READABLE DATASET
================================================================================
Original file: puranic_encyolopaedia_vettem_mani.json
Dataset number: 321 of 455
Format: valid JSON
Structure: Object / structured dataset
Original size: 5,659,965 bytes
Top-level fields: 11
Title: Puranic Encyolopaedia Vettem Mani
Creator: Vettem Mani
Date: —
Description: 'Puranic Encyolopaedia - Vettem Mani'

CONTENT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
METADATA AND OTHER FIELDS
  • title: Puranic Encyolopaedia Vettem Mani
  • creator: Vettem Mani
  • date: —
  • description: 'Puranic Encyolopaedia - Vettem Mani'
  • subject: Vettem Mani
  • identifier: yqck_puranic-encyolopaedia-vettem-mani
  • source_folder: yqck_puranic-encyolopaedia-vettem-mani
  • total_pages: 942
  • total_words: 971580
  • text_quality:
    • ocr_word_validity_score: 0.948
    • quality_tier: good
    • note: —

FULL TEXT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
a a
i Saeel Se asst Sa
‘rex he
~ ee _ eee |
ne _—
a a é oF a
f y
ae — > Se )
a Ag a }
| Se ies
| é Z en ge
Rees <>
_ ee a
| ee ave ip as, . ¢
La .
| Sas j
a
- SS ny aS
dA —.: S
Se —
QBIAANEy,
a cena
| Praa — r -
ff i =
J
ie - z
Le ee
P= c e
a a Ne
wa ac a
fae 4
(ef eee
| Won
‘ ' ieee
bs a = |
a a — te ‘ ae
N
a a
] X = Lt
| a ay Vx .
XR ts =
3 al
ae ae q
a
\ cual "
a 4 ee.

PURANIC
— EMICYCHOPHEDIA
ma 5 ae
a
Ape

s
ae
—"s G
ne so
- nd a :
eye ate -~* _
ps
Ee a ge
B aletinr, ~She ‘
She "2
ee eas:
al r
eS. oe 2
san ‘
r
‘iw -
8s ra
s 3 “ee!
(e- ee er ee —* ‘
se 3
id .
me .
Tac ATrY: *
Se eS ae ee EN oe ye Pe . See
> oat
ts te. or
a I SSeS “ =. LS : ; . ¥ aa ey =
we, <
aad « - ees ~
os
. - - ~~ all ced
> A a
Pe oe) ae
a “ws
. a é- é
as a :
be *
= Z s
a”? ote
ps *
ad >
pa “
J
be ~
os r
wf -* dl
t
. é a
on
: g a
. as
er 7
id =
, bd ba .
Fs .
A> I id . pie
haath FEE eee ao
_- aw
» "Ls
ie
bd ie 2 as OS ae Se :
a, Je ° a oes =
az? — 2 _ mh a 7 os je smi ~
i = we - ies ra .
“—_ s 5 » . w- baat oo
> ee el lie >
— . mA o- Se =
s ae = eet
a
ait, '
hd -~
‘ ry > bc. ote
af Sai -
te a :
. c! Ae cn
na .
I 2 F

VL ane?
nl
te
. ow
an
“Atte
my:
Oe ee
“te
td
bs Sores -*,
fafacatrtive &
maa,
pet a
(Far |
orl
Hteaed
‘a
"ge
lami Be
eseere- oretey
Wstaseiat a
no”
fe wma pe ebived
oy
vercgie:s sts
tte et oe t
iT
be. -o eo
Mae
ee
Se :
ace =
Cae ae *
e
Pc
“pon =
oe.

if
Culture in alj aspects—its history, geography,
religion philosophy, myths, beliefs and Practices of
aS a particular tree or plant have been explained
by their scientific or vernacular equivalents. All
modern critica] apparatus has been utilized in
the preparation of this comprehensive work.

Glo qo ae &,
dem aPet ea. gee

PURANIC ENCYCLOPAEDIA

ee ee ne ee ee ane
ee
PURANIC ENCYCLOPAEDIA
A Comprehensive Dictionary with Special Reference to the
Epic and Puranic Literature
VETTAM MANI
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS
Delhi Patna ae Varanasi

MOTILAL BANARSIDASS
Indological Publishers and Booksellers
Head Office: BUNGALOW ROAD, JAWAHAR NAGAR, DELHI-7
Branches : 1. CcHowK, VARANASI-1 (u.P.)
2, ASHOK RAJPATH, PATNA-4 ( BIHAR)
All Rights reserved by the Author
First Edition in Malayalam : Kottayam : 1964
Second Edition re 5s = 1967
Third Edition va “3 a 197]
Fourth Edition ,, - ia 1974
First Edition in English : Delhi, 1975
Reprinted : Delhi, 1979
Price : Rs. 300.00
Printed in India
BY SHANTILAL JAIN AT SHRI
AREA, NARAINA, NEW DELHI
FOR MOTI
JAINENDRA pRggg, A-45,
-28 AND PUBLISHED py NAR
AL BANARSIDASs8, BUNGALOW ROAD JAWAHA
PHASE-I, INDUSTRIAL
ENDRA PRAKASH jatn
R NAGAR, DELHI-7

i gt
FOREWORD
I feel flattered and consider it to be great privilege to have been asked by Shri Vettam Mani to
contribute a foreword to his Puranic Encyclopaedia, a really magnificent literary production,
massive in size and rich and invaluable in contents. This is the first attempt in Malayalam and for
the matter of that in any Indian or foreign language, so far as ] know, to produce a comprehensive
and well-nigh exhaustive book of study and reference with regard to episodes, incidents, characters
etc. occurring in the many Puranas and such other works in Sanskrit. In _ the field of mythology, with
regard to variety and contents as also sheer bulk, Greece stands first. Egypt comes only next. But
Indian mythology—the epics and the puranas—far exceeds and excels both Greek and Egyptian mythologies put together in merit and size. Even the preparation of a complete list of characters mentioned
in our epics, puranas etc. will be a stupendous and well-nigh impossible task calling for the combined
efforts of a number of scholars. But, fortunately for us, each and every such name, one need not
necessarily know or be acquainted with. At the same time there are great names which compel attention and should not escape a proper study. And, such names are legion, and Shri Mani has not
omitted mention of even one such name in his great work. I looked up the encyclopaedia for a few
such random names, and was really surprised to find detailed treatment of the same in the book. Moreover, with reference to really important names, incidents and episodes connected with them and the
whole genealogy are given. Everything is fully documented and quite authoritative. And, deep,
extensive and exhaustive study, patient and untiring research and above all absolute dedication to the
cause are so very patent on every page of the book. Literally and in effect Shri Mani’s is a unique
contribution, the first and foremost book, in the magnificent spheres of religion, culture, scholarship and history all put together. As the pioneer in the field he can justly feel happy and proud about
his rare achievement, and he deserves in ample measure the unstinted praise and appreciation of all
lavers of learning and culture.
Shri Mani has already earned well-deserved reputation as a teacher, especially in Malayalam,
and also as a diligent student of literature and author of talent. He evidently possesses a flair for
research. All such distinguished talents and attainments of his have been fully and quite successfully
commissioned in the preparation of this marvellous encyclopaedia. He has put every lover of learning
and knowledge everywhere, under an eternal debt of gratitude by the publication of this noble work.
"P.R. MENON |
Retired Judge, Chief Court, Cochin and.
Ex-President Keral Sahitya Academy.

ae

PREFACE
It is a matter of profound pleasure and pride for me that the internationally famous publishers
in the field of Indology, M/s Motilal Banarsidass of Delhi are publishing the English translation of my
Puranic Encyclopaedia, which was originally published in Malayalam, and which has already run
into four editions.
The Puranas along with the Great Epics—the Ramayana and the Mahabharata, have for
centuries, profoundly influenced Indian lite and Culture. The well-known. definition of a Purana
namely, primary creation, seconas a work having five characteristic features—puranam pancalaksanam
dary creation, the genealogies, the ages of Manu, and the dynastic account hardly does justice to the
While their genealogies and the
full significance of these works. They are much more than that.
dynastic account form the bed-rock of the political history of ancient India, they throw a flood of light
on all aspects of Indian Culture—its religion, social practices, art, literature and sciences. ‘They serve
as the key to the proper understanding of the various aspects of Hinduism—its beliefs, its modes of
worship, its mythology, its festivals, feasts, and fasts, its sacred shrines and places of pilgrimage, its philosophy and ethics and its theogony. Truly it has been said that a Brahmin was not really wise if he did
not know the Puranas. The study of ancient Indian history, and culture—particularly religion—is
As a matter of fact, it is virtually impossible
impossible without a proper knowledge of the Puranas. |
Indian culture and life, but also the literaturein modern Indian
to understand not only ancient L
languages, as it largely draws upon the ideas and ideologies as embodied in the contents of the Puranas
and the epics.
The literary writings in all Indian languages are indebted to the Epics and the Puranas in more than
one way—their form, content, ideas and ideologies are all influenced to a greater or lesser extent by these
ancient works. Direct and indirect allusions to Puranic episodes, characters, events, are frequently
to be met with in the literary writings of all Indian languages. Teachers engaged in imparting instruction in the literature in modern Indian languages must therefore be conversant with the contents of
the Puranas and Epics in order to be able to explain these allusions wherever they occur in the
writings in modern Indian languages. However, it is well nigh impossible for an average teacher to go
through the whole of this vast literature. Thus the need fora handy work of reference like the present
Encyclopaedia is apparent.
The desire to compile a Puranic Dictionary that should solve many of the day to day problems of
eae speiae Pane UBee teacher, took root in me, several years ago, but I could not arrogate to myself the
capacity to fulfill this urgentneed. I waited for many years, for more competent and better equipped
scholars to come forward and produce a work ofmy dreams. But since no one appeared to quench
this thirst, I plunged myself into this vast ocean of Sanskrit literature, and for thirteen years I dived
deep into it, studying not only the original texts but also modern works in English, Sanskrit, Malayalam
and Hindi. This took me five years, and I spent about twenty thousand rupees on books and travelling
for this project. I started the compilation on Ist of January, 1955, and it took me seven years to Sait
preparing the Press copy of my work. The first volume of my ‘Puranic Nighantu’ was eelnaved fi
February 1964 and the remaining four were published after an interval of six months in each case.
The second edition of all the five volumes was brought out in May 1967, _ still under the original title
‘Purdnic Nighantu’. However, in the third revised and enlarged edition in one: volume published in
October, 1971, the name was changed to ‘Puranic Encyclopaedia’.
backs are only inevitable, and I am fully consh needed aid to the teaching and study of
In an endeavour like this imperfections and draw
cious of the same. But as a pioneer effort, and as a muc
Malayalam language and literature, it will, I hope, be found useful. Scholars and general readers in
Malayalam have been generous in welcoming the encyclopaedia. That four editions of the work had
to be brought out within a period of seven years from 1967 to 1974 speaks eloquently for the merit, and
utility of the work and I feel my labour and expense amply rewarded. I felt still more flattered when
the celebrated firm of M/s Motilal Banarsidass of Delhi, who have already laid the world of Indology
under a deep debt of obligation by their monumental publieations in all fields of Indian Culture and history, mooted a proposal for publishing an English translation of the Malayalam original, I am deeply
indebted to them for bringing my work before a much wider circle of readers. The onerous task a
translating the work into English was entrusted to a committee of five scholars : 1]. Mr. P. Rajaram

Menon, Professor of English, Basel mission College, Kottayam; 2. Mr. K. R. Atchutan Nayar, retired
Professor of English, C.M.5. College, Kottayam;3. R.K.Kartha, ex-Chief Editor, Deshbandhu
Kottayam; 4. P. 1. John, Retired Headmaster, Kurichi ;and5. Mr. PN. Menon, Ollue.
Ineed hardly point out that these membersof the editorial committee are highly qualified for
this work and I must gladly acknowledge the fact that they have more than amply justified the trust
placed in them.
Finally, I cannot adequately express my feelings of deep gratitude to Shri Puthezathy Rama
Menon, the doyen of Malayalam literature, for writing an excellent introduction to the original
Malayalam edition of the work. I amalso beholden to many scholars and the reading public who
have been pleased to extend a most generous welcome to the Encyclopaedia, °
Kottayam
Bea LOPO VETTAM MANI

Puranic Encyclopaedia
A
A (a). The first letter (Vowel) of all Indian languages.
s letter has the
Siva, tortoise,
atiand bowAccording to the Nanartharatnamala thi
following meanings:—Brahma, Visnu,
courtyard, battle, harem, jewellery, sea, Parv
String,
ABALA is one of the fifteen devas who were the sons of
Paiicajanya. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 22, Verse 11).
ABHAYA was one of the sons of Dhrtarastra. He was
killed by Bhimasena. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 6/7,
Verse 104; Drona Parva, Chapter 127, Verse 62).
ABHAYAM. King Idhmajihva divided his kingdom
P laksadvipa into seven parts and gave them to his
seven sons. Abhayam is one of the parts. The other six
Subhadram, Santam,
Parts are:—Sivam, Yamasam,
Ksemarh and Amrtai. See ‘“Jdhmajihva”. (Bhagavata,
5th Skandha, Chapter 20, Verse 2). It is seen (from
M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 30, Verse 9) that the
territory known as Abhayam was conquered by
Bhimasena. (See Foot-note ) a _
ABHIBHU, He was a King, the son of the King of Kasi
and a relative of the Pandavas. He was killed by the
son of King Vasudana. He had a most wonderful
horse. (M.B. Udyoga Parva, Chapter 191, Verse 63;
Karna Parva, Chapter 6, Verses 93-24: Drona Parva,
HIMANYU I. He was the heroic son of Ar)
ae figure of the Mahabharata, by his wife
Genealogy. He was descended from Visnuin this order:
rahma-A tri-Candra-Budha-Pururavas - Ayus- Nahusa-
: Yayati-P Gru-Janamejaya- Pracinva - Pravira - NamasyvVitabhaya-Sandu-Bahuvidha-Samyati-Rahovac -Raudrasva-Matinara-Santurodha-Dusyanta - Bharata - Brhatksatra-Hasti- Ajamidha-Rksa-Samvarana © Kuru-JahnuSuratha - Vidaratha-Sarvabhauma - Jayatsena ~ Raviya -
Bhavuka-Cakroddhata-Devatitht - Rk sa-Bhima - Pratiyaantanu-Vyasa-Pandu-Arjuna-Abhimanyu.
2) Parvajanma (Previous Birth).. There 1s a story about
‘1, the Mahabharata. It was
Abhimanyu’s Parvajanma in
Varcas, son of Candra, who ‘ncarnated as Abhimanyu,
una the cenSubhadra.
son of Arjuna. A conference took place between the
ion of the Devas
Devas and Candra about the incarnation —
ruction of the wicked people.
in or the dest
tae a a Devas: “‘I do not like to send Varcas,
whom I love more than my life, to the earth. Still, I
think jt is not right to stand in the way of the plans of
the gods. You must agree to one condition if [ am to
send my son. Let him be born as the son of Arjuna.
I am unable to be separate for more os
Sixteen years. My son wi ter into the Cakra Vyiiha
of the enemies to be kill them and return to me
In the sixteenth year.” The devas (gods ) accepted this
condition. That is why, Abhimany) was killed in his
Sixteenth year. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 67). .
_ Abhimanyu received his
3) Military Training and War
training in arms from his father Arjuna. Later, he
went with his mother Subhadra to Dvaraka and lived
for some time with his uncle Sri Krsna. There he 1s
Said to have received training 1n arms from Pradyumna,
son of Sri Krsna. After the incognito life ol the
arding the number of. parts into which Kin
Pandavas, Abhimanyu. married Uttara
ger Hi tara, d
ue Se Ge shy Pi nity out ——
aC ‘ 1e first é 1 i
entered into a duel with eid cad aE ie
shay terrible conflict with Bhisma, Pint ae bral .
a S flagstaff. After that he assisted his father Ari =
ae ght against Bhisma. Verses 8-13 of Cha ee 55 of
isma Parva of the Mahabharata feaceie Abhi
manyu’s fight with Laksmana in thesecond day’s battl :
Then he took his place in the Ardha Cages Vyiha
(semi-circular phalanx) formed by Arjuna. He f an
fiercely with the Gandharas. He attacked Salya and fall
Set King of Magadha, along with his elephant
e fin himanyu assisting Bhimasena in M.B BI isma
Parva, Chapters 63, 64, 69 and 94 Afi Mhab
Abhimanyu defeated Laksmana in battle Ty h
defeated Vikarna, Citrasena and others also. L hep hee
took his position in the Srngataka Vyiha S ef ne
Dhrstadyumna. He started fighting with Sharad mf
He defeated Ambastha and Alambusa. Next he > i a
duel with Sudisna. After that he encountered De : :
dhana, Brhatbala and others. M)B. Drona Bien,
Chapter 10, Verses 47-52 are a description of Abhi.
manyu’s heroism by Dhrtarastra. He snatched Pauraee’ |
weapon and threw it on the ground. Next hé fou ht
with Jayadratha and Salya. Then he was caught in te
pea ie (circular phalanx) of the Sic
é ere he inflicted great losses upon the enemy force
alya was stunned and his brother was killed by
Abhimanyu. M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 38, Verses 93
and 24 describe the flight of the Kauravas in fear. A
this stage, even Dronacarya praised Abhiman
ae eg fainted during his fight with Abhi-
. Karna was defeated. Vrsasena, Sa ,
ry malt s son, Rugmaratha i igh oe,
ed. Laksmana was killed. Vrndaraka, Agvatthama
Karna and others were amazed by this terrible valour
of Abhimanyu. Six ministers of Karna were “slain
ee Asvaketu, son of the King of 'Magadha was
sites. King Bhoja was also killed. Salya was again
a eated. Satrufijaya, Candraketu, Meghavega, Suvarcas
ae ee were all kings—were beheaded by
imanyu. Sakuni was wounded by Abhimnanyu's
peoxe Kalakeya, son of Subala was slain. M.B. Drona
shabcggrece 4 40, Verses 13 and 14 say that at this
a a ussasana beat Abhimanyu to death with
4) After Death. M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 71, Verses
12-16 say that after death Abhimanyu attained the
immortal world of the Munis (Saints). King Parikgit
was the son of Abhimanyu. In M.B. Svargarohana
Parva, Chapter 5, Verses 18-20, we find that after his
death, Abhimanyu entered the moon in his former form
of Varcas.
5) Other names of Abhimanyu. In the Mahabharata
Abhimanyu has been referred to by several other names
such as ARJUNI, Saubhadra, Karsni, Arjunatmaja,
Sukratmajatmaja, Arjunapara and Phalguni.
6) Other details. King Pariksit was the son of Abhimanyu. Janamejaya was born as his son. It was Janameg¢ Idhmajihva divided Plaksadvipa
n e Malayalam version of the Bhagavata (By Ramanujan Elutta h )
th y ccnan
In the There seems to be some differe 1
Bhagavata the number mentioned 1s seven; but }
arsani . An
2aAnNI tesu girayo nadyasca saptaivabhijmatah ”. Th
the number is eight, The original Bhagavata says: «Sivam Yamasam,
the Malayalam Bh4gavata an eig
Subhadram, Santam, Ksemam, Amrtan
hth division called Sivadarh is peta Abhayam iti

ABHIMANYU II
jaya who performed Sarpasatra. (A yaga) Satanika was
the son of Janamejaya. Satanika had a son named
Sahasranika. King Udayana, the jewel of the Candra
Varnéa (Lunar dynasty) was born to Sahasranika by
the goddess Mrgavati (See ‘Udayana’, stories about
this Udayana are very famous. Kalidasa has mentioned
in his ‘‘Meghadiita’ about the old rustics who thronged
the country-sides to tell and listen to Udayana stories).
(Kathasaritsagara, Madana Kaficukalambaka, 4th
Taranga ).
ABHIMANYU II. One of the sons of Manu. The ten
sons born to Manu by Nadvala were: Kuru, Puru,
Satadyumna, Tapasvi, Satyavan, Suci, Agnistoma,
Adhiratra, Sudyumna and Abhimanyu. (Visnu Purana,
Section 1, Chapter 13).
ABHIMANYU VADHA PARVA. A part (branch) of
Drona Parva. (See ‘‘“Mahabharata’’).
ABHINAYA. In Agni Purana, Chapter 342, Abhinaya
has been defined as follows: Abhinaya is the art of
presenting before the people the ideas that are to be
communicated.to them. There are four divisions of
this art known as Sattvika, Vacika, Angika and Aharya
depending on Sattva, Vak, Anga and Aharya. Besides
these, another division known as Abhimanika (Abhim4nottha) may also be mentioned. This signifies the
expression of rasas like Srngara. There are two kinds
of Srngara known as Sambhoga and Vipralambha.
Four varieties of Vipralambha called Pirvanuraga
Vipralambha, Mana Vipralambha, Pravasa Vipralambha and Karuna Vipralambha are mentioned. The
union after Vipralambha is Sarhbhoga-Srngara. All
Sattvika bhavas are included in Srngara. All these have
to be expressed through Abhinaya.
ABHIRU. A Rajarsi who was born of the sixth
Kalakeya. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 67, Verse 53).
ABHISAKAM. A Janapada (Village) of ancient India.
The warriors of this Janapada were called Abhisakas.
(M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 18, Verse 12; Chapter
93, Versé 2).
ABHISARAM. A Janapada of ancient India. (M.B.
Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 94).
ABHISARI. Arjuna conquered this city, which was
one of the ancient cities of India, in the course of
his Digvijaya (conquest of the world),
ABHISYANTA. A son born to Maharaja Kuru by
Vahini. He had three brothers named Caitraratha
Muni and Janamejaya. Abhisyanta was the younger
brother of ASvavan and elder brother of Caitraratha.
(M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 94, Verses 50-51),
ACALA I. 1) General. Acala was theson of Subala. a
King of Gandhara. He was Sakuni’s brother ait a
heroic Charioteer on the side of the Kauravas. (M.B.
Udyoga Parva, Chapter 168, Verse |).
2) Acala had also taken part in Yudhisthira’s Rajasiya. (A very expensive sacrifice—yaga—performed by
an emperor. )(M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 34, Verse 7),
3) Acala had a brother named Vrsaka. In the battle
between the Kauravas and Pandavas, Arjuna killed
Acala and Vrsaka. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 30,
Verse 11)
4) One night Vyasa summoned the departed holy souls
and Acala also was among them. (M.B. Aévyamedhika Parva, Chapter 32, Verse 12).
ADHIRATHA
ACALA II. Name of a bull. Among the parsadas of
Skanda we see the bull named Acala. (M.B. Salya
Parva, Chapter 85, Verse 74).
ACALA III. An epithet of Mahavisnu. Among. the
thousand names of Mahdavisnu we see the name Acala
also. (M.B. AnuSsasana Parva, Chapter 149, Verse 92).
ACALA. Subrahmanya, who was born from Siva’s
semen which fell into the fire, was made Commanderin-Chief (Generalissimo ) by the gods to kill ‘Tarakasura.
A large number of warriors and mothers were
assigned to assist him. A woman named Acala was included among those mothers. (M.B. Salya Parva,
Chapter 40, Verse 14).
ACCHODA. A spiritual daughter of the Pitrs. (For
further details see ““Amavasu’’ ).
ACCHODASARAS. A river, who was the daughter of
the Pitrs called Agnisvattas. (Hari Varnga, Chapter 18,
Verse 26).
ACYUTA. (See Visnu).
ACYUTAYU. He was a heroic warrior on the Kaurava
side. Srutayu was the brother of Acyutayu. Both of
them were killed by Arjuna in the Kaurava-Pandava
battle. These heroes attacked Arjuna and Sri Krsna
furiously with their arrows and Arjuna had some
difficulty in killing them. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter
93, Verses 7-42).
ACYUTA STHALA. This is an ancient village in
India. In ancient times Siidras of mixed castes
inhabited this region. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter
129, Verse‘S))..
ADHARMA. A description of the lineage of Adharma
is found in Agni Purana. Himsa (violence) is the
consort of Adharma. The couple procreated two
children, Anrta and Nikrti, and from them sprang
up Bhaya (fear), Naraka (Hell), Maya (illusion),
Vedana (pain) etc. And, out of them Maya brought
forth Death, the destroyer of (all) objects. Vedana, in
its turn produced Sorrow and Grief out of Raurava.
From Death were born Disease, Senility, Sorrow, Intense
desire and Anger. (Agni Purana, Chapter 20).
ADHARMA. Adharma is a person who is an embodiment of Adharmas. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 66,
Verse 93). Adharma’s wife Nirrti delivered 3 children;
Bhaya, Mahabhaya and Mrtyu. Adharma had another
son, Darpa (conceit) born of Wealth. (M.B. Santi
Parva, Chapter 90, Verse 27).
ADHASSIRAS I was a great sage. Sri Krsna is said to
have met the sage on his way to Hastinapura. (M.B.
Udyoga Parva, Chapter 33, Verse G4).
ADHA SIRAS II. There is a reference in Visnu
Purana to a hell called Adhaggiras. (Visnu Purana Part
2, Chapter 6). 7 is
ADHIRA. A King; also a great devotee of Lord Siva.
Oncehe decreed death penalty on an innocent woman:
— also destroyed with his own hands a temple of Siva.
Ss a consequence of those two sinful deeds he became
a devil after death. Ultimately by the grace of Siva
age 5 1 and became an attendant of
: a Furana, Patala Khanda, Chapter 111)-
a yy A Kingdom in ancient device “legesilee
i. sma larva, Chapter 9, Verse 44. Today this place
nown as Rewa.
ADHIRATHA. Foster father of Karna.
zs Lineage. Descended from Visnu thus : Brahma-Atriandra-PurtravaseAyus - Nahusa - Yayati - Anudruhyv-

ADHOKSAJA
Sadanara-Kalanara-Srijaya-Titiksa- Krsadratha-HomaSutapas - Bali - Anga - Dadhivahana - DravirathaDharmaratha - Citraratha - Satyaratha - RomapadaCaturanga-Prthu - Gamba - Haryamga - BhadrarathaBrhadratha-Brhanmanas-Jayadratha - Dhrtavrta - Satyakarma-Adhiratha-Karna (foster son).
2) Foster father of Karna. Sage Durvasas had taught
Kunti some mantras to get children, and Kunti, then
unmarried, tested the first mantra with the Sun-god
as her object. The Sun-god appeared before Kunti
and from his power she conceived and duly delivered a
child, Karna. Fearing obloquy Kunti concealed the
child in a box and floated it on the river, Ganges. At the
time Adhiratha, a great comrade of Dhrtarastra came
to the river for a bath. His wife was one grieving
over not having a child of her own. So, when Adhiratha
found a child in the floating box, he took it home,
and himself and his wife Radha brought up the child
with pleasure. The child was named Vasusena, and
the child grew up to become the famous Karna and
favourite friend of Duryodhana. (M.B. Adi Parva,
Chapters 67 and 130; Vana Parva, Chapter 309;
Devibhagavata, Skandha 2).
3) Some particulars. Adhiratha was King of Anga. He
was a Sita (charioteer) and Karna grew up as his
son. Karna was sent to Hastinapura to be trained
in the use of weapons, and it was here that Duryodhana and Karna developed their friendship and
alliance. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 14/7, Verse 3).
Sri Mahadevibhagavata, in Chapter 3 relates the
following incident : ‘“Thus: lamenting Kunti sent the
box concealing Karna, by the nurse, to be floated in
the river, and after bath, food etc. she spent the hours
in the normal way within the inner apartment. Raja
Adhiratha bathing in the river saw the box floating in
the river’. These facts prove that Adhiratha was not
only the King of Anga but a good charioteer as well,
and further a very good friend of Dhrtarastra.
4) We come across Adhiratha on the occasion of the
trial of skill in the use of arms between the Kauravas
and the Pandavas. When Karna entered the lists
the Pandavas questioned his nobility of birth. Seeing
Karna’s great humiliation and discomfiture Duryodhana
enthroned him immediately as King of Anga. Vyasa,
who witnessed the scene has given a picturesque description of it. ——
ADHOKSAJA. A synonym of Maha Visnu. (Karsariradhoksajah—AmarakoSa ).
ADHRIGU. A great sage (Maharsi) who lived during
the Rgvedic period. (Rgveda, Mandala 1, Anuvaka
ADHRSYA. A river. (M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9,
Verse 24).
ADHYAPAYANA. A disciple of the great preceptor of
Atharvaveda, Sumantu. He divided Atharvaveda
into two parts and gave one to Utatthya and the other
to Vedadarsana. (Bhagavata, Skandha 12). :
ADITI. 1) Genealogy. Kasyapa, grandson of Brahma and
son of Marici married Aditi, daughter of Daksaprajapati. Aditi had twelve sisters: Diti, Kala, Danayus,
Danu, Simhika, Krodha, Prtha, Visva, Vinata, Kapila,
Muni and Kadri. (Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter
65, Verse 12). Devas are sons born to Kasyapa by Aditi
and hence. they are known as Aditeyas also. Kasyapa
married all the thirteen sisters including Aditi, and
ADITI
all living beings owe their origin to them. (See Kasyapa).
2) Descendants. 33 sons were born to Aditi. 12 of them
are called Dvadasgadityas, viz. Dhata, Aryama, Mitra,
Sakra, Varuna, Améa, Bhaga, Vivasvan, Pusa, Savita,
Tvasta and Visnu. Amongst the other 21 sons are the
11 Rudras and 8 Vasus. (See M.B. Adi Parva,
Chapter 65, Verse 15).
3) Main incidents. 1. How Mahdavisnu was born as the
son of Aditi. The Mahabharata and the Ramayana
refer to a story about the birth of Mahavisnu as the
son of Aditi. Visnu entered the womb of Adit as
Vamana (Dwarf). This story was related by the sage
Visvamitra to the boys Rama and Laksmana while
they were accompanying the sage in the forest. When
they entered Siddhasrama Visvamitra pointed to the
latter that the Agrama was sacred, because Mahavisnu
had stayed there for long as Vamana. The Devas
induced Mahavisnu to obstruct the sacrifice (yaga)
being performed by Emperor Mahabali, son of
Virocana. At ihat time Aditi, the wife of KaSyapa.
was doing penance so that Mahavisnu might be born
as her son, and accordingly he entered her womb.
1000 years later she gave birth to Visnu, and that child
was known as Vamana. (See Vamana; also M.B.
Vana Parva, Chapter 272, Verse 62, Anusasana Parva,
Chapter 83, Verses 25 and 26, as also Valmiki Kamayana, Canto 29).
2. Rebirth of Aditi. Once Kasyapa made all arrangements to perform a sacrifice (yaga). Having failed to
get the suitable cow for it, he stole Varuna’s cow and
conducted the yaga. Not only that, Kasyapa refused
to return the cow even after the yaga was over.
Varuna in hot anger rushed to Kasyapa’s hermitage.
Kasyapa was absent, and his wives, Aditi and Surasa
did not treat Varuna with due respect. The enraged
Varuna cursed them to be born in Gokula. He also
complained about the matter to Brahma. Brahma told
Kagyapa : “Since you, a learned person, have stolen
the cow, may you along with your wives be born in
Gokula and tend cows’. Accordingly Kasyapa and
his wives, Aditi and Surasa, were born respectively as
Vasudeva, Devaki and Rohini in Gokula in the 28th
Dvapara yuga. (This story has been told by Vyasa
to Raja Janamejaya). (Devibhagavata, Skandha 4).
3. Aditi in prison. Devakiis Aditi reborn. There was
reason for Devaki being imprisoned on the orders of
Karhsa. When Kaégyapa was living in an Asrama with ©
Aditi and Diti he was so much pleased with the
services of Aditi that he asked her to beg for any
boon she wished. Accordingly she prayed for an
ideal’ son. The boon was readily granted, and Indra
was the son thus born to her. The birth of Indra
engendered jealousy in Diti towards Aditi, and she
also demanded a son equal to Indra. Kasyapa obliged
Diti also, As Diti advanced in pregnancy and her
beauty also increased Aditi got jealous of the former
and she called her son Indra and told him that unless
something was done in time, Dit would deliver a
child equal to him (Indra) thus relegating him _probably to the place of second Deva. Thus admonished
by his mother the artful Indra approached Diti and
told her: “Mother, I have come to serve you”, Diti
was greatly pleased. Indra’s services drove Diti to
sleep very quickly, and Indra used the opportunity

ADRA
to enter the womb of Diti and cut into 49 pieces the
child with his weapon, the Vajra. The child in the
womb began crying on receiving cuts with Vajra when
Indra asked it not to cry. (M4 ruda, don’t cry) and
so the child got out of Diti’s womb as 49 Marutas
(winds). Then did Diti wake up and cursed Aditi as
follows “Your son did treacherously kill my
offspring in the womb itself. So he will forfeit the
three worlds. You were responsible for the murder of
my child. You will, therefore, have to spend days in
prison grieving over your children. Your children also
will be annihilated’. Because of this curse of Diti,
Indra once lost Devaloka and had to live elsewhere,
and Nahusa functioned, for a time as Indra. (See
Nahusa). In the 28th Dvapara yuga Aditi transformed as Devaki had to bea captive of Karnsa, and
Kamsa killed her children by dashing them on the
ground. (Devibhagavata, Skandha 4).
Narakasura stole the earrings of Aditi. Narakasura, who
turned out to be a curse and menace to the three worlds
consequent on the boon he got from Visnu, attacked
Devaloka once, and carried off Indra’s royal umbrella
and Aditi’s earrings. Mahavisnu incarnated himself as
Sri Krsna, killed Narakdsura in battle and got back the
earrings etc. (M.B. Udyoga Parva, Chapter 48, Verse
80; Sabha Parva, Chapter 38, Verse 29; Bhagavata
Dasama Skandha). |
Mahdvisnu became seven times son to Aditi. Once, desirous of having children Aditi cooked food (rice)
sitting herself in the entrails of Mount Mynaka (M.B.
Aranya Parva, Chapter 135, Verse 3). Dharmaputra,
in the course of singing the glories of Lord Krsna after
the great war refers to Visnu having taken birth
seven times in the womb of Aditi. (M.B. Santi Parva,
Chapter 43, Verse 6).
6. Budha cursed Aditi. A story in the Mahabharata
refers to Budha’s once cursing Aditi. The ever increasing power of Asuras made the Devas anxious. Aditi,
the mother of the Devas decided to send them all to
annihilate the Asuras. She had finished cooking food
for her sons, and lo ! there appeared before her Budha
and asked for food. Aditi askéd him to wait pending
her sons taking their food hoping that there would be
some food left after that. This caused Budha to lose
his temper and he cursed her that (Aditi) she would
become the mother of Vivasvan in his second birth
as Anda, when she would suffer pain in her abdomen.
(M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter 34, Verses 96-98).
Former birth of Aditi. During the former years
(period) of Svayambhuva Manu the Prajapati called
Sutapas, along with his wife Préni did Tapas for
12000 years. Then Mahavisnu appeared before them,
and Prsni prayed for a son like Visnu himself, and
Mahavisnu was born as her son named Prénigarbha.
This story is related by Sri Krsna to his mother on
his birth as the son of Vasudeva. (Bhagavata, Dasgama
Skandha, Chapter 3).
She, who became the wife of Prajapati as Prgni before
Svayambhuva Manu, and was born again as Devaki,
the wife of Vasudeva is one and the same person.
ADRA. A King of the Solar dynasty. (See Sirya
VarhSa).
ADRI was a King, the son of Visvagagva and father
of Yuvanaévai. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 202,
Verse 3),
wy
ADRSYANTI,
AGASTYA.
AGASTYA
ADRIKA. A nymph (devastr1). There is a story in
Devibhagavata about her being cursed by a Brahmin
and turned into a fish.
ADRSTABHAYA is the curse put on King Janamejaya
by Sarama, the dog of the Devas. While Janamejaya,
son of Pariksit was conducting, along with his brothers, a yaga of long duration at Kuruksetra the son
of Sarama went to the place and was thrashed by
the brothers of Janamejaya. Secing her weeping child
Sarama naturally got angry. She cursed the king
thus : ‘‘My son did not commit any offence; he did
not even look at the havis (oblations), nor did he
lick it. For having thrashed the innocent child you
will experience Adrstabhaya. When the yaga was
over Janamejaya got rid of the curse by getting sage
Somasravas do certain proper rites.
wife of sage Sakti, the son of Vasistha
and mother of sage Paraéara.
Kalmasapada, a king of the Iksvaku dynasty reached
the hermitage of Vasistha during a hunting expedition when Sakti, eldest of the hundred sons of
Vasistha came walking towards him. False pride
prevented either of them from giving way to the
other. The King got angry and whipped Sakti. Sakti
cursed the king and he was converted into a demon.
This happened at a period when sages Vasistha and
Visvamitra were at logger-heads. Vigvamitra got
admitted into the body of King Kalmasapada a
demon called Kimkara, and the king set out to take
revenge upon Sakti, the son of Vasistha. The King
was further promised all Support by Vigvamitra.
Kalmasapada ate up all the hundred sons of Vasistha.
Overcome with grief Vasistha attempted suicide
many a time. But the spirit (Atman) did not quit
the body. Thus sunken in grief Vasistha lived in his
hermitage with Adrsyanti, wife of Sakti. One day
Vasistha heard distinct sounds of the chanting of
the Vedas and Adrsyanti told him that a child of
his son, Sakti, was developing in her womb and that
the vedic sounds heard were sounds produced by
that son chanting the vedic hymns. Vasistha thus
was happy to hear that the dynasty will not become
extinct and, so, gave up all ideas of suicide. Another
day Kalmasapada in the guise of the demon hurriedly
came to devour Adrgyanti and Vasistha gave him
redemption from the curse. He was restored to his
old state and form. Adrsyanti. duly gave birth to a
son, and the child grew up to become Parafara,
father of Vyasa. —
While the Pandavas, in the course of their forest
life, were passing the banks of river Ganga at midnight,
a Gandharva named Amgaraparna enjoying in the
river-water clashed with Arjuna, and he was defeated. The story of Adrsyanti is one of the many
stories told by Arhgaraparna to the Pandavas. (M.B.
Adi Parva, Chapters 175-178),
1) Genealogy. Descended from Visnu
pyahma- Marici-Kasyapa-Siirya-Agastya,
2) Birth. A story occurs ‘in Uttara~-Rama-Carita
about the birth of Agastya. Nimi was the son of Iksvaku of the Sirya dynasty. When he ascended the
throne he decided to celebrate a sacrifice of long
uration. He invited Vasistha to perform the sacrifice.
But Vasistha, who had to participate in the sacrifice
in this order

AGASTYA
of Indra, could not accept the invitation and. Nimi
had to return disappointed. At this he got angry,
sought the help of Satananda, the son of the great
hermit Gautama and the sacrifice was begun. Vasistha
did not like this. He cursed Nimi that life might be
separated from his body. Nimi retorted with the same
curse. Vasistha’s spirit separated itself from his body
and began to roam about in the sky. At last he requested Brahma to provide him with a body. Brahma
granted his wish and said that he would be born again
from Mitra and Varuna.
When the spirit of Vasistha returned to the earth it
was Mitra and Varuna moving about, having only one
body for both. Vasistha’s spirit entered into that body.
One day Mitra-Varuna happened to see the celestial
beauty, Urvasi on the seashore. They embraced Urvasi
and immediately the spirit of Vasistha entered the
body of Urvasi.
After this Mitra. and Varuna separated themselves
from one another and assumed two different bodies.
Varuna approached Urvasi with lustful desire, but
rejecting him Urvasi accepted Mitra. Varuna had
seminal flow and this semen was taken and kept in a
pot. At the sight of this, remorse and passion arose
in Urvasi and the semen of Mitra already received
in her womb oozed out and fell on the ground. This
also was. collected and kept in the same pot along with
that of Varuna. After a few days the pot broke open
by itself and two babies came out. One was Agastya
and the other Vasistha. As these two were born of the
semen of Mitra and Varuna, they came to be known
as Maitravarunis later. This story partly occurs in Santi
Parva of Mahabharata, Verse 343 of Chapter 88._
3) Education. Very little is mentioned in the Puranas
about the education of Agastya. Still there are ample proofs that he was well-versed in the Vedas and
sciences and well skilled in the uses of diverse weapons.
In Verse 9, Chapter 139 of Mahabharata, Adi Parva,
Drona says to Arjuna as follows: -
‘““Agnivesa, my teacher was the disciple of Agastya, i tae
art of using bows and arrows and I am his disciple -
When it is said that even Agnivesa the teacher .
Drona was a disciple of Agastya, his poe ——
art of using weapons could easily be a a sive
4) Marriage. There is an interesting story "akg tad
marriage of such an austere man as Agastya,
trol. As the hermit
brought all the passions under con oe:
Agastya was walking along the LES = aaah
ancestors (Pitrs) hanging head downwar = — ‘eri ,
€ wanted to know the reason and eee maa nul
“Child; we would be allowed to enter hea
n as
et married as soon
if sons are born to you. So & d to him
~ i occurre
possible’. The necessity of marriage could be
who
only then. But will there be co ne ef this bearded
atient h to become
dwarfish hereait ? Agastya did not lose heart. n ae
time the King of Vidarbha was doing ‘gh
obtain a son. Agastya collected the a _ ce
all living beings, with which he pee ae
mely beautiful lady and named her Pp
C x - to the King of
Zastya gave Lopamudra as ey at getting
Vidarbha. The King who was de , k
Moar - - dl enplaye hundreds of a he
alter the child, who soon grew UP ; of Vidarbha
Agastya once approached the ising
AGASTYA
and expressed his wish to have Lopamudra as_ his
wife. The King was in a dilemma. On the one hand
he did not like his beautiful daughter having the
brightness of fire, to be given as wife to the hermit,
clad in the bark of trees and wearing tufts of matted
hair. On the other hand he was afraid of the curse
of the hermit Agastya. As the King was trying hard
to find a solution, Lopamudra herself came to the
King and said “Father, I am happy to say that I shall
willingly become the wife of the hermit Agastya.” At
last her father consented and discarding royal garments
and ornaments, Lopamudra accompanied Agastya.
It is mentioned in Vana Parva, Chapter 130, Verse 5,
that they were married at Mahdasindhutirtha. After
their marriage they went to Gangadvara. (Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 96).
3) Lhe story of how Agastya ate Vatépi. While Agastya
was doing severe penance, Lopamudra attained
puberty and had menstruation. Longing for a child,
she went and stood beside Agastya. She expressed
her wish to lead a family life. Her demands did
not stop there. During conjugation, Agastya should
wear flower garlands and ornaments, and she must
be provided with divine ornaments. Agastya was
surprised at the enormity of her demands. Poor, penniless Agastya! Leaving Lopamudra in the hermitage
he went in search of money. He at first approached
King Srutarva, who produced accounts of his income and expenditure and convinced Agastya that
he was having no balance at all. Agastya, accompanied by Srutarva, then proceeded to King Bradhnasva. He also produced accounts and refused to help
Agastya, who then followed by Srutarva and Bradhnagva went on to the wealthy King Trasadasyu,
who also producing his accounts refused to render
any help to Agastya. Finally Agastya accompanied
by the three Kings, went to the house of Ilvala, a
noble asura of immense wealth.
This asura Ilvala lived in Manimatpattana with his
younger brother Vatapi. Once Ilvala approached
a hermit Brahmin and requested that his wish for
a son, having the power and status of Indra, be granted. The Brahmin refused to grant such a boon.
Since then Ilvala and Vatapi considered Brahmins
as their enemies. The elder brother converted the
younger one (Vatapi) into a goat and whenever a
Brahmin visited his house, he would kill the goat,
prepare mutton dishes and set them before his
guest. When he had finished eating, [Ilvala would call
aloud. “‘Vatapi, come out’’. Breaking the stomach
of the,guest open, Vatapi would come out. In this way
Ilvala had killed a good number of Brahmins. It was
at this juncture that Agastya and the Kings came to
beg money of him.
Ilvala welcomed the guests with hospitality and as
usual killed the goat, prepared food with it and served
the food before Agastya. When Agastya had finished
eating, Ilvala called Vatapi loudly. But Agastya slowly
said, ““Vatapi, jirno bhava” (Let Vatapi be digested)
and immediately Vatapi was digested in the stomach
of Agastya. The awe-stricken asura Ilvala gave each
Brahmin ten thousand cows and as much gold and
to Agastya he doubled the quantity of alms. Over
and above this, he presented Agastya with a chariot
hitched with twa fine horses called Viravan and

AGASTYA
Suravan. Agastya returned to his hermitage and
adorned himself as Lopamudra:had demanded. (Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 99).
6) Birth of a_ son. Lopamudra became pregnant.
Agastya told her, “‘A thousand ordinary sons, or
hundred sons, each having the strength of ten ordinary
sons, or ten sons, each having the strength of hundred
ordinary sons, or a son, greater and nobler than one
thousand sons—which of these do you prefer ?”
Lopamudra preferred one son. When she was with
child Agastya again went to the forest to do penance.
After seven years of pregnancy Lop&mudra gave
birth to a lustrous son. The hermit Drdhasyu, who is
also called Idhmavaha, is this son. This child is said
to have chanted the Vedas (Holy Scriptures) immediately on his birth. He used to gather twigs for
kindling the sacrificial fire of his father, and hence he
got the name Idhmavaha.*
7) How he stamped the Vindhya mountain down. Once the
talebearer Narada happened to come to the Vindhya
Mountain, who gladly welcomed Narada, gave him a
seat, showed hospitality and asked for news. Narada said
“May you be blessed. Just now I am coming from the
Mahameru. Indra, Agni (fire) and other gods live
there. Kailasa, Nisadha, Nila, Gandhamddana etc. are
mountains far nobler than this Meru. But they are
not so haughty as him. That the Sun and the Moon
and such others revolve round him, is the reason for his
arrogance’. On hearing these tales, Vindhya thought
that Meru should be taught a lesson. Once Vindhya
made his peaks grow higher and higher till they touched
the sky. The Sun, the Moon and others found it very
difficult to pass over the high peaks in their usual journeys to the West, and so they had to roam about jn
the sky. When the journeys of the Sun and the Moon
were hindered, everything in the world fell into chaos.
The gods came to Vindhya in groups and tried to
pacify him. But their attempts were futile. So they
approached Agastya and made their petition to him.
He agreed to pacify Vindhya somehow or other. Agastya and his wife came to Vindhya from KaSsinagara.
When Vindhya saw Agastya he began to shiver with
fear. Contracting all his high peaks, he bowed before
Agastya, who said to Vindhya thus “Vindhya, I am
going to South Bharata. Let your heads be low till I
come back’, Vindhya agreed. Agast
lived there. Since then Agastya ha
the North and Vindhya had never risen up. As he had
made the mountain (Aga) bow its head he got the
name Agastya. (Tenth Skandha of Devibhagavata) |
8) Nahusa transformed to a huge serpent by Agastya
Devendra killed Vrttrasura, an enemy of the pods.
As Devendra had resorted to treachery for killing the
enemy (see the word Vrttrasura) he incurred the sin
of “Brahmahatya’. Once Indra went to the Manasasaras
without the knowledge of anybody and hid himself in
the petal of a lotus flower. The gods and especially
acidevi were much alarmed at the disappearance of
Devendra. Heaven was without a King. Bad omens
began to appear. Indra, who had hidden in the lotus
stalk in the shape of a water-snake, was not at all visible
* Idhma—twigs of d. (Id =twi
Schr gs of firewood. (Idhma=twigs of firewo d A
**Tt ig Mentioned in the Mahabharata, Aeuhaaan. bea
into a huge serpent, was the hermit Bhrgu, who had bee
AGASTYA
as the petals had closed over him. It was at this critical
moment that King Nahusa had completed hundred
horse-sacrifices and became eligible for the throne of
Devendra. At a great gathering of the Gods Nahusa
was elected as Devendra. Though Nahusa got all the
celestial maids at his disposal in the Nandanodyadna
(Nandana Garden) his passion for women was not
satiated. So he began to have an eye on Indrani. She
was in sorrow and misery at the disappearance of her
husband Indra, and did not at all look with favour on
this new move on the part of the new Indra. She sought
the help of Brhaspati, who agreed to protect her
from Nahusa. The newly-elected Indra could not tolerate this disloyalty on the part of Indrani. He became
furious and threatened Brhaspati with death, if Indrani
was not sent to him forthwith. All hermits gathered
round Nahusa and tried with their advice to dissuade
him from this attempt, but he would not be dissuaded.
Nahusa belittled Brhaspati and all the hermits and was
rude to them. Finally the hermits, being afraid o
Nahusa, went to Brhaspati to persuade him to send
Indrani to Nahusa. Brhaspati suggested to Indrani a
way of safety. Accordingly she came to Nahusa and said
to him “Lord, to become your wife, is a matter of great
pleasure to me. But before that I must make sure 1
my husband is living anywhere. So allow me to make a
search”. Nahusa agreed to this and by the blessings
of Devi, Indrani found out her husband. But Indra
would not return to the court, with Indrani, who
then complained about Nahusa’s outrageous behaviour.
Indra advised her a new way to protect herself from
Nahusa’s onslaught.
Indrani returned to Nahusa and told him “Lord, women generally love pomp and glory. I have a mania
for vehicles. You should make a palanquin. Let the
palanquin bearers be hermits. You must come to my
house in that palanquin with hermits as your palanquin
bearers and then I will accept you as my husband.”
Nahusa agreed. He employed Agastya and such other
hermits to bear his palanquin. He got into his palanquin and started for Indrani’s house. His desire to
reach Indrani was such that he thought the hermits to
be very slow. To make them quick enough he ordered
“Sarpa, Sarpa’”’ (walk quick, walk quick). The hermits
ae to run. Still Nahusa was not satisfied. He kicked
t the heads of the hermits and whipped the dwarfish
Agastya.
Agastya got angry and cursed Nahusa thus: ‘Since
you have whipped me saying ‘Sarpa Sarpa’, may you
be transformed into a mahasarpa (huge serpent) and
fall into the great forest.2?* *
The horror-stricken Nahusa pleased Agastya by praiseAgastya said that Nahusa would be freed from the
curse and attain heaven when he happened to meet
Dharmaputra. Nahusa instantly changed into 4
aad iene and slided into a great forest
During their. 5c} evimhagavata, 8th partea S
visited man tet woke a get Hammes Fagave
i fe oilee YP aces and reached the Yamun
by the mouth of mavayas. When Bhima was gai
serpent. In spite ete he was attacked by a hug
pent. in spite of his immense strength Bhima cou
=Carrier),
Fa Chapter 100, th
n hiding in the hair of Agastya, the person who cursed Nahusa and turned him

AGASTYA
not extricate himself from the hold of the snake, who
eventually informed Bhima of its previous history.
When Bhima understood that the serpent was none
other than Nahusa, a King of the Surya dynasty
(Solar), he felt sorry for him. Dharmaputra, who
came there in search of Bhima, talked with Nahusa,
who immediately regained his original form and
went to heaven. (Mahabharata, Chapter 17 of
Udyoga Parva; Chapter 179 of Vana Parva; Chapter
342 of Santi Parva).
9) How Agastya drank up the ocean. Indra ruthlessly
killed Vrttrasura, who had been harassing the Gods,
with the help of the Kalakeyas. The frightened Kalakeyas got into the ocean and hid themselves at the
bottom. From that hideout they decided to destroy
the three worlds. At night they came out on the
earth and ate a good deal of Brahmins, and caused
much damage to the hermitages of Vasistha and
Cyavana. All the Brahmins on the earth were terribly
afraid of the Kalakeyas. ‘The gods went to Visnu
and prayed for protection. Visnuinformed them that
the Kalakeyas could not be caught unless the ocean
was dried up, and this task could be performed only
by Agastya. So the Gods approached Agastya and told
him what Visnu had informed them. With pleasure
Agastya accepted the job. Accompanied by the Gods
and hermits he neared the swaying and surging ocean.
While all were watching unwinkingly Agastya brought
the great ocean into his palm and drank it up very
easily and subsequently the Kalakeyas were killed.
Now the Gods again approached Visnu and made
representation about the loss of the ocean. Visnu told
them that by the penance of Bhagiratha the divine
Ganga would fall into the earth and then the ocean
will be filled. In this way the earth regained its lost
ocean. (Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapters 101 to
10) Agastya cursing Kubera and his companion. In the
course of their sojourn in forest, the Pandavas
visited several holy places and’ reached the proximity
of the Himalayas. Leaving his brothers _ behind,
Arjuna went up the Mahameru to worship va
Years passed by. At last his brothers also —
for the Mahameru in search of Arjuna and wit
the help of the hermits Vrsaparva and Arstisena, they
rested, Kiolerapall (the capital of Kubera). a
Bhima destroyed the army of Kubera and kille
Maniman, his friend and favourite. Dhagiis pans
repenting of his younger brother’s iniquity pour
before Kubera and asked him with pes ee a ee
power of Gods gave way to the power °F =< ng
replied that it was due to the curse .
began to depict the event thus : hae re a
Maniman and myself were going; ina c anit ; # Be
present at the singing and chanting just, _begu a
Kugavati. At that time Agastya was stan ing bo fs
hermitage on the bank of Kalindi, per gum s
worship. When Manim4n saw this from the sky, a
spat on the head of Agastya, who instantly geiene ie :
cussed me. “Lo, iubera, your ra | a
spat on my head in your 8h" 9 Jpg man's hand
your army will meet with a ae ag Lg
When they die you should —~ ee ee ne
ll be liberated from the curse.’
it becomes possible for
killed Maniman you w!
AGASTYA
It is this curse that brought about the death of
Maniman and the army. When Kubera saw Bhima
face “to face his curse was revoked. (Mahabharata,
Vana Parva, Chapter 160).
11) Agastya cursing Marica and Tadakaé. The boys
R.ama and Laksmana went to the forest with Viévamitra for protecting sacrifice. When they entered the
Tadaka forest Visvamitra told them the story of
Tadaka thus :—
LTadaka is the daughter of Suketu, a semi god of the
tribe Yaksa. Being childless for a long time Suketu was
miserable and began to do penance before Brahma,
who blessed him and granted his wish and a daughter
was born to him. This daughter was named Tadaka.
Brahma blessed her, giving her the strength of one
thousand elephants. Tadaka grew up and became a
young woman. Suketu gave her in marriage to Sunda,
son of Iharjha. Tadaka gave birth to a son called
Marica. When Sunda was killed, Tadaka got wild
and ran into the hermitage of Agastya causing much
havoc there. At this Agastya got angry and cursed
her to become a Raksasi (giantess) and instantly
the bodies of Tadak&a and Marica were deformed.
Tadaka could not control her anger and she demolished the hermitage of Agastya. (Valmiki Ramayana,
Balakanda_).
12) The story of the theft of lotus. Once Bhrgu,
Vasistha and other hermits went on a pilgrimage,
with Indra as their leader. On the way they
reached Brahmasaras, in the holy place of Kausiki.
Agastya had grown some lotus flowers there. The
pilgrims plucked stealthily all the lotus flowers nurtured by Agastya and ate them. The furious Agastya
got into the midst of the hermits in search of the
culprit. None admitted the theft. Finally he caught
hold of Indra, as the thief. Indra said ‘“‘O, Lord,
had it not been for my eagerness to hear discourses
on duty from ‘your face, I would not have stolen
your lotus flowers.’’ Saying thus Indra returned the
lotus flowers. Agastya was pleased and let Indra
and the hermits depart in peace. (Mahabharata,
Anusasana Parva, Chapter 94).
13) How Agastya burned the Asuras (demons). (This
story occurs in the Mahabharata as, having been told
by the God Vayu to Bhisma as a discourse on the
greatness of Agastya, and Bhisma reiterating it to
Arjuna ).
Once the Gods had to accept defeat at the hands of
the Asuras (Demons) and they approached Agastya
and said thus : Oh, hermit, since we have been defeated by the Asuras, our prosperity is at an end. There
isnone to help us but you.” Hearing this Agastya
became angry and began to burn the Asuras to death,
by the merits of his penance. Many of them fell down
on the earth and some fell into Patala (the nether world).
The asuras who thus fell were not killed by Agastya. Thus the menace of the Asuras in heaven was
warded off, and the Gods lived in peace and prosperity.
(Mahabharata, AnuSsasana Parva, Chapter 155, Verses
14) Indra’s conflict with Agastya. Once Agastya commenced a sacrifice of twelve years’ duration. Many
hermits participated in this sacrifice. No sooner had
the hermit begun the sacrifice, than Indra, (the God of
Thunder and Rain) stopped rain in the world, Crops

AGASTYA
could not be raised. But Agastya provided everybody
who took part in the sacrifice, with sumptuous meals.
The hermits wondered how Agastya could do this. Some
of the hermits feared that the sacrifice would have to be
stopped before the stipulated time, if the drought continued. Agastya told them not to fear, and that if
Indra refused to send rain, he himself would become
Indra and protect the sabjects. Indra was horrified,
when he heard this and he began to send rain regularly. (Mahabharata, Asvamedhika Parva, Chapter
13 j Story of Gajendramoksa (Lhe redemptionof an elephant) .
In the Bharata a story occurs, as to how Agastya
cursed King Indradyumna, and turned him to an elephant. While Indradyumna, the King of Pandya was
absorbed in deep meditation on Visnu, Agastya reached the palace. Being immersed in meditation the King
failed to notice the arrival of the great hermit, who
getting angry with the King, cursed him to become an
elephant, for one thousand years. Instantly the King
was deformed into a big tusker and quitting the palace
it went to a big forest and lived there happily with the
she-elephants there. At that time a hermit named Devala was doing penance in that forest. One day Hihu,
a gandharva (a class of semi-gods) enjoying the company of some celestial maids came to the place where
Devala had put up his hermitage. The hermit saw
the Gandharva and the maids playing and bathing in
the pond in front of his hermitage in complete nudity.
Getting angry Devala cursed Huhu and he was deformed into a crocodile. This pond which was in the
Trikita Mountain was thus under the suzerainty of
the crocodile. The tusker (Indradyumna) entered the
pond to drink water. The crocodile caught hold of the
leg of the elephant. Each tried to pull the other with
equal force. This fight is said to have lasted for a
thousand years. When both were tired, godly feelings
began to dawn in their minds. Then, riding on an
eagle Mahavisnu appeared before them, cut them
asunder with his CGakrayudha (the wheel-weapon)
and both were given deliverance. (Bhagavata, 8th
Skandha, Chapter 2).
16) Agastya teaching Sri Rama the Aditya-hrdaya Manira
(A hymn'in praise of the Sun). When Sri Rama was
fighting with Ravana in Lanka, dejection befell him,
his heart being weighed down with faintness, for a
little while. Ravana made the best use of this opportunity and began to advance. The gods had gathered
in the sky above to witness the fight. Agastya, at that
particular moment, taught Sri Rama the Aditya-hrdaya
Mantra, a hymn in praise of the Sun-god and when
Sri Rama chanted that mantra, he resumed fight with
Vigour and Ravana was defeated and slain. (Valmiki
Ramayana, Yuddha Kanda, Sarga 107)
17) How the slant of the earth was rectified by seating
Agastya. The matrimonial ceremony of Sri Parameé.
vara and Parvati was held in the Himalayas. On
that auspicious occasion all the living beings of the
world were present, and as a result the Himalayan
region sank down and the earth slanted to that side.
To keep the equilibrium of the earth, Siva seni
eae to the south. Accordingly Agastya reached
a, am, where there was a temple dedicated to
© Worship of Visnu. Agastya had besmeared is
forehead with ashes and so admission to the temple
AGASTYA
was denied to him, by the devotees there who were
Vaisnavites. By his own power Agastya turned himself into a vaisnavite and got into the temple, and
immediately the image of Visnu in the temple changed by itself into a Sivaliniga (idol representing Siva).
Since then the temple at Kuttalam has remained a
temple of Siva. Agastya proceeded to the southernmost point of the earth and sat there and because of
his weight the earth regained its normal position.
(Skanda Purana).
18) Agastya and the Kraufica Mountain. When Agastya
passed the Vindhya mountain and proceeded to the
South a Raksasa (giant) called Kraufica hindered
his way. By his power the Raksasa caused to fall
everywhere a very heavy rain. Agastya sprinkled a
few drops of water from his waterpot on Kraufica,
who instantly became a mountain. Telling him that
he would get deliverance from the curse when the
weapon of Subrahmanya struck him, Agastya continued his journey to the South. (Skanda Purdana.).
19) Agastya and the River Kaveri. Once Sirapadma,
an Asura (demon) drove the Gods out from heaven.
Indra came to Siy4li a place in the district of Tanjavar
(Tanjore) and began to do penance to please Siva.
Rain was completely stopped. Agastya had compressed the river Kaveri and held the water in his
waterpot. Ganapati having come to know of this,
came in the form of a crow and toppled the waterpot. Agastya got angry and ran after the crow, which
immediately assumed the form of a boy. Agastya caught
hold of him. The boy instantly revealed himself as
Subrahmanya and granted Agastya a boon. ‘Your
waterpot will always be full’. Since then there had
never been shortage of water in the Kaveri. (Skanda
Purana).
20) Agastya in the palace of Bhadrasva. Once Agastya
lived in the palace of Bhadragva as his guest for
seven days. Agastya praised K4ntimati the queen
on several occasions. The King wanted to know the
reason. Agastya said : During her previous birth
Kantimati was the handmaid of a rich man. On
one occasion of dvadasi (twelfth night after full
moon) in the month of Tula (second half of October and first half of November) the rich man had
asked his handmaid to see that the lights in a certain temple did not go out and she did so, in consequence of which, during her current birth she has
become your queen, bearing the name K4ntimati.
The King and the queen were. much pleased at this
explanation of Agastya and thenceforward they
began to observe dyadaégi as a day of fasting. (Vayu
Purana).
21) Agastya cursing Urvasi, Jayanta and Narada. Once
Agastya went to the realm of the Gods, as a guest
of Indra. On that day a performance of dance by
Urvasi was held in honour of Agastya. In the midst
of the dance Urvasi’s eyes fell on Jayanta and she fell
i love with him; wr steps went out of beat. Narada
a’so'went wrong slightly in playing on his famous
lute called Mahati. A peasy call is and cursed
Urvasi, Jayanta and Narada. According to the curse
Jayanta became a bud. Urvagsi was born in the eart
as 4 woman called Madhavi and ‘Mahati’ the lute ©
Narada became the lute of the people of the earth.

AGASTYA
22) Agastya cursing Duspanya. Duspanya was the last
son of the King of Pataliputra. The wicked Duspanya
had slain a large number of babies, and the King
therefore expelled him from the palace. Duspanya
went into the forest, where he caught hold of the
child ot Ugraravas and killed it by putting it under
water. Ugraravas cursed him and accordingly he fell
into water and died and his spirit became a ghost
and wandered about tormented with pain and
anguish. At last the spirit approached Agastya, who
called his disciple Sutisna and asked him to go and
bathe in the Agnitirtha (a bath) in the Gandhamadana mountain and bring some water from the tirtha
and sprinkle it on the spirit of Duspanya. Sutisna
acted accordingly and immediately the spirit of Duspanya received divine figure and entered heaven. (Setu
Mahatmya).
23) How Agastya got golden Bangle. Once Agastya
entered a forest of about a hundred yojanas wide. The
forest was devoid of life. When he had walked a few
more steps some Gandharvas (semi-gods) and celestial
maids came there singing and dancing. From among
them a noble male being came forward to the bank of
a lake in the forest and ate without any hesitation, the
corpse of a man that was lying there. After that he
walked round Agastya and made obeisance to him.
Agastya asked him why he had eaten the corpse of a
man. The noble man told Agastya thus: “In treta
yuga (the third age) there lived a King named Vidarbha.
I am his son and my name is Sveta. After having ruled.
over my kingdom for a long time, I came to the bank
of this lake and began to do penance. After that discarding my body I entered heaven. Though I attained
heaven my hunger was not appeased. I asked Brahma
how, I, a dweller of heaven, got this hunger. Brahma
said that when I was King I had given nothing to anybody and so I got this hunger even after entering
‘ahma suggested that I should
heaven. As a remedy Brahma sugge Sod
come here everyday and eat ‘corpse and when I ha
completed ten thousand days the hermit ea
would come here and that when I offered him a pn ne
bangle my sin would be washed away.” Saying thus
‘a the golden bangle given by
Sveta offered to Agastya g
vanished and the corpse also disa and then he See
cppearedl Sait went to heaven. (Uttara Ramayana).
‘nformations concerning Agastya. — .
1} hewn, hed a brother called Sutisna. (Agnipurana, Chapter 7).
(2) Sutisna was Agastya
ty Sia) f the giantess
Vatapi were the sons 0 gi
ire a : alles ofa mountain Ajamukhi prayed to Durvasas for love and thus Ilvala and Vatapi
were born from Durvasas. These two sons demanded
that Durvasas should impart to them all his merits of
penance. Getting angry Durvasas cursed them that
they would meet with death at the hands of Agastya.
(Skandapurana, Asura Kanda). |
(4) Agastya had been the priest of the King Khela.
(Reveda, 112th Stkta ). a 7
(5) When Sri Rama returned to Ayodhya, with Sita
from Lanka, hermits from various parts visited him,
among whom, Dattatreya, Namuci, Pramuci, Sri
’s disciple too. (Setu MahaValmiki, Soma, Kandu, Agastya and their disciples
were from the South. (Uttara Ramayana).
AGASTYA SARAS
(6) Agastya gave Sri Rama an arrow, which, when
shot at an asura (demon) would pierce his heart, pass
on to the other side, fly to the sea and bathe in the
sea-water and return to the quiver, it is said. (Uttara
Ramayana).
(7) Once Agastya visited the hermitage of Apastamba.
He asked Agastya, who, of Brahma, Visnu and iva,
was the Supreme deity. Agastya replied: ‘‘These three
are only three different manifestations of the one
supreme Being’’. (Brahmapurana).
(8) For the story of how Agastya cursed the sons of
Manibhadra and transformed them to seven palms,
see the word ‘Saptasala’.
(9) There was a hermit called Sutisna, to whom Sri
Rama and Laksmana paid a visit when they were
wandering in the forest. This Sutisna is the younger brother of Agastya. (See the word Sutisna).
(10) Agastya cursed Suka and deformed him into a
Raksasa. (See the word Suka ii.).
25) Conclusion. It is believed that the great hermit
Agastya, who had performed such wonderful deeds by
the merits of his penance, is still doing penance in the
Agastya Kita hills. Agastya who had travelled throughout the length and breadth of Bharata had several
hermitages. In the Valmiki Ramayana, Aranyakanda,
Sarga 11, a description is given, of a beautiful hermitage of Agastya, and the peaceful atmosphere that
prevailed in and around it. Agastya had presented to
Sri Rama a bow got from Visnu, when the brothers
visited his hermitage. Agastya had accompanied Sri
Rama and his followers on his return journey to
Ayodhya from Lanka, with Sita after killing Ravana.
There 1s a legend in the Tamilnad that Agastya was a
member of the first two ‘Sanghas’ (groups) of the
“three Sanghas”, mentioned in Tamil literature. As
Agastya was dwarfish he is mentioned as Kurumuni,
(short hermit) in Tamil works. He has written a Tamil
grammar on music, literature and drama. But this
work is not available now. The Tamil Grammar
“lolkapyam’, which is considered to be the oldest grammar, was written by Tolkapyar, one of the twelve
disciples of Agastya. Even today in certain temples in
the T'amilnad, Agastya-worship is carried on. Kambar,
has mentioned about Agastya in his Ramayana. A great
Tamil author Villiputturan says that the Tamil language is the beautiful maiden presented by Agastya.
It is believed that the following works have been composed by Agastya:
1) Agastya Gita ; in the Varahapurana, Pasupalopakhyana.
2) Agastya Sarbhitd; in Paficaratra.
3) Agastya Samhita, in the Skandapurana.
4) Siva Sarmbhita, in Bhaskara Samhita.
5) Dvaidha-nirnaya Tantra.
AGASTYA KUTA. This is the sacred mount where
he sage, Agastya, sat and did penance during his soErie a he southern parts of India. In the Kiskindha
Kanda of Valmiki Ramayana we find King Sugriva
commanding that all his soldiers going in search of
Sita should pay homage to the sage Agastya.
AGASTYA PARVATA. This is a mountain in South
India believed to belong to the Kalafijara mountain
range. Agastya Kita is in this mountain.
AGASTYA SARAS. This is another name for Agastya
tirtha.

AGASTYA-ASRAMA
AGASTYA-ASRAMA. The Puranas make mention of
several aésramas connected with sage Agastya. The
Pandavas during their exile visited an asrama of this
name. This is situated near Paficavati twentyfour miles
to the south-east of Nasik. It is known as Agastya-giri
now. (Sloka 20, Chapter 80; and Sloka 1, Chapter 96
of Vana Parva, M.B.). _
“ The Mahabharata mentions another Agastya-Asrama
near Prayaga. Dharmaputra along with Saint Lomaga
stayed here for some time. Valmiki describes an aSrama
of this name which Rama and Laksmana visited during
their exile in the forests. (Chapter 11, Aranya Kanda
of the Ramayana).
AGASTYA TIRTHA. This is one of the five tirthas or
sacred places of worship lying scattered in the southern
ocean. The other four are the following: (1) The
Saubhadra tirtha (2) The Pauloma tirtha (3) The
K4randhama tirtha and (4) the Atipavana tirtha.
These five were known as Pajica tirthas and many saints
used to live there. There lived in each of these tirthas
. one huge and herce crocodile and all the saints living
there, afraid of these crocodiles, deserted their places
one by one. (Ref : Sloka 3, Chapter 220 of Adi Parva,
M.B. For more details see under Pafica tirtha).
AGASTYA VATA. This is a sacred shrine in the neighbourhood of the Himalayas. Arjuna paid a visit to this
place while he was living with his brothers in the
forests during their period of exile. (Sloka 2, Chapter
214 of Adi Parva, M.B.).
AGATI. A city. Two sons Taksaka and Chattraketu
were born to Laksmana (the brother of Sri Rama)
by his wife Urmila. The court of the eldest prince
Taksaka was situated in the city of Agati. Formerly
this place was known as Kanakhala and was occupied
by forest tribes. Exterminating these forest tribes,
Laksmana built a city there and apportioned it to his
eldest son Taksaka. (Uttara Ramayana).
AGHA. The name of an asura. This asura was one of
the followers of Karhsa. According to the instructions
of Karhsa, Agha once set out to Gokula to kill $y
Krsna. At that time Sri Krsna was playing on the
banks of the river Kalindi with other cowherds. Aghasura watched the games of the children from the sky
above. Then he transformed himself into a colossal
serpent and lay with his mouth wide open; his open
mouth looked like an immense cave. The Byul smell
coming from his mouth soon spread over the whole
place. Sri Krsna and the other children did not know
anything about this. In the course of their games they
walked into the cave-like mouth of Agha and were soon
trapped in his belly. Agha then closed his mouth and
all the boys including Sri Krsna were now imprisoned
inside his body. Some of the boys died. Realizing the
situation Sri Krsna now enlarged his body. His body
grew larger and larger until at last it burst open the body
of the serpent (Agha). Thus Agha was killed. $13 Krsna
then restored the dead boys to life by his divine looks
(Kataksa). This Aghasura was the brother of Bakasura
and Pitana. (Bhagavata, Skandha 10, Chapter 12).
AGHAMARSANA. He was a great hermit of austerity
who had observed the duties pertaining to Winz:.
prastha (the third of the four stages of life—forest hermit). (M.B., Santi Parva, Chapter 244, Stanza 16)
*Manas= Mind. Putra—=
Son. Manasa-putras are sons created from the mind Of Brads
a,
ee
10 AGNI
AGHAMARSANA SUKTA. This is a hymn in the Rgveda. It is said that all sins will be eliminated, if this
hymn is recited three times, standing in water.
AGHARDDANAVAMI. (See the word NAVAMI
VRATA).
AGHASVA. A King hermit (Rajarsi) named Pedu.
(Rgveda, Mandala 1, Anuvaka 17, Saikta 116).
AGNI.
1) Genealogy. Agni was descended from Visnu in this
order : Visnu-Brahma-Angiras-Brhaspati-Agni.
2) Birth. We come across several contradictory statements in the Puranas regarding the birth of Agni. There
is some real difficulty, therefore, in tracing correctly
the true genealogy of Agni. The one given above is
based on statements in Bhagavata and Mahabharata.
Angiras is one of the six mind-born sons of Brahma.*
Angiras married Sraddha and got four daughters and
two sons. Brhaspati was one of the sons and Utatthya
was the other. The daughters were Sinivali, Kuhi,
Raka and Anumati. (There is a mention of a third
son named Samvarta in the Bhagavata by Eluthassan
though the original quoted below does not say so)
sraddha tu angirasah patni
Catasro * sutakanyakah
Sinivali Kuhi Raka
Caturthya ’ anumatistatha
Tatputravaparavastam
Khyatau svarocise’ntare
Utatthyo bhagavan saksat
Brahmisthasca Brhaspatih.
Brhaspati married Candramasi and got six divine sons.
Of these Samyu, the eldest, married Satya and Agni
was born to Sarhyu of Satya. (Slokas 1 to 4, Chapter
219, Aranya Kanda of Malayalam Mahabharata).
3) Agni—One of the Asta-dik-palakas. (Asta = eight,
dik=zone, palaka=guardian). The Devi Bhagavata
states in its eighth chapter that Agni is one of the eight
guards posted at the eight different zones to protect
the universe. Indra guards the east; Agni, the southeast; Yama the south; Nirrti, the south-west; Varuna,
the west; Vayu, the north-west: Kubera, the North and
Siva, the north-east. The place where Agni sits on
guard is known as tejovati.
4) Agni—-One of the five elements. The universe is believed to be composed of five elements of which Agni
. one. The other four are Water, Earth, Ether and
if.
3) Lhe, story of how Agni gave a Maya Sita (Phantom
Sita) to Sri Rama. During their exile in the forests
Rama and Laksmana were for some time livine in an
asrama built on the shores of the ocean. One day
Agni disguised as a Brahmin approached them and
said “O, Sri Rama, thou art born to kill the demon
Ravana and save the world from his atrocities. Sita is
going to be a cause for that. Time is not far for you
to finish this duty of yours. Ravana is soon to come an
ae a ee Sita. You must, therefore, allow me
I shall kee ee ee Entrust Sita with me and
—- Pp her safe. In her place here you can keep
: aya Sita «(Phantom Sita) which will be a live repie oe a wife. In the end when you take bac
throw r LNs Ravana you will be compelled to
your wife into the fire to test her chastity. At
Sloka 10, Chapter 65, Adi Parva, M.B.

AGNI
that time IJ will take back the replica and give you
back your real wife’. Sri Rama was very much
pleased to hear this. Agni then, by his yogic powers
created a Phantom Sita and gave her to him. Rama
kept this as a secret even from Laksmana. In the great
Rama-Ravana battle Ravana was killed and Sri Rama
took back Sita to his kingdom. Then respecting public
opinion and wishing to establish in public the purity
of his: queen King Sri Rama put her into the fire. At
that moment Agni took back the replica and gave
back the real Sita to Sri Rama. Sita thus came out
from the fire unscathed. Later, on the advice of Rama
and Agni, the Phantom Sita went to the sacred place
Puskara and started doing tapas (penance) there.
After doing tapas for a long period of three lakhs of
divine years this Phantom Sita became known as
Svargalaksmi. It was this Svargalaksmi that later on
in the Dvapara yuga came out from the yajna kunda
of King Paficala as Pafcali and became the consort of
the Pandavas. Vedavati, daughter of Kuéadhvaja in
Krtayuga, Sita, daughter of Janaka in the Treta yuga,
and Pafcali, daughter of Drupada in Dvapara yuga
are one and the same person. On account of this she
is known as trihayani also. (Chapter 9 of Devi
Bhagavata). ae .
6) Lhe story of how Agni got indigestion. In olden times
there was a bold and mighty King called Svetaki. He
conducted several different types of yajna. AfHicted
by the unending dense smoke in the yajnia hall all the
ascetics left the place and went their way. Undaunted
by this, Svetaki started another twelve-year sacrifice in
which not a single sage took part. The sages rebuked
him and said if he wanted to conduct a sacrifice again
he could invite $tidras to help him. (Sidras belong
to the lowest caste among Hindus and are not allowed to participate in sacrifices generally.) Enraged
by this insult Svetaki went to Kailasa and did fierce
penance. Lord Siva appeared before him and gave him
Durvasas as a priest for his yajiia. For twelve years
sage Durvdsas performed the yajfia pouring into
the mouth of Agni through the sacrificial pit unlimited materials of food. Agni was overfed and
he got indigestion. He lost all appetite for food, became weak and the brilliance of his face faded.
(Chapter 235, Adi Parva, M.B.). | a
7) The story of how Agni burnt the big forest, Khandava.
When the indigestion continued without abate for some
time Agni approached Brahma and asked for a cure.
Brahma declared that his indigestion would be cured
if Agni could burn the huge forest, _Khandava, he
abode of the enemies of the Devas. Agni Pauekagar oa
started consuming the forest. But the inhabitants of the
forest soon quenched the fire. Disappointed Agni pe
to Brahma again and the latter advised him to bg i
me time till the advent of Nara-Narayanas to that
“i help Agni to burn the forest.
forest. They would then he!p “8 th
Agni waited for the time to come. At that time the
pe aclavas were living in Indraprastha with Sri Krsna.
When the heat became unbearable there ae and
K came to the banks of river Yamuna. Hearing
ie ‘val of Krsna and Arjuna who were none
about the sae. ST Waaeyare ancl Nava, Agila.
a a ene ached them and requested
brahmin appro t : 3
iene him to burn the Khandava forest. Agni
added that any attempt of his to burn the forest was
AGNI
always foiled by Indra who would send a heavy downpour of rain to quench the fire because Taksaka, an
intimate friend of Indra, was living there. aie,
To gain his end Agni gave Arjuna an arrow-case
which would never be empty, a chariot bearing a
monkey flag, four white horses adorned with gold
chains and also the famous Gandiva bow. To Sri Krsna
he gave the cakrayudha or the divine wheel-weapon.
(All these military equipments were once given to
Agni by Varuna.) When all these were given to-them
Krsna and Arjuna got ready to help Agni to burn the
forest. Agni started burning the forest, Indra at once
sent a heavy downpour of rain and Arjuna created a
canopy of arrows above the forest preventing the rains
from falling on the forest. Agni carried on his work
undisturbed, the forest was burnt and Agni was cured
of his indigestion. (Slokas 233 to 239, Adi Parva,
8) ani falls in love. As an inaugural procedure to the
great Rajastya which Dharmaputra performed at
Indraprastha his four brothers Bhima, Arjuna, Nakula
and Sahadeva conducted a victory march to the four
different sides of the kingdom. Sahadeva who turned
south conquered many kings including Dantavaktra
and Bhismaka and reached a country called Mahismatipura. There he had to encounter a powerful king
called Nila. Before long there broke a fire in his camp.
Disheartened, Sahadeva prayed to the God, Agni, for
help. It was then that Sahadeva came to know about
the ties between Agni and Nila.
King Nila had a beautiful daughter named Sudargana.
Once when she was talking to her father after having
entered the Agni-hotra Agni fell in love with her. From
that day onwards Agni became dreamy about the
beautiful lips of Sudargana. It reached a stage when
Agni would burn only if itwas blown by the lips of
Sudargana. This ended in Agni marrying Sudargana.
After the marriage Agni lived in the palace of his
father-in-law, King Nila, as a useful ally. It was at this
time that Sahadeva came to conquer Nila. But Agni
knew that for the proper conduct of the Rajasiya of
Dharmaputra his father-in-law had to surrender to
Sahadeva and so advised his father-in-law to do so.
What appeared to be a difficult problem was thus
easily solved. (Chapter 31, Sabha Parva, M.B.).
9) How Emperor Sibi was tested by Agni. Once Agni and
Indra thought of testing how strong and deep was the
sense of charity in Emperor Sibi. Indra took the shape
of a hawk and Agni that of a dove and the dove flew
and dropped down into the lap of the Emperor who
was at that time doing a yaga. The hungry hawk
came chasing its prey and finding the dove in the lap
of the Emperor said : ‘“O King, is it proper on your
part to withhold my food from me, and keep it in your
lap ?”? Hearing this Sibi replied: ‘This dove has sought
refuge in me. It is my duty to give it protection. If it
is only food you want I shall give you food.” Sibi then
offered many things including his kingdom io the
hawk in return for the dove. But the hawk refused
them all and finally agreed to accept an equal weight
of flesh from the body of the Emperor. Sibi without
any hesitation cut a portion of his thigh and weighed
it against the dove ina scale. The dove weighed more
and the Emperor started putting more and more flesh
from his body to make the weight equal. But the dove

AGNI
always weighed more and at last the Emperor said he
would weigh himself against the dove. As the weak and
fleshless Emperor was about to get into the pan of the
scale Agni and Indra emerged from the bodies of the
dove and hawk and appeared before the Emperor.
They blessed him and immediately took him to heaven.
(Chapter 131, Vana Parva, M.B.). .
10) Agni and the testicles.of a goat. The occasion is when
sage Vigvamitra is taking Rama and Laksmana to the
forests to give protection to the sages against the demons. I’hey reached the place where Ahalya lay as a
stone cursed by Gautama. Visvamitra told them the
story: “‘It was here that the great sage, Gautama, lived
with his beautiful consort, Ahalya. Once Indra had an
intercourse with her privately and Gautama coming to
know of the misdeed cursed her and turned her into
stone. By the curse of the same sage Indra lost his
testicles. Greatly aggrieved by this loss Indra prayed
to god Agni for help and on the advice of Agni the
devas removed the deformity by placing a goat’s testicles instead.” (Slokas 48 & 49, Bala Kanda, Valmiki
Ramayana).
11) How sage Bhrgu cursed Agni. Sage Bhrgu was living
with his wife Puloma in his arama. Puloma became
pregnant. One day when Bhrgu wanted to go out for
a bath in the river he asked Agni to keep a watch over
‘his pregnant wife. There was a demon by name
Puloma who was once in love with Puloma. On this
particular day Puloma entered the Agrama to see
his former love. When he entered the 4frama Puloma
saw Agni there burning with a brilliant flame in the
fire-pit. Puloma said: ‘“O God of fire, if I ask you a
question you must give me an impartial reply. I was
in love with this Puloma and I had accepted her as
my wife spiritually. But, then, her father gave her to
Bhrgu. Who, then, is the true owner of Puloma 2?”
Agni was afraid of Bhrgu. Yet he explained the position honestly. “It is true that Puloma has married
Bhrgu. But he has not married her according to Hindu
rites.’ Hearing this the demon changed himself into
the shape of a swine and carried away Puloma. On
the way Puloma delivered a male babe and it fell on
the ground. The boy was named Cyavana. It was this
boy that became later on the famous Cyavana Maharsi. Even at birth the boy was brilliant as the Sun
to look at and Puloma, the demon, noticing the, unusual brilliance of the child left the mother and child
on the way and fled frightened. Puloma returned to the
asrama carrying the child weeping profusely all the
way and creating a lanchrymal river called Vadhisaras. As soon as she entered the Agrama the angry
sage asked ‘‘Who told Puloma that you are my wife ?”
Puloma then told her husband all that happened there
and Bhrgu called Agni and cursed him thus - ““May
you be a consumer of all things on this Earth”. Greatly aggrieved Agni went away and hid himself The
absence of Agni created chaos in all the three worlds;
Heaven, Earth and the Nether-world. A deputation of
all the afflicted people waited upon Brahma and
ovis: *Kathasaritsigara gives another version of why Agni
wat, 10 death by Siva, Parvati, Siva’s wife, did not find a way
told him that the absence of Kama was making creation difficult. Siva then declared that there
living beings including hi Saeete
out reaching the cli “ a 3 oe Parvati and §
Agni was afraid of Siva ang SQ went and hid
iva imme€diately com
€ world was agitated and the universe stood
AGNI
Brahma modified the curse and declared that all that
Agni touched would become pure. Agni was consoled
and he started his work as usual.
12) How Agni cursed frogs, birds and elephants. Many
Important events took place while Agni was underground cursed by Bhrgu. It was during that time that
Parvati cursed all the Devas and the Devas were
defeated by the asuras (demons). The necessity of a
warrior capable of defeating the asuras arose then.
The idea of creating Lord Subrahmanya came up and
Brahma said that only Agni could help them in this
matter since Agni was the only one who escaped from
the curse of Parvati, being underground at the time
of the curse. The Devas started a vigilant search but
Agni was not to be found. Agni was then hiding inside
the ocean. The ocean was getting hot and the animals
living there found their life unbearable. Frogs went to
the devas and told them where Agni was hiding.
Enraged at this Agni cursed the frogs saying that they
would never be able to find the taste of anything.
Frogs went weeping to the devas who in turn blessed
the frogs saying that they would acquire the ability to
move about easily in any darkness. Agni changed his
place of hiding and went and hid in a big banyan
tree. An elephant going by that way found him out
and informed the devas; knowing this Agni cursed
the elephants saying that its tongue would go deep
inside. But the devas blessed the elephants saying that
the position of the tongue would never be a hindrance
to free eating and that clephants would be able to eat
anything and everything. Agni left the banyan tree
and hid himself in the hollow of a Sami tree. A little
bird living in that tree gave information to the devas
and the devas found him out before he got time to
leave the place. Agni cursed the bird saying that its
tongue would always be curved inside and the devas
blessed it saying that the curvature would help it to
sing beautiful songs. Since Agni was found out from
Sami tree this tree became sacred. Since this finding
out of Agni after a long absence is like a re-birth of
Agni the Puranas mention that Agni was born from
the Sami tree. The Devas then requested Agni to help
them to create a son capable of conquering the demons.* (Chapter 85, AnuSasana Parva, M.B.).
13) Birth of Subrahmanya. At that time Varuna performed
ayaga. All the dikpadlakas (zone guardians of the
universe) including Siva participated in the yaga.
Seeing the beautiful wives of the sages Siva had emission.
Taking the semen in his hand he put it into the fire.
Agni carried it to Ganga and requested her to take it
forconception. Though she at first refused she took it,
became pregnant and finally delivered a male child
whom she threw into the forest aravana. It was this
child who became known as Karttikeya or Subrahmanya later on. (Chapter 85, Anugdsana Parva M.B.).
14) How Agni blessed Nala. While Nala was going to the
wedding of Damayanti Indra, Agni, Varuna and Kala
cera beeps and asked him to go as a
nd advise Damayanti to marry one

AGNI
of them. Nala did so but Damayanti was adamant and
said she would marry none other than Nala. So all the
four gods appeared as Nala in the wedding hall.
Damayanti who was confused prayed that she should
be shown the real Nala. The gods then changed into
their original forms and blessed Nala. Agni said he
would come and help him the moment he wanted him.
Thus Nala became a good cook and Nala Pacakar
(Pacakam=cooking) became famous. Even now itis a
synonym for good cooking. (Chapter 57, Vana Parva,
M.B
13} = and Rambhad. There was once a danava called
Danu. He had two sons named Rambha and Karambha. They had no children and tormented by this
they went to Paficanada and started doing penance.
Rambha sat in the centre of Paficagni (five fires) and
Karambha in water to do penance. Indra afraid of the
severe and powerful tapas of the two took the form of
a crocodile and killed Karambha who was doing penance in water by dragging him down to the water. Bereayed Rambha started to commit suicide by jumping
into the fire. God Agni appeared before him ‘then and
asked him what he wanted. Rambha then said that he
should get a son who would be famous as a warrior in
all the three worlds. Agni agreed. Rambha on his way
back saw a voluptuous she-buffalo and married her
at yaksa kavata. ‘hey lived a happy married life and
one day a he-buffalo envious of their life attacked
Rambha and killed him. Grief-stricken Rambha’s wife
jumped into the funeral pyre and committed suicide.
Then from the fire arose a demon named Mahisdsura
(Mahisa = Buffalo. Asura=Demon). This buffalodemon became a terror to all in the three worlds later
on. (Chapter 5, Devi Bhagavata). . |
16) Difference of opinion between Agni and Argiras. Bhagavan Angiras did penance in his own Aagrama and
became more brilliant than Agni. The whole world
was submerged in his brilliance. Agni felta bit depressed at this. Agni argued that it was not proper on the
part of Brahma to give anybody else more brilliance
than himself. So as a protest against this Agni disappeared from the world. Even Angiras was annoyed at
Agni’s disappearance and so he went and consoled Agni
and took him to Brahma. Brahma declared that henceforth the world would recognize Agni as the father and
Angiras as his son. Thus Agni got the first eae in
effulgence..This is a story told by sage a: 2
to Dharmaputra. (Chapter 217, Vana ae _ -
17) Agni and Mahdbali. On their way to the i a
Visvamitra took Rama and Laksmana to Siddhasra ;
The sage explained to the princes the a pe shee
that agrama. He said: ‘‘Mahavisnu lived in this 4
for a number of years. It was at that time that the
Emperor of the asuras (demons), Mahabali, son of
he
a, was ruling the world conquering even t
sg» Ma ae conquered all the woe cn
Mahabali decided to conduct a gage ey
of. the Devas headed by Agni then waite be ae
visnu and Agni said: “‘O Lord, Mahabali . Ep
menced a yaga and before it is finished os on ge
to him and do something for the ee ee Pel
devas”. It was at this request of Agni : a space
took the form of Vamana and iS a a i, pe
nether-world. (Chapter 29, Batakanda,
Ramayana).
AGNI
18) Agni and Nahusa. Repenting for his act of killing
Vrtra Indra unknown to anybody went and hid ina
lotus in the Manasa Saras (Lake Manasa). Perplexed
by the disappearance of their leader the devas brought
Nahusa from the Earth and made him their leader.
Nahusa became very proud and arrogant of his new
position and tried to make Indrani his wife. Indrani
went to Brhaspati for help. Brhaspati commanded
Agni to go and find out Indra. Agni searched for him
in forests, rivers and oceans. At last he went to
Manasa Saras and searched among the lotuses. There
he found Indra hiding in a lotus and Brhaspati was
duly informed. Then Brhaspati gave Indrani some
clever directions to kil] Nahusa and Nabusa_ was
Killed. (See Agastya). There isa story in Santi Parva,
Chapter 28, of how Agni took for himself a quarter of
the sin which Indra acquired because of his killing
Vrtra, a brahmin by birth. (Chapter 14, Udyoga
Parva, M.B.).
19) Agni Deva and AGritaviryarjuna. After the great
Kuruksetra battle the Pandavas went again to Kuruksetra along with Sri Krsna. On their way Krsna
showed them the Paraguramahradas and narrated to
them several stories of Rama. Reference to Agni
comes when Krsna explains the reason why Paragurama
cut off the thousand hands of Karttaviryarjuna. It was
at the time when Kartiaviryarjuna was ruling the
three worlds by his might that Agni went and asked for
alms from him. K4rttavirya gave Agni mountains and
forests for his food which Agni burnt and ate. In one
of the forests was the agrama of sage Apava and that
also was burnt. Enraged at this the sage cursed Karttavirya saying that his thousand hands would be cut off
by Parasurama. Though the curse was not seriously
minded by the King then, it so happened that before
long Karttavirya had to encounter Paragurama ina
battle when the children of the King stole a sacrificial
cow belonging to Jamadagni, father of Parasurama.
In the battle all the thousand hands of Karttaviryarjuna were cut off by Paragurama. (Chapter 43,
Santi Parva, M.B.).
20) How Agni was duped. Once the wives of the Saptarsis (seven Saints) attended a yaga where Agni was
also present. Agni fell in love with them but knowing
it to be futile to make any attempt to fulfil his desire
he went to the forests dejected. Svahadevi, daughter of
Daksa was for a long time craving to marry Agni and
she decided to take advantage of the opportunity thus
offered. Disguising herself as the wife of Atigiras, one
of the seven saints, she approached Agni and said : “O
Lord, I am Siva, wife of Angiras. We were all excited
when you darted cupids’ arrows against us and they
have now selected me to come to you for fulfilling your
desire’. Agni believed her and took her as his consort.
(Chapters 223 to 227 of Vana Parva, M.B.).
21) How Agni became a doctor. There was once a sage
called Dattatreya who had a son called Nimi. Nimy
had a son and he died after thousand years. The
bereaved sage performed a Sraddha which was attended by all devas. The feast was so sumptuous that the
devas got indigestion after that. Consulting Brahma
Agni prescribed a remedy for their indigestion. He said:
“whenever you take any food make me also a participantin that. If you do so you will never get indigestion”. That is why a very small portion of any cooked

AGNI
food is first thrown into the fire before given for eating. This story is part of Bhisma’s oration to Dharmaputra on the origin of Sraddha (The ceremony conducted on the anniversary of the. death of a person by
his son). (Chapter 92, Anusasana Parva, M.B.).
22) How Agni became a horse. ‘There was once a preceptor named Aveda. He got a disciple named Uttanga.
One day Aveda left his 4srama for a distant place
leaving his disciple in charge of the management of the
asrama. Ihe preceptor was absent for a long time and
his wife started making love to Uttanga. The dutiful
disciple strongly objected to this. When Uttanga completed his course of study under Aveda he enquired
what he should give to his preceptor. The preceptor
directed him to his wife. The wife who bore a grudge
against Uttanga resolved to tease him and said that
he should go to King Pausya and beg of him the
earrings worn by his wife. Uttanga started immediately
and getting the earrings was coming back when on
the way Taksakawrested the ornament from him and
went and hid in the nether-world. Uttanga followed
Taksaka and there Agni-in the form of a horse appeared before him and asked Uttanga what he wanted.
He replied that he wanted to subdue all the serpents in
‘the nether-world. Agni then advised him to blow thro’
the nostrils of the horse. As he did so flames burst forth
from all the openings of the horse making the netherworld hot and smoky. Taksaka was frightened and he
at once gave back the earrings to Uttanga. Uttanga
was again worried for he had very little time to carry the
earrings to the preceptor in time. Hereagain Agni helped
him by carrying him swiftly on his back to the agrama.
When the preceptor and his wife found that U ttanga
had carried out their wish they blessed him. (Chapter
3, Adi Parva, M.B.).
23) Agni becomes a messenger. Once there arose a misunderstanding between Brhaspati and Samvarttaka,
sons of Angiras. Brhaspati went to devaloka as priest
while the other remained in the world as a mad saint.
At that time a King called Marutta invited Brhaspati to
officiate as priest for a yajiia of his. But Brhaspati
refused to accept it. Narada saw Marutta in despair
and told him thus: “You go to Kagi (Benares) and
there at Puradvara place a dead body and wait there.
Samvarttaka, Brhaspati’s brother will come and reprimand you. Without minding his scoldings follow him
and request him to become the chief priest for your
yaga. He will then ask you who advised you to do
like this. Tell him that Narada did so and if he asks
where he could find Narada do tell him that Narada
is hiding inside Agni’, Hearing this Marutta went to
_ Kasi and did all as directed. Sarhvartta agreed to become the priest but wanted Marutta to bring some gold
from Kailasa before that. Marutta brought that also
and the yajfia started. Brhaspati when he came to know
of all these developments became sorry for his refusal
first and decided to become the priest of Marutta for his
yaga. It was Agni who carried this message of consent
to King Marutta. Thus Marutta’s yajfia was performed
in a grand way. (Chapter 9, AS’vamedha Parva, M.B.).
24) Agni takes back the Géndiva. At the time of
Khandava dahana (burning of Khandava forest) Agni
Save Arjuna the famous GAndiva bow which Varuna
had given him. After the great Mahabharata battle
Agni took back this bow from Arjuna. The Pandavas
AGNI
at the fag end of their life started on a pilgrimage to
the south with their consort Paficali. Marching along
slowly they reached the shores of Aruna Samudra
(Aruna Ocean). Arjuna had with him then the Gandiva
and also the arrow-case which never becomes empty.
When they reached the shores of the ocean Agni blocked
their way standing before them in the form of a huge
mountain and said, ““O Arjuna I am god Agni. It was I
who gave this famous Gandiva bow to you. The bow
belongs to Varuna. So please throw it into the ocean
and proceed on your way’. On hearing this Arjuna
threw both the bow and the arrow-case into the ocean
and continued the march. (Slokas 33 to 43, Chapter
1, Mahaprasthanika Parva, M.B.).
25) Additional information about Agni, the God of fire.
1) Svahadevi, wife of Agni, gave birth to three sons,
named Daksinam, Garhapatyam and Ahavaniyam.
(Chapter 9, Devi Bhagavata) .
2) Agni, the God of fire, got three sons by his wife
Svahadevi named Pavaka, Pavamana and Suci. These
three sons had all together fortyfive sons. These fortyfive grandsons, three sons and Agni himself constitute
the fortynine Fires mentioned in the puranas (Angirasam. ).
3) Nila, the monkey, is born of Agni. (Sarga 41,
Chapter Kiskindha, Ramayana).
4) Dhrstadyumna, the great archer, was born of Agni.
(Sloka 126, Chapter 67, Adi Parva, M.B.).
3) Subrahmanya was born as the son of Agni. (Chapter
225, Vana Parva, M.B.).
6) Agni, the God of fire, loved all prajapatis like his
sons. (Chapter 85, Anugasana Parva, M.B.).
7) The sage, Bhrgu, was born from Agni. (Sloka 8,
Chapter 5, Adi Parva, M.B.).
8) All Devatas are Agni himself. (Sloka 109, Chapter 85,
Anusasana Parva, M.B.).
9) God Agni loved God Skanda more than anybody
else. (Chapter 226, Vana Parva, M.B.).
10) At the time when Sri Rama after killing Ravana
was putting Sita to a purity test by throwing her into the
fire, Agni witnessed that Sita had done no wrong and
was pure and chaste as before. (Sloka 28, Chapter 201,
Vana Parva, M.B.).
11) In the beginning Brahma created the universe:
There was no death then and the Earth became overcrowded. Brahma got worried and he sent fire from his
body to burn all beings. The world was on the verge
of extinction when Lord Siva intervened and requested
Brahma to withdraw Agni and create the god of Death.
(Chapter 52, Drona Parva. M.B.).
12) Agni is one of the Asta Vastis which are eight in
number. The others are : pa, Dhruva, Soma, Dharma;
Anila, Pratyusa and Prabhasa. (Chapter 15, Visnu
Purana).
13) Suci, son of Agni, born of Svahadevi is Badavagn!
himself. (Chapter 20, Agni Purana).
14) The God, Agni, uses a spear as his weapon and
the vehicle he uses is a goat. (Chapter 51, Agni Purana):
15) The sage, Agastya, converted the Visnu idol at the
Kuttalam temple into one of Siva and when people
around started an agitation Agastya sent forth flames
of fire through his eyes. (Asura Kanda of Skand@
Purana).
16) Agni was born to Pururavas as a son named Jatavedas. (Chapter 14, Navama Skandha of Bhagavata).-

AGNI 15
17) The Devas wanted help to clean their hands when
oblated materials stuck to their hands and Agni created from water three sons named Ekata, Dvita. and
ITrita for this purpose. Of these Trita fell into a well
while drawing water. Seeing him fall the demons
closed the well but Trita broke the top and came out.
(Stikta 52, Anuvaka 10, Mandala 1 of Rgveda).
18) Once the earth looked like heaven because-of the
innumerable celestial beings who came to earth in search .
of Agni. (Sakta 65, Anuvaka 12, Mandala 1 of Rgveda). ;
19) The Sun hands over his effulgence to Agni in the
evening and takes it back from him in the morning. (A
fact from Sruti—Sakta 71, Anuvaka 12, Mandala 1 of
Regveda).
20) For making fire for the sacrificial ceremony the
sages use two Arani sticks (‘These are two pieces of wood,
one upper and another lower, and fire is produced by
attrition). It is believed that the sages get the strength
to produce fire from it through Vy4ana, one of the forms
of Vayu (air). So Rgveda describes Agni as the son of
Vayu. (Sitkta 112, Anuvaka 16, Mandala L}
21) In the times of the Rgveda Agni was worshipped
asa God. (Sikta 1, Anuvaka 1, Mandala 1, Regeveda).
22) Lord Siva entered into an elaborate and long
conjugal play for creating Subrahmanya. Hundred
years went by and still the preliminaries never ended.
The universe was on the verge of a collapse and so
the devas decided to send Agni to put a stop to _ this
libidinal play of Siva. But Agni was afraid of Siva and
therefore absconded and hid himself in the ocean. The
ocean became hot and the water-animals unable to
bear the increasing heat went and informed the devas of
Agni’s hiding place. Agni cursed them all saying that all
of them would go dumb. He then went to the Mandara
mountain in the shape of an owl and hid there. But the
devas went there also and picked him up. Agni then by
his terrible heat stimulated Siva into action. Siva
threw his semen into Agni and Agni poured it into
Ganga and Ganga delivered a child which later on became Subrahmanya. (Taranga 6, Lavanakalambaka
of Kathasaritsagara) . a
26) Conclusion. Agni stands next to Indra in importance in the Vedas. Because Agni was indispensable for
yagas the care of Agni became very important. According to the Rgveda the birth of Agni 1s different. Born
of the clouds Agni reaches the earth as lightning. Then
Agni forsakes its form and becomes invisible. It was
Matarigva who gave form to Agni and gave him to the
Bhrgu family. From that day onwards it became
possible to produce fire and the Rgveda describes not
Agni is produced By sages by the use of Arani sticks.
The mdin job of Agiii is to receive the oblations from
devas when they — yagas.
27) Synonyms of Agnt. ”
Aout reat vaieatt Vahnih
Vitihotro Dhanafijayah
Krpitayonir jvalano
Jatavedastantnapat ;
Barhiésaisma Krsnavartma
Sociskegah Usarbhudhah
Asrayago Brhadbhanuh
Kréanuh Pavako’nalah
Rohitasvo Vayusakhah
Sikhavanasusuksanih
AGNIHOTRA (M)
Hiranyaretah hutabhuk
Dahano Havyavahanah
Saptarcirdamunah SukraScitrabhanurvibhavasuh
Sucirappittamaurvastu
Badavo Badavanalah
Vahnerdvay orjvalakilaVarcirhetih sikha striyam, |
Trisu sphulingognikanah
Ksantapah Sajvarah samau
Ulkasyannirgata jvala
Bhitir Bhasita Bhasmani
Ksaro-raksa ca davastu
Davo vanahutaganah.
(Amarakoéa)
The synonyms: |
1) Agni, Vaigvanarah, Vahnih, Vitihotra, Dhanafijaya,
Krpitayoni, Jvalana, Jatavedas, Taniinapat, Barhis,
usma, Krsnavartma, Sociskesa, U-sarbhudha, Aérayasa, Brhadbhanu, Krsanu, Pavaka, Anala, Rohitasva,
Vayusakha, Sikhavan, Agusuksani, Hiranyaretas, Hutabhuk, Dahana, Havyavahana, Saptarcis, Damuna, .
Sukra, Citrabhanu, Vibhavasu, Suci, Appitta.
2) Badavagni : Aurva, Badava, Badavanala.
3) Agnijvala: Jvala, Kila, Arcis, Heti, Sikha. (Flame)
4) Sparks : Sphulinga, Agnikana.
5) Heat : Santapa, Sajvara.
6) Firebrand : Ulka.
7) Ashes: Bhiti, Bhasita, Bhasma, Ksara, Raksa.
8) Wild-fire : Dava, Dava, Vanahutaégana.
AGNIBAHU. A son of the first Manu.
AGNIDATTA. See under the word Devadatta.
AGNIDATTA. (See under GUNASARMA).
AGNIDHARA JIRTHA. This is the name of a sacred
place near Gautamavana. (See Sloka 146, Chapter 84,
Vana Parva, M.B.).
AGNIDHRA (AGNIDDHRA).
1. Genealogy. Descended from Visnu thus : VisnuBrahma-Marici-Kagyapa - Vivasvan - VaivasvatamanuPriyavrata-Agnidhra.
2. Birth, Priyavrata, son of Vaivasvatamanu, married
Barhismati, daughter of Visvakarma. Agnidhra was one
of their ten sons. The other nine sons were : Idhmajihva, .Yajfiabahu, Mahavira, Hiranyaretas, Ghrtaprstha, Sava, Medhatithi, Vitihotra and Kavi. A
daughter also was born to Priyavrata and Barhismati
named Urjjasvati. Sukra Married her and Devayani
was their daughter. -
3) Married life. Agnidhra married a nymph named
Pirvacitti. They had nine children: Nabhi, Kirpurusa, Hari, I[lavrata, Ramyaka, Hiraficaya, Kuru,
Bhadrasva, and Ketumaila. It was from this Kuru that
the Kuru Varméa began.
4) Other incidents. ( 1) Agnidhra ruled over Jambudvipa for a long time. (Devi Bhagavata, Skandha 8),
(2) While he was the ruler of Jambudvipa Agnidhra
once went into a cave and did hard tapas there without eating any food. Brahma then sent a beautiful
nymph (Apsara maidén) to him to tempt him and
thwart his tapas. Agnidhra fell a victim to the temptation. His penance was shaken by that nymph named
Vipracitti. He married her. (Bhagavata, Skandha 5,
Chapter 2).
AGNIHOTRA(M). This isa sacrifice offered to Ag nideva. This has two parts, nitya and Kamya.

AGNIKETU
. A demon (R&aksasa) who was a close
et ant supporter of vevaee Rama killed him in
the course of his battle with Ravana.
AGNIKUMARA. An epithet of Lord Subrahmanya.
AGNILOKA. One of the devalokas situated on the
summit of Mount Mahameru. There are a few other
devalokas on the same mountain. They are : Indraloka, Yamaloka, Sivaloka or Kailasa, Satyaloka and
Vaikuntha. (Devi Bhagavata).
AGNIMAN. Name of one Agni. | ;
AGNIMITRA. The hero of Kalidasa’s play, Malavikagnimitra. He was a King of the Sunga dynasty
and the son of Pusyamitra. Kalidasa’s play deals with
the marriage of Malavika and Agnimitra.
AGNIMUKHA. An Asura. . .
1. Genealogy. He was descended from Visnu in this
order: Visnu - Brahma - Marici - Kagyapa - SirapadmaAgnimukha.
he Birth. Sirapadma married Maya’s daughter and
Agnimukha was born as their son. In the battle between the devas and asuras, the latter were defeated and
one of them sought shelter in Patala (the lower world).
Kagyapa married his daughter, Surasa. They had six
children ; they were: Sirapadma, Sunhika, Simhavaktra, Tarakasura, Gomukha, and Ajamukhi. Sirapadma married Maya’s daughter. Agnimukha was one
of their four sons, the other three being Bhanugopa,
Vajrabahu and Hiranya. (Skanda Purana, Asurakanda). In the Skanda Purana there is a vivid description of the valiant way in which Agnimukha fought
in the battle between the devas and asuras. .
AGNIPA. Son of a Brahmin named Vedanidhi. Once
five gandharva maidens named Pramodini, Susila,
Susvara, Sutara and Candrika fell in love with. him
and requested him to marry them. Being a strict
Brahma irin Agnipa was offended by this request and
so he cursed them and turned them into fiends. Vedanidhi pitied them and sought the advice of sage Lomaga
as to how those unfortunate maidens could be redeemed
from the curse. According to Lomaga’s advice the
five maidens bathed in the holy lake of Prayagatirtha
and regained their original forms. Then obeying the
instructions of sage Lomaga Agnipa married all these
five gandharya maidens. (Chapters 128 and 129,
Uttarakhanda, Padma Purana).
AGNIPRAVESA(M). Entering fire. In the YuddhaKanda of the Ramayana, Valmiki has described Sita’s
entering and standing in fire (Agnipravegam) as a
test of her purity. Though Rama recovered Sita from
Ravana, he wanted to accept her as his wife only after
her purity had been tested and proved. So he decided to
test her by fire (Agnipariksana). Sita shed tears at the
thought that her husband doubted her chastity.
Laksmana, at Rama’s bidding, made a pyre. Sita
jumped into it after praying to the gods. She remained
unscorched by the fire and Rama gladly received her
once more as his wife. ; .
AGNIPURA(M). A sacred place (Punya tirtha)in Indore
on the banks of the river Narmada. Many scholars
identify this with the place Mahesvaram. (Sloka 43,
Chapter 15, Anugdsana Parva, M.B.).
AGNIPURANA(M oo
1) General information. This is one of the eighteen
Puranas ascribed to Vyasa. It is believed that this
Purana was originally given orally (as advice) by Agni16 AGNISOMA (S)
deva to many sages, devas and Sage Vasistha. It is a
vast comprehensive work dealing with every subject of
importance. To give a copy of this book to a good
Brahmin on the Full Moon day in the month of
Marga Sirsa is supposed to be a highly virtuous and
meritorious deed.
'2) Contents. This large Purana consists of about 420
chapters. It deals in detail with the following subjects:
The Dasavataras of Mahavisnu ; Ramayana ; Mahabharata; rules and injunctions relating to the worship of
various gods (devapijavidhis) ; installation of idols in
temples (devatapratistha) ; Svapnamantras ; astrology ;
architecture and sculpture; Ayurveda ; Visavaidya
(treatment of poisons from Snakebite etc.) ; the principles of the drama (N&ataka) and other allied arts ;
figures of speech and all alamkaras in general ; and
physiology of the human body. All these subjects are
treated in a detailed and scientific manner.
AGNIPURNA. A King of the Solar dynasty (Staryavamésa).
1) Genealogy. Agniptirna was descended from Visnu
in the following order : Brahma - Marici - KasyapaVivasvan - Vaivasvatamanu - Iksvaku-Vikuksi - SagadaPurafijaya-Kakutstha-Anenas - Prthulagvan-PrasenajitYuvanasvan - Mandhata - Purukutsa - TrasadasyuAnaranya - Aryasva-Vasumanas-Sutanva-TraiyyarunaSatyavrata - Triganku-Hariécandra - Rohitagva-HaritaCuficu - Sudeva-Bharuka-Bahuka - Sagara - AsamaiijasAmsuman-Dilipa - Bhagiratha-Srutanada-SindhudvipaAyutayus-Rtuparna - Sarvakama - Suddsana - Mitrasakha-Kalmasapada - Agmaka - Milaka-Khatvanga -
Dirghabahu-Raghu-Aja - Dagaratha - Sri Rama-KuéaAditi-Nisadha-Nabhas-Pundarika-K semadhanva -Devanika - Rksa - Pariyatra - Bala-Vindorala - VajranabhaKhagana - Vidhrti - Hiranyanabha - Pusya- Dhruva -
Sudargana - Agnipirna. Agnipirna had two descendants—Sighra and Maru and with them the Siryavamsa came to an end.
AGNISAMBHAVA. A King of the Solar dynasty.
Genealogy, Visnu-Brahma-Marici-Kasyapa-Vivasvan -
Vaivasvatamanu - Iksvaku - Nimi-Janaka - Nandivardhana-Suketu-Devarata-Brhaddhrta - Mahavira-DhrtiKetu-Haryag va-Maru-Pratisvaka - Kraturatha - Devamidha-Vidhrta- Mahadhrti-Krtirata-~-Maharoma-Svarnaromaprastharoma - Siradhvaja - Kurudhvaja - Dharmadhvaja - Krtadhvaja - Bhanuman - akradyumna-SuciVanadhvaja - Urjjaketu - Aja- Kurujit - AristanemiKrtayus-Suparsvaka-Citraratha-K semapi - HomarathaSatyaratha-Gurunandana-Upagupta-Agnisarhbhava.
There are no other references to this King of the Solar
dynasty in the Puranas.
AGNISARMA,. (See the word VIDYUDDYOTA).
AGNISIKHA. Father of Vararuci. He is also kaown by
the name Somadatta. (Kathasaritsagara-Kathapithalambaka-Taranga 1. See also the word GUNAVARA).
AGNISIRATIRTHA, A holy place on the plains of the
river, ee oe brother, Sahadeva, performe
a yaga at this place. (M.B., Vana Parva, Chapter 90)-
AGNISOMA, A deity born of the union of 4 oe
Agnideva and Somadeva. He is one of the devas who
receive the havis (oblations) poured into the sacrificia
fire in a homa.
AGNISOMA(S). Agni and Soma.
Agni had two sons
by his third wife Bhanu 3
(also called Niga), They were
So ee i.

Hy
= Se
> ee re
AGNISAUCA(M)
Agni and Soma. These two sons were collectively called
Agnisomas.
AGNISAUCA(M). A cloak with magical properties
given to Nala by the serpent, Karkotaka. After separating himself from Damayanti, Nala was wandering in
the forest. Then he was bitten by the poisonous serpent,
Karkotaka. This deformed Nala beyond recognition.
Then the serpent gave him this shawl (Agnigauca).
Anybody who wore that cloak would regain his original
form and colour. (Kathasaritsagara-Alankaravati-lambaka-Taranga 6).
AGNISTHALI. (See the word PURURAVAS).
AGNISTHAMBHA(M) A mantra that will reduce
the burning power of Agni.
AGNISTOMA. (See AGNISTU).
AGNISTU. (AGNISTOMA).
1) Genealogy. Descended from Visnu in this order:—
Visnu-Svayambhuvamanu - Uttanapada-Dhruva-SrstiRipu-Caksusamanu-Agnistu.
2) Birth. Ten good sons were born to Manu by his wife,
Nadvala and Agnistu was one of them. The other nine
sons were: Uru, Piru, Satadyumna, Tapasvi, Satyavak,
Kavi, Atiratra, Sudyumna and Atimanyu. (Agni
Purana, Chapter 18).
AGNISVATTA. One of the seven Pitrs. The other six
Pitrs are : Vairaja, Garhapatya, Somapa, Ekagrnga,
Caturveda and Kala.(M.B., Sabha Parva, Chapter 11,
Verses 44, 45 and 46).
AGNIVESA. A Sage. He was the preceptor of Drona
and Drupada. It is believed that he learned archery
and the military arts from Sage Agastya. Drona had
the greatest respect for this guru, Agnivesa. He
was a master in the use of all weapons. There are references to this in Chapter 139, Adi Parva of the Mahabharata. ,
AGRAHA. The name of an Agni, a son of the Agni
named Bhanu. Bhanu married Supraja, daughter of
the sun and Agraha was oneof the six children born to
them. In the Caturmasikayajfia Agraha receives eight
kinds of havis (Oblations). (M.B., Vana Parva,
Chapter 221).
AGRANI. The name of an Agni. He was the fifth son
of the Aghi named Bhanu and_ his wife, Nisadevi.
(M.B., Vana Parva, Chapter 221, Slokas 15 to 22).
AGRASANDHANI. The name of the book which Yama
(the God of Death—K4la) keeps in which all the
virtuous and sinful actions of men are recorded.
AGRAYANT. One of the hundred sons of Dhrtarastra. He
is also known by the name, Anuyayl. (M.B., Adi Parva,
Chapter 116, Verse 11). .
AHA I. One of the astavasus. His father was Dharma
and mother, Ratidevi. (M.B., Adi Parva, Slokas 17 to
20, Chapter 66). 4. ¥onebealen Sethe
AHA II (AHAH). A sacred pond. if one bathes in
ey tg a land of the Sun. (M.B., Vana Parva,
Sloka 100, Chapter 83).
AHA III. One born of the dynasty
vamga).- (See under Heti, the genea
demon dynasty ).
AHARA. A son born of Danu to Kasyapa.
Parva, Sloka 25, Chapter 65).
AHALYA. Turned into stone by t
band, Gautama. Ahalya was @ P
dynasty.
of demons (asuralogy chart of the
(M.B., Adi
1e curse of her husrincess of the Piru
AHALYAHRADA(M)
1) Genealogy. Descended in order from Visnu as follows:
Brahma-Atri-Gandra-Budha - Purdravas-Ayus-NahusaYayati-Piiru-Janamejaya - Pracinva - Pravira-NamasyuVitabhaya - Sundu - Bahuvidha - Samyati - RahovadiRaudragva-Matinara-Santurodha - Dusyanta - BharataBrhatksetra-Hasti-Ajamidha-Nila-Santi-Suganti-PurujaArka-Bharmyasva-Paficala-Mudgala-Ahalya.
2) How Ahalyé got a curse and became a stone. The story
of how Ahalya was cursed by her husband, Gautama,
and was turned into a stone is told in different versions
in different puranas. The following is the version in the
Valmiki Ramayana. When Vigvamitra was taking back
Rama and Laksmana from the forest to the palace of
Janaka they came across an 4grama on their way. Giving
details about that 4srama VisVamitra told the princes
thus : ‘“This is the 4srama where the sage, Gautama, was
living with his’ wife, Ahaly4. Indra fell in love with the
beautiful Ahalya and while the sage was out for bathing
Indra entered the asrama in the disguise of the sage
himself and took bed with her. But before Indra could
get out Gautama himself came to the 4grama and enraged at what he saw, cursed them both. Indra was to
lose his testicles and Ahalya was to turn into a stone.
But taking pity on her the sage declared that she would
take her original form the moment R4ma of treta yuga
came to that place and touched the stone by his foot.
Testicleless Indra went to devaloka and there his friends
feeling sorry for him, substituted a goat’s testicle and
got him to normal.” While Visvamitra was talking to
the princes, Sri Rama’s foot touched the stone and Ahalya
stood up in all beauty. Ahalya and Gautama lived in
the same Srama again for another long period.
In Kathasaritsagara this story is told in a slightly different yet More interesting way. As soon as Gautama
entered the 4srama Indra turned himself into a cat.
Angrily the sage questioned Ahalya, “‘who was standing
here when I came in ?’? Ahalya replied, “Eso thiyo khu
majjara’” (Esah sthitah khalu marjjarah). It was a cat
which was standing there. Here Ahalya used a pun on
the word ‘maijjara’ and tried to be honest. ‘Maijjara’ is
the Prakrit form of the word ‘marjjarah’ which means cat.
But ‘majjara’ has another meaning also. (ma=mine
jara=lover i.e. majjara=my lover). So Ahalya did not
lie to her husband. (Kathasaritsagara, Lavanakalambaka).
3) How Ahalyad happened to bring up the mighty monkeys, Bal:
and Sugriva. Once Aruna, the charioteer of Surya (the
Sun) went to devaloka to see the dance of the celestial
maidens there. Since there was no admission to the dance
for men Aruna disguised himself as Arunidevi and sought
admission ; seeing the beautiful form of Arunidevi Indra
fell in love with her and that night a child was born to
Indra by' her. On the advice of Indra Arunidevi took the
child to Ahalya before daybreak and left it there to be
looked after by her. It was this child which later on
became the famous Bali.
Aruna went a bit late that morning to his master, the
Sun. The latter wanted an explanation and Aruna told
him what had happened. The Sun then asked Aruna to
become Arunidevi again and seeing the enchanting figure
the Sun also got a child of her. This child also was taken
to Ahalya and it was this child that later on became the
famous Sugriva.
AHALYAHRADA (M). A sacred pond in the tapovana

AHARA
(precincts of an asrama) of Gautama Rsi. It is believed
that one would go to heaven if one bathes in it.
AHARA. Ason born of Danu. to Kagyapa. (M.B., Adi
Parva, Sloka 25, Chapter 65).
AHICCHATRA. This was the capital of the state Ahicchatra which Drona got from Drupada, the King of
Paficala.
AHICCHATRA(M). A state under the sovereignty of
King Pajicala. On the completion of his studies under
Drona Arjuna brought before his preceptor King Drupada as a captive in discharge of the duty he owed to
him as his master. Drupada then gave the state of
Ahicchatra to Drona and got his release. (M.B., Adi
Parva, Slokas 73 to 76, Chapter 137).
AHIMSA. Non-imjury. There are-opinions both in favour
of and against Ahimsa in the puranas. SukracArya extols the importance of Ahimsa to the asuras (demons)
thus :
Bho ! Devaripavah satyam
Bravimi bhavatam hitam
Ahimsa paramo dharmo
Hantavya hyatatayinah
Dvijairbhogaratairvede
Dargitarn hirnsanam pasoh
Jihvasvadaparaih Kama—
Mahimsaiva para mata.
“Oh, foes of the devas, I shall tell you the truth which is
good for you. Non-injury to any living being is the most
righteous thing. Do not molest even those who come to
kill you. Even that act would be ‘hirhsa’ (injury). It
was those brahmins who were attached to worldly pleasures and addicted to overeating that enjoined in the
Vedas that hirhs@ is permissible for yagas.” (Devi Bhagavata, Skanda 4).. Markandeya Muni (sage) says thus :
“Why should I mind the innumerable killings going on
unnoticed in this world full of life. People of old speak
very sacredly about Ahimsa, But O best of brahmins,
who can live in this world without injury to another
life . (M.B., Aranya Parva, Slokas 32 & 33, Chapter
AHIRATHA. A King of the Piru dynasty. (See under
Pai1u vaméfa).
AHIRBUDHNYA. One of the sons of Vigvakarma. Five
sons and one daughter were born to Visvakarma of his
wife Surabhi. They were Ajaikapat, Ahirbudhnya,
Tvasta, Rudra, Barhismati and Samjna, (See under
genealogy of ViSvakarma).
AHITA. Ariver of ancient Bharata. (M.B., Bhisma Parva,
Sloka 21, Chapter 9).
AHORATRA(M). (See under Kalamfna).
AHOVIRA. A sage who adhered strictly to the injunctions
associated with the Vanaprastha stage of life. (M.B.,
Santi Paiva, Sloka 17, Chapter 144).
AI (%). This diphthong means a female sage (yogini)
according to the Agni Purana (Chapter 348 of Agni
Purana).
AIKSVAKI. Wife of Suhotra who was 2 son of Emperor,
Bhumanyu. Suhotra had three sons by Aiksvaki, They
were Ajamidha, Sumidha and Purumidha. (See Chapter
+ of Adi Parva of the M.B.).
AILA T. Son of fla; Puriravas. (See under Ila). .
AILATI. A member of the court of Yamaraja. (See Sloka
16, Chapter 8, Sabha Parva, M.B.). In Sloka 65, Chapter 115 of Anufg4sana Parva, it is said that he never ate
“on-vegetarian food in his life.
18 AIRAVATA I
AINDAVA. (See
BRAHMA).
AIRAVATA I. A large elephant, son of Iravati.
1) Genealogy. Descended from Visnu in this order :-—
Visnu - Brahma - Kasyapa - Bhadramata-Iravati-Airavata. KasSyapa married Daksa’s daughter, Krodhavaga
who bore him ten daughters. They were : Mrgi, Mrgamanda, Hari, Bhadramata, Matangi, Sardili, Sveta,
Surabhi, Sarasé and Kadru. Of these Bhadramata had
a daughter named Iravaii and Airavata was her son.
Airavata wasnot human in shape; he wasa large elephant. (See Sarga 14, Aranyakanda, Ramayana).
2) Lndra’s Vahana. Indra made Airavata his conveyance
(vahana). Indra was Kagyapa’s son by Aditi. Airavata
also was descended from Kagyapa. So Indra_ took
Airavata as his vahana.
3) Aitrdvata caused the churning of the ocean of Milk. There
is a story of how Airavata was responsible for the churning of the milk-ocean (Ksirabdhi-mathanam ). Once
some maidens of devaloka presented a garland of flowers
to sage Durvasas. When Durvasas visited Indra’s court
he gave that garland to Indra. Indra put it on the tusks
of his vahana, Airavata. The fragrance of the dowers
attracted a swarm of bees which became an intolerable
nuisance to Airavata. So Airavata tore the garland off
his tusks and hurled it away. When Durvasas heard
this, he took it as an insult. In his anger he cursed all the
gods—the curse was that all gods should become subject
to old age and the decrepitude and infirmities of old age.
But though Durvdsas cursed the gods, he also prescribed
a remedy. Ihe gods could redeem themselves from the
curse by drinking Amrtam obtained from the ocean of
Milk (Mahavisnu lies on the serpent, Sesa on this ocean).
The curse began to operate and the gods lost their perennial youth. I'he gods then befriended the Asuras and
with their help they churned the ocean of Milk. They
got the nectar (Amrtam), drank it and regained their
youth. (See under the word AMRTAM),
4) There is another story about Airavata—A story of
how he also rose out of the ocean of Milk. It is said that
when the devas and asuras churned the ocean of Milk,
Airavata alsa came up along with the other good things.
This story is narrated in the 18th Chapter of Adi Parva
of the Mahabharata. The explanation given is that when
Durvasas cursed the gods, Airavata was oppressed with
a sense of guilt because he was responsible for the curse.
So he-took refuge in the ocean of Milk and there started
propitiating Mahavisnu. There is however no warrant
for such an explanation in the Puranas. But the explanation sounds. plausible because it explains the absence
of Airavata during the interval between Durvasas’s
curse and the churning of the sea. Airavata is represented
as a white elephant. It is probable that he became white
after his long residence in the ocean of Milk. This lends
some additional plausibility to the above explanation.
9) Atravata, the Lord of the elephant. In the Visnu Purana
we are told how Airavata was made the chief of all elephants. When the Maharsis had crowned Prthu as the
‘Sovereign King, Brahma gave new posts of honour to
many of the devas. He made SOMA (Moon) the lord
of the Stars and Planets, of Brahmins, Yajfias and herbs.
Kubera was made the overlord of al] Kings; Varuna
was made the master of the seas and al] water: Visnu,
the lord of the Adityas and Pavaka (Fire ) the lord of
paragraph 13 under the word

AIRAVATA II
the Vasus. Along with these Brahma made Airavata the
lord of all elephants. (Chapter 22, Visnu Purana).
6) The breaking of Airavata’s tusks. There isa story of how
the tusks of Airavata were broken narrated in the Asurakanda of Skanda Purana. Once an asura (demon)
named Siirapadma attacked devaloka. A fierce battle
ensued between the gods and asuras. In the course of
this battle, Jayanta, Indra’s son, Was hit by an arrow ©
and at once he fell dead. Enraged by this Airavata
rushed at Siirapadma’s chariot and Shattered it to
pieces. Airavata then attacked Sirapadma who broke his
tusks and hurled him down to the earth. Airavata lay
paralysed for a long time; then he got up, retired to a
forest and prayed to Lord Siva. With the grace of Siva
Airavata regained his lost tusks and was able to return
to devaloka.
7) Other details about Airavata. (1) There is a belief
that Airavata is one of the eight elephants guarding the
eight zones of the universe. These eight elephants are
called the Astadiggajas. Airavata is supposed to guard
the eastern zone. (Chapter 66, Adi Parva, Mahabharata ). |
(2) Airavata and three other diggajas are supposed to
reside in Puskara Island. (Chapter 12, Bhisma Parva,
AIRAVATA II. Name ofa serpent born to Kasyapa and
his wile Kadru. This is mentioned in Sloka 5, Chapter
35, Adi Parva of the Mahabharata. Arjuna’s father-inJaw and Ulipi’s father, Kauravya belonged to the family
of this serpent. (See Sloka 18, Chapter 213, Adi
Parva).
ATRAVATA. An asura who was killed by Sri Krsna.
(See Chapter 38, Sabha Parva, Mahabharata). .
AIRAVATAGHATTA. Name of a place near the seashore, lying to the north of the mountain, Srigavan.
(See Sloka 37, Chapter 6, Bhisma Parva).
AISIKAM. Name of a small division of a parva of the
Mahabharata. (See under Mahabharata).
AITAREYAI. A great scholar with profound knowledge
of the Vedas. Being:a non-brahmin he was not able to
learn the Vedas from a guru. In spite of this handicap
he acquired considerable scholarship and wrote a learned
commentary on the Rgveda. This commentary ranks
high among the various commentaries on the Vedas.
AITAREYA II. Son of Sage, Manduki by his first wile,
Itara. Being the son of Itara he came to be called Aitabine AS boy he was very pious and used to chant the
y cs te Vasudevaya”’ frequently. But
tra ‘““Namo Bhagava )
a a shy and silent boy and his father mistook his
ea to be a sign of stupidity. onl with him ae
in f having learned sons, Manduki marrie
Belde desinons 8 j Pinga and had four sons by her
another Wornan names, ng Once Itara called her
who all became very learned. Once “eH ‘- =
him that his father regarded him as an
often twitting her using insulting
ir nworthy a son. She
aving siven birth to so u a She
ia bor} 4 i, — resolve to sacrifice her life. Aita
: ing discourse to her and
an enli htening | | A:
reya then. made : rmination to commit suicide.
dissuaded her from her dete i Te Qua SEI,
j . Visnu appeare efore them _
ee pe ee a son. On the aie e moe
Aitareys participated in the yajna conducted by Hari
son and told hi
unworthy son and was
19 AJAIKAPAT II
medhya at Kotitirtha and there he made a learned
speech on the Vedas. Harimedhya was so pleased with
him that he gave his daughter in marriage io him.
(Seé Skanda Purana, Chapters 1, 2 and 42).
AJA I. A king of the Solar dynasty.
1) Genealogy. From Visnu Were descended in order:
Brahma, Marici-Kasyapa-Vivasyan - Vaivasvata - Iksvaku-Vikuksi - Sasada - Purafijaya’- Kukutstha -AnenasPrthulagva - Prasenajit - Yuvanagva - Mandhata - Purvkutsa-Trasadasyu - Anaranya - Aryagva - VasumanasSudhanva- Traiyaruna - Satyavrata - Triganku - Hariégcandra - Rohitagva - Harita - Cuficu - Sudeva - BharukaBahuka - Sagara - Asamafijas - Amsgumin - Dilipa -
Bhagiratha - Srutanabha - Sindhudvipa - Ayutayus -
Rtuparna - Sarvakama - Sudasana - Mitrasakha - Kalmasapada - ASmaka - Milaka - Dilipa - Dirghabahu -
Raghu - Aja - Aja’s son DaSsaratha-Daéaratha’s son, Sri
Rama. .
M.B., Anusasana Parva, Chapter 115, Verse 75 says that
Aja never used to take meat.
AJA II. Among the different kinds of Rsis mentioned by
Yudhisthira, we find a class of Rsis called Ajas. (M.B.,
Santi Parva, Chapter 26). These Ajas had attained
| Heaven by Svadhyaya (self discipline) alone.
AJA III. King Jahnu had a son named Aja. Usika was
the son of this Aja. King Usika prayed to Indra for a
son. Indra himself was born as the son of Usgika assuming the name Gadhi. Satyavati was born as the daughter
of Gadhi. She was married to Rcika. Paragurama’s
father, Jamadagni was the son of Reika. (M.B., Santi
Parva, Chapter =0 ) :
AJA IV. By the grace of Siva Surabhi was able to purify
herself by penance. She then gave birth to Aja, Ekapat,
“hide Ivasta and Rudra. (Agni Purana, Chapter ;
AJA V._ In the first Manvantara* Svayambhuva, in the
second Manvantara Svarocisa and in the third Manvantara Uttama, were Manus. To the third Manu,
Uttama, were born as sons Aja, Paragu, Dipta and
others. (Visnu Purana, Part 3, Chapter 1).
Besides the above, the term Aja has been used to mean
Surya, Siva, Brahma, Visnu, Sri Krsna and Bija (seed).
AJAGAVA. Ajagava is a bow made of the horns of a
goat and a cow. Brahmins tormented the right hand of
the King Vena. From it the brilliant Prthu who shone
brightly like the God Agni, appeared as the son of Vena.
At that time the very first Ajagava bow, divine arrows
and armours dropped from the sky. (Visnu Purana,
Part I, Chapter 13)
AJAIKAPAT I. He was one of the eleven Rudras, who
were born to Sthanudeva, the son of Brahma. The cleven
Rudras are:—
I. Mrgavyadha 7. Dahana
2. Nirrti 8. Ivara
3. Ahirbudhnya 9. Kapali
4. Pinaki 10. Bharga
Sarpa 11. Sthanu.
6. Ajaikapat
(M.B., Adi Parva, Chapter 66, Verse 2).**
AJAIKAPAT II. Among the sons of Vigvakarma, we
find one Ajaikapat. Brahma _ created Vigvakarma.
Vigvakarma had four sons—Ajaikapat, Ahirbudhnya,
riod equal to 4,320,000 human years or equal to 1/4th day of Brahma.
¥ One Manvantara is ie dras given in the Visnu Purana, Part I, Chapter 5 are: Hara, Bahuriipa, Tryambaka, Aparasita
as, °
** The names of the Eleven
Vrsakapi, Sambhu, Kapardi, Raivata,
Mrgavyadha, Sarva, Kapali. A total number of 100 Rudras are mentioned in the Puran

AJAKA
Tvasta and Rudra. (Visnu Purana, Part I, Chapter 15).
This Ajaikapat is one of those who are in-charge of
preserving all the gold in this world. (M.B., Udyoga
Parva, Chapter 114, Verse 4).
AJAKA. An Asura.
AJAMUKHA (AJAVAKTRA).
AJARA
He was one of the
soldiers in Skanda’s army. (M.B., Salya Parva, Chapter
45, Verse 7/5). In the battle between Skanda and the
Asuras, Ajamukha killed the Asura, Madhu. (Skanda
Purana, Yuddha Kanda).
Birth. Kasyapa was born the son of Marici, son of AJAMUKHI (AJAMUKHI).
Brahma. Kagyapa married Danu, one of the daughters
of Daksa and had two sons by her. They were Ajaka
and Vrsaparva- (M.B., Adi Parva, Chapter 65, Verse
24; Chapter 67, Verse 16).
AJAKASVA. A king of the Piru Varhéga. The mighty
Jahnu was born to Ajamidha by his wife Kesini. Two
sons, Ajakasva and Balakasva were born to Jahnu.
Kugika is the son of Balakagva. Kugika is the grandfather of Vigvamitra. For genealogy see Piru Vaméa.
(Agni Purana, Chapter 278).
AJAMIDHA I. A famous king of the Piru Varéa.
1) Genealogy. Descended from Visnu in this order:—
Brahma - Atri - Candra - Budha - Puriravas - Ayus -
Nahusa - Yayati - Piru - Janamejaya - Pracinva-Manasyu - Vitabhaya - Sundu - Bahuvidha - Samyati - Rahovadi - Bhadragva - Matinara - Santurodha - Dusyanta -
Bharata-Brhatksetra~-Hasti-Ajamidha.
2) Birth. Several dynasties like Yadu Vaméa, Piru
Vasa etc. take their origin from Yayati. Dusyanta belongs to that dynasty. King Bharata was born as Dusyanta’s son by Sakuntala. Suhotra - Suhota - Gaya -
Gardda-Suketu and Brhatksetra were Bharata’s sons.
Brhatksetra had four children, who were : Nara, Mahavira, Garga and Hasti. Of them Hasti had three sons:
Purumidha, Ajamidha and Dvimidha.
3) Other details. Ajamidha had three queens—Dhimini, Nili and Kegini. Of them, Dhimini had a son,
Rksa and Nili’s son was Dusyanta (This was not Sakuntala’s husband, Dusyanta) and Kefini’s sons were Jahnu,
Praja and Ripina. Paramesti was another name of
Kesini. (M.B., Adi Parva, Chapter 94, Verses 30-32;
Anusasana Parva, Chapter 4, Verse 2).
AJAMIDHA II. Wescome across another Ajamidha also
in the Lunar Dynasty. He married Sudeva, daughter
of Vikantha a King of the Lumar Dynasty. This Ajamidha had 2400 children by his four wives, Kaikey i,
Gandhari, Visala and Rksa. Of them. Samvarana
married ‘Tapati, the daughter of Vivasvan. See Tapati
oa (M.B., Adi Parva, Chapter 95, Verses
AJAMILA. Ajamila’s story is given in the Bhagavata as
an example to illustrate that even the most wicked person
can attain Visnupada (Salvation).
Ajamila was a Brahmin who was once sent by his
father to the jungle to fetch samit (leaves and twigs
to make the sacrificial fire). Ajamila met there a beautiful Sidra woman. Forgetting everything, the Brahmin
made her his wife and children were born to them.
When that Brahmin, who was the very embodiment of
all vices, reached the age of eightyseven, the time came
for him to die. Yamadiitas (Agents of Yama—the god
of death) had arrived. The frightened Ajamila shouted
loudly the name of his eldest son, ‘Narayana’. Hearing
the repeated call of his name ‘Narayana’, Mahavisnu
appeared there and dismissed the agents of Yama. From
that day Ajamila became a devotee of Visnu and did
penance on the bank of the Ganges and after some years
attained salvation. (Bhagavata, Astama Skandha,
Chapter ne | )
1. Genealogy. Descended from Visnu thus : BrahmaMarici-Kaés yapa-Ajamukhi.
2) Birth Long ago in the battle between Devas and
Asuras one of the routed Asuras had fled to Patala (Hell).
Surasa was his daughter. Brahma’s grandson, Kasyapa
married Surasa. She gave birth to six children—Siirapadma, Simhika, Simhavaktra, Tarakasura, Ajimukhi and
Gomukha. The Asura woman Ajamukhi is one of them.
3) Chief events. (1) Marriage with Durvasas. Once
Sirapadma called his two brothers, Sirhhavaktra and
Tarakasura and ordered them to set up two cities, one
to the north and the other to the south, of Mahameru.
In obedience to his elder brother, Tarakasura started
with one half of the army and set up a city to the south
of Mahameru. That city wasnamed MAydpura. Sirmhavaktra lived in the city on the northern side of Mahameru. Their sister Ajamukhi went about enticing men to
satisfy her lustful passion. Once, in the course of her
wanderings, she met Durvdsas in the Himdlayan valley.
They fell in love and even married. The two Asuras,
Ilvala and Vatapi were born from their union. They
insisted on sharing their father’s achievements between
them. Durvasas cursed them that they would die at the
hands of Agastya. (Skanda Purana, Asura Kanda).
(2) Lhe cutting off of Ajamukhi’s hands. While wandering
with her lustful passion, Ajamukhi once went to the Siva
temple at Kasi. There she happened to meet Indra’s
wife, Sacidevi. In order to give her to her brother,
Sirapadma, Ajamukhi caught hold of Sacidevi. $acidevi screamed aloud. Suddenly Siva appeared there
with His sword. Even then Ajamukhi refused to release
Sacidevi. Siva rescued Indrani (Sacidevi) by cutting off
Ajamukhi’s hands. Hearing this, Sirapadma sent his
army and imprisoned the Devas. The imprisoend
Brahma at the instance of Sirapadma, restored Ajamukhi’s hands. Sirapadma’s son, Bhanugopa fought
against the,remaining Devas and defeated them. (Skanda
Purana, Asura Kanda).
AJAMUKHI. See AJAMUKHI.
AJANABHA. A mountain. A reference to this is seen in
the M.B., Anusasana Parva, Chapter 165, Verse 32.
Another name, Ajanabha Varsa for the territory ruled
over by Ajanabha, is also found in Bhagavata, Fifth
Skandha, Chapter 1.
AJARA. Tapantaka, the minister of King Vatsa, told
him the story of a man named Ajara to illustrate the law
that all people will have to suffer the consequences of
pice actions in a previous birth. The story is given beow :—
Once upon a time, there lived a King named Vinayasila
in Vilasapura, in the city of Srikanthanagari. After
some years, the King was affected by wrinkles of old age:
A physician named Tarunacandra came to the palace to
cure the King of his wrinkles. “The King should remain
alone in the interior of the earth for ful] eight months.
He has to use a medicine while remaining there. It
should not even be seen by anyone else. I myself am to
administer the medicine’’—This was the physician's
prescription. The King agreed. Accordingly the King

AJAVINDU
and the physician spent six months in the interior of the
earth. After that the physician, after a search, found a
man who exactly resembled the King and brought him
to the interior of the earth. After two more months,
the physician murdered the King and came out with the
new man. The people welcomed him with honour as
the King who was cured of his wrinkles. This man was
Ajara. After some time, the physician approached
Ajara for his reward. Ajara said : “It is by my Karmaphala (consequence of my actions in my previous birth)
that I have become King. In my previous birth I renounced my body after doing penance. According to the
boon which God gave me on that occasion, I have become King in my present birth’. ‘he physician returned
empty-handed. (Kathasaritsagarez, Ratnaprabhalambaka, 6th LTaranga). .
AJAVINDU. He was a King, born in the dynasty of the
Suviras. (M.B., Udyoga Parva, Chapter 14, Verse 14).
AJEYA. He was a King in ancient Bharata. Ajeya s name
is found among the names of the Kings mentioned by
Safijaya to Dhrtarastra. All these Kings Were mighty
and generous rulers who were the recipients of divine
arrows. (M.B., Adi Parva, Chapter 1, Verse 234).
AJIGARTA (RCIKA). He was a greedy Brahmin. (See
. RCIKA I .
King Hariscandra who was distressed by having no
children,’ propitiated god Varuna. Varuna _ blessed
him saying that a son would be born to him. But
the condition was that the child should be sacrificed
to Varuna. When the child was born, Hariscandra did
not like to sacrifice the boy. The sage Vis vamitra suggested that instead of sacrificing his own son it would be
enough if he bought another boy and sacrificed him.
Accordingly, Hariscandra sent his minister to find out
and purchase a Brahmin boy for the sacrifice. At that
time there lived in Ayodhya a greedy Brahmin named
Ajigarta. He had three sons. In the course of his search,
the minister came across this needy Brahmin and asked
him whether he was willing to sell one of his three sons.
He continued: ‘“‘Why should you be in this wretched
state of poverty and misery? Sell one of your sons and
you will get 100 cows as the price’. The minister’s
words and the price offered for the son made a deep
impression on the Brahmin’s mind. He thought:
“Tt is impossible for me to earn 100 cows. Even if it ae
possible how long would it take? If I sell him . cs
get hundred cows at once. What a lucky chance ! The
loss of a son is nothing.’ So thinking, he a, wa
Sunaggepha. (For the rest of the story, see the wor
teal i Bhagavata, Skandhas 7, 8).
‘Sunaggepha . Devi Bhagavata, a
AJINA. 1) Genealogy From Visnu, ‘ ra "a hig a
Kaégyapa; Vaivasvata, U ttanapada, Dhr ig set eh
Caksusa, Manu, Uru, Amga, Vena, Prthu, Antar ,
irdhana and Ajina. - _..
——_e had two sons, geet ae my
Antardhana had a son, Havirdhana, al J HavirDhisana, who was born in the Agnikula ee a
-—- & @ ife. Six sons were born to them, ra ,
dhana’s wife. Vraja and Ajina. (Visnu
barhis, Sukra, Gaya, REG A J
rgaea: Part 1, Chapter GAKAVARSA).
AJISAKA. (Sce the word (
individual called Ajodara in
AJODARA. There was an 1
Skanda’s army. | ior among the demons).
. (A mighty warrior a 8 ;
Sie ee Descended from Visnu in the following
——————— OS EIESEE ee
(M.B., Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 60).
AKRTAVRANA
order: Visnu - Brahma - Hetj - Vidyukega - Sukega
Sumali-Akampana.
2) Other details. Sumaili married Ketumati and got
fourteen children. They were 1) Prahasta 2) Akampana
3) Vikata 4) Kalakamukha 5) Dhiimraksa 6) Danda
7) Suparsva 8) Samhrada 9) Prakvata 10) Bhasakarna
11) Veka 12) Puspotkata 13) Kaikasi and 14) Kumbhinadi. Of these the last four are daughters. Prahasta was
one of the ministers of Ravana. The thirteenth child
Kaikasi was married to V isravas, son of Pulastya.
Visravas got three sons and a daughter. They were
Ravana, Kumbha karna and Vibhi Sana and Siirpanakha.
It was Akampana who informed Ravana that Rama and
Laksmana had killed his three allies, Khara, Diisana
and Trisiras (Aranya Kanda, Valmiki Ramayana).
3) Death. Akampana fought a fierce battle ‘with
antiman and in the end Hanuman plucked a big tree
and hit Akampana on the head with it and killed him.
(Sarga 56, Yuddha Kanda of Ramayana )
AKAMPANA II. He was a King who lived in the Krtayuga. He had a son named Hani who Was a fierce fighter.
He was killed in a battle and the King became much
depressed. Narada consoled him with other stories and
Vyasa told this story to Dharmaputra when he found
the latter greatly dejected and gloomy after the great
battle was over. (Chapter 52, Drona Parva of M.B.
also makes mention of Akampana).
AKARKKARA. A serpent, son of Kadru._
1) Genealogy. Descended from Visnu in this order :
Brahma-Marici-K afyapa-Akarkkara.
2) Birth. Kagyapa married the eight daughters of
aksa named Aditi, Diti, Danu, Kalika, Tamra,
Krodhavasa, Manu and Anala. Krodhavaga got ten
sons. One of them is Kadru. Ananta and Akarkkara
es born of Kadru. (Sloka 16, Chapter 35, Adi Parva,
AKRODHA. A King of the Piru dynasty. He was born
to King “Ayutanayi’ and his Queen, Kama. Kama,
mother of Akrodha, was the daughter of Prthusrava.
(Sloka 21, Chapter 95, Adi Parva, M.B.).
AKRTASRAMA. He is one of the few sannyasins who
have gone to heaven after completing the fourth asrama
of life namely, Sannydsa. The Kaurava-Pandava
battle was over. As the eldest, Dharmaputra performed
obsequies to all those of his kith and kin dead in the war.
He was then met by many sages including Vyasa and
Narada who comforted him in his bereavement. When
Dharmaputra later met Bhisma the latter among many
other stories told him the story of Akrtasrama also.
(Sloka 17, Chapter 244, Santi Parva, M.B.).
AKRTAVRANA
1) General information. Akrtavrana was a great sage of
erudition and was a disciple of Parasurama. He Is eXtolled in the Puranas and it is said that Stita who recited
first the story of Mahabharata to an assembly of sages In
the forest of Naimiga was a disciple of Akrtavrana.
(Skandha 12 of Bhagavata). _ _
2) How he became a disciple of Paragurama. Para urama
was returning after obtaining arrows from Lord Si va
after pleasing him by fierce penance. He was walking
briskly through the dense forests anxious to be at the side
of his preceptors to get their blessings. As he passed a
great cave he heard a moan and on setting to the site
of the sound found a brahmin boy being attacked by a
tiger. The tiger immediately fell dead by an arrow from

AKRURA 99
Parasurama. Lo! the tiger turned into a gandharva
freed now from a curse because of which he was for years
living as a tiger. The gandharva bowed down respectfully and thanked the sage for giving him relief and left
the place. The brahmin boy fell down at the feet of
Paragurama and said, “Great Lord, because of you I
have now become Akrtavrana meaning one who has not
received any wound, (Akrta=not having secured.
Vrana =wound). I shall, therefore, be your disciple forever hereafter’. From that day onwards he never left
Paragurama but followed him as his disciple.
3) Other details. (1) In the story of Mahabharata we
find Akrtavrana in several different contexts appearing
on behalf of Paragurama. It was Akrtavrana who tald
Dharmaputra the life and exploits of Parasurama during
the exile of the Pandavas in the forests. (Chapters 115 to
117, Vana Parva, M.B.).
(2). In Chapter 83 of Udyoga Parva we read about
Akrtavrana meeting Sri Krsna while the latter was going
to Hastinapura.
(3) In Chapter 173 of Udyoga Parva’we read about
Akrtavrana detailing the history of the Kaurava dynasty
to Duryodhana.
(4) Akrtavrana has played a very important role in the
story of Amba, daughter of the King of Kasi. Amba
along with her two sisters, Ambika and Ambalika, were
brought down to Hastinapura by Bhisma for his brother
Vicitravirya to marry. But on knowing that Amba had
mentally chosen Salva as her husband, Bhisma allowed
her to go back to Salva. But on her return to Salva he
refused to accept her and she came back to Hastinapura.
Bhisma then requested Vicitravirya to accept her as
his wife which, unfortunately, Vicitravirya also refused
to do. Amba then turned to Bhisma and besought him
to marry her which, much to his regret, he could not do
because of his vow of celibacy. Thus forsaken by all,
all her sweetness turned into bitter hatred towards
Bhisma and she remained alive thereafter only to kill
Bhisma. But even the foremost of warriors were not
willing to antagonise Bhisma and so her appeal to help
was not heeded by any. It was then that Hotravaha her
grandfather on the maternal side met her and directed
her to Paragurama. When she went to Paraéurdma it |
was Akrtavrana who received her and on hearing her
sorrowlul tale encouraged her to seek vengeance on
Bhisma. Again it was he who persuaded Paragurama to
champion her cause and go for a fight against Bhisma.
During the fight Akrtavrana acted as charioteer to
a (Sloka 9, Chapter 179, Udyoga Parva,
(5) Akrtavrana was one of the many sages who were
lying on a bed of arrows during the great Kuruksetra
battle. (Sloka 8, Chapter 26, Anudasana Parva, DBs}: °
AKRURA.
1) Genealogy. Descended from Visnu in the following
order : Brahma-Atri-Candra-Budha - Purtirayas - AyusNahusa-Yayati-Yadu (Chapter XII of Agni Purana).
Descending from Yadu in order were Sahasrajit-SatajitHchaya-Dharma-Kunti-Bhadrasena-Dhanaka-Krtavirya
Karttaviryarjuna - Madhu - Vrsni (Chapter XXIII of AKSAHRDAYA. A
Navama Skandha, Bhagavata). The Vrsni dynasty begins and from Vrsni in order descended Yudhajit-SiniSatyaka-Satyaki-Jaya-Kuni-Anamitra-Préni-Svaphalka -
Akviira. |
vata). (Chapter XXIV of Navama Skandha,BhagaAKSA I.
AKSAHRDAYA
9) Birth. Svaphalka of the Vrsni dynasty married
Nandini, daughter of the King of Kasi and Akrira was
born to them. Akriira was an uncle of Sri Krsna but is
respected more as a worshipper of Krsna.
3) Other details.(1)He became famous as a commander
of the Yadava army. (Chapter 220 of Adi Parva, M.B.).
(2) Akrira was also present for the Svayarnvara (wedding) of-Paficali. (Sloka 18, Chapter 185 of Adi Parva,
ta ‘At the time of Arjuna’s cloping with Subhadra, a
grand festival was going on in the Raivata mountain and
Akrira was partaking in the same. (Sloka 10, Chapter
218, Adi Parva, M.B.).
(4) Akrira accompanied Krsna with the dowry intended for Subhadra. (Sloka 29, Chapter 220, Adi Parva,
(3) ‘a krdira came to the country called Upaplavya for
attending the marriage of Abhimanyu. (Sloka 22, Chapter 72, Virdta Parva, M.B.).
(6) Akrira and Ahuka always quarrelled with each
other both alleging that the other sided with the opposite
camp of Krsna. (Slokas 9 to 11, Chapter 81, Santi
Parva, M.B.).
(7) Karhsa planning to kill Balabhadrarama and Sri
Krsna conducted a festival called Capapiija (worship
of the bow). It was Akrira whom Kamsa sent to bring
Balabhadra and Krsna for the festival. Akrira understood the plot, informed Krsna about it and also advised
Krsna to kill Kamsa. (Daiama Skandha, Bhagavata).
(8) Akrira fought against Jarasandha on the side o
Krsna. (Dagsama Skandha).
(9) On another occasion Krsna, Balabhadra and Uddhava sent Akrira to Hastinapura to get tidings about
Kunti and the Pandavas. Akrira met his sister Kunti
and talked to her for a long time and also met Dhrtarastra and talked to him after which he returned to
Dvaraka. (Dafama Skandha).
10) Akrira wentto Hastinapura as a messenger from
ri Krsna. (Refer sub-para 3 of para 13 under Krsna):
4) Domestic life. Akrara married Sutant, daughter of
Ahuka and got two sonsnamed Devaka and Upadevaka-
(Navama Skandha).
5) Syamantaka and Akrira. Refer para 2 under the word
Krtavarma.
(Aksakumara ).
1) Genealogy. Descended in order from Visnu 4°
follows: Brahma - Pulastya - Vigravas - Ravana - Aks@:
(Uttararamayana ).
2) Birth. Three sons were born to Ravana, King of the
demons, by his wife Mandodari. They were Megh@”
nada, Atikaya and Aksakumara. Aksakumara was 4
redoubtable hero and a fierce fighter but was killed by
Haniiman in Lanka. (Sarga 47, Sundara Kand4
Valmiki Ramayana).
AKSA II. We find another warrior of this name amon8
the soldiers who came to help Skanda in the KauraV@
a battle. (Sloka 58, Chapter 45, Salya Parv®
sacred chant or mantra. Whe?
Nala was roaming about in the forests after his sepP@"”
tion from Damayanti he happened to save the €0Ph.
Karkotaka, from a wild fire. But in return the snake Ht
him and made him as black as clouds. He then advise.
Nala to go to the palace of King Rtuparna where

AKSAMALA (ARUNDHATI )
cobra said, Nala would be taught the secret mantra of
Aksahrdaya by the King. |
One who knows this sacred chant can find out all secrets
of a game of dice and can count within no time the
number of leaves, fruits and flowers on a tree. Nala went
to Rtuparna and stayed with him. While living there a
brahmin named Sudeva came to Rtuparna and informed
him that Damayanti was going to marry again. Rtuparna
immediately started for Vidarbha taking Nala as his
charioteer. The chariot driven by Nala flew like a wind
and on the way when Rtuparna’s handkerchief fell down
and he requested Nala to stop the chariot. Nala informed
him that by the time the request was made they had
travelled already one yojana. As they proceeded they
Saw a huge tree full of leaves and fruits. Rtuparna ata
glance told Nala that the tree contained five crores of
leaves and two thousand nine hundred and five fruits.
Nala was surprised. Then they understood that Nala
was able to drive the chariot so quickly because. of his
knowledge of the sacred chant Agvahrdaya and that
Rtuparna was able to count ‘the leaves and fruits because of his knowledge of the chant Aksahrdaya. They
taught each other the sacred mantras. Because of - this
AKSAYAVATA. A sacred lake. When t
AKUPARA
faithfully followed them to the forest. Dha
then prayed to the God, Sirya and he abpcared Tete
him and gave him this Aksaya Patra (Aksaya =never
getting empty, Patra =pot). Everyday this pot never
got empty till the meals of Pavcaly Were over. (Chapter
>» M.B.). See also under Duryodhana,
; aol he Pandavas
during their exile went to Pulastyagrama sage Pulastya
gave a description of all the sacred lakes in India. He
says, “After reaching Markandeya
saya bathe. in that lake you will
get salvation’’. In the Navama Skandha of Devi Bhagavata you find the following about Aksayavata: ‘‘Puspabhadra is one of the famous sacred rivers in India. This
river starts from the Himalayas with the name Saravati
and flowing for 500 yOJanas (One yojanam is equal
to about 8 miles) on the left side of river Gomati reaches
the western ocean. There is an asrama called Aksayavata on the shores of this beautiful rive; which always
carries crystal clear water. The asrama got that name
Aksahrdaya Nala was able to win the game of dice the
second time and regain his kingdom. (Chapter 72, :
Vana Parva). ; Lord Siva, Bhadrakali and Skanda used to come and
AKSAMALA (ARUNDHATI). See under Arundhati. sit underneath this banyan tree.
| AKSAPRAPATANA. A particular Place in the country’ AKSINA. He was the son of Visvamitra. (Sloka 50,
of Anartia. At this place Sri Krsna killed two demons _ Chapter 14, AnuSasana Parva. For more details see
| named Gopati and Tdalaketu. (Sloka 29, Chapter 38; under Visvamitra).
| Sabha Parva, M.B.). . AKUPARA. ;
| AKSARAPURUSA. When all was set for the Kuru- 1) General information. There is a lake in the Him2-
| ksetra battle Arjuna showed signs of weakness and hesi- layas called ‘Indradyumna. Akipara is a tortoise livin
| tated to proceed for a fight. Sri Krsna then through the in it..There is also a Statement that this is the Adjfamous Gita enunciated a Philosophy of life during the Kirma (second of the ten incarnations of God). A
course of which he speaks about the two purusas, Ksara description of Akiipara is found in Chapter 199 of Vana
and Aksara. All that we see in this world and enjoy are Parva in Mahabharata.
Ksara and the power behind all of them is Aksara. 2) Ctranjivt (One who has no death). When the PandaGod is one who transcends the aspects Ksara and Aksara vas Were in exile in the forests sage Markandeya tells
and stands as the root cause of all life. (Slokas 16 to 19, many stories to Dharmaputra to console him in his sad
plight. The Pandavas asked Markandeya whether he
knew of anybody living before him. Then the Sage said,
“In times of old Indradyumna an ascetic King (Rajarsi)
fell down from heaven when he fell short of his accixmulated ‘Punya’. Sorrowfully he came to me and asked me
beeause of a big banyan tree standing near it. Kapila,
the great sage, did penance sitting here for a long time.
Chapter 39, Bhisma Parva, M.B.)_ |
AKSASUTRA. She was the wife of the sage Apastamba.
She was a very chaste woman. (See under Apastamba ).
AKSAUHINI, A big division of an army. It is described
in the Verses 19 to 26 in the 2nd Chapter of Adi Parva of |
the Malayalam Mahabharata. It says thus: One chariot, whether I knew him. I replied in the negative adding
one elephant, three horses and five soldiers constitute that perhaps Pravirakarna an ow! living on the top of
Whats. termed a Patti. Three such pattis make one Sena- the Himalayas might know him since he was older
mukha and three such senamukhas make one Gulma. than me. At once Indradyumna became a horse and
hree gulmas make one Gana and three such ganas taking me on its back approached the owl living, in the
mak 2 Vahini. Three such vahinis make one Prtana. Himalayas. The owl also could not remember IndraAn Ables Ping ook tains 21870 chariots, an equal nuinber dyumna but directed him to a stork named Nadijarhgha
of él hee ts, 65160 horses and 109350 soldiers. — who was older than the owl. The Ascetic king took me
AKSAYAPATR A. This is a copper vessel given to then to the Indradyumna lake where the stork lived.
Dh . Stirya (Sun ). To destroy the Pandavas, The stork also could not find the identity of Indraarmaputra by Surya (: lacgrmade of lan. Chey dyumna. Perhaps he said that a tortoise of name AkiDuryodhana kept them in a p o th h dense forests Para living in that same lake might know him. We then
escaped from there and passing t he a Rnweludi Be approached the tortoise and enquired whether he knew
Ganges and reached t ae oy ‘toise sat in meditation for so
crossed the river ‘ed the King’s daughter, Indradyumna. The tortoise sat in me tion me
Paficala where they oo sles killed two demons time and then weeping pr ofusely and shaking like-a leaf
Krsna (Pani aes Ay ge ios were living hap- stood bowing respectfully and said, How can T remain
called Hidimba and Baka. Whe Duryodhana defeated without knowing him? There are several monuments
pily at Indraprastha the J ear me sent them for a of the useful work done by him here. This very lake is of
them in a game of dice by sic P feces The Pandavas his making. This came into existence by the march of
f wy awaited ctomualllle subjects who the cows he gave away to the people”. The moment
ound it IMmpossl

ALAGHU
the tortoise finished speaking a chariot appeared from
heaven to take the King away. The King after leaving
me and the ow! in their proper places ascended to heaven
in the chariot. . —— .
ALAGHU. A son born to Vasistha by Urjja. Raja
(Rajas) Gaira, Urdhvabahu, Savana, Sukra and
Sutapas, who were great hermits, were brothers of
Alaghu, who has another name ‘Alagha’. (Agni Purana,
Chapter 20).
ALAKA. The city of Kubera. |
ALAKANANDA. River Ganga of devaloka. ‘The river
anga of the earth when it flows through devaloka is
called Alakananda and is called Vaitarani when it flows
through Pitrloka (nether world). Krsnadvaipayana
(Vyasa) declares that Deva Ganga with crystal pure
water flowing in devaloka under the name Alakananda
and Vaitarani of the nether world, a terror to sinners,
are the same as the Ganga of the earth. (Slokas 21 and
22, Chapter 170, Bhasa Bharata, A.P.).
Starting from Visnupada Alakananda flows through
. Devayana which blazes with the splendour of a crore of
beautiful many-storeyed buildings. Flowing from there
to Candramandala (moon) and flooding 1t completely
dows down to Brahmaloka. From there it divides into
four rivulets and flows to the four different sides with
the names Sita, Caksus, Alakananda and Bhadra. Of
these Sitd falls on the thickly wooded mountain tops of
Mahameru and flowing from there through Gandhamadana by the side of Bhadragvavarsa falls down in the
eastern ocean. Caksus falls on the top of Malyavan
mountain and flowing through Ketumala falls down in
the western ocean. The most sacred of the group,
Alakananda, falls on the mountain of Hemakita and
from there flows through Bharatavarsa and falls down
in the southern ocean. The fourth, Bhadra, falling on
the top of the Mountain, Srigavan flows to the northern
ocean. Of these the most sacred is Alakananda which
flows through Bharatavarsa and it is believed that even
those who think of taking a bath in that will acquire the
benefit of performing yagas like A$Svamedha and Rajasiya. (Eighth Skandha of Sri Mahadevibhagavata).
ALAMBALA. A giant who used to eat human flesh.
This cannibal was the son of Jatasura. This asura
(Alambala}) fought on the side of the Kauravas in the
Kuruksetra battle because Bhimasena had killed his
father, Jatasuia. In the battle, Ghatotkaca cut off the
head of this mighty warrior and magician and threw his
head into the war-chariot of Duryodhana. (M.B., Drona
Parva, Chapter 149). .
ALAMBATIRTHA. A holy place where there was a
sacred bath. Garuda, when he went to devaloka (the
realm of the gods) to bring Amrtam (ambrosia) took
rest in this holy place. (See under the word Garuda.
Also M.B., Adi Parva, Chapter 39, Stanza 39).
ALAMBUSA I. Son of the giank Rsyasrniga. He had
fought on the side of the Kauravas. (M.B., Udyoga Parva
Chapter 167, Stanza 33). There was a combat haneste
Alambusa and Ghatotkaca, on the first day of the battle
of Kuruksetra. |
Alambusa shot ninety sharpened pointed arrows at the
son of Bhimasena (Ghatotkaca), cut his body in several
places. Though he was full of wounds, he fought all the
more flercel >? (Bhasca Bha | “
45, ay 44). harata, Bhigma Parva, Chapter
ALAMBUSA
Alambusa had engaged Abhimanyu, Satyaki, Ghatotkaca, Kuntibhoja and Bhimasena all mighty men of
arms, in single combat, in the Kaurava battle. It is seen
that he has got another name, Sdlakatamka. He was
killed by Ghatotkaca in the battle. (M.B. Drona
Parva, Chapter 109, Stanzas 22 to 33). |
ALAMBUSA II. Another king on the side of the Kauravas. Satyaki killed this king. (Mahabharata, Drona
Parva, Chapter 140, Stanza 13).
ALAMBUSAIII. A king of the Raksasas. It 1s seen that
this Alambusa was defeated and driven away frcem the
battle-field by Arjuna. (Drona Parva, Chapter 167,
Stanzas 37 to 47).
ALAMBUSA IV. A giant, the son of Jatasura. Ghatotkaca killed this giant in the battle. )
ALAMBUSA. A celestial woman born to Kasyapa by
his wife Pradha. |
1) Genealogy. Begins from Visnu in the following
order: Brahma-Kasyapa-Alambusa.
2) How she enticed the hermit Dadhica. In days of yore
there was an ascetic named Dadhica. He began doing
tapas on the bank of the river Sarasvati. Indra was in
consternation. Indra sent this celestial maid Alambusa
to entice the hermit. When the ascetic got down to the
river, Alambusa approached him with enticing actions
and expressions. When the hermit saw her he became
passionate and he had seminal flow. The sperm fell
into the river. The river became pregnant and delivered
a child in due course. He was called Sarasvata.
Alambusa brought the child before Dadhica, who blessed
the child and said that there would be a drought in the
country continuously for twelve years and that at that
juncture Sarasvata would recite passages from the
Scripture to the Brahmins who had forgotten them. The
much pleased Sarasvati and Sarasvata went back.
At that time Indra lost his Vajrayudha (weapon of
thunderbolt) somewhere. The Asuras (enemies of
Gods) made an onslaught on the gods and their realm.
Indra knew that with a weapon made by the bone of
Dadhica the Asuras could be destroyed. Indra asked the
Gods to bring the bone. They came down to the earth
and requested Dadhica to give them a bone. Dadhica
giving his bone died and attained heaven. With his
bones Indra made a good deal of weapons such as the
Vajrayudha, wheel weapons, maces and sticks and with
them Indra slew all the Daityas (Asuras).
After this there was a great famine in the country. AS
there was no rain, crops failed and lands became dry an
the Brahmins left the country. Sarasvata alone remaine
with his mother. After twelve years the famine an¢
starvation came to an end. By then the Brahmins ha@
forgotten the hymns and mantras of the Vedas. They
approached the boy Sarasvata and renewed their me“
mory. (Mahabharata, Salya Parva, Chapter 51).
3) Punarjanma (Rebirth). Long ago Indra went 1
Brahma. There was one Vasu called Vidhiima also W1"
Indra. When these two were standing near Brahm
Alambusa also came there to pay homage to Brahm4The garments she had on were displaced by wi?@
Vidhiima saw the dazzling beauty of her body and was
overpowered by libido. Alambus& who understo?
this, was filled with passion for him. Brahma who 54
the changes in them looked at Indra with displeasure’
Indra knowing the mind of Brahma cursed them: «Both
of you who have lost meekness shall become human ee

ALAMBUSA
ings and then your desire will be fulfilled’. Owing to
the curse Vidhima was born‘as Sahasranika, the illustrious King of Candra varnsa (Lunar dynasty) and
Alambusa took birth as Mrgavati, the daughter of King
Krtavarma and his wife Kalavati. (Kathasaritsagara,
Kathamukhalambaka, Taranga 1). mite
4) The curse of Tilottamad. Sahasranika the incarnation
of Vidhama and Mregavatt the incarnation of Alambusa
fell in love with each other on the earth also. Before
the wedding took place Devendra once invited Sahasranika to heaven. He lived there for a time as the guest
of the Gods. After having defeated the Asuras it was
time for him toreturn: Indra sent Tilottama to keep
company. The charioteer was driving: Sahasranika
immersed in the thought of Mrgavati was sitting silent.
Tilottama said something which the King did not hear.
Tilottama cursed hinmy that he would be separated for
fourteen years from the object about which ‘he ‘was
thinking. He was not even aware of the curse. :
5) The period of separation. The King returned to
Kaugambi his capital city. Without much delay -the
wedding ceremony also was conducted. She: became
pregnant. One day she told her-Iover-husband that she
had a desire to dip in a blood pond: The King made a
pond and filled it witha solution of Laksa (wax, when
‘dissolved in water, the water ‘will look like blood) and
such other substances. Mrgavati was dipping and splashing'in it when an eagle taking her ‘tobe a piece of flesh
took her away: At the loss of his wife Sahasranika lost
his senses ‘and fell down unconscious. Immediately
Matali, Indra’s charioteer; came down from the realm of
Gods and brought the King back to’ consciousness, a0
then informing him of the curse of Tilottama he returned.
Without paying any heed to the consolatory words of
his ministers or other inmates ‘of the palace: the’ King
went on lamenting and moaning, “‘ha, my love: Mrgavati ! Where are you now ?” and waited for the end of
the period of the curse, execrating ‘Tilottama. Casting
Mrgavati on the Mountain ‘of the Rising Sun the great
bird flew away. The horror-stricken’ queen)! thinking of
her present condition cried aloud. A very large mountain
snake began to draw near to swallow her. ‘A divine
person saved her from that situation .and vanished: ‘Phe
unprotected Mrgavati decided to commit suicide.’ It
was a forest which abounded in lions; tigers, bears and
such other ferocious animals. But none of them came
and above the exertion of carrying, she
had to bear the difficulties of her forlorn. condition, and
she grew weary and worn and! became , unconscious.
Then a hermit boy came there and: questioned her who
Was now lean and. ill-dressed, about her. condition..and
consoling her guided her to. the hermitage of the great
hermit Jamadagni. When she saw the hermit who was
as radiant as the Sun, she bowed low before him..- ‘My
daughter | Don’t fear. You will geta heroic son here who
will continue your family. You will be reunited. to your
husband.’’. Said the great and noble hermit, who could
foresee the future. Somewhat pacified. Mrgavati lived
in that hermitage waiting for, reunion with her husband,
After some days she gave birth to a son who had all the
At the birth of the child Mrgasymptoms of greatness. » child Mr
oat Ver an unknown voice saying, “This boy, would
become the great and renowned King Udayana. His son
t the leadership of the Vidyadharas (the musijmp Gods)”. At this the queen was immensely
near her; over
ALAMBUSA.
pleased. The: boy Udayana ‘grew up in’the hermitage,
an incarnation ofall good qualities: ‘The hé:mit to whom
the past, the present and. the future were not-obscure,
performed the’ necessary ‘rites and rituals’ becoming a
Ksatriya boy (Ruling caste) and taught -him everything
including the’ Dhanurveda (the ‘Science of: Archery).
Asa token of her intense love for the'son, she put a bangle
with the name of Sahasranika inscribed on the arm of
Udayana. One day when Udayana was tramping the
forest, he saw’a snake-charmer‘catching a snake» Seeing
the beauty of the snake he asked the snake-charmer to Jet
the snake free. But the’ snake-charmer replied, “Oh
Prince, this is my daily bread. I-earn my livelihood by
exhibiting shakes. My previous snake was dead ‘and it
was with the help’of'a good deal of herbs and spells and
incantations that ‘I caught’ this one’. ‘ LOO
When he heard this Udayana ‘felt pity for him and gave
the bangle to’ the snake-charmer and let ‘thesnake free.
When the snake-charmer had gone with the. bangle,
the snake beaming with joy said to Udayana?: “‘Iam
~Vasunemi,' the elder brother of Vasuki. Iam grateful to
you for giving me freedom. | I give you this lute producing
exquisite notes of music, betels and ‘some’ tricks‘to “prepare never fading garlands and paste to make marks on
the forehead.’ Receive them as my presents”: Udayana
accepted the presents with gladness and ‘returned more
luminous than before tothe hermitage of Jamadzegni.
The snake-charmer took the bangle, given by Udayana
to the bazar for sale. The police caught him and took
him before’ the King, because they saw ‘the name. of the
King inscribed 'on the bangle.. The King asked ‘him how
_ he got'the bangle and the snake-charmer told ‘the King
the story from the catching ‘of the-snake ‘till he got the
bangle. ““This is the bangle that I put on the arm-of my
wife. The boy who gave this bangle to this snake-charmer
must be my son: "The King was thinking with sadness,
when the King héard’a voice from above say, *‘O King !
the period of ‘the curse js over: Your wife and ‘son are
In the Mountain of the Rising Sun”! At’'these words the
King felt extreme joy.° Somehow or’ other-he spent the
rest of the day.‘Early the next morning the King followed by his army, went to the Mountain of the Rising Sun
to bring back his wife’ and’ Son: ‘They took the ‘snakecharmer to show them the way. | . doidw
In due course’ the King and his train reached ‘the holy
hermitage of the eminent hermit Jamadagni.-The place
was always vibrant with sounds of the repeating and’recitation of the ‘Holy ‘scriptures and covered with smoke
mingled with the fragrance of burning herbs'and other
oblations burned in the sacrificial fire’ The various wild
animals which are: born €nemies of each other got ‘on
amicably there. ‘The hermit who was an'incarnation ‘of
the higher aspirations greéted the’ King who was the
protector of the ascetics, with the hospitality becoming
his status. The King who saw Mrgdavati with thei son
was overcome with gladness. Their reunion caused: a
shower of Ambrosia (Amrta): The King ‘stood before
the hermit with folded arms and’ bowed head for permission to depart. To the King: the hermit Jamadagni
said : “Oh, King, you are welcome to this hermitage.
To those such as you who are of the "Rajogunapradhana’
caste (Ruling race) the peaceful atmosphere of our
hermitage may not be appealing to the heart. But a holy
hermiiage is more. respectable than the palace of an
Emperor. There is no place for unhappiness here, You
ETS SOD a Gi mera oak a ean

ALAMBUSA
ve known that the reason for your separation
is : jo ‘When you were returning from heaven with
Tilottam4, you were so much engrossed in the thought of
Mrgavati that you did not pay any heed to the conversation of Tilottama. She was displeased with your behaviour and cursed you. In future, if ever you happen to
get into a position which will cause you mental trouble
you can be assured of the presence of this Jamadagni.
The King said, “I am extremely grateful to your Eminence for this great boon. I am fully aware of the fact
that the presence of the holy hermits who have under
their control the eightfold prosperities, is always a
harbinger of peace and prosperity. I am very sorry to
say that the exigency of my presence at the capital due to
the pressure of work in connection with the ruling of the
country compels me to cut short my visit to this holy
hermitage. I shall be looking forwaid with pleasure to
occasions which will enable me to pay visits to this Holy
abode.” .
Much pleased at the speech of the King the hermit said
to Mrgavati: “My daughter ! Not only myself, but all
the inmates of this hermitage are highly pleased at
having got you‘in our midst for so long. We are sorry to
part from you. Now look ! the animals of the hermitage
are standing round you and shedding tears. Still we are
consoled at your reunion with your husband. Naturally
you are of a very good character and your life In this
hermitage has given you a nice training and so there is no
need for any more advice from me at this time.”
Saying this he drew Udayana to his side, kissed him on
his head and said to the King again: ‘This son is a decoration to your dynasty. This handsome boy has been
taught everything becoming a royal prince. Let him be a
costly gem to you’.
Thus blessing the boy the hermit led him to the King.
The Joy at her reunion with husband, her shyness at
being near him, her sorrow at having to depart from the
hermitage and the surging feeling in her mind—all
these made her dumb and so being unable to say anything she expressed her love and regard for the hermit
whom she loved as her father, by some motions of her
body and took leave of him with her son. The blessed
King and his train, looking at the men, beasts and birds
which accompanied them for a while, took leave of them
and proceeded to the capital city. On reaching’ there
the King anointed his son Udayana as King. Sahasranika then went to the Himalayas to practise ascesis with
his wife. (Kathasaritsadgara, Kathamukhalambaka,
Taranga 2).
(b) Enticing Trnabindu. A story is.seen in the Bhagavata of how Alambusa enticed the King Trnabindu. He
married Alambusa and a daughter named Idavida
(Ilabila) was born to them. This Iabila was. married
to Vigravas, to whom a son named Kubera (the Lord of
wealth) was born By Alambusa Trnabindu had three
sons called Visala, Sanyabandhu and Dhimraketu.
“Tam bhejelambusa devi
Bhajaniyagunalayam
Varapsarayaste, putrah
Kanya cedabidabhavat
asyamutpadayamasa
israva dhanadarn sutarh
Pradaya vidyam paramiALARIKARAGRANTHA.
ALARKA (M) I.
ALARKA II
Mrsiryogegvarat pituh
Visalah Sanyabandhu:ca
Dhimraketuscatatsutah
Visalo varnsakrdraja
Vaigalith nirmame purim’”’.
“He who is the seat of all laudable qualities (Trnabindu )
was honoured by Alambusa (as husband ), Idavida
their daughter was given in Marriage to Visravas and
to them was born Dhanada (Kubera). His father
who Was 4 great hermit taught him everything required.
Three sons Vi§ala, Sunyabandhu and Dhimraketu,
were born to them. Vigala who was the founder of the
Dynasty, built a city called Vaiéali.” (Bhagavatam,
Navama Skandham, Chapter 2, Stanzas 31-33),
Alambusa took part in the birthday celebration of
Arjuna. * _
(Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 65, Stanza 49) (See
Footnote )
(A book on rhetorics and
figures of speech). See the word Pattu.
ALANKARAVATI. Wife of King Naravahanadatta. It
is Seen in the Kathasaritsigara where a Vidyadhara
woman tells the story of Alankaravati to the King.
Once a vidyadhara named Alankaragila ruled over a
city called Sri Sundarapura in the Himalayas. His wife
was Called Kaficanaprabha. A son was born to them.
They named him Dharmagila because Devi Katyayani
told them in a dream that the son would become Dharmapara (who performs duties well). To the prince, knowledge in every branch of studies was imparted and then
he was anointed heir to the throne. He executed regal
functions to perfection and ruled his subjects better than
his father. Kaficanaprabha, wife of Alankarasila, gave
birth to a daughter. At the time of her birth a heavenly
voice sald that she would become the wife of Naravahanadatta the emperor of the Vidyadharas. They named
her Alankaravati. She grew into a very beautiful maiden.
She learned arts and sciences from her father. She went
on a pilgrimage to the Siva temples far and' wide. One
day she heard a celestial voice: ‘Go to the Svayambhu
temple in Kasmira and worship there and you will get
as your husband Naravdhanadatta.” F inally Naravahanadatta the emperor of Vidyadharas married her.
(Kathasaritsigara, Lambaka 9, Taranga 1),
ALOLUPA. A son of Dhrtardstra.
ALPAKALA (M). A short time. (Alpa=short and KAla
=time). In the Bhagavata the following definition is
given of alpakala : “Take two tender leaves of a lotus
and place one on the other. Let a strong man take a
sharp needle and thrust it hard at the leaves. The time
eee for rs a to pierce one leaf and reach the
other is alpakala’’. [Bha avata 10n )s
a. 3F [Bhag (Malayalam version)
The name of an Insect. It was in the
form of this insect that Indra went and bore a hole on
the leg of Karna while Parasurama was sleeping on his
lap. The blood that flowed from Karna’s foot wetted the
body of the preceptor. )
ALARKA IT. A king of the states of Kasi and Karissa.
'€ WaS a very honest man. Forsaking all riches and his
kingdom he accepted Dharmamarga. (Sloka 64, Chapter 115, AnuSasana Parva, M.B.). He was a member 0
“Alambusa was the mother of the Celestial maid Kalavati. See the word Thintha Karala.

ALATAKSI
the council of yama. He attained salvation by yoga and
meditation. (18th Sloka, Chapter 8, Sabha Parva, M.B.).
Once Alarka decided to overcome the five senses. To
control them he sent arrows at the mind, nose, tongue,
ear, eye, skin and intelligence. But the senses never
surrendered to them. Then Alarka by sheer dhyana
and yoga brought them under control. (M.B., Anusdasana Parva, Chapter 30).
Alarka once told a blind brahmin boy to ask for any boon
from him. The boy demanded the eyes of Alarka. To
keep his promise Alarka scooped out his eyes and gave
them to the blind boy. (Ramiayana, Ayodhya Kanda,
Sarga 12, Sloka 43).
ALATAKSI. A woman in the service of Skanda. (M.B.,
Salya Parva, Chapter 43, Stanza 8).
ALAYUDHA. A giants He was the brother of Bakasura.
He fought on the side of the Kauravas. (M.B., Drona
Parva, Chapter 95, Stanza 46 and Chapter 176, Stanza 6).
Alayudha combated with Bhimasena and Ghatotkaca
and was killed by Ghatotkaca.
AMADHYA. A synonym of Sri Krsna. (M.B., Santi
Parva, Chapter 342, Verse 90).
AMAHATHA. A serpent. It was burnt up in the fire at
the Sarpa satra of Janamejaya. (M.B., Adi Parva,
Chapter 57, Verse 16).
AMANTHU. A king of the family of Priyavrata.
Genealogy: From Visnu descended in this order :
Brahma-Svayambhuva Manu - Priyavrata - AgindhraNabhi-Rsabha - Bharata - Sumati - Devatajit - Devadyumna - Paramesti - Pratiha - Pratiharta - Bhima -
Sita - Prastoka - Vibhu - Prthusena - Nakta- Gaya -
Citraratha - Samrat - Marici - Vinduman - Madhu -
Viravrata - Amanthu. Viravrata had two sons, Manthu
and Amanthu.
AMARACANDRA. A Sanskrit poet. It is believed that
he lived in the 13th Cent. A.D. Bala Bharata was his
work. Amaracandra was a Jaina priest. It is said that
he was a courtier of Visaladeva, the son of King Viradhavala who ruled over Gujarat from 1243 to 1262.
AMARAGUPTA. He was the minister of King Vikramasinha who ruled over Avanti in olden times. (Kathasaritsagara, Madana Maficuka lambaka, First’ Taranga).
AMARAHRADA. A place of holy bath. One who takes
his bath here will attain Svarga. (M.B., Vana Parva,
Chapter 83, Verse 106). .
AMARAKANTAKA. A_ mountain. It was on_ this
mountain that some parts of T'ripura, which was burnt
by Siva fell. From that time it became a holy place. In
Padma Purana, Adi Khanda, Chapter 15, we see the
following passage about the benefits obtained by visiting this holy place. “One who goes to Amarakantaka
mountain‘will enjoy the fourteen worlds for thirtyseven
thousand crores of years. Afterwards he will be born on
earth as King and reign as supreme emperor. A visit to
Amarakantaka has ten times the value of an Asvamedha.
If one has Siva’s dargana there, one will attain Svarga.
At the time of eclipse, all kinds of holy things converge
towards Amarakantaka. Those who take their bath in
Jvalegvara in Amarakantaka will enter Svarga. The
dead will have no rebirth. ‘Those who renounce their
Ales ill live 1 draloka till the time of
at Ivaleévara will live in Ru i
sa a In the valley of Amarakantaka and in the
Tittha live Devas known as Amaras and numerous Rsis.
Amarakantaka Ksetra has a circumference of one yojana.
(about eight miles).
sf AMBA
AMARAPARVATA. An ancient place in Bharata.
Nakula had conquered this place. (M.B., Sabha Parva,
Chapter 32, Verse 11).
AMARAVATI. It is the city of Indra, the King of the
Devas. Its location is described in Devi Bhagavata as
follows: ‘‘Brahma’s world extends over 10,000 yojanas
on the Mahameru mountain. There are eight cities—
each 2,500 square yoJanas in extent—of the Astadikpalakas in eight parts of this Brahmapuri. Thus there are
nine cities on the top of the Maha Meru. They are the
following :—
In the centre is Brahma’s city, Manovaii.
To the east of Manovati, Indra’s city, Amaravati.
In the south-east corner, Agni’s city, Tejovati.
On the southern side, Yama’s city, Sarhyamani.
In the south-west corner, Nirrti’s city, Krsnafijana.
In the west, Varuna’s city, Sraddhavati.
In the north-west corner, Vayu’s city, Gandhavati.
In the north, Kubera’s city Mahodaya.
In the north-east corner, Siva’s city, Yasovati.
(Devi Bhagavata, Astama Skandha).
AMARDANA. See the word ‘“PANCATANTRA”.
AMAVASI. In Amarakoga we read about Amavasi:
‘“Amavasya tvamavasya daiSah siryendusarhgamah”’.
Amavasi means New Moon. “Ama” means “‘Saha’’.
So AmAvasi is the Union of Sun and Moon in the same
rasi.
Once Bhrgu Maharsi cursed Agni. At that time Agni
explained the importance of Amavasi. The oblations
which are offered as homa into the fire become the food
of the Devas and Pitrs. Substances offered as homa on
Purnamasi become food of the Devas and those offered
on AmavasI become food of the Pitrs. (M.B., Adi
Parva, Chapter 7).
AMAVASU I. Son of Puriravas by Urvaii.
Adi Parva, Chapter 75, Verse 24),
Genealogy. From Visnu, Brahma-Atri-Candra-BudhaPurtiravas-Amavasu. ’
AMAVASU II. One of the Pitrs. Once Acchoda was
fascinated by the physical charm of this Amavasu and
made advances of love to him. AmAvasu repelled her
advances. On account of this impropriety of Acchoda,
who was a spiritual daughter of the Pitrs, she was degraded and in her next birth was born as Kali or
Satyavati. (Padma Purana, Srsti Khanda).
AMBA. Daughter of a King of Kagi.
1) Ami and Vicitravirya. Amba is an ill-starred
Character in the story of the Mahabharata. She had
two younger sisters named Ambika and Ambiilika.
Bhisma,who had taken a vow to remain a bachelor for
life, had once taken Amba, Ambika and Ambalika, the
three daughters of the King of K4si, to Hastinapura.
The circumstances in which this happened, are descried in Devi Bhagavata, Prathama_ Skandha as follows ;
Santanu, a King of the Candra Vaméa, had two wives,
Ganga and Satyavati. Bhisma was the son of Ganga
and Citrangada and _Vicitravirya were the sons of
Satyavati. Soon after Bhisma’s birth, Ganga vanished,
After a long period of reign, Santanu also died. Satyavati and. the three sons were left behind in the palace.
According to a vow he had taken long ago, Bhisma,
instead of succeeding to his father s throne, left it to his
brother Citrangada. Once Citrangada went for hunting
in the forest. There he came across a Gandharva named
Citrangada. The Gandharva did not like another man
Sea Bae

AMBA
. with his own, name to be living ini this world. So. he
killed the king: After that Vicitravirya became king.
Bhisma had to take up the task of arranging a suitable
./,marriage for Vicitravirya. ‘rt Ls A .
~, 2) The Svayamvara.. It: was at this time that Bhisma
., came to know that the King of Kasi was arranging the
_Svayathvara of his three daughters, Amba, Ambika and
| Ambalika. Bhisma went there and in the presence of all
.» the kings; who-had assembled there, took the three
,.|) princesses with him to Hastinapura. There he made all
preparations for the marriage. But as the time for the
ceremony approached, the eldest and most beautiful of
the princesses, Amba went to Bhisma and said : “I had
already made up my mind long ago to marry Salva, the
King. Besides, we are deeply in love with each other.
Therefore, please consider whether it is proper on the
part of a great man like you to force me into another
>. Marriage.” , ‘we i ,
On hearing this, Bhisma allowed her to do as she liked.
Amba. then went to King Salva and made an appeal to
him to accept her as his wife since. they were mutually
in love., fps | : !
72/3). .,Salva’s. rejection. To .her words Salva replied:
“What you have said about our mutual love is true. But
it is not right for a man to accept.a woman who has been
accepted by another. I saw Bhisma taking you by hand
and helping you into his chariot. Therefore go at once
_.- to Bhisma himself and ask him to,accept:you.”” Stunned
...by his words, she turned away, to go to the forest to do
1 4). Revenge on Bhisma. In. the. Mahabharata, Udyoga
..Parva, Chapter 17, we find that-Amb4 had cherished a
|, /secrét desire to wreak vengeance on Bhi sma. She went to
the ASrama of Saikhavatya Muni in the forest and stayed
4 there for the night. Her wish to do penance was approved by the Muni. On. the next day, Amba’s maternal
-, grandtfather,. Hotravahana (Srfijaya) came that way.
Hotravahana came to know of all her misfortunes, He
-, adyised, her to inform Parasurama ‘of all her grievances.
Just at that moment Akrtavrana, a follower of Parasu-
>>, rama happened to come there. Hotravahana introduced
5 >Amba to Akrtavrana-: Both Akrtavrana and Srfijaya
»explained all her affairs: to ‘Paraiurama. Paragurama
» undertook to persuade Bhisma to accept’Amba (ag his
wife). But, Paragurama’s proposal was turned down by
Bhisma. A terrible duel took Place between them at
5 -iSuruksetra. When the fight reached a critical stage
be/Narada and the gods induced Paragurdma to withdraw
from the duel. Thus the fight ended with equal victory
sinh tO both. Finding that it was Not possible to achieve her
» object through Paragurama’s mediation; Amba re7 ge iat etc. and went'to the Vaniuna valley
to do. penance for six years.» M.B:, Udyoga: Pa
Chapter 188). After that ‘for — year fe ats ke,
. fast, lying under the water in the river Yamuna. Again
_ for;another year she did penance, standing on the tip of
» the toes and eating only dry leaves. Next, she reduced
the sky and: earth: to. flames by ‘doing’ penance. The
«/ 80ddess Ganga appeared to her and when she under-
»» Stood her: plight, she told Amba that it was not possible
ot Kill Bhisma. In her agony and despair, without even
aa a ag water, she wandered about here and = there.
an Fay, Sotdess Ganga cursed her to: become’ a ‘river in the
nein mens oo a result of the curse, a. part of her was
Se ER COithecriver knowin :ag Amba. :
AMBA
5) Stva’s Boon. The remaining part of her engaged
itself in penance. Siva appeared to her and told her that
in the next birth she would attain masculinity. He added
that she would be born in the Drupada dynasty as a
great archer under the name of Citrayodhi and kill
Bhisma. Pleased with this prophecy, she took a vow that
she would kill Bhisma and making a pyre, burnt herself
to death.
6) Rebirth. King Drupada’s queen had been in great
distress for a long time because she had no children.
Drupada propitiated Siva by worshipping him for an
issue. Siva blessed him and said that a girl would be
born to him, but she would be transformed into a boy.
In due course, the queen gave birth to a girl, but it was
announced that it wasa boy. Therefore the child had to
be brought up, dressed like a boy. The child became
famous under the name of Sikhandi. When Sikhandi
attained youth, Drupada decided to look for a wife for
him (her ?). Still he was greatly perplexed as to how to
find a wife for Sikhandi who was already a youthful
virgin! But his wife assured Drupada that Sikhandi
would become a man, according to Siva’s blessing. So,
Drupada made a proposal for Sikhandi’s marriage with
the daughter of the King of Dagarna.
7) Sikhandi’s Marriage. Hiranyavarna, the King of
Dasarna, gave his daughter in marriage to Sikhandi.
The couple arrived at Kambalyapura. By this time the
wife came to. know that the “husband’? was a woman.
She disclosed the secret to her Ladies-in-waiting. They
in turn communicated it to the king. Enraged at this,
Hiranyavarna sent a messenger to King. Drupada to
ascertain the truth of the matter. He even began 10
make preparations for waging a war against Drupada,
King of Paticala. Drupada and his queen were in a fix.
At this stage the distressed Sikhandi. proceeded to the
forest, determined to: commit. suicide. People were
afraid of entering that forest because a Yaksa named
Sthtinakarna lived there.: Sikhandi went to the premises
of the Yaksa and performed certain rites for a number 0
days. The Yaksa appeared to her. Sikhandi explained
_the whole matter to him. They entered into a contract:
According to it, they exchanged their sexes—Sikhandi
"receiving the male sex of the Yaksa and the Yaksa receiving the female sex of Sikhandi. Sikhandi returned home
as a man. Drupada repeated with greater force his old
plea that his child was a man. Hiranyavarna made 4
thorough examination of Sikhandi and convinced him
~~ self of the: truth: Many years after, Hiranyavarna died8) Kubera’s Arrival.’
ater : At'that time, in the course of hs
world tour Kubera arrived at the residence of Sthina-
‘Karna. The Yaksa’ who was in female form, did not
come out to recéive Kubera. In his ‘anger, Kubera
pronounced a'curse that the female sex of Sthinakarn4
and the male’ sex of Sikhandi would continue for ever:
| The Yaksa prayed for the lifting of the curse. Kuber4
released him from’ the curse by saying that after thé
‘death of Sikhandi,
~ own male
the Yaksa would be restored to hi§
Sek, ie ei Tp rn -_
Accor ding to'the previous agreement, Sikhandi went
Sthinakarna s place after the death of Hiranyavarn@
_ But coming to know of all that had happened, he retur?”
“ed home. ;
Thus Sikhandi became a man permanently’
© Sikhandi had received his training in arms under Dro?2”
carya. ‘In the great Kaurava-Pandava battle, he becam®
a charioteer. _ Pant :

AMBAJANMA
9) Sitkhandi’s Revenge. The Mahabharata, Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 108, describes Bhisma’s encounter ‘with
Sikhandi during the Kaurava-Pandava battle., The
Pandavas started the day’s battle by keeping Sikhandi
in the vanguard. Bhima, Arjuna, Abhimanyu and other
warriors were giving him support. It was Bhisma who
led the Kaurava forces. Arrows began to fly from’ both
sides. It was the tenth day of the battle and Sikhandi
shot three arrows aimed at Bhisma’s breast. Bhisma
with a smile of contempt said to Sikhandi, “‘Sikhandi !
Brahma created you as a woman. You may do as you
like’. Hearing this taunt, Sikhandi became more infuriated. Arjuna inspired him with greater courage.
After that, keeping Sikhandi in front, Arjuna began. to
fight with Bhisma..Sikhandi also showered his arrows
on him. Ten of these arrows of Sikhandi hit Bhisma’s
breast. Bhisma disregarded even those arrows. At last
he said: “‘I cannot kill the Pandavas because they are
invulnerable (avadhyah). I cannot kill. Sikhandi because he 1s really a woman and not man. Though I am
also invulnerable and cannot be killed in battle, yet
today I have to die; the time has come for me to die.”
Meanwhile Sikhandi and Arjuna were discharging ‘a
continuous and heavy shower of arrows at Bhisma. At
last Bhisma fell down. (M.B., Udyoga. Parva, Chapter
Lif 3 Je 3
AMBAJANMA. It is a place of sacred bath where. the
sage Narada usually resides. Those who. die ‘here will
attain salvation (Moksa) by Narada’s blessing, according to M.B., Vana Parva, Chapter 83, Verse 81. :
AMBALIKA. (1) The youngest of the three daughters
of the King of Kasi—-Amba, Ambika and Ambalika.
Vicitravirya, son of Santanu married Ambika .and
Ambalika. The mother of this princess was Kausalya. ”
2) Péandu’s Mother. Vicitravirya died before: children
were born to his wives. To avoid the extinction ofthe
family, Satyavati, mother of Vicitravirya summoned
Vyasa,‘her other son and asked him to beget a son: for
Ambika. Vyasa obeyed his mother half-heartedly.
Ambika did not like the dark-complexioned, crudely
attired Vyasa. Still owing to the Mother’s pressure, she
passively submitted to the act. As a result of their union
‘was born Dhrtarastra, who was blind from his birth. ‘The
grief-stricken mother called Vyasa again and asked him
to have union with Ambialika this time. As' Ambalika’s
face was pale at the time of their union, a child with
pale complexion was born to her. He was named Pandu.
Having thus failed in both attempts, Satyavati asked
Ambika to go to Vyasa again. At night Ambika secretly
disguised her waiting-maid and sent her ‘in her own
place, to Vyasa. The*waiting-maid experienced exquisite
pleasure in Vyasa’s company and as a result a most
intelligent son was born to her. It was he who became
the renowned Vidura. (M.B., Adi Parva, Chapter 106).
AMBARITSA I. A King of the Iksvaku dynasty. on
1) Genealogy and Birth. From Visnu was born in the
) Shears 4-Marici-Kasyapa. - Vivasvanfollowing order : Brahma ‘Waikel « Gaadda-) PupaniayaVaivasvatamanu-Iksvalu, Vien ed Ai ; tener ein
See teartga. Aled lath had three sons: Ambaie, Macukannd and Purukutsa and itty daughters.
‘yana Bala Kanda, Sarga 61)...
AMBARISA/ I,
The Muni (Sage)! Saubhari married the daughters...
2) Ambarisa’s Yaga (sacrifice). In. Valmiki Ramayana
there is a story of Devendra’s theft. of the sacrificial
_cow. from Ambarisa’s yagaéala. Devendra could not
bear the thought. .of King .Ambarisa winning worldrenown and glory by performing yagas. Therefore Indra
stole the sacrificial cow.and took it away.: The Upadhyaya (Chief Priest), was alarmed at. the. disappearance of the cow and expressed his opinion to the: King
‘that 1t would be enough. to sacrifice a human, being instead of the cow. The King searched for the cow in all
countries, cities and forests. At last.-he. reached... the
peak of Bhrgutunga where the sage Rcika lived. with
his wife and children. The King explained.to the. sage
the whole story. He requested him to sell one ofhis.sons
in exchange for 100,000. cows. Rcika had three sons.
The eldest was his father’s favourite and..the youngest
_was the mother’s pet. In the end, Rcika sold the second
son, Sunasgepha in.return for 100,000 cows. ;
On. his return journey with Sunassepha the king..rested
:for a while at .Puskara: Tirtha. ‘There Sunassepha
happened to meet his uncle Visvamitra and:complained to him about his sad plight. Sunassepha’s. wish. -was
that the king’s yaga should be performed and at the same
» time his own’ life-span should be extended. Vigvamitra
promised to. save Sunagéepha. He: called . Madhucchandas and his other sons and said. to them: ‘‘One of
you mustitake the. place of Ambarisa’s . sacrificial cow
» and save 'the life of Sunassepha. God will bless you.”
» But none.of ‘the. sons. of. Visvamitra was. prepared to
become the sacrificial cow. Visvamitra uttered. a curse
on his sons that they:would have to: spend-a’ thousand
years on earth, eating »dog-flesh. Then he turned to
Sunassepha and told him that if he:prayed to the sods
at the time of Ambarisa’s yajfia, they would save him.
So: Sunagsepha: went. to. Ambarisa’s yagasala.. .As
ordered by the assembled guests, Ambarisa bound
unassgepha and had:him dressed in‘ blood-red'-robes,
ready for the sacrifice:.Sunassepha began to praise.and
pray to the gods. Soon Indra appeared and. blessed: him
with longevity: He>:also»: rewarded Ambarisa: for. his
yaga. Thus Sunassepha was saved. * (Valmiki Rama3) Ambarisa and Durvdsas. In Bhagavata we see a:story
which describes how the Sudargana Gakra which emerged from Ambarisa’s forehead chased Durvdsas in: all
the three worlds: Ambarisa:was.a devout worshipper of
Visnu. From the very beginning of his reign, peace-and
“prosperity spread all over: ‘the :country..\Mahavisnu
who was pleased with the-deep.. piety.“and devotion of
~ Ambarisa appeared to: him and bestowed: on ‘him «the
control of ‘his: (Visnu’s) Sudarsana\ Cakra.. After that
Ambarisa started the observance of - Ekadasi: vrata.
The rigour of the ‘observance alarmed even Indra. He
- decided to obstruct the observance somehow or other. At
that tinie, Durvasas arrived in devaloka. Indra instigated Durvasas to spoil the Ekadasi observance’ of
Ambarisa. : | 3 : :
Durvasas went to Ambarisa’s palace. There the King
received him with due respect and sent him to the river
Kalindi for his bath and morning rites. Durvasas went
be seen with slight variations in the Devi Bhagavata and other Puranas. In quote versions, Sunagsepha
Harigcandra’s yaga, and moreover, Ajigarta is referred to as the father of Sunassepha, (Brahmanda
Valmiki Ramayana).
* The story of Sunassepha may ;
has been described as the sacrificial cow a .
Puratia, Chapter 58 gives the same story
EYRE

AMBARISA II
for his bath and deliberately stayed away till the conclusion of Ambarisa’s Ekadasi observance. At the end
of the observance, after feeding the gods with his
offerings, Ambarisa kept the remaining portion for
Durvasas. After his bath etc., Durvasas returned, but
he was furious when he was offered the leavings of the
food of the gods and refused to take any food. In his
anger he advanced towards Ambarisa. A terrible monster Krtya emanated from the Maharsi and was about
to destroy Ambarisa. Ambarisa at once called upon
Sudargana Cakra, which appeared instantly and after
cutting the throat of Krtya, turned against Durvdsas.
Terrified by it, Durvasas began to flee for life. The
Cakra pursued him at his heels. Durvasas went to Indra
and sought refuge with him. But the Cakra followed
him there. Indra pleaded helplessness. Then the
Maharsi went to Brahma and sued for his help. There
also the Cakra pursued him. Brahma sent him to Siva.
Siva was also unable to give him shelter. Sudargana continued to chase him. Durvdsas then sought shelter with
Mahavisnu. Visnu told him plainly that there was
no alternative but to go and sue for mercy to Ambarisa himself and advised him to do so. At last Durvasas
returned to Ambarisa and begged his pardon. Ambarisa
saved him from Sudargana Cakra and described to him
the glory resulting from the observance of EkAdaéi
vrata. (Bhagavata, Navama Skandha).
4) Other Details (1) Ambarisa performed a yaga in
the Yamuna valley. (M.B.,Adi Parva, Chapter 1, Verse
277; Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 6; Vana Parva,
Chapter 129, Verse 2).
(2) Maharsi Durvasas recalled Ambarisa’s power.
(M.B., Vana Parva, Chapter 263, Verse Dale
(3) The Sage Vyasa once told Dharmaputra that
Ambarisa was one of the 16 great kings who lived in
ancient times. The 16 reputed Kings were : Marutta,
Suhotra, Paurava, Sibi, Sri Rama, Bhagiratha, Dilipa,
Mandhata, Yayati, Ambarisa, Sagabindu, Gaya, Ranti-
‘deva, Bharata, Prthu and Paragurama. (M.B., Drona
Parva, Chapter 64).
(4) Ambarisa fought single-handed against thousands
of Kings. (M.B., Drona Parva, Chapter 64).
(5) He performed one hundred yagas. (M.B., Drona
Parva, Chapter 64).
(6) Ambarisa once questioned Indra about his (Ambarisa’s) army Chief Sudeva becoming more mighty
611) himself. (M.B., Santi Parva, Chapter 98, Verses
(7) Ambarisa gave 110 crores of cows to th
(M.B., Santi Parva, Chapter 234, Verse 25) ° —
(e) were was te among the Munis who committed theft o astya’s lotuses. (M.B., a
Chapter 94, Se 24). \ Anuiistna. Parva,
(9) Besides giving cows to Brahmins, Ambarisa gave
them the country also.(M.B., Anuédsana Parva Chapter
137, Verse 8).
AMBARISA II. When Balabhadrarama entered the
lower world (Patala) after death, among the Nagas
lag ee — there was one called ‘“Ambarisa’’.
Aeepp, jUSsala Parva, Chapter 4, Verse 16).
—r eo I. King Srutayu, who belonged mu the party
© AAauravas was the ruler of Ambastha land and
Ch he was called Ambastha. (M.B., Bhisma Parva,
aie poe Verses 39-40). He was killed in the fight
juna. (M.B., Drona Parva, Chapter 93, Verses
AMOGHA
AMBASTHA II. There was a hero called Ambastha
among the warriors on the side of the Pandavas.( M.B.,
Drona Parva, Chapter 25, Verse 50). He fought
against King Cedi who was on the side of the Kauravas
and in the fight King Cedi fell.
AMBASTHA III. See the word “VARNA”,
AMBASTHAM. A region in ancient India. It is believed that it was to the north of Sindha (M.B., Sabha
Parva, Chapter 37, Verse 7).
AMBHORUHA. _ A sonof Sage Visvamitra. (M.B., Anusasana Parva, Chapter 4, Verse 59). 7
AMBIKA I. Elder sister of Ambalika, (See AMBALIKA).
AMBIKA II. Another name of Parvati. (Agni Purana,
Chapter 12).
AMBUMATI. A river.
Verse 56).
AMBUVAHINI. A river. (M.B., Bhisma Parva, Chapter
9, Verse 27). Praising this river at dawn and dusk will
bring divine grace. (M.B., Anusdsana Parva, Chapter
AMBUVIGA. One of the Kings of Magadha. He had a
minister named Mahakarni. (M.B., Adi Parva, Chapter
AMHU. An Asura in the period of the Rgveda. This
Asura had been doing much harm to the hermits.
Purukutsa was the hermit whom he tormented most.
Indra vanquished this Asura and destroyed seven of
his cities. (Rgveda, Mandala 1, Anuvaka 11, Sakta
63, Khanda 7).
AMITADHVAJA. A Raksasa. (M.B., Santi Parva, Chapter 227, Verse 50).
(M.B., Vana Parva, Chapter 83,
- AMITAUJA. A mighty Ksatriya King of the Paficala
kingdom. He was born from the element of a Raksasa
named Ketuman. Before the Pandavas went to war, they
had sent an invitation to him. He was one of the distinguished royal allies of the Pandavas. (M.B., Adi Parva,
Chapter 67, Verse 12; Udyoga Parva, Chapter 4,
Verse 12; Udyoga Parva, Chapter 71, Verse 11).
AMITRAJIT. A King. In his country there were innumerable Siva temples. Narada Muni who was delighte
by this sight, went to the Palace and said to Amitrajit:
“In the cify of Campakdvati there is a Gandharv4
virgin named Malayagandhini. She has been abducted
by Kankalaketu, a Raksasa. She has promised to marry
the person who will rescue her from him. Therefore
please save ‘her from the Raksasa.”’ As suggested bY
Narada Amitrajit killed Kankalaketu in battle an
recovered Malayagandhini and married her. Vira wa
their son. (Skanda Purana
AMOGHA I. A Yaksa who accompanied Siva when the
latter once went on a journey to Bhadravata. (M.B.,
Vana Parva, Chapter 231, Verse 35). |
AMOGHA II. This name has been used as a synonym of
Skanda. (M.B., Vana Parva, Chapter 232, Verse 5)-
A MOGHA III. A synonym of Siva. (M.B., Anugasan4
Parva, Chapter 17, Verse 114).
AMOGHA IV. A synonym of Visnu.
Parva, Chapter 149, Verse 25).
AMOGHA (M). An Agni which originated from Brhas
S family. (M.B., Vana Parva, Chapter 222, Verse
AMOGHA. Santanu Maharsi’s wife. Once Brahm
visited Santany Maharsi’s Agrama. As the Maharsi w4°
(M.B., Anugasan4

AMPITTA 31
not at home, it was Amogha who received the guest
with due reverence. Fascinated by the irresistible
charm of Amogha, Brahma had an involuntary emission of seminal fluid. He felt ashamed of his own weakness and left the ASrama immediately. The Maharsi
who returned to the Agrama soon after, came to know
from his wife whose semen it was. He asked Amogha to
accept Brahma Deva’s precious semen and not to let it
be wasted. Being a devoted wife, she accepted it, but
unable to bear the divine pregnancy, she deposited it
in the water lying in the valley of the Yugandhara
mountain. From that time, it became a place of holy
bath, known as Lohita. It was by bathing in this holy
water that Paragurama washed away his sin of annihilating the Ksatriyas. (Padma Purana, Srsti Khanda, 55).
AMPITTA. Aname for barbers. ‘Ampitta’ is derived from
the Sanskrit word ‘‘Ambisthah’’. The word Ambisthah
means Physician. In olden days barbers were physicians
also. Going about from house to house, they could easily
practise both these professions. Since barbers practised
physic also they were called Ambisthas. Ampitta is a
corrupted form-of Ambistha. (Dravidian Philology).
Barbers sometimes style themselves as ‘Pandits’?. It
is on the basis of this that we have today, “‘All Kerala
Pandit Sabha”? and other similar names. There is a
legend on the basis of which this community has assumed the title of “‘Pandit’’. |
Long ago when Sri Buddha was about to go to the -
forest for performing Tapas, thousands of people flocked
together to have his dargana. Buddha wished to continue
his journey after shaving his head. Buddha asked loudly
whether anyone in the crowd was prepared to shave
his head. Only a single man came forward cheerfully to
do that work. Buddha turned to him and said: “My
dear friend, you are the only Pandit in this crowd. You
have the wisdom to understand that there is nothing
disgraceful in shaving one’s head.”
He shaved Buddha’s head. From that day his descendants came to be known as ‘‘Pandits”. __
AMRTA. Daughter of a King of Magadha. She was the
wife of Anagva and mother of Pariksit. (M.B., Adi
Parva, Chapter 95, Verse 41).
AMRTAM. (See PRAMRTAM).
AMRTAM. A delicious and precious food obtained from
the ocean of Milk when the Devas and Asuras churned
it. In Chapter 152 of Agni Purana, the word “‘Mrtam”
is defined as wealth received by begging and Amrtam”
as wealth received without begging, and ‘“‘Pramrtam
as another kind of wealth obtained without begging.
1) Cause of Ksirabdhi-mathanam. (Churning of the Sea
of Milk) —Once when Maharsi Durvasas was travelling
through a forest, he met the Apsara woman, Menaka,
with a garland of Kalpaka flowers in her hand. The
fragrance of the flowers filled the whole forest. Durvasas
approached Menaka and requested her to give the a
land to him. The Vidyadhari (Apsara woman) prostrat,
ed before the Maharsi with reverence and presents
the garland to him. Wearing that garland on his hair,
Durvasas went to devaloka. -
There he saw Indra riding on his elephant, Airavata,
: . f Devas. The Maharsi took
jaigeel none 2 ep d presented it to
the rare garland from his head and p d
Indra received the garlan
ee teed ae Airivata's head. The elephant was
and placed it on Alrava Mig
attracted by the fragrance of the garland and tool! it ai
AMR TAM
‘its trunk, examined it by smelling it and then threw it
on the ground.
Durvasas, who became angry at the way in which his
garland was slighted by Indra said to him: “Sinze
you have treated my garland with disrespect, the glory
and prosperity of devaloka will perish !?? On hearing
the curse, Indra alighted from the elephant, frightened.
He begged pardon of the Maharsi. The furious Muni
continued: “I am not soft-hearted; nor am I ofa forgiving nature. Other Munis may forgive. Remember, I
am Durvasas. You have become so haughty because
other Munis like Vasistha and Gautama have been flattering you too much.” Having said this Durvasas went
his way. Indra returned to Amaravati.
From thatday the glory of devaloka began to decline.
The three worlds became dull. Even the plants and
shrubs began to wither. The performance of yagas came
to an end. The Devas began to be affected by the
infirmities of old age. Taking advantage of this situation,
the Asuras started preparations for opposing the Devas.
Under the oppression of the Asuras, the Devas groaned
in distress. Led by Agni Deva they sought refuge under
Brahma. Brahma led them to Mahavisnu. They all joined in praising Visnu who appeared and told them like
this: “OQ Gods! I shall enhance your glory. Do as I
tell you. Along with the Asuras bring all kinds of medicinal herbs and deposit them in the ocean of Milk.
Obtain Amrtam from it by churning it with Mahamery
as the churning staff and V4asuki as the rope. The
Amrtam (Amrta) which will be produced by churning
the Milk sea, will make youstrong and deathless. I
shall see that the Asuras will share in your troubles but
not in enjoying Amrtam.”’
2) Churning of the Milk Sea. After Visnu had vanished,
the Devas made a treaty with the Asuras and began to
work for getting Amrtam. All of them joined together
in bringing various kinds of medicinal herbs and after
putting them in the Milk sea which was as clear as the
cloudless sky, began to churn it, using Manthara Mountain as the churning staff and snake Vasuki'as the rope.
The party of Devas was posted at the tail-end of Vasuki
while the Asuras took their stand at the head. The
Asuras became enervated by the fiery breath coming out
of Vasuki’s mouth. The clouds which were blown by
that breath invigorated the Devas.
ahavisnu transformed himself into a tortoise, and
sitting in the middle of the Milk Sea served as the
foundation for the Manthara Mountain, the churning
staff. Assuming another form, invisible both to Devas
and Asuras, Mahavisnu pressed down the Manthara
Mountain from above. :
While churning the Milk Sea like this, the first object
that rose to the surface was Kamadhenu. Both Devas
and Asuras were strongly attracted towards Kamadhenu
While all were standing spellbound, Varunidevi with
her enchanting dreamy eyes next ‘appeared on the surface. Parijatam was the third to appear. Fourth, a group
of Apsara women of marvellous beauty floated up. The
Moon appeared as the fifth. Siva received the Moon.
The venom which came out of the MilkSea as the
sixth item, was absorbed by Nagas. After that arose
Bhagavan Dhanvantari, dressed in pure white robes
and carrying a Kamandalu in his hand filled with
Amrtam. All were delighted at this sight. Next Maha.
laksmi made her appearance in all her glory with a

AMRTAM
‘lotus in her hand and seated in an open lotus flower.
Gandharvas sang celestial songs in her presence;
_ Apsara women danced. For her bath, the Ganga river
arrived there with her tributaries. The Milk Sea itself
| took on physical form and offered her a garland of everfresh lotus flowers. Brahma bedecked her with orna-
‘ments. After that Laksmidevi, fully adorned in all her
magnificent jewels, in the presence of all Devas, joined
the bosom of Mahavisnu. The Asuras were displeased
at it. They snatched the pot of Amrtam from Dhan-
-vantari and fled away.
3) How Amrtam was recovered. With the loss of Amrtam,
the Devas were ina fix. They began to consider how
the pot of Amrtam could be recovered. Accordingly
Mahavisnu transformed himself into a celestial virgin,
_Mohini, of extraordinary beauty. She approached the
Asuras as a shy girl. The Asuras were enchanted by
her surpassing beauty. They asked her, “Who are
_ you?” Looking down on the ground, Mohini replied:
‘IT am the little sister of Dhanvantari. By the time I
came out of the Milk Sea, the Devas and Asuras had
already gone. Being lonely I am going about in search
of a suitable mate.”’ °
On hearing her words,’ the Asuras began to make
friends with her one by one, determined not to waste
this opportunity. They told her that she should distribute Amrtam to all of them and in the end she should
- marry one of them. Mohini agreed, but added : “All
of you should close your eyes: I shall serve Amrtam
to all. He who opens his eyes last, must serve Amrtam
to me and he will marry me’’.
All of them accepted this condition. They sat in front
_of Mohini with closed eyes. In a moment Mohini left
: ihe place with the pot of Amrtam and went to devaoka. :
4) Rahu’s neck is cut.
eyes, Mohini was not
When the Asuras opened their
to be seen. Finding that they
__were betrayed, they were in great perplexity. All of
them pursued Mohini to devaloka. Devas had put
~ the Sun and Moon gods on guard ‘duty at the gates
of devaloka. At the instance of the Asuras, Rahu in
disguise entered the divine assembly chamber. The
‘Sun and Moon gods detected him and Visnu with his
weapon, Sudargana Cakra cut open his neck. Swearing
that he would wreak vengeance on the Sun and Moon
_ Rahu returned. In the 8th Skandha of Bhagavata it is
said that even now from time to time R&hu swallows
the Sun and Moon, but they escape through the open
ash in his neck and this is known as solar eclipse and
lunar eclipse. ,
3) Defeat of the Asuras. Indra and all other gods took
Amrtam. The enraged Asuras attacked the gods, who
had gained strength and vigour by taking Amrtam.
ie foarte ee driven away in all directions. All the
three worlds began to enjoy glory and prosperity again.
6) Kalakita. The story of how the dendly isdn,
Kalakiita arose at the churning of the ocean o Milk,
Ss Given in M.B., Adi Parva, Chapter 18, Verses 42-45,
_ as follows : After many precious things hadgcome up
" Kalakita poison with fumes and flames. appeared on
_ the surface of the ocean. Its strong smell caused a
stupor in all the three worlds. -F earing that the world
r will Boe Brahma requested Siva to swallow that
ag Ria gulped it down, but stopped it in his
oat. Brom that day he became ‘“Nilakantha”’,.
age. So Garuda flew up to devaloka, fought with ¢
- Spread on the floor.
_ vata, 8th Skandha. (8)
AMRTAM
7) Lhe story of Atravata. Indra’s tusker Airavata was
responsible for the churning of the ocean of Milk. But
in the Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 18, Verse 42
it is said that a white elephant with four tusks arose
during the churning of the ocean of Milk and that
Devendra caught and tamed it. This is an obvious
contradiction. Besides, in Valmiki Ramayana, Aranyakanda, 14th Sarga, the wounded Jatayu describing his
family history to Sri Rama, gives the following account
about the origin of Airavata -
Kasyapa, one of the Prajapatis, married the eight
daughters of Daksa. One of them named Krodhavaga
had ten daughters by Kasyapa. They were: Mrgi, Mrgamada, Hari, Bhadramada, Matangi, Sardili, Sveta,
Surabhi, Surasa and Kadru. Of them Bhadramada
gave birth to a daughter, Iravati. The tusker Airavata
is Iravati’s son.
An explanation for this discrepancy may be seen 11
Visnu Purana, 3rd_ Section, Chapter 1. Now s)Xx
Manvantaras have passed (See ‘MANVANTARA’).
This is the seventh Manvantara. Fach Manvantara
has a new Indra. According to this, different Indras
have their own Airavatas. This is the only explanation
for this apparent contradiction.
8) Amrtam and Garuda, There is
Amrtam which says that Garuda once went to devaloka and brought Amrtam from there to be given [€
the Nagas, but Devendra came down and took it back:
This story is given in Mahabharata from Chapter
onwards. Vinata, a wife of Kasyapa gave birth '
Garuda and Kadru and her sister gave birth to the
Nagas. Once there was a dispute between Vinata am
Kadru. Vinata said that the hairs on the tail of Uccat
Sravas, Devendra’s horse, were white but Kadru
asserted that they were black. To settle the dispute they
made a bet. The condition was that the loser must
become the servant maid of the winner. As instructé
by Kadru, some of the Nagas went in advance a?
hung down from the tail of Uccais$ravas, thus giving th®
false appearance of a tail with black hairs. By this tric*
Vinata lost the bet and had to become Kadru’s serv@?
maid. As a result of it, the task of looking after Kadru
children became Garuda’s duty. Kadru told him th@"
if he fetched Amrtam from devaloka and gave it to t)”
Nagas, she was prepared to release himfrom the bo?
he
gods and defeated them. He returned with the pot of
Amrtam and gave it to the Nagas. The Nagas pail
to take their bath after placing the pot on darbha gr
Just then Devendra swooped do
and carried away the pot of Amrtam to devalok@
When the Nagas returned after their purifying path,
the pot was not to be seen. In their greed they bega”
to lick the darbha grass on which the pot was place°*
The sharp edge of the grass cut their tongues into Daa
This is why the Nagas (snakes) came to have forké
tongues.
Amrtam Which has been thus recovered after ma?)
such adventures, is still preserved carefully in devalo#":
[ (1) M.B., Adi Paiva, Chapter 17. (2) M.B.,
Parva, Chapter 27, verse 16. (3) M.B. Adi Parv®
Chapter 30, Verse 2. (4) Valmiki Ramayana, Arany
Kanda, 35th Sarga. (5) Visnu Purana, Section °’
Chapter 9. (6) Agni Purana, Chapter 152. (7) Bhag*
Uttara Ramayana. |
another story about

AMSA
AMSA. A sage of the family of Marici.
1) Genealogy. He was descended from Visnu through
Brahma, Marici and Kagyapa. . .
2) Birth. Marici was one of the six sons, all rsis, of
Brahma. These six sons, born parthogenetically of
Brahma, were: Marici, Angiras, Atri, Pulastya, Pulaha
and Kratu. Marici had a son named Kasgyapa. Kasyapa
married the thirteen daughters of Daksa. The eldest of
them, Aditi, gave birth to twelve sons Dhata, Aryaman,
Mitra, Sakra, Varuna, Améa, Bhaga, Vivasvan, Pusan,
Savita, Tyasté and Visnu. Amsa is one of these
twelve sons who have been called the twelve Adityas.
(See Chapter 65 of Adi Parva of the Mahabharata).
3) Events. The Mahabharata says (Sloka 66, Chapter
123) that Arhga was present at the time of Arjuna s birth
when several devas had come there to see the infant.
In Sloka 34, Chapter 45 of Salya Parva it is said that
Amé$a was present on the occasion of the Abhiseka of
Skandadeva. Ama is said to have presented to Skandadeva five good warriors: Parigha, Vata, Bhima,
Dahana and Dahati.
AMSAPAYA. Name of a priest (Rtvik) qualified to
officiate at a sacrifice. This priest officiated at the sacrifice (yajfia) performed by Brahma at Puskaraksetra.
(See Chapter 34 of Padma Purana). |
AMSAVATARA. The incarnation of God on earth is
called avatara. When the incarnation is only partial,
that is, when only some of the divine elements incarnate,
it is called arh$avatara (ArhSa=part). Chapters 54 to
64 of Adi Parva of the Mahabharata give us a list of
the gods who have incarnated partially. The following
list of devas and their amSsAvataras is based upon the
account given in the fourth Skandha of Sri Mahadevi
' AMSUMATI
Name of the god Name of the arhgavatara
31. Laksmi Paficali
32. Siddhi Kunti
33. Mati Gandhari
34. Jaya Hiranyaksa
39. Vijaya Hiranyakasipu
36. Hiranyaksa Ravana
37. Hiranyakagipu Kumbhakarna
38. Ravana Sigupala
39. Kumbhakarna Dandavaktra
40. Prahlada Salya
41. Kalanemi Karhsa
42. Anuhlada Dhrstaketu
43. Khara Dhenuka.
(For more details see under the word, AVATARA).
AMSUDHANAPATTANA. Name ofan ancient town in
North India. Bharata passed through this town while
going to Ayodhya from Kekaya after Dasaratha’s death.
Valmiki has described this town in the Ramayana in
this context.
AMSUMAN. Name of a King belonging to the Solar
dynasty ‘Sirya Varna).
1) Genealogy. Arnguman was descended from Visnu
through Brahma-Marici-Kagyapa-Vivasvan-Vaivasvatamanu-Iksvaku-V ikuksi-Sagada-Purafijaya - Kakutstha -
Anenas-Prthulagva-Prasenajit - Yuvanasva - MandhataPurukutsa-Trasadasyu-Anaranya - Aryasvan - Vasumanas-Sudhanva-Traiyyaruna-Satyavrata-Triganku-Hariécandra-Rohita$va - Harita - Cuficu - Sudeva - BharukaBahuka-Sagara-Asamaiijas-Amguman.
2) Birth. Sagara, a king of the Sirya varnga,(mentioned above) had two wives, Sumati (Vaidarbhi) and
Kesini (Saiba) by name. Keégini gave birth to a son
named Asamajijas. Araguman was the son of Asamafijas
~ of the god Name of the amsavatara and the father of the famous Bhagiratha. (See under
I. Kagyapa Vasudeva the title, BHAGIRATHA).
2. Adigesa Balabhadra 3) Some other details. Arnguman was one of the Kings
3. Narayanarsi Sri Krsna who attended the Svayathvara of Paficali. (Vide
4. Yamadharma Yudhisthira Sloka 11, Chapter 185 of Adi Parva of the Maha5. Agvinidevas Nakula and Sahadeva bharata) .
6. Dharma Vidura AMSUMAN II. There is a reference to one Armguman
7. Siva Asvatthama in the course of the description of the Visvedevas.
8. Gandharvaraja Devaka AMSUMAN Ill. King of Bhoja who was killed by
9. Astavasu Bhisma ; Drona in the war at Kuruksetra (Vide Sloka 14,
10. Marudgana Krpa ; Krtavarma Chapter 6 of Karna Parva). | .
il, Adie Devaki AMSUMATTI. ‘The daughter of the Gandharva King
12, Nararsi Arjuna named Dramila. Her story is narrated in the Siva
l 3 Vs 7 Bhimasena Purana to illustrate the benefits of performing the PraTa. can Karna dosa-Vrata. Sita €xpatiates on the importance and
- Surya . Drona advantages of Pradosa-Vrata to a number of sages
ye Seapets Santanu in Naimisaranya. King Satyaratha was a scrupulous
16. Varuna Virata observer of Pradosa-Vrata. Unfortunately he defaulted
17. Marut Dhrtarastra in his observance of the Vrata owing to unavoidable
18. Harhsa Gakuni circumstances and, after his death, was born again as
19. Dvapara Dhrstadyumna the King of Vidarbha. He was killed in a battle by the
20. Pavaka Diir vodhana King of Salva and his wife, pregnant at that time, fled
21. Kali Sikh pele toa torest. She gave birth to ason on the bank of a
22. Raksasa -. river. Then, when she stepped into the river to drink
23 Drupada Ti by acrocodile. Pre-
. Varuna Sons of Paticali some water, she was carried away oy a crocodile, Pre
24, Visvedevas Madri sently a Brahmin woman named Usa happened to pass
25. Dhrti 3 andha that way with her son named Sucivrata. Seeing a new26. Vipracitti Jaras n born infant there, that Brahmin woman took him, cave
2F . Hayagriva a as him the name, Dharmagupta and brought him up as
28. Baskala ce her own son. According to the advice of a pious Brah29. Lamba p i dyumna min named Sandilya, both Sucivrata and Dharmagupta
30, Sanatkumara

AMURTARAYAS
forming Pradosa-Vrata. Lord Siva was pleasSee on il gave them much wealth. Dharmagupta happened to meet ArhSumati, daughter of the
Gandharva King, Dramila, one day in a forest and
they fell in love with each other. Dramila came to
know of their love and so gave his daughter in marriage
to Dharmagupta. As a result of the wealth and power
which he had acquired by observing strictly PradosgaVrata Dharmagupta was able to return to Vidarbha,
defeat King Salva and regain his kingdom from him.
AMURTARAYAS. He was a renowned King of ancient
Bharata and the father of King Gaya. Amirtarayas
received a sword from Piru. (M.B., Santi Parva, Chapter 166, Verse 75).
ANADIPAKA. (See Paficatantra).
ANADHRSTI I. A King of the Piru dynasty.
1) Genealogy. Descended from Visnu thus : VisnuBrahma-A tri-Candra-Budha-Puriravas-Ayus - Nahu Sa -
Yayati-Piru-Janamejaya - Pracinvan - Namasyu - Vitabhaya-Sundu-Bahuvidha-Samyati-Rahovadi - Raudraégvan-Anadhrsti.
Anadhrsti is a son born to Raudragva by Misrake§i, an
Apsar woman. (M.B., Adi Parva, Chapter 94, Verses
8-12). Anadhrsti has two synonyms, Rceyu and Anvagbhanu.
ANADHRSTI II. Verse 98, Chapter 14 of Sabha Parva
mentions seven great Yadavas. One Andadhrsti is named
amongst the seven. This Anadhrsti was present at the
marriage of Abhimanyu at Ipaplavanagara. (M.B.,
Virata Parva, Chapter 72, Verse 22). There was one
Anadhrsti also amongst the warriors who encompassed
Arjuna and Krsna at the battle-field of Kuruksetra.
(M.B., Udyoga Parva, Chapter 151, Verse 67). He was
the son of King -Vrddhaksema. Hence he was called
Varddhaksemi also.
ANADHRSYA. One of the Kauravas. (M.B., Adi Parva,
Chapter 67, Verse 105).
ANAGATA. (See PANCATAN TRA),
ANAGHA I. Son of Vasistha. He had seven sons, by
his wife Urja. They were: Rajas, Gotra, Urdhvabahu,
Savana, Anagha, Sutapas and Sukra. Holy characters,
they became the saptarsis of the age of the third Manu.
(Manvantara).
ANAGHA II. was aGandharva. He participated in the
birthday celebrations of Arjuna. (M.B., Adi Parva,
Chapter 122, Verse 55).
ANAGHA III. A king called Anagha js
Verse 22, Chapter 8 of M.B.
ANAGHA IV. Skanda has a Synonym, Anagha as well.
(M.B., Vana Parva, Chapter 232, Verse 5).
ANAGHA V. A bird named Anagha is mentioned
among the children of Garuda. (M.B., Udyoga Parva,
Chapter 101, Verse 12).
ANAGHA VI. Used as a synonym of Siva.
Anusasana Parva, Chapter 17, Verse 38).
ANAGHA VII. Asynonym of Visnu. (M.B., Anugdasana
Parva, Chapter 149, Verse 29)
ANAGHAM. A place in ancient
Parva, Chapter 30, Verse 9).
ANAGNI (5). They are Pitrs, Pitrs like Agnisvattas,
Barhisads, Anagnis, Sagnis were offsprings of Brahma.
Two damsels, Mena and Dharini were born to them
of Svadha. (Agni Purana, Chapter 20).
ANALA I. A daughter of Daksa. Some of the other
Kughters are Aditi, Diti, Danu, Kalika, Tamra,
Krodhavaga, Manu and Anala., These daughters were
referred to in
India. (M.B., Sabha
34 ANANTA I
married to Kagyapa, son of Marici. Trees, creepers ete.
owe their origin to Anala. (Valmiki Ramayana, Aranya
kanda, Canto 14),
ANALA II. Another Anala is referred to in Verse 71,
Chapter 66 of Adi Parva, in M.B. This Anala was the
wile of Kagyapa and a great granddaughter of Krodhavasa, the daughter of Daksa. Krodhavasa begot Sveti,
and she Surabhi ; Rohini was the daughter of Surabhi
and Anala was Rohini’s daughter.
ANALA III. Daughter of Malyavan born of Sundari.
She was married to Vi§vavasu. Kumbhinasi was her
daughter. ( Valmiki Ramayana, Uttarakanda).
ANALAMBA. A sacred pool. A bath in the pool is as
efficacious as the Purusamedha yajna. (M.B., AnvSasana Parva, Chapter 25, Verse 32).
ANAMITRA I. A king of the Solar dynasty, The
tmapurana refers to him as the son of Nighna.
ANAMITRA II. Anamitra, son of Dhrsta is referred to
as a king of the Yadavas in Atmapurana,
ANAMITRA III. One Anamitra, son of Vrsni is refer’
red to in Matsyapurana. He was the father of Sini.
ANAMITRA IV. A son born to King Krosta and_ his
wife Madri.,
ANAMITRA. Father of Caksusa, the Manu of the 6th
Manvantara and son of sage Anamitra. (See Ananda):
ANANATA. A Sage. (Reveda, Mandala 4, Sukta 175):
ANANGA I. Son of Kardamaprajapati, and a king ©
reputed for his love of the people and unparallelled intes”
rity. He had a son called Atibala, (M.B., Santi Parv®
Chapter 59, Verse Ot
ANANGA II. (See Kamadeva).
ANANGA. A river in ancient India.
Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 99).
ANANTA I. (ADISESA). §
1) Genealogy. Mahavisnu begot Brahma and he the )
Prajapatis and Ananta (Adisesga ) is one of the Praj@
patis. (Valmiki Ramayana, Aranyakanda, Canto /”
Verse 7). Ananta is also referred to as the son
KaSyapa, one of the Prajapatis born of Kadri. (Mi)
Adi Parva, Chapter 105, Verse 41). Also Balabhad!®” —
rama, elder brother of §rj Krsna was a partial incar?
tion of Ananta.
2) Differences with mother. Vinataé and Kadri ae.
two wives 6f Kasyapa prajapati. Garuda was born i,
Vinata’s son and numerous serpents like Ananta, Vas¥ |
Taksaka, Karkkotaka were sons of Kadri. Once pe
controversy developed between Vinata and Kadri, ‘ne |
latter saying that there were a few black hairs on ¢ F
tail of Airavata and the former Cenying it. It t
agreed that she who proved wrong in the argumcl
would become the slave of the other. To
to be right Kadri, the same night, asked her sons Ap
go and stay suspended in the hairs of Airavata’s ta
Some of the sons agreed to do so, while her ot mi
(prominent) sons like Ananta expressed their dis!# _
nation to do such an unethica] act. Kadri cursed t “ie
disobedient children of hers to die at the serpent yas
of Janamejaya, Whereupon Ananta and his suppor'©
departed in sorrow, (M.B., Adi Parva, Chapter 65): ‘5
3) Ananta’s new engagement. Departing thus from b .
mother Ananta visited Sacred centres like Gandb?
madana, Badari and practised austerities. And, Br ab™
appeared before Ananta and asked him not to wor 4
but 0 go to the nether world and support the wor 4
on his hoods. Brahma also told him that Garuda wou y
render him all help in the new task. Blessed thus
(M.B., Bhism®

ANANTA II
Brahma, Ananta gladly took up the new job. (M.B.,
Adi Parva, Chapter 36, Verse 24).
4) Ananta has another abode in the palace of Varuna
in the west. (M.B., Udyoga Parva, Chapter 110, Verse
3) Ananta’s prowess. About Ananta’s prowess Visnu
Purana has the following to say : At the bottom of
Patala there is a base (Tamasic) form of Visnu called
Adigesa. Even the Danavas and the Daityas are not
able to describe the attributes of that form. The
Siddhas call this Adisesa Ananta who is worshipped
by Devas and rsis. Ananta has 1000 heads and the
Svastika mark which is clearly visible is his ornament.
The 1000 gems in his head illuminate all regions, and
he renders the Asuras powerless for the good of all the
worlds. AdiSesa whose eyes ever rotate due to the
overflow of his prowess, and who wears blue apparel
and garlands of white gems shines forth like another
Mount Kailasa beautified with garlands of clouds and
by the flow of the Ganga, Sri Deviand Varuni Devi serve
Ananta who holds in one hand a Jamgala and in the
other a mace (miisala). As the deluge (end of a yuga
Kalpanta) approaches Rudra emanates from the faces
of Ananta and consumes the three worlds. Adigesa
dwells ii; the nether world wearing the whole earth as
a crow.i, Even the Devas cannot gauge his nature, shape,
prowess etc. When he yawns the earth and waters shake
and shiver. The Gandharvas, Nagas, Caranas etc. fail
to understand the real extent of his attributes, and that
is why this strange being is called Ananta (endless). It
was by worshipping Ananta andby his grace that sage
Garga was able to master the sciences of astronomy
and causation (nimitta). (Visnu Purana, Part 2,
Chapter 5).
6) The land of Ananta. Patala is Ananta’s world, and
at its bottom there is a spot called Ananta. That spot
is 30000 yojanas in extent, and here lives Ananta. He is
known as Sankarsana also. He bears the whole nether
world as though it were a mustard seed. And, when
he thinks of destroying the entire world the Rudra
called Sankarsana will appear with other Rudras and
weapons like tridents (Trigtila). Other serpents bow at
the feet of Ananta, who is supremely beautiful with
divine lustre. (Devi Bhagavata, Skandha 8).
ANANTA II. A synonym of the Sun God. (M.B., Vana
Parva, Chapter 3, Verse 24).
ANANTA III. A synonym of Sri Krsna. (M.B., Udyoga
Parva, Chapter 70, Verse 14). >
ANANTA IV. One of the military captains of Skanda.
(M.B., Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 5/7).
ANANTA V. A synonym of haan (M.B., Anuédsana
Parva, Chapter 149, Verse 83). _
ANANTA VE A synonym of Siva. (M.B., Anugasana
Parva, Chapter 17, Verse 135) - Kine Po
ANANTA. Wife of Janamejaya, son of Sing furu. |
ANANTA. The abode of Ananta in the nether regions.
- DL = There are certain indica-
(Devi Bhagavata, Canto 8). (
Trivandrum, Capital city of
tions that Ananta refers to
‘ons of words like Svarga,
the Kerala State. Explanatio oh light
Bhimi, Patala, Ananta, Deva, Asura, throw mu g
on this inference).
ANANTAVIJAYAM. The conc
was blown during the great war.
Chapter 25, Verse 15).
h of Dharmaputra. It
(M.B., Bhisma Parva,
ANDA
ANAPAYACOLA. A King of the Cola country, 10631112, The Tamil poet Sekhilar who composed the
twelfth song of the great Saiva religious book called
Tirumurayil was a minister of this King.
ANARAKATIRTHA. A sacred pool. Brahma, along
with Visnu and others bathe daily in this sacred pool.
Therefore, it is said that the sins of all those who bathe
in the pool will be washed off.
ANARANYA (ANARANYA). A King of the Iksvaku
dynasty. (M.B., Adi Parva, Chapter 1, Verse 236).
For genealogy, see IKSVAKU. Anaranya was a vegetarian. (M.B., Anusasana Parva, Chapter 115, Verse 59).
Ravana once attacked his country whom he challenged
to a duel. In the duel Anaranya died. Before dying he
cursed Ravana that he would be killed by Rama, son
of King Daéaratha. (Brahmanda Purana, Chapter 45).
ANARANYA. (See ANARANYA).
ANARKA(M). A king born in King Kaipla’s dynasty.
(Agni Purana, Chapter 278).
ANASA (ASAMGA). A brother of Akrira. (Bhagavata,
Dagama Skandha).
ANASUYA. Wife of Sage Atri, son of Brahma. (Visnu
Purana, Part 1, Chapter 10).
1) Genealogy. From Mahavisnu were born in order
Brahma, Svayambhuva Manu, Devahiti, Anasiya. To
Svayambhuva, son of Brahmi, was born by his wife
atarupa five children : Uttanapada, Priyavrata, Ahuti.
Devahiti and Prasiti and Devahiti was married to
Kardama, son of Brahma. They begot two daughters,
Kala and Anasiy&. Marici married Kala and Atri
married Anasiiya. (Bhagavata, Skandha 1, Chapter 4).
2) The Tapastakti of Anasiiyad. Once upon a time, rains
having failed for ten years the whole world sweated in
agony and river Ganga got dried up. Famine stalked the
world. In this dire contingency it was the tapassakti of
Anasiiya that made trees bear fruits and Ganga to flow
again. Also, she converted ten days into nights on the
request of the Devas.
During their forest life Rama and Sita reached the hermitage of sage Atri, and the sage and Anasiya treated
the guests sumptuously. The above story about the
tapassakti of Anasiiya was told then by Atri. The story
helped to increase Rama’s respect for Anasiiya. Anasiya
gave Sita all proper advice. She taught Sita that absolute service to husband is the greatest tapas ordained
to women. Anasiiya gave to Sita a very sacred garland
and a sublime gem. And, after that Rama and Sita left
the hermitage. (Valmiki Ramayana, Ayodhyakanda,
Cantos 117 and 118.).
3) Sons of Anasilya. She had three sons: Dattatreya,
Durvasas and Candra. (Visnu Purana, Part 1, Chapter
10). (The reason for Mahavisnu being born as Dattatreya, Siva as Durvasas and Brahma as Candra to
nasiya is Ziven under Atri).
ANAUPAMYA. Wife of Bandsura. Once she developed
an amorous interest in Narada, which led to some
poate quarrels. (Padma Purana, Adikanda, Chapter
ANAVADYA. Wife of Kagyapa, this Apsara woman
participated in the birthday celebrations of Arjuna.
(M.B., Adi Parva, Chapter 122, Verse 62). :
ANDA.* Sita, the disciple of Vyasa said to the Munis
atthe Naimisaranya about the creation of the Universe:
In the beginning ‘n the heavy universal darkness, the
*ANDA. The primal seed (Anda=egg oF seed) from which everything was born.

ANDAKATAHA
first seed of life (anda) appeared. (M.B., Adi Parva,
Chapter 1, Verse 28).
ANDAKATAHA. The entire universe consisting of the
fourteen worlds, which are : Bhiloka, Bhuvarloka,
Svarloka, Maharloka, Janarloka, Tapoloka, Satyaloka,
Patala, Rasatala, Mahatala, Lalatala, Sutala, Vitala,
Atala.
ANDHA I. An offspring of Kasyapa by his wife
Kadri. (M.B., Udyoga Parva, Chapter 103, Verse 16).
ANDHA II. Thereis a story in M.B., about a huntsman, Vataka killing one Andha, an evil being. Andha
whose form and shape were that of an animal, by doing tapas, became recipient of a boon for destroying
everything. Brahma rendered him blind lest the world
perish, and that animal began tobe known as Andha.
When Andha began his programme of complete destruction many people rushed up to Vigvamitra in, his abode
in the forest. Andha followed them. But, Visvamitra,
in the interests of self-protection pointed out the refugees to Andha. As punishment for this sin Viégvamitra
had once to go to hell. This story was related by
Krsna to Arjuna during the great war at Kuruksetra,
and the reason for telling the story was this: During
the fight Arjuna hesitated to aim arrows against Karna.
Enraged by this attitude of Arjuna Dharmaputra asked
him to hand over his famous bow, Gandiva to Sri Krsna.
Feeling insulted at this demand Arjuna, all on a sudden, drew his sword to do away with Dharmaputra.
ri Krsna, prevented Arjuna from attacking his noble
brother, and in this context related the above story to
prove the truth that sins committed even unwittingly
will lead one, asin the case of Visvaémitra to hell.
(M.B., Karna Parva, Chapter 69).
ANDHA III. Upamanyu, the excellent disciple of
Dhaumya, consumed the leaves of a tree which made
him blind. (See Ayodhadhaumya) (M.B., Adi Parva,
Chapter 3).
ANDHAKA I. There was a very renowned king called
Andhaka in the Yadu dynasty. All kings belonging to
this dynasty used to be called Andhakas.
ANDHAKA II. Verse 12, Chapter 4 of M.B., Udyoga
Parva refers to another King called Andhaka. The
Pandavas had.sent to him a messenger soliciting military help.
ANDHAKA III. An Asura.
1) Birth. This Asura was the foster son of Hiranyaksa.
Siva was really his father. While once Siva was
immersed in yoga his daughter closed his eves playfully with her hands, and lo! a darkness rose and
enveloped the whole place. From that darkness, with
a sound as that of thunderbolt, appeared a Raksasa.
He got the name Andhaka as,he was born from darkness. At that time Hiranyaksa was doing tapas for a
son. Siva appeared before him and bestowing on him
Andhaka as a foster son said as follows: «If he
(Andhaka) earns the hatred of the world or desires
even, the mother of the three worlds cr kills brahmins
I will myself burn him to ashes”. After saying this
Siva disappeared. ( Vamana Purana, Chapter 63).
2) Andhaka desires Parvati with lust. One day overcome
by erotic Passion Andhaka said to his henchmen: as
follows : “He is my true friend who brings Siva’s
ponsh Et, Parvati to me. Yes, he is my brother, nay,
it even.” Hearing these ravings of Andhaka,
Tahlada went to him and convinced him thai Parvati,
36 ANDHRAKA III
in fact was his mother. But Andhaka was not quietened. Then Prahlada explained to him the gravity of
the sin of desiring other people’s wives. Even this had
no effect on Andhaka. He sent Sambarasura to Siva
to ask for and bring Parvati to him. Siva sent word to
vindhaka that ifthe latter would defeat him in the
game of dice Parvati would be sent to him. Andhaka
got enraged and rushed to mount Mandara and began
a fight with Siva.
3) Death. Defeated in the encounter, Andhaka craved
for Siva’s pardon. He admitted that Parvati was his
mother. He also prayed for Siva’s blessings for removal
of his Asurahood. Siva granted him the prayers. The
sins and Asurahood of Andhaka were thus ended. Siva
made him the head of the Asuras, named Bhrngi.
(Vamana Purana, Chapter 63 ete, ).,
ANDHAKA(M). A sacred pool. A dip in this pool will
bring all'the benefits of a Purusamedha yajnia. (M.B.,
Anusasana Parva, Chapter 25, Verses a 2
ANDHAKARAKA (M).A place in the island of Krautfica.
(M.B., Bhisma Parva, Chapter 12, Verse 18).
ANDHAKARAM. A mountain in the island of Kraufica.
(M.B., Bhisma Parva, Chapter 12, Verse 22).
ANDHAKUPA(M). In the Devi Bhagavata Mahavisnu
describes 28 hells to Narada, and Andhaktipam is one
of them. (see Naraka). Andhakipa is reserved for those
who kill either Brahmins or devotees of God or Sannyasins (holy people). This hell abounds jn cruel beasts
like the bear and leopard, evil birds like the eagle,
reptiles like the snake and scorpion and dirty insects
like bugs and mosquitos. The sinner will have to put
up with all these sufferings in hell till the period of his
punishment expires. (Devi Bhagavata, Astama
Skandha).
ANDHATAMISRA. One of the 28 hells. (See Naraka).
This hell is destined for wives who cheat their husbands
and consume food and for husbands who cheat their
wives and eat food. Agents of Yama get hold of
such sinners and push them into the Andhatamisra. AS
the cords of the agents with which they bind the sinners get tighter around their bodies they faint and fall
down owing to unbearable pain. When they regain
consciousness and try to run away and escape, the
Agents of Yama again bind them with the cord. (Devi
Bhagavata, Astama Skandha).
ANDHRA (ANDHRA). This is the Andhra Pradesh in
modern India. It has to be surmised that this place was
very famous during the period of the composition of the
Mahabharata. (M.B., Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Verse
ANDHRA. Warriors from Andhra were called Andhras.
(M.B., Drona Parva, Chapter 4, Verse 8).
ANDHRAKAT. Verse 24, Chapter 4 of Sabha Parva,
describes this king of Andhra Deéa as having sat in the
assembly hall of the palace constructed by Maya at
Indraprastha for the Pandavas. He was also present at
the Rajastiya Yajfia performed by Yudhisthira. (M.B.,
Sabha Parva, Chapter 34, Verse 1] 2.
ANDHRAKA II. The warriors of Andhra Dega were
called Andhrakas also. (M.B.. Karna Parva, Chapter
20, Verses 10 and 11). In the Bharata war the King of
Pandya defeated those warriors. Krsna incited Arjuna
to kill the Andhras and the Pulindas. (M.B., Karna
Parva, Chapter 73, Verses 19 to Zz 1 ie,
ANDHRAKA III, Andhrakas are classed with Mlec-

ANENAS II.
ANENAS I
Chas (lowest caste of people) in Verse 42, Chapter 207
of Santi Parva.
ANENAS I. A king of the Lunar dynasty (Candra
Vamisa).
1) Genealogy. Descended from Visnu in the following
order: Brahma - Atri - Candra - Budha - PuriravasAyus-Anenas.
2) Birth. Purtiravas had by his wife Urvasi six sons
named Ayus, Srutadyus, Satydyus, Raya, Vijaya and
Jaya. Of them, Ayus, the eldest, had five sons named
Nahusa, Ksatravrddha, Raji, Rambha and Anenas.
Nahusa had a son named Yayati to whom were born
the sons Piru, Yadu and others. The two dynasties of
Yadu and Piru (Yaduvathga and Piruvariga) originate from them. To Anenas, brother of Nahusa, a son
named Suddha was born. Suddha begot Suci who begot Trikakup and a son named Saritarayas was born to
Trikakup.
A Maharaja of the Iksvaku dynasty.
Genealogy. From Visnu descended thus: Kas yapaVaivasvata Manu - Iksvaku-Sagada-Kakutstha-Anenas.
ANGA. A King belonging to the Candra variga. (Lunar
dynasty) .
1) Genealogy. Descended from Visnu in the following
order: Brahma - Atri - Candra-Budha-Puriiravas-AyusNahusa - Yayati - Anudruhyu - Sabhanara - KalanaraSrijaya-Titiksa-K ugadhrta-Homa-Sutapas-Bali-Anga.
2) Birth. Anga, Kalinga, Suhma, Kandra, V anga,
Adrupa and Anagabhu are the seven sons born to Bali,
the son of Sutapas, by his wife Sutesna, and the King
Anga is one of them. There is a story about the birth
of these sons.
Once there lived a hermit named Utatthya. He was
the elder brother of Brhaspati. One day when Mamata,
Utatthya’s wife, was pregnant, Brhaspati approached
her with carnal desires. In spite of her efforts to dissuade her brother-in-law from his attemptsshe could not
prevail upon him. He forced her and satisfied his desire.
The child in her womb protested and kicked the sperm
of Brhaspati out into the floor. Brhaspati got angry and
cursed the child in the womb: ‘‘May you fall in perpetual darkness”. So the child was born blind and
remained blind throughout his life. Hence he got the
name ‘Dirghatamas’. Dirghatamas married Pradvesi. A
son named Gautama was born to them. The duty of
supporting Dirghatamas fell upon the wife and the son,
wno put him ona raft and pushed him astray into the
River Ganges. King Bali, who was bathing in the river
saw this. He rescued the hermit and took him to the
palace and pleasing lim by hospitality, requested him
to beget children in his.wife Sutesna, who detesting the
idea sent a Sadra woman Dhatreyi in her stead and
eleven children were born to them. By and by Dirghatamas came to know of the deceit played by Sutesna on
him and he became very angry. But the eat Set
him and pleased him again and a er ve
sons by Sutesna. ‘They were Anga, he oe bo eee
Paundra and Suhma. Dirghatamas Dlesse t ae a ey
would become very famous. ey, = i je
nae a ae tl : oi dl irgenaeatcalp.
Anga, Vanga, Kalinga, Paunc me of the Bali family.
These five are the famous King
sbharata, Adi Parva, Chapter ‘©
$) How Aga got children. Once Anga performed a
horse sacrifice. But the gods did not appear to receiv
ANGADA III.
ANGALAMMA
oblations. Holy seers said that the Gods refused to
accept the oblations offered by the King because he was
childless. So he performed the sacrifice called Putrakamesti (Sacrifice to get a son) and from the sacrificial
fire arose a divine person with a golden flask of pudding, which he offered to the King and his queen. The
King and the queen Sunitha ate the pudding, as a
result of which a son was born to them. He was named
Vena. This son was wicked. Because of his wickedness
the King became so miserable that he left his kingdom
and went on a pilgrimage. Since there was no other
means the people enthroned Vena, who tortured his
subjects beyond limit. (Bhagavata, 4th Skandha, Chapters Band 14).
ANGADAT. A son of Bali.
1) Genealogy. Descended from Visnu in the following
order : Brahma-Kasyapa-Indra-Bali-Angada.
2) Birth, Angada was the son of Balj (the son of
Indra) born of his wife Tara. (Mahabharata, Vana
Parva, Chapter 82, Stanza 28).
a) Angada was a member of the group of monkeys
sent by Sugriva to find out Sita. (Valmiki Ramayana,
Aranyakanda).
b) He was the foremost among the group of monkeys
who entered Madhuvana and ate the berries in the
garden, on their return after the search for Sita.
c) Angada was sent to the court of Ravana as a
messenger by Sri Rama. (Ramayana, Yuddhakanda) .
d) In the battle between Rima and Ravana Angada
combated with Indrajit. (Ramayana, Yuddhakanda).
e) After his combat with Indrajit, Angada and his
followers led an attack on the army of Ravana. (Ramayana, Yuddhakanda).
{) After the battle, SriRama anointed Angada as the
heir-apparent to the Kingdom of Kiskindha. The necklace which Bali had given on his death to Sugriva, was
returned to Angada. (Uttara Ramayana).
g) Sri Rama returned to Ayodhya after his forest
life and celebrated a horse sacrifice. The sacrificial
horse was caught and detained by King Suratha. Coming to know of this Satrughna sent Angada to deal
with Suratha, who said that the horse was detained
with the intention ofmeeting with Sri Rama personally.
Angada returned and told Satrughna what Suratha had
said to him. (Padma Purana, Patala Khanda).
ANGADA Ti, ‘Phere was a prince called Angada among
the mighty men-of-arms on the side of the Kauravas.
He got into action on the battle-field on the twelfth day
of the battle. (M.B., Drona Parva, Chapter 25, Stanza
Srutakirti the wedded wife of Satrughna, brother of Sri Rama, had two sons called Angada
and Chandraketu. (Uttara Ramayana).
ANGADA IV. In the Bhagavata we see another Angada
who was the son of Gada, the brother of Krsna by his
wife, Brhatti.
ANGAKARMA. Actions on the stage are of two kinds.
One is to express by the major organs of the body. The
other 1s to express by the minor organs of the body. Flead
etc. are major organs and eyebrow etc. are minor
organs. Actions expressed by major organs are called
Angakarma and those by minor organs are called Pratyanga Karma. (Agni Purana, Chapter 341).
ANGALAMMA. Sheis the wile of Virabhadra, a servant

ANGA (M)
of Siva. She has a rope in her left hand, with which she
hauls up the spirits of the dead.
ANGA(M). The kingdom ruled by King Anga. Other
details:
1) Lhe Dynasty. The first King of the Anga dynasty
was Anga the son of Bali. Anagabhu, Draviratha,
Dharmaratha, Romapada (Lomapida), Caturanga,
Prthulaksa, Brhadratha, Brhanmanas, Jayadratha,
Vijaya, Drdhavrata, Satyakarma, Atiratha, Karna,
Vrsasena and others were kings of this dynasty. Karna
was the adopted son of Atiratha. During the period of
the Mahabharata, Kings of the Atiratha family were
under the sway of the Candra vaméa (Lunar dynasty)
kings such as Dhrtarastra and Pandu.
formations see the word Atiratha).
2) How Karna became the king of Anga. A contest in
archery and the wielding of other weapons was going
on in Hastinapura, the competitors being the Kauravas
and the Pandavas. The status of Karna, who appeared
on the side of the Kauravas, was questioned by the
Pandavas on the occasion and Duryodhana, who always
stood on his dignity, anointed Karna as the King of
Anga, on the spot. (M.B., Adi Parva, Chapter 136).
3) Drought in the kingdom of Anga. Lomapada (Romapada) the king of Anga once deceived a hermit Brahmin.
So all the Brahmins quitted the country and thereafter
there was no rainfall in the country for several years,
The sages of the country began to think on the means
of bringing about rain. One day they approached the
King and told him that the only way to get rain was
to bring the great hermit Rsyagriga to the country.
Once Kasyapa happened to see Urvagi and he had
seminal flow. The sperm fell in a river. A deer swallowed it along with the water it drank. It gave birth to a
human child with horns on the head. This child was
called Rsyagrnga. It was brought up by a hermit
called Vibhandaka in his hut. Rsyasriga had never
seen women and by virtue of this, there occurred raine
fall wherever he went. The King Lomapada sent some
courtesans to the forest to attract Rsyasrnga, who
following them arrived at the court of Lomapada the
King of Anga and the King gave Rsyasrnga, as a gift,
his daughter Santa. Thus the country got rain. This
Lomapada was a friend of Dagaratha. ( Mahabharata
Aranya Parva, Chapters 110 to 113),
4) How the Kingdom got the name Anga. One Opinion is
that the Kingdom got its name from the King Anga
who ruled over it. Another Opinion is that the king got
his name from the country he ruled. However there is
a Story revealing how the country came to be called
Anga.
In the realm of God, preliminary steps were being taken
for making Sri Paramesvara wed Parvati. According to
the instructions of Devendra, Kamadeva (the Lord of
Love—Cupid) was trying to break the Meditation of Siva
and when Siva opened his third eye, fire emitted from
it and Anarga (Kamadeva) was burned to ashes. It
was in the country of Anga that the ashes of the ‘anga’
(Body) of Kamadeva fell and from that day onwards
ae be ry ee to be called Anga and Kamadeva,
nga {wit almitci ama =
kinda’ Sarea 96) body). (Valmiki Ramayana, Bala5) Other informations.
l : ; a ae
Saoaut > mentioned in the Hindi Dictionary, ‘Sabda
that the kingdom of Anga embracing Bhagatpur
(For further inANGAPRADAKSINA.,
ANGARA. A king of ancient India.
ANGARAJAVAMSA
and Mumger in Bihar had its capital at Campapuri and
that the country had often stretched from Vaidyanathanama to Bhuvaneévar.
(2) Arjuna had visited the Kingdom of Anga also during
his pilgrimage. (M.B., Adi Parva, Chapter 219, Stanza
(3) The King of Anga was present at the sacrifice of
Rajasiya (Royal consecration) celebrated by Dharmaputra, when the Pandavas were living at Indraprastha.
(M.B., Sabha Parva, Chapter 52, Stanza 16).
(4) On one occasion Sri Krsna defeated the Angas ina
battle. (M.B., Drona Parva, Chapter 11, Stanza 15).
(5) Parasurama had defeated the Angas once. (M.B.,
Drona Parva, Chapter 7, Stanza be Ys
(6) In the battle of Kuruksetra between the Pandavas
and the Kauravas, on the sixteenth day of the battle,
the heroes of Anga made an onslaught on Arjuna. (M.B.,
Karna Parva, Chapter 17, Stanza 12) :
(7) The Angas attacked the armies of Dhrstadyumna
and the King of Paiicala. (M.B., Karna Parva, Chapter
22, Stanza 2).
(8) A low caste man from Anga attacked Bhima, who
killed the man and his elephant. (Mahabharata, Drona
Parva, Chapter 26, Stanzas 14 to 17).
_ANGAMALAJA(M) (MALADA—KARUSA).
General Information. (1) This was a country in ancient
Bharata. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Stanza 50).
(2) Visvamitra had taken to the forest from Ayodhya
Rama and Laksmana to protect the hermits and their
yagas. On the way they entered the Tataka forest.
Visvamitra told the boys in answer to their questions
thus : “In olden days this place was a countryside
known as Angamalaja or Malada or Karisa. There is
a reason for calling the country by that name. Indra
killed Vrtra and thereby incurred ihe sin of Brahmahatya and so he came away to this country and lived
here for awhile. The Gods found him out here. They
poured water on the head of the unclean Indra and the
dirt, hunger, excreta and Kariisa having been separated
from his body fell on the soil of this place and was
mingled with it. Indra’s body became pure. As excreta,
Kartisa etc. were mingled with the soil of this country;
it came to be called Angamalaja, Malada or Karisa
from that day onwards. One part of the country was
called Malada and the other part Karissa. Indra, having
been purified by washing in water returned to heaven
with the gods. After that this country became uninhabited for a long time. The horrible Tataka lives in this
1 now’. (Valmiki Ramayana, Balakanda, Sarga
Rolling behind a chariot round
the temple as a vow,
He was defeated by |
Mandhata in a battle. (Mahabharata, Santi Parva,
Chapter 29, Stanza 88).
ANGARAJAVAMSA. “(THE DYNASTY OF ANGA
KINGS) Descended from Visnu in the following order:
Brahma - /tri-Candra-Budha-Puriravas-Ayus - NahusaYayati. Yadu, Turvasu, Druhyu and Anudruhyu were
the four sons of Yayati. The Anga dynasty starts from
Turvasu, one of the four. The following are the descen-
” Was th asu
Gobhanu, the > the son of Turvasus
Karandhama,
Karandhama,
son of Varga,
the son of Traigani, Marutta, the son 0
Dusyanta, the son of Marutta, Varatha,

ANGARAKA I : 39
the son of Dusyanta, Gandira the son of Variitha, and
Gandara the son of Gandira. The five powerful peoples,
the Gandharas, the Colas, the Keralas, the Pandyas
and the Kolas have descended from Gandhara.
Two sons, Druhyu aad Babhrusetu were born to Gandhara.
Babhrusetu begot Purovasu; Purovasu begot Gandhari.
From Gandhari Gharma was born, from Gharma Ghrta
was born, from Ghrta Vidusa was born, and from Vidusa
Pracetas was born. Pracetas got a hundred children of
whom the prominent were Anidra, Sabhanara, Caksusa and
Paramesu. To Sabhanara was born Kalanala and Srfi- .
jaya to Kalanala, Puranjaya to Srfijaya and Janamejaya
to Purafijaya. Mahasala was the son of Janamejaya;
Mahamanas the son of Mahasala, and USinara the son
of Mahamanas. To Usinara were born Nrga, Nara,
Krmi, Suvrata and Sibi by his wives Nrga, Nara, Krmi,
Daga and Drsadvati respectively. To Sibi were born
four sons called Prthudarbha, Viraka, Kaikaya and
Bhadraka. Four separate kingdoms arose in the names
of them. Uginara had another son called Titiksu. From
Titiksu was born Rusadratha; from Rusadratha was
born Paila, from Paila was born Sutapas and from
Sutapas was born the great hermit Bali. From Bali,
Anga, Vanga, Kalinga, Pundra, Baleya and Balayogi
were born. To Anga was born Dadhivahana. The King
Draviratha was the son of Dadhivahana, Dharmaratha
the son of Draviratha, Citraratha the son of Dharmaratha, and Satyaratha was the son of Citraratha. To
Satyaratha was born Lomapada; to Lomapada was
born Caturanga; to Caturanga was born Prthulaksa, to
Prthulaksa was born Campa; to Campa was born Haryanga, to Haryanga was born Bhadraratha, to BhadraANGARAKA
her. She replied with a deep sigh. “The pig you saw,
is my father Angarakasura. His body is as hard as
diamond and not vulnerable to any sort of weapon.
These maids have been caught by him from various
royal houses and brought here for my help. My name
is Angaravati. My father was changed toa giant by a
curse. Now he is asleep discarding the form of pig.
When he wakes up, filled with hunger and thirst, he
will do you harm. My tears flowed out in the form of
heated life-breaths, when I thought of these things.”
The King said, ‘Go and sit by him and cry when he
wakes up. He will ask the reason. Then tell him that
you had been crying, when you thought how forlorn
you would be without a mate, in case your father was
killed by somebody’’. Angaravati did as she was told.
Hearing her words Angaraka said, ‘““My daughter ! No
body can kill me. My body is made of diamond. There
is only one vulnerable point in my body which is on
Y left forearm and it is always covered with my
ow.”
The king hid himself closely and heard everything. He
fought with the Asura and hitting at the vulnerable
point killed him. The king married Angaravati and
took her to his palace. Two sons were born to him.
They were called Gopalaka and Palaka. By the grace
of Indra a daughter also was born to him by her and
she was Vasavadatta, the wife of the famous Udayana.
(Kathasaritsagara, Kathamukhalambaka, Tarafiga 3).
ANGARAKA IT. A prince named Angaraka is seen to
have been the descendant of Jayadratha, the King of
Sauvira. (Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 265,
Stanza 10).
ratha was born Brhatkarma, to Brhatkarmaé was born ANGARAKA III. A planet named Mangala which is a
Brhadbhanu, to Brhadbhanu was born Brhadatma,
to Brhadétma was born Jayadratha, to Jayadratha was
born Brhadratha and to Brhadratha was born Visvajit.
satellite of Brahma is seen to have been called by the
mame Angaraka also. (Mahabharata, Sabha Parva,
Chapter 11, Stanza 29).
After that Karna became the King of Anga. The son of ANGARAKA IV. We see one Angaraka among the one
Karna was Vrsasena and the son of Vrsasena was
Prthusena. These are the kings of the Anga dynasty.
hundred and eight sons of the Sun. (Mahabharata,
Vana Parva, Chapter 3, Stanza 10).
(Agni Purana, Chapter 277.) ANGARAKA. (SIMHIKA).
ANGARAKA I. An Asura who took the form of a pig.
The story of how this Asura was killed by his daughter
Angaravati, is given below.
Long ago there was an emperor named Mahendravarma in Ujjayini. His son Mahasena did penance for
a long time to get a wife and a sword. At last Devi
appeared and granted the boon: “‘My son! take this
extraordinary sword. So long as you have this _sword,
your enemies will not prevail against you. Angaravati,
the renowned beauty of the three worlds, who is the
daughter of the Asura Angaraka, will become your
wife in due course. As you do horrible deeds, you will
be called Candamahasena’’. He was given the sword
and a tusker called Nadagiri. One day Mahasena went
to the forest for hunting. He saw a very large pig. The
King used his arrows. But they did little harm to the
ig. Moreover it turned the chariot of the King over
a oti side and ran to a cave. The King followed it
‘th fury. On the way_he sat on the bank ofa lake
ah enol for a lady of exquisite beauty was walkossy turf in the mst ot soni ares
ached the King and talked with him.
us 4 Tet had entirely captured the heart of the
Kine, who told her everything. BUG began to wer
“Who are you? Why do you weep?” The King asked
with wonder,
ing along the m
1) Genealogy. Descended in the following order from
Visnu. Brahma-Marici-Kasyapa-Angaraka.
2) Birth. Inthe battle between the Gods and the
Asuras, most of the Asuras were killed and one Asura
fled from the clutches of death to Patala (the nether
world). Surasa was the daughter of that Asura. Kagyapa
married Surasa. To them were born the two daughters,
Angaraka (Simhika) and Ajamukhi, and four sons,
called Siirapadma, Sirbhavaktra, ‘Tarakadsura and
Gomukha. Thus Simhika is the sister of Tarakasura.
(Skanda Purana, Asura Kanda).
Other details, This giantess Angaraka had a clash once,
with Haniman. Sugriva had sent a large number of
monkeys under the leadership of Hanuman to search
for Sita. He gave Haniman certain instructions regarding the route he had to follow. Sugrivasaid, ““There is
a giantess in the middle of that Southern Sea. Her
name is Angara. She pulls the shadow towards her and
feeds on the object of the shadow.” | .
From this it is clear that she was a giantess who lived
in the sea between Lanka and South India. She knew
the art of bringing to her side, anybody who passed
over the sea, by pulling at his shadow. When Haniimian
jumped to Lanka from the mountain of Mahendra the
giantess attacked Hantiman. It is seen that the name

ANGARA (M)
Simhika also is used for Angaraka. Haniiman who was
subjected to the excessive attraction of Sirmhika, felt a
great storm raging round him. Finally he found her out,
a monster with such an uncouth face and a mouth as
wide as the hole of Patala (the nether world). There
was a terrible fight between Haniman and the monster,
in which Simhika, fell on the ground beaten. After the
fight Haniman resumed his journey. (Valmiki Ramayana, Sundarakanda, Sarga 1, Stanzas 178 to 186).
ANGARA(M). A countryside in ancient India. (Mahabharata, Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Stanza 60).
ANGARAPARNA. (Citraratha) See the word CITRARATHA TI. —_— 7
ANGARAVATI. (See ANGARAKA).
ANGAVAHA. A king of immense fame, belonging to the
dynasty of Vrsni. Angavaha attended, with Balabhadrarama, the sacrifice of Rajasitya (Royal consecration)
celebrated by Yudhisthira. (Mahabharata, Sabha Parva,
Chapter 34, Stanza 16),
ANGIRAS I.
|) Birth. He is a hermit born from the mind of Brahma.
Six mind-born sons (Manasa-Putras) were born to
Brahma, known as Marici, Angiras, Atri, Pulastya,
Pulaha, and Kratu. All the six of them became great
hermits. (Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 65,
Stanza 10) *.
2) Important events.
(1) The failure of Aiigiras.
Citraketu in the kingdom
reached his palace when the
state as he was childless. The King informed Angiras of
his sorrow. He pacified the King and said that a son
would be born to him. He and his wife Krtadyuti were
filled with joy. The other wives of the King did not like
this. They feared that when a son was born to Krtadyuti the King might overlook them. To the king a
son was born of Krtadyuti and the other wives poisoned
the child and killed him. While the parents were weeping over the dead child Angiras and Narada arrived
there and wiped their tears. Angiras agreed to bring the
child back to life. He instantly called the spirit of the
dead child to him and asked jt to become the son of
Citraketu. The spirit replied that it hada large number
of parents in several previous births and thatit was not
possible forit to become the son of Citraketu, and then
There was a King named
of Sirasena. Once Angiras
King was ina miserable
curse of Parvati, was born again as Vrtra aga -
vata, Skandha 6, Chapter 14), —— [or
(2) How Ajgiras cursed Sudarsana and transmuted him to a
serpent. While Sudargana, a vidyadhara (a class of semigods) was travelling lustfully with a Sroup of beautiful
girls he came across Angiras and some other hermits. He
teased Angiras calling him ‘durbhaga’ ( unlucky) and
Angiras cursed him and changed him to a big serpent
and he was promised liberation from the curse. when
during the dvapara yuga (one of the four ages ) Mahivisnu would incarnate as Sr; Krsna and would tread
upon him and then he would regain his former form.
From that day onwards Sudargana lived on the banks |
of the river Kalindi jn the form of a serpent. It was
*There is anothe
r story about the
happened to see some celestial] :
or Cinder,
I pt! birth of Angiras. At a sacrifice celebrated by
PR oe pas and was overpowered by passionate feelings. Brahm;
"giras along with Marici, Bhrgu and others. This deva (the shining one—the God) was called
ANGIRAS I
the time when Sri Krsna was having his game of love
with the Gopa women. On one night one serpent bit
Nanda the foster father of Sri Krsna. The cowherds
or gopas hit at the snake with burned wood. But it was
of no use. Sri Krsna came there and thrashed the
serpent, which instantly took the form of Sudargana
Vidyadhara and praising Sri Krsna entered heaven.
(Bhagavata, Skandha 10, Chapter 34).
(3) Angiras a Prajépati. Brahma had created sixteen
prajapatis, for effecting the creation of the universe.
Angiras is one of them. Their names are given below:
1) Kardama 9) Pulastya
2) Vikrita 10) Angiras
3) Sesa 11) Pracetas
4) Sarhgraya 12) Pulaha
5) Sthanu 13) Daksa
6) Marici I+) Vivasvan
7) Atri 15) Aristanemi
8) Kratu 16) Kagyapa
(Valmiki Ramayana, Aranyakanda, Sarga 14).
(4) The wives and children of Afgiras. Angiras had
several wives such as Subha, Smrti, Sraddha, Devasen4
and Vasudha. The names of the sons of Angiras are
given below:
1) Brhatkirti 39) Brhadmantra
2) Brhatjyoti 6) Brhadbhasa
3) Brhadbrahma 7) Brhaspati.
4) Brhadmana
The names of the eight daughters of Angiras are give?
below: ,
1) Bhanumati 9) Havismati
2) Raga 6) Mahismati
3) Sinivali 7) Mahamati
4) Arcismati 8) Kuha.
Besides these sons and daughters, other sons such as
Sudhanva and Karttikeya were born to Angiras by a
other wives. (Mahabharata, Vana Parva, five chapte!
(5) The clash between Ajigiras and Prahlada. ¥)uisasa0
Stripped Pancali of her clothes in the Palace hall, 1"
the presence of the Pandavas who had been defeate 4
in the game of dice. Before this Paficali had asker
Duryodhana one question, “‘Have you won yourself "5
myself ?’? One husband was not authorised to stake ”
wife Paficali who was the wife of five husbands. Moreove 4
according to the SAastras (sciences) the deeds execut?
by a King, who was miserable due to hunting, drinking:
playing dice and hankering after a woman, were -
legally binding. Hence how could the Kauravas ei
Paficali?’’ Vidura said that the witnesses in the hall =*4
to give an impartial answer to this question, and ¢ sat
the punishment of falsehood would come upon the d? :
himself. As an instance he gave the following old story
Virocana was the son of Prahlada; Sudhanya the %° -
of Angiras and Virocana fell in love with the sam
woman once.” There @itse a contention bervesn ¢
two as to who was greater. They staked their lives 4.
the issue. Then both of them together approached Pr ob
lada and requested him to give a decision as to W de
of them was the elder, Thinking that Prahlada mign eis,
with Virocana his son, Sudhanva said to him, “
Rudra, seminal flow occurred to Brahm4 ed
the sperm in the fire. From that fire apy agar?
Angiras because his origin was from

ANGIRAS I
you should not utter words of falsehood, nor should you
abstain from speaking the truth. If you do so your head
will be cut into a hundred pieces by Indra with his
Vajrayudha (the weapon of thunderbolt)”. Hesitating
to take a decision, because of the words of Sudhanva,
Prahlada went to Kasyapa to clear his doubts, and
asked: ‘‘Lord, doyouknow which are the future worlds
destined for those who utter words of falsehood or abstain
from giving out the truth ?” Kagyapa said, ‘‘On him, who
abstains from speaking truth knowingly a thousand cords
of death will fall. He who tells falsehood will have
to perform many a deed of duty to attain heaven.”
Having heard the words of Kagyapa, Prahlada said to
Virocana, ‘‘Virocana, Sudhanva is greater than you.
Angiras is greater than me. Likewise the mother of
Sudhanva is nobler than your mother. So according to
your bet you owe your life to Sudhanva.”? Pleased at
the righteousness of Prahlada, Sudhanva gave Virocana
a boon to live a hundred years more. (Mahabharata,
Sabha Parva, Chapter 63).
(6) How Argiras became the first son of Agni (Fire God).
Once Angiras was blazing out as a furious being. All
the worlds were illuminated by that flame-fire. As
Angiras was performing the functions of Agni (fire),
peoples of the worlds discarded Agni, who being sad at
the derision shown towards him by the worlds went to
a forest and hid himself there. The living beings
were in trouble owing to jack of fire. When he became
aware of this Angiras went to the forest and pacified
Agni. From that day onwards Angiras agreed to become the first son of Agni, who resumed his duties as
usual. (Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 217).
(7) How Angiras got the name Atharvdngiras. After the
slaughter of Vrtrasura, Indra went to the lake known
as Amrtasaras and hid himself there in a lotus flower. At
this time the Gods anointed Nahusa as Indra. Agastya
cursed him and turned him to a serpent and sent
him to the earth. When Indra returned to heaven many
persons gathered there to greet him. Angiras also was
one among them who did obeisance to Indra. He paid
his homage by reciting the hymns of Atharvaveda. Indra
who was greatly pleased at this, said to Angiras, ‘‘Hereafter you shall be known as Atharvangiras”. Angiras
who got this boon from Indra, returned with gratitude.
(Mahabharata, Udyoga Parva, Chapter 18, Stanzas 5
(8) Angiras and Drona. In the battle of Kuruksetra,
between the Pandavas and the Kauravas the great
teacher, Drona began to release hisdivine darts towards
his enemies in all directions. Immediately Angiras with
many other hermits came to Drona and told him,
“You have burned to death innumerable men with your
Brahmastra (The most powerful of all missiles). Your
end is very near. So put your weapons down and ses,
your fight.” Drona seems to have paid no heed at al
to the advice of the hermits. He did not stop fighting
too. 3
- Axotras on the merits of .Tirthas or holy
Sy een Se tra once eS Bhisma about
places (Baths) . vee le ne trihas (Hath), Bbtamva
the importance of holy a Sone had HGS TOL CATIEATLIS
told Dharmaputra, what Angiras f laine 6
about the merits obtained by going on pugrimag
sgiras had -described the holy
holy tirthas or Baths. Angi :
mers and character of holy Baths in Bharata such as
Puskara, Prabhasa, Naimisa, Sagarodaka, Indramarga,
ANGIRAS I
‘Devika, Svarnabindu, Hiranyabindu, Indratoya, and
such other numerous tirthas. (Mahabharata, Anugasana
Parva, Chapter 25, Stanzas 7-71).
3) Other details: |
(1) Daksa gave his two daughters in marriage to
Angiras. (Devi Bhagavata, Skandha 7). :
(2) Angiras once saved the Sun. ( Mahabharata,
Vana Parva, Chapter 92, Stanza 6). ft
(3) While the Pandavas were in exile in forest, Angiras
had been chanting and meditating in Alakananda in
the region of the mount Gandhamadana. (Mahabharata, Aranya Parva, Chapter 142; Stanza 6).
(4) When the hermits had stolen the Iotus flowers of
Agastya, Angiras gave some hints about the culprits.
(Mahabharata, Anusdsana Parva, Chapter 94, Stanza
20: See Agastya).
(S) Angiras once gave a discourse on fasting and the
merits of fasting. (Mahabharata, Anugdsana Parva,
Chapter 106, Stanzas 11 to 16).
(6) Angiras on another occasion delivered lectures on
the secrets of duties. (Mahabharata, Anugdsana Parva,
Chapter 127, Stanza 8).
(7) Once Angiras drank the water in the ocean to the
last drop. (Mahabharata, Anugasana Parva, Chapter
153, Stanza 3). ;
(8) When his thirst was not quenched, even though he
had drunk the entire water available in the world, he
created new springs of water again and drank them dry.
(Mahebbatats, Anugasana Parva, Chapter 153, Stanza
(9) Once Agni failed to show respect to Angiras, who
cursed Agni and thenceforward smoke came out from
fire. (Mahabharata, AnuSasana Parva, Chapter 153,
Stanza 8).
(10) Angiras conducted many of the important sacrifices
of King Aviksit. (Mahabharata, Agvamedhika Parva,
Chapter 4, Stanza 22). |
(11) Indra once gave Angiras a boon. ( Mahabharata,
Udyoga Parva, Chapter 18, Stanzas 5 to 7); s
(f2) Angiras blessed Dhruva who had~ Been doing
penance. (Visnu Purana, Arbéa 1, Chapter II).
(13) The daughters named Sinivali, Kuhi, Raka,
Anumati were born to Angiras by his wife Smrti. (Agni
Purana, Chapter 20).
14) Angiras is the first of the Agni devas (Fire-Gods)
and a hermit. He had a son called Hiranya-Stipa, who
also was a_ hermit (Rgveda, Mandala 1, Anuvaka 7,
Sikta 31),
(15) The Hermit Aagiras began to invoke the Gods to
get a son equal to Indra. Then Indra, thinking that
nobody should be born as his equal, took birth as the
son of Angiras. He was called Savya. (Rgveda,
Mandala 1, Anuvaka 10, Sikta 51). |
(16) Indra sent Saramé, the bitch of the Gods, to find
out the place where the cows had been hidden ; Indra
acted according to the advice of Angiras. At first the
bitch did not consent to go. But when Devendra promised
to feed’ her young one with milk she agreed. Sarama
found out the place where the cows were hidden and
informed Indra of it. (Rgveda, Mandala 1, Anuvaka1],
Sikta 62).
17) Rbhus are the sons of Sudhanva. (Son of Angiras).
The hermit Kutsa also is descended from Angiras,
(Rgveda, Mandala 1, Anuvaka 16, Sikta 10)

ANGIRAS II 42
(18) Angiras was theson of Brahma in the Svayambhuva
Manvantara (See Manvantara), but in the Vaivasvata Manvantara he was born from Agni.
(19) Once Vayu (the Wind-God) had to run away
from Angiras and hide himself as he had caused some
displeasure to Angiras. On another occasion Angiras
taught philosophy and sacred doctrines to the hermit
Saunaka. (Mundakopanisad).
ANGIRAS II. In the family of Marici, son of Brahma,
another King of the name of Angiras is seen.
Genealogy. Descended from Visnu in the following
order: Brahma, Marici, Kagyapa, Vaivasvata Manu,
Uttanapada, Dhruva, Sisti, Ripu, Caksusa Manu,
Uru, Angiras. (About this Angiras, no other information is available in the Puranas. Visnu Purana, Améa
1, Chapter 13; Agni Purana, Chapter 18).
ANGIROBHAVA. A hermit named Kaksivan. (Rg veda,
Mandala 1, Anuvaka 17, Sikta 120).
ANIKAVIDARANA. A brother of Jayadratha, a King
of the kingdom of Sindhu. Arjuna killed him. (M.B.,
Vana Parva, Chapter 265, Verse 12).
ANIKETA. A Yaksa, one of the attendants of Kubera.
(M.B., Sabha Parva, Chapter 10, Verse 18). He was a
king of the Anga dynasty. (Agni Purana, Chapter 277).
sae A division of the army. (See under AKSAUHIN1).
ANILA 1 One of the Asta (8) Vasus. His father was
Dharma and mother Svasa. Anila married Siva and had
two sons, Manojava and Avijfiati. (M.B., Adi Parva,
Chapter 66, Verses 17-25).
ANILAII. Garuda had a son called Anila. (M.B.,
Udyoga Parva, Chapter 101, Verse 9).
ANILA Il. A word used as a synonym of Siva. (M.B.,
Anuéasana Parva, Chapter 149, Verse 100).
ANILA IV. A word used as a synonym of Visnu. (M.B.,
Anugasana Parva, Chapter 149, Verse 38),
ANILA V. A Ksatriya King. His father, Vrsadarbhi
presented him as Daksina to the Saptarsis (7 sages) at
a yajfia performed by him (father). The King expired
soon after this. There was then a famine in the country.
The Saptarsis, tortured by hunger and thirst got ready
to prepare food with the corpse of the King. But the
corpse retained its form and they could not cook food
with it. (M.B., Anugasana Parva, Chapter 96)
ANILA. A famous serpent. (M.B., Adi Parva, Chapter
35, Verse 7).
ANIMANDAVYA.
1) General. How he got the name Anmandavya. Once
there was a famous Brahmin nzmed Mandavya. He did
Tapas (penance) for many years Standing silent in
front of his Agrama, under a tree, raising his hands in
prayer. At that time some thieves happened to pass by
that place, with stolen property belonging to the King.
Finding that the King’s men were pursuing them, the
thieves fled away after leaving their stolen property in
Mandavya’s Agrama. The King’s men seized Mandavya
with the king’s property. Even prolonged and repeated
questionings did not bring out a single word from
Mandavya. At last the thieves were caught. Mistaking
him as one of the thieves, the King’s men produced
andavya also along with the thieves before the King.
The thieves were all condemned to death. The royal
Sg toners took all of them to the place of execution
ae stuck them up at the tip of a trident (Sila). The
ves died, but even after a long time Mandavya did
ANIMISA
not die. In Mahabharata, Anugdsana Parva, Verses 46J], it is said that at this stage Siva appeared and blessed
him with longevity and then vanished. Several Munis in
the shape of birds came near Mandavya who was lying
on the trident and made enquiries about him. The King
came to know ofall thesestories. Full of repentance, he
went and begged pardon of Mandavya. ‘The attempt
to pull out the trident from Mandavya’s body failed. At
last it was removed by cutting it off. Since the tip (An})
of the trident was left behind in his body he was thereafter known as “Ani Mandavya”. (M.B.. Adi Parva,
Chapter 107).
2) Curse on Dharma. After going about in the world
for many years with the tip of the trident in his body.
Ani Mandavya once asked Dharma: “Oh! Lord, why
is it that an innocent man like me is afflicted with the
trident ?”. Dharma answered: “In your boyhood
you once caught small birds and pierced them with
a grass reed. It is a result of that sin that you have been
pierced with the trident.’ Mandavya replied; ‘The
Sastras ordain that there shall be no punishment for
sins committed till the age of twelve. Therefore the
punishment inflicted on me is wrong. As the murder
of a Brahmin is a greater sin than any other murder;
may you be born as a man in the ‘Sidra Caste’.”’
By the above curse of Mandavya, Dharma was born 4
son of a Sidra woman. It was this child who later on
became the renowned Vidura of the Mahabharata:
(M.B., Adi Parva, Chapter 107).
3) The story of how the Sun did not rise. When Ant
Mandavya lay on the tip of the trident another event
happened. Atri Muni’s son Ugragravas was the husbat
of Silavati. No other woman had so far surpasse
Silavati in her fidelity to her husband. Once Ugrasravas
happened to fall ill. He expressed his desire to visit 4
prostitute’s house. As he was too weak he could not walkThe devoted wife Silavati carried him on her ow?
shoulders and took him to the prostitute’s house. They
were passing near the piace where Ani Mandavya was
lying on the trident. Coming to know of the matte!
Mandavya pronounced a curse that Ugragravas shou!
die before sunrise. Silavati shuddered on hearing the
Fearing that she would be widowed by the death °
Ugragravas, She, in her turn, pronounced a curse tha
the Sun should not rise again.
Next day the sun did not rise. All activities came to #
standstill. At last the gods approached Atri Muni. They
induced Anasiya, Atri’s wife to persuade Silavati %
withdraw her curse. Then the sun rose again a?
Ugragravas died. (Brahmanda Purana, Chapter 42) - .
4) Other details. When the Pandavas were living }”
Hastinapura, Sri Krsna once paid a visit to them.
his way he met with certain munis. Among them w4
Ani Mandavya also. (M.B., Udyoga Parva, Chapter 83):
5) Once the King of Videha told Mandavya that thé
world is transient and advised him to strive for spiritué
Peace: Ani Mandavya who was pleased with !
—e s advice attained moksa (salvation) at once. (M.B @
anti Parva, Chapter 276, Verses 3-14),
ANIMISA. Verse 10, Chapter 101 of Udyoga Parvi
refers to one Animisa, son of Garuda. Also the wo
ls used as a synonym of Siva (M.B., Anugdsana Parv
Chapter 17, Verse 14, and of Visnu. (M.B., Anusasan@
Parva, Chapter 149, Verse 36).

ANIRUDDHA
ANIRUDDHA. Grandson of Sri Krsna.
1) Genealogy, From Visnu was born in this order:
Brahma, Atri, Candra, Budha, Puriravas, Ayus,
Nahusa, Yayati, Yadu, Sahasrajit, Satajit, Hehaya,
Dharma, Kunti, Bhadrasena, Krtavirya, Karttaviryarjuna, Jayadhvaja, Talajamgha, Vitihotra, Ananta,
Durjaya, Yudhdajit, Sini, Satyaka, Satyaki, Jaya, Kuni,
Anamitra, Préni, Citraratha, Vidtratha, Sira, inl,
Bhoja, Hrdika, Sirasena, Vasudeva, Sri Krsna,’ Pradyumna, Aniruddha.
2) Birth. Sri Krsna had 16008 wives. Out of the 16008
from Rukmini was born Pradyumna and from Pradyumna, Aniruddha.
3) Kidnapped by Usa. One of the stories about this
handsome prince refers to his being kidnapped by Usa
daughter of Banasura. Banasura, chief among the 100
sons of emperor Mahabali had 1000 hands. Siva pleased
by the sacrificial devotion of Banasura granted, as
requested by him, the boon that he himself (Siva) and
Parvati would guard the fort of the Asura, of course
with some reluctance. Now, none had the prowess to
attack this valiant Asura. Overflowing with conceit at
this he challenged Siva to a fight. Siva foretold that
the flagstaff of Bana would one day be broken and
then a powerful antagonist would defeat him. Bana
impatiently awaited the threatened day.
One day Usa happened to witness the scene of Siva
and Parvati engaged in love-making. Excited by the
sight Usa too desired to enact such a scene with a lover,
and she intimated her desire to Parvati. Parvati told
her that Usa would, within three days, see in a dream
a handsome prince with whom she might make love.
Accordingly, dressed herself in all glory with choicest
ornaments Usa awaited the happy day. On the third
day a handsome prince appeared before her in her
dream. Waking up, she began crying. Seeing Usa crying
Citralekha, her companion, and daughter of her father’s
minister, assured her (Usa) that whoever might be the
prince who appeared in Her dream shall be brought
down with the power of Mantra. Citralekha drew the
pictures of all princes: known to her and showed them to
Usa. The pictures represented all handsome men from
Devas to men. ‘No, this is not my prince charming’ was
Usa’s reply. Then Citralekha drew the picture of Sri Krsna
of Pradyumna, and then of Aniruddha. When Us4 saw
Aniruddha’s picture she stretched her ne ‘a : eal
that. It was this prince who had appeared beiore her
in the dream.
Next night Citralekha, by the power" a Fae
brought into Usa’s-room from Dvaraka Aniruddha, who
- . While Usa and Aniruddha were
was then in his sleep: father, Bana, got scent
thus together in the room AER Tbe ees
into custody.
of it and took Aniruddha adhe led to much commotion
The disappearance <A oa. oaxented Dyaraka and gave
Araka Narada :
rene iy Cmte a Aniruddha incident. Sri Krsna and
hurried to Bana’s palace and
Pradyumna, in all rear ae emits Ce gat
encircled his palace with ? ee
d fell down. The fierce fig
et eh oes ae defeat of Bana. mranens
married Usa and the elated couple started for <ohsaaal
Vajra was the son of Aniruddha. (Bhagavata, Dasama
Skandha, Chapters 61, 62 and 63). ‘ 7
(1) It was at the leet of Arjuna
_ a te aeclatll the Dhanurveda (Science
ANJANA PARVAN
on ). (M.B., Sabha Parva, Chapter 4, Verse
(2) Aniruddha is also conceived in the forms of “V ishu
and Brahma. (M.B., Bhisma Parva, Chapter 65,
Verses 69and 70).
(3) Brahma was born from the abdominal centre of
Aniruddha when the latter had taken the form of V isnu.
(M.B., Santi Parva, Chapter 341, Verses 15-17).
(4) Ihe word Aniruddha is also used asa synonym of
= (M.B., Anugasana Parva, Chapter 149, Verse
ANIRUDDBA II. The Mahabharata refers to another
Aniruddha who belonged to the Vrsni dynasty. Both
the Aniruddhas were present at the wedding of Paiicali.
(M.B., Adi Parva, Chapter 185, Verses 1 7-20).
ANIRUDDHA III. The Mahabharata mentions yet
another King Aniruddha. He did not eat flesh. (M.B.,
Anufasana Parva, Chapter 115, Verse 15).
ANJALIKASRAMA. This is a sacred place. One who
lives at this Tirtha for some time, gets the benefit of
Visiting the sacred tirtha at Kanyakumari ten times.
{M.B., Anugdsana Parva, Chapter 25, Verse 52).
ANJALIKAVEDHA(M). This is an art by which an
elephant could be made to stand submissively. Bhimasena had mastered this art. (M.B., Drona Parva,
Chapter 26, Verse 23).
ANJANA. 1) Mother of Haniman—Wife of Kesari,
the noble monkey and daughter of Kufijara, the monkey
leader. She was the mother of Haniman. Once while
iva and Parvati were gamboling in the guise of monkeys,
rambling through the woods, Parvati became pregnant,
That pregnancy was given to Vayu. At that time
Afijana was doing penance for an issue. Vayu transferred
the pregnancy he had received from Parvati to
Afijana. Thus Afijana gave birth to Haniman. (Valmiki
Ramayana, Kiskindha Kanda, Sarga 66).
Afijana gave birth to Haniiman in the woods ina valley
on the southern side of Mahameru. She was frightened
at the sight of the child shining like the sun. Haniman
began to cry for mother’s milk. Afijand said to Haniman: ‘Monkeys are fond of red ripe fruits. Therefore eat whatever you find in red colour.” Saying this
Afijana transformed herself into a goddess and went to
Heaven.
2) _Piirvajanma ( Previous Birth). In her previous
birth Afijana was a goddess named Pufijikastala (Managarva). Asa result ofa curse, this goddess was born
as a she-monkey in the Himalaya region. With the birth
of Haniiman, the curse was lifted. (Uttara Ramayana).
For more details see ‘‘Pufijikastala’’.
ANJANA. This is an elephant belonging to the Asuras.
His origin is in the family of Supratika. The other
three elephants born in this family are: Airavata,
Vamana and Kumuda. (This Airavata was not the
Airavata of Devendra). There are references fo
Raksasas coming to the battle-field on the back of
elephants. There is another mention of Afjana the
elephant standing in the battle-field. (M.B., Udyoga
Parva, Chapter 99, Verse 15; Bhisma Parva, Chapter 64,
Verse 57; Drona Parva, Chapter 112, Verse 32).
ANJANA(M). This is the name of a mountain. (M.B.,
Sabha Parva, Chapter 98, Verse 15).
ANJANA PARVAN. He was the son of Ghatotkaca and
randson of Bhimasena. For genealogy, see BHIMAENA. (M.B., Udyoga Parva, Chapter 194, Verse 90).

ANRTA
ASvatthama, the son of Drona, killed Afijanaparva.
(M.B., Drona Parva, Chapter 196, Verse 89).
ANRTA. Son born to Hirhsa by Adharma.
Purana )
ANRTAM (ASATYA). Hirsa, the wife of Adharma,
gave birth to daughters, Anrta and Nikrti, and from
them were born Bhaya, Naraka, Maya and Vedana.
And, Maya begot Mrtyu, the killer of all living beings.
From Vedana was born sorrow. And from Mrtyu were
born disease (vyadhi), Jara (wrinkles), Soka (grief),
Irsna(desire) and Krodha (anger). (Agni Purana,
Chapter 20).
ANTACARA(M). A place in ancient India.
Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 68).
ANTAKAI. Once the Devas, under the auspices of
emperor Prthu, turned goddess earth into a cow and
milked her. The result was twelve yamas, and Antaka
was one of the twelve. (See Prthu). (M.B., Drona
Parva, Chapter 69, Verse 26).
( Visnu
ANTAKA II. The. Reveda makes mention of one
Rajarsi, Antaka. (Rgveda, Mandala 1, Anuvaka 16,
Sakta 112). -
ANTAPALA. (See KETUMAN Vis
ANTARDHAMA. Son of King Ama of the Manu dynasty. He had ason called Havirdhama. (M.B., AnuSasana Parva, Chapter 147, Verse 23). And for
genealogy see Manuvarnfa.
ANTARDHANA. A King, the son of Prthu. (For genealogy see Prthu). (Visnu Purana, Part 1, Chapter | Lys
ANTARDHANA(M). A weapon of Kubera. (M.B.,
Vana Parva, Chapter.41, Verse 38).
ANTARDHI. A son of emperor Prthu.
Chapter 18). For genealogy see Prthu.
ANTARGIRI. A place in between the Himalaya ranges.
(M.B., Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 49 )« Arua
conquered this place. (M.B., Sabha Parva, Chapter
27, Verse 3).
ANTARIKSA I. One of the seven sons of Murdsura, the
other six being Tamra, Sravana, Vasu, Vibhavasu,
Nabhasvan and Aruna. After the death of their father
they quarrelled with Sri Krsna and were killed by him.
(Bhagavata, Dagama Skandha, Chapter 59, Verse IG) .
ANTARIKSA II. A Raja named Antariksa is mentioned in the Bhagavata. ;
Genealogy. Visnu, Brahma, Svayambhuva, Priyavrata,
Agnidhra, Nabhi, Rsabha, Antariksa. Svayambhuva
Manu had two sons, Uttanapada and Priyavrata.
Dhruva was the son of Uttanapada. Priyavrata married
Barhismati, and they had eleven children including
Agnidhra. Agnidhra married Pirvacitti, a Deva wo.
man, and they became parents to nine sons, viz. Nabhi
Kimpurusa, Hari, Iavrta, Ramyaka, Hiranmaya,
Kuru, Bhadragva and Ketumila. Nabhi wedded Merudevi, and to them were born 100 sons. The eldest son
was Bharata, after whom this country (India) is
named, i.e., Bharata. Bharata had 9 younger brothers,
namely Kusavarta, llavarta, Brahmavarta, Malaya,
Ketu, Bhadrasena, Indrasprk, Vidarbha and Kikata.*
I hese brothers had nine younger brothers who were all
highly evolved yogis. They were Kavi, Hari. Antariksa, Prabuddha, Pippalayana, Avirhotra, Dramida,
vamasa and Karabhajana. (Bhagavata, Paficama
Skandha, Chapters 1-4) ; ¥
(Agni Purana,
Original. (See Bhagavata, Chapter 4, Verse 10.)
44 ANUKRAMNIKA PARVA
ANTARVASA. A place in ancient India. (M.B., Sabha
Parva, Chapter 59, Verse 17).
ANU. (See ANUDRUHYU).
ANU. The Prince named Anu was the son-in-law of
Suka Brahmarsi, son of Vyasa. Suka Brahmarsi married
the beautiful Pivari, the daughter of the Pitrs. Sukadeva and Pivari had four sons: Krsna, Gauraprabha,
Bhiri and Devasruta and a daughter named Kirti.
Kirti was married to Prince Anu the son of Digbhraja.
(Devi Bhagavata, Prathama Skandha).
ANUCAKRA. One of the two attendants deputed by
I'vasta (a Prajapati) to help Skanda in war, the other
being Cakra. (M.B., Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Verse
ANOCANA, A nymph. This Devastri, along with other
nymphs came down on earth at the time of the birth.
of Arjuna and danced. (Adi Parva, Chapter 122,
Verse GF),
ANUDATTA. One of the five sons created by Pancajanya for the Pitrs. (M.B., Vana Parva, Chapter 220,
Verse. 10).
ANUDATTA (M). The fire (Agni ) called Pdaficajanya
created the elements named Anudittas. Pancajanya
generated these elements from his two hands. with
the help of his spiritual strength (tapagSakti). (M.B.,
Vana Parva, Chapter 220, Verse 10).
ANUDARA. One of the hundred sons of Dhrtarastra:
(See Kauravas) .
ANUDRUHYU. Son of Yayati. _ ;
1) Genealogy. Descended from Visnu thus: Brahma,
Atri, Candra, Budha, Puriravas, Ayus, Nahusa;
Yayati, Anudruhyu.
2) Birth. Yayati had two sons, Yadu and Turvasu, bY
Devayani, and three sons, Druhyu, Anudruhyu an
Piru by Sarmistha. (Agni Purana, Chapter 2):
ANUDYUTAPARVA. An inner parva of Sabha Parva.
In this parva is told the story of the game of dic¢
played between Duryodhana and Dharmaputra.
ANUGITAPARVA. A sub-section of Ag vamedha Parv4-
(See M.B.).
ANUGOPTA. A Viévadeva.
Chapter 91, Verse 37).
ANUHA. A Kingin ancient India. (M.B., Adi Parva:
Chapter 1, Verse 232).
ANUHLADA. Brother of Prahlada. .
1) Genealogy. Descended from Visnu thus: Vispu
Brahma, Kagyapa Hiranyakagipu, Anuhlada. at
2) Birth. Kagyapa married Diti, daughter of Daska. Dit
was a younger sister of Aditi. The sons of Aditi becameé
devas and _ the sons of Diti became asuras. Diti gav®
birth to two sons named Hiranyaksa and Hirany2”
kasipu and a daughter Simhika. Simbhika was given }
marriage to Vipracitti. They had two sons, Rahu an
Ketu. Five sons were born to Hiranyaksa and four sons
were born to Hiranyakagipu. These four sons were '
Anuhlada, Hlada, Prahlada and Sarhlada. (Vis0™
a Athga 1, Chapter 15 and Agni Purana, Chap”
ter
ANUKARMA, A Viévadeva.
Chapter 91, Verse oe his
(M.B., Anugadsana Parva:
(M.B., Anugdsana Parv#
ANUKRAMANIKA PARVA. The Mahabharata is ai
vided into 18 parvans. The first of them is called Ad
Parva and the first of its many sub-divisions is name
qnanuja's Bhagavata (Malayalam) mentions one Aryavarta also as Bharata’s younger brother. But the name does mot occur in the
Si ee -

ANUMATI
Anukramanika Parva. And, in this parva (Chapter)
Ugragravas (Siitanandana) son of Lomaharsana begins
telling the Bharata story at the yajiia (of 12 years’
duration) held by Kulapati Saunaka at the forest of
Naimiga. Vyasa composing the Mahabhfrata, the
creation of the world, the greatness of the Mahabharata,
Vyasa teaching his disciples the Mahabharata—all this
comes in this narration. (See Mahabharata).
ANUMATI. Daughter of Angiras, son of Brahma. Angiras
had two wives, Smrti and KhyAati, and four daughters,
Anumati, Raka, Kuhi and Sinivali by Smrti, and three
sons, Ucatthya, Brhaspati, Sarhvarta by Khyati. (Visnu
Purana, Part 1, Chapter 10).
ANUMLOCA. An apsaras. (Harivarhga 326).
ANUPAKA. A warrior from Antipa(m).
ANUPA(M). A famous place in ancient India. Some
scholars hold the view that Aniipa is near river
Narmada. (Sabha Parva, Chapter'51, Verse 27).
ANUPATI. A synonym of Karttavirya. (Vana Parva,
Chapter 116, Verse 19). :
ANUPAVRTTA. A place in ancient India. (M.B.,
Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 48).
ANUSASANA PARVA. One of the Parvans of the Mahabharata. (See Bharata).
ANUSNA. A river in ancient India. (M.B., Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 24).
ANUSRUTASRAVAS. Son of Somalj (Visnu
Purana).
ANUSTUP. One of the seven horses of the Sun God,
the other six being, Gayatri, Brhati, Usnik, Jagati,
Tristup and Pankti. (Visnu Purana, Part II, Chapter
ANUVINDA I. One of the 100 sons of Dhrtarastra.
There is a story in the Mahabharata about his being
imprisoned along with Duryodhana. Knowing that the
andavas were living in the forest in all comfort and
happiness Duryodhana and others went in precession to
them. Anuvinda also was in the as i age
Du and party were staying ina tent in th
ey oa, sa Citrasena appeared on the
scene and imprisoned them. Anuvinda too hs imPrisoned. (See Citrasena). (M.B., Vana nage apte1
242, Verse 8). He was killed m war i imasena.
(M.B., Drona Parva, Chapter 127, Verse o -
ANUVINDA II. The puranas refer to one oe a a
prince of Avanti. (1) He had a brother - : in 5
(2) He was defeated by Sahadeva who set orth to sub
Jugate the kings of the south just before the i
yajfia of Dharmaputra. (M.B., Sabha Parva, Chapter
31, Verse 10). (3) An Aksauhini (division of rm)
was despatched by Anuvinda to help Duryod wa
(M B Ud oga Parva; Chapter 19, Verses 24, 25). \4
On he fst day of te War a acwe, Chobe
; | jmewe ism fa, ©
oe Ae 3) tava son of Arjuna o—
both Vinda and Anuvinda in the battle. (M.B., oh
Parva, Chapter 83, Verse, ae TLE ‘Drona
nah 1 kin O wees "Di; ae
“~ mala nn ay eae 90). (7) Anuvinda was killed
7 ng M B., Drona parva, Chapter 399, Verses
sae ag and Anuvinda hada sister ager
i : hee The three of them hig a peta’ .
Rajadhidevi sister of Sri Krsna did ‘
4) sae] Mitravinda, which her brother ee n _
This a their reason for quitting the Pandava camp
5 APARAKAStT
and fighting on the side of the Kauravas.
Dagama Skandha, Chapter 58, Verses 30,
ANUVINDA III. The Mahabharata
prince Anuvinda also. He was the son of a Kekayaraja. He also fought against the Pandavas and was
killed by Satyaki. (M.B., Karna Parva, Chapter 13,
Verse 21).
ANUVINDA. A wife of Sri Krsna. (Padma Purana).
ANUYAYI. One of the 100 sons of Dhrtarastra. He is
called Agrayayi also; he was killed in battle by BhimaSena. (M.B., Adi Parva, Chapter 67, Verse 102;
Chapter 116, Verse 1] and Drona Parva, Chapter 157,
Verses 17-20) .
ANVAGBHANU. A King of the Piru dynasty.
genealogy see Piru dynasty). Piru had three sons,
Svara, Raudragva and Pravira. He had also another
son Manasyu by Siraseni, another wife. Anvagbhanu is
the son born to Manasyu and his apsara wife, Mitrakesi. Anvagbhanu is known as Reeyu and Anadhrsti
also. (M.B., Adi Parva, Chapter 94, Verses 5-12)
APALA. A daughter of the great sage, Atri. Suffering
from leprosy and hence forsaken by her husband Apala
stayed with her father and started tapas to please
Indra. One day, on her way home from the river,
Apala tasted the Soma which was meant to be offered
to Indra and hearing the sound produced then
Devendra appeared before Apala. She gave the Soma
to indra, who was so pleased with her that he cured
her of her leprosy. (Rgveda, 8-91).
APANTARATAMAS, 1) General.’ A Maharsi (Great
Sage). He was born out of the sound ‘bhu? uttered by
Mahavisnu. The sage is also known as Sdrasvata and
Apantaratamas. Because he was absolutely free from
inner darkness or ignorance he was called Apantaratamas. The sage, who was cognizant of the past, the
present and the future divided and systematized the
Vedas as ordered by Visnu. )
2) Vyasa was Apantaratamas reborn. Mahéavisnu
ordained that in the Dvapara age he be born as the
son of Parasara and once again divide and systematize
the Vedas, and so was he born as V yasa. (Sri Sankara’s
Mundakopanisad and Brahmasitra Bhasya).
APANTARATAMA. (Sarasvata). This is another name
(Bhagavata,
a8 Dee
refers to another
(For
of Apantaratamas. (See Ap4ntaratamas).
APARABRAHMA. (See Parabrahma). .
APARAJITATI. One of the serpents born to Kagsyapa
of Kadru. (M.B., Adi Parva, Chapter 35, Verse 13).
APARAJITA II. A King born out ofa part of one of
the eight Asuras, who were known the Kalakeyas.
(M.B., Adi Parva, Chapter 67, Verse 49). The Pandavas
had irtvited this King before they went to war. (M.B.,
Udyoga Parva, Chapter 4, Verse 21). i
APARAJITA III. A son of Dhrtarastra. (M.B., Adi
Parva, Chapter 67, Verse 101). Bhimasena killed him.
(M.B., Bhisma Parva, Chapter 21, Verse 22).
APARAJITA IV. A King of the Kuruvathsa. (M.B:,
Adi Parva, Chapter 94, Verse 54). “
APARAJITA V. One of. the eleven Rudras, the other
ten being Hara, Bahuripa, ‘Tryambaka, Vrsakapi,
Sambhu, Kapardi, Raivata, Mrgavyadha, Sarpa and
Kapali. (Agni Purana, Chapter 18).
APARAJITA VI. Used as _a synonym of Mahavisny.
(M.B., Anugdsana Parva, Chapter 149, Verse 89),
APARAKASI, A place in ancient India. (M.B., Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 42).

- APARAKUNTI 46
APARAKUNTI. A place in ancient India. (M.B., Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 43).
APARAMLECCHA(M). A place in ancient India.
(M.B., Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 65).
APARANANDA. A river. Arjuna once crossed it. (M.B.,
Adi Parva, Chapter 214, Verses 6 and 7). Aparananda is counted among the prominent holy rivers.
(M.B., Anugasana Parva, Chapter 165, Verse 28).
APARANTA I. A city on the west coast of ancient
South India. (M.B., Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Verse
APARANTA I]. Another name of the Siirparaka temple.
(M.B., Santi Parva, Chapter 49, Verse 67).
APARASEKA(M). A place in ancient India. (M.B.,
Sabha Parva, Chapter 31, Verse B).
APARAVALLAVA(M). A place in ancient India.
(M.B., Sabha Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 62).
APARAVIDYA. Knowledge is of two Categories or
types. Viz.
1) Paravidya. That science or knowledge, which helps
us to know or realise Him (Brahma) who is without
either beginning or end, who could neither be seen
with the eyes nor perceived by any of the senses.
(2) Aparavidya. This includes knowledge of the four
Vedas Rg, Yajus, Sima and Atharva, the six Vedangas
(sub-divisions of the Vedas) Siksa, Kalpa, Nirukta,
Chandas, Vyakarana, Apidhana, Mimamsa, DharmaSastra and the puranas, as also, Nyaya Sastra (Logic) ,
Vaidya Sastra (medicine) Gandharva Sastra, Dhanurveda and Artha SAstra (economics ).
APODADHAUMYA. (See Ayodhadhaumya).
APPAYYADIKSITA. A reputed Rhetorician in Sanskrit, who thrived in the 16th Century A.D. He wrote
two treatises on rhetoric, the Kuvalayananda and
Citramimamsa. The former is an interpretation of
chapter 5 of Jayadeva’s Candraloka and is very popularin South India.
APRACI. A hel]. (See Naraka) . (Visnu Purana, Part 2,
Chapter 6)
APRATISTHA(M). A hell. (See Naraka).
- APSARAS.* An Apsaras isa nymph (devastri). These
apsara women were born at the churning of the ocean
‘Agni aie Chapter 3). There are thousands of
psaras. (Details given against the names of Apsaras),
See ee . mi sage (Maharsi) who owes
€ assembly of Yudhisthira. M.B., bha P
Chapter 4, Verse 12) | an
ARA (ARAJAS). Daughter of Sukra maharsj.
begot three sons, Danda, Vikuksi and Nimi.
father’s death Danda became king of the country between the Vindhya and the Himalayas. In the course
ukra maharsi. He committed rape on hér and she
told her father about the attack by Danda. The Mahargi_ asked his daughter to do tapas, and further told
ARALI.
ARANYA. A King of the
ARANYA PARVA.
ARATTA(M)
her that he would burn Danda’s kingdom by arain of
fire. Ara did tapas, and at the behest of the Maharsi
Indra destroyed Danda’s kingdom by adownpour ofa
rain of fire. Afterwards this place became a terrible
forest where neither birds nor animals lived, and came
to be known as Dandakaranya. (Uttara Ramayana).
ARAKKILLAM. (Palace of wax). Both the Kaurava
and the Pandava princes lived in Hastinapura. The
Pandavas became experts in archery, and their exemplary
character and conduct made them, so to say, the apple
of their eyes to the people. This evoked great jealousy
in Duryodhana who made up his mind to completely
ruin the Pandavas somehow or other. Duryodhana, with
Dhrtarastra’s consent, built a new palace at Varanavata. Though many others did not know that the
palace was made of wax the Pandavas, from secret
information knew the fact. But, they only pretended
ignorance. Duryodhana and his minister Purocana,
Saw to it that the Pandavas shifted their residence to
the waxen palace. Duryodhana had planned to set fire
to the palace and burn to death the Pandavas. But, the
shrewd Vidura through his messenger Kanaka gave
notice of the conspiracy to the Pandavas just in time.
One night Purocana set fire to the waxen palace, but
the Pandavas escaped by a secret passage, which the
architect of the palace had made while constructing
it, and about which the Pandavas had previous knowledge. The same night a huntsman, with his five childre®:
was also staying in the palace. As they were unconscious with heavy dosage of liquor they could not escape the fire. Those six people, and accidentally
Purocana too were burnt to death. People, who gathered at the spot, thus saw seven corpses, and the news
was broadcast that the Pandavas, including their wile
Paficali and their mother had been burnt to deathThis incident took place one year after the Pandavas
had shifted their residence to the waxen palace. (M.B.
Adi Parva, Chapters 141-151 he
Visvamitra. (M.B., Anugasana Parva, Chapter 4, Vers¢
ARANTUKA. A guard posted at a boundary line o
Kuurksetra. (M.B., Vana Parva, Chapter 83, Versé
ARANTUKA. A sacred spot in ancient India, in rivet
Sarasvati. A bath there is as beneficial as performin8
the Agnistoma yajfia. (M.B., Salya Parva, Chapter 533
Verse 24).
Iksvaku dynasty. (See Tksvaky
dynasty) .
A sub Parva in 4 Mahabharat4:
(See Mahabharata). - _
J+ A place in ancient India. After Drone
was killed in the great war, Krtavarma ran away wil
the warriors of Aratta. (M.B., Drona Parva. Chapt
*Aristha, a wife of Kasya i i : A! 5 is r ita
ia, a v IK pa, delivered thirteen Apsatas. They were : Alambusa, Misrakegi, Vid 5 : 5 ksitas
Rambhi, Manorama, Keésini, Subahu, Suraja, Surata and Supriya. Aristha gave birth also to four Gititharwig tte ee Aubab!
and Tumburu as mentioned in the following verse,
Aristasita Subhagadevi devarsitah pura
Alambusa migrakeéi Vidyutparna Tilottama
Aruna raksita caiva rambha tadvat manorama
KeSini ca Subahusca vikhyatau ca hahahuha
lumburusceti Catvarah smrtah gandharvasattamah.
One of the sons who were Brahmavadins, of.

ARAYANNAM 47
ARAYANNAM. The swan (Hamsa ).
1) General. A bird (Hamsa) in Devaloka. The prefix
‘ara’ denotes royalty, sublimity, greatness etc. Many
puranas describe Arayannam asa bird of the Devas.
Manasasaras at the heights of the Himalayas is the
permanent abode of these divine birds. They do not
like the rainy season. So they come down to the earth
when rain bégins at the Manasasaras, and go back to
the Saras, when rain begins on the earth. This phenomenon explains Cerusgeri’s (Malayalam poet) statement in his Krsnagatha that ‘when rain set in harhsas
—Arayannams—began flying away’. .
2) Origin. Kaégyapa, the son of Brahma, married the
eight daughters of Daksa, Tamra being one of them.
Tamra bore five daughters Kraufici, Bhasi, Syeni,
Dhrtarastri and Suki. Syeni gave birth to the kite,
Dhrtarastri, the Hamsa and the Koka and Suki the
Sukas (doves). Koka or the Cakravaki bird is the sister
of Hamhsa. This is how the Arayanna and the Cakravaka got Devatva (divinity). (Valmiki Ramayana,
Aranyakanda, Canto 14). Pes
3) Bhisma and the Arayanna. Sigupala, before his death,
blabbered a lot of unbecoming things about Bhisma,
who was partial to his (Sigup4la’s) enemies. And, he related the story ofan Arayanna to elaborate the stand taken
by the aged Bhisma. An aged Harisa (Arayanna) which
once dwelt: on the sea-coast preached to all the other
birds much about ethical actions. The birds felt great respect for the Arayanna. They flew across the sea in search
of prey after entrusting their eggs to the Arayanna. The
old Arayanna grew fat on those eggs. There was one
intelligent bird among the lot, and when It looked for
the eggs they were not to be found. That bird informed
its colleagues about the treacherous conduct of the
Arayanna. The birds organised themselves and attacked
the Arayanna to death. Oh ! Bhisma, the same will be
your end also. (M.B., Sabha Parva, Chapter 41, Verses
4) Nala and Arayanna. While Nala, the prince of the
Nisadha kingdom was resting in a garden he saw an
Arayanna in a tank there. Out of curious pleasure Nala
caught it, but seeing its mental tremor he let it free.
Out of gratitude for this generous act, the ‘Arayanna
played the role of the messenger for Nala to get as his
wife Damayanti, the very beautiful daughter of the
King of Vidarbha. .
J) Be the Arayanna (Hamisa) got the white colour. Smet
king Marutta was conducting the Mahesvara Satra
(a yaga) and Devas like Indra came down to <x
their share of the Havis (oblations in the sacri
‘fire). And, this was the time when Ravana ae : -
attendants was on his triymphal tour. ag oo: that e
Devas were at the Agrama of Marutta, ovaus, 5 i
went there,and Indra and the other Devas, oe g
“assumed different disguises and hid themeal i Sage d the guise of the peacock,
mene Eppeyp. elu ae ub OF the chameleon and
Yama of the crow, Kubera beguiled Ravana went
Varuna of the Arayanna. Thus begutle earl dhe
—_— Devas, who thus escaped blessed the
mil Aga pad — hose forms they assumed. Indra
Eesti i, Cages bans ‘h -s of the peacock with mixed
shaped the blue sa i von, Wiercowan, ‘Te bleed
colours and eyes ht a ae Ge atuelel evils any
heh tua ee es uld dance with their feathers
disease, and that sey _ Yamadharma blessed the
spread when rain set in.
——— oe ~— eee
ARISTA (ARISTAKA)
crows that they would get the offerings made on-earth
by men to - their departed ancestors. And Bhagavan
Varuna told the Raja-Harhsas - “I escaped the clutches
of Ravana by assuming your shape and form. Therefore,
be thee, who are now black and white, in future as
purely white as milk”. Kubera blessed the Chameleon
with capacity to change colour as and how it pleased,
and also for its cheeks to appear golden in colour to the
onlookers. After thus blessing the birds the Devas disappeared. (Uttara Ramayana).
ARBUDA. An Asura. Indra Killed this Asura.
Mandala 1, Anuvaka 10, Sikta 51).
ARBUDA I. A naga (serpent) living in mountains.
(Sabha Parva, Chapter 21, Stanza a
ARBUDA II. The mountain Abu. (Mahabharata, Vana
Parva, Chapter 82, Stanza 99)'.
ARCANANAS. A muni born in the Atreyagotra of the
dynasty of Atri. He desired to marry Rathaviti. But
her father had decided to give her in marriage only
to a Maharsi, and, therefore Arcananas became a
Maharsi with the help of the Marutta and wedded
Rathaviti. Maharsi Syavagva was their son.
ARCISMATI,. The fourth daughter of Maharsi Angiras.
(M.B., Vana Parva, Chapter 216, Verse 6),
ARCIS. Prthu and the Arcis were born from the arms
of Vena. (Bhagavata, 4th Skandha, Chapter 15). Prthn
did tapas in forest and gave up his physical body in
fre and attained Vaikuntha (the abode of Visnu) with
the Arcis. (Bhagavata, 4th Skandha). For details see
Prthu. |
ARCISMAT. A sect of Pitxs,
Chapter 236, Verse 15).
ARDHADEVAS (SEMI-GODS). In temples hermits,
ancestors, serpents, celestial maids and such others also
are worshipped. Among these there are Vasus, Nagas,
Asuras, Paigacas, Vetalas and many other classes.
These are the semi-gods. (See Page 27 of Namvanangum Daivangal).
ARDHAKILATIRTHA. A holy ghat or bath built by
the hermit Darbhi. (Mahabharata, Vana Parva,
Chapter 83, Stanza 153}.
ARDHASADHAKA. A minister of King Dagaratha. He
had eight ministers. |
“The great king had eight ministers who Were pure
and famous and experts in dealing with matters of their
concern : Jayanta, Dhrsti, Vijaya, Siddha, Ardhasadhaka, Asoka, Mantrapala and Sumantra were
they”. (Valmiki Ramayana, Balakanda, Sarga 7,
Stanzas 2 and 3 : Vallathol Translation) .
ARGHABHIHANAPARVA. A parva in the Mahabharata.. (See M.B.).
ARTHA. A King of the lunar dynasty. He was a son
born to Arvacina (a king of the Piru dynasty) and
Maryada, a princess of Vidarbha. Ariha had a son,,
Mahabhauma, born of his wife,.a princess of Anga.
(M.B., Adi Parva, Chapter 19, Verses 18-19). Ms
ARIMEJAYA. A Raja of the Piru dynasty. (See Pary
dynasty). (Agni Purana, Chapter 278).
ARISTA. Wife of Kagyapa. The Gandharvas w ere korn
of her. (Agni Purana, Chapter 19, M.B., Adi Parva,
Chapter 67, Verse 83). ——
ARISTA (ARISTAKA). Anasura, a servant of Karnsa.
Once, at the instance of Karnsa he went to Gokula
disguised as an ox to kill Sri Krsna. The ox instilled
terror in people by tearing to pieces hills and mountaisn
(Reveda,
(M.B., Santi Parva,

ARISTANEMA (ARISTANEMI)
with its horns and bellowing like hell. But Sri Krsna
faced the beast, and rained blows on him and it was
thrown hundred yojanas away and it died. At the time
of death it regained its fromer from as Asura. (Bhagavata, Dasama, Skandha, Chapter 37).
ARISTANEMA (ARISTANEMI). (See Aristanemi).
ARISTANEMI I. One of the six sons of Vinata.
1) Genealogy. Visnu, Brahma, Kasyapa and Aristanemi.
Kasyapa married Dhrtardstri, daughter of Daksa. Suki
was their daughter, Suki had a daughter Nata and
she a daughter, Vinata. Aristanemi, Tarksya, Aruna,
Garuda, Para, Aruni and Sri Varuni were the children
of Vinata. (M.B., Adi Parva, Chapter 65, Verse 40).
2) Tapassakti of Aristanemi. Aristanemi with his son
was once performing tapas in the foiest. The son was
immersed in meditation clad in the skin of a deer thus
looking like a deer. Parapurafijaya, the King of Hehaya
who happened at the time to be hunting in the forest
discharged his arrow against the son of Aristanemi taking
him for a deer. When the king found out the real fact
he felt extremely sorry, and he craved pardon of the
boy’s father for unwittingly killing his son. Then Aristanemi pointing out his son who was standing alive
asked the King, “Is this the boy whom you killed ?”
The King was naturally wonder-struck. But Aristanemi told the King that there was nothing to wonder
atin the case as nobody would be able to kill them because their TapaSSakti was so great. The King felt so
happy at this, and returned to his palace after prostrating at the feet of the sage. (M.B., Aranya Parva,
Chapter 184).
3) Some other details. (1) Sumati, wife of King Sagara
of the Solar dynasty, was the daughter of Aristanemi.
(Ramayana, Balakanda, Canto 38, Verse 4). (2)
Kagyapa had the synonym Aristanemi also. (Valmiki
Ramayana, Kiskindhakanda, Canto 66, Verse 4;
Devi Bhagavata, Saptama Skandha). (3) Aristanemi’s
wives delivered — sixteen children. (Agni Purana,
Chapter 19). (4) Aristanemi has spoken a lot about
the greatness of Brahmins. (M.B., Aranya Parva,
Chapter 184, Verses 17-22). (5) Aristanemi once gave
much spiritual advice to Kinz Sagara of the Stirya
Meo (M.B., Santi Parva, Chapter 288, Verses
ARISTANEML II, Mahabharata, Santi Parva, Chapter
208, Verse 8 refers to one Aristanemi, the second son of
KaSgsyapa.
ARISTANEMI ITT, A Raja called Aristanemj occupied
a place in the council of Yama. (M.B., Sabha Parva
Chapter 8, Verse 9). )
ARISTANEMI IV. A false name assumed by Sahadeva
while the Pandavas lived incognito in the Virata._kingdom. (M.B., Virata Parva, Chapter 10, Verse 2)
ARISTANEMI v. A synonym of Sri Krsna. (M.B.,
Udyoga Parva, Chapter 71, Verse Hy *
ARISTANEMI VI. A King. Realising the transient
nature of worldly life, he gave up his kingdom and
went to and did tapas at Mount Gandhamadana. Indra
who was very much pleased at-this sent a messenger
with a vimana (aeroplane) to conduct the King to
Svarga ( heaven). When he was told that there was in
Svarga also the states of being high or low, and fall
a bo when the effect of good actions decreased,
ae Jng gave up his desire for Svarga and sent back
"a's Messenger. Then Indra sent the King with a
48 ARJUNA
messenger to the Agrama of Valmiki so that he might
gain spiritual knowledge. Valmiki consoled the King
with the advice that the telling, hearing and pondering
over the story of the Ramayana alone would be enough
to get eternal salvation. (Yogavasistham),
ARJUNA. The third of the Pandavas.
1) Genealogy. Descended from Visnu thus: Brahma,
Atri, Candra, Budha, Purdravas, Ayus, Nahusa, Yayati,
Piru, Janamejaya, Pracinyan, Pravira, Namasyu, Vitabhaya, Sundu, Bahuvidha, Samyati, Rahovadi,
Raudragvan, Matinara, Santurodha, Dusyanta, Bharata,
Suhotra, Suhota, Gala, Gardda, Suketu, Brhatksetra,
Hasti, Ajamidha, Rksa, Samvarana, Kuru, Jahnu,
Suratha, Vidiratha, Sarvabhauma, Jayatsena, Ravyaya,
Bhavuka, Cakroddhata, Devatithi, Rksa, Bhima, Pratica,
antanu, Vyasa, Pandu, Arjuna.
2) Previous birth. Arjuna and Sri Krsna are often referred to as Naranarayanas (Nara and Narayana). In
their previous life they were two Rsis called Nara and
Narayana, and from that time onwards they lived as
inseparable companions and sons of the same parents.
They entered Mahasamadhi at Badaryaérama in the
Himalayas. Of the two Narayanarsi was a partial incarnation of Visnu. About the Nararsi the Devi Bhagavata has the following to say : “Dharma had_ his
origin in the heart of Brahma, and he earned great
reputation for truthfulness and adherence to Vedic
dharma. He married the daughters of Daksa. Dharma
had four sons, Hari, Krsna, Nara and Narayana. O
the four sons Hari and Krsna became great yogis, and
Nara and Narayana, great tapasvins. Nara and Narayana did tapas, worshipping Brahma for 1000 years at
the holy Badaryagrama in the plains of the Himalayas.
Nara was born in the next birth as Arjuna. (Dev!
Bhagavata, 4th Skandha). See Nara.
3) Birth. To Vicitravirya son of Santanu was born
Dhrtardastra by Ambika, and Pandu by AmbalikaPandu had two wives, Kunti and Madri. The curse of 2
Muni made physical contacts with his Wives impossible fot
Pandu. (See Pandu). Kunti, before her marriage ha
attended on Maharsi Durvasas who pleased with he?
service made a gift of five mantras to her. The effect
of the mantras was that Kunti would become mother ©
a son from him about whom she was thinking while she
repeated the mantra. As soon as She got the mantras
she retired to a solitary place and thinking of the SunGod repeated the first mantra. At once Siryadeva appeal
ed and Karna was born to her by him, After assuring
her that the incident would not affect her chastity Sary4
disappeared. Kunti abandoned the child to float in the
river Ganga, and Stayed with Pandu keeping the othe!
practising the other four mantras one by one. By three
mantras she got three sons, Dharmaputra from Kala:
Arjuna from Indra and Bhimasena from the wind G0
(Vayu). The remaining one Mantra Kunti gave ry
Madri. She repeated it thinking of the Attia; Devas
and two sons, Nakula and Sahadeva were born to he!
(M.B., Adi Parva, Chapter 63 onwards),
4) Festival of birth. At the birth of Arjuna Kunti heard
a heavenly voice declare as follows > “Oh! Kunti ,
your son will be equal to Siva in Prowess and uncon”
querable just as Indra is. After defeating all the Kins?
he will perform the A$vamedha thrice. He will pleas”

ARJUNA
Siva and get the great weapon called Pasupata from
him. On the orders of Indra he will kill Nivatakavacas.
Hearing the above prophecy the Devas played ecstatic
music and flowers were showered from the sky. The
Saptarsis, Prajapatis and other sages arrayed themselves
in the sky. Thus, all animate and inanimate objects
celebrated the birth of Arjuna.
5) Naming. Sages from the top of the Satasriga
Mountain came together to perform the christening
ceremony of Arjuna. While enumerating the various
names of Arjuna, it is said in the Virdta Parva that
Krsna was the name Pandu gave to his son. (M.B., Adi
Parva, Chapter 123, Verse 20).
6) Childhood. The Pandavas spent their childhood at
Hastinapura with the Kauravas. Then Arjuna studied
the art and science of using weapons, dance, music etc.
along with the other boys. (M.B., Adi Parva, Chapter
129, Verse 1). Kasyapa, the high priest of Vasudeva
did for Arjuna the usual Sarhskdras like Upanayana
(wearing of the holy thread) etc. Arjuna was taught
the first lessons in Dhanurveda (Science of archery )
by Rajarsi Suka. Afterwards, Krpacarya became the
preceptor of the Pandavas in Dhanurveda, and it was
then that Dronacarya came. There is a particular story
about Dronacarya becoming the guru. (See Drona).
7) Spectal favour of Drona. Arjuna showed very great
interest in the science of the use of weapons. Drona, the
master, wanted to teach Asvatthama, his son, certain
special things, and he began sending all his disciples to
fetch water. ASvatthama used to be the first to return
with the water, and before the others returned Drona
began teaching Aévatthama the special lessons. Arjuna
came to understand this programme and he began
returning with water along with Asvatthama. Then
the guru began teaching the special things to both
Agvatthama and Arjuna. Drona instructed the cook
not to serve Arjuna food in the darkness. While
Arjuna was once taking his food, wind blew out. the
burning lamp, and Arjuna alone continued eating.
Because of constant practice Arjuna was quite sure
about the position of the hand and the mouth in
the process of eating, and Arjuna surmised from this
that archery also could’ be practised in darkness. He
began practising them. The guru came to know of it,
and witnessing Arjuna’s performance praised Arjuna as
a unique archer. (Bharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 132).
8) Ekalavya’s finger was cut. Ekalavya, son of Hiranyadhanus, King of the Nisadas (a tribe of hunters, forestmen) approached Drona to learn the ‘science of the
use of weapons. Drona, the Brahmin, refused the prayer
of this prince of the forest tribe. Ekalavya, after prostrating at the feet of Drona returned to the woods,
made an image of Drona with earth and meditating |
upon it as guru began practising the use of weapons.
The Kauravas and the Pandavas went hunting in the
: ing there Ekalavya with his matted air and
slad in dent * Ga the hunting dogs began barking at
him. Ekalavya shot into the mouth of the dog seven
arrows at one and the same moment. With the aoe
thrust in the mouth the dogs ran back to the Banaras
and they found out the culprit, Ekalavya, — c =
himself to be a disciple of Drona. Grief-stric - a. ‘
claim Arjuna hurried up to Drona and pany ros -
pronounced me to be your foremost discip yn - :
equal. But, today Ekalavya, another disciple of your
ARJUNA
has relegated me to the second place”. Thereupon
Drona went and saw Ekalavya in the forest. Ekalavya,
in all devotion stood up and saluted the guru. And
the guru said as follows : “Oh! Ekalavya if thou
artmy disciple give me the daksina (fee) due to the
guru, and I desire ta get the thumb of your right hand as
my fee’’. At once Ekalavya cut his thumb and gave it to
Drona. Henceforth Arjuna became Drona’s unequalled
disciple. (M.B., Adi Parva, Chapter 132).
J) Arjuna got Brahmasirastra. When once Drona and
his disciples were bathing in the river Ganga, a whale
caught hold of the leg of the guru. Ihe combined
efforts of the disciples failed to extricate the leg from
the grip of the whale. Ultimately Arjuna shot an arrow
and released the guru’s leg. Greatly pleased at this
Drona imparted to Arjuna knowledge about BrahmaSirastra, and Arjuna was enjoined not to use the astra
against men, but to use it only when confronting
higher beings than men. [Bharata (Malayalam), Adi
Parva, Chapter 133].
10) Competition in arms. When the training of the princes
was almost over Dhr'tardstra decided to havea rehearsal of their attainments, and the scene for it also was
set. The princes with bows and arrows appeared on
the scene. Yudhisthira and others first exhibited their
skill in shooting arrows in the order of their seniority.
Every scene was explained to Dhrtarastra by Vidura
and to Gandhari by Safijaya. Duryodhana and
Bhima clashed with each other. Agvatthama pacified
them and kept them apart. And, then Arjuna and
Karna appeared on the scene, and the onlookers declared them to be equal in skill in archery. When
their shooting exhibition was over, Karna who got
angry again rushed to the stage. Arjuna also got
ready. Arjuna challenged Karna’s eligibility on the
ground that he was low-born and not a Ksatriya. At
once Duryodhana proclaimed him as the King of Anga.
Though this pacified the scene, this competition in
archery served much to make the Kauravas and the
Pandavas the bitterest of enemies. (M.B., Adi Parva,
Chapters, 136, 137).
11) Arjuna’s gurudaksina (Offering of fee to the preceptor).
At the starting of training the princes Drona told them:
“I have one thing in mind, and you must do it for
me when you have completed the course of training.
All the disciples except Arjuna kept silent at this, but
Arjuna promised to fulfil the guru’s wish at the
proper time
The training was over, and it was time for gurudaksina.
- Drona asked to be brought bound before him Drupada,
King of Paficala. (For Drona’s enmity towards Drupada see Drupada) . Thereupon the Pandavas marched
to Paficala, and in a fierce battle Arjuna defeated
Drupada. Though Bhima tried to kill Drupada Arjuna
did not permit it, but took him bound to Drona.
This ended Drona’s hatred towards ‘Drupada, who
now gifted half his kingdom to Drona. Drona was
very much pleased ‘with Arjuna for the above act,
and advised him to fight even him (Drona) if the
latter opposed him (Arjuna). To this Arjuna replied
‘Yes’. (M.B., Adi Parva, Chapter 139, Verse 14), With
this promise to fight even the guru incase the guru
attacked him Arjuna became the most reputed archer
in Bharata. |

ARJUNA
12) fealousy of Dhrtarastra. After the gurudaksina Arjuna
marched against the neighsouring kingdom. He defeated very easily in war the King of Yavana and the
Kings Sauvira, Vipula and Sumitra. These victories of
Arjuna made the Kauravas very anxious; Dhrtardstra
brooded over it. (M.B., Adi Parva, Chapter 138, Verses
13} Hscape from the waxen palace. Duryodhana made
up his mind to destroy the P andavas somehow or
other. He got the Pandavas to shift their residence to
a palace made of wax at Varanavata, and one year after
this the palace was set fire to. The Pandavas escaped
death by fire through a tunnel aad entered the forest,
the next day. (See Arakkillam ).
14) Arjuna on the banks of river Ga..ga. The Pandavas walked much through the terrible forest, and after midnight
reached the banks of the Ganga. At that time Amgaraparna (Citraratha), the Gandharva was enjoying
his ume in the river with some Apsara women. The
presence of men at the scene, the Gandharva did not
relish. Arjuna and the Gandharva crossed in words,
which led to a duel. In the duel the Gandharva was
defeated. As the wife of the Gandharva prayed with
tears in her eyes Arjuna spared him his life. The
grateful Gandharva told the Pandavas many interesting
stories. He also made a present of divine horses and
imparted to them the esoteric knowledge called Caksusividya. The Gandharva finally told the Pandavas that
they were attacked because they came without Agni and
Ahuti in their front. He also explained this fact that
Arjuna could subjugate him on account of his (Arjuna’s)
genuine celibacy. (See Citraratha) .
15) Paricélisvayarmvara. Citraratha, during his talks
with the Andavas had pointed out to:‘them the need to
have a priest to lead and guide them in all matters,
and accordingly they visited Dhaumyasrama_ and installed the Maharsi (Dhaumya) as their priest.
And, meantime. seeing thousands of people on their way
to attend the Svayamvara (marriage by open choice
of husband by the girl) of Krsna (Paficali) daughter
of the King of aficala, the Pandavas also followed the
crowd. Veda Vyasa, whom the Pandavas met on their
way blessed them. King Drupada wished to give his
daughter Krsna in marriage to Arjuna. The news that
the nda as were burned to death in the palace of
wax grieved Drupada. Yethe had made arrangements for
a trial of strength by Heroes at the Svayamvara. A
tremendous bow was got ready and installed on the
and a machine constructed which was kept
suspended in the air. The target was placed inside
the machine. And then Drupada spoke thus: “My
daughter shall be married to him who will bend the
bow and with the first arrow hit the target placed
(M.B., Adi Parva, Chapter 155.
Verse 11). Great warriors like Duryodhana, Karna,
iSupala, Sirhgumara took their seats in the marriage
hall. All the kings failed even to lift the bow up. Ultimately Arjuna lifted the bow and hit the target very
easily. Pafcali put the wedding garland on Arjuna’s
neck. When the Pandavas returned to their mother
with Paficali in the evening the mother from inside her
Foom said: ‘*‘What you have got today, my sons, you
“J°Y among yourselves.” Kuntl said this under the
y, Pression that what her sons had got was some
Dhiksa. At any rate, in obedience to the above injuncinside the machine’’.
following story is attached to it.
ARJUNA
tion of the mother Paficali became wife to the five
Pandavas. (M.B., Adi Parva, Chapters 190, 191).
16) Arjuna at Indraprastha. The svayamvara of Paricali
broadcast news about the whereabouts of the Pandavas.
Dhrtarastra brought them back to Indraprastha, and
installed them ina new palace built at the place called
Khandavaprastha. (Indraprastha) . Dharmaputra ruled
a part of the country with Indraprastha as capital.
Narada went there once and advised the Pandavas to
guard themselves against mutual quarrels as the five of
them claimed one and the same woman as wife. ‘Thenceforth it was set forth that Pancali would live with each
husband in turn for one year. It was also settled that
during a particular year if any other husband than the
one whose turn it was to live with Paficali saw her the
intruder was to go on a pilgrimage for one year.
Once abrahmin came to the palace complaining that
his cows were stolen by thieves, and Arjuna promised to
help him. Arjuna did so without remembering that all
his weapons were stored in Dharmaputra’s palace. That
year Paficali was living with Dharmaputra. Forgetting
the fact Arjuna went to Dharmaputra’s palace, got his
weapons and helped the brahmin. For thus breaking
the rule Arjuna left his palace ona pilgrimage for one
year.
17A) Arjuna married Ul iipikd and Ciirdigada. Arjuna
with his bow and arrows went into the forest. Many
brahmins followed him. Arjuna reached the banks of
Ganga and entered the waters for a bath. Here Arjuna
was attracted by Ulipika, daughter of the Naga King
and he married her. A son was born to them called Iravan. After visiting places like A gastyavatam, Vasisthagir!
Arjuna reached “Manalur. He married Citrangada,
daughter of Citrangada, King of Manalur. After a stay
of three months there he went southwards. Citrangad@
gave birth to a son named Babhruvahana:
17B ) The mark on Arjuna’s flag is Hanilman, and the
Arjuna, once during 4
tour of the country was much surprised to see the Dam
constructed by Sri Rama from Rameévara to Lanka.
He also felt that it was not at all proper on the part
of Sri Rama to have sought the help of monkeys t0
construct the dam. Sri Rama could have made a dam
with arrows. Arjuna put this question to a great
scholar (Pandit) who was sitting nearby reading the
Ramayana. Neither the Pandit nor the other brahm1”5
gathéred there could give a convincing answer to AI’
juna’s doubts. Then a monkey child went up to Arjun4
and told him with pride that a dam made of arrows
would have broken when the monkeys walked on itArjuna said then, “no, no, ho monkey will be able t
break the dam built with Rama’s arrows; which monkey
will break.a dam of arrows made even by me ?’’ And;
a debate began about the subject. The monkey and
Arjuna agreed to a bet that if a monkey broke the da”
made by Arjuna he would end his life by jumping int?
fire, and if the monkey could not break the dam it
would for ever be Arjuna’s slave. Arjuna constructé
a dam with arrows. And, as soon as the monkey 5¢
foot On 1t 1t was broken. Arjuna tried again. Thoug
now It caused some efforts on the part of the monkey
the dam broke this time also, Arjuna was thus left wit
no alternative but to die hy jumping into fire an
fire was accordingly lit. Before Arjuna jumped into t
firs a brahmin boy, who was bathing in the river 14”

ARJUNA 51
upto Arjuna and told him that his attempt at self
annihilation was not justified as the bet was made without an arbiter. When Arjuna who was wedded so
much to truth brushed aside this argument and got
ready to end his life the boy said : “If you are so very
insistent about it you (Arjuna and the monkey) compete once again with me as arbiter. This suggestion of
the boy was accepted. The monkey child tried its best
to break the dam, but it failed. It developed its body
to the size of a mountain and jumped on the dam.
Even then it did not break. Then he ran up to the boy
who was acting as arbiter and prostrated at his feet
crying ‘Ramacandra’. At the same.moment Arjuna
also prostrated before the boy crying ‘Sri Krsna, slave
to devotees’. The boy asked both of them to get up,
and after admonishing them for their conceit gave them
good advice. He also asked the monkey child to keep
his word by remaining as the emblem of Arjuna’s flag.
(The monkey, boy was actually Haniman and the
brahmin boy Sri Krsna).
17 C) Arjuna married Subhadra. Arjuna went to the holy
place called Saubhadratirtha and redeemed the woman
named Varga from the curse she was labouring under.
., (See Varga). Arjuna continued hisjourney and reached
Gokarna and Prabhasa tirtha, where he met Gada,
brother of Sri Krsna. Gada described to Arjuna the
great beauty of his sister, Subhadra. Arjuna went to
Dvaraka and paid his respects to Sri Krsna. A few days
later the yadavas celebrated a great festival at mount
Raivataka. Arjuna went there disguised as a Sanny4Asin
and forcibly took away Subhadra with him with the
permission of Sri Krsna. Though the yadavas got ready
for a fight they were ultimately pacified, and Subhadra
was married to Arjuna. (M.B., Adi Parva, Chapter,
17D) Brahmin boy saved. When once Arjuna was in
Dvaraka with Sri Krsna a brahmin appeared on the
scene lamenting that his child died as soon as it was
born. Nobody paid any heed to this, and then Arjuna
rose up and assured protection to the next child to be
born to the brahmin and asked him to retum home in
peace. Arjuna also vowed that he would end his life
by jumping into fire if he failed to protect the next
the brahmin. a
ee et for the delivery of his wife approached the
brahmin took Arjuna home. Arjuna made the house
secure by making an enclosure with his arrows. Yet
the child died; not only that, at the time of birth itself its body disappeared. And, the brahmin Neape
insults on Arjuna, who looked very foolish. Rendere
thus an object of ridicule Arjuna began to make a nts
for him to jump into. At this Sri Krsna =ppean De
fore Arjuna and prevented him from jumping into ; .
And then both Krsna and Arjuna went to Visnuloka
‘a ubmitted the case of the brahmin to him. Visnu
ne . “Oh! Krsna and Arjuna, it was I who took
cae a h i boys for the pleasure of seeing you
Y "t may immediately return with the brahAnd Krsna and Arjuna returned with the
e brahmin, who now felt very happy.
Dagama Skandha, Chapter 89). .
Khandava forest. While Krsna and Arjuna
heir days on the banks of river Yamyna
n Agni Bhagavan (the fire-god)
Khandava forest as food to
away the b
both here.
min boys.
boys to th
(Bhagavata,
17E) Burning of
were spending t
in the summer seaso
‘requested them to give the
ARJUNA
him. (See Khandavadaha). Arjuna agreed to oblige
Agni Bhagavan, who presented to Arjuna the bow
called Gandiva, a white horse and many other powerful arrows. When Agni began burning the forest, Indra
sent a heavy shower of rain. By creating a tent with
arrows Arjuna saved the forest from the rain. Arjuna
killed Taksaka’s wife, cursed the Na ga called A¢vasena
and saved Maya, the architect of the Asuras who was
put up in the forest. Indra was pleased and gifted many
divine arrows to Arjuna. Maya gave the famous conch,
Devadattam to Arjuna. By now the one year of the
pilgrimage of Arjuna was over and he returned to
Indraprastha. (M.B., Adi Parva, Chapters 233-239).
17P) Fight between Arjuna and Syi Arsna. (See Galava,
para 4).
18) Again to the forest. Maya, who escaped death in
Khandava forest, in his great gratitude, went to Indraprastha, and with the permission of Dharmaputra built
for the- Pandavas an exceptionally beautiful palace.
And then the Pandavas made the conquest of all the
earth, and after killing enemy kings like Jaradsandha,
the Kimpurusas, the Hadakas, Sigupala, Kurundha and
Bhagadatta returned to Idraprastha and performed
the Rajasiiya yajfia. The Kauravas who got jealous at
this went on a visit to Indraprastha. When they entered the palace built by Maya they were put into many
a ludicrous situation. (See Sabhapravega). Insulted
and humiliated they returned to Hastinapura and
challenged the Pandavas to a game of dice, and in the
game the Pandavas lost not only their kingdom and
other riches, but P4aficdli as well. Duééasana dragged
Paficali and stripped her of her clothes in the royal
assembly and thus mercilessly insulted her. According
to the terms and condition agreed to with reference to
the game of dice, the Pandavas had to lead forest life
for twelve years and live for one year incognito. The
Pandavas again started for the forest. (M.B., Sabha
Parva).
19) Pandavas in Kamyaka forest: A number of brahmins
also accompanied the Pandavas to the forest. The noble
brahmin, Saunaka consoled the aggrieved Dharmaputra in the Dvaitavana. Dharmaputra felt worried
that he could not feed the brahmins who accompanied
him into the forest. Paficali prayed to the Sun-God,
and he gave the Aksayapatra to her. (See Aksyapatra) .
And, after this the Pandavas, along with the brahmins,
entered the Kamyaka forest. (M.B., Aranya Parva,
Chapter 36).
20) Arjuna secured divine arrows. Dharmapuira asked
Arjuna to do tapas in the Himalayas and _ thus secure
divine arrows. Accordingly Arjuna went south and saw
Indra in the Indrakila mountain. Indra gave him
boons. There Arjuna killed Mikdasura. And, then
Arjuna went to Mount Kailasa and pr ayerfully concentrated -his mind on Siva. Siva appeared in the guise of
a forest dweller. (See Pagupatastra). After that he got
the Dandastra from Yama, Pasastra from Varuna and
Antardhanastra from Kubera. (M.B., Vana Parva,
Chapters 37-41).
21) Arjuna in Indraloka. Indra, who was so very pleased that Arjuna got so many divine arrows deputed his
charioteer, Matali, to bring Arjuna to Devaloka, and
at Devaloka he learned more about archery and music.
The Apsara women forgot themselves when they saw
the exceptionally handsome Arjuna. Urvagi, mad with

ARJUNA
love, sent her messenger Citrasena to Indra. Being told
about Urvasi’s love Arjuna closed both his ears with
hands, and reminded the messenger of Urvagi’s maternal position with reference to him. Urvaéi cursed and
turned Arjuna into an eunuch. Indra consoled Arjuna
by assuring him that Urvaéi’s curse will turn out to be
of great benefit to him. Afterwards Arjuna stayed in
Devaloka for a few days with Citrasena, and during
the period he killed Nivatakavaca and Kalakeya.
Arjuna became a friend of Maharsi Lomaga, who had
gone to Devaloka to see Indra. Promising Arjuna that
he would protect Dharmaputra Lomaga returned to the
earth. Arjuna left the Kamyaka forest and returned to
his brothers after an absence for five years. He met the
brothers at Mount Gandhamadana. (M.B., Vana Parva,
Chapters 42-47) .
22) Procession. At last a witty and humorous brahmin
went to Dbrtarastra and dilated upon the hardships
being suffered by the Pandavas, and Duryodhana and
others were extremely pleased and happy to hear it.
Yet, they shed crocodile tears. But, Duryodhana was
in a mighty hurry to see with his own eyes the pitiable
plight of the Pandavas. On the pretext of going out for
hunting Duryodhana and others with the permission of
Dhrtarastra, Started for the forest with a number of
attendants. 8,000 chariots, 30,000 elephants, thousands
of infantry soldiers, 9,000 horses, merchants, ornaments,
courtesans and thousands of hunters formed this procession into the forest. Just like roaring winds during
the rainy season the Procession caused thunderous noise.
Duryodhana approached the pool in the Dvaita forest
and waited at a distance. (M.B., Aranya Parva, Chapter 239, Verses 25-29),
Duryodhana and attendants put up tents in the forest.
The Gandharvas obstructed Duryodhana, and he and
the Gandharva called Citrasena clashed with each
other. Duryodhana was made a prisoner. Arjuna came
On the scene and released him. And, thus humiliated
Duryodhana returned to Hastinapura with the attendants. (M.B., Aranya Parva, Chapters 239-253),
23) Arjuna los} consciousness. While once Paficali was
alone King J ayadratha forcibly took her away. Within
seconds the Pandavas confronted Jayadratha and regained Paficali. Jayadratha and his men were killed. The
Pandavas, who were very weary and tired walking in
the forest felt extremely thirsty. N akula, at the instance
of Dharmaputra climbed a tree and looked around and
sighted a pool of clear water. When Nakula went to the
pool and began to draw water a voice from above was
heard saying as follows : “Do not be so very daring.
This is my ancestral wealth. If you answer My questlons you may not only drink the water but also take
some with you’’. Without paying any heed to this warning Nakula drank water from the pool, and lo ! he fel]
down unconscious immediately. Sahadeva who went to
the pool in search of Nakula and drank water from the
Pool also met with the same fate as Nakula. Arjuna
and Bhima also had the same fate at the pool. Lastly
Dharmaputra went to the pool and understanding what
appened to his brothers requested permission to drink
water. At once a Yaksa appeared and brought the bro.
thers of Dharmaputra back to consciousness. In fact,
the Yaksa was none other than Yamadharmadeva. (For
luestions and answers of the Yaksa see Dharmaputra, )
B., Aranya Parva, Chapters 312-315).
ARJUNA
24) Life incognito. Now the twelve years of forest life
being over the Pandavas decided to spend the one year
of life incognito in the Virata palace. Arjuna disguised
himself and deposited his clothes and weapons in the
hollow of a Sami tree in the forest. And the Pandavas
in various disguises reached the Virata palace. They
assumed false names - Dharmaputra as Kanka, Bhima
as Valala, Arjuna as Brhannala, Nakula as Granthika
and Sahadeva as Aristanemi and Draupadi as Malini.
When the life incognito of the Pandavas for one year
was about to expire a rumour reached the Kauravas
that the Pandavas were at the Virata capital, and the
Kauravas thought that the Pandavas will appear on the
scene if a war was fought against King Virata. The
Kauravas, with this object in view, lifted the cows of
Virata and that led to war. Uttara, the prince of Virata
and they started for the warlicld. At the sight of the
massive army of the Kauravas Uttara got frightened
and tried to run away from the field. But Brhannala
tightly bound Uttara to the chariot, drove it very fast
to the forest, took back from the hollow of the Sami
tree his weapons and returned to the battle-field. The
Kauravas were absolutely defeated in the war and they
took to their heels. They understood that the very clever
and terrible warrior in disguise was Arjuna himself. But,
by the time the period of the Pandavas life incognito
was over. The king of Virata, greatly pleased over this
victory in war gave his daughter, Uttara’ in marriage to
Abhimanyu, son of Arjuna. ( -B., Virdta Parva).
25) Preparations jor war. After the forest life and life
incognito the Pandavas returned. The Kauravas refused to give them half the Kingdom. Sri Krsna, on behalf
of the Pandavas, implored that half the kingdom or five
war was perforce decided upon. Duryodhana went to
Krsna at Dvaraka to request for support in war. Krsna,
who favoured the Pandavas lay in false sleep as he did
not want to fight against them. Duryodhana sat at the
head of Krsna. Arjuna, who came after some time sat
at the feet of Krsna and remained there standing:
Awakening from sleep, it was Arjuna whom Krsna saw
first. After the greetings were over with Arjuna, Krsna
saw Duryodhana also. Between Krsna without any arms
and the armed forces of Krsna, Arjuna chose Krsna
the impending war, (Udyoga Parva).
Both the Parties were encamped in Kuruksetra ready for war. Sri Krsna acted as Charioteer to
Arjuna. He Stopped the chariot in between the opposing
armies. Arjuna felt deep anguish to find his own people
arrayed on the Opposite side for war. Reluctant to kil
relations, elders, friends and preceptors Arjuna _ lai
down his arms in the chariot. Then did Ki'sna instruct
him in Karmayoga (the philosophy of action), That
instruction and advice of Krsna is the world-famous
Bhagavad Gita, The Gita cleared off Arjuna’s illusions
and he praised the Lord, Sri Krsna, who revealed his
all comprehensive form (Visvaripa) to Arjuna.
On the first day of the war Arjuna fought a duel with
hisma, and the second day he fought the Kaurav2
forces with exceptional prowess, And then Arjuna pre-

ARJUNA
vented Krsna from killing Bhisma. But, the Kaurava
army faced defeat that day. On the third day Arjuna
defeated Bhisma, A$vatthama, Trigartta, Bhagadatta
and others. Thereupon a really fierce fight began. The
war lasted for 18 days. The important incidents during
the 18 days can be summarised as follows :-—
(1) Fierce fight between Arjuna and Bhisma.
(2) Fight between Arjuna and Aégvatthama.
(3) Arjuna destroyed the Kaurava army.
(4) Iravan, son of Arjuna, was killed.
(5) Arjuna fought against Drona and Sugarmi.
(6) Took the vow to kill Bhisma.
(7) Sikhandi prompted to kill Bhisma.
(8) On the appearance of Sikhandi the Kaurava army,
took fright and fled in great disarray.
(9) Arjuna fought a duel with Dugéasana.
(10) Duel with Bhagadatta.
(11) Duel again with Bhisma.
(12) Bhisma fainted and fell on the ground.
(13) Duel again with Dusgasana.
(14) With Sikhandi in the front made an attack on
Bhisma.
(15) Arjuna discharged three arrows to serve as pillow
to Bhisma who, dislodged from the Chariot, was
lying on a bed of arrows.
(16) Coo] water sprinkled on the face of Bhisma with
the aid of divine arrows. .
(17) Fought against Drona and defeated his forces.
(18) Satyajit deputed to remain with Dharmaputra to
help him.
(19) Sudhanva killed.
(20) Again fought with Bhagadatta. .
(21) Supratika, the elephant of Bhagadatta killed.
(22) And after that, Bhagadatta also killed.
(23) Vrsaka and Acala killed by Arjuna.
(24) Sakuni defeated.
(25) Arjuna killed the three brothers of Karna and confronted Karna. .
(26) Abhimanyu, son of Arjuna, killed. |
(27) Hearing about the death of Abhimanyu, Arjuna fell
down unconscious. .
(28) Awakened, Arjuna vowed to kill Jayadratha.
(29) Arjuna performed Siva Puja.
(30) Arjuna dreamt that night to have paid homage to
Siva along with Krsna and that Siva gave him
divine arrows like Pasupata. .
(31) Marched forth routing the elephant regiment of
Durniarsana. a Biter
32) R Duésasana in fight. ; ;
33) cone fought .Drona, Kytavarma, Srutayudha,
Sudaksina, King of nie
34) Sudaksina killed in fight. —
135) Sralaiva Acyutiyu, Niyutayu, Ambastha and the
Mlecchas’ army killed.
(36) Vinda and Anuvinda killed.
house of arrows, on
Id converted into a
“a joan of the great Array of arrows.
defeated Duryodhana.
39) Fought the nine great warriors on the Kaurava
(40) Anjuna cut off the right hand of Bhirisravas at
the instance of Krsna. if Wise
f lavadratha with arrows.
m Ae ne ae thrown on the lap of
Jayadratha’s father.
oS
SESE aa >
ARJUNA
(42) Alambusa, King of Raksasas killed.
(43) Dandadhara killed with his elephant.
(44) Arjuna killed the six brothers of Susarma, viz.,
Satyasena, Candrasena, Mitrasena, Srutafijaya,
Sausruti and Mitradharmi
(45) Difference of opinion arose between Dharmaputra
and Arjuna about the failure to kill Karna, and
in the heat of excitement Arjuna called his elder
brother ‘thou’,
(46) Immediately repenting Arjuna drew sword to kill
himself. But, regained mental peace by begging
pardon of the brother. :
(47) Killed Vrsasena, son of Karna,
(48) Karna brought down Krsna’s crown by his arrow
resembling the face of the serpent. Enraged at this
Arjuna killed Karna.
(49) Killed Satyakarma, Satyestha and others.
(50) After bowing to Vyasa, Arjuna withdrew arrow.
(M.B., Bhisma, Drona, Karna, Salya and Sauptika
Parvas).
27) After the war. In the great war the Kaurava army,
to the very last man, was annihilated. The Pandavas
assembled together. Thoughts about the future came up.
Sri Krsna consoled the sorrowing Dharmaputra. As
desired by Vyasa, Krsna, Dharmaputra and others
returned to Hastinapura and took up the reins of
Soverning the country, and the idea of performing an
Agvamedha Yaga was seriously mooted. A King named
Marutta agreed to give money needed for the yajiia.
Arjuna defeated all enemy kings. (M.B., Santi Parva).
28) Death and rebirth of Arjuna. On his way back
after digvijaya Arjuna was killed by the arrows of his
son, Babhruvahana. Immediately did Uluipi, Arjuna’s
wile bring back to life her husband by Mrtasafijivani
mantra. Then Arjuna questioned Ulipi about the
reason for his son killing him, and also as to how she
happened to be present at the time. Ulipi described
the story of a curse in answer -io Arjuna’s querry.
(M.B., ASvamedha Parva, Chapter 79),
29) The story of the curse. Ulupi said : You shall not
get angry. Yes, all is for the best. In war you killed
Bhisma by unrighteous means, viz. with the help of
Sikhandi. On his death, the Astavasus and Ganga Devi
cursed you with hell. I told apout this curse to my
father, who begged the Vasus for redemption, and they
said that you would be redeemed from the curse when
your son; Babhruvahana, killed you. Accordingly he
has been brought here to kill you.
The above story pleased Arjuna. (A’vamedha Parva,
Chapter 81).
30) Asvamedham. Arjuna again defeated Meghasandhi,
the King of Magadha, Sakuniputra and others and
returned to Flastinapura, where the Asvamedha yajfia
was performed. The Yadava dynasty was extinguished
before long. Arjuna did all the rites due to them on
death. He grieved over the departure of Sri Krsna.
(Bhagavata, Skandha 11, Chapter 31). And then he
went to Indraprastha with the consorts of Krsna. On
the way dacoits overcame Arjuna and snatched away
some of the females. Arjuna felt very sad. Then Vyasa
appeared and told him that he would be strong and
powerful only in the presence of Krsna. (Agni Pur ana,
Chapter 15).
31) Pandavas’ journey to the other world. Now, it was
time for the Pandavas to journey to the other world,
=e
a — a rr ce ll Se — ™
TEE J T= ee —s ee a mk Se ele SL Se ee
Ne ye Sree Ca Set Sedan, Ceara ert unin: jivereirer sates SRS Se se re ee caste Sit UA dl emai aaa
A ti oe ll ts A i le ea ty a ° —_ _ sigs a ee —
SE es

ABIUNA 54 ARJUNAKA
aa Lit juncture that the Yadava dynasty ended 34) Origin of certain words. Towards the close of his |
naiie moh lear rape and nt of Krsna’s con- life Incognito, Arjuna went to the Sami tree to take @
fem Teneaal tan . a ae cr | save them, and out Gandiva kept in its hollow. Uttara also was |
ah a i . er and died. \rjuna, who lost with Arjuna. Then Arjuna revealed himself to Uttara,
On duce Ey Te cdders ae hig es ane = elaborated the meaning of his various names
ge ae ; 0 deposit repute ‘as lollows:—
bow, Gdndiva in the sea. and Arjuna did so. (Maha I sh A
ee 7 é all tell you my ten names. Arjuna, Phaleuna Jisnu,
prasthana Parva, Chapter I, Verses 1-42). The Panda- iriti, § A ; vos a aati
vas continued their (cmeen Yudhisthira leading aren, mt te "Dhaanive lta On ee
od Te ane the Himdlayas, ~ there Paficali expir- because even after having conquered all the lands and
Vatthisthies — fel chon ae Ww i* anicali expired first, amassed wealth I stand in the centre of righteousness i
more partial = Agua, The th a sa having been -.-.I am called Vijaya because in fights with haughty |
ibtitidy and then.&s ae vp a a their opponents I always succeed...... I amcalled Svetavahana )
ed that Sahadeva died Sa fee ‘ oe A asin because white horses are harnessed in war to my chariot —
and conceit. And, the others continued goin coal gene a, Pate ene ale she sje’
An emaciated dog was already with os Pa. Boone guna because I was born in the month of Phalguna an
during their journey. Nakula = the third a die, and rd "he = ‘eee Ee ne Sonny Gene
: o . ; ‘ . le, an m 1 t wit the ai ras I : * head crown ‘|
y: y Ug tyas 1 put on my he t
oe ee Ce at ei Naka) extreme con- glowing as Sun...I1 am called Bibhatsu by men and |
Yudhisthira said, was due to his having ete Devas because I never resort to revolting means during
day. After Proceeding a short distance fy ther Bhat : rnd pace are adept in using the bow, Gandiva. .«. |
also fell dead, and udhisthira thought to himself a on an —— a ae ere weal is |
that it was due to Bhima’s voraei . Bele tee pt colour as I do, and moreover |
Flesnaels care, " er at en ~~ = a only white (just and ethical) acts....I am called Jisnu, |
Yudhisthira to Svarga. But, he celiteed the flex avin sab onate oe unassailable and ee |
that he would not do oo witswe. 7: 4 bi 7 ae subjugate and conquer, and also because I am the son 0 |
behind. When Indra wee 4 5h that i a Indra...My father gave me the tenth name of Krsna |
were already there, in Svarga Yudhisthira aoe iia Pabnurbien hag = (Krsna=attractive)»
the chariotand reached Svarga. and he _arala (Malayalam ) |. |
find his brothers there a with PAficali, ke a4 ie of Ary a a _ |
prasthana Parva and Svargarohana) 86; Sons af ) a ) ie em (4) ‘tee are
32) The meani a ons YF Arjuna. Srtakiriti, Iravan, Babhruvahan®
i} we of the word, Arjuna, Abhimanyu. |
Suklagubhrasucigveta- ARJUNA : I. A son of Emperor, N imi. al a
Visadagvetapandavah One Arjuna, son of emperor Nimi, got philosophic i
Avadatassito gaur i advice from a Muni named Asita (Brahmandapuran® |
Valakso dhavalo’ rjunah Chapter 47).
Harinah pandurah. — (A at ARJUNA III. (See Karttaviryarjuna). he
(2) The plant called Virataru. marakosa) ARJUNA IV. A member of Yama’s assembly. T
adisarjo virataru- as se are ;ompigaittinon, Trnaka, Sahadev™
Rindradruh kakubhor’r h isva, Sagva, Kréagva, aSabindu and Mahigvar®
(3) Gem * rjunah, (Do) (M.B., Sabha Parva, Chapter 8, Verse Lets an
Saspam blatrnarh ch; ARJUNABHIGAMANAPARVA. A sub Parva in Mahé
rr ghaso | E
yavasam trnamarjunam, (D bharata. (See Mahabharata), is
(4) Indra. 9) ARJUNAKA. A hunter. Dharmaputra was called to oF
side by Bhisma his body torn by arrows in fight and 0
33) Synonyms used in the Mahabha
q oe abharata 0 A we ,
harata, Bhimanuja, Bhimasenanuja, Bib ela
= he
nala, Sakhamrgadhvaj a, Sakraja, Sakranandana, Sakra- may be summarised as follows :—
sunu, Sakratmaja, Sakrasuta, Svetaé j
vetavaha, D > _dvetasva, Svetahaya Once, the s f tam
Gandivadhanvas Garin Dhanatijaya, Gandivabhrt, died on meen of waketlie te eam os oe and
Indraripa, Indrasuta, Daan Candivi, Gudakeéa, brought before Gautami the sake His object was ys
Jisnu, Kapi dhvaia, Benito “te aiarala, 22 — i immediately. But the Serpent proved it innoce 4
varadhva; ) ara, Kapi- endl hee te
sgl rue hsurmirla, —2Y Bling tat he boy emp and pom
tavan, " Kirity Kr i, Saucaveys, Kiritabhrt, Kiri- scene and explained that ers) = | he |
Waker drasiny, Maheadsaiee ae a ale of Death. And, it was the child who wee sesponsib € F
andava, Pand ) ara, Pakasasani, the cause of d F
halguna Saw ce, FE andunandana, Partha, Paurava, birth of the ina” ae Gautami was the cause el Ps J
; ? anjanasutanuja, Savyasaci, Tapatya, were » Ultimately Gautami herself ass a’
ridasegvars ~ ; 7
“Svaratmaja, Vanaradhvaja, Vanaraketana, Vana- ay for the sin. Bhisma consoled Dhat iP
raketu, Vanar
é avar = : :
Vasavatmai. = yaketana, Vasavaja, Vasavanandana, th “
Ja, Vasavi, Vijaya. € story, the cause for every effect was the ch

ARJUNAVANAVASAPARVA
ARJUNAVANAVASAPARVA. A sub parva in Maha-
-bharata. (See Mahabharata) . 7
ARKKA I. A synonym of the Sun. (See SURYA).
ARKKA II. A king of olden days. (M.B., Adi Parva,
Chapter 1, Verse 236). :
ARKKA III. The royal sage Rsika was Arkka, the
Asura, reborn. (M.B., Adi Parva, Chapter 67, Verses
ARKKAPARNA. Kagyapa’s son by his wife Muni. He
was a Devagandharva. (M.B., Adi Parva, Chapter 65,
Verse 43). _
ARTHAM. From the forehead of Mahavisnu a golden
lotus grew up from which Sri Devi was born. Dharmarthas (Dharma = righteousness and artha = wealth) also
were born from Sri. ‘From the forehead of Visnu,
sprung up a golden lotus and His wise spouse Sri arose
there from and oh, Pandava, righteousness and wealth
came into being from Sri”. (Bhasabharata, Santi Parva,
Chapter 59, Stanzas 130 & 131) 7
ARUJAM. A sect among the Raksasas. (M.B., Vana
Parva, Chapter 285, Verse 2). .
ARULMOLITHEVAR. The Saiva text of the south is
called Tirumura, and it contains twelve songs. The
first seven of those songs were composed by Tirujfianasambandha, Tirunavukkarf$ar and Sundaramirti. The
twelfth song is called Periyapurana composed by
Arulmolithevar. He is also called Sekhilar. Tevar was
prime minister (A.D. 1063-1112) of Cola. (Some great
lives). '
UNA I,
“ Birth. Son of Kagyapa by Vinata. Kasyapa, son
of Brahma, married Vinata and Kadri, and being so
much pleased by their services he gave them boons.
Kadrii got the boon to have 1000 naga (serpent) sons,
and Vinata to have two sons more powerful and vital
than the sons of Kadri. After this Kasyapa went into
the forest again for Tapas. After a period, Kadri gave
birth to 1000 eggs and Vinata to two. Both the mothers
kept their eggs in pots so that they were in the So
temperature. After 900 years the pot broke Up ant
Kadri had her 1000 sons. Vinata felt pained ssi
and opened one of her pots. A child only “crs O a
eas gag lg ig eee a
Parva, Chapter 16, Verses 9- in alt ads ale
years the other 8B of ll am €
ing s rged. He was Garuda.
2) Goal. Wale Rama and Lalmmans wandered
in the forest searching for Sita ce ite detecians
and disabled Jatayu. Jatayu Sains. marred, tLe
as BROWS | acacia ae wives, Vinata delivered
iin stoi ag Aruna. Sampati was Aruna’s
eve mone, Garey Ayu) the younger. (Valmiki
elder son and he , (Jat y Cute 14), Agni Parana,
ee ag 9 omnes to Garuda and Aruna as the sons
of Vinata. - fact of Vinata forcing
| ther. ‘The. fac :
3) Ar ane at om prematurely and ae han eae
out of it with only a half-developed body has been
O Oo at tne
mentioned above. Aruna got et oe slave of Kadra for
to
mother and cursed her a i ion
Garuda wou
el nag ere her to wait for 500 years so that
slavery. £
sficient son like himther physically deft
self might M4 patel After pronouncing this curse Aruna
ARUNA
“rose to the sky. This curse was the reason for Vinata’s
becoming a slave of Kadri. (M.B., Adi Parva, Chapter
4) Aruna became charioteer- of Sun. The Sun and the
Moon betrayed to the Devas Rahu, who waited at the
entrance of Devaloka to snatch off the N ectar (Amrtam)
got at the churning of the sea of milk (Ksirabdhi).
Thenceforth Rahu does often swallow the Sun and the
Moon. That phenomenon is called theeclipse (of the Sun
or Moon. Strya-grahana and Candra-grahana). Enraged
by these frequent attacks of Rahu, the Sun-God began
ed, but would go on their own way
achieved, the Sun-God began burning so Virulently as
to destroy all living forms, and the Devas were frightened by this and took refuge in Brahma. Brahma called
Aruna and asked him to stand as charioteer in front
of the Sun-God everyday so that the
might be reduced. From that day onwards Aruna has
Adi Parva, Chapter 24, Verses 15-20).
5) = of . yeni, wife of Aruna delivered two
sons, Sampati and Jatayu. (M.B., Adi Parva. C
68, Verse TL). ok ——
6) Aruna assumed Jemale form. Silavati, the chaste
woman, once did naked Tapas to redeem her husband,
Ugratapas from the Consequences of a curse. The object
of her tapas was to prevent the next dawn (Sunrise).
Owing to the intensity of her tapas the Sun ceased to
ha, therefore, assumed female form and sat among the Deva women, and
the beautiful ‘female’ kindled erotic sentiments in Indra
and he enjoyed a night with ‘her’. Also, a son was born
to them. And, before the day dawned Aruna, at the instance of Indra entrusted the child to Ahalyadevi and returned to join duty as the Sun-God’s charioteer, (Aruna,
while he acted as Indra’s wife was called Arunidevi).
the last night. This evoked the desire in the Sun to see
Aruna in female form. Aruna did so, and the Sun enjoyed her. This also resulted in the birth of a son, who
too was, at the instance of the Sun, entrusted to Ahalyadevi. Ahalyaddevi brought both the children with ‘tender
love, which Gautama muni, her husband did not like.
He cursed them and turned them into monkeys. After
some time Indra went to Ahalya to see his child and he
was told the story of Gautama’s curse. Indra searched
out both the monkeys. In view of the elder one having a
long tail he was Called Bali ( Vali) and the neck of the
second one being very beautiful, he was named Sugriva.
At that time, Rksaraja, the monkey King of Kiskindha
was very unhappy because he had no sons. He came to
know of Bali and Sugriva, and requested Indra to give
both the monkeys to him as sons. Indra gladly obliged
him. Indra blessed Bali to the effect that half the
strength of anyhody who attacked him would Be added
to his own natural power. Indra then sent him and
Sugriva to Kiskindha.
7) Synonyms. Sirasiita, Andru, Aruna, Kasyapi, Garudagraja.

ARUNA II
ARUNA II. A king of the solar dynasty, and father of
Iniganku. (Devi Bhagavata, Saptama Skandha). .
ARUNA III. A sage in ancient India. A community of
Rsis was denoted by this name. Those Rsis were called
Arunas. The Ajas, Prégnis, Sikatas, Ketus and Arunas—
they attained Svarga by self study. (M.B., Santi Parva,
Chapter 26, Verse 7).
ARUNA IV. A serpent. Karkkotaka, Vasuki, Taksaka,
PrthuSsravas, Aruna, Kufijara, Mitra, amkha, Kumuda,
Pundarika, and the chief of serpents, Dhrtardstra.
(M.B., Mausala Parva, Chapter 4, Verse 15),
ARUNA V. A Rsi. Taittariya Aranyaka refers to him
as born from the flesh of Brahma at the time of creation.
ARUNA VI. A Danava (Asura) born in the dynasty of
Vipracitti. He did tapas for long years repeating the
Gayatri mantra, and got from Brahma the boon not to
die in war. Becoming very arrogant on account of this
boon he left Patala (nether region) for the earth and
deputed a messenger to challenge Indra for war. At that
time a heavenly voice called out that as long as Aruna
did not give up the Gayatri he could not be worsted in
war. Then the Devas sent Brhaspati to Aruna to make
him give up Gayatri. Aruna questioned Brhaspati as to
why he of the enemy camp had come to him (Aruna).
Behaspati replied : “You and I are not different; both
of us are worshippers of Gayatri Devi. Being told so
Aruna gave up worship of Gayatri Devi, and she felt
offended at this and sent thousands of beetles against
him. Thus, without fighting Aruna and his army were
extinguished. (Devi Bhagavata).
ARUWNA VII. A son of Narakasura. When Narakasura
was killed Aruna along with his six brothers fought
against Sri Krsna and was killed.
ARUNA I. An Apsara woman born of Pradha, wife of
Kasyapa. Pradha and K\asyapa had the following children. Alambusa, Misrakesi, Vidyutparna, Tilottama,
Raksita, Rambha and Manorama. (M.B., Adi Parva,
Chapter 65, Verses 90, a1)
ARUNA II. A tributary of the river Sarasvati. (M.B.,
Vana Parva, Chapter 83, Verse LD)
ARUNASAMGAMAM. The place where Aruna falls
=“ (M.B., Salya Parva, Chapter 43, Verses
ARUNDHATI I. Wife of Sage Vasistha.
(1) Birth. She was born as the daughter of Karddama
Prajapati and Devahiiti. (See Vasistha)..
(2) Other information. (1) Once Arundhati got suspicious about the character of Vasistha and as a result
cihacaaien” wee chaste husband her beauty
suifered a set-Dack. ‘D., Adi Pq
Verses 27-29). tva, Chapter 232,
2) Arundhati shone forth in Brahma? i
ba Devis like, Prthvi, Hri, Svahakirti, Sura ong Qa
(M.B., Sabha Parva, Chapter 11, Verse 41). |
(3) She outshone all other chaste women in devotion to
her husband. She owed her Sreat power to her chastity
and service of her husband. (M.B., Aranya Parva
4) The seven great Rsis once offered her an ho
seat. (M.B., Vana Parva, Chapter 226, Verse —_
(5) There is a story in the Mahabharata of how Siva
Once blessed Arundhati. While the seven preat Rsis
were staying at the Himalayas it did Not rain consecutively for twelve years, and the Munis suffered much
without either roots or fruits to eat. Then Arundhati
ARVAVASU
began a rigorous tapas, and Siva appeared before her
disguised as a brahmin. Since, due to the failure of
rains, Arundhati had no food with her. She cooked food
with some cheap roots and served the gucst with it,
and with that it rained profusely all over the land. Siva
then assumed his own form and blessed Arundhati,
and from that day onwards it became a sacred spot.
(M.B., Salya Parva, Chapter 48, Verses 38-54).
(6) Arundhati once pointed out to Vrsdarbhi the evils
of receiving remuneration (fee). (M.B., Anu$dsana
Parva, Chapter 10, Verse a0 )..
(7) On another occasion she spoke about the secret
principles of ethics among others. (M.B., Anugasana
Parva, Chapter 130, Verses 3-] oF
(8) Onceall the Devas eulogized Arundhati and Brahma
blessed her. (M.B., AnuSasana Parva, Chapter 130,
Verses 12 and 13).
(9) Arundhati and Vasistha did tapas at the sacred
Sarasvati tirtha and entered into Samadhi. (M.B.,
Vana Parva, Chapter 130, Verse 1,
ARUNDHATI II. A wife of Kala (God of death)-
Arundhati, Vasu, Yami, Lamha, Bhanu, Marutvati,
Samkalpa, Muhurta, Sadhya and Vigva are the ten
wives of Kala. ( Visnu Purana, Part 1, Chapter 15).
ARUNDHATI VATAM. A
yaga. (M.B., 84, Verse 41).
ARUNI. given when he attended
Indra’s assembly disguised as female. (See Aruna).
ARUNODA. A river flowing through the wrod of
Plaksa, one of the seven islands of ancient times. The
wind around ten yojanas of Plaksa is very fragrant
because it carries the divine fragrance being emitte
always from the bodies of Parvati and her attendants:
who drink water from river Arunoda. (Devi Bhag2”
vata, Astama Skandha).
ARUPA. One of Daksa’s daughters, (M.B., Adi Parv4
Chapter 65, Verse 46).
ARUPATTIMUVAR. | (The sixty-three’s). In ancient
times there were sixty-three devotees of ivain the soul”
They were called N ayanaras and they have composé
many famous sacred songs. Prominent among them wel
Tirujfianasambandha, Tirunavukkaraga and Sundar@’
murti
ARVA. The son of Ripurhjaya. (Visnu Purana). -
ARVAVASU. An ancient Ascetic who had Law. a lum
nary in the Durbar hall of King Yudhisthira. The"
the Fandavas, when they arrived at ™
during their exile -
two ascetics Raibhya and Bhat
hermitages and lived here. A 80°,
named Yavakrita was born tu Bharadvaja. To Raib
bhya and his sons were learned men. Bharadvaja 4”
avakrita became ascetics, Yavakrita started doiné
penance with a view to get the boon of learning con
ing to him automatically without getting it direct!
from Brahmins. When his penance became severe Ine!
appeared and told him that the boon he asked for sae
an unpossibility and tried to dissuade him from }
attempt. Yavakrita was not willing to give up penant
Later Indra Came in the guise of a Brahmin to tP

ARYAMA
Banks of the Ganges and began to build a dam with
sand particles. Yavakrita said thatit was an impossible
task. Indra said that the desire of Yavakrita also was
as impossible as that. Still Yavakrita did not show any
intention of drawing back. Finally Indra granted him
the boon.
Yavakrita returned to the hermitage. Full of arrogance
he hankered after the daughter-in-law of Raibhya.
Raibhya plucked a tuft of hair from his head and Se
it as oblation in fire and created a giant who killed
Yavakrita. Bharadvaja felt sad and cursed Raibhya
that he would be killed by his son. Then with Yavakrita hejumped into the fire and died.
At that time Brhaddyumna, a Brahmin performed a
sacrifice. He invited Arvavasu and Paravasu as helpers.
As Paravasu was going along the forest he saw his father
covered with the hide of a deer and shot at him thinking him to bea deer. Hestealthily informed the matter
to Arvavasu. Arvavasu went to the forest completed the
funeral rites of his father and returned. Paravasu spread
the rumour everywhere that Arvavasu had murdered
his father. In the innocence of Arvavasu, nobody
believed. Everyone avoided him. He became sad and
forlorn and went to the forest and did penance to the
Sun. The Sun appeared before him and blessed him.
He returned and brought Yavakrita, Bharadvaja and
Raibhya to life again.
All these occurrences happened in this bath called
Madhubilasarngama. (Mahabharata, Aranya Parva,
The report of a conversation between this hermit, and
Sri Krsna who had been on his way to Hastinapura,
is given in the Mahabharata, Santi Parva, Chapter 336,
Stanza 7, Arvavasu also is counted among the hermits
who possessed the Brightness of Brahma like Rudra.
“Hermit Vasistha ! Now I shall give their names in
order. Yavakrita, Raibhya, Arvavasu, Paravasu, KakSivan, Aursija, Bala, Angiras, Rsimedha, Tithisuta,
Kanva, these are the Bright hermits, having the brightness of Brahma, lauded by the world and as bright as
Rudra, Fire and eee, Anusasana Parva,
Chapter 150, Stanzas 30, '
Avvawaga aa penance to the Sun for ae : a
The Sun-God came down from his way in the sky an
directions mentioned in the
gave him through Aruna_ re ) regardin
Kalpa (one of the six Sastras or ae = y ani
Saptami rituals. Arvavasu observed them strictly ani
d wealth. This story 1s
as a result he got children an .
given in Bhavisya Purana, Brahma Parva). Woenann
ARYAMA. One of the twelve Adityas Th elie
and Aditi. (Adityas=sons of Aditi). Ihe
:; = eo Mitra. Sakra, Varuna,
Adityas are, Dhata, Aryama, - oe 5 and
; ; an. Pasa, Savita, Tvasta an
Armhga, Bhaga Vivasvan, Chapter 65. Stanza 15).
Visnu. (M.B., Adi Parva, Gnhapter 09,
AMSU.
Améfga is sometimes called - nga (Solar
King of the Surya vam
“taut ke the werd VAMSAVALI (Genealogy) .
ANJA). A King of the Solar
—_ For genealogy see under
ASAMANJASA (
born to Sagara.
een
SAGARA. ; is birth in the Ramat bout his birth in ‘
hai HEE — ena a kind called Sagara in Ayodhya.
ce there Sa,
He te two women named KeSini and Sumati. For
*Tt was Mahavisnu who gave Daksa his
ASIKNI II
a long time they had no sons and so they went to the
Himalayas and started penance there in the mount of
Bhrguprasravana. After a hundred years Bhrgumaharsi appeared before them and pleased them thus : ‘Your
elder wife Kesini will give birth to a son who will
continue your dynasty and your second wife will give
birth to sixty thousand children”. After a few years
KeSini gave birth to Asamafijas and Sumati to a big
ball of flesh. That ball broke and sixty thousand babes
came out from it. ( Valmiki Ramayana, Balakanda,
Sarga 83).
2) Character of Asamatjas. He was a very cruel man
always tormenting people. He used to throw little children into the Saray river and stand on the banks of the
river enjoying the sight of the children dying drowning.
People hated him. His father, therefore, drove him out
of his palace. To this bad man was born Amsuman, a
King who became the favourite of the people. (Valmiki Ramayana, Balakanda, Sarga 38).
ASAMPREKSYAKARITVA. See under DEVASARMA
ASANI.
TV.
A holy hermit. While Sri
Hastinapura this hermit met him
Udyoga Parva, Chapter 83).
Krsna was going to
on the way. (M.B.,
ASIDDHARTHA. A minister of Dagaratha. ( Valmiki
Ramayana, Sloka 3, Sarga 7, Balakanda).
ASIKNI I. A river flowing through the Punjab in India.
This is called Candrabhaga and also Cinab (Cina).
The Rgveda also mentions about this. (M.B.. Bhisma
Parva).
ASIKNIIT. A wife of Daksa. Daksaprajapati, son of
Brahma, commenced creation with his own mind. When
he found that it was not conducive to the propagation
of the species he pondered over the subject once more
and decided to effect it by the sexual union of the male
and the female. He, therefore, married Asikni daughter
of Viranaprajapati. There is a version in the seventh
Skandha of Devi Bhagavata that Virani was born of
the left thumb of Brahma.* Then the virile Daksaprajapati begot by Asikni five thousand Haryasvas with
a view to propagating his species and the Haryagvas
also evinced great desire to increase their number.
Knowing this devarsi Narada of enchanting words
approached them and said “Oh, Haryaévas, I understand you, energetic young men, are going to continue
creation. Phew ! You are children who have not cared
to understand the ins and outs or ups and downs of this
earth and then how do you think you can create
people ? You are all endowed with the power to move
about on all sides without any obstruction and you are
only fools if you do not attempt so find out the limits
of this earth’’. Hearing this they started on a tour to
different sides of the earth to find out its boundaries.
Just like worms fallen into the ocean the Haryagvas have
- never returned so far.
When he found that the Haryagvas were lost the mighty
Daksa begot in the daughter of Virani a thousand sons
called Sabalagvas. They were also desirous of propagation but were also persuaded by the words of Narada to
follow the footsteps of their elder brothers. They discussed it among themselves and said ‘“he words of the
Maharsi are right. We must also follow the course taken
by our brothers. It is wise to commence creation after
wife, Asikni, when Daksa was doing penance in Vindhya. (Sasta Skandha, Bhagavata).

ASIKRSNA 58 ASMAKI
(3) He attended the coronation of Yudhisthira along |
with Narada and Vydsa. (Sloka 10, Chapter 53, Sabha |
Parva, M.B.). See under Devala for more information. |
ASITADHANVA. A king of Vedic times. Samkhyayana |
Sitra states that the Veda of Asuravidya was written by
this King.
ASITADHVAJA. Son of Kasyapa and Vinata. He was
present at a birthday celebration of Arjuna. (Sloka 72,
Chapter 122, Adi Parva, M.B.).
knowing the size of the earth.” They also went to
different sides and never returned just lke rivers falling
into the ocean. The loss of the Sabalagvas infuriated
Daksa and he cursed Narada.
Again to commence creation Daksa got of Asikni sixty
girls. Of these ten he gave to Dharmadeva, thirteen
to Kagyapa, twentyseven to Soma and four to Aristanem. I'wo were given to Bahuputra, two to Angiras
d t to the scholar Kréagva. Dharmadeva’s wives r
ee lle Vasa, Yami, Lamba, Bhanu, Marut- ASITAKASYAPA (DEVALA). For details see under
vati, Sankalpa, Muhiarta, Sadhya and Visva. Of Viéva JAIGISAVYA and Devala.. —
were born Viévedevas. Sadhya delivered the Sadhyas, ASITAPARVATA. A mountain situated on the banks ol
Marutva, the Marutvans and Vasu, Vasus. Bhanus were the river, Narmada, in the country of Anarta, (Sloka I, |
born of Bhanu. From Muhirta came Muhirtabhim4anis Chapter 89, ¥ ana Parva, M.B.). . _ - |
and from Lamba, Ghosa and from Yami, Nagavithi. ASMAKA I. Son born to Vasistha by the wife of Kalma- k
(Chapter 15, AnuSgdsana Parva, 1; Visnu Purana and sapada the King of Ayodhya. (See Iksvaku vamh§a) while
Skandha 6 Bhagavata). the King malmesnvens was walking rough the forest |
— , hunting he saw Sakti the son of Vasistha. As Saktidid not |
ASIKRSNA. Son of Asvamedhas, a King of the Lunar care to give room for the King, Kalmasapada wounded |
cynasty. (Bhagavata, 9th Skandha) , ; Sakti, who cursed the King and changed him to a Raksasa
ASILOMA. Prime Minister of Mahisagva. (Devi Bhaga- (giant). The giant immediately killed Sakti. After many
vata, Jth Skandha). years Vasistha blessed the King and changed the form of
ASIPATRAVANA. One of the notorious twentyeight the giant and gave him back his former shape. The King
hells. If you destroy forests without purpose you will go was delighted at having recovered his former shape. He
to this hell. (Chapter 6, Anugadsana Parva 2, Visnu took Vasistha to his palace. Madayanti the wife of the King
Purana). The Devi Bhagavata describes Asipatravana with his permission went to Vasistha and got with child.
like this : ‘Those who forsake their own natural duty Vasistha returned to the forest. [ven after the lapse of a
and go in for that of others are thrown into this hell; long period she did not give birth to the child. Madayantl
they die by the orderlies of Yama, the King of Death, who was miserable at» this, took an ‘agman’ (a small
There they will be whipped by a whip made of thorny cylindrical piece of the granite used to crush things place¢
herbs and as they run about with pain they will be on a flat square piece of granite) and crushed her stomach
followed and whipped. Crashing against the big stones with it and she delivered a son. As he was born by using
there they will fall fainting and the moment they wake ‘Asma’ he was named Aémaka. This King had built 4 |
up from the faint they will be Stabbed again. This city called Paudhanya. (M.B., Adi Parva, Chapter 176)
will be repeated. (Astama Skandha, Devi Bhagavata). ASMAKA II. Agmaka (m) is a place between the river
ASITA. A celestial maiden. She had taken - in the Godavari and Mahismati. Asmaka was a king ot a
roi « Parva, Mn of Arjuna. (Sloka 63, Chapter aq ine 4 - a the Kauravas on the Panda
122, Adi Parva, M.B.). side. (Karna Parva).
ine - Se ois . 1 7;
ASITA I. One of the Rtviks. of the Sarpasatra of Jana- . 7 oe eee ee aa —
mejaya, . ' 5 a
ie detauls, (1) The prominent Rtviks were Bhargava, ae nig Pao ae Be Dy thé
autsa, Jat, ngarava, Pingala, Vyasa, Uddilaka battle “by Abhimanin (Slokas 29 and 23. Chapter 37: |
_ramattaka, vetaketu, Asita, Devala, Narada, Parvata, Tinpen Parva eR yu. , Pp |
pes, Aa Kalaghats, Vatsya, Kohala, Deva- ASMAKI. Wife of Pracinva. Kagyapa was born (0
Parva, MB.) galya, Samasaurabha. (Chapter 53, Adi Marici, son of Brahma. To ateos eus born of is
fre diipes ak eae, Sumanty and Jamin We AS, daughter of Data, Vivasvan, Descending #
Shigavaray, *s of Wyasa. (Prathama Skandha, Devi Ayus, Nahusa, Yayati. Yayati had two wives Dev?
(3) “Asita, the sage, got by the blessing of Siva a son Yani and Sarmistha. The first was the daughter ©
named Devala. (Brahmavaivarta Purdina ) Sukra and the second the daughter of Vrsaparva.
‘Hlosoniyy Shain geplained to King Janaka the Devayani were b were born three sous, Dechy, Ant
Phtlosophy ofrebirth. (Brahmanda Purana, Chapter 47). druhyu and Paru. From Yadu Game the dynasty o
ASTTADEVALA. Yadavas and from Piru came the dynasty of Paurava*’
Main details. (1) He is one of those who spread the story Kausalya was the wife of Piru and her son was Jana
= sg ahabharata to the public. Vyasa wrote the Maha- mejaya. Piru conducted three ASvamedhas and secured
vetata into a lakh of books and first taught the great the title of Visvajita (conqueror of the world) and the?
_. to his son, the sage Suka. He later expounded it accepted the ascetic life and went to the forests. Jan*
thes other disciples. Narada spread the story among mejaya married Ananti alias Madhavi and got a soB
a ohn =e among the Pitrs, Suka among named Pracinva. Because he conquered all the /a?
(Sloka. oe and Yaksas and Vaigampayana among men. extending to the eastern horizon he got the nal
—s & 108, Chapter 1, Adi Parva, M.B.). Pracinva. Pracinva married a yadava girl of age
“) He was Present at the Sar i
d pasatra of Janamejaya. Asmaki and got nyati. (S to
(Sloka 8, Chapter 93, Adi Parva, M.B.). “ Chapter 95, Rai Parva, MB} woken &

ASMANAGARA 59
ASMANAGARA. A city of the nether world. The Uttara
Kamayana states that Ravana entered this city when he
was going home in the Puspaka Vimé&na (the aerodlane of ancient times) stolen from Kubera.
ASMAPRSTA(M). The sacred pond near Gaya known
as Pretasila. It is believed that if you perform obsequies
here even the sin of killing a brahmin would fade away.
ASMA. An ancient sage.
ASMOPAKHYANAM. This is called Asmagita also.
After the great Kuruksetra battle Vyasa spoke to
Dharmaputra to console him and the philosophy he
then expounded is called ASmopakhyanam. Once King
Janaka asked the great scholar ASman on the changes
that occur in Man as wealth comes and goes. ASman
then gave the King the same philosophy which Vyasa
gave to Dharmaputra and Asman’s oration to King
Janaka came to be known as Asmagita. (Chapter 28,
anti Parva, M.B.).
ASOKA I. The charioteer of Bhimasena. When Bhimascna was fighting a battle with Srutayu the King of
Kalinga, this charioteer brought the chariot to him.
(M.B., Bhisma Parva, Chapter 54, Stanzas 70 and 71).
ASOKA II. A minister of King DaSaratha. Daégaratha
had eight ministers. They were Jayanta, Dhrsti, Vijaya,
Asiddhartha, Arthasidhaka, Asoka, Mantrapala and
Sumantra. (Valmiki Ramayana, Balakanda, Sarga 7).
ASOKA III. A King of the family of the famous Asura
Agva. This king had been ruling over Kalinga. (Adi
Parva, Chapter 67, Stanzal4).
ASOKADATTA. Once the Vidyadhara (a class of
semi gods) named Asokavega was going through the sky,
when the hermit maids of Galavasrama (the hermitage
of Galava) were bathing in the Ganges. He hankered
after them. So the hermits cursed him. and changed
bim to a man. The name of Agokavega in his human
birth was Agokadatta. The oy Agokadatta in
z: scaritsagara 1s aS Io : . —
ea cag 5a pe. d a Brahmin named Govindasvami,
BBP | 1; 4= Te had two sons, Asokadatta
near the river Kalindi. Ne 4 :
- -e good men like their father.
and Vijayadatta. They Were'® famine in the country.
Once “there occurred a great temas
Govindasvami told his
Scarcity prevailed everywhere.
wife cy Faia bear to see the difficulties of our peo
ge
ervthing we have for famine relief
ov aie 5 ocas ee: live there.” His ae gi
wif ed to it and giving everything ior t e at q
lie agree dasvami with his wife and children starte
ae a way he met a hermit sage who had
for Kasi. J 7 world. He had his whole body besmearseUeRH Ce | ” With his tuft of hair and garment a
ed with as a f trees, he seemed to be Siva. Govin a”
of the salen { him and asked about the future
svami bowed bevore ‘ (hermit) said, “the future of
of his children. re But hae Vijayadatta will go away
our two sons is . e possible by the good-
— you. can ae is aS ee felt glad and sad at
ness of Asoka Beracriae the hermit they proceeded to
the same time. ed Kagi. There was a temple on the
Kasi. They a there and conducted worship in the
way. They pas shelter for the night under a tree outremple and a Other travellers also were there. are
side the temp es all went to sleep. Vijayadatta the
tired = ie ne ami caught cold. So he woke
second son 0
in th rely —_" began to shiver, because of
cold, he called his fathe1
and said, ‘‘Father, it appears
ASOKADATTA
that I have caught cold and I am shivering. I would
grow better if I could getsome fire. So please get some
twigs and make a fire. I don’t think, I may complete
this night otherwise’. They saw a fire close by. It was
in a burial-ground. Govindasvami took Vijayadatta to
that place where a dead body was burning.
Vijayadatta sat near the fire and warmed himself. In
the meanwhile he was talking to his father. He said,
‘Father, what is that round thing seen in the middle
of the fire ?” “That is the head of a dead body burning” said his father who was standing close by. He took
a burning faggot and hit at the head. The head broke
Into pieces and some viscous stuff from the head fell
into his mouth. There occurred a sudden change in
Vijayadatta. He became a fearful giant with huge
tusks and hair standing erect on the head. Somehow
or other he got a sword also. That giant took the burning head from fireand drank up all the viscous liguid
in it. With his tongue which looked like blazing fire he
licked the bones. Then he threw away the skull. Then
he approached his father with open mouth to swallow
him. “You ! giant, Don’t kill your father, come here !”?
a voice shouted to him from the burial-ground. Thus
Vijaya became a giant and disappeared. “Oh dear !
my child! my son! Vijayadatta !”, cried his father
and came away from the burial-place, and went to the
shelter of the tree and told his wife, son and others
everything that had happened. Stricken with grief
they all fell on the ground. All those who came io
worship in the temple gathered round them and tried
to console them. Among them was a merchant named
Samudradatta, a native of Kasi. He consoled Govindasvami and his family and took them to his house in
Kasi. He showed hospitality and gave them a separaie
place to live in. Noble men are kind to those who are
in distress. The great hermit had said that their son
would come back in due course. Hoping that such a
time would come soon Govindasvami and his family
dragged on their time. At the request of that wealthy
merchant they stayed there on. Asokadatta got his
education there. When he grew up to a youth, he got
physical training. He became such an expert in wrestling and other modes of fighting that nobody on earth
could overcome him. During a festival there was a
contest in wrestling. A renowned wrestler had come
from the south to take part in the contest. In the contest which took place in the presence of Pratapamukuta,
the King of Kasi; the wrestler challenged every wrestler in the country and had overthrown each one of
them. Having heard from the merchant Samudradatta,
the King sent for ASokadatta and put him against the
wrestler from the south. A very serious fight began
between the two. They grappled each other with firm
and resolute grips. The audience was struck with wonder at the variety of the modes of grappling and twisting and turning they exhibited. Applause came from
everywhere. The fight lasted for a very long time.
Finally Asokadatta threw the other to the ground,
and got much presents from the King. Gradually he
became a favourite of the King, and consequently
became wealthy. One day the King went to a temple
of Siva, a little away from the capital to observe fast
on the fourteenth night of the Moon and while returning he passed by a_burial-ground and heard a voice
saying, “Oh Lord ! The judge had ordered me to be

ASOKADATTA 60
hanged, for a charge of murder, merely out of personal
grudge and without any proof, and this is the third day
since I was put on this scaffold. My life has not yet
departed from the body. My tongue is dried of thirst.
Have the kindness to give mea little water.”
‘Punished without proof ! It will appear only so to him
who is punished”. Thinking thus the King asked
ASokadatta to give the man some water. “Who will go
to a burial-ground in the night ? I myself shall take
water to him”. Saying so Agokadatta took water and
went to the burial-ground and the King went to the
palace. The world was in darkness, With here and
there a spark of fire and light of fire-flies and lightning
mingled with the shouting of ghosts and the roaring of
the demons and occasional cries of birds and animals
the burial-ground was a dreadful place, where Agokadatta came and asked, “Who asked the King for
water ?” He heard a voice saying “Myself” and he
went to the place of the voice and saw a man lying on
a scaffold. An extremely beautiful woman also was lying
under the scaffold crying, and getting ready to jump
Into the burning fire since she could not bear the
separation of her husband on the new moon day. She
had plenty of golden ornaments on her body. Agokadatta asked her, ‘“Madam ! who are you, why are you
crying here ?” She replied, “I, an unfortunate woman,
am the wife of the man on the scaffold. My intention
is to burn myself along with his body. I am walting for
his life to depart. Because of my sin he is not dying.
This is the third day since he is lying like this. He will
be asking for water now and then. So I have brought
some water. But his face being high I cannot reach it
and I am seeing him burning with thirst, and am
swallowing the grief.” ASokadatta said, “See! The
King has sent this water for him. Now climb on my
back and you yourself give him this water.”
The woman instantly took the water and got on the
back of ASokadatta who had stooped down for her to
legs he was about to strike her on the ground, when
she shook her legs free and ran away and disappeared.
Because she dragged away her legs with force one
bangle came off from her leg and was left with
ASokadatta. Her behaviour aroused in him at first compassion, detestation in the middle Stage and fear in the
After his morning ablution he went to the palace. “Did
you give him water yesternight?”? asked the King and
he replied “Yes’’, and placed the bangle before the King.
“Where did you get this from ?” the King asked and in
reply he said everything that had happened in the
night. The King thought that Agokadatta was an extraOrdinary man and calling his queen showed her the
Ornament and told her everything. She was filled with
joy and wonder. She praised Agokadatta a good deal.
he King said, “Dear queen ! This Asokadatta is a
young man of greatness, learning, bravery, truth and of
aes birth. He is handsome too. If he would become
“ne husband of our daughter what a good thing it will
TE
ASOKADATTA
be? I have a desire to give him our daughter Madanalekha’’.
The queen also said that the thought was pleasing to
her. “This youth is the most suitable person to be her
husband. Some days ago Madanalekha had seen him in
Madhu garden and from that day a change is visible in
her. All laughing and playing is gone from her, and she
spends time in loneliness and thinking. I knew this from
her maids, Because of my thought about her I did not
sleep last night and only just closed my eyes in the
dawn. Then it seemed to me thata divine woman
appeared and said to me, “My daughter, Don’t give
your daughter Madanalekha to anybody else. She had
been the wife of Agokadatta in previous birth’’, I woke
up Immediately. Believing in the dream I consoled our
daughter. I am glad that now you also think so. Let the
Jasmine creeper entwine round the Mango tree.”’
When the King heard these things from his queen, withOut wasting more time he gave his daughter Madanalekha in marriage to Agokadatta. They suited each
other so much that not only their relatives, but the
others also were delighted. Brahma is well experience
in joining suitable things together. As they were a
getting on well one day the queen said to the King;
“My lord ! this Bangle being single doesn’t shine well:
We must haye another bangle made in the same shape
and design,”
The King immediately had some goldsmiths brought before him. He showed them the bangle and asked the™
to make one of the same pattern. They turned it on 4
sides and looked at it and said, ‘‘Please your highness °
This is not man-made. It is not possible for us to mak
one of this kind. Precious Stones like these are 1°
available in this earth. So the Only possible way 15 ©
search for its mate in the place where this was foun@
On hearing these words the King and the queen wer¢
crestfallen. Seeing this Agokadatta said that he wou p
bring the mate of the bangle. Fearing danger the Kin
tried to dissuade him. But ASokadatta was not prepare
to change his decision. He took the bangle and went t
the burial-ground that night. To get the bangle he ha
fo meet the same woman who had left the bangle. d
began to think of a means to find her out. He procure’
a corpse took it on his shoulder and walked about cé
ing out ‘Do you want flesh 2” He heard a_ voice 84
“Bring it here’, and he walked in that direction.
saw a beautiful woman who appeared to be the mistres”
sitting in the midst of so many servant maids on a tre
He called out ‘Take the flesh”. She asked “How mut,
will it cost Pp ASsokadatta said, ‘“There is a bangle wi
me. If you, will give me another bangle like this you she
have the whole body”’, Hearing the words of Agokadat!
the beautiful woman laughed and said, “That is
bangle. I have its mate with me also. Iam the same W?
man you saw when you came to give water to the ™4.
on the scaffold, Now the situation is changed. So you t
not recognize me. Tonight is the fourteenth lunar mg .3
too. It was good that you thought of coming to nig et
Otherwise you would not have seen me. Now seé;
the flesh be there. If you will consent to do what I say ;
shall sive you the other bangle also.” ASokadatta prom”,
ed to do what she required. Then she began, ‘“‘There’,
city In the Himalayas known as Trighanda, There lived gf
Slant in that city. His name was Lantbajihva. I bear
the name Vidyucchikha, am his wife, Only one daug :

ASOKADATTA
was born to me. Then my husband was Killed in a fight
with his overlord Kapalasphota, who being kind did not
dous any harm; and I live in my house now. My daughter is now a young woman. I was roaming about thinking
of a way to find out a man of might and bravery as husband for my daughter. Then I saw you going this way
with the King. The moment I saw you I knew you to be
the man I -was searching for and I decided to give you
my daughter in marriage. What you heard as the words
of the man on the scaffold was a trick played by me. You
brought water to the scaffold and nobody needed water
then. With the knowledge I have in Sorcery and witchcraft I put you into a little confusion. I gave you that
bangle to bring you again to me and it has served
the purpose today. Let us go to my house. It is my earnest wish that you should be the husband of my daughter.
And I shall satisfy your immediate need also.”’
The brave Agokadatta agreed to the request of the
giantess. She, with her power, took him to their city
through the sky. Asokadatta saw the golden city and
wondered if it was the sun taking rest after its tedious
journey. There he saw the daughter of the giantess and
thought her to be the incarnation of his adventurous
spirit. She was beautiful in every part of her body. She
aenatled i ~abha. He married her and lived with
was called Vidyutprabha ; a
th for a while. Then he said to his mother-in-law
is the bangle. I must go to Kaisi.
‘“Mother ! now give me § le?
en he King to get the mate of this bangle.
I have promised the . in-! her bangle and a
vhich he acce NV .
golden lotus a _— est Fie hen ea 4
before he came with id “J shall be here on every
a he sky. Then she sal :
oa he root of this tree in the
fourteenth lunar night on the ial des,
: If vou want to see me come on that day.
burial-ground. Y ing Agokadatta came away and
‘I shall do so’, s They wees stricken with grief at the
went to his parents. \ ba hanct Vee! eulinc
‘to of their remaining son. ¥ wi
departure and exile 7 oe of their 260i, Not waiting
vette by Joy, at iad nig father-in-law, who embracO ant to the ? . se les.
ng he ia . Aéokadatta gave him the two bang ;
oe a iden lotus flower also. The King an
. e go ' AS
t en el amit at the daring nw a Caen
h aed in detail everything thatha ee —
wo told them of Agokadatta grew higher an . cs J,
him. The er; ueen thought it a blessing t at they
The King and the q n-in-law. Next day the King got
got so ao "ae d placed the golden lotus at the
‘silve ;
nuashepateee o k t and placed it on the step of his he
mouth of the caske to see. The white casket and t é
r everyone _ they glistene
ee i charming to look at and they 4 the
red lotus were very 7 and of Agokadatta. One day
as the fame of the King and said “If we could
: d at it with pleasure ther casket
King looked a like this, we could make another caske
get one more er left side of this’’. As soon as he heard it
and place it on ee he King orders it shall be brought .
Asokadatta said ‘d ‘Ho’ you need not go ae ea
But the King s® This is not such an urgent need .
on erranda like this.
Leavteenth lunar night came.
oly Pla a eel in the bed he left the
‘s wife the pri ; He saw his mothering his wife t burial-ground. He saw hi
palace and realise — went with her to an: of i:
in-law the eed — happily for a while es D etad
giant and live hen he was about to return he requ 7
Vidyutprabha. When e golden lotus. She sal
. ‘kha to give him one mor
| TT te lotus with her and that they grew
that there |
ASOKADATTA
in the lake of the giant King Kapfalasphota. Asgokadatia
requested her to show him that lake. At first Vidyucchikha dissuaded him from this attempt. But he was
stubborn. So she took him to a place away from the
lake and showed it to him. The lake was full of golden
Jotus flowers. It was a pleasing sight. ASokadatta immediately got down into the lake and began to pluck the
flowers. The guards came and opposed him. He killed
a few of them. The others went to their master and informed about the theft. Kapalasphota with his weapons
came shouting and roaring and saw his elder brother
ASokadatta. He was Overpowered by joy and wonder.
Throwing away his weapons, with love and devotion
towards his elder brother he bowed béfore him. “My
brother! I am Vijayadatta your younger brother. By
the will of God I lived as a giant so long. You might
have heard this from father. Because we have met now
by good luck I remembered that I was a Brahmin. My
giantness is gone. On that day something obscured my
mind. That is why I became a giant’. When he heard
the words of his younger brother Agokadatta embraced
him. Both shed tears of joy. At that time Prajhapti
KauSika the teacher of the V idyadharas came to: them
and said, ‘You are Vidyadharas. All this happened due
to acurse. Now you and your people are liberated from
the curse. So learn the duties and functions of your
class and with your people take your proper place in
the society.”” Having taught them everything they required he disappeared. Thus the V idyadhara brothers,
having plucked golden lotus reached the peak of the
Himalayas through the sky. ASokadatta went to Vidyutprabha who also having been liberated from curse became a Vidyadhara girl. With that beautiful girl the
two brothers continued their journey and reached K&éi
where they bowed before their parents. That reunion
appeared to be a dream or something nearing madness
to their parents. They could not believe their eyes.
ASokadatta and Vijayadatta each Saying his name bowed
before them. Their parents lifted them up and embraced
them and kissed them on the head, and cried for joy.
They did not know what to do or what to say. Their
minds were incapable of thinking. Everybody heard
this and was amazed at it. The King was also filled
with joy. He came there and took them to the palace.
ASokadatta gave all the lotus flowers to the King, who
was happy and joyful at the achievement of more than
he had hoped for. Everybody appreciated them:
Govindasvami, in the presence of the King asked
Vijayadatta to tell his story from the moment he turned
a giant in the burial-place; “Weare very curious to
hear sit” he said. Vijayadatta began to say ‘Father,
you have seen how because of my mischief, I had broken that skull and some viscous liquid fell into my
mouth and I changed to a giant. After that the other
giants gave me the name Kapalasphota. They invited
me into their midst. We lived together. After a few
days they took me to the presence of the King of the
giants. As soon as he saw me he was pleased with me
and appointed me as the commander-in-chief of the
army. He who was overconfident in his power went to
war with the Gandharvas and was killed in the fight.
From that day onwards all the giants came under my
control. Then I met with my brother who came to
pluck the golden lotus flowers from my lake. With this
all the previous conditions of my life had vanished,

ASOKASUNDARI 62
My brother will say the rest of the story. When Vijayadatta had finished saying Aégokadatta continued the
story.
ene ago when we were Vidyadharas both of us were
going through the sky and we saw the hermit maids
of the hermitage of Galava, bathing in the Ganges. We
wished to get those girls. The hermits who saw this
with their divine eyes cursed that we would take birth
asmen and in that birth we would be separated in a
wonderful way and both of us would unite again ina
place where man could not reach and we would
be liberated from the curse and learn everything from
the teacher, and would become the old Vidyadharas
with our people. And according to this curse we took
birth as men and separation was effected. You all have
heard it. Today I went to the lake of the King of the
giants, with the help of my mother-in-law the giantess
for plucking the golden lotus flowers and recovered my
brother, this Vijayadatta. There we learned everything
from our teacher Prajfiapti Kaugika and became
Vidyadharas and have arrived here as fast as we could.”
Thus he informed them everything that had occurred.
Afterwards by the learning he received from his teacher
he changed his parents and the daughter of the King
into Vidyadharas and then bidding adieu to the King
Asokadatta, with his two wives, parents and brother
went to the emperor of the Vidyadharas through the
sky. When they reached there Afgokadatta and Vijayadatta changed their names into Asokavega and Vijayavega. According to the orders of the emperor those
Vidyadhara youths went to the mountain of Govindakita with their people as it was their abode, and
lived with happiness and joy. King Pratapamukuta
with wonder took one of the golden lotus flowers and
placed it in the temple and with the rest he made
oblations to god and considered his family to have
made wonderful achievements. (Kathasaritsagara,
Caturdarikalamba, Taranga 2).
ASOKASUNDARI. See the word Nahusa.
ASOKATIRTHA. A holy
urparaka. (Mahabharata,
Stanza 13).
ASOKAVANIKA. A famous park in Lanka. It was in
this park that Ravana kept Sita having stolen her from
_ ri Faas < described in Valmiki Ramayana
undarakanda, Sarga 14 and Aran akand 56
and in Mahabharata also :-— =e Sarge: oe
“Thinking of her husband alone, clad in the garments
of a hermit woman, eating only roots and fruits, in
prayer and fast, in sorrow and sadness, she of the wide
eyes . be the Asoka park which seemed asa hermitage.’ (Bhasa Bharata, Aranya Parva Chapt 80
Stanzas 42 and 43). oer ws
ASTABANDHA. A kind of plaster used for fixing idols
in temples. The following eight things are mixed and
ground consecutively for fortyone days and made ready
to be putin the cavity around the idol when it is fixed
there finally, (1) conch-powder (2) powdered myrobalam (3) resin (4) Kolipparal (a kind of rock) (5)
river sand (6) powder of emblic myrobalam (7) lac
and (8) cotton,
ASTABHARYA( 5).
ukmini (2)
place near the temple of
Vana Parva, Chapter 88,
>). The eight wives of $n Krsna. (1)
Jambavati (3) Satyabhama (4) Kalindi
ASTADRAVYA (S)
(5) Mitravinda (6) Satya (7) Bhadra and (8) Laksana.
ASTABUDDHIGUNA(S). Eight qualities _of the intel
lect. Suériisa, Sravana, Grahana, Dharana, Uha, Apoha,
Arthavijfiana, and Tattvajiiana. |
ASTACURNA. A mixture of cight powders. ‘The eight
things are: Cukku (dry ginger), Mulaku (chilli)
Tippali (long pepper) Ayamodaka (celery seed) Jiraka
(baraway seed) Karimjiraka (black caraway see
Intuppu (sodium chloride) and Kayam (asafoctida ).
ASTADASAPURANA (5). The cighteen puranas. See
under Purana.
ASTADHARMAMARGA(S). Fight ways of attaining
moksa; Yaga, Vedabhydsa, Dana, ‘Tapas, Satya, Ksama,
Daya, lack of desire.
ASTADHATU(S). Eight minerals : gold, silver, copper;
tin, zinc, black lead, iron and mercury.
ASTADIGGAJAS and ASTADIKKARINIS. ‘There are
eight male and eight female elephants standing guar
over the eight zones. They are :
Kone Male Female
East Airavata Abhramu
South-east Pundarika Kapila
South Vamana Pingala
South-west Kumuda Anupama _
West Afijana ‘Tamrakarn
North-west Puspadanta Subhradantl
North Sarvabhauma Angana
North-east Supratika Afijanavatl
(Amarakosa
Besides these, there are four diggajas (elephants of the
universe) who bear the earth standing below in the
nether world. Itis stated that the sons of Sagara wi?
went into the nether land in search of the lost horse of bY
father saw these elephants. As they went to the ¢@
they saw the huge elephant Viriipaksa, holding th®
earth on its head. It is said an earthquake occurs whe
for a change it shakes its head. Going to the left of }
they saw the elephant Mahapadmasama holding
earth on its head on the south. Going: again to the l¢
of it they saw Saumanasa holding the earth on its be
on the west and going to the left of it on the nor
they saw Bhadra holding the earth on its head. (V4
miki Ramayana, Balakanda, Sarga 40°). h
ASTADIK(S). (Eight zones). East, South-east, Soul”
South-west, West, North-west, North and North-eas* ,
AS TADIKPALAKA (S). The Devi Bhagavata states lik
this about the eight zones and their guardians. Situal’,
in the eight different zones of the Brahmaloka are ¢} gh
big Cities of the eight guardians of these zones €# €
covering an area of 2500 yojanas. All these are oD ioe
top of Mahdmeru and Brahma sits in the centre in oe
city called Manovati. Around his city are the others .
follows :
( 1) On the east is Amaravati, city of Indra.
(2) On South-east is Tejovati, city of Agni,
(3) On the South is Sarhyamani, city of Yama.
(4) On the South-west is Krsnafijand citv of Nirrt!
(5) On the West is Sraddhavati, ee of Varubi.
(6) On the North-west 1S Gandhavati, city of Vayu
(7) On the North js Mahoda
ya, city of Kubera.
(8) On the hee is YaSovati, city of Siva. ta):
sfama Skandha, Devi Bhagavat™
STADRAVYA(S). Eight substances of shade medici?®
e.
tt ge ain th tee -

—_— LO a eee ile aot:
Se ee ee | = =
ASTADUTAGANA(S)
(1) Arayal, (Aévattha—Fig tree) (2) Attu. (Udumbara—
Keg tree) (3) Plasu (Palasa—Downy soon ae
(4) Peral (Vata-Banyan tree) (5) Camata ( 3 u
(Sesame) (7) Vayasa(Krsnaguru cedar tree (8) tae
ASTADUTAGUNA(S). The eight qualities of a goo
messenger. (1) He should not stand perplexed when
he is being given the message to carry. (2) He must
be smart and enthusiastic. (3) He must have compassion for those in distress. (4) He mustrun his —-
quickly. (5) He must be mild. (6) He pe :
duped by the cunning words of others. (7) ! a
be healthy. (8) He must be able to talk lg ane
ASTAGANDHA. Akil (Eaglewood ), Candana (San al),
Gugeulu (Indian Bdellium), Maifici (Jajamamsi“opr
kenard) Kunkuma (saffron) , ae ce root),
Ramacca (Usiram-Sweet rush), lruvell ( Crome
1) Bhiitadaya, Ksama, Anasiya,
a cg x Leakanin, Akarpanya and Asprha.
(2) Buddhibala, Kulaguddhi, Sama, Learning, Parakrama, Mitabhasana, Dana and Krtajnata. |
(3) Absence of Jenlauy iene Santosa,
3 igi, Sama, Satya, othairya.
erative “One of fin sobilege of Skanda Deva.
(Sloka 62, Chapter 45, Salya Parva, M.B.).
ASTAKA. See under cis a
ing oi the Fur ty.
— - fd in order from Visnu as follows :
Brahma-Atri-Candra - Budha-Puriiravas-Ayus-N ahusaYayati-Piru-Janamejaya-Pracinva - Pravi ra-N amasyuVitabhaya - Sundu - Bahuvidha - Samyati - RahovadiRaudraéva- Matinara - Santurodha-Dusyanta-BharataSuhotra-Brhatputra-A] poe
(This Astaka was the brother of S unassepha ). —
ASTAKA II. A Rajarsi born to Visvamitra of Madhavi,
wife of Yayati. (Sloka 18, Chapter 119, Udyoga Parva,
M.B.). See under Galava. oe
1) How Astaka went to heaven. This story was told to
the Pandavas by the sage Markandeya. .
‘‘Astaka, son of Vigvamitra, des ge an oe
sea. All the kings took part in this. Pratar ;
es and <—e Sibi, and all the brothers. of—
Astaka attended the function. After the yaga Astaka
took his three brothers for an air travel and on the way
met the great sage Narada. Narada was <o e de
and as they continued their flight, Astaka <a op a
who should step down from the aeroplane : ay or
were allowed to go to heaven. “Astaka’, rep he eect
and explained the reason also. Once M ain ara
stayed at the 4grama of Astaka the former me a hes
ties of cows there and asked Astaka w ose they
— “Th in self praise Astaka had said that all
be ead which he had given away as gifts.
Asniics then asked who should get down s only pe
St llowed to go to heaven. ‘Pratardana’,
Newall and explained the reason. Once when
i A ri, 3 ‘mer’s chariot
Narada in the former’s ch:
Pratardana was (ache the other approached him
four brahmins one ame Ds When Pratardana asked
” te
ed for a horse €a dana ~
f oan —_ the brahmins were not prepared to wa
or
is four horses and asked
ae 4 aly moh sso found to be eae
the fourt i - ne drawing his chariot also and dragged t :
he edt i if but abusing the brahmins all the vas r
a re that gave him the slur. ‘Then Astaka aske
Ww
ASTALOHA (S)
Narada who should get down if only two were permitted to
enter heaven. ‘Vasumanas’, said Narada and explained
the reason. Narada went to the house of Vasumanas
three times and each time the latter spoke highly of his
chariot. Narada also joined in praising his flower-chariot and the brahmins present there also followed suit.
Pleased at this Vasumanas became proud of his possession
and his vainglorious talks made him unfit. Then Astaka
asked if only one were allowed to go to heaven who
should go. ‘Sibi’, said Narada immediately. Even Narada
would be only next to Sibi and Narada explained the
reason thus. Once a brahmin went to Sibi for food. Sibi:
asked him what food he relished most and the brahmin
said that he would like to have the fresh flesh of Sibi’s
only son, Brhadgarbha. Without even the slightest hesitation Sibi killed his son and cooked his flesh and when
the food was ready he went out to invite the brahmin.
But on going out the King saw the brahmin setting
fire to his palace, treasury, armoury, stables, harem and
elephant-sheds. Without even a quiver on his face, the
king respectiully took the brahmin inside and gave him
food. The brahmin was amazed at the patience of the
King and sitting before his food for some time told the
King that he would be satisfied if the King himself ate
that food. Respecting the request the King was about to
eat the flesh of his own son when the brahmin who was
none other than Brahma in disguise praised him for
his devotion and gave him back his son adorned with
sweet smelling flowers and disappeared blessing them.
When his ministers questioned him about this Sibi said,
‘I do not give for a name or fame. Neither do I give
for wealth and happiness. I do it because it is the only
way to be rid of sins”. (Chapter 168, Aranya Parva,
2) Other details. (1) Astaka was a Rajarsi. (Sloka 5,
Chapter 86, Adi Parva, M.B.).
(2) Astaka gave away all the punya (goodness) he
earned to Yayati. See under Yayati. (Slokas 13 & 14,
Chapter 122, Udyoga Parva, M.B.).
ASTAKALASYA. This is a gesture in the Kathakali
dance. In the play ‘Kalyanasaugandhika’ the character
~of Haniimana and in the play ‘Kalakeyavadha’ the
character of Arjuna do enact this. Increasing step by
step the gesture takes eight forms in combination before it is finished accompanied by background drumming and music. (Kathakali).
ASTAKAPALAM. Purodaéa
Kapalas. (Sloka 24, Chapter 221, Santi Parva, M.B.).
ASTAKARANA(S). Manas (mind), Buddhi (intelligence), Citta (thought), Ahamkara (egotism), Sarmkalpa
in the mind (imagination), determination, pride from
egotism and Avadharana in Citta.
ASTAKASTA(S). Kama (lust), Krodha (anger), Lobha
(greed), Moha (delusion), Mada (arrogance), Matcerya (rivalry), Dambha (pride) and Asiiya (jealousy).
ASTAKOPAVYASANA (S). (1) Paigunya (2) Sdhasa
(3) Droha (5) Irsya (5) Asitya (6) Arthadisana
7) Vagdanda and (8) Parusya. ——— la
ASTAKUMBHLACSY Siryabhedé, Ujjayi, Silkkari,
Sitali, Bhastika, Bhramari, Miarccha and Plavini. All
these have to be practised by students of Yoga, (Moksaprepared out of eight
pradipam).
ASTALOHA(S). Eight metals.
1. Suvarnam Gold.
2. Rajatam Silver.

ASTAMANGALA 64
3. Tamram Copper.
4, Stsakam Lead.
9. Kantikam Mercury.
6. Vamsam Vafigam—Tiu.
7. Lauham Iron.
8. Tiksnalauham Steel,
ASTAMANGALA. Brahmins, bow, Fire, gold, ghee, Sun,
water and Kine.
ASTAMANGALYA. (1) Kurava (2) Darpana (3) Dipa
(4) Kalasa (5) Vastra (6) Aksatam (7) Angana
(8) Svarna
ASTAMANOGUNA(S). (1) Paratva (2) Aparatva (3)
Samkhya (4) Parimina (5) Prthakta (6) Sam-yoga
(7) Vibhaga (8) Vega.
ASTAMANTRI(S). The eight ministers of the kings of
Iksvaku dynasty are: (1) Jayanta (2) Drsti (3) Vijaya
(4) Siddhartha (5) Arthasddhaka (6) Agoka
(7) Mantrapala (8) Sumantra.
ASTAMARGAS., Samyagdrsti, Samyaksankalpa, Samyagvak, Samyakkarma, Samyagajiva, Samyagvyayama,
Samyaksmrti and Samyaksamadhi. The Buddha Sannyasins have to live according to these eight directives of
life.
ASTAMBA(S). See the sixth KKhandika under Devi.
ASTAMI. The third skandha of Devi Bhagavata states
that the goddess, Bhadrakali, came into life on an
Astami day to block up the yaga of Daksa. That is
why the day is considered to be holy and important.
ASTAMURTI(S). Earth, Water, Air, Fire, Ether, Hota,
Sun and Moon.
ASTANAGA(S). Eight snakes. Vasuki; Taksa, Karkotaka, Sarhkha, Gulika, Padma, Mahapadma and
Ananta,
ASTANGAHRDAYA. The medical science which deals
in eight separate division the treatment of the human
body. (1) Sarira (2) Bala (3) Graha (4) Urddhva-
(5) Salya (6) Damstra (7) Jara and (8) Vrsa,
Bala—Body which has not attained Maturity; Graha—
External elements which damage the health of infants;
alya—extraneous substance lodged in the body; Vrsa—
The seminal fluid. (Directions of treatment),
ASTANGAYOGA (S}. Yama, Niyama, Asana, Praniyama, Pratyahara, Dhyana, Dharana and Samadhi. —
1) Yama. That which Prevents the yogis from doing
prohibited things. Ahirhsa, Satya, Asteya, Brahmaee and aa are yamas. .
) Nyama. Actions leading to Moksa. They are :
(1) SAUCA—Cleanliness of the mind—cleaning it of
such bad qualities like jealousy, (2') TAPAS—indifference (Samatvabhava) to the pairs of Opposites like
pleasure and pain, heat and cold etc. (5) Svadhyaya
~~pursuit of the science of salvation chanting of OM.
() SANTOSA—remaining happy and contented.
(5) ISVARA-PRANIDHANA—surrendering all actions to God.
3) Asana. Postures of sitting firmly and comfortably, Of
the many 4sanas the very prominent ones are : Syastikasana, Virasana, Padmasana, Siddhasana, Vastrasana,
Vyaghracarmdsana, Valkalasana, Kusasana, Krsndsana,
istarasana, Mayirdsana and Kirmasana. Of these
Siddhasana is considered to be the best of the lot. This
asana strengthens the 72,000 nerves of the human system
ante all the yogis prefer this to any other. “Kimanyaih
ahubhih pithaih pithe Siddhdsane sati’’ (of what use
are the others when there is Siddhasana) .
sions. Krodha—Anger,
ASTATARANT.
ASTAVAKRA.
ASTAVAKRA
4) Pranayama. Control of Prana (Prana is the life giving
breath and ayama is the checking of it). Select an airy
place and be seated in an ordinary dsana facing north
or east after taking your early morning bath. Sit erect
with your breast slightly pushed forward and your head
slightly drawn back. Then complete one Pranayama
doing Piraka, Kumbhaka and Recaka. The Rudrayamala states thus about Praniyama.
Daksangusthena daksam ca.
Ghranam sampidya mantravit
Idaya ptirayedvayurhi
Matra sodasabhih kramat
Angusthanamikabhyajica
Dhrtva nasadvayarn tatah
Tatastu kampayedvayurh
Pirakanam caturganaih
Anamaya tatha vamaNasam dhrtva tu daksine
Dvatrimgadbhistu matrabhir
Vayurecanamacaret.
Closing the right nostril by the thumb of the right
hand and inhaling air inside through the left nostril
taking 16 seconds is called Piraka. Closing the nostrils
by the thumb and ring-finger and keeping the breath
for 64 seconds is called Kumbhaka. Closing the left
nostril well and then exhaling through the right nostril taking 32 seconds is called Recaka. Parakss should
be done through the same nostril through which you
have done Recaka. (You must do at least ten Pranayamas ata time).
9) Pratya&hara. Withdrawing the mind from worldly
objects and sensuous pleasures.
6) Dhyana. Keeping your mind fixed on the tip of youl
nose. Meditation.
7) Dharana.Steadily thinking of things you should know:
Concentration.
8) Samadhi. The union of mind with God. This is 4
blissful superconscious state in which one perceives the
identity of the individualised soul and cosmic spirit.
(Yogabhyasa ).
ASTAPRAMANAS. Fight means of getting correct know”
ledge. Pratyaksa, Anumana, Upamana, Sabda (Agama) ?
Arthapatti, Anupalabdhi (Abhava) Sambhava, Aitihy2ASTARAGADIS. Raga, Dvesa, Kama, Krodha, Lobha;
Moha, Mada and Matsarya (Raga—Desire for sensuov®
pleasures. Dvesa—Desire to seek vengeance on those who
have offended you. Kama—Desire for worldly posses
Lobha—Miserliness. Moha—~
Mada— Pride. Matsarya—Jealousy.
Fight names of Taranidevi. They are °
Vara, Ugra, Mahogra, Vajra, Kali, Sarasvati, Kame
vari and Camunda.
Delusion.
1) Birth. The sage Uddalaka had a disciple named
Khagodara (Kahodara ) and a daughter named Sujat@:
Appreciating the devotion and good conduct of a
disciple, Uddalaka gave his daughter Sujata in marr!
age to him. Sujata became pregnant. When onc?
Khagodara was reciting from the Vedas the babe in th°
womb of Sujata said, “I have learnt the mantra. y?
are Chanting but the way you chant it is wrong’. (T i
vibrations of sound created by the utterance of eac™
word is ‘Mportant). Khagodara was angry and he cur?”
ach
ed his babe in the womb thus “Since your mind see!
to be crooked let your body also be of that type; with
mm?”
ee

ASTAVAKRA
curves all over”. When Sujata delivered the child it
had eight bends and light curves and so the boy was
named Astavakra, meaning one with eight bends.
(Chapter 132, Vana Parva, M.B.).
2) Father died before he was born. When Sujata was pregnant they suffered much from poverty and at the insistence of Sujata, Khagodara went to the King Janaka,
to beg for some money. Janaka was performing a yaga
then and so Khagodara had to wait. When at last he
went to the royal assembly he was asked to enter into
a polemical contest with Vandina, the court scholar and
having been defeated by him was asked to drown himself.
Uddalaka got a son named Svetaketu and Sujata delivered Astavakra. Both the boys grew in the Agrama
on great intimacy and Sujata withheld the news of the
death of her husband from the boys. (Chapter 132,
Vana Parva, M.B.).
3) How Khagodara was got back. One day the two boys
went _to bathe in the river and during a controversial
talk Svetaketu said that Astavakra had no father. This
teased him much and Astavakra went to his mother
and gathered all the facts about his father. He went,
then, straight to the royal assembly of King Janaka.
He was not allowed inside. The gate keeper said that he
was only a boy and only learned men could go inside
the sacrificial hall. Astavakra tba eis Meas neither
si was any indication of one’s knowledge or
leads Gate got himialf admitted into the hall. There
he entered into a polemical contest with the same court
scholar, Vandina, who had killed his father, Vandina
was defeated and was thrown into the same river in
which-his father had drowned himself. The moment
Vandina fell into the river Khagodara_ rose up
from there and the father and son along with Svetaketu returned to the agrama. Khagodara then took his
son for a bath and when it was over Astavakra became
a bright boy without crooks. (Chapter 133, Vana
Parva, M.B.) S :
. marry Suprabha, the
4) Marriage. Astavakra aes When Vadiariva was
aughter of a sage named Va 4 ided to test the love
approached for this the Sage A ees send eat 1
which Astavakra had towards his daughter
the HimaYou go to the north to
ee ee nota | ade Parvati and go further
layas. Pay homage to iful damsel. You
u will find a very beautitu
Si Piet gatos and when you come back I shall
Zive you my daughter.’ Agiivalkraswente xeuth, When
he pling toe timate Kubera entertained es a
remained there for a year enjoyins the ee, oo d
tial idens and then, after worshipping 51 Memon
Paveait weit further north. There he ae on <a
tive -women. t the Comma h hi st all the
the eldest of the lot, Uttara, remained wit atl aed
rest eft the place immediately she sated map og
a ss te aad aod told her about me Le i
Vala : Pl ated at this reply Uttara aaa . <n
Beye oe of the north in disguise and was testing
was the queen 0 kra who fulfilling his
blessed Astava ot he
oe gent HY returned and married the gir
oz Parva, M.B.) :
wanted, (Chapter 19, ng bee hecame crooked. There
sion of h * lived
ry parm =n story 4 about Astavakra. Once there
ASTAVAKRATIRTHA.
ASTAVASU(S)
a sage named Asita. He did great penance to please Siva
to bless him with a child. Siva blessed him and he got a
son named Devala. Rambha, the queen of devaloka, fell
in love with him but Devaladid not yield to her wishes.
Then Rambha cursed him and made him into one with
eight crooks. Thus Devala came to be called Astavakra.
He then did penance for six thousand years and Bhagavan Krsna accompanied by Radha appeared before him.
Radha was shocked by the ugliness of the sage and did
not relish his sight. But Krsna asking her to remain
quiet went and embraced him. At once Astavakra lost
all his crooks and became a beautiful man. At that time
a chariot descended from heaven and all of them went
to heaven in it. (Brahmavaivartta Purana).
6) Other information.- (1) Ast&vakra was also present
among the rsis who partook in the coronation ceremony
conducted after Rama’s return to Ayodhya from Lanka.
(Uttararamayana).
(2) Astavakra cursed those celestial maidens who rebuked him for his ugliness and they were born on earth
as the wives of Sri Krsna. When after the death of
Krsna they were being taken by Arjuna to the north they
were forcibly taken by some of the shepherds. (Chapter
IS, Agni Purana).
If one observes complete fasting
for twelve days doing tarpana in this sacred pond it is
said that he gets the benefit of doing of Naramedhayajfia. (Sloka 41, Chapter 25, Anugasana Parva, M.B.).
ASTAVAKTRA.. See under Astavakra.
ASTAVARGA(S). Meda, Mahameda, K&koli, Ksirakakoli,
Jivaka, Itavaka, Rddhi, Vrddhi (These are used in infusions for treating rheumatism).
ASTAVASU(S).
1) Origin. Ganadevatas are called Astavasus. They
were born to Dharmadeva of his wife Vasu, daughter of
Daksa. They are : Dhara, Dhruva, Soma, Ahar, Anila,
Anala, Pratyisa and Prabhisa. (Slokas 17 and 18,
Chapter 66, Adi Parva, M.B.). There is a version in
certain puranas that the Astavasus are the sons of
Kasyapa. |
Different puranas give different names to these Astavasus. According to Visnu Purana they are: Apa,
Dhruva, Soma, Dharma, Anila, Anala, Pratyisa and
Prabhasa, (Chapter 15 of Arnfam 1). In Bhagavata
they are Drona, Prana, Dhruva, Arka, Agni, Dosa,
Vasu and Vibhavasu. In Harivaméa they are : Akha, ©
Dhara, Dhruva, Soma, Anila, Anala, Pratyiisa and
Prabhasa. This only indicates that some of these have
two or more names for them. '
2) Curse of Vasistha. Once the Astavasus were enjoying a picni¢ with their wives and they happened to go
to the agrama of Vasistha. One of the wives got enamoured over Nandini, Vasistha’s beautiful cow and
wanted it. The Vasu to please his wife took the cow by
force and left the place. When the sage found his cow
missing after some time he understood by his divine
powers who stole the cow and so he cursed the Astavasus saying that all of them would be born on earth as
men. The Astavasus were greatly worried and approached the sage apologising and craving for pardon. The sage
relaxed the curse and declared that their life on earth
would be only for avery short time maintaining that
the particular Vasu who committed the theft would live
for a long time as man. It was this Vasu, Apa (Dyau)
whe was born as Bhisma.

ASTAVASU (S)
3) Rebirth of Astavasus. ‘The Asta vasus were pondering
over the curse and were thinking of how to bear it
without hardship when Gangadevi appeared before them
and they then appealed to her: “Devi, if you become
the queen on earth of some noble King we shall be born
ASTAVIDHANAYIKA (S).
ASTRA
Sambhu, Kapardi, Raivata, Mrgavyadha, Sarva and
Kapa4li were the sons of T'vasta. These are known as the
twelve Rudras. Puranas say that there are a hundred
Rudras like this. (Chapter 15, Améa I, Visnu Purana).
Eight kinds of heroines of
the stage :
as your sons and you must throw us into the river as
soon as we are born’’. Gangadevi accepted their request.
Once there was a King called Pratipa in the Candra
dynasty. One day when this ascetic King was worshipping Sarya on the banks of the river Ganga a beautiful
damsel arose from the waters and sat on the right
thigh of the King. Surprised the King told her thus, “Oh
beautiful maiden, who are you ? Do you realise what
unrighteous thing you have done? I am not one who
goes after women and it was a bit daring of you to
have taken me as a beau. Please understand that the
right thigh isintended for a daughter and daughter-inlaw. You can claim this right when you become the
wife of my son.” The beautiful girl was none other than
Gangadevi herself and she disappeared soon on recelving
the rebuke.
Pratipa got a son named Santanu and Gangadevi became the wife of Santanu. (For more details about this
see under Ganga). When Gangadevi became the wife of
antanu she made a condition to be his queen.
“Whether good or bad you should not obstruct any
(1) Svddhinapatika. Fit to be a counterpart ina love
Scene and play the role of one who js always fondled by
her husband.
(2) Vasakasajjika (Vasakasajja). Adorning herself well
and waiting for her lover in a well decorated bedroom.
(3) Virahotkanthita. Exhausted by the sorrow of separation from her lover.
(4) Vipralabdha. Cheated by her lover after fixing a
dateand a rendezvous.
(5) Khandita. Angered at the arrival of the husband in
the early hours of the morning with suspicion about his
character. |
(6) Kalahantarita. Repenting after having arrogantly —
disobeyed her husband.
(7) Prositabhartrka. One who has gone weak and moody
thinking about her husband in a foreign place.
(8) Abhisarika. One who approaches her husband with
great passion. (Natyakrama).
ASTAVIDHAPRAKRTYAVASTHA (S).
Agni, Air, Ether, Mind, Intelligence and Egotism.
Earth, Water,
action of mine. You must never give me any opinion of ASTAVIDHAPRATIMA( 3). ilamayi, Dhadtumay!,
yours On any matter. You must obey what I order. If at Lohamayi, Lepyad, Lekhya, Mrnmayi, Manimayi a”
any time you break any of these promises I will leave Manomayi. i
you that instant.” | ASTAVIDHAKUSTHA(S). Vimarccika, Bhadru, Man
It was while Gangadevi was living on earth as the wife dala, Sukti, Siddhmaka, Krsna. Sukla and Tarun
of Santanu that the Agstavasus were born to her. One (Astangahrdaya) . ili
after the other she threw into the river seven sons but
when she was about to throw the eighth the King
objected to it and Ganga disappeared immediately. That
son was Bhisma, who was none other than Dyau born
on earth by the curse of Vasistha. Al] the others, released
from the curse, went to heaven. (More details under
Bhisma).
4) A missile to Bhisma. When Bhisma had to fight against
his guru, Paragurama, the Astavasus Zave him the
missile, Prasvapa. (See Amba) (Slokas ll to 13, Chapter
183, Udyoga Parva, M.B.).
5) Sons of Astavasus. The sons of Apa, the first of the
Vasus, are : Vaitandha, Srama, Santa and Dhvani. Kala
the destroyer of all, is the son of Dhruva. Varcas is the
ASTAVIVAHA(S). Eight kinds of marriage. (1) Brahm
(2) Daiva (3)° Arsa (4) Prajapatya (5) Gandharv"
(6) Asura (7) Raksasa (8) Paigaca. Brahma is the 0”
where the father gives her daughter with sacred Lome
to a bachelor without accepting anything in return. Whe
the father gives his daughter to the priest at the tun ;
of a yaga it is called Daiva. It is Arsa if the father Be ad
the daughter and gets in return a cow or bullock. whe
the father gives the daughter with her blessings it ©
Prajapatya. The Marriage between two lovers is G4
dharva. It is Asura when the male takes his mate
force and it is Paigacika (most cruel and mean) W a
the girl is taken as his wife when she is in a state
unconsciousness, ne
ASTAYOGINI (S). The eight hermit-maidens who are‘ ) a
attendants of the goddess, Durga. (1) Marjjati ‘3
Karpiratilaka (3) Malayagandhini (4) Kaumu nae
tt ieee (6) Matali (7) Nayaki (8) Jaya (Sub
cara ).
ASTOP AYA(S) - Eight ways of attaining salvatior”
the son of Pratyiisa. Devala Sot two sons of great intelli- Yajfia, Dana, Vedadhyayana, Tapas, Dama, Saty :
gence and forbearance. Varastri, sister of Brhaspati and Rjusila, and Mardava. These are the qualities r equ
a woman of great yogic powers and world-wide travels ed for attaining salvation.
became the wife of Prabhisa. She gave birth to the ASTI. Daughter of Jarasandha, King of Magadhe
famous Visvakarmapr ajapati. He was the inventor of a Kathsa married Asti and also another daughter of Jat
great many handicrafts and Ornaments He became the sandha, (Slokas 29 to 32, Cha ter 14, Sabha P a
consulting architect of the devas and ranked first in that M.B.), Chapter 12 of Agni Passa” states thar Jarasan?”
art. The aeroplanes of the devas were designed hy him. went to war with the Yadavas hb f the P@
Men on earth depend on his art even now. That archi- none
suasion of these day hters
tect had four sons - Ajaikapat Ahirbudhnya, Tvasta ASTRA : : mitt’
: ; > . After killj Ataka, Visvam
in ae ~ bold. The great ascetics, Vigvaripa, reveals to Rama and Cekeoness, Taek, be "using, 2
Dravina, Hutahavyavaha, iSira, Prana and Varuna.
iva was Anila’s wife and she got two sons, Manojava
and Avijfiatagati. Agni’s son Kurhara was born at
Sarastamba. Kumara got three brothers, Sakha Visgakha
and Naigameya. Kumara is known as Karttikeya
because he was born of Krttikas. The Sage, Devala is

ee
—- oy SS ree See) eee eee ee) eeeengy eeeetees eabeiben —-
eae ee. a ne ee ne ee eee
ASURA 67
charged with power by holy incantation). Some of
those astras are named below:
Il. Dandacakra 2. Dharmacakra
3. Kalacakra 4. Visnucakra
9. Indracakra 6. Vajrastra
7. Saivasila 8. Aisika
9. Brahmagirastra 10. Brahmastra
Il. Modakisikhari 12. Dharmapaéa
13. Kalapaga 14. Varunastra
I5. WVarunapasa 16. Paramastra
17. Pinakastra 18. Narayanastra
19. Agneyastra 20. Sikharastra
21. Vayavyastra 22. Prathanastra
23. Krauficastra 24. HayaSsirastra
25. Kankalastra 26. Musalastra
27. Kapalastra 28. Kankandstra
29. ManavaAastra 30, Prasthapandastra
31. PragSamanAstra 32. Saurdastra
33. Varsanastra 34. Sosandstra
35. Santapanastra 36. Vilapanastra
37. Madanastra 38. Mohastra
39. Saumanastra 40. Sarhvartastra
41. Satydastra 42. Mayadhardstra
43. Tej aprabhastra 44, Saumydstra
45. Siégirastra 46. Tvastastra
47. Sudamanastra
Sri Rama received all these astras standing facing east.
(Sarga 27, Balakanda, Valmiki Ramayana)
ASURA. Those born to Kagyapa of his wife Danu are
called Danavas and those born of his wife Diti are called Daityas. They belong to the demonaic dynasty (Refer under ‘Asuravamsa’ in the genealogy chart). Renowned among the asuras were the following: _
Prahlada, Sarmhlada, Anuhlada, Sibi, Baskala, Virocana,
Kumbha, Nikumbha, Bali, Bana, Mahakala, Vipracitti,
ambara, Namuci, Puloma, Visruta, Asiloma, Kesi,
Durjaya "Ayassiras, A&vassiras, Agva, Sanku, Mahabala ;
Garga Mardha, Vegavan, Ketuman, Svarbhanu, A$vapati, Vrsaparva, Ajaka, Asvagriva, Siksma, abe
Ekapad, Ekacakra, Virapaksa, Harahara, Can a
Kupata, Kapata, Para, Sarabha, Salabha, Sirya an
andramas. doers
ASURA. of the eight daughters born to Kagyap
of ~ ae Pradha. (Sloka 41, Chapter 65, Adi Parva,
M.B.), a ie la
AS See under Gilgamis, Jalapralaya)._
asters bok v% son born to King Kufa of his
wife Vaj pane ‘Kugamba, KufSanabha, ne
and Vasa are the four sons of Kufa. (Sarga 32, Bala
kanda, Valmiki Ramayana). i dies die
A I. _ This was the same demon
—— Peay =e Adal, King of Kalinga. (Chapter 67,
Agiti Parva, MB»). rhe sage Vasa is the son of this
rsi. (Sakta 1I2of Rgveda). i this
iy and camels ) .
She ae We wife of Kasgyapa, grandson of Brahma.
(Agni Purana, eee Sanskrit poet. He has written
apchlagy ‘oe ‘prominent among which as
many Sanskrit ta and Saundaranan
ari
t poems, Buddhac
oe ‘ie grea’ was performed by autocrats to
ine te yaga. The vedas enj
into all c
about should go dra had conducte
to defeat him before conduc
to fight those who opposed the King. +0
ASVAPATI I
and a drama called Sariputraprakarana. He lived in
the 2nd Century A.D. His history of Buddha (Buddhacarita) was translated into Chinese during the period
414 to’421 A.D. He was known under the following
names also: Acarya, Bhadanta, Mahavadi and Bhiksu.
ASVAGRIVA. Son born to the Sage, Kagyapa by his
wife, Danu. (Sloka 24, Chapter 65, Adi Parva, M.B.).
ASVAHRDAYA. A mantra (sacred incantation) for
controlling the horse. (See under “Aksahrdaya’).
ASVAKETU. Son of King Gandhara. He fought on the
side of the Kauravas and was killed in the battle by
Abhimanyu. (Sloka 7, Chapter 48, Drona Parva, M.B.).
ASVAKRTA. A river. Once a sage called Rcika went to
Gadhi and asked for the hand of his daughter, Satyavati, in marriage. He demanded as dowry a thousand
horses black in colour and with only one ear for each.
Rcika prayed to Varuna and he gave him the horses
required. The river Agvakrta (created by horse) was
made by the flow of urine from these horses. (Chapter
57, Brahmanda Purana).
ASVAMEDHATI. A country of ancient India which was
ruled by a King named Rocam4n. Bhimasena conquered
him during the world-wide conquering campaign.
(Sloka 8, Chapter 29, Sabha Parva).
ASVAMEDHA II. A yiga. Kings used to conduct this
in order to get absolved of all sins. Fixing a victory
card on the head of a horse it is allowed to roam about
freely. If anybody stops the horse and ties it, the King
should go and defeat him in battle and bring back the
horse. If you do a hundred such y gas you can become
Indra. *
ASVAMEDHA. Son of King Sahasranika (Refer under
Sahasranika) .
ASVAMEDHADATTA. Son born to Satanika of the
MB) of Videha. (Sloka 86, Chapter 95, Adi Parva,
ASVAMEDHAPARVA. A parva of the Mahabharta.
See under Bharata.
ASVANADI. A river in the country of Kuntibhoja.
A$vanadi joins Carmanvati and the latter joins the
Yamuna and the Yamuna joining Gangi falls into the
ocean. It was through this river that Kuntidevi floated
in a box the infant Karna. At night accompanied by
her maid, Kunti floated the box containing her illegitimate son and stood on the banks of Agvanadi weeping
bitterly. Then thinking that her father would notice
her absence from the palace she returned home soon.
The box floated and reached the country, Campapuri,
ruled by a charioteer. (Slokas 22 to 26, Chapter 308,
Aranya’ Parva, M.B.).
ASVARATHA. A river in the Gandhamadana valley
flowing near the Agrama of the sage Arstisena. Many
kings of the Candra dynasty used to come and stay in
this 4grama. (Sloka 10, Chapter 160, Vana Parva, M.B.),
ASVASANKU. Son of Kafyapa born of his wife Danu.
(Sloka 21, Chapter 67, Adi Parva, M.B.).
ASVAPATII. Father of the most chaste woman, Savitri.
He was King of Madra. He was without children for a
long period and for eighteen years he worshipped the
goddess, Savitri and got a maiden from Agnihotra whom
establish their supreme sovereignty. For this the horse let out to roam
ty of the King could stop the horse and tie it. Then the King had
* Aévamedha or horse sacrifice Those who opposed a Sethe acoritibial horse should be followed by a hundr
da hundred such yagas.
ed young men ready

ASVAPATI II
he named as Savitri. For more details see under Savitri.
(Chapter 293, Vana Parva, M.B.).
ASVAPATI II. The son born to Kagyapa of his wife
Danu. (Sloka 24, Chapter 65, Adi Parva, M.B.).
ASVASENA. A Serpent which lived in the forest of
Khandava. This was the son of Taksaka and he tried
his best to escape from the fire that burnt the forest.
(Sloka 5, Chapter 239, Adi Parva, M.B.).
Once when Arjuna and Krsna were sitting on the banks
of the river Yamuna, Agni‘approached them and requested them to help him burn the forest of Khandava (see
under Khandavadaha). They agreed to help him and
Agni started burning the forest. Indra poured rains over
the fire; Arjuna created a canopy of arrows and prevented the raius from falling down. Agvasena, son of
Taksaka tried to escape from the fire but Arjuna obstructed his way by arrows. Then Aévasena’s mother
swallowed him and kept him in her stomach. Arjuna
cut off her head. Seeing this Indra sent a cyclone to
smash the canopy of arrows and Arjuna fell fainting.
Taking the opportunity Agvasena escaped. When Arjuna
woke up from his unconscious state he found Asvasena
missing. Then Arjuna cursed him thus : “Let not you
‘get refuge anywhere.”’ (Chapter 226, Adi Parva, M.B.).
Asvasena kept his grudge against Arjuna till the end.
In the great battle Arjuna and Karna met for a fight
and when Karna sent his Nagastra (serpent missile )
against Arjuna, Agvasena hid himself in that missile
and burnt the beautiful headwear of Arjuna. But Karna
did not like this foul play and refused to accept him
when he came back. Enraged at this the serpent attacked
Arjuna directly and was killed. Before his death he got
pearginiel with Krsna. (Chapter 96, Karna Parva,
ASVASIRAS I. A son born to Kagyapa of Dani. (Sloka
43, Chapter 65, Adi Parva, M.B.).
ASVASIRAS ITI. Bhagavan Hayagriva who was teaching
the Vedas at Vaihayasakunda near Naranarayanasrama.
(Sloka 3, Chapter 127, Santi Parva, M.B.).
ASVASIRASTHANA( M). A sacred place in ancient
— sauna + a of going to Siva with Krsna and
in that dream they visit this place also. D
eee Parva, M.B.). e Ghapter mu;
ASVATAKA. A country of ancient India.
Chapter 51, Bhisma Boren. M.B.). tha. (Sloka “
ASVATARA. A serpent. A sacred pond built in Prayaga
also carries this name. (Sloka 76, Chapter 55, Vana
Parva and Sloka 10, Chapter 35, Adi Parva, M.B.).
ASVATIRTHA. An ancient holy Place on the banks of
the river, Ganges, near Kanauj. It was at this place
that the horses rose from the earth at th
Reika Rsi to Varuna (See under Advalerta (Sloke
17, Chapter 4, MB.) ~ a
ASVATTHAMA.
1) Birth and genealogy. The semen of Bharadvaja Rsi
fell into the hollow ofa bamboo and from there was
born Drona. As per the instructions of his father Drona
married Krpi, daughter of the sage, Saradvata. The
good-natured Krpi gave birth to ASvatthama. (See
ME) Drona for genealogy). (Chapter 130, Adi Parva,
2) How he got his name. The moment he was born he
made a loud hoot like Uccaisravas and the sound resembled the braying of a horse. Immediately a voice from
heaven said that the boy should be named Aévatthama.
ASVATTHAMA
The boy was, therefore, named so. (Slokas 48 and 49,
Chapter 130, M.B.). .
3) Training in archery. Asvatthama took his lesson in
archery from his father Drona. At that time Drona got
new lessons from Paragurama and they were also imparted to Drona’s disciples. When Drona became the
preceptor of the Kauravas and Pandavas Asvatthama
also went with him. (Slokas 52 to 64, Chapter 130, Adi
Parva, M.B.).
4) Drona’s affection for his son. Drona was very a{lectionate to his son and wanted to teach him something
special in archery. So he used to instruct him during
the time the other disciples went to fetch water for the
asrama. Arjuna came to know of this and he, therealter, started bringing his quota of water quickly
enough to join the special class of Drona. Thus Arjuna
and Agvatthama leained a lot more than the others 1
the military art. (Slokas 17-19, Chapter 132, Adi
Parva, M.B.). ;
9) Lhe Mahabharata Battle and Asvatthima. In Sabha
Parva we find Agvatthama participating in the Rajasiya of Yudhisthira. After that we mect him only at
the Kuruksetra war. Fighting on the side of the Kauravas he played a very important role in that war. He
killed many veteran warriors and kings including the
following : Nila, Afijanaparva, Suratha, Satrufijaya
Balanjka, Jayanika, Jayasva, Srutaéva, Hemamiali, V1‘sadhara, Candrasena, the ten sons of Kuntibhoja, SudatSana, Vrddhaksetra, Cediraja, Malayadhvaja and Sura”
tha. He defeated many including Sikhandi, Abhimany¥:
Virdta, Satyaki and Vindhya. By using Agneyastra
(the arrow of fire) he made Krsna and Arjuna fal
fainting in the battle-ficld. He commanded the Kaurav@
army once. He killed many Pajicadlas and Somakas
while they were sleeping. In Chapter 139 of Dron
Parva we read about Arjuna defeating Aévatthama }?
a single combat one day.
6) Asvatthdma sees a ghost. Dhrstadyumna, son of King.
Paficala, killed Drona. When Aévatthama heard a
his father’s death his rage knew no bound. He cnr it
diately went to the heart of the military camp of ¢ e
Pandavas, Krpa and Satvata following him. There at ee
gate of the,camp he beheld a ghostly apparition. It ©
described in the Bhasa Bharata (Malayalam version °
M.B.) as follows : He saw a huge figure standing at
door with a body blazing like the Sun and the Moo™:
Bathed in blood and wearing a tiger’s skin in the sani
the figure wore a snake as his sacred thread and coves
ed his upper body with a deer-skin. There were innU
merable hands for this ghost and in each hand adorné
with snake-bangles he held a deadly weapon. Wit
crooked teeth anda ghastly face the goblin gave h
shiver to those who saw him. Flames bursting ort
from his eyes, Cars, nose and mouth he barred the way
of Agvatth4ma. Undaunted the son of Drona shower”
divine arrows on the figure. But the ghost by his sup"
meme powers absorbed the arrows to his body ,
moment they touched him. In despair Agvattha™
meditated on Siva and the latter appearing before hi
il person gave him a divine dagger. With that he enter©
the bed-chamber of Dhrstadyumna, woke him up he
viriking him with his foot, caught hold of him by t
hair on his head and killed him.
~ eeges ae He . 7A id
7) Afvatthama and his jewel. The anger of Agvatthama aa
not abate even afier killing Dhrstadyumna, the bute?

ASVATTHAMA Ii | 69
of his father. With a view to destroying the whole Pandava dynasty he sent against the Pandavas the all-powerful Brahmagirastra (a missile charged with great power
by a holy incantation). But Drona had given the same
type of missile to Arjuna also and so he sent forth his to
meet the other. It created such a great explosion that
all the elders on both the sides joined together and _requested them to withdraw the missiles. Arjuna demanded
the jewel on Agvatthama’s head to withdraw his missile.
But Asvatthama refused to part with it. He said, ‘‘This
jewel of mine is more valuable than all the wealth of both
Pandavas and Kauravas put together. If you wear this
you need not be afraid of your enemies, disease, hunger
and thirst. No harmwill come to you from Yaksas,
Nagas or thieves. I will never part with such a jewel”.
(Slokas 28-30, M.B., Chapter 15, Sautika Parva). After
great persuasion A$vatthama surrendered his jewel but
without withdrawing the missile directed it towards the
womb of Uttara who was bearing a child then. We
are reminded of an incident which happened when
the Pandavas were residing in Upaplavya; a poor
brahmin looking at Uttara said, . “When the Kauravas
will be weakening in power a child will be born to you.
The boy will have to bear a test even while in the
womb and so you must name the child Pariksit (One
who has been tested)”. d
When the powerful missile was flying straight tower ‘
Uttara’s womb Sri Krsna said, ‘‘Even though the chi
in the womb will die of this arrow It will be reborn.
Oh, Asvatthama, you will be denounced by = “ahte
sinner for killing this unborn babe. oe Bons ao Pie
evil deed you will roam about in te with you; you will
thousand years. Nobody will associate oe
ee : You will be tormented by all
be shunned by socety. be which you have now
diseases on earth. But the babe : rill
ae -and brave King. He wi
killed will be a famous scholar a1 : k
ily . sixty years. He will be known
rule this country for six A I am giving life to the babe
as the next Kururaja. Loo , orted Krsna, and Aégvatyou have killed”. Vyasa Supp action gave the jewel to
thama repenting on his hasty he forest with Vyasa.
the Pandavas and left for the to
3) Sonya of etd rang ue |
1 ; also 10r atu . “al
oe vitra, Acaryasuta, pane ara
oS "Dien Draunayani, ae ate ron )
Guruputra, Gurusuta Bee —— Steet Arata had
A I. Indravarma, val
pyr ae ~ name and it Was killed In the ba ec
by Bhimasena. (Sloka 15, Chapter |
M.B.). are. ‘eved that if one just thinks
‘war. [tis believe 1] cet
Nou it at daybrely midday, 204 FTG aa
salgcuai (il 8. Anusasana Parva, apte 2
t child of King Kuru. (See under
was Vahini. He 1s known
Hs ht 4005 Pariksit,, Sabaltive:
ihs ayan
eee a,
ASVAVAN. The firs
genealogy of Kuru).
as Aviksit also. He g '
Adiraja, Viraja, Salmah, 53, Chapter
and Jitari. (Slokas 50 to» ; 4
M.B.) 7 “VWINIDEVAS). satya al!
A (S) (ASVI lled
ASVINIRUMAD™ (8) sa Siirya (The Sun) ne _
Dery Te Fe. (lates LY ately. SHEPIh ne
tae a They are also known
§dasana farva, Os"
90, Drona Parva, —
ASVINIKUMARA(S) ASVINIDEVAS
and Aésvinidevas. These two are the physicians
us a devas. (Sloka 12, Chapter 123, Aranya Parva,
1) Genealogy. Descending from Visnu in order are :
Brahma, Marici, ° Kasyapa, Vivasvan (the Sun),
A§$vinikumaras.
2) Birth, The Visnu Purana describes the birth thus:
“Samjfia, daughter of Visvakarma, was the wife of
Siirya. She got three children : Manu, Yama and Yami.
Once finding the effulgence of Sirya unbearable she
engaged Chaya to look after Sirya and left for the
forests to do penance there. Surya took Chaya to be
Samjfiad and got three children of her : Sanaigcara,
(another) Manu and Tapati. Once Chaya got angry
and cursed Yama. It was then that Sirya and Yama
came to know that she was not Sarnjiia, getting more
details from Chaya, Siirya found out by his Jfianadrsti
(a power of sight developed by Yoga by which one
could see things far beyond the limits of his vision )
that Sarhjfia was practising austerities taking the form of
amare. Then Stirya went to her disguised as a horse
and with her co-operation produced three children of
which the first two became known as Agvinikumiaras. The
third son was called Revanta. Then Sirya took Samjia
to his place (Chapter 2, Amga 3, Visnu Purana).
Sloka 35 of Chapter 66 of Adi Parva states that Agvinikumaras were born from the nose of Sarjiia.
3) How Asvinikumdaras tested Sukanya. The Devi Bhagavata containsa story of how the Aévinikumaras tested
the fidelity of Sukanya, daughter of Saryati and made
her old and senile husband into a young and virile one.
aryati, son of Vaivasvata manu, had four thousand
beautiful princesses as wives. But none had any children. When they were lamenting over this misfortune
one of the wives gave birth to a girl and she was called
Sukanya. The father and all his wives together brought
up this daughter with great affection.
In the neighbourhood of the palace of Saryati there was
a tapovana as good and grand as Nandanavana and it
contained a lake similar to the Manasa lake. In one
corner of this tapovana a sage named Cyavana was
doing penance. He had been sitting there for so long a
period without food meditating on a goddess that he was
covered with plants and shrubs had grown over him. He
was unaware of the growth around him. Once at this
time Saryati with his wives and child and followed by a
large retinue entered the tapovana for recreation. The
King and his wives entered the lake and Sukanya with
her friends moved about in the garden plucking flowers
and playing. Moving about thus aimlessly Sukanya and
party reached the place where Cyavana was doing
penance. She saw the huge shrubby growth and while
looking at it saw two gleaming points inside the shrubby
heap. She was about to break open the thing when trom
inside she heard somebody addressing her thus : ‘Oh,
innocent girl, why do you think of doing this mischief.
Please do go your way. I am an ascetic. What wrong
have I done to you for you to disturb me like this ? But
Sukanya brought up as she was, as a very pet girl did
not like anybody advising her like this and so taking a
pointed stick gave two pricks at the site of the gleampoints and left the place arrogantly.
The gleam-points were the eyes of Cyavana and so he
lost his eyes and suffered much from the pain. Though
he felt angry he did not curse anybody. But slowly the

ASVINIKUMARA(S) (ASVINIDEVAS) 70
country began to witness the evil effects of this cruel
deed. People stopped passing urine or faeces. Even
animals were affected. The King and his ministers were
worried. People came on deputation to the King to
describe the disaster that had gripped the state. The
King began to doubt that somebody must have done some
great injury to the sage, Cyavana. He started enquiries
asking his subjects one by one about this. But everybody
replied in the negative. He bribed, he threatened. The
result was the same. Then one day while the King and
his courtiers were sitting despondent Sukanya approached her father and confessed what she had done. She
said: “While I was playing with my friends in the
tapovana I saw this huge shrub-heap and two points
gleaming from inside. I took a pin-stick and pricked
them both and on drawing it out I found it wet also.
But I left the matter there and never made any
enquiries thereafter”. Saryati now knew the cause of this
national disaster and so unmediately rushed to the sage
for forgiveness. Prostrating before the rsi the King pleaded
“Oh, best of rsis, forgive us for this injury done unknowingly. My daughter who js only an innocent child did
this playfully while she was playing in this garden with
her friends. She never knew what she pricked for a fun
were your eyes. Oh, the best of Sage, thou art rich in
orgiveness and so please do condone this mischief and
bless us.” Cyavana replied that he would forgive if he
gave Sukanya in marriage to him. Saryati was depressed.
How could he give his only and beautiful daughter to
this aged senile ugly and blind rsi? While the King was
thus pondering over this, Sukanya herself came to him
and said, “Oh, dear father, please do not worry on
my account. I shall go as his wife. If he is satisfied
the nation would be saved from a calamity and I am
prepared to sacrifice my happiness for the sake of the
country. Iwill be only too glad to do so.’ With suppressed unwillingness the King gave his daughter in marriage to Cyavana.
Sukanya after her Marriage engaged herself fully in the
After finishing her meals she would come-again to her
husband and sit by his side Massaging him. In the evening she would make ready all the things required for the
puja and after the pija feed him with nourishing food.
Whatever remained after his feed would be taken by her.
At night she would be at the foot of her husband and
take a nap. In the morning she would attend to all the
— what is the reason for your living like this ?”
a anya replied, ““Revered Devas, I am the daughter of
ryati and wife of Cyavana. Forced by certain circumASVINIKUMARA(S) (ASVINIDEVAS)
stances my father gave me in marriage to this sage who
is very old and blind. He is living in the rama nearby.
I am living with him looking after his comfort, If you
think it convenient you can come and accept our
hospitality,” Hearing this the Agvinikumaras told her
thus : “Sweet girl, you are fit to be the wife of one who
is better than this blind old ascetic. So please do accept
one of us as your husband”’. Sukanya did not relish
this talk and threatening them that if they did not withdraw stopping such blabbering she would curse them
to ashes. The Agvinidevas were a bit surprised and also
frightened at the attitude of Sukanya. “Oh, Princess,
we are immensely pleased at your sense of righteousness
and chastity and you can ask of us a boon. We are
physicians of the devas and can give your husband his
sight and can also make him young and virile. But there
is a condition for this. As soon as your husband beromes young and handsome we will also become like
him and then you can select one among us. Are you
willing ? If so we will make your husband charming and
handsome at this instant.
Sukanya was well pleased with this offer but the condition placed did not satisfy her. Soshe ran to the agrama
and told her husband thus - “Lord, I met the Agvinidevas on my way from the river after my bath and
enamoured of my beauty they have made this offer. We
husband. I am not able to understand their cunning and
so I have come to you to get from you the answer for
their question. I am anxious to see you young and handSome with your eyesight regained. I shall do as you
direct.”’
Cyavana said : “There is nothing in this for great thinking. You go and tell them that you would do as they
wish and bring them down here. On, hearing this Sukany4
went to the Agvinikumaras and took them to the agrama.
They asked Cyavana to take a dip in the lake nearby
and as he entered the lake the Agvinidevas also entere
it and took a dip in its waters along with Cyavana. Lo!
As they rose from the waters al] the three became young
and handsome looking alike. The Agvinidevas then
requested Sukanya to select one among them. Sukany4
was in a fix and she prayed to her goddess to give her
power to identify her husband, She was blessed with
that power and she selected Gyavana from the lot at
Which the Aégvinidevas were also pleased. (Seventh
Skandha, Devi Bhagavata).
4) Cyavana’s gratitude. Cyavana who got back his eye
sight and youth asked the Agvinikumaras what boon
they wanted. They then told him thus : “We are the
physicians of the devas. Devendra has unnecessarily pul
a ban on our drinking Soma ( juice extracted from the
creeper Soma). When Brahma performed a yaga at
Mahameru this leader of the devas did not allow us to
take a soma drink. If you are capable of doing it you
should get us the right to take this celestial drinkCyavana promised to do that.

ASVINIKUMARA (S) (ASVINIDEVAS)
told the King the request of the Aévinidevas and Saryati
also promised his help on this matter. —
On their return to their palace Saryati decided to perform a big yaga to which all the devas were also invited.
Cyavana officiated as priest. The Agvinidevas were also
present quite to the dislike of Indra. The time came for
distributing soma, and when Cyavana called the Agvinikumaras to take their share Indra objected saying that
since they were physicians of the devas they op ney
be given that drink. Cyavana argued against ria
after a great verbal combat Cyavana erg ed in
making the A$vinikumaras take the drin ve pie
details. look under ‘Cyavana’. (Seventh Skandha, Dev
Bhagavata) . belie
‘nformation regarding Asvinikumaras. oe
My see Ee Sted, pagal This story is given
Apodadhaumya. ;
(2 t heen Mee and Sahadeva. Kunti, wife of Pandu,
had ere from Sage eee five sone a
f which would give her ,
ag ha aes Kunti ae the pe “i oe
tine one of them. Surya app
chevhad t a om a ow om him who became — aad
Teege _— By chanting the second, ee : Teonatt =
meditating on ms: tied ae ‘and Arjuna.
ane ; .
jie hae a i Midri and =
ts as cula and Saha
_ t Naku
(3) Te ainisGuevas were present for the marriage, of
ancaly apter ecge ee
Dunant pees t bm forest Khandava the Aévini
f Arjuna.
devas stood on the side of “4 gnant an
) ns pee ee who eae “3 e Ben |
he boy became known a
Chapter 62, Drona Part? -
(5) During the Leesan to
anded over some Parsa va D.}> ‘e f Ghee
38, Chapter 43, Salya Par ‘y much oblations ©
(6) The A évinidevas like i eapkt Pisan, ei ay.
es r Ln Parva, Wiibs)«
e € others who — hapter 65; Anugasana * mien) «5 the
“_—- (Slaka hs ; (October
The month o
Agvina (' man gives ghee to the
nth of Ag
rahmins freely 1 tha
month he will eed) éasana
ter ‘
Physical beauty. (Sloka 10, Chapte
Parva, M.B.).
) ion to the fire for
(8) One who offe
twelve months in §
the Agvinikumaras. (
ae M.B.). oath
The great P é
at on the 93rd SO ving
there is a belief that al 7
ag mat Moon) = aor d it iss 11)
10) Dirghasrava ‘ng and } =i +a 112, Rk 11).
‘ hé ‘devas to get rain” (Revedas Sikta Il ai desert
S eed water. \°- was lost in
a downpour of sweet WT Gotan ver. He prayed to the
(11) Once a ne er drinkin8 ace a well itself ae
ee Patel an. hirst of the sage. (Rk 9, 5u
Svinidevas thi
d the
desert and quencnhe
16, Reveda).
(12) The sage
technique, Madhuv
d bore a child.
tby surgery.
a Soka a
.D.). oo Agvinidevas
ate Skanda. (Sloka
- Ghee as oblat
will reac
uccessio Chapter
Sjoka 99; ‘ii
thol, in his com4 aor — states that
‘ond Candrasaryas (the
e same. aie
“¢ Di once praye
alee Sat that they gave
107, Anusasana
he Agvinidevas the
t le
Dadbyatic tans an interesting story
dya-.
ASVINIKUMARATIRTHA.
about it. It was Indra who taught this to Dadhyafic
and while teaching him he had threatened that if he
gave away that secret to anybody else his head would
be cut off. Agvinidevas found a way to tide over this
difficulty. They at first cut offhis head and fixed the
head of a horse on him. It was with the head of a
horse that Dadhyafic taught them Madhuvidya and
as soon as the teaching was over his horse-head was
cut off and the real head placed in its place. (Rk 22,
Sikta 116, Reveda).
(13) The vehicle of the Aévinidevas is a donkey.
Once this donkey in the disguise of a wolf went and
stayed with Rjra§va, son of the Rajarsi Vrsagir. Rjra-
$va gave the wolf to eat hundred goats belonging to
the people of the place. Vrsagir got angry at this act
of his son and cursed him. The son became blind and
he got back his eyesight by pleasing the Aégvinidevas
by prayer and offerings. (Rk 16, Sukta 115, Rgveda). )
(14) Once Surya decided to give his daughter in
marriage to the owner of the horse which would win a
horse-race which Surya would conduct. In the race the
horse of the ASvinidevas won and they thus married
Sirya’s daughter. (Rk 17, Sakta 117, Rgveda).
(15) The A$vinikumaras killed an ‘asura of name
Visvak and destroyed his dynasty also. (Rk 16, Saikta
117, Rgveda).
It is believed that the
physical beauty of man would be increased if he bathes in this lake. (Sloka 17, Chapter 83, Vana Parva,
ASVINISUTA. A son born to Sirya of the wife of
Sutapas. There is this story about it in Brahmavaivarta Purana. Once when the wife of Sutapas was on
a pilgrimage Strya happened to see her. The beautiful
and venerable lady refused to accede to the desire of
Sirya and so the latter used force and took her. They
had a son who was named Afvinisuta. On her return
after the pilgrimage with her son she explained all that
happened and the sage sent both of them out. Sirya
taught his son Afvinisuta astrology and made him a
master in that science. Knowing that, Sutapas cursed
him and said he would turn to be one very diseased.
Later the sage amended his curse and added that he
would be free from disease if he worshipped the sun.
ASVINITIRTHA. Promises bodily splendour if one
takes a bath in this lake.
(Sloka 21, Chapter 25,
Anu§asana Parva, M.B.).
h the country of ATALA. This is one of the seven sections of Patala. The
seven sections are : Atala, Vitala, Sutala, Talatala,
Mahatala, Rasatala, Patala. Of them Atala has been
described as follows : Atala is the first world of Patala.
There reigns Bala, the son of Maya who is the famous
but haughty magician. He has created 96 Mayas who
are capable of granting all kinds of desires. Even now
cewtain persons who are interested in the practice of
Black magic, learn some of these 96 arts and practise
them. When this mighty fellow opens his mouth for
yawning, three groups of women known as Purmécalis,
Svairinis and Kaminis emerge from his mouth, He has
with him a rasayana called hataka with which he can
eaisly entice and seduce all who enter Atala and to
strengthen them for satisfying his lust. After enticing
them with it, he enjoys uncontrolled pleasure with
them, showering on them his amorous glances, bewitch-

ATAVISIKHARA
ing smiles and émbraces. (Devi Bhagavata, Astama
Skandha).
ATAVISIKHARA. Name ofa village in ancient India.
(M.B., Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Verse AG |.
ATHARVA(M). Among the Vedas, this has the fourth
place. It comprises different kinds of incantations of
occult powers for the destruction. of enemies. Atharvan
the son of Vasistha was the author of this Veda. In
Chapter 6 of the third section of Visnu Purana the
following reference is made to Atharvaveda: “‘Sumantu
Maharsi who was of infinite glory, first taught this
Atharvaveda to his disciple Kabandha. (Sumantu
Maharsi was the son of Jaimini, who was the disciple
of Vedavyasa). Kabandha divided Atharvaveda into
two parts and communicated them to two Maharsis
named Devadarga and Pathya. Devadaréa’s disciples
were: Medha, Brahmabali, Sautkayani and Pippalada.
Pathya had three disciples named: Jabali, Kumudadi
and Saunaka. They also made Atharvaveda compilations. Saunaka divided his compilation into two and
gave one part to Babhru and the other to Saindhava.
Mufijikega learnt it from Saindhava and divided the
compilation first into two and later into three parts.
The five divisions of the Atharvaveda—Naksatrakalpa,
Vedakalpa, Sarnhitakalpa, Angirasakalpa and S4ntikalpa, were made by Muiijikeéga. Naksatrakalpa contains Brahma’s works : Samhitakalpa contains Mantra
Vidhi ; Angirasakalpa contains abhicara and Santikalpa
contains taming of horses, elephants etc.
The mantras (incantations) in Atharvaveda and their
uses are given below :—
Uses
Mantras
1. Suparnastava Getting rid of serpents and snakePoison ( Sarpa-badha-nivaranam im
2. Indrenadatta Fulfilment of all desires (Sarvakama-siddhi) .
3. Ima Devi Attainment of peace (Sarva-
| Santi-karma) .
4. Devamaruta Attainment of peace (Sarvasanti-karma) ,; |
9. Yamasydlokat Prevention of bad dreams (Duh
Svapna-Samana),
6. Indragcandragca Prosperity in commerce and
paficavanija business (Vanijya-labha)
7, Kamojevaji Enjoyment of women (Stri-
. saubhagyam).
8. Tubhyamevaja- Equal to thousand Sacrifices
: ee see Seeatashoma-tulyam)
. Agnegobhinna trengthening of the j
: n (Buddhi-vrddniy, ‘"° itellect
10. Dhruvarndhru- ttainment of Osts )
Gata (Sthana-labha) PO! honour
11. Alaktajiva- Profit from agriculture (Krsilabha). i
12. Ahan te bhagna Prosperity in general,
13. Ye me paga Freedom from imprisonment
| (bandhana-vimukti)
14. Sapatvaha Destruction of enemies (Satrunafam).
13. Tyvamuttama Enhancement of fame (yagovrddhi).
16. Yathamregavati Enjoyment of women (Stri saubhagyam ).
Lf Yenapehadisa Birth of children (Grabha-labha ).
yante yonih Getting sons ( Putra-labha).,
a
Mantras
19. Sivasivabhih
20. Brhaspatirnah
pari patu
21. Muficdvitva
When these mantras
made to the sacrificial
rice, milk
Purana, C
ATHARVA
Udyoga Parva
chanter of
Maharsi,
At that t
the Devas,
(M.B., Vana Parva, Chapter 222
Atharva recovered Agni,
which were lying dormant
(M.B. Vana Parva,
Atharva was born
Santi, the daughter
name for
fer to Citt
ATHARVA
of Siva. (MB.
ATHARVA
seen. It is said
veda.
was this
from heaven. Atharva had two
Citti. This Atharva was the sa
the son of Vasistha, (Bhagavata, 4th Skandha, Chapterl).
ATHARVANGIRAS. See ANGIRAS. h
ATHARVANA. A son of Vasistha. (Bhagavata, Fourt
Skandha, Verse ‘te
ATHIDA (M). Name of
India. (M.B
ATIBAHU.
his wife Prad
. and Tumburu.
ATIBALA.
Rama and Laksmana
Mantras,
hunger and thirst,
Sarga 22)
ATIBALA I
dhya with
nouncing
with Lak sman
Brahm
Poses of the inca
to Vaikun
On hearin
asi named
he had ¢
Rama sen
Agni hid himself under the sea.
ime, it was Atharva who, at t
After learning Brahmay
death of Sri
After the war
ATIBALA I
Uses
Prosperity in general (Saubhagyavrddhi).
Blessings (Marga-mangala).
Warding off death
nivarana),
are Chanted several oblations are
fire. Substances like Camata, ghee,
into the fire as offerings. (Agni
(Mrtyuare thrown
hapter 262),
I. This muni is referred to in Mahabharata, |
» Chapter 43, Verse 50, as a professional |
Chandaveda. Once under the curse of Bhrgu
(See ““AGNI’).
he suggestion of
went under the water and discovered Agni. f
; Verse 8). |
and re-created the worlds |
owing to the absence of fire. |
Chapter 222, Verse 19). |
from Brahma’s face. His wife was |
Citti was another
e Puranas which rerva. Also, there are |
ay that Atharva was Angiras himself.
This name has been used as a synonym
, Anugasana Parva, Chapter 17, Verse
of Kardama.
anti. But there are som
1 as another wife of Atha
hich s
III, In Rgveda another Atharva may be
that he was the author of the Atharvaidya from Brahma, a
ought fire to the earth
Wives named Santi an
me person as Atharvana;
Atharva who first br
a Janasthana (Town) in ancient
., Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Verse ica :
He was a Gandharva born to Ka$yapa y
ha. He had three brothers : Haha, Hane
(M.B., Adi Parva, Chapter 65, Vers
A mantra. Vis vamitra who took the boy
to the forest taught them tw = |
Bala and Atibala, to liberate them fro |
Valmiki Ramayana, Balakand ay |
The Mah
es €
R arsi Atibala was the cause of th
ama and Laksmana. -
with Ravana, Sri Rama returned to Ay’
his retinue and began his reign. After pnd
Sita while Sri Rama was living in the pala¢
4, Satrughna and their families, one he
d Yama and said : “Sri Rama is i
_ He has fulfilled all the P%;
Now Visnu has to be rec@
ration.
tha’’, .
§ this, Yama assuming the guise of a Sandy
Atibala appeared before Sri Rama. He oe
© tell a secret to Sri Rama. Accordingly I
t everyone else out of the audience cham

ATIBALA II
Laksmana was asked to guard the entrance. It was
announced that if anyone entered the hall, Laksmana
would be killed. .
At this stage, Maharsi Durvasas arrived at the entrance
accompanied by many of his disciples. He had come
alter having performed penance for a thousand years
and in great hunger and thirst. He wanted to see the
King to ask for sumptuous food. Laksmana requested
him to wait a little but Durvasas refused to do so. He
even threatened that he would reduce all of them to
ashes by his curse. Finding no alternative, Laksmana
entered the hall and informed Sri Rama of the situation.
Durvasas was given a sumptuous meal. But for the fulfilment of the condition Laksmana’s death became necessary. Sri Rama cried with a broken heart. The honest
Laksmana went alone to the Sarayi river and drowned
himself in its depths. Soon after,. Sri Rama entrusting
the affairs of the state to others and in the presence of
thousands of spectators Plunged into the Sarayd river
and renouncing his earthly life, returned to Vaikuntha.
(Uttara Ramayana).
ATIBALA II, The name of a follower given to Skanda
by god Vayu on the battle-field. (M.B., Salya Parva,
Chapter'45, Verse 44).
ATIBALA I Il. There was another King named Atibala
who was a great scholar in Nitigdstra. From the tine
of his accession to the throne, he began to lead a
Vicious life, This Atibala’s father was a King named
Ananga. (M.B., Santi Parva, Chapter 59, Verse 92) 7
ATIBHIMA. One of the sons of the Agni, Tapa. (M.B.,
Vana Parva, Chapter 220, Verse 11).
ATIKAYA. One of the sons of Ravana. a
1) Previous Birth. This is a story concerning the oe a
Stage of the creation of the Universe. After comp ;
the task of creation Brahm, in his pride fell into a ; . if
N order to slight Brahma a little, Mahavisnu Pe 2 ae
‘wo Raksasas called Madhu and Kaitabha from his 4
i . : 4A woke up in fear an
Hearing their terrible roar Brahma woke up
& Cel f Visnu called Madhu
ed to Mahavisnu seeking refuge. Set ‘Haod ley
4nd Kaitabha and asked them wha uld
7 lied that they wo
would like to ask. They proudly rep Avisnu wanted
In that case Mahavisnu
8Tant a boon to Visnu. kill them. They answered :
them to grant him leave to ki sce abou GAO HE
“We will not break our p on tn fighting has not been
So, Bak MnceOEE Dash desire.” Mahavisnu
abated you must fulfil our eager ete wack dicel
‘ ? boon be carrie
Said : «T agree, But let my wish is properly fulfillAfter that I shall see that om will be reborn under
ed. After your death, one chi r under the name of
the name of Khara and é shall kill Khara in single
Atikaya, In the Trétayuga assion for fighting. Laksmana
Combat ‘after allaying his Pt Ananta will fight with
is the incarneevction and kill him. Thus both
Atikaya to his full satisfactio
‘and Mukt.
of you will get aganeet i h made the two asuras
ee sauling Ae his thighs and killed so: aaeoagle
Sau : a Ba They were ee ae, K be da)
argan ‘ " nda),
Atikaya, (Kamba Ramey ut the birth of Atikaya
2) Birth. LA agrees of Kamba Ramayana: . cs
in the Yuddha Rubera Ravana was tamer a
his victory il On his way he saw ne eau -
Puspaka Ape ea playing in the valley o pe J,
erga Citrangi, the wife of Citrangada.
e
Who
73 ATIRATRA
Ravana seduced her and hada secret union with her. At
once she became pregnant and gave birth toa dazzlingly
bright baby. The mother handed over the child to
Ravana and returned to the world of the Gandharvas.
Ravana, in his paternal love, took the child Into the
Vimana and proceeded. On the way, the Vimana
knocked against a mountain peak and the baby was
thrown overboard and fell in the forest. Ravana stopped the Vimana and made a search for the baby in the
forest. He found the child without the slightest injury,
smiling and lying on a flatrock in the deep woods. He
failed in his attempt to take it up even though he used
ten of his hands. The child began to grow steadily in
size. Then he tried again to lift the baby up using all
his twenty arms. The boy, who had by this time grown
into enormous size, suddenly sprang up and getting into the Vimana took his seat in it. Ravana gave him the
name Atikaya. On his‘arrival in Lanka, he presented
him as adopted son to the barren Dhanyaméla.,
Atikaya_ was brought up by Dhanyamala.
3) Lhe Boons. Atikaya went to Gokarna and did penance to please Brahma. Brahma appeared, but being
fully absorbed in Samadhi, Atikaya was not aware of
his presence. Even his life-breath had been stopped.
Brahma, by his power, instilled life-breath into him and
restored him to consciousness, He granted Atikaya all
the boons heasked for. They were three in number.
The first was the gift of Brahmastra which could smash
anyone. I'he second was the gift of an armour which
was unassailable by anyone. The third was absence of
thirst, desire and other cravings.
4) Education. Atikaya went to Kailasa and received
his education from Siva. He learnt all the sclences,
Arts, Sruti, Smrti etc. from there. On the completion
of his course he asked what Gurudaksina he should
pay. Siva made him promise that he would never
practise Black magic. Pleased with him, Siva awarded
him the Paégupatastra.
9) Victory in Battle. Atikaya had an uncle, a Raksasa
named Candra. Once he was defeated by Indra. It was
at this time of chagrin that he came to know that
Atikaya had reached Lanka with the Pasupatastra.
Candra Raksasa ordered Atikaya to bring Indra as a
captive. Atikaya went to Svarga (Heaven) and began
a war with Indra. Mahavisnu who came to help Indra
used his Sudargana cakra. Atikaya shot his Pagupatastra. Knowing Atikaya’s history well, Mahavisnu
brought the battle to a close. Both parties accepted the
position that Devendra had lost the battle and Atikaya
had won.
6) Death. In the Ramayana battle Atikaya fought
on the side of Ravana. After a most terrible conflict,
Laksmana killed Atikaya. (Kamba Ramayana, Yuddha
Kanda).
ATILOMA. An Asura who was killed by Sri Krsna.
(M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 38).
ATIMANYU. He was one of the ten sons of Manu. .
ATIRATHA. There was a King named Matinara in
Paruvarhga. (See PORUVAMSA). Four sons were born
to him: Tamsu, Mahan, Atiratha and Druhyu. (M.B.,
Adi Parva, Chapter 94, Verse 14). .
ATIRATRA. He was one of the ten children born to
Manu by Nadvala. (See MANU VAMSA), Kuru,
Piru, Satadyumna, Tapasvi, Satyavan, Suci, Agnistoma,
Atiratra, Sudyumna and Atimanyu were the names of

ATISANDA
the ten brilliant sons of Nadvala. (Visnu Purana, Part
1, Chapter 13) .
ATISANDA. After his death Balabhadra Rama went
to Patala in the guise of Ananta. All the serpents worshipped him. Among them was a serpent named Atisanda. (M.B., Mausala Parva, Chapter 4, Verse 16).
ATISRNGA.Vindhya Presented two parsadas to Skanda
on the battlefield. They were Atigrnga and Ucchrnga.
(M.B., Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Verses 49, 50).
ATISTHIRA. Mah?meru presented two Parsadas named Atisthira and Sthira to Skanda on the battlefield.
(M.B., Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 48). ;
ATITHI (guest). In ancient Bharata Atithi-satkara
(hospitality to a guest) was considered as a yajfia. In
Manusmrti, Chapter 100, Verse 3, it is said that even if
one lives on the scattered grains in thé fields after harvest, and even if penance is offered in the midst of
Paficagni (five fires) unless the Brahmin who comes
as a guest is fed, all virtuous deeds would be useless.
Besides, Manu has made the following remarks about
the Atithi (guest). a
“A new visitor at night must be treated asan Atithi.
An Atithi is one who comes occasionally, not daily.
But one who lives in your village and goes about as a
vagabond for a living, does not deserve to be treated as
an Atithi. The guest who comes either before or after
mealtime should not be sent away without being fed.
Even a Vaigya or Sidra who comes asa guest toa
Brahmin’s house has to be given food when the servants
are given food.’
ATITHIGVA. He was a King referred to in the Rgveda. He had another name, ‘‘Divodasa”’. This King
had fought several battles against Asuras with the help
of Indra. It is said.that once, being afraid of the Asuras,
he tried to hide himself under the water. (Rgveda,
Mandala 1, Anuvaka 10, Sakta 53; Rgveda, Mandala
1, Anuvaka 16, Sikta 112).
ATIVARCAS. Himavan gave Skanda two Parsadas on the
battlefield. They were Ativarcas and Suvarcas. (M.B.,
Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 46).
ATIYAMA. God Varuna gave Skanda on the battlefield
two Parsadas (attendant soldiers). One of them was
Yama and the other was Atiyama. (M.B., Salya Parva,
Chapter 45, Verse 45).
ALKL-I.
1) The son of Brahma. Atri Maharsi was one of the
manasaputras of Brahma. ‘The manasaputras WEre :
Marici, Angiras, Atri, Pulastya, Pulaha, and Kratu
(M.B., Adi Parva, Chapter 65, Verse 10).
2) One of the Saptarsis. Brahma’s sons, Marici, Angiras,
Atri, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu and Vasistha are known
as the Saptarsis (seven sages). (M.B., Santi Parva,
Chapter 208). |
3) Creator of the pracetases. ‘Lhe sage Pracinabarhis was
born in the family of Atri Maharsi. Ten Pracetases
(Prajapatis) were born as the sons of this Muni. (M.B.,
Sakti Parva, Chapter 208).
4) Citra Sikhandi. Among the seven Munis known as
Citra Sikhandis, we see Atri Maharsi_as one of the
Astaprakrtis which form the basis of the Universe. |
5) Important events. (1) How Mahdavisnu became Atri’s son.
Kasyapa had a sonnamed Kasipu. He was avery mighty
ruler and carried on his reign in an ungodly manner.
In a terrible battle which took place at that time between
the Devas and Asuras Kagipu was killed. Prahlada beATRI I
came the Asura King. Then there wasa_ battle between
Indra and Prahlada. After six years’ war, Prahlada withdrew, defeated. Later Mahdabali, the son of Virocana
(grandson of Prahlada) became cmperor of Asuras. War
broke out again between Mahabali and Indra. In this
war, Mahdavisnu helped Indra. ‘The Asuras were utterly
.defeated. They sought refuge with Sukra, the Asura guru.
Sukra promised to help them. He set out to the Himalayas to receive a powerful mantra from Siva. The
Asuras kept waiting for Sukra’s return.
At this stage, Mahavisnu who was the protector of Indra,
came to Sukra’s agrama and killed Sukra’s mother,
Kavyamata. Seeing this impudence of Mahavisnu, Bhrgu
Maharsi was enraged and cursed him that he should be
born many times in human wombs. It is on account of
this that Mahdvisnu had to take many avataras (incarnations). It was in this way that Mahavisnu incarnated
as Dattatreya, the son of Atri. (Devi Bhagavata, 4th
Skandha).
(2) Altri and Parafara. It was a time when Vasistha and
Vigvamitra were in a state of mutual ill-will. Once King
Kalmasapada was going about in the forest on a hunting
expedition. He met Sakti, the eldest son of Vasistha in
the forest. The King did not respect him properly. Sakti
transformed Kalmasapada into a Raksasa by his curse.
The Raksasa who was also a cannibal, first swallowed
Sakti himself. Vigvamitra offered whatever help he
could, to destroy Vasistha’s family. Kalmasapada ate
successively all the 100 sons of Vasistha. Vasistha, in great
sorrow and Sakti’s wife, Adrsyanti lived in an aframa.
Adrgyanti was pregnant at the time of Sakti’s death.
In due course she gave birth to a boy who was called
Pardgara and who later on became the father of Vyasa.
when Paragara grew up, he came to know that his father
Sakti was eaten by the Raksasa. Enraged at this, he
started a yajfia to annihilate the whole race of Raksasas.
As the yajfia gained intensity and force Atri Muni arrived
there with certain other Maharsis and dissuaded ParaSara from the yajfia. (M.B., Adi Parva, Chapter 181).
(3) Atri’s dispute with Vainya. Atri Maharsi and his
wife once got ready to go for Vanavasa. At that time the
poor Maharsi’s wife was in great distress because they
had no money to be distributed to their disciples and
children. She requested her husband to go to King
Vainya and to beg forsome money. Accordingly the
Maharsi visited King Vainya at his yagagala (The shed
where a yaga is held). He began to flatter Vainya by saying that he was the first among kings and so on, Vainya
did not like it. He began to dispute with Atri. Vainya
remarked that Indra was the first King. To settle the
dispute they went together to Sanatkumara Muni.
Sanatkumara sent them away reconciled. After that
Vainya gave Atri much wealth. After distributing all this
wealth among their sons and disciples Atri and his wife
set out to the forest to perform penance.
(4) How Atri became Sun and Moon. Once there was
a fierce battle between Devas and Asuras. Owing to the
shower of arrows from the Asuras, the Sun and Moon
became dim. Darkness spread everywhere, The Devas
began to grope in the dark. They requested Atri Maharsi to find a remedy for this. Moved by their distress,
Atri suddenly transformed himself into the Sun and
Moon. The Moon gave light to the Devas. The Sun
burnt up the Asuras by his intense heat. Thus the
Devas were saved. This story was told by Vayu Bhaga-

ATRI I
ten lost le MBs Anu§gasana Parva, Chapter 156).
eae “ — — rsaderbhi. In the Mahabharata we
Kine eeds te out a difference of opinion between
ih be ae rbhl and some Maharsis. This story was
shen Ficus a to Yudhisthira about the kind of peree te ican oe may accept gifts: Once the
a icatiaea eile? Vasistha, Bharadyaja, Gautama,
Meee end’ Cons a a and Pagusakha, with Aruncravelled sound <0 who were the wives of two Munis
Brahmaloka An ic Meee ee obifech “wens: to BY to
el ee far Sat time there was drought in the
world. King Vrsadarbhi, the son of Sibi, suggested that
lg ey Munis should be called and given
ne pa aon to accept it. Vrsadarbhi Henanié
the enilicw a "im xine een ae
. ; eae ‘ : udhani <1twa :
be eng bhi o Yatudhani to Sema” Alt a
tos “len rasta, te Yatudhani was guarding a lotus pond
that _ — a ae led by Atri happened to come
Vatudhant Th gt oon were able to recognize
—"s eer or °y eat her with their tridandu (Trident
After satisfying hele Tenet a Fe eee ta ashen
ei Maharsis went to Bralunaiike TMB ne
rva, Chapter 93). sa imemetin f
(6) Atri and Sraddha.
harata in which Atri
bern belonged to Atri’s
riginated in the world which Bhisma had
> tol -
to Lage " Atri. A son named tiadiaows
came 1 ” NF: ri, the son of Brahma. Dattatreya beSun ch sion uml was his son. Nimi’s son died after
andl ee years. Nimi Who was in deep grief at the
~ 1 of his son, ordained a Sraddha in memorv of hj
n. On that occasion Atri Maharsj Sa
explained to Nimi the importance of eee ie hE
Anufasana Parva, Chapter 91. Verses wre ila
(7) How Brahma, Visnu and Mihetiars ( é;
as sons of Airt. | There isno other woman iva) were born
who surpasses Silavati in her fidelity to hee | neha
order to enable Ugrafgravas, her hisband. t = ae ci
Passion, she once carried him on her mre aoe ye
a prostitute’s house. On the way Mands gee cs
pronounced a curse that Ugragravas thould die a
Sunrise. The grief-stricken ilavati r as ee
counter-curse that the sun should not kg os t
day. As the sun failed to rise, the Trimirtis (B ee
Visnu and Siva), accompanied by Anasiiya, At ay a
vem to Silavati. Anasiya persuaded Silavati aaah: th.
raw her curse. The Trimitrtis who were ha be
success of their mission (of bringing about hes aytae
asked Anastya todemand any boon she wa c ed
siya expressed her wish that the Tritatirits Br hina,
Visnu and Siva) should be born as her pe ee
aBreail. | sons and they
Mahavisnu, under the name of Dattatreya. was bor
“a the wa of ee Siva was born to hier under fhe
ime of Durvasas. ere iS a story ab it j
manda Purana. Once Siva LOL a eae ee ee
They began to flee for life. But Brahma alone did not
run he Siva who became more furious at this
pinched off one of the heads of Brahma. Still he was
not pacified. Parvati who was alarmed, approached Siva .
and begged him to suppress his
<a anger. At
Siva’s fur y was transferred and deposited pres
ATRI I
Atri’s wife. Durvasas is the embodiment of that element
of Siva’s fury.
According to the promise, Brahma also took his birth
as the moon from Anasiya, the wife of Atri. (For that
story, see PURURAVAS). There is a story about that
also in the Brahmanda Purana. Once when Brahma
was performing the task of creation, he experienced
carnal passsion. Sarasvati was the offSpring of that
passion. When Brahma saw her, he fell in love with her
also. This made him feel angry towards Kamadeva. He
pronounced a curse that Kamadeva should be burnt up
in the fire from Siva’s eye. (This is why Kamaceva was
later burnt to death by Siva). Although Kama had
retreated from Brahma his passion had not been suppressed, Brahma transferred his passion to Atri Maharsi.
The Maharsi gave it to Anasiya, his wife. Since she
was unable to bear such a violent passion, she gave it
back to her husband. That passion emerged from Atri’s
eye in the form of the Moon. This is why lovers experience strong passion for each other at the time of the
rising of the moon. (Brahmanda Purana, Chapters
(8) Atri and Ganga Devi. |
was performing penance in K
a terrible drought in the country
Anasaya made a Sivalinga of sand and offered worship
to it. Then Atri asked her to give him a little water.
There was no water anywhere. Suddenly Ganga Devi
ya: ‘‘There will be
appeared there and said to Anasuya : e
a hole here. Water will come out ofitin a torrent.
Pure water began to flow from the place pointed out
by Ganga Devi. Anasiya begged Ganga Devito stay
there for a month. Ganga Devi agreed to do so on condition that Anasiiya would transfcr her Tapz §§ :kt1 to
her for one month.
Atri was pleased by drinking the water.
nice fresh water.
siya where she got such
ed to him all matters. Atri expressed his desire to sce
Ganga Devi. She appeared before him at once. Anasiya prayed to her that Ganga should continue to exist
in the world always. Ganga Devi answered that she
would do so if Anastya was prepared to give her the
fruit of one year’s Tapassakti and of devoted service to
her husband. Anasuya agreed to that condition. Suddenly Siva appeared there in the shape of a Linga. At
the request of Atri and Anastya Siva took his seat
there permanently assuming the name of ‘“Atrisvara’.
Once, while Atri Maharsi
Amada forest, there was
_ At that time, his wife
He asked AnaShe explain-
(Siva Purana). ; -
(9) Other Details. 1. Besides Dattatrey4, Durvasas
and Candra. Atri had another son, Pracinabarhis.
Chapter 208, Verse 6). (MB
(M.B., Santi Parva, ! ) =
2. Many Pavakas had been born in Atri Vamsa.
Vana Parva, Chapter 222, Verses 27-29).
3 When the Kaurava-Pandava war was paging ees
great fury, many Maharsis went to Drona anc # ee
him to stop the battle. Atri Maharsi was one fe)
(M.B., Drona Parva, Chapter 190, Verse 35).
med Soma performed
4. On another occasion, a King name |
a Rajasiiya (Royal sacrifice). At” en Yo ~
chief priest at this yaga. (M.B., Salya Farva, apter
43, Verse 47).
5. Atri was alse among the Maharsis who had gon> to
witness Paragurama's tapas. (Brahmanda Purana, Chapter 64).

ATRI II 76
6. Rgveda, Sth Mandala was composed by Atri. (Rgveda
Samhita, Preface).
7. Once the Asuras put Atri Maharsi into the Satadvara yantra (a machine of torture with a hundred
holes). Rgveda, Ist Mandala, 16th Anuvaka, Sikta
8. _ the Asuras tried to burn Atri alive. (Rgeveda,
Ist Mandala, 16th Anuvaka, Sikta 112).
J. The Asuras at another time made Atri lie down
in a machine with a large number of holes and tried
to burn him alive in it. At that time he prayed to the
Agvins and they liberated him. (Rgveda, Ist Mandala,
17th Anuvaka, Sikta 116).
10. Atri was among the Maharsis who visited Sri
Rama, on his return to Ayodhya after the war with
Ravana. (Uttara Ramayana).
Il. From the navel lotus of Visnu Brahma was born,
Atri from Brahma, Soma from Atri, and Puriravas from
Soma were born. (Agni Purana, Chapter 12).
12. Atri begot by Anasitya, Soma, Durvdsas and Dattatreya yogi. (Agni Purana, Chapter 20).
ATRI II. In the Puranas another Atri, the son of Sukracarya, is also seen (M.B., Adi Parva, Chapter 65,
Verse 27),
ATRI III. The term Atri has been used as an epithet
of Siva. (M.B., Anugasana Parva, Chapter 17, Verse
AU. This word means Mahegvara (Siva). (Agni Purana,
Chapter 348) .
AUDAKA. This is the place where Narakasura with his
ten thousand girls was once imprisoned. It is a plateau
on the top of Maniparvata. Because water was in
plenty there the place was called ‘Audaka’. An asura
named Nirt was the keeper of this plateau. (Sabha
Parva, M.B.).
AUDDALAKA. A holy place of ancient India. The
place got this name because the sage Uddalaka lived
there. It is believed that if one bathes in this holy place
one will be absolved of all his sins.
AUDUMBARA. The King of the state of Udumbara.
This king once paid respects to emperor Yudhisthira
and gave him several presents and gifts. (Sloka 12,
ee -_ rh ei M.B.).
A glorifying prayer in Sam veda.
36, Chapter 134, Vana Parva, M.B.) =
—_S ie ag ofancient India. Sri Krsna
conquered this land. (Sloka 16 ser
Parva, M.B.). ) » Chapter 11, Drona
AURVA I. (Urva, Uraja),
of Bhrgu Maharsi.
1) Genealogy. Descending in order from Visnu, Brahma
Bhrgu, Cyavana, Aurva. -
Cyavana Maharsi married Arusi, daughter of Manu.
Aurva was her child who was the grandfather of Jamadagni and the great grandfather of Paragurama.
2) Birth. The Preceptors of the Bhrgu dynasty were the
hereditary gurus of the Kings of Hehaya. Krtavirya a
famous King of the Hehaya dynasty and father of Kartaviryarjuna had his education from a Bhrgu rsi living
in his agrama. On competing his education the king
paid lavishly and the Bhrgus became rich thereafter.
Ftavirya died and his sons did not very much like the
hargavas ‘Bhrgus) becoming rich by the wealth of
their ancestors. Knowing this the Bhregus started burying their wealth under the earth. Once a Ksatriya
(Sloka
A fierce saint of the line
AURVA I
king forcibly dug out from the house of a Bhrgu the
wealth he had safely buried and from that day onwards
the Ksatriyas and the Bhargavas became enemies. The
Bhrgus were hunted down by the Ksatriya kings and the
Bhargavas frightened by this move left their abode and
went and hid in Caves in mountains far away. Among
those who thus fled was Arusi, wife of Cyavana. Arugl
was pregnant at that time and she hid her ‘Garbha’ in
her thighs while fleeing. A brahmin woman who saw
this went and informed the Ksatriyas and they immediately went and caught hold of her. Then the thigh
broke and a boy came out of it. Because he was_born
from the thighs the boy was named Aurva. (Uri
Thigh and so, born of a thigh). (Chapter 179, Adi
Parva, M.B.).
3) Lhe effulgence of Aurva. Aurva was born with fiery
radiance and the sudden effulgence made the Ksatriya
Kings blind. Frightened they craved for pardon an
praised him. They got back their eyesight then.
4) Aurva and Badwagni. Aurva bore a deep grudge
against the Ksatriyas who had massacred his fore’
fathers. Aurva started doing rigorous penance and by
the force of his austeritics the world started to burn. At
that stage the Pitrs appeared before him and persuade
him to withdraw from his Penance. Aurva then to
them thus: ‘‘Pitrs, while I was lying in the thigh-wom
of my mother I heard hideous groans from outside an
they were of our mothers when they saw the heads ©
our fathers being cut off by the swords of the Ksatriy4:
Even from the womb itself I nurtured a fierce hatre
towards the Ksatriyas. No helping hand was rais€
before the pitiable wails of our mothers’’. f
The Pitrs were astounded at the firmness of the oan
Aurva and horrified at the thought of what —
happen if the penance was continued. They plead™”
again to cease his austerities and then submitting
their request Aurva withdrew the fire of his penan®,
and forced itdown into the sea. It is now believ™
that this fire taking the shape of a horse-head is es
living underneath the sea vomiting heat at all tim ‘
This fire is called Badavagni. More about this can di
had under the head Badavagni. (Chapter 180,
Parva, M.B.). ce
5) Aurva and the birth of Sagara. Ayodhya was Or
ruled by a celebrated King of Iksvaku dynasty na
Subahu. He had as his wife Yadavi a good natured A
well behaved woman who was a gem among quee ak
One day Talajamgha a King of the Hehaya tg
rulers who was then the King of Mahismati defer” ,
Subahu in a battle. Yadavi was then pregnant. Je pe
cO-wives poisoned her ; Yadavi did not die but
poison affected the child in the womb. ed
Alter the defeat, Subahu and Yadavi went and stayed
with Aurva in his agrama. For seven years they a ;
there and then Subahu died. Grief-stricken Yadav? ° fe
about to Jump into the funeral pyre and end het ipa?
when Aurva stopped her from the act pointing out sh?
she was soon to deliver a child. After a few months ind
delivered a son and Aurva called him ‘Sagara’ mea” ao
one with ‘gara’ (poison) in him. (Brahmanda Pur :
Chapters 16, 17). 0
) Aurva and the sister of Garuda. Garuda, — és
Vinata, had a sister named Sumati. Upamanyu, a ve
wanted to marry her but neither she nor her rela jn
liked it, Enraged at this the sage cursed Sumati 54
Al

AURVA II
that the brahmin who married her would have his head
burst. The marriage of Sumati thus remained a problem for her parents. There was a friend of Vinata, a
sannyasini, living in a forest and to find a way to escape
from the curse Vinata sent Garuda to her. The sannyasini advised Garuda to approach Aurva to find asolution
for the problem and Aurva was therefore approached
for advice,
It was at this time that the people of Ayodhya came in
search of Subahu and Yadavi who had left them years
before. When they knew of Subahu’s death they were
plunged in sorrow but were glad to know a son of
Subahu, Sagara, had grown up to bea successor to
Subahu. When Garuda made Aurva acquainted with
the pitiable tale of his sister Aurva decreed that Sumati
Should marry a Ksatriya instead of a brahmin and thus
tide over the curse. He then asked Sagara to marry
Sumati and blessed them saying that Sagara would one
day become an emperor and perform an Agvamedha
yaga. Aurva then sent Sagara along with the people
to Ayodhya where Sagara after defeating all his enemies
became the emperor of Bharatavarsa. (Brahmanda
Purana, Chapters 18-21). . no
Sagara’s sons and hozw Aurva helped in getting t wl
Sagara ruled the land for three thousand years. He ha
besides Sumati another wife, KeSini. Both of them bore
No sons for Sagara. Dejected he entrusted ae sou
tration of the state with his ministers and left for the
= rophesied
ama fof Aurva, Aurva blewed then. and prophen
and that Sumati would deliver sixty agent a *
no great use at all. Sagara and his Wes returl =
the palace and very soon both his wives oe Cosa
nant. In due time Kesin1 fe ck oe Gee of
named Asamaifijas. But Sumatt gave about to throw it
flesh. Greatly pained the mee ck ed him from
away when Aurva appeared there an t ee Gece of flesh
doing that. He directed him to ok ae soak a
into sixty thousand pieces —a rant be born from
jar of ghee. Every year one prince ixty thousand sons.
One of them. Thus Sumatt 59 aa
{ Ne ep _ 1? of his life Sagara
) Teaching of Aurva.
- Aurva gave
; érama of Aurva.
went and stayed in igen divine subject. He taught
him instructions on many 4 the four agramas, the
him about the importance a t castes of Brahrituals to be practised by a Sten til many such
mana, Ksatrlya; Vaisya and a Brahmajfiana.
other ‘things Finally Aurva aon a
(Chapter 8, Amsam 3, Vishnu *© ‘rsis together once
cate All the Bhargate v7 itd isited the
Z Snead of Aurva. Parasurama Vv
Stayed in
d paid respects to
Ag ‘during that time an
Arama one day ae BT Eu Cyavana, son of Bhrgu
me si — of Cyavana. (Brahmanda Purana,
cl © 63 ry of Malava.
Chaptre 63). n the coun in by his wife
brahmin living }
AURVAII. A named Sami
t a daughter Jy to Mandara, son
This brahmin g° married Very a After some
. she was ees
go er disciple a fully grown he went
; oe Mandara found his wt ‘ rva sent them both
Bays when ing his wife home. « “bl ssings. On thetr
to.Aurva'to Dring Tadara with his blessing oT nuist
to the house o et the Mahars! pen _
Me | alee i his sight. The sage cures
into lau
AUSIJA I. A King of ancient India.
AUSIJA II.
AVABHRTHAM
made them into two trees. When Aurva found his
daughter and: son-in-law missing he started a search for
them. -Then he came to know that both of them had
changed into trees by a curse. Aurva and his wife then
prayed to God for help. Aurva then lived in the tree
of Sama in the shape of Agni and Saunaka made an
idol of Ganapati with the root of the Mandira tree and
worshipped him. Ganapati was pleased by the devotional
deeds of Aurva and Saunaka and changed: the trees
again into Samika and Mandara. (Gane§a Purana).
AUSANAS (Kapalamocana). A holy place on the
banks of the river, Sarasvati. Brahma, the devas and
many maharsis lived here once. (Chapter 83, Vana
Parva).
This place is called Kapalamocana also. There is a
story behind the place getting this name.
At the forest of Dandaka Sri Rama killed many demons.
The force of the arrows took the skulls of the demons
to far off places in the forest. One of the skulls thus
sent far fell on the feet of a sage named Mahodara
who was then going that way. The-skull went deep
into his foot and not only did it wound his foot
but it stuck to his foot so hard that it could not
be drawn out also. With his foot in pains the sage
visited all the holy places but with no relief to his pain.
At last Mahodara came to AuSanasa and to his surprise
the skull came off from his foot healing his wound. He
remained there.for some time and obtained many divine
attainments. From then onwards the place was called
‘Kapalamocana’. After this incident Brahma, Vigvamitra,
Balabhadrarama and many such divine persons visited
the place. (Chapter 39, Salya Parva, M.B. )
He equalled
Indra. (Sloka 226, Chapter 1, Adi Parva, M.B.).
An ancient sage. There is a reference to this
sage who is the son of Angiras in Rgveda. This rsi was
a brilliant member of the-royal council of Dharmaputra. (Chapter 208, Santi Parva, M.B.).
AUSINARA (AUSINARI). Sibi, son of the King of
Uginara. See under Sibi.
AUSINARI (USINARA). A fidra girl born in the
country of Usinara. Gautama Muni got his sons
Kaksivan and others of this girl. (Sloka 5, Chapter 21,
Sabha Parva, M.B.),
AUSNIKA(M). An ancient place in India. The King
of this country paid respects to Dharmaputra offering
him several gifts. (Sloka 17, Chapter 51, Sabha Parva,
M.B
AUTATHYA. Son of Utathya (See under Utathya).
AUVVAYAR. A celebrated Tamil poetess. She was born
in a Paraya (lowest of the Hindu castes) family. Her
mother left her as soon as she was delivered and a
low caste Sidra brought her up. She lived for 240 years
before she left ona long journey never to return. She
wrote several books in Tamil. The important ones are
Atticiti, Kontaiventa, Mutturai, Natvali, Katvali
slukka, Nannitkova, Nantanikova, Aruntamilmala,
DarSanappattu, and Jnanakurul. She has made a dictionary in verses also.
AVABHRTHAM. The bath taken at the end of a sacrifice.
“Then all the Ksatriya Kings approached Dharmatanija (Dharmaputra) who had completed successfully,
under the protection of the Mighty Lord of the bow,
the cudgel and the wheel, the great sacrifice of the Raja-

AVACINA
siya (imperial inauguration) and taken the avabhrtasnana (the bath at the end of the sacrifice) .’’
(Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter 45, Stanzas 40, 41).
AVACINA. The son born to Jayatsena, a King of the
Piru dynasty, by his wife Sugrava the princess of
Vidarbha. To him was born Ariha of Maryada the
princess of Vidarbha. (M.B., Adi Parva, Chapter 95,
Stanzas 17 and 18).
AVADHUTESVARA. An incarnation of Siva. Once
Indra and Brhaspati went to Kailasa to do homage to
Siva who clad in air only hindered their way. Indra
requested that person to get out of the way. He requested repeatedly several times but in vain. Indra who got
angry took his weapon of Va jra. But Siva froze it. Moreover fire emanated from his eye on the forehead. At the
request of Brhaspati Siva turned the fire from his eye
towards Lavana Samudra (the sea of Salt). Jalandhara
who was killed by Siva had his origin in this fire.
(Siva Purana).
AVAGAHA. A warrior of the Vrsni dynasty. (Mahabharata, Drona Parva, Chapter I], Stanza 2d)
AVAISAKHA, (See Dhanagarma),
AVAKIRNA (M).A_holy place on the bank of the river
Sarasvati. (M.B., Salya Parva, Chapter 41),
AVANTI. A country called Malava in ancient
India. The famous Ujjayini was the capital of Avanti.
This city is situated on the bank of Sipra. The renowned poets such as K&lidasa and others, lived in this
city. This is one of the seven cities considered to be
capable of giving Moksa (heavenly bliss) . (M.B.,
Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Stanza 43):
AVANTI VAMSA. (Lhe Dynasty of Avanti). The
dynasty of Avanti Kings had _ its origin in the Yadu
dynasty. Candra was born to Atri the son of Brahma.
Budha was born to Candra, Puriiravas to Budha, Ayus
to Purdravas, Nahusa to Ayus, Yayati to Nahusa and
Yadu to Yayati. Yadu had five sons, the eldest of whom
was known by the name Sahasrajit. The rest of them
were known as Nilafijika, Raghu, Krostu and Satajit.
Sahasrajit had three sons called Satajit, Haihaya and
Renuhaya. Dharmanetra was born to Haihaya, Sahana
to Dharmanetra, Mahiman to Sahana, Bhadrasena to
Mahiman, Durgama to Bhadrasena and Kanaka to
Durgama. From Kanaka were born the four sons Krtavirya, Krtagni, Karavira and Krtaujas. Arjuna(Karttabecame the sg
lord of the earth comprising the Saptadvipa (Seven
Islands) by the merits of his penance. He got invincibility and thousand hands in battles, as boons He
performed ten thousand Sacrifices all in
with the rules and regulations. To €scape from loss of
great the extent of their might and prowess and the
number of sacrifices, offering of alms and penance done
be, would not stand on a par with him.
Karttavirya had a hundred sons, of whom the most
famous were Sirasena, Siira, Dhrsta, Krsna, and J ayaTenowned of these five
Avanti as King. Talajangha who had several
sons, was born from Jayadhvaja. .
*See Am Savatira.
AVATARA. (Incarnation) .
78 AVATARA
The family of the Haihayas was split into five. They
were the Bhojas, the Avanti family, the Vitihotra family, the Svayamjata family and the Saundikeya family.
(Agni Purana, Chapter 219)
AVARODHA. A King of the family of Bharata.
AVASANAM. An ancient Bath in Bharata, One could
attain the merits of Sahasragodana (giving a thousand
cows asalms) by bathing in this holy bath. (M.B.,
Vana Parva, Chapter 82, Stanza 128).
A The incarnations of Mahavisnu:—
1) General information. God takes three kinds of incarnations such as avatara, avega and améa. That which
has full power is avatara ; that which has power only
for the time being is 4vega and partial incarnation in
am§avatara.* The incarnations of Visnu are countless. Hermits, Manus, Devas (gods) and sons of Manus
are incarnations in part (amavataras) of Visnu. Complete avataras are ten in numbers of which Balabhadra
Rama is not considered as an avatara by some. InStead of him they place Buddha.
b) Reason for the incarnations. Mahavisnu has taken sO
many incarnations in the world. In the Sri Mahadevi
Bhagavata a story occurs to the effect that Mahavisnu
was forced to take so large a number of incarnations
due to the curse of the great hermit Bhrgu. The story
is aS follows : Kagyapa had a son named Kagipu. He
was daring and brave and ruled the country as an
enemy of the Gods. There arose a severe battle between
the gods and the Asuras. Kasipu was killed in that
battle. After Kagipu his son Prahlada became King.
He too was an enemy of the Gods. So there was @
battle between Indra and Prahlada. The battle continued for a hundred years. At last Prahlada was defeated. He felt very sorry at the defeat. So he anointed
Bali, son of Virocana, as King and leaving the Kingdom
he went to the Gandhamadana and began to do
penance. The fight continued between Bali and Indra.
In this fight Mahavisnu helped Indra. The Asuras were
completely destroyed. The defeated Asuras went to
their teacher Sukra who promised to protect them by
spells and incantations and herbs. The Gods knew
that Sukra had undertaken to protect the asuras.
Leaving the asuras behind, Sukra went to Kailasa to
get more power of spells and incantations from Siva:
Before going to Kailasa Sukra had asked the Asuras
Prahlada to the Gods for a truce. Prahlada, though a?
Asura was in good favour with the Gods. He reache
the court of Indra and said, “‘Gods, we have no desir
oT ait. How wicked a deed is battle and how delight”
ful it is to become a devotee of God ! So hereafter yor
will not be troubled by us. Likewise I hope you W
not do us innocent people any harm.”
The gods believed Prahlada. The Asuras, in the guls¢
of hermits waited for Sukra in the hermitage of Ka*
yapa. Sukra reached Kailasa and bowed before Siva a
requested that he might be given the power of defeat
ing the Gods by some means ulte unkn Brha>
' own to bre’
pati the teacher of the devas (Gods). Siva was 1”

AVATARA
trouble. He could refuse neither Sukra nor the Gods.
At last he told hermit Sukra that to come by sucha
spell he had to stand head downwards, inhaling smoke
for a thousand years. Siva said so thinking that when
the dreadful nature of the feat was considered, Sukra
might desist from the attempt. But Sukra began that
penance instantly.
The Gods understood everything. The deceit of the
Asuras, the crookedness of Sukra all were now clear to
them. They trembled with fear and began to consult
how to get over the difficult situation. Finally they
decided to goto war with the Asuras. The gods did
accordingly. The Asuras were in trouble. They were
not strong enough to face the Gods. So they all went
to Kavyamata, the mother of Sukra. The devas (gods)
with Mahavisnu at their head chased the Asuras. Kavyamata, by the merits of her devotional meditation
petrified Mahavisnu and Indra. Mahavisnu thought of
his Sudargana (wheel-weapon of Visnu) which instantly made its appearance and cut off the head of Kavyamata. The great hermit Bhrgu got angry because Mahavisnu committed woman-slaughter, and cursed him thus:
“You are a crooked being, a viper, a deceit. The
hermits who adore you as the seat of all that is good
are mere fools; you are wicked, of a black character,
and I curse you to take countless incarnations in the
world, and painful confinement by and by because of
your sins.” (Sri Mahadevi Bhagavata, 4th Skandha).
Thus having cursed Visnu, the hermit Bhrgu took naar
water from his water-pot and sprinkled it on the aoe
Kavyamata, who ao up as if ok ial (For the
remaining portion of the story see Sukra ).
2) Daca aa, (The ten Incarnations). Owing to the curse
of Bhreu, mentioned above, id
take pace incarnations, complete as well gee
Complete incarnations are ten In number. e}
called Dagavataras (The Ten Incarnations).
Matsyah Kirmo Varahasca
Narasimhasgca Vamanah /
Ramo Ramagca Ramasca
Krsnah Kalkir eee | {
Matsya (Fish), Karma (Turtle ¢ os
i (Ln ar).
als Baa, erate a? ome). These are
Krsna (Sri Krsna), Kalki (Yet toc ;
. eS: anardana.
the ten incarnations of J d one’ by one below.
The dagavatiras- are described ee
Ll) pn (Fish Incarnation). naa oa
son of Marici, and the grandson 0 men 2
a 4 b his wife Aditi. He was called - io
toe em ho was the son of Vivasvan is kn
re Sieg ET Manu. It was duras Va vasvata Manu or Satyavrata
: 1 asa
in th “time of this Manu that Visnu incarnated
Mat fish ). ; _
Omens nile Brahma was recitt
apriva, an asura, ate oh
ude Zr ma and with them he went under
a dfearthe stolen the first and —— ae are
Eg, win EE doing penance hee to take a bath.
He got down into the river ©; : “Oh King, I_ am
id to the Manu ; g
afraid of ag + bo So please don t forsake me’. Hear
afr
, Varaha (Pig), Narathe Vedas (the Scripale the Vedas from the
Mahavisnu had to under-"
. ce ee ee
ES ls Dt TE Bes |S SUC RRL a
ae Sas ee ies aa ke
AVATARA
ing this the Kind Manu took the fish in his hand and
put it in an earthenware pot and brought it up. In a
few days the fish began to grow. When the pot became
insufficient the King put it in a larger pot. When that
also became too small, the King put the fish in a pond.
When the pond could not hold the fish any longer the
King put it in the Ganges at its request. After a few days
the Ganges also became too small for the fish. Finally
the fish told the King: “Oh, King, within seven days
there will be a great flood in the world. You should
make a boat and take the seven hermit-sages with you
in the boat and escape. I will help you.”
Hearing this he got an immensely large boat ready and
obeyed the instructions of the fish. Within seven days
rain started in torrents. Everything in the world, the
moving and the not moving, were under the flood. A
horn began to sprout from the head of the fish. Manu
tied his boat on that horn. The fish reached the summit
of the Himalayas with the boat, which was tied to the
highest peak. Since the peak came to be called ‘Naubandhana Srnga’ (The peak to which boat is tied).
The rain ceased to pour. It was seen that everything
in the world had been destroyed except the Manu and
the seven hermit-sages and some of the germs, saved
in the boat. (This story occurs in the great Hindi work
‘Kamayant of JayaSankar Prasad). (M.B., Aranya
Parva, Chapter 187; Agni Purana, Chapter 2; Bhagavata
8th Skandha, Chapter 24).
This story of the incarnation of Visnu as fish is seen in
the Bible figuratively. ‘‘In the order of the generations
of Adam, the first creation of God, Seth, Enos; Kainan,
Mahalil, Jared, Enoch, Methiiselah, Lamech and Noah
were born. When Noah was five hundred years old he
begot Shem, Ham and Japheth.
There was a great flood during’ the time of Noah. God
said to him ; “The end of all flesh is come before one;
for the earth is filled with violence through them, and
behold, I will destroy them with the earth. Make thee
an ark of gopher wood; rooms shalt thou make in the
ark and shalt paint it within and without with pitch.
And this is the fashion which thou shalt make it of. The
length of the ark should be three hundred cubits, the
breadth of it fifty cubits, and the height of it thirty
cubits. A window shalt thou make to the ark and in a
cubit shall thou finish itabove and the door of the ark
shalt thou set in the side thereof, with lower, second and
third stories shalt thou make it. And behold, I, even I,
do bring a flood of water up on the earth. to destroy all
flesh wherein is the breadth of life from under heaven
and everything that is in the earth shall die. But with
thee will I establish my covenant, and thou shalt come
into the ark, thou and thy sons and thy wife and thy
sons’ Wives with thee, and of every living thing of all
flesh, two of every sort, shalt thou bring into the ark to
keep them alive with thee; they shall be male and female. Of fowls after their kind, and of cattle after
their kind, and of every creeping thing of the earth
after their kind, two of every sort shall come unto thee
to keep them alive. And take thou unto thee of all food
that is eaten and thou shalt gather it to thee, and it
shall be for food for thee and for them.”’ Thus did Noah
according to all that God commanded him, so did he.
And the Lord said unto Noah, “Come thou and all thy
house into the ark, for thee Have I seen righteous before me in this generation. Of every clean beast thou
ee ee ee
S , SO

AVATARA
Shalt take to t
and of beasts +
his female, O
hee by sevens the male and his —
hat are not clean by two the ma Se
aad f fowls also of the air by sevens the pe
th, the female to keep seed alive up on the face of a
© earth. For yet seven days and I will cause it to rain
UP On the earth forty days and forty nights, and every
‘Ving substance that I have made will I destroy from
off the Carth.”? And Noah did according unto all that
the Lord commanded him.
‘And Noah was six hundred years old when the flood of
waters was Up on the earth. And Noah went in, and
‘S Sons and his wife and his sons’ wives with him into
tne ark because of the waters of the flood. Of clean
beasts and of beasts that are not clean and of fowls and
of everything that creepeth upon the earth. There went
“1 two and two unto Noah into the ark the male and
the female as God had commanded Noah. And it came
tO pass after seven days that the waters of the flood were
“upon the earth. In the six hundredth year of Noah's
life in the second month on the seventeenth day of the
Month the same day were all the fountains of the
Sreat deep broken up and the windows of heaven were
Opened and the rain was upon the earth for forty
eys and forty nights. In the self-same day entered
0ah and Shem, and Ham and japheth the sons of
Noah and Noah's wife and the wives of the sons
with them into the ark. They and every beast after
his kind and all the cattle after their kind and
‘very creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth
and every fowl after his earth after his kind, every
Dird of every sort. And they went in unto Noah
into the ark, two and two of all flesh wherein is the
breadth of life. And they that went in, wentin male
and female of all desh as God had commanded him
and the Lord shut him in. And the flood was forty days
upon the earth, and the waters increased and bore up
the ark and it was lifted up above the earth. And the
waters prevailed and were increased greatly upon the
earth and the ark went up on the face of the waters.
And the waters prevailed exceedingly upon the earth
and all the high hills that were under the whole heaven
were covered. Fifteen cubits upward did the waters
prevail and the mountains were covered. And all the
flesh died that moved upon the earth, both of fowl and
of cattle and of beast and of every creeping thing that
creepeth up on the earth, and evcry man. All in whose
nostrils was the breadth of life, of all that was in the
dry land, died. And every living substance was destroyed which was up on the face of the ground both
man and cattle and the creeping things and the fowl
of the heaven, and they were destroyed from the earth.
And Noah only remained alive, and they that were
with him in the ark. And the waters Prevailed upon
the earth for hundred and fifty days.
And God remembered Noah and every living thing
and all the cattle that was with him in the ark and
God made a wind to. ee Over the earth and the
waters became calm. The fountains also of the deep
and the windows of —s lea Price and the rain
from heaven was restraine ; n 4 ig oy returned
from off the earth continually and after the end of the
hundred and fifty days, the waters were abated. And the
ark rested in the seventh month on tne seventeenth day
of the month upon the cc mee na arat. And the
waters decreased continually unt © tenth, month,
AVATARA
In the tenth month onthe first day of the month
were the tops of the mountains seen. And it came to
ass at the end of forty days that Noah Opened the
ae pn of the ark which he had made. And he sent
forth a raven which went forth to and fro until the Waters
were dried up from olf the earth. Also he sent forth
a dove from him to see if the waters were abated
from off the face of the ground. But the dove found
no rest for the sole of her foot and she returned
unto him into the ark for the walters were on
the face of the whole earth. Then Noah put forth
his hand and took her and pulled her to the ark. And
he stayed yet other seven days. And again he sent
forth the dove out of the ark. And the dove came
into him in the evening, and lo, in her mouth
was an olive leaf plucked off. So Noah knew that
the waters were abated from off the earth. And he
stayed yet other seven days and sent forth the dove,
which returned not again unto him anymore. And it
came to pass in the six hundredth and first year in the
first month, the first day of the month the waters were
dried up from off the earth and Noah removed the
covering of the ark and looked and beheld the face of
the ground was dry. And in the second month on the
seven and twentieth day ofthe month was the earth
dried. And God spake unto Noah saying: ‘‘Go forth of
the ark, thou and thy wife, and thy sons and thy sons’
wives with thee. Bring forth with thee every living thing
that is with thee, of all flesh both of fowl and of cattle and
of every creeping thing that creepeth up on the earth,
that they may breed abundantly in the earth and be
fruitful and multiply up on the earth. And Noah went
forth and his sons and his wife and his sons? wives
with him. Every beast, every creeping thing and every
fowl and whatsoever creep up on the earth after their
kinds went forth out of the ark. And Noah built an
altar unto the Lord and took of every clean beast and
of every clean fowl and offered burnt offerings o1: the
altar. And the Lord smelt a sweet savour and the Lord
said in his heart : ‘I will not again curse the ground
anymore for man’ssake. For the imagination of man’s
heart is evil from his youth. Neither will I again smite
anymore every thing as I have done. While the earth
remaineth seed time and harvest and cold and heat
and summer and winter and day and nignt shall not
cease. (Holy Bible, Genesis, Chapters 6, 7 and 8).
2) Kirmavatara. (Incarnation as a tortoise). Long ago
when Durvasas visited the realm of Gods he presented
Devendra with a garland made of flowers of exquisite
fragrance. Indra tied it on to the tusk of Airavata (the
elephant of Indra). When the beetles which gathered
on the garland for honey became a nuisance, Airavata destroyed that garland. Durvasas who got angry
at this cursed the gods as a whole that they would get
wrinkles and grey hair. The gods were advised by
Mahavisnu that if they got Ambrosia (Amrta—celestial
honey) from the sea of Milk by churning it they could
escape from this. Accordingly the Gods called the
asuras for help, and they approached the sea of Milk.
They made use of the Mountain of Mandara as churndrill and the huge snake Vasuki as churning rope, and
the churning commenced. The gods took hold of the
tail of the snake and as the churning was Pp
the churn-drill, the mountain of Mandara,
fixation at the bottom sank down. Then
roceeding
having no
Mahavisnu

AVATARA
took the form of a turtle, and got under the Mandara
mountain and lifted it up on his back. By the force of
lifting it went higher and higher up. Then Mahavisnu took
the form of an eagle and sat on the top of the mountain
and it came down a little and placed itself in the right
position. (Bhagavata, Skandha 8, Chapter 7; Agni
Purana, Chapter 3; Valmiki Ramayana, Balakanda,
3) Varahavatara. (Incarnation as a Pig). Jayaand Vijaya
were the two watchers who stood at the gate of Mahavisnu. Once the great hermit-sages Sanaka and others
reached Vaikuntha to visit Mahavisnu. Then Jaya and
Vijaya treated the hermits without respect. The hermits
cursed them that they would become Danavas (Asuras
or giants). They also said that when they were slain
thrice by Mahavisnu they would reach heaven. At
that period when hermit Kagyapa was carrying on
his evening prayer and devotional rites, his wife Diti:
approached him with lustful desire. KaSyapa told her
that as he was engaged in prayer and meditation it
Was not proper on her part to select that particular
moment for her lustful desire. But she persisted and
the sage yielded and out of that union two sons were
born. They are the two asuras Hiranyaksa and Hiranyakafipu. Of these Hiranyaksa was the incarnation of
Jaya and Hiranyakagipu that of Vijaya.* With the
birth of these two the whole world began to tremble.
These two asura brothers began to terrorize the world.
They wandered about causing destruction and devastation wherever they went. Once Hiranyaksa got down
into the ocean and began to beat the waves in the
Ocean with his cudgel. The ocean began to sway and
surge. Varuna (the Lord of water) was terrified and
he ran to Mahavisnu and sought protection. Mahavisnu took the form of a Pig and came to the ocean.
When Hiranyaksa saw Mahavisnu he took the earth in
his hand and ran to Patala (the nether world). Mahavisnu followed him and killed him and recovered the
earth. (Bhagavata, Skandha 3, Chapter 18; Bhagavata,
Skandha 2, Chapter 7 and Agni Purana, Chapter 4).
4) Narasimhavatara. (Incarnation as lion-man). With the
death of Hiranyaksa,. his brother Hiranyakagipu became
furious more than ever. He wanted to avenge the death
of his brother. His fury was turned towards Mahavisnu.
So he got on the top of the Mountain of Mandara and
did penance before Brahma and Brahma appeared and
granted him boons, one of which was that nobody but
Visnu should be able to kill him. He returned with
gladness and began to roam about torturing devotees
of Visnu everywhere.
A son named Prahlada was born to him. He was a god-
- fearing child and from birth an ardent believerin Visnu.
Hiranyakafipu tried his utmost to change his son to a
hater of Vismu. He got a special teacher for the
purpose and Prahlada was taken to the house of the
teacher to live with him until he changed his mind. The
result was that the teacher and all others who advised
him ultimately became believers in Visnu. Anger over-
.. topewered, Hiranyakasipu, Prahlada was thrown before
‘shad eléphants. But the tusks of the elephant missed the
aim and were driven into the earth and broken. Venomous snakes were employed and those which bithim had
their fangs broken. Finally the child was put in blazing
oandavakes their next birth they made their appearance as Ravnca and Kumbhakarna and during the third birth they we
AVATARA
fire. But the child felt the fire to be cool and soothing.
From that fire a ghost arose and tried to kill Prahlada.
Instantly the Sudargana, the wheel-weapon of Visnu
came down and cut off the head of the ghost. HiranyakasSipu jumped with anger and called out. ‘Where
Is your Visnu ?” His son replied that his Visnu dwelt
in every movable and immovable thing. Hiranyakasipu
kicked at a stone pillar close by and asked him, “Is
your Visnu in this pillar?’ Prahlada replied, ““My Visnu
is in Pillar and in fibre’. Before he had finished, the
Pillar broke open and a monster as horrible as the
Destroyer Siva, in the shape of a lion-man made its
appearance.
‘‘Mimamsamanasya samuthito ’grato
Nrsirhhariipastadalam bhayanakam
Prataptacamikaracandalocanam
Sphuratsatakesarajrmbhitananam
Karaladamstram KaravdalacaficalaKsurantajihvam bhrukutimukholbanam
Stabdhordhvakarnam girikandaradbhutavyattasyanasamhanubhedabhisanam
DivisprgatkayamadirghapivaraGrivoruvaksahsthalamalpamadhyamam
Candrarh$ugauraischuritar tantruhai- |
rvisvagbhujanikagatam nakhayudham.” |
“Before him who was waiting with curiosity to see what
would happen, with eyes blazing as molten gold, mouth
wide open in the middle of long bushy mane, tusks
long and curved and protruding fear fully, tongue swaying like a sword, eyebrows fierce looking, ears standing
erect and still, two nostrils as wide and deep as mountain canyons, jaws prominent and thick and broad and
set with fierceness, colossal body reaching the sky, neck
very thick and fat and short, breast excessively broad
and strong, waist very small and narrow, body thickly
covered with bushy hair exuberantly grown and as
yellow as the light of the moon, a number of claws very
sharp and pointed, the horrid monster Narasimha
(Lion with human head) suddenly appeared. (Bhagavata, Skandha 7, Chapter 8, Stanzas 20-22).
This was the figure of Narasithha. Mr. S. Paramesvara
Iyer, Ulloor, has described this figure in his ‘Bhaktidipika”’ as follows :
tongue as we
“Glari lazing cinder,
aring eyes burning as blazing cin k with folds,
dagger just used in piercing to death, nec
eyebrows looking mad, tusks like young moon, HEC
face with bushy mane grown to it, hair long ane aap
like pointed wire, claws looking like having drunk ee
body shining as if countless suns had risen toget Behe s
combined as if the fire of anger burning ete e
incarnated, in the shape of a lion up nta ‘
human shape beyond the neck.”’ (Bhaktidip ce) the
The horrid monster caught hold of Hiranyakasips and
King of the Asuras, pushed him to the oe routed
opened his heart with its fierce claws: ie a the inlike a spring. With ereat ferocity he P oe ania his
testines of Hiranyakagipu and isi Mitiada, with
neck as a garland and’ roared log ee of adoration
songs of praise and chanting of BY wed low down
pacified the stormy Narasimha and bowe
aT’ d with the devobefore him. The Narasimha was ee id and then disc the ¢
tion of Prahlada. He blessed 7, Chapter 8).
appeared. (Bhagavata, Skandha
re Sigupala and

a, =f
AVATARA ue AVATARA
Vamandvatara. (Incarnation as a Dwarf). It was to exvei the Emperor Mahabalhi, that Mahavisnu incarnat-
“d asa dwarf. To Kaégyapa, the son of Marici and
the grandson of Brahma, was born of Diti, Hiranyakasipu. And from Prahlada the son of Hiranyakasipu
was born Virocana and Bali was the son of Virocana.
Bali got the name Mahabali because of his prowess.
He was the emperor of the Asuras. A fierce battle
began over the Ambrosia got from churning the sea
of Milk, between the Asuras and the gods. In the battle
Indra cut Mahabali down with his Vajrayudha. The
Asuras took the body of Mahabali to Patala (the
nether world) where their teacher Sukra brought him to
life again. Then MahAbali worshipped the Bhargavas
and became more powerful than before and went to
heaven again and renewed the battle. This time he
defeated the Gods altogether and subjugated the realm
of the Gods who were scattered to all sides. The devas
or gods are the sons of Kagyapa born by his wife, Aditi.
She felt very sorry at the defeat of the gods. Seeing that
she was silent and sad Kasyapa asked her the reason.
She replied that she was thinking of ways to enable the
gods to recover their lost power and position. Kagyapa
advised her to please Mahavisnu by observing Dyadagi vrata (fast of the twelfth lunar night). Aditi did
so and Visnu appeared before her and asked her what
she desired. Her request was that Visnu should take
birth in her womb and recover Indra to his lost power
and position. Thus Visnu took birth as the younger
brother of Indra in the shape of Vamana (dwarf. )
At this time Emperor Mahabali was celebrating a sacrifice onthe bank of the River Narmada after having
subjugated the whole of the world. A large number of
hermits gathered there. Vamana also was among them.
He requested Mahabali to grant him three feet of
ground as alms. The teacher Sukra warned Mahabali
their lost places. (Bhagavata, Skandha 8
A description that by the toe of Va
(raised for measuring the third Step )
Brahma was cut open where from the Gan
is Seen in the Bhagavata, Skandha 5.
When Vigvamitra took Rama and Laksmana to th
forest they entered a holy hermitage and Visvamit “
told the boys that it was the hermitage where Aditi.
long ago had observed dvadaégi fast. It was
place that Vamana incarnated and place
the head of Mahabali.
“The bright Madhava took birth in Aditi as Vamana
and went to Mahdbali, requested for three feet of ground
and brought under control the three worlds for the good
of all. By binding Bali by might, he Lave to fridits at.
three worlds and this hermitage is the Place where ‘He
once placed his steps. I am a devotee of that Vamana.”?
Valmiki Ramayana, Bala Kanda, Sarga 29)... |
6) Parasuramavatira, (Lncarnation as Parasuréma) .
Karttaviryarjuna pleased the hermit-sage Datta
in that same
d his st€p on
Once
treya
the son of Atri, by doing penance and got the boon of
one thousand hands. One day he went to the forest for
hunting and entercd the bank of Narmada. The hermit
Jamadagni had been living there with his wife Renuka
and sons Paragurama and others. Lhe King being tired
of hunting got into the hermitage. Paragurama was not
there. The hermit called his divine cow Kamadhenu,
which provided the King and his followers with a very
good supper.
When the King departed he asked for the wonderful
cow. Thehermit did not consent. The King caught
hold of the cow by force and went to his city. Paragurama went to Mahismatinagar the Capital of Karttaviryarjuna, killed the King and took Kamadhenu back:
Irom that day onwards the sons of Karttavirya were
waiting for an Opportunity to take revenge.
Once Renuka went to the river to bring water. A gandharva (semi god) named Citraratha was bathing 1n
the river. She happened to look at him fora little while.
When she returned the hermit was very angry and aske
each of his sons to cut off the head of their mother. T hey
all refused. But Paragurama immediately obeyed his
father and cut off her head. His father was pleased and
said that he might ask any boon. He requested his fathe!
to bring his mother back to life. Accordingly Renuka
was brought back to life.
Once the sons of Karttavirya got into the hermitage:
at a time when Paragurama was away and_ cut off the
head of the hermit Jamadagni and took itoff’ When be
returned his mother told him how his father was killed.
She cried and beat her breast twentyone times, Paras
rama became an incarnation of revenge, and travelle
over the world twentyone times and killed every Keak
riya King. The blood of all those Kings flowed into on
channel and gathered in a holy Bath called Syaman@
paficakam. Thus Mahavisnu took his sixth incar ne
tion as Paragurama and fulfilled his duty of destroying
the wicked Ksatriya Kings (For details about Paras"
rama see under Paragurima and Karttaviryarjun@/’
(Bhagavata, Skandha 9, Chapter 16).
5 Peete _, Fan de
7) Sri Ramavatara. Mahavisnu took the incarnation ef
Sri Rama to kill] Ravana. (For further information 5
the words Sri Rama and Ravana).
8) Balabhadraramavatira. (The incarnation of Bala
bhadrarama) (See the word Balabhadrarama). p
9) Sri Krsndvatara. (The incarnation of Sri Krsna) (Se
the word Krsna). d
10) Kalkyavatara ( The incarnation as Kalki). At the or d
of Kaliyuga (the Age of Kali) all the people wou
become atheists and sceptics. Rewards will be receive
from the depraved. The classes wil be mixed. P eop
would become degenerate having no good qualities. _
religion called ‘Vajasaneyam’ with its fifteen doctri® a
only will be acceptable. People would become irresP?
sible wearing the garment of duty. Lawless pe°P .
would take the form of Kings and. will begin to el
men. In those days Lord Visnu will incarnate as Kal #
the son of Visnuyagas and the priest of Yajfiavalkya “168
learn the arts of wielding weapon and handling miss?
and destroy all lawless ones. The subjects will a
brought back to the four classes and the four agra ne
or Stages of life and the doctrines and directions O" be
long-established religion and peace and order wil

AVICI
restored. Then the Lord will cast away the form of
Kalki and go to heaven. After that, as of old, Krtayuga
(the first age) will begin class distinctions and the four
stages of life and such other establishments will once
more prevail. (Agni Purdna, Chapter 16).
3) The Incarnations of Mahavisnu.
It is mentioned in Sri Mahadevi Bhagavata, Skandha L.
Chapter 3 that Mahavisnu had taken the twentysix
incarnations given below :
1) Sanaka 2) Sananda 3) Sanatana 4) Sanatkumara
J) Varaha (pig) 6) Narada 7) Nara Narayanas 8)
Kapila 9) Dattatreya 10) Yajfia 11) Rsabha 12) Prthu
13) Matsya (fish) 14) Mohini 15) Karma (turtle)
16) Garuda (eagle) 17) Dhanvantari 18) Narasimha
(Lion-man) 19) Vamana (dwarf) 20) Paragurama
21) Vyasa 22) Sri Rama 23) Balabhadrarama 24)
Sri Krsna 25) Buddha 26) Kalki. (Information about
Matsya, Kiirma, Varaha, Narasimha, Vamana and
ParagSurama, are given under the word Avatara and
for the rest sée the same words).
In the first Skandha of ‘“Bhagavata Kilippattu” the
incarnations are exhaustively dealt with as follows : .
‘And after that to make it possible for the Lord with
four faces to rule his subjects justly and well. He took
Various incarnations with his portions, the first four of
which are four persons, Sanaka, Sananda, Sanatana and
anatkumara, in the order given, four or five-year old
children, well-versed in the four Vedas, the four always
inseparable wandered everywhere come to the world
to show the merits of Brahmacarya (the vow of celibacy). To kill Hiranyaksa and to lift up the earth a
took the form of Sikara (Pig). To show the eee e
tattva (essence) of Sat (good) and tama (dar nes)
He took the form of hermit Narada. To show the meri
of penance He became Nara and Narayana. To sim
to the world the meaning of ‘Sarmkhya Yoga ( c a
Philosophy dealing with evolution and ae wit che
Supreme Spirit) He came as Kapila the ar Be
teach the world the lew, of Atri. Then He came as
born as Datta of the wile o 1. ate
Veit t Deco’ a nT oT ten al flatten
was Rsabha, the noble King. 40 Sn0
he
o recover the Vedas
the earth He came as Prthu. I ro remove wrinkles and
Mats a ( fish) . d
an oe ees tad churned - a be tn na
then to lity the ae Ae give the world Ayurveda
as a bird He got up Dhanvantarl.
“os me as
(the scripture of medicine) ve ig nil Peart
© entice Asuras an
-- To save the devoted
form of Mohini. . form of
Prahisda anc 0 slay his her Ne ee ther of
| Seale we ive Mahabali and to cK ; ey oan
aan th aera We came. To destroy we wr of Jamahates at Brahmins He CT orasticll of Veda Vyasa.
dagni. Then he took the ! Phe BeGaiie é4 Rama.
owe tO gaye giant Ae padrarama. Then He came
, t He came
as Devakinuta [son of Deval EST OU ge end of Kal
eee att Wace i“ et “And there are many 1°
yuga rie will Co re
carnations still to speak O° ‘4
AVICI. One of the twentycis
are the twentyeight hells :
hells. The following
AVIMUKTA (M).
AVINDHYA
(1) Raurava (2) Sikara (3) Rodha(4) Tala(5)_ Visasana (6) Mahajvala (7) Taptakumbha (8) Lavana
(9) Vilohita (10) Rudhirambhas (11) Vaitarani
(12) Krmiga (13) Krmibhojana (14) Asipatravana
(15) Krsna (16) Lalabhaksa (17) Daruna (18) Piyavaha (19) Papa (20) Vahnijvala (21) Adhaéggiras
(42) Sandarhga (23) Ka4lasatra (24) Tamas (25) Avici
(26) Svabhojana (27) Apratistha (28) Apraci. (Visnu
Purana, Ara 2, Chapter 6).
The hell called Avici is described thus : “This is the
hell meant for those who stand false witness, who take
false oath and false name. The soldiers of Yama will
push these false people into the hell of Avici, from the
top of a mountwhich is a hundred yojanas (league) high.
The place of Avici, like the waves of the ocean, is swelling and falling and swaying and surging always. When
sinners fall there their bodies will be crumbled to pieces.
Their life will enter into new bodies and then the punishment will be repeated again and again.” (Devi Bhagavata, Skandha 8).
AVIJNATAGATI. Two sons were born to Anila, a vasu
by his wife Siva. They were called Avijiatagati and
Manojava. (M.B., Adi Parva, Chapter 66, Stanza 25).
AVIKAMPANA. This ancient King got from the hermit Jyestha Satvatadharma (righteousness). (M.B.,
Santi Parva, Chapter 384, Stanza 47).
AVIKSIT I. A famous King. The son of Karandhama
and father of Marutta. He was honoured even by
Brhaspati, having performed a hundred horse sacrifices.
Mention 1s made in the Markandeya Purana that Aviksit
had seven wives: Vara, Gauri, Subhadra, Lilavati,
Vibha, Mangavati, and Kumudvati. Besides them Vaisalini the princess of Vigal§ also was his wife. He had
taken this Vaisalini from her Svayathvara dais (the
bride herself selecting a husband from those who are
present), defeating the Kings who were present
there. Those defeated Kings, later, joined together and
defeated Aviksit and took hima prisoner. Finally Karandhama rescued him. His greatness is described as
follows:
“The righteous man Aviksit is equal to Indra in prowess. This austere and righteous man has become a
great sacrificer. In brightness he is equal to the
Sun, as forgiving as the earth, in intelligence equal
to Brhaspati and as firm as the Himalayas. By his
thought, word, and deed and self control and noble
actions he kept his subjects in peace and prosperity.”
bere Bharata, ASvamedha Parva, Chapter 4, Stanzas
AVIKSIT Il. Five sons were born to King Kuru by his
wife Vahini. Aviksit was one of them. [See the word
Vamsavali (Genealogy )].
The middle part of the city of Kagi.
There is a holy temple here. It is said that those who
commit suicide in this temple would attain heaven.
(Vana Parva, Chapter 64, Stanzas 78 and 79). For
more information see the word Divodasa.
AVINDHYA. A giant in whom Ravana had confidence.
But he held the opinion that Sita should be returned
to Rama.
“The aged giant and noble leader Avindhya, who had
earned the confidence of Ravana, brave, learned and of
good qualities, pleaded with Ravana and said that
Rama would exterminate the entire race of the giants

AVIRATHA
but the wicked Ravana would not pay heed to his
words.”’
(Sri Valmiki Ramayana, Sundara Kanda, Sarga 37,
Stanzas 12 and 13). This aged giant had sent T rijata
to the Agoka park to console Sita. Hear what she Says:
“The famous giant leader, the noble aged well-wisher
of Rama, Avindhya, had told me about you.”
“(M.B., Aranya Parva, Stanza 56). There is a situation in Vana Parva when this noble giant prevented
Ravana from his attempt to kill Sita.
“When he saw the decision of Ravana to kill Sita,
Avandhya pacified Ravana” and said, “you, a great King
of a great kingdom should not deteriorate to the level
of killing a woman. A woman who is in prison and at
your disposal is as good as dead. But in my Opinion, even
if you cut her body into pieces she would not die and
if she must die you will have to kill her husband.”’
(M.B., Aranya Parva, Chapter 289, Stanzas 28 to 30).
From this statement the wonderful intelligence of
Avindhya could be understood. It is seen in stanzas 6
and 7 of Chapter 291 of M.B., Vana Parva that it was
Avindhya who had taken Sita before Sri Rama when
he had captured Lanka.
AVIRATHA. A hermit of the family of Kardama.
Genealogy. Brahma-Kardama-Kapila - Grtsapati - Brahmana-Dhanvantari-K etuman-Aviratha.
AVIVAHITA. (Spinster). In the Mahabharata a
statement regarding spinsters and widows js seen.
‘Place meat on the ground and many birds will come
to it. So also men will gather round the woman who
is having no husband.” (M.B:, Adi Parva, Chapter 158,
Stanza 12).
AVYAYA. A serpent of the Dhrtarastra family. This
serpent fell in the sacrificial fire meant for serpents,
prepared by Janamejaya. (M.B., Adi Parva, Chapter
57, Stanza 16).
AYASSANKU.° A great Asura. He was born as 4 Prince
of the Kekaya kingdom. (M.B., Adi Parva, Chapter 67,
Verse 10).
AYASSIRAS. A son of Kagyapa by his wife, Danu.
(M.B., Adi Parva, Chapter 65, Verse 23). He was born
a prince of Kekaya. (M.B., Adi Parva, Chapter 67,
Verse 19).
AYATAYAMA (S). See Guruparampara.
AYATI. Son of King Nahusa and brother of Yayati.
(M.B., Adi Parva, Chapter 75, Verse 30)
AYAVAHA( M). place in ancient India. (M.B.
Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 9).
AYOBAHU (AYOBHUJA). A son of Dhrtarastra. (M.B.
Adi Parva, Chapter 67, Verse 98). Bhimasena killed
him at Kuruksetra. (M.B., Drona Parva, Chapter 157
Verse 19).
AYODHADHAUMYA —_ (Ayodhadhaumya),
dhaumya, Apodadhaumya, Dhaumya,
(sage). He had three disciples, Aruni,
Veda.
1) Disciple Aruni. He belonged to Paficala, and once his
guru deputed him to construct embankments in the
field. But, his attempts to construct embankments
did not succeed. Finally he lay himself in the field
where the embankment was required, and then the
flow of water stopped. The guru enquired about Aruni,
who was thus lying in the field. Then only he knew
the reason for Aruni’s absence. The guru went to the
field and called Aruni. Then the embankment burst
ApodaA great Muni
Upamanyu and
AYODHADHAUMYA
open and Aruni came out, and because of that Arunil
got the name Uddalaka. (M.B., Chapter 3, Verses
2) Dicciple Upamanyu. Once Dhaumya (the guru) asked
his second disciple Upamanyu to tend the cows. He
used to take care of the animals grazing in the woods
during daytime and return home at dusk and prostrate
before the guru. Looking at the plump and healthy
body of Upamanyu the guru asked him how he was
feeding himself. His reply was that he was begging
alms and feeding himself with what he got thus. Then
the guru asked him to hand over to him (guru) all
alms got in future. After that he used to give everything
he got by way of alms to the guru. And, he continued
returning to the Gurukula at dusk and prostrating before the guru. Finding Upamanyu even then as plump
and healthy as he was formerly, the guru said: My
son Upamanyu, you hand over to me all the alms you
get, and yet your body looks as trim as of old. How
happens it so?” Upamanyu replied : “After giving the
alms I get first to you, my guru, I do again beg for
alms and feed myself’’. To this the guru reacted or
My boy, what you do is not the proper thing. By t®
second course of alms-taking you stand in the way 2
other people getting their food. It is gross injustice
do so.” ol
Upamanyu, from that day onwards strictly folot
his guru’s instruction, and continued returning at dU
to the guru and doing obeisance to him.
Even then finding Upamanyu to be quite plump
healthy the guru told him : “Well, now you hand °
to me all the alms you get, and you do not take 4
a second time the same day. Yet you are quite fit 4
fat, How is it so ?”’ . on?
To this Upamanyu’s reply was that he was feeding bh! id
self on the milk of the cows he tended. The guru -
him that this too was not just and proper on his Pp?
The guru had not permitted him to drink milk huss pe
Upamanyu agreed to obey his orders. And, as ae 5
continued tending the cows and returning at dusk. y’
then he maintained the same plump and healthy P"
sique. And the Guru told him -
eat the food you get at the first alms-taking, you do ov
go in for alms a second time the same day, nor Bo
drink milk. Yet, how is it that you maintain the 5¢—
fat and healthy physique as in former days?” gay
Upamanyu’s reply was that he was feeding now-4-/ ne
on the foam of milk bristling at the mouth © nds
calves when they had fed on their mother’s milk. ut 9
“fost
and
yer
ms
nd
the guru said : “if that is so the calves will be,
kindness and sympathy for you, releasing much
of milk out of their mouths. That will affect the™- bi
do not repeat the process. Since the guru forbade —,.
to have food in any manner as detailed above, tat?
manyu, while tending the herd of cows in the fores’ {0
the bitter and poisonous leaves of a tree one ast
satisfy his burning hunger. The leaf was bitter. 1” w?),
and injurious in its properties. Therefore, this neW es 0
of satisfying hunger affected the health of the ey chi
Upamanyu and he became blind. Moving about 12 '
condition he fell into a neglected well in the woo? ot;
When, even after the sun had set, Upamanyu @! froP
as usual, return, the guru enquired about him . th4
other disciples. Naturally, they told the guru j rh?
Upamanyu was out in the forest with the cows: '
as follows: “You do ? t

AYODHYA
ACAMANA
guru felt that Upamanyu wa
taying away late i
forest since h 4 mart eat” ee search of Sita
thing he BaF galery! pay — from doing every- Laksmana, as ie ee panama Ye maging hes
orest accompanied by nose and breasts and Pres a ae Cue cut off her
away. ( Valmiki RamaOther disciples and called out fo
r Upamanyu, and neate S
Lf eoero responded from deep down the well. He AvOTANE ae Chapter 69).
Af er tila ." c sy eee pon yap pk son of Maharaja Bhan = ss Piru Varhsa; he was the
um that r ; E auma. RS Keune
Aévini Havas tee ail ls Le alg pray = the dha were the names nea iaee ea toh his t aut Akroed to the Aférama with other discipl mo and son. He came to be knows tering:
accordingly offered sia oar up ae os of his having performed 10 000 Pus Ayutanayi because
d 4 praises and prayed to the Asvini- Adi Parva, Chapter ; urusamedhas. (M.B.
‘a a who were so pleased with him thatthey appeared AYUTAYU ah os Y5, Verses 19-20) eh
a ore him and gave him a bread. Upamanyu refused The Puranas oat toe his state for 1000 years.
0 eat the bread without giving it to the guru. Then refer to him as tl Savata, the Matsya and the Vayu
the Aégvinidevas told him thus: ‘“‘In the past when we AYUTAYUS. F 1€ son of Srutagravas.
gave your guru a bread like this he ate the same with- Navama Skandhe) Fon, King Rtuparna. (Bhagavata,
sent giving it to his guru. You may just imitate him A. (at) This word tes y oaeel ony see Iksvaku dynasty.
and eat the bread yourself’. Even then Upamanyu did vakya (a word showing di eee na
not eat the bread. The Asvinidevas were so much form it means limit § cisrespect). In the indeclinable
ous at this that they blessed Upamanyu thus : “‘The ABHIRAS. ‘ft, anger and pain.
teeth of your guru will turn into hard iron and yours A few details: 1
Into pure gold. Your blindness will be cured and all the estuary of a aie |= people. People living in
lappiness and prosperity will be yours.” | generally called Abhiras Tn zat "3 and Sarasvati were
The blessings of the Asvinidevas took full effect, and bharata we find poe cierto native cf Maha:
iJpamanyu hurried to his guru and prostrated at his his victory march after the great Mahabha ople during
eet. Dhaumya and the other disciples of his congratu- 2) Once Abhiras went to Dhay te se
mia: Upamanyu. (M.B., Adi Parva, Chapter 3, Verses gifts. (Slokas 11-13. Chapter 51 Sabliz Pa ec
3) ees le. Veda. Ayodhadhaumya one day said to ee ar Fee hesied by Markandeya Rsi, moe
Veda ie t ird i I . “You stay with me for some- rulers of sates eee and Sakas would become
time g = —) Thee will bring you all prosperity in Kaliyuga (Sloka Se parts of Bharata during
Pate: BOVINE WG. mite wes M as 35-36, Chapter 188, Vana P
life.” Veda agreed, and stayed for “ long time in ne Be). , a Parva,
i ithout even the
Slightest murmur he put up with every discomiort and
hardship, be it acute hunger and thirst or extreme
cold or heat, and gladly performed all the work and
duties the master imposed on him. The guru was ab- 5) Petals of the hatred of Siidras and Abhiras
solutely pleased and his blessings es in Ve Pe Sa ice gg Sh gene a dissppeaved’ fron ee
e for the alsc!ple- (M.5., MB). okas 1 and 2, Chapter 37, Salya Hama,
a) In the Garudavyi
: davytha (Battle ar
rade ie he be uber
Dens Baton, MER ras also. (Sloka 6, Chapter 20,
Perity and omnipotenc 78.80)
arva, Chapter 3, Verses (0-267 * : ’
ahr North India which enjoyed great 6) Abhiras were Ksatriyas formerly. Afraid of Parag
rama they fled and lived in mountain-caves not a
AYODHYA. A city in N na ay years as the capi~
importance and reputation tor ma 2
‘al of the Kings oe the solar dynasty. (See Iksvaku (Slok. He etter work and thus became Sid
dynasty). All the Kings of this dynasty ruled ie mes 7) Wh 1H hapter 29, ASvamedhika Parva, M.B thy
try from this city as their — Lempee: abe Bsns v5 ates mac destroyed by floods ave ‘all the
precept f the Iksvaku Jas; Calne. eS * : i “Arjuna went north taking al
ing the period of the reign 0°, Kalmasapic» be ae ee a of Sri Krsna. At that time Abhiras nin
the thirtyfifth ruler in succession to Iksva hs a tiie oe altel (SI nf a attacked and carried away the
broke out between Kalmésapada, a iain, the King | M.B.). as 4/-63, Chapter 7, Mausalya Parva,
a hunti dition, an asis :
aati se tik ee the latter became @ aren fo oe Ga drink water three times accompanied
regaining his former orm as ae he ape'og twice and soonaian we nen with wathe slipé Yourdace
[ a 3 rs, P
friends a8 head once. This act is ma At se umes ie
ain. At the requVasistha and they i of his dynasty Vasistha “Trira
y elated. Triracamedapah pirvam
est of the King in the inte t]
2 ople were grea : . :
Panag Ayodhya, cae si < almasapada’s wife an ae pramrjyattato mukham
son was born to A frer that Vasistha used to go to z ani Calva spréedadbhir
as family precep- tmanam Sira eva ca”?
(Manusmirti, Sloka 60, Chapter 2 Me
that son was A$maka. installed
Ayodhya frequently one tmeof Si Ramathe@Y aw Bha
evi agavata in its eleventh Skandha says about
tor of the Iksvakus. 41" and glory, and atter
of Ayodhya maintained its Pall set in. Laudatory pe pends Uke this: “Drinking water by your right hand
is called Acamana. Curve your palm into the shape “
that gradually its decay an qd in most of the Puranas
rences to the city are fourmanda Purana etc. e a ke hold water in it and drink. There must 5
ike the Mahabharata, ; enough water in the palm to cover a green-gram '
Kosala). ; man. She met §ri Rama not less nor more. If it falls short or exceeds th seed,
AYOMUKHI. A Raksasa we to Matamgasrama 1 sure it 1s considered to be like drinking alcoho] “Whit
and Laksmana on their we

ACARAMARYADAS
shaping your palm neither your little finger nor your
thumb should touch the other fingers. At the time of
acamana you should support your right hand by your
left hand. Otherwise the water will turn impure.”
ACARAMARYADAS. See under Pijavidhi.
ADAMBARA. One of the five Parsadas whom Brahma
gave to Skandadeva. Brahma gave Kunda, Kusuma,
Kumuda, Damba and Adambara.
ADI. A mighty son of the demon, Andhakasura. He did
penance to please Brahma and obtained from him a
boon to seek vengeance on Siva who had murdered his
father. The boon.was that Adi would die only when he
left his present form and took another form. After
obtaining the boon Adi went to Kailasa and outwitting
the sentries entered the abode of Siva in the shape of a
serpent. After that he disguised himself as Parvati and
went near Siva. But Siva knew the trick and killed him.
(Srsti Khanda of Padma Purana).
ADIBAKA. A combat without serving any useful purpose and conducted out of sheer spite between two
people to the surprise of others. The fight between
Vasistha and Vigvamitra was of this kind. (Skandha 6
_ of Devi Bhagavata).
ADIGADADHARA. It was with the bones of an asura
(demon) named Gada that Mahavisnu made the first
gada (mace). By that mace Visnu killed Heti and other
asuras of that lot and got thename Adigadadhara (He
_ who first handled the mace). (See under Gada).
ADIKURMA. The mountain of Mandara which was
used as a churn-stick to churn the great milky ocean,
Ksirabdhi went down the ocean. Then Mahavisnu
took the shape of a tortoise to lift it up and this first
tortoise was called Adikirma. (Sloka 12, Chapter 18,
_ Adi Parva, M.B.).
ADIPARVA. One of the parvans of the epic Mahabharata.
__ It is the first parva. (See under Bharata).
ADIPARVATA. The place of abode of Siva in the
_ Himalayas. (Sloka 22, Chapter 327, Santi Parva, M.B.).
ADIRAJA. The son of Kuru who was a king of the
Piru dynasty. (See under Piru).
ADISISIRA. One of the disciples of SAakalya. Vyasa
made the Vedas and taught his son Sakalya a portion
of it. Sakalya divided his portion into five different
and equal divisions and taught each of his five disciples,
Vatsyayana, Maudgalya, Sali, Adigigira and Gokhalj a
_ division. (Skandha 12, Bhagavata) .
ADISTI. The disciple who was ordained by his preceptor to observe celibacy for a stipulated number of years.
ADITYA. The twelve sons born to the sage Kasyapa of
his wife Aditi are known as the twelve Adityas. They
are the following s Dhata, Mitra, Aryama, Rudra,
Varuna, Sirya, Bhaga, Vivasvan, Pasa, Savita, Tvasta
and Visnu. Besides these Aditi had twentyone children
including Indra. All of them are called Adityas meaning children of Aditi. From the thirtythree sons of Aditi
were born the thirtythree crores of devatas. Of these
_ the eldest is Indra and the youngest, Vamana. (Sloka
36, Chapter 66, Adi Parva, M.B.). (There is corroboration for this in Sloka 14, Sarga 14. Aranya Kanda,
Valmiki Ramayana).
Sirdar K.M. Panikar in his preface to the book ““Rgvedasamhita’’ writes thus about Adityas : “Generally we
think of Sirya (the Sun) when we hear the word
ditya. But there are many different Adityas in Rgveda, chief of them is Varuna. Though Savita, Pisa
AGNIVESYA (AGNIVESA)
and Mitra are all synonyms of Sirya in Rgveda they
are all separate devas. There is no end to the varieties
of Adityas and their prominence in the Vedas. Summarising we can say thus. The familiar devas like
Indra, Agni, Varuna and Siirya are not found in the
same form or power as we are taught to believe. ‘Those
whom we have lowered down to the posts of the eight
sentries of the universe are very prominent devatas in
the Vedas. Many Adityas have merged in Sarya and
winds in the god of Vayu. Rudra has merged in Siva.
Who will believe that the all-powerful Deva of the Rgveda and the vainglorious Indra who lives in fear of
_ men doing penance are one and the same person ?”’
ADITYAHRDAYA. A mantra (incantation) of great
power to destroy all enemies. During the combat with
Ravana at one time Rama fell exhausted in the battlefield. Seeing this the sage Agastya rushed to him and
taught him this mantra. (Sarga 107, Yuddha Kanda,
Valmiki Ramayana).
ADITYAKETU. One of the sons of Dhrtardstra. Bhima
sena_ killed him in the great battle of Kuruksetra.
(Sloka 102, Chapter 67, Adi Parva and Sloka 28, Chapter 88, Bhisma Parva, M.B.).
ADITYASENA. A very brave King. Stories about this
King are found in Kathasaritsagara. (Taranga 4, Katha_ pithalambaka) .
ADITYATIRTHA. An ancient holy place on the banks
of the river, Sarasvati. (Sloka 17, Chapter 99, Saly4
_ Parva, M.B.).
ADITYAVARNA. A king who always ordered without
thinking and repented later. The book Kathdsaritsagat4
tells the story of this King in the fifth taranga of 1%
part, Kathapithalambaka.
ADYAKATHA. A sage of old. He attended the sacrifice
conducted by the King Uparicara. (Sloka 9, Chapt
336, Santi Parva, M.B.).
AGNEYAPURANA. See under Agnipurana,
AGNEYASTRA. A powerful weapon or missile. On®
night Arjuna fought against agandharva, Angaraparm4:
on the banks of the river Ganges. Arjuna then describe!
to him how he came into possession of this missile. Th
powerful missile was given first to Bharadvaja by Brhaspatiand Bharadvaja gave it to Agnivegya who in tur?
gave it to Drona and the latter gave it to Arjuna, di
most favourite disciple. (Slokas 29-30, Chapter 170,
Parva, M.B.). f
AGNEYI. Wife of Kuru, son of Manu. Sambhu wife °
Dhruva gave birth to two sons, Sisti and Bhavy®
Succhaya wife of Sisti gave birth to five sinless 50?”
Ripu, Ripurijaya, Vipra, Vrkala and Vrkatejas. C4
susa was born of Brhati, wife of Ripu. Manu was ar
to Caksusa of his wife Puskarini, daughter of the gf ea
Viranaprajapati. Puskarini hailed from the dynasty .
Marutta. To Manu were born of Nadvala ten el
Kuru, Puru, Satadyumna, Tapasvi, Satyavan, SUG}
Agnistoma, Atiratra, Sudyumna, and Abhimanyu.
these, Kuru got of his wife Agneyi six sons:
Sumanas, Khyati, Kratu, Angiras and Sibi. Vena W
born to Anga of his wife Sunitha. (Chapter 13, Armsa
I, Visnu Purana).
AGNIDHRA. See Agnidadhra. -
AGNIVESYA (AGNIVESA). An ancient sage who rec¢!
an armourand the sacred mantras associated w!!
from Brhaspati. He was the Acarya of Dhanurveda 4
nga:
a
mo
ve"
fr it
j

AGRAYANA
the revered preceptor of Drona. (Slokas 67 and 68,
_ Chapter 94, Drona Parva, M.B.).
AGRAYANA. The fourth son of the Agni, Bhanu.
_(Sloka 13, Chapter 221, Vana Parva, M.B.).
AGREYA. A country conquered by Karna. (Slokas 19_ 21, Chapter 254, Vana Parva, M.B.)..
AHAVANIYA. An agni. (M.B., Adi Parva, Chapter
74, Verse 67).
AHUKA. A king of Yadu Vamsa. He was the father of
Ugrasena, the father of Karhsa. (Some Puranas say
that Ahuka and Ugrasena were the names of the same
person ). For genealogy, see “SYVYADU VAMSA”. In M.B.,
Sabha Parva, Chapter 14, Verse 33, we find that
Akriira had married Sutani, the daughter of Ahuka.
Ahuka hada hundred sons. (M.B., Sabha Parva, Ghapter
14, Verse 56). There were constant quarrels between
Ahuka and Akriara. (M.B., Santi Parva, Chapter 81,
_ Verses 8-11). ;
AHUTI. A Ksatriya King. Sri
i the city called Jarithi. (M.B.,
AJAGARAY “a ascetic. Santi Parva of a ae
its 179th Chapter states that Prahlada conversed with
this Save, a
AJAGARA PARVA. A pak ay
of Aabhirata. (See under M.D.) ;
iapanneies. The vrata practised by a ae
Jagara. (A vrata is a predetermined course O a
Which is followed with continued persistence). heer
Own words it is the following : “ll ] aN ye ae
will accept it but I will go cio ie oa ang
f ce a adbetio mg es a little and someced me well sometimes, aukas) KORRES
times not at all. I will eat vegetables Lond Been
times, I will eat meat ana any din big houses
soft bed or on bare earth alien —_" if I get
If T get the chance. I will wear costly
ins. If
them or I will wear dried leaves and aie: ines :
I get food from yagasalas I will Si es Chapter
will never go seeking for it. (Slokas .
ie Ht _
Pits pon "The howe z Mandhata_and Prt eras 33
Gandiva of Arjuna bear the name A a8eyo4 Chapter
and 34. Cha 126, Vana ila oe Ee lo
bt, Drane bids M.B. and Chaps
Visnu Purana) - family of Ajamidha.
AJAM ing born of the *4 Chapxy iyeye ds a of good horses. (Sloka 10, P
ter 270, Vana Parva, ae of Pitrs belonging to ia
AIFAPA(S). A Ga ihey are calles oe a
iat Ma Se yaa the ae 9 in the land o
ana ). sa eae ife
(Aiyam) (Matsye Their daughter ie oe ‘ the w!
of N ahiath, Srsti Khanda, Parad named ae =,
living } Sabha larva,
ARARGA. Poop Sioka 1. Chapter 34, 9a
Krsna defeated this King
Vana Parva, Chapter
on of the Vana Parva
on the walls of a Fort.
M.B.). F
Jes mace h these holes.
aA A ANSE oan el the fort pe great devotee
AKATHA Son of Mankana. r = burnt completely
f Si d : ace when his house We artially destroyed.
the iol of Siva inside his OWE as about, gv
C * a a
y — 4 —s ait oe to the flames when Siva
portion
~ there is no doubt about it. Elephants are an
ANA II
appeared before him and blessed him. (Patala Khanda
_ Padma Purana). eat
AKROSA. A king of ancient Bharata. He was king over
the land of Mahottha. Nakula conquered him during
his victory march. (Slokas 5 and 6, Chapter 32, Sabha
_ Parva, M.B.).
AKRTI. A king of ancient Bharata. This king ruled
over the land of Saurastra. (Sloka 61, Chapter 31
Sabha Parva, M.B.).
AKRTIPUTRA. Ruciparva, son of Akrti. He fought on
the side of the Pandavas and was killed by Bhagadatta.
(Slokas 40 to 47, Chapter 27, Drona Parva, M.B. Ms
AKUOTI. Wife of Ruciprajapati. Brahma’s son Svayambhuva Manu got of his wife Satariipa two sons Priyavrata and Uttanapada and two daughters Prasiti and
Akiti. Prasuti was married to Daksaprajapati and
Akiti to Ruciprajapati. :Akiti delivered twins named
Yajfia, a son, and Daksina,a daughter. (Chapter 7,
Vamsam 1, Visnu Purana). ;
ALAJALA. See under “YAMAJIHVA”,
ALAMBA. An ancient sage. He flourished in Yudhisthira’s court. (M.B., Sabha Parva, Chapter 5, Verse 5).
ALAMBAYANA. A comrade of Indra. (M.B., Anu-
$Gsana Parva, Chapter 13, Verse 15).
ALVAR. See the word NAMMALVAR.
AMA. See under AVATARA.
AMARATHA. A place in ancient Bharata. (Sloka: 54
Chapter 9, Bhisma Parva, M.B.).
ANA I. (A Malayalam word meaning elephant). Bhagavata relates the story of how Indradyumna became
an elephant by the curse of Agastya. (See under Indradyumna).
ANAII, (Elephant). Valmiki Ramayana narrates the
origin of elephants thus: ‘‘KaSyapa was born to Marici,
son of Brahma. KaSyapa married the daughters, Aditi
Diti, Danu, Kalika, Tamra, Krodhavaga, Manu and
Anala, of Daksaprajapati. Of these Krodhavaéa gave
birth to ten girls, Mrgi, Mrgamada, Hari, Bhadramata
Matangi, Sardili, Sveta, Surabhi, Suras’, and Kadra.
Elephants were born as the sons of Matangi. (Sarga 14,
Aranya Kanda, Valmiki Ramayana:). |
There is a story in the Mahabharata to explain why the
tongue of the elephant is curved inside. ‘“‘Bhrgu Maharsi
cursed Agni and greatly dejected over this he disappeared from public and hid somewhere. The Devas
started searching for him and it was an elephant that
showed the devas the hiding place of Agni. Agni then
cursed the elephants and said that thereafter all the
elephants would have their tongues curved inside. (Sloka
36, Chapter 85, Anugasana Parva, M.B.).
The signs of good elephants and the treatment to be
accorded to sick ones are detailed in Agni Purana.
“Elephants with long trunks and heavy breathing belong to the top class and they will possess great endurance power. Those who have nails eighteen or twenty
in number and who became turbulent during winter
belong to a superior class. ‘Those ones whose right
tusks are a bit raised, whose cry is stentorian as that of
thunder whose ears are very big and whose skins are
spotted are the best of the species. Other varieties especially the dwarfish type and she-elephants in the early
stage of pregnancy are not good and not fit to be tamed.
Elephants who have Varna, Sattva, Bala, Riipa, Kanti
Sariraguna and Vega will conquer enemies in a battle.
omament

ANA II 88 ANA II
- . The victory earned by a King with along with Cerupayar ) to which is added Cukku, Mulaku
oe pr a taowe cece, . 2 and Tippali. If it is Gulma it should be given sesame
For all diseases of an elephant Anuvasana or Sneha- oil boiled with the following: Trikotpakkonna, Cukku,
vasti is recomrnended. A bath after anointing it with Mulaku Tippali, Kotuvelikkilangu, Nagadantiveru, |
oil or ghee is good. For skin diseases the ghee may be Erikkinveru, Natkkotpakkonna, Milk and Attitappali. |
combined with Majjal (Turmeric) , Maramafijal or Navara rice with sort of cerupayar can also be given. |
gomitra (cow urine). If it suffers from enlargement ‘For swellings on the face, a paste made of tender |
of the belly, giving it a bath with sesame oil is good. Kivala fruits can be rubbed at the site of the swelling.
It can be given Paficalavanas and Varunimadya to For all sorts of pains in the stomach rice well mixed
drink. Ifthere is fainting it must be given rice mixed with the powder made by grinding together Vlalari,
with Vlalari, Triphala, Cukku, Mulaku and Tippali Kutakappdlayari, Asafoetida, Carala, Mafijal, Maraand water mixed with honey to drink. If there is head- mafijal may be given.
ache anointing the head with sesame oil and inhala- The best food for elephants is the rice of N avara, Vrihi
tion of the same is good. and cennellu. Yava and wheat are next to the above.
For diseases of the foot, treatment with Snehaputas is Any other food is inferior to these. Yava and sugarcane
prescribed. To get motion of the bowels Kalkanta will give strength to elephants. Dry yava rice is not
Kasaya (infusion of sugar candy )is good. To those who good. Milk and meat cooked with carminative ingrehave shivers should be given the flesh of peacock, dients are good for elephants who have gone lean.
Tittiri bird and Lava bird mixed with Lippali and pep- If the elephants receive great injuries ina battle the
per. For dysentery the tender fruit of Kivala, skin of meat of birds like crow, fowl, cuckoo and Hari mixed
Paccotti, flower of Tatiri should be dried and powder- with honey is good. F umigation by the burning of
ed and be given mixed with sugar along with rice. For chilli, fish, Vlalari, caustic soda, Puttal, Piram and
Karagraha (pain inside the trunk) Nasyam of ghee with Maramafijal mixed together is effective. Dropping
ntappd mixed in it should be done. It must be given honey medicated with tippali tandula, sesame oil, and
“Muttanga Kafici with tippali, Cukku and Jiraka in fruit honey in the eyes is not onl} good for the eyes but
it. For Utkarnaka (pain in the ear) flesh of pigs should is also inducive of digestion. Make an ointment with
be given. For Galagraha (pain in the neck) a liniment the faces of the birds cataka and Paravata mixed with
made of Dagamila, Mutirappuli and Kakkappancci in the burnt skin of Natpamara dissolved in light spirit.
oil should be rubbed at the site of pain and the elephant If this ointment is applied, the elephant would defeat
kept under chains. If there is difficulty in passing urine all enemies in a battle. Powder Nilotpala, Muttanga
light liquor containing powdered Astalavanas should and Takara and make an ointment using rice gruel.
be given. For all skin diseases use Vep oil as an oint- Applying this ointment in the eye 1s excellent.
ment and give the infusion of Atalotaka to drink. For If the nails grow they shouldbe cut at least once @ }
worms (inside the stomach) give cow’s urine with pow- month. Once ina month an oil bath is good for the
dered Vialari in it. If the elephant is getting reduced elephants. Elephant sheds should be spread with cowand Weak it should be given milk or meat soup with Cuk- dung discs and dust. Doing Seka with ghee during
ku, Tippali and grapes well mixed in it. If there islack | autumn and summer is advisable. (Chapter 287, Agni
of appetite it is to be given Mulgaudana (rice boiled Purana).
1. Vialari—The grain of Vlal—Vidanga (Babreng)
ee es of the three Tatts : |
a) amalaki (Emblic Myrobalam Vibhitaki (Belerj al and c) Haritaki obal
Cukku—Sun thi fe gingers =) si a) a ib ai |
Tiphalt eaktamarica (chilli)
ippali—Pippali (long pepper
Kiivala—Vilva (Renst Kins)
Paccotti—Lodhra (symplocos Racemosa)
Tatiri--Dhataki (Grislea Tomentosa)
Nasyam—A method of introducing medicine through the nose
Intappii—Sallaki Puspa (Flower of Boswellia Thurifera)
omc oo (Gyperus Rotendus) Kafici means rice boiled with water and Muttanga Kajici means rice and muttanga boiled
12. Jiraka—Jiraka (cumin seeds) a
13. Dasamitla—A combination of ten herbs. y
14. Mutirappuh
15. rn ga ~ -} Ratindn
16. Astalavanas—Eight salts like common salt :
17. Atalotaka—Atarisa ( Vasaka) ’ Fock salt, magnesium sulphate etc,
18. Cerupayar—Mudga (green-grain) | |
ig. Gulma |
20, Trikotpakkonna—Trivrt ( Turbithroot) G |
St ee ee (Plumbago rose) i
22. Nagadantiveru—Root of Nagadanti Glancous le ; 44)
28 Erilkin Veru—Root of Arkka camaaiie Swallow mae aia Bin en ee a
24. Natkko tpakkonna—Krsna Trivrt '
25. Attittippali—Hasti-pippali
26. Navara—Sastika—aA kind of rice.
27. Garala—Sarala (long leaved pine) ;
28. Mafijal—Haridra (Turmeric) |
29. Maramafijal—Darvi |
$0. Vrihi—Cinah (A kind of paddy) (Continued )
No
MOO Go MORE
= be

ANAKA 89 rane
ANAKA. A person of the Yadava dynasty. (See under ed in the ocean all the fortresses built by him and the
YADAVAV AMSA). place for some time remained as a forest-land. (Dagama
ANAKADUNDUBHI. An epithet of Vasudeva, father Skandha, Bhagavata Kilippattu). It was after that that
of Sri Krsna. | Sri Krsna made that Jand beautiful and called it
ANANDA, A forest on the top of the mountain Maha- Dvaraka. The country ruled over by Anartta was called
meru. It was inhabited by celestial damsels, devas, Anarttam. During his regime there lived in his land a -
gandharvas and Maharsis. (Chapter 93, Bhimi very great scholar named Vedaratha. (Umesanavrata,
Khanda, Padma Purana), _ Siva Purana) See under Vedaratha.
ANANDA (CAKSUSA). Sonof Maharsi Anamitra. It ANARTTA (M). A place in ancient Bharata. Arjuna
was he who was born as Caksusa, the sixth Manu. conquered this place. (Sloka 4, Chapter 26, Sabha
There is a story behind his birth. One day, while his _ Parva, M.B.). =
mother was keeping him in her lap and caressing him ANDHRA. The present Andhra Pradega. It was famous
the baby laughed and questioned “Oh mother why are even from puranic times and 1t was annexed by Sahayou caressing me, but look at those two cats. They _ deva by defeating its ruler in a game of dice.
consider me as their food”. After some time one ofthe ANGARISTHA. A king of ancient Bharata. (Slokas
cats took the child away and put it in the cradle of the ; IS and 14, Chapter 123, Santi Parva, M.B.).
child of King Vikranta, Vikranta took the child as his ANGIRASAKALPA. A samhita division of Atharvafor granted and reared him. At the time of Upanayana veda. The five Samhita divisions of Atharvaveda
the King asked the boy to prostrate before his mother at written by Mufjikega are the best. They are: The
Naksatra Kalpa dealing with the pija rites of the
Which t ‘claimed ‘‘Oh King, I am not your son.
teeming bo re ether place. By births and rebirths stars; The veda Kalpa dealing with the rites associated
all of us have many mothers and so it is better to be with Brahma, the Rtvik; The Samhita Kalpa, dealing
above rebirths”. After having said so much Ananda with the use and practice of Mantras; The Angirasa
Went to the forest and started doing penance. Brahma Kalpa dealing with sorcery; and the Santi Kalpa
appeared before him and blessing him said that he dealing with matters relating to the welfare and
Would become the sixth Manu and lead the world to control of animals like horses and elephants. (Chapter 6,
nanda was Arhgam 3 of Visnu Purdana).
right the blessing of Brahma A 5
S4teousness. By the (See under Caksusa). (Mar- ANGIRASI. A very chaste wife ofa Brahmin. By the
reb ak nu.
candeya — eae curse of Sakti, son of Vasistha Kalmasapada, a king of
ANANDAVARDHANA. A great critic of Sanskrit acer the Iksvaku dynasty became a demon. That demon
ture. He lived in the 9th century A.D. He expounde killed and devoured the husband of Angirasi. Enraged
his theory of Dhvanivada by 120 Karikas. His own at this the Brahmin lady cursed Kalmasapada saying
commentar of the Karikas is the book calles mare get that if he touched his wife thereafter he would die.
loka There are four parts for Dhvanyaloka and each That was why Vasistha had to beget a son for Kal.
tr eesti nan Cita. am ae masapada of his wife. (Slokas 16-22, Chapter 181, Adi
There is a belief among a few that the Karikas were _ Parva, M.B.).
ow 48 BDEE andthatAnanda- ANGHRIKA. One of the sons of Visvamitra who were
. hrdaya, ° .
Written by another scholar, 5a commentary on It. He Brahmavadins. (Sloka 94, Chapter 4, Anu§asana
it only a . =
ae. Sa Wr es aval council of a Parva, M.B.). | .
hmir during’ the period 854- ty ANJALI. A sage who was a classmate of Saunaka.
ae ae Shak Ke wrote Divapy B20 aoe (Skandha 12, Bhagavata).
elieve Dhvanya ee. . we
any commentaries have beet ante be ea citel ANJANA KULA. A division of elephants (in the
of which the one written by Abhin eit (Slokas 17 and 18, Chapter 112, Drona Parva,
ed to be the best. anu. He was a .
NARTTA. Grandson of Vaivasvatam _ ANUSASANIKA PARVA. One of the Parvans of the
ing, son of Saryati. . from Visnu-Brahma- Mahabharata. (See under Mahabharata’) .
1G Descending 10 order Saryati- .- =
- Genealogy. Descel Vaivasvatamanu - #ar) APA. One of the Astavasus. The Astavasus are Apa,
arici-Kagyapa-Vivasvan Ms ! Dhruva, Soma, Dharma, Anila, Agni, Pratyisa md
Nartta - asvatamanu: Manu, P bhasa The sons of Apa ar V a ‘ba ant
Sixteen ‘gons were born to vas Sudyumna, Iks- d Boami (See under i : or “co <a oo
Yama, Yami, Agvinikumaré, aaa ee em Narisyanta, 1 Visnu Purana). er “Astavasus). (Chapter 15, Amgam
vaku, Nr 8a, oa OP eagle OF these ae APAGA. A sacred river. It is said that if one gives food
Nabhaga, Prsadhra nd Anartta. Sukanya to one brahmin on the banks of this river it will be
equivalent to giving food to a crore of brahmins elseai hae beh where. (Sloka 68, Chapter 83, Vana Parva, M.B.).
. Varul se
ve children, Sukanya a
the wife of Cyavana. ___,
2) Other details. It was this Pe Petts
at the town of Kuéasthali ( ¥
31. Cennellu—Sali (Red rice)
32. Yava—yava (Barley)
33. Puttal
34. Piram ,
: i emai as ee .
36, Natpamara—four tree »
37. Nilotpala-—Nilapadma (Blu |
8. —Tagara , 41,
59. Seka A arip-bath with medicated Oo
Vata, Agvattha and Udumbara.
al ater-lilly)

APASTAMBA
APASTAMBA. An ancient sage. He once consoled
King Dyumatsena. (Sloka 18, Chapter 298, Vana
Parva, M.B.). a
1) How he got his name. Once a brahmin did not get
a suitable man toofficiate as priest for a éraddha ceremony. He then prayed to his ancestors, Visvedevas
and Mahavisnu for help and then Apastamba appeared
before him. The brahmin gave him food to his heart’s
content and asked him how he felt. To the surprise of
the brahmin Apastamba replied, he wanted some more
and thus made the Sraddha ineffective. The brahmin
got angry and cursed him by sprinkling on his face
water taken in his palm. But before the water-particles
reached his face Apastamba ordered the water-drops to
remain still. Water stopped stiff and still midway by
the power of the sage. Because water (Apa) became
stiff (Stamba) the rsi was named Apastamba. (Brahma
Purana).
2) How Apastamba tirtha came into existence. Once he met
Agastya Muni and asked him who was superior among
the gods Brahma, Visnu and Siva. Agastya declared
that Siva stood supreme of the lot and gave him advice
as to how to please Siva. Following his instructions
Apastamba did penance on the banks of the river Gautami and Siva appeared before him, blessed him, and
made that place a holy one. Siva declared that those
who, bathed at that place would obtain ‘Divyajiiana’
(Divine knowledge enabling one to know the past,
present and future). From then onwards that place
was known as Apastamba tirtha.
3) Other details. Apastamba had a very chaste and
humble wife named Aksasitra. Their son was Garki.
‘Grhyastitrasarngraha’ containing a prayer and two mantras is a contribution to the holy science by Apastamba.
Many Hindus follow it even now. He had stated
that the decrease in the number of great sages was
because of the fact that people were not practising the
control of the senses as before.
APADDHARMA PARVA. A sub-divisional Parva of the
Mahabharata. (See under Mahabharata).
APAVAN I. Another name of sage Vasistha. (Sloka 5
Chapter 99, Adi Parva, M.B.). |
APAVAN II. ‘An ancient sage., Karttaviryarjuna once
burnt the agrama of this rsi and he cursed Agni and
Karttaviryarjuna. (Slokas 42 and 43, Chapter 49, Santi
Parva, M.B.).
- (See Aycdadhaumya), _
PTA. A well-known serpent of the Kagya
. are 8, ie net Radi Parva, M.B.). yapa dynasty.
PURANA. A well-known serpent of the 4 -
nasty. (Sloka 6, Chapter 35, Adi Parva). oan dy
AR. The significance of the number six among the ancients, is given below. (In Malayalam Ar means six )
1) Six factors which reduce the span of life. Eating dry
meat, Drinking curd at night, Sleeping at dawn
Drinking impure water, .Exposure to sun’s heat in thie
morning, Inhaling fumes from dead body. ©
2) Six divine qualities. Omniscience, Omnipresence
Omnipotence, Sarvakaranatva (being the cause of
everything); Sarvanityatva (immortality) and Sarvesvaratva (having domination over everything) .
3) Six noblest qualities. Truth, Wisdom, Mercy, Justice
fortitude in grief, control of anger.
4) Six Rsi Dharmas (Duties of Sages). Brahmacarya,
ARUNI I
Absolute truth, Japa, Jiiana (wisdom), Niyama, Sense
of Justice.
5) Six qualities of noble wives. A minister in business, @
servant-maid in action, the goddess Laksmi in appearance, the Earth in patience, a mother in love anda
prostitute in bed.
6) Six qualities of a bad wife. Habit of dispute, stealing
of money, showing favour to strangers, scandal-mongering, taking food earlier than the husband, spending
most of the time in other houses.
7) Six Veddngas. Siksa, Kalpa, Vyakarana, Nirukta,
_ Jyotisa, Chandas.
ARALIKA. A mahout who could control elephants
that had gone mad temporarily. (Sloka 9, Chapter 2;
Virata Parva, M.B.). ;
ARANEYAPARVA. A sub-divisional Parva of the Mahabharata. (See under Mahabharata).
ARCOKA. A mountain in front of the forest Saindhava
inhabited by Manisipurusas. (Sloka 16, Chapter 129,
_ Vana Parva, M.B.).
ARJAVA. Son of Subala and brother of Sakuni. He
was killed by Iravan son of Arjuna. (Bhisma Parva
AROCAKA(M). ‘A country of ancient Bharata. The
people of this place are called Arocakas. (Sloka 1;
_ Chapter 51, Bhisma Parva, M.B.). f
ARSA(M). A form of marriage. Brahma is the form °
marriage in which the bride is given to a man of g0°
ancestry and fine character. Marriage by giving the
bride after receiving a pair of cows from the pride
groom is called Arsa. Prajapatya is the form of marriag”
in which the bride is given to the man who asks fo
her. When the bride is given with dowry, the marriags
is known as Asuram. Marriage with the mutual love as t
consent is Gandharva. Capturing the bride after a figh
and marrying her by force is Raksasa. Marriage 4 -
deceiving the bride is called Paigaca. These are ae
seven types of marriage. According to the author of i
Smrti another form of marriage known as DAIV4’
also mentioned. (Agni Purana, Chapter 154). a
ARSTISENA. A Maharsi. In the Mahabharata, V4"
Parva, Chapter 159 there is a reference to the Pan Pathe
visiting this sage during their life in the forest. ane
sena’s arama was midway between Badaryasrama ®
Kubera’s capital. us
Power of Tapas. In Krtayuga this sage did rigor ne
tapas in Prthidakatirtha. Owing to the rigour of ee
tapas he obtained all the chief vedas. He gave thr
boons to that sacred tirtha :—
1. ‘Those who bathe in this tirtha will get the ben¢
A$vamedha’ yaga.
2. There will be no fear of snakes in this tirtha.
3. A slight effort made here, will be rewarde
greater results. ait
After giving these three boons to the river Sarasv.
which is Prthidakatirtha the sage attained Brah yas
hood and entered Devaloka. (M.B., Salya PA?
_ Chapter 40, Verses 3-9),
ARTTAYANT,
for his great honesty and love of truth.
ter 32, Salya Parva, M.B.).
ARTIMAN. A mantra which eliminates all kinds
_ (M.B., Adi Parva, Chapter 90, Verses 23-26) .
ARUNI I. _A disciple of the sage Ayodhadhav
(For details see under Ayodhadhaumya) ’
fe"
ith
nott
(Sloka 56,
my”
Salya, son of Rtayana. He wa? char”
of fe"

ARUNI II 9)
ARUNI II. A cobra born in the family of the serpent,
Dhrtarastra. This cobra fell dead at the Sarpasatra of
, Janamejaya. (Sloka 19, Chapter 57, Adi Parva, M.B.).
ARUWI II. A son born to Kagyapa of his wife Vinata.
_ (Sloka 40, Chapter 65, Adi Parva, M.B.).
ARUNI IV. A soldier of the Kaurava army. He fought
against Arjuna along with Sakuni. (Sloka 122, Chap_ ter 156, Drona Parva, M.B.).
ARUNI V. One of the one hundred and eight Upanisads.
ARUSI. A daughter of Manu. Cyavana Maharsi married
her. They got a son named Aurva. The child was
taken from the thigh of Arusi. Rcika was the son of this
Aurva, Rcika was the father of Jamadagni, father of
Paragurama. Even from childhood Aurva was a ae
bright and good boy. (Slokas 47 and 48, Chapter 66,
_ Adi Parva, M.B.).
ARYAS. The Revede gives us most of the oe
regarding the Aryas who came to the north of In ua
during the times of the Vedas through the pees es
that north-western side of Bharata. Sirdar K.M. .P t
to the ‘Rgvedasamhita’ by -
he information available in the
Iture and says: “When the
India they were rich in
dogs, donkeys, and
n to them. In the
d not an elephWriting in his preface
allathol summarises t
Roeveda about Aryan cu
Aryans first entered
Cattle. They used to breed goats,
horses. The elephant was unknow
Vedas the vehicle of Ind a is a horse cy come on
ant. When hailing Indra_ they shout ee "anything
your horse-back’. The Veda does ae ate as his
about how Indra got the Satan ainst whom in
Vehicle. Sing to the glory of Indra oe would dare
his chariot driven by two horses no ene y
to f . ; ‘iculture.
The iaosila gives great DOE ee Uevara avid
reas under cultivation were ed waehine six, eight
setra’., Fields were ploughed A _ Water was taken
and even twelve bullocks to the p leat tanks) for the
from hradas and Kulyakas (ponds 20 sa very familiar
Purpose of irrigation. Agriculture a sorts of grains
es al O They used to cultivate a ducted trade by
and Srna caplud ite paw Lor where is a reference
the ex fgoods generany ia?
change ol g iska
N One —_ of the use of a coin ae: work, woodThe oe as were clever in te any well versed in mediWw z Ley were it is stated
‘Ork and metallurgy: mandala
- inth Fp o 4 ner.
CIne al: akta of the n! al practitio
€ also. In as a medical Pp Weave
that t er of a rgi was ¢ tries also.
hy lin = Ee to many eee time. Gotton
Ing was very important industry aan de by them ona
Cloth anil tien blankets en with great skill.
arg le. Iron was ust by h descriptions about
T aHee: of armours an ‘thes of the proficiency
een ~~ re ample evideny blacksmithy- Sea
- the Aryas in ir onmongery AP oferences to ener
cee them. t give
Vo miliar to - ar do not g
ae are indhu TV ice and ghee were
Cruising in boats in the 00 ]
. a , anima
Importance to the cruising: aT hed. Rsis wore
important. Meat was also re 4 shawls. as
. * tex E € Ww
skins but others wore ate her social one of famiJuring the Rgvedic times asa CO r of
divided into ea stages: ey society: . ae
les and was the nucleus of isaya- abe
Sramas formed into a piace nown. 4s stateof Visayas became oan was inderstood by the
Importance of Janas can
ARYAS
ments made about Paficajanas and the existence of
special Janas like Yadava Jana and Bhirata Jana.
There. is no wonder why the Aryas who had to live among
enemies accepted kingship. The Rgveda narrates the
difficulties people would have to encounter if they were
left to fight their enemies without a proper leader and
so advocates Kingship and gives it an exalted position
in their social structure. Sakta 22, Anuvaka 12 of
Mandala 10° describes the coronation of a King thus:
‘‘I do hereby crown you as King. Come to our midst.
Rule us with courage and an unwavering mind. Let
all your subjects love you. Let thy kingdom remain
with you for ever’. The next mantra is also of the
same idea. A King is above punishment. The veda
speaks about many famous kings of which the following
are worth mentioning. Divodasa, Sudas, Ambarisa,
Nahusa and Puriravas.
The chief priest was always the political advisor also.
Visvamitra and Vasistha were two great priests of the
Bharata dynasty. There were other priests also. Mention is there about a Rajasabha though nothing is said
about their powers or functions. It can be surmised
that the Sabha was constituted of only men of character
and learning. |
It is interesting to note the type of domestic life in
vogue then. A father had the right, to sell his children,
To cite an example is the story of SunagSepha who was
made into a cow and sold to Vigvamitra who looked
after him well. The father had the right to make his
children lose all rights over his properties. Vis vamitra
sent out from his family fifty sons who refused to obey
him. Dowry was current then. Sikta 11, Anuvaka 3,
Mandalam 10 ordains that the bride should go to the
house of her husband after the marriage. Polygamy was
not objected to. There is a mantra to harass the co-wife
and its purpose is to make the husband more attached
to her who hates the co-wife. The originator of this
mantra was Indrani, the queen of Indra. Indra had
many wives. Marriage was considered as a necessary
duty. Widow marriage was allowed.
The Rgveda gives the picture of a society of people
who were always at war with each other. ‘‘We are
surrounded by mighty enemies. Help us”. This is the
slogan that rings out from the Rgveda.
The Rgveda is a history of the Aryas. The march from
Kubhatata (Kubul) to the banks of Yamuna js depicted there. It was at Kubhatata that the mantras were
first made. When they reach the banks of the Ganga
the period of Rgveda ends. The crossing of each of
the five rivers of Paficanada is treated as a big event
by the rsis. When they saw the huge and deep river,
Sindhu, they were amazed. The wonder is reflected in a
lovely mantra. It was after crossing Sindhu that they had
to oppose the ‘Dasyus’. The Rgveda itself records that
the Dasyus were more cultured than the Aryas. Sambara, a Dasyu King, was the ruler of a hundred cities.
Their fortresses were strong. They have been described
in the Rgveda as A§vamayi, Ayasi and Satabhuji.
The chief opponents of the Aryas were a tribe of people
called Panis. From the Nirukta of Yaska we are given
to understand that the Panis were mainly engaged in
trade. The Rgveda names many Dasyu kings of which
the following few were more daring and brave and the
Aryas acknowledged their superior strength and courage:
Dhuni, Cumuri, Vipru, Varcis and Sambara. Among

ARYA
the several divisions of the Dasyus, the Simyus, Kikatas,
Sigrus and Yaksus ranked foremost in power. They are
described as having black colour and flat noses and
speaking a language different from that of the Aryas.
We may surmise from these facts that they belonged
to the Dravida class of people. They never conducted
yaga nor did they worship gods like Indra. They were
idol worshippers for they have been abused as ‘Siénadevas’. Later the Aryas learnt from the Dasyus the
worship of Siva, Devi and Linga.
Conquering these daring and cultured enemies the
Aryas reached the banks of the Yamuna to find to their
pleasant surprise a radical change in themselves. The
Bharatas settled themselves in the land between the
Yamuna and Ganga and remained friendly with the
Dasyus living to the east of Ganga. The Aryas who
settled down in Paficanada were strong and to prevent
them from coming and conquering them Bharata tried
to keep them remain on the other side of Sutudri
(Sutlej). This led to a war called Dasarajiia.
This war is to be considered as one of the most important of wars in the world. Those who opposed Sudas
were Aryas though among the supporters of Sudas were
also Aryas. It was the people under Sudas who came
out victorious in that war and put a stop to further
conquests by the Aryas. From thereafter the Aryas
joined hands with the aborigines and laid the foundation
for the great Hindu civilization. Thereafter the Rgveda
States about prayers for help to combat ‘our enemies
of Aryas and Dasyus’. The gods who were recognised
later were those who were not found in the vedas of
the Aryas. The worship of Mahayogi and Devi found
__in Mohenjodaro is an evidence of this change,
ARYA. One of the seven mothers who were present at
the birth of Subrahmanya. (Sloka 13, Chapter 228,
__ Vana Parva, M.B.).
ARYAKA. A famous serpent. (Sloka 7, Chapter 35,
Adi Parva, M_B. ) Aryaka is associated with Bhimasena
in the following story. Once Duryodhana gave snake
poison in his food to Bhimasena. Unaware Bhima took
his food as usual and went to bathe in the river. After
some time Bhima became unconscious due to the effect
of the poison ‘and fell flat in the river.
Immediately Duryodhana bound him by ropes and put
him In more deep waters. Bhima reaching the bottom
was bitten by all the snakes there. This fortunately
served as an antidote and the Polson in Bhima’s body
Aryaka who advised Vasuki to ive him < ana’
(Slokas 64-68, Chapter 127, Adj a MB) Po
ARYAKU. Another name for Durgadevi., (Chapter 12
Agni Purana). :
ARYAVARTA. Another name for Bharata. There js
also a place of that name. According to Smrti the land
lying between the Himalayas and the Vindhyas is called
_ Aryavarta. (Sloka 15, Chapter 325, Santi Parva, M.B.).
ARYAVARTA. A king of the dynasty of Vigvakarma.
Genealogy. Descending in order from Visnu are Brahma,
Dharma, Prabhasa, Visvakarmd, Priyavrata, Agnidhra,
Nabhi, Rsabha and Aryavarta.
Of these Rsabha got of his wife Jayanti twenty sons:
Bharata, KuSavarta, [lavarta, Brahmavarta, Aryavarta
Malaya, Ketu, Bhadrasena, Indrasprk, Vidarbha,
D2 ASANA
Kikata, Kavi, Hari, Antariksa, Prabuddha, Pippalayana,
Avirhotra, Dramida, Camasa and Karabhajana. Of these
Bharata ruled over this land and gave it the name
Bharata. Brothers of Bharata ruled different parts of this
land, Dramida’s land became known later as Dravida
‘(Daksinabharata) .
ASADHA I. A Ksatriya King. He was the incarnation
of a Raksasa called Krodhavaéa. Kagyapa was the son
of Marici, Brahma’s son. Kasgyapa married Krodhavasa, daughter of Daksa. The Raksasa group called
Krodhavasas were the children of Krodhavagi. Many,
Ksatriya kings trace their descent from this group 0
Raksasas. The names of such Ksatriya Kings are given
below: Madraka, Karnavestha, Siddhartha, Kitakariddha, Sub4ahu, Balhika, Kratha, Vicitra, Suratha,
Ciravasas, Kauravya, Dantavaktra, Durjaya, Rukmi,
Janamejaya, Asadha, Vayuvega, Bhiaritejas, Ekalavya,
Sumitra, Gomukha, Vatadhana, and Ksemadhiurti.
(M.B., Adi Parva, Chapter 6, Verses 59-64).
ASADHA II. Siva. (M.B., Anugasana Parva, Chapter
ly7, Verse 121).
ASADHABHOTI. See under Paficatantra.
ASADHA. Name ofa month. By feasting in this month,
one will have many sons and much wealth. (M.B., AnuSasana Parva, Chapter 106, Verse 26).
ASADHA. Name ofa star. After observing a fast o1 the
day of this star, if curd is given to a Brahmin of noble
birth, one can take rebirth in a family having mary
cows. (M.B., Anugdsana Parva, Chapter 64, Verse
ASADHAKA. A mahout in the Udayana story. ap
Kathasaritsagara, Kathamukhalamba ka, Sth Taranga, W
find a reference to an elephant called Bhadravati and 4
mahout named Asadhaka in the palace of the heroin®
Vasavadatta.
ASAMGA. See under ANASA. b
ASAMGAPLAYOGI, A King, who was generous PY
nature. In the Rgveda, there is a reference to this ae
who once lost his masculinity and was transformed i?
a woman but was restored to manhood by a Mur
named Medhyatithi. \ cen aay
ASANA. Posture in Yogabhydsa. There are differe
types of dsanas. The chief of them are given below:
1) Bhujaingdsana. Lying flat, face downwards OF ai
sheet with hands placed close to the body on elt a
side. After relaxing all the muscles of the body, conce™
trate the mind on health. Kecping the feet close
gether and pressing the knees against the ground,
the soles upwards to the sky. Place both palms, press
against the ground, touching the shoulders on ie
sides. Then raise the head and bend the neck ba¢ d
wards as far as possible. At this time, the trunk a
legs should be in close contact with the ground. On
dually raise the chest, supported by the hands on : F
ground. Bring the head down in the same way as his
raised and restore the body to its former position.
asana strengthens the backbone. ds2) Salabhasana. Lie flat on the Sheet, face downwa!.
Keep the legs close together and raise the feet up er
the heels touching each other. Place the hands ©" 4,
to the body on either side and close the fists upwar
Place the fists and shoulders close to the groun "hy.
ree the whole body stiff after inhaling the bre@',
Then try to raise the legs. Support the weight 0" by
body with the breast and hands. This is possible
al
ing
h

ASAVAHA II. A prince of th
ASRAMA., Asramites (Inmates of
Le ———EE
7 Ee Eh ENS -
ASAVAHA I
pressing the fists, firmly against the ground. Until the
asana 1s completed, do not send out the breath. Keep
the legs straight and stiff. The lower abdomen and legs
may be raised slightly. This makes the 4sana complete.
On fecling suffocation, the legs must be brought down
slowly.
Besides these, there are many other dsanas like Dhanurasana, Pagcimatandsana, Halasana, Mayitrasana,
Sarvangasana, Matsydsana, Sirsaésana, Arddhamatsyendrasana, Padahastasana, Trikonasana, Uddiyasana,
Nauli, Viparitakaranl, Yogamudra, Savasana, etc. (See
under Yoga).
ASAVAHA I. A son of Kagyapa and Aditi. From Visnu
Brahma, from Brahma Mariciand from Marici Kasyapa
were born. KasSyapa married Aditl, daughter of Daksa.
Aditi gave birth to ten sons: Brhadbhanu, _CaksurAtma, Vibhavasu, Rcika, Savita, Arka, Bhanu, Asavaha,
Ravi and Vivasvan. Vaivasvata Manu was the son of
Vivasva 1.B., Adi Parva, Chapter 1, Verse 42).
/ivasvan. (M.B., Adi Pat isi dynasty. He was
Present at the Svayarivara of Draupadi. (M.B., Adi
Farv er Verse 19). |
1 ig santa an Agrama )have to pass
our stages of Brahmacarya:
and Sannyasa are known as
5 Part III, Chapter 9
the four Agramas. Visnu Purana,
describes each of the Asramas as follows :
» Brahmacarya. “After Up S
Maintain a Brahmacari’s ES iniyas (the five
Study of the Vedas, suppress -eceptor. Living
Senses) and live in the house one “iG customs and
there with proper degree 1 6ii the Guru. The
vratas he should serve and ae’ er observance ©
Study of Vedas should be with Pp yabmacatl ‘shoul
ratas and steady attention. — 00g Agni at the
Worship with concentration, thie and dusk) and alter
time of the two sandhyas ant Guru. When the Guru
that he should do obeisance ” When the guru walks,
Stands, he should also be stan yvhen he sits; he shoul
he should walk behind him ane Wl 1¢ pupil) should
Sit in a lower position. e Sisya | P guru himNot do anything against the gure him and wen
Self asks, the Sisya should sit 1 thing After that,
edas without atten ing to any d which a
With his permission he Be ail take his bath oh iE
Sot by begging. The ay ) has taken his
or ‘ay and flowers
Water only. after the ee (8 a, watel 7 supplied
IM. It. Everyday the Gama he it an
5 the intelliWhich the guru needs, mu
through four stages. The
Garhasthya, Vanaprastha
boy should
himself in the
to th
(by the Sisya). f the Ve ‘
2. Girhastiya, After Se U8 Payment 0 the Pe
Gurudaksit the Guru: by earning
Sent gisya gives :
tor) and with the care » arty Id fulfil all
thasthagrama. Then accupa er Onis capacity:
mo jtable ‘ord! 1. Di A
one from a ST iat acc so: wi ndadana
igations of a Gi -. the Pu (sacrifices)
é
he Grhastha who worship® wit += Watis with
Offerings of rice balls), eo i line)» el of food
A SIs with Svadhyaya (sell se ball oe ihe holy
egetting of children, spin ith h grad is the
etc. le wor Grha -ahmacarls
worl a nee irtuoU s.r, and brahim
Only source of support for i fee
who beg their food. There ce from
of nobility. Brahmanas ‘4
act
anyey. them 1 NC
aunty on
-——— oR ERIN SOEV TT A EST $$$ — ——
= ab ES CS Chr ~ wes ees a eS
= RO ET ae TET tb os Se —~=h
——— — SS, SEE : — a" Enh
———SS ee — i
ASRAVYA
to study Vedas, for pilgrimage and for seeine
The Grhastha is the only eo ana carpe came
who are homeless, who do not carry their food with
them and those who spend the night whorever they
reach. If such people come to his house, the Gohnstha
should welcome them with kind and loving words, and
give them bed, seat and food. The guest who leaves a
house disappointed, is really departing after transferring his own sins to that householder and takine away
all the virtuous deeds of the householder. lt 1S ate
proper for the Grhastha to treat a guest with disrespect
to behave rudely or treacherously towards him. to a ret
what has been given to the guest, or to Shera or
rebuke him. The Grhastha who performs. the supreme
duty of Grhasthasrama in this way properly, is liberated
from all secular bonds and reaches the noblest worlds
3. Vanaprastha. After having finished all his duties in
this way, to his satisfaction, the Grhastha with ‘the
commencement of old age, should go to the forest either
after entrusting his wife to his sons or taking her also
with him. There, he should use leaves, roots and fruits
for his food, grow hair and beard, sleep on the bare
ground, lead the life of a tapasaand receive and honour
all classes of guests. His clothes, sheets and blankets
should be of deer-skin and darbha grass. The rule is
that he should bathe three times a day. W orship of gods
performing homas, hospitality to all guests, mendicancy
—all these are the laudable features of Vatianestiet
Any oil that is available in the forest is to be used for
his oil bath. Enduring heat and cold, performing tapas
are also his duties. The Muni who observes this cule in
Vanaprastha with due austerity, burns up all his evils as
with fire and attains the eternal worlds.
4. Sannyasa. The fourth Asrama is that of the Sannyasi
Before entering upon the fourth Agrama one has to
renounce the love of travel, wealth and wife and also
give up all spirit of rivalry. One who embraces sannyasa should abandon completely the efforts for the
three Purusarthas of Dharma, Artha and Kama treat
friends and foes alike and continue to love all living
beings. Not even a single creature should be offended
by thought, word or deed. Conquering all passions
the Sannyasit should renounce all bonds and dttadhments. He should not stay ina village more than one
night and ina town more than five nights. Even that
should be in such a way that no one feels any love or
hatred towards him. For sustaining life, he should go
about begging food from the houses of the people of
the three castes—Brahmins, Ksatriyas and Vaigyas. It
should be after all people have taken their food and
put out the cooking fire. The Sannydsi should cast
away all vices like Kama, Krodha, Garva, Lobha, and
Moha and should not have any thought of self in anything. The Muni who goes about giving shelter to all
creatures will not have to fear any creature. The
Brahmana who follows the Sannydsasrama as described
above with a pure heart and without difficulty will
shine like fire without fuel and attain Brahmaloka in
peace.
ASRAMAVASA PARVA. One of the Parvas in the
Mahabharata. (See under Mahabharata) .
ASRAMAVASIKA PARVA. One of the Parvas in the
Mahabharata. (See under Mahabharata) .
ASRAVYA. A muni (sage) in Indra’s assembly, (M.B
‘Bis,
Sabha Parva, Chapter 7, Verse 18),

aaa de ASTIKA
ASTIKA. The - _— Fi |
So nama jaca: star Jerektrsand hr wit, Manasidev. ga isth toa son who was a pat of
Sarpasatra and saved the nagas. ee he A ci Since he was the son of Manasa1) Birth. There is a story about Astika’s birth in the Cod a bo a ye We Nouch and. to thie
Devi Bhagavata. Long ago the people of the world were Th ha a was named Astika.
so much troubled by the serpents, that they sought pro- siviae eam fine me thes fee or
tection from Kagyapa Prajapati. To find a remedy for abandoned his w; WE yeas ae Sage Jenallset
this, Kagyapa discussed t ~ abandoned his wife, he had blessed her saying that the
out an ond * ia eoutles Bone amram Be a hey womb would be a brilliant and_devoted
suggested that a number of mantras and a deity peg ae ee ; ) 1s why this boy came to be called Astika.
basis of those mantras should be created. According] “ Pa. = aa was taught Veda, Vedarngas etc.
KaSyapa created many mantras and Manasa nT ae if arama-Siva himself. After receiving the blessings
basic deity of those mantras. She is named “Manasa rs ales Eopur as a or
deye? ee cae (Givgon eee tas by - nes : ee to Visnu for many years. Having received Visnu’s
power. Manasadevi has eleven other names also nine h ale ey returned to Kailasa. After living there
oa a u, Jagatgauri, Siddhayogini Vaisnavi, Naga- ried rr; ihe Tarun * . Ka sop Faden wr
agini, Saivi, Nagegvari Te Wee oN : e ASrama 0 aSyapa Prajapati, the
Visahars aud Mahfitianayacs rePrva Astikamata, father of Manasadevi. Kagyapa mk — smh pleased
Manasadevi (Jaratkaru) when quite young, went t to see his noble-hearted daughter and her brilliant
Kailasa for doing tapas (penance). There i “= si ha Io cnhance the fame and accomplishments of
to Siva for a thousand years, At last Siva appeared ee 3 boy Kagyapa gave a sumptuous feast to ten crores
blessed her with divine wisdom She ae d mith - _Drahmins, (Devi Bhagavata, Navama Skandha).
great learning and devotion. (Devi Bha avata N a on, Was, Manasadevt's brother. Astika grew up
Skandha) . g , Navama there under the care of Vasuki. It was Gyavana Mun!
At that time, a Muni (sage) named Jaratkaru, when Adi Pee ae an Vv 4" ——
travelling through t | a I'va, apter 46, Verse
eal 8 “tat Blan a a eg a agp 3) Astika at the Sarpasatra. Once King Pariksit, the
the end o1 a blade of grass, They were Fas a P = a — of Abhimanyu was travelling through the forest fot
riously at the end of a reed grass, head festa cami ae animals. He picked up a dead snake with the
about to fall into the sles. Taner Fe pe tip oO oe bow and put iton the shoulder of a sag®
they were lying in that condition. They ex ined th ‘ eee amika”’, Samika’s son, Srrhgi came to knoW
they were in that plight because Hiatt’ deace d t Se In his anger, Srmgi pronounced a curse that
Jaratkaru had no children. As he ic ae a King Pariksit should die within seven days by the bite
is no hope either, of his having any issue Si, i of Taksaka. When Pariksit heard of this, he had 2
has no children, we will not ay =oo “4 pa ci palace built on a single pillar in the middle of the
To save the Pitrs from their predicam -~ 1 tia , hea? ee inaccessible to Taksaka and took shelte!
decided to marry. But he wished to ~ : ee there. The most famous physicians and wizards were |
who had the same name as his. Once Vas 13 amet engaged to ward off the approach of Taksaka to that |
Jaratkaru and told him that mies Pi, i —_ place. Six days passed like this. On the seventh day:
Jaratkaru and that he would be very happy if Jaratkay sacimmned to make a final attempt, Taksaka disguise;
married her. Jaratkaru aCOEOERA the at . “i aru himself as an old Brahmana and set out to the King ®
— Jaratkaru. cadily and place of eet te On his way he met Dhanvantari who
Alter their marriage, while the _ was proceeding to Pariksit to protect him. They P¢
in a place called Puskara tirtha, in on came friends and asa result of it, Dhanvantari returne
TgpPened which interrupted the happy cant of their alter receiving a large number of rare precious stone:
life. One evening, the husband was sléepi SiR: 4 given to him by Taksaka. Assuming the form of a small
head in the wife’s lap, under ens with his worm, ‘Taksaka secretly ent ich Ww
" A Ee! a tree. The sun was about b y entered into a fruit whic
o set. As the Maharsi did not wake up before sunset, th to be presented to the King. As soon as the King t0°
wife became anxious. It is believ d nset, the that fruit in his hand Tak shap?
ed that he who does not ; ) saka took his own
wake up before sunrise and he who does not off inne and size and bit the King who died nmediaten”
ers at dusk will be guilty of the sin of Bratreai. 2 ahh Janamejaya was the son of this King Pariksit.
ing a Brahmin). Nor was it proper to wake hi ‘ ui; Janamejaya performed all the obsequies of his fathe™
a sound sleep. But in the end, she did w ke hit Torn. After that, in a spirit of revenge Th the object of
The husband sprang die im. serene ake him up. annihilating the whol Sth one
great tury. He renounced Brah ¢ race of serpents, he summ
the wife then and there. Weeping bitterly, she b nL as to conduct a sarpa satra (snake sacrifice/’
for his forgiveness. At last’ Jaratkan, x a nceged In the sacrificial fire specially prepared at that y#8°?
told her: “You will havea (ely miele ees and many serpents were being ed - It seemed that the
nowned, virtuous, scholarly and devout son os lant, re- whole race of serpents id Pp. od out
oO will be But Tak would shortly be wipe¢ “, g
a devotee of Visnu and a preserver of the familv”’ 7 aksaka alone was not to be seen. The officiati?
Alter this Manasidew setont to Kailas eum y: priests were beginning to ‘ent cri?
{ a en she of Wh g get angry. Impatien d
reached there Parama-Siva and Parvatj comforted he mere 3s Taksaka rent the air. The frighten®
Manasadevi was pregnant. The precepts and spirit tal Taksaka fled for life to the palace of his friend Indt4
advice Piven by Jaratkaru, Paramas iva and a” a and there lay down, curling round Indra’s cot whe?
Gore heard by thechild in the wowih andea aves sa the priests understood this they decided to use the
; irth he became a Jfiani anda yogi. In due course a, on and mantras which would bring Indra, his as =
and all, along with Taksaka to the sacrificial
a

ASTIKA PARVA Suites
At this stage, all the gods rushed to Manasaddevi and
fell at her feet and begged her to save the situation.
The kindhearted Devi called her son Astika and advised him to persuade Janamejaya to stop the sarpasatra. Astika went to Janamejaya and requested him
to give him the lives of Taksaka and Indra as a gift.
Janamejaya, after consulting the munis and priests
and at their advice, agreed to do so. In. this way, the
Sarpasatra was stopped and the remaming serpents
escaped with their lives. (Devi Bhagavata, Navama
_ Skandha, M.B., Adi Parva). ?
ASTIKA PARVA. One of the Parvas in the Mahabharata. See Mahabharata. '
ASURAM. A form of marriage. (See VIVAHA)._
ASURAYANA. A son of Visvamitra, (M.B., Anusasana
_ Parva, Chapter 4, Verse 56). i.
ASURI, celal raat He was the wi? of
Kapila Sirnkhyadargana and the guru of soar ec
Paficagikha. Once Asuri had a full vision of . nin
Save many precepts on spiritual pres a 4
aharsis. The Bhagavata says ee ae (MB
Spiritual enlightenment from his wae saa ee
_ Santi Parva, Chapter 218, Verses 10- (M.B.. AnuASVALAYANA I. A son of Visvamutra. (M.B.,
_ Sasana Parva, Chapter 4, Verse 54).
sons, Sisti, Bhava and Sambhu. Sisti gat fiv j
Ripufijaya, | ipra, Vrkala and Wikre Cakeuse ae
born to Ripu of his wife Brhati. Manu was born to
Caksusa of his wife Virani. Uru was the son of Manu
Uru got of Atreyi Anga, Sumanas, Svati, Kratu,
seecet oe ays ynagter 18, Agni Purana).
! river. oka : A
tee wh. ( 22, Chapter 9, Sabha
ATREY1I ITT. Anastya, wife of Atri
_ Atreyi.
ATREYI IV. Daughter of Maharsi Atri. She was married
to Angiras, son of Agni. Angiras always spoke rudely to
her and pained at this she once approached her father
and told him about this. Her father told her thus :
“Your husband is the son of Agni. That is why he
appears unbearable to you. Therefore give him a cold
bath always and he would gradually become mild.”
Hearing this the devout Atreyi transformed herself tato
a river ec ae to cool him down by constant
showers. [his river later on became t i
Nadi. (Brahmanda Purana). a st
AVAHA. A Vayu. (M.B., Santi Parva,
‘Verse 37) .
AVANTIKA. Daughter of Yaugandharayana, a famous
character in the story of Udayana. (See under Yaucandharayana). r
is also called
Chapter 328,
disciple of
a ih sa =
ASVALAYANA II. An a at bee ous works: AVARANA. A King of Vigvakarmi’s dynasty.
Saunaka. Asvalayana ieee aati Srautasutra Genealogy. From Visnu were born in the following
Asvalay order : Brahma - Dharma - Prabhasa-Vigvakarma-PriyaASvalayana Grhyasitra,
_ and Aévalayana Stuti. vrata-Agnidhra-Nabhi-R sabha-Bharata-Avarana.
: Bharata married the world-beauty, Paficajani. Five
children, Sumati, Rastrabhrt, Sudargana, Avarana, and
Dhimraketu were born to her. (Bhigavata Daca
Skandha).
AVARTANANDA. A sacred Tirtha. One who bathes in
this tirtha will be able to enjoy life in Nandanavana
(M.B., Anu§gasana Parva, Chapter 25, Verse 45). )
eo. Soe 2 ancient India. It is said that
arna conquered this place. (M.B.. Van
Chapter 254, Verse 9). e ) ear
AVASTHYA. An Agni. (
2215 Verse 3):
. Thi
ATAKA, A serpent born of the Kavli r eee.
serpent was burnt at the Sarpasa‘ra ©
_ (Sloka 12, Chapter 57, Adi ac aa Sahadeva conATAVIPURI. An ancient city in )DO'". Chapter 31,
quered ce ‘ae (M.B., Sabha Parva,
ATHARVAN A. A sage. When Agne evisited i the
ing to Siva accompanied by a,
_ dream the agrama of this sag®
ATMADEVA. See un
acquired the power
ATREYA, <A. sage.
: vent
nce this rs! ¥
O e he drank
M.B., Vana Parva, Chapter
2 go from one plant and ther AVIRHOTRA. © A king of Vigvakarma’
st of Indra ances OL ¢ é ing of Visvakarma's dynasty.
ee 28 egal clisit) and enjoyed corae heaven ey * rom oo were descended in the jollowing
the " See ‘dens A desire 60 pe d he approache Ex <P Prahma - Dharma-Prabhasa-Visvakarma-Barhis-
= ne estla ee qd in his mind an his own mati- nyevrata-Agnidhra-Nabhi-R sabha-Avirhotra.
is own budde him a new heave? this heaven Jayanti, Rsabha’s wife bore to him twenty children who
Isvakarma who gave i earl ok over & the same Were : Bharata, KuS§ivarta, Ilavarta, Brahmavarta,
ut before long the j took bact med - Aryavarta, Malaya, Ketu, Bhadrasena, Indrasprk.
from him. Though gad ee back but
Tom the demons, Atreya a! 3 of Gomati an
to his old agrama on the ban ime attained 54
Penance there for a /0” bh
Brahma*Purana)- also present
Ove details. Atreya was h sarpasatra O
ascetics who assembled at! Paiva, MB.) ka 6, ChapSloka 8, Chapter 55, ACr yamadeva: ©’
treya was a discip/© . oynabrahma.
ter 199, Vana Parva, M.B): shout Nirgve
3) This rsi taught his dir gasana
K (Sloka 7, Chapter 137, r ancient
TREYA(M). Aplace? “7B. aphuva Manu
Chapter 9. Bhisma Parv4 “-.° Svaya™ og UttanaATR R Write of King Ur p jyavrata ¢ Suruci
: EYI I. Wile OF a tw sons; = Uttama . three
a Bis wate Satarup q son nah’ yhruva 8°
cae marr mee uva of Sunil.
One Of name
d doing
lvation
among the
f Janame)ay*
rva, ¢
gnarata. (Sloka es
Vidarbha, Kikata, Kavi, Hari, Antariksa, Prabuddha,
Pippalayana, Avirhotra, Dramida, Camasa and Karabhajana. The eldest of them, Bharata, became the ruler
of India. From him this country came to he called
‘“BHARATA”, All the younger brothers ruled over the
different parts of this country.
AYATI. A daughter of Mahameru. Two daughters were
AYAVASA. A King. There is mention about thie
born to Mahameru, Ayati and Niyati. Ayati was married
by Dhata and Niyati by Vidhata. Dhata and Vidhata
are the two sons born to. Bhrgu Maharsi of his wife
Khyati. Dhata got a son, Prana, of Ayati and Vidhata,
a son, Mrkandu of Niyati. Praga got a son Dyutiman
and he got a son Rajavan. (Chapter 10, Arhgam 1, Visny
Purana ). | 7
in Sakta 128, Mandala | of the Reveda, King

AYOGAVA
AYOGAVA. A special caste of people. Their profession
was drama acting. They were adepts in handicrafts. See
under Caturvarnyam. (Chapter 151, Agni Purana).
AYODHADHAUMYA. ‘See under Ayodhadhaumya.
AYRAJAS. Name ofa class of Kings. Till the beginning
of the 10th century A.D. Ayrajas were a prominent
political force in Kerala. They ruled over a huge area in
S. Kerala (S. Travancore) till the time of the Venad
dynasty coming into power.
AYUDHA PARIKSA. A test in the skill of archery was
conducted when the Pandavas and Kauravas finished
their study at the feet of Dronacarya. This is described
beautifully in Chapter 134 of adi Parva, M.B.
AYURVEDA. It is the science which the sage Dhanvantarl taught Sugruta. This describes all the diseases
and the treatment meant for them. Ailments are of four
kinds : Saririka refers to fever, skin diseases etc., Manasika refers to those arising out of anger ; Agantuka
refers to cuts, wounds and injuries, and Sahaja refers to
hunger, thirst, old age, etc. (Chapters 279 to 286, Agni
Purana). Refer Dhanvantari for more details.
AYUS I, Soh. of Puraravas and father of Nahusa.
1) Genealogy. Descending in order from Visnu BrahmaCandra-Budha-Puriravas-Ayus.
Ayus was born to Purtiravas of Urvagi. To Ayus was
born of his wife Svarbhanavi Nahusa. (Sloka 24, Chapter
7, Adi Parva, M.B.).
2) Birth of the son. “See under Nahusa. |
3) Other details. Ayus was a king who had acquired
great power by penance. (Sloka 15, Chapter 296, Santi
Parva, M.B.).
AYUS II. One who was the king of frogs. Sugobhani
was the daughter of this frog-king. Sugobhana was
married to King Pariksit. For the interesting story of
the marriage of a king with a frog see under Pariksit II,
AYUSMAN. Kasyapa, son of Marici, got two sons,
Hiranyaksa and Hiranyakagipu anda daughter Simhika,
of his wife Diti. Simhika became the wife of Vipracitti.
Of her were born the celebrated asuras, Saimhikeyas,
of which Rahu was one. Hiranyakafipu had four brave
Sons, Anuvrata, Vrata, Prahlada and Sambhrada. OF
ibi and Baskala and Prahlada got a son, Virocana
Mahabali was the son of Virocana. (Chapter 19, Agni
Purana),
B
BABHRAVYA. An author of the ‘Science of Love’,
vetaketu was the first of the authors who had written
on the Science of amour (Kama-fastra). Babhravya
made only a condensation of the work of Svetaketu,
BABHRAVYAM. A clan or sotra of Brahmanas in
Ancient India. It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Santi
Parva, Chapter 342, Stanza 103 that the hermit Galava
belonged to this clan.
BABHRU I. A maharsi of the
Vyasa. (See Guruparampara),
BABHRU II. A Ydadava of the
one of the ablest of Yadava warriors, (Chapter 14
Daksinatya Patham, M.B.). Even in his old age he
used to do penance. Sigup4la carried away his wife when
once he was away in Dvaraka. He was a friend of Sri
Krsna. He died when hit by an arrow from Vyasa.
(Chapter 4, Mausala Parva, M.B.).
line of Preceptors from
Vrsni dynasty. He was
96 BABHRUVAHANA
BABHRU III. A king of Kagi. By the help of Sri Krsna
he attained Rijyalaksmi, (Chapter 28, Udyoga Parva,
M.B
BABHRU IV. A son of King Virata.
0/7, Udyoga Parva, M.B.).
BABHRU V. One of the sons of Vigvamitra who were
Brahmavadis. (Sloka 90, Chapter 4, Anugisana Parva,
B
(Sloka 33, Chapter
BABHRUDAIVAVRDHA. A Yadava king. The information from Puranas available about him is given below :
1) This Rajarsi was an adept in the art of yajfia. Es
was a disciple of Narada and Parvata Maharsi. (Aitareya Brahmana 7.34),
2) He was a Yadava of the Vrsni dynasty and one of the
seven noted ministers of the Yadu line of Kings. (Sabha
Parva, M.B.).
3) At the time of the kidnapping of Subhadra Babhrudaivavrdha was partaking in a grand festival at the
mountain of Raivataka. (Chapter 211, Adi Parva, M.B.):
4) When once this Rajarsi went on a visit to Krsna;
Sigupala carried away his wife. (Chapter 42, Sabha
Parva, M.B.).
9) When in the end the Yadavas in Dvaraka quarrelled
with each other and were destroyed, the plight of the
Yadava ladies became miserable. Then Sri Krsn4
entrusted Dva4raka and Babhrudaivavrdha with the tas
of taking care of them. But in the battle of the maces
he was killed with a mace thrown at him. (Chapter 5
Mausala Parva, M.B.).
BABHRUMALI. A sage. He was a lively member of thé
Sabha of Yudhisthira. (Sloka 16, Chapter 4, Sabha
Parva, M.B.).
BABHRUSETU. A Gandhara king. He was the brothe:
of Druhyu and father of Purovasu. (Chapter 277, Ag”
Purana).
BABHRUVAHANA. A son of Arjuna. .
1) Birth, When the Pandavas were residing in Ind¥4
prastha after marrying Paficali, Narada went to -
them once. With a view to avoiding any quarrcl ann
ween the Pandavas over the one wife they jointly posers
ed, Narada suggested that each should take P jm
for a year in turn and he who violated the arrang
ment should go to the forest for a year. Once Aru
went to the house of Yudhisthira who was with Pafic4
and for thus violating the arrangement Arjuna had e
go to the forest for a year, During this exile whue,
was staying at Gangadvara he married the serpent 8!”
Ulapi and‘got a son called Iravan of her. At
After that he went to a country called Manalir. ed
that time that country was being ruled by a king ca f
Citrangada. P rabhafijana one of the forefathers ‘ye
Citrangada had, by hard Penance for a progeny, acd a
each of his successors & O
ed from Siva a boon and
son each to maintain the line. But when it came |
Citrangada to his surprise he got a girl instead of a sda
But he got her “UP aS a son and named her Citrang@ pa
It was when she was ready for marriage that ee
WEA ther €. The king received Arjuna with respect ss
alter enquiring about his welfare requested him to me for
Arjuna married her and stayed co ‘s
ce x - Leaving that juna Wer i
Paficatirtha and there he gave are ng the colts,
maidens who were lying in the tirthas as crocot} jir
hen he went back to Manalir Citrangada ha : ing
vered a son whom he named Babhruvahana. Pron?

BADARIKASRAMA (BADARYASKAMA)
them that he would take them later to Hastinapura, he
left the place.
2) His fate to kill his own father. It was. by a ruse that
Arjuna made Bhisma fall. Arjuna put Sikhandi before
his chariot and Bhisma refused to take arms against a
eunuch and accepted defeat. But Gangadevi witnessing
the battle between Bhisma, her son, and Arjuna from
above could not bear this foul play and so cursed _ that
Arjuna would die at the hands of his son. Uliipi the
serpent wife of Arjuna heard this curse and went to her
father Kauravya who in turn went to Ganga and begged
for a relief from the curse. Gangadevi then said that
Arjuna would be killed by Babhruvahana but would be
brought to life by Ulipi by placing the Mrtasaijivani
Stone on the dead man’s breast. |
3) The killing of Arjuna. The Mahabharata pale ae
Over. When Yudhisthira was performing the re See
yaga Arjuna conducted a victory march iby 1 ens
horse. On his way he reached Manalir. “i nti oh
called Babhruvahana and asked him to chplleey. er
abhruvahana with his bow and arrows i f il reed
and in the grim battle that followed oe ir narile
Ceing this Citrangadé came to the piace of }
, - + . orsyading Babhruvahana
i. mai Ps mmediately went to the
to kill his own father. Ultp! 7 ede nel
Serpent world and brought the ME ee coe is Sa if
as she placed it on Arjuna’s breast © Ce santuante
i; peer | leep. When he saw Citrangada,
Waking up from a S'ecp. iled and asked them
ablirugahand and Ulapi be 40 hen explained to
Why they had all come there. Ulupi then © oP
; y had a tremely pleased ove!
a, ae urse and extre As
im the story of the curse ‘ook them all to Hastina
the end of the curse Anju’a t0°° Parva and Chapters
Pura. (Chapters 218 to 210 of Ace
9 to 82 of ASvamedha Paiva, istindpura Sri Krsna
+) Other details. (1) On reach ng ae nario tate
8ave Babhruvahana as 4 Chapter 88, Aévamedha
divine horses. (Sloka ©, :
ary ey
(2) ‘The different names given tohim I
as follows : Citrangadasuta; MampP Z
Suta and Manipuresvara. RAMA). very
BADARIKASRAMA. (BADARYA® here that Nara ce
Oly place in the Himalayas. rousands of years and the
arayana did penance aa ry prominent place 1n
uranas, therefore, give tt @ ws ACANA). A
1em, \DARAP pe
BADARIPACANA TIRTHA. ee es here fasting for
Sacred place in Kuruksetré ab a one will becom =
‘welve years eating, dates 8: "ana P oe anetent
prea as’ Vasistha. ney face. Visalapurt, ath dark
Par . Bis 2 of ; 1
Cj ARIVANA. Ris eae te this place. ri also.
ty of purdnic fame 18 2 4 and vVigalapu
B . rama comprises Badarivan =i fire
ADA der Aul
BANE See un Fthe KasyaP4 74,
A. A serpent 0
ntl
n the Puranas are
Dhanafjayaoh a it es
b a reference to this scrP© ae a follower of
BADD SS ee MB.) gyamnitt®. Ee ies Chapter
fia Brahms aaie (MB, Anugasan@ dag Bharata.
B ne 03), ainous region ‘ bhi Parva,
GIRI, Amountait | apnarat, | lying in, the
Chapter 97 ar that this Conquered by Arjun
Vicinity of the Himalayas be oti
Uring his conquest 0 the
BAHUKA II
BAHU I. A king of the Sirya-varéa (solar dynasty). H
was the father of Sagara. He is known by the ae
Subahu also. This king was once defeated in : beac pee
being weary and sad he entered the hermitage of eee
His queen was given poison by another wife ak the
King. But the child in her womb did not die The :
wanted to jump into the fire in which the bod of Ler
husband was to be burned. But Aurva told a that hes
son would become a famous king and that she should
not commit suicide. Thus she desisted from committing
suicide. A son Was born to her. As she had been poison.
ed when the child was in her womb the son ae si ;
me ee a oe (with poison). It is said in MahaKing later 1 Parva that this prince became a famous
BAHU II. Mention is made in Mahabha -
Be epee 4, Stanza 22, that the Sac oa ee
of sending an invitation to a kine | Ba *]
battle between the Kurus and et an VESHADE the
ee a A eee the Sundara dynasty. Mention is
ade l 4 i abha
el ot ; this King in Mahabharata, Udyoga Parva,
BAHUBHARYATVA. (P olygamy ). Polygamy was a
custom In vogue in ancient India. It was not prohibited for a man to have more than one wife. It was
customary to give dowry also. It is said in the Reveda
Mandala 10, Anuvaka 3, Sukta 11 that the bride choalg
proceed to the house of the husband, after the marria e
A spell (mantra) meant for keeping down one’s cae
is seen in the Rgveda, Mandala 10, Anuvaka 11, Sakta
17. It isa prayer to destroy the love of husband for a
co-wife and to direct that love towards oneself The
deity of tas spell is Indrani the wife of Indra a was
a polygamist. In those days marriage was an essential
duty. Widow marriage was not forbidden.
BAHUDA. A holy bath. If one stays in this place for a
night in celibacy . and fast, one will get the fruits of
performing a sacrifice to devas (gods). The modern
investigators say that this place is on the bank of river
Dhavala which flows near Avadhi. It is mentioned in
Mahabharata, Santi Parva, Chapter 23 that the hermit
Likhita had recovered his lost hand, by bathing in this
holy place and giving oblations to his ancestors
BAHUDAMA. An attendant of Subrahmanya | (M.B
Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Stanza 10), i —
BAHUDANTAKA. A book on the science of Ethics (NitiSastra), the work of Brahmi. It contains ten thousand
chapters. I'his book was abridged into five thousand
chapters by Purandara. (M.B., Santi Parva, Chapter 69
Stanza 83),
BAHUDANTI. Mother of Purandara who was the Indra
during the Manvantara (Period of a Manu) of Manu
Vaivasvata. (See the word Purandara).
BAHUDASUYASA. The wife of Pariksit, aKing of the
Kuru dynasty. A son named Bhimasena was born to her.
(M.B., Adi Parva, Chapter 95).
BAHUGAVA. A king born of the family of Yayati,
(Bhagavata, Skandha 9).
BAHUKA I. A’serpent born in the family of Kaurayya.
This snake fell in the sacrificial fire of Janamejaya and
was burnt to death. (M.B., Adi Parva, Chapter 57
Stanza 13). .
BAHUKA II. The pseudo-name assumed by Nala when
he was living in the palace of Rtuparna in diso,: ~
For further information see the word Nala. —

BAHUKA III 98
BAHUKAIII. A mighty hero of the family of the
Vrsnis. About this Bahuka, mention is made in Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 129, Stanza 19.
BAHULATI. Ariver. In Mahabharata, Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 9, Stanza 29, mention is made about this river
which is famous in the Puranas.
BAHULA II. An attendant of Subrahmanya. (M.B.,
Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Stanza 5).
BAHULA III. Wife of Vidura a Brahmin, who frequented
the houses of harlots. Bahula was in the habit of going
to the temple of Gokarna and hear Puranas, after the
death of her husband. By this good deed Vidura got
deliverance from sin. (Skanda Purana ry:
BAHULASVAN I. A king of the family of Sri Rama.
(Bhagavata, Skandha 9) ,
BAHULASVAN II. A king of Mithila. He was godfearing. Once Sri Krsna visited his palace. At that time
he received much good advice from Sri Krsna. (Bhagavata, Skandha 10).
BAHUMULAKA., A serpent born to Kafyapa Prajapati
of his wife Kadru. (M.B., Adi Parva, Chapter 35,
Stanza 16),
BAHUPUTRA. A Prajapati (creator). He was one of
the spiritual sons (Manasaputras) of Brahma. (Vayu
Purana 65:53),
BAHUPUTRIKA. An attendant (female) of Subrahmanya. (M.B., Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Stanza 3).
BAHURATHA. A king of the family of Bharata.
(Bhagavata, Skandha 2).
BAHURUPA. One of ‘the eleven Rudras. Eleven
Rudras were born to Kasyapa by his wife Surabhi.
Surabhi, who had been purified by Maheégvara whom
she had pleased by her penance, got as sons, Aja,
Ekapad, Ahirbudhnya, T'vastr and Rudra. The renowned Vigvaripa was the son of Tvastr. The eleven
Kudras are Hara, Bahuripa, T'ryambaka, Aparajita,
Vrsikapi, Sambhu, Kapardin, Raivata, Mrgavyadha,
Sarpa and Kap4lin The number of the Rudras is one
hundred lakhs. They pervade everything moving and
Zot moving. (Agni Purana, Chapter 18),
BAHUSALI. A prince of Avanti. He was a friend of Sri-
- datta. (For further information see the word Sridatta)
BAHUSUVARNAKA.
the Ganges. (Kathasaritsagara).
BAHUVADYA. A country m ancient India. Mention
is made about this Country in Mahabharata Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 9, Stanza 55.
BAHUVIDHA. A king of the family of Anga, (Agni
Purana, Chapter 277),
BAHUYOJANA. An attendant of Subrahmanya. (M.B.
Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Stanza 9).
BAHVASI. One of the hundred sons of Dhrtarastra. It
is mentioned in Mahabharata, Bhisma Parva, Chapter
28 that he was killed by Bhimasena in the battle of
Mahabharata.
BAHYAKARNA. A serpent born to Kagyapa Prajapati
of his wife, Kadru. (M.B., Adi Parva, Chapter 35,
Stanza 9),
An ancient city on the bank of
BAKA II
BAHYAKUNDA. A serpent born in the family of Kasyapa Prajapati. Mention js made about this serpent in
Mahabharata, Udyoga Parva, Chapter 103.
BAHYASVAN. A king of the Paru dynasty. He was the
son of King Purujati. Five sons were born to Bahyasvan called Mukula, Sriijaya, Brhadistha, Yavinara and
Krmila. These five sons became famous as Paficalas. |
Of these, the family of Mukula became the Maukulyas, who were having temples and were of two classes.
A son named Pajicagya was born to Mukula. A son
named Divodasa and a daughter named Ahalya were
born to Pajicagva. Ahalyé got with child from the
hermit Sadradvata and gave birth to a son named Sata:
nanda. (Agni Purana, Chapter 278).
BAKA. Daughter of the demon, Sumali. He had four
daughters - Baka, Puspotkata, Kaikasi and Kumbhi-
=. Ravana is the son of Kaikasi. (Uttara Ramayana),
BAKA I. A demon. The Pandavas escaping from the
trap of Arakkilla (lac-house) through a secret tunne
went to the village Ekacakra on the banks of the
river Ganga and Stayed there in the house of a brahminBaka wasa demon who was terrorising the villagers
there. He used to come to the village freely and carry
away people for his food. Because of this nobody live
IN peace and so they all joined together and decide
to send one man daily with plenty of other eatables t0
the demon in this cave. Days went by like that a?
one day the turn came to the brahmin who was shelteting the Pandavas. That brahmin had besides his oe
one son and a daughter. The problem arose as to sane
should £0 to the demon. The father was willing bu
the wife did not want him to go and vice versa. Thé
children began to cry and hearing the noise Kun";
mother of the Pandavas, went there to enquire es
learned the tragic story of the family. She immediate’
went to Bhima and acquainted him with the problen”
before the brahmin. Bhima at once volunteered to oe
to the demon deciding to kill the man-eater and thv
putting an end to his depredations. —.
Bhima started on his journey to the demon carr ying
Cartload of rice and curry. Deliberately Bhima arr ee
at the place of the demon very late. Baka rolled it
eyes in anger at the sight of the late-comer. an
Bhima without heeding him satin front of the em
and started eating the rice and curry. Baka charé i
at Bhima with fury but Bhima defended and a bat d
ensued in which Baka was killed and he fell dea
like a mountain-head dropping down.* (Chapters
164, Adi Parva, M.B.). -
BAKA II. A demon. As young boys $ri Krsna a
Balaramabhadra were once playing in Ambadi (Gore
la) on the banks of the river Yamuna when
demon, Baka, despatched by Karhsa, went to them ne
the form of a huge terrible-looking stork. In no “tl
ppening its ferocious beaks the stork swallowed K?S rd
But the _touch of Krsna burnt the throat of the
and vomitting Krsna the bird fell dead.
“Kirmira, a demon, was the brother of Baka, (Sloka 23, Chapter 11, Aranya Parya, M.B.).
fit is in the roth Skandha of Bhagavata that the story of this Baka occurs.
HOt so clear, Hence the origina] in Sanskrit is quoted below -
Sa vai Bako nama mahdnasuro bakaripadhrk
Agatya sahasa Krsnam tiksnatundo ’grasadbali
But in the vernacular translation of the same the stot y
Krsnam mahabakagrastarh drsiva Ramadayo ’rbhakah
Babhivurindriyaniva vina Pranarh vicetasah,

BAKA III 99
BAKA ITI. (Bakadalbhya). The great sage who poured
into the sacrificial fire the country of King Dhrtardastra.
or details see under Dalbhya.
BALA. A sacred incantation. (See Atibala),
BALA J. (VALA). A demon born to Kasgyapa Prajapati
of his wife Danayu. This demon had three brothers:
Viksara, Vira and Vrtra. It was this Bala who later on
became the king of Pandyadeéga. (Sloka 42, Chapter
67, Sloka 33; Chapter 65, Adi Parva, M.B.).
hapter 168 of Vana Parva states that this Bala was
led by Indra. (For details see Vala).
BALA IT. A deva born to Varuna of his elder brother’s
wife. (Sloka 52, Chapter 66, Adi Parva, M.B.). _.
BALA III. Fhe son born to Pariksit of the Iksvaku
dynasty of the daughter of Mandikaraja. This ‘Be
had two wives, Sala and Dala. (Sloka 38, Chapter 192,
ana Pary site)
LA Iv. A’ Sek In the battle with Kumbhakarna
this monkey did many brave deeds. (Sloka 6, Chapter
5) Var (Beds = -
Ay. re tA = 3 ) arriors whom Vayu Bhagavan
ther
S4Ve as a gift to Subrahmanya. The ae sto Parte,
nas, Atibala. (Sloka 44, Chapter 91,
rata. He was_ the
BALA VI. A Maharsi of ancient Bha hapter 208, Santi
pt Of Maharsi Angiras. (Sloka 27, C
arVa.,. MB.) . .
et ve VII. F sandtana Visvadeva. (Sloka 3
BALA VEll of osvcode of Visnu. When sine ‘i =.
“ad Over the and of emperor ~~ ie peceniil the
the UNderworld, the’ followers 0 tion. Bala was
1D mmo
yajiia Mandala and created a co to the scene to
One of the parsadas who a aka Bhagavata).
quel] tama in
BALA Ie spel: Ssdean He lived ay ae 8
the netherlands called Atala. He oy to the asura
ferent kinds of magic and gave ave the devas
ABicidns who by the use ‘0 them §
Mense trouble.
ce when Balasura yawned three oe had with them
x amini and Purnscali were born. They ner gave =
mee table substance called Hata enlivening the se’
men
fter
whic Cam a Se ppenkl ge eats
a Skandha, ? ondthaga
0, Chapter
Ue in him and praise
Y this Bala asked Indra to -
Wanted and the sly Indra a hesitatl
ody of Bala, Without the leas dra threw
Ody into pieces and gave eh nd all the Diamon
the Pieces to different sides ine to
= Pieces fell were at once ta
~< | nivad
dahantamaé
. - ilam pra : is d roh
Gop asin pitargasd fsatam Baka
’ gak$ vat
Cacchardda sadyo Te eabh y apa
Se patente sa Me rasasakt
Dorbhyam Bali dara asim.
Pagyatsu balesu * yaddivauka Chapter 11
Mudavaho vira" iit that of Krsna
*Si bhadra is 8° mixe
With Ince the life of Bala
that of Krsna,
kandha, Bhagavata),
Dalat life story of Balarama could be had only if
O° SE? SOS WET, SE EEL al
. rd eee
BALBHADRA
After the death of Balasura his wife Prabhavati went
to their preceptor ( Kulaguru) Sukracdrya and told
him all that took place and requested to bring back to
life herlost husband. But Sukracarya regretted that he
could not give life again to her dead husband but could
by his powers make her hear his voice again. Prabhavati agreed to that and then she heard her husband say
“Leave your body and join me’’. Prabhavati immediately courted death and joining Bala became a river.
(Padma Purana, Uttara Khanda, Chapter 6),
aoe (M). To know what are Dagabalas see under
attu. .
BALABANDHU. A king of ancient Bharata. There is a
seers to him in Sloka 236, Chapter 1, Adi Parva,
BALABHADRA. (Balabhadrarama, Balarama, Baladeva a
The elder brother of Sri Krsna and the eighth incarnation of Mahavisnu.*
1) Birth, When the number of wicked kings increased
Bhiumidevi (goddess of Earth) turned herself into a cow
and took refuge in Mahavisnu. Mahavisnu then promised to be born as the sons of Vasudeva named Balabhadrarama and Sri Krsna and destroy the wicked.
Vasudeva was the son of the Yadava, Siirasena. King
of Madhura. To Devaka the brother of another Y adava
King, Ugrasena, was born a daughter Devaki. The
marriage of Devaki with Vasudeva was celebrated but
on the same day an ASaririni (a heavenly voice from
above) said that the eighth child of Devaki would
kill Karhsa. Instantly Karnsa put both Vasudeva and
Devaki in jail. The first six sons born to Devaki were
killed the moment they were born by striking them
against the ground. Devaki became pregnant for the
seventh time. The babe in the womb was Ananta incarnate by Visnu’s directive to be of help to him when
he would also be born soon as Krsna. Therefore it
was necessary to save the child from the cruel hands
of Karhsa as it was certain he would kill the babe the
same way he had killed all the others before. So he
ordered Mayadevi to take the child from the womb of
Devaki and place it in that of Rohini, another wife of
Vasudeva. Mayadevi did so and the boy got the name
Samgharsana, also because of this. The news spread
that Devaki aborted. Rohini delivered a boy and was
named Sathgharsana alias Balabhadrarama. (Dasama
Skandha, Bhagavata)
2) The colour of Balarama and Sri Krsna. Sri Krsna is
the eighth child of Devaki. The elder brother Balarama
is white in complexion while the younger, Sri Krsna is
black ini complexion. There is a story behind this. The
devas decided to be born as Gop4las (shepherds) in the
earth to_be of help to Krsna in his duty of killing the
wicked. They informed Mahavisnu of their decision
and the Lord was immensely pleased.'He then took
one white hair from his head and said that it would go
to Rohini’s womb and change into Balardma and
it Is read along
eS eee ae ete Sat LE Sateen tee
re re et meres - :

BALABHADRA
taking a black hair said that it would go into Devaki’s
womb and change into Sri Krsna. It was thus that
Balabhadra became white and Sri Krsna black. (Chapter 199, Adi Parva, M.B.).
3) Brothers. Balabhadrarama had six brothers born of
his mother Rohini. They were: Gada, Sarana, Durddama, Vipula, Dhruva, and Krta. (Navama Skandha,
Bhagavata).
4) Till their marriage Sri Krsna spent his childhood
in Ambadi and Balarama, in Madhuri. Once the sage
Garga went to the house of Vasudeva and it was he
who then told the story behind the births of Balarama
and Krsna. Hearing this Vasudeva went to Madhura
and brought Balabhadrarama also to Ambadi. Gargamuni then performed all those sacred rites which were
usually done to boys of that age and both of them then
remained in AmbAadi. Several] important events happened during their stay here, notable among which are:
Pitanamoksam (killing of the demoness Pitana and
giving her salvation). Sakatasuravadha (killing the
asura, Sakata), Trnavarttavadha (Killing the asura,
Irnavartta) , Vatsdsuravadha (killing the asura,
Vatsa), Bakavadha (killing the demon bird, Baka) ,
Aghasuravadha (killing the asura, Agha), Dhenukasuravadha (killing the asura, Dhenuka), Kaliamardana
(beating the snake, Kalia) and Pralambavadha (killing
Pralamba). (See under Krsna for more details).
Karhsa conducted a Capapiija (worship of the bow) to
kill Krsna. It was on a festive scale and both Krsna and
Balarama went to Madhura to attend the same. ‘There
gave as Gurudaksina (The fee you pay inthe end for
the instructions given) the lost child of the guru. Then
they went to Madhura and there several events took
place, important among which was the fight between
Krsna and Jarasandha. By this time the Yadavas
were becoming lean financially and so to make some
money Krsna and Rama went to the diamond-infested
mountain of Gomantaka. On their way they met
Parasurama doing penance under a Banyan tree. On
the advice of Paragurama they killed Srgalavasudeva
I) Marriage. Before the advent of Balarama and Krsna
the island Dvarak4 was known as Kufasthali. Itw
ruled over by a famous Rajarsi, Revata, This king was
the son of King Anartta and grandson of emperor
aryati. Revata gota hundred sons, Kukudmin being
the first and a daughter named Reyvyati. When the time
for marriage of his daughter came the King was anxious
to find outa fitting husband for her and he went to
Brahmaloka to take the advice of Brahma. Revati also
accompanied him. There stupefied he saw Vedas, Yajfias
Mountains, rivers, oceans, Rtus, all in divine fizures
standing before Brahma, worshipping him. The sweet
celestial songs gave them both untold happiness. He
then told Brahma the Purpose of his visit and Brahma
meditating for some time told him that Balabhadrarama,
Son of Vasudeva, was the only one person suited for
her. T he king returned to Dvaraka and gave his
BALABHADRA
daughter in marriage to Balarama. (Saptama Skandha,
Devi Bhagavata).
6) A pilgrimage. When the great Pandava-Kaurava
battle started Krsna became the chariotecr of Arjuna
and Balarama went to the forest, Naimiga. He was not
much interested in the battle. At the forest of Naimisa
he saw Sita telling Puranic stories to the several sages
assembled there before him. Sata did not rise up when
hesaw Balarama and _ the latter moved to anger very
soon cut off thehead of Sita. Vhe sages assembled there
decried the act of Balarama and lamented deeply over
the incident. At this Balarama promised that he would
give birth, from the dead body of Sata, to one who will
be well versed in all the Vedas, éastras and sciences. The
sages then blessed Balarama.
During that time there lived in the vicinity of Naimisa
forest a demon called Balvala (Vatkala). He used to
annoy the sages there and the sages requested Balarama to put a stop to the atrocities of that demon. He
immediately killed “the demon by his weapon, Hala,
and then raised from the dead body of Sita a pandita
of great erudition. Later, to remedy the sin of killing
Sita, Balarama, repentant, visited all the sacred places
in Bharata. Once when he heard about the grim battle
between Duryodhana and Bhimasena, he went to the
battle-field and tried his best to stop the war. Dh1sappointed he returned to Dvaraka. (Dagama Skandha,
Chapter 79, Bhagavata) . ;
7) Death. Once the rsis Narada, Kanva and Visvamitra came to Dvaraka. To make fun of them some 0
the Yadavas dressed a Yadava like a pregnant woman
and producing her before the Sages asked them what
child she would deliver. Enraged at this the munis
saidin one voice that she would deliver a mace and that
Iron mace would be the cause of the end of a
Yadavas.
After the Mahabharata battle the Yadava dynasty re
mained alive only for thirtysix years. After that by
the curse of the brahmin the Yadavas were all killed 17
a drunken brawl between themselves in the very pre
sence of Krsna and Balabhadra. This happened on the
shore of Prabhasa tirtha and Balarama was sitting
there then in deep meditation. Suddenly the soul 0
Balarama went out from his mouth in the shape of id
white serpent and the serpent entering the nether wor ’
was given a warm welcome by the prominent serpent
there. (Mausala Parva, M.B.).
8) Other details.
(1) It was Balabhadrarama who taught Bhimasena the
mace-fight. (Sloka 4, Chapter 138, Adi Parva, M.B.)-
(2) Balabhadraraima was present along with Sri Kren
at the marriage of Pajficili. (Sloka (7, Chapter 18;
Adi Parva, M.B.),
(3 ) Balabhadrarama became very indignant when -
heard about Arjuna carrying away Subhadra and it w4
Krsna who pacified him. (Chapter 22, Adi Parva, M.B.)-
(4) He was Present at the marriage of Abhimany™
conducted at the city of Upaplavya. (Sloka 21, Chapt¢
72, Virata Parva, M.B.). :
(5) He was very insistent that the Pandavas and ae
ravas should come to a truce. (Chapter 2, Udyo8
Parva, M.B.), ,
(6) He witnessed the battle of maces between Dury?
dhana and Bhimasena at Kuruksetra. (Chapter 7”
Salya Parva, M.B.).

BALABHADRARAMA IT
(7) Balarama conducted a pilgrim tour and visited all
the holy places of Bharata at a time when the PandavaKKaurava war was in full swing. (Chapter, 35-54, Salya
Parva, M.B.).
(8) Balarama was of opinion that 1t was unjust of Bhimas¢na to have killed Duryodhana and was about to kill
Bhimasena. (Sloka 4, Chapter 60, Salya Parva, M.B.).
(9) Once Balarama spoke in extolling terms about the
secrets of Dharma. (Sloka 17, Chapters 126, Salya
Parva, M.B.).
(10) It was Balarama who performed the obsequies of
Robimanyu. (Sloka 6, Chapter 62, ASvamedha Parva,
Ad,
(11) He went to Hastinapura when Yudhisthira performed the Agvamedha oa. (Sloka 4, Chapter 66,
vamedha Parva, M.B.). 4 pales
Balarama introduced Prohibition in Dvaraka.
(Sloka 29, Chapter 1, Mausala Parva, M.B.). “indi
(13) Once he made dry the river Kalindi. ( See Kahn i) :
BALABHADRARAMA II. A very ae serpent.
lok ‘he , Adi Parva, M.B.). _ a?
ADAA. Geo laf of the Agni, Bhanu. ah ee
a Which gives life ge een to oF a e1ng§>-
Sloka ‘hapter 221, Santi Parva, M.D).
ALANDHAE Ts geen of the king of ane
the mightiest of men marry her, said her father. Oe
all the kings who tried to take her get eR of
“rand Sarvaga was the son born a ‘dha Parva,
Mondhara, (Sloka 70, Chapter 95, Asvame
BALADT. An ancient hermit. He bac powechil,
Performed a severe penance bk a “Accordingly
CVatas appeared and granted him a “om Medhavin
* Son called Medhavin was born to ee, o cursed him to
“4s€d the great hermit Dhanusaksa, 135) |
Chapte1 at famous in
Cath. M.B. Vana Parva, VE
BALAHAK AT (VALAHAKA). 4 OP bar hall of
the P uranas, This serpent stays 1 3 Sabha Parva,
aruna, . worshipping him. ( oes , ] oi
ayaBALAN a Stanza 9) HAKA). A brothez . ‘ha in
HAKA II. (VALA He helped Jayant ter
dratha the King of aera Vana Parva,
“napping Draupadi. +
La : : horse yoked
BALAHAK & TID. (VALAHAKA) A fate PS ention
is mag ¢ ight side of the char O Furata Parva, Chapter
4aade about this horse in M.B., Vite: —
BALAH AIS 23. A king. Once Siva, gee that i
sion of hi ain shape of a cow-ca calf a sae
Be ae Bon,» grow to the Ee all ne
.t the growth ceased, salou mE (Skandb Purat
3.90% Karma (action) v5! oupat'®
his forester |. ol
A forester. he got to his 0
B F
ALAKA (VALAKA). ven himse
£0 for hunting and he gave Cc ‘hint for h
Parents without reserving ae en thoug
ay he did not find any ani e forest. ~~
- © a thorough search 1 he ank r
: "ried. At last he reache drinkins vali
i 4n extraordinary anima re
“Ver seen such an anima Be
If. One
river.
He had
. ‘ven t
sJakhilyas is 8%
alakhi
*In some other Puranas the mother of B
loi
he name
BALAKHILYA (S) (VALAKHILYAS )
-It was a peculiar creature. That creature had done
penance before Brahma, from its young age with the view
of destroying everything. Brahma appeared before the
creature and granted it the boon that it would have the
power to make anything blind. Brahma also said that
anybody who killed the creature would be given a place
in the realm of Gods. The creature had been wandering
in the forest making blind every creature it met. and
one day it was drinking water and it was then that
Valaka shot it down. As soon as the creature fell down
the gods showered flowers, and took him to the realm
of Gods in a divine chariot. (M.B., Karna Parva
Chapter 69). | :
BALAKATIRTHA. (VALAKATIRTHA), A holy place
near the mountain of Gandhamadana. Those who bathe
in this holy bath would become as bright and famous as
devas (gods) It is mentioned so in the Mahabharata
| AnuSasana Parva, Chapter 25, Stanza 19. :
BALAKASVA. (VALAKASVA). He is the grandson of
the hermit Jabnu and the son of Aja otherwise called
Sindhudvipa. Balakagva had ason called Kufika, (M.B
Santi Parva, Chapter 49, Stanza 3). —
BALAKHILYA(S). (VALAKHILYAS), A group of
hermits.
1) Ongin. Sixty thousand hermits were born to Kratu,
one of the Saptarsis (seven hermits), by his wife
Santati.* They are called Balakhilyas. Everyone of
them was only the size of half a thumb, but they were
as bright as the blazing sun and had attained control
over their senses. (Visnu Purana, Aréa 1, Chapter 10).
2) Garuda (Eagle) and Balakhilya (s). A story connecting the birth of Garuda with Balakhilyas occurs in
the Puranas.
Once Kasyapa Prajapati performed a sacrifice to
obtain children. The work of bringing firewood for
the sacrifice was entrusted to Indra and the other
devas (Gods) and the Balakhilyas. When Indra was
heaping up on heaps pieces of big logs the Balakhilyas
who were very small were bringing in chips of
wood. Seeing this Indra laughed. The Balakhilyas
got angry and stopping the work entrusted to them
began to do penance with a view to create another Indra. Knowing this Indra was much flurried.
He went to Kasyapa and told him everything. Kagyapa
went to the Balakhilyas and pacified them. At this time
Vinata, a wife of Kagyapa, was doing penance to
obtain a son. Kagyapa said that the penance of the
Balakhilyas would not be fruitless and that asa result
of their penance a son who would overpower Indra
would be born to Vinata. Accordingly a son was born
to her. Garuda was that son. The fact. that Garuda
overthrew Indra when he went to heaven for ambrosia,
is well known. (M.B., Adi Parva, Chapter 31).
3) Routine of fe. The Balakhilyas live in the mandala
of Sarya (solar region), They travel in front of the sun
in the shape of birds. They wear hides of animals. They
are righteous and are only as big as a thumb. They are
very ardent in doing the works of devas (Gods). They
are sinless. There are Balakhilyas living in the lunar
region also. They worship the Sun daily. All the world
stand firm in truth because of the penance of the
Balakhilyas. (M.B., Anugdsana Parva, Chapter 141.)
‘Sannati’. This may be a mistake in the manuscript,

BALAKHILYA SAMHITA
4) Other information. (1) Garuda (Eagle) who went
to the realm of devas ( gods) for Amrta (ambrosia) took rest on the branch of a banyan tree, and
that branch was broken from the tree. Sixty thousand
Balakhilyas were doing penance hanging head downwards on that branch. Garuda knew thjs only after the
branch was broken. F caring the curse form themhe took
the branch in his beak and flew about here and there.
At last, according to the advice of Kagyapa, he took the
branch to the mount Gandhamadana and without causing any harm to the small hermits placed it there.
(M.B., Adi Parva, Chapter 30).
(2) When Dusyanta entered the hermitage of Kanva
he saw the Balakhilyas doing panance, hanging down
on the trees in the vicinity, ( M.B., Adi Parva, Chaptér 7).
(3) In Valmiki Ramayana, Balakanda, Sarga 5], it
is mentioned that the Balakhilyas were engaged in
prayer and meditations and offering oblations to fire
in the hermitage of Vasistha.
(4) It is mentioned in Valmiki Ramayana, Balakanda,
Sarga 51, that in the period of the Ramayana, in
South India, when Ravana was going to the house of
Marica, he saw the Balakhilyas doing penance,
(5) The Balakhilyas learned the Vedas and SAstras
(scriptures ) Sitting in the chariot of the sun. (Kampa
Ramayana, Parvakanda ).
BALAKHILYA SAMHITA. See the word Guruparampara
BALAKTI, (VALAKI). One of the hundred sons of Dhi'tarastra. Mention is made in . the Mahabharata, Adi
Parva, Chapter 185, Stanza 2, that Valaki had been
present on the occasion of the Svayamvara (wedding)
of Draupadi.
BALAKI. A hermit. He is called Gargya also as he is
a son of Garga. He acquired much knowledge and so
Once the hermit went to the King of Kagi and told him
that he would impart to him the knowledge of Brahma.
he would give thousand cows in
that the sun-god was Brahmi.
it, Everything that
king earlier,
(knowledge of Supreme Soul). As the fla
from fire, and as the spider weaves its het and sits in its
centre, the soul creates everything, controls everything
and pervades everything,” ( Srhadaranyakopanisad) .
BALAKSA. An ancient King of Bharata. While the
Pandavas were living incognito in the kingdom of Virata,
Duryodhana and his brothers stole the cows of Virata,
7) Consequence of which there was a battle, The devas
(gods) came in planes to see the fight between Arjuna
and the teacher Krpa. It is mentioned in the Mahames emanate
BALAYANI
bharata, Viradta Parva, Chapter 56, that the King Balaksa
was there with the gods when they came tosee the fight.
BALAMITRA. A king. Satrughna who led the yaga
horse of Sri Rama fought with Viramani and at that
time Balamitra fought on the side of Viramani. (Chapter
40, Patala Khanda, Padma Purana).
BALAMODAKA. The son of Suratha, the King of
Kundalanagari. (Padma Purana, Chapter 40).
BALANIKA (VALANIKA) I. A son of the King
Drupada. Mention is made in Mahabharata, Drona
Parva, Chapter 156, that Asvatthama killed him in the
battle of Kuruksetra.
BALANIKA (VALANIKA) II. A brother of Matsya,
the King of Virata. During the battle of Kuruksetra
he had taken the side of the Pandavas and had fought
against the Kauravas. (M.B., Drona Parva, Chapter
BALASVAMI,. A warrior of Subrahmanya. (M.B., Salya
Parva, Chapter 45, Stanza 74),
BALAVATI. The daughter of hermit Kanva. She did
Penance to please the Sun to obtain a husband of a
very good nature. The Sun appeared before her and gave
her some dates and asked her to prepare food with them
and bring them back. Balavati began to cook the dates.
Though all the faggots she had gathered were consume
it Was not Properly boiled. As there was no more firewood she put her leg into the oven. Seeing this the Sun
God was pleased and said ‘All your wishes will be
realized’”’. From that day onwards that place was called
by the name “Balapa’. (Padma Purana, Uttara Khanda,
Chapter 152),
BALAVINASTAKA. The hero of a story, given in KathaSaritsagara, Kathamukhalambaka, Taranga six, to show .
that it is not good to make others angry. The story }§
as follows :— :
Long ago there was a Brahmin named Rudra Sarm4He had two wives. Both gave birth toason each. The
elder wife died and her son also was brought up by ny
younger wife. Being jealous she fed the child with f00
too hard for the child and it became lean with stomac
swollen and the bones Projecting. It looked an uncout?
figure. Seeing him like this Rudra Sarma called him cee
vinastaka (one who is lost when he is a boy). he
gradually grew up. When he was only five years old d
showed extraordinary intelligence. One day he decide :
to teach his foster-mother a lesson. On that day he en
sitting alone on the lap of his father. He said to a
father, ‘Father, I have two fathers’’, Thenceforward th
father began to doubt his wife, that she was having s,
lover. He grew jealous. He would not talk to her. The 108".
mother thought Balavinastaka was the cause for th!
change in her husband’s behaviour. One day she calle
the change in the behaviour of his father towards hae
He said that he would bring about a change in the ber
father if he would be cared for proper?’
She agreed. Then he took a mirror and held it pe
his father and When the reflection of his father fell ethe mirror he sald, “Father, [ have two fathers”. tn?"
diately the doubt of his father was removed. It 1s
right to make even a boy angry. )
BALAYANI. An acarya (Teacher), In Bhagavat®
Skandha 10, it is seen that BAlavan; ht Bala
khilya samhitg by Baskala. See ane HS Sa
a

BALAYOGI 103
BALAYOGI. A king of the Anga dynasty. He was the
son of Bali, who had six sons named Anga, Vanga,
Kalinga, Pundra, Baleya and Balayogi. (Agni Purana,
Chapter Bid).
BALAYUS. One of the eight sons born to Puriiravas by
Urvasi. (Padma Purana, Srsti, Chapter 12).
BALHIKA. (BALHIKA) I. A powerful king born in
the family of Ahara. (M.B., Adi Parva, Chapter 67,
Stanza 25). |
BALHIKA II. A king who in his previous life was the
asura called Krodhavaga. It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Drona Parva, Chapter 96, Stanza 12, that
this King helped the Kauravas in the battle of Kuruksetra
~" : third son.of JanameBALHIKA III, A king who was the M.B., Adi Parva,
Jaya and the grandson of King Kuru. (
Chapter 94, Stanza 56). ;
BALETKA IV. "k son se Pratipa; a King a 2 se
dynasty. He had two brothers, hate . = 94 that
is said in Mahabharata, Adi Parva, f Sibi was their
Sunanda, the princess of the countty © = Skandha 9,
mother. Mention is made in Bh nS Balhika had a son
Chapter 22, Stanza 18 that this king a fae be
named Somadatta. Balhika was 4 ine . ston ly, not
and the Pandavas. Balhika exhorted ‘paitle rae eu
to engage in a battle. Still, when tn alhika was once
Balhika sided with the Kauravas. | iil of the army
elected as the general of eleven divis1
0 ; -uruksetra
The sae of Balhika in the battle of Kuruks
T€ given below :—
!) There was a combat on the
between Balhika and — ;
ap anza 30). ; hisma Parva,
pir 6, Sas sc, (MB
3) fag 104, Stanza A
ought with Drupada. :
) Balhika fought with yk hapter
arva, Chapter 96, Stanza 1/7: (Drona Parva; ee
5) Bhimasena killed Balhika. (~"™ (M.B.,
BAD? Stanza 15). r of Dharmaputra.
Mention
Bhisma
first day of the battle
(Mahabharata, Drona Parva,
HIKA V. The chariotee 0).
Sabha Parva Chapter 58, ze oe Bharata.
ALHIKADESA. Acountryin anger’ srata,
1S made about this country ™
ae 9. of
ALT (MAT ABALI) I. An he grandson of eed are
Was the son of Virocana and t ras O the Da! ye am
Geneal d Birth. 16 AST aya a Prajap4 ; co
e sons bern, sof his wife Ditt, 10 “= © There oe her
arici anel grandson © ¢ Diti. Bu i
Many Asuras born as the son qrapadma,
Hiranyaksa, Hiranyakasip™ rious.
.*Yakasura and Gomu oS hi were a Hrada and
Sisters Simhika and Ajamu ambra O ocana was
Cur sons called Prahlac a a
nuhrada were born to Ee pabali ge
€ son of Prahlada and ahabal an from Bana.
“ena. Bana was born from ere bor?
Suras called Nivatakavaca® varying it 2
the e churning of the oF wiite he Wot avisnu onder’
“© wealth of Devendra: 0 ean. wealth from
'S house, it all fell in te the Jost )
the devas (gods) to recover
(M.B., Bhisma Parva, ©
BALI (MAHABALI) I
ocean. It was impossible to churn the ocean without
the help of Mahabali. So the devas went to Mahabali
and sought his help. Mahabali agreed to help them.
The real aim of the devas was not to regain the lost
ledge of the Mr tasafijivani (life-restoring remedy). So
the dead were being brought to life. But it 7 not
possible for devas to do so. It was to make up this
deficiency, by obtaining Ambrosia from the sea, that
the devas tried to churn the sea, under the pretence of
recovering the lost wealth. Mention is made in the
Visnu Purana, Améa 1, Chapter 9 and Matsya Purana
Chapters 250 and 251 that these events took place
during the regime of the Indra named Mantradruma in
the Caksusamanvantara (the period of the manu named
Caksusa). .
3) War with Indra. The 8reat teacher Sukra again
anointed Bali, who was brought to life again, as Indra.
After that he performed the sacrifice of Vigvajit (conqueror of the world) on behalf of Bali. Assuming the
petbons anes f sovernment, Bali performed one
1undre vamedha yagas (Hors agacela, Bian yagas ( € sacrifices) (Bhaga
After the Visvajit sacrifice, Yajfiadeva (god of sacrifice)
who was greatly pleased at the sacrifice, presented Bali
with a divine chariot, equal in all aspects to that of
Indra, a golden bow, two quivers, which would never
become empty and a div;
the teacher Sukra gave him a divine conch, and Brahma
presented a garland. (M.B., Santi Parva, Chapter 216).
4) Attainment of the Position of Indra. Mahavisnu had
not been on good terms with the devas, fora time.
Taking this opportunity, Sukracarya the teacher of the
Asuras, persuaded Bali to engage the devas in a battle.
Bali defeated the devas completely in a pitched battle.
Thus the realm of the gods came under the sway of
Mahabali. Once, during that period Bali invited his
grandfather Prahlada to heaven and requested him to
accept the most honourable seat there. Prahlada
accepted his invitation and anointed B.li as Indra. Bali
deviating from virtue.” (Vamana Purana, Chapter 74).
Because Bali had ruled his kingdom according to the
advice of Prahlada, he became famous in the three
worlds. (Vamana Purana, Chapter 75).
According to the version of Bhagavata, Prahlada when
he grew old, left his kingdom in the hands of his son
Virocana and went to the forest for penance. Virocana
was not as famous as Prahlada. After the period of
Virocana, Mahabali came to the throne. He was a
mighty king. Within a short time he became the emperor
of the Asuras. It was during this period that the churning of the Milk Sea took place. The Asuras and the
Devas (gods) sat on either side and using the mount
Mandara as churn-drill, churned the Milk Sea and
obtained Amrta (the celestial nectar of immortality )
A battle took place between the Asuras and the Devas
for the possession of Amrtakalaga (the Ambrosia and
the container) and the emperor Mahabalj was killed ;
the battle. The Asuras carried the dead body of Maha,

BALI (MAHABALI) I.
bali to his capital, where Sukracarya (their teacher-priest Sukra) brought him to life again by the help of sacred
herbs. Mahabali instantly waged another war, flercer
than the previous ones, with the devas, and having
defeated them, he drove them out of their realm and
brought it under control. (Bhagavata, Skandha 3).
9) Lhe curse of Prahlada. As the whole of heaven came
under the sway of Bali, the devas began to leave the
country one by one. Everybody was happy and comfortable under the rule of Bali. But the devas and Brahmanas were denied the privileges they deserved. They
approached Visnu and represented their grievances,
Visnu told them thus : “Bali is devoted to me. Still, to
redress your grievances I shall take the Incarnation of
Vamana shortly.”
In. course of time the Asuras and their countries began
to be weakened. Seeing the approach of destruction
emperor Bali became thoughtful. He approached
Prahlada to learn the reason. Prahlada told Bali thus:
“Lord Visnu is now Staying in the womb of Aditi for his
incarnation as Vamana. That is why the country and
the Asuras are subjected to destruction. Hearing this
Mahabali said: “Our Raksasas are more powerful
than that Visnu.” Hearing these haughty words of
Bali, Prahlada got angry and cursed Bali ‘“‘Let your
country be destroyed.” Bali requested Prahlada to
pardon him. Prahlada advised Bali “You will get salvation only by relying on Visnu”’. (Vamana Purana 77).
6) Defeated by Vamana. The defeated devas had taken
refuge in forests. Aditi the mother of the devas was
very sorry at this. She shed tears before her husband
KaSyapa Prajipati, who advised his wife to take a fast
of twelve days, and taught her the rules and rituals of
the fast. Accordingly she took the fast, Visnu appeared
before her and asked her what boon she wanted. She
requested Visnu to take birth as ner son, to drive awa
Bali and to restore her sons, the devas (gods), to their
kingdom of heaven. Mahav; shu agreed.
Aditi became Pregnant and gave birth to the son
Vamana. He was an incarnation of Mahavisnu. [The
Sth incarnation (avatara) of Visnul].
At this time Mahabali was performing a sacrifice on the
bank of the river Narmada. Vamana came to the place of
: steps of ground. Mahabalj
was pleased with the boy and told him that he was
willing to give the boy even the country called Bhrigaraka and that he was prepared to forego the kingly
pleasures for the boy. The hermit boy did not show any
desire for them. So many gathered round them to
witness this sight. The teacher Sukracarya called Mahabali and said that the boy was a cheat and that his
request should not be granted. But Mahabali decided
to grant the wish of the boy and as a token of his gift
he began to offer the boy water from q waterpot. Then.
the teacher got into the mouth of the pot in the shape
of a mote and water would not flow freely out of the
mouth of the pot. Knowing this Vamana took a grass
of Darbha and pushed it at the mouth of the pot. The
grass pierced one eye of Sukracdrya. From that time
onwards Sukracarya had only one eye, Water flowed
freely into the hands of Vamana. ukra got angry and
cursed Bali. Vamana began to measure, the fround
and simultaneously began to grow. The asuras who were
BALI ITI,
BALT III,
BALI III
horrified at this, began to attack Vamana with anything
they could lay hands on. Still Vamana was growing.
Finally he became an immensely large being. With
one step he measured the whole of earth and with the
second step he took the whole of heaven. Then he
asked Bali, where to place the third step. Mahabali
said that he had only his body left, as his own, and
that Vamana might take it and complete three steps.
Vamana placed his foot on the head of Bali and pushed
him down to Patala (the Netherworld). Thenceforward the asuras became the inhabitants of Patala.
(Bhagavata, Skandha 6S).
7) Bali and Ravana. Once Ravana visited Bali who
was under custody in Patala, and said to him, ‘‘I have
come to save you from here. So get yourself free from
the custody of Mahavisnu, with my help.’ Hearing
this, Bali asked Ravana to fetch the two earrings of
Hiranyakagipu, which were shining like blazing fire
a little away from them. Ravana moved forward to
take them. But he fell unconscious. Bal; caused him to
recover and said: “These earrings were worn by my
great grandfather Hiranyakasipu. How could you;
who are not even capable of taking his earrings, save
me from his slayer, Visnu? Visnu is Almighty an
All-powerful and Supreme Lord of everything.” Hearing this, Ravana was filled with shame and he returned:
( Valmiki Ramayana, Uttara Kanda, Praksipta Sarga) -
8) Bali born as a Gardabha (Ass). Bali, who was fallen
from power took birth in the womb of an ass an
roamed about. Brahma instructed Indra to find out
Bali. (M.B., Santi Parva, Chapters 216-218).
9) Other information.
(1) Mahabali shines in the durbar of Varuna. (M.B.
Sabha Parva, Chapter 9, Stanza 12). f
(2) Once Mahabali went to Prahlada and repented 0
his sins and begged for pardon. Then he began to mak
enquiries on spiritual matters. (M.B., Vana Parva,
Chapter 28, Stanza 3).
(3) From his childhood MahAbali was a hater of the
Brahmanas. (M.B., Santi Parva, Chapter 90, Stanz4
ea
( y Once Mahabali was engaged in a serious conte!
with Indra. (M.B., Santi Parva, Chapter 223). ted
(5) After having lost his kingdom Mahabali ridicule®
Indra in various ways. (M.B., Santi Parva, Chapté
225, Stanza 30). t
(6) Once Mahabali talked with Sukracarya abou"
giving gifts of flower, smoke and light. (M.B., Anu
sasana Parva, Chapter 98, Stanza 15). he
(7) Laksmi Devi had forsaken Mahabali because ft:
behaved haughtily towards Brahmanas. (M.B., San
Parva, Chapters 216-21 8).
(8) In the religious Books such as
story of Mahabali is given to illustrate
(Anasakti) . 7
A hermit. It is mentioned in the Mahabhara®’
Sabha Parva, Chapter 4, Stanza 10, that this her™
lived in Hastinapura. “n
An incarnation of Siva. Siva incarnated f
the hermitage of the Balakhilyas in the mount, _
Gandhamadana during the period of Varaha Ka!P 4
(Kalpa—one day of Brahma or the period OF
manus). It is seen in Siva Purana, Satapatha Brahma”
that Bali had four sons, called Sudhama, Kasy4P*?
Vasistha and Virajas,
ae €
Yogavasistha oe
disinterestedn¢

BALI IV
BALITIV. A king of the Yadavas. He was the son of
Krtavarman. Bali married Carumati, the daughter of
Rukmini. (Bhagavata, Skandha 19),
BALI V. A famous monkey-king of the country of Anava.
This King who was the son of Sutapas was a contemporary of the great King Sagara.
Bali did penance and Brahma appeared before him,’
and blessed him and said, ‘You will become a great
sage and will live till the end of the Kalpa (a period
of world age). Your power will be inimitable. Nobody
will overthrow you in battle. You will be loved by
your subjects and they will obey\you. You will be wellversed in the knowledge of law and its observance and
the learned will recognize your knowledge. You will
re-establish caste system in your kingdom.”’ (Harivamisa,
Sudesna was the wife of Bali. The couple had no children.
At last they appealed to Dirghatamas a hermit, from
whom they got five sons called Anga, Vanga, Kalinga,
Pandu and Suhma (Brahma Purana). In Bhagavata
it is mentioned that he had one more son called
Andhra,
Bali left his body at the end of the Kalpa and entered
heaven. Before his death he had divided his kingdom
€qually among his sons. (Bhagavata, Skandha 9, Mahapapatata, Adi Parva, Chapter 92).
LI. A mighty monkey-king. |
|) Birth, Bali is the son of Indra. There 1s a story
about the birth of Bali as follows:—
Mavati who was devoted to her husband once carried
on her shouler husband Ueratapas who was a leper,
der to ne house ofa harlot one night. On the way
they saw the hermit Animandavya, who had been
Placed on a trident by the order of the King, beating
his limbs with agony. Lying on the See . aa
gratapas. Seeing the amorous nature of a i:
Animandavya cursed him that before sunrise he Ww “
die. Silavati who was a woman of great pity a
loyalty hearing the curse said, ‘‘Let the Sun not r
tomorrow.’’
N ext day, though it
night prolonged. Ar
usual time but saw t
ing time was intolerable to
ed to make the best use of
Witnessing a little of the dance ©
i 5 as. But ma
was time the sun did not rise. The
una the charioteer was ready at the
he Sun sitting motionless. Wastthe charioteer. So he decidthe time at his disposal by
f the celestial beauties
les had no admittance
in the realm of the dev ie
there. So Aruna took the shape of vs meagre -
ont wae vast of tl lestial maids Indra
eine in the midst of the celes
i ne secretly took her toa dark place
. That son is Bali.
grew amorous. f ra
at coition.
ane Soot ga ae ne Sun was standing full of
When Aruna returned fessed everything
hom : na confessed every
a oh "eae hen a a whole a a
expressed his desire to see that _——— : sige heen
adopted. Accordingly Aruna again d Sugriva was
The Sun also had Nae hg pall and Sugriva
this Dh a f
iy — by Ahalyadevi 1 the hermitage ©
Gaut jja had been
Seder | _ a monkey-king nam ed Foe aa ts capital
ruling over the forest with Kiskin " dra and placed
He had no sons and so he appr eachie. me ht Bali and
before him his grievances. Indra proug
BALI
Sugriva from the hermitage of Gautama and handed
them over to Rksarajas. (M.B., Adi Parva, Chapter 107;
Brahmanda Purana, Chapter 42; Uttara Ramayana
and Kampa Ramayana, Pirvakanda). —
2) Marriage and Kingship. Owing to difference of opinion, Bali defeated the asuras who came for the churning
of the Sea of Milk. The devas who were pleased at
this, gave Bali,a woman named Tara, derived from
the Sea of Milk. Thus Tara became his wife and he got
ason by her, named Angada who became famous as a
mighty warrior-prince. Sugriva married Ruma. At that
time Rksaraja died and Bali became King. (Kampa
Ramayana, Pirvakanda). ‘
3) Enmity with Haniiman. It was during this period
that Hanum4n was born. While Siva and Parvati were
living in the forest as monkeys Parvati got with child.
The child was given to Bhagavan Vayu ( Wind-God )
with the womb. Vayu placed the womb with the child
in Afijana Devi’s stomach. Narada informed BAliall these
things. Bali thought that his position would be lost, if
a being born of Siva, grew up in the form of a monkey.
In accordance with the advice of Narada, Bali melted
Paficaloha (Five metals) and passed it into the womb
of Afijana. Still the child in the womb was not killed
as it was the sperm of Siva. The molten metals became
earrings of the child in thewomb. (Kampa Ramayana,
Pairvakanda ).
4) Sugriva separated. Once, the son of Maya, the carpenter of the asuras, wanted to defeat Bali bya
combat or cunning sleights as he was an expert wrestler and magician. He came to Kiskindha in the midnight and standing before the palace, challenged Bali,
who getting angry came out followed by Sugriva. Seeing the two of them the magician began to run. Bali
and Sugriva chased him to a cave. Placing Sugriva at
the mouth of the cave Bali followed the magician. Before going, Bali said to Sugriva: ‘Brother, I will go in
and kill the Magician and return. Be brave and stay
here. If the asura dies milk will appear at the mouth
of the cave and if he kills me blood will be seen. If the
latter happens close the mouth of the cave firmly and
return to Kiskindha and live happily there.”
Bali did not return evenaftera year. F inally the asura
was killed. But by the cunning sleights of the magician
it was blood that appeared at the mouth of the cave.
Thinking that his brother was slain by the magician
Sugriva felt sorry. Then he closed the mouth of the cave
firmly with stone and returned to Kiskindha. Hearing
about the death of Bali the monkeys anointed Sugriva
as King. After a time Bali returned stronger than before
and saw the mouth of the cave closed. He thought that
Sugriva had closed the mouth of the cave deliberately
to kill him and to usurp his throne. B4&li reached
Kiskindha and drove Sugriva away. Sugriva fled to
Mount R&yamukacala which was prohibited area for
Bali due to a curse. Matanga had cursed him that if
he entered that mountain his head would be broken.
So Sugriva was safe in that mountain.
The desire of Bali to take revenge on Sugriva increased
everyday. Everyday he used to go to the four seashores and conduct bath, prayer, meditation etc. and
return to Kiskindha within a short time. With one
jump he will reach one place from another, and in
each jump he would put one step on the head of
Sugriva in the Réyamtkacala. Hanuman was the

BALI
minister of Sugriva. He was much annoyed at this
habitual torture of Sugriva. One day as usual Bali
was stepping on the head of Sugriva to jump to another
place, when Hanuman caught hold of Bali by his waist.
Hanuman thought that if Baliwas dragged down on
the mountain somehow or other, his head would break
and there would be an end of his wicked deeds. Bali
thought that if he could jump into Kiskindha with
Hanum4n it would be easy for him to destroy Sugriva.
But both were of equal strength. So Bali did not jump
with Hanuman to Kiskindha and Hanuman did not
drag Bali to the ground. Both did not know how to
stop the fight. At last they made a treaty. Bali agreed
to stop torturing Sugriva and Hanuman agreed not to
cause any trouble to Bali. Both returned to their own
places. After that Sugriva lived in Réyamikacala with
his ministers and Bali in Kiskindha. (Valmiki Ramayana, Kiskindha Kanda, Sarga 10;Kampa Ramayana,
Purvakanda).
9) Bali was cursed by MAtanga the great hermit. See
the word Dundubhi para 4.
6) Defeating Ravana. Bali had got a boon from the
Gods that he would get half the strength of his opponent who stood face to face with him in fight. This
power enabled Bali to defeat all his foes and bring the
countries in all directions under his sway. Ravana heard
about this and decided to overpower Bali somehow or
other and approached Kiskindha. Bali knew this. His
minister, Taran, went to Ravana and told him about
the power of Bali and of the beon by which Bali got
half the strength of his opponent. When Ravana heard
of this peculiar boon he decided to kill Bali. His idea
was to kill Bali by going behind him when he went to
the sea-shore to take bath in the morning.
Next morning Bali went to the eastern sea-shore and
began his prayer and meditation. Ravana approached
Bali from behind and sat close to him. Perhaps the
idea of Ravana might have been to take Balj by his
tail and beat him on the ground. Bali knew that
Ravana was sitting behind him, But pretending that
he knew nothing put his long tail on the body of
Ravana, and passed it lengthwise and breadthwise
through every part of his body and tied him like a
bundle of faggots, and made a jump into the air.
Within a short time he visited all the usual places and
reached Kiskindha. Seeing Ravana hanging by the
tail of Bali, even the women folk laughed. Thus
Ravana admitted defeat. B&li let him go unhurt.
(Uttara Ramayana).
7) Death. After Sita had been stolen away Rama
and Laksmana wandered about in the forest. Then
they met with Hanuman, who took them to his King
Sugriva. Sri Rama and Sugriva entered into a treaty,
by which Sri Rama was to kil] Bali and to restore to
Sugriva his wife who was under the custody of Bali, and
to make him the King of Kiskindha, in return for
which Sugriva and his men had to help Sri Rama to
find out and recover Sita. In accordance with the conditions of the treaty, Sri Rama and Sugriva reached
Kiskindha, to confront with Bali. Sri Rama and Sugriva had hit up on a plan, by which Sri Rama was to
shoot Bali down, when Sugriva was engaged in boxing
with Bali. Sugriva challenged Bali to a single combat.
Bali came out and a horrible boxing began between the
two. But Sri Rama could not distinguish one from
BALISIKHA. A serpent born to Kagyapa prajeP as,
BALLAVA (VALLAVA). A country in Bharata.
BALVALA (VALKALA). An asura. This asur@
BALVALA( VALAKALA)
the other. Thier faces were so alike. Sugriva, being
defeated, receded from fight. Sri Rama and Sugriva
returned to Réyamiikacala. Surgiva spoke ill of Sri
Rama. But Sri Rama revealed the truth, and Sugriva
believed it. Next day morning both of them started for
Kiskindha to kill Bali. Sri Rama had put a flower
garland around the neck of Sugriva to distinguish him
from Bali. This time Tara tried to the utmost to dissuade Bali from fighting. But without paying any heed
to her words Bali engaged Sugriva in fighting. Sri
Rama, sitting in ambush, instantly sent an arrow to
the breast of Bali who looked to the side from which
the arrow came. Before falling down, looking at Sri
Rama Bali said “It is not right on the part of the King
of Ayodhya to have shot an arrow from ambush”:
Hearing that Sri Rama said, “Ifyou see me face to face
you will become devoted to me. It is not right to kill
one’s devotee. You are a friend of Ravana, who as you
know, is my foe. If I let you alone Ravana is likely to
get your help. Besides, you have a boon that you wil
get half the strength of the foe who faces you, and 4s
such you cannot be killed by anybody in direct fight:
It is unavoidable for the safety of Sugriva, for DY
interest, for the protection of the world at large, an 4
for the preservation of law and order that you shou ;
be killed. Was it not a violation of duty on your pa!
to steal the wife of Sugriva ?” _"
Bali fell down. Immediately Taradevi and Anga i
arrived there. Tara spoke very harsh words to +
Rama. At last Bali entrusted Tara and Angada wit
rl Rama and then he died. (Kampa Ramayan
Kiskindhakanda).
BALIHAM. A dynasty of Ksatriyas. It is mentioned i
Mahabharata, Udyoga Parva, Chapter 74, Stanza
that there was a king named Arkaja in this dynasty: xi
of his wife Kadru.
Stanza 8).
(M.B., Adi Parva, Chapter
BALIVAK. A hermit. It is mentioned in Mahabhara™
Sabha Parva, Chapter 4, Stanza 14 that this herm
had been a member of the durbar of Yudhisthira.
BALLALA. Sonof a Vaigya named Kalyana.
childhood Ballala was an ardent devotee of Ganap? 4
When he was a child he used to gather pebbles i“
make a heap and then worship it, imagining it t©
Ganefa (Ganapati). tO
His parents did not like this. They tried their best £0
dissuade him from this habit. Once they tied ts
a tree and gave him severe cuts. But their attemP,
were futile. One day an image of Ganapati aros® 4a
the place where the child used to worship. (Ga?
Purana | ;: 2), Mer
= nat
tion is made about this country in Mahabhara™’
Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9.
BALLAVA (VALLAVA). This is the pseudo-n4%,
assumed by Bhimasena, while the Pandavas were “owe
in pseudonymity in the kingdom of Virata. In 5§ rat
Puranas this name is shown as ‘Valala’. (M.B., ¥!
Parva, Chapter 2, Stanza 1).
BALOTKATA. A female attendant of Subrahma?Y
(M.B., Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Stanza 23). ad
ea
been tormenting the hermits of the forest of Nai”

BANA (BANABHATTA) I
This asura was killed by Balabhadrarama.* For
detailed story see para 6 of the word Balabhadrarama.
BANA (BANABHATTA) I. A Sanskrit poet who lived in
the 7th century A.D. He was a member of the assembly of emperor Harsavardhana. ‘Harsacarita’ (prose)
is the most important work of Bana. Though many of
the descriptions in this book contain exaggerations it
affords plenty of scope for investigation into the features of ancient Sanskrit literature. He has mentioned
about Vyasa, Bhattara-harigcandra, Satavahana,
Pravarasena, Bhasa, Kalidasa and such others.
Flarsacarita, in -a sense, is a Romance. It is divided
into eight Ucchvasas. From the first two or three
Chapters informations could be had of Banabhatta.
His mother Rajyadevi died when he was a little boy.
At the age of fourteen his father also died. After that
he arrived at the palace of Harsa. The story of HarsaCarita begins with the death of Prabhakara-Vardhana,
father of Harsa. The Book ends with the story incomplete. Harsacarita is the only historic prose work
available in Sanskrit.
BANA II. A mighty and powerful Asura. a
I) Genealogy and birth. Descended from Mahavisnu in
the following order .Brahma-Marici- Ka’yapa-Hiranyakagip u-Prahlada-Virocana-Mahabali-Bana. :
2) Getting 2 boon. Bana began his reign with the city
of Sonitapura as his capital. Then he went to the
vicinity of the Himalayas and began to do penance
inki . rance and asked
thinking of Siva. Siva made his appea
: sted that he should be
im what he wanted. He requeste op
Considered as the son of Parvati and that he should be
Ziven thousand hands so as to destroy all his enemies.
hat day onwards
iva granted him the boon. From
gran d him as the younger brother of
Parvati id
an He returned to his Kingdom and began
to reign, _
3) pan with Sri Krsna and his fall. (See the ware
‘Aniruddha) anas Banasura 1s
Or mation. ai when a
often called by the name Chapter
ne an attendant of Siva.
(2) nolan (the teacher of the gn eed
worked for the uplift of Bana. Bes :
I 8, Stanza 4}. , helped by
(3) ec nie Battle with Sui Krsna, Bana 0 (ge) and
Siva, Subrahmanya, and the — rt .
others. (M.B., Sabha Parva, Se aa
(4) Sri Krsna cut down — heel weapon):
With his Cakrayudha (the w® ;
of the mountal
Sabha P2 hapter 38). .
abha Parva, C Pp under the cover (gods). So once
raufica with
5) Ba en stood
(5) Bina. often srracked the dovts
Subrahmanya we to & ha. Parva Chapter 46, Stanza
his arrows. (M.B., »4 ;
BANS Ill. A warrior of
made about this Bana i
Chapter 45, Stanza 67.
BANA IV. An asura. Dur
_ this Asura fought against th
ivalinga had been consecra
; hi
* Inthe original of Bhagavat@
M.B., Adi Parva,
ands of Bana
=F
Mention 1s
anya. |
Sup barata, Salya Parva,
of Sri Rama
oimeé
nis brothers. 4
nd t of this
; name is given 48
Balvala. But
BARBARIKA
asura. So it was not possible for Laksmana to defeat
him though he had fought with him for so many days.
Laksmana heard an etherial voice saying, ‘‘Unless and
until the image of Sivalinga is removed from his throat
Bana could not be killed.’ By the operation of arrows
Laksmana smashed the image of Sivalinga in his
throat. With the same arrow he cut the throat of the
asura’ also and thus Bana was killed. (Kampa Ramayana, Uttara Kanda).
BANDHUDAYADA. A son who can claim to be a heir.
The Puranas state about six different kinds of Bandhudayadas.
1) Svayaryata. A son born to one’s wife without a
progenitor.
2) Pranita. A son born to one’s wife by the blessing
of any holy man.
3) Putrikdpuira. Son of one’s daughter.
4) Paunarbhava. A son born after a re-marriage.
5) Kanina. A son born before marriage.
6) Bhaja. Son of one’s sister. All these sons are
heirs. (Chapter 119, Adi Parva, M.B.).
BANDHUMAN. A king of the country of Videha.
Chapter 6, Brahmanda Purana).
BANDHUMATI. A lady attendant of V4savadaita,
wife of Udayana. (See Vdsavadatia).
BARBARA. Accountry of puranic fame. The people
living there were called Barbaras. They were considered as low caste people. There is also a statement that
these people were born of the sides of the cow, Nandini. (Sloka 37, Chapter 174, Adi Parva, M.B.).
During the victory march of the Pandavas Bhimasena
conquered the Barbaras. Nakula also conquered these
people. (Chapter 32, Sabha Parva, M.B.). In the
Rajasiiya yajfia of Dharmaputra the Barbaras were
resent with gifts.
BARBARIKA. Son of Maurvi born of Ghatotkaca, son
of Bhima. Skanda Purana gives the following details
about him.
Barbarika was a Yaksa in his previous life. Once the
devas unable to bear the insufferable harm done to
them by the Danavas approached Lord Mahavisnu for
help and then the Yaksa who was present there at that
time said with arrogance, “Chere is no need for Visnu
to curb the activities of the Danavas. I shall do it myself”? Hearing those arrogant words Brahma cursed
him saying that in his next life he would be killed by
Visnu._
True to the curse the Yaksa was born in his next life
as Barbarika, son of Ghatotkaca. To lessen the force of
the curse Krsna advised him to worship Devi. At last
pleasing the goddess by the kindly help of a brahmin
named Vijaya Barbarika killed a demoness called
Mahajihva and a demon of name Repalendra. The
brahmin further gave him a weapon named Vibhati
which could split the vital centres of the body of an
enemy and said, ‘‘Use this weapon against the Kauravas who oppose the Pandavas.”’
Once Barbarika defeated his grandfather Bhima in a
battle and greatly grieved over the injury done started
to commit suicide. Then Devi appeared before him and
reminded him thus, ‘You will get salvation only if you
are killed by Sri Krsna and so desist from committing
suicide. 7
in the Malayalam translation the name used is ‘Valkala’’,

BARHANASVA
The great war started and Barbarika fighting on the
side of the Pandavas started using his weapon Vibhiti.
He sent it against all excepting the Pandavas, Krpacarya and ASvatthama. He did not leave even Krsna
alone and the weapon fell on the feet of Krsna also.
Enraged at this Krsna used his Sudargana Cakra and
cut off his head ; at once Devi appeared and brought
him to life. After the. great battle on the advice of
Krsna Barbarika went and lived in Guptaksetra.
BARHANASVA. A king born of the dynasty of emperor
Prthu. Descending in order : Prthu-Visvarandhi-CandraYuvanagva-Savanta - Brhadagva - Dhundhumara (alias
Valayagva) - Drdhasva - Haryagva - Nikumbha and to
Nikurnbha was born Barhanaéva and from him KréasvaPrasenajit-Yuvanaéva - Mandhata. (Saptama Skandha,
Devi Bhagavata).
BARHIS. A devagandharva clan. These were born to
Kasyapa prajapati of his wife Prtha. (Chapter 65, Adi
Parva, M.B.).
BARHISAD(S). A class of Manes. It is mentioned in
Agni Purana, Chapter 20 that some classes of manes
such as Agnisvattas, Barhisads, Anagnis, and Sagnis are
said to have derived from Brahma. Brahma created two
different sets of Pitrs, Agnisvattas’ and Barhisads,
(Chapter 10, Amgam 1, Visnu Purana),
These Barhisads who are members of the Yamasabha (council of the God of Death) perform the mAntric rites for
the dead. The name brings into its fold the world of
the seven sacred sages also. (Chapter 208, Santi Parva,
M.B.). It was through these Barhisads that Brahma
taught Satvatadharma to a brahmin who became wellknown later as Jyestha. (Chapter 34, Sloka 45, Santi
Parva, M.B.).
Manusmrti states that the Barhisads are the sons of the
Maharsi Atri and the Pitrs of all the Daityas, Danavas,
Yaksas, Gandharvas, Uragas, Raksasas, Suvarnas and
Kinnaras.
Daityadanavayaksanarh
Gandharvoragaraksasam
Suvarnakinnaranamca
Smrta Barhisado’trijah :
(Manusmrti, Sloka 196, Chapter 3).
BARHISMATI. Wife of Priyavrata, son of Svayambhuva
Manu and brother of Uttanapada. She was the daughter
of Visvakarmaprajapati. Priyavrata married another
daughter of\ his named Suripa. Suriipa delivered ten
sons and a daughter. They were : Agnidhra, Idhmajihva, Yajfiabahu, Mahavira, Rukmagukra, Ghrtaprstha, Savana, Madhatithi, Vitihotra, Kavi and a
daughter Urjjasvati. Priyavrata got of his wife Barhismati three sons, Uttama, Tamasa and Raivata. These
sons became in due course the Manvantaradhipatis,
(Astama Skandha, Devi Bhagavata).
BARHASPATYA. The Nitigastra of Brahma. Brhaspati
condensed and codified the laws of Ethics by Brahma,
This was compiled by Brhaspati. This book contains
three thousand chapters. Mention is made about this
Book in Mahabharata, Santi Parva, Chapter 59, Stanza
BASKALA I. A king of the asuras.
|) Birth, Two sons, Hiranyaksa and Hiranyakagipu
and a daughter Sirmhika, were born to Kagyapa prajapati of his wife Diti. Simhika became the wife of Vipracitti. Four sons, Anuhrada, Hrada, Prahlada and Samhlada, were born'to Hiranyakasipu. Hrada was the son
BHADRA III
of Hrada. Three sons Ayusman, Sibi and Baskala were
born to Samhrdada.
2) Later history. Baskala became one of the ministers
of the famous and mighty hero Mahisdsura. Ciksura
was the minister of law and order. Tamra was the Finance
Minister. Asiloma was the Prime Minister and Bidala
the minister of foreign affairs. Udarkka was the general
of the army; Baskala, Trinetra and Kalabandhaka were
members of the administrative council. Sukracarya was
the minister of education. Baskala played an important
part in the battle between Mahisdsura and Indra.
When soldiers were killed by thousands, Mahisisura
sent lastly, Baskala and Durmukha. Baskala engaged
himself in a combat with Devi who fought on the side
of the Devas. Baskala became angry and aiming at the
breast of Devi he gave a severe blow with his clubBut Devi evaded him with her club and gave him 4
severe thrust with her trident at his breast and Baskala
fell dead. (Agni Purana, Chapter 19; Devi Bhagavata,
Skandha 5),
BASKALA II. One of the disciples of Vyasa. (See the
word Guruparampara).
BATU (VATU). A brahmin who reads the Gita datlyBecause in life he held fast to duty he was carried t0
heaven after death. The dead body was eaten awa
by birds and the bony skeleton remained. When raiPs
Started the empty skull was filled with water and a
Sinner passing that way touched the skull and the sinn®
got salvation. (Padma Purana, Uttara Khanda). ,
BAUDHAYANA. A teacher-priest who acted accordin8
to Kalpa Sitras (rituals of sacrifices). ‘
BHADRA I. A king of Cedi who fought on the Pandav
side. Karna killed him. (Karna Parva, Chapter 2”
Verse 48) . A
BHADRA II. One of the four elephants which, !f0
Patala, support the world. (See Astadiggajas) . —
BHADRA IIi. Son of Sraddha, daughter born to Svaya™
bhuva Manu by his wife Satarapa. Sraddha had .
following sons : Subha, Prasada, Maitriputra, Abhay —
Dayatmaja, Santija, Bhadra, Muda, Tustija Sm@Y
Pustija and Yoga. (Bhagavata, Caturtha Skandha) ra
BHADRA IV. A yaksa, one of the ministers of Kubé ;
Fle had to be born as a lion on account of the curs
sage Gautama. are
BHADRA V. People of the kingdom of Bhadragan@ na
generally called Bhadras. It is stated in the 54 at’
Parva that the Ksatriya princes of Bhadragana prese 4
ed lots of money in connection with the R4j4§
yajfia of Yudhisthira. of
BHADRA VI. A maharsi, son of Pramati, and fathe?
Upamanyu. «Ate
BHADRA VII. A son born to §;i Krsna of Kale
(Bhagavata, Dagama Skandha).
BHADRA I. See Bhadrakali.
BHADRA II. The beautiful daughter of King Kaks
She was married to King Vyisitagva of the Paru dy® ath
When Bhadra, in unbearable grief lamented the ae
of her husband his soul appeared on the skies rp"
blessed her. Accordingly she got pregnant by_the €° va
of her husband and delivered six sons. (Adi Pa
Chapter 120, Verse 38). ; _ ance
BHADRA III. One of the wives of Kubera. Kuntt © ef
related the story of Bhadra to Paficali and exhorte 6)
to live like Bhadrd. (Adi Parva, Chapter 198, Vers°
ivan
asty

ee Oe CC =
BHADRA IV 1
BHADRA IV. The word Bhadra is used as another name
of Subhadra, sister of Sri Krsna in Verse 14, Chapter
218 of Adi Parva.
BHADRA V. Yet another Bhadra, daughter of the King
of Vigala is mentioned in Chapter 45 of the Mahabharata. She did penance for getting the kingdom of
Karissa, when Sigupala, disguised as King Karisa appeared on the scene and carried her away.
BHADRA VI. There is reference’ to another Bhadra,
daughter of Soma in Chapter 154 of the Anugasana Parva.
She once did intense penance to secure Utathya as her
husband. Atri maharsi, father of Soma, came to know of
the desire of his granddaughter, and got her married
to Utathya. Varuna once fell in love with Bhadra, who
was an exceptionally beautiful woman, and abducted
and concealed her in the sea. When Utathya returned
to the Agrama, his wife was missing. He understood
what had happened to Bhadra by the light of his divine
knowledge (television of mind). Burning with anger
he drank up the sea completely dry, and Varuna shuddering with fear returned Bhadra to Utathya and profusely apologised. Thus ended the problem.
BHADRA VII. Verse 24, Chapter ; o ihe ee
Parva, states that Bhadra, one of the four wives 0
Vasudeva, father of Sri ae died by jumping into the
ay ‘ her husband.
aber A daughter of the King of Kasi. The
grandson of Sagara, a king of the Solar dynasty A Aa
Bhadra, daughter of the King of Kasi. (Brahmane
‘ Purana, ig ap, +
H A [X. One Bhadra, :
by King Agoidhra. She had eight sisters, viz.
- ‘5 YJeradamstri, Lata, Ramya,
Devi, Pratiripa, Ugra Stamiha)
Nari and Devaviti. ( EEpeavens Paficama
BHADRA a See Vidisa <a. : : ‘« KsaBHADRA(M). A kingdom 1n ancient agen i
triya princes of Bhadram cage i Sabha Parva,
Dharmaputra at the Rajasiya aga ee: of Hie
Chapter 52, Verse 14). Karna, in th’ - d this kingdi i A. (conquest of countries) subjugate
dom, (vane Parva, Chapter 254.) ka
BHADRABAHU. A king of Paruvamss.
dha, Bhigavata) . ¢ Pradyumna. (Bhagavata,
BHADRACARU, : son 0
, ay.
BHADRADEHA. A king. According _
he was one of the sons of ics en
' ing to
BHADRAKA 1. A king belonging |
Agni Purana, Chapter ee This brahmin, who
) A brahmin Oe as : by chance,
ade life in committing Sins, ha thus
aga,
took magha bath for three days at Prayag
ti kingot himself sanctified. ling the Avan
King Virasena, who was pon ‘ ‘i y the performance ©
aughter of Meru was married
Meru
Syama ;
(Navama Skanhe Visnu Purana
Devaki.
Anga dynasty.
King
ed ample sane Deaths of
Se canned vom yaa ee one and the same
re ka took pi” ‘al in_ his life, he
Virasena and Bhadra Artie
day. Though Bhadraka Oe nase after |
went to heaven along with (Padma Puran
had taken the magha th.
khanda).
BHADRAKALI. An
1) General, Lord 91)
immolation in fire of hi
conducted by Daksa rus
frer death as he
A, Uttara4rvati.
other form of Se :
Siva, on heal gi
5 wile, 5 a
hed in 4
bout the self
e famous yajna
the spot,
ee
ee
BHADARAKALI
and beat the earth with his matted hair, and there ensued two forces called Virabhadra and Bhadrakali. This
Bhadrakali was really Sati or Parvati in another form.
2) Bhadrakali and Karvsa. There is a story in the DagamaSkandha of Bhagavata that Karisa took away from
the room in which Devaki had delivered Sri Krsna the
child of Yasoda by whom Krsna had been replaced,
and dashed the child against a rock, and that the
child then escaped from his clutches and rose up to the
sky. That child was Bhadrakali in another form, (Agni
Purana, Chapter 12).
3) Kampa, Lankalaksmi and Bhadrakéli. Lankalaksmi,
who was guarding the city of Lanka, was the first to
prevent Hanuman from entering the city. Tamil
Puranas aver that this Lankalaksmi was an incarnation
of Bhadrakali. Hanuman thrashed Lankalaksmi with
his left hand at which she vomitted blood and fell down
unconscious. On regaining consciousness, remembrance
of the past occurred to her, and after thanking Hanuman,
who restored her to her former form, she returned to
Kailisa. She complained to Siva that she could not
witness the Riama-Ravana war. Then Siva told her
thus:
‘You go to the Dravida country and be put up in the
‘Svayambhilinga’ temple there. I shall be born there
as Kampa, compose the Ramayana in Tamil and get
conducted the dolls-play. Then you would be able to
enjoy thestory of Sri Rama, especially the Rama-Ravana
war, both by hearing and seeing the same in better
manner than by actually seeing the war.
Bhadrakali acted according to this bidding of Siva.
There lived a great scholar named Sankarandrayana
close to the temple. His wife was Cinkaravalli. Lord
iva, as decided upon previously was born as the son
of Cinkaravalli, who had become a widow while she
was worshipping ‘Svayambhiideva’ for the gift ofa
child. But, Cinkaravalli, who feared scandal in her,
a widow, becoming a mother, forsook the child in the
temple precincts and left the place. One Ganegakaunta
sighted the orphan child, and took it to Jayappavallan,
the Kaunta chief. The Kaunta chief, who was without
children brought up the orphan child as though it had
been his own child. Since the child was recovered from
the foot of the flagstaff it was named Kampa. Kampa,
who was very intelligent even in his infancy, but lazy by
nature turned out to be a great scholar and good poet
in Tamil by the time he grew up to be a youth, and
he became, consequently a prominent member in the
‘poets’ assembly’ of King Cola. When to his name was
added the plural suffix ‘r’ as a token of great respect
he came to be known as Kampar.
Once King Cola asked Kampar and Ottakkiitta another
member of the poets’ assembly to compose in Tamil
poetry the story of Sri Rama. The King’s direction was
that. Oftakkittta should compose his poem upto the
incident, Setubandhana (building a bridge in the sea up
to Lanka) and Kampar should write the story of the
war in his poem. Ottakkitta completed the task allotted
to him within six months. But Kampar had not attempted to write evena single line. Having been informed
about the matter the King ordered that the poem, Ramiyana should be recited in the assembly the very next
day itself. Kampar, who began writing his poem the
same day with the object of completing itin the nj ht
itself fell asleep without writing anything at all. When
a = oe a eer Pe ets ee ep ee ee — SS
= eee

BHADRAKALIPPATTU 110
Kampar awoke early in the morning he saw a divine
form disappearing from his room, and exclaimed, “Oh!
mother ! you have slipped away’’. To this the divine
form replies, “Oh Kampar ! I have finished writing”.
And, then the divine form vanished completely.
When Kampar got completely out of sleep and looked
about he found the Ramayana story fully written in
verse on his desk. Kampar inferred that the poem was
composed by Saradabhagavati, the presiding deity of
learning and literature, and he was wonder-struck. He
recited the poem in the royal assembly, and the King
and others too were wonder-struck. And, afterwards,
according to the orders of the [Sing the story of the war
(Yuddhakanda Katha) beganto be exhibited as dollsplay in the presence of the idol of the Devi in the
temple. Thus Siva incarnated himself as Kampar,
recited the story of the Rama-Ravana war in the temple,
and hearing it Bhadrakali danced.
The above is the chief legend about Kampar.
BHADRAKALIPPATTU. (PattusSong). Folk song very
popular in Kerala temples. The practice is to sing
songs in praise of Bhadrakali
BHADRAKARA. A king of ancient India; he once left
his kingdom, in fear of Jarasandha, and took refuge in
South India. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 14, Verse 26).
BHADRAKARNESVARA(M). A sacred place. He who
visits this place conducts worship will never have to
face ill fate. (Vana Parya, Chapter 84, Verse 39).
BHADRAMATA (BHADRAMANA). Daughter born to
Kasyapa prajapati of his wife, Krodhavaga. The ten
daughters of Krodhavagéa are: Mrgi, Mrgamanda,
Hari, Bhadramata, Matangi, Sarddili, Sveta, Surabhi,
Surasa and Kadru. (Sarga 14, Aranya Kanda,
Valmiki Ramayana) .
BHADRAMATI. A very poor brahmin. This brahmin
had six wives and two hundred and fortyfour daughters.
(Narada Puranam).
Once, hearing the glory of Bhidana (giving away land
free to the deserved) he was much impressed and from
then onwards he became filled witha strong desire
to give land free to the poor. He had no land of his
own. But he went to the king of Kaug4mbi and begged
for some land which when received was immediately
given as gift to poor brahmins. After that he went and
aorta baw iis Fagan fea tirtha situated in the mount
of Venkatacala. adramati got salvati 1
deed. (Skanda 2,1,10). ° 7
BHADRASAKA. A name of Subrahmanya. It is the figure
of Subrahmanya in the shape of a goat that is known
as ~ puma (Sloka 4, Chapter 228, Vana Parva
BHADRASALA(M). A forest on the top of the Mountain BhadraSvavarsa which lies to the east of
Mahameru. There is a tree called Kalamra in this
forest. This is a very sacred tree standing miles
high above other trees and is being worshipped by
the Vrddhacaranas. By worshipping this tree the
men have become white and majestic and by drinking a juice prepared from its leaves the women keep
themselves eternally young. Chapter seven of Bhisma
Parva says like this about this tree: “Kalamra stands
towering miles high bearing flowers and fruits at all
times of the year. The Vrddhacaranas worshipping it
are white, strong and majestic. ‘The women drinking
its juice are lotus-complexioned, beautiful, Moonfaced,
BHADRASRAVAS
well versed in music and dance and having a life-span of
over a thousand years, remaining young all the time.
BHADRASARA. A king in the region of KaSmira. His
only son, Sudharman, was very much devoted to Siva
and spent most of his time worshipping him. The
father tried his best to withdraw his son from this excessive devotion but failed.
Then one day the great sage, Paragara, came to the
King as his guest and the King then requested him _ to
make his son withdraw from his Siva-worship. But
Paragara then told him about the previous life of
Sudharma and consoling him persuaded the King to do
the ‘Rudrabhiseka’ (uninterrupted pouring of cold
water over an idol of Siva) by himself. The king then
entrusted the state with his son and left for the forests
accepting an ascetic life. (Skandha Purana, 3.3.20-21).
BHADRASENA. A king. Uddalaka Maharsi performed
a demoniac yadga to destroy this king. (Satapathabrahmana).
BHADRASRAVAS. Aking whom the Puranas extol as
having ruled Saurastra in Dvaparayuga. At the forest
of Naimiga sage Sita told the following story to explain
how Laksmi (goddess of wealth) took her abode in the
houses of men.
Bhadrasrava (Bhadragravas) who was ruling Saurastra
had seven sons and a daughter of his wife Suraticandrika. The daughter was named Syamabala, Once
truthful-Syamabala was sitting under a green-wood tree
with her playmates playing. with diamonds and gold
sand when the goddess of wealth disguised as an age
brahmin woman went to the gates of the palace and aske
for permission to see the queen, Suraticandrika. The
sentries pressed for details about her and then she sa!
this: “My name is Kamala. My husband is a man name
Bhuvanasva and we live in Dvaraka4. Your queen in her
previous birth was a Vaigya woman. One day she quar”
relled with her husband and he beat her hard and the?
crying loudly she ran out of the house. I met her an
when she told meher story I instructed her to observ
a Punyavrata (Fasting to any particular deity). She d!
it willingly and asa result she acquired great wealth
and happiness. '
One day the husband and wife died. Yama, the kin8
of Death, then sent his orderlies to bring before hi
that couple who had always quarrelled with each othe!
while living. Bound by ropes the ghastly servants °
Yama were about to drag them to their land when t
angelic servants of Visnu with the insignia of ‘ amnkhaCakra-Gada’ on their lapels arrived there and those
messengers of Laksmi headed by Svapraka§a cut off the
ropes and carrying them in a Rajaharsa chariot to°
them through noble paths to the land of Laksmi. Th
lived there happily for a period calculated at the rate o
a thousand years for one week of Punyavrata observe"*
In the endto complete the goodness remaining they
were born as King and queen on earth with plenty
of wealth and happiness. But they have now forgott™
about the Punyavrata and I have come here to re™!
them of it.” d
The gate-keeper immediately went to her mistress ay
told her all that happened. But the queen, Suratica™ d
rika got angry when she heard the story and order
the old woman to be sent away from there with thra®
es. The old woman ran away from the palace cryin
loudly and Syamabala on hearing the ‘cry went #

BHADRASRENYA
enquired about the incident. On hearing the story
from the woman Syamabala got instructions regarding
that Punyavrata from the old woman and started
observing it. Within four weeks she got married and
went to her husband’s house. After Syamabala’s departure from the palace the wealth of the King began to
wane and they became sopoor that at the request of the
queen the King Bhadragrava went to his daughter to ask
for help. The daughter gave his father a block of solid
gold drapped in a paper. But on his return to the
palace when he opened the bundle he found there a
block of charcoal instead of gold. On seeing the mishap the king burst intoa cry.
Suraticandrika then went to her daughter and was well
received and attended to. During her stay there the
Punyavrata day of the month came and the daughter
tried her best to make her mother also observe the
same. But the poverty-stricken queen broke the fast
without her daughter’s knowledge by eating what remained in the dishes of the children. But the next
month Syamabala compelled her mother to observe the
fast strictly and so Suraticandrika took the Vrata
successfully. A few days after that Suraticandrika returned home and to her amazement found ee
in plenty there once more. (Chapter 11, Bhaga ¢,
Se ea. A Hehaya King who was ruling a
state with Mahismati as capital. He had fought eee
wars with Divodasa, king of Kasi. (See under Vivo
dasa). woe.
B I. A king of Pairuvaméga. He was
of nll Ahadraiva had ten sons: ey Srey
Sannateyu, Ghrtey¥, Citeyu, Sthandeyy, a Fee
Sammiteyu, Krteyu and Matinara. (Chapter.2/0,
Purana). ‘7 the
Once Agastya, went and a Sntimate Even
palaceot = i speak in glowing terms about
day Agastya Use ; for it he replied:
Kantimati and asked about the reason aaa in
“Tn her previous birth Kantimati was 4 servan 8 oe
7 tt F house. The master of the house one ‘ieee P
ed te "with the task of seeing that none © the month
i ervosal out on the night “am Os bee duty so
of Tula (Agvina—October)- oe bart asa queen an
wil 2 Age a
-_ Fae Mate which both Bhadrasvae t aintion
eae d sincerely, receiving 45 4 res
from Visnu. (Vayu Purana). son
BHADRASVA Il. Agnidhrés
grandson of Manu; got | the sons
a celestial maiden. UNC eg
His brother were = a
Ramyaka, Hiranmay, 1
try ruled by Bhadrasva wat andhamadana.
to the east of the —_
, Bhagavata )-
BHADRASVA. An island aa
Dharmaputra was ruling -stra, (Chapter
described this land to Dhrtar™, dvice
Parva and Chapter 7, n the adv 4
BHADRATANU,. An unr otee 0 VALS
of Danta he became a deve riya
salvation. (Padma Purana,
BHADRATUNGA. A sacred place; a
of Priyavrata and
r his wife Parvacit,
was Bhadrasva.
; Kin sa. Hari, Lavrta,
<= Kin etumala. The counled Bhadrasva lying
(Paficama
mountain of Meru.
d Safijaya once
ra M4, Santi
hmin. O
isnu and a
apter 17).
nee in the holy
11] BHAGA II
waters of this place would entitle one to Brahmaloka.
(Vana Parva, Chapter 82, Verse 80).
BHADRAVATA. The abode of Parvati and Parame§gvara. The glory of it is described in Chapter 82
Vana Parva, M.B. |
BHADRAYU. A king who wasa devotee of Siva. He
was a leper and in his life he suffered much, even the
pangs of death. His wife was the dutiful and good |
natured lady, Kirtimalini.
On the sixteenth birthday of Bhadrayu Siva appeared
before him in the name of Rsabha and blessed him
after instructing him on the precepts of Rajadharma.
He further gave him a dagger and a conch as weapons
and twelve thousand elephants, With the might of all
these, Bhadrayu became unconquerable. (Siva Purana,
Satarudrasamhita) .
One day, while Bhadrayu was ruling the country, Siva
came in the guise of a tiger and carried away the wife
of a brahmin. Bhadrayu, a firm protector of his subjects gave his own wife to the brahmin and prepared
himself to give up his life in fire. Siva greatly pleased
at this selfless act of Bhadrayu befitting a true King
appeared before him and blessed him and gave back
the brahmin his wife.
Bhadrayu in his previous birth was a King called
Mandara and Kirtimalini in her previous birth was
Pingala, queen of Mandara. (Skanda Purana, 3.3.12;
BHAGA I.
1) General. One of the twelve Adityas born as sons of
Kagyapa prajapati by his wife, Aditi. Visnu, Sakra,
Aryaman, Dhata, Tvasta, Pisa, Vivasvan, Savita,
Mitra, Varuna, Amgu and Bhaga—these are the DvadagAdityas, and they were Devas famous as Tusitas in
the last Caksusamanvantara.
2) Other information. (1) Bhaga married Siddhi, and the
couple begot three sons called Mahiman, Vibhu and
Prabhu and three daughters called Suvrata, Vararoha,
and Agis. >
(2) Bhaga participated in the birthday celebrations of
Arjuna. (M.B., Adi Parva, Chapter 122, Verse 66).
(3) At the time of Khandavadaha (burning of the
Khandava forest) Bhaga, as a supporter of Indra, who
was fighting Arjuna and Sri Krsna, sprang upon the
enemies with sword in hand. (M.B., Adi Parva, Chapter 236, Verse 36). >
(4) Bhaga shines forth’ in Indra’s assembly. (M.B.,
Sabha Parva, Chapter 7, Verse 22).
(5) Bhaga was also present at the installation of Subrahmanya as commander of the fighting forces. (M.B.,
Salya Parva, Chapter 45).
(6) After Devayuga (Deva age), the Devas asembled
together and decided upon the share of yajfias due to
each of them, and in thus fixing shares they left out
Rudra. Enraged at this neglect Rudra made a bow
and fought against the Devas. During the fight Rudra,
with the point of his bow, extracted the hands of
Savita, the eyes of Bhaga and the teeth of Pisa. Ulltimately the Devas satisfied and pleased. Rudra, who
returned to Bhaga and others the eyes etc. which had
been extracted. (M.B., Sauptika Parva).
BHAGAII. Certain Puranas refer to Bhaga as one of
the eleven Rudras. But, this view is not universally
accepted.

BHAGA IilI
BHAGA III. A vedic god considered to be the lord of
wealth, prowess and happiness. Bhaga is also one of
the six Adityas mentioned in the Rgveda, viz. Bhaga,
Mitra, Aryama, Varuna, Daksa and AmSa. (Rgveda,
idl)
BHAGADA. An attendant (woman) of Subrahmanya.
(Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Verse 26).
BHAGADATTA. Bhagadattawas King of Pragjyotisapura. Mahabharata furnishes the following information
about him.
1) Bhagadatta was born from a limb of the asura
called Baskala. (M.B., Adi Parva, Chapter 67, Verse
2) He was present at the wedding of Paficali. (Adi
Parva, Chapter 185, Verse 12).
3) Known also as lord of the Yavanas (Yavanadhipa) .
BHAGAVAD GITA
19) Bhagadatta killed Ruciparvan. (Drona Parva,
Chapter 26, Verse 52).
20) He shot the Vaisnavastra (arrow given by Visnu)
on Arjuna. (Drona Parva, Chapter 29, Verse 17).
21) Arjuna killed Bhagadatta. (Drona Parva, Chapter
22) After his death, his son, Vajradatta became King
of Pragjyotisa. Arjuna killed Vajradatta also. (A§vamedha Parva, Chapter 76).
23) King Sailalaya, who was Bhagadatta’s grandfather,
attained Indraloka on account of the. greatness of his
tapas. (Agramavasika Parva, Chapter 20, Verse 10).
BHAGANANDA. An attendant woman of Subrahmanya.
(Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Verse 11).
BHAGAVADDHYANAPARVA. A sub-parva of UdyogaParva. It comprises chapters 72-150 in Udyoga Parva.
Bhagadatta was a friend of Pandu, and that friendship BHAGAVATA. One of the eighteen famous Puranas.
was transferred to Yudhisthira too. (Sabha Parva,
Chapter 14, Verse 14).
4) The triumphal tour of Arjuna in connection with
the Rajasiiya yajfia performed by Yudhisthira evoked
Gayatri is the main theme of this Purana and based on
it it dwells on the greatness of Dharma (duty) and states
about the dharmas of Sdarasvatakalpa. (See under
Purana) .
feelings of jealousy in the heart of Bhagadatta, and he BHAGAVAD GITA.
fought against Arjuna. The courage and prowess Arjuna
exhibited in the fight astonished Bhagadatta, who
congratulated Arjunaon his supreme courage and
admitting defeat yielded to Arjuna. (Sabha Parva,
Chapter 26, Verse 7).
5) Bhagadatta, along with the Yavanas was present at
the Rajasiya of Yudhisthira. He also made presents of
horses of very high pedigree and very costly gems etc.
(Sabha Parva, Chapter 51, Verse 14).
6) Karna once defeated Bhagadatta in fight. (Vana
Parva, Chapter 254, Verse 5).
7) In the great war he, with his army, fought on the
side of Duryodhana. (Udyoga Parva, Chapter 19,
Verse 19).
8) During the first day of the war Bhagadatta fought
+a duel with the King of Virata. (Bhisma Parva Chapter 45, Verse 49). ' °
9) He was defeated in his fight with Ghatotkaca.
(Bhisma Parva, Chapter 64, Verse 59).
10) In the fight which took place after the above defeat Bhagadatta caused Bhimasena to faint-in the field
(Bhisma Parva, Chapter 64, Verse Lah |
11) And after that he defeated Ghatotkaca in fight.
(Bhisma Parva, Chapter 83, Verse 40).
12) Next ensued the combat with King Daégarna in
which the King was defeated. (Bhisma Parva Chapter
13) It was not long after this that Bhagadatt
i hands of the Ksatradeva. (Bhisma Puta, Chaprer
95, Verse 73).
14) Vigoka, the charioteer of Bhima-sena, hit by the
arrows of Bhagadatta fell down and fainted. (Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 95, Verse 76). )
15) Bhagadatta and Satyaki fought against each other.
(Bhisma Parva, Chapter 111, Verse 7),
16) Chapters 113 and 114 of the Bhisma Parva describe the combats fought by Bhagadatta with Bhimasena and Arjuna. .
17) Bhagadatta and Drupada fought with each other.
(Drona Parva, Chapter 14, Verse 40).
18) Bhagadatta killed king Dagarna. (Drona Parva
Chapter 26, Verse 38). °
1) General. The Bhagavad Gita is a poem consisting of
650 verses divided into eighteen chapters. The Gita
covers chapters 25-45 in the Bhisma Parva of the Mahabharata, and it is in the form of a talk or discussion
between Arjuna and Lord Krsna. The mighty armies
of the Pandavas and the Kauravas were arrayed on
opposite sides for mortal combat on the field of Kuruksetra when Arjuna, overcome by grief at the prospect
of fathers, brothers, preceptors and other Kinsmen
fighting and killing one another expressed to his
charioteer, Sri Krsna his aversion to fighting. But, the
Lord pointed out to the unwilling Arjuna, by unique
and various arguments, his imperative duty, under the
circumstance, to fightand fight in heroic earnestness with
the result that Arjuna shed his disinclination to fight and
entered the fray, which ended in the ultimate victory
of the Pandavas. And the dialogue between Arjun@
and Krsna, and especially the great teaching of Krsna
on the field form the theme of the Gita. The Gita
contains three spheres or fields of teaching; the karma
yoga (philoSophy of action), jfiana yoga (philosophy of
knowledge) and Bhaktiyoga (philosophy of devotion) -
The three yogas are treated each in six chapters. 4
The theme of the Gita is philosophy, and it is revere
as one of the most sublime philosophical texts of the
Hindu religion. Many a great thinker and philosopher
like Acarya Sankara, Ramanujacarya and Madhv2carya have.annotated, and written commentaries 0”
the Gita. There is a school of thought which believes
that the Git& was taught to Arjuna by Krsna himsé
on the battle-field in something like tabloid form 4”
that Vyasa eleborated the mighty teaching in its prese?
form. The poet, Bana, who flourished in the 7¢
century A.D., and the great Sankara, who lived in the
Sth century believed that the Gita was sung by Krs?4
himself. But there are some modern. thinkers, W?°
argue that the Gita was composed some time betwee”
the third and fourth centuries B.C. and it was intet
a into the Mahabharata in the second centu!
The Gita has translations in all the languages of the
world. The whole world has acclaimed it asa Ve

BHAGAVATI
weighty and valuable contribution in the sphere of
philosophy.
2) Theme of the Gita. It has been mentioned above that
the Gita forms chapters 25-45 in the Bhisma Parva of
the Mahabharata. The subject-matter of each chapter
of the Gita is given below.
Chapter 25. Arjunavisada yoga:—Both the armies take
positions in Kuruksetra. At the sound of the conches
Arjuna becomes dejected and sorrowful at the prospect
of killing relations, preceptors and Kinsmen.
Chapter 26. Samkhya yoga :—The greatness and majesty
of the Sirnkhya and the Karma yogas. .
Chapter 27. Karma yoga :—The need for action according
to the Jiiana and the Karma yogas.
Chapter 28. Franakarma Vibhaga pos :—Power of Saguna
Brahma (Brahma with attributes), Niskama-karma
yoga (Action without an eye on the result) spiritual
greatness of various yajiias. ad
Chapter 29. Sannyasa yoga -—Samkhya yoga, Niskamakarma yoga, Jana yoga, lana yosa with Bhakti.
Chapter 30. Almasamyama yoga -—Niskamakarma yo§g;
Atmodharana, Jnhanayoga. _. _ 7:
Chapter 31. Fiana yoga :—Jhanavynanas; ee of Me .
world, the Daiva and Asura aspects of Igvara, worship
of other Devas. Aes 8
Chapter 32. Tarakabrahina yoga -—-Seven questlo :-
Arjuna-about Brahma, Atmatatva and 2h ts
Krsna’s answers thereto. Bhakti yoga, the sukia
‘the Krsna margas. =
rst Bas. _—" '
Chapter 33. Rajaraja guhya yoga aah ee
origin of the world, [gévarasvarupa, Sakamanils
Pasana Bhagavadbhakt. ; srute. ies. alan
Chapter 34. Vibha yoga . —Bhagavan’s Vibhuttl (Divine
attributes), Bhakti yoga. +. Shadteaacind Sues
Chapter 8 Visvartipadarsana yoga + Ar tee ee
fo be-shown Visvarupa (cosmue, —_ 7 ee icersdl
vigvariipa by Sri Krsna and Sanjaya, ee te ‘a Arjuna
vigvarupa to Arjuna; ae Sight)
fear-stricken at ¢
sines the praise of Krsna. | mS:
Chapter 36. Bhaktivoga :— The oe O
shipping God with form and withou “ ny eet
Chapter 37. Ksetraksetrajna Vibhaga Jo8 ieee el
of Ksetraksetrajia with Jfiana, @!
Purusa. — __. The greatness of
Chapter 38. Gupatrayavibhage Ween ert — 4 HsHiiha. the
fiana; Jd’s origin 1F° - to attain
J eel sattva, rajas and tamas; means
ldo, ve ae
god; marks of Yugatitapurue® Essential prin
Chapter 39, Purusottama es of God, relationship ee
life, attainment Of *. *. le and theory ©
FOr coal and Paramatma, principle
“Usa.
gata BEES and) Aken Pail hhaga yoga -—Good acChapter 40. Daivasura a eos ned necrentisie
: jentiie
tions, evil deeds, sci®
actions. 25 Bo 00a
Chapter 41. Sraddhatrayavib hase Fg dana.
Scientific tapas, diet, yajnata} aaa
tation of Om. A ee Tyagam, Samkhy
Chapter 42. Moksasannyase Oe sth’, Niskamakarmay 084
. jananis! ae
e Varnadharmas, J" = Gita. mm
a of th 5 of the Gita
ciples of
.—-Descriptions of
Interprewith bhakti and the greatnes! « greatnes
(For another story about eanialt
see Dugsasana ala ool Bhagavan be (Nature
gece age Pe ‘( universal self) and #ra™
NAYS CO ee
BHAGINI.
BHAGIRATHA
and its modifications) respectively. Prakrti is also
called by the name Sakti. The following elucidation
once given by Mahavisnu about Bhagavan and Bhagavati is greatly illuminating.
Time, space, atmosphere and the universe (Brahmandam) are, just like Paramatma, eternal. This is the
truth and reality. Below this eternal Gokula exists
Vaikunthaloka, which also is, like the former, eternal.
Just like this, Prakrti, which is a sport to Brahma and
is also without beginning or end (Sanatani) too is
eternal. In the same manner as flame exists in fire inseparable from it, moonlight in moon, beauty in the
lotus flower and brightness in the sun, so does nature
exist in soul inseparable therefrom. In the same way
as the goldsmith cannot make gold ornaments without
gold and the potter cannot make pots without clay, the
Paramatma will not in the least be able to function
unaided by Prakrti. Prakrti (Nature, Devi) isall powerful. ‘Para’ becomes powerful enough to do everything
when he joins the Devi.
The sound ‘Sa’ means welfare and good fortune, and
the sound ‘kti? means prowess. Hence “Sakti” means
the embodiment of welfare and prowess or she, who is
the giver of welfare and prowess. Bhagavati combines
in herself knowledge, affluence, riches, fame and strength.
As the Paramatma is always with and inseparable from
such Bhagavati he is called Bhagavan also. When
Prakrti and Paramatma remain combined it is called
Parabrahma, which possesses neither form nor attributes. And, when Prakrti and Purusa separate, of their
own accord, they assume forms and attributes.
The above is Saiva doctrine in a nut-shell. The
Vaisnavas do not accept this position. They ask, ‘““How
is it possible to have brightness or effulgence without
there being an effulgent one ?”’ Therefore, the Vaisnavas
believe in the existence, at the centre of an effulgent
sphere, of a thing possessing the utmost effulgence and
brightness equal to that of Brahma. This ‘thing’—
Deva—is very efficient and effective to remedy sorrows
due to birth, death, disease etc. and to him the lifetime of Brahma is just one minute only. This Deva. is
called Paramatma, Parabrahma and Krsna by the
Vaisnavas. ‘Krs’ means maximum devotion (love)
towards Paramatma, and ‘na’ means he who becomes
slave to such devotion. Hence Krsna means he who
becomes a slave to the love of his devotees. There is
another meaning also for the word Krsna. Krs means
all and ‘na’ means seed or root; and thus Ky‘sna means
he, who is the root of everything. In the very beginning there was only this Krsna ; and this Lord, subject only to his own will and pleasure, divided himself into two, the left side becoming woman and the
right side man. (Devi Bhagavata, Navama Skandha).
A word used in addressing women. Verse
129 in chapter two of the Manusmrti lays down ‘that
the wife of another person and women who are not
one’s relatives should be addressed either as Bhavati,
Subhage or Bhagini.
BHAGIRATHA.
1) Genealogy. Descended from Visnu thus: BrahmaMarici - Ka$yapa-Vivasvan-Vaivasvata manu-lksvakuVikuksi-Sasada -Kakutstha-Anenas-Prthulagva-Prasenajit-Yuvanasva - Mandhata - Purukutsa - TrasadasyuAnaranya-Haryagva-Vasumanas - Sudhanva - Traiyya
runa-Satyavrata or Triganku - Hariécandra-Rohitaéva,

BHAGIRATHA
Harita - Cuficu - Sudeva - Bharuka- Bahuka - SagaraAsamafijas-Am$uman*-Bhagiratha. .
2) Recluse. Many years had not lapsed after his coronation as King when, in the heart of Bhagiratha spiritual thoughts began to crop up. A great sage called
Tritula was his guru. Once Bhagiratha asked the guru
what was the means to get ridof worldly sorrows, and
the guru replied as follows:—
The ego will be annihilated when the tendencies and
cravings towards objects of the senses are absolutely
suppressed and the whole and perfect truth is realised
through knowledge, the practice of concentration etc.
The ego will not disappear as long as one does not
become one’s real self by completely overcoming the
sense of pride, shame etc. which form the outer case
of worldly life. The egoless state is the ultimate
achievement and most supreme state. Oh! Bhagiratha !
if you would get rid of sentiments like pride etc., give
up all attachment to material objects, become fearless
and gift away, with thoughts concentrated on the inner
self, all your wealth to enemies, and then move among
those enemies, without any sense of ego and pride
about this material body, and take alms from them
(enemies) and also give up me, who am your preceptor
in the matter of knowledge ; then you will become the
most sublime Brahma’’. This advice of the guru
affected him so much that Bhagiratha, holding his
duties firmly in mind, engaged himself in spiritual
practices, and after spending some time thus he performed, according to rules, the Agnistoma yajiia aimed
at gifting away everything. All wealth like cows, land,
horses, goldetc. were distributed in gifts to noble
brahmins and the poor folk according to their eligibility for the same. Within three days he had gifted away
everything except the clothes he was wearing. And,
then he invited his neighbouring enemy king and gave
to him, without the least hesitation, the kingdom which
had been bereft of all wealth. The ministers and other
citizens felt very sorry about the whole thing. But, Bhagiratha left the country at once for other places having
with him only the clothes he was wearing. He spent his
days in various places and forests where he was not
known even by name. Ere long, Bhagiratha attained
ultimate spiritual solace. And, then he accidentally
came to his former kingdom, which was then being
ruled by the enemy King. The ministers and other
citizens to whose houses he went begging for alms
recognised him, and with sorrow unbearable they
appealed to him to accept the throne again and rule
the country. Bhagiratha rejected their request, and,
after staying there for some time, he started for other
places. During this wandering of his he met his old
preceptor, Tritula, and both of them, in company
toured for some time cities and forests. They felt it very
painful to keep on to their body like that. They
thought like this : “Why should the body be kept like
this. What if this material object continues to exist
or perishes ? But let it (the body) continue as long as
it exists without in any way being against the order
of things and ethical practices’’. And, in this frame of
mind they traversed the forests. Now, the minister of
a distant kingdom who was on the look out for a
BHAGIRATHA
successor to the King who had died heirless, persuaded
Bhagiratha to accept the Kingship of that country. The
ministers of Bhagiratha’s former Kingdom also now
requested him to resume his old kingship, especially
since its new ruler had already expired. Bhagiratha
obliged them, and became once again King of his own
country., (Jnanavasistham).
3) Bhagirathaprayatnam. (Himalayan or Herculean effort).
Sagara, an old predecessor of Bhagiratha had two
wives called Kegini and Sumati. Kegéini had one son
named Asamafijas and Sumati 60,000 sons. Sagara
once conducted an Aégvamedha yajfia in the IndoGangetic plane, when Indra stole away the sacrificial
horse and kept it quite near to sage Kapila who was
doing tapas in Patala. The 60,000 sons of Sagara set
out in search of the horse and found it out in Patala.
At the sight of the horse they shouted themselves
hoarse. Enraged at this sage Kapila reduced those sons
of Sagara to ashes in the fire which emanated from his
eyes.
After entrusting Asamafijas with the duty of performing the funeral rites of his 60,000 sons Sagara expired.
Asamafijas transferred that duty on to Armmguman, an
he to Bhagiratha. Bhagiratha did penance on the seashore concentrating his mind on Gangadevi. The Dev!
appeared before Bhagiratha and asked him to choose
what boon he would, and he requested the Devi to pe!
form the funeral rites of 60,000 sons of Sagara remaining in the form of ashes in Patala. To this Gangadev}
replied that the earth will not be able to withstan
the impact of her powerful flow, but she shall, if Siv4
permits, flow into his matted hair. And, Gangadev!
asked Bhagiratha to first get that permission. This d!
not dishearten Bhagiratha, who went to mount Kailas4
to do penance so that Siva might grant him his pray?
He thus did penance for 1000 years. Siva appeared t0
him and agreed to receive the rushing flow of Gang#
water on his matted head. And, accordingly Siva stoo
in position to receive the rushing waters of Ganga, aD
Ganga flowed on to his head. Even the most powerfu
flow of Ganga water on his head did not cause Siva t?
move from his position even by a hair’s breadth. Th
awakened the conceit in Gangddevi, understanding
which Siva contained her on his head. Without finding’
any outlet the waters of river Ganga flowed along th©
matted hairs of Siva for thousand years. 90, Bhag}”
ratha had once again to please Siva. Thus please
again Siva shook his matted head and one drop °
water fell on the ground, and that is the river Gang”
in North India. The Ganga flowed along plane grour
to Patala and performed the funeral rites of Sagar as
sons. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 108; Valmik!
Ramayana, Bala Kanda, Canto 42; Brahman¢?
purana, Chapter 97;Bhagavata, Navama Skandh@
Kampa Ramayana (Tamil), Yuddha Kanda; Padm@
Purana, Part 4, Chapter 21).
4) Other Information.
(1) Bhagiratha is a member of Yama’s assembly and
serves him. (M.B., Sabha Parva, Chapter 8, Verse 11):
(2) Siva bestowed boons on him. (Vana Parva, Chap’
180, Verse 1).
*According to verse 12, Chapter 25, of Vana Parva, Bhagiratha is the son of Dilipa. But most of the Puranas refer to him *
he son of Arméuman.

— — = TT a a aaa
Sa SS nr peennareedeneranen Bree -
BHAGIRATHI
oO
(5) Bhagiratha had faith in the great efficacy of making
os of cows. (AnuSasana Parva, Chapter 76, Verse
(4) He married his daughter to Kautsa. (Anu§dasana
Parva, Chapter 131, Verse 25).
(S) Once Bhagiratha made a gift of one lakh of cows
with calves to Maharsi Kohala, and attained Uttamaloka. (AnuSasana Parva, Chapter 137, Verse 27).
BHAGIRATHI. Another name of Ganga. (See under
Ganga).
BHAGNARATHA. A synonym of Citraratha. (See
Citraratha ).
BHAGURI. A man of great erudition, Bhaguri was
noted for his proficiency as a Sarvagastra Pandit
(scholar of all sciences), Vyakaranakara (grammarian),
Kogakara (etymologist) , Jyotissastrajna (Astronomer)
and Smrtikara (authority on Smrti). }
BHAIRAVA I. A naga belonging to the Dhrtarastra
Vaméa. There is a reference to this naga in Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 51, Verse 17. He was
burnt up at the Sarpasatra performed by King Janamejaya. |
BHAIRAVA II. A Parsada of Siva. _ . .
1) General. Immediately after his birth, this terrible
Monster subdued all the Devas without getting the
permission of Siva. Enraged at it, Siva turned him on
a tree by a curse. But Siva was soon pacified and lutte
the curse by declaring that those who offered puja to
the gods would get the full reward is their worship
only if they offered puja to Bhairava also.
Biairava — a tree as oon iy = be piece
: the goas.
became a tree because he sub aera ee” aoe
to be called KA ¢
due) t has another name, “«TATIRI
offer piija to this tree.
that tree cam
(Damana=Subdue). I
tree. Even os pious rao.
Agni ana, Chapters 92-0U)-
2) eitth. Once Beaten and Vishnu aa rly
with pride. In his haughty way, haunt geal Hen
Under the insult, Siva was infuriated * 7 oe en
fire of his fury was born Bhairava with his
Lin rana 1.90). irava
3) ‘Beabmahalya As soon as Ne dc Big erg
rushed towards Brahma and prakie : a ante
which had insulted Siva. By this, tion of this sin, as
of Brahmahatya. OF the explauio ‘gurney to go
ordered by Siva, Bhairav? “en rh a in his hand.
abegging, with Brahma’s severe q ‘“Brahmahatya’”’
me me created a woman name
iravaand asked her to follow Bhaira laces, he was
anit ted mary ee fin of BrahmaAlthough Bhairava visit a thie
not able to ikea poor a of Siva, be ee :
A tt € su F = 3 a W 1cii
Vina nd washed of Bs Onde place. De
‘ted there the |
“TI also de osite ‘Kapalamocana
SS Ee under the name eas
tirtha”. (Siva Purana, Satarudra 92r ca elavdeate
* Family mn Kalika - ate According to this
& Waranasi orn
the family o . oe of Varanasi was
Parana, vi aya, the reputed -— Vike Purana oe says
nes } om :
‘iy of Bhairava- >. aavi city and set UP
that “Vijaya, destroyed oe omg Vetala
the Khandava forest in 1'S P hairava and Vetala
According to Kélika ana jvaparsadas ake
: -. nrevious births, rse of Parvati.
were in tei rev as BY SoH
ahakala rng}. .
115 BHALLATA
that they were born as mortals in their next birth.
(Kalika Purana 53).
The Puranas mention eight Bhairavas called Asitarnga,
Ruru, Ganda, Krodha, Unmatia, Kap4ali, Bhisana and
- Sarmhara. TF
5) Shape. Bhairava has a terrible shape. He wears the
crescent moon and plaited hair on his head. His weapons are, sword, arrow, dagger, bow, trident, rope
etc. At times he is dressed in elephant-skin. He has
five faces. Serpents are his ornaments. (Agni Purana,
Chapters 52-80), )
BHAIRAVI. One of the eight Ambas. They are:
Rudrarcika, Rudracandi, Natevari, Mahalaksmi,
Siddhacamundika, Siddhayogegvari, Bhairavi and
Ripavidya. All these are the eight different forms of
Devi. (See the word DEVI).
BHAJAMANA. A Yadava King, whose father was Satvata and mother Kausalya, and they had, beside
Bhajamana, another son called Satvata or Andhaka.
Bhajamana married the two daughters of S fjaya,
named Bahyaka and Upabahyaka by whom he got six
sons. (Bhagavata, Navama Skandha).
BHAJYA. An 4carya in the line of the Rk disciples of
Vyasa. Bhajya studied Valakhilyasarmnhita at the feet of
his guru Baskali. (Bhagavata, Dvadasa Skandha).
BHAKSAKA. A Sidra sinner. In Padma Purana the
following story is related about this Sidra.
Bhaksaka who was once going aimlessly somewhere
felt extremely thirsty, and quenched his thirst by
drinking water which was found near the small platform raised for the holy Tulasi shrub. The sanctity of
the water thus drunk washed away all the sin attached
to him. Some time later he was killed by a forestdweller, and he attained svargaloka (heaven). Bhaksaka
in his previous birth, was a king who led a voluptuous
life, and he, once, robbed a very beautiful woman of
her chastity, and it was as a punishment for the sin
that the King had to be born, in the next birth, in the
womb of a Sidra woman. (Padma Purana, Brahma
Kanda, Chapter 22).
BHAKTI. A Devi born in Dravida deSa (Southern
India). Once Devi, along with her two sons, Jfiana
and Vairagya, started on a walking tour to Gokula and
Vrndavana via Karnataka, Maharastra and Gurjara
(Gujarat). During the long tour the mother and her
sons became aged. But, as soon as they set foot on
Gokula and Vrndavana old age quitted Bhakti and
she became young again. But, her sons remained old.
So the mother requested Narada to turn them young
again. Narada read out to them the Vedas, the
Vedanta (Upanisads) and the Bhagavad Gita, all to no
purpose. Bhakti’s sons still remained old. Then Sanaka,
Sananda and Sanatkumara asked Narada to read out
the Bhagavata to them. Narada did so, and the sons of
Bhakti Devi became young again. (Padma Purana).
BHALANDANA. A king. Though by birth he was a
brahmin he became a Vaigya because of doing things
belonging to the VaiSya community like trade and
commerce. (Markandeya Purana). According to the
Bhagavata, Visnu Purana and Vayu Purana Bhalandana was the son of Nabhaga.
BHALLATA. A king of the line of Bharata. He was the
son of King Visvaksena and father of Kine Brhadas
(Navama Skandha, Bhagavata). By agva,

BHALLATA(M)
BHALLATA(M). A place of habitation in ancient India.
Bhimasena conquered this land during his victory march.
(Sloka 5, Chapter 30, Sabha Parva, M.B.).
BHALUKII. A Rsi, who wasamember of Yudhisthira’s assembly. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 4, Verse 15).
BHALUKI II. A maharsi. He also accompanied the
Pandavas to Dvaitavana. (Vana Parva, Chapter 27).
BHALUKI III. An 4carya. He was a disciple of Langali,
a member of the Sama line of disciples of Vyasa.
(Vayu Purana).
BHAMAHA. A critic who lived in the sixth century A.D.
He was one of the top critics in the Sanskrit language.
His important work is ‘Kavyalamkara’. This is also
called Bhamahdlamkara by afew. There are six chapters
-in this. The first chapter deals with KavyaSarira, the
second and third with Alamkara, the fourth with Kavyadosa the fifth with Nyadya and the sixth with Sabdaguddhi. As against Dandi Bhamaha separates ‘Katha’ from
‘Akhyayika’. According to him the requisites of a good
Kavya are sweetness, pleasantness and liveliness. Dandi
prescribes ten attributes for a good Kavya. Bhamaha is
of opinion that Vakroktiis no alamkara at all. In
a wider sense it is ‘atifayokti’ (exaggeration). But
Bhamaha admits it has a place in Kavya.
BHAMINI. Wife of Aviksit, King of Vaigali. The
famous Marutta is the son born to this couple. The
Markandeya Purana states that Bhamini once went to
Nagaloka to give refuge to the serpents there.
BHANAVI. A river. Sri Rama and Laksmana on their
way to the forests from Citrakita crossed this river,
Bhanavi. (Sarga 52, Ayodhya Kanda, Valmiki Ramayana) 7 |
BHANDAYANI. A maharsi. This sage sits in Devaloka
and worships Indra. (Sloka 12, Chapter 7, Sabha Parva,
BHANDIRA(M). An ancient forest. It was in this
forest situated in Ambadi that Sri Krsna with his cowherd chums conducted his childhood exploits. There
was a very huge tree of name Bhandira in this forest
and it was under this great tree that Krsna and his
friends met daily for their play. This forestis on the
northern bank of Ganga in: front of Keésighatta in
Vrndavana. The Puranas proclaim that it was here that
Brahma conducted the marriage of Krsna with Radha.
(Chapter 38, Sabha Parva, Daksinatya Patha, M.B.).
BHANGA. A serpent born in the Taksaka dynasty.
Bhanga was burnt to ashes at the Serpent Yajfia performed by King Janamejaya. (M.B., Chapter 57
Verse 9) ._ °
BHANGAKARA I. A king, son of Aviksit and grandson
of King Kuru of the Lunar dynasty. (Adi Parva, Chapter 94, Verse 53).
BHANGAKARAII. Aking of the Yadu dynasty. He
attended the grand celebrations held at Mount Raivata.
(Adi Parva, Chapter 218, Verse 11).
BHANGASURI I. Another name of King Rtuparna.
BHANGASVAN
India. For the story of his transformation into a woman
(BHANGASVANA). A king in ancient |
BHARADVAJA I
refer to para 42 under ‘Indra’.
BHANU I.A son born to Krsna of Satyabhama. (Dasama
Skandha, Bhagavata) .
BHANU II. Son of Dyau; this Bhanu was a guru of
Sirya. (Sloka 42, Chapter 1, Adi Parva, M.B.). .
BHANU III. A devagandharva born to Kasyapa prajapati of his wife Prtha. (Sloka 47, Chapter 65, Adi
Parva, M.B.).
BHANU IV. He is the son of an agni called Paficajanya.
He is born of the spiritual essence of Angiras and
Cyavana. This Bhanu is called Manu and Brhadbhanu.
(Chapters 220 and 221, Vana Parva, M.B.).
BHANU V. A king of ancient Bharata. This king took
a flying tour of Kuruksetra in Indra’s aeroplane to
witness the battle between Arjuna and Drona. (Sloka
9, Chapter 56, Virata Parva, M.B.).
BHANU VI. A yadava. He learnt the art of archery
from Pradyumna. Sahadeva married the daughter 0
this Bhanu called Bhanumati. (Vana Parva, 180, 27
and Harivaméa 2.20.12). .
BHANUDATTA. A brother of Sakuni. In the Mahabharata battle he fought against Bhima and died.
(Sloka 24, Chapter 157, Drona Parva, M.B.).
BHANUDEVA. A warrior of Paficala state. Karna killed
him in battle. (Sloka 15, Chapter 48. Karna Parva) -
BHANUKOPA. A demon. He fought against Subrai”
manya. (Asura Khanda, Skanda Purana).
BHANUMAN I. A king of the dynasty of Sri Ram
He was the father of a King called Sakradyumn®
(Navama Skanda, Bhagavata). —
BHANUMAN II. A son born to Krsna of Satyabham*
(Dasama Skandha, Bhagvata).
BHANUMAN III. A prince of Kalinga. He fought ”
the side of the Kauravas and was killed by Bhimase?*
(Chapter 54, Bhisma Parva, M.B.) f
BHANUMATI I. The daughter of Bhanu, a leader
the Yadavas. When Sri Krsna went with his retinue
Yadavas to visit the holy palace called Pindaraka ™.’
Yadavas conducted a wine festival. During that fest}
val a demon of the name Nikumbha carried aw@7
Bhanumati. This was because of a curse to Bhanum@
from Durvasas whom Bhanumati did not respect one
when they met at the garden of Raivata. Durvasas “a
after the curse consoled her by assuring her that ne
would be saved and married by Sahadeva, one OF | 1.
Pandavas. True to this, Bhanumati was married to Sah
. i U
deva in the presence of Narada and Krsna. vis?
Parva, Chapter 90). he
BHANUMATI II. BS
Daughter of Krtavirya. She w4 bs:
wife of Aharnyati, a king of the Paru line of monar¢
They had ason named Sarvabhauma. ex?
BHANUMATI III. Daughter of Angiras. She w4 na
traordinarily beautiful. (Sloka 3, Chapter 218; ya
Parva, M.B.). . ¢pe
BHANUSENA. A son of Karna. He was killed 1% 04
battle by Bhimasena. (Sloka 27, Chapter 48, **”
Parva, M.B.),.
BHARADVAJA I. Another name of Dirghatamas.*”
** Dirghatamas is also called Bharadvaja. But the Bharadvaja of puranic fame is not Dirghatamas. Dirghatamas is the so”, wis
Brhaspati illegitimately got of Mamata, his brother’s wife. There was then another legitimate child in the womb cf ta, Knowit
a iugad Weld HEX ‘Bharadvaja ee ae the brunt of two’ and so the son of Bibaiiati rét the ddmeanl Bhacedv aia, also. d
name of this son was Dirghatamas or Vitatha. Dirghatamas is not the Bharadvaja who was the father of Drona. The famous Bhar
ree
The yas®
was the son of Atri. Dirghatamas or Vitatha was the addpted son of Bharata, son of Dusyanta, (Bhagavata and Kamparamay4?*’
details see under Bharata I and Dirghatamas.

BHARADVAJA Il 117 BHARADVAJA VI
BHARADVAJA II. The sage Bharadvaja of Puranic Bhare ca bharyamavyajad
fame.
1) General information. Ayodhya Kanda of Kampa
Ramayana states that this sage was the son of Atri
Maharsi. He lived for many thousands of years. He is
connected: with Valmiki and the story of Sri Rama.
Bharadvaja was for many years a disciple of Valmiki.
He was present with Valmiki when the hunter killed
one of the couple of Kraufica. When Valmiki and
Bharadvaja reached the shores of the river, T’amasa,
that day Valmiki told Bharadvaja thus : ‘‘Look, Bharadvaja, what a clean ghat this is. The water is pure and
clear. Place your water-jug here and give me my
valkala. We will get down here in this sacred water”.
Then Valmiki taking the valkala from the disciple
walked along the shore admiring the beauty of the
forest trees and found on his way the historic Kraunca
couple. (Sarga 2, Bala Kanda, Valmiki Ramayana).
2) Bharadvaja and the study of Vedas. Bharadvaja gave
himself untiringly to the study of the Vedas. He obtained from Indra a boon to extend his term of life on
earth to many thousands of years by different stages,
each stage covering a span of a thousand years of life.
All these years he devoted to an incessant study of the
Vedas. Finding the term not sufficient for completing
the study of the Vedas he appealed to Indra again for
extension and Indra appearing in person took him before
three mountains and giving him three handfuls of
sand told him thus, “What you have studied about
Vedas till this time is equivalent to the amount of
sand I have now given and what is yet to be studied
about the Vedas is as big as the three mountains before
you”, Any other mortal being would have i ae
heartened by this revelation made by Indra, ioe wi
Bharadvaja. Undaunted he continued his studies. (Bhag
Vata }. oud
3) Bharadvaja in the role of a magician. pena
haradvaja was in yi ee cs RE
gl oe lost - Seuata oa bes return
as ting his
con eins ew about the exile of hus Brgthen: a
hoping to bring them back to Ayodhya ewe * eening
of them with a big retinue of soldiers an ee i
the retinue outside, Bharata aap Sie and his
Bharadvaja. The latter decided 0 Vis a to his
People a grand r eception and calung he that night.
side asked him to arrange 4 royal maint alas and all
Devas, Gandharvas, Apsarases: | cone ~agwned dancers
such eople were invited for the pe Migrakesi and
from devalokdl like Ghrtaci, Hema, baeoie n Vanaraji
Alambusa appeared for nit ae cage to. the
took part in the dance. Distr we brelctt to an end
guesisof their ow” accord. | Meverything vanished and
See a ast the magic of thesage. (Sarga 9"
Ayodhya Kanda, Valmiki Ramayana). born to Bhara4) Drona’s origin. Drona was the Ghrtici. (see under
dvaja of the celestial woman, mil
The. agrama of
horn again. See under
Drona).
3) pm Bharadvija died once but was saa
Arvavasu. . This is how the connotation 0
6) The name Bharadvaj@
the word is explained. __
Bhare’sutan bhare sisy4”
Bhare devan bhare dvyj@"
Bharadvajo’smi Sobhane
(I protect even those who are not my sons, I protect
my disciples, I protect devas and the brahmins. I
protect my wife andall these I do with ease and so I
am named Bharadvaja). (Bhagavata)
7) Other details.
(1) Bharadvaja once gave refuge in his asrama to
Manorama, daughter of the King of Kalinga and her
son. (See under Manorama).
(2) The sixth mandala of Rgveda contains the songs
of Bharadvaja.
(3) He was among the sages who once went to Dvaraka
and cursed Samba. (See under Samba).
(4) Bharadvaja had a daughter Devavarnini whom
Vigravas married and got the son, Kubera. (see under
Kubera).
(5) Once Bharadvaja was travelling through an uninhabited forest with his son when he became exhausted
by hunger and he then begged of a Siidra; Prthu,
several cows. (Sloka 107, Chapter 1, Manusmrti).
(6) This sage took part in a birthday celebrations of
Arjuna. (Sloka 57, Chapter 122, Adi Parva, M.B.).
(7) Because of the blessing of Bharadvaja Bharata got
a son named Bhimanyu. (Sloka 22, Chapter 94, Adi
Parva, M.B.). 3
(8) Bharadvaja taught the secret of the missile Agenya
to Agnivega. (Sloka: 39, Chapter 129, Adi Parva,
(9) He worshipped Brahma sitting in the council of
Brahma. (Sloka 22, Chapter 11, Sabha Parva, M.B.).
(10) This sage came to the battlefield during the Maha-
. bharata battle and requested Drona to lay down his
missile. (Sloka 35, Chapter 196, Drona Parva, M.B.).
(11) Once Bhrgu Maharsi asked him some questions on
the creation of this universe and Bharadvaja gave him
satisfactory amswers. (Chapter 182, Santi Parva,
(12) ae sage performed the sacrifice Putrakamesti,
and gave ason to Divodasa. (Chapter 30, Anusasana
Parva, M.B.).
BHARADVAJA III. The eldest son of the Agni, Samyu.
(Sloka 5, Chapter 219, Vana Parva, M.B.).
BHARADVAJA IV. A renowned sage. Bharata, a King
of the Piru line of kings, had*no sons and as he was
spending his days in sorrow Marutta gave Bharata this
Bharadvaja as a son. Bharadvaja who was by birth a
brahmin from. then onwards became a Ksatriya.
(Matsya Purana 49. 27-39 and Vayu Purana 99. 152BHARADVAJA V. A maharsi born of the line of Angiras. He was the father of Yavakrita and a friend of
Raibhya, son of Visvamitra.
Once Raibhya created a Kritya and that Kritya killed
Bharadvaja’s son -Yavakrita. Unable to bear the loss of his
son Bharadvaja was preparing to give up his own life
by jumping into the fire when Arvavasu brought to life
Yavakrita and gave him to the sage. Immensely pleased at the regain of his son Bharadvaja ended his life
on earth and went to heaven. (M.B., Vana Parva,
HARADVAJA VI. A brahmarsi who lived in the Pirvamanvantara. He was living on the shore of Ganga
doing rigorous penance. One day desirous of conducting a special type of Yajfia he went to bathe in the

BHARADVAJA VII 118 BHARATA II
Kanva Muniwhen he returned to the ASrama and knew
everything, sent Sakuntala to the palace of Dusyanta.
But King Dusyanta never recognised her and when
Sakuntala was returning deeply grieved Menaka her
mother, took her and left her in the 4srama of KaSyapa.
There Sakuntala delivered a son. The boy grew brave
and fearless and he could subduc even the wildest of
animals around there. Kaéyapa, therefore, named him
Sarvadamana. _
Once when Dusyanta was returning home after visiting |
Indra he saw Sakuntala, recognised her, and took her |
and the boy to his palace. This was the boy_who later
on became known as Bharata. (Chapter 73, Adi Parva,
3) Marriage and reign. Bharata was a partial incarnation of Mahavisnu. Even while he was young he became
a ruler and conquering the world destroyed the wicked.
Bharata had three wives. All the sons born to them
were bad and so the mothers killed them all. Aggrieved
over the loss of his sons he worshipped the devas to
river along with other sages. There he saw the celestial beauty, Ghrtaci, standing in all splendour after her
bath. Bharadvaja had seminal emission and from that
was born a daughter, Srutavati, to him. (Chapter 47,
Salya Parva, M.B.).
BHARADVAJA VII. A great scholar well-versed in
all the Sastras. He is the author of ‘Dharmasitra’ and
‘Srautasiitra’. (The Visvavidydlaya of Bombay keeps
a hand written copy of his work Srautasiitra written in
Pandu script).
BHARADVAJA I. A Maharsi. It was he who convinced
Dyumatsena, father of Satyavan that he (Satyavan)
would be endowed with long life.(Vana Parva, Chapter
BHARADVAJA II. The collective name of a particular
sect of preceptors mentioned in the Upanisads. The
Brhadaranyaka Upanisad refers to this sect of preceptors
as disciples of Bharadvaja, Paragarya, Valaka, Kauéika,
Aitareya, Asurayana and Baijavapayana.
BHARADVAJA III. A grammarian. According to the
Kktantra, pratigakhya of Sdmaveda, it was Brahma,
who first composed the science of grammar. This
science was taught by Brahma to others in the following
order : Brahmato Brhaspati, he to Indra, Indra to
Bharadvaja and he to his disciples.
Panini has discussed the grammatical concepts of Bharadvaja. Rkpratisakhya and Taittiriya have quoted the
opinions of this grammarian.
BHARADVAJA(M). A place of habitation in ancient
get a son for him. At that time the great preceptor
Brhaspati forcibly married Mamata the wife of his
brother. Mamata was pregnant then and when she
conceived from Brhaspati also she bore two children.
On delivery she threw the child of Brhaspati in the
forests and went away with the other son.
The Devas took care of the discarded child and named
him Bharadvaja and gave the child to Bharata. Bharat
gave the boy the name Vitatha (Dirghatamas) . Bharat@
ruled over his land for twentyseven thousand years a?
Bharata. (Sloka 68, Chapter 9, Bhisma Parva, M.B.).
BHARADVAJATIRTHA. One of the five sacred places
(bathing ghits in sacred rivers). (See Varga).
BHARADVAJI. A famous Indian river mentioned in
the Puranas. (Bhigsma Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 20).
BHARADVAJIPUTRA. A preceptor, who was a disciple of Parasariputra. In the Brhadiranyakopanisad he
is referred to in many contexts as Vatsimandaviputra.
BHARANI. One of the twentyseven constellations.
Punya is assured if one gives as gift acow to a brahmin on that day. (Sloka 35, Chapter 64, Anugdsana
Parva, M.B.). :
BHARATA I. Son of Dusyanta born of Sakuntala.
| )Genealogy. Descending in order from Visnu - BrahmaAtri-Candra-Budha-Purtravas-Ayus-Nahusa - Yayati -
Piru-Janamejaya - Pracinva - Pravira-Namasyu- Vitabhaya-Sundu-Bahuvidha - Samhyati - Rahovadi - Raudragva-Matinara-Santurodha-Dusyanta-Bharata.
the land was, therefore, called Bharata. (Sloka 9°
Chapter 2, Adi Parva, M.B.).
After ruling the land ideally he left for the fores® |
entrusting the land to his son, Vitatha. (Navame |
Skandha, Bhagavata).
Vitatha also was called Bharata and he had five rT
Suhotra, Suhota, Gaya, Garbha and Suketu. (Chapt
2738, Agni Purana).
BHARATA IT. Son of Da§garatha. gi
|) Genealogy. Descending in order from Visnu-Brahm?"
Marici-Kagyapa-Vivasvan - Vaivasvatamanu - IksvakuVikuksi-Sagada-Kakutstha-Anenas-Prthulagva “etane!
jit - Yuvanaéva - Mandhata - Purukutsa - Trasadasy"”
Anaranya-Haryasva-Vasumanas-Sudhanva-Trayyarur”
Satyavrta- (Triganku)-Harigcandra-Rohitagva - Ean
Cuficu-Sudeva-Bharuka - Bahuka - Sagara - AsamaP)?
Armsuman-Bhagiratha-Srutanabha-Sindhudvipa - Ayu.
yus-Rtuparna-Sarvakama-Sudas - Mitrasaha (Kaley |
2) Birth. Dusyanta was once hunting in the forests when pida )-AgSmaka-Mialaka-Khatvanga (Dilipa, Diré ,
he hit a fawn with his arrow. The fawn fled to the bahu)-Raghu-Aja-Dagaratha-Bharata. —
Agrama of Kanva Muni and the king followed it. On 2) Birth. Dagaratha, King of Ayodhya, had three wiver
reaching the Agrama grounds he saw Sakuntala water- Kausalya, Kaikeyi and Sumitra. Kausalya gave Sage
ing the plants helped by her companions Anasiya and to Sri Rama, Kaikeyi to Bharata and Sumitra 2
Priyarnvada. Dusyanta and Sakuntala fell in love with Laksmana and Satrughna. Kaikeyi, mother of Bharat®?
each other at first sight. Kanva was absent from the was the sister of Yudhajit, Raja of Kekeya. Bhar’ g
Agrama and they married according to the Gandharva was born on the day of Paya. (Sloka 14, Sarg@ °°’
rites and Sakuntala became pregnant soon. The king Valmiki Ramayana) a
gave her his signet ring as a sign of faith and left for Dagaratha remained in sorrow without children a
his palace. When Dusyanta left her Sakuntala fell into very long time and then he performed a Putrakame”
a deep reverie and she never knew about the arrival of
i aM yaga (A sacrificial ceremony to get children) -
the arrogant sage, Durvasas to the a§rama. Durvasas the Maharsi Rsyagrnga as the officiating priest: . of
mistook her as disrespectful and cursed her saying that
the sacred fire arose a divine figure carrying a P° tbe
she would be forgotten by the man of whom she was pudding and it was after taking that pudding that 15
thinking then. Sakuntala never knew about the curse
wives of Dagaratha became pregnant. (Sarg?
also. Balakanda, Valmiki Ramayana).

BHARTA II
3) Till the end of Sri Rama’s forest life. The sons of
DaSaratha married the daughters of Janaka, King of
Mithila. Sri Rama married Sita, Bharata, Mandavi,
Laksmana, Urmila and Satrughna, Srutakirti.
Dafaratha made arrangements to crown Rama as King
and then leave for the forests and lead an ascetic life.
At that time Bharata and Satrughna were in the
country of Kekaya with their uncle, Yudhajit. When
the day of coronation was drawing near Kaikeyi
demanded of Dafgaratha the execution of two boons
which were once promised by Dafaratha to her long
ago during a battle between the devas and asuras. One
of them was to crown her son, Bharata, as king and the
other to send Rama to the forests for a period of
fourteen years. Dagaratha was shocked to hear that.
But, without any hesitation, Rama and Laksmana
accompanied by Sita went to the forests and Dagaratha
Overcome with immense grief caused by this unpleaSant turn of events fell down dead. Messengers were
sent then to Kekaya to bring Bharata and after travelling for three days Bharata and atrughna reached
Ayodhya. Though they were not informed of the death
of their father they were worried all the way because
of the several bad omens which they saw. Cn entering
Ayodhya they were shocked to find all the roads deso,
late and arriving at the palace they found it silent an
gloomy. Kaikeyi then told him all that had happened
yi then eee re
and when Bharata knew that his mother was at :
root of all this calamity hs rage knew no boun =
Forgetting himself he drew from the sheath ue 2 aoa
ing sword and stood before his mother with the ep
sword wavering to strike or not to strike and mused to
himself «‘No, Not a woman and not ones own mother;
> Immediately after this was
0, it should not be done’.
is throat.
sword straight to his
pe Pree By d and swept away the
But advattly & } intervene
roitly Satrughna Thi re O
Sword before it fell at 1ts aim. “ee looked
. to his senses and .
atrughna brought Bharata Me his stare his mother
at his mother so fiendishly that fcr Hee
turned pale like a flower brought near Ae ee at di
harata. immediately changed a ie Satrughna
annyasi and started to §0 to the tenet The news
followed his brother. Vasistha ee rowed at the
spread like wildfire and people | eae soon a huge
palace eager to follow shes DROUers, peste Vasistha
Procession was scen moving toward ae "Kausalya and
and Arundhati in a chariot in — pharita and
umitra in another next to1t ane , walking. People
ghna closely following the ‘eae The great crow
Joined the procession irom ae r Ganga. Guha
of ] ched the banks of the rive F poole fort
comnine ‘75 Ecol of the great ae is "ai first
Ayodhya through spies went and “tf his “ae itieaee.
in dis ste and later as himself made across the river
He chen took Bharata and Satr ME ailita.
to the presence of Sri Rama at Bharata-Satrughna,
When they r eached Citrakiita on? d Sumitra entered
Vasistha and Arundhati, Se otlicts remaining out:
ag 1 Rama, 4 d about the
a. wae = and Laksmana were grief. All the
ir father they were d the obsequies
cai, a i yasistha officiating; pen Pcie the
of their father: Rama and ee yow and said he
future. Sri Rama pea y wy after fourteen years
would return to his count
BHARATA III.
Satru- :
were fe ee Ee ee eee eee
BHARATA IIT
and insisted that Bharata should rule the country
during that period. Bharata accepted the arrangement
saying that if his brother did not come back after fourteen years he would give up his life by jumping into
the fire. Sri Rama then gave his sandals to Bharata who
accepting the same with due respect returned home
followed by others. On reaching Ayodhya Bharata did
not go to the royal palace which he considered as empty
because of the absence of his brother, Rama and
abhorrent because of the presence of his mother, Kaikeyi.
Instead, he went to a nearby village called Nandi and
installing the sandals there lived there and ruled the
country.
4) Return of Sri Rima. Sri Rama when he came _ back
to Ayodhya after fourteen years was crowned King.
Bharata got two sons of his wife Mandavi, Subahu and
Sirasena. While they were thus living happily in
Ayodhya, message was sent through an ascetic by
Yudhajit from Kekaya that some gandharvas were
creating trouble in that country. It was the state of
Sindhu in Kekaya which was subjected to _ this
molestation and on the advice of Rama Bharata went
and subdued the trouble, killing the gandharvas. He
then created two small states on either side of Sindhu
and made his two sons the Kings of those states.
When Sri Rama gave up his life in Sarayii river and
rose to heaven as Visnu Bharata and Satrughna also
gave up their lives and took the forms of the conch
and the wheel which adorn the hands of Visnu.
(Uttara Ramayana).
A son of Rsabha.
1) Genealogy and birth, Descending in order from VisnuBrahma - Svayambhuvamanu - Priyavrata - AgnidhraNabhi-Rsabha-Bharata.
Emperor Priyavrata partitioned his empire to his eight
children. Agnidhra got Jambudvipa. Agnidhra had
nine sons: Nabhi, Kimpurusa, MHarivarsa, Ilavrta,
Ramya, Hiranvan, Kuru Bhadragva and Ketumala. On
the death of the father Jambudvipa was divided into
nine states and Nabhi got the land called Hima. Nabhi
married Merudevi and got a son, Rsabha. Rsabha: had
a hundred sons and Bharata was the eldest. (Chapter 1,
Amgam 2, Visnu Purana).
2) Marriage, administration and entry into Asrama life.
Bharata took over the administration of the kingdom
at the death of his father, Rsabha. He married Pajficajani daughter of ViSvariipa. They had five sons, Sumati,
Rastrabhrt, Sudarsana, Avarana and Dhimraketu. The
Paficama Skandha of Bhagavata contains a statement
to the effect that India got the name Bharata from
this king. (It 1s worthwhile remembering at this
juncture a previous statement that the name Bharata
was obtained from Bharata, son of Dusyanta). Bharata
like his forefather was very erudite and affectionate
and always respected his duties. He always meditated
on Brahma and in his heart there shone the Paramapurusa in the figure of Vasudeva adorned with Srivatsa,
Kaustubha, Vanamala, Samkha, Cakra, Gada and
Padma. He ruled the country for a crore of years and
after that dividing the country among his sons went to
the a4grama of Pulaha Maharsi to spend the rest of his
life there. On the rocks lying in the river flowing in
front of the Agrama were the marks of Cakra On one
side and Nabhi on the other and the river therefore
came to be known as Cakranabhi. Bathing in this river
a EIEEE 'S oOo

BHARATA III
and doing pija Bharata lived there oblivious of the
world outside. (Paficama Skandha, Bhagavata).
3) Bharata and the deer. Bharata led a purely ascetic
life performing everyday the rites laid down by
scriptures and muttering the mystic formula of Brahmaksara. One day a thirsty pregnant deer went to drink
water in a nearby pond. As it was drinking it heard
the loud roar of a lion nearby. Frightened the poor
animal without even waiting to quench its thirst ran
into the forest and On its way delivered a child and the
deer-babe fell into the river. The deer exhausted and
tormented by fear ran into a cave and fell down dead.
Bharata happened to sce the new-born deer floating
on the river and took it to his 4§rama. From then onwards Bharata’s mind was diverted from the spiritual
to the mundane effort of taking care of the young deer.
The deer followed him wherever he went and if it did
not turn up in time in the evening after grazing
Bharata went about in search of it weeping. Years went
by and Bharata became old and died with the name of
the deer on his lips. (Paficama Skandha, Bhagavata).
4) Rebirths of Bharata, Because he died with the
thought of the deer in his mind he was reborn asa
deer. The deer was aware of his previous birth and
regretted that he spent the life of a man for the sake
of a deer. The deer, therefore, left the house of his
_ mother in the mountain of Kalafijara and went to the
asrama of Pulaha. The pious animal daily bathed in
the river and died there on the bank of that river. So
in its next life the deer was born as the son of a
brahmin in the line of Angiras. That brahmin had two
wives and got nine sons of his first wife and one of the
second. The son born to the second wife was none other
than Bharata. In due course the brahmin died and his
second wife jumped into the funeral pyre and ended her
life. ‘hrown an orphan Bharata became a puppet in
the hands of his brothers. Bharata was asked to look
after the cattle and fields of his brothers for his living.
With great forbearance Bharata did all he was told.
One day Bharata was keeping watch over the fields of
his brothers. It was midnight. In the neighbourhood
the Candalas were making merry over the birth of a
child to one of the women. Some of them were bringing a
man bound: by ropes to be given as ‘Narabali’ to the
goddess Kali. (Narabali is the offering of a human
being with his head cut off to propitiate a deity). On
the way the man escaped and the disappointed
Candalas were roaming about in search of a -substitute
when they came across Bharata keeping watch over
the fields. Immediately he was bound by ropes and
taken before the idol of K4li. The effulgence of the
brahmin astounded Kali and getting angry for bringing
such a pious brahmiin for sacrifice she devoured the
Candalas and allowed the brahmin to go free,
Escaping from there Bharata reached a village walking
all the way. That village was being ruled over by a
king called Rahigana and that king was going to see
Bhagavan Kapila Maharsi along the banks of the river
Iksumati in a palanquin. The palanquin had not enough
BHARATA (MAHABHARATA)
bearers and so the brahmin was asked to join the
team of bearers. As they were moving the palanquin
shook because of the wrong steps kept by Bharata. The
king reprimanded Bharata and Bharata then gave the
king fitting replies based on the ethics of Vedanta. The
erudition of Bharata greatly impressed the king and he
stepped down from the palanquin and bowed to
Bharata.
Bharata went from there to the forests singing devotional songs in praise of Visnu and at last attained
salvation. (Paficama Skandha, Bhagavata).
BHARATA IV. A sage and the famous author of Natya-
§Astra. He was a critic who lived around the year 400
B.C. His book on Natyagastra (Histrionics) is world
famous. Kalidasa in the second act of his drama,
Vikramorvasiya states that this Bharata used to coach
the devas in the art of acting. Natya$astra is a book
comprising thirtyseven chapters dealing with the art of
dance and music. He has written in detail about the
four Alarnkaras, Upama, Dipaka, Ripaka and Yamaka
and also about the ten requisites of a Kavya. He has
not forgotten to write about the defects and demerits
of Kavya also. Commentaries on Natyasastra have
been written by lions in the profession : Mitragupt@,
Harsavardhana, Sankuka, Udbhata, Bhattanayaka an
Abhinavagupta. Of these ‘Abhinavabharati’ the com
mentary written by Abhinavagupta is the only om
freely availiable now.
BHARATA V. The Mahabharata speaks about a few
other Bharatas who were sons of Agni. Samyu is a $0”
of Agni known as Bharata. This Bharata has 8°
another name, Urjja. (Sloka 6, Chapter 219, var
Parva, M.B.). There is'an Agni of name Bharata w!!
a son named Bharata. When this Agni is propitiate
one gets healthy and strong and so this Agni 1s calle
Pustiman also. (Sloka 7, Chapter 219, Vana Parv®:
M.B.). There is another Bharata son of an Ag?
called Adbhuta. It is this Agni that burns dead bode:
As this Agni lives permanently in Agnistoma Yajnas; }
gets the name of Niyata also. (Sloka 6, Chapter
Vana Parva, M.B.).
BHARATA (MAHABHARATA). An epic written >Y
Vyasa. *
1) General information. :
Bharata is acclaimed as the first emperor of Bh ;
The theme of this great epic is the fight betwee” em
two lines of princes belonging to the dynasty of Bhar? a.
That is why the book is called Mahabharé of
The great size of the volume and the greatnes® ch
the wisdom contained therein have contributed a €
to its getting the name, Mahabharata. Once “V¢
devas put the Mahabharata in one pan of a ba a
and the Vedas in the other pan. Then the ?
were convinced that the Mahabharata weighe ore
than all the Vedas put together. (Slokas 269° ins
Chapter 1, Adi Parva, M.B.).* This book cont® ip
over a lakh of verses. There isno subject om es of
which is not dealt with in the Mahabharata. NoP
ee a ; 1C°
The Mahabharata is an €P™
arata:
* Pura kila suraih sarvaih sametya tulaya dhrtam |.
Caturbhyah sarahasyebhyo Vedebhyo hyadhikam yada
Tada prabhiti loke’smin mahabharatamucyate
Mahatve ca gurutve ca dhriyamanarh yaso’dhikam
Mahatvad bharavatvic ca Mahabharatamucyate.
a

oo —
SS
BHARATA (MAHABHARATA)
the world’s epics isso big as Mahabharata. In size the
Mahabharata is double that of Homer’s Iliad and
Odyssey put together. The following poem about it is
worth mentioning now:
Yatha samudro bhagavan
Yatha ca himavan girih /
Khyatavubhau ratnanidhi
Tatha bharatamucyate //
Mahabharata is not a mere epic. It is a whole literature
in itself containing a philosophy which has been an
unfailing and perennial source of spiritual strength to
the people of India. Above all it has for its core the
Gita which is perhaps the noblest of scriptures.
The Mahabharata comprises eighteen books, each book
being called a Parva. ‘here are 2109 chapters in it, the
chapters differing in size. Besides, there is an annexe
called Harivarnga which deals with the life and history
of Sri Krsna.
2) Contents. The contents of each Parva are succinctly
given below: The Parvas are so named as to give a
hint of their central theme. |
(1) Adi Parva. (Adi=beginning) . Pandu and Dhrtarastra, king of the Candra dynasty, are brothers. Bhisma
brought them up. Dhrtarastra was born blind and he
got a hundred children of his wife Gandhari. They
were called the Kauravas. Pandu had two wives Kunti
and Madri and got of them five sons called the
Pandavas headed by the eldest Yudhisthira.
(2) Sabha Parva (Sabha = court). The Pandavas and
Kauravas lived together in the court at Hastinapura.
There, the Kauravas entered into a game of dice with
Yudhisthira and through the deceitful tactics engineered by the keen-witted akuni, Yudhisthira was defeated
and he lost everything he possessed. The Pago’
were then compelled to g° ‘nto exile to the forests tor
twelve years and spend another year after that neo
Nito. If they were found out during that a “
incognito they were to 8° into exile for ae = ae ;
of twelve years. The Pandavas accompanied by tan
left for the forests.
(3) Vana Parva (Vana
longest of Parvas and _
in the forest Kamyaka. © . §
Carita’ and ‘Kiratarjuniya’ are told int a eee
(4) Virata Parva. (Virata =name of a King) - forests spent
as after completing their ter a as edit of King
the year of their life in rf i i
Virata. Many wonderful events too rae
stay there and this Parva deals
them. , first Gene
(5) Bhisma Parva (Bhisma = te pharata war was fought
. The great : :
_ Seaiiha ee sanse Of Kuruksetra lying 4 pie ea
oe ine Delhi, Bhisma was the first Bora as. Vyasa
a O indavas. ‘
Pree = DT the battle classifying 1t on
ing to the generalissimos of the Ka ehiama fought
the four generalissimos Sie eae the tenth day by
for ten days and was struck down oP
een eh
ao ona The St Ge the spe
When Bhisma fell Drona took charge ght under his
commander. This Parva aca Dhrstacommand. Drona waés killed in th
dyumna.
forest). This is one of the
‘j the life of the Pandavas
‘ae known stories ‘Nala
ralissimo of
journey t
BHARATA (MAHABHARATA)
(7) Karna Parva. (Karna=The third generalissimo).
This Parva deals with the war under the cotnmend
Karna. Karna fell in the end at the hands of Arjuna.
(8) Salya Parva. (Salya=The fourth and last of the
Generalissimos). When Karnafell Salya took over
charge of the Kaurava army. As the war was coming to
an end most of the big warriors of the Kaurava army
were killed. In the end Bhima and Duryodhana met
ina grim fight with maces in which Duryodhana was
killed. This Parva deals with the final stage of the
battle.
(10) Sauptika Parva. (Sauptika=pertaining to sleep).
This Parva tells us the tragic story of how Krpacarya,
Krtavarma and Agvatthama who were the only three
left with Duryodhana after the great battle went into
the camp of the Pandavas at night and killed all the
brave warriors of the Pandava army, excepting the
Pandavas, who were sleeping in their camp unaware of
the foul play lying ahead.
(11) Siri Parva. (Stri=woman). This Parva deals with -
the great lamentation in the battlefield, after the war,
of Gandhari and other women.
(12) Santi Parva. Yudhisthira was crowned king and
even at thattime Bhisma was lying on his bed of arrows
awaiting death. Before taking up his duties of. the state
Yudhisthira went to where the grandsire lay dying and
took his blessing and instruction in dharma. This
‘nstruction of Bhismacarya to King Yudhisthira of the
three dharmas, Rajadharma, Apaddharma and Moksadharma is the famous Santi Parva.
(13) AnuSasana Parva. (Anusasana = Instruction).
Bhisma still on his death-bed continues his instructions
on several topics, like duty, freedom and fasting, giving
entertaining stories to illustrate the essence of his teach-
‘ng. This Parva is devoted to this.
(14) Afvamedhika Parva, (Agvamedha= y4ga conducted by emperors). This Parva deals with the yaga
conducted by Yudhisthira when he became the emperor of Bharata.
(15) Agramavasika
mitage) . Dhrtarastra,
Parva. (Aframavasa=life in a herthe blind and his wife GAandhari
accompanied by Kunti left for the forests and lived
therefor two years in a hermitage. One day the forest
caught fire and the three without trying to escape sat
on the ground facing eastwards in yoga posture and
calmly gave up themselves to the flames. This is dealt
with in this Parva.
(16) -Mausala Parva. (Mausala=Mace). This Parva
gives the story of how the Yadavas fought against each
other -with maces and were destroyed and how
Dvaraka sank down into the ocean. It describes the
death of Sri Krsna and Balarama also.
(17) Makdprasthanika Parva. (Mahaprasthana =Death).
Dharmaputra entrusts his kingdom to his successor and
alongwith his four brothers and wife Paiicali sets out
a long journey to Mahameru_ never to return. This
o death is detailed in this Parva.
Parva. (Svarga= Heaven). ‘This Parva
Pandavas and their relatives
on
(18) Svargarohana
describes the entry of the
‘nto Svarga, heaven. |
3) Mode of Narration. Most of the verses in the
Mahabharata are in the Anustup metre. At certain
laces other metres also have been used. There are
pieces also in It. There are twenty notable pieces,
prose
seven in Vana Parva, seven in Santi
three in Adi Parva,

NS ee 6 ee eee
BHARATA (MAHABHARATA) 122 BHARATA (MAHABHARATA)
Parva and three in Anu§asana Parva. All the pieces are
statements by realised souls. The style of the poetry is
simple andthe method of presentation lively. At times
the imagination of the poet extends up to the horizon.
Though there is a flow of spiritualism throughout the
matter is purely mundane.
4) Authorship. Bhagavan Vy4sa is believed to be the
author of Mahabharata. He was a contemporary of the
Pandavas and the Kauravas. Many of the events of the
Mahabharata were personally witnessed by Vyasa. He
took three years to write this book. The following
§lokas will support the above:
Kururaja kulasthanam
Drstam vrttam ca yatsthitam /
Tatsarvam bhagavan Vyaso
Varnayamasa Bharate. //
(Padma purana)
Tribhirvarsaih sadotthayi
Krsnadvaipayano munih /
Mahabharatamakhyanam
Krtavanidamuttamam. //
(Sloka 55, Chapter 62, Adi Parva).
The Varaha Purana states that Vy4sa composed the
Mahabharata at a period when the end of Dvapara
yuga merged with the dawn of the Kaliyuga. The
Bhagavata states that Sri Krsna passed away on the
first day of Kaliyuga. The Bhagavata is devoted to
admire and praise the life of Sri Krsna. This book also
is written by Vyasa. This §loka found in the first Chapter of Adi Parva clears the doubt:
Vasudevasya mahatmyarm
Pandavanarh ca satyatam /
Durvrttam Dharttarastranam
Uktavan Bhagavanrsih. //
The original name of the Bharata which Vyasa composed was ‘Jaya’. In the first Chapter of Adi Parva is this
§loka to support this statement:
Narayanam namaskrtya
Naram caiva narottamar/
Devim Sarasvatim caiva
Tato Jayamudirayet//
After the death of the Pandavas and the Kauravas the
disciples of Vyasa, Sumantu, Jaimini, Paila, Suka and
VaiSampayana gave this book great publicity. They
wrote books based on this story of Bharata of which
only the ‘Bharata’ of Vaigampayana and the Aégvamedha Parva of Jaimini are now available.
Vyasa’s Bharata was first expounded by Vai§ampayana
at the Sarpa-satra of Janamejaya. At the request of
Janamejaya, VaiSampayana added some more facts to
the original work known then as ‘Jaya’. Jaya with the
a) Jayo nametihaso’yam
r (a) een a (Sloka 22, Chapter 62, Adi Parva).
imégati sahasrim
ay ioe bharatasamhitam
Upakhyanairvina tavad
Bharatam procyate budhaih
(Sloka 78, Chapter 1, Adi Parva),
(3) Refer to the sloka given in para 1,
accretions came to be known as Bharatasamhita. Sita
who narrated this story to Saunaka and others at the
forest of Naimiga added some more matter to the
Bharatasamhita and made it larger. The present
Mahabharata is this expanded edition.
The following facts prove that the Mahibhirata has
thus passed through three stages of evolution:
1) This book is known by three names: Jaya, Bhiratasamhita and Mahabharata.
2) There is a reference to the three parts of the book
in Sloka 66, Chapter 1 of Adi Parva.?
3) There are three different opinions regarding the
total number of glokas in the Mahabharata. According
to Ugragravas there are 8800 verses, according to Vyasa
24000 verses and according to another statement 4
lakh of verses.3
4) The narration appears to be of three different kinds,
descriptive, philosophical and oratorical, indicative ©
three different authorships.
9) Sita and VaigSampadyana have made accretions tO
the original work ‘Jaya’ of Vyasa.
Viewed with these facts we are led to believe that
Vyasa has composed only the very essence of Mahabharata comprising 8800 slokas and that work was
known as ‘Jaya’ as referred to in the first invocatory
verse of the epic. VaiSampayana added a few verses °
his own and brought the number to 24,000 and gave thé
book the name of ‘Bhiaratasamhita’. It was Sata who
made many more additions and made the book so }'8
as to fetch it the name of ‘Mahabharata’. The eP!%
which is now current among us contains a lakh ©
verses and it took perhaps centuries to get this transfor
mation of the book from ‘Jaya’ to ‘Mahabharata’.
6) Period of publication. The Kali Varsa_ starts from
3102 B.C. The great Mahabharata war was fought ps
a period when the end of Dvapara yuga merged ace
the dawn of Kali yuga as could be gathered from *
following verse from the epic:
Antare caiva samprapte
Kalidvaparayorabhit /
Samantapaficake yuddham
Kurupandavasenayoh. // . al
(Sloka 13, Chapter 2, Adi Parv
So it can be deduced that the great war was fous
round about 3102 B.C. Dhrtarastra lived for eightt
years after the great battle and the Pandavas rule
country for 36 years. (Stri Parva, M.B.). It was W
Sri Krsna died that the Pandavas ended their at’
and commenced the Mahaprasthana. So it can be a
mised that Sri Krsna _ lived for 36 years after the
2 Manvadi Bharatam kecid
Astikadi tathapare
Tathopari caradanye
Viprah samyagadhiyire.
3 Idam éatasahasrar tu lokanaim punyakarmanam
Upakhyanaih saha jfieyamadyam bharatamuttama™
Caturvimgati sahasrim cakre bharatasarbhitam hy
Upakhyanairvina tavad bharatarh procyate budba?*
Astau slokasahasrani Astau élokagatani ca
Aham vedmi suko vetti Safijayo vetti va na va- 1):
(Adi Parva, Chaptef

BHARATA (MAHABHARATA)
Sri Krsna died on the first day of Kali yuga, 3102 B.C.
Therefore it is clear the Mahabhirata battle was fought
in 3138 B.C. There are indications in other puranas
tO support this theory. There was that rare phenomenon
ofa Saptagraha yoga (Combination in astronomical
Position of seven planets) while King Pariksit, son of
Arjuna, was ruling the country.!. This happened in a
month of Magha (January) and a probe into the dates
of such previous occurrences revealed that a similar
one had happened in the month of Magha in the years
3177 and 477 B.C. (The next one is to happen in 2223
-D.). This phenomenon repeats itself in every hundred
years and so it is to be believed that one of the kind
happened in 3077 B.C. precisely during the period of
ariksit. It is therefore confirmatory to the statement
that the great war occurred in 3138 B.C.
The Pandavas ruled the country for 36 years on 9
war and Vyasa wrote this divine epic aIEE TH *
of the Pandavas. Vyasa took three on redhat
Is wore “Therefare } 1 be well conctuce
rk. Therefore it cal The Pandavas
B.C.
after entrusting the
administration of the state into the hands 2 : a
us must have happened in 3102 B.C. Pariks1 “aca
1¢e country for 60 years and SO his son Jana “ :
Ccame King in 3042 B.C. It was or: S Y sasatea
4s becoming King that he conducted Ee an st
ant it was at this Sarpasatra that i al ssembleqrounded Jaya? (Mahabharata) to the sage °
there,
This fixing of the date of Mahabharata = aie a
Conc Usions arrived at by the pandits ‘ argue t *
eign chronologists differ from Us: vney eahabharata
ai in the 10th century B.C. that re following
tle took place on the strengt ‘; a fight between
he ¢] Abharata .
1eme the Mahabn oin an
urus and Didctins. After tie ‘da “af 4 people
there js a statement in the Yajurve fore the great
Ormed by the merger of t _ Thereto! ¢. It
wat Should have happened 3 gs on th
a peri -wors
Period of hero-w andavas W
deeds of the Kurus and to the other and
yasa wrote the epic in 3100
commenced their Mahaprasthana
anded ation he
. one generale’ Pet 8
Mo dually * ale ll took shape ™ the 10
ahabharata. ; he asd
thought. +” pe Bat a
ee 3 : hool of :'
bh=... 28 another scho * pminenc
a wata, Brahma is given gree unted at all. Sepak
the “ times Brahma was tad! “sts Brahma h da
r
-~ Solden f the Buaas it shol
Picuoys held wn Hinduism. Therelore n during tne
= wrl
6t ced that the Mahabharat — about 8,000 verses
1 Century B.C. Then there
in ; hai
Me Mahabharata.
Wards the second stage of
“1h4 the epic
Mahabnar 500 glokasu ni a vaisnaVite he at this stage that the 7 jored 38 2 inca BC
of yCOlour and Sri Krsna was“ in 30 ite
ISnu. gs Who , r : .
recorg Megasthenes of indus * wertain P!
4 8 that the majority 5
* that Period, There are reference
gale patikeee ama
T. (a) Saptarsayo maghayuktah $7 eyasan dvij
(b) Te tu pariksite kale ™
ana
atsya put
‘1-cité gatam Nrigntt P
yrana As 24,
123 BHARATA II
of the Mahabharata to Greeks and Buddhists. Therefore a set of foreign chronologists conclude that those
aerate on ne ny ae could have been written
only after Buddha and after the attack Bha
the Greeks i.e. by 300 B.C. ee
The third stage of the Mahabharata is its present form
and it was at this stage that it included new philosophy
in it. The Dharmasamhita of Manusmrti became popular
in the fifth century A.D. and therefore the third Stage
of the Mahabharata must have started before that, in
the 3rd century A.D. ‘
BHARATA II. (Bharatavarsa. India).
The puranas describe the Earth to be constituted of
seven continents: Jambiidvipa, Plaksadvipa, Salmalidvipa, Kuéadvipa, Krauficadvipa, Sakadvipa and
Puskaradvipa. Of these India is Jambidvipa.
The Bharatavarsa was constituted of nine islands at
that time in the following positions : In the centre
was Ilavrta and to the east was Bhadravarsa. To the
south-east was Hiranyaka and to the south was Bhirata.
To the southwest was Hari andto the west was Ketumala. To the north-west was cambaka and to the north
was Kuruvarsa. Beautiful Kimpurusa varsa stood to the
north-east of Ilavrta. There was neither the passage of
time nor the fear of ageing or death in any of these
continents excepting Bharatavarsa.
This Bharatavarsa itself is a group of nine islands
, each separated from the other by oceans and thus made
not easily accessible between each other. Indradvipa,
Kageruman, Tamraparna, Gabhastiman, Nagadvipa,
Kataha, Simhala and Varuna are the eight others and the
ninth is this island of Bharatavarsa. This island is called
Kumara also. On the eastern boundary of this island live
Kiratas, on the western side, Yavanas, on the southern
boundary Andhras and on the north Turuskas. In the
Centre live the Brahmins, K satriyas, Vaisyas and Sidras.
The eight sacred mountains of this place are Mahendra,
Malaya, Sahya, Suktiman, Rksaparvata, Vindhya and
Pariyatra. There are several other mountains also in
Madhyapradega. They are: -Kolahala, Vaibhraja, Mandara, Durddhara, Vatadhiima, Vaidyuta, Mainaka,
Sarasa, Tungaprastha, Nagagiri, Govardhana, Ujjayanta, Puspagiri, Arbuda, Raivataka, Rsyamiika, Gomanta,
Citrakita, Krtasmara, Sriparvata and Konkana. This
place is inhabited by Aryas and Mlecchas. The rivers
which they use for drinking water are the following:
Sarasvati, Paficaripa, Kalindi, Hiranvati, Satadru,
Candrika, Nila, Vitasta, Iravati, Kuhi, Madhura,
Hararavi, Usira, Dhataki, Rasa, Gomati, Dhitapapa,
Bahuda, Drsadvati, Nisvara, Gandaki, Citra, Kausiki,
Vadhisara, Sarayi and Lohitya. All these rivers originate from the base of Himavan. Those originating
from Pariyatra are: Vedagmrti, Vedasvani, Vrtraghni,
Sindhu, Parnasa, Nandini, Pavani, Mahi, Sara, Carmmanvati, Lapi, Vidisa, Venumati, Citra and Oghavati.
Those flowing down from the Rksaparvata are: Sona
alias Mahanada, Narmada, Surasa, Kriya, Mandakini,
Dagarna, Citrakita, Devika, Citrotpala, ‘Tamasa, Karatoyas Pisacika, — Pippalagreni, Vipasa, Vafjjulavati,
Satsantaja, uktimati, Cakrini, Tridiva, Vasu, Valguyahini. From the base of Vindhya flow down the follow-

BHARATASAMHITA 124
ing rivers: Siva, Payosni, Nirvindhya, Tapi, Vena, Nisadhavati, Vaitarani, Sinibahu, Kumudvati, Toya, Reva,
Mahagauri, Durggya and Antassiva. Those originating
from the base of Sahya are the following great rivers:
Godavari, Bhimarathi, Krsna, Venya, Saridvati, Visamadri, Suprayoga, Vahya, Kaveri, Dugdhoda, Nalini,
Varisena, and Kalasvana. Those arising from Suktiman
are the following: Krtamala, Tamravarni, Vafijjula,
Utpalavati, Suni and Sudama. All these rivers are very
sacred and are considered to be absolvers of _ sins,
mothers of the universe and wives of oceans. There are
bad rivers also besides these.
The Madhyapradesa comprises the following states:
Matsya, Kusidra, Kundala, Parficala, Kosala, Vrka,
Saka, Barbara, Kaurava, Kalinga, Vanga, Anga and
Marmaka. The states lying to the north are the following: Abhira, Sathyadhanaka, Bahlika, Vatadhana,
Abhira, Kalatoyada, Aparanta, Sidra, Pahlava, Khetaka, Gandhara, Yavana, Sindhu, Sauvira, Bhadraka,
Satadrava, Lalittha, Paravata, Misika, Mathara, Urukadhara, Kekaya, Damsana, Kamboja, Darada, Anga,
Lokika, Vena, Tusara, Bahya, Todara, Atreya, Bharadvaja, Prasthala, Dageraka, Lambaka, Tavakarama,
Ciidika, Tarmgana, Alasa, Alibhadra, Kirdta, Tamasa,
Hamsamarga, Suparsva, Ganaka, Kilita, Kurhika,
Cirna, Urnapada, Kukkuta, Mandavya and Panaviya.
Those lying to the east are the following : |
Anga, Vanga, Madgurava, Antarggiri, Bahirggiri, Pravarnga, Vamgeya, Mamsada, Baladantika, Brahmottara,
Pravijaya, Bhargava, Angeya, Marsaka, Pragjyotisa
Vrsaddhra, Videha, Malla, Tamraliptaka, Magadha
and Ananda. The states lying to the south are the
following: Pundra, Kerala, Cola, Kulya, Januka, Misikada, Kumarada, Mahagaka, Maharastra, Mahisika
Kalinga, Adira, Vaisikya, Aranya, Sabara, Pulinda,
Vindhyagaileya, Vidarbha, Dandaka, Paurika, Seria.
Agmaka, Bhogavardhana, Naimika, Kuntala, Andhra,
Udbhida and Nalakaraka. The western states axe:
Sairpparaka, Varidhana, Durga, Calikata, Puliya, Sunila
Tamasa, Tapasa, Karaskara, Bhimi, Nasikanta, Sunarmmada, Darukaccha, Sumaheya, Sarasvata, Vatsiya
Surastra, Avantya and Arbuda. The follwoing states lie
adjacent to Vindhya: Kartisa, Ekalavya, Mekala, Utkala
Uttamarna, Dasarna, Gopta, Kikarava, Tosala Kosala,
Traipura, Khellisa, Turaga, Turhbara, Vahela Nisadha.
Antpa, Tundikera, Vitihotra and Avanti
There are a few more states which lie attached to mountains: Nirahara, Hamsamarga, Kupatha, Tarmgana
KhaSsa, Katha, Pravarana, Urna, Aplasta, Suhihuka.
Trigartta, Kirata, Tomara, Sagikha and Adrika (Cha :
ter 13, Vamana Purana). P
See the map of Paurdnika Bharata).
BHARATASAMHITA. Another title of the Mahabharata.
(See Bharata I).
BHARATI. A famous river mentioned in the Puranas.
It is stated in Verse 25, Chapter 222 of the Vana Parva
that Agni (fire) originated in this river,
BHARATI. Daughter. of the Agni called Bharata.
(Slcka 9, Chapter 219, Vana Parva, M.B.).
BHARAVI. A Sanskrit poet who flourished in the 6th
He is the author of the mahakavya called
Raghuvamsa, Kumarasambhava, Kiratya and Naisadha are the five
century A.D.
Kiratarjuniva.
arjuniya, Sigupalavad!
1. Yendyoji na vesma sthiram arthavidhau vivekina jinavesma/ Sa jayatam ravikirtih kavitagrita-Kalidasa-Bharavikirtih.
BHARTRHARI
Mahakavyas in Sanskrit with established reputation.
In the Ehole records of A.D. 634 Bharavi is held up
in praise along with Kalidasa.1 The theme of Kiratarjuniyais Siva, in the guise of a hunter, attacking Arjuna
immersed in penance. Bharavi’s literary style is simple
and sweet. In the use of similes he is sccond only to
Kalidasa. Among his books only Kiratarjuniya has been
found out yet.
BHARGA I. Grandson of Divodasa, a King of the Puru
line. Divodasa got ason named Pratardana. Bharga
and Vatsa were the sons of Pratardana. (Chapter 278;
Agni Purana).
BHARGA II. A synonym of Siva. |
BHARGA(M). A village of ancient India. (Sloka 51,
Chapter 9, Bhisma Parva, M.B.).
BHARGAVA. One who belongs to the Bhrgu dynasty:
(See Bhrgu).
BHARGAVA (M). A city in ancient India. (Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 9, Verse 50).
BHARMYASVA. A famous king of Paiicala Desa. He had
five heroic sons headed by Mudgala. (Navama Skandha,
Bhagavata)
BHARTRHARI. A famous Sanskrit poet.
1) Birth. He was the son of Vidyasagara, a great brahmi
scholar, who lived in Pataliputra. There is a lege?
about the birth of Bhartrhari in Uttara Bharata. 7
Vidyasagara while young learnt the Vedas from is
guru. But he was not satisfied with that study —
wanted to learn more about all gastras and so he starte
on a tour to find out a guru who would teach him oa
he wanted. On his way he met several great schola
but none came up to his standard of a guru. One ees
tired after a long journey he reached a mountain valley
Washing his hands and feet in a nearby rivet oe
quenching his thirst he went and sat down unde ed
banyan tree to rest. The cool breeze sent the tt
brahmin to sleep and he slept. pan”
A Brahmaraksasa who was living on the top of the ait
yan tree when it became midday descended |"
the tree to perform the sacred rites of the day and oud
a man lying asleep. By the sacred thread on his na?
the Brahmaraksasa surmised that the man was od
min and woke him up. Waking up Vidyasagara, O be
to his surprise the bearded Brahmarakgasa stan ing veld
fore him and after mutual enquiries Vidyasagar? |;
him of his mission. The Brahmaraksasa told him wae
‘‘Boy, let your name Vidyasagara (ocean of learp east
be true in your life. I am acquainted with many het?
ras and I shall teach you everything I know. ae 0
are certain conditions for the same which you ha and
observe. You must live with me for six mont elf 2°
should fast during that period behaving your” pit?
one under a vow. I shall, however, teach you am ng?
which would help you to remain unaffected by rel °
thirst or sleep. If you are prepared to accept toe fot
and become my disciple I shall quench your thir tex”
knowledge. Vidyasagara willingly agreed to
and became his student. q the
Both of them then climbed on the banyan trce oe of
Brahmaraksasa sat in his usual place on a eee pe |
the tree and Vidyasagara on a branch just below nth”,
instructions started and continued for sl* ip?
Vidyasagara never felt thirst or hunger dutgrab
period. When the teaching was complete the
If

BHARTRHARI
a ory te farewell to his disciple and departed leaving
Vides ea dehind.
the poset Tes got down from the tree and performed
léarni si aa of his guru. Vidyasagara while he was
rning used to note down the instructions of the guru
on the leaves of the banyantree. It had come to a huge
bundle on completion. Taking the bundle along with
him Vidydasigara left for his country. By the time he
left the forest area the power of the mantra faded and
Vidyasigara began to feel the pangs of hunger and
thirst. By dusk he reached Kalinga and there he came
to the door of a dancing gi! named Mandakini. The
door was locked as the owner was away ina Siva temple
nearby. Exhausted by the journey, hungry and thirsty;
ldyadsigara lay down on the doorstep and soon fell
asleep with the leaf-bundle as a pillow. Mandakini when
she returned from the temple at about ten at night saw
a brahmin sleeping on the doorstep, tired and exhaust
ed. She soon asked her servants to get him inside and
treatment of the doctor
Sent for a doctor. By the clever at Of
and the expert =e i of Mandakini, Vidyasagara a
vived. When he was fit for travel he started o a .
Mandakini objected and requested him ' aa t df
idyasigara did not agree to it and she took on. i
Ing and told him all that had happene®- F ood
Idydsagara to be one with great etna a ae
Manners ‘he decided that Vidyasagara should }
1s daughter (a Ksatriya); daughter “2
a brahmin), daughter of Kulapati (2 vr nction in
also Mandakini (a Sidra). There was an aad only
those days that a brahmin should marry =o
after having married from all the a Sfficulty for
CCision of the King surmounted oe andakini.
ldyisagara to marry the siidra fs ing
arriages were all conducted 1” ‘inist ’s Malat
daughter bore the name Kalavati, the ™
. - pred a Son:
and Kulapati’s sali, Each delivers, triva boy,
ulapati’s Sumang 4 Vararuci, he Keay’
rahmin boy was name Bhatt!
ikramaditya, the Waisy@ 0°77” ld
SY, Bhartrhari ir became °
e ‘ y a ® A
2) Kingship, When the Bis. of Kat nd when Vidya"
1€ gave the kingdom to Vidy ase phartrbari the Kins:
peat died all his other so” me “jeath-bed qa promise
artrhari gave his father 0” ° were born © and
that he would see that 2° oon > wives he wae =
. though Bhartrhar! marri¢ “dre by them living
enough not to produce | yartrhar divine
- Bhar trhari becomes @ ie ay - qa ripe
“Ppily with his wife whe and giving «ill never
o, e
Isposition came to his house
Man 6é ea e pel
So said: “If you who are P the bene
of his minister
BHARTRHARI
aes fi, oe husband and that prostitute thought
Fe le, Bias use is my life when my lover is dead.
ee etor ever’. So thinking she sent for her
er and giving him the mango explained to him th
a, ae thing. But the horse-groom was ell
is oted to his wife and desiring that his wife should
main young always he gave it to her. The gr
ee We : a etalon of the palace and it was at the
er departure from
work that she was given the cna ethene ls
and so she carried it home in "hee hand Sha sane
who was returning from somewhere to the see poe
the woman carrying the mango and cnedilourd ites me
knew how she got it. On coming to the palac h pein
for the horse-groom and though at first ‘he heme ee
tried to shield the queen, he was compelled to eal <fe
truth in the end. The truth pained him much “Ph 1
Tt was this wretched and unfaithful woman wh ime
believing to be very chaste and loving. Woman og nepey
_be believed. Look, she has fallen in love with an ugly
glylooking servant of mine and unless he was her |
would not have given this mango to him. It “a she
that ts matter is not pursued any further = ‘ We
will decide about the future course of BeHOH. t Me
Thinking thus, he sent away the horse-groom ek er.
to his bed-chamber and lay there immersed in Morrie,
The horse-groom immediately informed the ee a
- everything that took place and the queen felt sorry that
her secret had come to light. She k
unishment that her = Ba es Sembee nt
also be blackened and so décided to Kill her ese d
before the affair became public. At once she m: : and
ottata (flat bread made of wheat or rice) with as nese
it and bringing it to the bed-room told her fowl a
with much pretended affection. ‘It will take a ti =
for your lunch to be ready. Let not you lie a
empty stomach. Eat this now’’. So saying she pl *
the bread in the hands of Bharirhari and left the ro a
Bhartrhari suspected foul play and mused “This be F
has been prepared by her with poison to kill me _
better to give up living with her. There is no ie .
about it. Of the four asramas the fourth, Sannya ubt
the best. It is pleasant and sorrowless. Therelire. p is
dually that 46rama should be accepted”’. Thinking oa
he came out from his room with the bread and ES %
it hidden somewhere in the lower end of the east we
house remarking “Ottappam Vitteccutum” (The ottata
will pure the house), Then taking an earthern bowl fi ‘
begging he left the house unnoticed by any. The mo or
Bhartrhar1 left the house the house se a ie —
everyting in it was burnt to ashes. rf an
Bhartrhari renouncing all and changing hi
the robes of a sannyasi went about fiving ia ie.
After some time he decided that he would never beg *)
“Come old. It i sé Y
. . t 18 becau . or O - in he & :
Ation awd fercure SHOP live J 5 5 3» So sa g esi would eat only that which others gave him voluntarily.
OE ‘-* ou sanny had by that time reach
© people that I am iving Y the ee Daas le e reached a big temple’ in south
Save th ad left the P ace: after 5° nal: India where in one of the entrances to the temple, the
left h: e mango an nt thus! “what is 1€ east one, was sitting the famous sannyasi Parana
my rs Bhartrhar} a d die So this gt Pillayar. Bhartrhari, therefore, went and sat at _
lle wo become *. gone. a? ) - i 1 ‘ :
EE Ty chan se ot alive afte she Be live lons Jaining fe tein the toned sg nae Whatever
Should be given to Het Le’ his wile 1 poor for days together he went siithont fo 4. B aa
pclore, ie the mane oat, Th t wile Wy chaste ee sick or felt weak. 20M At he mewer
0 “ull ing is
er t} im fthe iY. Jov! te hors
: Bephiad” ncn O = be = - than no was himself porn of a brahmin the brahmin father would go to hel]
7 accep e OVE dra WwW 2) 9
a lover. He was a rn to ee Temple:
.¢ port
g Df
I. There is a belief that if 2 Spe abida™
This temple is believed © P

BHARTRSTHANA (M)
One day a beggar went to the eastern gate and asked.
Pattanatt Pillayar for alms. Pillayar said, *‘I am also a
beggar like you. I have nothing in my hand to give you.
But there is a man sitting in the western gate. He is a
rich man and he may give you something’’. ‘The beggar
went to Bhartrhari and asked for alms. Bhartrhari
also expressed his helplessness in the matter. But then
the beggar said ‘“The man sitting at the opposite entrance
told me that you were a rich man.”’ Bhartrhari smiled.
He knew then why Pattanatt Pillayar said so. A man who
has renounced everything need not keep even a bowl to
beg. The bowl was a luxury and a sign of wealth.
Bhartrhari threw away the bowl and remained at the
temple entrance till the end of his life. It was while
sitting there that he wrote his famous poems.
4) His well-known works are: (1) The Niti Sataka (2)
The Srngara Sataka (3) The Vairagya Sataka and (4)
The Subhasitas.
BHARTRSTHANA (M). A very holy place in ancient
India. It is said that even those who merely visited this
place would get the benefit of performing an ASvamedha
yajiia. The place got its importance because Lord
Subrahmanya lived there. (Sloka 76, Chapter 84, Vana
Parva, M.B.)
BHARU. A daughter of Daksaprajapati. The prajapati,
at one stage begot sixty girls of Vairini and gave them
to Kagyapa, who distributed them among several Devas.
Bharu was the woman so given to the Visvadevatas.
(Hari Vamsga, Chapter 3).
BHARUKA. A king of the Solar dynasty. He was the
son of Sudeva and father of Bahuka. (Navama Skanda,
Bhagavata ).
BHARUKAKSA(M). A_ village of ancient India.
Sadras lived there. At that time of the Rajasiiya of
Dharmaputra these Sidras brought gifts to the King.
(Chapter 51, Sabha Parva).
BHARUNDA. A particular kind of bird found in the
Kingdom called Uttarakuruvarsa. These birds carry in
their strong beak corpses to their caves and eat them.
(Bhismaparva, Chapter 7, Werse 12).
BHARYA. Wife. Bhisma points out the sanctified importance of Bharya (wife) as follows:—
Without her even the palace will prove itself to be just a
forest. She will be a great support (to the husband) in
the matter of dharma (duty) artha (wealth) and Kama
(enjoyment of material comforts). (These three precede
the ultimate state of Moksa (salvation) and the wife will
be a great support in fulfilling the conditions during the
first three stages.) While on tour in foreign places she
will remain faithful to him and instil confidence in him.
Bharya is great wealth to man.
In his forlorn life on earth the wife is of great help to
man. Jo him, who is suffering from diseases and is
otherwise in distress there is no remedy (medicine) like
a good wile. There is no relative like a wife. In the
matter of practising dharma there is no other support to
match the wife. If one has no good wife to take care of
domestic affairs one will be driven to the forest; the
home will be like a forest. (Santi Parva, Chapter 144).
BHASA. A very prominent dramatist in Sanskrit. As
Bana and Kalidasa have noticed him in their works,
it may safely be assumed that Bhasa lived in an earlier
period. Since Pratima nataka and Abhiseka nataka,
which are universally admitted to have been composed
by Bhasa, depend for their themes on the Valmiki
BHASI
Ramayana, it is clear that Bhasa lived after Valmiki.
K4lidasa’s period has not yet been fixed beyond doubt.
It is almost settled that Bana lived sometime between the
sixth and seventh centuries A.D. Prof. Keith has been
of the view that Valmiki lived before the 4th century
B.C. In the light of all such factors it could be presumed
that Bhasa lived in the period between the 4th century
B.C. and 6th century A.D.
Though Bhasa has so many glories to his credit he does
not fully match Kalidasa, and this might have been the
reason why Indians did almost forget Bhasa with the
advent of Kalidasa on the literary arena.
We are not in a position to name with unerring definiteness the works of Bhasa. The general belief is that he
has written nearly twenty three dramas. In 1922, Pandit
Ganapati Sastri unearthed from various sources thirteen
dramas of Bhasa. Three out of them, viz. Pratiiayaugandharayana, Svapnavadsavadatta and Avimaraka owe their themes to the Brhatkatha, while Pratima nataka and Abhiseka nataka have Ramayana as
their basic inspiration. Out of the eight remaining
dramas six, viz. Madhyama vyayoga, Paficaratra, Dutavakya, Ditaghatotkaca, Karnabhara and Urubhanga
owe their themes to the Mahabharata, while the last
two dramas, Balacarita and Carudatta are dependent
for their themes on anecdotes about Sri Krsna and 08
yaksa stories.
Though Dr. Ganapati Sastri has strongly contended that
all the above thirteen dramas were written by Bhas
himself, his view has not yet received universal accep~
tance. Whatever that be, it is an admitted fact that
Svapnavasavadatta is by far the best among the thirtee?
dramas. It is a continuation of the story of Pratijayauy
gandharayana. The wedding of king Udayana am
a is the subject matter of Svapnavasavaatta.
With his killing of the Raksasa ‘Avi’ the Sauvira king
comes to be known as Avimara, and Avimara’s falling
in love with Kurangi, daughter of Kuntibhoja forms the
theme of the drama, Avimaraka. In Pratima nata J
is told the story narrated in Ramayana from Ayodhy2kanda to Pattabhiseka. Abhiseka nataka codifies t y
stories in the Kiskindha Kanda and Sundara Kanda ©
the Ramayana and describes the coronations of Sugriv®
and of Sri Rama. Though the characters in Paficarat’
are borrowed from Mahabharata the story is entire y
Bhasa’s. Madhyama vyayoga, Datavakya, Ditaghato
kaca, Karnabhara and Urubhanga are one-act play*:
These five plays have as their basis some of the anecdore"
in the Mahabharata. In Carudatta is treated the 10V
story of Carudatta and Vasantasena. ana
Indisputable evidence is still lacking to credit Boe
with the authorship of all the thirteen plays referred
above.
BHASAS. (See Bhasi). oe
BHASAKARNA,. A military captain of Ravana. Han
man killed him in fight. (Valmiki Ramayana, Sund?
BHASLI, Daughter of Tamra, Daksa’s daughter. KasyaF
prajapati married the following daughters of La “a
Aditi, Diti, Danu, Kalika, Tamra, Krodhavasa, “5,
and Anala. Tamra had five daughters, viz. Krau
Bhasi, Syeni, Dhrtarastri and Suki. And, the
Bhasi are the Deva sect called the Bhasas. (
Ramayana, Aranya Kanda, Canto 14}.
sons |’.
valmil

BHASKARA 127 BHAVABHUTI
BHASKARA. One of the Dvadasadityas born of Kasyapa Agnidhra, Yukta and Jita. At that time, the sons of
prajapati and Aditi, (Anugdasana Farva, Verse 150). Manu who will be protecting the B
BHASKARACARY A. A master astronomer of ancient gambhirabuddhi aaa aed Kings (Vien cs sat
India. It was he who declared, much earlier than western 3rd Part, Chapter 2). os Ph urana,
experts, that the earth is round in shape. BHAUMA II. Another name of Narakdsura. (See the
BHASKARI. An old maharsi of India. He ati ae word Narakasura).
the Rsis who visited Bhisma on his bed of arrows, (Santi BHAUMATII. A Raksasa born to Simhika by Vi itti
Parva, Chapter 47, Verse 12). Paragu-Rama killed him. Rishmande Be AeOD ul
BHASMA. (Sacred ash). To know a story about the BHAUTYA. See the word Manvantara.
greatness of Bhasma see under the word Durjaya. BHAVATI. One of the eleven Rudras. He was the son of
BHASMASURA. A demon. There is no mention about Sthanu and grandson of Brahma. (Chapter 66, Adi
this demon in any of the Sanskrit puranas but ‘Sivali- Parva, M.B.). :
lamrta’ in Marathi contains the following story about BHAVA II. A sanadtana Visvadeva. (Chapter 60, Adi
him. Parva, M.B.). :
Bhasmasura was born of the Bhasma dust (ashes) on BHAVATIII. One of the sons born to Kasgyapa of Surathe body of Siva. Pleased at the great devotion of the bhi. :
demon towards him Siva asked him to name any boon BHAVA (M) I. A famous forest mentioned in the
he wanted. Bhasmasura said that he wanted the power Puranas. Bhava was near the Venumanda mountain,
to burn to ashes anybody on whose head he placed his which was closeto Dvaraka. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 38).
hand. Bhasmasura became arrogant with the boon BHAVA. One of the twelve Devas born to Bhrguvaruni
and he became a nightmare to the whole world. Then Rsi of his wife Divya, — :
BHAVABHUTI. A Sanskrit poet who lived in the 7th
MahAavisnu appeared before him in the form of Mohini, A
an attractive dancer and alluring him by her charm century A.D. His important works are the three dramas,
started on a dance called Muktanrtya. During the course Malatimadhava, Mahdaviracarita and Uttararimascura was forced to place his hand carita. Bhavabhiti was a brahmin of the Kaévapaor his wey ae po “the moment his hea touched his gotra. He was the son of one Nilakantha and me ee
lecsesel, ox seosex: Luemest Hon GSTs karni. He was a great devotee of Siva and he got his
BHASVARA. One of the two attendants presented by name Bhavabhiti later because of this. His original
Sarya to Subrahmanya; the other was named Subh- name was Nilakantha. Bhavabhiati was born in Padmasid (Galya, Paiva i ere 45, Verse 31). . pura - ie ee af Vidarbha. But Bhavabhiti spent
BHATTAN XRAYANA. A sanskrit poet ane oe ost af us life in the palace of Yasgodharma, king of
ry e a * - in Cf]
near about A.D, 700. Veuisambhats @ Bhavabhiti’s first drama is believed to be Mahavira-
, “| of his found out, yet. He A aii ae
acts is the only composition ae Mrearajalaksma. carita. There are seven acts in this. The theme is based
is also known by another
Certain scholars anise that he might have lived before
A amana. P
ne alert a a A literary critic who flourished iy
the 10th century A.D. in India. He appaposce - eee
oe sah et a ah , Gee PE hese But,
a d on tne aly ;
fie ae has oh been found out, yet. Contesting the
dh ' at 1n uggesvanivada (the rhetorical theo oer: : Een | oa :
d i : i ig sUper1o he exp mean
ted or implied meaning 155 Pp hes heal theres
ning ) of AnandavardhanaceryM in poetry ). Abhivada (that sentiment 18 SIFY" ihe rasavada. Hence,
has supported the Tase™.
a oy ae that Bhattanayaka lived in the period
r to Abhinavagupta.
after Anandavardhana Se ee A Ridhe, Bhavakatvam
Thar ataY (aire gg “he the three excellences of
oja
good poetry. . ho lived in the 7th century
t poet who i ;
ee A yor a composition 1s the ware
..D. His mo vadha, which has peo very P io -
mays, RaveN h nati Bhattikavya- T as maha y
and famous by the of Ramayana in its nag
Kandas (cantos). The kavya 18 — ps ee
al Valabhi in obedience
King Sridharasena- Manu. In the time of this
rteenth Ma 1
oe 5! called Suci ie on Lang ne
sea there will be five STOUPS thas, Bhrajikas
rd tras,
are called Caksusas, Pavi ».. (seven sages) of that
and Vapavrddhas. Oe - = Sukra, Magadha,
Manvantara are Agnl
“TOO
on the story of Sri Rama. But there are some variations
from the original Ramayana in this drama. Bhavabhiiti states that even at the time of the svayamvara of
Sita, Ravana was a suitor. There is an opinion among
certain critics that Bhavabhiti did write only up to the
46th verse in the fourth act and the rest was written
by another poet named Subrahmanya.
Malatimadhava is a drama of ten acts. Itisa love-story
of Malati and Madhava. Malati was the daughter of the
minister of Ujjayini and Madhava was the son of the
minister of Vidarbha. It was while Madhava was having
his education in Ujjayini that he came to love Malati.
It was Kamandaki who was a classmate of both the
ministers and who became a sannyasini later who pulls
the strings of this love story. The king of Ujjayini wanted
Malati to marry Nandana, a friend of his. But MaAlati
did not love him. Yet afraid of getting the displeasure of
the King, Malati’s father decided to give her in marriage
to Nandana. In despair Madhava was about to commit
suicide when from the temple nearby Madhava heard
an agonised weeping. He rushed to the site of the sound
and found to his bewilderment the gruesome sight of
Malati being dragged for sacrifice by a sorceress named
Kapalakundala helped by her guru Aghoraghanta,
Madhava killed Aghoraghanta and saved Malati.
Disappointed Kapalakundali swore that she would
seek revenge on Madhava and disappeared. MaAlati
went back to her palace. At this time Madayantika
sister of Nandana and Makaranda, a friend of Madhava
became lovers. Once Madayantika was attacked
tiger in a Siva temple and Makaranda saved her Sa

BHAVADA 128
the wild beast, and they became lovers thereafter. The
proposal to give Malati in marriage to Nandana was
still pending then. The marriage day was fixed and a
day before that by a clever ruse played by the keenwitted Kamandaki Ma4lati and Madhava eloped together.
Makaranda, friend of Madhava, was disguised and dressed
in bridal robes and Nandana little suspecting the trick
played on him married the substitute. Before they went
to the bridal chamber for the night Nandana’s sister
came to see her new sister-in-law and the moment she
put her eyes on her she understood who it was and that
night they also eloped. Thus poor Nandana was left
alone.
Kapalakundala by her sorcery separated Malati from
Madhava but luckily Saudamini a disciple of Kamantaki saved her from Kapalakundala. Later Malati
married Madhava with the permission of the King.
This is the story of Malati-Madhava.
Uttararamacarita is a play of seven acts. The theme is
the story of Rama after his return to Ayodhya after the
exile. It begins with the renouncement of Sita by Rama
and ends with the vanishing of Sita.
All these three dramas used to be enacted during the
festival of ‘Kalapriyanatha ’ at Ujjayini. The predominant emotion in Mahaviracarita is ‘Vira’, in MalatiMadhava, ‘Srngara’ andin Uttararamacarita ‘Karuna’.
In expressing and elaborating the emotion of ‘Karuna’
Bhavabhiti excels Kalidasa. The one draw-back which
keeps him second to Kalidasa is his lack of humour and
wit. The sanskrit poet Dhanapala in his _ book’
‘Tilakamafijari’ speaks about Bhavabhiti thus :
Spastabhavarasa citraih
Padanyasaih pravarttita /
Natakesu natastriva
_ Bharati Bhavabhatina //
BHAVADA. A follower of Skandadeva. (Chapter 45,
Salya Parva).
HAVANMANYU. A king of Piruvamsa. He had five
B sons: Brhatksatra, Nara, Garga, Mahavirya and Jaya.
(Gnapter 19, Amsa 4, Visnu Purana).
BHAVANIKA. <A companion of princess Mrgamkavati.
(See Sridatta).
BHAVATI. ‘The word prescribed by Manu to be used
while addressing women. Not all women should be
addressed like that. All women who are not your relatives and the wives of others should be addressed using
any one of the following words: Bhavati, Subhage o1
Bhagini.
Parapatni tu ya stri syad
asambaddha ca yonitah /
Tam briyad bhavatityevam
Subhage bhaginiti ca. //
(Manusmrti, Chapter 2),
BHAVAYAVYA. A muni, whose glories are sung in the
Reveda. He married Romasa, daughter of Bhrhaspati.
Once she approached her husband with the request for
coition, and the husband laughed at her. (Rgveda,
Mandala 19, Anuvaka 19, sakta 127).
BHAVINI. A female attendant of Subrahmanya. (Salya
Parva, Chapter 44, Verse 11).
BHAVISYA PURANA. This purana contains the instructions given by the god Siirya to Manu. There are about
fourteen thousand books in this purana and they deal
i. Since much information about Bhima is given under the
a brief description of Bhima is attempted under the present heading.
BHIMA
with almost all subjects on earth including such important ones like, Srsti (creation), Kalamana (time),
Garbhadhana (conception), Godana (gift of cows),
Agramadharmas (duties of a hermit) Linga Sastra
(science of sex), Visacikitsé (treatment of poisoning )
and Ayurveda (Medical science). (Chapter 272, Agni
Purana ). :
BHAVISYARAMAYANA. ‘The part after Uttararamayana. Uttararamayana states about Bhavisyaramayana
being sung by Kusa and Lava in the presence of ori
Rama.
BHAVUKA. A king of the solar dynasty. He was the
son of Raviya and father of Cakroddhata. (Bhagavata,
Navama Skandha).
BHAVYAI. AsonofDhruva. He got of his wife Sambhu
two sons, Sisti and Bhavya. (Chapter 13, Améa 1,
Visnu Furana).
BHAVYA II. A clan of devas in RaivatamanvantaraParimiti, Priyanigécaya, Mati, Mana, Vicetasa, Vijaya,
Sujaya and Syoda are some of the prominent devas O
the clan. (Brahmanda Purana, 2.36, 71-72).
BHAVYA III. One of the Saptarsis (seven sacred
saints) of Daksasavarni Manvantara. .
BHAYA. A demoness, sister of Kala who presides ove!
the land of-death. She was married to Heti, son ©
Brahma and brother of Praheti. Vidyutkesa was their
son and he married Salakantaka, daughter of Sandhya:
(Uttara Ramayana). F
BHAYA (M). Hirnsa is the wife of Adharma. They 8°
a son named Anrta and a daughter named Nikrtl. From
them were born Bhaya, Naraka, Maya and VedanaOf these Maya produced Mrtyu, destroyer of Sed,
Vedana got of her husband Raurava son named Duhk ue
From Mrtyu were born Vyadhi, Jara, Soka, tas
and Krodha. (Chapter 20, Agni Purana). Ano! 4
version about the birth of Bhaya is found in Sloka_ 3
Chapter 66 of Adi Parva, M.B. Adharma married ae
and to them were born Bhaya, Mahabhaya and Mrty"
three sons of demoniac disposition. ‘These three SO
led a sinful life. ara
BHAYANKARA I. A prince of the country of agua
He was a dependant of Jayadratha. It was this Bhay a
kara who followed Jayadratha with his flag were sil
was trying to kidnap Pafcali. Arjuna killed
(Chapter 265 and 271, Vana Parva, M.B.).
BHAYANKARA II. A sanatana Visvadeva. (Ch@
91, Anugdsana Parva, M.B.). ka 4
BHAYANKARI. A follower of Subrahmanya. (Slo
Chapter 46, Salya Parva, M.B.). - MB:
BHEDI. A female attendant of Subrahmany4 (
all
ptct
Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Verse 13):
BHELA. A disciple of Punarvasu Atreya w
Ayurveda acarya. He was a contemporary of
and has composed a work on Ayurveda, entitle
samhita’. - any?"
BHERISVATA. A female attendant of Subrahm®
(M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Verse 26).
BHIMA. Bhimasena, one of the five Pandavas.
1) Genealogy. (See genealogy of Arjuna). Cand!
2) Birth and childhood. King Vicitravirya © pbrt™
varnéa (lunar dynasty) had two __ sons called “<6
rastra and Pandu. The Kauravas (Duryodhana etc. 4 the
sons born to Dhrtarastra of his wife Gandhar!, ar onl
captions Dharmaputra, Arjuna, Nakula, Sahadeva and pancalt
S
rf agaivel?
d ‘Bhel

BHIMA
Pandavas were the sons of Pandu and his wives Kunti
and Madri. Dharmaputra, Bhima and Arjuna were
the sons of Kunti, and Nakula and Sahadeva of
Madri.}
Kunti directed a mantra gifted to her by Durvasas towards Vayubhagavan (the wind-god) and the result
was the birth of Bhima. Hence he is called Vayu-putra
(son of the wind-god). At the time of his birth a celestial
voice announced that the boy would grow up to be the
strongest among the strong. (Adi Parva, Chapter 122,
. Verse 14). On the tenth day after birth the child Bhima
fell from his mother’s lap on a rock. Bhima was not
injured in any manner by that fall, although it crushed
the rock into power. (This story is told in the southern
texts of the Mahabharata in Chapter 132 of Adi Parva).
The naming ceremony of the child was performed by
the Maharsis, who stayed at Satasrnga. Kasyapa Maharsi, family priest of Vasudeva performed the ceremonies
like wearing of the sacred thread. Bhima learned fightzi with the gad (club or mace) from Suka, the famous
ajarsi.
The Kauravas and the Pandavas spent their childhood
in Hastinapura. Dronacarya taught them fighting
with weapons. The Kauravas and the Pandavas often
engaged themselves in children’s games. In all such
games Bhima used to hurt and ‘defeat the Kauravas,
and to this fact the unending hatred of the Kauravas
towards Bhima owed its origin. Once they adminis
tered poison to Bhima who fell down unconscious, and
then they threw him into the depths of the Ganga
(Ganges). Going deeper and deeper in aioe os
Bhima, at last, reached the Nagaloka, where the ec.
(serpents) bit him which neutralized the effects of ( e
Poison in his body. There he got acquainted W™l #
naga called Aryaka, who introduced him to ate ts
king of the nagas, and Vasuk1 presented him wit oe,
. Wealth and other costly gems. But, what use W a
this wealth to Bhima ? Then Vasuki agreed to give
Ww f it the
a divine drink, which would ene eile at one
Strength of thousand elephants. D
Fe. eight ‘pot-fulls of that divine ieee aoe
became tremendously strong. Puls ae F k might be
Nagaloka for eight days so that the h day the nagas
thoroughly assimilated, Gea
Saw him off in all pomp au .
to his mrntliee ee brotliers ae —S them,
Ww ib xious at his abs' ;
Whee dee oohson of the princes in the use of weapons
a conducted. DuryoWas Over a competition or i ‘club-fi ght’, and when
dhan hima entered into Titer was
Kara a ts intervene in the on a ed Bota.
uestioned by Bhima. Duryodhana ince before DronaAsuna agreed to presen t King Te fierce war the
carya as gurudaksina to him. VY ima annihilated the
Pandavas fought with Dr upada, Ee ad afterwards
elephant division of the latter’s army: aubawal at the
Bhima underwent higher teasing ev Chapter 136,
“hands of Balabhadrarama. (Adi ,
Verse 4).
3) The Pandavas
the Kauravas an
and stronger, Duryodhana,
removed the Pandavas to V
there. They were put UP :
1 The Pandavas were not in fact
inapt enmity between
stinapura. As
a A Xap began growing stronge
Se nate with his father’s permission,
jranavata and settled them
here in 4 palace specially
direct issues of Pan
"OO
BHIMA
made of lac. The Pandavas divined the secret of it and
escaped from the fire, when the palace was set fire to.
Verse 10, Chapter 147 of the Adi Parva states that it
was Bhima, who set fire to the palace. Escaping thus
through a tunnel the Pandavas travelled a great distance
in the forest. Kunti and four of her sons got tired by the
exertions of the travel and were forced to sit down for
rest on the way. Bhima, continued the journey carrying
the mother and his four brothers on his shoulders. With
their entry into Hidirnba forest the weakness left them,
and they became their former selves.
4) Hidimba killed. Kunti devi and four sons slept under
the shade of a tree at dusk, and Bhima kept guard over
them. There dwelt in the forest a Raksasa called Hidimba
with his sister, Hidimbi. Hidimba looked around that
particular day from the top of a tree, and detecting
Bhima his mouth watered. He deputed Hidimbi to
bring Bhima over to him. Hidimbi approached Bhima,
whose fine figure kindled feelings of love in her. She
desired to have him as husband. Hidimbi having not.
returned even after a long time Hidimba went over to
the spot, and there finding Hidimbi in love-talks with
Bhima he got terribly angry. He wanted to kill Hidimbi.
Bhima, who could not suffer the killing of a woman in
his presence rushed against Hidimba, The noise of the
fight awakened the other Pandavas from sleep, and at
the instance of Arjuna, Bhima killed Hidiinba. Thus
rendered helpless and forlorn Hidii.bi again craved
Bhima for love. On the suggestion of Kunti, whose
heart melted at the sightof Hidimbi’s helplessness Bhima
took her as his wife. But, one condition was stipulated
for their enjoying the honey-moon, The condition was
that they might enjoy honey-moon, from dawn to dusk
in the sky and on mountain tops, Hidimbi, who was
endowed with magic powers carrying Bhima with her.
And, after dusk Bhima was to be returned to Kunti,
Accordingly Bhima and Hidimbi spent one year, and
to them was born a son called Ghatotkaca. Promising
that he shall return when wanted, Ghatotkaca with his
mother went into the forest. The Pandavas also left
for the village called Ekacakra. (Adi Parva, Chapters
5) Killing of Baka and the wedding of Pafcali. While at
Ekacakra Bhima killed the Raksasa called Baka and
freed the people of the village from their distress.
Afterwards the Pandavas attended the Svayamvara
(free choice of the husband by woman) of Pafcali,
who became ‘their wife. There Bhima defeated Salya
in fight. And, the Pandavas duly returned to Hastinaura. (For details see Baka, Paficali and Arjuna).
6) Again to forest. On their return to Hastinupura the
Pandavas took their residence in the palace built by
Maya. There Maya presented a magnificent club to
Bhima. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 3, Verse 18). It was
&ri7 Krsna, lord of Dvaraka who served as the right hand
of the Pandavas. Jarasandha, who was then King of
Magadha fought with Krsna eighteen times and got
defeated. Yet he did not yield, and at last Krsna decided
to do away with him. Krsna, Arjuna and Bhima, in
disguise, set out for Magadha. They entered Jarasandha’s
alace and challenged him to a duel. Bhima and Jarasandha clashed, and at the instance of Krsna Bhima
rent the latter in two and threw him on the ground,
Though Jarasandha was alive again, Bhima rent him
du. For details see Kunti.

BHIMA 130
in two and threw away the two parts to two places.
(M. B. Sabha Parva, Southern Text, Chapter 24).
The main impediments and thorns in their way thus
having been removed, Dharmaputra decided to perform
Rajasiya. Bhima was deputed to conquer all the kingdoms in the eastern part of India. Bhima achieved the
object and returned with great wealth to Indraprastha.
Though Bhima got ready to kill Sigupala, who alone
refused to acknowledge the suzerainty of Yudhisthira,
he also yielded on the tactful advice of Bhisma. The
Rajasuya Yajna went off quite successfully. It was
Bhima, who, after the Yajfia was over, took Bhisma and
Yudhisthira to Hastinapura. Afterwards, in the contest
in the game of dice played between Dharmaputra and
Duryodhana, the Pandavas lost everything. The Kauravas brought Paficali into the assembly hall and attempted
to strip her naked in public. Bhima who got enraged at
this shouted that the hands of Yudhisthira who played
dice should be burnt in fire. (Adi Parva, Chapter 68,
Verse 6). And, Bhima took then and there the terrible
pledge that he would, with his hands stained by blood
from the chest of Dussasana, who tried to rip Paficali
naked, tie up Paficali’s hair which got untied in the
scuffle. He also swore that he would break the thigh of
Duryodhana. In uncontrollable rage Bhima also shouted
that he would turn into ashes all those who took part in
the game of dice. Bhima took also the vow that all the
Kauravas would be killed.
According to the terms and conditions laid down with
regard to the contest in the game of dice the Pandavas
went into the Kamyaka forest to live there for twelve
years and then to live incognito for one year.
7) Life in forest and life incognito. There lived in Kamyaka forest a Raksasa called Kirmira, brother of Bala,
whom Bhima had killed on an earlier occasion. Kirmira,
who was awaiting an opportunity to avenge the murder
of his brother, now clashed with Bhima in the forest.
ne did very easily kill him. (For details see Kirmira).
Thus the Pandavas spent their days once again in the
Kamyaka forest under the spiritual leadership of sage
Dhaumya. They thought about their lost kingdom.
Should they go to war against the Kauravas or should
they spend the rest of their lives in the exercise of dharmic
injunctions ? At one time Bhima advised Yudhisthira
against war; but on another occasion he pleaded vehemently in favour of war. It was during this time that
Arjuna went to the Himalayas to please Siva by penance
and get from him the Pagupatastra. (Arrow called
Pasgupata). The Pandavas naturally got nervous and
upset at the rather long absence of Arjuna; Bhima was
more anxious and sorry than the others. Then the
Pandavas set out in search of Arjuna, and travelled upto
Mount Gandhamadana. Then the party got so tired
that they could not proceed any further. Pafcali fell
down fainting. Then Bhima remembered Ghatotkaca,
who appeared before his father (Bhima) at once. As
directed by Bhima Ghatotkaca mounted the Pandavas
on his shoulders and the journey continued. They
reached the Asrama of Naranarayanas, and rested there
for six days. One day the wind blowing from the north1. When raised, Haniman’s tail was as high in the sky as the flag of Indra, and produced a thunderous sound. AS
BHIMA
east dropped near Paficalia Saugandhika flower. And,
Bhima set out in the north-east direction to fetch saugandhika flowers for Pancali, who felt a special liking for
them.
Walking and walking Bhima entered Kadalivana.
Haniman, his skin wrinkled and hair grey due to old
age, was living in this forest. He obstructed the path of
Bhima. Haniman awoke from sleep and raised his tail
with a terrific sound. Bhima walked upto the place
whence the sound was heard.! (Vanaparva, Chapter
146). In the clash that ensued between Haniman and
Bhima the former came out victorious. Haniman,
however, congratulated Bhima and directed him on the
path to the saugandhika forest.
Bhimasena reached the saugandhika forest, which was
being guarded by the Raksasas called Krodhavasas.
Bhima overcame them, collected the flowers and returning with them stayed in the Badarikagrama with his
brothers and Paficali. Here it was that Bhima killed
Jatasura. (For details see Jatasura II).
Four years were thus spent; yet Arjuna had not returned.
The Pandavas continued their journey northwareOn the 17th day they came to the Agrama of Vrsaparv
in the Himalayas. They were duly received by the
maharsi, who directed them in their onward journey:
Continuing the journey they reached the Asrama ©
Arstisena whence, after crossing variousmountain peas®
and still walking they reached Kubera’s Alakapuri whe”
a Yaksa called Maniman obstructed their further P!9
gress. Bhima killed Maniman and the other Yaksas W’
rushed to his support. kinally Kubera himself 54%
Bhima and blessed the Pandavas. cone
While they were returning from Kubera’s palace ae
was caught by a python. But, it was really ee
transformed into a python on account of a curse. men
killed it and it assumed its original form as Maney
(See Agastya, Para 8). By this time Arjuna had obta™
Pagupatastra from Siva and he duly returned t0 a
brothers, and the Pandavas continued their journey
the forest. in
Meantime, knowing that the Pandavas were put eat ng
Dvaitavana, the Kauravas started for their dwe _
place in a procession led by Duryodhana with the = :
and camped nearly two furlongs away from a ES “he
Dvaitavana. While thus camping Duryodhana Cle”,
with a Gandharva called Citrasena, who with a erent
of his comrades came to the pool for water oF jana
and in the encounter the latter made Dury© much
prisoner. Bhimasena who witnessed the scene very | aid
laughed at Duryodhana. But, Arjuna intervene
set free Duryodhana and others. , and
The Pandavas again entered the Kamyaka fores = cali
it was at that time that Jayadratha abducted e ay?s
Bhima killed Kotikasya who acted on behalf © eure?
dratha. (See Kotikasya). Moreover Bhima he? chat
Jayadratha, got his head shaved clean and dec a pat?
he was a slave of Dharmaputra. It was here at io pad
vana that Dharmadeva tested the Pandavas, W ave
gone to a nearby pool to fetch water; all the se pt
except Yudhisthira died at the pool, but were The
back to life again. (See Dharmaputra, Para } ;
thous vf
mpetiD® pe
mountains were vomitting through their mouth, the sound produced by the raising of the tail shook the mountains. Drowning the tru
excited elephants the sound reverberated all around the mountains. Hearing the sound Bhima, his whole body horripilated ©
forest in the direction of the sound. In the middle of Kadalivana, on a mighty rock, Bhima saw Haniman.
ntere

BHIMA
twelve years’ forest-life of the Pandavas now came to
an end.
According to the advice of Dharmadeva the Pandavas
selected the Virata palace for their life incognito, Bhimasena assuming the name Vallava (Valala). And, here
Bhima killed ina duel Jimiita, the pugilist. (See Jimiita
II), It was also here that Bhima killed Kicaka and the
Upakicakas. (See Kicaka), On another occasion, at
the instance of Yudhisthira Bhima took Sudharma, King
of Dagarna to Yudhisthira captive; but he was later set
free. Next year the Pandavas defeated Duryodhana in
the fight in connection with the theft of the cows of the
Virata King, and then they declared that their forest
life and life incognito were over.
8) Bhima in the great war. Even after the return of the
Pandavas after the forest life and life incognito the
Kauravas refused to give them half of the kingdom. So,
both the parties began preparations for war. Given hereunder is the main incident relating to Bhima from this
period to the Svargarohana (going to Heaven) or the
Pandavas after relinquishing the kingdom in favour of
Pariksit, including their victory 1n war and the admuinistrati the country.
(1 oc Hlesoribed to Dhrtarastra the prowess ane
achievements of Bhima. (Udyoga Parva, Chapter te
(2) Sri Krsna before leaving for the Kaurava mig Y
for compromise talks asked for the views of Bhima a +
the whole problem, and Bhima opined that peace w
ure. uae. (Udyoga Parva, Chapter 74).
preierable to war. (Udyog bapa redtor wat
(3) When Sri Krsna admonished Bhima he ne bt
and waxed eloquent am heroism and prowess.
Udyoga Parva, Chapter ; ;
et = ea wanited Sikhandi to be appointed chief of the
Parva, Chapter 161). | ;
(5)! Sen cane ack with an ge ia ee
who was sent by Duryodhana to the a
a _ (Udyoga Parva, Chapter 2
(6) Bhima. questioned Dharmaputra who, when the
ite Si foot
to the Kaurava assembly |
(Bhisma Parva, Chapter 48, ee a é
(7) The world shuddered at sel .
(Bhisma Parva, Chap ©" year fought a duel with
(8)O fi t day of the war Bhima foug Serse 19).
D ny (Bhisma Parva, Chapter a led Sakra-
(9) Tn ho ci with the Kalinga) ee 9 4).
deva. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter Bhisma Parva,
(10) Bhima killed Bhanuman. (Bhs
94, Verse 39). qd Salya,
(11) He killed King of K
chariot wheels of ,
Parva, Chapter 54, V Parva, Chapter 54,
(12)Killed Ketuman.
Verse 77).
(13) Annihilated th a
army, and rivers ©
Chapter 54, Verse 103).
(14) Defeated Duryodhana.
Verse 16). ;
(15) Fought against Bhisma.
63, Verse 1). Kole
(16) Fought against the prtaraatt
this fight eight sons of aba,
sandha, Susena, Ugra,
f Bhima.
Chapter
an who guarded the
pas alinga. (Bhisma
ru 5)
erse
(Bhisma
- toton of the Kaurava
e elepham™ he (Bhisma Parva,
(Bhisma Parva, Chapter 58,
(Bhisma Parva, Chapter
jot of Kauravas, and in
‘, Senapati, Jaraviz ;
Bhima, Bhimaratha
EEE “" Oe
BHIMA
and Sulocana were killed. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 64,
Verse 32).
(17) Fought a fierce war against Bhisma. (Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 72, Verse 21). TVS
(18) Fought with Duryodhana. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 72, Verse: 17),
(19) Defeated Duryodhana the second time.
Parva, Chapter 79, Verse 11).
(20) Defeated Krtavarma. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 82,
Verse 60). -
(21) Killed Bhisma’s charioteer. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 88, Verse 12).
(22) Killed eight more sons of Dhrtarastra. (Chapter 88,
Verse 13, Bhisma Parva).
(23) Struck by the arrow of Bhima, Dronacarya fell down
unconscious. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 94, Verse 18).
(24) Killed nine more sons of Dhrtarastra. (Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 96, Verse 23). ,
(25)Defeated Balhika. (Bhisma Parva,
Verse 18).
(26) Fought a duel with Bhirisravas. (Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 110, Verse 10).
(27) Killed ten maharathis (heroes in chariot war) of
the Kaurava army. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 113),
(28)Dhrtarastra applauded the prowess of Bhima.
(Drona Parva, Chapter 10, Versé 13).
(29) Bhima fought with VivimSati. (Drona l’arva, Chapter 14, Verse 27). |
(30) Defeated Salya in club fight. (Drona Parva, Chapter
(31) Fought with Durmarsana. (Drona Parva, Chapter
25. Verse):
(32) Killed Anga, king of the Mleccha tribe. (Drona
Parva, Chapter 26, Verse 17).
(33) Fought with the elephant of Bhagadatta, was
defeated and ran away. (Drona Parva, Chapter 26,
Verse 19). .
(34) Attacked Karna and killed fifteen warriors of his.
(Drona Parva, Chapter 32, Verse 32).
(35) Fought with Vivingati, Citrasena and Vikarna.
(Drona Parva, Chapter 96, Verse 31). )
(36) Fought with Alambusa and came out victorious.
(Drona Parva, Chapter 106, Verse 16).
(37) Fought with Krtavarma. (Drona Parva, Chapter
(38) Consoled Yudhisthira who was in great perplexity.
Drona Parva, Chapter 126, Verse 32).
(39) Defeated Drona again. (Drona Parva, Chapter
(40) Killed Kundabhedi, Susena, Dirghalocana, Vrndaraka, Abhaya, Raudrakarma, Durvimocana, Vinda,
Anuvinda, Suvarma and Sudarégana. (Drona Parva,
Chapter 127, Verse 60).
(41) Threw off Dronacarya along with his chariot eight
times. (Drona Parva, Chapter 128, Verse 18).
(42) Defeated Karna in fight. (Drona Parva, Chapter
(Bhisma
Chapter 104,
43) Killed Dussala. (Drona Parva, Ghapter 129).
(44) Defeated Karna again. (Drona Parva, Chapter
(45) Killed Durjaya, son of Dhrtarastra. (Drona Parva,
Chapter 133, Verse 13).
(46) Killed Durmukha, sor of Dhrtardsira, (Drona
Parva, Chapter 134, Verse 20).

BHIMA
(47) Killed Durmarsana, Dussaha, Durmada, Durdhara
(Duradhara) and Jaya. (Drona Parva, Chapter 135,
Verse 30).
(48) Defeated Karna again. (Drona Parva, Chapter 136,
Verse Li).
(49) Killed Citra, Upacitra, Citraksa, Carucitra, Sarasana, Citrayudha and Citravarman. (Drona Parva,
Chapter 136, Verse 20).
(50) Killed Satrufijaya, Satrusaha, Citra (Citrabana)
Citrayudha (Agrayudha) Drdha (Drdhavarman) Citrasena (Ugrasena) and Vikarna. (Drona Parva, Chapter
(51) Defeated Karna again. (Drona Parva, Chapter 139,
Verse 9).
(52) Destroyed many bows of Karna. (Drona Parva,
Chapter 139, Verse 19).
(53) To capture Karna bereft of his arrows, Bhima jumped into his chariot. (Drona Parva, Chapter 139,
Verse 74).
(54) Bhima tumbled to the ground unconscious at the
blows of Karna. (Drona Parva, Chapter 139, Verse 91).
(55) Gave directions to Arjuna to kill Karna. (Drona
Parva, Chapter 148, Verse 3).
(56) Killed the prince of Kalinga by thrashing and
kicking fim. (Drona Parva, Chapter 155, Verse 24).
(57) Killed Jayarata, Dhruva, Durmada and Duskarna
by pushing and beating them. (Drona Parva, Chapter
(58) Rendered the great hero Somadatita unconscious
by thrashing him with his club. (Drona Parva, Chapter
(59) Killed Balhtka. (Drona Parva, Chapter 157, Verse
(60) Killed Nagadatta, Drdharatha (Drdhagvan ) Mahabahu, Ayobhuja (Ayobahu) Drdha (Drdhaksatra )
Suhastha, Viraja, Pramathi, Ugra (Ugragravas) and
Anuyayi (Agrayayi). (Drona Parva, Chapter 157,
Verse 16
(61) Killed Satacandra. (Drona Parva, Chapter 157,
Verse 23).
(62) Killed Gavaksa, brother of Sakuni, as also Sarabha,
Vibhu, Subhaga and Bhanudatta. (Drona Parva, Chapter 157, Verse 23°),
(63) Defeated Duryodhana again. (Drona Parva, Chapter 166, Verse 43).
(64) Engaged himself in a fierce fight with Halayudha.
(Drona Parva, Chapter 177).
(65) Got defeated in the fight with Karna. (Drona Parva,
Chapter 188, Verse 10).
(66) Killed the elephant named Aévatthama and spread
the false news that Asvatthama (son of Drona) was
killed. (Drona Parva, Chapter 190, Verse 13};
(67) Fought against narayanastra. (Drona Parva, Chapter 199, Verse 45).
(68) In the fight with Asvatthama Bhima’s charioteer
was killed. (J\rona Parva, Chapter 199, verse 45),
(69) Killed Ksemadhiarti, the King of Kalita. (Karna
Chapter 12, Verse ZO}.
Parva, :
(70) Fought with Agvatthama and fell down unconscious
by the blows dealt by him. (Karna Parva, Chapter
(71) Killed Bhanusena, son of Karna. (Karna Parva,
Chapter 48, Verse 27).
BHIMA
(72)In the next fight killed Vivitsu, Vikata, Sama,
Kratha (Krathana) Nanda and Upananda. (Karna
larva, Chapter 51, Verse 12).
(73) Defeated Duryodhana again. (Karna Parva, Chapter 61, Verse 53).
(74) Taking upon himself all the responsibilities of the —
war deputed Arjuna to guard Dharmaputra. (Karna
parva, Chapter 65, verse 10).
(75) Defeated Sakuni. (Karna Parva, 81,
Verse 24),
(76) Fought fiercely with Duryodhana. (Karna Parva,
Chapter 82 and 83).
(77) Killed Dussasana in accordance with his (Bhima’s)
old pledge and drank the blood from his (Dugsasana’s)
chest. (Karna Parva, Chapter 83, Verse 28). ;
( 78) Killed ten sons of Dhrtarastra, viz. Nisangi, Kavacl,
Pasi, Dandadhara, Dhanurgraha, Alolupa, Sala, Sandha
(Satyasandha) Vatavega and Suvarcas. (Karna Parva,
Chapter 84, Verse 2).
(79) Next, single-handed Bhima killed 25000 infantry
men. (Karna Parva, Chapter 93, Verse 28).
(80) Defeated Krtavarma (Salya larva, Chapter 11;
Verse 45),
(81) Did club-fight with Salya. (Salya Parva, Chaptet
12, Verse 12),
(82) Defeated Duryodhana again. (Salya Parva, Chapter 16, Verse 42).
(83) Killed the charioteer and horses of Salya. (Saly4
tarva, Chapter 17, Verse 27). d
(84) Killed another 25,000 infantry men, single-hande®
(Salya Parva, Chapter 19, Verse 49).
85) Killed 11 sons of Dhrtarastra, viz. Durmarsa??
rutanta (Citranga) Jaitra, Bhiribala (Bhimaba’é/
Ravi, Jayatsena, Sujata, Durvisaha (Durvisaha). ae
vimocana, Duspradharsa (Duspradharsana) and Sru
tarva.
(86) After that killed Sudar‘ana, son of Dhrtarastl’
(Salya Parva, Chapter 27, Verse 49), 2
(87) In the club fight that ensued between Duryodhalt
and Bhima, Duryodhana’s thigh was broken by +
blows with Bhima’s club. (Salya Parva, Chapter ~”’
Verse 47). . a
(88)Then Bhima kicked Duryodhana on the he
(Salya Parva, Chapter 59, Verse 4). —
(89) Bhima rushed forward to get hold of Asvattham"
who was then sitting with Vyasa on the Ganga ag 3,
Bhima challenged him. (Sauptika Parva, Chaptet
Verse 16). _
(90) Consoled Paficali by giving to her Agvattha™
gem. (Sauptika Parva, Chapter 16, Verse 26). hap’
or ik, apologised to Gandhari. (Stri Parva, ©
(92) Bhima made Yudhisthira to retract from his !
tion to renounce the world and become a Sanvy
(Santi Parva, Chapter 19), |
(93) Yudhisthira installed Bhima, as crown
(Santi Parva, Chapter 41, Verse 9).
(94) Yudhisthira settled Bhima down in the pala?
Duryodhana killed in war. (Santi Parva, Chap
Verse 6), , were
(95) As directed by Vyasa, Nakula and Sahadev4 dh
put in-charge of protecting the Kingdom. (Asvam
Chapter
a’s
nie?”
asite
prince?
f
O
“ahs
Parva, Chapter 72, Verse 19). mins
(96)It was Bhima who, along with the 4bis
brah
measured the yajiabhimi, in connection with Yu

BHIMA II.
BHIMA II
thira’s Agvamedhayajiia. (Asvamedha Parva, Chapter
(97) During one of those days Babhruvahana visited
Bhima, who sent the former back loaded with money
os foodgrains. (ASvamedha Parva, Chapter 88, Verse
(98) It was Bhima who held the umbrella to Sri Krsna in
the chariot on his way back from the company of the
Pandavas to Dvaraka. (Agvamedha Parva, Southern
Text, Chapter 92).
(99) Bhima opposed Dhrtarastra’s demand for money to
perform the rituals of those who had died in war. (Asramavasika Parva, Chapter 11, Verse 7).
(100) After Dhrtarastra, Kunti and Gandhari retired into
the forest Bhima visited them once. (Asramavasika
Parva, Chapter 23). .
8) Bhima’s conceit put down. While, after the great war,
the Pandavas and Sri Krsna were discussing several
matters all the Pandavas except Bhima said they owed
their success in war to Krsna. But, Bhima, in all haughtiness claimed the credit for victory to his personal ae
With the object of putting down this conceit on ne oe
of Bhima, Sri Krsna, with Bhima seated along ~ ee
on Garuda, set out on a journey to the sout are
crossing the sea and Mount Subela Sri Krsna, Ps foie
out to Bhima a lake twelve yojanas wide es - Gin
near Lanka, asked him to find out the ae oe ed
and return with the information. Though Bhima
some distance he could not find ‘oil i a. aid
that, all the warriors there jointly attacke he an
? ter the attack her
findi i lf impotent to coun : :
bauky rene or refuge. Then Sri pce
ring clipped and threw away the lake, a ae ‘illed
as follows :—‘‘This is the skull of Kum a. Ste al
by Sri Rama in the Rama-Ravana war. e
geyas .
s called ‘Sarogeyas .
who attacked you are the nae own Bhima’s conceit,
Th ds of the lord put nas 0.66).
and he apologised to Krsna. (Sk anna Bre en iP
9) Death. After entrusting matters of ee ae poe nae
the country to Pariksit the Panga he front, they
great journey. Yudhisthira ape é of their journey
started for Kaildsa. During the cou” a one after the
Pajicali, Sahadeva, Nakula and sy udhisthira the
Other fell down dead. Bhima aske suitable answers
reason for the deaths and he was a about to fall
by the latter. At last when Bhima "0 i
down and die he.asked the tr ting was the reason.
thira replied that Bhima’s poling ore Heaven he
iveceandi when Dharmaputra seats there. (See
found his brothers had already the med
Arjuna, Para Sh ie, - had a son na
10) Other deformation. Si ‘eat Chapter 99, Verse
Sutasoma by Pafical. ;
75). led Sarvaga was born to Bhims ae
a : is
aol longi of the King of Kas | eet
Chapter 95, Verse ae are found used hang tare
Tia ae for Bhima. - “Ys allava, Bhimamaja Anan oalh, Arjunaparva) Kusasardila, Marudhanva Jaya, Kauntey@, ka Pavanatmaja, © Sa
titmaja Maruti, Pandava, Pa gamiranasuta, ay
bhafijanasuta, Raksasakanl? a
putra, Vayusuta, Vrkodar ” nakes men
The Mahabharata ™
A "wt
BHIMA III.
BHIMA VII.
BHIMA VIII.
BHIMA JX
Bhima, son of King Pariksit and brother of Janamejaya.
(Adi Parva, Chapter 3, Verse 1). It was this Bhima who,
at the yajfia conducted at Kuruksetra attacked, without
reason, the son of Sarama, a dog of the Devas.
A Deva gandharva delivered by Muni,
the wife of Kagyapa prajapati. (Adi Parva, Chapter
69, Verse 42). He took part in the birthday celebrations
of Arjuna. (Adi parva, Chapter 122, Verse 55).
BHIMA IV. Yet another Bhima, grandson of King
Aviksit of the Lunar dynasty and son of Pariksit is
mentioned in Chapters 94 and 95 of Adi Parva. His
mother was Suyasa. He married Kumari, daughter of
Kekaya Raja and they had a son called Pratigravas.
BHIMA V._ Father of Divodasa, king of Kasi. (Udyogaparva, Chapter 117, Verse 1).
BHIMA VI. A Sidra who attained Svarga as on his head
fell water with which the feet of a brahmin were washed.
The following story about him occurs on page 619 of
the Padmapurana.
In the dvapara yuga there lived a Sidra called Bhima,
who engaged himself in the profession of Vaisyas. An
outcaste from practices pertaining to Sidras he enjoyed
life with a Vaisya woman. He was a terrible fellow, who
had killed many brahmins, and also enjoyed the wives
of many elderly people including his teachers. He was
a robber as well. Once he went to a brahmin house,
and with the object of robbing his wealth spoke to him
in a pathetic tone as follows:—‘‘Respected sire, you
will please listen to my grievance. You appear to be kindhearted. Please give me some rice, or else I will die this
very moment.”
Brahmin:—“‘Oh hungry guest ! There is no one here
to cook food. I shall give you daily some rice, which
you may cook yourself. I have neither father, mother,
son, brothers, wife nor any other relatives. All of them
are dead and gone. The unfortunate fellow that I am,
I am staying here alone. No servants or others here.”
Bhima:—*"Oh revered brahmin! I too am a lonely
person. I shall live here for ever serving you. I am a
Sidra.”
These words of Bhima pleased the brahmin so much that
he cooked some food quickly and served the Sidra with
it. He stayed with the brahmin from that day onwards.
His idea was to rob the brahmin of his wealth at some
convenient time and get away. But, since he used to
pour on his head everyday the water with which the
brahmin’s feet were washed he got redemption from all
his sins.
One night a thief got into the brahmin’s room to steal his
earnings. Seeing the thief Bhima rushed at him to give
him a-good thrashing. But, the thief, in the twinkling
of an eye, cut off Bhima’s head and escaped from the
scene. At once there came down the attendants of Lord
Visnu to lead Bhima to Vaikuntha. A divine chariot
drawn by Rajahamsas (swans) also came down. Bhima
got into the chariot and reached the abode of Visnu.
Father of Damayanti. (See Damayanti).
One of the hundred sons of Dhrtarastra.
He was killed by Bhima, one of the Pandavas. (Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 64, Verse 86).
BHIMA IX. Verse 17, Chapter 94 of Adi Parva, Mentions
about one Bhima born to King [lin of his wife Rathandhari. This Bhima had four brothers, viz., Dusyanta
Sara, Pravasu and Vasu.

BHIMA X
BHIMA X. One of the five attendants given to Subrahmanya by the Deva called Atma. Parigha, Vata,
Dahati and Dahana were the other four. (Salya Parva,
Chapter 45, Verse 34).
BHIMA XI. A king of ancient time. He sits in yama’s
assembly worshipping yama. There are hundred kings
in yama’s assembly, having the name Bhima. (Sabha
Parva, Chapter 8, Verse 24). It is on account of the
penance of the hundred Bhimas that the difficulties
of people are lifted.(Wana Parva, Chapter 3, Verse 11).
These one hundred persons were kings in ancient days.
Owing to several adversities they left their kingdoms
for the assembly of yama. (Santi Parva, Chapter 227,
Verse 49).
BHIMA XII. A yadava king, the father of Andhaka.
This Bhima was a contemporary of Sri Rama. He conquered Madhurapuri founded by Satrughna after killing
the Daitya called Madhu.
BHIMA XIII. A friend of Ravana, king of Lanka. It
was on the top of Bhima’s house that Hanimdan rested
for the first time after arriving at Lanka. (Valmiki
Ramayana, Sundara Kanda, Canto 6).
BHIMABALAI. (BHURIBALA). One of the hundred
sons of Dhrtarastra killed by Bhima. (Salya Parva,
Chapter 26, Verse 14),
BHIMABALA II. One of the five Vinayakas born from
the asura called Paficajanya. These Vinayakas cause
difficulties and obstructions to the yajiias of Devatas.
(Vana Parva, Chapter 221, Verse 11).
BHIMABHATA. A gandharva. The following story has
reference to his past life.
On the death of Srutadhara, king of Ekalavyanagara the
younger of his two sons, Satyadhara drove out of the
kingdom the elder brother, Siladhara. Thus ousted from
his kingdom Siladhara did due penance and got from
Siva the boon that Satyadhara be killed while he himself be made a gandharva. Owing to the blessine of
Siva Satyadhara died, and he was born again as Sarna tA
bhata, son of Ugrabhata, King of Radhanagara, and
Siladhara was born as Bhimabhata, brother of Samarabhata. On the death of Ugrabhata Bhimabhata, after
killing Samarabhata ascended the throne. And, on one of
those days, he was transformed into a wild elephant as
the result of the curse of a muni. But, he iremembered
his previous existence, and, though turned into elephant
could speak like men. Bhimabhata became a gandharva
because he received and treated well once a. traveller
and related to him his (Bhimabhata’s) own story
Kathasaritsagara Sasamkavat*larhbaka).
BHIMAJANU. A king in ancient India. He remained in
the assembly of yama serving the latter, (Sabha Parva
Chapter 8, Verse 21). '
BHIMAKSA. A Raksasa, who used to attack the kingdoms of Kasi and Kosala often. Finally the above kings
jointly encountered him. He was killed by King Haryasvan. (Brahmanda Purana).
BHIMARATHA I. A king of the family of Vigvamitra.
His father was Ketuman and Divodasa his son. (Bhagavata, Navama Skandha).
BHIMARATHA II. One of the hundred sons of Dhrtarastra killed in the war by Bhima. (Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 64, Verse 36).
BHIMARATHA III. A hero who fought on the Kaurava
side. It was this Bhimaratha who stood at the centre of
the garuda vyiha (army formation in the form of the
134 BHISMA
bird garuda, Kite) set up by Drona. (Drona Parva,
Chapter 20, Verse 12). He killed Salva, the Mleccha
king and a supporter of the Pandavas. (Drona Parva,
Chapter 25, Verse 26). When Yudhisthira was king at
Indraprastha Bhimaratha sat in Pandava assembly as a
comrade of the Pandavas. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 4,
Verse 26). _
BHIMARATHI (BHIMA). Ariver in the South extolled
in the puranas. Sins of those who bathe in this river will
vanish. On its shore is a sacred place called Pandharapura. (Vana Parva, Chapter 88, Bhisma Parva, Chapter 2).
ernemiana One of the hundred sons of Dhrtarastra.
(Adi Parva, Chapter 67, Verse 99).
BHIMAVEGA. One of the hundred sons of Dhrtarastra.
(Adi Parva, Chapter 67, Verse 99).
BHIRU. A son born to Manibhadra and his wife Punyajani.
BHISANA. Son of Baka. From the day his father was
killed by Bhima Bhisana was impatiently waiting for
revenge. When the Pandavas began the Asvamedha
yajna he obstructed it at a place near Ekacakra. Arjuna
fought and killed him. (Jaimini Asvamedha Parva,
Chapter 22).
BHISMA.
1) Genealogy. From Visnu were descended in the following order-—Brahma-Atri-Candra-Budha - Puriravas ~
Ayus - Nahusa- Yayati - Paru - Janamejaya - PracinvaPravira - Namasyu - Vitabhaya - Sundu - Bahuvidha -
Samyati - Rahovadi - Raudrasva - Matinara - Santurodha-Dusyanta-Bharata-Suhotra-Suhota -Gala-Gardda
-Suketu-Brhatksetra-Hasti - Ajamidha - Rksa - Samva"
rana - Kuru- Jahnu-Suratha-Viddaratha - Sarvabhaum@
Jayatsena-Ravyaya-Bhavuka-Cakroddhata - Devatith! ~
Rksa - Bhima-Pratipa-Santanu-Bhisma.
2) Birth and Boyhood. Bhisma’s name in his boyhood w°
Devavrata. He was the eighth son of Santanu, a kin&
of the lunar dynasty and Gangadevi. This boy was t?”
human embodiment of Dyau, one of the Astavasu®:
Santanu, his father was the re-birth of another ‘on -
‘Mahabhiseka. The story concerning this, as given ”
the Mahabharata is as follows:—
King Mahabhiseka after his death, attained V1 el
Once he went to visit Brahma at Satyaloka. At ae
time Gangadevi was also present in Brahma’s assem Yi
In that pious atmosphere, a gentle breeze began to b at
and Gangadevi’s clothes were slightly deranged. Ju
at that moment, Mahabhiseka took a stealthy planed
her and she also returned that glance. This was 20".
by Brahma who turned both of them into human are
by a curse. Gangadevi begged pardon and brad’,
lifted the curse and blessed her that the Astavasus wi ee
come to the earth to be born as her sons and that ats at
wards she could come back to Heaven. After -
Gangadevi was born as a mortal woman in the we ne
under the name Ganga and she spent her days ill
forests near the Ganga river valleys. King
In those days the ruler of the Lunar dynasty was 4™ pe
named Pratipa. Having no children, he went vnere”
bank of the river Ganga and performed tapas ; eal”
Gangadevi who was moving about in the forests Phe
by, saw the King deeply absorbed in his tapa%- "ed
snulokaapproached him and sat on his right thigh. She W*" pat
the King to be her husband. He explained to new law
the right thigh is the proper seat of a daughter

had the smell of fish she got !
her the perfume of mus
return to her whenever she W!
Virgin,
live with him. It is at this stag
BHISMA
and so she would become his son’s wife in due course.
In course of time, Pratipa had a son, Santanu, born
to him. When Santanu grew up into a young man, one
day he went fora hunt to the Ganga-valley and there he
met Gangadevi. He fell in love with her at first sight
and courted her. Gangadevi agreed to become his _ wife
on condition that he should not say anything to displease
her and ifhe violated that condition she would leave him.
The king accepted the condition and they became man
and wife.
At about that time, the wife of Dyo, one of the Astavasus, happened to see the sacrificial cow of the sage
Vasistha and wished to have it. She expressed her
desire to her husband, Dyo. Dyo, with the other seven
vasus went and took away by force, Vasistha’s cow.
Vasistha in his anger cursed the Astavasus to be born as
mortals. They repented and begged pardon from
Vasistha. The sage told them that all of them would
be born as the sons of Gangadevi and all except Dyo,
who actually stole the cow, would return to Heaven
at the time of birth itself. As for Dyo, he would continue
to live in the world for a long time, as an adventurous
hero. . |
Gangadevi became pregnant and gave birth 2 fe ae
child. She carried the child to the river ag ,
threw it into the river. Santanu who followed her up
to the river bank, did not say anything ,against her,
reme ing his promise.
Seven childien seve bi to her and she peri nha
into the river in this way. When Ce Re allow
eighth child, Santanu insisted that he wee ‘Ae he had
her to throw away that child into ys N ede left the
violated the condition, the angry a 4 and
palace with her child. She named 1 Vasistha and
brought him up in the forest. The sage : ee
Gangadevi taught him ab aa fie same forest
Thirtytwo years later, the king went be stopping the
for hunting. He saw 4 See canted fr ibe boy,
dwt oh the sivee Ganga. Getting intereste
that time he had
the King approached him. on) oy Gangadevi to give
King prayed. fi
paappeared "She appeared with the child ore gi
handing over the child to a child. (M.B. Adi
manga to the abo, nae eS 4
Parva, Chapters 99- yas anointed, as
’ ¥ vrata Vv
ee Ei King Santanu reached the
forest —. the Ganga ‘ae eo of the forest fh ah
ee ane ie filling the air 1} the . a
he felt the perfume 0 He we
He wondered from where 1° © e of this smell until
1 tryi d out the soure Gshermatl
send Sage oi See os robe her that
had a daughter named Satyavan around. ‘The king
the fragrance of musk spread es e asked the fisherman
fell in love with her at first En. But the brave fishcrto give the girl in marriage to
. “teMatsyagandhi.
3 a8 e was
1, Satyavati’s original nam*,
et into Ne", he create
Once the sage Parasara banpenes oe this mystic oe hill imme
ins .. n. i
a result of it the child Krsna (W254 his presence: Although a
ult of it the c rst ‘shed for nat 3 usual, Satya
ec was attrac te
: ‘ ined 4
The whole episode Ore tat Santanu
IEE Oe
“1. The fisherman got he
ly inl
he eae her boat and he fell og : nid
d by the pe
BHISMA
man did not yield to the king’s demand immediately.
Fe laid down several conditions, one of which was that
Satyavati’s sons should succeed to the throne of Santanu.
The king was in a fix. Devavrata was the eldest son and
heir-apparent. lo deny kingship to his sons would be
highly improper. Unable to find a solution to this difhcult problem, the king returned to the palace, much
depressed and gloomy. There he avoided all company
and took to his bed, passing his time in sadness and
solitude. |
When Devavrata knew about his father’s condition. he
called the Ministers and asked them about it. They
told him everything in details. At once, without informing even his father, Devavrata went to the fisherman’s
cottage on the bank of the river Ganga and begged for
Satyavati on behalf of his father. The fisherman repeated
his former condition. Devavrata agreed that Satyavati’s son shall be given the right of Kingship. The
fisherman pointed out that disputes were likely to arise
between Devavrata’s sons and Satyavati’s children regvarding the right of succession to the throne. At anée
Devavrata stood up and made a_ solemn pledge that he
would remain a bachelor for life. The fisherman gave
Satyavati to Devavrata to be taken to the King. Devavrata took her to the palace and presented her to his
father. The King, when he came to know of the part
played by his son in the matter, rose from his bed and
embraced Devavrata with tears of joy and gratitude.
The gods showered flowers on the scene. Because he had
taken such a solemn oath, it was declared that henceforth he would be known by the name “BHISMA”’.
The loving father Santanu also gave him a boon that
Bhisma would die only when he wished. (M.B., Adi
Parva, Chapter 100).
4) Affacrs of the Kingdom in crisis. Two sons named
Vicitravirya and Citrangada were born to Satyavati by
Santanu, who died shortly afterwards. As desired by
Satyavati, Bhisma crowned the boy Citrangada as king.
Although Citrangada’s reign was a prosperous one, it
could not last long. Once a Gandharva named Citranada attacked him at Kuruksetra and after a battle
which lasted for three years, the Gandharva Citrangada
killed the King Citrangada. It was Bhisma who performed the funeral rites of the King Citrangada. After
that Vicitravirya was crowned King.
It was at that time that the Svayamvara of the three
daughters of the King of Kasi, Amba, Ambika and
Ambalika, was held. Bhisma thought that it would be
good if Vicitravirya married them. So Bhisma attended
that function. The presence of Bhisma who was an old
man, at the Svayarhvara, frightened the girls. The other
kings who were present, stopped him from entering
the place, since he had taken an oath to remain a lifelong bachelor. T’he old Bhisma stood up and spoke at
‘ength about the eight different forms of marriage and
after defeating several kings like Salva, he seized the
three daughters of the King of Kasi and took them with
r from the stomach ofa fish. (See the word Adrika). Since she
- > She used to assist a fisherman in his work asa ferryman in the river Ganga,
ove with her. The sage removed thesmell of fish from herand gave
t atnoon and under its cover, he had a sexualunion withher. As
diately left the mother to perform tapas in the forest after promising to
e gave birth to a child, Parasara blessed that she would again remain a
ti returned to the fisherman’s cottage in the evening and continued to
rfume of musk and came to the cottage where he met Satyavati,

Se
BHISMA
him in his chariot to Hastinapura. Preparations were
made for the marriage of Vicitravirya with the three
princesses. Then Amba approached Bhisma and told
him that she had already dedicated her heart to the king
of Salva. Bhisma generously allowed her to return home.
(For the rest of Amba’s story, see the word “‘Amha’’.
Vicitravirya married Ambika and Ambalika. He ruled
over the country for seven years at the end of which he
died of consumption. The dynasty faced a crisis, as
there was no one to succeed him. Satyavati approached
Bhisma with a suggestion to beget children by Vicitravirya’s wife. But Bhisma stood firmly on his solemn oath
to continue as a life-long bachelor. (M.B. Adi Parva,
5) Bhisma’s Wire Pulling. After that Satyavati summoned Vyasa to Hastinapura and sons were born
to Ambika, Ambalika and their maid by him. Ambika
gave birth to Dhrtardstra, Ambalika gave birth to
Pandu and the maid gave birth to Vidura. They grew
up and Dhrtarastra married Gandhari and Pandu
married Kunti and Madri. Duryodhana and his brothers
were born to Dhrtardstra, while the Pandavas were
born to Pandu. Pandu died at the Satasrnga vana and
Madri observed sati by jumping into his funeral pyre
and burning herself alive. After that, the Kauravas
and Pandavas who lived in the palace at Hastinapura,
split up into two blocs. When the palace made of lac
was destroyed by fire, the Pandavas went into the forest
and came back to the country after their marriage with
Paficali. They ruled over the country with Indraprastha
as their capital. In the gambling contest between
Dharmaputra and Duryodhana, the Pandavas lost their
kingdom and everything and so they went to the forest
again. They lived for twelve years in the forest and spent
one year incognito in the palace of the King of Virata.
At that time the Pandavas reappeared in the battle
which took place as a result of the theft of King Virata’s
cows by the Kauravas. Duryodhana asserted that he
would not give so much land to the Pandavas as to put
a dot with a needle. With the failure of Sri Krsna’s
mediation, the Kauravas and Pandavas encamped on
the opposite sides of the field of Kuruksetra, preparing
for a grim battle.
Bhisma was the chief protagonist in all these events
relating to the Kauravas and Pandavas. At every stage
in the story we see Bhisma’s influence. The main events
in which this superman who used to give shelter to
Kauravas and Pandavas alike, played a decisive role
are given below:—
(1) Bhisma sent a messenger to Subala, king of Gandhara, to ask for the hand of Gandhari, to be married to
en (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 109, Verse
(2) He went to the palace of Salya, king of Madra and
secured Madri to be married to Pandu. (M.B. Adi Parva,
Chapter 112).
(3) He brought about the marriage between Vidura and
the daughter of Devaka. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter
(4) The Maharsis who were the inhabitants of Satasrnga
told Bhisma about the birth of the Pandavas. (M.B.
Adi Parva, Chapter 125, Verse 22).
(5) Bhisma offered ‘Jalafijali? (worship with holy water)
to Pandu at his death. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 126,
Verse 27),
BHISMA
(6) He performed the death anniversary of Pandu.
(M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 127, Verse 1).
(7)He engaged Dronacarya to teach archery to the
princes. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 130, Verse 77).
(8) He burst into tears and wept bitterly on hearing that
Pandavas were burnt to death in the palace of lac and
was about to offer them ‘Jalafijali’. Just then, Vidura
came to him and secretly informed him that the Pandavas
were not dead. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 149, Daksinatya Patha).
(9) He advised Duryodhana to give half the kingdom to
the Pandavas. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 202).
(10)He had taken part in Dharmaputra’s Rajasiya
Yajfia. Dharmaputra had entrusted to Bhisma, the
arrangements for that yajfia. (M.B. Sabha Parva,
Chapter 35, Verse 6).
(11) He advised Yudhisthira to give the highest place of
honour in that yajfia to Sri Krina. (M.B. Sabha Farva;
Chapter 36, Verse 28).
$3) Bhisma ridiculed Sigupala (Sabha Tarva, Chapter
(13) Sigupala insulted Bhisma. (Sabha Parva, Chaptet
(14) Bhisma stopped Bhima who rushed out to Kill
Sisupala. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 42, Verse 13).
(15) It was Bhisma who narrated the life story of Sigupala. (Sabha Farya, Chapter 43).
(16)In the battle against Sifupala, Bhisma selected
powerful Kings to help Sri Krsna. (Sabha Parv4
Chapter 44, Verse 41).
(17)Once Bhisma asked the sage Pulastya about the
value and importance of pilgrimage. (Vana [arv®
Chapter 82, Verse 4).
(18) Bhisma advised Duryodhana to be on friend’
terms with the Pandavas. (Vana Parva, Chapter ,
Verse 4). scat
(19) In the battle which was fought by Kauravas again®
King Virata, Bhisma arranged the regiments in ord© -
after sending Duryodhana to Hastinapura. (viras
Parva, Chapter 52, Verse 16). '
(20) A grim fight took place between Arjuna who ee
to help the Virata army and Bhisma. At last, it was “
charioteer who removed Bhisma, (who had fallen ¢° d
unconscious) from the battlefield. (Virata Party’
Chapter 64). aght
(21) When the Kauravas were contemplating to eit
against the Pandavas who had returned after cone
incognito life, Bhisma ridiculed Karna and prais
Arjuna. (Udyoga Parva, Chapter 21, Verse 16). he
(22) At that time, he explained to Duryodhana; ©
greatness of Sri Krsna and Arjuna. (Udyoga Pa
Chapter 49, verse 2). feet
(23) Duryodhana proposed to bind the hands and “i
of Sri Krsna who was expected to come as the env els
the Pandavas. Hearing this, Bhisma in great ee
walked out of the gouncil hall. (Udyoga Parva, ©
ter 8B, Verse 19).” 9 a a
(24) Bhigma strongly advised Duryodhana to ma a
treaty of peace with the Pandavas. (Udyoga Ze
Chapter 125, Verse 2). :
(25) He declared that he would not kill the P4?
but would kill 10,000 soldiers of the Pandavas ev
Udyoga’Parva, Chapter 156, Verse 21).
dav?°
yay

BHISMA
(26) As desired by Duryodhana, Bhisma declared the
Rathis and Maharathis who belonged to the Kaurava
side. (Udyoga Parva, Chapters 165-168).
(27) Bhisma described all the Maharathis of the Pandava
side to Duryodhana. (Udyoga Parva, Chapters 169-
(28)Bhisma told Duryodhana that Sikhandi and the
Pandavas should not be killed. (Udyoga Parva, Chapter
(29) Bhisma offered pija to Paragurama. (Udyoga Parva,
Chapter 123, Verse 27).
(30) Amba who was allowed by Bhisma to marry her
lover, King Salva, was rejected by him and returned
to Bhisma again. But he did not accept her. Although
Paragurama pleaded with him on behalf of Amba,
Bhisma did not marry her. (Udyoga Parva, Chapter
(31) In connection with Amba’s case, a duel was foug t
on the field of Kuruksetra between Bhisma and Parasurama. Bhisma started the duel after asking for the
permission of Parasurama. Pleased with the fight, i
Vasus presented to Bhisma, the Prasvapana arrow. | ut
he did not use that arrow against Parasurama, since
the gods and Narada prevented him from gate au
At the request of the gods, pitrs and Gang s as) :
Stopped the fight and prostrated at the feet of Pa
rama. (Udyoga Parva, Chapters 178-185). ihetbi
(32) Bhisma narrated to Duryodhana the story aaclen
who was re-born as Sikhandi. (Udyoga parva, Pp
188-192), hat he had the
33) Bhi himself told Duryodhana tha
ieee sh'to egurihilate ‘ the Pandavas. (Udyoga Parva,
Chapter 193, Verse 14). le, Yudhisthira
ae nels ie a er a “ls = be pe to start it.
Went to Bhisma and asked for Ais Per ced him.
hisma granted him permission 44)
gyrisma Parva, ce hs Verse :
Bhisma in Bharata £uaana. duel took place bet-
(1) On the first day es a Paiva Chapter 45,
von Bhisma and Arjuna. (Bhi ;
. ' of king
(2) Tn a battle Bhisma killed Bey ae tl ). .
Viréta, (Bhisma Parva, Sehr with Arjuna. (Bhisma
(3) There was again a terrible fight w
Parva, Chapter 52). __, (Bhisma Parva,
(4) Satyaki killed Bhismas © ,
Chapter 64, Verse Pa f the Kauravas was being
(5) Seeing that the army ©) lent strokes of Arjuné
. irections by the vie © Bhisma
scattered in all directions DY jay’s battle. (Bhis
Bhisma ordered to stop the second day
Parva, Chapter 55, Verse 42). for the fight. (Bhisma
(6) Bhigma_ challenged — eo
Parva, Chapter 59, Verse 96) a
(7) Fought again with Arjuna. (P ee
60, Verse 25). acary2 and Duryodhana
(8) Bhisma gave or ders to D oe anger: (Bhisma Parva,
to save Bhagadatta who fell 19
C } 64 ‘ ° nd Krsna
hapter 64, verse what Arjuna 4 rene
(9) Bhisma told Duryodhana and Narayana. (Bhism
harioteer.
Parva, Chapter
were the incarnations of Nara ia
Parva, Chapter's mune greatness of —
(10) Bhisma_ praise 68,
Stotea, (Bhisma Parva, One forward to oppose him,
(11) Seeing Sikhandi tus
EE SE PS Tg a A A ae
BHISMA
Bhisma put an end to the battle. (Bhisma Parva, Chap- ©
ter 69, Verse 29),
(12)A terrible fight took place between Bhisma and
Bhimasena. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 70).
(13) There was again a fight with Arjuna. (Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 71).
(14) Bhisma wounded Bhimasena and defeated Satyaki.
(Bhisma Parva, Chapter 71, Verse 21).
(15)Bhisma wounded King Virata. (Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 73, Verse 2).
(16) Duryodhana who was frightened by Bhimasena’s
deeds of valour, was encouraged by Bhisma. (Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 80, Verse 8)... 3
(17) He deprived Dharmaputra of his chariot. (Bhisma
parva, Chapter 86, Verse 11).
(18)When Bhimasena killed Bhisma’s charioteer, the
horses turned round and ran away, dragging the chariot
with them. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 88, Verse 12).
(19) He ordered Bhagadatta to fight with Ghatotkaca.
(Bhisma Parva, Chapter 95, Verse 17).
(20) He swore that all except Sikhandi would be killed.
(Bhisma Parva, Chapter 98, Verse 4).
(21)Satyaki and Bhisma fought again.(Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 104, Verse 29).
(22) Bhisma killed 14,000 Maharathis who belonged to
the Cedi, Kasi and Karitsa countries. (Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 106, Verse 18).
(23) Bhisma explained to Dharmaputra, the method by
which he (Bhisma) could be killed. (Bhisma parva,
Chapter 107, verse 76). |
(24) He declared that he would not fight with Sikhandi,
who was neither man nor woman. (Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 108, Verse 43).
25) He allowed Yudhisthira to launch an attack on
himself (Bhisma). (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 115, Verse
(36) Bhisma, shot by Arjuna’s arrow, fell down unconscious. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 117, Verse 64).
97)Bhisma who recovered and _ rose again, killed
atanika, brother of King Virata. (Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 118, Verse 27).
(28) Bhisma routed the Pandava army most disastrously.
(Bhisma Parva, Chapters 118, 119).
(29) He considered the misery of life and the sweetness
of death, (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 119, Verse 34).
30) Bhisma who was wounded by Arjuna’s arrows,
described to Duséasana, the heroism of Arjuna. (Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 119, Verse 56).
(31) Arjuna shot his arrow at Bhisma and made him fall
down from his chariot. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 119,
Verse 87).
(32) He told Hamsa that he would remain alive until the
sun came to Uttarayana. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 119,
Verse 104).
(33) Bhisma who fell and lay on a bed of arrows begged
for a pillow to the Kings. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 120,
Verse 34). |
(34) When he found that they were not paying any heed
to his entreaties, he asked for a pillow toArjuna. (Bhisma
Parva, Chapter, 120, Verse 28).
(35) He exhorted the Kings to put an end to the battle.
(Bhisma Parva, Chapter 120, Verse 51).
(36) Bhisma begged for water to Arjuna. (Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 121, Verse 18).

BHISMAKA
(37) He advised Duryodhana to end the battle. (Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 121, Verse 38).
(38) As Karna wished for ‘Virasvarga’ (Heaven for the
valiant) Bhisma permitted him to fight. (Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 122, verse 34).
(39) Vyasa sent Dharmaputra to Bhisma to learn the
mysteries of ““Dharma”’ from Bhisma before his (Bhisma’s) death. (Santi Parva, Chapter 37, Verse 5).
(40) Bhisma said that Sri Krsna was more competent
to give advice on “Dharma” than himself. (Santi
Parva,. Chapter 52, Verse 2).
(41) When the frightened and ashamed Yudhisthira
approached him, Bhisma cheered him up. (Santi Parva,
Chapter 14, Verse 19).
(42) Bhisma explained to Yudhisthira, with the help
of various examples and illustrations, “Rajya Dharma”’,
‘“‘Apaddharma’”’, and ‘‘Moksa Dharma”, (Santi Parva,
Chapter 56, to Anugdsana Parva, Chapter 165).
(43) After giving his advice to Yudhisthira Bhisma gave
him permission to enter Hastinapura. (Anusasana Parva,
Chapter 166, verse 50).
(44) He gave advice to Dhrtarastra regarding his duties
and responsibilities. (Anusasana Parva, Chapter 167,
Verse 30); .
(45) He asked for Sri Krsna’s permission to renounce his
body. (Anusasana Parva, Chapter 167, Verse 37).
(46) With Sri Krsna’s permission, Bhisma renounced
his body. (Anusasana Parva, Chapter 168, Verse 2).
(47) The Kauravas performed the funeral rites and Jalaiijali (purification by sprinkling water) of Bhisma (Anugasana Parva, Chapter 168, Verse 10).
(48) Gangadevi lamented that Sikhandi, who was neither
man nor woman, killed Bhisma. (Anugasana Parva,
(49) Vyasa and Sri Krsna told Gangadevi that Bhisma
died by Arjuna’s arrow. (Anusasana Parva, Chapter
(50) On a later occasion Vyasa invoked into the river
Ganga, those who died in the battle and among them
Bhisma was also present. (Asramavasika Parva, Chapter 3Y, verse 7).
(51) After his death, Bhisma remained in Heaven as
Dyau, one of the Astavasus. (Svargarohana Parva,
Chapter 5, Verse 11).
Other names of Bhisma. Apageya, Apagasuta, Bhagirathiputra, Bharata, Pitamaha, Bharatarsabha. Bharatasattama, Bhismaka, Santanava, Santanuputra, Santanusuta, Santanuja, Devavrata, Gangasuta, Gangeya,
Jahnaviputra, Kaurava, Kauravanandana, Kauravya
Kurusarddila, Kurugrestha, Kuridvaha, Kurukulagrestha, Kurukulodvaha, Kurumukhya, Kurunandana,
Kurupati, Nadija, Prapitamaha, Sagaragdsuta, Satyasandha, Taladhvaja, Vasu are other names of Bhisma
used in the Mahabharata.
BHISMAKA. King of Vidarbha and born in the Bhoja
dynasty, Bhismaka was the father of Rukmini, the wife
of Sri Krsna. He had five sons. A friend of Bhisma,
he conquered and ruled over a fourth of the world.
He defeated the Krathas, Pandyas and Kaisikas. He
was very much devoted to Jarasandha. (Sabha Parva,
Chapter 14, Verse 21). Sahadeva, who was on a triumphal tour in connection with the Pandava’s aSvamedha
yajiia fought and defeated Bhismaka at Bhojakatanagara.
Bhismaka was also called Hiranyaroma, (Sabha Parva,
BHOJA V
Chapter 31, Udyoga Parva, Chapter 158, Santi Parva,
Chapter 4).
BHISMA PARVA. A sub parva in the Mahabharata.
BHISMASVARGAROHANA PARVA. A sub division
of Anusasana Parva. .Chapters 167 and 168 of Anu§asana Parva are included in this.
BHISMAVADHA PARVA. A sub Parva of Bhisma Parva.
It comprises Chapters 43-122 of the Bhisma Parva.
BHOH. A term used for greeting elders. When saluting
an elderly person, the term “‘Bhoh”’ is used as a suffix to
his name.
For example:
‘“Somasgarma nama aham asmi bhoh”’
Bhoh gabdam_ kirtayedante
Svasya namnabhivadane /
Namnam svarupa bhavo hi
bhobhavo rsibhih smrtah //
(Manusmrti, Chapter 2, verse 124)
BHOGAVAN. A mountain—Mahabharata, Sabha Parva;
Chapter 30, Verse 12 says that in the course of his triumphant over-running of the eastern lands, Bhimasen@
conquered this mountain also.
BHOGAVATI I. Nagaloka or Patala. When Sugriv4
sent monkeys in all directions in search of Sita, he g@¥°
instructions to them to go and search for her in Bhog4”
vatipura. Valmiki Ramayana, 4lst Sarga, Kiskindh@-
kanda describes the place as the city infested with oat
pents (nagas) and guarded by them. Vasuki, King °
serpents, lives there.
BHOGAVATIII. Ganga of Patala. (M.B. Sabha Parv®
Daksinatya Patha, Chapter 38). ;
BHOGAVATI III. A place of holy bath at Pray48*
It is better known as Vasuki tirtha. Mahabharata i ape”
Parva, Chapter 85 says that a bath at this tirtha }
efficacious as an Agvamedha yajiia. 7,
BHOGAVATIIV. Another name for the river Sarasv@
(M. B. Vana Parva, Chapter 24, Verse 20). "
BHOGAVATI V. A female attendant of Subrahma?y
(M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Verse 8). artic
BHOJAI. A king of the ancient country named M2" 35,
kavata. In Mahabharata Adi Parva, Chapter “~~.
Verse 6, we see that this king had attended the Svay* ne
vara of Draupadi. He was slain by Abhimanyu 4° oy
battle of Kuruksetra. (M.B. Drona Parva, ap
48, Verse 8). gant!
BHOJA II. A king of Yaduvarhéa, Mahabharata, ©" ser
Parva, Chapter 166, Verse 79 says, that he died y0)8"
the stroke of the sword of Maharaja Usinara. B
varhsa takes its source from this king. skrit
BHOJA III. A king who became renowned as a san 054
scholar. It is believed that he lived from 1018 dit
A.D. His capital city was Dhara. Bhoja is CF. 16d,
with the authorship of two scholarly books ent ga’
‘“‘Sarasvatikanthabharana” and ‘“‘Srnigarapré “128
Of these, the first is a compendious volume in five set! ,
ters, dealing with the merits and -defects 0, Li ; tbe
figures of speech, etc. Bhoja observes that bes} = are
four styles(in poetry) laid down by Rudraka, erie
two more styles, namely, “Avanti” and "Mag" at”
BHOJA IV. A follower of Sudas. In Rgveda, 3 pho?
dala, 58th Anuvaka, 7th Sikta we find that ge pi?
had given help to sage Visvamitra in perform!'?
Asvamedha yaga. ae Bho
BHOJA V. A king of Kanyakubja. Once this king was o
met a woman with a fantastic shape. Her body

BHOJA
human shape while her face was that of a female deer.
When the king asked her about her strange shape, she
related her past history as follows:—‘“‘In my previous
birth, I was a female deer. On one occasion the whole
of my body except my face, was plunged in a river and
those parts of the body under the water were transformed
into human shape. From that day, I have been changed
into this form.’’
On hearing her story, the king took her to the holy river
and immersed her again in it. She was at once transformed into an actual woman and the king married her.
(Skanda Purana, 7-2-2). .
BHOJA. An exquisitely beautiful virgin of the country,
Sauvira. Mahabharata Drona Parva, Chapter 10,
Verse 33 says that Satyaki abducted her and made her
his wife.
BHOJA (M). (BHOJAVAMSA). This is a branch of
Yaduvaméa. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 217, Verse 18).
BHOJAKATA. The capital of Vidarbha. Once Sahadeva, one of the Pandavas conquered this city. It was
at this place that Sri Krsna defeated Rukmi, the ‘brother
of Rukmini at the time of Rukmini’s Svayamvara. The
original name of Bhojakata was ‘“‘Kundinapura .
(M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 3] and Udyoga Parva,
Chapt ao
BHOJIKA. A’ Brahmana. (See the word Pataliputra).
BHOJYA., A Bhoja princess. She was abducted by
J yamagha ‘of the Yadava — and married to his son,
Vida amagha).
aS Se I np ca
f eight kinds. O )
derided 7: ony ro babble, those who are obstinate,
‘ n hollow laughter, those
: indulge i
ogee, thie att - who pretend to be deaf,
wh b
aut — phe to assert their self-importance—these
of “‘Bhosas”’. :
BHRAMARA. . meee of the land of Sauvira. ue was
a comrade of Jayadratha. M.B. Vana P a mi ot
265 describes how Bhramara walked -— t = —
of Jayadratha with banner in his bap a Lon
abducted Paficali. Bhramat og = & Ron a Tan
BHRAMARI, A Raksast Wim ssura, she togk birth in
bhasura, As directed by Jathbhasura,
1] Ganega. One day she
mol el Kasyapa Og ee to Ganega. Ganesa
e pol
Fina me and fisted her to death. (Ganesa
BHRASAKARNA, “ a lee eS
ae aaa Ve Kalakamuks _——"
ksa "Dana Suparsva, Aa. Pusp 2 eat,
Bhessakarna and four daughters— event ,
Kaikasi and Kumbhinasi. (Uttara
BHRGU. of Brahma. He was the
1) General. A sage, the son f the Bhrgu vamsa
Ae Meme has been reputed
founder of Bhrgu varhsa. iS 7
are called ee abe Bare ere Reis of great sanctity
for many of its members
and grandeur.
2) Birth. oa The
“Utsamga ‘
Dakso ‘*rbgusthat eine
Pranadvasisthah sanJe™ ,, ;
Bhrgustvacah karatkratuD -
* Narada was born from Brahma’s lap;
rado jajne phuvah |
Daksa from hi
BHRGU
From these lines we see that Bhrgu was born from
Brahma’s skin (tvak). But in M.B. Adi Parva, 5th
Chapter, we find another version regarding his birth.
In that passage we read that Bhrgu was born from
‘“Vahni’’ (fire). In the light of these two statements, we
may examine Bhrgu’s birth.
Bhrgu had two incarnations. The first time he was born
from Brahma’s skin. In course of time, the sage Bhrgu
became famous. In the Daksayaga, this sage was present as one of the Rtviks (officiating priests), On that
occasion, Satidevi who was in rage and grief because
her husband (Siva) was not invited to the yaga, committed suicide by jumping into the sacrificial fire. Hearing
about this, Siva was enraged and the monster spirits who
emerged from his matted locks caught hold of the
Rtviks. Bhagavata caturtha skandha says that the Bhita
named Nandigvara, who emerged from Siva’s locks,
caught hold of Bhrgu and killed him.
Therefore the Bhrgu who was born from Brahma’s
skin must be considered as having died at Daksayaga.
Bhrgu was born again in Vaivasvata Manvantara.
This second birth was at the famous Brahmayajfia
of Varuna. He was reborn from fire, as Brahma’s son.
This child who was born from Brahma’s semen which
fell in the sacrificial fire, was brought up by Varuna
and his wife Carsani. Consequently Bhrgu is referred
to as ‘“‘Varunaputra” and “Carsaniputra’’ in some
Puranas. Since he was born at Varuna’s yaga he is
sometimes called ‘‘Varuni Bhrgu’’.
3) Bhrgu VamSa. (Bhrgu family). Each birth of Bhrgu
gave rise to a separate family. They are given below
separately:—First birth: Bhrgu and his wife Khyati
had a daughter Laksmi and three sons, Dhata, Vidhata
and Kavi. Mahameru’s daughters; Ayati and Niyati
became the wives of Dhata and Vidhata, respectively.
Two sons, Prana and Mrkandu were born to those two
couples. Markandeya was born to Mrkandu and from
Markandeya was born Vedasiras. Prana had a son,
Dyutiman who had a son Rajavan. From that Rajavan,
Bhrgu Varhéa multiplied. The family tree of this first
Bhrgu Varhéa is given below:—(See Visnu purana,
Part I, Chapter 10).
BRAHMA
Bhrgu) — Khyati
Dhata=Ayati Vidhata = Niyati Kavi Laksmi=Visnu
Prarta Mrkandu
Dyutiman Vinlaslien
Rajavan Vedagsiras
Second Birth: The second Bhrgu Vamsa is the family
which took its origin from the second birth of Bhrgu
as the son of Varuna. Varuna’s son, Bhrgu married
the woman, Puloma. They had six children who were,
Bhiita, Cyavana, Vajrasirsa, Suci, Sukra, and Savana.
By his first wife Bhita, he had his sons, ‘‘Ekadatéa
Rudras” (eleven Rudras) and “Rudra Parsadas”
s Amgustha, Vasistha from his Prana, Bhrgu from his skin and Kratu from his arm,
Se ae ? -
- 3 : = ——_— 2 Some ee eT les ee EL
E — oe

BHRGU
(Attendants of Rudra) and by his second wife Sarapa
he had a crore of Rudras. Cyavana had two wives,
Sukanya and Arusi. Aurva, a son was born to Arusi.
From Aurva was born Rcika, from Rcika Jamadagni
and from Jamadagni, Parasurama. Cyavana had a
- son, Pravati, by his wife Sukanya. Ruru or Sunaka was
the son of Pravati by the Apsara Ghrtaci. Ruru
and his wife Pramadvara had a son, Saunaka. Suka,
the son of Bhrgu had two sons, Canda and Alarka and
a daughter, Devayani. Thisis thesecond Bhrgu Vaméa.!
The family tree is given below.
BHRGU
Bhrgu set out to Devaloka. First he went to Brahma’s
assembly. There, in the presence of Brahma who was
seated in the midst of many Munis, Bhrgu took his seat
on a stool. Brahma was provoked by this act of disrespect. Bhrgu left the place without a word and went to
Siva’s place. Siva rose from his seat and approached
‘him to embrace and welcome him. Bhrgu, shrank back
saying, ““Do not touch me ?”? Siva became angry and
was about to hit him with his trident when Parvatl
stopped him. ¢
Bhrgu then turned his steps to Vaikuntha, the abode 0
Varuna = Carsani
Varuni Bhrgu—Puloma
Bhita =Bhita =Sarupa
| Sukanya—Cyavana—Arusi
Ekadasga
Rudras Koti Aurva
Rudra Rudras Ghrtaci—Pravati
Parsadas |
Pramadvara =Ruru
(Sunaka)
Saunaka
4) Bhrgu cursed Mahavisnu. Once a terrible war broke
out between Devas and Asuras. In that war, not only
were the Asuras defeated but many of them were also
killed. Diti, the mother of the Asuras, with tears in her
eyes, complained to Bhrgupati. Puloma, Mother of
Sukra, promised to find a remedy for this somehow.
She at once went to the forest and started a tapas for
the annihilation of the Devas. As the tapas gained
force, the Devas were alarmed and they sought the
protection of Mahavisnu. Mahavisnu used his
Vajrayudha (Vajra weapon) against Bhrgu’s wife,
Puloma. Under the stroke of Vajra she fell down, a
headless corpse. The enraged Maharsi Bhrgu_ cursed
Mahavisnu to be born as a mortal in this world and to
suffer the pangs of separation from his wife. When the
curse was pronounced against Mahavisnu, he directed
his weapon Cakra against the Maharsi. Bhrgu fled in
panic and at last begged pardon and prayed for shelter
to Mahavisnu himself in the ocean of milk. Visnu
withdrew his Cakra. Bhrgu himself restored Pulona
to life. To fulfil the condition of Bhrgu’s curse, Visnu
agreed to incarnate in the world as Sri Rama, the son
of Dagaratha and to experience the pain of separation
from his wife. (Uttara Ramayana),
5) Bhrgu kicked Visnu. Long ago all the Maharsis
joined together to perform a yaga on the bank of the
river Sarasvati. A dispute arose among them as to who
was the most mighty among the Trimiartis. Some of
them voted .or Brahma, others declared that Visnu
was more mighty than the other two, while a third
group stood for Siva’s superiority. They unanimously
elected Bhrgu to ascertain and find out the truth of
the matter.
Vajrasirsa Suci Sukra Savana.
Carlda Kuli Devayani
Rcika
a
Parasurama
Mahavisnu. There he saw Mahavisnu in a a
slumber. Seeing Mahavisnu whose task is the Pile
servation of the world, sleeping like an irrespons ou
person, Bhrgu gave him a kick on his breast. fore
who sprang up suddenly, saw Bhrgu standing “pat
him. He begged pardon of the sage. He declared en
he would carry Bhrgu’s footprint permanently ©? dischest as a sign of his repentance for having show? 05
respect to the Maharsi. This foot-print still aah
on Visnu’s chest and is known by the name “‘Sr WaT at
In this way, the Munis came to the conclusion ata»
Mahavisnu is the noblest of the Trimirtis. (Bhag@V
Dagama Skandha). t
cred SP?
6) The origin of Bhrgu Tirtha. There is a sa neva”
called, ‘““Bhrgu Tirtha’’ on the western side of wee
medha. It is here that Bhrgu once offered tapas t0 ame
Owing to the austerity of his tapas, his hair cetcly
matted and discoloured. His body was comp &jva
covered with earth heaped up by termites. Whey nim
was still not propitiated, Parvati interceded w!t
on behalf of Bhrgu, Siva agreed to bless BhrguSiva sent his bull to the place where Bhrgu was sit
The bull in the course of its gambols broke up 4? as
troyed the earthen covering on his body whic pase?
made by the termites. Bhrgu became angry and ¢ pul!
the bull. But he was stunned by the sight of ¢ © igh!
rising up to heaven through the air. A divine , pi?
spread there. Siva appeared before him and aske p acl
what boon he wanted. Bhrgu prayed that the ote
where he was doing tapas should become a 1° y Jace
iva granted his prayer and from that day, the
became famous under the name “Bhrgu Tir tha : Pr.
1. Devi Bhagavata, Saptama Skandha says that Bhrgu had married two daughters of Daksa. Mahabharata een
Chapter 85, Verse 127 says that Bhrgu had seven
e : ae
sons, namely Cyavana Vajragila, Suci, Aurva, Sukra, Varenya, and: aval

BHRGU
Brahma and other Devas and the Kinnaras still worship
this Bhrgu Tirtha. All sin is removed by a mere sight
of this sacred Tirtha. Those who bathe in the holy
water of this place attain Heaven and they will not be
born again. Even by hearing about the greatness and
glory of this Bhrgu Tirtha, one will be cleared of all
sins and find an easy way to Sivaloka. (Padma Purana,
Chapter 20).
7) Other details. (1) It was Bhrgu who gave the boon
for having progeny to Sagara, King of the solar dynasty.
Sagara, with his two wives, Kesini and Sumati, performed tapas at Bhrgu prasravana in the Himalayas.
After a hundred years, Bhrgu, who was pleased, blessed
the king that he would have numerous children by one
wife and one son who would be progenitor of a vaméa,
by the other wife. (Valmiki Ramayana, Balakanda,
38th Sarga). a
(2) Once cn some Munis went.to Dvaraka, Samba
and other Yadavas mocked them and the Munis cursed
them. Bhrgu was one of those Munis. (See the word
Samba). /- oa
(3) Paragurama, after exterminating the oe i g ‘
went to the Agrama of Bhrgu, the founder of the am y
and received his blessings. (Brahmanda Purana, Chap-
( 4) an Maharsi was a prominent Ren Yudhisthira’s assembly. (M.B. oe * Verse es Te
o a member of Indra’s assembly.
by Bows oie that Indra’s glory heightened.
(M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 7, \ ers se bat
(6)Bhrgu was 4 member of Brahma’s assembly also.
(M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter ll, Verse ka a
(7) Once Bhrgu blessed his son Reika Ee rh
in-law Satyavati that they would have children.
Vv Parva, Chapter 116, Verse |
(8) $i severe who went as the messeng¢! of pa “
Hastinapura, travelled in Daksinavarta, alone aie
sage Bhy ee (M.B. Udyoga Parva, Chapter 09,
cy between the Kurus
d the scene of battle between We
ee savas ext tried to persuade Sea ae _
withdraw form theagit (MLB. rope.kesie
l Verse 34). io
et. me Bhrgu lectured on a eee ie me =
Philosophy of life, etc. (M.B. Sani :
i Bharad
11)Bhrgu explained to »
bias ee the sky originated
183). ' al manner, Me ge tg
s tage — f the soul. (Santiparva,
of lure an
Chapter 187). .
(13) He made a critical examina?
defects of racial discrimination. |
ls | Brahminhood on a King
“i it Bhrge ee Anusasana. Parva, Chapter
name itana , .
30, Verse 57).
yaia how the Panca-
(Santi Parva, Chapter
sed in a logic
fgration O
ion of the merits and
(Santi Parva, Ghapter
2 he was born out
“Bhrgu because |
(15) He got a ndasana Parva, Chapter 85, \ aa _/
of fire. ae | who gave the — ee
am a depose Nahusa from 1 P
BHRSUNDI.
BHU (H).
BHUJYU
(17) ‘There is a story that Nahusa kicked Agastya on the
head while the latter was carrying Nahusa’s palanquin
and that Bhrgu, who was hiding in Agastya’s locks of
hair, cursed Nahusa and changed him into a python.
(M.B. Anugdsana Parva, Chapter 100)
BHRGUTIRTHA. A place made sacred by the performance of tapas by Bhrgu.
(For more details see the
6th para under Bhrgu),
BHRGUTUNGA. A peak on which the sage Bhrgu
performed tapas. Rcika had lived there with his wife
and children. (Valmiki Ramayana, Balakanda, 6lst
Sarga), @?
BHRNGI. A Maharsi who was a devotee of Siva. Once
he went to Kailasa and began to go round Siva to pay
homage to him. But since Parvati and Siva were sitting
together as one body, he could not go round Siva separately. He did not have much reverence for Parvati.
So he took the form of a female beetle (Bhrigi) and
bored his way through a hole made in the place where
their bodies were united and thus went round Siva alone.
Parvati was angry at this slight shown to her and cursed
him to become physically weak. His legs became so
weak that they were unable to support his body. So
he prayed to Siva again and he blessed him with a third
leg. In this way Bhrngi became a Maharsi with three
legs. (Maharsis).
A fisherman. He used to earn his living
by theft. :
Once when the Maharsi Mudgala was passing through
a forest , Bhrsundi stopped him. But in the presence of
the Brahmanic effulgence of the Maharsi, the fisherman
was dazed. Mudgala took pity on Bhrgundi and advised
him to worship Lord Ganeéga.
From that time Bhrsundi gave up his evil ways, and
accepting the advice of Mudgala, started the worship
of Ganeia with single-minded devotion. As a result
of it, an elephant’s trunk began to grow from the middle
of his forehead. Bhrgundi who thus acquired a shape
closely resembling Ganesa, was visited by Indra, mistaking him for Ganapati. (Ganega : 1.67). |
In the creation of the world, the Lord broke
the beginningless “Anda” (the primal egg or seed )
and from it the sound ‘“‘Om”’ emerged. The first sound
of it was ““BHUH’’; the second was “BHUVAH”;
and the third was ‘““SVAH”’. So the combination “Bhur
Bhuvah Svah’? was formed. Then came the most
adorable and superlative effulgence of the creator
(Savita). That radiance dried up all water. A little of
the water became a highly viscous substance. This
viscous matter gradually solidified and became the earth.
Where the anda originally was became the source of
that supreme effulgence. As it was the first radiant
light, it came to be called Aditya (adi=first), The
great procreator Brahma seemed to emerge from the
centre of the anda. The garbhajala ( the water contained in the anda) became the oceans and rivers of the
world. (Vamana Purana, Chapter 43).
BHUJAKETU. A king who fought on the side of Duryodhana in the Bharata Yuddha.
BHUJANGA. A son of Kadri by Kasyapa prajapati,
BHUJYU. A Rajarsi (royal sage), the son of Tugra.
King Tugra sent his son with an army across the seq to
conquer the enemies in a distant island. When the boat

BHUKAMPA 142
in which they sailed had reached mid-ocean, it was
caught in a storm and wrecked. The prince and the
soldiers sank into the sea. At that time the prince prayed
to the Agvins who saved Bhujyu from drowning and
carried him back to the palace in boats and chariots
travelling through the air. This story is given in the
Rgveda where the adventures of Agvins are described. (Rgveda, Ist Mandala, 17th Anuvaka, 116th
Sukta.).
BHUKAMPA. (Earthquake). The cause of earthquake according to ancient belief is given below:—
The earth is being supported and held in its position by
an elephant called Viripaksa. When he feels the burden
too heavy he shakes his head and earth tremors follow.
(Valmiki Ramayana, Balakanda, 40th Sarga).
BHULINGA (M). A bird which lived on the opposite
side of the Himalayas. The cry of this bird resembles
“MA SAHASA’’.! But this bird lived by pecking at
and eating the flesh between the teeth ofa lion. Sifupala
mentioned this bird as an example to illustrate that
Bhisma’s advice was at variance with his practice.
The bird exhorts people not to act in a rash way (Ma
Sahasa) and at the’same time acts rashly.
BHUMANYU I. A king who was the grandson of King
Dusyanta and the son of Bharata. From Mahabharata
Adi Parva, Chapter 94, Verse 19, we see that he was
born by the blessing of Bharadvaja. His mother was —
Sunanda, daughter of Sarvasena, King of Kasi. When
Bhimanyu grew up, his father Bharata entrusted him
with the affairs of the Kingdom. Bhimanyu had six
sons by his wife Puskarini; they were Diviratha, Suhotra,
Suhota, Sukavi, Suyaju, and Rcika. In Mahabharata, ©
Adi Parva, Chapter 95, Verse 33, we see that he had
another son Suhotra by a woman Vijaya, a Dasarha
maid.
BHUMANYU II. There is another Bhamanyu, grandson
of Kuru, a King of the Lunar dynasty and son of
Dhrtarastra, mentioned in Maha Bharata, Adi Parva,
,Chapter 94, Verse 99.
BHUMANYU III. A Deva Gandharva. He participated in the celebrations connected with Arjuna’s birth.
(M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 91, Verse 35).
BHUMI I. The earth.
1) General. The Puranas maintain that Bhimi has a
Devi (goddess). The births: of Bhiimi and its basic
oddess are in two different ways.
The Mahabharata, (Daksinatya Patha) says that the
goddess Bhimi was the daughter of Brahma and that
she was married by Mahavisnu. The earth on which
we live is the Mrtpinda of which the basic deity is this
Bhimidevi. Of the many versions given in the Puranas
regarding the origin of earth, three are given below:—
1) Long ago, towards the end of the age of floods, the
earth was in a liquid state. At that time, Siva cut open
his thigh and let fall a drop of blood in the water.
It assumed the form of an “‘anda”’ (egg). Siva took that
anda and split it. A man came out of it. From him was
made Nature (Prakrti) for the creation of the Universe.
One half of the broken anda became sky and the other
half became the earth. (Kathdsaritsagara, Kathapithalambaka, 2nd ‘aranga).
(2) Mahavisnu lay on the surface of water which spread
everywhere in the beginning. A lotus sprang up from
% Ma Sahasa = Do not act rashly.
BHUMI I
the navel of Visnu and from its top Brahma was born.
Liquid matter began to flow out of Visnu’s ears on both
sides. From it were born two Raksasas named Madhu
and Kaitabha. They persecuted Brahma. Mahavisnu
woke up and killed Madhu and Kaitabha. ‘The thick
fat of these Raksasas hardened into the earth. (Dev!
Bhagavata, Navama Skandha),
3) In the beginning Mahavisnu (Mahavirat Purusa)
spread everywhere. In every pore of that Mahavirat
who was lying on the surface of the water, there was 4
Brahmanda. In course of time that Virat obtained mind.
That mind stood connected with each of the pores
equally. Later from it were formed the ‘“‘Paficamahabhitas”. From their combination was formed the Bhita
called ‘‘Maha Prthvi’. It was cut into many pieces
and each of the pieces was deposited in each pore.
It was these Prthvi pieces which became “Bhim1s
at the time of creation. At the time of the floods, these
Bhimis sank again into those pores as before. In eac
of these Brahmandas, there are the earth, mountains,
forests, oceans, the seven islands, Himavan, Meru,
Sun, Moon, Stars and other planets. Also, each of
them has its own Brahma, Visnu, Siva and other Devas:
Since all the different Bhimis in all the Brahmandas
had been formed artificially, they all perish in the floods.
(Devi Bhagavata, Navama Skandha). ;
3) Bhimi Devi (Goddess Earth) is the wife of Maha
Visnu. In Varaha Kalpa (Age of the Pig) the Asur
Hiranyaksa carried the Earth and Submerged it under
water. At once Maha visnu appeared in the form 0! @
Pig and lifted up the Earth on its horns. When the Earl!
floated on the surface of water like a lotus leaf, Bhim™
Devi who was pleased, stood up in her charming figure:
Mahavisnu fell in love with her and with the brilliance?
of a crore of suns, had sexual union with her for ¢
period of one Devavarsa. It is from that time t on
Bhimi Devi became Mahavisnu’s wife. As a ia
of their union, a son named Mangala was born
them.
Ghatega is the son of Mangala. Mangala has anotht
name, Covva. After the birth of Mangala, at the behe
of Lord Visnu, all people began to offer worship or
Bhimidevi. Mahavisnu himself first worshipped -
by reciting,the mantra—‘‘Om Hrim-Srim-Krim- oF oe
dhayai Svaha”. After that this mantra became pop”.
for worshipping Bhimidevi. (Devi Bhagavata, Navam
Skandha). His
Narakasura was Bhiimidevi’s son by Hiranyaksa, La
Asura. When Hiranyaksa, in the form of a pig, C4" . 0
Bhimidevi on his horns to Patala, the horns came
contact with Bhimidevi and she became pregna’.
In Bhagavata, Dafama Skandha we read that Naré he
sura was born as the result of this contact. (See .
word Naraka I). nes
Sita was the daughter of Bhimidevi, born on anot Si
occasion. Sita was married by the Kosala King dil
Rama. When she was abandoned by her hus _
she was at last’ accepted by Bhiimidevi within het
self. (See the word Sita). the
4) Bhimi and Prahlada. Since Bhiimidevi had bee” sted
wife of the Asura Hiranyaksa she has also bee? °° gs
the'mother of the Asura clan, Hiranyaksa’s brot uh

BHUMI II
Hiranyakagipu. Prahlada, the son of HiranyakaSipu,
was a devotee of Visnu. The father did not like the son’s
devotion to Visnu. So he persecuted Prahlada in various
ways. Once he threw down Prahlada from the top of
a high building. At that time Bhimi devi appeared there
and received him in her arms. (Brahmanda Purana,
Chapter 24).
5) Bhiimidevi and Prthu. Once the Emperor Prthu
turned Bhimidevi into a cow and milched all resources
from her. (For details, see the word Prthu). ea
6) Parvati’s curse. Once Parvati and Siva indulged in
their sexual act for many years. The earth ina: gr
shake to its foundations. The gods approached iva
with a request to refrain and he agreed. Siva s semen
was discharged and fell on the earth. Parvati who es
angry at this, cursed Bhamidevi as follows:— O
Bhamidevi ! You will assume many forms and be
the wife of many. Since you have prevented me ee
giving birth to a son, no children will be cee be
in future.”? (Valmiki Ramayana, Balakanda, 36th Sarga )-
7) Other details. . a
ih te has another name, pe . (M.B.
Sabha Parva, Daksmnatya Patha, Chapter 3 eae
(2) Bhimidevi prayed to Sri Krsna and obtaine onl
vastra for her son Narakasura. (M.B. Drona ?
Chapte Verse 30). seuss
(3) log Pielandiitz was carrying on the a te
of Ksatriyas, Bhimidevi indvced Ov tre of Bhapalas.
entreat Paragurama to stop his \. iM B. Santi Parva,
(Protectors of Bhami= Ksatriyas). (M.b.
Chapter 79, Verse 44). d to Sri Krsna,
aimidevi ibe
4 he (Bhiamidevi) descri <
ms t= ar nao (M.B. Anusasana
Par , Chapter 34 Verse -
(5) At te are she explained tb oe ae ae
nature of Grhasthasramadharma, Dunes Seed
holder). (M.B. Anusasana Parva, Chapter , tary oe
(6) On one occasion, when King ADEE ai oe a
Bhamidevi lost her own form an van gee
time, Kasyapa prajapati paralyse ; , . (M.
— os oath ela whole earth to the sage
ep gs 7 = Bhimidevi has been called
as yapa.
usgasana
““Kagyapi” (daughter of Kasyapa)- (M.B. An
Verse a
Parva, Chapter 154, +. Bhimi devi, the
: “c. of Dhruva. This , d
aco — had two: sons named A banda).
daughter of Sisum Caturtha oka
A ta, ,
Vatsala, by Dhruva. Oe s the wife of a king
= mi, who wa
BHOMI III. Another Bait ioned in M.B. Udyogs
ed Bhimipati 1}
—_ Chapter 117, Verse 14)
BHUMINJAYA.
the Kauravas. :
“Garuda Vyiha’ ——— Chapter 20, ine eo
; | na ; vavex Twin, Ele
Dro Mp wgatiya King a rodhavade
RE iron froma portion ofan ASAT Gr)
(M B. Adi Parva, nal — Bhismapan™ in
ON , A. As of Bhisma Farva
SEE oe nd 12
are included in thls. g. we see another
_yrana, Chapter 2/°3 . had four sons,
palhika aa Sonada ant of them B alhika
phalanx)
statement that Santanu, king of the Lunar dynasty, had three
Somadatta, Bhiri, Bhirigravas and Sala.
BHURISRAVA (BHURISRAVAS)
BHUMIPATI. A king of ancient India. There is a reference to this King in M.B. Udyoga Parva, Chapter
117, Verse 14.
BHUMISAYA. A king in ancient India. M.B. Santi
Parva, Chapter 166, verse 75 says that King Amirtarayas gave a sword to Bhiimigaya who gifted it to Bharata,
the son of Dusyanta.
BHUPATI. A visvadeva. (M.B. Anugdsana Parva,
Chapter 91, Verse 32).
BHURI I. A king of the Kuru dynasty. Somadatta,
king of the Kuru dynasty had three sons, Bhiri, Bhirisravas and Sala! In M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 185,
we read that they had attended the Svayarvara of
Draupadi and in Sabha Parva, Chapter 94 ii is said
that they had taken part in Yudhisthira’s Rajasiiya.
In Drona Parva, Chapter 166, we read that this King
Bhiri was slain by Satyaki during the war between
Kauravas and Pandavas. After death, Bhiri obtained
a place with the Visvedevas. (M.B. Svargarohana
Parva, Chapter 5, Verse 16).
BHURI II. A son of the sage Suka. Vy4dsa’s son, Suka
married Pivari, the daughter of Pitrs. She had four
sons by Suka, who were named Krsna, Gauraprabha,
Bhiri and Devagruta, and a daughter named Kirti.
(Devi Bhagavata, Prathama Skandha).
BHURIBALA. (BHIMABALA). ‘One of the hundred
sons of Dhrtarastra. Mahabharata Salya Parva, Chapter 26, Verse 14 says that at the battle of Kuruksetra he
was slain by Bhimasena.
BHURIDYUMNA I. A king in the assembly of Yama.
He attained Heaven (Svargaloka) by virtue of his
having performed godana (gift of cow). (M.B. Sabha
Parva, Chapter 8, Anugdsana Parva, Chapter 76).
BHURIDYUMNA II. A Maharsi. This sage once went
to Reine as a messenger of peace. On the way he
met with Sri Krsna whom he reverently worshipped by
doing ‘‘Pradaksina”’.
BHURIDYUMNA III. He was the only son of Viradyumna, a King. Bhiridyumna was lost somewhere in the
forest. (M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter 127, Verse 14)
BHURIHAN. A Raksasa. He was a king in ancient
times. (M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter 277, Verse 51).
BHURIKIRTI. Aking. He had two daughters, Campika
and Sumati who were married by Lava and Kuéa resectively. (Ananda Ramayana, Vivaha Kanda).
BHURISRAVA (BHURISRAVAS). See
(1) General. He was the son of Somada,a king of
Kuruvaméa (Kuru dynasty).
(2) Other details. Bhirisravas had two brothers named
Bhiri and Sala. They were all present at the Svayarhvara of Draupadi. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 185,
Verse 14).
(3) He once described to Duryodhana, the heroic qualities of the Pandavas and advised him to maintain peaceful relations with them. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 199,
Daksinatya Patha).
(4) He took part in Yudhisthira’s Rajasttya yajiia
with his father and brothers. (M.B. Sabha Parva,
Chapter 34, Verse 8).
(5) In the war between Kauravas and Pandavas, he
arrived with an ‘‘Aksauhini” (A division of the army)
inorder to give help to Duryodhana. (M.B. Udyoga
Parva, Chapter 19, Verse 16).

BHURITEJAS 144
(6) Bhisma once remarked that Bhirigravas deserved
to be counted among the Rathis and Yiuthapatis.
(Udyoga Parva, Chapter 165, Verse 29).
(7) On the first day of the battle at Kuruksetra BhiriSravas fought a duel with Sarmkha. (Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 45, Verse 35).
(8) He fought with Satyaki (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 63,
Verse 33 ).
(9) He killed the ten sons of Satyaki. (Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 74, Verse 25),
(10) Defeated Dhrstaketu in battle. (Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 84, Verse 35).
(11) He fought a duel with Bhimasena. (Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 11, Verse 44).
(12)A duel was fought with Sikhandi. (Drona Parva,
Chapter 43, Verse 45).
(13) Bhirisravas fell down under the stroke of Satyaki.
(Drona Parva, Chapter 142, Verse 59).
(14) Arjuna cut off the left arm of Bhirigravas. (Drona
Parva, Chapter 141, Verse 72).
(15) Enraged by Arjuna’s action, Bhirigravas squatted
on th: ground to attain Svarga (Heaven). (Drona Parva,
Chapter 143, Verse 33).
(16) Satyaki kilied Bhirisravas. (Drona Parva, Chapter
(17) After death Bhirigravas became a Vigvadeva.
(Svargarohana Parva, Chapter 5, Verse 16).
(18)Some of the other names of Bhirisravas given in
Mahabharata are:—Bhiridaksina, Salagraja, Kaurava,
Kauraveya, Kauravya, Yapaketana, Yipaketu, Sardila,
Kurusrestha, Kuridvaha.
BHURITEJAS. A king in ancient India. He was born
from a portion of the Asura Krodhavaga, according
to Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 67, Verse 63).
BHUSUNDA. A dispassionate and large-hearted crow.
The residence of this crow was a Kalpavrksa standing
on a beautiful peak surrounded by luxuriant vegetation
in the north-eastern:corner of Mahameru. There were
numerous bird-nests on the southern branch of that
Kalpavrksa. In one of them lived this centuries-old
bird.
Once when the sage Vasistha went to Devaloka, he
happened to hear about this crow. He went to see
Bhusunda in its nest. The crow recognised Vasistha
at once. They exchanged greetings. The sage opened
the conversation as follows:—‘‘Oh, King of birds !
when were you born? How did you become a great
soul ? How old are you ? Have you recollections of the
past ? Who was the prophet who suggested this residence
for you ?”’
The bird calmly replied as follows :— ‘‘If you are interested in hearing my past history I shall tell you. Lord
Sankara the Almighty lives in this world. He has numerous attendant spirits. Besides these spirits who have
hoofs on their head, hands in the hoofs, teeth in
the hands and stomach in the face, and who have faces
resembling those of monkeys, camels, and elephants,
he has also hordes of Matrs in his retinue. The Matrs,
attended by spirits continue their dance in the presence
of the Lord. Mountain peaks, the sky, the different
worlds, deep pits, cremation grounds, etc. are their
haunts. Chief among these Matrs are eight sisters
named, Jaya, Vijaya, Jayanti, Aparahita, Siddha,
Rakta, Alambusa and Ulpala. They have other followers also. Alambusa’s vehicle is the crow named Canda.
BHUSUNDA
All these Matrs assembled together on one occasion to
celebrate a festival in the sky. There was a display of
many kinds of entertainments at that time. Disputations
in spiritual matters, music, dancing, drinking and other
forms of hilarious activities were freely indulged in.
In another part of the sky, their vehicles were also
enjoying themselves with similar celebrations of drinking,
dancing, and merry-making. The swans who were the
vehicles of Brahmidevi were dancing in one place,
intoxicated by drink. Canda, the crow, who was Alambusa’s vehicle, also joined their company. Completely
absorbed in their delirious raptures, the intoxicated
swans indulged so freely in their amorous pleasures with
Ganda that they became pregnant. At last when the
merry-makings ended and all of them dispersed, the swans
became aware of their plight and informed Brahmi
about it. The gracious goddess (Brahmi) told them
that in their present state they were unable to discharge
their duties in drawing her chariot and so they were allowed to goand enjoy themselves wherever they liked. After
this she entered into a trance. The swans in the fullness
of time, gave birth to twentyone sons. We, the twentyone brothers, are those children. We. and our mothers
went to Brahmidevi and offered worship to her for 4
long time. Asaresult, the Devi woke up from her trance
and pleased with us, gave us her blessing. After that,
we went to our father (Canda) and off red our devoted
services to him ard prostrated before him and Alambusadevi. They blessed us. We asked our father to
suggest a most suitable place for a secluded life. This
Kalpa Vrksa is the secluded place recommended by
him. We paid obeisance to our father and Alambusadevi and came to settle down here. Many ages have
passed since then. Now your visit and holy presence
here, have liberated me from all worldly bonds an
ennobled my life. My twenty brothers lived for many
Kalpas and yugas at the end of which, convinced of the
meaninglessness of worldly life, renounced their bodies
and attained Sivaloka.
On hearing this, Vasistha asked Bhugunda to tell him
more about his past life. Bhugunda resumed his story :—
‘Long long ago, the whole earth was full of big rocks;
without trees, forests or mountains. After a great floo
the surface of the earth was covered with ashes. In
one caturyuga (a period equal to the length of the four
yugas, Krta, treta, dvapara and Kali) the earth saa
filled with forest trees and in another Caturyuga, moun
tain ranges appeared. I have seen an age in whic
Brahmanas, were drunkards, Sidras were virtuous a
women of noble families committed adultery. *°
have now been born in the eightieth ‘‘Janma’’ as © ’
son of Brahma. You were born once from the sky> “4
another time from water, then from the mountain ome
again from fire. I can remembeér this earth sinking a ai
the ocean five times and Lord Visnu taking the for™ A
a tortoise, lifting it up, above the water. I have seen at
ocean of milk being churned twelve times. I know_" a
Hiranyaksa had taken the earth three times to F —
(underworld). The Lord has incarnated six times ©
Bhargava Rama. Incarnation of Buddha has ¢4®*” -
place in six Kaliyugas. Tripuradahana (burnips sa
the ‘T'ripurdsuras) has taken place thirty times. - “ted
yaga was broken up twice. Lord Siva has slain 7.
Indras. He fought seven times with Sri Krsna for, led
sake of Bana. I also remember another epic ent!

BHUTALHAMA
‘‘Ramayana’’, containing one lakh of verses and dealing
with metaphysical problems. I have seen the customs
of Krtayuga being followed in Kaliyuga and the customs
of Kaliyuga being followed in Krtayuga.”’
Having heard the whole story, Vasistha gave his blessing
to Bhutunda and left the place. (Jnana Vasistha,
Bhu undopakhyana), s
BHUTADHAMA. An Indra. This Indra is different
from the actual Indra. There is reference to this Indra
in Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 96, Verse 28.
BHUTAJYOTI. A king who was the father of Vasu and
son of Sumati.
BHUTAKARMA. A warrior who fought on the side of
the Kauravas in the battle at Kuruksetra. He was
killed by Satanika, the son of Nakula.. (M.B. Drona
Parva, Chapter 22, Verse 25). . ;
BHUTALAYA (M). A famous village in the puranas.
It was a resort of thieves and robbers. Dead bodies
were often thrown into the river which was flowing
through this village. Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 129, verse 9 says that it was against Sastras to bathe
In this river.
BHUTAMATHANA. A warrior of Subrahmanya. (M.
. Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 69). as
BHUTASANTAPANA. One a \ sons of Hiranyaksa,
Bha tama Skandna).
BHOT See a warrior who fought on the side of
the Kauravas against the Pandavas. He had sere his.
position in the “Garudavyiha (name of a Pt, an
formed by Dronacarya. (M.B. Drona Parva, ay
20, Verse 6).
BHUTAS. t of beings created by Rudra). .
I ) tal a = eee class or sect in ancient India.
In the Puranas, this Manava sect is classified into four
subdivisiors. (1) gee at
as yapl ‘, (4) Pulahapraja. . ,
2) Bee tn the S bmnanda Purana there 1s Ene follow
3 atary — in = bit ee pen creations.
u the su na a
a 36 he asked the Rudra, lee ge! is
nerf cite function of creation. Accordingly he beg
- Ss ‘of his wife Sati. All
thousands of Bhitas a ghee _ Pate aan Hee
the issues were the exac sce fi d eyes, bushy
Lear inet , long eats; fee hanging te h. ne aaa
. n r
eyebrows, long, pointed 4 the grotesque features 0
air etc. were the & : s their
a ae music-haters used se Lea sires d
Yajiiopavitas (sacred tm) ae ak ed and carried
‘ ‘oe ly were, as a ’ antastic
is Sivas gar ncada, Buc ne ie? BEE Wa car,
ares with elephant skin. Their chiek Weap
“sword, €tc. ‘s acknowledged
3 yn Ghtte Chief In the Puranas, ice by ane
Bhata chief. That is why Rue! ka’, ‘“Rudranuas the ee ‘‘Gananaya ete eointine
n S 5 ee inc
Ata” “Bhavaparisad® oe “(king ) of all the
ed 10 , dra is not an
name Rudra 18 vo ana declares that Ru be eae
Bhitas,. Vamana Puran . and Matsyapurar
o Rudras
; rana
individual, Both Vamanapurane ia as tw
ae — a (Matsyapurana 18
who are So
A 2 ‘ t iven as
23. Vamanapratya, the nusnber Of The chiel among
ih “~~. aa oat erable Bhitas, Ash
em, Un
(2) Isvarapraja (3) -
BILVA
and Khatvamga etc. are their weapons. The emblem
on the banner is a cow or a bird. That is how the
Gananayakas have got the titles like ‘‘“Mayiradhvaja’’,
“Maytravahana”’. (Vamana Purana 67, 1-23).
4) War with Asuras. In the war between Siva and
Andhakasura, the Bhiitas fought on the side of Siva.
It was Vinayaka, the master of the Bhita hordes who
first came into conflict with the Asura. In that battle
Andhaka defeated Vinayaka. After that, Nandi, another leader of the Bhitas, attacked Andhaka jointly
with Vinayaka and defeated him. At last, Andhaka
approached Siva himself for protection, and Siva received
him and appointed him as commander of one of his
hordes of Bhitas. It is this Andhakasura who later
became famous under the name of Bhrngi.
In this way, the Bhiitas had fought many battles with
the Asuras, joining the party of the Devas. But at the
time of Daksa’s yajiia, they joined the party of the Asuras
and opposed the Devas.
Although the Bhiitas won all the battles they fought both
on the side of the Devas and on the side of the Asuras,
in the end they had to leave north India and to come and
settle down in south India. By the time of Vaivasvata
manvantara they had already become South Indians.
BHUTIVARMA. A Ra&ksasa who was the friend of
Kanabhiti. (Kathdasaritsagara).
BHUVANA I. A Maharsi who visited Bhisma when he
was lying on the verge of death. (M.B. Anusasana
Parva, Chapter 26, Verse 81).
BHUVANA II. A sanatana Visvadeva. There is a
reference to him in M.B. Anusasana Parva, Chapter 91,
Verse 35.). :
BHUVANA II. A sanatana VisSvadeva. There is a
reference to him in M.B. Anusasana Parva, Chapter
BHUVANA. Brhaspati’s sister. She was married to
Prabhasa, one of the Astavasus. A son named Vigvakarma was born to them. (Brahmanda Purana, 3-3-21BRUVANESA: See the word Bhadragravas.
BIBHATSU. One of the ten names of. Arjuna. He got
this name because he desisted from doing loathful acts,
‘J will never resort to loathful deeds in war. Therefore
the devas and men call me Bibhatsu’’. (Mahabharata,
Virata Parva, Chapter 44, Stanza 18).
BIDALA. A minister of Mahisasura. (Devi Bhagavata).
BIDALOPAKHYANA. See the word Dirndika.
BIDAUJAS. A son born to Aditi by the blessings of
Visnu. (Padma Purana, Bhimikanda, Chapter 3).
BILVA. (VILVA). A devotee of Visnu. There is a
story in Skanda Purana about Bilva who lived as a
Vaisnavite first and then was converted to a Saivite.
In the beginning Brahma created many things among
which Vilva (tree) (Crataeva religiosa) also was
created. Under that tree an anonymous man began to
live. Brahma gave him the name Vilva. Being pleased
at the behaviour and devotion of Bilva, Indra asked him
to turn the wheel of administration of the earth. Accep-
* ting the offer Bilva requested Indra to give him the
Vajra (diamond) for the smooth running of the administration of the earth. Indra told him that vajrayudha
(diamond-weapon) would be at his disposal, when he
thought about it, if the occasion required it.
Once Kapila a Saivite reached the palace of Bilva.
After a long conversation both became fast friends, One

OE I 0 A or a 5 re ET a a re et ee
BILVAKA
day there was a debate between Bilva and Kapila as to
whether penance or Action (doing one’s duty) was
appreciable. In this discussion Bilva lost the equilibrium
of his mind and thinking of the diamond-weapon of
Indra cut off the head of Kapila. In Kapila there was
the power of penance as wellas the power of Siva. So
through Siva Kapila got immortality. In the meanwhile
Bilva went to Visnu and got a boon that every living
thing in the earth should fear him. But the boon was
futile. This was a turning point for Bilva. The mind of
Bilva changed todevotion forSiva. He concentrated his
attention on the worship of Sivalinga at the forest of
Mahakala. One day Kapila came by that way and was
greeted by Bilva with honour and regard, and they
again became fast friends.
BILVAKA. A famous serpent born to Kagyapa prajapati of his wife Kadri. (Mahabharata, Adi ‘Parva,
Chapter 35, Stanza 12).
BILVAKATIRTHA. A holy place in Haradvara. It is
mentioned in Mahabharata, Anugasana Parva, Chapter
25, Stanza 13 that those who bathe in this holy Bath will
attain heaven. ,
BILVAPANDURA. Aserpent. The father of this serpent
was Kagyapa and mother, Kadra. (M.B. Adi Parva,
Chapter 35, Stanza 12).
BILVAPATRA. A serpent born in the family of Kasyapa
prajapati. (M.B. Udyoga Parva, Chapter 103, Stanza
BILVATEJA. A serpent born in the family of Taksaka.
This serpent was burnt to death by falling in the sacrificial
fire of Janamejaya. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 57,
Stanza Q).
BINDUGA. A Brahmana who lived in the village of
Baskala. Being a frequenter of the houses of harlots
and of various other mean habits, he had led his wife
Caricala also to lead an immoral life. Once Binduga
called his wife and told her thus: ‘You may continue
the life of a harlot; but all the money acquired must be
handed over to me.”’ ‘Thus they continued their lives
and after their death both were reborn as devils in the
mountain of Vindhya. In the midst of their life as devils,
once it chanced for Caficala. to hear the Siva Purana
recited and she got her shape of devil changed. She
requested Parvati to change the shape of her husband
also. Parvati sent her attendant Tumburu to Binduga
to tell him the story of Siva and thus he also got his form
changed. (Siva Purana Mahatmya).
BINDUMATI. The queen of the great King Mandhata.
Bindumati was the daughter of the King Sagabindu.
Purukutsa and Mucukunda were the two sons born to
her from Mandhata. (Devi Bhagavata, Skandha 7).
BINDUSARAS. A holy place famous in the Puranas.
The following information is obtained from the Puranas
about this holy place. |
(1) Bindusaras lies on the north of the Mount Kailasa.
(Mahabharata Sabha Parva, Chapter 3, Stanza 2).
(2)It was at Bindusaras that Bhagiratha did penance
to bring down Ganga to the earth (Sabha Parva, Chapter
3, Stanza 10).
(3) Devendra performed hundred sacrifices at this place.
(Maha Bharata, ‘Sabha Parva, Chapter 3),
(4)Once Siva performed a sacrifice at Bindusaras.
(Sabha Parva, Chapter 3).
(5) Sri Krsna did penance here for several years to get
righteousness. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 3, Stanza 11).
BODHISATTVA
(6) At this place, Maya, the asura gave Arjuna the famous
conch known as Devadatta and to Bhimasena the famous
club of Vrsaparva. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 3).
BODHA. A king. In the Mahabharata, Sabha Parva,
Chapter 14, Stanza 20, mention is made that this King
fied to South India with his brothers and relatives fearing
the attack of Jarasandha.
BODHA(M). A place in ancient India. It is famous
in the Puranas. Mention is made about this place
in Mahabharata. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Stanza 39.
BODHAYANA. An individual of the lineage of teachers.
(See the word Guruparampara).
BODHISATTVA. A _ good-natured husband generally
quoted in Sanskrit works. The following is the story
given about him in Kathasaritsagara, Taranga 9.
Once there lived a wealthy Vaijya. who had ason named
Bodhisattva. When the childhood of the boy was at an
end his mother died. ‘The Vaisya married again and got
his son also married. Because of the car-buzzing of his
wife, the Vaisya drove his son out of the house. Bodhisattva left the house of his father, with his wife. By
and by they reached a desert. Not a drop of water was to
be had. ‘There was not even the shoot ofa grass. Jt was 4
sandy place with nothing else in sight. He walked for
seven days carrying his wife on his shoulders. His wile
grew weary and worn with hunger and thirst. Seeing
that she was about to die he gave her his flesh and blood.
The wicked woman took them and saved herself from
death. On the eighth day they reached the jungles of 4
hilly place full of fruit-trees and with a river with grassy
banks, flowing down to the valley. With fruits and C0?
water he appeased the hunger and _ thirst of his w1!©
Then he got down to the river to take a bath. He saw
a man with his limbs cut off, coming afloat. Now 2?
then he was producing pitiable sounds. The kind son a
the Vaisya, without minding his weakness due to fast st
the last seven days, swam to the man and brought him
the bank of the river. He did all services possible for him
Then he asked him who had cut off his limbs. He reP
lied that his enemies had done so, with the intention ¢
he might die suffering severe pain for a long time. al
Vaisya’s son stood still for a little while. Then he
his bath. With his wife he lived in the forest ies
penance. The wounds of the man he saved had i :
healed. The Vaigya’s son, one day, went out to nat
forest to gather fruits and roots for their food. At ! ni
time his wife grew lustful and had coition with the ™
without limbs. Gradually she begar to dote on him. ail
decided to kill her husband who was an impediment ik
her way. She pretended to beill. The Vaisya’s son bee of
to treat her. One day she took her husband to the edg
a very deep well and said: “‘See, there is a divine het a ie
the bottom of this well. I will be cured if I could ¢4 2,
This is what a goddess told me ina dream yestermig’
Hearing this her husband made a rope, and tied 1 ope
tree. Then he began to go down the well by the f ere
She cut the rope and the man fell into the well. “_
was a passage from the well to the river. The i
took him through that passage to the river. He got An 285
the river, and sat under a tree thinking of the wicke €
of women. There was a city close by. At that te rhe
King of the city was dead and there was no heir on 5
subjects of the city brought an elephant and said, nl} be
ever this elephant takes and places on his back , pant
our king”, They sent the elephant out. The ©€P

BODHYA
was pleased at the virtuous character of the son of the
Vaisya. So taking him, as if he was God, placed him on
its back and walked to the city. The people gathered
round him and anointed him as their King. The son of
the Vaisya became King. He never even thought of
women who are generally fickle and wicked.
The wicked wife of the Vaisya’s son took the limbless
man on her shoulder and wandered about saying, ‘“The
enemies of my husband have put him in this plight.
Because of my conjugal fidelity I carry him thus and
earn our daily bread. Please give us alms’’. In this
manner she spent her days in begging. Thus wandering
from place to place she reached the city where the
Vaisya’s son was the King. The people, seeing her
loyalty to her husband, honoured her and spoke highly
of her. Hearing that a very loyal wife had reached his
city the King sent for her. The King recognized her
Instantly. But she did not know him. The King reminded
her of her deeds of the past one by one and began to
tease and scold her. Finally when she understood that
the King was her husband she was dumb-founded. The
amazed ministers looked at each other. The King revealed everything to them. The ministers disfigured her and
drove her away.
BODHYA. A famous teacher-priest. Once there was a
discussion between Nahusa and Bodhya on Philosophy.
The summary of what Bodhya said is as a =e
Before I advise others, I do it myself first. 4
cher of none. I take the world as my teacher. I learne
the lessons of harmlessness from snakes, disappointmen*
from Pingala the harlot, self-sacrifice from eermaid
concentration from the archer, and loneliness ie a mal
who isa spinster. (M.B., Santi Parva, 171, 56; i him
This hermit came to the King be has ct a a 171
philosophy and ethics. The. ware ‘e pe F feations
of Mahabharata, Santi Parva, cop — name
of this hermit, which are known by the ta
B "‘Cata. (Song of Bodhya).
BRADY NASVA. ‘A Lines Agastya once soya =
King to request him for some wealth. (See
Agastya).
BRAHMA ° ntheon. The triOne of the trimirtis of oe ae, :
mirtis are Brahma, Me ee ig
] nformation. O -
) General infor edinthe Puranas
iver ntion ms
Universe. It is me + Paramasiva
creates, Visnu preserves an |
f Brahma is from
universe. Heahmi
; * Brahma. ij Purana
“) T he apie ue nu. It is mentioned 11 — llows —
the nave of V152U. pirth of Brahma as 1olloW»-
bout the ‘an leaf in the
Tn = Leagan Mahavisnu lay cc ad 1? Who
shape of a baby and began to thir'™ _ work ? Where to
onenictl me ? What for ? What }s ad real voice said :—
work ?”’ avid $0 on. At that time si «anyadasti sanata-
*‘Sarvam khalvidamevaham dat this ethereal
Sees amaze ;
nam”?.* | Manav whose oracle it was. Still He
en Mahadevi,
voice. He did not know W a |
lay meditating UP " ete =a | as seal feds
tf : ay a
Gal orn pany, Gada (club); Padma (ioe rious
—— ——- erities and havin Saktis
maids who are prosp d by the
e
| compan!
clothes and ornaments, a” accomp
the creator of the
that Brahma
Sanatanam anyad nastl.
1 Idarm sarvam khalu aham eva,
destroys the ~
BRAHMA
(powers) named Rati, Bhiti, Buddhi, Mati, Kirti,
Dhrti, Smrti, Sraddha, Medha, Svadha, Svaha, Ksudha,
Nidra, Daya, Gati, Tusti, Pusti, Ksama, Lajja, Jrmbha
and Tandra, appeared before Mahavisnu, who was
struck with wonder. Mahadevi said, ““Oh, Visnu, what
is there to wonder at ? Every time the universe is subjected to creation, preservation and destruction, you
are born thus due to the great power of the supreme
spirit. It seems that you have forgotten those matters.
Know that the supreme power is beyond qualities. We
are all with qualities. Your main quality is Sattva.
From your nave Brahma will be born. His attribute 1s
Rajoguna (activity, passion ormotion). From the middle
of the eyebrows of Brahma, will be born Rudra, whose
attribute will be Tamasaguna (darkness). Brahma,
with the power: of penance, will acquire the ability of
creation and by_his attribute of Rajoguna will create
the world in the colour of blood. You will be the preserver
of that world. The same world will be destroyed by
Rudra at the end of the Kalpa (world age)”’.
Accordingly from the nave of Visnu a lotus grew up and
in that lotus flower Brahma took his form. The same
Brahmadeva did penance before Mahavisnu and Jagadamba, who were pleased at his penance and gave him
all the boons he wanted. After that Brahma began the
work of creation. He created with his mind the Saptarsis,
(seven sages) and then the Prajapatis (the lords of
emanation). From them all the movables and _ the
immovables in the universe came into existence. (Devi
Bhagavata, Skandha 7).
In manusmrti, Chapter 1, the following stanza about the
creation of Brahma occurs.
‘‘Tadandamabhavad haimam
Sahasramsusamaprabham |
Tasmin jajfie svayarn Brahma
Sarvalokapitamahah”’ //
That egg was as radjant as the Sun, with the colour of
gold. Brahma the great grandfather of everything in the
world took birth by himself in it.
From the supreme power, an egg fell on the water which
was the first creation. ‘That egg became a germ of golden
colour. Creating a life, which had done penance in its
former births in such a way as to enable it to become
Brahma, in the golden germ of the egg, the supreme power
entered the life that is to become Brahma as its inner
cuide. That Brahma is known as the Pitamaha (Grandfather of the manes) or Paternal grandfather of all the
worlds.”
Vamanapurana Chapter 43 states as follows about the
creation of Brahma :—
Ages before the beginning, when all the worlds with
everything they contained were submerged in the single
ocean of the great flood, the germ of living things formed
itself into a big egg. Brahma who had been inside the
egg went to a long sleep. The sleep continued for a
thousand yugas (ages) when Brahma woke up; as
Sattva guna (purity) was the foremost attribute of him,
he saw that the world was void. When the thought of
creation occurred in his mind Rajoguna (activity or
passion) became his foremost attribute. Rajas is the
attribute that creates and Sattva, that which preserves.
At the time of destruction Tamoguna (darkness) becomes the foremost attribute. That Bhagavan (Supreme
All these are myself: Except me there is nothing eternal,

a
ee ee
BRAHMA
Spirit) the Purusa (the Male creative Energy ) pervades
over everything, in all the living worlds. That Eternal
Being is Brahma, Visnu, Siva.
Knowing that the world was lying in pure water, the
Bhagavan (Supreme Being) cut the egg open. From it the
Omkara (the sacred syllable ‘Om’) emanated. The
first sound of it was ‘Bhih’, the second, sound, ‘Bhuvah’
and the third sound ‘Svah’. So they came to be known
as ““Bharbhuvah Svah’”’. Then the glorious radiance of
the sun was born from it and Brahma the grandfather of
the worlds originated in the centre of the egg.
3) Instigation to compose Ramayana.’ It was Brahma who
instigated Valmiki to compose the Ramayana.
A. fowler of the forest tribe shot down one of a couple of
snipes which were carrying on love-making, on the banks
of the River Tamasa. Seeing this Valmiki cursed the
fowler. The curse came out of the mouth of Valmiki
in the form of a verse, “ma nisada pratistham tvamagamah §asvatih samah, yat krauficamithunadekam,
avadhih kamamohitam,”? which according to hearsay,
is the first piece of poetry in the world. Brahma who
was attracted by the poetry came to the hermitage of
Valmiki and instigated him to compose the story of
Rama in verse. It is stated in Valmiki Ramayana,
Balakanda, Sarga 2, that the Ramayana was composed
thus.
4) Ravana is given a boon. It was Brahma who made
Ravana an ever-powerful hero. Penance was done by
Ravana in the vicinity of the Himalayas and Brahma
appeared before him and granted him the boon that no
living creature except man, would kil] him. (Valmiki
Ramayana, Bala Kanda, Sarga 16).
9) The loss of a head. Long ago Siva plucked off a head
of Brahma. This story occurs in various puranas with
slight changes. Two of them are given belew:—
(1) In olden days, in the period of Satyayuga, Mahavisnu did penance in Svetadvipa (the island Sveta)
to obtain Eternal Bliss, being deeply engaged in the study
of Brahmavidya. Brahma also went to another place
and began to do penance for the suppression of passions.
Both were doing severe penance. So they began to
walk in order to take rest from the penance. On the way
they met each other. One asked ‘‘who are you ?”? The
other also asked the same question. The talk ended in a
contest as to who was the greater of the two. Each
claimed himself to be the Supreme power of the world.
Neither of them was prepared to recognize the claims.
of the other. In the midst of this contest, a phallus,
extra-ordinarily bulky and fair appeared before them and
an ethereal voice said from the sky: ‘You need not
quarrel as to who is superior. He who reaches the extremity of this phallus is the superior person. So both of
you proceed, one upwards and the Other downwards
and find out the end.’’ Hearing this Visnu went downwards to find out the bottom and Brahma, upwards to
the top. Visnu travelled for a long time and finding no
end thought the attempt futile and returned to the starting point with disappointment and sat down.
Brahma travelled upwards for a long time and found no
end. On the way he saw the petal of a pandanus flower,
coming down from the sky. Brahma took it and joyfully
returned and said haughtily to Visnu : ‘See, I have
taken this flower from the head of the Phallus. I have
’ You forester, your life will not continue for many years since you have killed one of the couple of snipes,
BRAHMA
brought this to convince you. You have been defeated.
50 can you not admit that I am the superior ?
Mahavisnu did not believe the words of Brahma. So he
called the Pandanus flower to him and questioned 1t.
The Pandanus flower took false oath and witnessed in
favour of Brahma, who had asked the flower beforehand to be on his side. Mahavisnu did not believe
this either and said, ‘‘Let Siva be witness to this flower”
Siva at these words appeared before them and revealed
the deceit played by Brahma and the flower and then
cursed the Pandanus flower _ that thenceforward 1t
should not have a place among the flowers of oblation
to Siva. Then Siva got angry and plucked off a head
of Brahma. That is the skull Siva uses for receiving
alms. (Devi Bhagavata, Skandha oi) ne
(2) In days ofold all the worlds with everything in them
were under water in a single ocean. The Sun, the
Moon, the Stars, air, fire, everything was destroyed. A
day of utter darkness appeared. Grass, bush all wid
destroyed. Nothing could be seen and recognized. /
existents and non-existents were destroyed. Bhagavan,
(Supreme Being) was sleeping continuously for so a
thousands of nights. At the end of the night Bhagar
assumed the attribute of Rajas (Activity) and got be, Y
for the work of creation. He, the knower of all ine
and Vedangas appeared in the shape of a wonderful —
ing with five faces. Another being with three eyes, mat ie
hair, a trident in one hand, and a garland of beads in t '
other, and with darkness as its attribute took shape. Toe
being was called Purusa (the male creative pews
Then the Mahatma (the Supreme Spirit) created at
kara (Egoism). It affected Brahma and Siva. eT NS
by egoism, Siva said to Brahma :—“Who are you ! ae
created you ?” Swelled with egoism Brahma aske het
reply:—“Who are you? Who are your parents ?. of
me hear it.’’ This talk ended ina quarrel. The a i
Bhagavan (the Lord) was from this quarrel. at
ately after his birth the Lord took ag unpatealee aed
and playing it, went up to the sky. Siva being de Para
by Brahma, bowed his head and coloured. While a
mesvara was standing angrily thus, the fifth face od
him, “You, who are having three eyes and whose eh
bute is darkness ! look here ! I will tell you all. You, aye
wear air as garments, and ride on an ox, are the destr ad
of the world.” Hearing these words Siva grew EO ts
more angry, opened his third eye and looked tee the
at Brahma to burn him. Seeing the faces shining weil
Sun Brahma said, ‘‘When you beat on water, bubble ais,
appear. But do they have any prowess ? Hearing + his
Siva plucked off the head of Brahma with the tip
finger nails. (Vamana Purana, Chapter 2). vijay?”
9) Changing Vijayalaksmi to Laikalaksmi, by curse. sasury’
laksmi, one of the eight Laksmis, was the tr ~ i
keeper of Brahma. Once she became careless her:
charging her duties. Brahma got angry and cur hu mbly
“You go to Ravana and keep his tower’’. She 5 said:
requested for absolution from the curse. Brahm
key:
=D es n
‘‘At the time of the incarnation of Sri Rama, a mo ¢ Sri
hero named Hanuman will reach Lanka in <_i will
Rama’s wife, whom Ravana had kidnapped. hal day
obstruct him, and he will strike you down. On i] retuly
j
you will be absolved from the curse and you w!
here instantly.” Accordingly Vijayalaksmi was bo

Lanka under the name Lankalaksmi. When Hanuman
jumped to Lanka she prevented him, and he struck her
down to the ground. (Kampa Ramayana, Sundara
Kanda).
6) Brahma cursing the daughters of Himavan. Three daughters named Kutila, Ragini and Parvati and a son
named Sunabha were born to Himavan by his wife
Mena. The three daughters went to the Himalayas for
penance, to get Siva as husband. They were not even
six years old then. The devas saw them. The Adityas
and the Vasus took Kutila who was doing penance, to
the world of the gods. All the gods gathered together
and asked Brahma. ‘‘Oh Lord, be pleased to tell us if
this girl will be able to bear a son who could kill Mahisasura”’, Brahma replied. ‘This poor girl will not be
capable of bearing the radiance of Siva. So let her gO
away.’ Kutila got angry at Brahma and said ' Lord,
I will try to become fit to bear the unbearable radiance of
iva. Harken, I will do penance properly and please
Visnu and make Siva bow his head. I take a vow to
that effect.” Brahma became angry and told Kutila,
“You, wicked Kutila, you did not succumb to my words.
So by my curse you will be turned to water.
‘ahma rater
Kutila having been cursed by Brahma became wa
and began to food the world of Brahma. Seeing the or
of water. Brahma made cause-ways on four sides with the
Vedas of ‘Re, Yajus, Sama and Atharva. Thus being
tied up she stays in the world of a ae igi tile
T k Ragini also before Bra ima and put th
Lorre roy The reply of Brahma was the same a
befene She also got angry a said to cae mite
— o as to enable to give to one in
\~ eee he the killer of Mahisasura. Brahma
a ce also. ‘‘You are deliberately diohey
words which even devas won't gainsay. es i _ oiehe
come the colours of the “en anal a : . = er
m ilight, and her |
pomomy ~ ohne (Vamana Purana, Chapter
7) Giving a boon to a tiger and golden colour to Parvati. ‘The
Aarvati ter of Himavan was Kali.
a. a i? arb at) because of. oe a
te i tien the marriage Siva and Parva a
houehold Lif :n the golden house built by ie hay
asi a Devi humorously, oe rae ce
Faeaedl P t angry and said to her husband.
ut down a tree by an
an arrow will be cured. iE. YP eur inflicted by hard
axe it will sprout/aBir The arrows of words shoot
° cured. : fler
words will nev eE OT Tate who are ome eset:
Our of’ the ot dit ht Wise people shouk le. So my lord,
a patos | Pon Wane violated that princip’.
at otners.
ill endeavour to
. : enance. Iw :
do intensiv® P not call me by the
I am going to dition that you may not y Reta
create such a condluo™, | Parvati bowe
cn . 93 ing tnus, into the
name Kali again.’ ig good-bye she went up into aoe
Paramesvara - the peak of Himalayas Instantly they
air and reache anti and Aparajita. d stayed with
pec eee They got pet™™ a aa
arrived to sce
mnie: don her. — ce, a tiger,
Parvati to ia engaged in als pen a tang
While oe of tusks a0 o— rvati) was standing
with his weap imalayas. Uma ( i. “J shall do it when
pings °° * The tiger bega) to thins,
on one leg.
BRAHMA
it is needed’’. Thinking thus it gazed at the face of Devi
with staring eyes and consequently it lost one eye.
Pronouncing the word Brahma Devi did -penance for a
hundred years, After that Brahma, the Lord of the three
worlds appeared before her and said to her: “I am much
pleased. Your penance was flawless. Ask your boon.”
Kali replied, “Oh, Lotus-born ! First give this tiger a
boon, It will please me.” Then Brahma gave the wonderful tiger leadership of the Ganas, devotion to Siva, invincibility and righteousness. After giving the tiger this boon
Brahma told Parvati, ““Now, Ambika, ask your boon.
Don’t hesitate, I will grant the boon.’? Then Parvati
asked the boon. “Brahma, give me golden colour’.
Brahma said “‘Let it be so’’, and disappeared. The
dark complexion of Parvati disappeared. She got the
colour of the filament of the lotus flower. From the discarded.skin Katyayani was born. Then Indra appeared
and asked for her as a gift: Indra requested Parvati on
behalf of heaven. “‘Let me have her. Let this Kausgiki
be my sister. Because she was born from your Koga,
(outer skin) she is Kaugiki, I am also Kausika.*? Devi
gave the beautiful Kausiki to Indra. Sahasraksa (Indra
who has thousand eyes) took her to the Vindhya mountain; when they reached there Indra told her. ‘“You stay
on this mount, honoured and revered by gods. You will
be known as Vindhyavasini (who stays on the Vindhya).
He consecrated the goddess there. She was given a lion
as her carrier (Vahana) “You destroy the asuras ?”
saying so Indra returned to Heaven. (Vamana Purana,
Chapter 54).
8) Brahma became river. Long ago in the period of
Caksusa manvantara (the age of a Manu), Brahma
decided to perform a sacrifice on the Sahya Mountain
and preparations were made for it. Brahma came with
Visnu and Siva. Bhrgu and the other hermits took their
seats. Mahavisnu called Svaradevi, the wife of Brahma.
But she was very slow in coming. The hermit Bhrgu
said to Visnu : “You yourself have gone to call Devi.
But she is very slow. The auspicious moment is coming
‘to an end. So how are we to commence the rituals ?”
‘If Svara does not appear before the end of the stipulated
time we shall seat Gayatri in her place,” said Visnu.
Siva also agreed to it. So Bhrgu seated Gayatri on the
right side of Brahma and the rituals were performed. By
then Svara reached the sacrificial hall. When she saw
that Gayatri was placed in her place and the rituals were
performed she became angry, because of her quarrel
with her co-wife. She called out: ‘Where the person to
whom respect is due, is not given respect and where the
person who ought not to be respected is given undue
respect, there, scarcity, death and fear will be rampant.
She dared to sit on the right in my place. So she will
grow lean and become a river which will not be seen in
the world. All of you willbecome rivers because you have
placed a person lower than me in my position.” Hearing
the curse of Svara, Gayatrirose up trembling, and cursed
Svara also to become a river. Before Svara was changed
to a river, Brahma and the other gods rose up and
requested for absolution from the curse. Svara said,
“Gods, it is because you have not given oblations to
Ganapati in the beginning of the sacrifice, that this
break, due to my anger, has been caused. My curse
cannot be futile. So each of you change to a river by
your portions and we, your wives, will also become rivers
by our portions, and flow to the west,’’

BRAHMA
Thus Brahma, Visnu and Maheévara became rivers
with their portions. Brahma became the fast-flowing
Kukudmati, Mahavisnu changed to river Krsna and
Siva, the river Veni. The devas also changed their
portions-to rivers and flowed from the Sahya mountain
to the east and their wives changed to rivers by their
portions and flowed to the west. Svara and Gayatri
flowed as two rivers to the west and then joined together
as one river called Savitri. Visnu and Siva who were
consecrated at the sacrifice by Brahma came to be called
Bala and Atibala (Powerful and more powerful). This is
the origin of the rivers in Kerala. (Padma Purana,
Chapter 113).
9) Brahma 1s not worshipped. Long ago Brahma and
Visnu went to see Siva near Himavan. They saw a shining phallus there in front of them. It was of immense
size. One of them went downwards and the other
upwards to find out the end of it. Both returned without
reaching the top or the bottom and by penance they
pleased Siva who appeared before them and asked them
what boon they desired. Brahma asked Siva to take
birth as his son. Siva did not like this and said that nobody would worship Brahma because of his extravagant
desire (namely, to have Siva as his son). Visnu requested
that he should be made a servant at Siva’s feet. So
Visnu incarnated as Siva’s Sakti(power). That Sakti is
Parvati. So Visnu and Parvati are one and the same ina
sense. (Kathasaritsagara, Kathapithalambakam, ‘Taranga 1).
10) The abode of Brahma. It is said in Devi Bhagavata,
Skandha 8, that the abode of Brahma is on the top of
Mount Mahameru. There are nine towns there. Manovati which is in the centre, is the town of Brahma. Due
east of Manovati stands Amaravati, the town of Indra.
On the south-east corner there is Rajovati which is owned
by Agni (fire-god). Due south of Brahmapuri there is
the town of Samyamani which is the town of Yama (God
of death) On the south west corner there is the town of
' Nirrti. It is named Krsnafijana. On the west there is
the town called Sraddhavati. It is the abode of God
Varuna. On the north-west corner there is the town
called Gandhavati which is the abode of Bhagavan
Vayu (Wind-God). Due north to Brahmapuri stands the
town of Kubera (God of wealth). It is known by the
name Mahodaya. On the north east corner there is the
city of Siva. It is known as Yagovati.
11) The sons of Brahma. Brahma is the creator of all
the living things in the world. Still mention is made in the
Puranas about countless divine persons who were born
from the mind and body of Brahma, directly and indirectly. They are given below in groups
(1) Marici, Angiras, Atri, Pulastya, Pulaha, and Kratu.
It is mentioned in the Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter
65, Stanza 10, that these six grand hermits were born
from the mind of Brahma.
(2) Dhaté and Vidhata. It is mentioned in Mahabharata Adi Parva, Chapter 66, Stanza 51 that these
two were good sons born to Brahma.
(3) Rudra. Mention is made in Agni Purana, Chapter
20, that Brahma had a roaring son who was named
Rudra.
(4) Svayambhuva Manu. It occurs in Bhagavata
Skandha 11, that Manu Svayambhuva was the son of
Brahma.
(9) Kandarpa (Kamadeva—Cupid). In Kathasarit-
' He had seminal discharge. Aditya (the Sun)
BRAHMA
sagara, Lavanakalarbaka, Taranga, 6, it is mentioned
that Cupid was born from the Egoism of Brahma.
(6) Madhuka and Golika. In Uttara Ramayana, mention is made that from the playful habit of Brahma, a
giant named Madhuka and a giantess named Golika
were born.
(7) Bhrgu. It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Adi Parva,
Chapter 5, Stanza 8, that the hermit Bhrgu was the son
of Brahma.
(8) Jarmbavan. It is seen in Kammpa Ramayana that
Jarhbavan was born from the sweat of Brahma.
(9)The Sanakas. In Bhagavata mention is made that
the Sanakas (Sanaka, Sananda, Sanatana and Sanatkumara) were sons of Brahma.
(10)In Mahabharata, Anusdsana Parva there 1s 4
passage given as the words of Vasistha spoken to Bhrgu,
about the birth of many of the sons of Brahma. ‘“‘May
I tell you a story I have heard long ago about the revelation of Brahma of himself?
Lord Rudra took the form of Varuna and performed a
sacrifice. Many hermits, all the devas, Agni and others,
Vasatk=ra (Exclamation in sacrifice) which took body;
and all yajfiangas came to the sacrificial hall. All the
expedients, all the glories which are thousands in numbe!
took shape and came to the sacrifice. Rgveda array
in garments of heroism came there. All the omens, 4
the voices, all the emotions, all the etymologies of pro
nouncing Veda Siktas, all the svarabhaktikas, Omkara
(the syllable Om) the eye of all the Vedic metres an
their theories, all restraints and donations, all Vedas,
Upanisads, accomplishments, Savitri, the past, the near
future and distant future, all these came there. The
Lord Siva held everyone of them. He offered hts spirit
by his spirit. The sacrifice took many forms and she
radiances. Paramagiva is heaven, is the sky, is the earth,
is the ether and the husband of the Earth, 1s the lor
of all accomplishments, is noble and the lord of radiance:
This Lord is lauded by the names Brahma, Siva, Ru i
Varuna, Agni, and Prabhavatt. Siva is the King of me
the worlds. Penances, sacrifices, vows emblazed by fas ,
all the directions and gods of directions, Indras, celesti?”
maids, mothers of the worlds, all these assumed ae
and came to the sacrifice in multitudes. Everybody we
witnessed the sacrifice of Paramegvara, who was in ™
form of Varuna, was greatly pleased. Seeing the pleasé
celestial maids standing in rows passion arose In Brahmétook the
earth on which the semen fell and threw it into the s4¢ 7
ficial fire, which blazed furiously. Brahma who poear
the offerer of oblation had discharge again. He got it ad
the sacrificial ladle and with recitation of spells ofc
it in the sacrificial fire as if it was ghee. The puwer.
semen contained the three attributes of Sattva, R4J
and Tamas. From the attribute of Rajas arose nce
living world which had activity as its purpose. Rag onis the quality of Sattva which entered the living a? - of
living world. It gives light to everything. It also 4 ed
the power of discrimination. From the semen © 5 0
in the fire, three sons with body and the attribur om
demi-gods came out. The male who had originate saa)
the flame called ‘Bharjana’ became Angiras. “avi
who originated from the burning coals became” ves
Over and above these three radiances, other raasici
also originated from the sacrificial fire. From the

= = jeunes ——— eee
BRAHMA 151 BRAHM2.
(rays) of the fire Marici the father of Kagyapa was born.
From the KuSa-grass spread on the floor of the hall of
sacrifice, the Bdalakhilyas were born. Atri also was
born from the Kuéga-grass. The noble hermits called
Vaikhanasas, who have grown powerful by penance and
became the seat of all good qualities, were born from
the sacrificial ashes. From the stream of fire which are
the eyes of the sacrificial fire the handsome ASvins
were born. The rest of the Prajapatis were born from
the ears of the fire. From the pores of the skin of fire
were born the hermits, from the sweat the ‘chandas’
(metre of Vedas) and from might, the mind. For this
reason the Vedic scholars and knowers of the Sruti and
those who see the superiority of Vedas, say that fire isa
combination of all the gods. The trees that feed the fire
are called Masas (months), the sap of the tree is called
Paksa (half of the month i.e. full moon to new moon and
new moon to full moon), the pith of the tree is called
night and day and the flames are called Muhirtas
(auspicious moments). Rudras were born from the
blood of fire and the golden coloured gods, the Maitras,
also were born from the blood of fire. From the smoke
of the fire, the Vasus, from the flame of the fire Rudras
and the Adityas of the extreme radiance were born.
The planets and stars which stand in their places 1n
the sky are the charcoal of the fire. Brahma declared that
fire was Brahma the supreme spirit, eternal and the
giver of all wishes. The sinless Mahadeva, who was 1n
the form of Varuna said, “This sacrificial fire is mine,
: _ So the children born as the first
and I am the sacrificer So Bhreu, Aagiras an 4
fruit of this sacrifice are mine.
doubt. Let everybody who moves
no
Sie Oe aie tooo that these three are my aon the
fruit of my sacrifice.” Agni said, “These are pare an
my organs. They had been depending on ms a
sustenance. So they are my Sons. Bras : seh
of all the worlds and the grandfather of all bitie ing
said, ‘““They are my sons. I offered my sperm to he %
and ‘these sons were born therefrom. How can Mey
the utterer of the
claimed by anybody else ae ait the owner of
fferer of the sperm. © |
ihe he Tat a the owner of py ie OE mee
' i rou
contest on the point that the birth - ee eee:
from the oblation of my sperm. fore Brahma and
these arguments en A ot, It is not only us that
sg nd ae but the entire pre ae
non-living is born from you. h ia nish.
the shape of Varuna have kay, 10 days of old, a
12) Brahma and the giantess Ki askiaty. on the northern
ferocious giantess name ack “s hugeness of her
side af ae Himalayas. Dea ale aes cerita She
body and the sary fr the alleviate ot aya Mou
eat She stood on one leg 1 om — ae on the
i = her eyes on the sun 1? ce continued
ee tea ht and the severe penan d before her
Moon 1n sd x Brahma gapenite - is be
for a thousand yea : sk for any ‘i a .
and told her that s fen (Needle) as har 3 sa
“T wish to become abi" 71 i. is the boon I pray 10;
said, “Let it be so,
; disease.
ing the form of CAC ed ber and _ (needle) with the
-- cholera) You
= e wicked,
Brahma’. Brahma hese ee
my daughter, you shall pe (Spasmno
prefix “V’ that is Visticika, ap ase -
can eat those who eat stale 100%
those who sit in places where they ought not to sit and
those who are hard-hearted. Enter into their bodies and
affect their hearts, spleens and life-breaths. Thus carr
out the work of destruction? You can affect both ee
good and the bad. But good people should not be killed
So to save them from death, you can use this mantra
(spell).
“om, hram, hrim, srim, sam, visnugaktaye, namah:
bhagavati visnugakti ehi, enam hara hara: dehe hana
hana? paca paca! matha matha : utsddaya utsadaya : dire kuru kuru svaha—visiicike !_ tvarh himavantam gaccha? jivasarah candramandalam gatasi
svaha.”’ =
Saying these words Brahma disappeared. Karkkati made
her body smaller and smaller and finally assumed the
shape of a needle. After that she began her work b
entering the body of those who had lost their edna
because of illness, in the form of a needle of gout ma!
caused Cholera, and the body of those who were lean
and worn and weary, in the form of internal cholera
Thus assuming two bodies and killing countless people
she travelled for a long time in the earth:and the sk
until she herself felt aversion to her work. When an
remembered her original form she loathed the needleform. Karkkati again went to the vicinity of the Himalayas and began to do penance, which lasted for another
thousand years. Thus she became pure and by the
power of thinking, she acquired spiritual knowledge
Then she wanted to be saved from the mirage of birth
and death, to attain which, she did penance for yet
another thousand years at the end of which, the high!
pleased Brahma appeared before her and said, “dau rad
ter Karkkati, all the darkness is erased from your Bec
and you have attained deliverance from delusion. Now
I will bless you according to your wish. Receive your
original body and walk about in the worlds eating the
ignorant, bad beginners, the imprudent, those who sit in
bad places and dwell in bad places.”
She became a giantess again, but as she had attained
purity of soul, she engagec herself in deep meditation
which was free from doubt. The meditation lasted for a
long time. Finally her mind waved. Then she remembered about worldly things and felt hunger. She remembered, “‘Brahma has ordained the wicked as my food
So I shall seek them.” ‘Thinking thus she went to a jun le
in the vicinity of the Himalayas. That was the dwellin
place of foresters. In that dark night the King and ee
minister of the foresters approached the place where
Karkkati sat. Karkkati seeing them thought, “Jet me
know first if they are good or bad.’ So she decided to
ask them some questions.
She asked them in a voice like thunder. ‘“‘Who are you ?
Are you enlightened sages or ignorant fools ? say quickly.”’
The king of the foresters hearing this replied in a cynical
way. “You insignificant ghost? What is your form ?
Where do you sit? Let us see your powerless body. Who
is there to fear at your sound which is like the humming
of a she-beetle ?”
Hearing this reply Karkkati showed her tusks and laughed loud, to spread light, and to terrify them. They
heard the loud roaring sound of her laugh and saw her
huge form in the light. But those mighty heroes were
not at all shaken by the sound they heard or the sight
they witnessed. The Minister looked at her and said
‘Hei, Giantess ? These delusions of yours will have me

BRAHMA
effect on us. Even if a number of raosquitoes like you
come before us, they will be only dry leaves before wind.
You are acting like this merely for food. So what is
your need? Tell us, we will satisfy you’’.
Hearing the words of the minister Karkkati knew that
her might was useless before such valiant men. She
thought them to be sages. So she said ‘‘Hey mighty
heroes. Who are you ? Tell me the truth’. The minister
said: ‘This the King of foresters and I am his minister.
We came for a night-walk to find out and punish wicked
people like you.”’
The giantess appreciated them and said: ‘‘I am about to
put some questions to you. If you give me suitable answers you will be saved.” The King agreed. The questions put by her are given below in the order they were
asked :—
I) Inside what atom which is-unit and multiple at the
same time, do the lakhs of universes originate and vanish
as bubbles in a sea?
2) What does shine as ether and non-ether ?
3) What is it that is something and nothing ?
4) What is it that is going and not going at the same
time ?
59) What is it that has taken form from voidness ?
6) What is it that ismoving and at the same time stationary as a rock?
7) Who draws pictures in clear sky?
&) In whai seed do the worlds exist as a big tree in its
seed ?
9) From what substance can the living and non-living
things in the worlds, not be separated as the foam and
waves cannot be separated from the ocean ?
10) What substance is dualism not separate from
(others) as fluidity from water ?
The reply given by the minister to each question is given
below in the order of the questions,
1) Hey, Giantess : All the questions you have put before us encased in figurative words discernible only to
the Vedic sages, are concerned with the supreme Being.
The atom is the supreme Spirit which is beyond all
knowledge of the mind and the senses. As it is without
organs of action it is as unmanifested as the sky. And
inside that supreme atom which could be felt only by the
mind, crores and crores of bubbles of universes originate
and vanish due to frailty.
2) ‘The impersonal Supreme Being, having no substance,
pervades everything. This Supreme Being, Brahman,
is pure knowledge (Jnanasvariipa). It is the sky and the
non-sky.
3) As it is indescribable the Impersonal Supreme Spirit
is nothing, but as it is a reality it is something.
4) As it pervades everything accessible, the Impersonal
Supreme Spirit has the quality of motion. But as it hag
no emotions and as there exists no space beyond, it is
motionless.
5) As it is inaccessible to others the Supreme Spirit is
having no existence, but as it 1s the essence of everything
that is good, it has existence. .
6) The Supreme Spirit is the radiance of motion or
activity and as there 1s nothing else to be found out, that
is, as it doesn’t know anything else it is as rigid as a
rock,
7) Inthe clear sky the Supreme Spirit draws the pictures
of the universe.
8) Exists in the Supreme Atom.
BRAHMA
9) As the entire visible world cannot be separated from
the Supreme Spirit nothing is other than the Impersonal
Supreme Spirit.
10) The differentiations of the various worlds are mere
appearances of the Supreme Spirit and so dualism is of the
same figure.
The King drew Karkkati nearer to the Impersonal
Supreme Spirit. He advised her not to commit slaughter.
She accepted the advice. The King asked her to come
to his palace assuming the form of a beautiful woman.
She asked, what could he offer to a giantess as food.
The King said: ‘““You good woman, we shall find out a
way for that. You change yourself to a beautiful woman
wearing golden ornaments and stay in my palace for a
while. I shall arrange to gather sinners, robbers and
such other wicked people who are to be given capital
punishment, in thousands from various places, and shall
give them to you. You can take your original form and
take them all to the peaks of the Himalaya and feed on
them, .
Gluttonous people like to eat in solitude. After having
eaten sumptuously, take some sleep, and a little rest 1n
meditation. When you wake up you come again and
take away people destined to be killed. The slaughter
done for the sake of righteousness is not a sin. It is said
to be equal to mercy. When your desire for meditation
is over you must come to me. If an attachment of love
is formed even with bad persons it is difficult to break
the love.”
Karkkati obeyed the King. They all reached the palace.
Within six days three thousand wicked persons, w0
were sentenced to death, were brought before the King;
from his own country and the various dependent countries, and were given to Karkkati. In the night she took
her original form, gathered all the wicked people, who
deserved killing and bidding good bye to the King;
went to the Peaks of the Himalayas. (Jiadnavasistha). f
13) Brahma and Haindavas. At the end of the day °
Brahma there was the great flood, and destroying ail the
heavens, Brahma went to sleep. He woke up next mor
ing and after the usual morning ablutions, prepared a
creation. He looked around at the sky, and saw som
heavens still engaged in usual activities. He was ers
at this unusual occurrence. Ten Brahmas and the ee
less devas (gods) under them were doing their routin®
work. Brahma stared at the worlds for a long time thin :
ing “‘How is it’’. ‘Then he by his divine power caused ce
of the suns, working ina heaven, to come to him, 4 eo
asked him. ‘‘Who are you, shining one ? How have the
worlds come into existence ?” . 4 anil
The Sun said with humility. ‘Your sons Marici nal
others erected a beautiful shed called Suvarnataen
in a corner of Jarnbudvipa in the valley below -_* iL.
A Brahmana named Indu arose from that “ab
The Brahmana who was a Vedic scholar, righte™.
and peaceful, led the life of a house-holder wit
. - : So they
wife for a long time. But they were childless. They
went to Kailasa and did penance to get children. - ms
entered a natural arbour which was quite silent and ‘ -
severe penance. Siva appeared and said that
would get children.
In course of time, ten sons were born to them.
a long time, when the sons had reached manhoo
old parents died. The sons felt very sorry. They res
life as short and full of woe and misery. So they we”
r
t for

BRAHMA
penance, as they had no relatives left to care for them
They abstained from all the pleasures of the world and
reached Kailasa. They began to meditate upon the
shortness of life. ‘“What is there which is noble in this
world ? Is there anything except woe and misery ? How
simple is the desire of man for greatness ? One thinks
himself prosperous if he becomes a house-holder. The
head of the village is more prosperous than a householder. The King of a dependent state is more powerful
than the head of a village. An independent king is far
more prosperous than a dependent King. When we
think of the state of an emperor how simple is an independent king ! When compared with Indra, the Lord
of the three worlds what is an emperor after all? But
there is nothing glorious in the state of Indra also as it
ends in a Brahmamuhirtta (a period .in the life of
Brahma). So what is there substantial and eternal ?
Brahma alone is eternal and indestructible.” said the
eldest brother. ‘Concentrate your mind and say to yourself, ‘I am the supreme Being Brahma seated on a lotus’,
and meditate upon it and pray
Brahma will be conferred upon you,” They understood
this and thus the ten brothers became Brahmas. There
are ten heavens of them. They are ten worlds in the
sky of mind. I am the sun who creates day and night in
one of them,” saying thus the Sun went away. Brahma
commenced his activity. (Jfianavasistha ).
14) The age of Brahma. F orty-three crores twenty lacs
of human years is one four-yug period called ‘Devadevas or gods).
caturyuga’ (a period of four yuga® of the
One thousand deva caturyugas will make one Mahayuga
(great yuga) A Mahayuga is a day time of, Brahma.
During the period of one Mahayuga, that is, during
one day of Brahma, fter another,
fourteen Manus, one 4 n0
help Brahma in doing the work of creation. This is the
time of the seventh Manu in the present day time
(Kalpa)of the present Brahma. The period of six Manus
are over in the present day time of the presen
t Brahma.
Vaivasvata is the present Mant. Brahma wakes a4 *
the morning—the beginning ol a Kalpa. ia Mi ee
underwent destruction in the night, are create again
in the morning. AS Brahma wakes up daily
in the morning, what are the things created before, which do not
undergo destruction ? At that time there will aa
without destruction, six or twentyfour tattvas (p
These twenty-four
sations.
ples ) which are natural creation / oe
principles are not the creation of rahma. - “i @
e who created Brahma 1n the lo
ho was originated 1n the
pepente names, H Oe me
5 ted them. Branme S Ol
Teas wget prew from the nave of Narayan a ineh
the work of creation guided by these = ee
. forme :
ples. The work ah acer Per vention): Everything
called
called Prataree (gay ce wil dene rtene tn
evening. After a day time is ove a me F adeed
and sleep for Brahma. =
years, dat is thirty-six thousan Peet d the life
and Brahma nights. At the expiry : d will dissolve 1n
of Brahma will come ae a Bf Brahmas have
Narayana. ‘Thus crores and cro future also crores
appeared and passed away pan agai):
will appear and pass away: Sans of Brahma. The
15) The creations and substiule ore tone two kinds, The
creations performed ?Y Brahm © cond is Pratisarga or
first is Sarga or creation and the s¢ :
for it and knowledge of
BRAHMA
substitute creation. In the first Kalpa when a Brahma
1S born from the lotus, certain creations are made and
the things thus originated do not undergo destruction in
the evening or at the end of the Kalpa. They are the
sarga or creation. On that day and every day of the life
of Brahma they help Brahma in the work of creation
In a sense they could be called Prajapatis (the lords of
emanation). But as most of them have not left sons
and for other reasons also, they are not well known by
that name. Only the persons mentioned here have cf
long a life as that of Brahma. The Sanakas, Karddama
Marici, Atri, Angiras, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu Bhreu,
Vasistha, Daksa, Narada, Dharma, Adharma, Nirrti,
Sarasvati, Kama, Atharva, the. Manes, Agni ‘Sthanu,
and Svayarhbhuva : these do not end ‘at the end of a
Brahma’s day (or Kalpa) and will be dissolved only when
Brahma is dissolved. A Brahma creates in his first morning not only persons from Sanaka to Svayarhbhuva, but
also creations which have a history only up to the end
of that day, such as the lokas (worlds) of Bhiloka
Bhuvarloka and Svarloka, and minerals, plants aviuiials;
humanity etc. Sarga or creation is called Prakrta Srsti
(natural creation). Pratisarga or substitute creation
is called Aprakrta Srsti or unnatural creation. At the
end of the Kalpa, Sarvarttakagni (Fire which destroys
the universe) and Sarnvarttaka varsa (Rain which dee
troys the universe) wil] occur and all the unnatural creations -will be destroyed. In all the morning, followin
the first morning of a.Brahbma substitute creation heat
hey are destroyed at the end of each Kalpa
place, and t
(Bhagaby Sarnvarttakagni and Sarnvarttakavarsa.
vata).
16) Other information.
(1)Brahma was once born under the name Candra
from the womb of Anastiya the wife of hermit Atri
(See Anasiy4).
(2) From the passion of lust of Brahma, a daughter
named Sarasvati was born and Brahma married her
(See Sarasvati ).
(3) It ss seen in Bhagavata, Skandha 11, that the caste
system came out from the mouth of Brahma.
(4) It was Brahma who gave the name Indrajit (he w
overcame Indra ) to Meghanada the son "of fy bees
because he had defeated Indra. (Uttara Ramayana)
(5) When the life time of Sri Rama was about to come
to an end, Brahma sent Kala (time—the God of death)
in disguise to the presence of Sri Rama. (See Rama).
(6) In the burning of Tripura, Brahma was the charioteer of Siva. (See Tripurarn). |
7) Once Brahma performed sacrifice on the head of
Gayasura (a giant). (See Gayatirtha).
(8) Once Brahma went to the hermitage of Vyasa, and
advised him to compose Bharata and to propagate it in
the world. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 55).
(9) It was Brahma who-gave the name poetry to the
work of Vyasa and employed Ganapati as the scribe of
Vyasa. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 1, Stanza 61).
10) At the sacrifice of Varuna, Brahma begot Bhrgu
the hermit from the sacrificial fire. (M.B. Chapter 5
Stanza 8).
(11) Daksa was born from the right thumb of Brahma
and from his left thumb was born the wife of Daksa
(M. B. Adi parva, Chapter 66, Stanza 10),

= nt ae ee
BRAHMA
(12) Dharmadeva incarnated from the right breast of
Brahma. (M.B. Adi parva, Chapter 66, Stanza 3).
(13) The hermit Bhrgu broke open the heart of Brahma
and incarnated from there. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter
66, stanza 41).
(14) Sukra turns all the worlds round at the instruction
of Brahma. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 66, Stanza 42).
(15) Brahma gave boons to two asuras (demons) Sunda
and Upasunda. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 208, Stanza
(16) Visvakarma created Tilottama according to the
instruction of Brahma. Brahma gave her a boon. (M.B.
Adi Parva, Chapter 211, Stanza 23).
(17)When Agni suffered from indigestion, Brahma
instructed that the forest Khandava should be burnt
to cure him. (See Agni).
(18) Brahma made the bow called Gandiva. (M.B.
Adi Parva, Chapter 224, Stanza 19).
(19) At the end of thousand yugas Brahma performs a
grand sacrifice near the holy place Bindusaras on the
top of the mountain Hiranyagrnga. (M.B. Sabha Parva,
Chapter 3, Stanza 15),
(20) Brahma has a divine council. A complete description is given of this council in Mahabharata, Sabha
Parva, Chapter 11.
(21)Brahma cursed Hiranyakagipu and gave him a
boon that he would not be killed by any sort of weapons.
(M.B. Sabha parva, Chapter 38, Daksinatya Patha).
(22) Brahma wears a divine conch for the sake of Indra.
(M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 53, Stanza 14).
(23) Brahma had erected a Yiipa (a post to which sacrificial animals are tied) near Brahma-saras in Dharmaranya. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 34, Stanza 86).
24)Once Brahma performed a sacrifice in Prayaga
(Allahabad). (M.B, Vana Parva, Chapter 87, Stanza
(25) Brahma sang a hymn once for the holy place of
Puskara tirtha(M.B. Vanaparva, Chapter 82, Stanza
(28) It was according to the instruction of Brahma that
the devas went to Dadhica and requested for his bone.
(M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 100, Stanza 8),
(27) Brahma once performed a sacrifice called ‘Istikrta’
at Kuruksetra. ‘This sacrifice took one thousand years
for its completion. (M.B.Vana Parva, Chapter 120,
Stanza 1),
(28) The devas (gods) got angry because Brahma lifted
the earth taking the shape ofa hog. But Brahma pacified
them. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 142, stanza 45),
(29) Once Brahma created a city, called Hiranyapura,
for the asuras (demons) named the Kalakeyas and told
them that it would be destroyed by human hands. (M.B.
Vana Parva, Chapter 173, Stanza 11),
(30) Brahma was born from the lotus in the nave of
Visnu. (M.B. Vana parva, Chapter 203, Stanza 10).
(31) Brahma granted a boon to a King named Dhundhu.
(See Dhundhu).
(32) Brahma was the father of Pulastya and the grandfather of Ravana. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 274,
Stanza 11).
(33) Once Brahma instructed the devas to take birth as
monkeys. (M.B. Vana parva, Chapter 376, Stanza 6).
(34)Once Brahma got angry thinking how to destroy
the living creatures which were increasing prolifically.
(M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 52, Stanza 46).
BRAHMA
(35) Death came into being from the body of Brahma.
(M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 53, Stanza 17).
(36) Death was given the boon of destruction of the living
beings. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 53, stanza 21).
(37) Once Brahma took the devas (gods) to the presence
of Siva because they had fled away fearing Vrttrasura.
(M.B. Drona Farva Chapter 94, Stanza 53).
(38) Brahma prophesied that Arjuna would come out
victorious in the fight between Karna and Arjuna.
(M.B. Karna Parva, Chapter 87, Stanza 69).
(39) Brahma presented the hide of a deer to Subrahmanya, who was going to the battle field. (M.B. Salya
Parva, Chapter 46, stanza 52).
(40) Brahma granted a boon to
Carvaka), .
(41) Brahma gave Rudra a sword, (M.B. Santi Parva;
Chapter 166, Stanza 45). :
(42) Brahma pacified Siva who got angry, at the sacrlfice of Daksa. (M.B. Santi parva, Chapter 283, Stanz4
(43) Once Brahma took the form of a swan and exhorted
the Sadhyaganas. (M.B. Santi parva, Chapter 229). 4
44) Once there arose a fight between Mahavisnu 2”
iva and Brahma pacified both of them. (M.B. San
Parva, Chapter 342, Stanza 124). 7
(45) Once Brahma went to the mount Vaijayan
talked to Siva about the glory of Mahavisnu.
Santi Parva, Chapter 350 Daksinatya Patha). _ -
(46) Once Brahma talked about the nobility of Brahm
nas. (M.B. Anugasana Parva, Chapter 35, Daksin@ y
Patha).
(47) Brahma gave the devas (gods) the eart
for performing sacrifice. (M.B. Anusasana Parva,
ter 66). . the
(48) Once Brahma made a speech to Indra abour oo |
importance of giving cow n gift. (M.B. Anusa
Parva, Chapter 74, Stanza 2). I
(49) Te granted a boon to Surabhi. (M.B. Ap
§asana Parva, Chapter 83, Stanza 36). _ is
(50) Brahma originated the Prajapatis by woe ai
sperm into the sacrificial fire at the sacrifice of 99). :
(M.B. Anugasana Parva, Chapter 85, prance nits)
(51) Once Brahma gave the devas (gods), Rsis ( i one
and the Nagas (serpents) the ekaksaramantra (t Chap’
syllable-spell) ‘OM’. (M.B. Asvamedha rarva,
ter 26, Stanza 8) - 4 ‘Catus”
(52) In almost all the Puranas Brahma is calle chs
mukha’ (having four faces) and to substantiate vane
following story is given in the Matsyapurana. ay, ao
created Satariipa with half the portion of his bo wile
accepted that bright and beautiful woman as 1
He could. not bear his beautiful wife to be ate cote
his sight even for a moment. So much had he
attached to her. ait T
One day Satariipa was walking round ae se bY
‘daughters born from his mind also were seate ". “ his
So he could not turn round and round and a? jac?
wife as she was moving. To solve this problem,
of one face, there arcse four faces. _ het 4
Once Satariipa was walking in the air. To 5€ matt?
that time there arose a fifth head on the top of his H
hair, It is this face that was plucked off by Wi ing pov
53) Various stories occur in the puranas rega™ They at
iva plucked off the fifth head of Brahma.
given below,
Carvaka. (See
ta and
h as a gift
Chap”
Pd

BRAHMA
(1) Once Brahma praised Siva and pleased him and
asked him to become his son. Siva did not like it. He
got angry and cursed, “‘I shall become your son. But I
will pluck off your fifth head.” ,
(2) In the beginning Brahma created the incarnation
of Siva, called Nilalohita also, along with the creation
of worlds and everything init. In later creations Brahma
did not think of Nilalohita. Seeing Brahma carrying
on the work of creation forgetting him, Nilalohita got
angry and cursed Brahma, “Your fifth head will shortly
be destroyed.”’ . .
(3) After Brahma became five-faced the brightness of
the devas began to decrease day by day. Seeing this the
conceited Brahma said to Siva: “I am the first who got
existence in this world. So by all means I am the eldest.
Hearing this Siva got angry and plucked off the fifth
head of Brahma and threw it away. (Matsyapurana,
When the fifth head was gone, the rest of the heads were
benumbed, The sweat which flowed from them was
thrown into the earth by Brahma. Out of it came out
a horrible monster, which began to chase Siva, we
saree hold of it and gave it to Visnu. (Skanda, »,
(4) In the phar Ee cglleat aq ory occurs about
the quarrel between Siva and Drahmea, | ae
Ones Brahma fell in love with Sati the wife ae
coming to know of this Siva tried to kill Brahma. i Gica
visnu tried to pacify Siva, but 1t was of a eal ‘
took away the fifth head of Brahma and ma a II a * ee
and consequently Brahma became invincible.
world. = A
(5) Once Siva showed his daughter sapere
who grew lustful instantly ; Siva sari to his sons
showing this ill-owned Do ee icaltia created Sati
(Brahma’s sons). As a revenge Skanda, 2, 2, 26).
and insulted Siva pote ag 7 oe In Amaral arious names of Brahma an
kote fet names are given to Brahma. .
“Brahmatmabhih surajyesthah
Paramesthi pitamahah ,
Hiranyagarbho lokesah
Svayambhiiécaturanana (|
Dhatabjayonir druhino
Viranicih kamalasanab /
4 prajapatir ved
vided aye srtvidhih {|
Nabhijanmandajah parvo |
nidhanah kamalodbhavah: |
Sadanando rajomurtt
Sattyako harnsavahanah Hl
Brahma—he who increases.
Atmabha—born of his own ®
Supreme Spirit.
mr Ww
suras (gods).
eal iti inn who d
Parama.
Pitamaha—grandfather of the
and others.
Hiranyagarbha—hav
€ in womb.
Cig tie god of the il
Svayarnbhi—who js born - e
Caturanana—who has four °°"
cecord or born of the
ho came into being before all the
wells in the world 0
manes such as Aryama
f truth or
undane
way tie golds Ete a
BRAHMACARYA
Dhata—who holds or bears everything.
Abjayoni—born of lotus. (abja)
Druhina—who hurts asuras.
Virafici—he who creates.
Kamalasana—who sits on lotus.
Srsta—he who creates.
Prajapati—Pati of prajas (Lord of progeny).
Vedha—he who creates.
Vidhata—he who does.
Visvasrt—who creates the world.
Vidhi—he who does or decides or judges.
Nabhijanma—born from the nave of Visnu.
Andaja—born from the egg.
Harmsavahana—who has swan as his conveyance.
BRAHMA. See Parabrahma.
BRAHMA. A kind of marriage. The bride is adornBRAHMABALI.
BRAHMACARI I.
ed with all kinds of ornaments and is taken to _bridegroom; and given to him as wife. This is called Brahma
marriage. Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 73,
Stanza 8 states that this mode of marriage was allowed
to all the four castes of ancient Bharata.
An individual of a dynasty of teachers.
(See Guruparampara) .
See Brahmacarya.
BRAHMACARIII. A devagandharva (a class of Gods)
BRAHMACARYA.
born to Kasyapaprajapati of his wife Prtha. He took
part in the Birth festival of Arjuna. (M.B. Adi Parva,
Chapters 65 and 122).
In ancient India an ideal life was
considered to pass through four stages, and Brahmacaryais one of the stages of life. The four stages
are Brahmacarya (Vedic student vowed to chastity),
Garhasthya (married householder), Vanaprastha (forest
hermit) and Sannydasa (an ascetic who has renounced
the world). Brahmacarya, the first stage of the four
is considered as the period of education. The rules and
conduct of a Brahmacari are given in Manusmrti,
Chapter 2.
The brahmacari who lives with the teacher has to obey
certain rules and principles. He should bathe in the
river at sun-rise and offer oblations to gods and manes.
A brahmacari has to abstain from using honey, meat,
fragrance, flowers, flower of chrysanthemum (Ind.)
women, curd, milk, ghee, churned-curd, slaughter,
bath applying oil, anointing the eyes with collyrium,
sandals, umbrella, lust, anger, covetousness, dance,
music, gambling, slander, ridicule, falsehood, and
causing injury to others. A Brahmacari should go to
bed alone. Semen should not be made to discharge
through lust. If seminal discharge occurs in dream he
should take bath early in the morning and worship the
Sun, pronouncing the mantra or spell ‘Punah’ thrice.
The Brahmacari should live on alms. It is the duty of
the brahmacari to bring water, flower for oblation,
cowdung, soil and darbha (grass) for the teacher. He
should receive alms only from the houses of those who
believe in the Vedas and sacrifices. He should not go
to the house of his téacher or his heirs and their families
for alms. Provided there are no other houses he may
receive alms from the houses of his teacher’s relatives
and in the absence of such houses he may approach
the houses of heirs to his teacher and in the absence
of such houses he may receive alms from the house of
the teacher. He should fetch ‘Camata: (fuel chieg
from butea frondosa) from a place of purity in the

BRAHMADATTA I
forest, as instructed in rules and dry it in the sun ; in
the absence of which it may be got dried in a sheltered
place. This fuel should be put in the sacrificial fire in
the mornings, at noons, and in the evenings. If a healthy
Brahmacari fails in doing his duties consecutively for
seven days it will be considered that his vow of Brahmacarya is broken and then he will have to take the vow
of ‘Avakirni’ again. Without waiting for the order of
the teacher, the Brahmacari (student) should engage
himself in devotion and meditation and in the service
of the teacher daily. When the student is before the
teacher he should stand with folded hands controlling
his body, speech, brains, sensitive organs, and mind.
Only when he is asked to sit, should he do so before
the teacher, covering the portions of his body, which
are to be covered, with clothes. He should rise up in
the morning before his teacher wakes up, and go to
bed only after the teacher has retired for sleep. When
his teacher calls him, he should not give reply lying,
sitting, walking, eating or looking in the opposite
direction. He should not gainsay the teacher. The
student should attend to the orders of the teacher and
comply with them, sitting if the teacher is sitting,
standing if the teacher is standing, standing back if the
teacher is advancing towards him, running behind if
he is walking, standing close by when he is facing the
opposite direction, folding his limbs when the teacher
is lying or sitting near. The student should have his
seat and bed one step lower than those of his teacher.
The student should not sit in a careless manner in
places where the teacher’s eyes could reaeh. He should
not utter the name of his teacher. Ifanybody speaks ill
of his teacher he should close his ears and run away
from the spot. If-a Brahmacari scoffs his teacher, he
will be born as a donkey, and as a dog if he scorns him,
and as a worm if he steals the wealth of his teacher
and as a beetle ifhe becomes jealous at the greatness
of his teacher. When the teacher is angry the brahmacari should not go near him. The Brahmacari should
not speak unasked. A Brahmacari could sit with his
teacher only when they are in avehicle, or ona camel
or in a tower or on the steps or on rocks or in a boat. He
should consider the teacher of his teacher as his teacher.
He should not address his parents who visit the house
of the teacher, without the permission of his teacher. He
should respect learned men, holymen, sons of the
teacher and those who are born of his family, as a
teacher. If the wife of the teacher is of the caste of the
teacher, the brahmacari should consider her as his
teacher. If the wife is not of the same caste the brahmacari needs only to stand up and make obeisance to her.
A brahmacari should not apply oil to the body of his
teacher’s wife, wash her, massage her body, and comb
her hair. A brahmacari may either shave his head or
grow matted hair. He should never be asleep at sunrise
or sunset. For learning Vedas etc. the student should not
give the teacher cows, clothes etc. as free gifts beforehand. On completion of education, when the student
asks the teacher for permission to get married, he should
give the teacher what he demands. A brahmacari who
has fully complied with the rules mentioned above,
will attain heaven after his death.
BRAHMADATTA I. A famous king of Kampilyapura.
1) Birth. Brahmadatta was born in the family of
Brhatksatra who was a scion of the Solar dynasty.
BRAHMADATTA I
Brhatksatra begot Suhotra, Suhotra begot Hasti, Hast!
begot Ajamidha, Ajamidha begot Brhadisu, Brhadisu
begot Brhaddhanus, Brhaddhanus begot Brhaddharma,
Brhaddharma begot Satyajit, Satyajit begot ViSvayit,
Visvajit begot Senajit and Senajit begot Rucira, Rucira
begot Prthusena, Prthusena begot Nipa, Nipa begot
Para, Para begot Prthu, Prthu begot Sukrta, Sukrta begot Vibhraja, Vibhraja begot Anuha, and Anuha married Krtvi, the daughter of hermit Sukra. Brahmadatta
was born to Anuha by Krtvi.
2) Previous birth and kingship. In Padmapurana, Part
III, Chapter 10, there is a story stating how the
seven sons of Kaugika, a hermit, became fishermen by
a curse and how they got absolution and attainment
of heaven by offering oblations to the manes. The
story is given below. Brahmadatta was the rebirth of
Pitrvartti, one of those seven sons. —
In days of old there was a hermit named Kausika 1)
Kuruksetra. His seven sons, Svaripa, Krodhana,
Himsra, Piguna, Kavi, Vagdusta and Pitrvarttt were
studying under Garga, a teacher. Their deeds were 4°
bad as their names indicated. Their father died. Th¢
sons were in want. There was no rain anywhere in the
world, These brothers had taken the milking cow °
their teacher Garga to the forest for grazing. oe!
decided to kill the cow of their teacher. The youns®
of them said, ‘“‘If we kill the cow we can use hie
offerings to the manes, and the sin will not be hee
on us. The elder brothers agreed to it. According Y
Pitrvartti killed the cow and began sacrifice to - 5
d to gir"
manes. Two of the elder brothers were detaile Fel
oblations to the devas, and three of them to ° he
d to bet
oblations to the manes. One was detaile ae
us remember!
with the necc*
t divil
e CO
guest and himself as the sacrificer. ‘Th
the manes the sacrifice was completed
sary rituals. In short, those seven hermits go
power and became daring wicked men and ate th 4
of their teacher. They told the teacher that the ©
was eaten by a leopard and gave him the calf. 1 2
In course of time they all died and were born —— 0
wild men in Dagapura. But because of their offerine
the manes they had retained memory of their Oe eet
births. So they fasted in holy baths and discarde ‘ject
lives before the people. They were born again @° |,
in the mount of Kalafijara. Because of the pol
knowledge and the penance and fast they a as
the body of deer in Prapatana and got rebul nase”
Cakravaka (ruddy goose) in the lake called Men war
saras. In this birth their names were Sumanas, ee ei
Vasu, Citradargi, Sudaréi, Jiata and Jhanapy vind
names suitable to their character. Those seve!
brothers were saints by virtue of their harmony, ce
the Supreme spirit. But owing to mental distut” ©) .4three of them lost their attainments. Seeing t - b
sures that King Anuha of Paficala was enjoy’ of
his wealth, vehicles, big army and beautitu ab
one of the Cakravakas, Pitrvartti, the devote? forme
mana, who being loyal to his father had Pe. tO
: : ' desil& pe
sacrifice and given offerings to the manes, eing 4
become a king. The other two brothers S°© ‘che :
wealth, glory and power of the two ministem, ©. the
to become ministers. Thus Pitrvartti was bor™ ad tb
son of Anuha with the name Brahmadatta ;
other two were born as Pundarika and Subalaka, - ing 0
the two ministers. Brahmadatta was anointed a§

BRAHMADATTA I
Paficala in the great city of Kampilya. The King
loved his father. He was mighty and powerful. He was
regular in performing sacrifices and giving offerings to
the manes. He had the attainment of harmony with
the supreme spirit. He understood the thought and
speech of birds and animals. He married Sannati, the
daughter of Sudeva (Devala); she was in her former
birth the cow of Garga.
Once as the King was walking in the garden with his
wife, he saw two ants. The minute creatures, who —
were husband and wife were engaged in a petty quarrel. The male one, with loving words, pacified the
female one, who instantly came close to her husband
and they became happy. The King felt amazed at this
conversation of the ants, and he laughed. Because of
the attainments of his previous lives, he had the power
to understand the language of animals, birds, etc.
Seeing the King laughing without any reason the queen
Sannati asked him why he laughed. She said that
there was no reason whatsoever for the king to laugh
just then. The King replied, “Oh, beautiful one ! justnow there was a quarrel between a female and @ male
ant. I heard i That is why I laughed. There is no
other reason.’’ The queen did not believe the grt
She thought that the King had been scofling her. :
asked him how he came to understand the ace i
of such’ creatures. The King could not Apes
question. He fasted for seven days. On oe ge
day Brahma appeared before him and told a Pm
King will know everything from the wor . Oak
Brahmin, whom he would meet when he goes to_
in t a
amar returned to the palace ap eer a
night there. Next morning be-starter ft nie ae they
ministers, for a walk. When they oi natin the
saw an old Brahmin coming towar s Le ‘s
king the Brahmin recited a Verse:
‘‘Brahmanas in Kuruksetra are
which seven as wild men 10 Da apn Sida?
Stags in Kalahyare,. Diary bet
-e we, now Living . i
Wiese an axing heard pea aE Lea A ene
ae — —— Lr oF a Bll Brahmin ae ie
vene, The] day eese mentioned before too eee
neat | het a ‘es a poor Brahmin 1n “he <4 ai
next birth Se areal °f their previous bir 3s» The
nt OF Dima, Sarvadarsi, | tee c
Tap: chika names nea ae to attain suA decided to g° for pen n eMy _
sked them, ©:
preme bliss. Then the poor ae away leaving your
sons, what is
; in
this 8 are hat jutiul ?The, sans replied,
be. a oil ou a way to earn we la wiih we
ey i, A oaasrconl morning Sa lent "of wealth.”’
the King, navy YOU will get plenty
will teach you heir father this ve
rse and then bares
The boys yan t - the old Brahmin, cam
went to the iorest.
Their father, The King was
to the gate of the
palace at arhpilya.
ta became the
Brahmadatta. ther story how CA eT ing of Paacala
There is ano Long 280 Anuha, ed. Helore he
King of this place. 4. who appe4 : de
did penance befor The King ma
: ‘on what he dest© "14 should be a
og home he might have a So? who
is x |
157 BRAHMADATTA Iil
- mighty hero, a learned man, a great hermit and who
could understand the language of all living creatures.
Brahma granted him boon and thus Brahmadatta was
born to Anuha, It was before this Brahmadatta that
the Brahmana recited his verse and it was that King
who swooned and fell down.
The two ministers were Subalaka the son of Babhravya
who was the author of the Kamagastra and Pundarika
the son of Pafcala who propagated the science of
medicine. They also remembered about their former
births and also fell down unconscious. When they
recovered the King Brahmadatta and the minister
Subala and Pundarika bemoaned the loss of powers
they had attained before by devotion, meditation,
penance and sacrifice. They cried, ‘“‘Fate has made us
desirous of the objects of oursenses and we have lost our
harmony with the Supreme Spirit.”” They repeated the
cry again and again and they spoke about the blessings
obtained by offering oblation to their manes. Brahmadatta gave the old Brahmana plenty of wealth and
several villages and - sent him fully satisfied. Then he
anointed his capable and fully qualified son Visvaksena
as King and with his retinue retired to Manasa-saras
for penance.
3) A bird as his wife when he was Ring. When Brahmadatta was the King of Kampilyapura a bird named
Tapaniya become his friend. Her head was purple
coloured and body black. By and by this bird became
his wife. A daughter named Sarvasena was born to
Brahmadatta by his bird-wife. The King had sons by
other wives. ‘Tapaniya would wash her child and place
her in the cradle early in the morning and then
go to the forest and fly about in the air. She would
return in the evening and tell the King news all over
the world. It went on like this for a long time.
Once, when there was nobody in the room a prince
took Sarvasena from the cage and choked her to death,
Tapaniya returned and seeing the dead body of her
daughter, waited for a long time. Finally she pecked
out the eyes of the prince and flew away into the air.
(Harivaméa, Chapter 20).
BRAHMADATTA II. Another King who ruled over
Kampilya, This King was the son of the hermit Cali
and his wife Somada, a Gandharva woman whose
mother was Urmila, When he was ruling Kampilya,
Kuganabha was the King of Kanyakubja. One hundred beautiful daughters were born to the King
Kuganabha. One day while they were playing in the
jungle Vayubhagavan (wind-god) saw them and grew
lustful. But they did not yield to his request. So he got
angry and cursed them and they became hump-backed.
The King was very sorry. He presented his hundred
hunch-backed daughters to King Brahmadatta, who,
by his divine power straightened their backs. When
they regained their former form they became the wives
of Brahmadatta. This story occurs in Valmiki Ramayana, Balakanda, Sargas 32 & 33.
BRAHMADATTA III. Mention is made in Mahabharata,
Bhavisya Parva, Chapter 104, about another Brahmadatta. He was the King of Salva. Though he had two
wives he had no children. Finally by the grace of
Siva two children were born to them. They were called
Harhsa and Dibhaka. (For further information gee
Dibhaka).
E'S OO

BRAHMADATTA IV
BRAHMADATTA IV. A king who ruled over the country of Kasi. One night he saw two swans flying in the
air. hey were of golden colour. There were a number of swans around them. They seemed like two
lightnings in the midst of white clouds. Brahmadatta
wished to see them again. His desire increased to such
an extent that he had desire for nothing else. He
consulted his ministers and made a lake. Every creature which seemed beautiful to him was brought to
that place. Hearing this those two swans also came
there. By and by he tamed them and asked them how
they got the golden colour. The swans said thus :
“Oh King! you might have heard of the famous mountain Mandara, which is the field of games of the Devas
(gods). At the time of the churning of the milk sea
when this mountain was used as churn-drill, Amrtam
(celestial nectar of immortality) touched this mountain. So the flowers, fruits and roots in the vicinity of
this mountain got the power of removing death, wrinkles etc. Candraciida also will come to this mountain
occasionally to play on the top of it and so it became
more glorious than the mount Kailasa. One day
while Mahadeva was playing in those gardens he had
to leave on an urgent matter concerning Gods. So he
left Parvati there and went away. Devi began to walk
about in those gardens with pangs of separation.
Spring season came. The Ganas (servants of Siva) and
the maids of Parvati attended on her. One day Manipuspesvara, a Gana, hankered after Candralekha,
daughter of Jaya. She had been engaged in fanning
Parvati. Both were young and their figures suited each
other. Candralekha reciprocated his love. Understanding this Pingegvara and Guhegvara, two ganas
looked at each other and smiled. Seeing this Devi
looked round with anger to see what caused them to
smile. They squinted their eyes and showed Manipuspe vara and Candralekha to Devi. Because of separation
she had been much worried, weary and sad. So all
these affairs made her angry. She said: ‘“‘It is good
that you behave like this when J am in this plight !
‘The two are making love. Seeing that, you are laughing.
May these two dotards be born‘on the earth and become husband and wife there. Let you two who
Faughed before me without humility also be born on
the earth, first as poor Brahmanas, and then as
Brahmaraksas (demon friends}, outcasts, robbers,
dogs with tails cut off and finally as various kind of
birds.” ‘Thus she cursed the four of ganas. Then a
gana named Dhirjata said to Parvati: “Devi, this is
unfortunate. They have not commited any severe
crime.’’ Devi got angry at him and cursed him too:
‘“May you also be born on the earth as a human being.”’ After this Jaya the loved maid of Parvati requested her for absolution from curse, for all. The Devi
said that all of them would get absolution at the place
of penance of Brahma and other gods and would return here. Of these, Candralekhi and her husband and
Dhirjata would be happy on the earth. The two
others would lead a miserable life on the earth.”
(Kathasaritsagara, Padmavatilambaka, Taranga L).
BRAHMADEVA. A warrior who fought on the side of
the Pandavas against the Kauravas in the battle of
Mahabharata. His duty was to protect the army in
the rear. (M.B. Udyoga Parva, Chapter 196,
Stanza 25) .
BRAHMANDA
BRAHMADUMBARA. A holy place in Kuruksetra. In
Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 83, Stanza 7], it
is said that this place is auspicious to Brahma.
BRAHMAHATYA. Killing a Brahmana is called Brahmahatya. In ancient India killing a Brahmin was considered to be a great sin. He, who committed this sin
had to build a hut in the forest and live there for a
period of twelve years, or make an alms-pot called
‘Sivasirodhvaja’ and wander about begging alms, to
purify his soul, or else to attempt to jump intoa
blazing fire thrice with bowed head, or perform one
of the three sacrifices ASvamedha, Svarjit or Gosava.
If none of these was possible, he had to give all the
wealth he had to Brahmins well-versed in Vedas, as
gift, It is mentioned in Agnipurana, Chapter 169, that
if any of the vows mentioned above was performed he
would be absolved from the sin of Brahmahatya. ©
BRAHMAJIT. A son of Kalanemi. (Brahmanda Purana
BRATIMAMEDHYA. A river, famous in the Puranas.
Mention is made about this river in Mahabharata
Bhigsmaparva, Chapter 9, Stanza 32. .
BRAHMAMUHURTA. The period of forty-eight minute
before the sunrise is called Brahmamuharta. Th°
deity of this period is Brahma. In Agni Purana, ony
ter 155, it is instructed that one should wake up #
this period and engage in prayer and meditation.
BRAHMANA. (BRAHMIN). —
(1) Origin. Brahmanas, Ksatriyas, Vaigyas, and Sidra
are the caturvarnas or the four castes. The Puranas ae
that the four castes originated from different parts ©
the body of Brahma, See Manusmrti, Ghapter ©
Stanza 87
‘‘Sarvasyasya tu sargasya
Guptyartham sa mahadyutih
Mukhabahiripajjanam
Prthakkarmanyakalpayat. ath
(With a view to sustain the world, Brahma ordered a tl
vities, for the four castes (Brahmana Ksatriya, cic ni
and Sidra) who were born frcm his face, arms, pais
and feet). From thig statement it is seen that the 7
manas were born from the face, Ksatriyas from feet
arms, Vaisyas from the thighs and Sadras from the
of Brahma. - mana
2) The activities of a Brahmana. The duties of a Bra - to
are, performing sacrifice, and encouraging ae: dass
perform sacrifice, learning Vedas and teaching : pas
giving gifts and getting remuneration. A Brahman? i
two births in one life. Till the time of investiture | oxi
the sacred string is one birth and from that perio ied
wards is the second birth. So a Brahmana is ©
‘dvija’ or twice-born. ¢ agri
The Brahmanas were allowed to do the works ° id4
' rce and Ku ey
culture, keeping cows, trade and comme on
(money-lending). Living on the interest of te C
giving out asloan is Kusida. But they should no! flesh.
on products from cow, jaggery, salt, lac a” me of
The suffix ‘Sarma’? should be added to the
Brahmana. A Brahmana can have four wives.
BRAHMAYNA(M). See Veda. ne anda
BRAHMANDA. The word Brahmanda means | hich ai
of Brahma (anda-egg), the Supreme Being iG Jon8
the root of the origin of the universe. At 2 ning ut
ago, which is beyond reckoning, there was not ale
an egg. This egg was split into two and from ?

BRAHMANDAPURANA
child with the radiance of innumerable suns came out.
This wonderful child was helpless. After his birth he
cried for a while, because of hunger and thirst. He
got no help. There was nobody to feed it. So this
wonderful child looked up and lay there. This helpless child was called ‘Viratpurusa’ (the next emanation
from Brahma) by those versed in the Puranas. The
boy was so called because he was the most material
of materiality. But he was an atom of atoms and the
first figuration of God. From each pore of the skin of
the great virat, who was the base of all the worlds a
universe came into being. Thus all the countless universes were born. Each universe has its own trinity of
Brahma, Visnu, Siva and devas (the bright ones), the
protectors of the eight zones. One universe comprises
fourteen worlds or realms, from Patala to the Brahmaloka (from the nether world to the upper world or
the realm of Brahma). Countless such universes exist.
Over and above all these universes.there 1s Vaikuntha,
and above Vaikuntha there is another world with an
area of fifty crore yojanas (leagues ), called ‘Goloka we
world of cow). Only the two worlds Vaikuntha an
the Goloka are eternal. Bhiiloka (the earth) consists
of seven islands and sixty-four peninsulas. There are
seven worlds above and seven worlds below. The seven
upper worlds are Bhiiloka, Bhuvarloka, Svarloka, Janaloka, Tapoloka. Satyaloka and Brahmaloka. ie a
universe consists of fourteen worlds. This 1s ae i sa
given by the Puranas about Brahmanda. (Devi Dhag
ee de, in the Visnu Purana, ae 2;
Chapter 7, about the construction of Bealnene es
This Brahmanda, like the seed of the nag 1p ae
(Vitar—the wood-apple) ; is covered ane ee fom
all around by andakataha (egg-shell) . eee eee)
is covered by water ten times the Be ae eed ae
water-shell is covered by @ shell o pn OY cll
shell of fire there 1 the shell of air anc¢ oe ee
is covered with ether: Around the shell o ‘ aan
is the shell of Egoism of darkness. Over ihe one
Egoism there is the shell of glory an asus ed
glory b cae ty Sab tea Le becless Brahrakrtl
en exists 10 ane Kee ee es bh yee
Geiwete Eek an ST ie Supreme Spirit).
Purusa. (The Natur ¢ the eighteen puranas.
BRAHMANDAPURANA. On Ya ahma about the glory
ae ive thousand verses 1n
This purana contal
of Brahmanda. There are twe ter 272).
BRAHMANIPPATTU. (ior Kerala. |
connected with the a eile stands before his
BRAHMANJALI. When @ folded. Folding
th his. arms loldec 3
ge he a att is called Brahmafijali. (Manu
oth arms
smrti, Chapter 2) - Aanvantara.
BRAHMAPRALAYA- See, TMAPURANA). This is a
BR ht to
BRAHMAPUT cventy five, 208 ug, Tesmention
oe oe bee it-sage Marici »Y 1: t if a copy of this
ed in Ai ni P urdna Chap a Brahmin on the full
in. Soa a |
book = taken and offered © Vaisakha with cow and
moon day of t al mie heavet
month of
water, the giver Ww
BRAHMATIRTHA
BRAHMAPURI. The abode of Brahma. Brahmapusf is
on the summit of Mahameru, with an area of fourteen
thousand yojanas (leagues). Around-this city, at the
four sides, (East etc.) and at the four corners (SouthEast etc.) there are eight towns, very big and beautiful,
kept by eight protectors such as Indra and others. The
river Ganga which springs from the feet of Mahavisnu
wets the whole of Candramandala (Lunar region),
falls down on the Brahmapuri, and dividing itself into
four rivers called Sita, Alakananda, Caksus and Bhadra
flows in four directions. The river Sita flows through
the top of the mountains and passing through the
mountain in the east called Bhadragva, falls in the
Eastern Ocean. The river Alakananda flows to the
south and reaches Bharata. Then it divides into seven
rivers which unite in the ocean. The river Caksus passes through the mountains in the west and enters the
country called Ketum@lavarsa and then flows into the
ocean. The river Bhadra passes through all the mountains in the north and flows through the north country
of the Kurasa and falls in the North Ocean. The mountain of Malyavan in the west and the mountain of
Gandhamadana in the east are as long as the moun-
‘tain of Nilagiri in the north and the mountain of
Nisadha in-the south. Mount Meru shaped like an earring stands in the middle of these four mountains.
(Visnu Purana, Améa 2, Chapter 21).
BRAHMASALA. A holy place. It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 87, Stanza 23, that the
moment one visits this holy Bath in the river Ganges,
one would attain heaven.
BRAHMASARAS. A holy place in Dharmaranya. Ifa
man fasts in this holy place for one night, he would
reach the world of Brahma. In this holy place there is
a peg driven down by Brahma himself. One who walks
round this peg will attain the fruits of performing a
Vajapeya yajiia (a drinking sacrifice). There is another
holy bath of the name Brahmasaras in Gaya. (M. B.
Anugasana Parva, Chapter 25, Stanza 89).
BRAHMASAVARNI. Tenth Manu. (See
tara).
BI APAAASIRAS. See Brahmastra.
BRAHMASTHANA. A holy place. It is mentioned in
Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 84, Stanza 103,
that a person who visits this holy place will get the
fruits of performing Asvamedha yaga. (Horse sacriManvanfice).
BRAHMASTRA. This is known by another name Brahmasirastra also. This weapon was given to Agastya by
Siva. It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Adi Parva,
Chapter 138, Stanza 9, that Agastya gave this weapon
to Agnivega, who gave it to Drona and Drona gave it to
Arjuna and instructed him about the use of it as
follows :
‘*You should never shoot this arrow’ at man. If it is
used against mean people the three worlds would be
destroyed. It is said that this weapon has no parallel
in the world. Keep this pure, and give ear to what I
say. If an enemy, other than human being attacks you,
this weapon may be used to kill him in battle.”
BRAHMATIRTHA. A holy piace in Kuruksetra.. It is
mentioned in Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 83
Stanza 113, that a non-brahmana who bathes in this
holy place willl attain Brahmanatva. (the state of bein
a brahmana).

BRAHMATUNGA
BRAHMATUNGA. A mountain. Arjuna dreamt that
Sri Krsna and himself went to the presence of Siva.
Brahmatunga was a mountain that Arjuna saw on the
way in his dream-travel. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter
80, Stanza 31).
BRAHMAVAIVARTAPURANA. One of the eighteen
Puranas. Savarni Manu taught this Purana to Narada.
The theme of the Purana is the story of Rathandhara.
This Purana contains eighteen thousand verses. It is
stated in Agni Purana, Chapter 272, that this Purana
is-good to be given as a gift on the full moonday of the
month of Magha. |
BRAHMAVARTTA. A holy place situated in Kuruksetra. [It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Vana Parva,
Chapter 83, Stanza 53, that he who takesa bath in
this holy place will go to the world of Brahma. Manusmrti, Chapter 2, Stanza 17, refers to this Brahmavartta.
Manu says as follows :
“‘Sarasvatidrsadvatyordevanadyoryadantaram /
Taddevanirmitam degam
Brahmavarttam pracaksate. //
‘The place between the two rivers Sarasvati and Drsadvati is called BrahmAvartta, which was made by the
devas.” |
BRAHMAVEDHYA. Ariver, famous in the Puranas.
Mention is made about this river in Mahabharata,
Bhisma Parva; Chapter 9, Stanza 30.
BRAHMAYAJNA. A special sacrifice to be performed
by a Brahmin only. The rules and rituals of the sacrifice are given below :—
The Brahmana should rinse his mouth three times.
Then he should wipe his mouth twice and face once.
Then he should take water in his hand and sprinkle
iton his hands and legs, and then sprinkle it on his
head, eyes, nose, ears, chest and forehead. After that
uttering the name of the place, date, time, star etc. he
should say to himself, “I am beginning to perform
Brahmayajfia.” For this he should have to place two
darbhas (grass—Poa cynosuroides) in his right hand,
three in his left hand, one on the seat, one each on his
Brahma-string (sacred string worn by brahmins), hair
and legs, and then think of the time, place, etc. and say
to himself, ‘I am about to perform Brahmayajfia to
please the gods known in the Siktas (hymns in the
Vedas) for the absolution of all my sins.”’ Then recite
Gayatri (spell) thrice. Then recite the following Vedic
mantras or spells, in the order given: Mantras beginning with; ‘‘Agnimile’’; ‘““Yadanga’’; ‘Agnirvai’ ; ‘Mahavratam’; ‘Pantha etacca’; ‘Samhitavidamaghavat’;
‘Mahavratasya’; ‘Ise tvorjje’’, “Agnaayahi”’ and gannodevih.’”? Then in conformity with the number of letters
used, he should recite the grammatic Sutra known as
Vrddhiradaic. (Devi Bhagavata, Skandha 11).
BRAHMAYONI. A holy place in Kuruksetra. It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 83,
Stanza 143 that one who bathes in this holy Bath will
attain the world of Brahma.
BRAHMAHUTAM. A sacrifice. ‘There are five kinds of
sacrifice, known as Ahuta, Huta, Prahuta, Brahma~
huta and Prasita. Ahuta is sacrifice to Brahma, Huta
is sacrifice to devas or Gods, Prahuta 1s sacrifice to
Ghosts, Brahmahuta is sacrifice to man and Pragita is
the sacrifice to the manes. (Manusmrti, Chapter 3).
BRHADBRAHMA I
BRBU TAKSA. A king of the period of the Vedas. He was
liberal and interested in architecture and all kinds of
construction work. In the Rg Veda and Samkhyayana
Srauta Sitra mention is made that this king offered
plenty of presents to the hermit Bharadvayja.
BRDHNASVA. A king. It is mentioned in Mahabharata,
Vana Parva, Chapter 98, that Agastya once went to
this king and begged him for wealth.
BRHADANTA I. A king of the country known as
Ulika. Once ina battle, Arjuna defeated this King.
Thenceforward he was friendly with the Pandavas.
Brhadanta offered Arjuna a good deal of costly pre
sents. In the battle of Bharata, this king fought on
the side of the Pandavas and was killed in the battle.
(M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 27, Adi Parva, Chapter
185, Udyoga Parva, Chapter 4; Drona Parva, Chapter
23 and Karna Parva, Chapter 9).
BRHADANTA II. Brother of the king Ksemadhirt.. He
fought against the Kauravas and was killed in the
battle. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 25; Karna Parva
Chapter 5). .
BRHADASVA I. An ancient hermit. He had much respect for Dharmaputra. It is stated in the Mohabuare
Vana Parva, Chapter 52, that Brhadasva went tot °
forest Kamyaka with Dharmaputra. Brhadasva “7
ted the story ‘Nalopakhyana’ to Dharmaputra -
order to divert his mind from the thought of the __
of his kingdom. When he had finished the story a
taught Dharmaputra, the two important spells, AKS
hrdaya and Aévasiras. ais
BRHADASVA II. A king of the Iksvaku dynasty.
father was Sravasta. The King Kuvalayasva me
son of Brhada va. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter
Stanza 7). si
BRHADATMA. A king of the Anga dynasty. (Ag
Purana, Chapter 278). Adi
BRHADBALA I. A king in ancient India. (M.B.
Parva, Chapter 1, Stanza 237).
BRHADBALA II. Son of Suba, a King of
He was present at the Paficali Svayamvara
of Pajicali) with his brothers Sakuni an
(M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 185, Stanza 5}. -
know?
BRHADBALA III. A king of the country 4" na
Kosala. During his conquest of the East, og
defeated this King. This powerful King of = ( 1m"
given fourteen thousand horses for the me aes with
perial inauguration) of Yudhisthira. He wa harat2Abhimanyu and Ghatotkaca in the battle of Chap’
It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Drona pay? prhadter 40, Stanza 20, that Abhimanyu killed this »
(M.P:
Gandhara-
(marriag®
d Vrsak@-
bala in the battle.
BRHADBALIKA. An attendant of Subrahmany@-
Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Stanza 4).
BRHADBHANU. A fire. A hermit who had at re
great knowledge in Vedas and Vedangas aa 931s
also has this name. (M. B. Wana Parva, Chap
Stanza 8),
BRHADBHASA. See Brhadkirti. |
BRHADBHASA. A daughter of the Sun. It 3s oI ran
in the Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 22 ;
9, that Brhadbhasa was the wife of the Ag?
called Bhanu.
BRHADBRAHMA. See Brhadkirti,
uired

BRHADDHALA I
BRHADDHLA I A great King of Kosala. He gave
fourteen thousand best horses for the Rajasiiya (imperial inauguration) sacrifice performed by Yudhisthira
as present. In the battle of Mahabharata, Brhaddhala
sided with the Kauravas and fought against the Pandavas and was killed in the battle by Abhimanyu. (M.B.
Drona Parva, 46; 24; Bhagavata, Skandha 9).
BRHADDHALA II. The son of Subala, the king of
Gandhara—Brhaddhala attended the Paficali Svayamvara (marriage of Paficali) with his brother Sakuni
and Vrsaka.
BRHADDHALA III. Aking of the Yadavas. He was
the son of Devabhaga, the brother of Vasudeva.
(Bhagavata, Skandha 9).
BRHADDHALADHVAJA. A hermit who was a leper. I t
is stated in Brahma Parva of Bhavisya Purana that this
hermit recovered from leprosy by Sun-worship.
BRHADDHVAJA. A Raksasa (giant). This giant wandered about stealing the wealth and women of others.
One day Brhaddhvaja happened to meet with Kesini,
the beautiful wife of king Bhimakeéa. The lustful giant
was about to take her away, when she told him
thus :— “I hate my husband very much, So I am
ready to come with you, of my own accord. ee
Taking her in his chariot the giant went | a nig
sAgara safigama. When she learned that this p mee a
under the rule of her husband, she died of saa roe
unable to bear separation from Kesini, the BG ne
died. As these two had died at the holy er 2 ¢ ein
sagara sangama, both attained the world oO smu.
(Skanda Purana, Kriyakanda) :
BRHADDHVANI. A river in In
dia. This river is famous
in the Puranas. Mention is made a ee
Mahabharata, Bhisma Parva, Chapter ¥; fe fartee
BRHADGARBHA. Son of emperor Sibi. (For
information about him see Astaka) .
i f
BRHADGIRI. A person named Yati. ae Pgh ain
those who were against sacrifice. (For fur
tion see Prthurasmi). | .. «rnin, Wanton
_ A king 1n ancient Indla. he
merry ony this ces in Mahabharata, Adi Parva,
Breer SN ting of the family of Bharata, (Bhaga
vata, Skandha 9).
BRHADID A nih
Purana, Chapter a
BRHADRATHA I. A king. He
ing in
lead a life of retirement after having
n the throne. i
et for the attainment of eae
Sakayanya appeared before hl ie or anil,”
eaight atk any boon. Accor; i PS ont ieee
’ 4 ive m { Ww
leds what tern ie ona * with his request. ( Maitri
edge’.
Upanisad ). .
BRHADRATHA oe Pas =
af uyad tha and tha Tbe of the mountain
oe Th Lamsuras, © ve at m the attempt of
f °c, A aiaettie saved oe See BY Tccruramil:
Of ST casio UE’ toe es | ?
er a acata Ge ti Pauw, Chapter 49; Drona Parva
Chapters 97 an he Boru dynasty TH
irika, .
EE we one of the seve 2
rha
of the Puru dynasty. (Agni
t to
went to the fores
stalled his eldest
ing of t
ie n sons
BRHANMANAS I
- Yadu, Pratyagra, Bala, Matsyakala and Vira were the
brothers of Brhadratha, A son named Kugagra was
born to Brhadratha. (Agni Purana, Chapter 275).
BRHADRATHA IV. Son of Uparicara, the king of
Cedi. Uparicara made his son Brhadratha, hing of
Magadha. In course of time he becamea powerful
emperor. This Brhadratha was a mighty warrior-king
with an army of three aksauhinis (an aksauhini is a
complete army consisting of 21870 horses and 109350
infantry). Though he had married two daughters of
the King of Kasi he was childless. The sorrowful king
went with his wives toa hermit named Candakaugika
and pleased him by giving him precious stones. The
King told the hermit about his sorrow due to lack of
children, The hermit gave them a mango fruit and
said that the King should enthrone the son who would
be born by eating the mango, and return to the forest
for penance. The hermit gave eight boons for the son
who was to be born.
The King and his wives returned to the palace and
divided the mango fruit into two and both of his wives
ate the fruit and became pregnant. Each of them gave
birth to half of a child. The lifeless forms of these half
children were thrown out. A giantess called Jara put
them together and instantly the pieces joined together
and became a living child. The giantess took that child
and made a present of it to the King. That child grew up
and was known by the famous name Jardsandha. From
that time onwards Giantess-worship began in Magadha.
When Jarasandha came of age the King anointed him
as King and went to the hermitage of Candakausgika
with his wives and began to do penance. After coming
to the forest Brhadratha killed a giant named Rsabha
and with his hide made three Big drums and placed
them in the city. The sound of one beat on the drum
will last for a month. When Bhima, Arjuna and §ri
Krsna came to Magadha to kill Jarasandha they broke
these drums. (M.B. Adi Parva, 53;Sabha Parva,
Chapters 17, 19 and 21).
BRHADRATHA V._ A king who lived in a portion of
an asura named Siksma. This king was present at
Paficali svayambara (marriage of Paficali). (M.B. Adi
Parva, Chapter 67, Stanza 185).
BRHADRATHA VI. An Agni (fire) . As this Agni is the
son of Vasistha he has got the name Vasistha also. A
son named Praniti was born to this Agni. (M.B. Vana
Parva, Chapter 220).
BRHADVATI. A river in India, puranically famous.
Mention is made about this river in Mahabharata,
Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Stanza 30.
BRHADVISA. A king of the family of Bharata. (Bhagavata, Skandha 9).
BRHADUKTHA. He was the son of the hermit named
Paficajanya. He was transformed to a god, who is
remembered at the beginning of the sacrifice known
as agnihotra. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 22,
Stanza 13).
BRHADDYUMNA. See Arvavasu.
BRHAJJYOTI. The son born to Angiras of his wife
Subha. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 218, Stanza 2) .
BRHAKA. A deva Gandharva. (A class of Gods). It is
mentioned in Mahabharata Adi Parva, Chapter 129
Stanza 57 that this Gandharva was present at the
Birthday celebration of Arjuna.
BRHANMANAS I. See Brhatkirti,

BRHANMANAS II 162
BRHANMANAS II. A hermit. This hermit was one of
the seven sons born to Angiras of his wife Sumzna.
(M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 208).
BRHANMANTRA. See Brhatkirti.
BRHANMEDAS. A king of the Yadavas. He was the
son of Vapusman and father of Srideva. (Kirma Purana,
BRHANNALA. The name adopted by Arjuna during
the concealment of the Pandavas in the Kingdom of
Virata. (For further information see Arjuna).
BRHANTA I. A king. Yudhisthira performed a horse
sacrifice. Arjuna was taking the sacrificial horse
round, for the conquest of the North when King
Brhanta opposed him. Arjuna defeated him and brought
him under subjugation. He presented Arjuna with a
large quantity of precious stones. (M.B. Adi Parva,
Chapter 177).
In the battle of Mahabharata Brhanta fought on the
side of the Pandavas, and was killed by DuéSdasana.
(M.B. Karna Parva, Chapter 4).
BRHANTA II. A warrior on the side of the Kauravas.
He was the brother of Ksemadhirti. Brhanta was
killed ina fight with Satyaki. (M.B. Karna Parva,
Chapter 4),
BRHANTA. One of the seven mothers of Subrahmanya.
(M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 118, Stanza 10).
BRHASPATI. The teacher of the devas (Gods).
1) Birth. The father of Brhaspati was Angiras, the
son of Brahma. Brahma grew amorous, at the sight of
some celestial maids who were present at a sacrifice
performed by Rudra ; and he had seminal flow.
Brahma put the semen in fice. From that fire the devas
such as Marici, Bhrgu, Angiras and others were born.
The name Angiras was given because he was born out
of angara (live-coal). Eight sons were born to Angiras
by his wife Vasuda. ‘lhey were Utathya, Brhaspati,
Vayasya, Santi, Ghora, Viripa, Samvarta and Sudhanva. All of them were sages who had attained oneness with the supreme Spirit by knowledge, and who
had been free from worldly pain. Of them Brhaspati,
Utathya and Sarivarta became famous through all
the worlds. In some puranas Vasuda, the mother of
Brhaspati, is given the name Sraddha also.
It is stated that Brhaspati had a sister named Angirasi.
She was a ‘follower of the Brahma cult. She became
the wife of Prabhasa the last one of the eight Vasus.}
Visvakarma was her son. (Bhagavata Skandha 4, Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 66).
2) Is Brhaspatt the son of Agni? In some puranas
Brhaspati is described as the son of Agni. Its authority
is given below. Angiras, the father of Brhaspati was
once doing penance in his hermitage. When the fire of
penance increased the brightness of the real fire
decreased. Agni (fire) stood before Angiras and said
‘‘Oh Lord ! your brightness surpasses mine. From this
day onwards you are the real fire. So you shall be the
first fire and I will be the fire of Prajapati which is the
second fire.”’
Because of this boon of Agni, the devas (gods), recognized Angiras also as a fire-god. So in some Puranas
Brhaspati is mentioned as the son of Agni (fire-god).
(Bhagavata, Skandha 4).
1 It is stated in Mahabharata, Vana Parva,
pati had six more brothers, born later, named Brhatkirti, Brhatjyoti, Brhadbrahma, Brhadmana,
Angirasi had the name Bhanumati also.
BRHASPATI
3) Teacher of the Devas. The story of how Brhaspati
became the teacher of the devas, is given in the
Bhasabharata, Chapter 76 as shown below :
“The Suras and the asuras (the gods and the demons)
became enemies from time immemorial, regarding the
possession of wealth and prosperity in the three worlds.
To secure victory in the battles the gods made Brhaspati their teacher and likewise the asuras made Sukra
their teacher.”’
The devas and asuras began to fight for prosperity
and wealth. At that time the devas selected Brhaspat!
and the asuras selected Sukra, as their teacher. .
4) The conjugality of Brhaspati. Tara was the wile of
Brhaspati. She was very beautiful. Seeing Candra’s
handsome figure she doted on him. There arose several
quarrels over this affair. Finally the devas intervene
and Tara was given back to Brhaspati. Budha was
born to Candra by Tara.
The individual called Tarain the family of the monkey;
wasason of Brhaspati. It is mentioned in Valmiki
Ramayana, Bala Kanda, Sarga 17, Stanza 10 as follows,
which proves this fact. -
‘“Brhaspati begot the mighty monkey Tara.” In. “
Rgveda, Mandala 1, Anuvaka 19, Sakta 126, 1t ‘4
mentioned that Brhaspati had a daughter name
Romaga. When her husband teased her Romasa pat
toher husband: “You please come and feel il
hand on my body. Don’t think that my organs br
small. Though I am hairy like the goats of Gandhar 2
{ have got all the organs fully grown.” This 1s ' a
statement in the Rgveda. Inthe Uttara Ramayar
it is stated that Brhaspati had a Brahmana son na™ -
Kugadhvaja, and that a daughter named Devavath ie
born to Kugadhvaja. Devavati was born from nal
mouth while Kugadhvaja was engaged in devotlo iis
recitation of the Vedas. Sita was the rebirth of ae
Devavati. It is stated in the Mahabharata, Adi P a —
Chapter 67, Stanza 69, that Drona, the son of B we
dvaja, was born from a portion of Brhaspati. Kkaca
of the
another son of Brhaspati. For full partici west
j
story how Devayani (daughter of Sukra) :
after Kaca, see ‘Kaca’. Mention is ma = EL
Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 219, aes uae
that Brhaspati had a wife called Candramasi an’ ith
she gave birth to six Agnis. In Kampa Ra a
Yuddhakanda mention is made that Brhaspat! niet
daughter named Sulekha. Six sons and a d 3 gnis
were born-to Candramasi. The six sons were om ghe
(fires) : In sacrifices the burnt offerings and ae re
were the portions meant for the great and mig"? reat
Samyu, the son of Brhaspati. It is to satisfy nome ovat
fire which blazes with numberless pointed tongue? | niin sacrifices such as Caturmasya, Asvamedba o yas
mals are slaughtered. The daughter of an cin
the wife of Samyu. The name of the wonderfu thre?
(Samyu’s wife) is Satya. A son named Diptt an ipti is
daughters were born to Samyu. The son of
Bharadvaja who is the recipient of first portio” fering
oblated in sacrifice. On all full-moon days "1 a
of sacrifices are meant for Bharata. Bharata © “ parae
named Bharataand a daughter named Bharat’. praj®
the Agni is said to be the son of the Agni who os
qd that Br po
Chapter 218 that the mother of Brhaspati had another name, Subha, abhasa an
Brhadmantra, and Brha

BRHASPATI
pati Bharata. Thus Bharata got the famous name ‘the
great’. Bharata married Vira and a son was born to
them called Vira. This Vira like Soma is the recipient
of sacrificial ghee, according tothe belief of the Brahmanas. As this Vira is the recipient of the second ghee
offered in sacrifice, as Soma, he is known by names
such as Rathaprabhu, Rathadhvana and Kumbharetas.
Vira married Sarayii and became the father of Siddhi—
Siddhi the Agnidevata—who is remembered in all
fire songs. Fire which has no action on prosperity,
fame and vigour has the name Niscyavana. Niscyavana praises the earth. Satya is the son of Niscyavana.
Satya which blazes by flame determines time. Satya Is
known by another name Niskrti. The Agni Svana
spreads diseases. ‘The Agnis ca led Vipulaprabha, YatAtma and Brahmacari are invoked in simple domestic
sacrifices by Brahmanas. The awful fire Badavagni 1s
supported by life. The sixth son of Brhaspati and Tara
is called Svetakrt. The oblation offered to this Agni
is known as Udadvara. Svaha was the daughter of
Candramasi. Svaha had three sons. They are three
Agnis called Kamagni, Amogha, and Ukthya. (Bhagavata, Skandha 4).
5) Growing amorous on the wife of elder brother. A.story
stating how Brhaspati begot 4 S08 by the wus
Utathya is given in Skandha 9 of Bhagavata. egen as
the wife of Utathya, was pregnant. Brhaspati ha
coition with her when her husband was away: o
mother and the child in the womb who Uta sae
act of Brhaspati were curse. Mamata gave bet te ve
children. Fearing that her husband might cas 4 aya
she left the son of Brhaspati in the ae ies Be
about to go, when there was 4 divine voice ITO! Bahia:
““Midhe, Bharadvajamimam
pate.’ **You senseless Woman,
p this one
of Hert o, Hee ae voice Brhaspati took the
two.” ing this ethe . oes
child bar ae bien the name , Bharadvaja ag fri
him up. After that the child was oh pal of this
Bharata. The famous archer Drona was sae
Bharadvaja. : n the
6) Personation of Brhaspat. The eae Pe eacarya
devas and asuras increased day nis Tenants before
the teacher of the asuras began i Ww ‘ get Give
Siva in the Himalayas, vr. the devas. The ¢ ration
spell or incantation " inane years. Indra came to
of the penance WAS ot his daughter Jayanti to
know of this acer ae Est deceit. She staye with
et the spell from
k his disciple and ;
Bs "Gc appeared petate pin When he was about
sfoupilc of? destroying the ota
to return Jayantt, ge hher, of a long bere:
cause of his Lowegtee request: Sukra ele ee iat
he could . - usband, for ‘ Lees eeeid
e ous hat during that period — le began an
years and te" tae world. Thus the SO"
e invisi
se of this period.
- jnvisible life. ting the best ¥
epati thought of mas , aweqg and went to mC
Brhaspatl thoug ukrcary? © fen paeEHte
He personated himself -
Asuras, who thinking ;
after a long penanc
welcome. Brhasp!
began to exhort the 4
loving and sincere
‘ seat of Sukracarya an
such a manner that
163 BRHASPATI
within the period of ten years he was able to remove
factionalism and hatred from them.
At the expiry of ten years’ invisible life Sukra returned
having sent Jayanti away. The asuras saw two Sukras
together and were amazed. They declared that the
real Sukra was he who had been teaching them for the
last ten years. Being dismayed at the ingratitude of the
asuras he cursed them that they would shortly be
destroyed and then left the place. At this juncture
Brhaspati also assumed his real form and returned to
heaven. Thus the asuras became a people without a
leader like sheep without a shepherd. At last they
approached their teacher Sukra who became their
teacher again, when they begged for his pardon, But
he said that his curse could not be recalled, But he
gave them absolution by saying that they would regain
their lost power during the time of Manu Savarni.
(Devi Bhagavata, Skandha 4).
1) Cursing Ravana. Once Ravana was returning haughty and proud after having defeated the devas and conquered heaven, when Sulekha the daughter of Brhaspati, got terrified and ran away to hide herself from
him, Ravana chased her and when she was caught he
tried to ravish her. Brhaspati got angry and cursed him.
“You, who have grown rank by the dart of Cupid,
will meet with death by the dart of Rama”. (Kampa
Ramayana, Yuddha Kanda) .
8) Brhaspati and Haniiman. Afijana the mother of
Hanimin was a servant of Brhaspati in her previous
birth. Her name then was Pufijikasthali. She once went
to fetch water. At that time many Vidyadhara young
people, both male and female, came there and engaged
‘1 amorous acts. Pufijikasthali witnessed these lovescenes for a long time and then returned home. It is
mentioned in Kampa Ramayana that Brhaspati
cursed her to be born in the next birth as a female
monkey.
Afijana gave birth to Haniman. When he grew up
Haniman desired to learn Vedas and Sastras (scriptures). Haniiman approached Brhaspati to learn from
him. But Brhaspati was not prepared to teach a monkey
who jumped about everywhere. The disappointed
Hantiman went to the Sun, who asked him how it
could be done by himas he was engaged in travelling
without stop. Haniiman said that he would move in
front of the sun always. Thus Hanuman who had been
rejected by Brhaspati became the disciple of the Sun.
(Uttara Ramayana).
9) Other information.
(1) It is mentioned in Devi Bhagavata, Skandha I, that
Brhaspati was the teacher of the hermit Suka.
(2) In Agni Purana, Chapter 51, it 18 instructed that
Brhaspati should be consecrated in temples as wearing
a necklace of beads (Elaeo carpus seeds) and a water
pot. |
(3) Mention is made in the Mahabharata, Adi Parva,
Chapter 169, Stanza 21 that Brhaspati gave Bharadvaja Agneyastra (the arrow of fire).
(4) During the period of emperor Prthu, when the
Earth-goddess was changed into a cow the gods employed Brhaspati to milk the cow to obtain the things they
needed. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 69).
(5) Once Brhaspati gave. Subrahmanya a stick as a
present. (M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 46).

BRHATKARMA
(6) Once Brhaspati advised Indra to use sweet words.
(M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter 84).
164 BUDHA I
Purana that Narada had taught Brhatsena, Brahmavidya (theosophy) .
(7) Once Brhaspati got angry with Mahavisnu at the BRHATSENA. A female attendant of Damayanti. Mention
sacrifi-ial hall of Uparicaravasu. (M.B. Santi Parva,
Chapter 336, Stanza 14).
(8) Brhaspati cursed the Jaladevatas (goddesses of
water). (M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter 242, Stanza BA)
(9) Brhaspati and Candra are said to be Brahmana
Kings. (M.B, Asvamedha Parva, Chapter 9, Stanza 8).
10) Cozclusion. Brhaspati was a deep thinker and one
who had firm convictions in many matters, He was a
man of vast knowledge. Every movement of the gods
had its origin in the brains of Brhaspati. There is no
philosophy which does not contain the exhortations
made by B haspati at various times to the devas ( gods )
or kings or hermits.
BRHATKARMA. A king of the family of Anga. (AgniPurana) .
BRHATKATHA. See Gunadhya.
BRHATKAYA. A king of the family of Bharata.
(Bhagavata, Skandha 9).
BRHATKETU. A king in ancient India. Mention
is made about this king in the Mahabharata, Adi
Parva, Chapter 1, Stanza 237.
BRHATKIRTI. A son of Angiras. Mention is made in
Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 218, that seven
sons, named Brhatkirti, Brhajjyoti, Brhadbrahma, Brhadmana, Brhadmantra, Brhadbhasa and Brhaspati anda
daughter named Bhanumati were born to Angiras and
his wife Subha.
BRHATKSATRA I. A_ king. Scion of the family of
Bhagiratha. In the Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter
158, Stanza 21, it is mentioned that this king attended
Paficali Svayamvara (Marriage of Paficali) .
BRHATKSATRA II. A king of the country called
Kekaya. On the first day of the battle of Bharata at
Kuruksetra, this King fought with Krpa, the teacher.
Later he killed Ksemadhirti in the battle. In Mahabharata, Drona Parva, Chapter 125, mention is made
that he fought with Drona, the teacher and was killed.
BRHATISSATRA III. A king of the country known as
Nisadha. In the battle of Bharata, he fought on the
side of the Kauravas and was killed in the battle, by
Dhrstadyumna (Drona Parva, Chapter 337, Stanza 6 Fs
BRHATPUTRA. A king of the Pury dynasty. King
Suhotra was his father. King Brhatputra had three
sons, Ajamidha, Dvimidha and Purumidha. (Agni
Purana, Chapter 278).
BRHATSAMA. A teacher born in the family of Angiras. The Ksatriyas of his time had troubled and harassed him a great deal. Mention is made in Atharva
Veda that the Ksatriyas met with destruction as a
consequence.
BRHATSAMA(N). The name of a hymn, (Reveda,
Mandala 1, Anuvaka 10, Sakta 52),
BRHATSENA I. A king born of the family of Bharata.
(Bhagavata Skandha 9)
BRHATSENA II. An asura (opponent of gods) born
from a portion of Krodhavaga, a daitya (asura).
Laksmana, the daughter of Brhatsena was one of the
wives of Sri Krsna. In the battle of Mahabharata,
Brhatsena was on the side of the Kauravas.
SRHATSENA III. A teacher. It is mentioned in Garuda
is made in Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 60, that
when Nala was defeated inthe game of dice, Damayanti sent Brhatsena to inform the ministers about the
defeat of the King.
BRHATTA I. Another name of the Sun. (M.B. Adi
Parva, Chapter 1, Stanza 42).
BRHATTA II. A king born to Kaleya, an asura. (M.B.
Adi Parva, Chapter 67, Stanza 55).
BRHATTA(M). A song of Sama (conciliation—one of
the four expedients) originated from the head of hermit Paficajanya. From the face of this hermit another
song of Sama called Rathantara also originated. These
two songs of Sama are very effective expedients. So
they are called Tarasaharas (quickly effective). (M.B.
Vana Parva, Chapter 220, Stanza 7). a.
BRHATI I. Mother of Caksusamanu. Two sons, Sisthi,
and Bhavya were born to Dhruva by his wife Sambhu.
Succhaya the wife of Sisthi gave birth to five sons,
Ripu, Ripufijaya, Vipra, Vrkala and Vrkatejas. ‘These
sons were sinless. Brhati was the wife of Ripu. Caksusa Manu was born to Ripu and Brhati. (Visnu Purana,
Améga 1, Chapter 13).
BRHATI IT. One of the seven horses of the Sun. The
seven horses of Sun are, Gayatri, Brhati, Usnik,
Jagati, Tristup, Anustup and Pankti. (Visnu Purana,
Amsa 2, Chapter 8).
BRHATVA.@A devagandharva (a class of gods). In the
Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 122, mention 15
made that @his gandharva had participated in the
birth celebration of Arjuna.
BRLHANA (BILHANA). A Sanskrit poet who lived in
the 11th Century A.D. Brlhana is the author of Vikramankadevacarita, Caurapaficasika, Karnasundari an
such other works. Of these Karnasundari is a fouract play. The theme of the play is Kamadeva the
king of the Calikyas marrying Karnasundari 4
vidyadhara woman. The King at first sees her 1n 4
dream and falls in love with her. She then appe
before the King in the guise of a boy. But the me
gent minister recognizes her by her fragrance an
introduces her to the King and the King marries her.
Brlhana had written his dramas on the model 0
Malavikagnimitra, Ratnavali and such other dramas.
BUDBUDA. A celestial maid. She was the hand-maid ©
Varga a celestial beauty. (For further information s¢©
Varga).
BUDHA I. Son of Candra. ;
1) Birth. Brhaspati the teacher-priest of the dev4
had a very beautiful wife named Tara. One day see1D8
the handsome figure of Candra, Tara became amorous’
Candra was the Disciple of Brhaspati. It was not 18 ;
on the part of the wife of the teacher to feel amoror’
towards a disciple. Brhaspati came to know of t +
affair and sending for Candra asked him to return
wife. Both Candra and Tara did not pay any heed 3
Brhaspati. Both sides were about to engage in a batt g
The devas arrayed themselves on both sides. ar ol
that this was not an honourable thing some ae
tried fora compromise. Finally Candra returned Ta
to Brhaspati, At this time Tara was pregnant. <a
Candra and Brhaspati claimed the paternity 0 aya
child in the womb of Tara, who witnessed that Can

BUDHA II
was the father of the child. All accepted the words of
‘Vara. Budha was the child Tara gave birth to.
2) Marriage and birth of a child. Budha grew up to be
a youth. During the period the King Sudyumna one
day entered Kumaravana (a forest) and was changed to
a woman. When the King became a woman the name
adopted was Ila, who grew amorous of Budha. The
famous King Puriiravas was the son born to them.
(For more information see Ila, Candra and Puriravas),
3) Other information
(1) Budha wears a necklace of Rudraksa beads (Elaeo
TF Seeds) and hasa bow. (Agni Purana, Chap-
(2) Candra performed the christening ceremony of
Budha. (Bhagavata Skandha 9).
(3) Budha is a luminous member of the assembly of
Brahma. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 11, Stanza 29).
UDHA IT. A hermit. Once he spoke about the importance of Vanaprastha (retirement in the forest). It 1s
mentioned in Mahabharata, Santi Parva, Chapter 244,
Stanza 17, that this hermit spent the whole of his life
in Vanaprastha (retirement in the forest) and at the
end he entered heaven.
BUDHA III. A scientist on ethics. He has written a
book called Dharmagastra on the different kinds of
rites of consecration, initiation etc. from formation in
the womb till Upanayana (investiture with the Brahma
String), different: kinds of marriages, P aficamahayajfias (the five essential sacrifices) Sraddha (offering
tothe manes), Pakayajiia (simple domestic sactie
fices), Somayaga (drinking the moon-plant J ics
the Soma sacrifice) and such other matters of e a
BUDHA IV. A Brahmana who lived in Gaudadcesa.
Budha who was the incarnation of all vices drank ee
much and spent a whole night lying fap a a
the veranda of the house of a harlot. His father * ae
anxious about him as he had not returned thoug
bh, He searched everywhere
night had advanced mucn. :
here he was lying un
and finally came to the place w ee. ey
conscious. He reviled the ‘son, who getting
killed his father then and there. oe _
After that he returned home. His mater en
to leave off his vices. His wife shed eaige ediments
Seeing that his mother and wife were me
on his way, he put an end to their ene ee
Once this Brahmana carried awe? ok d her. Sulabha
ful wife of hermit Kalabhiti and ravishe Be"
c d made him a leper.
Budha wandered, about and reached the ity fg
firasena. On that day the King was fae However
Heaven with the en! (went not move an
hard the pilots might try the Pp “Drive away
ag eo “The ~ Of ee dafal murderer
the leper there. € vi
ha de the plane stationary.
TRaEDA who Le kind and ee
and cured him with ae :
letters) and got ready to take |
B oe ne ; ee Buddhism. Some er
J . The founder a oP ald in
oom eee ee of vig oP a sed thie
a battle the devas were defeated by ee, Waele
sails approached Visnu with their gr
visnu incarnated as the son of
s, neared the leper
(a spell of four
Iso to heaven.
6 uddhodana with the
BUDDHISM (BUDDHA-MATA)
name Gautamabuddha (Siddhartha). Then he went
to the asuras and made them reject the Vedas and the
laws thereof. All the Daityas (Asuras) became Bud- ©
dhists. There is a story in Agnipurana, Chapter 16,
that thus it was the purpose of Buddha to convert
every asura to Buddhism and send him to hell.
The story given above is in accordance with the Puranas. The following are the facts gained by historic
investigations.
Gautama Buddha was born in B.C. 560, in Kapilavastu
near the Himalayas. His father was Suddhodana. He
was born in the family of the Sakyas. The word ‘Sakya’
is another form of the word Ksatriya. The real name of
Buddha was Siddhartha. Suddhodana brought up his
son in such a way that he should not be subjected to
any sort of mental pain or worry. So he kept Buddha
aloof from the outer world. Thus he spent his childhood
in comfort and pleasure. Once by chance he happened
to see a sick man, an old man and a dead body. The
sight made him thoughtful. He began to think upon
a way to remove sorrow and pain from the world and
to bring about peace and comfort. 7
The change. that appeared in the son worried th
father. So at the age of sixteen he made Siddhartha
marry Yasgodhara. A son was born to them. But the
mind of Siddhartha was restless, distressed and agitated. One day Siddhartia discarded everything and
went out of the palace alone.
Siddhartha wandered from place to place learning
from various teachers. But he did not find peace.
Once on a full-moon day while he was sitting in meditation under a banian tree he got ‘Bodha’. (insight or
conviction). From that day onwards he began to be
known by the name ‘Buddha’. After that he came to
Kasi, and told his disciples how he got Bodha or conviction. The number of his followers increased day by .
day. Thus Buddhism came into being. Buddha said
that the reason for pain and sorrow in the world was
desire and that sorrow could be exterminated only
by controlling and overcoming all desire. To attain
Eternal Bliss one should be true and righteous in
thought, deed and word and that ‘Not Killing’ was
the foundation of righteousness. Buddhism spread
everywhere in Bharata.
Gautama Buddha died at the age of eighty.
BUDDHAGHOSA. An ancient Sanskrit poet. It is believed that he lvedin the 4th century A.D. The
most important work of this poet who was a Buddhist,
is ‘Padyacidamani’. The life of Buddha is described
in this Book in ten Kandas (sections). A similarity to
the poems of Kalidasa and Agvaghosa is seen in this
poem. Buddhaghosa is said to have reached Ceylon
in 357 A.D. and translated some Buddhist literature.
BUDDHI. A wife of Dharmadeva. In Visnu Purana
Arméga 1, Chapter 7, it is mentioned that Dharmadeva
had married thirteen daughters of Daksa. They are
Sraddha, Laksmi, Dhyti, Tusti, Medha, Pusti, Kriya,
Buddhi, Lajja, Vapus, Santi, Siddhi and Kirti.
BUDDHIKAMA. An attendant of Subrahmanya. (M.B.
Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Stanza 12).
BUDDHISM. (BUDDHA-MATA). The origin of Buddhism was in the sixth century B.C. This new religion
was shaped out of Hinduism that prevailed at that
time. Buddhism which had its origin in North India
prevailed everywhere in India up to the eleventh

century A.D. During that period there was an overflow of this religion to the other parts of Asia. Now
this religion has its full sway over the people of Burma.
90% of the population there, are adherents of Buddhism. 80% of the people of Thailand, 60% of the
people in Ceylon and Japan and 17% in China are
now Buddhists. In India, Pakistan and the Philippines
the Buddhists are only a minority. Even though Indonesia is a Muslim country there is a small class of
Buddhists there. Combodia, Lavos and Tibet are considered to be Buddhist countries. In Nepal there are
only two religions, Hinduism and Buddhism. In countries outside Asia there are followers of Buddhism.
Statistics reveal that there are one hundred and sixtyfive thousand Buddhists in North America, one
hundred and thirtyfive thousand in South America,
and ten thousand in Europe. The number of Buddhists
in the world today is 150.31 crores.
CG. (4) The letter C has two meanings, viz., evil people
and pure man.
CAIDYA. Sigupala, king of Cedi. Dhrstaketu, King of
Cedi, is also known by this name. It was this Caidya
who led the Kraujicavyiha created by Dhrstadyumna
in the great battle. (Krauficavyiha =A battle array
in the shape of a stork). (Sloka 47, Ghapter 50, Bhisma
Parva).
CAITRARATHA. A prince born to King Kuru of his
queen Vahini (Sloka 50, Chapter 94, Adi Parva).
CAITRARATHA(M). A forest of puranic fame. Once
King Yayati enjoyed sexual acts with the apsaras
Vigvaci in this forest. (Sloka 43, Chapter 75, Adi
Parva) . It was here in this forest that Pandu spent some
days once with his wives Madri and Kunti. (Sloka 48,
Chapter 118, Adi Parva).
As a support to the great mountain Mahameru were
four mountains, Mandara, Merumandara, Suparsva
and Kumuda. Above each of these was a garden-wood,
Nandana, Caitraratha, Vaibhrajaka and Sarvatobhadra.
Thus it is to be presumed that Caitraratha was on
Merumandara. (Chapter 16, Paficama Skandha,
Bhagavata).
CAITRARATHA PARVA. A sub-division of Adi ‘Parva,
(See under Mahabharata) . |
CAITYAKA. A mountain. This mountain is situated
near Girivraja, the capital city of Magadha. This mountain was very dear tothe people of Magadha. The
followers of Brhadratha deemed it as a God and
worshipped it. (Chapter 21, Sabha Parva).
CAKATA. (See Brahmadatta IT).
CAKRA I. A son of Vasuki, the Naga king. He died at
the serpent yajfia (Sarpa Satra) of Janamejaya by
falling into the fire. (Adi Parva, Chapter 57, Verse 6).
CAKRA II. One of the three attendants given to
Subrahmanya by Visnu, the other two being Sankrama
and Atikrama. (Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 40).
CAKRA III. One of the two attendants presented to
Skandhadeva by Tvasta, the other one being Anucakra.
(Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 40).
CAKRA(M) I. Sudargana Cakra (disc) of MahAvisnu..
The Visnu Purana contains the following story about
the origin of the Cakra.
Siryadeva (the Sun God) married Samjia, daughter
of Viévakarma. But, due to the insufferable heat of
her husband the marital life of Samjna became miuserCAKRAVYUHA
able, and so she requested her father to lessen the heat
of Sarya. And, accordingly Vigvakarma ground surya
on a grinding machine and thus diminished his effulgence. But, the grinding could diminish only 1/8 of
that effulgence, which glowing red-hot dropped on the
earth, and with that Vigvakarma made the Sudarsana
Cakra, the Trigtila, the Puspakavimana and the
weapon called Gakti. Out of those four things the
Trigala came to be possessed by Siva, the Puspakavimana by Kubera and Sakti by Brahma. The Sudargana Cakra which was glowing like anything was
deposited in the sea. (Visnu Purana, Part 3, Ghapter 2).
There is a story in the Mahabharata as to how the
Cakra thrown into the sea came into the possession 0
Mahavisnu. While Sri Krsna and Arjuna _ were picnicing on the shores of the Yamuna Agnideva went t0
them and requested them to give Khandava forest t0
him for food. As Taksaka, friend of Indra, was living
sn the forest the latter was causing heavy rains to tall
there. Krsna and Arjuna realized the fact that Ag”
would be able to consume the forest only after subjug®
ting Indra. But, how to manage it ? Then Agni eae
that he would supply the weapon to fight Indra pl
and accordingly he meditated on Varuna, who i
sented to him (Agni) a chariot and flag with monkey
as symbol, a quiver which would never become emp .
of arrows, a bow called Gandiva and the Sudarsan
Cakra. Agnideva gave the Cakra to Sri Krsna and ol
other things to Arjuna. (M.B. Adi Parva, Ghap
CAR RA (M) II. A city in ancient India.
Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 45). Oo
CAKRADEVA.. A warrior born in Vrsni vamsa.
dynasty). (Sabha Parva, Chapter 14, Verse 57) «
CAKRADHANUS. A synonym of Kapila maharsl.
Kapila) . .
CARRADHARA. A very intelligent brahmuin. One-eye
and bent down in body he is a character In Vatsara)
carita. (See Vidiisaka).
CAKRADHARMA. Chief of the Vidyadharas. He,
his younger brother is engaged in singing the praise
(Bhism@
(Vrsn
(see
with
Kubera. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 10, Verse 27). oi
CAKRADVARA(M). A_ great mountain. Indra r oA,
his mountain. (Santi Pa
formed a yajfia on t
Chapter 4, Verse 185).
CAKRAKA. The son, a Brahmavadin, |
Anugasana Parva, Chapter 4, Verse 64) . this
CAKRAMANDA. A_ naga (a serpent). It was x) 10
naga which was deputed by Ananta (naga kine fae
lead the soul of Balarama on his death to P4
(Mausala Parva, Chapter 4, Verse 16).
CAKRANEMI. A woman attendant 0
(Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Verse 5) « ; parv%
CAKRATI. A town in ancient India. ( Bhisma
Chapter 9, Verse 45). 1ie the
CAKRAVAN. A mountain very much extolle f sitd
Puranas. When deputing monkeys in quest = cb it
Sugriva instructed them to make a special SCe gy"
Mount Cakravan. It was on this mountain thé pa
karmi made the Sudarsana Cakra. (Valmik
yana, Kiskindha Kanda, Chapter 42, Verse 16) -
CAKRAVYUHA. A Phalanx. ail. jp
A particular pattern of army formation on gt? Cakr?¢
the Kaurava-Pandava war Dronacarya form® O i0s?
vyiha wherein Abhimanyu, son of Arjuna 8°
of Visvamitt®
f Skandadev™

CAKRIKA
trapped and killed. (Abhimanyu, who forced himself
inside the Vyiha did not know the method of geting out of it which Arjuna alone knew). Cakravyiha is
made in the form and shape of Cart-wheels. Vyasa has
described the Cakravyaha made by Drona as follows:—
The great preceptor made the Cakravyiha and posted
in it to maximum capacity kings, who were equal to
Indra. In every opening of the vyuha were posted
princes equal in prowess to the Sun. All the princes
were organised compactly. And, all of them wore red
uniforms and were adorned with other things also red
in colour and held red flags. They also wore golden
ornaments and garlands scented with Sandal paste.
Ten thousand strong they rushed forward to fight with
Abhimanyu. Duryodhana’s son, Laksmana, led the
onrush. In the centre (of the Cakravyitha) _ stood
Duryodhana in the company of heroes like Karna,
Dus$asana and Krpa. And, at the head of the army
stood Drona, the captain of the army, who looked like
the rising sun. Then there was the King of Sindhu,
and near ‘him stood Aévatthama, and there stood in
front of them thirty Kauravas, all of them equal to
Devas. On the flanks were great heroes like Salya,
Bhirigravas. And then did the battle rage- (Drona
Parva, Chapter 34). ;
CAKRIKA. A forest hunter. The following Sory 1S
told about him in Chapter 16, Kriyayoga of the Padma
Purana. f a
Devoted much to his parents, Cakrika was a gr
devotee of Visnu. He ee to worship Visnu ant aia
faite, (edible) roots. ee; But, he dies) OF Tg
himself tasting them. One day while t 4 “7 ; Ae
fruit, somehow or other it got itself lo El 1. The
throat, and all his attempts to dislodge 1 and therefruit had to be, at any rate; offered to Visnu an
fore Cakrika drew his sword and cut his Brose i
Lord Visnu who was so pleasea at SE el * mae
SI, -
of the man appeared Oval is “Cakrika expired at
Hme afterwards -
back to life. Some d thus attained salvation.
ote Oa Ping in the dynasty of Yayati.
(Bhagavata, Navama Skandha) .
CAKSUSI. A synonym of the Sun.
1, Verse 42). -4a. Starting from
) : f river Ganga. tarting ir
CAKSUS II. A tributary 0 “= falls into Devayana
ae Ganga falls in
sin ool co Se tobi and after flooding the wee
and thence — ur tributaries, V1Z., 51%,
area it divides 1 Brahmatself into fou: ;
3 and Bhadra and falls into
agen gen 4 re directions. Of the four pa ol
O
ries the river ee Ge rota Ketumala and falls
Malyavan and then flows "Cc s¢a which flows through
into the western! the above-mentioned tributary,
India is a branch of tama Skandha).
ss = Bhs ta, AS
Alakananda. (Dev! Bhegave he lunar dynasty. He
( Adi Parva, Chapter
- ~ born in ¢ l
—— is — of King Anudruhy (Bhagavata, Navame
Skandha ). ‘er which flows through
DHANIKA. A riv ran Ul.
es. (Saka island). (Bhism4 Parva, Chapis
Verse 33).
CAKSUSAMANU rteen Manus. (see
1) General. The sixth of the fou
Manvantara) :
CAKYARKUTTU
2) Genealogy. Uttanapada and Priyavrata were the
sons of Svayambhuvamanu, and Dhruva was Uttanapada’s son. Dhruva had two sons, Sisti, and Bhavya
by his wife Sambhu. Suchaya, wife of Sisti, had five
sons, viz., Ripu, Ripufijaya, Vipra, Vrkala and Vrkatejas. From Brhati, wife of Ripu, was born Caksusa, the
mighty and Caksusa begot a son called Manu by
Puskarani, daughter of Viranaprajapati and one of the
offsprings of Varuna. This Manu was called Caksusa
Manu. And Caksusa Manu _had ten sons by his wife
Nadvala, daughter of Vairajaprajapati, called Kuru
Puru, Satadyumna, Tapasvi, Satyavan, Suci, Agnistoma, Atiratra, Sudyumna and Abhimanyu. Out of
the ten, Puru had the following sons by Agneyi, viz.
Anga, Sumanas, Khyati, Kratu, Angiras and Sibi.
Anga married Sunitha, and Vena was their son. The
famous emperor, Prthu was Vena’s son.
3) Former life. The following story is told in the
Markandeya Furana about the former life of Caksusa
before he was born as Caksusa. In that former life he
was Ananda, son of Anamitra. Once a cat carried
Ananda away and laid him on the bed of the child of
King Vikranta, and the same cat deposited the king’s
child somewhere else. And, Ananda grew up as the
real son of the King. But, one day he told the King
the truth about him and left for the forest for tapas.
Brahma appeared before him and blessed that he
would, in the next birth, be born as the sixth Manu
and thus Caksusa became the sixth Manu.
4) Chief incidents during his time. During Caksusamanyantara were born the famous Nara and Narayana as
the sons of Dharma. It was also during this period that
Brahma was born as Candra, Visnu as Dattatreya and
Siva as Durvasas from Anasiiya, the purest of women
and the wife of Atri. (Devi Bhagavata, Caturtha
Skandha).
CAKSUSI. An art, the study of which will enable one
to see anything in the three worlds. Caksusi was
taught by Manu to Soma, by him to Vigvavasu, by
him to Citraratha, the Gandharva and by him to
Arjuna, son of Pandu. (Adi Parva).
CAKYARKUTTU. A very important art practised in
temples mainly in Kerala. It is called so because it is
exhibited by Caky4rs (a sect attached to temples). In
important temples a place called Kiittambala is set
apart for displaying the art. The Kiittu now prevalent
in Kerala temples is not exactly ofits old form. Kulaéekharavarma perumal (elected ruler of old Kerala)
effected some changes in the old art form, and Bhaskararavivarma perumal and Tolakavi made further reforms
in it. The art of Kittu was evolved with the object of
relating puranic stories in such a manner as will help
devotional feelings grow in man.
The main aim of the Kittu is to narrate puranic
stories in such a way as to instil Bhakti in the hearers
and to create an interest in them in the Puranas. The
Cakyar (the man who gives the discourse who usually
belongs to the Brahmin sect called Cakyars) tells the
story in a very interesting way, reciting appropriate
passages from the Puranas and illustrating them with
apt examples and similes. The narration is from the
beginning till end humorous. The Cakyar who delivers
the discourse is usually a man with a good sense of
humour and a sense of what is odd, strange or eccentrj
in nature and human character. There are three ous.

CALA
ties of Kiittu : Prabandharn Kittu, Nambiar Kittu and
Kitiattam. Of these the first is narrative (Akhyanapara) while in the second and third type, the element
of acting is more important ( Abhinayapara).
CALA. lLaksmidevi. The following story is told in the
Devi-bhagavata as to how this name came to be
applied to the devi. Once Revanta the very handsome
son of Siryadeva came to Vaikuntha riding Uccaih-
$ravas, Indra’s horse. Devi, who was at that time with
Visnu gazed for a few minutes in wonder at the horse.
She did not, therefore, attend to Visnu’s talk. Angered
at this Visnu told the devi: ‘‘Since your eyes find
enjoyment on unnecessary things and move about
among such objects, you shall be called from today
onwards Rama and Cala. Also you will be born as a
mare on earth. Aecordingly Mahalaksmi was born as
a mare on the banks of river Sarasvati, and regained
her old form only after delivering a son by Visnu. That
son was Ekavira, founder of the Hehaya kingdom. (Devi
Bhagavata, Skandha 6).
CAMARA. (CAMAREF), An animal whose tail isits most
important and valued organ. Inthe course of its movements in the forest if the tail gets entangled anywhere
it is supposed to lie down there till the tail is freed by
itself. About the origin of Camara, the following story
is told in the Valmiki Ramayana. Krodhavaésa, daughter
of Daksaprajapati and wife of Kasyapa had ten daughters, viz. Mrgi, Mrgamada, Hari, Bhadramada,
Matangi, Sardili, Sveti, Surasa, Surabhi and Kadri.
To Mrgamadi the Srmaras and Camaras owe their
origin. (Valmiki Ramayana, Aranya Kanda, Canto 14).
CAMARA(M). A rod (handle) with a large tuft of
hair, fibre or feathers at the end. A symbol used by
kings and brahmins. Camara of the king should have a
golden handle, and it should be made of the wings of
the swan, the pea-cock, the Balaka bird etc. But, the
wings of different birds shall not be intermixed. Circular in shape, the Camara should have on its handle
3, 4, 5, 6, 7, or 8 sandhis (joints, knots). (Agnipurana, Chapter 245).
CAMASA. A yogi, the younger brother of Bharata, a king
born in the dynasty of Priyavrata, son of Manu. This
country got its name Bharata from king Bharata (country
ruled by Bharata). Bharata had nine brothers called
Kuéavarta, Ilavarta, Brahmavarta, Aryavarta, Malaya,
Bhadraketu, Sena, Indrasprk and Kikata. Bharata had
also nine other brothers renowned as navayogis, born
of another mother. Camasa was one of them, the other
eight being Kavi, Hari, Ambarisa, Prabuddha, Pippalayana, Avirhotra, Dramida and Kharabhajana. (Bhagavata Paficama Skandha). | |
CAMASODBHEDA. A holy place in Saurastra which
forms part of the very reputed sacred place called
Vinagana. Itis said thatit was here that the river
Sarasvati which once became invisible, was detected. A
bath here is as efficacious as performing the Jyotistoma
yajfia. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 82, Verse 112).
CAMATKARA. (See PATTU).
CAMOHARA. A visvadeva. (M.B, Anugdasana Parva.
Chapter 191, Verse 35).
CAMPA. A king born in the Anga
CANDRAVAMSA) . |
CAMPA. (CAMPAPURI). A city on the banks of river
Ganga, Caripa is often referred to in the Puranas. It
was here that Lomapada lived in tretayuga. (M.B.
dynasty. (See
CANAKYA (KAUTILYA)
Vana Parva, Chapter 113, Verse 15). In Dvaparayuga
the city was ruled by a Sita called Atiratha, who got
Karna, while he and his wife were brooding over their
lack of a child. In after years Karna also ruled the
city. (M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter 5, Verse 7).
CAMPAKA. A vidyadhara. Once he visited the banks
of river Yamuna with his wife Madalasa when they got
from the forest nearby a child. The child in later years
became famous as Ekavira, founder of the Hehaya
dynasty. (See EKAVIRA).
CAMPAKARANYA. (CAMPAKARA). A holy place
in Northern India. One day’s halt at the place and 4
bath there is considered to be as good as giving away
one thousand cows as gift. (M.B. Vana _ Parva;
Chapter 84). _
CAMPEYA. Son of Visvamitra who was a brahmavadin
(M.B. Anusasana Parva, Chapter 4, Verse 58).
CAMPU. A literary form of presenting a story
mixture of prose and verse, and abounding in en
in a
tiful descriptions ; ‘“Gadyapadyamayam kavyam =e
piirityabhidhiyate’’. Over and above prose and i
the Campiis use dandakas (very long, eer
its OFS”,
poetical prose). This literary form had ve
first in Sanskrit and other Indian languages adopt¢ in
with some variations. For instance, though De aie
Sanskrit Campus is really prose, that in Malaya -
is something akin to metrical prose. There are a
than two hundred Campiis in Malayalam. The ee
famous of the Campi writers in Malayalam bch
Punam Namboothiri, Mahamangalam Namboo
and Nilakantha. .
CAMU. A division of an army. (See Aksauhini)
CAMUNDA. (See Parvati).
CANAKA. The auspiciousness of Canaka (cowdung
due to Laksmi. (See Laksmi, Paras I and 6).
CANAKYA (KAUTILYA). The famous author ~
‘‘Arthasastra”’ a treatise on political economy. «tive
Eastern and western scholars have made ae 4ias
researches on this intellectual giant of couagues EET
Canakya. But, nothing definite has yet been esta a at
about his time or life. Indians have accepted Cal ,
the traditional legend that he was a minister 0 -, als?
gupta, the founder ofthe Maurya dynasty. HHect ° a
firmly believed that it was this mighty inte ampere
brahmin who made Candragupta a power ‘Canal,
and steered the ship of his state. The phrase A sal.
kutilaniti? (crooked tactics) has become Pie to be
Some scholars hold the opinion that he on d)
called ‘Kautilya’ because of his_ Kutila «. VE
tactics ; but evidence to establish this view-P° /'8
to be adduced. = naky
It is his famous Arthasastra, which has made O48" es
name a world famous one. The great pane os}
Jolly has described the Arthasastra as a oma yers
tion in the Sanskrit language. And, Johann ~ abo"
great western scholar has the following to ©
the book :—
“Kautilya’s
collection and collater
Arthagastra is not one single text, cic
ation of all books eT am
India. To study the greatness of the oes a
principles contained in it today requires con ad the uF
constant study at least for twenty lama dl _n?
remitting efforts of a scholar with unapov
ledge are required.”

CANCALAKSI
Even his name has not yet been confirmed beyond
doubts. Kautilya is also called Visnugupta, Canakya,
Dramila, and Angula. Modern researches place the
date of the Arthasastra at near about B.C. 400. In
Visakhadatta’s Mudraraksasa (drama) the name
Kautilya is used.
The Authors of Nitigastra maintain that the name of
the author of Arthagdstra was Visnugupta. It may be
gathered from the Mudraraksasa that he became famous
as Canakya as he was the son of Canaka, and that
he possessed deep erudition in Nitisastra, DharmaAstra and astrology. There is another legend to the
effect that this brahmin (Canakya) belonged to Kaiicipura and that he migrated to Pataliputra, the seat of
learning and scholarship. As Kamandaka, who lived
in the fourth century B.C. has eulogised Ganakya in
his nitigastra it may be surmised that Canakya lived
sometime near about that, Candragupta and Canakya
are referred to in the Visnu and the Vamana Puranas. |
Kautilya was keen-eyed and scholar par excellence.
“Arthagastra” is a great book written by him after
thoroughly examining the viewpoints of previous
scholars, and then establishing his own views and
theories. From the Dagakumaracarita of Dandi (A.D.
709) it may be seen that there are 6000 verses In the
Anustup metre (eight letters in one line) in the ArthaSastra composed by Visnugupta for the use of Candragupta Maurya. The Artha astra has been held in praise
by Banabhatta who lived in the 7th Century, Somadevasiri, who lived in the 10th century and also a
Hemacandra, the author of Kavyanusasana, who liye
in the 12th century. The book is a discourse oa °
principles and practices that are necessary ta: estanls
ideal empire. Canakya has
a strong government of an } Pp resis Liles
mentioned in his book with respect the ere Ae a
Manu, Sukra, Brhaspati, Narayana, ei) Yeanakya
Govinda diksita. (For the puranic story abou
see Vararuci, Para 6). toad 9 ="
= ; lot who lived in dva
CANCALAKSI. A nove tt ‘dnight she came to the
h
pare FET alae to meet a paramour the latter ce =
arrived, While waiting impatiently there if Visnu
attacked and killed by ale Op a ee aay tie soul of
as also of Yama arrived to carry had sinned
? hat she
Stare Yama’s men argued t ake ral Oe
througnou
t her life, and therefore clal oh hee
soul. But the emissaries of Visnu coun
ment thus : S‘once on
her trade
her way to conduct ee
Caficalaksi got into a temple ao munched tambula !
the course of which she rubbe
some lime on oe car
i into consideration this fac
Se ee oe ame thus e a! ie temple
wall her soul deserves to be led to bis Ge Bare
In th ment the emissaries of Ya vos
! f Gaficalaksi was taken to Vaikunt :
i adma Purana, Chapter 6).
the emissarics of Vise idyadhara girl. Once while she
CANCALAKS! Il. rd % er over Mahdalaksm1,
was concentrating her m ind in pry mitted rape on her,
‘ A as, com?
Ravana, King of the Raksas auld die on account 0
‘m that he shoulc
ofa ai _—o se accordingly at ee bie
Me pau on account of Sita, the incar
illed by
Mahalaksmi. (Kamp Ramayana).
CANDA. | (See Candamundas)
CANDABALA. A prominent In the Ram
monkey.
CANDAMAHASENA
Ravana war this monkey caused much trouble to Kumbhakarna. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 287, Verse 6).
CANDABHARGAVA. Amaharsi born in the dynasty
of Cyavana Muni. A very erudite scholar and deeply
versed in the Vedas, it was this maharsi, who performed
Janamejaya’s famous Sarpa sattra. (M.B., Adi Parva,
Chapter 58, Verse 4).
CANDAKA. A forest hunter who attained salvation by
the worship of Sivalinga. (Phallus of Siva).
While once hunting in the woods Candaka saw a Siva
temple in ruins, and the Sivalinga lying on the ground
uncared for. This sight greatly grieved him, and he
told Simhaketu, son of the Paiicala Raja who happened
to come that way all about the temple and the
linga. To his query as to whether the sAstra permitted
a hunter like himself to worship Sivalinga, Sirmhaketu
answered there were injunctions in the Sastras for
people like him (Candakas) to instal Sivalinga on
rock and then worship it daily, the worshipper wearing ashes from the burning ghat on his body. Accordingly Candaka installed the linga on a rock and began
worshipping it daily along with his wife, Pulindi. But
after sometime there was left no ashes in the burning
ghat and Candaka and Pulindi discussed between them
the means to get ashes for the next day. Then Pulindi
suggested that she should burn herself to ashes and that
Candaka should continue worshipping the Sivalinga
wearing on his body the ashes. Very unwillingly
Candaka agreed with the sad proposal of his wife, and
the next day he worshipped the Sivalinga wearing on
his body the ashes of Pulindi. And, at the close of the
worship he called aloud for Pulindi, and lo! wonder
of wonders ! she stood there before him more healthy
than formerly. Moreover a vimana descended from the
skies and conducted both Candaka and Pulindi to
Sivaloka. (Siva Purana, Sarhbaramahatyma) .
CANDAKAUSIKA. A muni, son of Kaksivan, the son of
Gautama. Brhadratha, King of Magadha, was having no
issues when, one day, Candakausika went to the palace
and blessed the King as a result of which a son called
Jarasandha was born to him. Candakausika continued to
live at Magadha for long as the preceptor of the kings of
that land. (See Jarasandha) .
CANDALA. (See Caturvarnya) .
CANDAMAHASENA.
1) General. A very prominent and reputed king of
Ujjayini. Vasavadatta, wife of Udayana was his
daughter.
9) The name Candamahasena. His real name was Mahasena. ‘After ascending the throne he began doing
tapas to get a noble wife and a good sword. When he
cut his own flesh and made an offering of the same to
the sacred fire after a long period of tapas the Devi
became pleased, and offered him a sword of exceptional
excellence and said that as long as he had that sword
with him no enemy would defeat him. The Devi also
assured him that ere long Angaravati, daughter of the
asura called Angaraka and the fairest damsel in the
three worlds would become his wife. Since he ( Mahasena) did the most austere rites and rituals, the Devi
said, he would come to be called Candamahasena,
Afterwards the sword given by the Devi and the elephant called nadagir! proved as successful and effective
to him as were Vajrayudha and his elephant Airavata
to Indra.

CANDAMUNDAS
3) Marriage. One day, during a hunting expedition
a boar escaped unhurt by the king’s arrows and after
turning turtle his chariot it went into a cave. The king
in great anger followed the pig into the cave, and going
forward some distance he saw a beautiful animal whereupon he seated himself on the side of a tank. There he
saw, amidst a number of women an exceptionally
beautiful woman moving about. Casting her charming
eyes glistering with love the woman approached the
King. During their conversation, when the king told
her about himself she began crying. To the query as
to the reason for her crying she answered as follows :—
‘The boar you saw is my father, Angarakasura. His
body is harder than even diamond, and none can inflict
any injury on it. The women you see around are
princesses captured by my father from various palaces
for my help, and my name is Angaravati. My father
became a Raksasa as the result of a curse ; he is now
asleep in the assumed form of a boar. On awaking he
is sure to eat you for food, and it was that thought which
brought tears to my eyes’’. To these words of Angaravati, the king replied as follows :—‘‘If you have any
love for me you would go to your father and begin
crying when he wakes up, and to his question as to
why you are crying you should reply that thoughts
about your future in the event of your fathers’s death
brought tears in your eyes.”
Angaravati agreed to the above proposal of the King.
She hid the King in a safe place and went and stood
by the side of her father. Everything happened as was
anticipated and Angaraka consoled his daughter by
saying that none would be able to kill him whose
body was as hard and strong as diamond, there being
only one opening through which he might be struck on
the left wrist which might be concealed by the bow.
Candamahasena who heard the above talk came out of
his hiding place and challenged the asura to war. He
raised his left hand to show the sign, ‘‘just coming,
please wait’’, and the king then shot his arrow through
the opening on his left wrist. The asura fell dead.
4) Berth of Vasavadatta: And, now Candamahasena
married Angaravati and returned to his kingdom with
his wife. Two sons, Gopalaka and Palaka were born to
the royal couple, and the King celebrated an Indrotsava for the welfare and prosperity of the children.
Pleased at the utsava Indra appeared to the king in
sleep and blessed him saying that a daughter would be
born to him and that her son would be crowned emperor of the Vidyadharas. Accordingly a daughter was
born to the King, and she was called Vasavadatta.
(given by Vasava, i.e. Indra) . Udayana married Vasavadatta. (See Udayana).
CANDAMUNDAS. Two brothers born in the Asura
dynasty, the elder brother being called Canda and
the younger Munda. These brothers collected, like
the other asura leaders Dhimraksa, and Raktabija,
thousands of soldiers and lived in all pomp and
glory.
During this period two asura brothers called Sumbha
and Nigumbha had returned from the Himalayas after
securing from Brahman a boon that they would meet
with their death only at the hands of a woman. Canda
and Munda became their friends and attendants.
Sumbha and Nigumbha set out on a triumphal tour
and conquered heaven, earth and patala. The Devas
~ a 2 ee
CANDATUNDAKA (S).
CANDIKA
took refuge in a forest. After wandcring in the forest
for a long time, at the instance of Brhaspati they sought
asylum with Parvati. Parvati stood for sometime in deep
concentration, and there emerged from her divine body
Kausiki or Kali. Parvati assured the Devas that she
would kill Sumbha and Nigumbha. And, then Kali sat
alone on a rock in the thick Forest. Canda and Munda,
who happened to pass that way were attracted by the
great beauty of Parvati and imparted the news to
Sumbha and Nisumbha, and they deputed Dhimraksa
and 60,000 soldiers to bring Parvati over to them ; but
by one humkara (sound ‘hum’) she reduced them [0
ashes. Ultimately she killed Sumbha and Nigumbha
also. (Devi Bhagavata, Paficama Skandha). |
A son of Garuda. (Udyog@
Parva, Chapter 101, Verse 9).
CANDAVEGA. A gandharva. (See Purafijana).
CANDIKA. A terrific form of Parvati, who 1s ma
ped in temples under the name Candikadevi. -
Devi’s idol has twenty hands. In the hands on the righ
side are held Sila (three-pronged weapons ) era,
Vela (rod), Cakra, pasa (rope), parigha (shiel ;
ayudha, abhaya, damaru and Sakti, while the “ane
on the left side hold nagapaga, small parigha, ae
Ankuga (a long-hooked rod), pasa, mam, flag, §@ 16
mirror and an iron cylindrical rod. ‘Ihere are rahe
idols of Candika with ten hands. At the fect of |
Devi lies Mahisadsura with his head severed from bo 4
There will also be standing near the idol a purusé als
born from the neck of the Mahisa brandishing 1s -
pon, and with the Sila in his hand in all rage nat
womitting blood and with red hairs and eyes. “ae
purusa is bound strongly on his neck with rope
vehicle of the Devi is a lion. The Devi 1s moun re pis
the lion with her left leg on the asura lying below: :
Candikadevi thus stands with weapons In the — ’ ne
annihilator of enemies and with three eyes, _ qs
should be worshipped in pijamandala with nine Pac’ i
(tantric divisions) along with her idol. Firstly the at
should be worshipped in the central padma an
and others in the other padmas. ;
There is also another Candikadevi (Durga)
teen hands. She holds in her right hand a skull, §
mirror, brdom, bow, flag, damaru and pasa (cor HO d;
in her left hand rod, iron pounder, Sila, oe noid
Ankuéa (a sticklike weapon with one end bent ere
on to things) Sara (arrow) Cakra and salaka- va th
are nine other Durgas having the same weapo” they
e broom. z
above except the Damaru and th purgas
have only sixteen hands each. These nine ~ Cand*
called Rudracanda, Pracanda, Ueracanda, ns nding
nayika, Aticandika, and Candogra. The Durg2 * a (re
at the centre will have the colour of gorocay wit
sandal paste) and the others will have the “k) i”
colours; arunavarna (red) Krsna varna erat as?
varna (blue), sukla varna (white), dhum! white?
(brown) pita varna (yellow) and sveta yvarna fot BS
The nava Durgas (nine Durgas) are insta e qiftese”
prosperity of children etc. And all these are b
forms of Parvati. = called if}
Also, in various aspects or poses, Parvati 1 tale? );
other names, She is called Siddha when es pearnyt
Ratnbha-vana wearing aksamala (garlan aha with ne
of
kirita (crown) and agni. The same Sid ene
the fire is called Lalita. Gauridev! with

CANDRA I
hands on the left side placed on the shoulder and the
head, and holding the mirror in the other hand, and
holding in one of the hands on the right side fruits etc.
and the other hand held up is called Saubhagya gauri.
(For further details see Parvatt). (Agni Purana, Chapter 50).
CANDRA I. A prominent asura, also called Candravarman. It was this asura, as beautiful as Candra (the
moon) who was born as the king _of Kamboja under
the name Candravarman (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter
67, Verse 31).
CANDRA II. A king born in the Solar dynasty and the
son of Vigvarandhi and father of Yuvanasva. See
Vamisavali)
CANDRA III. The Puranas declare that Candra was
one of the invaluable things got at the churning of
Ksirabdhi (ocean of milk) Candra, Mahalaksm1, Sura,
Uccaihgravas, Kaustubha, Paryata, Kamadhenu,
Dhanvantari, Amrtam and K4alakata were _the things
thus got from the Ocean of Milk. (M.B. Adi Parva,
Chapter 18 and Visnu Purana, Part 1, Chapter. 9) . Also,
the evil devataé called Jyestha, Airavata, the gem
named Cintamani and fair damsels like Tara and Ruma
were got from the Ksirabdhi, (Kampa Ratieynne
Yuddhakanda), For general information about Candra,
see Grahas).
CANDRA IV. (CANDRA DEVA)._ uya. (See
1) Birth. The child born to Att by Anasuya. it is
Puriravas). In Skandha 4 of the Devibhagavata 1}
stated that it was Brahman Ww
See Atri). oo ara
55 rh led married life with the wife of his Be re
the very beautiful wife of Brhaspatt, re ditiae her
Devas happened to reach Candra's aca fall sn love
perambulation one day. Candra and a in conjugal
with each other at first sight and live S
_ Brhaspati, being
happiness. And thus days passed by . SP et les
eput
informed of the fact on enqi)> Brhaspati sent
‘ od
arq back, but to no purpos es os
to bring ‘Tara a and again to Tara, but all to no
his disciples ag i: t to the house of
purpose. Then egg ae pm lia = to no purpose.
Candra and invited Ta" 3 spoke to Candra as
Enraged at this ie er g sd. thie® Avamteard, He
follows: ‘“The brahmin-killer, ee who associates himwho marries another's wife anc ie responsible for the
self with the above Se a ‘therefore, are not fit
most terrible e D a ioka. Unless you neon, Ga
enough tot a. aT wort VO u.” None of fe eal
wife to ‘d shake Candra. He told t € ae
ee ea had gone to his house on her ean a
wnat Eee ie “bie when she was ogee rs so
would also new ndra made Brhaspati all the sau.
These words © od home and waited cee open
angry. He oie he got disappointed, ho = ni
ine Lares noted, ages tt
ARE tine the gatekeepers cid 0" ut Brhaspati sought
this time oat the cruel rebull Braaspe ee him
Teall? al di sent word to canes as ce
me i og hr home or be ared for war.
to sen
prep 4 :
ra_ started for
Candra refused to yield, o a aan some difthen ye t Candra But, there was : and the news
ins
ye ne amnons the devas abo
ut all this,
reached the asuras. At once
f the
Sukra, preceptor 0
d an old enemy of Brhaspati met Candra and
asuras an
A "oOo
ho was born as Candra. ©
171 CANDRA IV
assured him all support in case war broke out between
Indra and Candra. He also strongly advised Candra
not toreturn Tara to Brhaspati. And, ultimately a
fierce war began between Indra and Candra. All activities in the world were thrown into confusion and
chaos. At this Brahma on his harhsa (swan) came to
the scene and admonished Candra and Sukra. They
could not but obey Brahma and so were forced to stop
fighting. Moreover, Candra returned Tara to Brhaspati.
The quarrel and fighting thus ended for the time
being, but another problem cropped up. At the time
Candra returned Tara to, Brhaspati she’ was carrying,
and Brhaspati was not aware of the fact. And at last
Tara delivered an exceptionally beautiful male child.
The naming ceremony of the child was duly performed,
Brhaspati himself acting as its father. When the news
reached Candra he sent a messenger to Brhaspati
claiming the child was his. Brhaspati too claimed its
fatherhood. This controversy developed almost to the
brink of a second devasura war. At this stage Brahma
went to Brhaspati’s house and questioned Tara as to
who really was her child’s father, and she named Candra.
Upon this Brahma asked Brhaspati to release the child
to Candra. Brhaspati did so. (Devi Bhagavata, Prathama Skandha).
3) Wives of Candra. Candra took twentyseven daughters of Daksa as his wives. (Devi Bhagavata, Saptama
Skandha). These twentyseven wives are the twentyseven stars. Candra circumambulates Mahameru along
with these, his twentyseven wives (Stars). (M.B. Vana
Parva, Chapter 163, Verse 33). The names of the
twentyseven wives are given hereunder: Asvini, Bharani, Krttika, Rohini, Mrgasiras, Ardra, Punarvasu,
“Pusya, Aslesa, Janakarn, Phalguni, Uttaraphalguni,
Hasta, Citra, Svati, Visakha, Anuradha, Jyestha,
Mala, Purvasadha, Uttarasadha, Srona, Sravistha,
Pracetas, Pirvaprosthapada, Uttaraprosthapada,
Revati.
Solar eclipse according to the Puranas. ‘The Devas and
the asuras jointly churned Ksirabdhi wherefrom emerged Dhanvantari with the Amrtakumbha (pot of nectar) .
(See Amrtam). |
But an asura mayavi (magician) called Saimhikeya
absconded to Patala with the Amrtakumbha whtch
nobody noticed as everybody was busy with dividing
other divine objects. Only after the mayavi’s disappearance was it noticed that the Amrta Kumbha was
missing. At once Mahavisnu assumed the figure of a
beautiful woman, got back the Kumbha and gave it to
the devas. The devas began drinking the amrtam when,
at the instance of some other devas, Sairmhikeya, the
mayavi assuming the form of an old brahmin reached
svarga, got a share of the amrta and began to drink it.
Sirya and Candra (Sun and Moon) who were on
cuard at the gates divined the secret of the ‘old
brahmin’ and informed Mahivisnu about it. He cut
the throat of the pseudo-brahmin with his Sudarsana
CGakra. But, half of the nectar he had drunk stayed
above the throat and the other half below it. Therefore,
though the head and the trunk were severed they
remained alive. These two parts, i course of time,
evolved as Rahu and Ketu.
When the throat was cut some blood as wel! as some
amrta dropped on two places on the ground, and they

CANDRA IV
became the red onion and the white onioa respectively. Some vaidika brahmins used to consider the red
onion objectionable for consumption as it was evolved
from blood, while the white onion was considered
usable as it was evolved from amrtam.
Rahu and Ketu still maintain their hatred for Surya
and Candra who had betrayed the asura, who, disguised as brahmin tried to drink the amrta. Eclipse is the
phenomenon of Rahu and Ketu swallowing Siarya and
Candra as and when opportunity presents itself for it.
But, since the throat is severed from the body, Surya
and Candra thus swallowed get out through the throat.
That is the reason why Sarya and Candra become
visible after the eclipse in over. (Kampa Ramayana,
Yuddha Kanda and Bhagavata Astama Skandha).
5) Candra became Calf. Once emperor Prthu _ transformed Bhimidevi into a cow and milked from her all
things and provisions. On that occasion it was Brahma,
who acted as Calf. And, following Prthu when the
Rsis milked the cow Candra served as Calf. (For
details see Prthu).
6) Waxing and waning of Candra, the purdnic story regardding it. Of the twentyseven daughters of Daksa whom
Candra had married he loved Rohini much more than
the other twentysix wives, and so kept her always with
him. This annoyed the twentysix wives, who complained
about it to Daksa. Daksa’s advice to Candra to treat
all the wives on an equal footing had noeffect on him.
So, the twentysix neglected wives again complained to
Daksa as follows : ‘“‘We shall stay in the aSrama and
serve you. Soma (Candra) does not associate with us,
he will not accept your advice.”
Though Daksa warned Candra a second time, that too
had no effect on him. So the twentysix wives, for the
third time, complained to Daksa. Daksa got angry at
this and cursed that Candra should suffer from tuberculosis. Thus Candra was afflicted by consumption.
Though Candra performed many a yajiia to get cured
of the fell disease, they did not produce the desired
effect. Gandra remaining a tubercular patient, the
growth of medicinal plants stopped with the result that
all living things contracted consumption. When people
began becoming thinner, the devas asked Candra for
an explanation, and he told them all the details. They
then sought the help of Daksa, who gave Candra
redemption from the curse by ordaining that if he dived
in the Sarasvati tirtha in the western sea he would be
free from consumption for half of every month. Thenceforth Gandra made it a practice to dive in the Sarasvati tirtha and that is the reason why Candra is exempted from Ksayaroga for fifteen days. (M.B. Salya Parva,
Chapter 35).
7) Candra—h ing of stars and of medicines. During the
reign of emperor Prthu, he changed Bhimidevi into a
cow. Later the Rsis also changed bhimidevi into a
cow and milked her. It was Candra who served as
calf then. Pleased at this Brahman crowned Candra as
king of the stars and medicines. (Harivarhga, Chapter
4, Verse 2).
8) Other information about Candra
(1) Candra is 11,000 sq. yojanas in area, 33,000 yojanas
in circumference and a volume of 5,900 cubic yojanas.
(M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 12).
(2) Candra presented two attendants called Mani and
72 CANDRAHASA
Sumati to Subrahmanya (Salya Parva, Chapter 49;
Verse 32). |
(3) Candra once made a discourse on the superior
qualities of brahmins to Sambarasura. (Anugasana
Parva, Chapter 36, Verse 13, Southern Text).
(4) All welfare and prosperity accrue to him, who on
full-emoon day at moon-rise tenders offerings to Candra
of bread in copper vessels with honey poured into It.
(Anusgasana Parva, Chapter 86, Werse, 15, Southern
Text);
(5) Candra is one of the asta-vasus. Candra_ bad
four sons, Varcas, Sigira, Prana and Ramana by his
wife named Manohara. (Adi Parva, Chapter 66,
Verse 18).
(6) Abhimanyu was Candra’s son, Varcas, reborn 45
the son of Arjuna. (See Abhimanyu). ;
CANDRA. An important river in ancient India. (Bhism
Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 29).
CANDRAGUPTA I. Second son of Ravana. Once
when Sri Rama was King, Candragupta abducted the
daughter o! Sugriva and the daughter-in-law of Vibhisana. Hanuman released them both as ordered by ¥9!?
Rama. (Kampa Ramayana Uttara Kanda ; also sc
Sahasramukha Ravana). |
CANDRAGUPTA II. A minister of Kartaviryarjum’:
Kartaviryarjuna was once fed sumptuously by Jamat"
agni at his 4§rama with the help of Susila, the devasurabhi (divine cow). Candragupta, at the instance
Kartaviryarjuna tried to capture Susila by force, ene
disappeared immediately in the sky. Kartaviryarjun” |
servants then forcibly took away its calf. CandraguP *
thrashed to death Jamadagni, who tried to obstru
their action. (Se¢é Kartavirya, Para 9). =
CANDRAHANTA. An asura, who was reborn as Kins
Sunaka. (M.B., Adi Parva, Chapter 677, Verse 37).
CANDRAHARTA. A son born to Kasyapa prajapatr
Simhika, daughter of Daksa. (M.B., Adi Par
Chapter 65, Verse 31).
CANDRAHASA. Son er King Sudharmika_ of Kerat
The following story about him is told in Jaimin1 AS
medha Parva. sixth
Candrahasa, born under the star Milam had 4 all
finger on the left foot indicative of poverty an ‘illed
other evils. And, therefore, on his birth enemies **"
Sudharmika and his wife followed him soon take”
other world. The child thus left an orphan was alace:
to Kaundalakapuri by a female inmate of the P ears
But unfortunately the woman died within he xe,
of the above incident. The child, just for very exis ‘at lY
took to begging. After sometime some women J ous?
took up charge of the boy. Once he went to the “feast
of Dhrstabuddhi, minister of Kaundala where @ | es
was in progress. The munis present there wer al q be’
sed by Candrahasa and prophesied that ae the
come a King. To Dhrstabuddhi, the munls sa! ‘cious *
child would guard his wealth. Angry and mee wo
the prophesy of the munis Dhrstabuddhi asked n tO"
to kill the boy. They led him to the fores™ 7 ston’
way Candrahisa got a Salagrama (a small sact apple
which represented some upadevata) which he all the
very devotedly to his face. They did not 1m . foot av
boy, but cut off his sixth finger on the left :
showed it to their master. dere? a
Thus left alive in the forest by the muf ind 0
boy was roaming about when the King af Ka

CANDRAHASA
a hunting expedition saw the destitute boy, and taking
pity on him took him back with him to the palace.
The boy was put under the care of Medhavati, the
King’s consort. The king named him Candrahasa. Since
the King took a special interest in the education of
the child he became adept in all arts and sciences. At
the age of twelve Candrahasa, with the permission of
the king, set out on a triumphal tour, and the king
welcomed Candrahiasa on his return after his glorious
victory that brought him wealth.
At the instance ofthe Kalinda king, Candrahasa, sent by
his messengers tribute to the Kaundala king, who, understanding from them that so much of wealth had been
brought to the Kalinda king by Candrahasa started at
once for the Kalinda palace. On being told the whole
story about Candrahasa, Dhrstabuddhi, the minister of
the King of Kaundala made-up his mind to do away with
him somehow or other for which he despatched a letter
to his son, Madana, through Candrahasa.
CGandrahasa-on his way to Kaundala slept on the banks
of a river. Campakamilini, the daughter of the King
of Kaundala and Visayd, daughter of Dhrstabuddhi
happened to go to the river bank where Candrahasa
was sleeping. Campakamilini, who became subject to
great love for Candrahasa removed the anklets on her
feet and approached him slowly, and when she took up
and read a letter she found lying beside him, she felt
awe and sorrow to find therein a suggestion to poison
him to death, Without wasting much time 1n thought she
changed the word ‘visamasmai’ (give him poison ) to
‘Visayasmai’ (give him Visaya) and put it in “mn ioe
place. After some time when Candrahasa pe nee
sleep and reached Kaundala city and delivered t a =
to Madana its content pleased him very muc i = ae
Visaya, she was spending her days 10 nee ae hie
that Candrahasa should marry her. F ‘Vj avai-wai
cumstances the marriage of Sota es Hoey
solemnised on the earliest auspI1Cclo
In due course Dhrstabuddhi retur ned to oy saan
all the wealth he could lay his hands upon 4 ea cea
Kalinda. He seethed with grief and rage 4 ll the
Cae ? + to Candrahasa. All t)
that Visaya had been —* did not satisfy him. He
explanations offered by Ma a kill Candrahasa.
persisted in ne SE ale gh day asked CandraThe evil-minded hee h Devi temple after having
hasa to go and worship at the
me here. pa ee
a Tenet it was Madana who, instead oF “4 a
a illed. (
pn de ania ig elu
Alini drahasa,
Dean a te favour the King took to the forest
it’s life.
te eae eelopanenls added fuel ‘ag! ane 6 hag
in respect of Dhrstabu * an Te paeamne W llnigh
3 S j
temple precincts; he the result of his having
mad. Crying
troubled the Vaisnave Candrahasa ae his head
against the pillars of the tem death of Dhrstabuddhi,
aginst Oe as ioe ove ey fy thea
fire. Devi appeared and granted Hite Madara back t
is WI ring the
life. And, when the Kalinda Ke it in ‘heir as in
wicked Dhrstabuddhi were abDO
CANDRAHASA (M).
CANDRAMASI.
CANDRAMATII.
CANDRANGADA. Grandson of Nala.
CANDRANGADA
flaming fire, Dhrstabuddhi went to them and imparted
to them the secrets about the life of Candrahasa. The
Kalinda king and his wife dropped their former decision
to end their life, and Candrahasa took up the reins of
government at the behest of the King. Candrahasa,
who won repute as a very powerful and effective ruler,
during the Asvamedha sacrifice of Yudhisthira captured
the sacrificial horse, and Arjuna, at the instance of
Krsna had to enter into a pact with Candrahasa, who
promised him help for the success of the sacrifice. Gandrahasa had a son called Makaraksa by Visaya and another
son, Padmaksa by Campakamialini.
Ravana’s sword. Rdavana, in the
course of his triumphal tour after receiving the boons
fom Brahman, subjugated kings, and marching northward reached the valleys of Mount Kailasa. But, Nandikegvara stopped him there, and Ravana, threatening to
throw away Siva, master of Nandikesvara along with
Kailisa, put his twenty hands under it to pull it out,
and the great mountain shook violently. Parvati got
frightened and running upto Siva embraced him.
Siva, who divined the reason for all these with his eye of
supreme knowledge grounded the mountain firmly on
earth, crushing Ravana’s hands under it. Unable to
take away his arms from under the mountain, Ravana
remained there for about thousand years singing the
praises of the Lord. At last Siva appearedto Ravana
and presented him with a sword called Candrahasa.
It was this sword which won victories for Ravana in
fiture wars. (Uttara Ramayana).
GANDRAKETU I. A son of Satrughna, brother of Sri
Rama. Satrughna had two sons, Angada and Candraketu ‘by his wife Srutakirti (Uttara Ramayana).
CANDRAKETU II. A vidyadhara King. See Muktaphalaketu ).
GANDRAMAS. A rsi who imparted spiritual knowledge
to Sampati and advised Jatayu to give directions about
the way to the monkeys in their search for Sitadevi.
(Valmiki Ramayana).
Tara, the wife of Brhaspati. She fell in
love with Candra and lived with him for sometime, and
came to be called Candramasi. (M.B. Vana Parva,
Chapter 219; see also Tara). |
Wife of king Hariscandra reputed for
his unique honesty and integrity. (See Hariscandra).
CANDRAMATI II. A city. Two sons, ‘Taksaka and
Citraketu were born to Laksmana of Urmila. Taksaka
was crowned King of Agati, a city built on the eastern
coast of the sea after annihilating the hunter tribe there,
and Citraketu was crowned king of Candramati, a city
built on the western coast of the sea after killing all the
Mlecchas there. (Uttara Ramayana). |
He married
Simantini, daughter of Citravarman, a king of Aryavarta.
Simantini, hearing about Candrangada fell in love
with him, and it was with the help of Maitreyi, wife of
Yajfiavalkya, that she was wedded to him.
While once Candrangada was enjoying a boat-race in
Kalindi (river) with his friends a storm upset the boat
and most of them were drowned to death. The servants
of Taksaka saw Candrangada sinking to the bottom
of the river and carried him to Patala and he stayed
there for sometime in the midst of amorous naga damsels,
Candrangada’s people, under the impression that he
had died, performed his funeral rites, and Simantinj

CANDRAPIDA 174
took to widow’s life. Enemies captured his kingdom
and imprisoned his father, Indrasena. When once the
naga King asked Candrangada to marry naga girls and
settle down in Patala he told the King that he was already
married and that his wife Simantini was brooding over
him, and he had, therefore, to return to her. Accordingly
the naga king sent him back with presents of a white
horse, a Raksasa and an infant serpent.
Candrangada, with his presents, came up in Kalindi
where Simantini, grief-stricken was spending her days
in penance, and they recognised each other. Informed
about the return of Candrangada the enemy kings released his father from captivity and apologised to him.
And he pardoned them.
Candrangada and Simantini took great interest in observing somavaravrata (fasting etc. on Mondays) and pleased
at the vrata of the latter Sri Parvati blessed her. Two
brahmins called Devamitra and Sdrasvata were living
there at the time. Three sons called Sumedha, Sarasvata
and Samavan were born to Devamitra. The sons also
turned out to be great scholars but they were poor.
They could not get brides as they were poor. In the
hope that they would get some money if they approached
Candrangada and Simantini the brahmins went to
them. After hearing their story the king and his queen
conducted them ina procession in the precincts of the
palace, Sumedha dressed as husband and Samavan
as his wife. But, lo! when the procession was over
Samavan could not be divested of his womanhood, and
Simantini named her Samavati. Being told that his
son had turned woman Sarasvata sought the advice of
some munis to remedy the situation. But, all the attempts
of the munis to change the woman to man failed, and
they opined that only Parvati, who had been pleased
by the Somavaravrata, would be able to find a solution,
to the problem. From that day onwards the brahmin
youths lived as husband and wife. (Siva Purana, Somavaravratam ).
CANDRAPIDA. A son of Janamejaya. Pariksit was the
son of Abhimanyu (Arjuna’s son). Janamejaya was,
Pariksit’s son. Janamejaya married princess Vapustama
of Kasi. ‘Two sons called Candrapida and Siryapida
were born to the couple. Candrapida had hundred sons,
who distinguished themselves as great heroes in archery.
Satyakarna was the eldest among the sons. Svetakarna,
son of Satyakarna, married Yadavi, the daughter of
Sucaru. (Bhavisya Purana).
CANDRAPRABHA. (See Siryaprabha).
CANDRAPRABHA. Mother of the wonderful girl,
Somaprabha. (See Somaprabha).
CANDRASARMA I. A great sinner, who killed his
preceptor. ‘I’he Padina Purana relates the story of four
siuners named Vidura, Candragarman, WVedasarman
and Varfijula, who shed their sin by bathing in the
Ganga. The sins committed by the four were respectively
Brahmahatya (killing of brahmin), Guruhatya (killing
of the preceptor), Agamyagamana (having sexual .contact with women like the wife of guru which is debarred )
and Govadha (killing of cow) respectively. The leader
of the above four sinners was one Vidura of the Pafacala
dega. He was begging in the streets without the tuft
of hair, the sacred thread and tilaka (mark of sandal
paste etc. on the forehead). He went from house to
house begsing for alms crying thus: ‘‘Here 1s come the
man (himself) who committed Brahmahatya. Please
a a gr rr
CANDRASENA I. A king of Simhala desa
CANDRASENA I
give alms to the brahmin-killer who isa drunkard also.”
During his begging tour he visited all the tirthas also,
yet brahmahatya stuck on to him.
While this sinner Vidura, his heart rent with sorrow and
remorse, was sitting under a tree, a Magadha brahmin
called Candragarman happened to come there. ‘This
brahmin had committed the sin of guruhaty4 (killing the
preceptor). He told Vidura:—‘‘While residing with the
guru, blinded by desire, I killed the guru, and am now
burning myself in the fire of repentance.”
While they were engaged thus in conversation a third
person, called Vedasarman also came there in an albsolutely tired condition. He told Vidura and Candrasarman
that his relatives and others had cast him out.as he once
did the sin of agamyagamana, and by the time he had
finished telling his storya Vaigya called Vanjula came
there. Besides drinking liquor he had committed govadha
(killing of cow) also. ‘Though these four sinners assembled at the same place, they only talked, but did not touch
one another, take food together, rest on the same seat
or lie on the same bedsheet.
According to the advice of a Siddha (an evolved soul)
the four sinners dived in the holy waters of Ganga an
came out redeemed of their sins. (Padma Purana,
Chapter 91).
CANDRASARMA II. A brahmin of Agni gotra from
Mayapura, he was the disciple and son-in-law of Devag§arman. Both of them were killed by a Raksasa while
they were gathering darbha (a particular varicty ©
grass used in religious ceremonies} in the forest. CandraSarma attained Vaikuntha as he was a very righteous
person. During Krsnavatara (incarnation of Visnu
as Sri Krsna) he was born as Acrira. (Padma Purana :
CANDRASEKHARA. A King (son of Pausya).
following story about his birth is told in the Padm
Purana. | -
Though married for a long time Pausya did not have
blessed with a
issue. He began worshipping Siva to be t
son. Siva was pleased at this and he gave him a a
which he divided equaliy among his three wives. r
due course the three wives delivered. But, to get ees
full and complete form ofa child the three children et
be joined together, and so the parts were unified. =
boy was Candragekhara. ‘Thus Candrasekhara acqu
the name Tryambaka. tai
Candragekhara married Taravati, daughter of ee
tstha, a King of the solar dynasty. On account ae
curse of Kapotamuni two sons, Bhrngi and Maha ai
were born to Taravati in Vetala yoni and Bhair -
yoni respectively. Dama, Uparicara and Alarka = j
sons born to Candragekhara himself. (Aurasapult
(Ceylon
Candrasena had two daughters, Mandodar!1 and 7
mati by his wife Gunavati. Kambugriva, son 0 i
anva, the chief of Madra desired to marry sya's
But, since she preferred unmarried life Kambus" tO
desire did not fructify. Some time later she reuse ale:
marry another suitor also, King Virasena © jamatl
Meanwhile the marriage of her younger sister, Indu
was celebrated, herself having selected Sude sn’ gh
Madra prince at the Svayarnvara as husband. Tho! one
handsome person Sudesna was a philanderer, an yant:
day Indumati saw him in bed with her mal Se itt
From that day onwards, cutting asunder 4 4 stave
relationship with Sudesna, Indumati went an

CANDRASENA II
with her father. This story told by Mahisasura to show
that women possess only very little discretion occurs in
the Paficama Skandha of Devibhagavata.
CANDRASENA II. A king of Ujjayani and a great
devotee of Siva. As he performed great sacrifices and
gave away money and materials in gift to those who prayed for them, an attendant of Siva called Manibhadra
once gave him a gem, which possessed supernatural
powers. Attracted by the lustre and glare of the gem
many kings wanted to’ purchase it. But Candrasena
refused to sell it. Much incensed at the refusal, the enemy
kings set out to fight Candrasena, who then took refuge
in the Mahakala temple in Ujjayani the idol installed in
which was Sivalinga. Lord Siva then appeared to him
and granted him salvation. (Siva Purana, Sanipradosamahatmyam ).
CANDRASENA III, The Mahabharata refers to another
Candrasena, son of Samudrasena, King of Bengal. He
was present at the svayamvara of Paficali. (M.B. Adi
Parva, Chapter 185, Verse 11). Bhimasena once defeated Candrastna and his father in fight. (Sabha Parva,
Chapter 30, Verse 24). After that Candrasena became a
supporter of the Pandavas. It 1s stated in Drona Parva
that in the great war Candrasena fought from a chariot
drawn by horses as white as Candra (moon) and got
killed by Agvatthama.
CANDRASENA IV. Another Candrasena,
the Kauravas, is referred to in the Bharata as ae
fought against the Pandavas. His duty was 0 cat ne
chariot wheels of Salya; he was killed by Yudhisthira.
(Salya Parva, Chapter 12, Verse 52). _
CANDRASITA. A female attendant of Skandadeva.
(M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Verse 11). _
7 : hough actually in love
CANDRASRI. A woman, who, Mors
. ‘h her paramour.
with her husband enjoyed life with a oe athe:
. 7 by ra Me te
Candraéri is the heroine of a story narra” oe ental
saritsagara to prove that the interest a rl Be epee
in clandestine relationship 18 only due : aoe Bal
tations. Candrasri was the wife of a vaisy
ived in the
varman, who lived in
looking out through the windows 1n per iGiahara and
the very handsome vaisya ae ae
felt great desire for him. She &
the house of het ae eoulitls affair her relations
5 at] ecame
ee CE aie tit, And, her husband pe ee
eae orl Once he became il wit? agri continued
Even while he was in HIS aig rat day she was
s+» with the paramou er husband
was no more. At once she took leave
a4 es. * id
-commmitted suicide BY J
homens husband. (Kathasa1 itsagara,
baka, Taranga 2). son of King A
CANDRASVA Sgn had two brothers ole
Iksvaku a (M.B. Vana Parva, ‘ fee
eat "AMI A brabmin, who BP. eo Devamati
CANDRASYV Sirya. He stayed with an. Pete
ing oer hea ruled by Ring a end.at the time of the
in Kz é a
called Mahipala was pees tales declared that Mahipal
ld a celestia slater a daughter calle
birth of the chi a aug
would become King. Alen to Candrasvami,
Candramati also
a partisan of
having
d satisfie
Kuvalayas va of the
CANDRASVAMI
During this period, rains having failed, very severe
famine stalked Kamalapura. Even the king unmindful of
justice and righteousness began extracting from the
people whatever they possessed. Finding the situation
deteriorated so much Candrasvami set out for his fatherin-law’s house with Mahipala and Candramati, and on
the way they had to cross what was once a wild forest,
but which had by then been denuded of green trees or
other foliage due to the failure of the rains. ‘The children
were severely afflicted by thirst, and so the father, after
leaving them at the foot ofa tree went in search of water
when he was caught by the people of the forest king and
taken before him. When he knew that he was about to
be given in sacrifice to Devi the brahmin folded his
hands and prayed to Stiryadeva, who appeared before
him and assured him that not only will death not visit
him, but also he would be united with his wife and
children.
The children left under the tree began crying, their
father having not returned to them, anda Vaigya called
Sarthadhara who came that way felt pity for the crying
children and took them to his house. One day
Anantasvami, a brahmin and a minister of King
Taranatha of Tarapura happened to visit Sarthadhara.
Anantasvami, who had no children of-his own took away
with him the children from Sarthadhara.
One day Siiryadeva appeared to the forest king in his
sleep and asked him not to kill the brahmin (Candrasvami) held captive by him. The very next morning
Candrasvami was released from captivity. Roaming
about in quest of his children, Gandrasvami reached the
city called Jalapura where he was put up as the guest
of a house-holder. One day the host told Candrasvami
that a vaigya called Kanakavarman had, a few days back,
told him that he (Kanakavarman) had got two children,
one male and the other female from the forest, and taken
them to the Nalikera island. ‘The very next day Candrasyami, along with a vaisya called Visnuvarman arrived
at the Nalikera island, and on enquiry they were told
that Kanakavarman, with the children had left for
Kataha island. They then went to Kataha island only
to be told that Kanakavarman had gone to Karpira
island. With another Vaisya Candrasvami landed on the
Karpura island to no purpose. After thus going to the
Suvarna and Simhala islands too Candrasvami met
Kanakavarman at OCitrakitapura. Kanakavarman
showed the children to Candrasvami, but they were not
his. He burst into tears, and returned from Citrakitapura. He passed on his way back many a temple and
city and at dusk reached a big forest. He satisfied his
hunger,by eating some roots and fruits, and got upon
a tree and sat on the top of it. It was mid-night, yet
sleep did not oblige him. Then he saw a matrsangha
(a group of women) consisting of Narayani and others
come and dance at the foot of the tree. Narayani saw
Candrasvami and after the dance was over and her
companions had left the place Narayani called him down
from the tree and gave him a flower. And, according
to the advice of Narayani the next day morning Candrasyami went to Tarapura where, accidentally he got into
the house of Anantasvami, minister of the kingdom, and,
for food, répeated vedic hymns. The minister invited him
for meals, and there he saw Mahipala and Candravati.
He placed the flower presented by Narayani on Mahipala’s nose whereupon the children recognised him

CANDRAVALOKA 176
their father. The people celebrated it as a happy day.
King Taravarman gave his daughter, Vasumati, in
marriage to Mahipala along with half his kingdom.
They went to Kamalapura and returned with their
mother. All of them spent their days very happily at
Tarapura. (Kathasaritsagara, Alankaravati Lambaka,
Taranga 6).
CANDRAVALOKA. A King of Citrakitanagara.
When once the King in the course of a hunting expedition
came to the bank of a river tired and done up he saw
there the very beautiful lady, Indivaraprabha, daughter
of Maharsi Kanva by Menaka. Having fallen in love
with each other they went to the agsrama of the maharsi
where, at his instance, Candravaloka took the pledge not
to kill animals in future, and Kanva married his daughter to the King. On their way back to the palace the
couple went to sleep on the banks of a pool which belonged toa Brahmaraksas, who caught hold of them,
but released them on condition that they gave him in
their stead a brahmin boy aged seven. Thus they returned to Citrakita and told about the incident to
minister Sumati. As advised by Sumati anidol in gold
equal in size to a brahmin boy aged seven was made and
a proclamation was issued that the golden idol would
be given to him who, in return, give a brahmin boy
seven years old. A brahmin boy was got, andhe was
given to the Brahmaraksas. (Kathasaritsagara Sag ankavati Larnbaka, Taranga 27).
CANDRAVAMSA. A royal dynasty the kings of which
ruled India for a long time. Since the founding father
of the dynasty was Candra all the kings in the dynasty
came to be called Candravamégaraja. (For Candra’s
birth see Purtravas). A chronological list of the kings
of this dynasty is given infra.
Descended from Candra thus, Budha—Purtiravas—
Ayus—Nahusa. Nahusa had two sons, Ayati and
Yayati. Yaydti had three sons: Druhyu, Anudruhyu
and Piru by his wife Sarmistha, and two sons, Yadu and
Turvasu by his wife Devayani. The genealogy of each
of them is given below.
1) Druhyu :—Descended from Druhyu thus:—Babhru—
Setu— Aranya— Gandharva — Dharma— Ghrta — Durdama— Pracetas—Mlecchas.
2) Anudruhyu :—Three sons, Sabhanara, Caksus and
Paroksa were born to Anudruhyu. Sabhanara begot
Kalanara, and he Srfijaya. Sriijaya had four sons
(a) Janamejaya, (b) Mahamanas, (c) Usinara and (d)
Titiksa. UsSinara and Titiksa proved tobe family progenitors. ‘Their genealogy is given below :—
c) Usinara. USinara had five sons : Sibi, Vena, Krmi,
Usi and Darpa of whom Sibi begot five sons: Bhadra—
Suvira—Kekaya—Vrsadarpa and Kapotaroma, and
from Kekaya was born the Kicakas.
Titiksa. Descended from Titiksa were : Kréadd)
ratha—Homa—Sutapas and Bali, and Bali had seven
sons : Anaghabhu—Anga—Kalinga—Suhva—Pundra—
Vanga and Adriipa. Of the seven sons Anga turned out
to be the family progenitor, and thenceforth the Anga
royal dynasty starts its course. To Anga were born the
following sons Dadhivahana—Raviratha—Dharmaratha — Citraratha — Satyaratha — Lomapada — Caturanga—Prthu—Campa—Haryanga and Bhadraratha,
and to Bhadraratha were born three sons viz. Brhadratha—Brhatkarma and Brhadbhanu. And Brhadratha
had the following sons : Brhanmanas, Jayadratha—
CANDRAVAMSA
Vijaya—Dhrtavrata—Satyakarman and _ Atiratha.
Karna was Atiratha’s foster son and father of Vrsasena.
3) Paru. Descended from Piru were:—Janamejaya—
Pracinvan—Pravira—Namasyu— Vitabhaya — Sundu—
Bahuvidha — Samyati— Rahovadi and Raudrasva.
Raudragva married Misrakegi. They had ten sons, viz.
Rksayu — Krsayu — Sannatayu—Ghrtayu — Citayu—
Sthandilayu — Dharmayu — Sammitayu— Ktayu and
Matinara. Matinara begot two sons (a) Pratiratha and (b)
Sindhuratha.
a) Pratiratha. From Pratiratha was born Ikanva and
from him Medhatithi.
b) Sindhuratha. He had three sons, Dusyanta—Pravira and Samanta, and Bharata (Vitatha) was born (0
Dusyanta of Sakuntala. From Bharata were descendec
the following :— Suhotra—Suhota—Gala—Garda—
Suketu and Brhatksatra, who had four sons: Nara—
Mahavira—Garga and Hasti. And, Nara begot Sam
krti and he begot Rantideva and Kuru. A son called
Papaksaya was born to Mahavira. Garga begot Sani.
And it was Hasti who founded Hasthinapura. He becam®
the family progenitor. Hasti had three sons, Purumidha
—Ajamidha and Dvimidha. The King called Vipt@
was the son of Purumidha.
Ajamidha, the second son of Hasti had thr
Rksa (b) Brhadisu and (c) Nila. Their
are mentioned below.
a) &Rksa. Rksa begot Samvarana and —
Sarhnvarana was born Kuru. From Kuru originated 2
Kuru dynasty. Kuru had four sons (Al) Pariks :
(A2) Sudhanus, (A3) Jahnu and (A4) Nisada. ai
of the four Sudhanus and Jahnu became family pros®
tors. oi
(A2) Sudhanus. The following were descended 1 a
him in order :— Suhotra—Cyavana—Krti— UP
caravasu——Brhadratha and Jarasandha. Jarasandha an
four sons Soma—Sahadeva—Turya and Srutae
(A3) Fahnu. Yrom Jahnu were descended - : Surat
Vidaratha— Sarvabhauma—Jayatsena—Ravay@ ail
Bhavuka—Cakroddhata—Devatithi—Rksa—Bhim4 and
Pratici. Pratici had three sons : Devapi, Santanu “ a
Balhika. Santanu was also called Mahabhisak. ge
he had two wives, Ganga and Satyavati. From “ae
was born Bhisma; of Satyavati, before her i 5,
was born Vyasa by Paraéara. ~~ sm had an yas
Citrangada and Vicitravirya by Santanu. From for
were born Dhrtarastra, Pandu, and Vidura, | an a of
Dhrtarastra the Kauravas. Kunti and Madri, W! hat’
Pandu, together got from the devas five sons, viz. vdev
maputra, Bhima, Arjuna, Nakula and _ {by
Dharmaputra had two sons, Devaka and Prativip®
ee sons, (a)
descendants
7k
To Bhima was born of Hidimbi Ghatotkaca. at an
was born of Renumati to Nakula. Arjuna’s pat arn?
were : Abhimanyu—Pariksit—Candrapida— #7 zg"
Svetakarna — Ajaparsva — Janamejaya — AGupt2 —
Sahasranika z Asvamedha — rsa ale — pita
Citraratha—Suciratha—Dhrtiman— susena way
Sucaksus—Nala—Uparipalva—Medhavi—Mrty) a
Dusya—Nimi — Brhadratha — Satanika—Dur
Vibhinara—Dandapani—K semaka. .
B) Brhadisu. Descended from Brhadisu were So 2
dhanu — Brhatkaya — Jayadratha — Visada ; prdh
citta—Ruciragva. Rucirasva had three som
hanu—Kasya and Vatsa.
da

CANDRAVAMSA
C) Nila. Descended from Nila were : Santi—Susanti—
Puruja—Arka—Bharmyaé va and Paficala. Pancala had
five sons: Mudgala, Yavinara, Kampilya, Brhadisu
and Safijaya. Mudgala had two children : Divodasa and
Ahalya. Gautama married Ahalya. To Gautama was
born Satananda, to Satananda Satyavrati and from
Satyavrati was born Saradvan. And from Divodasa,
brother of Ahalya were descended : Mitrayu—Pusya—
Sudasa—-Sahadeva—Somaka and Drupada. Drupada
became King of Pancala and to him were born Dhrstadyumna and Paricali (Krsna). Dhrstaketu and. Dhrtaketu
were the sons of Dhrstadyumna.
4) Yadu. The Yadu dynasty owes its origin to Yadu who
had four sons : Sahasrajit, Krosta, Nala and Ripu. Satajit, the son of Sahasrajit begot three sons. : Mahahaya,
Venuhaya and Hehaya (Ekavira). Dharma was
Hehaya’s son, and Kani was the son of Dharma. Kani
had four sons : Sadajit, Mahisman, Bhadrasana and
Durdama. Bhadrasana begot Dhanaka and he Krtavirya, Krtagni, Krtavarman and Krtaujas. Kartaviryarra’s son, and SKartaviryarjuna had
juna was Krtaviry :
hundred sons, Jayadhvaja, Sirasena, Vrsabha, Madhu,
Maurjjita and others. Vrsni with whom the Vrsnl
dynasty begins was Madhu’s son. From Jaya the
eldest son of Kartavirya were degeayye os in order :
Talajangha—Vitihotra—Ananta— urjaya.
The Vrsni dynasty. Vrsni, son of Madhu and ee is
Kartaviryarjuna had four sons : Sumitra, 1U 1ajit,
Vasu and Sarvabhauma. Sini and Nimna wil the
sons of Yudhajit. From Sini came in order : ae 7)
SAcyaki (Yuyudhana )—Jaya— Kani — ines ae es
Préni had two sons, (1) Citraratha and (2) she a
1) Citraratha. ‘Two sons (1A) Vidiratha an (
Ku re born to Citraratha. 5 ie
(1A) Vigarathe. From Vidiratha was born Sta ae
from Sara was born Sini. Bhoja was Sini’s son ar od
Bhoja, Hrdika was born. Hrdika had tegen sa
vaha, Gadadhanva, Krtaparvan an o oie
daughter Prtha (Kunti). And ten sons
- Lian ka
- to viga, Devasravas, ‘nase,
Stra by Marisa : Vasu, Devabl § V 7 Kavika an A
Sriijaya, Kalani. saa ai, Sri Krsna was
Vasudeva. Vasudeva ma P adyumna
po as the won of Vas hn of Ped
was Sri Krsna’s son. Aniru
umna, and Vajra of Aniruddhe- of Kukura were -
dants :
(1B) Kukura. The ae —_ amburudundubhi—
Val -__Viloman—Kapotarom ka had two
ott = huka—Ahuka. Ahuka Usrasena’s
Daridra—Vasu—Na Al
—s “Ugrasena "s Devaka. aka had three sons :
De — es il Sudeva. pena be Feary
ae ol et itadeva, Gantideva, ‘Upa eva,
- ki.
Devaraksita, Sahadeva a ) brother of Citraratha.
2) Svaphalka. called Akriira, Asanga,
cl so -_ Mrduvadgiti, Dhara
Sarameya, Mraura, ksa, rimardana, satrugh'™»
Ksatropex $4; shu. Of them Akrira ha
Sukarman,
= tibahu.
Gandhamadana and Pra “ | |
two sons : Devaka cs Snes descended 7: order :
4 ur . Bi _ ‘ ama—
ae ae “si Bhan —Tribnart S Dusyanta was
it wolligal fl Marutta ha tT =. ‘famous Dusyanta,
one '. ‘this Dusyanta - i anta—Variitha Gar
° untala ). 7 ahara, Kerala, Cola
a four sons, Gandharas
jira, 1¢
CAPAYAJNA
and Pandya. From Gdandhara came in order, Kola,
Druhyu, Babhrusetu, Purovasu — Gandharigharman—
Ghrta—Vidusa—Pracetas. Pracetas had four sons—
Anibhra, Sabhanara, Caksusa and Paramesu. From
Sabhanara came in order Kalanara—Sriijaya—Puraii-.
jaya—Janamejaya—Mahasala—Mahamanas.
All the above royal dynasties belong to Candra vamia.
(Agni Purana, Visnu Purana, Bhagavata and Brahmanda Purana).
CANDRAVARMAN. A king of Kamboja. As handsome
as Candra, he was born in the dynasty of the asura called
Candra (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 67, Verse 31).
Dhrstadyumna killed him in the great war. (M.B.
Drona Parva, Chapter 32, Verse 62).
CANDRAVATI. Daughter of Sunabha, the asura.
Pradyumna, son born to Sri Krsna of Rukmini, married
Prabhavati, daughter of the asura called Vajranabha.
Sinabha was the younger brother of Vajranabha.
Sunabha had two daughters called Candravati and
Gunavati. These girls once saw Pradyumna and Prabha- ©
vati engaged in love-talk and they were attracted by
Pradyumna. They requested Prabhavati to select husbands for them also from among the Yadavas. Prabhavati, in her childhood had learnt from Durvasas a
mantra, the repetition of which by a woman thinking
+n mind of any male would help to secure that male as the
husband for her. Prabhavati taught that mantra to
Candravati and Gunavati. They thought respectively
of Gada and Samba and repeated the mantra with the
result that Gada married Gandravati and Samba married
Gunavati. |
CANDRAVATI. A wife of Harigcandra in his former
birth. (See Hariscandra ).
CANDRAVATSAM. A Ksatriya dynasty which originated from king Candravatsa. (M.B. Udyoga Parva,
Chapter 74, Verse 16).
CANDRAVINASANA. An asura, who descended on
earth as a reputed king under the name Janaki. (Adi
Parva, Chapter 67, Verse 37).
CANDRAVRATA. A penance performed for the attainment of beauty, happiness and popularity among the
people. It 1s practised during the full-moon day in
Dhanu (December-January ). (M.B. Anugasana Parva
Chapter 110). ;
CANDRAYANA. A penance. (See Vrata).
CANDRODAYA. A brother of the Virata King.
Drona Parva, Chapter 158, Verse 42).
CANURAI. A Ksatriya king, who served Dharmaputra
at the council hall built by Maya. (M.B. Sabha Parva,
Chapter 4, Verse 26).
CANURA II. An asura, one of the attendants of Karhsa.
Kamsa had employed as his body-guards many
pugilists—Pralambaka, Cantra, Trnavarta, Mustika,
Aristaka, Kesi, Dhenuka, Agha and Vivida and these
pugilists were sent with Pitana to Gokula to kill Sri
Krsna. On the death of Putana they returned to
Mathura. When Karhsa invited Krsna to Mathura
Canira and Mustika were the chief pugilists entrusted
with the duty of killing Krsna. Krsna fought with
Canira and Balabhadra with Mustika. Both Canira
and Mustika were killed. (Bhagavata Dasama Skandha),
CAPALA. A king in ancient India. (M.B. Adi Parva,
Chapter 1, Verse 238).
(M.B.
CAPAYAJNA. A programme of worshipping the bow
Karnsa did this yajiia for fourteen days, and Rena

FS a ee aia
CARAKA
was invited to witness it. And Krsna killed Kamsa,
(Bhagavata, Dagama Skandha).
CARAKA. Author of Carakasamhita.
CARMAMANDALA. A village in ancient India. (M.B.
Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 47).
CARMAVAN. Son of King Subala. He was the brother
of Sakuni. Iravan, son of Arjuna killed him in the great
war. (M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 90).
CARMANVATI. A river in north India, now known
as river Campa.
1) General. King Sasgabindu, who ruled northern
India in olden days once performed a yajiia. The skins
(carmans) of animals killed in the yajfia lay there ina
heap like a hill. When rain fell there flowed from the
‘skin-hill’ a river and it was called Carmanvati. (Devibhagavata, Prathama Skandha).
2) Other details. (1) River Carmanvati serves Varuna
in his assembly. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 9, Verse
ely.
(2) Once on the bank of this river Sahadeva defeated
the son of Jambhaka in fight. (M.B. Sabha Parva,
Chapter 31, Verse 7).
(3) He who bathes in this river will get the same result
as from the Agnistoma yajfia. (M.B. Vana Parva,
Chapter 82, Verse 54).
(4) Carmanvati is one of the rivers responsible for the
origin of Agni. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 222,
Werse 23)
CARU (CARUCITRA). A son of Dhrtarastra, killed in
war bv Bhimasena. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 136).
CARUBHADRA. (See Carugupta).
CARUCANDRA. (See Carugupta).
CARUDEHA. (See Carugupta).
CARUDESNA. I. .A son of Sri Krsna by Rukmini.
(See Carugupta). He was present at the wedding of
Draupadi. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 185). The chief
incident in his life was his killing Vivindhya. (M.B.
Vana Parva, Chapter 16, Verse 26).
CARUDESNA II. (See Candrasena).
CARUDHI. A mountain near the Mahameru. There
are twenty mountains around the Meru, viz., Kanga,
Kuraga, Kugumbha, Vikankata, Trikita, Sisira, Patanka, Rucaka, Nila, Nisadha, Sitivasa, Kapila, Sankha,
Vaidirya, Carudhi, Hamsa, Rsabha, Naga, Kalafijara
and Narada. (Devibhagavata, Astama Skandha),
CARUGUPTA. Son of Sri Krsna by Rukmini. Pradyumna, Carudesna, Sudesna, Carudeha, Sucaru, Carugupta, Bhadracaru, Carucandra, Aticaru and Caru
were the ten sons of Rukmini. She had also a daughter
called Carumati. (Bhagavata Dasama Skandha). As
distinct from the Bhagavata the Mahabharata, speaks
of three more sons to Rukmini, viz., Caruyagas, Caruvesa and Carusravas. (Anusasana Parva, Chapter 4,
Verse 59.).
CARUMATI. (See Carugupta).
CARUMATSYA. A brahmavadi son of Visvamitra.
(M.B. Anugasana Parva, Chapter 4, Verse 59).
CARUNETRA. A celestial woman, who spent her time
in Kubera’s assembly. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter
10, Verse 10).
CARUSIRSA. A maharsi, who belonged to Alarnbagotra. A friend of Indra, the maharsi once spoke to
Dharmaputra about the greatness of Siva. (M.B.
Anuégasana Parva, Chapter 18, Verse 5).
CARUSRAVAS. (See Carugupta).
- oe a eee
178 CATURIKA
CARUVAKTRA. An attendant of Subrahmanya. He
was much devoted to brahmins. (M.B. Salya Parva,
Chapter 45, Verse 71).
CARUVESA. (See Carugupta).
CARUYASAS. (See Carugupta).
GCARVAKA I. A Raksasa, who was a close friend of
Duryodhana. The following story is told about how he
happened to become Duryodhana’s friend.
In the Krtayuga this Raksasa did tapas to please Brahma at Badaryasrama, and Brahma gave him the
boon that he would be safe from all beings. ‘Then he
went round the world troubling brahmins, who, at
last sought refuge in Brahma, and he pacified them
with the assurance that Carvaka would become a friend
of Duryodhana when he would insult Brahmins an
be reduced to ashes in the fire of their anger.
Accordingly Carvaka became a friend of Duryodhana.
When, after the great war, Dharmaputra_ entere
Hastinapura with his followers thousands of brahmins
gathered around and blessed him. Carvaka also disguised as a brahmin came there and condemning Dharmaputra asan enemy of his own people cursed him.
The brahmins recognised him and cursed him to ashes.
(M.B. Santi Parva, Chapters 38, 39).
CARVAKA II. Certain Sanskrit texts refer to another
Carvaka, a philosopher in ancient India. He was an
atheist. He controverted in a powerful manncr the
belief in the existence of heaven and hell after death.
CARVANGI. Wife of King Bhadragrenya and daughter
of Kugamba. (Brahmanda Purana, Chapter 2 ys
CASAVAKTRA. An attendant of Subrahmanya. He
had deep love for brahmins. (M.B. Salya Parva, Chap
ter 45).
CATURANGA. A king of the Anga dynasty. He pa
the son of Hemapada and father of Prthulaksa. (A8®
Purana, Chapter 277).
CATURASVA. A Rajarsi.
ber is Yama’s assembly. (Sabha Parva, Chapter, -
CATURASYA. A heroic asura. Once he fell in lov
: : bha,
with Rambha, and on his request ee a axiie
He was a prominent al
Rambha’s attendant, won over her mistress to fie
The asura, Rambha and Svayamprabha then c* 4ia
their residence to a beautiful palace built in south nas
for Claturaisya. But, Indra who felt Ram)!
eee to earth, killed Caturasy*
Svaya
by Maya
absence badly came
and took Rambha back with him. Indra cursed “he
rabha to remain on earth. And, he told her that I
should welcome and treat well the monkeys who sage 3 5
be arriving there in their quest of Sita, and thee sts
would get redemption from the curse. The BHDYE. it?
were revealed by Svayamprabha herself while we?
ing the monkeys. (Kampa Ramayana). re
CATURDASIMAHATMYA. The _puranas oi
that worshipping Siva on Caturdasi day will apport
desires. There is a story in om of the puranas
ing this claim. (See Kumudvati). a
CATURDAMSTRA, An a od of Subrahmarts
He always showed great devotion towards Bra
(M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 62). .
CATURIKA. A harlot about whom the follow!
is told in Kathasaritsagara. tigrab
Once a poor Brahmin got a piece of gold as ‘Pra while
(fee or daksina for performing a religious rite a jd,
he was perplexed not knowing what to do with t by
a Vita advised him to go on taur with the money
g story
t

CATURMASYA
selling the gold. The poor Brahmin did not even know
how to goon tour. Then the Vita advised him to visit a
harlot called Caturika, who lived close by and who,
the Vita said, would teach him how to go on tour.
Brahmin:—What shall I do first after going to the
harlot’s house? |
Vita :—Caturika will become friendly if you would
give her the gold. Then you should use sweet and charming words, and that is all.
The Brahmin went immediately to Caturika’s house and
he was received honourably by her. Then giving the
gold to her he requested her to instruct him about going
on tour. This request of his evoked laughter from people
around him. Then the Brahmin who was versed in the
Srutis began reciting the Saman with his palm formed
in the shape of the ears of the cow. All those who were
present there wildly laughed at him, and somehow or
other he escaped from the none too pleasant scene, and
reported his experience at the harlot’s to the Vita.
He very easily understood that the reason for the Brahmin being ridiculed was that misreading his advice to
use ‘sama’ (sweet words) the Brahmin recited the samaveda. He took the brahmin back to Caturika and asked
her to return the ‘grass’ (gold given her by the brahmin) to ‘the cow’, the Brahmin who was as simple as
the cow. Laughingly Caturika returned the gold to
him. (Kathasaritsagara, Kathapitha Larnbakam, Taranga 6).
CATURMASYA. A penance (
for four months. During this per
studied with pure heart. The Pan
at Gaya. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 95). eet i
CATURMUKHALINGA. 4A Brahma linga insta a
the northern bank of Sarasvati by Brahma. a i
to start with, created animate and inanimate objects,
bout further creation when ae
ful girl, born of herself appeared before ie ! saci
became enamoured 0 and showe an
coming passion. As 4 punishrhent for she ee it
heads broke. Thus broken-headed_ Bra a at
the Sthanutirtha, which washes off all sins, Hs aoe
ern bank of Sarasvatl and installed his own linga, Ao
as the Caturmukhalinga. This fastallan nal an
a feteemed him rom ig a akan ato
ATURTHIVE AT pe yea, may achieve oes should
caer hag oath While observing so after New Moon
worship, Ganapet oath of Makara (rooney Ned
Next day the ia aor :
il seeds. whe ae ae |
rice and oll seedy disadangas beginning caecha
‘A acchatikaya’ is the avahané man ae ui Be
tikaya the visarjane manta ith ‘tunkaya’ and
WOtsEIDP ce. a mt as oli with offering of sandal
Depa ne with Bae On hotkayay4 vidmahe vakra
paste, rice balls etc. “Om Ma oe ay at
tundaya dhimahi tanno danti pr
s the Caturthi
a attl tra. He or sne ae is worshipped
gayatri ager }e Ganapati !
vrata will attain
- the devotee wil
hich is a/so aturthi :
on a Tuesday Wile” . aturthi occurrl
Vrata) which continues
iod, the Vedas are to be
ng in Mina
tisfied. i, and that da
oS rie heat ) js called Avighnacaturthh, ar oa
fasting should be in the night. damanaka
‘pped with
May Ganapati should be worshipPe
EEE "oOo
davas did this penance -
of his |
_ be killed.
» is the Ganesa .
CATURUPAYAM
flowers, and then the worshipper will become’ very
happy. (Agni Purana, Chapter 179). Also see Vinayaka
Caturthi. |
CATURUPAYAM. The four means used by Kings in
olden times to achieve their objects are called Caturupayam. Sama, dana, bheda and danda are the Caturupayas (four tactics). There are three other upayas
also, almost equally important as the first four, and the
seven upayas are collectively called Saptopayas. ‘There
are also yet other upayas, but they are not important
enough to merit special mention.
1) Sama, It is the best means to attract and convert
others to one’s side. It consists in winning people with
sweet words and looks. People who are friendly by
temperament and straightforward may be brought
round by sama. Sama is employed in dealing with sons,
brothers and other relatives.
2) Dana. There are five kinds or varieties of dana
(gift) viz. pritidana, dravyadana, svayamgraha, deya
and pratimoksa. If a person gets help from another
and acknowledges help by reward that reward is
called pritidana. The miser and the poor should be
brought round by pritidana. ' Military captains, heroes
and citizens should be won over by this dana. Those
- who fall at feet should be honoured by dana.
3) Bheda. Bhedopaya is of three kinds: to destroy or
end the friendship subsisting between people, to create
dissension and to make the parties quarrel with each
other. He who is falsely praised, he who does not desire
wealth or welfare, he who has ‘been invited to come and
then insulted, traitor to king, he who has been exorbitantly taxed, the angry one, the honourable one, the
insulted, the unreasonably forsaken one, he who harbours hatred in his mind, the pacified one, one whose
wealth and wife have been taken away or stolen he
who has not been respected though deserving of respect—
if such people are in one’s opposite. camp, suspicion
should be raked up among them and thus division created in their ranks. If subordinate chieftains, and forest
tribes commit offences they should be brought round.
by the use of sama and bheda upayas.
4) Danda. Dandopaya is of three kinds, viz, killing
denuding of wealth, and inflicting pain on the body or
torture. Danda has two other forms, prakaga (open)
and aprakaga (secret). Those who have become objects
of hatred to all people should be subjected to prakaéadanda. People, whose killing the world will detest,
- should not be killed openly, but only secretly. Enemies
should be killed with weapons etc. Brahmins should not
Friends and allies should not be subjected
to danda; friends, who are made objects of danda will
wither away like worm-eaten trees. The King, who
possesses the three powers (of wealth, army and people’s
support) and is fully conscious of the time and environmental factors should annihilate enemies by the instrument of danda. Evil people should be defeated by
danda itself. :
The upaya maya consists in practising deception by
magic or other -yogic powers. The powers can be
acquired by the worship of the idols of certain Devatas,
People who employ go about at night in various disguises. They disguise themselves as beautiful women or
even as animals. They also deceive people by creatin
illusions of clouds, fire or lightning. For instance, Bhima
killed Kicaka by going to him in the guise of a woman

CATURVARNYAM
Not to dissuade people who indulge in unjustifiable
grief, war etc. is the principal aim of the upaya called
upeksa. Hidimbi gave up his brother Hidimba by
practising Upeksa. Next is the Indrajalopaya (magic).
For example, tocreate illusions of clouds, darkness, rain,
fire, and other magic in order to instil fear among
troops of the enemy etc. To scare the enemy is the aim
of Indrajala. (For details of Caturupayas see Kanika).
(Agni Purana, Chapter 241).
CATURVARNYAM. (The four Castes, Classes).
1) General. The puranas tell that Brahma created the
four castes like Brahmins, Ksatriyas, Vaigyas and Sidras
and assigned to them duties and rules of procedure.
2) Origin. Brahma got ready for the work of Creation, concentrating his mind on. the universal soul, the
embodiment of Truth. And, the first tobe born from his
face were people with sublime qualities, and them he
called Brahmins. Then emerged from his chest people
in whom the heroic or militant qualities preponderated.
(Rajasa). Them the Creator named Ksatriyas. Then
from his thighs were born people in whom rajas and
tamas preponderated, and they were called Vaisyas.
And, lastly Brahma brought forth from his feet another
sect of people, and as tamas (darkness, cultural darkness )
preponderated in them they were named Sadras. The
system of four castes is called Caturvarnyam. (Visnu
Purana, Part 1, Chapter 6).
3) Code of conduct. Ahimsa (non-violence), Satyavada
(speaking truth), Bhitadaya (love for all living beings),
Tirthaseva (resort to holy places), Dana (gifts), Brahmacarya (celibacy), Vimatsaratva (absence of malice),
Service of Devas, Brahmins and Gurus (elders), to attend
to all dharmas (duties), Pitrpuja (worship of elders)
eternal loyalty ta King, to accomplish objects in conformity with the injunction of the Sastras, not to commit
cruel deeds, Titiksé (forbearance, to put up with
equanimity the pair of opposites such as pleasure and
pain, heat and cold), belief in God—these codes of conduct are common to all Castes and in all the four stations
in life. Now, the special codes for each of the four
castes.
1) Brahmins. To perform and get performed Yajiias,
to study and to teach the Vedas, to give gifts and to
receive gifts—these form the dharma (duties) of the
Brahmin. Brahmins take their second birth (dvija)
on the upanayana (wearing of the sacred thread).
The caste of the mother is the caste of the child. But
children born to Brahmins of their non-Brahmin wives
are not Brahmins. Children born of a Brahmin woman
to a Sudra are called Candalas. Sons born of Brahmin
women to Ksatriyas are called Sttas, and sons born of a
Brahmin woman to a Vaisya are called Vaidehikas.
The Brahmin shall not adopt the profession of the other
castes. The twice-born are, however, allowed in certain
circumstances, the profession of agriculture, protection
of cows, commerce and kusida (to lend money on interest). But, he shall not trade in gorasa (milk and other
cow products) lavana (salt) and flesh. If he be an
agriculturist, the Brahmin may till the earth, cut medicinal plants and destroy pests. But, he must purify the
soul by performing yajfias and worshipping Devas.
The soil should be ploughed with eight oxen attached to
the plough. He may sustain himself either with Rta
(food got by begging) or Amrta (food got not by begging). The suffix ‘“Sarma”’ should be added to the names
CATURYUGA.
CATUSKARNI.
CATUSPATHARATA.
CATVARAVASINI.
CAVETIUPATA.
CAVETTUPATA
of Brahmin children. Upanayana (wearing of the sacred
thread) should be done when the child 1s eight years
old. The maunji (girdle around the waist) to be worn
after upanayana should be made either of munja grass
or of the bark of trees. Brahmin brahmacarins should
wear hides, and when they beg for alms the sentence
should commence with the word ‘Bhavati’, e.g. “Bhavatt,
bhiksarn dehi). The Brahmin can marry in all the castes,
but he shall perform ritual only along with the wife o
his own caste.
it) Ksatriya. ‘Yo give gifts according to rules, study
Vedas and perform yajiias form the duty of the Ksatriya.
To look after and take care of good people and to punish
evil-doers are his especial duties. Names of Ksatriya
children should take the suffix ‘‘Varma’’. After upanéana the child should wear tiger skin. He should carry
a danda (rod) of the Arayal (peepal) trec. When the
Ksatriya brahmacarin begs for alms the word ‘bhavatl
should be used in the middle of the sentence, e.g.“Bhiksam
bhavati dehi’’. The Ksatriya can marry in the other
castes, except the Brahmin. At the ume of wedding the
Ksatriya woman should hold an arrow in her hand.
iii) Vaisya. Agriculture, protection of cows and trace
are the special duties of the Vaisya. Children born ©
Brahmin women to Vaisyas are called Vaidchikas.
Names of Vaigya children should have the suffix ‘gupe’
after them. After upanayana the Vaisya brahmacar!?
should wear sheep’s skin. He should carry a danda mac©
of a branch of the Kivala tree. The Vaisya may have 4
wife of his own caste and one of the Sidra caste. -
the time of wedding the Vaisya woman should hol
cane in her hand. | —
tv ) §adra. Service to the Brahmin and architec -
form the duties of the Sidra. Children born to Ksatt a
women by Sidras are called Pulkasas. Children bo!
alas
to Brahmin women by dalas;
Godras are called Can¢ ’
and sons born to Sadras by Vaisya women are ca
Ayogavas. _ |
The Candala’s profession is to hang criminals sente .
to death, and to live by women. The Pulkasa i live
live by hunting. Ayogava is to act on the stage a che
by architecture. The Candala should live outs! Pes ;
village. The Candala has a right to take the cloth “ih
corpses. He shall not have any physical contacts, he
the others. He will attain salvation if he die 1 4 be
course of protecting others. The suffix ‘dasa ot il
added to his name. He shall marry only from 11
caste. (Agni Purana, 4 Chapters from 151). nes)"
need
Vairajas, agnisvattas, garhapatyas, somapa
Caturvedas and Kalas are the seven manes.
Gabha Parva, Chapter 11, Verse 47).
(See Manvantara).
One of the female attendant
Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Verse
A female attendant of
Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Verse 27). skand™
A woman attendant 9°
(M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Verse 12).
(CAVERU). (Pata= army) days
A particular division of the army which in O° th
used to come forward to lay down their ee jm
service of the country. When defeat in wat i roy*
certain for their king an army division ult
CATURVEDA. One of the Saptapitrs (seven ner gt
daf Ska?
s of Oe),
deva. (M.B. Skat ae
(M.B.

CEDI
leadershi
ae oe Sake nei who took their last
aotegel ! people. The soldiers left their
mes with their head and eyebrows shaved, and people
gave them a hearty send-off. Rither victory or death
in battleficld was their slogan. This system originated
in Kerala. Imitating Kerala, Turkey and Egypt formed
on own division of Cavettupata in the 15th century.
; ie Cavettupata of Turkey called the Janissary was
ormed out of poor Christians captured in war, and that
of Egypt called Mamaluk was formed out of slaves.
But, the CAavettupata of ancient Kerala was self-organised out of burning love for their king and country.
The families of those warriors of the pata who died in
fight were allotted royal favours. Even before, in the 14th
century A.D. there existed in Kerala this system of
Cavettupata. From A.D. 1090 to 111] A.D. many fierce
wars were fought between Kerala and the Cola country,
and it was perhaps during this period that this system of
fighting came into vogue. Certain inscriptions of the
per lod go to prove that Ramavarmakulasekhara Cakravarti who ruled Kerala during the above period drove
out the Colas from Quilon and captured places up to
Kottar.
Foreign writers have also referred to the Cavettupata.
Amouces” and “Amochi” used in the ‘Rise of Portuguese power in India’ indicate the Cavettupata. “In
the war’ between Cochin and Calicut in 1504 three
princes of Cochin were killed, one of them being the
nephew of the ruling monarch. On_his death 200
d the body-guard of the
Cavettu warriors who forme
nephew rushed to the field after shaving their heads
and eyebrows and killed all the enemies they saw.”
CEDI. A king of the Yaduvamsa.
1) Genealogy. Descending in order fro
Atri—Candra-—Budha— Pururavas ~~ Ayus — Nahusa —
Yayati -- Yadu — Krostha — | A Svahi—
bindu — Prthusravas —
Rugeka — Citraratha — Sasa *
Vidarbha—Romapada—
e Cedi dynasty begins
Cedi came to be
m Visnu:—BrahmaDharma—Rucaka - JyamaghaBhadru_—Krta—Usika—Cedi, Th
from Cedi and the land ruled over by
known as Cedirajya.
2) Other detatls regarding Kir
1) Once Uparicaravasu conque
Chapter 63, Adi Parva). .
“fo of Nakula, we a princess of
2) Karenumati, W!
Cedi rajya, (Sloka 79, Chapter, °° ag oe
3) Once Sigupala reigned over this country. i te 36
death his son Dhrstaketu “ crowned king. (Sloka 99;
Chapter 45, Sabha Parva )- i
4) During’ the period of Nala, Cedirajy@ i ruled
by king ,Subahu- Damayanti lived = his nat very
comfortably. (Sloka 44, Chan-©' 65, Ne the help of the
a) dalitejaxem, 2 pine S ip ene of 91870 shariets
Pandavas with an aksauhini T horses and 1 0930
equal number of elephants, 3 ad dyoga Parva).
8) Th et. a Co this "state helped Sri
The Ksatriya warriors q
Krsna in many leave: (Sloka 1), Chapter 28, Udyog
Parva é 7 .s d
7) (cai was counted as one of the — = ee
“1 ancient Bharata. oka 40;
arva ). |
CEKITANA. (SATVATA, VAR NEY Vrsni dynasty.
1) General information. An archer ° =
ng ~Cedi.
redt his land. (Sloka 2,
OO ,
CEMB (U).
CERIPPU
He lived for the Pandavas and attained Vir
(Heaven for the brave) in the great a ae ne PYates
2) Important ae (1) Cekitana was present at the
svayarnvara of Draupadi. (Chapter 171 Slok
Udyoga Parva). aha SIDER:
2) When the Pandavas entered the hall const
Maya for the first time Cekitana was ieee |
are 97, Chapter 4, Sabha Parva).
t the time of the Rajasiiya he approached Dh
utra and presented him withan arrow-holder. (Sloka 9,
en 53, Sabha Parva). ‘
4) On the first day of the great battle this g
wrestled with Susarma. (Sloka 60, Chapter” oe
Parva). hae ia
5) At the Kuruksetra in the combat with Krpaca
d : : rpacarya
oe nt 8 them fainted, (Sloka 31, Chapter 84, Bhisma
6) He wrestled with Citrasena, Sloka 8
Bhisma Parva). fame
7) Cekitana fought with Anuvinda in th ;
battle. (Sloka 48, Chapter 14, Drona oe
8) Dronacarya defeated Cekitana in the great battl
(Sloka See tee 125, Drona Parva). ‘i .
9) Duryodhana killed Cekitana in the
one a Chapter 12, Salya Parva). nee ae
10 en Vyasa by his yogic powers invited the spiri
of all the dead warriors on the’ banks of the Gatieh the
spirit of Cekitana was also there. (Sloka 12, Chapter os
Agramavasika Parva). :
(COPPER). The sperm of L
which was dropped into the river Ganga cevdoped pa
form and gave birth to Subrahmanya. Alon BNO
Subrahmanya came out from Ganga gold seer wate
and from its heat steel and copper. From the dirt mae
out tin. (Sarga 37, Valmiki Ramayana). ‘ica
CENKANNARAJA, See Jambukegvara.
CENNASU NAMBU TIRI.
Cennas ara
Nambiatirippad was born and bred up in Ketale, be ae
born in Vanneri in Ponnani Taluk in the year 1498 AD.
His father was Ravi Nambitirippad of Bhargava so
Besides his book ‘Tantrasamuccaya’ he has ee
book ‘Manavavastulaksana’. This book is called Me: “
syalayacandrika’ also. al
CERA. (A king of serpents). See under Ruru
CERIPPU. (FOOTWEAR ).
< Fs : ‘There is a stor ‘
Mahabharata of how Cerippu and Kuta (footwe y in
umbrella) were born. Once the heat of the a ane
came unbearable to Jamadagni and enraged fe -
the sage started sending arrows against the Sun firs
wife Renuka was supplying him with arrows. When ‘
set of arrows was finished Renuka brought nether :
This continued without break and the Sun began —
feel the attack. Unable to do anything against the sage
the Sun heated the head and foot of Renuka on her wa
to supply the arrows so fiercely that Renuka fell oa
under a banyan tree exhausted. When she became well
enough to walk she took the arrows to her husband who
was very angry for her being late. She then explained
to him how because of the extreme heat of the sun sh
fell down on the way. Jamadagni then started with
increased fury his shower of arrows and the Sun in th
disguise of a Brahmin approached and advised him that ;
was not possible to strike down the Sun because h =
fe acai in the sky and so it was better to withdtaw
rom that attempt. 1 sal
pt. But Jamandeng said the Sun would
ie

CH
be stationary for some time at midday and then he would
hit the Sun down. When the Sun found that Jamadagni
would never drop his attempt he accepted defeat and
presented Jamadagni with a pair of sandals and an
umbrella to protect against the heat from below and
above. From that day onwards footwear and umbrella
came into vogue.
The practice of presenting sandals and umbrella is
being carried down from generation to generation and
even today it is being followed; these two are given as
gifts on the ‘Sraddha’ day. (Chapters 95 and 96, Anusasana Parva, M.B.)
CH. This letter means a cut, amputation severance.
(Chapter 348, Agni Purana).
CHAGAMUKHA. Subrahmanya. He is here idolised
as one having a face like that ofa goat. (Sloka 3, Chapter
228, Vana Parva).
CHANDODEVA. Sage Matanga was known
previous birth by this name. (See Matanga).
in his
CIRAKARI
Venkata who ruled over Vijayanagar during the period
1586 A.D. to 1614 A.D. His one great work is ‘Raghavayadavapandaviya’. There are three Kandas in it and
one Kanda each is devoted to the story of Sri Rama,
Sri Krsna and the Pandavas.
CIKSURA. War minister of Mahisdsura. Vamra was
his finance minister, Asiloma prime minister, Bidala
foreign minister, Ubharka Commander-in-chief, Sukra,
minister for education and Baskala, Trinetra and Kalabandhaka consulting ministers. (Devi Bhagavata,
Paficama Skandha).
CIKURA. Son of Aryaka, the serpent king. Cikura had a
son called Sumukha. Once Garuda ate Cikura for food.
(M.B. Udyoga Parva, Chapter 120, Verse 23). __
CINAR. People of China. It is believed that the Cinars
were born from the body of Nandini, the cow, during
her fight with Visvamitra. (Sloka 38, Chapter 174,
Adi Parva). These low-caste people paid homage to
Yudhisthira and gave him many presents. (Sloka 31,
Chapter 51, Sabha Parva).
CHATRAKETU. The second son born to Laksmana die
of his wife Urmila. The eldest son was Taksaka. Sri CINTAMANI. A diamond. This was salvaged SO
Rama after his return from the exile established a ocean of milk along with other precious items tea
Kingdom called Agati on the eastern sea-shore and Airavata, Uccaihsravas, Kalpavrksa, o—. ad.
crowned Taksaka as the King of that place. On the wes- Candra, Apsaras, Mahalaksmi, Tara, and Ku
tern side after subjugating the mlechhas (low-caste (Yuddha_ Kanda, Karnpa Ramayana ). . aac= tn the
non-Hindu tribe) Sri Rama established another kingdom CIRADATA. ‘There was a king called Ciradata a —
called Candramati and installed Chatraketu as the King country called Cirapura. Though himself a good ma val
of that country. (Uttara Ramayana). was surrounded by bad advisers. Once a forelg ms
CHATRAVATI. ‘There was in ancient Bharata a coun- Prasanga, came along with two friends to the Pater
see the King. But due to the bad advice of his c ats
the King did not care to see them even. For five 1h ‘
they stayed there without even getting a look af he
King. One day the only son of the King died. _
courtiers gathered round the child and pretende
; ar m
be greatly grieved. Prasanga and his friends ae caus?
try called Ahicchatra. Chatravati was the capital of that
State. The country itself is also known as Chatravati.
(Sloka 21, Chapter 165, Adi Parva).
CHAYA. A substitute of Samjfia, daughter of Visvakarma. Sarhjiia got from Surya three children, Manu,
Yama and Yami. The heat of Sarya, her husband, hi
became unbearable to her and so she created a substitute to the scene. They saw the king and spoke BO —* talk t0
in her exact form and leaving her to look after Surya, ‘For five years you have not cared either to see uy $02
us. We were cherishing a hope that at least yo, ie nd
her husband, she left the place and went to her father.
Sirya did not know of this replacement and taking her
to be Sarnjiia he produced three children by her, Sani,
Savarnamanu and Tapati. Chaya loved hersons more
and this made Yama angry and he raised his legs to
strike her when Chayd cursed that Yama’s legs would fall
off from his body. Yama complained to his father and he
would give us a better treatment when he grew ° 5 now
became King. We were living here on that hope “ wit
that hope also has been shattered and so we are : sal,
the place this instant.”’ The King was surprise oe
that they were prepared even to walt for his ts,
reseP
the King and gave them very many, pt
ae “ ‘ Kathasaritsag® a
amended the curse and said that only some flesh from (Taranga 5, Alankaravati Larhbaka, dia
his limbs would fall to the ground and that flesh would CIRAKA. A place of habitation in ancient India. ? they
serve as food to the germs in the earth. Yama would Karna conquered this land and from then Sink 195
escape from further injury. After consoling his son he started paying tribute to Duryodhana. (S10
turned towards Chaya. The anger of Surya frightened Chapter 8, Karna Parva). used to
her and she told him everything. Sirya then divorced CIRAKARI. A son of Gautama Maharsi,, Pe aed the
O
think deeply before doing any deed and s
name Cirakari.
Once the sage Gautama foun
chastity of his own wife and enrage sl
his son Cirakari to chop off the head of t ei tot :
mother. Giving this command Gautama ee ’S ode
forest and Cirakari in obedience to his fathe did 2°
her and brought back Samjfia. For details see Samjia.
(Chapter 9 of Harivamsa; Chapter 2, Améa 3, Visnupurana). _
CHAYAGRAHI . 1. A demoness who harassed Hanimain on his flight to Lanka from the Bharata shore.
She, by a trick of the shade obstructed his path and
é
ct 1
d out proof again “nde
d at this comm tet 5
Haniiman realising the danger killed her by a blow ,
with his left foot and sprang forward. (Sundara Kanda, came before his mother, weapon in hane. ede nor
Kampa Ramayana). kill her immediately but pondered over the - Tt ane
CHAYASUTA. Sani (Saturn ). of the deed. Matricide is a great sin, he MUS:¢ Voth’
CIBUKA. A low-caste born of N andini, the cow, during her again who would be there to look after ace 4 nIB ig
fight with Vigvamitra. (Sloka 38, Chapter 174, died. Perhaps his father, when he cools et a
Adi Parva). regret his command and come back cee urnet fe
CIDAMBARA (SITAMBARA). A Sanskrit poet of 16th he was sitting undecided when Gautama tee his
of remorse for his hasty order. On seeing
century A.D. He was a poet in the court of emperor

CIRANJIVI 183
alive he was greaily relieved and immensely happy and
he blessed Cirakari. (Chapter 266, Santi Parva).
CIRANJIVI. The name of a crow, a character in the
Paficatantra’. (See under Meghavarna).
CIRANTAKA. A son of Garuda. (Sloka 1, Chapter
101, Udyoga Parva).
CIRAVASAS I. A Ksatriya King born as a rebirth of
an asura Krodhavasa. (Sloka 61, Chapter 67, Adi
Parva).
CITAL
So saying he embraced the King and taking a powder
from his body smeared itonthe sword and asked Jivahara to strike again. This time very easily Jivahara
severed the head from the body of Nagarjuna. The
King was greatly aggrieved and he renounced all and
went to the forest and led a pious life.
Cirayus’ son Jivahara became King. But Nagarjuna’s
sons killed him and his mother died of grief. (Taranga,
Ratnaprabha Lambaka, Kathasaritsagara).
CIRAVASAS II. A yaksa. He stayed in the court of CYRINI. A river. It was onthe banks of this river that
Kubera worshipping him. (Sloka 10, Chapter 10,
Sabha Parva).
Vaivasvata Manu clad in bark-skin and with knotted
hair did penance. (Sloka 6, Chapter 187, Vana Parva).
CIRAYUS. An ancient King of the country Cirayu. CITAL. (Termites). Cital has got its ownplace in the
Nagarjuna was a minister of this King. Nagarjuna knew
the secret of ‘Rasayanasiddhi’. Once Nagarjuna prepared a medicine for himself and the King which if
taken would keep them eternally young. They took
medicine accordingly.
After some days tg child of the minister died. Griefstricken Nagarjuna decided to prepare Amrta which
would eradicate death from this world. He had prepared it but there remained one more medicine to be
added to this. The auspicious moment to add the roe
was to come only after five days and Nagarjuna waiter
The devas were frightened. If Amrta was made olay
able on earth men would become Devas. Devas cou
not bear‘ this and so they sent the Aégvinikumaras °
the. earth to persuade Nagarjuna to desist from = Yes
of preparing Amrta. F urther they informed him t a, -
dead child was living happily heaven. He agree
Stop his work. :
After some time Cirayus crowned his son paleee
heir-apparent. Overjoyed Jivahara ran to a deer
hanapara to give her the glad dines, scien
told her son thus: “My child, why oe is avert
happy to think that you have become the heir-appare?
me ruvarajas
Several sons of your father had a She has taken
and died before becoming King. : him
a i i from Nagarjuna and that hme
eternally young. None sige re 4 yeas old and
King. Your father is now cjg me 3 arajas but
will live long. Many of you will henome 75, tide over
not the King. I will therefore sugser ot son Nagarjuna
this difficulty. Everyday in the 200" Guire whether
would come outside the palace am that tare he would
anybody isin need of anything-, id opportunity when
give whatever was as
you can ask for his head.
father would either die O'S oa
puranas. Devi Bhagavata has the following story about
the origin of it. ,
Mahavisnu once looking at the face of Laksmi laughed
without any apparent reason. Laksmi, thinking that
Visnu was laughing at her and that he had an eye on
some other woman more beautiful than her lost her
temper and cursed Visnu that his head would be severed
from his body. :
No sooner was the curse pronounced than the asuras came
in batches fully armed and challenged Visnu to war.
Single-handed the Lord fought the asuras with one bow.
The fight did not end though it continued for thousands
of years. Visnu felt tired and decided to rest awhile.
He planted one end of the untied bow on the ground,
rested his chin on the other and sat in Padmasana.
Being very tired the Lord remained asleep for a long
time in this posture.
About this time the devas made preparations to perform
a yajila. All the devas except Mahavisnu attended that
ajfia. Since he was the master of yajfias performed for
purposes of the devas they could not begin it in his
absence. So, Brahma and others went in search
of Visnu to Vaikuntha. But he was not to be found there.
Then Brahma and _ others found out with their
eyes of knowledge where Visnu was and they went to
the place where he was sleeping. They waited there
for a long time, yet Visnu did not awake from sleep.
Then Brahma hit at a plan to awaken Visnu. It was
to create citals (termites) to eat the end of the bow.
When they had eaten away the end of the bow
planted on the ground the cord binding the two ends
of it would break, the bow would straighten up and the
speedy movement of it would awaken Visnu.
According to this plan Brahma created citals, but his
other plans were not acceptable to the citals,. They
argued that the advantage of awakening the Lord from
sleep would go only to the devas, while its sin would
fall upon them.
Then you can become the iis suggestion and he went They argued
I h =f hen
Jivahara was pleased. to hear t 5 oarjuna and w
io _after-noon to oo eee ith his query Jered
ane fon he bead. Most willingly Nee tthe medicine
his fet en be chopped off. But ee e sword ineffective.
est cul -earjuna getting
ery So A ton without, Ne bub ble
his neck “,. 17 asked Nagara aha Se an 1e im ediatey fase d saying,
juna a chloe his hea but Nagy ous pirths I have
i to
“Oh, King, in my ninetynin® Jease 4° not a. oe
offered my head like this _ i she hundredth time ’-
desist from making this offer
snterru
*To disturb one in sleeps ‘cling of t
are tantamount to Brahmahaty@ (
ta story, to separate
be prahmin)
IEE
Nidrabhangah kathachedo
Dampatyoh pritibhedanam /
Sigumatrvibhedasca
Brahmahatyasamam smrtam //*
Brahma conceded the justness of this argument and
asreed that, in future, a part of the result of yajiias
shall go to citals. It was after this that havis(sa crificial
offering) which, in the course of being submitted to the
fire falls on the sides of the pit of fire became the share
of citals (termites). This promise of Brahma pleased the
the citals, and they did as was bidden by Brahma and
husband and wile as also mother and child from each other—these things

CITAYU
the bow of Visnu straightened up with a terrific sound.
The devas were terror-stricken, the whole universe
shook, the earth experienced a convulsion and the oceans
too were shaken. Moreover, the head of Visnu was
severed from the body, rose high up in the sky and fell
‘nto the sea. Brahma, Siva and others opened their eyes
‘hoa to find the body of Visnu lying thus without the
head.
This loss of Visnu’s head proved to be useful in another
way. Now, Hayagriva, after securing the boon from
Brahma that he would be killed only by one with horse’s
head, was running rough-shod over the whole earth.
The devas cut off the head of a horse and attached it to
the trunk of Visnu. Thus Visnu came to life again, and
according to his orders the citals gnawed away the cord
of Hayagriva’s bow as a result of which he was killed.
(Devimahatmya, Prathma Skandha).
CITAYU. A king of the Piru dynasty. He was the son
of Bhadragva, who had ten sons called Rksayu, Krsayu,
Sannatayu, Ghrtayu, Citayu, Sthandilayu, Dharmayu,
Sammitayu, Krtayu and Matinara. (Agni Purana,
Chapter 278). -
CITRA I. A son of Dhrtarastra killed in war by Bhimasena. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 136, Verse 20).
CITRA II. A gajaraja (king elephant) with whom
Subrahmanya, as a child, used to play. (M.B. Vana
Parva, Chapter 225, Verse 23).
CITRA III. A hero who fought on the Kaurava side
against the Pandavas. He was killed by Prativindhya.
(M.B. Karna Parva, Chapter 14, Verse 32).
CITRAIV. A hero from the Cedi Kingdom who fought
on the Pandava side against the Kauravas. Karna
killed him. (M.B. Karna Parva, Chapter 56, Verse 46).
CITRA. A celestial maiden. When once Astavakra went
to the court of Kubera this maiden gave a dance in
honour of his visit. (Sloka 44, Chapter 14, Anus asana
Parva). 7
CITRABAHU (CITRAYUDHA). Ason of Dhrtarastra.
He was killed in war by Bhima. (M.B. Drona Parva,
Chapter 136, Verse 20).
CITRABANA. (CITRA, CITRAKA). A son of Dhrtarastra. Bhima killed him in war. (M.B. Drona Parva,
Chapter 137, Verse 27).
CITRABARHA. Ason of Garuda. (M.B. Udyoga Parva,
Chapter 101, Verse 12).
CITRACAPA. (CITRASARASANA, SARASANA).
One ofthe hundred sons of Dhrtarastra. (M.B. Adi
Parva, Chapter 67).
CITRADEVA. An attendant of Subrahmanya. He
loved brahmins deeply. (M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter
45, Verse 71).
CITRADHARMA. A king in ancient India. The asura
called Virupaksa was born again as Citradharman.
(M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 67). The Pandavas invited
him to come and help them in the war. (M.B. Udyoga
Parva, Chapter 4, Verse 13).
CITRAGUPTA. A minister of Kala. (God of death).
His duty is to examine, after the death of men, a list of
the good and evil actions they had done while living.
(M.B. Anus asana Parva, Chapter 130).
CITRAKA (CITRA, CITRABANA). A son of Dhrtarastra. Bhima killed him in the great war. (M.B.
Drona Parva, Chapter 137).
CITRAKETU I. An emperor,
for a long time. At last a son was
who remained childless
born to him owing to
184 CITRALEKHA Il
the blessings of Sage Angiras. But, ere long the child was
dead and gone, and its parents, immersed in sorrow
took the dead child to Angiras. Narada also happened
to be there on the occasion. Angiras restored the dead
child to life and asked him to live with the parents.
The boy immediately stood up and told Angiras that
he had many parents in his many previous lives, an
requested to be enlightened as to which of those parents
he was to live with. Brahma and Narada felt confused.
In the end they disappeared after imparting spiritua
wisdom to Citraketu. And, Citraketu, who, for eight
davs immersed himself in concentrating the mind on
God was turned into a Gandharva; his wife too turned
Gandharva. . .
And, both of them rose up in the sky and flying ov!
Mount Kailasa looked down to the mountain. ‘There they
saw Parvati being seated on the thighs of Siva at which
sight Citraketu laughed. Enraged by the laughte!
Parvati cursed him to be born aS an asura, a
born as such. Vrtrasura was Citraketu born a
(Bhagavata, Sastha Skandha). .
CITRAKETU II. A son of Garuda. (M.B. Udyo8*
Parva, Chapter 101, Verse 12).
CITRAKETU III. A Paficala prince
side of the Pandavas. (M.B. Bhisma Parva,
CITRAKETU IV. A of Sisupala. (Bhagav@"™”
Navama Skandha). ot
CITRAKESI. An Apsara woman. King Vatsa beg
sons like Vrsaof her. (Bhagavata, Navama Skandha -
CITRAKSA. One of the hundred sons of Dhrtarast
Bhimasena killed him in the great battle. (Drona Parv”
Chapter 136). _
CITRAKUNDAKA. (DIRGHALOCAN Je p
Kauravas killed by Bhima. (M.B. Bhisma
Chapter 96, Verse 27
CITRAKUTA. A mountain. _
Renowned in the puranas, this mountain 1S O
of the river, Mandakini. (M.B. Vana Parva,
85). It was here, at Citrakita that Sri Ramé;
and others lived for a period of time. It ae
Rajalaksmi (royal wealth and welfare) wil an
those who fast on the Citrakuita after a at ~ 6;
Mandakini. (M.D. Anugadsana_ Parva, Chap fp.
stn Banda Zilla of the ©
Verse 29). This mountain 1s 1n Banda
in modern India.
nd he was
s asurawho fought on the
Chaptet
son
n the bane ;
apt.
Ch Poa
hat
rac
bree
Citrakita is described in Canto
Ramayana. . his ma de?
CITRALEKHA I. A celestial maiden. a once
came and danced in the assembly of the Pan¢
(Sloka 34, Chapter 9, Vana Parva, M-0-/: Ase ghtet 0
CITRALEKHA II. A companion of Usa » © paint
the demon, Bana. She was a beautiful portray’ Kr
Usa once dreamt of Aniruddha, grandson er rea af
Even before knowing the identity of the idolo fn cits ";
Usa fell in love with him. Next day % re her dre?
lekha gathered from the gloomy Usa details O any **
and Citralekha started making portraits, O° ml
charming princes but Usa was not satisHe “actly 8
drew in her imagination a figure which vias $4. 1 3
that of Aniruddha, the man of her dren pitt ind
satisfied and it was through the cleverness © .
that Aniruddha was brought to Us?
Usa was able to marry Aniruddha. (See
ruddha’).
ji?
poo ; Aol
r

CITRAMUKHA
CITRAMUKHA. Asage. Though he was born a Vaisya,
he became a brahmin and from there gradually rose
to the status of a brahmarsi. (Chapter 56, Anusasana
Parva, M.B.)
CITRANGA I. (CITRANGADA, SRUTANTAKA).
One of the hundred sons of Dhrtarastra. In the great
battle Bhimasena killed him. (Sloka 11, Chapter 26,
Salya Parva). |
CITRANGA II. A warrior. In_ the Agvamedhayajiia
performed by Sri Rama Satrughna followed the sacrificial horse and Citranga blocked them on their way.
Satrughna killed him. (Chapter 27, Patala Kanda,
Padma Purana).
CITRANGADA I.
ranga I,
CITRANGADA L..
King Santanu of
(CITRANGA). See under CitA son of the Maharaja Santanu.
the Candra dynasty had two wives,
Ganga and Satyavati. Bhisma is the: son born of Ganga;
of Satyavati were born two sons, Citrangada and Vicitravirya. They were very brave and learned. After
ruling his kingdom for a long period, living with Satyavati and the three children Santanu passed away. Because Bhisma dedicated himself to a life of unbroken
chastity Citrangada was crowned King. Once when he
went to the forest for hunting he met with a gandharva
of the same name. Both did not like the other to keep
the same name and so a fight ensued. It was fought
in Kuruksetra and lasted for three years. In the end
Citrangada was killed. Bhisma felt very sorry and after
asking Vicitravirya to perform the funeral rites crowne
him as King. (Devi Bhagavata, Prathama Skandha).
CITRANGADA III. A gandharva. See under Citranmy II. K ho attended the
RAR f th ings Wno a ;
ANGADA IV. One of the bc have been the King
svayarhvara of Draupadi. He mig
of either Kalinga 4 Dagarna because both ee
were then ruled by @ Citrangada, (Sloka 22, Chapter
CITR A ape vA king of Kalifiga. Almost all the
Kings of Bharata attended a svayamvara On
oe palace of this King. (Sloka 2, Hapte
ar oil
CITRANGAD A VI. A king of Das arma. He oes Se
sacrificial horse sent out by Dharmaputra, \2vamed :
Asvamedhayajfia and fais ea him. ,
ey in A Heeih A character 10 the oe
in the book ‘Paficatantra Stories’ B-2 in Pa
tantra).
CITRANGADA I.
4., Santi
A celestial maiden. ‘Once this girl
in honour 0
| gav ance in the court of Kubera ;
ane Sloka 4h, Chapter 19, Anugasana Parva).
CITRANIGADA II. A wife of ee ee utra was
General information. se aan Ik fase by miscloseted with Paficali in amorous tals" aetied as per
take entered the room and was thus oe eilerimage for 4
a previous mutual agreement to'go on fe F B erpent girl
year. During this exile he married the serp\'’
- on his pilgrimage
Ulipi. After that he proceeded 35 ranalit was then
ll ‘ basi :
oe ~_ 9 called Citravahana. Citrangada
was the daughter of C
An ancestor of Citrava
of a son, did great penance
blessed him and said that 1n future
ahana.
sland “reatly grieved by the Jack
to propitiate Siva and Siva
he and his successors
IEEE”
CITRANGADA
would get a son to keep their line unbroken. Accordingly
all the forefathers of Citravahana got a son each but
when it came to the turn of the latter he got a girl
instead.
Arjuna accidentally saw Citrangada and fell in love with
her, and. knowing that, the king received Arjuna in his
palace and requested Arjuna to marry his daughter.
Arjuna married her and the couple got a son named
Babhruvahana. Promising them that he would come
back and take them to Hastinapura Arjuna continued
his pilgrimage. (Chapters 219, 220, and 221, Adi
Parva). ,
2) How Citraigada came to. Hastindpura. When after the
great epic battle Dharmaputra conducted an Afgvamedhayajfia it was Arjuna who led the sacrificial horse
to the south. When Arjuna came to Manalir he came
against Babhruvahana who challenged him for a fight.
In the grim battle that ensued Arjuna fell dead by the
piercing arrows of Babhruvahana, his own son. At that:
time Ulapi and Citrangada came to the scene and
seeing Arjuna lying dead, Ulipi brought the diamond
Mrtasafijivant, and placing it on Arjuna’s face brought
him back to life. (See Babhruvahana for details).
After this incident all of them, Citrangada, Ulipi and
Babhruvahana went to Hastinapura along with Arjuna.
(Chapters 79 to 81, Agvamedha Parva).
3) Other details
(1) Citrangada on reaching Hastinapura bowed down
before Kunti and Paficali touching their feet and lived
amicably with others like Subhadra. . (Sloka 2, Chapter
88, ‘Asvamedha Parva).
(2) Kunti, Subhadra and Paficali gave Citrangada
many diamonds as present. (Sloka 3, Chapter 88
Agvamedha Parva).
3) Citrangada looked to the comforts of Gandhari
as a servant-maid. (Sloka 23, Chapter I, Agramavasika
Parva).
4.) Citrangada was one among the women who wept
when at the fag end of their life Dhrtarastra, Gandhari
and Kunti started for Vanavasa (life in the forest).
(Sloka 10, Chapter 15, A‘ramavasika Parva).
(5) Citrangada was 4 beautiful woman having an
enchanting figure as that of a Madhika flower. (Sloka
11, Chapter 25, Agramavasika Parva).
(6) After the Mahaprasthana of the Pandavas Citrangada left for Manipur. (Sloka 18, Chapter 1, Mahaprasthanika Parva ).
CITRANGADA Ill. Daughter - of Vigsvakarma. Once
while she was bathing ina pond along with her companions in the forest of Naimiga Prince Suratha, son of
Sudeva, came that way. Seeing him Citrangada told her
companions “This beautiful young man is in love. I
must give myself to him”. Though her companions
objected to her doing this, waving aside: the objections
Citrangada approached Suratha.
When Viévakarma knew about this he'was extremely
angry and cursed her saying that she would never have
a marriage. Citrangada fainted when she heard the
curse and her companions tried their best to wake her
up, but failed. They then took her to be dead and left
the place in search of firewood and other things to
conduct a funeral.
When Citrangada woke up she looked around for her
companions and finding none including her lover, the
prince, she ran and threw herself into the river, Sarasvati

CITRANGI
That river pushed her down to river Gomati and that
river in turn washed her ashore a huge forest. ‘There
she was met by the sage Rtadhvaja. Knowing her
sad tale the sage felt compassion for her and cursed
Viévakarma to be born as a monkey. Then he let her
marry her lover and blessed them. (Chapters 63 and
64, Vamana Purana).
CITRANGI. Daughter of Bhadrasrenya, a_ king of
Hehaya. She was the wife of Durmada. (See under
Durmada).
CITRAPUSPAM. A garden where peculiar kinds of
flowers grow. This garden is on the higher planes of
Mount Sukaksa tothe west of Dvaraka. (M.B. Sabha
Parva, Chapter 38).
CITRARATHA I. (ANGARAPARNA). A_ devagandharva.
1) Birth. Citraratha was the gandharva son of
Kagyapaprajapati of his wife Muni. (Sloka 43, Chapter
65, Adi Parva).
2) Citraratha and Arjuna. The greatest event in the
life of Citraratha alias Angaraparna was the defeat he
suffered at the hands of Arjuna. ‘The Pandavas after
their escape from the lac palace (Laksagrha) through
a tunnel arrived in a forest and there they killed the
demons Hidirnba and Baka. One night they were
walking along the shores of the river Ganga when they
heard a sound of somebody bathing in the river, Arjuna
who was walking ahead waving a country torch went
to see who was bathing at that time of the night. Arjuna
then saw Citraratha enjoying a bath with his wife
Kumbhinasi. That period of the night was allotted to
the gandharvas, and human beings were not expected
to be out walking at that time. Citraratha felt it
impertinent that “Arjuna a human being should be out
walking at night and peep into the privacy of the
gandharvas. The gandharva and Arjuna so entered into
a combat. Citraratha who was a great fighter was,
after a grim battle, subdued, bound hand and foot, and
brought before his brothers by Arjuna. Kumbhinasi
followed her exhausted, powerless and spiritless husband
and pleaded to Dharmaputra to release him. Dharmaputra advised Arjuna to do so and on getting his release
he taught Arjuna the famous Caksusividya—the magic
art of seeing by one’s own eyes anything and everything
‘n the three worlds : Heaven, Earth and the netherworld. Manu was the author of this magic art and from
him Soma learnt it and from Soma Visvavasu, from
Viévavasu, Citraratha and from Citraratha, Arjuna.
Besides this Citraratha gave Arjuna many chariots
and horses.
In return Arjuna taught him the secret of the missile
Aonigira. Exchanging faith and affection thus Citraratha
and the Pandavas became friends. He then narrated to
the Pandavas many interesting stories, of which the
following are a few. The story of the feud between
Vasistha and Visvamitra, story of Tapatisarmvarana
and tales about the sage Parasara, Kalmasapada,
Adrsyanti, Bhargavas, Krtavirya and Aurva, Citraratha advised the Pandavas to have a priest for the
sacrificial rites and it was thus that they engaged
Dhaumya as their family priest. :
Since Arjuna had destroyed all the chariots belonging to
Citraratha, the latter got a name ‘Bhagnaratha’ (devoid
of chariots). Citraratha admitted that Arjuna could
186 CITRARUPA
conquer him because of his vow of celibacy. ( Chapters
165 to 183, Adi Parva, M.B.).
3) Other details.
(1) Citraratha attended one of the birthday festivals of
Arjuna. (Sloka 52, Chapter 122, Adi Parva, M.B.).
(2) Citraratha worshipped Kubera sitting in the latter’s
council. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 10, Sloka 26).
(3) He offered asa gift to Dharmaputra four hundred
excellent horses which could fly like wind. (Chapter oe,
Sloka 23, Vana Parva).
(4) When the gandharvas milked the earth during the
time of the emperor, Prthu, Citraratha acted as the call.
(Sloka 39, Chapter 6, Harivamsa).
5) Siva once sent Citraratha as a messenger to Asura
‘ankhacada, with a message that Samkhacuda shoul
abandon his satanic activities. (Devi Bhagavata, Navama Skandha).
CITRARATHA II. One of the ministers of Dagaratha.
He belonged to the Sita dynasty. (Sloka 17, Ayodhya
Kanda, Valmiki Ramayana). ? 7
CITRARATHA III. A king of Salva. Once Renuka,
wife of Jamadagni, after her bath in the river stay©
ashore watching this king and his queen bathe in the
river with erotic plays. Renuka thus reached the asramé
a bit late and Jamadagni enraged at this commande
his son Paragurama to chop the head of his own mother.
(Brahmanda Purana, Chapter oo),
CITRARATHA IV. A king of the dynasty of Bharata.
He was the son of King Gaya. Citraratha had a sister
named Sugati and a brother Avarodhana. (Paficam?
Skandha, Bhagavata). vif
CITRARATHA V. A prince of Paficala. He was kil 4
in the battle of Mahabharata by Dronacarya. (%°
43, Chapter 122, Drona Parva). He
CITRARATHA VI. A king of the Anga country: “-
married Prabhavati, sister of Ruci, wife of Devasarm
(Sloka 8, Chapter 42, Anugasana Parva, MeDei" ty,
CITRARATHA VII. A king of the Yadava oo 9,
He was the son of Uganku and father of Sara. (Sloka
Chapter 147, AnuSasana Parva).
CITRARATHA VIII. Son of Virabahu and a!
Sri Rama. In the Rajya Kanda of Ananda Ra
there is the following story about him. 4 for the
Citrarathaewas also one among those assemble
svayamvara of Hema, daughter of Kusa.
anaesthetic missile to the assemblage ane f
all fall down senseless. He then took Hema ou ie he
marriage hall. But on reaching outside he felt ©”.
done a very unjust thing and so withdrew ™E ed
and stood outside ready to fight. bt ens
which Citraratha defeated all. But Lava alone Cc 7
to fight with him. Virabahu, father of Citrarat cia
was Closely watching the fight came to the help © dow”:
ratha and engaging Lava in a fight struc a him
a friend of
mayan4
Kuéa seeing this attacked Virabahu an che sco
hand and foot. At that time Sri Rama came Oe nis 2”
and told Kuga that Virabahu was 4 friend © a citr
t
set Virabahu free. Hema was then marrie espec’’
ratha and Virabahu was sent away with due 1 ,
CITRARATHA, An Indian river of pure! ;
(Chapter 9, Bhisma Parva, M.B.). by 4 cus?
CITRARUPA. An attendant of Siva. When PY a mar?
of Mahavisnu Mahalaksmi was changed 1nt0 _
it was through this attendant that iva sent a
Visnu. (Devi Bhagavata, Skandha 6).

CITRASARASANA (SARASANA, CITRACAPA)
CITRASARASANA. (SARASANA, CITRACAPA). One
of the sons of Dhrtarastra. In the great battle he was
killed by Bhimasena. (Sloka 90, Chapter 136, Drona
Parva).
CITRASENA I. A gandharva. There is reference to
this gandharva in many places in the puranas. He had
two wives Sandhyavali and Ratnavali.
1) How Arjuna saved him. Once when Citrasena with
his wives was travelling in the aerial car the spittings of
Citrasena fell upon the sage Galava who was doing his
sandhya rites then. The sage complained about the
incident to Sri Krsna who promised to bring to him the
head of Citrasena before sun-set. Sage Narada informed
Citrasena of this vow of Krsna. The gandharva was
taken aback and did not know what todo. But Sandhyavali and Ratnavali went and sought the help of Subhadra.
They made a fire pit in front of her house and decided
to end their lives along with Citrasena by jumping into
the fire. While Citrasena was circling the fire-pit before jumping into it his wives wept loudly and hearing
the noise Subhadra came out and saw what was happening. They then took from Subhadra a boon to the effect
that they should be allowed to live with their husband.
It was only after granting them the boon that Subhadra
understood the whole situation. Subhadra was in js
fix but Arjuna assured her that Citrasena dee °
protected at any cost. Arjuna very cleverly shielde -
the arrows sent against the gandharva by Krsna <
er adually the fight came to be one between Arjuna @
ri Krsna. Subhadra came
found difficult to continue the
Citrasena to bow down and touch t
Citrasena obeyed and the issue sett
both the parties. 2 —
2) Arjuna defeats Citrasena. While the aa een
in exile, Duryodhana knew
were camping in the Dvaitava
Karna Duryodhan? pr ee teh aie suffering Pandawith his retinue to enjoy the sight 0 “i a pretext of an
vas. So they started to the forests = of Bal Tyiesiltaannual stock-taking of eee h ; split into parties
vana with a huge army: There they §P Soon
; y by themselves.
and roamed about ee a near the hermitage of
one of the parties re4 f sndharvas ma ng
5 saw a few & : i
mally ae pn : With the usual ee ai ae
eetmnanted the gandharvas to eae wed The gandharroom for Duryodhana to come mn ad ai being informvas did not pay heed to thelt rap it with the gan hared of this Duryodhana went ri andharvas an
vas. It was Citrasena who led t oi split the Kaurava
his incessant shower of Pict life a acre wid
for made them d and 10
isolated re his army, was oH less ess they approataken a prisoner. In their sheet e an acquainte
. hermitag Dharmached Dharmaputra 12 ‘ odhana.
him with the F itiable pligh* es help of the ——.
+ O t. Ci
putra asked Arjuna to 8°. c jt knew that
Arjuna faced Citrasen@ in. + jun
then appeared in his real form 2 request of Arjuna
he was 6 hting a friend. hen (Chapters 39 to
Citraratha release Dur odhan
occupied 4 seat
243, Vana Parva). dharv@
3) Other details. (1) i Pag wit
in the court of Yudhisthira 2°°
CITRASENA XIII
gandharvas and a few Apsara maidens. (Sloka 32,
Chapter 4, Sabha Parva).
(2) .Citrasena is a member of the court of Kubera also.
(Sloka 26, Chapter 10, Sabha Parva).
(3) Citrasena used to attend the court of Indra also
at times. (Sloka 22, Chapter 7, Sabha Parva).
(4) At the invitation of Indra Arjuna went to devaloka
and Citrasena taught him dance and music. It was
during this visit that Arjuna threw a cold blanket on the
amorous approaches of Urvasi and was consequently
cursed by her to be an eunuch. It was through Citrasena
that Indra sent word to Urvasi to console Arjuna and
give relief from the curse. (Chapters 45 and 46, Vana
Parva). | |
CITRASENA If (UGRASENA).
sons of Dhrtarastra.
2) Other details.
(1) . Gitrasena was present for the svayamvara of Pancali. (Sloka 3, Chapter 185, Adi Parva, M.B.).
(2) Citrasena was among those who accompanied
Duryodhana when he went to play the historical game
‘of dice with Dharmaputra. (Sloka 13, Chapter 58,
Sabha Parva).
(3) In the great Mahabharata battle he fought against
Bhimasena, Suéarma, ‘Satyaki and Satanika. Bhima
killed him. (Chapter 137, Drona Parva).
CITRASENA III. A prince of the Piru line, son of
Pariksit and grandson of Aviksit. (Sloka 54, Chapter
94, Adi Parva).
CITRASENA IV. A minister of Jarasandha. He was
known as Dirmbhaka also. (Sloka 32, Chapter 22,
Sabha Parva).
CITRASENA V. A king of the
He fought on the side of the
Pandavas and was killed by
Chapter 14, Karna Parva).
CITRASENA VI. (SRUTASENA). Brother of Sugarma,
the king of Trigarta. These two brothers jointly
by an incessant downpour of arrows suffocated Arjuna
‘4 the battle-field. (Chapter 27, Karna Parva, M.B.).
CITRASENA VII. A warrior of Paficala. Karna killed
him in the great battle. (Sloka 15, Chapter 48, Karna
One of the hundred
country of Abhisara.
Kauravas against the
Srutakarma. (Sloka 14,
Parva ).
att easiok VIII. A son of Karna. Nakula killed
him in the great battle. (Salya Parva, Chapter 10).
CITRASENA 1X. A brother of Karna. In the great
battle Yudhamanyu killed him. (Sloka 39, Chapter
83, Karna Parva).
CITRASENA X. One of the kings on the sea-shore.
Along with his son he fought on the side of the Pandavas
against the Kauravas and was killed by Samudrasena.
(Sloka 16, Ghapter 6, Karna Parva).
CITRASENA XI. A serpent. This serpent joined
hands with Arjuna during the Krsnarjuna battle.
(Sloka 43, Chapter 87, Karna Parva).
CITRASENA XII. A king of the dynasty of Vaivasvatamanu. (Navama Skandha, Bhagavata ).
CITRASENA XIII. A Maharaja who obtained salvation by observing the Astamirohini Vrata. This
king was a great sinner having committed such sins as
Agamyagamana (Incest), Brahmasvapaharana (stealing, things belonging to Brahmins), Surapana (drinking) and Pranihirhsa (causing injury to living beings),
One day while hunting he followed a tiger and at dusk
exhausted with thirst and hunger he reached the banks

CITRASENA I
of the river Yamuna. It was the day of Astamirohini
and many maidens were observing the Astamirohini
Vrata there. Before them was a heap of rice and
other eatables which was given as an offering to
Krsna and seeing the lot the King begged for something to eat and drink. The maidens replied that it
was a sin to take food on that day of Vrata and then there
came a change in the mind of the King and he readily
agreed to observe the Astamirohini vrata and did so.
Because of this when the king died, though a great
sinner he was, he was taken to heaven by the servants
of Visnu. ‘This story was told by Vasistha to Dilipa
to impress upon him the greatness of observing
the Astamirohini Vrata. (Chapter 13, Padma Purana ).
CITRASENA I. An Apsaras. This celestial maiden
was a dancer in the court of Kubera. (Sloka 10, Chapter 10, Sabha Parva). When Arjuna went to the land
of Indra this maiden gave a dance in honour of Arjuna.
(Sloka 30, Chapter 43, Vana Parva).
CITRASENA IJ. A prominent river. The people of
ancient Bharata used to drink the water of this river.
(Sloka 17, Chapter 9, Bhisma Parva)
CITRASENA III. A follower of Subrahmanya. (Sloka
14, Chapter 40, Salya Parva, M.B.).
CITRASIKHANDI. Saptarsis (The seven saints) Marici,
Angiras, Atri, Pulastya, Pulaha, Krtu and Vasistha.
These saints are called by the name Citra‘ikhandis
also. (Sloka 29, Chapter 336, Santi Parva). -
CITRASILA. A puranic river. The water of this river
is used by the Indians for drinking. (Sloka 30, Chapter
9, Bhisma Parva).
CITRASVA. Another name of Satyavan. He used to
make the figure of horses using clay and people therefore gave him this name of Citraégvan. (Sloka 13,
Chapter 294, Vana Parva).
CITRAVAHA. A _ puranic river of Bharata. (Sloka
17, Chapter 9, Bhisma Parva).
CITRAVAHANA. A king who ruled Manipur during
uranic times. (See Citrangada).
CITRAVARMA I. One of the hundred sons of Dhrtarastra. He was killed in the great battle by Bhimasena.
(Chapter 136, Drona Parva, M.B.).
CITRAVARMA II. A prince of the country of Paficala.
He was the son of 4 king called Sucitra. He
had four brothers : Citraketu, Sudhanva, Citraratha
and Viraketu. When Viraketu was killed in the great
battle all the brothers attacked Drona who killed them
all. (Slokas 43 to-49, Chapter 122, Drona Parva, M.B.)
CITRAVARMA III. Father of Simantini, wife of King
Candrangada. (See Candrangada). |
CITRAVEGIKA. A serpent of the family of Dhrtarastra. This serpent was burnt to death at the sarpa
sattra of Janamejaya. (Sloka 8, Chapter 57, Adi Parva).
CITRAYUDHA I. (CITRABAHU). One of _ the
hundred sons of Dhrtarastra. He was slain by Bhimasena in the great battle. (Sloka 20, Chapter 136,
Drona Parva). _
CITRAYUDHA II. (DRDHAYUDHA). One of the
sons of Dhrtarastra. He was slain by Bhimasena.
(Sloka 29, Chapter 137, Drona Parva).
CITRAYUDHA III. A King of Simhapura. During
the victory march of the Pandavas Arjuna conquered
this King. (Sloka 20, Chapter 27, Sabha Parva).
CITRAYUDHA IV. A warrior of the state of Cedi.
COLA
He fought on the side of the Pandavas. The horse of
this warrior was blood-coloured and his weapons were
of a peculiar type. Karna killed him in the great battle.
(Chapter 23, Drona Parva and Chapter 56, Karna
Parva ).
CITROPACITRA. One of the
rastra. In the great battle Bhimasena killed him.
18, Chapter 111, Drona Parva).
CITROPALA. A river of puranic
Chapter 9, Bhisma Parva) .
CITTAVASTHAS. States of the
hundred sons of Dhrta-
(Sloka
fame. (Sloka 34,
(See under
mind.
Pattu.).
CIYYALI. A holy place in South-India. (Sce under
Agastya).
COLA. A very righteous emperor of Kaficipura. Be
cause of the virtuous rule of this emperor his country
got the name Cola. There is an interesting story 1”
Padma Purana of how the emperor attained Vaikunthaloka (The abode of Mahavisnu ).
Once Cola went to Vaikuntha to worship Mahavishnu:
As he was worshipping him with pearls and Eo
of gold a brahmin subject of his came there to wor uF.
him with water and Tulasi leaves. The simple oe
ing of Tulasi leaves and flowers by this brahmars!, aia
dasa, eclipsed the expensive one by the King am an
latter was greatly offended and he rebuked the Bra em
saying that he was a poor man who did not know W ie
devotion to Visnu was. But Visnudasa did not it
the taunt unchallenged. He asked the king OD eof
and sec who would merge with the glowing entity
the Lord earlier. :
The King on returning to his palace started a Vals This
sattra. (An almonry dedicated to Mahavisnu)-
almshouse was as comfortable and luxurious 4°
a.
one once started by Brahm f Gay
nava4 inthe temple O! ony
Visnudasa on the other hand spent his life in 4 ois.
temple leading a celibate life and observing rtes P
ing to Visnu. 7 n
One day after finishing his daily morning rites Vy
dasa cooked his food as usual and kept 1 os ~ som
to be taken later. But on returning to it alle, te
time he found his food eaten by somco
went without food that day and it happen
day also. It continued to happen thus for 4
all these days Visnudasa went fasting: | .*e
then decided to watch and_ see who the
On keeping a vigil he found a Candala (a abbing
the lowest Cadre) timidly coming and gre
the food with gluttonous greed to appease thief
Seeing the famished skeletonous body of the and C2
dasa felt compassion rather than resentment “i
him back to take the food went after him © That £9,
come here and take this ghee also with you. ad 2 A ‘
has no fat in it.” But the Candala frighten’ st aa
sight of the owner of the food ran away him. B d
legs could carry him, Visnudasa follow! 2 usted ae
soon the Candala fell fainting on the road exhe’’. jt
nin
tired. Visnudasa reaching his side started fan “hans
with his cloth. Very
soon the Capea” Cakte
himself into Mahavisnu adorned with Lice
and Gada and Visnu embracing his devo
to Vaikuntha.
Hearing this C
Vaisnavasattra, to his side and
this sattra to spite Visnudasa and now
Sarikha pie
pe
of ed
oe
nla called Mudgala the PT iy stato
lamente
he has go"

COLA (M)
Vaikuntha. It was due to his true devotion to God
that he has attained salvation, What we have done
is of no use.” So saying he crowned his nephew as
King. Even while young he had become an ascetic and as
such had no sons.
the nephew as King became a precedent in Cola.
Renouncing the kingdom Cola went to the sacrificial
hall and circling the sacrificial fire stood before it and
addressing Mukunda said “Oh Visnu, grant me unwavering devotion to you in thought, speech and deed.”
Repeating this three times the king jumped into the
fire. At this Mudgala, the priest, burst into anger and
tore off the lock of hair on his head. So even today
the deceridants of Mudgala do_ not have hair-locks.
Visnu who is always affectionate to his-devotees graciously appeared from the sacrificial fire and embraced
the King. The King was then taken to Vaikuntha.
(Chapters 110, 111, Padma Purana).
COLA (M). The three celebrated kingdoms of SouthIndia of old were Cola, Pandya and Cera. References
to these will be found in many places in the Puranas
and a few are given below Li.
1) Among those present for the svayamvara of Rukmin!
were the Kings of Goa, Pandya and Kerala.
2) Descending in order from ‘Turvasu were Varga—
_ Karandhama — Marutta —
Gobhanu — Traisani Ma
Dusyanta — Varatha — Gandira. From Gandira were
born the people of Kerala, Pandya and Cola.
C ; Purana).
eae Oi ot — the King of Cola.
the army of
Sabha Parva
ifts to
3) Arjuna conquered
(Sloka 21, Chapter ).
Dharmaputra.
3 formed
5)When during the great rst
the i tioaty abe the soldiers from Cola guarded the
southern wing. (Sloka 60, Chapter 9, Bhisma ae
6) Sri Krsna once conquered, the _ of Cola. (Sloxa
17, Chapter 11, Drona arva). _
COURAS. A set of Ksatriyas who became Sadras by
¢ the brahmins. - |
Pinclyes Pend gah Sirakhyas, Latas, Dravidas, ee
Couras Darvas 4s, Saundis, Sabaras, Ar oa
Kiratas and Yavanas were all Ksatriyas but were turn
int U a curse Of the brahmins.
oe sk Pl cp oastl tribe of south toni
were aborigines older than the Mahabharata in OFl§
(Sloka 42, Chaptet 207, Santi Parva); tin, (Gloka
CUCUKA (M). A place in ancient south India.
ae eR LO; ee ay: nyasi in a tale
CUDAKARNA. The characte? of a Sanny
in Pajicatantra.
CUDALA.. The saintly wife of King S
once Sikhidhvaja renounced his ae a ee, |
the forests, his wife g2v° im be a
jfiana and brought him back to 7
/7, Yogavasistha ). _
CUDAMA:. I. See_under Sita.
CULI. A sage. Once Somada, ©
women Urmila, looked after this
with her service he asked her W cali g
Somada asked for a son y him. a
tual son of his and the boy was
This Brahmadatta married the
daughters of Kuganabha. ala
yana ).
ikhidhvaja- When
dom and went to
‘1 Atma-
(Chapter
hter of a andharva
-—* and well please
hat she wanted an
ave her a Spit
Brahmadatta.
-ed hunch-backed
From that time the crowning of
189 CYAVANA
People of ancient Bharata’ used
CULUKA. A river.
(Sloka 20, Chapter
to drink the water of this river.
9, Bhisma Parva).
CUNCU. A King of the Hehaya line of kings. He was
the grandson of Rohitasva and son of Harita. King
pay ‘ the son of Cuficu. (Brahmanda Purana, Chapter 16.
CURAYKKA. While emperor Prthu was ruling the
earth it was once transformed into a cow and milked.
Each got a different substance and what the Nagas got
was poison. They milked the poison into a pot-like
Curaykka. :
CUTU. (Dice). Itis an imaginative pauranic assumption that there isa satanic force latent in dice, hunting,
wine and women. There is a story to support the presence of this evil power within the above four. Indra
once turned the Aévinidevas out of his court labelling
them as outcastes and banned wine to them. Discontented at this the Agvinidevas approached Cyavana and
the latter performing a yaga invited the Aévinidevas and
gave them the yaga wine, ‘Soma’. Infuriated at this
Indra raised his celebrated Vajrayudha (Weapon of
thunder) to kill Cyavana. But the sage by his yogic
powers paralysed the hands of Indra and instantly from
the sacrificial fire there arose Mada a genie to kill Indra,
Frightened by this sight Indra fell at the feet of Cyavana
and craved for pardon. The sage then tore the genie into
four pieces and threw one each into dice, hunting, wine
and women. That is why all the four are as alluring as
destructive. (Saptama Skandha, Devi Bhagavata).
CYAVANA. A.celebrated sage of the Bhargava dynasty.
1) Genealogy. Descending in order from Brahma—
Bhrgu—CGyavana.
9) Birth. Bhrgu is the son of Brahma born of Agni at the
Brahmayajfia conducted by Varuna. The beautiful and
virtuous lady Puloma was the wife of Bhrgu. Even before Bhrgu married her she was being loved by the demon
Puloma and her marriage with Bhrgu embittered him
and he waited for an opportunity to kidnap Puloma.
One day when Bhrgu went to the river for his bath
Puloma entered the asrama and there he found his love
Puloma being watched over by Agni. Puloma compelled
Agni to tell him the truth whether Bhrgu had married
Puloma. according to the rites enjoined by the scriptures.
Agni confessed that it was not so and then Puloma
taking the shape of a hog carried away Puloma who was
then ina stage of advanced pregnancy. On the way the
wife of the sage delivered and the babe dropped to the
ground. Because the babe was born with a fall (Cyavana)
from the womb the boy was named Cyavana. The
radiance of the boy burnt the demon into ashes. Puloma
weeping profusely with tears rolling down her cheeks
returned to the asrama. Her tears ran into a river and the
river got the name Vadhisara Bhrgu on knowing how all
happened cursed Agni saying that Agni would thereafter
be an all-round eater. (eating anything and everything).
(Chapters 5 and 6, Adi Parva).
3) Penance and marriage. Even when he was very
young CGyavana commenced practising austerities.
He went to the forests and sat in meditation without food
or sleep, oblivious to what happened outside. Years went
by, and Cyavana did not stir from his place. Gradually
earth began to cover him and soon he was completely
enveloped by earth. Creepers grew on it and birds made
rests; Cyavana did not know anything about it.

190 CYAVANA
CYAVANA
One day Saryati with his wives and children came to
that forest for a picnic. Sukanya, daughter of King
Saryati, along with her companions separated from the
King and roamed about in the forest making merry.
They soon came to the place where Cyavana sat doing
penance. There was an unusual radiance around the
heap of earth they saw there and Sukanya out of curiosity
started striking down the earth. Then from inside came
Cyavana’s voice advising her not to crumble down the
- earth as she was doing. Sukanya ignored the advice and
searched for the source of the voice. She then saw two
points of glow and taking a thorn gave two pricks at
those points and left the place with her companions.
Those glow-points were the eyes of Gyavana and Cyavana felt insufferable pain when his eyes were thus pierced
through. But he neither became angry nor cursed the
girl who did this havoc. Cyavana went on with his
penance. But soon the country of Saryati began to experience the bad effects of this evil-deed. People one by one
in the beginning and then the whole lot were disabled
from passing either urine or faeces. From men and
women the disease spread to the animals also. The country
was in a chaos and the subjects flocked to the palace to
complain to the King. Saryati knew that somebody must
have in a some way tormented Cyavana and enquired
of each and everyone of his subjects. Whether anybody
had knowingly or unknowingly given pain to Cyavana.
Nobody had done so and the King was worried. Then
Sukanya ran to her father and confessed what she had
done. The King ran immediately to the place where
Cyavana was doing penance and striking down the earth
prostrated before the sage who was sitting there sad and
miserable. The King apologised to Cyavanaand requested him to pardon his daughter.
Cyavana then told the King that it was enough if he
gave his daughter in marriage to him in expiation of the
harm done. The King was shocked to hear this for
Cyavana was not only ugly but now blind also. The
King returned to the palace sad and worried and there
was gloom over the whole palace. But Sukanya approached her father and agreed to be the wife of Gyavana.
The problem was solved and the King with great reluctance took his daughter to the forests and gave her in
marriage to Cyavana.
4) Cyavana attains eternal youth. It was the time when
Indra had banned Somap4ana (drinking of the yaga wine)
to the Aégvinidevas. Discontented at this they roamed
about in the forests and soon came to the neighbourhood
of the asrama of Cyavana.
Sukanya after becoming the wife of Cyavana did all she
could to make her husband comfortable and happy.
She would collect very sweet and tasty fruit from the
forests and give him. She would bathe him in hot water.
After arranging all the materials needed for the morning
rites like yava, sesame, darbha and water, she would
take her husband to the place ofthe puja leading him
by hand. When the morning paja was over she would
seat him in a suitable place and give him rice and fruits.
After the meals she would give him pan to chew. Only
after doing all these would she go to do her daily rites
and that too only after obtaining her husband's permission. She would finish her routine in no time to come
back to her husband to see whether he was in need of
anything. Then she would make arrangements for the
evening puja and after the puja was over she would give
him his dinner. She would eat only what was left by
her husband. At night she would spread a soft bedding’
and lull him to sleep. Then she would take a nap lying
at the foot of her husband. During summer she wou
fan him and during winter she would make fire to give
him heat. Early morning she would take him to a dlistant place for his excretion and after washing him woul
seat him in a suitable place for cleaning his teeth an
face. Then the routine would start with great devotiop
again. ; . | ; eae te
One day Sukanya was returning from the river alter
bath and on the way she came across the Asvinideva’:
They were astounded to see such a beautiful damsel .
the forest and they accosted her and requested sale
select onc of them as her husband. Knowing her identity
they advised her to forsake her old and blind husband an
come and live with one of them. She flew into 2 | se
when she heard her husband spoken of so slighting ¥
and by logical argument convinced them the oe os
their request. Then they told her thus: “You are At
we are the physicians of the devas. We can give tif!
eyesight to your husband and make him as pee
as one of us. We will then appear before you — you
lovely young men identical in appearance roll “ y,
must select one among the three as your husbant:
Sukanya was immensely pleased as well as surprise
hear the offer and was eager to sce her husban i
and beautiful. But the last condition ee het
Anyhow she promised to give a reply after scours _ he
husband and ran to the asrama to tell her — “a the
news. Cyavana advised her to accept the cyinidev®
Agvinidevas and Sukanya ran back to the h ‘ terms
and brought them to her husband accepung t om alon8
The Aégvinidevas took the aged and blind Sr ed into
with them to the river nearby and the three P tie ee!”
the river. When they rose up after a dip on tecilt to ie
ged as young, lovely and charming triplets ae 0
distinguished from one another. When a = yed 19
before the three to select her real husband she P". ontify
her goddess and the Devi gave her the power tO pre’
Cyavard and so she correctly chose him from te
(Saptama Skandha, Devi Bhagavata). e
5) Cyavana defeated Indra. Immense'y
gaining his eyesight and youth Cyavana ill
devas what they wanted. The Agvinl suld lik
Indra had banned wine to them and they W mn meds ne
have the ban lifted. Gyavana | ahars! ote 4 al t
commenced a Somayaga to which were 3” “ira saw 4s
devas and the Aésvinidevas also. ine BE w
Aévinidevas standing to partake of the soma en to h
furious and objected to the wine being orn indr2,™ 40
Cyavana dissented and a fight ensued be rrayud
Cyavana. Indra raised his weapon fs i c |i?
strike at Cyavana and then Cyavana ma Grea
go stiff. He then raised ie hay sacrificia
demon called Mada to kill the ¢evas- away’ iin
were frightened by this demon and they a stand
Indra could not run for his limbs were = for he!P dr?
there he prayed to. his preceptor Brhasp qvana-- €
Brhaspati advised Indra to surrender to d po
bowed his head before Cyavana am a dice?
cused. Cyavana was pleased and withdra - : to 5
tore him into four pieces and threw one ~d
Hunting, Wine and Women. The devas “Sk on
then went back to heaven. (Saptama
devas replie' tO,

CYAVANASRAMA
Bhagavata. Rgveda, Mandala 1, Anuvaka 17, Sukta
116; Chapter 123, Vana Parva).
6) Other details.
(1) Parasurima once came and stayed at the 4srama of
Cyavana. At that time Bhrgu and Cyavana were in the
asrama. lhey blessed him and advised him to go [0
Kailasa and do penance there to propitiate Siva. It was
thus that Parafurama happened to go to Kailasa to do
penance there. (Brahmanda Purana, Chapter 62).
(2) Cyavana got a son named Pramati. This Pramati
was the father of Ruru and the
(Chapter 5, Adi Parva).
(3) Cyavana married Arusi daughter of Manu. Aurva
was the son born to Arusi from her thigh. In descending
order from Aurva were born Reika—Jamadagni—
Paragurama. (Chapter 66, Adi Parva).
(4) Astika learnt Sanga Vedas from the asrama
of Cyavana. (Chapter 48, Adi Parva).
(5) Cyavana was the guru of Bhisma. (Sloka 11,
Chapter 37, Santi Parva).
(6) King Yuvanasva once went to the agrama of Cyavana
greatly worried over the lack of a descendant. Cyavana
prepared some sacred water made potent with the recital
of mantras to induce gestation and kept it there. Accidentally the King drank that water and got pregnant.
The pregnancy developed without miscarriage and in due
time the King gave birth to a child, the left side of his
Stomach bursting forth to push out the child. It was this
child who became Mandhata. (Chapter 126, Vana
Parva).
(7) Cyavana was 2 brilliant member of the court of
Brahma. (Sloka 11, Chapter 92, Santi Parva).
(8) Cyavana went to Patala (nether-world).
Kekaralohita). ;
(9) Once the august V edasarma 0
to the agrama of Cyavana lost in thou
ved hi it d enquired about the reason
ne “— ‘old him that the lack ofa
for his sorrow. Vedasarma :s
son worried him much. Cyavan? oi — Saeed
assured him of a child soon. (Chapter on me and she
(10) Cyavana had a daughter named a ter 14,
was married to a sage called Somasarma- (Ghap
Padma Purana).
CYAVANASRAMA. 4 sacred P
of Kas iraja, used to bathe ina po”
Chapter 186, Udyoga Parva):
CYAVANASAROVARAM.
ed that this is the best
(spirits of the dead). ( loka 11,
Pp arva).
(See under
f Kaugikagotra went
ght. Cyavana recelr
lace. Amba, daughter
d nearby: (Sloka 26;
ce. It 1s believPitrs
Vana
D
D. (=) This letter means (1
_ or fear (trasa). ; :
DA. This syllable means ruin. (Ag™ Pu
) Rudra gad (2) temer
rana, Chap ter
348). ‘*n the RgDABHITI. A hermit who 3s praise rea i, Anuvaka
veda. It is mentioned in Rgvedas ha ed Turvill,
16, Sakta 112, that the AS yinidevas |
Dabhiti, Dhvasanti an Purusantts
from a danger.
DADHICA. (DADHICI).
1) Birth.
Mahabharata,
this hermit was the son ©
A js ma
A famous hermit. Mention. anza 83,
Salya Parva, Chapters? nit
f the great herm
grandfather of Sunaka. |
DADHICA (M)
that he was made of the essences of the world, witha
huge body.
2) The birth of the hermit Sarasvata, Dadhica erected his
hermitage on the bank of the river Sarasvati and began
todo penance, ‘The power of penance increased daily.
Seeing this Indra was flurried. So he sent the celestial
maid Alambusa to break the penance of Dadhica somehow or other. Alarhbusa came to the hermitage of
Dadhica and began to dance and sing. When the hermit
caw her he grew lustful and seminal discharge occurred
to him. The semen fell in the river Sarasvati, who became pregnant and in due course gave birth to a child.
She took the child to the hermit Dadhica and told him
the story of the child. The hermit was much pleased.
He took the child and embraced it and blessed the river
Sarasvati thus :—
“Brahma, the gods and the celestial maids will be pleased
if your water is offered as: oblation.”’
Dadhici then said that the child should be named Sarasvata. He also added that when there was a drought continuously for twelve years, Sarasvata would have the
power to bring rain. Then Sarasvati took the child to
her abode and brought it up. ,
3) How he destroyed the asuras with the head of a horse. Once
Dadhici went to the world of the devas (gods).
From there he looked down and saw the earth filled. with
the asuras. Indra went to destroy them. But he could
not. So he made a search for anything left behind by
Dadhica. He understood that Dadhica had with him
the head of a horse. It was found in a lake in the country
of Saranya. With the bones taken from that head Indra
and Dadhica destroyed a large number of asuras.
(Rgveda, Mandala 1, Anuvaka 13, Sukta 84).
4) The weapon (Vajra) of Indra was made from a bone.
A story occurs in the Mahabharata, which says that the
Diamond-weapon of Indra was made of a bone of
Dadhici. The asuras went to fight with Indra under the
leadership of Vrttrasura. Indra tried his utmost to kill
Vritrasura, but he could not. At last Indra approached
Brahma, who told Indra that if a bone of the hermit,
called Dadhica was obtained it could effectively be used
against Vrtra. Accordingly Indra went with Nara
and Narayana to the banks of the river Sarasvati and ~
entered the hermitage and bowed before the shining
hermit Dadhica and informed him of their errand. The
hermit replied that he had no objectionin giving his
bone to save the gods. Saying thus the hermit discarded
his life. Indra took the bone of Dadhici and made his
weapon of Diamond (Vajra) with which he killed Vrtra
and _ his followers. (Mahabharata, Chapter 100).
5) Other information
4 ) At the sacrifice of Daksa, Dadhici got angry because
(M.B. Santi
iva was not given his dues of the sacrifice.
Parva, Chapter 284).
(2) Once Dadhici talked to a Brahmin called Karuna
about the importance of the ashes dedicated to Siva.
(Padma Purana, Chapter 101).
3) See Dhanafijaya V to know how this hermit gave
absolution from curse to a fly.
D ADHICA (M). A holy place in Kuruksetra. Angiras
the son of Sarasvati was born in this place. From that
day onwards this place became a holy place. It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 83
Stanza 186 that he who bathes in this holy place will

DADHIMANDODAKA
obtain the fruits of performing the sacrifice ASvamedha,
and enter the world of Sarasvati.
DADHIMANDODAKA. An ocean. This ocean 1s near the
ocean Ghrtoda samudra (Mahabharata, Bhisma Parva,
Chapter: 12, Stanza 2).
DADHIMUKHA I. A famous serpent, born to KaSyapa
prajapati by his wife Kadri. (Mahabharata, Adi
Parva, Chapter 35, Stanza 8).
DADHIMUKHA II. A famous monkey. This old mon-
» key was the general of a huge monkey-army. It is
mentioned in Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter
983, Stanza 7 that this general approached Sri Rama
once, with his army.
DADHIVAHANA. An ancient king of Bharata. The
hermit Gautama saved the son of this King from the
attack of Paragurama (Mahabharata, Santi Parva,
Chapter 49, Stanza 8).
DADHIVAKTRA. A monkey who helped Sri Rama.
It is seen in Adhyatma Ramayana, Sundara Kanda,
Sarga 5, as follows :—
‘“Dadhimukhah Kruddhasugrivasya matulah”. From
this it is understood that Dadhimukha or Dadhivaktra was the uncle of Sugriva. (For further information see Madhuvana).
DADHYAN.! A hermit. Once Indra_ taught this
hermit Madhuvidya (the art of mead) Indra told the
hermit that his head would be cut off if he taught anybody this art. The Aésvinidevas approached Dadhyan
to learn this art. Fearing Indra the hermit refused to
teach them the art. Agvinidevas cut off his head and
buried it in a place. Then they cut off the head of a
horse and fixed it on the neck of Dadhyan. Having
the head of the horse he taught the art to the Aévinidevas. When Dadhyan had finished teaching, they
took away the head of the horse and fixed his own
head in place. (Rgveda, Mandala I, Anuviaka, 17,
Sikta 166).
DAHA I. One of the eleven Rudras. He was the grand-
- son of Brahma and the son of Sthanu. (Mahabharata,
Adi- Parva, Chapter 66, Stanza 3).
DAHA II. An attendant given to Subrahmanya by
Arhéa, a god. (Mahabharata, Salya Parva, Chapter
45, Stanza 34).
DAHADAHA. . An attendant of Subrahmanya. (Mahabharata, Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Stanza 20).
DAHATI. A warrior given to Subrahmanya by god
Améa. Mention is made about this warrior in Mahabharata, Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Stanza 34.
DAIVA I. Almighty God. (See [gvara).
DAIVA II. A kind of marriage. The form of marriage
by which one gives his daughter to a priest. (See
Vivaha ).
DAIVALIKA. A country. Mention is made in Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter 52, Stanza 18, that
the King and the people of Daivalika were present
on the occasion of the sacrifice of Rajasiiya (imperial
consecration) of Yudhisthira.
DAIVASAMPATTI. The virtues
born of a noble family.
“He Bharata ! Security, knowledge of tattvas the desire
of those who are
1The stories regarding the
tioned as the son of Bhrgu, and in Reveda it occurs that
Moreover the story of Dadhyan teaching the A $vinidevas t
Some statements in the Rgveda make it difficult to assume t
onthe majority of statements in the various puranas this book has accepted the fact that tbese hermits are separate P
ho taught Madhuvidya to the Agvinidevas was Dadhyan.
Dadhici was the son of Bhrgu whereas the hermit w
DAITYADIPA.
DAKINI.
DAKSA.
two hermits Dadhici and Dadhyan in the Puranas are not very clcar.
Dadhica was the son of Hermit Atharva who was the son eher pit ag
re t
th?
he ‘Madhuvidya’ is connected with D
hat both Dadhyan and Dadhici are one an
DAKSA
to attain harmony with the Supreme Being by the knowledge of Brahman, alms-giving, self restraint, performing sacrifice, self-study, penance, sincerity, truth, liberality, continence, kindness, mildness, modesty, resolution, cleanliness, forgiveness, brightness, abstaining
from committing murder and getting angry, having
no malignity, covetousness, fickleness and pride and
not injuring others are the Daivasampatti or g00
qualities of a noble man.” (M.B. Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 40).
One of the sons of Garuda. Mention
is made about Daityadipa in Mahabharata, Udyoga
Parva, Chapter 101, Stanza 11.
DAITYASENA. Sister of Devasena, the wife of Subrahmanya. Kegi, an asura, married her. (For detaile
story, see Devasena). -
A class of women supposed to be proficien
in magic and the performance of feats with the help
of mantras. (See Ksuraka).
In most of the Puranas reference?
about two Daksas occur. In some puranas both are
referred to as one and the same person, whereas 1)
some others both are considered as scparate persons;
1) Two Daksas.
so much so the stories concerning both are ing
C often. The fact is that there 7)
and entangled very oft ee at
only one Daksa, whose life was of two acu’ h point,
Daksa was killed at the sacrifice of Daksa, at whic ee.
ends the first stage, or the first Daksa. The second S ;
was the rebirth of the same Daksa. A short biograPp
of Daksa including both stages is given below -~,
) S ‘ . reat hermits;
Brahma created by his mind, the aie g Plana. 2
Marici, Angiras, Atri, Pulastya, Vasistha, Fuie’t .
aricl ngira ty Ned the Man asa
Kratu. So these seven hermits are calice _
putras (sons born from mind) of Brahma. Afte ot
from the anger of Brahma, Rudra was born, an from
his lap Narada, from his right thumb Dak«a,
hjs mind the Sanakas and from his left thumb
named Virani were born.
Virani nama tasya stu
asiknityapi sattama mee
From this are which occurs in Kalika Purr of
may be assumed _ that ‘Asikni? was another Ran dhy2
Virani. Daksa did penance in the mountain © Skandh@
for a long time. It is mentioned in Bhagavata, ve
8, that Mahavisnu appeared before Daksa 4”
him ‘Asikni as his wife. eT, AsikniSeveral sons were born to Daksa by his wit peca™
The last one was a daughter named Sati wM? orifice”
the wife of Siva. At this time Daksa performed a
As he was not invited to that sacrifice, Thou h
Virabhadra and Bhadrakali and killed Daksa. 7. Jost
the devas put the head of a goat 1n place * peferen’
head and brought Daksa to life again, 10, nal Th
is made about the life of Daksa after the sonal Bhas*
the first stage of the life of Daksa ends. De .)
vata, Skandha 7). ' aris?
After this, once the Pracetases (the ten sons nil rO
: d the earth was | ree”
were engaged in penance an ig
perly cultivated in consequence of whic a #8 jel
In Maha bharata Dadin® a pasion
te
adhici in some
the same ersone
d th P ersons a,

DAKSA
grew up and the whole of the earth was changed into
a big forest. The sky was covered with tree tops. It
was difficult even for the wind to pass through them
and thus the forest thrived for ten thousand years. The
pracetases got out of the sea after penance and entered
the shore. When they saw the big forest they got angry
and the ten of them discharged fire and wind from
their faces. The wind up-rooted the trees and the fire
dried them. Thus almost the whole of the trees were
consumed, Then Candra, the King of the medicinal
herbs came there and told the Pracetases “Oh, Kings,
hold your anger. I will make the trees conclude a
treaty with you. The beautiful Marisa who was born
to the trees is my foster-daughter. I give her to you
as your wife. From half the portion of your minds
and half the portion of my mind the great and wise
prajapati Daksa 1s going to take birth in her womb”.
The Pracetases controlled their anger and accepted
Marisa as their wife, at the words of Somadeva (Candra )
and ay thé som of the ten -pracelss the Prajapati Daksa
was born, With this the second stage of the life of Daksa
begins. The important occurrences in the two stages
of the life of Daksa are given below in their order.
Once Brahma
2) Daksa’s creation of the prajas or subjects.
called Daksa and ordered him to create prajas or’ subjects. Accordingly Daksa created the gods, the hermits,
the Gandharvas (Demi-gods) ,the Asuras, the serpents
etc. Seeing that the subjects he created were not proliferating as required he thought of creating subjects
by coition of male and female; and he begot by his
wife Asikni five thousand sons, and they were called
Haryasvas. They in their turn were about to create
subjects when Narada appeared before them and said
“Oh, Haryasvas, mere children and ignorant
of the secrets of this world. How do you intend to
create subjects ! a ee ‘ole
and_ breadthwise,
to go up an re
wily ion’ you try to find out Ser - a
is he words of Narada, they @™.
?— age not returned since.
in different directions and have
Thus Daksa lost the
Daksa again begot
thousand sons by Asikni and they were called anes
Seeing that they also were about to ge ae Moe
Narada scattered them also, by aoe : oe oe
Sabalagvas who had gone to see the end 0
have not yet returned.
Daksa got angry with Nara eee
“You also, like ™Y children andetiey onwards
to place all over the earth - From
Narada became 4 wanderer, :
place. The wise Prajapati “4
d tS Ten of the gizls WO” ay
amsels by Asikni them to KasyaPas ow
sed him thus :
deva, thirteen 9°
bs
them to Soma, and four of Ee ot tw
the rest two were given © vie ames of the wives
and two to the wise Krsasvan below Khasa,
of each are given ©” Dari
Aditi ard, Krodhavasa, ra;
2 Yami, Lamba ;
Arundhat, pa, Mubiirt@
Sankalp
(1) KaSspapa.
Surabhi, Vinata,
Muni.
(2) Dharmadeva.
Bhanu, Marutvatt,
Vis va. . Krttika, Rohini, M
(3), Soma. Aésvayuk, Bharat» | vasu, Pusyam,
§iras, Tarakam (Ardra); ‘
193 DAKSA
sam, Janakam, Phalguni, Uttara haleunam
Citra, Svati, Vigakham: Anuradha, Crests Mae
Purvasadham, Uttarasadham, Srona, Sravistha, piacetas.
Purvaprosthapadam, Uttaraprosthapadam, Revati.
The names of the wives given to Angiras, Aristanem)
Bahuputra and Kréasva are not mentioned.
Besides these damsels, twentyfour daughters were born
to Daksa of his wife Prasuti who was the sister of Uttanapada. Dharmadeva married thirteen of them also, named
Re vaba, Laksmi, Dhrti, Tusti, Medha, Pusti, Kriya
Buddhi, Lajja, Vapus, Santi, Siddhi, Kirti. Of ‘the rest,
Khyati was given to Bhrgu, Sati to Siva, Sarnbhiti to
Marici, Smrti to Angiras, Priti to Pulastya, Ksama
to Pulaha, Santati to Kratu, Anasuya to Atri Orja
to Vasistha, Svaha to Agnideva and Svadha to the
Manes. (Visnu Purana, Arméa 1, Chapter 15).
3) Sacrefice of Daksa. Once Daksa performed a sacrifice called Brhaspatisavana. To this sacrifice he did not
invite his daughter Sati or her husband Siva. Daksa
did not invite them because of three reasons accordin
to the Puranas. 5
1) Once Durvasas, the son of Atri; went to Jambinada
and meditated with the mantra or spell of ‘Mayabija’
and worshipped Jagadambika (mother of the
world) the goddess there. The goddess was much pleased and gave him as a token of her pleasure the garland
of flowers she wore from which nectar was oozing
Durvasas wore it on his head and went to the palace of
Daksa, the Prajapati. When he saw sucha wonderful
garland which was not of this world, he wanted to have
it and Durvasas instantly gave it to Daksa. He placed it in
a prominent place in his bedroom and enjoying the
wonderful fragrance of it he conjugated with his wife
and polluted that pure garland by his lust. Siva and his
wife came to know of this and they scolded Daksa, who
kept this bitterness in his heart and when the sacrifice
was performed, , he decided not to invite them. (Devi
Bhagavata, Skandha 7).
(2 Siva was considered as a polluted man by Daksa
as he had always been carrying with him the skull of
Brahma and so he thought it wrong on his part to admit
his daughter and son-in-law to the sacrificial hall. The
story of how Siva came to have the skull, is given below.
In days of old when the whole world was under the
single ocean (of the great flood) the sun, the moon, the
fire, air everything was destroyed and darkness preyailed. All the vegetations were destroyed. All the
emotions and non-emotions disappeared. The supreme
Lord ‘was sleeping for so many thousands of nights
together. At the end of the night he assumed the attribute of ‘Rajoguna’ (activity) and got ready to create
the universe. From the face of the Supreme Lord and
creator of the universes came out Brahma with five faces.
In the same way, ‘va with three eyes and matted hair,
and trident and rosary of beads (Elaeo carpus) and with
attribute of “I'amas’ (darkness—destruction ) also came
out. Both Brahma and Siva were filled with egoism and
both began to quarrel with each other. It was a contest
as to who was greater. The contest ended in attack.
Siva plucked off the fifth head of Brahma, when the
same face, flushed with anger, scolded Siva. The head
fell into the hands of Siva, who could not throw it down
as it didn’t come off from his hand. Brahma cursed
Siva and made him polluted, Since Siva became polluted

194 DAKSINA
DAKSA
his wife Sati also was considered as polluted by Daksa was crowned as the Ki ;
(Vamana Purana, Chapter 2) _ Prthu ) s the King of the subjects. (See under
(3) Once the prajapatis performed a sacrifice. Brahma, (3) It occurs in Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter
Visnu and Siva were present there. Daksa, who had been 11, Stanza 18, that Daksa was a member of the assembly
invited by the prajapatis also was present. When Daksa of Brahma.
entered the hal] his son-in-law Siva did not rise up. (4) Daksa was one of those who visited Bhisma 1n his
Log een of Siva made Daksa angry. Daksa made .bed of arrows. (M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter 47).
up his mind to take vengeance on Siva, and performed (5) Mention is made in Mahabharata, Santi Parva,
a sacrifice known as Brhaspatisavana. To that sacrifice Chapter 166 that the devas, the manes the gandharvas,
he did not invite Siva or Sati. the celestial maids, the Raksasas, animals aad pind’
Hearing that her father was conducting a sacrifice Sati fishes and all living creatures were born from the daughcame uninvited. But Daksa did not even look at her. ters of Daksa. |
Satidevi whose heart was broken at this treatment made DAKSASAVARNI. The name of the ninth Man
a fire and jumped into it and died. Siva became furious During the regime of this Manu, there will be three |
when he came to know of this. Being overwhelmed with classes of devas (gods) called the Parnas, the Marictsorrow and anger he beat his matted hair on the groun d garbhas and the Sudharmans. Fach of these ganas or
from which two monsters, Virabhadra and Biadrdicili, classes will consist of twelve devas or gods. Indra, thet
came out. They ran to Daksa’s sacrificial hall eed des King will be known as Adbhuta. He will be mighty 4”
troyed everything they saw, killed everybody, caught powerful. In that Manvantara (age of the Manu
hold of Daksa and cut off his head. Then they began to Savana, Dyutiman, Bhavya, Vasu, Medhatithi,
create havoc in the whole world. The hermits and Jyotisman and Satya will be the Saptarsis (the seven
sages began to take to flight. Men and animals shivered. hermits) and Dhrtaketu, Diptiketu, Paficahasta, Nut
Thus the three worlds began to tremble with tak, "The maya, Prthugrava and others will be the sons of Man |
gods approached Siva with supplication to curb his Daksasavarni. (Visnu Purana, Amsa J, Chapter |
anger. ‘The gracious Sankara was pleased to recall the DAKSAYANI. Daughter of Daksa. This name is ger |
monsters. After that everybody requested him to bring rally used for all the daughters of Daksa. Occasionally |
Daksa back to life. But the search made for the head of i name is used for the grand daughters of Daks |
also.
y iis
Daksa was futile. At last Brahma took the head of
ad of A HAKSINA. A daughter, born to Prajapati Ruci, p vm
the
goat and joined it to the headless trunk of Daksa. Thus =a :
he was brought to life again.’ (Devi Bhagavaia, Wee Akati. The first Manu was Svayambhuva, ho beSkandha 7). O Brahma. He accepted Sataripa, his sister Me birth
4) Cursing Candra. Candra had married twentyseven se nt = a pa ae two
daughters of Daksa. But he showed particular attach- dauchters Prantl atid Rati OF seek ingle daughte™»
ment to Rohini. -The other twentysix wives could not Praia aia ‘ven tO Braid ti a: and Akati te |
bear this. They made a complaint to their father Daksa. Prajapati Re Akiti nal ne th to twins, 2 son ™ ed |
Daksa called Candra and advised him to show equal Aaa vod day ar vemed Dak ni. O Yaji4 |
attachment to all his wives and not to show any partia- oa ed sons were Santi b ae he were 2 clas° |
lity to anyone. Candra did not gainsay his father-in- of devas (gods) called ned Vamnas ith the mete of Manv
law, but he did not make any change in his disposition. Sva eeatiteon (Visnu Purana, Arhga l hapter )-
After a few days all the daughters except Rohini went Now Daksina is worshi ed - a oddess The § :
to the palace of Daksa and told. him that they were Daksina was reborn nat mail det the na
Bled C oe | git Hin, Tg Sas Daksa got angry and Sugila. At that time she was 4 cowherd woma? al
Pega cursed him to become a sick man friend of Radha. She liked to talk with Sri KEE nt
3 = bennan : O yi to?"
‘fom that day onwards Candra became a patient affec day Raha saw her siting in J yecluded pla whe?
ted with consumption. All the vegetations in the world Suéila saw that Radha had found them out, Se ied
began to weaken. It appeared that the world was came dumbfounded with shame, and sat with Porn
about to be destroyed. So the gods approached Daksa head. Sri Krsna slowly placed Sugila devi own © 40
and requested him to show some leniency towards instantly vanished. The angr Radha cursed Sust yet
Candra. Daksa accordingly called Candra and told become ashes if ever she domed the Goloka again. ya
him that he would be affected by consumption only for a Radha ran about everywhere in causal: 8 yj KEP
fortnight and after that he would recover gradually. but he could not be Poa be
Candra went to Prabhasa tirtha and Sarasvati tirtha and Immediately after the curse, Sugila got dow? from tio”
dipped in water. He began to recover from that day. Goloka and began to worshi ’ Mahalaksmi wit dev fre
It is according to the curse of Daksa that Candra (Moon) and meditati nd P f; t an yow: gs€
4 watie®: MB. Salva P titation an very severe Ias ples:
waxes and W ( ya Parva, Chapter 35). a long time Mahalaksmi appeared to her an alak
her, and Susila became absorbed in a rePie
5) Other information.
( 1) Daksa has another name ‘Kan’. Since the absorption of Susila devi, who W#7. .
Daksa the Prajapati 1S a son of ten fathers. He has of Daksinadevi, in Mahalaksmi, the sacrific view”
two names. They are Daksa and Kan.” (M.B. Santi devas (gods) became fruitless. They were Tr ihe m? 0
Parva, Chapter 908, Stanza 7). 7 They all went to Brahma to find a solution. 2 nil w ,
(2) When the emperor Prthu milked the earth, Daksa was serious Brahma meditated upon vie peat u
1. Though Daksa was brought to life again with the head of a goat there is no mention of him again in the Puranas: °
Daksa again as the son of Marisa,

DAKSINAGNI
became pleased with Brahma and to save the devas, he
attracted Daksinadevi from the body of Mahalaksmi
and gave her as a present to Brahma. Brahma gave that
devi (goddess) to Yajiiapurusa (the god of sacrifice)
so that the sacrifices of gods might become fruitful.
When Yajiiapurusa saw that supernatural beauty he was
overpowered by lust and swooned. The couple spent a
hundred divine years in seclusion enjoying the company
of each other, asa result of which devi became pregnant.
The pregnancy matured in twelve divine years and she
gave birth to a child which was named Phalada. It is
this same Phalada, the son of Yajfiapurusa and Daksina
who awards fruits to all actions. The learned men say
that Yajiiapurusa, Daksinadevi and Phalada divide the
fruits of actions among the doers. (Devi Bhagavata,
Skandha 9).
DAKSINAGNI. A_ strong
Paficajanya. (M.B. Vana
wind born from_ the fire
Parva, Chapter 229, Stanza
DAK SINAKAILASA. Kalahasti, Trisivaperoor and
Trikonamala are known by the name Daksinakailasa.
DAKSI:AMALLA. A country ‘1 ancient India. This
country is called Mallarajya. Its capital was Kusinagara
or Kuginara. In Mahabharata mention is made that
Bhimasena, during his conquest brought this country
under control. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 30).
DAKSINAPANCALA. A place famous [ the Puranas.
This place lies to the south of the Ganges uP to the river
Carmpat. It is mentioned in Mahabharata Sabha Parva,
Chapter 14, Stanza 97, that the King of this country
fled to the south fearing Jarasandha. Paricala lies to the
south and north of the anges. But the country es
divided into two when Drona defeated Drupada the
Afica “mn the part of the
King of Pajicala, and took away from him the p
eounk® north of the Ganges: After that, the part taken
-apanica he part sout
by Drona was called Uttarapaficala and t
of the Ganges was called Daksinapaficala. . A
Dae ASINDHU. A holy place- This ae an bes
re ¢ thern séa. f one visits iS
a al oo han he will get the fruits of performing
sacrifice of Agnistoma, and the es ee of tra
by the aeroplane of the gods. .B.
Chapter 82, Stanza ,
DAKSINATYAS, | feb peop me
L i abharata, ‘
158, cea 0. ed at the time of the composing O° a
Mahabharata, the leader of the Daksinaty
emperor Bhismaka. ;
DALA. The son of King Pariks ve
The mother of Dala was Sugobhana,
King of Mandika. Dala ha
Vana Parva,
.. the dynasty of Iksvaku.
it of — ca jaughter of the
er brother le
an
ala was rl Herm!
Sala. Dala became king when 4 Vana
Se ac mis the priest of a ae o
Parva, Chapter 192). See ue Maharsi of NaimmiDALBHYA (BAKADALBHY* tas ., a story of how thy
sana dace, performed re eal
kingdom in the sacrificial ae imigarany4 app
Long ago some of the sages © - some money:
Dhrtarastra with a reques ba. Lt wae
leader was the sage Dalbhy ey
begged Dhrtarastra for ae ‘nsul
refused to give money, ae
voked at this, Dalbhy began P
roached
Their
DAMANAKA II
which Dhrtarastra’s kingdom was the havis in the form
of sliced meat. This homa was performed in Avakirnamahatirtha at Prthiidaka. As a result of it the kingdom
began to decline. The King was alarmed and consulted
great scholars and astrologers about the cause of the
country’s decline. ‘They told him that the cause of the
disaster was Dalbhya’s homa. Dhrtarastra at once proceeded with rich presents to propitiate Dalbhya at
Avakirnamahiatirtha. Dalbhya was pleased and as
desired by the King, performed homa with milk and
honey and revived all those who had died. (Vamana
Purana, Chapter ate
Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter 4, Verse 11 says
that this Maharsi flourished in Yudhisthira’s assembly.
On another occasion, he is referred to, as coming to
Dyumatsena, the father of Satyavan. At that time, he
comforted Dyumatsena by saying that Satyavan would be
blessed with longevity. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter
DALBHYAM. A holy place in North India. (M.B.
Vana Parva, Chapter 58, Verse 12).
DALBHYAGHOSA. Another name for the holy asrama,
Dalbhyam.
DAMA I. The brother of Damayanti. No other information about Dama is available in the Puranas.
DAMA II. A hermit. He was one of the hermits who
came to visit Bhisma when he was lying on the bed of
arrows. (M.B. Anusasana Parva, Chapter 26, Stanza 4).
DAMA. See Sambara.
DAMA. A female attendant of Subrahmanya. (M.B.
Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Verse 5).
DAMACANDRA. A King. He was a mighty hero anda
friend of Dharmaputra. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter
DAMAGHOSA. The father of SiSupala, the King of
Cedi. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 186, Stanza 86).
DAMANAI. 4 brother of Damayanti. In Mahabharata,
Vana Parva, Chapter 53, Stanza 8 it is mentioned that
King Bhima had a daughter named Damayanti, and
three sons named Dama, Danta and Damana.
DAMANA II. A hermit, Bhima the King of Vidarbha
pleased this hermit, who blessed the King and said that
he would get children. Accordingly the king got Damayanti as his daughter and Dama, Danta and Damana
4s his sons. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 53).
DAMANA III. The son of the King Paurava. Dhrstadyumna killed Damana in the battle of Bharata. (M.B.
Bhisma Parva, Chapter 61, Stanza 20).
DAMANAIV. Ason of Bharadvaja. After the investiture
with the Brahma string (upanayana) Damana started
on a travel. On the way near Amarakantaka he met
with the hermit Garga who talked to him about the
glory of Kasi. Damana who was a secker of spiritual
knowledge, stopped his travel and sat down to do penance
and thus leaving his body he attained heaven. (Skanda
Purana, Chapter 2, 4, 74). |
DAMANAKA I. One of characters in a story, of Paficatantra. (See Mitrabhedam ).
DAMANAKA II. A daitya (asura) Mahavisnu in his
incarnation as Matsya (Matsyavatara ), killed this asura
who was a dweller of the sea. Visnu threw the body of
the -asura into the earth. By the touch of the Lord the
body became fragrant and it was changed to a plant
which is known as (Kozhunnu or Kozhuntu) Damanakam. (Skanda Purana).

DAMANAKAM
DAMANAKAM. The TAtiri tree (Grislea Tomentosa).
The ceremony of worshipping this tree is called Damanakarohanavidhi. The Grislea tree is supposed to be
Bhairava, who had been changed to a tree by the curse
of Siva. A story to this effect occurs in the Puranas.
Bhairava was formed from the anger of Siva. Bhairava,
against the will of Siva, destroyed the devas, and so
Siva cursed him and turned him to a T4tiri tree. It is
called Damanaka because Bhairava tried to do “‘damana’
(restraint or punishment) to the gods.
Bhairava felt sorry at the curse of Siva. He requested
Siva to withdraw the curse. At last Siva had pity on him
and said that all would worship Damanaka tree. The
method of that worship is called Damanakarohanavidhi. It is given below:
This tree should be worshipped on the seventh or thirteenth lunar day. The worshipper ‘should ‘go to the
tree, with those who recite mantras and spells. After
the worship is over the worshipper should say, “O,
Tree, which has originated by the power of Hari, you
come to my presence, On behalf of Siva, and by his
order, I have to take you home.” Saying thus the
tree should be taken home and consecrated in the evening in accordance with the rituals. In the house, the
Sun, Siva and Agni should be evoked and worshipped
and then the root of the tree should be planted in the
Igana (N.E. point) corner of the house and when it
is planted, the spell or incantation of Vamadeva Mantra
or Siromantra should be recited. In the same way
the trunk with the branches of the tree is planted on
the Northern part. The fallen leaves and __ flowers
should be placed on the eastern side. When the root
is planted the following prayer should be uttered :
Amantritosi devesa
pratah kale maya prabho/
Kartavyastapaso labhah
Pairnam sarvam tavajnaya. | /
After that at dawn he should take bath and with oblaof sweet-smelling flowers etc. should worship
tions
(Agni Purana,
Siva. This is Damanakarohanavidhi.
Chapter 80).
DAMAYANTI Daughter of Bhima the King of Vidarbha. The most noble of all the Indian heroines, Dama-
-yanti has secured a place in the literatures of almost
all the languages in the world. The famous hero Nala
is her huband.
1) The background of the story of Nala. During the time
of the forest life of the Pandavas, Arjuna had gone to
Kailasato do penance before Siva for getting divine
weapons. The rest of the Pandavas spent the time
till the arrival of Arjuna, in sorrow and sadness. They
spent miserable days one by one. At that time the hermit Brhadasva visited them. They welcomed the
hermit. In the midst of their conversation Dharmaold the hermit with tears that he was the most
n the world. Hearing this the hermit
told them the story of Nala, to console the Pandavas.
2) The birth of Damayanii. The King Bhima of Vidarbha was childless for a long time. While the King was
spending sorrowful days, as he had no children, a
hermit named Dama reached his palace. The King
welcomed the hermit. Seeing the sorrow of the King the
hermit blessed the King and the queen, and as a result
a daughter named Damayanti and as her brothers
putra t
unhappy man 1
DAMAYANTI
three sons Dama, Danta and Damana were born to
them.
3) The Svayanwara (marriage) of Damayanii. During
this period a son named Nala was born to Virasena the
King of Nisadha. The child was an expert in the game
of dice and he would speak only truth. He grew up
dnd became a_ youth.
Once the swans which came to the palace of Damayanti from Nala, began to praise Nala. They sang
about the glory of Nala. Nala also knew about the
beauty and the other good qualities of Damayant.
Thus they fell in love with each other. Nala also started
for Kundinapuri, the capital city of Vidarbha, to marry
Damayanti. The devas (gods) Indra, Agni, Varuna
and Yama, having heard of the beauty of Damayanti
from Narada, had gone Kundinapuri, to take part
in the marriage. On the way they met Nala. They
were aware of the fact that Damayanti was in love
with Nala. So they called Nala and sent him to Damayanti with a message that Damayanti should et
one of the four gods as her husband. By the boon 0
invisibility, given by the Gods, Nala entered the room
of Damayanti unseen by others and gave the message
to Damayanti. But Damayanti did not agrce to it.
The Gods also entered the nuptial hall and took their
seats in the shape of four Nalas. Damayanti aa
the hall with the nuptial garland in her hands. one
saw five Nalas including the real Nala, and prayed be
the gods to show her the real Nala her lover. 5° ne
devas assumed their real forms and Damayantl ps
the garland on the neck of the real Nala and aenaag
him as her husband. Being much pleased with the a
haviour and character of both Nala and Da EY or
the four gods blessed them. Agni promised to be a
Nala whenever he thought of him. Yama said ‘cal
Nala would always be righteous. Varuna said Ava
Nala would obtain water at the thought of it. ree
blessed him saying that he would get moksa ST a
tely after the completion of a yaga. The gods ag
till the end of the marriage ceremony and then ti
departed. Nala and Damayanti lived in Kundinap
* out
4) The hatred between Kali and Doapara. Hearing, one
the Svayartvara of Damayantl Kali and . P
started for Kundinapuri. On the way they fe martiand the other gods, who were returning from the
; = peg EAE
age of Damayanti. They told Kali and Dvapat? cali
Damayanti had accepted Nala as her husban saying
and Dvapara got angry at this and rena After
that they would destroy the kingdom of Na ‘ody of
that Kali waited for a chance to enter the esi
Nala. After twelve years, once Nala, after Pr:
urine, without washing his legs performe ‘
worship. At that moment Kali entered t. , senses °
Nala. With that Nala became bereft oO i young?
righteousness and duty, and challenged a ongages
brother Puskara to a game of dice. Bae Ha of
Nala in the game of dice. Kali stood 1n ten in the
an ox as helper of Nala. Nala lost his king “efeate?
game. Seeing that her husband was en ce are
continuously, Damayanti sent for the cha a dra
neya and sent her son Indrasena and daug® at Kund ,
sena to Kundinapuri. After leaving the chilere? rel. Af "4
napuri Varsneya engaged himself in 4 ae ya ap
visiting several countries he reac ed Ay?

DAMAYANTI
became the charioteer of King Rtuparna.
) Nala and Damayanti to the forest. Puskara got the
kingdom, wealth and everything that his elder brother,
Nala, had possessed. The miserable Nala left everything he had and clad in only one cloth got out of the
palace. His wife Damayanti followed him. They stayed
outside the city for three days. Puskara made a proclamation that if anybody rendered any help to Nala
he would be ruthlessly put to death. After that Nala stayed there for three more days, with only water for food
and drink. Then he went to the forest. His wife followed
him. They were hungry. Nala saw some golden birds.
Nala wanted to catch them for food. So he took his
only cloth and spread it on the ground. The birds
took that cloth and flew away. Those birds were the
dices used in the game. They were influenced by
Kali. The miserable and hungerstricken Nala asked
his wife Damayanti to go with. the caravan traders
who were going to Avanti and save herself. But she
did not consent to go away from him.
They spent that night in an inn. They both fell asleep
because of weakness. After a time Nala woke up.
He thought that his wife would somehow or other
get to some country closeby and save herself, if he
left her there. So he decided to take half of her cloth.
How to do it without her knowledge ? Thinking a
Walked round the Imm He saw & good sword. He
took. the sword, and cut half ri the cloth of Damayanti
and leaving her in the inn he went awey:
In a short S hile she woke up and missing her husband
she cried aloud and ran here and there mn ers
him. Then she went into the forest crying: ig sna :
3 her. She crie
caught hold of her and began to swallow there. He
aloud. Hearing the Cry; 2 ae a But when
cut the snake open and saved Damayanti.
‘bido and
he saw her he became overpowered a we
tried to make her his wife. She got angry
: is sh
him and he instantly fell down deal Ate eee
began to wander in *
the forest aimless! Rapes
wild animals and fearing them. At ast oe eof Nala.
rock and sat there and. began to wail Awhile she was
6) Damayanti in the kingdom of 3
: traders came
Sitti he k wailing, 4 O
by ‘te my They had been attacked OY a. hier
elephants and were running ae They brought
saw Damayanti. She told them dered through
; She wan
her to the kingdom of Cedi. 5 d the palace
ties tag hile and finally a qa mad wothe country for a W \
of the King Subahu. bef The queer
man the street boys WwW b ys and felt
saw the woman surrounded her to
pity for her. She -sent..her
the palace. Without revealin
ot King Nala, ane Pe
e queen consoled her 40
hnatinad back. She invited per
Palace till she got her hhusba
replied as follows : “Mother, .
there are certain conditions. ‘h
offals of victuals, I won't ™* bey relat
I won’t talk with men who are
anybody hankers after me
killed. Brahmanas may com an
nection. with the searc for ™m
vow.” The queen agree
DAMAYANTI
her the attendant of her daughter Sunanda.
7) Nala in Ayodhyé. Nala filled with sorrow was walking along the forest when he saw a wild fire. From the
midst of the fire somebody was calling Nala by name
and crying. When Nala approached the fire, he saw
the great and famous serpent Karkotaka lying entwined
in the flames. Karkotaka the King of the Nagas had
once deceived Narada, who then cursed him that he
would become stationary in a place like an immovable
thing till Nala came and rescued him. From that day
onwards, Karkotaka was remaining in that forest without moving. Then the forest caught fire. Karkotaka
being unable to move had to remain in the fire. Nala
immediately saved Karkotaka from the fire and with
that he was absolved from the curse of Narada. Karkotaka asked Nala to walk forward, counting the steps.
When Nala counted ten, Karkotaka bit on the leg of
Nala and he became ugly. Then the.serpent said to
the flurried Nala, “Don’t fear. I have made you ugly
so that others may not recognize you. Now you are
ugly because of my poison. But my poison has affected
Kali who is in your body. Because he had harmed
ou who are blameless, he has to suffer for it. So long
as this poison is in you, nobody will harm you. You
must go to Rtuparna the King of Ayodhya and tell
him that you are Bahuka a charioteer. You must give
tuparna the spell ‘Asvahrdaya mantra’ and get
from him the spell ‘Aksahrdayamantra’. After that
you will have reunion with your wife and children.
Here. are two cloths for you. Whenever you want
to get your original form you need only wear them.”
Saying these words Karkotaka gave Nala two divine
arments and then disappeared.
Nala started for Ayedhya. He reached the palace
on the tenth day. There he was employed as the horse
keeper of Rtuparna on a pay of hundred pieces of gold.
Thus he stayed there under the name Bahuka. Varsneya
and Jivala who were the horse-keepers of Rtuparna
upto that time, were placed under Bahuka.
Bahuka used to recite a poem every evening when he
returned from his work.
Weary and worn of hunger and _ thirst,
That poor woman, where might she be ?
Serving whom will she be now.
Thinking of the unlucky fool?
Hearing this song of lamentation everyday, once his
assistant Jivala asked Bahuka, whom he was reciting
the poem about. Bahuka replied : ‘‘Once there was
a man who was a fool. He got a good wife. For some
reason they were separated. The fool is still wandering
about weary and sad in search of his wife.”.
8) Damayanti im Kundinapura. At this time Damayanti was living in the palace of the King of Cedi,
as the maid of princess Sunanda. King Bhima became
very sorry not knowing where Nala and Damayanti
had gone. He sent men in all directions to search for
them. The King: proclaimed that those who found
them would be awarded thousand cows, lands assigned
to Brahmins, and villages. He proclaimed that so
many COWS would be given even to those who could
give any information about them. Hearing this Brahmanas went in all directions and Sudeva, one of them
reached the Kingdom of Cedi. He recognized Tinton.
yanti who was like fire inside the cover of smoke. When
Damayanti was alone Sudeva approached her and

DAMAYANTI
said that he had come from Vidarbha and that he was
a friend of Damayanti’s brother. Damayanti recognized Sudeva and she cried aloud. Sunanda who saw
this scene, told her mother about it. The queen sent
for Sudeva and asked him what the matter was. He
revealed everything about Damayanti, to the queen.
When they heard the story all the women in the harem
cried. Then with tears the queen said, “Hear this,
Damayanti, your mother and myself are the two daughters of Sudama the King of Dasarna. Father gave
your mother to Bhima the King *of Vidarbha and me
to Virabahu the King of Cedi. I have seen you when
you were an infant.”
When the King of Cedi knew everything he sent Damayanti in a palanquin to Vidarbha.
9) The search for Nala. Damayanti told her father
that she didn’t want to live any longer unless Nala
was brought to her. Bhima had been trying hard to
find out Nala.’ One day Parnada one of the numerous
Brahmins who were engaged in the search for Nala,
came to Bhima and said, “while I was wandering from
place to place, 1 happened to reach the palace of Rtuparna the King of Ayodhya. There I made enquiries
about Nala the husband of Damayanti, in the presence of the King. But nobody gave me any answer.
When I returned Bahuka the charioteer of Rtuparna
followed me. An ugly man with short hands, an expert in driving horses, and an excellent cook, he asked
me several questions about Damayanti.”’
When Damayanti heard this she had _ horripilation.
She secretly went to her mother and compelled her
to send Sudeva the Brahmana to Ayodhya. Her mother
consented. She called Sudeva, in the presence of her
mother and told him to go to Ayodhya and tell Rtuparna
that the second svayamvara (marriage) of Damayanti
would take place before sunrise next day and that
he should come earlier. Sudeva instantly went to
Ayodhya.
Rtuparna, hearing the words of Sudeva, wanted
Bahuka to take him in the chariot to Vidarbha within
the period of a day time for the second svayamvara
of Damayanti. Nala consented with a breaking heart.
Immediately they started. Varsneya also got into
the chariot. The chariot flew through the sky with
tremendous speed, to Vidarbha. On the way the upper
garment of the King fell on the ground. He ordered
the chariot to be stopped for taking his upper garment.
Nala said that within that winking time the chariot
had iravelled a yojana (league) and gloried in his
ower of driving horses. Then they saw in the forest
4 Tanni tree (Terminalia bellerica) with fruits. Seeing
the Tanni tree the King said, “O Bahuka, if you are
an expert in horse-driving I am an expert in reckoning.
I will tell you how many leaves and nuts there are
n that Tanni Tree. There are five crores of leaves in
both the branches together and two thousand and
ninetyfive nuts. They stopped the chariot and checked
the tree and found the reckoning of the King correct.
The King had the knowledge of the art called ‘Aksahrdaya’. It was with this art that the king calculated
the number of leaves in. the tree, at one look. Bahuka
drove the chariot with the speed of wind because he had
known the art called ‘Aéyahrdaya’. Then and there,
Bahuka taught the King the art of ‘Agvahrdaya’ and
the King taught Bahuka the art of ‘Aksahrdaya’. The
DAMAYANTI
moment Nala learned Aksahrdaya Kali vomitted
the poison of Karkotaka and got out of the body of
Nala. Long ago, the mother of Indrasena, 4 god, had
cursed Kali and drove him out. Since then Kali had
been living in the body of Nala. As soon as he came
out Kali begged Nala for pardon. Nala curbed his
anger. But Kali was afraid of Nala. So he made the
Tanni tree his abode. Because of that Tanni became
detestable.
Rtuparna, Varsneya and
pura in the evening. Wh
of Nala reached the ears of Damayantl her hear
with joy. The chariot was stopped and Ktuparne
entered the palace. The King Bhima welcome
Rtuparna heartily. As there was no sign of any prepatétion for the svayamvara (marriage) Rtuparna under=
stood that some sort of trick had been played on him.
10) Test of Nala. Damayanti sent her maid air
to Bahuka to watch him. Kegini had a secret Me
with Bahuka. Though Nala did not reveal himse ?
he cried when she talked about Damayantl. Kes1n1
returned to Damayanti and told her what she an
heard and seen. Damayanti became more and ou
convinced that Bahuka was Nala himself So she se
Keéini again to Nala. She discovered the followine
facts about Bahuka, after a keen observation, ®
made a report of them.
1) Bahuka does not stop to pass
door. The upper sill lifts by itself
through.
(2) He gets enough room
a big crowd. —
(3) — pots are filled with water at a look nea hie
(4) When he stretches out a grass to the sun, }
(5) Fire does not burn him even if he touc
(6) When he crushes a flower, it blooms more
ful and fragrant than before. - che
When Keéini said all these facts to Damayan't) ver
became fully convinced that Bahuka was nove . to
han Nala Hinasele Damayanti sent Kes “- aga yan
Bahuka to get some meat cooked by him. Ces ini d
tested the taste of the meat brought by x
che knew that the food was cooke BY i
sent Keéini again to Bahuka with her es pul
ing Indrasena and Indrasena coming to ri ‘hem
ran to them, gathered them and embracet
cried aloud. Then he told Kesini that ne
so because the children were just like his ,
ren. 7 D
11) Reunion. After having tested aa. bes everything
yanti sent Kesini to her mother to te the fact ie.
Bahuka reached Kundinaen the sound of the chariot
t bumpe
through even pass
for him to
n
for him to pass through eve
it. .
and to say that she was convinced O° he
_ at t
Bahuka was none other than Nala and tat she er
rence was only in shape and to reques® “rhe Wi
= 1 rson.
Bahuka 1 Pr with the peor
be permitted to see
all these facts.
informed the King of t
sion of her parents Bahuka was brought “Dpamayaed
: Ww
of Damayanti. The moment Bahuka * was
he began to shed tears. Damayanth © ec?”
sle
— Id him thus *) pis S
with emotion. But she to ad left D4
seen a maf who
>» Who else, but N
‘“Bahuka, have you
ing wife in the forest
and the righteous would discard
loving wife who had been sleeping, W

DAMAYANTI II 199 DANAM
hunger in a lonely place ? Have I done anything
wrong to him in my younger days so that he should
leave me in the forest when I was sleeping ? Leaving
aside real gods I married him. I worshipped, him. I had
children from his blood and, now he has abandoned
me. In the presence of Gods and with fire as witness,
holding my hands he had taken a vow that he would
support and protect me. Where has that vow gone ?\
At these words Bahuka shed tears for a long time:
Then he told her all that had happened to him since
their separation. Damayantt requested Nala, not to
have any misconception regarding the idea of a second
svayamvara; she said to him that she committed no
wrong and that her fidelity and loyalty had undergone
no change. At that time Vayu (the wind-god) in an
etherial voice said ‘‘Damayanti has committed no
sin”. Immediately Nala put on the divine clothes
given by Karkotaka and regained his original form.
Damayanti embraced Nala and cried aloud. The king
her father, mother and the people of the city all ran
to them. -
Next day Rtuparna returned. After a few days Nala
collected an army consisting of three hundred soldiers,
sixteen elephants, fifty horses and a white chariot only,
from Vidarbha and went (to the kingdom of Nisadha.
Reaching there Nala challenged Puskara for a game of
dice. Puskara refused the challenge. Nala took his
sword to cut Puskara into two. Finally Puskara ie
to play. At the first cast of the dice the a on i é
Kingdom of Puskara fe]] into the hands of Nala. Bu
Nale did not kill Puskara; instead, he embraced him.
i 1 hildren reached
Nala became King. Damayanw and the Cc
t country with more happiness
Nisadha. Nala ruled he | —
and prosperity than
ea I The daughter of Pramloca. See
ig A ara. ;
okt tue of the two attendants given by Ean
to Subrahmanya. The other attendant A naa ;
bara. (M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter Any WEISE aerate
DAMBHA. A danava OF asura. als ee ae
Vipracitti an asura born to Kas yap PE ita,
This Darhbha is the father of San ae ae
Darmbha received from their teaches ee Lea
known as the famous Visnumantra an wer pg ee,
tirtha and did penance there for ¥ cee Ss Bott
due to this penance that the son : ie 9)
to him. (Dev! Bhagavata, Skan
DAMBHODBHAVA. See Parasurama, Para-<10, subsection 2. : ;
DAMBHODBHAVA. . ag re ht the whole world
mighty warrior prince. He oe body left to fight
under control. At last” there i be
with. So he walked about chal i him. Then Brahma
with. But none dared to fight W? Narayanas who were
advised him to challenge Nara AY,
doi ce on the northern-™ to GandhaBe the anpenit went ie his mig ayana of his desire
madana and informed ara 4 mere hermits an
to fight. ‘They said that Uy Wut Dasabhodbhava was
that they had no powet on q Narayana took some
not satisfied. Finally <7 mit the emp oe nt an
isika grass and beg mign'y s of the
Though the army of the an in the hand
it could not stand against the §
hermits. Finally the emperor admitted failure and
bowed before the hermits. They advised him not tobe
arrogant in future and to lead a pure life. Hearing the
exhortations of the kermits the emperor became a
devoted man. He returned to his palace and led a life
of righteousness. (M.B. Udyoga Parva, Chapter 96).
DAMI.. A famous holy place. Brahma usually sits in this
place and worships Mahegvara. In Mahabharata,
Vana Parva, Chapter 82, Stanza 72, itis mentioned that
all the sins of those who bathe in this place will be washed
away.
DAMSA. The giant who took birth as the worm ‘Alarkkari’. This giant came in the shape of a beetle and pierced the leg of Karna, the disciple of Paragurama.
Darhéa once kidnapped the wife of Bhrgu, and the hermit
cursed the giant and turned him to a beetle. He also
said that Paramesvara would absolve him from the
curse. (See Karna, Para 4).
DAMODARA. Sri Krsna. When Sri Krsna was a small
boy, Yasoda tied him to a mortar-stone. The boy ran
about, dragging the heavy stone with him and the rope
snapped. Part of the rope still remained round his
abdomen. From that he got the name Damodara.
‘Dama’? means rope and ‘“‘Udara’? means abdomen.
(See Krsna).
DAMO3..I. A sage in the assembly of Yudhisthira.
Once he met $ri Krsna who wason his way to Hastinapura. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 4, Verse 13).
DANADARI. A town in ancient India. (M.B. Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 50, Verse 52).
DANAM. ‘Gift. In ancient India a spiritual significance
was attached to danam. (offering of a free gift). One
who gave water was said to achieve contentment; one
who gave food, eternal happiness; one who gave land
overnment of the country; one who gave gold would
attain longevity; one who gave a house would get
domestic felicity; one who gave silver would get physical
beauty; one who gave clothes would reach candraloka:
one who gave a horse would attain the world of the
Agvinidevas; one who gave bulls would get prosperity;
one who gave Cows would reach siiryaloka; according to
Manusmrti.
Varidastrptimapnoti
Sykhamaksayyamannadah /
Tilapradah prajamistarn
Dipadascaksuruttamam [|
Bhiamido Bhimimapnoti
Dirghamayur hiranyadah /
Grhadogryani vesmani
Ripyado rupamuttamam | /
Vasodaé candrasalokyaMaégvisalokyamasvadah /
Anaduddah Sriyampustam
Godo bradhnasya vistapam /|/
7 (Manusmrti, Chapter 4).
According to Manu, the Acarya, the rewards obtained by
offering the following articles as “Danam’’ are as
follows :—
Articles offered as Danam Reward obtained by data
(giver ).
Vehicle—bed Virtuous wife.
Refuge (shelter ) Prosperity.
Corn Eternal happiness.
Brahmajnana Brahmasayujya.
(See also Naksatrayoga and Merudana).

DANAVA
DANAVA. Ddanavas arethe sons born to Kagyapa Prajapati by his wife Danu and their descendants. (See
under Danu).
DANAYUS. A daughter of Daksaprajapati. Kas yapaprajapati married Danayus. Four sons Viksara, Bala,
Vira and Vrata were born to her. (M.B. Adi Parva,
Chapter 69).
DADA J. A king who was the son of Iksvaku. It 1s
mentioned in Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 67,
Stanza 45, that this King was the rebirth of Krodhahanta, an asura.
1) Birth. Iksvaku had one hundred sons. Of them
Vikuksi, Nimi and Danda were famous. Danda became
a famous archer when he grew up. In the Brahmanda
Purana mention is made that this King Danda took
part in the Devasura battle (Battle between the gods
and the demons) and killed several thousand asuras
(demons ).
2) Administration. The king Iksvaku gave his son
Danda the country between the mountains Himalaya
and Vindhya and anointed him the King of that country. Danda built a capital city known as Madhumatta
and began to rule the country. He had an army of
Caturanga (four parts, elephant, chariot, horse and
infantry). The hermit Samana was the priest of King
Danda. (Uttararamayana).
3) The origin of Dandakaranya (the forest of Dandaka).
Danda once raped Ara, the daughter of hermit Sukra,
who had been doing penance in a forest in the middle
of the country of Danda. Sukra the hermit got angry and
destroyed the country of Danda by a shower of fire.
From that day onwards that country was known as
Dandakaranya. (For further information see under
Ara).
DANDA II.
1) General information. Another Ksatriya King of
ancient India. He was the son of the King Vidanda.
In Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 185, it is mentioned
that Vidanda and Danda had attended Draupadi
Svayarhvara (the marriage of Draupadi).
2\ Other information. (1) Bhimasena defeated the
King Danda. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 307, Stanza
(2) This King Danda was the brother of Dandadhara,
the king of Magadha. Dandadhara and Danda were
killed by Arjuna in battle. (M.B. Karna Parva, Chapter
18, Stanza 16).
DANDA III. An attendant of the Sun. (M.B. Vana
Parva, Chapter 3, Stanza 68).
DANDA IV. .A warrior of the kingdom of Cedi. He
fought on the side of the Pandavas against the Kauravas
and was killed by Karna. (M.B. Karna Parva, Chapter
56, Stanza 49).
DANDA V. A synonym of Mahavisnu. (M.B. Anusasana Parva, Chapter 149, Stanza 105).
DANDA VI (DANDAKA). A thief who had made the
world tremble in the Dvapara yuga. This wicked Dandused to steal the wealth of the Brahmanas, kill
rusted him, speak lies, rape the women of
liquor, eat the flesh of cows, mingle with
e and do various other sinful deeds daily.
ent to a Vaisnavite temple to commit
he reached the steps of the temple he
ich were wet, on the ground and a
hat was there, was levelled by the
aka
those who t
others, drink
wicked peop!
Danda once WwW
robbery. When
wiped his legs wh
small depression t
» making
DANDADHARA I
drawing of his legs. He broke the lock with an iron rod
and entered the temple. Inside the temple he saw Krsna,
clad in yellow robes lying on a beautiful cot, with his
spouse Radha. The thicf instantly howed before the
spouse of Radha. By this act his sins were washed away.
Still impelled by his evil nature, he took the silk garment
of Krsna, spread it on the ground, collected as many
things as he could take, placed them in the garment and
them into a bundle, got out of the temple
with shaky feet. The bundle fell on the ground with a
loud noise. Hearing the noise the neighbours woke up
and looked out. The thief began to run and was bitten
by a poisonous snake and fell down dead. ‘The men 0
Yama (God of death) tied the’ spirit of the thief with a
rope and took him before Yama. Citragupta looke
‘nto his accounts and informed Yama that he ha
committed all the sins. Yama asked if there was any
good deed to his account. Then Citragupta said ‘‘When
this great sinner was going to commit theft in a Varsha
vite temple, at the steps of the temple, he levelled a pit
by the mud on his leg, and that single good deed ~
his part has wiped out all his sins.” Hearing this Lowe
gave him a golden seat and showed hospitality and a
bowed before him and said “‘By the soil on your legs ae
have purified my abode today. I am grateful to | ati
Now you may go to the blissful world of Visnu W ‘his
there are no deaths or births or sorrow”. Hearing ©
Danda entered Vaikuntha. (Padma Purana, Chapter is
DANDA VII. A giant (Raksasa ). This giant me
was born to the giant Sumali, by his wife Ee nr
The nine ministers of Ravana, named Prahasta, ve till
pana, Vikata, Kalakamukha, Dhimraksa, Sup? pers
Samhrada, Prakvata and Bhasakarna were bro
of this Danda. (Uttara Ramayana).
DANDAM J. A divine weapon of Kala
mentioned in Mahabharata, Vana Parva, UP .
Stanza 26 that King Yama had presented this W
to Arjuna. JamD2!
DANDAM II. A holy place on the bank of river Pars of
Those who bathe in this holy place will get the parva
giving a thousand cows as Gift. (M.B. Vana
Chapter 85, Stanza 19). . The four
DANDAM III. One of the four expedients., n King
expedients are Sama, Dana, Bheda and Da ae out
should subdue an enemy by resorting to . 1 qand@
expedients. Of the four expedients, sama a
are considered to be the best.
Samadinamupayanam
Caturnamapi panditah | —
Samadandau prasamsantt
Nityarh rastrabhivrddhaye. | stanza ! id
(Manusmrti, ‘
Wise people say that, of the four expedient
Danda are the most effective for the
country. _ any4
DANDABAHU. A warrior of Subrahmat pa
Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Stanza 73). r Mag? ple
DANDADHARA 1. A. Ksatriya King, °°. avail#
The following information about this King apt
from the Mahabharata. ‘ft OL Be Bick
1) Dandadhara was born as the rebit’ va char
known as Krodhavardhana. (M.B. Adi Pan pie?
67, Stanza 46). of the coma |
2) Bhimasena, during his conquest | prothet
overcame King Dandadhara an am ,

DANDADHARA II
(M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 30, Stanza 17).
3) In the battle between the Pandavas and the Kauravas, Dandadhara fought from the back of an elephant
against the Pandavas. When Dandadhara began to
exterminate the army of the Pandavas, Sri Krsna persuaded Arjuna to fight against Dandadhara, who was
killed in the fight. (M.B. Karna Parva, Chapter 8,
Stanzas 1 to 13).
DANDADHARA II. One of the hundred sons of Dhrtarastra. Bhimasena killed this Dandadhara in the battle
3) Kuruksetra. (M.B. Karna Parva, Chapter 84, Stanza
oe
DANDADHARA III. A king who helped the Pandavas.
Very often the name Maniman also occurs along with
the name of Dandadhara. ‘They might have been brothers or sons of the same father by separate mothers.
In the Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 186, Stanza 7,
mention is made that these two had been present at the
marriage of Draupadi. Dronacarya killed both of them
in the battle of Bharata. (M.B. Karna Parva, Chapter
6, Stanza 13). |
DANDADHARA IV. A warrior born and bred in the
country of Paficala. He kept the rear of the army of
Yudhisthira in the battle of Bharata against the Kauravas. He died by an arrow: of Karna. (M.B. Karna
Parva, Chapter 49, Stanza 27). | "
DANDAGAURI. A celestial maid. When Arjuna visited
devaloka, there was a dance of this woman in honour
of him. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 43, Stanza 29).
DANDAKA. See Danda VI. himself from
A = h saved himse
DANDAKARA. A Bie Te or calle Visnupaficaka.
oing to hell by taking the vow ‘
This Sadra “ane lived in the tretayuge had ‘sae © pace
deal of wicked deeds. Finally he accepted the a ges OF
Brahmanas and performed the vow of Visnupanc
and because of the vow he attained heaven. (Padma
Purana, Chapter 95 Js %
DARD ARARANYA A forest in the elas ag
Valley. For the story of how this place became a &
f der Ara. _ h
ee _— ( 1) This 1s a BO ‘gar ies :
takes bath ia this place would get = s fod at 55,
thousand cows as gilt. (M.B. Vana Farva,
Stanza 41).
(2) During the time of the oe "
his cottage in this forest an ia taal R
It was in this forest that a part O
was cut off and the ! i
who came under the a Ip.
Trigira was completely “™
Marica was killed by 511 Sortie Td = of
the sword of Ravana 1”
(M.B. Vana Parva, Chapters fought on the side
DANDAKETU. A warrior W a the back of
vi . foug Chapter
of the Pandavas. Dandaketu 1, Parva,
an attractive horse. B. Hastie
DANDANITI vt e laws of chastisem ‘te subjects
nit? ig the law of punishment given to the criminal
by Kings of ancient * ja. :
laws of ancient India, fining : alled Prathama Sahasa
and fifty panas (a COM! t
danda {first degree of puna . a
five hundred panas W* ae
Sita was stolen,
atayu died by
Dandakarany?-
DANDAPANTI IT
danda (medium punishment) and fining upto ‘thousand panas was called Uttama Sahasa danda (highest
degree of punishment). If a man complains to
the King that his property is stolen, when actually
it is not stolen, the man will be fined the amount
that is said to have been stolen. There was another
law, that the owner of the stolen property and
the thief would have to pay doubie the amount
they admit, if the amount shown in the complaint
differed from the actual amount stolen. For appearing as false witness, the three classes of non-Brahmins
were punished with fine and if he was a Brahmin he
would have to be cast out of the society. The King
ordered that if one spent the property entrusted with
him for keeping, the owner of the property would
have to be paid double the amount. If one says that
he has given the property for keeping when actually
it is not, the person will have to be punished as if he
were a thief. If a man spends an amount without
knowing that it was the property of others, the man
will have to be acquitted of the charge.
If an artisan has received money in advance for a particular product and fails to give the thing at the stipulated time the King will fine the artisan one svarna.
If a man received money in advance on a promise to
do a particular work and if he fails to do the work he
will be fined one. Krsnala of gold. (One Krsnala
weighs three yavagrains ). If a man conceals his diseases
and marries a damsel, she will be considered as a spinster and the man will be fined two hundred panas.
If a cowherd agrees to look after the cows of another
receiving pay and food and refuses to return the cow
to the owner the King will fine him hundred panas.
Ifa Ksatriya scoffed a Brahmana the fine imposed
would be hundred panas. Ifit is a Vaisya the fine will
be two hundred panas. If it is a Sadra he will be put
to death. If a Brahmin scoffs a Ksatriya the fine is
fifty panas. If a Sudra scoffs a Vaisya the fine is twentyfive panas. If a Brahmin scoffs a Sidra the fine is
only twelve panas. If a Sidra scoffs a Ksatriya his
tongue should be cut off. Ifa Sidra advises a Brahmin,
he may inflict any punishment on the Sidra.
If a Sudra wronged a Brahmin, the Sidra might be
punished by cutting off the organ which was employed
‘nthe crime. Ifone spat ata Brahmin, the two lips of
the culprit might be cut off. If a man passed urine on a
Brahmin the culprit would have his penis cut off. If
, Sadra sits on the seats of the upper classes his buttock will have to be cut off. If one slays cow, elephant
camel or horse half of his limbs will have to be cut
off. Cutting across a road, changing of: boundaries,
making the water of pools and ponds impure etc. will
have to be punished with a fine of two suvarnas. (Agni
Purana, Chapter 227).
DANDAPANT I. A king of the family of Yayati.
This King was the son of Vibhinara and the father
of Nimi. (Bhagavata, Skandha 10).
DANDAPANI II. The son of Paundraka, the King
of Kasi. Sri Krsna _ killed Paundraka. As his son
Dandapani was not powerful enough to kill Sri Krsna,
he performed the sacrifice of Mahesvara yajfia. Being
leased at the sacrifice Siva created Krtya in the
sacrificial fire and sent her to Dvaraka to destroy Sri
Krsna, who aimed his Sudargana cakra (wheel-weapon)
at her. She ran to Varanasi, where the wheel turned

DANDASUKA 202 DARDDURA
a and everybody with her to ashes. (Padma- 5. Asiloma 20. AS vagrivan
= itera, Kanda. Chapter 278). 6. Kesi 21. Stksma
DANDASUKA. A hell. See the para Naraka under 7. Durjaya 22. Tuhunda
Kala. 8. Ayassiras 23. Ekapad
DANDI I. A son of Dhrtaradstra. Mention js made 9. Asvasiras 24. Ekacakra
about him in Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 67, 10. Asvaganku 25. Viripaksa
Stanza 103. Il., Garga 26. Harihara
DANDI II. A god. This god is worshipped as a waiter 12, Amiurdha 27. Nicandra
of the Sun. The sun is consecrated in a chariot of one 13, Vegavan 28. Nikumbha
wheel, yoked with seven horses, and wearing two lotus 14. Ketuman 29. Kapata
flowers. On the rightside of the Sun his waiter Dandi 15. Svarbhanu 30. Sarabha
will be standing as door-keeper with ink and pen in his 16. Agva 31. Salabha
hand, and on the left his waiter Pingala will be stand- 17. Agvapati 32. Surya
ing with a stick in his hand. These two gate-keepers 18. Vrsaparvan 33. Candra.
are the two ganas of the Sun. (Agni Purana, Chap- 19. Ajaka
ter 51). (This sun and the moon (Sdrya and Candra) are not
DANDI III. A famous critic and writer of Sanskrit the planets),
literature. He lived in the 6th century B.C. His criti- From the sons named above ten families of Danavas
cal work Kavyadargfa made him famous. There are (asuras) arose. The founders of the families are mentionthree chapters in this book. The first chapter is about ed below :
criticism of poetry and the use of idioms. The second 1. Ekaksa 6. Tapana
chapter deals with fisurative language. The third 2. Amrtapa , etlee:
chapter deals with alliteration and rhyme and the flaws 3. Pralamba 8. “Mahahanu
In poetry. 4. Naraka J. Garvistha
‘Dagakumaracarita’, is supposed to be another work 5. Vatapi 10. Dirghajihva
of Dandi. (History of Classical Sanskrit Literature). All the danavas or Asuras belong to one of these ten
DANTA. Son of Bhima, King of Vidarbha. This families. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 65).
prince was the brother of Damayanti. (M.B. Vana DANU II. A King. Two sons Rambha and Karambha
Parva, Chapter 53, Verse 9), were born to this king. (See Karambha),
DANTA. An apsaras of Alakapuri. Once she danced DARADA !. King of an ancient country known as Balin honour of the sage Astavakra. (M.B. Anufsasana hika. It is stated in Mahabharata Adi Parva, Chapter 67,
Parva, Chapter 19, Verse 45). Stanza 58 that this King was the incarnation of a portion
DANTADHVAJA. The son of Manu Tamasa. Once of the asura named Sa
Dandadhvaja gave as oblation his flesh and blood earth was cleaved be
in fire, to get children. But it was of no use. So he DARADA II, An ancient country j ja.
put his hair of the body, of the head, his sinews, the The people of this ¢ y Mm North East India
marrow of the bones, and liver and sperm in the fire. is mentioned in Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter 27
When the sperm was put in the fire there was a voice that Arjuna conquered this country durin hi _ uest
‘Don’t’ and with that the king fell dead. And instantly of countries. The Daradas paid tribute a Yudhi shiva:
seven luminous children came out from the fire. They During their forest-life the Pandavas had passed ri ugh
began to cry aloud. Hearing their cry Brahma came the Country of the Daradas. At the hasta “ e ve
there and anointed them as the Maruts (wind gods), Bharata-battle, the Pandavas had sent fon ice , the
They were the maruts of Tamasamanvantara. (Vamana Daradas also. But they fought on the side of the Ranges.
oe eee) _ Mention is made in Mahabharata, Drona Pere Chapter
DANTAVAKTRA I. A Ksatriya king of Kariisa. He was 70, S heal conan a ap a
the rebirth of the daitya (asura) Krodhavaéa. (M.B. country. It is mentioned in Mahabharata Ds : $3 <i
Adi Parva, Chapter 67, Stanza 62). - Chapter 121, that in the battle of Bharata th, ng ari
DANTAVAKTRA II. He was the rebirth of Vijaya, one of attacked Satyaki and that Satyaki killed ¢] e Dara
the two door-keepers of Mahavisnu, Jaya and Vijaya, DARADA IIT. A tribe. At first the them.
(For full particulars see under Jaya). Y were Ksatriyas.
They grew jeal f 5
Dantavaktra was a contemporary king of Sri Krsna. chavioet to 8 jas, (Mn pramanas and so they were
udras, it, $4 ~
Dantavaktra died in nettle ri Krsna and returned Stanza 17), udras. (M.B, Anugasana Parva, Chapter 35,
to Vaikuntha (the abode o Visnu). D AM. A place in _ ;
DANTIMUKHA,. An asura (demon). This asura was rence to this olaee in Mahabharate eyes . ed
* killed in a fight with Subrahmanya. (Skanda Purana, ter 50, Verse 50. ee BEV, ay
Asura Kanda). DARBHI. An ancient hermit This herm; ; ;
t tha
DANUT path) named Ardhakila in Kuruksetra, Peae ane
1) General information. Danu, the daughter of Daksa that anybody who bathed in this place d fasted ld
was married to Kafyapa Prajapati. It js mentioned in ] and fasted cou
earn the mantras (spells and incantations ) and become
a Brahmana, It occurs in the Puranas that the hermit
Darbhi has brought the four oceans
Mahabharata that the Danavas (demons) were born
from Danu.
2) Sons. One hundred sons were nae to Danu. The Vana Parva, Chapter 83, Stanea 34) this bath, (M.B.
following are the important among them. DARDDURA. A ; take : :
Vineet 3. Namuci aes Che deity of thiy mounitaitt
2 Sita 4 Bulema is said to be sitting in the council hall of Kubera
d
of wealth) and worshippi Sees
ng him, according to Maha-

DARI
bharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter 1, Stanza 35.
DARI. A serpent born in the family of Dhrtarastra. This
serpent fell into the sacrificial fire of Janamejaya and was
burnt to death. (Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 97,
Stanza 16).
DARIDRA. A king born in the family of Yayati. He
was the son of Dundubhi and father of Vasu. (Bhagavata, Navama Skandha).
DARPA. A king of the family of Yayati. (Bhagavata,
Skandha 9).
DARSAKA. A country in ancient India. (M.B. Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 9, Stanza 53).
DARUKA I.
1) Sri Krgna’s charioteer. In the Mahabharata, we come
across few persons who excel Daruka in their skill as
chariotcers. We find the following details about him in
the Mahabharata :
1) When Sri Krsna fought against
was over-whelmed by Salva’s arrows.
Chapter 21, Verse 5).
2) At the time of the battle at Kuruksetra, hearing the
sound of Sri Krsna’s conch-shell, Daruka drove his chariot
and brought it before Sri Krsna. (M.B. Drona Parva,
Chapter 147, Verse 45). :
dinnil es t with Karna, Daruka drove
3) When Satyaki fou he proved his extraordiSatyaki’s chariot. At that time
nary skill in charioteering. M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter
147, Verse 54). exis” emis’ ;
4) ‘After salad attended by Daruka, Sri wins ats .
horses flew up into the Heavens. (M.B. Mausala ,
Chapter 3, Verse 5)- 7
9) Ti was Daruka who informed the Pandavas ee
Yaduvaméa had perished. On his return, RE — Sei
ed Arjuna in his journcy to Dvaraka. .B.
Pa ra Vs 7 a
DARURA ILA —— of Mahisasura. ae ber)
vata, Paficama Skandha). For further details a
Daruka, see under Ghantakarna.
DARUKA III. A son of Garuda.
s a reference
4 King Salva, Daruka
(M.B. Vana Parva,
M.B. .Udyoga Parva,
ice to this Daruka .
Chapter 101, Verse 9 contain under Naraka.
DARUNAM, A nara “7 — called Darvam.
DAR iya king - e of
Gpinie “ fas al to whether Darvam Se ec a
a land or of a caste. B. Sabha Parva,
Verse 18). ,
DARVA, A country in Ancient India.
about this country i Mahabh
moe 9, Stanza =
.VADHISARA (5)- .
Drona Parva, Chapter 95; ee om a.
DARVAM. The word Darvas Wi Sa
Class of Ksatriyas. In ape € -
Chapter 52, Stanza 13, it 18 $4! a with a large ee
family had presented Dharmapull
tity of wealth.
VI, Anancient tow
bp epapter 9, Verse 54)
ARVISANKRAMANA.
ention 1s made
Bhisma Parva,
(M.B.
A low. class people.
particular,
4 Parva,
in India (M.B. Bhisma Parva:
nin
Those who
ing the sac!
A holy :
n. (Mahabha-
— . its of
Visit this place will cae a eat he
fice of Agvamedha an wl Stanza
D rata, Vana Parva, Chapter ©” ia
ASA. A country in Ancient Lner
Chapter 9, Stanza 56).
. qa Parve
1. It ds stated in Mahabharata, V4?
DASARATHA
DASA. A term used as a suffix to the name ofa Sidra. In
ancient India the rule was that the proper suffix for a
Brahmin’s name should be ‘Sarma’, for a Ksatriya’s name,
‘Varma’, for a Vaisya’s name, ‘Gupta’ and for a Siidra’s
name, ‘Dasa’. (See under Caturvarnya).
DASADRYU. A hermit. It is mentioned in Rgveda,
Mandala 1, Anuvaka 7, Sikta 33 that DaSadryu was a
valiant hermit.
DASAGRIVA. Ravana. (See under Ravana).
DASAJYOTI. A son of the King Subhrat. Mention is
made about him in Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 1,
Stanza 44.
DASAMALIKA. A ‘country in Bharata. (M.B. Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 9, Stanza 66).
DASAMUKHA RAVANA. Ravana, the enemy of Sri
Rama. (See under Ravana).
DASANANA. See under Ravana.
DASARAJA. Foster-father of Santanu’s wife, Satyavati.
His actual name was Uccaihégravas. For detailed story
see under Satyavati.
DASARAJNA. A great war which took place in India in
ancient times. It was a terrible clash between the Aryans
who lived in Paficanada and the primitive inhabitants
of India, before the Rgveda period. Sudas, the king
was the adversary of the Aryans. Among the relatives of
Sudas were Aryans and non-Aryans. It was the people
under Sudas who got victory in ‘this war. Anyway,
with this war, (DaSarajfia), a new mixed race of people
came into being in North India, which was composed
of the Aryans and the primitive inhabitants of the country.
The Hindus are the descendants of this mixed race.
(Rgveda).
DASARATHA. (Nemi). A famous king of the Iksvaku
dynasty. He was the father of Sri Rama.
1) Genealogy. Descended from Visnu in the following order.
Brahma — Marici — Kasyapa — Vivasvan—Vaivasvata
Manu—Iksvaku—Vikuksi—Sasada— Kakutstha — Anenas—Prthulas va—Prasenajit—Yuvanas va—Mandhata—
Purukutsa—Trasadasyu—Anaranya—Haryasv a— Vasumanas—Sudhanva--Traiyyaruna--Satyavrata (Triganku )
Hariécandra—R ohitas va— Harita— Cuficu — Sudeva—
Bharuka—Bahuka—Sagara—Asamajijas — Amsuman—
Bhagiratha— Srtanabha — Sindhudvipa — Ayutayus—
Rtuparna—Sarvakama—Sudas— Mitrasaha — (Kalmasapada) — Asmaka — Milaka — Khatvanga (Dilipa;
Dirgha bahu )— Raghu—Aja—Daaégratha.
2) Birth. Dagaratha was the son of Aja, of the family
of Iksvaku, born of his wife Indumati.?
3) Dasaratha’s hunt. Once during the early part of his
life Dagaratha was walking through a forest engaged in
hunting. He reached the bank of the river Sarayu.
It was evening and the forest was thick. He walked in
search of wild animals. The night was advancing and
darkness getting thicker. Then he heard a sound from
the river as if an elephant was drinking water. Thinking
it to be an elephant Dagaratha sent an arrow in the
direction from which the sound came. Instantly he heard
4 man crying with pain. The king was disappointed.
He ran to the spot and saw a hermit boy lying in a pool
of blood beating his limbs on the ground and crying.
The waterpot he had been dipping in the water lay
close by. In answer to the questions of the King, the
‘labila, was the name of the mother of Dasaratha.

DASARATHA 204hermit boy whose name was Sravana,' said, “Oh
King ! What wrong have I done? My parents are
sitting thirsty and blind with age, in the hermitage closeby. I, their only son, was dipping the pot to take water
to them, when you sent the arrow at me. So, please take
some water to them in this pot and console them.”
Hearing this, with tears the King drew out the fatal
arrow irom the body of the boy and with that the boy
Sravana said good bye to the world. Dagaratha took
water in the pot and went in search of the hermitage in
the darkness. With difficulty he found out the hermitage
and as he drew near, the aged parents of the boy heard
his footsteps and called him eagerly. The King, with
tearful eyes told them what had happened. There was
loud wailing and crying in the hermitage. According to
their wish the King took them to where their son lay.
Then the King made a fire and placed the dead body
of the boy in it. The aged and blind parents cursed
Dagaratha, ““You also will die of loss of children’’.
Then they also entered the fire and were burnt along
with their son’s dead body. (Valmiki Ramayana, Ayodhya Kanda, Sarga 63).
4) Marriage. Dasaratha had
Kauégalya, Kaikeyi and Sumitra.
5) Kaikeyi given a boon. ‘There was a great battle in the
world of the gods between the asuras and the gods.
According to the request of the devas, Dagaratha went to
the world of the devas to help them. Kaikeyi also went
with Dagaratha. In a severe fight with Sambara, an
asura, Dagaratha fell down unconscious. Kaikeyi took
him away from the battle-field. When he recovered the
King got into the chariot and fought more fiercely than
before. This time the wheel-bolt of one of the wheels of
the chariot of Dagaratha slipped away. Without informing her husband of this danger, Kaikeyi inserted her
finger into the bolt-hole and prevented the wheel from
sliding away. The King won the battle. 'After the battle,
when the King came to know of the services rendered
by Kaikeyi, he promised her two boons. Kaikeyi told
the King that she would ask for them later, when she
needed them. Then they returned to Ayodhya. (Valmiki
Ramayana, Sarga 9, Karhpa Ramayana, Bala Kanda).
6) Administration of Dasaratha. The capital of Dagaratha’s kingdom of Kosala, was Ayodhya. This city was
‘situated on the bank of river Saray. Dagaratha was as
famous in Ayodhya as Indra was in the realm of the
gods. There were palaces in Ayodhya for the kings who
brought tribute to stay. In short, as mentioned in
Valmiki Ramayana, Bala Kanda, Sarga 5, Ayodhya was
the heaven on earth. .
7) Ministers. DaSaratha had eight ministers, Srsti,
ayanta, Vijaya, Siddhartha, Rastravardhana, Agoka,
‘Dharmapala, and Sumantra. (Agni Purana, Chapter 6)
The name Dasaratha. The real name of Dagaratha
8) Nemi. Once the unattackable and invincible asura
ve -4 conquered the throne of Indra. At the request
ae and the gods, this King reached heaven and
of Bra d the armies of the asuras very easily. Sambara
arg assumed ten shapes and attacked the King
got anery? ainits at the same time. The king confronted
from a at ten points, at the same time, and
the 7 all of them at the same moment. Because “he
ae his chariot to ten points at the same time and
ah with enemics on those ten points Brahma apprethree wives, named
DASARATHA
ciated his valiant fighting and charioteeering and gave
him the name ‘Dasaratha’ (one who is capable of driving
the chariot to ten points at the same time). Thus his
original name was forgotten and he came to be known
only by the name given him later. (Karhpa Ramayana,
Yuddha Kanda).
9) Birth of Sons. WKausalya was the first wife of Dagaratha. She was the daughter of the King of Uttara
Kosala. A daughter named Santa was born to Dag aratha
by Kausalya. After this, no sons or daughters were born
to Dasgaratha for a long time.
At this juncture Lomapada, the king of Anga who was the
class-mate and a great friend of Dagaratha, came to
Ayodhya on a friendly visit. He also had no children.
So he entreated Dasaratha to give Santa to him as a
foster-daughter. Thus he took away Santa to Anga.
Lomapada gave Santa in marriage to Rsyasrnga a
hermit. (See under Rsyagrnga).
As Kausalya was childless Dagaratha brought as his
wife Kaikeyi the daughter of the King of Kekaya and
sister of Yudhajit. Still no children were born to them.
He was much disappointed. At last he married again and
brought Sumitra the princess of Kagi. Of these three,
Kausalya was the chief wife.
Though he had three wives, Dagaratha still remained
childless. The King and his queens spent their days in
sorrow for a long time. The King remembered the curse
he had incurred when he was young. The curse was
that as they had died with sorrow at the death of their
son Sravana, the same thing would happen to me.
So he believed that sons would be born to him.
He performed several devotional acts to get children.
Finally he gave up all kingly pleasures and began to
lead an ascetic life. He built a temple for his own use
and consecrated the idol of Mahavisnu in it. Then entrusting the administration of the Kingdom to his ministers
he and his wives engaged themselves in daily devotion
and meditation in the temple. Then the King decided
to perform the sacrifice of Putrakamesti (sacrifice for
getting children) by the hermit Rsyagrniga under the
guidance of Vasistha. The King informed Rsyasrnga
of his decision. Rsyagrnga could not refuse the King’s
request as the king was his father-in-law. Moreover
Lomapada and Santa also requested the hermit to comply with the desire of Dagaratha. So Rsyag rnga came to
Ayodhya and the sacrifice of Putrakamesti was begun.
The air vibrated with the recitation of mantras (spells and
incantations) and the Veda Siktas. The hermit uttered
the divine spell of Putrakamesti_ and Offered oblations
in the sacrificial fire. Then a wonderfy] and luminous
figure came out of the fire with a Pot containing a
pudding of ambrosia, and placed the pot before Rsyasrnga and then disappeared in the sacrificial fire. When
the wonderful figure disappeared, Rsyag riga took the
pot of pudding and gave it to Dagaratha with prayer and
incantations. Dasaratha received the golden pot and in
accordance with the instruction of the hermit. divided
the pudding between his first wife Kauégalya and second
wife Kaikeyi, both of whom gave half of their share to
Sumitra. Thus the three wives ate the divine pudding
and by and by all of them became pregnant. Kaugalya
and Kaikeyi gave birth to a son each and Sumitra
gave birth to two sons. The son of KauSsalya was called
Rama, the son of Kaikeyi was named Bharata and the
tn Agnipurana Chapter 6, itis stated that the name of this hermit boy was Yajnadatta.

DASARHA
sons of Sumitra were called Laksmana and Satrughna
(Kampa Ramayana, Bala Kanda). . )
10) The boon of Sani (Saturn). Astronomers are of
opinion that famine will occur in ‘the world for the
period of twelve years, when the planet Sani (Saturn)
comes into the orbit of Rohini (a star). But now the
planet. Saturn does not come into the orbit of the star
Rohini. ‘There is a story in the Padma Purana. which
states that this happened so because of a boon Sani } d
given to DaSsaratha. mes
During the regime of Dagaratha the planet Sani approached the orbit of Rohini. Experts in astronomy said that
the earth would be ruined by famine etc. if Sani cleft
the star Rohini. Hearing this Dasaratha took his bow
and arrows, got into his chariot, and started for the
firmament. He travelled for one lac and a quarter of
yojanas (leagues) and reached the hind part of Rohini
which is beyond the sun. Adorned with golden me
ments and a golden crown studded with jewels, s - ‘d
on a golden chariot decorated with precious stones ated
Jofty flagpost and yoked with horses of the colo : f
swan, the king shone in the sky as a second sun Heidi i
the bow-string right upto his ear and placed in A aie
arrow of destruction. When the devas and the bel
saw the arrow of destruction they began to tremble wil
fear. Sani came to Dagaratha and fell before him and
said that he would grant any boon to the Kine rd
requested him to recall the arrow of destruction haa:
ratha told Sani that he only wanted Sani not to Bie gre
the orbit of Rohini. Sani agreed. From that da a
Sani has never entered the orbit of Rohini P (Pach :
Purana, Uttara Kanda, Chapter 34), _ ais
11) Death. Rama and Laksmana with Sita went t
live in the forest. Sumantra who accompanied liens
up to the river Ganges, returned to the palace By
then Dagaratha had fallen down filled with orief. He
had never recovered from that state of Siranmentawen :
At the time of his death Bharata and Satruchna had
been away in the kingdom of Kekaya and Rama and
Laksmana in the forest. Thus the curse he incurred
in his younger days from the aged hermit, the father of
Sravana, was fully realized. 7
12) Dasgaratha appears again, Ravana was killed in the
battle. Sita was tested in fire and found sinless. Rama
accepted her, seeing that her conjugal fidelity was not
marred. At this time Siva appeared before Rama in a
divine aeroplane. DaSaratha was seated in that plane
clad in pure garments. He took Rama and Laksmana
into his lap and embraced them. He blessed them and
Sita who was standing with folded hands. Then Daégaratha disappeared. (Valmiki Ramayana, Yuddha Kanda
en 12), Gy Ay
DASARHA. A king of the Yadu family. He was so famous
‘ that his descendants were called the Dagarhas. As Sri
Krsna was born as a descendant in the line of Dagarha
Sri Krsna is sometimes called Das arha, in certain places.
For genealogy see under Yaduvarhsa. )
DASARHI I. A woman belonging to Dagarha’s family.
Vijaya, the wife of Drumanyu, Sudeva, the wife of
Vikanthana, Subharhgi, the wife of Kuru, Kunti, the
wife of Pandu—all these Yadava women are enittied
— name Dasarhi. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter
DASARHI II. In Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Daksinatyapatha, Chapter 38 we find that the assembly of the
zie DASERAKA (M)
Yadava leaders was known by the name of Das arhi.
DASARNA. An inhabitant of the Dasarna country.
This name is also used for addressing King Dasarna.
(M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 50, Verse 47).
DASARNA(M). An ancient country, famous in the
Puranas. a
1) General information. ‘This country had been divided
into two, Eastern Dagarna and Western Dasarna. The
modern Patna and the surrounding places comprised
Eastern Dagarna and the places of Malva, the Western
Dagarna. Some are of opinion that Dasarna comprises
the South-East part of the Vindhya mountain. Tt is mentioned in ‘Meghadita’ that Vidisa was the capital of
Dasgarna. The modern name of Vidisa is Bhilsa.
(2) Other information regarding Dasarna. oan
(1) Mention is made in Mahabharata, Adi Parva,
Chapter 112, Stanza 29, that once Pandu brought the
country of Vidisa under subjugation.
(2) At another time Bhimasena conquered the country
of Dagarna. (Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter
29, Stanza 5). r
(3) Nakula _ conquered this country. (M.B. Sabha
Parva, Chapter 32, Stanza djs _
(4) King Sudama ruled over the country of Dasarna.
He had two daughters. )
‘married the first “one and Virabahu the king of Cedi
married the second daughter. Damayanti was the
daughter of Bhima. A daughter named Sunanda was
born to Virabahu. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 69).
(5) Before the battle of Bharata, Hiranyavarma Was the
King of Dasarna. ikhandini the daughter of Drupada
went in the guise of a male and married the daughter
of Hiranyavarma. The king of Dagarna who had been
deceived thus, attacked Drupada. But the problem was
solved because Sikhandini actually became a male. (See
the word Amba). (M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9,
Stanza 41).
(6) The king of Dasarna ¢
in the battle of Bharata. (
51, Stanza 12).
(7) Citrangada was th
ook the side of the Kauravas
M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter
e king of Dasarna at the time of
the Agvamedha sacrifice of Yudhisthira. In Mahabharata, A§vamedha Parva, Chapter 83, 1t 1S stated that
Arjuna defeated Citrangada.
DASASVA. Tenth son of Iksvaku. He ruled over the
city of Mahismat. It ig mentioned 1n Mahabharata,
Anugasana Parva, Chapter 2, Stanza 6, that Dasasva
had a son named Madirasva. .
DASASVAMEDHA. A holy place situated m Kuraie ee
It is stated in Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter al
Stanza 14, that those who bathe in this holy P in
obtain the fruits of giving a gift of eros aiecita:
DASASVAMEDHIKA(M). A holy place ™ 0 (MB.
Those who bathe here will attain Supreme »'»»:
Vana Parva, Chapter 83, Stanza 6
haDASAVARA. An asura. Mention 1S ane Pe ats
bharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter id aes in his palace.
asura (demon) serves Varuna ane MY” i. (MB.
DASERAKA(S). Members of a amar
Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9°, e. It is by observing
A A(M). A_ place-name. ) heen
nadia ata nat to the west of oe = a
Vaisya attained moksa (salvation ). (See under
Sravanadvadasi).
Bhima, the king of Vidarbha |

DASURA 206
DASURA. A sage. For further details see under
araloma.
DASI. An important river in India. (M.B. Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 31).
DASRA. The first of the gods called the A$ vinidevas.
The two gods Dasra and Nasatya are known by the
collective name Agvinidevas. (M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter 208, Stanza 17).
DASYU. The ancient dwellers of North India. What
we see in Rgveda is mostly a history of the Aryans from
the period of their exodus from the plateau Kumbha
till they reached the banks of the Yamuni. The plateau
of Kumbha is Kabul, The Dasyus were the first people
the Aryans had to confront with after passing the Indus.
Rgveda bears testimony to the fact that the civilization
of the Dasyus was far advanced than that of the Aryans,
Sambara, King of the Dasyus, was the ruler of hundred
cities. All the cities were fortified with strong walls and
fortresses, which are described as ‘aSvamayi’, ‘ayasi’,
‘Satabhuji’ etc. The greatest enemies of the Aryans were
the ‘Panis’ of these cities, T’hey were a particular class
of people of these cities. In the ‘Nirukta of Yaska’ it is
mentioned that panis were traders. N ames of many of the
Kings of the Dasyus occur in the Reveda. Dhuni,
CGumuri, Pipru, Varcas, Sarnbara and such others are the
most valiant and mighty among them. The most important of the several tribes of the Dasyus were the Simyus,
the Kikatas, Sigrus and the Yaksus. They are mentioned
as the Anasas in the Reveda. (Anasas—without nose),
Perhaps their nose was flat : more over they are stated as
having dark complexion. So it may be assumed that the
Dasyus were Dravidians. They talked a primitive
language, and they despised sacrificial religion. They did
not worship Gods like Indra and others. They possibly
worshipped the Phallus, Siva, Devi and the like.
DATAKACCHA. An ancient country on the bank of
the river, Narmada. (Kathasaritsagara) .
DATTA (DATTAKA). See under Dattatreya,
DATTAMITRA. This is another name of Sumitra the
King of Sauvira, Arjuna, during his conquest of the
countries, defeated this King. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 188, Stanza 20).
DATTATMAN. A Viévadeva. (A class of gods concerned
with sacrifice to the manes). (M.B. Anugasana Parva
Chapter 91, Stanza 34).
DATTATREYA. (DATTA),
puranas,
1) Birth. Anasiya, the wife of hermit Atri gave birth
to Dattatreya. But Dattatreya was the incarnation of
Mahavisnu.
There is a story in Brahmanda Purana how Mahavisnu came to incarnate as Dattatreya,
Once there was a hermit called Animandavya (Mandavya). While the hermit was engaged in silent meditation, some robbers passed by that way. The King’s
men who were chasing the robbers, came to the hermit
and asked him about the robbers. The hermit did not
break the silence. The King’s men, thinking the hermit
to be the thief bound his hands and legs and took him to
the palace. The King ordered Mandavya to be killed by
Piercing his body with a trident. Accordingly a trident
was posted on a hill far away and Mandavya was seated
A hermit famous in the
DAYAKRAMA.
1. Dattatreya is known by the name ‘Datta’ also in the Puranas,
DAYAKRAMA
on the tip of it. Mandavya lay there in agony.
It was at this time that Silavati, famous for her conjugal
fidelity, went to the house of a harlot, carrying her
husband Ugragravas on her shoulder. When they passed
by that way Ugragravas scolded Animandavya; getting
angry at this Animandavya cursed Ugrasravas that he
would get his head broken and die before the sun-rise,
Silavati became very sorry when she heard the curse
and she also cursed. “Let the sun not rise tomorrow’’.
The sun did not rise next day. Everything in the world
was in chaos. The devas were flurried. They went to
Brahma. Brahma took them to Siva. They could not
find a solution. So all of them approached Mahavisnu.
The Trimirtis (three gods) told the devas that the
problem would be solved, and the devas returned.
Brahma, Visnu and Maheévara went to Silavati. Before
seeing Silavati, they went to Anasiya the wife of Atri
and sought her help to persuade Silavati to recall her
curse. T"hus Anasiiya and the Trimirtis approached
Silavati and spoke compassionate and consolatory words.
At last Silavati recalled the curse. The Trimirtis convinced Silavati, that Ugragravas would not die. The
pleased Trimirrtis asked Anasiya to ask for any boon. She
replied that she did not want any boon except that the
Trimirtis should take birth as her sons. Accordingly
Mahavisnu took birth as Dattatreya, Siva as Durvasas
and Brahma as Candra, in the womb of Anasiiya. This
is how Dattatreya was born} Dattatreya did penance
from his childhood and became a hermit. (Brahmanda
Purana, Chapters 39 to 44).
2) Kartaviryarjuna and Dattatreya.
juna became King Dattatreya had become very famous.
viryarjuna and his wife came to the river Narmada,
and taking bath in the river, began to worship Dattatreya, who was doing penance closeby. Dattatreya
was pleased and went to Kartaviryarjuna and asked him
what his desire was. He requested for thousand hands
and to be a youth for ever, and such other things.
Dattatreya granted his wishes. After that Kartaviryarjuna would very often go to the hermit Dattatreya for
his advice. (Brahma Purana, Chapter 44),
3) Cursing Ravana. Once Ravana went to the hermitage of Dattatreya. The hermit had placed a waterpot
purified by reciting spells and incantations, Ravana
stole that waterpot. When the hermit knew this. he
cursed Ravana saying, “Since the water, which "was
evoked by spells and incantations, has fallen on your
head, Monkeys will pollute your head by treading on
it.” (Valmiki Ramayana, Yuddha Kanda),
A son born to hermit Pulast a b hi ife
Priti. This Dattoli was in his previous birth. Hallie
the Svayambhuva manvantara. (Visny Purdna. Arméa
1, Chapter 10),
(INHERITANCE), Dayakrama is

DAYAKRAMA (INHERITAN CE)
the system by which the wealth of parents is received by
the heirs. Tlie system of inheritance as described by Manu
is as follows :—
1) After the death of the parents, all the children should
divide their wealth among themselves. When either the
father or the mother is alive, the sons should not take
their wealth.
2) Ifthe wealth is not divided, the eldest brother should
keep the whole of it in his custody and maintain his
brothers and sisters like a father.
3) Ofthe entire wealth, the eldest brother may take onetwentieth part, the second brother, one-fortieth part
and the third brother, one-eghtieth part and the balance
is to be divided equally among all of them.
4) Ifthere are more than three sons, the eldest and the
youngest may take one-twentieth and one-eightieth (of
the entire wealth) respectively, and each of the other
brothers may take one-fortieth. The rest of the property must be divided equally among all of them.
5) After dividing like this, if there are unmarried sisters,
each of the brothers should give one-fourth of his share
for their marriage.
6) The ornaments which the m
way of her dowry etc. may be ta
her unmarried daughters.
7) If, after his marriage, one of the brothers dies, the
brother who keeps his movable and ane ean
ties, must beget children by the brother S Wises eo
over the above properties to her issue.
Manusnrrti).
DAVANAKSETRA. A famous temple of Goddess “ane
in Epheseus. In Greek mythology ee { ogee ks the
the goddess of hunting. She 1s also ee at: ra
Moon Goddess. Being 2 virgin sie ° “ their patron.
worshipped by virgins who regarded E a teaoer the
Dayana (Diana) is one of the beautiful daug d in many
supreme God, Zeus. Her idol was worst Pe this godPlaces in Grease, There was 4 famous wai destroyed
dess in the town of Epheseus. emer
in the 3rd Century B.C. by o_
DEVA (S). Gods or Genes |
‘on. From t -eligions have
eee se in every country and 2 ae was the
lauded their superior nature an Dee "{ the term ‘Deva
Hindus and the Buddhists who first apr ed in all religions:
to certain very subtle beings recognis
other had received by
mmemorial belief in
‘a) has spo
he Parsi religion (Zaratusira : ae entas’ 1s i.
evarajans and their attendants. The Christian re
Devaraja. |
of Devas like ©
lam refers ° revelations, Mik
actual term used for the
810n refers to nine. a“
ominion,”’ Angel etc. +5 nee
Viz, Gabriel, the presiding Deva :
ayel of protection, Astly4 &
Tuction. An important ees un
about Devas like Indra, Mitr A ; portant
X ajfias etc. Devas occupy query d and
Cnopanisad states that te a The subject
Were taught a Jesson by. é _ en ma [0
athopanisad is the advice 8? vat the Y* fe vences abou
ne Mundakopanisad S2¥° ‘There aT nd Upa
rds originated from Goe- Purana
€va worship in the Smrus: - asitah sadhy3
'. Tasmiacca devah bahudha gampr
ken after her death by |
207 DEVABHAGASRAUTARSA
ranas contain scientific discussions, about the origin,
work or functions, classes,etc. of Devas. The Mantra-
§astra and Tantrasastra deal also about the various sects
and class of Devas, their nature, and the worship to be
offered to them etc.
2) Christian Devas, Satan and devils. Christian religious
books .commonly use the term Malakhas for Devas.
Greek mythology contains a story about the Malakhas,
who did not obey the orders of Jehovah and how He
cursed them, turned them into devils and flung them into
hell. And, in hell they organised a revolutionary party
to fight Jehovah. Many leaders talked on the subject of
how to take vengeance on Jehovah. It was nearabout
this period that Jehovah created with the dust on earth
Adam as his beloved son and settled him in the garden of
Aden. God created from the ribs of Adam the woman
called Eve, and they lived in Eden quite happily.
Satan and other leaders in hell decided that the greatest
revenge that could be taken upon Jehovah was to create
troubles for his dear son, Adam in Eden. Accordingly
. Satan went to Eden and made Adam and Eve eat the
forbidden fruit with the result that Jehovah cursed and
turned them into human beings and turned them out of
Eden. Milton in his reputed poem Paradise Lost has told
the above story in inimitable language.
3) Indian Devas. Most of the Indian Devas are the sons
of Kasyapa Prajapati by Aditi, daughter of Daksa Prajapati. The total number of Devas is 33 crores. The Devas
are divided into many classes or sections like Adityas,
Vis vadevatas, Vasus, Tusitas, Abhasvaras, Anilas, Maharajikas, Sadhyas, Rudras, WVidyadharas, Pitrdevas etc,
There are further divisions like Apsaras, Viripaksas,
Bhadras, Gandharvas, Kurhbhandas, Raksasas, Nagas,
Agvinis, Kinnaras, Kirhpurusas, Pigacas, Guhyakas,
Siddhas, Caranas, Matrs, Kismandas, Bhitas, Vetalas,
etc. Yet another division is into Lokapalas, Lipikas etc.
The Devas are classified with special reference to
bhitaganas like Prthvi etc. and are, therefore, referred
to as Bhiidevatas, Agnidevatas, Vayudevatas, etc. The
presiding spirit of Bhidevatas is Kubera, that of the
Jaladevatas is Varuna, that of the Agnidevatas, Vayubhagavan and that of the Akasadevatas, Indra. And,
under them there are various sets of Devas in charge of
different departments. Sadhyas, Vasus, Adityas, Apsaras
etc. are Akasadevas, Maruttas and Gandharvas,
Vayudevas. Yaksas and Yaksis are servants of
Kubera. Virapaksa, Bhadra etc. are Bhidevas.
Viripaksa supports the earth according to the Valmiki
Purana. Those who protect nidhis (treasures ) may also
be consjdered Bhtimidevas.
There are 33 bosses or presiding spirits for the 33 crores
of Devas. Dvadasadityas (12) Ekadagarudras (11)
Astavasus (8) and Asvinidevas (2) are the 33 chiefs of
Devas. Indra is the chief of all of them.
4) The term Deva. ‘The word Deva means light and
also play. Devas shine forth, they are also playful.
Thus the name is quite .apt for them. (See Gramadevata).
DEVABHAGA. A king of the Yayati dynasty. (Bhagavata Navama Skandha).
DEVABHAGASRAUTARSA. A rsi, the son of Sruta
and learned in yajiias. He had accurate knowledge as to

DEVABHRAT 208
which parts of the yajfia-cow should be distributed to
whom, and till death he did not impart this knowledge
to anyone. But, sometime afterwards a non-human
individual taught the subject to Girija, son of Babhru.
(Aitareya Brahmana).
At the time when the Srfijayasand the Kuru kings were
living in amity consequent upon the daksayana yajjia
it was this Devabhaga who acted as the priest of both
the parties. His theories on Savitragni are quoted in
Taittirilya Brahmana.
DEVABHRAT. An effulgent Devaté who was the son of
Ravi and father of Subhrat. (Adi Parva, Chapter 1,
Verse 42).
DEVADARSA. An Acdrya in the line of Vy4sa’s disciples.
Fle was the disciple of Kabandha, and he had many
disciples. Medha, Brahmabali, Sautayana and Pippalada were chicf among those disciples. (See genealogy
of Gurus).
DEVADARUVANA. A holy centre. A dip inthe tirtha
here is productive of very good results. (M.B. Anugasana
Parva, Chapter 25, Verse 27).
DEVADASA. A rich Vaigya extolled much in the Katha-
-Saritsagara’ He lived in Pataliputra and had married the
daughter ofa very rich Vaigya of Paundravardhana. After
his father’s death Devadasa lost all his wealth in gambling, and his wife foresook her impecunious husband and
returned home.
After roaming about for some time the helpless Devadasa
decided to go to his wife’s house, and one mid-night
he went there. While hiding himself there in the darkness
he heard his wife telling her paramour the following:
‘“‘In the four corners of Devadasa’s house are hidden
four treasures. But he does not know about the treasures
hidden thus by one of his fore-fathers. I got the information from his mother. You should purchase the property for a small price.”
No sooner did Devaddsa hear the above than he
hurried back to his house and dug up the treasure
and thus became wealthy again. The paramour of his
wife went to him a few days later and purchased the
property at a heavy price. But, when he dug up the
place no treasure was found. Then he wanted to sell]
back the property to Devadasa himself, but he refused
to purchase it. The case was taken before the King when
Devadasa detailed the whole story. And, as ordered by
the King, Devadasa disfigured his wife and wedded
another wile. (Kathasaritsagara, Lavanakalambakam,
Taranga 5).
DEVADATTA I. A famous brahmin boy whose story is
described in the Kathasaritsagara.
Devadatta was the son of the Brahmin, Haridatta of
Kambukapura. Though as a boy Devadatta learnt al]
the arts and sciences when he grew up to be a youth he
became a very wayward fellow. Dice-play became his
main job. One day in a game of dice he lost even his
clothes, and being afraid of his father, he left the place
without returning home.
Devadatta roamed about, and during one such trip
he saw a deserted temple, and a municalled Jalapada
engaged in reciting mantras. Devadatta prostrated before the muni and told him all the details about himself.
The muni accepted Devadatta as his gisya and promised
to secure vidyadharahood for him.
Next night Jalapada led Devadatta to a burning ghat,
DEVADATTA II.
DEVADATTA II
nearby the temple. After conducting Piaja in the shade
of a fig tree with offerings of Payasa and Vaiévadevabali the muni told Devadatta thus: ‘‘You should
come here daily and perform pija like this, and pray
at the close of it, ‘Oh ! Vidyutprabha ! please accept my
puja.’
Devadatta acted according to the above advice of the
muni, and one day, at the close ofhis pija the tree broke
open into two and a beautiful female who appeared from
it took him with her saying that her mistress wanted him.
He was thus taken to a house studded with gems wherein
he saw a noble lady seated on a cot. She caught Devadatta by his hands and after seating him alongside said
to him: “I am Vidyutprabha, daughter of the Yaksa
king Ratnavarsa. I am a virgin girl. Muni Jalapada
has worshipped me so much that I have decided to
fulfil his desire. I am in love with you and you will
please wed me.”
Accordingly Devadatta married Vidyutprabha and lived
there with her. In due course she conceived, and Devadatta met Jalapada and told him about the whole
affair, and the muni, to achieve his personal object
asked Devadatta to cut open the abdomen of Vidyutprabha and take to him the child found therein, Devadatta did not at all relish the idea. Yet reluctant to
disobey his preceptor he returned to his wife. She permitted him to carry out the directions of the muni, yet his
mind did not approve of the action. Then Vidyutprabha
herself cut open her abdomen, took the child out of it
and placing it before her husband told him thus:—
‘He who eats the child will become a Vidyadhara.
Take it. I was a Vidyadhari turned into a Yaksi by a
curse, and to cut open my abdomen and take out the
child like this was the redemption promised me from the
curse, and now I go to the Vidyadhara world; we shall
meet there.” And she disappeared,
In great sorrow Devadatta brough i a
2 ght the child to Jalapada who, after sending him out on the pretext J his
(Jalapada’s) performing Bhairavapija, ate up the child.
Devadatta returned and when he knew of the action of
for him while, in fear. the sword fell do
in - > WwW €
hands of Jalapada who now fainted. Heed :
vented the Vetala from killing Jalapada and he (Vetala)
at the instance of Devadatta took Jalapada to the burning ghat and cremated him there,
_ Katyayanidevi at this time appeared before Devadatta
and pleased with his courage appointed }; «of of
the Vidyadharas. He wedded Vidyut in av Ele @
happily. (Kathasaritsagara, yutprabha and lived
Taranga 2).
A king of ancient India Kin
Jayadatta. Jayadatta wanted to marry his son Deredntin
to the daughter of a Vaigya in Pataliputra, Though it

DEVADATTA III
was a far cry from Pataliputra to Jayadatta’s court the
Vaisya married his daughter to the prince as he attached
much importance to such an alliance with the King.
From the dowry given by the Vaisya to his daughter
the resources of her father appeared to be very meagre
to Devadatta.
After some time Devadatta’s wife returned to her house
with the permission of her husband. During her absence
Jayadatta expired, enemies attacked his kingdom and
Devadatta with his mother ran away from his kingdom.
Sometime after that he started for his wife’s house. But,
feeling that it would not be proper for him to personally
tell his father-in-law about what had happened to him
he waited outside an inn near his wife’s house, and he
had not waited there for long when he saw a woman
descending by a cord from the other door of the house.
He felt deeply mortified to detect that 1t was his wife
who was thus descending. And, when she, not recognising Devadatta in his dirty clothes, asked him who ue
was, he answered a ‘traveller’. Taking no notice of t a
‘traveller’ she got into the inn, and Devadatta fallen
her. Inside the inn she was met by a man who a
for being late to go to him; but, in spite of - ice
she pleased him with coy words. Then and tI a ave
datta divorced her in his mind, but Se hn i
observing their love-making. In the course 0 wa Kee
play an ear-ring studded with costly gems TO ‘t, She
the floor from her ears, but she did not notice lt.
ta
; e dawn. Devadat
parted from her paramour befor and there he
went to Kanvakubja with the ear-ring, © 4
pledged it ‘<pell kh sovereigns with ni neh ee
collected an army and conquered back or eqr-ring® to
Then he redeemed the pledge an‘ ae anyie public.
his father-in-law. The whole incident = whom she
When she realised the fact that the gina Devadatta’s
ad met at the inn was her ow? sae _- her heart was
wife felt so deeply hurt and humiliated th
mn he GAT aravahanaroken and she died. (Kathasaritsagaré: Nar
datta Janana, Taranga
VEVADATTA III, Fathe — G
a atyala . : . aya
EVADATES (M). rie divine enor “ tiie wabba
got this conch from Varuna @ de dusaras on M
. rsaparvan which was 1 i ‘asa.
aindka to the south of Mout for the Pandavas he
built the palace at Indraprastha ” Arjuna that conch
Went to Bindusaras and broug tor himasend. :
ani Devadattam, and a club for ip wae
arva, ‘er 3). ted a
In the tele dl ‘urslegetra a mephisma Ean
orse and blew his conch Devadattal®
apter 25 e 14). ‘ ‘ous
VADITIBA, VA king who 18,Bi eG) on
asura. (Adi Parva, Chapter - as. When ee rs
EVADUTA. A messenger of the pe enout his brote
Putra refused to live in heave™ .4. whom *
Ike Karna it _ this Devadit' art (M.B. Svmdata
harmaputra to Karna am ; Thais (ey
rse ). ec sun-se
tohana Parva, Chapter 2: eae and_ befor )
'S to be meditated upon at japter
Cveryday. (Anugasana Parves dynasty oti, from
EVADYUMNA. A king ° ‘ as bor? ager porn.
tom Bharata, son of Rsabha, ae d
umati Devajit and from rr ther of Ki
Cvadyumna was the grane
r of the reputed muni Utatthya.
life was 4?
209 DEVAKI
father of King Paramesthi. (Bhagavata Paficama
Skandha). . :
DEVADYUTI. A Rsi who dwelt in his 4frama on the
banks of river Sarasvati. Owing to the blessing of Visnu
a son called Sumitra was born to him, As a result of his
doing rigorous tapas for 1000 years he shone with a
rare effulgence. Though Visnu appeared to him_ one
day in the month of Vaigakha and asked him to choose
any boon he wanted, he, who was so much detached in
life prayed only for devotion to God. (Padma Purana,
Uttara Khanda, Chapter 212).
DEVAGANA. See Manvantara.
DEVAGARBHA. A Rsi. He too was present as one of
the hotrs (Priests) at the yajfia conducted by Brahma
at the Puskara temple. (Padma Purana, Srsti Khanda,
Chapter 34).
DEVAGRAHA. An evil planet. Devagraha -dargana
(seeing this planet) will lead to insanity. (Vana Parva,
Chapter 23, Verse 47).
DEVAHAVYA. A sage, a member of Indra’s assembly.
(Sabha Parva, Chapter 7).
DEVAHOTRA. A maharsi, who was an _ honoured
member at the yajfia performed by Uparicaravasu.
(Santi Parva, Chapter 336, Verse 9).
DEVAHRADA (M). A tirtha centre on the heights of
~ Mount Kalafijara. A dip in its holy waters will bring the
same result as the dana (gift) of a thousand cows.
(Vana Parva, Chapter 89, Verse 56).
DEVAHUTI. A daughter of Svayambhuva Manu, the
son of Brahma. The Manu had two sons called Priyavrata and Uttanapada and three daughters named
Akati, Devahiiti and’ Prasiti. Akiti was married by
Ruciprajapati and Devahuti by Kardamaprajapati
and Prasuti to Daksprajapati. Kapila, the mighty
exponent of the Sankhya system of philosophy and great
ascetic was the son born to Kardama by Devahiti.
Kapila taught his mother the world famous Kapila
Ssstra, (Devibhagavata, Astama Skandha) and when the
teaching was over he bade farewell to her and took to
forest life. And, his mother performed a yajfia on the
lines advised by her son, on the banks of river Sarasvati.
Because she took three baths daily her hairs became a
mixture of black and blue in colour and she got emaciated due to fasting. She wore the bark oftrees. Devahati, who realised all the principles and the truth became blind to all external objects like gardens, maids,
mansions etc. Thus immersed in meditation she in.
course of time attained siddhi (realisation). The particular spot on thé banks of Sarasvati where she attained
ciddhi is called Siddhapada.
DEVAHVAYA. A king in ancient India. (Adi Parva,
Chapter 1, Verse 235). : es
DEVAKA I. A king in ancient India, Born in the Yayati
dynasty he shone like Indra (Adi Parva, Chapter 67).
He was the brother of Ugrasena, father of Kamsa, and
the father of Devaki, the mother of Krsna. (Sabha
parva, Southern Text, Chapter 22).
DEVAKA II. A king in ancient India. He fostered a
.,| born to a brahmin by a Sidra woman. It was this
el whom Vidura married. (Adi Parva, Chapter 113,
OEVAKA “IL. A king, a contemporary of the Pandavas.
(Udyoga Parva, Chapter 41, Verse 17).
pEVAKI. Mother of Sri Krsna.
1) Genealogy. Descended from Visnu thus :—Brahma

DEVAKSATRA 210 DEVANIKA
—Atri—Candra — Budha — Puriravas — Ayus— DEVAKUTA II. A holy place. A dip in the sacred
Nahusa — Yayati — Yadu — Sahasrajit — Satajit— waters at this place is equal in its effects to that of an
Hehaya — Dharman — Kuni— Bhadrasena —Dhanaka ASvamedha yajfia. Moreover the family. of such persons
—Krtavirya — Kar taviryarjuna — Madhu — Vrsni— also will prosper. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 84, Verse
Yudhajit — Sini — Satyaka — Satyaki — Yuyudhana— 14),
Jaya — Kuni — Anamitra— Préni — Citraratha— pryapa I. A famous muni, the son of Pratyiisa, one
Kukura — Vahni — Viloma — Kapotaroma —Tum- of the astavasus. (Adi Parva, Chapter 66, Verse 26).
buru — Dundubhi — Daridra — Vasu — Nahuka— Devala muni is a character in the well-known story of
Ahuka — Devaka — Devapa — Devaki. ee Gajendramoksa. (For details seeé Indradyumna),.
Devapa had seven daughters, viz, Srutadeva, Santideva, DEVALA IT. i, a very erudite scholar in the
Upadeva, Srideva, Devaraksita, Sahadeva and Devaki., Vedas. He was the elder brothe, of Dhaumya maharsi,
1 and was present at the Sarpa-satra (serpent yajna) of
King Janamejaya. Once Sri Krsna on his way from
correct. Karnsa was the son of Ugrasena, the brother of Dvaraka to Hastinapura met D evala. After the great war
Devaka. Devaki was the grand-daughter of Devaka. was over he visited Yudhisthira.
Certain P uranas refer to Devaki as the daughter of Devala had a daughter called Suvarcala. In the svayamvara ceremony he held for his daughter to which sons
of munis were invited she chose Svetaketu as her husband.
(Santi Parva, Southern Text, Chapter 22),
niece of Karhsa. Thus it is equally correct to say that Devala had two very intelligent and forebearing sons.
between Karhsa and Devalki there was _brother-sister (Visnu Purana, Part 1, Chapter 15 ).
relationship as also uncle-niece relationship. DEVALA III. | A disciple of VY
2) Devaki in previous birth, Devaki in her previous birth Sampayana, Sumanty and Jaimini were some of the
was Aditi, the daughter of Daksa and wife of Kas yapa- disciples of Vyasa. (M.B Prathama Skandha )
prajapati. (See Aditi, Parva Brahmavaivarta Purana contains the followin
: = . : g story
3) Marriage and children. Vasudeva, the Yadava married about Devala. Devala was the son born to ASiionmart as
Devaki. Sri Krsna was their eighth child. Six sons of the result of a roi
theirs born elder to Krsna were killed by Karhsa. (See heavenly lanyeee felt in love with him ye ambha, |
Karhsa, Para 2). The seventh child, from the very it, L
womb itself of Devaki was passed on to the womb of not veciprocrate her love, So, she cursed him to become
| ked in body. ,
rch nae amas Sd ey Whe he cca <-
was the child thus a to ee ia Pee child did penance after which Krsna and Radha appeared to
was Krsna. (F or details ace Arena, pened ). him. Radha laughed at the uncouth dorm of Astivakra.
4) Other information relating to Devaki. (1 ) Many Ksat- But. K “i
; :; : z rsna admonished her and embraced hj . At once
~<a a, Chapa ted the svayathvara of Devaki. (Drona his bodily crookedness disappeared and i. beau: nell
ee: : et a handsome. A vimana then descended heaven
(2) & ollowing Krsna’s 8iving up of his body and the and Radha, Krsna and *munj together 2 a ake
destruction, due to mutual fights, of the Yadavas, Vasu- ey Pp
deva, Rohini and Devaki also gave up their lives. Ekaparna, dausht ae —
(Bhagavata, Ekadata Skandha, Chapter 31, Verses 18, aries " G tay or was this Devala’s wife.
_ _ DEVAMATA, An ancient rsi in India.
DEVAKSATRA. A king of the Yayati dynasty, (Bhaga- talk with Narada about the Riiuan tesa’ en Parva,
vata, Navama Skandha). Chapter 99).
DEVAKULYA. Grand-daughter of Marici maharsi, DEVAMIDPHA. A reputed Yad
who lived in the Svayambhuva Manvantara. As she of Yadu, son of Vavats, He Was the ante fa OF
washed in her Previous life the holy feet of Mahavisnu, Vasudeva and father of King Stirasena. (Drona Parva,
in the next birth she was born as river Ganga. (Bhaga- Chapter 144, Verse 6 *\
ata, Caturtha Skandha). |
DEVAKUNDAM T (DEVAHRADAM). A sacred ar? img s —wa 3 avendant of Subrahmanya.
place. A dip in the holy waters there is productive of y ee apter 14, Verse 14).
results equal to that of an AS vamedha yajfia. (Vana DEVAMI TRASAKALYA, Son of Mandukeya muni. A
Parva, Chapter 85, Verse 20), great Vedi¢ scholar, he taught the five Sarhhitas to his
DEVAKUNDAM II. A particular part of Krsnavena five disciples, Mudgala, _ Gokala, Matsya, Khaliya
river. It is known as Jatismarana hradam also. A bath and Saigir cya. (See Yajfiavalkya),
in the holy waters here will evoke memories of previous DEVANADI. A river descr ibed as existing in the assemlife. (Vana Parva, Chapter 85, Verse a7). bly of Varuna. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 19),
DEVAKUTA I. A mountain 18,000 miles in extent and DEVANIKA, A king born in §14 Rama’s dynasty.
2000 miles in height. Devakita is on the eastern side of (Solar). Kuga was Sri Rama’. Son, Aditi the ‘son of
Mahameru. There is another mountain called Jathara Kusa, Nisadha the son of Aditi, Nabhas Nisadha’s son,
near this mountain. (Devi Bhagavata, Astama Skandha)., P undarika the son of Nabhas, Ksemadhanvya the son
1. Devaki Rohini caiva Vasudevastatha sutau /
Krsnaramavapasyantah Sokarta vj jahuh Smrtim //
Pranarhéca vijahustatra bhagavadvirahaturah,

DEVANTAKA 911
of Pundarika and Devanika the son of Ksemadhanva.
In the navama skandha of Bhagavata it is said that
Devanika was the grandfather of Pariyatra and father
of Rksa.
DEVANTAKA. A Raksasa, the son of Rudraketu. When
the people of the three worlds could no longer stand his
depredations Ganapati incarnated in Kagyapa’s house
and killed Devantaka. (Padma Purana, Srsti Khanda),.
DEVAPA. A king born in the Yayati dynasty. (Bhagavata, Navama Skandha).
DEVAPATHA (M). A holy centre. To stay there bathIng in the holy waters is as productive of results as
conducting a Devasattra (Yajiia). (Vana Parva, Chapter
85, Verse 45).
DEVAPI I. A king born in the lunar dynasty.
Genealogy. Descended from Visnu thus :—Atri—Candra—
Budha—Puriravas—Ayus—N ahusa — Yayati— Piru—
Janame jaya—Pracinvan — Pravira — Namasyu —
Vitabhaya — Sundu — Bahuvidha— Sarnyati — Rahovadi—R audrag va—Matinara—Santurodha—Dusyanta—
Bharata—Suhotra—Suhota—Gala — Garda — Suketu—
Brhatksetra—-Hasti—-Ajamidha—Rksa— Sarhvarana—
uru — Jahnu—Suratha — Vidtratha — Sarvabhauma—Jayatsena—Avyaya— Bhavuka — Cakroddhata—
Devatithi—Rksa—Bhima—Pratica—Pratipa—Devapi.
ratipa had three sons named Devapl, Santanu and
Balhika. Santanu succeeded Pratipa as king as his elder
Crother had taken to sannyasa as a boy. ( Adi Parva,
apter 94, Verse 61). —
Devapi resorted *y the forest. Devapi was the wits
loved by his father and was the apple of the eyes O R ‘
Subjects. But he was suffering from skin disease. °:
when Pratipa wanted to crown him king ee ag :
objected. Their argument was that God would no
- dicease became king. The
Pleased if a man with skin diseas Santanu as
Ing yielded to their wishes and crowned -
Is Lee The youngest brother epee PS —
Stayed in his mother’s house. Devapi who was oe ne
“d that he was denied the crown, tayo a Parva,
and spent the rest of his life in penance. (Udyog
hapter 149), ;
{is end, Devapi did tapas at the Tr on
‘the interior of Kuruksetra and eee ba)
DE wvation. (Salya Parva, Chapter oa Pandava side
“VAPT II, A warrior who fought on wi ue
hi the great war. He hailed from _ C€ 48)
D ‘Mm. (Karna Parva, Chapter 56, Verse 40). borders of
EVA RASTHAM. "A city in the Ronerer val there.
(Sake India. King Senabindu pal ae cap
abha Parva. Chapter 97, Verse }
DEVAP RATHA. A ike of the Yayati dynasty: ;
avam sae
PEVAPRATISTHA, The sacred rite of jue ie have
b om (idols) in temples for which peer ding i
Tu laid down by great acaryas. a A the cen
Hles Vasudevamirti is to be installe Rae r
rj a aficdyatanas (the Sri kovil—the ocession of the
tet and the four paths used for the ve N rasumha,
“Ys around it). The murtis |
*8riva and Varaha are to be ins 3
i Svapn . nave
= natal mibalalnsye Visnave prabbavea I]
‘Svaya visvariipaya svapnadhipatay” iy am/
Acaksya devadevega prasuptosm! yi sae
GQ {Pne sarvani karyani hrdistant
“2 Om hum phat visnave svaha.
tirtha in
attained
(Bhagavata,
alled A the zones
es
DEVAPRATISFHA
(corners) dominated by Agni, Nirrti, Vayu and Isana
respectively. Narayanamirti should be installed at the
centre of the prasdda. Ambika should be installed in
Agni’s corner, Aditya in Nirrti’s corner,Brahma in Vayu’s
corner and Sivalinga in the [gana corner. Linga in the
form of Rudra should also be installed in the Igana
corner; or it may be installed in all the nine corners or
zones. In that case Vasudevamirti should be installed at
the centre. All the Devas bearing the name Rama
must be installed to the east of the Prasada. Lokapalakas like Indra should be installed at the eight places
starting with the east. In Paficayatana pratistha Purusottama should be installed at the centre. Mahalaksmi
and Vaisravana are to be installed to the east of the
Prasada, and the Maitrs in the south. Subrahmanya,
Ganapati, Igana and the planets (grahas) like Sun
should be installed in the west. Dasavataramirtis (ten
incarnations of Visnu) should be installed in the North.
Candika should be installed in Agni’s zone, Sarasvati
in Vayu’s zone, Ambika in Nirrti’s zone and Sri Bhagavati in Igana zone. In temples with thirteen Alayas
Visnu should be installed at the centre. Miartis like
KeSgava should be in the east.
Devapratimas (idols) are of seven varieties like those
made of earth, of wood, of metals, of gems, of sandal
wood, of stone and of flowers. Of the above, idols made
of earth, sandalwood and of flowers ‘are meant only for
temporary use, but they also grant all the desires of the
devotees.
Stone for idols should be got from mountains. Pandura
(white), Aruna (red), Pita (yellow) and Krsna ( black) -
rocks having any one of these four colours may be
selected. If no such stone is available any other stone
may be used, but by doing homa and reciting Narasirhha
mantra the attributes of any of the specified varnas
should be transferred to it. It is best to have white
markings on the stone selected for the idol. There are
the three genders, masculine, feminine and neuter with
reference to stones. Stone which produces the sound of
bell metal on being hit and gives out sparks of fire on
being cut is of the masculine gender. Stone which
possesses these attributes to a lesser degree is of the
feminine gender. Stone with no shape is of neuter gender. Beside these three varieties there are the sagarbha
(pregnant) stones also, viz. stones withround markings
on them, and they should not be used for making idols.
Once it is decided to make an idol, Vanayajfia should
be performed first. To worship the forest from which
the stone for the idol was.to be obtained is vanayajiia.
A specified place in the forest should be dug up, the
pit treated with cow-dung and a small platform raised
and Visnu worshipped thereon. After sacrificial offerings
etc. instruments for the construction of the idol like
tanka (chisel) should be worshipped. To sprinkle on
the stone Salitoya (water in which paddy grains are
ut) purified with the chanting of astramantra is the
next step. After that bhitabali (offerings to the spirits
of the stone) should be performed upon which the
bhiitas residing inside the stone will quit. Then the
acarya should go to sleep repeating the svapna mantra.!

DEVAPUSKARINI 7 212
If he dreams good dreams everything is quite right;
if bad dreams are dreamt, the next morning narasimhahoma should be performed, the stone given offerings
with chanting of astramantra., The edge of the instruments used for sculpturing the idol should be firstly
smeared with ghee, honey etc. The architect should be
one who has gained mastery over the senses. He should
first cut the stone into a Square, and then it should be
placed on a chariot, covered with cloth and taken to
his house. Then after performing a puja the work on
the idol should be started. (Agni Purana, Chapter 43).
DEVAPUSKARINI. A very ancient tirtha in India a dip
in which is as efficacious as performing an Asvamedha
yajfia. (Vana Parva, Chapter 85, Verse 43)
DEVARAJA I. A king in ancient India who spent his
days in the assembly of Yama worshipping him. (Sabha
Parva, Chapter 4, Verse 26).
DEVARAYJA IT. An immoral brahmin who had been a
trader in Kiratanagara. Once he met a whore at the
bathing pool and got’so inextricably tied up with her
that he killed his parents and wife for her sake. Then
one day he had to go to Pratisthananagara on business
where he heard sacred stories being read. He had also
a glimpse of the divine. A month after that he died.
Though an evil fellow, because of his having worshipped
iva for a month he had the good fortune to go to Mount
Kailasa after his death. (Siva Purana Mahatmyam),
DEVARAKSITA. Sister of Devaki, mother of Sri Krsna.
(See Devaki).
DEVARANYA (M). A holy centre. It was here where
Amba, daughter of the Ka¢i king did tapas. (Udyoga
Parva, Chapter 186, Verse af).
DEVARATA I. A king who flourished in Dharmaputra’s assembly. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 4, Verse 26).
DEVARATA Ii. (Sunasé epha). »
General. A king of Mithila. The kings of Mithila were
commonly called Janaka. Devarata was called Devarata
Janaka, (See Janaka).
2) Genealogy. From Visnu descended thus :—Brahma,—
Bhrgu—Cyavana—Urva— Rcika— Devarata (Sunassepha). (For details see Sunaéiepha)
DEVARATA ITI. A house-holder whose daughter Kala
was married by ‘Sona. Kala was killed. by Marica.
Devarata and Sona along with Vig vamitra went to
ivaloka in search of Kala. As Kala had, at the time
of her death, uttered the word ‘Hara’
gone to Mount Kailasa and was spendin
service of Parvati who, after maki
participate in Somavaravrata sent them bac
(Padma Purana, Patala Khanda, Chapter Fy : ees
DEVASAMAM. A mountain. Here lived Agastya in his
asrama for some time. (M.B. Chapter 88, Verse 17)
DEVASARMA I. A very reputed muni. He had a wilh
called Ruci and a disciple called Vipula. (See Vipula
DEVASARMA II. A Brahmin, an erudite Scholar in the
Vedas. His story was once told to Parvati by Siva as
follows :—
Devagarman, the very erudite brahmin scholar in the
Vedas came to be much respected by the people of the
tour varnas (Castes) because of his constant and unfailing performance of the various religious duties and
rites like the Agnihotra etc. He had sons, relations and
/COWS in abundance. But, he did not observe the ¢uklaPaficami in Prosthapada (Bhadrapada) which js one of
DEVASARMA IV
the dvadasacandra miasas (the 12 solar months ).
That day was his father’s death anniversary (Sraddha
day) for which he would invite Brahmins on the previous evening. And, in the morning he would get cooked rice by his wife in 18 different ways for the gratification of the departed soul. Then will he feed the
Brahmins. On one such day he duly treated a Brahmin
versed in the Vedas. In the evening when he
was washing his feet with water brought by his wife
he heard the following conversation between a dog
and an ox.
Dog :—Please attend to my words about what my
daughter-in-law did. One day, as fate would have it,
I went to my son’s house, where a snake was drinking
milk, and I drank the whole of the milk which was left
over by it. My daughter-in-law saw me drinking it and
I was absolutely crest-fallen. I don’t feel any yearning
even for food.
Ox:—Now dog, please attend to my sorrow and grief.
Today my son feasted the Brahmins, but he did not even
think of me. Nobody gave me evena blade of grass or
a drop of water. I have not tasted anything today.
Moreover I am a captive also. All this must be the result
of some sin committed by me in my past life ; no doubt
about it.”’
The very learned and intelligent brahmin inferred from
the above talk that the dog and ox were his mother and
his father respectively. He thought to himself : they have
been born as animals in my house. What remedy shall
J find out therefor ?
On account of such painful thoughts the Brahmin could
not sleep in the night. Early in the morning he went
to sage Vasistha and unburdened his heart to him and
requested him to find a solution to the low and mean
birth which had become his parents’ fate. After meditating for some time the great sage told the brahmin 4S
follows :—
“Look here, the ox was, in its previous birth, a great
brahmin in Kundinanagara. He did not observe the
ukla-paficami in the month of Prosthapada, the day
being the death anniversary of his father. His wife had
menstruation on the same day, but she herself feasted
the Brahmins. A woman is impure during the four days
of menstruation. Because of having feasted the Brahmins on the first day of her monthly period the Brahmin’s wife was born as a dog. As for the husband, he
was born an ox as he not only did not observe the
ukla-paficami day, but also shared the sin of his wife.
Further questioned by the brahmin as to what he should
do for the salvation of hjs parents, Vasistha advised him
to observe the Rsi paficami in the month of Prosthapada
(Bhadrapada). He did so and his parents blessed him
and attained salvation. (Padma Purana, Chapter 78).
DEVASARMA ITT. (See Mitrabheda),
DEVASARMA IV. The hero of a story told by VisnuSarman.
Visnusarman, the intelligent preceptor, told five stories
ased on five tactics to
Out patiently attempting to
find out the truth, Devagarman is the hero of one 0
the stories.
Story one. Once upon a time there lived in Gaudades@

DEVASARMA V. A
DEVASARMA V
a brahmin called Devasarman with his wife Yajiiasena.
When his wife got pregnant Devagarman told her that a
good and lucky son would be born to them to which she
replied as follows :—‘‘On no account build castles in
the air and brood over things. I shall tell you a story
about a danger which happened to one who built
castles in the air. A brahmacari was carrying home in
a pot on his head some rice flour. On the way he
thought thus : “I will purchase a she-goat with the
money I get out of the sale of this rice powder, and
it will deliver two kids every year. I will sell all the
kids and with the sale proceeds purchase a cow and
when it multiplies I will have the wherewithals for cultivation and then I will do cultivation in a good field
and produce much paddy. And when I have thus money
in hand I will renovate my house and marry. We will
then have a good son whom I will name Somasarman,
and if my wife, without caring for the boy, goes to milk
the cow I will go to the cow shed and give hera good
beating. ‘When his imagination reached this point the
pot on his head received, without his knowing, a blow
with the stick in his hand and it fell down on the ground
and was broken to pieces.” h
Five or six days after telling the above story fo i
husband Yajhasena gave birth toa child. One day nid
went to the river to take her bath leaving the chi
to the care of her husband. Soon after a messenger a
from the palace to invite Devasarman for mi a ml
being Amavasi when Brahmins were fed wer oe acc
given daksina, (presents of money). Fle cou abl fee
till his wife arrived; the child became a problie
him.
The brahmin had a be
the child to the care o!
palace. Within a short time a serpent os
towards the child and the Mongoose a
it it J ces, Naturally the Mongoose
cael uit exet with the blood of the serpent, a i
finding the Mongoose 9°
turning home ml
ea ae eae it might have ae | ia nan
and in a rage he killed the poor Mongoose. ,
ss
feenered te room and WE SY fie dame on
fit, a “> tad returned after bath by now
also found fault with him. hmin in very indiThe second story. Once there was a Bra ene
gent circumstances.
loved Mongoose. After entrusting
of it the Brahmin went ‘0 the
5 seen crawling
tacked it and
got itself
. 3 «while he was 48 one
childhood. One any no food that day ae bos
and tired as he 00 dream that three sanny
miaearest wate oe ium a thal noon and that if beaten to
would come to his house
falls of treasure
death they would turn into three pot full
well. '
with which he could ive co up the treasure in
His dream came true, al
itnesse
who had w!
his room after sending away 4 barber
turne
e barber re ;
the incident with a aoe oO ie ‘false belief that sann
home cherishing in his m1»
. -fulls of
snto pot-fulls ¢
ASI ou me to his
a n to death W sins Ca 3
ce hed: one day some aa and they ram out
house and he began beatin’
: a the attention of the
; . 1eS attracte were cut Oo
crying aloud. Their cih® © ber’ eapon).
servants of the King. :! three-P nged hee rites
and he was killed on Sala (4 used to aa tnight.
cea nf the sea every 10?
e
for the dead at the confluence
DEVASARMA VI.
DEVASMITA
On every such occasion souls of the departed used to appear and bless him. Once Devasarman went to Pitrloka
with his pitrs, and he got restless and sorry to find other
pitrs living there in greater comfort than the pitrs of
his parents. When he was told that the better fate of
ine other pitrs was due to their sons performing Sraddha
at Mahisagarasangama he returned to earth and with the
help of other people did Sraddha at the sangamaand
thus raised the condition of hispitrs. (Skandha Purana.
Skandhas 1, 2 and 3).
A Brahmin who lived on the northern side of river Kaveri. The following story about
him is told in chapters 2, 4 and 12 of the Skanda
Purana.
One day in the month of Karttika he asked his son to
bathe. The son refused to obey his father, who got
angry at the disobedience of the son and cursed him to be
turned into a rat. But, when the son begged his pardon
he said that the boy would resume his old form when
he heard about the greatness of Karttika.
While the Brahmin, thus turned into rat, was roaming
about in the forest it saw Visvamitra maharsi seated
under a tree with his disciples. The maharsi was telling
the disciples about the greatness of Karttika. The Brahmin boy—turned cat—heard the ‘story and reverted to
its old form as the Brahmin boy.
DEVASARMA VII. See Maya Siva.
DEVASATTRA (M).
A yajfia. (See Vana Parva,
Chapter 84, Verse 68).
DEVASENA I. A very intelligent king who ruled his
DEVASENA. II.
country with Sravasti as his capital. (See Unmadini).
Husband of Kirtisena. (See Kirtisena) .
DEVASENA. Daksa’s daughter and wife of Subrahmanya and a woman of rare beauty and purity. Daityasena and Devasena, daughters of Daksa, used to
enjoy themselves at Manasa saras. One day Keéi, the
asura saw them and craved for their love. Daityasena
agreed to become his wife, but Devasena refused, and
she prayed for the help of Indra, who happened to
come there at the moment. Indra and Kesi fought
with each other. Kesi used the club against Indra, who
broke it into two with his vajrayudha. Then Keéi hurled
4 mountain at Indra, who cut it also. Frightened to
death Kesi then ran away with Daityasena to safety,
and Devasena expressed her desire to Indra to have
one who could defeat the Devas, Danavas and Yaksas
as her husband. But, Indra could not find such a one
in the whole universe. Indra told Brahma about it.
The Devas put their heads together and brought forth
Subrahmanya from Siva to be her husband. In the
war between the Devas and the asuras Devasena helped
Subrahmanya, and the asuras were completely destroed. (Vana Parva, Chapters 223, 224).
DEVASILA. See Gayatirtha.
DEVASMITA. A Gem of a woman who was much devoted
to her husband. The story of Devasmita has been so
often quoted in ancient Indian literature. She was the
daughter of a Vaisya called Dharmagupta and was
married to Guhasena, son of a Vaisya called Dhanadatta, who belonged to Tamraliptinagara.
After the death of his fsther Guhasena decided to go to
Katahadvipa for trade, and Devasmita, a very suspicious wife, objected to it. When his other relations began
pressing him to go to the dvipa for trade and his wife
not to go, Guhasena could not take a decision on the

914 DEVAVARNINI
DAVASMITA
t God might take among a thousand merchants. Guhasena too felt his
fea ieciear ayn ———? Deraeuies also followed own doubts about her identity. But, without we bed
him. Then God appeared to them in their dreams her identity she saw the king and told him that she ha
and gave each of them a red lotus flower Saying, “both certain matters to submit before the Prajaparisat (popuof you keep one flower each with you, and while both lar assembly). The King accordingly convened a et
of you are away from each other if either of you go of the assembly and Devasmita identified the four Aen
astray the lotus flower in the hands of the other who had tried to seduce her and submitted all detai :
person will fade.”? And, on awaking both of them had regarding the episode. The King then gave her a lot o
a flower in their hands. Guhasena with his flower in money, appointed the four youths as her servants and
his hands started for Katahadvipa, and Devasmita sta- sent her back home with Guhasena. (Kathasaritsagara,
yed at home with her eyes fixed on her lotus flower. Sathamukhalarbakam, Taranga 5) 7 ;
Guhasena reached the dvipa and traded in gems. Every- DEVASRAVASI A king of the Yayati dynasty. (Bhabody was surprised to find in his hands a lotus flower gavata, Navama Skandha ). a
which never faded, Four Vaisya youngsters wanted to DEVASRAVAS II A Rsi born in Vis vamitra s family.
understand the secret of it and one day they invited He was a mantrika of the Kugika gotra (Santi Parva,
Guhasena to their house and treated him to liquor very Chapter 47, Verse 5).
liberally. When he got absolutely drunk they question- DEVASRUTA, A son of Sukamuni. Suka, the son of
ed him about the secret of the lotus flower, and he, Vyasa married Pivari, the beautiful daughter of the
though in indistinct words, explained it to them. When Pitrs, and to them were born four sons, Krsna, Gaurathe secret was thus out all the four youngsters decided Prabha, Bhiri and Devasruta, and one daughter, Kirti.
to seduce his wife. They extracted from him the infor- ( Devibhagavata, Prathama Skandha).
mation that he was not returning in the near future, DEVASTHANA.
and they then came to Tamralipti, General. A maharsi, who was a friend of the Pandavas.
At that time there lived in LTamralipti a bogus Sannya- Other information, (1) After the §reat war was over this muni
sini (a female anchorite ) called Yogakarandika, The four Visited Dharmaputra and induced him to perform yajiias.
youths from Katahadvipa visited her, and she under- (2) Along with some other munis he gave spiritual
took to fulfil their desire. She asked them to halt at her advice to Dharmaputra and comforted him. (Santi
house and then went to Devasmita with some refreshments. Parva, Chapter 37, Verse 27).
Devasmita’s bitch barked very violently at the bogus an- (3) He was one of the munis, who visited Bhisma on
chorite when she told the former thus :—Child! don’t his bed of arrows. (Santi Parva, Chapter 47, Verse 5).
you see the bitch barking at my very sight. The bitch ig DEVASURAYUDDHA (S) Wars between the gods and
crying thinking of her Previous birth at my sight. Her- asuras. Altogether twelve wars were fought between
self (the bitch) and I were, in our last birth, the wives the Devas and the asuras, viz. Narasimha, Vamana,
of a Brahmin. Since our husband was a courtier at the Varaha, Amrtamathana, Tarakamaya, Adibaka, Traipalace often he was away from home and in his absence pura, Andhaka, Vadha, Vrtravadha, Dhvajapata,
I used to satisfy the cravings of sex by associating freely Halahala and Kolahala., Hiranyakasipu, the daitya
with other males, [| had even at that time realised the was killed by Narasimha. Vamana took Mahabali
truth that there was no duty higher than satisfying the Captive after measuring the three worlds in one stride.
senses, and so I am now reborn with memories of the Hiranyaksa was killed in fighting in the sea by Vardha
past life. As for this bitch in her past life as co-wife with with its tusks. Indra defeated Prahlada and in the
me of the Brahmin, she sinned against her sense-organs Tarakamaya war also killed his son Virocana who had
by upholding, in ignorance, her chastity, as a, Punish- planned to kill] him (Indra), As the Devas could not
ment for which she was born as dog in this life. Yet, she kill the danavas of Tripura, Trilocana killed them.
remembers her past. Vrtra who was aided by the danavas was killed by
Though Devasmita saw through the false and trea- Indra with the help of Visnu. Indra himself killed
cherous heart of the bogus anchorite, without expres- Vipracitti and his followers who became invisible by
sing it she talked in all respect with her, Believing that maya after the felling of the dhvaja (flag Staff), and in
she had succeeded in her mission she told Devasmits the course of celebrating their victory the Devas defeatabout the four youths who had come from Kataha- ed Sandamarka at the yajfiavabhrtha ( Bathing at the
dvipa, and Devasmita welcomed the Idea very gladly. close of the yajfia). Thus were waged twelve wars
Devasmita got some liquor and mixed poison in it. between the Devas and the Asuras, (Padma Purana,
When it was night one of the Vaisya youths came, and Part 4, Chapter 13),
after rendering him unconscious by administering the DEVASVAMT. A Brahmin, (See Vararuci)
poisoned liquor to him Devasmita Stripped him of all DEVATITHI - A king born in the Piru dyno.
his clothes and ornaments, got him Scratched on the was his father and Karambha, daughter of ue
brows by the bitch and threw him into a cow dung Kalinga, his mother. (Adi Parva, Chant 95 39)
heap. Before it was dawn next day he returned to the Devatithi had werided Maryada, daughter of a ae
anchorite’s house, took a bath and dressed himself up in of Videha. (Adi Parva, Chapter 95 V S
decent clothings. His other three companions also visj- DEVAVAHA. A king of the Yayati d erse 23),
ted Devasmita one after the a in the next a Navama Skandha), dynasty, (Bhagavata,
days, and they too underwent t ¢ Same experience as the DEVAVANAM. A sacred place. The ri 5
first one, Lastly the bogus sannyAsini also was got down Nanda flow along this Glace. (Vana Parva ~ - ry
and Devasmita cut her limbs and er her oes — Verse 2 ) pter
after this Devasmita put on the §arb of a merchant an DEVAVARNIN I, Dau hter of Bharadya} i ;
went to Katahadvipa and identified her husband from Visravas married he and to ‘them went mp

DEVAVATI I
called Kubera. (See Kubera).
DEVAVATI I. Daughter of the Gandharva called
Manimaya. Sukeéa, the Raksasa married Devavati, and
three sons Malyavan, Sumali and Mali were born to
them who lived as dependants of Ravana. (Uttara
Ramayana).
DEVAVATI II. Sita, wife of Rama was Devavati in her
previous birth. (See Sita for information for Devavati’s
death in fire and rebirth as Sita).
DEVAVATI III. Daughter of the daitya called Mandaramali. (See Visvakarman, Para 2}
DEVAVITI. Daughter-in-law of king Agnidhra. Pirvacitti, the apsara woman was the king’s wife and they had
nine sons called Nabhi, Kiripurusa, Hari, [lavrta,
Kamuka, Hirafijaya, Kuru, Bhadrasva and Ketumila,
and these sons married the following daughters of Meru,
viz. Merudevi, Pratiripa, Ugradamstri, Lata, Ramya,
Syama, Nari, Bhadra and Devaviti. Thus Devaviti became the wife of Ketumala. (Bhagavata, Paficama
DEVAVIRATA I, Bhisma (See Bhisma for details). or
DEVAVRATA II. A brahmin who believed in yajfias:
He once received without due regard and with inc
ference the tirtha water given to him by a devotee
Krsna after worship of the Lord, as a result of wre
in the next birth, he was born as a bamboo oe : ;
as he did, consciously or otherwise some good deeds Z
Krsna made a flute out of that bamboo dic. an
Devavrata thus attained redemption. (Padma Purana,
Patala Khanda, Chapter 73).
DEVAVRDHA I. A warrior, w
Pandavas in the Kuruksetra war
t Sys 5, Gass :
DEVAVRDIHA ‘a A king who, along ae oe aa
attained heaven as he had mete Sy 8
umbrella, (Santi Parva, Chapter 234,
Pravaga which is
DEVAYAJANAM. The place tre of the ‘Devas. Arabi
Ajnic cen
ight af he ogo aN i groups er
Udyoga Parva, Chapter 186, ee a .
DEVAYAJI. A warrior of Subrahmanya.
Chapter 45, Verse 7)- ee
DEVAYANI. Sukracarya’s daughter. ss had two
l) Birth, Svayambhuvamanu, SoM ©, rata wedded
> anapada. bee hters
d Dies beautiful dau
two eas a bi Surikp ten
Idhmajihva, Yajfiabahu,
ho fought against the
(Karna Parva, Chap-
(Salya Parva,
Sons: Priyavrata an t
Suripa and Barhismat,
of Visvakarmaprajapati, an
Sons called = Agnidhra, ba. Savana, Medhaahavira, Rukmagukra, Ghr ee: i . daughter called
tithi, Vitihotra and Kavi 7 oe thé whole lot. O
rjasvati who was the youngest © and Mahavira were
the above ten sons Kavi, er er Tapasa a
Spiritual giants and great sages. ta by his second wile
Aivata, the three sons of Priyavralt © aradhipatis.
arhismati turned out to be | avrata was a
rjasvati, the only daughter of a evayanl v
to ukracdrya, preceptor of the a ti, (Devibhagave™:
Sukracarya’s daughter by Ugayve™
9 Stama Skandha) ‘
g Curse by Kaca. Kaca, son
ukracarya’s disciple to aan for evel) ss dies
ec science to ward oO dea But after a yaloka
el] Madly in love with Kaca. : eturne Kaca’s
“nder her father were over Kaca cursed that
Ani, W
thout marrying Devayanl,
of Brhaspati _ gr
MrtasaAs nape
on his daughter by Sarmistha,
DEVAYANI
learning should prove useless, And, Kaca cursed her
in return that nobody from devaloka should marry
her. (For details see Kaca).
3) Devayani ina neglected well, Once Vrsaparvan was the
king of the asuras, and Sukracarya lived in his palace.
armistha, the daughter of the king and Devay4ani, the
daughter of Sukracarya became thick friends. While
one day these two friends with their companions were
engaged in water sports Indra came that way. Very
much interested in seeing the deva damsels thus engaged
in water sports Indra assumed the form of air and blew
off the dresses of the damsels from the shore while they
were playing in the river. The damsels hurriedly got
out of water, ran after the fleeing garments and put
on whatever came to their hands. In the confusion what
armistha got and wore was Devay4ni’s clothes. Devayani
ran after Sarmistha and caught hold of the clothes, but
the latter did not yield them to her. Both of them
indulged in hot words against each other, Sarmistha
calling Sukracdarya a beggar living in her father’s
palace for his food. Not only that, she pushed Devayani
into a neglected well and went her way.
At that time prince Yayati, son of Nahusa, was hunting
in that forest. Feeling very thirsty he came to the well
for a drink and therein saw Devayani in tears. He
brought her out from the well and leaving her there
went on his way.
Sukracarya and his wife actually got anxious and upset
that their daughter had not returned even after the
lapse of so much time and deputed their servant
Gurnika to seek for Devayani. She found her out in
the forest. But, Devayani reftised to return home as
she did not want to continue as the daughter of one
who lived on the charity of Sarmistha and her father.
Gurnika carried back this news to Sukracarya, who then
went himself to the forest and met his daughter. He
felt deeply wounded to hear about the insults heaped
and sent word to
Vrsaparvan that they were not returning to the palace,
Vrsaparvan realised that if Sukracarya quarrelled
with him the whole asura world also would become
divided. He, therefore, tried his best to pacify the
acarya and his daughter. At last Devayani agreed to return to the palace incase Sarmistha went to her with one
thousand of her maids to serve as her (Devayani‘s) maids.
Vrsaparvan acted accordingly and Devayani was
satisfied and returned to the palace with her father.
(Adi Parva, Chapter 78 onwards, )
4) Wedding of Devayani. Some time afterwards when
Devayani was sporting in the forest with Sarmistha and
others, King Yayati happened to pass that way. They
recognised each other and Devayani requested Yayati
to marry her as she had mentally chosen him as her
husband on the very same day on which he had saved
her from the well.
Yayati realised only too well that it was really dangerous to marry the daughter of Sukracarya in the forest
secretly and he, therefore, rejected Devayani’s request.
But, she got down her father there and with his permission Yayati married her. He also got much wealth
by way of dowry. Sarmistha and her maids accompanied
Devayani but Sukracarya warned Yayati that On no
account should he touch Sarmistha.
With his wife and her attendants Yayati returned to
his palace; but he put Sarmistha and her maids _

DEVI 216
a place newly built for the purpose. Devayani delivered
a child in due course and it was named Yadu. Sarmistha one day met Yayati in the forest and requested
for a child by him. Though at first he was reluctant to
oblige remembering only too well the injunction of
ukracarya, he at last succumbed to the eloquence of
Sarmistha. She got pregnant by him and the child
she delivered was called Druhyu.
Devayani was alarmed at the birth of a child to
Sarmistha, who was unmarried, and questioned her
about it. Sarmistha’s answer that a brahmin stranger,
who came that way was the father of her child satisfied
Devayani.,
Ere long another son, Turvasu, was born to Devayani,
and Sarmistha too delivered two children called
Anudruhyu and Piru. Thus the mistress (Devayani)
had two sons and her servant, Sarmistha three sons.
While Yayati and Devayani were one day strolling in
the garden the sons of Sarmistha came there. She
noticed the close resemblance of those boys to her
husband ( Yayati) and it kindled her wrath. Though
Yayati did not, because of the presence of Devay4ani,
notice the children, when she asked them who their
father was, they answered “Yayati”, whereupon in
great rage she-ran up to her father. Yayati too followed
er. Devayani told her father about the infidelity of
Yayati and he (Sukra) cursed that Yayati be afflicted
with old age. When Yayati asked for redumption from
the curse Sukracdrya told him that he could exchange
his old age for the youth of somebody else.
Yayati then called together all his five sons and asked
them whether anyone of them was prepared to exchange
his (son’s) youth for his (Yayati’s) old age for one
thousand years. The three elder sons refused to agree
to the proposal, but the fourth son Piru gladly exchanged his youth with his father’s old age. After spending
his life in youthful enjoyment for one thousand
years Yayati returned his youth to Piru, and Paru
Hane Kingship of the country. (Adi Parva, Chapters
5) Synonyms Sor Devayéni. Auganasi, Sukratanaya and
Bhargavi,
DEVI. (Mahamaya). Though Devi is without a beginning it 1s told how she became first visible to living beings,
1) Beginning: While Mahavisnu was resting on a fig
Nanyadasti sanatanam.
(All that is, Iam. There is nothing eternal but me. ).
This declaration astonished Visnu, but he could not
understand who made it. While he was meditating
upon it, Devi appeared to him in the following manner.
Devi’ held in her four sacred hands weapons like the
conch, the disc, the club and the lotus flower and was
clad in divine clothes and wore divine ornaments and
was attended upon by powers! like Rati (the erotic) ,
Bhiti (riches and prosperity), Buddhi (intelligence) ,
Mati (intellect) , Kirti (reputation) , Dhrti (understanding
1. Ratir bhitistatha buddhirmati kirtih smrtirdhrtih {
Sraddha, medha, svadha, svaba Ksudha, nidra, daya, gatih {
Tustih pustih ksama lajjA jrmbha tandra Ca Saktayah |
Samsthitah Sarvatah parsve Mahadevyah prthak prthak. //
DEVI
capacity), Smrti (ability to remember), Sraddha (attention, concentration), Medha (intellect), Svadha, Svaha,
Ksudha (thirst), Nidra (sleep) , Daya (compassion) , Gati,
(momentum ), Tusti (pleasure, happiness) Pusti (growth,
progress), Ksama (patience, forberance), Lajja (sense
of shame), Jrmbha and Tandra (laziness).
And, the Devi spoke to Mahavisnu . as follows:—After
all, what is there to be wondered at. Whenever the
world faced the phenomenon of Srstisthitilaya (creation, existence and absorption into the primordial force)
you too have come up due to the power of Mahaéakti.
As for Paragakti (the ultimate, universal force) it is
above and beyond all attributes. We, all of us, possess
attributes. From the nabhi (navel) of yourself in whom
sattvaguna (gentle attributes) predominates will be
born Brahma in whom rajoguna (active attributes)
will predominate, and ‘from the centre of his brows
will be born Rudra with tamoguna (black, destructive
attributes). Brahma, by the force of his tapas will earn
powers of creation and will with his rajoguna create
the world blood-red in colour, and you will be the
sustainer and guardian of that world. The very same
world will be annihilated by Rudra at the end of the
Kalpa era. You please do know that I am the sittvic
force which depend on you for the purpose of creation.
All creations of worlds have been made according to
the suggestions of Devi.
2) Origin of Devi. Once King Janamejaya questioned
Vyasa about the birth of Devi to which he replied as
follows :—
Even Brahmavisnumaheévaras (Brahma, Visnu and
iva—the Hindu trinity) are not capable of thinking
about the origin of Devi. Then, what about me? Yet
let me make an attempt. All the forces—everything—
which appear in various names and forms are in fact
Devi herself, her different manifestations. Just as a
forms, actions etc. she is addressed. by different names.
(Devi Bhagavata, Paficama Skandha). ~
3) Five forms of Devi, When primordial nature (Milaprakrti) incarnated or manifested in the form of Visnu
the desire for creation raised its head in him. And, at
once the Devi—female—aspects in Visnu manifested
in five forms like Durga, Laksmi, Sarasvati, Savitri and
Radha. These five — forms are designated as the
Paficadevis. Brief notes on the five Devis are given
below.
(1) Durgadevi. Mother of Ganeéa bhagavan. (God with
the elephant’s head). She is the consort of Siva.
Nardayani, the Visnumaya, -is none else than Durga.
She is also perfect Brahma, the one and the only one
with no second to it. She is worshipped by Devas like
Brahma and by sages and maharsis. She is the basis,
the root and root cause of. everything. She is eternal,
upholder of dharma, truth itself and the giver and
Promoter of happiness, reputation, welfare, salvation
etc. as also of sorrow, grief, pain etc. She takes great
(Devi Bhagavata, Prathama, Skandha).
a

DEVI
»ucasure in removing the worries and sorrows of devotees who seek refuge in her. She is all-power, achievements and assets personified. All imaginable permutations and combinations of every attribute comprise in
her and she it is who activates the universal soul.
2) Laksmi. ‘This Devi is the most sublime form of the
universal soul, nay, the universal soul itself. She is all
wealth and riches personified, and she is the very seat of
beauty, compassion, welfare, peace, all goodness etc.
Evil traits like anger, avarice, haughtiness etc. are miles
away from her. She is all sympathy and_ kindness
towards her devotees. In Vaikuntha, as Mahalaksmi she
is ever engaged in the service of her husband, Visnu.
In heaven she is the very glory of it. In houses she
appears as the welfare and prosperity of the inmates.
She is in fact beauty itself and is the essence of beauty
everywhere. She is all-emerciful, and worshipped by
all.
(3) Sarasvati. She is very base and fountain head of and
the presiding deity of the word, intellect, knowledge,
the arts etc. She also is of the form of the ‘universal
soul and liberally grants intellect, poetical skill, reason
and logic, understanding capacity etc, to her se ee
The finest music with all its beauties originates Irom
her. Yes, she is the goddess of all learning, fine arts ae
every branch of knowledge. Like the ice piece, ik
Jasmine flower etc. she is beautiful in her white ee
She recited the holy names of Sri Krsna. She ss O ae
form of tapas and mre ae pang Ab eat
she it is who grants all guts an F lanenteen (ea
‘. the goddess of language am carming on
a A aaa her human beings would lose their
capacity to speak. |
(4) Sdavitridevi. She 1s moth
classes) Vedangas, the tan
chanting of holy sry Bes f
wen “the pipet of Brahman, the very essence O
is eterna
truth and existence and supreme bliss. She
basis and pith
orms the very basis
and grants i git anol of the universal soul.
This ott Oe a i as been purified by the touc
+ of this Devi. : py
bye eadhikadevi, ffth of the paficaprakt tis 1S
. at
e pranas and She 1s ©
the presiding deity. Jon ote Pexceptionally beautiful
those prem ‘ness, sublime an
ame “re all fortunes and ee ual
rsi
serious, and the const 5 - ‘tributes as the lord.
and equally endowed with divine 4 a!
f an
She is formless also, BON Lae
unattached and detached, al
great Devas ot mel
even Agni would not burt” cath &
Ralpa os the daughter ‘4 Vrsabhanu;
sacred feet trod over this an -
“holy. Once Brahma did tape" ut cou
a glimpse of the Devi s
were able to see her only 4
er of the four varnas (aaa?
tric science €tc. She is 0
names and mantras),
he
nated herse
incal
passion for the world, inc ¢ Devi. The
(See Prakrti). ¢, f ations ;
4 sari | artial manifer the five forms of the
) Amar iipa(s) —p at erned wil ow; here are
above discussion was ©° festations OF born
Devi in her full an anal manic
six other Devis, who are Devi.
from certain parts of ine
the .origin of the vegetable
DEVI
(1) Gangadevi. This Devi who flows in the form of
water and washes off men’s sins takes her origin from
the body of Mahavisnu. (There is another story which
traces Ganga’s origin to the Anda (egg or seed) of
Brahma). (See Ganga).
(2) Tulasi. Sheis the lover and also the servant at
the feet of Visnu. She also washes off men’s sins and
promotes their welfare. (See Tulasi).
(3) Manasadevi Manasadevi, who was born as a daushter of Kasyapa is another partial incarnation of
Mahamaya. She is a great tapasvini, a favourite disciple of Sankara, unique in learning and erudition,
sister of Ananta (the king of Serpents), the presiding
deity of Mantras, wife of Jaratkaru muni and mother
of Astika muni. (See Manasadevi) .
(4) Devasenddevi. Since this Devi has been born out of a
sixth part of Mahamaya she is called Sasthidevi also. It
is this Devi, who gives children to living beings and also
protects them. For one year from the birth of a child
this Devi should be worshipped. Those who cannot
afford it should worship Devi on the 6th or 2lst day
after a child is born. (See Devasena).
(5) Marigalacandika. She is born. from the face of
Milaprakrti. Anybody who propitiates and pleases
her will be the recipient of all good things like sons and
grandsons, wealth, reputation, welfare etc. (See Mangalacandika) . |
(6) Bhimidevi. She is the basis for all things, soil for
kingdom, the treasure
house of all gems and the very incarnation of compassion and sympathy. (See Bhimidevi).
5) Amsakalddevi(s) . Another class of devis who are
also partial manifestations of the Supreme Devi. They
are born out of the parts of Mahadevi. The following
are the Amsakaladevis.
(1) Svdhddevi. Consort of Agni Bhagavan (Fire God).
Gyaha is worshipped in all the worlds. If havis (oblation) is offered without repeating her name the Devas
will not accept it.
(2) Daksipadevi. Wife of Yajfiadeva, this Devi is worshipped by all. Without this Devi all Karmans (actions)
in the world will become futile.
(3) Diksadevi. Wife of Yajfiadeva, this Devi is worshipped by all.
Diyate vimalam jfianam
Ksiyate karmavasana
Tena dikseti sa prokta.
The Devigrants pure knowledge.
(4) Svadhadevi. Wite of the Pitrs, worshipped by manes
and men. Offerings made to the Pitrs without honouring this Devi will prove to be futile.
(5) Svastidevi. Consort of the Vayu. When offering Daksina
and making divya-dana (divine gifts) if ‘Svasti’ (may
good happen) is not uttered the gifts will be of no use.
(6) Pustidevi. Wife of Ganapati. If this Devi ceased to
exist men and women would become feeble, because
she is the source of all strength.
7) Tustidevi. Consort of Ananta worshipped by everybody. If the Devi ceased to exist there. would be no
happiness in the world.
(8) Sampatti devi. Wife of Ilsana. Worshipped by Devas
and men. If the Devi ceased to exist the whole world
would become poor and indigent.
(9) Dhrti. Consort of Kapila. Everybody worships her

DEV! 218
all the time. If the Devi ceased to exist the whole world
would become timid and cowardly.
(10) Satidevi. Wife of Satya. Well-wisher of all, this
Devi is worshipped by muktas. (people released from
worldly attachments). If the Devi ceased to exist there
would be no friendship and amity between people.
(11) Dayadevt. Wife of Moha. If the Devi ceased to
exist the world would become hellish and a fierce battle
field.
(12) Pratisthadevi. Wife of Punya. In the absence of
this Devi, who grants good and happy results to people’s
actions the whole world would become as though it
were dead.
(13) Szddhadevi.
(14) Kirtidevi. Both the Devis, Siddha and Kirti are
wives of Sukarma. If they ceased to exist the whole
world would be bereft of reputation and become lifeless
like a dead body.
(15) Kripyddevi. Wife of Udyoga. If she ceased to exist
the whole world would become inactive and cease to
function.
(16) Muithyddevi. Wife of Adharma. Wayward and
characterless people worship this Devi. If the Devi
ceased to exist the whole world as evolved by Brahma
would cease to exist. This Devi was not seen anywhere
in the world during Krtayuga. She began to appear
in a subtle form here and there during Tretayuga. In
dvaparayuga she attained more growth and then her
limbs and organs became doubly strong. In Kaliyuga
she developed to her full stature and growth and goes
about everywhere with her brother, Cheat (Kapata).
(17) Sdntidevi. (see below).
(18) Lajjadevi. Both the Devis, Santi and Lajja are goodnatured wives. If they ceased to exist the world would
become dull and sleepy.
(19-20-21 ) Buddhidevi, Medhadevi and Dhrtidevi. These
three Devis are wives of Jiiana. If they ceased to exist
the world would become steeped in ignorance and
foolishness,
(22) Marti. Wife of Dharma. She is very beautiful and
effulgent. In her absence the universal souy]- would become devoid of vitality, helpless and meaningless,
(23) Sridevi. Wife of Mali. Her absence wil] make the
world lifeless. |
(24) Nidradevi. Wife of Kalagni. The Devi
who has attained realisation, affects everybody
world during night and makes the
and plunges them in sleep. In the absence of this Devi
the world will become a lunatic asylum.
25-26-27) Ratri, Sandhya and Divasg. These three are.
ne of Time (Kala) . In their absence oe
have any sense of time and none would be able to calculate and fix time.
(28-29) Visappu and Daéham.
Daham = thirst. These two Devis are the wives of
greed (Lobha). They go about the world affecting
people and thus making them worried and miserable.
(30-31) Prabhadevi and Dahiké devi are the wives of
Tejas (Vitality). Without them Igvara will fndit impossible to continue the function of creation.
(32-33) Mrtyu and Jara are the consorts of Prakrstajvara and daughters of Kala. And, if they cease to exist,
Brahma’s creation would also cease. (For Brahma’s
creation individual souls with the will for action are
DEVI
necessary. He cannot create a soul of his own. So
death is a pre-condition of creation, birth. If there is
no death there isno birth also. There is a school of
thought which maintains that if there is no death but
only birth there will not be space on earth for the living,
and therefore birth will stop if there is no death. ).
(34-35) Tandra and Priti are the daughters of Nidra and
consorts of Sukha (pleasure, happiness). These Devis go
around the world on the orders of Brahma.
(36-37) Sraddhé and Bhakti are the consorts of Vairagya
(aversion to worldly comforts, renunciation) and they
give salvation to the souls of the people in the world.
Aditi, mother of the Devas, Diti, mother of the Asuras,
Surabhi, mother of cows, Kadri, mother of serpents
and Vinata, mother of Garudas are also involved in the
process of creation, and they are born out of parts of
Devi.
6) Idol of Devi. There are special injunctions for making idols of the Devi for installation in temples. Candikadevi should have twenty hands. The hands onthe
right side should hold Sila, sword, disc, cord,
damaru, Sakti etc. and the hands on the left side should
hold nagapaéa, flag, club, mirror etc. (There are also
idols with slight differences from the above).
Laksmidevi would hold in her right hand the lotus
flower and a Kiwvala fruit in the left. Sarasvatidevi will
have in her hands books, aksamala and vina. Gangadevi
rides on a makaramatsya (fish) holding in her hands
a pot and lotus flowers. Yamunadevi rides the turtle
with a pot in hand and she is blue in colour.
Now, about the saptamatrs. ‘Tumburu, white in colour,
and mounted on an ox restson a éila with vind in hand
before the Matrs. Among the Matrs Brahmi has four
faces, wears the aksamala and holds the aksapatra etc.
in her left hand. She is seated on a swan. Sankari ©
(Mahe$vari) is white in colour. She has in her right
hand bow and arrows, and the disc and bow in her left
hand. The ox is her vehicle, Kaumari is seated on the
peacock. She has two hands in one of which is held
Sakti (Vel). Laksmi has in her right hand the conch
and disc, and the club and the lotus flower jn her left
hand. Varahi rides the buffalo with staff, sword, club
and conch in her hands. Indrani is seated on the club,
holding diamond in her hands. She has a thousand
eyes. Camundi has three eyes and is without flesh in the
body. Her hairs are raised above. She holds in her left
hand elephant’s skin and $ila in the right hand. At
times she is seated on a corpse also.
Now, about the idols of the eight Arnbas. Rudra Carccika holds a skull, Stila and cord in her hands. She
wears elephant’s skin, her legs slightly held up. She
becomes Rudracaémunda when she assumes eight hands,
and holds the skull and _ the damaru. And in dancing
pose she is called Nates vari, and with four faces Mahalaksmi. She is called Siddhacamunda when she assumes
the form with ten hands and three eyes, and when she
cats men, horses and_ buffaloes. In this form she holds
in her right hand the sword, damaru etc. and in her
left hand the Trig ula, bell etc. Since the Devi is sarvasiddhipradayika (giver of all divine attainments of
assets) she is Siddhayogesvari also. There is also another Devi in this very form who holds the pasa and
Amkuféa in her hand and who is slightly red in colour.
She is called Bhairavi. When Bhairavi assumes the
form with twelve hands she is called Ripavidya. All the

DEVIBHAGAVATA 219
above eight Devis were born in burial grounds and are
Raudramirtis. They are known as the Astambas.
DEVIBHAGAVATA. The Saivas venerate this book as
one of the eighteen Puranas. But according to the Vaisnavites, this is an authoritative book of a_loftier level
than the eighteen Puranas. (See under Purana).
DEVIKA I. (VEDIKA). Daughter of Govasa, the Saibya King. She was wedded by Yudhisthira in Svayaimvara, and to them were born a son called Yaudheya.
(Adi Parva, Chapter 95, Verse, 76).
DEVIKA II. A holy centre. A dip in the tirtha there
will give the same result as that of a yajiia. (M.B. Vana
Parva, Chapter 82, Verse 102).
DEVIPITHA. The dead body of Satidevi crumbled into
small pieces and fell in different places in Bharata.
Each place where a piece of the dead body fell, is known
by the name Devipitha. There is a reason why the
dead body crumbled into pieces. an
Daksa performed a sacrifice to which Siva was not ivitifice, and committed
ed and Satidévi came to the sacri
Siva who became furlsuicide by jumping into the fire.
ous, liey pats ‘atid carrying the dead body a os
wife on his shoulder, walked the length and breadth o
Bharata like a mad man. It seemed pet was ie
going to recover from this mania, and the ae ( gone
were worried at this. To rescue iva fi se - a hea
disposition, Mahavisnu, unseen by 0 " oy tae
Siua with a bow and arrow. Whenever - W a ceal
nient Mahavisnu sent an arrow at the body of satidevt,
“r i he hitting of the arrows
on the shoulder of iva ith S and fell here and
the b as crumbled into piece gn
rake Mae within a few days the Hoe eee
came to an end an Siva walked to a a tne
pieces of the dead body fell in 108 agen te
Devipithas came into existence. as a is kaw i
places and the names by which the Ve
such places are given below. wide ween
Devipitha visalaksi a
1, Varanasi Lingadharim
2. Naimisarany4 Kumuda
3. Prayaga . Ramu
4, Gandhamadana a muda
2. Daksa Kailasa (Manas2) Fide
6. Uttara Kailasa Manasa) Gautam _
s Gonians wren’
. Mandara adotkat
9. Caitraratha Jayanti
10. Hastinapura Gauri _
ll, Kanyakubja Rambha
12. Malayacala Kirtimati
13. Ekamrapitha Vis ie lo
14, Viéva Puruhula..
15. Puskara b Sanmargacsyi"
16. Kedarapitha Manda.
Li, Himavatprstha Bhadrakarnii
18. Gokarna Bhavani |.
19, Sthanvisvara ae —
20, Villvaka eee
21. Sri Saila Bhadra
22. Bhadregvara jJay4 als
23. Varahasgaila mete
24. Kamalalaya Ruel”:
Kali
25. Rudrakot!
26. Kalafijara
Salagrama
Sivalinga
Mahalinga
Makota
Mayapuri
Santana
Gaya
Purusottama
Sahasraksa
Hiranyaksa
Vipasa
Pundravardhana
Suparsva
. Trikuta
Vipula
Malayacala
Sahyadri
Hariscandra
Ramatirtha
Yamunatirtha
Vikota tirtha
Madhavavana
Godavaritirtha
Gangadvara
Sivakunda
Devikatata
Dvaravatl
Vrndavana
Madhura
Patala
Citrakuta
Vindhya
Karavira
Vinayaka
Vaidyanathatirtha
Mahakala
Usnatirtha
Vindhyaparvata
Mandavya
Mahesvaripura
Chagalanda
Amarakantaka
Somes vara
Prabhasa
Sarasvati
Mahalaya
Payosni
Krtasauca
Karttika
Varttaka
Sonasangama
Siddhavana
Bharatasrama
Jalandhara
Kiskindhaparvata
Devadaruvana
Kasmiramandala
Himadri
Kapalamocana
Kayavarohana
Sankhoddhara
Pindaraka
Candrabhaga
Acchoda
Vena
DEVIPITHA
Mahadevi
Jalapriya
Kapila
Mukutes vari
Kumari
Lalitambika
Mangala
Vimala
Utpalaksi
Mahotpala
Amoghaksi
Patala
Narayani
Rudrasundari
Vipula
Kalyani
Ekavira
Candrika
Ramana
Mregavati
Koti
Sugandha
Trisandhi
Ratipriya
Subhananda
Nandini
Rukmini
Radha
Devaki
Parameés vari
Sita
Vindhyadhivasini
Mahalaksmi
Umadevi
Arogya
Mahes vari
Abhaya
Nitamba
Mandavi
Svaha
Pracanda
Candika
Vararoha
Puskaravati
Devamata
Mahabhaga
Pingales vari
Simhika
Atisankari
Utpala
Subhadra
Mata (Laksmi)
Ananga
Vig vamukhi
Tara
Pusti
Medha
Bhima
Suddhi
Mata
Dhara
Dhrti
Kala
Sivadharini
Amrta

DEVISTHANA
92. Badaryasrama Urvasi |
93. Uttarakuru Au sadhr
94. WKusgadvipa Kusobha :
95. Hemakita Manmatha_
96. Kumuda Satyavadini
97. Asvattha Vandaniya
98. Vaisravanalaya Nidhi
99. Vedapatana Gayatri
100. Sivasannidhi Parvati
101. Devaloka Indrani
102. Brahmaloka Sarasvati
103. Suryabimba Prabha
104. Matrloka Vaisnavi
105. Satitirtha Arundhati
106. Ramatirtha Tilottama
107. Citta Brahmakala
108. Jiva<arira Sakti
DEVISTHANA. A holy place, dedicated to Sakambhari
Devi. It is stated in Mahabharata (Vana Parva, Chapter
84, Stanza 13) that one who stays in this holy place
and eats greens (cira or kira) for three days will get
the fruits of eating greens for twelve years.
DEVITIRTHA(M). The common name of three holy
centres (Sankhini, Madhuvati, Mrgadhima) in Kuruksetra. I’hose who bathe in Sankhini will become beautiful in appearance, while those who bathe in Madhuvati and Mrgadhima will get the benefits of performIng a thousand godanas (gifts of cows ),
DHA. This letter means dharana, Sobhana, Dhata, dhattura (umma plant). (Chapter 348, Agni Purana).
DHAMA. A hermit who protected Ganga-Mahadvara.
(Mahabharata, Udyoga Parva, Chapter 111, Stanza
DHAMADHAMA: A follower of Subrahmanya. (Sloka
27, Chapter 46, Salya Parva).
DHANAKA., A kine of the Yayati dynasty. (Navama
Skandha, Bhagavata).
DHANAPALA. A Vaisya who lived jn the city of Ayodhya. He built in Ayodhya a temple for the Sun-god
and appointed, for a year, paying his wages in advance,
a scholar well versed in Puranas to read aloud the
Puranas in the temple. After six months Dhanapala
died and asa result of the goodness accrued to him b
his worthy deeds the Sun-god came to him with his
chariot and took him to his place and seating him on
his seat paid respects to him. Later he was taken to
Brahmaloka. (Bhavisya Purana, Brahma Kanda
Chapter 94)._ vo?
DHANASARMA. A brahmin belonging to Madhyadeéa.,
Once when Dhanasgarma went to the forest to get
darbha he confronted three flerce evil spirits and getting frightened ran away irom them. But the spirits
followed him and the Brahmin then cried and said
“Oh, please do not harm me. Mahavisnu will bless
The moment they heard the name of Visnu there came
a change in them. They reiterated their story to
Dhanagarma. ‘I heir names were Vaisakha, Sudasa and
Advaita. Because of the ingratitude of Vaigakha he
got a nick-name ‘Krtaghna’ (ungrateful man) also. All
the three were human beings in their Previous. birth.
Not only that, Advaita was
All the three became evil spirits because of their sins,
From the conversation Dhanagarma understood that
Vaisakha was his father and they then knew each other,
DHANANJAYA V
The son then anxiously enquired what he should do to
absolve his father of his sins and save him from hell.
Vaisakha then told him observe the vrata, Vaigakhapurnima. He did that and all the spirits went to
heaven. (Chapter 94, Padma Purana).
DHANAVARDHANA. A virtuous Vaigya who lived in
the island of Puskara in the Krtayuga. Once Dhanavardhana after having performed Vaisvadeva sat for
his food. At that time he heard a cry from outside
“Annarh dehi (give me food)’’. Dhanavardhana immediately came out to see who the visitor was but seeing
none went in and started taking his food. Because he
ate his food once left aside, his body was torn to
hundred pieces. (Bhavisya, Brahma Kanda).
DHANAVATI. See Siryaprabha.
DHANANJAYA I. A famous serpent. This serpent was
born to Kasyapaprajapati of his wife Kadra. (Sloka 5,
Chapter 35, Adi Parva). This serpent served as a rope to
bind the horses to the chariot of Siva during the time
of burning to death the Tripuras. (Sloka 29, Chapter
34, Karna Parva). This serpent sits in the court of
Varuna and worships him. (Sloka 9, Chapter 9,
Sabha parva). |
DHANANJAYA II. Another name for Arjuna. (See under
Arjuna).
DHANANJAYA III. The army given to Subrahmanya by
Siva. (Sloka 17, Chapter 46, Salya Parva),
DHANANJAYA IV. A Sanskrit critic who lived during
DHANANJAYA V. There was
a king called Harivira. |
the period between 11th and 12th century A.D. He was
a member of the court of King Mujija. His important
work is ‘Dagaripaka’. This work contains three
hundred élokas divided in four separate divisions. After
the death of Muiija, Dhanika, brother of Dhanafijaya,
wrote a commentary on this work. The treatise. is
named‘ Dasariipavaloka’. There are several] quotations in
this from the Sanskrit dramas “Venisarnhara’ and ‘Ratnavali’. He has in this work discussed Drama and Poetry
in general giving prominence to the emotional side of It.
The critical work, Dagariipavaloka, contains quotations
from a book ‘Kavyanirnaya’ by Dhanika himself, But
the work ‘Kavyanirnaya’ has not yet been made available. Even in composing poetry Dhanafijaya was well
versed. He is the author of the well-known epic ‘Raghavapandaviya’. It is known as ‘Dvisandhana Kavya’ also.
This is based on the lives of Pandavas and §rj Rama.
Dhanafijaya bears the name of Srutakirt; also. It is
stated by scholars that Raghavapandaviya was written
during the period 1123 to 1140 A.D. (History of classical Sanskrit Literature) .
once a brahmin ascetic
called Dhanafijaya in the gotra of Vasistha. This hermit
had hundred wives and got hundred sons, one by each
of his wives. The son born of his wife Sabhaka (Salaka)
was named Karuna. The father divided his assets
equally among his sons and yet they quarrelled with
each other,
Once Karunamuni went to the shores of Bhavanasini along with a few other munis to worship
Narasithha, There a brahmin had brought a lovely
lime as an offering to the deity. Karuna took the lime
from him and smelt it. At this the brahmin got angry
and cursed him. “Sinner, may you live as a fly for a
hundred years, Then Mahatma Dadhica will give you
back your original form.” Karuna instantly became @
Ls

DHANANJAYA VI
fly and he pleaded to his wife thus “Beloved, I have
become a fly. Please do protect me.’ Karuna started
flying hither and thither and his cruel brothers made
the fly fall in oil and killed it. Sucismita, wife of
Karuna, started weeping laying the dead fly in her lap.
Arundhatidevi passing that way saw her and consoled
her thus: ‘Sucismita, stop lamenting. I shall bring it
to life this instant by sacred ashes.’ So saying the Devi
took some ashes from the fire-pit and reciting the
powerful Mrtyuiijaya mantra sprinkled it on the dead
body of the fly. Sucismita fanned the fly. The potency
of the ashes brought the fly back to life.
After a hundred years one of his relatives killed it
again. Sucismita grief-stricken, took the dead fly to the
Maharsi, Dadhica. The sage told her thus: “Tt was
bhasma (sacred ashes) that gave life three times to
Jamadagni, Kasyapa, the devas and myself. I will,
therefore, give life to thy husband by bhasma itself.”
Dadhica took some ashes and meditating on Mahesvara
recited a mantra and sprinkled it on the dead fly and
brought it back to life. By the touch of Dadhica, the
fly, husband of Sucismita, became Karuna again and’
both of them went back to their hermitage. (Chapter
101, Padma Purana). 7
DHANANJAYA VI. A brahmin devotee of Mahavisnu
who lived in the Treta yuga. Once, in winter, when
for want of proper clothing he could bear the biting
cold no longer, he broke some twigs of the Agvattha
tree (poplar leafed fig tree) and made fire to warm
him. When Dhanafijaya broke the twigs lt gave reflective pain on the body of Mahavisnu. But Mahavisnu
who was aware of the unflinching a of pee oe
1 ae ' ispleased but appeare
jaya to himself was not displeas apPoody. The
Dhananiava with wounds all over
Bivihmnin i how Visnu got the wounds ce 2
knowing that it was the consequence of his one ng. -
twigs of Agvattha Dhanaiijaya in utter grie¢ ae e "
cut his own head off. Greatly pleased Visnu s opps
him from his attempt and asked him by ne a Pee 2
Very modestly he replied that he woul e ert
he was given the strength to continue as a
Vi Purana, Kriya Kanda) .
CeecaRA. A Brahmin born 1n the city of mre be
Abandoning the duties enjoined by pee a Bae
Brahmin he strayed away — ee si of sins. He
all sorts of sins. He became a5 Ps revels he
w
al in: nerce and once
bihsh sce damm There he met many people
reached the city of Mahismati. . to obfrom several adjoining villages who had ue ei: Ae 6
serve the Karttika Vrata. Later Dhanesvara We sh dict
a cobra there and fell down fainting. Very Va mia came
When he died the messengers e There, Citrahi —" — Ya he ans ogg oer
sat erilnnes from boyhood till hus SO eer of any
added ‘Even from boyhood Pie tet hati the sins he
good deed done by him. On the atiee ear. He is an
has committed could not be sé fe hell till. the
incarnation of evil. He must pon the body of vam
end of the world.” On healt lling aside an attenblazed like flame with anger MC 0°), “take this sinnet
dant he ordered, ‘Hi; Pretapala aa throw him into
away, beat him ‘with spiked clubs ie took him away
Kumbhipaka”. Pretapalaka instanty d club threw
-spike
and breaking his head with a thorn-sP
DHANURVEDA
him into a copper vessel containing burning oil. But to
his great amazement the burning oil became cold as
soon as the body of Dhanegvara came into contact with
it just as it happened once before in the case of Prahlada.
The perplexed attendant can to Yama and told him of
this strange incident. Yama was also surprised at this
novelty in hell and called back Dhanesvara and_ started
enquiring about his life once again. Narada came there
at that time. Both of them then talked about Dhanesvara.
Narada told Yama how the unanticipated thing so
happened because DhaneSvara on the eve of his death
spent some time with people who were observing the
Karttika Vrata washing away thus all the sins accumulated so far in his life. Hearing that Yama took Dhanes -
vara round hell and giving Dhanesvara, the position of
a Yaksa sent him to Kuberapuri. (Ghapter 115, Padma
Purana).
DHANI. A messenger of'the asuras called Kapas. The
Kapas once sent Dhani to preach moral code among the
Brahmins. (Chapter 157, Anusasana Parva, M.B.)
DHANIKA. A Sanskrit poet. (See Dhanafijaya [V).
DHANUGRHA. (DHANUGRAHA, DHANURDHARA)
One of the hundred sons of Dhrtarastra. He was killed
in the great battle by Bhimasena. (Sloka 62, Chapter 84,
Karna Parva, M.B.).
DHANUVAKTRA. A soldier of Subrahmanya. (Sloka
62, Chapter 49, Salya Parva, M.B.).
DHANURVEDA.
General information. A scientific treatise on the art of
warfare in ancient Bharata. Because of the undue importance of the science the treatise is deemed and respected as a Veda. There have been innumerable books on the
subject to teach Dhanurveda to the Ksatriya youths,
In the book ‘Prasthanabheda’ by Madhusidana Sarasvati he states that Dhanurveda is a branch of Yajurveda.
A Sanskrit book called Dhanurvedasamhita is now
available. Some scholars are of opinion that not much
antiquity can be attributed to this work. Many books
relating to Dhanurveda have been lost to us. What
details are there in Agni Purana are given below :
2) Divisions of Dhanurveda. This is known as Catuspada
(four-footed) also because of the fact that the four
main constituents of an army are the chariots, elephants,
horses and men. Dhanurveda has been divided into
five parts (1) Yantramukta, (2) Panimukta, (3) Muktasandharita, (4) Amukta and (5) Bahuyuddha. There is
another division according to Astra. and Sastra. There
is yet another division of the science into two by some
scholars from a different viewpoint calling them Maya
and Rju.
Yanttamukta (Yantra=machine). This means a warfare where machines are used. Ksepini (sling) bow and
arrow and other such machines are included in this.
Panimukta. (Pani=hand). This is where the hand is used
mainly. Stone, mace etc. are used in this.
Muktasandharita. ‘This includes the use of weapons like
a spear.
Amukta. The use of a weapon like a sword which never
leaves your hand.
Bahuyuddha. (B&hu=head). The fight with only bare
hands without the use of a weapon. One who wishes
to fight should make ready his own weapons. He should
be one who will never get tired even after exertion. A
war with bows and arrows is considered the best and

DHANURVEDA
most manly, that with a spear ranks next, a fight with a
sword is bad and a fight with hands, the most mean.
3) The Trainees. Only a brahmin is entitled to bea preceptor in Dhanurveda. The Ksatriya and Vaisya should
learn from him. The Sidra can fight of his own in
danger. He is not allowed to learn military science
from a preceptor. Those mixed-born are to help the
king during a war.
4) Vartous postures. ‘There are nine different ways of
standing when you give a fight, classified according to
the different positions of one’s foot, heel and knee.
Samapada. When you stand with your Angustha, Nariyani (Gulpha), Pani and Pada closely joined together,
it is termed Samapada.
Vaisakha. Weep your legs twentyseven inches apart and
without bending your knees stand erect throwing your
weight on the fingers of the foot. This stand is called
Vaisakha.
Mandala. Keep your knees thirtysix inches apart and
stand in the shape of a harhsapankti and this position
is called Mandala.
Alidha. Bend your right knee and thigh in the shape of a
plough and without any movement to that posture
draw your left leg fortyfive inches apart. This stand is
called Alidha.
Pratyalidha. If you bend your left knee and thigh and
stand like above it is called Pratyalidha.
jaia. Place your right foot straight and place the left one
perpendicular to the right one with the heels and the
ankles of the feet five fingers apart. The whole length
of the posture should not exceed twelve fingers. This
stand is called Jata.
Dandaydia. Keep the right knee bent and the left leg
straight or vice versa: This posture is called Dandayata.
Vikata. If for the above posture the distance between
the two legs is two palm-length it is Vikata.
Svaputa. Keep the knees vigunas and the feet Uttayanas
for the posture of Svaputa.
Svastika. Keep your legs sixteen fingers apart and raise
your feet a little keeping the level of both the feet equal.
This is Svastika.
5) Use of arrows. Before a man is to make use of a bow
and arrow he should first take the posture of Svastika
and bow down. He should take the bow by the left hand
take the arrow by the right hand. He then should adopt
a posture of either Vaisakha or Jata and taking the bow
should sink into ihe earth one end of the bow and
draw the bow-string up to the other end and see whether there is sufficient length for the string. He should
take an arrow from his sheath and thrust the arrowhead into the ground near the bow. He should
place his elbow on the top of the arrow with his forearm
bent and fist clenched. If the clenched fist touches the
top of the bow that bow and arrow is superior to an
other. He should tie the bow-string in a way that the
distance between the tied bow-string and ithe bow is
twelve fingers. He should place the bow in front of his
navel and the arrows in a quiver on his hip. Taking an
arrow he should raise the bow and fix the arrow at a
point on the bow-tring between his eye and ear. He
should take the arrow by his left fist and fix it so that the
fist touches the left nipple. The bow should not change
position horizontally, vertically, laterally, face down.
wards or upwards. Then taking an arrow from the sheath
by the thumb and forefinger fix it on the bow-string and
DHANURVEDA
stretch it well before sending the shot. The clue to
correct aim is this. Anything that one can see with one’s
eyes but can be covered by his fist is within the arrowshot. When one arrow is sent another should be taken
immediately from the sheath and sent in quick succession. This is called Upaccheda. .
6) Operations with a sword and a carma (shield). ‘There
are thirtytwo different ways of putting into use a sword
ora ‘carma’ (shield). Bhranta, Udbhranta, Aviddha,
Apluta, Vipluta, Srta, Sammpata, Samudirna, Svetapata,
Akula, Savyoddhita, Savyavadhita, Daksinoddhita, Daksinavadhita, Analaksita, Visphota, Karala, Indramahasakha, Vikarala, Nipata, Vibhisana, Bhayanaka, Samagrapada, Arddhapada, Trtiyamgapada, Pada, Ardhavarija,
Varija, Pratyalidha, Alidha, Varaha and Lalita.
7) Operations with ropes. There are eleven different ways
of using a rope in a war. Paravrtta, Aparavrtta, Grhita,
_ Laghugrhita, Urdhvaksipta, Adhahksipta, Sandharita,
Syenapata, Gajapata and Grahagrahya. Adepts in this art
have stated that there are five acts in the rope-operation.
Lhey*are |. Riu, Ayata, Visala, Tiryak and Bhramita.
8) Mode of using the weapons. (1) Deeds with a wheel
are : Chedana, Bhedana, Patana, Bhramana, Sayana and
Vikartana.
(2) Sala (spear). Deeds with this are : Asphotana, Ksolana, Bhedana, Trasana, Andolana and Aghiata.
- (3) Tomara (iron club). Deeds with this are : Drstighata
Parévaghata, Rjupaksa and Istaprapta.
(4) Gada (Mace). Deeds with this are : Gomitra, Ahata,
Prabhita, Kamaldsana, Tata, Urdhvagatra, Vamanamita, Daksinamita, Avrtta, Paravrtta, Padoddhita,
and Avapluta Harhsamarda.
(5) Parasu (axe). Deeds with this are : Karala, Avaghata, Darhsa, Upapluta, Ksiptahasta, Sthita and Sanya,
(6) Mudgara (hammer). Deeds with this are : Tadana.
Chedana, Cirnana, Plavana and Ghatana.
(7) Bhindipdla. Deeds with this are : Sarnéranta, Viéranta, Govisarga and Sudurdhara. Deeds with the Laguda
are the same as these.
(8) Vajra. Deeds with this are: Antya, Madhya, Paravrtta, and Nidesanta. The deeds with Pattiga are the same
as there.
(9) Krpdna (Churika—small dagger). Deeds with these
are : Harana, Chedana, Ghatana, Bhedana, Mrmksana;
Patana and Sphotana.
(10) Ksepint (Kavina—Sling). Deeds are Trasana, Raksana, Ghatana, Baloddharana and Ayata.
The feats of one who fights-a bludgeon or cudgel are the
following:
Santyaga, Avadamifa, Varahoddhitaka, Hastavahasta,
Alina, Ekahasta,-Avahasta, Dvihasta, Bahupaga, Katirecitaka, Utgata, Uroghata, Lalataghata, Bhujavidhamana,
Karoddhita, Vimana, Padahati, Vipadika GatrasarméJesana, Santa, Gatraviparyaya, Urdhaprahira, Ghata, Gomutra, Savya, Bhaksina. Paraka, Taraka, Danda, Akula,
Kabaribandha, Tiryagbandha, Apamarga, Bhimavega,
Sudar§ana, Simhakranta, Gajakranta and Garbhakranta.
(Agni Purana, Chapters 249-252) .
9) Dhanurveda in Mahabharata. Some references to Dhanutveda in Mahaharata are given below:
( aaa Samed Baral was a noted preceptor in
and taucht aan ie f his di gd & > a
cer Pan - y Sof his disciples. (Chaptar 129,
(2) Dronacarya learnt Dhanurveda from Paragurama

DHANUSA
and imparted it to many other disciples of his including
on and Pandavas. (Chapter 129, Adi Parva,
(3) Agniveéa,a sage, learnt Dhanurveda from sage
Agastya. (Sloka 9, Chapter 133, Adi Parva, M.B.).
(4) Dhanurveda has got ten angas and four caranas.
(Chapters 6 and 41, Salya Parva, M.B.). ,
(5) Four-footed Dhanurveda worshipped Subrahmanya.
(Sloka 22, Chapter 44, Salya Parva, M.B.).
DHANUSA. An ancient sage. He was a priest in the yaga
of Uparicaravasu. (Sloka 7, Chapter 336, Santi Parva).
DHANUSAKSA. An ancient sage. He killed Medhavi,
son of the sage Baladhi, accusing Medhavi of having
in other sages (Sloka 50, Chapter 135, Vana Parva,
Eos) 5
ees. One of the Kings of Kasi. Dhanvantari was
born as his son. (For details see under Dhanvantari).
DHANVANTARI I. A deva who was a preceptor in
Ayurveda.
1) Origin. The devas and asuras together churned the
milky ocean, Ksirabdhi, to salvage Amrta (Nectar) from
it. After thousand years there arose from the ocean a
deva with a Kamandalu (water-pot of ascetics) in one
hand and a danda ‘n the other. That deva was Dhanvantari, (Sloka 31, Sarga 45, Bala Kanda, Valmiki
Ramayana). “1
"Phe Beh Dhanvantari from the ocean of Milk is
described in Chapter 29 of Harivamsa SC
Prosperous-looking Dhanvantam rising above the Reena
level of Ksirabdhi stood worshipping Mahavignu. | Vist
cave him the name of Abja. Dhanvantari is thus known
i bowing to
by the name of Abja also. Dhanvantari
Visnu_ said ‘“Prabho, I am your son. Allot to me
yajfiabhaga”’.
Vtsnu replied thus:
been allotted. Because you wert fee aca
you cannot be considered as one among ,
be born again in the world for a second time ane ee ye
will be a celebrity. m \
in the womb you will have
; "nas a
Garima. Therefore you will be born
nate in eight division
You will write i z nea,”
Ayurveda; your second life els Es os a we
After having said so much Visnu mig in BE Kasi, in
2) Rebirth of Dhanvantart. unotra, ang ond Grts2the second Dvapara yuse rae sp Sala got a son,
mada. Sunaka was the son fhe a To Kasa was
Arstisena. Kaga was born_f0 a time Dhanva
born Dirghatapas ( Dhanva). For 4 e went and did
did not have any children and *, bjadeva (Dhanvanpenance to propitiate Abjadeva. ‘ son to Dhanvé.
tari) was pleased and was —, rari and the latter
Dhanva named the boy 4° Dhanva® eight in num
taught his disciples Ayurveda: horn Ketuman—
ber. From Dhanvantari 11 oraer 9 arivainsa) -
Bhimaratha—Divodasa. (aE rere 2. a story in the
3) Dhanvantari and Pariksit. 1 nd bit Pariksit to
puranas that when Taksaka we ose infected a
kill him, a Visahari ( King but was bri =
snake venom) rushed to sav h e indications }
and sent back by Taksaka.
; - reference
‘ ari under
the Puranas to show that the Visaha that Kasyap@ was
was Dhanvantari thoug
h it is sta saka)
the person involved. (See un = lee the
4) Dhanvantari and Manasadev
c6 of yajfia have already
fa Sern after the devas
‘ Krsnajanma
DHARANA II
Khanda of Brahmavaivarta Purana there is a story
connecting Dhanvantari with Manasadevi, a serpentgoddess.
Once Dhanvantariwith his disciples was going to Kailasa.
On the way Taksaka made a venom-spitting hiss. At
once one of the disciples of Dhanvantari boldly went
and plucked the diamond on the head of Taksaka and
threw it to the ground. Hearing this Vasuki, King of
serpents, sent to Dhanvantari thousands of serpents
under the leadership of Drona, Pundarika and Dhanaijaya. The poisonous breath of all these serpents joined
together made the disciples of Dhanvantari swoon.
Immediately Dhanvantari by a medicine made from
vanaspati made all his disciples recover and then sent
all the serpents toa swoon. When VaAasuki heard this
he sent the serpent-maid, Manasadevi, a disciple of
Siva, to face Dhanvantari. Manasadevi and Gadira
were both disciples of Siva. But Dhanvantari was a
follower of Gadira. Manasadevi made all the disciples
of Dhanvantari swoon but the latter because of his great
proficiency is Visavidya soon brought back his disciples
to normal. When Manasadevi found that it was impossible to defeat .Dhanvantari or his disciples by using
poison Manasadevi took the trigila given to her by Siva
and aimed it at Dhanvantari. Seeing this Siva and
Brahma appeared before them and pacifying them sent
them all their way.
DHANVANTARI II. (Amrtacarya). An eminent medical scientist born in the ambastha caste. There is no
reference anywhere in the Puranas regarding any
relationship between the two Dhanvantaris. There is
the following story about Amrtacarya in Ambasthacaracandrika. *
Once Galava Maharsi went to the forest to collect
darbha and firewood. He walked for long and felt
thirsty and hungry. Then he saw a girl coming that
way with water and Galava quenched his thirst taking
water from her. Pleased with her the Maharsi blessed
her saying “May you get a good son.” The girl replied
that she was still unmarried. Galava then made a figure
of a male with darbha and told her to get a child from
that figure. She was a Vaisya girl named Virabhadra
and she got a beautiful child of that darbha male
Because the boy was born toa Vaisya ofa brahmin
male he belonged to the Ambastha caste. The boy was
named Amrtacarya.
DHANYAMALA. The foster-mother of Atikaya. (See
Atikaya).
DHA Wife of a Vasu named Drona (see under
Nandagopa).
DHARA I. He isthe first Vasu born to Dharma of his
wife Dhamra. (Sloka 19, Chapter 66, Adi Parva).
DUARA II. Aking who wasa friend of Yudhisthira.
(Sloka 39, Chapter 158, Drona Parva, M.B.). . |
DHARA. A holy place. If one bathes in this holy
place (Bath) his sorrows will be at an end. (M.B.
Vana Parva, Chapter 84, Stanza 25).
DHARANA. One of the eight means of Rajayoga (One
of the ways of union with the supreme Spirit). Yama,
Niyama, Asana, Pranayama, Pratyahara, Dharana
Dhyana and Samadhi are the eight means (See under
Rajayoga). |
DHARANA I. A king bornin the family of Candravatsa. (M.B. Udvoga Parva, Chapter 7, Stanza 16)
DHARANA II, A naga (serpent) of the family of

DHARANA (M) | 224
Kasgyapa. (M.B. Udyoga Parva, Chapter 103, Stanza
DHARAWA(M). A measure. In ancient times a dharana
was made up of ten palas. (Manusmrti).
DHARAPALA. A king of ancient times. He ruled over
a country named Vidisa. There isa holy place where
the rivers Vetasi and Vetravati meet. Dharapala constructed a temple at the confluence. There is a story also
for his doing so.
Once a Siva-parsada brought to Siva a woman at a time
when Parvati was away from the place. Siva and the
woman were enjoying each other when Parvati came
to the place. Getting angry she cursed the Parsada and
made him into a fox. The fox came to the place where
the rivers Vetasi and Vetravati meet and did penance
there and attained Moksa. Dharapala saw the divine
plane coming down to take the Parsada away and _ he,
therefore, constructed a temple at the place where the
plane landed. He then arranged scholars well versed
in Vedas and gastras to read Padma Purana there. He
himself read Padma Purana and attained moksa.
(Chapter 29, Padma Purana),
DHARESVARI. A goddess living in the tirtha (holy
bath) of Jambunada. This goddess is another form of
Parvati. (Devi Bhagavata, Skancha 8).
DHARINI. A daughter born to the Manes (Pitrs) created by Brahma, by their wife Svadha. Dharini had an
elder sister named Mena. Both were expounders of the
Vedas and of good qualities. (Visnu Purana, Améa 1,
Chapter 10).
oe A deva who is the abode of all luxuries in
ife.
1) Berth. ‘Vhis deva broke the right nipple of Brahma and
came out in the form ofa human being. Three sons
were born to him: Sama, Kama and Harsa. Kama
married Rati, Sama, Prapti and Harsa, Nanda.!
2) Marnage and family life. The Bhagavata states that
Dharma married the thirteen daughters of Daksaprajapati named Sraddha, Maitri, Daya, Santi, Pusti, Tusti
Kriya, Unnati, Buddhi, Medha, Titiksa, Hri and Masti.
Besides them he married ten other girls named Bhanu
Lamba, Kukubh, Jami, Visva, Sadhya, Marutvati.
Vasu, Muharta and Sankalpa and also a woman named
Sunrta. According to Mahabharata Dharma married
the following daughters of Daksa: Kirti, Laksmi. Dhrti
Medh, Pusti, Sraddha, Kriya, Buddhi and Lajja. |
From each of his wives there originated a family. The
son born to each is given below Sraddha—SubhaMaitri—Prasada; Daya—Abhaya; Santi--Sukha; Tusti—
Moda; Unnati — Darpa; Buddhi — Artha; Medha—
Sukrti; ‘Litiksa — Sama; Hri — Prasraya. Marti gave
birth to the virtuous Naranarayanas. Sunrta became the
mother of the devas, Satyavrata and Satyasena.
Satyasena became famous by slaying many cruel and
evil-natured Yaksas, demons and spirits. Lamba gave
birth to Rsabha and Vidyotana. Rsabha got a son,
Indrasena. Vidyotana became the father of stanayitnu.
Kukubh delivered Sankata and Sankata became the
father of Kikata and Durgadeva. Jami got a son Svarga
and of him was born Nandi. Visva gave birth to Viéva1. Sthanarh tu daksinarh bhitva Brahmano naravigrahah /
Nihsrto bhagavin dharmah sarvalokasukhavahah If
Trayastasyavarah putrah sarvabhitamanoharah /
Samah Kamasca Harsagca tejasa lokadharinah //
DHARMA
devas and Sadhya to Sadhyas. These Sadhyas are different
from those born of Brahma. Sadhyas became the father of
Arthasiddhi. Marutvati gave birth to Marutvat and
Jayanta. Vasu gave birth to eight sons and they were
known as Astavasus. Drona, the first of the Astavasus,
married Abhimati. Abhimati is known as Dhara also.
lt was Drona and Dhara who were born as Nandagopa
and Yatoda later. Prana, second of the Astavasus,
married Urjasvati, daughter of Priyavrata. (Navama
Skandha, Bhagavata).
3) Prominent sons. Four sons of Dharma, Hari, Krsna,
Nara and Narayana became prominent. Hari and
Krsna were great yogis while Nara and Narayana were
great ascetics. (See under Naranarayana).
4) The daughter named Dharmavrata. Dharmadeva got a
daughter named Dharmavrata of his wife Dharmavati.
Dharmavrata was an ascetic and she was married to
Marici, son of Brahma. One day Marici came back
from the forest after getting darbha and flowers extremely tired and so after food lay down to rest. His wife
sitting by his side massaged his legs, The sage fell asleep. Then Brahma came there and Dharmavrata
attended on him and worshipped him. Marici, when he
woke up, finding Dharmavrata attending on another
man cursed her and made her into stone. Dharmavrata
pleaded not guilty and standing inside a fire-pit did penance for ‘ten thousand years. Brahma and other devas
appeared before her and consoled her by assuring that
though she would be a stone devas would take their
abode in it and that she would be worshipped by all.
From that day onwards that stone was known as Devaéila
and even now it is believed that Brahma and other
devas live therein. (Chapter 114, Agni Purana).
5) Dharma was cursed and made Vidura by Animandavya. (See
Animandavya). ee
Other details. (1) A portion of Dharma took life as Yudhisthira in Kunti. (See Dharmaputra).
(2) Dharma did penance in Dharmatirtha for a very
long time. (Sloka 1, Chapter 84, Vana Parva).
(3) The abode of Dharma was Dharmaprastha. (Sloka I,
Chapter 84, Vana Parva).
(4) Dharma did penance on the banks of the rive!
Vaitarani for a long time. (Sloka 4, Chapter 114, Vana
Parva).
(5) While the Pandavas were in exile in the forest
Dharma in the form of adeer came to the hut of 4
Brahmin and carried away by its horns the Arani stic
which the Brahmin owned for making fire by attrition.
(Chapter 311, Vana Parva). - et
(6) Dharma appeared in the form of a Yaksa and made
all the Pandavas swoon except Yudhisthira, on the
shores of a pond in the forest and later got them back
to normal. (See under Dharmaputra).
(7) Dharmadeva went to Vi§vamitra jn the guise of
Vasistha to test him. (See para 3 of Galava).
(8) Following a directive from Brahma, Dharmadev4
once brought before Varuna all the daityadanavas boun
by ropes. (Chapter 128, Udyoga Parva). \
(9) Mahavisnu was born as a son of Dharmadeva. (See
under Naranarayana) .
(M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 65).

DHARMABHRT
(10) Dharma worshipped a brahmin named Satya taking the form of a deer. (Sloka 17, Chapter 272, Santi
Parva).
(11) Dharma tested Sudargana taking the form of a
brahmin. (Sloka 79, Chapter 2, Anusasana Parva).
(12) Dharma saved a sage named Vatsanabha from a
ereat downpour taking the shape of a buffalo. (Chapter
12, Anugasana Parva).
(13) Dharma disguised as a brahmin, went and imparted advice to Janaka, father of Sita. (Chapter 32, Agvamedha Parva). |
(14) To test Jamadagni, Dharma went to his 4srama
taking the form of Anger. Jamadagni had just milked
Kamadhenu and kept the milk in a pot. Dharma as
Anger crept into the milk. Jamadagni drank it and yet
remained calm. Seeing this Dharma appeared before
him in the form of a Brahmin and blessed him assuring
Jamadagni that ‘n future he would be obedient to
Dharma (Chapter 91, Agvamedha Parva).
(15) When at the fag end of their life the Pandavas
started on their Mahaprasthana, Dharma as a_ dog
accompanied them up to the gates of heaven. ( Sloka
22, Chapter 5; Svargarohana Parva).
7) Dharma and kala. There is a misunderstanding found
Puranas that Kala, the chief of Kalapur),
even in some :
But if the
and Dharma are one and the same person. Bs
stories around each are examined it is easy [0 Ge uce
rent devas. The father and
that they are two diffe " | 1
mother of Dharmadeva is Brahma. The ag of Kala
is Sirya and mother Sarhjiia, daughter of V isvakarma.
This itself is a sufficient evidence to show that the two
are different persons. Further, Kala or Yama is the
sixth descendant of Visnu.
But scholars are misled to think
tical. There is a reason for it.
Dharmarajah Pitrpatih
Samavartti Paretarat I
Krtanto Yamunabhraa
Samano Yamarad Yamah i.
Kalo Dandadharah Sraddha- patiind
Devo Vaivasvatontakah sala. Vyasa bas a dat
The above are th oie ie He Mahabharata the
synonyms for Dharma a ama. Now smaarig #6
words Dharmaraja, Vrs 4 ‘de in commmon—
synonyms for the two there 3 this misunderDharmaraja and Yama. , ‘| and goo in
a the evi
standing. Because Kala weighs harmadeva got
man he got the name Dhami" nation of Dharma.
that name because he ss the incar
t the
The real name of Kala is Yama. Dharmadeva §°
‘Yama’ (contro
ssesses Ors
name Yama because he po Scala has no SOnS; Vidura
the self for moral conduct) . eva.
ea ech oe OL DBA ag naan
D RT. Amahars i Rama
eden! This sage narrate ae ganadhara that
story of the pond ‘Paficapsara * aranya, Sarea 11).
rises from ‘it. (Valmiki Ramay27 sabheda. 79
DHARMABUDDHIL. See under Mt anya. (Sloka **»
DHARMADA. A follower of Subramr + 4 te
Chapter 45, Salya Parva) - ¢ Kosala. He haa 4 brit
I, A king 0 me a celeDri'y
——— pt By her chastity wall . They got
and got me name of Arundhat - We
a daughter named Taradatt:
that the two are idena.
s 5 in con
and Nagasri were engaged
DHARMAGUPTA II
bered their lives in their previous births. It was not
allowed to speak about previous births in open and if
anybody did so death was the penalty. But Nagasri
could not control herself and prepared to accept the
worst. Nagagri told her husband thus: “I am just reminded of my life in my previous birth. I will tell you my
story. I was the servant maid of a brahmin named
Madhava in this same place. I had a husband named
Devadasa then. My husband was the son of a merchant.
We made a small. house of our own and lived there
peacefully. Each of us would bring food from where we
worked and everyday we used to set apart a portion of
what we got for guests and the pitrs. We were satisfied
with what was left after that. If we got more than one
set of clothes we would give it to the poor. Then there
came a famine in the country. Our earning also was
reduced daily. We lived in hunger. One day a hungry
and tired sannyasi came to our place and we gave him
the whole of our food. My husband died that
day and I gave away my life jumping into the funeral
pyre of my husband. Then I was born in the family of
a King and became your wife.”
Dharmadatta also got back the memory of his previous
birth. He said he was the Devadasa of Nagasri’s
previous life.
The moment they finished talking about their previous
births both fell down dead. Orphaned Taradatta then
lived under the care of her mother’s younger sister.
After some time a Maharsi came to their house and by
his blessing Taradatta got a husband named Kalingasena. Kalingasena was a brave and daring Prince. Very
soon they got a daughter and she was named Kalingasend. (Kathasaritsagara, Madanamafijuka lambaka,
Taranga 2).
DHARMADATTA II. A Brahmin who lived in the city
of Karavira. One day while Dharmadatta was going to
the temple with material for puja he came across a
demoness named Kalaha on the way. The brahmin
threw the puja materials in his hand on to the face of
the demoness. When a tulasi leaf touched the demoness
she got back the memory of her previous birth.
Kalaha then abandoned her cruel nature and begged
Dharmadatta to advise her as to how she should get a
release from her. demonaic life. Taking pity on her
Dharmadatta gave her all the ‘punya’ he had obtained
by observing Karttikavrata. (Chapters 106, 107, Uttara
Khanda, Padma Purana and Chapters 2, 4, 24, 25
Skanda Purana).
Dharmadatta and Kalaha were born as Dagaratha and
Kaikeyi in their next births as a result of the accumulated Punya obtained by observing Karttikavrata. (Sara
khanda, Ananda Ramayana) .
DHARMADHVAJA. See under Tulasi.
DHARMAGUPTA I. A prince who obtained blessings
from Siva by observing the Pradosavrata. (For detailed
story see Arhgumati).
DHARMAGUPTA II. A Nandarajakumara belonging to
the Lunar dynasty. Chapters 1, 2 and 13 of Skanda
Purana gives the following story about him.
Once Dharmagupta went to the forests, hunting. Deeply
‘nterested in the game he never knew when it became
dusk. It was late to go back to the palace and so deciding to stay ‘1 the forest for the night he climbed upon a
tree and made a seat there to rest. After some time a bear

DHARMAKARA
followed by a lion came running and took refuge on the
top of the same tree. The lion stood growling below.
Seeing aman on the same tree the bear said ‘‘Oh, Prince,
we are both in the same sad plight now. Believe me
as a friend. We can spend the night on this tree safe.
Therefore, go to sleep till midnight and I will keep
watch over. After that I will go to sleep and you keep
watch’’. Gladly accepting the proposal the prince went
to sleep and the bear kept vigil. Then the lion suggested
to the bear to push down the prince. The bear replied
that he would never cheat a friend and that it was a
great sin also to do so. After midnight the bear slept
and the prince kept watchover. The lion then suggested to the prince to push down the bear. Thinking that
he would be saved if the bear is given to the lion the
unfaithful prince pushed the bear down. But the bear
escaped catching hold of the branches lower down.
Embittered at this the bear cursed Dharmagupta and
made him mad.
Then addressing Dharmagupta first and the lion next
the bear said thus : “I am Dhyanak4stha a sage of the
Bhrgu family. I can take any form I like. I cursed you,
Dharmagupta, because you cheated a friend. This lion
is Bhadra, one of the ministers of Kubera. Once he
entered into sexual act with a bear in front of the
asrama of Gautama at midday and the sage cursed him
and made him into a lion. The sage as a relief from the
curse had further decreed that he would get his original form when he entered into a conversation with me.”
When Dhyanakastha finished speaking the lion changed
itself into the form of Bhadra.
Dharmagupta remained mad and his father, the King,
approached Jaimini for help. The sage said that the
prince would be cured of his madness if he bathed in the
Puskarini tirtha. The king did as was suggested and
Dharmagupta was cured.
DHARMAKARA. A righteous house-holder. Once a
prince entrusted his beautiful wife with Dharmakara
and went away. Though she lived with him for six
months he did not have any kind of contact with her.
‘he prince returned. Wicked people tried to arouse
doubts about the chastity of his wife and the householder. But it was futile. Still fearing calumny Dharma-
‘kara entered fire. In that test by fire he came out victobody remain unscorched, but
i that ge — ie the wicked people who loans
im were filled with leprosy and be
Purana, Srsti khanda, wi a 50)” came ugly. (Padma
DHARMAKETU. A king of Bhargava gotra. He was the
son of Suketu and father of Satyaketu. (Navama Skandha
Bhagavata) . ,
DHARMANANDANA. A king of the fam; z
(Navama Skandha, Bhagavata) ‘ i Snaneeey
DHARMANGADA. A Brahmin who became a dee
: ' ete dap P
meditator on Visnu, because of his habits In his previous
life. Dharmangada was the son of Rukmangada by
his wife Sandhyadvali. Rukmangada was the son of
Rtadhvaja who lived in the city of Vidisa, He was
a man of good personality, who lived with his
father and being a generous man he did not hesitate to
give his head to Mohini for the pleasure of his father.
God Visnu was pleased with him because of his love of
his father and of his loyalty to Vaisnavite deity and took
him bodily to heaven (Vaikuntha), Dharmangada
226 DHARMAPUTRA
lived there for many thousands of years enjoying heavenly pleasures. Then he went astray from divine life
and had to take life again as Suvrata the son of a
Brahmin named Somagarma.
The wise Suvrata discarded the passions of Kama (desire),
Krodha (anger) etc. and controlled his senses and engaged himself in penance in Vaidiryamahadri. For hundred years he sat in meditation and Mahavisnu was
pleased with him and took him and his father to
Vaikuntha. At the instruction of Mahavisnu, Suvrata
took life again in the house of Kagyapa. When he died
he went to Vaikuntha. In every successive birth he had
the remembrance of his previous birth. (Padma Purana,
Chapter 21).
DHARMANETRA I. A king of the Hehaya family. He
was the son of Hehaya and father of Krti. (Brahmanda
Purana, Chapter 2).
DHARMANETRA It. Ason of Dhrtarastra. (Sloka 60,
Chapter 94, Adi Parva).
DHARMAPALA. A minister of Dagaratha. There were
eight ministers for Dagaratha: Srsti, Jayanta, Vijaya,
Siddhartha, Rastravardhana, Asoka, Dharmapala and
Sumantra. (Chapter 6, Agni Purana).
DHARMAPRASTHA. A sacred place. It is believed to
be the abode of Dharmardaja. There is a general assumption that anybody who touches the water ina well
there will be absolved of all sins. (Sloka 99, Chapter .
94, Vana Parva).
DHARMAPUTRA. The eldest of the Pandavas, the
others being Bhimasena, Arjuna, Nakula and Sahadeva.
1) Genealogy. See under Arjuna.
2) Birth. Pandu, brother of Dhrtarastra, had two wives,
Kunti and Madri. There was a curse for Pandu that he
would die the moment he touched his wife. (See under
Pandu). Kunti, the first wife of Pandu, had obtained
from Durvasas five mantras. The mantras were very potent. If she called upon any god reciting the mantra that
God would manifest himself to her and bless her with 2
son. When Kunti found that Gandhiri was pregnant and
was about to deliver she became anxious and meditating
on Dharmadeva recited one of the mantras given by Durvasas and got a child from him. The boy was born at midday on the -eighth Jyestha day of the year on Paficami
and at the auspicious hour, Abhijit. At the time
of his birth there was a celestial voice which said ‘This
boy will become a very righteous and bold King, best
among the virtuous. He will be known as Yudhisthira’.
Obeying the dictate of the mysterious voice he was
named Yudhisthira. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 123).
3) Boyhood. When he had five sons Pandu went to the forest
of Satagrnga together with his family to spend the spring
time there. The sages residing in that forest conducted
the christening ceremony of Dharmaputra. Kas yapa,
priest of Vasudeva, performed the Upanayana ceremony
(thread-wearing) of Dharmaputra (Chapter 123, Daksinatyapatha) Adi Parva, M.B.). Rajarsi Suka imparted
instructions to Dharmaputra on spear-warfare, Pandu
died during their stay there. Madri abandoned her life
by jumping into her husband’s funeral pyre. Before
doing so she called Dharmaputra to her side and joining her hands together said “Son, you are now the father
to your brothers.” When Pandu and Madri were dead
the sages of the forest took Kunti and the children to
Hastinapura and entrusted them to the care of Bhisma

DHARMAPUTRA
detailing to him all that had happened in the forest.
(Chapter 125, Adi Parva, M.B.).
4) Kaumara( youth). Dharmaputra and his brothers spent
their boyhood in Hastinapura along with Duryodhana
and his brothers. Bhimasena became a great foe of
Duryodhana and his brothers and Duryodhana always
nurtured a desire to kill Bhimasena. Once Duryodhana
invited Dharmaputra and his brothers to have aquatic
games in the Ganga. Accepting the invitation Dharmaputra participated in the games along with his brothers.
One night Duryodhana caught hold of Bhima alone and
tied him with ropes and threw him into the river. When in
the morning Dharmaputra found his brother missing he
ran to his mother to inform her of the loss. ‘Kunti asked
him to start a search and while he was on it Bhimasena
appeared before him and told him how he was thrown
into the river by Duryodhana and how. he went to
Nagaloka and was brought to earth with great acquisitions from there. Dharmaputra advised them not to
blic. They wie Se has
warfare in Hastinapura under Dronacarya. armaputra
got great proficiency in chariot-fighting. As ee
(fee for the preceptor ) Dharmaputra agreed to Oring
; tor. But Arjuna stopDrupada bound before the precep © (Chapters 127
ped him and saeig — the task (Chapte
to 136, Adi Parva, M.».).
5) Becomes heir-apparent and goes to the forest. a
c qd Dharmaputra as the heir-apparel
a as P leted his course of study in
latter had successfully compie’s
: ‘chteousness and adminisLi ed gone Sa ae cevellell his father and beratl Tici Dharmap ;
a ee ile among his subjects. Jealous be
ie decided to destroy the Re chan nr
With the permission of his father, Dury
a a as to
tructed a palace at Varanavata for toe ae ia
reside there. That palace was ul
d
tire population resente
under Arakkillam). The en him. They tried
, d rebuke
tof ilo ah akan ts Varanavata ace ae! aie
Bi ao fi il words he made them abandon Cee sana
ie cee hmins fo owed Dharmapurre- i eet
os Dury ahs na set fire to the palace. whith had
ae ne nf ugh a tu nel from the of Duryodhana
anae mat Shout the knowleog il ding. Escapfos! alt the ‘aie of construction of the the forests an
ing from there the Pandavas oye ahore of the Ganga.
travelling farther came M.B.)-
(Slokas 138 to 148, Adi panes
t] bs . ad d
life incognito. . it was presume:
6) Story up to the if as burnt to aE tt of Dhrtara1) When the palace wa instruc
th they were dead wee! Pandavas ro coe ee
‘tes O fe ism
stra the funeral ri © Vi dura informe Daksinatyapatha,
make the incident pu
at Hastinapura. But
P andavas _ alive. (Chap a Bhima to marry
Adi Parva, M.B.). mission to (Chapter 154,
r
(2) Dharmaputra gave Pe the forest.
Hidirnba while they Wee 7) coeadl
Daksinatyapatha, Adi anv jun to re (Sloka
(2) Dharmaputre erated b yjuna in 4
sa who W _
39, Chapter 169, Adi Parva) paficali, ,
(4) After the svayarive : ‘ theit
narrated to Drupacé : Parva): _ 5 ret
ist palace, (Chapter - ar the Pandava
9) After svayamvara
escape from
urned
DHARMAPUTRA
to their country and Dharmaputra was crowned king
of half of the country. He started his rule at Khandavaprastha, his capital; (Chapter 206, Adi Parva).
(6) Narada went to Khandavaprastha and advised them,
how to avoid unpleasantness accruing from their having one wife in common. His advice was that Paficali
should spend one year with each of the five in turn.
(Chapter 207, Adi Parva).
(7) When Abhimanyu was born to Arjuna, Dharmaputra
gave ten thousand cows to brahmins as gifts. (Sloka 69,
Chapter 22, Adi Parva).
8) Yudhisthira got a son Prativindhya of Paficali.
(Sloka 79, Chapter 220, Adi Parva).
(9) Yudhisthira got a son Yaudheya of Devika, daughter
of King Sibi (Sloka 76, Chapter 95, Adi Parva).
(10) When Sri Krsna went to Dvaraka from Indraprastha
Dharmaputra drove the chariot in the place of Daruka,
charioteer of Krsna. (Sloka 16, Chapter 2, Sabha
Parva).
(11) Maydasura_ constructed_a beautiful palace in
Indraprastha and gave it to Dharmaputra. (Sloka 37,
Chapter 3, Sabha Parva).
(12) Yudhisthira decided to perform a Rajasiiya at Indraprastha. Even before the Rajasitya Sri Krsna, Arjuna
and Bhimasena together killed Jarasandha. After that
Yudhisthira sent Arjuna to the northern side and the
other brothers to the southern side for Digvijaya (conquest of countries) . When he established his autocracy
he performed the Rajasiya. (Chapter 45, Sabha
Parva).
(13) Yudhisthira used to give free sumptuous food to
thousands of brahmins in golden pots daily. (Chapter 49,
Sabha *Parva). .
(14) Envious Duryodhana sent Vidura to bring Dharmaputra to Hastinapura and defeated him foully ina game
of dice. Though Dharmaputra lost everything Dhrtarastra gave him ‘back: everything. (Chapter 72, Sabha
Parva, M.B.). ;
(15) Before Dharmaputra went back to his place, with the
permission of Dhrtarastra, Duryodhana called him back
again for another game of dice. Despite protests from
all sides Dharmaputra went again fora game of dice
with Duryodhana and lost again all he possessed. ‘Then
he left the country with his brothers and wife to spend
twelve years in exile in the forests and another year
incognito. (Chapter 79, Sabha Parva).
(16) Surya gave the Aksayapatra (a pot which is never
emptied) to the Pandavas. (Sloka 72, Chapter 3, Vana
Parva) . |
i7) Me first the Pandavas stayed in Dvaitavana and
later on the advice of Vyasa they went to Kamyakavana.
(Sloka 41, Chapter 36, Vana Parva).
(18) He advised Bhimasena to remain quiet for thirteen
years. (Chapter 52, Vana Parva).
(19) Brhadaégva, the sage, narrated the story of Nala to
Dharmaputra while they were in the forest. (Chapter
43, Vana Parva).
(20) The sage Lomaga imparted instructions on philosophy to Dharmaputra while they were 1 the forest.
(Chapter 94, Vana Parva).
(21) Yudhisthira met and conversed with Parasgurama
at the mountain Mahendra. (Chapter 117, Vana Parva).
(22) The Pandavas then travelled in north India. On
their way to the mountain of Gandhamadana Paficali

DHARMAPUTRA 228
fainted and Yudhisthira wept bitterly. (Chapter 145,
Vana Parva).
(23) From Gandhamadana Dharmaputra with his wife
and brothers reached Badarikagrama and from there
they returned to Dvaitavana.
(24) When they went to Kamyaka vana Sri Krsna visited
Dharmaputra there. (Chapter 153. Vana Parva).
(25 )Duryodhana and his followers made a grand march
to Kamyaka vana to see the Pandavas in sad plight
and there the Gandharva Citrasena bound them all by
ropes. Arjuna on the orders of Dharmaputra got them
all released. (Chapter 246, Vana Parva),
(26) While the Pandavas were in exile in the forest
Dussasana went and invited Yudhisthira to attend a
Vaisnava sacrifice conducted by Duryodhana. But
Dharmaputra sent him away saying that it was not
proper to come to the country before the expiry of the
period of exile. (Chapter 256, Vana Parva),
(27) Yudhisthira received the sage Durvasas with respect
and after offering homage sent him away contented.
(Chapter 262, Vana Parva).
(28) Jayadratha kidnapped Paficali and in the battle
that ensued Dharmaputra slew the King of Trigartta
but left free Jayadratha. (Chapter 2/2, Vana Parva).
(29) At a time when Yudhisthira was plunged in sorrow
the sage Markandeya narrated the story of Sri Rama
to console him. (Chapters 273 to 291, Vana Parva).
7) How Dharmadeva tested Y, udhisthira. The Pandavas
travelling through the forests reached Dvaitavana, A
brahmin among their group was making fire by the
arani sticks when a deer rushed at him and took the
arani sticks away, carrying them on its horns. The
Pandavas ran after the deer and they travelled far
away from their place, still not getting scent of it. They
were all tired and thirsty, Yudhisthira directed
Nakula to climb on the top of a tree and investigate
whether there was any water anywhere nearby. Nakula
did so and reported that he could se€é a pond not far
from the place where they were sitting. Yudhisthira asked Nakula to go and fetch water. Nakula did
not return fora long time and Sahadeva was asked to
go and enquire. Sahadeva also did not return and
Arjuna was sent in search of them. When Arjuna did
not return Bhimasena went to enquire. Bhimasena also
did not return and finally Yudhisthira himself set out in
search of them. On reaching the pond Yudhisthira
was dumbfounded to see his brothers lying dead on
the banks of the pond. Weeping bitterly Yudhisthira
entered the pond and to his surprise he heard a voice
from the air addressed to him thus: “Ho, Yudhisthira
I am a stork living on the smal] fishes of this pond.
This pond is my hereditary Property. It was I who
killed your brothers. I will ask you certain questions
If you answer them correctly you can drink from this
pond. If not, you will also die.
Dharmaputra:—“‘I do not believe that you are simply
a bird. My brothers are renowned for their valour and
have defeated not only the devas, danavas, gandharvas
and raksasas but also the four huge mountains like
Himalaya Pariyatra, Vindhya and Malaya, I am eager
to know your true self who have slain such brave
brothers of mine.”
Yaksa:—“I am a Yaksa and not merely a bird. |
objected to your brothers’ taking water from the pond,
DHARMAPUTRA
But waving aside my objections they started taking
water from the pond and then I slew them. Now,
hear my questions: Who carries the Sun? Who are his
followers ? Who makes the sun sect? On whom does
the sun exist?”
Dharmaputra:—It is Brahman who carries the Sun.
Devas are his followers. Dharma makes him set. He
exists on Satya.
Yaksa:—How does Mahasiddhi come to he Srotriyas ?
(those who study the Vedas).
Yudhisthira:—It happens by deep penance.
Yaksa:—What is the reason for a brahmin getting divinity? What deed is equal to good conduct? What makes
a brahmin mortal and what makes him evil?
Yudhisthira:—The Brahmin gets divinity by meditation, Austerity is equal to good conduct. Death makes
a brahmin mortal and abusive words make him evil.
Yaksa:—What is the divinity of Ksatriyas? What is
equal to good nature? What makes them mortal and
what makes them evil?
Dharmaputra:—The divinity of a Ksatriya is weapon.
Sacrifice is equal to good conduct. Fear makes him
mortal and non-sacrifice makes him evil.
Yaksa:—What is the best thing for agriculture? What
is the most important thing for agriculture? What are
the installations of the atmosphere and child-birth?
Dharmaputra:—The best thing for agriculture is rain.
The important thing for agriculture is seed. The installation of atmosphere is rays and that of child-birth
is child.
Yaksa:—Who is lifeless even though he breathes?
Dharmaputra:—He who never offers oblations to a
deva, a guest or a servant is like the dead even though
he breathes.
Yaksa:—What is bigger than the earth? What is higher
than the sky? What is swifter than the wind? What
are greater in number than grass?
Dharmaputra:—Mother is bigger than the carth.
Father is taller than the sky. Mind is swifter than the
wind. Thoughts are greater in number than erass.
Yaksa:—What is it that does not shut its eyes when
asleep? What is it that does not grow after birth? What
is heartless >, What grows very quickly?
Dharmaputra:—A fish does not shut its eyes when
asleep. An egg does not grow after its birth, A stone
is heartless. A river grows very quickly,
Yaksa:—Who is a friend to one who lives outside his
country? Who is a friend to a householder, to a patient
and to one dead?
Dharmaputra:—For one who leaves his country the
friend he gets 6n his way is the best friend. To a householder his wife is his friend, to a patient his doctor and
to one dead, charity.
Yaksa:—Who is a guest of all? What is N ectar? What
is spread throughout the world?
Dharmaputra:—Agni (fire) is the guest of all. Moon
(Candra) is the nectar. Air is that which is spread
throughout the world.
Yaksa:—Who circles around solo? Who is born again?
What is the remedy for cold? What gives the maximum
yield?
Dharmaputra:—The Sun circles solo. Candra is born
again, Fire is the remedy for cold. Earth gives the
Maximum yield,

DHARMAPUTRA
Yaksa:—What is the soul of Man? Who is the companion given by God? What is Upajivana?
Dharmaputra:—The soul of Man is his son. The companion given by God is wife. Gloud is Upajivana.
Yaksa:—How do you become rich? How do you become happy ?
Dharmaputra:—If you abandon lust you will be rich.
If you abandon desire you will be happy.
Yaksa:—By what is this world covered? By what does
the world become clear? By what does one. lose his
friend? What is the obstacle for an entry into heaven?
Dharmaputra:—Dullness_ covers the world. World
becomes clear by intelligence. A friend is lost by desire.
Domestic ties stand in the way of getting into heaven.
Yaksa:—Who are those equal to the dead? Which
country is dead?
Dharmaputra:—A poor penniless man is equal to the
dead. The country where there is mob-rule is dead.
Yaksa:—Who is a pandit? Who is an atheist? Who 1s
wicked? What are lust and jealousy?
Dharmaputra:—A righteous man is a pandit. An
atheist is wicked. Lust is the cause of worldly life.
Jealousy is the cause of worry.
Yaksa:—Though charity, wealth and lust are incom
patible with each other when do they unite together ?-
Dharmaputra:—When charity and wife compromise
the above three blend together harmoniously. . .
The Yaksa was highly pleased with the replies cei y
Dharmaputra. He then offered to revive one of mH ie
thers and asked Dharmaputra to name whom he s ie
dose Then Yudhisthira named Nakula. Yaksa ott
enquired why he had named Nakula leaving oaee sth
and Bhima. Dharmaputra nepligd: Fae both
and Madri were two wives of Pandu they were Pale
mothers to them and so he wanted to oe one _ s
sons of Madri alive. He therefore pressed the er than
Nakula again. The Yaksa who was ran plied reply
Dharmadeva was immensely happy es “confessed to
and gave life to all his prot ey fi ie of a deer
Yudhisthira that it was he who in the k : He returned
came and ran away with the ara a adwvi
the arani sticks also. Dharmadeva or t of King
; Loi life incognito at the cour
- to go and spend their lite.
Virata blessing them wit
the assurance that they
would never be found out during
their life in see
Dharmadeva disappeared after this ome 0 Panda
returned to their asrama. (Chap
9 and 313 of
Vana Parva, M.B.). 10)
8) Aifatavasa (Life incogn?): lating
* > eam a the great battle eed ot is life
to or involving Dharmapr he °Mahabharata battle
in disguise up to the end 0
are given below: |
; t to aV
1) Yudhisthira tried utmos id not
ha he lear that the Pandavas fight. S50 Yudhreven an inch of lane, he decide ed on one side of
sthira prepared for 4 wat a a Chapter 196, Udyothe Kiruksetra with his amy:
ga Parva)
(2) Dharmaputra §4
li in vyuhas.
arva). a fie
(3) Dharmaputra a ; 7, Bhisma@ Parva)
va army. (Sloka 3, a
See under Arjuna.
oid war but when it
be given
na to keep his
ons toAtyt 19, Bhisma
Chapter
ooked at the Kaurave instruc
(Sloka ’
DHARMAPUTRA
(4) Yudhisthira blew his conch Anantavijaya to announce
the war. (Sloka 16, Chapter 25, Bhisma Parva).
(5) Yudhisthira sought permission from Bhisma to fight
against the Kauravas, (Sloka 35, Chapter 43, Bhisma Parva).
(6) Yudhisthira bowed before Dronacarya and sought
permission to conduct the war. (Sloka 52, Chapter 43,
Bhisma Parva).
(7) He sought permission from Krpacarya to fight the
war. (Sloka 69, Chapter 43, Bhisma Parva )
(8) Yudhisthira went to Salya_and obtained his permission to conduct the war. (Sloka 78, Chapter 43,
Bhisma Parva).
(9) Yudhisthira appealed to the warriors on the Kaurava side to join his army. Only Yuyutsu, responded to
that beckoning and joined the Pandava’s side. (Sloka
94, Chapter 43, Bhisma Parva).
(10) On the first day of the battle Dharmaputra fought
qa duel with Salya. (Sloka 28, Chapter 45, Bhisma Parva).
(11) Yudhisthira constructed a Vajra Vytha (an array
- jn the shape of a diamond) with his army. (Sloka 22,
Chapter 81, Bhisma Parva)
(12) Yudhisthira fought with fury and defeated Srutayus. (Sloka 8, Chapter 84, Bhisma Parva).
(13) Yudhisthira got defeated by Bhisma. (Sloka 2,
Chapter 86, Bhisma Parva).
(14 Bhagadatta attacked Yudhisthira. (Sloka 84, Chapter 96, Bhisma Parva).
(15) He fought against Sakuni. (Sloka 11, Chapter
105, Bhisma Parva)
16) Yudhisthira sought permission from Sri Krsna _ to
kill Bhisma and he went straight to Bhisma himself
and asked him how he should be killed. Yudhisthira
attacked Bhisma as per the latter’s instructions.
(Chapter 107 to 115, Bhisma Parva). |
(17) In the meantime Dronacarya made a vow that he
would capture Yudhisthira. So Yudhisthira thereafter,
always kept Arjuna near at hand. (Sloka 3, Chapter 13,
Drona Parva).
(18) Yudhisthira consoled his own army when Abhimanyu was slain. (Sloka 35, Ghapter 49, Drona Parva).
(19) Yudhisthira attacked Salya and Krtavarma.
(Chapters 95 and 97, Bhisma Parva).
(20) Yudhisthira was defeated in a fight with Drona.
(Sloka 18, Chapter 106, Drona Parva). )
(21) He fought against Duryodhana. (Sloka 15, Chapter 124, Drona Parva),
(22) He defeated Dronacarya in another
(Sloka 27, Chapter 157, Drona Parva).
(23) Hg became moody when Ghatotkaca was killed.
(Sloka 27, Chapter 183, Drona Parva).
(24) He made Karna swoon in a fight. (Sloka 21,
Chapter 49, Karna Parva). :
(25) He withdrew from the battlefield after having
been defeated by ASvatthama. (Sloka 38, Chapter 35,
Karna Parva).
(26) Karna wounded Yudhisthira. (Sloka 33, Chapter
63, Karna Parva). !
(27) Once Yudhisthira scolded Arjuna and the latter
reatly offended started to go to the forests and then
Yudhisthira himself appeased him. (Chapters 63, 70 and
71, Karna Parva).
(28) Yudhisthira slew Candrasena and Drumasena who
were the guardians of Salya’s Gakravyitha. (Sloka 52
Chapter 12, Salya Parva).
battle.

DHARMAPUTRA
(29) He slew Salya (Sloka 51, Chapter, 7, Salya
Parva).
(30) He killed the younger brother of Salya. (Sloka 64,
Chapter 17, Salya Parva).
(31) Duryodhana at this time went to a lake in Dvaipayana and lay there immersed under water. Yudhisthira went there with:an army and challenged him fora
fight. (Sloka 18, Chapter 61, Salya Parva).
(32) When Yudhisthira won the war he sent Sri Krsna
to Hastinapura to console Gandhari. (Sloka 40,- Chapter 62, Salya Parva).
10) Yudhisthira is crowned K. ing. When Yudhisthira won
the war he sent Nakula to bring Pajficali. He went
round the Kuruksetra battle ground and saw his own
kith and kin lying dead and the sight made him faint.
After that he went to Dhrtarastra. Gandhari cursed
him for killing her sons. Gandhari gave a piercing
look at the nails on the foot of Dharmaputra when he
stood before Gandhari bowing down, Instantly the
nails turned black. Yudhisthira gave Dhrtarastra the
names of all the prominent persons who were killed in
the war. Dhrtarastra ordered Yudhisthira to perform the
obsequies of the dead. It was at this stage that Yudhisthira
came to know from Kunti that Karna was his brother.
Yudhisthira wept bitterly when he knew the secret from
his mother and cursed womankind as a whole stating
that woman would thereafter be incapable of keeping a
secret to herself. The news of the death of Karna gave
a sudden mental turn-back to Yudhisthira and he
decided to renounce all and go to the forest. He
called aside his followers and announced his decision to
them. At that time Vyasa came there and preached to
him about the perishable nature of life. Yudhisthira
then asked him what he should do for the atonement
of the sins committed. Though he strongly desired to
go to the forest Vyasa and Sri Krsna did not allow him
to do so and sent them all to Hastinapura. When the
Pandavas entered the city the people gave them a
rousing reception and Yudhisthira was crowned King.
(Chapters 10 to 17 of Sauptika Parva, Chapters 12 to
27 Stri Parva, Chapters 1 to 40 Santi Parva). :
11) Administration. When Yudhisthira became King
with the permission of Dhrtarastra, he distributed the
various administrative responsibilities among his brothers. He took for himself the task of taking care of
their kith and kin and friends, He Save many gifts to
the brahmins and other dependants. He once went to
Sri Krsna to express his gratitude for him. He Visited
Bhisma lying on his bed of arrows accompanied by
Sri Krsna and his brothers. Bhisma revealed to him
the inner import of Rajadharma, Apaddharma and
Moksadharma. Receiving the blessings of Bhisma
Yudhisthira and his brothers returned to Hastinapura
Yudhisthira went to the Himalayas to get riches from
Marutta before performing an Agvamedha Sacrifice.
While on his way to the Himalayas he fasted for a night
and worshipped Siva. People like Vyasa and Sri Krsna
partook in the sacrifice. After the sacrifice was over
Dhrtarastra desired to go to forest and sought the
approval of Yudhisthira to do so. On hearing that
Yudhisthira wept. But on the advice of Vyasa he gave his
approval for Dhrtarastra to go to forest. DhrtarAstra
appealed to him through Vidura for funds to perform the
obsequies of the dead. Bhima objected to this but
DHARMAPUTRA
Yudhisthira reprimanded him and silenced him and
gave Dhrtarastra enough funds for his purposes. Kunti
and Gandhari accompanied Dhrtardstra to the forest.
Yudhisthira accompanied by Paficali and Sahadeva
went and saw them in the forests after a few days.
(Chapters 41 to 55, Santi Parva, Chapters 92 from
Anusasana Parva and Asvamedha Parva and Chapter
26 from Asramavasika Parva).
12) Vidura merges into Dharmaputra. When Dhrtarastra,
Gandhari and Kunti went to forest Vidura also accepted
sannyasa and left for the forest. There sitting under a
tree he started doing penance. After a few days Yudhisthira came to the forest to see his mother and others.
After spending some time with Dhrtarastra, Gandhari
and Kunti he went to the place where Vidura was
doing penance. Vidura started running the moment he
set eyes on Yudhisthira and the latter ran after him.
After some time Vidura turned back and stood staring
at Yudhisthira. At that time the soul of Vidura escaping from his body merged with that of Yudhisthira.
The body of Vidura stood stiff and leaned against a tree.
Taking him to be dead Yudhisthira started to do the
funeral rites and then there resounded a voice from
heaven saying that Vidura was not dead. The unknown
voice was from Dharmadeva. When the voice subsided
Vidura became his old self again. Yudhisthira went
back. (Chapter 26, Aésramavasika Parva).
13) The end of Dharmaputra, Soon after his return from
the forest Narada came to Hastinapura and told him of
the death of Dhrtarastra, Kunti and Gandhari in a
wild fire in the forest. Lamenting deeply Yudhisthira
performed the obsequies at Hastinapura. It was at
this time that the Yadava dynasty perished and Dvaraka
was sunk into the ocean. The Pandavas then crowned
Pariksit as their successor and entrusted Yuyutsu with
the administration of the State till Pariksit came of age.
Vajra was appointed as chief of Indraprastha. The
obsequies of Vasudeva, Balarama and Krsna were performed at Hastinapura. Krpacdrya was appointed as
preceptor to Pariksit. After having made all such
arrangements the Pandavas commenced their Mahaprasthana. The five Pandavas and Paficali started from
Hastinapura. A dog also followed them. Yudhisthira
walked ahead. On the way, one by one, Paiicali _ Sahadeva, Nakula, Arjuna and Bhimasena fell dead. Alone
with a dog to keep company, Yudhisthira reached a
plateau on the top of the Himalayas and there Indra
was waiting for him with a chariot. But Yudhisthira
said that he would not come to heaven without his
wife and brothers. He was then informed that they had
already reached heaven. Yudhisthira insisted that the
dog also should be taken to heaven which Indrae
blankly refused. But Yudhisthira refused to ascend the
chariot without the dog which, he said, had given him
company from the start to the finish. The dog then
changed itself into Dharmadeva and he complimented
him on his sense of justice. When Yudhisthira entered
heaven he saw Duryodhana sitting in all luxury and glory:
Yudhisthira did not like it but Narada pacified, him.
Yudhisthira saw all his relatives sitting there. A devadita
took him round hell also. When he heard the pitiable
groans from there Yudhisthira thought his right place
was with them. But Indra and Dharmadeva again consoled him. He was given a bath in Akaé aganga. He then
lost his mortal form and his soul entered Divyaloka.

DHARMARAJA
Standing in the form of Dharmadeva he saw all his
relatives including Krsna. (Chapters 38 and 39,
ASsramavasika Parva, Chapter 1, Mausala Parva;
Mahaprasthanika Parva, Svargarohana Parva).
14) Synonyms of Yudhisthira. Ajamidha, Ajatagatru
Bharata, Bharatasardila, Bharatapravara, Bharatarsabha, Bhdratasattama, Bharatasirhnha, Bhimapirvaja,
Dharma, Dharmaja, Dharmanandana, Dharmaprabhava
Dharmaputra, Dharmarat, Dharmaraja, Dharmasuta,
Kaunteya, Kaurava, Kauravasrestha, Kauravanandana,
Kauravya, Kauravanatha, Kuntinandana, Kurusardiula,
Kurugrestha, Kuridvaha, Kurukulodvaha, Kurumukhya, Kurunandana, Kurupandavagrya, Kurupati,
Kurupravira, Kurupungava, Kururaja, Kurusattama,
Kuriittama, Kuruvardhana, Kuruvira, Kuruvrsabha,
Mrdangaketu, Pandava, Pandavasrestha, Pandavanandana, Pandaveya, Panduputra, Partha and Yadavimata.
All these words have been used to identify Yudhisthira
in the Mahabharata.
DHARMARAJA. A king of Gaudadesa. He became
King at a time when Jainism was getting more and
more hold on the people and the Hindu Vedic rites
were getting less and less popular among the people.
The King thought it was his duty to revive the interest
in the Vedic rites and so became a pricst himself
and did much propaganda on the superiority of a
same, writing several books on the subject for Ae benefit
of the people. (Bhavisyapurana, Pratisarga arva).
DHARMARANYA. A Brahmin. He had many ciaren
The major portion of his life was spent in hard wor
to support his large family. After that he went i
PP ‘, heaven. In his quest, he
search of means to attain heavel a. His
happened to reach the realm of Nagas Pits : »nabha
entered the house of a Naga name ae “9
When he reached the bouts Pasian ya at yee
carrvine the chatiotof the Sun. name: ‘taside the house-and spent few daysin vow =°™ pier
tion, Then Padmanabha TE ad teh en The
Padmanabha about the ee re superior to the Sun.
Naga replied that i e and lived in the hermit
The Brahmin accepted P ot (M.B. Santi Parva, 4
age of Cyavana jor 4
Chapters from 361).
DHARMARANYA (M). A fores”
It is mentioned az Ne oe enters this forest ca
: mo ita
would become ke, Tt EST SO eu
of the King named Asu | |
Ts ; f Angaraja.
he family 9
DH . Aking of | ada and the son
1 ore great granite of Nd wren
of Draviratha. (Chap = wt he Kekaya line e ney
D king 0 _ At last, a
cE aerate - Fens il t no children. fe of his elder
pi ad a - a son of Sucandis ‘rmasakha were
bali But tie hunderd ~ ie king consulted Nt
hich is a holy place.
rest “a Tatia Parva Chapter 82
rot ! rakamesti
pining for having a son conducted ; taint chilministers and on the sea-coast.
yajfia (a sacred sacrifil
cial a outhern ~
r ‘ ives gO
dren) at Hanamatkunda ne his hundred wives &
ac
As a result of that © : 15). ‘rot
i a. (Skanda Paral, aiege was alae he Ce of
I, as ar
Saal toniie his rebirth. Dharm
ma
DHARMAVARNA
the three sons of an eminent Brahmin called Vidyadhara.
His other two sons were Vasufarma and Namagarma.
While both his brothers became great scholars Dharmagarma never studied anything and became a muff.
His father was greatly worried on account of this.
Dharmagarma never heeded the advice of his father
and went about in bad company ruining himself. Years
went by and Dharmasgarma became old.
One day Dharmafarma was sitting repentant in a
temple sadly pondering over his past when a siddha
came to the temple. Watching him Dharmagarma saw
him go and sit in a lonely place for meditation with his
eyes shut. Dharmasarma went and stood near him
very respectfully. When the Siddha opened his eyes
after some time he saw Dharmasarma standing before
him and then the Siddha made enquiries about Dharmagarma. The latter then requested the Siddha to give
him instructions to acquire the supreme knowledge.
The Siddha then gave him Jfianopadega (advice on
knowledge) and Dharmasarma soon became a Siddha
himself. He then started ona pilgrimage and on the
way he got a parrot. He took care of the bird just like
his son and loved it very affectionately. One day when
Dharmasgarma was away from the place to collect
fruits for his food a cat caught and ate the parrot.
Greatly grief-stricken Dharmasarma wept bitterly and
ran about likea madman. After some days he died
and because at the time of death he was thinking about
the parrot he was born a parrot in his next birth. The
jfianopadesa of the siddha was still lingering in him
while he died and so even in his life as a parro the never
lost the jiiana he had acquired in his previous life.
(Chapter 122, Padma Purana).
DHARMASARMA II. See under Sivagarma.
DHARMASAVARNI. The eleventh Manu. (See under
Manvantara).
DHARMASVA. A Brahmin. Once this Brahmin was
coming home with water from the Ganges. On the way
he saw Kapakalpa,the servant of merchant Ratnakara,
being killed by an ox. Though Kapakalpa was a sinner,
his end aroused pity in the heart of the Brahmin. So he
sprinkled the Ganges-water on the body of Kapakalpa
who instantly regained life and energy. The Brahmin
who saw the power of Ganges-water began to worship
the Ganges from that day onwards. It is mentioned in
Padma Purana, Kriya Khanda, Chapter 7, that finally
the Brahmin gota boon from the Ganges that only
uttering the name of the Ganges should he meet with
death.
DHARMATIRTHA I. A holy place of ancient Bharata.
If a man bathes in a pond there, he would be absolved
of all sins. (Sloka 1, Chapter 84, Vana Parva).
DHARMATIRTHA II. Another holy place of ancient
Bharata. If a person bathes in a pond there he would
get the benefit of performing a Vajapeya Sacrifice (Sloka
162, Chapter 84, Vana Parva).
DHARMAVARNA. A Brahmin who lived in the country
of Anarta at the end of Kaliyuga. Once when he went
to the land of the dead, he saw his fathers hanging by
the end of darbha. They requested Dharmavarna to
marry and obtain sons who would get them relief from
their plight. Dharmavarna married and as soon as he
got a son he went to the forest of Gandhamadana to
practise penance there. (Chapters 2, 17 and 22, Skanda
Purana).

DHARMAVATI
DHARMAVATI. A wife of Dharmadeva. He got of
Dharmavati a daughter Dharmavrta. Dharmavrta was
_married to Marici, son of Brahma. (See under Gayatirtha).
DHARMAVRTA. A daughter of Dharmadeva. (See
under Gayatirtha).
DHARMAVYADHA. Though -he was born in the caste
of foresters he became’a saint by following the path of
duty and righteousness. In his previous birth he was a
Brahmin. He was a friend of a king who was an adept
in archery. Once both went on hunting expedition to the
forest. ‘The brahmin sent an arrow at a wild animal but
the arrow went and struck a sage who was doing
penance under a tree. When the sage was rolling on the
arrow he said: “Oh, evil-natured Brahmana, may you
be born as a hunter selling flesh in your next life.” The
Brahmin went and apologised to the sage and craved
for pardon. Taking pity on him the sage consoled him
by saying that though he would be born as such, he
would be a great scholar and attain moksa by doing his
duty without even once wavering from it.
The Brahmin was born a hunter in the country of
Mithila. He took to looking after his parents as a vow
and soon became a top-ranking righteous man. He did
his duty to which he was born. He sold meat and
earned a living. He never killed or butchered an animal.
One day a Brahmin named Kausika was doing penance
sitting under a tree when a crane perched on_ the top
of its branches defiled the Brahmin’s head with its
droppings. The Brahmin in rage looked up and his
powerful stare burnt the crane and it fell down dead.
Leaving that place some time later he went to a house
to beg. The house-wife informed him that he would be
given alms only after attending to her husband. The
Brahmin was not pleased with her reply. Seeing that she
added ‘Please do not look at me like that. Iam no
crane. ‘l’o me my husband is supreme.”
The Brahmin was taken aback when he heard the lady
mention the incident of the crane. The lady explained
to him that all her powers were due to her devotion to
her husband and advised the Brahmin to go and meet
Dharmavyadha of Mithila to remove the egoism in him.
Obeying her instructions Kaugika went and accepted
Dharmavyadha as his guru. The learned hunter then
spoke to Kauéika about Varnadharmas, Sistacaras
himsa and ahirhsa, Mimamsa relating to dharma and
karma, the importance and glory of Brahmavidya, the
significance of the control of the senses, ‘l’rigunas, Pranavayu, service to father and mother and many such
other things. The egoism of Kavgika was removed and
he returned home. Devoted to his parents he attained
heaven. (Chapters 27 to 33, Vana Parva).
DHARMAYU. A king of the Piru family. His father
was Raudrasgva, the son of Piru and his mother was a
celestial woman Migrakesi. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter
94, Stanza 11). |
DHARSTAVAMSA. A particular family of kings of
the Iksvaku Dynasty. This family Originated from
Dhrsta the brother of Iksvaku. So this family is called
Dharstavamsa (Devi Bhagavata, Skandha f)..
DHATA I. :
|) General information. One of the twelve Adityas. (See
Dvadagadityas and Aditya) .
2) Other details: (1) At the burning of Khandava
ase DHAUMYA
forest among the gods who came against Sri Krsna and
Arjuna, there was Dhata also. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 266, Stanza 34).
(2) Dhata gave Subrahmanya five followers named
Kunda, Kusuma, Kumuda, Darmbara and Adambara as
gift. (M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 45 Stanza 39).
DHATA II. It is seen in Visnu Purana, Arhéa 1, Chapter
10, that two sons named Dhata and Vidhata and a
daughter Laksmi were born to Bhrgu, the son of Brahma,
by his wife Khyati. Of them Dhata and Vidhata
married Ayati and Niyati, the daughters of Meru..
Laksmi became the wife of Mahavisnu.
DHATREYIKA. A maid of Paficali during the time of
the forest life of the Pandavas. It was this maid who
informed the Pandavas that Jayadratha had kidnapped
Paficali. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 269, Stanza 16).
DHATU (S). (Minerals). To understand the Puranic
stories regarding the origin of iron, copper, tin-etc. see
under Irump (iron).
DHAUMRA. An ancient hermit. He was one of the
hermits who visited Bhisma in his bed of arrows. (M.B.
Santi Parva, Chapter 47, Stanza 11).
DHAUMYA I. A hermit.
1) General information. This hermit was the younger
brother of Devala, a hermit. The Pandavas, who
escaped from burning in the Laksa house, reached the
banks of the Ganges when this hermit was performing
penance in the holy tirtha of Utkoca. Arjuna defeated
Citraratha, a Gandharva. After that Citraratha and
Arjuna became friends. The gandharva advised him
that a priest was unavoidable and that the Pandavas
should accept the hermit Dhaumya who was doing
penance in the Utkocatirtha as their priest. Accordingly
the Pandavas accepted Dhaumya as their priest. From
that day onwards in everything the Pandavas did,
Dhaumya was their priest. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter
2) Other details. (1) After the Svayarhvara of Paficali,
Dhaumya performed the marriage ceremony for eac
of the Pandavas from Dharmaputra to Sahadeva
separately with Paficali. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter
(2) When sons were born to the Pandavas, Dhaumy4
performed the rites of investiture etc. with the Brahme
string etc. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 220, Stanza 87).
(3) Dhaumya was the chief priest who performed the
rites of sacrifice at the Rajasiiya of Yudhisthira. He
anointed Yudhisthira as King. (M.B. Sabha Parva,
Chapter 53, Stanza 10),
(4) When the Pandavas started for forest life, Dhaumy4
walked in front of them with Kuéa grass in his hands,
singing Yamasima and Rudrasiama songs. (M.B. Sabha
Parva, Chapter 80, Stanza 8).
(5) Once Dhaumya talked about the attributes of the
Sun and advised Dharmaputra to worship the Sun.
(M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 3).
(6) In the forest Dhaumya rendered powerless the
illusive and magical arts of Kirmira, an asura (demon) -
(Mahabharata, Vana parva, Chapter 11, Stanza 20).
(7) Dhaumya described to Dharmaputra the importance
of several holy tirthas or Baths, (M.B. Vana Parva;
Chapters 87 to 90). |
(8) On another occasion Dhaumya described to
Dharmaputra the motions of the Sun and the Moo?

DHAUMYA II
and the positions of Visnu and Brahma. (M.B. Vana
Parva, Chapter 163).
(9) When Jayadratha had stolen Paiicali, Dhaumya
blamed him and tried to recover Paficali. (M.B. Vana
Parva, Chapter 238, Stanza 26).
(10) Dhaumya advised the Pandavas how to preserve
pseudonymity in the capital of Virata. (M.B. Virata
Parva, Chapter 4).
(11) When the Pandavas started their life incognito
Dhaumya performed the rite of Agnistoma and uttered
the Veda mantras for their prosperity, recovery of
kingdom and victory in the world etc. When they
started Dhaumya took the fire with oblations and went
to the country of Paficala. (M.B. Virata Parva, Chapter 4, Stanza 54). |
(12) After the bharata battle, Dhaumya performed
the funeral ceremonies, offerings etc. of the relatives
of the Pandavas. (M.B. Stri Parva, Chapter 24),
(13) After Dharmaputra was anointed King, Dhaumya
disclosed to hine the secrets of righteousness. (M.B.
Anugdasana Parva, Chapter 127, Stanza 15).
DHAUMYA II. In the Puranas we see: another hermit
with the name Dhaumya. In Mahabharata, — ieee
Parva, Chapter 14, Stanza 112, 1¢ 1s ae nit
this Kermit was the brother and teacher o he =
Upamanyu. He had been keeping el Vana
Dyumatsena, the father of Satyavan. ( ee ae ee
Parva, Chapter 298, Stanza 19). Other nam a :
Ayodha Dhaumya, Ayodha Dhaumya, Apodha me Hie
Apodhadhaumya ete. — cise —_ this Dhaumya,
i hadhaumy4).-
DHAUTAMOLAKA, king bor. 3 oyna gy
(Mahabharata, Udyoga P ae ATA. A mountain.
-DHAVALAGIRI. (SVETA Pi’ tain. (MahabhaArjuna once encamped in this mountain.
rata, Sabha Parva, Chapter 97, Stanza 29).
DHENU. See under Surabhi.
DHENUKA. slat = (giant) with the
‘ e' , ss A fierce Raksasa § ven -_ a =
nents ruey, He lived in the forest > Kan (TA
os P a : x
People did — dare : Pom Sei Krsna and his teas
giant. Hearing 4 oe ‘ to. the forest.
ra. Rama went its of which
brother Balabhadra, ees in the forest, the etd ran
1 palm tr , ise D. ;
they scone wah force. a vee es beat the giant to
to them. Balabhadra 4” =
death. I Bhagavata, ‘Ske Mustika,
2) Other details. (1) ie Canura, Traavar followers
oe i Aig ne and others were a
risfaka, ” ; ther story
of Karmsa. Skandha 10, te er the other
( (9 In ehh dra Rama; ri eee asura entered
. a rn FZ : looking after the co shape of a .
cowher s wer 4d af the flock, in struck him agains
(Dh ") Rama and Krsna sa ee
enu). Ka z =.
a tree and killed him- untry 32
DHENUKAM. An ancien “Stanza D h
Bhisma Parva, Chap oa place- arg penance
DHENUKASRAMA. * of a a? Chapter. 54,
Death Yama took t p. Drona oe
in this place. —
Stanza 8).
DHENUTIRTHA. A boy
Bharata. (M.B.
“agoe, UF aingelly (1a) .
Pp ace.
andha 10, it is
)- e god of
DHRSTABUDDHI
"offered as gift in this holy place, one would get redemption from all sins. (Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 84, Stanza 87) |
DHIMAN. Second: son of Purtravas. {M.B. Adi Parva,
Chapter 75, Stanza 24).
DHIRADHI. A brahmin devotee of Siva. He lived in
Kasi. Because he meditated on Siva alone, Siva was
pleased with him and helped him in various ways.
The ganas of Siva were amazed at Siva’s partiality for
Dhiradhi. Paramasiva told them the story of the former
birth of Dhiradhi. “This Brahmin was a swan in his
former life. Once he was flying over a lake when he
became ‘tired and fell down. His colour became black.
Then Kamalini, another;swan who dwelt in the same
lake told him to recite the tenth Chapter of Gita, and
to meditate on Siva. Because the swan did that holy
act, he was born a Brahmin in his next birth. Though
he was a Brahmin in his previous birth, he kicked his
teacher and for that fault he had to take birth asa
swan. Later, because of the love of Siva, Dhiradhi
‘attained heaven. (Padma Purana, Uttara Khanda,
Chapter 184).
DHIROSNI. A god concerned with Sraddha (offering
to the manes). (Mahabharata, Anusasana Parva, Chapter 9, Stanza 32).
DHISANA. The wife of Havirdhana born in the dynasty
of the emperor Prthu: Dhisana was born from fire. (Six
sons, Pracinabarhis, Sukra, Gaya, Krsna, Vraja and
Ajina, were born to Havirdhana by his wife Dhisana
born of fire. (Agni Purana, Chapter 18).
DHRSTA. Ason of Vaivasvata Manu. Iksvaku, Nabhaga,
Dhrsta, Saryati, Narisyanta, Prarméu. Nrga, Dista,
Karusa and Prsadhra were the sons of Vaivasvata
Manu. (Bhagavata, Skandha 8).
DHRSTABUDDHI. A Vaisya who attained heiven by
performing the fast of Vaigakha Vrata. He lived in the
country of Bhadravati, on the bank of the River
Sarasvati. The name of the king of the country was
Dhrtiman. Dhanapala, a Vaisya of that country had |
five sons: Sumanas, Dyutiman, Medhavi, Sukrta and
Dhrstabuddhi. The last of them turned out to be a
wicked man. Going after many women, keeping
company with wicked people, gambling, wandering
about in search of harlots, not venerating Gods, Manes
or Brahmanas, wasting the money of his father, eating
untouchable food, drinking liquor and such other acts,
he indulged in. Once he was seen walking in the
street with his hand on the shoulder of a harlot. So his
father turned him out of the house. He was discarded
by his relatives too. He sold the ornaments he had on
his body. When that was finished the harlots also
evaded him. He became a destitute having no money
or clothes. When he became tired with hunger and
. thirst he began stealing in that city. The King’s men
caught him.. They chained him and scourged him.
Finally, he went to the forest and with a bow and
arrows he lived by hunting.
Dhrstabuddhi happened to reach the hermitage of
Kaundinya. It was the month of Vaisakha. While
‘Kaundinya was coming from the Ganges, having taken
bath, a drop of water fell on Dhrstabuddhi from the
wet cloth of the hermit, and consequently his sins were
washed off. He fell before the hermit and requested
him to instruct him in the way of attaining heaven,

DHRSTADYUMNA 234
The hermit advised him to observe the fast of VaigakhaSuklaikadasi knownas Mohini. Accordingly he observed
the fast and became sinless. Invested with a divine form
he entered the realm of Visnu. (Padma Purana, Uttara
Khanda, Chapter 51). |
DHRSTADYUMNA. The son of King Drupada. He was
brother of Paiicali. |
1) Birth. Drupada and Drona were fellow students. After
finishing his education Drupada became King. When
Drona came to his palace Drupada did not honour
him. Drona got angry, went to Hastinapura and began
to teach the Pandava and the Kaurava princes in
archery and other weapons. When the weapon-training
was over, Arjuna, at the instruction of Drona, defeated
and captured Drupada. Drona seized half of his kingdom from him. |
As Drupada was not powerful to wreak vengeance on
Drona, he performed a sacrifice to obtain a son who
could take revenge on Drona and regain his lost
prestige. Ason and a daughter were born from the
sacrificial fire. The son was named Dhrstadyumna.
The daughter grew up and became the famous Paficali.
The Pandavas married her. .
At the time of birth, Dhrstadyumna had a crown on
his head, and armour on his body, bow, arrows and
sword in his hands. He ran out of the fire into a
chariot and sat in it as ifhe were about to begin a
travel of conquest. Seeing this the Paficdlas were filled
with joy. There was a celestial voice: “This boy will
destroy the fear of the Paficalas. He is born to slay
Drona.” At this time the queen approached the sacrificing priest with a request that the children born of the
sacrificial. fire should consider her as their mother.
Accordingly the children accepted the wife of Drupada
as their mother. Brahmanas named the boy Dhrstadyumna and the girl Krsna.2 (M.B, Adi Parva, Chapter
166). (For more particulars see under ‘Pafcali’
Para 2),
2) Till the battle of Bharata. The history of Dhrstadyumna till the battle between the Pandavas and the
Kauravas, is given below.
The news:that Dhrstadyumna was_born to kill Drona
spread everywhere. The Broad-minded Drona did no
seem to mind this news. Drona took Dhrstadyumna to
his house, with the permission of Drupada and gave
him training in the wielding of weapons. He believed
that God’s will could not be thwarted. After he had
learned archery Dhrstadyumna returned to his kingdom:
Next, we see Dhrstadyumna at the svayamvara
(marriage) of Paficali. Several kings arrived from
various countries on that occasion. When the auspicious moment came, Dhrstadyumna brought Paficali to
the nuptial dais. He proclaimed. the rules and conditions that the competitors of Svayamvara had to
observe. After that he conversed with each king who
was present. In the Svayarhvara Pafcali accepted
Arjuna. The Pandavas and Paficali were given the
Kumbhakara mandira (the Palace of Kumbhakara) which
stood in the city of Drupada, to stay for that night.
Though the Pandavas were in the guise of Brahmanas,
Dhrstadyumna had his own doubts about their identity.
DHRSTADYUMNA
So he hid himself somehwere in the Palace and kept an
eye. on them. This shows his peculiar trait of observation. After this he returned to his Palace and
pacified: his father who had been much worried about
his daughter’s selection.
Next, we see Dhrstadyumna, during the time of the
forest life of the Pandavas. He consoled Paficali, who
was miserable. After that he took the sons of Pajicali,
to his house. While the Pandavas were living in the
forest ‘Kamyaka’, Dhrstadyumna visited them. The
forest life of the Pandavas came to an end. A battle
between the Pandavas and the Kauravas became jnevitable. Then the Pandavas selected Dhrstadyumna, as
the commander-in-general of their army. He ordered
for a general parade of the army and. gave them
instructions. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapters 166 to 195;
the whole of Sabha Parva; Vana Parva, Chapters, 12, 22
and 51; Virata Parva, Chapter 72; Udyoga Parva,
Chapters 50, 157, 163 and 164).
3) Dhrstadyumna in the Bharata-battle The part played
by Dhrstadyumna in the battle is given below:
(1) In the first day’s battle Dhrstadyumna _ confronted
Drona. (M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 45, Stanza 31 ).
(2) Fought with Bhisma. (M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 47, Stanza 31).
(3) On the second day of the battle he formed the
disposition of the army called the ‘Krauficarunavyiha’
(M.B. Bhisma. Parva,Chapter 50, Stanza 2 i ..
(4) A terrible -fight ensued between Drona and
Dhrstadyumna (M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 53).
(5) He fought with Aévatthama (M.B. Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 61, Stanza 19).
(6) He killed Damana the son of Paurava. (M.B.
Bhisma Parva, Chapter 61, Stanza 20),
(7) He killed the son of Salya. (M.B. Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 61, Stanza 29).
(8) He fought with Salya and was wounded. (M.B.
Bhisma Parva, Chapter 62, Stanza 8).
(9) He formed the disposition called the ‘Makara
Vyaha’. (M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 75, Stanza 4).
(10) He: shot. the missile called Pramohana (the arrow
of fainting) and the Kauravas swooned, (M.B. Bhisma
Parva; Chapter 77, Stanza! 45).
(11) He was.defeated by Drona (M.B. Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 77, Stanza 69). |
(12) He defeated Duryodhana. (M.B. Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 82, Stanza 53),
(13) He fought with Vinda and Aravinda. (M.B.
Bhisma Parva, Chapter 86, Stanza 61).
(14) He fought with Krtavarma. (M.B. Rhisma
Parva, Chapter 110, Stanza a.
(15) He again fought with Bhisma.
Parva, Chapter 114, Stanza 39);
(16) There was a combat with Drona again. (M.B.
Drona Parva, Chapter 7, Stanza 48).
(17) He fought with Suéarma. (M.B. Drona Parva,
Chapter 14, Stanza oF):
(18) He fought with Durmukha.
Chapter 23, Stanza 4).
(19) He killed Candravarma and Brhatksatra, King of
Nisadha, (M.B. Drona Parya, Chapter 35, Stanza 65).
(M.B. Bhisma
(M.B. Drona Parva,
1. The fast taken on the eleventh day of the bright lunar fortnight in the month of Vaigakha.
2. Because he was
born with Dhrstatva (boldness) amarsatva (impatience) and dyumna (vigour) the son of Drupada_ was
called Dhrstadyumna, Draupadi was called Krsna as she was of Krsna varna (dark complexion.
‘Makha’ (sacrifice).
Thus Drupada got two children from

DHRSTAKARMA
(20) He made Drona swoon by shooting arrows at him
and got into his chariot and sat there. (M.B. Drona
Parva, Chapter 122, Stanza 56).
(21) Inthe fight which continued Drona defeated
Dhrstadyumna. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 122,
Stanza 71).
(22) In the fight with Asvatthama, Dhrstadyumna was
defeated. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 160, Stanza 41).
(23) He killed Drumasena. (M.B. Drona Parva, Ghapter 170; Stanza 22).
(24) He was defeated by Karna. (
Chapter 173, Stanza 7).
(25) He vowed that he would kill Drona, (M.B.
Drona Parva, Chapter 186, Stanza 46).
(26) In the fight that followed he cut off the head of
Drona. (M.B. Drona Parva, CHapter 192, Stanza 62).
(27) Following this, he annihilated the elephants of the
Kauravas and made Krtavarma swoon. (M.B. Karna
Parva, Chapter 22).
(28) He fought with Karna.
Chapter 59, Stanza 7). 7
th Aévatthama, the Kauravas
-(M.B. Karna Parva,
M.B. Drona Parva,
(M.B. Karna Parva,
(29) In the fight with ¢
caught .Dhrstadyumna _ alive.
Chapter 59, Stanza 39). =
(30) He happened to enter the camp of DuSsasana
but escaped. (M.B. Karna Parva, Chapter 61, Stanza
Do). ane
31) In the night, while Dhrstadyumna was sleeping
Fohetterns kicked him to death. (M.B. Sauptika
Parva, Stanza 26).
(32) The funeral of
according to rités.
33) The Pandavas conducted mourning and offering
to the deified ancestors for Dhrstadyumna (M.B. te
Parva, Chapter 42, Stanza 4). ee,
j Dhrstadyumna
34) After death the spirit of Dhrs
sevied in she Fire-God. (M.B. Svargarohana pave
Chapter 5, Stanza 21)0
4) Names. In Bharata, Ut ©
Manes, i Boe day
Paficalamukhya, Paficalaputra, <a
Paficalya, Parsada, anes Sa
used as synonyms of Dhrsta ee aa
DHRSTAKARMA. A king ©
(Bhagavata, Skandha 9)- Se
DHRSTAKETU I. A prince oon o
Dhrstadyumna an ae f :
Ragged Pils SO 7 = the family of Yayat
DHRSTAKETU II. A king
(Bhagavata, Skandha. 9).
DHRSTAKETU III. The a
umna was conducted
Dhrstady Parva, Chapter 26,
(M.B. Stri
Draupada, Drona”
Paficalakulavardhana,
aficalarat, Paficalaraja,
Yajfiaseni-etc. are
the names,
Yayati family,
was the son of
f King Drupada.
-zpala, the King of
“4 Stu apbarata about
Cedi. The details obtained *F° f
this King are given below: | ‘of Anuhlada, the ao ;
(1) Dhretaketu was the rebirth) Chapter. ©”
Hidcrontation- M.B. Adi fen’ death
Stanza 7). ‘ nointed 4s King oe :
Ppa “Sate Fo
: D. eca
Stanza 36). her, D ae a Parva,
(3) After th death of his fat As ( B. Van 3
a trib tary King of the Pandave B
utary King (M.D.
ati.
Chapter 12, Stanza 2). named Karenum
(4) Dhrstaketu had a:siste
DHRTARASTRA I
Vana Parva, Chapter 22, Stanza 40). |
(5) During the Bharata-battle, Dhrstaketu supplied
the Pandavas with an aksauhmi (21870 elephants,
21870 chariots, 65610 horses and 109350 infantry).
(M.B. Udyoga Parva, Chapter 19, Stanza 7).
(6) Dhrstaketu was appointed as one of the seven
commanders-in-chief of Yudhisthira. (M.B. Udyoga
Parva, Chapter 157, Stanza 11).
(7) On the first day of the battle of Bharata,
Dhrstaketu, confronted Bahlika. (M.B. Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 45) ,
(8): He fought with Bhirigravas. (M.B. Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 84).
(9) Dhrstaketu fought with Paurava. (M.B. Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 116, Stanza 13).
(10) Dhrstaketu fought with the teacher Krpa. (M.B.
Drona Parva, Chapter 14, Stanza 33). |
(11) He fought with Ambastha. (M.B. Drona Parva,
Chapter 25).
(12) He killed Viradhanva.
Chapter 107, Stanza 17).
(13 He-fought with the teacher Drona and was killed ©
in thé fight. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 125,
Stanza 23). |
(14) Among the spirits of those relatives of the
Kauravas, who died in the Bharata-battle, which were
evoked to the surface ofthe Ganges, by Vyasa, the
spirit of Dhrstaketu also appeared. (M.B. Asramavasika Parva, Chapter 33, Stanza 11). |
(15) After his death Dhrstaketu became a Visvadeva
in heaven. (M.B. Svargarohana Parva, Chapter 5, Stanza
753 Vyasa has used the following names in_ his
Bharata for Dhrstaketu: Caidya, Cedija, Cedipati, Cediungava, Cedirat, Saigupali, Sisupalatmaja.
(M.B. Drona Parva,
DHRSNU I. The second son of Vaivasvata Manu. (M.B.
Adi Parva, Chapter 75, Stanza 15).
DHRSNU II. A. Prajapati who was the son of Kavi. He
DHRSTI.
was learned in Vedas. (M.B. Anusasana Parva, Chapter 85, Stanza 133).
One of the eight ministers of Dasgaratha.
Jayanta, Dhrsti, Vijaya, Asiddhartha, Arthasadhaka,
Agoka, Mantrapala and Sumantra were the eight ministers of Dagaratha. (Valmiki Ramayana, Sarga 7).
DHRTADEVA. Daughter of King Devaka. Vasudeva.
married this princess. Viprstha was the son born to the
couple. (Bhagavata, Skandha 9).
DHRTAKETU. A king of the Bhrgu family. (Bhagavata,
Skandha 9).
DHRTARASTRA. I. Father of the Kauravas.
_ river Ganga. Giving the eighth son
1) Genealogy. (See the genealogy of Arjuna).
9) Birth. Santanu, a king of the Lunar dynasty, had
two wives Ganga and Satyavati. Ganga. gave birth to
eight sons. But seven of them were thrown into the
Bhisma to Santanu
Ganga disappeared. Santanu then married Satyavati,
a fisher-woman. .Satyavati gave birth to two sons, Citrangada and Vicitravirya. When Santanu -grew old,
Citrangada was anointed as King, as_Bhisma had taken
Brahmavrata (vow of celibacy). Once when Citrangada’ went-to the forest for hunting, a Gandharva of the
name Citrangada killed him. So Vicitravirya became
the King of Hastinapura. Bhisma took the three daughters of the King of Kasi, Amba, Ambika and Ambalika

DHRTARASTRA I
by force into his chariot and brought the last two, to
Hastinapura to be given as wives to Vicitravirya. On
the way he sent Amba back. Vicitravirya married Ambika and Ambalika. But shortly after that he also died,
before any children were born to him, Fearing that the
Lunar dynasty would come to an end, Satyavati brought
her son Vedavyadsa, who was born to her from hermit
Paragara, before her marriage, to Hastinapura. In the
night Satyavati sent Ambika adorned with ornaments
and costly garmenis, to the bedroom of Vyasa. But she
could not bear to lie with Vyasa who was clad in barks
of the tree and wearing matted hair. Still thinking that
it was not right on her part to stand against the wish of
her mother, she approached Vyasa and lay with him
with closed eyes. Ambika became pregnant. The child
she gave birth to, was blind. That child was Dhrtarastra.
Next night Ambalika approached Vyasa. When she
saw Vyasa she turned pale at his uncouth figure and
her face became bloodless. So the child born to her was
pale and was called Pandu. Next night the maid of the
queen approached Vyasa with a joyful heart and so she
got Vidura, as son, who was extremely wise and intelligent. Thus Dhrtarastra, Pandu and Vidura became sons
of the same father.! (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapters, 63
3) Up to marriage. After the birth of Dhrtarastra Vyasa
returned to forest and since then Bhisma stood in place
of father to the children. Bhisma performed ‘Upanayana’ (investiture with Brahma-string) and other rites
of the children. Dhrtarastra, Pandu and Vidura had
their education in Hastinapura. (M.B. Adi Parva,
Chapter 108).
‘“Dhrtarastra, Pandu and the wise Vidura
The three were brought up as sons by Bhisma,
They became well educated, cultured aud devotional,
Respectful towards vows and fasts, and
of good physique, earnest in work
And they became valiant youths.
Learned the Vedas and Veda of archery,
Clubbing, shield and. swords play,
Elephant-keeping, laws of chastisement,
Veda éastras, allied works and epics and the Puranas,
Pandu came out expert archer, '
Dhrtarastra the strongest of all.
None in the three worlds was equal to Vidura,
In wisdom and knowledge and righteousness,”
(M.B.Adi Parva, Chapter 109).
Because of his blindness Dhrtarastra was not anointed
as King. It is stated in M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 108
Stanza 25, that in the place of Dhrtarastra, Pandu was
inted the King. _
4) Marriage and birth of children. Dhrtarastra came of
marriageable age. Bhisma had heard about Gandhari,
daughter of Subala, the King of Gandhara, as a beautifal damsel of good qualities. Moreover she had acquired
a boon from Siva that hundred sons would be born to
her, Bhisma sent a messenger to Subala with a request
ae = ri wife to Dhrtarastra. Subala
to give Gandhari as ala was
8 ced at the aspect of getting a blind man
not much please h :
in-law. Still he thought of the prestige his family
as ae t by a marriage alliance with the kings of the
Pa. u meee and finally agreed. Gandhari submitted
yt Ol of her father, and to live with a husband who
1. It is stated in M
having the name Dhrtarastra. (See under Dhrtarasjra ITT),
DHRTARASTRA I
was blind. She tied her eyes with a cloth. Sakuni the
son of Subala brought Gandh&ari to Hastinapura, and
gave her to Dhrtarastra. With the sanction of Bhisma
their marriage took place.
Once Gandhari feasted Vyasa who came tired with hunger and thirst. The hermit was pleased with her and
blessed her to have hundred sons. Gandhari became
pregnant. But even after two years no delivery took place.
She crushed her womb by force and a lump of flesh
came out. At that time Vyasa came there. He cut the
lump into hundred piecesand kept them in ghee-pots.
Gandhari hada desire to get a daughter also. Vyasa
who had known it had cut the lump in such a way that
there was a small piece in excess. The pots broke by
themselves in due course and hundred sons and a
daughter were born. The daughter was named Duéséala.
A son named Yuyutsu also was born to Dhrtarastra of a
Vaigya woman. Duryodhana was the eldest of the
hundred sons. The children grew up. Dufgsala was
given in marriage to Jayadratha, the King of Sindhu.
(M.B. Adi Parva, Chapters 109 to 116).
5) Till Bharata-batile. At this juncture Pandu incurred
a curse from a hermit that he would die if his wife touched him. With that Pandu retired to forest with his
wives. Dhrtarastra was grieved at the separation of
his brother. Pandu died in the forest and Madri jumped
into fire and died with her husband. Dhrtarastra asked
Vidura to perform their cremation rites. After that
Yudhisthira became King. The Pandavas became more
and more prosperous. This made the heart of Dhrtarastra
cloudy. He gave sanction to Duryodhana to transfer the
Pandavas to the lac house in Varanavata. The lac house
caught fire and it was rumoured that the Pandavas died
in the lac house fire, and Dhrtarastra shed crocodile
tears, and ordered for the mourning and oblation to
be performed. After the marriage of Paficali, it came to
be known that the Pandavas were alive and that they
were living with Drupada. Dhrtarastra recalled them and
gave them half of the country. The Pandavas made
Indraprastha their capital and began to rule the kingdom. Yudhisthira performed the sacrifice of Rajasiiya
(royal consecration). Dhrtarastra also took part in the
sacrifice. .
Duryodhana wanted to challenge Yudhisthira toa
game of dice. Dhrtarastra agr eed but advised Duryodhana not to live in enmity with the Pandavas. The
game of dice was played, and Yudhisthira lost everything the Pandavas had. Dhrtarastra called Paficali
and told her that she might ask any boon. She requested that her husband Dharmaputra might b~ exempted from servitude ‘and the Pandavas made free. Dhrtarastra compelled her to ask for more boons. She replied
that according to law Vaisyas were eligible for one boon,
Ksatriya women two boons, Kings three boons and
Brahmanas hundred boons, and since she had already
taken two boons, she wanted no more. Dhrtarastra who
was pleased at this reply gave the Pandavas freedom
and returned all their lost wealth.
Durydédhana wanted to challenge the Pandavas fora
game of dice again. Dhrtaragtra agreed. This time also
Yudhisthira lost the game. The Pandavas who had lost
everything, were ordered to go to forest for twelve years
and to live incognito for one year. The Pandavas went
B. Agramavasika Parva, Chapter 31, Stanza 7 that Dhrtardstrawas born as the incarnation of a Gandharva

DHRTARASTRA I
to the forest with Paficali. Dhrtarastra was grieved.
After thirtee 1 years the Pandavas returned. Duryodhana said that not an inch of land would be given to
the Pandavas. Dhrtarastra felt sorry at thi . Sri Krsna
came to talk abopt conciliation. Duryodhana wanted to
take hima prisoner. But Dhrtarastra opposed it. Sri
Krsna showed Dhrtarastra his ViSvaripa (cosmic form)
to see which, Krsna gave him sight for the time being
for which Dhrtarastra was very thankful. The Pandavas
and the Kauravas came to Kuruksetra for Bharata-battle.
Dhrtarastra called Sanjaya to him and asked him about
oa ey seas the parties had made for war. Safijaya
e a true description of the battle arra
parties. (M.B. Adi Parva. Sabha Parva ann, Daa
(e) lie Parva).
rtarastra and the battle of Bharata. Th i
battle began. ‘The heart of Deen was cilevel git
sorrow. When Arjuna vowed that he would kill Jayadratha, Dhrtarastra cried aloud. When he knew th t
Satyaki had destroyed the army of the Kauravas he
became dumb with grief. He praised Bhima’s val
and blamed his xn
sons. When Sajfijaya tol 1
about the fall of Karna, Dhvese ina et Cea
unconscious., He rose up again and a
noises from the battlefield, He fell ee a
he knew that Salya and Duryodhana were killed. He
rose again and cried for a long time. He gathered the
women-folk, his people and went to the battlefield
He broke the metal statue of Bhima and embraced the
Pandavas. He asked Yudhisthira to do the mournin
and offerings for the dead. It was done accordin ie
The Pandavas respected Dhrtardstra. But Bhima
scolded them. Dhrtardstra and Gandhari were greatl
depressed and asked Yudhisthira to permit them to live
in forest. Yudhisthira tried to prevent it. He kissed on
the head of Yudhisthira. Seeing that they did not eat
food he asked them to eat. Yudhisthira saw that the
would eat only if he permitted them to live in net,
At last Yudhisthira agreed. Dhrtarastra accepted
money from Dharmaputra and performed mournin
as eS for ue sia on a large scale (M.B. Beane
arva, Karna Parva, Stri Parva, Santi Pd
_Agramavasika Parva). apeaats Egeva and
7) Journey to forest and death. Afterwards Dhrtarastra
and Gandhari went to forest. Kunti followed them
All the subjects followed them a long way, cryin ,
Dhrtardstra sent them back and entrusted the aah
Krpa and Yuyutsu with the Pandavas. Dhrtarastra
Gandhari and Kunti lived on the Ganges. From there
they came to Kuruksetra and lived in the hermitage of
Satayapa for a time. During that period Narada
visited them. The Pamdavas and the subjects visited
them again. Vyasa also came there. He took Dhrtarastra and the rest of them to the river Ganges and
evoked the spirits of those who died in the battle.
Vyasa gave Dhrtarastra divine eye to see the departed
spirits. After this, at the request of Vyasa they all
returned.. Dhrtarastra, Gandhari and Kunti went to
Gangadvara.and performed severe. penance and were
burnt to death in- a wild fire. The-relatives put their
remains in. the Ganges. The spirits of the three—Dhriarastra, Gandhari and Kunti entered the realm of
Kubera. (M.B. Asramavasika Parva, Svargarohana
Parva). |
8) The names of Dhrtarasjra. Ajamidha, Ambikasuta,
DHRTARASTRA III. A-deva gandharva,.
DHRTARASTRA IV.
DHRTARASTRA V. One of the famous sons
DHRTASENA
Ambikeya, Bharata, Bharatasardula, Bharatasrestha;
Bharatarsabha, Bharatasattama, Kaurava, Kauravasrestha, Kauravaraja, Kauravendra, Kauravya, Kuruéardula, Kuruérestha, Kuradvaha, Kurunandana,
Kururaja, Kuruvarngavardhana, Kuruvrddha, Vaicitravirya, Prajiiacaksus etc. have been used as synonyms
of Dhrtarastra.
DHRTARASTRA II. A_ serpent born to MSKasyapa
Prajapati by his wife Kadri. It is stated in Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter 9, Stanza 9, that this
serpent sits in the Durbar of Varuna and worships
him.‘ During the time of emperor Prthu, devas (gods) ,
asuras (demons) and Nagas (serpents) milked the earth,
and the person who milked for the Nagas was the
serpent Dhrtarastra (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 69).
It is stated in Mahabharata, Karna Parva, Chapter 34,
Stanza 28, that once this Naga was admitted into the
chariot of Siva. When Balabhadra Rama, discarded
his body and went to Patala (nether world, several serpents
came to greet him. Dhrtarastra was one of them. (M.B.
Mausala Parva, Chapter 4, Stanza 15) «
(Semi-god) .
Some information. (1) This deva gandharva was the son
of i eae Kagyapa by his wife Muni. (M.B. Adi
Parva, ‘Chapter 65, Stanza 15).
(2) He took part in the birth-celebration of Arjuna.
(M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 122, Stanza 55).
(3) He went to the presence of King Marutta as a
messenger of Indra: (M.B. Aévamedha Parva, Chapter
(4) It was this Gandharva who had taken birth as.
Dhrtarastra, the father of Duryodhana. (M.B. Svarearohana Parva, Chapter 4, Stanza 15). |
A king who was the son of Janaf Kuru, a king of the Lunar’
mejaya and the grandson ae Kundika and others. (M.B.
dynasty. He had eleven son
Z
Chapter 94, Stanza 98 ) af "Wel.
There is a story about this naga (serpent ) in Jaimini,
Révamedha Parva, Chapter 39. _
After the Bharata-battle, Yudhisthira performed a
sacrifice. Arjuna led the sacrificial horse. He traveHe
far and wide and reached Manalur. At the inate aceon
of Ulapi, Babhruvahana confronted his = fe
A terrible fight ensued and Babhruvahana cut © a
head of Arjuna. Citrangada sent Babhruvahana to las
‘Nagaloka’ (the world of serpents) to brin ee ThE
‘Mrtasafijivini? to restore her husband to me =e
keeper of this jewel, which was under the Hs y
serpent Sesa was Dhrtarastra, the son of Vasu ‘ BabhKnowing that it was not casy to g he A
ruvahana fought with Dhrtarastra. _ A halite did not
fight he got the jewel. But Dhrtarastra, the head of
want Arjuna to come to life again, ae ew it into the
Arjuna, by the help of his sons and thr
hermitage of Dalbhya. oe
DHRTARASTRI. A daughter bor oe a hats
wife of Kas yapa Prajapati. Tamré ha 4 Suki Of these,
Kranifici, Bhasi, Syeni, Dhrtarastri a
5 from Bhasi, the
from Kraufici, the ow’: ae eels and the ruddy
gle and vulture from Syeni, al
oe eon Diecarasitl were born 10 Tay
occurs in Valmiki Ramayana, Aranya ars ee a
DHRTASENA. A _ king who took the side Oo e

DHRTAVARMA 238
Kauravas. (M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 6, Stanza
DHRTAVARMA. The brother of Suvarma, the king of
Trigarta, and Ketuvarma. Arjuna led the sacrificial
horse of Agvamedha performed by Yudhisthira after
the Bharata war. Siryavarma the king of Trigartta, confronted Arjuna and was defeated. Ketuvarma who
came next was also killed. Dhrtavarma came next.
He showered arrows on Arjuna and inflicted wound on
his hand, and the famous bow, Gandiva fell from his
hand. Arjuna grew angry and fought so fiercely. that
eighteen famous and mighty Trigartta warriors fell.
At last-Dhrtavarma fell at the feet. of Arjuna and
begged for pardon and accepted the supremacy of
Yudhisthira. (M.B. Asvamedha Parva, Chapter 74).
DHRTAVATI. (GHRTAVATI).A famous river. M.B.
Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9),
DHRTAVRATA. A king of the family of Yayati. (Bhagavata, Skandha 9).
DHRTI I. A daughter of Prajapati Daksa. She was one
of the wives of Dharmadeva. Ma§adri, the mother of
Nakula and Sahadeva, was the rebirth of Dhrti. (M.B.
Adi Parva, Chapter 67). Dhrti had given birth to Niyama when she was the wife of Dharmadeva, who had
married Sraddha, Laksmi, Dhrti, Tusti, Medha, Pusti,
Kriya, Buddhi, Lajja, Vapus, Santi, Siddhi and Kirti,
thirteen of the daughters of Daksa. Visnu Purana,
Amésa I, Chapter 7).
DHRTI II. A Visvadeva god .(M.B. Anuégdsana Parva,
Chapter 91).
DHRTI III. The son of Vitahavya, the king of Videha.
Fe was a contemporary of Vyasa and Vicitravirya the
king of the Kurus. Bahulasva was the son of this
Dhrti. (M.B. Adi Parva),
DHRTIMAN I. A king of the family of Yayati. (Bhagavata, Skandha 9). y
DHRTIMAN II. An ancient country in KuSsadvipa
(the island of Kuga). (M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 12,
Stanza 13). |
DHRTIMAN III. See under Dhrstabuddhi.
DHRUVA .I.
1) Birth and childhood. Manu Svayambhuva the son of
Brahma, had two sons named Priyavrata and Uttanapada. They were mighty heroes and of “righteous
character. Uttanapada had two wives, Suruci and
Suniti. Suruci gave birth to Uttama and Suniti to
Dhruva. Uttanapada showed more favour towards
Uttama and Suruci. But he looked upon Dhruva and
his mother with disfavour.
Once Uttama sat on the lap of his father when the
latter was sitting on the throne. Seeing this, Dhruva.
wanted to sit along with his brother. But fearing the
displeasure of Suruci, who was also there, the King did
not take Dhruva on to his lap. Seeing the endeavour of
Dhruva, Suruci said to him, “Child, if you wish to sit
on the lap of your father, you ought to have been born
in my womb. You cherish high ambition which you do
not deserve.” These words of Suruci were not palatable
to Dhruva who ran to his mother and sat on her lap.
When Suniti knew what had happened she shed tears.
After a few moments Dhruva stood up and made a
vow. “I will get a position unattainable even for my
DHRUVA I
father, by my own endeavour.” He then started for the
forest. He attained self-renunciation even in childhood
becoming a disciple of hermits and performing severe
penance.
Dhruva began penance in the forest of Madhuvana on
the river Jamuna. Suniti came and-tried to take him to
the palace. But he did not return. He intensified his penance more and more. At last Mahavisnu appeared before
him. Dhruva requested for a lofty, and eternal place
which would become a prop of the world. Accordingly,
Visnu pointed out to Dhruva, a noble place, higher
than the planets, stars Saptarsis (Ursa Major) and the
devas who travelled in aeroplanes. Mahavisnu said
that Dhruva would live in_a lofty place as a star till
the end of the Kalpa and his mother Suniti would also
remain as a star near Siva as long as Dhruva lived
(Visnu Purana, Améa 1, Chapters 11 and 12):,
2) The previous birth of Dhruva. Mahavisnu appeared
before Dhruva and revealed his previous birth.
Dhruva was a Brahmin in his previous birth. He used
to meditate on Visnu with concentration of mind. In
course of time he befriended a prince who was a youth,
of beautiful and bright complexion, enjoying all the
pleasures of the world. Attracted by the position and
status of the prince, the Brahmin wanted to become a
prince. Mahavisnu granted his wish. Accordingly
Dhruva took his next birth as the son of Uttanapada.
(Visnu Purana, Aréa 1, Chapter 12).
3) The reign and end of Dhruva. After receiving the boon
from Mahavisnu, Dhruva returned. All who were there
embraced Dhruva. Years passed by. Uttanapada left
his kingdom to Dhruva and became a forest householder. Dhruva became King. The King Dhruva
married Brahmi, the daughter of Sigumara a Prajapati.
The queen gave birth to two sons Kalpa and Vatsara.
Dhruva married Ia the daughter of Vayu (wind). She
gave birth to a sonnamed Utkala.
Uttama remained unmarried. While he was huntjng in
the forest a Yaksa (a demi-god) killed him. Suruci was
caught in wild fire and died..Hearing about the death
of Uttama, Dhruva took his weapons and reached the
realm of the Yaksas. He stood at their gate and
challenged them for battle. One lac and thirty thousand
Yaksa warriors fought with Dhruva. Dhruva destroyed
the entire army. The Yaksas began illusive and
magical arts. Dhruva overcame that also. At last
Kubera himself appeared before Dhruva and blessed
him. They got him into a plane and placed him in a
place higher than -all the planets. (Visnu Purana,
Bhagavata).
4) The descendants of Dhruva. Two sons named Sisti and
Bhavya were born to Dhruva by his wife Sambhu.
Succhaya the wife of Sisti gave birth to five sinless sons
named Ripu, Ripufijaya, Vipra, Vrkala and Vrkatejas.
Brhati the wife of Ripu gave birth to Caksusa of extreme
bright complexion. Manu was born to. Caksuga by his
wife Puskarani the daughter of Viranaprajapati and included in the children of Varuna. Ten sons Were born
to the bright Manu by his wife Nadvala, daughter
of Prajapati Vairaja. These ten bright sons were Kuru,
Piru, Satadyumna Tapasvi, Satyavan, Suci, Agnistoma, Atiratra, Sudyumna, and Abhimanyu. Agneyi,
the wife of Kuru gave birth to six children.
They were Anga, Sumanas, Khyati, Kratu, Angiras
and Sibi. A son named Vena was born to Anga

DHRUVA II
by his wife Sunitha. Hermits churned the right hand
of Vena to obtain children. Asa result of churning
Vaineya was born from the right hand of Vena. That
King is the famous Prthu. This Prthu milked the earth
for the prosperity of his subjects. (Visnu Purana, Amsa
1, Chapter 13).
5) The place of Dhruva. The origin of the river Ganga
was through the hole at the top of the shell of the
mundane egg. It flowed down and fell on the highest
part of heaven. That place is called Visnupada. Sitting
in this Visnupada, Dhruva does penance to Visnu. So
this place got the name Dhruvamandala. (Devi Bhagavata, Skandha 8).
DHRUVA II. He was the son of Nahusa and the brother
of Yayati. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 75, Stanza 30)
DHRUVA III. A king. He sits in the council of Yama
and serves him. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 8, Stanza
CeUVA IV. A warrior who fought on the side of the
Kauravas against the Pandavas. He was killed by
Bhimasena, (M.B. Drona. Parva, Chapter 155, Stanza
DHRUVA V. A king who supported Yudhisthira. (M.B.
Drona Parya, Chapter 158, Verse 39). m,
DHRUVA VI. A son born to Dharmadeva by his wife
Dhimra. He was one of the asta Mons aaa Vasus)
M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 66, Stanza
DHRUVAKA. A Sastor of Subrahmanya. (M.B. Salya
P 45, Stanza 79).
DHRUVARATNA. An not = of: eae (M.B.
Chapter 46, Stanza 4). .
den toaamtat "A king of Kosala. During: the pa
of this King there was prosperity m 5 a meee
people were virtuous. ‘This king had two
h the second wife
d Satrujit. The King was
brought up alike.
le loved
to a son name
: re
and both sons were
cleverer than Sudarsana peop
also gave birth
much pleased
As Satrujit was
Satrujit more.
Once Dhruvasandhi went |
ing and was killed by a lio :
ing to the custom Sudarsan
wall; tig wmotiee ET eet make Satrujit the
King of Ujayinl: 2° mother of Sudarsana_ was the
i a the a. t the
daughter of the King of Kalitga. Hearing 7 and
death of Dhruvasandhi, the mine King of Ujjayini
Kalinga arrived. at Ayodhya. a made king an
got angry because sSuder* a ehaial took the side of
began war. The King.
in Ayodhya
Sudargana. A terrible battle ‘was UE ene Tn the
as to who should be ¢
he heir to?! ne ‘led Virasena,
battle Yudhajit, the King of Ujjayint, “his mother
' the king of Kalinga.
Suda According to the
Manorama were in a4 8°
a
Iry plight. - and Sudarsana
advice-of minister Vidulla, el
fled from the capital. Vidu
-o the forest for huntin in the forest. Accordbecame King. Lilahe daughter of the
an he maid - O
d them.
t
days they
two
anorama accompanie oak by fishermen
reached Gangatata. They ison : had. At last-wi
thieves and they lost everything he Ganges and reacne'
the help of a boat Ey cross emitage of Bharadvaja
Trikita. They went to ™° |
med Sudargana was —
DHUMRAKSA II
who was doing penance there.
tion. | 3
After making Satrujjit King, Yudhajit began to search
for Manorama and Sudargana. He got news that they
lived in Citrakita. Yudhajit went there with an army.
But he could not get them out of the hermitage of
Bharadvaja. Manorama and SudarSana lived safely in
the hermitage.
Once Vidulla came to the hermitage of Bharadvaja to
enquire about Manorama. Seeing the old man the
hermit boys called out ““Kliba Kliba.” Prince Sudargana
heard only “Kli’. The syllable ‘Kli’ is the spell called
‘Kamaraja bijamantra’. Without knowing its meaning
Sudargana called out ‘Kli’ several times. With that the
prince got a special power.
Six more years passed. ‘Ihe prince became eleven years
old. By this time Bharadvaja had taught the prince
Vedas, Sagtras, etc. The prince was a devotee of Devi.
Devi appeared before him and: gave hima bow and a
quiver which would never become empty, and an
impenetrable armour. Sudarsana married Sasikala the
daughter of the King of Kasi. Nisada, the King of
Srngiverapura, was a friend of Dhruvasandhi. He gave
Sudargana a chariot which Sudarsana rode through the
forest: With the help of the King of Kasi and others
Sudargana recaptured Ayodhya. He made Vidulla his
minister and ruled over the country for a long time.
(Devi Bhagavata, Skandha 3).
DHUMAPA. A set of deified manes (Pitrs) who form a
gana (Siva’s hosts of deities). This Gana is seen to
havé attended the sacrifice of Daksa. (M.B. Santi
Parva, Chapter 284, Stanza 8.)
DHUMAPALA. A river. (M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter
9, Stanza 18).
DHUMAVATI. A holy place. The wishes of those who
take three days’ fast in this holy place are realised.
(M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 84, Stanza 22).
DHUMINI. The wife of King Ajamidha of Puru dynasty.
By this wife, a son named Rksa was born to Ajamidha.
(M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 94, Stanza 32).
DHUMORNA I. The wife of King Yama (God of Death).
(M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 117, Stanza 9).
DHUMORNA II. The wife of hermit Markandeya.
(M.B. Anusasana Parva, Chapter 146, Stanza 4).
DHUMRA I. A hermit. This hermit was a luminary in
the Durbar of Indra. (M.B. Sabha ‘Parva, Chapter 7).
DHUMRA II. A warrior of Subrahmanya. (M.B. Salya
Parva, Chapter 45, Stanza 64). :
DHUMRA. A daughter of Prajapati Daksa. She became
the’ wife of Dharmadeva. Two sons, Dhruva and Dhara
were born to the couple. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 66,
Stanza 19).
DHUMRAKESA I. A Pracetas (Bhagavata, Skandha 4).
DHUMRAKESA II. The third son of Prthu, the son of
Vena. Five sons were born to Prthu by his wife Arcis.
On the death of Prthu, his elder brother’s son Vijitasgva
appointed ‘Dhimrakega as the governor of southern
countries. (Bhagavata, Skandha 4).
DHUMRAKETU. A son of Bharata. Five sons named
Sumati, Rastrabhrt, Sudargana, Varana and Dhimraketu
were born to Bharata by his wife Paficajani. (Bhagavata
Skandha 5),
DHUMRAKSA I. A king of the Iksvaku dynasty,
DHUMRAKSA II. A minister of Ravana,
He gave them protec-

DHUMRASVA
Genealogy. Brahma created the Raksasa (giant) Heti.
The son Vidyutkega was born to him of his wife Bhaya.
Sukesa was born to Vidyutkesa by his wife Salakatanka.
Sukega married Devavati. Three sons, Malyavan,
Sumali and Mali were born to the couple. To Suméii,
by his wife Ketumati, fourteen children were born:
Prahasta, Akampana, Vikata, Kalakamukha, Dhimraksa, Danda, Supargva, Sarbhrada, Prakvada, Bhasakarna, Veka, Puspotkata, Kaikasi, and Kumbhinasi;
most of them were ministers of Ravana. (Uttara
Ramayana).
2) Work and death. Dhamraksa was one who worked in
all the branches of administration of the state. In all
the battles fought by the Raksasas Dhimraksa was
present. He was also called Dhimralocana. He was
killed in the battle of Rama and Ravana at the hands
of Hantiman. (Valmiki Ramayana, Yuddha Kanda,
Chapter 51).
DHUMRASVA. A king of the Iksvaku dynasty. He was
the son of Sucandra and the father of Safijaya.
(Valmiki Ramayana, Bala Kanda, Sarga 47).
DHUNDHU I. A notorious Asura. He was the son of
the Madhu Kaitabhas.
Brahma was born in the lotus from the navel of Visnu,
who was lying in meditation on the surface of water.
From the ear-wax of Visnu two asuras—Madhu and
‘Kaitabha sprang up. They: terrified Brahma by shaking the stalk of the lotus. Brahma became terribly
afraid of the asuras and ran about on the surface of
water. Hearing the cry of Brahma Visnu awoke, but
he could not defeat the asuras. Visnu decided to
employ ‘Sama’ (conciliation) the first expedient. The
arrogant demons ordered Visnu to ask of them any
boon. Visnu replied. “If:t is so, you must be killed by
me.”’ They could not but give the boon. They agreed
to the request of Visnu and said: “But we must be
killed in an atmosphere, which is not cloudy.” Visnu
killed them when the atmosphere was clear. 7
A son named Dhundhu had been born to Madhu and
Kaitabha. Because Visnu had killed his fathers
Dhundhu decided to take revenge on Visnu and the
Gods. With this idea in view Dhundhu began to‘ do
penance in the sandy desert of Ujjalaka in Marudhanva.
Standing on one leg he did penance for: thousands of |
years. ‘hen Brahma appeared before him and gave the
boon that he would not be killed by Devas, Danavas
(asuras), Gandharvas (Demi-gods) , Raksasas (demons) ,
Yaksas (paragods) and Uragas (serpents) . Having got -
this boon, he lived under sand in the desert of Ujjalaka.
His idea was to destroy the gods.
A hermit named Uttanka had erected his. hermitage in
another part of Marudhanva and began penance. By his
penance he made Visnu appear before him and then
made a request that Dhundhu’s activities be put a
stop to. Visnu replied “Uttanka! Dhundhu has become
a curse to the three worlds. There is aking named
Kuvalagva, born of the dynasty of Iksvaku. He will
kill Dhundhu.” Saying these words, Visnu disappeared.
Uttanka went to the palace of Kuvalagva and told
him what Visnu had said. Kuvalasva and_ his sons
went to the forest and killed Dhundhu in a fight.
From that day Kuvalasva came to be known by the
DHYANA
name Dhundhumara,! which meant ‘the killer of
Dhundhu: (M.B. Vana _ Parva,-4 Chapters from 201).
DHUNDHU II. An ancient King who lived on vegetable
food only. (M.B. Anusasana Parva, Chapter 115,
Stanza 66)..
DHUNDHUKARI. See under Gokarna.
DHUNDHULI. See under Gokarna.
DHUNDHUMARA. A king of the Iksvaku dynasty.
(See under Kuvalagva) . He was also called Kuvalayaéva
DHUNDHUMUKEA. A wicked King. Viéalya was his wife.
Even at the marriage of hisson this wicked King remained indifferent. He indulged in sexual activities with a
udra woman. Not much later he killed her. As soon
as her brother knew about this he ran to the palace
and killed the King Dhundhumika along with his wife.
Because he waskilled by a Sidra, the family of the King
faced destruction. His son was also wicked like his
father. But on the advice of a sage he begant o utter
(the five-syllabled and six-syllabled mantras of Siva)
in consequence of which, his patents were redeemed.
(Linga Purana). |
DHUNDHURA. An Asura. It is stated in Ganega
Purana that this asura went to the house of Kasyapa
in the shape of a parrot and tried to kill Ganega who
had incarnated in the house of KaSyapa, but was
killed by him. ,
DHURANDHARAM. A country in ancient India. (M.B.
Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Stanza 18).
DHURTA. A King of ancient India. (M.B. Adi Parva,
Chapter 1, Stanza 238). .
DHURTAKA. A serpent born in the family of Kaurava.
He fell in the sacrificial fire of King Janamejaya an
was burnt to death. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 57,
Stanza 13).
DHVAJAVATI. The daughter of the hermit Harimedha,
who lived in the sky, according to the order of the
Sun. (M.B. Udyoga Parva, Chapter 110, Stanza 13).
DHVAJINI,-A country in ancient India. (M.B. Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 83). |
DHVANI. The son of Apa who is-one of -the eight
Vasus. Apa had. four sons called Vaitanda, Srama,
Santa and Dhvani. (Visnu Purana, Amga 1,
Chapter: 15). :
DHVANYA. A king. He was the son of Laksmana. (See
Reveda Index) . .
DHVASANTI. A hermit of the period of the Rgveda.
Asvinidevas rescued the hermits Turviti, Dabhiti,
Dhvasanti and Purusanti from danger, Regveda,
Mandala 1, Anuvaka 16, Sakta 112). |
DHYANA. (Meditation). Even from ancient times the
people of Bharata believed that heaven could be attained by meditation. There are scientific methods ©
meditating upon God. They are described below:
The root “dhyai’’, means “to think”, Dhyana (meditation) means thinking of God with concentrationGod is invisible and figureless. We can meditate only
upon some material that contains the attributes of GodSo dhyana (meditation) is to fix-the mind on the
object of meditation, and to imagine that particular
object in a particular place and to concentrate the
mind upon it. One who casts off his body, while engag~
ed in meditation attains ‘Sdyujya’ (oneness with God)-
t- Dhundhu was the son of KaSyapa, born of Danu, It was to kill Dhundhu that Visnu incarnated a Vamana, Vamanapuran@
Chapter 8.

DIBHAKA
He who can meditate upon God, with concentration
of mind even for a moment or two can attain heaven.
The fruits he attains are far greater than the fruits
attained by performing great sacrifices and offerings.
For meditation, there are four factors : Dhyata (the
meditator), Dhyana (the act of meditation) Dhyeya
(the object meditated upon) and Dhyanaprayojana
(the attainment by meditation). He who indulges in
meditation is the meditator. The act done by him 1s
meditation. ‘That which is meditated upon is the object
of meditation. What the meditator obtains as a_ result
of his meditation is the attainment. A meditator should
be wise and virtuous, should have attention and _patience, devoted to Visnu and always energetic.
We can meditate upon God, walking, standing, sleeping
and awake. Godshould be consecrated in the centre of
the lotus chair of the heart and be worshipped with devotional meditation. It is to give practice in fixing the
mind firmly on a particular object, that the sages say
that some visible material object should be given to
meditate upon, in the early stage of meditation. When
concentration of mind is obtained by meditating upon
a visible object, it will be possible for us to meditate
upon an object which is not amenable to sia sae
When engaged in meditation we should be thinking
A jyotiratma va , a Om. (1
“Aharn Brahma jyotiratma vasudevo vimukt 1 A
asudeva, and Virnukta
-ahma, the light, the Spirit, V =
eae oelgge ge ‘ith anything), OM). (Agni
(having no connection WI
Purana, Chapter 374).
DIBHAKA. A prince who, Pp
boons and Sieeines from the gods, tried i aes
Durvasas. Balabhadrarama_ killed him. ‘The fo §
account occurs in the Bhavisya Purana. No chilBrahmadatta, King of Salva, had two yaar waatta’s
dren were born to them for several yale Bia ay ot ae
minister, Mitrasaha, also had no chi Zi a Brahmas
was a brahmin and a scholar. On a ilisa and performed
datta, with his wives, went to Sat’
. “41 an. As aresult of ten
rapas to, pleeks eat ee idee and blessed
ears’ rigorous tapas : ter his
him hac two sons would Be, Pore NGF dhe eke
irth to two sons. ueen
aueen ee Harhsa and that of <i ager caer
was named Dibhaka. At this t Se of Viena. That
to Mitrasaha, the minister by t 5
ee A ar elas? poilt but J anardana was
‘bhaka were § an formed
. ‘Mieke of cn, Hamsa an {or ee
a childhood t9 pease at they became a kable power and arrows. the world. Once
katitakas (torturers) and went ari destroye
they .went to Kas yapa’s girenngaee to the
of worship. After that ne ‘he sages an
Durvasas. There they torture nly loin cloth. Then
Sages naked who were wearing OMY
they returned.
Enraged by these,
taking the destroye
uffed up by the power of
ime a St
he bless!
vasas rl
sage ad and other articles. ee
d loin-clot an saluted him Ww
u
Krsna and his courtiers sto” o like sam
they saw Durvasas coming
‘ ure fied.
hearing the news, Sri Kr eer him back Pree sent
kill Harisa and Dibhaka a? a rajastiya, he hould
Harnsa and Dibhaka bega” sage t
J dadindana. to Sri Krsna with theme
24] | DILIPA I
either fight with them or give them tribute (in the
form of money). Janardana went to Dvaraka, just as
Akritira, a devotee of Visnu, went to Amb4adi with the
message of Kamsa. Immediately Krsna and Balabhadra
with the chief Ministers like Satyaki went to Salva. In
the war that followed Sri Krsna killed Harnsa and Bala.
Bhadrarama killed Dibhaka. (M.B. Bhavisya Parva,
Chapter 103-129).
DIGVIJAYAPARVA. A sub-division of the Sabha Parva
of Mahabharata. It comprises of Chapters 25 to 32 of
Sabha Parva.
DIK. A river. The Mahabharata, (Bhisma Parva, Chapter
9, Verse 18) states that the water of this river was used
for drinking by the people in India.
DIKSA. Diksa is the vrata that expels sin and increases
Jnana (wisdom). Those who are to be blessed fall into
three categories. The person who belongs to the first
category is called Vijfianakala; the second is Pralaya-’
kala; and the third is Sakala. Vijnanakala is free from
sin alone. Pralayakala is free from sins and Karmans.
Sakala has everything from Kala to the earth. The
Diksas to be practised by the three classes of persons
are of different kinds. Diksa is classified into two:
‘Niradhara and Sadhara.
Niradhara Diksa is performed for the sake of Vijfianakala and Pralayakala. Sadhara Diksa is prescribed for
the third class of people, the Sakaias.
DILIPA I. (Khatvanga). A mighty king of the Iksvaku
dynasty.
(1) Genealogy. See Dasaratha’s Genealogy.
2)Reign and Birth of Son. Dilipa is counted as one of the
noblest kings. His reign was extremely popular. But
even after a long period of married life, he had no
issue. His queen was Sudaksina, the princess of Magadha. In order to get Vasistha’s advice, Dilipa and
Sudaksina went to the sage’s asrama. After hearing
about their grievance, Vasistha meditated for a little
while and described why the royal couple’ were not
blessed with children:—“‘Long ago, Dilipa had paid
4 visit to Indra. While returning after the visit, he
passed by Kamadhenu who was lying under the shade of
Kalpavrksa. He paid no heed to her, as he did not
see her. The divine cow (Kamadhenu) took this as
a personal slight to her and cursed the King that he
would not have children until he served and propitiat-
‘ed her daughter, Nandini. Neither the King nor his
charioteer was aware of the curse. Kamadhenu has
now gone to Patala (underworld) to attend a sacrifice
of Varuna. Therefore Dilipa and his queen should
attend on and propitiate her daughter, Nandini.”
From the next morning the King and queen began to
offer their services to Nandini. The King followed her
as her shadow. After twentyone days, one morning
Nandini went to graze in a dense forest. As usual, the
King also followed her. As they reached the middle
of the woods, the King was enchanted for a moment
by the charm of the Sylvan scenery. Just then, on
turning round he saw a lion springing towards Nandini
to prey upon her, Suddenly he took up his bow and
aimed an arrow at the lion, but to his great amazement, his hands were paralysed. The lion spoke to him
as follows:—‘O King, you need, not exert yourself in
vain. 1 am the servant of Lord Siva. This holy deodar

DILIPA II
tree which you see in front of us, was planted and
tended by Parvati. My task is to protect this tree.
Parvati and lord Siva have authorized me to kill and
eat the animals which come this way. Therefore this
cow is my food.”
The king was in a fix. He begged the lion to spare
Nandini and to eat his (king’s) body imstead. The
lion agreed. The King put down his arms and _ stood
bowing down in front of the lion. Hearing the words,
‘Beloved child, arise’? he looked up, and the lion had
vanished. Just then Nandini told him that it was she
herself who had done this to test him. The King and
Nandini then returned to the Asrama. As a result of
Nandini’s blessing, the King’s wife bore a son who
later became the celebrated emperor Raghu. (Padma
Purana, Uttara Khanda, Chapter 198).
(3) Killing of the Asura, Virasena. Once a powerful Asura
named Virasena attacked Vaisravana. When lord
Siva came to know of it he tried to defeat Virasena,
but in vain. At Siva’s request, Mahavisnu entered the
scene. He was also unable to subdue the Asura.
Visnu advised Vaigsravana to seek the help of Dilipa.
Dilipa went to Alakapuri and encountered Virasena.
Under the shower of arrows fram Dilipa, blood began
to flow from the body of Virasena. But each drop of
his blood came to life as a new Virasena and all those
Virasenas continued a_ ceaseless battle with Diailipa.
At last Dilipa prayed to MRakteSvari who suddenly
appeared and drank all the blood. In this way the king
managed to kill Virasena. (Kampa Ramayana, Yuddha
Kanda).
(4) Dilipa and the Holy Waters. Once king Dilipa led
a saintly life on the bank of Ganga, the sacred place
worshipped by Devas, Rsis and Gandharvas. With
religious practices and offering puja to Devas, Rsis
and Pitrs, he spent time in prayer and meditation.
One day he happened to meet Vasistha, and paid
homage to him. The sage Vasistha described to him
all the places of sacred waters and explained the greatness of each. (See under Khatvanga). (Padma Purana,
Chapter 10).
DILIPA II. A serpent born in Kagyapa family. There is
a reference to this serpent in Mahabharata, Udyoga
Parva, Chapter 103, Verse 15.
DILIPASRAMA. A sacred place. It was at this place
that Amba, the daughter of the King of Kasi performed
austere tapas (Penance). (See under Amba),
DIMDIKA. A rat who played a part in Bidalopakhyana
The story runs as follows:
Once a cat performed tapas, holding his hands up, on
the banks of the Ganges, when the found no way to get
food. Seeing the devotion of that cat all living beings
birds and animals began to worship him. Once the cat
called all rats and told them: “One cannot do spiritual
and physical deeds at the same time. So I will look after
piritual affairs. You should attend to my
| needs. That is, bring me food, bathe me in
the Ganges, all these are your duties.”
The rats agreed to do So. They took him to the
Ganges, bathed him and gave him food. But, the cat,
whenever he got a chance caught a rat and ate it up
The cat’s health improved day-by-day and the number
of rat’s began to decrease. Among them, there was a
clever rat named Dimdika. He called all the other rats
your §
physica
DIPAKARNI
‘and organized a secret conference. The subject of
discussion was the cruel deeds done by the cat to the
rats.
The next day Dimdika went secretly to examine the
ways of living of the cat. The cat ate Dirhdixa. After
40 days the rats came to know that Dimdika was
missing. ‘They assembled secretly. ‘hey elected a rat
named Kokila as their leader. Under his leadership
the rats declared independence and left the place. ‘Lhe
cat also went-his own way finding no means to get food.
(M.b. Udyoga Parva, Chapter 160).
DINNAGA. A Sanskrit dramatist who lived between the
second and fifth centuries A.D. ‘‘Dhiranaga’’ was his
other name., The Sanskrit drama “KUNDAMALA”
which is based on Uttara Ramayana and has six acts,
was composed by Dinnaga. Dinnaga, the Buddhist preacher and this Dinnaga are two diiferent persons.
Vinayaka and Siva are praised in the introductory stanzas of _Kundamala (A.B. Keith: Classical Sanskrit
Jiterature) .
DINANATHA. A King who lived in Dvapara Age. He
was a mighty and famous Vaisnava. But his childless
life distressed him very much. Once he consulted
Galava. about his plight. Galava assured him that if he
performed a human sacrifice, a son would be born to
him. A handsome, scholarly and highly-born man was
to be sacrificed into the fire, A cripple, a dark-skinned
man or a crude fellow was unsuitable for the purpose.
The King’s servants scoured the villages and towns
looking for such a perfect man, but in vain. At last
they reached acountry called Dasapura, inhabited by
noble Brahmanas. ‘The women of that place were
reputed for their charming eyes. No man could resist
their fascination. In that lovely city there lived a
Brahmana named Krsnadeva with his virtuous wife and
three sons. The King’s servants requested Krsnadeva
to give one of his sons to be sacrificed. They offered
four lakhs of gold coins as price. The Brahmana and
his wife cried bitterly and Krsnadeva offered himself
instead of his sons. The royal servants seized one of his
sons after throwing gold coins in the house and
prepared to take him away. At this stage the second
son of Krsnadeva came forward and volunteered
himself. They agreed and he accompanied them to the
palace. On their way they met the sage Visyvamitra.
He asked them to release the boy but they refused to
set him free. The sage followed them to the palace and
undertook to perform 'a sacrifice which would bless the
King with progeny without a human sacrifice. The
King accepted the offer and thus the boy was_ saved.
(Padma Purana, Chapter 12).
DIPAKARNI. A character in Gunadhya’s Brhatkatha.
Dipakarni was a King. He had a wife named
Saktimati. One day while she was sleeping in the garden she was bitten by a snake and she died. Distressed
by her departure, Dipakarni accepted BrahmacaryaHe was deeply grieved because he had no son to
succeed to his throne. One day Siva appeared to him
in a dream and told him thus:- “When you pass
through the forest, you will come across a youth riding
a lion. Take him to your palace; he will be your son.”
Dipakarni woke up happily. He had faith in his dream.
One day he went to a distant forest for hunting.
There he saw a very handsome boy riding on a lion.
He was reminded of his dream when the boy dismounted
bh

DIPTA
and the lion walked away slowly to a nearby stream to
drink water. At once Dipakarni shot an arrow at the
lion. Suddenly the lion gave up its animal shape and
transformed itself into a man and spoke to the King as
follows :—
I am a Yaksa named Sita and a friend of Vaisravana.
Once when I went to bathe in the river Ganga, I
happened to see a Rsi virgin and I fell in love with her.
I married her according to the Gandharva rules. The
Rsis who came to know of it turned us into a lion
couple by their curse. When we fell at their feet and
begged pardon, they gave her a blessing that a son
would be born to her and that I would fall under your
arrow. After that we were wandering about asa
lion-couple and in due course she became pregnant.
In the fullness of time she gave birth to this boy and
then was liberated from the curse. I have been bringing
him up by giving the milk of lionesses. Now, by being
hit by your arrow, I am also released from the curse.
From this time kindly receive this mighty youth as
your own.”
After saying this,
returned to the pala
the Yaksa vanished. Dipakarni
Ce; taking the boy with him. Since
he was catried by Sata, the boy was named “‘Satavahana”. When he grew up into a youth, Dipakarni
handed over the rule of the kingdom to him and
entered into Vanaprastha. In courst of time ee
became an emperor. (Kathasaritsagara, Kathapitha
lambaka, 6th Taranga. ). |
DIPTA Son of Manu Uttama. Uttama was the third
Manu. He had_ three sons—Aja, Parasu and Dipta.
.(Visnu Purana, Part 3, Ghapter ks
DIPTAKETU. A King of olden umes:
Chapter |, verse 937):
DIPTAKSA. A Ksatriya
ed King was born
Parva, Chapter 74).
DIPTAROMA. A Vis vadeva.
Chapter 91, verse 31).
DIPTI. A Vis vadeva.
orga a hes se Magadha. He ue a by Pandu.
{sec a en nee a “2 eed sons of DhrtaDIRGHABAHU I. One a: Bharata War. (M.B.
rastra. Bhimasena killed ee in
Bhisma Parva, chapter mos ; King. There are conflicDIRGHABAHU II. A pr e Puranas.
ting versions about bim 1m th ho was th
DIRGHAJAMGHA. A Yaksa thasaritsagara,
of the Yaksa Puspadatta. ine
pithalambaka, 9nd Tarang?) : ) to Kasyapa
(M.B. Adi Parva,
tribe. Pururavas, the renownin this family. (M.B. Udyoga
(M.B. Anugasana Parva,
(M.B. Anugasana Parva, Chape elder brother
Kathaborn
5 ra
ers a i. nave TN Parva, Chapter 65,
‘by his wuHe :
re of the
_ Verse 30) - sy character in one of
DIRGHAKARNA. 4 rabb be gt :
nas ger depen * T peaple (See under Pancan or W
trusting mea
e of the hund
tantra) .
DIRGHALOCANA. OF
rastra.
red sons of DhrtaHe traces his
in?
aha-
. jl S:
Ksatrly® “\rsa Parva.
DIRGHAPRAJNA. A YT asura,
ancestry from 4 part of ; mere Afamnelt
1. The story of Brhaspatt ® je hat the child bor
Bharadvaja. The Mahabharata ® ate
q is given in Bh
n to Mamata wa
DIRGHATAMAS
bharata (Udyoga Parva, Chapter 4, Verse 12) states
that the Pandavas had sent an invitation to him at
the time of the Kuruksetra battle.
DIRGHAROMA. (DIRGHALOCANA). One of the
hundred sons of Dhrtarastra. He was killed by Bhimasena in the Bharata War. (M.B. Drona Parva, ChapDIRGHASATTRA. A holy place. He who visits this
holy place will derive the blessings of having performed
the ASvamedha and Rajasiya sacrifices. (M.B. Vana
Parva, Chapter 82). .
DIRGHASRAVAS. A son of Dirghatamas.
Mandala 1, Anuvaka 112, Sukta. 117).
DIRGHATAMAS. A great Muni.
1) Birth. Angiras, the son of Brahma, had two sons,
Utathya and Brhaspati. One day when Utathya was
away from home, Brhaspati approached his elder
brother’s wife, Mamata, who was pregnant at the time,
and tried to have sexual union with her. But she tried
to dissuade him and said—‘‘The child in my womb,
born from Utathya’s semen has already mastered
Vedas and Vedamgas. Your semen is also equally
powerful. How can my womb bear the combined force
of the two semens? So please refrain from this attempt
of yours.” But even after hearing these words of his
sister-in-law, Brhaspati was not able to control his
passions. At the time of the intercourse, when the
semen of Brhaspati entered the womb, the child within
it cried out—‘‘Father ! this passion is improper. ‘lwo
persons have no place here. So withdraw your semen.”
Brhaspati did not heed the request. The child in the
womb repelled the semen that entered the womb with
his foot and it dropped on the floor. Brhaspati who
became angry, cursed the child. As a result, the boy
was born blind. He got the name ‘‘Dirghatamas”
because he was born blind. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chap9) Family Life. In brilliance of parts, Dirghatamas’
equalled Brhaspati. Dirghatamas, who was born blind,
married Pradvesi, a Brahmani. The couple had many
children, chief of whom was Gautama. But after the
birth of the children, Dirghatmas fell into evil ways
and became an object of hatred and contempt. i bé
inmates of aSramas dubbed him a sinner. His wife, was
disgusted with him. One day, the enraged Dirghatamas, in his fury cursed women as a whole and
Pradvesi. could not control her anger. She, with the
help of Gautama and other sons made a raft and
placing Dirghatamas on it, floated it down the river
Ganga. The King Bali happened to see the raft floating down the river. He sent men to bring the boat to
the bank. The King recognized Dirghatamas and
asked the Muni to beget brilliant and intelligent
children by his queen. Dirghatamas agreed and the
King sent the queen Sudesna_ to him. The queen who
did not find pleasure in the company of the blind and
decrepit Muni sent a nurse to him. The nurse bore to
him Kaksivan and ten other sons all of whom became
great scholars. After some years the King came to know
that the mother of those boys was the nurse. Then he
sent Sudesna again to the Muni. Dirghatamas, after
touching her body blessed her and five sons, Anga,
According to this story the child in her womb was
(Reveda,
Agavata Purana.
s Dirghatamas.

DIRGHATAPAS 244
Vanga, Kalinga, Pundra and Sunga were born to her.
They founded five Kingdoms which were ‘known by
their names respectively. They are known by their
modern names: Bhagalpura, Bengal, Andhra, Rajasahi and Tamravika.
3) Other details. (1) Dirghatamas had another wife
named Usik. (Rgveda, Ist Mandala, 16th Anuvaka,
112th Sakta.)
(2) Dirghatamas continues to be in the assembly of
Indra offering worship to him (Indra). (M.B. Sabha
Parva, Chapter 7, Verse 11).
DIRGHATAPAS I. Father of Dhanvantari. (See under
Dhanvantari).
DIRGHATAPAS IIT. See under Punya.
DIRGHAYAJNA. A King of Ayodhya. Bhimasena had
once won him over to his side by persuasive speech.
(M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 30, verse 2).
DIRGHAYUS. Brother of Srutayus, the King of Kalinga.
Arjuna killed him in the war. (M.B. Drona Parva,
Chapter 94, Verse 29).
DIRGHIKA A daughter of Visvakarman. She was
abnormally tall, and since there was the Sastric injunction that he who married such women would die
within six months none came forward to wed her.
Dirghika began a penance for a good husband. As it
continued for years together symptoms of old age began
to appear in her. At this juncture an old and ailing
householder came there. On certain conditions he
married Dirghika. After sometime, in obedience to the
husband’s wish Dirghika set out on a tour carrying him
on her shoulders. Though Mandavya cursed her husband on their way, due to the chastity of Dirghika the
curse proved to be ineffective. The similarity in the
stories of Sandili and _ this Dirghika Jeads us to think
that they might have been one and the same person.
DISACAKSU. One of the prominent off-springs of
oe (M.B. Udyoga Parva, Chapter 101, Verse 10).
1) General. A daughter of Daksa Prajapati. She was
married to Kasyapa, grandson of Brahma and son of
Marici. She had many sisters, chief among whom were
Aditi, Kala, Danayus, Danu, Simhika, Krodha, Prtha,
Visva, Vinata, Kapila, Muni and Kadri. Kagyapa’s
sons by Aditi became Devas (Aditeyas) and his sons
by Diti became Asuras (Daityas) . (M.B. Adi Parva,
Chapter 65).
2) Indra cut Diti’s embryo to pieces. Devas and Asuras
agreed to churn the ocean of milk as a joint endeavour.
But when Amrta rose up to the surface, they began to
quarrel over it. In the battle between Devas and
Asuras for the possession of Amrta, Diti’s sons were
killed.
In her inconsolable grief at the death of her sons, Diti
prayed to her husband Kagyapa that she should be
blessed with a brave and heroic son who would be
capable of killing Indra. The sage granted her the
boon and told her that by worshipping the lord with a
pure mind and body fora hundred years, she would
bear a son who would be mighty enough to kill Indra.
In due course Diti became pregnant and following her
husband’s advice, she fervently worshipped the Lord
and remained pure in mind and body. When Indra
came to know that the child in Diti’s womb was to be
his slayer, he approached her under the disguise of an
attendant, offering to serve her. He waited for an
DITI
opportunity to get access to her and before the expiry
of a hundred years he got a chance. One day, Diti
went to bed without washing her feet and fell asleep.
Indra took his Vajra and gaining access to her womb
cut the embryo within it into seven pieces. The child
in the womb began to cry loudly. Indra asked it
“MA RUDA” (Do not cry). Then he proceeded to
cut each of the seven pieces again into seven and
finally there were fortynine pieces in all. They subsequently became Devas known as ‘Maruts.”’ They got
the name Maruts because Indra told them ““Ma Ruda.”
All the fortynine Maruts later on became the helpers
of Indra. (Visnu Purana, Part 1, Chapter 21).
3) Diti’s sons, Asuras were Diti’s sons. Chief among
them were Hiranyakasipu and Hiranyaksa. They had
a sister named Simhika. Hiranyakasgipu had four
sons—Anuhlada, Hlada, Prahlada and Sarmhlada who
were famous for their glory and might. Sirapadma,
Simhavaktra, Tarakasura, Gomukha and Ajamukha
were also Diti’s sons. Of them, Sirapadma had four
sons by his wife Mayasuta, who were Bhanukopa,
Agnimukha, Vajrabahu and Hiranya. An asura named
Mahasira was born to Sirbhavaktra by his wife,
Vibhiti. The Asuras, Sambara, Sakuni, Dvimirdha,
Sanku, Agva, were the sons of Hiranyaksa. Simhika
married Vipracitti; Rahu and Ketu were born to them.
Samhlada, the son of Hiranyakasipu had three sons,
Ayusman, Sibi and Baskala. Virocana was the son of
Prahlada; Mahabali was the son of Virocana; Bana
was born to Mahabali and to Bana were born four
crores of Nivatakavacas. All these were the prominent
children of Diti. Besides them, Diti had crores of other
Asuras born to her. (Visnu Purana, Part | , Chapter
3; Harivarmga, Chapter 3).
4) Birth of Hiranyakasipu and Hiranyaksa. Hiranyakas ipu
and Hiranyaksa were the rebirth of Jaya and’ Vijaya,
the two gate-keepers of Mahavisnu. (See under Jaya).
There is a story as to how they were born as the sons
of Diti.
Diti was one of the wives of Kagyapa. She had no
children while the other wives of Kasyapa had children.
Jealousy and grief rankled in her mind. One day she
approached Kasyapa and pressed him to beget a son
for her. It was the time of dusk when Kasyapa was
deeply absorbed in his day’s devotional worship. She
disturbed his “Dhyana” (devotional concentration) by
her importunity, but he was reluctant to yield to her
wishes at such an inauspicious time. It is at dusk that
iva goes about with his attendant hordes of spirits,
wearing the crown of his matted hair covered with the
dust carried by the whirlwinds from cremation grounds
and keeping his three eyes wide open. Kagyapa asked
Diti to wait for a few minutes, until that terrible time
was over, but she did not heed his advice. In the fury
of her passion she sprang towards him and stripped
him of his clothes and in the end Kagyapa yielded to
her carnal desires. But after the act he in a repentant
mood told her that she had defiled her mind by having
sexual union in that unholy hour and by doing so had
sinned against the gods. As a result, twin sons will be
born in her womb. They would persecute and torture
the three worlds. Mahavisnu would incarnate to
destroy them. But since she also felt a little regret in
her act, a grandson of her (Prahlada) will become a
devotee of Visnu.

DIVAHPUTRA
Twin sons, Hiranyakasi =
to Diti, For the oe ce mone) ha pee: born
laelaii Sid ianeak € story, see under Hiranyafiat), nyaksa, (Bhagavata, Prathama Skan5) Diti flourishes in the as
: snes sembl 7 |
fie Chapter 11, verse 39.) * Se
IPUTRA. One of the twel 2 eons
born in the form of the Sun. (M B. Rai’ P. od
ter 1, Verse 42). eB EER: RE
nen - A Seay of Sirya (Sun).
AIlI. As 3
Chapter 101). son of Garuda. (M.B. Udyoga Parva,
ee III. See under Nisakara II.
tg ene IV. A king. During the reign of this king
i: e Matsya Purana was composed.
IVIRATHA I. A King born in Bharata’s dynasty.
He was the grandson of Bharata and the son of
" Bhumanya. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 94, Verse 24).
IVIRATHA II. A king. He was the son of Dadhivahana.
In the course of Paragurama’s extermination of
Ksatriyas, the sage Gautama rescued a son of Diviratha
and gave shelter to him. (M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter
49, Verse 80
DIVODASA. (ATITHIGVA). A king of Kasi.
1) Genealogy. From Visnu descended in the following
order:—Brahma - Atri - Candra - Budha - Purtravas -
Ayus - Anenas - Pratiksatra - Srfijaya - Jaya - Vijaya -
Krti-Haryagva-Sahadeva - Nadina - Jayatsena - SarhkrtiKsatradharma-Suhotra-Sala . Arstisena-Kasa - Dirghatapas - Dhanvantari - Ketuman - Bhimaratha -
Divodasa.
Divodasa’s great grandfather's father, Kasa had many
sons. They were called the Kasis. It was from Kasa’s
reign that Varanasi came to be called Kasi. (Hari
Varnsa, Chapter 29).
2) Divoddsa’s Reign. When Divodasa began his rule in
Varanasi, there was a Raksasa named Ksemaka.
Divodiisa killed him and extended his kingdom. At
that stage, Bhadrasrenya, King of Hehayas invaded
Divodasa. Divodasa killed the hundred sons of Bhadraérenya. At that time the sage Kurnbhaka (Nikumbha }
came to Kasi. His practice was to live fora ea
years at any place where he reached at the time 0
yee Girne fe had reached Varanast ab dusk, ne S008
an rama and lived there for @ thousand i
that time there was a famine in Varanasl. cabin
land was in the grip of a sever© drought. alpen od A
4érama and its surroundings alone remained greceD aha
cool. Herdsmen used to take cattle ie orhey acti
neighbourhood of the agrama. Once W = i wi the
ned in the evening, they took with taf the "sage
sacrificial cow of Kunrbhaka. It was dar mild not trace
searched for the cow everywhere gous - intuition
its whereabouts At last he cam e ehord en In his
that his cow was taken away by the Bea and left
rage he cursed that Varanasi should pe Kumbhaka) ‘
the place with his disciples. (See U7 Fy rivarnsa is diff
The story of the ruin of Varanas? . married Parvati,
erent, It was the time when fie Etats Siva shifted
the daughter of Himavat. me whose task was
his residence to his wiles ec ‘orld, was never availato look after the affairs © fam. HS
ble for the purpose @ a “ion. They @Pa
proached Parvati’s mother, Men
DIVODASA
to persuade Siva to return to his a
means. Mena called her daughter et eaten ne
husband as a vagabond who had no place tola his
head on, Parvati could not bear this insult. Her mae .
stinging remarks got circulation in Devaloka. So sh
geen Siva to settle down somewhere on earth with hee
pee Eres and promised to take up residence at
The ruler of Kasi in those days was Divodasa. It wa
a prosperous period in the country. As a rule ee
ae to God only when faced with misfortunes. So
iva decided to bring about a famine among the eopl
of the country by ruining it. For that “he sa a
Kumbhaka to Varanasi. Kumbhaka arrived in Kags
and appeared to the barber Karnaka to whom te
communicated Siva’s intentions. The barber cheerf ily
fell in with the proposal and built a temple o ‘the
next day for the residence of Kumbhaka. feete in
the temple, Kumbhaka began to participate in ine
a iase i matters of the people. His blessings were uch
of “er ;
ee it after and people came to have deep faith in
Divodasa had no children. He had made many pi
offerings to gods and performed many holy raha a
removing his wife’s sterility, but it was all in wales
At last, at the King’s suggestion, she began to Ofer
piija to Kumbhaka praying for issue. But “even aft
a long period of devoted worship, she received -
blessing or boon from the sage. Moved by the path ie
condition of his queen, Suyasas, Divodasa re a bea
Kumbhaka very severely. He ccpimantiot tha &
denying his blessings to the queen while he was sh “
ing them on all and sundry in the country. Pr akae
at the King’s rebuke, Kumbhaka pronounced * = a
that the country should be ruined. As a result of ie the
country began to decline. (Harivarhsa, Chapter 29)
Siva and Parvati came and settled down in Varan: I
After some years, Parvati began to press her Mastanrdl
to leave the place and to go somewhere else Siva =
not inclined to do so. He said the place was *SAvI te
kta” and therefore insisted that he would not ed
it. From that time the place came to b ‘lled
‘‘Avimukta.”’ tia
3) Other details. ol
(1) Towards the end of his life Divodadsa be
Rajarsi (Royal Saint). There are numerous elect .
to this Rajarsi in the Reveda. Since Divcdgen, was a
a very hospitable nature he was known b wate
name, “Atithigva”. In Rgveda, Ist Mandala,’ 160,
a 127th Sukta, we read that once he hid ian
a nee water to escape from an Asura called
(2) Divodasa had a son named “Parucchepa”, who
was a Rsi. Rgveda Ist Mandala 19th Anuvaka, 127th
‘Sikta relates to Parucchepa.
(3) Bhimaratha, the father of Divodasa, had two other
names, Bhimasena, and: Sudeva. Divodasa purchased
Madhavi, the daughter of Yayati after paying two
hundred Syamakarnaévas (beautiful horses with darkcoloured ears) to Gdalava, so that he might have children. After the birth of his children, he returned
Madhavi to her father.(M.B. Udyoga Parva, Chapter
(4) He sits in Yama’s assembly and offers Pija to
- Yama. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 8, Verse 12)

DIVYADEVI
(5) Divodasa once plundered the accessories of his
enemies. Agnihotra vanished after it. (M.B. Santi
Parva, Chapter 96, Verse 21).
(6) It was at the behest of Indra that Divodasa built
the city of Varanasi (M.B. Anusasana Parva, Chapter
30, Verse 16).
(7) Once Divodasa fought with the King of Hehaya
for one thousand days. After having lost his army he went
to the sage Bharadvaja and performed Putrakamesti
sacrifice. As a result of ita son. Pratardana was born
to him. (M.B. Anusgasana Parva, Chapter 30).
(8) Other names for Divodasa used in the Mahabharata are—Bhaimaseni, Kasisa, Saudeva, Sudevatanaya
tc:
DIVYADEVI. Daughter of Divodasa, King of Plaksadvipa. There isa story about this princess in Padma
Purana, Bhimikhanda, Chapters 85, 88.
Divodasa decided to give his daughter Divya in
marriage to Citrasena, King of Rupadesa. But just
before the day fixed for the marriage Citrasena died
prematurely. So, as advised by the Brahmanas who had
come there she was married to Riipasena. He also died
soon after. She was subsequently married to 21 persons
in turn, and all of them died one by one.
Everyone took pity on her for her ill-fate. At last, at the
suggestion of the ministers, preparations were made for
her svayarnvara. Here also ill-luck pursued her. All
the princes who arrived to take part in the svayamvara
killed each other in mutual fight. Depressed and embittered by all this, Divya decided torenounce all worldly
pleasures and proceeded to the forest.
Once Suka named Ujjvala came to Plaksadvipa.
Moved to pity at the grief-stricken Divya he taught her
‘““Asainyasgayana”’ vrata. When she practised this vrata
with devotion for about four years, Mahavisnu appeared
before her and took her with him to Visnuloka.
DIVYAKATAM. A city situated in Western India in
ancient times. According to Mahabharata this city was
conquered by Nakula.—Sabha Parva, Chapter 32.
DIVYAKARMAKRT. A Visgvadeva. (M.B. Anugdsana
Parva, Chapter 91, Verse 35).
DIVYASANU. A Visvadeva. (M.B; AnuSdsana Parva
Chapter 91, Verse 30).
DIVYAVARSA (M). 365 days make one year for human beings. One year for human_ beings is one day for
the gods. 365 such days of the gods make one year for
the gods. This means that 365 years for human beings
are equal to one year for the gods. The year for the
gods is known as “Divyavarsa” or “Divyavatsara’’.
Krtayuga is made up of 4,800 Divyavatsaras. Tretayuuga has 3,600 Divyavatsaras. 2,400 Divyavatsaras make
up one Dvaparayuga. Kaliyuga has 1,200 Divyavatsaras.
12,000 Divyavarsas of this kind make up one “caturyuga”’. 71 CGaturyugas are the period of one Manu.
After the end of the period of one Manu, the gods
complete their term of existence. The total period of
i4 Manus is called a Kalpa. At the end of every
Kalpa there is a deluge. One Kalpa is one day time
for Brahma. After the deluge, until the time of one
Kalpa, is Brahma’s night. There is no universe at that
time. At the end of that Kalpa, the next Kalpa
begins and Brahma starts his work of creation.
In this way when 350 days and nights of Brahma
are completed, it is one Brahma Varsa. One Brahma
life-span is 120 such years. After that there is nothing
946 DRAVIDABHASA
for a Brahma’s life-span. Then Brahma is re-born and
resumes creation. (Bhagavata, Dasama Skandha).
DRAUPADI. Paiicali, the wife of the Pandavas. (See
under Paficali) .
DRAUPADIHARANA PARVA. A sub section of Vana
Parva in the Mahabharata. This covers Chapters 262
‘to 271 of Vana Parva.
DRAUPADISATYABHAMASAMVADA PARVA. A
sub section of Vana Parva, in the Mahabharata. This
comprises Chapters 233 to 235 of Vana Parva.
DRAVIDA I. A King of the family of Priyavrata who
was the son of Manu. (Bhagavata, Skandha 5).
DRAVIDA II. A gandharva who was the father of
‘Karhsa. (See under Karhsa) ArnSumati was the daughter of this gandharva. (See under Amsumati).
DRAVIDA(M). (DRAVIDA). In ancient days the
whole of South India was known by the name J'amilaka, as Tamil was the language used throughout South
India. Strictly speaking, all the languages used in
South India were given the name Tamil. The word
‘Tamil’ underwent changes in the language of North
India and took the form ‘Dravida’. Etymologists are
of opinion that the changes that took place in the word
Tamil were are follows :- Tamil — Damil — Damid-
— Dramid — Dravid — Dravid. Reference to the
Dravida country occurs in most of the Puranas.
Mahabharata states that Sahadeva, one of the Pandavas, sent a note for collecting taxes from the people of
Dravida. Sabha Parva, Chapter 31, Stanza 71.
‘There are other countries also in the southern Bharata
such as Dravida, Kerala, Pracya, Misika, Vanavasika
Karnataka, Mahisaka, Vikalpa and Miasaka.” This
statement (M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9) throws
light on the various countries which existed in South
India at the time of Mahabharata. In Bhagavata,
Skandha 10, it is mentioned that Karnsa, the uncle of
Sri Krsna, was the son of Dramila, a gandharva. (See
under Kamsa).
DRAVIDAS. It is stated in Mahabharata (Anusasan@
Parva, Chapter 33, Stanza 22) that the dravidas wer
originally Ksatriyas and that they became Sidras by
the curse of Brahmanas.
DRAVIDA BHASA. (Dravidian Language). Linguists
have classified the languages of the world under certain
sroups. Important among them are the Indo-Europea?
group, the semitic group, the Hamitic group, the Ural
Altaic group, the South East Asiatic group, the Drav!~
dian group, Austric group, the Bantu group and the
Chinese group.
.. Almost all the languages in South India belong to the
Dravidian group. The languages of this group are
Tamil, Telugu, Kannada, Malayalam, Tulu, Kutaku,
Tota, Kota, Badaka, Kuruk and Brahai. Of thes¢
Brahui alone is used in the mountain regions of Balucisthan. Linguists like Smimud and others have state
that there is a close relation between the Australian a0
Dravidian languages. The Aryan language has influence
ed the Dravidian languages to a creat extent. But Tami
has not been so much influenced as Telugu, Kannada
and Malayalam. It is because Tamil had a creat wealt
of literature of its own from ancient times.
The Dravidian group is again divided into four sections
Eastern, Western, Northern and Southern. Brahw}
is the only language in the Northern section. Its Ety

DRAVINASA
mology, grammar etc. are like that of the Dravidian
group. But it had been influenced to a large extent by
the Iranian language. Still it keeps its Dravidian character,
Telugu, Gondi, Kuruk, Kolami, Malta etc. come under
the Eastern group. Of these only Telugu has grown as
a literary language. Telugu is in use from Madras to
Mahendragiri. But it has various sub-divisions and local
differences. The Telugu used in the Districts of Krsna
and Godavari is considered to be the purest form.
Golari, Salevari, Kamari, Vasari, Dasari etc. are its local
sub-divisions, Over modern Telugu, Sanskrit has its
full sway.
Kannada, Kutaku, Tota, Koda, etc. come under the
western group. Kannada 1s used in Mysore and the
vicinity of the Districts of Coimbatore, Salem, Bellary,
Anantapore etc. Badaka used in the Nilgiris, Kurumpa,
used in the vicinity of Nilgiris, Kutaku used in
Coorg; are the sub divisions of Kannada. In edicts from
the 5th century Kannada could be seen 1m its ancient
form. The modern Kannada _ has been used from 16th
century onwards. Tulu is in use in places between the
rivers Candragiri in, the south of, Southern Canara and
gs could be includKalyanapuri. Only a few ancient sons be u
edin ‘Lulu literature. The Malayalam. script 1s used
to write Tulu. But now certain books in Tulu have
been published using Kannada script.
Tamil and Malayalam are the languages of the Southern section. ‘The oldest literature the Deas
group is in Tamil. The most ancient form in Tami
is seen in the edicts and stone tables of the 30t rte
B.C. The most important among them _ are the pate
works, The grammatical work ‘Tolkapp1yam, :
: ‘1. Malayalam became an
literary grammar of Centarr ne century A.D. The
independent language only by th =
oats relation iat exists between Tamil f pig os
is not visible in any other janguas : s of the various
group. By examining the jinter-relation eT ott
languages in the DS a Oe can ascertain
how close or distant the relation nea -s first from the
which languages separated themselv
original Dravida language.
DRAVINASA. A Pracetas. ( ie
Pracina Barhis). (Bhagavata, Skandha 4)
a ay of Anga. He was
King of the family ' ‘s
"tse He aband aed the father of Dharmaratha
One of the ten sons of the
(Agni Purana, Chapter 211} —oure things, The
DRAVYASUDDHI. Purifying oe in ancient
mode of purification - ae The procedure of
(4éuddhi.
India, was known as ravyasud
purification was as follows : one by coming into conIf earthern-wares became imp
in fire.
ld be burnt 12
tact with urine or excreta, they shou
remoulded. °F eof
+ peg a | in tamarin’ 3 _ dewater. Things
c ure
iron or bronze may be ang be washed 1n P
made of lass or pearl h as lotus etc. cou
water Things born in wate? sae er, If cloth }§ made
be purified by dipping them 1. itin water. If it is a
‘iu rub it with soil and di oil and water ry
large quantity of cloth, 4 mux 5 will become EP hee
b inkled it Wooden t etc. need only
e sprinkled on ne vaached
by planing. Cot, may
washed. Pots vsed for ©°
DRDHAYUDHA
with cow’s milk. Things made of ivory may be washed
in mustard-water. Jaggery, salt etc. need only be dried.
Agni Purana, Chapter 156).
DRDHA I. (DRDHAVARMAN). One of the hundred
sons of Dhrtarastra. Bhimasena killed him in the great
war. (Drona Parva, Chapter 137).
DRDHA II. (DRDHAKSATRA). One of the hundred
sons of Dhrtarastra. Bhimasena killed him. (Drona
Parva. Chapter 157).
DRDHADHANVA. A King of the Piru dynasty. He was
present on the occasion of Paficali’s svayarivara. (Adi
Parva, Chapter 105. Verse 15).
DRDHAHASTA. One of the hundred sons of Dhrtarastra. (Adi Parva, Chapter 67, Verse 102).
DRDHAKSATRA. See Drdha II.
DRDHANEMI. A King of the Piru dynasty. He was
the son of Satyahrdi and father of Suparsva. (Bhagavata, Dagama Skandha).
DRDHARATHA I. (Drdharathasraya). One of the
100 sons of Dhrtarastra killed in the great war by
Bhima. (Drona Parva, Chapter 157).
DRDHARATHA I. One of the kings, who should be
remembered both at dawn and before sun-set. (Anugasana Parva, Chapter 165, Verse 52).
DRDHARATHASRAYA. See Drdharatha I,
DRDHASANDHA. (SATRUNJAYA). One of the 100
sons of Dhrtarastra. He was killed in the great war by
Bhima. (Drona Parva. Chapter 13/7, Verse 20).
DRDHASENA. A King of the Yayati dynasty. He fought
in the great war on the side of the Pandavas and was
killed by Drona. (Drona Parva, Chapter 21, Verse 52).
DRDHASVA. A famous king of the Iksvaku dynasty.
He was the son of Kuvalayasva who had 21,000 sons.
All those sons but three were killed in the fight with an
asura called Dhundhu. The three sons who survived
the killing were Drdhagva, Kapilasva and Candraéva.
Vana Parva, Chapter 204).
DRDHASYU. A son born to Agastya maharsi by Lopamudra. He was born only after remaining in the
mother’s womb for seven years. He was a very great
scholar and tapasvi. He began studying the Vedas
fromm the very time of his birth. He is called Idhmavaha also. (See Idhmavaha).
DRDHAVARMA I. See Drdha I.
DRDHAVARMA. II. A King. Kadaligarbha was the
name of his wife. (See under Kadaligarbha).
DRDHAVYA. A maharsi. He was one of the seven
Rtviks of Dharamaraja. Unmucu, Pramucu, Atreya,
Drdhavya, Urdhvabahu, Trnasoma and Angiras were
the seven Rtviks. (Anusasana Parva, Chapter 150,
Verse 34).
DRDHAVRATA. A_ brahmarsi who lived in South
India. (Santi Parva, Chapter 208, Verse 28).
DRDHAYU I. Son born to King Puriravas by Urvasi.
(Adi Parva, Chapter 75, Verse 25).
DRDHAYU II. A King who lived in North India during the time ofthe great war. (Udyoga Parva, Chapter
4, Verse 23).
DRDHAYU II. A brahmarsi of South India. He is
known as Drdhavya and Drdhavrata also (Anu‘asana
Parva, Chapter 65, Verse 40). |
DRDHAYUDHA. (CITRAYUDHA). One of the 100.
sons of Dhrtarastra killed in the great war. (Drona
Parva, Chapter 136, Verse 20).

DRDHEYU
DRDHEYU. A maharsi who lived in the western ‘part
of India. (AnusAasana Parva, Chapter 150, Verse 36).
DRDHESTADHI. A King in ancient India. (Adi
Parva, Chapter 1, Verse 238).
DRONA TI. The teacher in archery of the Pandavas and
the Kauravas.
1) Berth, Drona was the son of Bharadvaja who had his
hermitage erected on the bank of the Ganges. Once
Bharadvaja went to bathe in the river. When he got
into the river he saw the celestial maid Ghrtaci. The celestial maid ran away as soon as she sawthe hermit. But
her cloth was caught in grass and slipped off her body.
When the hermit saw the complete form of her body
which was bright and beautiful, he had seminal] discharge.
The discharged semen was kept in a Drona (trough).
A child was born from that and he was named
Drona, who was brought up in the hermitage. (M. B.
Adi_ Parva, Chapter 13).
2) Education and Marriage. Drona learned the art of
using weapons from his father and the hermit AgniveSa.
Drupada the prince of Paficdla was the fellow student
of Drona. They became great friends. On completion
of education Drupada returned to Parficala. Drona
married Krpi ihe daughter of Saradvan. A son was born
to them. At his birth the child neighed like the horse
Uccaihsravas ; so his parents named him Asvatthama.
Hearing that Parasurama was giving Brahmanas free
gift of wealth and property, Drona reached there.
Drona’s desire was to get Dhanurveda (the art of
archery). Drona with his disciples went to Mahendragirl and saw Parasurama, who was about to enter forest
giving away everything he had. Paraéurama said, “‘I
have given away to the Brahmanas gold and everything
I had. The land I had conquered is given to Kasyapa.
Now there remains only my body and some weapons.
You can have one of them.”
Drona preferred the weapons. Thus Drona got the
entire armoury of Para‘urdma. (M. B. Adi Parva,
Chapter 13).
3) He became thé teacher of the Pandavas and the Kauravas.
After receiving dhanurveda from Paragurama Drona
went to Paficala. Drupada who had been a fellow
student of Drona was the King of Uttarapaficala. then.
Though Drona had become Proficient in archery, he
was very poor.
He had no money even to buy milk for his child. Once
the playmates of Aévatthama made him drink a mixture of water and flour saying that it was milk. So
Drona approached Drupada for financial help. But
Drupada shunned his fellow student, scolded him and
sent him away without giving any help. Drona vowed
that he would, somehow or Other, take revenge upon
Drupada and departed from Paficala.
The aim of Drona was to get some capable disciples. He
reached Hastinapura and stayed in disguise with Gautama
for a while. Once the Pandavas and the Kauravas who
were boys were engaged in the game of Kara (a kind
of cricket play) outside the palace premises. The ball
fell in a well by chance. The princess stood round the
well and began to ponder how to get the ‘ball’ out of
the well. They tried all means but in vain, At that
time a Brahmana of dark complexion, short and aged,
came by that way. Itwas Drona. The boys gathered
round the old man. Drona _ threw his ring also into the
i. Totake revenge on Drupada was the thought that was
DRONA I
well and said : “Your kingly qualities are very poor.
Your education in using weapons is not complete. If
you give me a meal I will get both the ring and the
ball together’ The boys agreed to the conditions.
Drona took a grass and evoked arrow into it by mantra
(spell) and shot it at the ‘Kara’. The next grass was
shot at the first grass. It struck the first grass. Thus he
shot grasses one after another till the grass reached the
brink of the well and by pulling the grass he took the ball
out. In the same way he took the ring also out of the
well. When they got the ‘Kara’ the boys stood round
Drona and asked him what he would like as the reward
for his deed. Drona said that they need only tell Bhisma
how a short man of dark complexion took the ball out of
the well. Accordingly the boys went to Bhisma and
told him everything. Immediately Bhisma understood
that it was Drona. Bhisma thought that Drona was the
best person to teach the princes. So Drona was brought to
the palace and was_ engaged as the teacher in archery.
(M.B. Adi Parva, Chapters 130 and 131).
4) Lducation in Archery of the Kauravas and reward.
(2) First vow. Drona asked the Pandavas and the Kauravas to sit together and then told them. ““There is one
thing that you should do for me when your education
is over’. Hearing this they all kept silent. But Arjuna
came forward and took the vow that he would achieve
that task according to the wish of the teacher.
(5) The disciple who is second to none. The training in
weapons commenced. Hearing of the fame of Drona,
disciples came from places far and near. Arjuna was
the first of all the students. Sending all the students to
fetch water Drona taught his son Aévatthama certain
special lessons.‘ Arjuna secretly knew this. So he
brought water as quickly as possible before the others.
As Drona loved his brilliant student Arjuna, he taught
both his son and Arjuna alike the secrets. Seeing the
brilliance of Arjuna Drona ordered the cook not to seat
Arjuna in a dark place for meals. Yet it happened once
that the light was extinguished by wind while the princes were having their meals. All sat still, without eating,
while Arjuna alone ate his food. From this Arjuna
discovered that without seeing the object one could hit
the target by constant practice. Drona was greatly
pleased at this and embracing him promised to try to
make him such an expert that there would be none
equal to him in archery.
(¢) Ekalavya. Once Arjuna and the other disciples went
to the forest for a hunt and there they met Ekalavya
who was superior to Arjuna in archery. This Ekalavya
had once approached Drona to learn archery from him.
But it was against the rule for a Brahmin to teach a
forester the art of fighting, So Ekalavya returned to the
forest and making an earthen image of Drona worshipped it and began self-learning in archery. Now he had
become superior to Arjuna in archery. The teacher
had said that none would be equal to Arjuna in archery:
Arjuna told Drona about Ekalavya. The teacher went
to the forest and got the thumb of Ekalavya as the
reward due to the teacher. Since then Ekalavya became
a great archer though only of a lower leve] than Arjuna
(See under Ekalavya).
d) Expert disciple. ‘The education in archery and the
us€é of weapons was nearing completion. In archery
Arjuna was second to none. Duryodhana and Bhima
uppermost in the mind of Drona.

DRONA I
became expert club-men. Agvatthama was the first in
the secrets of archery. Nakula and Sahadeva became
expert swordsmen. Arjuna was expert in all branches of
weapon-training. Bhima had bodily strength and Arjuna
had the strength of learning. Yudhisthira was the foremost in chariot-fighting.
e) Artificial bird. Once Drona placed an artificial bird
on the branch of a tree without the knowledge of the
princes, to test their practice in archery. Then he
laced his disciples with their bows, around the tree,
and told them to shoot the bird down at his command.
Drona first called Dharmaputra and told him io look
at the bird. ‘Then he asked him what he saw. Dharmaputra said that he saw the bird, the tree, the teacher
and the students. He tested one by one. All gave the
same reply, that Dharmaputra gave. At last he asked
Arjuna. Arjuna stood for a while, taking aim and said
that he saw a bird only. The teacher commanded to
shoot and Arjuna sent an arrow. At the first shot the bird
fel] down headless. With this test Drona understood that
Arjuna could defeat Drupada and embraced _ his
disciple.
f) Drona caught by
disciples went to a L..
dipping and splashing in the Ww :
Been by fhe lem Drowa was unable to extricate
himself from the grip of the crocodile. So he asked =
disciples to shoot the crocodile and kill it. eo
agape. Arjuna at once took bow and arrows an a
five arrows one after another at the crocodile, w ich
died instantly and came afloat. Lhe el
was much pleased, got out of the water and em oe
Arjuna an ug, tao, Dre
weapon. After imparting tis odg 12
Age ng not to operate this weapon on oo if =
enemy superior to man attacked ae the V5
should send this missile at him to = 1m. san Aeul
Giving due respect f0 the advice of t oe ie nS
received the Brahmas irastra. {M.B. Aa 4 ,
ter 133). ; away the rintr 133 ation byte pupils. When the are old
ces terminated, Dhrtarastra accol ,
:; -pla
demonstration of weapon prays tered we ane - :
imi rite Drona wo : . ter that the
Deen Brabmanas to bless bis ee a cloths,
pupils gave the teacher, ieee ane aid homage t0
all other costly things. The oneal? blessings to
The teacher 8@¥ ail:
to their teacher. comme
- them. With this the
Clubbing between Duryodhana, a
terrible one. : Ps whi
ous fight. Drona S© vatthame
The audience PP a
formance of Arjuna W er
the audience and the et ee na also ‘ie
1 rf inar cap : ° r yuna,
at his extraord i. details see unde Om, Wee
his performance. ( 'B. Adi Parva,
and Karna, fara */" se
came
monstration ‘
and 134). _ Wheo de = teacher the gift
da She
5) Revenge upon Drm ror giving i the beginning, ' d
a crocodile. Once Drona and his
he in the Ganges. While they were
ater a crocodile caught
an end it was the time 3 hould
|! her 1a¢, vert they 510
a cae at on -ompletion of Foe ed tat Drupada,
is pupus tha di ede
“ee, Accor ing
give him a gut.
the princes. 42 |
DRONA I
“the King of Paficala, should be brought before him with
his hands tied. As soon as Duryodhana and Karna heard
this they rapidly marched to Paficala and engaged
Drupada in a fight but were defeated by Drupada. After
that Arjuna entered the battle-field, defeated and tied
Drupada and brought him before Drona who was kind
enough not to kill Drupada. The Kingdom of Pajficala
was divided into two. Drupada was given Uttara-Pafcala and Drona took Daksina Paficala. Then Drupada
was released. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 137).
6) Arjuna is accorded sanction to fight with his teacher. One
year after the revenge on Drupada Yudhisthira was
anointed as heir-apparent, by Dhrtarastra. Once, in
the council of the king, Drona called Arjuna to him and
said: ‘Oh, Arjuna ! you must take an oath to do a particular thing in the presence of your relatives. If it happens
that I oppose you in battle you should fight against me
without thinking that Iam your teacher. This “oath is
rour gift to your teacher.’’ Arjuna agreed and took the
oathin the presence of the people. Because there was such
an oath Arjuna’s conscience did not prick him when he
had to fight against his teacher Drona in the battle of
Bharata between the Pandavas and Kauravas. (M. B,
Adi Parva, Chapter 139).
7) Part played by Drona up to the battle of Bharata.
(1) Duryodhana and his party came to know only at
the time of the svayarnvara (marriage) of Pancali that
the Pandavas were not killed in the lac house burning.
When Arjuna won the test and got Paficali, the Kauravas became furious and began to plot against the
Pandavas. At that time Drona came to the council-hall
of the Kauravas and said that the Kauravas should go
to Paficala and greet the Pandavas, bring them back
and give them half of the kingdom. (M. B. Adi Parva,
Chapter 203).
(2) Drona was present at the sacrifice of Rajasuya
(imperial consecration) performed by Yudhisthira.
(M. B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 34, Stanza 8).
(3) When the game of dice was going on between
éakuni and Yudhisthira Drona came with Dhrtarastra
to the place to witness the game. (M. B. Sabha Parva,
Chapter 60, Stanza 2).
(4) Drona declared that the game of dice between
Gakuni and Y udhisthira was not fair (M. B. Vana
Parva, Chapter 9, Stanza 2),
5) Drona was well-versed in archery. (M. B. Vana
Parva, Chapter 37, Stanza 4).
6) While the Pandavas were living in the country of
Virata, Arjuna in the guise of Brhannala, fought with the
Kauravas. Drona was the first to recognize Brhannala
as Arjuna at the sound of his conch. (M. B. Virata
Parva, Chapter 46, Stanza 24).
(7) In that fight Drona fought with Arjuna whose
arrows wounded Drona and he ran away from the
battlefield. (M. B. Virata Parva, Chapter 58).
8) When Sri Krsna came to the council-hall of the
Kauravas to plead for a treaty on behalf of the Pandavas
who had returned after forest life and pseudonymity,
Drona took the side of the Pandavas and argued with
Duryodhana. (M. B. Udyoga Parva, Chapter 126).
9) Drona advised Dhrtarastra to see that a battle
between the Kauravas and the Pandavas was avoided.
(M. B. Udyoga Parva, two Chapters from 138).
10) When it was almost decided that the battle was
inevitable Drona boasted to Duryodhana that he would

DRONA I
annihilate the army of the Pandavas within a month.
(M. B. Udyoga Parva, Chapter 193, Stanza 1a).
8) Why Drona, whose leaning was towards the Pandavas,
took the side of the Kauravas in the battle of Bharata. At
heart Drona was on the side of the Pandavas. But he
fought against them, taking the side of the Kauravas.
Even at that time he ardently wished the Pandavas to
win the battle. What is the reason for it ? An answer to
this question is found in Mahabharata, Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 43.
The battle was about to begin. Dharmaputra went to
Drona and bowed before him and requested to bless
him so that he might win the battle against the Kauravas. Drona said, “It is good on your part to have
come and seen me before the battle is begun. If you
had not seen me I would have cursed you to lose the
battle. But today I am honoured since you have come.
You fight the battle. Victory is yours. But I have to
stand with the Kauravas, and there isa reason for it.
Man is a slave of money and money is not the slave
of Man. The Kauravas have tied me with money’. Sri
Krsna will be on the side of the righteous. Where Sri
Krsna is, there will be victory. But so long as I fight
it is difficult for you to win. So try to kill me at the
beginning of the battle. You need not feel sorry for
killing your -teacher. Because when I shower arrows
and fight vehemently I won’t look to see which enemy
has struck me down. Enemies could kill me only when
Iam lying on darbha grass leaving fighting jn disappointment. I will put down my weapons in battle
only when I hear words which I dislike to hear.”?
After having - revealed these secrets of his own he sent
Yudhisthira back. (M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter <3)
J) Drona in the batile of Bharata. (1) On the first day
of the battle Drona fought in a combat with Dhrstadyumna, who was defeated. (M.B. Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 77, Stanza 69).
(2) Drona killed Sankha the son of King Virata. (M.B.
Bhisma Parva, Chapter 82, Stanza 23).
(3) Drona became unconscious by the clubbing of
hn (M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 94, Stanza
(4) Drona fought with Arjuna. (M.B. Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 102, Stanza 6).
(5) Drona defeated Drupada. (M.B. Bhisma Parva
Chapter 104, Stanza 24), ) ;
(6) There was a fight between Drona and Yudhisthira
(M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 110, Stanza 17),
(7) Drona combated with Dhrstadyumna. (M.B.
Bhisma Parva, Chapter 116, Stanza A his
8) He became the commander-in-general after the
fall of Bhisma. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 7, Stanza
(9) He gave Duryodhana a boon to catch Yudhisthira
alive. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 12, Stanza 20).
(10) He killed Yugandhara (M.B. Drona Parva.
Chapter 16, Stanza 31). |
(11) Vyaghradatta and Sirmhasena were killed by
Drona. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter, 16, Stanza Si).
(12) In the fight which followed Arjuna and his army
were driven back by Drona. (M.B. Drona Parva,
Chapter 16, Stanza 50).
(35) He killed Brhatksatra,
DRONA I
(13) Drona advised Duryodhana to try to get Arjuna
away from the battlefield. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 17, Stanza 3).
(14) He killed Baka. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 21,
Stanza 16).
(15) He killed Satyaki. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter
21, Stanza 21).
(16) He killed Satanika. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter
2] Stanza 28).
(17) Drdhasena was killed by Drona. (M.B. Drona
Parva, Chapter 21, Stanza 52).
(18) Drona killed Ksema. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 21, Stanza 53).
(19) He killed Vasudana and Ksatradeva. (M.B.
Drona Parva, Chapter 21, Stanzas 55, 56).
(20) He fought again with Dhrstadyumna. (M.B.
Drona Parva, Chapter 31, Stanza 8).
(21) He annihilated the army of the Pandavas. (M.B.
Drona Parva, Chapter 32, Stanza 42).
(22) He made a Cakravyaha. (Strategical formation of
the army in the shape. of a wheel). (M.B. Drona
Parva, Chapter 34, Stanza 13).
(23) He broke the sword of Abhimanyu (M.B. Drona
Parva, Chapter 48, Stanza Md )e
(24) By forming cakragakatavyiiha he saved Jayadratha. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 87, Stanza 22).
(25) He fought with Arjuna again. (M.B. Drona
Parva, Chapter 91, Stanza 11). ;
(26) He put the divine-armour on Duryodhana. (M.B,
Drona Parva, Chapter 94, Stanza 39).
(27) A fierce fight ensued between Drona and Dhrstadyumna. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapters 95 to 97).
(28) , wounded Satyaki, (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapber LLY.
(29) Satyaki defeated Drona. (M.B. Drona Parva,
Chapter 117, Stanza 30). |
(30) Drona scolded Dugéasana who ran away defeated
by Satyaki. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 4 ne
(31) He killed Viraketu, (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter
122, Stanza 41).
(32) He killed Citraketu, Sudhanva, Citravarma and
Citraratha. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 122,
stanza 43),
(33) He fell unconscious, hit by Dhrstadyumna. (M.B.
Drona Parva, Chapter 122, Stanza 36) .
(34) He defeated Dhrstadyumna. (M.B. Drona Parva,
Chapter 122, Stanza 7] de
(M.B. Drona Parva,
Chapter 125, Stanza 22),
(36) He killed Dhrstaketu for his son. (M.B. Drona
Parva, Chapter 125, Stanza of), )
(37) Sahadeva, the son of Jarasandha, was killed by
Drona. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 125, Stanza 45).
(38) He killed Ksatradharma the son of Dhrstadyumna.
(M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 125, Stanzs 66).
(39) Bhimasena defeated Drona. Bi
Chapter 127, Stanza 93), me AMAR. Droge Parva,
(40) Bhimasena threw away the chariot with Drona in
it eight times, (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 128;
Stanza 13),
1. “‘Man is slave to wealth, wealthis slave to none. This ig trueoh King. The Kauravas have bound me with wealth, I am
telling you this without shame. You only require battle, Iw
ul fight for the Kauravas and wish for your victory,”

DRONA II
(41) Drona:killed the King of Hehaya, all the sons of
Dhrstadyumna, and the King Sibi. (M.B. Drona
Parva, Chapter 155, Stanza 14).
(42) He became unconscious in the fight with Yudhisthira. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 162, Stanza 49).
(43) He killed Drupada and Virata, the grandsons of
Drupada. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 186, Stanza BS).
(44) Hearing that Agvatthama had been killed he was
—_ a. grief. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 190,
tanza J/).
(45) After that throwing away the weapons, he
immersed in a deep meditation and attained harmony
with the Supreme Being and his spirit entered the
oo of Brahma. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 192,
tanza 43).
(46) Thu by the power of meditation his spirit went
to heaven and the body without spirit sat motionless
in meditation. Dhrstadyumna cut off his head and thus
killed Drona. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 193,
Stanza 62).
10) Other — (1) Vyasa evoked the spirits of those
who died jn’ the battle of Bharata to the surface of the
Ganges. ~The spirit of Drona was one of them. (M.B.
Aéramavasika Parva, Chapter 32, Stanza 7).
(2) Offerings were’ given to the manes for Drona.
(M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter 296, Stanza 15).
(3) Drona attained heaven after his death, and was
absorbed ‘in Brhaspati (M.B. Svargarohana Parva,
Chapter 4, Stanza 21).
(4) He was the man W
vaja from a portion of ein
Chapter 67, Stanza 69).
(5) Kohtya (teacher) , Acarya-mukhya ( chief ae |
Bharadvaja, Bharadvajasuta, Bharadvajatinajé, me
acarya, Sonasva, Sonasvavaha, * Vyasa
Rukmaratha are used as synonyms 0 Y
in Mahabharata.
DRONA II. A bird. A
ho took birth through Bharad-
(M.B. Adi Parva,
Sonahaya,
f Drona
hermit Mandan born to the ui
- Khandavadaha,
pala of Jarita, a bird. (See under
DRONAM. A. medicinal herb. (See under Marutt
D RONABILISEKAPARVA. Asubsection of DronaParva :
Chapters 1 to 16.
DRONA PARVA. An impo
Mahabharata.
DRONAVADHA PARVA. A sub
Chapters 154 to 192. 7,
DR ADA. oly
emery oe. Chapter 29; 7 masa of Puru
‘ORSADVAN. Father-in-law of King ati’s wife. (See
dynasty. V arangi was the name see
Sarmyati) .
DRSADVATI. A_ river
During their exile in t
water from it. (Wana Parva,
was on the delta of this rivet
rtant Parva (section) in the
section of Drona Parva:
bath ( tirtha ). (M.B.
th of la ee
Pandavas dran
a “5, Verse 2). It
tnarted advice
ong =aiea Verse 15).
to the sou
to Yudhisthira. (Sabha a this river is equal to
Living on the northern bank 0 hapter . To perliving in Svarga. (Vana Parva, saul of the dead after
form bali and other rites for the “ag. Stanza 68 states f
t. Mahab harata Adi Parva: eg Drupada was Adi
. ala, <a
Adi Parva Phe jtey 120, Stanza 41; a? a Mahabharata,
father of Drupada’s great grandfat er.
the son of Somaka.
the son of Prsata.
Parva,
DRUPADA
bathing in the river is as efficacious as performing the
Agnistoma Yajfia. (Vana Parva, Ghapter 88).
DRSTAKETU. A danava. (Adi Parva, Chapter 67,
Verse 8).
DRUPADA. (Saumaki,' Yajfiasena). Father of Paficall.
1) Genealogy. Descended from Visnu in the following
order:—Brahma—Atri—Candra—Budha— Purtiravas—
Ayus — Nahusa — Yayati—Piru—Janamejaya— Praciuvan—Pravira—Namasyu—Vitabhaya—Sundu— Bahuvidha — Sarnyati—Rahovadi—Raudras va—Matinara—
Santurodha—Dusyanta—Bharata—Suhottra—Suhota—
Gala—Gardda—Suketu—Brhatksatra— Hasti — Ajamidha — Nila — Santi—Susanti—-Puruja—Arka—Bharmyasva—Paficala— Mudgala — Divodasa — Mitreyu —
Prsata — Sudasa — Sahadeva — Somaka—Yajnasena
(Drupada).
9) Education and kingship. Yajfiasena went to the hermitage of Bharadvaja for education. Drona, who became
a great teacher in archery later, was also a student and
disciple of Bharadvaja at that time. Thus during the
time of education both Drupada and Drona became
fast friends. After receiving education Drupada returned to his country. At that time Paficala was ruled
by Prsata. When Yajfiasena returned on completion of
his education, Prsata died and Yajfiasena was anointed
as King of Uttara-Paficala. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chap3) Yajitasena reproaches Drona. It has already been said
that during the period of education Drona and Yajfiasena were fast friends. Once Drupada said to Drona:
“My dear friend. My father has told me that I would
be made the King of Uttara Paficala on completing my
education. Thus if I become a King, the treasury of the
King will be at your disposal.”
After the education both returned to their places. Not
much later Drona got married. A son born to him was
named Agvatthama. Drona was so poor that he could
not even buy milk for his child. Once the friends of
Agvatthama mixed flour in water and made him drink
it saying that it was milk. Asvatthama drank it without
knowing that it was not milk. Thinking that he had
become energetic by drinking milk he began to run
with the other boys. At last they told him the truth
and teased him.
With his wife and child Drona went to Drupada who
did not care to recognize him as a friend. Drona tried
to remind him of their former friendship. But Drupada
shunned him and said, “Tf I had friendship with you,
it was to achieve certain ends. There is no friendship
between the rich and the poor, the learned and the
illiterate, the brave and the coward. So if there was
any friendship at all it was not real. You, who are slow
of brain! Kings of high status cannot have friendship
with such people especially the poor. A Brahmin
learned in Vedas won’t befriend a Brahmin who is not
learned in Vedas, a man seated ina chariot cannot
befriend a man who is not seated in a chariot and a
King cannot befriend one who is nota King. Soa
friendship of bygone days is no friendship at all”.
Drupada’s reproaches aroused a storm of anger in
Drona. He vowed that he would avenge the insult.
With his wife and child he got out of the palace. He
hat the original name of Drupada was Yajfiasena. Mahabhirata,
But according to other puranas Prsatawas the
Chapter 131, Stanza 6, Drupada is addressed as ‘Saumaki:

DRUPADA 252
wandered about in search of disciples who were capable
of confronting with Drupada. At last he. came to
Hastinapura and became the teacher of the Pandavas
and the Kauravas. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 130).
4) The revenge of Drona. Drona told Bhisma about his
dealings with Drupada. Bhisma consoled Drona. Before
the commencement of the training in archery, Drona
told his disciples : ““When your training in archery is
completed you will have to do a favour to your teacher’’. All stood agape. But Arjuna camé forward and
said: ‘I will do”. Drona embraced Arjuna. The training commenced. The Andhakas, Vrsnis and others
joined his school of archery.
The training in archery came to an end. Drona called
his disciples and told them that Drupada should be
tied with a rope and placed before him. When they
heard the words of the teacher, Duryodhana, Karna, Yuyutsu, Dussasana, Vikarna, Jarasandha and Sulocana led
the Kauravas to Paficala. Arjuna knew that the
Kauravas would not be able to defeat Drupada. He
told the teacher that when the, Kauravas returned
without achieving the task, he himself would ‘go and
bring Drupada. After a terrible battle the Kauravas
were deteated by the Paficalas. After that Arjuna confronted Drupada. Nakula and Sahadeva stood as
guards of the wheels. Bhimasena with his club stood
in front of the army. Arjuna drove the chariot right
in the midst of the Paficala army. Bhima took his club
and a terrible battle ensued. Arjuna shattered the
Paficala army, bound Drupada and took him to Drona.
The teacher looked at Drupada and reproached him
with scornful word: “‘[ have destroyed your country.
Now you are at my mercy. Is not the former friendship
a friendship?” Drupada requested that they should be
friends in future. Accordingly Drupada was set free.
The country of Paficala was divided into two, and
giving Uttara Paricala to Drupada, Drona took Daksina
Pancala. Thus because of the revenge of Drona, Drupada lost half of his kingdom. (M.B. Adi Parva,
Chapter 137).
9) Birth of Children. Though Drona and Drupada
were on friendly terms Drupada did not forget the
defeat he had incurred at the harids of Drona. So,
Drupada deswred to have a son who would become
powerful enough to take revenge on Drona. He began
to think of ways and means. He consulted severa]
learned Brahmins. At that time two hermit brothers
yaja and Upayaja lived on the bank of the. Ganges.
The King approached them and requested their ‘help to
obtain a son, who would kill Drona, and promised to
give them cows and other precious things in return.
At first they refused to help him. The King served
Upayaja for a year, and pleased him. He sent the King
to the hermitage of Yaja. They accepted the request
of the King. Both the hermits performed a sacrifice
for Drupada. A boy and a girl arose from the sacrifcial fire. The boy was named Dhrstadyumna and the
girl was named Krsna (Paficali). There was a celestial voice that the boy would kill Drona when he grew
up. (M.B. Adi parva, Chapter 167). |
6) The marriage of Parcalzt. Paficali grew up. Drupada
desired to give her in marriage to Arjuna. But at “that
time the lac-house caught fire and the Pandavas disappeared. Drupada set certain tests in the Svayamvara
of Paficali with a view to ascertain if Arjuna was alive.
DRUMASENA I
The Pandavas came to the svayamvara and Drupada
found out Arjuna. But Drupada did not like the idea
of his daughter becoming the wife of more than one
husband. Then Vyasa appeared there and informed
Drupada of the previous births of the Pandavas and
Paricali. Drupada was much pleased and he gave the
. Pandavas a good deal of wealth and sent Paficali with
them. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 196).
7) Other details (1) Drupada was present at the marriage of Abhimanyu, celebrated at the city of Upaplavya
(M.B. Virata Parva, Chapter 72, Stanza 17).
(2) Drupada gave the Pandavas an aksauhini, (division
21870 elephants, 21870 chariots, 65610 horses, 109350
footmen) of army for the battle of Bharata. (M.B.
Udyoga Parva, Chapter 57).
(3) At the battle of Bharata, Drupada was anointed as
one of the seven commanders on the side of the
Pandavas. (M.B. Udyoga Parva, Chapter 157, Stanza
iT)
(4) Drupada fought with Jayadratha on the first day
of the battle of Kuruksetra. (M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 49, Stanza 55).
(5) L upada was defeated in a combat with Drona the
teacher. (M.B. Bhigsma Parva, Chapter 7, Stanza 48).
(6) Drupada combated with Aégvatthama. (M.B.
Bhisma Parva, Chapter 110, Stanza 16).
(7) He fought with Bhagadatta. (M.B. Drona Parva,
Chapter 14, Stanza 40).
(8) He fought with Balhika.
Chapter 25, Stanza 18).
(9) He was defeated by Prsata. (M.B. Drona Parva,
Chapter 138, Stanza 24),
(10) Drona the teacher killed Drupada. (M.B. Drona
Parva, Chapter 186, Stanza 43).
(11) The Pandavas gave offerings to the manes for
Drupada. (M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter 42, Stanza 5).
(12) Vyasa evoked the spirits of the dead to the surface
of the Ganges, after the Battle of Bharata came to an
end. Drupada also was there among the spirits which
appeared on the Ganges. (M.B. Agramavasika Parva,
Chapter 32, Stanza 8).
(13) After death Drupada entered heaven and was
absorbed in Visvadevas. (M.B. Svargarohana Parva,
Chapter 5,°Stanza 15).
(14) It is stated in Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter
67, Stanza 68, that Drupada was born from a portion
of the Marudganas.
8) Synonyms of Drupada. Pai\cala,
raja, Parsata, Prsatatmaja,
Drupada are his synonyms.
DRUMA I. A King in ancient Bharata. Mention is
made about him in Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter I,
Stanza 233,
DRUMATII. In Mahabharata, Chapter 67, Stanza 8,
King Druma, who was the rebirth of the asura Sibi, is
mentioned.
DRUMA III. The leader of the Kinnaras (heavenly
musicians). M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 10, Stanza
29). He sits in the Durbar of Kubera (God of wealth)
and sings. He was the teacher of Rukmin, the son 0
Bhismaka and he gave a bow to his pupil Rukmin.
(Mahabharata, Udyoga Parva, Chapter 158.)
DRUMASENA I. A Ksatriya King. He was born from
a portion of an Asura called Garvistha. (M.B. Adi
Parva, Chapter 66, Stanza 55). He stood as guard of
(M.B. Drona Parva,
ParicalaYajfiasena,
Paficalya,
Saumaki,

DRUMASENA II
the wheel of Salya and was killed by Yudhisthira in the
ea. of Bharata. (M.B.Salya Parva, Chapter 12, Stanza
DRUMASENA II. A warrior who fought on the side of
the Kauravas against the Pandavas. He was killed by
Dhrstadyumna the son of Drupada. (M.B. Drona
Parva, Chapter 170, Stanza 22 ).
DRUHYU I. A son of King Yayati. Two sons, Yadu
and Turvasu were born to Yayati, the son of Nahusa,
by his wife Devayani and three sons Druhyu, Anudruhyu and Paru by his wife Sarmistha. Druhyu was cursed
by his father because he did not comply with the request of his father to exchange his old age with the
youthof his son. The curse was that his desires
would not be realized, that he would stay in places
where he would not like to stay that his kingdom would
be lost and that he would be called Bhoja. (See under
Yayati).
oR E Il. A son of Matinara, a King of the Paru
dynasty. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 94, Stanza 14).
DUHKHA (M). Agni Purana tells the following about
the origin of Duhkham.
Hirnsa (violence) is the wife of Adharma (unrighteousness). To the couple were born two daughters called
Anrta (falsehood) and Nikrta (fraud) and from them
were born the daughters Bhaya (fear ) Naraka nace
Maya (illusion) and Vedana (pain). Maya brought
forth Mrtyu (death), the annihilator of all ae
objects, and Vedana, from Raurava (a particular hell)
brought forth Duhkha (sorrow, grief). From Mrtyu
were born Jati (caste), Jara (wrinkles) , Soka oe
Trsna (covetouseness) and Krodha (anger). (Agni tu
rana, Chapter 19). ;
DULIDUHA. A Ring in ancient
Chapter 1, Verse 233). P
DUMDUBHA. A Ln Sage Sahasrap ane a
snake as a result of a curse. For details sce
Sahasrapada. ,
DUNDUBHI I. A terrible asura,
brother of Mayavi. Syapa,
fy Birth, Dinavas wore, the ORE py his wil
grandson of Brahma and son ti. Maya, chief among
Danu, daughter of Daksaprajape™™ g "unique archi
tect. Once Maya fie ll Hema dancing wit
devaloka where he fell in > Maya tol
. When the dane ee fallen in
India. (Adi Parva,
man of Maya and
the deva-women.
Hema about his love ‘9 eT athe place in secret and
love with Maya. And they © Trimalayas where they
reached the southern singe Saati
built a beautiful city: c4
there. Exe long they- ha tO nel
Mayavi, both of them equally wife
ama a}- . = qa aid ta
9) Dandubhc - st nship with ee cet Pint Kailasa.
for a daughter in the wester® PITY of Kaildsa to fee
One of those days Parvati went out | day of Subrabbrahmins in celebration O calle
ps é
manya. In the absence Gomavaravra
Ly the Ay wite enjoyed her
Madhura who had observ® giva) who enjoyed
to Kailasa to salute Mahadeva ( Siva Parvati notice
fo Sa ai On he a o the breasts of
or'some time.
ash rn by [hum inference from this
fadhura Drawing the natura hurd to be transformane a and: cursed Madhu
and_ they lived
ne Dundubhi and
hed in prowess.
DUNDUBHI I
ed into a frog. Then Siva blessed her that she would
regain her former self after twelve years and have a
heroic husband. Madhura who was thus turnedinto a
frog fell into a well close to where Maya was engaged
in tapas. And, after twelve years, the frog regained its
former form.and became Madhura again. Maya, who
saw her adopted heras daughter and brought her up as
such calling her Mandodari. Mandodari became Ravana’ wife and thus Dundubhi became the brother-in-law
of Ravana.
3) Dundubhi grew up. The following is told about Dundubhi in Canto 11, Kiskindha Kanda of Valmiki Ramayana.
As beautiful and majestic as the peak of Mount Kailasa,
the heroic Dundubhi possessed the form of the buffalo.
And, he had the strength of a thousand elephants.
Proud and haughty over his own prowess and losing his
head over the boon he had received from God, Dundubhi went to fight with the ocean, the lord of rivers. (It
was Siva who gave him boons. See M.B. Anusasana
Parva, Chapter 11).
4.) Fight with Bali and death. Haughty almost to madness over the unrivalled strength and prowess he got as
the result of the boon, Dundubhi went about challenging whomsoever he met for a fight. But none dared to
accept the challenge. Then he went to the sea-shore
and challenged Varuna, who, appearing on the crest
of the waves said: “I am not strong and powerful
enough to fight with you. Only Himavan can do that.
So, please go north.”
Accordingly Dundubhi went ‘north to Himavan and
challenged him in great rage. Himavan clad in his neat
and white apparel appeared and spoke in humble tones:
“Oh mighty Danava: I am not accustomed to fighting
war. Myjobis only to arrange necessary convenience to saints and sages. But, there is in southern India
a very powerful monkey called Bali, who is the King of
Kiskindha, and Bali alone can combat with you.
And, Dundubhi accordingly went southward to Kiskindha and challenged Bali. Terrible as the dark clouds in
the sky the danava who possessed the body and
horns of the buffalo—began roaring like hell at the tower
gates of Kiskindha, uprooting trees with his horn and
tearing the earth with his hoofs. Disturbed by the noise
Bali along with his wife Tara came out of the palace,
and said to Dundubhi: “Look here, please, I am only
a King of the monkeys. Why should you, who are so
very strong smash my tower?’’? but, these soft words of
Bali only kindled Dundubhi’s anger all the more and his
challenges became the fiercer. Then did Bali, wearing
the golden chain given by Indra, rush forth to engage
Dundubhi in mortal duel in which the former began
gaining more and more strength while the latter got weaker and weaker. Dundubhi took to flight in the skies.to
save his life. But, the moon dawned then and in the
moonlight Bali and his brother Sugriva followed Dundubhi, who entered a terrible cave covered by something
like a forest of grass. After stationing Sugriva at the
opening of the cave Bali followed Dundubhi into the
cave. Sugriva waited there one year for the return of
Bali from the cave when one day he witnessed foaming
blood flow out of the mouth of the cave, and mistakenly
believing that Bali was dead he closed the mouth of the
cave with a huge stone and returned home. But, Bali,
who had by then killed Dundubhi kicked off the stone

DUNDUBHI II
and came out of the cave and followed Sugriva ina
rage. From that day onwards Sugriva lived at the Rsyamuka mountain where Bali had no admission. (Valmiki
Ramayana, Kiskindha Kanda, Cantos 9, 11, 46).
5) Curse on Bali due to the blood of Dundubhi. During
Bali’s duel with Dundubhi blood from the body of the
latter spurted out to the skies, and it also fell in the
hermitage of Matanga at Rsyamuika where the sage
Matanga was performing tapas. Angered at this the sage
cursed him whoever he might be, who was responsible
for blood falling in his asrama, with death by his head
getting broken ifhe mounted Rsyamika. Sugriva took
shelter there because of this curse on Bali. (Valmiki
Ramayana, Kiskindha Kanda, Canto 11)
DUNDUBHI II. See under Manthara.
DUNDUBHINIHRADA. A powerful Raksasa, who was
the son of Diti and the uncle of Prahlada. When, in
the fierce fight between the devas and the asuras the
Jatter got absolutely defeated this Raksasa ascribed
the reson for the failure to the brahmins and began
killing them. He captured the Kasi temple and many
other temples like it. In the circumstances Siva gave
refuge to the brahmins of Kaéi, and the Raksasa was
destroyed by Sivasakti. (Sivarudrasarnhita, Yuddha
Kanda, Chapter 58).
DUNDUBHISVANA(M). A particular Place in KuSa
island. (M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 12, Verse Ia).
DURADHA (DURADHARA, DURDHARA). One of
the hundred sons of Dhrtarastra. He was killed by
Bhima. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 135, Verse 36).
DURADHARA. See under Durdadha.
DURASADA. A son of Bhasmasura. He learned Paficaksari vidya from Siva and used to repeat it. Pleased at
this Siva gave him all the boons he wanted with the
result that he lost his head and began troubling everybody. When thus unrest and injustices increased in the
world Dhumdhi, the son of Sakti killed him. (Ganesga
Purana, Chapter 38, 42).
DURDAMA. Son of a Gandharva called Visgvavasu.
The following story about him is told in the Skanda
Purana. Chapters 1, 3 and 4).
While maharsis like Vasistha and Atri were once
engaged in the worship of Lord Siva at Mount Kailasa,
Durdama, with his thousands of wives came there. In
the Halasyatirtha near-by they got engaged in water
sports with their bodies stark naked. On seeing their
naked sports Wasistha cursed Durdama to be turned
into a Raksasa. When his wives begged of Vasistha for
redemption from the curse he told them that seventeen years thence Durdama would regain his old form.
Durdama thus turned Raksasa tried once to devour
Galava when the Sudarsgana Cakra of Visnu killed
eo ‘He regained his old form and returned to
dharvaloka.
DURDHARSANA. (Durmada). One of the hundred
sons of Dhrtarastra. He was killed by Bhima. (Drona
Parva, Chapter 155, Verse 40). .
URGA I, The goddess of the universe, Durga
a possesses " different forms and aspects. Parvati, spouse of
Sara 4 of Durga. According to the prayer of
Siva is a form assumes_ diverse forms,
hi Devi - She au
i ais 64 forms as Aryadurga, Vedagarbha,
Arabika, Bhadrakali, Bhadra, Ksemaksemakari, NaikaIn south India she is worshipped more
bahu, Devi etc terrible forms. Devi in her gentle
in her fierce and
DURGAMA
aspects and moods assumes the forms of Kanya,
Kamaksi and Makamba. In Kerala the Devi is called
Bhagavati also, in Andhra Jokulambika and in Tamilnadu Kannaki. Worship of the Devi is supposed to be
more than 4000 years old in India. In religious literature from Vedic times up to date Devi occupies an
important place. In modern India Sri Ramakrsna
Paramahamsa, guru of Svami Vivekananda, was a great
devotee of Durga.
In the Mahabharata there are various references to the
Devi. When the Pandavas entered the capital of Virata
for their life incognito they worshiped Durga, who
appeared to them and granted them certain boons.
(Virata Parva, Chapter 6). At the commencement of
the great war Arjuna, at the instance of Krsna prayed
to Durga, who appeared in the sky and granted him
boons, for victory in War. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 23).
See Paficadevis and Prakrti,.
DURGA II. A river famous in ancient India. The
Pandavas drank water from this river. (Bhisma Parva.
Chapter 9, Verse 33).
DURGA(M). Fort. There are six kinds of forts, viz.
Marudurgam, Jaladurgam, Prthvidurgam Vanadurgam,
Parvatadurgam, and Manusy adurgam. Among the
above six Manusya durga is the most important (M.B.
Santi Parva, Chapter 56, 35).
DURGAJAM. A city in ancient India. (Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 9, Verse 52).
DURGAMA. Anasura chief born in the dynasty of
Hiranyaksa and son of Taru, Durgama was an enemy
of the Devas from his very birth. He argued to himself thus: ‘“‘the very strength and power of the
Devas depend on the Vedas; if there is no Veda there is
no yajfia, if there isno yajfia the Devas do not get
their share of the havis, if they do not get the havis
they will lose all their strength and prowess, and, therefore, the best means to teach the Devas a lesson is to
destroy the Vedas.’? Durgama decided that the surest
means to achieve that was to perform penance. Accordingly he went to the Himalayas and began doing
penance abstaining from food and drink. After a thousand years Brahma appeared to him and asked him
what boon he wanted. Durgama said “I must get the
Vedas; I should get all the mantras known to brahmins
and Devas‘in the three worlds, and all the presiding
deities of those mantras should come and stand before
me and be subject to my control; I must also get the
strength to defeat all the Devas.” Brahma granted
Durgama all the boons. And, thenceforth the brahmins
could not recollect the Vedas or the mantras. No
bathing, no homas, no daily rites, no rites for the dead,
no yajfias, no japa (repeating divine names) and no
tapas. Symptoms of old age caught the Devas in its
grips. Durgama drove them out of Devaloka and _ they
hid in mountain caves. Within a hundred years the
world reached the rock bottom of destruction, Water
disappeared from the world. Alarmed beyond measure
at these developments the brahmins went to the Him4layas and prayed to Jagadambika (mother of the universe). Ambika appeared to them, and their lamentations brought tears to the eyes of Ambika, and thus
water scarcity came to an end. Ambika gave them Saka
(a'vegetable) fruits and roots to eat. Because she protected her devotees by supplying Saka to them she
came to be known as Sakambhari, thenceforward. Also

DURGAPUJA
because she shed tears from & i
ea to . addressed as cwelal ae a
cing told about the above devel
with his army attacked Devi. The ‘Gt ‘items ee
. furious.. From Devi’s body emerged numerous
<_<. ern a carries Bala, Tripura, Bhairavi
ali wi , 1ands were som 1nent and powerful Saktis which ac el “The
army of Durgama was annihilated. Then the ficht
commenced directly between Devi and Durga
- ifteen —_— of Devi hit the asura at the very ae
ime cI I A
Sa ihe), aé was killed. (Devi Bhagavata, Saptama
DURGAPUJA. See under Navaratri.
DURGASAILA. A mountain in Saka M.B
Bhisma Parva, Chapter 11, Verse 25), _—
i io oe oe A son of King Mahavirya. Duritasaya had three sons, Traiyyaruni, Kavi and Puskara
runi. (Bhagavata, Skandha 9; Verse 19 and i -
DURJAYA I. An absolutely cruel King. Owing af le
Bee aan of adharmas (evil actions he had committed)
<ala ordained him to be born and reborn twentyon
times as various animals and’ as a Beslmnariiess: I :
roamed about forests. One of those days ‘he seater
hold of a sivayog! called Mahadeva whose bod wa
smeared with Vibhiti (the sacred ash), but as ie ne
the Vibhuti from the body of the Sivayogi got cmieanea
on his body also, Durjaya got back his former for
and he was lifted upto Svarga. (Siva Pura B 2
Mahatmya). Ws, SEES
island.
DURJAYA II. A danava born to Kas J
Danu, his wife. (M.B. Adi fame ae ele ey ay
Verse 23), ? pter 60,
DURJAYA III. (Dusparajaya) One of th
os (Vus -_O e hundred
= o ee (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 116,
oe s. “Kine Ss i a advised the Pandavas
Parva, Chapter 4, Verse, 16). ce Gee enn
DURJAYA V.. Son of King Suvira of the Iksvak
dynasty. (Anusdsana Parva, Chapter 2, Verse 11) ae
DURJAYA VI. A'synonym of Mahavisnu, (Anuss
Parva, Chapter 144, Verse 86). 2 mL:
PE VII. Ee son of Supratika. While he
Iving as € lord ove
conquered the various ivodomi he waa Lid thet
Gauramukha Muni had in his possession the famous
gem called Cintamani. He fought to gain that gem
and died. The place where he rhet with death ee to
Be known as Naimisaranya in after years. (Varal
urana, Chapter 17). ee
DURJAYA. Short form of Durjaymanimatinagara referred
to in laudatory terms in the Mahabharata ‘Some
englats hold that Durjaya is the Ellora caves of modern
ndia, seven miles off Daulatabad. (Vana Par
Chapter 96, Verse 1). par
DURMADA I. See Durdharsana.
DURMADA II. A son of Harisa, the Gandharva King. -
Himself and Unmada, the apsara woman enpersohated
pomselves and cheated Puriravas and Urvaéi (See
oe Enraged at the deception Urvagi cursed
that Durmada be born as a Raksasa and Unmada a
princess. Also, Unmada as princess would have to marr
not the person she really loved but some one ale,
Both Durmada and Unmada then begged Urvasi for
255 DURMUKHA IT
redemption from the curse and the latter said thus:
‘*This Durmada will be born as son of Unmada, and
on seeing her son and husband die, she will end her
life by burning herself, and her soul will attain Svarga”’.
As a result of the above curse Unmada was born as
the daughter of the King of Videha and Durmada as
the son of the Raksasa called Dirghajamgha. As Raksasa,
Durmada was called Pingalaksa. The King of Videha
named Unmada as Harini.
While Harini was once walking in the garden with her
companions Pingalaksa abducted her and flew off in
the sky, and put her ina great forest. A prince called
Vasumanas, who happened to come that way on his
fast-riding horse Jimita heard the lamentations of
Harini, and after killing Pingalaksa he took her with
him to her palace. The King of Videha and his subjects, who were in great anxiety and distress at the
disappearance of Harini felt really happy to have her
back. And, all of them opined that Harini should be
married to Vasumanas. Accordingly the date for her
Svayarmnvara was announced. But, on the day of the
svayamvara Bhadragrenya, King of Hehaya who, along
with other Kings was also present on the occasion,
forcibly took Harini and rode off with her. According
to the condition laid down by Urvasi for redemption
from her curse Durmada was born as son of Harini and
he was named Durmada. a
Bhadragrenya, Harizi and Durmada lived very happily
in the Hehaya palace. When Durmada came of age he
married Citrangi, his uncle’s daughter on the advice
of sage Garga. Soon war broke out between Bhadragrenya, and Divodasa, King of Kasi in which Bhadrarenya was killed. Harini courted death by fire,
regained her former life and under the name Unmada
returned te. the world of the Apsaras. |
DURMADA III. Son of Asura Maya. Conceited and
' haughty over his strength Durmada once challenged
Bali to fight, and defeated by Bali he ran away from
battlefield and hid in a cave. (Ananda Ramayana
_ Sadrakanda). .
DURMARSA. An asura, he clashed with the Devas at the
churning of the sea of milk. (Bhagavata dagamaskandha). ;
DURMARSANA I. One of the 100 sons of Dhrtarastra.
In the great war Arjuna destroyed his Gajasena and
Satyaki wounded him. Finally he was killed by Bhima.
After the war was over Nakula occupied his palace.
(M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 113, Drona Parva,
DURMARSANA II. A son born to Srnyjay
pali. He was a relation of Vasudeva.
navamaskandha).
DURMUKHA I. A minister of Mahisasura.
sent to Bhadrakali with a message by his master.
Bhagavata, Paficama Skandha). _ i.
DURMUKHA II. One of the er sons of om os
stra. The following information about him 1s
from the Mahabharata.
(1) He was present at the Svayamvara of Draupadi.
(Adi Parva, Chapter 189, Verse |). Gandharvas
: t na, andnarv
(2) During the procession ii ha pter 242, Verse
took him captive. (Vana
(3) In the great war he fought with Sahadeva. (Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 85, Verse 25)»
a by Rastra-
(Bhagavata
Once he was
; (Devi

DURMUKHA III
(4) He killed Arjuna’s charioteer. (Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 47, Verse 12).
(5) He defeated Srutakarman. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 79, Verse 35).
(6) He was defeated by Abhimanyu. (Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 84, Verse 42}.
(7) A duel was fought between Durmukha and
Ghatotkaca. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 110, Verse 12)...
(8) Duel fought between Durmukha and Dhrstadyumna.
(Drona Parva, Chapter 20, Verse 26).
(9) He fought with Purujit. (Drona Parva, Chapter
(10) He was defeated in fight with Sahadeva.
Parva, Chapter 107, Verse 25).
(11) Bhimasena killed him in war. (Drona Parva, Chapter 134, Verse 20).
(12) After the war his beautiful palace was occupied
by Sahadeva. (Santi Parva, Chapter 44, Verse 12).
DURMUKHA III. A King who flourished in the assembly of Yudhisthira. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 4, Verse
DURMUKHA IV. A Raksasa, who was a member in
Ravana’s assembly. (Sabha Parva, Chapter, 9, Verse
13). According to the Uttararamayana he was the son
of a Raksasa called Malyavan by his wife Sundari,
and he had Vajramusti, Virupaksa, Suptaghna, Yajfiakofa, Matta and Unmatta as brothers and Nala and
Ketumati as sisters.
DURMUKHA V. A serpent. It was also present among
the serpents, which had come to Prabhasaksetra to
receive Balarama who, after death, went to Patalaloka.
(Mausala Parva, Chapter, 4, Verse 16).
DURMUKHA VI. An asura on the side of Mahisasura.
Tamra, finance minister of Mahisasura sent Durmukha
with Baskala to fight against Devi, who killed him.
(Devibhagavata, Skandhas 5, 13). In his previous
at he was one of the Paulastyas. (Adi Parva, Chapter
lj.
DURMUKHI. A companion of the Raksasa woman
called Ajamukhi. See Ajamukhi.
DURVARA. Son of King Suratha of Kundalanagara.
When Suratha cagtured the yajfiasva (sacrificial horse)
of Sri Rama Satrughna clashed with him. Durvara
also was present on the occasion. (Padma Purana,
Patala khanda, Chapter 49). ,
DURVARANA I. An army chieftain of the King of
Kamboja. He was killed in the great war by Satyaki.
(M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 112, Verse 42).
DURVARANA If. A messenger of the very powerful
Jalandhara. When the Devas and the Asuras churned
Ksirabdhi (ocean of milk), many excellent things emerged out of it. When those things were divided among
them all, Devendra took possession of 14 gems in an
unauthorised manner. When Jalandhara, through his
messenger Durvarana, demanded Devendra to return
the gems, not only did he not return them but he also
declared war against Jalandhara. When war broke out
Jalandhara hesitated as to whether he should fight
with Visnu or with Siva. Durvarana advised him first
to fight with Siva. (Padma Purana, Uttarakhanda,
Chapter 16).
DURVASAS
1) Genealogy. A sage, who used to lose his temper
very easily. He is believed to have been born from an
arnga (part, aspect) of Siva.
(Drona
DURVASAS
2) Birth. Three different stories are told in the
Puranas relating to his birth.
(1) Once a quarrel, arose between Brahma and Siva
which developed into fighting, At the sight of Siva
seething with rage the Devas ran off frightened, and
Parvati also got frightened. She told him ‘Durvasam
bhavati me’. (It has become impossible for me to live
happily with you). Realising that it was his momentary
anger which made life miserable for Parvati Iva
decided to transfer that trait of his character to someone else.
The incident took place during the life period of
Silavati, who was very much reputed for her chastity.
While Silavati was carrying her husband Ugrasravas
(who though a leper yet desired to visit brothels) to
the house of a prostitute the muni Anumandavya
cursed Ugragravas to die before sunrise the next day
with his head broken. (See under Anumandavya).
Silavati made the counter curse, let not the sun rise the
next day, to the muni’s curse. Accordingly the sun did
not rise the next day, and confusion prevailed every
where, whereupon the Trimiartis and the Devas, through
Anasuya, the wife of Atrimaharsi, got the curse ©
Silavati withdrawn. Pleased at this the Trimirtis
asked Anasiiya to choose any boon she desired, and she
prayed that Brahma, Visnu and Mahesvara take their
partial incarnations through her. Accordingly Brahma
as Candra and Mahavisnu as Dattatreya were born 4°
sons of Anasuya. And, Siva deposited his anger, which
had caused unhappiness to Parvati, in Anasuya. The
child born out of that aspect of Siva to Anasiiya was
Durvasas. The name Durvasas was very apt as tne
child was born out of the anger of Siva which ha
made life miserable (durvasa) for Parvati. (Brahman¢@
Purana, Chapter 44).
(2) Once defeated in his fight with Brahma Siva took
refuge with the Naranarayanas who were doing penance
in the plains of the Himalayas. Siva told sas°
Narayana everything about his plight and he asked the
former to pierce his left hand with the Sila. Siva did
so and three streams of blood flowed out of the wour
made on the hand of the Rsi, one stream towards the
sphere of the stars, another into the skull in Siva §
hand and from the third stream Durvasas was bor!
Brahma, who witnessed this miracle withdrew from
war and returned to his abode. (Vamana Purana:
Chapter 2). ,
(3) In the fierce fight with the Tripuras Siva, in great
rage, ultimately shot an arrow against them, and that
arrow, after killing the Tripuras, assumed the form ©
a child and returned to the lap of Siva, and the chi
-was named Durvasas. (M.B. Anusdsana Parva, Chapter 160, Verses 14, 15).
3) Kunti granted boon. Once while Kunti was living ™
the palace of Kuntibhoja Durvasas came there, 2”
pleased with Kunti, he granted her five mantras. J
was with the aid of those mantras that Kunti becam©
mother of Karna and others. (For details see. under
Kunti Para 2).
4) Sri Krsna bathed in padyasa (pudding). Once Durvasas
came to Dvaraka where Krsna and Rukmini looke
after him to his heart’s content. Though, at times he
took only meagre food, at other times he destroy
everything he saw and created. trouble. Krsna 4”
Rukmini served him according to schedule, One ay

DURVASAS
the sage asked Krsna to cook some pudding and it was
got ready. Then the sage asked Krsna to smear his
(Krsna) body with pudding. Krsna did so except on
his feet. After that Durvasas got down the chariot and
making Krsna and Rukmini serve as horses himself got
into it and drove away in great speed into the forest.
On the way he thrashed the ‘horses’ one ofter the
other, Neither Krsna nor Rukmini felt sorry about this
action of the sage. On reaching the forest he halted
the chariot and blessed Sri Krsna that arrows would
not hit the parts of Krsna’s body which were smeared
with the payasa. The spot at which the sage blessed
Krsna became famous as Varadanatirtha in after years.
It may be noted that Krsna died by an arrow hitting
his foot which was not smeared with the payasa. (M.B.
Anugasana Parva, Chapter 160).
5) Conducted yajta for Svetaki. ‘There once was a King
called Svetaki equal to Indra. He conducted a yajfia
of a hundred years’ duration. Innumerable brahmins
were engaged in the successful conduct of the yajfia.
Some years after the yajfia began the brahmins went
their own way leaving it unfinished as the clouds of
fume all the twentyfour hours in the yajfiasala irked
and affected their eyes. When Svetaki requested them
to further cooperate to complete the yajfia they
insultingly asked him to invite Sidras for it. Then
the King went to the Himalayas and did tapas for
Siva, who at last deputed Durvasas 0 complete the
yajfia, and under the maharsi’s aegis 1t was comple
within twelve years. On account of the epee e erings of havis in Agni (fire) during on ae oa :
fell a prey to indigestion, which was a a Y al a
it ate up the Khandava forest. (See Khaagave cannes
M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 935). ;
6) Mudgala granted salvation. Once oni gs fine
sage Mudgala who was doing tapas in rae =
taking food only rarely and demanded bea 00 ae
the object of testing his dharma TO ith him,
Th ave Durvasas 4 5 :
himself’ starving, and Durvasas left the. ay on
eating a. part of the footl and Se nee ak ‘Durvasas
ries vest of ity ‘Late procs was repeat Seared any
for six days, but Mudgala never felt of. sie snares of
offence Greatly pleased at ihe ao dil ascend to
the King. Durvasas blessed him {0 ] ‘ descended
heaven. Immediately a vEnan oe ‘it to heaven.
from Visnuloka and carried Mudgala 10
(MB. Vane bay Chap aie ran away in fear of
“4, ation. (1) a,
the mem nig under Duryodhana, eer hiake
(2) He suffered at the hands of Hamsa
ibhaka ).
(3) He a at Gaivapaficaksara to the woma
Kalavati. (See uneer Kalavati) . (see under
(4) Durvasas and Ksirabdhi-mathanam
Amrtam). | ‘fia. (See under Daksa) -
(6) Tenrified nyt helter-skelter 1? the three
worlds. (See unc a ae he death of Laksmana.
(7) He was respons}
tala).
(Sec Lakeman) nat See Slam Seb. (MB
(9) He spent his time 19 ee her stiry
Sabha Parva, Chapter 11,
see under Pitrtirtha)
n called
257 DURYODHANA I
DURVIBHAGA. A particular area in ancient India.
The Ksatriya kings of the area presented a lot of
money and foodgrains to Yudhisthira at the Rajasiya
yajiia: (Sabha Parva, Chapter 52,Verse 11).
DURVIGAHA (DURVISAHA). One of the hundred
sons of Dhrtarastra. He was killed in the great war by
Bhimasena. (M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 26, Verse 20).
DURVIMOCANA. One of the hundred sons of Dhrtarastra killed by Bhimasena. (Drona Parva, Chapter
DURVIROCANA. One of the hundred sons of Dhrtarastra killed by Bhimasena (Drona Parva, Chapter
DURVISAHA (DURVIGAHA). One of the 100 sons
or Dhrtarastra. He attended the svayarhvara of
Paficali, On the occasion of the procession of Duryodhana and others, Durvisaha was put in prison. (Vana
Parva, Chapter 242, Verse 12). He was killed by
Bhimasena in the great war. (Salya Parva, Chapter
96, Verse 20).
DURYODHANA I. Villain in the Mahabharata story;
the eldest and greatest of the Kauravas.
1) Genealogy. See under Kauravas.
(2) Barth. Dhrtarastra born blind married Gandhari.
Hungry and thirsty, Vyasa once came to Dhrtarastra’s
palace where Gandhari treated him sumptuously, and
he blessed her to have hundred sons by her husband.
Ere long Gandhari conceived, but even after two years
she did not deliver. Grief-stricken at this she got
herself aborted in secret as the result of which she
‘delivered’ a mass of flesh, and hearing about it Vyasa
visited her. As instructed by him hundred pots were filled
with ghee, and the mass of- flesh was sprayed with cold
water as a result of which it got divided into hundred
pieces, each the size ofa thumb. Also a smaller piece of
flesh remained. Those pieces of flesh were deposited in the
pots filled with ghee and the pots kept in a secret place.
Vyasa departed for the Himalayas for tapas.
In course of time the pots burst open one by one and
from each pot emerged a boy. From the 101st pot a girl
was born. Eldest among the boys was named
Duryodhana, and the girl called Dugsala. (For other
names see under Kauravas) .
Duryodhana, at the time of his birth cried in the voice
of an ass on hearing which the asses kept in their shed
also cried. Also, such evil omens as the jackal howling,
birds like crows, vultures etc. crying and storms breaking out were witnessed on the occasion. Alarmed by
such evil omens Dhrtarastra sent for the brahmins and
his other friends and well-wishers like Bhisma and Vidura
and enquired of them whether, after the death of
Dharmaputra, Duryodhana would be able to become
King. As soon as Dhrtarastra had asked the question, evil
~ omens like the world becoming dim, jackals howling ete.
were witnessed again. Scholars like Vidura did their best
to divine what the future of Duryodhana would be, and
after mature consideration Vidura and the brahmin
pandits opined that because of Duryodhana’s birth the
country and people would be ruined,and they, therefore advised that he should be cast away and forsaken.
But, paternal affection did not permit Dhrtarastra to
accept the advice.
During this period Gandhari was laid up for a few days
with stomach trouble, and a vaisya woman was engaged

DURYODHANA I
to look after Dhrtarastra, who begot of her a son called
Yuyutsu.? Thus with 100 sons and Dussala for daughter
Dhrtarastra became rich in the matter of children?
(M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 114).
(2) Duryodhana harms Bhimasena. Now, Pandu was
dead and Madri also died in the funeral pyre of her
husband. Forlorn and helpless Kunti and her five sons
came to Hastinapura, and Dhrtarastra welcomed them
to the palace. Thus arose the occasion for the Pandavas
and the Kauravas to live together in the Hastinapura palace. And, naturally there used to be petty
differences and quarrels between the Pandava and
Kaurava princes. Bhima being in every way a giant the
Kauravas had often to suffer at his hands. To collect all
the hundred Kaurava brothers together and throw them
away in one lump to push them to the ground, to suffocate them by holding their heads under water etc—these
were some of the childish pranks played by Bhima on
the Kauravas. The constant repetition of such pranks
and mischiefs on the part of Bhima rendered him an
object of hatred for the Kauravas among whom the
common conviction grew that it was essential to put an
end to Bhima’s life for their safety, nay even their very
existence.
One day, the Kauravas, with the object of doing away
with Bhima, escorted the Pandavas to Pram4anakoti on
the banks of the Ganga for water sports. There all of
them ate sumptuous meals and took various drinks. But,
Duryodhana had secretly mixed Ka4lakita poison in the
food of Bhima. After taking meals they began playing
water-sports. After the sports were over they returned
to their tents and slept. Owing to the effects of the
poison and the overexertion during the day Bhima
slept stone dead. While all were asleep during the night
Duryodhana bound the hands and legs of Bhima with
cords and threw him into the depths of the Ganga.
Bhima who was still unconscious sank down to the very
bottom of the river where the denizens of nagaloka saw
him and the nagas bit him in anger. The poison of the
nagas neutralised the effects of Kalakita poison in
Bhima, though their bite could not make even a scratch
on his skin. Freed thus from the effects of poison Bhima
shook himself up from sleep and drove off the nagas.
Alarmed at these developments the nagas called Vasuki
up to the scene, and he, recognising Bhima held him in
embrace and gave him much money and costly gems
etc. Bhima refused the gifts, but asked Vasuki for nagarasa, which would impart the strength of thousand nagas
to those who used it. Vasuki gave Bhima eight potfuls
of nagarasa, which the latter drank to the last dregs
and thus gained immeasurable strength.
When next morning after the water-sports the Pandavas
and the Kauravas awoke from sleep Bhima was found
missing. Duryodhana said that Bhima had returned
earlier to Hastinapura, but this did not satisfy the
Pandavas. Kunti lamented over the absence of Bhima.
Bhima, who drank the naga rasa lay on the veranda of
Vasuki for eight days in the manner of one who had
lost consciousness. By the time he woke up on the eighth
day the body had almost fully assimilated the rasa.
Vasuki told Bhima that eight potfuls of nagarasa
DURYODHANA I
would impart the strength of 10,000 elephants. And
then at the instance of Vasuki Bhima took his bath in
holy waters and wore new clothes and fragrant garland.
He ate the pudding offered by Vasuki, and taking leave
of him and followed by nagas he came up from the
water to the bank of the Ganga. Bhima gave a detailed
description to his mother and brothers of all that had
happened to him. Dharmaputra advised him to keep
the secret. After the incident, once again was Kalakita
poison mixed in the food of Bhima. But, Yuyutsu born
of the vaisya woman to Dhrtarastra gave the Pandavas
confidential report about it. Because of the powerful
effect of naga rasa, the Kalakita consumed by Bhima
did no harm to him but it only got assimilated in his
body. On another occasion Duryodhana killed the
charioteer of Bhima. (Bhasa Bharata, Chapter 127 and
3) Karna crowned king of Anga. The Kauravas and the
Pandavas learnt the use of weapons of war at the feet
of Dronacarya, and when the studies were over arrangements were made for a rehearsal, and at the rehearsal
Bhima and Duryodhana were the first to clash with
each other. When the encounter reached its climax
both of them pointed the club at each other. But, Agvatthama intervened and pacified them. Next Karna entered the stage fora trial of strength with Arjuna, and
at once arose from the Pandava side questions about
Karna’s nobility and aristocracy of birth etc. Karna
stood there stunned, not knowing what to say or how
to repel the attack. Then it was Duryodhana who rose
up to announce that he was, that very moment, crowning
Karna King of Anga. This ended the scene. (Bharata
(Malayalam), Adi Parva, Chapters 134, 135 and 136).
4) Pandavas trapped in palace built of lac. The above
incident confirmed and completed the cleavage of the
Pandavas and the Kauravas into two hostile camps.
Meantime another event happened. Dronacarya demanded of his pupils to bring before him King Drupada
by way of gurudaksina (tuition fee), for the acarya had
to wreak vengeance upon Drupada (See under Drona).
Though Duryodhana tried his best he could not capture
Drupada. Not only that, Drupada defeated him also in
fight. At this junture it was Arjuna who presented
Drupada as captive to Drona by way of gurudaksina.
The incident proved to be another provocation for
Duryodhana to hate the Pandavas.
Now, Duryodhana made up his mind to destroy the
Pandavas somehow or other. With this end in view hé
went to his father, posing himself to be a great wellwisher of the Pandavas, and obtained his permission to
transfer their (Pandavas’) residence to another palace.
Accordingly Duryodhana deputed his minister Purocana
to get built at Varanavata a palace of lac. Vidura came
to know of the intended mischief and gave advance
notice of it to the Pandavas through a messenger
Kanaka. The architect built the ‘Jac palace’ but built a
tunnel also attached to it. A year after the Pandavas shifted the residence to the new ‘palace’ Duryodhana set.
fire to it, and the Pandavas escaped unscathed through
sar i (Bharata (Malayalam) Adi Parva, Chapters
1. Vyasa blessed Gandhari to have 100 sons. Then how was it that she gota daughter too ? On being questioned thus by King
Janamejaya Vaisarhpayana replied ‘‘when Vyasa was dividing the mass of flesh a desire to have a daughter entered the heart of Gandhari
and divining that desire Vyasa cut the fleshin such a manner as
bP
to have one more piece, viz. 101
Duryodhana was born asa part of Kali. (M.B. Agsrama- vasika Parva, Chapter 1).

DURYODHANA I
5) Duryodhana invited the Pandavas back to Hastinapura.
Duryodhana and his brothers were living very happily
under the impression that the Pandavas had been burnt
to ashes along with the ‘lac Palace’. Then it was that
the Pandavas, disguised as brahmins and in the presence
of all the Kings, won Paficali, the daughter of King
Drupada, in svayarhvara, for their wife. After the
marriage the Pandavas stayed in Drupada’s palace and
the Kauravas returned to Hastinapura. Duryodhana
and others felt all the more jealous at the Pandavas’
becoming more powerful as a result of their marriage.
Again it was decided that the Pandavas should be destroyed anyhow and at any cost. But, how to effect the
destruction? Duryodhana wanted to attract the Pandavas to destruction through women and to create differences and divisions among them. But, Karna attacked
the plan as impracticable, and instead he wanted to
defeat Drupada and render the Pandavas impotent. At
this stage Bhisma and Drona argued that it was most
preferable to give half the Kingdom to the Pandavas
and receive: them with grace. Dhrtarastra supported
the proposal as a result of which the Kauravas went to
Paficala and escorted the Pandavas back to Hastinapura, Dhrtarastra partitioned the country between
the Kauravas and the Pandavas and the latter shifted
their residence to their part of the country with Khandavaprastha fIndraprastha) as its capital. When the
Pandavas went to Indraprastha Maya built for them
an exceptionally beautiful palace where King Dharmaputra performed rajasitya. Duryodhana and a eat
nestly participated in it. After the rajasiiya the ‘og
vas wanted to have a look at the palace and in the
course of surveying it they placed themselves ce
ridiculous situations due to visual illusions. ee) the
bright floors of glass for er pe oa pulled up
their clothings and measured W1
theirs. Then they mistook actual pools for a aay ie
into them and got wet. At the sopeede. seared
of the Kauravas Bhima clapped his hanes an
= thi ‘th hands and
with laughter. Draupadi hid her face wl! + aaienloas
t aver
‘led. Altogether the Kauravas cul
Flite and ce returned to Hastinapura. ee Adi
arya. 4 Parva, Chapters 85, 85).
Parva, Chap ae feat in the game of dice. The
alth including costly stones and
6) Dharmaputra’s first
to Dharmaputra at the
sight of the great We
‘J kings
sented by various | a
Rajastiya and ‘he humiliation experienced while survey
all the more ma
ug epee saa Liat Pandavas. He now
hatred
witht ane A ecila either to defeat the cal ee
for alll or to commit suicide by taking po Sakuni whose
tions On_ te ‘led. Ultioffous or fst {0 P am es (Duryodnaee age
} kuni, an expert 1n 2 ascuiitie
a to invite Db 4 earaaita an
fifa that the rest he would take care : "oe eaage, but he
Vidura advised ey Drea, 5 yodhana’
1a nol i e fate, agree eal
ae ely ould fed Vidura to Dharmaputra to invite
proposal,
him for the game. 74
Dharmaputra, 11 fact, da!
ee to the eloquence
an
; o play.
Sakuni and at last agreed ; a pans
108 suvarna weight, an orn
the game, but he
ersuasive Powers 0
Kings lined up the
he chest.
not like
every foot of
DURYODHANA I
royal hall to witness the game. First gems were staked.
and Duryodhana won the game. Then 1000 golden niskas'
and treasuries were offered to the winner. Duryodhana
won that game also, Next chariot with horses and next
to that 1000 maid-servants were staked and Duryodhana
won those games too. 1000 horses, 1000 golden chariots
with their horses, the horse decorated with gold presented by Citraratha to Arjuna, 6000 soldiers with their
arms and armaments—these formed the next successive
bets, and each game Dharmaputra lost. The next bet
was 400 copper vessels each filled with pure gold, and
Duryodhana won that game also. And, now Vidura
tried to dissuade Yudhisthira from playing the game;
but neither he nor Duryodhana heeded the advice. And,
Duryodhana by foul play snatched from Dharmaputra
all his wealth, his kingdom and his brothers. Now, Paficali alone remained, and Dharmaputra bet her too
and played the last game and lost..
Duryodhana deputed his Suta, Pratikami, to Indraprastha, to fetch Draupadi but she sent him back. Next
Dugédsana was deputed and he brought .Paficali to the
sabha dragging her by the hair. She was proclaimed to
be the maid-servant of the Kauravas. At last Dhrtarastra
intervened and sent back the Pandavas along with
Draupadi to Indraprastha.
7) Second game and exile in the forest. Duryodhana and
others did not appreciate the intervention of their father.
He again conspired with Sakuni and it was decided to
challenge Dharmaputra to one more game. The conditions to be stipulated were that the vanquished in the
game should stay in exile for twelve years in the forest
and live incognito during the thirteenth year, and if
found out and recognised during this period the whole
process of exile and life incognito would have to be
repeated. Duryodhana and Sukuni approached Dhrtarastra and said to him thus: “Dear father, the desire
for revenge at their defeat in the game of dice gnaws
at the Pandavas’ heart like poison. Also, they will never
forget our having dragged Draupadi by her hair. When
a suitable occasion arises they will take revenge on the
whole lot of us. Therefore, we want to challenge
Dharmaputra to a final game of dice, the condition
being that he who gets defeated should go in exile into
the forest for twelve years and then to live incognito
for one year. If we get defeated we will simply carry
out the condition on our part.
This request of Duryodhana appealed to his father, who
invited Dharmaputra once again for a game of dice.
Dharmaputra accepted the invitation, in fact, in spite
of ‘himself. This time too Duryodhana won the stake
and the Pandavas set out to the forest. Even at the
time of parting Dussasana insulted Bhima who retorted
thus: ‘You, mean fellows, you cheated my brother by
foul play. If I fail to tear your heart open in fight and
drink blood I do not want heaven. Moreover I will kill
Duryodhana, and Arjuna will kill Karna. Sakuni, the
expert in foul play in dice will be killed by Sahadeva.
We will meet in the 14th year from today at the
battlefield. Adieu.”’ :
Thus did the Pandavas depart for the forest. Kunti
being too old Vidura took her to his house, and he
consoled her, lamenting over the separation from her
children. (M.B. Sabha Parva).

DURYODHANA I
8) Curse of Maitreya. The Pandavas entered the
Kamyaka forest where they were welcomed by the
sages. Among them Maitreya whom the misfortune
of the Pandavas affected much started for Hastinapura
for peace parleys. Vidura advised DhrtarAstra that
Maitreya’s proposals should be respected lest he should
curse the King. Dhrtarastra and Duryodhana received
the sage with respect. And, the sage asked them to
recall the Pandavas from the forest and live on friendly
terms with them. Duryodhana did not in any manner
respond to the advice of the sage, but stood there
absolutely mum tapping his thigh with his fingers and
making drawings with the fingers of his feet on the
ground. This the sage interpreted as an insult to him.
He stood up ablaze with anger and cursed Duryodhana
thus: ‘‘You will, sooner than later reap the consequences of your false pride; your cruelty will invite
terrible war, and in the fight Bhima will rend asunder
your thigh, which you struck with your fingers
just now.”
Greatly agitated over the curse Dhrtarastra prayed
the sage for redemption and the sage said: “if only
your son resorts to forebearance and peace the curse
will not take effect, otherwise it will come true.’? And
after making this announcement the sage returned to
the forest. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 10).
9) The procession. While the Pandavas were staying
in the Kamyaka forest Duryodhana and others went
there on the pretext of looking after the cows. The
Gandharvas took them captive; but the Pandavas
intervened and set them free. Feeling humiliated at the
mishap Duryodhana decided to end his life after crowning Dussasana as King. But DuSsasana did not agree
to the proposal. (For details see Ghosayatra) .
10) Duryodhana’s attempt at death and his trip to Patala.
Humiliated at the procession thus and turning down
the advice of friends to return to the palace, Duryodhana spread grass on the ground and lay down there
to die. As his death would spell disaster to the Danavas
they decided to send him back to his palace for which
purpose they performed the Vaitana sacrifice in Patala.
While offering milk in the sacrificial fire a Raksasa
woman, Kttya, arose therefrom, and at the instance
of the Danavas she carried Duryodhana over to Patala.
There they told him thus: “Oh Duryodhana, a part
of your body has been earned by us from Siva by our
penance. That part of your body above the waist is
made of diamond. Therefore, arrows will not pierce
your body. Grieve not. Bhagadatta and other heroes
have been born to help you. Your great supporter
Karna 1s possessed of the soul of Narakasura,” These
words of the Danavas instilled fresh hope in Duryodhana, and he was taken back to his Kingdom by Krtya.
This ‘incident appeared as a dream to Duryodhana.
Bucking up confidence and courage again he returned
= fe inapura and continued to rule (M.B. Vana
Parva, Chapter 252). —
>. Visnu yajna. At this juncture Duryo11) ag ee 5 i os a Rajastya for which he
are cain to the palace. After bestowing «much
eg the subject the brahmins pointed out that
thought on etic fal Duryodhana to conduct a
there was no 8 Dhrtarastra and Dharmaputra
Se cesaes is elders ; ;
a pe ites, “At the same time they pointed out that
DURYODHANA I
there was another Yajfia called Visnu Yajfia as efficacious as Rajasitya which Duryodhana was competent to
perform. Accordingly Duryodhana performed the Visnu
yajiia and earned reputation among evil monarchs.
(M.B. Vana Parva, Chapters 256, 257).
12) Boon from Durvasas. Once Durvasas accompanied
by his disciples, came to Duryodhana’s palace, and
Duryodhana decided somehow or other to befriend and
use the maharsi as a weapon against the Pandavas. He
housed the maharsi and his disciples in the palace for
afew days and pleased them by careful service at which
the maharsi asked Duryodhana to request for any boon
he desired. And, Duryodhana asked the maharsi to
visit the Pandavas one day in the forest with his disciples
when they had finished taking their meals. The
maharsi agreed. And, this was the period of time when
Paricali had received the aksayapatra from Sirya.
Everyday the patra would produce enough food for the
Pandavas and the other people with them, but it would
become empty for the day after Paficali had eaten her
food. This was the nature of the aksayapatra.
Pajicali had finished her meals one day when Durvasas
and his disciples came to the Pandavas. Not knowing
that Paricali had already finished her food Dharmaputra welcomed the maharsi and his disciples and
requested them to take bath in the Ganga and return for
their meals. Paficali was in a fix. The aksayapatra
would not produce any more food for the day, and if
not duly fed the maharsi would get angry and curse
them. In this painful dilemma she prayed to Sri Krsna
for succour, and lo! he appeared and asked Pajficali for
some food. She replied that the aksayapatra was quite
empty. But, Krsna got from her the patra and ate one
particle of Kira (a leafy vegetable) which had stuck on
its side, ‘That leafy substance fully satisfied his hunger
and thirst whereupon the hunger and thirst of Durvasas
and his disciples were also quenched. Then Krsna
asked Sahadeva to bring back the maharsi and his
disciples from the bank of the Ganga and accordingly
he went there and invited them. Only a few minutes
had passed since the maharsi and his disciples had felt
the satisfaction of a sumptuous meal. They were also
astonished to think how in such a short time food for so
many people could be cooked by Paficali. They felt
rather anxious about the reaction which Dharmaputra
would evince in case they returned to him to say that
they required no food. Durvasas realised only too well
that to quarrel with the Pandavas, who enjoyed the
friendship and support of Krsna was like playing with
fire. ‘Therefore, the maharsi with his disciples ran away
from the place secretly. Pandavas waited long for the
maharsi and his disciples to return fearing that the object
of Durvasas might be to return at the untimely hour
and curse them. But, Sri Krsna told them the details
about the maharsi’s departure and assured Dharmaputra that he and his disciples would not return. (M.B.
Vana Parva, Chapter 263).
13) War against Virdta. After twelve years’ exile in the
forest the Pandavas began their life incogni to at Virata
nagara. Kicaka, brother-in-law of Matsya, the Virata
King, was killed secretly by Bhimasena, and news was
spread that Kicaka was killed by a Gandharva.
None of the spies deputed by Duryodhana to spot out
the Pandavas during their life incognito could gather

DURYODHANA
any information about them. One of those days
Sugarman, King of Trigarta, told Duryodhana that the
Virata King had lost his power and spirits due to the
death of Kicaka and it was, therefore, the proper time
to attack the Virata country and subjugate it thoroughly. The idea appealed to Karna, who prompted
Duryodhana to war against Virata. The army was
fully mobilised. As an excuse for the war, at the instance of Duryodhana, Susarman, King of Trigarta
lifted innumerable cows of the Virata King. “This
happened on the day on which the life incognito of the
Pandavas was to have ended. And war started thus.
The Virata prince Uttara who spent his time in the
zenana in the palace appeared in the field of war
Arjuna, under the assumed name_ of Brhannala took up
the charioteership of Uttara. But, at the sight of the
vast Kaurava army Uttara fainted, and Arjuna hurriedly drove the chariot over to where his bow gandiva
was kept hidden, and with the bow in his hands Arjuna
jumped into the thick of the fight. A fierce war watued
in which the Kaurava army was completely routed
The life incognito of the Pandavas was also over ariel
Duryodhana became naturally anxious about the future
of things. (M.B. Virata Parva, Chapter 65).
14) Preparation for war, Duryodhana refused to give
the Pandavas, even after their return from twelve years’
-— in forest and one year’s life incognito, even ‘asmuch
am as would hold a pin’, and war became inevitable.
e Pandavas and Kauravas fought the great war which
lasted for eighteen days on the field of Kuruksetra
(1) Duryodhana went to invite Sri Krsna. Preparations for
the war were gathering speed and momentum. Both
the sides were on the look out for more friends and
allies. Being told that Arjuna had gone to Dvaraka to
seek Krsna’s support Duryodhana rushed to the place.
Seeing Duryodhana from a distance Krsna lay on his
bed in a false sleep, and Duryodhana took his seat
on a stool at the head of the bed awaiting Krsna to
awake from sleep. Soon after, Arjuna came there and
he stood at the feet of Krsna with head bowed down
When Krsna awoke from sleep it was Arjuna whom he
saw first, and while exchanging greetings with Arjuna
he was told that it was Duryodhana, who had come
first. But when Duryodhanaand Arjuna explained the
object of their visit he told them thus:—
‘No doubt it was Duryodhana who came first. But, it
was Arjuna whom I met first. Since Duryodhana came
first and I saw Arjuna first I shall help both of you in
war. There is the adage that youngsters should be
given priority of consideration. So, Arjuna may indicate his preference first. I shall give one of you an army
of 10 lakhs of warrfors as strong in body as myself,
and I shall stand by the other without arms and without fighting. Arjuna may make his choice first. And
he ear Krsna an his.side in the war while Duryodhana
was ha to get Krsna’s might -
Parvay Chapte fae ile ei aie cia
2) Duryodhana sought Balabhadra’s help but Balabhadra told him frankly that since he ould ae esdlee
Krsna he would remain neutral in the war. (M.B.
Udyoga Parva, Chapter 7, Verse 25).
(3) Duryodhana got an aksauhini (a specific division of
army) from Krtavarman. (Udyoga Parva, Chapter 7,
Verse 32).
(4) Salya promised to captain the Kaurava army.
DURYODHANA I
(M.B. Udyega Parva, Chapter 8, Verse 18).
(5) Duryodhana could collect a total of eleven aksauhinis. (M.B. Udyoga Parva, Chapter 1Y, Verse 27).
(6) He assured Dhrtarastra that the Kaurava army
would easily defeat the Pandava army. (M.B. Udyoga
Parva, Chapter 57).
(7)-He declared that war was a yajfia. (M.B. Udyoga
Parva, Chapter 58).
(8) At the instance o
built for Sri Krsna on hi
compromise talks on behalf of the Pandavas.
Parva, Chapter 85).
(9) Duryodhana opined that Krsna be taken captive
when he came to plead for compromuse and peace,
but the others did not support him. (Udyoga Parva,
Chapter 83, Verse 13).
(10) Duryodhana worshipped Krsna with rare and
excellent things and invited him for meals, but Krsna
did not accept any. (Udyoga Parva, Chapter
(11) Duryodhana rejected the advice of sage Kanva
to come to terms with the Pandavas. (Udyoga Parva,
Chapters 97-105).
(12) He emphatically announced in the MKaurava
assembly that even as much land as may be required
to hold a pin,would not be given to the Pandavas.
Chapter 127, Verse 26) .
ee ee ante | Kaurava assembly for
13) Krsna’s pleadings in the
ec and oe on. behalf of the Pandavas oe to
have any effect. On the occasion Duryodhana, akuni,
Karna and Dussasana conspired to take Krsna _ captive.
Satyaki informed Krsna secretly about the conspiracy
and Krsna informed Dhrtarastra about It, and he
warned the conspirators against their wicked plan.
g ter 13, Verse 4) -
(Udyoga Parva, Chapter : aun Ridiea,
14) Duryodhana appointed , L
(a Pe Hardika, Aésvatthama, Karna, Sakuni,
Balhika and Kamboja as commanders of the army.
Udyoga Parva, Chapter 155). .
his) Parvodhans appointed Bhisma as the Csamaane
in-Chief of the army. (Udyoga Parva, Chapter
verse 26) .
16) He appointed Ulika
ri Krsna, the Pandavas,
Dhrstadyumna and others.
(17) He ordered the po to th
Udyoga Parva, Chapter 195).
+18)’ He appointed Dussasana as Bhisma’s body-guard.
Bhisma Parva, Chapter 15) .
19) On the flag staff of Duryodhana Poca usin aon
his flag with the serpent’s emblem flew high ™,
Bhisma Parva, Chapter 17, Verse 25). of meses on
(20) He learnt from Drona the anne en
both sides before the fighting started. (BbntS
Chapter 25). — ee
15) ‘Duryodhana in battlefield. The sae ag on antatl
relating to Duryodhana in actual Wer ied hit by the
(1) In the first day’s fighting he '4! 58, Verse 17) -
arrows of Bhima. (Bhisma Parva, chap” ~r the elephant
(2) He attacked Bhima with the supp red, (Bhisma
division (Gajasena) and i atc oe" :
Parva, Chapter 64, Verse os
(3) Bhienadena again confronted him, - - sary fell
down fainted. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter oY,
f Dhrtarastra a rest house was
s way to the Kauravas for
(Udyoga
as messenger and warned
ikhandi,
Drupada, Virata, S
(Udyoga Parva, Chapter
e Kuruksetra field.

DURYODHANA I 262
(Bhisma
(4) Dhrstadyumna defeated him. Parva,
Chapter 82, Verse 53).
(5) Bhima killed eight brothers of Duryodhana at one
stretch, and Duryodhana cried before Bhisma. (Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 88, Verse 37).
(6) He fought against Ghatotkaca and killed four
Raksasa attendants of the latter. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter
(7) He fell down at the blows delivered by Ghatotkaca.
(Bhisma Parva, Chapter 92, Verse 14).
(8) He thrashed Bhima to unconsciousness.
Parva, Chapter 94, Verse 5).
(9) Overpowered by Ghatotkaca, he gave expression to
his sorrows before Bhisma. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 95,
Verse 8).
(10) He directed Salya to fight against Yudhisthira.
(Bhisma Parva, Chapter 105, Verse 26).
(11) Grieved at the death of the warriors in his army
he,went to Bhisma in great anguish. (Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 109, Verse 16).
(12) Duryodhana and Satyaki fought against each other.
(Bhisma Parva, Chapter 111, Verse 14).
(13). He fought with Abhimanyu. (Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 116, Verse 1). |
(14) He appointed Drona as chief of the army.
(Bhisma Parva. Chapter 6, Verse 2).
(15) He prayed for Drona’s blessings to capture Yudhisthira alive. (Drona Parva Chapter 12, Verse 6).
(16) He embraced Drona at the sight of the latter
disintegrating the fighting forces of the Pandavas.
(Bhisma Parva, Chapter 23, Verse 7).
(17) He accorded sanction to his warriors to kill Abhimanyu. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 39 Verse 16).
(18) He prompted Karna to fight Abhimanyu. (Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 40, Verse 23).
(19) He ran off at the blows of Abhimanyu. (Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 30).
(20) Heiconsoled Jayadratha who ran away in fear of
Arjuna. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 74, Verse 14).
(21) When he admitted that he was not efficient to
fight Arjuna, Drona tied a divine talisman on his body.
(Bhisma Parva, Chapter 94, Verse 73).
(22) Defeated by Arjuna he ran away with the talisman
on him. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 103, Verse 32).
(23) Satyaki defeated Duryodhana. (Bhisma Parva
Chapter 120, Verse 40). )
(24) He got defeated by Yudhamanyu and Uttamaujas
(Bhisma Parva Chapter 102 Verse 30).
(25) He incited Karna to kill Arjuna. (Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 145, Verse 12).
(26) He lost his enthusiasm with the death of Jayadratha
(Bhisma Parva, Chapter 150).
(27) He made allegations against Drona.
Parva, Chapter 152, Verse 2).
(28) He fought with Yudhisthira and got defeated.
(Bhisma Parva, Chapter 153, Verse 22)
(29) Aévatthama got ready to kill Karna, but Duryodhana pacified him. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 150,
Verse 15) .
(30) He fought with Bhima and got defeated. (Bhisma
P Chapter 166, Verse 30).
(31) He deouted Sakuni to kill the Pandavas. (Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 170, Verse 60). _ ; |
(32) He got defeated in fight with Satyaki. (Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 171, Verse 23).
(Bhisma
(Bhisma
DURYODHANA I
(33) He prompted Alambusa, son of Jatasura to fight
with Ghatotkaca. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 174, Verse
oi.
(34) He fought with Nakula and got defeated. (Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 187, Verse 50).
(35) On the death of Drona he ran away from the
battlefield. (Drona Parva, Chapter 193, Verse 17).
(36) After the death of Drona he appointed Karna
chief of the army. (Karna Parva, Chapter 10, Verse 43) .
(37) He fought against Yudhisthira and got defeated
(Karna Parva, Chapter 29, Verse 32).
(38) He requested Salya to act as Karna’s charioteer.
The request so enraged Salya that he rose from his seat
at once. But, Duryodhana brought him round with
praises. (Karna Parva, Chapter 32).
(39) He created so much troubles and difficulties for
Nakula and Sahadeva in fight with them.
(Karna Parva, Chapter 56).
(40) In further fighting he got defeated by Bhima.
(Karna Parva, Chapter 61, Verse 51).
(41) He killed the Kulinda prince. (Karna Parva,
Chapter 85, Verse 19).
(42) When Agvatthama put forward certain compromise proposals he rejected them. (Karna Parva, Chapter
88, Verse 30).
(43) Karna was killed and Duryodhana was immersed
in grief. [Karna Parva, Chapter 92, Verse 15).
(44) He rejected peace proposals made by Krpa, and
a the decision to fight. (Salya Parva, Chapter 5).
(45) He appointed Salya as chief of the army. (Salya
Parva, Chapter 7, Verse 6).
(46) He was again defeated by Bhima. (Salva Parva,
Chapter 16, Verse 42). |
(47) He was defeated by Dhrstadyumna. (Salya Parva,
Chapter 25, Verse 23).
(48) After the defeat he ran away from the battlefield,
entered a pool rendering the water motionless PY
magical power and stayed under water. (Salya Parva,
Chapter 29, Verse 54).
(49) Krpacarya, Agvatthama and Krtavarman went to
his hiding place and tried to arouse him for war but he
expressed disinclination for war. (Salya Parva, Chapter:
(50) Yudhisthira visited Duryodhana in the latter §
hiding place, but he answered Yudhisthira from unde!
water. (Salya Parva, Chapter 31, Verse ro
(51) On the urging of Yudhisthira he came out of the
pool. (Salya Parva, Chapter 32, Verse 33)
(52) He got prepared for club fight with Bhima. (Saly4
Parva, Chapter 33, Verse 52).
(53) Ill omens like storms, dust fall, thunder and lightning, followed his preparations for fight with Bhima-
(Salya Parva, Chapter 56, Verse 8).
(54) He fell down at the blows of Bhima with his thigh
broken. (Salya Parva, Chapter 58, Verse 47).
(55) Sri Krsna spoke harsh words to him and he
ee to them all. (Salya Parva, Chapter 61, Vers¢
(56) He shed tears before Salya. (Salya Parva, Chaptet
61, Verse 7).
(57) He appointed Aésvatthima chief of the army-
(Salya Parva, Chapter 65, Verse 41).
(58) Congratulating Aévatthama he cast away his mortal coils. (Sauptika Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 56).

DURYODHANA II
16) Other information.
(1) Duryodhana was one of the eleven maharathas on
the Kaurava side, others being Yuyutsu, Dussdsana
Dussaha, Durmesana, Vikarna, Citrasena, Jaya Kurumitra, Karna and Satyavrata (all of them, sons of
Dhrtarastra). (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 63, Verse 18)
(2) With the help of Karna he abducted the daughter
of the King of Kasi. (Santi Parva, Chapter, 4, Verse 13).
oe ate "e a his splendid palace was occupied
y Bhima. (Santi Parva, Chapter 44, Verse 6).
(4) Vyasa brought by his Atak to ‘hie surface
of the Ganga the souls of the heroes who were killed in
the battle. Amongst them was the soul of Duryodhana
also. (ASramavasika Parva, Chapter 32, Verse 9).
(5) Yudhisthira saw Duryodhana, after his death, living
in heaven, resplendent as Sirya in the company of
holy devatas. (Svargarohana Parva, Chapter 1, Verse 4).
17) Synonyms of Duryodhana. Ajamidha, Bharata, Bharatagardila, Bharatasrestha, Bharatagrya, Bharatarsabha,
Bharatasattama, Dhartarastra, Dhrtarastraja, Gandhariputra, Kaurava, Kauravanandana, Kauravendra,
Kauravya, Kauraveya, Kurukuladhama, Kurumukhya,
Kurunandana, Kurupati, Kurupravira, Kurupungava,
Kurusattama, Kururaja, Kurusirnha, Kuruttama, Suyodhana.
DURYODHANA II. The Mahabharata refers to another
Duryodhana, grandson of Suvira, and son of Durjaya.
(Anugasana Parva, Chapter 2, Verse 18). _A ‘daughter
called Sudargana was born to him by his wife Narmada.
Duryodhana married Sudaréana to Agnideva. .
DUSANA. A Raksasa. Diisana, who came along with
Khara to fight, was killed by Sri Rama. (See Khara).
DUSKARNA. One of the hundred sons of Dhrtarastra.
He was defeated in fighting in the great war by Satanika. (Drona Parva, Chapter 155) } ;
DUSPANYA. Last son of a merchant in Pataliputra.
Short-tempered and haughty, this Duspanya killed cm
children, ‘The King outlawed him. He went into the
forest where he drowned the child of mahars! Eis lite
The maharsi cursed him that he also should — ae
by drowning and his soul roam about in pew ee a
distress. The curse came true. After aed bs i fot
many years he approached /gasty® a: bcted Tl disredemption from the curse. The ee “it nitirtha in
ciple, Sutiksna to gé oe - the sinful
Mount Gandhamadana and sprinkle 1 sash om ay the
soul of Duspanya. Sutiksna did as he was 4d. salvation.
guru, and the soul of Duspany4 alee
(Setumahatmyam) red sons
DUSPARAJAYA (DURJAYA); Oo ae fous
of Dhrtarastra. On the occa -— c as "Eke captive by
ney to Dvaitavana Dusparajaya , the Gandharvas he
the Gandharvas. In the wat walt Chapter 25). He was
clashed with Nila. (Drona Dan ater 26) .
killed by Bhima. (Salya Farths (ra RSA). One of the
DUSPRADHARSANA. (DU?) led him in fighthundred sons of Dhrtarastra. pare
Chapter 29). n
piace eu Dirtarastra. i ee hegre
the arrows of Satyaki and.ckilled bY |
Parva, Chapter 135).
DUSSALA. One of the
was killed in war by
of Dhrtarastra who
hundred sons Parva, Chapter
Bhima. (Drona
DUSSASANA I
Buen. The only daughter of Dhrtarastra by Gan1ari.
(1) She was married to Jayadratha the Raja of Sindhu.
(2) Her birth. See under Kauravas.
(3) Yudhisthira did not permit Jayadratha to be killed
when he abducted Paficali as he was the husband of
Duggala. (Vana Parva, Chapter 271, Verse 43).
(4) When Arjuna reached Vidarbha attending the
Asvamedha yajfia the archers obstructed his progress
and he killed them all. Suratha, son of Dussala, was
also among those killed, and she came _ to the battlefield
with her infant child crying, whereupon Arjuna stopped
the fighting and in remorse crowned the son of Suratha
as the King of Sindhu. (Asvamedha Parva, Chapters 78
DUSSASANA I. A son of Dhrtarastra,
1) His birth. See under Kauravas.
2) Other information. (1) He, along with his brothers
was present at the svayarnvara of Panicali. (Adi Parva,
Chapter 185, Verse |).
(3) He kept store and served food to the guests at the
Rajasiiya of Yudhisthira, (Sabha Parva, Chapter 35,
Verse 5).
(3) He dragged Paficali and stripped her of her clothes
in the assembly hall of the Kauravas. (For details see
under Pajficali).
(4) Gandharvas took him captive in Dvaitavana.
(See under Kauravas) .
(5) The Pandavas released the Kauravas from captivity, and Duryodhana laden with this humiliation
did not desire to return to Hastinapura. He asked
Duégasana to assume kingship and rule the subjects
well, Dugsasana rejected the offer and wept. This
was a good trait in the vicious character of Duégéasana
like lightning in the midst of dark and thick clouds.
(Vana Parva, Chapter 249).
3) Dussasana in the great war. (1) During the first
day of the war he fought a duel with Nakula. (Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 22).
(2) He got defeated in the duel with Arjuna. (Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 110, Verse 23).
(3) He promised Duryodhana that he would kill Abhimanyu. Drona Parva, Chapter 89, Verse 24).
(4) Abhimanyu rendered him unconscious with his
arrows. (Drona Parva, Chapter 40, Verse 13).
(5) He got defeated by Arjuna and ran away from
the battlefield. (Drona Parva, Chapter 10).
(6) He fought with Satyaki. (Drona Parva, Chapter
96, Verse 14).
(7) He got defeated by Satyaki and ran off. (Drona
Parva, Chapter 121, Verse 29).
(8) He defeated Prativindhya. (Drona Parva, Chapter
(9) Sahadeva defeated him in fighting. (Droria Parva,
Chapter 188, Verse 5).
(10) He fought with Dhrstadyumna and got defeated.
(Drona Parva, Chapter 189, Verse 5).
(11) On the death of Drona he ran away from the
battle-field. (Drona Parva, Chapter 193, Verse 15).
(12) Sahadeva defeated him. (Karna Parva, Chapter
23, Verse 18).
(13) Duséasana put Dhrstadyumna in prison. (Karna
Parva, Chapter 61. Verse 33).
(14) He fought with Bhima, (Karna Parva, Chapter

DUSSASANA II
4) Death of DuS§Gsana. In the fierce fight between
Bhima and Duésdsana at Kuruksetra Bhima felled him
with his club and sat on his chest asking him
with which hand of his he pulled Draupadi by hair,
Raising his right hand Dusgasana cried out, ‘This
- is the hand you seek for’. At this reply of his
Bhima pulled out Dugsasana’s right hand and thrashed
him with it. He cut asunder Dussasana’s chest and
drank the blood which gushed out of it (Karna Parva,
Chapter 83, Verse 8).
5) After his death. (1) After Duf$asana’s death Arjuna
occupied his palace. (Santi Parva, Chapter 44, Verse
(2) Vyasa evoked the souls of the heroes who died in
war and sprinkled Ganges water on them. Dussasana
was one among those thus treated. (As’ramavasika
Parva, Chapter 32, Verse 9).
(3) After death he attained heaven. (Svargarohana
Parva, Chapter 5, Verse 21)
6) Synonyms of DusSdsana. Bharata, Bharatagrestha,
Bharatapasada, Dhrtarastraja, Kaurava, MKauravya,
Kurusardila etc. |
DUSYANTA I
death, and its rage having not yet subsided it threw
around his bones. Duésasana, who ended his life thus
was reborn as an elephant and was owned by King
Jayadeva of Ceylon for a long time. A great friend of
King Khadgabahu, Jayadeva presented the elephant
to him. At the sight of its brothers and other relations
memory about its previous birth dawned on the _ elephant. And,‘ it lived in great grief. After some days the
King presented the animal to a poet pleased at his
samasyapurana (filling the three lines of a stanza in
tune with the fourth line given). The poet sold the
elephant to the King of Malava as it got ill with
fever. In spite of the best treatment administered to it
the elephant seemed to be nearing its end. Without
either eating or drinking or sleeping the animal stood
motionless shedding tears day and night. One
day, the Malava King visited the elephant when,
to the surprise of all assembled there, the elephant
spoke to the King thus: “Oh, King: if a brahmin
recites the 17th Chapter of the Bhagavadgita I will
be completely cured of my illness.”
Accordingly a brahmin was brought. As soon as he
chanted the Gita and sprinkled water on its head it
DUSSASANA II. Another DuSsasana, servant of the
son of King Khadgabahu of Saurastra is also mentioned
in the Puranas.
Khadgabahu had a famous elephant, which one night
broke its chains and escaped, and all the mahouts
could not chain it again. People in terror of the elephant
ran helter-skelter. Now, a brahmin was going that way
chanting verses of the 16th Chapter of the Gita, and even
though the mahouts warned him he did not change
his path. Instead he saluted the elephant by touching
its cheeks and proceeded on his way unhurt by the animal. The King felt great respect for the brahmin when
he was told that he owed his miraculous powers to
the 16th chapter of the Gita, and he took the brahmin
with him to his palace. The King gave him 100,000 golden
got rid of its animalhood, ascended the divine aeroplane and shone forth like Indra. The Malava King
also began daily reciting the Bhagavadgita and within a
short time afterwards attained salvation. (Padma
Purana, Chapter 8).
DUSSILA. A harlot who lived in Pratisthana. One
Devadasa was her husband. When Devadasa had once
gone to the palace on some business Duéggila hid her
paramour, with the object of doing away with her
husband, on top of the ceiling of her room. He killed
Devadasa while the latter was' sleeping in the night.
Next day when people gathered at her house she gave
out the story that her husband was murdered by thieves.
But the people got the true story about the death 0
Devadasa from his four-year-old son and beat Duégsila
coins and received from him the Gita mantra. He began to death. (Kathasaritsagara, Saktiyasolambaka,
reciting daily certain verses in the 16th Chapter of the Taranga 2).
Bhagavadgita. DUSTABUDDHI. See Mitrabheda.
Some time afterwards the King one day went to an
open ground near his palace accompanied = by soldiers and set the elephant free from its chain. Then,
DUSYANTA I. A_ reputed King of the Lunar dynasty2) Genealogy. Descended from Visnu thus:—Brahma—
Atri—Candra—Budha—Puriravas—Ayus — Nahusa —
unheeding the entreaties of the frightened people he Vavati ba ai
ati — Piaru-—Janamejaya—Pracinvan—N ui
approached the elephant, saluted it by touching its Vitabhaya — boas Baireave “Sar an ~~ Rahovadi
cheeks and came away unhurt. He could act in this Raudragva— Matinara — Santurodha—Dusyanta.
fashion because of his firm faith in the efficacy of the
Bhagavadgita. And afterwards he placed his son, on the
throne and himself led a life of recluse repeating the
Bhagavadgita.
Some Puranas have another version of this episode.
Duégasana was a servant of Khadgabahu’s son and he
attempted to catch the elephant but was killed
by it. He attained salvation by hearing the 17th Chapter of the Baga e . , .
£65 an idiot, betting a huge sum of money with
the junior mabouts of the elephant and unheerine the
warnings of several people co om the elephant.
Children agitated the animal anc — fell down
from its back. The angry animal stamped the fool to
|. The genealogy given above bas been taken jointly from Agnipurina, Bhagavata and Visnupurana. But the Mahabharata
g : Verse 17) gives Ilinas the name of Dusyanta’s fath d Rathanti th f hi
. t : ; e na syanta’s father an athantias that of his mother. It may be
. Sac ont pee aia al [lin were one and the same individual, ia a
Matinara had two sons: Santurodha and Pratiratha,
and Santurodha had three sons: Dusyanta! Pravira
and Sumanta. Pratiratha begot Kanva and he, Medhatithi.
His reign. Within a short period of time Dusyanta
bacame the emperor of India. (Adi Parva, Chapter 68,
Verse 3). His empire extended up to the sea, and. he
became an object of envy for other rulers. Under his rule
the four castes flourished in affluence. None was threatened with illness or by thieves. The seasons marched
in due order, the clouds raining at the proper time etc-
“Tike the ocean not getting agitated, and putting uP
with everything with unique patience like the earth,
Dusyanta ruled the country” (Adi Parva, Chapter 68).

aes
DUSYANTA II 965 DVAIDHIBHAVA
3) Marri :
© a hist to hunt, Hated tx his chariee with meet | aatiteage ee
th th , » which move utalaksanas.
aan Se eek ae ee ak aig bee os 0) The caste of the person bitten by the snake and
attend . oa Ing, 1¢aving the the caste of the dita.
oe ee a hermitage of the sage (2) The first word uttered by the dita. If it is the
Malini rivérand Fe itaer t . sand on the banks of name of the patient, it has a special significance.
of the eendionel: ing with his eyes the beauties (3) If the dita makes an incomplete sentence, it isa
is there in dire oe ge cage asrama. “Who significant laksana. ;
Sakuntala. the f d crits ied the King, whereupon (4) The things carried by the dita such as stick, rope
a oster daughter of Kanva came out, and brie ‘ :
oe ay eo ee (5) The colour of the clothes worn by the dita.
Enchanted by the beauty of Sak z i
questioned her about her rege and she tol Rec te
story about Visvamitra’s love for Menaka, and Kanva
bringing up their daughter. Dusyanta felt deep love patient can be cured. : nied fait:
Dh her, and in accordance with rules prescribed in Chapter 35, Verses 19,20)
arma sastras married her in the Gandharva way. He DVADASABHUJA. A warrior of subrabeaners, er
(6) The tone in which the dita speaks. These are the
laksanas from which the doctor knows whether the
cre gs eas “<s stipulation that the son born to. her Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Stanza BY) -
nant and afies next monarch. Sakuntala got preg- DVADASADITYA (5). The twelve sons born to Kasyapa
Sderioveied ey Hie” alle cat that she would duly be by his wife Aditi are called Dvadasadityas (Twelve
No sooner had D palace Dusyanta returned. Adityas) The word Aditya means ‘born of Aditi’. As it
who had been out a at left the asrama than Kanva, occurs in Agni Purana (Ch. 51)a table, showing the names
divine eves he me to the asrama. With his of the twelve Adityas and the sign of the Zodiac over
ena Nea He erstood what had happened in his which each Aditya. predominates and the colour of it,
ae sonalieent ori Sakuntala that she would have is given below. :
ruler of the west mln a 5 ee ae Dvadasadityas. Sign of the Kose Bl a
i me 1 Varuna. Mesa (Aries lack,
rte bege chae Ms Sakuntala delivered a son. Kanva 9 Sarya (Sun) Recbhs Tearus) Blood-colour.
named the child S. Scare g to the birth of the child, and 3 Sahasrarhéu Mithuna (Gemini) Slightly redcolour.
eRe KEE arene ec amana. The child grew up to 4 Dhata Karkataka (Cancer) Yellow.
Poortaue a 2 en O and Kanva realising that the 5 Tapana Sirhha (Leo) White. |
would ond in ns aand her son at the aérama’ 6 Savita Kanya (Virgo) Pure white.
pacé gawk Ghe | of the child’s welfare and pro- 7 Gabhasti Tula (Libra) tawny colour.
heeapital. of —— er and the child to Hastinapura, g Ravi Vrécika (Scorpio) Yellow.
When they rea hae ae, anne by his disciples. 9 Parjanya Dhanu (Sagittarius) Parrot-colour.
him Gout Liat oo ag al ace and sent word to 1Q Tvasta Makara (Capricorn) Snow-white.
tific mecvemert ~ pee he, pleading ignorance about |] Mitra Kumbha (Aquarius) Smoky hue.
arriage with Sakuntala, refused to receive her and 12 Visnu? Mina (Pisces) Blue.
the child. Dusyant : :
question. At an p= oo nou) nee DVADASAKSA. A_ warrior of Subrahmanya. (M.B.
emotions was about to leave the palace, a Peledaivaes Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Stanza 88) :
announced that Dusyanta had, in fact, married DVADASIVRATA. A fast ordained in accordance with
aa, that Sarvadamana was his son and that he the Hindu religion to make an ene w ie Meglio
: ‘Jery in li i 1 is fast or VO
(Sarvadamana) would become a great ruler under the misery in life. There 1s . eke fa e Fyinight 16 be
name Bharata. (Adi Parva, Cha which is performed in th
; pters 69-74) . peri * ae =
4) Other information. (1) D ; month of Phalguna (Mina). It is given © ow.
(1) usyanta did not eat flesh. Once Rane {fahabali, with a vast army of Asuras, went
(Anugasana Parva, Chapter 115
(2) After his death Disyania seed eats asvemnbl to the realm of the gods and drove them out of ee
worshipping him. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 8, Verse 15). Aditi was much grieved at the an ifort eet f
DUSYANTA II. A son born to King Ajamidha of the Paru her sons. Kaéyapa her husband asked her the een
dynasty by his wife called Nili. He had a brother called her grief, She told him about the fal gee b ve
Paramesthi. (Adi Parva, Chapter 94,.Verse 33). Both asked him for a remedy. Kasyapa told her to, er uf
the Kings, Dusyanta and Paramesthi ‘are referred to as Dvadasivrata. Aditi took Dvadasivrate a eee who
Paficalas also. (Adi Parva, Chapter 94, Verse 33) was pushed down to Patala by Mahavigny ai
DUTALAKSANA (M). The word fatal nad aneciil incarnated as Vamana. From that aay et avata
meaning in Visavidyad. If a man is bitten by a Laan Dvadafivrata is considered to be holy fast. ( ,
the man who goes to the Visavaidya Skandha 8
L , to speak to h andha 8). ; ti
about it and bring him if eal is cited iadia’ DVAIDHIBHAVA. One of the six qualities, tne nah
pees the external signs and symbols of thediita and Sandhi, Vigraha, Yana, Asana, and son 2 war. The
nares spoken by him the visavaidya understands is to make peace with the enemy: Ma ae going for war.
whether the person bitten by the snake would die or journey to battle is Yana. Asana ze to two, i.e. if the
survive. ‘T’hese signs and words of the ‘diita’are called Dvaidhibhava is dividing his army
1. This version of the episode is found i athe tds ‘ngs suitable to his work,
a 5 a in Mahabharata. The poet Kalidasa has made variations,
a tlt Some deviations from the Mahabharata story may Pe noticed in the works of some other pose an
2. Different names of Adityas occur in different Puranas. The names given here are based on the Agni #uratsthe Abhi-

DVAIPAYANA
army rose against the King, he should bring one party
on his side and make the two parties fight with each
other. Samégiaya is to yield to the powerful. (Manusmrti, Chapter 7, Stanza 160).
DVAIPAYANA. A synonym of Vyasa. He who is born
in an island, i.e. Vyasa. (See under Vyasa).
DVAIPAYANAM. A lake in Kuruksetra. During the
battle of Bharata, Duryodhana ran away from the
battlefield and hid himself in this lake. (M.B. Salya
Parva, Chapter 80, Stanza 47).
DVAITAVANA. A forest in which the Pandavas lived
during their forest life. (M.B. Vana Parva).
DVAPARA I. A friend of Kali, who went to the Svayamvara of Damayanti accompanied by Dvapara. (See
under Kali).
DVAPARA II.° The deity of Dvapara Yuga (the age of
Dvapara). (See under Yuga).
DVAPARA YUGA. See under Yuga.
DVARAKA. (DVARAVATI; DVARAVATI).
place where the capital of Sri Krsna stood.
1) General information. The King Jarasandha was the
enemy of the Yadavas. To save themselves from the
attack of Jardsandha, the Yadavas united themselves
under Sri Krsna, and built a strong city in the western
islands. That beautiful city was called Dvaraka. Kuégasthali, is another name of this city. The beautiful
mountain Raivataka stood as a fortress round the city
which was so strongly built that it was not possible
even for the gods to enter it. Even women could fight
sitting inside the forts. The fortress Raivataka was three
yojanas long. In each yojana three divisions of the
army were camped. In each yojana there were hundred
doors, with a strong army to guard each of them.
(M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 14).
2) Sri Krsna in Dodrakad. Dvaraka was the abode of Sri
Krsna. It excelled even Amardavatiin beauty. There
was an efficient council of the leaders of the Yddavas.
Dagarhi was the name of that council. Many Yadava
leaders Sri Krsna, Balabhadra and other luminaries
attended the council. The royal palace was as luminous as the Sun and the Moon. Dvaraka was built by
Vigvakarma. There were ditches on the four sides of
Dvaraka. There were four beautiful parks called
Nandana, Misgraka Caitraratha and Vaibhraja. The
mountain Raivata acted as the eastern rampart of the
city. Three other mountains, Venumanda on the North,
Sukaksa on the west and Latavesta on the south acted
as natural forts. On the east of the city there was a
beautiful lake. The city had fifty main gates to which
sharp machine rockets, big iron wheels etc. were fitted
had an area of 96 yojanas
The
tection. It
tya patha).
sails. (1) Arjuna visited Dvaraka in the
a) _ — - a han, It was then and there that he
eed aabhateas Adi Parva, 3 Chapters
from 217). ‘Dvaraka A
. Salva attacked Dvaraka. The Yadavas
(2) Toe Bing (MB. Vana Parva, Chapter 15),
‘2 = ae i a procuring beatitude. There is a
pp hich is pure and divi
_— ine,
bath known as Pindarake 89, Stanza 65).
-va, Chapter
ta) "hh om “Bindaraka that Nrga, a chameleon
DYUTIMAN II
attained beatitude. (M.B. Anusasana Parva, Chapter
70, Stanza 7).
(5) It was here that the pestle of iron, which proved
the cause of destruction of the Yadavas, came out of
the stomach of Samba. (M.B. Mausala Parva, Chapter 1).
(6) After the death of Sri Krsna this city was swept
over by the sea. (M.B. Mausala Parva, Chapter 7,
Stanza 41),
4) Modern view. According to the modern researchers
Dvaraka was situated in the sea to the west of Gujarat.
There is a small locality near the sea, still called
Dvaraka, and the principal occupation of the people of
this place still is cattle-rearing, and trading in milk.
They claim to be the descendants of the family of Sri
Krsna.
DVARAPALAPURA. An ancient city of Bharata.
Nakula subjugated this city. (Mahabharata, Sabha
Parva, Chapter 32, Stanza 11).
DVARAVATI. See under Dvaraka.
DVAYAKSA. Anancient Kingdom in Bharata. The
King of this country brought gifts to the palace of
Yudhisthira, (Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter 51,
Stanza 17).
DVIMIDHA. A King of the Piru dynasty. He was the
brother of Ajamidha and Purumidha. (Agni Purana,
Stanza 278).
DVIMURDHAN. A _ son of Hiranyaksa. Sambara,
Sakuni, Dvimirdhan, Sanku and Arya were the sons
of Hiranyaksa. (Agni Purana, Chapter 19).
DVITA. An ancient hermit. He was the son of Gautama. It is stated in Mahabharata, Salya Parva,
Chapter 37, that by the curse of his brother he became
a wolf and begot monkey, scorpion, etc.
DVIVIDA. A monkey. He was a warrior in the army of
Sri Rama.
DYAU (DYU). One of the Astavasus (eight Vasus).
(For particulars see under Astavasus) . ,
DYU (DYAU). One of the Asta Vasus (eight Vasus).
This Vasu has another name Apa. (For details see
under Astavasus).
DYUMAN. A King of the dynasty of Bhargava. (Bhagavata, Skandha 9). |
DYUMATSENA I. A King. He was the father of
Satyavan. He ruled over the Salva country, Saibya was
his wife. By and by he lost his eye-sight- Then another
King conquered his country. Dyumatsena who lost
everything went to the forest with his wife Saibya and
child, Satyavan. (For particulars of how Satyavan
married Savitri and how Dyumatsena regained his lost
kingdom, see under Satyavan). ;
DYUMATSENA II. A King who fought with Sri Krsna.
(M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 38).He used to attend
the aa of Yudhisthira. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 4).
DYUTAPARVA. A subsection of Sabha Parva, (Chapters
46 to 73), in the Mahabharata.
DYUTI. A_ goddess who protected Arjuna.
Vana Parva, Chapter 37, Stanza 38)
DYUTIMAN I. A King of the Madra country. Vijaya
the daughter of this King was the wife of Sahadeva. one
of the Pandavas. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 95,
Stanza 80).
DYUTIMAN II. A King of the Salva country. He
gave his country to Rcika and attained heaven. (_M.B,
(M.B.

ee
DYUTIMAN III
Santi Parva, Ghapter 234; Stanza 33).
DYUTIMAN. III. Son of the King Madirasva born
in the [ksvaku dynasty. He was a mighty and bright
hero. The King Suvira was the son of Dyutiman.
(M.B. AnuSdsana Parva, Chapter 2, Stanza 9) .
DYUTIMAN IV. A hermit of the family of Bhrgu. A
daughter named Laksmi and sons named Dhata and
Vidhata were born to Bhrgu by his wife Khyati. Dhata
and Vidhata married the daughters of Meru named
Ayati and Niyati. Prana and Mrkandu were born to
the couple. Markandeya was born from Mrkandu and
Vedagiras from Markandéya. A son named Dyutiman
was born to Prana and Rajapala was born to Dyutiman. The family of Bhrgu owes its expansion to Rajapala. (Visnu Purana, Amsga 1, Chapter 10).
E
E. (a). This sound means ‘Devi’.
EDI. A follower of Skandadeva. (Sloka 13, Ghapter 46,
Salya Parva). | ,
EKACAKRA. A village where the Pandavas lived for
some time during their exile. Bhima’ killed Baka during
their stay in a brahmin-house in the village. (See -
under Baka).
EKACAKRA. A famous demon born to Ka§g yapaprajapati of his wife Danu. Demons Sarmbara, Vipracitti,
Namuci, Puloma, Visruta, Durjaya, Ayassiras, Asvasiras, Ketu, Vrsaparva, Agvagriva, Viripaksa, Nikurmbha,
Kapata and Ekapat are brothers of Ekacakra and are
equally famous. (Chapter 65, Adi Parva, M.B.).
EKACANDRA. A follower of Skandadeva. (Sloka 30,
Chapter 46, Salya Parva).
EKACUDA. A follower of Skandadeva. (Sloka 5, Ghapter 46, Salya Parva).
EKADASADHIPATIS. Eleven adhipatis. For Devas the
adhipati (ruling power) is Indra; for the stars, Candra;
for Prajapatis, Daksa; for wealth and Yaksaraksas,
Kubera; for men Manu; for rsis, Vasistha; for Grahajyotis, the Sun; for exudations, Varuna; for rivers, the
Ocean; for Bhitaganas, Siva; and for the birds, Garuda.
EKADASAMANUSADHARMA. The eleven dharmas
of men are: Svadhydya, Brahmacarya, Dana, Yajiia,
free from Krpanatva, Daya, Ahirhsa, Ksama, Jitendriyatva, Sauca and Daiva Bhakti. (Tarkadipika) .
- EKADASASANKARAVARNA (S). (1) Karana_ (one
born to a Vaiéya of a Sidra woman). (2) Ambastha
(one born to a brahmin of a Vaisya woman). (3)
Ugra (one born to a Ksatriya of a Sidra woman). (4)
Magadha (one born to a Vaisya of a Ksatriya woman).
(5) Mahisya (one born to a Ksatriya of a Vais ya
woman). (6) Ksatta (one born toa Sidra of a Ksatriya
woman). (7) Sata (one born to a Ksatriya of a brahmin
woman). (8) Vaidthaka (one born to a Vaigya of a
brahmin woman). (9)~Rathakara (one born to a Mahi_ sya of a Karana woman) (10). Parasava (one born toa
brahmin of a Sadra woman). (11) Candala (one born
is a _ of a brahmin woman). (See under Purh, Put,
utra) .
EKADASAPUJASTHANA (S). The eleven pujasthanas
are Sarya, Agni, Vipra, Gau, Vaisnava, Akasa, Vayu,
Jala, Bhimi, Atma and Sarvabhiitas. (Tarkadipika).
EKADASARUDRAS,. Ajaikapat, Ahirbudhnya, Virupaksa, Suregvara, Jayanta, Bahurupa, Aparajita, Savitra,
Tryarnbaka, Vaivasvata and Hara are the eleven
Rudras. (Visnu Purana, Chapter 15, Amsa ii
267 | EKAJATA
EKADASATATTVA (S). Five Jiianendriyas, five Karmendriyas and mind constitute the Ekadasatattvas
(eleven tattvas).
EKADASATEJOGUNA (S). Sparsa, Samkhya, Parinama,
Prthaktva, Samyoga, Vibhaga, Paratva, <Aparatva,
Vega, Ripa and Dravatva. (Tarkadipika) are the
eleven tejogunas.
EKADASI. The eleventh day after a new moon or full
moon day. The vrata observed on this day is called
the Ekadasi vrata. King Ambarisa observed very
strictly and continuously the Ekadasi Vrata to obtain
the status of Indra. (See under Ambarisa). (Navama
Skandha, Bhagavata). This vrata would fetch food
for the hungry and - salvation for those who are in
search of it. (Agni Purana). The method of observing
this vrata is detailed below:
Those who observe the Ekadasi vrata should be on a
regulated diet excluding meat and avoid sexual acts
on the Dagami day, the day preceding Ekadasi. On
both the Ekadasi days in a month one should not take
any food at all. The period which combines Ekadasi
with Dvadasi (the twelfth day) is called Harivasara
because of the presence of Visnu at that time. That
is a good time for doing sacred yajnas. That day where
there is only a small portion of Ekadasi and the rest
Dvadasi is the best day for yajnas. Trayodasi (the
thirteenth day) 1s good for breaking the fast. The day
which merges Dvadasi into Trayodasi 1s the best day
for breaking the fast. Do not observe the Vrata on a
day which combines Dasam1 with Ekadaégi. Hell 1s the
result if one does so.
Completely abstaining from food on the Ekadasi day
you should take food on the Dvadasi day. As you take
your food you. should pray like this: “Bhunksyeham
Pundarikaksa Saranam me bhavacyuta’’. (Oh, Pundarikaksa, I am going to break my fast. Oh, Bhagavan,
let you be my heaven). If an Ekadagi comes on a
Piryarn—Pusya—day in the bright half of the month that
day should on any account be observed. That day would
ive the observer unlimited good result and that
Ekadagi is qualified as Papanas int (destroyer of all
evils). When Ekadasi and Dvadasi happen to compute
on a Tiruvonam (Sravana ) day the Ekadagi is qualifies
as Vijaya. That day gives prosperity to devotees. It is
also called Vijaya if an Ekadasi comes 1 ~ aa
of Phalguna (March) on 4 Payarh (Pusya) ao -
wise extol this day as one promising crores of good elects.
{ - ° oo Wik ° h
_ On the Ekadas1 day you should do vege i Nea
| happiness.
is productive of universa PP this world and
will acquire children and wealth in
attain "Nignalldka on death. (Chapter 178, Agni
Purana) ‘hva,
EK ADASENDRIYA (S)._ Srotra, Tvak, cain a
Payu (anus)
Ghrana, Vak, Pani, Pada,
ind the eleven sense-organs:
ED ATIAMISATIRTHA. An ancient holy a ae et
India. If a man bathes in a sag i eisatl
the benefit of giving aw4y as charsty
(Slok 20. Chapter 83 Vana Parva) - ‘4
BRAJATA. A Serato of the castle of Ran a
demoness talked = HY enticing Y 3 Valmiki Ramasurrender herself to Ravana. (Sarga 4:
yana, Sundara Kanda).
1. The names of Ekadagarudras are found differently in different Puranas.
t

EKAJATA 268
EKAJATA. A warrior of Skandadeva. (Sloka 53, Chapter 45, Salya Parva).
EKAKSA I. A demon born to Kasyapaprajapati of his
wife Danu. (Sloka 29, Chapter 65, Adi Parva, M.B.).
EKAKSA II. A soldier of Skandadeva. (Sloka 58, Chapter
45, Salya Parva, M.B.).
EKAKSARAKOSA. Each and every letter has got a
separate meaning. The dictionary describing _ this
meaning is known as Ekaksarakofa. (Chapter 348,
Agni Purana). |
EKALAVYA I. Son of Hiranyadhanus, a Kingof the
foresters. He went to Dronacarya to learn archery.
Dronacarya refused to accept him as a disciple because
he was a Sadra. Undaunted he went to the forests,
made a replica of the preceptor in clay and standing
before it started practising archery.‘Soon he became a
matchless archer.
Some time later the Pandavas went to the forests for
hunting. One of the hunting dogs wandering saw
Ekalavya and started barking. Ekalavya sent seven
arrows to its mouth and kept it open. When the dog
returned to Arjuna he was dumbfounded at the skill
of the archer and when he came to know the archer
was an unknown disciple of Drona his disappointment
knew no bounds. Drona had once declared that Arjuna
was the best and topmost of his disciples. Arjuna went
and complained to Dronacarya. Dronacarya called
Ekalavya to his side and asked him to give him as
‘Gurudaksina’ (fee to the preceptor) his right-hand
thumb. Without the least hesitation Ekalavya offered
his thumb to the guru and from that day onwards his
skill faded and he became inferior to Arjuna. (Chapter
132, Adi Parva): Ekalavya was killed by Sri Krsna.
(Sloka 77, Chapter 48, Udyoga Parva, M.B.). -
A son of Ekalavya seized the sacrificial horse of Arjuna
and was killed by Arjuna (Chapter 83, Agvamedhika
- ' Parva, M.B.).
EKALAVYA II. A King who was a rebirth of an asura,
Krodhavaga. He participated in the great war on the
na6. the Pandavas. (Chapter 4, Udyoga Parva,
EKANANGA. «A daughter of Yasoda and hence aa sister
of Sri Krsna. It was because of her that Krsna could
slay Karhsa. (Chapter 38, Sabha Parva, M.B.).
EKAPADA. A country of ancient Bharata. The King
and the people of this country came to the Rajasiya
of Yudhisthira but were prevented from entering inside
because of the uncontrollable crowd inside. (Sloka 17,
Chapter 51, Sabha Parva, M.B.). |
EKAPARNA. Sister of Durga. Ekaparna, Ekapatala
and Aparna were the three daughters of Himavan born
of his wife Mena. Ekaparna ate Only one leaf and
Ekapatala ate a bunch of leaves. Aparna did not eat
even a leaf. Ekaparpa was married to a'sage called
Devala and Ekapatala to a sage called Jaigisavya.
(Chapter 18, Hari VarhSa). (See under Himavan) .
EKAPATALA. See under Ekaparna.
EKAPAT I. See under Ekacakra.
EKAPAT II. Asynonym of Bhagavan Visnu. (Sloka
95, Chapter 149, Anusdsana Parva, M.B.).
EKAPINGA (EKAPINGALA). Another name of Vaigravana. Once Vaigravana looked jealously at Parvati
EKAVALI
seated on the left side of Paramesvara and instantly his
one eye burst. When Parvati regained her peace of
mind that one eye of Vaisravana was changed into
pingala colour. (See under Kubera).
EKARATRATIRTHA. A sacred place. If one stays at
this place righteously for one day one would attain
Brahmaloka. (Sloka 182, Chapter 83. Vana Parva,
EKASRNGA. One of the Saptapitrs. Vairdja, Agnisvatta, Garhapati, Somapa, Ekagrnga, Caturveda and
Kala are the seven pitrs. All these seven stayed in
Brahmasabha worshipping him. (Slokas 47 and 48,
Chapter 11, Sabha Parva).
EKASRTA. See under Vararuci.
EKATA.
1) General information. An ancient sage. He was the
son of the Maharsi Gautama. He had two brothers,
Dvita and Trita.
2) How Ekata became a wolf by a curse. There is a story
of how Ekata and Dvita duped Trita in the Mahabharata,. When Gautama died Trita became the chief of
the three. Dvita and Ekata did not like this. Once all
the three were passing by a forest with a herd of cows for
a yaga. [rita was walking ahead and the other two were
following him with the cows. At a strategic point on the
way the brothers carried away the cows by a separate
route without the knowledge of Trita. When Trita _
came to know of the loss he was greatly distressed. On
reaching the shores of the river Sarasvati, he was frightened by a wolf and running to escape from the anima
fell into a dilapidated well. He performed a yaga from
where he lay. Assuming a creeper inside the well to be
Somalata, Trita recited the Rks and the devas responded
to his prayer. Devas like Brhaspati graciously appeare
before him and asked him to demand a boon from
them. Trita replied that his desire was to worship the
gods standing on the waves of the river Sarasvati.
Accordingly the river was made to flow that way and
‘Standing on the waves Trita worshipped the gods. After
that he went home and cursed his brothers and made
Ekata andDvita into wolves.
3) Other details.
i) Ekata was a sage much banked on by the people of
western. Bharata. (Sloka 31, Ghapter 208, Santi Parva) .
li) Ekata attended a yajiia conducted by Uparicaravasu
(Chapter 336, Santi Parva).
ili) Ekata accompanied by Dvita and Trita once went
to Svetadvipa to visit Narayana. (Sloka 12, Chapter
39, Santi Parva).
iv) Ekata and his two brothers were among the sages
who visited Bhisma while he was lying on his bed of
arrows. (Sloka 7, Chapter 26, Anugasana Parva, M.B.)
v) All these three sages lived on the west coast as Rtviks
of Varuna. (Chapter 15, Anugdsana Parva, M.B.)..
vi) Sikta 150 in Mandala | of Rgveda contains the
eulogistic songs of Trita, one among the trio. (See
under Trita) .
EKATVACA. A follower of Skandadeva. (Sloka 24,
Chapter 46, Salya Parva).
EKAVALI. Wife of Ekavira, founder of the Hehaya
dynasty. (For details see under Ekavira) .

EKAVIRA 269 ELI AND PUCCA
EKAVIRA! (HEHAYA). A founder of the Hehaya flowery forest was soon arrested by the sight ofa
line of kings.
1) Genealogy. Descending in order from Visnu: Atri—
Candra-—Budha — Puriiravas—Ayus—Yayati—Yadu—
Sahasrajit—Satajit—Ekavira (Hehaya).
2) Birth of Ekavira. Once there was a King called
Revanta who was an intimate friend of Indra. One day
riding on Uccaihsravas, Indra’s horse, he went to
Vaikuntha. Fascinated by the arresting beauty of
Revanta, Mahalaksmi sat gaping for a while and did
not hear what Visnu talked to her. Visnu was offended
and lost his temper. Laksmi was looking with interest
alternatively at Revanta and the horse when Visnu
cursed her to be born as a mare on earth. Horrified,
shedding tears, Laksmi begged for relief. Visnu decreed
that she would return to Vaikuntha after giving birth
to a son who would be equal in glory to Visnu himself.
Mahalaksmi came to Earth taking the shape of a mare
and lived in a forest situated at a point where the rivers
K4alindi and Tamasa meet and where once Suryapatni
stayed and did penance. Meditating on Siva she lived
there for a thousand divine years and then one day
Siva and Parvati appeared before her and asked her
what she wanted. She then said “Oh, Bhagavan, Mahavisnu cursed me and made me into a mare. He _ has
decreed that I would go_ back after bringing forth a son
as glorious as Visnu. From whom am I to bear a son
like this??? Siva promised to find a solution and going to
Vaikuntha sent Visnu to earth in the form of a horse.
Visnu came to Laksmi and they lived together tor ae
time and soon a son was born to Laksm. ee :
child in the forest both of them went back to Vai-
. f us
kuntha. It is this child who later on became a 2 Hot
King, Ekavira. It was because he was born of a
that he got the names, Hehaya and Haihaya. (Skandha
6, Devi Bhagavata) .
3) How Ekavira came to the palace.
Satajit, son of the grandson 0
penance to obtain a son. He was
-a point where t
in the forest situated a A hel night a Vidyadhara named
a t. ER
os ay gare a Vidyadhari named Rapper
and pores the infant lying be aN ey ete -
recognise . bo
Viewu ee en we a while they a ete
horse and mare and sO A tou ve 4 feat
ace as >. immed!
Nara - pt before Satajit doing Sarai — e
rd sakes ema to take care of a child ieee - els
ariether "aide of the forest disappeared.
r ‘Id to his palace and
pleased at_ this Satajit took anes going the child the
* 1 SO ae
brought him forth as his ows me a prince Satajit
oe Ekavira. When the boy pope forest with his
- ‘4c and went to {
crowned Ekavira King penance there for sometime
fter doing sae vy
tained Vegtoka. (Sean ° ine Eka
. - Eikavatt. as , i
*) ia a pe son of the minister “e mo: ned
accompanle * ks of the river Ganga. *t wé ie Ps
sure trip to the ban ng the sight of 4
It was at this time that
f Yayati was doing
also doing penance
he rivers Kalindi
ELI AND PUCCA.
sweet smelling lotus with a hundred petals blooming in
the river. By the side of the lotus was standing a
beautiful damsel weeping. The prince went to her and
asked her the reason for her weeping. After great persuasion she replied thus: ‘‘Oh, Prince, there is a country
not far from yours which is now being ruled over by a
very righteous King called Raibhya. His queen is called
Rukmarekha. They had no children for a very long
time and so Raibhya conducted a Putrakamesti yaga.
When ghee was poured profusely into the sacrificial fire
the flames rose up to great heights and from inside the
flames came out a lovely maiden. The King named her
Ekavali and bought her forth as his daughter. I am
Yagovati the daughter of the minister there. We were
of.the same age and so I was asked to live with her as
her companion. She was very fond of lotuses and the
King constructed big ponds with lotuses in them for
her recreation. Yet she used to go to other ponds also
in:search of lotuses.
One day we came to this side of the river Ganga to
play. Then a demon ofname Kalaketu came and kidnapped her. I followed her. She never surrendered to the
enticements and persuasions of Kalaketu. Her father
wanted her to be married to Ekavira, King of Hehaya.
Kalaketu sent her to prison. Without knowing what to
do next J am standing here weeping.
Hearing this Ekavira went to Patala and defeating
Kalaketu released Ekavali and brought both Ekavali
and Yasovati to the palace of Raibhya. Pleased at this
Raibhya gave his daughter in marriage to Ekavira.
Kartaviryarjuna was born in the family of Ekavira.
(Skandha 6, Devi Bhagavata) .
ELAPUTRA. A serpent born to Kaégyapa of his wife
Kadri. This serpent was very intelligent. Once there
arose a dispute between Vinata and Kadri over the
colour of the tail of the horse of Indra, Uccaihéravas,
Kadri argued that there were black hairs in the tail
while Vinata held there were none. Really there were
no black hairs and Kadri to win the argument wanted
her sons to go and hang on the hairs to create a black
colour. The serpents like Vasuki and others refused to
do so and Kadri then cursed them saying that they
would all be burnt to death at the Sarpasatra of
Janamejaya. To take measures'to get free from this
curse a meeting of the serpents under the leadership of
Sesa and Vasuki was held and in that assembly Elaputra made a stirring speech. (Chapter 38, Adi Parva,
(Eli=rat, Piicca=Cat).
The story of the cat and the rat described by the poet
Kufijan Nambiar is from KathAsaritsagara. The story
in original is the following.
Once there lived on a big banyan tree near the city of
Vidisa a mongoose, an owl, a cat and a rat. The mongoose and the rat lived in two separate hollows at the
foot of the tree, the cat in a cavity in the centre of the
tree and the owl on the branches at the top. Of these
the rat could be eaten by all the other three and the cat
could kill all the rest. The rat and the mongoose afraid
Puranas. Devi Bhagavata states that Ekavira is the son of Turvasu,
and the prince wandenine aes in lama
f Ekavira 1s 3 srvarjuna. It is not c
f a) mre is the father af ward is the father of the ofa
al l Yadu, 80m 0 ad _-Dhanaka—
baa yee g, ‘Z (nat “Dharm se Kuni—Bhadrasena
escending
Vrsni, starts the Vrsni dynasty.
orrect. The genealogy chronicled here is based on Agniand Visnu
ndfather of Ekavira: Yadu—Sahasrajit --Satajit—Hehaya (Ekavira)
Krtavira—Kartaviryarjuna. From the grandson of Kartaviryarjuna,

ELLU 270
of the cat did stir out only during night time and the
cat moved about day and night afraid of none wishing
to catch hold of the rat and eat it. Their common place
of activity was a rice-field nearby.
Once a forester laid a net to catch the cat and the cat
fell into the trap and lay there hanging inside the net.
The rat coming that way saw the plight of the cat and
jumped with joy. But soon the owl and the mongoose
came to the spot and seeing their enemy, the cat, imprisoned rushed to catch hold of the rat. The rat then did
a very clever thing. It went and tore open the net
imprisoning the cat and when the cat jumped out of the
net the owl and the mongoose ran away and disappeared. The rat went to its hole. This is a story to
demonstrate the fact that with a change in the situation
an enemy may turn out to bea friend. (Taranga 7,
Madanamaficukalambaka, Kathasaritsagara) .
ELLU. Anoil seed. (Sesame). Ellu- originated from
the body of Kagyapa. Because Ellu is born of the body
of Kasyapa, King of Rsis, it is considered as divine to
offer Ellu to anybody. (Sloka 10, Chapter 66, Anusasana Parva).
ELU: This word in Malayalam means ‘Seven’.
“(1) The seven qualities which would enhance prosperity
are the following: Dhairya (courage) , Sama (forbearance), Dama (control of the sense), Sucitva (cleanliness), Daya (compassion), Mrduvak (geniality of
speech) and Ahimsa (not giving injury to your friends).
(2) The seven divisions of Kerala are Venat, Palinat,
Karkanat, Citanat, Kuttanat, Kutanat and Malayamanat. ,
(3) ‘The seven Cittasalyas are Daylight Candra, Woman
past the prime of life, a pond without lotuses, a lovely
person without learning, a lord greedy of wealth, a
virtuous but poor man and a cruel royal attendant.
(4) Seven Karmas : Bravery, skill, courage, resourcefulness, Ben walle from war, magnanimity and
» commanding power. .
(5) Seven solemnities : Mammodisa, Miiron, Kurbana,
—_—_—e Vivaha, Pattatva and Tailabhiseka of the
sick.
(6) Seven Cirafijivis (People who never die) : Agvatos Bali, Vyasa, Hanuman, Vibhisana, Krpa and
Parasurama.
( 7) Jivavasthas : Ajiiana, Avarana, Viksepa, Paroksaeet Aparoksajiiana, Anarthanivrtti and Anandaprapti.
(8) Seven islands : Jambudvipa, Plaksadvipa, Puskaraad Krauficadvipa, Sakadvipa, Salmaladvipa, and
usadvipa.
(9) Seven Dhatus : Rasa, Rakta,
Asthi, Majja and Sukla.
(10) Seven rivers : Ganga, Yamuna, Godavari, Sarasvati, Narmada, Sindhu and Kaveri.
11) Seven Nadis : Ida, Pingala, Susumna,
Alarhbusa, Asthijihva, Gandhari.
(12) Seven wives of Vasudeva: Devaki, Srutadeva,
Yasoda, Srutisrava, Srideva, Upadeva and Suripa.
(13) Seven mountains : Himavan, Nisadha, Vindhya,
Malyavan, Pariyatra, Gandhamadana and Hemakita.
(14) Seven Patalas : Atala, Vitala, Sutala, Nitala, Talatala, Rasatala, and Mabhatala. ;
(15) Seven holy places : Ayodhya,
Kasi, Kafici, Avanti and Dvaravati.
Marmsa, Medas,
Musa;
Mathura, Maya,
GADA I
(16) Seven Maruts : Avaha, Sarhvaha, Pravaha, Udvaha, Vivaha, Parivaha and Paravaha. |
(17) Seven Vargas : King, Minister, Country, fort,
treasury, army and strength of friends and relatives.
(18) Seven colours : White, black, red, green, yellow,
blue and violet.
(19) Seven forests : Kamyaka, Aditi, Vyasa, Phalki,
Sirya, Madhu and Sita.
(20) Seven dosas (defects) : Laziness, arrogance, ignorance, profligacy, Hauteur, pride and selfishness.
(21) Seven vices : Hunting, dice, womanising, drinking
squandering, harshness of speech and cruelty.
(22) Seven seas : Lavana, Iksu, Sura, Sarpis, Dadhi,
Ksira and Suddhodaka.
(23) Seven notes : Sadja, Rsabha, Gandhara, Madhyama, Paficama, Dhaivata and Nisada.
ERAKA. A serpent born in the family of the Kauravas.
This serpent was burnt to death at the Sarpasatra 0
Janamejaya. (Sloka 16, Chapter 57, Adi Parva).
ETASA. A sage who is greatly extolled in the Reveda.
The son of King Svaéa fought with this sage and it was
Indra who saved Etaga then. (Sakta 62, Anuvaka 11,
Mandala 1, Rgveda.).
ETASA. One of the horses of the Sun. (Sikta 122,
Anuvaka 18, Mandala 1, Reveda).
There are no words beginning with F. The letter corresponding to F in Indian languages is Ph.(m). 50 4
words beginning with this sound come _ under the
letter P.
G
G (iz) The letter G means both Gandharva and Vinayaka
(Agni Purana, Chapter 348).
GABHASTIMAN. An island. Once the valiant Sahasrabahu conquered and subjugated it. (M. B. Sabn@
Parva, Chapter 38).
GADA. A weapon. An asura called Gada was born '
Kagyapaprajapati by his wife Diti. Visnu killed Gada,
and Vi§vakarman made a weapon with his bone. S1nc°
the weapon was made from Gada’s bone it came to be
known as Gada. (Agni Purana, Chapter 114).
GADA I. A brother (Yadava) of Balabhadrarama. .
1) General. Vasudeva had, besides Devaki, seven wives
called Rohini, Bhadra, Malini, Madira, Ila, Rocan@
and Pauravi, and out of the seven Rohini had six sons
called Balabhadrarama, Gada, Sarana, Durdam4
Vikala and Krta. (Bhagavata, Navama Skandha).
2) Other details. ;
(1) Gada was present at the svayathvara of Draupadi.
(Adi Parva, Chapter 185, Verse 32). *
(2) On the marriage of Arjuna with Subhadré
it was Gada who brought the dowry of Subhadra fro™
Dvaraka to Indraprastha. (Adi Parva, Chapter 22U;
Verse 32).
(3) When Sri Krsna came to Dvaraka Gada received
him with embraces. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter ~?
Verse 35).
(4) Gada also was present on the occasion when the
Pandavas first stepped into the beautiful palace built
for them by Maya at Indraprastha. (M. B. Sabha
Parva, Chapter 4, Verse 39).
(5) Along with the other Yadavas Gada too w4*
present at the rajasiiya yajiia of Yudhisthira. (M- ?°
Sabha Parva, Chapter 34, Verse 16).

GADA II
(6) Gada held a prominent position among the Ydadavas deputed to guard Dvaraka against the onslaught
of King Salva. (M. B. Vana Parva, Chapter 15,
Verse 9)... ;
(7) Gada also accompanied Sri Krsna to the Agvamedha yajfia performed by Yudhisthira. . (ASvamedha
Parva, Chapter 86, Verse 9).
(8) Sri Krsna felt uncontrollably angry when Gada
was attacked during the mutual fighting with iron rods
by the Yadavas which climaxed in their total annihilation. (Mausala Parva, Chapter 3, Verse 45).
GADA II. See Gada.
GADADHARA. A synonym of Mahavisnu.
There is a place called Gaya to the north of Mount
Kalafijara, to the south of Himalayas, to the east of
Kuéasthali and to the west of Vasupura. Once a king
called Gaya conducted at Gaya an ASvamedha, a Naramedha (yajfia at which man is offered as sacrifice) and
a Mahamedha and Mahfvisnu acted as gate-keeper of
Gaya. As Visnu stood guard there holding the gada
(club) in his hands he came to be known as Gadadhara
also thenceforth. (Vamana Purana, Chapter 76).
GADAPARVA. A sub-parva of: Salya Parva in Mahabharata. (See Mahabharata).
GADAVASANA. A particular centre in Madhurapuri.
The name owes its origin to the following reason. When
Krsna killed Karhsa, his father-in-law Jarasaridha got
so angry that he hurled his gada (club) ninetynine
times at Madhurapuri from his capital, Girivraja. The
spot where the gada finally fell came to be called Gadavasana in course of time. (M. B. Sabha Parva, Chapter
GADHII. Father of Visvamitra. :
1) Genealogy. Descended from Visnu thus : BrahmaAtri-Candra-Budha - Puriravas - Ayus - Nahusa-Yayat
Piru - Janamejaya-Pracinvan-Pravira - Ni ane
bhaya-S andu-Bahuvidha-Saryati-Rahovadi-Rau I = vaMatinara-Santurodha - Dusyanta - Bharata _ sete a -
Suhotra-Brhatputra-Ajamidha-Jahnu-Balakasva- usika
ee had by his wife Vaidarbhi four sons
called Kuéamba, Kusanabha, Asurtarajas and Re
OF the four sons Kugamba built a city called Kausambi,
Kuganabha built the city of Mahodayapura, Asurtaa ity of
maranya and Vasu the city
se le agi oF ee rs heir respective cities.
irivra] d they administered t Spec ICS
ee le ‘had anaived daughters by his ate et
an Apsara woman. He felt very sad is ott ie
sons. At last he performed the Putrakamesti yajna,
d Gadhi was born to him. ee |
3) Cadhi?s wean A son named bi or al sae
daughter called dalle spec Ae wedding of
i jed to sage # ae >.
his. daughter Gadhi owned Ne hi stay in the
: _ Duri .
and left for the forest for tap 0 nea of Reika for @
forest Gadhi was put up acon ng
ton many pugrimas ant
ane, poe #9). Tiee also Satyavati and Visva4) Death. Gadhi entered eo
heaven. (Salya Parva, Chapte! a ees
GADHI Il. A brahmin who showed Visnu's Pp
maya. (See under Maya).
GAGANAMURDHA. 4 reputed asura,
amadhi and went to
son of KasyapaGALAVA
prajapati by Danu. Later on, he was born as one of the
five Kekeya kings. Ayassiras, Agvagiras, Ayaganka,
Gaganamirdha and Vegavan were the five kings. (Adi
Parva, Chapter 67, Verse 11).
GAJATI. A powerful monkey King who fought on the
side of Sri Rama against Ravana. (Vana Parva,
Chapter 283, Verse 3).
GAJA II. Younger brother of Sakuni, the son of Subala.
He, along with his brother fought in the great war
against the Pandavas and got killed by Iravan.
(Bhisma Parva, Chapter 90).
GAJAKARNA. A yaksa in Kubera’s assembly. (Sabha
Parva, Chapter 10, Verse 16).
GAJASIRAS. A warrior of Skanda.
Chapter 45, Verse 60).
GAJENDRAMOKSAM. The story about Indradyumna,
the Pandyan King being transformed into an elephant
due to the curse of Agastya and his attaining heaven.
(See under Indradyumna).
GALAVA. A celebrated sage.
1) Birth,. He was a son of Visvamitra. He was a
brahmavadi. (Sloka 52, Chapter 4, Anufédsana Parva.
2) How he goi lis name. ‘There is no record of his original name in any of the Puranas. He got his name
Galava later. There is a story about this both in Devibhagavata and Harivarhga. It is as follows :
There was once a King called Aruna in the family of
Mandhata. Aruna got a son and he was named Satyavrata. (It was this Satyavrata who later became the well
famed Triganku). When Satyavrata was a youngster
he once went inside the marriage hall of a brahmin and
kidnapped the bride. Furious at this evil deed of his
son the king sent him out from his palace and Satyavrata
roamed about aimlessly. :
Nature protested against this deed of the King abandoning his heir and there was no rain in the country for
twelve years. ‘The people were all put to great trouble,
Among those who suffered were the wife and children
of Visvamitra. Visvamitra had at that time gone to
the shores of the river Kausiki, for doing penance. The
family of Vigsvamitra was in great distress living without
any means for food. The sight of the children crying
for food to appease their hunger pained their mother
much. So she decided to sell one child and feed the
others by what she got from the sale. It was better to
be without one child than all the children dying out of
hunger.
She made a rope out of darbha leaves and tying it round
the neck of one child took it to the market for sale.
Both the mother and child were weeping profusely on
their way. Satyavrata saw them and took pity on them.
When Satyavrata heard their sad story and knew that
the woman was the wife of Visvamitra he told her
thus: “Oh, Venerable Lady, you need not sell this boy.
Untie the rope round his neck and throw it away. I
will look after your family till the return of your husband. I will daily bring food for you all and hang it
ona tree near yOur asgrama.”’
The mother was extremely happy to hear this and she
at once untied the rope round the neck of the boy and
the boy from thence became known as Galava. (For
details see under Triganku). ,
3) Gurudaksind of Galava. Galava continued his education under his father. At that time Dharmadeva to
(Salya Parva,

GALAVA
test VisSvamitra came to him disguised as Vasistha.
Visvamitra came out with rice to receive the guest but
by that time the guest had disappeared. But Visvamitra remained there with the rice for hundred years
till Dharmadeva returned. All these years Galava looked
after Visvamitra’s comforts. Visvamitra was immensely
pleased with Galava and allowed him to go away free
without any gurudaksina when his education was over.
Galava wanted to give some daksina but Viévamitra
refused to accept it. Galava insisted on giving and then
Visvamitra asked him to give whatever he liked but
Galava wanted the Daksina to be named. Disgusted
with this: stubbornness Vigvamitra said “Go and get me
eight hundred horses each with one of its ears black’’.
Galava was shocked to hear the demand and greatly
worried roamed about in search of horses of the type
specified. Garuda taking pity on his sad plight took
him to the palace of Yayati. Hearing the story of
Galava Yayati sent his daughter Madhavi with Galava
saying that if she was given in marriage to any king he
would give him the eight hundred horses of the type
he required.
Galava took Madhavi to Haryagva, a King of the
Iksvaku line of Kings. Haryagva was doing penance
at that time to obtaina child. Galava said that Haryasva would get a son of Madhavi and he should,
therefore, accept Madhavi and give him in return eight
hundred horses each with one ear black. Haryagva was
amenable to the terms but the only difficulty was that
he had only two hundred horses of the type specified.
Finding this difficulty Madhavi said “Oh, Galava
please do not worry on that account. I have a boon from
a brahmavadi sage that I would remain a maiden
even after delivery. So give me in marriage to this
King and get two hundred horses. After giving birth
to a son to this King take me to another King and
get two hundred horses from him and then to another and
thus by giving me to four Kings you can get the eight
hundred horses you require.”’
Galava liked this plan and so when Madhavi gave
birth to a son he took her to Divodasa, Raja of Kasi.
When a son was born to him Galava took her to Ué inara,
King of Bhoja. Galava thus got six hundred horses but
there was nobody else to give him the remaining two
hundred. When Galava was contemplating as to what
he should do next Garuda came to his rescue. He
advised Galava to give six hundred horses and Madhavi
in lieu of the remaining two hundred horses to Vigvamitra. Galava gave Visvamitra thehorsesand Madhavi
and pleased with the gurudaksinad Visvamitra
blessed Galava. Visvamitia got a son named Astaka
of Madhavi. (See under Astaka),. _
4) Gdlava and Citrasena. Galava was once having his evening prayers in the river when the spittings from the mouth
of Citrasena who was travelling by air above fell on
the puja materials of Galava. Galava went and complained to Sri Krsna of this and Krsna in haste pro-.
mised to bring before Galava the head of Citrasena
before the sun set. Narada who heard this went and
informed Citrasena of Krsna’s vow. Citrasena was
frightened to death. But Narada asked him not to lose
hope and advised Sandhya and Vali, wives of Citrasena, to approach Subhadra, sister of Krsna, for protection. Both of them went to Subhadra and made a
214 GANAPATI
grand fire-pit in front of her palace. Citrasena decided
to end his life by jumping into the fire and as he was
clécling the pit his wives wept loudly. Since her husband Arjuna was away from the palace Subhadra_herself ran to the place from where she heard the crics.
When they saw Subhadra they begged for ‘Mangalyabhiksa’ (a boon to live with one’s husband}. Subhadra
agreed to give them that. Then she heard their : tory
in full and only then did she realise that she had undertaken to do the impossible. Yet, to help Subhadra,
Arjuna agreed to protect Citrasena. When Sri Krsna
attacked Citrasena Arjuna defended. The fight then
ensued between Arjuna and Krsna. Both had very
powerful and divine weapons and the world stood on
the verge of a collapse by their fight. Then Subhadra
did a brave thing. She stood between the two and
requested for a cease-fire. Then Sri Krsna asked Citrasena to bow down and touch the feet of Galava. Galava
pardoned him. (Padma Purana).
5) Yapodina. Galava once gave Yayati one eighth
portion of the goodness accrued to him by his long
penance. (See Yayati for details).
6) Gdlava gets ahorse. Patalaketu, a demon, used to
give trouble to Galava daily while he used to do
penance. Once this demon sent a deep hot breath to
the sky and then a horse fell from the sky. Soon an
unknown voice from air said, ‘“This is a very strong
horse and it would travel many a yojana in an hour.”
Galava took that horse and gave it to Rtadhvaja-
(Vamana Purana, Chapter 59).
7) Other details regarding Galava.
(1) He was an intimate friend of King Pratipa. (Sloka
13, Chapter 20, Harivarga). :;
(ii) He was a shining member of the court of Yudbisthira. (Sloka 15, Chapter 4, Sabha Parva).
(ili) He shone in the court of Indra. (Sloka 10, Chapter 7, Sabha Parva).
(iv).He conducted a discussion with Narada on the
true nature of real prosperity. (Sloka 5, Chapter 287,
Santi Parva).
(v) On another occasion he spoke to Dharmaputra 0?
the glory of the universe. (Sloka 52, Chapter 18;
Anusasana Parva).
(vi) He swore before God to prove his innocence 12
the lotus-theft involving Agastya. (Sloka 37, Chapter
94, Anusasana Parva). ,
(vii) Srngava who married Vrddhakanya was a son of
Galava. (Sloka 14, Chapter 52, Salya Parva). Fort
details see under Vigvakarma.
GAM. Music. (Agni Purana, Chapter 348) .
GANA. A female attendant of Skanda. (Salya Parva:
Chapter 46, Verse 3).
GANAM. An army division. Three Gulmas form one
Ganam. (See Aksauhini).
GAYNAPATI.
1) Genealogy. A son of Siva with face like that of a?
elephant. As Siva has appointed this son as chief 0
the ganas (attendants) he is called Ganapati.
2) His birth. While Siva and Parvati assumed the for m
of monkeys and enjoyed themselves in the forest Parvati
got pregnant, and Siva took the semen from the wom
and gave it to Vayu (wind God. ) Vayu deposited it 1?
the womb of Afijana, who delivered a son named Haniman. Siva assumed the form of an elephant (tusker )

GANAPATI 273 GANDAKI (GANDAKA)
and Parvati that ofa she-elephant. Parvati delivered a
son in the form of an elephant. That son was named
Ganapati. (Uttara Ramayana).
3) His tusk broken. Once Paragurama arrived at Kailasa
to mect Siva. At that time Siva was asleep. So Ganapati did not allow him to get in. A duel broke out
between them. In that duel one of Ganapati’s tusks
was broken. (Padma Purana).
+) Ganapati turned into crow. An exceptionally hot
summer set in once in South India. The whole land
became parched. So Agastya went to Siva and requested for some holy water, and the Lord put Kaveri who
was worshipping him just. then, in the Kamandalu
(something like a teapot which sannyasins carry with
them) of Agastya and sent him back. Indra, who did
not relish this action of Siva, asked Ganapati to some
how or other upset Agastya’s Kamandalu of holy water,
and Ganapati, in the guise of a crow went and sat on
the brink of the Kamandalu and thus upset it. Agastya
and the crow quarrelled with each other. Then did the
crow assume its original form as Ganapati and blessed
Agastya. Moreover, Ganapati filled Agastya’s Kamandalu with holy water, which the latter distributed
among devotees in South India, and that is the present
Kaveri river.
5) Other stories about Ganapati’s h
contain two different stories as to how Ganapati happened to have the elephant'’s head. Once Parvati
pointed out to Ganapati the planet Saturn, and his head
got burned down due to the ocular powet of Saturn,
and according to one story Ganapati s head thus lost
was replaced with that of an elephant. ‘The other story
is more interesting. When once Siva tried to enter the
room where Parvati had gone to take her bath clad in
a single clothing Ganapati prevented Siva from doing
so. Siva, enraged at the obstruction made by ieee:
cut off his head, and when his anger was coo : mis
he replaced Ganapati'’s lost head with that of an elephant. (Padma Purana).
6) i pk ie
iddhi and Budani.
whee Ganapati and Subrahmanya aie ee Bue ot
marriage they were In 4 hurry 2 “ on Mt
conducted a test. Siva and Parva : a ae
who returned first after going roun the w ae
married first. Accordingly Subrahmanya moun e oe
vehicle (peacock) and set out for a tour game oe
world. Ganapati did nothing of the sort. but alte
little time he went roun
ead. The Puranas
Ganapati has two wives called
d his parents, vZ., Siva and
A I d for an explanation about his action
read papi that since the whole universe mn
in Giva and Parvati, going around them ogee ie
to touring round the world. Pleased at this reply his
parents got Ganapati married first. alana
7) VighneSvaraivam. (Power to remove . at es
Ganapati is called Vighnes vara pecanns, . e # speed
who removes all obstacles from the paths of m
creates them. ; hing done without
; to get anything ,
tj has the power to &
1 ie ebstructions as also the power 4 - a ee ihe
the path of anything sees ae oie Ganapati a the
custom came into vogue of worship is completion
i rl
very commencement of any a Oo oe nies
without any hitch or hindrance. 4€ ! |
GANDAKI (GANDAKA)._ A river in
such worship would be duly completed, Indians believe.
In support of that belief the following story from the
6th taranga of Lavanakalambakam, Kathdasaritsagara
may be quoted. F
The Devas decided to appoint. Subrahmanya as chief
of the army to kill Tarakasura. When Indra took up
the pot of water purified by mantras to anoint Subrahmanya’s head with it, his hands became benumbed, and
he stood aghast. Then Siva said that any action begun
without Ganapati puja would meet with such obstacles.
At once Indra worshipped Ganapati and his hands
recovered from the paralysed condition. And, Subrahmanya was duly anointed with the holy water.
8) Ganapati wrote the Mahabharata. After the death of
the Kauravas and the Pandavas sage Vyasa entered
again into meditation, But, the whole story of the
Bharata reflected in the mirror of his mind. He wanted
to translate the story into a great poem and requested
Brahma to suggest a suitable person to write the story
on his dictation, and Brahma suggested Ganapati’s
name. Then Vyasa thought about Ganapati and he
_ appeared before the sage. But, Ganapati did not appreciate the idea of serving as Vyasa’s scribe. So he stipulated a condition that he would write down the poem
provided Vyasa dictated it in sucha mannerthat he
had not to lay down his pen even once before the epic
was completed. To this Vyasa stipulated the counter
condition that when he dictated without the least interruption or pause Ganapati should not write down the
matter without understanding the meaning of it. And
under such conditions the composition of the Mahabharata was completed within three years. (Adi Parva
Chapter 1, Verses 74-80).
9) Ganapati pija. Ganapati occupies the most prominent place among the Devas connected with Siva. In
South India, Ganapati puja came into vogue in the 6th
century A.D., and idols of Ganapati now extant might
have been made at that period. In South India, temples
dedicated to Ganapati are inno way less in number
than those to Subrahmanya. The idol of Ganapati is
installed at the gateways of villages and forts, under
the fig tree, at the entrance of temples and at the southwestern corner of Siva temples. Two types of idols are
important: the Itampiri (the proboscis turned to the
left side) and the Valampiri (the proboscis turned to
the right side). It is stated that the enormously big
belly of Ganapati contains in it the whole universe.
10} Synonyms of Ganapati.
Vinayako vighnarajo
dvaimatura-ganadhipah /
apyekadanto herambo
lambodaragajananah. (Amarakoéga).
(Vinayaka, Vighnaraja, Dvaimatura, Ganadhipa, Ekadanta, Heramba, Lambodara, Gajanana).
GANDA. A dasi, who served the saptarsis. (Anusasana
Parva, Chapter 93).
GANDAKAM. A particular locality on the banks of
river Gandaki. Bhimasena once conquered this place.
(Sabha Parva, Chapter 10, Verse 15).
GANDAKANDU, A Yaksa of the assembly of Kubera.
(M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 10).
Orthern India
which falls into the Ganga.
2) Origin. There arose an argument between the

GANDHAKALI 274
Devas and the asuras about the Amrtam (nectar) got
from the churning of Ksirabdhi (the milk ocean) and
Mahavisnu appeared in the form of Mohini and enticed the asurasaway from the subject and ‘gave the
nectar to the Devas. Attracted by the great beauty of
Mohini, Siva made love to her, andthesweet produced
at the time of their embrace flowed as river Gandaki
through theearth. (Skandha Purana, Asura Khanda).
3) Jt became a holy river. While the worms on the banks
of Gandaki were once collecting soil they fell into the
river, and all at once they attained salvation, the reason
being that the water in the river had been formed by
the sweet of Visnu and Siva. And, from that day onwards people began worshipping Gandaki as a_ holy
river. (Skandha Purana, Asura Khanda).
4) Other information.
(1) He who drinks the water of the river is freed from
sins. (Adi Parva, Chapter 169, Verse 20).
(ii) The river is also known as Narayani, Salagrami,
Hiranvati and Hiranyavati. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter
9, Verse 25).
(iii) ‘ Sri Krsna Arjuna and Bhimasena once on their
way from Indraprastha to Girivraja crossed this river.
(Sabha Parva, Chapter 20, Verse 27).
(iv) The water in Gandaki is a mixture of the waters
of all holy rivers. Therefore, a bath in Gandaki is of
equal value as an ASvamedha yajfia and he who bathes
in it will attain Siryaloka. (Vana Parva, Chapter 84,
Verse 115) .
(v) Gandaki is one of the rivers which were responsible for the origin of Agni (fire). (Vana Parva, Chapter 84, Verse 113).
GANDHAKALI. Another name of Satyavati. (Adi
Parva, Chapter 95, Verse 48).
GANDHAMADANA I. A monkey, who had been helpful to Sri Rama, was the son of Kubera. (Valmiki
Ramayana, Bala Kanda, Canto 17, Verse 11). This
monkey usually stayed on Mount Gandhamadana.
During the Rama-Ravana war he led a contingent of
monkeys. (Vana Parva, Chapter 283, Verse 5) .
GANDHAMADANA II. A Raksasa King, who stays in
Kubera’s assembly : (Sabha Parva, Chapter 10).
GANDHAMADANA(M). A mountain famed in the
Puranas and lying to the east of the Himalayas. (Bhagavata, Paticama Skandha). The puranic importance of
the mountain may be summarised as follows :—
(1) Kagyapaprajapati did tapas at this mo
Parva, caste (hae Verse 10) . untain. (Adi
2) Ananta (Adigesa) had once done tapa
berva, Chapter 36, Verse 3). ~ a = = .
(3) Once Pandu went to the Satagriga mountain
along with his wives Kunti and Madri for doing tapas,
and on that occasion they visited Gandhamadana also.
(Adi Parva, Chapter 118, Verse 48).
(4) This mountain assumes the form of a divine person. attends Kubera’s assembly and worships him.
(Sabha Parva, Chapter 10, Verse 32).
(5) Sri Krsna in the company of Iarayanarsi spent
10,000 years on this mountain as an anchorite. (Vana
Parva, Chapter 12, Verse 11).
(6) Arjuna on his way to Mount Kailasa to do tapas
crossed the Gandhamadana mountain. (Vana Parva,
Chapter 37, Verse 41).
(7) Only those who possess power got by tapas will
GANDHARI
be able to climb this mountain. (Vana Parva, Chapter
(8) There is the Badari tree and under it there is an
asrama of Naranarayanas onthe heights of this mountain, and Yaksas stay there always. (Vana Parva,
Chapter 141, Verse 22).
(9) Once the Pandavas, with the aid of Ghatotkaca
mounted this mountain. (Vana Parva, Chapter
(10) It was here, at this mountain that Bhima killed
Maniman, a friend of Kubera. (Vana Parva, Chapter
(11) Kubera, who was driven out of Lanka stayed at
this mountain during the initial periods. (Vana Parva,
Chapter 275, Verse 33).
GANDHARA. A stretch of land of ancient Bharata. It
is believed that this land stretched from the shores of
river Sindhu to Kabul. Subala was a mighty ruler of
this country. His daughter Gandhari was the wife of
Dhrtarastra. (Sloka 11, Chapter 111, Adi Parva).
Agni Purana points out a relationship between the
Gandharas and the Dravidas. Descending in order from
Visnu were Candra—Budha—Purtravas—Ayus—Nahusa
—Yayati—Turvasu. In order from Turvasu were Varga—
Gobhanu—Traisani—Karandhama— Marutta— Dusyanta—Varitha—Gandira—Gandhara. From Gdandhara
arose the five different provincialists: Gandhdaras,
Keralas, Colas, Pandyas and Kolas. (Chapter 277;
Agni Purana). |
GANDHARI. Wife of Dhrtarastra.
1) Birth. There was a King called Subala in the family
of Turvasu, brother of Yadu. (For genealogy see under
Subala). Subala became the King of the land of Gandhara. This land extended from the river Sindhu to
Kabul. Gandhari was the daughter of Subala. (Chapter 111, Adi Parva).
2) Marriage. Gandhari became a devotee of Siva even
from her childhood. Siva became pleased with her an
blessed her saying that she would bear a hundred sons.
Bhisma came to know of this and he planned to get her
married to Dhrtarastra. One day he sent a messenge!
to Subala making a proposal. Subala knew that Dhrtarastra was born blind but considering his lineage an
the powerful alliance it would. make, consented to the
proposal of Bhisma. Sakuni, brother of Gandhari, then
by the order of his father took Gandhari to Hastinapura and Dhrtarastra accepted her as his wife. Gandhari obeying his father’s instructions without a demut
accepted her blind husband with such devotion that
she made herself blind. by tightly covering her eyes
with a silk shawl. (Chapter 110, Adi Parva).
3) Birth of Sons. Once Vyasa came to her exhausted
with hunger and thirst. Gandhari appeased his hunger
and thirst with tasty things to eat and drink. Vyas@
was immensely pleased and he also blessed her an
said she would get a hundred sons. Very soon she. became pregnant. But even after two years she did not
deliver, while Kunti, wife of Pandu, gave birth to 4
son. Grief-stricken, she hit hardly on her womb secretly
and then a great mass of flesh came out. Then Vyasa
appeared before her and advised her to cut the lump
of flesh into a hundred pieces and deposit one each 12
a jar of ghee. Vyasa himself cut it into pieces. Gandhari expressed a desire to have a girl also. Vyasa cut
it into hundred and one piecesand put them in hundred
a
ve .

GANDHARI
and one jars of ghee. In due time the jars broke and
a hundred sons and a daughter came out of the jars.
The daughter was named Dussala. For their name see
‘Kauravas’. Dhrtarastra got anotherson named Yuyutsu. (Chapters 115 and 116, Adi Parva).
4) Gandhari faints. When Safijaya reported about the
death of Karna at the battle both Dhrtarastra and
Gandhari fainted. (Sloka 55, Chapter 96, Karna
Parva).
5) Gandhdari starts to curse the Pandavas. When the battle
was over the sons of Gandhari and their followers were
killed. Dhrtarastra suggested that the Pandavas should
visit Gandhari and pay homage to her. The Pandavas,
therefore, went and stood before Gandhari very respectfully. Vengeance boiled in her heart and her body
shivered. Gandhari was about to curse the Pandavas
when Vyasa, intervened saying ‘“‘Gandhari! Don’t you
remember you said that victory would lie on the side
of the righteous in this war? Your words are not wasted.
The Pandavas won the battle because right was on
their side. So why should you get agitated ®”? Gandhari
became calm on hearing these words and she admitted
that the end of the Kuru dynasty came because of the
mistakes of Duryodhana, Sakuni, Karna and Duiéasana. She, thereafter, treated the Pandavas as her own
sons. (Chapter 14, Stri Parva, M.B.).
6) Dharmaputra’s foot-nails become blue. Following the
instructions of Dhrtarastra, the Pandavas, approached
and bowed before Gandhari. She covered her face
with a cloth and wept, tears rolling down her cheeks.
When Dharmaputra bent to touch her feet the latter
saw through the veil on her face the foot-nails of
Dharmaputra. A few drops of the lachrymal water fell
on the foot-nails of Dharmaputra making them turn
blue instantly. (Ghapter 15, Stri Parva).
7) Gdndhari curses Krsna. At the end of the battle the
aggrieved Gandhari went to Kuruksetra together with
Krsna and other relatives. Seeing mighty Kings on the
Kaurava side lying dead like huge trees lying truncated
Gandhari burst into tears. She knew that Sri Krsna
was at the root ofall this. Embittered she looked at
Krsna and cursed him. “Ho, Krsna, thirtysix years
from this day you will lose your sons, ministers, friends
and relatives. You will become a lone walker in the
forests and be killed by trickery.”
It was because of this curse that the Yadava tribe perished and Krsna was struck by the arrow of a hunter
which made him end his life on earth.
8) The end of Gandhari. After the great Kuruksetra battle
heart-broken Dhrtarastra and Gandhari accompanied
by Kunti, Vidura and Safijaya went to the forests to
spend the rest of their life there. Many people and the
Pandavas accompanied them up to the river Ganga and
there near the a4grama of Satayipa Dhrtardstra made
a hut and lived with Gandhari and Kunti.
The Pandavas felt the separation of their relatives
unbearable and lived in grief. After six years one day
Dharmaputra saw his mother, Kunti, in a dream. He
told his brothers about this and they all felt a desire
to go to the forest and see their mother. ‘The next day they
reached the shores of Ganga. Vyasa also joined them.
Gandhari and Kunti expressed a desire to Vyasa that
they would like to see the dead sons and relatives once
again. Vydsa then asked them to go and take a dip
in the river. When they rose up after a dip they saw
GANDHARVI
standing on the shores of the river the great warriors
Karna and Duryodhana and others. By the yogic power
of Vyasa even the blind Dhrtarastra could get the vision.
Very soon the vision faded and the Pandavas returned
to Hastinapura.
Two days after, fire broke out in the forest where
Dhrtarastra was staying. Dhrtarastra, Kunti and
Gandhari were burnt to death in that fire. (Chapter 32,
Agramavasika Parva).
9) After the death. Dharmaputra performed the obsequies of those who died in the wild fire (Asramavasika
Parva, Chapter 30) . Leaving the mortal bodies the souls of
Dhrtarastra and Gandhari entered Kuberaloka. (Sloka
14, Chapter 5, Svargarohana Parva).
10) Synonyms of Gandharit. The following words have
been used in the Mahabharata to denote Gandhari:
Gandhararajaduhita, Saubaleyi, Saubali, Subalaja,
Subalaputri and Subalatmaja.
GANDHARI II. Another Gandhari, wife of Ajamidha,
one of the great Kings of the Piru dynasty. (Sloka
37, Chapter 95, Adi Parva).
GANDHARVA I. Gandharvas are sons born to the
famous Kagyapaprajapati of his wife, Aristha (Agni
Purana, Chapter 19). Both belonged to the race of
the Devas.
GANDHARVA II. A King born in the dynasty of
Janamejaya. (Bhagayata, Navama Skandha).
GANDHARVA. A marriage settled by the boy and the
girl of their own accord. A love marriage. There are
six different kinds of marriage: Gandharva, Arsa,
Prajapatya, Raksasa, Asura and Paigaca. (See under
Vivaha).
GANDHARVANAGARA. Vyasa has compared munis
disappearing from sight to the fading out of Gandharva
nagara.
“After having thus spoken to the Kurus, and while
they were looking on, the band of sages disappeared
in a trice like the fading out of Gandharvanagara.”
(Adi Parva, Chapter 126, Verses 35 and 36).
What is this Gandharvanagara ? The following description occurs in Hindi Sabdasagara. ‘Owing to different
optical illusions (sight) of man, villages and cities may
appear to exist in the sky and also on seas, rivers, etc.
Wren during summer the air on the upper strata of
deserts, seas etc. gets heated, expanded, and rises up,
the light passing through it becomes multi-coloured and
gives reflections in the sky in the form of village parts or
cities. Also can be seen therein reflections of trees,
boats etc. One such reflection may be cast on earth
also. This isa mere optical illusion. This reflection
immediately fades out also. This unreal city which is
an optical illusion is Gandharvanagara.
GANDHARVASENA. Daughter of Dhanavahana (a
gandharva) who lived in Svayamprabhanagara on
Mount Kailasa. She was cured of leprosy by observing
somavaravrata. (Skandha Purana). ——
GANDHARVATIRTHA. An ancient place of pilgrimage on the banks of Sarasvati in North India. The
gandharva called Vibhavasu usually dances at this
place with his companions. Balabhadra Rama once
visited this holy place. (Salya Parva, Chapter 37,
Verse 9). ; 7
GANDHARVI. The first mother of horses. Kasyapaprajapati had by his wife Krodhavasa ten daughters: Mrei,
Mrgamanda, Hari, Bhadramata, Matangi, Sardali,

GANDHAVATI I
Sveta, Surabhi, Surasa and Kadra. Of the ten girls
Surabhi in due course of time became mother of two
daughters. Rohini and Gandharvi. From Rohini was
born the cattlebreed and horses were born from Gandharvi. (Valmiki Ramayana, Aranya Kanda, Canto 14).
GANDHAVATI I. The name Satyavati (Kali) was
assumed when sage Paraéara had swept away her
matsyagendha (fish smell). She got also another name
Yojanagandha. (Adi Parva, Chapter 63, Verse 80).
GANDHAVATI II. The city of Vayu (the wind God).
There are said to be nine cities on top of Mount Mahameru: (1) Manovati of Brahma at the centre, (2) Just
on the eastern side of it Amaravati of Indra, (3) Agni’s
Tejovati in the south-eastern corner, (4) Maya’s Sarnyamani in the south, 5) Nirrti’s Krsnafijana in thesouth-western corner, (6) Sraddhavati of Varuna on the
west, (7) Gandhavati of Vayu in the northwestern
corner, (8) Mahodaya of Kubera on the north, and, (9)
YaSovati of Igana in the north-eastern corner. (Devibhagavata, Astama Skandha).
GANDINI. A very beautiful princess of Kasi. Svaphalka married Gandini. (Dasama Skandha, Bhagavata ).
GANDIVA. The famous bow of Arjuna.
1) Make. It was Brahma who made the bow. ‘This
terrible bow which can punish the unjust and the
wicked has been made by’ Brahma’, (Udyoga Parva,
Chapter 98, Verse 21).
2) Specialities of Gandiva. This bow is enough to fight
one lakh of people at one and the same time. Both
Devas and men could be defeated with it. Chiselled
very smooth and shining with many colours it was a
very long bow. It was. worshipped by Devas, Danavas
and Gandharvas. (Virata Parva, Chapter 43). It
gained and also decreased in power as the situation
called for. (Udyoga Parva, Chapter 98, Verse 20).
3) History of Gandiva. Brahma, who made this bow
kept it with him during the first 1000 years. For the
next 1009 years Prajapati kept it with him. Next, Indra
got it from Prajapati and he used it for 3585 years.
After that Candra kept it for 500 years with him, and
then Varuna came in possession of it, After using it for
100 years Varuna gave it to Arjuna, who used it for 65
years.
4) Gandiva and Arjuna. Arjuna agreed to protect the
Khandava forest from rain, if Indra sent rain when
Agni began eating the forest. But, realising that Arjuna
possessed no weapons to effectively oppose Indra, Agni
requested Varuna to give the following to Arjuna, viz.,
the Gandiva bow and a quiver wherein the arrows
will never be exhausted, and the chariot marked with
the symbol of monkey and drawn by four white horses
—all kept by Candra. Varuna at once made a present
of the above to Arjuna. And, it was with the aid of this
Gandiva, that Arjuna defeated Indra at the time of
Khandavadaha. (See Khandavadaha). Arjuna had
taken . a secret vow to cut off-the head of anyone who
asked him to give the bow to some one else, (Karna
Chapter 69).
in -* ni Arjuna won many wars with the help of
. (See Arjuna).
5) Aruna oe upp ‘Gandiva. The great Kuruksetra war,
which shook Bharata, to its very foundation came to an
end. Dharmaputra was crowned a King. It was at this
juncture that the Yadava dynasty got itself anniGANGA
hilated and Sri Krsna entered mahasamadhi. Now the
Pandavas lost all interest in mundane’ life, and they
set out for the forest on their great journey after crowning Pariksit, the grandson of Arjuna as King. Their
great travel took them to. the shores of the Red Sea.
The Gandiva was still in Arjuna’s hands. On the shores
of the Red Sea Agni Deva appeared before the Pandavas and spoke to them “Well, Pandavas, I am Agni
Deva. Arjuna requires the Gandiva no more. I got it
from Varuna for Arjuna. Return it, therefore, to
Varuna.”
No sooner did he hear Agni Deva speak thus than did
Arjuna throw it into the depths of the sea and also the
quiver which never got exhausted of arrows with it.
Agni Deva disappeared, and the Pandavas continued
their journey. (Mahaprasthanika Parva, Chapter 1).
GANGA. The famous and holy river of India.
1) Origin and general information. Ganga had its origin
during the incarnation of Visnu as Vamana. When
Vamana measured the three worlds in three steps the
nails on his left feet were raised high. They caused a
pore on the upper side of the universe. Ganga, starting
vata) the finger of Visnu’s feet fell in heaven (Bhagavata).
The famous Visnupadi, the flowing water (tirtha) of
which washes away the sins of the people in the universe
is the very same Ganga under discussion. F or many
yugas (eras) this river confined itself to the heights of
the sky, otherwise called Visnupada. This particular -
spot is known as Dhruvamandala as it is here that
Dhruva, son of King Uttanapada, does, his penance.
The seven sages who constantly go round and round
the Dhruvamandala take their bath in this holy river.
The course of the river is thus: starting from Visnupada
it falls on devayana glittering with crores of vimanas
and therefrom it descends on Candramandala_ which it
submerges. It follows its course again from there dividing itself into four tributaries called Sita, . Caksus,
Alakananda and Bhadra and then falls in Brahmaloka
wherefrom it flows in all directions. Of the four tributaries Sita falls on the head of Mount Meru, flows down
to Gandhamadana, then circling through Bhadraéva
varsa falls into the eastern sea. Caksus falls on the
peaks of mount MaAlyavan, flows through Ketumala
and falls into the western sea. Alakananda falls on
mount Hemakita, flows through Bharata Varsa and falls
into the southern sea. And Bhadra falls on the head
of mount Srigavan, flows through Uttarakuru and falls
into the northern sea. Alakananda flows through
Bharata Varsa and is regarded as the most sacred of the
four tributaries.
anes wile et through heaven fell on the earth
alter thousands of years of its ori in. 5
Paficama, Skandha, Chapter 17). z i lea
2) Why Garig& became Siva’s consort. Mahavisnu was
once engaged at Vaikuntha in a pleasant talk with his
wives, Laksmi, Sarasvati and Ganga when Ganga cast
lustful eyes on Visnu, who, behind the backs of the
other two wives returned the lustful glances. Sarasvati
could not put up with that situation for a long time.
Therefore, she got up from her seat and beat Ganga.
Laksmi tried to restrain Sarasvati lest the quarrel should
become fiercer. Angered at this intervention Sarasvati
cursed that Laksmi be born on earth, Ganga got angry
that innocent Laksmi was thus cursed, and she in her

GANGA
turn cursed that Sarasvati be born asa river on earth.
Sarasvati did not take the curse lying down, but cursed
that Ganga also be born asa river on earth and take
upon herself the sins of the whole world. When all the
three wives of Visnu got themselves thus into trouble
he told them as follows : ‘‘Everything has happened as
it should have happened. Laksmi may go to the earth
and be born in the home of Dharmadhvaja and grow
up as his daughter, but not from the womb of his
women. There you will purify the three worlds after
which you will be born as the plant called tulasi, and
be married by an asura called Sankhacida, who will be
born as a part of me. And, after that you will be turned
into a sacred river called Padmavati, and leaving the
river on earth your divine form will return to Vaikuntha.” And, to Ganga Visnu said as follows : “You will
g0 to earth as a holy river to wash off the sins of people
there. A king called Bhagiratha ‘will be leading you to
earth, and you will, therefore, be known as Bhagirathi
also. And, you remain there on earth as the wife of the
ocean of King Santanu. Your divine form will return
to mount Kailasa as the consort of Siva.” As for Sarasvati, Visnu asked her to be born asa river on earth, ©
her divine form ultimately jaime to Satyaloka and
ing the consort of Brahma.
ee ne he that Laksmi became the consort of
Mahavisnu, Ganga of sy fae of Brahma.
i Bhagavata, Navama Skandha). \ ;
onl eae on earth due to the curse of ee Mahabhisak, an emperor of the Iksvaku ynasty, Went
to Satyaloka after he had attained heaven, to — a
Brahma. Ganga too happened to be aac ‘s the
devotional atmosphere at Satyaloka a casual pia:
removed Ganga’s clothes slightly from sage Re an
Mahabhisak then cast.a lustful glance at her which she
also returned. Brahma, who was observing this exchange
of love got angry and cursed that Mahabhisak be born
as a King on earth and Ganga as his wife. Ganga
rayed for redemption from the curse, and Brahma
told her that she would regain her old status after she
had delivered the Astavasus. As_ the Gopeeayence of
Brahma’s cure Mahabhisak was born as King antanu
in the solar dynasty on at eer married Ganga.
di Parva, Chapters 96 and Y/). :
5 Bhagiratha Broiihe Cott Ganga on as ae eee
of the solar dynasty had two wives called sumati (Vai-
: eS ‘bya). A son called Asamafijasa
darbhi) and Kes ini sarge yt foes san ean i
Keé ini, and ‘0.
nthe gf he drove out of the mee. oe oe
ho turned out to be an enemy of the people. The
oa HAG aoe proved to be a menace to the
60.000 sons of Sagara also Cost (aratiolecton
: roached Brahma tor p
hing mplemeigg yg ae the ence foe a sage
alled Kapila will destroy the 60,000 evi i 4d oe
Dating the above pectod 9 eo ee ai <i.
é Yajia, and his § heal th
vith he penrifvial horse. But, a en a
sea-shore the horse disappeared. he asked them
lained about it to their father, mane fates cranlleta
to look out for the pore in — een a eset, Shea
‘ii. i
poet back. Not tered Patala, where they ce
dug a noe and ¢ d the cme - 3
Kapila absor a who ha
fied. a pole near the sage. \". I .) The sons of
carried away the horse and tied it there).
GANGA
Sagara, believing that it was Kapila who had stolen
the horse were about to attack the sage when he opened
his eyes, and they were reduced to ashes in the fire of
Kapila’s eyes. 7
His sons having not returned even after a long time
Sagara asked his grandson Améuman to seek them out,
and after an extensive search he saw Kapila at Patala.
Amsuman pleased Kapila with laudatory phrases and
the latter returned to him the sacrificial horse. Kapila
also pronounced the blessing that the grandson of Armsuman would perform the purificatory rites of Sagara’s
sons by bringing down Ganga to éarth from heaven.
Ambsuman returned to the palace with the horse and
the aSvamedha was duly concluded.
From Amsuman was born Dilipa and from him Bhagiratha. On becoming.King, Bhagiratha handed over the
reins of government to his ministers and began efforts
to bring down Ganga to earth. He did tapas for thousand years on the slopes of the Himalayas when Ganga
asked him to please Siva first as he alone could face her
(Ganga) fall on the earth. Accordingly he pleased Siva
by his penance and Siva agreed to receive Ganga on
his head. With a terrific noise Ganga came down on
Siva’s head. The haughty Ganga wanted to carry down
Siva also to Patéla. Realising this ambition of her
Siva blocked her passage with the result that she wandered about in Siva’s matted hair for many years
without finding an outlet. Bhagiratha again did tapas
and pleased Siva who shook his matted head and made
fall some water therefrom on earth. The water fel] into
Bindusaras, and flowed in seven tributaries, the first
three, Hladini, Pavani and Nalini towards the east, the
next three, Sucaksus, Sita and Sindhu towards the west
and the seventh tributary followed Bhagiratha. In this
manner they progressed a great distance till they reached the asrama of the sage Jahnu, and the haughty
Ganga flooded the asrama. The sage got enraged at
this and drank up Ganga. But Bhagiratha pleased the
sage who then let out Ganga through his ears. Thenceforth Ganga came to be called Jahnavi also. Ganga
again followed Bhagiratha to Patala and made the sons
of Sagara attain salvation by purifying them with her
waters. (Valmiki Ramayana, Bala Kanda, Cantos 43
and 44 ; Brahmanda Purana, Chapter 97 ; Devi Purana,
Dvitiya Skandha; Drona Parva, Chapter 60 ; Anugdsana
Parva, Chapter 4 and Vana Parva, Chapter 109).
5) Ganga flowed into the sea. After the purificatory rites
of the sons of Sagara were over, Bhagiratha conducted
Ganga to the sea and with its waters the sea became
full,,( Vana Parva, Chapter 109, Verses 18-2 1).
6) Ganga set on the thighs of Pratipa. Ganga once fell
in love with Pratipa, father of Santanu, and set on his
right thigh when he (Pratipa) was doing penance on
the banks of the Ganga for a son. Pratipa did not agree
to Ganga’s proposal that he should marry her and told
her thus: “‘the right thigh is for the children and
daughters-in-law to sit on and the left thigh for the
wife; therefore, you be my son’s wife.”
Then Pratipa called his son Santanu and told him :
‘Sometime back a divine woman came to me and J
promised to wed her to you. Therefore, if any divine
woman approaches you for a son you must accept her,
and whatever she may do you must not object to
that...”. Not long after this Pratipa crowned Santany

GANGA
King and left for the forest, (Adi Parva, Chapter 97).
7) Astavasus and Ganga. While the wife of Dyau, one
of the Astavasus (eight Vasus) was roaming about in
the forest she saw Nandini (the divine cow) grazing
with her calf near the asrama of Vasistha, and she
desired to have the cow to be presented to her intimate
friend Jitavati, the daughter of King Usinara. She
informed her husband, Dyau about this desire of hers,
and Dyau told his relations about it. Next day the
Astavasus, in the absence of Vasistha at the asrama,
stole off Nandini and her calf. When Vasistha returned
to the asrama the cow and calf were missing, and he
divined the reason for it with his divine eyes. He cursed
that the Astavasus be born as men on earth, and when
they prayed for redemption from the curse Vasistha
told them that they would be born as men within one
year from that day, die at once and return to heaven
At the same time the sage said that Dyau alone, who
took the leading part in stealing the cow, would live on
earth for a longer period before he returned to heaven.
(The reputed Bhisma was this Dyau). The Astavasus
set out for the earth to be born as men and on their
way they met Ganga and told her about their curse
etc. Ganga also told them about her curse, and permitted them to be born in her womb. (Adi Parva, Chapter
8) Ganga became the wife of Santanu and the Astavasus were
born. Once while hunting on the banks of the Ganga
Santanu saw a beautiful maiden and they fell in love
with each other. She agreed to become his wife on the
condition that he would not oppose whatever she said.
Santanu agreed to it and married her. Soon after a
child was born to them and in the very presence of
Santanu, she threw the child into the Ganga. As per
previous condition Santanu kept mum at this. She
threw into the river the seven Astavasus, who were
born to her in succession. When she was about to
throw the last eighth of the Astavasus (Dyau) into
the river Santanu prevented her. She got angry at
this and disappeared with the child. (Adi Parva, Chapter 9B).
9) Santanu got back the son. Thirtytwo years after,
antanu went hunting again on the banks of the Ganga
where he saw the river obstructed in its course with
arrows by a handsome boy. Santanu did not recognise
that the boy was his son, who had been named Devavrata by Ganga. Devavrata disappeared after throwing
Santanu into an illusion by his magic power. All of a
sudden a doubt dawned in his mind whether the boy
was his own son, and he called out to Ganga to show
him the boy. Ganga appeared with her son with beautiful ornaments on him and spoke to Santanu thus:
‘This is Devavrata, the eighth son whom you entrusted
to me. He has mastered everything in archery from
Vasistha, and he is Dyau (the vasu) son of Angiras reborn. You may please take charge of him.” After
saying this she returned to heaven. (Adi Parva, Chap10) all and Subrahmanya. (See under Subrahmanya). ;
if ) a and Bhisma. (See under Bhisma) _
12) Greatness (divine nature) of Ganga. Mahabharata has
(Anug4sana Parva, Chapter 26), the following on the
sreatness of Ganga.— :
If, after death, the bones of the dead are deposited
GANGADVARA (M)
in Ganga the departed will attain heaven. Even if one
had sinned throughout his life he would attain Visnupada (heaven) if he worshipped Ganga. Bathing in the
Ganga is as beneficial as performing hundred yajiias.
As long as the bones of one remain in the waters of the
Ganga so long will he occupy an honourable seat in
heaven. He who has come in contact with its water will
shine forth as the sun devoid of all darkness. Places
which are not favoured by its waters will become barren
like night without the moon and trees without flowers.
Ganga water is more than enough to satisfy living
things in all the three worlds. He who does penance
standing on one leg for thousand years, and he who
gives up his body in the waters of the Ganga are on
a par with each other. God attaches more importance
to him who has fallen into the Ganga than to him, who
has performed tapas hanging by his head for a thousand
years. He whosmears the sand on the banks of the Ganga
on his body will get the lustre and glow of the devas,
and he, who smears the sand on his head will shine
forth like the Sun. All the sins of those on whom has
blown the air which had come in contact with Ganga
water will be-swept away. It should be known that
Ganga water can wash off all sins and purify mortals.
The Agni Purana (Chapter 110) has the following om
this subject.
Through whatever places the Ganga flows those places
become sublime and sacred. Ganga is the refuge of all
created beings who aspire for the final good. If Ganga
is worshipped daily it will save families both on the
mother’s and the father’s side from evil fate. To drin
Ganga water is better than the observance of a thousand lunar months. If one worships Ganga for a month
one will derive all the benefits of having performed al
the yajfias. Even the blind (the ignorant) who worship
Ganga, will attain equal status with the devas. Thé
sight of Ganga, contact with its waters and drinking
Ganga water will purify people in thousands and lakhs.
13) Garigé and Radhé. Ganga is Radha and Krsna liquidified into water. Once in goloka Radhadeviattemp"
ed to drink Ganga dry, who, terror-stricken, 1!
herself at the feet of Sri Krsna, and the wholé
world experienced difficulties due to non-availability
of water. Sri Krsna came to know of the situation 2?
made Ganga appear again on earth. (Devibhagavata,
Navama Skandha).
14) Symbols and vehicle of Ganga. Ganga, white in colout
rests on makaramatsya (a variety of fish) holding
her hands a pot and lotus flowers. (Agni Purana, GhaPter 50).
15) Synonyms of Ganga used in the Mahabharata. Akasa
ganea, Bhagirathasuta, § Bhagirathi, Sailarajasuta>
aivasuta, Devanadi, Haimavati, Jahnavi, Jahnukany#
Samudramahisi, Tripathaga, Tripathagamini.
16) Synonyms of Ganga.
Ganga visnupadi jahnutanaya suranimnaga /
Bhagirathi tripathaga Trisrota bhismasirapi // :
(Ganga, Visnupadi Jahnutanaya, Suranimnaga, Bhagirathi, Tripathaga, Trisrota, Bhismasi). (Amarakosa)-
GANGADATTA. See Bhisma.
GANGADVARA (M). The place or locality in the IndoGangetic plane where the river Ganges falls from the
Himalayas. This place is known as Haridvara also:
arHidvara has an epic importance.
oaeaenenee a = sees n es

GANGAHRADA (M) 279
(1) It was nere that King Pratipa did tapas. (Adi
Parva, Chapter 97, Verse 1).
(2) Sage Bharadvaja had stayed on the banks of the
Ganga, at Haridvara. (Adi Parva, Chapter 129, Verse
(3) Arjuna visited Haridvara during his tour or Pilgrimage. (Adi Parva, Chapter 213).
(4) This is the entrance to heaven. A bath here in the
Kotitirtha is as beneficial as the Pundarika Yajiia.
(Vana Parva, Chapter 34, Verse EA)
(5) Sage Agastya and his wife Lomapada once did
tapas here. (Vana Parva, Chapter oi, Verse LT).
(6) It was here that Siva appeared to Jayadratha, who
did tapas. (Vana Parva 72, Verse 24).
(7) Daksaprajapati had once performed tapas at
Kanakhala in Haridvara. (Salya Parva, Chapter 38,
Verse 27).
(8) Those who bathe at Kufavarta, Vilvaka, Nilaparvata and Kanakhala in Haridvara will attain
heaven. (Anusdsana Parva, Chapter 25, Verse 13).
(9) Bhisma did the funeral rites of his father at the
mouth of the Ganga. (Anusasana Parva, Chapter 34,
Verse I1).
(10) Dhrtarastra, Gandhari, Kunti and others died in
wild fire in the forest at Gangadvara, and Yudhisthira
conducted their funeral rites there itself. (Asramavasika
Parva, Chapter 39, Verse 14).
GANGAHRADA (M). A sacred place on the limits of
Kuruksetra, There is a_ terribly deep whirlpool of the
river Ganges here and that depth of the river is considered to be equivalent to three crores of sacred places.
(Vana Parva, Chapter 83, and AnuSasana_ Parva,
Chapter 25).
GANGAMAHADVARA (M). The particular spot on
the Himalayan peak wherefrom Ganga starts. Those
who go there die in Ice-falls. Only Nara. and Narayana
have crossed this place. (Udyoga Parva, Chapter 111,
Verse 16). ;
GANGASAGARASAMGAMAM. A sacred tirtha, a bath
in which is as beneficial as the performing of ten Aégvamedha yajfias. (Vana Parva, Chapter 35, Verse 4).
GANGASARASVATISAMGAMA (M). A sacred _tirtha
at Prayaga. Those who bathe in this tirtha will attain
heaven. (Vana Parva, Chapter 48, Verse 38).
GANGAYAMUNASAMGAMA (M). A sacred tirtha in
Prayaga. Bathing in the tirtha is as beneficial as
performing ten Asvamedha yajfias. (Vana _ Parva,
Chapter 85, Verse 4)..
GANGEYA I. See under Bhisma.
GANGEYA II. Subrahmanya (See under Subrahmanya).
GANGODBHEDA(M). A sacred place where fasting
for three nights will give the results of a Vajapeya
yajfia, and he who fasts here will become one with the
universal soul. (Wana Parva, Chapter 84, Verse 5).
GANITA A. Visvadeva, who used to calculate the course
of time and ages. (Anusgasana Parva, Chapter 91,
Verse 36).
GARBHA. A son of Bharata, the son of Dusyanta.
Suhotra, Suhota, Gaya, Garbha and Suketu were the
five sons of Bharata. (Agni Purana, Chapter 278).
GARBHA (M). The Puranas have described the views
of sages about the origin of 4tman in woman's womb.
Asitamahamuni stated the following about the birth of
GARBHA (M)
a child to King Janaka. (Brahmanda Purana. Chapter
48). Of the seven elements in the human body, viz.,
Rasa, Rakta (blood), Mamsa (flesh), Medas (fost) ,
Asthi (bone), Majja (marrow) and Sukla (seminal
fluid) the last one, Sukla, is the most valuable. Brahmabija (the seed for production) is contained in Sukla.
From the food we consume, blood and the seminal fluid
take their nutrition. The Sukla emitted during coitus
enters the womb of the woman propelled as it were by
Krostavayu. It takes only one night for the Sukla to
get inextricably mixed with blood in the womb. In that
mixing if the proportion of blood is higher, the child
born will be girl, and if the proportion of Sukla is higher, the offspring will be boy. If blood and Sukla are
mixed exactly in equal proportions the child will be
‘neutral’, neither girl nor boy. During the first month
of pregnancy the child will bein Hquid form. In the
second, it solidifies due to the mixing and interplay of
heat, cold, air, etc. During the third, holes for
eye, ear, etc. become ready and the vein system is
formed. In the fourth, head, hands and legs of the
child are formed, and it is during this period that the
prospective mother develops certain desires. If those
desires are not satisfied the child may be born with
physical deformities. During the fifth month the hips
and bones develop. The various organs get firmer and
stronger gradually and fingers appear during the sixth
month. It is during the sixth month that hairs on the
head and body appear and feelings and emotions originate in the mind. During the seventh month the ten
vayus (winds) on the basis of the nervous system are
released, and the child experiences glimpses of its previous existence, and Ability to feel pain also is there.
During the ninth mionth due to the force of the wind
which effectsactual delivery the child gets head down
in the womb, and during the tenth month it emerges
out of the womb. The child loses its memory about the
past because of its contact with the female organ
and external wind.
According to the Agni Purana the process is a little
different : 7
When Jiva (the soul) has entered the womb for rebirth
it remains in fluid form during the first month. During
the second month it solidifies; in the third month the
organs begin to develop, in the fourth month skin,
flesh and bones appear, in the fifth month hairs appear,
in the sixth month mind is produced, in the seventh
month the child will begin to feel pain. The body is
covered by a skin (Garbhacarma) and both hands are
held above the head in saluting position. If the child
is a female it lies in the left side of the mother’s womb,
if a male on the right and if ‘neutral’ in the middle of
it. From the seventh month the child begins to experience the taste of foods consumed by the mother. During
the eighth and ninth month there would be great
emotional excitements and upsurges. If the mother
suffered from chronic diseases the child also would inherit it. When pregnancy is matured thus, certain
winds lead the child down the womb and it gets out
through the female organ.
The child inherits its skin, flesh and heart from the
mother. The sex organ, marrow, excretion, sweet and
belly are inherited from the father. Head, the nervous

GARDABHI
system and gukla are the contributions of the 4tman.
(Agni Purana, Chapter 369).
GARDABHI. A son of Vigvamitra who wasa brahmavadi. (Chapter 4, Anugasana Parva, M.B.).
GARGA.
1) Genealogy. Descended from Visnu thus ;—BrahmaAtri-Candra-Budha-Puriravas-Ayus-Nahusa-Puru-Janamejaya-Pracinvan-Pravira-Namasyu-Vitabhaya -SunduBahuvidha -Samyati -Rahovadi - Raudraéva -MatinadraSanturodha -Dusyanta -Bharata-Suhotra -Suhota -GalaGarda-Suketu-Brhatksatra-Garga.
2) Birth. Brhaspationce approached, on the crest of
a wave of lust, Mamata, his brother’s wife who was
pregnant then. The child from the mother’s womb said
‘no’ to the move. But, Brhaspati cursed the child and
had his own way with Mamata. Thus two children
developed in her womb. Just after delivering the children the mother went away leaving the child by Brhaspati behind. The Devas took charge of the forsaken
child and named him Bharadvaja. Ultimately they
handed over the child (Bharadvaja) to king Bharata,
the famous son of Dusyanta. Children had already been
born to Bharata by his three wives, but as all of them
were found to be immoral the mothers themselves killed
them. It was at such a juncture that Bharata got Bharadvaja as adopted son. (Bharadvaja is known by
another namealso, Vitatha). From Vitatha was born
Manyu, from Manyu Brhatksetra. from Brhatksetra
Jaya and from Jaya Garga. The famous Rantideva
was the grandson of Nara, (the brother of Garga) and
son of Sarkrti. A son called Sani was born to Garga
after which he took to Sannydsa. (Bhagavata, Dagama
Skandha, Chapters 20 and 21).
3) Yadavaguru. In course of time Garga became preceptor of the Yadavas. Sri Krsna and Balabhadrarama who
had returned to Mathura from Ambadi were sent to
sage Sandipani in obedience to the advice of Garga.
(Bhagavata, Navama Skandha).
4) Garga and Mucukunda. Garga once visited Mucukunda,
son of Mandhata at his palace, and very much pleased
with the devoted reception accorded to him blessed
Mucukunda that one day he would see Sri Krsna in
person. It was according to this blessing that Mucukunda, while asleep once in a cave had a sight of Krsna.
(See under Mucukunda).
5) Amportance of Garga. A number of reputed sage
visited Sri Rama on his return to Ayodhya from the
forest. Amongst them were present Kausika, Yavakrita,
Raibhya, Kanva and Garga with their numerous disciples. (Uttara Ramayana).
6) Garga, a scholar in astronomy. There is a place called
Gargasrota on the banks of river Sarasvati. Garga did
tapas here and discovered some principles of astronomy
such as the path of planets, stars etc. He was also the
chief astronomer in the assembly of emperor Prthu.
Santi Parva, Chapter 59, Verse 111).
7) Other information. (1) While the great war was
raging Garga visited Kuruksetra and advised Drona to
end the war. (Drona Ee arva, Chapter 19).
(2) He advised King Visvavasu about eternity. (Santi
Parva, Chapter 318, Verse 49). .
(3) He spoke about the greatness of the world (Visvamahima) to Yudhisthira. (Anusasana Parva, Chapter 18).
280 GARHASTYA
GARGASROTA. See under Garga, Para 6.
GARGAYANI. See under Gurupararpara.
GARGI. A celebrated brahmavadini born in the family
of Garga. _
GARGYA I. (TRIJATA) GARGA. A famous sage.
1) Birth. He was one of the sons of Visvamitra. (Sloka
55, Chapter 4, Anusadsana Parva). (For genealogy see
under Visvamitra). He became gradually the priest of
Gudavas. He has written a famous book called Gargasmrti. Valmiki Ramayana mentions that Gargya is
known as Trijata also.
2) How he became prosperous. Sage Gargya had many
children. It was while he was staying in the forest with
his wife and children that Sri Rama came to that forest
for Vanavasa. The news of the exile of Sri Rama spread
like wild-fire and many brahmins flocked to the place
and Sri Rama gave them immense riches. Wife of Gargya heard the news only late and as soon as she heard
the same she called her husband from the fields where
he was working and taking away from him theimplements sent him post-haste to the place of Sri Rama.
Trijata as soon as he came to the presence of Rama told
him the purpose of his visit. Huge herds of cows were
then grazing on the banks of the Yamuna river. Sri
Rama told Gargya to take a stump and throw it with
all his strength. He did so and Sri Rama gave him all
the cows grazing up to the place where the stump fell.
It was a big lot and Gargya became prosperous from
that day onwards. (Sarga 32, Ayodhya Kanda, Valmiki
Ramayana).
3) Gargya’s precepis on Dharma. The following are the
precepts laid down by Gargya on Dharma. (1) Be
interested always on entertaining your guests, (2) Do not
eat meat, (3) Do not give injury to cows and brahmins,
(4) Perform yajfia with a pure mind and pure body.
(M.B. Anusasana Parva, Chapter 127),
4) Gargya’s place in the line of preceptors. Vyasa expounded the Vedas to Vedamitra, Saubhari and S2kalya.
Sakalya taught what he learnt to Vatsyayana, Maudgalya, Sali, Adigigira, Gokhali and Yatukarna. Yatukarna taught Nirukta to Baskala, Kraufica,Vaitala, and
Viraja. Baskala combined all the other branches _ together and made ‘Balakhilyagakha’ and taught it to
Balayini, Gargya and Samsara. The Rgvedacaryas
are those from Vyasa to Sarhsara. (Bhagavata, Dasama
Skandha). |
9) Indrasabhé and Gargya. Gargya was a shining member of the Indrasabha. (Sloka 18, Chapter 7, Sabha
Parva, M.B.). :
GARGYA II. See under Balaki.
GARGYA(M). A place cf habitation of ancient Bh2rata. ‘his place was captured by Sri Krsna. (Chapter
Il, Drona Parva).
GARHAPATI I. An agni (fire). (Sloka 6, Chapter 74;
Adi Parva).
GARHAPATI II. Oneof the seven fathers. The seven
fathers are: Vairajas, Agnisvattas, Garhapatis, Somapas, Ekagrngas, Caturvedas and Kalas. (Chapter 11,
Sabha Parva, M.B.).
GARHASTYA. The Grhasthagrama a stage in life when
you live with your family asa house-holder. The true
dharma of a householder is to live with what he gets by
doing the duty allotted to him. He should feed pilgrims
and should not appropriate to himself what belongs

GARISTHA
others unless and untilitis given to him. (Sloka 3,
Chapter 31, Adi Parva). ri!
GARISTHA. A sage worshipping Indra in his assembly. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 7, Verse 13).
GARUDA. King of birds. : ;
1) Genealogy. Descended from Visnu thus:— Brahma
—Marici—Kas yapa—Garuda. ;
2) Birth. Kagyapa, grandson of Brahma and son of
Marici married the eight daughters of Daksa called
Aditi, Diti, Danu, Kalika, Tamra, Krodhavasa, Manu
and Anala. And: to Tamra five daughters were born,
viz. Kraufici, Bhasti, Syeni, Dhrtarastri and Suki. Out
of the five women Kraufici became mother of the owls,
Bhasi delivered the bhasas (types of birds) and from
Syeni were born vultures and kites. Harhsa, Kalaharisa,
Koka.etc. are children of Dhrtarastri. From Suki was
born Nala and from Nala, Vinata; Aruna and Garuda
were the two sons born to Vinata. (Valmiki Ramayana, Aranyakanda, Canto 15).
There is a story in the Mahabharata about the birth of
Aruna and Garuda. Kasgyapa who was much pleased
with the service of Vinata and Kadri asked them to
select any boon they desired. Kadri chose to havea
thousand nagas as her children while Vinata chose to
have two sons more powerful and heroic than the thousand sons of Kadri. After granting them the boon
_ Kasyapa retreated into the forest.
After some time Kadré Jaid thousand eggs and Vinata
two eggs. Both of them kept their eggs in hot pots. In
the 500th year the eggs of Kadri hatched and thousand
serpents of various kinds emetged out of them. But
Vinata’s eggs did not hatch yet, and the sight of Kadri
playing with her children pained Vinata much. She,
therefore, broke open one of her eggs'in secret, and a
half-grown child stepped out of it. That child was
Aruna. Aruna got angry that Vinata forced open the
egg prematurely. He told her that as punishment thereof she would become a slave of Kadri. But, Aruna
granted her redemption from the curse thus: After another 500 years thé remaining egg of yours will hatch
and a son endowed with exceptional power and _ prowess will be born to you. He will liberate you from
slavery.”’ After telling his mother so much Aruna rose
to the sky where he became the charioteer of the Sun.
(Adi Parva, Chapter 16. See also Para 6 infra).
After 500 years the egg broke itself open and out came
Garuda with blazing effulgence, and he rose up in the
sky. His body glowed like the sun. The Devas who got
themselves dimmed by his effulgence asked Agnideva
the reason therefor. Agnideva told them about the
birth of Garuda and also that he was equally effulgent
as himself (Agnideva). Then all of them went to
Garuda and lavished on his head all possible blessings,
and Garuda, as requested by them, controlled his effulgence and returned to his mother. (Adi Parva, Chapter 23).
3) Slavery of Vinata: The churning of the Milk-ocean
was done before Garuda was born. Indra got a horse
named Uccaihgravas from the Ocean of Milk. Between
Kadri and Vinata a dispute arose as regards the colour
of the horse’s tail, Kadri saying that it was black while
Vinata asserted that it was white. They further agreed
to test the colour the next day, betting that she who
was proved to be wrong would become the slave of the
victor. As the naga sons of Kadri hung on to the tail
GARUDA
“of the horse the tail appeared to be black and Vinata
lost the bet and became Kadrii’s slave.
It was at this juncture that Garuda was born, and he
felt highly mortified to find his mother working. asa
slave of Kadri.
Kadrii and her naga sons once ordered Vinata to carry
them to the naga residence in the middle of the ocean,
called Ramaniyaka (Ramanam). Accordingly Vinata
carrying Kadri on her shoulders and Garuda carrying
Kadrii’s sons on his shoulders rose up in the sky. But,
Garuda did not relish the slavish work, and he, carrying with him the nagas, flew up to the sun’s orbit. The
naga children fainted due to the excessive heat. But, on
the request of Kadri Indra sent heavy rain and the
nagas regained consciousness. By then they had reached
Ramaniyaka island.
4) Attempt at freeing Vinata from thraldom. Garuda, extremely pained at the pitiable plight of his mother,.one
day asked Kadri what price’ she and her children
demanded for freeing Vinata from slavery, and Kadri
demanded Amrta from Devaloka as the price.
Garuda decided to get it and informed his mother
about his decision to fly to Devaloka. But, what about
food till he reached Devaloka? Vinata solved the problem by advising Garuda to eat the nisadas he will
meet on his way to Devaloka at the island called
Nisadalaya, at the same time specially forbidding him
from eating on any account, brahmins who might be
there, at Nisadalaya. How to distinguish brahmins
from others, queried Garuda, and his mother replied .
by pointing out that the brahmin will burn the throat
of him who tries to eat him, like fire. Then Vinata
blessed her son that his wings would be protected by
Vayu, the lower half of his body by sun and moon, the
rest of the body by the Vasus and the head by Agni.
She also promised to wait there till her son returned.
5) Garuda to Devaloka. After saluting his mother
Garuda set out on his quest for Amrta. All the fourteen
worlds shook at the lashing of his wings. He reached’
Nisadalaya, where while consuming whole lots of Nisadas a brahmin and his wife also happened to get into
his throat. Garuda felt their presence immediately in
his throat and requested them to get out of his mouth.
Accordingly they got out and also blessed Garuda, who
continued on his journey.
Next Garuda reached the forest whete his father
Kagyapa was engaged in tapas. He told him about his
mission and requested him for something to eat.
Kagsyapa replied thus:— “You see a pool wherein an
elephant and a tortoise are living for long as enemies.
Long ago two brothers Vibhavasu and Supratika quarrelled over their paternal wealth and at the height of
it Vibhavasu cursed Supratika to become an elephant
when Supratika pronounced the counter curse that
Vibhavasu should turn out to be a tortoise. You, my
son Garuda may eat that elephant and tortoise. May
your journey for Amrta be crowned with success.
Now, Garuda after saluting his father, flew up in the
sky carrying in his beak the elephant and the tortoise
from the pool. As trees were falling uprooted due to
the terrific vibrations caused by the lashing of his wings
Garuda did not find a convenient place to sit down to
eat his food. While continuing the journey Garuda saw’
a big tree, its branches spread out in a circumference

GARUDA 282
of a hundred yojanas. But, as soon as Garuda set foot on
a branch of the treeit (branch) crumbled down. On
that broken branch were the sages called Balakhilyas
doing tapas hanging their heads down. Fearing that the
sages might fall down Garuda continued his flight
holding in his beak the torn branch of the tree. But he
could not find a safe place to deposit the branch with
the sages. So hecame again to Mount Gandhamadana
and saw Kagyapa, who apologised to the Balakhilyas
on behalf of his son and also explained to them about
his mission. ‘The Balakhilyas were pleased and they left
the place for the Himalayas. As advised by Kagyapa
Garuda deposited the branch of the tree on an uninhabited mountain peak. Garuda ate the elephant and
the tortoise there, and therefrom flew to Devaloka (Adi
Parva, Chapter 29, 30).
6) Balakhilyas cursed Indra. Even before the arrival of
Garuda ill omens began appearing in Devaloka. Indra
asked Brhaspati for explanation about the ill omens.
Brhaspati with his divine eyes saw Garuda approaching Devaloka for Amrta, and he told Indra about
Garuda born out of the powers of the tapas of Ka‘yapa
and the Balakhilyas. He also told that such a fate as
the present one befell Indra due to a curse of the
Balakhilyas. Indra and the other Devas stood guard
over the pot of Amrta ready to repel all possible
_attacks.
There was a reason for Garuda’s birth from the powers
of the tapas of the Balakhilyas, and also for Indra to
be put into the present predicament due to the curse
of the Balakhilyas. Kagyapaprajapati, a long time ago,
began a terrific yajfia for a son, and Indra and the
Balakhilyas who numbered more than 60,000 were
deputed by Kagyapa to collect firewood for the yajfia.
The Balakhilyas were only of the size of a thumb, and
Indra who very easily collected all the firewood needed
for the yajfia laughed at the tiny Balakhilyas who were
carrying small twigs etc. for firewood. Angered at the
insult the Balakhilyas. removed themselves to another
place nearby and began a yajfia directed against Indra
who alarmed at it sought the help of Kasyapa who then
held peace talks with the Balakhilyas. They transferred
their yagaSakti (yAjfiic’ powers) also to Kagyapa and
agreed to be satisfied with the condition that as the
result of Kasyapa’s yajfia a son should be born to him,
who (the son) would defeat Indra. Thus, for the time
being Indra escaped from the wrath of the Balakhilyas.
After the yajfia was over Vinata came to Kasyapa and
he blessed her with a son wishing that he should become exceptionally strong and powerful, and that was
Garuda. (Adi Parva, Chapter 30). '
7) Amrtakalasapaharanam. ( The pot of nectar carried
away). Garuda approached the pot of nectar, and
Vigvakarma who attacked him first was felled to the
ground. The dust storm raised by the waving of
Glaruda’s wings blinded everybody. The Devas and
Indra, nay, even the sun and the Moon lined up
against Garuda, but he defeated them all, and entered
the particular place where the pot of nectar was kept:
Two terrific wheels were rotating round the pot and
they would cut into mince-meat anybody who tried to
lay hands on the pot and a machine circled the wheels.
Below the wheels were two monstrous serpents with
glowing eyes and protruding tongues like flashes of
fire, and the serpents never closed their eyes. The very
GARUDA
look with those eyes was enough to poison anyone to
death. Garuda blinded those eyes by raising a torrent
of dust, pierced them in the middle with his beak and
and through the hole, his body reduced to such a tiny
shape, went nearer to the pot. He destroyed the
wheels and the machine, and carrying the pot of nectar
in his beaks rose to the sky shielding the light of the
sun by his outspread wings. Mahavisnu, who became so
much pleased with the tremendous achievements of
Garuda asked him to choose any boon. Garuda
requested Visnu that he should be made his (Visnu’s)
vehicle and rendered immortal without his tasting
amrta. Both the boons were granted.
8) Garuda and Indra became friends. Indra hit with the
Vajra (his special weapon) the wings of Garuda who
was returning from Visnu. It did not wound his body,
but a feather of his fell in the atmosphere. Everybody
who saw the feather acclaimed Garuda as Suparna (he
with the good wings). Indra was wonder-struck, an
he approached Garuda and requested that they should
be friends in future and the pot of nectar be returned.
Garuda replied that the nectar would be returned if
he was granted the power to make nagas his food, an
Indra blessed him that he would. live by consuming
nagas. And then Garuda told Indra thus : “I took th!s
pot of amrta not for my own use. The nagas cheate
my mother and made her a slave, and she will be free
if only this pot of nectar is given to them (nagas) . You
may snatch off the pot from the nagas; I shall not
object to it.”
Indra and Garuda thus became. friends and the former
followed Garuda on his way back home.
9) Garuda handed over the pot of amria to the nagas and
Indra cheated them of it. Garuda handed over the pot °
nectar to the nagas, who on the suggestion of the
former placed the pot on darbha grass spread on the
ground, Also, in accordance with Garuda’s advice that
they should take a purificatory bath before tasting the
amrta the nagas went out to have the bath, and 12
their absence Indra carried off the pot of nectar back
to Devaloka. Failing to find the pot of nectar on ‘their
return from bath the aggrieved nagas licked the darbha
on which the pot was placed with the result that their
tongues were cloven into two. It was from that ‘day
onwards that the nagas became double-tongued
(dvijihvas). And, thus Garuda redeemed his mother
from slavery. (Adi Parva, Chapter 34).
10) The fig tree which Garuda broke with his beaks and
Lanka. It has been noted above that Garuda on his
way to Devaloka restedon a fig tree. That fig 15
called Subhadra in Valmiki Ramayana.
Ravana saw the fig tree around which sages were sitting
and which bore marks. made by Garuda sitting thereon.
(Valmiki Ramayana, Aranyakanda, Canto 35, Verse
There is some connection between this tree and Lanka.
Garuda had, as directed by Kasyapa, deposited in. the
sea the branch of the tree on which the Balakhilyas
hung in tapas and with which Garuda flew hither an
thither fearing about the safety of the Balakhilyas. At
the spot inthe sea where the branch was deposite
sprang up an island like the peak of a mountain. It
was this island which in after years became reputed 4S
Lanka. (Kathasaritsagara, Kathamukhalambaka,
Taranga 4).
— Se 8 Ee

GARUDA 283
{1) Garuda, Saubhari and Kaliya. Garuda had always
entertained great hatred against the nagas, and now
' Indra’s permission having been obtained by him to eat
the nagas for food, Garuda decided to launch a regular
naga-hunting expedition. He began eating the nagas
one by one. Alarmed at this the nagas planned for their
security in a conclave, and approached Garuda with
the proposal that one naga would go to him daily
to serve as his food instead of his indiscriminate killing
of them. Garuda accepted their proposal. After some
time the nagas proposed to Garuda that they would
conduct a sarpa-bali (sacrifice of serpents) and submit
the food got out of the bali to him so that his nagahunting might be stopped for ever. Garuda agreed to
this also. According to the new agreement daily one
naga began going to Garuda with the food got
out of the bali.
But K4liya alone did not agree to the programme as he
did not recognise Garuda to be superior to him in
power. And, Garuda, who wanted to teach the haughty
Kaliya a lesson challenged him to fight, and the fight
took place in river Kalindi, Kaliya’s abode. During
the fight the lashing of Garuda’s wings raised the
water in Kalindi up in the sky and it drenched the
sage Saubhari all over, who was performing tapas on
the banks of Kalindi. Saubhari cursed that the body
of Garuda be shattered into a thousand pieces if ever
he entered that area in future, and thenceforth the
place became a prohibited area for Garuda. During
after years Kaliya was put up at this place.
A kadamba tree alone outlived the eflect of the poison
of Kaliya. The tree could outlive the deadly poison.
because Garuda had rested onit on his way back from
Devaloka with amrta. (Bhagavata dagama Skandha).
12) Relationship of Garuda with the kings of the solar
dynasty. King Sagara of the solar dynasty was married
to Sumati, the elder sister of Garuda, and there is a
story behind the marriage. |
There was once a king called Subahu in the solar
dynasty. He married one Yadavi, but for many years
they had no issues. Yadavi had become old by the
time she conceived a child as the result of many
yajiias etc. But, Subahu’s other wives, viz. co-wives
of Yadavi, did not like the prospects of Yadavi
becoming a mother. They administered poison to, her
with the result that Yadavi did not deliver in time,
but continued as a pregnant woman for seven years.
The sad couple, for their mental relief went into the
forest and lived as disciples of a sage called Aurva. But
Subahu died rather soon and Ya€adavi prepared
herself to follow him in the funeral pyre. But, the
sage Aurva prevented her from self-immolation speaking to her thus : “You shall not act rashly. The child
in your womb will become a famous emperor and rule
over the whole world.” }
Yadavi yielded to the sage’s advice and did not court
death, and soon afterwards she delivered a son, and he
was named Sagara, which meant ‘‘he who was affected
by poison even while he was in the mother’s womb. It
was this child who, in later years, became reputed as
emperor Sagara,
Sagara married the elder sister of Garuda when he was
living asa boy in Aurva’s asrama, and there is a story
behind the marriage, a story which related to the time
when Garuda was not born.
GARUDA
Vinata, mother of Garuda, while she was working as the
slave of Kadri, one day went into the woods to collect
firewood for her mistress. In the terrible rain. and
storm that ensued, Vinata lost her track and wandered
in the forest for many days before she could take shelter
in the asrama ofa Sannyasin. The pious man felt sorry
for poor Vinata and blessed her that a son, who would
be able to win freedom for her would be born to her.
(Garuda was the son thus born to her.
Before the birth of Garuda when Kagyapa and Vinata
were living together with their daughter Sumati the boy
sage Upamanyu, son of Sutapas, went to them and told
Kagyapa thus: ‘‘While touring round the earth I worshipped the pitrs at Gaya and I have been told that they
(Pitrs) would get redemption only in case I married and
became a father. I, therefore, request you to please give
your daughter Sumatito me as wife. Vinata did not
relish this proposal. Upamanyu got angry at the rejection of his offer and cursed Vinata saying that if
Sumati was given in marriage to any other brahmin boy
she (Vinata) would die with her head broken into
pieces.
It was during this period when Vinata was ina fix
about the marriage of Sumati that Garuda was born to
her. He also thought over the problem and argued like
this: the curse is only against a brahmin boy marrying
my sister Sumati; why not Sumati be given in marriage
to a Ksatriya; but where to find an eligible Ksatriya
boy? At this stage Vinata asked him to go and meet the
Sannyasin, who had promised her an illustrious son, in
the forest and this Sannyasin directed Garuda to Aurva,
for advice and guidance. When Garuda met Aurva and
sought his advice about the marriage of his sister, the
sage thought that the context offered a very good bride
to Sagara. And, according to Aurva’s advice Sumati
was married to Sagara, and thus Garuda became related to the Kings of the Solar dynasty. (Brahmanda
Purana, Chapters 16, 17 and 18). The Sixty thousand
sons born to Sagara by Sumati were reduced to ashes in
the fire which emanated from the eyes of Kapila. (See
Kapila), When Armguman, the grandson of Sagara was
going around the world to find out these 60,000 sons he
met Garuda on the'way, and it was he who advised that
the waters of Ganga-should be brought down on earth
so that the dead sons of Sagara might get spiritual
redemption. (Valmiki Ramayana, Balakanda, Chapter 41).
13) Garuda’s conceit laid low. A very beautiful daughter,
Gunakeéi, was born to Matali, the charioteer of Indra.
In the course of his search fora suitable husband for
Gunakeégi he came to Patalaloka in the company of
Narada, and there Matali selected a noble naga called
Sumukha as his prospective son-in-law. But a month
before Garuda had eaten Sumukha’s father Cikara, and
he had also given notice to Sumukha that within a
month’s trme he too would be eaten.
Narada and Matali met Sumukha at the abode of his
grandfather Aryaka, who was very glad to marry his
grandson to Matali’s daughter. But, the threat of
Garuda that he would eat Sumukha before the month
was over stared them all cruelly in their face. So, they
appealed to Indra for a solution to the problem, in the
presence of Mahavisnu. Indra gave an extension of life
to Sumukha and he wedded Gunakegi. The marriage
enraged Garuda so much that he went to Indra’s

GARUDA - 284
assembly and insulted both Indra'and Visnu at which
Visnu extended his right hand to Garuda asking him
whether he could hold the hand. And, when Garuda
placed Visnu’s hand on his head he felt as if the whole
weight of the three worlds was put on the head. Garuda
admitted his defeat. Mahavisnu’ thus laid low the
conceit of Garuda, (Udyoga Parva, Chapter 105).
14) Garuda helped Gélava. Galava was a disciple of
Visvamitra. Once. Dharmadeva, to test Vig vamitra, went
to his A4grama disguised as Vasistha and asked for food.
As there was no ready-made food at the aérama just
then, Visvamitra naturally took some time to cook new
food, and he went with it, steaming hot, in a plate to
the guest. Saying that he would return within minutes
and receive the food, the guest ( Dharmadeva) left the
place, and Visvamitra stood. there with the plate in
hand awaiting the return of: the guest. He had to
remain standing thus for one hundred years, and during
_ this whole period it was Galava who stood there looking
after his guru. When hundred years were completed
Dharmadeva returned to Vigvamitra and accepted his
hospitality, and then only could the latter take some
rest.
Vis vamitra blessed Galava, and. now it was time for him
to leave the A4srama. Though Visvamitra told that no
gurudaksina (tuition fee) was required Galava persisted in asking him what fee or present he wanted.
Visvamitra lost his temper and told Galava that if he
was so very particular about gurudaksina, eight hundred horses all having the colour of moon, and one ear
black in colour might be given as daksinad. Galava
stood there aghast at the above pronouncement of his
preceptor, when Garuda happened to go over there and
hear from Galava about his sad plight. Money was required to purchase horses, but Galava was penniless.
At any rate Garuda with G4lava on his back flew eastwards and reached Rsabhaparvata and they rested on
a peak of it. There the Brahma woman, Sandili was
engaged in tapas and she served them with food, After
food Garuda spoke disparagingly about Sandili. Garuda
and Galava slept that night on the floor, but when they
woke up in the morning lo! Garuda was completely
shed of his feathers. Garuda stood before Sandili, his
head bent in anguish. Sandili blessed Garuda, who
then got back his old feathers. :
Continuing their journey Garuda and Galava reached
the palace of the very rich King, Yayati. Garuda introduced Galava to Yayati, who found it difficult to get
800 horses for Galava. But, Yayati gave his daughter
Madhavi to Galava saying that he might give her to
any King and get money. enough to purchase 800
horses. After thus showing the means to get money to
Galava, Garuda returned home,
talava gave Madhavi first to King -Haryagva of
Srodbya” then to King Divodasa of Kasi. asic next to
King Uéginara of Bhoja and got fram them two hundred
horses each, and he ‘submitted the horses and also
Madhavi in lieu of the balance of two hundred horses
to Vigvamitra as daksina. A son called Astaka was born
to Visvamitra by Madhavi, who had been granted a
boon that she would not Jose her youth and beauty even
though she lived with any number of people. (UdyogaParva Chapter 108). |
15) Fight between Garuda and Airavata. Sri Krsna once
GARUDA
went to Devaloka and plucked the Parijata flower from
the garden Nandana, and this led to a fight between
Indra and Krsna in which Garuda also joined. Garuda
directed his main attention on Airavata which, at his
blows, fainied and fell down. (Harivaméa, Chapter 73).
16) Defeated by Vasuki. To churn the Milk-Qcean the
Devas and Asuras decided to use Mount Mandara as
the shaft and Vasuki as the rope to rotate the shaft.
The attempts of the Devas, the Asuras and the Bhitaganas of Siva failed to uproot and bring with them the
mountain, when Garuda, at the instance of Visnu
brought the mountain as easily as a kite carries a frog.
Again, when others failed to bring Vasuki from nagaloka Garuda went and asked the naga chief to follow
him to the ocean of Milk. Vasuki replied that if his
presence was so indispensable he must be carried over
there. Then Garuda caught the middle part of Vasuki
in his beak and rose in the air. But, even though
Garuda rose beyond the horizon, when he looked down
half of Vasuki still remained on the ground. Garuda
then tried to fold Vasuki into two and carry it, but,
again to no purpose. Disappointed and humiliated
Garuda returned without Vasuki. Afterwards Vasuki
was brought to the ocean of Milk by Siva’s hand stretched down into Patala. (Kamba Ramayana, Yuddha
Kanda).
17) Bhima went in search of the Saugandhika flower on
account of Garuda. While, in the course of their exile in
the forest, the Pandavas were put up at the 4grama oO
maharsi Arstisena, Garuda picked up from the depths
of the sea one day a naga called Rddhiman, and due to
the vibration caused by the lashing of Garuda’s wings
Kalhara flowers from the garden of Kubera were flown
to the feet of Paficali. She wore the fragrant flowers in
her hair saying that if she were to have good flowers,
wind had to bring them. Since there was a mild and
veiled insinuation in that statement that Bhima was
inferior to the wind the former did not appreciate that
comment by Paficali. And so he rushed to Mount
Gandhamadana to collect Kalhara flowers. (Vana
Parva, Chapter 106). :
18) Garuda. saved Uparicaravasu. Once a controversy
started between the Devas and the brahmins, the former
advocating the use of goat’s flesh in performing yajnas
while the brahmins contended that grains were sufficient
for the purpose. Uparicaravasu, who arbitrated in the
debate spoke in favour of the Devas, which the brahmins
did not like, and they cursed Vasu to fall from the sky
into the pits of the earth. This curse was countere
by the Devas blessing. him that as long as Uparicaravasu remained on earth he would not feel hungry an
that he would regain his old form due to the blessings
of Mahavisnu. Vasu prayed to Visnu, who sent Garuda
to the*former, and Garuda carried Vasu to the sky ©O?
his wings. Thus, Vasu became again Uparicaravasu-
(Santi Parva, Chapter 338). | |
19) Other information about Garuda. (1) A danava once
stole away the crown of Sri Krsna who was on a visit
to. Mount Gomanta. Garuda retrieved it from the
danava and returned it to Krsna. (Bhagavata, Das‘ama
Skandha).
(2) The monkeys who searched for Sita visited the
house of Garuda also. ( Valmiki Ramayana, Kiskindha
Kanda, Canto 40, Verse 39).

GARUDAPURANA
(3) Garuda had married the four daughters of
Daksaprajapati. (Bhagavata, 6th Skandha).
(4) He hada son named Kapota. (Udyoga Parva,
Chapter 101),
(5) During the Rama-Ravana war Laksmana, Sugriva
and all the monkeys swooned hit by the nagastra of
Indrajit. Sri Rama then thought of Garuda, who at
once came down on earth and bit away the nagapasa.
(Kamba Ramayana Yuddhakanda).
(6) Garuda_was present at the birth-day celebrations
of Arjuna. (Adi Parva, Chapter 122, Verse 50).
(7) At the birth of Subrahmanya Garuda submitted
his own son, Mayiira, as a present. (Anusasana Parva,
Chapter 86, Verse 21).
20) Synonyms for Garuda.
Garutman Garudas Tarksyo Vainateyah Khagesvarah /
Nagantako Visnurathah Suparnah Pannagasanah: //
(Garutman, Garuda, Tarksya, Vainateya, Khagegvara,
Nagantaka, Visnuratha, Suparna, Pannagdasana.
(Amarakoga).
21) Names used in the Mahabharata to represent Garuda.
Arunanuja, Bhujagari, Garutman, Kéagyapeya,
Khagarat, Paksiraja, Patagapati, Patagesvara, Suparna,
Tarksya, ‘Vainateya, Vinatanandavardhana, Vinatasinu, Vinatasuta, Vinatatmaja. (For story regarding how
Garuda stopped eating nagas see under Jimiitavahana).
GARUDAPURANA. One of the eighteen Mahapuranas.
‘Fhis is believed to be a narration to Garuda by
Mahavisnu. There are eight thousand $lokas in it.
There is an opinion that only the Tarksyakalpa is of
Visnu. The theme of the Purana is the birth of Garuda
from Brahmanda. If this Purana is given as a gift it
should be given along with the image of a swan in
gold. (Chapter 272, Agni Purana).
GARUDAVYUHA. A system of arranging soldiers on
the battlefield in the shape of Garuda.
GATITALI. A warrior of Skandadeva, (Salya Parva,
Chapter 45, Verse 67). |
GATRA. A maharsi, the son of Vasistha, who had by
Urjja seven Rsis called Rajas, Gatra, Urdhvabahu.
Savana, Alaghu, Sukra and Sutapas. (Agni Purana,
Chapter 20).
GAURA (M). A mountain in the Kuga island. (Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 12, Verse 4). |
GAURAMUKHA. A son of sage Samika. It was
Samika’s son Srngi, who cursed Pariksit to death by
snake-bite. (See Pariksit). Srngi cursed that Pariksit,
who had thrown a dead snake on the neck of his father
while in meditation, would be bitten to death by snake
within seven days. Sriigi sent word about the curse
through his disciple Gauramukha to Pariksit. (Adi
Parva, Chapter 42, Verses 14-22).
GAURAPRABHA. San born to Suka (Vydsa’s son)
by his wife Pivari. Suka had four sons called Kysna,
Gauraprabha, Bhiri and Devasruta and a daughter
Kirti. (Devibhagavata, Prathama Skandha).
GAURAPRSTHA, A royal sage who worships Yama at
his sabha (assembly). (Sabha Parva, Chapter 8, Verse
GAURASIRAS. A sage of ancient days, who worshipped
Indra in his assembly. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 7, Verse
GAURAVAHANA. A King, who was present at the
GAUTAMA I
rajasuya sacrifice of Yudhisthira. (Sabha Parva, Chapter
34, Verse 12).
GAURI I. See Parvati.
GAURI II. A female attendant (Devi)
_ (Vana Parva, Chapter 231, Verse 48).
GAURITII. Wife of Varuna. (Udyoga Parva, Chapter
117, Verse 9).
GAURIIV. An Indian river. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter
9, Verse*25 ).
GAURISA. A royal Sage and .a member of Yama’s
assembly. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 8, Verse 18).
GAURISIKHARA (M). <A ‘sacred place on_ the
Himalayas. A bath in Sthanakunda here brings the
same benefits as are derived from the performance of
Vajapeya and Asvamedha sacrifices. (Vana Parva,
Chapter 84, Verse 151).
GAUTAMA |
1) General Information. The Puranas record about a
sage called Gautama though nothing is known about
his genealogy. Yet the genealogy of his wife Ahalya is
available. See under ‘Ahalya’.
2) Sons of Gautama. The eldest son of Gautama was
Satananda. (Sloka 2, Sarga, 51, Bala Kanda, Valmiki
Ramayana). Gautama had two sons. Saradvan and
Cirakari. Saradvan was born with arrows-in his hand.
(Sloka 2, Chapter 130, Adi Parva). Cirakari used to
ponder over everything before he acted and so all his
actions were delayed. He got his name Cirakari.
(Chapter 266, Sabha Parva). Saradvan was known as
Gautama also. That was why Krpa and Krpi, children
of Saradvan were known as Gautama and Gautami.
(Sloka 2, Chapter 129, Adi Parva). Besides these,
Gautama had a daughter of unknown name. There is
a reference to this girl in gloka 11 of Chapter 56 of
Agvamedha Parva. It is reported that this daughter
wept when Utanga a disciple of Gautama came to the
asrama with a huge load of firewood on his head. In
Chapter 4, of Vamana Purana there is a reference to a
few other daughters of Gautama, namely, Jaya, Jayanti
and Aparaji.
3) An attempt-to kill Ahalyé. Once when Gautama was
away from the 4srama Indra came there as a guest.
Considering it as her duty to treat a guest of her
husband properly during his absence Ahalya received
him well and gave him fruit to ease his tiredness.
Indra went back. Gautama on knowing this on his
return suspected the chastity of his wife and calling
his son Cirakari ta his side asked him to cut off her
head. After giving the order Gautama went to the
forests. ,
Cirakari had a peculiar nature. He will ponder over
things deeply before taking any action. He knew he must
abey the orders of his father but killing one’s own
mother was a greater sin than disobeying a father.
Weighing the merits and demerits of the act Cirakari
sat thinking without doing anything. ._ ;
Gautama when he reached the forest thought een
about Ahalya and her crime. After all what has she
done ? A guest came to the 4grama and as duty-bound
she welcomed: him. It was indeeda great sin to have
killed her by her own son. Immersed in thoughts of
this kind, sad and repentant, Gautama returned to the
agrama to find Cirakari sitting silently deeply engrossed in thoughts. On seeing his father Cirakari was
perplexed and he explained to his father about the sood
of Parvati.

GAUTAMA 286
and bad effects of his order. Gautama was pleased at
this and he blessed him with long life.
4) How the disciple Utatiga was tested. Utanga was the
best of the disciples of Gautama. So even when all
the other disciples were sent away Gautama asked
Utariga to continue as a disciple which Utanga did
most willingly. The disciple became old with grey
hairs. Then taking pity on him Gautama received
gurudaksina from Utanga and sent him away with
blessings. (For details see under ‘Utanga’).
5) Curse of Ahalya. Indra became a lover of Ahalya
and slept with her. Gautama coming to know of that
cursed both Indra and Ahalya. (For details see under
Ahalya).
6) Other details regarding Gautama.
(i) Kalmasapada, King of Ayodhya. lived for twelve
years as a demon following a curse of Vasistha. At
last he took refuge in Gautama and following his
advice went to Gokarna and doing penance there to
propitiate Siva attained moksa. (Sivaratri Mahatmya).
(11) It was sage Nodhas, alias Gautama, who composed
Sukta 58, Mandala one of Rgveda.
(iii) Laksmana, brother of Sri Rama, constructed a
palace called Vaijayanta near the 4srama of Gautama.
(Uttara Ramayana).
(iv) Gautama is one of the seven sages (saptarsis (Sloka »
50, Chapter 133, Anugasana Parva).
(v) Gautama sat in the court of Brahma and worshipped Brahma. (M.B. Sabha Parva).
(vi) Gautama once blessed Dyumatsena, father of
Satyavan, and said that he would regain his eyesight.
(Sloka 11. Chapter 298, Vana Parva). |
(vil) When the war between the Pandavas and Kauravas broke out Gautama went to the Kuruksetra
battlefield and advised Drona to stop the battle.
(Sloka 36, Chapter 190, Drona Parva):
(vili) Gautama was also one of the many sages who
visited Bhisma while he was lying on his bed of
arrows.
(ix) Once Gautama built a hermitage on the top of
the mountain Pariyatra and did penance there for
sixtythousand years. Kala, the God of time, then appeared before him and Gautama received him well and
sent him away. (Sloka 10, Chapter 47, Santi Parva).
x)-Once Gautama turned the moustache of Indra
green by a curse for showing disrespect to him. (Sloka
93, Chapter 352, Santi Parva).
(xi) When Gautama was born, there was such brilliance that the surrounding darkness was removed and
so the boy ‘was named Gautama (Gau= light rays,
Tamas= darkness) to mean the remover of darkness.
(Sloka 94, Chapter 93, Anusasana Parva).
(xii) Once Gautama instructed the King Vrsadarbhi
on the evil of accepting rewards for good deeds. (Sloka
42, Chapter 93, Anusasana Parva).
(xiii) Gautama was also one among the rsis who swore
that they were not involved in the theft of the lotuses
of the sage Agastya. ( Sloka 19, Chapter 94, Anué4sana Parva, M.B.).
GAUTAMA II. A brahmin who was a member of the
court of Yudhisthira. He was a member of . Indrasabha
also, This Gautama while he was living in Glirivraja
had sexual relations with a Sadra woman from the
country of Usinara and a son was born to them named
De OD eer Dem
a
GAUTAMA V
Kaksivan. (Slokas 17, 18 and 3 of Chapters 4,7 and
21 respectively of Sabha Parva, M.B.).
GAUTAMA III. An ascetic of great erudition. He had
three sons named Ekata, Dvita and Trita. (See under
‘Ekata’). (Sloka 79, Chapter 36, Salya Parva).
GAUTAMA IV. Another ascetic of great virtue. Once
when this Gautama was going through the forest he
saw an elephant babe lying wearied. He took it to his
asrama and brought it up. When it became a full
grown elephant Indra disguised as the emperor
Dhrtarastra came to take it away secretly. Gautama
found it out and then -he was offered thousand cows
and much wealth in lieu of the elephant. But Gautama
refused to part with the elephant. Pleased with his
extreme affection for his dependant, Indra took both
Gautama and the elephant to heaven. (Chapter 102,
Anugasana Parva).
GAUTAMA. V. An ungrateful brahmin. He was born
in Madhyadega. He left his parents and after travelling
in many lands he came to a country of foresters. ‘The
foresters received him with respect and he lived in a
ie of the foresters and married a lady from among
them.
Gautama abandoned his brahminhood and accepted
the duties of foresters. He was living like this when
another brahmin boy came to that village. He searched
in vain for a brahmin house to stay for the night and
then knowing that a man born a brahmin but made
a forester by his duties was living there he went to his
house. Gautama also came there carrying the animals
and birds he had hunted down that day. His body
was bathed in blood. The brahmin guest felt compassion for Gautama and advised him to leave his
trade and go to his house in his country.
In the morning the brahmin. guest went away without
taking any food. The advice of his guest kept him
thinking. He decided to abandon his life as a hunter
and so leaving everything behind he went to the seashore. He met some merchants on ‘the way and while
they were travelling together a wild elephant attacked
them. Many were killed and Gautama escaping ran
swiftly and came to the base of a big banyan tree.
He was tired and slept there for a while.
A big vulture named Nadijamgha lived on the top of
that banyan tree. He used to go out to worship Brahma
at dusk and when he returned to his abode that day
he saw a man lying wearied down below. Gautama
attempted to catch the vulture and eat it but the
vulture playing a benign host placed before Gautama
food for him and made enquiries about him and asked
him the purpose of his travels. Gautama told him that
he was very poor and that he wanted to acquire some
wealth somehow.
Nadijamgha then said that he would get for him enough
wealth from the demon-King Viripaksa who was an
intimate friend of his. Gautama was pleased. The
vulture fanned him and sent him tosleep. Next morning Nadijarngha sent Gautama to Viripaksa and the
demon gave Gautama as much gold as he could carry
on his shoulders.
Gautama took the gold as a head load and came _ back
to the base of the banyan-tree. Nadijarngha came to him
and they talked to each other for some time. Gautama
who had become a gluttonous flesh eater looked with
greed at the fat body of the vulture and in an instant
————SES

GAUTAMI I
killed it and packed the flesh along with the load of
gold and went his way.
Viripaksa did not see Nadijamgha for two daysand he
was worried. He, therefore, sent his son to the banyan
tree to look for Nadijarngha. When he reached the
base of the tree he found to his grief only the bones
and feathers of his father’s friend. He knew what had
happened and he immediately followed the ungrateful
brahmin and capturing him brought him to his father
bound hand and foot. Viripaksa without any mercy
cut him into pieces and threw them for the crows to
eat. But even the crows would not eat the flesh of such
an ungrateful man. ne ;
Viripaksa burnt the remains of Nadijarhgha in a
funeral pyre. Devas assembled in the skies to watch
the funeral. Then Surabhi sprinkled milk on the
funeral pyre and brought back Nadijarmgha to life.
The reborn vulture felt sorry for Gautama and requested Surabhi to restore to life the wretched Gautama
also. Gautama also was brought back to life and he
embraced Nadijamgha. Gautama then went away with
his load of gold. |
Gautama returned to Sabaralaya and there married a
Sidra lady and begot evil sons. The devas were
offended at this and cursing him condemned him to
hell. (Chapters 168 to 173, Santi Parva).
GAUTAMI I. Another name of Krpi, wife of Drona.
(See under Krpi).
GAUTAMI II. The womancalled Jatila belonging to
the family of Gautama is known as Gautami also. (See:
under Jatila).
GAUTAMIIII. A-brahmani whose son succumbed to
snake-bite. (See Arjuna).
GAUTAMI IV. A river referred to in verse 71, Chapter
165 of Anugadsana Parva.
GAVAKSA I. A monkey king. A terrific warrior, he
helped Sri Rama with 60,000 monkeys. (Vana Parva,
Chapter 283, Verse 4).
GAVAKSA II. Younger brother of Sakuni, the son
of Subala. In the great war he broke into the military
set up of the Pandavas. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 90).
He was killed by Iravan, son of Arjuna. (Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 90).
GAVALGANA. Father of Sajijaya of Mahabharata
fame. (Adi Parva, Chapter 63, Verse 97).
GAVAYA. A very powerful monkey King. As captain of
a regiment he fought on the side of Sri Rama in the.
Rama-Ravana war. (Vana Parva, Chapter 233, Verse
Lae
GAVAYANA. ‘(GAVAMAYANAM). A, yajiia. (Vana
Parva, Chapter 84, Verse 102°
GAVIJATA. (SRNGI).. Th son of a sage named
_ Nagabhisana, Gavijata cu.sed that King Pariksit
should die of snake-bite. ‘The curse was made under
the following circumstances.
King Pariksit went hunting one day in the forest and
he who had chased a deer in hot haste for some distance felt naturally very weak and tired, and requested
a sage he saw there in the forest for some water.
Immersed in meditation the sage did not hear the King,
and mistaking him to be a haughty fellow, the King,
with his stick, lifted a dead snake and placed it round
the neck of the sage. Yet he did not stir. The King
returned to his palace.
GAYA III.
GAYA V
Gavijata, son of the sage and a devotee of Devi heard .
of the insult heaped on his father’s head while he was
merry-making in the forest with his companions. The
companions derided him by saying that though his
father was Nagabhisana (having snakes as ornament)
the naga was! feless. Enraged at this and not waiting
to study details about the incident he pronounced the
following curse. “Whoever might be the person who
threw a dead snake about my father’s neck, he will be
bitten to death by Taksaka within seven days from
today.”’ Only after the curse was pronounced did he
understand that it was King Pariksit who had become
the object of the curse. And, he despatched his disciple
immediately to Pariksit to inform him about the curse.
The King’s reaction was, ‘when the time for death
comes let me die.” (Devi Bhagavata, Dvitiya
Skandha) .
GAVISTHA. A famous asura. It was he who descended
on earth as king Drumasena. (Adi Parva, Chapter 67) .
GAYA. A particular locality in North India (Nepal).
Here there is Gaya mountain and a holy centre also.
There is legend to the effect that Buddha did tapas here,
People of this locality gave many presents to
Yudhisthira. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 52, Verse 16).
GAYA I. See Gayatirtha.
1) General. A King of ancient India Gaya was a
Rajarsi and son of Amirtarayas: The Rajarsi had
conducted many yajfias. A very well-known yajfia of
his is described in verse 18, Chapter 75 of Vana Parva.
2) Particular Information. (1) Gaya wasa member in
oo assembly. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 8, Verse
(2) He had earned reputation and wealth by visiting
the sacred temples in India. (Vana Parva, Chapter 94,
Verse 18).
(3) ‘The Rajarsi had come in his vimana (aeroplane)
to witness the fighting between Arjuna and Krpacarya
in the war, which broke out as a result of the Kauravas
lifting the cows of the Virata King. (Virata Parva,
Chapter 56, Verse 9).
(4) SriKrsna met Gaya on his (Krsna’s) way to
Hastinapura from Dvaraka. (Udyoga Parva, Chapter
83, Verse 27).
(S) Once King Mandhata subjugated Gaya. (Drona
Parva, Chapter 62, Verse 10).
(6) Sarasvati devi-once attended a yajfia conducted by
Gaya, assuming for herself the name Visala.
(7) He once gifted away land to Brahmins. (Santi
Parva, Chapter 234, Verse 25).
(8) Gaya did not eat flesh. (AnuSasana Parva, Chapter
GAYAII. A king born to Ayus, the son of King
Purtravas by his (Ayus’s) wife Svarbhanu (Svarbhanavi). This Gaya was the brother of Nahusa. (Adi
Parva, Chapter 65, Verse 25)...
An asura. (See Gayatirtha) .
GAYA IV. “A King born in the dynasty of the famous
emperor Prthu. Prthu had two sons called Antardhana
and Vadi. A son called Havirdhana was born to Antardhana by Sikhandi; he (Havirdhana) married Dhisana
born in the family of Agni and they had six sons called
Pracinabarhis, Sukra, Gaya, Krsna, Vraja and Ajina.
(Harivarmga, Chapter 2, Verse 31). :
GAYA V. A King, a descendant of Dhruva. (Agni Purana,
Chapter 18).

GAYAKA 288 GHANTA I |
Anustubh, and Pankti. (Chapter 8, Amégam 2, Visnu |
Purana).
GAYATRI II. | |
1) General information. A glorious Vedic mantra. This
GAYAKA,. A warrior of Subrahmanya. (Sloka 67, Chapter 85, Salya Parva).
GAYAPARVATAM. A sacred mountain. Yamaraja
honoured it on a particular occasion. Brahmasaras
encircled by the Devas is on this mountain. To
perform the Sraddha rites of the dead at Brahmasaras
is considered to be excellent. (See Gaydlirtha).
GAYASIRAS. A peak .of Gaya Mountain; it is also
known as Gayagirsa. (Vana Parva, Chapter 87).
GAYASIRSA. See Gayasiras.
GAYATIRTHA. The following story is told in the Agni
Purana about the origin of this very reputed sacred
place at Gaya.
An asura called Gaya was once _ performing
tapas here. As the intensity of his tapas’ went
on increasing, the Devas got nervous and _ they
approached Visnu with the request that he should
save them from Gayasura. Visnu agreed to oblige
them. Meantime the intensity of Gaya’s tapas increased aaily. Ultimately Visnu appeared to Gaya and as
requested by him granted him the boon to the effect
that he would become more holy and sanctified than
all the tirthas in the world.
Brahma and other Devas became afraid of Gaya’s
power and prowess and they complained about him to
Visnu, who advised Brahma to request Gaya for his
bedy in order to perform a yajfia. Brahma did so and
Gaya lay down on earth so that the Yajfia might be
performed on his body. Brahma began the yajfia on his
head, and made an offering when the body of Gaya
was not stationary or quiet. When told about this fact
Visnu called up Dharmadeva (See Marici, Para 3) and
told him thus : “You please hold devagila (a divine
stone) on the body of Gaya, and let all the Devas sit
upon it, and I shall be seated on the stone along with
the Devas, holding the gada (club) in my hands.”’
Dharmadeva did as he was bidden by Visnu. The body
of Gaya stopped shaking as soon as Visnu sat upon the
stone, and Brahma made the full offerings. Thenceforth
the place became a holy tirtha under the name Gaya.
After the yajfia was over Brahma gave the Gaya temple
20, 000 yards (5 Kroga) in extent with 55 villages
attached toit as daksina (fee) to the masters of the
ceremony. Brahma presented the villages to them after
creating therein hills purely of gold, rivers flowing
with milk and honey, houses built of Gold and silver
etc. But the brahmins who got these gifts stayed on
there, their avarice only on the increase perhaps.
Angry at this Brahma cursed the people of Gaya, and
according to it the brahmins became illiterate and evilminded; rivers flowed with water instead of milk and
honey. The brahmins lamenting over their evil fate
submitted their grievances before Brahma, who consoled them thus : Well, brahmins of Gaya, as long as
there exist the sun and the moon you will continue
to be dependent upon the Gaya tirtha for your sustenance. Whoever comes to Gaya and gives offerings
to you and performs the due rites for the souls of the
departed, the souls of hundred generations of his
ancestors will be transfered from hell to heaven where
they will attain final beatitude. | |
Thus did Gayatirtha become famous. (Agni Purana,
Chapter 144).
GAYATRI I. One c
other horses are Brhati,
of the seven horses of Siirya. The
Usnik, Jagati, Tristubh,
GERU. A mineral obtained from m
_ Chapter 158, Vana Parva).
GH (4). This letter has two meanings: (1) Bell (2) 4
mantra has twentyfour letters. There are nineteen
categories of movable and immovable things in this world
and to this if the five elements are added the number
twentyfour is obtained. That is why the Gayatri has got
twentyfour letters. (Chapter 4, Bhisma Parva). At the
time of Tripura dahana Siva hung this Gayatri mantra
as a string on the top of his chariot (Chapter 34, Karna
Parva).
2) The glory of Gayatri. If one recites Gayatri once one
will be freed from all sins done at that time; if one
recites it ten times all the sins done on one day will be
washed away. Thus, ifone recites it a hundred times
the sins of one month; thousand times, the sins of a
year; one lakh times, the sins of his life time; ten. lakh
times, the sins of his previous birth; hundred lakh times,
the sins ofall his births, will be washed away, If a
man recites it ten crore times he becomes a realised
soul and attains moksa. (Navama Skandha, Devi
Bhagavata). |
3) How to recite Gayatri. It should be recited sitting
still with your head slightly drawn downwards with
your right palm open upwards, with the fingers raised
and bent to give the shape of the hood of a_ snake.
Starting from the centre of the ring-finger and counting
down and going up through the centre of the small
finger and touching the top lines on the ring, middle and
forefingers, count down to the base of the forefinger,
you get number ten. This is how the number of recitations is counted. This methed is called the Karamala
(hand rosary) method. This is not the only method
that could be used. You can use a rosary made of
lotus seeds or glass beads. If you are using lotus seeds
you should select white seeds for the rosary, (Navama
Skandha, Devi Bhagavata).
GAYATRISTHANA. A sacred place of northern \ Bharata. If one spends one night here one will get the
bencfit of giving away as giftsa thousand cows. (Sloka
28, Chapter 85, Vana Parva).
ountains, (Sloka 95,
blow or assault; striking or killing. (Agni Purana,
Chapter 348).
GHANAPATHA. A particular system of Vedic studies.
There are four such systems. The system of separating
each word from conjunctions and combinations an
combining with the word just before and after it 15
called Jatapatha. Jatapatha means joined or combined
Patha. Ghanapatha isthere to avoid errors in Jatapatha
Ghanapatha consists of padapatha and Kramapdatha.
In Padapatha the split words are once more combined
and Pratigakhya lays down the rules to combine words.
It is because of this scientific system of reciting that
the Rgveda remains to this day pure in text without
different readings.
ifferent readings He
GHANTA. I. A brahmin born in Vasistha’s family.
spent hundred years worshipping Siva. Once Ghanta
asked sage Devala to give his daughter in marriage to
him. But Ghanta’s ugliness stood in the way. 5o He
abducted the daughter of the sage and married her.
Enraged at this Devala cursed and turned him into an

ig used because the brothers wer
GHANTA II
owl. He was also given redemption from the curse that
he would regain his form the day he helped Indradyumna, (Skanda Purana).
GHANTA II. See under Ghantakarna.
GHANTAKARNA I.
1) General. Ghanta and Karna were two Raksasa_ brothers who attained ‘salvation by worshipping Visnu.
(Bhagavata, dasama Skandha). But the elder brother,
Ghanta alone is sometimes called by the name Ghantakarna in the Puranas.
2) Birth, There is a reference in Darukavadha (killing
of Darukasura) about the birth of Ghantakarna.
Daruka, after having secured a boon from Brahma, used
to harass the world too much and when his depredation hecame unbearable Siva created Bhadrakali
from his third eye and she killed the asura. Mandodari
wife of Daruka and daughter of Maya was sunk in
grief at the death of her husband. She began to do
tapas. Siva appeared and gave her a ew drops of sweat
from his body saying that the person on whom she
sprinkled the - sweat drops would suffer from small-pox
and that such patients would worship her (Mandodart)
and supply her necessary food. From that day onwards
Mandodari became the presiding deity over small-pox.
On her way back to the earth with the sweat-drops
Mandodari met Bhadrakali at whom she threw the sweatdrops to take revenge for her husband’s death. Immediately Bhadrakali fell down with an attack of small-pox.
Hearing about the mishap Siva created a'terrible
Raksasa called Ghantakarna. According to Siva’s
directions Ghantakarna licked off the small-pox from
Bhadrakali’s body.’ But, when he tried to lick it off from
her face she prevented him saying that she and Ghantakarna were sister and brother and that it was improper
for the brother to lick the face of the sister. And, even
to this day the small-pox on Bhadrakaii’s face remains
as an ornament to her.
3) The name Ghantakarna. This Raksasa, at first, was
an enemy of Visnu, ard did not tolerate even the mention of Visnu’s name. Therefore, he went about always
wearing a bell’so that the tinkling of it warded off the |
name of Visnu from entering his ears. Because he wore
a ghanta (bell) in his Karnas (ears) he came to be
known as Ghantakarna. (M.B. Bhavisya Parva, Chap4) Turned out to be a devotee of Visnu. Ghantakarna
became a servant of Kubera. Once he did tapas for
salvation. Siva appeared and asked him to do oe to
lease Visnu as Visnu was greater than himself (Siva).
From that day onwards he removed the bells from_his
ears and became a devotee of Visnu. (Bhavisya Parva,
Chapter 80).
5) Attained salvation. Handing over charge of government to Satyaki Sri Krsna once went to Kailasa mounted on Garuda to see Siva. On his way he dismounted
at the Badaryagrama, and while sitting deep in_meditation there he heard the thundering voice of Pigacas
(souls of dead people roaming about without attaining
salvation). He also heard the barking of dogs, and thus
he understood that Pigacas were hunting animals. The
hunters came to Krsna’s presence. They were led by
Ghantakarna who was reciting the name of Visnu. Sri
1, According to certain Puranas Ghantak
e inseparable from each other,
GHANTAKARNA II.
GHATA
Krsna felt pity for him. Ghaniakarna told Krsna that
his aim and ambition were to see Visnu and that Siva
had blessed that he would realise his ambition at
Badaryasrama. Pleased at allthis, Sri Krsna revealed
his Visvaripa (representing in his person the whole
universe), and at once Ghantakarna brought half of the
corpse of a brahmin and submitted it as a present
before the Lord. He explained to Krsna that according
to the custom of the Raksasas that was the best present
which could be .nade. Without accepting the present
Krsna patted Ghantakarna on his back with the result
that he cast off his body and rose up*to Vaikuntha.
(Bhavisya Purana, Chapters 80-82 and also Bhagavata
Dagama Skandha). aye
6) Ghantakarna Pratistha. (Installation of his idol in
temples). Though Ghantakarna was a Raksasa, as he
attained Vaikuntha due to the blessings of God Almighty his idol is still installed in temples and worshipped. The installation ceremony is described in
Chapter 59 of the Agni Purana thus: ‘Ghantakarna
should have 18 hands. He cures diseases born as a result
of sins. He holds in his right hand Vajra, sword,
Cakra, arrow etc. And in his left hand broom, sword, cord
bell, pickaxe etc. He also holds the trisila (trident).
Ghantakarna who turned out to be a Deva is believed
to cure small-pox.
One.of the four attendants presented by Brahma to Subrahmanya. Nandisena, Lohitaksa, Ghantakarna and Kumudamiali are the four
attendants. (Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Verses 23-24),
GHANTODARA. An asura, who was a member of
GHARMA. A King of
GHATA. An urban area in ancient India.
Varuna’s assembly. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 9, Verse
the Anga royal dynasty.
(Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 63).
GHATA. A notorious thief. He had a friend called
Karpara. They were jointly known as Ghatakarparas.
Once both the friends went to commit theft. Léaving
Ghata at the door-steps Karpara entered the chamber
of the princess who after enjoying sexual pleasures
with him gave him some money asking him to repeat
such visits in future. Karpara told Ghata all that had
happened and handed over to him the money which the
princess had given him. Karpara went again to the
princess. But, owing to the weariness caused by the
night’s enjoyment both the princess and he slept till late
inthe morning. Meantime the palace guards found out
the secret and took the lovers into custody. Karpara
was sentenced to death and led out to be hanged. Ghata
was present on the spot and Karpara asked him secretly
to save the princess. Accordingly Ghata, without anybody knowing about it, took the princess over to his
house.
The King ordered enquiries about the absence of the
princess. Under the natural presumption that some
. relation or other of Karpara alone might have carried
away his daughter the King ordered the guards of Karpara’s corpse to arrest anybody who approached the
corpse and expressed grief. Ghata came to know of this
secret order of the King. Next day evening Ghata posing
himself as a drunkard and with a servant disguised as
arnas are two individuals, Ghanta and Karna. The term Ghantakarna—singular number—

GHATAJANUKA 290
a woman walking in front and with another servant
carrying rice mixed with dhatira (a poisonous fruit)
following him came to the guards keeping watch over
Karpara’s body. Ghata gave the poisoned rice to the
guards who after eating it swooned under the effect.
Ghata used the opportunity to burn the corpse of
Karpara there itself. After that Ghata disappeared.
The King then deputed new guards to watch over the
funeral pyre of Karpara as he anticipated some one to
come to pick his charred bones from the pyre. But,
Ghata put the guards into a swoon by a mantra he had
learned from a sannyasin and went away with the bones
of his friend.
Realising now that further stay there was not safe Ghata
left the place with the princess and the sannyasin. But,
the princess, who had already fallen in love with the
sannyasin poisoned Ghata to death.
GHATAJANUKA. A sage who was a prominent member
in Yudhisthira’s assembly. (Sabha Parva; Chapter 4). _
Once, Sri Krsna, on his way to Hastinapura met this
sage. (Udyoga Parva, Chapter 38).
GHATAKARPARA. One of the nine great poets in
Sanskrit reputed as the nine gems in Vikramaditya’s
court.
“Dhanvantari—K sapanak Amarasimha—Sanku—Vetalabhatta—Ghatakarpara—Kalidasah”’. A poem of twenty-two verses in Sanskrit called Ghatakarpara kavya is
attributed to him. The theme of the poem is a message
despatched by the hero to his wife who has only recently
been married. All the stanzas are in yamaka (repeating
a word or set of words to convey different meanings at
the end of each line). By composing a poem called
‘Nalodaya’, Kalidasa answered the challenge posed by
Ghatakarpara in the use of Yamaka. Ghatakarpara
answered Kalidasa in the following stanza.
Eko hi doso gunasannipate
nimajjatindoriti yo babhase /
ninam na drstam kavinapi tena
daridryadoso gunarasinaéi. //
(Kalidasa, in verse 3, Canto 1 of Kumarasarhbhava
had written ‘Eko hi doso gynasannipate nimajjatindoh
kiranesvivankah’’. In the above verse by Ghatakarpara
the usage ‘Kavinapi tena’ may be interpreted in two
ways, viz. Kavina-+-api+-tena and Kavi--napitena. By
the second combination Ghatakarpara converted K4lidasa into a barber (napita).
GHATIKA. A measure of time equal to 24 minutes.
Sixty vinadikas make one Ghatika. (See Kalamana).
GHATOTKACA.
1) General. Ghatotkaca, son of Bhimasena played a very
important part in the story of Mahabharata. He was,
from his very birth, a staunch friend and ally of the
Pandavas. He courted a hero’s death in the ‘great war.
2) ‘Birth. On the burning of the ‘lac Palace’ the
Pandavas escaped through a tunnel and reached a forest.
While they were sleeping on the ground, Hidirnba the
Raksasa chief in the forest saw the Pandavas from the
of a tree, and he deputed his sister Hidimbi to
andavas to him for food.
JL apnroached the Pandavas in the guise of a
ie i ap She was attracted towards Bhima
and she prayed for the return of his pee, which Bhima
refused. Impatient at the delay Hidimba rushed towards the Pandavas, and in the duel that ensued
between him and Bhima, he was killed by Bhima,
top o
bring over the P
GHATOTKACA
Then Hidimbi approached Kunti and requested her to
ask Bhima to marry her. The Pandavas agreed to the
proposal on condition that Bhimaand Hidimbi should
enjoy their honeymoon in the forest and on mountains,
but Bhima should return to them at dusk everyday.
Ghatotkaca was the son born to Bhima and Hidimbi,
(Adi Parva, Chapter 155).
Indra bestowed on Ghatotkaca prowess enough to be a
suitable opponent to Karna. (Adi Parva, Chapter 155,
Verse 47).
Ghatotkaca grew up to become a good friend of the
Pandavas. When Hidimbi and Ghatotkaca took leave of
them Kunti said to Ghatotkaca : ‘‘You are the eldest
son to the Pandavas. You should be ever a support to
them.’ To this Ghatotkaca answered that he would
return to them whenever any need arose for it.
3) Carried the Pandavas on shoulders. During their exile
in the forest the Pandavas became too tired to walk any
further when Bhima remembered Ghatotkaca, who
promptly appeared before the Pandavas, and at the
instance of Bhima got down a number of Raksasas also.
Ghatotkaca carrying Paficali on his shoulders, and the
Raksasas carrying the Pandava brothers on _ their
shoulders went by air to Badarikaégrama where
Naranarayanas were doing tapas, landed them there,
and then they (Ghatotkaca and his companions) took
leave of the Pandavas. (Vana Parva, Chapter 145).
4) Ghatotkaca in the great war. (1) In the first day’s
fighting he fought against Alambusa, Duryodhana and
Bhagadatta. Frightened at the terrible course of the
fight the Kauravas purposely postponed that day’s
fighting. (Bhisma Parva, Chapters, 45, 57, 58).
(2) He defeated the King of Vanga and: killed his
elephant. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 92, Verse 36).
(3) Defeated Vikarna. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 29, Verse
(4) On receiving blows from the great Kaurava
heroes, Ghatotkaca rose up to the sky. (Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 93, Verse 6).
(5) Ghatotkaca made the Kaurava army take (to
their heels by the exercise of his magic powers. (Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 94, Verses 41-47).
(6) Fought a duel with Durmukha. (Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 110, Verse 13).
(7) Dhrtarastra praised the prowess of Ghatotkaca.
(Drona Parva, Chapter 10, Verse 62).
(8) He fought with Alayudha. (Drona Parva, Chapter 96, Verse 27).
(9) Killed Alambusa. (Drona Parva, Chapter 109,
Verse 28). :
(10) Agvatthama, son of Drona killed Afijana Parva,
son of Ghatotkaca, (Drona Parva, Chapter 156, Verse
16 Ghatotkaca fought with Karna. (Drona Parva,
Chapter 175).
(12) He fought with Jatasura. (Drona Parva, Chapter
( 13) He killed Alayudha. (Drona Parva, Chapter 178;
Verse 31). .
(14) Karna clashed with Ghatotkaca and failing to
kill him by any means he (Karna) used Vaijayantl
Sakti as the last resort. This Sakti had been given to
him. by Indra in exchange for his head-gear and earrings, and Karna had been keeping the Sakti in reserve to kill Arjuna. At any rate Karna used it against

GHATOTKACAVADHAPARVA
Ghatotkaca and he was killed. After killing Ghatotkaca the Sakti entered the sphere of the stars. (Drona
Parva, Chapter 180).
5) Other information. (1)
hmins and their yajfias.
Verse 27).
(2) When the souls of the heroes killed in the great
war were called upon the banks of Ganga by Vyasa,
Ghatotkaca’s soul too had appeared. (Asramavasika
Parva, Chapter 32, Verse 8).
(3) After death he lived with Yaksadevas. (Svargarohana Parva, Chapter 5, Verse 37).
6) Synonyms of Ghatotkaca used in Mahabhérata.
Ghatotkaca hated the bra-
(Drona Parva, Chapter 181,
Bhaimaseni, Bhaimi, Bhimasenasuta, Bhimasenatmaja, Bhima- ’
sainu, Bhimasuta, Haidimba, Haidimbi, Kaksasa,
Raksasadhipa, Raksasapungava, Raksasesvara and
Raksasendra.
GHATOTKACAVADHAPARVA. A sub Parva of Drona
Parva, (Drona Parva, Chapters 153-186).
GHORA. A son of sage Angiras. (Anusadsana Parva,
Chapter 85, Verse 131).
GHORAKA (M). Name ofan urban region in the southwest of ancient India. The people of this region supplied money to Yudhisthira. (Sabha Parva, Chapter
52, Verse 14).
GHOSA. A tapasvini famed in Rgveda. She was the
grand-daughter of Drgata maharsi and daughter of sage
Kaksivan. As she contracted leprosy in her very childhood nobody came forward to marry her. Ultimately
she composed a mantra in praise of Asvinidevas. They
cured Ghosa of leprosy and she got married. (Rgveda,
Mandala 1, Anuvaka 7, Sukta 117).
GHOSAVATI. The famous Vina of emperor Udayana.
Kathasaritsagara. )
GHOSAYATRAPARVA. A sub-Parva, ‘Chapters 236951 of the Vana Parva. The procession made by Duryodhana and others to the Pandavas who lived in the
forest forms the theme of this sub-Parva.
GHRANASRAVAS. Anattendant of Skanda. Always
immersed in yoga he worked for the welfare of brahmins. (Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 57).
GHRTA. A King of the Anga dynasty. He was the son
of Gharman and father of Vidusa. (Agni Purana,
Chapter 277).
GHRTACI. ”
1) General. She was an exceptionally beautiful apsara
woman, and she revelled in disturbing the peace of
the sages and becoming mother of children by them.
Ghrtaci,- who succeeded in breaking the penance of
the sages like Kufanabha, Vyasa and Bharadvaja
occupied a very prominent position among apsara
women.
2) Suka, the son of Vyasa. Vyasa longed very much to have
a son. Ultimately, after receiving instruction and advice
from Narada, he reached the peaks of Mahameru and
worshipped Mahadeva and Mahadevi for one year
with the one-syllabled mantra OM which is the very
seed of word. By now the great tejas (effulgence) of
Vyasa lighted up the whole world. and Indra _ got nervous and upset. The great Lord Siva appeared on the
scene and blessed Vyasa that he will have a son who
would become a very wise man, very much interested
in helping others, and very famous also. Vyasa returned
gratified to his asrama. One day, while in the process
of preparing the sticks for producing fire, thoughts
291 GHRTAVATI
about a son passed through his mind. Fire is produced by
the rubbing of two sticks. But, he thought, how
could he who had no wife, become the father of ason ?
While immersed in such thoughts he saw Ghrtaci
standing near him, herself having come along the sky.
Vyasa did not like the presence of Ghrtaci. Fearing
the curse of Vyasa she assumed the form of a parrot and
flew away.
The beauty of Ghrtaci as also the flight of the parrot
kindled erotic feelings in Vyasa and seminal emission
occurred. The semen fell on the stick used for producing fire, and without knowing the fact he went on -
using the sticks for producing fire. And, then did
appear from it a son of divine lustre. That son became
reputed in later years as sage Suka. (Devi Bhagavata, Prathama Skandha). | |
3) Two children by Bharadvaja. Once sage Bharadvaja was
taking his bath in the Ganga, Ghrtaci also came to
bathe. On the banks of the river her clothes caught
- something and were removed from their position. The
sight of it caused seminal emission to the Sage. The
semen thus emitted was kept ina Drona, (bamboo cup)
and when it was due the Drona broke and out
of it came a child. It was this child which, in later
years, became so very famousas the great Dronacarya.
(Adi Parva, Chapter 149). On another occasion also,
the sight of Ghrtaci caused emission in Bharadvaja,
and Srutavati or Sruvavati was the noble daughter
born out of it. ‘(Salya Parva, Chapter 48, Verse 63).
Hundred daughters of Kusanabha. Kuganabha, son of Kuga
was a saintly king. Once Kuganabha fell in love with
Ghrtaci and a hundred daughters were born to him
of her. Once Wind-God felt enamoured of the
hundred girls, but they refused to satisfy his desire. So
-he cursed them to become crooked or bent down in body.
Later on, Brahmadatta, son of the sage Culi, straightened
their bodies and married them. (Valmiki Ramayana,
Bala Kanda, Canto 32)
5) Birth of Ruru. On another occasion Ghrtaci attracted and subjugated a King called Pramati. Ruru was the
son born to Pramati by Ghrtaci.
6) Other information. (1) Once Ghrtaci pleased Sage
Astavakra, who introduced her into Kubera’s assembly.
(Anugasana Parva, Chapter 19, Verse 44).
(2) Ghrtaci danced at the birthday celebrations of
Arjuna. (Adi Parva, Chapter 122, Verse 65).
(3) A daughter called Citrangada was born to Visvakar-
‘man by Ghrtaci. (See under Visvakarma) . |
(4) A daughter called Devavati was born to Ghrtact.
(See under Devavati)
GHRTAPAS A great sage who lived on ghee. A disciple
of Brahma he was an instructor of Sanatana Dharma.
(Santi Parva, Chapter 166, Verse 24).
GHRTAPRSTHA. A son of Priyavrata, brother of
Uttanapada. Svayambhuvamanu had two famous sons
called Priyavrata and Uttanapada. Priyavrata, the elder
son, married two daughters of Visvakarmaprajapatl
called Suripa and Barhismati, and of Surupa were born
ten sons called Agnidhra, Idhmajihva, Yajiiabahu,
Mahavira, Rukmasukra, Ghrtaprstha, Savana, Medhatithi and Vitihotra, and also one daughter called
Urjasvati. (Devibhagavata, 8th Skandha).
GHRTAVATI. An important river in India. (Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 23). |

GHRTEYU 299 GODILA II
disguise and engaging Jaradsandha in a duel killed him
and crowned his son as King. (Chapter 24, Sabha
Parva). Once King Duridhumara abandoning the, gifts
Girivraja.
GHRTEYU. A King born in the Anga dynasty. (Agni
Purana, Chapter 277) .
GHURYNIKA. Foster mother of Devay4ni, daughter of
Sukracarya. (Adi Parva, Chapter 78, Verse 25), oitered by the devas came and slept in
GILGAMIS. It is the most ancient book of the Babyloni- (Sloka 39, Chapter 6, Anusdsana P arva).
ans. Itisas old as Reveda. Another book so oldas (ITA. See under Bhagavad Gita.
these is the ‘‘Book of the Dead” of the Egyptians. (See GITAPRIYA. A follower of Skandadeva. (Sloka 7,
Chapter 46, Salya Parva).
under Jalapralaya). 2 sd
GIRIGAHVARA. A place of- habitation on the north- Se ae Fear Musial among a
eastern side of Bharata. ‘(Sloka 42, Chapter 9, Bhisma eee ee en ne tOuUne tat sage Fivastya hae
Parva). no a a ts teased a sage by making ae
a ; sounds of a boar. Ihe enraged sage cursed him an
ae oe ne Whe The a a lady turned him into a boar. He got relief from the curse
behind Ter Gace one U fiver ouxtimati, there 1s a, story when Iksvaku killed him and Gitavidyadhara became
Siieetcanys ying, St VeCleara. . his old self again. (Chapter 46, Srsti Khanda, Padma
uktimati was a river flowing through the capital city Purana). 7
Kolahala driven by amorous desires subdued Suktimati. Bhagavata).
The next morning on finding no river in its place the GO. (GAU). A wife of sage Pulastya. Vaigravana was
people were surprised. The news reached the ears of the born of her. The son left his father and went to
King. He became furious and rushing to the mountain Brahma. (Sloka 12, Chapter 274, Vana Parva).
gave it a hard kick. It created a hole in the mountain GOBHANU. A King who was the grandson of Turvasu
and the river flowed through it. But by that time of the Puru dynasty and son of King Varga. Gobhanu
Kolahala had got a son and a daughter of Suktimati. had ason named Traisani. (Chapter 277, Agni Purana).
Greatly pleased at the King for setting her free from GODA. A follower of Skandadeva. (Sloka 28, Chapter
Kolahala, Suktimati gave her children to the King. The 46, Salya Parva).
of the kingdom of Uparicara.’Once the mountain GITHA. A King of the Bharata dynasty. (5th Skandha,
King brought up the son and made him the chief of his GODANA. In ancient India it was believed to bea very
army. The girl was brought up and named Girika and great deed of moral merit to give cows as gifts. If one
when she was of marriagable age the King married her. buys cows with the hereditary wealth and gives them |
When once Girika was having her monthly period the as gifts one would reach an ever prosperous world and |
King was forced to go to the forests for hunting. While even one’ who buys cows with the money received by
gambling and gives them as gifts would live for several
in the forests he saw the animals having sexual acts and ‘— :
as he thought of Girika at home he had emission. He years enjoying prosperity. (Chapter 73, Anuéasana
never wanted to waste the seminal fluid. He wrapped it Parva) .
in a leaf and sent it to his wife through a kite. Another GODAVARI. A river of South India. This river has
kite thinking it to be something to eat attacked the packet been glorified much in the Puranas.
and it fell intoa river down below. A fish swallowed. it (1) Godavari isa member of the court of Varuna.
and later when a fisherman caught it and opened its (Sloka 20, Chapter 9, Sabha Parva).
belly a boy and a girl came out of it. The girl was (2) This river originates from Brahmagiri, situated
ae asc Pel of Vyasa. (10th Skandha, Devi near ‘T'ryambakajyotirlinga of Nasik district in South
ao : - India. The river is very deep and is a giver of proscote creer See under Gunanidhi. perity to those who wane — Many aces aindiipeed
STHA. A mountain of the country of Nisadha. this river. ‘(Sloka 2, Chapter 88, Vana Parva).
Indra once hid himself on this mountain. (Sloka 13, (3) If one bathes in this river one will get the benefit
Chapter 315, Vana Parva). of conienn + .
Bee | g a Gomedha yajiia. Not only that, after
GIRIVRAJA. A city which has gained great importance his death he will go to the land of Vasuki. (Sloka 33,
in all the Puranas of India, Chapter 85, Vana Parva).
1) Origin. There was once a King named Kuéfa in the (4) The origin of Agni is from Godavari, (Sloka, 24,
Piru dynasty. (For genealogy see under ‘Gadhi’). Chapter 222, Vana Parva). |
‘This Kusa_begot of his Wue,' Vaidarbhi, four sons: (5) Sri Rama, Laksmana and Sita stayed for a long
named Kusamba, Kusanabha, Asurtarajasa and Vasu. time during their exile in Paficavati on the shores of
Each of them built a city of his own and started his this river Godavari. (Valmiki Ramayana, Aranya
rule there. Girlvraja is the magnificent city built by -Kanda, Sarga 16). | Nowe
Vasu. (Sarga 32, Bala Kanda, Valmiki Ramayana). (6) Godavari is one of the most important rivers of
2) Jarasandha’s rule. Vasu had a son named Brhadratha India. (Sloka 14, Chapter 9, Bhisma Parva) . |
and Jarasandha was the son of Brhadratha. During the (7) He who bathes in Godavari will be prosperous.
rule of Jarasandha Girivraja became glorious like (Sloka 29, Chapter 25, Anugasana Parva) . ‘
Nandanodyana. This city lying in the midst of five GODHA. A village in the north-east part of ancient -
mountains was the seat of prosperity then. (Chapter 21, India. (Sloka 42, Chapter 9, Bhisma Parva). Ly
Sabha Parva). Jarasandha kept many mighty kings of GODILAI. A Samavedamirti. By his curse - Utatthya
his time, as prisoners in this city. Unable to contro! became a dunce and later became famous as Satyatapas.
(For details see under Satyatapas) ,
his wrath against Krsna once he hurled his mace a
hundred times and threw it from Girivraja to Mathura. GODILA II. A servant of Vaisravana. Once when
Sri Krsna, Bhimasena and Arjuna entered Girivraja in Godila was travelling by air he saw Padmavati, wife

GOHARANAPARVA 293
of Ugrasena, King of Vidarbha, bathing in a pond
along with her companions. The very sight of the
enchanting Padmavati roused carnal passions in him
and the Yaksa took the form of Ugrasena and _ started
singing from the top of a hillock nearby. Padmavati
went to him because she mistook him for her husband.
Embracing her passionately the Yaksa outraged her
modesty. Subtle differences in the act created doubts
in Padmavati and, on being questioned, the Yaksa told
the truth and left the place. (Chapter 49, Padma
Purana). | 1p
GOHARANAPARVA. A © sub-divisional
Mahabharata. See under ‘Mahabharata’,
GOHATYA. In ancient India killing of cows was considered to be a great sin. It is interesting to note the
punishment prescribed for this crime in the Agni
Purana. For onemonthhe should drink barley water
only. He should live in a cow-shed wearing the hide of
the cowhe has killed. He can have some supper and
that too without salt He must bathe for two months in
cow’s urine. During day time he should follow the cows
looking after their comfort. He should drink the
menstrual discharge with his face lifted upwards.
Fasting, he should give away as charity ten cows and a
bull. If not, he should give as charity all his wealth to
god-fearing brahmins. Ifa man only stops the cow for
others to kill he should bear a fourth of the punishment;
if he stops and ties it for killing he should bear half of
the punishment and if he stops it, ties it and gives the
weapon for killing he should bear three-fourths of the
punishment. (Agni Purana, Chapter 159),
GOKHALI. One of the disciples in the tradition of
Vyasa. He was the direct disciple of Sakalya. Sakalya
divided the branch of Veda he received into six and
gave one to each of the following six disciples :
Valgayana, Maudgalya, Sali, Adigifira, Gokhali, and
Yatukarna. (Skandha 12, Bhagavata).
GOKARNA I. See under Gokarna.
GOKARNA II. An incarnation of Siva. In the seventh
Varahakalpa Siva was born as Gokarna and he then
got four sons named, Kasgyapa, Usanas, “G“yavana and
Brhaspati. (Satarudrasamhita, Siva Purana).
GOKARNA. _In the great battle Karna sent a _serpentmissile against Arjuna, ‘The serpent named Agvasena
was the power behind the missile and Gokarna was _ the
mother of that serpent. (Sloka 42, Chapter 90, Karna
Parva).
GOKARIVA. A. sacred place of Puranic importance
situated on the extreme north of Kerala.
(1) Origin. There was once on the banks of the river,
Tungabhadra, a village made sacred and prosperous by
the brahmnins who livéd there. In that village lived a
noble brahmin named Atmadeva. His wife was a
quarrelsome woman named Dhundhuli. Even after many
years of married life they got no children and
Atmadeva, greatly grief-stricken, left his home and
went to the forests. He was sitting on the shore ofa
lake after quenching -his thirst from it when a
_ Sannyasin came that way. Atmadeva told him about his
domestic life and pleaded that he should suggest a way to
get a son for him, The sannyasin satin meditation for
some time and contemplated on the horoscope of
Atmadeva and regretfully informed him that according
to his horoscope he was,to have no children for seven
successive births, He, therefore, advised Atmadeva to
Parva of
GOKARNA
abandon all his worldly pleasures and accept sannyasa
for the rest of his life. But Atmadeva was not to be
discouraged by this prophecy and he urged the
sannyasin to help him somehow to get a child. The
sanyasin. then gave him a fruit and asked him to give it
to his wife and ask her to observe a life of fasting for a
period of one year.
Greatly pleased with this boon Atmadeva returned to
his house and told his wife all that had happened and
gave her the fruit. She liked to eat the fruit but a
year’s fasting seemed troublesome to her. She was
thinking of how to get over this difficulty when her
younger sister came to her and suggested a plan. She
said “Sister, I am pregnant. I shall give you the
child [ deliver. You can declare it as your child and
make your husband believe so. You can announce in
public that you have eaten the fruit and have consequently become pregnani. We can, to test its merit,
give the fruit to a cow.”? Dhundhuli liked the plan very
much, and so did everything like that.
The news that Dhundhuli was pregnant spread in the
city. Very soon her sister gave birth to a child and
that child was proclaimed as the child of Dhundhuli. On
the pretext that Dhundhuli was short of breast-milk her
sister started doing the breast-feeding. The child was
named Dhundhukari.
After three months the cow that ate the fruit delivered
a child. The ear of the child was like that of a cow
and so he was called Gokarna.. Dhundhukari and
Gokarna grew together. Dhundhukari became a very
evil-natured boy while Gokarna grew into a_ scholarly
one. Dhundhukari who was the very seat of everything
bad made the life of their parents wretched and the
disappointed Atmadeva renounced all and went to the
forests and did penance and attained moksa. Unable
to bear the torture by her son, Dhundhuli committed
suicide by jumping into a well. Gokarna started on a
pilgrimage.
Dhundhukari lived in his own house surrounded by
prostitutes. Thieving was his only means of livelihood.
Knowing this the servants of the king started to capture
Dhundhukari and the prostitutes who lived with him,
for their safety, bound Dhundhukari with ropes and put
him into fire and killed him. The soul of Dhundhukari
became a great phantom. Hearing the news of the
death of his brother, Gokarna returned home. He
conducted a graddha at Gaya to give peace to the soul
of his departed brother. But the phantom of Dhundhukari was not pacified. This phantom troubled him
always. Gokarna was not afraid of it and asked him .
what he wanted and the phantom pleaded that in some
way Gokarna should get him absolved of all his sins.
Gokarna then consulted Pandits to know what method
should be adopted to save a soul which could not be
saved even by a Gaya-Sraddha. The Pandits advised
him to do penance to propitiate the Sun. The Sun who
appeared before Gokarna as a result of his penance
declared that if he did read the entire Bhagavata in
seven days Dhundhukari would get moksa. So Gokarna
performed a Saptaha and among those who assembled
to hear it was the phantom of Dhundhukari also. The
phantom finding no place to sit crept into a sevenlayered bamboo and sat there listening to Gokarna.
When the first day was over the first layer broke and it
went on like that every day and on the seventh day the

GOKARNI
seventh layer broke and when Gokarna finished
the twelfth Skandha the phantom rose from _ the
bamboo to heaven. When it was going to heaven it
looked at Gokarna and told him that his moksa was due
to the result of hishearing the saptaha reading. When
Gokarna asked him why none of the others who heard
it got it he said that it was because none had heard it
with such rapt attention as he had done.
Gokarna then conducted another reading of Saptaha
and the people present heard the same with rapt
attention. When the reading was over, a chariot of
Visnu- from Vaikuntha descended and _ carried
away all those who heard the reading. The place
where Gokarna sat and read the Saptaha became
known later as the famous Gokarna. (Chapters | to 3,
Bhagavata Mahatmya).
2) Mitrasaha and Gokarna. A King of Ayodhya named
Mitrasaha who hecame famous by the name _ of
Kalmasapada, became a demon by a curse of Vasistha.
He attained moksa by living and worshipping God in
the temple at Gokarna. (See under Sivaratri for
details).
3) Gokarna and the origin of Keralc. Brahmanda Purana
gives a story associating Gokarna with the origin of
Kerala.
By the request of Bhagiratha the river Ganga fell on
earth and flowing as different brooks emptied its waters
in the ocean. The level of the water in the ocean went
up and the temple of Gokarna and the land of Kerala
were submerged in waters. The sages who were in the
temple somehow escaped and _ took refuge on the
mountain Sahya. ParaSurama was doing penance there
then and the sages went to him and told him of their
plight. Parasurama went and stood in Gokarna and
threw an axe to the south. All the land from Gokarna
up to the place where the axe fell rose up from the
ocean to form a piece of land which was named Kerala.
(Chapter 97 of Brahmanda Purana).
4) Other Purdnic details regarding Gokarna. (i) Bhagiratha
did penance to bring Gangadevi to Earth at Gokarna.
(Sarga 12, Chapter 42, Bala Kanda, Valmiki
Ramayana).
ii) The serpent named Sesa spent much time living
here. (Chapter 36, Sloka 3, Adi Parva).
iii) Arjuna visited Gokarna while he was on his pilgrimage. (Sloka 34, Chapter 26, Adi Parva).
iv) Gokarna was one of the abodes of Siva. Brahma,
Maharsis,Bhitas and Yaksas used to stay at Gokarna to
worship Siva. (Sloka 24, Chapter 85, Vana Parva).
v) The ae i of Gokarna is renowned in all the |
three worlds (Sloka 15, Chapter 88, Vana Parva).
vi) Gokarna is a tapovana also. (Sloka 51, Chapter 6,
Bhisma Parva).
vii) Sri Krsna, Arjuna and Pradyumna together killed
Nikumbha, who had kidnapped Bhanumati, at Gokarna.
(Chapter 90, Visnu Purana).
GOKARNI. A follower of Skandadeva.
Parva, Chapter 90; siege . sam
T ther of an Asura name adhupa.
Ce ends BRED from " face of Brahnia ee
amayana }.
GOLOKA A 2 teem Misti cows live in this world
which is above all the other worlds. Surabhi, daughter
(M.B. Salya
GOMANTA I.
GOMANTA II.
GOMANTA III.
GOMATI. (KAUSIKI).
GONANDA
of Daksa, acquired great powers by doing rigorous
penance in this world. Pandits say that Goloka is the
upper lip, Brahmaloka, the lower hp of Mahavisnu.
(M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter 347, Sloka 52).
A famous mountain near Dvaraka. This
mountain is known as Goma and Raivataka also. Once
Sri Krsna went to see Gomanta and on the way met
Parasurama. (Skandha 10, Bhagavata). Parasurama
and Sri Krsna went together and saw this beautiful
mountain. Vyasa has devoted Chapter 40 of Visnu
Parva entirely for the description of this mountain of
Gomanta. Once Balabhadrarama caught hold of Jarasandha on this mountain but let him off.
A place of habitation lying to the
north-east of ancient India.. (Sloka 43, Chapter 9,
Bhisma Parva).
A mountain of the island of Kuéa.
(Sloka 8, Chapter 12, Bhisma Parva).
A celebrated river of Puranic
fame. This is worshipped as a goddess.
1) The curse. Kampa Ramayana states that this river
was Kausiki, sister of Vigvamitra. She became a river
by a curse.
Kausiki was married to a_ sage .called Rcika. Once
Rcika went to devaloka to see Brahma. Kaugiki unable
to bear the separation followed her husband by her
power of chastity. On the way Rcika saw her and
cursed her and made her into a river. From that day
onwards she started running as a river named Kauéiki.
See under Kausiki. (Bala Kanda, Valmiki Ramayana) -
2) Other details from the Puranas regarding Gomati.
i) Sri Rama conducted the ASvamedha yaga at Naim1garanya on the banks of this river. (Uttara Ramayana) ;
ii) The sins of those who drink the water of this river
are washed away. (Sloka 20, Chapter 169, Adi Parva).
lil) The devi of Gomati river lives in the court 0
Varuna worshipping him. (Sloka 23, Chapter 9, Sabha
. Parva).
iv) Dharmaputra came to this river during his pilgt!-
mage. (Sloka 2, Chapter 95, Vana Parva).
v) Gomati is the wife of Agnideva called Visvabhuk.
(Sloka 19, Chapter 219, Vana Parva).
vi) This is one of the most important rivers of Bharatavarsa. (Sloka 18, Chapter 9, Bhisma Parva).
vii) The land of Divodasa, King of Ayodhya, extended
from the shores of Ganga to the base of Gomati. (Brahmanda Purana, Chapter 2). |
GOMATIMANTRA. A mantra for obtaining blessings
from cows. If one recites this mantra standing in the
midst of cows one would get many children and great
wealth and if it is recited by a woman she would get
the affection and love of her husband. (Sloka 42, Chapter 81, Anugasana Parva, M.B.).
GOMEDAKA. See under Navaratna. ‘
the
GO MUKHA I. A notorious King. He was born of th¢
family of Krodhavasa. (Sloka 63, Chapter 67, Adi
Parva).
GOMUKHA II. Anasura who was a follower of 48
asura called Sirapadma. (Asura Kanda, Skand@
Purana).
GOMUKHA III. Son of Matali, charioteer of Indra-
(Sloka 8, Chapter 100, Udyoga Parva).
GONANDA. A soldier of Skandadeva. Sloka 65, Chapter 43, Salya Parva).

GOPALAKA
GOPALAKA. A son born to Candamahasena of his wife
Angaravati. Besides Gopalaka he had another son
named Palaka. (Kathasaritsagara, Kathamukhalambaka, Taranga 3).
GOPALI. I. A nymph. Once when Arjuna went to
devaloka this celestial maiden gave a. performance in
dancing in his honour. (Chapter 43, Vana Parva).
GOPALI II. A follower of Skandadeva. (Sloka 4, Chapter 46, Salya Parva).
GOPARASTRA. A place of habitation in the north-east
part of ancient India. (Slcka 44, Chapter 9, Bhisma
Parva).
GOPATI I. A demon. He was a co-worker of another
demon named Kalaketu. Sri Krsna killed Gopati on
the banks of the river Iravati on the mountain Mahendra. (Chapter 38, Sabha Parva).
GOPATI II. A deva gandharva. He was born to Ka-
§yapa of his wife Muni. (Sloka 42, Chapter 65, Vana
Parva). This gandharva participated in the birthday
celebrations of Arjuna. (Sloka 55, Chapter 122, Adi
Parva).
GOPATI III. Ason of the celebrated emperor, Sibi.
When Paragurama killed and made extinct all Ksatriya
kings it was a herd of cows that brought up this child.
(Sloka 78, Chapter 49, Santi Parva).
GOPATI IV. A synonym of Siva used in Sloka 151,
Chapter 17 of Anusasana Parva
GOPATI V. Asynonym of Visnu used in Sloka 66,
Chapter 149, of Anugasana Parva. |
GOPAYANA. The army of Gopas. (Sloka 13,, Chapter
71, Bhisma Parva). _
GOPIKKURI. See under Urddhvapundra.
GOPTATARA. A place on the northern bank of the
river, Sarayi. Sri Rama with his two armies and_vehicles ascended to heaven from this place. (Sloka 10,
Chapter 83 Mahabharata).
GORATHA. The palace of Magadha. This palace was
sittated on a mountain near Girivraja. (Sloka 30, Chapter 20, Sabha Parva).
GOSAVA. A mahiayajfia. (Sloka 17, Chapter 30, Vana
Parva). .
GOSRNGA. An important mountain of South India.
Sahadeva captured this mountain. (Sloka 5,. Chapter
31, Sabha Parva). |
GOSTANT. A follower of Skandadeva. (Sloka 3, Chapter 46, Salya Parva). ;
GOTAMA. A sage named Gotama, son of Rahigana,
is found everywhere in Rgveda. The seventyfourth
siikta in the thirteenth anuvaka of the first mandala of
Regveda is composed by this sage. There are many other
suktas also in his name. This sage 1s not the Gautama,
husband of Ahalya, who made Saokta 58, Anuvaka 11,
Mandala 1 of Reveda. |
Once this Gatams tired of thirst asked the Maruts for
some , water. The Maruts took a huge well to his side
and poured water into a big pot. (Suktas 86, 87,
Anuvaka 14, Mandala 1, Rgveda).
It was Aévinidevas who took the well to Gotama.
(Sakta 116, Anuvaka 17, Mandala |, Rgveda).
GOTIRTHA. A holy place. The Pandavas visited this
place during their pilgrimage. (Sloka 3, Chapter 95,
ayia. son of Vasistha. Vasistha had of his wife
Urjjé seven sons named Rajas, Gotra, Urddhvabahu,
GRAHAS
Savana, Anagha, Sutapas and Sukra. These holy men
were saptarsis in the third Manvantara. (Chapter 1,
Visnu Purana). |
GOVARDHANA. A mountain of Ambadi (Gokula).
This is believed to be a form of Krsna. This is called
Giriraja also. ‘The residents of Ambadi from time immemorial used to worship Indra for getting rains. But
after the advent of Krsna there came a change in that
belief. Krsna told them that rains depended on Govardhana andit was enough if they worshipped that mountain and so the residents of Ambadi started worshipping
the mountain. Indra got enraged at this and sent heavy
rains to Ambadi intending to submerge it in water. But
Sri Krsna lifted the mountain over Ambadi like an umbrella and saved the city from the wrath: of
Indra. See under ‘Krsna’ for more details. (Dasama
Skandha, Bhagavata)
GOVASANA. A King of the country called Sivi. The
daughter of this King, Devika, married Yudhisthira in a
svayamvara. Once Govasana met ina duel the son of
Abhibhi, King of Kasi. (Sloka 38, Chapter 95, Drona .
Parva).
GOVASANA (M).A country of ancient India. The people
of this place presented Yudhisthira with much wealth.
(Sloka 5, Chapter 51, Sabha Parva).
GOVIKARTA. The man who puts _ nose-bands
bullocks. (Sloka 9, Chapter 2, Virata Parva).
GOVINDA. A synonym of Sri Krsna (Mahavisnu). He
got this name because he saved the people and cows of
Ambadi by lifting the Govardhana mountain and
using itas an umbrella. (Daksinatya patha Chapter
38, Sabha Parva).
GOVINDADATTA. A brahmin of great fame who
resided in Bahusuvarnaka, a city on the banks of the
river Ganga. His wife was a very pious woman. They
had five children. Once when both the parents were
away from the house a sage called Vaisvanara came
there but the children did not receive him and treat
him properly. Knowing this Govindadatta abandoned
| -_ “" children. (Kathasaritsagara, Kathapithalarhaka).
GOVINDAGIRI. A mountain of Krauficadvipa. (Sloka
19, Chapter 12, Bhisma Parva).
GOVINDASARMAN. A brahmin who lived in olden
times in the city of Kasi. (See under Simbhadhvaja).
GOVITATA. A peculiar kind of horse sacrifice. Sage
Kanva once made his grandson, Bharata, conduct a
sacrifice of thiskind. (Sloka 130, Chapter 74, Adi Parva)
GOVRAJA. A soldier of Skandadeva. (Sloka 66, Chapter 45, Salya Parva).
GRAHAS (PLANETS). Indians from very ancient days
have maintained certain definite ideas and inferences
about the planets. Though those ideas differ somewhat
from the results of modern researches, the influence of
the ancient ideas is discernible in all the Puranic texts in
India. Fhe main ideas are summarised below.
Sirya (Sun), Candra (Moon), Sukra (Venus), Budha
~ (Mercury), Kuja (Mars), Brhaspati (Jupiter) Sani
(Saturn), Rahu and Ketu are the navagrahas (the nine
planets) .
Suryascandro mangalafca
Budhascapi brhaspatih /
Sukrah ganaigcaro rahuh
Ketugceti navagrahah | /
Or

GRAHAS 296
Besides the above nine planets, Indian astronomers take
into account a starry sphere in the sky called Saptarsis
and the star called Dhruva.
1) Sérya. ‘The sun gives light to all the other planets.
It has an area of 50 crore yojanas and its distance from
the earth is 22 crore yojanas. Surya exists within the
universe, and is called also Martanda as it originated
from dead (mrta) egg (anda). Surya divides the sky,
heaven, hell, the earth, east, west, north, south etc.
from one another. According to the course of Surya
three periods of time or ‘seasons’ like uttarayana,
daksinayana and visuvat are caused. Five months from
May is the uttarayana period, five months from
November the daksinayana period, and the months of
April and October are the Visuvats. Since during the
uttarayana the sun rises up comparatively slowly
(mandagati) during this period the day is longer than
night. As in daksinayana the course of the sun is quicker in pace (Sighragati) night is longer than day, and
during visuvat, (samagati) day and night are of equal
duration.
The other planets have three positions called Jaradgava,
Airavata and Vaisvanara, the first being the central
position, the second the northern position and the
third the southern position. Nine stars, Aévini, Bharani,
Krttika, Rohini, Mrgasiras, Ardra, Punarvasu and
Pusya occupy the Airavata vithi (northern position
or segment). Another nine stars, Magha, Parva
Phalguni, Uttara Phalguni, Hasta, Citra, Svati,
Vigakha, Anuradha and Jyestha occupy the central
position, and the last nine stars, Mila, Purvasadha,
Uttarasadha, Sravana, Sravistha, Satabhisak, Pirvaprosthapada, Uttaraprosthapada and Revati occupy the
southern position.
To the east, south, west and north of Mount Mahameru
exist Devadhanika (Indrapuri) Samyamani (Yamapuri)
Nimlocani (Varunapuri) and Vibhavari (Kuberapuri)
respectively. When Surya appears in Devadhanika it
will be dawn, when he has travelled to Sarnyamani it
will be noon, when he is in Nimlocani it will be sunset
and when he is in Vibhavari it will be mid-night. This
is how Surya circles the Mahameru. Within 15 nadikas
(6 hours) the sun travels 24 crores plus 24 lakhs of
yojanas. Surya’s chariot has one wheel and _ twelve
spokes. ‘he wheel represents a year and the twelve
spokes stand for the twelve months of the year. The
chariot has also three nabhis representing the three
caturmasyas, and six bands representing the six
seasons. The height of the chariot is 36 lakhs yojanas
and it has a width of 8 yojanas inside. Arunadeva is the
charioteer, and the seven chandas are the horses. The
seven chandas are, Gayatri,’ Brhati, Usnik, Jagat,
Tristubh, Anustubh and Pankti).
Night is called Usa and day Vyusti and the time in
between is Sandhya. When Sandhya begins the terrible
Raksasas called Mandehas attempt to consume Sirya.
They have been granted the boon that everyday they
will be dying though they may not be losing their
bodies. So, everyday there rages a fierce fight between
nd BO When the fight is on, noble brahmins
them and Surya. hue Se
hrow up water sanctified by Gayatri mantra with
throv rh water turns into Vajrayudha and burns the
Sok 7 The first offering in Agnihotra is
Raksasas to ashes. 1 daca
‘ation of the mantra beginning
made with the recitation 4 able dc chi
‘Suryo Jyoti’ because of which the sun is able to shine
GRAHAS
with thousands of rays with the result that the Raksasas
are burned to death. The Balakhilyas who number
more than 60,000 form Sirya’s body-guard. (See under
Sirya for Puranic stories about him).
2) Candra. (The Moon). Candra exists at one lakh
yojanas away from Sarya, and it revolves round the
earth. A candra month of twentyseven days is divided
into twelve rasis (houses) viz. Simha (Leo), Kanya
(Virgo) Tula (Libra) Vrécika (Scorpio) Dhanus
(Sagittarius) Makara (Capricorn) Kumbha (Aquarius)
Mina (Pisces) Mesa (Aries) Vrsabha_ (Taurus)
Mithuna (Gemini) and Karkataka (Cancer). Every
month Candra stays in each of the above houses only
for 24 days.
The full moon makes Pitrs happy, divides the month
into two halves, Krsna Paksa (the dark fortnight)
and Sukla Paksa (the bright fortnight) and functions
as the very life of all living beings. The twentyseven
stars from A§gvini to Revati are the wives of Candra.
There is another view that Gandra has twentyeight
wives including another star called Abhijit. Candra has
another name, Sarvamaya. Candra with bis pleasing
rays, as sweet as Amrta (Nectar) bestows happiness on
devas, Pitrs and all other living beings. So he is called
Sarvamaya.
Candra’s chariot has three wheels. Ten beautiful horses
white as Jasmine flowers draw the chariot. These
horses also like those of Surya live for -a Kalpa era.
Because the Devas drink its digits Candra wanes into
one digit (Kala). Then Stirya makes him wax again
with one single ray of his called Susumna. When only
two Kalas of his remain Candra enters the orbit of
Surya and stays there in the ray called ‘ama’, and _ that
day, therefore is called amavasya. And on that day
Candra enters waters for the first time, and after that
dwells in trees, creepers etc. While Candra is thus in
trees etc. those who cut them will be committing the
sin of brahmahatya. (slaughter of a brahmin). When
only a little of the 15th kala remains on new moon day
hordes of Pitrs gather round the enfeebled Candra to
drink him, and they drink the amrta kala, one of the
two kalas still remaining with him. Thus the three
classes of Pitrs, Barhisadas, Saumyas and Agnisvattas
get absolutely satisfied for one month. Thus Candra
nurtures Devas in the Sukla Paksa and pitrs in Krsna
Paksa, and grows trees, creepers etc. with life-giving
water, (For details see under Candra).
3) Sukra (Venus). Sukra is an auspicious Deva very
much interested in doing good to the world and making
people happy. His course is also, like that of Sirya, of
three types, intense (quick), slow and of equal pace.
Two-and-a-half yojanas above Siirya, Sukra follows 4
course alternating in front of and behind Sarya. Sukra
never goes very far away from Surya, and he possesses
a big-chariot drawn by horses from earth. (For details
see under Sukra).
4) Budha (Mercury). Though inherently auspicious
Budha, in contact with inauspicious planets takes their
character and becomes weak. Budha also has the three
paces, quick, slow and medium. Budha moves close t0
Sirya and if he moves from Surya storms, failure 0
rain etc. will be the result. He is considered to be: the
son of Candra. His chariot is made of wind and fire,
golden in colour and is drawn by eight horses having
the speed of wind. (See under Budha for more details).

GRAHAS
5) Kuja (Mars). Kuja is two lakhs of yojanas above
Budha, and remains in every rasi (house) more or less
for 45 days. When the position is affected it causes
inauspicious experiences to living beings. The chariot
of Kuja is made of gold, glittering and of huge size.
Eight horses born from Agni draw the chariot.
6) Brhaspati (Jupiter). Jupiter travels 2 lakhs of yojanas
away from Kuja’s sphere. Though it is an auspicious
planet its reverse course is productive of evil results.
Jupiter travels for twelve months in every rasi (house).
His golden chariot is drawn by eight white horses. (See
Brhaspati) .
7) Sani (Saturn). Sani is 2 lakhs of yojanas away from
Jupiter's sphere, and it stays in every house for twenty
months. As it moves only slowly it is called Sanaigcara
also. Sani is considered to be the son of Surya. It is an
inauspicious. planet. His chariot is drawn by multicoloured horses born in the sky. ,
8) Raku. His ash-coloured chariot is drawn by eight
horses as dark as beetles. Once the horses are harnessed to the chariot it will always be running. On full
moon days R&ahu starts from Sirya and reaches Candra
and returns to Surya on new moon days. It is an inaus_ picious planet. (For details see under Rahu).
9) Ketu. His chariot is drawn by eight horses, which
have the speed of wind. Itis also an inauspicious
planet. |
10). Sapéiarsis. Thirteen crores of yojanas away from the
zone of Sani exists the Saptarsi zone. Seven maharsis
are incessantly on the move in that sphere, wishing all
that is well for the whole world. (See Saptarsis).
L1) Dhruva. Thirteen crores of yojanas away from the
saptarsimandala there is a place called Visnupada.
Dhruva, son of Uttanapada lives there in the company
of Indra, Agni, Kasgyapa, Dharma and others. The
Dhruvamandala remains there stationary like the
supporting pillar of all the planets ever on the move.
(See Dhruva; Devibhagavata 8th Skandha;) Visnu
Purana, Part II).
Astrologers aver that living beings pass through the
periods and positions of the following planets, viz. Ketu,
Sukra (Venus) Aditya (Sun), Candra (Moon), Kuja
(Mars), Rahu, Brhaspati (Jupiter) , Sani (Saturn) and
Budha (Mercury). The following table shows how
people born under different stars pass through the
different dagas. The order of succession of the daégas
and the period of each dasa can also be seen from this
table.
Stars (Day of birth)? | Daga Years
Aévini Magha Mila Ketu 7
( Asvayuk )
Bharani Parva . Parvasadha Sukra 90
Phalguni
Krttika Uttaraphal-' | Aditya 6
guni Uttarasadha
Rohini Hastam Sravana Candra 10
1. To find. out your dasa
in the dasa shown in the right han
into the Ketu daga. So with the other stars a
is born will last requires some astrological skill ; a
hours. Ifa man is born under a star when half this
ponding dasa. The portion of the da
a man is born under the star Asvaini
7 years. But the man will get only
dasa,
d side against that star ;
(Agvyuk) when : the star is
at the time of birth, please see the above
e. g.
also as shown in the above
also the exact time. of birth
period of dominance is
é3 that the man will get 1s prop
the last quarter of it, namely a
297 GRAHAPIDA
MrgaSiras Citra Sravistha Kuja 7
Ardra Svati Satabhisaj Rahu 18
Punarvasu. Vigakha Pirvapro- Brhaspati 18
sthapada
Pusya Anuradha -Uttarapro- Sani 19
‘ . sthapada
Aglesa Jyestha Revati Budha 17
GRAHAPIDA. (Adverse planetary effects on children)
Astrologers hold the view that planets affect or exercise
some influence on the lives of people. According to
that given hereunder isa brief description of planets,
which affect a child from its very birth as also of
remedial measures to keep the child free from such
adverse planetary effects.
On the very day of the birth of the child a female
planet called Papini affects it as a result of which it will
refuse all food and be lying turning its head this way
and that. Papini will tap the health not only of the
child but of the mother also. Bali (sacrificial offering
with flesh, fish and liquor as also waving with flowers and
fragrant materials and lighted lamp, and smearing the
child’s body with sandal paste, mancetti powder, tatiri
flower, bark of pachotti, are remedies against the attack
of Papini. Burning of buffalo dung also is_ useful.
On the second night after the birth of the child another
female planet called Bhisani attacks it. Symptoms of
the attack are coughing, deep breath and shrinking of
bodily. organs. The remedies for the attack are: smearing
of the-body with paste made in sheep’s urine of tippali
(long pepper), ramacca, root of ‘‘Katalati” and sandalwood. The child should also be exposed to the fumes
got by burning the horn tooth and hairs of the cow.
And, with the above-mentioned things bali should be
offered to the planet.
On the third night the female planet called Ghantali
affects the child. Frequent crying, yawning, shivering and
loss of appctite are the main symptoms of the attack.
Smearing the body with a paste of lotus styles, afijana
stone and tooth of cow and elephant mixed with goat’s
skin is a good remedy for the illness. The child should
be treated with the fumes got by burning the leaves of
naguna (a tree) and bilva and balias aforesaid should
also be offered.
Kakoli (female planet) affects the child on the fourth
night. Shivering, loss of appetite, frothing and wandering of the eyes are the main symptoms of the attack.
In this case bali should be offered with liquor and
flesh; the body should be smeared with a paste in
horse’s urine of elephant’s tusk and the outer skin of
snakes. The child should also be subjected to the fume
of tamarind and margosa leaves.
- Hamsadhika (female planet) affects the child on the fifth
night.. Yawning, breathing out alone and closing of
_ fingers are the main symptoms of the attack. Bali with
table. Any one born under any af the stars 1s considered born
People born under (Agvayuk) Agvini, Mrgasirsa and Mila ha born
table. To calculate how long the dasa into which a,,paticlar person
should -be known. A star remains dominant for about 24
over, then that man will get only half the period of the corresortionate to the period of dominance of the star. For example,
last quarter of the Ketu daga. ‘The total period of this dasa is
in the that he will pass on to the next daga—Sukrabout 1 a years. After

GRAHAPIDA
fish etc. should be offered to this planet, and the child
smeared with a paste of goat-horn, roots of the vatyala
plant, bark of pachotti (Tilva) manayola and haritala.
Phalkari (female planet) attacks the child on the
sixth night. Startling, fainting, waking frequently from
sleep and crying much, loss of appetite and turning the
body round and round are the chief symptoms of the
attack. In this case bali with fish etc. is called for.
The child is also to be exposed to the fumes produced
by the burning of dried tamarind, gulgulu, Kottam
and elephant’s tusk,
Muktakesi (female planet) attacks the child on the
seventh night. Bad odour, yawning, weakening of body
and cough form the main symptoms of the attack.
Exposure to fumes produced by burning leopard’s teeth
and the smearing of the body with a paste made of '
orris root and cow’s dung and urine should also be
done.
Sridandi (female planet) attacks the child on the eighth
night. Wandering of the eyes, crying and also making
a barking noise and quick movement of the tongue
are the main symptoms. Bali with fish etc. and smea-_
ring the body with a paste of orris root, mustard seed
and garlic are the treatment for the attack.
The terrible female planet, Urdhvagrahi attacks the
child on the ninth night. Startling, breathing out alone
and biting the fists of both hands form the chief symptoms of the attack. Smearing of the body with a paste
of red sandalwood, Costus speciosus etc. and exposure
to fumes produced by burning the hairs and nail of the
monkey are remedies for the illness.
Rodani attacks the child on the tenth night. Incessant
crying and bodily fragrance and blue colour are the
main symptoms of the attack. Exposure to fume produced by burning margosa leaves and application of a
paste made of orris root, tamarind are good remedies.
Bali should be offered with fried paddy, flesh and barley
rice. For thirteen days from its birth the child should
be treated in theabove manner. ~ :
A terrible female planet called Piitana attacks the child
when it isone month old. Crying like~ the crow, frequent breathing, smell of urine on the body and
reddening of the eyes are the chief symptoms of the
attack. Remedies thereof are as follows : bathing in
cow’s urine and exposure to the fumes got by burning
cow’s teeth, bali to be offered with yellow clothes. red
flower, red sandalwood, lamps lighted, three varieties
of payasa (pudding), liquor, gingelly seeds and flesh.
Bali with the above materials should be offered for
seven days under an ‘Ung’ tree on the southern side.
Mukuta, (female planet) attacks the child two months
old. Coldness of the body, vomiting, parching of mouth
etc. are the chief symptoms. Remedy for the attack
is offering of bali with flower, Sandalwood, clothes and
bread (all black in colour) and lighting of lamps and
ing. .
—* attacks the child, in the third month. Abnormal sleep, exessive urination etc. are the main symptoms
f the attack. Bali in the morning with barley, flesh,
Of Le sure to the fumes of ghee at
milk, rice etc. and expo To bath
on are the treatment for the illness. To bathe the
child ‘n water boiled with the leaves of five trees is also
good,
GRAHAPIDA
Pingala attacks the child, when it is four months oldExcessive coldness of body, bad odour and emaciation
of body are the main signs of the attack. Pingala’s
attack often proves fatal.
During the fifth month the planet Lalana attacks the
child. Weakness, blood coming out of the mouth,
and excretion yellow in colour are the main’ symptoms
of the attack. Bali with fish etc. on the southern side of
the house is the treatment for it.
Pankaja attacks the child during the sixth month. Various
kinds of awkward movements, crying in awkward and
peculiar voice are the main symptoms of the attack.
Offerings of liquor, fish, flesh, rice, flowers etc. will cure
the illness.
During the seventh month Nirahara attacks the child.
Bad odour, tooth-ache etc. are the main symptoms.
Bali with fish, flesh etc. is the cure.
Yamuna attacks the child during the eighth month. Skin
eruptions etc. are the chief symptoms. No special treatment is required for ‘this.
During the ninth month Kumbhakarni attacks the child.
Fever, vomiting and abnormal crying form the chief
symptoms. Bali with flesh and liquor is the cure for it.
Tapasi attacks the child during the tenth month.
Refusing to eat food and rolling of the eye-balls form
the main symptoms. Bali on level ground with flesh
etc. is the remedy for it.
During the eleventh month Raksasi attacks the child.
No treatment is called for. |
Caficala attacks the child during the twelfth month.
Breathing problems, palpitation etc. are the main
symptoms. Bali during the first half of the day with
Kalmasa etc. is the remedy.
During the second year of its life the child is attacked
by Rodani. Shivering of the body, crying and emission of
blood‘and urine form the main symptoms. In such
cases bali should be offered with pudding of molasses
and gingelly seeds made into small balls. Also an idol
should be made of gingelly seeds and it should be
bathed in gingelly water. The child should further
be exposed to the fumes got by burning the leaves of five
trees.
Catuka (a female planet) attacks the child during the
fourth year. Fever, swellings, and weakness of limbs are
the main symptoms. Bai with fish, flesh, gingelly seeds
and also fuming form the treatment.
Paficala attacks the child when it is five years old.
Fever, weakness of limbs are.the symptoms. Bali with
flesh, rice, etc, and fuming with the excretion of sheep
form the treatment. Bathing in water boiled with
leaves of jack fruit tree, peepal tree etc. is also good.
Dhavani attacks the child when it is six years old.
Thinning of face, tastelessness of mouth and weakness
of limbs are the main symptoms in such cases. Bali for
seven days with the above-mentioned things and bathing
in kanjunny » (Bhrngaraja creeper) water are the treat-
. ment.
Yavana attacks the child in the seventh year. Speechlessness, vomiting, laughing and crying for no apparent
reason form the symptoms. Bali with liquor, flesh,
pudding etc. and fuming and bathing form the treatment.
Jataveda attacks the child in the eighth year. The
child refuses food and cries. Bali with cooked gingelly,

GRAMADEVATA 299
gingelly bread and curds, and bathing and fuming form
the treatment.
Kala (Kali) attacks the child during the ninth year.
Feelings of fear, roaring etc. are the symptoms. Bali
with gingelly rice, gingelly bread, gingelly powder,
Kalmasa and pudding form the treatment.
Kalaharhsi attacks the child during the tenth year.
Fever, burning sensation and emaciation are the
symptoms. Bali for five days with bread called Paulik
and rice mixed with ghee, exposure to fumes of margosa
leaf and smearing the body with a paste of Kottam
form the treatment. ,
Devabhiti attacks the child when it is eleven years old.
Then he will utter harsh and cruel words. Bali and
smearing as above form the treatment.
Valika attacks the child in the 12th year. Frequent
hiccoughs is the symptom. Treatment is the same as
above.
Vayasi attacks the child when it is 13 years old. All the
limbs except the face get emaciated. Treatment 1s as
follows : bali with red rice, red sandal-wood and red
flowers; bath in water boiled with the leaves of five trees;
and exposure to the fumes of margosa and mustard.
Yaksini attacks the child when it is fourteen years old.
Awkward physical expressions, stomach-ache, fever and
thirst are the symptoms. Bali with flesh, rice etc. and
bathing etc. as above form the treatment.
Mundika attacks the child when it is fifteen years old.
Various kinds of pains, bleeding etc. are the symptoms.
The mother of the child is to be treated for this.
Vanari attacks the child during the 16th year. Falling
down, continuous sleep and’ fever form the symptoms.
Bali during three nights with pudding etc. and bathing
and fuming as above form the treatment.
Gandhavati attacks the child during the seventeenth
year. Agitation of limbs and crying are the symptoms.
Bali with Kalmasa etc. and bathing and fuming as
above form the treatment.
The following mantra should be repeated in all balis
and gifts.
Orn namah sarvamatrbhyo balapidasarhyogarn bhufija
bhufija cuta cuta Sphotaya sphotaya ay ves sphura
grhana grhana akattaya akattaya kattaya kattaya evam
siddharupo jfiapayati hara hara nirdose kuru kuru
balikarh balarh striyarn purusarh va sarvagrahanamupakramat-cimunde namo devyai hrum hrum hrim
apasara dustagrahan hram tadyatha gacchantu grhyatam anyatra panthanam rudro jhapayati. (Agni Purana,
Chapter 299),
GRAMADEVATA. India is predominantly a rural
country with a number of villages, and the rural folk
depend mainly upon agriculture for living. Agricultural
land, rain and epidemics which affect them as_ well as
GRANTHIKA
temples in Andhra also. Most of them are Jokulambika
temples. In Tamil Nadu there are gramadevatas called
Mariyamma, K4aliyamma, and Draupadiyamma. Not
the Draupadi mentioned in the Mahabharata; but the
Kannaki of Cilappadikara is the Devi worshipped in
Tamil Nadu.
There are two kinds of Devis called Saptamatrs and
Saptakanyas. Saptamatrs have purusas (husbands) and
saptakanyas have seven brothers for help and support.
Devi piija is very much prevalent in South India. The
custom is supposed to be as old as 5000 B.C. Idols of
Devi have been unearthed from Mohanjo-daro and
Harappa. Even the Buddhists worship the Devis called
Yaksi and Hariti. When in after years Hinduism was
revitalised these gramadevatas got promoted as the
great Devatas of the epics and the Puranas. The
Ramayana mentions the incident of the Devi called
Lankalaksmi driving away Haniiman. There are famous
Kali temples in Ujjayini and Calcutta. It is believed
that in the temple at Cidambaram also Kali occupied
a prominent place. But, according to legends, Siva
defeated Kali in a dance competition and ousted her to
her present temple at the outskirts of the city. Camundi
is worshipped as the ancestral guardian deity in Mysore.
The Kamaksi temple of Kajici, Minaksi temple of
Madura and Mikambika temple of North Karnataka
may be cited as examples for the worship of the gentle
form of Devi. Alarmel Mankattayar temple at
Tiruccanir is a very important Devi temple. The
‘Aditi’ in the Vedas and Kottravai of Tamil Sangha
texts point to the very long past of the Devi in India.
Kalidasa and Kalamegha (a Tamil poet of the
fifteenth century have worshipped Kali. Sri Ramakrsna
Paramaharhsa and the great modern ‘Tamil poet
Bharati were devotees of Kali.
There are also gramadevas worshipped like the gramadevatas. Munigvara and Karuppan are two prominent
eramadevas. In certain villages Bhairava, Vira, Irula,
Katteri and Nongi are worshipped as gramadevas. In
South Karnataka a set of Devas called Bhitas are
worshipped, Paficuruli being one of them. Sasta or
Ayyappa is another gramadeva. Sast& is most popular
in Kerala-and in Tamil Nadu. Buddha also is called
Sasta. In certain places idols of Sasta with two wives,
called Pirna and Puskala are also found. Sabarimala
Sastais yogamirti (in yogic pose).
In most of the gramadeva temples idols of the Devas
are not found. A pitha (stool-like seat) is supoosed as
the seat of the Deva and it represents the Deva also.
But, in some temples weapons like the sword, the club
etc. are found. Offerings to the deity in gramaksetras
and annual festivals are common in such temples. (Nam
vanamgum daivarmngal-Tamil) .
their cattle—these are the main concern of the villagers. GRAMANI. A bhitagana (set of atten dania) af Gi
Indians, from very ancient days, used to believe that
each of the above has its own presiding devatas. Such
devatas are the gramadevatas. . .
Devi.is the chief gramadevata of South India. Devi As
called Durga and Kali also. But, Devi is worshipped in
sixtyfour different forms or aspects. The gentle Devi,
viz. in her gentle aspect or attitude has three forms,
Kany, Kamaksi, and Makambika. In Kerala Devi 1s
Sins of those who worship this gana will be removed.
(Anugasana Parva, Chapter 150, Verse 25)
GRAMANITYA. One born in the family of the Ksatriya,
who is the governor of village. Nakula defeated the
gramaniyas during the conquest of Jands in connection
with the aévamedha of Dharmaputra. (Sabha Parva;
Chapter 32, Verse 9).
called Bhagavati also. Valiyangadi Bhagavati of GRANTHIKA. Name assumed by Nakula during his
Calicut is Laksmidevi. Kali temples in Karnataka are
called ‘Kottapurarn Laksmi Ksetras . There are such
life incognito at the Virata palace. (Virata Parva,
Chapter 3, Verse 4).

GRDHRAKUTA
GRDDHRAKUTA. A mountain of northern India. The
Larhsiiras gave protection to Brhadratha at this mountain. (Sloka 82, Chapter 49, Santi Parva).
GRDDHRAPATRA. A soldier of Skandadeva, (Sloka
74, Chapter 45, Salya Parva).
GRDDHRAVATA. A mount of the Himalayas. This
mount is the abode of, Mahadeva. Those brahmins who
visit this place would get moksa and those of other
castes would be absolved of all sins. (Sloka 91, Chapter
84, Vana Parva).
GRDDHRIKA. A bird. Kagyapa begot of his wife
Tamra, the six birds namely Kaki, yeni, Bhasi,
’ Suci and Griva. (Agni Purana, Chapter
GREEK LITERATURE. Greek is one of the most
important Indo-European languages. As an independent branch of the original Indo-European language
Greek established itself by about 2000 B.C. Even
during its earliest period Greek had four local dialects
as a result of the arrival of the Greek-speaking people
at different periods of time. Iolic, Ionic-Attic, Arcado
Cyprean and- western Greek are the four dialects.
Iolese was prevalent in the Lesbos region, and this is
the dialect mainly used in the poetry of Homer. The
Tonic and Attic dialects were prevalent in Ionia and
Attica respectively. After Homer, the major portion of
Greek literature was written in this dialect. The
Arcado-Cyprean dialect was used in Arcadio and
Cyprus. The fourth dialect was also called Doric.
Naval traditions, commerce and _ political power contributed to the growth and development of Greek
language and literature. In each dialect, even from the
very beginning, literary efforts were made. Each of the
four spoken languages very soon developed into a
written language. But, in the very initial periods each
of the spoken dialects continued its existence in the
form of ballads and songs transferred from one man to
another. It was Homer who gave those popular ballads
an epic form and status and sowed the seeds of the
great literature of Greece.
The golden period of Greek literature was when the
city of Athens enjoyed supreme political power.
Literature during the period set the model for future
generations. It was during this period that Greek
achieved the best in different literary forms like tragedy,
comedy, lyric, elegy, history, philosophy, oratory etc.
Pindar, Aeschylus, Herodotus, Sophocles-Euripides,
Aristophanes, Thucydides, Plato and Demosthenes
these are distinguished names who were responsible for
the great development of the literary forms referred to
above.
Greek literature passed the Alexandrian, Roman and
Byzantian periods before it arrived at the modern
period. It was Solomos and Valoritus and others who
gave impetus and inspiration to modern Greek literaGRHADEVI. Another name of the demoness Jara.
See under Jara) ,
GRHAPATI A sage. There is a story in Siva Purana
ut this sage. ;' - ie ee
igen father of Grhapati was living with his wife
Sucismati in a hermitage on the banks of the river
5 sada. They had no children and Sucismati, was
iene much on this account. She requested her husband
find out ways and means to get a child. Visvanara,
GRHASTHA
went to Kasi and did penance to propitiate Visves vara
and the God appeared before him and blessed him and
said: “You will soon get ason’’. Very soon the wife
of Visvanara delivered a child.and the son was named
Grhapati. When the child was nine years old Narada
came there once and warned them against fire. Visvanara immediately went and did penance to propitiate
Siva and obtained from him for his son the qualities of
fire also so that fire would be unable to act on him. It
was on account of this that Grhapati when he installed
an idol of Siva at Kasi gave it the name of Agnisvara.
GRHASTHA. In ancient India the life of a male person
was divided into four stages, namely, Brahmacarya
Garhasthya, Vanaprastha and Sannyasa. He who is in
the second stage of life is called a Grhastha.
When a person marries, he becomes a Grhastha. The
bride should have certain qualities to be an ideal wife.
The girl should be only a third of the age of the male.
She should not have hair either too much or too little.
She should not be black or of a pingala hue. She
should not have any of her organs extra at the time of
birth. The following types of girls are to be avoided
for marriage. (1) Girls bred up by low-caste people
(2) girls with hair over the body(3) not born of a
good family (4) sick ones (5) ill-natured ones (6) girls
who use abusive language (7) with hereditary diseases
(8) with gmasru (hair on the face) (9) girls with masculine features (10) with the sound of males (11) lean
ones (12) with the voice of a crow (13). with thick eyelashes (14) round eyes. Again avoid girls having hair
on their legs, raised heels and those with small depressions on their clieeks when they laugh. Girls whose
bodies are too bright, with white nails, red eyes and
fat hands and legs are not good for marriage. Girls too
tall or too short, with eyelashes touching each other,
with broad and raised teeth are to be avoided. A true
Grhastha is one who marries a girl who is separated
from him by five generations on the maternal side and
seven generations on the paternal side.
A true Grhastha should daily worship devas, cows,
brahmins, scholars, old men and preceptors. He should
worship sandhya (dawn and dusk) daily and also fire.
He should wear on his body leaves of Visnukrantl,
Karuka (couch grass), Tulasi (holy basil plant). He
should appear neat and smart wearing good dress, wit
white flowers on his well combed head. He shoul
never steal, speak unpleasant words to anybody nor
speak an untruth even if it be pleasant. He should not
openly speak about the sins of others. He should. not
covet another man’s wife. He should not travel in a
damaged vehicle nor should he sit under the shade of
a tree on the banks of a river. A Grhastha should not
mingle with such persons as (1) men hated by the
people (2) outcastes from society (3) insane men (4)
those having a great number of enemies (5) those who
torment others (6) prostitutes (7) husbands of prostitutes (8) those who use abusive language (9) those
who tell lies (10) spendthrifts (11) scandalmongers an
(12) rogues. Never travel alone. He should not bathe
against the flow in a river. Never enter a house on fire
nor climb to the extreme top of trees. He should not
grind his teeth, squeeze out his nose, yawn without
covering the mouth. breathe or spit, with the ae
covered, laugh noisily, breathe out with a sound, bite

GRIVA 301
the teeth, pinch grasses or write or draw on the ground
(Améa 3, Visnu Purana). | c
GRIVA. A daughter in bird form born to Kasyapaprajapati by his wife Tamra. Griva had the following
sisters, Kaki, Syeni, Bhasi, Grddhrika and Suci, all birds.
(Agni Purana, Chapter 1).
GRTSAMADA I. A celebrated sage. He was the son of
a sage called Vitahavya. Grtsamada was equal to Brhaspati and a great friend of Indra. Once this sage lectured to Yudhisthira on the glory of Siva. Many have
mistaken Grtsamada for Indra. Once the asuras bound.
GUNADH
Sita to the other side of the river. (Sarga 50, Valmiki
Ramayana, Ayodhya Kanda).
Guha is seen next when Bharata comes to the forest in
search of Rama. When Bharata returned from Kekaya
he went in search of Sri Rama and Laksmana and came
to Guha in Srigiverapura. Guha then gave Bharata all
available information regarding Sri Rama. Guha then
sent the Dasa army along with Bharata. (Sarga 84,
Ayodhya Kanda, Valmiki Ramayana).
Guha, chief of Srnigiverapura, spent the night with
Rama and Laksmana under an Oka tree. (Chaper 6,
Agni Purana).
him by ropes mistaking him for Indra. Bip Had 2 ce GUHA (S). A tribe of people of ancient India. Andhras,
named Kuceta. (For more details see under Varistha)
(Chapters 18 and 30, Anusasana Parva).
GRTSAMADA II. A King ofthe Bhargava dynasty. He
Pulindas, Cucukas, Guhas, Sabaras and Bhadras are
some of the tribes of the south. (Sloka 42, Chapter 207,
Santi Parva).
was the son of King Suhotra. Grtsamada had two bro- GUHASENA. See under Devasmita.
thers. Kagya and Kuga, and a son, Suniaka. (9th GUHYAKA. A Yaksa. (A division of Yaksas who were
Skandha, Bhagavata) . \
GRTSAMADA III. The son born to Indra of Mukunda.
There is the following story about him’in Ganesa
Purana.
Once when Rukmangada was out from the palace,
Indra, in the guise of Rukmangada, went to
Mukunda, wife of Rukmangada, and slept with
her who was at that time sexually hungry. She delivered
a child in due course. This boy was Grtsamada. He
grew into a great scholar. Nobody was able to defeat
him in any verbal duel. Once Grtsamada went to the
palace of the king of Magadha to attend a Sraddha (an
prominent members of the court of Kubera). They were
present at the marriage of Draupadi. (Sloka 7, Chapter
186, Adi Parva).
Other details.
(i) The palace of Kubera in the sky is borne by Guhyakas. (Sloka 3, Chapter 10, Sabha Parva).
(ii) Bhimasena slew many Guhyakas on the mountain
of Gandhamadana. (Sloka 55, Chapter 11, Salya
Parva).
(iii) Some of the soldiers who died in the Mahabharata battle went to the world of the Guhyakas. (Sloka
23, Chapter 4, Svargarohana Parva). |
offering to the manes) along with Vasistha and others. GULIKA. A hunter who was given moksa by the sage
Atri Maharsi who was present there then spoke slightingly of Grtsamada’s parentage and Grtsamada coming
home questioned his mother. The mother then told him
what had happened and Grtsamada getting angry at the
immoral act committed by his mother cursed _her and
said ‘‘May you be a Kantaka tree”’. Mukunda also did
not leave her son free. She cursed him thus ‘“You will
Uttanga. This hunter once made an attempt to steal
the gold plates on the roof of the Visnu temple at the
palace of Sauvira. Uttanga was present at the temple
then and, Gulika tried to kill the sage. The sage cursed
him and.-killed him. Taking pity on him later Uttanga
sprinkled some water from the river Ganga, on him
and the hunter attained Vaikuntha. (Naradiya Purana).
have a demon as your son”’. But Grtsamada went and GUNA. See under Pattu (Ten).
did penance to propitiate Ganapati and got Brahmanya. GUNADHYA. He is the author of the celebrated BrhatRTSAPATI. He was the son of Kapila, a King of the
r Paru dynasty. He had a brother called Kausika. Grtsapati had sons in all the four castes, namely, Brahmana,
Ksatriya, Vaiéya and Sidra. (Chapter 277, Agni
Purana) . ih : y ta
AKESA. Anothername of Arjuna. He got the
Pa because he conquered sleep. (Sloka 8, Chapter
138, Adi Parva). 7 ia
GUDHASENA. A King of the aoe ns sa em
3 he country of Nisadas alias Srngipace Mie aette of the river Ganga. Sri Rama
hen he went on exile to the forests went to the resi-
. - of Guha accompanied by Laksmana and Sita.
ha. a devotee of Rama, received them with respect
wi a them many kinds of fruits and roots to eat.
B tei Rama said that it was not proper to accept
fi afi d roots and so he drank only pure water from
ean a Guha was asked to feed his horse. At night
— Veakeeiatia stood watch over Rama and po ioe
I teered to stand guard but Laksmana fe use ‘6
mone the offer. So Guha kept company with Laksmana
nt the night talking to each other.
= gelato my ‘a per Rama’s request Guha lags
“ canoe and Guha himself took Rama, Laksmana an
katha which is a precious mine of Sanskrit Literature.
Gunadhya had written this in satanic (paigacika) language difficult for ordinary people to read or understand.
This was translated into Sanskrit by the poet Ksemendra in a book called Brhatkathamafijari. This was the
first translation and it was in an abridged form. Somadeva made a more elaborate translation and it is this
translation that is now known. as the Kathdsaritsagara.
Gunadhya is believed to be an incarnation of the Sivaparsada, Malyavan. There is a story behind Malyavan
being cursed and made to be born asman by Parvati.
Once Parvati worried Siva to tell hera story original
and interesting and not heard of by anybody before.
Placing Nandikega at the door and instructing him not
to allow anybody inside Siva started narrating the story
of the Vidyadharas to Parvati. At that time Puspadanta,
chief of the genie-guards of Siva who was at liberty
to go to the presence of Siva at any time, came there
and heedless of the protests of Nandikesa entered the
room. There he found Siva telling a story to Parvati
and she was hearing the same with rapt attention. The
story was so interesting that Puspadanta also heard it
standing concealed in a place in the room. After having
heard the whole story Puspadanta went back unnoticed

GUNADHYA
and told the story to his wife, Jaya. Jaya on another
occasion told the story to Parvati and the latter was
taken aback and she went to Siva and complained:
“Your Lordship told me that the story was unique,
not heard of before by anybody. But even Jaya knows
it.’ And she wept with disappointment. Then Siva
stood in meditation for sometime, and knew how
Puspadanta had entered the room unnoticed and how
he had told the story he had heard to Jaya. Siva
explained this to Parvati and she immediately sent
word for Puspadanta who came trembling and confessed everything. Parvati then cursed Puspadanta
and also Malyavan who came to speak on behalf of
Puspadanta and made them men. They begged for
relief from the curse and then she said, ‘“‘Long ago
Vaisravana cursed a Yaksa named Supratika and converted him into a devil named Kanabhiti. This devil
. 1s now living in the deep forests on ‘the Vindhya mountains. When youtalk with him you will become your
old selves again. Puspadanta should first tell the story
he has heard from Siva to Kanabhiti and then he will
be relieved from the curse. Kanabhiti will then tell
Malyavan many stories. Then Kanabhiti will get
release from the curse. Malyavan should make public
all the stories he had heard from Kanabhiti and then
he will also get release from the curse.” Accordingly
Puspadanta was born as Vararuci in the city of KauSambi and Malyavan as Gunadhya in the city of
Supratisthita. (For details see under Vararuci).
The story of how Supratika became Kanabhiti is this:
The Yaksa, Supratika, got friendly with a demon
named Silagiras and they moved about freely as chums.
Vaisravana did not like this and he cursed Supratika
and converted him into a satan. At once. Dirghajangha,
elder brother of Supratika, came and begged for relief.
Vaisravana then said: ‘‘Puspadanta will be born on
the earth by a curse as man and he will one day come
and tell Supratika many great stories. After hearing
them he should narrate them to Malyavan who will
then be born on the earthas man. Supratika will then
get release from the curse and become his old self again’’,
Supratika was born in the forests of Vindhya as
Kanabhiti.
This is the story of the birth of Gunadhya. There is a
city called Supratisthita in the country of Pratisthana
and there lived a brahmin named Somagarma. He had
two sons, Vatsa and Gulmaka and a daughter named
Srutartha. Before long the parents died and Srutartha
grew up under the protection of her brothers. Kirtisena,
brother of Vasuki, married her by gandharva rites and
Gunadhya was the child born to them.
Even while he was a boy he went to the south for his
education and there from a brahmin he studied all arts
and sciences. When he completed his studies he started
on a tour and at that time became the minister ofa
king called Sdtavahana. He married from there. One
day his (Satavahana’s ) wife rebuked the king when the
latter made some linguistic errors and Satavahana became dejected and moody from that day onwards. Then
there came to the court of the King a brahmin named
Sarvavarman who promised to make the King proficient
| ‘thin six months. But Gunadhya said that
in languages wi ee.
ible to doso within six months. They made
it was not poss =:
a bet. Gunadhya swore that if Sarvavarman would teac
the King the Sabdasastra (science of language-sounds)
GUNADHYA
within six months he (Gunadhya) would abandon his
knowledge of Sanskrit, Prakrit and local language. On the
other hand if Sarvavarma failed to accomplish the feat
the latter should wear on his head for twelve years the
chappals of Gunadhya. Sarvavarman agreed and went
to do penance to please Subrahmanya. Subrahmanya
granted him a boon by the power of which Sarvavarman made Satavahana a scholar in Sanskrit. Defeated,
Gunadhya abandoned his knowledge of all languages
and bidding adieu to the King by gestures left for the
Vindhyan forests.
When Gunadhya went to the forests Kanabhiti, King
of the Satans was not in his place. He heard the
satans speaking in their peculiar language and intelligent that he was he picked up the language.
and when Kanabhiti came he spoke to him in his own
language. Kanabhiti told in the satanic language the
great stories of seven Vidyaddharas. Gunadhya took
seven years to write the stories in the satanic language
and compile them into seven lakhs of granthas to form
a Mahakavya. There were no writing materials available for him and Gunadhya wrote them all on leaves
using blood and twigs. When he started reading his
book all the devas assembled in the sky to hear it. On
hearing it Kanabhiti got release from the curse. It is
this book containing seven lakhs of granthas that is
called the Brhatkatha.
Gunadhya then thought of how to keep alive such an
interesting and gigantic book and then two of his
companions Gunadeva and Nandideva suggested to
him to dedicate the book to the King, Satavahana.
Gunadhya agreed to that and the two disciples took the
book to the King. The King read the whole story. But
did not like it. It was very elaborate. The language
was satanic. It was written with blood. The King
looked at the book with contempt.
When the disciples found that the King was not in
favour of the work, they took it back to Gunadhya.-
Gunadhya felt a great dejection. He went to a_ hillock
nearby with his disciples and made a big fire-pit. He set
aside the story of the Vidyadhara named Naravahanadatta composed of a lakh of granthas for the use 0
his disciples and then started putting into the fire-pit
the rest, reading aloud each leaf before he put it into
the fire. The sad disciples watched it weeping. Even
the wild animals of the forest flocked to the place and
stood. there listening to Gunadhya. At that time Satavahana became a sick man. The physicians of the
palace said that the illness was caused by the dry flesh
he was taking. The cook was called in and he accused the hunters who supplied them with flesh
daily. ‘The hunters were questioned and they informe
the King that only such flesh was available since all
the beasts and birds were standing without food listening to a man who was reading something from a lea
and then burning it in a fire-pit before him. SAatavahana immediately went to the place guided by the
hunters. There to his astonishment he found Gunadhy4
sitting before a fire-pit surrounded by weeping beasts
and birds and throwing leaves of his book one by on
into the fire after reading each before it was put into
the fire. Satavahana ran to him and prostrated before
him. Gunadhya then told Satavahana his story 1%
satanic language beginning from the curse on Puspadanta down to his destroying his own work in the firé-

GUNAKESI
His disciples translated his talk to the King. The King
was awe-stricken and he asked for the granthas. But
by that time he had already burnt six lakhs of granthas containing six stories. He gave to the King the
remaining one lakh of granthas. After that, bidding
farewell to the King, Gunadhya jumped into the fire
and abandoned his life on earth and went to the
presence of Siva. :
King Sdatavahana accompanied by the disciples of
Gunadhya came to his palace carrying the ‘Brhatkatha’
containing the story of Naravahanadatta. He gave
presents to Gunadeva and Nandideva who explained
to him the book in Sanskrit. King Satavahana added
a preface to the book to explain to the public how the
book came to be written in satanic language. The book
very soon got world fame. (Pithanularnbaka Kathasarit Sagara),
GUNAKESI. Daughter of Matali, charioteer of Indra.
She was more beautiful and well-behaved than many
other girls. Matali went about in search of a. suitable .
husband for her in all the three worlds. At last he
met Narada going to the presence of Kubera. He told
Narada about this and Narada took MAtali to Patalaloka
to search for a suitable bridegroom. Then they found out
a serpent boy named Sumukha (good looking) worthy
of his name who was the grandson of Aryaka and son
of Cikura born of the family of Airavata. But Sumukha was in danger at that time. Garuda had taken a
vow that he would eat Sumukha the next month. Aryaka
told Narada about this, Narada took Sumukha to the
court of Indra. Mahavisnu was also present there. When
Narada told the story there Indra blessed Sumukha and
granted him long life. This made Garuda angry and he
went to the court of Indra and rebuked Indra. Mahavisnu who was present there then did not like this act of
Garuda and he called the latter to his side and asked
him whether he could bear the weight of one of his
arms. With arrogance Garuda said ‘yes’ and Visnu
then placed one of his arms on the shoulder of Garuda
But Garuda found the weight unbearable and begged
pardon of Visnu, bereft of all his arrogance. The
marriage of Sumukha with Gunakesi was then conducted. (Chapters 97 to 100. Udyoga Parva. )
GUNAMUKHYA. A celestial maiden who took part
in the birthday celebrations of Arjuna. She gave a
dance there then. (Sloka 61, Chapter 122, Adi Parva).
GUNANIDHI. A Puranic character who lived a sinful
life and yet attained Svarga. In the country of Kosala
there was once a noble brahmin named Girinatha who
was rich, erudite and well-versed in the Vedas. Considering his greatness people called him Girinathadiksita. Gunanidhi was his son.
unanidhi grew up he started his education
ag receptor called Sudhisna. Sudhisna had a
wife named Muktavali. After some time Gunanidhi
started having clandestine relations with Muktavali.
This developed so much that Gunanidhi gave poison
to his guru and killed him. His parents came to know
of this and they came and reprimanded him. Evilnatured Gunanidhi thought that the presence of his
parents would be an annoyance to him 1n future. So
Gunanidhi and Muktavali planned together to kill his
parents and one day they poisoned them,
GUNASARMAN
After some time Gunanidhi and his wife lost all they
had and. gradually Gunanidhi turned himself into a
thief and drunkard. Nobody in the village liked the
couple and all the villagers combined together and
sent the couple away from the place. Gunanidhi and
Muktavali went to the forests and there they started a
life of lootirig the travellers. After -some years af .a
sinful life Gunanidhi one day died lying beneath -a
Rudraksa tree. Servants of both Yama and Siva came to
claim the soul of Gunanidhi. The servants of Yama said
that the right place of Gunanidhi the sinner, was in hell
but the servants of Siva said that even if he was a great
sinner his place was in heaven because he died lying
beneath a Rudraksa tree. In the end the Sivadiitas won
and took Gunanidhi to heaven. :
This story was once told by Siva himself to demonstrate
the glory of Rudraksa.(Skandha 11, Devi Bhagavata)
GUNASARMAN. A character of the Puranas well versed
in all arts and sciences. He was the son of the brahmin
Adityagarman of Ujjayini. The birth of Gunagarman
bears a story. Once Adityagarman went to the forests and
by his spiritual powers made Sulocana,a celestial
nymph, to merge with him. A son was born to them
and he was named Gunagarman. Adityagarman
became a deva. Even from boyhood he became very
erudite. Once Indra came to see Adityagarman. Adityagarman who was in deep thoughts did not see Indra
and*so did not rise up when Indra came. Indra felt
insulted and cursed him to be born again on Earth.
AdityaSarman prostrated before Indra and asked for
pardon. Indra then said that it would be enough if
his son was born on Earth in his stead. So Gunagarman
was born on Earth to bear the curse of his father.
At that time Ujjayini was being ruled over by a King
called Mahasena. He had a very beautiful wife named
Agokavati. Gunasgarman became gradually an intimate
friend of the King. Knowing that Gunagsarman was
well versed in all arts the King and queen asked him
to give thema performance in dancing. The dance
was so excellent that the King engaged Gunasarman to
teach dancing to Asokavati.
Once a royal attendant tried to give poisoned food to
the King and Gunagarman finding it out saved the
King. From that day onwards the King loved him
more. When once Mahasena was imprisoned by his
enemies Gunasgarman by his magic powers released
him. In return for this help the King gave Gunagarman a thousand villages. |
Then to the misfortune of all Asokavati fell. in love
with Gunagarman. Gunagarman bluntly refused her
love. Embittered at this Agokavati started talking ill of
Gunagarman and the King at last sent Gunasarman out
from the palace. The servants of the King tried to
capture him and put him into prison but GunaSarman
escaped from the royal servants by his magic powers.
He then went and stayed in the house of a brahmin
named Agnidatta and married his daughter, Sundari.
Then on the advice of the brahmin GunaSraman did
penance to propitiate Subrahmanya and got many
more powers from him. Gunasarman equipped with
these.additional powers conquered Mahasena and his
country and became King there. He then sent Mahasena
and his wife Agokavati, out from the country. (Siuryaprabhalammbaka, Taranga 6, Kathasaritsagara).

GUNAVARA
GUNAVARA. A heroine, devoted to her husband, in
the ancient literaturé of India. There is a story in
Kathasaritsagara describing the depth of her devotion
to her husband.
Gunavara was the queen of Virabhuja, King of the
country of Vardhamana. He had besides Gunavara
ninetynine other wives. But none had any children. So,
the King asked the chief physician of the state to
suggest a. way to remedy this. The physician asked for
a white and horned goat tobe brought and he then
made with its flesh a preparation. Then sprinkling
over it a special medicinal dust, he gave it to the wives
to eat. But Gunavara who never left her husband for
a moment came late to take the preparation and by the
time she came the others had already consumed the whole
lot. Then by an order of the King the horns of the
goat were made into a similar preparation and
Gunavara took it with the dust sprinkled over it. All
the wives got a child each. Gunavara’s son was named
Srngabhuja. |
All the other wives of Virabhuja became jealous of
Gunavara. They told the King that Gunavara was in
Jove with a servant of the palace. The King did not
believe it. But he thought he would test her. The King
called the servant in question and accusing him of
having committed the murder of a brahmin sent him
away from the state on a’ pilgrimage. Sorrow-stricken
the servant set out for the pilgrimage. The King then
approached Gunavara and said that a sannydsin had
declared that he, the King, would lose his crown if one
of his wives was not put in a cell underground.
Gunavara who adored her husband readily agreed to
live underground.
The other wives were satisfied and yet they wanted to
send away her son, Srigabhuja also from the palace.
One day when all the children were playing in the
court-yard a stork came and sat perched on the top of
the palace. The princes attempted to catch hold of it.
A sannyasin who came there then informed the children
that the stork was none other than Agnisikha, a demon,
who had come there to capture and take away the
children, All the children then tried to drop it down
by arrows. But none succeeded. Then Srigabhuja took
a golden arrow from the palace and sent it against the
bird, The arrow struck the demon bui the bird flew
away carrying the golden arrow, —
The other princes found it as an opportunity to rebuke
Srngabhuja and they, led by Nirvasabhuja, reproached
him for losing the golden arrow. Unable to bear their
rngabhuja went after the stork following the
path of the blood drops which fell on the- ground from
the. wound. At last he reached Dhamapura, the land of
Agniéikha. There he fell in love with Rapasikha, the
daughter of Agni¢ikha. They were soon married and
et Agnigikha gave Smigabhuja great trouble. At last
.Spigabhuja and Ripasikha took the golden arrow and
eloped from the place one night and reached the city of
Vardhamana. Agnisikha followed them but the magic
powers of Rapasikha made him turn back. When King
Virabhuja saw his son Srngabhuja_he was extremely
happy. The King then released Gunavara fcom the
dungeon and praised her for her devotion to her husband. He loved her more and treated her with greater
insult
GURUPARAMPARA
affection than before. At that time the servant who had
been sent away also returned. (Taranga 5, Ratnaprabhalambaka, Kathasaritsagara) .
GUNAVARA. A celestial lady. This lady was present
at the birthday celebration of Arjuna and gave there
then a performance in dancing. (Sloka 61, Chapter
122, Adi Parva).
GUNAVARMAN. Adityasena, King of Ujjayini, had a
wife named Tejasvati. Gunavarman was the father of
Tejasvati. (Taranga 4, Lavanakalambaka, Kathasaritsagara).
GUNAVATI I.
Mandodari).
GUNAVATI II. Daughter born to Sunabha, younger
brother of Vajranabha. She had an elder sister named
Candramati. Prabhavati, daughter of Vajranabha, was
married to Pradyumna, son of Sri Krsna. One day
when Prabhavati and Pradyumna were engaged in
amorous conversation Gunavati and Candramati came -
to them and they expressed a desire to get husbands
for themselves from -among the Yadavas. Prabhavati
advised Candramati to marry Gada, brother of Krsna
and Gunavati to marry Samba,:son of Krsna. (Chapter 94, Harivarga).
Mother of Mandodari (See under
GUNAVATI. A river. Once Parafurama slew some
Ksatriyas on the northern banks of this river. (Sloka
8, Chapter 70, Drona Parva).
GUPTA. A caste appellation. In ancient India appellations to the names were put to distinguish one caste
from another. So ‘Sarma’ was added to a brahmin name,
‘Varma’ to a Ksatriya name ‘Gupta’ to a Vaisya
name and ‘Dasa’ toa Sidra name. Such appellations
were considered to be a mark of nobility in those olden
days. (Chapter 153, Agni Purana).
GUPTAKA. A prince of the country of Sauvira. He was
a friend of the famous Jayadratha. In the great battle
he was killed by Arjuna. (Sloka 27, Chapter 271, Vana
Parva).
GURNIKA. A companion of Devayani. (Chapter 78,
Adi Parva).
GURU. The following five persons are to be considered
as gurus: Father, mother, Preceptor, Agni (Fire) and
Atman (soul), (Sloka 27, Chapter 214, Vana Parva).
GURUDARA. Ason of Garuda. (Sloka 13, Chapter
101, Udyoga Parva). :
GURUPARAMPARA. The origin of the Vedas and the
lineage of Gurus is given below:
1) Origin of the Vedas. At the time of creation the
Veda was born from the face of God. It contained 4
lakh of granthas with four padas like Rk. From the
Veda were born the;ten yajiias. The Veda was originally one. It was Vyasa who divided it into four divisions resulting in the four Vedas.
Vyasa divided the Vedas thus: When Brahma commanded Vyasa to divide the Vedas into divisions he first
selected four disciples who could see the end of the
Vedas. He accepted Paila to study Rgveda, Vaisampayana to study Yajurveda, Jaimini to study Samaveda
and Sumantu to study Atharvaveda. Besides these he
selected the highly intelligent Romaharsana alias Suta
to study the Itihasas and Puranas.
At first, the Veda was one. Vyasa divided it into ee
He based the division on the caturhotra, performance °

GURUPARAMPARA 305
four hotrs. He arranged the performance of Adhvaryu
as Yajus, that of hotr as Rks, that of Udgatr as Samans
and that of Brahma as Atharvans. Then he separated
the Rks to form Rgveda, Yajus to form Y ajurveda and
Samans to form Samaveda. He devoted Atharvaveda to
specify the rites and duties of Kings and
Brahma. Vedavyasa thus split the single Veda tree into
four and fromi there arose later a forest of Veda trees.
2) The saints of Rgveda. Paiia divided Rgveda into
two samhitas and gave one each to Indrapramati and
Baskala. Sage Baskala divided his Samhita again into
four and taught it to four of his disciples, Bodhi, Adimadhava, Yajiiavalkya and Parasara. Indrapramati without splitting his sambhita taught 1t to his renowned son,
Mandikeya. The branch of Indrapramati thus went
down into circulation through the disciples of Mandukeya and the disciples of the disciples and so on.
Vedamitra of Sakalya gotra, one sage 1 the line of the
disciples of Mandikeya, split the samhita into five, and
taught it to Mudgala, Gomukha, Vatsya, ya
Sarira. Sakapiarna a colleague of Vedamitra divided it
into three and added a division to it by composing a
Nirukta of his own. He taught them to V aitalika,
Balaka and Kraufica. This was how the Indrapramat
Samhita produced branches and sub-branches. Baskala
divided his sarhhita into another set of three and taught
it to Kalayani, Gargya, and Kathajava. The sages
mentioned above are the ones who spread Rgveda in
the world.
3) Saints of Y ajurveda. Vaigampayana, disciple of Veda
Vyasa, made twentyseven divisions of Yajurveda and
taught them to his disciples. Among those disciples was
Yajiiavalkya, son of Brahmarata, The branch Taittiriya
originated from Yajiiavalkya.
4) The Taittiriya branch. Once all the sages learned in
the Vedas made a decision. He who does not attend the
Brahmasamaja meeting held at the mountain of Mahameru will be tainted with the sin of Brahmahatya
(murder of a brahmin). At one time Vaigampayana
was not able to attend and so was charged with the sin
of Brahmahatya. He called his disciples to his side and
told them that they should observe a Vrata /to absolve
Vaigampayana of his sin. ‘Then one of his disciples,
Yajniavalkya, stood up and said that he would observe
the vrata alone and that there was no need of anybody
else in that matter. When asked why he said so he
replied that none of the colleagues of his was so brilliant and majestic as he was. Vaigampayana did not
like this arrogance of Yajiavalkya and so angrily
‘fiavalkya to give back all that had been
anded Ya be
cong to him by Varampayana. Obeying orders Yajfiavalkya vomited all the yajus and went away from the
place. The other sages taking the form of the bird,
Tittir1, accepted the vomited i aa Therefore that
branch of the Veda got the name 0 Taittiriya and
those sages were known as the Taittiriyas.
5) <Ayatayama (i; Sn his leaving harap ir
Yajniavalkya put into operation a nie of Yajus
called Ayatayama unknown even to io a
This was how it happened. Yajiavalkya alter leaving
the Brahmasamaja went and did penance to” a
the Sun-god. The Sun appeared before 7. in the ee
of a horse. Yajiiavalkya then requested ie to ee
him new yajus amuknowh eyed. ( Vabanpeye
the deeds of |
Saliya and >
GURUPARAMPARA
The Sun then remaining in the shape of the horse
(Vaji) itself imparted to him instructions on a new
set of Yajus called Ayatayama which were not known
to anybody else, even. to VaiSampayana. Those who
studied it were called Vajis. There are fifteen branches
of the Vajis, Kannu being one of them. All were put
into operation by Yajfiavalkya.
6) The Sannyasins of Sdmaveda. Vedavyasa taught Samaveda to Jaimini. Jaimini had a son, Sumantu, and he in
turn had a son named Sutva. Sumantu and Sutva
were very intelligent and they studied one branch each
of the Vedas. Sutva had a son, Sukarma, and he
divided Samavedasarhhita into a thousand branches.
Sukarma had two disciples: Hiranyanabha and Pauspiiji, and both of them studied all the thousand
divisions of the Samaveda. The five hundred disciples
of Hiranyanabha who came from the north and studied
Samaveda were called Udicya Samagas (those come from
the north). Another five hundred came from the east
and studied SAmavedasamhita from Hiranyanabha and
they were called Pracya samagas. (Hiranyanabha is
known as Kaugalya also.) Pauspifiji had four disciples :
Logaksi, Kauthumi, Kaksivan and Langali. These four »
and their disciples split their sarhhitas and increased
them. Krti, one of the disciples of Hiranyanabha,
taught his disciples twentyfour samhitas. They also
split them into many more and made the Samaveda
bigger.
7) The saints of Atharvaveda. Vyasa taught Atharvaveda
to Sumantu. Sage Sumantu taught it to his disciple
Kabandha first. Kabandha split it into two and gave
one each to his disciples: Devadarga and Pathya. Deva
had four disciples: Medha Brahmabali, Santakayani and
Pippalada. Pathya had three: Jabali, Kumuda and
Saunaka. All these made samhitas. Saunaka split his
samhita into two and taught one to Badru and another
to Saindhava. Mufijikega learnt it from Saindhava. He
split it into two first and then again into three. The five
garmhitas of Mufijikega namely, Naksatrakalpa, Vedakalpa, Sarhhitakalpa, Angirasakalpa and Santikalpa are
the most important divisions of the Atharvaveda. The
Naksatrakalpa contains methods of worshipping Naksatras; the Vedakalpa contains the rites of the Rtvik
Brahma, and the Samhitakalpa contains the science of
the care of horses and elephants.
8) Puranas. Wyasa compiled a Purana sarmhita using
speeches, appendices, poems and Kalpanirnayas and taught it to Romaharsana alias Sata. Sita had six disciples
named Sumati, Agnivarcas, Mitrayus, Saméapayana,
Akrtavrana, and Savarni. Akrtavrana, Savarni and Sarhgapayana born of Kasyapagotra have themselves made
Puranasamhitas. There is another samhita composed
by Romaharsana based onthe sarmhités made by the
above three.
Visnu Purana is based on the latter four sarnhitas. There
are eighteen Puranas, namely, Agneya, Br ahma, Brahmanda, Brahmavaivarta, Bhagavata, Bhavisya, Garuda,
Karma, Linga, Markandeya, Matsya, Naradiya, Padma,
Siva, Skanda, Vamana, Varaha and Visnu. There are
eighteen sub Puranas also. In all these are described the
creation, the deluge, the dynasties of the devas, history
of kingly dynasties, changes of generations etc. (Amsa,
3, Visnu Purana; 19th Skandha, Bhagavata),

GULMA
GULMA. See under Aksauhini.
GULMAKA. The uncle of Gunadhya. Gunadhya is the
author of the famous book ‘Brhatkatha’. In the city of
Supratisthita there was a brahmin named Somagarma
who had three children, namely, Vatsa, Gulmaka and
Srutartha. Gunadhya was theson of Srutartha (Taranga
6, Kathapithalambaka, Kathasaritsagara) .
H
H(z}. This letter has two meanings: (1) Understanding (2) Rudra. (Agni Purana, Chapter O48);
HAHA. A Gandharva, the son of Kas yapaprajapati by
his wife Pradha. (Adi Parva, Chapter 122, Verse 59),
Other Information. (1) Haha was present at the birthday celebrations of Arjuna. (Adi Parva, Chapter 122,
' Verse 59).
(2) He lives in Kubera’s assembly. (Sabha Parva,
Chapter 10, Verse 25).
(3) Haha welcomed Arjuna in the Devaloka when
once he visited the place. (Vana Parva, Chapter 43.
Verse 14). ,
HATHAYA. A King, the son of Vatsa, born in the
dynasty of Saryati. He was the founder of the Haihaya
dynasty. He became a brahmin by choosing Sage Bhrgu
as his Preceptor. He was also known as Vitahavya.
(Anusasana Parva, Chapter 30, Verses 94-57).
HAIMAVATA. A region north of the Himalayas made
famous in the Puranas. Sukabrahmarsi on his way from
Mahameru to Mithilapuri crossed this region. (Santi
Parva, Chapter 325, Verse 14).
HAIMAVATI I. A synonym of river Satadru, (See
under Satadru).
HAIMAVATI II. A wife of Vigvamitra. ( Udyoga Parva,
Chapter 117, Verse 13). |
HAIMAVATI III. A wife of Sri Krsna. When Krsna
was cremated Haimavati also ended her life in the
funeral pyre. (Mausala Parva, Chapter 7, Verse 73).
HAIRANYAVATI. A river which flowed along Hiranmaya, a Puradnic region. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 8,
Verse 5).
HALADHARA. A synonym of Balarama. (See under
Balabhadrarama) .
HALAHALA(S) A sect of asuras, who were the first
creation of the Trimtrtis, when they also possessed the
power of creation. The Halahalas, who became very
powerful within a short period of time earned from
Brahma all the boons they wanted, and they then
conquered the three worlds. At last they barricaded
Kailasa and Vaikuntha also, and Hariharas (Visnu and
Siva) defeated them after a fierce fight lasting for a
thousand years. The Hariharas returned to their abodes
and spoke about their achievements. Their wives laughed at the bravado of their husbands. At this Mahavienu got angry with Laksmi and Siva with Parvati,
and in protest the Devis left their husbands. From
that day onwards Visnu and Siva began losing their
Brahma, who divined the reason for the growing
power. : Visn u and Siva persuaded Laksmi and
yoann © hs heir husbands so that they might
Parvati to return to the _
wer. Yet, Brahma told them that
e would handle the work of creation.
Thus wen Viena, and Siva divested of their right to
creation. (Devi Bhagavata, 7th Skandha).
regain their former po
HAMSADHVAJA
HALAYUDHA. A Sanskrit poet who lived in the 10th
century A.D. A mahakavya called Kavirahasya is his
most Important work. The hero in the great poem is
Krsna IIT. A King of the Rastrakita dynasty, and poet
Halayudha was a courtier of his.
HALIKA. Aprominent naga born in
dynasty. (Adi Parva, Chapter 15).
HALIMA. One of the Saptamatrs
(Vana Parva, Chapter 22, Verse 10).
HALIMAKA. A naga born in the family of Vasuki. He
.was burnt to death in the serpent yajfia of Janamejaya.
(Adi Parva, Chapter 57, Verse 5):
HAMSA I. An incarnation of Maha Visnu in Krtayuga.
He instructed great sages like Sanaka on yoga in the
presence of Brahma. He is also called yajfia. (Bhaga-
-vata Ilth Skandha). Harhsa, who was a prajapati as
well advised the Sadhyadevas about the means to
attain salvation and the advice is known as Harmsagita.
(Santi Parva, Chapter 288).
_~HAMSA II. A son born to Kasgyapa of his wife,
Arista. He was a Gandharva and it is believed that
Dhrtarastra was an arhéavatara of this Gandharva.
(M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 6, See also under Arméivatara). |
HAMSA ITI.
I) General. A minister of Jaradsandha. Harhsa and
Dimbhaka were the sons of Brahmadatta, the chief of
Salva, and they were adepts in archery. Paragurama
was their preceptor. (Harivarhéa 3, 103). The
Mahabharata calls Harhsa’s brother Dibhaka.
2) Education. Vicakra and Janardana_ were intimate
friends of Harnsa from their very infancy, of whom
Janardana was the son of Mitrasaha, a friend of
Brahmadatta. Harhsa,’ Dimbhaka and Janardana had
their education together, and their marriages also were
conducted at the same time. After some time Siva
presented them many weapons like Rudrastra, Mahesvarastra and Brahmaégirastra, and also two attendants
for self-protection. (Harivarnga 3, 105).
3) Curse of Durvaésas. Swollen-headed and haughty on
account of Siva’s boon, Harisa and Dimbhaka turned
out to be a nightmare to the world, and they once
tried to give trouble to Durvasas, who cursed them to
be killed by Mahavisnu. Sometime later the sage
himself informed Sri Krsna about this curse of his.
4) Death. The Harhsa brothers began an afvamedha
(Horse Sacrifice) and deputed Janardana to collect
the tax thereof. Sri Krsna alone refused to pay the
tax with the result that Hamsa clashed with Krsna who
killed Dimbhaka and kicked Harhsa down to Patala.
He died there, in Patala of snake-bite. (Harivarnéa a,
5) Grief of Farasandha. Warhsa’s death caused much
grief to Jarasandha, and for many years after it, he shed
tears over the death of his friend. Even at the time
when Bhimasena, during his triumphal tour of the east,
attacked Jarasandha he remembered the dead Harmsa
and Dimbhaka. (Sabha Parva, 13, 37).
HAMSA (M). Swan. For story about
harhsa on earth see under Srsti, Para 12.
HAMSACUDA. A Yaksa, who worships Kubera in his
assembly. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 10; Verse IZ).
HAMSADHVAJA. A King of Campanagari,
was a great devotee of Visnu. During his
the Kasyapa
(seven mothers).
the origin of
who
reign

HAMSAJA 307
monogamy prevailed in the country. He took the
yajiic horse of Yudhisthira captive, and in the fight to
release the horse Arjuna killed Sudhanva and Suratha,
sons of Harhsadhvaja. Grieved and enraged at their
death Harnsadhvaja took the field against Arjuna, and
Sri Krsna finding that Arjuna’s life was in danger
pacified them both. Also Krsna requested Hamsadhvaja
to be a supporter of Arjuna in future. Harnsadhvaja
had five sons called Suratha, Sudhanva, SudarSa,
Subala and Sama. (Jaimini, Asvamedha Parva, ys
hl
HAMSAJA. Awarrior of Subrahmanya. (Salya Parva,
Chapter 45, Verse 68).
HAMSAKAYA. A Ksatriya by caste, Harhsakaya was
present at the rajasiiya of Yudhisthira. (Sabha Parva,
Chapter 52, Verse 14).
HAMSAKUTA (M). A mountain lying between
Hastinapura and the-Satagrnga mountain. On his way
to Satasrniga Pandu crossed Hamsakutam. (Adi Parva,
Chapter 118, Verse 50). Sri Krsna once tore off a peak
of the mountain and established it in Dvaraka. (Bharata,
Southern text, Chapter 38).
HAMSAPATHA (M). A region famous in the Puranas.
The armies from this place fought in the great war.
They fought taking their position at the grivasthana
(neck position) of the Garuda vyuha (A particular
array of soldiers) set up by Drona. (Drona Parva,
Chapter 20, Verse 7).
HAMSAPRAPATANA TIRTHA. A sacred place at
Prayaga on the banks of the Ganga. (Vana Parva,
Chapter 85, Verse 87). .
HAMSAVAKTRA. A warrior who fought on the_side
of Subrahmanya and defeated the Asuras. (Salya
Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 75).
HAMSI. A daughter of Bhagiratha whom sage Kautsa
married. (Anugasana Parva, Chapter 137, Verse 26).
HAMSIKA. A daughter of Surabhi. This cow is said to
be supporting the southern region. (Udyoga Parva,
Chapter 102, Verse 7).
HANUMAN. A monkey born of the elements and
aspects of Devas. In the epics of no other country could
be found a character that belongs to the animal
kingdom who is as powerful, erudite and ‘philosophic
as Hanuman.
1) Birth. Many and di
the birth of Hanuman to
they are briefly noted below. i |
(1) The semen discharged by Siva, whose erotic
feelings were excited by the sight of Visnu disguised
as Mohini was received by the Saptarsis and deposited
in the womb of Afijana, and Hanaman was born out of
it; (Siva Purana, Satarudrasamhita ). ~
(2) Dagaratha divided among his wives the divine
payasa (pudding) got from the putrakamesti yajfia
‘which was performed so that he might be blessed with
children. Somehow or other a _kite snatched some
pudding and flew off with it. On its way ae pudding
fell down from the beaks of the kite on the fingers of
Afijana doing tapas ‘n the forest. She ate that pudding
and Hanaman was born as the son of anja. due
to the extraordinary powers of the pudding. (Ananda Ramayana).
(3) Siva, once in his fierce 4 tu
entered Kesari, the husband of Af
ferent are the stories about
Id in Purdnic literature, and
nd effulgent form (aspect)
ana and had coitus
HANUMAN
with her. After that Vayu (Wind-god) also had coitus
with her. Thus as a result of the sexual act by both
the Devas Afijana got pregnant. Later, Anjana was
about to throw into the valley of the mountain _ her
new-born child as it was an ugly one ‘when Vayu
(Wind god) intervened and saved the child. Hanuman
was the child thus born of Siva and Vayu. (Bhavisya
Purana, Pratisarga Parva).
(4) Haniman’s actual father was Siva. Ganapati
_ was born to Siva and Parvati as they played in the
forest disguised as elephants. After that Siva and
Parvati played about in the forest disguised as monkeys
as a result of which Parvati got pregnant. Since
Parvati did not like the idea of being the mother of a
monkey, Siva, by his yogic power entrusted the child,
(in embryo) that was in the womb of Parvati to
Vayu (Wind god), who carried it with him hither and
thither till it became mature, when it was deposited in
Anjana, the monkey woman. The monkey called Kesari
was her husband. Thus Haniiman was born as the son
oL Anjana.
Afijana also has a story of her own. Once upona_ time
she was the’ maid-servant called Pufijikasthala of
Brhaspati. One day she went out to gather flowers
when the love-makings of other young women attracted
her so much that, without gathering flowers, and her
erotic sentiments being aroused much, she returned
home and covered Brhaspati with kisses. Brhaspati got
really angry with the misbehaviour of his maid-servant
and cursed her into a female monkey. She was told
that, after she had lived for sometime with a monkeyhusband she would get a child from the vitality of
Siva, after which she would return to him as maid
servant as of old. And, accordingly , Pufijikasthala
became a female monkey under the name Afijana and
lived at Afijana forest with a handsome monkey called
Kesari as her husband.
It was while Afijana was doing tapas so that she might
become pregnant by Siva that Siva and PArvati played
in that forest disguised as monkeys, and Parvati
conceived and the child ultimately came out as the son
of Afijana.
Even while Afijana was pregnart the child in her womb
had much to suffer at the hands of Bali. Hearing from
Narada that Siva’s son had been born in Afjana’s
womb Bali feared that the actual birth of such a son
would jeopardise his lordship over the monkeys. To
ward off the threatened contingency, Bali, as advised
by Narada, let in the five metals (gold, copper, iron,
tin and: zinc) in watery form into the stomach of
Afijana. (This isa means of causing abortion). But,
the attempt misfired. Instead of the five metals killing
the child in Afijana’s womb, they became ear-ornaments for it, and Haniiman was thus born with ornaments in his ears. (Karmba Ramayana Parvakanda) .
2) Naming and boons. As soon as Haniman was born
Afijana was released from the curse, and she wanted to’
return to heaven. The monkey child asked: its mother
what its future would be and haw it was to earn its
living. She assured him that he would never be
destroyed and that fruits as ripe as the rising sun (she
pointed the sun out to him) would form his food. And,
Afijana returned to heaven.

HANUMAN
Thinking that the glowing and glittering Sun was_ food
for him to be eaten, the monkey child made just one
jump at it (Sun) and quite neared it. But seeing Rahu,
bigger than the Sun he jumped at it. Then it was that
it saw Airavata and it tried to eat it. And, seeing this
attempt of the monkey-child, Indra used his vajrayudha
(Thunderbolt) against it. The weapon hit its chin and
wounded it, and in precarious condition it fell down
on earth. Vayu (Wind god) who saw his child falling
down wounded carried it off to Patala.
When Vayu (air) quitted the earth everything thereon
came to a dead-stop. Living things were on the verge
of death due to suffocation. And, then Brahma and
others went to Patala, comforted Vayu and congratulated the monkey child. On the basis of Indra’s vajra
having made a scar on its hanu (jaw-bone or chin) the
monkey child was named Haniiman by the Devas, who,
one by one blessed him as follows :—
Brahmadeva ; May you live long, so long as Brahma
exists.
Mahavisnu : May you live all your life as_ the greatest
devotee of God.
pee : No weapon of any kind will wound or hit your
ody. |
Agni : Fire will never affect you.
Kala : May not death ever court you.
All the Devas : None will ever equal you in strength
and speed. Brahma blessed Haniiman again giving him
more physical power than Garuda and Vayu blessed
him to have more speed than himself. (air). (Valmiki
Ramayana, Balakanda, Canto 15; Uttararamayana;
Kambaramayana, Parvakanda; Adbhutaramayana).
3) Education. Being born of Siva and on account of
the Sivasakti in him, Hanitman reached ‘boyhood
immediately. To learn the four Vedas and the six
sastras he chose Surya mentally as_ his preceptor, and
approached him with the request to be taught the
Vedas etc. Surya agreed to have Haniman as his disciple subject to the condition that the latter would not
be permitted to sit with the Balakhilyas in his (Surya’s )
chariot and study. Haniiman agreed to the condition
to learn from Surya walking in front of him. With
book opened in his hand and concentrating al] his attention on the face of Sirya Haniman traversed the sky
and within a short period of sixty hours he mastered all
the Vedas and the sastras thoroughly well. Though
Surya said that he would consider the great interest
Hanuman took in his studies as daksina (tuition fee )
Haniman wanted Surya to accept something more by
way of daksina, and Siirya said as follows :— “If you
are so very particular about offering me something
more as daksina I shall tell you. My son Sugriva is
living on earth with Bali and he is not as strong and
powerful as Bali. You be of help to Sugriva as his
minister and constant companion.”
Happy at Sarya’s words Hantiman returned to the
forest and lived as Sugriva’s minister for the rest of his
a he Rama’s servant. F rom the day he met Sri Rama
after the abduction of Sita by Ravana till Rama’s death
his story is inextricably connected with that of Rama.
(See under Rama). _ ‘eal = :
5) His music. Once in a musical competition Haniman defeated Narada. (Adbhutaramayana; also see
Para 8 under Narada) .
HANYAMANA. A famous
HARA IT.
308 HARA (M)
6) Sivalinga at Ramesvaram. There is a story in the
Yuddhakanda of Ramayana connecting Haniman with
the Sivalinga installed in the temple at Ramegvaram.
- (See under Ramegvaram).
7) Lost his divine power. Once due to a curse of sage
T'rnabindu Haniman lost his great strength and _ vitality. But, he would regain the lost power when one
reminded him ofit. During the search for Sita Hanuman felt it dificult to jump across the southern sea to
Lanka due to the above curse. But, when Jambavan
described to him about his noble origin and_ pc-vers
Haniman regained his lost power and vitality, and
successfully jumped across the sea to Lanka. (See
Trnabindu II, Para 2).
S) A fort made of tail. He madea fort of his tail and
saved Rama and Laksmana withinit. (See Patalaramayana).
9) Haniiman and Sahasramukha Rdavana.
mukha Ravana).
10) Haniman and Satrughna. Satrughna, who conducted
the horse in connection with the ASvamedha performed
by Sri Rama after his return from exile in the forest,
fell down unconscious in his fight with King Viramani,
and then Haniman brought a herbal medicine called
‘Drona’ from the Himalayas and with its aid brought
back Satrughna to consciousness. (Padma Purana,
Patala Khanda, Chapter 44).
11) Yaken captive by Kusa and Lava. The Yajiiaéva
(sacrificial horse) of the ASvamedha yajiia of Sri Rama
led by a contingent of Rama’s army was resting in a
tent put up near the hermitage of Gautama when Kuéa
and Lava together captured the horse. Haniiman, who
rushed over to the spot on receiving intimation of the
news was bound hand and foot with creepers by Kusa
and Lava and dragged to the hermitage. Sita, was then
in the hermitage brooding over the past, and the repetition of the word ‘Rama’ by the humiliated Haniman
awoke her from her reverie. She was taken aback to
see Haniman there in that plight and got him released
from captivity by her sons. (Kamba Ramayana,
Uttarakanda).
12) Old age. Having witnessed Ramavatara (incarnation of Rama) to its very end, Haniman, who ha
by now become quite old, spent his days guarding the
Kadali forest. Bhima, who happened to go there to
collect Saugandhika flowers got defeated in fight by
Hantiman. (See Bhima, Para 7).
13) Arjuna’s flag-Symbol (See under Arjuna 17 B).
14) Idols of Haniiman. When an idol of Haniman 1s
installed in a temple, he must be represented as holding
Vajra in one hand and his feet must seem to tear the
ground under them. (Agni Purana, Chapter 51).
place in south India
mentioned in the Puranas. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9;
Verse 69),
HARA I. A famous Danava, born to Kafyapa of his
wife Dani. He was reborn as King Subahu. (Adi
Parva, Chapter 67, Verse 23).
One of the eleven Rudras. (Santi Parva,
Chapter 208, Verse 19).
(See SahasraHARA III. A synonym of Siva.
HARA (M).
A region of Puranic fame. Nakula subjugated the King of Hara by a simple command without
any resort to arms, and the King attended Yudhi-

HARAKALPA
sthira’s Rajasiiya with presents. (Sabha Parva, Ghapter
51, Verse 5%).
HARAKALPA. One of the sons born to Vipracitti by
Simhi. Paragurama killed him. (Vayu Purana, 68, 19}.
HARAKEYURAKA. See under Lavana. Il
HARAVA. An asura born from the tear drops of
Brahma. He was burnt to death in the flames emerging
from Sivalinga. (Skanda Purana, 5, 2, 48).
HARDIKA I. A Ksatriya King born from an amsa of
the asura called Agvapati. (Adi Parva, Chapter 67,
Verse 15). nae
HARDIKA II: Krtavarman. He was called Hardika
because he was the son of Hrdika of the Yadu dynasty.
(See under Krtavarman) .
HARI I, Asynonym of Visnu., (
HARI II. A warrior of Subrahmanya.
Chapter 45, Verse 61). | . .
: A warrior who fought on the side of the
See under Visnu .
(Salya Parva,
HARI III.
Pandavas and was killed by Karna.
HARI IV. An asura, the son of Tarakaksa, who got
from Brahma a boon enabling him to prepare Mrtasanjivani. (a medicme to revive dead people). (Karna
Parva, Chapter 33, Verse 27). |
HARI V.. Son of King. Akampana. Though he was as
powerful ‘and. proficient in archery as Mahavisnu, ane
equal in prowess to Indra in war he got into the hands
of his enemies and was killed. (Drona Parva, Chapter
HARI VI. A particular sect of the attendants of Rayana.
They attacked’ the army of monkeys. (Vana Parva, |
Chapter 285). -.- Rs |
HARI VII. A.very powerful bird born 1p Garuda’s
_ dynasty. (Udyoga Parva, Chapter 101, Verse 13 ) m8,
HARI VIII. A-~ particular: species of horses... ‘They
possess long hairs-on the neck and are golden in colour. |
(Drona Parva, Chapter 23, Verse 13). heh
HARI IX. .A daughter born to Kagsyapaprajapati by his
wife Krodhavasa,. Lions and monkeys originated from.
this Hari. (V almiki Ramayana,
HAI x, Av‘son’of Dharmadeva. Dharmadeva begot
four sons, Hari, Krsna, Nara and Narayana of the daughters of Daksa: (Devi Bhagavata, 4th Skandha)..
HARI XI. A-sect of Devas. During the Tamasamanvantara there were four such sects, viz. Haris,
Satyas, Suparas and Sudhis. (See Manvantara).
HARIBABHRU. A great sage, who was a member of
Yudhisthira’s assembly. (Sabha
Verse 16).
HARIBHADRA. Daughter
was given in marriage to
were born the monkeys,
(Brahmanda Purana) .
HARIDASA. A monkey
ire pra sage who was reborn in his
next birth as Rangaven, 4 gopi in Gokula (Penetus
colony) as he had chanted the Krsna na O meaty
letters during his life as sage- (Padma Purana, Fatala
apter 72). .
anteina’ he bent born in Kasyapa s dynasty. (Adi
| Verse 12). alte time
oe Gan “a the Raksasa women who kept
guard ove Sita in the Agoka grove. (Valmika Ramayana, Sundara Kanda, 23, 5).
Parva, Chapter 4,
of Kagyapa by Krodha.. She
sage Pulaha and from them
Kinnaras, Kimpurusas etc.
King, son of Pulaha by Sveta.
Aranyakanda, Canto
" RARISCAANDRA II
HARIMEDHAS. A saintly King of ancient days. He
once conducted a yajfia and a daughter called Dhvajavati was born to him. She lived in the western regiofs
(Udyoga Parva, Chapter 110, Verse 13)
HARIMITRA. -A brahmin, who had his arama on the
banks of the Yamuna. Owing to his association with
Harimitra a sinner called Vikundala took his bath
in the'sacred waters of the Kalindi during two Magha
months. The first bath released him from all his sins
and the second bath made him eligible to go to heaven.
Thus Harimitra was. responsible for the attainment of
heaven by the sinner Vikundala. (Padma Purana, Adi
Khanda, Chapter 31). ,
HARINA. A naga which belonged to the Airavata
family. It was burnt to death at the Sarpasatra of Janamejava. (Adi Parva, Chapter 57, Verse 11).
HARINASVA. A King in ancient India. He once got
from King Raghu a sword with divine powers which he
presented to King Sunaka. (Santi Parva, Chapter 166).
HARINI. A daughter of Hiranyakasipu, also called
Rohini. She was married to Visvapati, an Asura.
Vana-Parva, 20.18). ,.
HARIPINDA. A female attendant of Subrahmanya.
(Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Verse 24).
HARISCANDRA I. A King of the solar dynasty very
much reputed for his unique truthfulness and integrity.
‘He was the son of the famous TriSanku.
1) Genealogy. See under Triganku.
2) A. brief life-sketch. To keep his plighted word and
for the sake of truth he gifted away the whole of his
kingdom to Vigvamitra. When that was not sufficient
he cleared his debts to Vigsvamitra with the money got
by selling his wife, Candramati, his son, Lohitagva and
finally himself. And, he earned his livelihood with the
wages he got for cremating corpses, himself doing
_ duties as guard at a burning ghat and as the slave to a
-. Gandala. Ultimately the Trimirtis (Brahma, Visnu and
Siva) appeared and heaped on him all the beons he
desired and rewarded him with high honours. (See for
details para 4 under Vis vamitra).
HARISCANDRA II. An emperor of ancient times, to
_ whom Brahma gave as a gift a palace which automatically produced. everything desired by its owner. He was
lord over the seven islands. About his former birth and
the plenitude of his riches the Padma Purana (Uttara
khanda, Chapter 32) has the following story to say:-
Harigcandra himself was surprised that he became so
very rich in the matter of children and of wealth.
Wondering what actions of his entitled him to so much
wealth and to his position which was equal to Indra’s
the emperor went to Sumeru by vimana where he
questioned Sanatkumara, a brahminical sage seated in
meditation on a golden stone as to who he was in his
past life and to which actions of his past life he owed
allthe present wealth and prosperity. The great sage
replied as follows:-
“In the past birth you were a truthful and purehearted vai§fya; you gave up your own profession and
so you were ousted from home by your own people. At
that time a famine and other scarcity conditions
occurred there. One day you got into a pond along
with your wife, collected lotus flowers from it and went
to K2éi to sell the flowers. But, no one purchased the
flowers. At last, Candramati, daughter of Indradyumna

HARISCANDRA Iit 310
purchased the flowers fora yajia she was performing.
When you saw Visnu installed along with Adityabhagavan (Sun-God) and worshipped with flowers, feelings of devotion swept your mind and you too worshipped the idols with lotus flowers. You enjoy today
the*fruits of that action in the past life,
(It is not quite definite whether Harjé candra I and II
are one and the same person). ;
HARISCANDRA III. A Sanskrit poet who lived in the
9th century A. D. The mahakavya called ‘“‘DharmaSarmabhyudaya”’ is his main work. This mahakavya
comprises of 2] cantos. He has composed another work
called ‘‘Jivandharacampii”,
HARITA I. A King who was the grandson of Hariécandra and son of Rohita. (Bhagavata, 10th Skandha).
HARITA II, A King, who was the son of Vapusman
and grandson of Svayambhuvamanu. He was King of
Haritavarsa in the island of Salmali. (Markandeya
Purana 50, 28 ; Brahmanda Purana, 2, 3). )
HARITA III. A_ son born to Yadu of the naga woman
called Dhimravarna. He founded an independent
kingdom in the Naga island and became a prominent
a of the Madgura tribe. (Hari Varhéa, 2, 38; 29,
HARITA I. A great sage who visited Bhisma in his bed
of arrows (Saragayya) . (Santi Parva, Chapter 47;
Verse 7). Once he attended Yudhisthira’s assembly
and spoke on eternal truths conducive to mental peace.
That talk of his became famous as Haritagita. (Santi
Parva, Chapter 278).
HARITA II. An author on Smrtis (codes of conduct) .
He has written two texts on the subject called Laghuharita smrti and Vrddhaharitasmrti,
HARITALA (M) ‘A mineral (yellow orpiment) got
from mountains, which is red like the clouds at dusk.
ne Parva, Chapter 158, 94).
HARITASVA.
1) General. A King born in the solar dynasty. In the
art of music he defeated Narada and shamed Sarasvati
(Geddess of language), pleased Brahma and by the
melody of his music sent Visnu to sleep. The mounting
achievements of the King in theart of music evoked
jealousy in Sivasankara, the lord of music. When
ankaramirti in a competitive spirit played the raga
Sankarabharana (a particular tune) Haritasva) pointed
out that Santarasa (the calmness and poise) which was
- suited to that raga had given
which was a serious mistake. Enraged at this Siva
opened his eye of fire at the King who retorted boldly
thus, “even if the eye of fire was opened a mistake was a
mistake’. This stand of the King pleased Siva so much
that he bestowed on the King boons and good wishes
as presents for his (king’s) victory over all.
2) Killed Andhaka. Andhakasura conquered Svarga
and took Indra prisoner during the period when Haritagva was King. The combined efforts of Brahma, Visnu
and Siva could not kill Andhaka. At last at the instance of Brhaspati a representative of the Devas visited
Haritasva at Ayodhya and sought his help to kill Andhaka and accordingly the King set out for war against
the demon. Agastya told the King in secret that —
aka treasured an image of Siva and Parvati in_ his
stomach, and after removing, with his arrows the idol
from his stomach, Haritasva killed him and restored
place to raudra rasa
HARYASVA II
the Deva-loka to Indra. (Kamba Ramayana, Yuddha
Kanda).
HARIVAMSA (M). An appendix to the Mahabharata
in 10,000 verses. The main object of it is to sing the
praises of Mahavisnu. It contains three parts called
respectively Harivamsa Parva, Visnu Parva, and Bhavisya Parva. Creation of the world, kings of the solar
dynasty and of the lunar dynasty, Yadu dynasty and the
birth of Sri Krsna form the theme of Harivaméa Parva.
Visnu Parva deals mainly with the pranks and games
of Sri Krsna in his childhood. Though there occur
certain hints about the future at the beginning of the
Bhavisya Parva, the creation of the world, the incarnation of Visnu as Vamana (Dwarf) and as Narasimha
(half man and half lion) , Siva and Visnu constitute its
main theme.
I'he following verses prove that the Harivamsa also was
composed by Vyasa.
Harivaméastatah parvapuranam khilasarhjiitam /
Visnuparvasi goscarya
Visnohkamsavadhastatha //
Bhavisyam parvacapyuktarn
Khilesvevadbhutarn mahat /
Etat parvagatam pirnam
Vyasenoktam mahatmana /|/
(Adi Parva, Chapter 2, Verses 83-84) .
HARIVARSA (M)_ The northern part of Mount Hemaparvata. Arjuna, during his triumphal tour of the
northern regions conquered this region and took away
a lot of costly gems. (Bharata, southern text, sabha
Parva, Chapter 28).
HARIVIRA. See Dhanagarman.
HARSA I. One of the three sons of Dharmadeva, the
other two being Sama and Kama. Harsa married
Nanda, (Adi Parva, Chapter 66, Verse 32).
HARSA IT. A great poet in Sanskrit, who flourished in
the 12th century A.D., his most reputed work being the
Mahakavya called Naisadha, one of the five Mahakavyas (Epic Poems) in Sanskrit’ language. Another wellknown work of his is Khandanakhandakhadya. He was
a member of the literary assembly of King Jayacanda
of Kanauj. Hira was his father and Mamalladevi, his
mother.
HARSA ITI. King Harsavardhana who ruled over North
India between A.D, 660 and 668. He is remembered and
respected more as a poet in Sanskrit than any thing else.
Nagananda, Ratnavali and Priyadarsika are his more
important works, The poet Bana has written the biogra=-
phy of Harsa.
HARYANKA. A King born in the royal dynasty of Anga.
Fie was the son of King Carnpa and father of King
Brhadratha. (Agni Purana, Chapter 277).
HARYASVA I. The five thousand sons born to Daksa
by his wife Asikni are known as Flaryasvas. (See
Asikni JI). |
HARYASVA II. A King of the solar dynasty. The following information about him is culled from the Mahabharata.
(1) He was king of Ayodhya. A Powerful ruler, he
had a fully equipped army. (Udyoga Parva, Chapter
(2) He took Madhavi, daughter of Yayati as his wife
and thus solved the problem of gurudaksina for Galava.
(See under Galava).

HARYASVA III
(3) Never in life‘did he eat flesh. (Anusasana Parva,
Chapter 11, Verse 67).
HARYASVA III. Father of Sudeva, King of Kasi. He
was killed by the sons of Vitahavya. (Anusasana
Parva, Chapter 30, Verse 10).
HASINI. An apsara woman of Alakapuri. She once
danced in Kubera’s assembly to welcome sage Astavakra
(Anuéasana Parva, Chapter 19, Verse 45).
HASTAMALAKA. A disciple of Sri Sankara. (See
under Sankaracarya, Para 7). 2
HASTI JI.. A King born in the lunar dynasty. (Adi
Parva, Chapter 94 Verse 58). ) |
HASTI II. Another king of the lunar dynasty. His father
- was Suhotra and mother Suvarna, who belonged to the
. Iksvaku dynasty. This Hasti married Yagodhara, daughter of King Trigarta, and a son called Vikantha was
born to them. Hastinapura was the city mewly built by
Hasti. (Adi Parva Chapter 95, Verse 34). |
HASTIBHADRA. A naga born in the Kasyapa dynasty.
(Udyoga Parva, Chapter 103, Verse 13). ;
HASTIKASYAPA. A great sage who lived in North
India in very olden days. He once met and talked with
ri Krsna, who was doing tapas on the mountains.
(Anugasana Parva, Ghapter 139, Verse LT).
HASTINAPURA. Capital city of the Pandavas. (See
under Hasti II).
HASTIPADA. A naga born in the Kagyapa dynasty.
(Adi Parva, Chapter 35 Verse 9).
HASTIPINDA. A naga born in the Kasyapa dynasty
(Adi Parva, Chapter 35, Verse 14).
HASTISOMA. A famous river mentioned frequently in
the Puranas. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 19) _
HATAKA (M) I. A region to the north of the HimaJayas, where the guhyakas lived. Arjuna, during his
triumphal tour in the north made the guhyakas his
allies. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 28, Verse 3). iL
HATAKAM IJ. Adrink (rasayana). Those who live in
Atala a section of Patala drink this tonic. (See Patala) .
HATAKI. Ariver. Paramesvara and Parvati once had
intercourse at Vitala, a section of Patala and their
semen formed itself into the river called Hataki. (Bha-
| ta, 5th Skandha). a
HAVANA. One of the eleven Rudras. (AnuSasana
Parva, Chapter 150, Verse 13). : :
HAVIGHNA. A King of ancient days, who was one -o
those who were to be remembered both in the morning
and the evening. (Anusasana Parva, Chapter 155,
Verse 58).
“Wife of Pulastya. (See Pulastya) .
ot iy om of Antardhaman of the Manu
dynasty. (Anusdsana Parva, Chapter 147, Verse 24).
HAVIRDHANA. A grandson of emperor Prthu, who
~ had two sons called Antardhana and Vadi and to
Antardhana was born a son called _Havirdhana by
Sikhandini, and they had six sons called Pracinabarhis,
Sukra, Gaya, Krsna, Vraja and Ajina. (Visnu Purana,
Part cae vee an
HAVISMAN. great sage 1
assembly of Indra. (Sabha Parva,
ho was a member of the
Chapter 7, Verse
HAVISMATL. A daughter of Angiras. (Vana Parva,
Chapter 218, Verse 6).
HAVISRAVAS. A King born in the family of Kuru, a
HAYAGRIVA V
King of the lunar dynasty. (Adi Parva, Chapter 94,.
Verse 59).
HAVYAGHNA. A Raksasa about whom the following
story is told in the Brahmanda Purana.
Havyaghna was born from the smoke which rose from
the fire of a yajfia which sage Bharadvaja along with
his wife Paithinasi conducted on the banks of river
Gautami, and he began eating the havis. Questioned
about it by Bharadvaja Havyaghna answered as
follows :—‘‘I am an unfortunate fellow called Krsna
cursed by Brahma. If you would kindly sprinkle on me
the Ganga water, Suvarna, ghee and soma I will be
redeemed from the curse.
Bharadvaja complied with the request of Havyaghna
and he got redemption from the curse.
HAYAGRIVA I. An Asura, the son of Kas yapaprajapati
_ by his wife Danu. (Valmiki Ramayana, Aranyakanda,
Canto 14).
As a child the Asura began tapas on the banks of river
Sarasvati, and after a thousand years Devi appeared
and asked him to choose any boon he wanted, and he
wanted to become invincible by Devas and Asuras, and
also deathless. When Devi told him that such a boon
was out of question, he wanted the boon that he
(Hayagriva) should not be killed by anyone but by a
Hayagriva (one with the horse’s neck). Devi granted him
the boon.
Hayagriva, who became haughty and overconfident on
receiving such a boon, went about the three worlds
troubling good peopie, and at last he clashed with the
Devas. As he could be killed only by one with the head
of a horse the combined attack of Mahavisnu and _ the
Devas did not succeed in defeating him and Mahavisnu decided to rest for some time to recoup himself
from weariness. During his rest his head was hit by
the end of his own bow and the head was severed from
the trunk. Mahavisnu replaced the head thus lost with
that of a horse and killed Hayagriva in fight. (For
details see Cital).
HAYAGRIVA II. An asura who guarded the kingdom
of Narakasura, He was killed by Sri Krsna, (Udyoga
Parva, Chapter 130 Verse 50).
HAYAGRIVA III. A King born in the Videha dynasty. (Udyoga Parva, Chapter 74, Verse 15).
HAYAGRIVA IV. A saintly king. Though he defeated his enemies, yet, as he had no backing and support,
he was finally killed. The story of Hayagriva was told
by Vyasa to teach Dharmaputra the lesson that even
the greatest of heroes requires the support of others.
Though killed, Hayagriva secured a place in heaven.
(Santi Parva, Chapter 24, Verse 23).
HAYAGRIVA V. An incarnation of Visnu.
1) In Vedic literature :—In Vedic literature incarnation
as Hayagriva is attributed not to Visnu, but to Yajfia.
But the Taittiriya aranyaka depicts yajfia as a protoform of Visnu. The inference that may be drawn from
the above is that the root of the Hayagriva story
detailed in Vedic and Puranic literature is one and the
same. by
About the Hayagriva incarnation the Paficavirhsabrahmana contains the following story.
Agni, Indra, Vayu and Yajfia (Visnu) once began '
yajfia on the understanding that the havirbhaga
obtained from it should be divided among all the

HAYAJNANA
Devas. But, in violation of the agreement, yajfia left
the place carrying away the whole Yajnhabhaga with
him, and he drove back the Devas who followed him
with the help of the bow presented to him by Devi.
Finally the Devas got the string of the bow bitten off
by termites and the bow which got straightened up
cut off yajfia’s head. Yajna then. apologized for his
offence and then the devas got the Asvinidevas to fix
the head of a horse to the trunk of Yajfia. (Paficavimsabrahmana 7, 5, 6; ‘laittirilya aranyaka 5, 1;
Taittiriya Samhita, 4-9, 1).
2) Ln Puranic literature. The above story is told in
Skanda Purana with slight modifications as follows :-
Once Brahma and other Devatas conducted a test as to
which one amongst them was the greatest, and when
it became evident tha tMahavisnu was, in every respect,
superior to all the others Brahma cursed that Visnu
should lose his head. Visnu, who got thus bereft of his
head attended a yajfia conducted by the Devas with the
head of a horse attached to his trunk. After the yajfia
was over he went to dharmaranya and did tapas there
and by the blessings of Siva got back his former head
instead of that of the horse.
HAYAJNANA. The science of controlling horses. (Vana
Parva. Chapter 77, 17).
HAYASIRAS. Hayagriva. (See Hayagriva V).
HEHAYA (HAIHAYA). See Ekavira and Paragurama).
HEMA. A lover (wife) of Maya, the asura. (For
details see Maya, Indra, Para 61 and sub para 3 of
Para, 24, Rama and Svayamprabha.).
HEMACANDRA. A King, son of King Visala and
father of Sucandra. (Bhagavata, 9th Skandha).
HEMAGUHA. A naga born in Kagyapa’s dynasty. (Adi
Parva, Chapter 35, Verse 9).
HEMAKANTA. Son of King Kugaketu of Vanga. He
committed the sin of brahmahatya as he killed
the sage, Satarcas. Later on he redeemed himself from
the sin by giving water to Trita,a brahmin. (Skanda
Purana).
HEMAKUNDALA. A vaisya.(See Vikundala).
HEMAKUTA (M) I. A mountain in the North. Arjuna
once went to Harivarsa after stationing his army here.
(Sabha Parva, Chaprer 28).
HEMAKUTA (M) II. A mountain on the banks of the
river Nanda, known also as Rsabhakita. Once Yudhisthira went to this mountain and enjoyed the many
beautiful scenes there. (See Rsabha II).
HEMAMALII. He used to supply flowers to Vaiéravana. He had a beautiful wife called Visalaksi. Once
when he returned with flowers from. Manasasaras he
felt an onrush of love and spent time at home in love
ranks with his wife. Kubera went to the temple for
worshipping Siva at noon and though he waited there
till dusk time tor Hemamiali to bring the flowers the latter
Kubera got angry and sent for Hemamali and he came trembling with fear. Kubera’s curse
rned him into a leper afflicted with eighteen varieties
- and separated from wife he fell from Alakadid not come.
of he came to Hemadri where he met sage
Mi kandeya. Hemamiaili told him all about his misforarkan¢ dvised him to observe Asadhathe sage 4
ee Hemamali did so and got cured of the
fell disease and returned to Devaloka. (Padma Purana,
Uttarakhanda, Chapter 54).
312 HIMAVAN
HEMAMALIII. A son of King Drupada. He was killed
in the great war by Agvatthama. (Drona Parva,
Chapter 156, 182).
HEMANETRA. A Yaksa. Heworships Kubera in his
assembly. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 10, Verse 17).
HEMAPRABHA. See under Vallabha.
HEMAPRABHAVATI. See under Varatanu.
HEMARATHA. A King of the solar dynasty. Grandson
of Citraratha, Hemaratha was the son of Ksema and
father of Satyaratha. (Bhagavata, 9th Skandha).
HEMAVARNA. Son of King Rocamana. He fought in
the great war on the side of the Pandavas against the
Kauravas, (Drona Parva, Chapter 23, Verse 67).
HERAMBAKAM. A region of South India, the inhabitants of which are known asthe Herambas. Sahadeva,
during his triumphal tour of the South defeated the
Herambas. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 31, Verse 13).
HETI. An‘Asura. (See under Prahcti).
HIDIMBA. A Raksasa, whom the Pandavas confronted
in the forest after their escape from the lac palace.
Bhima killed him and married his sister, Hidimbi.
Ghatotkaca was Bhima’s son by Hidimbi. (For details
see Ghatotkaca). -
HIDIMBA (HIDIMBI). Mother of Ghatotkaca. (5¢e¢
Ghatotkaca).
HIDIMBAVADHAPARVA. A sub Parva of Adi Parva.
(Adi Parva, Chapters 151-155 form the sub Parva).
HIDIMBAVANA (M). The forest where Hidirnba
dwelt. _ (See Ghatotkaca).
HIDIMBI (HIDIMBA). See Ghasotkaca.
HIHI. A class of fiends (Pigacas). (Bhagavata 10th
Skandha).
HIKA. A Raksasa who lived in the river Vipasa. He
was a companion of another Raksasa called Baht and
to them, jointly was born a son called Bahika. (Karné
Parva, Chapter 44, Verse 41).
HIMAVAN. (THE HIMALAYAS).
1) General. The great mountain on the northern
borders of India. In the literature and the religious
thought of India the Hirsadlayas occupy a position ©
universal respect and adulation. The Indian belief 1S
that the mountain has got a divine soul. (e.g. 1t }
referred to as “‘devatatma” in Kalidasa’s Kumarasan)-
bhava). The Him4layas are referred to very often 1
the Puranas and epics.
2) Other information from Mahabharata. (1) The
Balakhilyas had performed tapas on the Himalayas-
(Adi Parva, Chapter 30, Verse 3).
(2) The Naga named Sesa once
practise control of the mind in solitude.
Chapter 36, Verse 3).
(3) Vyasa performed tapas there. (Adi Parva, Chapte?
(4) Pandu, father of the Pandavas had to cross the
K4alakita mountain and the Himalayas to rea
Gandhamadana. (Adi Parva, Chapter 148, Verse 48) -
resided there tO
(Adi Parva,
(5) Bhargava women hid themselves in the Himalaya*\y
at the time when the Ksatriyas were hunting out peor’
of the Bhrgu dynasty. (Adi Parva, Chapter 177, Ver
(6) The whole fire of the yajfia conducted by sage Para®>
ara to annihilate the Raksasas was deposited in ae
extensive forest near the Himalayas, (Adi. Parv
Chapter 180, Verse 22).
Se

HIMAVAN
(7) Arjuna once sojourned on the Himalayas. (Adi
Parva, Chapter 214, Verse 1).
(8) The Devata of the mountain worships Kubera in
his assembly. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 10; Verse 31).
(9) As suggested by Surya, once Narada did penance
for 1000 years on the peaks of the Himalayas so that
he might see Indra’s assembly. (Sabha Parva, Chapter
11, Verse 8). e*
(10) Arjuna once crossed the Himalayas and encamped
at Dhavalagiri. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 27, Verse 29).
(11) Bhimasena once stopped for a short time near
the Himalayas imagining himself to be emperor of the
whole world. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 30, Verse 4). .
(12) It was at the Himalayas that Merusavarni imparted advice to Yudhisthira. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 78,
Verse 14). rid
(13) Bhawteatha performed tapas on the Himalayas.
Vana Parva, Chapter 108, Verse 3).
| (14) ‘The Kiegdom of Subahu, King of Kalinda was on
ima A d
the plains of the Himalayas. The Pandavas stoppe
fier for a. nigtt and left for the Himalayas the next
day. (V arva, Chapter 140, Verse 24).
(5 ) van soon wel an the seventeenth day of ee
life in exile: in the forest came to the top 5h
Himalayas, and visited the asrama of Vrsaparvan
(Vana P Chapter 18). ;
1) he ae eines at
Himal da reciating the pea
a python caught fim by the leg. (Vana Parva, Chapter
(7) S Markand once saw in the stomach .of
a Aarkanacy4 T gosen : ae
child aa es like the Himalayas, Hemakita
éte. (V , Chapter 188, Verse F
(18) Much Para to sage Markandeya an owl calle
Pravarakarna had lived 0 the Himalayas. (Vana
Parva, C 199, Verse 4) « the
(19) | Keren conquered all the SL "(Vana
P imalayas and collected me from
arva, Chapter 254, Verse 7: - alavas live
(20) On he northern heights of is on “Chapter
iva and'Parvar forewe CUSIRER Se
115, Verse A}. i
(21) Elimavan is one of se i
Paountains stretching pon the ea a
arv &. Verse 9}: v4 . wit
(22 a’ Se dies his tour of Kailas iM prona Parva,
Sti Krsna saw all the peaks a emule
| - 80 3). . eas. Himavan
(23) When atest to ashes the Peparess © aca
and Vindhya served as th aul .
(Karna Parva, Chapter 4% eats éiva’s semen on @
(24) ‘Thé River Ganga deposit® nya was born from
' high peak of Himavan and ubra ae 9)
it, (Karna Parva, Chapter 44,
(25) Himavan, the Devata = S brahmany
present at the installation of ie
the army. (Salya Parva, OP°PC prahmanya wo F
(26) Himavan presente aie CAS (Salya Parva,
dants called Suvarcas and ae ‘=
Chapter 45, Verse 46) - on Himavan,
(27) Sri Krsna once perfor “con Pradyumna from
and as.a result of it was bor? o aa 12. Verse 30).
Rukmini. (Sauptika Parva; ap ‘ble wealth to empe-
(28) Himavan presented inexhausr Verse 113).
ror Prthu. (Santi Parva, Chapter *~:
x rain-producing
the west. (Bhisma
ntain, also was
HIMGULA. A mineral
a as chief of
HIRANMAYA (M).
HIRANYA
(29) The peaks of Himavan have an area of 100
yojanas; Brahma once conducted a yajiia there. (Santi
Parva, Chapter 166, Verse 32). |
(30) Daksaprajapati once conducted a yajfia at the
place called Gangadvara on the slopes of Himavan..
(Santi Parva, Chapter 284, Verse 3). |
(31) In Chapter 327 of the Santi Parva the following
statement occurs about Himavan. According to the
advice of King Janaka Suka brahmarsi mounted. the
Himalayas. Siddha-caranas lived on the mountain. °
Celestial women walked all over the place. The mountain always. reverberated with the noise of different
varieties of living beings. The noise produced by Kin-
.naras, peacocks and many. other birds could always be
heard there. Himavan was the permanent abode of
Garuda. The Astadikpalakas also lived there. »
(32) When Suka.moved up. to the world above it
appeared as though the Himavan was being cut open.
He saw two divine peaks of mountains on the two
sides of the path; one of them was the peak of the
Mahameru and the other that of Himavan. Boththe ~
peaks gave way to Suka. (Santi Parva, Chapter 333).
(33) Siva desired to secure Uma, the daughter of.
Himavan as his wife. Meantime sage Bhrgu demanded
that Uma be wedded to him. When Himayan told the
sage that it had already been decided to gave Uma in
marriage to Siva, the Sage cursed that there would not
be, infuture, gems in the Himavan. (Santi Parva,
Chapter 342, Verse 62).
(34) Visnu and Siva once fought with each other on
the Himavan, and then it seemed as though the mountain was being cleft into pieces. (Santi Parva, Chapter
35) Naradahad his 4érama there, on the Himavan.
(Santi Parva, Chapter 346, Verse.3).
(36) Sri Krsna once visited the 4grama of Upamanyu
on the Himavan. (Anusasana ‘Parva, Chapter 14, Verse
(37) .King Marutta performed a yajfia on the Himalayas and brahmins went away leaving a_ lot of wealth
there. (Agvamedhika Parva, Chapter 3, Verse 20).
(38) Safijaya left for the Himalayas after Dhrtarastra
and Gandhari were burnt to death in a wild fire. (Agramavasika Parva, Chapter 37, Verse 33).
(39) During their mahaprasthana (great journey) the
Pandavas travelled by the Himalayas and Dharmaputra
ascended to heaven from the top of the Himdlayan peak.
‘(Mahaprasthanika Parva, Chapter 2, Verse'l).
(vermillion) obtained from
mountainous regions. It has the colour (red) of the sky
at sunset. (Vana Parva, Chapter 158, Verse 94).
HIPPOCRAITUS. A Greek scientist and thinker. Father
of the Allopathic system of medicine. He has written
a book on medicine €onsisting of nearly seventy parts,
His theory is that the heart is the centre of origin of
life and the heat of the body is the manifestation of life.
Out of the five elements of the Indian system of medicine he accepts four, -viz. Prthvi (earth), Ap (Water) ,
Agni (fire) and Vayu (air). T ill the 18th century A.D.
his theories were very popular.
A particular region in Jambi
island, to the south of Nila mountain and to the north
of mount Nisadha. (Bhagavata, 5th Skandha),
HIRANYA. (Hiranyakasipu, Hiranyaksa )

HIRANYA
1) General. Owing to a curse Jaya and Vijaya who were
gate-keepers at Vaikuntha were born as two asuras,
Hiranyaksa (elder brother) and Hiranyakasipu (younger brother). These brothers are known also as the
Hiranyas. (See Jayavijayas) .
2) Birth. Three sons called Hiranyaksa, Hiranyakasipu
and Vajranga and a daughter, Simhika were born to
Kagyapaprajapati by his wife Diti. To Hiranyakasipu
were born four sons called Anuhlada; Hlada Prahlada
and Samhiada. (Visnu Purana, Part 1, Chapter 15).
‘There is yet another story relating to the birth of these
asuras. Though the other wives of Kagyapa became
mothers Diti alone was not blessed with a child fora
long time. One day at dusk while Kagyapa was immersed in meditation Diti rushed into his room and began
lamenting and complaining about her having not yet
been made a mother, and urgently asked Kagyapa to
make her one. But, Kagyapa pointed out that it was
not the proper time for such things. It was dusk when
Siva with his attendants would be out sight-seeing
covered with ashes from burning ghats spread all around
by storms. So KaSyapa wanted to wait for some time
more. But, she was not in amood to pay heed to his
advice and Kagyapa had to yield to her proposal. After
obliging her, once again he took his. bath and began
meditation. |
Diti became pregnant. She also got alarmed about the
indiscretion committed at dusk time that day and,
Kagyapa told her : “Your mind became impure, you
did not obey me, you insulted the Devas also. There
are two kids of a very low type in your womb. They
will oppress the three worlds and kill innocent people.
Mahavisnu will never tolerate such things. He will
incarnate himself to kill them. But since you feel penitent now, a grand-son of yours will becomé liked by all
good people, and he will be a great devotee of Mahavisnu. (‘This was Prahlada).
At any rate, one hundred years after her getting pregnant Diti delivered twin sons. The first born was named
Hiranyaksa and the next one Hiranyakasipu. (According .° certain Puranas Hiranyakaéipu was the first
orn). )
3) Hiranyaksa. ‘The boys grew up to become a growing
menace to the whole world. Hiranyaksa toured all the
three worlds with a club. He besieged Svarga. Devas ran
away in fear. Hiranyaksa, shaking his club, jumped
from the sky into the sea and engaged himself in the
sport of thrashing the waves with his club. Years passed
by like this, and at last he went to Vibhavari, the capital of Varuna and challenged him to fight. Varuna
came out of the palace, admitted his incapacity to fight
Hiranyaksa, and suggested to him to challenge Mahayisnu. Accordingly he set out in search of Mahavisnu.
It was during this period of time that the earth got engulfed in water. Svayambhuvamanu requested his father,
Brahma to raise up the earth from water. But, nowhere
could be seen the earth, everywhere it was only a_ vast
xpanse of water. Brahma then meditated upon Maha
_ who came out through Brahma’s nose in the form
vie boar. It grew up into a very big boar within
of ped a ‘umped from the sky into the ocean, and
ne Hine, BE t picked up from under the
within a few minutes 1
ocean the earth on its tusks and appeared on the surface
of the water. Hiranyaksa understood that the boar,
which without the least fear picked up the earth from
HIRANYANABHA II
Patala was none other than Mahavisnu and _ he challenged Visnu to fight. After replacing the earth in its
old position Visnu fought with Hiranyaksa and killed
him.
4) Hiranyakasipu. With the killing of his brother,
Hiranyakafipu’s hatred and enmity towards Visnu increased very much. He, by doing tapas for very long
years, secured boons from Brahma and conquered the
three worlds and ruled them as Triloka Cakravarti
(Emperor of the three worlds). He prohibited throughout the empire not only the chanting of Visnu’s name,
but even thinking about him (Visnu) by his subjects.
‘“Hiranyaya namah” (salutations to Hiranya) replaced
the old custom of chanting ‘Narayanaya namah’ (salutations to Narayana). Meantime, a son called Prahlada,
a great devotee of Mahavisnu was born to Hiranyakafipu. (For the story of Hiranyakagipu’s death see
Prahlada). (Kamba Ramayana, Yuddha Kanda; Padma
Purana, Bhimikhanda, Chapter 20).
5) Story about the name Hiranyakasipu. Sage Kagyapa
once conducted an Agvarhedha yajfia. A golden seat
was put up there for the great sages who came to participate in the yajfia. Diti was pregnant during the time
of the yajfia, and while it was duly progressing she one |
day came and sat on the above-mentioned golden seat,
and very shortly she delivered a child. As the child was
delivered on the golden seat the child came to be called
Hiranyakasipu. (Brahmanda Purana, 8, 5, 7-12; Vayu
Purana 67, 69).
HIRANYABAHU. A naga born in VAsuki’s dynasty.
He was burnt to death at the sarpa satra of Janamejaya.
(Adi Parva, Chapter 57, Verse 6).
HIRANYABINDU. A sacred place near the Himalayas.
During his pilgrimage Arjuna visited this place also.
bath in this tirtha will wash off one’s sins. Hiranyabindu is situated on the top of Mount Kalafijara.
HIRANYADHANUS. A King of forest tribes. Ekalavya,
the great master of archery was Hiranyadhanus’s son
(See Ekalavya). ——
HIRANYAGARBHA. A synonym of Sri Krsna. (Santi
Parva, Chapter 342, Verse 96).
HIRANYAHASTA. A son born to princess Vadhrimati
thanks to the blessing of the Aévinidevas. She was
married by a eunuch. Sorrow-stricken at such 4
marriage the princess requested the Asvinidevas for children and they gave her a son, (Rgveda, Mandala L,
Anuvaka 17, Sikta 116) who was called HiranyahastaHe became a sage and married the beautiful daughter
of King Madiragva. (Santi Parva, Chapter 934, Verse
HIRANYAKASIPU I. (See Hiranya).
HIRANYAKASIPU II. A danava. He once shook
Mount Meru and Siva granted him welfare and prosperity. (Anuéasana Parva, Chapter 14, Verse 73).
HIRANYAKSA I. A brother of Hiranyakasipu. (See
Hiranya).
HIRANYAKSA II. One of the sons of Visvamitra, who
was a Brahmavadin. (Anugasana Parva, Chapter *)
- Verse 57). |
HIRANYANABHA I. A King born in the solar dynasty:
He was the son of Vidhrti and the father of Pusy4:
(Bhagavata, 9th Skandha). “id
HIRANYANABHA. II. A son of Srijaya, A_ ch! i
named Suvarnasthivi was born to Srijjaya, but 1¢ ae
before long, and then it was Narada who brought

HIRANYAPURAM 315
back to life again. After its rebirth the child came to
be called Hiranyanabha also. Hiranyanabha lived for
1000 years. (Santi Parva, Chapter 149).
HIRANYAPURAM. A city of the Daityas. The Daitya
woman, Puloma got the city for her children by tapas.
Puloma is called Kalaka also. (Certain Puranas aver
that Kalaka was the sister of Puloma). The children of
Puloma are known as Kalakeyas for whose safety and
security she did tapas for 1000 years. And, when
Brahma asked her to choose any boon she desired,
Puloma said as follows:- ‘“There should arise no reason
or cause for my sons to feel sorrow in their life; Devas,
snakes or Raksasas should not kill them and they must
have a beautiful city to live in. Brahma granted her all
the boons. Hiranyapura was built by Brahma for the
Kalakeyas to live in. It was full of gems and it could
easily travel in the sky.
When life became impossible for the Devas due to the
depredations of the Kalakeyas, Indra brought
Arjuna to Devaloka. As the Kalakeyas were granted the
boon that they would not be killed by ‘the Devas,
Arjuna’s help had thus to be sought by Indra. Arjuna
killed the Kalakeyas and destroyed Hiranyapure- (Vana
n Narada gave
HOMAKUNDA (M).
HRINISEVA
head and thence on Bindusaras, and therefrom flowed
in seven tributaries. Three tributaries, Hladini
Pavani and Nalini: flowed eastwards, Sucaksus Sita
and Sindhu westwards, and the seventh tributar
Seen eine aoa The mortal remains of the “ae
were floo ith i
se Sa ‘oui ed with iis WatEDS, and their souls
HOMA. A king belonging to the dynasty of Bharata.
He was the son of Kréadratha
(Bhagavata, 9th Skandha). and: Jatasn Oh Puta a
HOMADHENU. The cow, which offers milk needed
for yajiia.
The pit for maki ings
during yajias. Rules odinialcine the aibane “Fesanie,
es "4 are 24 of the Agni Purana as follows:—
‘irst, demarcate a piece of ground one yard s 1eD
thread and dig it one yard deep. After anae a adie
(inches) space on all the four sides of the pit make three
divisions init. The three divisions should be 12” x 8” and
4”? deep; the inner division 1?” deep, the middle one 8”
and the one outside of it 4°? deep. All the three divi
sions should be four feet in width. The above Soe
divisions are called Satvamekhala, Rajomekhala and
Tamasamekhala, and this is the pit, viz). Homakunda
On the western side of it a yoni (receptacle) 10 x15
Parva, Chapter 173). On one occasio ada.
- @ correct a of Hiranyapura to Mee the
charioteer of Indra. (Udyog Parva, Chapter 100).
HIRAM TAS, One ak tHeuaOn fe OTe
-‘Hiranyaretas was king of the Kusa island and ha
seven sons called Vasu,
athgulas should be made. Its depth should gradually
decrease in the descending order 6, 4, 2 arngulas. In
shape the yoni will be ofthe shape of the peepal leaf.
(Yoni is that of Sakti ; the Kunda is her stomach. The
conception about Sakti is that of a woman lying on
ses iam ee bee the east.). The priest performs
the rites, himself seated to th t of i i
-head ers to the east. ph cae cat oe 7 e
HOTRAVAHANA. A saintly kin h
aaeeye a Amba. (see onder At bel. re ‘* acca
HR . Also called Hlada, a son of Hi Sj
(See under Anuhlada). eh iba
HRADA II. A naga. Hrada was also present in the
company of nagas, which carried the soul of Balabhadrarama to Patala. (Mausala Parva, Chapter 4, Verse 16).
HRADODARA. A Raksasa, who was killed by Subrahmanya in the war between the Devas and the Asuras.
s paneer Chapter 46, 75).
R . A Yadava. He was the father of Krt
6 cal FoR Chapter 63, Verse 105). eT
' great sage. He lives in th
- aoe (Sabha Parva, Chapter 7, 13). cae bie
Vasudana, Drdharuct, NabhiSupta, Satyavrata, Vivikta and Vamadeva. (Bhagavata
Sth Skandha).
IRANYAROMAN. A kin
suzerainty over the southern regions.
known as Bhismaka. (Se€ Bhismaka
HIRANYASARAS. An ancient tirtha b
eee Candra washed off his sins by
anti Parva, Chapter 3425 -. mountain to the
HIRANYASRNGAM. An extensive me soe
nort - Mainaka which 18,
h_ of Mount M This ‘mountain 1s said to be
Verse 10;
OF Mount Kailasa.
a mine of ent (Sabha Parva, Chapter 3%
I ter 6, fi in ora!
HIRANVASTOPA. “A great Sages oe a of Angiras
(Reveda, Mandala !, Anuvaka /, she “ ate
HIRANYAVARMAN. | A king of a
was married by Sikhandi. )See car a nskrit on the
HITOPADESA.. A book ee “4 collection of fortyasis of the Paficatantra- toc are foun 1) Birth. One of the 16d =
a the stories 4 e ol the aughters born to § bhuthree stories, and rwentyfive °° not muck difference vamanu by his wife called Gatarane. HES catcata, ‘4th
in'the Paficatantra. There 82." 6 ine two books. The | Skandha).
In the stori out the orig!” ee Narayana 2) Other informati
: es, ay ee + tare be one Narayat 2) U rmation.
author of Hitopadesa 15 ee Dhavalacandra. Of the in his assembly.
oh the oldest one 1s
¢ the book, , hook
sed that the 00
n mn 10th and 12t
‘darbha who exercised
* Lives He was also
of the western
athing here.
daughter
(1) Hridevi worships Brahma
(2) When Arjuna started for Indraloka Draupadi meditated upon Hri so that no dangers might overtake him.
(Vana Parva, Chapters 37, 38).
(3) Hri too was present at the installation ceremony
of Subrahmanya. (Salya Parva, Chapter 45, 13).
HRIMAN. A Sanatanavisvadeva. (eternal Deva of the
universe). (Anusdsana Parva, Chapter 91, 31).
HRINISEVA. A saintly king born in the Asura dynasty.
He was one of the ancient kings whom fate had made
to relinquish their kingdorns. (Santi Parva, Chapter
Pandita, a dependant ©
Manuscripts available ©
dated 1373 A.D. It has bee :
was written somewhere betweer
centuries A.D.
There are four parts 0 the orereating ‘diss
(gaining friends) , Suhrdbheda ration) and
a de friends) Vigraha (sep? : ¢
{union ). 5 on 0
a ( HRADA). A — for Hrada, §
iranyakagipu. (See Hrada) ie
HLADINI. rg ae of the Gane ark fell on
down by Bhagiratha to the earth
lled Mitralabha
ensions
Sandhi
Ganga brought
Siva’s

HOHU
HUHU. A Gandharva, son of Kasyapaprajapati by
Pradha.
(1) He was present at the birthday celebrations of
Arjuna. (Adi Parva, Chapter 122, Verse 59).
(2) Huaht was among the Gandharvas who welcomed
Arjuna in Devaloka. (Vana Parva, Chapter 48, Verse 14}.
(3) Hiha lives in Indrasabha.
(4) Once he was turnéd into an alligator on account of
the curse of Devala. (See under Indradyumna).
HONA. A tribe. There are a number of references-in the
Puranas to the Hiinas, who were created from the froth
in the mouth of Nandini, the cow which was in
_ Wasistha’s 4rama. (Adi Parva, Chapter 174, Verse 18).
Nakula conquered the Htnas in the western regions.
(Sabha Parva, Chapter 32), The Hina kings took
part in the Rajasiya of Yudhisthira and made costly
presents. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 51, Verse 24).
HUNDA. An asura, the son of Vipracitti. (He abducted
Asokasundari, sister of Subrahmanya. (Padma Purana) .
(See under Agokasundari) .
HUNDA(M). An urban region in ancient India. The
people of this area were known as Hundas. In the great
war they fought on the side of the Pandavas. They took
their positions in the Krauficaruna vyiha formed by
Nakula and Sahadeva. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 50,
Verse 51).
HUTA(M).
hutam ).
HUTAHAVYAVAHA. One of the two sons of Dhara,
the Vasu, the other son being Dravina. (Adi Parva,
Chapter 66, Verse 21).
I. (g). This letter means Kamadeva.
Chapter 348).
J. (2). This letter means
Purana, Chapter 348).
IDA I. Daughter of Vayu (wind-god). Ida had a son
Utkala by Dhruva.
IDA II. Daughter of Manu. In Taittiriya Brahmana,
we find the following reference to this Ida :—
Once Manu came to know that Devas and Asuras had
performed an Agnyadhana (consecration of the _fire).
To ascertain whether it was deposited at the proper
time, Manu sent Ida to them, Ida found that both
parties had followed the wrong method, She said to
Manu :—“Your yajfia (Agnyadhana) should not be as
ineffectual as that of the Devas and Asuras. Therefore
I myself shall deposit the Trividhagnis (the three Agnis
which are to be set in the proper place) at the proper
place.’’ Manu agreed and began his yaga. Asa_ result
of it the Devas attained plenty and prosperity,
Once when Id4 was in the presence of Manu. the
Devas invited her openly and the Asuras invited her
covertly. Since Ida accepted the invitation of the
Devas, all creatures abandoned the Asuras and joined
the party of Devas. (Taittiriya Samhita).
IDHMAJIHVA. Svayambhuva Manu had two famous
sons-——Priyavrata and Uttanapada, Of them. Priyavrata
married Suripa and Barhismati, the two daughters of
Vigvakarma Prajapati. Idhmajihva was born to him
by his first wife. Idhmajihva had nine brothers Viz,
Agtidhra, Yajfiabahu, Mahavira, Rukmagukra,
One of the five great yajfias. (See Pra-
(Agni Purana,
‘Rati’ and Laksmi. Agni
Parva (Chapter 4) says that Mahabahu was the son of Vaivasvata Manu, Prasandtd wai the $
IKSVAKU
Ghrtaprstha, Savana, Medhatithi, Vitihotra and Kavi.
Urjjasvati was their youngest sister. (Maha Devi
Bhagavata, 8th Skandha),
IDHMAVAHA. Son of Agastya and his wife Lopamudra.
The actual name of Idhmavaha was Tridasyu. There 1s
a story in the Mahabharata about the birth of this boy.
When Lopamudra was pregnant, Agastya asked her :—
©1000 sons of average ability; or 100 sons, each of them
having the worth of 10 sons; or 10 sons, each having the
worth of 100 sons; or a single son having the nobility
and greatnessof more than a thousand sons; which
would you prefer ?”” Lopamudra chose a single son with
the greatness of a thousand sons. Tridasyu or Idhmavaha
was the son born according to her wish. The child was
in the womb for seven years before he was born. He
began to recite Vedas even from the moment of his
'. birth. As the boy grew up, he used to bring small pieces
of firewoods and twigs to feéd the fire for his father’s
lioma. That was why he got the name Idhmavaha.
(One who brings the necessary things for homa).
(Idhma =fuel; vaha= one who carries).
IKSULA. An important river. (M.B, Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 9, Verse 17).
IKSUMATI. Ariver. It flows near Kuruksetra, The
nagas, T'aksaka and Agvasena lived in this river. (M.B.
Adi Parva, Chapter 3, Verse 138). —
Kuéadhvaja, brother of the King of Mithila used to
live in the Iksumati river valley, (Valmiki Ramayana,
Bala Kanda. 7th Sarga, Verse 2).
There is a reference to: this river in Kathasaritsagara,
Madanamajficukalambaka, 2nd taranga also.
IKSVAKU.! A son of Vaivasvata Manu.
1) Genealogy. From Visnu were descended in the
following order—Brahma—Marici—Kas yapa—Vivasvan
—Vaivasvata Manu—lIksvaku.
Sraddha, Vaivasvata Manu’s wife bore him ten sons—
Iksvaku, Nrga, Saryati, Dista, Dhrsta, Karusa,
Narisyanta, Nabhaga, Prsadhra and Kavi. Vaivasvata
Manu had six more sons by another wife, Chaya. ‘They
were Manu, Yama, Yami, Aévinikumara, Revanta,
Sudyumna. The Iksvaku family takes its source from
Iksvaku. The Kings of the solar dynasty were all born
in the Iksvaku family. This dynasty is named ‘Solar
Dynasty” because Iksvaku was born to Vivasvan (Sun)
the son of Kagyapa. In Devi Bhagavata, 7th Skandha
we see that Iksvaku was born from Manu’s spittle. The
descendants of Iksvaku up to Sri Rama’s sons Lava an
Kuéa are given below :— _
Iksvaku had three sons—Danda, Vikuksi, and Nim.
From Vikuksi was born Sasada ; from Sagada, Purafjaya; from Purafijaya, Kakutstha; from Kakutstha,
~ Anenas; from Anenas, Prthulasva; from Prthulasva
Prasenajit; from Prasenajit, Yuvanasva; and from
Yuvanaéva was born Mandhata. Ambarisa, Mucukunda
and Purukutsa were the sons of Mandhata. Besides
them he had fifty daughters also. The sage Saubhar?
married them. The family-tree continues again from
Purukutsa, one of the sons of Mandhata.
From Purukutsa, Trasadasyu was born; from Tra
dasyu, Anaranya;from Anaranya, Aryagva; from Aryasv4
Vasumanas; from Vasumanas, Sutanva; from Sutanv®
Trairyyaruna; from ‘Traiyyaruna, Satyavrata oF
saon of
Lahhé edha
1. Mahabhérata ASvam Prasandhi and Iksvaku was the son of Ksupa.
.Mahabahu, Ksupa was the son of

um ILINA
Triganku; from him Harigcandra;, from Harigcandra,, 4) Transformation again ; 11a expressed to Vasistha, he
stha, her
Rohitagva; from Rohitaéva Harita; from Harita, grief at having been tur i
Cujficu; from Cuficu, Sudeva; from Sudeva, Bharuka requested Sri Bwraines vite a bere hier gory = ae
and from Bharuka Sagara was born. Sagara had two form as a man. Siva said. that Il4 would be | ne nial
wives—Sumati and Keéini, Sumati gave birth to a woman every alternate month, throughout fa tp
60,000 children, while . Kegini had a single son, ing the month when she was aman he would cavave
Asamafijasa. Amguman was the son of Asamafijasa; himself in matters of Government, and the next month
Bhagiratha was the son of Amsuman; Srutanabha was when a woman, she would stay in the inner apartments
the son of Bhagiratha; Sindhudvipa was the son of | in the palace, Brahmanda Purana, Chapter 32 says
rutanabha; Ayutayus was the son of Sindhudvipa; that Iksvaku, brother of Puriravas ruled th
Rtuvarna was fie he of Ayutayus; Sarvakama was the the latter becaine a major. “AG ‘gant > Sissies
son of Rtuvarna; Sudas was the son of Sarvakama; attained majority Sudyumna handed over to him the
Mitrasaha, the son of Sudas; Kalmasapada was the reins of Government and retired to the forest for tapas
son of Mitrasaha; ASmaka was the son of Kalmasa- and during this period he was taught the Nawalsara
pada; Milaka was the son of Agmaka; Khatvanga ws ceaeee by sage Narada. Sudyumna adored Devi with
the son of Malaka; Dirghabahu (Dilipa) was therein. "ee She appeared to him and blessed him with
of Khatvanga; Raghu was the son of Dirghabahu; Aja the state of salvation, (Bhagavata) .
was the son of Raghu; Dagaratha was the son 0 Aja. Puriiravas married Urvasi, and ruled the country,
DaSaratha had tl wives. Kausalya, Kaikeyi and (Bhagat 9th Skandha; Devi Bhagavata, First SkanSuimina, Sa Resta wes born to alse? ae hls, en + hace : ie 75 and Aduaiceaelt
was th ‘keyi and Symitra had two SOM, | ) » Verse .
thle ta wae haa and Kuga were 9? ILA a h A river. At the birth of Subrahmanya this river
ama’s b Sita. (See the word Kala- paid homage to him with fruits and roots. (M.B. Anubrahmana)? . i Geant bribes hed | i apiece
ILA ) mna when, after becom- , rahmins bathed in this river. (M.B.
A. The name then OY oat. (arene nan ee
ILA | Dank ht f Vaivasvata Manu. © s hol ata Skonperaenee bathing ghat. A dip in the
1) as ae “De ended from Visnu in this order :— rth Vai a Wars © ill-fate and confers the benefits
1 Geng Desens 0 aout Ge eh (hee: Vana Fans Shane 9
“eae ae f Kagyapa b vay : TA (IT; —
Aditi wad tla =o ae i the som aivasvata Manu by his > rinaeileiye his . A King in the line of PriyavWife Sraddha Th sku the ancestral father of the solar ILAVRITA (LAVRTT ae Manu, (See Genealogy).
dynasty of Kings was brother of Ila. JLAVRTA VARSA peas ee ea (See en)
roe Kings was Dr d Sraddha had, for a long afi ABE ies hat part of the country in the
fine: Sanka huang TREE i formed once by Agastye 8) re of Jambidvipa.. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter
ildren. : ne that as ve 3
a yajfia to propitiate the Mitravarunas Se ohter Son ILAVU. See Vayu, Para 6.
might be born to him (Manu) - sonia. Then Manu ILIBILA. The wife of Vigravas and mother. of Kubera.
born to him and she was callea * him Vi b |
7 hter was born to isravas was born as the son of Pulastya, one of th
ms Vasistha why a ce ceaiile was erformed by Prajapatis by Manini. Visravas had two ries Kaikasi
ead of a son for wHom will-power turne and Ilibila alias Devavarnini and Vaisravana (Kubera)
) his it
Sastya. At once, Vasistha by. as named Sud- was born of [libila. Hence Kubera 1 Beh ois
the girl I]4 into a boy; and the boy W* also; To’ Vifravas was born by Kaikast, ommellgseg
yumna, (Bhagavata). Once Sunaka sana, Kumbhakarna and Si a
3)" gavata). 7 into woman. ONT nara ypILA. A King of Pa ae
ene ogee A et ar
ana neat Kailasa to salute Sri Parame var vara were Me fe Y ac ee Sern, “o ee: was Ilila’s
of f . i = jan | : mee i 5 apter * 5 |
the fact that just then Parvaen appearance of Sunaka Ilila by the name [lina and Ses Suontas ng Riera
enjoy; : 3 Ca nian le, WHO
an Ying themselves. Th y the divine cove “curse ‘fea he .
aoe then naked. ‘They there’ ri ne future woul baa ite pe aypm mS ona eT we gr
at anvb . entered the ore ; am ae a ess name amsu, ahan
turned into 2 vant (Bhagaval@) puntingone day: nea i a elem ge responsible for the
Sudyumna, now a young man, es urse entered aa Be earthiaad eae ae i 7 ss ache ed ee
udy; , ant oO iV a | . as Tamsu's son. re€-atso
forest with ‘ie SR nll hunting: M iofstricken, —— (Nebr and he had five sons. (M.B.
a were transforme P an ink ae and then ped ILINA. Son of fine so rma in TN dynasty. His
y stayed in the forest '0) | ing the name Li wife was Rathantari. Ilina had five sons by her. "They
for th a4 bearing | an. On the
or the palace, Sudyumnd"S*peautifel each other Xt, Adi Parva Sen, ie eee amiees
way Budha met IIa, they fell 10 vas porn to Bugha ‘ota ' lila) , Chapters 16-18. See also underthe
ait married. A son, Puraravas
by la. (Bha ,
hah nealosy according to-some Puranas. The genealogy given above is based on Bhagavata and
. i Th -_enateatonele the &
Agni Surava. are certain vari

ILLAKA
ILLAKA. A*person who led avery ideal family life.
Son of a Vaigsya in the city of Mathura, Illaka hada
very beautiful wife. Illaka had one. day to goto ano-
‘ther place and his wife wanted to accompany him. But,
Illaka did not allow that and went alone. Then she
waited at the gates looking towards the husband moving
fast away. And, when he completely disappeared from
sight she, who could not bear the separation, fell down
‘on the spot and expired. Illaka heard about the death
and without delay, he hurried back home. He placed
the dead. body of his wife on his lap and wept, Weeping
- thus-he also expired:: (Kathasaritsagara, Lavanakalam-
. baka, Taranga I). 7 fat ees ia
ILVALA. An Asura; who lived in the Manimati city.
_. Ilvala and his brother Vatapi ate up a number of brahmins and Agastya cursed them to‘death. (See Agastya) .
INDIA. ‘South Sarakh’, a newspaper published from
the United Arab Republic with the assistance of the
Indian Embassy gives the following account of how thé
land originally known.as ‘Bharata’ came to be called
India. The name ‘India’ was given to “Bharata” by
the Arabs. Even from very early. times, Arabs used to
give the name ‘Hind’ to their girls. In ancient Arabic
love poems, thisname could be seen very frequently.
There were commercial and cultural contacts between
Bharata and Arab lands, from very old times. The
words ‘Kharan Ful’ (spices) ‘Pulfal’ (Pepper) etc.
may be seen in Arabic poems of the pre-Islamic period.
These contacts became more intimate in later years and
the Arabs began to take very great interest in the products and the people of this country. They began to
call ‘Bharata’ by the pet name ‘Hind’ which they
used for their little children. They began to use the
term ‘Al Hind’ when referring to Bharata in their
poems, records'and trade agreements. In course of time
this was shortened to ‘Hind’ and finally became
‘INDIA’. |
INDIVARAKSA. A Gandharva. He was the son of
Nalanabha, the chief of the Vidyadharas. There is.a
story about this Gandharva in Markandeya Purana,
Chapter 60 :— | |
Indivaraksa went to the sage Brahmamitra to learn
Ayurveda. For some unknown reason, the sage did not
teach him. Indivaraksa decided to learn by overhearing
what the guru taught the other pupils from a hiding
place. In six months’ time. he learnt. Ayurveda. Overjoyed at the thought that he was able to acquire as
much learning in this science as the other pupils, within such a short time, and oblivious of his surroundings,
he laughed loudly. The guru who understood the secret,
uttered a curse that he would become a Raksasa within
seven days. The repentant Indivaraksa begged for his
pardon. Then the sage told him that he ‘would be
restored to his own form and give up the Raksasa shape
when he was shot with arrows by his own children.
Once when he approached his daughter ‘Manorama
to devour her, his son-in law, Svarocis who had _ learnt
the science of archery from that girl, defeated him. ‘In
this way, Indivaraksa got his own former form.’ After
that he taught Svarocis, the sciences of archery which
he had learnt from h
Brahmamitra. ¢ Paritya Ki h
gasena a King who
INDIVARASENA. Son 0 Dani tyagasena had two
f Iravati. yagasel
mee a aiiaaieercanet and Kavyalankara. As they
"i Madri thé other wife of Pandu. Thus Arjuna: was
ig own daughter and also from © gon of Kunti by Indra.
INDRA
had no children, the distressed King with his queens
worshipped the goddess Durga. Durga gave the King
two fruits. She blessed that the queens would bear
children when they ate the fruits. Adhikasamgama ate
both the fruits without showing them to the other wife.
Two sons were born to her. Indivarasena was the elder
son. (Kathdsaritsigara, Ratnaprabha lambaka, 8th
Taranga) .
INDRA.
1) Genealogy. Visnu—Brahma—Marici—Kas yapa—
Indra.
2). Birth: KaSyapa was born to. Marici, the eldest of
the spiritual sons .of Brahma. Indra was the son of
Kasyapa and Aditi, the eldest daughter of Daksa. ‘The
twelve sons who. were born to Kasyapa and Aditi are
called Adityas.' The twelve Adityas are—Dhata, Aryama,
‘Mitra, Rudra, Varuna, Sirya, Bhaga, Vivasvan, Pusa,
Savita, Tvast3, and Visnu. In addition to them,’ Aditi
had twentyone sons more. Indra is the eldest of the 33
sons. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 65, Verses 9-15).
Indra became the ruler of the Devas. Airavata 15
Indra’s elephant, Uccaissravas, his horse, and Vajra his.
weapon, (Agni Purana, Chapter 51, M.B. Adi Parva,
Chapter 18). |
3) Indra and Garuda. Kasyapa had two sons, Garuda
and Aruna by Vinata and a large number of Nagas by
his other wife, Kadri. Kadri and her children kept
Vinata and her son Garuda “as their servants. Kadru
agreed to set them free if they brought Amrta from
Devaloka.
Once Kadri and her children asked Garuda to carry
them to the beautiful Nagalaya in the middle of the
ocean. Garuda carried them on his shoulders and _ flew
very high near the sky. The excessive heat of the sun
made the Nagas unconscious. Kadri, in her distress;
' prayed to Indra. Indra showered rain and cooled the
atmosphere. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 25, Verses 717). They reached the lovely island in the middle of
the ocean,
Garuda decided to earn his freedom by bringing Amrt@
from Devaloka. With determination, he flew up 1nl0
heaven and secured Amrta. The enraged Indra attacked him with his weapon, Vajra. But Garuda sprea
his feathers in such a way that he was not wounded.
Indra was struck with wonder, and pleased with the
beautiful feathers (Parna) of Garuda, named him
‘Suparna’. At last Indra was pleased and _ allowé
Garuda to take Amrta with him. (M.B. Adi Parva,
Chapter 32, Verses 18-25).
4) How Indra came to have 1000 eyes. (See Tilottama,
Para) .
Qnd
5) Indra and Arjuna.. (1) Kunti, Pandu’s. . wife had
‘received five mantras from Durvasas for begetting oes
One of those Mantras was chanted meditating on
sun even before she was married and Karna was bor?:
After marriage she used three more of the Mantras 4?
three sons were born to her from Yama, Vayu 2”
Indra respectively. The fifth Mantra was presented as
(M.B. Adi Parva, “Chapter
(2) There is a story ofa rivalry between Indra _ a
Arjuna in the Mahabharata. (See under ‘Khan¢
vadaha’) .

INDRA
Ae) Das their life in the forest, once Arjuna
ot ut ailasa to worship Siva, On the way Indra
him Ny : er him and showered his blessings on
(4) Pena Vana Parva, Chapter 41, Verses 19, 16).
ae ook his life in the forest, Indra presented. to
— a who visited him in Indra’s residencé, a Gan hfeos one Citrasena as his companion. Citrasena
Che, im music, dance, etc. (M.B. Aranya Parva,
pter 44, Verse 9).
structed by
(5) At the palace of Indra, as secretly in
Arjuna with advances of
Indra, Urvasi approached 4
ield to her temptations:
on | ne sees refused to yles! .
lifted re Into a eunuch by. her curse. . But Indra
aie he curse by saying that this curse would be an
Benjaa to him during the incognito life of the
Teds: avas. It was Citrasena who was used as a tool by
Parva to test Arjuna’s self. control. (M.B. Aranya
Indr n order tq ensure |
a, disguised as a Brahmin,
6) Ty ’ s ear-rings. (M.B. Aranya P
the e 1 a and Vytrasura. A famous exp!
——_ ling of Vrtrasura. Under -the
made the Kalakeyas and many othe te idea
e ‘om the Devas. The battle raged furiou s nga
5 unconscious owing 1 the shower © ar!
a Vrtra. At once Vasistha with his | divine poe
kat wees Indra to consciousness. Finding it 1mposs* e to
Vrira, the nonplussed Devas und
Arjuna’s victory i battle,
obtained by begging
arva, Chapter 310).
oit of Indra was
other Raksasas
er the leadership oF
ndra a Avi Visnu told them that
pproached Mahavisnu. 1st ;
rtra could be killed only with thé bone of the sage
‘ adhica. So all of them approac ed Dadhica. Realisité
2¢ situation, Dadhica . let Indra “ATE his hone. f
a eae Indra'made his weapo® . ajra with ; - me
7 receiving a fatal strove rom t, Vrira “ 5
ead. (M.B, Vana Parva, Chapter Dr ,, 153
anti Parva, Chapt 981, Verses 5/4 8 q
By killing i Nisa a 6 sncurret the sin 0 Brahmahatya.
é curred" T Rss t
-expiat . evas and - gl :
Piate for that sin the D his holy bath. there.
to
ss arayu river an performe
(Valmiki Ramayana, Baia Kanda a ere Vrtraor further details about Vrtrasura * ° ay errs
AgviniSura) ,
) ands a and Cyavana.
Ind Sto drink soma J!
= oe and while pass! :
Ukanya, wife of the sag avane |
eautiful. The Asvinidevas advised her re Cyavana.
ife instead of being the ; the blind VY
cond Sukanya rejected their advIC& 15. evesig
euugal fidelity, they restored CYAV"
7 ya € him a youth with peautiful ey
soma promised to get perm 1 dra, Aé
Soma juice. He performes # a. Ind ted that the
and other gods attende it, _ Indra a juice.
Svinis should not be allowed °°; rr dispute
yavana disputed with him 4 ie the. llowed
e the ; Bp. Vana
g thr oug a Ww as extremely
Was defea
) ted. From that tum
Oma d * . ‘ ‘C avana 5 Oe i
Parva, Chapt "5d Artie. 14; Anus asane pane
yeu 16: qjd not
hapter 156. Waleed TG | d
1 Sih and Ms sisal fat prother ee object of
rebuki me of Indra’s activities: ,
Visy Ing Indra, ‘Tvastr begot qa son n ee
arupa had three faces an he
leadership of
INDRA.
Trigiras. With one face he u :
ae ee he drank acca ae i. reli eaan ye
a 9 eg the world. He performed. a a face
ee ban rs who wae alarmed at it, sent aileeete 4s
a ues im, but in vain. At last Indra himeal fF esses to
Td ores riding et his elephant. Airavata a aks 2
réiras with his Vajrayudha. In his viole : f killed
had the three heads of Trigiras cut by na) fury he
From that day, it was ordained that the head af the
‘cow sacrificed at yagas should be given to a carpent
er."
Tvastr: who was enraged rahi
Trigiras, begot another a viene S ailing of his son
6th Skandha). : . (Devi Bhagavata,
9) Indra and Nahusa. See the word Agi
10) Indra and Bali. When Ao dees % of
away the Asuras, Mahabali, the Asura - and .drove
med the form. of an ass and hid himself - peror assuhouse. Brahma. informed Indra of this Ten pana
| : ioun
him out there, but set him free without killing at th
ak
behest of Brahma. (M.B. Santi
11) Indra and ae Yayati tne oe er eee
his old age, he handed over the kingly aie gale am
younger son Piru and went to the forest for ] ae to his
enance. Ajiter performing penance ip rforming
Indraloka in theend. Indra did not like Ya Eve an
that there was none who had greater Sewel a boast
than himself. Indra pushed him down t th of tapas
3 cS eae ae 88). _to the world.
12) Indra and Saradvan. Saradva
Sage Gautama. Saradvan moet ee bora a she son of
ing divine arrows. Devendra who was alarme - acquirApsara woman Janapati to obstruct his tapa , sent the
affected by her irresistible charm. and ae s. Deeply
her temptations, he had an involuntary cect by
semen, which fell on the Casta ba anc spit ission of
two parts. T'wo children a bo laut hs sak it itself into
from it. The King’s servants brought oo born
Hastinapura. The boy was named Krpa and a to
was named Krpy. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 130) =
13) Indra and King Kuru. ‘The King ames K ).
once ploughing the field at the place known — was
ksetra. (This was long before Kuruksetr as Kurufamous as the battlefield of Bharata Yud ah became
who ha pened to come that way at the tim = : Indra
King tilling the land, asked him why he e, seeing the
The King replied that he was poifininten as doing’ s0.
enable the men whodell dead there, to ane 7 pee to
¢ aven.
‘Indra returned to Heaven, smiling. Other devas cam
e
to know of. this from Indra. . :
came to Devaloka, the share sonia whith ifall men
received by the gods, would be diminished re to be
advised Ind:a to go and give some boon to Ki ilar f
Indra returned to earth and gave his blesing t Kui
as follows :
‘The following classes of people will attain heaven if
they die there (at Kuruksetra
1) Those who die of ee
s ace Hae die fighting heroically.
ose who were men 1 i i ,
who ee been born as Beas eg © be
From that time Kuruksetra became i
rove. (MLB. Salya Parva, Chapter 53). re
14) Indra and Taksaka. Indra’s friend, a Naga named
Taksaka lived in Khandava forest. When Agni b “<—
Khandava forest, Indra caused the rain to fall —
Y

ee
INDRA
to save Taksaka. See under ‘Khandavadaha’. (M.B.
Aranya Parva, Chapter 235).
For the story of how Indra saved Taksaka from the
Sarpasatra see under ‘Astika’.
15) Indra .and Khéndavadaha. At the time of
Khandavadaha, Sri Krsna and Arjuna fought against
Devendra.
16) Indra Sabha. Maya undertook to build a sabha
(assembly hall) for the Pandavas at Indraprastha.
When it was being discussed, thesage Narada described
to them Indra’s sabha as given below :—
Indra has a Sabha which dazzles with divine effulgence.
It is 150 yojanas in length and 100 yojanas in breadth.
It has a height of five yojanas. Beautiful storeyed
buildings and divine trees add to the grandeur of the
sabha. Indra is seated within the holy light in it.
Sacidevi takes her seat near him. Indra is very handsome. He wears a crown, he is dressed in spotlessly
pure clothes, and wears a garland round his neck.
Maruts, Siddhas, Devas, Rsis and a host of others
stand around attending onhim. They are all bright with
the halo of fire. Paragara, Parvata, Savarni, GaAlava,
Samkha, Likhita, GauraSiras, Durvasas, Akrodhana,
Syena, Dirghatamas, Pavitrapani, Bhaluvi, Yajiiavalkya,
Uddalaka, Svetaketu, Pandya and other famous sages
are members of Indra’s assembly. In this way, Indra’s
Sabha is the most magnificent. (M.B. Sabha Parva,
Chapter 7).
17) Indra and Kamadhenu. Once Indra saw Surabhi, the
Kamadhenu, crying in the Indraloka. He asked her
why she was crying. Surabhi answerd: ‘‘My Lord, the
cattle, who are my children are groaning in theworld:
under the yoke of the farmer. I was overwhelmed with
grief at the sight of their sufferings’? Indra’s heart meltted due to Kamadhenu’s tears. He caused very heavy
showers in the world when ploughing the fields became
impossible. In this-‘way as a result of Surabhi’s tears
Indra caused heavy rainfall which gave rest to the cattle
in the world. (M.B. Aranya Parva, Chapter 9).
18) Indra and Nala. Nala proceeded to Vidarbha to
attend ‘Damayanti’s Svayamvara. On the way, the four
gods, Indra, Agni, Varuna and Yama met him. (For
further details see the word ‘Nala’). Nala married
‘Damayanti with the blessings .of these gods. When.the
devas returned, they met Kali and Dvapara. to whom
they described Nala’s marriage. Kali and Dvapara who
wished to 5 latin thet naturally felt disappointed
and angry. Kali was about to pronounce a curse on
Nala. But on the advice ofiiievenrtins he did-not doso.
Still he decided to gain secret entrance into Nala’s
body and to bring about the loss of his Kingdom.
(M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 58). |
19) Indra and Mandhata. A King named Yuvanaéva
was born in the Iksvaku dynasty. He earned great
reputation by performing many Aévamedha yagas. But
he was very much distressed because he had no child-
) ‘So he entrusted his kingly duties to his ministers
- eeded to the forest. One day. during his wandean ~~ dat the asrama of the sage Bhrgu. He
ring ne a d thirsty. Bhrgu had filled a pot with
is eitia a mantra and placing it on a low
water by reciting to sleep. Not knowing that it was
stool, he had i ause pregnancy, and in his
a pot of water intended to © f
~2e drank water from it. He beintense thirst, Yuvanas va . Wavaniéva «brought
came pregnant and in due cours ” §
24) Indra and the sage Baka. After
al
320 INDRA
forth a son. Indra, accompanied by other gods came
to see the child. When the Devas asked how the child
was going to drink milk, Indra put his index finger into
the child’s mouth and the child began to suck it. Indra
said ‘The child will drink me’’. ‘The Sanskrit words
‘Mam dhata’” mean “one who drinks me’. Thus the
child was named “Mandhata”’ by Indra and the other
gods. (M.B. Aranya Parva Chapter 126).
20) Indra and Sibi. Once Indra and Agni tested the
strength of Emperor Sibi’s ‘dharma’. Indra took the
form of an eagle and Agni that of a dove. The dove flew
down into the lap of Sibi. The eagle pursued it. The
dove entreated Sibi to save it from the eagle. Sibi promised to do so. The eagle argued that the dove was its
prey and should be returned toit. But Sibi offered to
give the eagle his own flesh, equal in weight to that of
the dove. Accordingly, the dove was placed: in one pan,
but even when all the flesh from his body was cut and
placed in.the other pan, it did not weigh equal to the
dove. At this stage, Indra and Agni appeared to Sibi
in their own forms and blessed him to be more happy
and prosperous than before. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chap21) Indra and Yavakrita. Long ago there was asage
‘named Yavakrita. He started a tapas with the ambition
of acquiring all knowledge by himself, without the help
of a Guru. Indra was alarmed at the sternness and
rigour of the tapas. He induced Yavakrita to stop
tapas, but it-was in vain. At last Indra disguised himselfas an old Brahmin and went to the bank of the
Ganga where Yavakrita was performing tapas. He
began to build a dam across the river with sand. Seeing
this Yavakrita ridiculed him. The old Brahmin retorte
that Yavakrita’s tapas was also equally. fidiculous. But
Yavakrita was not shaken even by his taunt. He resumed his tapas with renewed strength. At last finding
no other alternative, Indra appeared to Yavakrita an
granted his wish. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 135).
92) Loss of Indra’s umbrella. Once Narakasura went
to heaven, fought with the gods and robbed Indra of his
umbrella and: the earrings of Aditi, Indra’s mother:
-Grief-stricken Indra complained to Sri Krsna. Accomthe back of
panied by Satyabhama and riding on ve
Lt
Garuda, Sri Krsna went to the city of Pragjyotisa,
residence of Narakdsura and razed it to the ground.
recovered the umbrella and ear-rings and returned to
heaven with Satyabhama. Indra and Aditi were over
joyed on getting back the lost articles. On their retur?
journey, Sri-Krsna.at the request of Satyabhama cut
for her a twig of the Parijata tree. This made Indra
angry and he fought against.Sri Krsna. After defeatin8
Indra and other gods, Sri Krsna accompanied by 54"
yabhama returned to Dvaraka with the Parijata. ( Bhagavata, 10th Skandha).
23) Indra and Narakdsura. The Asura called Naraka
once performed a very severe penance on the Gandhamadana mountain. with the object of usurping Indra 5
place. Indra was alarmed and rushed to MahavisnU
for help. Visnu went to Gandhamadana mountain 2?
killed Narakasura. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 142 ).
the war betwee
Devas and Asuras, Indra, in a peaceful state of m1? :
was going around the world, riding on his elephan ?
Airavata. When he reached an Agrama on the easte!
coast of the sea, he met the great sage Baka. A conve!”

— 321 INDRA
Sation about the happiness of lon evity took place “Indra sought refuge under Brahma. Brahma ise
between Indra and ane Baka who oe Hanidted thousand him to bathe in Sonapunya tirtha to ieotate ae
years old. After that Indra returned to Devaloka. sin. Accordingly Indra bathed in the river Sarasvati
(M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 193). : and washed off his sin. | |
D5). Indien and Rete, Den g ago a terrible war took place River Sarasvati. There is a story about how Sarasvati
; river became Sonapunya tirtha. There were frequent
betwee Asura
n Devasand Asuras. At that time #2 su
called Kesi attempted to abduct Devasena, daughter of quarrels between Vasistha and Visvamitra. Once
a Prajapati. Hearing het shrieks, Indra rushed to the Maan got ria when he came to know that
spot. In the clash between Kesi and Indra, Kesi’s club yarae fae te cok a penance on the banks of the
was broken into two with In dra’s weapon Vajra. river Sarasvati. He summoned Sarasvati and ordered
Suddenly Keéi lifted a mountain and threw itat Indra. her to produce Vasistha before him immediately.
Indr ' 9 two. One part of Sarasvati was in a dilemma. If she brought Vasistha
a broke that mountain also int Pp Vigvamitra, Vasistha would curse her; Sai
it fel ae (eae oe ichtened. After that, {ha would
ic a a Fics Mee ae ee to fall in hand, "3 He bgt PES him Vig vamitra would curse her.
Keéi’s hand Devas = answered thus .—“J am the At ae ae h a Pghn Vasistha before Vis vamidaughter of P apati, a , name is Devasena. Kesi baa ae i = Hee Vi; sat on her bank little by little near
abducted m ae ue ~— Daityasena. My sister and é 1€ p el asin ae ited performing his penance,
I aed i ¢ y elder _ mS bath in this Manasa lake. au J Cs a st - iat him down into her own
eff had ome to take 0 i to abduct both of us. My current. uabe arried him floating down to the
expressed his ws that a person who 15 place where Visvamitra was waiting. When Vasistha
1] become My husband. reached his presence, - Visvamitra was pleased. But
ill beco without allowing Visvamitra to capture Vasistha she
vather has given me his blessing
orshipped by gods and asuras W Itations with ee
. took him away in her current, eastwards. Enraged
aving heard these facts, Indra held weet ubrah- : ea ae
rahma and arranged the mariage wild “Sybrah- at this, ViSvamitra pronounced a curse that blood
Manya and Devasena. See also t 993) should flow through the river Sarasvati. Thus the
. water in the river became blood-red. The great sages
Manya”. (M.B, Vana Parva, Chapt! 7 ura, Indra
26) Indra a Ajigiras. After ee ae | ake, to who came there afterwards sympathised with Sarasvati
_ himself in a lotus lias wi (idling 2 Brahmin). ae =p ten gua of their prayers Siva
ue for the sin of Brahmahaty necame, Indra. cn) eee ee at lds :
as at that time that Nahus@ ~ the earth as 4 It was 1 oe ndra took his bath and
ahusa had been forced to 8° back to Devas brought washed off his ae Salya Parva, Chapter 43).
serpent by the curse of Agasty4, aiged Indra wit 3] _indea St, rutavati. Bharadvaja’s daughter
ack Indra, At that time, Angi® h + day Angiras. Srutavati ( ici performed a very severe penance
Mantras from Atharvaveca. prom I eon was please to get Indra i he oe sband. ‘To test her character,
Sot the name of ‘Atharvangi* - ' would become Indra oY oe the shape of Vasistha and went to
and blessed Angiras that his name Udyoga Parva, Srutavati. She received the guest with due reverence.
amous throughout the world. (M.B. y Pleased with her treatment, the guest handed her five
ughou nad 3 raw fruits and asked her to cook them for him.
re 6rutavati gladly undertook that service. She proceeded
apter 18 . a
27 led Viet. ema accor )
a ies oe a pat: ade DY Vika pled 31. to cook es ue but even after burning all the fuel
ing to Ind J fain (M.B. Karna Parv ; she had, the fruits were not properly cooked. So she
erse 49) ra’s liking. cura perform began to use her limbs one by one as fuel and burned
3 he Tripurasul 4 After them up. Indra was deeply impressed by her self. '
d appearing to her in his own form married
) Indra a bd . ais ‘.
nd the Tripuras: fom Brak fice an
. : : t sacrilice
Penance and receive boons aq was not able © Srutavati, (M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 48).
that: . ; [Indra - | ipuras
kil] ee aes with, Ings ra had Coe earn 32) Indra became Satakratu. Indra performed one —
kille db ~ he vanqu al Tripura - (M. hundred sacrifices at the place called Indratirtha. Thus
arva ype. See the W Karna and he became Satakratu. It was there that he gave much
29) Indra “Pads a (the sun-got). in pattle, eo). Brhaspati. .(M.B: Salya Parva, Chapter 49,
r and Jur : Bharata Ces Carva, Verse <)-— Lar Le oe a
tae came into conflict ee dra me : 33). Indra became a bird. Once Indra took the form: of
nd sy raged in heaven al d win, hile ‘ oined a bird and went to the forest and ‘preached moral * and
ra argued that Arjuna W°" eDevas yy in _ spiritual duties to the sages who had “gathered there. ||
(M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter 11). °° - ! !
, ry: ee fa,
€rted that Karna would gain yictO q Karna S side.
g joie ad thus Sury4 34.) Indra and Dantideva. Once Dantideva received a
© side of Arj d Asura
t rjuna an ; us 4 ter
we end, Arjuna came ou st ie Parva, Chapt« boon from Indra that he should have plenty of food
87) defeated by Indra. (M.D. . ig act ance ae eapule Saleen | an it, (MB. Santi Parva, |
20) eiuasa: 21% y he apter <Y, Verses 12U, : | .
evita and Namuti- The RADE piddee ha 35) Indra and Brhaspat. Once Brhaspati told Indra
rays “ capture by Indra b 7 r 5 bi and Pwet thing that vay in wee pe could pn achieved with
riendshin® as e rel “pin either ‘Trusting his i speech. (M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 84, Verse
Ip, promise not Wee: jme 7S . ; — ns | |
cma things or at night of in “dra cut aie a Brhaspati’s wife Tara once fell in love with Candra
rds, Naimuci cae out) Be" une waves OF pouting, (the Moon god). She deserted Brhaspati and went to
€ad with the froth scraped from’ su 4 him promis el? live in Candra’s residence. | Brhaspati complained
a our Pe | $s 0
at the time of d :
Ge | ‘dusk, The be : ng y
You murderer of a friend; b peal B

INDRA 322
about it to Indra. Indra promised to bring her back
and to restore her to Brhaspati by whatever means
possible. Accordingly he sent a messenger to Candra.
Compromise talks with Candra ended in failure. So
preparations were started for a dreadful war between
Indra and Candra. Sukra, the preceptor of Asuras
also joined the side of Indra. Brahma who came to
know of all this, came riding on his swan and _ reconciled Indra and Candra. As directed by Brahma,
Candra agreed to restore Tara to her lawful husband,
Brhaspati, (Devi Bhagavata, First Skandha).
36) Indra and Prahlada. The great King Prahlada once
conquered Heaven. Indra, who lost his kingdom and
gory: accepted Brhaspati’s advice and went to meet
ukracarya. Sukra told Indra.that Prahlada was the
noblest person and that he had earned that nobility by
his good qualities. Indra decided to acquire those good
qualities from Prahlada.
Indra disguised himself as a Brahmin boy and approached Prahlada with a request for moral and spiritual
advice. Prahlada accepted him as his pupil and gave
him moral and spiritual advice. Pleased with the
pupil’s devotion, Prahlada agreed to give him whatever
boon he wanted. The pupil said that he wanted only
the good qualities of the Guru. Prahlada agreed to it.
Then a shadow-like figure appeared to emerge from
Prahlada’s body. Prahlada who was puzzled asked the
figure :—‘‘Who are you” “The figure answered :— “I
am your virtuous character. Now I am leaving you
and entering this boy’s body.” Saying thus it left
Prahlada’s body and entered ~ Indra’s body.
Following it, all the good qualities of Prahlada, like
charity, truth, glory etc. entered Indra’s body one
after another. It was only in the end that’ Prahlada
came to know that the cunning pupil was Indra. Thus
from that day, Prahlada began to decline in his good
qualities and Indra began to prosper, ( M.B. Santi
Parva, Chapter 124), | |
37) Indra and Gautama. There is a story in the Mahabharata, of how Indra restored life to a dead Brahmin
Gautama was a Brahmin who had left his own home
and settled down to live in the village of Dasyus (an
aboriginal tribe). He married from a low caste and
followed the customs of Dasyus. At that time another
Brahmin happened to ‘come there. He ridiculed
Gautama who had lost his caste. Next mornin
Gautama left his residence and went to another pl
Tired after his long journey, he fel] aslee me
banyan tree. A King of birds named Neda a
een dijampgha
lived on that tree. Nadijarhngha who’ was the son of
Kagyapa, became very friendly with Gautama. He
brought fish from the river Ganga to feed Gautama
and fanned him with his wings. Gautama told the
bird that he was a poor Brahmin and that he was
anxious to get some wealth, There was a wealthy
Raksasa King named Vir upaksa in that country, who
was a close friend of Nadijarngha, Nadijarmgha sent
Gautama to Viripaksa with a request to give Gautama
some wealth. Virupaksa_ gave Plenty of gold to
Gautama. He returned to the foot of the banyan tree
carrying the gold on his head. Gautama who was
quite tired after his long walk, was hospitably received
by Nadijarngha. That kingly bird lay asleep close by
Gautama. An evil desire to eat the flesh of Nadijathgha dawned upon the mind of Gautama. He killed
' As they were discussing this problem, Indra and Brahm
INDRA
that King of birds in his sleep. Viriipaksa who came to
know of this, killed Gautama and gave his flesh as food
for Dasyus. Viripaksa, with tears in his eyes, made a
funeral pyre and cremated Nadijamgha’s body. At that
time, as directed by Brahma, Surabhi caused milk to
flow from heaven and revived Nadijarhgha. Virapaksa
told the whole story to Indra who came there at that
time. Indra said that Nadijarhgha died as the result of
Brahma’s curse. He had offended Brahma on a former
occasion by refusing to attend Brahma’s assembly,
although he was invited. Nadijarhngha who was restored
to life, was noble enough to request Indra to bring
back Gautama also to life. Accordingly Indra revived
Gautama. Nadijarmgha returned the gold to Gautama
and sent him away with his good wishes. Indra returned
to heaven. (M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter 173).
38) Indra and Ahalyaé. Indra; once fell in love with
Ahalya, the wife of Gautama. Sage Gautama who
came to know of it, cursed Indra. For further details,
see under Ahalya.
39) Indra turned into a Fox. Once a haughty Vaisya
knocked down a young sage named Kafsyapa, with his
chariot. The disgraced sage decided to commit suicide.
Knowing this Indra went to the sagein the form of 4
fox and spoke to him, dwelling upon the evil aspects
of suicide. At last the young sage gave up the idea of
committing suicide and returned to his
(M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter 130).
40) Indra and Subrahmanya. Long ago the Asuras led
by ‘Tarakasura, persecuted the gods in many ways.
Tarakasura had received a boon from Brahma _ that
only the son born to Siva could slay him. So, to distract Paramesvara from his penance, in order to make
it possible for him to beget a son, Indra sent Kamadeva
(god of love) to him. But Kamadeva was burnt up iD
the fire from the third eye of Siva. After that Parvati
won Siva as her husband as a result of her austere
penance. She prayed to Siva that Kamadeva should be
brought back to life and that a son should be born to
her. Siva replied to her :—
“Kama was born from BrahmAa’s mind. As soon as he
was born, he asked Brahma “Kam Darpam ?’ which
means—whom shall I tempt and conquer ?”? So Brahm4
called him ‘“‘Kandarpa”’. Brahma had advised him
even at that time that he should never tempt méDisregarding that advice he came to attack me and
burned him up. Now it is not possible for him to bé
born in a physical form I shall beget of you a son
with my spiritual power. I do not need the urge °
Kamadeva for this, as in the case of ordinary
mortals’’. _
a
arrived there. At their request Siva agreed to beget 2
son by Parvati. Since it is not desirable that 4
living beings should perish, Siva allowed Kamadev4
to be born in the minds of all creatures. Brahma a”
Indra returned quite happy. One day, Siva an
Parvati began their amorous dalliance. They did et
stop it even after a hundred years. The whole wor!
began to shake toits very foundations. Fearing that
the world might perish, the devas, as ordered
Brahma prayed to Agni, to interrupt the amorous Pp/@Y
of Siva and Parvati. Agni, who understood that it w4%
not possible to achieve their object, fled and concea!©
himself under water. The Devas went out in ee
of Agni. By that time, the creatures in the water W
hermitage. ©

INDRA
ae not bear the heat of Agni, told them the secret.
hen Agni deprived them of the power of speech by a
curse. After that he went and hid himself on the
Mandara mountain. Elephants and parrots disclosed
the secrets of Agni, who was hiding within the hollow
of the trunk of a tree. Agni deprived them of their
tongues by a curse. At last the gods discovered Agni.
They sent him at once to Siva ‘to stop him in his
amorous dalliance. Agni succeeded in his mission by
his intense heat. Siva, transferred his semen to Agni who
became pregnant. Being unable to bear its weight Agni
deposited it in the river Ganga, who at the behest of
iva himself, left it in the woods on the Mahameru
mountain. Siva’s attendant bhatas (spirits) offere
Pija to it there. After a thousand years a boy with six
faces (Subrahmanya) was born out © it, He was suckled by the Krttikas employed for that © purpose by
P arvati and the boy grew up with astonishing rapidity
within a few days. Having been suckled by the
Krttikas, the boy got the name ““Karttikeya jae
In those days, Devendra who was defeated by TarakaSura, decided to give up wat and was living 1 MahaMeru. The Devas and the sages used to gO oth
Manya for protection. When Devendra ney it, he
ecame angry and went to wa! with Subra pare?
Subrahmanya was wounded on the face cs aad
Weapon. From the wound two sons named th i He
Visakha were born to Subrahmany@. With Dory ae
in, At this stage
Subrahmanya encountered Indra aga hat Subrahiva appeared there and informed: Inara a Th akasura
Manya had been born with a mission to ia ze Hee
and to restore Indra’s kingdom "© "He be ed pardon
that Indra recognized Subrahmanya. 16 BP atal him
of Subrahmanya and expressed his desire e 4 a
A his military commander. a “a tried to P
€ ceremony of snstallation by >
Water On Subrahmanya’s eh id tated chat
ROE coud of SHE ua Line inst
because he had tried to petfom gered worship tO
Propitiating Ganapati. ndra then © went O
i) thus became
be ac (Ganapat aN
0 itch. Subra oe . ter=
nde cn ncader, Hilled TArakesees Ba
wards. (Kathasaritsagat@, Lavanak?
Taran ay. : d Mahabali
a rien and Mahabalt. 4 in gloom
0 ha i ome 4 . qa visit.
and Deewie _ once Indra paid Mahabali’s
At that time Mahalaksm! emerge MB Santi Parva,
Ody and enteréd Indra’s P0 (ee
Chapter 224), Once Indra asked
2) Indra and Godana (gift of cow) or giving 4 co
rahma about the efficacy © godant , world free from
as gift, Gramma ecld him that ther” and: thi 02
: € infirmities of old age and disease erform Godana
oe He added that those W Ae t to
ou : ka. be wen
gale get a place in Goer in KART his arrows
Shoot birds wi ‘soned arrow’: | poison ane
ta big Se ee adecially and the Pie Fak of that
UP the whole tree, In the hollow ers. Ht did not
tree there lived a bird with mys : rl peen its refuge
IKE to leave that tree W ic ne ie yn the guise :
Ever since its birth. One ¢4Y Dee ognized him
4 Brahmin came to the bird, vEES
fused to
it was
to Subrah- .
= INDRA
its mystic power. In the conversati
Devendra advised the bird to nthe eqeee had
some other suitable place for its residence. The bird
did not accept his advice. Indra was pleased at the
bird’s loyalty and gratitude towards that tree which
ie been ae shelter all along. So he took the bird
a roa . im to Devaloka. (M.B. Anusasana Parva,
44) How Indra turned Bhamgdsva into a
was a King named Hk pee eu, Once te eodeeten
sacrifice called ‘‘Indradvista’”? .which was believed t
have the power of blessing him with children Tae
being not invited was displeased with him and was seat
ing for an opportunity to wreak vengeance on him
One hundred sons were born to Bhamgasva. Once h
went to the forest after entrusting the affairs of the
kingdem to his sons. Indra cunningly misguided fii
and made him lose his way in the forest. Wanderin
alone with his horse in the forest, he reached the Baek
of a river. Weary and thirsty, he stepped down into the
river. To his amazement, he was instantly transformed
into a woman! The bewildered ‘“‘woman’’ somehow
reached Bhamgasva’s palace. All the members of his
family were deeply grieved over his change of sex. To
avoid embarrassment to himself and others, Bharngasva
returned as a woman to the forest and there lived as
the wife of a sage and became the mother of a hundred
a we Sk ee “she” went back to the palace
wi e sons j
agg aa and leaving them there returned again
Indra went to the palace at this tim
two sets of hundred sons quarrel dhe ae ee
until all of them perished in fighting. Hearin ahaa
this the mother who was in the forest, wept bitter!
Indra visited her (Bhamgaéva) there and she told hive
the whole story of her misfortunes and begged his
pardon for performing Indradvista sacrifice without
inviting Indra. Pleased with her repentance Indra
promised to resuscitate one set of her hundred sons
She wanted all the hundred sons who were born when
she was a woman, to be restored to life. Indra was
ready to restore her manhood too, but*she preferred
to continue as a woman. Indra restored to life all the
900 sons of Bhamgaégva and leaving Bharhgasva as a
woman, returned to Devaloka. (M.B. AnuSsasana
Sidra ted A 12) ;
ndra and Matamga. <A story is ad j z
Bharata under the title of [erksacMintachn Snghaeadr™
which illustrates that a Ksatriya, Vaifya or Sidra can
never become a Brahmana by any means. It was told
by Bhigma to Arjuna as follows :—
“Long ago a Brahmana’s wife gave birth to a boy. The
boy was given the name Matarhga. His father sent him
in a chariot drawn by a donkey, in connection with a
yaga which he wanted to perform. Matamga whipped
the donkey mercilessly. Seeing this, the donkey’s mother
said to Matarnga—“You are not a Brahmana.
Brahmanas cannot be so cruel. You area Candala (a
man of the lowest caste) born to your mother by a
barber.”
Matarnga sadly returned to his father and after telling
him what he had heard from the mother-donkey set out
to perform an austere penance with the object of
becoming a Brahmana. Devendra appeared to him
and asked him what he wanted. Matarhga asked for a

INDRA
boon whereby he could become a Brahmana; Indra
vanished after saying that it was impossible. After that
Matamga performed penance for hundred years,
standing on one foot. Indra appeared again and
repeated that it was impossible for Matarhga to become a Brahmana. Then Matamga continued his
penance for a thousand years, standing on his toe.
Indra appeared again and transformed Matarmga into
a Deva named ‘“‘Chandodeva’’. Indra told him that
though he could become a Deva, he could never
achieve Brahminhood. In his extreme grief Matamga
renounced his life and entered Heaven. (M.B. Anufgasana Parva, Chapters 27, 28 and 29).
46) Indra and Sambara. There isa story in the Maha
Bharata in which an Asura named Sarmbara explained
the greatness of Brahminhood to Indra. Once Indra
approached the Asura, Sarnbara and asked him what
was the source of his glory and prosperity. Sambara
replied that it was all due to his whole-hearted worship
of Brahmanas, From that time Indra began to offer
worship to Brahmanas and thus he won the place of ©
Indra. (M.B. AnuSdsana Parva, Chapter 36).
47) Indra loved Rucit. There is a story in the Mahabharata of how a sage named Vipula_ who was born in
the family of Bhrgu once saved Ruci, his Guru’s wife
from Indra. Long ago, a great sage named DevaSarma
lived in a forest. His wife Ruci being. enchantingly
beautiful, many suitors were attracted to her. Chief
among them was Indra. Devagarma was aware of this.
Once he had to leave his aframa in connection with a
yaga. So he ordered his disciple Vipula to guard his
wife Ruci during his absence. He had given a hint to
Vipula that Indra who was an expert in __ disguises,
might appear in the arama in any form. Vipula, by
means nl a power entered into his guru’s wife
and guarded her. |
After some time, Indra reached the Agrama in the guise
_ of a handsome youth. He disclosed his real identity to
Ruci and told her that he had come there to spend a
night with her. Ruei fell in love with him. But since
she was under the mystic control of Vipula, Indra was
ae to or yn At = vee sent him away
in disgrace. .B. Anusasana Parva, Chapter 4, 44)..
48) Indra’s theft of Lotus. Indra once stole A a a’s
lotuses. (See under Agastya). _
49) Indra’s theft of an Elephant. Indra once stole an
elephant belonging to_the great sage Gautama. The
sage complained to Dhrtarastra, who advised: him to
offer prayers to Indra. Accordingly Gautama pleased
Indra by his prayers. Indra appeared and after returning the elephant took both the elephant and Gautama
along with . to Devaloka. (M.B. Anuédsana Parva,
Chapter 102).
50) indi and Marutta. Long ago there was a famous
king named Marutta. Indra was Closely associated with
him in many of his activities. (For more details see
tta).
ry = ) and Dharmaputra. Another anecdote about
Indra which deals with he part of Dharmaputra’s
i. i. ah a the Mahabharata.
a vas towards the end of their lives entered
The Fane e travelling to the north. Dharmathe forest and were ©:
tra who was walking in front, was followed by a dog.
a the way the four brothers and Paficati fell down
dead. Dharmaputra continued his journey accompanied
INDRA
by the dog without turning back or looking behind. At
the end of the journey, Indra was waiting for him with
his chariot. He told Dharmaputra that his brothers and
wife had already taken their places in Heaven and that
he should leave behind the dog and get into the chariot
to go to Devaloka. Dharmaputra pleaded that it was
not right for him to enter Devaloka after deserting the
dog which had followed him so far. Even though Indra
pressed him very much to enter the chariot without the
dog, Dharmaputra did not yield. At last the dog assumed the form of Yama who appeared and explained to
them that he had taken the form of a dog and followed
his son Dharmaputra to test his noble nature. They
were all happy and all the three of them proceeded 1n
the chariot to Devaloka. (M. B. Mahaprasthanika
Parva, Chapter 3).
52) Indra and Bali. In Uttara Ramayana there 1s @
story as given below, about the birth of Bali, a son 0
Indra :—
Aruna, the charioteer of Sirya (the sun-god) went one
night to Indraloka to see the goddesses dancing. Men
were not allowed to enter the dancing hall. So, Aruna
managed to enter the hall by disguising himself as 4
beautiful lady. The moment Indra saw her he fell 17
love with her. The name she assumed at that time was
Aruni. Indra secretly took her outside and they had a
sexual union. Bali was the son born from their union.
53) Indra’s theft of a Horse. A King named Sagara once
performed a sacrifice. Devendra stole the sacrificial
horse. Sagara sent all his 60,000 sons in search of the
horse. They dug up the earth and went to the Nether
worlds where they saw the horse tied in front of thé
sage Kapila. The enraged sons of Sagara tried to
capture and bind the sage. But Kapila reduced al}
the 60,000 princes to ashes by his curse. (Valmiki
Ramayana, Balakanda, Chapter 39).
54) Indra cut an embryo to pieces. iti and Aditi were
the daughters of Daksa. Kagyapa married them. Indra
was born as the son of Aditi. At this birth of a son 1
Aditi, Diti became jealous of her sister. One day $ 4
told her husband Kaéyapa that she too wanted to have
a virtuous, heroic and brave son who would be ager
to. Indra in every respect. Kasyapa promised to gran
her wish.
In due course, Diti became pregnant. Now it w@°
Aditi’s:‘turn to become jealous of Diti. She could not
bear the thought of Diti having a son equal to her ow?
son Indra, in glory and splendour. So she called Indra
and secretly instructed him to destroy Diti’s child in °°
womb, by whatever means. | ail
In obedience to his mother, Indra approached D1"
pretending friendship and spent a lot of time jn het
company. He soon won her confidence and love by his
affectionate attentions. On one occasion, when she ae?
in sound sleep, Indra, by his mystic power, entered into
Diti’s womb with his weapon Vajra and cut the ch!
in the womb into seven pieces. The child began to ba y
loudly, but Indra said ‘“‘Ma ruda”’ which means do
not cry’? and cut each of the pieces again into seye™
parts. Thus the embryo (child) was finally cut ,
fortynine pieces, which later became the fortyny
‘“Marutas’? or “Maruts’’. When she woke up, DY
realized Indra’s treachery and in her fury she curse
Indra and Aditi. She cursed that Indra would lose ,
kingdom of Devaloka and that Aditi would be 1

INDRA
prisoried and her sons would be killed. As a result of
this curse Devendra lost his kingdom on one occasion.
Aditi, in her next birth, was born as Devaki, wife of
Vasudeva and was imprisoned by Karhsa who killed
her children. (Devi Bhagavata, Fourth Skandha).
55) Indra and Ambarisa. |
(1) King Arhbarisa had a minister named Sudeva.
Sudeva fell fighting in the battle-field. After some years,
Ambarisa also died. When Ambarisa arrived in Heaven,
he was surprised to find that Sudeva had already secured
a place there long ago. Ambarisa had performed many
more acts of holiness than Sudeva. Yet Sudeva attained
Heaven earlier than Ambarisa. Ambarisa asked Indra
why it was So. Indra answered that just as Ambarisa had
performed many sacifices, Sudeva had performed many
war-sacrifices. He added that war-sacrifices were as
efficacious for attaining Heaven as other kinds of sacrifices
(M.B. Santi Parva, Ghapter 98). '
(2) Arhbarisa, King of Ayodhya was performing a
sacrifice. At that time, Indra had stolen the sacrificial
animal. To continue the sacrifice without interruption,
the King decided to substitute Synassepha, the son of
Rcika, for the cow. But Sunassepha prayed to oe
who came and rescued him from the jaws of death.
(This story is given in other Puranas with ee variations. Valmiki Ramayana, Bala Kanda, 61st ae
ee is a story that
- te ie Triganku. There } iad a Ringo tie
d down from Heaven, Trigan
Siirya varhsga (Solar dynasty) . See under Ne ead
57) Indra and Visvamitra. Once Visveru Oo “ihe
vow of silence for a period of one thousan ae rye
end of that period, when he was about to take ;
Indra appeared in the form of a Brana at ne os
that food. Visvamitra gave that fon : a nee ee
and resumed his austere penance. (Valmiki 1a,
Bala Kanda, 65th Sarga) .
58) Indra, Sri Rama and Sarabhanga.
(1). At the time when 9”
leading their life in the forest, on
to the Agrama of en ae
to take the sage with 1!
talking, they saw Sri Rama ems "ana and left the
advised Sarabhanga to SP pe had a conversaplace. As suggested by Indra, the Se hi oa offered his
tion with Sri Rama. After © oats loka. (Valmiki
body to the fire and vege ff a ) ¢
Ramayana, Aranya Kanda, “| é,j Rama and Ravana
2) Wh th battle betwee S - Rama, an
(2) "When ihe bat Por reented © Se arta
excellent chariot along with the ae on tHe battlefield
horses were handed over 0 Sri ere fought against
by Matali,Indra’s charioteer. ‘ yan him, (Valmiki
Ravana from that chariot cae . 103)
Ramayana, Yuddha Kanda, »4 BF dea appeared before
(3) After the war with Ravan at boon he wanter ‘i
ti Rama and asked him who died int
Rama replied that all those mon A ie forests in whic
war should come back to life an ad flowers 19 all the
they lived should’ abound 10 1 all those monkeys to
seasons of the year. Indra restorer“ they lived, grecn
life and made all the forest's in W (Valmiki Ramayana,
and rich with luxuriant vegetation. 2 vdte HE
Yuddha Kanda, Sarga 129). stody: uring t A b
99) Indra gives his sword for safe-cu na accompanle y
in the forest Sri Rama an Laksma
INDRA
Sita entered Dandakaranya. Sri Rama’s chief object in
going there was to give protection to the sages and their
hermitages in the forest. But seeing that he had made the
killing of Raksasas his main purpose, Sita told him that
this change in the objective would spoil other important
matters. To illustrate this she told him the following
story :— |
‘Once upon a time, a great sage was observing holy
rites with great austerity. Indra was alarmed at it. He
went to the sage’s hermitage in the form of a warrior
armed with a sword. Indra handed over his sword to |
the sage for safe custody. The sage accepted it and
from that time all his attention was concentrated on
the sword. All his time was spent in guarding the
sword and he began to neglect his devotional duties
as a sage. As a result of it his mystic power declined
and ultimately he fell into Hell. (Valmiki Ramayana,
Aranya Kanda, 9th Sarga). é,
60) Indra and Kabandha. See under Kabandha.
61) The Post or Office of Indra. Indra was anointed as
King of Devas on Meghavan mountain. In the 42nd
Sarga of Kiskindha kanda of Valmiki Ramayana we
find that Sugriva had ordered the monkeys to search
for Sita on that mountain also.
62) Indra and Maya. Maya, the carpenter of the
Asuras, performed penance to Brahma and acquired
complete mastery in the science of carpentry and
architecture. After that he constructed a forest mansion
of golden colour and took up his residence in it. Once
Maya ‘set his eyes on a goddess named Hema. When
Indra knew this he became angry and killed Maya
with his weapon—Vajra. From that time Hema got
Maya’s golden mansion. This was told by Hema’s
maid, Svayarhprabha to Haniman. (Valmiki Ramayana, Kiskindha Kanda, JIst Sarga ).
63). Indra cut off the wings of Mountains. In Krtayuga
all the Mountains in the world had wings. They used
to fly about here and there like Garuda with the
speed of wind. The sages and the Devas feared that
they might fall on their heads. The Devas held a conference and elected Indra to find a remedy for this.
Indra cut off the wings of the mountains with his Vajra.
The Mainaka mountain was a friend of wind. When
Indra was about to cut off the wings of that mountain
Wind suddenly removed it and deposited it in the
ocean. It is out of his gratitude for this that the
Mainaka mountain rose up from the ocean and provided a resting place for Haniman, the son of Wind
god, when he jumped to Lanka. This story was told
by Mainaka mountain to Haniman, (Valmiki Ramayana, Sundara Kanda, Ist Sarga).
64) Indra cut off his preceptor’s head Once Devendra
accepted a sage named Viévaripa as his preceptor for
a sacrifice. Visvaripa’s mother was a Danava partisan.
So this priest, as directed by his mother, performed
the sacrifice with the prayer—‘“May the gods and the
Asuras prosper.”? As a result of the prayer, both the
gods who performed the sacrifice and the Asuras
who did not perform it, prospered. At this Devendra
became furious and he cut off the head of the Guru.
(Devi Bhagavata, 3rd Skandha).
65) Indra and Mahisasura. See under Mahisasura.
66) Indra became a bull, Long ago there was a King
called Kakutstha in the Iksvaku dynasty. When he was
ruling over the kingdom of Ayodhya, a war broke

INDRA 326
out between Devas and Asuras. In that war, the Devas
were not able to defeat the Asuras. Indra, in distress
approached Visnu for refuge. Visnu advised him to
seek the help of Kakutstha, King of Ayodhya. So Indra
with the other gods went to Ayodhya. When Kakutstha
heard about their appeal for help, he glady offered
his help but only on condition that Indra became his
vehicle. Seeing no other way, Indra assumed the
form ofa bull and Kakutstha, riding on the back of
“Kakutstha”’, ‘Indra-vahana” and “Purafijaya”. (His
original name is unknown). ‘“Kakut?’ means the “hum
of a bull”. Because he was seated on the “Kakut” he
got the name “Kakutstha”’. Because he made Indra
“vahana” (vehicle) he got the name of “Indravahana”.
As he defeated the Asuras and conquered their city
(pura) he was called “Purafijaya”. Kakutstha was the
son of Sagada and the father of Prthu. Sri Rama is
called “‘Kakutstha” because he was born in the
family of Kakutstha. (Devi Bhagavata, 7th Skandha).
67) Indra’s Task. Devi Bhagavata, 8th Skandha says
that Indra is one of the “Astadikpdlakas (the eight
Protectors of the quarters’ and the name of his city
is “‘Amaravati’’,
68). Indra’s term of Life. The Devi Bhagavata 5th
Skandha says that two life-spans of Brahma make
Visnu’s life-span. Siva has double the life-span of
Visnu, that during the life of Brahma, fourteen
Indras will drop down from Heaven and perish, and
one day of Brahma is made up of one thousand
“Caturyugas.”?
There are fourteen Manvantaras during the life of the
present Brahma (See under Manvantara). This means
that fourteen Manus will be born and will die one
after another during this period. Each Manvantara will]
have its ewn Indra and the Devas. The first Manu was
passed
Manu is Vaivasvata the son of
is the
be born. For the Names of the Indras
Manvantaras, see under Manvantara,
Part 2, Chapter b:,
69) Indra became a Calf. (See under Prthu) ,
70) The name Purandara. Sardar K. M. Panikkar
in his preface to Reveda Samhita Says that Indra
got the name Purandara because he destroyed the
cities (Puras) of the Dasyus. But in Chapter 71, of
Vamana Purana, we are told that he got this name
because he killed “‘Pura”’, the son of Mahabali.
71) Indra in the land of Konkana. Once an Asura named
Sarapadma obtained from Brahma, a boon to enable
him to conquer the whole world. Fle persecuted the
inhabitants of all the three worlds. Hé sent hig followers
to bring Indrani (Indra’s wife) _to him asa captive,
Indra, who came to know of this, secretly went away
with Indrani to the Konkana land and lived ina
temple there. After some days, entrusting Indrani to
the protection of Sasta, he went to Kailasa. Just at this
time, Sirapadma’s sister Ajamukhi came there and
tempted Indrani. Sasta cut off the hands of Ajamukhi
of different
(Visnu Purana,
INDRA
and took Indrani to Kailasa. (Skanda Purana, Asura
Kanda),
72) Indra and Mucukunda. Mucukunda, a King of the
Iksvaku dynasty, once went to Devaloka at the invitation of Indra. In the war between the Devas and
Asuras, Mucukunda helped Indra and the Asuras were
was pleased and asked Mucukunda
what boon he wanted. Mucukunda asked for a boon
which would give him long and sound sleep, Indra
granted it and in addition declared that anyone who
disturbed Mucukunda’s sleep would be reduced to
ashes. After that Mucukunda went to sleep in a cave
in the middle of a dense forest.
A King of the tribe Yavana performed penance to
Brahma and obtained his boon which would enable
him to defeat the Yadavas (Sri Krsna’s clan)
he began to fight with Srj Krsna. Because of
Brahma’s boon, Sri Krsna was not ablé to kill him.
at him with great anger, Yavana
was at once reduced to ashes, (Bhagavata, 10th
Skandha),
73) Indra’s favourite Drink. The juice of the Soma
Plant is the favourite drink of Indra. (Reveda, Ist
Mandala, Ist Anuvaka, Ist Stikta).
74) Indra became a Goat, Sage Angiras began worshipping the Devas, hoping to have a son who will be
equal in glory to Indra. Indra who did not like
another person to be his equal, took birth himself as
the son of Angiras. Savya is the name of that son.
Once Savya assumed the form of a goat and ate up the
soma plant of a sage called Medhatithi. The sage then
called him Mesa (goat). Indra is still known by the
name, Mesa. (Regveda, Ist Mandala, Ist Anuvaka,
SIst Sikta),
75) Indra turns woman, Once Indra took birth as the
daughter of a king named Vrsanaéva and assumed the
(Rgveda, Ist Mandala, Ist Anuvaka,
92nd Sikta).
76) Indra and Ryisvan. Once Indra helped a King named
Rjigva to defeat the Asuras, Karaifija, Parnaya an
Vamhgrda. (Rgveda, Ist Mandala, Ist Anuvaka,
I3rd Sikte).
77) Indra and Sia. A King named Svagva offered
prayers to Sirya to bless him with children. Sarya
himself etook birth as his son: Once a great sage called
Etasa got involved in a fight with this , son (Surya) -
When the sage was about to collapse, Indra came to
his rescue. (Rgveda, {st Mandala, 11th Anuvaka,
62nd Sikta).,
ma replied that she was prepared to do so, if Indra
would give milk to her child and look after it in her
absence. Indra undertook that task and the bitch went
out and found out the place where the cows were hidden
and reported it to Indra, (Reveda, Ist Mandala, 11th
Anuvaka, 62nd Sukta).
79) Indra and Dadhica. Dadhica (Dadhici) was the son
a)

INDRA
fight them. He tried to find out whether Dadhica had
leit behind anything to be used as a weapon. ‘“‘Dadhica
had with him a horse-head’’, he was told. Indra went in
search of it and at last found it ina lake ata place
called Saranya. It is with its bone that he killed the
Asuras. (Rgveda, Ist Mandala, 13th Anuvaka, 84th
Sikta). |
80) Indra and Dadhyai. Indra taught Madhuvidya
(The science of intoxicating drinks) to Dadhyan. He
was warned by Indra that if he communicated that
lore to anyone else, his head .would be cut off. Once
the Aévinis wanted to learn it. Since Indra had denied
Soma drinking to Aévinis, they were not on good terms
with Indra. So they approached Dadhyan to acquire
that Knowledge. But he refused to teach -them due to
his fear that Indra would cut off his head. So the
Agvinis cut off Dadhyan’s head and fixed a horse's
head in its place. With that horse-head Dadhyan
taught the Asvinis Madhu Vidya. After they had learnt
the knowledge, they replaced his own head after sg
ving the horse-head. (Rgveda, Ist Mandala, 1/t
Anuvaka, 116th Sikta).
81) It . said that once, in a light mood, ae any
a mare give birth to a re. (Reveda, Ist Mandala,
18th Anuvaka, 12Ist Sakta). _ 214 |
82) Indra and Satanika.. atanika was ‘ ae ie
Lunar dynasty who ruled over the ‘a O a. hegete
Indra who was -highly impresse y
ve -_ him to Devaloka to suppress
exploits: GniGe pnvitee Satanika was
as ade bel ibe? ey ok *Sahasanika went to
killed. After that Satanixa ? leased
Devaloka and killed the Asuras. Indra mca a Pel
declared that Sahasranika Ee cnaranaer Mregavati.
Mrgavati and they wer eee ac k Ist Taranga).
(Kathasaritsagara Kathamukha larnbaka, Ist tar
: - Wasavadatta who was the
83) Indra and Yasaoniale - aagne world by Indra’s
O syle Bee
Deals i 2 ae weVasavadatta’?. (Kathasaritsagara,
Kathamukha lambaka, Ist Taraiiga)
84) Indra and Meghandda. Ravana ssing. In his pride
world with the help of Brahms After a fierce battle,
he came into conflict with eT aeaced Indra.
Ravana’s son, Meghanada ‘Ravana chained Indra’s
Indra to Lanka as @ eee hi flagstaff. The Devas
hands and fect and Yet soa ee for elf Brahma went
in distress approached a of Indra. After grving
to Lanka and secultee Se ate, Brahma returned to
the title of Indrajit to “© :
Brahmaloka. | | mmitted adultery
Soeretie heft this Devendra : sehr ‘At that ime
with Ahalya, Sage aE pee him, that he cies
Gautama had uttered 69" pained by an SEO:
‘n prison, Cher. - filfilment
ee life 5 oe ‘prison in a was in fu
in Ravane ia Ramayana) of Vayu
of that curse. {Uttara Ram = nan, the son
85) Indra and Hanuman. a soon as he was, toe
(wind) sprang up into the sky and mistaking it to e
seeing the brilliant ris!™8 sun who was standing
§ the w Rahu pe When
some delicious food. He $4 cowards mae asi
near the sun ana ma Airavata, Indra he th aa
Hecame meaty 76 saint once he ured ee between
standing in Devaloka. a, 8 ecing the px on Vajra
elephant to swallow MIM vised his W E dhe fell
Haniman and Airavata ee (jaw bone) an
which cut the monkey’s "74
327 INDRA
down dead on the earth. Vayu, in déep sorrow, took
the dead body of his son and went to Patala. When
Vayu (wind) left the world, the creatures of the world
underwent great suffering. Then the Devas led by
Brahma went to Patala, consoled Vayu and revived
Haniman. Since his ‘‘Hanu”’ was cut with Vajra, the
monkey was named ‘“Haniman”’ by Indra. Besides,
Indra gave him a blessing that Haniman would die
only when he wished. (Uttara Ramayana, Valmiki
Ramayana; Kiskindha Kanda; 66th Sarga).
86) Indra and Govardhana. For the story of how the
people of Gokula (Cowherds’ colony) stopped the worship of Indra, how Indra caused a heavy shower ofrain, |
and how Sri Krsna used the Govardhana mountain as
an umbrella, see under “‘Krsna’’.
87) Indra becomes victim of old age. Once the sage
Durvasas went to Devaloka. The goddesses gave him a
grand reception at which Menaka presented him with
a garland made of fragrant flowers. The sage gave it to
Devendra. Indra placed it on Airavata’s tusk. The
fragrance of the garland attracted a ‘large number of
bees to it. They swarmed round the head of the elephant and annoyed it. Airavata picked up the garland
trampled it under his foot, pulled it to pieces and threw
it away. Durvasas took this as an insult to himself and
pronounced a curse that all the gods would be subjected to wrinkles and grey hair of old age.
Indra and the other gods fell victims to old age. Indra
requested Durvasas to release him from his curse. The
sage relented and told him that if the Devas drank
Amrta obtained by churning the ocean of milk-they
would reeover their youth. Accordingly, the ocean of
milk was churned by the joint effort of the Devas and
Asuras and in the end the Devas snatched it away.
When the Devas drank Amrta, the symptoms of old age
disappeared and they recovered their youth. (Uttara
Ramayana).
88) Indra and Dandakaranya. Danda the son of Iksvaku,
a King of the Solar dynasty, ruled over the territory
between the Vindhya and the Himalayas.’ Once when
be was out ahunting in the neighbourhood of the mountains, he saw a charming woman. She was “‘Ara’’, the
daughter of the sage Sukra. The King was fascinated
by her beauty and fell desperately in love with her at
the very first sight. He seized her by force and committed rape on lier, When Sukra knew about this, he was
furious and uttered a curse that Indra should shower
a rain of fire on Danda’s kingdom. Thus the whole
country, of Danda was destroyed by Indra’s rain of fire.
In course of time that region was turned into a dense
forest and came to be called “‘Dandakaranya’’. (Uttara
Ramayana). — |
89) Other names of Indra. Indra; Marutvan, Maghavan,
Bidaujas, Pakafasana, Vrddhafravas, Sunasira, Puruhata, Purandara, Jisnu, Lekharsabha, Sakra, Satamanyu, Divaspati, Sutrama, Gotrabhit, Vajri, Vasava,
Vrtraha, Vrsa, Vastospati, Surapati Valarati, Sacipati,
Jambhabhedin, Harihaya, Svarat, Namucisudana, Sarmkrandana, Dugcyavana, Turasat Meghavahana, Akhandala, Sahasraksa, Rbhuksa. ae
90) Indra’s Divinity. In the earliest stage of Hinduism,
Indra had occupied one of the most eminent places
among the gods. Mahavisnu had_ only the place of
younger brother of Indra at that time. In Amara Kosa
we find “Upendra Indravaraja” as the synonym of

INDRA 328
Visnu. In Rgveda Indra has a more important place.
Although Rudra is a divinity or deity and although
there are references to Kapardin, there is not even a
single stuti (praise) about Siva in the Reveda. Rgveda does not recognize Devipija and idol worship.
But in the Puranic age, Indra was transformed into a
lascivious “Deva Prabhu’? (Lord among the gods).
Sardar K.M. Panikkar, in his preface to “Rgveda
Samhita” says about Indra:— “The main actor in Rgveda is Indra. In the war against the Dasyus the Aryas
seek the help chiefly of Indra. Indra is represented as
very handsome and of a golden complexion. His weapon
is Vajra, thunderbolt which was made by Tvasta.
Vayu (wind) is his charioteer. He is constantly travelling about in the sky driving in his goldén chariot. Indra
likes drinking Soma juice more than the other gods.
Indra is even referred to as ‘“Somapa’’. He is also
sometimes described as the twin brother of Agni. Sages
have sung unendingly about the exploits of Indra.
Hiranyastipa, a sage, has~ composed a work entitled
“‘Indrastuti’’ which celebrates many of the heroic deeds
of Indra. Indra was Vajrapani who had slain the Asuras
like Ahi, Tusna, Sarbara, Vala, Vrtra and others. ,
There are also several stories in the. Vedas about the
birth of this hero. At the time of Indra’s birth, somehow, his mother felt that he was incapable of being
killed. So she decided to abandon him. Fearing trouble
for herself, she asked the child to leave her and go to
some other place. Indra refused to do so and followed
her to the house of Tvasta. There he drank the juice
of the soma plant and gained Strength to kill his enemies. But unaware of this, his mother, tried‘ to keep
him concealed. Indra, however, came out of the place
in his dazzling attire and encountered the enemies.
. Vrtra who met Indra got ready for a fight. In the fight
Vyarhsa struck down Indra. The devas fled in fear.
Indra who was left alone called upon Visnu and sought
his aid. ° '
Although Indra needed help in his fight with Vrtra, he
“was the chief support to the Arynasin their fight against
theDasyus. It was Indra’s Vajra which broke-up the fortresses of many Dasyu kings. That was why he got the
name “‘Purandara”. Once Indra. dried up the whole
river to enable his army to cross it for the sake of Sudas. When Sufravas became helpless, Indra destroyed
twenty kings and 60099 soldiers with his chariot wheel.
Thus we see Indra in the Regveda ‘as the destroyer of
the Dasyus and the protector of Aryans.’
Indrani, Saci and Pulomaja are the names of Indra’s
wife. Indra’s son, Jayanta is also- known by the name
of Pakasasani. Indra’s city is Amaravati ; his chariet
“Vimana”, his charioteer Matali.-and his garden Nandanavana. “Vaijayanta” is the name of his mansion.
Indra’s weapon has several other names, such as, Hradini, Kuliga, Bhidura, Pavi, Satakoti, Svaru, Samba,
Dambholi, Asani etc. Indra’s assembly is called “Sudharma”. Indra’s bow is the rainbow, his sword js
Parafijaya and his residence is Heaven, The trees in
Heaven are, Mandara, Parijata, Santana, . Kalpavrksa
and Haricandana. The festival celebrated in honour of
Indra is called “‘Sakradhvajotthana or ““Indrotsava’’.
91) Indra and Uttanka. See under Uttanka.
92) Indra and Kabandha. See the second para under the
name Kabandha.
93) Indra was born as Gadhi. See under Gadhi,
INDRADYUMNA I
94) Stva ended Indra’s pride. See under Pandavas.
95) Indra stole the cows. For the story of how Indra stole
the cows from Gokula see under Krsna.
96) Indra and Mahdsani. Once Mahagani, the son: of
Hiranya defeated the gods in a battle and took
Indra and Indrani to Patala as captives. The
Devas who knew that Mahagani was a relative of
Varuna, sought the help of Varuna. At the instance. of.
_ Varuna, Indra was released. The revengeful
Indra prayed to Siva. Siva appeared and asked Indra
to submit his complaint to Visnu. Indra offered his
Prayers to Visnu. As a result of it, a man who had the
elements of Siva and Visnu, in him, took his birth from
the water of the Ganga. He killed Mahagani. ( Brahmanda Purana),
INDRADAIVATA. A yajfia (sacrifice) performed in
order to get children. King Yuvanasva got the yajnia
conducted. After it was over the King drank water
from pots filled by brahmins, and became pregnant.
(See Mandhata). (Devi Bhagavata, 7th Skandha).
INDRADAMANA. A King who gifted alot of money
a“ — (M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter 234, Verse
INDRADATTA. See ‘Vararuci’.
INDRADHVAJA. A flag staff: It is erected in order to
get rain. If anybody dreams that jt has broken and
fallen, it isa bad omen. It means that some disaster
_will befall the country. (Agni Purana, Chapter 229).
INDRADVIPA (INDRA _ ISLAND). Mahabharata,
Sabha Parva refers to the island as having once been
conquered and subjugated by king Sahasrabahu.
INDRADYUMNA I. A King born in the dynasty of
Svayambhuva Manu, and a king of the Pandya
country.
1) Genealogy. Descended from Visnu in this order :—
| Visnu — Brahma — Svayambhuva Many — Priyavrata — Agnidhra — Nabhi — Rsabha — Bharata —
Sumati — Indradyumna.
2) Indradyumna turned into elephant. Indradyumna, 4
devotee of Visnu handed over governance of the country
to his children when he became old, and performed
penance in the Malaya mountain. One day, when he
was immersed in meditation Agastya came there. Naturally, Indradyumna. did not notice Agastya’s arrival.
Enraged at this the latter cursed Indradyumna and
turned him into an elephant. Being told immediately
about the curse by his servants Indradyumna sought
redemption from the curse from Agastya himself. Redemption was granted thus : Indradyumna ‘would roam in
the forest for years as an elephant, a devotee of Visnu
_ and he would attain salvation when Lord Visnu came
down to the earth and patted the elephant on its back.
Accordingly Indradyumna who was turned into an elephant roamed about in the forest for many years in the
_ company of a herd of wild elephants. At last it arrived
at Mount Trikiita. There was a lake there on the banks
of which was sage Devala engaged in penance, Hahi,
the Gandharva had once come to this lake with a number of Apsara -women and they indulged in amorous
sports, which Devala did not like. He cursed Haha and
turned him into a crocodile, and the crocodile lived in
the same lake.
Indradyumna who was turned into an elephant, stepped
into the lake to drink water when the crocodile caught
hold of its hind leg. Neither did the elephant yield nor

INDRADYUMNA II
the crocodile leave the former free. Their tug of war
continued for 1000 years when Mahavisnu appeared
on the scene, killed the crocodile and saved the
elephant. At once the elephant was re-transformed
into Indradyumna and he attained Vaikuntha (the
abode of Visnu). (Bhagavata, 8th Skandha). |
A Malayalam verse summarises the above story as
follows :—Impelled by Agastya’s curse the elephant
went to the lake at. Mount Trikita, and suffered for
1000 years as the crocodile which caught hold of its
hind leg did not loosen its grip. Then appeared on the
scene the killer of Murasura (Lord Visnu) on his
vehicle, Garuda, killed the crocodile with his discus
and granted salvation to the elephant. .
3) Indradyumna’s fall from heaven when the mertts of his good
deeds were exhausied. The merits or the result of his
good and noble deeds having been exhausted, Indradyumna, the:saintly king once descended from heaven
to earth, and the sad King approached sage Markandeya. But, the sage did not recognize him. The King
and the sage went to Pravirakarna, an owl living ‘sa
the top of the Himalayas. It also did not recognise the
King. Then they went to Nadijamgha, a stork. very
much older. than the owl and living in the lake known
as Indradyumna. Nadijamgha also could not recognise
the Kine. In another part of the lake was living a
ae = = older than Naditortoise called Akipara, who was older k and
‘scha. At last the King, the sage, Praviraxarna
sie ea soara. At his very sight
Nadijarngha approached Akipara. care eid soa
Akapara recognized the Bing. A i pee aa
Markandeya that Indradyumna was a f Mee tin
ing an -- Eheral and munificent in distribuung
King and quite libera ea wes formed, BY
gifts, and that the lake Indradyum
: the King. Having
the passage of the cows a ae King the sage sent
ails regarding
a a (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 199)-
INDRADYUMNA II. Mahabharata, Vere oo araChapter 19, Verse 32 velar aces Se nad
oe ad 2a contemporary of Sri Krsna > ATS
him, ,
INDRADYUMNA IIL. A sage Indrady
edin the list of Saints who ie, |
Dharmaputra during his forest 11.
Chapter 26, Verse 22).
INDRADYUMNA IV. Name ©
INDRADYUMNA V. A king a <5
(See Para 2, under Ve as who lived es.
. VI. ‘tod the Jagan-
— ete “e ail of Visnu. He oti hip Tord
natha temple in
Jagannatha, The .
umna is.mentiontheir /homage to
M.B. Vana Parva,
King Janaka’s father.
cr the *ksvaku dynasty.
When the King, disappointed Seath at Mount Nua
return, determined to fast ¥® shalt see Him
Thou :
: cried, rse sacrifice an
when a celestial voice a horse sa" = nti
formed Narasimhamuru
Afterwards the King pet le.
built a magnificent Vist "tied in the temp'e
brought by Narada was 8" na (sight) of “Lor
ougat by a darsane eed him to cut
During sleep the King had ice directe
tral vo and make
Jagannatha. Also’ an 4 seashore an
sete the fragrant tree ae the king 8° b ade bal
idols. with. it. Accordingly "*” c phadra made a
Visnu Balarama, Sudarsan4 " (Skanda Pp ura) ai.
installed them in t i A_ stork elt this
INDRADYUMNA(™).- + AKapare lived in *
ee d
jarngha and the Adikurmé calle
lake. It came into existence when the cows given in gift
by King Indradyumna passed along that way. (M.B.
Aranya Parva, Chapter 198). The pool lay near
Mount Gandhamadana, and the Pandavas once visited it. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 118, Verse 18).
INDRAJIT. Ravana’s son, Meghanada. :
1) Genealogy. Descended from Visnu thus:—Visnu,—
Brahma—Pulastya—Visravas — Ravana — Meghanada
(Indrajit) .
To Pulastya, one of the Prajapatis was born by
Malini, Visravas. Vigravas had two wives, Devavarnini,
also called Ilibila and Kaikasi. Vaigravana or Kubera
was his son by Ilibila and. Ravana, Kumbhakarna,
Vibhisana and Sirpanakha (daughter) being the
offsprings of Kaikasi. Ravana married Mandodari and
three sons, Meghanada, Atikaya and Aksakumara were
born to them. Meghanada came to be known as Indrajit also, because he had defeated Indra once. 3
2) Son of Siva. Though it was Mandodari, Ravana’s
wife, who gave birth to Meghanada (Indrajit) the
Uttararamayana refers to him as the son of Siva in a
story as follows:—
Once, after religious fasting and other rites on a
Monday (to propitiate the Sun-God) Madhura, an
Apsara woman, adorned with all kinds of ornaments
went to Mount Kailasa to offer salutations to Lord
Siva. Parvati, Siva’s consort was not present then,
and Madhura used the opportunity to please the
Lord, and she got pregnant by him. Allon a sudden
Parvati appeared on the scene, and knowing what .
had happened in her absence she cursed Madhura to
fall into an abandoned well as a frog. Madhura
prayed for redemption from the curse, and Siva pitying her sad plight blessed her that after 12 years she
would get herself transformed into a fair damsel and
become the daughter of Maya and would, then, be
married by.a great King. According to Parvati’s curse
Madhura fell into a well in the forest as a frog. Mayasura was performing penance near the well to geta
daughter. On the expiry of 12 years after Madhura
fell into the well asa frog, Mayasura looked into it
and beheld a beautiful girl. He took her to his palace
named her Mandodari and brought her up as his own
daughter. Ravana married her. It was at this stage
that Siva’s vital fluid which had, twelve years before,
entered her womb made its appearance in the form
of a son. Ravana named him Meghanada. Being Siva’s
son he grew up with great prowess. (Uttara Rafhayana).
3) Meghandda’s yajfias. When once Ravana was
away from Lanka on a conquest of the world, Meghanada went to Nikumbhila, the central place for con-
- ducting yajfias, and performed seven yajiias with sage
Sukra as the chief priest. By the time all the seven
yajfias, viz. Agnistoma, Aévamedha, Bahusvarna,
Vaisnava, Mahesvara, Rajasiya and Gosava_ were
over, Ravana returned to Lanka and sage Sukra
gave him details about the yajfias conducted by his
son Meghanada. Ravana did not like the Vaisnava
-yaga performed by his son, and Sukra, who got angry
at this cursed, Ravana that he would meet with his
death at the hands of Visnu. (Uttara Ramayana).
By performing a Saiva yaga, Meghanada got the blessings of Siva, who taught him (Meghanada) the great
art of Samadhi, which helped one to move amongst
others invisible to them,

INDRAKILA 330
4) The name, Indrajit. Once Ravana encircled Indraloka with a big army, and Indra, very much alarmed
ran up to Visnu for protection. Visnu told Indra that
it was not yet time for Ravana’s death and when it
was time Visnu himself would slay him. Disappointed
at this Indra returned, and a fierce war ensued between
him and Ravana. Indra fought with Ravana, and
Jayanta, his son fought with Meghanada. When fighting reached its climax Meghanada resorted to the
art of Samadhi taught by Siva, and became invisible
to others. Then he showered his arrows. Jayanta
fainted on the battlefield. Puloma, father of Indrani, |
carried away Jayanta without others knowing and
concealed him in the ocean. Everyone thought that
Jayanta was dead. Burning with grief and revenge
Indra confronted Ravana again. Ravana fell down at
the blow with Indra’s vajra (thunderbolt). Then once
more making himself invisible to others, Meghanada
jumped into Indra’s chariot and bound him prisoner.
By that time Ravana got up on his feet, and he and
Meghanada carried away Indra to Lanka and chained
him to the foot of the flagstaff. |
The Devas, grief-stricken at this sad fate of Indra
went to Brahma and submitted their grievance.
Brahma reached Lanka, and named Meghanada Indra-~
jit. (He who gained victory over Indra). Indrajit
prayed to Brahma for the boon, which would ward
off death for ever. When Brahma told him that the
boon of eternal deathlessness was out of the question
he sought the following boon : that when he had performed a yajfia, out of the sacrificial fire should emerge
a chariot and necessary horses and that he should not
be killed by any one while fighting from that chariot,
and that he did not mind being killed ‘by enemies if
he got away without completing the yajiia. Brahma
granted him. the boon. And, as directed by Brahma
Ravana released Indra from imprisonment after one
year. (Uttara Ramayana). |
9) Indrajit and Haniiméan. A clash occurred between
Indrajit and Haniman, who landed in Lanka in search
cf Sita, and the former got Haniman bound by
Brahmastra. (Valmiki Ramayana).
6) Death of Indrajit. At the height of the fierce war
between Rama and Ravana, Indrajit and Laksmana
clashed with each other. Finding victory impossible
Indrajit created a fake Sita and killed her. Thinking
that Sita was dead, grief-stricken Haniiman, Laksmana
and the regiment of monkeys withdrew from the
fight. Informed of Sita’s death Rama fainted.
Indrajit began the yajfia for victory over Rama ‘at the
place called Nikumbhila. Vibhisana told Rama and
Laksmana about the warning of Brahma that Indrajit would be killed if the yajfia was obstructed. Happy
at the information Rama and Laksmana immediately
went to Nikumbhila to fight with Indrajit who was
engaged in performing the yajfia, and without completing the yajfia he came out and began fighting, and
Laksmana killed him. (Valmiki Ramayana, Yuddha
Kanda, Chapters 82-91).
| } in 1 f the Himalaya and
RAKILA. A mountain in front of the ilaya an
re mountains. The presiding deity of this
mountain is a devotee of Kubera. (M.B. Vana Parva,
Chapter 37).
INDRAPRASTHA
INDRALOKABHIGAMANA PARVA. A sub Parva in
Mahabharata.
INDRAMARGA. An ancient sacred place (bathing ghat)
Those who take a dip in the holy waters there will attain
heaven. (M.B. Anugasana Parva, Chapter 25, Verse 9).
INDRANI. Wife of Indra (Saci).
1) Genealogy. Descended from Visnu thus : Visnu—
Brahma — Kagyapa —Puloma—Saci (Indrani). Puloma
was an asura born to Kasyapa by his wife Danu. Indra
married Saci, the daughter of Puloma, and hence §aci
is called Indrani also. She is called Paulomi also as she
was the daughter of Puloma.
2) Indrani and Sitrapadma. An Asura called Strapadma
once coveted Indrani. He deputed his men to fetch
aci somehow or other to him. Hearing about this,
Indra, keeping Indrani with him, went to and stayed in
the Chiyali temple in Konkanadgega, and afterwards
Indra‘went to Mount Kailasa after asking Sasta to
guard Indrani. During Indra’s absence Ajamukhi,
sister of Sirapadma met Indrani and induced her to
become Sirapadma’s wife. Indrani refused. Ultimately
Indra returned and took Indrani back to Devaloka.
3) Indrani and Nahusa. See under Agastya.
4) Indrani and Pancali. Mahabharata says that Paficali
was a partial incarnation of Indrani. (See under Paficali) .
A part of Saci was born in the_ family of Drupada as
Draupadi, viz. Paficali. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 67).
(1) Indrani once went to the assembly of Brahma and
worshipped him. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter I],
Verse 42).
(2) When once Satyabhama came to Devaloka with
Sri Krsna, Indrani conducted her to Aditi, mother of the
Devas. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 36).
(3) Saci also was present at the birth of Subrahmanya. (M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Verse 13).
(4) Indrani and Arjuna. (See under Arjuna) -
INDRAPARVATA. A mountain in Videha. (M.B. Sabha
Parva, Chapter 30, Verse 15).
INDRAPRAMATI. A disciple of Paila. He belonged
to the line of Vy4sa’s disciples. For other details see
under Vyasa,
INDRAPRASTHA. Capital city of the Pandavas. It is
the same as Delhi, the capital of modern India,
1) Construction. As ordained by Dhrtardstra, Dharmaputra, claimant to half of the kingdom, went to the
forest Khandavaprastha with his brothers. Sri Krsna
_ stood by them ; great sages like Vyasa helped them.
There, in the forest, they built a city called Indraprastha
as beautiful as Indraloka. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter
2) Reconstruction. Once Agni burned down the Khandava forest. (See under Khandavadaha). Arjuna saved
Maya and five others from the fire. Maya asked Arjuna
what he should do in return for saving his life. Arjuna
replied that it was not proper to expect any reward for
saving one’s life and that, if Maya was very keen about
doing something in return, it might be done for Krsna.
Then Krsna asked Maya to build for the Pandavas a
palace, the most beautiful one in the world at Indraprastha. And, accordingly, after getting the Brahmins
duly feasted, Maya marked the ground ten thousand

INDRAPUJA 33]
Kiskus! in extent. Then Maya went to the mountain
Mainaka to the west of Mount Kailasa, where
in the pool called Bindu he had stored a large quantity
of gold and gems. Maya brought those materials as
also a conch called Devadatta from there and built the
most beautiful palace in the world at Indraprastha.
Within the palace were made many a beautiful pool and
various patterns with galleries etc. in glass. It-was built
so beautifully and in such a manner as to create, at the
very sight, the illusion that there was water where there
was really no water and vice versa. It took fourteen months to complete the construction of that most beautiful
model of architecture. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapters
3) Vara, son of Aniruddha of the Yadava dynasty
was made master of Indraprastha after the time ofthe
Pandavas. (M.B. Mausala Parva, Chapter 7, Verse
pija (Indra-worship) is_ also
It was during the reign of Vasu,
asty that Indrotsava began
anised manner. Pleased at
Indra appeared to him and
planted the danda on
Thenceforward raising
st item in celebrating
d with flowers, sandal,
et
INDRAPUJA. This
called Indrotsava.
aking of the lunar dyn
being celebrated in an org
the long penance of Vasu,
presented a Venudanda. Vasu
earth and conducted Indrapuja.
the Venudanda ene a
In va. The staff is decorated with
moe etc. To the top of the staff is attached cae
form of a Harhsa and offerings are given to it. ; e
reason for this is the fact that 1t was the oles O a
Harhsa that Indra appeared to Vasu. Pleased by
A : ed as follows :—If
Indrapaja of Vasu, Indra ¢ warship me inthe manner
men, and especially 1g: lfare will accrue to.
d Vasu, prosperity and welfare
rete ne thei kingdoms. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter
INDRASENA I, A son of King Nala. pce
Parva, Chapter 60, Verse 93), Nala had also a daug
INDRASENA II. Son of “he Pariksit. (MB. Adi
Parva, Chapter 94, vets 2 sbha Parya, Chapter
Mahabharata, Sabha Parya,
Sar to one Indrasena, 5 Saar =
the P andavas He accompanied te peak West 11).
forest life (M B. Vana Parva, Shae Gandhamadana
When the Pandavas arrived ee Pulinda King.
they left Indrasenta with pula Verse 27). After
(M.B. Vana Parva, Ghapte him to Dvaraka. (M.B.
some time the Pandavas sent 58). Indrasena was
Vira hapter Verse J ‘ch was
irata Parva, Chap > of Abhimanyu W
wedding MB. Virata
2 elle fal ‘city- tee \ |
Parva, Chapter 72, Verse *°7" fought on the side of
EINDRASENA IV, A King who tone ter 156, Verse
te
the Kauravas. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chap
' birth.
itn ene AJ. Name of Pancali in her former
(See under Paficali) . ¢ King Nala.
INDRASENA II. Daughter °
INDRASENA III. Nalayanis 4 FO cnaga.
was married by cs sage a Chapter 112, Yer
Rsya$rnga). (M.B. Yana )
‘*Kiskur haste” (Amara)
1 Kisku means a cubit.
TRAVAN
11). Indrasena served her husband for 100 years.
M.B. Viradta Parva, Chapter 21, Verse 11).
INDRATAPA. An Asura, who was a devotee of Varuna.
(M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 8, Verse 15).
INDRATIRTHA. A sacred place on the banks of the
river Sarasvati. It was here that Indra performed 100
yajfias. (M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 48, Verse 49).
INDRATOYA. A river near Mount Gandhamadana.
Bathing in the river and staying there for three nights
is tantamount to performing the horse sacrifice. (M.B.
Anusasana Parva, Chapter 25, Verse 11).
INDRAVAHANA. King Kakutstha of the Iksvaku
dynasty made Indra his vehicle in the form of an ox
and fought the Asuras thus. Hence the name Indravahana. (See under Kakutstha) . |
INDRAVARMAN. A King of Malava, he fought on the
side of the Pandavas, and got killed by an elephant
called ASvatthama. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 190,
Verse 15). |
INDROTA (INDRODA). A_ sage, son of Suka, the
great sage, andalso called Saunaka. Janamejaya, son
of King Pariksit once killed a brahmin, and at once
Brahmahatya (sin of having killed a brahmin) seized
the King. The King lost all mental peace at this and
sought the advice of many sages for redemption from
the sin, and Indrota (Saunaka) advised him to goon a
pilgrimage and perform righteous duties (dharma).
The King acted accordingly and got rid of the sin of
killing the brahmin. This story occurs under the title
Indrotapariksitiyam in Santi Parva in three chapters.
(Chapters 150-152). )
INDROTSAVA, See under Indrapija.
INDUPRABHA. See under Malayaprabha. °
INDUMATI I. Daughter of Candrasena, King of
Simhala and his queen, Gunavati. (See under Candrasena).
INDUMATI
Nahusa).
INDUMATI III. Wife of Raghu.
IRAI. One of the wives of Kagyapa. Aditi, Diti,
Danu, Arista, Surasa, Khaéa, Surabhi, Vinata, Tamra,
Krodhavasa, Ira, Kadri and Muni were the wives of
Kasyapa. Grass on earth originated from Ira. (Agni
Purana, Chapter 19).
II. Mother of Nahusa. (See under
IRA II. There was a devi called Ira among the -
attendants of Kubera. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 10,
Verse 11).
IRAMA. A river. Sage Markandeya is reported to have
once seen thisriver in the stomach of child Krsna.
(Vana Parva, Chapter 188, Verse 104. Also. see under
Markandeya).
IRAVAN. <Ason born to Arjuna of the serpent damsel
(Nagakanya) named Ulipi. (For genealogy see under
Arjuna).
1) Birth. According to the practice laid down Paficali
used to live with each husband for one year. by turn.
When she was living with one husband the other four
husbands had no admission there. When once Arjuna
wanted his arms to redeem the cows of a brahmin
stolen by thieves he entered the apartment of Dharmaputra where the arms had been kept and took them.
For thus having entered, against rules, the apartment
then kept by Dharmaputra and Paficali, Arjuna had to

IRAVATI
go on a pilgrimage for one year. Numerous brahmins
accompanied Arjuna and while spending the night on
the banks of the Ganga, Arjuna entered its waters for
bathing. ‘There he saw the Naga damsel, Ulipi. They
fell in love with each other and got married. And, a
son named Iravan was born to them. Ulipi granted
Arjuna the boon that all water-animals would obey
him and that in water he would be invincible. Leaving
Ulupi and Iravan behind, Arjuna continued his stay in
the forest.
2) Further Information. (1) In the great war Iravan
fought on the side of the Pandavas. During the first
day’s fighting Iravan and Srutayu fought a duel.
(M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 45, Verses 69-71).
(2) Travan defeated Vinda and Anuvinda in fight.
(Bhisma Parva, Chapter 83, Verses 18-22).
(3) Iravan killed five brothers of Sakuni. (Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 90, Verses 2 7-46).
(4) Iravan fought against Alambusa and was killed
by the latter. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 90, Verses 56IRAVATI I. Grand daughter of Kasyapa. Ten daughters
were born to Kasyapa by his wife Krodhavaga, viz.
Mrgi, Mrgamanda, Hari, Bhadramata, Matarmgi,
Sardall, Sveta, Surabhi and Kadri, and Iravati was
Kadri’s daughter. (Valmiki Ramayana, Aranya
Kanda).
IRAVATI II. A sacred river. (M.B. Anugdsana Parva,
Chapter 146, Verse 18). |
IRJIKA. A locality. (M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9,
Verse 52).
IRI. There are hundred Kings in the palace of Yama
worshipping him, and they are called the Tris.
(M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 8, Verse 23).
IRIMPU. A Malayalam word meaning ‘iron’. The
metal iron originated in the following way. The Devas
sought Brahma’s protection against the onslaughts of
Tarakasura, who had obtained a boon to the effect that
he could be killed only by a son born to Siva. And,
implored by Brahma and others Siva entered. into the
sex act with Parvati. The impact shook the universe,
_ Agni separated them from the-process and the semen of
Siva dropped in Agni. Agni deposited it in the Ganga.
The Ganga could not bear it and it coursed through
her (Ganga’s) arteries and out of it was born Subrahmanya. Also from the particles of the semen gold and
silver were produced. From the intensity of the heat
were produced iron and copper. See under Subrahmanya. (Valmiki Ramayana, Bala Kanda, Canto oT).
ISA. A Visvadeva. ( Universal deva). (M.B. Anugasana
Parva, Chapter 91, Verse 31). .
ISANA (SIVA). Isana, with matted hair rides on the
ox. See under Siva. (Agni Purana, Chapter 51),
ISANADHYUSITA TIRTHA. An ancient tirtha. Tasting the water of this tirtha will give all the benefits of
the horse sacrifice. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 84,
Verses 8, 9). ;
ISTARASMI. A King mentioned in the Reveda, He
performed many yajfias. (Rgveda, Mandala 1, Anuvaka 13, Sakta 123). ;
ISTASVA. A King mentioned in the Rgveda. He per-
‘formed many yajfias. (Rgveda, Mandala 1, Anuvaka
19, Sikta 124). ; ee
ISUPADA. An Asura born to Kagyapa and his wife,
‘Danu. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 65, Verse 25). This
ISVARA
Isupada was reborn in his next life as the very heroic
and powerful King Nagnajit. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter
ISVARA. Once Devi told Himavin who, according to
the Hindu religion, God is, and how creation takes
place from Igvara (God). The famous discussion about
Godhood, called Devigita is quoted hereunder.
(1} Ahamevasa pirvarh tu
nanyad kimcit nagadhipa /
Tadatmaripam cit samvit
Parabrahmaikanamakam. // |
(Before the creation of the universe commenced, I alone
was ; there was nothing else. Then I was called Parabrahman, Citsvaripi, Sarnvitsvaripi and Atmaripi).
(2) Apratarkyamanirdeéyamanaupamyamanamayam /
Tasya kacit svatah siddha
Saktirmayeti visruta //
(That form is beyond discussion (Apratarkyam); beyond
description (Anirdegyam); incapable of being
compared (Anaupamyam); beyond birth, death youth,
old age etc. (Anadmayam). In this form of mine resides
mayasakti.
(3) Na sati ¢4 nasati sanobhayatma virodhatah /
Etadvilaksana kacidvastubhitasti sarvada //
(That mayaéakti cannot be said to be existing or not
existing. Thus it is neither existing nor not existing.
The statement existing and not existing is subject to the
error, paradox. That great force exists always in me
with the pair of aspects.
(4) Pavakasyosnateveyamusnamsoriva didhitih |
Candrasya candrikeveyam
Mameyam sahaja dhruva //
(Fire does not exist without heat, nor Sun without light
nor Moon without its rays. Just like this, that mayasakti
is coeval with me. It is permanent. :
(5) Tasyarh karmani jivanarm
Jivah Kalagca saficare /
Abhedena vilinah syuh
Susuptau vyavaharavat //
(Just as all actions, feelings and even the sense of time
remain latent in deep sleep, even so all the actions and
emotions of all living beings lie absorbed in Maya).
(6) Svasaktegca samayogadaharmh bijatmatarh gata /
Svadharavaranattasyadosatvarh ca samagatam ‘//
(Iam myself the source of this Maya; but it has a
Strange power called Avarana which hides my real
nature)
(7) Caitanyasya samayogad
nimittatvarh ca kathyate /
Prapaficaparinamacca
Samavayitvamucyate //
(Being joined to Caitanya (Brahman) Maya becomes
the material as well as the immediate cause of the universe (Prapafica) .
(8) Kecittam tapa ityahustamah kecijjadarh pare /
Jiianam mayam pradhanam ca
prakrtirh saktimapyajam ||

ISVARA
(This maya is referred to differently by different people
as tapas, tamas, jada, jana, maya, pradhana, prakrti
and aja.) .
(9) Vimaréa iti tarh prahuh
Saivagastravisaradah |
avidyamitare prahurvedatatvarthacintakah //
(Experts in Saiva philosophical thought refer to this
maya-as vimarga and Vedic seers call it avidya).
(10) Evam nanavidhani syuh
namani nigamadisu /
tasyah jadatvam drsyatvat
jhananasattatossati //
(Thus Vedas refer to maya by various names. Because
of visibility maya is called jada, and because it is destructive of true knowledge it is called asat) .
(11) Caitanyasya na drsyatvam
drsyatve jadameva tat /
svaprakasam ca caitanyam
na parena prakasitam“//
(Caitanya (Effulgence) is not visible. What is seen 1s
jada (material expression) , Caitanya 1s self-illuminating ;
it is not illuminated by something else) .
(12) Anavasthadosasatvanna svenapi prakagitam /
Karmakartrvirodhah syattasmattaddipavat svayam i!
(13) Prakagamanamanyesam
Bhasakarh viddhi parvata /
ata eva ca nityatvam a
Siddham samvittanormaine: ae
(If caitanya is not self-illuminating then 1t En ae
to the drawback of Anavasthadosa pc mal Pies d
If Caitanya does not possess the quality 0 its ake
illumination there should necessarily be pice ng ;
which illuminates it, and there should again be acta a: 8
to illuminate that which illuminates Cartanyay aa :
Continues ad infinitum. This state of no conc
a annot be, at the
called anavastha dosa. Aloo ote te ‘object of ‘action,
same time. the subject (actor) efore
and that invites the draw-back of seca at TOpicaeys
O King of mountains ! understand f Th s by its
is self-illuminating and it illuminates ot es ae ah
own illumination. And this, therefore, Pr
Caitanya is eternal). dane
(14) Jagratsvapnasusyp yh
g abhicaratat
eryasya acai
snubhitosti karhictt // three states of
(All visible things go oP © ant ‘ike visible things
awaking, dream and deep sleep ree bes not experiCaitanya is not subject to change; 4
ence the three states) - ae
(15) Yadi tasyapyanur oad
starhyayam yen | ksina |
anubhitah sa evatra an
Sistah sarnvidvapuh pu 3) experi
(If it is argued that 1t (Caitany “4
states then there must be ARE
the experience. But, since it 15 | Ise as
nating there cannot be : a :
16) Ata eva canityatvam |. |
- proktam sacchastrakovidaih
anandarupata casy® it
parapremaspadatvata' |
es the three
‘witness’ for
self-illumi333 ISVARA
“(Because of the above reasons experts in the science
of philosophy hold that this Caitanya is eternal, and
that, since it is the basis of bhakti which assumes the
form of absolute love, it is anandariipa).
(17) Ma na bhiivarh hi bhiiyasamiti prematmani sthitam /
sarvasyanyasya mithyatvadasarngatvam sphutarh mama //
(No living souls think ‘I am not’. Every body cherishes
always his self-importance, the ‘I’. It is present there
in every living soul ‘in the form of love. This fact itself
proves that I am different from all material objects).
(18) Aparicchinnatapyevamata eva mata mama !
tacca jfianarh natmadharmo
dharmatve jadatatmanah //
(That I am indivisible is quite definite. Knowledge is
not an attribute of the soul (atman) but is the very
form of the soul itself. If knowledge were only an aittribute of the soul it (soul) should have been material
(jada) and it is quite a certitude that the soul is not
material, because knowledge is the very nature of the
soul ).
t6) Jfianasya jadasesatvam
na drstam na ca sarnbhavi /
Ciddharmatvarn tatha nasti
Ciragcid nahi. bhidyate //
(The soul is pure knowledge without any touch of the
jada. It is also pure existence. It is one and indivisible).
(20) Tasmadatma jianaripah
sukhariipasca sarvada /
satyah pirnopyasamgasca
dvaitajalavivarjitah //
(The atman (soul) is therefore jfianarupa (of the nature of
pure knowledge), Sukharupa (of the nature of pure joy)
and satyarapa (of the nature of absolute truth). It is
ynattached to anything and free from duality).
(21) Sa punah kamakarmadiyuktaya sviyamayaya /
purvanubhiitasamskarat
kalakarmavipakatah //
(22) Avivekacca tattvasya
sisrksavan prajayate /
abuddhipurvah sargosyam
kathitaste nagadhipa //
(23) Etaddhi yanmaya proktam
mama rupamalaukikam /
avyakrtam tadavyaktam
mayasabalamityapi //
(24) Procyate sarvasastresu
sarvakaranakaranam
tattvanamadibhitittam ca
saccidanandavigraham //
(25) Sarvakarmaghanibhitamicchajfianakriyasrayam /
hrimkaramantravacyam tadadi tatvarnh taducyate //
(Impelled by the Vasanas of previous actions the Mayaéakti proceeds to create the world, beginning with the
94 tattvas. My form which is immaterial and unmanifested is praised by all Sastras to be the cause of all
catises and the basis of all tattvas. It is also the basis of
all knowledge, action and volition and realizable only
through the hrimkara mantra).

_ISVARA : 334 ISVARA
(26) Tasmadakaga utpannah ©
S§abdatanmatraripakah /
bhavet sparsatmako vayustejorupatmakam punah //
(27) Jalam rasatmakam pas cat—
tato gandhatmika dhara /
$abdaikaguna akaéo
vayusspars aravanvitah
(28) Sabdaspargaripagunam
teja ityucyate budhaih /
§ abdasparS ariparasairapo vedagunah smrtah //
(29) Sabdasparsariiparasa_ gandhaih pajicaguna dhara /
tebhyobhavan mahatsitrarm
yallimgam paricaksate //
(30) Sarvatmakam tat sarmproktarh
suksmadehoSyamatmanah /
avyaktam karano dehah
sa coktah purvameva hi //
(From this primordial principle the five elements
(paficabhiitas) were born. The first of these is ether
which is the element of sound because sound travels
through ether (Sabda-tanmatra-ripa). Then air (vayu)
gave rise to the sense of touch and s0 air is called
sparsaripa. This vayu again gave rise to Agni (Vayoragnih). Then came water which corresponds to the
sense of taste (rasaripa). From water came earth which
is gandharupa (the source of smell) (Udakadbhimih).
Akasa (ether) has only one guna, namely sound. Vayu
(air) has two gunas—Sabda and Sparéa (Sound and
touch). Agni has three gunas:—ripa, gabda and sparga.
Jalarn (water) has four gunas—sabda, sparga, ripa, and
rasa. The last element—earth—has five gsunas—éabda,
sparsa, rupa, rasa and gandha. From these five tanmatras is born the linga-arira or suksma-Sarira ).
(31) Yasmin jagadbijaripar
sthitarh lingodbhavo yatah /
tatah sthilani bhitani
paficikaranamargatah //
(32) Paficasarhkhyani jayante
tatprakarastvathocyate /
purvoktani ca bhitani
pratyekam vibhajeddvidha //
(The jagat (universe) remained in embryo form (bijariipa) in these paficatanmatras. Then by the process of
Pajicikarana all the gross material objects were created.
These paficabhitas were first divided into two (each
was divided into two). Then by a process of the combination of these ten parts different substances were born
as detailed in the following stanzas.
(33) Ekaikam bhagamekasya
caturdha vibhajed gire /
svasvetaradvitiyamée
yojanat pafica pafica te //
(Each half of each of these five bhiitas is again subdivided into four parts. These 1/8 parts are joined to
the other halves and by combining them in other fractions
the material bodies (sthulaSariras) of all beings are
made). .
(34) Tatkaryam ca virat dehah
sthiladeho yamatmanah |
paficabhiitasthasatvams aih
érotradinarh samudbhavah //
Viratdeha (Cosmic body) is the sum total of these individual material bodies. The inner conscience and bodily
organs like ear etc. originate from the gentle and pure
aspects of the five elements.
(35) Jnanendriyanam rajendra !
pratyekam militaistu taih /
antahkaranamekam syad
vrttibhedaccaturvidham //
(36) Yada tu samkalpavikalpakrtyam
tadabhavettanmana ityabhikhyam /
syad buddhisamjfiam ca yada pravetti
suniscitam samsayahinaripam //
(37) Anusandhanaripam taccittam ca parikirtitam /
aharm krtyatmavrttya tu
tadahamkaratam gatam
(Antahkarana, due to differences in state assumes foul
forms.’ When once ‘conception and doubt’ arise in 4
subject, then it is called mind. When there is no doubt,
but there is assuredness it is called understanding
(buddhi). The function of examining a subject again
and over again belongs to citta. To think of ‘I’ is
egoism or ahamkara).
(38) Tesam rajoibgairjatani
Kramat karmendriyani ca /
pratyekam militaistaistu
prano bhavati paficadha //
(39) Hrdi prano gudespano
nabhisthastu samanakah /
kanthadeé epyudanassyadvyanah sarvasariragah //
(From the coarse (rajasic) aspects of the five senseorgans originate the five organs of action like word,
foot, hand, excretory and the genital organ, and also
the five pranas (breaths) called prana, apana, sam4na;
udana and vyana. Prana is located in the heart, apan4
in the anus, samana in the nabhi (navel) udana in the
throat and vyana all over the body).
(40) Jianendriyani paficaiva
paficakarmendriyani ca /
pranadi paficakam caiva
dhiya ca sahitam manah //
(41) Etat siksmaégariram syan
mama lingarn yaducyate /
Tatra ya prakrtih prokta
sa rajan dvividha smrta //
(Organs of knowlege 5, of actions 5, and pranas 5, and
buddhi 1, mind 1, the body is composed of these 17
factors). This forms the Siksmasarira whose prakrtl
is two-fold (as mentioned below).
(42) Satvatmika tu maya syadavidya gunamiérita /
svasrayam ya tu samrakset
sa mayeti nigadyate //
One is pure maya and the other is avidya possessing
properties).
(43) Tasyath yat pratibimbarhsyadbimbabhitasya cesituh
sa I$varah samakhyatah
svagrayajiianavan parah //
(44) Sarvajfiah sarvakarta ca
sarvanugrahakarakah /
avidyayam tu yat kimcit
pratibimbam nagadhipa //

IYAM
(Brahmacaitanya reflected in this maya is Iévara
(God). That Isvarais the same as the Atman (soul),
brahman absolute, creator of everything, omniscient,
and the cause of all blessings. The soul reflects to a
small extent in avidya also).
(45) Tadeva jivasamjfiam syat
sarvaduhkhasrayam punah |
dvayorapiha samproktarh
dehatrayamavidyaya //
(This jiva is the receptacle of all sorrows. Due to
vidya and avidya both get three kinds of bodies) .
(46) Dehatrayabhimanacca- |
pyabhinnamatrayarh punah !
prajfiastu karanatma syat
suksmadehi tu taljasah //
(47) Sthiladehi tu visvakhyastrividhah parikirtitah /
evamisgopi samprokto
jivastitraviratpadaih ll
Prathamo vyastirupastu
samastyatma parah smrtah /
sa hi sarvesvarah saksat
jivanugrahakamyaya // |
Karoti vividharn visvam
nanabhogagrayarh punah /
macchaktipreri o hs
mavi rajan prakalpitah. //
He who is a tnd is proud about the material
body is called Visva; he who attaches importance to
a ho is aware
the subtle body is called Taijasa, and aa, The jiva is
of the causal body is called Praj ;
isvari individual but Isvara_ is
Vyastisvaripa (has nate i ae lévara works
Samastyatmaka (embrace
impelled by my power) .
TYAM. lyam in Malayalam
means the metal lead. A metal
formed out of the dirt in river Gang- (
See Irimpu) .
J ‘) This letter means jaya (victory) - (Agni Purana,
hapter 348). +. Catvaka
me neP er a sletiedteet he hermit Satyakama. (For
details der Satyakama) . 244 ie AnuJABALI a A earns hermit. In Maha paar that
SAsana Parva, Chapter 4; Stanza 2° anita They
Jabali was one of the sons of Loam was the son
were expounders of the Vedas. Tre ected with Vaof Vigvamitra his life was mostly con ear how this son
sistha, The Puranas do not make If © 0" oF Vasiof Vig vamitra happened to fall into te was one of the
stha who was a foe of Vidvemnts It is menséven spiritual advisers of King Dasa da, Sarga 48 that
tioned in Valmiki Ramayana; Ba ee nadeva, ali
eight hermits such as Suyayn ‘yn Ayodhya in the
Kagyapa Vasistha and others lived 3
oe of the King Dasaratha- forest, tO bring Sri Jabali
t. to ; im. ja
back to Ayodhya, “Taba also pe mole to make
argued with Sri Rama, using ee ha 4
im return to Ayodhya. eal py the consoling words
ama angry. But he was pact” hya
of Vasistha. (Valmiki Ramayam™ vies of
abali comes in the line of diet anttl
n ts
divided the Veda and taught a arvaveda to is
The hermit Sumantu first Be into ¢ Fhe disci
disciple Kabandha who divided" & pathya.
taught two disciples Devadars4,
JAGATI
ples of Devadarga were Magadha, Brahmabali, Sautkayani and Pippalada. Pathya had three disciples.
They were Jabali, Kumuda and Saunaka. Of these
Jabali was a famous expounder of Atharvaveda. (Visnu
Purana, Aréa 3). <a
JABALI II. Son of Rtadhvaja, a hermit. (See under
Viévakarma, Para 2). _ |
JABALI III. A hermit. The descendants of this hermit
also are known by this name. Jabali who performed
penance on the mountain of Mandara had several disciples.
While Jabali was going along the forest he saw a young
man of handsome appearance engaged in penance on
the shore of a lake. Jabali wanted to know about him
‘and his penance. But as the young man was in deep
meditation Jabali had to wait there for several years.
At last the young man awoke from his meditation and
told Jabali the secrets of devotional meditation and contemplation of Krsna. The remaining life of Jabali was
spent in the worship of Krsna, in consequence of which
in the next birth he was reborn: as a cowherdess,
named Citragandha in the house of the cowherd Pracanda. (Padma Purana, Patala Khanda,: Chapters
JABALI IV. A _hermii. The intensive penance of this
hermit compelled Indra to. depute the celestial maid
Rambha to hinder it. Jabali became a prey to the enticement of this heavenly beauty and a daughter was born
to them. This damsel was carried away by the King
Citrangada. The hermit Jabali cursed Citrangada to
become a leper. (Skanda Purana. Chapters 3, 143,
JADA. An immoral brahmin: Jada, who set out to do
commercial business once was killed by thieves. As a
result of sins committed in previous births he was turned
into a Pigaca. After his death his son, who led quite a
moral life went to Kasi (Banares) to perform his father’s
obsequies, and at the particular spot where his father
was living as Pigaca the son recited Chapter 3 of the
Gita, on hearing which Jada got released from his state
as Pigaca. (Padma Purana, Uttarakhanda and Markandeya Purana).
JAGANNATHA PANDITA. A very powerful and ruthless
literary critic in Sanskrit. He lived between 1590 and
1665. He is also known as Panditaraja (King of scholars). His most important and- well-known work is
Rasagangadhara. To this day it remains as an invalu-
-able treasure’in rhetorics. (Alankara Sastra). |
His poetic theory is ““Ramaniyarthapratipadakah Sabdah
Kavyam’’. (Words which convey beautiful meanings
constitute poetry). He vehemently opposed the dhvani
vada (suggestive words and phrases conveying more
meanings produce more rasa than they literally
and apparently appear to carry). CitramimamsaKhandana is another work of the Panditaraja. In
this work another rhetorician named Appayadiksita is
strongly criticised. The allegoric poem, “Bhaminivilasam’’, is supposed to have been written by this great
rhetorician based on the untimely death of his wife,
Bhamini. He has also written five other works, the five
Laharis [Gangalahari etc].
AGATI. One of the seven horses which draw the chariot of Sirya. Gayatri, Brhati, Usnik, Jagati, Trstubh,
Anustubh and Pankti are the seven horses. {Visnu
Purana, Part II, Chapter 8). 7

JAGRAT
JAGRAT. According to the vision of Rsis or sages, every
living being has four states. They are Jagrat (waking
state), Svapna (dream), Susupti (profound sleep) and
Turiya (the fourth state of the soul, i.e. oneness with
Brahman in different degrees). The hermits and sages
have said about the four states of soul as given below:—
1) Fagrat. In this state the individual soul is awake.
The five organs of senses, the five organs of activity and
the four inner organs of the living being will be active,
when the soul is awake. In this state he enjoys the outer
world through the five senses. That is, he sees with the
eyes, hears with the ears, tastes with tongue, smells with
the nose and feels with the skin. Every man thinks that
his understanding through the senses is real. It is the
individual soul which is responsible for this understanding. But it is difficult to say whether these perceptions
through the senses are real or unreal. A hermit says as
follows:—“An individual soul travels from Jagrat to
Svapna and from Svapna to Jagrat as a fish which goes
from one shore to the other without touching anything.
For an individual soul the state of jagrat is only one of
the four states. So we cannot give the verdict that
the state of Jagrat alone is real and all the rest are
unreal.” The individual soul whichis in the state of
jJagrat enjoys the outer world and so: it is ‘bahihprajfia’ (external—knowing). In this state the individual soul enjoys the external world with the seven
organs and the nineteen faces. The seven organs are,
the two eyes, head, soul, body, urinal bladder and the
legs. The nineteen faces are the five senses, the five
organs of activity, the five life-breaths and the four
inner organs of mind, intellect, egoism and will. The
individual soul in the state of Jagrat enjoys the external
world with these organs and faces. The soul in this state
is called ‘Vaisvanara’. This state is experienced by all
the human beings of the world and so it is called Vaisvanarast (Brhadaranyaka, Mandikyopanisad) . |
2) Svapna (dream). ‘The second state of the individual
soul, is svapna (dream). He who indulges in dream,
forgets everything he had experienced in the state of
Jagrat and creating new worlds he.enjoys them. While
the five organs of senses and the five organs of activity
of the dreamer take rest, the four inner organs of
citta (will) Ahankara (egoism) Buddhi (reason) and
manas (Mind) will be working. See what the author of
Upanisad says. ‘The dreamer separates his self from the
wide universe and creates his own radiance by his: own
radiance. The light of the self is the light for the
dreamer. That man creates a chariot or an assemblage
of chariots or roads where there is no chariot or an
assemblage of chariots or a road; joy, delight or extreme delight where there isno joy or delight or ex-
: (a eg mahamatsyasya ubhe kile anusarmcaratah
Pirvarh caparam calvam evayarp purusah etavubhavantau
apusamcarati svapnantam buddhantam ca, (Brhadaranyab) Jagaritasthano bahihprajfiah saptaneah ekopavirnéati.
P) rhe eae sthilabbukvaisvanarah, a: b n dikyopantend)
2 (a) Sa yatra prasvapityasya lokasya sarvato méatramupadaya
svayam vihatya svayath nirmaya svena bhasa svena jyotisa prasvapityatrayam purusah svayam jyotirbhavati (Brhadaranyaka),
(b) Atraiva devah svapnamahimapam anubhavati yad
drstam drstam anupasyati srutam grutamevartham
anugrnoti. Dasadigantaraisca pratyanubhitaj punah
§rutamn canubhitam ca ananubhitarh (CA saccAsacca
sarvarn pagyati sarvam pasgyati. (Prasnopanisad).
Tadyathasminnakase gyeno vA suparno va vivarj grant
‘ O va a sr
sp 4 Neary viparipaty gal
kathcana svapniarh pasyati.
JAGRAT
treme delight; ponds, wells and rivers where there are
no ponds, wells and rivers. A dreamer is a Lord; the
state of the dream is the state of activity.’? Another
hermit says as follows about the state of dream :—
‘The dreaming individual soul which sees again things
which were seen here and there, hears again things
‘which were heard here and there, enjoys again things
which were enjoyed in places far and near, is really
enjoying greatness. He sees thingsseen and not seen,
heard and not heard enjoyed and not enjoyed. The
dreamer, like a King who travels with his train throughout his country, as he pleases, plays by getting in and
out of his own body, and enjoys lofty experiences, and
so he is happier than he who eats alone and enjoys his
food. The individual soul in its state of dream _ is called
the ‘Taijasa (the radiant) because he illuminates
himself by his own radiance. In this state the individual
soul does not touch anything and so it is sinless.?
3) Susuptit. The third state of the individual soul 15
susupti (profound sleep). The soul alone is active i?
this state. In susupti the individual soul desires for
nothing and does not indulge in dream. In this state
the individual soul does not think that the soul and _ the
body are two. So it is unitary. The sleeper is calle
‘Prajiia’ also. The individual soul which is in the state
of sleep, completely severs its’ connection with the .
organs of senses, the organs of action, mind, th¢
Pranamayakoga (the chest of the life-breaths), the
manomaya koga (the cask of mind) and Vijfianamay4
KoSa, the chest of knowledge orunderstanding. The min¢;
the sense organs, Siksmasgarira (the suble body) 2?
the actions are the items which could abandon thé
connection with jivatma (individual soul). In sleeP
the jivatma separating all its connections, for the tumé
being, with these items absorbs itself in the Brahm@-
See what the author of the Upanisad says about the
state of Susupti (Sleep). Asan eagle folds its win8°
and falls down weary and tired, after flying rounc }”
theair for a long time, the individual soul, avoiding
all desires and having no dreams, takes rest. The soU
sleeps in the nadi, with seventytwo thousand branche
called -‘hita’, like a child or a King or Brahma:
During sleep the mind, senses etc. are not destroye®
They only keep away. They reappear when the m4”
wakes up from sleep.
4) Turiyam. In the state of Turiya the Jivatma alom®
is active. The individual souls which abide in creatur©
are another aspect of Brahman. Everything said abou
Brahman can be said about the jivatma in the state
t
of
profound sleep. But the’ bliss that we enjoy in sleep *
not remembered in the state of activity. The same
bliss that we enjoy in profound sleep could be enjo
{c) Sa yatha maharajo janapadad erhitva sve janapade yatha
ka4amar parivartate, evamevaisa etat pranan grh
sve Sarire yathakamam parivartate (Brhadaranyaka) ‘
3 (a) Yatrasvapno na karhcana kamarn kamayate na kafica?
svapnam pagyati tat susuptam susuptasthane ekibhuta
yed
itv
a
bh
prajiianaghanam eva Anandamayam hi anandabhukee'”
mukhah prajnah. (Mandikya, Tritiya pada).
(b) Saptasthanontah prajfiah saptatigah ekonavirnSatimukb*
praviviktabhuk taijaso. (Dvitiyapada Mandikya)
. t atya paksau sarhlayayaiva dhriyata evam ayam purus?"
punah pratyanubhavati, drstam. cddrstam cAérutarhn cq ctasmA antaya dhavati, yatra supto na kamcana kamasy kamayate =
‘(Brhadar ankya)

JAGUDA :
: 337 JAIMINI I
a bs ae Sgeias aie te mae of yoga or when this King was surrounded by enemies once, the
Sti paneendner a — oy 1en it came to be Agvinidevas got him into their chariot and through
afi 5 upernal bliss could be enjoyed even easily passable ways took-him to the top of a mountain.
er one ad awakened from contemplation, a fourth JAIGISAVYA. A hermit who attained salvation by the
state of the jivatma (individual soul) was recognized. strength of his penance. ;
But =, the Brhadaranyaka only three states of the It is stated in Harivarnga Chapter 18, that three
| ace mentioned. Ls. daughters, Aparna, Ekaparna and Ekapatala_ were
mmersion of the individual soul by the yogin in the born to Himalaya by Mena and. the hermit Devala
universal soul Brahman in the state of jagrat or married Ekaparna and the hermit Jaigisavya married
activity is called Turiya. The individual soul which Ekapatala. In Mahabharata, Santi Parva, Chapter
is in the state of Turiya, is described as follows in the 929, mention is made that this hermit gave fea
Chandogyopanisad. _ advice to the hermit Devala, son of Asita, about the
The jivatma which is in the state of ‘uriya 1s not need for equanimity. On another occasion this hermit
conscious internally. He whose inner consciousness is talked to Yudhisthira. about the glory of Siva. (M.B.
active is Taijasa. He is not bahihprajiia (conscious of —§ Anusasana Parva, Chapter 18, Stanza 37).
the outer world). Bahihprajia is Vaisvanara. He is There is a story about how this hermit Jaigisavya
attained the world of Brahma. Once he reached the
not a combination of Taijasa and Turiya. He is not
compact with consciousness as a conscious man not a hermitage of Devala, who showed the necessary
conscious man; nor is he an unconscious man. He, who hospitalities. After a few days this hermit disappeared.
could be explained only by negations, cannot be seen. After that he used to be seen only at the time of meals.
He is unmanifestable, indiscernible, unthinkable, Once Devala took his waterpot and went by air to the
indescribable and without any characteristic mark. sea, to fetch water. When he reached the sea he saw
Jaigisavya bathing there. Devala had gone when
Jaigisavya was in the hermitage. How did he reach
the sea before Devala ? Devala filled the pot and
returned thoughtful. When he reached the hermitage
Only by unswerving faith could he be known. It
creates the universes and at the same t
It is the supreme reality, the one w!
ime negates it.
thout a second
(dvaita). This is the state of Turiya.* bur
Vaigvanara is called the soul with annamayakosga (the Jaigisavya was there. _ After this Devala travelled
material body) , Taijasa, the soul with Pranamayakosa through the world of the inspired sages. Wherever he
: : 1 with went, he saw Jaigisavya. He asked the inspired
the sheath of the life breaths), Prajfia, the sou ; ; ;
iitennat kote (eli enh of oi derstanding) and sages how it was possible. ‘They praised the attainTuriya, the soul with snandamayakoga (the chest of ments, Jaigisavya had obtained, by his ‘tapas’
bliss} ; (penance) . Finally in the sight of everybody, Jaigisavya
‘ habhiarata, flew to the world of Brahma. (M.B. Salya Parva,
JAGUDA. A country in ancient India. In Ma ;
Vana Parva Chapter 51, Stanza 29, it Is mentioned Chap ae 90). fe :
that the Kin of this country took part in the It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter
5 Yudhi- 11, Stanza 24, that this hermit .Jaigisavya sits in the
tion) performed by : ; sav
es alace of Brahma and carries on meditation and conSee under Jahnu). templation on Brahma.
he family of Puru. JAIMINI 1;
Rajasiiya (royal consecra
_sthira,
JAHNAVI. The river Ganga. (
JAHNU. A ‘+ King borr in t ;
1) Genealogy. Descended from Visnu in the following 1) General Information. A hermit of the highest degree
order :_ hin — Atri_-Candra—Budha—Pururay" of learning. In the “History of Classical Sanskrit
a—Pracinvan {jiterature” it is mentioned that Sumantu, Jaimini,
Ayus—Nahusa—Ya atj—Paru—Janamejay ; ‘
Bn ee uiabiaye Su Ete a yee. and Suka were the five important
— Sarhyati — Rahovadi __. Raudrasva — | isciples of Vyasa. * ese Suka was the son of
et i Ei ai ee ee co pee: - mentioned ‘that
it 6 eae oa ell ! e 5, fe yasa had other ciscip es alsoin his hermitage, such
Sitti Bol ieee wives, Dhimini, Nili aod ee as Asita, Devala and others. The five disciples menPicawas kom & Dhamini, Dusyanta an tioned first gave publication to the work of Vyasa
\Ksa was born irom cini. The descen- called ‘Jaya’, which was the original of the Mahamesthi from Nili and Jahnu from Kes
dants of Jahnu are calle | the Kus ikas. Jahnu hande pharata. VaiSampayana and Jaimini made some
kas t to iti to the work ‘
| se Balakas va and Se additions k ‘Jaya’. In Sanskrit there 1s
i Na — a ae _ the son of BT atte es et ar Baas which contains »
enance. $s . Aa amedahna rarva 5
: river Ganga, on vamedha . (See under Guruparampara) .
2) Drank up the rier Gants, Th” accordance Wop Banas Chapter chat Brahwnanda. Purana sth
the herm! urana, 4 ut rahmanda Purana is the
request of Bhagiratha, submerged this haughtiness of story . told by Jaimini to.Hiranyanabha at NaimiJahnu. Jahnu became angry put at the entreaty Cf = garanya.
at
Gates and drank up the river, h his eat. oe |
5 2 Oe 6out throug ik: 9) Jaimini was present at the sarpasatra (sacrifice to
Foe Si Pie Casein es onwards Ganga kill lg of SR o (M.B. Adi Parva,
under Ganga). - : Chapter 93, stanza 0).
got the name Jahnavi. period of Reveda. It is stated * (3) Jaimini had been a member of the council of
AHUSA. A King of net 17, Sukta 116, that nd nee oe
<gveda, Mandala |, nuva , ‘och pa prajianaghanam na praae naprajiiam adrstam avyaharyam
.. Ta nam ane t * : : Z n
N pahihpra4) fam ie bi ee yas searb prapaficopasamam éantarh givam advaitam caturtham manyate sa atma
_. 1 Nantah prajiiam na * ivqm eka
agrahyam al ; , avyapadesy
eae aksanam acintyam 4 y
Sa Vijneyah, ; |

JAIMINI II
JALAPRALAYA
Yudhisthira. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 4, Stanza JALADHARA. A mountain in Sakadvipa (The island
v, This hermit visited Bhisma in his bed of arrows
during the Bharata Battle. (M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter
46, Stanza 7).
JAIMINI II. The priest of Subahu the King of the
Cholas (Colas). In accordance with the advice of this
priest the King performed many good deeds and
consequently attained heaven. (Padma Purana,
Chapter 94).
JAITRA: Ason_ of Dhrtarastra. It is mentioned in
Mahabharata, Salya Parva, Chapter 26, Stanza 14,
that he was killed by Bhimasena in
Bharata.
JAITRAM I. ‘The chariot of King Harigcandra. It was
by driving in this chariot that the King carried out the
conquest of countries. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 12,
Stanza 12),
JAITRAM II. The conch of Dhrstadyumna. (M.B.
Salya Parva, Chapter 61).
JAJALI. A hermit who reared birds on his head by
the power of penance.
This hermit who had practised continence from his
childhood lived in a forest. Jajali never thought rain,
heat of the sun, snow and such other natural things
as unbearable. Once this hermit stood like a pillar in
the forest, immersed in meditation. Two birds built
their nests in his matted hair. Non-violence being his
policy, he did not move. The birds came to their nests
every evening and stayed for the night. After a few
days they laid eggs in the nests. Still the hermit did not
move. ‘The eggs were hatched. The hermit understood
that also. Still, he did not move. The young ones got
wings. They grew up and began to go out with the
parent birds. They went out in the morning and
returned in the evening. The hermit stood like
a pillar. One morning they went out and
did not return in the evening. The hermit
stood there for six days waiting for the return
of the birds. On the sixth day evening they
returned. Next time the hermit waited for a month
for the return of the birds. They did not return. So he
started from there and went to the sea and dipped in
the water and said, “‘there is no man more virtuous
than I either in water or on land’’ with haughtiness, But
the water demons said in an ethereal voice that Tuladhara, the merchant of Kasi was more virtuous than
he.
Hearing this Jajali went to Kasi and saw T iJadhira.
Tuladhara greeted him gladly and they talked for a
long time. Jajali understood that Tuladhara was tar
more virtuous than he. So he sought advice from
Tuladhara and thus Jajali obtained heaven. (M.B.
Santi Parva, 3 Chapters from 261).
ALA. A deity of water. In Mahabharata, Sabha Parva,
Chapter 11, Stanza 20 it is mentioned that this deva
was a luminary in the durbar of Srahma.,
JALA. A tributary of river Jamuna. The King Usinara
performed a yaga (sacrifice) onthe bank of this river
and attained a position higher than Indra. (M.B.
Vana Parva, Chapter 13, Stanza 21) ‘
JALADA. A mountain in Saka island. The famous
country known as Kumudottaravarsa is near this
mountain. (M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 11, Stanza
the battle of
JALAPADA. See under Devadatta I.
JALAPRADANIKA PARVA A sub
JALAPRALAYA.
of Saka). (M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 11, Stanza
JALADHI. The crocodile which is the conveyance of
Varuna. It is mentioned in Vamana Purana, Chapter 9,
about conveyances of Gods as follows :—
“The conveyance of Indra is the white elephant, which
came into being from the palm of Danu, and is of
extraordinary strength and valour. The black buffalo
called Paundraka, which was born from the thigh of
Rudra, and is as quick as the mind and very fierce, is
the conveyance of Yama (the god of death). The
conveyance of Varuna is the black crocodile called
‘Jaladhi’, born from the ear-wax of Rudra, and having
divine power of movement. The conveyance of Vaisravana (the god of wealth) is a ferocious man with eyes
like two cart-wheels and body as big as mountain, who
was born from the leg of Ambika. The eleven Rudras
have speedy horses, terrible serpents and white oxen
of high speed. Candr; has a chariot as his vehicle yoked
with five hundred swans. The vehicles of the Adityas
are chariots yoked with horses and camels. The conveyances of the Vasus are elephants, men for Yaksas, serpents for Kinnaras, and horses for the Agvinidevas. ‘The
Maruts of fearful appearance have deer as conveyance.
The Vidyadharas have parrots for conveyances. An
asura called Andhaka has a chariot with thousand posts
as his vehicle. Prahlada had, as conveyance a divine
chariot of gold and silver yoked with eight white horses and elephant for Virocana, horse for Kujarnbha,
divine chariot yoked with yellow horses, for Sankukarna,
elephant for Hayagriva, chariot for Maya, Great serpent
for Dundubhi, Aeroplane for Sarmbara and lion for
Ayassganku.
JALANDHAMA. A warricr of Subrahmanya. (M.B.
Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Stanza 57).
JALANDHARA. .A mightly and valiant Asura. Khadgaroma was his charioteer and Vrnda was _ his wife.
Jalandhara was the grandson of the sea of Milk. Once
he met with the headless Rahu, who said’to Jalandhara, the whole story beginning from the churning of the
sea of Milk. Jalandhara, became furious at the gods who
had churned his grandfather. So he collected a big
army of asuras and went to war with the devas. Though
a large number of Asuras were killed in the battle,
Indra and Visnu were defeated and Visnu was taken
captive and hidden under the sea. Finally Paramasiva
went to fight with the Asura. In the fight Jalandhara
was killed and Visnu was rescued. (Padma Purana,
Chapters 3 to 5). For further details see under Maya-
§iva,
section of Stiri
Parva, of the Mahabharata. This sub section compris¢s
of Chapters 1 to 15 of Stri Parva.
In all the Asiatic Puranas, reference
to an ancient great flood, with slight changes occurs.
According to Hindu Puranas this great flood took place
before Mahavisnu took the incarnation of Matsya. In
the Holy Bible which is the scripture of the Christians;
the story of the great flood is allied to the story of the
Noah. (See under Avatara). This story occurs in the
Babylonian literature also. The book ‘Gilgamish’ which
is as old as the Rgveda, is considered to be the oldest
in the world. The theme of the Gilgamish is the travel

JALAPRALAYA
English translation of a famous
So these details are nc
of a man named Gilgamish. This story is written in
twelve clay-tablets. After 1850, the scientists of England
who carried on an archaeological research, found in the
library of Ancient Nineveh, the most famous in the
ancient world, these twelve tablets along with twentythousand other tablets, all of which were in good condition. This library was built by the King Agurbanipal
in 7th century B.C., on a very high place on the bank
of the river Tigris, in the ancient Nineveh.
All these clay tablets have been removed to the British
Museum. It took several decades to decipher them.
When these clay tablets were discovered there was not a
single man who .could read and understand them, in
the world. In spite of hard work, several years passed
by without getting even a single tablet deciphered. They
were written in ‘Accadean’, which was the language
of the court of Agurb&nipal and the national and the
international language of the time. Another copy of
this great work was discovered on the bank of the Euphrates, where the capital of the famous King Hamurabi of Ancient Babylon stood, Later discoveries disclosed that this great work Gilgamish was part and
parcel of the famous ancient civilization of the Oriental
countries. The Hittites and the Egyptians tried to translate this book Gilgamish into their own languages. In
the tablets with letters in theform of arrow heads, found
on the bank of the Nile, the portions which were difficult for them to translate, are given red marks. a
It was from a small piece of broken clay atte =
clues to the origin of this famous work were 0 pre i
The world is indebted to the Sumerians, who aa t oe
capital in the place where the city Ur stands, lor
original work of Gilgamish. Les
Mention +s made about a great flood in Gilgamish, _
follows: Gilgamish set out on an adventurous journey
ern from him the means
see his ancestor Utnapistim to learn .
of shining eternal life. The gods had told this man
1 i‘loamish reached
+ of eternal life. At last Gilg
arg a oe eommtl out his ancestor and asked him
: ‘fe Utnapistim said that
about the secrets of eternal betes ae Dea eet
+, ‘Shoorappa
he, had lived gr Iya’ God. When the Boe ied
to destroy mankind by a a ae oa Ba 0
his devotee Utnapist ns artiiti Demolish your mee
see a ty st ship. Leave r wealth and ees iy
your life. Cast away your property gence aie The
Bring the seeds of every living eng ; measurements.”
antp you build should Ye like ihe sore of the “‘/:rk of
ti Ri mane ae opinion that in Pra
ones the ihiee continents a ee eyialle or some
were one continent and ne BY bap ¥' Pie. ABwe
Other reason the south pat’? mediterranean sea
: the
and water flowed in and thus hen the far off regions
came into existence. At a time Ww
ho escape
the people Ww
of the earth were mi cr che enitte world had been sub
‘magined that this
merged by the flood. It could Be posterity verbally
on D ostee
story of the great floed ‘ar te it appeared in aaa
and after so many gc? . different orms.
regions in different languages uh Gilgamish a
have dealt wit er, This
lapralay4- + wor ie Ke ev
rma 6 alaya -
luded vader this word Jalapralay
1 In writing about Ja
little elabo
book had no
JAMADAGNI
JALASANDHI I. One of the hundred sons of Dhrtarastra. Bhimasena killed .him. (M.B. Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 64, Stanza 33).
JALASANDHI II. A warrior who fought on the side of
the Kauravas against the Pandavas. He was present at
the svayamnvara of Paficali. (marriage of Paficali). It 1s
mentioned in Mahabharata, Drona Parva, Chapter
115, Stanza 52, that he was killed by Satyaki in the
battle of Bharata.
JALELA. An attendant of Subrahmanya. (M.B. Salya
Parva, Chapter 46, Stanza 16}.
JALESVARI. An attendant of Subrahmanya. (M.B.
Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Stanza 16).
JALEYU. A son born to Raudragva the son of Piru, by
a celestial woman named Misrakeséi. Mention is made
about Jaleyu in Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 94,
Stanza 10.
JAM. It means gitam (music). (Agni Purana, Chapter
JAMADAGNI. A hermit of majestic power. He was the
father of Parasurama.
1) Genealogy. Descended from Visnu in the following
order are: Brahma— Bhrgu — Cyavana — Aurva —
Rcika—Jamadagni.
2) Birth. ‘There is an interesting story about the birth
of Jamadagni. Gadhi-was the son of king-Kusamba. A
daughter named Satyavati was born to Gadhi. The
hermit Rcika giving a dowry of one thousand horses,
each with one black ear, married Satyavati.. Once
Satyavati told her husband that herself and her mother
wanted to get a child each. After the sacrifice of oblations to Agni (fire), Rcika took two parts filled with
boiled rice and gave them to Satyavati, with mantras
(spells). The radiance of Brahma was invoked into
one pot and the radiance of Ksatra was invoked into
the other. The hermit had asked Satyavati to eat the
rice into which the radiance of Brahma had _ been inyoked and to give the other pot to her mother. But the
daughter and mother changed the pots secretly and
Satyavati ate the rice in the pot into which Ksatra radiance was invoked and gave the pot of rice filled with
Brahma-radiance to her mother. Both the women conceived. As the child grew in the womb the radiance of
Brahma shone on the face of the mother and Ksatra
lustre was seen on the face of Satyavati. Rcika asked
Satyavati for the reason, She admitted the secret interchange of the pot.
Satyavati and her mother both delivered at the same
time. Satyavati got the son Jamadagni, who was the
embodiment of Ksatra tejas andthe child with Brahma
tejas born to the mother was Vigvamitra. Therefore, in
some Puranas Visvamitra is described as the uncle of
Jamadagni whereas in some others they are said to be
‘brothers. (Brahmanda Purana, Chapter 57).
3) A house-holder, When Jamadagni grew up he made
a tour and visited the holy places one by one and
reached the palace of King Prasenajit of the family of
Iksvaku. He saw Renuka the beautiful daughter of
King Prasenajit and fell in love with her. He requested
Prasenajit for the hand of Renuka. The King, without
raising any objection gave his daughter Renuka in
marriage to Jamadagni. The couple came to the bank
rately. Details on Gilgamish were obtained from the
t been received when I wrote about the work ‘Gilgamish’

JAMADAGNI 340 JAMADAGNI
afflicting vour body. 5
the Ksatriya Kings twentyone times.
of the river Narmada and erecting a hermitage began
‘tapas’ (penance) . Four sons, Rumanvan, Suhotra, Vasu
and Visvavasu were born to Jamadagni by Renuka.
(Brahmanda Purana, Chapter 58).
4) The birth of Parusu rama. Because of the wickedness
of the Ksatriya Kings, the goddess Earth became
miserable. She made a representation to Brahma who
took her to the sea of Milk and told Mahavisnu_ everything. Mahavisnu promised to take an incarnation as
the son of Jamadagni and destroy all the wicked Kings.
Accordingly Renuka gave birth to Parasurama, who
was an incarnation of Mahavisnu. (Brahmanda Purana,
Chapter 59).
5) Jamadagni getting the bow of Visnu. Once the devas
(gods) desired to know who, of Siva and Visnu was
the more powerful. They informed Brahma of their
desire. Brahma asked VigSvakarma to make two tremendous bows. He gave one to Siva and the other to
Visnu. The bow which Visnu got was known as Vaisnavacapa and that which Siva got was known as
Saivacdpa. After this Brahma caused enmity between
Siva and Visnu. A terrible battle ensued between Siva
and Visnu. After a while the Saivacapa became
less effective. At the request of the devas, the fight was
stopped. The devas decided that Visnu was superior to
Siva, in power. Siva got angry at this decision and
gave his bow to Devarata Janaka, the King of Videha.
It was this bow that Sri Rama broke at the marriage
of Sita. »
Seeing that Siva had given away his capa (bow)
Mahavisnu gave his bow to his devotee, the hermit
Reika. That Vaisnava capa was given to Jamadagni
by Rcika. ‘Thus the famous Vaisnava capa arrived at
the hermitage of, Jamadagni. (Valmiki Ramayana,
Bala Kanda, Sarga 75).
6) Renuka was killed. Paragurama became fourteen
years old. Jamadagni went to the forest to gather
fruits, roots etc. After completing the cleansing work
of the hermitage, leaving Paragurama in the forest,
Renuka went to the bank of the river Narmada (Reva)
to fetch water. When she reached the river, Kartaviryarjuna and his wives were playing in water. She
waited for them to go. When they were gone she got
into the river.. But as the water was muddy because of
the play, she walked a little to the east’ where there
was pure water. She saw there Citraratha the King
of Salva playing with his wife in the water, How
beautiful they were ! She had never seen so beautiful a
woman or so handsome a man. She stood there looking
at them for a while. When she reached the hermitage
with water, Jamadagni had already returned a long
while ago. He had returned weary and tired of the
heat of the midday-sun. He did not see his wife in
the hermitage. He had been sitting very angry when
Renuka returned with water. She put ‘the pot down
and bowed before her husband and told him the reason
for her being late. When he heard the reason his anger
blazed. He called his sons one by one and ordered
them to kill her. But the four elder sons did not dare
to execute his order saying that slaughter of a woman
was a great sin. But Parasurama came forward and
by a cutting-arrow cut off the head of his mother. The
father called the four sons who disobeyed him and
cursed them thus :
‘Since you have disobeyed the order of your father,
because of your ignorance, you shall become foresters
and live in forest.”’
Being overwhelmed with sorrow at the death of his
mother, ParasSurama swooned and fell down. When
his anger subsided, discretion dawned on Jamadagni.
He aroused his son and took him on his lap and asked
him what boon he wanted for having accomplished
the unaccomplishable task. Paragurama’s request
was that his mother should be brought to life again.
The hermit was pleased and he brought Renuka to
life again. (Brahmanda Purana, Chapter 60).
7) The sun gave FJamadagni an umbrella and sandals. See
under the word Cerippu (Sandals).
8) The temptation of Dharma. See under the word
‘Dharma’ Para 6.
9) Famadagni was killed. Once Kartaviryarjuna, with
his minister Candragupta and some attendants had
been hunting in the forests on the banks of the river
Narmada, It was noon. The hunters grew tired 0
hunger and thirst. They came to the hermitage of
Jamadagni. The hermit called his divine cow Suésila
and ordered her to give food to the King and his party.
Within a few seconds meals were got ready for
thousands of people. The King and his attendants ha
a feast. On their return journey the wonderful cow
Susila was the subject of their talk. The King wante
to get the cow which possessed divine power. So he
sent his minister CGandragupta to the hermitage of
Jamadagni with instructions to get the cow Susila 1?
exchange for a crore of cows or even half of the
kingdom, But the hermit was not prepared to give
the cow. The minister and his men caught the cow
by force and went away. The hermit, filled with grie!:
followed the party a Jong way through the forest, a0
requested Candragupta to return the cow. Candragupta got angry and struck him to death, and took the
cow to the palace, in the capital city of Mahismati.
After waiting for a long time, Renuka started in . searct
of her husband. She saw Jamadagni lying almost dead,
ina pool of blood. She fell down and _ beating ne
breast cried aloud. Parasurama with Akrtavrana a”
other disciples came there. When she saw her ae
Parasurama, she beat her breast twentyone times
and cried. Parasurama, took an oath that since 5!
mother beat her breast twentyone times and _ cried,
would travel around twentyone times and put an end
to the Ksatriya Kings. After that they took the dea
body of Jamadagni and placed it on fire, and began
sing the song of Visnu. Then the hermit Sukra came
by that way and with the help of Mrtasafijivan?
brought Jamadagni to life again. The lost cow Susila
also returned without her calf. (Brahmanda Purana,
Chapter 69; M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter 49) .
10) Death of FJamadagni. Paragurama and Akrtavran2
went to the city of Mahismati with the intention ©
bringing the calf of Susila back. They stood at the
gate of the city and challenged Kartaviryarjuna for a
1 Seeing his mother beating her breast twentyone times, Bhargava caught hold of her hands and said ‘‘Mother, stP
Don’t be sorry. I am here to end your sorrow. Since you have beaten your breast tw jhilate
? 5 5 entyone times, I will anm
D ’ Bhargava Rama took an oath thus, to his mother. bs y mes, I w
Ce,

JAMAGHA
fight. Kartaviryarjuna came out with his army. In
the battle which ensued, Kartavirya and his sons and
most of his warriors fell dead. Paragurama and
Akrtavrana returned with the calf. Jamadagni asked
Parasurama to go to Mahendragiri and do penance in
order to mitigate the sin of killing a large number of
people. When Parasurama had gone for penance,
urasena a son of Kartaviryarjuna came with his men
to the hermitage, cut off the head of Jamadagni and
took it away. Paragurama and the disciples of
Jamadagni placed the dead body of Jamadagni on the
pyre and burnt it. Renuka jumped into that fire and
died. After this Paragurama began his twentyone
tours for the extermination of the Kgatriya Kungs.
(Brahmanda Purana, Chapter 86). .
11) Other information. (1) Udayana grew up in the
hermitage of Jamadagni. (See under Udayana). ae
(2) Jamadagni was one of the hundred sons of Rcika.
(M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 66, Stanza 45) :
(3) Jamadagni was one of the hermits,
ri Rama on his return from forest life. é
who came to Ayodhya from the North were, Kasyapa,
Bharadvaja, the Sanakas, arabhanga, Durvasas,
Matanga, Vibhandaka, Tumburu and the Saptarsis
(the seven hermits). Uttara Ramayana) . aa
(4) Jamadagni was present at _the gens ee ( oa
celebration) of Arjuna. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter te,
Stanza 51).
(5) whee hermit is a luminary in the assembly of
3 = Parva. Chapter 11, Stanza 22).
Brahma. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Pp wee
is ’ battle of Mahabharata,
(6) During the time of the acd Dronaito
Jamadagni entered Kuruksetra and a "Ch “ag 490
stop the battle: (M.B. Drona Parva, apte :
Sta 35),
(7) Jamedtagni once delivered a speech onthe ie
sides of accepting rewards, 2 vt Phas 44).
(M.B. Anugasana Parva, Chapter 93, st aa the
(8) Jamadagni vowed that He abi (MB. Anus asaffair of the stealing piel i S AQUI:
ana Parva, Chapter 94, 9'4 ; ai Bhar12) The Names if FJamadagn. Arcika, ees catamé
favanandana Bhrgusardila, De sa to denote
Reikaputra are the names used by VY
Jamadagni, in Bharata. sti.
JAMAGHA. A King of the family of Yayau
_ Vata, Skandha 9)-
JAMBAVAN. A monkey ;
was the minister of Sugr!V*: aused by
1) Sen ec the troubles and ie = a oole de
the wickedness of “Ravane ee ched Brahma for
: a proa : ae
goddess Barth and’ the Devas 4PPOO' or Milk Mahawho visited
The hermits
(Bhagankey of extraordinary might. He
redress. Brahma took them xd that he would inc
! y ie
visnu heard everything 40 Id kill Ravana. Brahm
as the son of Dagaratha and wou to help him on that
was directed to create mo? or eae Jambavan an
Occasion. Accordingly Brahma
bear. In some of the Indian languages he is
JAMBAVAN
There are two stories about the birth of Jambavan in the
Puranas.
(1) Brahma sat fora long time thinking about the
creation of monkeys. Then he wanted to yawn., for
which he opened the mouth and instantly Jambavan
came out from inside Brahma through the open mouth.
“T have already created Jambavan the noble bear, who
jumped out of my mouth when I yawned.” (Valmiki
Ramayana, Balakanda, Sarga 17, Stanza 6).
(2) One day time of Brahma ended and the night had
advanced two yamas (six hours). The Madhukaitabhas
born of the ear-wax of Mahavisnu began to create
trouble and commotion in the waters of the great flood.
They saw a lotus on the surface of water. Seeing Brahma
in it they challenged him for fight. Hearing their shouting and the challenge Brahma became afraid of the
asuras. His middle face began to sweat. The sweat
flowed through his cheeks and reached the loins. Jambavan came into being from that sweat. Sohe got the
name Ambujata, (born from the water of sweat). As
he was the first person who entered the country of |
Jambinada he was called Jambavan. As he was born
when there was no universe or time his age or date
of birth could not be ascertained. At the time of Sri
Rama Jambavan was six Manvantaras (age of a Manu)
and for hundred and sixtyfour Caturyugas (a period of
four yugas) old. (The present age is the twentyeighth
Caturyuga of the seventh Manu). Jambavan_ had witnessed all the incarnations from Matsya to Sri Rama.
(Kamba Ramayana Purva Kanda).
2) Fambavin and the incarnation of Sri Rima. During the
time of Sri Rama Jambavan was the minister of
Sugriva. It is stated in Valmiki Ramayana, Kiskindha
Kanda, Sarga 41, that Nila, the son of Agni, Haniman,
Jambavan, Suhotra, Sarari, Saragulma, ‘Gaja, Gavaksa,
Gavaya, Susena, Rsabha, Mainda, Dvivida, Vijaya,
Gandhamadana, Ulkamukha, Asanga, Angada and
others were the ministers of Sugriva.
The monkeys who went to the south in search of Sita.
reached the sea shore. The question was how to jump
over the sea to Lanka. Each of them came forward to
show his ability and admitted failure. Finally Jambavan
called Haniiman to him and advised him to jump over
to Lanka. Hanuman who was not aware of his own
powers,” refused. Jambavan told him about his birth
self-power, attainment of boons etc. Haniman became
convinced of his powers at the words of Jambavan and
jumped over the sea to Lanka, (Ramayana, Kiskindha
Kanda). |
3) Jambavan and the incarnation of Vamana. Jambavan
walked’ round Mahavisnu, who incarnated as Vamana
to curb the powers of Mahabali. At that time
ambavan was immensely strong. But by the time of
the incarnation of Sri Rama his strength had decreased
much. Hear what he said to the monkeys who assembled on the sea shore to go in search of Sita.
«‘My abilities in olden times were not what you see
now. In the far old days, I had walked round that
described as a
Several other monkeys. yambavan key or @
1 It is difficult to ascertain qin ot as a m™
Monkey. In Malayalarn he was a (monkey, -
van is denoted by the words ‘Kap? ed that Jamba
Sarga 17, From this it is to be assu"" ke birth
make the gods and the celestial wom” ear OF ower
Wrong to consider Jambavan either ®" "15; own P
2 For the cause of his forgettn®
ma period. In Valmiki Rim4yana, which is the original work, Jambaae ambavan is called Rksapungava in Valmiki Ramayana Balakanda
sa (bear)- In the same chapter it occurs that, it was the aim of Brahma to
van ee Es oe help Mahfavispu in the incarnation of Sri Rama. Soit is not
as mon €
monkeysee under Trnabindu II.

JAMBAVATIT 342 JAMBUDVIPA
Eternal Being Visnu when he measured three steps at
the sacrifice of Mahabali. Now, I am very old and
have not enough strength to jump over the sea.”
(Valmiki Ramayana, Kiskindha kanda, Sarga 65).
4) Fambavan and the incarnation of Sri Krsna. The longliving Jambavan who had witnessed nine out of the
ten incarnations of Mahavisnu is seen in connection
with the precious stone Syamantaka, in the incarnation
of Krsna. The Sun-god gave this jewel Syamantaka to
King Satrajit. His younger brother Prasena wore it
and went to the forest for hunting. A lion killed him
and took the jewel in his mouth and was going along
the forest when Jambavan killed it and took the jewel.
It was rumoured that Sri Krsna had killed Prasena
and taken the jewel. So Sri Krsna went in search of
the jewel to the forest, defeated Jambavan and took the
jewel, and returned it to Satrajit. Sri Krsna married
Jambavati the daughter of Jambavan. (Bhagavata,
Skandha 10).
9) fambavan became old for ever. At the time of the
Incarnation of Vamana, Jambavan was very strong
and valiant. When Vamana brought under control the
three worlds by measuring three steps Jambavan
travelled throughout the three worlds carrying the news
everywhere. Within three moments Jambavan
travelled eighteen times through the three worlds. In
this travel of lightning-speed the end of the nail of his
toe touched the highest peak of Mahameru, who
considered it as an insult and said “You are arrogant
of your speed and youth. Hereafter your body will
notreach where your mind reaches and you shall be
ever old.”’ Because of this curse Jambavan became old
and unable to carry out what he wished. (Kamba
Ramayana, Yuddha Kanda).
JAMBAVATI. Daughter of the famous Jambavan. Sri
Krsna went in search of the famous precious stone
Syamantaka which was lost when Prasena wore it and
went to the forest for hunting. Krsna found it in the
‘cave of Jambavan, who fought with him and was
defeated. Finally he gave his daughter Jambavati to
Sri Krsna as wife, and the jewel Syamantaka as dowry.
ri Krsna came to his capital Dvaraka with his wife
Jambavati. When sons were born to the other wives
of Krsna she became sad. and requested her husband
that sons may be born to her also. On hearing this
request Krsna went to the mountain where the
hermit Upamanyu was engaged in penance. With that
hermit who was an ardent devotee of Siva, as his
teacher, Krsna began a penance before Siva, in
accordance with his (Upamanyu’s) advice. The
penance, holding yogadanda and Kapala (devotee’s
staff and skull) lasted for a month. In the second
month penance was performed standing on one leg and
drinking only water. In the third month he did
penance standing on toes only and using air as food.
After six months Paramasiva appeared and blessed
him that his wives would have ten sons each. Accordingly Jambavati gave birth to her first son who was
named Samba. (Devi Bhagavata, Skandha 4).
JAMBHA. A Daitya (Asura). He was the chief among
those who snatched away Amyta from the hands of
Dhanvantari. (Agni Purana, Chapter 3).
In the Puranas several Asuras (demons) _bearing the name Jambha are mentioned. It is stated in
Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Daksinatyapatha, Chapter
JAMBUDVIPA. One of
38, that Sri Krsna killed an Asura named Jambha.
Mention is made in Mahabharata, Sabha Parva,
Chapter 98, Stanza 49 that the teacher Sukra refused
to help a Jambha whom Indra killed later. It occurs
in Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 102, Stanza
24, that Mahdavisnu had killed an asura called Jambha.
‘It is stated in Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 289,
Stanza 2, that a group of Jambhasuras, who had
undergone training under Ravana, once attacked
Hanuman. Another Jambhasura had been killed by
Arjuna, as stated in Mahabharata, Udyoga Parva,
Chapter 49. All these Danavas (Asuras) were sons 0
Kagyapa born of his wife Danu.
JAMBHAKA., A Ksatriya King. This King was killed
in battle by Sri Krsna. He had a son who, later
became King but was killed by Sahadeva in his
conquest of the countries. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter
31, Stanza 7).
JAMBU. A tree which stands on the southern side of
the mount Mahameru. This tree bears fruits an
flowers throughout the year irrespective of the seasons.
This tree is watered by the Siddhacaranas. The
branches of this tree reach the realm of heaven. The
place in which this tree stands is known as Jan
dvipa. The ripe fruits as big as elephants fall down a0
are broken. The juice oozing from them flows as a -big
stream. This is called the river Jamba. It flows throug
the southern part of the country known as I[lavrtta.
The goddess who lives on the bank of this big river 38
known as Jambvadini. She is very fond of Jambi fru!
This goddess who loves everything in the world, 1S
worshipped by the gods, nagas (snakes), the hermits a0
sages, Raksasas (giants) and every body in the wot
with devotion. Even by the mere thinking of her she
could be pleased. She destroys the sins and increases
the purity of people. She cures all the diseases an
gives people, health, wealth, long life, prosperity 2”
happiness. —
The juice of the Jambi frait when mixed with soil a?
acted upon by water, air and sun’s rays, turns into a
kind of gold called Jambinada. The devas, vigye
dharas etc. use this gold to make ornaments for iar
women. This gold is superior to other kinds of gol¢.
(Devi Bhagavata, Skandha 8).
the Puranically famou®
Saptadvipas (seven continents). These seven continen
areembankments separating the seven seas, Jambudvipa, Krauficadvipa, Sakadvipa and Puskaradvipa a'°
included in the seven islands.
Jambidvipa has an area of one lakh of yojanas. The
island is round like a lotus flower. There are e1g
long mountain ranges which divide the island int?
nine countries, which look like nine petals of the lotus
flower. Each of these nine countries has an area of nine
thousand yojanas. The two countries of the north an
south extremities are bowshaped. Four of the remaining seven are longer than the rest. The central country
is square. This country is known as llavrtta, at tne
centre of which there is the mountain Sumeru wit
a height of one lakh of yojanas. This is calle
Svarnaparvata (The mountain of gold). The top 9?
this mountain is a great flat place with an area 9
thirtythousand yojanas. This great plain is ten thousa?
yojanas above the ground level. On the northern part
of [lavrtta lie the three mountain ranges of Nilagi,

JAMBUKA
Svetagiri and Srmgavan, and midway between them
the three countries called Ramyaka, Hiranmaya and
Kuru. On the southern part of llavrtta, there are the
three mountains of Nisadha, Hemakiita and Himalaya
and three countries .Harivarsa, Kimpurusa and
Bharata. The mountain Malyavan lies to the west and
Gandhamadana to the east of llavrtta. There are two
countries Ketumala and Bhadragva having an area of
two thousand yojanas each with the two mountains
Nila and Nisadha as boundaries. At the foot of the
mount Mahameru, there are the mountains of
Mandara, Meru, Suparsvaka, Kumuda and many
others. On those mountains big trees like naval
(syzygium jambolanum) Makanda (Mango tree)
Katambu (Naucka Candamba) banyan etc, grow in
plenty. On the top of these mountains there are four
lakes, full of milk, honey, juice of sugarcane and sweet
water. The devas become prosperous by the touch of
the water of these lakes. Besides these parks there are
four heavenly parks known as Nandana, seer
Vaibhraja and Sarvabhadraka. The women folk 4 the
devas (gods) and Gandharvas (demi-gods) play in
these parks, which are convenient for couples ie carry
on lustful play. A river 1s formed there, by t Aas
oozing from the fallen mango fruits. The fue
purple coloured and is called Arunanadi ae seins
The goddess named Aruna lives .here. a BI a svat
Jambi tree is in this Jambtdvipa. (Devi. bhagavate,
Skandha 8).
JAMBUKA. A warrior of +" ae
Parva, Chapter 45, Stanza . :
JAMBUKA. (JAMBUMALIKA) _ Bailie Grae ve
child of a brahmin died when Sri Rama, a ng pec
years’ exile in forest had returned to wee Ente
ruling the country in an, idea’ wavs i, child to the
and his wife carried the dead body ot dy #2 surprised
palace with loud lamentations. Ee pe Tati when the
how there could be child-deat (righteous)
: é mS ost dharmic
King was ruling it 1 se was present in the
manner, Then did Narace, te age of Ramarajya 4
assembly, point out that ma MO. was the reason
udra Sack was doing tapas and that 1t child. At once
for the untimely death of the prabne. ica Sage after
ri Rama sét out in search of the enemy entered the
directing Satrughna to see that me care of the dead
Sommers etl asking Laksmané to ta her detailed
body of the brahmin chil i ah
search Sri Rama found Jambt the branch of a tree
ailam doing tapas hanging 0) ld Sri Rama that he
on his legs with head down. ** ka and was performing
was the Sara Sage called J amburka heaven in his very
tapas thus so that he might ascend tO ead of the Sadra
body. Sri Rama at once cut ont is sword fell on him,
Sage, who attained, as 300 = hild of the brahmin
moksa (salvation) , and the dead Cr ana).
returned to life again.
JAMBUKESVARA. Name ‘as 4 installed ayae
installed in Mysore. The pone mba is a, fruit :
a me
: Gs o co
ukeSvara temple in 1 a es happened
(M.B. Salya
A
ere is a story about how f Jamba trees,
under this tree. nis place ull © af ia ambu
nce ime this un i
upon a an aie a penance "1. the sanctity
a reciuse perio d, go to s pe an offering
tree got a fruit of it Attracte ‘t farst
F : it
Of the fruit the recluse submitted
JAMBUNADA II
to Lord Siva, and only after that he ate it. As a result of
that the fruit germinated in the stomach of the sage
grewup into a tree and emerged into light and air
bursting his head open. Elated at this the sage danced
before God, who asked him to return to the place from
where he got the fruit. Accordingly he returned to
Tiruvanakovil and continued his penance. Pleased so
much with the Sage Siva followed him and sat under
the tree. From that day onwards Siva came to be
called Jambunatha. To this day Jambunatha sits under
the Jambi tree.
Later, a temple came to be built there under the following circumstances. A controversy arose between Malyavan and Puspadanta, two of the Bhiitaganas of Siva,
as to who cherished more devotion to the Lord. The
controversy developed into a quarrel and Puspadanta
cursed Malyavan into a spider, and Malyavan cursed
Puspadanta into an elephant. Now, when the mutual
curse took effect wisdom dawned on both Malyavan and
Puspadanta, and they took refuge in the Lord for redemption from the curse. The Lord sent both of them to
the Cola country, and after wandering about in different parts of the country both of them came to Jambuke§vara, and lived there worshipping God. ‘The elephant
used to bathe daily in sacred tirthas, bring holy water
in its trunk and make an offering of it to the Lord. As
for the spider it wove a net above the head of the Lord.
so that dried leaves did not fall on it. The elephant
used to daily sweep off the net above the head of the
Lord and make his offering of the water thereon. But,
the spider would again weave the net. Thus their quarrel continued. One day the spider, in great anger, got
into the trunk of the elephant and bit it hard. Due to
unbearable pain it smashed its trunk ona granite stone
and fell down dead. At this God appeared and blessed
both of them. The Lord also said that the sacred spot
would come to be known as Tiruvana-Kovil (ana=
elephant ; Kovil=temple) in memory of Puspadanta
who had taken the form of the elephant. The spider
was told that he would be born in the Cola dynasty
and carry on for long years many good acts. Accordingly Malyavan was born as the son of Subhadeva, the
Cola king and Kamalavati, his queen, and ruled the
land for many years under the name King Cenkanna.
He it was who built the Jambukegvara temple. (Tiruyvanakkavu Purana).
JAMBUKHANDAVINIRMANA PARVA. A sub section
of Bhisma Parva, in the Mahabharata. See under
Mahabharata.
JAMBUMALI. A Raksasa (giant) who was the son of
Prahasta. Haniman killed this Raksasa in a fight, when
he went to Lanka in search of Sita. (Valmiki Ramayana
Sundarakanda, Sarga 44).
JAMBUMALIKA. See under Jambuka.
AMBUMARGA. An ancient holy place. If one visits
this place one will attain the fruits of performing the
sacrifice of ASvamedha (horse sacrifice). (M.B. Vana
Parva, Chapter 62).
AMBUNADA I. A mountain. The river Ganges flows
through the valley of this mountain which is connected
with Mahameru. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 139,
Stanza 16).
JAMBUNADA II. A golden mountain which stands in
the place called Usirabija. A King named Marutta

JAMBUNADA III 344
performed sacrifice on this mountain.
_Parva, Chapter 111, Stanza 23).
JAMBUNADA. III. Gold is formed from the river
Jambi which flows through Jambidvipa (the island
Jambi). The gold is called Jambinada, according to
_Mahabharata, Bhisma Parva, Chapter 7, Stanza 26.
JAMBUNADA IV. Ason of Janamejaya, a King of the
dynasty of Piru. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 94, Stanza
(M.B. Udyoga
AMBUNADI. A famous river. (See under Jambidvipa).
JANADEVA. A Janaka King who ruled over Mithila
(Santi Parva, Chapter 218, Verse 3).
(1) Mahavisnu, once in the guise of a brahmin, tested
the King and pleased with him granted him certain
boons. (Santi Parva, Chapter 219).
(2) None of the 100 acaryas in his court could answer
his questions about salvation satisfactorily. But, Paficasikha, who casually came to the palace advised the
King about the means to attain salvation. (Santi Parva
Chapter 211).
JANAKA. .
1) Genealogy. Janaka was descended from Visnu in the
following order:—Brahma,—-Marici—Kaés yapa—Vivasvan—Vaivasvata—Iksvaku—Nimi— Mithi— Udavasu—
Nandivardhana — Suketu — Devarata —Brhadratha—
Mahavira—Sudhrti—Dhrstaketu—Haryag va — Maru—
Pratvantaka — Kirtiratha — Devamidha —-Vibudha—
Mahidhraka—Kirtirata—Maharoman—Svarnaroman—
Hrasvaroman—-Siradhvaja (Janaka).
2) Janaka dynasty. ‘ Danda, Vikuksi and Nimi were the
three prominent sons of Iksvaku. The dynasty of Vikuksi earned reputation as the cradle of such powerful
Kings as Vikuksi, Kratha, Mandhata. Triganku. Hariscandra, Sagara and Bhagiratha. Sri Rama also was
born in Vikuksi’s dynasty. It was Nimi, the younger
brother of Vikuksi who founded the Videha dynasty.
There is a story about that dynasty getting the name,
Videha. Nimi decided to conduct a yajfia and requested
Vasistha to act as high priest at the yajiia. Vasistha,
who then was busy with the affairs of another yajha
asked Nimi to postpone his proposed yajfia to a later
date. To this Nimi made no answer, and Vasistha went
away under the impression that his suggestion had been
accepted by Nimi. Accordingly, as soon as he got free
from other preoccupations Vasistha went to Nimi to
conduct his yajfia. But, Nimi had already performed
the Yajfia with Gautama as high priest. Enraged at this
Vasistha cursed Nimi that he should lose his body and
become Videha (without body), As the result of the
curse Nimi fell down dead. As Nimi had no sons living
the Rsis churned out of his body a child. As the child
was got by mathana (churning) he was named Mithi
Janaka. After that all kings born in Mithi’s dynasty
began using the common name Janaka.
The actual name of Janaka, father of Sita, was Siradhvaja. Mithila or Mithilapuri was the city founded by
Mithi. From the time of the curse pronounced on Nimi
the Kings of that dynasty also came to be known as
Videhas, and the country they ruled Videha. (See
Nimi). (Devi Bhagavata, 6th Skandha). ;
- ja. Siradhvaja, the father of Sita
3) Brother of Siradhva ; Ate)
had a brother called Kugadhvaja. While Siradhvaja
was the King of Mithila the King of Samkasya called
Sudhanvan attacked Mithila. Siradhvaja killed SudhanJANAKA
van in the war and crowned his brother Kusgadhvaja as
the King of Samkasya. Laksmana’s wife Urmila was
Kusadhvaja’s daughter. Kusadhvaja had three daughters called Mandavi, Urmila and Srutakirti. Bharata
married Mandavi and Satrughna married Srutakirti.
(Kamba Ramayana, Balakanda; Valmiki Ramayaria.
Balakanda, Canto 71).
4) Birth of Sité At a time when Siradhvaja had no
issues a girl emerged from the furrows of the ploughed
earth, and Siradhvaja felt the desire to bring up the
child as his own daughter. And, a celestial voice, ‘‘Oh!
Siradhvaja! it is your own daughter’ clinched the issue
for the King. That daughter was Sita. Siradhvaja—
Janaka—accordingly brought up Sita as his own daughter. (Valmiki Ramayana, Ayodhya Kanda, Cantol 18).
5) Janaka got Saivacdpa. See under Jamadagni
6) Janaka and Kahotaka. See under Astavakra.
7) Janaka and Astavakra. See under Astavakra.
8) Janaka in Yamaloka. King Janaka once, by his yogic
powers cast off his physical body. A vimana (aerial
chariot) from Devaloka arrived to carry Janaka’s soul
there. On his way to Devaloka Janaka approached
Kalapuri where innumerable sinners were being tortured in the various hells. When they breathed the air
which had come in contact with Janaka’s body, they
got much relief from their tortures and the fire of hell
now became cool and pleasing to them. When Janaka
was about to go away the inmates of hell begged him not
to leave them in that condition. He thought to himself
thus: “If these beings get some comfort or happiness
from my presence I shall surely stay here in Kalapuri,
which will be my svarga (heaven).” Thinking thus,
Janaka the most righteous of souls stopped _ there.
And then Kala arrived there to determine suitable
punishments to the various kinds of sinners, and_ seeing
Janaka there, asked why he, the most virtuous and the
purest of souls, waited there, Janaka explained his reason
for standing there and added that he would quit the
place only if Kala released all those people from hell.
On hearing Janaka’s answer K4la pointed out to him one
by one the sinners who were being tortured in hell
and explained things as follows:— ‘Look here, that
fellow there had seduced the wife of his most intimate
friend, and that is why he is tied to a red hot iron bar
for 10,000 years. After those 10,000 years he would be
born in a pig’s womb, and when he is born among
human beingsit would be as a eunuch. The other fellow
there forcibly kissed another man’s wife, and so he: has
to be roasted in Raurava hell for hundred years. That
other fellow is put into this vessel filled with blood and
pus with both his hands cut off as he had stolen other
people’s property. This fellow did not speak even a
word of welcome to a tired and hungry man who sought
his hospitality at night. That is why he has been thrown
into thick darkness, and there, for a hundred years, he
must undergo the additional suffering of wasp-bite. As
for this man he had ina loud voice found fault with
another man, and this other fellow is his friend who
listened to those vilifications attentively. And, that is
the reason why both of them have been pushed into
this unused well. So, all these people have to suffer for
their sins. You, King Janaka, who did only righteous
acts will please go away from this accursed place.”
Janaka asked Kala how those sinners could be released
from hell, and Kala answered that if any good act 0

JANAKA
the King was transferred to them they could be set
free. One early morning Janaka had, with a pure
heart, chanted “Rama, Rama” and that good act was
exchanged for the freedom of the sinners.
After their release had been effected, Janaka asked
Kala : “You say that only sinners come here. What sin
have I committed that I should come here ?” Kala’s
reply to the question was as follows :—‘‘Oh ! King,
no one else in the whole world has so much punya as
you have got. But, a small sin you have committed.
Once you prevented a cow from eating grass, and,
therefore, you had to come up to the gates ofhell. Now,
that sin has been atoned for. So you may go to svarga.”’
Janaka saluted Kala and in the divine vimana went to
Heaven. (Padma Purana, Chapters 30 and 31). ’
9) Artificial Janaka, While Sita was a captive in Lanka
Ravana, to bring her round, deputed a very clever
magician called Marutta to her, disguised as Janaka,
her father. And Marutta, in the capacity of her father
consoled her and advised her to yield to the wishes of
Ravana. But Sita did not yield, and the artificial Janaka
assumed his original form of Marutta and went away.
(Kamba Ramayana, Sundara Kanda). 7
10) Other information about Fanaka. (1) Bhimasena
defeated one Janaka, who was King of Mithila during
the time of the Pandavas. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 30,
Verse 13).
(2) King Janaka .was —
tion of all good qualities.
Verse 37). eG
(3) Janaka, the father of Sita, 1
ed his kingdom and became a recluse.
Chapter 18, Verse 4).
(4) Once the sage ca
pieces of advice to Janaka. (
(5) Once in a war between
Pratardana, the army of Janak
army of Pratardana stood agnast, a
them to fight by showing ag an
(Santi Parva, Chapter J » i I valle Ksemadars1
(8) One ina, We ee on ‘ito be an impossibiwhen victory for Janaka was a ea niseka gave his
lity he, as advised by sage “ABB, Parva,
daughter to Ksemadarsi in marriage.
Chapter 106, Verse 2). tions
(7) Once Mandavya a great SAS Bd ae ae Becal
about Trsna- '(desire) to Janaka A catisfactorily
philosopher answered the questions quite $
(Santi Parva, Chapter 976). .
(8) On another occasion a
Paragara about the a |
fare. (Santi Parva, Chapter 4707" ka among
v Ther coins maar called Kari ve eats ie
the Janaka Kings. Once f°" , Chapters 30<-
ade Karala Janaka. (Sanu many”
(10) Once a Sage advised a J ae eau
man on subjects relating © :
Chapter 309). - t many ques-
( 11) ond Janaka, so? y copia Faswered to the
tions to Yajnavalkya and they os ; Parva, Chapters
a satisfaction of the Kins:
(12) The Janaka King called Ja
a personification or imcarna-
(Vana Parva, Chapter 207,
n his old age renounc-
(Santi Parva,
lled@ Agmaka imparted some
See under Aémakopakhyana)
Janaka anda king called
a, in the presence of the
hast, and Janaka incited
d hell to them.
( anti
had a talk with Sage
f prosperity and welo called -Vasu-
(Santi Parva,
aya, Wad once *
ee JANAMEJAYA I
discussion with Sage Paficasikha about the means to
avoid death. (Santi Parva, Chapter 319).
(13), There was once a Janaka King called Dharmadhvaja, and Sulabha, an erudite woman in Mithila
wanted to test the King. By her yogic powers she
assumed the form of a very beautiful woman and visited
Janaka’s palace. She was offered a seat by the King,
and seated on the stool she took her soul into the
body of Janaka, and the soul entered into a dicussion
on philosophic subjects with Janaka. Sulabha was thus
convinced about the unique scholarship of the King
and left the palace ashamed about her attempt to
test the King. (Santi Parva, Chapter 320).
(14) Suka, the son of Vyasa not being fully satisfied by
the study of Bhagavata once visited Janaka at the
instance of his (Suka’s) father, and Janaka did so
easily clear the doubts of Suka, which even Vyasa had
not been able to successfully tackle. (Devi Bhagavata,
Ist Skandha).
(15) King Janaka did not eat flesh. (Anusasana Parva,
Chapter 115, Verse 65).
(16) Dharma, once in the guise of a brahmin imparted
many pieces of advice to Janaka. (Asvamedha Parva,
Chapter 32). ?
The above facts prove-that the Janaka kings, asa rule,
were great scholars and philosophers.
11) Synonyms of Fanaka. Aindradyumni,
Dharmadhvaja, Karala, MKaralajanaka;
Mithiladhipa, Mithilesvara, Vaideha etc.
JANAKI I. A Ksatriya king who was the rebirth of
an asura named Candravinasana. It is stated in Mahabharata, Udyoga Parva, Chapter 4, Stanza 20, that the
Pandavas had sent to him a letter of invitation to take
art in the battle of Bharata.
ANAKI II. See under Sita. :
ANALOKA. One of the fourteen worlds. This world is
situated three crores of yojanas (leagues) away from
Dhruvapada (the region of Dhruva—Pole star) according
to Visnu Purana, Amsa II, Chapter 7).
JANAMEJAYA I. A famous King of the Solar dynasty
1) Genealogy. Descended from Visnu thus:—BrahmaAtri - Candra - Budha - Puriravas-Ayus-Nahusa-YayatiParu - Janamejaya - Pracinvan - Pravira-Namasyu-Vitabhaya-Sundu-Bahuvidha-Sarnyati-Rahovadi-RaudragvaMatinara - Santurodha - Dusyanta - Bharata-SuhotraSuhota - Gala - Garda - Suketu - Brhatksetra-Hasti-Ajamidha-R sa-Samvarana-Kuru-Jahnu- Suratha-VidirathaSarvabhauma-Jayatsena - Ravyaya - Bhavuka - Cakroddhata - Devatithi - Rksa-Bhima-Pratica-Santanu-VyasaPandu-Arjuna-Abhimanyu-Pariksit-Janamejaya.
9) Birth, marriage and accession to throne. Janamejaya
was the son of Pariksit by his wife Madravati. Vapustama, daughter of Suvarnavarman, King of Kasi was
Janamejaya’s wife. Two sons, Satanika and Sankukarna were born to them. Janamejaya had _ three
brothers called Srutasena, Ugrasena and Bhimasena.
(Devi Bhagavata, 2nd Skandha ; Adi Parva, Chapters
3) Death of his father. Janamejaya’s father, Pariksit
ruled the country in a very distinguished manner for
sixty years. While once hunting in the forest Pariksit
became very tired and thirsty. While searching for
water he came across a Sage named Samika and asked
him for some water. Samika being engaged in meditation did not hear the King’s request. But, the
Daivarati,
Maithila,

JANAMEJAYA I 346
King mistaking the sage’s silence for haughtiness threw
in anger a dead snake round his neck and went away.
But, within seven days of the incident Pariksit was
bitten to death by Taksaka, king of the Nagas according to the curse pronounced on him by Gavijata,
son of sage Samika.
Janamejaya was only an infant at the time of his
father’s death. So the obsequies of the late king were
performed by his ministers. After that at an auspicious
time Janamejaya was crowned King. Within a short
time he mastered statecraft. Dhanurvidya was taught
by Krpacarya. Very soon he earned reputation as an
efficient administrator. He got married in, due course.
(Devi Bhagavata, 2nd Skandha).
4) His hatred towards snakes. In the course of a talk
one day with Janamejaya Uttanka the sage detailed to
him the circumstances of his father’s death. Only
then did he understand the actual cause of Pariksit’s
death, and the information kindled in him intense
feelings of revenge not only against serpents but also
against the whole serpent dynasty. (Devi Bhagavata,
2nd Skandha).
5) Sarpasatra. (Serpent yaa). Janamejaya sought
the advice of priests and Rtviks as to how best revenge
could be taken against the serpents, and they advised
him to perform the great Yajiia called Sarpasatra.
And, accordingly all necessary arrangements for the
Satra were made, and the King began diksa (Initiation )
for it (to live for a few days under severe routine to
prepare the author of the yajfia for it). But the priest
who made the arrangements looked into signs about the
successful conclusion of the yajfia and opined that it
would be obstructed by a brahmin, and, the King,
therefore, ordered strict steps to be taken against the
entry of strangers into the Yagasala.
And, the Sarpasatra began. High priests wore black
clothes, and chanting mantras they made offerings in
the sacred fire, and this created a burning sensation in
the hearts of serpents. They began, one after another
to come and fall into the fire. All varieties of serpents
got consumed by the fire thus.
Sages like Uttanka, Candabhargava, Sarngarava, Vy4sa,
Uddalaka, Atreya, Pramataka, Svetaketu, Narada,
Devala, Kalaghata, Srutasravas, Kohala, Devagarman,
Maudgalya and Samasaurabha acted as Rtviks at the
Satra. Though almost all the serpents courted death in
the fire, Taksaka alone did not come. Fear-stricken he
had taken refuge with Indra.
As the chanting of mantras increased in intensity and
volume V4asuki began to feel the burning sensation. He
requested his sister Jaratkaru to find out some means
of escape from the Satra, and at the instance of Jaratkaru her son Astika set out for the palace of Janamejaya to obstruct the Yajiia.
Though the Rtviks invoked for along time Taksaka did
not appear. Enraged at his absence, Uttanka searched
for Taksaka with his divine eyes and found him seated
on the throne of Indra along with him, who had given
him (Taksaka ) asylum. ‘This challenge of Indra kindled
the wrath of Uttanka all the more, and he invoked
Indra, Taksaka and Indra’s throne too so that all of
them might together come and fall into the fire. And,
lo! there came the whole lot of them. Only two minutes
more and all of them would be reduced to ashes.
By now Astika, the son of Jaratkaru had arrived at the
Yajfia §ala. Janamejaya received the young Sage with
all respect and promised to grant ‘his desire whatever that be. Astika’s demand was that the Sarpa Satra
should be stopped. Though Janamejaya was not for
stopping the yajfia, he was reminded of his promise to
grant any desire of Astika and the latter insisted on the
stopping of the Satra. Janamejaya stopped it. Astika
blessed that the serpents which had died at the Satra
would attain salvation. (Adi Parva, Chapters 52-58 ;
Devi Bhagavata, 2nd Skandha).
6) Listens to the Bharata story. While the Sarpa Satra
was being conducted Vyasa came over there and related
the whole story of the Mahabharata at the request of
Janamejaya. (Adi Parva, Chapter 60).
7) Sarama’s curse. Janamejaya along with his brother
once performed a yajfia of long duration at Kuruksetra.
While the yajfia was going on, a dog (son of Sarama
the bitch of the Devas) came there. The three brothers
of Janamejaya beat the dog which’ returned to 1ts
mother, Sarama, crying. The mother asked him whether he had done anything to deserve the beating, an
he answered thus : ““No, mother, I had done nothing,
wrong. I did not lick the havis, nor did I even look at
it.’ Hearing her son’s reply Sarama in deep anguish,
went to Kuruksetra and questioned Janamejaya as t0
why her innocent son was beaten by his brothers. Neither he nor his brothers replied to Sarama, and she
cursed Janamejaya that he would be subjected
adrstaphala (unforeseen results). This curse upset
Janamejaya so much that after the Sarpa Satra wa®
over and on his return to Hastinapura he made a seare
fora Purohita (priest) competent enough to redee™
him from his sins, and at last he invited Somasrava®>
son of the great sage Srutagravas to be his Purohita, 2
thus did Somagravas become the priest of Janamejay@
(Adi Parva, Chapter 3).
8) Successors of Janamejaya. Janamejaya had two pom
Candrapida and Suryapida by his wife Kasya. Hundre
sons, experts in archery, were born to Candrapida. The
eldest of them, Satyakarna, ruled the country after Ja"*
mejaya. Satyakarna had a son called Svetakarn4 .
whom was born a son called Ajapargva by his wi©
Yadavi, the daughter of Sucaru. (Bhavisya Parva,
Chapter 1).
9) Other Information
(1) Janamejaya defeated the King of Taksasila and subjugated the country. Adi Parva, Chapter 3, Verse 20)-
(2) The Sage called Veda was the preceptor of Jana
mejaya. (Adi Parva, Chapter 3, Verse 82).
(3) After the Sarpa Satra, Janamejaya performed ‘ao
Agvamedha yajfia at which Vyasa delivered a length
discourse on life and salvation. As Janamejay4 sal
that if he were to believe the words of Vyasa his dea
father Pariksit should be shown to him. Vyasa brous
Pariksit down from Svarga and showed him to his son.
On the occasion were also present sage Samika 4”
his son Srngi. ( Agramavasika Parva, Chapter 35)
10) Life time of Fanamejaya. The great war at Kur,
ksetra was fought in 3138B.C. (See under Mahabhara’®
After the war was over the Pandavas ruled the count!
for 36 years. Vyasa took three years to compose
Mahabharata. According to the Mahaprasthanik
the Pandavas set out for the forest after handing ae
the government to Pariksit, who ruled the count'y fo
JANAMEJAYA I
a Parva
— ee

JANAMBEJAYA II
sixty years. From the above facts it becomes evident
that Janamejaya became king in 3042 B.C.
11) Synonyms of FJanameaya. Bharata, Bharatasardila,
Bharatasrestha, Bharatadhya, Bharatarsabha, Bharatasattama, Kaurava, JKauravasardula, Kauravanandana,
Kauravendra, Kauravya, Kurusardila, Kurusrestha,
Kuradvaha, Kurukulasrestha, Kuruk ulodvaha, Kurunandana, Kurupravira, Kurupungavagraja, Kurusattama, Pandava, Pandavanandana, Pandaveya, Pariksita, Pauravya etc.
JANAMEJAYA II. One Janamejaya, a prominent member of Yamaraja’s assembly 1s referred to in the Adi
and Sabha Parvans of the Mahabharata. This Janamejaya had once’ been defeated by Mandhata. (Drona
Parva, Chapter 62, Verse 10). He conquered the world
within three days. (Santi Parva, Chapter 234) .
JANAMEJAYA III. A Ksatriya King who was Krodhavaga, the Asura, reborn. He was killed by Durmukha,
the son of Dhrtarastra. (Karna Parva, Chapter 6,
Verse 19).
renin IV. A prince born to King Kuru by his
wife called Vahini. (Adi Parva, Chapter 94, Verse
his
JANAMEJAYA V.
of Pariksit. He had a s a)
Parva, Ghapter 150, Verse ¥)- :
beater (sin of killing a brahmin) oe ae
been forsaken by his subjects. So he had to
the forest. His search for means 0
took him at last to sage Indrota, who made him p
form Agvamedha yajfia. Thus, he got redemption from
the sin and he Sie ° ll discip
Par ters 150-153). | Te
JANAMETAYA VL A son of King uy be a
Kausalya. He is also known 2° Pravira. T if : ae
a son called Pracinvan by a noble end ca a
of the Madhu Dynasty. (Adi Parva, C ae i nail
JANAMEJAYA VII. A serpent who atten leanne
of Varuna. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 9, Stanz
JANAMEJAYA VIII. A King born in
Nipa. (M.B. Udyog@ Parva, i er
JANAMEJAYA IX. A King W ‘4 ome:
Yudhisthira. He fought with art
was the son of King Durmukha. to
RNABADE ae Parva this celestial fel kes
cae erm
vgn by Ind rc aos a penance, ois eclestal
Saradvan and the momen
im. Krpa an
beauty seminal discharge ocourred OM .. Adi ‘Parva,
Krpi were born from that seaHeR. = Sri Krsna).
Chapter 129). f Mahavisnu (Sri Krsna) -
_ A synonym ° oo tremble,
Oe teat he Dar wigs demons)
Sri Krsna was called Janat r ”
“He, who has lotus a® his SC4" o has all these attribushable and unchangeable, he ae he who makes the
tes is Pundarikaksa (lotus-eyed ™M B. Udyoga Parva,
Asuras: tremble is Je ana.” (M.
Chapter 70, Stanza 9): ‘tialtit.
JANARDANA Uh gee under pthe forest Dandakawiie
is is a we §G@ee Rama
sy oe a a Goda be a long time
in this forest with Sita an a + was at this place
during the period of his forestlne ; Raksasas
that Gj Rama killed fourte
Another King born in the dynasty
son called Dhrtarastra.
He once committed
his Janamejay4
Drona Parva,
ho 1s eternal, imper-
(Santi .
JANUJANGHA
(giants) such as Khara Disana, Trisiras and others.
(M.B. Daksindtya Patha, Sabha Parva, Chapter 38).
Marica allured Sita and Ravana kidnapped her in this
place. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 147). Sirpanakha
tried to attract Sri Rama and Laksmana, and her nose
etc, were cut off, in this forest. It was in this place
that Sri Rama cut off the head of a Raksasa (demon)
and threw it away. That head fellin the lap of a hermit
called Mahodara. (M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 39).
Janasthana is regarded asa holy place. It is mentioned
in Mahabharata, Anusdsana Parva, Chapter 25, Stanza
99, that those who stay in this place and take bath in
the Godavari will acquire imperial prosperity.
JANDAKARA. One of the eighteen Vinayakas, who
stay near the Sun. In chapter 16 of the sambhava
Purana it is mentioned that this Jandakara is engaged
in carrying out the orders of Yama (the god of death).
JANGALA. A country in ancient India. (M.B. Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 9, Stanza 56).
JANGARI. A brahmavadi son (interested in theories
about Brahman) of Visvamitra. (Anusdsana Parva,
Chapter 4, Verse 57).
JANGHABANDHU. A sage who was a member of
Yudhisthira’s assembly. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 4,
Verse 16).
JANTU.
1) General information. A King of the Paru dynasty.
It is mentioned in Agni Purana, Chapter 278, that he
was the son of the King Somaka and father of the King
Vrsatanu.
2) Jantu born again. Somaka had hundred wives. But
only one of them gave birth to a child. That child was
Jantu. He was a pet of all the hundred wives. Once
Jantu was bitten by an ant. -All the hundred queens
began crying and shouting and all ran to him. Hearing
the tumult in the women’s apartment of the palace,
the King and the minister ran to that, place. When
the tumult was over the King began to think. ‘‘It is
better to have no sons at all, than to have only one
son, There are hundred queens. But none of them
bears a child. Is there a solution for this ?”’
‘At last the King summoned his family-priests and
consulted them. The decision of the priests was that
if the King should sacrifice his only son, then all his
wives would become pregnant and all would give
birth to children, and that among the sons thus born,
Jantu also would be reborn. The mother of Jantu did
not look at this project with favour. ‘‘How can we be
sure that Jantu also will be there among the sons to be
born, after his _ death??? She was worried by this
thought: The priests consoled her and said that there
will be a golden mole on the left flank of Jantu.
Finally the mother agreed to their plan. Sacrificial
dais was arranged. Sacrificial fire for holy offerings was
prepared. The priests tore the child into pieces and
offered them as oblation in the fire. When the sacrifice
was finished, all the hundred queens became pregnant.
Fach of them gave birth to a child. As the priests had
redicted, there was a golden mole on the left flank
of the child delivered by the mother of Jantu. (M.B.
Vana Parva, Chapters 127 and 128).
JANUJANGHA. A King who is fit to be remembered
every morning and evening. Mention is made about
this King in Mahabharata, Anusasana Parva, Chapter
165, Stanza 69.

JAPA(S)
JAPA (5). A group of Gods (devas) of the third
Manvantara (age of Manu). In that Manvantara the
Manu was Uttama, Indra was Suéanti, and the
Devaganas (groups of gods) were Sudharmas, Satyas,
Japas, Pratardanas, and Vasavartins, the five groups,
each consisting of twelve members. (See under
Manvantara) .
JAPAKA. A Brahmana who was constantly engaged in
uttering Gayatri. Japaka was ordered io go to hell
because certain mistakes were detected in the uttering
of Gayatri. But Devi Savitri intervened. She appeared
before him and gave him heaven. This Japaka was a
contemporary of Iksvaku. (M.B. Santi Parva, 3
Chapters from 197),
JARA. A_ forester. It was this forester who shot an
arrow at Sri Krsna and killed him mistaking him for
an animal. (See under Sri Krsna).
JARA. A harpy (Raksasi). Though she was a harpy
she loved human beings. It is believed that if the
picture of Jara and her children is placed in the
house and venerated, there will be no haunting of any
other kinds of demons.
The figure of Jara was sculptured on the wall of the
Palace of Brhadratha, the King of Magadha, and was
being worshipped. Because the King worshipped her,
she had been looking forward to an opportunity to
reward the King. Brhadratha had married two
daughters of the King of Kasi. They were twin sisters.
For a long time they remained childless. The King
was very sorry, and went to the forest with his wives.
He saw the hermit Kaksivan or Candakausika, the son
of Gautama arid requested that a son should be born
to him. The hermit was sitting in meditation under a
mango tree and a.mango fell on his lap. The hermit
took it and by prayer and meditation he invoked
divine power into it and gave it to the King. The King
divided it into two and gave it to his wives. The queens
became pregnant and the three returned joyously.
In due course both delivered. But each of them gave
birth to only half of a child. The horrified queens took
the uncouth figures outside the palace and left them
there. Jara was watching this. She ran to the spot
and placed the two portions together, Instantly it
became a child of proper form. Hearing the cry of the
child the mothers came out. Jara appeared there and
placed the child before the King Brhadratha. As desired
by Jara thechild was named Jarasandha because he
was joined together by Jara. This child grew up and
became the notorious King Jarasandha of Magadha
(M.B. Sabha Parva, 3 Chapters from var
It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Drona Parva, Chapter
182, Stanza 12 that when Arjuna fought with Jarasandha this harpy had been staying in the weapon of
arasandha and was killed in that fight.
JARATKARU I. A hermit who is Puranically famous.
1) Birth. This hermit was born in a Brahmana dynasty known as Yayavaras. He was the only son of
Yayavaras. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 13),
2) The name Jaratkaru,— The meaning of the name
Jaratkaru is given in Bhasabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter
40, as follows :— oo
“Jara is consumption, Karu is daruna (awful) . By and
by his body became hard and awful and by penance
he made his body to wear out, and so he got the name
‘Jaratkaru’.
JARATKARU IL.
JARATKARU II
By means of penance he made his body lean and worn
out and so got the name Jaratkaru.
3) Marriage. The calm and abstemious Jaratkaru
remained unmarried for a long time. One, day he
happened to meet with his Manes. They were holding
on to a grass and were about to fall into hell, and a
‘rat was cutting the root of the grass which was their
only hold. The moment the root is severed all the
Manes would fall into the deep ravine of hell. It was
at this juncture that Jaratkaru, met his Manes. ‘The
moment they saw him they said, ‘See Jaratkaru, we
are your Manes. We have to obtain, heaven, life, contentment and happiness by the good deeds of your
son. So go and get married quickly.”
At first he did not like the talk about marriage. Still,
in order to procure heaven for his ancestors he agree
to get married. But he made a condition that the name
of the bride also should be Jaratkaru and she should
be given to him as alms. Saying these words, he
walked away along the forest.
News reached the ears of Vasuki, the King of the
Nagas (serpents) that the hermit Jaratkaru was
wandering through the forests calling out that somebody
should give him as alms a damsel named Jaratkaru.
Vasuki had a sister. Jaratkéru was her name. Vasuk!
decided to give her to the hermit Jaratkaru. She was
adorned with costly garments and ornaments and was
taken to the hermit Jaratkaru. Jaratkaru said :—
“Hear my condition, I will not cherish her if she
causes displeasure to me. If she docs so I will send
her away instantly.”
On condition that if she did anything displeasing 1
him he would leave her at once, the hermit Jaratkaru
married Jaratkaru the sister of Vasuki. (Dev!
Bhagavata, Skandha 2; Mahabharata, Adi Parva,
Chapters 13 and 47).
4) Leaves his wife. Jaratkaru lived in the hermitag®
with her husband looking after him with love an¢
loyalty. One day the hermit was sleeping with his hea!
on the lap of his wife. Though it was sunset the herm!@
slepton. It was time for the evening wor ship
of the hermit. If he is aroused he will get angry. T
wife was in a difficult situation. Anyhow she arouse¢
her husbarid. The hermit got up full of anger am¢
shouted, ‘“‘You have hindered my sleep, you wick
woman and teased me. So from today you are not ™Y
wife. I am going away.”
She begged him for pardon with tears. But without
paying any heed to the entreaties of his pregnant wile,
he left her.
The helpless Jaratkaru gave birth to a son named
Astika who later stopped the famous sacrifice, SatP4
Satra meant for killing the serpents. (M.B. Adi Parv4
Chapter 47). See under Jaratkaru IT.
1) General information. It occurs in Devi Bhagavat@,
Skandha 9, about Jaratkaru, the sister of Vasuki a”¢
the wife of hermit Jaratkaru as follows. This dev!
(goddess). is the daughter of Prajapati Kagyapa, bor®
from his mind. So she got the name Manasadev!
(goddess born from mind). Some think that she got
the name ManasAdevi because she is the deity of mine:
There are some who imagine that she got the namé
Manasadevi because she held Sri Krsna Paramatma?
(the Supreme Spirit) firmly in her mind, This dev?

JARATKARU II
had been meditating upon Sri Krsna Paramatma for
wile yugas (world-ages) She is known by twelve
lames,
(1) Jaratkaru. Manasadevi had been performing
penance, and meditating upon Sri Krsna Paramatman
for three complete yugas and her garments and _ body
were worn out. So Krsna gave her the name Jaratkaru.
(2) Fagadgauri. Because she was comely and_ beautiful
and of fair complexion and was worshipped all over
the world, she got the name Jagadgauri.
(3) Manasaé. Because she was born from the mind of
Kasgyapa, the name “‘Manasa”’ was given to her.
(4) Siddhayogini. As the fruits of her Tapas (penance) ,
she got the attainments of Yoga (meditation, devotion,
contemplation and other ways of union with the
Universal Soul) and so she was given the name Siddhayogini,
(5) Vaisnavi. Because she had constant devotion to
Mahavisnu she was called Vaisnavi.
(6) Nagabhagint. Because she was the sister of Vasuki
the King of the Nagas, she got the name Nagabhagini.
(Sister of Naga). as
(7) Saivi. As she was a disciple of Siva she got the
name Salvi.
(8) Nagesvari, Becaus
from the Sarpasatra (
of Janamejaya the son 0
name Nagesvari. | er, ak
(9) Faratkarupriyd. Because she became the wile 0
the hermit Jaratkaru she was called Jaratkarupriya.
(10) Astikamata. Because she was the mother ae
hermit Astika she got the name Astikamata. Cre ee
(11) Visahari. Because she was the go Visahari
destroyed poison, she was known by a ps aa of
(12) Mahdjitdnavati. Since she had ite : — fede aie
vast knowledge, yog@ and che ig Bent sces
dead to life, she was give? ena y aleeoe to the
2) Birth. Once the serpents became a P to Prajapati
men of the earth and they all went
ints. Kasyapa an
S heir complaints. Kasyap:
tli si er and at the instruction O
Brahma sulted each oth ad
Brats Kaévapa created several Mantras | (spel tL :
incantations) and Manasadevi from his mu
deity of these spells. | wag ver
3) Pusey of her tapas \P Jag! ieee nears to
young she went to Kailase 7 PS last Siva appeare
Paramaé iva for a thousand years. £4¢, knowledge, and
before her and gave her the pa the divine Sr
taught her the Samaveda. He or <Astaksari’ and
Krsna mantra (a spell) ere of Krsna) calle
Sri Krsna Kavaca, (the, acne to use them 17
Trailokyamangala’ snd taught her one the spell she
worship. Wearing
“. d us!
this armour ar” ating upon 57
performed penance in Puskara, ye Pie At
Krsna Paramatma, for three aie matma appeared
the end of this period Sri eB ons she wanted. 9
before her and gave her al =? ie would be worshippKrsna said that all over the world s
ed and that she had
er
power to give boons to
oy Aadays ave his daughte!
Qe . Bs P « a > he
4) Marriage and rejection. atkaru; hermit. As ;
Manasadevi in marriage to J ara once the hermit $ cp
were living in the hermitag® . » Seeing the setting
hs . o is W « ‘ .
with his head on the lap of ee The hermit
sun she aroused her hus
e she saved the Nagas (serpents)
sacrifice for killing the serpents)
f the King Pariksit, she got the
became
oa0
JARASANDHA I
angry and decided to reject her: She thought of the
Devas, -who instantly arrived. Brahma argued that it
was not meet and right to reject his wife before a
child was born to her. The hermit touched the groin of
his wife and prayed and with the power of yoga (meditation, contemplation etc.) she became pregnant. The
son born to her is the famous hermit Astika.
After giving birth to Astika shé went to Kailasa, where
Paramesgvara and Parvati received her. x
5) The mantra (incantation) of worship. To get the
attainment of Manasadevi one has to utter the spell
(mantra) “Om Hrira-Srim-K lirn-Airh-Manasadevyai
svaha’’ five lakh times. He who has got the attainment
of this mantra as given above will be equal to Dhanvantari (the physician of the Gods) and to him poison
will be Amrta (ambrosia). This goddess could be
invoked into a secluded room on the day of Sankranti
(Transit of the Sun): If offerings of oblations and
worship are carried on, he would be: blessed with
children, wealth and fame.
JARASANDHA I. A terrible King of Magadha.
1) Genealogy. Descended from Visnu in the following
order :—Brahma - Atri-Candra-Budha-Puriravas-AyusNahusa - Yayati-Piru - Janamejaya-Pracinvan-PraviraNamasyu - Vitabhaya-Sundu-Bahuvidha-Sarhyati-Rahoyadi - Raudragva - Matinara - Santurodha - DusyantaBharata-Suhotra-Suhota-Gala - Garda - Suketu - ‘Brhatksetra~Hasti-Ajamidha-R sa-Sarhvarana-Piru-SudhanvaCyavana-Krti-Vasu-Brhadratha-Jarasandha.
2) Birth. Jarasandha was created by joining together
two halves of a child, by a giantess called Jara, and so
this child got the name Jarasandha. (For detailed story
see under Jara) .
3) The first battle with Sri Krsna. Asti and Prapti, the
two wives of Kamsa, were daughters of Jaradsandha.
When Sri Krsna killed Karhnsa, the two daughters
went to their father and shed tears before him. Jarasandha became angry and with a ‘mighty army surrounded the city of Mathura. A fierce battle was
fought between Jarasandha and Krsna. At last Balabhadrarama caught hold of Jarasandha and was
about to kill him, when an ethereal voice said that
Balabhadrarama was not the person to kill Jarasandha.
Accordingly Rama and Krsna set Jarasandha free.
(Bhag ivata, Skandha 10).
4) Other information.
(1) Itas mentioned in Bhagavata, Skandha 10, that
arasandha was the teacher too, of Karhsa.
(2) Jarasandha had four sons, Soma, Sahadeva, Turya
and Srutasru of whom Sahadeva became King of
Magagha, after the death of Jardsandha.
(3) Mention is made in Mahabharata, Adi Parva,
Chapter 185, that Jarasandha had been present at the
Svayarnvara (marriage) of Paficall. |
(+) Once there arose a_ battle between Jarasandha
and Karna, in which Jaradsandha was defeated and so
he made a treaty with Karna. (M.B. Santi Parva,
Chapter 5, Stanza 6). |
5) The death of Jardsandha, The enmity between Sri
Krsna and Jarasandha was life-long. These two mighty
powers confronted each other eighteen times. Sri Krsna
decided to kill Jarasandha, the King of Magadha,
‘1 a duel. Once Sri Krsna with Arjuna and Bhima,
reached the city of Magadha in the guise of Brahmanas. They started from the kingdom of Kuru

JARASANDHA It
travelled through Kurujangala and passed by
Padmasaras and KaA@lakita, visited the holy, places of
Gandaki, Mahasona, Sadanira and such others, crossed
the river Saraya and reached the opposite bank. Then
they travelled through the countries of East Kosala
and Mithila. Touring through the countries they
crossed the rivers Carmanvati, Ganga and Sona. Wearing matted hair and barks of trees they reached Girivraja, the capital city of Magadha. There were three
big drums, which were used only on special occasions.
The hide of elephant was used for making them.! Seeing
all these sights they reached the presence of Jarasandha,
who welcomed them with necessary formalities and
talked with them. But they kept silence. At last Sri
Krsna told him that his two friends were having the
vow of silence, which would terminate only at midnight. So the King left them in the sacrificial hall and
went to the palace. He came to them at midnight and
asked them who they were. Sri Krsha revealed to him
that they were Krsna, Bhima and Arjuna, who had
come to fight a duel with Jarasandha, who had unreasonably put many innocent Kings in dungeon, and
challenged him to select any one of them for duel. Jarasandha, trembling with fury, selected Bhima. In that
duel Jarasandha was killed. (M.B. Sabha Parva,
3 Chapters from 20).
6) Names given to Fard:andha. Barhadratha, Magadha,
' Magadhadhipa and jJaradputra are some of the names
used in the Mahabharata by Vyasa as synonyms of
Jarasandha.
JARASANDHA II. (Satrusaha). One of the hundred
sons of Dhrtaradstra. It is mentioned in Mahabharata,
Drona Parva, Chapter 137, Stanza 30 that this Jarasandha was killed by Bhimasena.
JARASANDHA III. In Karna Parva of the Mahabharata, Chapter 5, Stanza 30, we see a King Jayatsena
who fought on the side of the Kauravas and had been
killed by Abhimanyu. The father .of this King Jayatsena
was one Jarasandha, a Ksatriya of Magadha.
JARASANDHAVADHAPARVA. A sub-section of Sabha
Parva, of the Mahabharata. This sub-section comprises
of Chapters 20 to 24 of Sabha Parva.
JARAYU. An attendant of Subrahmanya. (M.B. Salya
Parva, Chapter 43, Stanza 19).
JARITA. A mother bird with four young ones, who suffered much in the burning of the forest Khandava. (For
detailed story see under Khandavadaha, Para 8).
JARITARI. A son of the mother bird Jarita. (See under
Khandavadaha, Para 8).
JARJARANANA. An attendant of Subrahmanya. (M.B.
Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Stanza 19),
JARTIKA. A tribe of Vahikas. They are considered to
be the lowest of the tribes. (M.B. Karna Parva, Chapter
44 Stanza 10).
JARUDHI. A country in ancient India. (M.B. Sabha
Parva, Chapter 38). .
JARUTHI. An ancient city. It is mentioned in Maha-:
bharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 12, Stanza 30, that Sri
Krsna, with his friends Abuti and Kratha defeated
Sig upala, Jarasandha, Saibya and Satadhanvan in this
city.
JATADHARA. A_ warrior of Subrahmanya.
Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 61).
(M.B.
350 JATAKARMADISAMSKARA (S)
JATAKARMADISAMSKARA (S). In the ancient days
the people of Bharata observed certain social and
customary rites immediately after the birth of a child.
They were known as Jatakarmans. Each caste had its
own jatakarmans. They are given below :
If it is a male child jatakarman should be done before
cutting the umbilical cord. At that time gold is ta be
rubbed in ghee and honey and the tongue of the child
should be touched with it, uttering mantras (spells)
(Colloquial name of this rite is giving gold and honey).
The child should be named on the tenth or twelfth day
after birth, selecting suitable lunar day, good star and
auspicious moment. The name should imply prosperity
to Brahmans, might to Ksatriyas, wealth to Vaisyas
and humility to ae That is, the word ‘Sarman’
in the case of Brahmana, ‘Varman’ for Ksatriyas,
‘Gupta’ for Vaigyas and ‘Dasa’ for Siidras, should be
added to thename. The names given to girls should
be of easy utterance, having clear meaning but not
cruel, very beautiful, charming, and _ propitious
avoiding long letters as far as possible. Four months
after delivery, the child should be taken out of the
room of confinement to see the Sun. On the sixth
month the rite of ‘Annapraga’ (feeding with rice)
should be performed. In accordance with hereditary
customs the two rites mentioned above may be per
formed at any time after the third month. For
Brahmanas and Ksatriyas the ceremony of ‘Caula’
(tonsure) may be performed at the time of birth or at
the age of three. The ceremony of Upanayana (Investiture with the Brahma string) should be conducted at
the age of eight from pregnancy for Brahmanas, at the
age of eleven from pregnancy for Ksatriyas and at the
age of twelve for Vaisyas. But Upanayana could be
performed at the age of five for Brahmanas who desire
Brahma-radiance, at the age of six for Ksatriyas who
desire might and at the age of eight for Vaisyas who
desire wealth. There is another opinion that Upanayana could be performed up to the age of sixteen for
Brahmanas and twentytwo for Ksatriyas. Even after
the attainment of this age, if this ceremony is 1°
performed, that boy will be considered an out-cast from
the mantra (spell) of Gayatri, and will have 2°
admittance to the rituals and ceremonies performed by
Brahmanas and will be known by the name Vraty#
(an outcast, uninvested Brahmana). These Vraty?°
could not be taught Vedas or be given women as
WIVES.
Brahmana, Ksatriya and Vaisya brahmacaris (celibates)
could use the hides of black antelope, spotted deer
goat as upper garment and clothes made of silk threa°:
flax or wool of sheep or red leopard. To tie round the
waist, Brahmanas have to make belts out of MutJ4
(grass), Ksatriyas, out of Marva (grass) and Vais yas
out of flax. When these are not available, Brahmanas
may use Kuga grass, Ksatriyas fianal grass and Vaisy4
Darbha grass called balbaja to make belts of customary
three darns or five darns with a knot. A celibate shou
have a stick. For Brahmanas the stick should be m#¢°
of Bilva (Aegle marmelos) or “palaga’’ (butea frondosa)
and for Ksatriyas, of banyan or blackwood. (Mimos@
catechu) and for Vaisyas, of Dillenia speciosa
tree) or fig tree. For Brahmanas the © stick should
1. See under Brhadratha IV to know about the sound of this big drum.

JATALIKA
reach up to the top of the head, for Ksatriyas up to the
forehead and for Vaisyas up to the nose. Before going
for alms, the celibate should take his stick, bow before
the sun, go round the fire and only then set out. ‘The
alms received should be offered to the teacher as
oblation, then he should turn to the east and wash hands
and mouth and eat it. Brahmanas should wear
the upper garment or their sacred thread (Yajiiasiitra) on the left shoulder and under the right arm and
then it is called ‘Upavita’; if it is on the right shoulder
and under the left arm it is called ‘“‘Pracinavita” and
if it is round the neck it is called ‘‘Nivita”.
These Jatakarmans may be done for the female child
also at the stipulated times by tantras, without reciting
mantras, for the purification of the body. The rituals
performed without reciting Vedamantras (spells) are
called tantras. For women marriage is to be considered
as Upanayana, looking after the needs of husband to be
considered as learning at the house of the teacher, and
housekeeping as samidadhana (gathering fuel of Butea
frondosa). (Manusmru, Chapter 2).
JATALIKA. A female attendant of Skanda.
Parva, Chapter 46, Verse ne
JATAPATHA. See under Ghanapatha. '
JAT ARUPASILA. A mountain. This mountain ee
in a place having an arca of thirteen ame: i fall
opposite shore of the sea where the laa ea une ee
with tremendous cry at the mouth of the su mari oe
(Badavagni). The monkeys sent by Sugt -miki
for Sita, made a search in this seaman ii so. ( 50)
Ramayana, Kiskindha Kanda, Sarga 40, ota oe maJATASURA I. A King, who was a memoct c7 4)
‘utra’s assembly. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 4, Verse “*/-
TA Il. A Raksasa, Jatasura, disguised as a
Sr acerny bm with the Pandavas 1n the eae el
was to carry off Paficali and the arrows of the ae
as and when he got an opportunity for de ee
taking advantage of Arjunas aoe i a
out ahunting) Jatasura caught hold oe Lees
also the arrows and ran away with lut hes. Dharmaalone managed to slip away from his ciutches.
his
hurried to the scene, ™
brothers and Ens ne
(Vana Parva, Chapter ~ ea had a son calle amAS This Jatasura % ‘eat wal:
—- wae eee oy on in, the BS
(Deana Parva; Chapter 174); og
JATASURA PARVA. _ 4 sub-Pa
(Salya
of Mahabharata.
, a A ‘ from
(See under Mahabharata) f Pururavas, porn
G Three sons 0! © _ (Bhagavata,
-——| (fire) they are called the Jatavedas (ues
Skandha 9). Anas.
J ATAYU_ \ bird mnie in te Figg as__ follows,
1) Genealogy. Descence ; _—Jatayu.
Be ey, a Kadena leg Jatayn We
2) Birth. ‘Two sons called mee was Syeni. Syeni,
born to Aruna Their mother, Oven. Sampati and the
wife of Aruna delivered tw ee ter 66, Verse _/ Ie
great Jatayu (Adi Varvas Grint and Sampan
‘is
“Know that J am the son atayu, and ao
my elder brother. Kiya Ean Ca
son of Syeni.” (Valmiki Ramay™
JATISMARAKITA
But, according to Kamba Ramayana, the name of the
mother of Sampati and Jatayu was Mahaéveta.
(Kiskindha Kanda). Perhaps, Syeni was also known
as Mahasveta.
3) Fatayu flies towards Sirya. Sampati and Jatayu,
once under a bet flew up towards the sun. Jatayu
outfley Sampati, and in the exuberance of youth
entered Sirya’s orbit at noon time with the result that,
due to the excessive heat his wings were scorched. At
this Sampati, to save his brother, flew up higher than
Jatayu and spread out his wings like an umbrella | over
Jatayu with the result that Sampati’s wings were burnt,
and he fell downsomewhere on the Vindhya mountains.
He spent the rest of his life under the protection of a
sage called Nisakara who was performing penance on
the mountains. After their tragic meeting in Suryamandala Sampati and Jatayu never again met in their
life. (Valmiki Ramayana, Kiskindha Kanda,, Chapter
58; Kamba Ramayana, Kiskindha Kanda).
4) Fought with Ravana. Jatayu clashed with Ravana,
who was carrying away Sitadevi in his vimana, and in
the fierce fight that they fought in the air, Ravana cut
off Jatayu’s wings and thus felled him on the earth,
almost dead. (Valmiki Ramayana, Aranya Kanda,
Chapter 51). :
5) Death. Rama and Laksmana during their search
‘n the forest for Sita came upon Jatayu lying without
wings almost dead and reciting Rama’s name. Jatayu
described to Rama how Ravana had carried away Sita
and how he had tried to stop him and fought with him.
After giving this account he died. Rama and Laksmana
lit a fire and cremated Jatayu. The great bird’s soul
attained salvation. (Kamba Ramayana).
JATI. A warrior of Subrahmanya. (Salya
Chapter 45, Verse 61).
ATI. See under Caturvarnya.
JATILA. The name assumed by Siva ‘when he played
the part of a Brahmacarin. Parvati began rigorous
enance to obtain Siva as her husband, and Siva
visited her disguised as Jatila, a brahmacarin to test
her. (Siva Purana, Satarudrasamhita) .
JATILA. A righteous and generous woman who was
born in the Gautama dynasty. She once sought the
help of the saptarsis. (Adi Parva, Chapter 195; also
See under Gautami IJ).
JATISMARA. A holy bath. It is mentioned in the
Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 84, Stanza 128
that the body and mind of the person who bathes in
this tirtha (bath) will become pure. P
JATISMARAHRADA. — A__ holy _ place. In. the
Mahabhérata, Vana Parva, Chapter 85, Stanza 3,
mention is made that if a man gives alms at_ this holy
lace, he will be able to remember his previous
birth and life.
JATISMARAKITA. A worm which got emancipation
through the advice of ‘Vyasa. Once while Vyasa was
roaming about in the country, by chance he saw this
worm. It was running through the road, seemmg a cart
coming very fast. Vyasa stopped it and asked, “What
are you running from ?”’ The worm replied that he
was running in fear that the wheel of the cart coming
from behind might crush him. In the previous birth
this worm was a Sidra. Jealousy, resentment, arrogance,
selfishness etc. were the traits of his character in his
previous life. Only twice in his life had he done good
Parva,

JATHARA
deeds. Once he honoured his mother and on another
occasion he respected a Brahmana. Because of these
two good deeds, in his present life as worm he had
the remembrance of his previous life. Vyasa gave the
worm necessary advice. Instantly the worm was crushed
under the wheel of the cart.
In the next rebirth this Jatismarakita was born asa
Ksatriya King. As he was leading the life of a powerful
King he met with Vyasa. He received advice from the
hermit. In his next life he became a Brahmana and
finally he attained bliss. (M.B. Anuéasana Parva, 3
Chapters from 117).
JATHARA I. A very erudite brahmin scholar in Vedic
lore. Jathara was a prominent figure at the serpent
yajtia held by Janamejaya. (Adi Parva, Chapter 53,
Verse 8).
JATHARA II. A mountain within the ranges of Mahameru. On the eastern side of Mahameru there exist two
mountains called Jathara and Devakita, 18, 000
yojanas in extent and 2000 yojanas high. On _ the
western side of Meru are the mountains called Pavamana and Partyatra, on the southern side Kailasa and
Karavira, and on the northern side Trigrnga and
Makaragiri. (Devi Bhagavata, 8th Skandha).
JATHARA III. An urban region in ancient India.
JATHARA. A warrior of Subrahmanya. (M.B. Salya
Parva, Chapter 46, Stanza 128).
JATUGRHAM. See under Arakkillam (lac palace).
JATUGRHAPARVA. A particular section of Adi Parva.
JATUKARNA. An ancient hermit with control over his
senses. Hle was a‘member of the council of Yudhisthira.
(M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 4, Stanza 14).
JAVA. A warrior of Subrahmanya. (M.B. Salya Parva,
Chapter 45, Stanza 75)
JAYA I. Ason of Dhrtardstra. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 63, Stanza 119). He fought with Arjuna at the time
of the stealing of cows. (M.B. Virata Parva, Chapter
54). This Jaya fought with Nila and’ Bhima in the
battle of Bharata. Bhima killed him. (Drona Parva,
Chapters 25 and 135), )
JAYA IT. A deva (god). At the time of the burning of
the forest Khandava, this deva came with an iron pestle
to fight with Krsna’ and Arjuna, (M.B. Adi Parva,
Chapter 226 Stanza 34), |
JAYA NI. A King in ancient India. He sits
bar of Yama (God of death) and worships him. (Sabha
Parva, Chapter 3, Stanza 15).
JAYA TV. A synonym of the Sun.
ter 3, Stanza 24).
JAYA V. The pseudo name taken by Yudhisthira at the
time of the pseudonymity of the Pandavas in the country of Virata. Bhima was known as Jayanta, Arjuna by
the name Vijaya, Nakula by the name Jayatsena and
Sahadeva by the name Jayadbala at that time. (Virata
Parva, Chapter 5, Stanza35). At that time Paficali
addressed all her five husbands by the name Jaya.
(M.B. Virata Parva, Chapter 23, Stanza I? }.,
JAYA VI. A naga (serpent) born in the family of Kaéyapa. (M.B. Udyoga Parva, Chapter 103, Stanza 16).
JAYA VII. A-warrior who fought on the side of the
Kauravas. It is mentioned in the Mahabharata, Drona
Parva, Chapter 156, that both Sakuni and this warrior
fought with Arjuna. __
JAYA VIII. A warrior of: the country of Paficala. Mention is made in Mahabharata, Karna Parva, Chapter
in the Dur-
(M.B. Parva, ChapJAYA IV
56, Stanza 44 that this warrior fought on the side of
the Pandavas and that Karna wounded him in the
battle.
_JAYA IX. One of the attendants given to Subrahmanya
by Vasuki, the King of the Nagas (serpents), Vasuki
gave Subrahmanya two attendants named Jaya and
Mahajaya. (M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Stanza 52).
JAYA X. Asynonym of Mahavisnu. (M.B. Anusdsana
Parva, Chapter 149, Stanza 67).
JAYA XI. (JAYAVIJAYAS). They were gate-keepers of
Vaikuntha. As these two .sons of devas were engaged
in the service of Mahavisnu guarding the gate, the
hermits Sanaka and others came to see Mahavisnu to
pay him homage. Jaya and Vijaya stopped them at the
gate. Sanaka got angry and cursed them to take three
births on the earth as Asuras (demons). The sorrowful Jaya and Vijaya requested for absolution from the
curse. The hermit said that they had to take three
births as Asuras and that they would be redeemed by the
weapon of Mahavisnu. Accordingly Jaya and Vijaya
were born in the earth as Hiranyaksa and Hiranyaka-
-Sipu. They were killed by Mahavisnu. n_ the second
birth they were Ravana and Kumbhakarna. Mahavisnu incarnated as Sri Rama killed them. In the third
birth they were Sigupala and Dantavaktra. They were
killed by Sri Krsna, an incarnation of Bhagavan Visnu.
For further details see under Hiranyaksa. Hiranyaka-
§ipu, Ravana; Kumbhakarna, Sigupala and Dantavaktra. After three births Jaya and Vijaya returned to
Vaikuntha. (Bhagavata, Skandha 7).
JAYA XII. Father of the Raksasa (giant) Viradha, who
was killed by Sri Rama at the forest Dandaka. Viradha was born to the giant Jaya by his wife Satahrada.
(Valmiki Ramayana, Aranya Kanda, Sarga 3).
JAYA XIII. The original name of the Mahabharata written by Vyasa, Many of the scholars are of opinion that
Vyasa was not the author of the whole of the Mahabharata that we see in its present form now. They ae
that the Bharata written by Vy4sa consisted only ©
eight thousand and eight hundred stanzas. That wo1k was
named Jaya. To those eight thousand and eight hundred stanzas Vaigampayana added fifteen thousand, tw
hundred stanzas and this great book was given the
name Bharata or Bharata samhita (Bharata collection).
When Sita recited this book to other hermits in N yoo
§aranya the book had a lakh of stanzas. Plcmusiente
the book was called Mahabharata, (History of classica
Sanskrit Literature; Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter
62, Stanza 20).
JAYA. I. A daughter of the hermit Gautama. Gautama
had two daughters by his wife Ahalya named Jayant!
and Aparajita besides Jaya.. While Daksa was perform
ing a yaga, (sacrifice) this Jaya informed Parvati
it. Parvati fell down when she heard that Daksa ha
not invited Siva to the sacrifice. Siva got angry at
Daksa’s negligence and from his wrath the Bhitaganas
such as Virabhadra and others (attendants of Siva
arose. (Vamana Purana, Chapter 4). F
JAYA. I. Wife of Puspadanta, a gana (attendant ©
iva). See under Puspadan‘a. -
JAYA. TI. Another name of Parvati. (M.B, Virata
Parva, Chapter 6, Stanza 16). q
JAYA IV. A daughter of Daksa. Two daughters name
Jaya and Suprabha were born to Daksa. To Suprabha
and Jaya fifty sons each were born, These hundred som

JAYA V 359
wore various kinds of arrows and such other weapons.
(Valmiki Ramayana, Balakanda, Sarga 21).
JAYA V. A maid of Parvati. It isseen in Skanda Purana
that this Jaya was the daughter of Prajapati Kréagva.
JAYA. Wife. The husband enters the wife in the form of
semen and takes birth as the foetus and then is born
from her as son and so the wife is called Jaya.
‘“‘Patirbharyam sampravis ya
Garbho bhitveha jayate /
Jayayastaddhi jayatvam
Yadasyam jayate punah”’ //
(Manusmrti, Chapter 9, Stanza 8).
JAYA (M)I. The name ofan auspicious moment. This
has the name Vijayam also. (M.B. Udyoga Parva,
Chapter 6, Stanza 17).
JAYA (M) II. The name given to the story of Vidula.
See under Vidula.
JAYADBALA. The false name assumed by Sahadeva at
the time of the incognito life of the Pandavas in the city
of Virata. (M.B. Virata Parva, Chapter 3; Stanza 35).
JAYADEVA I. A Sanskrit poet who lived in the 13th century A.D. He is the author of the play ‘Prasannaraghavam’, As far as the story of Sri Rama Is concerned,
some changes have been made in this play from that
given by Bhavabhiati in his ‘Mahaviracarita . According to this play Sri Rama and Banasura both were
lovers of Sita. The famous work ‘Candraloka , a treatise on rhetorical figures, was written by this poet Jaya-
: E Es e < - S da’ the
deva. His most important work 1s Gitagovinda, |
“<h3 life of Sri Krsna, especially
theme of which is the early Iie - Radha, which is very
the lov tween Sri Krsna an :
ae, his book consists of 12 sargas
touchingly described. T
and aah cata contains 24 octaves. This es wae
devotee of Krsna. He used to sing lyrics be os ue
image of Krsifa while his wife danced according to
beat. ye Pe
JAYADEVA II. See under Dussasana ©". =
dred sons of KartaJAYADHVAJA. The fifth of ihe lige a 5 sed
iryar] . t is stated in Bra L rural 5
46 that, of = inmmdred sons of Ree wens he
Sirasena, Dhisana, Madhu and Jaya ae Father ot
mightiest. warriors. This Jayadhvaja
Talajangha.
JAYADRATHA I. aad Ww
the kingdom of Sindhu. ; ae
l) Genealo ry Descended from Visnu bs Ueeltt
order : Brahma —Atrl en “Janamejaya—Pracinsie — ati —rulu, seth h :
re pre-made
dha —Samyati —_Rahovadi ——Rauaras
=<Spnota—
Santurodha—Dusyanta —Bharata—Subowse™ ajamiGala—Gardda —Suket
u —Brhatksane _-Jayadratha!
dha--Brhadisu-—Brhaddhanu—Brhavtaye oY
2) Birth and attainment ap 20OF JPY taken by his father.
a result of severe fasts 4” ee bid Jayadratha,
There was an ethereal voice @ , very famous, King.
“This child would become 3 the head of this child
Th him, who puls . d pieces within a
on Aad wail break into 4 hundre ren he heard
“hh joy wi }
moment” His father was filled at pyadratha King at
this ethereal voice, and s° heen
arrior King who ruled over
arva, Chapter
1. It ismentioned in ‘ohty emper D dease
ksatra was the only famous and ere cans that he was “°
ratha was the son of Brhatksatra oP 'Y
67 that
tates Adi P dr
Mahabharata, * Really speaking ey of that king.
JAYADRATHA I
a very young age and went to Samantapajicaka to perform penance. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 146).
3) Marriage. It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Adi
Parva, Chapter 116, Stanza 17, that Jayadratha married
the princess Dusésala.
4) Fayadratha and Pavcali. From the very beginning
Jayadratha was a bitter enemy of the Pandavas. It is
not difficult to find out the root of this enmity. It is
stated in Adi Parva, Chapter 185, Stanza 21 that Jayadratha was present at the svayamvara of Paiicali. The
fact that he did not get Paficali, might have laid the
foundation of this enmity.
From this moment Jayadratha was looking forward to a
chance to carry off Pajicali.
The forest life of the Pandavas began. They wandered
through many forests and finally reached the forest,
Kamyaka. Once the Pandavas left Paficali alone in the
hut and went to the forest for hunting. Jayadratha
came to know of this. He came with his mento the |
place where the hut stood. At the very first sight of
Paficali, he fell in love with her. He sent Kotikasya,
the King of Trigarta, who was the son of Suratha as a
messenger to Pajicali. Kotikasya told Pamicali about the
superior qualities of Jayadratha and requested her to
accept Jayadratha, leaving the Pandavas. But she
rejected his request. The messenger returned to Jayadratha and told him what had happened. Jayadratha
himself came in a chariot and tried to entice her,
Paiicali did not yield. Jayadratha caught her by force
and took her away in his chariot. Dhaumya the priest
of the Pandavas followed them with tears. Shortly afterwards, the Pandavas returned to the hut. They searched
for Paficali here and there. They heard everything
from a maid, and instantly followed Jayadratha, whose
army confronted the Pandavas. ‘The heads of almost all
the warriors of Jayadratha fell on the ground. Jayadratha fled from the battlefield. The Pandavas followed
him and caught him and scourged him. Bhima shaved
his head letting only five hairs to stand on the head.
They took him as a prisoner before Dharmaputra.
Finally at the instruction of Yudhisthira and Paficali,
he was released. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapters 264 to
5) Other detatls.
(1) In the sacrifice of Rajasiiya (imperial consecration)
performed by Yudhisthira, Jayadratha took part as a
tributary King. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 34,
Stanza 8).
(2) Jayadratha was present at the game of dice between
Duryodhana and Yudhisthira. (Sabha Parva, Chapter
58, Stanza 28).
(3) It was while going to Salva to marry a damsel that
Jayadratha attacked Paficali at the forest of Kamyaka.
(M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 264).
(4) Feeling ashamed at the result of his attempt to
carry off Paficali, Jayadratha went direct to Gangadvara and pleased Siva by penance. Siva gave him the
boon that he would be able to defeat all the Pandavas
except Ariuna. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 272).
6) Jayadratha in the battle of Bharata.
In the battle of Bharata, which lasted for eighteen days
between the Kauravas and the Pandavas, Jayadratha
Jayadratha was the son of Brhatksatra. After Bharata, Brhat.
atha was the grandson of Brhatksatra. The statement that Jay atl

JAYADRATHA II
took the side of the Kauravas and fought against the
Pandavas. The part played by him in the battle is given
below :—
(1) On the first day there was a combat between Jayadratha and Drupada. (M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter
45, Stanzas 55 to 57).
(2) Attacked Bhimasena. (M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 79, Stanzas 17 to 20).
(3) Fought with Arjuna and Bhimasena. (M.B. Bhisma
Parva, Chapters 113 and 115).
(4) Engaged in a combat with the King Virata. (M.B.
Bhisma Parva, Chapter 116, Stanzas 42 to 44).
(5) Jayadratha and Abhimanyu fought with each
other. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 14, Stanzas 64
(6) Fought with Ksatravarman. (M.B. Drona Parva,
Chapter 25, Stanzas 10 to 12).
(7) Arjuna vowed that he would kill Jayadratha, who
tried to flee from the battle-field when he came to know
of this. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 74, Stanzas 4
(8) He began to combat with Arjuna. (M.B. Drona
Parva, Chapter, 145).
7) The death of Jayadratha. When a fierce fight began
between Arjuna and Jayadratha, Sri Krsna came to
Arjuna and said, ‘“‘Arjuna, there was an ethereal voice
at the birth of Jayadratha. The head of the person who
puts down the head of Jayadratha on the earth, would
be broken into a hundred pieces. So send an arrow in
such a way that his head falls on the lap of his father.”
Hearing this, Arjuna sent an arrow which cut off the
head of Jayadratha and the head fell in the lap of Jayadratha’s father who had been sitting in deep penance
and meditation in Samantapaficaka. Instantly the father
awoke from meditation and stood up and the head of
his beloved son, with ear-rings on both ears fell on the
earth and the head of the father was broken into a
hundred pieces and he died. (Drona Parva, Chapter
146, Stanzas 104 to 130).
8) The names of Fayadratha. Saindhavaka, Saindhava,
Sauvira, Sauviraja, Sauviraraja, Sindhupati Sindhuraja,
Sindhurat, Sindhusauvirabharta, Suvira, Suvirarastrapa,
Vardhaksatri and such other names are used as synonyms of Jayadratha in the Mahabharata.
JAYADRATHA II. In Mahabharata, Sabha Parva,
Chapter 8, Stanza 36 we see another Jayadratha who
sits in the durbar of yama (the death-god) and meditates upon him.
JAYADRATHAVADHAPARVA. A sub section of Drona
Parva in Maha Bharata. This consists of Chapters 85
to 152 of Drona Parva.
JAYADRATHAVIMOKSANA PARVA. A sub section of
the Vana Parva, in Mahabharata. Chapter 272 is in
this section.
JAYANIKA I. A grandson of Drupada. Mention is
made in the Mahabharata, Drona Parva, Chapter 156
Stanza 18, that this Jayanika was killed by Agvatthama.
JAYANIKA II. A brother of the King of Virata. (M.B.
Drona Parva, Chapter 158, Stanza 42).
JAYANTA [. Son of Indra. . |
1) Genealogy. Descended from Visnu in the following
order: Brahma — Marici — Kasyapa—Indra—Jayanta.
Jayanta was the son born to Indra by his wife Sacidevi. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter | LZ, Stanzas 3 and 4),
2) Fayanta lost one eye. During his forest life, Sri Rama
354 JAYANTA VI
lived with Sita and Laksmana on the mountain Citrakita for some days. Once Sri Rama, being very tired
of walking in the forest fell asleep with his head in the
lap of Sita. Taking this chance Jayanta came in the
shape of a crow and scratched the breast of Sita with
his claws. Sita cried and Sri Rama woke up and saw
Jayanta in the shape of a crow. Rama got angry and
shot the BrahmAstra (a divine arrow) against Jayanta.
Fear of life made him fly throughout the whole of the
three worlds. Even Brahma, Visnu and Maheévara
were unable to protect him, All the while the divine
arrow followed him. Finally having no go he came and
fell at the feet of Sri Rama. Sri Rama said that the
Brahmastra could never become futile and so the arrow
must hit his right eye. Accordingly the arrow struck at
his right eye and thus Jayanta lost his right eye. In
Adhyatma Ramayana this story is stated with some
slight changes. According to Adhyatma Ramayana,
this incident took place when Sita had been drying raw
flesh. (Valmiki Ramayana, Sundara Kanda, Sarga 38).
3) Fayanta hidden in the ocean. After getting the boons
Ravana became arrogant and with a big army went to
the realm of the gods. Ravana engaged Indra in a
fierce battle. In that fight Meghanada the son of
Ravana attacked Jayanta, who swooned and fell down.
Immediately Puloma, the father of Sacidevi, gathered
Jayanta in his hands, unseen by anybody and hid him
in the sea. After the disappearance of Jayanta the battle
entered the second stage. Thinking that his son Jayanta
had been killed, Indra began to fight with Ravana
with more vigour than before. In the battle which
followed Meghanada subdued Indra and made him a
captive. Taking Indra and the celestial maids as
captives, Ravana and his men went to Lanka. (Uttara
Ramayana).
4) Fayanta became Bamboo. Once Agastya came to
Indra’s durbar. Indra arranged for the dance 0
Urvagiin honour of Agastya’s visit. In the midst of
the dance Urvasi saw Jayanta before her and she fell
in love with him. Consequently her steps went out 0!
beat. Narada who was playing his lute called Mahati
went wrong. Agastya got angry and cursed Jayanta
and changed him to a bamboo. Urvasi was cursed to
become a woman with the name Madhavi. Agasty4
cursed Narada that his lute Mahati would become the
lute of the people of the world. (Vayu Purana).
5) Other information.
(1) In the stealing of the Parijatapuspa (the flower of
a paradise tree) Jayanta fought with Pradyumna the
son of Sri Krsna and was defeated. (Visnu Parva
Chapter 73).
(2) Jayanta was defeated by Siirapadma, an Asura;
ina battle. (Skanda Purana, Asura Kanda).
JAYANTA IT. During the time of his life incognito i?
Virata the name assumed by. Bhimasena was Jayanta-
(M.B. Virata Parva, Chapter 5, Stanza 35).
JAYANTA TIII..In Mahabharata, Udyoga Parva;
Chapter 171, Stanza 11, mention is made about one
Jayanta of Paficala. ‘
JAYANTA IV. One of the eleven Rudras. (M.B. Santi
Parva, Chapter 208, Stanza 20).
JAYANTA V. A synonym of Mahavisnu (M.B. Anusasana Parva, Chapter 149, Stanza 98).
JAYANTA VI. One of the twelve Adityas. (M.B.
Anysasana Parva, Chapter 150, Stanza 15).
+ ORO ess pee
R

JAYANTA VII
JAYANTA VII. One of the ministers of Dasaratha. The
eight ministers of Dasaratha were Jayanta, Dhrsti,
Vijaya, Asiddhartha, Arthasadhaka, Agoka, Mantrapalaka — Sumantra. (Valmiki Ramayana, Bala Kanda,
Sarga 7).
JAYANTII. A holy place on the bank of the river
Sarasvati. There is a tirtha (bath) here known as
Somatirtha. It is mentioned in the Mahabharata,
Vana Parva, Chapter 83, Stanza 19 that those who
bathe in this tirtha would obtain the fruits of the
sacrifice of Rajasiya. (Imperial consecration).
JAYANTI II. Daughter of Indra and sister of Jayanta.
In Bhagavata, Skandha 4, there is a story stating
how Jayanti was the wife of Sukra for ten years.
Sukracarya was the teacher-priest of the . Asuras
(demons). Once the devas (gods) had completely defeated the Asuras. With the intention of procuring
new powers from Sri Parameégvara, Sukracarya went to
Kailasa. When the penance of Sukra became more
and more severe the gods and Indra began to be
furried, Indra told his daughter Jayanti to become the
servant of Sukra and to break his penance somehow or
other. Jayanti did not like this procedure of her father.
Still she did-not like to disobey her father. So she
went to Kailasa and became the attendant of Sukra
and stayed with him. She served him dutifully ane
with chastity. She would fan him with plantain oe
She would prepare cold and fragrant water for i”
to drink, When the Sun became hotter she would ie
her upper garment as an umbrella so that he shou :
be in the shade. She would gather fully ripened goo
fruits for him to eat. She would gather good variely
of darbha grass, cut them into the length of a arn a
with good flowers she would give them to ans aa
for his morning oblations. She would ga ee bs
sprouts and make bed for him and would stan =
him fanning till he slept. She would get weet ny
for him to rinse his mouth when he woke up. ie ie
did the work of a dutiful disciple. She did no east
by speech or action, try to entice him so
way Dy Sp ‘cht be broken. She spoke only words
vow of penance Mg res and helpful to Kim. This
which would be pleasing a? 7 then Paramagiva
continued for thousand are "boous he requested
appeared Dit eee eal d with her. In_accorfor. After that Sukracarya tae Sukra allowed her to
dance with her request the hermit i Te cae Reil'a
li ‘th him for ten years as his wile. g Cath
ive wit 1m | --d of ten years they )
boon that during that Fae world. Thus Sukracarya
would be invisible 0 Fee i the house very happily
married Jayanti and they live¢ 19
J AVANT? TH. The queen of the a on esac
born in the | dynasty 4 ie of Jayanti ‘(See under
children were born to 8
Rsabha II). attendant of Subrahmany4.
AYAPRIYA. A_ female a
. (M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Stanza )
JAYARATA, A_ warrior
who fought on the ee Ee
* © WwW
Kauravas. Bhimasena killed a Wer Bharata. (M.B.
prince of Kalinga, in the PR og),
Drona Parva, Chapter ! 59; ‘tant
JAYARATHA. A Syms F
the 12th century. Me wae See em AE iG
is Haracaritacintamal! - (History
literature) .
JAYATSENA I
JAYASARMAN. A Brahmana who became wealthy by
taking the vow of Kamala (Kamalavrata). Kamala is
the eleventh day of ‘Adhimasa’.
It is believed that this day is better than other days. If
a man fasts on that day Goddess Kamala will be pleased
with him.
_ The devotee should awake in the Brahma muhiurta
(fortyeight minutes before sunrise) and take bath
thinking of. Purusottama and begin the fast. If the
prayer and meditation is conducted at the house he
will get double the fruits. If it is at a river it will
yield four times the fruits. If it is at a cow-shed the
fruits will be thousandfold and if it is conducted at
a fireshed or Saivite temple, at a holy bath or in the
presence of God the fruits will be a thousand and one
hundredfold and if it is near a tulasi (holy basil) the
fruits will be a lakhfold and if it is done in the
presence of Visnu the fruits obtained will be unlimited.
This JayaSarman who took the fast was the son of a
noble Brahmana named Sivagarman of Avanti. He was
the youngest of five sons. He became a wicked man. So
he was avoided by his relatives. Being driven away
from home, he went to a distant forest and lived there.
Once, by luck, he happened to reach the holy place of
Triveni Mahatirtha. He was very tired of hunger and
thirst. So he bathed in the tirtha and searched for some
hermitage. By chance he saw the hermitage of Harimitra
As it was the month of Purusottama-many people had
gathered there. Brahmanas were telling stories of mitigation of sins. He heard the story of the vow called
Kamalavrata and its fruits. So JayaSarman stayed in that
hermitage with them and took the vow of Kamalavrata.
That night Devi appeared before him and said : ‘‘I have
come from Vaikuntha, because I am greatly pleased with
ou. Since you have taken the vow of Kamalavrata on
the eleventh day of the dark lunar. fortnight called
Kamala of the month of Purusottama I will grant you
boons. Because you have taken the vow at Triveni, I am
immensely pleased with you. The noble Brahmanas of
your future generations also will be blessed by me”.
Saying these words the Devi gave him boons and disappeared. From that day onwards Jayagarma became a
great wealthy man and he returned to his father’s house
(Padma Purana, Chapter 64),
JAYASENA I. Father of the famous Candamahasena.
See under Candamahasena). |
JAYASENA IJ. Aprince of Magadha. He was a member of the council of Yudhisthira. (M.B. Sabha Parva
Chapter. 4, Stanza 26).
JAYASENA III. A King of Avanti. To this King was
born a son named Vindanuvinda and a_ daughter
named Mitravinda by his chief wife Rajadhidevi. Mitravinda was married by Sri Krsna.
JAYASVA I, Ason of King Drupada. It is mentioned in
Maha Bharata, Drona Parva, Chapter 156, Stanza 181
that Jayasva was killed by Agvatthama in the battle of
Bharata. he
JAYASVA II. A_ brother of the King of Virata. (M.B.
Drona Parva, Chapter 158, Stanza 42).
JAYATSENA I. _A King of the kingdom of Magadha. It
‘+s stated in Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 67 that
this King, who was the son of Jarasandha, belonged to
the family of Kalakeya. This King was a friend of the
Pandavas. Mention is made in Mahabharata, Adi

JAYATSENA II 356
Parva, Chapter 185, Stanza 8, that Jayatsena was
present at the svayarhvara (marriage) of Draupadi.
Towards the end of the battle of Bharata, the Pandavas sent a letter of invitation to this King and accordingly he came to the help of the Pandavas with an aksauhini of army (21870 Chariots, 21870 elephants, 65610
horses and 109350 infantry). (M.B. Udyoga Parva,
Chapter 19, Stanza 8).
JAYATSENA II. A King of the Paru dynasty. His
father was Sarvabhauma and his mother was the
princess Sunanda of Kekaya. Jayatsena married Suéravas, the princess of Vidarbha. A son named Arvacina
was born to them. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 35).
JAYATSENA III. The name assumed by Nakula in
his life incognito. (Virata Parva, Chapter 5, Stanza 35).
JAYATSENA IV. A King who took the side of the
Kauravas. He was son of Jarasandha. This King came
with an aksauhini of army and helped the Kauravas
in the battle of Bharata. (M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter
16, Stanza 16). It is mentioned in Karna Parva,
Chapter 5, Stanza 30 that this King was killed by
Abhimanyu.!
JAYATSENA V. A son of Dhrtardstra. It is mentioned
in Mahabharata, Bhisma Parva, Chapter 69, that this
Jayatsena was defeated by Satanika and in Salya Parva,
Chapter 26 that he was killed by Bhimasena.
JAYATSENA, An attendant of Subrahmanya. (M.B.
Salya Parva. Chapter 46, Stanza Lh.
JAYAVIJAYAS. See under Jaya XI.
JHA. This syllable means ‘famous’.
Chapter 348).
JHAJHA. The father of Sunda an Asura who was the
father of Marica, whose mother was Tataka. (Valmiki
Ramayana, Bala.Kanda, Sarga 25).
JHILLI. A Yadava of the house of Vrsni. He was one
of the seven chief ministers of Sri Krsna in Dvaraka.
(M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 14, Daksinatya patha).
JHILLITI. JShullipmdaraka). A warrior of the Vrsnis.
It is stated in Mahabharata, Adj Parva, Chapter 185,
Stanza 20, that this warrior was present at the svayarhvara (marriage) of Draupadi. It is also seen that this
Yadava carried the dowry of Subhadra to Khandavaprastha from Dvaraka. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 120,
Stanza 32). This warrior took part in the Bharata
battle. It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Drona Parva
Chapter 11, Stanza 28 that this warrior played a laudable part in the battle of Kuruksetra.
JHILLI i ( jlallipindarakam ) ( Fhillika). A worm. This
worm Nas another name Jhinku. (M.B. V
Chapter 64, Stanza 1). en
JHILLIKA( M). An ancient town in South India. Mention is made about this town in Mahabharata, Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 9, Stanza 59,
JHINKU. See under Jhilli IT,
JIHVA. A servant woman who stole ornaments from the
palace. For the detailed story of how she was caught
with stolen goods see under Harigarman.
JIMUTA I. A King born of the family of Yayati. (Bhagavata, Skandha 9).
Purana,
(Agni
JiIMUTAVAHANA
JIMUTA. II. A wrestler (Pahalvan). While the Pandavas were living incognito in the city of Virdta, once
Brahmotsava (Brahma festival) was celebrated all over
the country. Wrestling was an important item of the
Brahma festival. Jimitta was the most famous of the
wrestlers who took part in the festival..He struck several
_ wrestlers down. At last King Virdta asked Bhima to
wrestle with Jimiita. Bhimasena accepted the invitation.In the wrestling Jimita was killed. (M.B. Virata |
Parva, Chapter 16).
JIMUTA III. A hermit. Mention is made in Mahabharata, Udyoga Parva, Chapter 111, Stanza 23 that this
hermit got a treasure of gold called Jaimita from the
_Himalayas.
JIMUTAIV. The horse of the King Vasumanas. See
under Vasumanas.
JIMUTAKETUI. A synonym of Siva. There is a story
ut the Puranas about how Siva got the name Jimitaetu.
When summer season began Parvati told her husband
iva: “My Lord, Summer has set in. What are we to
do without a house to protect us from the hot sun and
the strong wind?” Siva replied. “Dear! It is because
I have no house that I walk about in the forest
always.”
Because Siva said so, the loyal wife Satidevi spent the
summer with her husband in the shade of trees, When
the summer was over rainy season began. People stopped walking about. The sky became black with clouds.
The roaring sound of thunder was heard everywhere.
Seeing that the rainy season had begun Parvati again ©
requested her husband to erect a house. Hearing her
request Siva replied. “I have no wealth at all to build
a house. You see that I am wearing the hide of a Icopard. The serpent Sesa is my Brahma-string. Padma
and Pingala aremy car-rings. One of my bracelets for
the upper arm is Kambala and the other one. is the
naga (serpent) Dhanafijaya. My bracelet on the right —
hand is Asvatara and on the left hand is Taksaka. The
string that I wear round my waist is Nila, as black as
antimony. So let us go above the clouds and spend the
rainy season there. Then rain will not fall on your
body.” ;
Saying thus, Siva got into a lofty cloud with Parvati
and sat there. That cloud looked like the flag of Siva.
Thenceforward Siva came to be known by the name
Jimitaketu. (Vamana Purana, Chapter) .
JIMUTAKETU II. See under Jimiitavahana.
JIMUTAVAHANA. A Vidyadhara, (demi-god). He was
the son of Jimiitaketu, who was the ruler of a city
named Kaficanapura in a valley of the Himalayas. Being childless he had been sad for a long time. At last
he approached the divine tree Kalpaka (a heavenly tree
that yields every wish) that stood in hjs garden and
requested it to bless him with a child. Thus a son was
born to him. The famous Jimitavahana was that son.
When Jimiitavahana came to know of the divine powers
of the Kalpaka tree, from the ministers, with the permission of his father he went to the Kalpaka tree,
bowed before it and said to it, Oh noble tree! You have
1. The Mahabharata mentions two princes of Magadha, bearing the same name ‘Ta area?
; genet , £ a’. The fath en
to be Jarasandhas. Butit is said that after the death of the famovs Jarasandha his son Me hac _— kin, This Sahadene with bis
brother Jayatsena took the side of the Pandavas and “ough against the Kauravas. Hence the King Jayatsena mentioned here must be the
son of some other Jarasandha of the Kingdom of Magadha.

JIMUTAVAHANA
granted all the wishes of my forefathers. But I have one
wish. No body should be miserable in the world. So I
wish to give you to the world with that purpose in
view’. Instantly an ethereal voice said from the tree.
“Tf you are forsaking me] am going away. But I will
fulfil your wish.”? Thus according to the wish of Jimu-_
tavahana the Kalpaka tree shed gold everywhere in the
world and then went to heaven and disappeared. The
earth became wealthy and prosperous. The fame of
Jimiitavahana spread throughout the three worlds, and
all the Vidyadharas grew jealous of him. As the heavenly
tree Kalpaka, which yielded all the wishes, had returned to heaven, they thought it the most propitious time
and arrayed their army against Jimitavahana. His
father Jimitaketu had completed all preparations to
meet the enemy. But Jimitavahana approached his
father and said, ‘Father !I am perfectly sure that no
body could defeat you in battle. But see how mean
it is to destroy so many lives and win the country merely for the pleasures of this fragile body. So let us gO
away from here. Leave the kingdom to them.
Jimitaketu, who was pleased at this generous nature
of his son, respected his wish and went with his family
to the Malaya mountain and _ lived there. Mitravasu,
the son of Vigvavasu, the King of the Siddhas and
Jimiitavahana became close friends. One day Jimutavahana was wandering about in the forest when he saw
in the middle of a garden a_ temple dedicated to Devi
and a young woman of exquisite beauty, surrounded by
her maids, singing hymns and worshipping Devi. Jimutavahana was attracted by her extra-ordinary beauty.
Love budded in her heart also. On enquiry it was
understood that she was Malayavati, the sister of ee)
ravasu, After that both of them engaged ina oe ta
of love-making. Hearing her mother egal tie oa
vati instantly went home. Being fallen head- ong
love, Jimitavahana spent the night somehow of
and. at dawn reached the temple with a bern sa
While the hermit boy was consoling Jimutava
Malayavati also came ¢t h
was alone, and since she
friend hid behind a tree. a i r lover she deci sof
aration
peti a “de and standing at the steps, she said
; Tmnutavanana as
‘Devi ! If it 1s impossible to get thet eee hak
_ my husband in this oa ed i See eat Tatth at least’’.
I may have my wish grantee 1 t on
Savin this she tied one end of her, de P eeaiiy there
the tree and tried to commit aa hter, don’t do
was an ethereal voice which said, “Daughter,
= fe anata ‘Il become your hussuch rash. things. Jimatavahana wily eo Vidyadharas
band. He will become the emperor tied the knot of the
_ also.” Jimiitavahana came and bas ee saved her from
. ‘th his own hands an? delight
upper garment wl and said with delight.
to commit suic
death. Her maid ap Se day I heard what prince
“Friend ! you are very el vievavasul Thus he sai
Mitravasu said to pi aie gave away his own Kal-
| Te atavahana who this place.
ons ee pe the welfare of others er os te hospitality
Teawill bring prosperity to us, 1 re ‘layavati to him. It
to this noble guest by giving ou" ble man for my sister
is very difficult to get such a Fant The prince in
a A ne else.” The father ¢ iS gentleman. | ee 4,
tantly went to ¢ cme
marriage will take
home.”
here. Jimitavahana and. his |
JIMUTAVAHANA
With his heart overflowing with joy, Jimttavahana
went to his house. Mitravasu was there. He revealed
the purpose of his coming. Jimiitavahana, who had the
remembrance of his previous births told Mitravasu that
in the previous birth also they had been friends and
that Malayavati had been his wife. Thus their marriage
took place. Delightful days of. the married life passed
one by one. One day Jimitavahana and Mitravasu
went for a walk. They reached a forest on the seashore.
Seeing some bones there Jimitavahana asked Mitravasu about them. Mitravasu said ; ‘“‘In ancient days
Kadri, the mother of Nagas (serpents) made Vinata,
the mother of Garuda, her slave by some trick. Garuda
liberated his mother from slavery. But the hatred
increased day by day and Garuda began to eat serpents,
the children of Kadri. Seeing this, Vasuki the King
of Nagas entered into a contract with Garuda, so as to
prevent the nagas from being destroyed altogether. The
arrangement was that Vasuki would send a_ serpent
everyday to Garuda. Garuda ate all those serpents
sent by Vasuki in this place. These are the bones of
those poor snakes,”
When Jimitavahana heard this story his heart was
filled with pity. He decided to save the life of at least
one serpent by giving his body instead. But the
presence of Mitravasu was an obstacle to carry out
his wish. At that particular moment a minister of
Visvavasu appeared there and took away Mitravasu
saying that he was-wanted by his father. Left alone,
Jimiitavahana stood there when he saw a young man
coming with an old woman who was crying bitterly.
On enquiry Jtmitavahana learned that in accordance
with the agreement with Garuda, the old woman was
bringing her only son Sankhaciida to give him as food
to Garuda. Jimiitavahana told them that he would
take the place of Sankhaciida that day. The mother
and the son reluctantly agreed to his desire. The old
woman went away crying and Sankhaciida went to the
temple.
Hearing the sound of Garuda’s wings Jimitavahana
laid himself on a stone and Garuda taking him in his
beaks flew to the top of the Malaya Mountain. On the
way the jewel of Jimitavahana known as ‘Cidaratna’,
which was soaked in blood fell down, in front of
Malayavati. Knowing that it was the jewel of her
husband, with a terrible cry she ran to her. father.
Because of his knowledge of arts and _ sciences,
Jimitaketu also knew everything and with his wife and
daughter he went to the top of the Malaya mountain.
In the meanwhile, Sankhaciida, having done obeisance
to ‘Gokarnanatha’ (God), came back to the stone
where he had left Jimutavahana and seeing a pool of
fresh blood, became sad and silent. Then determining
that he would save Jimitavahana at any cost, he
went up the mountain following the track of the blood
drops.
ariel took Jimiitavahana to the peak of the mountain
and began to peck at him. Jimitavahana grew more
and more delightful as the pecking became harder.
Garuda looked at him with wonder and_ thought,
‘Surely, this is not a naga. It must be a Gandharva or
somebody else.’? Not knowing what to do he sat looking
at his prey, who invited him to finish off his meal. By
this time Sankhaciida had reached the spot. Soon
Jimitaketu with his wife and Malayavati also arrived.

JIRNODDHARA
‘They all cried aloud. Garuda was in great confusion.
When he knew that he was about to eat the famous
Jimutavahana, who had given away even the Kalpaka
tree for the good of others, Garuda was filled with
remorse. Instantly Jimitavahana died. The parents
and Sankhaciida cried beating their breasts. Malayavati
fellon the ground and cried. Then looking up she
called out with tears. “‘Ha ! Devi ! Jagadambika ! you
have told me that my husband would become the
emperor of the Vidyadharas. Has your boon become
futile because of my misfortune ??? Devi appeared and
said “‘Daughter ! My words will not become futile.”
Then Devi sprinkled Amrta (ambrosia) on Jimitavahana and brought him to life. He sprang up more
radiant than before, and was anointed as emperor
of the Vidyadharas by Devi. When Devi disappeared
Garuda who was much pleased, told Jimitavahana
to ask for any boon. ,
Jimutavahana requested for the boon that -Garuda
should stop eating the Nagas and that all the serpents
who had been reduced to bones should be brought to
lite again. Garuda granted him that boon. All the
serpents which had been killed by Garuda came to
life again. All the gods and hermits came there with
joy. After all had gone, Jimtitavahana went with his
relatives to the Himalayas as the emperor of Vidyadharas.t (Kathasaritsagara, Sasankavati Lambaka,
Taranga 23).
JIRNODDHARA. Erection and consecration of images
fixed in temples which have fallen into dilapidation, is
called Jirnoddhara. Mention is made in Agni Purana,
Chapter 67, about the principles of Jirnoddhara, as
follows :
The priest should adorn the image with ornaments and
perform ‘Stavana’. If the idol is very badly ruined by
age it must be abandoned, Broken image and that
with any part of the body severed or disfigured should
also be abandoned, even if it is made of stone or any
other material. When the image is renovated the
priest should make burnt offerings thousand times with
Narasimhhamantra (spell or incantation). If the ruined
image is made of wood it should be burned. If it is
made of stone it should be placed at the bottom of
deep water, either in the sea or anywhere else, If it is
made of metals or jewels, it must be put into water,
The ruined image should be placed in a carriage and
covered with a cloth. With instrumental music and
so forth the image should be taken to water in a procession and then submerged in water. After this the
priest must be given a gift. Only after this should the
new image be erected and consecrated. On a good day
in an auspicious moment a new image of the same
material and measurement as of the old image should
be erected and consecrated by the priest.
JITARI. Son of Aviksit born of the family of Piru.
Aviksit was the son of King Kuru. Mention is made
about Jitari in Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 94,
Stanza 53.
JITATMA. A Visvadeva (A class of gods) concerned
with Sraddha (offerings to the Manes). (M.B. Anugdsana
Parva, Chapter 91, Stanza 31). ;
JITAVATI. A daughter of King Usinara. She was the
most beautiful woman in the world. She was the friend
JIVATMAN
of the wife of a Vasu named Dyau. It was because of
the words of this Jitavati that the Astavasus (the eight
Vasus) stole the cow Nandini of Vasistha, and by the
curse of Vasistha had to take birth in the womb of
women on earth. (See under Ganga, Para 7).
JISNU I. A name of Arjuna. (See under Arjuna).
JISNU II. A synonym of Sri Krsna. As Sri Krsna had
won all the battles he fought, he got the name Jisnu.
(M.B. Udyoga Parva, Chapter 70, Stanza 13).
JISNU III. A warrior who fought on the side of the
Pandavas against the Kauravas. This warrior who was
a native of Cedi, was killed by Karna (M.B. Karna
Parva, Chapter 56, Stanza 48).
JISNUKARMAN. A warrior who stood on the side
of the Pandavas and fought against the Kauravas. He
was a native of the country of Cedi. (M.B. Karna
Parva, Chapter 56, Stanza 48).
JIVAJIVAKA. A King of birds. Mention is made 1n
Mahabharata, Santi Parva, Chapter 139, Stanza 6,
about this bird.
JIVALA. A charioteer of Rtuparna, the King of Ayodhya. Nala who had been living there under the name
Bahuka had accepted Jivala as his friend. (See under
Nala). |
JIVATMAN (The induvidual life or soul). The Aparabrahman (which is next to the highest Brahman) that
is so minute and subtle is called Jivatman. Parabrahman
is God almighty. It is mentioned in Taittiriyopanisa
about this 4aparabrahman as follows :
“Tasmad va etasmadatmana 4kagah sambhiatah,
akasad vayuh vayoragnih, agnerapah adbhyah prthv!
prthivya osadhayah osadhibhyo annam annat purusah
sa va esa puruso annamayah.”
‘From this Atman came into existence ether possessing the
quality of sound. From ether air, possessing the qualities
of sound and touch, came into existence. Fire with the
qualities of sound, touch and colour came into being
from air. From fire, water having the qualities of soun
touch, colour and taste came‘into being. From water ear!
with the qualities of sound, touch, colour, tasteand sme
came into existence. Vegetation grew from earth, an
from vegetation food, from food semen, and from semen.
Purusa came into existence. The materialized form °
aparabrahman is the body. Its subtle form is the sou”
Jivatma or the individual soul is the subtle form of sou
dwelling in the materialized form of the aparabrahmanThis soul sits in the miniature lotus of heart in the
miniature ether. The body which is made of the five
elements is the dwelling place of this Jivatma. The
individual life exists in every living being. The body
originated from food is the outer covering of the Jivat
ma. This materialized body is also called Annamay@
koga (the cask of food). Inside this annamayakoga there
is the Pranamayakoéa (the chest of the life breaths) . It 1
stated in the Taittiriyopanisad that this Pranamayakos®
is separate from and existing inside the annamayakos4The Pranamayakoga which exists inside the. annam@-
yakoSa has the shape of man. The life breath whic
appears as the inhaling and exhaling breath is the hea
of the Pranamayakoga. The life breath Vyana 1s the
right wing and Apana is the left wing, ether its soul a2
Prthvi (the earth) its tail.2 Inside the Pranamayakos4:
there exists the Manomayakoéa (the chest of min@/>
1 Thisstory is told to the king Trivikramasena by Vetala, See under Trivikramasena.
2 Tasya prana eva Sirah vyano daksinah paksah apanah uttarah paksah akasa atm, Prthivi puccham. (Taittiriya).

JNANAPAVANATIRTHA
but it fills the entire interior of the Pranamayakoéa.
The Vijfianamayakofga (the chest of knowledge or understanding) exists inside the Manomayakoéa. ‘The Jivatma
or the individual life dwells inside this Vijiianamayakoga and pervades the entire body. Itis by the activity
of Vijfianamayakoéa that ‘the Jivatma feels its individuality. Inside the VijfianamayakoSa there exists a fifth
koga (chest) called the Anandamayakosa, which is the
immediate covering of Jivatma, and which has no sense
of individuality. The three Kogas, Anandakoéga, Vijfianakoga and Pranamayakoga together is called Siksmasarira
(the subtle body). It must be remembered that Siksmaéarira is different from Susiiksmasarira (the minute
subtle body).
Heart is the abode of the Jivatma. Hrdi (in heart)
ayam (this being—Jivatma exists). So the name ‘Hrdaya’ (heart) is meaningful.’ The Purusa (male being),
which sits inside the heart or the Jivatma 1s as. big as
the toe according to the Kathopanisad. . ge
The Jivatma or the Aparabrahman is without beginning.
Even from the past which is beyond our, thinking crores
and crores of Jivatmans had got into individuals and
when the Annamayakosas of the individuals decayed
due to death, they abandoned them and entered iato
new individuals. The author of the Brhadaranyaka
gives an explanation to the question why this Jivatma
which is as free as air enters the body of man, beast,
bird, tree, rock etc. and subjects itself to misery and
hardship. “Where does the Jivatma originate from: how
does it enter this body?” Jivatma originates from Paramatma (the soul of the universe) - As the shadow
pervades the body ofa man this Jivatma_ oyershagawys
this body.” Sri Sankaracarya expounds if, in eae a
way; he says that the Jivatma 1s tied to the body by
‘sation or desires of the mind.
ANAPRVAN: ncient holy bath. MenNANAPAVANATIRTHA. Ana
: tion is At in Mahabharata, - Vana Parva, Can
84. Stanza 3 that those who visit this holy pie wil
attain the fruits of performing the sacrifice of AgniJRMBHADEVI. See under Kottuva apes é Figeide
JRMBHIKA. Yawning oF gaping. *0F atid ee
‘story of how gape came ‘nto existence in the WORM,
under Kottuva (Gape)
JUHU. A King of the
Skandha 9).
AI, daughter 0 2
Ra hes ee des was the son born to the couple
(Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 95, Stanza 25)
ame t
JVALA II. The wife of Niladhvaja. ae ee Jeet
this Jvala in the “Jaimini Agvamedha
15, as follows : a3
The Pandavas began the sacri’ nued
led the sacrificial horse. ae 4 reached t
march defeating all Kings and © ared for a
dhvaja. Niladhvaja was not Prek
this his wife Jvala tried epee
husband to war. Seeing te J asked
ched her brother U ka an
Arjuna. He also was com oi
Jvala became very anger r
Ganges. When the Ganges Wi" I
she stopped and said, “Dear antarbr
1 Ayam purusah phah satyah calla
family of Yayati. (Bhagavata,
€ Taksa ka. The King Rksa marmedha. Arjuna
se val his victorious
he city of Nilafight. Seeing
ways to push her
futile she approahim to fight with
oht with Arjuna.
bank of the
touched. her feet
am become sinful
daye yatha
vrihir va, yavo Va, Sa ega Sarvasy
359 JVARA
by the touch of Ganges-water.”” The amazed Ganga
took the form of Sumangaladevi and stood before Jvala
and aked her the reason for saying so. Jvala said ‘““Gangadevi submerged her seven sons and killed them. After
that she took the eighth son from Santanu. That son
too was killed by Arjuna in the Bharata-battle. Thus
Ganga is childless and sinful.’ Hearing this Ganga
Devi cursed Arjuna ‘“‘Let his head be cut off in six
months’ time.”? Jvala was satisfied. (For the result of
the curse see under Arjuna, Para 28).
JVALAJIHVA I. One of the two attendants given to
Subrahmanya by Agnideva. (Fire god). Jyoti was the
other attendant. (M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Stanza
BO)
JVALAJIHVA II. A-warrior of Subrahmanya. (M.B. -
Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Stanza 61).
JVALESVARA. See under Tripura.
JVARA. (Jvaram) (Fever).
1) General information. A fearful being. It is stated in the
Puranas that living beings catch fever owing to the
activities of this’ monster.
2) The origin of juara. Once Siva _and Parvati were
talking with each other in the Holy Bath called Jyotiskam on mount Mahameru. On that day Daksa had
performed a sacrifice at Gafgadvara. Siva alone was
not invited. Seeing the Gods Brahma and the others
going to that place throu h the sky, Parvati asked Siva
what the matter was. Siva explained everything to
Parvati, who became very sorry because her husband
had not been invited. Siva grew uneasy at the sorrow
of his wife. A drop of sweat fell down from his third
eye. A fearful monster with the lustre of fire arose
from that drop of sweat. That figure is described as
follows :
“¢A terrible monster, with dwarfish figure, staring eyes,
reen moustaches, hair standing erect on head and
body covered with hair all over, looking like a combination of hawk and owl, with jet-black colour, wearing
a blood-coloured cloth.” (M.B. Santi Parva, Chap-
‘With three legs, three heads, six hands and nine eyes,
comes Jvara the terrible monster, as fierce as Yama
the god of death and fearful like a thousand clouds with
thunderbolt, gaping and sighing, with tight body and
horrible face, rendered so by many eyes.” (M.B. Visnu
Parva, Chapter 122). o
To this uncouth figure Siva gave the name Jvara, who
dashed away and entered into all devas (gods). Brahma
and the others caught fever and were laid up. At last
they all came to Siva. Hearing their request Siva
divided Jvara into several parts and separated them from
devas and entered them into other living beings, and
ordered that, headache for elephants, green coverings
for water, shedding of skin for snakes, hoof-rot for cows,
sore-throat for horses, feather-sprouting: for peacocks,
sore-eye for cuckoo, hiccough for parrot, weariness
for tigers and fever for men will be caused by Jvara.
It was the time of the terrorization of Vrtrasura. Jvara
caught hold of that Asura also. It was at this time
that Indra used his thunderbolt and killed Vrtrasura.
M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter 283 ; M.B. Visnu Parva,
Chapter 122).
eéanah sarvasyadhipatih. ,
(Brhadaranyaka)

JYAMAGHA
JYAMAGHA. A King born in the dynasty of Iksvaku.
(Harivamga, Chapter 36).
Five sons, who were equal to gods, named Sahasrada,
Payoda, Krosta, Nila and Ajika were born to Yadu of
the family of Iksvaku. Several noble persons were born
in the family of Krosta. A noble and broadminded son
named Vrjinivan was born to Krosta. Svahi was born
to Vrjinivan, Rugeku to’ Svahi, Citraratha to Rugeku
and Sasabindu to Citraratha. Thousand sons were born
to Sagabindu who was an emperor. Important among
those thousand who were blessed with radiance, fame,
wealth and beauty, were Prthugravas, PrthuyaSas,
Prthutejas, Prthubhava, Prthukirti and Prthumati.
USanas was the son of Prthusravas, Sineyu was the son
of Usanas and Rukmakavaca the son of Sineyu. Rukmakavaca killed ali the archers and conquered the
countries and performing agvamedha (horse sacrifice)
gave away all the countries he conquered, as gift to
Brahmanas. Five sons were born to Rukmakavaca. Jyamagha was one of them. His brothers were Rukmesu,
Prthurukma, Parigha and Hari. Of them Parigha and
Hari were made Kings of foreign countries. Rukmesu
was given the country ruled by his father. Prthurukma
served Rukmesu. They drove Jyamagha away from the
country.
Jyamagha went to the forest and erected a hermitage
for him. Then according to the advice of a Brahmin, he
who was an old man took bow and arrow and got into
a chariot flying a flag and went to the bank of the
river Narmada. He had neither wealth nor attendants.
Fle stayed on the mountain Rksavan eating fruits and
roots. His wife Saibya also had become old. They had
no children. Still Jyamagha did not marry anybody
else. Once Jyamagha came out victorious in a fight in
which he got a girl. Jyamagha took the girl to his wife
and told her, “This girl shall be the wife of your son.”
She asked him how that could be when she had no
son. He said, ‘‘She will become the wife of the son who
is going to be born to you.” As a result of severe
penance a son named Vidarbha was born to Saibya.
The damsel who became the wife of Vidarbha gave
birth to two sons named Kratha and Kaisika, (Padma
Purana, Chapter 13).
JYESTHA I. A deity of inauspicious things. In Kamba
Ramayana, Yuddha Kanda, it is observed that Jyestha
was a goddess obtained by churning the Sea of Milk.
As soon as she came up from the sea of Milk, the
Trimirtis (Visnu, Brahma and Siva) found her and
sent her away ordering her to sit in inauspicious places.
The Goddess Jyestha came out of the Milk-Sea before
the goddess Laksmi. So this deity is considered the
elder sister of Laksmi. As she is the elder she is also
called Miadhevi (Midevi). The mode of worshipping
this goddess is given in Bodhayana Sitra. Tondiratipotialvar, who was a Vaisnava Alvar, who lived in 7th
century A.D. said that it was useless to worship this
Goddess. Ancient images of this Goddess have been
found. But worship of Jyestha was completely discontinued after the 10th century. _
In Saiva Puranas it is mentioned that this Goddess
is one of the eight portions of Paragakti. It was believed
that the powers of this Goddess regulated human lives
in various ways.
JYESTHA II. A star. It is mentioned in Mahabharata,
Anugasana Parva, Chapter 64, Stanza 24 that if BrahJYOTISAM
manas are given greens on the day of this star it will
bring good to the giver. ;
JYESTHA. A hermit who was well-versed in the 5amaVeda. This ancient hermit once received valuable advice
from the Satvatas called Barhisads. (M.B. Santi Parva,
Chapter 318, Stanza 46). oo
JYESTHAPUSKARA. A holy place. Those who visit this
holy place will get the fruits of performing the sacrifice
of Agnistoma. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 200,
Stanza 66).
JYESTHASAMA. A Sama meditated upon by the
hermit Jyestha. (M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter 348,
Stanza 46).
JYESTHILA. A river. This river stays in the palace of
Varuna worshipping him. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter
9, Stanza 21).
JYESTHILA. A holy place. He who stays in this
holy place for a night will get the fruits of giving 4
thousand cows as gift. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 84,
Stanza 164). 2 4
JYOTI I. Son of the Vasu named Aha. Mention 1s made
about him in Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 66,
Stanza 23. . fi
JYOTIII. One of the two attendants given to Subrahmanya by the God Agni (fire). The second one was
Jvalajihva. (M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Stanza 33).
JYOTIKA. A famous serpent. This serpent was born to
Kasgyapa by his wife Kadra. (M.B. Adi Parva,
Chapter 35, Stanza 13).
JYOTIRATHA. A famous river. The people of India
used to drink water from this river. (M.B, Bhism@
Parva, Chapter 9, Stanza 26). . —
JYOTIRATHYA. A river. He who bathes in this rivé
in the particular place where it merges with the river
Sonabhadra, would obtain the fruits of performing the
sacrifice of Agnistoma. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter .
JYOTIRVASU. A King born in the family of Purura
vas. He was the son of Sumati and the father of Pratika-
(Bhagavata, Skandha 9). a Aya
JYOTISA(M). (Astronomy and astrology). Jyotisa be
the science about the stars and heavenly bodies. T
heavenly bodies are the sun, the moon, the O -
planets and the stars etc. From the very ancient day
men believed that these planets and stars inthe § ;
played an important part in controlling the grower
and activities of all the living and non-living thing
in the world. _
Astrology has been a recognized science in Egypt, en
and India from very ancient days. History tells us th
3000 years before Christ there were astronomers ie
Babylon. But even before that time astronomy had fully
expanded and grown in Bharata. ainnitcd)
The Vedas are supposed to have six Angas (ancillaries?
They are Siksa (Phonetics), Kalpa (ritual), vane
(Grammar), Jyotisa (astronomy) Chandas are
and Nirukta (etymology). From this it can be said ¢ a
the Indians had acknowledged Astronomy as an anc!
llary of the Vedas. The expounders of the Vedas 54Y
that Astronomy is the eye of the Vedas. _
Astronomy has two sides, the doctrinal side (Pramane
bhaga) and the result-side (Phalabhaga). The Calenda
is reckoned in accordance with the Pramana-bhag@:
Prediction and casting horoscopes of living beings 15 the
Phala-bhaga.

JYOTISKA
The astronomers have divided the sky that surrounds
the earth into twelve parts called ragis (zodiacs). All
the stars of the first zodiac appear in the shape of a goat
(Mesa) so that zodiac was called Mesa. Thus the
zodiac in which the stars took the shape of an ox was
called Rsabha (ox). In the zodiac Mithuna the stars
took the shape of a young couple. Karkataka means
crab.
a crab. In the same way Simha means lion and Kanya
means a damsel. Tula means balance and Vrécika
means scorpion; Dhanus means bow and Makara means
Makara matsya (horned shark). Kumbha is a water
pot and Mina means fish. The name of the zodiac is |
In that zodiac the stars appear in the shape of
KABANDHA
JYOTISMAN. ‘An ancient King of Kufadvipa. This
King had.seven sons, called Udbhida, Venuman,
Vairatha, Lambana, Dhrti, Prabhakara and Kapila.
Each division of that country is given the name of each
of these sons. (Visnu Purana, AmSa 2, Chapter 4).
JYOTSNAKALI. The: second daughter of Candra. In
Maha Bharata, Udyoga Parva, Chapter 98, Stanza 13,
it is mentioned that this daughter was extremely beautiful and that the Sun married her.
K
KA. This letter has the following meanings:
(i) Prajapati. (Sloka 32, Chapter 1, Adi Parva, M.B.)
(ii) A name of Daksaprajapati. (Sloka 7, Chapter 208,
Santi Parva, M.B.).
according to the sign of the zodiac. That is, in what
shape the stars in that particular zodiac appear to the
people of the earth. The figure of the twelve zodiacs
with the earth as centre is given below:—
(iii) A name of Visnu. (Sloka 91, Chapter 149, Anusasana Parva, M,B.)
(iv) Brahma (Visnu, Mahegvara). (Chapter 348, Agni
Purana, M.B.).
KABALABARHISA. A King of Vrsnivamga. (See under
Rsabha Mithuna VRSNIVAMSA)
KABANDHA.
1) General information. The demon who attacked Kama
Kumbha Karkataka and Laksmana while they were wandering in Dandakdranya after the abduction of Sita by Ravana.
2) Previous history of Kabandha. here was a King of GanMakara Sirnha dharvas called Sri. He had a son named Danu. Danu
was known as Viévavasu also. Vigvavasu once performed a penance to propitiate Brahma for long life
and Brahma appeared before him and blessed him with
immortality. Arrogant of this acquisition he roamed
about as he pleased.
One day he attacked Indra and the latter furious at his
jmpudence used the Vajrayudha on him and the head
and thighs of Visvavasu were squeezed into his body.
Vigvavasu pleaded that he should be given some way
to take his food. Indra then granted him two very long
hands and a mouth on his belly. Then Visvavasu spent
his days in a forest near the Matangasrama in Kraufcaranya bearing the name Kabandha (Headless trunk).
Indra added that he would attain his real form when
Rama and Laksmana cut his hands.?
A favourite pastime of Kabandha was to frighten the
sages. One day he attacked a sage called Sthulasiras
and that sage cursed him saying that he would retain
his ugly figure for ever. The demon pleaded for relief
and the sage said that he would regain his original
figure when Rama cut his hands and left him in the
desolate forest. From that day onwards Kabandha
lived there waiting for Sri Rama. (Sarga 70, Aranya
Dhanus Vrécika
In Kerala and some other places the zodiacs are se
to the right in order beginning with Mesa, niga
marked to the left in the same order in some 0
other parts of India.
The earth completes one rotation in 60 Nate oe
minutes) i.e, 24 hours. In each rotation these re
sodianes face theeatth: Ker a man peg ape
cular point on the earth it. will take 3 Io i oe
nadikas (two hours) on an average, for a ZO
Tarent places according
him. But it may vary 1 differe sb A month is the
the difference of the shape of the “The lanet Jupiter
time the sun remains 1n 4 zodiac. : x halfon ail
takes a year and Saturn a te dar shows which
average to pass a zodiac. The os and how far
are the planets standing 1n each oe Ae ein that partithey have travelled ata partic tee in a patticular zodiac. When a particular 200126
a . D4 is
; n born in that region > waiting for,
cular region of ye pe hen a particular Kanda, Valmiki Ramayana) .
said to be born in .
f Mesa the child which takes 3). Kabandha meets Rama and Laksmana. Jatayu was
place faces the 70010= 0 be born in the zodiac 0 lying half dead by a blow from the sword of Ravana
birth in that place 1s said to be ‘ven the name Lagna by and Rama and Laksmana went to him and talke d to
Mesa. The zodiac 0! pl “ll versed in the result- him. He gave them some information regarding Sita
astronomers. Those who are well- inion that the life, before he died. After burning the body of Jatayu in a
side of astronomy ar of oP upon the position funeral pyre Rama and Laksmana went westwards.
fortune etc. of living beimss depev They entered the Krauficaranya and reached Matangaof the planets in relation
to their nie by his vana. There they saw a great cave. A huge demoness
5 serpent born to - 203, attacked them near that cave and _ seeing the beautiful
JYOTIS KA. : A ey ; Udyoua Parva; Chapter form of Laksmana she invited him for amorous plays.
oe Kadri. (M.». (M.B Laksmana cut off her ear, nose and breasts. Then they
tanza 15). ¢ mount Sumeru. entered deep into the forests. Bad omens greeted them.
JYOTISKA(M). A peak ©
duet Poets — 983, Stanza 5)
1. ‘I am the son of Sri
Ramayana. In Sloka AZ, Chapter 279 ¥
womb by the curse of a brahmin.
.. §loka 8, Chapter 71, of the Aranya Kanda of Valmiki
q Danu” says Kabandba, 2 a saysy tl an a gandharva, Visvavasu and came to be born in a demonaic
f Arany4

KADALIGARBHA
KACA 362
Before long they saw Kabandha rushing towards them. once Kaca came back to life and stood before them.
He is described thus in the Mahabharata : All the three then returned to the 4srama happily.
‘He was as big as a mountain, dark as a black cloud, The anger of the Asuras against Kaca knew no bounds.
On another occasion the Asuras seized him and after
with pointed hairs all over his body and looked fierce
with a voice as loud as thunder. He had an eye on his killing him pounded his body into a_ paste and mixed
stomach, round and yellow, emitting a glare like a it up in sea-water. This time also, at the request of
fire-flame. Looking wicked he thrust his big tongue out Devayani, Sukracarya brought him back to life.
of his huge mouth licking the sides.” The third’time the Asuras burnt the body of Kaca and
mixed the ashes in wine and served it to Sukracarya to
The demon stretched out his big hands and caught
hold of Sri Rama in his right hand and Laksmana in drink. The disciple thus went inside the belly of the
his left hand. Finding themselves helpless in his hands guru. Dusk came, the cattle came and still Kaca did
Laksmana implored Rama to flee away from the not return and Devayani reported the matter to her
demon leaving him alone. Sri Rama cut off Kabandha’s father. Sukracarya sat for some time in meditation an
hand and Laksmana cut off the left hand. then he knew that Kaca was in his own stomach. If he
uld burst his stomach and Sukra
right
Kabandha then asked them who they were. Kabandha got Kaca out, he wo
would die and if he did not get him out his daughter
told Rama and Laksmana his previous story and then
fell dead. Rama and Laksmana burnt the dead body in would burst her heart and die. Sukracarya was in a 1.
a funeral pyre. He rose up in the air as the Gandharva He asked Kaca how he got in and he replied that 1
King of old and advised Sri Rama to go to Sugriva for was through the wine. Sukra imparted to Kaca the
knowing more about Sita. (Sargas 70 to 72, Aranya art of Mrtasafijivani and Kaca lying within the stomac
Kanda, Valmiki Ramayana). repeated it. I’hen Sukracarya called Kaca by name
KACA. The first son of Brhaspati. That extremely and Kaca came out bursting the stomach of his guru.
beautiful boy was a great favourite of the devas. The preceptor Jay dead and by employing the art ©
i) Genealogy. Descending in order from Visnu-— Mrtasafijivani he had learnt, Kaca brought his gurl
3rahrna—Angiras—Brhaspati—Kaca. to life. Sukracarya eschewed wine from that day
9) How he studied the secret of Mrtasafiivani. The onwards and declared it as a forbidden drink %
Devas and Asuras always quarrelled with each other. brahmins. Sukracarya said that because Kaca was
Devas accepted Brhaspati as their guru and the asuras reborn from his stomach he must be deemed his son.
3) Kaca was cursed. Kaca remained for some mor
made Sukracarya their guru. Sukracarya knew an art
which Brhaspati did not know, the secret of Mrtasaji- time under the tutelage of Sukracarya and when
took leave of
jivani. When the devas cut the Asuras to pieces, education became complete he
Sukracarya used to bring them back to life by his preceptor and also Devayani. Devayani followed bi
knowledge of Mrtasafijivani. Mrtasafijivani is the art of for a long distance from the hermitage and requeste
reviving the dead. him to marry her. Kaca replied he could not do 9
because he had become a brother to Devayan
Devas were at a loss to know what to do. They wanted
to learn the secret of Mrtasafijivani from Sukracarya
somehow. It was imperative that they should: learn it.
got angry and cursed him saying that He
ble to use the art of Mrtasafijivam
ba¢
Devayani
would not be a
Then they found out a way. They sent Kaca, son of had learnt from her father. Kaca cursed her :
Brhaspati, to Sukracarya. saying that none of the sons of sages would marry a
Kaca went to Sukracarya and told him that he was Kaca however felt relieved that though he would id
les would be ; y
be able to practise the art, his discip
to do so. He went back to Devaloka and was hea :
the son of Brhaspati and had come to him to be his
i the #4
hen imparted 77,
disciple for a period of a thousand years doing service
to him. The modesty of the boy appealed to Sukracarya welcomed by all the Devas. He t
and he accepted Kaca as his disciple. of Mrtasafijivani to the devas. (Chapters 76 an
Devayani, daughter of Sukracarya, fell in love with Adi Parva, M.B.). he
Kaca. They were always together as an inseparable 4) Kaca visits Bhisma. Kaca was also one among | 5
couple. Asuras did not like the advent of Kaca to the several people who visited Bhisma while the latter “ 9 |
f arrows awaiting death. (Sloka ~’
Agrama of Sukracarya. They knew that he had come lying ona bed o
to study the secrets of the Asuras. Once Kaca went Chapter 47, Santi Parva, M.B.).
alone to look after the cows and the Asuras followed KACCHAM. An ancient place of ha
him stealthily. When Kaca entered deep into the Chapter 54, Salya Parva).
e nine treasures of Kubet “9,
forest the Asuras killed him and gave him to the KACCHAPAM. One of th
KACCHAPI!. Name of the harp of Narada. (Sloka,
wolves.
It became dusk. The cows returned to the Agrama Chapter 54, Salya Parva, M.B.).
of the great
without the cowherd. Devayani waited for a long KADALIGARBHA. Daughter ;
time for Kaca to come. Not seeing him Devayani went Mankanaka. There is a story about her. in Kathas4@
weeping to her father and said, “Oh, father, the sun
has set. You have performed your nightly fire sacrifice.
The cattle have come back by themselves and still
bitation. (Sloka as
sage
rile
sagara, t
There was once a city called Iksumati. It was a ho
banks of the river Iksumati. It was Visvamitra wick
Kaca has not returned home. I fear he is dead or has set up that river and city. In a hermitage in t ka
been killed. I cannot live without him.” forest on the shores of Iksumati lived a sage, Mat ful |
The affectionate Sukracarya could not bear the sight naka performing penance. One day ‘ioe peaul 1
of his dear daughter weeping and so he went to the nymph Menaka, came there from above. AS ® ve
employing the art of blew, her upper garment was displaced. Seeing f |
he semen |
forest with Devayani and
Safijivani he invoked the dead youth to appear. At bare body, Mankanaka had emission. T

KADALIVANA
the sage fell into a Kadali (plantain) tree and from
there arose a maiden, extremely beautiful. Because she
was born from Kadali she was called Kadaligarbha.
Kadaligarbha grew up into a beautiful lady and one
day a King named Drdhavarma came that way while
hunting and seeing Kadaligarbha he fell in love with her
and married her with the permission _ of Mankanaka.
The Devas advised her to scatter mustard seeds on the
way to her husband’s house and in case her husband
abandoned her she should be guided by the mustard
plants to return home. She did so.
One day by the evil advice of a barber the King
divorced her and she returned to the Asrama by
following the young mustard plants. But. Mankanaka
took her back to the King. (Taranga 6, Madanamaijukalambaka, Kathasaritsagara) .
KADALIVANA. This grove is situated on the banks of
Kuberapuskarini which abounded in Saugandhika
flowers, ‘There were different kinds of plantain fruits of
golden hue in this grove. Hanuman resided in it.
chapter 146, Vana Parva, M.B.).
KADAMBARII.A river flowing westwards in Jambidvipa.
In Bhagavata 5th Skandha it is said that this river got its
name “Kadambari” because it had the hollow trunk
of a Kadamba tree as its source.
KADAMBARI II. An excellent story book in prose
written in Sanskrit by the great Sanskrit poet
Banabhatta. Kadambari is the heroine of the story. |
KADHMOR. A saintly King. He is worthy of being
remembered in the morning. (Chapter 165, Anusasana Parva). ya
KADRU. Wife of Kagyapa and daughter of Daksaprajapati.
1) Genealogy. Descended from
Brahma—Daksa—Kadru.
2) Kadri—Wzife or daughter of Aasyapa
was the wife or daughter of Kasyapa 18 4
remains unanswered still in the Puranas.
Bhasa Bharata states like this. _
The six spiritual
Atri, Pulastya,
named Kasyapa
of Daksa, namely, t
Simhika, Krodha, Pradha,
Visnu thus -—Visnu—
? Whether Kadri
question which
Chapter 65 of
- Marici, Angiras,
Maricj got a son
and he married the thirteer daughters
Aditi, Diti, Kala, Danayus, Danu,
Vigva, Vinata, Kapila, Muni
to this, Kadru was the wife of
and Kadri. So according
Kaégyapa. ; ree
But ‘te 14th Sarga of Aranya Kanda of Valmiki Rama
yana states -
Daksaprajapati
these Kasyapa marrie - -
Tamra, Rerodhavasa, Muni and — cag es
gave birth to eight daughters. Tey Gardai, Sveta;
manda, Hari, Bhadramata, Matangl, ) ?
Surabhi, Surasa and Kadri. ave birth to five
Tamra another wife of Kasyapa 8 & yeni, Dhrtarastri
daughters, namely, Kraulicl; Bika : EE to Bhasas,
and Suki, Kraufich ga¥t cory Dh i" v3 stri to swans all
Syeni to eagles and vultures, Dhrtare
Suki to Nata. Nata gav
e birth to bi — +; was the
Thus, according to the Ramayana, Karr dhavasé.
daughter of Kasyapa porn of he the elder sister ©
Again Vinata who is spo
Kadra in Mahabharata is a ;
er of the graner
Kadrii’s mother
daughter of Kas yap4- This oe
and Vinata’s grand mother's mother
ughters and of
got sixty illustrious da See Kalika
4_-Aditi, Diti,
e sisters. But
363 KADRU |
both of them looked after KaSyapa as if they were
direct sisters.
3) Kadrii, mother of serpents. Kadri and Vinata lived
serving Kasyapa. Kagyapa was pleased with them and
asked them what boon they wanted. Kadri asked for a
thousand serpents to be born of her and Vinata asked
for fwo sons who would be braver and more brilliant
than the sons of Kadra. Kaéyapa granted them what
they asked for and when Kadru and Vinata became
pregnant he left for the forest.
After some time Kadri delivered a thousand eggs and
Vinata two eggs. Both of them kept the eggs in warm
jars and after five hundred yeats the thousand ‘eggs of
Kadra burst letting out a thousand serpents. Vinata
became impatient and broke open an egg of hers. Out
came from it a half developed being and that was
Aruna. Aruna cursed her for being impatient and said
“You let me out half developed because of your overanxiety and you will, therefore, become a servant, of
Kadri. Keep the other egg for another five hundred
years. Then a very powerful son will come out of it
and that son will relieve you of your servitude .to
Kadri’. So saying he rose up in the air and became
the charioteer of the sun. After five hundred years the
other egg of Vinata broke and Garuda came out.
(Chapter 16, Adi Parva, M.B.)
4) Sons of Kadri. Names of the prominent sons of
Kadri are given below:
Sesa, Purananaga, Aryaka, Vasuki, Kapifijara, Ugraka,
Airavata, Elaputra, Kalagapotaka, Taksaka, Savama,
Sumanas, Karkotaka, Nila, Dadhimukha, Dhanafijaya,
Anila, Vimala, Kaliya, Kaimasa, Pindaka, Maninaga,
Sabala, Apta, Sakha, Pindaraka, Hastipinda, Val,
Karavira, Pitharaka, Sikha, Puspadarhstra, Sumukha,
Nisthanaka, Vilvaka, Kaunapagana, Hemaguha, Bilvaandura, Kuthara, Nahusa, Mrsnada, Kufijara, Pimgala,
Ba nkha, Prabhakara, Bahyakarna, Sirapurna, Kumuda,
Hastipada, Haridraka, Kumudaksa, Mudgara, Aparajita, Tittiri, Kambala, Jyotika, Halika, Asvatara,
Pannaga, Kardama, Kalikaka, Srivaha, Bahumilaka,
Vrtta, Kauravya, Karkara, Sarmvrtta, Dhrtarastra,
Arkara, Patta, Sarkhapinda, Kundodara, Sarhkhamukha, Subahu, Mahodara, Kismandaka, Virajas,
Ksemaka, Salipinda
All the serpents. in the world have been born from these
prominent serpents. (Chapter 35, Adi Parva, M.B.).
5) Kadrit curses her sons. Once Kadri called Vinata to
her side and asked her the colour of Uccaiggravas, the
horse of Indra. It was purely a white horse and Vinata
told so. But Kadri said its tail was black. Each stood
firm in her statement and then Kadri made a bet. She
who was defeated in the bet should serve the other as
her slave. Vinata agreed. Kadri wanted to cheat Vinata
and so asked her sons to remain suspended from the
tail of the horse in such an artful way that the tail
would look black from a distance. Some of her sons refused to be a party to this deceit and Kadri cursed
them saying that they would all be burnt in the Sarpasattra of Janamejaya. Kasyapa did not like the curse.
But Brahma came there and said that the serpents
as a class were injurious to society and as such a curse
of that nature was necessary. Brahma then taught him
Visasarhharavidya (Treatment of snake-poisoning).
(Chapter 20, Adi Parva, M.B.).

KAHODA
6) Kadrit and children go to Ramanipyaka. Once Kadri
told Vinata. “Vinata, take me to the island .of Ramaniyaka in the middle of the ocean. It is a beautiful place
to stay. Let your son, Garuda, take my sons to that
place.”” Vinata took Kadri and Garuda took her
children during the journey. Garuda rose high up in the
air nearing the sun and the serpents began to feel the
heat unbearable and began to get charred. Kadri then
prayed to Indra and the latter then sent a heavy downpour of rains. ‘This saved the serpents from being burnt
to death and they reached the island of Ramaniyaka
safe. (Chapters 25 and 26, Adi Parva, M.B.).
7) Other detal .
(i) Kadrw lives in the court of Brahma worshipping him.
(Chapter 11, Sabha Parva, M.B.).
(ii) Kadri taking the form of Skanda—graha in an
infinitely minute size enters the wombs of women and
eats the embryo. (Chapter 230, Vana Parva, M.B. ).
KAHODA (KAHODAKA — KHAGODAKA). A sage
the disciple and son-in-law of Uddalaka. He was
the father of the sage Astavakra.
Uddalaka had another name ‘‘Svetaketu”. He was a
sage who had personally seen and talked to the goddess
Sarasvati. It was at that time that Kahodaka became
his disciple. Kahodaka who was of a gentle nature
served his preceptor for along time and won his favour.
He was immensely pleased and after teaching the
necessary things gave his daughter Sujata in marriage
to Kahodaka. In due course, Sujata became pregnant.
One day, the child in the womb cried out that there
was a mistake in his father’s recitation of the Vedas.
Kahodaka was displeased at this. He cursed the child
that he would be born with a body having eight bends
(curves). So the boy was named ‘‘Astavakra”? (one
who has eight bends). Sujata who was poor, once sent
Kahodaka to King Janaka for some money. Kahodaka
who was defeated in a disputation was immersed in
water. Astavakra rescued his father. (See under Astavakra). 7
KAHOLA. An ancient sage who flourished in Indra’s
assembly. (Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter 7) .
KAIKASI. Mother of Ravana.
1) Birth, From the wrath of Brahma oj
Praheti was born and from Brahma’s hunger - emi.
god Heti was born. The son Vidyutkeéa was born to
Heti, of Bhaya the sister of Kala (God of death—Time)
Vidyutkega married Sdalakatanka the daughter ak
Sandhya. A son named Sukega was born to them
Sukega married Devavati daughter of Manimava “
Gandharva. Three sons Malyavan, Sumali and TNT
were born to them. The three brothers Ma] avan
Sumali and Mali married Sundari, Ketimall ane
Vasudha respectively, the three daughters of Narmada
a gandharva woman. To Sumaii, by his wife Kétumaiti.
were born the ten sons, Prahasta, Akampana, Vikata,
Kalakamukha, Dhimraksa, Danda, Suparéva Sarhhrada, Prakvata and Bhasakarna and four daughters
Veka (Brha), Puspotkata, Kaikasi and Kumbhinasi.
2) Marriage. As Sumali was walking through forests
with his wives and daughters, he saw so many Yaksas
(demi-gods) going in planes to pay homage to
Vaisravana. Sumali understood that Vaisravana
became worthy of homage because he was the son of
Vigravas. So he took his daughter Kaikasi and lef;
her in the house of ViSravas. After a while, being
KAIKEY1I II.
KAILASA
pleased with her services, Visravas took her as his
wife. Once she requested her husband for children.
Accordingly she got Ravana, Kumbhakarna and
Vibhisana as sons.
KAIKEYI I.
1) General information. One of the wives of Dasa-
‘ratha, who had three wives, Kausalya, Kaikeyi and
Sumitra. It is mentioned in Valmiki Ramayana,
Ayodhya Kanda, Sarga 70, Stanza 28 that Kaikeyi was
the sister of Yudhajit, the King of Kekaya. Kekaya
was seven days’ journey away from Ayodhya.
2) Getting boons. In days of old there was a_ battle
between the devas and the asuras and Dagaratha went
to the world of Devas, with Kaikeyi, in a chariot to
help Indra against the Asuras. The devas were 1n 4
sorry plight due to the illusive and sorcerous mode 0
fighting of Sambara the Asura and his men. Dagaratha
faced the Asuras in ten directions at the same time an
fought with them. In this fight his chariot had to be
turned to every direction and up and down so swiftly
that the bolt of the wheel slipped out and the whee
was about to come off when Kaikeyi inserted her thum
in the hole of the bolt and kept the chariot safe ap
steady. The King was not aware of this bravery on the
part of his wife. At last when he came to know of this
he promised to give her two boons. The queen $a!
that she would ask for those two boons later. as she
didn’t want anything then. After this the King were
the queen returned to their country. (Valmix}
Ramayana, Sarga 9; Kamba Ramayana, Balakanda). ,
3) Request for the boons and the forest life of Sri Rama.
the celebration of anointing Sri Rama as_ the
apparent in Ayodhya was going on, the buiipy
Manthara approached Kaikeyi and advised her oP Gos
ways of making her son Bharata King and _ sending “
Rama to forest. At first Kaikeyi refused to agree , :
this, but at last she succumbed to the repeated geal
of Manthara. Dagaratha came to see Kaikeyi who sev
lying in grief. Making use of this opportunity Kal a
requested for the granting of the two boons pr ae
earlier. One boon was that Bharata should be anoim "
as heir apparent making use of the preparations soe! _
for Sri Rama and the other boon was that 5ri ~—
should live in forest, wearing bark of trees and a wn
hair for fourteen years. When Dagaratha heard ™ “
requests he became unconscious. But he grante
wishes.
eir
Wife of Ajamidha, a King of the Pare
dynasty. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 95, Stanza 37) ata
KAIKEYIIII. Sudesna, the wife of the King of
was known by the name Kaikeyi also. She was aifé
daughter of Kekaya, the King of Sita, born of his
Malavi. As she was the daughter of Kekaya, she 16).
the name Kaikeyi. (M.B. Virdta Parva, Ghaptet 5S¢
Besides, it is stated in the Puranas that all the prince
es of the kingdom of Kekaya were called by the 24
Kaikeyi. the
KAILASA (KAILASAKA). A serpent belonging eepent
Kagyapa family. Mention is made about this seF “4
in Mahabharata, Udyoga Parva, Chapter 103, pis
KATLASA
n
1) General information. The mount Mahameru has - 1
area of eighteen thousand nazhikas (Indian mile e
Koga) and a height of two thousand nazhikas. On

KAIRATA PARVA
eastern side of this mount there are two mountains
called Jathara and Devakita, Pavamana and Pariyatra
are the two mountains on the western side. On the
south there are the two mountains of Kailasa and
Karavira. The two mountains on the north are called
Trigriga and Makaragiri. It is stated in Mahabharata,
Vana Parva, Chapters 109 and 141 that the abodes of
Siva and Kubera are on the mount Kailasa. Once, to
please Siva, Mahavisnu performed penance on Kailasa.
(M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 222, Stanzas 33 to 40). It
is mentioned in Maha Bharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter
3 that the mountain Mainaka stands to the north of
Kailasa. Once Vyasa went to Kailisa. (M.B. Sabha
Parva, Chapter 43, Stanza 17). In Vana Parva,
Chapter 106, mention is made that the King Sagara,
with his two queens, once went to Kailasa for penance.
It was on the Kaildsa that Bhagiratha performed
penance to propitiate Siva to biing down Ganga.
Kaildsa is hundred yojanas high. The devas come to
this place daily and return. It is mentioned in Sabha
Parva, Chapter 141, that in the place where Kubera
lives on Kailasa there live a large number of Yaksas
(demi-gods), Raksasas (giants) Kinnaras (heavenly
musicians), Garudas (hawks) Matangas (elephants)
and Gandharvas (semi-gods) . The lake of lotus of
Kubera which was reached by Bhimasena once, was 1G
Kajlasa, In Vana Parva, it 1s mentioned that the
Andavas visited Kailasa during their forest life. a
could be understood from Mahabharata, Anusasana
Parva, Chapter 83 that Kamadhenu performed penance
on the Kailasa, once.
KAIRATA PARVA. A
Mahabharata.
KAISIKA. See under Jyamagha. aa
KAISIKA (M). An ancient country 1n Bharata. ee
mentioned in Maha Bharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter 1°
that Bhismaka the King of Vidarbha conquered this
sub section of Vana Parva im
country.
KAITABHA.
1) ‘General information. Kaitabha was an bathe =
Madhu, an Asura (demon). These two brothers
Madhu-Kaitabhas.
known in the Puranas as
2) Origin. In the Puranas, two stories slighty <pae
from each other, occur about the birth of © adh
-, Devi Bhagavata,
; occurs in a =
one — “the other in Mahabharata, Santi
Fe eet Purana, Chapter Lat is stated as
ae te here was DO earth or any other
ee he
Mahavisnu slept on t
ere was O igs the
Re of te wate OA Tag Ta Ho
there
lotus grew up-an = in the lotus
my thet of ‘he stalk. Brahma oe fe ~ A eaitett
flower. Brahma stayed in the ase a Ee, boil, the
reciting the Vedas. Ear-wax flowe wile two Asuras
ears of Mahavisnu. From the ©
; born. . i |
Madhu and Kaitabha were Mahabharata, é5nti
in the birth of MadhuIn the beginning Sy water:
The following occurs
Parva, Chapter 348 about pee
) : 1 of Mahavisnu
A tots en the flower there
A lotus flower grew UP. fr
and Brahma was bora
were two drops of water a
drop was as sweet as honey i
born the Asura Madhu wit
_ In
he a i ehewigat, ODS
m that drop was
attributes of tamas
KAITABHA
(darkness). The other drop was hard and from it
Kaitabha was born with the attribute of Rajas
(activity) .
3) Madhu-Kaitabhas’ acquiring boons. Madhu-Kaitabhas
were born in water, grew up in water and walked on
the surface of water, haughty and arrogant. ‘They
began to think about how the big flood of water came
into existence. Then Devi appeared before them and
taught them the mantra or incantation of Vagbija
(origin of logos). Reciting this mantra, Madhu and
Kaitabha worshipped Devi for thousand years. Devi
appeared and asked them what they wished. They
wanted the boon that death should befall them only as
they desired. Devi granted them the boon. After this
they became haughtier because of the boon, and_ lived
in the water playing with the creatures in water having
nobody to confront them (Devi Bhagavata, Skandha 1).
4) The theft of the Vedas. Madhu Kaitabhas saw
Brahma lying in the lotus flower reciting the four
Vedas which he had created. They caught hold of all
the Vedas and went to Patala, (the nether world) and
hid themselves there. Brahma grew sad at the loss of
the Vedas and followed Madhu-Kaitabhas, who began
to attack Brahma. At this Brahma became terribly
afraid of the Asuras and ran to Mahavisnu who was
lying in a deep sleep of contemplation. Brahma praised
him, Mahavisnu woke up. (Devi Bhagavata, Skandha
5) The death of Madhu and Kaitabha. According to the
request of Brahma, Mahavisnu confronted Madhu and
Kaitabha. Madhu engaged Visnu in fighting while
Kaitabha took rest and when Madhu became tired
Kaitabha engaged Visnu in fighting. Thus the ficht
went onfor along time and Visnu became tired of
continuous fight. Visnu understood that owing to the boon
given by Devi the Asuras would die only if they wished
for death, and that no body could kill them. So Visnu
began to meditate on Devi, who said “It would never
be possible for you to kill Madhu and Kaitabha
because of my boon. They could be killed only by
deceit. So you may kill them deceitfully”’.
Hearing these words Mahavisnu approached the Asuras
and said to them. “I am much pleased with you. So
you may ask for any boon.” Hearing this they laughed
and said that they were more powerful than Visnu
and that he might ask of them any boon. Taking that
opportunity Mahavisnu said “Oh ! powerful persons
I ask you to grant me this boon. Give me the boon a
kill you.”? This request shook them. ‘They were willing
to be killed at any place except water. They thought
that Vigsnu would not be powerful enough to Kill them.
Mahavisnu instantly raised his thighs which were
enlarged to a great extent over the water as solid earth
seeing which the Asuras enlarged their bodies to the
extent of a thousand yojanas. But Mahavisnu enlarged
his thighs further, caught hold of Madhu and Kaita--
bha, laid them on his thighs and cut off their heads
with his discus. All the surface of the sea_ was covered
with the medas (fat) of these Asuras. This medas of
Madhu and Kaitabha collected itself into a lump and
became the earth. So the earth got the name ‘Medini’.
As the earth was the fat of the Asuras it was not fit for
food. (Devi Bhagavata, Skandha 1}.
6) The so of Madhu-Kaitabhas. A horrible son named
Dhundhu was born to Madhu-Kaitabhas. He lived

KAITAVA
under the sandin a wilderness called Ujjalakam. A
King of the Iksvaku family named Kuvalayasva_ killed
Dhundhu. So Kuvalayasva got the name Dhundhumara. See under Dhundhu. (Mahabharata, Vana
Parva, Chapter 202). (Khara and Atikaya are the
rebirths of Madhu and Kaitabha. See under Atikaya).
KAITAVA. Another name of Ulika, the son of
Sakuni. |
KAITAVA (M). Accountry in ancient Bharata. Mention is made about this country in Mahabharata,
Bhisma Parva, Chapter 18; Stanza 13).
KAKA Ason of Karnsa (Bhagavata, 9th Skandha).
KAKAM. A _ town in ancient India. (M.B. Bhisma,
KAKT I. Original mother of the crows. (See under
KAKI II. One of the seven mothers who suckled
Subrahmanya at his birth. The seven mothers were—
Kaki, Halima, Brahmika, Malini, Palala, Arya and
Mitra. (M.B. Aranya Parva, Chapter 228, Verse 10)
KAKA (GROW).
1) Origin. Kasyapa was the son of Marici, who was
the son of Brahma. Kagyapa’s wife Tamra had many
daughters like Kaki, Syeni, Bhasi, Grdhrka, Suki and
Griva. From Kaki were born the crows in the world.
(Agni Purana, Chapter 19).
2) Crows—the symbol of sin. There is a reference in
Siva Purana to this. Long ago the King of Kasi had a
daughter named Kalavati. Even in her youth, she
received the “‘Saiva paiicaksara mantra.’’ After that,
she was married by Dasarha, King of Mathura, who
was asinner. When he touched Kalavati who was a
holy woman, he experienced unbearable heat. Kalavati
said that it was because of the King’s sin. So she took
Dasarha to the sage Garga, who purified Dasgarha with
his mantras (incantations) and made him stand in
water. At once the King’s sins came out of his body
in the shape of crows. Some of them flew away. Many
of them fell down with their wings burnt. Seeing this,
the sage Garga said that all those crows were the
volume of sins accumulated in the course of the innumerable births through which he had passed. (Siva
Purana, Paricaksara Mahatmya).
3) Lhe Crow and Rice-offerings. In Uttara Ramayana
there is a story about the crow’s right to eat the
offering of rice to Pitrs. Once a King named Marutta
performed a Maheévara sattra. Indra and other gods
attended the sattra. Hearing about this, Ravana came
that way. The frightened gods fled away assuming the
forms of different birds. Yama escaped in the form of
a crow. From that time, Yama was pleased with crows.
He gave a blessing that in future, when human beings
worship the pitrs by offering rice to them, the crows
will have the right to eat that rice. Thus the right of
the crows to eat offerings of rice, originated from that
time. (Uttara Ramayana ?
KAKSA. A place of habitation of ancient Bharata.
(Sloka 49, Chapter 9, Bhisma Parva).
KAKSAKA. A serpent born ‘of the family of Vasuki.
This serpent was burnt tw death at the Sarpasattra of
Janamejaya. (Sloka 6, Chapter 57, Adi Parva) .
KAKSASENA I.
1) General information. (i) A King who was the grandson
366 KAKSIVAN I
of Aviksit and son of Pariksit. For genealogy see
‘Pariksit’.
(ii) Ugrasena, Citrasena, Indrasena, Susena and
Bhimasena were his brothers. (Chapter 94, Adi Parva).
2) Other details.
(i) Kaksasena was a member of the court of Yama.
(Chapter 8, Sabha Parva).
(ii) Kaksasena was considered to be one among the
pious souls, like Sibi, Pratardana, Rantideva, Ambarisa, Janamejaya, Vrsadarbhi, Parasurama, Sri Rama,
Karandhama and Mitrasaha who had attained salvation by their charity and righteousness. Mahabharata
states that Kaksasena the saintly king attained
salvation by presenting gifts to the great Vasistha.
(Sloka 14, Chapter 137, Anugasana Parva).
KAKSASENA II. There was another King called Kaksasena inthe court of Dharmaputra. (Sloka 22, Chapter
4, Sabha Parva).
KAKSASENASRAMA. An Agrama situated on the top
of the mountain, Asita. Perhaps this was constructed
by Kaksasena. (Sloka 12, Chapter 89, Vana Parva).
KAKSEYU (KRSEYU). Son of Raudragva born of a
nymph called Misrakesi. He had nine brothers, named
Rkseyu, Sannateyu, Ghrteyu (Krteyu) , Citeyu. Sthandileyu, Dharmeyu, Sammiteyu, Rteyu and Matinara. For
genealogy see under ‘Piruvarhéa’. (Sloka 10, Chapter
94, Adi Parva).
KAKSIVANI. This was a Rsi well praised in the
Regveda.
1) Birth. King Kalinga did not have children for 4
long time. The King, therefore requested the sage
Dirghatamas (Gautama) to get a son for him by his
queen. The sage consented, But the queen did not
like to sleep with the oid sage. She therefore requested
her servant maid, Uéi, to lie with the.sage. Kaksivan
was the son born to Dirghatamas of Usi. (Sikta 129,
Anuvaka 18, Mandala 1, Rgveda).
2) Other details.
(i) He was of the family of Angiras and he lived in 4
hermitage in the east. (Chapter 208, Santi Parva, an
Chapter 135, Anugasana Parva).
(ii) He praised Visnu by reciting the Rks with deep
concentration and acquired many virtues. {Chapter 292,
Santi Parva).
(iii) Mahabhdrata states that Kaksivan was the precep”
tor of Indra and also the creator of the world wit
Rudratejas (majesty equal to that of Siva) .Yavakrita,
Raibhya, Arvavasu, Paravasu, Kaksivan, Angiras an
Kanva are seven Barhisads (a set of manes born 0
Brahma) who are also gurus of Indra living in the east.
(Chapter 150, Anugdsana Parva).
(iv) Kaksivan was famous. among the Yajvans. (Sukta
18, Anuvaka 5, Mandala 1, Reveda).
(v) To test the strength of Kaksivan he was once given
a hundred pitchers of liquor by the Aévins. (Sukta 116,
Anuvaka 17, Mandala 1, Rgeveda).
(vi) Kaksivan who was returning home from the
asgrama of the preceptor after completing his educatio”
spent one night at a place on the way. In the morning
when he awoke he saw Svanaya son of King Bhavayavya before him. The beautiful boy had strayed to that
place .by accjdent while playing with his friends nearPYKaksivan was attracted by the enchanting features Oo
the boy and decided to make him the husband of his
daughter. Svanaya on knowing the details regat ing

KAKSIVAN 367
Kaksivan took him to his father’s palace and the King
receivedl the sage with respect and gave him many
presents. (Sikta 125, Anuvaka 18, Mandala 1,
Reveda).
KAKSIVAN II. A King of ancient India. He was the
father of Bhadra, wife of Rsitagva. (Sloka 17, Chapter
120, Adi Parva).
KAKSIVAN. A son of Maharsi Gautama. Mahabharata,
Sabha Parva, Chapter 21, Verse 3 states that at the
time when Gautama was living in Girivraja, he had
connection with a Sidra woman of Usinara land and
as a result of it Kaksivan was born to her. This
Cautama was not the husband of Ahalya.*
Kaksivan Had a son named Candakausika and two
daughters named Bhadra and Ghosa. Mahabharata,
Sabha Parva, Chapter 4, Verse 17 states that Kaksivan
flourished in Yudhisthira’s assembly. }
KAKSIVATASUTA. A-female sage named Ghosa who
was the daughter of the sage Kaksivan. As she was
suffering from the disease of leprosy, no one was prc_ pared to marry. her. She composed a mantra i praise
of the Agvinidevas. They cured her of he diseas
After that she got married. Besides Ghosa, Kaksivan
had another daughter named Bhadra. (See under
Bhadra). i) ;
eaeorsr HA. Ason of Saégada, a King of the Iksvaku
dynasty. He was the father of Anenas. (See under
KARUISTHA. 6,7 Rama got the name Kakutstha ae
cause he was born in the dynasty of Kakutstha. (See
tstha) . a
KALA 1 eo of - ec 2 ale renga
, _ Art. The sixtyfour arts at Taam
rit fmnusic). (2) Vadya (instrumental mus)
(3) Nrtya (Dancing) . (4) Natya ae Oke m4
Citra (painting). (6) Accunirmana, (ma ing 2 pela
(7) Puspanirmana (flower-gardening)- \°). skarana
racana (artistic flower laying). ( re iit
(Dressing). (10) Grhalahkaraha (furnishing 0) Or a
il) $ : <nirmana (making of beds). (12) Ja res
Node ath water). (13) Jalavadya ie see ie a of
(14) Vividhavesadharana (wearing, eI flower gatdre es) (15 Malanirmana (making Nw C4 Vastradharana (wearing eee (19) Sugan cha
nirmana (making 0 flowers)
‘on of sweet-s elling
rg a (calles ecordtia food articles). (21
eo) Alarhkrtahéra Bhangikarané (beautification) .
ia ic). pe: ds). (24)
Inala mae?) ening oH Pa le
Modakanirmana (making © (26) Tailoring. \
nirmana (making © (28). Riddle.
Alanirma aking of ne ‘ting of poems
Leese ia (Zompetition in the re havisadikarana
according to certain Tuleh 31 Granthaparayan@
(clarification a meg). Natakadarsana (err erally
tread ig oe a purana part aa be ‘complete
plays). (33) 9am ne person {0 2 (making
ee anastt: BI © jrmana
the last line, proP>s” of skill). (34) N36) Logic. (37)
by another as a tra arpentry: nt
of cots of canes). iY Ms i homes): (38) Sy diaVa idva jence O iene 1 of gold and a
astuvidya “ na (connoisseur my -, was the son of Dir
ratnaparisoana Ee op: See under Dharma,
that
1. Itis also stated elsewher™ are aati p
2, Kala and Dharma are
KALA I
| monds). (39) Dhatusarhskarana (purification of metals).
(40) Skill in distinguishing the colours of diamonds.
(41) Khanipariksana (finding out of mines). (42)
Understanding trees and their value (Vrksayurvedayoga). (43) Cockfight. (44) Understanding the language of birds like Maina. (45) Massaging. (46) Kesapraksalana. (47) Aksara mustika kathana. (48) Videsaphasapathana (Learning of foreign languages). (49)
Defabhasi-jfiana. (knowledge of thelanguage of one’s
own country). (50) Bhavikalapravacana (fortunetelling). (51) Yantranirmana (making of machines).
(52) Smaranagaktiposana (increasing memory power).
(53) Sravanapatha (studying by hearing). (54) Nimisakavana (Instant poetry-making). (55) Kriyavikalpa.
(56) Kapatabhava (False poses), (57) Chandojfiana
(knowledge of different metres). (58) Vastragopana.
(59) Game of dice. (60) Another gambling game. (61)
Balalila (entertainment of children). (62) Vinayacarakrama (etiquette). (63) Vaitalikavidyajiiana (panegyrics). (64) Karyagrahana (comprehension of facts)
(Sabdasagara).
r disease. KALAI.2 (YAMA). The god of Death. When the life
span of each living being allotted by Brahma is at an
end, Yama sends his agents and takes the soul to Yamapuri (the city of Yama). From there, the holy souls
are sent to Vaikuntha (Heaven, the abode of Visnu) and
the sinful souls to Hell.
1) Genealogy and birth of Yama. Yrom Mahavisnu were
descended in the following order—Brahma, Marici,
Kagyapa, Sirya (Sun), Yama (Kala). :
Sirya married Sarna, daughter of Visvakarma. They
had three children, Manu, Yama and Yami. Of them,
Yama has the task of taking away the souls of those
whose life-span is at an end. Once Samjfiia who was
unable to bear the dazzling brilliance of Sirya, ordered
her maid Chhaya to attend on him and went to the
forest for performing penance. Mistaking her for his
wife Sarnjiia, Siirya begot of her three sons namely,
Ganigcara, Manu and Tapati. Once Chhaya cursed
Yama for disobedience. Then Sirya and Yama under-
- stood that she was not Samjfia. After that the Agvinikumaras, Revanta and -Bhaya were born to Sirya and
Sarhjfia. Thus Visnu Purana, Part III, Chapter 2 says
that Yama was the brother of Manu, Yami, the
Aévini Kumaras, Tapati, Sanaigcara and Bhaya. Yama’s
sister Bhaya was married by the Asura, Heti. Sunitha
was the eldest daughter of Yama. Amga married her.
The famous King Vena was her son. (Visnu Purana,
Part I, Chapter 13). |
2) Yama is a Dikpalaka. Once Kubera offered penance
to Brahma for ten thousand years in water, head downwards and in the middle of Paficagni. Brahma who was
pleased, appeared before him and Kubera prayed to him
that he should be made one of the Lokapalakas. Accordingly Brahma ordered that thenceforth, Indra should
rule in the East, Yama in the South, Varuna in the
West and. Kubera in the North. Yama’s city is called
Samyamini. (Uttara Ramayana).
3) Curse on Yama. Yama was once cursed by the sage
Ani Mandavya. It was as a result of it that Yama was
born as Vidura. (For details see under Animandavya).
4) Yama became Maharsi. Sri Rama who returned after
his forest life became king of Ayodhya. He ruled over
ghatamas, the father of Gautama. Sec under Dirghatamas,

KALA I
the country for 11,000 years. Then it was time to recall
- Mahavisnu who had incarnated as Sri Rama, to Vaikuntha. Brahma sent Yama to the earth to bring back
Sri Rama. Yama who assumed the guise of a young
Maharsi, went to Ayodhya and visited Sri Rama.
He said that he was the disciple of the sage Atibala and
had come to tell him a secret. So Laksmana was posted
at the entrance to prevent anyone from entering the
room. It was announced that anyone who tried to enter
would be slaughtered. After that, while Sri Rama and
Yama were having their secret talk, Durvasas, the sage,
who was hungry after a fast of 1,000 yedrs, arrived at
the door, asking for food. Laksmana told him humbly
that he could not be allowed to enter just then.
Durvasas, who became furious, was about to curse the
whole race of Kings. So Laksmana entered the room
and informed Sri Rama of the arrival of Durvasas. At
the same time, in fulfilment of the order, he was ready
to be slaughtered. Vasistha suggested that it would be
enough if Laksmana was banished from the palace.
Accordingly he was expelled and he went and drowned
himself in the.depths of the river Sarayai. Sri Rama
who was broken-hearted at his separation from Laksmana went to the same river and drowned himself there
shortly after. Yama then took their souls to Vaikuntha.
(Uttara Ramayana).
5) Yama became crow. In Uttara Ramayana there is
a story thatat Marutta’s Yaga, Yama who was frightened at the sight of Ravana, escaped in the form ofa
crow. (For details, see under Crow).
6) An Age without Yama. In the Puranas there are references to three periods when there was no Yama.
(1) Onesuch period was in Krtayuga. At that time
there was no death on earth which became overcrowded
with living beings. Unable to bear their weight, the
earth sank down to a depth of 100 yojanas. The goddess
of Earth offered tearful prayers to Mahavisnu, who
incarnated as Varaha (pig) and lifted up the earth 100
yojanas. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 142).
(2) When Markandeya reached the age of sixteen,
Yama went to him to takeaway his life. Markandeya
hid himself behind the idol of Siva. Yama threw his
noose at him but it fell round Siva’s neck. Siva opened
his third eye and glared at Yama who was burnt to
ashes in its fire. (See under Markandeya).
(3) See under Paficali, Para 1, Sub Para 2.
7) Yama returned Satyavan’s Life. (See under Satyavan).
8) Yama and King Nrga. See under Nrga.
9) Yamapuri (the city of Yama). Yamapuri is thousand
yojanas in extent. here is an entrance on each of the
four sides. On one side of the city stands Citragupta’s
mansion. The fort surrounding the city is made ofiron.
There are a hundred streets in Yamapuri. They are all
decorated with banners and festoons. There is a group of
people in Citragupta’s mansion. They are engaged in
calculating the life-span of living beings. They take into
account the vices and virtues of human, beings. To the
south of Citragupta’s residence is situated ‘“Jvaramandira’”’ (the abode of diseases ). Adjacent to it are
the abodes of all kinds of diseases, each disease having
abode. Yama’s home is situated at a distance
of twenty yojanas from the abode of Citragupta. It has
an area of two hundred yojanas anda height of fifty
yojanas. It is supported by one thousand columns. On
one side of it. there is an €X
its own
tensive assembly hall. It is
KALA I
here that those who have led virtuous lives in the world,
find their abode after death. They lead a life of eternal
heavenly bliss there. (Garuda Purana, Chapter 14).
(10) Naraka (Hell). There is a world called Pitrloka in
the middle of the three worlds, on their southern side
below the earth and above the Atala loka. The Agnisvattas and other pitrs stay there in meditative trance
for securing prosperity to those who come to _pitrloka.
Yama is the ruler of pitrloka. Since he is scrupulous in
imparting justice, Yama _ is also called Yamadharma.
He administers justice with an even hand to all living
beings brought there by his agents, according to their
virtues and vices during their earthly lives. He has
power to assess the virtues and vices of people and to
assign suitable punishments to them, but not to alter
the laws or methods of punishment. Sinners are sent tO
the different Narakas by Yamadharma according to the
nature and seriousness of their sins. The Puranas refer
to twentyeight Narakas in all. They are:—
(1) Tamisram. Those who rob others of their wealth,
wives, children etc, are bound with ropes by Yama’s
servants and cast into the Naraka known as Tamisram.
There, they are given sound beating until they faint.
After they recover their senses, the beating is repeate
and those who try to escape are bound hand and foot
and pushed again into this hell. This is repeated as long
as Fate has ordained.
(2) Andhatamtsram. This hell is intended for the wile
who takes food after deceiving the husband or the husband who takes. food after deceiving his wife. The
punishmen there is the same as that of Tamisram except
the beating. But the excruciating pain suffered by the
victims on being tied fast with Yama’s rope by is
servants, makes them fall down senseless.
(3) Rauravam. This is the hell into which those who
have persecuted other living beings are cast. Thos¢
who seize and enjoy another man’s property or resources, also come under ‘Persecution’, When such peop©
are thrown into this hell, those whom they had pet
secuted or cheated while on earth, assume the shap®
of “ruru’? and torment them severely. ““Ruru”’ 15
kind of dreadful serpent. This hell is known as ‘‘Rauravam’”’ because of the abundance of rurus there.
(4) Mahdarauravam. Here also there are ruru serpents.
Only they are ofa fiercer type. Those who deny ¢ e
legitimate heirs, their inheritance and possess and enJOY
others’ property, are squeezed to death by these terrible
serpents coiling round them.
(5) Kumbhipakam. This is the hell for the punishment
of those who kill and eat birds and animals. Here, oi '8
kept boiled in huge vessels. Yama’s servants plug
sinners into this oil. The period of their torture extenc®
to as many years as there were hairs on the bodies °
the birds or animals which they killed and ate.
(6) Kalasiitram (Yamasiitra). This hell is terribly hot. it
is here that those who do not respect their father,
mother, elders, etc. are cast. They rush about in te
unbearable heat of this hell and drop down exhauste©s
from time to time.
(7) Asi(ta) patram. This is the hell in which those sinner
who abandon svadharma (one’s own duty) and acccP,
Paradharma (others’ duty) are flogged by Yama °
servants with whips made of asipatra (sharp-0o8
sword-shaped leaves). When they run about U
the flogging they trip over stones and thorns and fall ©

KALA I © 369 | KALA I
their faces. Then they are stabbed with knives made of during the whole term of their punishment under the
asipatra, They drop down unconscious and when they constant flogging of Yama’s servants. ys
recover their senses, the same process is repeated. (18) Lalabhaksam,. This is the Naraka for lustful people.
(8) Sikaramukham. Kings who neglect their duties and The lascivious fellow who makes his wife swallow
oppress their subjects by misrule, are punished in this semen, is cast into this hell. Lalabhaksam. is a sea of
hell. They are crushed to a pulp by beating until they semen. ‘The sinner lies in it feeding upon semen alone.
fall down unconscious and when they recover, they (19) Sérameyasanam. Those guilty of unsocial acts
are again subjected to the same treatment. like Ancendiarism, poisoning food, mass __ slaughter,
(9) Andhakiipam. This is the hell for punishing those ruining the country, etc. are cast into the Naraka
who oppress Brahmanas, gods and the poor. In this called Sarameyasana. There, nothing but the flesh of
Kupa (well) there are wild beasts like tiger, bear etc. dogs is available for food. There are 700 dogs in that
carnivorous birds like eagle, kite etc. venomous crea- Naraka and all of them are as ferocious as leopards.
tures like snakes and scorpions and insects like bugs, They attack the sinners who come there from all sides
mosquitoes, etc. The sinners have to endure the cons- and tear their flesh from their bodies with their teeth.
tant attacks of these creatures, until the expiry of the (20) Avicz. This Naraka is for those guilty of bearing
period of their punishment. false witness, false swearing or assuming false names.
(10) Krmibhojanam (Food for worms). Depraved Brah- They are hurled into Avici from a mountain which: is
manas who take their food without worshipping gods . 100 yojanasin height. The whole region. of Avici Is
sarc Lonneine .gueKs, axe thrown into this “Krmi- always shaken like an ocean with. turbulent waves. As
bhojana” Naraka which is one lakh yojanas in extent. soon as the sinners fall into it they are mee aaa
Worms, insects and serpents sting them andeatthem up.. — into. dust. They ae again restored to life and the
Once their bodies are completely eaten up by these purmsnmen bas Seperate.
bodies, which (21) Ayakpanam. ‘Those who belong to the first three
Sa Sg rc : poole eee They have to castes—viz. Brahmanas, Ksatriyas and’ Vaisyas—who
: ; of their term indulge in drinking Soma, Sura etc. are bound and:
wee i e in this manner, till the end thrown into this hell. They are forced to drink melted
of punishment.
ait, ror steal other irov in liquid form.
(11) Sealy it. Dien, aie eae are cast (22) Ksharakardamam. Braggarts . and those who insult
people y Beets I echt Naraka, which is built of iron people of noble birth are cast into this hell. Here,
into the furnaces 0 ma lar with blazing fire. Yama’s servants keep the sinners upside down and
ang eye a th Naraka is intended for men and torture them in various ways.
(12) Salmailz. 1 ‘ted adultery. A figure made of (23) Raksobhaksam. This Naraka is for the punishment
‘ance pn gin SP aera Ho laced there. The victim is of meat-eaters. There are separate compartments in
iron, heated red-hot aes servants flog the victim this hell for those who perform human sacrifice, eat
a, ie ane 7 | human flesh or the flesh of other creatures. All the
aor PEAS etch nishment living beings they had killed before, would hzeve arrived
(18) Vajrakaggakasats oe at ee et el an hens an advance. They would all join together in
of those who have unnatura aii | eople are made to attacking, biting and mauling these sinners. ‘Their
other animals. Here, the Si ee ee |e shrieks and complaints would be of no avail there.
embrace iron images full of diam for Kings who have (24) Silaprotam. People who take the life of others
(14) Vaitarani. This 1s the Naraka = < Ba terers, It who have done no harm to them, by deceiving them
violated all ordinances of pee Enact Vaitarani is or by treachery, with weapons like the trident, are
is the most terrible place of pu ta. urine, blood, hair, thrown into the “Stilaprotam” hell. Yama’s servants —
a river filled with human exc
bones, nails, flesh, fat and all kinds of
ey are fix each of the sinners of the above class, on the top
ferccious beasts it “it:
Those of a trident. They are forced to spend the whole term
There are various kinds of dand mauled by these of their punishment in that: position, suffering intense
who are cast into it are attacke have to spend the _— thirst and hunger, enduring all the tortures inflicted “on
creatures from all sides. The tnt the contents of them by Yama’s servants.
t, feeding upo?
term of their punishmen (25) Dandasiikam. Sinners who persecute fellow
So cal 2 3 © like’ vey erne into this
this river. ith excreta, creatures like’ venomoys serpents are cast into
(15) Pityodakam. This is a well, a - others who Naraka. There are many wild beasts and many hooded
urine ae phlegm ia es nn caste against serpents here. They eat alive, the sinners who fall into
5 3 ° omen oO O . ;
have intercourse with w der about this hell.
customs. ordinances etc. vagab her such (26) Vatarodham. This hell is for thyuse who _ persecute
irresponsibly like animals an the créatures living on “‘mountain-peaks, dense forests,
‘me a aa this Naraka. : t hollow trunks of trees, etc. It resembles mountains,
sinners are cast into -. for the punishmen O ) 7 eae his hell
. dham This Naraka 15 or d other mean caves, forests etc. After throwing them into this
(16) P FaGarO eis keep dogs, asses ap. Is for food. the sinners are tortured with fire, snake, poison an
of Brahmanas who d kill animats weapons, just as they had tortured other creatures,
ly hunt ap inners and
animals and constant y ather round the s while on earth. ,
sn — Tapas their arrows and subjec (27) Paryavartanakam. One who — oi - a
them to constant insult rortare of those —pelson. wie eePio this Nareka. ‘The moment he fall
em to c -. Naraka is for the display their him, 18 inrown El fae Netaae. oe ee
(17) Visasanam. This by Killing cows to i into it, his eyes are put out by being pierced with the
who perform Yaga
main there
Ith and splendour They anill have to 7°
wealth and spleé
nds who wan
“1 birds and ot

KALA I
beaks of cruel birds like the crow, eagle etc. It is the
most painful experience for them.
(28) Sacimukham. Proud and miserly people who
refuse to spend money even for the bare necessities. of
life, find their place in this hell. Those who do not
repay the money they have borrowed, will also be cast
into this hell. Here, their bodies will be continually
pricked and pierced with needles. (Devi Bhagavata,
8th Skandha; Visnu Purana, Part 2, Chapter 6).
12) Mantra (incantation) to invoke Yama.
‘“‘Mahisastha Yamagaccha
dandahasta mahabala /
raksa tvam daksinadvaram
Vaivasvata namos stu te’’. //
After invoking Yama with this mantra, one should
worship with the mantra ‘‘Vaivasvatam Samgamanam”’.
(Agni Purana, Chapter 56).
13) Yama Defeated by Ravana. Once the sage Narada
went to Ravana and expatiated on the glory and splendour of Yama. Immediately Ravana set out to Samyamani with the intention of subduing Yama. Accepting
Ravana’s challenge, Yama came out. After a terrible
battle between them, which lasted for seven days neither
of them was able to defeat the other. Both of them
had received Brahma’s boon. In the night of the
seventh day, Yama rushed forth with his staff to beat
Ravana to death. Then Ravana took his Brahmastra,
At that critical moment, Brahma came to the battlefield and persuaded Yama to withdraw from the fight.
Yama retreated to his city and closed the gate.
Ravana went back with a triumphant shout. (Uttara
Ramayana). , :
14) Other details concerning Yama.
(i) Yama attended Draupadi’s Svayamvara. (M.B.
Adi Parva, Chapter 186, Verse 6).
(ii) It was Yama who performed “Samitra’” (killing
of animals) at the yaga done by devas in the Naimigaranya. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 196, Verse 1),
(iii) In the fight between Indra and Arjuna in
Khandavadaha, Yama joined the side of Indra. (M.B.
Adi Parva, Chapter 226, Verse 32).
(iv) Once in a thousand years, Yama comes to
Bindusarovara and performs a yaga. (M.B. Sabha
Parva, Chapter 3, Verse 15). |
(v) Yama is a member of Brahma’s assembly. (M.B.
Sabha Parva, Chapter 11, Verse 51).
(vi) When Arjuna performed tapas and _ received
Pasupatastra from Siva, Yama was pleased and
presented Dandastra to Arjuna. (M.B. Vana Parva
Chapter 41, Verse 25). ,
(vii) Yama was one of the devas who tested and then
blessed Nala who went to Damayanti’s Svayarvara.
(See under NALA). : yaihvara
(viii) Indra made Yama, the King of Pitrs, (M.B.
Udyoga Parva, Chapter 16, Verse 14),
(ix) Mahabharata, Drona Parva, Chapter-69, Verse 26
says that when Devas milked Bhimidevi, Yama took
the form of a calf. (See under Vena).
(x) In Tripuradahana (burning of Tripura) Yama
remained in Saivabana (the arrow of Siva, (M.B.
Drona Parva, Chapter 202, Verse77. See also under
TRIPURA). .
(xi) Yama presented two warriors, Unmatha and
Pramatha to god Skanda). (M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter
KALABRAHMANA
45, Verse 30).
(xii) Once Yama gave advice to the sage Gautama on
the subject of Dharma. (M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter
cai) Yama once gave a boon to a Brahmana named
Japaka. (See under JAPAKA. M.B. Santi Parva,
Chapter 199).
(xiv) Once Mahavisnu taught Yama, Siva-Sahasranama. Yama taught it to Naciketa. (See under SIVA
and-NACIKETA. Also M.B. Anugasana Parva, Chapter
(so) Yama sent his special agents to bring a Brahmana
named Sarmi. (See under SARMI. Also M.D.
Anugdsana Parva, Chapter 68).
xvi) Yama once lectured on the efficacy of giving
“tila” (gingelly seed) “‘jala” (water) and anna (rice
to a Brahmana,. (M.B. Anugasana Parva, Chapter 68).
(xvii) Yama once explained the secrets of Dharma.
(M.B. Anugasana Parva, Chapter 130).
(xviii) Yama used to worship Siva on the mountain
- Mufijavan. (M.B. Asvamedha Parva, Chapter 8).
(xix) Dhiimorna is the name of Yama’s wile. (M.B.
Udyoga Parva, Chapter 117, Verse 9).
(xx) There is a story in Mahabharata, Adi Parva
about the condition of the world in the absence °
Yama. Once Yama started a prolonged yaga at
Naimisaranya. At that time there wasno death 1n the
world. All living beings continued to live indefinitelyThe Devas all joined together and approached Yama
with a request to solve the problem. Yama conclude
his yaga and resumed his duties and death came to
the world again. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 199).
KALA II. A Maharsi. Mahabharata, Sabha Parv@:
Chapter 7, Verse 14, refers to this sage as offering
worship to Indra, in Indra’s assembly. _——
KALA. A daughter of Daksaprajapati. (See under Kalika) -
KALA. See under the word Kalamana. . its
KALA (S) A group of Manes. This group lives 1" t
Brahmasabha. (Chapter 11, Santi Parva). _
KALABANDHAKA. An_ adviser of MahisasuréCiksura was his war-minister, ‘Tamra his finance
minister, Asiloman, Prime Minister, and Udarka, Chie
of the army. Kalabandhaka, Baskala and Trinett4
were the advisers of Mahisasura. (Devi Bhagavata :
Skandha) . = ii’
KALABHITI. A devotee of Siva. As his father Mam
performed penance for the sake of a son fora thousan
years his wife conceived, but did not deliver. Mam
- Asked the’ child im his mother’s womb why he did ?°
- come out to which the latter replied that he did ??
come out as he feared the Asura called Kalamarga- ‘
the: child feared Ere it came to ve ae
Kalabhifi). As advised by Siva, Mamti created in ! d
child knowledge about dharma, renunciation etc. Tbe
thus made him conscious about higher ‘knowledge.
child-came out of the mother’s womb. In due cours¢ "d
time Kalabhiti took to the worship of Siva, who bless”
him as follows : ‘Since you have outlived Kalamare*;
in future you will become famous as Mahakala-
(Skanda Purana).
KALABRAHMANA. A brahmin, who defeated Kay %
A great effulgence that emanated from his head ‘t of
hundred years after his continuous Japa (Chanting ;
mantras) blocked the passage of sky-walkers (Deva
and spread to the three worlds. When Brahma

KALADA
others asked him to choose any boon, he said that he
wanted nothing but chanting the Lord’s name and
mantras. Again, Brahma insisted on the brahmin’s
choosing some boon or other, and then he removed
himself to the northern planes of the Himalayas, where
also he continued chanting mantras. There too his effulgence became so powerful that Indra deputed celestial
women to obstruct his Japa, but they could do nothing
in the matter. Then Indra deputed Kala to end the
KALAKEYA(S)
KALAKAKSA. An Asura. He was killed by Garuda.
(M.B. Udyoga Parva, Chapter 105).
KALAKAMUKHA (KALAKAMMUKA). A Raksasa.
He was the brother of Prahasta, Ravana’s Minister. (For
Genealogy, see under Prahasta). During Sri Rama’s
life in the forest KalakAamukha was also among Khara,
Diisana and others. The other eleven members of that
group were—Syenagami, Prthugriva, Yajiagatru, Vihangama, Durjaya, Karaviraksa, Parusa, Meghamali,
Mahamali, Sarpasya and Rudhiragana. (Valmiki Ramabrahmin’s life, but he failed in the attempt. Ultimately
King Iksvaku came to the brahmin and asked for half
the power he -had earned by his tapas, which the
brahmin readily granted. And, Iksvaku became thus
famous all over the worlds. (Kathasaritsagara, Suryayana, Aranya Kanda, 26th Sarga).
KALAKANYA. Daughter of Kala (Yama). (See under
Purafijana) .
KALAKAVRKSIYA. An ancient Saint. the
During
prabhalam baka) . . reign of the King Ksemadarsgin in the country of
KALADA. An urban region in ancient India. Kosala, his subjects were put to great sufferings under
(Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9). . the misrule and ‘chisipee? of hiscourtiers. At that time,
d 3 : — Kalakavrksiya who wasa friend of Ksemadarsin anda
KALADANTAKA (KALADANTA). A serpent Poe reputed sage, came to Kosala with a caged crow. The
Vasuki’s dynasty. It was burnt to death at
pent yajiia of Janamejaya. (Adi Parva, Chapter D7.
KALADVIJA. A serpent, which attained salvation. The
story of this naga, which was at first a Sudra is told in
chapter 16 of the Padma Purana as follows :-— .
Once upon a time there lived in Karavirapura a very
selfish Sudra called Kaladvya, who was sentenced by
Kala to ijve in hell for four Manvantaras. After living
in hell the whole of the period he was born as a naga
and suffered much in the crevices
living thus, on an Aévina parnima (Full moon nal re
ne Growth sok Aswitie), ab threw-our sem fried pa vi
and Kaudi (shells) which fell before Visnu. At es ue
Lord redeemed it from all its sins, and on its death,
in due course, the attendants of Visnu took him in a
divine chariot to the Lord.
KALAGHATA. A brahmin schol
a member of the assembly at the serpe
. : Chapter 53).
by Janamejaya. (Adi Parva, ap i “hh: i¥aS
KALAHA. Wife ofa brahmana e Gaursatra. This woman
sage went about the country claiming to know Kakavidya” (Vayasi vidya) by which a crow could be made
to tell past events. Actually,:the sage was going round
the country in order to gather first-hand information
about the corrupt practices of the King’s men. After
acquiring knowledge of the exact state of affairs in the
country, Kalakavrksiya reached the palace. Under the
cloak of the crow’s words he exposed some of the improprieties of the King’s Minister. Naturally, the Minister
was furious and by his secret instructions his servants
shot the crow to death that same night. On the next
day, the sage himself went to the King and convinced
him of the Minister’s guilt. The King accepted the
sage’s suggestions and brought about a thorough overhaul of the administration by punishing or dismissing
the culprits. (M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter 82).
In Mahabharata, Santi Parva, Chapter 106 we find
that this sage once advised Drupada to make a treaty
with King Ksemadarsin. Kalakavrksiya was a sage who
flourished in Indra’s assembly. (M.B. Sabha Parva,
Chapter 7).
ar in the Vedas. He was
nt yajfia conducted
an inhabitant 0 a satastie of what her husband KALAKETU. A renowned Asura Emperor who was the
used 2 Pea * Bhiksu kept it a rule’ to ask her gon of Danu, the wife of Kasyapa. Once he abducted
asked her to do 2 f hat he wanted her to do. But Ekavali, the wife of Ekavira and went to Patala (underto do the opposite 0 Ww Hat the éraddha pinda in the world). Ekavira fought a fierce battle with Kalaketu
one day he asked a he threw it in aucyakupa a and recovered Ekavali. (See under Ekavira) .
river Ganga, i ka Yorn na demoniac womb. But xALAKEYA(S). (KALAKHANJAS).
pesiltct Pe purified by the Dvadasaksari 1) Birth, The Asuras who were born to Kala (Kalika)
| Dharmadatta | got or half the virtue accrued by ae by Kasyapa Prajapati, the son of Marici and Brahma’s
mantra and Bhi they were reborn as Dasarare a grandson.
By virtue 0 Ananda Ramayana, Sarakanda ; eet 2) General. “Kalakeya” is not the proper name of
Kausalya. ( is Ana). See also under Dharma a S a particular Asura. The sons of Kala (Kalika) are all
khanda,P adma i ural onym of the Kalakeyas. ( collectively called Kalakeyas. They number about
KALAJNA(S). A sy Dak 60,000. Sometimes they fought under the leadership of
under Kalakeya). . One of the daughters of > a Vrtrasura and at other times under other Asura
KALAKA (KALIKA). Mahabharata, Vana *arvi, leaders.
married her. d Narakasura were Once the Kalakeyas
Kas yapa an r. nn
: t Kalakeya ae RG a, 3) Agastya and the Kalakeyas. O: :
on i “Kasyapa. ee ae Paty started a campaign of hatred against Brahmanas. At
of {0 4. Chapter 4) In Mahab = receive nightfall they used to enter Brahmana_ premises and
Sage ea ; nd that ipa never be commit murders, disturb their yagas, etc. The Brahmanas
s
Parva, Chapter Li be that her son
* - complained to the sage Agastya. Agastya set out to
from Brahma, 4 P°" eg or
to Kalika by ssasyeres
capture the Kalakeyas, who were alarmed and hid
themselves in the ocean. Agastya dried up the ocean by
KALAKA An Asura ssl Kanda Chapt! re drinking it. But some of the Kalakeyas escaped and
: abe) r .
(Valmiki Ramayan, Aran skanda deva. (M.B. palys fled to Patala. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 101).
KALAKAKSA. watt
Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 69).

KALAKIRTI 372
4) Arjuna and the Kalakeyas. ‘The headquarters of the
Asuras was Hiranyapura, situated near Devaloka. Once
they allied themselves with thousands of other Asuras
called ‘“‘Nivatakavacas’ and launched an attack on
Devaloka. Indra sent his charioteer Matali and brought
Arjuna to Devaloka. Arjuna defeated the Nivatakavacas
and Kalakeyas in battle. A large number of Kalakeyas
were killed in the battle. (M.B. Vana Parva Chapters
KALAKIRTI. A Ksatriya King. Mahabharata, Adi
Parva, Chapter 67 says that this King was born from
the limb of Suparna, the younger brother of the Asura,
Mayira.
KALAKOTI. A sacred place in Naimisaranya. (M.B.
Vana Parva, Chapter 95, Verse 3).
KALAKUTA. The virulent poison that’ came up
during the churning of the Ocean of Milk. Siva swallowed and retained it in his throat, and so he came to
be called Nilakantha.
“And Kalakita arose like fire burning all the worlds.
The smell of it sent the three worlds into a swoon.
At the request of Brahma Siva swallowed the poison to
save the world from absolute destruction. And, he
(Siva) retained it in his throat’. (Adi Parva, Chapter 18).
KALAMANA. (Calculating time). In ancient days
in India time was calculated in the following
manner.
Time taken (needed) to
pierce a leaf with a
needle — Alpakala
30 Alpakalas — 1 Truti
30 ‘Trutis — ] Kala
30. Kalas — 1 Kastha
30 Kasthas — 1 Nimisa (matra)
4 Nimisas — 1 Ganita
10 Ganitas” — 1 Netuvirpu (time for a
deep sigh)
6 Netuvirpus — 1 Vinazhika
6 Vinazhikas — |] Ghatika
60 Ghatikas — 1 Day (Ahoratra)
15 Ahoratras — 1 Paksa (Fortnight)
2 Paksas — 1 Candramasa (A day for
the Pitrs) ,
2 Masas (months) — 1 Riu.
6 Rtus — | year for men (A day for
300 Y (Men’s) It Die mide
ears en’s —— ivyavarsa (Divin
4800 Divyavarsas — | tee wnvine year)
3600 Divyavarsas — 1 Tretayuga
2400 Divyavarsas — | Dvaparayuga
1200 Divyavarsas — 1 Kaliyuga
12000 Divyavarsas — 1 Caturyuga
71 Caturyugas ~ -—= I| Manvantara
14 Manvantaras — I Pralaya (Kalpa)
1 Pralaya — Brahma’s one day.
(Bhagavata Trtiya
skandha)
74 Nazhikas (Ghatikas)— 1 Yama
4. Yamas ne | day time
8 Yamas — I day (day and night) .
(Devi Bhagavata, 9th Skandha),
The ‘Kalamana’ according to the Visnu Purana
differs in certain respects from the calculations given
above. Chapter 3, Part 1 of Visnu Purana says :—
KALANEMI II
Fifteen Nimisas make one Kastha. Thirty Kasthas
make one Kala and thirty Kalas make one Muhirta.
‘Thirty Muhirtas make one day (man’s) and thirty
such days, divided into two fortnights form a Masa
(month). Six months form an Ayana; there are two
ayanas called Daksina and Uttara. Daksinayana is
night, and Uttarayana is day for the Devas. 12,000
Divyavarsas—Deva varsas—form a Caturyuga consisting
of the Krta—Treta—Dvapara and Kali yugas, consisting respectively of 4000, 3000, 2000 and 1000
Divyavarsas. Before the commencement and after the
end of every one of the above four yugas there is an
interval respectively of 400, 300, 200, and 100 years.
The interval before the commencement is called
Sandhya and that at the end is called Sandhyaméa. The
period between Sandhya and Sandhhyaméa is called Krta
yuga etc. One thousand Caturyugas form: one day for
Brahma, and it (Brahma’s one day) has 14 Manus.
Again, Chapter 8, Part 2 of the Visnu Purana has the
following to say about Kalamdna.
Fifteen nimisas make one Kastha, thirty Kasthas one
Kala, thirty Kalas one muhirta and thirty muhirtas
one day and night. Day is long or short according to
the length or shortness of parts of the day, like morning,
noon and evening. Despite the above variation evening
or dusk time is always (2 nazhikas) the same. The
three muhirtas from the sun’s ardhodaya (when half
of the sun has arisen) is called Pratahkala, (morning)
and it is 1/5th of day time. The three muhiurtas
following are known as sarngava. Madhyahna (noon)
is the three muhirtas after sarhngava. The time after
madhyahna is aparahna (afternoon). Aparahna_ lasts
for three muhirtas. The time after this is dusk. ‘Thus,
a day-time of fifteen muhirtas is divided into five parts
of three muhirtas each. On Visuvat day the day will
have full fifteen muhirtas. Then during Uttarayana
and Daksinayana the day will be longer or shorter.
During Uttarayana the day will be longer than night,
and during Daksinayana vice versa. Visuvat occurs
when the sun enters the Tula (Libra) and Mesa (Aries)
houses. Daksinayana is when the sun enters Cancer,
and Uttarayana when it enters Capricorn.
Fifteen days and nights constitute a Paksa (fortnight)
and two Paksas one month. Two solar months constitute a Rtu (season), three rtus one ayana and two
ayanas one year. Since there are four kinds of months,
i.e. Saura, Savana, Candra and Naksatra, years are
considered to be of five different kinds. The first is called
Samvatsara; the second parivatsara; the third idvatsara;
the fourth, anuvatsara and the fifth, vatsara. Th1s
period of five years is called a yuga. In a yuga of five
years there are 60 saura months, 61 sivana months,
62 Candra months and 67 naksatra months. At the
beginning of the sixth year the sun and moon meet in
the same house and that period of five years also 1s
called yuga. (Sridhariyam).
KALAMRA. See under BHADRASALA.
KALAMUKHA (S)
Ahybrid race born from the
union of men and Rdaksasas. Sahadeva defeated the
Kalamukhas also during his conquest of the southern
region. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 31, Verse 67).
KALANEMII. A great Asura. In later years he was
born as Karmsa, the son of Ugrasena. (See under
Karnsa).
KALANEMI II. A brahmin from Malava. His father

KALANEMI III
was called Yajfiasena. (Kathasaritsagara, Kathamukhalambaka).
KALANEMI III. A Raksasa. During the RamaRavana war, when Laksmana swooned, Haniman
started for Drona mountain for medicine. Ravana
deputed Kalanemi to obstruct the path of Haniman.
Well acquainted with the trickeries of the Raksasas Haniman killed Kalanemi who appeared before him disguised as a sage. (Adhyatma Ramayana, Yuddha Kanda,
Canto 67).
KALANIRNAYA.
ISalamana.
KALANJARAGIRI. <A famous mountain at Medhavika
tirtha. He who bathes in Vedihrada on this mountain
will get the benefits of gifting away 1000 cows. (Anu-
§asana Parva, Chapter 25). Spread on the four sides of
mount Mahameru are twenty mountains. They are :—
Kuranga, Karaga, Kusumbha, Vikankata, Trikita,
Sisira, Patanga, Rucaka, Nila, Nisadha, Sitivasa,
Kapila, Sankha, Vaidirya, Carudhi, Harnsa, Rsabha,
Naga, Kalafijara and Narada. (Devi Bhagavata, 8th
Skandha) .
KALAPA. A powerful sage of great majesty. Yudhisthira worshipped this sage at the end of the Rajasiyayajiia, (Chapter 85, Sabha Parva).
KALAPA. A great sage, who was a member of Yudhisthira’s assembly. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 4).
KALAPARVATA I. A mountain on the sea coast near
Lanka. (Vana Parva, Chapter 277) ‘
KALAPARVATA II. Amountain seen by Arjuna on
his way to Siva with Sri Krsna during their dreamjourney. (Drona Parva, Ghapter 80). hol
KALAPATHA. A son of Visvamitra. He was a scholar
in philosophy and a Brahmavadi. (Anusgasana Parva,
Chapter 4).
RAT ARES I. A holy place. (Sloka 43, Chapter 25;
Anusdsana Parva). __
KALAPINGA II. A kind of
KALAPRSTHA. A serpent. It was with age st
that the hair on the necks of non aratt ie pine
chariot of Siva at the burning of the Jrypuras,
tied. (Karna Parva, Chapter te bo over the night on
K I. The Devata presi ) =
i —o death. The fierce aapert Or the: Deva IS
described in the Mahabharata as fol oe and eyes
Coal-black in colour, with swollen Seiad appeared
and wearing red garlands and clothings— Pp
‘ ras the death-night.
the wom in (Devata) presiding Pe drags away the
d in her han j
- souls.of the dead. (Sauptika Parva, Chapter S}-
KALASA. °A serpent born_of the too y
(Sloka 11, Chapter 103, Se ae ia
KALASAILA. <A range of mountatls tao)
in ancient India.
(Calculating time). See under
bird. See, under KapiiiUttarakhanda
(Vana Parva, ay 7. Chapter 35,
KALASAPOTAKA. A serpent. emia d
on
KAP eT A holy place. If one sips SE ee tunees
in that place one will acquire re, Chapter 83, Vana
an Agnistoma Sacrifice. (Sloka ov,
) (Sloka 72,
arva. dj
SALASODARE, A. “i
C 85 a Parva). Wala).
KArsecTRA, A hell. ee wnat ahya. A taihi
KALATIRTHA. A sacred P
r of Skanda.
KALI I
here is as good as making a gift of eleven
Parva, Chapter 85).
KALATOYAKA, An urban region in ancient India.
(Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9).
KALAVATI I. A daughter of the King of Kaéi.
This gem of a woman worshipped the sage Durvasas
and became a saint by obtaining the Saiva_ Paficaksara
(five letters pertaining to Siva—Sivaya namah). Afterwards Dasarha, King of Mathura, married her. The
King felt very hot whenever he approached her and
he questioned her about it. She said she had received
the Paficaksara Mantra even from childhood and
sinners would feel the heat if they touched her. The
King was greatly disappointed and Kalavati took him
to Sage Garga toredeem him from all his sins. The
sage dipped the King in the river Kalindi and when
the King rose up all his sins flew away from his body as
tiny birds. The King reaching the palace, embraced
Kalavati and then he felt her body very cool and
pleasant. They got a son also. (Paficaksaramahatmya,
Siva Purana).
KALAVATI II. Mother of Mrgavati, a queen. Mrgavati was the mother of Udayana. See under Mrgavati).
KALAVATI III. A nymph. See under Thinthakardla.
KALAVEGA. A serpent born in the Vasuki dynasty. It
was burnt to ashes during the serpent yajiia of Janamejaya. (Adi Parva, Chapter 66, Verse 7).
KALAYAVANA. A powerful Asura born out of the
effulgence of Gargacarya. He was killed by Sri Krsna.
(See under Krsna).
KALEHIKA. A_ female attendant
(Salya Parva, Chapter 46).
KALEYA(S). A set of Asuras born to the great sage
Kagyapa of his wife Kala. Some scholars hold the view
that the Kalakeyas and the K4leyas are one and the
same. Kaleyas destroyed the Agramas of sages like Vasistha, Gyavana and Bharadvaja. (Vana Parva, Chapter 102). Devas killed some of the Kaleyas; the others
ran away to Patala. .
KALI I. Incarnation of sin, the Sin-god.
1) Birth, Kasyapaprajapati, son of Brahma, begot of
his wife Muni sixteen sons and Kali was the fifteenth
son. He was a deva-gandharva. The other sons of
Kasyapa were: Bhimasena, Ugrasena, Suparna, Varuna
Dhrtarastra, Gopati, Suvarcas, Satyavak, Arkaparna,
Prayuta, Visruta, Citraratha, Saligiras, Parjanya and
Narada. (4 Slokas from verse 43, Chapter 65, Adi
Parva). .
9) How Pariksit controlled Kali. When Sri Krsna went ‘to
Vaikuntha, the Pandavas entrusted the administration
of the’ state to Pariksit, son of Abhimanyu and started
for the Mahaprasthana. King Pariksit was travelling
the continent conquering places when he saw Kali in
the garb of a Sidra King teasing a cow and bull
couple. Pariksit aimed an arrow at him and then Kali
came and bowed down before the King. The King did
not kill him. He let him go free but ordered him to go
away from his state. Kali was nonplussed because all
the land belonged to Pariksit and there was no place
for him to go. So Kali begged of the King to give him
some space to live. Pariksit then declared that Kal i
could live in the following five places: Gambling:
Drinking, Woman, Murder and Gold. From that day
onwards the free movements of Kali were thus restricted
(Chapter 17, Ist Skandha, Bhagavata).
cows. (Vana
of Skandadeva.

KALI I
3) Kali, Lord of Kaliyuga. There are fourteen Manvantaras during the life of Brahma. The life’ time of a
Manu is a -Manvantara. This present period is the
seventh Manvantara. In each Manvantara there are
four yugas, Krta, Treta, Dvapara and Kali. Krtayuga
consists of 17,28000 years, Tretayuga consists of 12,-
96000 years, Dvaparayuga 8,64000 years and Kaliyuga
4,32,000 years. The christian era started in the Kali
era 3102 and after another 4,26926 years Kaliyuga will
come to an end and the present universe will enter
the. eighth Manvantara. From the beginning of the
Kaliyuga acts of sin predominate and Kali, sin-god,
will lord over the world.
Kali was born on the day Sri Krsna ascended heaven.
When Bhagavan Mukunda abandoned his body and
went to his place in Vaikuntha. Kali came into being
binding all on earth. (Sloka 66, Chapter |, Bhagavata
Mahatmya). |
4) Kali and Nala. Kali and Dvapara were going to
the Svayarhvara of Damayanti when they met Indra
and others returning from the Svayarhvara. They told
Kali and Dvapara that Damayanti was married to Nala.
Kali and Dvdpara felt it an outrage that Damayanti
should have married a man of the earth and not a deva.
Kali decided that Nala should be sent out of his
country and his matrimonial life made most unhappy.
Dvapara consented to be his accomplice in this attempt.
Kali followed Nala waiting for an opportunity to enter
his body. One day, by an oversight Nala, without doing
the acamana after passing urine, performed his sandhyavandana. Taking that opportunity Kali entered the
body of Nala. Kali went to Puskara, brother of Nala in
the guise of a bullock and made Nala challenge his brother to a game of dice putting that bullock as a wager.
Puskara accepted the challenge. Nala wagered and lost
all his movable and immovable possessions and went to
the forests with Damayanti. Nala, prompted by Kali,
abandoned Damayanti in the forests and went his way.
Damayanti cursed Kali.
It was at this time that the great serpent Karkotaka was
entrapped in a wild fire. Nala saved him from the fire
but in return the cobra bit him turning Nala into one
of blue hue and said “Oh Nala, let Kali who cheated you and is now inside your body suffer with the
poison I have injected into your body.”
Nala roamed about and reached Ayodhya and there
became the charioteer of Rtuparna, King of Ayodhya.
When Rtuparna went to the second marriage of
Damayanti to Vidarbha, Nala went with him as his
charioteer. On the way Nala taught Rtuparna the
science of Asvahrdaya and Rtuparna in return
taught him the science of Aksahrdaya. When Nala
learnt the secret of Aksahrdaya he vomited all the poison
inside him and Kali left him. Nala was about to curse
Kali but refrained from it at the request of Kali. At
once Kali climbed on a Tanni tree (Beleric Myrobalan) and went down from the tree when Nala left
the place. Tanni is from that day onwards considered
a cursed tree. (Chapter 58, Vana Parva).
5) The world in Kaliyuga. The celebrated sage Markandeya had prophesied about the happenings in Kaliyuga thus: In Kaliyuga all will be dishonest. Charity
and Sacrifices will be only for a name. Brahmanas
would do the duties of Sudras. Sidras will become
prosperous. There will be sinners as kings. People will
374 KALIDASA
be short-lived and the stature of the people also will
diminish. Beastly type of men will be on the increase.
Taste and smell will vanish. Women will be ‘Mukhebhagas’. Men will sell rice and brahmanas, the Vedas.
Women will sell their vaginas. The yield of milk from
cows will decrease. Flowers and fruits will become less.
Crows will be on the increase. Brahmanas would become
beggars. Sages will be merchants. Brahmanas would
without any reason grow hairs and nails. None will
observe the four agramas correctly. Students will defile
the bed of their preceptors. Rains will be in and out of
season. Trees and plants will refuse to grow in many
places. There will be murder of people everywhere.
Merchants will be cheats and they will use false measures. Righteous persons will decrease and sinners will
increase. Girls of seven or eight years will become
pregnant and boys will become fathers. Young men at
the age of sixteen would be grey-haired. Old men will
continue practising the habits of young men. Wives
will lie with their servants. Wives will be prostitutes
even while their husbands are alive. People will die
lots of hunger.” (Chapter 188. Vana Parva).
6) Kaliyugatirtha. ‘The greatest tirtha of Kaliyuga 45
the river Ganga. (Chapter 85, Vana Parva) .
7) Duryodhana was the incarnation of Kali and Sakuni, that
of Dvapara. (Chapter 31, Asrama Parva).
KALI II. A synonym of Surya. (Sloka 20, Chapter 3;
Vana Parva).
KALI III. A synonym of Siva. (Sloka 79, Chapter 17,
Anu§gasana Parva) .
KALI I. A synonym of Satyavati, mother of Vyasa. (See
under Adrika and Satyavati) .
KALI II. An aspect or form of Parvati.
Parvati) .
KALIDASA. The greatest poet and dramatist in Sans
krit, Some scholars opine that Kalidasa flourishe a
the 8th Century B.C. while others place his date upt?
the period 11th Century A.D. At any rate most of thr
scholars consider the period between Ist Century © “¢
and 5th Century A.D. as the most probable date ©
the great poet. Some of the main theories in this reg”
are as follows;—
(1) Eighth century B.C. Towar
varméa Mahakavya Kalidasa has referred to the
King Agnimitra. Therefore the poet must have
the 8th Century B.C. This is the view of the s
Hippolyte Fanche.
(2) Second Century B.C. According to Dr. Ku
Raja Kalidasa lived in the second Century B.C.»
reasons for the belief being as follows. The poet was
contemporary of King Agnimitra of the Sunga dynas’*'
This Agnimitra is eulogised in Kalidasa’s Malavikag” |
mitra. Agnimitra is referred to in the Bharatav
(epilogue) of the drama also. . that
(3) First Century B.C. The traditional belief is ¢ d
K4lidasa was a member in the assembly of poets at
scholars of the court of emperor Vikramaditya,
started the Vikrama era in B.C. 96.
Dhanvantariksapanakamarasimnha-Sanku—
Vetala-Bhatta-Ghatakarpara-Kalidasah |
Khyato Varahamihiro nrpateh sabhayam —
Ratnani vai vararucir nava vikramasya. Kali4) Fifth Century A.D. According to Dr. Keith, ayer
dasa lived in the fifth Century A.D. One ©4?
nal
(See under
ds the close of Raghu
son 0
lived 12
cholat
fyan
the

KALIKA
gupta II, who defeated the Sakas in 339 A.D. was
King of Ujjain. He was known as Vikramaditya also.
Dr. Keith thinks that the great poet might have been
a member of this King’s court. Perhaps Kalidasa had
remembered his royal patron Vikramaditya in his
drama called Vikramorvasiya. Dr. Keith is further of
the view that Kalidasa composed Kumarasambhava
after attending the birth celebrations of Kumaragupta,
son of King Vikramaditya.
(5) Sixth Century A.D. Three scholars, Fergusson, Max
Muller and Kern have opined that Kalidasa lived in
the sixth Century A.D.
Whichever be the date of Kalidasa it could be known
from his works that he spent the major part of his life
in Ujjain, and was inextricably indebted to the city in
many ways. Raghuvamméa and Kumarasambhava are
his two mahakavyas. He had also written three dramas,
Abhijfianasakuntala, Vikramorvasiya and Malavikagnimitra and a lyric called Rtusamhara. He wrote also a
world-famous poem called Meghasandesa.
KALIKA. A female attendant of Skanda. (Salya Parva,
Chapter 46, Verse 14).
KALIKA. One of the attendants given to Skanda by
Piisan, the other being Panitaka. (Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 43).
KALIKASANGA A_ holy place.
good as that at Kalikasrama. ;
KALIKASRAMA. A holy place. If one bathes ab
spends three nights here one will be released sar :
sorrows of life and death. (Anusasana Parva ap
KALIREVA. A son of King Subala. He was killed by
Abhimanyu. (Drona Parva, Chapter 49).
KALINDI (YAMUNA). -
1 ret | Kalindi alias Yamuna is one of the holy
a As i f the river is
: +, India. The presiding deity 0
Kalindidevi. Kalindi, the daughter of the Mag? vat
source in Kalinda mountal?, and ee Ganga at
Se fie the fiver, Raking: fms Te cera
Prayaga and this confluence of the two rivers
Sangama which is a sacred place Krsna was born
2) Gave way for Sri Krsna. As Soon cid “i ‘Ambadi. Due
Vasudeva stealthily removed the aoe “ae. and Vasuea ain he Bg pannge aa te, es ea
Kalindi tora ) ree ee
Cit OS oiled to take Krsna to Ambadi. (Bh age
kandha). 4 once
a ate po Ka gear was
stayed in aanbees a . “Or Kalindi with the Com
a a iene of liquor he desired py BY eatte 4
oer the is at f eae a caida’
is companions the chaste aun
Kalindi to aK? Peace her by mt pines iat:
tee ii bs. reat fear Kalindi salute in ts waters.
pe wed with the gopis for some tme
enjoyes 10th Skandha) - After Maya had built
Bathing here is as
Bhagavata, anal:
i Kalindi, Sri Kysna’s WU% | "ec Krsna spent a Xen
Ind rastha for the Pandavas, a while Krsna and
lore th them. An : one y - indi the latter
the banks of Kali
e an
Arjuna were stro n performing penane
saw there a beautiful ne ald Arjuna that the object
days there wl
KALINGA(M)
Arjuna passed on the information to Krsna he took her
in his chariot to Dvaraka and duly married her.
(Bhagavata, 10th Skandha).
5) Soris of Kalindi, Ten sons, were born to Kalindi by
Krsna. (Bhagavata, 10th Skandha). 3
6) Harsa and his son in Kalindit. Once Krsna attacked
Jarasandha and the son of his minister, Harhsa, being
told that his father had been killed, committed suicide
by jumping into Kalindi. But, Harhsa had not been
killed, and when he returned from the battlefield and
knew about the death of his son, he too jumped into
Kalindi and committed suicide. (Sabha Parva,
Chapter 14). |
7). Other information...
(i) Kalindi is one of the seven tributaries of the Ganga.
One who drinks its water will be released from all sins.
(Adi Parva, Chapter 139, Verse 19).
(ii) The Pandavas, during their life in exile in the
forest drank Yamuna water, got over their weariness
and continued their sojourn. (Vana Parva, Chapter 5,
Verse 2).
(iii) Sahadeva, son of Srfijaya, gave Agni Deva 1000
golden emblems on the banks of the Yamuna. (Vana
Parva Chapter 90, Verse 7).
(iv) Bharata performed thirty-three Agvamedhas on
the banks of the Yamuna (Vana Parva, Chapter 90,
Verse 8). On another occasion he conducted six Asvamedhas at the same spot. (Drona Parva, Chapter 68).
On yet another occasion he conducted three hundred Asgvamedhas. (Santi Parva, Chapter 29).
(v) Ambarisa, the son of Nabhaga conducted a yajfia
on the planes of KAalindi. (Vana Parva, Chapter 129).
(vi) Agastya the great sage performed penance on the
planes of Kalindi. (Vana Parva, Chapter 161).
(vii) King Santanu conducted seven yajfias on the
banks of the Kalindi. (Vana Parva, Chapter 162).
(viii) The colour of Kalindi is black. Kama (Cupid)
shot arrows of flower at Siva, who was lamenting
over the death of Sati, and he (Siva) thus excited toa
condition of insanity jumped into Kalindi with
the result that its water turned black m_ colour.
(Vamana Purana, Chapter 6 and also see under
Yamuna).
KALINDIDVIPA. It was on this island that Vyasa was
born as the result of the intercourse between Parasara
and Satyavati. (Adi Parva, Chapter 60).
KALINGA I. Rtayu, King of Kalinga was present at
the svayarnvara of Draupadi. (Sloka 13, Chapter 185
Adi Parva). Rukmi played a game of dice with
Balabhadra with the help of Kalinga (for details see
under Rukmi). The sage Dirghatamas begot a son of
the wife of the aged and senile Kalinga and the boy
was named Kaksivan (Sikta 125, Anuvaka 18, Mandala 1, Reveda).
KALINGA II. A warrior of the god Skandha. (M.B.
Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 64).
KALINGA III. A Daitya who lived in Krtayuga. In
Skanda Purana there is a story that he conquered
heaven, drove away the Dikpalakas, posted his own
forces in their place and was finally killed by Devi.
KALINGA. Srutayus, King of Kalinga, and a member
of Yudhisthira’s assembly. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 4).
KALINGA(M) (KALINGA). An ancient place in the
south of Bharata.

KALINGADATTA . 376
Other detazls.
(1) Arjuna visited this place while he was on a pilgrimage. (Sloka 9, Chapter 214, Adi Parva).
(2) Kalinga was also included in the countries conquered by Sahadeva while he was on his victory march.
(Chapter 31, Sabha Parva).
(3) People from Kalinga presented Yudhisthira with
gifts for the Rajasuya. (Sloka 18, Chapter 52. Sabha
Parva).
(4) Yudhisthira visited Kalinga while he was on a
pilgrimage. (Sloka 4, Chapter 114, Vana Parva).
(5) Karna conquered Kalinga while he was on a
victory march. (Sloka 8, Chapter 254, Vana Parva).
(6) Sahadeva defeated the King of Kalinga. (Sloka
24, Chapter 23, Udyoga Parva).
(7) Sri Krsna slaughtered the people of Kalinga.
(Sloka 76, Chapter 48, Udyoga Parva).
(8) The people of Kalinga took part in the war between the Pandavas and Kauravas. (Sloka 6, Chapter
20, Drona Parva). |
(9) Paragurama conquered this place. (Sloka 12,
Chapter 70, Drona Parva).
KALINGADATTA. See under Dharmadatta.
KALINGASENA. See under Madanamajijuka.
KALIPRIYA. A prostitute. She attained svarga by
observing the Karttikavrata. (Chapter 21, Brahmakhanda, Padma Purana).
KALIYA.
1) Birth. KaSyapa, grandson of Brahma and son of
Marici begot of his wife Kadri powerful nagas like
Sesa, Airavata, Taksaka, Karkotaka, Kaliya, Maninaga, Purananaga etc. and from them were born all
kinds of nagas on earth. (Adi Parva, Chapter 35).
Kaliya possessed one thousand heads. (Bhagavata,
10th Skandha).
2) Kaliya taok his abode in Kalindt, Vinata and Kadri
were wives of Kasyapa. The former was the mother
of Garuda and the latter of the nagas. In a wager
Vinata was defeated and had to become the slave of
Kadri. Garuda brought Amrta from Devaloka and
redeemed his mother from slavery. Yet Garuda and
the nagas continued to be enemies, Garuda killing and
eating nagas whenever he gota chance for it. At last the
nagas entered into an understanding with Garuda
agreeing to give him the havis (offering) which they
got on certain days, and thus Garuda stopped eating
the nagas. But Kaliya did not subscribe to the above
agreement ; he treated Garuda with contempt. But, in
an encounter with Garuda Kaliya was put to so much
of hardships that he, along with his family, shifted his
residence to a particular sector in KaAlindi.
3) Admission denied to Garuda. Owing to the curse of
a sage called Saubhari, who was performing penance on
the banks of Kalindi, that Garuda would die brokenheaded if he entered Kalindi, it was a prohibited area
to Garuda.
4) Suppression of Kaliya. Owing to the virulent poison
of Kaliya the waters of Kalindi became poisonous and
the trees on its banks dried up. Once, while Krsna
and his companions, the Gop4alas came to the banks of
the river grazing their cows. The Gopalas drank water
from the river and fell down dead. Then Krsna jumped into the river from the top of a tree on its bank and
danced upon the hoods of Kaliya who had rushed to
Sagara—Asamafijasa—-Améuman—Bhagirath
KALPA ITI
attack him. Kaliya vomited blood and saluted Krsna.
His wives and children also saluted the Lord. Krsna
sent all of them away to Ramanaka island assuring
Kaliya that Garuda would not attack him on seeing the
marks of his (Krsna’s) feet on Kaliya. Thus did
K4liya and his family shift their residence to Ramanaka island. (Bhagavata, 10th Skandha).
KALIYUGA. See under Manvantara.
KALKI. The tenth avatara (incarnation) of Mahavisnu. The ten avataras are called Dasavataras.
Kalki isthe last of them. Agni Purana, Chapter 16
says as follows about the incarnation of Kalki :—
Towards the end of Kaliyuga, all people will lose their
faith in God and become irreligious. They will accept
presents from the wicked. At that time, there will be
intermixture of castes. People will become thieves and
evil doers. Fifteen divisions of the Veda Vajasaneya
alone will become the authoritative document. People;
wearing the garb of righteousness, will indulge 1?
unrighteousness. Mlecchas (lowest class of people
assuming the form of Kings will begin feeding upo?
human beings. At that time Lord Visnu will incarnate
as Kalki, the son of Visnuyasas and the priest 0
Yajfiavalkya and exterminate all mlecchas. He W!
restore people to caturvarnya and the four asramas 20
maintain proper standards of conduct. Afterwards the
Lord will renounce the form of Kalki and ascent
Heaven. Then Krtayuga will begin again.
Chapter 190 of Bhasa Bharata supports almost all the
above statements. In the light of them, we can gather c¢T™
tain features of Kalki’s incarnation when Kaliyuga reaches
its zenith. Mahavisnu will be born as a Brahmana wit
the name Visnuyagas, in the village called S4mbhala.
Visnuyagas will become famous under the name Kalki.
He will be the priest of Yajfiavalkya. He will create arm°
and soldiers by his will itself and destroy the wicked:
With that Krtayuga will commence. 3
There is difference of opinion as to whether Kalki
incarnation has passed or is yet to come. But in ! ‘
light of the statements in the Puranas, Kalki has no
yet come. Mahabharata, Vana Parva, says 4
Kaliyuga extends over a period of 4, 32, 000 year:
It is now only a little over 5,000 years since it began.
Still, more than 4, 26, 900 years have to pass before
the end of Kaliyuga. Therefore lakhs of years have
still to pass before the incarnation of Kalki.
KALMASANIGHRI. See under the word KALMAS4PADA. HA,
KALMASAPADA. (KALMASANGHRI, MITRASA
SAUDASA). A famous king of the Iksvaku dynasty:
He wandered about in the forest as a Raksasa for twelve
years. |
1) Genealogy. From Visnu were descended in _, the
following order —Brahma—-Marici—K ag yapa— VV"
van—Vaivasvata Manu—Iksvaku—Vikuksi—Sasada ~~
Purafijaya—Kakutstha—Anenas—Prthulaé va—Prasen*”
jit—Yuvanas va—Mandhata—Purukutsa—Trasadasy4—
Anaranya—Aryasva—Vasumanas— Sutanva — Tray)
aruna—Satyavrata—(Trisanku) —Harig candra— Rohi
tas va— Harita—Cuficu—Sudeva—Bharuka—Bahuka—
bha—Sindhudvipa—Ayutayus—R tuparna— Sarvakam@
Sudasa (Sudhagana) —Mitrasaha (Kalmasapada)- he
2) Name. His actual name was Mitrasaha. Since
was the son of Sudasa, he was called Saudasa alsoa—Srutan*

KALMASAPADA
(M.B. Anugadsana Parva, Chapter 78). Kalmdasanghri
and Kalmasapada were names which he got as a result
of Vasistha’s curse.
3) Mitrasaha became a Raksasa. Mitrasaha was a reputed and glorious king belonging to the solar dynasty
of kings who ruled over Ayodhya. He had a queen
named Madayanti. While they were leading a happy
and enviable married life, Mitrasaha was forced to
lead the life of a Raksasa in the forest for a period of
12 years, as the resultof a curse. The story of this
curse is given in different Puranas in different versions
and they are given below ;—
4) Sakti Cursed Mitrasaha. One day Mitrasaha went to
the forest for hunting. Visvamitra wished to get this
mighty King as his disciple. While the King was
passing through the forest, he saw Sakti, Vasistha’s son,
- coming towards him. The King was a Ksatriya and
Sakti was a Brahmana. They were faced with the
problem of whether the Ksatriya should make way for
the Brahmana or vice versa. Neither of them made way
for the other. At last, Mitrasaha struck Sakti with his
whip. In his anger Sakti cursed Mitrasaha that he
should become a Raksasa and roam about in the forest
for 16 years. Vigvamitra who was standing nearby at
the time introduced a devil into the body of the King
d fi + dav Mitrasaha wandered about in the
Dai i, ee M.B. Adi Parva,
forest in the form of a Raksasa. (
Chapter 176).
5) Vasisth cursed Mitrasaha.
in the forest. While hunting 2 _ two tl
cubs. Actually, they were two Raksasas in disguise.
The King who was unaware of it, killed one of them
with an arrow. The other cub suddenly assumed his.
own form as a Raksasa and after giving Mitrasaha a
warning that he would take revenge on him at the
proper time, vanished.
After the hunt the King returne ite
informed Vasistha that he wished to ert petit
medhayaga like his ancestors. The sage offered to oe
him in it. Shortly after, one day, the old Raksasa-tiger;
eat
disguising himself as the sage Vasistha, came to Mit
: ‘no! I will tell you a secret.
saha, and saidj— 0" me a eat desis _to eat
Don’t tell anyone else. I have ked meat to my Asrama
nd some coo ; .
meat food. Please se ing about + After saying this,
without anyone know!
the aiswided Raksasa-sage left the eg _—
The King told this secret to.his wile se aye . pie
prepared the meat-food secretly and tool is ° ee i
Agrama. When Vasistha saw the a oy 2 Laas
asa personal insult-and anes the King
Raksasa. (Uttara Ramayana)- .
po story of Vasistha’s ait an, and
‘le Mi hunting in ; :
eet a Ty py accident. The or He went rf
younger brother swore to avenge his Sahm aia Rail.
the King in the disguise 0 ae he voval
Mitrasaha appointed him as @ ©
kitchen.
At about that time,
on the invitation 0
“i Tag oe ed the cook to prepar
honour. He order 1€
guest at once. The Raksasa pe
est of this oppor™
to make the b
Mitrasaha once went to hunt
he came across two tiger
d to his palace. He
Ayodhya,
d _Vasistha came to hy,
Onniaratia for a Sraddha. sisarteh
is. greeted the sage wit
e food for the
k, decided
ou KALMASAPADA
he cooked some human flesh and offered it as food for
Vasistha. The enraged sage cursed the King to become
a man-eating Raksasa who would roam about for twelve
years in the woods. Thus Mitrasaha became a Raksasa.
(Siva Purana, Sivaratri Mahatmya). |
7) How Mitrasaha got the name ‘‘Kalmdsapada.”’ Mitrasaha became very angry whan he was cursed by
Vasistha. He decided to pay back-in the same coin by
cursing Vasistha also. He took water in his hand and
was about to throw it down with the words of curse.
But his queen Madayanti stopped him. She reminded
him that it was not right to curse a Brahmana and
requested him to sprinkle that water on his own feet.
The King’s anger cooled down.and he sprinkled the
water on his own feet. Since his feet were polluted by
the water of sin Mitrasaha came to be called ‘“Kalmasapada”, and Kalmasanghri” from that day. (Siva
Purana, Sivaratri Mahatmya).
8) Kalmasapada’s life as Raksasa. The curse-ridden
Kanmasapada began to look upon Vasistha and his
sons with inveterate hatred. He roamed the countrysides and forests in the form of a Raksasa. He started
man-eating by feeding upon Sakti, the eldest son of
Vasistha. After that he ate all the remaining 99 sons
of Vasistha. Distresced at the loss of his children,
Vasistha left his Asrama, bent on committing suicide.
He tied his own hands and feet securely with a rope and
jumped into the river to drown himself. This attempt,
like several other attempts to commit suicide, failed
and he did not die. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 177),
In the Mahabharata there is a story which says that
once Uttanka, a disciple of the sage Gautama went to
beg the Kundalas (ear ornaments) worn by Kanmasapada’s (Saudasa’s) queen, for the sake of Gautama’s
wife. (For details, see under the word “Uttanka’’) .
9) Brahmani’s curse on Kalmasapada. In the course of
his wanderings through the forest as a Raksasa, Kalmasapada happened to come across a Brahmana youth
engaged in amorous pleasures with his wife Angirasi.
The King caught hold of the youth and killed him. His
wife, the Brahmani wept loudly and after cremating her
husband’s body in a funeral pyre, jumped into it and
burnt herself to death. Just before her death she pronounced a curse on Kalmasapada that if he touched
any woman in future he would die immediately.
After the death of the Brahmana couple, the sin of
Brahmahatya (killing of Brahmana) continued to pursue Kalmasapada in the form ofa terrible monster.
He fled for life from it and at last reached the presence of King Janaka. There, he happened to see the
sage Gautama who taught Kalmasapada Divyajnana
(Divine wisdom). As advised by the sage, he went to
the temple at. Gokarna and spent some years in deep
meditation. (Siva Purana, Sivaratri Mahatmya).
10) Sdpamoksa. (Liberation from Curse). Towards the
close of the twelve years which Mitrasha (Kalmagaada) spent as a Raksasa, Vasistha saw him. The sage
sprinkled holy water on Mitrasha and at once the
Raksasa (the spirit of the Raksasa)left his body and he
resumed his original figure of the King. He accepted
Vasistha as his preceptor. They went back together to
Ayodhya. :
Although Madayanti, queen of Mitrasaha was there,the
King was not able to touch her owing to the Brahmani’s

KALMASI 378
curse. So he requested Vasistha to beget children by
her. Accordingly Madayanti became pregnant by
Vasistha. But she did not deliver the child even after
twelve years. At last she hit the embryo in her womb
with a stone and the child was born. Since he was born
with the help of a stone (Asman), the child was named
“Agmaka’’. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 167).
KALMASI. A river. It was while travelling by athe side
of this river, that King Drupada reached a Brahmana
village where he happened to meet Upayaja. (M.B.
Adi Parva, Chapter 166). Mahabharata, Sabha Parva,
Chapter 78, Verse 16 says that it was on the bank of
this river that the sage Bhrgu blessed Yudhisthira.
(Modern scholars believe that Kanmasi. is the same as
the present river Yamuna). |
KALODAKA. A sacred place. The sin of causing
abortion of those who bathe in the tirtha here will be
washed away. (Anusasana Parva, Chapter 25, Verse
60 and Santi Parva, Chapter 152, Verse 12).
KALPA I. Ason of Dhruva. See under DHRUVA.
KALPA II. A period of one thousand Yugas or fourteen
Manvantaras. See under MANVANTARA.
KALPA III. The customary proceedings of Yagas.
These proceedings are made in the form of Sitras. ‘The
Satras describe how the Brahmanas and mantras are
to be used. For each Samhita there are separate
Srauta Sitras. The Srauta Siitras for Rgveda Samhita
are Aévalayana, Sarkhayana and Saunaka. Those for
Samaveda are Masaka, Latyayana and Drahyayana.
Those for Krsna Yajurveda are Apastamba Bauddhayana, Satyasadha, Hiranyakesi, Manava, Bharadvaja,
Vadhila, Vaikhanasa, Laugaksi, Maitra, Katha and
Varaha. For Suklayajurveda it is Katyayana Srauta
Sitra. For Atharvaveda it is Kaugika Srauta Sitra.
All these Sitras contain only brief symbolic words and
are difficult to understand without explanation.
KALPAKA. Siva’s garden. It is situated in Kaildsa.
(Kathasaritsigara, Kathapithakalambaka, Part I).
KALPAVRKSA. A _ tree in Devaloka. It has the
power of giving any object that one wishes to get.
There are five Kalpavrksasin Devaloka. Their names
are : Mandara, Parijata, Santana, Kalpavrksa and
Haricandana. .
Agni Purana, third Chapter mentions that among the
wonderful things obtained by the churning of the
ocean of milk, there was Kalpavrksa also. So Kalpavrksa was born from the ocean of milk.
KALYA (KALI). Mother of Vyasa. (Agni Purana,
Chapter 278).
KALYANA. A sage. Once certain Angirases including
this sage observed sattra (sacrifice) for the attainment
of Heaven. But nobody was sure about the Devayana
path which leads to Heaven. So they selected Kalyana
to find out the path. He went in search of the
Devayana path and on the way he met Urnayu, a
Gandharva who was in the company of some apsara
women. The gandharva disclosed the Sama which
would enable Kalyana to find out the Devayana path.
On his return, Kalyana told the other Rsis that he
had received the Sama, but he refused to disclose from
whom he obtained it. With the help of that Sama
known as Aurnayuva, the Angirases attained Heaven,
but because of his failure to disclose the whole truth,
Kalyana was denied access to Heaven. Besides that,
KAMA I
he became a victim to the disease of leprosy. (Paficavimséa Brahmanam). ,
KALYANI. A female follower of Skandadeva. (M.B.
Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Verse 6).
K4AMAI. God of beauty in Indian mythology.
1) General. A Prajapati named Dharma was born
from the right breast of Brahma. Dharma was very
handsome. Three sons, Sama, Kama and Harsa who
were exceedingly handsome, were. born to him. Of
them, Kama became the god of beauty. His wife was
Rati. Sama became the husband of Prapti. Harsa had
Nanda for his wife. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 66,
Verses 31-33). .
In Kalika Purana we see another story about Kama’s
birth. Brahma created ten Prajapatis. After that, the
woman Sandhya was created. At the very moment 0
her birth, Brahma and the Prajapatis were irresistibly
fascinated by her charm and they sprang up from
their seats. All their thoughts converged on the same
object. At this time a handsome youth emerged from
Brahma’s mind with a floral bow’ in his hands.
Immediately after his birth, he asked Brahma “Kam
darpayami’”? (Whom should I make proud ?) Brahma
replied—Let the minds of living beings be the aim 0
your arrows”. He suggested Rati the daughter ©
Daksa, to be Kama’s wife. Since he stirred the mim
of Brahma, he got the name “MANMATHA”, and
since he was extremely attractive in appearance He
came to be called “KAMA”. (For further details, s8¢©
under “RATT”
2) How Kamadeva got the name ‘“‘KANDARPA”. As soo?
as Kama was born, he went to Brahma and asked him
‘Karn darpayami ?”’ (Whom should I make proud ?)-
Therefore he got the name ““KANDARPA”. (Kathasaritsagara) .
3) Brahma cursed Rama.
upon Para Brahman for the purpose of creation.
felt carnal thoughts rising in his mind. At once 2 8!
was born from his mind. She appeared before him 4°
did obeisance to him. This girl was Sarasvati. Brahm?
fell in love with her. He declared that she should stay
in the tongues of all living beings, and . particularly at
the tip of the tongues of all scholars. After that he
made Sarasvati his wife. Soon he felt repentant for his
weakness of mind. His anger blazed at Kama who was
the cause of all this. He cursed that Kama would be
burnt to ashes in the fire from Siva’s third eye. After
that Brahma gave his carnal desire to the great sage
Atri who transferred it to his wife Anasiy4. It hardene
itself within her and took the form of Candra, w°
was thus born to her. (Brahmanda Purana, Chapt¢
4) Kama was burnt up in fire. Long ago an Asuté
_ named Taraka, who was proud of his invincible might,
was causing much havoc and terror in the whole worl
Even the gods were afraid of him because he had rece1v©
a boon that Siva’s son alone was capable of killing h1™-
It was the time when Parvati, the daughter of Himava”»
was performing a penance praying that Parames var@
should become her husband. Taking advantage of t i
opportunity, Indra sent Kama to rouse the passio? “d
love in Siva’s mind. Kama reached Siva’s seat a?
tried to stir up his passions. Siva who was enrage? ®
Once Brahma was meditatine
this, opened his third eye blazing with fire. Kama we»

KAMA I
burnt to ashes in that fire. The place where Kama’s
body (Anga) fell, came to be called ‘‘Angarajya’’. Since
he lost his body, Kamadeva got another name
‘‘Ananga”’. (Valmiki Ramayana. Bala Kanda, Chapter 23).
5) Kama’s Next Birth, When Siva burnt up Kama,
the latter’s wife Rati prayed to Siva to restore her husband to life. Siva was pleased and said that Rati would
be born in the world and Kama would take birth as
her son.’’ ( Kathdsaritsagara) .
According to Siva’s blessing Rati was born in the world
under the name of Mayavati. She became the kitchenmaid of an Asura named Sambara. At that time Sri
Krsna approached Siva with a request that he should
be blessed with a son. Siva blessed him saying that
Kama who was burnt up in the fire of his eye would be
born as the son of Rukmini, Sri Krsna’s wife. Accordingly, Rukmini, conceived and a handsome child was
born to her.
Sambara, who employed Mayavati as his kitchen-maid
had received a boon from Siva. A condition laid down
in it was that Sambara would die not long after
Kamadeva’s birth in the world. So Sambara was making careful enquiries to ascertain whether Kama was
born anywhere in the world. It was during this period
that Sambara receive
reborn as Sri Krsna’s son.
Rukmini’s house and stole t
irito the sea, A sea-fish swallows
fisherman who caught it presented it to Sambara. When
Sambara cut it open, he saw a lovely baby inside the
fish. He entrusted the child to Mayavati to be brought
up.
A here
At this stage, the sage Narada happened to come t
and he exnlained to Mayavati in secret, that the baby
‘th
Ka nd she was Rati. From that time, s
ee on and tenderness.
brought up the child with great affection at
As eae iohastt and Kama grew up into : oe
Mayavati began to make amorous advances see
him, Looking upon her with regard due sae me Ben
Kama was displeased with these advances. ei ab ‘tole
him what Narada aa Goi ie i abOET cat pele
ions 1 ast life. She advised ©
mae f eaun ite place for Dvaraka as soon as geron
As advised by her, Kama killed Sambara Raley a
and Mayavati went to Dvaraka in a care oh -
their respects to their parents there. In the pre
- ‘ctened ‘‘Prad-
; 5 Kama was chris
soar number of sages, band of Usa, was the son ot
yumna”.
‘ruddha, the hus
a lag ’ Aniruddha, Pradyumna had a
At once he went secretly to
he little baby and threw 1t
lowed the child and a
Besides
daughter Trsa.* ia
6) Other names of Kama.
have been used for Kama in
Manmatha, Mara, a ena
ka Ananga, ; =
vi ae Kusurtiest, ane
pati, Makaradhvaja, Atmabhi,
The following names
the Puranas:—Madana,
Minaketana, Kandarpa,
Paficasara, ambararl,
Puspadhanva, RatiIraja, Isma, Kinkira,
Ramana, Dipaka,
iv dhukalakeli, Kafijana, oo - af,
ceadeatia. ' Samantaka, sage se, ee wavenit,
Puspaketana. Makaraketys satya, May3.
Samsaraguru, Gadayitnu, a eae
7) Kama’s weapons. Kama has a b0
Ud
1, From Kathasaritsagaré we find that Uea
d the news that Kama had been |
yana and Vasavadatta were the rebirths
KAMADHENU
cane, its string is made up of beetles, and the tips of his
arrows are flowers. His vehicle is the parrot and the
sign on his banner is fish. The five flowers of his arrows
are:—Aravinda, Agoka, Citta, Navamalika, Nilotpala.
Besides these, he has five more arrows which are—
Unmadana, Tapana, Sosana, Stambhana and Sammohana. (Amara KoéSa).
KAMA II. An Agni who was the son of Svahadevi.
Mahabharata, Vana Parva. Chapter 219, Verse 23 says
that this agni was of inimitable beauty.
KAMA III. Another name for Paramesvara. (M.B.
Anugasana Parva, Chapter 17, Verse 42).
KAMA IV. Another name for Mahavisnu. (M.B. Anuéasana Parva; Chapter 149, Verse 45).
KAMA V. Agreat sage. There is a reference to this
sage in Mahabharata, Anusasana Parva, Chapter 150,
Verse 41.
KAMA. Daughter of PrthuSravas. She was the wite of
Ayutanayi, a king.of the Piru dynasty and mother of
Akrodhana. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 177).
KAMATHA (KAMATHAKA). A serpent born in
Dhrtarastra’s family. This serpent was burnt up in
Janamejaya’s sarpasattra. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter
KAMACARI. A woman follower of Skandadeva, (M.B.
Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Verse 23).
KAMADA. Another woman follower of Skandadeva.
(M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Verse 27).
KAMADEVA. See under Kama.
KAMADHENU: (SURABHI—NAN DIN]I).
1) General. She is the first mother of cattle. She is a
goddess with marvellous powers and attainments who
gives milk whenever needed by gods and sages. The
Puranas declare that all the cattle in the world today
are descended from Kamadhenu.
2) Three different names. ‘This sacred cow is sometimes
called ‘‘Kamadhenu”, at other times, ‘‘Surabhi’’ and
also ‘Nandini’. They are not three different cows, as
some people suppose. See Bhasa Bharata, Aranya Parva
Chapter 9, Verses 7 and 17. There Surabhi and Kama.
dhenu are names used for referring to the same cow.
Again, in the Bhasa Bharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 99,
Verse 14, we find the name Nandini applied to Kamadhenu. Thus we may conclude that Kamadhenu had
two other names, viz. Surabhi and Nandini. But since
the term ‘‘Surabhirgavi”’ occurs in Amarakoéa, it follows
that even ordinary cows may be called ‘‘Surabhi’’
3) Birth and Family. Inthe Puranas Surabhi is described variously as Daksa’s daughter, Kasyapa’s wile,
Kasyapa’s daughter, etc. Although at first sight there
may appear some discrepancy in these statements, in
the light of them we may clearly arrive at the ancestry
and birth of Surabhi. Valmiki Ramayana, Aranya
Kanda, 14th Sarga says that Kasyapa, the son of Marici
and the grandson of Brahma married Daksa Prajapati’s
daughters —Aditi, Diti, Danu, Kalika, Tamra, Krodha_ yaga, Manu and Anala. Fram verses 90 and 21 in the
same Sarga we understand that Surabhi was the daughter of Krodhavasa, Daksa’s daughter, by Kagyapa. In
the same Sarga we find that two daughters, Rohini and
Gandharvi were born to this Surabhi and from Rohini
were born all the cows in the world that we see today
of Kama and Rati.

380 KAMADHENU
KAMADHENU
and from Gandharvi were born all the horses. It was
by her own father Kagyapa himself that Surabhi’s offsprings were born. ‘Therefore, the reference to Surabhi
as the wife of Kagyapa may also be justified.” Since
Krodhavaéa, the daughter of Daksa was the mother of
Surabhi, actually Surabhi was the grand-daughter of
Daksa, But in a broad sense, a grand-daughter may be
considered as a daughter. So the reference to Surabhi
in Bhasa Bharata, Anusasana Parva, Chapter 83, Verse
28 as Daksa’s daughter is correct in that sense.
4) How Kamadhenu Received Divine Powers. Long ago Aditi,
wife of Kasyapa, conceived Mahavisnu in her womb
and began an austere penance standing on one leg. At
that time Surabhi went to Kailasa and offered worship
to Brahma for ten thousand years. The gods who were
pleased, came to Surabhi taking Brahma with them.
Brahma said to her:—‘Surabhi I have made you a
goddess. You are now above the three worlds—Heaven
Earth and Hell. Your world, “Goloka’’ will become
famous. All people will worship you and the cows who
are your off spring.’”.
From that day on which Brahma blessed her, Surabhi
became a goddess with marvellous spiritual powers.
(M.B. Anusasana Parva, Chapter 83).
5) More than one Kamadhenu? ‘There are references to
several Kamadhenus in the Puranas. There is one Kamadhenu in Vasistha’s Agrama. At Varuna’s yaga we see
another Kamadhenu. There is no ground for believing
that there is only one Kamadhenu and that it was
borrowed by each Deva in turn for some particular
occasion. It is possible that there were many Kamadhenus in the family of Kamadhenu and they were
owned by different Devas. Moreover it is stated that
several Kamadhenus take their origin from sources
other than the family of Kasgyapa. One of them is from
the ocean of milk. In Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 18, we find that when the Devas and Asuras churned
the ocean of milk, along with many other precious
things, Kamadhenu also came up to the surface.
There is a reference to another Kamadhenu in Bhasa
Bharata, Udyoga Parva, Chapter 102, There, it is said,
Brahma who got Amrta swallowed it beyond limit in
his avidity and when he vomited, a Kamadhenu came
out from his mouth. That Kamadhenu is said to be
living in the world known as Rasatala. The abovementioned passage also says that there are four other
Kamadhenus living on the four sides of the Kamadhenu
which lives in Rasatala. They are Saurabhi in the east
Hamsika in the south, Subhadra in the west and Dhenu
in the north.
The next Kamadhenu is the one which was born from
the side of Sri Krsna. Once Sri Krsna and his consort
Radha were amusing themselves by amorous pleasures
in a remote and secluded place. When they were tired
they wished to drink some milk. At that time, Sri Krsna
created by his will power, the cow Surabhi and the
calf Manoratha, from the left side of his body. Sridaman milked that cow into a new earthen pot and
when Sri Krsna was drinking it, the pot fell down and
as spilt all over the floor. The milk which
an area of 100 yojanas, became a lake
called ‘‘Ksirasagara”’ for Radha and her maids to bathe
and enjoy water-sports. Numerous cows were born
from the pores of Surabhi and they were presented to the
the milk w
spread over
Gopas by Sri Krsna. (Devi Bhagavata, 9th Skandha).
Like this, several Kamadhenus are seen in the Puranas.
Therefore there is no discrepancy or contradiction in
statements declaring that there were many Kamadhenus
in different Agramas. But since Kamadhenu had
achieved divine powers by Brahma’s grace, it is but rea-
‘sonable to believe that the different Kamadhenus are
really the different forms of the original Kamadhenu,
the daughter of KaSyapa.
6) Theft of Kamadhenu by Satyavrata (Trisanku). Satyavrata (Trisanku) was the son of Aruna, a King of the
Iksvaku dynasty. He was a vicious and immoral fellow.
Once he abducted a Brahmana girl just at the time of
her marriage in her bridal dress. Enraged at this his
father drove him away from his palace. Satyavrata
wandered about aimlessly in the country and in the
forests.
Soon after this there was a famine in the land. Human
beings and animals began to die of starvation. At that
time Vigvamitra was performing penance in the forest
after leaving behind his wife and children in the country.
When he saw that the whole family was in danger of
death by starvation, he decided to make some moncy
by selling one of the sons, in order to save the lives oO}
the rest of the family. Satyavrata who came to know of
this, met Visvamitra and dissuaded him from selling
his son. He promised to supply some flesh every day to
the family by hunting animals in the forest and keeping
the flesh suspended from the branch of a near-by tree.
Accordingly, he began leaving the flesh regularly hanging from the branch of the tree. One day he
could not get any flesh by hunting. That night he went
to Vasistha’s 4srama and stole Kamadhenu. He killed
the cow and ate some of its flesh. The rest he gave to
Visvamitra’s family.
The next morning when Vasistha woke up, he did_ not
see his cow. But he came to know of the whole affair by
his intuition. In his fury he cursed Satyavrata and sal
that the world would brand him with the name “‘Trisanku?’ because he had committed three heinous sins viz. killing of cows, abducting another man’s wife and incurring
his father’s displeasure. After that Vasistha restored
Kamadhenu to life. (Devi Bhagavata, 7th Skandha) .
7) Visvamitra attacked Kamadhenu. Once while Visvamitra was a ruling King; he went into a forest to hunt.
In the course of his rambles through the forest, he happened to arrive at Vasistha’s Asrama with his retinue.
Vasistha called Kamadhenu and ordered her to provide
food for Vigvamitra and his party. Kamadhenu, by het
divine powers, prepared food within a short tme an
gave them a sumptuous meal; Visvamitra was greatly
pleased with this amazing feat of Kamadhenu and he
asked Vasistha to give her to him. He even offered to
give crores of cows in return for her. But Vasistha
refused to comply with his request. Then Visvamitra
tried to seize and take her away by force.
At once Kamadhenu assumed the form of a terrible
monster of destruction. From the different parts of her
body emerged fierce warriors who clashed with Vis vamitra’s followers. All the arrows shot by Viévamitra
were caught by Vasistha with his hand. In the ené
Visvamitra admitted that the might of a Brahmana }
superior to the might of a Ksatriya. (Vasisthas was 4
Brahmana and Viévamitra a Ksatriya). Visvamitra,
«, ta Vien Purdue, Patt I, Chapter 15, Surabhi is described as Kasyapa’s wife.

KAMALA I
soon gave up his kingly duties and began penance,
thus turning himself into a ‘‘Rajarsi” (Royal saint).
Valmiki Ramayana, Bala Kanda, 52nd Sarga ; M.B.
a Parva, Chapter 40 ; M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter
8) Kamadhenu was attacked by the Asta Vasus.
the word ‘“‘Astavasus’’, Para 2).
9) Kamadhenu cried. (See under the word ‘Indra’,
Para 16).
10) Kamadhenu revived King Baka.
‘“‘Gautama’’).
11) Other details.
(i) Kamadhenu gave birth to Ajasa, Ekapat, Ahirbudhnya, Tvasta and Rudra. Visvariipa was the son of
Tvasta. (Agni Purana, Chapter 18).
(ii) Kamadhenu said that she had no part in the theft
of Agastya’s lotus. (M.B. Anusdsana Parva, Chapter
i Sri Krsna turned Govardhana mountain into an
umbrella and defeated Indra when Kamadhenu came
to Gokula and bathed Sri Krsna with her milk according to Bhagavata, 10th Skandha.
(iv) Once the sage Jamadagni went to Goloka and
propitiated Kamadhenu by his tapas. Kamadhenu gave
her sister Susila to Jamadagni. The sage presented that
cow to his, wife Renuka. (Brahmanda Purana, Chapter
(See under
(See under the word
KAMALA I. Mother of Prahlada. (Padma Purana).
KAMALA II. A. follower of Skandadeva. (Sloka 9,
Chapter 46, Salya Parva, M.B.).
KAMALAKSA “4 A great warrior who fought on the
side of the Kauravas. Duryodhana sent this warrior
along with Sakuni to attack Arjuna. (Chapter 156,
Drona Parva. M.B.). fa a
KAMALAKSA II. A son of Tarakasura. He was one 0
the famous trio of demons. For details see under
‘Tripura’.
KAMALAKSI. A follower of Skandadeva.
46, Salya Parva). ,
KALLA SER See under “Jayasarman’ . sth hs
KAMANDAKA. A great sage of ancient times ( \ a i
bharata, Santi Parva, Chapter 123) states ek NG .
once taught Rajadharma (kingly duties) to g
KRLEAPALA. A Yadava dependant of Sri Krsna. (Bhagamere en of a country called aa lad
This King ‘was a prominent meme A nt O
Yudhisthira. (Sloka 99, Chapter 4, Sabha = lige
KAMATHAII. A great sage: He sea parca MB).
soul by his penance. (Chapt ee. Mahabharata, Vaid
_ A sacre .
.— ~~” g2, Verse 105 says that id
takes his bath in this holy tirtha will have a
AMAA: A prominent, ch gem
Kasyapa. (Chapter 39; Adi Parva, -
tirtha was the abode of U0 ca. (Island of Kusa),
KAMBALA. A part ©
(Chapter a Tamil poet. He was born in a
ie
ee ora eters of the King many pons ae
poor family. At the orde! Tamil. But Kambar’s wot
wa 1 R
amayana in 1am Kamba
2 preted i ia best. This is the renowned
was ac
a A K
(Chapter
¢ the family of
B.). The Prayaga
KAMPILYA
which the important ones are Sarasvati Antadi and
Kafici Purana. It issaid that unintelligent children of
Tamil nadu are even now given sand from the burial
ground of Kambar to induce intelligence into them.
The (—r) suffix in Kambar is plural denoting respect.
(See under ‘“Bhadrakali’) .
KAMBOJA I. Sudaksina, the King of the country,
Kamboja. He was present at Draupadi’s svayarnvara.
In Mahabharata, Karna Parva, Chapter 156 we read
that his younger brother was killed by Arjuna. The
Kings of Kamboja were all known as Kambojas. Long
ago, this country was ruled by a King named Kamboja.
In Mahabharata, Santi Parva, Chapter 166, Verse 77,
we see that this Kamboja was given a sword by the
King Dhundhumara. Perhaps it was from this King
Kamboja that the country came to be called ‘Kamboja’.
KAMBOJA II. This kingdom was situated in the north
western part of India. It is the modern Kabul. We get
the following information from Mahabharata.
(1) From Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter 27,
Verse 23, we see that Arjuna had subdued _ this
Kingdom.
(2) The horses which were tied to Yudhisthira’s chariot
were brought from Kamboja. (M.B. Sabha Parva,
Chapter 52, Verse 5).
(3) The Mlecchas (a tribe of low-class people) of
Kamboja will become Kings in Kaliyuga. (MLB.
Vana Parva, Chapter 188, Verse 36).
(4) There were Kambojas in Duryodhana’s army.
(M.8. Udyoga Parva, Chapter 160, Verse 130).
(5) At the time of Mahabharata the King of Kamboja
was the brave and heroic Sudaksina. (M.B. Udyoga
Parva, Chapter 166, Verses 1-3).
(6) In the battle between Kauravas and Pandavas, the
Kambojas .took their position in some places in the
“Garuda Vyiha’’, a phalanx in the shape of an eagle
made by Bhisma. (M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 56,
Verse 7).
(7) The horses of Kamboja were beautiful in appearance and of the colour of parrots. The horses which
were tied to Nakula’s chariot, were of this kind. (M.B.
Drona Parva, Chapter 23, Verse 7).
(8) When the horses of, Kamboja ran, their tails and
ears remained motionless. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter
36, Verse 36).
KAMBUGRIVA. Son of Sudhanva, King of the country of Madra. Candrasena, King of Sirmhala, tried to
get his daughter Mandodari married to this King. But
Mandodari did not consent to it. (5th Skandha, Devi
Bhagavata.)
KAMODA. A goddess who came out of the churning of
the ocean of milk. (For further details see under
‘Vihunda’).
KAMPA. A prince of Vrsnivamga. He became a_ Viévadeva after his death. (Chapter 5, Svargarohana Parva
KAMPANA I. A mighty King. He was a prominent
member of the court of Yudhisthira. (Chapter 4, Sabha
Parva, M.B.).
KAMPANA II. A demon. (See under Nahusa).
KAMPANA. A river. If one bathes in this river one will
get the benefit of doing a Pundarika yajiia. (Chapter 84,
Vana Parva, M.B.).
KAMPILYA. An ancient town in South Paficala. It was
the capital city of King Drupada. Sikhandi had come

KAMSA I
to this city after his marriage. Once the King Dasarna
came near this place and sent a Brahmana ‘messenger
to Kampilya. In olden days, a King named Brahmadatta used to rule over this city. (M.B. Udyoga Parva) .
See under the word ‘Brahmadatta’.
KAMSA I. Son of Ugrasena, King of Mathura, and an
incarnation of an Asura called Kalanemi.
1) Genealogy. Descending in order from Visnu : BrahmaAtri - Candra - Budha-Puriravas-Ayus-Nahusa-YayatiYadu-Sahasrajit-Satajit-Hehaya-Dharma-Kunti (Kuni) -
Bhadrasena-Dhanaka-Krtavira-K artaviry4rjuna-MadhuVrsni - Yudhajit - Sini-Satyaka-Satyaki (Yuyudhana )-
Yaya-Kuni-Anamitra-Prsni-Citraratha - Kukura -VahniViloma-Kapotaroman (Kapotaloman)-Tumburu - Dundubhi-Daridra-Vasu-Nahuka-Ahuka-Ugrasena-Kamsa.
2) Kantsa, an incarnation of Kalanemi. In the_svayambhuvamanvantara Marici had a wife named Urna and
they had six mighty and powerful sons. One day they
ridiculed Brahma saying ‘A father who has married his
own daughter’ (Brahma married Sarasvati, his own
daughter). Brahma became angry and cursed them to
be born as demons on earth. All the six sons were,
therefore, born as sons of a demon called Kalanemi on
earth. In their next birth they were born as sons of
Hiranyakagipu. They led a pious life and pleased at
this Brahma asked them what boon they wanted and
they demanded that they should not be killed by anybody. Their father, Hiranyakasipu, did not like his
sons getting a boon behind his back and so he cursed
his sons ‘“‘“May you all six go to Patala (nether-world)
and sleep there for a long time under the name of
Sadarbhakas. The sons begged for relief and Hiranyakasipu said that they would after sleeping for a long
time be born to’ Devaki, wife of Vasudeva, as their
children and that Kalanemi, their father in their previous birth would then be born as Karhsa and kill the
children of Devaki by striking their heads on the
ground.
Accordingly Kalanemi was born as Karhsa and he
killed the six children of Devaki by striking them on
the ground. (Skandha 4, Devi Bhagavata).
The 10th Skandha of Bhagavata states ‘“‘killing Kalanemi born as Karhsa”’ when it refers to the killing of
Kamsa.
3) Another story regarding the birth of Ramsa. Kamsa
was not actually the son of Ugrasena. It was Narada
who revealed to Kamsa the story of his birth. It is as
follows.
Once when the wife of Ugrasena was in her menses she
went to the garden with her companions. Then a
Gandharva named Dramila disguised as Ugrasena
went to her but she knew the trick and cursed him
that he would go to hell. But Dramila committed rape
on her and then left the place making her pregnant.
When the child was born Ugrasena’s wife greatly hated
the child got of an evil deed and cursed it saying that
the child would be killed bya member of the family
of Ugrasena. Thus Karnsa was the son born to the wife
of Ugrasena by the Gandharva, Dramila. It was because
Kamsa was aware of it that he behaved very badly to
Ugrasena and Krsna. (10th Skandha, Bhagavata).
4) How Kamsa got Mathurapurt. In olden times there
was a famous place called Madhuvana in the
river-base of Kalindi. The place got the name of Madhuvana because the demon Madhu was residing there.
KAMSA I
Madhu had a son named Lavana. Lavana was a very
wicked demon always ill-treating the devas. Satrughna,
son of Dagaratha, killed him and lived there establishing
a beautiful kingdom there. He named that place
Mathura. After the death of Satrughna two of his sons
ruled that country. Then when the Sirya dynasty be-
‘came extinct the city of Mathura came into the possession of the Yadu dynasty. It was ruled then by a very
brave and valiant ruler named Sirasena. Vasudeva
father of Sri Krsna was the son of Sarasena. After the
death of Sirasena another King of the Yadava dynasty;
became the ruler of the place, Vasudeva
amsa became
Skandha z,
Ugrasena,
accepting cow-rearing as his profession. K
King keeping Ugrasena as a prisoner. (
Devi Bhagavata).
5) V sudeva and Devaki are imprisoned. Vasudeva married
Devaki daughter of Ugrasena and sister. of Kamsa.
Karhsa pleased with his sister presented her with a
chariot. Karmnsa, Wasudeva and Devaki ascended the
chariot. and Karhsa himself drove the chariot. Then
from an unknown source above came a voice which
said “Oh King, know thou this and from this moment
chalk out thy plans for the future. The cighth son ©
your sister will kill you for certain. You will be no
match against him.” (Chapter 1. Bhagavata 10L
Skandha).
Hearing this voice from heaven Kamsa got furious and
dragging his sister by the hair raised his sword to ku
her. Vasudeva then pleaded weeping not to kill Devaki.
Only the eighth child of Devaki was going to kill him.
Vasudeva would hand over all the children to him 4°
soon as they were born. Such arguments pacified Kamsa
and he left off Devaki without hurting her.
Devaki delivered a son.,He grew up under the nam
of Kirtiman and one day Narada visited Karnsa a?
told him that he was the incarnation of an Asura name¢
Kalanemi and the son who would be born to Devaki
to kill him was Narayana. Kamhsa, blind with fury,
killed Kirtiman by striking him on the earth’ and 1°
prisoned both Devaki and Vasudeva.
6) Man-hunt of Kamsa. Pralamba, Canira, Trnavart4,
Mustika, Aristaka, Kesi, Dhenuka, Agha, Vivida an
Patana were born in the Asura family as servants Oo
Karnsa. He sent them to different sides of the country
to torment the Yadavas. Many Yadavas left the placeEven Karnsa’s father Ugrasena, a great devotee of Visnu
was teased.
In the meantime Devaki delivered six sons including
Kirtiman and all of them were killed by Kamsa y
smashing their heads against the ground below. 1H
seventh foetus of Devaki was aborted. (Instructed by
Mahavisnu, Mayadevi invoked the seventh foetus OF
Devakiand transferred it to the womb of Rohint
another wife of Vasudeva. The child thus born to Rohimt
was Sankarsana or Balabhadrarama. Mahavisnu then
entered the womb of Devaki instructing Mayadevi '°
enter that of Yasoda, wife of Nandagopa of Ambadi 4!
the same time. Sri Krsna was then born in the figuré
of Visnu. The watchmen were sleeping. Following
directions from the new-born child Vasudeva took the
child to Gokula and leaving the child there brought
back the child of Yasoda and p'aced it near Deva 1.
When the watchmen awoke and knew about the delivery of Devaki they immediately ran to Karhsa t0 ve

KAMSA I
him. Boiling with rage Karhsa rushed to the side of
Devaki and taking the child by the legs raised it for
smashing it against the ground. The child to the frightened dis may of Karhsa slipped from his hand and
rising up in the air said “Hi, ill-mannered wicked
Kamsa, do not waste your valour on women. Your
killer has already been born on earth. Do search for
him quickly.”
Karhsa went pale with fright on hearing this and went
away to his palace.
7) Conspiracy of Kamsa. The thought that his killer
was born somewhere made him restless. He let off
Vasudeva and Devaki finding them innocent. Then he
sat sadly pondering over the future. The courtiers then
advised him to kill all the children who had been born
within the past ten days and that would include the
killer also. Karnsa accordingly sent to different parts
of the country his secret agents to kill all children, ten
days old.
During this campaign Putana, Sakata, Trnavarta,
Aristaka and KeSi tried to kill Sri Krsna, also but
Krsna killed them all easily. For details see under each
head separately. (10th Skandha, Bhagavata).
8) Kamsats slain. Aristaka was one of the prominent
Asuras sent to kill Krsna. He attacked Krsna in the
form of an ox. Sri Krsna killed it without any difficulty. Narada who saw this incident informed Kamsa
about it adding that Krsna and Balarama were the
sons of Vasudeva only and the child who slipped out
of his hands was the child of Yasoda. Karhsa got furious
and he again imprisoned Vasudeva and Devaki and
brought to Mathura Sri Krsna and Balabhadrarama
and started thinking of ways and means to Kill them.
Karhsa arranged to conduct a grand celebration of
Ayudhapiija (worship of the weapons) and invited
Krsna and Balarama for the same among many other
gopas from Ambadi. He sent his chariot with Akriira
to fetch Krsna and Balarama from Ambadi. Akrara
privately informed Krsna of the bad aac: : e
Karmsa. Nandagopa and many others from pipe
started for Mathura. When Sri Krsna and Balabha or
rama started their journey in the chariot the gop a
gopikas assembled there cried loudly. Some blamed.
Akriara. : fp
Krsna and Balarama reached Mathura. There re ion
huge wild elephant and the five Asuras,
Mustika’ Kita, Sala and Kosala whom Karsa se it
ready to kill Krsna and Rama. Sitting on a pe me
watching this, Karhsa became frightened - ln :
and roared with rage _ toon aes fe rak a Pe
should be instantly sent awa pee ee
their wealth and all that of the separ S pe tle
~ Bind with ropes the rogue “Nan gopa,
alae wicked Vasudeva. Throw my pa a emia
‘nto the river K4lindi bound hand an ae ok
father should, be killed if he was a reiauv
oa ieee and Balarama boiled with rage when bags
heard the orders of Kamsa ane Sy aupite een
ushed Kamsa 49 1 ,
dmesg killed him. (10th Skandha, Bhagavata)
9) Other -_——
i) Kamsa ha _ th
oi named Asti and Prapu. (
gavata) :
s two daughters of Jaramarried © ‘loth Skandha, BhaKANAKHALA IIT
(11) Karhsa was a fierce bow-man. All the kings hated
him. Karhsa kept under him a crore of fighting men.
He had eight lakhs of charioteers and an equal number
of elephants. His army contained thirtytwo lakhs of
horses. (Daksinatyapatha; M.B., Sabha Parva, ChapKAMSA II. Mahabharata mentions another Karsa
who was also killed by Krsna. But he was not the son
of Ugrasena. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Daksinatyapatha,.
KAMYA. A celestial woman. In Mahabharata, Adi
Parva, Chapter 122, it is said that she took part in the
celebrations at the birth of Arjuna.
KAMYAKAVANA. The Pandavas lived in this forest
for a long time, during their forest life. At that time,
several sages were performing penance in Kamyakavana.
Vidura who went out in search of the Pandavas met
them in this forest. After that Safijaya went to Kamyakavana and took Vidura with him. It was in this
forest that the Pandavas met sages Markandeya and
| Narada. (M.B. Vana Parva).
KAN.. Daksa. (See under DAKSA). /
KANABHUTI. Adevil. His name in the previous life
was ‘“Supratika’. Once he made friends with the
devil Sthilagiras. Kuberawho became angry at this,
cursed Supratika and turned him into a devil. Supratika settled down in the Vindhya mountain, assuming
the new name “Kanabhiti’’. After narrating Brhatkatha to Gunadhya, Kanabhiti assumed his former
form. (For further details, see under the word GUNADHYA). |
KA.ADA. A famous sage of ancient India. He was the
founder of the Vaisesika system. The word means one
who eats Kana (atom). His foes gave him this name to
ridicule him. He is also called Kanabhaksaka. Kanada
is known as Pippalada also. (He got that name because
he used to eat Pippali (long pepper) in large quantities). (See under PIPPALADA).
KANAKA. A big forest on the southern base of Mahameru. Afijanadevi gave birth to Hanim4n in this
forest. (Uttara Ramayana). _
KANAKADHVAJA. (KANAKANGADA), A son of
King Dhrtarastra. He was slain by Bhimasena).
(Sloka 27, Chapter 96, Bhisma Parva).
KANAKAKSA. A soldier of Skandadeva. (Sloka 74,
Chapter 45, Salya Parva).
KANAKANGADA. See under KANAKADHVAJA.
KANAKAREKHA. Daughter of the King ofthe island
of Kanakapuri. By a curse she was born as the daughter
of Paropakari, King of thecity of Vardhamana. A
brahmin named Saktideva married her. (Caturdarikalambaka, Kathasaritsagara, Taranga 1).
KANAKAVARSA. A King who ruled the cauntry of
Kanakapuri on the banks of the river Ganga. (Kathasaritsagara) .
KANAKAVATI. A follower of Skandadeva. (Chapter
618) Salya Parva).
KANAKAYUS. A Son of Dhrtardstra. He had another
name, Karakayus. This pririce was present at the
svayarhvara of Draupadi. (Sloka 185, Chapter 67, Adi
Parva).
KANAKHALA I. The place where the Daksayaga was
conducted. (Chapter 4, Vamana Purana).
KANAKHALA II. A holy place on the shores of the
river Ganga. If one bathes in this river one gets the

KANCANA I
benefit of performing an Asvamedha sacrifice. (Sloka
30, Chapter 84, Vana Parva). Kalidasa speaks about
this place in his famous work ‘Meghadita’. At the
behest of Vasistha, Taksaka, son of Laksmana, conquered the foresters of Kanakhala and then established a
city there called Agati. (Uttara Ramayana).
KANCANA I. One of the two warriors given to
Skandadeva by Mahameru. The other warrior was
named Meghamali. (M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 45,
Verse 47).
KANCANA II. A King of the Piiru dynasty. See under
the word PURUVAMSA.
KANCANAKSA. Awarrior of Skandadeva. (M.B.
Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 57).
KANCANAKSI. A river which flows through Naimigaranya. This is a part of the river Sarasvati. (M.B.
Salya Parva, Chapter 38, Verse 19).
KANCANAMALA. A lady attendant of Vasavadatta,
wife of Udayana.
KANCI (KANCIPURA). This was the capital city of the
Cola Kings. This city was also called “Kancivaram’”’,
It is mentioned among the holy cities. (M.B. Udyoga
Parva, Chapter 161, Verse 21).
KANDARA. A follower of Skandadeva.
Salya Parva).
KANDARPA. Another name for Kamadeva. Kamadeva was born of the mind of Brahma and as soon as
he was born he turned to Brahma and asked ‘‘Kam
darpayami ?”? (Whom should I make proud ?) So
Brahma gave him the name Karhdarpa alias Kandarpa.
(Lavanakalambaka, Kathasaritsagara, Taranga 6).
KANDU. A great sage of ancient Bharata. He was the
father of Marisa (Varksi) wife of the Pracetas.
1) Birthof Marisa. Marisa, daughter of Kandu, took
her birth from a tree. There is an interesting story about
this in Visnu Purana.
Sage Kandu, chief of the devajfias, was performing
penance in a hermitage on the banks of the river
Gomati. Devendra sent Pramlocaé, an enchanting
nymph, to Kandu to distract him from his penance.
Pramloca by her sweet words and enticing manners won
the heart of the sage and Kandu accepting her as his
wife went to the valley of Mandara and lived there
happily for a hundred years.
One day Pramloca went and bowed before her husband
and sought his permission to go back to Devaloka.
‘Dear, stay here for some time more” replied the sage.
Another hundred years went by. Again one day she
went and sought permission to go home. Again the
(Chapter 46,
sage asked her to stay for a while more. Centuries.
passed without the sage losing even a little of his
amour. On the other hand every day it found different
channels of expression. One evening the sage stepped
out of his Agrama and on seeing that Pramloca enquired where he was going.
Sage: The sun 1s going to set. I am going todo my
sandhyavandana. I do not want to bring a break in
my daily ablutions and duties.
Pramloca : Oh, Righteous one, did the sun set for you
only today ? The Sunset of hundreds of years has gone
by without your knowing. . .
Sage : Dear, you came [0_ this holy river-shore only
this morning. It was only this morning that I saw you
coming to my Asrama for the first time. Now the day
_ 384 KANIKA I
is over and dusk is coming. Why this ridicule ? Please
do tell me the truth.
Pramloca : That I came to you one fine morning 1s
quite true. But since that several centuries have
elapsed.
Sage : How many years have gone by since I started
enjoying with you ?
Pramloca-: Nine hundred years, six months and three
days have passed since I came to you.
The great sage became very angry and scolded
Pramloca much. That beautiful maiden heard it all
standing bathed in_ perspiration. The sage in rage
commanded the trembling nymph to go away from
his presence. Pramloca, thus reprimanded and sent
away, rose up in the air and travelled by it. As she
flew, the perspiration of her body was absorbed by the
tender leaves of trees on the way. She was pregnant
at that time and the embryo which went forth along
with her perspiration was absorbed in bits by the
tender leaves and sprouts. Wind gathered them from the
different trees and made everything into one. Moonlight gave it development and gave it the form of 4
woman. She was named Marisa. That was how Marisa
was born of trees (Chapter 15, Arnga 1. Visnu Purana }»
2) Curse of Kandu. Kandu’s dear son aged sixtee?
died in a forest. Grief-stricken, the sage cursed that
forest and made it a desert. There was no water
there and all the trees became dried and dead.
Haniaman and party who went in search of Sita came 10
this place. (Chapter 48, Kiskindha Kanda, Valmiki
Ramayana). :
3) Kandu in the presence of Sri Rama. When Sri Ram
returned to Ayodhya after his exile many sages from
all the four different parts came to visit him. Those
who came from the south were Kandu, Dattatrey
Namuci, Pramuci, Valmiki, Soma and Agasty@-
(Uttara Ramayana).
of Skandadeva. (Sloka 14,
KANDUTI. A follower
Chapter 46, Salya Parva).
KANIKA I. af
1) General information. One of the ministers
Dhrtarastra. He was a brahmin well-learned 1”
Kiitaniti (Diplomacy). The bad advice he gave
Dhrtarastra became well-known as ‘“Kanika’s Kuta
niti’’.
2) Kanika’s Kitaniit. Once Dhrtarastra asked Kaniké
how to conquer one’s enemies by using the fou
methods of Sama, Dana, Bheda and Danda. Kanika
replied : ‘“Threaten the timid ones. Give respect ie
the brave and kill them by trickery. Give gifts to the
‘greedy ones. If any one becomes your enemy kill seat
even ifit be your father, preceptor, son, brother 9
friend. Never speak insulting words about others even
when you are extremely angry. Never believe the
faithful and unfaithful alike.”
3) Kanika’s story. Kanika justified his policy by
of the story ofa fox who put into practice the
tricks to gain his end. , ‘
Once there was a very selfish fox in a forest. He felt P
desire to eat the flesh of a lion. For that end he mé ?
friends with a tiger, a rat and a mongoose. The Sn
advised the rat to gnaw the paws of the lion and ma >
it lame. The tiger should then kill the lion. The —
was killed and the fox suggested that they could a
a hearty meal of the lion after a bath. EveryboY
means
four

KANIKA II
excepting the fox went for his hb
watch over the carcass of the ea os ae ps _
after his bath. The fox looked worried and the a
ag him the reason why. The fox said “Gemma
: e << says with arrogance that le it was that killed the
ae y pEve does not allow me to eat what the rat
= to be his kill.” Hearing this the proud tiger
eft the place saying ‘“‘Let me see whether I can kill
Sl prey without the help of anybody.”
ee the rat came after its bath. The sly
ie id “My friend, the mongoose says that the flesh
ie ion 1s poison. It says ‘‘Let the rat eat it and die.”
en this the rat went its way.
. pa the mongoose. The fox threatened it and it
ie way. The fox then ate the flesh of the lion by
imself and was contented. |
Kanika then said that the Kings should use such tricks
against their enemies. (Chapter 139, Adi Parva).
KANIKA II. There is a statement in Mahabharata
about another brahmin of the Bharadvaja family who
was also well-versed in Kitaniti. He was an adviser to
Satrufijaya, King of Sauvira. (Chapter 140, Santi
Parva).
KANINA. Achild born to an unmarried woman.
Vyasa, Karna, Sibi, Astaka, Pratardana, and Vasuman
were Kaninas. |
-KANJALA. See under Dharmasarma.
KANKA I. One of the seven famous archers of the
Vrsni dynasty. The seven are : Krtavarma, Andadhrsti,
Samika, Samitifijaya, Kanka, Sanku “and Kunti.
(Chapter 14, Sabha Parva).
KANKA II. A King of ancient
Chapter 1, Adi Parva).
KANKA III. A_ bird,
Chapter 66, Adi Parva).
KANIKA IV. The name which Dharmaputra bore when
he spent his life incognito at the palace of the. King of
Virata. (See under Dharmaputra ).
KANKA V. A place of habitation of ancient India.
This place was given to Dharmaputra as a gift by the
‘nhabitants of the place. (Chapter 5], Sabha Parva).
KANKANA. A follower of Skandadeva. (Sloka 16,
Chapter 46, Salya Parva) .
KANTAKINI, A follower of Skan
apter 46, Salya Parva).
KANTARAKA. "A city " South India. There 1s a reference in Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter 31,
Verse 16, about the conquest of this place by Sahadeva.
Modern scholars are of the opinion that Kantaraka 1s
situated on the banks of the river Vena. .
A An ancient sage. He was a worker of his
KANTARIKA.
ait It was in this family that the pre-eminent
Brahmadatta was born. (Chapter 342, Santi Parva).
KANTI. A city in ancient India. (M.B. Bhisma Parva,
9, Verse 40).
la : ie observed in the month of
IVRATA. A obs r
oe It consists in ibaa ae be S aeeene
i only at nignt.
oh 25 ie fo A te Aa longevity ane health
can be obtained. Chapter 177).
ASYAPA).
KANVA I. (KB ) ance anatael
1) General information. (
; the father who brought up Sakuntala.
India. (Sloka 233,
son of Surasa. (Sloka 69,
dadeva. (Sloka 16,
r one year, ¥
(Agni Purana,
Puranic fame
From Rgveda
KANYAHRADA
it can be gathered that the Kanva fami
¢ amil 7
pom among the Rsi families of witout andes,
ecause he was born in the family of sage Kagyapa,
son of Brahma, Kanva was known as Kasyapa also.
Kanva’s father was Medhatithi as could be seen by a
reference to him in Sloka 27, Chapter 208 of Santi
ee as sper ears Kanva was staying in a her
mitage on the banks of the ri lini, wi t
Preise river Malini, witha num2) Kanvasrama. Vana Parva of Mahabha
mi abharat
that Kanvasrama was on the northern a aie
river Praveni. According to certain critics Kanvagrama
was situated on the banks of the river Cambal. f
miles to the south of ‘Kota’ in Rajputana. any
3) How Kanva got Sakuntala. Once Vigvamitra started
a severe penance and Indra desiring to obstruct the
attempt sent the enchanting Menaka to entice him
They fell in love with each other and soon Menaka
bore a girl. The parents left the child in the forest and
went their way. Birds ( Sakuntas) looked after her for
sonic sme and so she was named Sakuntala. Accidentae ae came that way and took the child to his
4) The Yaga of Bharata. Bharata, son
: 2 of D
ac # acne type of Yaga called ‘Govitate will
anva as the chief preceptor to offici
aL 74, Adi Parva). 7 suai — om
5. Kanva and Duryodhana. Once Kanva
thana. nva narrat
Duryodhana how Matali and his wife Sadheema pm
to him in search of a suitable husband to their daughter
ae ome Udyoga Parva, M.B.)
anva, a sage of the east. When Sri Rama 3
to Ayodhya after his exile many sages sad eas
different parts came to visit him. Kanva was one of
those who came from the east. The others who came
along with him were, Vasistha, Atri, Visvamitra
Gautama, Jamadagni, Bharadvaja, Sanaka, Sarabhan a
Durvasas, Matanga, Vibhandaka and Tumburu i
7) Kanva and Reveda.
(i) There are ten Mandalas in Reveda. Th
dalas from two to seven are written cy Aifiatent ee
lies. ‘The second Mandala was written by the Bhargava
family of rsis, the third by the Visvamitra family, the
fourth by that of Vamadeva, the fifth by Atri, the sixth
by that of Bharadvaja and the seventh by the famil
of Vasistha. Fifty Suktas of the first Mandala and me
whole of the eighth Mandala were written by Kanva
( - } Bana ae a son ar Medhatithi. Sikta twelve
: our in the t é 1
ti) K ee Medhatithi ae i A ae
ili anva had a daughter named Indi a
by Menaka. (Kathasaritsagara). (See ee ag 0 tN
valoka and Kasyapa I).
ee ‘ A King of Puiruvarnga. (Piru dynasty).
ay was the son of the brother of Santurodha, father of
usyanta. His father was Pritiratha and he also had
a son named Medhatithi. (Agni Purana).
KANVASIRAS. A caste. Originally they were Ksatriyas.
In Mahabharata, Anugasana Parva, Chapter 35,
Verse 17 we find that they were reduced to low caste
because of their being jealous of the superiority of the
Brahmanas.
sp ee pepe A sacred place. If one stayed in this
ace for a while one would attain Devaloka. (Ch
25, Anugasana Parva). —

ae le ll
SS a SE NS ST Sv
“VKANYAKAGUNA: A -place of ‘habitation of: ancient |. ‘Ifyou visit Rsabhacala:of Pandyadesa youwitbget the
_silmdia (Chapter 9;'Bhisma Parva).oi ison cic ce benefitoof conducting ‘an! '\Aévamedhayaga: ‘Dhen you
KANYAKUBJA./ (KBANYAKUBJA). ¢7 96 Sennoue. “oimust! govfarther:south ‘and take:a dip lin Kanyatirtha.
.o2lk) sGeneral information. -A-city- of Puranic:'fame on:the .»/)Thetouchsof that water, absolves:you-of all ‘sins?7Phen
<s ybanks of\the river Gaiiga: This .is the same place which <1; visiti\Gokarna situated in the:ocean!ifamous int all! the
“ge now)known as Kanauj:- Visvamitra was ithe son of («1 three worlds:and worshipped bysall’Pisy iA .t01l |
9 Gadhi, King of Kanyakubja. jeuliiiedbolé es sus 'Fronmthis itiis to be. :undérstoodi-that: ot! the:timre of
-ci2) Origin: ofthis citys: Once there was ‘ia greatsage. {110i Mahabharata Kanyakumari! wasi partoof Pandyadesa
named Kuga who was the sonof Brahma! He had of and that Gokarnawasiam islandi) iodine youd yt
-otchis wife Vaidarbhi four-sons named Kusgamba,! KuSa- »'. 2) Purdnicrstories about Kanyakumari}; Thereovare several
ot pabha;|: Asirtarajasa:and Vasu: Kusa asked: them:''each -olgtories regarding» the « origin! .and renown) of Kanyasentovtule A country ..and oso-each of them»built avcity of — » kumari in the Puranas. !The moést . important idnes’ are
suohis! sown. ) Kusambai named ‘his city: Kausambi; Kusa- given below. “yg ait tage yest oils ai emiicol
nabha gave his: citysthe: mame ‘of.’Mahodayapura, ': | (1:) 'Absolver-ofi sins.) The wifevofiia ‘brahmini named
hotAsartarajasa ‘called his. city: Dharmaranya and Vasu Apaiicika living in Kasi became-ainchaste and tov»wash !
5 called chis city'-Girivraja. Of these :Mahodayapura, away her sin she camé to: Kanyakumari walking all
_ccti¢ity of Kuganabha) /became later famous ‘as‘Kianyakubja. -/ :the:way and! did: penance thereslidaily sbathitigsin its
éio(Bala Kanda; Valmiki Ramayanayo! ai fioi york waters:: SHe . attained Salvation andit is believed that
pi.n3)p Hows Mahodayapura : became Kanyakubja. «Kuganabha ,,..a,bath,inits waters,would absolve anybody /of! jal’ his
10) begotachundred daughters of: ‘the nymph Ghrtaci ody sins. :{ Manimekhala)).9:53 to sicnisid sodions suods
ic/Those béautiful girls were once playing’ in’ the ‘forests <; (2) Cakxa tirtha of Kanyakumari; Punyakasi; daughter of
eid when! the’! wind-god fell’ in love with them. The’girls ;;,, Maydsura, once: went,to,Kailasa and worshipped Siva.
rejected his love and Vayu getting angry ‘with “them After three yugas Siva appeared before her/and,aske
-sineursed them:and ‘made! them hunchbacks. Because the ,,, her, what, she wanted. She replied; that she wanted ;;to
Jivhundred’ Kanyakas: (girls) {became Kubjas (hunch- |- be, «merged, in, Siyac always. ; iva then,said. “Lhree
1 Ibacks). atothat place, the place became'known- as. Kanya- “hundred anid sixtyfive days would make a, -year,.,,f0Ur
sabia. rome ibd. ty tetas.) lakhs and thirtythree years, would make a J 1:
‘| Bi (bs, t\ ‘TD ie ‘Ae
0) Whenc:the: daughters‘ returned to'the ‘palace‘as hunch- four’ an
Sie >
y
io
er)
red: | _ Krta, Treta, Dvapara and Kali’ar ugas , a!
“<ovpacks Kuganabha’ was greatly distressed.' Weeping,’ the ~ “1 When'?'two thousand “such Wugds are over Brabma
girls told him what‘had’ ‘happened. ‘At'that timé a’sage !° ‘finishes a‘day:"Such thirty’ days make one ‘gnodth’ and
named ‘Culi was performing penance in’ a forest'‘nearby. ‘\‘twelvé'ihonths)a year for Brahria!"WHen such ‘hundre
>on Somaday'daughter of Urmila, a gandharva lady, married years of Brahma are over thé great deluge conics.’ Such
yes@ilitcand they ‘got a son named Brahmadatta.‘This .°’ “ten«déluges''make':anazhika (twentyfour ininuutes of
io 9 Brahmadatta’ niarried’' the’ hundred‘ hunchbacks of Visnu. Counting thus when. you! pass ten Visnurdeluges
ooisKusanabha and the very touch of Brahmadatta trans- Siva! passes-a:second) Then isithe time - for Ahe/fulfil_1! formed’ the hunchbacks into beautiful girls.’ OOlB ment of your desire. Till that time: ot bitin meditasa/iAfter having given his daughters in’ marriage Kuganabha ‘°" tion‘on the shores:of! the Southi*seas! Youd Aelmitage
condiicted'a Putrakamesti yaga to'get a’ son Ini’ that ‘0 swould:becknown! as) Kanyaksetia®! driT'apah?Sthala.
Yaga Brahma appeared in person and blessed Kusanabha — During your stay there!you smauso kill call) thesswicke
-08 gnd-he got a son. The son was named ‘Gadhi.* Gadhi cibpeople like*Banasuraand: give relief| to the / people:
“itigot ‘a ‘son and a daughter. ‘The son was named Visva- ©“! will also come/and stay withoyow there Mthen!?? ets
Svsgnitra “and the ‘daughter, Satyavati’Recika married -’ Punyakasi after “prostrating before: Sivacawent ito the
od? Sdivavatil)Gadhi and /Visvamitra were’the’ ‘rulers of .”| :
south seas Taking a Japamala (necklace for prayer yin
: her hands she assumed. the ‘name’ Kanyakumari; a?
ie Rael stecakt nat adh. oe, Relic cde Ol gtarted her penance, After/conquéring “all the three
oc) 4) Narada’ and Kanyakubja.” There was-a'very big lake _ worlds demon Bana was having a Wicket pale over_his
sve Kanyakubja, Mahavishnu’ once’ showed’ Maya to ~~ eople when he'saw'Kanyakutiarl and asked “her tobe
ovloNarada at'that place. ‘(See under ‘Narada’).* (| '" AS fig wife, Heeapproached’ hee! with his! wicked “sefve nts
| BY Viseamitra and Indra take wine ‘together. Vigvatnitra v2 Durmukha atid’ Durdartana But! Kanyakumiai? * atly
dixiKanyakubja. See under’ /‘Reika,’ Viévamitra’— (Sargas
vilc39 to34,/Balakanda; Valmiki Ramayana)? (°°! «"
-__and Indra took wine together ‘at ‘Kanyakubja. | “(Sloka © spefased and dnithe battle that ‘ensued; Bariasurw fell“dea
-ANYAKUMARI (KANYAKUPA;: KANYATIRTHA) aid Igy ‘the Cakratirtha: (Skanda' Parana) ..471 (AATWA i
1) General information. Mahabharata makes ‘references '“!°"(3)"The phantom child which’ escapedtrom the’han $
(igh mnany ‘places to Kanyakumari, the’ southern’ extremi- Of Karnsd at the timélof the birth ofSe Kpaia was that
to ¢yl of former Kerala” and ’Gokarna, “the” ‘northern .»divineslady, Karyakumarita(Padma Purana) .eriAt 4
SoB6undary. It must, ther efore, be. ‘surmised “that' “these 3) The Geographical view. It Gsisaidithate thereswas a? |
two holy places were very ancient ones. Vana Parva, ‘, ,extension of the present continent, to phe south apd tht |
°°" praises Kanyakumari at many places. If any one“bathes j,;;, expansivedand icalled Lamiiria wan.dater! submers? |
at this place one will become very famous. (Anusasana yoivwaters.!/ There ig,a-desctiptionnofsneh annextende plane !
“Parva, M.B.). silo somes ofy the -old;-literatyre, dike, Gilappadikaran- | |
Chapter eightyfive of Aranya Parva, of Bhasa ‘Bharata Kanyakumari which,was ‘called. ‘Kumiarizambadi als |
speaks praisingly of Kanyakumari and Gokarna among was the first setu; Dhanuskotig thes middle serus, or |
om other places. It says thus: ic: Oliuive & TOT soKlg . sca c Peotikkara, last setu. (Setu Purana VGA ns (I |
, Gadhi—This is found as ‘Gadhi’ in Mahabharata and ‘Gadha’ in’ Ra maya a, PSI TU AGG CEU SEP hs vid odve torlist old 26

KANYASAMVEDYATIRTHA
A) In-History)) Kanyakumari, had attracted s the;-attenption,of foreigners long, before Chnist.:| Hérodotus | who
lived, int) the ; third y.century; iB.Gii) hasy written» about
Kanyakuman in,one, of his, books.aiiiosis soil’. blow
in, the, book Periplus:, written, in) 60> ADs there) is va
mention of, Kanyakumari. « Ut) says:iPious. persons iat
‘the,fagiend.of their lives dedicate theirs:lives, toi God
jand goto. Kanyakumari .on.a pilgrimage and. stayi:there
accepting. jan ;, ascetic,life. Aldiyine lady bathed)in the.
2 oly; waters, there. grants; you,;;darsana}s''s)2 brs oduds1
ce tolemy another, traveller, who lived/two, thousand: years
agonzefers tq. Kanyakumariin, \his sbaoke asi‘ Kormaria
Akron’. He had bathed in those waters:and worshipped
an the (Kanyakumari temples{ic GAL yeh? nnornssdy A { C
.Marco,Polo, of, Venice wiho sdhad.teavelled these! pants: in
1243, A.D., has written, of ; hissworshipping in the KanyaAumari temple. /He, has also, recorded having.seen thirty
m Kanyakumari a-glittering figureilike that: cof
noisiiboim lo sgoy ov.
who, lived, in,,,1203.. A.Dp; has
» miles, {tt ‘
ithe, Pole;star. 1) DEis
ibn Batata, Wl
D Ons
figals
referred to
anyakumary in nis baer as Raskumbariecisfosos 19/1
KANYASAMVEDYA IRTHA,;; An;ancient holy, place.
S/itid +
It is‘believed that those who visit this place wills attain
the world of Prajapatimanu, (Chat ten 84, Wana Rarva)
‘ee ace, if-ajman, spends three
nights at this place he would, attain Syargab (\Gl apt
._ 83, Vana..P nva) 4 stint omie il’ bojiziv sliqs.al (it)
APA sy aif company of Asuras. Lhe \Mahabharata
+2 "ss fy risa ALL we tle’ . Pr Re ‘
Ky : ves Bi story éf how the brahmins err (ee demons.
ae -to.the.earth, andjgave eyesibhesAgvinidevas ange. came to.ths 20) aoe eee a
“sight, tothe blind sage, Gyavanai) twas; tne dime, We
-ABUO tdisiw Jove Sire | Agvinid Sage
n Ti: had d ied oma. Juice fo,the, AsV NIAEvAss| ag
1 ean “ick his eyesight,;and promised, the
“TIP IT La BP" (ZS OBIC |) PRAC AS han -on “wine te
“"ASvi ao that he Fould iift, the (ban con iW igi tor
na conducted, a. Yaga.to, which the: $VilllJRO iL oe 7
co “invited, , Indra, and: the, other: devas
L Sak . mee’ pees Boe - 7
refused to, take.the, sqgrificial .wine andi hptterd Alone
“ wh . ce gOte J t] RST 4 = : =
eshith the’ Agvinidevas, ,Cyavanai Boti@ngty ARM ches Pie
“Tie om the sacrificial fire’ an,, Asura; RAMS i Mage.
eeth ,the demon went
ERE GAY
piss
é er
devas, were also
“The Kapas
RITE V
mn All at once,Gyavana ;conojound ASiteaats all it at } ie Al LN rh jdigatt rs “
; quered th ‘ the
tk sit Yew 5 i TROL I eet
Beapinins’ for, help, «i nesbrabmins
oainst the, Kapas. - K
“Paar eda wae pee Eee ts
. 80 why, ao FOU
With .a huge:mouth, and long, tect
sh i brane 1st Puig YOM
33D 7 SLID ey t © Devage i ) 7" h So
and, -earth,; the Deyas
(When they lost both heavy ATs The. brahmi
-BTIOSVOWUGHE d+ Xv
LiF QI1 SS.
yw oat S pollo 2 Vea nee ; anl Sal
6 the Hrahimins for peace-talks.) ie sy a d
ahmins yam aN is
e re € ismree Ane Oh, bre MUD») Ait edas.and,are, Very
fight théem?They are WeHvetisocy Coss oe They are
Cf 169 50) D otonw, Zen t4 Cc nd ct. Yagas.. 40¢y Al
Thyise® eh who. are entitled .to, C9 ao se Prosperity
“PiphtEdus: persons’ similar 10, C re wives, nor, do
“Tivés’ itt them. infiéy never keep unchaste SLOT,
they eat stale meat. It is not PrOR ioe
‘“ to, fight against.
AG “ft Pike he
2AsticH ViFtHOUS PaPSORS ot car bupleary Hae! at
“Butte brshinins did noe pay heed t0 vty ae AbaL
sand they ‘killed!all-the’ Kapas ™ Salk’ “Phe -Aapar,
though they were born SR ees
-ipetsons. 1(Qhapter | Sify AnASASPR gilt o 14
KAPALA«d See under Brahma, Sth! Pare néchores Of" tite
KAPALAMOCANAY#:A holy place Oona 98, . Varia
_ fiver, Sarasyaui, dny,Kunuksetra. Lae 1° and! )) bay
ENT Creat pone rate Rudras. This Rudraj was’
“thé Son of Sthanu, son of Braun:
Parva). According..to. the U7 - a4 ‘Sarpa, Nirrti
OR uatatctne re! fetlowikig: Mreavyadha, S47 PAs: 2tt"
Pan ce 3" oe
were good-narns
. i\s
a
Be you
the Mahabharata, the ; eleven,
IG k Ww
KAPATA BHIKSU~
»Ajaikapaty:|“Ahirbudhnyay '°Pinaki, vara.’ Kapali,
Sthanu, Bharga.‘and: ‘Dahana. '(Seé’ under Kapardi).
‘Theieleven*Rudras ‘are’ réferred “to ‘in’ different’ Ways
‘ini Agni!Purana and Vighu Purana) 0° UO DES eos
KAPALD I1xoSiva! The Mahabharata ‘gives ‘the’ follow-
-ing story’: regarding’ the’ reason for Siva’s" getting the
mamerofRapaliji ~.1 sefuis)) .beloot enw Ueails
Once a great controversy arose. regarding the ‘supreme.
»sovereignty) ‘of the’ three’ Worlds between Brahma and“
Visnu. Then there came to their midst an , effulgence..
of Siva and a voice from heaven said “He ESE
the source of this brilliance is thé real “sovereign of ae
-tthree worlds’) Brahma went’ up to find'the™ uppér end
Jand?iVisnu went down’ to ‘find’ the lower end! “They
ictravelled for a-very'long timé “without findins™ the’ tad
when Brahma saw a Ketaki flower’ coming’ ISR SB
benquiry’ the’ flower ‘said'it was coming’ from’ the “origin
~of ‘the ‘brilliance’ and” that ‘three’ Brahma: déluges had
Jelapsed ‘since: its starting ‘from there. Brahtia took that
iflower and went to! Visnu. Visnu' asked Brahiia Whether
che shad seen! therend of the effiilgence’ and Brahma Aid
f
isyés’:olmmediately: the ‘flower in’ the ‘hand - of “Brahina
}turnedsintos the figure of® Siva-and cut off 6ne OF fhe
heads: of Brahmamaking' five-headéd Brahma ‘into fourheaded. The angered Brahma’ curséd-Siva ?“May you
\ go: begging-with acKapala (hurian skulf) in your hand.”
Thus Siva became a Kapali. Siva cursed Brahma ‘back
saying: ‘You «will not' be! worshipped ' by anyone” ‘(See
sander SivayyBralima)|i isoqe youl. wudsvoC bois:
KAPARDI (One of 'the veleveri Riidras,’ Accorditic' “to
Agni-Purana the Ekadaga'"Rudras: (éleven Rudras) Are
othe following’: Hara, Bahuripa; Tryambaka,’Aparajita
Vrsakapi, Sambhu, Kapardi, Raivata, Mrgavyadha,
_»Sarparand Kapali. .(Chapter 18; ‘Agni’ Purana’) =
KAPATA. «A demon. > He “was! 'Kasgyapa’s son’ born’ of
chis;wifé’ Danui:( Chapter 65, 'Bhisma Parva)" nO sl
KAPATABHIKSU:..| Acfalse'sage! ! Too ilustraté ‘the fact
that if.ayman/ifails in hiscdeceit he ‘will be ‘subjectéd ‘to
tidicule,-a‘story ofia false sage occurs in ‘Kathasaritsa-
. garac Since this: Character-has° earned” ‘a place. inthe
, Indian literature his story is‘givenbelow!:) 0919 )!895
) There} wasronce)a' cityucalled: Makandi onthe banks of
the, :river,,Gangac > In sthat icity. lived °@ > sage’ who
yobserved-silence:}as| a» Vrata. (One day’ when ‘he went
obeggingshe saw a:beautiful girl)in a Vaisya’s house ‘and
_the false | ascetic) was” attracted ‘by ‘her: Breaking’ his
silence he said ‘What a pity!” and left the place.’ The
Valsya was worriedwhy the sage said. so’ and ‘approached
phim, and asked why: hé broke his: silence to) say so. The
sage, said :‘*Your daughter ‘is ill/omened. If you’give her
inmarriage all of you.remaining will perish: So pack her
-in.{a box.and:with'a:torch burning‘on the top‘of it set it
afloat on the river.”“The Vaisya did'so/00/'1 91) ow
‘Thesage coming to his: Aérama’ ‘called’ his‘ disciples’ to
his side..and said ““To-night a box witha’ torch burning
on the topjof,.it will. come: floating! on the river.“You
oust take it and bring it-to.me without opening it.” r
he disciples, went. to!the» river) and ‘seeing: the box
coming floating caught it and:took it to their preceptor.
-But.froma point high up in the. river’a prince had seen
the) box, coming floating and/ had. opened it. He had
then released the girl from ithe: box and had floated the
box again filling it with a black » monkey. When the
disciples got the box to the guru he. said “Take it upstairs and keep.it there: There:is a Pija to be conduct-
» I IBG!I i
LI \

KAPI
ed with the recital of sacred verses. It should not be
seen by others. You can all go to sleep.”’
Lhe false sage went up eager to enjoy the girl in the
box and opened the box with pleasant thoughts. But to
his utter horror there jumped from the box a ferocious
black monkey who mauled him terribly. The Kapatabhiksu was fooled. (Taranga 1. Lavanakalambaka,
Kathasaritsagara ).
| — A river. (M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Verse
KAPIDHVAJA. Arjuna.
KAPILA I. A fierce sage.
1) Genealogy and birth. Kapila was the son of Kardamaprajapati, son of Brahma, born to him of his wife
ee oe of Brahma and daughter of
vayambhuva Manu.
Svayambhuva Manu got two sons named Priyavrata and
Uttanapada and three daughters named Akiti, Devahuti and Prasiiti. The daughters were married to Ruci,
Kardama and Daksa respectively. To Ruci was born of
Akuti a boy named Yajiia. He was a partial incarnation
of Visnu. To Kardama was born of his wife Devahuti
Kapilacarya, a great sage and the celebrated exponent
an Lees ag —— got many daughters
andha, Devi Bhagavata).
pate Kapila was known as Cakradhanus also. (Sloka 17
hapter 109, Udyoga Parva).
Kardama married the daughter of Vaivasvata Manu
called Devahiti. They spent their honeymoon in the
air ee throughout the world. Devahiti delivered
nine daughters and a son named Kapila. KardamapraJapat gave his daughters in marriage to Marici and the
other sages.
2) Kapila—incarnation of Visnu. The Brahmanda
Purana states that Kapila was the incarnation of Visnu.
In Chapter 93 there is this statement : “Bhagavan
a will a e all. ee Lord of the universe
as now been born in the world as Kapilacarya.”’ -
5) Ais i imparts spiritual a ae to his mother. Kapila
started a severe penance. At that time Kardamaprajapati died and Devahuti wife of Kardama and mother
of Kapila approached Kapila and asked him to instruct
her on the path of Bhakti Yoga. Kapila imparted to her
spiritual knowledge and gave her instructions to follow
the path of Bhakti Yoga for Salvation. She entered into
- ve of =< and attained Samadhi. (3rd Skandha,
agavata).
4) How kh me ys to ashes the Sagaraputras. Once there
was a king ca a Baeeta in the Solar dynasty. He had
two wives named Kesini and Sumati. Kegini got a son
named Asamafijasa and Sumati got sixtythousand sons.
Ce ies ne, and Bel yal nae
where t eet. AmMsSuman,
son of Asamanjasa led the sacrificial horse. Indra disguised as a demon stole the horse when it came toa
mountain side and hid it in the nether worlds.
Sagara sent his sixtythousand sons in search of the horse.
They dug the whole continent of Jambidvipa surrounded by mountains. Devas, gandharvas and bhujangas
complained to Brahma. Then Brahma said: “The whole
of this world belongs to Visnu. He has incarnated himself as sage Kapila to kill] the sons of Sagara and is
now in the nether-world bearing this world. In the fire
of his anger the Sagaraputras will be burnt to death’’.
On hearing this all of them came back.
388 KAPILA VIII
The Sagaraputras returned to their father when they
could not find the horse. But Sagara ordered “Go and
dig again till you find it”. They went to the nether
world. After circling the eight elephants who carry the
world they dropped down to the nether world through
the north-east corner of the earth. There they saw sage
Kapila engaged in penance and the sacrificial horse
grazing by his side. The sons of Sagara made a great
hubbub there and Kapila produced a big sound of
rebuke and stared at them. All the sixtythousand sons
of Sagara were reduced to ashes. For more details see
under Bhagiratha. (Sargas 39 and 40, Balakanda.
Valmiki Ramayana).
5) Kapilayogasastra. Kapila made the renowned Kapilaastra sitting in his ASrama and taught it to his mother
Devahiti. Kapila was a great yogin. The yoga Sastra
itself is based on the Sankhya philosophy of Kapila. His
Sankhya Sastra, known as Kapila Sastra also, contains
the distinctive yoga of meditation and it creates in you
spiritual knowledge removing your ignorance totally.
After teaching his mother his ‘Kapila’ he went to the
Aérama of Pulaha and lived there. (8th Skandha, Devi
Bhagavata ).
6) Other details regarding Kapila.
(i) Kapila was the preceptor of the King of Sindhu.
5th Skandha, Bhagavata) .
(ii) Kapila visited Bhisma while the latter was lying
on his bed of arrows before his death. (Sloka 8, Santi
Parva, M.B.). |
(iii) ‘There occurred a discussion once between Kapila
and a Sage named ‘Gau’ on the subject whether Grhasthadharma (doing one’s duty as a house-holder) oF
yogadharma (doing yoga practices) was superior.
(Chapter 286, Santi Parva).
(iv) Kapila was a sage of great brilliance of bodyWhen the sons of Sagara went to the nether world in
search of the horse they saw the sage Kapila sitting
there radiating a brightness equal to that of fire. (Ghapter 107, Aranya Parva).
(v) Kapila was an authority on Sankhya and Veda
and was a worshipper of Siva. (Sloka 4, Chapter 18,
Anu§g4asana Parva).
(vi) He has written two books, namely, Sankhyapravacana and Tattvasamasa.
KAPILA II. Another name of Sirya. (Sloka 24, Chapter 3, Vana Parva, M.B.).
KAPILA III. A serpent king. It is believed that Kapila
is one of the seven serpent Kings who hold the earth in
its position. The others are: Dharma, Kama, Kala, Vasu,
Vasuki and Ananta. (Sloka 41, Chapter 150, Anugasana
Parva).
KAPILA IV. Son of an Agni named Bhanu. He was
his fourth son and was believed to be another incarnation of sage Kapila (Sloka 21, Chapter 221, Vana
Parva) .
KAPILA V. Another sage who was the father of Salihotra. He officiated in a yajfia conducted by Uparicaravasu. (Chapter 336, Santi Parva).
KAPILA VI. A son of Vigvamitra who was a brahmavadi. (Chapter 4, AnuSasana Parva) .
KAPILA VII, A synonym of Siva. (Chapter 17, Anusasana Parva).
KAPILA VIII. A synonym of Visnu. (Chapter 149,
Anusgasana Parva).

KAPILA I 389 KARANDHAMA
KAPILA I. Daughter of Daksaprajapati. Kasyapa named ‘Tumburu and Suvarcas. KApota received
ro Kapila. (Sloka 12, Chapter 65, Adi Parva wealth from Kubera and gave it ti Hie Gans So
M
KAPILA II. A holy place of Kuruksetra. If one bathes
in a sacred pond there one will get the benefit of
making a thousand Godanas (giving away cows as
gifts). (Chapter 83, Vana Parva).
KAPIL«, III. A river. (Chapter 9, Bhisma Parva) .
KAPILA IV. The mother of Paficagikha. (Chapter 218,
Santi Parva).
KAPILA (M). Seventh division of KuSadvipa. (M.B.
Bhisma Parva, Chapter 12, Verse 14).
KAPILAHRADA. A sacred place in Kasi. If one bathes
there one will get the benefit of performing a Rajastiya
yajiia.
KAPILAKEDARATIRTHA. A holy place of ancient
India, Sage Kapila stayed here for some time. If one
bathes ina pond there one will acquire the art of
becoming invisible to others (Chapter 83, Vana Parva,
KAPILASASTRA. The Sastra made by Kapila, the
sage. After making this Sastra Kapila communicated it
to his mother Devahiti. (Devi Bhagavata 8th
Skandha). s
KAPIL Rey A. Son of a King called Kuvalasva. A sage
named Dhandhu destroyed him. (Sloka, 40 Chapter
204, Vana Parva)
KAPILA TIRTHA. A sacred pond owned Py a King
called Kapila. (Sloka 32, Chapter 84, Mana ‘sabe —
KAPILAVATA. ‘A sacred place. Fy kt of givin
observe fasting you will get the CARTES 84. Bane
away in charity a thousand cows. (Chap :
Parva . “a x S ing Suna‘-
KAPILEYA. Son of Vusvanulras soll he child
Sepha from death, Visvamitra wae father Ajigarta
on his lap. At that time, the child's o—_ ic the
came to him and wanted bee a eee Tike
puis to him. bbs “mt in te also my son.”
ADI abnravya@, a; ee
Pci this we, DAP inter Lea eae ian
been Vigvamitra’s son. (Aitareya ec diz x (Sloka 26,
KAPINJALA. A river “ ancient India.
Chapter 9, Bhisma Parva). ird. There is a
KAP INJARA. (KAPINJ eae 4 oe Mahabharata.
story about the origin of this bir kill Indra. Trisiras had
Once Tvasta created T a 4 te recited the Vedas by
three heads. When by one ee by the third he looked
another head he drank wine 4 vious of the growing
at the world wickedly. Indra 4 n by his Vajrayudha.
Strength of Trisiras felled him Gow
an axe came that
eon mallee Taksaka, vrtndra he cut off the heads
Ww ders emerged
of Trifies When the heads fell tt cdl "and Kalafrom them birds called Kap!” he the Vedas came
Pitgala, From the head which ee that drank the
the birds Kapifjalas; from ue . and from the head
wine came the birds Kalapingal®: kedness came the
that looked at the world i ve parva :
birds Tittiris. (Chapter 9, U ee ndadeva.
KAPISKANDHA. A a“ of Oke a
Chapt Salya Parva. 101,
KAPOTA. a Garuda. (CRAP ~ of
= arya), __asonda, the daughtet a
KAPOTA, A sage. Citra wit She had two §
Kakutstha and Urvasi, was his
(Sloka 7,
Udyoga
Kapota cursed Taravati, the queen of Candragekhara,
that she would bring forth two sons with monkey-faces.
(Kalika Purana, Chapter 56).
KAPOTAROMA (KAPOTALOMA). Son of _ the
emperor Sibi who was greatly devoted to his dependants, (For genealogy see under Sibi). He had another
name Audbhida. (Chapter 197, Vana Parva). He was a
prominent member of the court of Varuna. (Santi
Parva) .
KARABHA. A King who bowed
King of Magadha.
Parva, M.B.).
KARABHAJANA I. A King of ancient India.
KARABHAJANA IT. One of the nine celebrated sons of
Rsabhadeva. He was a yogin of divine wisdom. He
imparted spiritual knowledge to these present at the
yajfia of the King of Videha. (Skandhas 4 and 5
Bhagavata ).
KARABHANJAKA. A place of habitation in ancient
India. (Sloka 69, Chapter 9, Bhisma Parva).
KARABHI. Son of Sakuni. (Matsya Purana).
KARAHATAKA. A country of south India. Sahadeva
— this country. (Chapter 31, Sabha Parva,
KARAKA. A place of habitation
Chapter 9, Bhisma Parva).
KARAKARSAKA. A brother of the Raja of Cedi.
Sarabha is the other brother. The Raja of Cedi along
with his brothers, Karakarsaka and arabha, helped
the Pandavas in the great battle. (Sloka 47, Chapter
50, Udyoga Parva).
KARAKASA. A soldier who fought on the side of the
Kauravas. He stood and fought at a strategic point in
the Garuda Vytha formed by Drona. (Sloka 6,
Chapter 20, Drona Parva).
KARALA. A Deva Gandharva. He took part in the
birthday celebrations of Arjuna. (Chapter 122, Adi
Parva, M.B.).
KARALADANTA. A great Sage. He was a bright
member of the court of Indra. (Chapter 7, Sabha
Parva, M.B.).
KARALAJANAKA. A King of Mithila. Vasistha imparted to him spiritual knowledge. (Santi Parva).
KARALAKSA. A soldier of Skandadeva. (Chapter 45,
Salya Parva). y
KARAMALASAMPRADAYA. The method of counting
the number of recitals of a prayer by using the fingers
of the hand. (See under Gayatri),
KARAMBHA. Brother of Rambha, father of Mahisasura.
See under Mahisa.
KARAMBHA. A princess of Kalingadega. She was
married to Akrodha, a King of the Piruvamsa. She
was the mother of Devatithi. (Sloka 22, Chapter 95,
Adi Parva).
KARANA. Another name
Yuyutsu and Varna.
KARANDHAMA.
1) General information. A King of Iksvaku Varhéa.
Descending in order from Iksvaku came Vimsga—
Kalyana—Khaninetra—Suvarcas. Suvarcas later on
became famous as Karandhama.
2) How he got his name Karandhama. Once there came
qa famine in the country of Suvarcas. The treasury
before Jarasandha,
(Sloka 13, Chapter 14, Sabha
in ancient India.
of Yuyutsu. See under

336¢ KARKOTARA#
KARANDHAMANA
KARDAMA IiscAPrajapati, Palalia, son‘of Brdhma} 'bé=“
gotsof his’. wife Kesarma- thrée ‘sons: named’ Kbrdana,
Urvariyan and Sahisnu. (Chapter 10, Arsa_1; (Vishu
Purdda OF thesethtes Kardama idtried -Devabiati.'
became.empty.,, Faking that:.opportunityd the l ememies
attacked; his countrysiThere wassnovarmy ifon! him-'to
fight ;against his, enemiesoi Meditating lupom God he
‘blew .-his.,hands;;and,,.thenjan;army:isuffidieny <tor fight
his enemies appeared before -hims:ahds musing ithaf-he iDevahitil wad the dalishterof Svaydmbhiuva | Maniu‘and
defeated them. Bécause!/he)‘artanged I/Anslarhtyby «sistent Akiti and-Prasiti:! (8th Skandha,'Devi “Bhagavata). (svisd sis¥ (co set | tf alr ;
Devahatiwas:anadéal’ wifesand -served~ het! inusbahd+
Pde Yur with great devotiénics Kardama? was pleased Y 'with! is!
,,(4).2The,,celebrated » Kang 5 Aviksit>iwasr the:som:of wife and presented her with an aeroplane:’ Karddina
Karandhama. (Chapter 4, ASvamedha Parva). (svist dnd! Devahittiséontucted then'a tourvor the! Ayotlds Sin
Gi), ,Karandharma was, a| prominent?imemberiiof/ the! that plane. Devahiiti deliyéred vine nldaughters sand!
scourt of Yama,,, (Slokar 16, Ghaptér,8jiSabha Parva)i.i egdnsU Fhe daughtets ‘were married to ‘Marici and! othér4
KARANDHAMANA. See under the word Katandhama’ rsages'iand :the:’soh sprew! ‘into ‘the !redlébrated Sage
KARANDHAMANA.(M), oA vitirtha sifuated/. near. the Kapilacdrya. Kardama hen entered into Samadhi.
7 southern, ocean. ’he fiyg holy, places [in/théAsonthérm! (Sitting lin syoga and! dourting | death OF Weyeis 6wht
ocean, YWiz., Agastya tintha;.Saubhadya; {tir tha; bPdiiloria saccord) .0 (8rd Skandha, -Bhagavata) sliqszl sane wsibrl
otirtha, Karandhamana, tirtha, and, Bharadwaya firthawere KARDAMIA I}:uvAcwvirtuous? gérpeént:! (Qhapter'i 35," Adi
called Paiiea), tinthas. .dnb theo equrse sf TAqana’s JParva jis Y .c8 sojasd) eto of gidiabvmt ei fto29¢
pilgrimage, he visited these Pafica tirthasscvebithat KARDAMA III. This Sage sits in the court of ‘Brahma
; time,the; Sages meyer used.to.igoy. therei/.Therelcwas/at sand worships “him sr Slokai<l 93 Chapter! C¥15 Agabha"
special reason for dts; dhe five,celestiab women) Varga, NPdrvajoM: Bayon sligs2 siebe 2h) enidem will .B8e
Saurabhey}, Samici,, Budbuda and Fata, used, toilives mi KARDAMAIMA Aivelébratedi sage whoowus'the e¢rand-
,them np the, form of cxocgdiles; as, a result/of7 Aigage’si son of Viraja. He had a son named Ananga.: Sibka 90,
Set Anjuna liberatedall of themso( Bor; details see o@hapter:59,:Santi' Parva) vonial 6 to 104 Ba PTL
under the word “‘Varga’’) . (f14 KARDAMILAKSEPRAGHA temple-neard the! Gneunitain
BARONS AN pe ih Analad the; -mothex ! of alli tr€es.i of Samanga. Bharata was crowned King at! this Verhple .
= Wee the — aughter of ‘Daksa, and the, swifes; of ofSlbka 9; (Chapter 135pWdnaoParva).AtTPAL i / LTA
_Kasyapa, She is, known as, Virudha alsoy/That was. bow KARENUMADI/ ,Daughtetdf Sisupalla) Kings sib edi.
oN itut became a synonym of ineea Dt ds, believedsthat — bNakuladnarried ther ‘and they pota-child. Manoel Nira
panaie stays in. the;tree, Karaiija. 1To..obtain Jplessings omitta.\SlokacA9, Ghiap tere95J Adi Rarva))iisz gl grivedo
, from;Anala people worship the, Karanja; trees (Slokas KARISALS AosoniiS Visvamithas(McB.Anusasand Rarva.
35) to 36, Chapter 230, Vana Parva)svisT seovbU .04 Chapter 4, Verse 55) (pyie'l
KARAPARVAN. A holy, plage in ther Sanmeatijrivert KARISAKdvn: Acpldce of: habitatfonicimodanciént:-ndia”
sineric aye B és PRY BiAG An} thes Sarawati /riverl KARISA Katvs:: Acplitce of: shabitatfonicimodnciént-lindh
_valley,, (M B,,. Salya, P ava, Chaptspot)sH .esveiws 2 b(Ghapter 9s::Bhisma-Parwa,iMi.Bi)y. sliseb coon silqy’
-Karadhamana (blowing of.) hands) ole wdscgirvenc ‘the
Dame of, Karandhamanalalso. o>. ygolsonse 101) Asus
3); Other detavls§ sacV NCL soigsdh sbiddbuA 9itisau
1 Tite) eT Se . J Z ;
KARASBARA. .& despised .¢: untry; PF angient times. KARISIN leo dAsriverlid Chapter 9:i Bhigina Parya) gisk 110
There is a r eferencé to this.,country,,dny the, Maha- KAR LE TsssA place! ofihabitation in-anvient India: (GhaPpre pharatay SArne cab Chapter, 445 sve A. ATA TAA oteri9. Bhistna Panvajads suimivei¥ .ad oF pls ne
iS es br ARISE fapab tan ok Aasicnth dia. KARKAKHADDA. etl eplaces ofshabitation: ingame!
KARATOYA, _ » Dhisma t arva) - (2M svt gd olndia.; This plate, wasiconqueved by: Kama: i for Dury?
Aa dia SSFP yotiver., Lhis river ,worships, Varuna dhana. (Vana: Paras o1sitf. ) oe a etsiniivaiV 1997
GRE UE a SOT “Glokay-22,,,,Ghaptero9.nSabha KARKANDU, siAsdaintly-Kinganentioned in/ Sink te 2H
ey iS cl en NE A og oa ae arabe Se yee Te
Sia S AABINS Toh Al nes ys pee guid get thei benesy KARKARA-T Alpiominent Gerbeat! Sbé tinder Kadi!’
Rona Pa va) iS TBS ; SABE ABSA ri Chapter HBS, KARBATI ds See para b2cdinder!Bralma 11) i pods 104 fe
KARAVIRA I svg bsbasie to sotbloe A | ACHATL ALA KARKI2i7Thesspn loflithe: sagei Apastambas byv hisoW’
Chaniaiets oy ; is a serpent, (sv4 loka, |b, vAksastitrad besiver od bsed so yd nodW .ebsod
ey RAVI elas ehey : Fear: TM Ae fT ML dA KARKOTAKA: oc teftible setpertusrh of bsod 19300".
SARAVIBALE. A BORRAD, URE AUN SIAGIOE — yklyBiphon(t lis serpent wise both-sbi Aiyare
KARAVIRAMIII. . ‘There wae ou hiy 996) .basd sd lo 4 ibe weadt@eid yd avob mid boils} 2B ait TD 30 dygior
yeaa dt dg rapiioh Bt Dif re SlPorcFOUMERY AMES iQ) Bhe curses, Once Kaykotaka cheatdd thi sage Nay? i
a ce mountay .. Gomanta. oAehe angny, sage (cursed! hind andicsaid bthatihe) waul
wa aii rsa eee 0% gare alte ya, Kingjealled: phayento otemaim,,withont ethedpowensd? movements3>
Leonean ont 1 SH CH Sy. Sri SBA and < the forest, till; Nala cameito: resdud{him,| From: -thats©
| Balt tice Ree Dee TAS PSCSIO QBN OMTaRT EIA: ont arkotakayliyed in that forest, awaltirig the artivali?
(10th Skan iV. ig ¢ F t 1 fevysd ibs. wNala@eeib yee bsoil od} sooth canlspaiqs7 ebaid 3S ‘
KARAVIB A esis Le OF ES! atthe: h . shgighbourhgod; of; pedi Neka and Karke tak@s:c ONE: A waldi fite5 spread
‘Dvaraka. (Chapter 38, Sabha arya i] bug seinvue 98Verathe. foresty, Karkotaka whose power of movement
KARAVIRAKSA. A demon. He fought | against, Rama, was destroyed, hy; Narada’s curse;:,¢ried aloud, cal ang
and. , Laksmane | 2/078 4 wiph SRAM ODUsaRa) and upon Nala to. coms,and save him. It wasicav. Abie. 1time
OTT ings. | (Sloka 24, Chapter, APa Minya,,, Kanda, ~—y- arrived at the spot after! leaving: Damaya?
“Walmiki f amayana )- uy A—silos sila—s vil Be An she rest.., Nala; came ),to, him, .on, hearin Aig ene”
KARAVIRAPORA. A’ holy, pines LAE one Da iee‘in "The Suet ied pe in of Nava \a’s
- this place, one will attain, the form. of Bre sa (Ch pier ;,curs¢,and yeducing himselfita ‘the size,of a. thamibs's4 |
we 5, Anusasana parva) 2 lo yuoveo ah gt onicis) 6 2 {Pah the; ground.» Nala, removed him.to a safe spot away
gots
a

-idfomiVthed ifine: TLheli serpent saskedliNala co walkha few
steps counting his footsteps. Nala did.ososandiat the
tenth step, Karkotaka stung him and -his\swholeObody
bswas: firmed: blues Suddenly Karkotaka:assumed his)own
original shape andsspokeitd\Nald as!dollows:+-Slc have
_isdohangéd:iyouriiappearances sbbthatiopeopleiinay not be
able to recogniae’you./Kalicwho: isitroubling sy¥Ouy ) still
stilivedbwithin syéus{alt if! heswhp:soiafiected by) my
poison. You needs nofl feaic danger frérh ‘poisom) any
-cuomotent¥ oun willinevén besdefdated tam sbattlé. Go) and
engage yourself as thé:chaflatderséf Rtupamal}) King of
2uniAyodhya (You wilbteachihim bAévahbdayas znantra. In
¢Geturm for itsthe Wilbsteachsbyou Aksahrdayal mantra.
Here are two garments which I giyevyot. dfiyot put
aqathenys ony: you hwilbis bearés toveds;too:youtsoWn shape.
< 1Maylydu be blessed iagain <with’ achappy family ‘life.
After saying this, Karkotaka vanished oe a
-shBatvaliChapter 66sdboyinG. boiqm1o1g s1s.Al Esa ls
KARKOPAKAGY A landsheyont:thé edstemgocearre tt is
194 cok) fans from) there! obey thee) mivericSieos ais ASN ee
mountain is just across it. (Kathatavisstigara hi mn
SKARMABHUMI. gdPhd landiofBharata. dow! Misco
inent cotahe Gamera’ Karmabbim ispiver Ibelowd All
tinent cotshe hame 10” Karmah eae spl onva
clea insihiolandsenjoy a hfedirrGwarga} onvearth
those borndnsthibolamdsenjoy cee: thei actions
lo hin! hethgcediing\tothetctassiéd which theby agnor’
ols belongyniamely Sattvic Rajasioldrstamesto ae pcre
aovferconlybthisdandtopbtain fonsith poop nae nvabhtimi
worlds.! Therefore this land got thename ! a all
o} 9 (8th Skaridhay Ddvi Bhagavata te och s1olod )
DRARMAHW ofA King af the fumibyof Arjuna. c tte) was
esvthestiodf Bridtsbra
dti6 kaleid nip Bhagane
JKARNA hovDkhe eldesy sono! ™. 7 oath ithe iaauraoAsbrothercof theoPandavas hé}joined, Se ptne take of
-blivagidndo hesamenthed King! Lan i sdgab family.
boeiKtangassbmiesin thegertealogy aV ress i orn OM SAU: —
1901 9 Genealaa'p, v(Debsending P an 1h Jablumyasu4| Nabausa193 ByknabkiicOaad ra sep aaamalertr es Tyibhard-KaranYayati-Turvasu-Vahni-Bha ei io WoR and He adopted
19h} dhaiebNtdradia2udngaritte ait G8 aatead Gunidharascophlsyan ta) csDdsyantaz Vara a ¢
esoriord off SIOW
igaePhoudhhé was the
boeivbs ond
of Kaun
~ Gharmasy Girtasu fae \ ww
Kola-Druhyu-Babhrusetu ~, P areys 1. Seaijaya -(Puransified dopaceeiate SahaniaraBlanare) SE arith
alan oe - «cada Mi nhamane
slogay allan swia’ brNfanasalalMahe i h) (Bhemetnga
ody al] arawiéfay a eh eee) (The Ang
fsuRusadra tha PatldL stapes BoE Oee iy Dit massdiynaseabeyifsyi- Dadbivanene oyoadab -1Oatdrahgaratha-Citraratha- Satyaratha™ if. AL ata Brhatkarméa28 Beiitalla. catnpacttanyaree Bhat anno Viva
rete a nu-Brhadawrna Jy iv 90510 om a
WOHIRR IrKG 1 nsw J iy B p Cat PaN Sa,
2) Birth of Kdrnae> pasidity 2 ig ae THIS ) girl
18IGg A ap agi daagneer oni 8, Vvby “pide Oedlled
was aut ie even from chit) alice atthe HH) aa
in amelie) i anew ap LE Pay sdosthe! welfare of
THORS oiica haere charge of ate roi esages fVasas
OS bievaerdpaged! ih! peligiolsioe four morfth"as nti Ring
came there then ge Wating Ni age was
orf RN Eel dee | oe
. ) d av ie avr vei a y gO
- immensely please and g75%, ne calnea Lun pilifest
(Pagers a aie nce, th ia eda, (6% him
roqaiin ae » hd Bess E er W th (svisd BITTE ZL 08
wlasall bipevpat
srt
O
BIA [
0} awpbalsranpts paiel of
andthe father of rata jaya. (9th :
i KARNA I
qu anieglory.s heamdntraiwasitd bé:used: only: five .timés,
bs{{ksuntinwds yyoumgpandywantedito:tést thee power: of the
orf) mantra. ob she:wecited;thesmantna) Meditating@ieni the
obsSubalnstanily: she felrshesawia <divines persbh scoming
biseted hanffrom the suneiShé wasVperplexed. Butt the
-2edivine form émbnacedcherand consoledihervsalying! that
she rom, dim 2 lose her virginity even if‘shecbore a
-vesiQ 40m, china, ;None, excepting her step-mother new
soa out this ad de eoute, Kung delivered @ shale chil
“ris tod vith the belp of her, step-mother she put that child
lode Po ARS Heated at ON ihe VCE BS Was cso cise
‘moti at (POF ofRAVIRE sb va. cntered, the: Yamuna
er ‘leaving: * ; ous 1G gs
node iygs.4 d iPAVANS ee: 1 the river, zanga.
orl PeutpS OMY, ore eached dam papurs, a country
insu RU RS tae HEP nosh. eB SESH 99 3B aby
a seo : ler etray. mae, UGLINESS . OD) TIVE lle
CE OE ee bath and dak: Chama dadha’ woe of
Adhiratha, who was childless was greatly pleased ‘to see
asvep pAbeintide thd box atid théy udopted it atid brought
sviheap Phe bey waslaamed Wasa sea! Teves this babe
tiodthatbecartie the celebrated HKarias a fiery ardso2¢F our
ort Qhhiprero irda B05 V ated Parvalymos esw molisoubs
992 3) bpuicanian af Kaba |(Rarnd lorew wih -theo Abuse of
basAdhiathaincthe eoanwpver -AnswCbearine!! te ames
sesvVasisend! atid | Mest s Kiimtp ditiew? this!? through pies.
colWhetp the! time Gdiie for imipattiny education to Karna
oI} SN AHitaths sent Hin to Has titiiputa’ t0 fhe preside of
ori pei foPteabhing hind archerye! Kania /‘stidted! Uihder
i ppaland Paras aad ais, RE OHS “ducatioi he
boreHterdd Satcld kawey Swick DaEcdhana! -( Ghapter309,
IsyoVaha’Parva}, ditw’ sisgmioo oj sisal lo idgrt os
I? 4) besardas cased Rama was Gatsed bY SUbDTAhMi and
a Babee te as sales Bel6wW! HCO? ont ~
of Bren (While they were studying !archéry’ Arjutia®and
bos Katha Wed With [64eR other Ramat bllee rad deted
souptoia teittadithi if private the'sectet df thé! Brahma
baspfisile? t6!fighe "againsts Abjatia?! But "Drond” dtd not
-qsiiedede te Rig reqitést! fiw std beosidmo sdisidbA
Karna then went (td Wathatidragiri: and bowed béfore
as (Parasurdiinban direptesented himselfiastaymember of the
CC sBhrew farriily, de nsaid che had come tothim' t6 be his
sy tdistipleandetearnthel sedrét of ithe Brahmasthissile from
boukibs Pavagarama believed him and adceptizie: hitn as
hodistiple aught isiny many new’ techniqtes it aiichery.
ofi Onve. Kaewh waeowardering’ ihoithe vicinity df the
-oldaseammeoowhenCchelsaw adonelyicow grazing theresand
seo lara twhhoudl knewing thas it belorséd ‘tod “bvaHmin
Sirgent Oi axtow and killed’atiThe: brahmin'/cdt! furious
oi andeursed Rabies thussOh¢? sitiner! ithe: wheels weyour
snidcwabtswoukh e6down i the mud!whendyodo fee? the
vbsenémp#6 fisht against Vhoniyow ardnow king traifing.
o} (Dhend wher yousslnd perplexed byeuri eppohetit Would
salanedntsyeurl Reade? Kavli pceniested Wr aitrexioval of
orl dhe tirselbweé thé -bralithirebasea taskdw any meiéy.
ove Paras ufhina? tauyh CK aina theu geerec> Of HE Biahma —
oidqnigdie SOne day tree afer -atday’s fast!) ad"'a walk
JOOPFSGH the ABFALIAS With Hiss disciple Parasarama-slept
vi bikagtne" higbspeaad Godnhaygy om Warha’ Then a
8 OFfeeHe ASME A LAPkKA RAAERELTICUAG did st&tted siitking
vats Bdoee from His thiph Blood! was>@dzii bin IMs thigh
o} caHa Rev Raps dia! REE Stik #tdm PIs posttiGAde st it
Ad ais
scit
Lie HIS. AVE TH His Aap?” S@ddchly'PHtasu.
ani@awoke ditaS ared-ayihe ile? ad she BEctie fell
aris .AOgsIW air tbal .bszeseog on emoqssw
mid ovsg 8
{ aflthe (Waild excepting BHardtavargal weeinbapied pvitnwuglis¥ boliss ise

KARINA I
dead. It then took the form of a demon and rising up
in the air said ““Svamin ! I was once a demon called
Darga. Once I carried away by force the wife ofthe
sage Bhrgu and the angered sage cursed me and made
me a beetle. When I craved for pardon hesaid
that I would be given my original form by Parasurama.”
When the demon disappeared saying so much Parasurama turned to Karna who stood with respect, his dress
all covered with blood. Paragurama said : ‘‘No_brahmin can bear so much pain with such patience. Surely,
you are not a brahmin. Let me know the truth.” ‘T'rembling with fear Karna revealed his identity and then
Paragurama cursed him saying “You will forget the
secret of the Brahma missile at the time when you want
to use it against your enemy.’ (Chapters 2 and 3, Santi
Parva).
5) How Karna became the King of Aga. The Pandavas
and Kauravas were studying archery under Dronacarya
together and Karna also was.among them. When their
education was complete a day was fixed to exhibit the
skill of the students. The public also was invited to see
the skill of the princes. Everybody showed his best and
Arjuna displayed super-human skill so that the vast
assemblage was lost in wonder and admiration. Then
strode Karna to the scene and not only did he duplicate
with ease Arjuna’s feats but he did show something
more. The assemblage was dumbfounded. Arjuna turnned pale. At this moment Krpa stood up and questioned
the right of Karna to compete with these with royal
blood in them. Then rose Duryodhana and said: “If
the combat is not in order simply because Karna is not
a prince it is easily remedied. I crown Karna as the
King of Anga”. Then there came to the scene the aged
Adhiratha, the foster-father of Karna, and as Karna
saw him coming he went and bowed before him and
Adhiratha embraced him with tears in his eyes. (Chapters 134 to 136, Adi Parva, M.B.).
6) Karna’s armour and ear-rings. Karna was born with an
armour on his body and rings in his ears. Chapter 99
of Adi Parva says thus : ‘“To Kunti was born of Surya
the mighty Karna. Even at his birth hewas adorned
with an armour over his body and rings in his ears.”’
Sarya had ordained that.as long as Karna wore the
armour and ear-rings he would be unconquerable.
Indra knew this and wanted to get Karna rid of these
so that Arjuna, his son, might gain a victory over Karna.
Karna was reputed for hischarity and Indra under the
garb of abrahmin went to Karna and begged of him
his ear-rings and armour. The Sun god had already
warned him ina dream that Indra would thus try to
deceive him. Still Karna could not bring himself to refuse
any gift that was asked of him and so he cut off the
ear-rings and armour with which he was born and gave
them to the Brahmana. The only request that the noble
Karna did make was that in separating the ornaments
' from his body no wound should be made. Indra did it
with great skill neither hurting him nor making even a
ratch on this body. Indra bade Karna ask for any
- he wanted. The Sun god had also advised him to
aa fOr a good weapon in return in case he gave away
his assets and so he requested Indra the best of the
weapons he possessed. Indra gave him his weapon, the
Sakti, called Vaijayanti also. Karna had to use that
KARNA I
weapon to kill the great Ghatotkaca in the Mahabharata battle.
7) Other details.
(i) Karna was present at the Svayamvara of Draupadi.
(Sloka 4, Chapter 185, Adi Parva).
(ii) Bhima defeated Karna once ina single combat.
(Sloka 20, Chapter 34. Sabha Parva).
(iii) Karna took part in the Rajasuya of Yudhisthira.
(Sloka 7, Chapter 34, Santi Parva).
(iv) Karna defeated Jarasandha once in a single combat. Chapter 44, Sabha Parva).
(v) Karna defeated in his victory march many kings
like Drupada, Bhagadatta and Kerala. (Chapter 254;
Aranya Parva).
(vi) Karna conquered the cities of M@lini and Camp
and annexed them to the country of Anga. (Chapter D3
Karna Parva).
(vii) Karna prompted Duryodhana to tease the Pandavas living in the forest. (Chapter 7, Vana Parva).
(viii) Karna swore that he would kill Arjuna. (Chapter
257, Vana Parva).
(ix) Karna lost his clothes during a fight against the
king of Virata. (Chapter 65, Virata Parva).
(x) Kandaprstham is the name of Karna’s bow. F
8) Karna and the Kuruksetra battle. The great battle
Mahabharata lasted for eighteen days and some ° i
incidents touching Karna during that period are ENE
below :
(i) Before the great war started Kunti went alone t
the shores of Ganga and met Karna. She then confess
to him that she was his mother and that the Pandavas
were his brothers. She advised Karna to join sides w!'
the Pandavas and the Sun god approved of it, DU
Karna refused to do so. He said he would never forsa c
Duryodhana who had brought him up from his chil :
hood at a time when he was in peril. But he promise
his mother that he would never kill any of her other four
sons but would kill Arjuna in the battle-field. (Chapter
146 Udyoga Parva). ,
Gi) Karna started his fight against the Pandavas afte
taking blessings from Bhisma.
Parva).
(iii) Karna fought against the princes of Kekay"?
Arjuna, Bhima, Dhrstadyumna and Satyaki in sing
combat. (Chapter 32, Drona Parva).
(iv) Abhimanyu defeated Karna ina single combat:
~ (Chapter 40, Drona Parva).
(v) Karna made Bhima unconscious. (Chapter 139;
Drona Parva).
(vi) Karna once withdrew a bit when hit by the arrow
of Arjuna. (Chapter'139, Drona Parva). c
(vii) Karna insulted Krpacarya at one time. (Chapt
158, Drona Parva). 3
(viii) Karna killed Ghatotkaca with the weapon Sak .
which Indra had given him in exchange for the armon
and ear-rings which he had given Indra. (Chapter 18°;
Drona Parva). .
(ix) Karna ran away from the battlefield whe? h
heard that Drona was dead. (Chapter 193, Kar?
Parva). ss
(x) Karna was made the Generalissimo of the Kauré
va army when Drona died. (Chapter 10, Karna Parv®”
(xi) Salya became the charioteer of Karna (Chap*©
86, Karna Parva).
(xii) The beautiful headwear of Arjuna fell down t?
(Chapter 3, Drona |

KARNA II
the ground by the snake-faced arrow of Karna. (Chapter 90, Karna Parva).
(xiii) When Arjuna was fighting against Karna the
chariot-wheels of Karna sank into the ground. (Chapter
90, Karna Parva).
(xiv) Arjuna slew Karna.
Karna Parva).
(xv) Karna had three sons named Citrasena, Satyasena
and Susena. All the three were killed at Kuruksetra by
Nakula. (Slokas 19 to 50, Chaptcr 10, Salya Parva).
9) Karna goes to heaven. After his death Karna went to
heaven and merged with his father, the Sun god. (Sloka
20, Chapter 9, Svargarohana Parva).
10) Names ‘of Karna.
‘iy a a was born with an effulgence (Vasu)
he was first given the name Vasusena.
(ii) Because he was born. with Kundalas (ear-rings)
«his Karnas (ears) he was called Karna. (Chapter
302, Aranya Parva).
(ili) Besides these two he had many other names.
‘ re given below: . | Wt
Rdhivachi,” Adityanandana. Adityatanaya, Angaraja,
Angesvara, Arkaputra, Bharatarsabha, Goputra, Kaunteya, Kuntisuta, Kuradvaha, Kuruprtanapatt, Kuruvira,
Kuruyodha, Partha, Vrsatmaja, Radhasuta, Radhatmaja, Radheya, Ravisinu, Sauti, Savitra, Siryaja,
Sir aputra Siiryasambhava, Sita, Sitanandana, Sita:
od Siitasinu, Satasuta, Stitatanaya. Vaikartana,
Sa.
eReeA TL, ae Dhrtarastra. Bhimasena killed
this Karna. (Chapter 67, Bhisma Parva).
Younger brother of Ghanta.
(Sloka 50, Chapter 91,
See under
KARNA III.
arte barber who lived in Kasi. (Chapter 29,
og beta ATTA: A sage who attained Svarga after
observing correctly the duties of Vanaprastha. (Sloka
Anti Parva). ‘
_ i& Chapter 244 ore of the pe eee of Mahabharata.
See under Mahabharata. ry of South India. The
_ Acount :
KARNAPRAV AR ae contained soldiers from this
nec ae (Sloka 13, Chapter 51. Bhisma Lie *
, A (S). An ancient tribe of pe
CA RA ores of the sea in the south. The
inhabited ‘the,
pe distinctive feature of this tribe was that their ears
he feet.
ly Jong, drooping down to t
apa pani ee Pubdued this tribe. coe
67, Chapter 31, Sabha Parva). They once brought to
isthira m valuable presents and paid their
on kine | Sloka 19, Chapter 52, Sabha Parva).
KARNAPRAVARANA. A follower of Skandadeva,
(Chapter 46, Sloka 25, Salya Parva). i
AVAS. A. sage who was a member o
—— of Yudhisthira. (Sloka 23, Chapter 26, Vana
Parva).
KARNATAKA. A_ co
bharata says like this:
untry of South India. Maha-
‘There are a few more eauaroes
are: Dravida, Kerala, Pracya,
ems Oe Karnataka, Mahisaka, Vikalpa
and Masaka.”? (Chapter 9, Bhisma Parva). ‘
KARNAVESTA. A Ssatriya King. He was the
nation of an Asura named Krodhavasa.
Adi Parva).
incar-
(Chapter 67,
KARTAVIRYARJUNA
KARNIKA. One of the eleven Devakanyakas who sang
and danced in the Janmotsava of Arjuna. The others
are: .Menaka, Sahajanya, Pufjikasthala, Rtusthala,
Ghrtaci, Visvaci, Pirvacitti, Ulloca, Pramloca and
Urvasi. (Chapter 123, Adi Parva).
KARNIKARAVANA. A forest to the north of the mountain Sumeru. All the six seasons appear there at the
-same time andso this forest is always filled with flowers.
(Chapter 6, Sloka 24, Bhisma Parva).
KARPARA, See under Ghata.
KARPASIKA. A country in ancient India. The maids
of this country served in the Rajasiya of Yudhisthira.
(M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 51, Verse 8).
KARSAPANA(M). (KARSIKAM). A_ measure of
weight for gold and silver in ancient India.
KARSNI. A Deva Gandharva. Mahabharata, Adi Parva,
Chapter 122, Verse 56 says that he participated in the
celebrations connected with Arjuna’s birth.
KARTA. A ViSvadeva, (Sloka 35, Chapter 91, Anugasana Parva). !
KARTASVARA. An Asura. Once this Asura became
world emperor. (M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter 227,
Verse 52).
KARTAVIRYARJUNA (KARTAVIRYA). A renowned
King of the Hehaya dynasty.
1) Genealogy. From Mahavisnu were descended in the
following order: Brahma—Atri—Candra—Budha—Puri-
‘yavas — Ayus— Yayati—Yadu—Sahasrajit— Satajit—
Ekavira—(Hehaya )—Dharma—Kani — Bhadrasena —
Dhanaka—Krtavirya—K artaviryarjuna.
2) Hehaya Dynasty and Bhargava Dynasty. ‘The Hehayas
were Ksatriyas and the Bhargavas were Brahmanas.
The Bhargava sages were the family preceptors of the
Hehaya Kings. The Hehayas who were generous and
charitable, used to give plenty of wealth to the Bhargavas. Consequently in course of time, the Bhargavas
grew wealthy while the Hehayas gradually declined. In
order to tide over their difficulty, the Hehayas decided
to borrow some money from the Bhargavas. But the
Bhargavas refused to oblige, on the plea that they had
no money. The enraged Ksatriyas (Hehayas) began te
persecute the Bhrgus (Bhargavas). The Bhrgus left fo1
the Himalayas after burying all their treasures under
the floor of their Agramas. The Ksatriyas pursued
them and hunted them even there. At last a Brahmani
wko belonged to the Bhargava race, gave birth toa
sage named Aurva through her thigh. With his birth
the Hehayas began to lead a less aggressive life. After
the lapse of many years, the mighty Kartaviryarjuna
was born in the Hehaya dynasty and the mighty sage
Jamadagni was born in the Bhrgu dynasty. Both of
them nourished their hereditary feud. With his capital
-in the city of Mahismati on the banks of the river
Narmada, Kartaviryarjuna began his reign. (See
under Aurva I).
3). Thousand Hands of Kartaviryarjuna. Once when
Kartaviryarjuna was living in his capital Mahismati,
the sage Narada happened to come there. The King
greeted him with due reverence and asked him what
course of action was to be followed for attaining
moksa (salvation) and at the same’ time for enjoying
worldly pleasures. Narada replied that by performing
the rite known as “‘Bhadradipa Pratistha”’, both these
objects could be achieved. Accordingly, Sartavirya
went to: the banks of the river Narmada with his wife

eS
KARTAVIRYARJUNA
and began the observance of Bhadradipa Pratistha.
Kartavirya’s guru was Dattatreya, the son of Atri. At
the conclusion of the Yaga rites, Dattatreya who was
pleased, asked Kartaviryarjuna what boons he wished
to have. Kartavirya with joined palms asked him many
boons one of which was that he should have a thousand
arms. Dattatreya granted him the boons, and K@artavirya who became proud of his new possession, ruled at
Mahismati for 86,000 years. (Brahmanda_ Purana,
Chapter 44). )
4) Vayu’s Warning. Kartaviryarjuna. who returned
triumphant after receiving the boon from Dattatreya
heard a mysterious voice warning him in the following
words :—‘‘You fool ! Don’t you know that a Brahmana
is superior to a Ksatriya? A Ksatriya governs his
subjects in alliance with the Brahmana’’. On _ hearing
this, Kartavirya became angry. -He’ understood that
Vayu, the divine messenger was behind the mysterious
voice. He despised Vayu and argued that a Ksatriya
was superior to a Brahmana. Vayu gave him a warning that a Brahmana would curse Kartavirya. (M.B.
Anusasana Parva, Chapter 152).
5) Adrtavirya cursed by the sage. Once Agni (fire-god)
approached Kartavirya and begged for food. The King
allowed him to feed upon mountains and trees from any
part of his Kingdom. So Agni began to devour the
woods and hills. This led to the burning down of an
Asrama owned by asage called Apava. The enraged
Sage came to know that Kartaviryarjuna was responsible for the havoc and pronounced a curse that Paraéurama would chop off all the thousand hands of Kartaviryarjuna. |
6) Kartaviryarjuna and Ravana. In the course of his
triumphal march, after conquering the whole world,
Ravana once arrived with his forces on the bank of the
river Narmada. Enjoying the smooth flow of the crystal
clear stream of the Narmada and the pleasant sand
banks in the river-bed, he spenta night there with his
followers. Early next morning he took his bath in the
river and setting up the idol of Siva on the sand bank,
began to worship it.
Just then Kartaviryarjuna and his wives came to the
place and began their water sports, a few yards down
the river from the place where Ravana was sitting. As
part of his amusements, Kartavirya stopped the flow of
the river by making a dam with his thousand arms.
This caused the level of the water to rise and Ravana
with his materials of worship was submerged in the
flood. Enraged at this disturbance to his worship, he
sent two of his men down the river bank to find out
what was happening. They traced the source of the
trouble to Kartaviryarjuna and his water-sports and
reported the matter to their master. At once Ravana
armed himself with his bow rushed to Kartaviryarjuna
and began a fierce fight. Atlast Ravana fell down under
the heavy stroke of Kartavirya’s mace and was bound
‘1 chains and imprisoned. He lay there for one year.
Ravana’s father sage Pulastya came to know of this and
he went to Kartavirya’s palace. He was received with
at his request, Kartavirya released
t and :
due respec hat they remained friends for life.
Ravana and after .
Uttara Ramayana). .
‘ Kartavirya and Renuka’s Death. One day when
Parafurama was fourteen years old, his father sage
Jamadagni went to the forest to fetch some Samits
KARTAVIRYARJUNA
(sacrificial twigs). Jamadagni’s wife, Renuka swept and
cleaned the Agrama and went to the river Reva to fetch
water and Parasgurama was left behind in the Asrama.
Whenshe reached the river bank, she saw Kartaviryarjuna
indulging in amorous pleasures with his wives in the
water. She waited unobserved on the bank for some
time and after they had left the place, she stepped into
the river. But since the water was muddy, she had to
go to another place in the river to get clear water.
There also she lingered for a few minutes, looking at
the amorous amusements of Citraratha, King of Salva,
with his wives. Itwas only after they had departed
_ that she was able to return to the Arama with _water.
_ Meanwhile Jamadagni who had returned to the Asrama
earlier was angry at her delay and was waiting impatiently for her arrival. As soon as she reached the Asrama,
the sage, in a fit offury, ordered Paragurama to cut
off her head and the latter obeyed him. (Brahmanda
Purana, Chapter 58).
8) The Triumphal March of Kartavirya. All the Kings 12
the world acknowledged the supremacy of Kartaviry4In Brahmanda Purana, Chapter 16, we find that Kings
of the Solar dynasty like Trayyaruna, Hariscandra;
RohitéSva and Cuficu were defeated by Kartaviry¢
rjuna. In his golden chariot he went about defeating
Devas, Yaksas, Rsis and others. He challenged eve?
Visnu. He insulted Indra in the company of Indram-
(M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 115).
Intoxicated by his successes, Kartavirya went to the
sea-shore and challenged the ocean and began to destroy the animals in the sea by shooting them with his
arrows. God Varuna appeared before him and aské
him what he wanted. Kartavirya asked the god |
name aman who had the capacity to fight with him.
Varuna answered that Jamadagni’s son Paraguram@
was the person who satisfied that condition. Karta”
virya accepted the challenge and went in search °
Paragurama. (M.B. AnugAsana Parva, Chapter 29).
9) Killing of Jamadagni. Once Kartavirya went °
hunt in the forest with his followers. They were roating in the Vindhya forests in search of game. At noon
after a refreshing bath in the clear waters of the © iver
Narmada when they were preparing to return, wet
saw Jamadagni’s Agrama. After asking his men to W4!
at the river-bank, Kartavirya went alone to the
Agrama. He paid his respects to the sage and after
their usual greetings, Jamadagni asked him to call, his
followers also to the Agrama. When all of them arrive
the sage gave them a sumptuous feast. Kartaviry@
wondered how the sage managed to doit. They spe?
the night there and when they returned home née*
morning K4rtavirya’s minister Candragupta told bh!
that he saw a cow in Jamadagni’s Asgrama and that it
was from that divine cow that the sage was able to get
all the rare articles of food which he supplied to t
guests. He also offered to get the cow from the sas
So the King sent Candragupta to the Agrama to beg
the cow from the sage for him. Candragupta accordingly
went with a few followers to the Asrama and begg¢
for the cow. At that time Parasurama was not in the
Agrama. Jamadagni told them that the cow aes
Kamadhenu’s sister, Suéila and that it was not possible
to give her. Candragupta tried to seize the cow me
force but she suddenly vanished into the sky. T
King’s men tried to capture her calf. Jamadagn! W e
- ee
El . are
— a es | EC =

KARTTIKEYA
came forward to prevent them, was beaten to death by
Shan (Brahmanda Purana, Chapters 67 to
10) Famadagni’s Restoration to Life. Parasurama
returned soon to the Agrama with the disciple Akrtavrana. At the sight of his father lying dead on the floor,
Paragurama cried aloud. Renuka beat her breast
twentyone times. Seeing this, Parasurama took a
solemn vow that he would go round the world _twentyone times and extirpate the Ksatriya Kings. The sage
Sukra appeared there with Susila who had vanished.
After restoring Jamadagni to life Sukra went back.
11) Death of Kartaviryarjuna. ParaSu Rama_ who had
turned himself into the very embodiment of Revenge,
accompanied by Akrtavrana, took his stand at the gates
of the city of Mahismati and challenged Kartaviryarjuna to a fight. Kartavirya came out with a huge
army. In the terrible fight that followed, Parasurama
himself with his axe (parasu) chopped off all the
thousand arms of Kartaviryarjuna. All his sons were
killed. Kartavirya himself fell down beheaded. This
was the end of the pillar of Hehaya dynasty. (Brahmanda Purana, Chapter 81).
12) Kartavirya’s sons. Kartavirya had one hundred
sons. All of them were killed in the battle by Parasurama. Their names, as given in Chapter 76 of
Brahmanda Purana, are given below :—
Nirmada, Rocana, Sanku, Ugrada, Dundubhi, Dhruva,
Suparéi, Satrujit, Kraufica, Santa, Nirdaya, Antaka,
Akrti, Vimala, Dhira, Niroga, Bahuti, Dama, Adhari,
Vidhura, Saumya, Manasvi, Puskala, Busa, Taruna,
Rsabha, Rksa, Satyaka, Subala, Bali, Ugresta,
Ugrakarma, Satyasena, Durasada, Viradhanva, Dirghabahu, Akampana, Subahu, Dirghaksa, _Vartulaksa,
Carudamstra, Gotravin, Manojava, Urdhvabahu,
Krodha, Satyakirti, Duspradharsana, Satyasandha,
Mahasena, Sulocana, Raktanetra, Vakradamstra,
Sudamstra, Ksatravarma, Manonuga, Dhimrakesa,
Pingalocana, Avyanga, Jatila, Venuman, Sanu, Pasapani, Anuddhata, Duranta, Kapila, Sambhu, Ananta,
Visvaga, Udara, Krti, Ksatrajit, Dharmi, Vyaghra,
Ghosa, Adbhuta, Purafijaya, Carana. Vagmi, Vira,
Rathi, Govihvala, Sangramajit, Suparva, Narada,
Satyaketu, Satanika, Drdhayudha, Citradhanva,
Jayatsena, Viripaksa, Bhimakarma, Satrutapana,
Citrasena, Duradharsa Vidiratha, Sira, Sirasena,
Dhisana, Madhu, and Jayadhvaja
KARTTIKEYA. Skanda, the sono
under Skanda.
KARUNA. See under Dhanajfijaya.
KARUSATI. A King .of Karusa
Bhadra was performing penance
her bean hector Sigupala carried her away.
11, Chapter 45, Sabha Parva).
KAKUSA II. One of the nine sons 0
The other sons are Iksvaku,
Saryati, Narisyanta, Pramsunaga,
(7th Skandha, Devi +4" : saad Vo
A. Ill. A Yaksa. This Yakga acco
Re oes performed penance on the shores — of =
river Kalindi, to propitiate Devi, taking in only
air. Devi was pleased and ap
erson said “You will become th
tara’. (Skandhas 10 and 13, Devi B
f Siva. Far details see
. A lady of name
to get this King as
(Sloka
f Vaivasvata Manu.
Nabhaga, Drsta,
Dista and Prsadhra.
pearing before him in
he lord of Manvanhagavata).
395 KASI 1
KARUSA I. The sixth son of Vaivasvata Manu. (M.B.
Adi Parva, Chapter 75).
KARUSA. II. An ancient land. (The King of this
land used to suppress robbers and plunderers. He was
present at Draupadi’s Svayarnvara. (M.B. Adi Parva,
Chapter 185), y
KARUSA (M). A place in ancient India. Historians
are of opinion that itis the Bundelkhanda of modern
India. The sin of Brahmahatya (killing of brahmins)
of Indra was washed away by brahmins at this place.
The place where Karisa (cowdung) from Indra fell
was called Karisa and it gradually became Kariisa.
(See under Angamalaja). )
KARVATA. An ancient country of India. The King of
se = was slain by Bhimasena. (Chapter 30, Sabha
arva).
KASERAKA. A Yaksa. Mahabharata, Sabha Parva,
Chapter 10, Verse 15 says that Kaferaka continues to
attend on Kubera asa member of his assembly.
KASERU. A lovely daughter of Tvasta, the Prajapati.
Narakasura abducted Kageru when she was fourteen
years old. She was one of the virgins married by Sri
Krsna who won a victory over Narakasura. (M.B.
Sabha Parva, Chapter 38, Daksinatya Patha).
KASERUMAN (KASERUMAN). An _ Asura who
was a Yavana. He was slain by Sri Krsna . according to
Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 12, Verse 32.
KASI I. (VARANASI. BANARAS). (See under Divodasa also).
1) General. One of the oldest and most popular
sacred centres in India, Kasi is reputed for its Viévanatha temple of hoary traditions, according to one of
which the Sivaliiga in the temple was installed by
Brahma himself. (Halasya Mahatmya).
2) Pilgrimage on foot to Kasi. Devotees from many
parts of India go on pilgrimage to Kasi on foot, bathe
in the holy waters of the Ganga and thus earn spiritual
satisfaction and release from worldly attachments. The
reason for the.above is stated in the Agni Purana as
-follows :—Once, at Kailasa Siva told Parvati that the
temple at Kasi was called ‘Avimukta’ (unreleased) as
it never perished, and all Japa, tapa, homa and dana
made there never cease to give auspicious results. One
should walk on foot to Kasi and live there. Having
gone there one should never leave the place. There are
eight great tirthas at Avimukta, i.e. Harigcandra tirtha,
AvratakeSvara tirtha, Japyevara tirtha, Sri Parvatirtha, Mahdalayatirtha, Bhrgu tirtha, Candeévara
tirtha and Kedaratirtha, These tirthas extend to two
yojanas to the east of the Kasi temple and _half-ayojana to the west of it. The river Varana is also there,
and Varanasi is at the centre of all these. Whatever is
done at Varanasi like bath, Japa, homa, worship of
Devas, dana, obsequies for the dead, oneself living there
etc. is productive of devotion and salvation, (Agni
Purana, Chapter 112),
3) References to Kafi in the Mahabharata.
(i) Pandu: once conquered Kaéi.
Chapter 9).
(ii) Bhima married Balandhara, daughter of the King
of Kasi. (Adi Parva, Chapter 35, Verse 77) .
(iii) Bhimasena conquered Kasi. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 30, Verse 6).
(iv) Sahadeva conquered Kasi. (Udyoga Parva, Chapter 50, Verse 31).
(Bhisma Parva,

KASI II 396
(v) In the war between the Pandavas and the Kauravas, the King of Kasi fought on the side of the former.
(Udyoga Parva, Chapter 196, Verse 2).
(vi) Arjuna conquered Kasi. (Adi Parva, Chapter 122,
Verse 40).
(vii) Sri Krsna conquered Kasi. (Drona Parva, Chapter 11, Verse 15). :
(viii) Karna once conquered Kasi on behalf of Duryodhana. (Karna Parva, Chapter 8, Verse 19).
(ix) Kagi had been ruled by the Kings called Haryaégva.
Sudeva, and Divodasa. (Anusasana Parva, Chapter 30,
Verses 12 to 15).
(x) King Vrsadarbha and UsSinara had ruled over
Kasi. (Anusasana Parva, Chapter 30, Verse 9).
(xi) Bhisma conquered Kasi during the Svayarhnvara of
Amba. (Anusadsana Parva, Chapter 44, Verse 38).
(xu) The horse sent out in connection with Yudhisthira’s Asvamedha passed through Kasi also. (Asvamedha Parva, Chapter 83, Verse 14).
(xiii) Fer the origin of the name Kasi see under Divodasa.
KASI II. An inhabitant-citizen-of Kasi. (Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 106, Verse 18).
KASI III. Ason of Kaviprajapati. (Anusasana Parva,
Chapter 85, Verse 133).
KASIKA. A famous charioteer on the Pandava side
(Udyoga Parva, Chapter 171, Verse 15).
KASISVARA TIRTHA. A sacred place on the banks of
river Ambumati on the borders of Kuruksetra. A bath
in the river redeems one from all sins and raises one to
Brahmaloka. (Vana Parva, Chapter 83, Verse 57).
KASMIRA (KASMIRAKAM). A state in North India,
Kaémira was famous during the Mahabharata period
also. Once Arjuna conquered this state (Sabha Parva,
Chapter 27) . People from the statehad attended Yudhisthira’s Rajasiiya with many articles of presentation. Sri
Krsna once defeated its ruler. (Drona Parva, Chapter
11, Verse 16). Parasurama also once defeated its ruler.
(Drona Parva, Chapter 7/0, Verse 11).
KASMIRAMANDALAM. A particular place in Ka‘mira
where once a conference of sages was held. (Vana
Parva, Chapter 203). Besides all.the prominent sages
of North India, distinguished persons like Nahusa,
Yayati, Asi and Kasyapa attended the conference.
- Rivers Jhelam and Chenab flow through this place, and
it is a holy centre. Those who bathe here will become
like sages.
KASTURIGANDHI. Another name for K4li (Matsyagandhi) or Satyavati, the mother of Vyasa. To know
how she got this name, see under Satyavati.
KASYAI. A famous King of Kasi ; father of Amba,
Ambika and Ambalika. He was also called Krodhayaga. According to Chapter 171 of Udyoga Parva,
Kagya’s real name was Senabindu.
KASYA II. One of the great sages who visited Bhisma
on his bed of arrows. (Santi Parva, Chapter 47,
i AEYAPA i _ Chief among the Prajapatis.
1) Kasyapa—Son or Grandson of Brahma ? It is impossible
to give a definite answer to this question. In MahaEigpata Adi Parva, Chapter 65, we see that six spiritng_—Marici, Angiras, Atri, Pulastya, Pujaha and
io re born to Brahma. Kagyapa was born as
ge ae” Marici and that all living beings in the
a a their origin from Kasyapa. fecandiang to
this statement, Kasyapa 1s the grandson of Brahma.
KASYAPA
But in the 14th Sarga of Aranyakanda in Valmiki
Ramayana there is an account of the creation of all
animate and inanimate objects in this world. According
to a statement in that passage, we find that Kasyapa
was the youngest brother of Marici, Atri, Pulastya and
others. This means that Kagyapa was the son of Brahma.
Therefore there is nothing wrong in regarding him
either as the son or as the grandson of Brahma. In the
Puranas we find references to him in both ways.
2) Original Gotra or Clan.. Mahabharata, Santi Parva,
Chapter 297, verse 17 says that all living beings belong
to the four original Gotras— the gotra of Angiras,
Kasyapa gotra, Bhrgu gotra and Vasistha gotra and
that all the other gotras came into existence subsequently.
3) KaSsyapa’s wives. Kasyapa had 21 wives who were:—
Aditi, Diti, Danu, Arista, Surasa. Khasa, Surabhi,
Vinata, Tamra, Krodhavasa, Ira, Kadri, Mun,
Puloma, Kalaka, Nata, Danayus, Sirmhika, Pradha,
Visva, and Kapila. Of these, the 13 wives, Aditi, Dit,
Kalaka, Danayus, Danu, Simhika, Krodha, Pradha,
Visva, Vinata, Kapila, Muni and Kadru, were the
daughters of Daksa.
Of these the first wife Aditi had 12 sons. These 12 809°
namely Visnu, Sakra, Aryama, Dhata, Tvasta, Pusa,
Vivasvan, Savita, Mitra, Varuna, Amsa and Bhaga are
called Adityas (sons of Aditi). In the sixth Manvantar@
these 12 Adityas belonged to the tribe known as Tusitas:
(The present Manvantara is the seventh one). The
crores of Devas came into being from the tw
Adityas. “f
The Daityas were born from Kagyapa’s second W!
Diti. The chief Daityas are Hiranyakagipu, Hiranyak$*
and Simhika. All the other Daityas were born for
them.
elve
The Danavas were the children of Danu, another x
of Kasyapa. Dvimirdha, Sambara, emg oe _
arab)
Siras, Kapila, Sankara, Ekacakra, Mahabahu, heidi
Mahabala, Svarbhanu, Vrsaparva, Puloma, and Wipe
citti are the famous Danavas. The other Danavas w®
the children of the people mentioned above. :
Another wife of Ka$yapa, Surabhi gave birth to a ad
Ekapad, Ahirbuddhnya, Tvasta and Rudra and als ‘
the Ekadaga Rudras namely :—Hara, Bahuripa, ar yam
baka, Aparajita, Vrsakapi, Sambhu, Kapardi ,Ra “
Mrgavyadha, Sarpa, and Kapali. Vinata gave bine
Garuda and Kadri was the mother of the nagas.
Puranas proclaim that all living beings that we $
the world today, sprang from Kaégyapa’s offspring’
his different wives. (Valmiki Ramayana, Bala Kanga
Chapter 29; Visnu Purana, Part I, Chapters 15-2 4
Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapters 16 and 65 4”
Agni Purana, Chapter 18). "
4) Brahma taught Kasyapa cure for snake poison. ‘The an
pents (Nagas) were born to Kadri, one of the wiv i
of Kagyapa. Once Kadri asked her children to han
down like hair from the tail of Uccaissravas. if
refused to do so. Kadrit became angry and cursed sae
that they would be burnt alive at Janamejaya’s ee :
Sattra (snake-sacrifice). After the curse, the Nag -
became dangerously venomous. At this stage, Rape
taught Kasyapa the art of curing snake-polsol
protect other creatures that might be bitten by “
Nagas. Cure of snake-bite in this world dates !°
that time. (M.B. Adi Parva. Chapter 20).
ee in
qgivala,

KASYAPA I 397
5) Kasy pa and Garuda. Garuda is a mighty son of
Kasyapa by his wife Vinata. Vinata made a bet with
her sister Kadri. Kadri won the bet. Vinata became
Kadri’s maid-servant as a result of the bet. To be
relieved of this bondage Vinata’s son Garuda had to
bring Amrta from Devaloka and give it to Kadri and |
her Naga-sons. Garuda agreed and flew up to Heaven
to fetch Amrta.
On the way, he visited his father Kasyapa who was
performing penance on the Gandhamadana mountain.
He asked his. father to give him some food, as he was
very hungry. Kasyapa told him the following story:—
‘Long ago a sage named Vibhavasu lived near this place.
He and his younger brother named Supratika began to
quarrel over the sharing of their father’s wealth. The
elder brother transformed the younger brother into an
elephant by a curse and the younger brother turned
the elder into a tortoise hy his curse. They are still
living in yonder lake as elephant and tortoise and
continue like enemies. If you eat both of them, you will
be strong enough to fight against the Devas and get
possession of Amrta for yourself,”’
On hearing this, Garuda went to the lake and caught
the elephant and tortoise in his claws and flew up into
the sky. The mountains began to tremble and a whirlwind swept the Heavens when Garuda beat with his
wings. He flew about here and there unable to find a
convenient place to sitand enjoy his meal. On the way,
his eye caught sight of a huge banyan tree spreading its
branches far and wide, to a distance of 100 yojanas
around it. When he perched on one of its branches
with the elephant and tortoise, the branch broke and
fell down. From that branch certain sages known as
Balakhilyas were hanging with their heads downwards.
So, to prevent them from falling to the ground, Garuda
lifted it in his beak and began to fly up again. Unable
to find a suitable spot where he could deposit the
branch with the sages, Garuda returned to his father
again. At the request of Kasyapa, the Balakhilyas went
to the Himalayas. He showed Garuda a vast, snow-.
clad mountain on which he could deposit the broken
branch he was carrying. Garuda flew to that mountain
and ate up the elephant and tortoise and thus gained
strength to fight with the Devas for Amrta. After that
he proceeded to Heaven. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapters
6) Othe Birth of Kasyapa. In Caksusa Manvantara, the
sage Sutapas performed a penance along with his wife
Préni for 12,000 years. Lord Visnu appeared to them
and asked what boon they wished to ask. ‘They prayed
that the Lord should take birth as their son. Visnu
granted their prayer aid was born as their son.
In the next Manvantara (the period of Vaivasvata
Manu) Sutapas and Prgni were re-born as Kagyapa
and Aditi respectively. At that time also Mahavisnu
was born to Aditi as Vamana. (See under Vamana).
In this birth, Kasyapa had many other wives besides
Aditi. Surasa was one of those wives. (Bhagavata, 10th
Skandha).
It was this Kas yapa himself who was reborn as Vasudeva and Aditi became Devaki. Surasa was born as
Rohini, another wile. There 1s another reason for
Kagyapa and Aditi to take birth for the third time.
Once Kagyapa had prepared to perform a Yaga. All
arrangements were co
mplete. But the sacrificial cow
KASYAPA I
alone was not available. Kasyapa solved the problem
by stealing a cow from Varuna’s cattle-shed. Aditi and
Surasa concealed it in the Agrama. Enraged at the
theft of his cow, Varuna complained to Brahma. A
curse was pronounced by Brahma and Varuna that as
a punishment for stealing and hiding the cow, Kasyapa
should be reborn as‘a cowherd and Aditi and Surasa
should be reborn as the cowherd’s wives. It was by
this curse that Kasyapa, Aditi and Surasa were reborn
as Vasudeva Devaki and Rohini respectively. (Devi
Bhagavata, 4th Skandha).
7) Parasurama’s gift of land to Kagsyapa. Paragurama
performed a Yaga after exterminating all Ksatriya:
Kings. At that Yaga he gifted all the lands he had
conquered till then to Kagyapa. In Mahabharata
ee Parva, Chapter 117, there is a reference to this
gift.
8) KaSyapa and Kerala. After Parasurama went round
the world eighteen times and exterminated the
Ksatriya Kings he performed a Yaga. At that Yaga he
gave the whole earth as daksina to Kasgyapa. After that
Kasyapa drove away Paragurama from the earth ‘
the south. Taking pity on Parasurama, the ocean gave
him the region known as “‘Sirparaka’’. Kasyapa_ seized
Sarparaka also from Paragurama and ‘gave it to
Brahmanas. Parasurama went to the forests after it.
Later on, intermixture of castes took place in this region
and anarchy prevailed there. At one time, Sirparaka
sank down into Patala (lower world). Kasgyapa who
saw this held the earth up, brought Ksatriyas from the
north and made them rulers of the country. (M.B.
Santi Parva, Chapter 49). This ““Sirparaka” is believed
to be Kerala.
9) Other Details about Kasyapa,
(1) Kasyapa arrived at the place of Arjuna’s birth
accompanied by other sages. (Mahabharata, Adi
Parva, Chapter 122).
(ii) Kagyapa flourished in Brahma’s assembly.
Sabha Parva, Chapter 11).
(ii1} Once there was a dispute between Virocana, the
son of Prahlada and Sudhanva, the son of Angiras. It
was Kagyapa who settled this dispute. (See the 5th
Para under the word Angiras).
(iv) Once Kasyapa went on a_ pilgrimage in
a of Yudhisthira. (M.B. ee ets eos:
(v) Once Brahma gifted the entire earth to Kasyapa
at a Yajfia. Bhumidevi (Goddess of the earth) who
was distressed at it, went to Patala and began to
lament., At that time Kagyapa propitiated the goddess
Tae austere penance. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter
(vi) After ParaSurama had given the entire earth to
Kasgyapa, Kasyapa drove away Paragurama from the
earth. Paragurama then shot an arrow into the sea
and converted that portion of the sea into land. (M.B.
Drona Parva, Chapter 70, Verses 18 and 19).
(vii) When the war between Kauravas and Pandavas
was 1n progress, Kasyapa approached Drona and
wanted him to bring the battle to a close. (M.B.
Drona Parva, Chapter 190).
(viii) Kasgyapa was also present with other sages at
the time of Skanda’s birth. (M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter
(M.B.

KASYAPA II
(ix) Kagyapa once gave some pieces of advice to
Purauravas. (M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter 73)..
(x) In the 8th verse of Chapter 208 of Santi Parva, in
Mahabharata, we find that Kagyapa had another name
Aristanemi.
(xi) Kagyapa once related to Bhisma, the story of
Mahavisnu’s Varahavatara. (Incarnation as Boar).
(M.B. Santi: Parva, Chapter 209, Verse 6). :
(xii) Bhasa Bharata says that gingelly seeds were first
introduced into this world from sage -KaSyapa’s body.
(M. B: Anusasana Parva, Chapter 66, Verse 10).
(xili) Kagyapa explained to Vrsadarbhi, the evil of
receiving pratigraha (presents). (M.B, AnuSsasana
Parva, Chapter 93).
(xiv) Kasyapa once spoke to Arundhati about the
weakness of his body. (M.B. AnuSdsana Parva, Chapter
93, Verse 65).
(xv) At another time, Agastya suspected that Kasyapa
had stolen his lotus. But Kagyapa swore that he was
innocent. (M.B. Anugasana Parva, Chapter 94).
(xvi) In Bhasa Bharata it is said that Kagyapa was
one of the Sapta Gurus (seven Preceptors) of Kubera.
The other six Gurus were—Vasistha, Atri, Gautama,
Bharadvaja, Visvamitra and Jamadagni. M.B. Anusasana Parva, Chapter 150).
(xvii) In Bhagavata we see that Kasyapa and other
sages were instrumental in bringing about the destruction of Yadu Vaméa. (For further details see under
SAMBA). -
KASYAPA II. A serpent. In Mahabharata, Adi Parva,
Chapter 122, we read that this serpent was present at
the time of Arjuna’s birth.
KASYAPA I. (KANVA).
1) General. Two sages Kas yapa and Kagsyapa are mentioned in the Puranas, and due to the close similarity in
the names in some Puranas the two names are used one
for the other. There is, therefore, considerable difficulty
in distinguishing the one from the other and unerringly
hitting upon the right person in certain contexts.
There is a very ancient sage the first cause or the
original father of all living beings in the universe. He
is described, in most of the Puranas, as the grandson of
Brahma and the son of Marici. He was the husband of
the original or first mothers of living beings, called Diti
and Aditi. The interpretation that he was called Kagyapa as he used to drink Kagyam (liquor) is not founded
on facts. No Purana refers to him as a drunkard.
The sage called Kasgyapa was the foster father of
Sakuntala. The statement that he was called Kasyapa
as he was born in the dynasty of Kasyapa is also not
correct. Kanva was not born in the dynasty of Kagyapa.
The genealogy of Kasgyapa is as follows:
2) Genealogy. Descended from Visnu thus: Brahma—
Atri — Candra—Budha—Puriiravas—Ayus—Nahusa—
Yayati—Puru—Janamejaya — Pracinvan — Pravira —
Namasyu—Vitabhaya—Sundu— Bahuvidha — Sarmyati
Rahovadi — Raudragva — Matinara—Pritiratha—
Medhatithi—Kanva (Kasyapa) .
=124h 3 Kanva’s father.
Medhatithi was :
Chapter 208, Verse 27). According to the Agni
Ms son called Kanva was born (Kasyapa)
Purana a 80! ¢ King Pritiratha of the Puru
to Medhatiti, s0) t the family matters of
dynasty. But, nothing abou g
Kanva is mentioned therein. In the Mahabharata itself
the name Kaéyapa is often used instead of Kanva.
(Santi Parva,
KATVAKU
From the above facts it may be understood that Kanva
was born asa prince, and that later on, he became a
sage. Moreover, the Agni Purana says that Santurodha,
the brother of Kanva’s father, was the father of Dusyanta. According to that Kasyapa and Dusyanta were the
sons of brothers, Kasgyapa being that of the elder one.
For the time being the above are the only reasonable
inferences, and the truth has to be found out by further
researches. But, one thing is certain according to the
genealogy, that Kagsyapa was born twenty generations
after Kasyapa.
3). Kdafyapa and Taksaka. ‘The story is told in the 2nd
Skandha of Devi Bhagavata and in the Adi Parva of
Bharata that Taksaka set out to bite King Pariksit and
Kasyapa to cure him of Taksaka’s poison, but that
Taksaka bribed Kasyapa off his mission to save the
King. But, the story as such is unfounded. It was Kasyapa and not Kagyapa whom Brahma had taught the
science of the treatment and cure of poison (see under
Kasyapa) and, therefore, it should be Kagyapa whom
Taksaka bribed. |
4). Kasyapa and Sakuntala. See under KA, VA.
Father of Rsyagrnga was
5). Kasyapa and Rsyasriga.
one Kasyapa; may be Kasyapa or Kagyapa. The great
er possibility is for KaSyapa to be the father. (S¢¢
under RSYASRNGA).
6). After a Yajfia Visvakarman made a land-gift to
Kasyapa once. (See under KANVA).
KASYAPA II. Priest of Vasudeva; this Kagyapa lived
for years as a good friend of the Pandavas. He is cons!
dered to be a very distinguished ascetic. (Asvamedha
Parva, Chapter 16).
KASYAPA III. Son of Sage KaSsyapa. This Kagyapa was
member of Indra’s assembly. (Sabha Parva, Chapter //:
He was present at the Yajfia conducted by empero!
Prthu.
KASYAPA IV. An Agni, the son of Kasyapa. Paficajany@
was born from the five Agnis, Kagyapa, Vasist)@:
Prana, Angiras and Cyavana, all of whom were sons 9
Kasyapa. (Vana Parva, Chapter 220).
KASYAPA V. A haughty Vaisya once felled to the
ground a brahmin youth called Kasgyapa by hitting him
with his chariot. (See under Indra, Para 38).
KASYAPA VI. Sons of Kasyapa like Vibhandak2Rajadharman, Visvavasu, Indra, Aditya and Vasu)
other Devas and other living beings born in KasyaPp4 5
dynasty—all these are also called Kagyapas.
KASYAPADVIPA (ISLAND). An island in the shap®
of a hare visible in the moon. (Bhisma Parva, ChaPter 6, Verse 55).
KASYAPI. (Earth). The earth came to be known 4
Kasgyapi as it had been given as a gift to Kagyapa
Paragurama.
‘‘The whole of the earth was given to Kagyapa and thus
it came to be called Kafyapi’. (Brahmanda Purap@
Chapter 89).
KATHAKA. A soldier of Skanda. (Sloka 67, Chapter
45, Salya Parva).
KATHASARITSAGARA. See under BRHATKATHA.
KATHOPANISAD. See under NACIKETAS.
KATVAKU (KHATVAKU). A son of Vaivasvata Mann.
Brahmanda Purana states that he was an ancestor °
Iksvaku. 7
In the beginning Manu, alias Vaivasvata, had a ipa
named Katvaku. He was the first of kings and he rule

_KATYAYANA | 399
the world for a long time. On the banks of the river
Sarayi he constructed a city called Ayodhya. Ayodhya
was celebrated for its beauty and wise men proclaimed |
that it was more beautiful than the cities of the eight |
suards of the universe or the city of even Brahma, the
Creator. | | , é
KATYAYANA I. A grammarian who wrote a commentary on Panini’s grammatical work entitled Astadhyayi.
He has also written Srauta Siitras and a book on
“Dharma Sastra’’. |
KATYAYANA. II. Kathasaritsigara says that “‘Katyayana’”’ was another name of Vararuci.
KATYAYANA. III. A great sage who flourished in
Indra’s assembly. We see a reference to him in Maha.
bharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter 7, Verse 19). |
KATYAYANI. One of the two wives of Yajfiavalkya.
' After withdrawing completely from worldly activities,
Yajfiavalkya asked his wives to divide his worldly assets
equally between them. But Maitreyi the other wife, being
of a deeply spiritual nature, Katyayani herself had to
undertake the burden Of all the material affairs. (Brhadaranyakopanisad).
KAUKUHAKA. An ancient country in. South India. |
(M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Stanza 60).
~“KAUKULIKA. An attendant of Skandadeva. (M.B.
Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Stanza 15).
KAUMODAKI. The club of Sri Krsna. It is mentioned,
in Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 224, Stanza 23,
that this club was given to Sri Krsna by Varuna the
god of water, at the time of the burning of the forest
Khandava.
KAUNAPA. Aserpent born in the family of Vasuki..
This serpent was burnt to death in the Sarpa Sattra
(sacrificial fire to kill serpents) of Janamejaya. (M.B.
Adi Parva, Chapter 57, Stanza 6).
KAUNAPASANA. A famous serpent born in the family of
Kaurava. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 35, Stanza 14).
KAUNDINYA I. See under Mitrabheda, |
KAUNDINYA II. A hermit who lived in the Palace of
Yudhisthira. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 4, Stanza
16). See under Dhrstabuddhi.. e .
- KAUNDINYA III. A hermit. This hermit had erected his
hermitage in Hastimatisabhramatisangama and lived
there. Once due to excess of rain the river flooded and
his hermitage was washed away. So the hermit cursed |
the river. “Let the river be dried up’’. Then he went ©
to the realm of Vaikuntha. (Padma Purana, Uttara
Khanda, Chapter 145). nek :
KAUNIKUTSYA. A noble Brahmin. It is mentioned
in Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 8, Stanza 25, that
this Brahmin visited Pramadvara who died of snakebite, .
aay ere -'Those who were born in the
the famous King Kuru. Descended in the
nee he order from Visnu :— Brahma—Atri—Candra
Budha— Puraravas —-Ayus —Nahusa —Ya ae
Janamejaya—Pracinvan ar konpa ee oMe Tea "
aya— undu—Bahuvidha—-Samyatt —-Rahova oe audraigva—Matinara—Santurodha —Dusyanta— at
Suhotra—Suhota -— Gala — Garda — Suketu — z atksetra—Hasti—Ajamidha—Rkya—Samyarana — uru.
This is the genealogy of Kuru. From in t et snes
logy continues as follows :— Jahnu—Surat ae ic ae
tha—Sarvabhauma —Jayatsena —Ravaya —bhavuka—
_ Sadasuvak, Ugragravas, Ugrasena,
KAURAVA (S)
Cakroddhata —Devatithi —Rksa —Bharata —Pratica—
Santanu. Santanu had two wives Ganga and Satyavati.
Bhisma was born of Ganga. Vyasa was born to Satyavati before her marriage. from the hermit Paragara.
_ After the marriage, from Santanu, two sons Citrangada
and Vicitravirya were born to her. A Gandharva killed
Citrangada. Bhisma brought the three daughters of the
King of Kasi, Amba, Ambika and Ambalika as wives
of Vicitravirya, but on the way knowing that Amba was
in love with the King of Salva, she was -sent back.
Ambika and Ambalika became the wives of Vicitravirya.
Shortly Vicitravirya also died. With a view to continue
the royal family, Satyavati sent for Vyasa, so that he
might beget children of Ambika and Ambalika. At
the time of coition Ambika closed her eyes to avoid
seeing the uncouth face of Vyasa. So she got as son
Dhrtarastra who was blind from birth. Seeing the ugly
figure of Vyasa Ambalika turned pale and so the son
born to her was pale in colour. He was called Pandu.
From Dhrtarastra, Duryodhana and his brothers were
born and from Pandu were born the Pandavas. All
members born in the family-of Kuru were known as
Kauravas. But later, the sons of Dhrtarastra came to be
known by the name ‘Kauravas’.
2) The origin of Kauravas.. (Duryodhana and his brothers). Dhrtarastra married Gandhari the daughter of
Subala the King of Gandhara. Once Vyasa reached the
palace weary with hunger and thirst. Gandhari gave
Vyasa food -and drink. Vyasa was pleased with her and
told her that she might ask for any boon. She said that
she wanted to get hundred sons from Dhrtarastra.
Vyasa granted the boon. Gandhari became pregnant.
Even after two years she did not deliver. She heard that
Kunti, the wife of Pandu had given birth to a child,
Gandhari became sad. She crushed her wonib and gave
birth to a lump of flesh. Understanding this, Vyasa
came there and cutting the lump into hundred and one
pieces kept them in ghee-pots. Advising Gandhari to
keep the pots in secret, Vyasa went to the Himalayas.
The pots were broken at the proper time and hundred
sons and a daughter came out.. Besides them Dhrtarastra had another son named Yuyutsu by a Vaisya
woman. .
The hundred and one sons of Dhrtarastra beginning with
Duryodhana are the Kauravas.
3) Names of the Kauravas.
Duryodhana, Dussasana, Dussaha, DuSéala, Jalagandha,
Sama, Saha, Vinda, Anuvinda, Durdharsa, Subahu, Duspradharsana, Durmarsana, Durmukha, Duskarna, Karna,
Vikarna, Sala, Sattva, Sulocana, Citra; Upacitra, Citraksa, Carucitra, Sarasana, Durniada, Durvigaha, Vivitsu,
Vikatanana, Urnanabha, Sunabha, Nanda, Upananda,
Citrabana, Citravarma, Suvarma, Durvimeca, Ayobahu, Mahabahu, Citranga, Citrakundala,, Bhimavega,
Bhimabala, Valaki, Balavardhana, Ugrayudha, Susena,
Kundadhara, Mahodara, Citrayudha, Nisangi, Pasi,
Vrndaraka, Drdhavarma, Drdhaksatra, Somakirti,
Aniidara, Drdhasandha, Jarasandha, Satyasandha,
Senani, Dusparajaya, Aparajita, Kundasayi, Visalaksa, Duradhara,
Drdhahasta, Suhasta, Vatavega, Suvarcas, Adityaketu,
Bahyasi, Nagadatta, Ugrasayi, Kavaci, Krathana
Kundi, Bhimavikrama, Dhanurdhara, Virabahu, Alo,-
lupa, Abhaya, Drdhakarman, Drdharathasraya, Anadhrsya, Kundabhedi, Viravi, Citrakundala, Pramatha,

KAUSIKA UH.
KAUSIKA IV.
KAURAVYA 400
Apramathin, Dirgharoman, Suviryavan, Dirghabahu,
Suvarma, Kaficanadhvaja, Kundasin, Virajas, and
Yuyutsu. Dussala (daughter ). (Mahabharata. Adi Parva,
Chapters 67 and 117). (For further details about the
Kauravas see under Duryodhana and Duésasana).
KAURAVYA. _ A noble serpent which was born of Airavata, (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 218, Stanza 18).
KAUSALA (KAUSALA). Skandadeva once changed
the shape of his face to that of the face of goat. Then
he got the name Kausala. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter
228, Stanza ‘4).
KAUSALYA I. A queen of King Dagaratha and mother
of Sri Rama. Dagaratha had three wives Kausalya,
Kaikeyi and Sumitra. Kausalya gave birth to Sri Rama,
Kaikeyi to Bharata and Sumitra to Laksmana and
a (Valmiki Ramayana, Bala Kanda, Sarga
KAUSALYA II. Queen of the King of Kasi. Amba,
Ambika, and Ambalika were daughters of this Kausalya.
Of these daughters Ambalika also was called Kausalya.
After the death of Pandu she went to the forest with
Ambika. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 129).
KAUSALYA III. The queen of a Yadava King. She
was the mother of the Yadava named KeSin. (Devi
Bhagavata, Skandha 9).
KAUSALYA IV. Wife of Puru, the son of King Yayati.
Janamejaya was born to Puru of his wife Kausalya.
(M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 95, Stanza 11).
KAUSALYA V. The queen of Janaka, the King of
Mithila. Once King Janaka decided to sell his palace
and everything he possessed and to go abegging for alms.
But his brave wife Kausalya convinced her husband by
her reasonable arguments that he should not venture to
do so. Thus she prevented her husband from carrying
out his decision.
KAUSALYA. A teacher, who belonged to the line of
disciples of Vyasa. Jaimini was the disciple of Vyasa.
Sumantu was the son of Jaimini. A son named Sutva,
was born to Sumantu. Sukarman was the son of Sutva.
Sukarman had two disciples Hiranyanabha. and Pauspifiji. Kausalya was another name of Hiranyanabha.
(Visnu Purana, Arnéa 3, Chapter 6).
KAUSAMBi. Four sons, Kusamba, Kusanabha, Asirtarajas and Vasu were born to Kuéa, the son of Brahma,
of his wife the princess of Vidarbha. According to the
order of their father each prince built a city and began
to rule over it. Kaugambiis the city bwilt by Kusamba.
Kuéganabha built the city of Mahodayapura ; Asurtarajas, the city of Dharmaranya and Vasu the city of
Girivraja. (Valmiki Ramayana, Bala Kanda, Sarga 32).
It is mentioned in Kathasaritsagara that the.city of Kauéa4mbi stood in the middle of the kingdom of Vatsa and
that Udayana born of the family of the Pandavas had
once ruled this country with Kausambi as his capital.
KAUSIKA I. (Visvamitra) . See under Visvamitra.
A hermit who lived in the palace of
t ig mentioned in Mahabharata, Udyoga
r 83, that while going to Hastinapura,
his hermit on the way.
minister of Jarasandha. It is mentionYudhisthira. I
Parva, Ghapte
rj Krsna met t
K AUSIKA I harata, Sabha Parva, Stanza 22, that he
ed in Mahab
had another name Hamsa also.
While the Pandavas were leading forest
life, the hermit Markandeya told the story of a noble
Brahmin name
d Kaufgika, to Dharmaputra. Once this
KAUSIKA VI
Brahmin sat under a tree and performed penance. A small
crane which sat on a branch of the tree passed excreta
on the head of the Brahmin. He became angry and
looked at the bird. Instantly the bird was reduced to
ashes. The Brahmin sincerely repented and went to the
countryside to live on alms. Once he reached the house
ofa Brahmin. The wife of the Brahmin came to the
door and requested him to wait a bit. Immediately her
husband arrived, and she, being engaged in looking
after the needs of her husband forgot the Brahmin
Kausika, who became angry and spoke cruel words to
her. She argued that the noblest deed was looking after
one’s husband and that it was not meet and right for
Brahmins to get angry. She advised Kausika to go [0
Mithilapuri and to receive advice from the famous
Dharmavyadha. Kaugika repented his rash nature,
went to Dharmavyadha and received advice from him.
He returned home and lived peacefully with his parents-
(M.B. Vana Parva, ten chapters from 206).
Though a man of veracity, he finally had to go to hell,
for the following reason. While he was engaged 1?
penance in the forest some thieves came by that way wil
some stolen goods. The owners of the goods were, chasing
the thieves. Kaugika told them the way by which the
thieves had gone. So at the end Kausika was thrown
into hell. (M.B. Karna Parva, Chapter 69).
KAUSIKA V. A King of the Puru dynasty. Kapila was
his father and Grtsapati was his brother. The four
castes Brahmana, Ksatriya, Vaigya and Sadra original
ed from Grtsapati. (Agni Purana, Chapter 278). '
KAUSIKA VI. A hermit. This ancient hermit lived”
Kuruksetra. His sons Svasrpa, Krodhana, Himst@>
Pifuna, Kavi, Vagdusta, and Pitrvartti_ lived with
hermit Garga for learning under him, Their names
indicated their character. Their father died. The so”*
were in poverty. Atthis time rain ceased altogetherGarga asked his disciples to take his milch cow t0
forest for grazing. Owing to hunger the brothers 260!
ed to killand eat the cow. But the youngest said: in
you are bent on killing the cow, we had better ar
use of it as an offering to the Manes, and no sin wi
visit us.”” nd
All agreed to this and Pitrvartti killed the cow —!
began the sacrifice. Two elder brothers were employ”
in worshipping the gods and three were detailed to e
offerings to the manes. One was asked to be the ane 7
Pitrvartti was the sacrificer. Remembering t —
ancestors with reverence he began the sacrifice 7
accordance with the rites. Thus the seven hermits a -
the cow and told Garga that the cow was caught by
tiger. , ‘th
In due course the seven of them died, and took rebit :
as rude low-caste people in Dafgapura. Because © a
sacrifice and offerings to the Manes they had ¢
remembrance of their previous birth. So they fe :
god and took fast and vow at a holy bath and in ¢ -
presence of a multitude cast off their lives and we
O
. ‘n KaAalafijara hills. Because ;
born again as animals 1n alafijara h ff their
their abstinence due to knowledge they cast © He
lives by Prapatana (jumping down from the top ° “ne
mountain) and were born again as Ruddy geese, 18 -
Manasasaras whentheir names were Sumanas, Kus
Vasu, Citradargi, Sudarsi, Jnata and Jaanaparae es
names conforming to their character. The seven bro
became pure and sinless by their union with GO

KAUSIKA VI
Supreme Spirit. But three of them fell out of the union
because of their desire. They saw the pleasurable life
led by Anuha the King of Paficala who was immensely
wealthy with many beautiful wives. At the sight of this,
one of the geese—the Brahmin Pitrvartti, who performed
the sacrifice of offering to the Manes because of his love
for his father-—wished to become a king. Seeing the two
wealthy ministers who ‘led luxurious lives, two of the
ruddy geese wanted to become ministers. Accordingly
Pitrvartti was born as Brahmadatta the son of Vaibhraja and the other two as sons of ministers with names
Pundarika and Subalaka. Brahmadatta was anointed
as King of Paficala in the great city of Kampiltya. That
King was mighty, loving his father well, always desirous
of giving offerings to Manes and harmonious with God,
having the ability to read the hearts of every living
being. He married Sannati the daughter of Sudeva.
This woman in her previous birth was the ‘cow of
Garga. As this cow was used as offering to the Manes
she gotrebirth as a religious-minded woman and became the queen of Brahmadatta, who ruled over the
kingdom well for a long time.
Once the King and the queen were walking in the
garden when they saw two ants which were quarrelling
with each other. They were husband and wife. After
a time the quarrel ended and they grew more loving
than before and the she-ant pressed closely against her
husband. Brahmadatta hearing their conversation stood
smiling. He could understand the language of every
living’ being because of the merits of his previous births.
When the King smiled his wife asked him for the reason. He described to his wife the quarrel of the antcouple. The queen did not believe his words. She
thought that the King had been making fun of her.
She asked him how he learned the language of birds
and beasts. But the King could not give an answer and
he became thoughtful. The remaining four of the ruddy
geese took rebirth asthe sons of a poor Brahmin in the
same city of Kampilya. They had the remembrance of
previous births. Their names’ were Dhrtiman, Sarva-:
darsi, Vidyacandra_ and Tapodhika, names befitting
their character. They decided to perform severe penance
to attain Supreme bliss, and were about to get away
from the house when their father, the poor Brahmin
cried bitterly, being helpless. They taught their father
the following poem and advised him to recite the poem
before the King the next morning, order to get plenty
of wealth.
‘Noble Brahmins in Kuruksetra
The seven foresters in Dasapura
Deer in Kalafijara and in Manpsa a
dy geese, the same now are men.”
on cho was not able to give answer to the
question of his wife, was about to go out ou the palace
for a walk with his wife and ministers, when the o rab
min made his appearance and recited the poem taught
by his sons, to the King. When the King heard t :
a he remembered the previous births and fainte
d fell down. The two ministers, Subalaka -son of
Babhravya the author of the science of love and Pundarika son of Paficala the author of the science of medicine
and treatment, also remembered about their previous
births and fell down with grief. The three of them
t their fall from the union with the SupLamon efrit, Brahmadatia gave that old Brahmin plenty
KAUTSA
of wealth and villages and sent him away contented.
After anointing his son Visvaksena as King, Brahmadatta
and his retinue went to Manasasaras for penance.
For a while they lived in the forest engaged in penance
and then cast off their lives and entered the world of
Supreme bliss. (Padma Purana, Part 3, Chapter 10),
KAUSIKA VII. A King. This king became a cock at
night. His wife Visala was filled with grief at this
transfiguration of her husband in the night. She
told her grief to the hermit Galava who told the queen
about the previous birth of her husband as follows :—
“In the previous birth he used to eat cocks to get
strength. Knowing this Tamraciida the king of fowls
cursed him. ‘*You shall become a cock during nights.”
That is why your husband has become a cock.”
According to the advice of the hermit the King began
to worship Lord Siva and he was liberated from the
curse. (Skanda Purana).
KAUSIKA. (GOMATI). A river. The hermitage of
Vigsvamitra stood on the bank of this river. The modern
name of river Kausika is Kosi. The river Kosi flows
through Bihar. Those who bathe in this river will
obtain remission of sins. See under Gomati. (M.B. Vana
Parva, Chapter 84).
KAUSIKACARYA. The king Akrti.. It is mentioned in
Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter 21, that this King
ruled over Saurastra and was known also by the name
Kaugikacarya.
KAUSIKAKUNDA. A holy place. It is mentioned in
Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 84, Stanza 142
that Visvamitra got his attainments in this place.
KAUSIKASRAMA. A holy place. It was at this place
that Amba, the daughter of King of Kasi performed a
severe penance. (M.B. Udyoga Parva, Chapter 156,
Stanza 27). )
KAUSIKYARUNASANGAMA. A holy place. It is stated
in Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 84 that ifa
man fasts in this place, the confluence of Kaugiki and
Aruna rivers he will be absolved of all his sins.
KAUSTUBHA. A brilliant precious stone. It is mention
edin Agni Purana, Chapter 3; Valmiki Ramayana
Balakanda Sarga 45, Stanza 39 and Mahabharata, Adi
Parva that this precious stone floated up at the time of
the churning of the sea of Milk. This jewel which
originated from the ghee in the sea of Milk, was worn
on the breast by Visnu.
“This divine jewel called Kaustubha came up in the
middle of ghee and stayed in the breast of Visnu,
spreading its rays everywhere.” (M.B. Adi Parva,
Chapter 18, Stanza 37).
KAUTHUMI. Sonof a Brahmin named Hiranyanabha. Once this Brahmin youth went to the hermitage
of King Janaka and entered into a controversy with the
Brahmins there. In the argument Kauthumi became
angry and killed a Brahmin. From that day he became
a leper. The sin of Brahmahatya (murder of Brahmin)
also followed him. Finally according to the advice of
his father he worshipped the sun God, with Sravyasarhjfiakasiikta (a spell or incantation) and by the
blessing of the Sun
sin of Brahmahatya and the disease of leprosy.
sya Purana, Brahma Parva).
KAUTILYA. See under Canakya.
KAUTSA. Anoble Brahmin scholar. He was present at
the sarpa-sattra (sacrificial fire to kill
God he got deliverance from the
(Bhaviserpents) of

KAUTSYA
Janamejaya. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 58, Stanza 6).
KAUTSYA (KAUTSA). A hermit who was the disciple
of Varatantu. When he had completed his education
he asked his teacher what gift he desired. The teacher
said that he wanted fourteen crores of gold coins as
gift. Kautsya approached the emperor Raghu. The
emperor had just finished a sacrifice called Visvajit and
had emptied his treasury by giving away all the
wealth he had as alms. Only pots made of wood were
left as his wealth. When the emperor heard about the
need of Kautsya he decided to conquer the capital city
of Kubera. That night Kubera filled the treasury of
Raghu by a shower of gold. The emperor Raghu gave
Kautsya fourteen crores of gold coins. (Raghuvarhéa).
KAVACA. A sage in the assembly of Indra. (M.B.
Sabha Parva, Chapter 7). He was one of the sages of
the western part. (M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter 208,
Verse 30).
KAVACI. One of the sons of Dhrtarastra. (M.B. Adi
| Parva, Chapter 67, Verse 103). In Mahabharata,
Karna Parva, Chapter 84, it is said that he was killed
by Bhimasena. |
KAVERI. A holy river in South India.
places like Sriranga and Kumbhakona are on its banks.
The Devi of the river lives in Varuna’s assembly
worshipping him, (Sabha Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 20).
The Skanda Purana has the following story as to how
Kaveri came down to earth :
Once Agastya propitiated Siva at Kailasa and sought
the boon of some water for him to found a sacred place
on earth. At the same time Kaveri also was worshipping Siva. Siva filled Agastya’s bowl with Kaveri water.
Agastya, on his way back from Kailasa cursed the
Raksasa called Kraufica and kicked the Vindhya
mountain down. (See under Agastya). After overcoming various difficulties. Agastya at last reached
South India. He sat in meditation with the. bowl of
Famous sacred
of a crow came and sat
it. The Water in
and that river is the
Skanda Purana yi
as a river,
present Kaveri. (Asurakanda,
KAVITA son of Vaivasvata Manu. Vivasva
son of Kasyapa and Aditi. Vaivasvata Riaan wer “
son of Vivasvan. Manu had sixteen sons who were—
Manu, Yama, Yami, As vinikumaras, Revanta
mna, [ksvaku, Nrga, Saryati, Dista, Dhrsta
Narisyanta, Nabhaga, Prsadhra and Kavi
KAVI II. pee is a reference
who was the son of the Sage Bhr i Abh3a
Adi Parva, Chapter 66, Vern 42. fie dns ie i
sages who stole the lotus of Agastya, (M.B. A + ioe
Parva, Chapter 94, Verse 32), oes
KAVI III. An agni who was the fifth son of
is named Kavi. This agni is Situated in the
form of Badavagni. This agni hag two
also—Udaha and Urddhvabhak. (M.B.,
Chapter 219, Verse 20).
KAVIYIV. In Mahabharata, Anugasana Parva, Verse
132, Chapter 85, we find that three Persons, namely
Kavi, Bhrgu and Angiras took their birth from the
Brhaspati,
s€a in the
Other names
Vana Parva,
1 Sukra is also known as Kavya. Certain Puranas
claim Suk
son of Bhrgu. Puloma was Bhrgu’s wife. But, the Purana is
8 call the
KAYADH
KAYASODHANATIRTHA. A holy
KAYASODHANATIRTHA
ificial fire at the famous Yaga of Brahma. Of them
Bootes made Kavi his own son. This Kavi had eight
sons known as the Varunas. One of them was named
Kavi and another was named Kavya.
KAVIV. Rgveda, Ist Mandala, I7th Anuvaka. 116th
Sakta refers to a blind sage named Kavi. a
KAVIRAJA. A Sanskrit poet who lived in India in the
12th Century A.D. His chief works are “Raghavapandaviya’” and “Parijataharana’’. His real name was
Madhavabhatta.
KAVISA. A sage. There was a person named Kavisa
among the sages who came to visit Sri Rama when he
returned after his life in the forest. The sages who
came there from the western country were, Vrsangu,
Kavisa, Dhaumya, Raudreya, Narada, Vamadeva,
Saubhari, Astavakra, Suka, Bhrgu, Lomaéga, and
Maudgalya. (Uttara Ramayana). _
KAVYA. Son of Kavi, one of the Prajapatis. (Anuga- _
sana Parva, Chapter 85). Also, a synonym of Sukra.
KAVYA (M). Agni Purana, Chapters 390 to 400
contain a discussion on poetry, which is the basis for
literary criticism in India. ‘The above discussion 1n
Agni Purana, comprehends the forms and features of
poetry, rasa (sentiment), style, the art of acting and
the drama, and other matters related to poetry and
art.
KAVYAMATA. Mother of Sukra, the preceptor of the
Daityas.1 Kavyamata possessed extraordinary powers
of penance. In the Devi Bhagavata the following story
is given; how she cursed Visnu and how she made
Visnu and Indra powerless.
Once a fierce war was fought by the Devas and the
Asuras in which the latter got defeated, and they sought
the help of Sukracarya, But, as the Devas enjoyed the
support of Visnu, Sukra could not do anything for the
asuras, and he therefore advised them to get on someOw or other for some time. After that Sukra went to
Kailasa and performed penance, hanging head downwards, for a thousand years to secure rare and exceptional mantras. During this period the Devas again
attacked the Asuras, who ran up to Kavyamata for
succour, and she, by one glance, sent the Devas to
long sleep. She reduced Visnu and Indra also to @
state of paralysis. Then Visnu meditated upon the
Sudargana Cakra, which arrived immediately and with
the Cakra he cut off Kavyamata’s head, Sage Bhrgu
then appeared on the Scene and brought back Kavyamata to life, and she, in furious rage cursed that Visnu
should take many births, As a result of the curse
rece Fhe a to incarnate himself on eerth many
wes. (Devi Bhagavata, 4th Skandha).
KAVYAVAHA (S). group of i
Bhagavata, Skandhas ]] and :
Pitrs were born from the drops of sweat which came
out of the bodies of Daksa and others when they were
fascinated by the charm of Sandhya, the spiritual
daughter of Brahma.
Wife of Hiranyakagipu. Prahlada was
The Devi
15 state that this group 0
born to her.
\ Place in Kuruksetra, According to Mahabharata, Vana Parva:
a asthe son of Bhregu,
while certain others refer to hj s the son of Kav!
= Se mother of - ss Mm as the °
the son of Bhrgu. Puloma and Kavyamata are different Persons, Th of Sukra Kavyamata. N
the son of Kavi.
srefore, Sukra might be
© mention is made about the wife of Kavi
the son of Bhrgu hy another wife, or he might be

KERALA.
KAYAVYA
Chapter 86, by taking a bath at this place the body
would be purified.
KAYAVYA. <A Candala. He was born to a Candala
woman as the son of a Ksatriya. But the Candalas
who were impressed by Kayavya’s moral conduct,
made him the headman of the village. He taught
others that all people should honour Brahmanas and
love their country. His political creed was that those
who prospered by the ruin of a country were just like
the worms living on a dead body. (M.B. Santi Parva,
Chapter 135).
KEDARA. A holy place inthe interior of Kuruksetra.
It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter
83, that those who bathe in this holy Bath would
obtain the fruits of good actions. One of the twelve
Lingas consecrated in important places, is in
Kedara.
KEKARALOHITA,. A great serpent which once took
sage Cyavana to Patala. Cyavana, after worshipping
Siva at Nakulesvara tirtha got into river Narmada to
take his bath when the naga cailed Kekaralohita
caught hold of him, dragged him and bit him. As
the sage meditated upon Visnu the poison did not
affect him. The serpent released him from Patala as
he was unaffected by poison. Cyavana went to the
palace of Prahlada accompanied by naga damsels. On
the request of Prahlada Cyavana described to him the
holy places on earth, and without any delay Prahlada
came to earth for hunting during which sojourn on
earth he visited Naimisaranya. (Vamana Purana,
Chapter 8).
KEKAYA. The Mahabharata mentions another Kekaya,
a King of the solar dynasty. He wedded two Malava
princesses from the elder of whom were born Kicaka
and Upakicaka, and from the younger was born
Sudesna, also called Kaikeyi. This Sudesna married
Matsya, the Virdta King. (Virata Parva, Southern
text, Chapter 16).
KEKAYA(M). :
1) General. A Kingdom in ancient India. Kaikeyi, one
of Dagaratha’s wives, was a daughter of a Kekaya
King.
2) Origin. The country got the name ‘Kekaya’ as it
was ruled by King Kekaya. His genealogy is as follows.
Descended from Visnu thus -—Brahma—Atri-—Candra—
Budha—Puraravas—Ayus—Nahusa — Yayati — Anudruhyu—Sabhanara—Kalanara— Sriijaya — USsinara —
Sibi—Kekaya. Sibi had four sons called Bhadra,
Suvira, Kekaya and Vrsadarpa. (Bhagavata 9th
Skandha) .
Other details. (1) The King and the people of Kekaya
were called the Kekayas. _
(2) Five heroic Kekaya princes met with their death
in fighting Drona. (Stri Parva, Chapter 25, Verse 25).
(3) Two Kekaya Princes, Vinda and Anuvinda fought
on the Kaurava side. (Karna Parva, Chapter 13).
KERAKA. People of an ancient country in South
India. It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Sabhaparva,
Chapter 31 that Sahadeva the son of Madri_ conquered
the Kerakas and Kerala.
A small country lying in the
| information. : :
BR canes From the Puranas it
south-west corner of India.
' re
Id be understood that this country lying to t
ott of Gokarna upto Cape Comorin and to the
KERALA
west of Western Ghats had a very ancient history and
civilization of its own.
2) Origin of Kerala. ‘There are two statements, slightly
different from each other, in the Puranas, about the
origin of Kerala.
(1) For performing the funeral ceremony of the sons
of Sagara whose ashes were lying in Patala (Nether
world), Bhagiratha performed penance and brought
the heavenly river Ganga to the earth. (See under
Ganga). The river fell in North India and flowed in
torrents to the sea and the surrounding regions were
submerged in water. Among the places submerged,
there was the important holy place and Bath of
Gokarna also, lying on the west coast of India. Those
hermits who lived in the vicinity of the temple at
Gokarna, escaped from the flood and went to Mahendragiri and informed ParaSurama of the calamity of the
flood. Parafurama went with them to the sea-shore.
Varuna did not make his appearance. The angry
Paragurama stood in deep meditation for a little
while. The weapons came to his hands. Varuna was
filled with fear and he instantly appeared before
Paragurama, who asked him to release the land
swallowed by the sea. Varuna agreed. Parasurama
sent his bow and arrow back to the sky. Then he took
a winnowing basket (Sirpa).and threw it at the sea.
The sea retreated from the place up to the spot where
the winnowing basket fell, and the portion of land
including Gokarna which had been swallowed by sea was
recovered. This landis called Kerala, which is known
by the name ‘Sirparaka’ also. (Brahmanda Purana,
Chapters 98 and 99).
(2) Paragfurama went round the world eighteen
times and killed all the Ksatriya Kings. After that he
performed the sacrifice of ASvamedha (horse sacrifice) .
In the sacrifice he gave all the lands as alms to
Brahmins. KafSyapa received all the lands for the
Brahmins. After that he requested Paragurama to
vacate the land. Accordingly ParaSurama created
new land by shooting an arrow at the sea, for
his own use. ‘‘At the words of Kasgyapa, he made the
sea retreat by shooting an arrow, thereby creating dry
land.” :‘This land was Kerala. (M.B. Drona Parva,
Chapter 70):
3) Kerala and Pataéla (Nether world). The ancient
sages of the Puranas have grouped the worlds into
three, the Svarga (heaven), Bhtmi (the earth) and
the Patala (the nether world). The three worlds taken
as a whole were divided into fourteen worlds. It does
not appear that this grouping was merely imaginary.
A keen observation of the Puranas would lead one to
infer that the Himalayan plateau was considered as
Devaloka-Svarga (heaven), the planes between the
Himalaya and the Vindhya as Bhiloka (the earth)
and the regions to the south of the Vindhya as Patala
(the nether world), by the ancient people of India.
The seven worlds of Patala such as Atala, -Vitala,
Sutala, Talatala, Mahatala, Rasatala and Patala might
have been seven countries in this region. The following
description which occurs in Devi Bhagavata, Skandha 8,
would substantiate this inference.
“Patala is below the earth. This Patalais a group of
seven worlds one below the other, with names, Atala,
Vitala, Sutala, Talatala, Rasatala and Mahatala. In
all those worlds, there are several beautiful cities and

houses, palaces and castles, parks, gardens, open temples
and halls, natural arbours etc. made by Maya. There
live the Asuras, the Danavas (a class of Asuras-demons)
the nagas (serpents) and others, with their families,
with happiness and comfort. Chirping birds, _ Pigeons,
parrots, docile parrots etc. always play there with their
inseparable mates. Trees bearing sweet fruits, plants
covered with fragrant flowers, arbours with creepers
growing thick, beautiful houses floored with white
marble, and so many other things giving pleasure and
comfort are seen there in Plenty. In these things the
Patala surpasses heaven. Daityas, Danavas and the
Nagas (the Asuras and the serpents) are the dwellers
of these worlds. They lead a happy and pleasant life with
their families enjoying all sorts of comfort and luxury.”
Patala, one of the seven divisions of the world is described as follows :
“This is the region of the Nagas (the serpents). At the
root-place of this region there is a particular place
aving an area of thirty thousand yojanas. Visnu Kala
who has the attribute of ‘tamasa’ (darkness) lives there
under the name ‘Ananta’. The rea] Ananta or Adié esa
is the radiant embodiment of this Kala. The daughters
of the Naga Kings are of fair complexion and very
beautiful, with clean body. They use perfumeries such
as sandalwood, aloewood, Saffron, etc,”?
In this description, the words Daityas, Nagas, Ananta,
Sandalwood, aloewood etc. and the mention of natural
beauty should be paid particular attention to. From
the Ramayana we can understand that the Aryas referred to the Dravidas as Asuras, Raksasas (Giants) etc,
History says that the Nagas were the early inhabitants
of Kerala. The ancient word ‘Ananta’ denotes Trivandrum (Tiru-Ananta-puram Di
Padmanabha at Trivandrum answer
tion. The perfumeries such as sa
4) The Primitiveness of Kerala. From the portions of
Koa, Sten tae it could be ascertained that
“Fala had an independe f it
a ol p nce of its own from the very
(1) Among the Kings the §
marriage) of Sasikala, the daughter of the King of
ast, such as, the King of Kuru, King of Madra, Kin
of Sindhu, King of Paficala, Kings of Karnataka, Cole
and Vidarbha, there was the King of Kerala also, (Devi
Bhagavata, Skandha 3). oa
(2) When describin
part of Bharata, names suc
Misika, Karnataka ete. Occur in the Me: Kerala
So it is to be understood that when asa aes
Bharata, there was the kingdom of Kerala abe: the s
was separate from the country of Dravida (MB
Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9). ae" ol
(3) “Kartaviryarjuna took his majestic seat in the
midst of Cola, Kerala, Pandya and other Kings of the
countries under the sea, who were standing round him
to pay homage to him.” ( Brahmanda P urana, Chapter
(4) It is mentioned in Agni Purana, Chapter 277, that
a King named Gandhara was born in the dynasty
who attended
KERALA
of ‘Turvasu the brother of Yadu, and that from Gandhara were born the powerful families of the Gandharas
the Keralas, the Colas, the Pandyas and the Kolas. a
(5) In Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 175, it is
mentioned that the people of Kerala were considered as
barbarians by the North Indians.
(6) In Bhagavata, Skandha 10, it is mentioned that the
Kings of Cola; Pandya and Kerala, from South India,
had reached the capital city of Vidarbha to take part
in the Svayarhvara (marriage) of Rukmini.,
(7) Mention is made in Mahabharata, Vana Parva,
Chapter 254, Stanza 15, that in his conquest of the
countries, Karna had conquered Kerala also.
(8) It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Sabha Parva,
Chapter 31, that Sahadeva, one of the Pandavas, conquered the Keralas and the Kerakas. It may be noted
that the Kerakas are different from Keralas.
(9) Valmiki mentions the countries which could be
seen by the monkeys who were sent to the South by
Sugriva to search for Sita.
Nadim Godavarirn Caiva
Sarvamevanupaégyata /
LTathaivandhran ca Paundran ca
Colan Pandyan ca Keralan, //
“You could see the river Godavari
countries of Andhra, Paundra, Co
Kerala,”
This is a proof of the primitiveness of Kerala.
(10) The King of Kerala had given Yudhisthira, as
presents, sandalwood, pearls, Lapis Lazul; ;
and beyond it the
la, Pandya and
5) The ancient administration of Kerala, Parimelazhakar,
a Sanga poet who was a great expounder of ‘Tirukkural’’, has stated that from the beginning of the world
the three kingdoms
Though there is a bit of e
there are enough proofs to sa
the birth of Christ, Kera]
In ‘Tolkappiyam’ the first
mention is made about the admini
Megasthenes, a traveller of
about the rule of Kerala :
There were five councils calle
(the five sreat councils) to help the Cera Kings.
It is stated that thes
Was an advisory Committee, of which, the
priest of the King, the Chief Minister, Chief of the spies
and the Chief Revenue officer (Kaviti) were members.
For convenience of administration the country was
divided into tarakkiittas (groups of houses—villages) and
and Nattukkiittas (Districts—group of villages), Taras
villages) were ruled by four elders (Karanava ). Four
Villages formed a Nalpadu (group) of four. Four Nalivision of the country with
Kazhakas formed a
a), Perumkazhaka was
Padus formed a Kazhaka (
a chief temple within it) and four
crumkazhaka (greater Kazhak
thes sea as T'rkkala. The assembly hall of trkcalled Kottil. This hall was er t nerall
beside the temple. The chief officer of rg temple
was the Chairman of the trkkiitta (assembly of
by People), When a trkkitta js assembled, sixtyfour
elders of the “taras”’, the“accag” (officers) of Kazhakas,

KERALA
the sixtyfour Tandans and sixteen Nalpadies had to be
present. I'he Nalpadies were the chiefs of four taras.
The accas, who were the Presidents, had to come clad
in variegated silk, with waist-band of long cloth and
wearing asmall sword (Churika). Till. recently the
Kazhakas of Andallir, Rampallya, Kurvantatta, Turutti
‘etc., and so many Nalpadus and taras and the elders
thereof had been retaining and enjoying titles and
distinctions of rank,
The Namboothiris (Brahmins) entered Kerala before
the beginning of the Malayadla Era. With that, changes
took place in the administration of Kerala. Certain
edicts help us to ascertain the changes that took: place
in the administration. The edict of Vazhappally of the
Sth century by Rajagekhara is an important one in
this connection. This emperor of the Ceras who is considered to be .a contemporary of Sri Sankaracarya had
the title beginning with “‘Rajadhiraja Paramesvara
Bhattaraka’”’. (T.A.S. Vol. II, P. 8-14). The subject
dealt with in the edict is the ‘daily worship and settlement’, in the temple of Tiruvottiyair. It is stated in this
edict that the people of Vazhappally and the representatives of 18 Nadus or divisions had met in the temple
and taken certain decisions.
The next one is the Kottayam Copper edicts known as
the ‘“Tarisa Church Edicts.’ This is a.document granting
the Tarisa Church in Quilon, the’adjoining lands and
some other institutions. This edict was granted by
Ayyanati tiruvatikal the. ruler of the Natu (division) ,
for the Cera emperor. It is mentioned. as ‘including
the Temple Officer Vijayarakatevar’, which means
that Vijayaraka had been present on the occasion of
granting the edict, as the representative of Emperor
Sthanuravi. The Naduvazhis (local chiefs or rulers of
division) were not empowered to take decision in very
important matters. Titles, rights distinctions: of rank
etc. were granted by a council of Chief minister,
Officers, Punnattalappati and Polakkitippati (two
high officials). Vijayarakatevar, the Koil adhikari,
was the representative of the emperor at Mahodayaura. The supervising officials of temples were generally called the ‘Koil adhikari’. Normally. the younger
brothers of the Kings were appointed in this rank.
These temple-officers were helped in their duties by
the Division-rulers, people of the locality and the inferior officers in the temple. When the empire of
Kulagekhara declined, the family of P crumpadappu
iti ‘Koil adhikari’. So the title ‘Koil
got this position of Bt searevld Ps
adhikari> is added to the names ol the princes o
ee is the Mampally Edicts. This is a deed of
free to the temple of Airtir, in the
granting some lands kal b
name of Adiccan Umayamma of Trkkalayapuram, by
= - kota in M.E. 149. Even such
Venattu Sri Vallabhan
ae . the granting of free lands,
an unimportant thing as ao eC ie
had to be effected with the permission OF Metra &ings
A.S. Vol IV, Page 9).
and their councils. (T.A.9. on a ae.
From these edicts it is clear that the administration
: by representatives elected
the temples was carried ov. OY NE le there was an
by people. For each village temple
administrative councl
by Naduvazhis and Degavazhis (Divisional and Sub
Divisional rulers who had Nair infantry (big or small
as the case may
trative assembly
be) at their disposal. The adminisbai either in the open hall at the main
. pandaras, Malaytralis, Mutuvans
1. These councils were controlled |
KERALA
gate of the temple or on the stage for performances.
The rights and authorities were in the hands of the
general assembly of the people called Nattukkitta and
the council of the temple officials. When the Namboothiris became powerful they became members of the
council, With this change the Kings and Koil adhikaris
became puppets in the hands of the Namboothiris. In
the Ramesvaram edict of M.E. 278 it is mentioned that
King Ramavarma Kulasekhara was punished with
retribution for his ‘hatred’ of the Aryas. Finally the
Nambithiris (Malayala Brahmins) became the landlords of the country.
6) Lhe people af ancient Kerala. It is assumed that the
ancient inhabitants of Kerala were Dravidas. But
some historians have mentioned about the ‘Proto
Dravidians and: the Pre Dravidians. The hill tribes such
as Kanikkars, Mutuvas, Mala Vetas, Pulayas, Kuravas, Nayatis, Malayarayas, Malayatis, MalapPullatis etc. are
said to have belonged to this group. They worshipped
several things such as stone, banyan tree, elenji tte
Asclapia tree, Nim tree Terminatia Bellarica, Borassus
flabelliformis, cassia fistula, Ghosts, thunder, rain, the
sun etc. They worshipped good ghosts for welfare, and
bad. ghosts to avoid misfortunes. They had images of
Mata, CGatta, Cavu, Maruta, Pettucdvu, Arukula,
Preta, Vazhipinakki, Ayiramilli, Parakkutti, Kattujati,
Malavazhi, Marini, Nayattu Pe Mankattamma,
Muniyappa, Vettakkaran and so on. They worshipped
in small bushes, open grounds. or houses. They «knew
black magic such as cursing, giving poison in meals etc.
These uncivilized people were very particular about
cleanliness on the occasions of delivery, menstruation,
death etc. They pleased bad ghosts by offering liquor,
flesh and blood, and good ghosts with milk, ghee, honey
etc. They buried dead bodies with a little raw rice
. meant for food at the time of entering the other world.
They had collective worship. They sang songs at the
time of worship using some primitive musical instruments. For each village there were elders who were
priests and rulers. They erected stone’huts in the burial
place and buried the dead inside these in graves. These
graves were called ‘Pandukuzhy’. The Urdlis, continue
the custom of posting two stones at either end of the
grave. The custém of burial prevailed more than
cremation.
Nair, Nambitiri, Izhava, Christians, Muslims and such
other castes came to Kerala from other places later.
7) Lon Batuta and Kerala. Ibn Batuta who was born in the
town of Tanjir in Morocco in Africa in A.D: 1304 had
travelled all over the Eastern countries then known. He
had started from his house on a Haj Pilgrimage at the
age of 22. He returned home only after 29 years, having
travelled all over the known countries. He has written
a book in Arabic about his travels of 29 years. One third
of this thick volume is devoted for descriptions of his
travels in India alone, Its name is ‘Tuh Phattunannar’.
He passed over the Hindu Kush in A.D. 1333 and
entered India. In the midst of his travels throughout
the length and breadth of India, he came to Kerala
also. He says as follows about Kerala in his book:—
“Malabar is the country of Pepper. This country S
length from Gokarna to Quilon is two months’ journey,
All the roads in this country are rendered cool and shady
by asclapia trees. On the roads at intervals of half an

KESARA
hour there are inns. Near the inn there will be a well
and a person to give water. The non-Muslims are given
water in pots. But water is poured into the hands of
-Muslims. Rice is served in plantain leaf and sauces
are also served in the same leaf. Uncultivated and
uninhabited land is not to be seen. Each house is
situated in the centre of a cultivated area. The people
of this country do not use animals to carry goods.
Travelling is on foot, Only Kings use horses. There is
a conveyance called mafical (Palanquin). Slaves are
used as Palanquin bearers. I have seen roads which
could be used so fearlessly, only in Kerala and, no
where else in the world. Capital punishment is given to
one who steals even a coconut. The people of this
country respect Muslims.
There are twelve kings in Malabar. None of them
are Muslims. Many of them are powerful having an
army of more than fifty-thousand soldiers. But there are
no quarrels or clashes among them. The powerful do
not have the desire to subjugate the less powerful. The
inheritants of these kings are not sons, but nephews
(sons of sisters). Besides the people of Kerala I have
seen only the Muslims of the country of Salam on the
banks of the Niger in Africa who have adopted the
system of inheritance in the female line.”
Ibn Batuta has given some minor descriptions about
the towns of Mangalapuram, Ezhumala, Kannir
Calicut, Paliyam, Cranganir and Quilon.
KESARA. A Mountain in Sakadvipa (Saka island).
The air on this mountain was always filled with fragrance. (M.B, Bhisma Parva, Chapter 11, Stanza 29)
A forest King who lived
While Kesari was living
cursed a celestial maid nam
in the Maha Meru.
in the Mahameru, Brahma
ed Managarva and changed
Kesari, under the name Afijana. For a long time the
couple had no children, Afijafia worshipped Vayu Bhagavan (Wind-God) for a child.
Once during this period the
to Parama Siva and requested him to beget a son to
help Mahavisnu who was about to incarnate as Srj
Rama to kill Ravana, Siva and Parvati instantly took
the form of monkeys and entered the forest for play.
They having not returned for a long time the gods
asked the wind-god to 80 in search of them. The wind
god came in the form of 4 great storm and shook the
whole of the forest, Stil] they did not come out. Parvati
who was Pregnant was ashamed to
Iva she got on an Agoka tree and g
that tree alone standing motionless
Vayu god approached me tree and looked up. Siva and
é ore Vayu. Parvati re
the foetus in the form of monkey to eae, a Siva
had Instructed, Parvati gave the child in the womb to
the wind-god. It was at this time that Afijana had
prayed to Vayu for a child. Vayu Save that child
to Afijana, who gave birth to it. That child was
Haniman. Thus Haniman got the names, Afijanaputra
gods and hermits went
(son of Afijana), Vayuputra (son of Va u), K -
putra (Son of Kesari) ete, (M.B. Vana il Chap.
KESAVA. See under X’ rnd.
KESAYANTRI. An attendant of Skandadeva, (MB.
Salya Parva, Chapter 46).
KESINI V
KESI I,
1). General information. An Asura. It is mentioned in
‘Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 65 that forty Asuras
or Danavas were born to Kasyapa, the son of Marici,
and the grandson of Brahma, by his wife Danu, and
that Kesi was one of them.
2). Kesi and Indra.. Once a war broke out between
the Devas and the Asuras. Disasters befell the Devas.
Daityasena and Devasena, the daughters of Prajapati
were about to be carried away by Kesi. Daityasena
agreed to accompany him of her own accord, but
Devasena cried aloud. Hearing her cry Devendra reached the spot. A terrible fight ensued and finally the
defeated Kesi ran away. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter
3). Kesi and Visnu. Once there was a fight which lasted for thirteen days, between Keéi and Visnu. (M.B.
Vana Parva, Chapter 134, Stanza 20). ;
KESI II. A follower of Karhsa, This Asura, on the ine
struction of Kamsa, went to Ambadi (Gokula) Sra
the form ofa horse, to kill Sri Krsna. Sri Krsna kille¢
Kesi. It is seen in the Bhagavata (Malayalam) that Sri
Krsna got the name Kegava because he had killed Keéi-
(Skandha 10, Keg ivadha).
KESI1II, In Bhagavata there is another Kesi who was
the son of Vasudeva.
“‘Pauravi Rohini Bhadra
Madira Rocana Ila /
Devakipramukha Asan
Patnya Anakadundubheh,” )
Pauravi, Rohini, Bhadra, Madira, Rocana, Ila and
Devaki were the wives of Vasudeva,
From this statement made in Bhagavata, Skandha 9;
Chapter 24, it is clear that Vasudeva had a number 9
Wives. Kausalya, who was one of them, was the mother
a pay (Bhagavata, Skandha 9, Chapter 24, Stanza
KESINTI I. A celestial woman. In Mahabharata, Adi Parv4
Chapter 65 it is stated that the twelve celestial maids;
Alambusa, Misrakeéi, Vidyutparna, Tilottama, Arun,
Raksita, Rambhi, Manorama, Keéini, Surata, Suraja
and Supriya were born to Ka yapa of his wife Pradha.
The wife of Ajamidha, a King of the Purt
dynasty. The three sons Jahnu, Vraja and Rapina were
born to Ajamidha of his wife KeSini. (Agni Purana,
Chapter 278) ,
and by various tests found out that Bahuka was Nala.
(M.B. Vana Parva, Chapters 74. and 75).
KESINI IV. A servant of Parvati. It is mentioned i?
Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 231, Stanza 4
that once Parvati with her servant Kegini praise
Iva,
: J wagered their lives d accepté
Prahlada as their judge. The decision of Prahlada was

KESINI VI
that the Brahmin was the nobler of the two. Because
Prahlada said the truth Sudhanva did not kill Virocana. But Virocana had to wash the Ifeet of Sudhanva
in the presence of Keéini, feet Sudhanva married
Kegini in the presence of Virocana. (M.B. Udyoga
Parva, Chapter 35).
KESINI. VI. A wife of King Sagara. This Keéini
was the daughter of the King of Vidarbha. ‘I'he son
Asamafijasa was born to Sagara of Kesini. (Valmiki
Ramayana, Balakanda, Sarga 38).
KETAKI. (A flower). [Pandarnus odoratissimus |
Though Ketaki is a flower which had been worn on
Siva's head, it is not worshipped for the following
reason. |
In Satyayuga Mahavisnu performed intense penance
on the Sveta island for the attainment of eternal happiness. Brahma also performed penance at a beautiful place for the annihilation of desires. During
their tapas Visnu and Brahma, for a rest, left their
seats and walked about in the forest when they met
each other. There arose a controversy between them
about their respective greatness when Siva, in the form
of a Linga, appeared between the two contestants and
told them that he, who first found out his (Siva’s) head
or feet was greater than the other. Accordingly Visnu
went down and Brahma went up on a tour of
enquiry.
Though Visnu went down deeper and deeper for a long
time to find out Siva’s feet he failed in the attempt and so
returned and sat at the place whence he started for the
search. Brahma went up a very long distance when he
saw a Ketaki flower falling down from the sky. He took
the flower in his hands and went to Visnu and told him
that he had found out Siva’s head and showed the
Ketaki flower as proof of his discovery claiming that it
was taken from Siva’s head. But Visnu did not believe
Brahma and asked the Ketaki flower to bear witness
to Brahma’s claim, The flower gave false evidence in
favour of Brahma. Siva got angry at this false evidence
of Ketaki and cursed it. The Ketaki lost its place
among the best flowers from that day onwards.
KETU I. (KETUMAN). A Danava. He was the son
of Kasyapa (grandson of Brahma and son of Marici )
by his wife Danu. This Asura, who exists in the shape
ofa planet had thirtythree brothers, i.e. Vipracitti,
Sambara, Namuci, Puloma, Asiloma, Kesi, Durjaya,
Ayassiras, Asvagiras, Agva, Sanku, Mahabala, Garga,
Amirdhan, Vegavan, Manavan, Svarbhanu, Asvapati,
Vrsaparvan, Ajaka, A§vagriva, Siksma, Tuhunda,
Ekapat, Ekacakra, Virupaksa, Harahara, Nikumbha,
Kapata, Sarabha, Salabha, Surya and Candramas.
(Adi Parva, Chapter 65).
But Ketu maintained clos
step-brother of his, beg.
ther wife called Simhika. /
today considered as inauspiciou
a half-moon and Ketu holds in
lamp. Amitaujas was Ketu reborn.
67, Verse 11).
KETU II. A great sage
salvation by self-study.
far
KETU III. A synonym ©
Chapter 17, Verse 38).
er relationship with Rahu, a
the son of Kagyapa by anoRahu and Ketu are even
s planets. Rahu wears
his hands a sword and
(Adi Parva, Chapter
of ancient India. He attained
(Santi Parva, Chapter 26, Verse
f Siva.’ (Anugasana Parva,
KETUMAN III
KETU IV. A King born in Bharata’s dynasty. agavata, 9th Skandia). aia
KETU V. (DHUMAKETU). The following story is
told in Visnudharmottara Purana about the birth of
Dhimaketu.
Noting that the population on earth had increased
abnormally Brahma created a damsel called Mrtyu and
asked her to kill people. At this command of Brahma
she began crying, and from her tear drops various kinds
of diseases originated at the sight of which she took to
penance. Then Brahma appeared and blessed her saying that no one would die because of her at which she
heaved a great sigh of relief from which was.born Ketu
or Dhimaketu.
KETUMALA I. The grandson of Priyavrata, the son of
- Manu. Agnidhra, a son of Priyavrata married Pirvacitti. Nine sons were born to Agnidhra of his wife
Parvacitti. Ketumala was one of them. His brothers
were Nabhi, Kimpurusa, Mari, [lavrta, Ramyaka
Hiranmaya. Kuru and Bhadragva. ,
In old age Agnidhra divided his kingdom among his
sons. Later, the portion given to Ketumala came to be
known as Ketumala. (Bhagavata, Skandha 5).
KETUMALA II. Aholy place in Jambidvipa. (M.B.
Vana Parva, Chapter 89).
KETUMALA III. (See under Ketumala I). Ketumila
is the ninth division of Jambidvipa. The people of this
part of the earth are equal to gods (Devas). The women
are very beautiful. In Mahabharata, Sabha Parva it is
stated that Arjuna conquered this land. Ketumala is
situated on the east of Mount Meru. In Mahabharata
Bhisma Parva, Chapter 6, there is the description of
Ketumala.
KETUMAN I. Ketu the Asura (demon). (See under
Ketu I).
KETUMAN II. A King who was a luminary in the
council of Yudhisthira. He was a warrior on the side of
the Kauravas and a friend of Srutayudha, the King of
Kalinga. It ismentioned in Mahabharata, Bhisma Parva
Chapter 54, Stanza 77, that Bhimasena killed his
warrior in the battle of Bharata.
KETUMAN III, In the Mahabharata, another Ketumin
who had fought on the side of Pandavas, is stated. Dhrtarastra had praised the valour of this warrior. (M.B.
Drona Parva, Chapter 10, Stanza 44),
KETUMAN IV. A palace in Dvaraka. It is mentioned
in .Mahabharata, Daksinatya-patha, Sabha Parva
Chapter 38, that Sudatta, the wife of Sri Krsna lived
in this palace. bu
KETUMAN V. Antapala (the guard of the boundary)
of the west. At the beginning of the creation of the
world Brahma had appointed as guards of the boundaries, Sudhanvan in the east, Sankhapada in the south,
Ketuman in the West and Hiranyaromaka in the North.
(Agni Purana, Chapter 19).
KETUMAN VI. A King of the Puru dynasty. (See
under Vamsavali).
KETUMAN VII. In Bhagavata we see a Ketuman. who
was the son of Dhanvantari, who gave Ayurveda to the
world. ;
‘Who was the deva who made the Ayurveda in days
of old ? His son was Ketuman whose son was Bhimaratha.”? (Bhagavata, Skandha 9).
KETUMAN VIII. Son of Ekalavya. In Mahabharata,
Bhisma Parva it is mentioned that this King of the

KETUMATI 408 | KHANDAVADAHA
forest tribes fought on the side of Duryodhana and was
killed by Bhima. '
KETUMATI. Mother of Prahasta, a minister of Ravana.
Ketumati had two sisters Sundari and Vasudha. These
three were daughters of a Gandharva woman.
Giant Heti, the son of Brahma married Bhaya-and
Vidyutkega was born to the couple. Sukega was born to
Vidyutkega by his wife Salakatanka. Three sons
Malyavan, Sumali and Mali were born to Sukega by his.
wife Daivavati. Sundari, Ketumati and Vasudha the
three beautiful sisters mentioned above, were married
by the giants Malyavan, Sumali and Mali. respectively,
Thus Ketumati became the wife of Sumali, To Sumali
and Ketumati were born ten sons, Prahasta, Akampana,
Vikata, Kalakamukha, Dhimraksa, Danda; Supars va,
Samhrada, Prakvata and Bhasakarna and four daughters
Veka, Puspotkata, Kaikasi and Kumbhinasi. Most of
the sons were ministers of Ravana. (Uttara Ramayana).
KETUSRNGA. A King of ancient India. (M.B. Adi
Parva, Chapter bY.
KETUVARMAN. A prince of the country of Trigarta,
He was the youngest brother of Siryavarmd, the King
of Trigarta. When Arjuna led the sacrificia] horse of the
orse-sacrifice of the Pandavas, Ketuvarman accompanied Arjuna as a helper. (MB. Agvamedha Parva
Chapter 74),
KEVALA. A city of ancient India. It is mentioned in
Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 254, Stanzas 10
and 11 that Karna conquered this city,
KHA. This syllable has the meanings ‘empty’ and ‘organ
of sense’. (Agni Purana, Chapter 34 ): |
KHADGA. A warrior of Skandadeva. (Mahabharata
Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Stanza 67).
KHADGABAHU. See under Dussasana IT,
ae See under Kalki.
. AT. A naga. (serpent) born in the famil
fs eae hee aE aie Chapter 103), muy of
synonym of Siva. (M.B. Asana P:
Chapter 17, Bisa 67), pests, 2 os
KHAGAMA. A Brahmana. In Mahabharata there is a
story which describes how this Brahmin Khaga
changed another Brahmin to a serpent by cursin Sin
The Brahmin Khagama and Sahasrapat were fr ids
Once Sahasrapat made a snake of grass and errif 7
Khagama at Agnihotra (Burnt offering in the h iv Ry
Khagama Instantly cursed Sahasrapat to b heme
serpent. Sahasrapat Tequested for lib ia
curse. Khagama said that he woul
form on the day he saw Ruru the
that day onwards Sahasray at roa ; :
countries in the form of oe Haare: ety
Once Pramadvara the wife of Ruru, die :
Ruru cried over the death of his wife zi bee
According to the advice of a Messenger Pani
Devas Ruru gave half of his life-time to his wife a q
she came to life again. But Ruru felt a bitter hatred
against serpents and began their extermination. Once
he met with Sahasrapat. Instantly at the sight of Rury
Sahasrapat obtained his original form. (MB. Adi
Parva, Chapter 11).
KHAGANA. A King born in the family of Sri Rama. He
was the son of Vajranabha and the father of Vidhrti.
(Bhagavata, Skandha 10).
KHAGODARA. See under Kahoda,
KHALI I. A synonym of Mahavisnu. (M.B. Anugasana
Parva, Chapter 17, Stanza 43): ;
KHALI II. An Asura dynasty. Mention is made in Mahabharata, Anugadsana Parva, Chapter 155, Stanza 22,
that Vasistha once destroyed an Asura dynasty called
Khali, with his effulgence. |
KHALU, A river of ancient India. (M.B. Bhisma Parva;
Chapter 9, Stanza 28).
KHANAKA. A messenger sent by Vidura, secretly to
the Pandavas who were living in the wax-house.
Vidura sent a message through Khanaka to the effect
that Duryodhana had decided to set fire to the waxhouse employing Purocana to do iton the 14th night
of the dark lunar fortnight. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter
KHANDAKHANDA. A female attendant of Skanda. In
Mahabharata, Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Stanza 20,
mention is made about this woman.
KHANDAPARASU. Siva. A story occurs in Mahabharata stating how Siva got this name. The famous
Daksa-yaga (sacrifice performed by Daksa) was performed at a time when the Nara N arayanas were engaged in
penance in Badaryasrama. Daksa did not invite his sonin-law Siva. The angry Siva sent his trident against
to be known by the name Mufijakega, By a sound
“hum”’, the: hermit Narayana deviated the trident,
which reached the hands of Siva, who got angry an
approached Narayana to kill him. Nara, who was close
by took an arrow and reciting spells over it, released it
to kill Siva, Immediately the arrow changed to an axe.
iva broke the axe. After this the axe became the
weapon of Siva. In Mahabharata Santi Parva, Cliapter
49, Stanza 33, it is mentioned that this axe was given
to Paragurama the disciple of Siva. Thenceforward
Iva got the name Khandaparaéu, (Paragu means
axe). ( Mahabharata, Santi Parva, Chapter 343. StanKHANDAVADAHA.
1) Introduction. Long ago a King named Svetaki began
to perform a sacrifice of duration of 100 years, Many
Brahmins took part in the sacrifice as priests conducting
the rituals and ceremonies. These Brahmin priests behandava there lived so many creatures which were
enemies of the devas (gods) and that by eating their
vent earn ease Of Agni would be cured” Anum ingly
Agni came to the Khandava forest. |

KHANDAVADAHA
The serpent Taksaka, a friend of Indra, lived in this
forest with his wife and children. Indra knew that Agni
had come to burn the Khandava forest and resolved to
save Taksaka at any cost. When Agni (fire) began to
catch the forest, Indra had already begun rain. So it
was not possible for Agni to consume the forest. Agni
tried seven times to consume the forest and in all these
seven attempts he failed. Agni again approached
Brahma, who told him that the Nara-Narayanas would
take birth in the earth as Krsna and Arjuna and that
at that time it would be possible for fire to consume the.
forest Khandava. Aaa
2) Krsna and Arjuna in the forest of Khandava. While the
Pandavas were living in Indraprastha, once the hot
season became so unbearable that Arjuna took Krsna with
him and went to the forest of Khandava. While they
were playing in the river Yamuna with their wives
Agni came there in the guise of an old Brahmin and told
them all that had happened and requested their help
for eating the Khandava forest. Krsna and Arjuna
promised to help him in this affair.
3) Preparation of weapons. :
and Arjuna were not having sufficient weapons. Agni
(fire-god) thought of Varuna (the God of water) who
instantly appeared. At the request of Agni Varuna gave
Arjuna the famous bow ‘Candradhanus’ (Gandiva), a
quiver which would never become empty of arrows
and a chariot having a flag with the sign of monkey.
and to Sri Krsna the weapon of the discus. Varuna gave
four white horses also with gold chains round their necks
for drawing the chariot of Arjuna. With these weapons
Krsna and Arjuna got ready to help Agni. Sri Krsna
became the charioteer of Arjuna.
4) Burning the forest. When Krsna and Arjuna stood
ready Agni began to consume the forest. Krsna and
Arjuna guarded the boundaries of the forest so that
the inmates of the forest might not escape. The living
creatures ran hither and thither finding no way to
escape. Many died of suffocation. At that time the
hermits who were dwellers of that forest ran to Indra
and informed him of the great calamity. Indra instantly
ot ready to fight and save the forest. He covered the
icles of the sky with clouds and a heavy rain we
showered on the forest. Arjuna created a alee
arrows like an umbrella over the fire and saved him
from the rain.
5) The family of Taksaka.
Taksaka had been away at
son of Taksaka was writ
is his mother
"iy A phe a) she ran to the boundary to
throw the child into the outer Kegigns 5 ene Sa
Arjuna got angry and cut at the head o ; Aare
at the nick of time Indra sent a storm an ma ‘ oe
swoon and Aégvasena was saved. So gana Mi an
furious and began to cut down every rea e at
Arjuna, Krsna and Agni together cursed ASsvasena
he would get refuge nowhere. ;
ASvasena bent up his hatred of nena. on omg
Ww .
battle, Agvasena got on an arrow © ;
Arjuna and knocked off the crown of Arjuna and ae
ed. But due to the curse Karna did not receive him
back.
6) Deadly fight. :
Arjuna, who cut off their heads.
At this particular time
Kuruksetra. Asvasena the
hing with heat and pain.
The serpents and hawks confronted
Krsna killed the
For the time being Krsna -
wife of Taksaka) swallowed him. ,
KHaNDIKYA
Asuras with the weapon discus. Indra came to the
battle-field riding on his elephant Airavata. Kala
(Time) , Kubera, Skanda, Agvinidevas and all the other
Devas (gods), and Asuras (demons) helped Indra in the
fight. But Krsna and Arjuna came out victorious.
7) The advent of Maya. Meanwhile Krsna and
Arjuna called Indra and told him who they were and
informed him that Taksaka had gone to Kuruksetra.
Hearing this Indra blessed Krsna and Arjuna and
retreated from the battlefield. Agni began to consume
the forest more vigorously than before. Because of the
unbearable heat, Maya, the: architect of the Asuras,
came out of the house of Taksaka and ran to Krsna
and Arjuna and entreated them tosave him. Accordingly
Arjuna saved him from the fire.
8) The story of four birds which escaped from the fire. In
that forest a hermit named Mandapala_ had erected his
hermitage and lived there performing penance. He died
and went to the world of ancestors. But there, the hermit
did not attain any fruit of the penance he had performed.
The hermit asked the Devas for the reason. They replied
that it was because the hermit had nosons. The hermit
came to the forest again to marry and beget sons.
Mandapala married a bird called Jarita. Four sons named
_ Jaritari, Sarisrkka, Stambamitra and Drona, were born
to them. After this Mandapala left Jarita and her sons
and went after another woman Lapita.
Feathers were not- yet grown on the body of Jarita’s
four sons. The burning of the forest began before it.
Jarita and her sons were in a sorry plight. The mother
could fly. But she did not think of leaving her young
ones in danger. She decided to die in the fire folding
the young ones under her wings. But her sons did not agree
toit. They entreated her to fly away. Thus moments of |
tears passed by. At last Jarita told them crying, ““There
is the hole of a rat closeby. The rat had been taken
away by a kite. I will take you to that hole and close
it. Then I shall go away and return when the fire is
abated.”
But the young ones did not agree to this. They loved
to be killed by fire, rather than to be killed by rat. Finally at their request Jarita flew away.
Mandapala thought of his sons. He separated from
Lapita, and came to Agni and requested him to save
his sons and Jarita. Agni consumed the forest and
neared the birds. The young birds requested Agni to
save them. Agni Deva saved them. Mandapdla and
Jarita returned. That family lived for a long time in
joy and happiness and finally attained the world of the
gods. Agni returned to heaven after the burning of
the forest of Khandava. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapters 233
KHANDAVAPRASTHA. See under Indraprastha.
KHANDAVAYANA. Paragurama gave all the countries conquered by him to Kagyapa. Along with the lands
he gave a golden dais also. The group of hermits called
Khandavayanas cut the dais into pieces and shared them
with the permission of Kaégyapa. (M.B. Vana Parva,
Chapter 117, Stanza 13).
KHANDIKYA. A Ksatriya King. Kesidhvaja was the
son of his paternal uncle. Both had learned well the
ways of muibe with the divine life. Khandikya had become an expert in Karmayoga (the path of action) for
becoming one with the divine life whereas Kes idhvaja
tried to achieve oneness with divine life by Jfiana
EEE — Oe

KHANINETRA | 410
Yoga (the path of knowledge or spiritual attainment).
Each desired to subdue the other. eConsequently
Khandikya lost his kingdom and had to live in a forest
with his priest and minister. (Bhagavata, Skandhas 9
and 13),
Kesidhwaja who tried the path of knowledge to attain
Absolution performed several sacrifices for that purpose
and cut himself asunder from the bonds of action. Once,
while he was performing a sacrifice, a tiger came to the
Place of sacrifice and killed the sacrificial cow. Then
Kesidhvaja asked the priests who were conducting the
sacrifice, what the atonement was for the death of the
sacrificial cow. The priests sent the King to the hermit
Kageru, who sent the King to the hermit Bhrgu. Hermit
Bhrgu in his turn sent the King to the hermit Sunaka.
But the matter did not end there. The hermit Sunaka
could not dictate the atonement for the death of the
sacrificial cow. So he sent the King to Khandikya who
was living in the forest. The moment Khandikya saw
Kesidhvaja he stood ready to kill him. But Kesidhvaja
revealed everything to Khandikya, When he under.
stood the situation Khandikya told him with sincerity
the rites given in the Sastras (Vedangas) to atone the
death of the sacrificial cow.
Kesidhvaja returned and completed the sacrifice. The
one item of ‘gift to the teacher’ alone remained. So Keéidhvaja came to the forest again. Khandikya raised the
sword to cut him, Kesidhvaja said that he had come to
give Gurudaksina to the teacher. Khandikya repented
his rashness and requested Keé idhvaja to tell him the
ways of cutting himself asunder from the bonds of
sorrow and grief. Kesidhvaja advised him the ways to
obtain eternal bliss. (Narada Purana).
KHARAT. A giant (Raksasa). Khara
the rebirths of Madhu and Kaitabha.
ee Kaitabha and Atikaya,
Birth and genealogy. Mahabharata menti
follows about the birth of this giant Ae ces
born from Pulastya the son of Brahma. Kub
born from Vig ravas. Kubera ruled over Lanka. Vigravas
who had no one to help him once looked with anger at
Kubera, who, understanding the wish of his father ave
him three giantesses named Puspotkata, Raka pat
Malini as attendants. They attended on him faithful]
and Visravas was pleased with the i
- m. To Sravas
sons named Ravana and Kumbhakama were born We
Puspot' até, Vibhisana was born by Malini and ned
born by Raka. By and by Khara becam
archer. Ravana, Kumbhakarna and Vibhisana performed penance to obtain boons and Khara and Siirpanakha stayed with them to serve them, (M.B. Vana
Parva, Chapter 275).
2) Other brothers. Khara had two other brothers
Diisana and Trigiras. (Uttara Ramayana) ,
3) The slaughter of Khara. While Sri Rama, Sita and
Laksmana were staying in the forest of Dandakaranya
urpanakha the sister of Khara came. there once and
tried to get one of the brothers Sri Rama and Laksmana
as her husband. Laksmana cut off her nose and ears.
and Atikaya were
For details see
KHILA.
KHYATI I.’ A daug
KHYATTI TI, Daughter of K
KICAKA.
KICAKA
She went to Khara, Disana and Trigiras and lamented
before them. The three of them immediately started
- with an army of fourteen thousand giants and fought
with Rama and Laksmana, who killed every one of
them. (Valmiki Ramayana, Aranyakanda, Sargas 19
KHARA IT. Another giant who helped Ravana in the
battle between Rama and Ravana.
In Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 285, Stanza 2,
it is said that “Parvana, Patana, Jambha, Khara,
Krodhavaga, Hari, Praruja, Aruja, Praghasa and others
fought with Rama.
KHARAJANGHA. A female attendant of Skanda. (M.B.
Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Stanza 22).
KHARAKARMI,. A female attendant of Skanda. (M.B.
Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Stanza 26).
KHARI. A female attendant of Skanda. (M.B. Salya
Parva, Chapter 46, Stanza a2).
KHASA. A wife of Kagyapa Prajapati. (Visnu Purana
Amsa I, Chapter 15),
KHASA(M). A country in ancient India. (M.B. Drona
Parva, Chapter 122, Stanza 41).
KHASIRA. A place situated on the North East corner
of Ancient India. (M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9,
Stanza 68).
KHATVANGA.
|) General Information. A King of the Iksvaku dynasty,
known by the name Dilipa also. Bhagavata Skandha 9,
states that Khatvanga was the son of the grandson of
Kalmasapada. Aémaka was the son of Kalmasapada,
Milaka the son of Agmaka and Khatvanga the son of
Milaka. )
Khatvanga who was a royal hermit once pleased God
and understood how long he would live. From that day
hands of ministers and spent the remaining days in
devotion and meditation. (Bhagavata, Skandha 2).
2) Particular details. In Mahabharata it is mentioned
that Khatvanga was the son of the woman called
Wibila and that he had the name Dilipa also. Khatvanga was one of the sixteen famous Kings of Bharata.
The sixteen Kings were Marutta, Suhotra, Paurava,
Sibi, Sri Rama, Bhagiratha, Khatvanga, (Dilipa) Mandhata, Yayati, Ambarisa, Sagabindu, Gaya, Rantideva,
Bharata, Prthu and Parasurama. Khatvanga performed
one hundred sacrifices. At the time of sacrifice he made
golden roads. Even Indra came to the sacrifice. The
Devas blessed Khatvanga on that day. See under
Dilipa. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 61), F
: va 4 te BPPSHIX to: Mahabhivaia calle
Khila. This Khila js eo as ie mete also. This
Portion too was written by Vyasa.
KHYATA. An attendant of Skanda. (M.B. Salya Parva,
Chapter 46, Stanza 20).
hter of Prajapati Daksa. The hermit
Bhrgu married her, A daughter named Laksmi and two
sons named Dhata and Vidhata were born to Bhrgu by
Khyati. (Agni Purana, Chapter 20). |
| uru, who was born of the
family of Dhruva. Six sons, Aga, Sumanas, Svati,
ratu, Angiras, and Sibi were born to Kuru by his
wife \gneyi. (Visnu Purdna, Ama 1, Chapter 13).
yati ae a daughter born to them.
rother-in-law of Matsya, king of Virata and
son of Kekaya, king of the Sittas, ' |

KIKATA
1 )General information. ‘To Kekaya, king of the Sitas
was born of queen Malavi, Kicaka and other 105 sons
younger to him called Upa-Kicakas. Their only sister
was called Sudesna, (Bharata, Southern text, Page
1898). Kicaka and Upa-Kicakas took their birth from
an aspect of Bana, the eldest of the Asuras known as
the Kalakeyas. (See Bharata, Page 1893). Matsya, the
Virata king wedded Sudesna; and from that day onwards, the brothers too lived in the Virata palace. Kicaka
was the chieftain of Virata’s army, and he had, many a
time, defeated in war King Sugarman of ‘Trigarta.
(Virata Parva, Chapter 25, Verse 30).
2) Kicaka and Pawicali. During their life incognito,
the Pandavas lived in the Virata palace after taking
up various jobs. Paficali, under the assumed name
Malini, served Sudesna and her daughter Uttara as
their chaperon. Kicaka fell in love with Paficali at
first sight. But, Paficali resisted all his advances. Then,
he sought the help of his sister Sudesna to bring round
Pancali to him somehow. Sudesna asked Kicaka to be
ready on the New Moon day with liquor and rice and
promised to send Malini (Paficali) to him. Ordered
by Sudesna, she went to Kicaka with his plate of food
much against her will. Kicaka caught hold of her, but
she ran when the former caught her by the hair, felled
her on the floor and kicked her. A Raksasa, who was
deputed for Pajicali’s security appeared on the scene in
a trice and felled Kicaka. .
3). Kicaka’s Death. The very same night with tears in
her eyes, Paficali told Bhima all about the indecent
behaviour. He asked Paficali to invite Kicaka toa
secret meeting at a specified place the next night, and
promised her that he would remain concealed there
and kill Kicaka. Accordingly Bhima concealed himself
the next night in the dancing hall and, as-requested by
Paficali, Kicaka came to the hall at midnight to spend
a few hours with Paficali. Bhima was lying there on
a cot, and Kicaka, mistaking him for Pancali kissed
him. Bhima caught him in his iron grips and crushed him
to death. The next morning, it was the fate of Kicaka’s
brothers to lament over his death. The story also was
spread that Kicaka was killed by some Gandharva, the
of Paficali.
ey Upa-Kicakas removed the dead body of their
brother to the burning ghat. Proclaiming that semi
who was responsible for the death of their brot es
would also be burnt to death on the same pyre, me
Upa-Kicakas forcibly took her with them. pee ae t °
heart-rending cries of Paficali Bhima rushed to oe ee
d killed all the Upa-Kicakas and saved Pajficali
Gain Keath In the presence of the Virata king the
arene ot of Kicaka and the Upa-Kicakas took place.
ira Chapter 13 et seq). ,
eitats. A fie Bort in the dynasty of sea ieee
son of Manu. He was one of the nineteen sons O ing
Bharata, the other eighteen being an a as i
varta, Brahmavaria, eee aa acl i ty
idarbha, : sa,
= ag ane Avirhotra, aes Camasa
and Karabhajana. (Bhagavata, 5th Skandha).
3 d by King Kikata.
TA (M). The country ruled |
See akon story is toldin Devi Bhagavata as to how
is ki ined heaven.
an ass in this kingdom attaine
There was once in Kikata a merchant who had an ass
i was
to carry his merchandise. Once the merchant
KIMPURUSA
returning home from Bhadracala with his ass loaded
with bundles of costly Rudraksas. The old ass fell down
dead on the way, the weight of the Rudraksa bundles
having been too much: for it, and immediately it
assumed the form of Siva and went to Kailasa. Even
ifamandoes not know what he is carrying, if he
carries sacred things he will certainly attain salvation,
like the ass that attained salvation in this case. (Devi
Bhagavata, 11th Skandha).
KILI (PARROT).
1) Origin. About the origin of Kilis (parrots) the
following is stated in Canto 14, Aranya Kanda of the
Ramayana.
Kas yapa, the grandson of Brahma and son of Marici
married the eight daughters of Daksaprajapati, one of
them being called Tamra. Tamra had five daughters
called Kraufici, Bhasi, Syeni, Dhrtarastri and Suki.
Sukas or Kilis (parrots) are the offsprings of Suki.
2) Parrots acquire talking faculty. Lord Siva agreed to
beget asonto kill Tarakasura, at the request of the
Devas. The coitus between Siva and Parvati for the
purpose did not end even after a hundred years. Due
to the pressure of the process the whole world shook,
and when the world appeared to get destroyed the
Devas asked Agnideva to persuade Siva to stop. But,
afraid of approaching Siva Agni ran off and hid himself in the ocean. The Devas followed him, and animals
in the water which were burning with the heat of
Agni, told the Devas that Agni was hiding in the sea.
But, Agni cursed them all to dumbness, and leaving the
ocean hid himself on mount Mandara. The parrots
revealed this secret, when Agni cursed them also and
made their tongues fold inwards. The Devas and the
parrots requested for redemption from the curse,
Redemption was granted thus: “Though the tongue
be turned inwards your sound will be melodious. Just
like the voice of a child your (parrots’) sound also will
be sweet and wonderful.”’
From that day onwards parrots began talking and
singing. (Kathasaritsagara, Lavanakalambaka, Taranga
6 and Anugasana Parva, Chapter 85).
KIMPUNA. Ariver in Devaloka. It worships Varuna
in his assembly. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 20).
KIMPURUSA.
1) General. A King called Agnidhra was born in the
dynasty of Priyavrata, son of Manu. He became lord
of the Jambi island, and married an apsara woman
named Purvacitti. To them were born nine sons called
Nabhi, Kimpurusa, Hari, Ilavrta, Ramyaka, Hiranmaya, Kalva, Bhadrasva and Ketumala. Agnidhra
partitioned the kingdom among the nine sons. The
land Kimpurusa ruled over was known as Kimpurusa
or Kimpurusavarsa. It lay to the south of Hemakita
mountain. It was here that Haniiman spent his last
days worshipping Sri Rama.
‘The son of the wind God (Hantm4n) lives in the
country called Kimpurusavarsa in the worship of Sri
Rama.” (Bhagavata, 5th Skandha).
According to the Sabha Parva (Chapter 23, Verses 1,2)
Kimpurusavarsa guarded by the sons of Druma is
situated to the north of the Himalayas facing the
Dhavala mountain, and this country was once conqueted by Arjuna,
IE Ol

ane 4]9 KIRTIMAN I
nfortiati | have met the Kinkaras on the Himalayas. (Asva2) Other information. S n : |
i Pulaha Prajapati. medhika Parva, Chapter 65, Verse ys
Bes iene ts ees i‘ a KINKINIKASRAMA, A holy place. A bath oe
(ii) They witnessed Agastya drinking up the ocean will lift one to heaven. (Anugasana Parva, Chapter ;
dry. (Vana Parva, Chapter 104, Verse 2] a Verse 23). ; ual as
(ili) They guard the lotus ponds kept by Kubera to KINNARA (S), A sect of Devas all of whom
sport with his beloved ones, (Vana Parva, Chapter Vinas in their hands, (Agni Purana, Chapter D1).
15', Verse 9).
KIRATA. An urban region in ancient India. (Bhisma
(iv) In his conflict with Ravana, Kubera left behind Parva, Chapter 2, Verse 1). a ae
him Lanka and his P uspaka Vimana, escaped towards KIRATARJUN IYA. During the life in exile in the
the north and settled down on mount Gandhamadana forest of the Pandavas, Arjuna performed penance to
with the help of the Kimpurusas, (Vana Parva, Chapter Propitiate Siva in the Himalayas. Disguised as a
forest-hunter Siva appeared on the scene and _ tested
(v) Yaksa women were their mothers, (Santi Parva, Arjuna’s valour. Arjuna won in the test and was
Chapter 207, Verse 25). presented the Pagupatastra by Siva. The story is told
(vi) They were present at the asvamedha of: Yudhi- in Chapter 167 of the Vana Parva. (See under
sthira. (Asvamedha Parva, Chapter 88, Verse 37), Arjuna).
(vii) Suka Brahmarsi reached Bhara
la, crossing KIRITTI I, A warrior of Skanda deva. (Salya Parva,
Kimpurusavarsa, (Santi Parva, Chapter 325). Chapter 45, Verse 7] F
KINDAMA. A great sage. Once sage Kin I
dama and KIRITI I. A synonym of Arjuna.
his wife were roaming in the forest in the fo
tm of deer. KIRMIRA.
While hunting, King Pandu discharged his
against the he-deer. It assumed its origin
(See under Arjuna).
A. fierce Raksasa, brother of Baka and
arrow friend of Hidimba. Having heard about the death of
7 alform as Baka at the hands of Bhima, Kirmira who was living
sage Kindama and told the King that it was wrong on in Kamyaka forest planned a reven
his part to have hit him (the sage) w
rf hile he was After being defeated in the game of dice the Pandavas
engaged in love play. “I am dying, but in future if came to the forest, and they confronted Kirmira. In
you physically contact your wife you too will die.” After .
the duel with Bhima Kirmira fell down dead. (Vana
saying so the sage fell down dead, Pandu could never Parva, Chapter Ll),
have children of his own from his wives due to this KIRTI I, Daughter of Suka Brahmarsi, son of Vyasa.
curse. He forgot all about the curse once, embraced Suka wedded Pivari, the beautiful daughter of the
Madri and fell down dead. (Adi Parva, Chapter 117), Pitrs. Four sons named Krsna, Gauraprabha, Bhiri
KINDANA (M). A sacred Place In Kuruksetra, A holy and Devasruta and a daughter Kirti were born to
dip ane IS productive of innumerable auspicious Suka and Pivari. Kirti was wedded by Prince Anu,
results, . son of Kin Vibhrama, and a son ca hmadatta
KINDATTAKUPA. A holy pond. He who sows was born e them, who grew — tn a great
dan es ac pond 1s redeemed from the three scholar and an ascetic, On the advice of Narada,
laa 2) pies . itr-Rna and Deva-rna. The King Brahmadatta ultimately abdicated the throne in
Brahmacar lib
the second by house-holder’s life a ee acy) favour of his son
» Performed penance at Badaryasrama
yajfias. (Vana Parva,
and attained salvation. (Devi Bhagavata, Ist Skandha)
. KIRTIIL. A daughter of Daksaprajapati. Svayambhuplace in Kuruksetra. A atariipa, and to them
8s uy and two daughters called Prasiiti and Akiiti. Daksage A King born in the lunar dynasty. Nam- Prajapati married Prasiti, and they had twenty-four
roci, Kin ana and Vrsni were the three sons of King ~~ daughters who were : Sraddha, Laksmi, Dhrti, ‘Tusti,
i, ein pang a. Skandha), Medha, Pusti, Kriya, Buddhi, Lajja, Vapus, Santi,
aksasa, akti, th . Siddhi, Ki ti, Khvat
and King Kalmasapada of the fie ae Vasistha im co
S : eG Sambhiti, Smrti, _
: solar dyn t sama, Sannati, Anasiya, rja, Svaha, and Svadha.
nan fe ree anat a the King ehictn The first thirteen of the Hee ‘wentyfive girls were
urned Saxti in Oa Kaksasa, At this juncture Visva- married by Dharmadeva,. The other eleven girls were
2 el tas eran oh Bad epeyerg ie gor cn Agia
Kirikara, Kalmasapada killed F “on aud induced by een Pe vin e ee Atri, Vasistha, Ag
Adi Bared, Chaprns 175) 4S of Vasistha. KIRTI In ener te aes Spapier ids -
. gt . O 18 the basis and caus
KINKARA JI. Name of Kala’s Stick. Tt jg with this all fame and Teputation. (Vana Parva, Chapter 37,
stick that Kala _kills living beings. “Like aly who ere 38),
holds the stick Kinkara’’. (Karna Parva, Chapter 56 TIDHARMA. A Ksatriya hero, who was 2
Verse: 122), :
KINKARA (S). A race of Raksasas, After ‘lai
the palace a aa the Tandavas on ing DeaMtAN I, The first son born to Vasudeva and
put 8000 Kinkaras for guar Ing the palace (Sabha : AL. a c wan 2
Parva, Chapter 3). These mec ei able to renigve rata a a hs romeo Ic kill him he had patierot
the palace from one place to another. Yudhisthira, who ccording] ie k MM to her should be taken to es
started for the north to collect money is said tis 8°y the first-born son of Devaki was taken
» DUE Was returned to the parents as Kamsa thought

KIRTIMAN II 413
that he was not his enemy. He was brought up under
the name Kirtiman. Afterwards Narada visited Karhsa
and explained to him about his former birth, the
object of Krsna’s incarnation etc. This information so
angered Kamsa that he got Vasudeva and Devaki
chained in prison. Moreover he brought back the
first-born son of Devakiand dashed him to death on
-astone. Thus ended the life of Kirtiman.
K{RTIMAN II. Mahavisnu mentally created a son
called Virajas, and Kirtiman was his son. A son called
Kardama was born to Kirtiman. (Santi Parva, Chapter
59, Verse 90).
KIRTIMAN III. A’ Viévadeva (universal deva).
(Anugasana Parva, Chapter 91, Verse 31).
KIRTIMUKHA. A Siva gana born out of the matted
hair of Siva with three faces, three tails, three legs and
seven hands. The Lord at first asked him to live on
corpses, but later on, in appreciation of his valour
granted him the boon that if anyone saw the Lord
without thinking first about Kirtimukha, he would
meet with his down-fall. (Padma Purana, Uttara
Khanda, Chapter 50). ;
‘KIRTISENA. Son of the brother of the Naga chief
Vasuki. He made a love-marriage with Srutartha
daughter of a brahmin, and a child was born to them.
(Kathasaritsagara, Kathapithakalambaka) —
KIRTISENA. A heroine who has firmly established her
reputation in Sanskrit literature. An exceptionally
good woman, Kirtisena was the daughter of a merchant
called Dhanapala in Pataliputra, and was married by
another merchant called Devasena. Once Deve
left the country for purposes of trade, and during : is
absence from home the mother-in-law of Kirtisena shut
her up in‘a dark room. But, with the help of an on
rod, which fortunately came to her hands she made :
hole in the room at night, and through it eiapee
from captivity. Hungry and thirsty, a ied oe
along distance in the forest, and at mig’ se Pas
tree and rested thereon. eae ane ‘aoe ”
came to the :
i ae a ieee ae the King of Vasudattapura was
aoe De ey | d because a_ bug entered
suffering from pain in the head bec
we i mbers. All the
his ear and multiplied ther Js incurable. But, the
ici he case
physicians gave ott of the tree advised the following
cure for the King’s illness to her ee Fa here
the King’s head with ghee and enol i LS aaEr UES
sun at noon. After that insert a a tuk auahill
ear, and keep the other end of the tube ve 5 Hes s
of water. Then the bugs will come out ‘i ee
into the water, and the King will be cure
ness. er
Kirtisend who heard this medical ie Sage A
seat on top of the tree disguised her f his troubled:
went to the palace and cured the "108 ” the palace as
In her disguise, she continued’ { aM ashand Devasena,
a friend of the King. Shortly, her mained The King
came there and they were happily hoes ara, Madanagave them costly presents. (Kathasaritsagara, *
mafijukalambaka, Larenee OP of the monkeys in
_ An ancient king ‘~ the
=o = Hise ising 1S ann both in
abharata.
eae , monkey King called
Ramayana and the
He was childless.
‘neo the - Ramayana period 4
Rkwarsie was the ruler of Kiskindha.
KISKINDHA
Once upon a time a son called Bali was born to Arunidevi by Indra, and another son called Sugriva was born
to her by Surya. (See under Aruna). Both the boys
were bfought up in the Agrama of sage Gautama.
When they grew up, Indra handed them over to Rksaraja, and thus Bali and Sugriva came to Kiskindha.
After the death of Rksaraja, Bali became King of Kiskindha and Sugriva lived in the service of his brother.
At that time there was- a very mighty Asura called
Dundubhi. Finding no one fit to fight with, he challenged Varuna. Varuna directed him to Himavan, whose
eaks he rent asunder, and played with. Then Himavan
told Dundubhi that he was of a peaceful nature and
that Bali would be a match for him (Dundubhi).
Accordingly Dundubhi fought with Bali and got killed.
Bali cast away the corpse: of Dundubhi. The blood
oozing out from the nose of Dundubhi fell on the
body of sage Matanga who was engaged in penance on
the peak Rsyamika. Bymeans of his divine powers, the
sage found out the origin ofthe blood contaminating his
body, and-cursed that Bali would die the moment he
sét foot on the mountain.
Dundubhi’s son Mayavi was enraged at the death of
his father. He went to Kiskindha to take revenge on
Bali, but got defeated by the latter in fighting. Mayavi
took to his heels; Bali followed him, and Sugriva followed his brother. Mayavi took refuge in a cave followed
_ by Bali, and Sugriva waited at the mouth of cave. Even.
after one year neither Bali nor Mayavi emerged out of
the cave, but Sugriva saw blood coming out of the
cave and heard Mayavi roaring. Taking it for granted
that Bali was killed, Sugriva closed the mouth of the
cave, returned to Kiskindha, and at the instance of his
subjects assumed kingship.
But, Bali forced open the cave, hurried back to his
kingdom, and interpreting the action of Sugriva as
one purposely done to usurp the throne, drove
Sugriva away and took for himself Sugriva’s wife. Thus
Bali became again King of Kiskindha.
There is a mountain called ‘‘Bali-kera-mala’”’—mountain
prohibited to Bali—in the eastern region of the former
princely kingdom of Travancore. Is itin any way connected with Rsyamikacala ?
Sugriva founded anew kingdom at Rsyamika mountain. Mainda, Dvivida, Haniman and Jambavan
were the ministers of Sugriva. It was while Sugriva was
thus living on Rsyamikacala that Rama and Laksmana
came that way in the course of their search for Sita. In
accordance with the agreement made between Sugriva
and Rama, the latter killed Bali and crowned’ Sugriva
as the King of Kiskindha. (Valmiki Ramayana, Kiskindha Kanda, and Mahabharata, Vana Parva, ChapDuring the triumphal tour of Sahadeva in the South he
fought against Kiskindha, and after seven days’ fighting
the monkeys saw Sahadeva off with a present of costly
ems.
eiSahindeva fought against the monkey chiefs like
Mainda, Dvivida etc. for seven days, but neither of
them got exhausted, and the monkey chiefs, with
affection and gratitude asked Sahadeva to depart with
gems.”’ (Sabha Parva, Chapter 31). ;
During this period nothing was heard of Sugriva,
Haniman and Jambavan in Kiskindha. Might be
Sugriva was no more. Haniméan, after the death of Sri
$e

KISKINDHAGUHA
a lived in Gandhamadana in Kimpurusavarsa.
pele and Bhagavata, 10th Skandha). From the
story of Prasenait may be seen that Jambavan left
Kiskindha and lived in another cave with his sons
and other relations. Itwas the other two ministers of
Sugriva, Mainda and Dvivida, who were ruling Kiskindha when Sahadeva went there. The power and
prestige of Kiskindha had begun to set by then, and in
course of time Kiskindha ceased to exist but in name.
KISKINDHAGUHA. A mountainous region in Dhavad
district in South India. Certain scholars hold the view
that this was the actual Kiskindha. |
KITAKA. A King born from an aspect of the Asura
called Krodhavasa. (Adi Parva, Chapter 67, Verse 60).
KITAVA(S). An ancient tribe of people. They once
visited Yudhisthira with many presents. (Sabha Parva,
Chapter 51, Verse 12).
KOHALA. A Brahmin scholar. It is stated in Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 93, Stanza 4, that this
Brahmin was present at the ‘Sarpa Sattra? (sacrifice to
kill serpents) of Janamejaya. Once’ Bhagiratha gave
this hermit as alms one lakh of cows with calves. (M.B.
Anusasana Parva, Chapter 138, Stanza 27).
KOKA. (Cakravaika bird), Ruddy Goose: To know the
Puranic story about the origin of this bird (Ruddy
goose) see under ‘Arayanna’ (Swan).
of remembering their previous births.
KOKANADA I, satriya King of ancient India. It
is mentioned in Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, that at the
time of the regional conquest of Arjuna, this King fell
at his feet and sought refuge.
KOKANADA II. A warrior of Skanda. (M.B. Sabha
Parva, Chapter 2h.
KOKAVAKA, A
country in ancient I dia. (M.B.
Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9), ie ial
KOKILA. See under Dindika.
KOKILAKA. warrior of Skanda. (Mahabharata,
alya Parva, Chapter 45, Stanza 23).
KOLAGIRI. ‘mountain of South India. (Mahabharata
Sabha Parva), Sa
Sahadeva :
mountain. conquered the People of this
Asura. In the battle b t
the Devas and the Asuras Carried on by Subrahmanya
this Asura confronted Malyavan and was killed. (Padma
). After the decline
families such as Perumpatappu, Neduviripsey tat roval
rapa, Venatu etc. came into Power. Some details regarding the family of Kolasvaripa are given below,
In ‘Kerala Mahatmya’, it Is given that Parag urama
had made a Soma-K satriya, as King of Cirakkal or
Kolattunadu. According to ‘Keralotpatt?? it was Ceraman Perumal who did this, T.
| O§an says that Kolasvarupa came into being from the children born to the
last Perumal of the Venatu family. In the edicts Viraraghavapattaya or Jitasasana no Mention is made
about Kolattunadu. Both the families of Venatu
and
Kolattunadu, from very early times had observed
the customary rites of taint, pollution, defilement etc.
It is said in ‘Keralamahatmya’ that Paragurama had
enthroned the sons of two sisters In both the kingdoms.
KOLLAVARSA. (MALAYALAM ERA
44. KOLLAVARSA
But no documents are available to prove that there
was any connection between the two families till the 5th
century M.E. (Malayalam Era). i.e.14th century A.D.
See under Kollavarsa.
KOLIKA (KOKILA). This is the name of a rat. Kokila
is a character in the story known as Bidalopakhyana,
told by Narada to Dhrtarastra. Once a cat began to
perform penance holding up both of its hands, on the
bank of the Ganga. After a long time birds and rats
began to come very close to it believing that it would
not hurt them. They made the cat their leader. The
wicked cat daily ate a rat secretly. Thus the body of
the cat grew stronger day by day and there appeared a
steady decrease in the number of the rats. Among them
there was a wise rat called Kokila. He understood the
deceit played by the cat. So proclaiming independence
he and his fellows ran away and saved themselves.
(M.B. Udyoga Parva, Chapter 160).
KOLISARPA, A tribe. Formerly this tribe was of Ksatriya. Caste. A Brahmin once cursed them and made
them Sidras. (M.B. Anuéasana Parva, Chapter 33,
Stanza 22),
KOLLAGIREYA. An ancient country in South India.
It is stated in Mahabharata, Ag vamedha Parva, Chapter
83, that Arjuna conquered this country
). Several opinions
on, an assembly of the
era. The neighbouring kingoms also recognized this new era. Reckoning of dates
ased on this Malayalam Era is seen in the ‘Madura
and ‘Tinnevelly Stone-edicts and copper edicts.’ On
the fifth day of Cinnarh of the first year of M.E., five
royal families of Travancore met together and took 4
decision that the festival days of the temples should be
reckoned according to the Malayalam Era. The controversy 1s not about the starting of the new Era, but the
reasons for Starting the new era.
Logan Says that the Malayalam Era was started in
commemoration of the conversion of Ceraman Perum4
to Islam and his Pilgrimage to Mecca. But there is impropriety in thinking that the Hindu subjects of a King
would commemorate the conversion of their King into
Islam religion. Some Say that the new era was starte
: iod of ankaracarya has not
yet been decided definitely, The opinion aceeated by
If this ig accepted as true
825 A.D, Should be by so

KOLLAVARSA
lam Era should have been established for some ot her
reasons.
Another opinion is that the new era was established
to commemorate the independence given to the two
Kolattiri Kings (North and South) by the Perumal. The
North Kolattiri family should have begun the new era
on the first day of Kanni (the second month) and the
South Kolattiri family on the first day of Cinnam
(the first month). (Because in Malabar area, the era
commences on the first day of Kanni.). Another opinion
that is prevalent is that Kollavarsa was started to com-_
memorate the erection of the two towns of Quilon
(North and South), But even two centuries before A.D.
825 the town of South Quilon had become famous. So it
is an objection to this argument. Some are of opinion
that anew era was started in commemoration of
Sankaravijaya (the victory of Sankara) due to the
fact that the Brahmins of the north and the south
alike accepted the teachings of Sankaracarya. But it is
difficult to believe that the northerners and the southerners accepted the teachings of Sankaracarya on a particular date and issued a declaration to that effect and
started a new era. Some connect the starting of the
New Era with the ‘Tiruvonam’ a grand festival of the
Malaydlees. But it cannot be believed that a national
festival was started by a single man. According to
Logan it would appear that the grand festival of Tiruvonam was started to commemorate the journey of
Perumal to Mecca. But the conversion episode is more
likely to be considered as a blasphemy and the Kings
and people of Malayala land are not likely to commemorate it, Prof, Sundaran Pillai: has cut all the
arguments given above and brought ela mic
theory. His inference is that the new Era is the transformation of an-old era known as Saptarsivatsara
(year of the seven sages) or Sasiasava es: “ee
tific year) which prevailed throughout “neia ane
. wT: ; Emi In A.D. 897 Saptarsi
is still in force in Kaémira. Iv 72. and
Vatsara was 4972 and it'was known as merely /¢, 2h
that if all the hundreds are taken away, a ete oe
' figure will be the same as that of mee Se ee
i BE ine eapy Of ae eee ihe Santarsivatiara
begins as one, two and so on. But the Sap A pares
begins in the month of Metam (9th mont
as Kollavarsa begins in Cinnam. ae
ence also. His ap iriay is that the basalt an eae
took some time to reach the country of Malaya =e ae
North Indian countries and they had been 4 an falas
Saptarsivatsara up to the time of their arriva light
2 ‘al they adopted some sig
yala and after their arrival Mey inements
modifications in the era according tothe req
Saptarsivatsara.
of the new settlement, and renewed He Pe Vedanta
Gopala lyer, the great exponent ‘n his
philssopliy, says as follows about era. and
‘Chronology of Ancient TAU But Kollavarga
Kollavarsa commenced in B.C. 1176 ; he sands This
is divided into groups of eequrcing * Vatsara, which
has a close connection with aap ae 1176 The year
also might have commencec I” B. ‘A.D. 824. The
mentioned above completed 2000 eb 895, under the
third recurring thousand begins 1 £4." ;
name Kollavarsa.
Princent, Buchanan an
rable western scholars Ww
Opinions about Kollavarsa.
d Burnell are the three memoho have expressed their
Princent connected
He explains this differ- -
415 KOSALA (S)
Kollavarsa with Paragfurama. Buchanan said that
the Malayalees have a recurring of every millennium.
Burnell has stated in his book “South Indian Paleography”’, that the theory of recurring Millennium is
wrong..
An astronomer who was a contemporary of the King
who established the Malayalam era has stated in his
work called ‘Sankarandrayaniya’ (a manuscript in
Palm leaves) that an astronomical movement was
reckoned and a new era was started at Quilon. This
palm leafmanuscript is kept in the Manuscripts
Library at Trivandrum.
KONKANA. An ancient country of South India.
(Mahabharata, Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Stanza 60).
KOPAVEGA. A hermit. This hermit had © served
Yudhisthira. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 4, Stanza 16).
KOSA. A river. It is stated in Mahabharata, Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 9, Stanza 27, that the water of this
river was used for drinking by the ancient people of
Bharata.
KOSAKARA. See under Nigakara II.
KOSALA I. The King and the people of the country
of Kosala are called by the name Kosala.
KOSALA II. One of the wrestlers of Karmsa. The
famous wrestlers of Karhsa were Cantra, Mustika,
Kita, Sala, Kosala and others.
KOSALA.
1) General information. A wealthy and prosperous
country on the banks of the river Sarayi. Ayodhya
was the Capital of this kingdom. This city was built
by Manu, the father of Iksvaku. This city was twelve
yojanas long with a breadth of three yojanas. It is
understood from Valmiki Ramayana, Balakanda,
Sarga 5 that during the time of Daéaratha this city was
modified to such an extent as to be ona par with any
modern city.
2) Other details. (1) Bhimasena once conquered
Uttara Kosala (north Kosala). (M.B. Sabha Parva,
Chapter 30).
(2) Sahadeva during his regional conquest, subdued
Daksina Kosala (South Kosala). (M.B. Sabha Parva,
Chapter 31, Stanza 12). |
(3) Sri Krsna once conquered the country of Kosala.
(M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 21, Stanza 15).
(4) Abhimanyu, the son of Arjuna, kilied the King
of Kosala in the battle of Bharata.
(5) Karna once conquered this country for Duryodhana.
(M.B. Karna Parva, Chapter 8, Stanza 19).
(6) During the time of the battle of Bharata a King
named Ksemadarégi ruled over Kosala. (M.B. Santi
Parva, Chapter 82, Stanza 6).
(7) At the time of the Svayarnvara (marriage) of
Amba, Bhisma defeated the King of Kosala. (M.B.
Anusasana Parva, Chapter 44, Stanza 38).
fe) Arjuna who led the horse for sacrifice conquered
the country of Kosala. (M.B. Agvamedha Parva,
Chapter 83).
(9) Those who bathe in the holy bath of Rsabha
tirtha in Kosala, will obtain the fruits of giving one
thousand cows as alms. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter
85, Stanza 10).
KOSALA (S). The Ksatriyas of the country of Kofala.
These Koéalas once fled to the southern countries
EEE

KOSTHAVAN #16
fearing Jarasandha. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 14,
Stanza 27). ;
KOSTHAVAN. <A mountain.
bharata, Asvamedha Parva, Chapter 43 that | this
mountain was the overlord of many other mountains.
KOTARA. An attendantof Skanda. (M.B. Salya Parva,
Chapter 46, Stanza 14). ;
KOTARAKA. A serpent born in the family of Kagyapa.
(M.B. Udyoga Parva, Chapter 103, Stanza 12),
KOTIKASYA (KOTIKA). A King who was the follower of J.yadrat a. While the Pandavas were living in.
the Kamyaka forest once they went out leaving Paficali
‘lone in the hut. At that time Jayadratha the King of
Sindhu, the son of Vrddhaksatra came there and saw
Paficali. He sent his follower Kotikasya to entice
Paficali, who did not succumb to temptation. At last
Jayadratha carried Paficali away by force.
This Kotikasya was the son of Suratha and Was the
King of Trigarta. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 265).
OTILINGA. This word was added to the names of
the members of the Kotunallur royal family. Especially, Kufijikuttan Tampuran is denoted by the name
‘Kotilingesvar . in some of his poetic works, The word
‘Kotilinga’ is the Sanskrit form of the Dravidian word
Kotunnallir, This city was the Capital of the Cera
Kings, |
KOTISA. A serpent born in the family of Vasuki, (M.B,
Adi Parva, Chapter 57, Stanza 5),
KOTITIRTHA., A holy bath, It is mentioned. in MahiIn this holy bath wil] get the fruits
horse sacrifice.
KOTTUVA. (Yawning, Gape),
Skandha 6, there is a story explai
beings began to awn. After
In Devi Bhagavata,
ning how the livin
of Brhaspati the Devas caused Vrttrasura_ to gape.
After opening the mouth he found it: difficult to shut,
and the mouth remained open. In the meanwhile
he mouth. Gape
time, ;
under the word a me. (For details see
ey pee eC Ksatriya King
Oh ower of Dharmaputra. M.B. Sabha
4, Stanza 28). ( abha P arva, Chapter
KRAMAPA, ‘A son born to Pulaha by
Kramapa had a brother named Sa
who was a constant
_by his wife Ksami.
hisnu. (Agni Purana
ortion called ‘word study’ (Pada Patha) in
ihc scripture) .. Every word in the Veda is at hae
from its prefixes and suffixes. The second step isKramapatha or the study of joining Prefixes and suffixes to
each word got by the first step. Next step ig Jatapatha
in which words are combined with their Prefixes and
suffixes. To guard against the creeping ‘in of Mistakes
in this step, the next step which is known as Ghanapatha is taught. In this step the first step of Padapatha
and the second step of Krama patha are mixed together
It is stated in Maha--
KRATHA VIII.
KRATHA J.
KRATHA
KRATHA Iv.
KRATHA Vv. A famous serpent.
KRATHA(M).
KRATU
and intermingled , from beginning to end and end to
beginning. There are rules to make combined words by
using prefixes and suffixes. These rules are called
Pratisakhya. Because the Vedas are taught in this way
with so much attention and care, their texts have never
been subjected to changes and variations. .
KRATHA I. A Ksatriya King. He was the rebirth of
an “Asura called Krodhavaéa. (M.B. Adi Parva,
Chapter 67, Stanza 61). See under Jyamagha.
KRATHA II. A King defeated by Bhimasena during
his regional conquest. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter
30, Stanza 7),
KRATHA III. A hermit. In Mahabharata, Udyoga-
- Parva, Chapter 83, Stanza 27 it is Stated that this
hermit visited Sri Krsna on his way to Hastinapura.
KRATHA IV. There was a warrior named Kratha on
the side of the Kauravas.
(M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter
120, Stanza IQ).
KRATHA V. A warrior of Skandadeva, (M.B. Salya
Parva, Chapter 45, Stanza 70).
KRATHA VI. A Yaksa. (Demi-God), When Garuda
reached the world of Devas he had to fight with this
Yaksa. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 32, Stanza 18).
KRATHA VII. An Asura (demon). It is stated in
Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 67 Stanza 57 that
this Asura was born as King Siryaksa on the earth in
his re-birth,
Name of a son of Dhrtarastra.
Adi Parva, Chapter 116, Stanza a |
mous King in Ancient India. ‘The
following details about this King are found found
4n the Mahabharata.
(1) He was the rebirth of an
the son of Sirhhika. (M.B. Adi
Stanza 40),
(2) Kratha attended the Svayarhvara (marriage) of
Draupadi. (M.B. Adj Parva, Chapter 186, Stanza 15).
(3) Sri Krsna defeated Kratha at the city of Jaruthi.
(M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 12, Stanza 30). '
(4) In the battle of Bharata this King attacked Abhi-
(MLB.
Asura called Rahu,
Parva, Chapter 67,
_ Manyu. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 46, Stanza 26).
(5) In the battle of Bharata Kratha killed the prince of
Kalinga, and a King from the mountain killed
Kratha, (M.B. Karna Parva, Chapter 85, Stanza 15).
KRATHA IT. A King of the Puc, dynasty. (M.B. Adi
Parva Chapter 94, Stanza 98).
ITT, Captain of the
(M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 283, Stanza LY) .
A warrior of Skanda. (M.B. Salya
Parva, Chapter 45, Stanza 70).
army of monkeys.
At the time of the
death of Balabhadra this serpent came there to lead
Is soul to Patala (nether world) . (M.B. Mausala Parva,
hapter 4, Stanza 6),
). An ancient country in India. It is
that mcd in Mahabhar ata, Sabha Parva, Chapter 21
that Bhismaka the King of Vidarbha had conquered
this country,
KRATU,
1) General information. One of the six mental sons of
rahma, Marici, Angiras, Atri, Pulastya, Pulaha and
Kratu were the mental sons of Brahma. (M.B. Adi
Par va, Chapter 65). Kratu is described as bne of the
41 Prajapatis (lords of emanation )
a

KRAUNCA I
2) Some details. (1) It is stated in Mahabharata, Adi
Parva, Chapter 65, Stanza 9, that the hermits called
Balakhilyas were the sons of Kratu.
(2) Kratu was present at the birth-celebration of
Arjuna. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 122, Stanza 52).
(3) Kratu came to save the Raksasas from the Raksasa
sattra, (A great sacrificial fire meant for the Raksasas
(giants) to jump into and die by themselves) performed °
by the hermit Paradgara. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter
189, Stanza 9).
(4) Kratu was a luminary in the councils of Brahma
and Indra. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 7, Stanza 17).
(5) Kratu was present at the Birth celebration of
Skandadeva. (M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Stanzal0).
(6) There is a group of hermits called ‘Citrasikhandins,
of which Kratu is a member. (M.B. Santi Parva,
Chapter 335, Stanza 27).
(7) By the blessings of Siva, Kratu got a thousand sons.
M.B. Anugasana Parva, Chapter 14, Stanza 87).
(8) Kratu went to visit Bhisma who was lying on the
bed of arrows awaiting death in the beginning of
Uttaradyana of the year. (M.B. Anusasana Parva,
Chapter 26, Stanza 4). :
KRAUNCA I. An Asura, In Vaman
ter 57 it is mentioned that this A
Subrahman a.
KRAUNGA II, A mountain.
a Purana, Chapsura was killed by
There is a story about this
lived an Asura named
haught t. Once Agast
and worshinped Stra. Kaveridevi also was standing
Lo ; ared before
close by, worshipping Siva. God Siva oon any boon.
Agastya and told him that he might ask for
He reheated Yat the power to push co tee ge
icking and to establish a holy Tirtha (ba :
earth. Siv: ted the boons.
iva tained aoe a river and placed her 1m the
turning from
water-pot _ Ag Agastya Was
ter-pot of Agastya. ig water-pot, Kraufica the
Kailasa, with Kaveri in and hindered his
Asura took the shape of 7 :
way. The A caused 4 ing the pat
os a heath the forest scien finding Pp
for days. At last he realized the vein with chanting of
drops of water from his waterpot <3 sat the Asura
antras and meditation threw tue ae re for ever as 4
with the curse that he would ata ceed from the
mountain, He said that he would ‘ Subrahmanya, the
curse when pierced by the arrow 0 Kraufica the Asura
son of Siva. From that day onwards That mountain
had been standing there a5 @ me Krauiica.” (Skanda
was called “The mountaiD of
Purana, Asura Kanda). Chapter 18,
There is another statemem f the mounthat the mountain Kraunca |
tain Maindka, the son of Men*. ttle with the
Subrahmanya fought 4 aN of Mahabali,
any died. Banasura, © inside te ™
the battlefield and_ hid himnse!* aE oun aa
Kraujica. Subrahmany4 . (Fire-god) +
with the arrow given by me ee (M.B. Salya
Krauficdsura was liberated from —
— a aie t jidasa mentions abort arate Vana
n ‘Meghadita’ Katiaa aha aie |
in the mounted Kraunica. a
nt in Harivamsa,
was the son ©
a Asuras.
fled from
mountain
OO EE
KRMI I
Parva, Chapter 225, Stanza 33, mention is made that
through this cleavage swans and vultures fly to Mahameru. (For the story of how Paragurama cleft the
Kraufica mountain see under Paragurama).
KRAUNCA III. (A kind of snipe). A bird.
KRAUNCADVIPA. (ISLAND OF KRAUNCA). One
of the Saptadvipas (seven islands). The seven islands
are Jambidvipa, Plaksadvipa, Salmalidvipa, Kuéa_ dvipa, Krauficadvipa, Sakadvipa and Puskaradvipa.
(Devi Bhagavata Skandha 8). Krauficadvipa is described as follows in Mahabharata, Bhisma Parva, Chapter 12:—In this island there are the mountains Kraufica,
Vamanaka, Andhakara, Mainaka, Govinda, Nibida, and
Viskambha. The various countries in this island are
Kugala, Manonuga, Usna, Pravaraka, Andhakaraka,
Munidesa, Dundubhisvana etc.
KRAUMCANISUDANA. Aholy place on the banks
of river Sarasvati. It is mentioned in Mahabharata,
Vana Parva, Chapter 84, Stanza 160 that he who bathes
in this place would get a Vimana. a
KRAUNCAPADI.: A holy place. He who makes oblations of balls of boiled ricein this place will obtain
remission of sin of Brahmahatya (sin incurred by
killing a Brahmin). (M.B. Anusasana Parva, Chapter
25, Stanza 42).
KRAUNCARUNAVYUHA. Another name of Krauficavyuha (strategic disposition of an army). Dhrstadyumna formed the Krauficarunavyiha. (Mahabharata,
Bhisma Parva, Chapter 50).
KRAUNCAVYUHA. A strategic formation of the army
in the shape of Kraufica bird (snipe). In the battle
of Bharata, Bhisma made the formation of Kraufica.
(M.B. Bhisma Parya, Chapter 75). The Kraufica disposition has eight strategical positions, the face, eyes,
head, neck, stomach, left flank, right flank and thighs.
In the disposition formed by Bhisma, Drona stood at
the face, ASvatthama and Krpa stood at the eyes,
Hardikya at the head and Sirasena at the neck. The
King of Pragjyotisa stood at the stomach of the formation. The Tusaras, Yavanas, Sakas and Cipuvas
guarded the right flank. Srtayus and Bhiriéravas kept
the thighs.
KRAUNCI. A daughter born to Kafyapaprajapati by
his wife Tamra the daughter of Daksa. Five daughters,
Kraufici, Bhasi, Syeni, Dhrtarastri and Suki were born
of Tamra. From Kraufici, were born the owls, the Bhasas
from Bhasi, the hawks and vultures from Syeni, the
swans and ruddy geese from Dhrtarastri and Nara, the
mother of Vinata from Suki, (Valmiki Ramayana,
Sarga 14).
KRAVYADA (8S). <A particular group of the Manes or
the deified ancestors that receive the souls of the
deceased. Mention is made about the Kravyadas in
Mahabharata, Santi Parva, Chapter 269, Stanza 15.
KRIYA. One of the daughters of Daksa. Dharmadeva
married her and three sons Danda, Naya and Vinaya
were born to him of Kriya. (Visnu Purana, Améa I,
Chapter 7).
KRKANEYU. (KAKSEYU). One of the ten sons whom
King Raudragva of the Puru dynasty begot of the
Apsaras called Misrakesi. (Adi Parva, Chapter 94,
Verse 10). |
KRMII. A King of the royal dynasty of Anga. King
UGinara had five wives named Nrga, Nara, Krmi,
Daéa and. Drsadvati, and of them were born respective-

KRMI II A18
ly the sons Nrga, Nara, Krmi, Suvrata and Sibi. (Agni
Purana, Chapter 227). ; :
KRMIII. A wife of Usinara. (See under Krmi I),
KRMI III. A Ksatriya dynasty. (Udyoga Parva,
Chapter 74, Verse 13).
KRMI IV. A river. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 17).
KRMIBHOJANA (M). One of the twentyeight hells.
(See Naraka under Kala I),
KRMILA. A king born in the Puru dynasty. There was
a king in the dynasty called Bahyasva, who had five
sons called Sriijaya, Brhadisu, Mukula, Krmila and
Yavinara. In later years they became famous as Paiicalas. (Agni Purana, Chapter 278).
KRMISA. A hell known as Krmibhojana also. (See
under Kala I.)
KRODHA I. A famous Asura born to Kasyapa_ by his
wife Kala. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 65, Stanza 35).
KRODHA II. It is stated in Bhagavata that Krodha was
born from the eye-brow of Brahma. There is a story
about this Krodha in the ‘Jaimini-As vamedha Parva’.
Once, while the hermit Jamadagni was performing
sacrificial offerings to the Manes, Krodha came there
and secretly put poison in the pudding prepared from
the milk of the sacrificial cow. Even though the hermit
knew this he did not get angry. Seeing this, Krodha
became afraid of the hermit and approaching him said
“Oh, hermit ! I thought that the Bhargavas (those
born of the family of Bhrgu) would get angry quickly.
Now I understand that it is wrong.” Jamadagni pardoned him and said : “But you have to appease the anger
of the Manes”. ‘The Manes cursed him that he would
have to take birth as a mongoose. But he was given
remissiom that he would be liberated from the curse,
when he narrated the story of the Brahmin Ufcchavrtti
at the palace of Dharma in the presence of Sri Krsna.
Thus Krodha regained his former form.
KRODHAHANTA. A famous Asura. He was born to
Prajapati Kasyapa by his wife Kala. The notorious
Vrtrasura was the brother of Krodhahanta. (M.B. Adi
Parva, Chapter 65).
KRODHANA. An attendant of Skanda. (M.B. Salya
Parva, Chapter 46, Stanza 6).
KRODHANA. A hermit of great importance in the
palace of Indra. (Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter
7, Stanza 11),
KRODHASATRU. A famous Asura who was born to
Prajapati Kasyapa of his wife Kala. (M.B. Adi Parva,
Chapter 65, Stanza 35).
KRODHAVARDHANA. An Asura. In Mahabharata,
Adi Parva, Chapter 67, Stanza 46, it is mentioned that
in later ages this Asura was reborn under the name
Dandadhara.
KRODHAVASA. A follower of Indrajit. In the battle
between Ravana and Sri Rama this Asura made himself
snvisible and attacked the monkeys. By the help of
Vibhisana, who was an expert in the art of vanishing,
the monkeys killed Krodhavaga in the battle. (M.B.
Vana Parva, Chapter 269). —
KRODHAVASA. Wite of Prajapati Kagyapa. (Valmiki
Ramayana, Aranya Kanda, Sarga 14). The Asuras who
vere born to Krodhavasa are also called Krodhavaégas.
Most of these Krodhavasas were employed to guard the
a. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 154).
lotus-lake of Kubera. (
Bhimasena once entered the lotus-lake of Kubera and
plucked the “Saugandhika” flower. The Krodhavasas
KRPA II
ran to Kubera to inform him of this theft. ene:
in Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 289, wear of
that these Krodhavagas were present 1n the 4
Ravana.
KROSANA. A female attendant of Skanda. (M.B. Salya
Parva, Chapter 46, Stanza 17). ’
KROSTA. A son of Yadu. Salvsstada, Payoda, aes
Nila and Ajika were the five sons of Yadu. (Harv ?
Chapter 38).
KRPA I. AKing in ancient India. He neve
(Anugdsana Parva, Chapter 115, Verse 64).
KRPA II. (KRPACARYA). e
1). intidece, Descended from Visnu_thus : pect
Atri—Candra —Budha —Puriravas —Ayus—Na —_
Yayati —Puru —Janamejaya -——Pracinvan oo
Namasyu—Vitabhaya—Sundu—Bahuvidha—Samye
Rahovadi —Raudrasva —Matinara ae a
Dusyanta—Bharata—Suhota—Gala—Garda—Su 7 ay
Brhatksetra—Hasti—Ajamidha—Nila—Santi—9¥* all
Puruja—Arka—Bhavyasva—Paficala—Mudgala. ? aii
ghter called Ahalya was born to Mudgala. Mahar! ol
tama married her. To Gautama was born SatanaD ~ae"
him Satyadhrti, to him Saradvan and to Saradvan ii
born Krpacarya. The Puranas refer to the ae
preceding Gautama only in the maternal line. It 1S ivan
in verse 2, Chapter 130 of the Adi Parva, that a
was the son of Gautama. According to Agni Pur ome
Bhagavata etc. Saradvan, father of Krpa was the of
of the great-grand son of Gautama and grandson
Satananda. (Agni Purana, Chapter 278). 2
2) Birth of Krpa. Though born in a family of _—
Saradvan evinced more interest in Dhanurveda. oe
performed penance in the forest, with bow and asin
deposited by his side. As his penance gathered — ws
the Devas got alarmed. To break his penance a6 4
deputed the Devata called Janapadi to the al :
she appeared before Saradvan and danced, dresse O ai
in one piece of cloth. Emission occurred to him. hi 4
wisdom dawned on him immediately and leaving be sie
him the bow, arrows and deer skin he quitted ¢
place. heh
The semen discharged by him fell on the arrow aa :
broke into two giving birth to a male child an
female one.
3) Krpa inthe Palace. One of the attendants of King
antanu, who had come to the forest to hunt, saw tHe
children and took them to the King. The King felt Krpa
(pity) for them and brought them up in the Se
and as they were thus brought up due to his Krpat cy
came to be called Krpa and Krpi. (Adi Parva, Chapter
4) Krpa’s mastery of Dhanurveda. While living in the
forest engaged in penance Saradvan, with his on
power understood that the two children forsaken PY
him were growing up in the palace. He went to the
palace and told the king details about the children. He
also lived there in secret and taught Krpa everything
contained in the four branches of Dhanurveda and the
various usages in archery. Gradually Krpa became 2?
A4carya (master) in Dhanurveda. Not only the Pandavas
the Kauravas, the Yadavas and the Vrsnis but also
kings, who came from various regions of the country
learned archery at the feet of Krpa. (Adi Parva, Chapter
r ate flesh.

KRPA II
5) Krpa at the trial of skill in archery of the
the Pandavas. When the training of the Kauravas and
the Pandavas in archery was Over, a test was arranged
for them. Spectators crowded to see it. Drona, Krpa
Somadatta, Balhika, Bhisma and Vidura and othe:
great ones took their seats in the stadium. Arjuna and
Karna entered the arena for contest when Krpa_ inter.
vened and said that Arjuna Was the youngest son of
Kunti but Karna should specify his parentage. At this
Karna stood stunned, and it was then that Duryodhana
declared Karna to be the King of Anga. (Adi Parva
6) Activities of Krpa upto the grea war. (1) He atte
the Ravastiye, ase of Yudhisthira. (Sabha fa
Chapter 34, Verse 8). ; ;
There he acted as the custodian of mone
buted daksinds (monetary presents).
Chapter 35, Verse 7).
(11) It was he who instructed the spies deputed by
Duryodhana as to how to detect the Pandavas during
their life incognito. (Virata Parva, Chapter 29). Hie
oe detailed to Duryodhana the various aspects of
politics.
(iil ) Krpa once told Duryodhana that he was powerful]
enough to annihilate the Pandava army Within two
months. (Virata Parva, Chapter 193).
7)Krpa in the war. (i) On the first day of the war he
fought with Brhatksetra. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 45).
(ii) In the fight with Cekitana he fell down and fainted. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 84, Verse 31) ;
(111) He wounded SAatyaki.
(iv) - Fought a duel with Sahadeva. (Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 110, Verse 12).
(v) He fought with Arjuna and Bhima,
Chapter 113, Verse 114).
(vi) Fought with Dhrstaketu.
(vii) Fought with Vardhaksemi.
Chapter 25, Verse 41). _ ,
(viii) His flag floated in the air and could be seen
from anywhere in the battlefield. (Drona Parva,
Chapter 105).
(ix) He killed the body-guards of Abhimanyu. (Drona
Parva, Chapter 42, Verse 38).
(x) Fighting with Arjuna he fainted and fell down.
(Drona Parva, Chapter 147 Verse 9),
(xi) During the fight he ridiculed Karna. (Drona
Parva, Chapter 158, Verse 13). »
(xii) He advised ASvatthama to prevent Duryodhana
from confronting Arjuna. (Drona Parva, Chapter 150,
Verse 77).
(xiii) In the battle that ensued he defeated Sikhandi.
(Drona Parva Chapter 169, Verse 39).
(xiv) When Drona fell down dead he fled from the
battle-field. (Drona Parva, Chapter 193, Verse 12),
(xv) He was defeated by Satyaki.
Chapter 20 Verse 53).
(xvi) He killed Suketu, son of Citraketu.
Parva, Chapter 54, Verse 28).
Kauravas and
Y and distri-
(Sabha Parva,
(Bhisma Parva, Chapter
(Bhisma Parva,
(Drona Parva, Chapter
(Drona Parva,
(Drona Parva,
(Karna
(xvii) Defeated Yudhamanyu. (Karna Parva, Chapter
61, Verse 55).
(xviii) He killed the Kalinda prince. (Karna Parva
Chapter 85, Verse 6).
KRSADRALHA
(xix) He advised Karna to enter into a compromise with
the Pandavas. (Salya Parva, Chapter 4).
—o He ran away from the battlefield to Dvaipayan@
ake (Salya P arva, Chapter 30, Verse 9).
xxi) Yudhisthira came to the lake with an army and
tpa ran away from there. (Salya Parva, Chapter 30,
Verse 60).
(xxii) He appointed Agvatthama chiefof the army 0?
the suggestion of Duryodhana. (Salya Parva, Ghaptet
65, Verse 43).
(Xxili) He fought during the night along with Asvatthama. (Sauptika Parva, Chapter 5, Verse 35)-.
(xxiv ) He killed the soldiers who ran away from the
a camp. (Sauptika Parva, Chapter 8, Verse
(xxv) He set fire to the camp of the Pandavas:
(Sauptika Parva, Chapter 8, Verse 109). z
xxvi) He cried at the pitiable condition of Dury°
dhana. (Sauptika Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 10). . ta-
(xxvii) He went to Hastinapura after telling Se
rastra and Gandhari that both the Kauravas and il
Pandavas would be ruined. (Stri Parva, Chapter
Verse 21). : hana
8). End of Krpa. The great war ended. Duryod! for
and others were killed and, when Dhrtarastra leit any
the forest with Gandhari, Krpa desired to occa
them. But, Dhrtarastra did not permit it. biacaent a
as advised by Dhrtarastra, put up Krpa i e the
(Agramavasika Parva, Chapter 16, Verse 5). cre atiies
Pandavas set out on their great journey ay eae O
appointed Krpa as the preceptor of Pariksit, — a 4).
Arjuna. (Mah4prasthana Parva, Chapter !, Ve enanDuring his last days Krpa went into the forest for eo
ce and there he breathed his last. (Santi
Chapter 296, Verse 14). ra9) Rynone for Krpa. — atamyae ae,
tacarya. Brahmarsi, Saradvata, Saradva
Gautama, Krpa.
KRPI. (See Para 2 under Krpall). _ ince Of
Later history. Krpi was brought up ™ e Dionacary2
King Santanu. She was duly married by cg i
and a son called Agvatthama was born to much over
Parva, Chapter 130). Krpi lamented “wo Parva,
the death of Dronain the great war. (
Chapter 23, Verse 33). . d as
The terms Sdradvati and . an are use
synonyms of Krpi in the Maha arata. seunk
KRSA. I. A friend of sage Srfgi. Since Kysa une ghtea lot of sacrifices for the protection of eee Hence he
ousness) his body became very Krsa ae Sri oi about
was called Krga. It was Kréa, who os snake roun
King Pariksit who had once thrown a oe Chapters 41
his (Srngi’s) father’s neck. (Adi Parva,
and 42). ‘ Airavata
KRSA II. A prominent serpent dae se serpent
family. The serpent was reduced to “Chapter 57, Verse
yajiia of Janamejaya. (Adi Parva,
Lys . ‘vine powers:
a 4 Ill. A great sage endowed nr one he visitHe was also present in the ae | Anus asan@
ed Bhisma on his arrow-bed.
Chapter 26, Verse 7). £ the famous
‘cin brother 0
KRSADRATHRA. Son of EL ska dha) .
emperor Sibi. (Bhagavata, :

_ KRSAKA
KRSAKA. A naga born in the Kagyapa dynasty.
3 ‘ pter 106, Verse 15).
(Cdyogaparva, Chap d Soma at the
KRSANU. The sage who stood guar oa ME ie
) Yajfia conducted oP eee Kutsa. (Regveda, anc ’
KREASVA T ‘ the Pratdpati called Kréaéva married
Jaya and Suprabha the daughters of Daksaprajapati
and to both were born fifty sons each. All the sons were
really arrows called Samhara. Visvamitra, by the power
of penance made these hundred sons (arrows) of Kré a-
$va his own. It was these arrows, which Vis vamitra
gave to Sri Rama and Laksmana. (Valmiki Ramayana,
Balakanda, Cantos 21 and 26). :
KRSASVA II. A king of the solar dynasty. (Bhagavata,
9th Skandha). _
KRSASVA III. A King who served Yama in his court.
(Sabha Parva, Chapter 8, Verse 17). Sait.
Once he came down to earth in Indra’s Vimana to
witness Arjuna, in the company of Uttara, the Virata
Prince, fight during the lifting of cows. (Sabha Parva,
Chapter 56).
KRSEYU. A King born in the Puru dynasty.
PURUVAMSA).
KRSIVALA. An ancient sage who lived in Indra’s
court, (Sabha Parva, Chapter 7, Verse 13).
KRSNA (SRI KRSNA)... Born ir the Yadava dynasty
as the son of Vasudeva and Devaki, Sri Krsna was the
ninth of the ten incarnations of Mahavisnu.
1) Genealogy. Descended from Visnu thus :—Brahma
yp oandra-Budha—Puriiravas—Ayus—Nahuse
—- Yayati— Yadu— Sahasrajit — Satajit — Hehaya—
Dharma—Kunti— Bhadrasena—Dhanaka — Krtavirya
— Kartaviryarjuna — Jayadhvaja — ee —
Vitihotra— Arianta — Durjaya — Yudhajit — Sini —
Satyaka—Satyaki ( Yuyudhana) —Jaya—Kuni—Anamj.-
tra—Prgni — Citraratha — Vidiratha — Stra — SiniDhoja—Hrdika—Sirasena—Vasudeva Se Krsna.
Ten sons called Vasudeva, Devabhaga, Devasravas,
aka, Sriijaya, Kakanika, Syamaka, Vatsa, Kavika
and Vasu were born to King Sirasena by his wife
Marisa. Of those ten sons Vasudeva Married Devaki,
the sister of Karhsa. He had also a second wife called
ohini and she was the mother of Balabhadrarama.
rt Krsna’s former births. Owing to q curse of
Varuna, Kasyapaprajapati was born on earth as
Vasudeva and his (Kafyapa) wives Aditi and Surasa
were born as Devaki and Rohini, (See under Kagyapa
and Aditi). Like this $7 Krsna also h i
Once upon a time from the heart of Brahma
born the Prajapati called Dharma, who Was ve
ful and wedded to righteous |j
accordi
injunctions of the Vedas, He edaiet | iE Se
of Daksaprajapati, and four sons called Hari,
Nara and Narayana were born ‘oO him. Hari ‘and
Krsna turned out to be gteat Yogins, and Nara and
Narayana ascetics. Naranarayanas performe Penance
to please Brahma for a thousand years at Badarik.
asrama in the valley of the Himalayas, Celestial
women, whom Indra had deputed to break their
penance, approached them and requested them te take
them (celestial women) as _ their Wives. Ascetic Narayana who got angry at the celestial women’s request
was about to curse them when Sage Nara intervened
and pacified him. Then sage Narayana told them
thus :—“You must protect my Vrata (penance) in
ie
(See under
this life. In that case, in the next birth I shall . satiety
your desire. In the 28th Dvaparayuga ‘5 te as
incarnating on earth on behalf of the Devas. Then Z ~
also may be born as princesses. I shall rs
Krsna in the Yadu dynasty and marry all of you.
(Bhagavata, 4th Skandha). .
Accordingly sage Narayana was born as §ri Krsna =
the Yadu dynasty, and sage Nara was born as Arjuna
be his companion.
The curse of Bhrgu the great Sage also contributed to
ahavisnu’s tivaraliny himself as Sri Krsna. Once
in a war which lasted for 100 years between the Devas
and the Asuras most of the latter were killed. Then
ukra, preceptor of the Asuras went to Mount
Kailasa to secure exceptional weapons, and the Asuras
took refuge under Kavyamata, the mother of ogpie
Devendra sought Mahavisnu’s aid, and he cut o
Kavyamata’s head with his Cakra (discus). Bhrgu
was enraged at this killing of awoman. He cursed that
Mahavisnu should be born as man. Owing to various
reasons like the above Mahavisnu happened to ie
Ornasman in the Yadava dynasty, as the son o
Vasudeva. (Devi Bhagavata, 5th Skandha).
3) Vasudeva’s wedding. To Siirasena, the Yadava Ring
of Mathurapuri was born a son called Vasudeva, an
Devaki was born as the grand-daughter of Devaka, the
brother of Ugrasena, another Yadava King. -Devaki
was the sister of Karnsa. Devaki ven j
to Vasudeva with a dowry of twelve
particular weight) of gold and a
acted as charioteer in the weddin
bharas (@
chariot. Karsa
8 procession during
Karhsa as follows :—
amsa stood up in the chariot ablaze with rage. He
caught hold of Devaki by her hair and raised a
he conciliatory words 0
to pacify Karhsa. Then Vasudeva
sa all the children a
to Devaki immediately after their birth. Accordingly
4) First-born son of Vasudeva. The
asudeva was duly handed over to Kar; , pe
Kirtiman. On one of those
Karhsa and told hi
object of Krsna’s in
amsa realised how fatal to
Vasudeva and Devaki, and h
killed the child by dashin
also kept them chained j
9) Kathsa’s excitement.
Parada upset Karhsa
life, the
hen it was that
him was the existence 0
€ hurried up to them an
g its head against a rock. He
N prison,
The information imparted by
3 much. He shut his father
srastna in prison and himself became King. He
deputed Asuras like Pralamba, Canira, Trnavarta,
Mustika, Arista, Kegi Dhenuka, Agha,’ Vivida an
Pitana to harass the Yadavas, the Andhakas and the
reais. After the death of Kirtiman, Devaki, in the
Prison, delivered five sons. (See under Karhsa. Para
or the previous history of the first six sons of Devaki)-
the five children also as soon as they

KRSNA
6) Birth of Sri Krsna. The Asuras ki
Devasura war were later born as eee “ ig BS
on earth. The burden of such Kings enna. mas
too much for her, goddess’ Earth, in the guise ee oe
complained about it to Brahma who took her - Siva
who too could not find a solution to the problem fed
oy Bhimidevi. So, all of them accompanied By the
evas approached Mahavisnu and prayed for the
redress of their grievance. Mahavisnu sent them back
a by the assurance that he would be born as
i son of Vasudeva and Devaki to solve the problem.
— ain arranged the Devas to be born as Gopas and
nae women as Gopikas on earth for his
Deval conceived for the 7th time, and it was an aspect
val Ananta. Mahavisnu instructed Mayadevi thus :
m ou go to the earth and transfer the child in Devaki’s
i to that of Rohini, the second wife of Vasudeva
*e after that, at the very time of my birth you
ae be born as daughter of Yagoda, . wife of
Nandagopa. You would be worshipped by_ the world
Tf various names like Ambika, Narayan, Candika,
urga, Bhadrakali etc. The child transferred by you to
the womb of Rohini will become known as Sankarsana,
Balabhadra and Rama.
Accordingly Mayadevi transferred the
womb to that of Rohini, and it was given out that the
seventh child of Devaki was aborted in the womb.
Devaki conceived for the eighth time, an on Astami
day in the month of Simha (Leo, August-September)
when the Brahma stars were collected on the same day
was Sri Krsna born. Mahavisnu incarnated | himself
as Krsna with the conch, the discus, the club and the
lotus flower in his four hands. Vasudeva saluted the
marvellous child, and the chain that hound himself
and Devaki broke asunder, and the new-born child
spoke thus to Vasudeva "Tn Svayambhuva Manyan®
tara the Prajapati called Sutapas with his wife Prsnt
meditat 12,000 years, and when I
OT en the ad acted! them to choose any boon
child in Devaki’s
appeared to them an
they prayed for my being born as their oe
next life Sutapas was born as Kasyap4 and Fysni 4
the form of Wamana
nd Aditi
Aditi, and I incarnated in
(Dwarf) as their son. Afterwards Kasyapa ae ths as
took various births and I too took various b as
their sow. ‘Now also, Kasyapa and Aditi, ate ont be
Vasudeva and Devaki. Just at this eas a Gokula
has been born to Nandagop4 and Yagoda 4 with the
You shall take me over ! ere and rep gee Vasudeva
child hess ox Goran’ Seer = |
the above facts Krsna assumed th
its mo er.
child and lay by the side of se were deep in sleep
5. Vasudeva
when the guards at the prison
the doors of the prison opens H a ai on his
with the child Krsna, starte for ‘ vrse fot him to
Way the river Yamuna chang d o fs eid were opel
Proceed. ‘The doors of Yaso as ae the child of
Owing to the divine prowess © . ; jnte deep sleep
Yagoda, everybody in the house se Yéodaa an
Vasudeva placed Krsna 'y a as rad thus
returned home with her ¢ ild. “8 yp and reported to
P Devaki
returned the rison-guards wo hild by |
arhsa Feout the delivery i hold of the child
Karhsa rushed to the house oe
and was about to dash it agains
KRSNA
the child slipped fre
apepetion ‘tspoke se ey Ga ene Wee i het
! unrighteous and cruel Karhsa !
a a Go peg oe women. Thy bike h ton
chap) earch for him everywhere. (Siva Purana,
Colour of Sri Krsna and Balabh Z S
j rst adrar q
ae a kei and Balabhadra bhi Ties tea
oy a = abharata to explain this sie erent in
igh 2 ue. ‘The Devas informed Mahavisnu of dicks
erie O nar en themselves on earth for re
cae ion of the evil and cruel people. Pleased ‘
“ on Visnu plucked from his head ‘ F
air and also a white hair and threw th oe
ao oe he said that the black hair ail | wz
boa and be born as Krsna while the whit se
enter Rohini and be born as Bal bh he
ccordingly Krsna became of the colour of i ae
(black) and Balabhadra white in colour. (A C_
Chapter 199, Verse 31). oa! ae
8) The incidents during the child | tK
(1) Pittanamoksa t Salvation gy egg a
Raksasi and one of the assassins deputed b Kare -
search out and kill Krsna, went to Keen © lou
con as a Gopa woman and fed him on ae arin
aL e in extracted her life also with her son
foe she assumed her original form and fell down
(2) Sakatasura killed. Karnsa
called Sakata to kill cag eh te haa
sleeping Krsna in the form of a cart mae rai 4d ae
oe re jumped awake and kicked the al oe
os et ae (See under Sakata). into
rndvartasura. ‘Trna eS
FP dere of Karnsa went ro Amibaat . a pee
oy e) manner, Yasoda was then breasifecd :
chi rsna, and the child appeared to gr ah ‘lle
Ween - pe a tried to lay the ghild on
, but had to lay him . :
heavy for her to Hive to le bel 4 ai ; “Th 109
varta, in the form of a whirl-wind, rose up - th eal
carrying Krsna along with him. Ambadi (G ae
was chokingly filled with clouds of dust ; the Ce ea
ee or But, Sri Krsna clasped round the oe
fe a rested, and on account of the child’s wails
‘ie aa 4 any more. The child Hapdbned,
pardban und the Asura’s throat and he got killed its
with a thud on a rock. Yagoda “i _and
took the child in her hands and covered i a hurriedly
(See under Trndvarta). it with kisses.
(4) Naming. During this
eae visited Ride at Eee be se ees
sae gt Devaki of the actual facts relating to
rat as > es of Rohini was brought there, and the
lat ne a “i Rama, and Yagoda’s child Krsna
e 2 oo ie en pep Rama and Krsna grew
be Comet as the apple of the people’s eyes. (See
(5) All the worlds in Krsna’s mouth. ‘The ka
saw Krsna eating mud and informed oe peas ‘Ben
she, in great anger, opened the child’s mouth to look
for the sand when she saw there all the worlds includi
herself and she closed her eyes in great alee
(Bhagavata 10th Skandha) .

KRSNA
na drags Ulikhala. (Mortar). YaSoda_ was once
eee Krsna when she noticed milk flowing
out of the boiling pan, andshe put the child on the
floor and went to attend to the boiling milk. Angry at
this Krsna broke the milk-pot by throwing a stone at
it. Yagoda then tried to bind the child to the mortar
with a cord. But, any number of cords could not
reach round the child’s waist. At this trouble of his
mother Krsna decided to oblige her and then the first
cord itself sufficed to bind him round the mortar. But,
Krsna then began running, dragging the mortar
behind him. Dragging the Ulakhala behind him he
passed through a narrow gap between two trees. The
trees were shaken and at once the trees rose up in the
sky as two Devas. The two trees were actually
Nalakiibara and Manigriva, the sons of Vaisravana,
both of whom had been cursed into the form of trees
by Narada. (See under Nalakibara).
(7) Vatsdsura killed. Sri Krsna and Balabhadrarama
were one day, engaged in sports along with the Gopalas
on the banks of river Kalindi. At that time an Asura
sent by Karhsa got into the ranks of the ‘cows disguised
as a cow. Sri Krsna understood it ; Balabhadra also
pointed out the new ‘cow’ to him. Then Krsna _leisurely went towards the herd of cattle, lifted the new ‘cow’
by its legs and tail and dashed jt against a peepal
tree. The peepal tree and the one next to it were
broken, and thus ended the life of Vatsasura,
(8) Baka killed. On another occasion Karhsa deputed
Bakasura, brother of Piitana to kill Krsna. He assumed
the form of a bird, and lay there on the road with his
fierce mouth wide open. The Gopalas were terrorstricken. But, Krsna entered the cave-like mouth of the
bird leaving his companions behind. The Asura
closed his mouth, and the Gopalas cried out in fear
and agony. But, Sri Krsna stirred
within Baka’s stomach and he was
died. (See under Baka).
(9) Killed Aghasura, Aghdasura,
oer deputed by Karnsa to kil
orm of a serpent and with its mouth
cave lay on the road used by the Gopal The cal
that emanated from its mouth vitiated the atmosphere
The Gopalas including Krsna and Balabhadra eiitered
the serpent’s mouth, and immediately its entire bod
shook and it vomited blood. Life escaped through 2
broken stomach. The Gopalas came out of it ae fi I
down unconscious. But, at the very sight of Krsna the
regained consciousness, (See under Agha), a
(10) at i in ridiculous situation.
occasion Brahma saw Mahavisnu, in th
ofman, playing on the banks of the Rall ae =
Balabhadra and his companions. To test whepae CG d
possessed powers in the assumed form of man "
Brahma carried away the cattle of the Gopalas The
Gopalas were naturally upset at the disappearance f
their cows. After consoling them Krsn :
the cattle on the heights of mount Gova
the forest. But, the cattle were to be
and when Krsna returned to the banks
the Gopdlas too had disappeared. Divining the reason
for the whole affair by his divine Powers, Krsna created
both the Gopalas and the cows with his divine powers.
brother of Baka and
I Krsna assumed the
On another
rdhana and in
found nowhere,
of the Kalind;
round and round |
KRSNA
One year passed by thus, and one day Krsna and _ his
companions with their cattle went to the top a
Govardhana. Brahma was alarmed to find Krsna with
the artificially created Gopalas and the' cattle, and
while he was looking at them the colour of all of them
began changing and within minutes they put on the
form of Visnu. Moreover, he saw another Brahma and
Brahmaloka. Upset and alarmed by the whole
phenomenon he sang the praises of Mahavisnu at which
his illusion was lifted and he saw the actual Krsna, the
Gopalas and the cattle.
(11) Dhenukdsura killed. There lived in the Kadali forest
on the banks of the Kalindi an Asura called Dhenuka
with his followers. The forest was thick with palm trees.
Out of fear of the Asura nobody dared to travel in the
forest. Sri Krsna and Balabhadra having heard the
story about Dhenuka one day went to the forest with
their companions. Balabhadra shook down a lot of the
palm fruits , the Gopdlas loudly cheered him. The
Asura rushed forth challenging them when Krsna and
Balabhadra thrashed him to death.
(12) Suppressed Kaliya. There lived in K4lindi a fierce
serpent called Kaliya with his: wife andrelations. The
trees on the banks of the river were withered and had
dried up on account of the poisonous breath emitted by
the serpent. One day the Gopilas and their cattle drank
water in the Kalindi and fell down dead. Then Krsna
climbed a tree on the banks of the river and jumped
into its waters and Kaliya rushed forward to him with
his hoods spread out. Krsna stepped on the hoods and
danced thereon, Kaliya vomited blood, got exhausted
and prayed to Krsna for mercy. At the instance 0
Krsna the serpent with. its family emigrated to the
Ramanaka island. (See under Kaliya).
(13) Krsna swallows jire. When Krsna came out of the
waters after having suppressed Kaliya and taking with
him the gem presented by Kaliya, the Gopalas covere
Krsna with embraces, People of Ambadi came to the
banks of the Kalindi looking out for the children. As the
sun had set by now the Yadavas spent the night there,
when a wild fire enveloped them, and they cried out
to Krsna. Krsna swallowed the entire fire. (Bhagavata,
10th Skandha)
(14) Killed Pralamba. While the Gopalas were playing
Once under the shade of a giant peepal tree called
Bhandiraka an Asura known as Pralamba joined their
Sames disguised as a Gopala. Krsna and Balabhadra
understood the trick, They made all the others take
the following pledge, i.e. that all of them would beat
: : , Pralamba rose uP
to the skies with Balabhadra, who broke the former’s
a Anat Talamba felldown dead in his actual for™
(15) Again in wild fire.
caugh The Gopalas were once again
7 Wild fire at the Mufija forest o, the banks 0
went to the, They cried out in great fear when Krsna
a in standing wit
swallowed the
r. Fhe Gopalas were aston-

KRSNA
ished to find themselves safe when they opened their
eyes. (Bhagavata, 10th Skandha).
(16) Blessed the wives of Brahmins. Krsna and his companions one day travelled along way along the banks
of the Kalindi. They felt very hungry and Krsna advised them to request for food at brahmin houses. They
begged for food the wives of brahmins, and the
wives happy at Krsna’s presence there, came with food.
Krsna blessed them. (Bhagavata, 10th Skandha),
(17) Theft.of clothes. Krsna once picked up the clothes
of the Gopa women who were bathing in the Kalindi and
climbed to the top of a tree with the clothes and played on his flute. The Gopa women came out of the river
and saluted Krsna with folded hands. He then returned
the clothes to them. (Bhagavata, 10th Skandha).
(18) Mount Govardhana used as Umbrella. Indra is the
rain-God. The people of Ambadi used to perform yajfia
every year in favour of Indra for rain-fall. Krsna opposed the custom saying that Mount Govardhana was the
house-hold deity of the people of Ambadi and it was
enough for them to worship the mountain. The people
of AmbAadi, therefore, offered the Yajfia they had arranged that year for Indra to Govardhana. | Angered at
this Indra let loose heavy rains on Ambadi. Krsna uprooted and held Mount Govardhana like an umbrella
lest the people should suffer from the heavy rains, and wer
took shelter under it. The rain did not stop even er
seven days. Yet, due to Krgna’s kindness _ the pean 41
not suffer any hardships. Beaten at his own game, f the
sang the praises of Krsna. Devasurabhi Se et ~“
Devas) came and saluted Krsna and anointe i.
the Indra of the Gopalas. The Devas aplncate _
‘Govinda’ meaning, he who protects the cattle. (Bhag
vata, 10th Skandha). :;
sacs 10h Sand by Varga, Once, afer vin
observed Ekadagivrata Nanda bathed int fe ae
indi. At the instance of Varuna a Deva eA ba di were
took him tq the abode of bisahe aaa I s Krsna
distressed at the disappearance of : a. ig oe up at
and Balabhadra dived into the Kalina me OT chead
Varunalaya. Varuna told fs ee in person, and
Nandagopa so that ee M nwhile the people of
requested to be pardoned. “ae ll the worlds reflectAmbadi, who came to K4lindi saw a Ambadi with
ed init. Krsna and Ramé ae 10th Skandha) -
their father ‘Nandagopa. (haga a he melody
5) t of the spring the m
(20) Rasakrida. At Ene a Gopa women love-lorn.
of Krgna’s flute rendered 1 5° fiute, and all ts
He went to Vrndavane me and unmarried followed
See at an an attempt to send them bac
him. Krsna made 4 '
to their houses. But, the
Suddenly Krsna i.
Gopa women mad Wit’ '
na Fath Radha calling ‘ O Krsna - pi ce d the waters
Krsna appeared belofe we af d them. Sri Krsna
of the Kolindi with them and - world (Bhagavata,
thus explained Bhaktiyog4 ' 7 G
the Gopas
(Ol) *? “thon * allowed Nandago? a | ee Devi forest,
a Maheévara paja (worstl, to sleep on the
performe the night without go1D8 chews pera
ig ey tind hon from some s tried their
banks of oie dagopa. Though the Co aagOpt
ese tin ooo did not loosen its SUP
es
love .
red from among them, an | the
love roamed about
EEE OO
KRSNA
Then Krsna gave ita kick and the snake transformed
itself into a Deva called Sudargana. He was a Vidyadhara, who had been converted into a python by the
curse of sage Angiras. (See under Sudarsana).
(22) Killed Aristasura. (Vrsdsura). During this period
Aristasura, a follower of _Kamsa, came to Ambadi disguised as an ox, and people got terror-stricken at the
sight of the fierce ox. Krsna engaged himself in a duel
with the ox (Arista) and killed it. (See under Arista).
(23) Killed Kesi. Karhsa then sent an Asura called Kesi
to Ambadi. He approached Krsna in the guise ofa
horse into whose mouth the latter thrust his hand, which
began growing in size with the result that the Asura
vomited blood and expired ; Krsna got the name
Keégava as he killed Kesi. (Bhagavata, 10th Skandha).
(24) Killed Vyomasura. Wyomasura, son of Mayasura
was the last of the Asuras deputed by Karsa to kill
Krsna. He joined the company of the Gopas disguised
asa goat. Krsna dragged him into a cave and killed
him there. (Bhagavata 10th Skandha).
9) Sri Krsna quits Ambadi. When all the attempts of
Karhsa to do away with Krsna failed he resorted to
another trick. Karhsa invited Sri Krsna and Balabhadra,
feigning great affection, to witness the dhanur yajfia
(worshipping the bow) being held at Mathurapuri, the
capital of the country. The invitation was sent through
Akrira, a great devotee of Krsna. He went to Ambadi
with a chariot and delivered to Krsnaand Balabhadra
Karhsa’s invitation to them for the fourteen days’ dhanur
yajiia. The Gopas and Gopis shed tears at the prospect
of Krsna leaving Ambadi. But, Krsna and Balabhadra
took leave of them and started for. Mathurapuri in the
chariot brought by Akrira. On their way to Mathura
they bathed in the Kalindi and when they dived in its
waters Akrara saw the Visvaripa (Cosmic form of
Krsna). After the bath they continued their journey
when Akrara informed Krsna in secret, about all the
evil tactics of Karnsa and requested him to kill the
latter. (Bhagavata, 10th Skandha).
10). Rama and Krsna in Mathurapuri.
(1) Rajakavadha (the washerman is slain). Rama and
Krsna duly reached Mathurapuri, and in the evening
they went out for a stroll in the city to view its beauties
when they saw a washerman carrying the washed clothes
of Karmsa. They asked him for some of the clothes but
the washerman not only refused them the clothes but
also ridiculed them calling them cattle-breeders. Sri
Krsna thrashed the washerman on the spot and distributed the clothes among the children who had gathered there, himself wearing a yellow cloth from the stock
and giving a blue one to Balabhadra.
(2) Kaficukakara (iailor) gaven salvation. Next, they
caw a tailor who used to stitch shirts, turbans etc. for
Karnsa. He presented costly shirts and turbans to Rama
and Krsna. Krsna gave him salvation and distributed
the clothes to the Gopas with him.
(3) Sudaman presents garlands. ‘Then Krsna and Rama
‘ntered the house of Sudaman who gave them each a
garland. Krsna blessed him.
(4) Straightened the hunch-back Trivakréa. Rama and
Krsna continued their walk when they saw a female
hunch-back coming opposite to them with a beautiful
vessel filled with angaraga (fragrant things like sandal-

KRSNA
wood, musk etc. reduced into a paste to be smeared on
the body). She told them that she was the maid-inattendance of Karhsa ; her name was Trivakra and the
angaraga in the vessel was for the use of Karhsa. She
felt pure love for Krsna and gave him the angaraga
along with the vessel. Rama and Krsna smeared their
bodies with it. Krsna stepped on her feet and with his
right hand raised her chin upwards and she was cured
of her hunch. Her love for Krsna knew no bounds and
she begged him to spend the night in her house. Krsna
promised to oblige her on another occasion and continued the walk.
(5) Krsna broke the bow. Rama and Krsna continued
their walk into the Yajfia hall of Katnsa. A big bow
was seen there, and Krsna broke it with his left hand
before the guards could approach him. With the broken
pieces of the bow he killed the soldiers sent by Kathsa to
take him and Rama into custody. They again continued
their walk. The sun set, and though they lay down to
sleep thoughts about the underhand dealings of Karnsa
kept them sleepless, |
(6) Krsna killed the fierce elephant. That night Krsna
dreamt many an inauspicious dream. The next morning
Karhsa set up an arena for pugilistic combats. Yadava
chiefs like Nandagopa, many other important persons in
Mathura and Kamhsa took their seats on the dais. Famous
pugilists like Canira, Mustika, Kita, Sala and Kosala
also entered the scene. Kathsa had stationed a fierce
elephant called Kuvalayapida on the way Rama and
Krsna had to take to enter the arena for pugilistic
competition. The mahout prompted the elephant to
catch hold of Krsna, and in the fight that ensued with
the animal Krsna killed it and Save one tusk of it to
ama. Krsna beat the mahout also to death with the
tusk. After this they entered the scene.
(7) Kamsa killed. The pugilistic competition started,
Caniira fought against Krsna and Mustika a ainst
Rama and both Caniira and Mustika were killed. Rama
: Karhsa, burning with an
rom his seat Toaring, “‘Annihilate the Gopilas, kill
Nandgopa, drown U i
: , srasena, the friend of oy i
in the Kalind? ec » the r enemies,
: from pri :
sena was crowned King of Mathura, pena. Upra
(8) Farewell to the people of Ambadi.
saluted Nandagopa and Yagodi, and e
their clothes and bows for safe Custody. Then sa in
that they would return after strengthening the Vode
dynasty, Rama and Krsna sent their Parents and the
other Gopas home. (Bhagavata, 10th Skandha),
11) Education of Rama and Krsna.
(1) After bidding adieu to the people of Ambadi, Vasudeva, on the advice of sage Garga sent Rama and
Krsna for their studies to the Agrama of the great sage
Sandipani. During their education at the Aérama Krsna
Rama and Krsna
htrusted to them
KRSNA
and Kucela became intimate friends. One day, at the instance of the wife of their preceptor, Krsna and Kucela
went into the forest to gather firewood. In the heavy
rain and storm that followed they lost their track and
wandered about in the forest. The next day the preceptor brought them back from the forest. Krsna learned
the sixty-four arts and dhanurveda (science of archery )
at the feet of Sandipani. (Bharata, Southern Text,
Page 802 ; Sabha Parva, Chapter 38). ;
(2) Gurudaksinad (Preceptor’s Jees). When Rama and
Krsna completed their studies they asked the preceptor as to what he wanted by way of tuition fee, and
the guru wanted to gét back his son, who was, years
ago, drowned in Prabhasa | tirtha. Accordingly
Rama and Krsna went in their chariot to Varuna at the
sea coast. Varuna told them that it was the Asura
called Paficajana, who lived in the sea in the form of
a conch, who had killed their preceptor’s son. 5rl
Krsna entered the sea and killed the Asura. But, the
child was not to be seen inside the conch. Blowing
this conch, which in later years became famous as
Paficajanya, Rama and Krsna went.to Yama’s abode,
who on being told about the object of their visit returned the child to Rama and Krsna, They presented the
child to their preceptor. He blessed them and they
returned to Mathurapuri.
12) Upto Krsna’s return to Doaraka.
(1) Message through Uddhava. Rama and Krsna who
returned to Matburapuri after their studies at Sandipani’s ASrama thought about the people of Ambadl.
It was a long time since they had heard about them. So
Krsna sent a massage to Ambadi by his minister Uddhava. After duly delivering the message
Uddhava stayed at Ambadi four or five months after
which he returned to Mathura with the presents given
to Krsna by Nandagopa, Yaoda and the other Gopas.
(2) Vistted Trivakrg. Krsna had promised to visit the
house of Trivakra at the time he cured her of hef
hunch, and she had been for long awaiting Krsna. But
only now he got the opportunity to fulfil his promise.
He accepted her hospitality at her house and thus
ended her grief.
(3) Interested himself in the Pandavas. By this time
Pandu had died. The Pandavas and Kunti, sister 0
Krsna’s father were living at Hastinapura along with
the Kauravas. They were victims to al] sorts of miseries:
Hearing about the sad plight of the Pandavas Krsna
deputed Akrira to Hastinapura to enquire about them:
untidevi, With tears in her eyes, told Akrara about
the injustice being done against the Pandavas by the
auravas and the continuous attempts being made to kill
Bhima. Akrira visited important persons like Vidura>
Dhrtarastra etc, Akriira exhorted Dhrtarastra, who ha¢
eocceded Pandu as King, to mete out equal justice 0
auravas as well as to the Pandavas. Akrira returne'
to Mathura and gavea report to Krsna about his visit
to the Pandavas. es
(4) The Jarésandha war. Asti and Prapti, wives of
amsa complained about the killing of their husband
by Krsna to their father Jarasandha, King of MagadhaJarasandha, aided b Kings as Salva;
alinga, Cediraja, Dantavaktra and §i< upala besiege
“3 athurapuri with a big army. Yadava ieaders like
met i ealabhadra, Uddhava, Akrira and Krtavarma?
the enemies in battle in which many kings g°¢

KRSNA
killed. Balabhadra met Jarasandha in duel, but let him
off on the request of Krsna. But, Jarasandha, supported
by Banadsura.and others besieged Mathura again and
again. When Balabhadra attempted to kill Jarasandha,
a celestial voice declared that it was not possible for —
the former to kill Jarasandha, and the war, therefore,
ended for the time being.
(5) Krsna and Balabhadra meet Parasurama. The continuous war with Jarasandha reduced the financial resources of the Yadavas and to replenish their treasury
ri Krsna and Balabhadra started for mount Gomantaka
the repository of gems and on their way they saw
Paragurama engaged in penance under a peepal tree.
Paragurama told them that there was a kingdom at_the
foot of the Gomantaka called Karavira ruled by King
Srgalavasudeva and advised them to kill him and collect
enough money and gems. Krsna and Balabhadra did
so and reached Pravarsanagiri with money and gems so
collected. There Garuda brought back to Krsna his
crown which had been, sometime back, stolen away by
Banadsura. Krsna and Rama returned to Mathurapur.
Since Srgalavasudeva had been killed by Krsna and
Rama, Jarasandha attacked Mathurapuri again, for the
eighteenth time. Though during all the wars Jarasandha
was defeated, by that time the Yadava power had been
weakened much and so Krsna ultimately decided to
leave Mathura and found another kingdom somewhere
else. Krsna had two reasons to come to this decision.
Firstly, Jarasandha was the father-in-law of his uncle
Karnsa. Next, it was Jarasandha’s object to conquer
Mathurapuri for Karhsa’s sons. Taking into Oeste
tion the above two objects of Jarasandha, ore aul :
Rama voluntarily quitted Mathura with the =, ee
and went and lived in the city built for them by Visva
karman onan island called Dvaraka in the vee sea.
(See under Kufasthali). (Bhagavata, 10th Skan a 5
13) Krsna killed Kalayavana. King Kalayavana wante
to conquer Mathurapuri for. ‘dona Poe cay eae i
iva the Doon
penance and secured from fe to kill him. Krsna ha
Te Yadavas would be ‘ dejected by th
shifted to Dvaraka, somewhat aqjee™’
that Kalayavana could not Be killed because of the
protection accorded by Siva’s boon. Ki
Another thing also happened ~ at this Ve Seat Of
Mucukunda, son of Mandhata had om d the Asuras in
Indra gone to Devaloka and defeate rd for this
war. Indra asked him !0 Ee aot a place
service and Mucukunda wanted to f r a long time.
for him to sleep as he had not slep ; ee on earth and
Indra, accordingly showed him 4. sleep would be
told him that he who disturbed De eons went to
reduced to ashes by his very look, Muc
sleep in that cave.
Kalayayana approach
latter, pretending to
to kill him and the
r of Kalayavana, oe)
entere
before him. Kalayavana followed Krea, wie followed
the cave where Mucukunda was sleeping a. mistaking
rsna into the cave also. Kalay ee ’ whereupon
Mucukunda for Krsna, kicked ae S a Kalayavana,
he jumped up from sleep and looke eared before
who was reduced to ashes. hen Krsna ape advice of
qd the former. On tis an
nce at Badarikasrama
ta, 10th Skandha) .
ed Krsna
be. in fea
Mucukunda. who praise
Krsna he performed pena
attained salvation. (Bhagav@
ee ”~l
KRSNA I
14) Sri Krsna escaped from fire. Balabhadra and Krsna
started for Dvaraka carrying all the riches of Kalayavana. They met Jarasandha on their way and took to
their heels. Jarasandha followed them to the heights of
Mount Pravarsana where they disappeared. Jarasandha
set fire to the four sides of the mountain when Rama
and Krsna escaped secretly from the fire to Dvaraka.
Jarasandha returned to Magadha believing that both
his antagonists were burned to death. (Bhagavata, 10th
Skandha). =u
15) Wedding of Rama and_Krsna.
(1) Balabhadra-Revatit. Balabhadra married Revati,
daughter of King Anarta of KuSasthali, former name
of Dvaraka.
(2) Krsna-Rukmini. King Bhismaka of Vidarbha had
five sons the eldest of whom was Rukmi. His sixth
child was a daughter and she was named Rukmini.
Stories about Krsna kindled in Rukmini love for him.
Rukmi, who hated Krsna, wanted to give his sister in
marriage to Sisupala. Rukmini sent through a brahmin
amessage about the affair to Dvaraka. On the day of
- Rukmini’s Svayamvara Rama and Krsna also went to
Kundinapuri, capital of Vidarbha. and Krsna. in the
presence of all Kings, carried Rukmini away in his
chariot. The Kings who, under the leadership of
Rukmi, attacked Krsna were routed. A son called
Pradyumna was born to Krsna by Rukmini. (See under
Pradyumna).
(3) Krsna-Fambavati. Prasena, brother of the Yadava
King Satrajit, went ahunting wearing on him the gem
called Syamantaka presented to the latter by the Sungod, Jambavan_ saw a lion carrying off the gem after
killing Prasena. He killed the lion, recovered the gem
from it and gave it to his children to play with. A
rumour. was spread that it was Krsna who had killed
and stolen the gem. Krsna searched for the gem in the
forest and found it out inthe cave of Jambavan. In
the duel that ensued between Jambavan and Krsna
the former was defeated. He recognised Krsna to be
the Lord, and presented Syamantaka and _ also his
daughter Jambavati to Krsna and Jambavati thus
became Krsna’s wife. (See under Syamantaka).
(4) Sri Krsna-Satyabhama., Sri Krsna returned Syamantaka to Satrajit and he, in return, gave his daughter
Satyabhama in marriage to Krsna. Though Syamantaka was given to Krsna by way of dowry he did not
accept it. (Bhagavata, 10th Skandha).
(5) Sri Krsna-Kalindt. The happy news that the Pandavas had escaped from the lac palace and were living at
Khandavaprastha took some time to reach Krsna, who
had been pained to, know that they were burned to
death in the palace. Assoon as Krsna knew that the
Pandavas were safe at Khandavaprastha he went to
them along with Yadava chiefs like Satyaki and others.
It was then that the fire-god Vahni, requested Arjuna
for the Khandava forest for his food and Arjuna consented to it. It was Krsna who drove Arjuna’s chariot
‘n his fight with Indra at the burning of the forest by
Agnideva. (See under Khandavadaha). Arjuna saved
Maya from the Khandava fire and Maya, in return for
the kindness, built a palace for the Pandavas at Indraprastha. Krsna also lived there for a few days. One
day while Krsna was strolling on the banks of the
Kilindi in the company of Arjuna they saw a woman,
who told them that her name was Kalindi and that

KRSNA I
she would marry none but Krsna. Krsna then took her
as his wife. (See under K4lindi). After staying at
Indraprastha for three or four months Krsna returned
to Dvaraka with K4lindi. (Bhagavata, 10th Skandha),
(6) Sri Krsna-Mitravinda. The King of Avanti had
married Rajadhidevi, sister of Krsna’s father and they
had two sons called Vinda and Anuvinda and a
daughter Mitravinda, who had fixed in her mind
Krsna as her husband. Krsna, who was present at her
Svayarnvara carried her off on his chariot to Dvaraka.
(7) Sri Krsna-Satya. King Nagnajit of Kosala, father of
Satya, had seven oxen like elephants in strength. The
King proclaimed that his daughter would be married
to the person who would tie down the oxen. Various
Kings attempted the task but failed. Ultimately
Arjuna and Krsna went to Kosala and Krsna assumed
seven forms and tied down the oxen with cords. The
seven oxen at once fell down. Krsna took Satya for his
wife.
(8) Sri Krsna-Kaikeyi (Bhadra). Krsna married
Kaikeyi, the daughter of Srutakirti, sister of Krsna’s
father.
(9) Sri Krsna-Laksmana. Laksmana, daughter of King
of Madra_ chose Krsna at her Svayamvara and she
became Krsna’s wife.
(10) Arsna-16000 women, Brahma had given the boon
to the 16000 daughters of Narakasura in their previous
birth that Visnu would marry them in their next birth.
While even the Devas were suffering on account of
Narakasura, Sri Krsna along with Satyabhama mounted
Garuda, went to Pragjyotisa, the kingdom of
them to Dvaraka, assumed the guise of 16000 men and
married those 16000 girls, He builta palace for each
of his 16000 wives. (For details see under N arakasura)
16) Krsna’s 16008 wives. The eight women, i.e,
Rukmini, Jambavati, Satyabhama, Kalindi, Mitravinda, Satya, Kaikeyi (Bhadra) Laksmana and the 16000
daughters of Narakdsura constituted Krsna’s harem,
(The 16000 daughters of Narakasura are not mentioned
by namein the Puran s). (S a
ae ae nas). (See under Sudatta and
18) Fight between Krsna and Arjuna. ( Ga
19) Killed Murasura. (See urelec ce a any
20) Killed Narakasura. (See under Naraka),
21) Plucked away Périjata. During the period whe
Narakdsura was having his own ways on the earth atid
when he took away by force Indra’s royal umbrella
and the ear-rings of Aditi, the Devamata, Indra soy ht
Krsna’s help to suppress the Asura, Krsna along with
Satyabhama, mounted Garuda, went and killed the
Asura and restored the royal umbrella to Indra and
the ear-rings to Aditi. On their way back home
—_— Krsna,
as desired by Satyabhamé, plucked by its roots the
Parijata from Devaloka at which Indra fought Krsna,
but got defeated. The Parijata was brought to Dvaraka
and planted in front of Satyabhama’s Palace. It jg
Stated that Parijata was thus brought and planted by
KRSNA I_
Krsna to alleviate the grief caused to Satyabhama by
the return by Krsna of Syamantaka to Satrajit.
(Bhagavata, 10th Skandha) .
22) irsna’s sons and grand-children. Ten sons were born
to each of the eight chief wives—from Rukmini to
Laksmani—of Krsna. Names of the chief among
those eighty sons are given below.
(1) Of Rukmini—Pradyumna, Carudeksna, Sudeksna,
Carudeha, Sucaru, Carugupta, Bhadracdru, Carucandra, Aticaru, Caru.
(2) Of Faémbavati—Samba, Sumitra. ;
(3) Of Satyabhama — Bhanu, Subhanu, Svarbhanu,
Prabhanu, Bhanuman, Candrabhanu, Brhadbhanu,
Havirbhanu, Sribhanu, Pratibhanu.
(4) Of Kalindi—Sruta.
(5) Of Mitravinda—Vrkaharhsa.
(6) Of Satya—Bhanucandra.
(4) OF Bhadra—Sangramacitta.
(8) Of Laksmanéd—Praghosa. ;
A daughter called Rukm§avati was born to Rukmi,
brother of Rukmini. Pradyumna married Rukmiavati
and Aniruddha was their son. It was this Aniruddha,
who wedded Usa. Carumati, the daughter of Rukmim
was married by the son of Krtavarman. (Bhagavata,
10th Skandha) .
23) Krsna tested Rukmint While Sri Krsna was once
having a chat with Rukmini he wanted to test her
love for him. So he told her that he was penniless an
helpless and was hiding from his enemies there at
Dvaraka and that he would onlybe really glad if she
married some other powerful King. Krsna had not
completed his sentences when Rukmini fell down
unconscious. Krsna then consoled her. (Bhagavata,
10th Skandha).
24) Krsna fought with Bana. See under Bana
25) Krsna killed Paundraka. See under Paundraka.
Nrga given salvation. See under Nrga.
27) Srikrsna blessed Paticali at the time of her Svayamvara
(See under Paficali) .
28) Subhadré given in marriage to Arjuna, Arjuna had
to go on a pilgrimage for one year as atonement 10F
having got into the palace where Yudhisthira was
spending the days with Paficali. It was during this
period of his pilgrimage that Arjuna married Subhadra;
who was the younger sister of Krsna due to whose
cleverness alone Arjuna got her as his wife. (For
Ctails see under Subhadra
9) Krsna got the club called Kaumodaki and he saved May:
See under Khandavadaha.
30) Krsna with the Pandavas. The rest of Krsna’s
life was intimately connected with the history of the
andavas. Important roles played by Krsna durin
the period up to the great war, are summarised belowL) He conducted Yajfia continuously for many years
for the protection of Dharma (righteousness). (Sabh@
os Chapter 8, Verse 16),
2) Permitted Yudhisthira to
yajia. (Chapter 14, Sabha Parva, MB)
(3) Along with Bhima and Arjuna, he went t0
athura in the guise of a brahmi illed JaraSandha. (See under Jarasandha), aE ee Eb
(4) He Crowned Sahadeva SO - 5
I 5 ? n of s dha, a
rie of Mathura. (Sabha Parva, Gigi: 04, Vers 243) -
€ gave a lot of Money as donation at. the
Rajasuy4
—e

KRSNA I
Rajasiiya Yajfia of Yudhisthira, (Sabha Parva, Chapter
(6) He was presented with ear-rings by Bhiimidevi
(goddess Earth). (Sabha Parva, Page 808, Southern
CGA
(7) Me killed Sigupala. (See under Sigupala).
(8) He made the clothes of Paficali unending when
Duryodhana tried to strip her naked in the royal
assembly. (See under Paijicali) .
(9) He fought Salva and Saubha. (See under Salva
and Saubha). '
(10) He once took Subhadra and Arjuna to Dvaraka.
(Vana Parva, Chapter 22; Verses 47, 43). :
(11) He consoled the Pandavas at the Kamyaka
forest. (Vana Parva, Chapter 183, Verse 16). .
(12) He ate the bit of a leaf of greens from Paricalt’s
vessel and was pleased with her. (See under Pafical!)
(13) Attended the wedding of Abhimanyu at
Upaplavyanagara and gave a lot of money t ‘Dharmaputra. (Virata Parva, Chapter 72, Verse 24).
(14) He sent to the court of King Virata a messenger,
who explained to him the corrupt ways of the
Kauravas and the righteousness of the Pandavas.
Udyoga Parva, Chapter 1).
31) Tested by Worada. | Narada wanted to know ae
Krsna managed to satisfy all his 16008 i or
this purpose he visited their houses and Narada. was
wonder-struck to find Krsna engaged _
with his wives in all the houses he visited. (Bhagavata,
10th Skandha). te
32) Krona blessed Kucela. See under Kuce a undies
33) The story of Santdnagopalam. See para 7 (
Arjuna.
The Kauravas refused to part
34) Krsna feigned sleep. \
i half fg kingdom to the Pandavas, ar ae
returned from their exile in the forest. DO
; t to
sides began preparations for war. Duryodhana went |
Py . ms im
Dvaraka to invite Krsna to his side, and Sines,
at a distance Krsna feigned sleep and lay ao ‘i
ae he head of Krsna
Duryodhana occupied a stool at ¢
bed. Arjuna, who also ne oe tt a "Arjuna
with folded hands at Krsna’s feet. 3 odhana
whom Krsna first saw on waking up- ¥ frst. Krsna
told him that it was he who ad. come Sa ah
was in a fix, and he had to promise e side and his
sides. He promised his entire army to Wels
personal help, himself without any WES’ make his
ked to
to the other side, and Arjuna was an Huryodhana.
r
choice first as he was at ae and Duryodhana
Arjuna chose Krena aihow qd to act as Arjuna’s
with his infantry. Krsna agree
charioteer. ‘i bly. Dharmayava assembly.
35} As messenger of tn be at means to avoid war
na
puira requested Krst o Dhrt
somehow or other and Krsna s came out of it. Ultamastra through Safpye a iG viet the Kauravas for which
tc ‘mself decided t0 ¥™ *< chariot wit
a ae wen first to Dvaraxa - ie ith aang 3
Satvaki. On his way Kreme Hastinapura
great sage. -
where he visited and consoled
had his supper 4 '
os Me ate eoutt and strongy P ridiculed him
se But Duryodhana and oun é-; Krsna at
eae veripted to take him captive. rt,
ee NI''~F ll
in conversation _
KRSNA I
once exhibited his Visva-ripa (Cosmic form). The
Kauravas were frightened to witness Brahma on
Krsna’s forehead, Siva on his chest, Aditya-VasuRudras in his mouth etc. Sri Krsna granted the blind
Dhrtarastra divine eyes to see this Visvaripa and he
sang the praise of Krsna. Krsna returned to the
Pandavas after advising Karna to fight on the Pandava
side in the impending war. ( Udyoga Parva).
36) Krsna in the greatwar. The parts Krsna played
during the Kuru-Pandava war are briefly given below.
(1) The Kaurava and the Pandava armies were gathered at Kuruksetra in full battle array and Arjuna, at
the sight of the thousands.of relations in the opposite
camp, became a prey to a great delusion and sat down.
Krsna then enthused him to fight by giving him
advice, which came later to be known as the great
Gita. The Gita contains the Sankhya, Yoga, the
characteristics of the wise people and the unwise, description about yajfias, greatness of knowledge, characteristics of Samkhya and niskamakarma, yogins,
jfianayoga etc. (Bhisma Parva, Chapters 26-42).
(2) At the commencement of the battle, Krsna blew
aloud his conch Paficajanya. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter
25, Verse 15).
(3) Krsna rushed forward with his Cakrayudha to
kill Bhisma, who then praised Krsna. (Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 65).
(4) He prompted Arjuna to kill Bhisma. (Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 106, Verse 33).
(5) He received on his chest the Vaisnavastra shot by
Bhagadatta against Arjuna. (Drona Parva, Chapter 29,
Verse 13).
6) Consoled Arjuna, who was lamenting over the
death of Abhimanyu. (Drona Parva, Chapter 72).
(7) Consoled Subhadra, who was sunk in sorrow at
the loss of her son. (Drona Parva, Chapter 77).
(8) Consoled the crying Paficali and Uttara. (Drona
Parva, Chapter 78).
(9) Took Arjuna ina dream to Siva and got Siva’s
blessing for him. (Drona Parva, Chapter 80).
(10) He looked after the horses in the battle-field.
Drona Parva, Chapter 100).
(11) Prompted Arjuna to kill Duryodhana. (Drona
Parva, Chapter 102). |
(12) Krsna created illusory darkness and prompted
Arjuna to kill Jayadratha. (See under Jayadratha) .
(13) He lifted the darkness after Jayadratha was killed
by Arjuna. (Drona Parva, Chapter 146).
(14) As it was notproper for Arjuna and Karna to be
fighting with each other at mid-night he deputed
Ghatotkaca to fight Karna. (Drona Parva, Chapter
(15) He consoled Dharmaputra, who was erieving
over the death of Ghatotkaca. (Drona Parva, Chapter
(16) He prompted Arjuna _ to kill Karna. (Karna
Parva, Chapter 60).
(17) Withdrew Arjuna from confrontation with Karna
on the pretext of attending to Dharmaputra, who had
been wounded. (Karna Parva, Chapter 64).
(18) A sudden dispute arose between Dharmaputra and
Arjuna, who drew his sword to kill the former. And
Krsna reconciled them by relating the story of Vyadha
and Kaugika (For the story see under Valaka).

KRSNA I | 428
suicide: Krsna
19) Arjuna got ready to commit
ee : h (Karna Parva,
dissuaded him from the attempt.
Chapter 70). ;
(20) Krsna again prompted Arjuna to kill Karna.
(21) In the fierce battle that ensued between Arjuna
and Karna, Krsna pressed down the platform of the
chariot when the latter shot the nagastra (the serpent
arrow). The arrow flew off with Arjuna’s crown.
(Karna Parva, Chapter 90).
(22) Arjuna killed Karna after which Krsna prompted
Dharmaputra to kill Salya. (Salya Parva, Chapter 7).
(23) Krsna prompted Bhima to kill Duryodhana in ‘an
illusory battle. (Salya Parva, Chapter 38).
(24) As requested by Yudhisthira Krsna left the
battle-field for Hastinapura and returned after consoling Dhrtarastra and Gandh ari. (Salya Parva,
Chapter 62).
(25) Krsna cursed Asvatthama who released arrows
against pregnant women, (See under ASvatthama).
(26) Asked Bhisma to instruct Yudhisthira on dharma
(righteousness) . (Santi Parva, Chapter 51).
(27) He granted the boon to Bhisma lying on the bed of
(28) He related to Arjuna the root meaning of his
various names. (Santi Parva, Chapter 34] ).
(29) He explained to sages and Bhiimidevi some profound doctrines about God and the world. (Anug4sana
Parva, Chapter 167),
(3 € 84ve permission to Bhisma to dj Anuéga
Parva, Chapter 167). te. (Anusasana
(31) Consoled Gangadevi who grieved over the death
of Bhisma. (Anugasana Parva, Chapter 168),
in the form of discussions between Siddhamaharsis and
asyapa. ( Asramavasika Parva, Chapter 1G),
en ee hag mais details aa therwie ae ee
self performed t . -
Par va) © obsequies of Abhimanyu, (ASvamedha
38) Killed Hamsadibhakas. See under Dibhaka
39) Krsna brought back Pariksit to life, Kr ;
went to Hastinapura. There Uttara, wife of Abie, again
delivered, but the child was born dead e oan,
of Asvatthama had hit her womb. Krsna cape a
dead child back to life on the request of Kunti oT ms
this child, who became later famous as Pariksit ( sg
medha Parva, Chapter 66). = eae
40) The evening of Krsna’s life,
(1) The curse of Gandhéri. Most of the heroes and
distinguished archers like Duryodhana had been killed
in the great war, and Gandhari overwhelmed with grief
and anger at the death of her sons lamented Over them
KRSNA I
loudly. She realised that Krsna was the cause of all
the destruction and cursed him as follows :—
“If I have gained any powers by my loyal and devout
service to my husband, O ! Krsna I curse you on the
strength of that power. Since you forsook relations like
the Kauravas and the Pandavas who quarrelled with
cach other, you also will have to witness the killing of
relations. Thirtysix years from today your relations,
ministers and sons will be killed, and you too will be
killed by a hunter in the forest. Your women-folk also
will cry as we women cry now.” (Stri Parva, Chapter
BF) i.
The curse of Gandhari that the Yadava dynasty would
be annihilated after thirtysix years was fulfilled. In the
thirtysixth year another curse also befell the dynasty
which contributed further to its annihilation.
(2) Curse of the sages. The sages Visvamitra, Kanva
and Narada came to Dvaraki once. Some Yadavas
brought Samba dressed as a pregnant woman before the
sages and asked them derisively what child, whether
male or female, would Samba give birth to. Angry at
this insult, the sages said that the ‘pregnant woman
who was told about the curse said that it was as it was
destined to be. Next day Samba delivered an jron rod.
The YAdavas filed it into powder and threw the
powder into the sea. Sri Krsna_ enforced prohibition of
liquors in Dvaraka with the object of avoiding any
untoward incidents in Dvaraka. It was declared that
those who produced liquor would be hanged to death
along with their families. (Mausala Parva, Chapter 1).-
(3) Evil omens. Signs of the destruction of the Yadavas
began appearing. Agents of Kala visited house after
people enjoying sleep, Sheep howled like jackals. Asses
were born from cows and cats from mules. Dogs cohabited with rats. The Cakrayudha ( Discus) given to
Krsna by Agnideva at the time of Khandavadaha disappeared into the sky while the Yadavas were looking
on. Thus symptoms of an all-round destruction were
witnessed.
(4) Destruction of the Yadavas. Sri Krsna, Balabhadra,
Uddhava and others were about to go on a pilgrimage:
and the Yadus, the Vrsnis and the Andhakas began
Manufacturing and drinking liquor. They also began to
ike arrow-like grass. The Yadavas fought with one
another and many were killed. Krsna got terribly angry
at the death of Satyaki, Pradyumna and others. He
plucked a handful of grass and it transformed itself into
him. Then all the people plucked up the grass which
turned into iron rods. They fought amongst themselves
with the iron rods and all of then: got killed.
(5) Death.of Rama aad Krsna. During this period Balabha Ta went and seated himself under a tree in deep
meditation, Krsna stood near him. Daruka and Babhru
also arrived there. Krsna deputed Daruka to Hastinapura to inform Arjuna about the annihilation of the
adava race. Then Krsna went to the
soled the women-folk there. When he told them that

KRSNA I
shed tears. Krsna then took leave of Vasudeva and
returned to Balabhadra. Krsna saw even at a distance
a white serpent coming out of Balabhadra’s mouth
and moving away to Patala through the sea. The serpent which was the soul of Balabhadra was duly received by the prominent Nagas in Patala. Krsna roamed
about the forest for some time and then lay down on
the ground immersed in Yoga with his feet raised up.
An Asura called Jara, who saw Krsna’s raised feet from
a distance mistook the same for a deer and shot it with
his arrows. Krsna expired at once and rose up in the
guise of Visnu to Vaikuntha. (Mausala Parva).
(6) Reason for Krsna’s foot being hit by arrow. Durvasas
once went to Dvaraka and enquired who was there to
put him up as a guest. Krsna invited him to his palace
and treated him as avery honoured guest. He began
creating trouble there by breaking vessels, eating only
very sparsely at times but eating all that he saw at
other times. Krsna and Rukmini put up with the
vagaries of the sage quite patiently. One day the sage
expressed a desire to taste pudding, and accordingly
Krsna and Rukmini cooked it and served it to the sage.
After tasting some pudding he asked Krsna to smear
his whole body with the balance of it and Krsna did so
except the bottom of his feet. The sage asked him why
he did not smear the nether surface of his feet with
the pudding to which Krsna humbly answered that he
did not like doing so. Durvasas smeared Rukmini’s
body with what remained of the pudding. He yoked
Rukmini to the chariot and rode off swiftly in It. On
the way he whipped Rukmini. Krsna ran after the
chariot so that he might be of service to the sage.
After he had gone some distance the sage jumped oe
of the chariot and ran through the forest. Ultimately
he turned round to Krsna and told him as follows :—
“Oh ! Krsna! I am pleased with your service. “
Rukmini have the first place among your wives. She w1
not be affected by old age. And, you will never |
with death by being hit at those parts of yout BOG?
which have been smeared with the pudding. ava the
When Krsna and Rukmini returned to a pe 1 oS Ge
vessels which Durvasas had broken were found -
sic “4-9 than of old. Their welfare
in a more glittering condition tha e died hit by
and happiness were also ie aoe nat hietect
the arrow of the hunter ont oo Baha bats “witht
as he had not smeared that yer Anugasana_ Parva,
pudding left over by Done to the effect that
Chapter 159), (‘There 3s apart Sit Rama had killed)
Jara, the hunter, was Bali (w ‘ liation for his former
reborn, and he killed Krspa int seat
death). |
(7) After Krsna’s cme
i) Ariuna came to VV
Mw cot “~— . on r the guIse of Narai th Krsna, 1 :
— Bg = a fine sphere. (Svargarohana Parva,
Chapter 5, Verses 24-26) «
(iii) Anointed queens a
-and some other wives O
pyre and ended their lives. (
7, Verses 73 and 74). ee
(iv) While Arjuna was leading
Krsna away from Dvaraka -
chem of the ways But tHe Wome”:
araka and cremated Krsna.
ini a ti
Rukmini and Jambava
* Krsna entered his funeral
Mausala Parva, Chapter
e remaining wives of
st-dwellers attacked
to escape from their
_ Dasarhasimha, Dasarhavira,
KRSNADVAIPAYANA
clutches, ran off and jumped into the river Sarasvati
and died in its waters. Their souls entered heaven
(Svargarohana Parva, Chapter 6, Verse 25).
(8) Names of Krsna.
(a) Used in Mahabharata. Acyuta, Adhideva, Adhoksaja, Adideva, Aja, Amadhya, Anadi, Anadimadhyaparyanta, Anadinidhana, Anadya, Ananta, Andhakavrsninatha, Asita, Atman, Avyakta, Avyaya, Bhojarajanyavardhana, SBhitesvara, Bhutapati, Bhitatman,
Bhitesa, Cakradhara, Cakradhari, Cakragadabhrt,
Gakragadadhara, Cakragadapani, Cakrapani, Cakrayudha, Dasarha, Dagarhabharta, Dasarhadhipati,
Dasarhakulavardhana, Dasarhanandana, Dasarhanatha,
Damodara, Devadeva,
Devadevesa, Devadevesvara, Devakinandana. Gadagraja, Garudadhvaja, Gopala, Gopendra, Gopijanapriya, Govinda, Haladharanuja, Hari, Hrsikesa, Janardana, KamsakeSsinisidana, Karhsanisidana, Kaustubhabhisana; Kesava, Kesiha, KeSihanta, KeSinisidana
KeSsisidana, Mahabahu, Pitavdasas, Ramanatha, Ramanuja Saivyasugrivavahana, Sambhu, Sankhacakragadadhara, Sankhacakragadahasta, Sankhacakragadapani,
Sankhacakrasipani, Sarngadhanurdhara, Sarngadhanva,
Sarngagadapani, Sarngagadasipani, Sarngi, Sauri,
Salabhrt, Sili, Sankarsananuja, Sarvadasarhaharta,
Sarvanagaripudhvaja, Sarvayadavanandana, Satya,
Suparnaketu, T'arksyadhvaja, Tarksyaraksana, Trailokyanatha, Triyuga, Vasudeva, Vasudevaputra, Vrajanatha,
Vrsnisardila, Vrsnisrestha, Vrsnikulodvaha, Vrsninandana, Vrsnipati, Vrsnipravara, Vrsnipungava,
Vrsnisattama, Vrsnisirnha, Vrsnijiva, Vrsnyandhakapati, Vrsnyandhakottama, Yadava, Yadavasardila,
Yadavasrestha, Yadavagrya, Yadavanandana, Yadave-
§yara, Yadusardila, Yadiérestha, Yadidvaha, Yadupungava, Yadusukhavaha, Yadittama, Yaduvarhéavivardhana, Yogesvara, Yogisa, Yogi.
(b) Synonyms of Krsna in AmarakoSa.
Visnur Narayanah Krsno Vaikuntho Vis taragravah/
Damodaro Hrsikegah Kesavo Madhavah Svabhih//
Daityarih Pundarikakso Govindo Garudadhvajah/
Pitambarocyutah Sarngi Visvakseno Janardanah ||
Upendra Indravarajah Cakrapaniécaturbhujah |
Padmanabho Madhuripur Vasudevas Trivikramah/!
Devakinandanaééaurih Sripatih Purusottamah/
Vanamali Balidhvamsi Kamsdaratir Adhoksajah//
Vigsvambharah Kaitabhajid Vidhus Srivatsalaichanah.
(Visnu, Narayana, Krsna, Vaikuntha, Vistaragravas,
Damodara, Hrsikesa, KeSava, Madhava, Svabha,
Daityari, Pundarikaksa, Govinda, Garudadhvaja,
Pitambara, Acyuta, Sarngi, Visvaksena, Janardana,
Upendra, Indravaraja, Cakrapani, Caturbhuja, Padmanabha, Madhuripu, Vasudeva, Trivikrama, Devakinandana, Sauri,Sripati, Purusottama, Vanamili, Balidhvamsi, Kamsarati, Adhoksaja, Visvambhara, Kaitabhajit, Vidhu, Srivatsalafichana.).
KRSNA I. Another name for Paficali.
Pancali .
KRSNA II. A river in South India.
KRSNA III. Another name for Durga. (Virata Parva,
Chapter 6, Verse 9).
KRSNA IV. A female attendant of Skandadeva. (Salya
Parva, Chapter 46, Verse 22).
KRSNADEVA. See under Dinanatha.
KRSNADVAIPAYANA. Vyasa. (See under Vyasa).
(See under
"NC Ol

KRSNAKARNI 430
KRSNAKARNI. A female attendant of Skandadeva.
(Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Verse 24).
KRSNAKESA. A warrior of Skandadeva. (Salya Parva,
Chapter 45, Verse 61).
KRSNANANDA. A Sanskrit poet who li ed in the 13th
century A.D. He is the author of Sahrdayananda Kavya
which contains fifteen cantos. The theme is the story
of Nala.
KRSNANJANA. Capital city of Nirrti, one of the eight
Guardians of the quarters. (Devi Bhagavata, 8th
Skandha).
KRSNANUBHAUTIKA,. A great sage. He visited
Bhisma on his bed of arrows. (Santi Parva, Chapter
47, Verse 11).
KRSNAPARVATA. A mountain in Kuéa island very
dear _to Visnu. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 12, Verse 4).
KRSNATREYA. A great sage of ancient India. It 4
said that this sage grasped the whole of Ayurveda and
practised it by the strength of his penance (M.B. Santi
Parva, Chapter 210, Verse 21). ;
KRSNAVARTMAN. Another name for Agni. Agni was
addressed by this word at the serpent yajiia by Astika.
(M.B. Chapter 55, Verse 10).
KRSNAVENI. A sacred river in South India. A bath
in the Devakunda in this river (Jatismarahrada) will
kindle in one remembrance about previous life. (Sabha
Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 20). Agni is supposed to origioe me) this hrada. (Vana Parva, Chapter 2292,
rse 26).
KRTA. I. A King of Janaka’s dynasty. He was the son
of Vijaya and father of Sunaka. (Bhagavata, 9th
Skandha). Krta had seven beautiful daughters wha
because of a sense of non-attachment and renunciation.
forsook their father’s home for the cremation ground
even while they were mere children. They lay down
there declaring that they had left their bodies as food
for the birds; and birds and wild beasts ate up their
ae poets oe of this life of renunciation,
they attained salvation. (Kathasaritex
eh a alambaka, Taranga 5) : meteeegara, MavlanaRTA TT. A Vigvadeva (Un; in
bana Clann si, ad oe Deva). (Anufasana
: ETAS. reat ;
chara, Chapter 26, Vere 22), NOM days. (Vana
_ eons Cnt aan , “ing of Janaka’s dynasty. (See
RTADYUTI. Queen of Ki
King had aoartee he beng nant ee —
Angiras by means of his austerities and Te ; ped
blessing Krtadyuti delivered a son lee ho the latter i‘
poisoned the child to death at which b G
' oth Citraketyu
and Krtadyuti fell down unconscious. Tho Wh Ades
and Narada appeared on the scene and Hn) rie ee
to console the King and the queen they na = best
comforted. Then Angiras returned to them he al -
the dead child. The soul saluted them and : = _
follows:— “Oh elders, during various births I a . as
the son of various parents. And, you please ‘noint on
to me the particular parent as whose son | s to liv
just now.” Nobody had any answer to this dukétion
and the child went on its own way. ?
Afterwards Citraketu and Krtadyuti went
earth as great devotees of the Almighty, and durin
this perambulation Citraketu came to the presence ae
iva on whose thigh Parvati was sitting then, Citraketu
round the
KRTAVARMA
felt ashamed at the sight and questioned Parvati about
her action whereupon she cursed and turned Citraketu
into an Asura. The well known Vrtrdsura was Citraketu thus reborn. Krtadyuti ended her life following the
curse upon her husband. (Bhagavata, 6th Skandha).
KRTAGHNA. See under Dhanagarman.
KRTAGNI. A King of the Yadu dynasty. Descended
from Yadu thus: Sahasrajit—Satajit—Hehaya—Dharma
—Kunti—Bhadrasena— Dhanaka — Krtagni. Krtagni
was the brother of Krtavirya, who was the father of
Kartaviryarjuna. Krtavirya had three brothers called
Krtagni, Krtavarman and Krtaujas. (Krtayus).
KRTAKSANA. A King of Videha, who was a member
in Yudhisthira’s court. He made a present of fourteen
thousand horses to Yudhisthira. (Sabha Parva) .
KRTAMALA. The river in which Mahavisnu first
appeared as fish. (See under Matsyavatara) .
KRTAPARVA, A King of the Yadava dynasty. (See
under Yadava Varhfa) .
KRTASAUGAM. A holy centre in Kuruksetra. He
who bathes here will derive the benefits of conducting
a eee Yajfia. (Vana Parva, Chapter 83, Verse
KRTASRAMA. A great sage, who had distinguished
himself in the court of Yudhisthira. He lived a life of
renunciation as a Vanaprastha and attained heaven.
(Santi Parva, Chapter 244, Verse 18).
KRTASVA. A great sage of ancient days. He was the
son-in-law of Daksaprajapati. Daksa had sixty daughters by his wife Virani, thirteen of whom were wedded
to Kasyapa, ten to Dharma, twenty-seven to Candra,
io A neu, ‘~-* to Aristanemi, two to Krtaéva and
wo to sangiras. (Devi Bhagavata, 7th Sk .
KRTAUJAS. See under KRTAGNIL —
ie yenet, Sage, who was an admirer of
udhisthira. (Vana Parva, Chapter 26, Verse 24).
KRTAVARMA. A King of the Vrsni dynasty. “ the
previous generation of Vrsni also a Krtavarman is noticed. The genealogy of both is given below.
1) Genealogy. Descended from Visnu thus : Brahma
Atri—Candra—Budha —Puriiravas—Ayus —Nahusa—
Yayati—Yadu—Sahasrajit—Satajit—Hehaya—Dharma
Kunti—Sadajit—Dhanaka.
Dhanaka had four sons called Krtavirya, Krtagni, Krtavarman and Krtaujas, and one of the four was the first
Krtavarman.
The dynasty continues again fromKrtavirya--Krtaviryatia hn ae _—Madhu —Vrsni —Yudhajit —
yaka—Satyaki ' (Yuyudhana) —Jaya—Kani—
Anamitra—P Fsn1— Citraratha — Vidiratha—-Sira—Sini
“eee had’ four sons, viz. Devavaha, Gadadhanvat;
rlavarman and Sira., And, Siira begot of his wifes
a aa sons, Le, Vasu, Devabhaga, Devas ravas;
anil V7. rnjaya, Kakanika, Syamaka, Vatsa, Kavuka
Krtavarman referred 6 belo eo! Vasudeva. The
an relerred to below was rsna’s grand-father. the brother of Krs
2) Krtavarman and S eT
me yamantaka. King Satrai; his
Kingrign the famous gem’ called Syar eatin The
on Irn A eae agena. Went for hunting with this jewe
the lion and got the “a A me, and Jambavan killed
: dal was circulated to the
effect that Sri Krsna h q an circulated to
got back the gem from J oo the gem. But, Krsna
avan and handed it over

KRTAVARMA
to Satrajit, who in turn, gave his daughter Satyabhama
in marriage to Krsna. Though Satrajit wanted to give
the gem—Syamantaka—to Krsna as dowry, the latter
did not accept it.
Akrira and Krtavarman were bosom friends, and they
incited another Yadava King Satadhanva, to grab the:
Syamantaka. Satadhanva killed Satrajit and taok possession of the gem. Hearing about this murder Sri
Krsna and Balabhadrarama set out to kill Satadhanva,
who, in great alarm, started for north after entrusting
the gem to Akrira and Krtavarman. His horse died
at Mithilapuri and he began running. Balabhadra and
Krsna ran after him, caught and killed him. But, they
did not get the Syamantaka.
Now Akrara and Krtavarman began their, penance at
Kasi. Seven years passed thus when famine broke out
in Dvaraka, When once upon a time famine stalked
Kasi the king had brought Svaphalka, father of Akriira,
over to Kasi, and there was no more famine in the
country. Therefore, when famine broke out in Dvaraka
the Yadavas thought the presence of Svaphalka’s son,
Akrira would dispel the famine. Accordingly Akrira
was recalled to Dvaraka, and along with him returned
Krtavarman also. SriKrsna and Balabhadra decided
that Syamantaka should be kept by Akrura himself.
3) Other information relating to Krtavarman.
(i) He was a very famous archer. (Adi Parva, Chapter
67, Verse 81). ’ Adi
(ii) He was a great devotee of Sri Krsna. (M.B. Adi
Parva, Chapter 63, Verse 105). ssa Healt
(iii) He was present at the Svayarnvara of Pafcal.
(Adi Parva, Chapter 185, Verse 18). -
(iv) He had once gone to Khandavaprastha wit a PIE
sents to Subhadra. (Adi Parva, Chapter 220, Verse
(v) He was a pe ee Puma a of Yu
Sabha Parva, Chapter 4, Verse Y0/:
tei) He was one of the seven Maharathas me yer
dynasty, the other six being Sri Krsna, Varies"
: d:-Samba.
Saineya, Cakradeva, eee of Abhimanyu at
ii resent at the mar
Hotnlavyanngits (Virata Parva, Chapter 72, hae one
(viii) The Pandavas invited him to Sa ae
Kauravas. (Udyoga Parva, Chapter 4, Vers n pe
(ix) As demanded by Duryodhana oe sia u
Aksauhini (a particular division 0 wy) ae a
— “i (Udyoe he. be ot himself at the
d atya
re ah naive! Krsna. (Udyoga Parva, Chapter
(xi) feet day of the great war be ae
with Satyaki. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter eg tart
(xii) Abhimanyu oe him. (Bhis
a ae : he Krauficarunaa t the head of the
Leen J a - + Dm (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 735
Verse 17). |
(xiv) Bhimasena d
82, Verse 61).
(xv) Satyaki woun
xvi) Aduel was
lon (Bhisma E arvas
(xvii) He fought with Arjuna,
dhisthira.
efeated him. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter
ded him. (Bhisma Parva, . Chapter
Dhrstatween him and rst
ao nie 110, Verse 9). |
Bhima and Satyaki.
KRTEYU
va Parva, Chapter 113, and Drona Parva, Chapter
(xviii) He. attacked Abhimanyu and killed his horse.
(Drona Parva, Chapter 48, Verse 32).
(xix) He fell down and swooned in the fight with
Arjuna. (Drona Parva, Chapter 92 Verses 16-33).
(xx) Afterwards he fought with Yudhamanyu and
Uttamaujas. (Drona Parva, Chapter 92, Verse 27).
(xxi) On another occasion he defeated Sikhandi and
Bhima. (Drona Parva, Chapter 114, Verse 59).
(xxii) He defeated Yudhisthira also in fighting. (Drona
Parva, Chapter 165, Verse 24).
(xxiii) Following the death of Drona he ran away
from the battle-field. (Drona Parva, Chapter 139,
Verse 13).
(xxiv) He fainted on the field in fight with Dhrstadyumna. (Karna Parva, Chapter 54). When he regained
consciousness he met Duryodhana at Dvaipayanasaras
and induced him to fight. Dharmaputra followed him
with the army.
(xxv) He also was present with Asvatthama when he
attacked those who were asleep during night. (Sauptika
Parva, Chapter 5, Verse 38).
(xxvi) It was he, who set fire to the camp of the
Pandavas. (Sauptika Parva, Chapter 8, Verse 109).
(xxvii) He returned home after informing Dhrtarastra
about the death of Duryodhana, on the termination of
the great war. (Stri Parva, Chapter ll,. Verse 21).
(xxviii) He was present along with Krsna at the Asvamedha yajiia conducted by Yudhisthira. (ASvamedhika
Parva, Chapter 66, Verse 3).
(xxix) He was killed in the club-fight by the Yadavas.
Mausala Parva, Chapter 3, Verse 28).
(xxx) After death he joined the Marudgana and secured
eternal fame. (Svargarohana Parva, Chapter 9, Verse
4) a for Kriavarman. Anartavasi, Bhoja, Bhojaraja, Hardikya, Hrdikatmaja, Madhava, Satvata,
Varsneya, Vrsnisithha.
KRTAVEGA. A very holy Rajarsi. He was a member
in the court of Yama. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 89).
KRTAVIRYA I. Father of the famous Kartaviryarjuna
(For genealogy see under Kartavirya). He got a Soma
Yajfia conducted by the sages of the family of Bhrgu and
gave away a lot of wealth to people of Bhrgu’s family
(Adi. Parva, ‘Chapter 177, Verse 18). Krtavirya was a
member of the court of Yamaraja. (Sabha Parva
Chapter 8, Verse 9).
KRTAVIRYA II. Father-in-law of king AhamyaAti of the
solar dynasty. He hada daughter called Bhanumati.
(Adi Parva, Chapter 95, Verse 15).
KRTAYUGA. There are four Yugas (Eras) called Krta,
Treta, Dvapara and Kali yugas. (For the set up etc.
of the Yugas see under Manvantara).
In the first Yuga, i.e. Krta yuga, people will be quite
righteous. As the Yugas change righteousness will fade
out in increasing measure till the world will be filled
with unrighteousness and evil by the time it is Kaliyuga.
When Kaliyuga is completed Mahavisnu will incarnate
himself as Kalki and wipe out unrighteousness and establish Krtayuga once again.
KRTAYUS (KRTAUJAS). A brother of Krtagni. (See
under KRTAGNI).
KRTEYU, A king born in the Anga dynasty.
"ll

KRTI I 432
KRTII. A Sage who belonged to the order of the disciple
of Vedavyasa. Jaimini was the disciple of Vyasa, and
Sumantu the son of Jaimini. Sumantu had a son called
Sutva, and Sukarma was the son of the latter. He
had two disciples called Hiranyanabha alias Kausalya
and Pauspifiji. Krti was a disciple of Hiranyanabha,
and he composed twentyfour Samhitas for the Samaveda and taught them to his disciples, (Visnu Purana,
Part 3, Chapter 6). :
KRTIII. A saintly King who flourished in the court of
Yamaraja. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 8, Verse 9).
KRTI IIT. A Vigévadeva (universal deva). (Anugdsana
Parva, Chapter 91, Verse 35).
KRTIIV. A synonym of Mahavisnu,
Parva, Chapter 149, Verse 22).
KRTIV. A King of Sikaradega. He presented hundred
elephants to Yudhisthira, (Sabha Parva, Chapter 52,
Verse 25).
KRTI VI. A son of Nahusa. Nahusa had five other.
sons called Yati, Yayati, Samyati, Ayati and Viyati.
rti was the sixth son and the youngest of the lot.
KRTTIKA I. When Subrahmanya was born the Devas
deputed six mothers to breast-feed him, and they are
called Krttikas. Certain Puranas hold the view that
six faces were caused to Subrahmanya as he had to
feed on six breasts at the same time while
that six mothers were deputed to feed him as he was
born with six faces. Again, according io certain
Puranas it was Parvati, who deputed the Krttikas. The
child came to be known as Karttikeya also as It was fed
by the Krttikas. (Skanda Purana, Valmiki Ramayana,
Balakanda, Canto 47 and Kathasaritsigara, Lavanakalambaka, Taranga 6),
After having fed Skanda the Krttikas entered into the
sphere of the stars. (Vana Parva, Chapter 236, Verse
1). The star into Which the Krttikag entered is
callec the Krttikg star. Narada said once that if one
feeds brahmins with ghee and pudding on Karttika da
one may ascend to Devaloka, (Anusasana Parva
Chapter 64, Verse DH
KRTTIKA IT. A holy Place. He who bathes here
will derive the benefits of performing. an Atiratra
Yajfia. (Vana Parva, Chapter 84, Verse D1),
KRTTIKANG - A holy centre, He who bath
es
here and observes fast for two weeks will be absolved
from sins. (Anugasana Parva, Chapter 25, Verse 22)
KRTTIKASRAMA. A ho y cence: “One Who patie
here and worships the Pitrs will be absolved 7
(Anufgdsana Parva, Chapter 25, Verse 22);
ARTTIVASESVARA, See under Siva.
"sage Suk ‘Anuas Dae a8 the danger
- ‘Anuha, n the family of Ajamidha
married Krtyi, and Brahmadatta was theirson, <° ”
en Geet AEA) E “ABs auce born wh
the black arts as enunciated in the Ath "Ne
practised to annihilate enemies. -Krty4 ma
male form too. Some of the activities of cn
given below.
(1) Carried off Duryodhana. While the Pandavas were
living in exile in the forest, Duryodhana and others
went in a procession to the forest. Though Duryodhana
was taken into captivity in the forest by a “Ganz
dharva, Arjuna saved him out of fraternal considera.
tion for him. Duryodhana returned to Hastinapura.
Now the question was whether half of the kingdom
(Anusasana
KRTYA
should be given to the Pandavas or not. Sakuni and
others advised Duryodhana to give it, but the latter
remained adamant against it. Dhrtarastra decided to
end his life and for the purpose spread darbha grass on
earth and sat thereon. The Asuras heard about these
developments and created a Krtya by mantras. The
Krtya took Duryodhana to Patala where the Asuras
advised him against any compromise with the _Pandavas. On the other hand they wanted him to intensify
his hatred against the Pandavas, and they assured
him all support. After that Krtya took Duryodhana
back to Hastinapura. (Vana Parva, Chapter B02 ) 2
(2) Krtya born under the name Madana. Devendra once
prevented the Agvinidevas from drinking Soma juice.
- (Devas drink a liquid-liqueur extracted from the soma
creeper, during yajfias, and that is called Somapana).
Aggrieved at the orders of Indra the Aévinidevas
wandered about the world in the course of which they
approached sage Cyavana of the Bhargava family.
They restored sight to the blind Cyavana, who, in
return, assured them that he would see to it that they
got the right of drinking soma juice. Cyavana began
a Yajfia and Indra came for Somapana. The sage
invited the Asvinidevas also for Somapana. Indra
prevented them from doing so, and the sage opposed
him. Then Indra drew his Vajrayudha against Cyavana.
The sage made Indra’s hands paralysed. Further, he
raised from the Yajitic fire a Krtya which appeared in
Sharp molar
teeth hundred yojanas long, other teeth each ten yojanas long, hands ten thousand yojanas long and as big
as mountains, round eyes like the Sun and Moon,
mouth spitting fire—such was Madana, the Krtya, a
really terrible being. Frightened at the sight of the
terrible being Indra Permitted the Agvinidevas to drink
Soma.
(3) Krtya against Ambarisa, Ambarisa once began the
kadasi Vrata and the Devas deputed Durvasas to
obstruct -it somehow or other. Durvasas came to
barisa, who requested him to return after bath.
But, though the vrata was over the sage did not return
and Ambarisa fed the Devas with the offerings (havis).
Immediately after that Durvasas returned and complained that what he was given was the left-overs of
the havis, By means of black art he created a Krtya,
who charged against Ambarisa’s throat. Ambarisa
prayed and the Sudaréana Cakra of Visnu appeared and
illed the Krtya and drove Durvasas round the three
worlds. At last the Sage sought refuge with Ambarisa
himself and thus saved himself.
Skandha).
(4) Krtya opposed Sri Krsna. While Krsna was ruling
varaka, Paundrakavasudeva was the King of Karisa.
nee he sent q messenger to ask Krsna to go and bow
down before him as he was the real Vasudeva. Enraged
Sudargana Cakra, which by
ee

KRTYA II °
(5) Krtyd against Prahlada. To change the nature of
Prahlada, a great devotee of Visnu, his father Hiranyakagipu deputed Asura preceptors. But, severe punishments like poisoning, throwing into fire etc. did not
succeed in changing the devotee’s character. At last,
the preceptors raised Krtya from fire. The Salam,
which Krtya thrust against the throat of Prahlada was
broken into hundreds of pieces. Krtya then got angry
and turned against the preceptors, who had sent her
against Prahlada. The preceptors fell down unconscious
on the verge of death. But, Prahlada touched their
bodies and they became alive again. (Visnu Purana,
Part 1, Chapter 18).
KRTYA II. A river. Indians used to drink water
from this river. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9 Verse 18).
KRURA (KRODHA). A daughter of Prajapati Daksa.
She became the wife of Kafyapa’ A large number of
Asuras were born to her. They all were very_cruel and
were called Krodhavagas. (Mahabharata, Adi Parva,
Chapter 65, Stanza 32). oe
KRURA. Acountry in Ancient India. (Mahabharata,
Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Stanza 65).
KSA (q). This letter means (1) Ksatriya (2) field
(3) Narasirhha (the lion-man incarnation of Visnu)
(4) Hari (Visnu) (5) Protector of temples and gate
keeper. (6) Lightning (7) Destruction (8) A demon.
KSAMA. Wife of Prajapati Pulaha. Three. sons Kardama, Urvariyan and Sahisnu were born to Pulaha of
his wife Ksama. (Visnu Purana, Aréa 1, Stanza 10).
KSAMAKA. A King of the Puru dynasty. (Agni
Purana, Chapter 278). : |
KSATRADEVA. The son of Sikhandi.
famous archer. Bhagadatta wounded the ri
Ksatradeva in the Bharata-battle. He fought with
Laksmana and Drona. Laksmana killed him.
(M.B. Udyoga Parva, Chapters 57 and La See
Parva, Chapter 95; Drona Parva, Chapters 14, <1 4
P , Chapter 6).
KSATRADHARMAN, ‘A son of Dhrstadyumna. The
teacher Drona killed him. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter
me A son of Dhrstadyumna. Drona
killed him. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 10, Stanza
KSATRAVARMAN, | an a
fought with Jayadratha }
Drona killed him. (M.B. Drona Parva,
KSATRIYA, See under Caturvarnya.
KSATTA I. Vidura.
der the word Varna.
Tt ig z iol maid. This celestial ae oS
part fn the birth celebration of Arjuna. (M.b. i
122, Stanza 00). iy one
KSEMA orn King in Ancient India. an tee ae
Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chap EP Fe ee ihe:
- KG < the rebirth of th ,
= ee g zrata-battle this King took the side of
the Pandavas and was killed by Droma. (M.B. Drona
P , Chapter 21, Stanza 53).
KSEMADARSI: A King of ep oeall, ©
in the Mahabharata stating ee og ae
vrksiya saved this King from the ac aie
favourites. The treaty Oe ge chen il in
i imsell. bega
he en to inform the King about this. F inally
He was a2
son of Dhrstadyumna. He
the battle of Bharata.
Chapter 186).
EEE 'SOO Ee
ght hand of ~
KSEMASARMA
the hermit Kalakavrksiya began to travel throughout
the country with acrow kept in a cage. As if the
crow was speaking, the hermit began to tell the past,
present and future fortunes of the people. The crow
became famous and people began to have faith in the
crow. Once Kalakavrksiya and the crow reached the
palace and under the pretence that the crow was speaking, the hermit disclosed all the secret dealings of the
treasury-keeper. The servants of the King stealthily
put the crow to death that night. When the King
knew this he made Kalakavrksiya the minister and the
ai began to prosper. (M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter
On another occasion the treasury of the King Ksemadargi became empty. At this time King Janaka had
come to war with this King. According to the sincere
advice of Kalakavrksiya the King married the daughter
of King Janaka. From that day onwards his country
became prosperous. (M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter 106).
KSEMADHANVA. A famous archer who fought on the
side of the Kauravas. This archer led Duryodhana in
the battlefield. (M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 17, Stanza
od )e
KSEMADHORTI. I. A Ksatriya King of Ancient
India. It is stated in Mahabharata, Adi Parva,
Chapter 67, Stanza 64 that this King was born from a
portion of the Asura called Krodhavasa. The King
ruled over the country called Kulita. In the battle of
Bharata he fought on the side of the Kauravas and
was killed by Bhimasena. (M.B. Karna Parva, Chapter
12, Stanza 44).
KSEMADHURTI II. A King who took the side of the
Kauravas. This King who was the brother of Brhantaka, fought with Satyaki in the Bharata battle. (M.B.
Salya Parva, Chapter 21, Stanza 8).
KSEMADHURTI III. A warrior, He fought with
Brhatksatra and died in the fight. (M.B. Drona Parva,
Chapter 107, Stanza 6).
KSEMAGIRI. Anothername of Bhadrakali (a goddess).
In Agni Purana, Chapter 12, it is mentioned that
Arya, Durga, Vedagarbha, Ambika, Bhadrakali,
Bhadra, Ksemya and Naikabahii are also synonyms of
Bhadrakali. :
KSEMAKA I. A Raksasa (giant). In Brahmanda
Purana, Chapter 2, it is mentioned that this Raksasa
had lived in Kasi and that the King Divodasa killed
this Raksasa and built a city there.
KSEMAKA II. A serpent (Naga) born to Kasyapaprajapati of his wife Kadri. (M.B. Adi Parva,
Chapter 53, Stanza 11).
KSEMAKA ITI. A King who was a luminary in_ the
palace of Yudhisthira. Mention is made in Mahabharata, Udyoga Parva, Chapter 4, Stanza 24, that
the Pandavas had sent invitation to this King for the
battle of Bharata. .
KSEMAMURTI. A son of Dhrtarastra. (M.B. Adi
Parva, Chapter 67, Stanza 100).
KSEMANKARA. A_ King who was the friend of
Jayadratha. This King ruled over the country of
Trigarta. Nakula killed this King. (M.B. Vana Parva,
Chapters 265 and 275).
KSEMASARMA. A warrior who fought on the’side of
the Kauravas. Ksemagarma stood and fought at the
neck of the Garudavytiha (the formation of the army

KSEMAVAHA 434 KUBERA
| ie in this
i > of le) made by Karna. (M.B. KSIRAVATI. A holy bath. Those who bathe in
De atten Cherise 30, Stanss 6) holy bath will obtain the fruits of performing the
KSEMAVAHA. A. warrior of Skanda. (M.B. Salya sacrifice of Vajapeya. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 84).
om Parva, Chapter 45, Stanza 66). KSIRIN. A tree in the family of the Uttara Kurus.
KSEMAVRDDHI. The minister of King Salva. He
_ was both minister and general of the army at the same
time. Samba, the son of Sri Krsna defeated; K semavrddhi. (Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter I6).
KSETRA (S). Sacred spots. In Malayalam it means
Temples also.
1) General information. The temples of India are
reflections of the outward form or body of man. As
the soul lives in the body of man, God dwells in the
temples. The stone, rock, marble, metals etc. are equal
to the bones of the body of aman.
2) Two types of temples. Temples are of two types.
One type is the Gramadevata temples. These are
temples in. which goddess Bhadrakali is consecrated
and worshipped for the protection of villages and
cities. The second type is of special temples. These are
temples specially. meant for a particular god or
goddess. Thus there are temples for Visnu, Siva,
Ganapati and so on.
3) Graémadevaté temples. Worship of Bhadrakali existed
in India from very early times, When Mohanjodaro
and Harappa were excavated idols of Devi ( goddess )
more than 4000-years old, were obtained. from there.
During the prevalence of Buddhism in India the
goddesses Yaksi and Hariti were worshipped in
India. Later when Hinduism was revived these
goddesses took their places in it ag the goddesses of
Hindu Puranas and epics. The Kali temples of Ujjayini and Calcutta are famous. In the Cidambara
temple also the main deity is Kali. The legend is that
aramasiva defeated Kali in a dance. In Mysore
cn seb) is worshipped as chief
amily goddess, Kamaksi in Kafici, Minaksi 3 ,
(South India), Maikambika in North as | hiagoee
sO on are the gentle and peaceful forms of Kali,
4) Devas (gods). In many of the temples :
India, Munigvaran and Karuppan a ‘the: eae
devatas (village gods). In some Places Bhairava also is
worshipped as gramadevata, In certain other plac
Viran, Trulan, Karetti, = Nondj and eee i:
are worshipped. Sasta or Ayyappan h ee
are figures which are Sattvika, Ra: 7
(having the attributes goodness, ostentation mee cae
sloth). In some places figures having tw or four “
eight hands are seen. It is Presumed that this deity is
a portion of Siva. It is stated in Agni Purana, Chapter
91 that Ksetrap4alas should be figures having trident in
the hand.
KSIRASAGARA. Sea of Milk. Tt is mentioned in
Mahabharata, Udyoga Parva, Chapter 102, that
Brahma drank too much of Amrta and vomited. From
the vomit the cow Surabhi came into being, The milk
of Surabhi flowed and collected into a sea. This seq js
called the milk-sea or K sirasagara,
This tree has six tastes. Milk flows ceaselessly from
this tree. It is said that from the fruit of this tree we
could get cloth, ornaments etc. (M.B. Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 7).
KSITIKAMPANA. A captain of the army of Skanda.
(M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Stanza 59).
KSUDRAKA. There was a country known as Ksudraka
in Ancient India. Those who inhabited this country
were called Ksudrakas. It is stated in Mahabharata,
Sabha Parva, Chapter 52 that the Ksudrakas had
brought gifts to Dharmaputra. In the battle of Bharata
Duryodhana protected Sakuni with the help of the
Ksudrakas. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 51, Stanza 16).
It is stated in Mahabharata, Bhisma Parva, Chapter 19
that the Ksudrakas attacked Arjuna at the behest of
Bhisma. Many Ksudrakas were killed when Paragurama exterminated the Ksatriyas. (M.B. Drona
Parva, Chapter 7Q),
KSUPAI.. A Prajapati. There is a story about the
birth of this Prajapati in Mahabharata. Once Brahma
wished to periorm a sacrifice. But he could not get
suitable priest as the performer of the sacrifice. So
Brahma decided to create a befitting person as Rtvik
(the priest who does the rituals of the sacrifice) and
© got pregnant in his head. After a thousand years he
sneezed and a Prajapati came out of the head of
Brahma. That Prajapati was Ksupa. He made Ksupa
his Rtvik. (Mahabharata, Santi Parva, Chapter 122).
Rudra Bhagavan made him Prajapati (the Lord of all
subjects) ,
KSUPA II. A King who was the son of Prasandhi,
and the grandson of Vaivasvata Manu. He was the
father of Iksvaku. In Mahabharata, Sabha Parva,
Chapter 8, itis mentioned that Ksupa stayed in the
Palace of Yama after his death. In Mahabharata, Santi
Parva, Chapter 166 it js stated that this King had receiveda sword directly from Vaivasvata Manu. Ksupa
was not in the habit of cating flesh. (M.B. Anugdsana
Parva. Chapter 159, Stanza 67).
KSURAKARNI. An attendant of Skanda. (M.B. Salya
Parva, Chapter 46, Stanza 25).
RA.
KUBE
1) Genealogy. Descended from Visnu thus : Brahma—
ulastya—Visravas—Kubera.
2) Birth. Pulastya Prajapati wedded Manini alias Havirbhi, daughter of sage Trnabindu, and a son called
ifravas was born to them, Visravas married [libila
alias Daivavarnini, daughter of Bharadvaja. Ravana
umbhakarna and Vibhisana were the sons of Visravas
by another wife. (Refer to the genealogy of Ravana)-
Ong, and the above mention-
“C tour sons were the fruits of the boon granted him
by Brahma, whom he pleased by austerities. (For details
see under Vitravas, Para 1};
Kubera’s attainment of eminence.
yuga the Devas went to
Once during Krtat Varuna, and after performing
a Yajfia for Kubera they told him thus: “Ty = you
live in the ocean itself as deva ofall rivers, and let the
ocean and the rivers obey you. Ag in the case of the
hee you too will experience waxing and waning.”
fom that day Onwards Kubera became the lord a
a

KUBERA
oceans, rivers, streams etc. and all of them together
gave him immense wealth. Siva became a particular
friend of Kubera. (Salya Parva, Chapter 47).
4) Kubera in Lanka. Afterwards Kubera performed
penance for ten thousand years in water with head
submerged, to please Brahma. Yet, Brahma did not
appear. Thenhe performed penance standing on one
foot in the centre of Paficagni. Brahma appeared and
asked him to choose any boon. Kubera requested that
he might be made a lokapalaka (protector of the universe) and the custodian of wealth, and Brahma responded by supplying Kubera the treasures Sankha nidhi
and Padmanidhi and also the Puspaka Vimana as
vehicle. He was also appointed one of the Astadikpalakas. (Indra, Agni, Yama, Nirrti, Varuna, Vayu,
Kubera and [ga are the eight protectors of the eight
regions). Kubera’s city is called Mahodaya. _
Kubera felt really happy and told his father Visravas
about his new status and dignity. The father also
blessed the son. Kubera requested his father to geta
city built for him to live in, and his father asked him to
settle down in Lanka built by Maya on top of the
mountain Trikita in the middle of the south sea. From
that day onwards Kubera took his abode in Lanka. (It
was originally built for Indra).
5) Old history of Lanka. Once upon a time when
Brahma was repéating the Vedas he felt hungry. He was
annoyed that at that untimely hour he should have felt
hungry, and from his angry face emerged the Raksasa
called Heti. From his hunger emerged the Yaksa called
Praheti. The Raksasa turned out to be an unrighteous
being, and the Yaksa a righteous person. Heti married
Bhaya, daugher of Kala, anda son VidyutkeSa was born
to them, who wedded Salakatanka, daughter of Sandhya.
To them were born a child, whom they forsook in
the valley of mountain Manthara and. went their own.
way. Siva and Parvati came that way just then, ee
the forsaken child and blessed it. At once the : "
became a youth, Siva named him Sukesa, an , 4
married Devavati, the daughter of a Gandharva calle
a three sons called
Manimaya. To them were born
Mal oe Sumili. and Mali. Thanks to the blessings
of Siva all of them became youths as soon @s He Mie
born. By means of pence they nae Ce ANGE: ean
onquer the three worlds.
aaa ee to their father. They did not relish
the advice of their father to lead a righteous life. They
} ing people. Maya
went round the three patie ae an he top of the
built for them the city ca
Mountain Trikuta. ie TE “ae
There is a story about the origi of Cota eae
controversy arose between Vasu Str ve that he
as to who was the greater of the two. , ee Lan body
was greater than Vayu, Vasuki envelope d) could not
mountain Mahameru s0 that Vee ee lountata with
enter it, and Vayu tried to blow 1 d the whole world
the result that a_dust "ieee ade iG Visnu, who paci-
° 7 reiu ee
from view. The Devils 100 sted one coil round the
Asuki he then unw
ssid org fol advantage of the opportunity and
into
untain to the South in
swept off one peak of the mo
1 ikiita. ;
the sea, and that peak 1s Trt A cn jes Lean -,
alyava =i and Mali settled dow L ;
Milyavan, Suvenda Ketumati and Vasudha, the ieee
daughters of Narmada, 4 Gandharva woman.
ES OO ee
KUBERA
sons called Vajramusti, Viripaksa, Durmukha, Suptaghna Yajfiakoga, Matta and Unmatta and a daughter
called Nala were born to Malyavan and Sundari. Ten
sons called Prahasta, Akampa, Vikata, Kalakamukha,
Dhiimraksa, Danda, Suparéva, Samhrada, Prakvata
and Bhasakarna and four daughters called Veka, Puspotkata, Kaikasi and Kumbhinasi were born to Sumali
and Ketumati. Four.sons called Anala, Anila, Aha and
Sampati (these four were the ministers of Vibhisana)
were born to Mali and Vasudha.
When the harassments of the Raksasas became unbearable the Devas sought protection from Siva, and Indra
detailed to him about the unrighteous actions of Malyavan, Sumali and Mali. Siva directed the Devas to
Visnu, who set out, to fight. against the Raksasas.
Mali cut at Garuda, and Visnu killed him (Mali)
with his Sudargana Cakra. The other Raksasas retreated
to Lanka. As their presence in Lanka was dangerous to the Devas, Visnu_ directed the Sudarsana
Cakra to go to Lanka every day and kill the Raksasas
in groups. The Cakra began its work, and the remaining
Raksasas escaped to Patala. Lanka became thus deserted -
and Kubera took his abode there. The Yaksas, born from
the hunger of Brahma roamed about without a leader
and ultimately settled down in Lanka under the leadership of Kubera. (Uttara Ramayana ).
6) Kubera left Lanka. The other sons of Visravas like
Ravana returned with boons from Brahma for the conquest of the earth, and the first thing Ravana did was to
drive away his brother Kubera from Lanka. He also
took by force the Puspaka Vimana of Kubera, who
cursed Ravana thus: ‘This will never be your vehicle,
but will become that of his, who kills you.”
Kubera, with the Yaksas, Kinnaras etc. went north and
settled on mount Gandhamadana. (Vana Parva, Chap7) Kubera’s sabha. ‘The assembly hall of Kubera is 100
yojanas in length and 100 yojanas wide. High walls
surround the city. In thecentre of the city is a beautiful
mansion studded with gems where Kubera sits surrounded
by thousands of women. Maruta Deva carrying fragrance
from Kalpavrksa worships him. Gandharva and Apsara
women entertain Kubera with music. Migrakesi, Rambha, Menaka, Urvasi, Citrasena, Sucismita, Ghrtaci,
Pufijikasthala, Visvaci, Sahajanya, Pramloca, Varga,
Saurabheyi, Samici, Budbuda, and Lata are the chief
among them. Manibhadra (Manibhadra), Dhanada,
Agveta, Bhadra, Guhyaka, Kaéeraka, Gandakandu,
Pradyota, Mahabala, Ka, Tumburu, Pisaca, Gajakarna,
Vigala, Varahakarna, Tamrostha, Halakaksa, Halodaka
Harnsacida, Sankhavarta, Hemanetra, Vibhisana,
Puspanana, Pingalaka, Sonitoda, Pravalaka, Vrksabaspaniketa, Ciravasas and Nalakibara are the chief
members in the court of Kubera. Siva, a good friend
of Kubera, very often visits him. Gandharvas and sages
like Vigvavasu, Haha, Hibi, Parvata, Tumburu and
Sailiisa live in Kubera’s assembly. Narada told Dharmaputra that the Kuberasabha was thus always sweet and
pleasant. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 10). |
8) Fight between Kubera and Ravana. Kubera got secret
‘nformation that the Devas and the brahmins had decided jointly to complain to Mahdavisnu about their
unbearable harassment by Ravana. He sent a messenger to his brother Ravana warning him to lead a more
righteous life. Ravana got so much enraged at the

KUBERA 436
advice of his brother that he cut the messenger into
pieces and served as food to the Raksasas.
Ravana mobilised his army against Kubera and the
Devas, and decided first to attack Kubera. At the head
of a huge army led by heroes like Mahodara, Prahasta,
Marica, Suka, Sarana, Vajradarhstra, Dhimraksa,
Viripaksa, Yuipaksa, Mahaparéva, Matta, Unmatta,
Vikata, Suptaghna, Yajfiantaka, Makaraksa, Kumbhakarna, Atikaya and Aksakumara, Ravana marched to
Alakapuri where a fierce battle ensued between Ravana’s and Kubera’s armies. Many Yaksas were killed
by Ravana’s army, and the Yaksa hero Manicara
killed a large number of Raksasas. As a last resort
Ravana thrashed Manicara on the head with a club
and this turned the hair on his head to one side. From
that day Manicara came to be known as Parsvamauli
(head turned to one side). In the fight that followed
between Kubera and Ravana the former fell down
unconscious. But, the Yaksas brought two Vimdanas
and carried Kubera to the palace. Ravana plundered
Kubera’s palace and carried off to Lanka a lot of costly
gems and other wealth. (Uttara Ramayana)
9:) Kubera became a Chameleon. King Marutta once performed a Maheévara yajfia to which were invited
Indra, Varuna, Kubera and K4la. While the yajfia was
progressing Ravana came that way with ‘his army.
Indra and the others, in great fear, ran away and
escaped disguised in various forms, Kubera assuming
the form of a chameleon. After resuming his own form
Kubera gave the Chameleon the gift to change its
colour. It was further blessed that to the onlookers it
would seem that there was gold on its cheeks. (Uttara
Ramayana).
10) Kubera cursed Viripaksa.
Kubera had a yaksa called
Virupaksa as Manager,
and he was in charge of
Kubera’s treasures also, Virupaksa had employed a
gigantic yaksa to look after the treasures outside the
capital. One day a brahmin called Pasupata came in
search of treasures to Alakapuri. He knew a very
peculiar art, viz. he would go about with a lamp
lighted with ‘the ghee of men’ (oily substance extracted
from human body) and the lamp would tumble down
from his hands on earth exactly on spots where treasures lay hidden. Pasupata tried to unearth Kubera’s
treasures by the above means, and Virupaksa who got
scent of the brahmin’s activities got him killed. Since a,
brahmin (Pagupata ) was killed the sin of brahmahatya
affected the Yaksa community, and angered at this
Kubera cursed Viriipaksa into a man, and he was born
on earth as the son of a brahmin, Viripaksa’s wife
complained about this curse to Kubera, who told her
that she would be born as a daughter of the maidservant of the brahmin as whose son her husband was
born, and that he (son) would marry her, Kubera,
further told her that association with hér would redeem
Viripaksa from the curse and that both of them would
return to him. Accordingly she lay as a human child at
the gates of a brahmin maid-servant, who took it to her
master. The child and the brahmin’s son grew up
together in his father’s house, andin due course they
were wedded to each other. They felt SO happy as
thougn at a reunion after a long” separation, First the
brahmin boy and after him his wife expired, and they
returned to Alakapuri. (Kathdsaritsagara )
KUBERA
11) Kubera and emperor Prthu. While emperor Prthu
was ruling the land in the best interests of his subjects,
mountains, trees, Devas, Asuras, Saptarsis, Raksasas etc.
came to the earth and sang his praises, and as ordered by
the emperor the earth turned itself into a cow and they
milked her. It was Kubera who served as calf when
the Raksasas began to milk the cow. (Drona Parva
Chapter 69, Verse 24). )
The Devas crowned Prthu as ‘mperor, and, on that
Occasion imperial symbols were presented to him. The
throne was presented by Kubera; the royal umbrella by
Varuna; the crown by Indra and the sceptre by Yama.
(Bhagavata, 4th Skandha Chapter 15, Verses 14 and15).
12) Kubera cursed Tumbury. The Yaksa called Tumburu
once displeased Kubera, who cursed him into a Raksasa.
¢ was to be redeemed from the curse on his death at
the hands of Sri Rama. Tumburu, who was born as
e€ was eee in the forest.
: 4Uumburu and returned
(Valmiki
to Kubera’s Palace. Ramayana, Aranya
Kanda, Canto 4).
13) Kuber
regained her equanimity she turned When Parvati
into yellow In colour so that he mgr we of sae
the Incident. Henceforth Kubera cam ee
Ekapingala. € to be known as
14) Agastya cursed & ubera, K
the chanting of mantras held i
Kubera was on his way to Peowcne
wna the latter spat of the a Mt 7 ern a pyet
es orming Penance on the banks of ya, who a
eit ee them thus :__« - ia Kalin
ant ianiman has insulted me. T » your attendoy widens a be killed by a man, yore he himself anu
vise oa fi i you will be absolved from das on = tel
8. Or the man, who had killed Man; 1S curse a
rmy. animan and his
Bhimasena, who went t
search of the Saugandhika foroan* Gan
also was invited to
y the Devas at Kusgavati.
Chapter 161). Curse, (Vana Parva,
15) Other information about K
(Vana avas once during their lif in? ma =
V arva, Chapter 161, V vaile in the forest.
(ii) During the
fainted on the field When Sri Rama
mantras, which Kubera sent choi peed, bat
Guhyaka, which broy ht Ra rough the Yaksa,
(Vana Parva, Chapter 289, Vers 0 Consciousness.
(iii) Kubera once cursed th
eo ec by getting the penis of Sthinak Tan became a
mba and Sthiinakarna ), vesarna. (See under
(iv) Sukracdrya once
Bhisma Parva, Chapte a lot of wealth.
(v) A King called M
Kubera, (Santi P ucukunda ence fought with
Mucukunda. “iva, Chapter 14, Verse 4). Se. under

KUBERATIRTHA.
KUBERATIRTHA
(vi) Sukra once carried off all the wealth of Kubera,
who complained to Siva about it. Siva, in anger, raised
his gala, when Sukra stood on its top and pressed it
down. Siva threw Sukra off, but he fell into the palms
of Siva who threw him again. Sukra then entered the
stomach of Siva and roamed about there finding no
path to get out. Siva waited with the Sula to kill Sukra
the moment he came out of his (Siva’s) stomach. Sukra
came out as Siva’s son, and Parvati prevented Siva from
killing Sukra on the plea that it was not proper to kill
one’s own son. Sukra thus escaped and Kubera lost
some of his wealth, (Santi Parva, Chapter 289).
(vii) On another occasion Kubera entertained sage
Astavakra. (Anugasana Parva, Chapter 19, Verse 37).
(viii) Kubera should be installed in temples as seated
on a goat with club in his hand. (Agni Purana, Chap-
(ix) tie name of Kubera’s wife was Bhadra. (Adi
Parva, Chapter 198, Verse 6).
(x) Kubera is called Naravahana also as he rides im a
vehicle drawn by men. He is also called Rajarayja,
a Be is King of Kings. (Adi Parva, Chapter 275, Verses
" Js
(xi) Visravas got angry with Kubera, and from that
day he deputed three Raksasa girls to serve his father.
(Vana Parva, Chapter 275, Verses 1-3). .
xii) Synonyms for Kubera used in Mahabharata. Alakadhipa, Dhanada, Dhanades vara, Dhanagopta, Dhanadhipa, Dhanadhipati, Dhanadhyaksa, . Dhanesvara,
Dhanapati, Dhanega, Dravinapati, Gadadhara, Guhyakadhipa, Guhyakadhipati, Kailasanilaya, Naravahana,
Nidhipa, Paulastya, Rajaraja, Rajarat, Raksasadhipau,
Raksasegvara, Vaisravana,. Vittagop!a, on
Vittega, Yaksadhipa, Yaksadhipati, Yaksapat, * 20
pravara, Yaksarat, Yaksaraja, Yaksaraksasabharta,
Yaksaraksodhipa.
xiii) Kubera’s garden is called
Nalakibara, his capital Alaka and hi
ae oe hundred years when
xiv) Kubera once did tapas for
ve appeared and granted him the boon that he would
become King of the Yaksas. (Padma Purana, Adikhanda
Chapter 16).
Caitraratha, his son
5 mountain-seat
A holy place on the banks of the
river Sarasvati. Once the Devas appeared to ae
this tirtha and granted him overlordship, © we x
friendship of Siva, Deva-hood and gs ip ey ak
world. The Marudganas crowned him : a 2 ee
the son Nalakibara also ther. The a Oe HeNaimportant in many ways came to ie — : y
tirtha in later years. (Salya Parva, e e se. Kubha
KUBHA. A river mentioned 10. the xgveda. v3 an
Siniln, Sueastn, ‘Witastd, Asie, 5 GUN, amt
Satadra, Sarasvati and coi. are the importa
rivers referred to in the Rgved4KUBJA. An ugly woman bout ighow cid eee
story is told in Chapter 126, of Uttarakhans
Purana. |
Kubja became a widow in her very childhood, and she
e a be Ss ceremonies.
ving auspiciou
spent eight years in observing r she attained
As she took the ‘Magha bath’ every Yr?
salvation. This ms the period a eee =
Upasunda were harassing the worl , ah “trad, thew
them Kubja incarnated as Tilottama an : — bes
by her excellent beauty. They fought each ©
KUKKURA I.
KUKKURA I
hand and got killed. Brahma was pleased at this and
granted Kubja a place in Stryaloka.
KUBJAMRAKA. A holy place. A visit to this place is
as good as offering a gift of a thousand cows. The
visitor will also attain heaven. (Vana Parva, Chapter
84, Verse 40).
KUCELA. Sudadman, better known as Kucela was a
brahmin class-mate of Sri Krsna at the Agrama of
sage Sandipani. One day Sandipani’s wile deputed
Kucela and Krsna to collect fire-wood from the forest,
and they had to stay the whole night there as they
could not find out the way back to the asrama due to
heavy rain, thunder etc. After their education was
over these two thick friends left the asrama and went
their different ways in life.
Sri Krsna became the lord of Dvaraka, and Kucela a
house-holder with many children, and_ starvation
gripped the family. One day, at the instance of his
wife, Kucela started for Dvaraka to visit Krsna with a
packet of rice flakes as a present to him. Krsna received his old classmate most cordially, and ate one handful of rice flakes from the packet brought by Kucela.
Rukmini prevented him from a second helping of the
flakes. After spending some time most happily with his
old friend, Kucela started homewards. Only on _his
way back did he think that Krsna had not given him
- any monetary help. But, by the time he reached home
his old dilapidated house had converted itself into a
beautiful mansion, and his wife and children were in
great happiness. Sri Krsna’s blessings thus converted
poor Kucela into a very rich person. (Bhagavata, 10th
Skandha).
KUHA. A prince of the Sauvira kingdom. He was a
follower of Jayadratha. (Vana Parva, Chapter 265,
Verse IL).
KUHARA. A King of Kalinga. He was born from an
aspect of the Asura called Krodhavasa. (Adi Parva,
Chapter 67, Verse 65).
KUHU. Daughter of Angiras, one of the Prajapatis.
To Angiras, by his wife Smrti were born four daughters
called Sinivali, Kuhi, Raka and Anumati. (Visnu
Purana, Part 1, Chapter 10).
KUJA. Kuja is an individual belonging to the Devagana. His weapon is called Sakti. He wears the
aksamala. (Rudraksa garland).
KUJRMBHA. A very powerful and valiant Raksasa
who possessed an iron rod named Sunanda. He had
earned the boon that the rod would lose its power
only on contact with women. He lived underground in
a thick forest on the banks of the river Nirvindhya.
Once he abducted Mudavati, the beautiful daughter .of
Vidiratha, King of Vaisali. At last Vatsapri, the son
of Bhalandana made Mudavati touch the iron rod of
the Asura, which became powerless because of the
touch of a woman, and then he (Vatsapri) killed the
Asura. Vatsapri then married Mudavati. (Markandeya
Purana, Chapter 116).
KUKARDAMA. A wicked monarch of Pindarakadega.
He had to be born in Pretayoni (womb of a ghostess)
due to his many sins, and once he came to the agrama
of Kahoda, and the sage recognised him as his former
disciple and absolved him from his ghosthood. (Padma
Purana, Uttara Khanda, Chapter 139).
A King of the Lunar dynasty, the
founder of the Kukkura dynasty.

KUKKURA II
KUKKURAII.A noble sage who distinguished himself in
Dharmaputra’s court. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 4, Verse
KUKKURA (M). An urban region in ancient India.
(Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 42).
KUKKUTIKA. A female attendant of Skanda. (Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 46, Verse 15).
KUKUDMIN. A son, Anarta, was born to King
Saryati, the son of Vaivasvata Manu. Revata, the
famous Rajarsi, who ruled from _ his capital at Kuéasthali island, was theson of Anarta. Anarta had hundred
sons, the eldest being Kukudmin, and also a daughter
called Revati. (Devi Bhagavata, 7th Skandha).
KUKURA I. (KUKURA). A King of the Vrsni
dynasty. From Vrsni the descendants are in the
following order :—Yudhajit—Sini— Satyaka — Satyaki
(Yuyudhana )—Jaya — Kuni — Anamitra — Prsni —
Citraratha—Kukura. As Kukura was a very reputed
King his successors were also called Kukuras. The
Ksatriyas of this dynasty were subject to the orders of
Sri Krsna. ( Udyoga Parva, Chapter 28). Members of
the Kukura and Andhaka dynasties became drunkards,
and at last quarrelled with one another and died.
(Mausala Parva, Chapter ope
KUKURA II. A serpent born in the Kagyapa dynasty.
_(Udyoga Parva, Chapter 103, Verse 10).
KUKURA (M). An urban region in ancient India.
(Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 60).
KUKSI I.
were born two sons called Priyavrata and Uttanapada
by his wife Sataripa, and Kardama Prajapati married
the daughter of Priyavrata, And, to them were . born
three sons called Samrat, Kuksi. and Virat. (Agni
Purana, Chapter 18).
KUKSIII. A well known Asura King. An aspect of
this Asura was later reborn as King Parvatiya. (Adi
Parva, Chapter 67, Verse 96),
KULACALA. (KULAPARVATA) - Kulaparvatas are
seven in number, Viz. Mahendra, Malaya, Sahya
Suktiman, Rksavan, Vindhya, Pariyatra. ( Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 11), —
KULADHARMA. The moral and ethical codes of
conduct, especially with reference to family life. Arjuna
told the following about Kuladharmas to Krsna at
Kuruksetra. _
In the decline of a family, its time-honoured usages
perish; with the perishing of such rites impiety overtakes the entire family.
With the growth of impiety even the noble women
become unchaste, and if women become corrupt,
mixture of castes ensues.
Hell is verily the lot of the family and family-destroyers
through caste admixture; for, their ancestors fall
deprived of balls of rice and libations.
The ever-lasting caste virtuesand the family merits get
ruined because of the chaos in the caste system,
We have heard that hell is verily the long-lasting abode
of the men whose family religious practices have been
broken. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 25 and the Gita)
KULAMPUNA. A river which ought to be daily remembered. (Anusasana Parva, Chapter 165, Verse
KULAMPUNA. A holy place. A bath here brings
about sanctification of the entire family. (Vana Parva,
Chapter 83, Verse 104).
‘ KUMARADATTA,
To Svayambhuva Manu the son of Brahma
KUMARI IV
KULATTHA. A holy centre in ancient India. (Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 66). _
KULIKA. A prominent serpent born of Kadri. (Adi
Parva, Chapter 65, Verse 4] ).
KULYA. A Rsi who belonged to the line of disciples of
Vyasa. (Bhagavata, 12th Skandha).
KUMARA I, Skanda or Subrahmanya. (For details see
under Skanda),
KUMARA II. A King in ancient India, He was
invited by the Pandavas to help them in the great war.
He was defeated by Drona, (Udyoga Parva, Chapter 4,
Verse 24).
KUMARA III. A sage reputed as Sanatkumara.
details see under Sanatkumara).,
KUMARA IV. One of the prominent sons of Garuda.
KUMARA V. An urban region in ancient India. King
Sreniman of Kumara was defeated by Bhima during
in triumphal tour. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 30, Verse
KUMARA (S). Sanaka, Sanandana, Sanatkumara and
a Wes the sons of Brahma endowed with
cternal youthfulness. They are known as the Kumaras.
KUMARADASA. A Sanskrit poet of the 7th century
A.D. His chief work is the great poem called Janakiharanam consisting of twenty cantos.
Guardian of the mother
Vaisya called Misika. (See under Misika).
KUMARADHARA. A river which ha. its source in
Brahmasaras. Those who bathe in the river will become intelligent and wealthy, (Vv P en
84, Verse 149). y- (Vana Parva, Chap
the
KUMARAKA. A prominent serpent born in
Kauravya dynasty. It was burnt to death at the serpent
(For
of the
yajiia of King Janamejaya. ( Adi Parva, Chapter 5/7,
Verse 13),
KUMARAKOTI. Aholy place. A visit to the place
1s as good as offering a-gift of a thousand cows. (Vana
Parva, Chapter 2, Verse 117),
KKUMARAVANA (M). The Place where King
Sudyumna got changed into a woman. When __ once
Sanaka and other sages went to Kumaravana to see
iva he was seated there with Parvati on his lap.
Seeing the sages Parvati got angry and cursed that
men who entered the forest in future would be turned
ito women. King Sudyumna went to hunt in the
Puriiravas was the son born to this
(Devi Bhagavata, Ist Skandha),
KUMARAVARSA, A place near mount
(Bhisma Parva, Chapter 11, Verse 26).
KUMARI TI. A Princess of the Kekaya kingdom. She
a ee mother of Pratisravas, and wife of Bhimasena,
a King of the Purn dynasty, (Adj Parva, Chapter 95,
Verse 43)
Chapter 93 na
Parva, it is stated that certain maidens al en from
Were called Kumars an
renin the womb of their
Raivataka.
KUMARI Ill. Wife of the ser
{ fii
(Udyoga Parva, Chapter 117, Verse 175" famed
KUMARI Iv. A river in ancient India
Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 36), (Bhigmé

KUMARI V. A river in the Saka
KUMBHA I.
KUMBHA.
KUMBHAKA I.
KUMARI V
island. (Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 11, Verse 32).
KUMARIPUJA. Itisa special item in Navaratripija.
According to the definition ‘Kumarika tu sa prokta
dvivarsa ya bhavediha’, Kumari is a two-year old
female child. To worship such a child is Kumaripuja,
and it should be conducted accompanied by sumptuous
feasts and presentation of clothes etc. There are no
hard and fast rules as fo how many Kumiéris should
be worshipped and as to the manner and method of
the worship. The same Kumari may be worshipped
during all the days of the Puja, or every day one more
girl may be worshipped like this:—one girl on the first
day, two on the second day and so on. Or it may be
in the order 4,6, 8 etc or 4,8, 12, 16 etc. Even if
the daily number be nine it isin order. There 1s no
rule that Kumaris alone should be worshipped; any one
of the navakanyakas would do. A girl two years
old is called Kumari, three years old Trimurti; four
years old Kalyani; five years old Rohini; six years old
Kali; Seven years old Candika; eight years old Sambhavi; nine years old Durga and ten years old Subhadra.
These girls are called Navakanyakas. But, a child less
than two years of age should not be worshipped, because
it will not be fully sensitive to taste, smell etc. Also,
age alone does not render Kumaris suitable for worship.
They shouldbe absolutely free from ulcers, De:
ugliness, squint-eyes, dwarfishness, lameness, ba
odour, stigma of low b Formed:
special objects a Brahmin child should be wors NPs 3
for victory, a Ksatriya child and for profit, a ” ye
or a Sidra child should be worshipped. The = fi a
may worship brahmin children; the Ksatriya, Brahmin
and Ksatriya children; the Vaisya, Brahmin, ee oe
and Vaisya children; and the Sidra, oo
Ksatriya, Vaigya and Sidra children. (Devi Bhagavata, 3rd Skandha).
One of the three s
other two being Virocana an
Parva, Chapter 65, Verse 19). f
; hakarna, whose wile
II. Son of Kumbha lled Kumbha and
eae him two sons ca
Nite eha., Both of them were very apy —
Kumbha, in the Rama-Ravana war es seiniistes
of monkeys on various occasions. Many 0 a on BE
of Sugriva tried to defeat Kumbha. <i Sugriva
Bali also could not stand up to aint into the sea
fought against Kumbha and flung i el of mount
when the water in it rose up 10 the: .6Y |
the sea roaring
Vindhva. Kumbha came ashore from the sear
fraeick thted fe death by Sugriva. (Valmiki Ramayana,
Yuddha Kanda, Case ie af Skanda. (Salya Parva,
Verse 75). _s
KUMBHAKA II. *Nikumbhaka) A ing — Bese.
If he visited any place at dusk he “3 7 King Divoihousane gears. Fe visited Ee aii killed the Raksasa
dasa was ruling the state after having : Tee, Kili
called Ksemaka, who had livee te a th tis disciples.
bhaka lived in a forest In asi Wl adius of three
Prosperity reigned supreme wits A OFT heats
Yojanas. from where + sage lived. Nel
mine infested the area. _ oo
aces sence famine broke out 1n Kasi, a coms ra
of rain caused great havoc. Finding 1 Pp
ons of Prahlada, the
d Nikumbha. (Adi
irth etc. For the achievement of
KUMBHAKARNA
feed the cows their keepers went with their live-stock
every morning to Kumbhaka’s place where summer had
not yet even peeped in, and after feeding their cows
there, they returned home in the evening. But, one evening they led back with them the cows used by the sage for
his Pijas. When the sun set, as usual the sage sat before
the sacred fire for Puja. But, the cow had not come.
With his divine vision he found out the reason for the
absence of the cow. He cursed that the region where
the keepers of the cows lived be turned into a desert,
and the kingdom of Kasi became a desert place, whereupon king Divodasa went to the banks of the Gomati
and founded a new kingdom there. (Brahmanda Purana
Chapter 2).
KUMBHABARNA.
1) Genealogy. Descended from Visnu thus: Brahma—
Pulastya—Visravas—Kumbhakarna.
2) Birth, Pulastya, one of the Prajapatis married
Havirbhii (Manini) and a son called Visravas was
born to them.
Ravana and Kumbhakarna were born to Visravas of
Puspotkata, and Vibhisana was born to him of Raka,
and Khara and Sirpanakha were born to him of
Malini. The above version is based on verses—] to 8 in
Chapter 275 of the Vana Parva. But, according to
Uttara Ramayana, Ravana, Vibhisana and Kumbhakarna were born to Visravas of his wife called Kaikasi.
According to the Agni Purana, Puspotkata and Kaikaéi
were one and the same.
3) Former births of Kumbhakarna. Ravana and Kumbhakarna were originally the two Devas called Jaya and
Vijaya. Visnu appointed them as gate-keepers at Vaikuntha. Once they stopped sages like Sanaka and others
at the gates, and the latter cursed Jaya and Vijaya into
Raksasas. When they complained about the curse to
Visnu he promised to welcome them back to Vaikuntha
after they had lived three births as Raksasas. Accordingly Jaya was born as Hiranyaksa and Vijaya as
Hiranyakasipu, both of them Asuras. Mahavisnu incarnated himself asa Boar and killed Hiranyaksa and
as Narasimha he killed Hiranyakasipu. Hiranyaksa and
Hiranyakasipu were reborn as Ravana and Kumbhakarna respectively. Mahavisnu, during his incarnation
as Sri Rama killed both Ravana and Kumbhakarna.
Ravana was reborn as Sigupala and Kumbhakarna as Dantavaktra. Both of them were killed by
Mahavisnu during his incarnation as Sri Krsna. Thus
the Deva called Vijaya, on account of the curse of
Sanaka ‘and other sages, passed through three lives as
Hiranyakasipu, Kumbhakarna and Dantavaktra and
finally reached Vaikuntha. (Bhagavata, 7th Skandha).
4) RKumbhakarna secured boons. Kumbhakarna_ spent his
childhood with his brothers at the 4srama of his father
on mount Gandhamadana. Kubera was at the zenith of
his glory at that time, having been crowned king of the
Yaksas, and alsohaving got the Puspaka Vimana. The
reputation of Kubera kindled jealousy in Kumbhakarna
and his brothers. They too performed penance in the
forest on one foot for a thousand years. But, Brahma
did not appear. They continued the penance without
eating any food. Khara and Sirpanakha stayed there
serving their brothers. Even after the second thousand
years Brahma did not appear. Then Ravana cut off his
ten heads and made offerings of them to Brahma. Then
Brahma appeared. Brahma restored his heads to Ravana

KUMBHAKARNASRAMA
and he was granted the boon that he would not be
killed by anybody but a man. The Devas shuddered
at the gift to Ravana, and feared about the future in
case Kumbhakarna too got such a boon. At their request
Sarasvati danced on his tongue at the time of
Kumbhakarna’s request for a boon. Kumbhakarna wanted NIRDEVATVAM (Absence of all
Devas). But by a slip of the tongue (caused by Sarasvati) what he asked for was nidravatvam (sleep).
Brahma granted him nidravatvam ; he said that Kumbhakarna would sleep for six months of the year
continuously, Vibhisana got the boon that he should remember righteousness in danger and use the Brahmastra
without any training in its use. Lhe brothers returned
home after securing the boons, and, after driving off
Kubera, the lord of Lanka, Ravana and his brothers
took their abode there. (Vana Parva, Chapter 275 and
Uttara Ramayana).
9) Death of Kumbhakarna. Kumbhakarna played a very
important part in the Rama-Ravana war. Prominent
warriors on the side of Rama, like Sugriva, his ministers and Laksmana fought with him. But, none of them
could kill him. At last, Sri Rama’s arrows killed him.
(Valmiki Ramayana, Yuddha Kanda, Chapter 67).
Kumbhakarna is not to be viewed merely and purely
as an evil character. His advice to Ravana on various
occasions shows noble traits of his character. When &ri
Rama with his army of monkeys appeared’ on the other
side of the ocean Ravana held a conference of his
brothers, ministers and others at which Kumbhakarna
spoke as follows:—“You abducted Sita without consulting us, and we would not therefore be responsible for
the consequences of that action of yours. But, it is not
proper that the younger brother should keep away
when danger faces the elder one, and on that principle
here I am ready to fight Rama.”
These weighty words of Kumbhakarna throw consjderable light on the character of Kumbhakarna.
(Valmiki Ramayana, Yuddhakanda, Chapter 12).
KUMBHAKARNASRAMA, A holy place. He who
visits this place will enjoy the respect of others. (Vana
Parva, Chapter 84, Verse 157). .
KUMBHANDA. Minister of Bandasura. Citralekha,
companion of Usa, the daughter of Bana was the daughter of Kumbhanda. (See under USA). (Bhagavata,
10th Skandha).
KUMBHANDAKODARA. A warrior of Skandadeva.
(Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 69). |
KUMBHARETAS (RATHAPRABHU, RATHADHVANA). Bharadvaja, the first son of Sarhyu married Vira,
and an Agnideva was born as their son. This Agni is
known by the names Kumbharetas, Rathaprabhu and
Rathadhvana. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 220, Verse
ASRAVAS. . An attendant
“= Parva, Chapter 46, Verse 26),
KUMBHAVAKTRA. A warrior of Skandadeva. (Salya
Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 75).
KUMBHAYONII. Agastya. (See under Agastya),
KUMBHAYONI II. A Deva woman who danced in
Indrasabha when Arjuna came to Indraloka. (Vana
Parva, Chapter 43, Verse 30).
KUMBHINADI. Daughter of Sum4li the Raksasa, by
Ketumati. She was abducted by the King of Mathura
of Skandadeva.
KUMUDAMALI
called Madhupa. Ravana killed him.
Madhupa).
KUMBHINASA. An asura and a notorious philanderer.
(Anus asana Parva, Chapter 39, Verse 7).
KUMBHINASI I. Wife of Angaraparna, a _ great
Gandharva. When Arjuna was about to kil] Citraratha
Kumbhinasi requested Yudhisthira to save her husband,
and he wasaccordingly set free. (For details see under
Angaraparna).
KUMBHINASI II. A daughter born to Vigvavasu of
Anala. A Raksasa called Madhu abducted and made
her his wife. The famous Lavandsura was their son.
KUMBHIPAKA (M). One of the twentyeight narakas
(hells). It is intended for the cruel folk, who kill for
food harmless animals and birds. Since such cruel folk
are roasted in Kumbhi fire the hel] came to be known
y this name. Big vessels full of boiling oil are kept
there and the servants ofYama push the sinners into
them. One who had killed an animal] will be kept in
the boiling oil for as many years as the number of hairs
the animal killed by him had on its body. (Devi
Menai, Sth Skandha; also see under Pitrtirtha).
(See under
KUMUDA J. rominent .
Chapter 35, Verse 15). on’ Serpent. (Adi Parva,
KUMUDA Il. A prominent monkey, who was an
aa of Sugriva, (Vana
Oe EOD IIT. A great elephant born in the dynasty
“ by Agee (Udyoga Parva, Chapter 99, Verse 15).
DA IV. A‘son of Garnda, (Udyoga Parva,
KUMP ol: oe 12).
; ne of th
eine Shands e five attendants
Parva, Chapter 289, Verse
iven by
. (Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Verse
KUMUDA VI. A warrior Ww
deva. (Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 56)
serene VII. Synonym of Mahavisnu
sasana Parva, Chapter 149, Verse 76). _
ee VIII. There are four mountains supporting
, ameru on its four sides, and Kumuda is one of those
. a mountains, Mandara, Merumandara and Suparsva
ead te oe three, According to the 8th Skandha
1 Dnagavata th
on the four ides of ar be i niga 4.
Kusumbha, Vikankata Po aga aia
ho fought with Skanda-
(Anu-
: ’ Trikita Sis: :
Rucaka, Nila, Nisadha a aa isira, Patanga,
Vaidiirya, Carudhi, Harte va Kapila, Sankha,
and Narada. a5.
KUMUDADI. One of those
rg to the line of Vy
the Atharvaveda. Jaiminj was ra
Vyasa. His son, Sumantu, ates Pie i
Kabandha the Atharvaveda. Kabandha di ‘id it into
two between Devadarga and Pathya, Medha. on of be 7
bali, Sautkayani and Pippalada were the di 7 ver
Devadarsa, and Jabali, Kumudadi and aa €
6). disciples of Pathya. ( ey gr Fae
Visnu Purana, Part 3, Chapter
KUMUDAKSA,. A rominent
Chapter 35, Verse 15). oe SSREERG.
KUMUDAMALT (KU MUDAMAN})
four attendants given by Brahma to Skan
three being Nandisena, Ghantakarna
All the four were very powerful, as swift
aga, Kalafijara
Vedic
~ , vet Scholars, who
asa’s disciples.
His forte was
(Adi Parva,
One of the
da, the other
and Lohitaksa.
and speedy as

KUMUDODARA
wind and noted for their sexual energy. (Salya Parva,
Chapter 45, Verse 25).
KUMUDODARA. A particular region in the Saka
island. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 11, Verse 25).
KUMUDVATII. Wife of King Vimargana of KiratadeSa. Kumudvati requested him one day, to put a
_ Stop to his cruelties against the people. His reply was
as follows :—‘‘Oh ! dear wife, don’t feel sorry. In my
past life I was a dog and, starved almost to death, I
went tothe gates of the Siva temple at Pampapura. It
was Caturdasi day, and thousands of people had
gathered there, and I stood there looking at the
ivalinga. Then someone cried out, ‘Beat the dog to
death’, and though, in mortal terror, I ran_ thrice
about the temple, people beat me te death. Since,
although only by accident, i had run thrice around
the temple, I was born as a King in the present life. I
cherish the greatest devotion for Lord iva; but, as
inherent tendencies do not die out so easily 1 possess
certain characteristics of the dog and that ts why 1
commit the present cruelties.”’
On hearing her husband’s past history Kumudvati
wanted to know about her past also, and Vimarsana
said thus : ‘In the past life you were a she-dove. Once
you sat on the top of a Parvati temple with a p1ece of
flesh in your beak. Then another dove tried to snatch
it from you, and with it you flew thrice round the
temple. But, the other dove killed you and flew away
with the piece of flesh. Since you flew around the
Parvati temple thrice you are now born as @ queen.
Vimaréara told her this also that in the next birth eh
would be born as the daughter of King Srfijaya, as i
daughter of the King of Kalinga in her third ees
as the daughter of the King of Magadha in <1 re,
birth, asthe daughter of King Dasarna in her
birth, as the daughter of Yayau im
the daughter named Vasumati of the
in her seventh birth, and that va
attain salvation. Vimarsana in os King’ of
likewise be born as the oe Peas — Gendhara
Saurastra in his third birt Dk vin his fifth birth,
in his fourth birth, as King o nee as. King of the
as King Anarta in his sixth birth, Re vets age
_ a “th, and that ultimately 2
Pandyas in his seventh birth, Vimarsana taught his
too would attain salvation. Thus | ‘n salvation
; ad ultimately attain saiva'
wife that both of them wou ae: A iva Purana,
as theyhad gone om the temple.
Caturdagsimahatmya) - ; ¢ &= Rama.
KUMUDVATI Il. Wife a usr tar se once
Kuga lost the ornaments ou Angry at the loss
while he was sporting 10 the river. at the Sarayu when
fa his arrows : :
Kuga was about to shoot ly returned to him his
the naga called Kumuda se earrndiitatl as wife to him.
lost ornaments but a; fa sae | |
Ananda Ramayana) . lva Parva,
KUNADIKA. A warrior of Skanda deva. (Saly
Chapter 45, Verse 58). e
KURTA, A vel erudite nde afi se
at the serpent a of Jana <r
Chapter 53, Verse °)- ts given by
KUNDA. One of the five aio 5 Etruria, Kumuda,
to Skandadeva, the other a va, Parva,
Dambara and Adambara. (satya,
Verse 38).
King of Vidarbha
mately she would
next birth would
He was present
her sixth birth, as_
(Adi Parva, .
KUNDODARA III
KUNDABHEDI. Ason of Dhrtarastra; Bhima killed
him. (Drona Parva, Chapter 127, Verse 60).
KUNDADANTA. A Videha brahmin, Kundadanta
gave up his worldly possession for the attainment
of spiritual knowledge, and sought the help of sage
Kadamba. Finding that he had not yet completely.
mastered the senses Kadamba sent him to Ayodhya,
where he lived with Sri Rama, and Vasistha taught
him the necessary texts on the subject so that he
attained spiritual knowledge. (Yogavasistha).
KUNDADHARA I. A son of Dhrtarastra. He is known as
Kundodara also. Bhimasena killed him. (Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 88, Verse 23).
KUNDADHARA II. A serpent worshipping Varuna in
his court. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 9. Verse 9).
KUNDADHARA III. A cloud. None of the Devas
condescended to bless a poor brahmin, who once performed penance in the forest when a cloud called Kundadhara appeared and told him that, if the Devas would
permit, he (cloud) would bless him. Immediately the
Deva called Manibhadra requested the cloud to bless
the brahmin. The cloud did so and the brahmin
attained salvation. (Santi Parva, Chapter 271).
KUNDAJA (KUNDABHEDI. A son of Dhrtarastra;
Bhima killed him. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 96, Verse
KUNDALA I. A serpent born in the Kaurava dynasty.
It was burnt to death at the serpent yajfia of Janamejaya. (Adi Parva, Chapter 57, Verse 16).
KUNDALA II. An urban region in ancient India.
(Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 63).
KUNDALAPURUSA. See under Samudrika Sastra.
KUNDALI I, One of the children of Garuda. (Udyoga
Parva, Chapter 101, Verse 9).
KUNDALI Il. A river the water of which was drunk by
the Indiaus. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 21).
KUNDALI Ill. A son of Dhrtarastra, also kuown as
Kundasi. He was killed by Bhima, (Bhisma. Parva,
Chapter 96, Verse 24). |
KUNDALI IV. A synonym of Sri Krsna. (Anu§4sana
Parva, Chapter 149, Verse 110).
KUNDAPARANTA. Anurban area in ancient India.
(Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 49).
KUNDARIKA. A female attendant of Skandadeva.
(Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Verse 15),
KUNDASI. See under Kundali Il.
KUNDIKA. Great-grandson ofKing Kuru of the lunar
dynasty, and son of Dhrtarastra. (Adi Parva, Chapter
-KUNDINA. The capital of ancient Vidarbha. Damayanti was born and brought up in this city. (See under
Damayanti). |
KUNDIVISA, An urban region in ancient
(Bhisma Parva, Chapter 50, Verse 50).
India.
-KUNDIVRSA. An urban region in ancient India.
(Bhisma Parva, Chapier 56, Verse 9).
KUNDODARA I. A son of Dhrtarastra. Bhima killed
him. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 88, Verse 23).
KUNDODARA II. A prominent serpent. (Adi Parva,
Chapter 35,Verse 16).
KUNDODARA III. Sixth son of King Janamejaya. The
King had eight sons, Viz. Dhrtarastra, Pandu, Balhika,
Nisadha, Jambiinada, Kundodara, Padati and Vasati,
(Adi Parva, Chapter 94, Verse 57).

KUNIGARGA 442
KUNIGARGA. A reputed sage. By severe austerities he
increased his spiritual powers, created a girl by his
mental power, and afterwards entered into Samadhi.
The girl, who did not relish the idea of marriage, began
penance in solitude, and she grew old. In the Mahabharata she is known as Vrddhakanya (Old Virgin). In
the evening of her life she longed to give up her
material body and to attain salvation.’ At this juncture
Narada told her that salvation was not for unmarried
women. She, therefore, gave half the power of her
penance to a young man called Srnigavan and lived as
his wife for one single night. She thus attained salvation
(Salya Parva, Chapter D2).
KUNINDA. A noble brahmin. He presented a divine
conch to Yudhisthira at his Rajasiya Yajfia. (Sabha
Parva, Chapter 51, Southern text),
KUNJA. A reputed sage. Once he enjoyed the company
of Pramlocd, the celestial woman. (See under
Pramloca) .
KUNJALA I. A warrior of Skanda. (Salya Parva.
Chapter 45).
KUNJALA II. A wise parrot which lived on the banks
of the river Narmada. The Padma Purana (Chapter
89, Bhimikhanda) has the following to say about the
parrot.
Kufijala, the wise parrot, had a wife and four sons
called Ujjvala, Samujjvala, Vijvala and Kapifijala.
These brothers used to feed themselves on sweet fruits
etc. on the planes, mountains and other places. They
also used to carry tasty fruits to their parents. The four
brothers thus led a happy life in every way. (See under
Subahu).
KUNJARA I. A great monkey. Afijana mother of
Hantiiman was the daughter of Kufijara. ( Valmiki
Ramayana, Kiskindha Kanda: Canto 66, Verse 9).
KUNJARA II. A well-known serpent. (Adi Parva,
Chapter 35, Verse 15).
KUNJARA III. A prince of the Sauvira country. He
was a follower of Jayadratha, and was killed by Arjuna.
(Vana Parva, Chapter 27] he |
KUNTAKA (KUNTALA ). A Sanskrit poet who flourished in the eleventh century A.D. He was a contemporary of Abhinavagupta, and a critic who maintained
that the ‘life’ of rea] poetry was Vakrokti expressing
ideas in an artistically round-about way instead of in a
blunt and plain manner).
KUNTALA. The King of the country Kuntala. Kuntala
was a Kingdom in ancient South India. The King of
the country was called Kuntala and the people were
known as Kuntalas. (Sabha Parva, and Bhisma Parva ve
KUNTI (PRTHA). Wife of King Pandu and the mother
of the Pandavas, Kunti is a noble heroine in the Mahabharata. .
1) Birth, Kunti was the sister of Sri Krsna’s father
Vasudeva. Herreal name was Prtha. Vasudeva and
Prtha were the children of King Siirasena of the Yadava
dynasty. King Kuntibhoja was the son of Siirasena’s
sister. He had no issues. Surasena had promised to give
the daughter first born to him as the adopted daughter
of Kuntibhoja, and accordingly his first-born daughter
Prtha was given to Kuntibhoja, and Kunti was brought
up in his palace. From that day onwards Prtha came to
. known as Kunti. (Adi Parva, Chapter 111),
Kunti, Madri and Gandhari were born from aspects
respectively of the three celestial women Siddhi,
KUNTI I
Krti and Mati. (Adi Parva, Chapter 67, Verse 160).
2) Kunti and the mantra. To treat brahmins who came
to the court of Kuntibhoja with worshipful offerings
etc. was the duty of Kunti. Once sage Durvasas visited
Kuntibhoja, and as he knew that the sage was easily
annoyed Kunti was specially deputed for his service,
and she served him to the utmost. One day, to test
Kunti, he asked her to be ready with his food by the
time he took his bath, and he took practically no time
to return after bath and sit for meals. By that time
Kunti had managed to cook his food, which she placed
before him in a plate. The food was too hot and steaming, and the sage meaningfully looked at the back of
Kunti. Realising the meaning of the look, Kunti turned
her back to the sage for him to place the plate of food
thereon. The sage placed it accordingly on her back
and began eating, Though her back was really burning
she showed no sign of it. Pleased at her behaviour the
Sage taught her a mantra and blessed her to the following effect.
‘Repeating this mantra you invoke whichever Deva you
like and thanks to his favour you will get children.
(Kathasaritsagara, Lavanakalambaka, Taranga 2 and
Bharata (Malayalam) Chapter 111),
3) Kunti tested the mantra. After the departure of
Durvasas from the palace, Kunti developed an irresistible desire to test the eficacy of the mantra. and one
day she invoked Sun-god with t
to yield. She requested Sirya for a son adorned with
a car-rings etc. (Vana Parva Chapter 207 Verse
Surya assured Kunti that even though a child was born
to her from him, that wil] not affect her virginity an
departed. Kunti delivered a son in due course of time
in secret. She locked up the child in a box and floated
it in the Yamuna. An old charioteer called Adhiratha
become the famous Karna. (Adi Parva, Chapter 112)-
4) Kunti’s wedding. In due course Kuntibhoja_celebrated Kunti’s Svayarhvara and she chose King Pandu
ms ne iso dynasty as her husband, and Pandu took
cr to Fastinapura in all po Adi Parva,
Chapter ria). pomp and glory. (Adi Parv
9) Kunti’s wedded life. Pandu marri
called Madri, and all the three
the forms of deer. The
: the moment he touched
his wives, and grief-stricken at
| the curse he told his
: oa about it and decided to take to Sannyasa. But,
the wives told him that they would commit suicide in
a rd gh A ae hangs Ultimately Pandu went to
Wi 1S Wives, and there or: r
formance of penances, he began the Ee
— some time Pandu asked his wives to become
me ers by some noble persons, But, Kunti and Madri
id not agree to it, Then Kunti told Pandu about the

KUNTII
boon she had got from Durvasas, and with his permission she bore three sons called Dharmaputra, Bhima
and Arjuna respectively from the three Devas, Dharma,
Vayu and Indra. As it had been ordained that the
fourth and fifth children would bring sorrows and pain
to the parents Kunti satisfied herself with three children (Adi Parva, Chapter 122, Verses 77, 78).
But, as Pandu desired that Madri also should have
children by Kunti’s mantra she used the remaining
mantra and two sons, Nakula and Sahadeva from the
ASvinidevas were born to her.
6) Kunt? widowed. During a winter when the forest
was fragrant with flowers, Pandu forgot all about the
Sage’s curse and indulged in sexual joys with Madri, and
immediately he expired. Kunti and Madri competed
with each other to end their life in the funeral pyre of
their husband. But, as the sages and other relations
insisted that one of them should live to bring up the
children, Madri alone ended her life, and Kunti returned
to Hastinapura with the five children. (Adi Parva,
Chapter 125).
7) Kunti at Hastindpura. At Hastinapura differences
cropped up between the Pandavas and the Kauravas.
Kunti and the five Pandavas removed themselves to
the ‘Lac palace’ built at Varanavata. When the palace
was gutted by fire Kunti and her sons escaped through
a secret tunnel to the forest, and Bhima carried the
worn out Kunti on his shoulders. In the forest the
Raksasa woman Hidimbi, requested Kunti to permit
Bhima to become her husband, and Kunti advised
Bhima to beget a child by Hidimbi, and thus was born
Ghatotkaca. At the city named Ekacakra, Vyasa consoled
Kunti. There the brahmins complained to Kuntt about
the depredations of Bakasura. Kunti got Baka killed by
Bhima and asked the brahmins to keep the matter secret.
On the advice of a brahmin who came there psc EEN
ly Kunti and others visited the Paficala kingdom, any
there Arjuna, having defeated all the ings, pe ‘aia
at Paficali’s Svayamvara wedded her. The Panda
who returned with Paiicali at dusk time were Ace my
Kunti to enjoy that day’s bhiksa (Alms receive) me
gether among themselves. Accordingly Panica’s he court
the wife of all the five Pandavas. Vigne, = ito her
of the Paficala King saluted Kunti and ae _ ialked
various varieties of gems. Kunti and Vidu
idura
about the painful incidents of the past, and Vidu
escorted the Pandavas back to Hastinapura.
Arjuna led a solitary life in the forest en Year ame
then returned to Hastinapura with Subha ie adit
had married meanwhile. Kunti receive
heartily. In the game of dice with Duryodhana, ee
putra was defeated; and the P andavas aga! d Kunti
for their life in the forest. During tas rena one day
lived in Vidura’s house. Meanwhile Sri he ere of her
visited Kunti, and she told Krsna about the
SOns with tears in her eyes. D
fused to give
uryodhana re fj
half of the kingdom to the Pandavas, who returne
after twelve years’
life in exile in the finest ant i
: ), e Pandav
year’s life incognito. Sri Krsna prompted L ‘began
to war with the Kauravas, 40 F
Preparations for war. (Adi Parva,
h the parties
he om Ehapter 135 to
: upto
abha and Vana Parvans an Udyoga ay 7
Chapter 137).
- re eee Se ees ee Ee a
KUNTI U
8). Kunti before Karna. War clouds grew thick and
fast, and Kunti at Vidura’s house got restless. Her
heart trembled at the disasters of war as described by
Vidura. She went alone to the banks of the Ganga
where just then Karna was engaged in Japa with his
hands raised and face turned to the east. Kunti waited
for some time after which they began to talk. With
tears in her eyes Kunti told Karna that he was her
son and implored him to return to the Pandava side
to which Karna replied as follows : “Oh ! noble lady,
that is quite impossible. I have vowed to kill Arjuna.
I will not kill the other four Pandavas. You shall
always have five sons alive. If Arjuna were to be no
more I would be there for you in his stead.”
Kunti shuddered at those terrible words of Karna,
and thus did both of them part with each other.
(Udyoga Parva, Chapters 145 and !46).
9) Last days of Kunti. The great war ended. Thousands of warriors on the Kaurava side like the mighty
Karna were no more. On the Pandava side also many
were killed. Though the Pandavas won the war _ their
hearts no more enjoyed peace or happiness. Kunti
suffered as though caughtina wild fire. She asked
the Pandavas to perform the obsequies for Karna also.
When she let out the secret that Karna was her firstborn child Dharmaputra burst into tears. WKunti
consoled Subhadra and Uttara who were lamenting
over the death of Abhimanyu. She requested 5ri
Krsna to cremate the dead son of Uttara.
Then Kunti went to Gandhari, who stood there bathed
in tears. Grief-stricken, Dhrtarastra and Gandhari
started for the forest. Holding Gandhari’s hand in hers
Kunti led the way. The Pandavas prevented their
mother from going, but she did not yield. She advised
Dharmaputra to have a special eye on Sahadeva, not
to forget Karna’sname and not to show any displeasure towards Bhima and_ Pajicali. But, the
Pandavas wanted to follow their beloved mother into
the forest. Paficali and Subhadra stationed themselves
behind Kunti, who shed copious tears at the sight.
Dhrtarastra and Gandhari, who also felt deeply
pained at the sight tried their best to dissuade Kunti
from following them to the forest. But, Kunti consoled
her sons and daughters-in-law by means of sympathetic
words and followed Dhrtarastra and Gandhari to the
banks of the Ganga, where all of them lived together.
The Pandavas felt acutely the absence of their mother
at home. They went to the forest and paid their respects to Kunti on the banks of the Ganga. Kunti
embraced Sahadeva with tears in her eyes. Though
Yudhisthira and Sahadeva wanted to stay with Kunti
in her service she did not allow that. Kunti, Dhrtarastra and Gandhari performed penance in the forest
near the Ganga, taking food only once in a_month.
The three of them died there in a wild fire. (Asramavasika Parva, Chapter 37, Verse 31). Their relations
inmersed their bones in the Ganga and performed the
necessary obsequies. (Stri, Santi, Asramavasika and
Aévamedhika Parvans).
10) Kunti in*® Devaloka. Kunti, Madri and Pandu
went to Devaloka. (Svargarohana Parva, Chapter 9,
Verse 15).
KUNTI II. A particular region in ancient India. The
warriors there were knownas Kuntis. (Sabha Parva,
Chapter 34, Verse 11).

KUNTI Il 444
KUNTIIiI. An urban area in ancient India.
Parva, Chapter 14, Verse 27).
KUNTIIV. A King born in the Yayati dynasty.
KUNTIBHOJA.
1) General. A King of the Yadudynasty; son of the
sister of Sirasena, who was the father of Vasudeva and
randfather of Sri Krsna. (For genealogy see under
Si Krsna). Kuntibhoja was also the foster-father of
Kunti, the daughter of Sirasena. (See Para 1, under
Kunti 1).
2) Other information. (i) Sahadeva, during his
triumphal march over the southern kingdoms subjugated Kuntibhoja. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 31, Verse
) Fie participated in the Rajasiiya Yajiia of Yudhisthira. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 34, Verse 12 ).
(iii) The son of Kuntibhoja also became famous under
the same name, and Purujit was the son of this
Kuntibhoja. Both of them were uncles of the
Pandavas. (Karna Parva, Chapter 6, Verse 22)
(iv) On the first day of the Kuruksetra war Kuntibhoja and his sons fought with Vinda and Anuvinda.
(Bhisma Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 72),
(v) It was Kuntibhoja who occupied the netrasthana
(eye-position) of the Krauficavyiha set up by
Dhrstadyumna. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 50, Verse
"ks Kuntibhoja and Satanika occupied the Padasthana (foot position) of the Makaravyiha on the
Pandava side. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 75, Verse 11).
(vii) He possessed a noble and high-bred horse.
(Drona Parva, Chapter 23, Verse 46)
(viii) In the great war_he fought with Alambusa.
(Drona Parva, Chapter 16, Verse 183).
(ix) Ten of his children were killed by Agvatthama,
(Drona Parva, Chapter 95, Verse 18),
KUPATA. An Asura son of Kafyapa by Danu. (Adi
Parva, Chapter 65, Verse 26).
KURANGA. One of the mountains which encircle
Mahameru. (Devi Bhagavata, 8th Skandha).
KURANGAKSETRA. A holy place. He who bathes
here and observes fast for ‘three nights will attain
salvation. (Anugasana Parva, Chapter 25).
KURANNU. (The Malayalam word for monkey).
Kasyapa, the grandson of Brahmi and son of Marici
married eight daughters of Daksaprajapati and one
of them Krodhavaéga delivered ten daughters. Monke F
and lions were born frora Hari, one of those es
save ‘a oe are brothers, and both are
called ‘hari’. almiki Ramayana 5
Canto 14, Verse 24). Yana, Aranya Kanda,
KURAPARVATA. One of the mountains which encircle
Mahameru. (Devi Bhagavata, 8th Skandha)
KURCAMUKHA. One of the sons of ViSvamitra.
They were Brahmavadins, (expounders of Brahman)
(AnuSasana Parva, Chapter 4, Verse 53) .
KURMA. I. A prominent serpent, son of Kadra. (Adi
Parva, Chapter 65, Verse 41).
KURMA II. (Turtle). The
(Sabha
second incarnation of
Mahbavisnu. (See under Avataras).
KURMAPURANA. One of the eighteen Puranas, (See
under Puranas) . | a
KURU I. A King calied Kuru was born in Dhruva’s
dynasty.
Genealogy.
Descended from Visnu thus: Brahma —
KURU II.
KURU III.
KURU IV
Svayambhuva Manu—Uttanapada—Dhruva— Sisti —
Ripu—Caksusa (Caksusa Manu)—Kuru.
King Kuru was the grandfather of the reputed Vena and
the great grandfather of emperor Prthu. Anga was the
father of Vena. Not much is said about this Kuru in
the Puranas. Kuru had ten brothers called Puru, Uru,
atadyumna, Tapasvi, Satyavak, Suci, Agnisthu,
Adhiratha, Sudyumna and Abhimanyu. Kuru had
by his wife Atreyi seven sons called Anga, Sumanas
Svati, Kratu, Angiras, Gaya and Sibi, and to Anga
was born by his wife Sunitha the son, who became
reputed as Vena. Prthu was Vena’s son. Prthu had
five sons called Antardhana, Vadi, Sita, Magadha,
Palita. To Antardhana was born of his wife Sikhandini
a son called Havirdhana, to whom were born by his
wife Dhisana six sons called Pracinabarhis, Sukra, Gaya,
iXrsna, Vraja and Ajina. The above is the only information available about this Kuru dynasty in the
Puranas. (Visnu Purana, Part 1, Chapter 13),
‘Iwo sons, i.e. Uttinapada and Priyavrata
were born to Svayambhuva Manu of his wife Satarapa.
One King Kuru born in the dynasty of Uttanapada
has been referred to above, i.e. Kuru I, Another King
Kuru is noticed in Priyavrata’s dynasty. To Priyavrata
were born of his wife Barhismati fourteen sons called
Agnidhra, Idhmajihva, Yajfiabahu, Mahavira, Ghrtaprstha, Sava, Hiranyaret, Medhatithi, Vitihotra,
Kavi, Urjaspati, Uttama, Tamasa and Raivata. ‘To
Agnidhra by his wife Pirvacitt; were born nine sons
called Nabhi, Kimpurusa, Hari, llavrta Ramyaka,
Hiranmaya, Kuru, Bhadragva and Ketinnaia. One
King Kuru appears among them; but nothing more
than the fact that he married a woman called Nari is
known about him. (Visnu Purana)
A Kin
under Rantideva)
g, the brother of Rantideva. (See
KURU IY.
1) Genealogy and birth. The very famous
was born in the Puru dynasty. His genealo
hereunder. Descended from Visnu_ thus
Atri - Candra - Budha - Puriravas - Ayus- Nahusa -
Yayati - Puru - jJanamejaya - Pracinvan - Pravira -
Namasyu - Vitabhaya - Sundu - Bahuvidha - SamyatiRahovadi - Raudragva - Matinara - Santurodha -
Dusyanta - Bharata - Suhotra - Suhota -~ Gala - Garda:
Suketu - Brhatksatra-. Hasti - Ajamidha - Rksa -
Samvarana - Kuru. a
To Kuru were born four sons calle
ome Jae and Nisadhagva. Th
uru Kings is as follows : Sudhanus-Cyavana - KrtiPugpavan -Jubu. atta - Kusdgraja - Reabiia
fence was another son of B
acd tour sons called Soma, Sahade
rutasru. From Jahnu, the followin ‘a were
born :—Suratha - Vidiratha - S34 :
s . rvab = ‘teers
sena, - Raviya - Bhavuka - Cakroddhate Revayate -
Rksa- Bhima and Pratica. Prat;
called Devapi, Santanu and Balhik . nel
known as Mahabhisak also. Dhrtarastra and Pandu
were the successors of Santanu, and they came to be
known as Kauravas also as they belon ed to the
dynasty of Kuru, But, since the sons of Bandu were
bern of Devas they may not be called Kauravas
2) Other Lnformation, (1) Kuruksetra became holy
King Kuru
gy is given
> Brahma -
d Pariksit, Sudha-
€ Senealogy of the
rhadratha. Jarasandha

KURU V
and sanctified on account of Kuru’s_ tapas. (Adi
Parva, Chapter 94, Verse 80).
(ii) While Kuru was once ploughing
Kuruksetra Indra appeared there, and
talk, (Salya Parva, Chapter 53 Verse 6).
(iii) While Kuru was once performing a yajiia at
Kuruksetra, the river Sarasvati went there under the
name Surenu (Oghavati) and watered the land.
(Salya Parva, Chapter 38, Verses 26 and 27).
KURU V. One of the sages who visited Bhisma on
his bed of arrows. (Santi Parva, Chapter 47, Verse 8).
KURU VI. Ason born to Sarnvarana of Tapati. The
boy, following his naming and other consecratory rites,
grew up like fire in which was offered havis (ghee).
At the age of ten he became omniscient. At the age
of sixteen he married Saudamini, daughter of Sudaman. (Vamana Purana, Chapter 24}.
KURUJANGALAM (KURU). A kingdom in ancient
India of which Hastinapura was the capital. This
kingdom acquired the name Kurujangala from Kuru.
(Adi Parva, Chapter 94, Verse 49) .
KURUJIT. <A king born in King Janaka’s dynasty. Aja
was his father and Aristanemi his son. The genealogy
from Janaka to Kurujitis as follows : Janaka—Virada—
Nandivardhana — Suketu — Devarata — Brhaddhrta—
Mahavira —Dhrtaketu—Haryas va —Maru—PratisvakaKraturatha — Devamidha — Vidhrta — Mahadhrta—
Krtirata — Maharoma—Svarnaroma—Prastharoma _
Siradhvaja (Janaka, the father of Sita) —Kurudhvaja
—Dharmadhvaj a—Krtadhvaja—Kesiketu— Bhanuman
—Sakradyumna—Suci— Vanadhvaja — Urjaketu—Aja
—Kurujit. (Bhagavata, 9th Skandha).
KURUKSETRA.
1). General. Made famous
Kuruksetra is a sacred place situate
the river Sarasvati and north of Drsadvat
live in this region really live in heaven. (
Chapter 83, Verse 4). ; _
According to Pulastya even those who come into contac
with the dust blown by the wind from this place meet
with auspicious end.
2 \ Other details. (i) Taksaka lived on. the banks of
the river Iksumati in Kuruksetra (Adi Parva, Chapter
(11) eine became a sacred place as king oe did
tapas there. (Adi Parva, Chapter 14, Verse Jt _—
(iii) Two sons called Citrangada and Viiaye ee a
born to Santanu of Satyavati. Once while : un ing 70
a forest Citrangada met 4 Gandharva, wose na
that
also was Citrangada. The Gandharva got angry -
a man bore his a and so he killed Citranigada. The
(Adi Parva, Chapter
incident took place at Kuruksetra
101, Verses 8 and 9).
(iv) Sunda and Upasunda, _w!
oplds lived in Kuruksetra (Adi
erse 2/7)’.
(v) Before the Khandava forest -" ee
Taksaka left the place and went 2. De 4) !
lived there. (Adi Parva, Chapter 22 , - i ——
(vi) During their life of exile in: the fores be ee
visited Kuruksetra (Vana Parva, Chay Ee
(vii) King Mandhata once conducte if ya] Dipl
the boundaries of Kuruksetra. (Vana Parva, “nap
( vii) The ae sage Mudgala lived here. (Vana
a land in
they had a
by the Mahabharata,
d to the south of
i. People who
Aranyakanda,
who conquered all the
Parva, Chapter 209,
KUSA II
Parva, Chapier 260, Verse 3).
(ix) Once a fierce fight took place here (Kuruksetra)
between Bhisma and Parafurama. ParaSurama wanted
Bhisma to accept Amba, daughter of the King of Kasgi
as his wife.
(See under AMBA).
(x) Bhisma lay wounded on the bed of arrows here.
(Bhisma Parva, Chapter 119, Verse 92).
(xi) Kuruksetra had been formerly known as Samantapaficaka. Since King Kuru made this place holy it
came to be known as Kuruksetra thereafter.
(xii) It was at Kuruksetra that the Pandavas and the
Kauravas waged a fierce war and it was here that Sri
Krsna taught Arjuna the Gita. (Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 258, Verse 42). ,
(xiii) Emperor Sudarsana, son of Agni, who was famous
for his hospitality, lived here. (Anusasana Parva,
Chapter 2, Verse 40).
KURUPANCALA (M) The combined name for Kuru
and Paficala in ancient India. (Bhisma Parva Chapter
9, Verse 56).
KURUTA. A Sage mentioned in Rgveda. He is also
known as Rjrasva. (For details see under Rjragva).
KURUTIRTHA. A sacred place to the south of ‘Taijasatirtha in Kuruksetra. He who takes a bath here will
enter Brahmaloka. (Vana Parva, Chapter 83, Verse 166).
KURUVAMSA. See under KURU.
KURUVARNAKA. An urban area in ancient
(Bhisma Parva, Ghapter 9, Verse 56).
KURUVARSA (M) The country ruled over by Kuru
came to be called Kuruvarsam.
KURUVINDA. An urban area in ancient India. The
people of Kuruvinda were called Kuruvindas. (Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 87, Verse 9).
KUSA I. A great sage of ancient India. He was as
effulgent as burning fire. The famous Sage Visvamitra
was born in Kuga’s dynasty. (For genealogy etc see
under Visvamitra) .
KUSA II. One of the two sons of Sri Rama, the other,
being Lava.
1). Birth, To Sita forsaken by Rama a son called Lava
was born while she was living at the asrama of Valmiki.
One day Sita took Lava to the stream to bathe him,
and Valmiki, who did not know about it was upset not
to see the child in the agrama. He feared that it might
have been eaten up by some animal, and fearing that
Sita might die when she missed the child he created a
ye with Kuga grass and laid it where Lava was lying
before.
India.
When Sita returned to the agrama with Lava
after their bath Valmiki explained the whole situation
to Sita. Since the second child was created with Kuga
grass he was called Kusa, and he was made the second
son of Sita (Uttara Ramayana and Kathasaritsagara,
Alankaravatilambaka, Taranga 1).
2) Kusa went to Ayodhya. 6.7 Rama decided to conduct
an Asvamedha yajfia. It was ordained that the emperor,
who conducted a yaifia should have his wife. As Sita
had been abandoned, Rama had no wife for the purposes of the yajfia. It was laid down that in the absence
of the wife a statue of hers may be made with palasa
wood. But, Vasistha decreed that a statue of Sita
might be made with gold, The yajfia was to be held
in the Naimisa forest. During the triumphal tour of
Satrughna with the yajfiika horse he reached the banks
of the river Tamasa near the asrama of Valmiki where

KUSA Il 446
Lava and Kuga captured the horse. Satrughna could
not defeat Lava and Kuga, and they routed the additional force also which arrived under the leadership of
Laksmana to help Satrughna. Then Valmiki intervened
and the horse was returned to Satrughna. Afterwards,
Valmiki, Sita and Lavakuéas also attended Sri Rama’s
yajiia where Lava and Kua recited the poem Ramayana composed by Valmiki. Rama recognised the boys
and they were made to live in Ayodhya. Thus did
KuSa visit Ayodhya.
The Kathasaritsagara tells the following story about
KusSa’s visit to Ayodhya.
Valmiki duly performed the thread-wearing ceremony
of Lava and KuSa and taught them, even in their very
childhood, allarts and sciences including the secrets
about divine arrows. The boys one day killed a deer in
the asrama and worshipped with its flesh the linga, which
Valmiki used to worship daily, and asa result of that
the sage became ill. Sitadevi requested for penance for
the action of her children, and Valmiki said that Lava
should bring golden lotus flowers from Vaisravana’s
pond and flowers of Kalpakavrksa from his garden, and
that Lava and Kusa together should worship the
Sivalinga with those flowers. Lava then went to mount
Kailasa and after killing many yaksas collected the
flowers. On his way back he rested for some time at the
foot of a tree. Just then Laksmana, who was on _ the
look-out for a human being for the naramedha (human
sacrifice) of Sri Rama, also reached the spot. He
decided to take Lava captive with him, and they fought
with each other for some time. At last Lakmana
took Lava captive by using mohanastra (arrow which
makes the opponent unconscious) and took him to
Ayodhya, Sita was pained that Lava had not returned
yet, and Valmiki with his divine vision understood the
reason for his absence. He deputed Kuga to Ayodhya
to bring back with him Lava somehow or other. When
Kuga reached Ayodhya, Sri Rama was conducting the
Asvamedha yajfia, and Kufa, successfully confronting a
number of people, got into the yajfia ground. In the
combat that ensued between Kuga and Laksmana the
latter was defeated, as he could not defeat Kuga due to
the greatness of Valmiki. When Sri Rama asked
Kusa who he was he replied that he was the brother
of Lava and that he had heard from his mother Sita
that both of them were the sons of Sri Rama. Rama
was overjoyed to hear that and he covered the boys
with kisses. Sita also was brought down from the asrama
of Valmiki, and all of them lived very happily. (Kathasaritsagara, Alamkaravatilambaka, Taranga 1),
3). Kusa’s reign. Following the demise of Laksmana Sri
Rama divided the country between Kuga and Lava. A
city called Kusavati was built in the Kosala Kingdom
and Kuga was crowned King thereof. Thirtytwo out
of the sixtyfour aksaulimis of the kings of the solar
dynasty, four out of the eight ministers and half of the
y ble property were allotted to Kuéa. Lava was
ans d ‘ne of north Kosala where a city called
oan lauee as built for him, and the other half of the
Saravati w ters etc. became his share. While Kuga and
army, ange i the country thus, Sri Rama immolated
himself «1 the depths of the river Sarayi (Uttara
Ramayana). -essors. Descended from Sri Rama thus:
Risa Aditi-—Nisadha—Nabhas—Pundarika— KsemaKUSABINDU. An _ urban region in
KUSADHVAJA III. A King. The fo
KUSADVIPA. One of the the seve
KUSADVIPA
dhanva — Devanika — Rksa—Pariyatra—Vindorala
Vajranabha — Khagana — Vidhrti — Hiranyanabha—
Pusya — Dhruva — Sudarsana— Agniptirna—Sighra—
Maru. The solar dynasty was annihilated at the advent
of Kaliyuga (Bhagavata, 9th Skandha).
KUSA III. A king born in the Kuru dynasty. To Kuru,
who built Kuruksetra was born a son called Sudhanva,
and to him was born Suhotra, who became the father
of Gyavana. Suhotra begot of another wife Girika seven
sons called Brhadratha, Kuéa, Yadu, Pratyagraha, Bala,
Matsyakala and Vira. Kuéga was one of the seven sons.
(Agni Purana, Chapter 78).
ancient India.
(Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 36).
KUSACIRA. A river the water of which Indians of
ancient days used to drink.
(Bhisma Pp ter
9, Verse 24). Pai, ae
KUSADHARA,. A river the water from which Indians
used to drink. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9 Verse 24).
KUSADHVAJA I. A brahmin, son of Brhaspati. Penniless and poor, the brahmin once g f
King Salva. The miserly king dig = tg Sa Ss
thing. Thereafter he began worshipping Bhagavati
with the object of making some money, Whil a ditating upon Bhagavati a girl] emerged out of wrentatiie
She was named Devavati. When she ‘aa e -—
asura called Sambhu desired to marry i ? age fee
dhvaja did not agree to the proposal] Er. - + the
refusal Sambhu killed Kusadhvaja whil¢ Sa ha
asleep one night. But Devavatj Cursed ~ a ce
the asura into ashes. Then she took her in re ae
to secure Mahavisnu as her husband a to giana
happened to come there, and he tried - en Rav ac
wife. But, she repelled all his attempt make her _
caught hold of her by the hair. She ‘a cle which a
her hair. She then immolated herse] c aped by a “5
It was this Devavati, who was, jn her in burning et
Sita, daughter of King Janaka (tiem. we life, born
KUSADHVAJA II. Brother of King iene ee
Sita. He lived on the banks of 2 @2aka, father e
(Valmiki Ramayana, Balakanda, Canes sama -
JANAKA I, 0). See un
him is quoted from the Skanda Purse ing story about
KuSsadhvaja was a monkey in his former bi he
had then performed the auspicioys acti Irth, and as
Siva in a cradle throughout day and aac of swingin8&
birth he was born as King Kugadhyai 8% in the ne
King abducted the daughter of the ewe One day the
she was bathing. The Sage curseq Pi Aenivega whe?
form of a vulture. He was Promised Ing into the
the curse that he would regain hig hy; cmption from
day on which he helped Indradyumy,. "*" form on t
is rich in pearls. (Bhisma Parya . rand, Kuga island
‘laksa, Salmali, Kuga, Kraufica, '§31,.Pter 13), Jambi,
the seven islands (Saptadvipas) , a and Puskara are
double the area of Plaksa. Each is] “Mali island has
Is twice as large as the preceding "qd, in this ordet
vata, 8th Skandha). = SSS (Devi BhagaKuéSa island encircles the sea of Surg (- :
was the chief over the island. He “Vine. Jyotismat
Udbhida, Venuman, Vairatha, Lamp. °°ven sons calle!
kara and Kapila. The Subcontine ana, Dhrti, Prabha
their names, In Kuga island, along i - called ait
altyas a

KUSADYA 44.7 KUSIKA I
Danavas, Men, Devas, Gandharvas, Kinnaras and
Kimpurusas live. There are four castes of people there
called Damis, Susmis, Snehas and Mandehas, all of
them leading righteous lives. The above four castes
form the Brahmin, Ksatriya, VaiSya and Sudra people
in the island. There are six mountains there called
Vidruma, Hemasgaila, Dyutiman, Puspavan, Kusesaya
and Harimandira. ‘There are also seven rivers there
called Dhitapapa, Siva, Pavitra, Sammati, Vidyut,
Ambha and Mahi. These rivers annihilate sins. ‘There
are also other small rivers there. There isa Kusastamba
(a cluster of Kuga grass) in the island. The stamba
which glows like fire illuminates the island by its
light and lustre. (Bhagavata). The Kusa island is
encircled by the Ghrta ocean. (Visnu Purana Part IJ,
Chapter 4).
KUSADYA. A Kingdom in ancient India. (Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 44). ;
KUSALA. A holy place near mount Kraufica. (Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 12, Verse 21). _
KUSALAVA(S). Kuga and Lava, the two sons of Sita.
(For details see under Kusa). ;
KUSALYA. A holy place in ancient India. (Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 4 ). :
KUSAMBA I. The third son of Uparicaravasu. Kusamba
is also known of Manivaha. Vasu had _ five sons called
Brhadratha, Kugamba, Mavella, Yadu and Rajanya.
KUSAMBA II.
1) General. A son of Kuga. The city he built was
called Kaugambi. (See under Kusa). "
2) Other information. (i) Kugamba had a daug ter
called Carvangi, who was married by Bhadrasrenya,
the solar King. (Brahmanda Purana, Chapter 2). ;
(11) ‘Two sons, Sakra and GAadhi were born to Kusam a
and to Gadhi was born a daughter, Satyavati. Visvamitra was Gadhi’s son. (Brahmanda Purana, Chapter
This statement is not Lebar a aaa
a intain that Gadhi, the tather o igvaml
ee he son of Kusika
as th n of Kuganabha, who was t q
asad brat See under Kuganabha).
and brother of Kugamba. (Se if
a Kuga of Vaidarbhi. (For
KUSANABHA. A son born to = nae Fuca oad tilt
Genealogy see under Vigvamit ) Kusa +
SONS, namely Kugamba, Kusanabha, Asurtarajasa and
— ‘lt Mahodayapura and lived
Vasu, and Kusanabha built ee aoe to him of his
there. One hundred daughter
wife Ghrtaci. Vayubhagavan once ae | Jia ie
marry him at which proposal they laughe a> i
derision. He cursed them and made them hunch- ay <
ugly women, and Kuéanabha felt very somy @ ou
this cruel fate of his daughters.
To Somada, daughter afd Gandharva woman ie
Urmila, had been born a son, Brahmadatta, ous to =
mental power of the sage Cui. ow aaa aon
marriage his hundred daughters to Bra ct aie.
they were cured of their hunch at the touch of bra
evious beautiful selves. ;
pea = begeapo en lled Putrakamesti,
Kuganabha conducted the yajiia Cabee, | 5
and Kuga, who was so pleased by the yajna ce ae
to have a son called Gadbi. Vis vamitra ing the !
of this Gadhi. Visvamitra had also a sister et tend i
whom Rcika wedded. (Valmiki Ramayana, balakanda,
Cantos 32-35). ws
KUSAPLAVA (KUSAPLAVANA )
who bathes and spends three M5
._ Aholy place. He
hts there will derive
the benefits of an aSvamedha yajfia. (Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 12, Verse 21). It was here that Ditidevi, wife
of Kasyapa did tapas for a son who would be equal to
Indra. Again it was here that Indra entered into the
womb of Diti and cut into pieces the child in the
womb. KuSsaplava became famous because of the above
happenings. (Valmiki Ramayana, Balakanda, Canto
KUSASTAMBA. A sacred centre in the Kuéa island
He who bathes here attains a place in heaven surrounded by Deva women. See under KuSadvipa. (Anugasana Parva, Chapter 25, Verse 28). —
KUSASTHALI. The ancient name of Dvarakapuri:
an island. It was emperor Revata, son of Bruarta’ the
grandson of Vaivasvata Manu, who first built a city in
KusSgasthali and ruled the country. Their Bate ohh
Descended from Visnu thus: Brahma Marie Kae = :
—Vivasvan—Vaivasvata Manu—Saryati (Say ata)
Anarta—Revata. Certain Puranas state het it w
Anarta, who first built forts at Kusasthali. [it would was
be incorrect to say that Anarta built forts in this ee
first founded by his son Revata. The city was mk te
the sea after a few years. Afterwards the nem ity
mained as a forest for long years. It was later es as =
Sri Krsna built Dvaraka there. F ollowine = -
death the Yadava dynasty got annihilated ee ond S
region was again swallowed by the ocean Torche C
believed to_have been an island situated jn th raka is
the west of Gujarat. Even today there is a * € sea to
ae on the a - India to the west of Cuees
i Bhagavata, /t c Z ,
Skandha). 7” kandha and Bhagavata, 10th
KUSASVA. An Iksvaku King go
and father of King Samadi. (Valmiki ge Sahadeva
Balakanda, Canto 47). amayana,
KUSAVAN. A deep region in the Ja _
near Manasa lake. (Vana Parva, Chapter tg Uulanaka
5) sé
KUSAVARTA I. Son of King Rsabh <i
nineteen brothers, viz. Bharata, lavacta eaverta had
Aryavarta, Malaya, Bhadraketu, Seat ranmavarta,
Vidarbha, Kikata, Kavi, Hari, Antariksa ndrasprk,
Pippalayana, Avirhotra, Dramida ~ ¢ Prabuddha,
Karabhajana. (Bhagavata, 5th Skandha) amasa and
KUSAVARTA II. A_ holy place Se _
(Anusasana Parva, Chapter 25, Verse 13) cient India.
KUSAVATI. A city in Devaloka, af :
once conducted a mantra yajfia, Tt wa. the Devas
participate in this yajfia that Agastya on his way to
and his attendant Maniman. (Vane ped Kubera
161, Verse 54). arva, Chapter
KUSESAYA. One of six great me
ae pie ee Diahees hd in
Kumuda an arl are the gj a, eSaya,
Parva, Chapter 12, Verses 10 bat ‘i. ee (Bhisma
KUSIDA I. A sage belonging to th
disciples. (Bhagavata 12th Skandha) ii
KUSIDA II. To live on the interest of
others. Agriculture, breeding of oan ——
Kusida are the professions ordained "hie
emergency. (Agni Purana, Chapter 152),
KUSIKA I. A very famous monarch in the
He was the grandfather of Visvami;
Gadhi,
er of Vyasa’s
y lent to
Mmmerce and
Puru d
ynasty,
ra and father

KUSIKA II
1) Genealogy. Descended from Mahavisnu _ thus;
Brahma - Atri - Candra - Budha - Puriiravas- Ayus -
Nahusa - Yayati - Puru - Janamejaya - Pracinvan -
Pravira - Namasyu - Vitabhaya - Sundu - BahuvidhaSarmyati - Rahovadi - Raudrasva - Matinara - Santurodha - Dusyanta - Bharata - Suhotra - Brhatputra -
Aj midha - Jahnu - Balakagva - KuSgika.
2) Indra as son. KuSsika began tapas for a son who
would be equal to Indra and could not be. killed by
others. Pleased with his tapas Indra voluntarily took
birth as Kusika’s son. Gadhi was that son; in fact he
was an incarnation of Indra. (Santi Parva, Chapter
KUSIKA II. A sage who came to see Pramadvara
who died of snake poison (Adi Parva, Chapter 8, Verse
25). On his way to Hastinapura he saw Sri Krsna.
(Udyoga Parva, Chapter 83, Verse 27).
KUSIKASRAMA. A holy agrama on the banks o.
the river Kosi where the sage called Kusika is believed
to have lived. (Vana Parva, Chapter 84, Verse 131).
KUSMANDAKA. A prominent serpent. (Adi Parva,
Chapter 35, Verse 11).
KUSTUMBURU. A _ Raksasa in Kubera’s
(Sabha Parva, Chapter 10, Verse 16).
KUSUMA. One of the five attendants given to Skandadeva by Dhata. Kunda, Kusuma, Kumuda, Dambara
and Adambara were the five attendants. (Salya Parva,
Chapter 45, Verse 39).
KUSUMBHAPARVATA. One of the mountains around
Mahameru. (Devi Bhagavata, 8th Skandha).
KUSUMBHI. A forest near Dvaraka. (Sabha Parva,
Chapter 38).
KUTA. One of the pugilists deputed by Karhsa ‘to kill
Sri Krsna and Balarama when they went to Mathura
to wi ress the dhanuryajfia. Canira, Mustika, Sala
and Kosala were the other prominent pugilists deputed by Karhsa for the purpose. (Bhagavata, 10th
Skandha).
KUTAPA. After-noon, considered to be auspicious for
perferming obsequies. The offerings made to Pitrs at
Kutapa are the best. (Adi Parva, Southe
Chapter 93). | ae
KUTHARA. A prominent naga. He was present among
the nagas, who went to receive Balabhadra when he
went, in the form of naga, into the sea. M.
Parva, Chapter 4, Verse 15). ( Mausala
KUTHARA. A nagaborn in Dhrtarastra’s family. It
was burned to death at the serpent yajfia of Janamejaya. (Adi Parva, Chapter 57, Verse 15),
KUTILA. See under Parvati.
KUTSA. Son of a Rajarsi called Ruru. Kutsa is
mentioned with reference to Indra in many places in
the R gveda. |
KUTTALA (M). Seat of a famous Siva tempie in
South India, originally a Visnu temple. There is a
story about its conversion into the present Siva temple
S$ i
fcak ong his journey to the south, reached Tirukkutralam (Kuttalam) in the Tirunelveli Zilla on the
southern borders of Tamil Nadu. The temple there was
dedicated to Visnu, and the Vaisnavas (devotees of
Visnu) prevented Agastya from entering the temple
with ashes on his forehead. At once he transformed
himself into a devotee of Visnu, and was permitted
entry into the temple. As Visnu wanted to show the
court.
LAKSMANA
world that he and Siva were one and the same,
and also the greatness of Agastya, the idol of Visnu
was ail on a sudden changed into a Siva Linga. Since
then the temple ‘has remained a Siva Temple.
(Skanda Purana).
KUVALAYAPIDA. Name of the elephant posted at
the gates of Mathurapuri to kill Sri Krsna and
Balabhadrarama, who went there to witness the
dhanuryajfia. But, they killed the elephant.
Rangadvaram sarnasadya
Tasmin nagamavasthitam /
Apagyat Kuvalayapidam
Krsno s mbasthapracoditam // |
(Bhagavata, Dasama Skandha, Chapter 48, Verse 2).
KUVIRA. A river. (Bhisma Parva Chapter 27).
KUYAVA. An asura referred to in the Rgveda.
(Reveda, Mandala 1, Anuvaka 15, Sukta 104).
Lu
LA (a) This letter means the Creator. (Chapter 349;
Agni Purana).
LABDHANASA. See under Paficatantra.
LAGHUPATANA. Acrow,a character of the storybook, ‘Paficatantra’. (See under Pajicatantra) . -
LAJJa. One of the thirteen daughters of Daksapraj@
pati. The other daughters were, Sraddha, Laksmi, ©
(Chapter 7, Ama 1, Visnu Purana).
LAKSAGRHA. The house of jac (a kind of red dye):
(See for details under Arakkillam).
LAKSANA I. Daughter of Duryodhana.
Samba. (See for details under Samba).
LAKSANA II. A celestial maiden. This maiden took
part in the birth day celebrations of Arjuna. "Slok@
62, Chapter 122, Adi Parva, M.B.).
LAKSANA (LAKSMANA) III. One of the eight quee?S
of Sri Krsna. Laksana was the daughter of Brhatsen@;
King of Madra. (Srsti Khanda, Padma Purana). »°™
Krsna got ten sons of her some of whom are Praghosa;
Gatravan, Sirnha and Bala. (10th Skandha, Bhagavata). : :
LAKSMANA. Son born to Dagaratha of Sumitra.
1) Short history. Since details about Laksmana are
included in the story under ‘Rama’ only a short
description is given below :
Dasaratha, King of Ayodhya had three wiv
Kausalya, Kaikevt and Sumitra. To obtain childre®
Dasaratha performed a sacrifice named Putrakames!!
requesting the great sage RsyaSriga to officiate at the
ceremony. At the close of the ceremony a divine
Person rose up from the sacrificial fire with a pot of
pudding and all the three wives became pregnant b
cating the same. Kausalya gave birth to Sri R&m)
Kaikeyi to Bharata and Sumitra to Laksmana 4?
atrughna. Laksmana was an incarnation of Ananta
and so Rama and Laksmana had more attachment t°
each other,
Visvamitra once took Rama and Laksmana to thé
forests to give protection to the sages against the
demons who gave them trouble. In the course of that
Visvamitra took them to the Svayatnvara held at the
court of Janaka and §
ri Rama married Sita a?
Laksmana married Urmila.
Wife of

LAKSMANA II
When the coronation of Sri Rama was about to take
place, Kaikeyi demanded of Dasaratha, on the strength
of the two boons granted to her on a previous occasion,
to send Sri Rama to the forests for fourteen years and
crown Bharata her son as King. Dagaratha was
compelled to accede to her request and so Sri Rama
went to the forests. Sita and Laksmana accompanied
him. Laksmana during the fourteen years of their
exile followed his brother Rama like a_ shadow.
Laksmana cut off the breasts and nose of Sarpanakha,
the demoness who made amorous overtures to ‘them.
Laksmana acted promptly and bravely when the
notorious trio, Khara, Disana and Trisiras attacked
them and he was responsible for the slaughter of the
three. Ravana, coming to know of that, carried away
Sita to Lanka.
Grief-stricken, Rama and Laksmana roamed about in
the forests searching for Sita. At last they came to
Sugriva with whom they made an alliance. Rama and
Laksmana got back for Sugriva his kingdom of
Kiskindha and Sugriva in return helped Rama and
Laksmana to fight Ravana. Accompanied by an army
led by Sugriva Rama and Laksmana went to Lanka
and defeating Ravana took back Sita to Ayodhya. Sri
Rama was crowned King and Laksmana_ helped his
brother in his duties. When there arose a scandal
about Sita from the people, Sri Rama asked Laksmana
to take Sita away to the forest and leave her there. In
the Agvamedha conducted by Sri Rama, Laksmana
led the sacrificial horse and the horse was blocked and
captured by Lava and Kusa and Laksmana fought
against them.
When the purpose 0
over, god of Death in the gar
Sri Rama for a private talk.
closeted in a room and Laksmana was asked to keep
watch over the door with instructions not to allow
anybody inside. After some time sage Durvasas
came there and Laksmana entered the room to give
his brother the information of his arrival. Rama was
angry and abandoned Laksmana_ and, feeling lo aaa
tant later, Sri Rama jumped into the river and drowne
himself before a huge crowd of weeping subjects.
Laksmana immediately ended his life by drowning
himself at the same place where his brother did so. |
2) Birth, Laksmana was born on the day of —
in the lagna of Karkataka. ( loka 15, Chapter lo,
Bala Kanda,
Valmiki Ramayana):
LAKSMANA IT.
f the incarnation of Rama was
b of a sage approached
Rama and the sage were
A very brave son of Duryodhana. He
was a great archer. © he Mahabharata gives the
following information about him. defeated this
(i) In the great battle Abhimanyu
. 73, Bhisma Parva).
Laksmana. (Sloka 32, Cae eK satradeva. (Sloka 49,
(ii) Laksmana fought against
Chapter 14, Drona Parva). |
(iii) Abhimanyu killed hum 1
17, Chapter 46, Drona Parva).
the battle-field. ( Sloka
at the request of
iv) A at war when once, a é ,
Kunitvand. andar, V¥s8, OY 00 Garant
arrayed the dead warriors for Kuntt Th (Sloka 11
Ch. this Laksmana was A AL. them. ,
apte avasika Farve?- .
LAKS MANA. — of the queens F Krema.
_ (Chapter 33, Sabha Parva, DaksinatyaP pk
LAKSMI I, Consort of Mahavisn™
LAKSMII
1) Origin. Devi originated from the left side of
Paramatma (Supreme Being). The beautiful Devi by
a command from the Supreme Being divided herself
into two enchanting damsels both equal in figure,
splendour, age, majesty, adornment and love. One of
these was Laksmidevi and the other Radhadevi. That
born of the left was Ramaand that of the right, Radha.
Radha wedded herself to the two-handed Sri Krsna
and Laksmi also wanted the same person and so Bhagavin himself became two, Sri Krsna from the left side
as a two-handed person and as_ four-handed
Visnu from the right side. (9th Skandha. Devi
Bhagavata) .
2) Different incarnations of Laksmi. Laksmi had many
incarnations and she had been on earth in different
forms at different times. They are given below:
(i) Birth from the ocean of .milk. Once the Devas
became aged and afflicted with rugosity and
grey hairs by a curse of Durvasas. Indra lost his
majesty and was ousted from Svarga. Svargalaksmi
deserted Devaloka and went to Vaikuntha and merged
with Mahalaksmi.
The Devas were greatly aggrieved on account of this
plight of theirs and they went to Satyaloka and
appealed to Brahma to find a solution to their difficultses. Brahma was helpless in the .matter and so they
all together went to Vaikuntha and represented their
grievances before Mahavisnu. Visnu smiled and told
Mahalaksmi thus: ‘‘You go and be born as Ksirasagarakanyaka using a part of your inherent power
and do give relief to the Devas.” Accordingly when
the Devas conducted the churning of the ocean of milk
(Ksirabdhimathana) Mahalaksmi, the goddess of
beauty, wealth and prosperity arose from. the ocean as
Ksirasigarakanyaka (Daughter of the ocean of milk)
and blessed the Devas and puta Vanamala (garland
of wild flowers) on Mahavisnu. The Devas got back
all their lost wealth and prosperity and they, on going
to Devaloka, worshipped Laksmidevi properly. (9th
Skandha, Devi Bhagavata).
(ii) Mahalaksmi was born as a mare. (See under
Ekavira, Para 2).
(iii) Mahalaksmi was born as the Tulasi plant (Holy
Basil. (See under Tulasi.)
(iv) Mahalaksmi was born as Sita and
under Sita) .
(v) Other births :
Vedavail, (See
Mahalaksmi was born as a daughter
to the sage Bhrgu of Khyati. When Mahavisnu
sncarnated as Surya, Laksmi rose up from the lotus.
When Visnu became Parasurama, Laksmi became
the earth. When Mahavisnu incarnated as “Sri Rama,
Laksmi became Sita and when Visnu was born as Krsna
Laksmi became Radha. ‘Thus whenever and wherever
Mahavisnu changed his form, Mahalaksm1 also changed hers to form part of the changed life. (Chapter 9,
Arméa 1, Visnu Purana).
3) Mahdlaksmi cursed Visnu.
Mahavisnu, her husband, that his hea
from his body. (See under Cital).
4) Two forms of Laksmi. Mahalaksmi has two forms,
Visnu-priya Laksmi and Rajyalaksm1. The former is the
embodiment of chastity and _ virtuousness. The latter
goes about courting Kings. Rajyalaksmi 1s fickle and
unsteady. This Laksmi enters all places where virtue
and charity are found and as soon as these two vanish
Once Mahglaksmi cursed
d would drop off

LAKSMI II
from any place Rajyalaksmi will also vanish from that
place.
5) Laksmi in cow-dung. ‘The people of Bharata consider
cow dung as very sacred and there is a story in the 82nd
Chapter of Anusasana Parvaas to how cow-dung became so sacred :
Once a herd of cows was grazing in a large grassy ground
when Laksmi happened to pass that way. Mahalaksmi
was pleased at the cows and bade them ask for any boon
they wanted. ‘The cows were prosperity incarnate and
contented and they rejected the offer of Laksmi and
when pressed again by her, said that they would like to
have prosperity deposited in their dung also. Mahalaksmi did so and so even today it is believed that the
cowdung is embedded with prosperity.
6). Other details :
(i) Laksmi stays in the court of Kubera.
Chapter 10, Sabha Parva).
(11) Mahalaksmi is installed in temples as an idol carrying
a lotus in her right hand and a Bilva fruit in her left
hand. (Chapter 50, Agni Purana).
(i111) Laksmidevi stays in the court of Brahma also.
(Sloka 41, Chapter 11, Sabha Parva).
LAKSMIII. A daughter of Daksaprajapati. She was
married to Dharmadeva. (Sloka 14, Chapter 66, Adi
Parva).
LAKSMIDASA. A Sanskrit poet who was the author
of Sukasandega.
1). Birth. He was born in the former state of Cochin in
Karingampilly Mana. This Mana (house) was near the
temple of T'rppitamangala in Vellarappilly in Cochin
(Kanayannur taluk). The Karingampilly Mana was
bearing the position of Taliyatiri in the village of Iranikkula. It is over two hundred years since that Mana
became extinct. (The houses of Namboothiri brahmins
are called Manas).
2) It is believed that the famous ‘Sukasandeéa’ was
written in 112 M.E. There is one set of historians
who hold that it was written in 666 A.D. But the famous scholar and poet Ullir states with authority that
it was written in the 10th or 11th century A.D.
3) Stories about this poet. As usual there are legends
regarding this poet also. That the poet was a ve
dull boy in his childhood and that he became bright
and brilliant by the blessings of his guru is one legend
After writing his Sukasandefa the poet went on a
pilgrimage in South India. One night he came to a
brahmin’s house but was not given any food or a place
to sleep. He slept in an open veranda on the outside,
He was lying awake when he heard his ‘Sukasandeéa?
being read inside by a few people. At a stage they were
not able to follow the import of a verse when Laksmidasa shouted the meaning from outside. A door
opened and a voice enquired in Tamil “Are you
Karingampilly 97? When he said yes they were extremely
happy and took him inside and treated him with
respect.
4) Works. No major work other then Sukasande§a has
j. Two small poems are available.
(Sloka 19,
been found.
Gukasandega has been written on the model of the
famous Meghasandeéa of Kalidasa. Many commentaries
on this have come to light; of these the one written by
‘LLALATAKSA. A country of ancient India.
LANKA
Manavedan Raja of Kozhikode Palace named Vilasini
is the best. Other commentaries named Varavarnini,
Cintatilaka and Vyakrti are also worth mentioning.
LALABHAKSAM. A hell. (See under Kala I).
LALAMA. A division among horses. The white patch on
the forehead ofa horse is also called Lalama and so
horses with lalama are called Lalamas. (Sloka 13, Chapter 13, Drona Parva).
The King of
this country was present at the yajnia of Yudhisthira with
very many valuable presents. (Sloka 17, Chapter 51,
Sabha Parva).
LALITA. See under PUNDARIKAMURKHA.
LALITA. A Gandharva. This Gandharva was born by
a curse and by observing a vrata called Kamada Ekadasi
he obtained relief from the curse and became Gandharva
again, (Uttara Khanda, Padma Purana).
LALITAKA. An ancient holy place of Bharata. If one
bathes in a sacred pond there, one will be free from sins.
(Sloka 34, Chapter 84, Vana Parva).
LALITTHA. A country of ancient Bharata. The people
of the place were called Lalitthas. They fought on the
side of the Kauravas in the great battle. Lalitthas boasted that they would kill Arjuna in the big battle. The
King ofthe Lalitthas attacked Abhimanyu. Arjuna
killed them all in the battle. (Sloka 47, Chapter 9;
Karna Parva).
LAMBA. A daughter of Daksaprajapati. Asikni wife of
Daksaprajapati got a hundred daughters and ten of them
were married to Dharmadeva. Lamba was one of them.
(Chapter 15, Arhsa 1, Visnu Purana).
LAMBANI. A follower of Subrahmanya. (Sloka 18,
Chapter 46, Salya Parva). )
LAMBAPAYODHARA. A follower of Subrahmany4
(Sloka 21, Chapter 46, Salya Parva)
LAMPAKA. A place of Puranic fame. In the great ep)¢
battle the people of Lampaka fought on the side of the
Kauravas. They attacked Satyaki and he destroyed the
Lampakas. (Sloka 42, Chapter 121, Drona Parva) .
LANGALI. A celebrated river of Purdnic fame. This
river worships Varuna in the form of a Devi. (Sloka
22, Chapter 9, Sabha Parva).
LANGHATI. A river of Puradnic fame. This river sits 1°
the court of Varuna and worships him.
LANKA, The kingdom of Ravana.
1) Origin. It is believed that the present island of
Ceylon was the Lanka of the Puranas, the city °
Ravana. This city of Lanka was situated on the top °
the mountain Trikita. This Trikita was a pea
of Mahameru. Because of a fight ‘between Vasuki
and _ Vayubhagavan this peak broke away from
Mahameru and fell into the dcean. (See Para 5 under
Kubera),
se xg sa ViSvakarma constructed a magnificent city
nine top of the mountain Trikata for the use ©
Kubera. Kubera lived there adored and worshi ped by
_ One day Kubera travelled by air in an eat of
seal ne mother of Ravana saw that and she became
jealous. She called her son to her side and said that
- any cost the city of Lanka on the mount Trikita
aath ay Shp and given to her, Ravana along
went to the Himalayas and performed
p aiien there and obtained several boons from Siva. Then
avana conducted a victory march as an arc h-opponen

LANKALAKSMI
of all living forces and drove away Kubera from Lanka
and took possession of Lanka as the place of his abode.
He took along with him all the demons residing in
Patalaloka.
3). The design of Lanka. Vigvakarma, the celebrated
architect designed the beautiful Lanka and the supreme
building ability of Maya brought into form the enchanting city. On the top of Trikuta was the all important
Navaratnagrnga and ona spacious plateau on its top
stood the majestic city of Lanka, In the centre was the
ten-storeyed palace of Ravana and around it in eight
different places stood the nine-storeyed buildings of the
great ministers of Ravana. The nine edifices were like
the Navagrahas (nine planets) of Lanka. Each of the nine
edifices was built with one of the nine gems and the royal
palace in the centre was built by using all the nine gems.
Even the sun avoided passing over these buildings and
changed his path eithera bit to the north or to the
south making what is known as the Daksinayana and
Uttarayana. (Yuddha Kanda, Kamba Ramayana ).
4). No sand in Lanka. The ancient belief is that there is
no sand in Lanka The fourth taranga of Kathamukhalambaka of Kathasaritsagara gives a story relating to the
reason for this belief.
Garuda flew to Devaloka to bring :
redeem his mother from her servitude to his step-mother.
On his way he took an elephant and tortoise from near
the agrama of Kagyapa for his food. He sat on a huge
banyan tree to eat them. On the ground below the
Balakhilyas were performing penance. The branch on
which Garuda sat with his food sagged and before it
broke Garuda took away the elephant and tortoise
and deposited them on the mountain Gandhamadana
near the ocean. The branch broke and fell into the ocean
and the city of Lanka was built on the branch and om
was why the ancient people believed there was no sa
in Lanka.
5). Other detatls.
(i) Sahadeva sent Ghatotkaca to “ts
the King of Lanka for ae asta ial
utra. (Chapter 31, Daksimatyapatl’) noon hn
(Gi) The mes of Lanka attended the RA th .
Dharmaputra and took charge of serving ©
feast. (Sloka 23, Chapter 53, Vana Parva ). :
ws — ‘ty of Lanka with a fire
(iii) Haniiman once burnt the C1 ry
gs his tail. (See under : L ‘a at first to Kubera.
(iv) It was Brahma who gave Pah)
(Sloka 16, Chapter 27%, ' _ Vibhisana was crowned
(v) After the death of Ravana, V! 991, Vana Parva).
the King of Lanka (Sloka 5, Chapter ©
LARIKAPAKSMI, A Devi who was relieved of her cuits
by a hard stroke of his hand by ee Vijaya1). How she came to Lanka. Lankalaksnt ies of
laksmi in her previous pirth. She wa ding her neglithe treasury of Brahma and one day finding
her “Go to the earth
gent of her duties Brey ahs palace-gate
tower O
and be th tch-girl fe OW ee
Penang? She bemeed for relief and Brahma said, “Dut
7 -. wife Sita will
ing the incarnation of Visnu as Bane L- bt ees
be carried away by Ravana am in block the way ©
search of het to Lanka. You will then trike you down
that mightly monkey and he will aon Be then released
by a fierce blow of his hand. You Wl™.
from the curse and come back to me:
Amrta (nectar) to
collect tribute from
a of DharmaLAVANA II
Vijayalaksmi accordingly was born in Lanka and
became the watch-girl of Ravana’s palace.
2) Release from the curse. Hanuman coming to Lanka
in search of Sita tried to find an opening through
which to enter Lanka. Then he saw a huge tower-gate
on the northern side of the mountain Suvelagiri.
When he reached the gate he found it closed. The
mighty monkey beat hard on the door and the strong
door burst into two and fell on to the floor. Instantly a
ferocious woman of enormous size rushed to the gate
with a piercing roar and blocked it. Hantiman found
the situation dangerous and so gave her a_ powerful
blow and felled her. She then very politely asked
Haniman who he was and Haniiman revealed his
identity and told her the purpose-of his visit. Lankalaksmi then took leave of Hantman and leaving
Lanka went to Sri Rama and worshipped him. “Rama
blessed her and she returned to Satyaloka and started
doing her duties as before. (Sundara Kanda, Kamba
Ramayana ).
LAPETIKA. A holy place. If a man visits this place
he would get the benefit of conducting a Vajapeya
ajiia. (Sloka 15, Chapter 58, Vana Parva).
LAPITA. The second wife of a sage called Mandapala.
(See for details under Mandapala) .
LATA. A celestial maiden. She was the companion of
another Devi of name Varga. Though she became a
crocodile by the curse of a brahmin she was set free
by Arjuna. (See under Paiicatirtha) .
LATA. A particular division of the Ksatriyas. Because
a set of the Ksatriyas showed jealousy towards the
Brahmins they became Latas. (Sloka 17, Chapter 35,
Anuéasana Parva). ‘ ,
LATAVESTA. Amountain situated on the southern
side of Dvaraka. It had five colours and so resembled
the Indracapa. (Chapter 33, Daksinatya Patha, Sabha
Parva).
LAUHITYA I. A country of Puranic fame. ‘This
country of out-castes was conquered by Bhima and he
took from there different kinds of diamonds. (Sloka
26, Chapter 30, Sabha Parva).
LAUHITYA II. A_ sacuég_place constructed by the
powers of Sri Rama. If neBathes in a pond there one
would become golden _in colour. (Sloka 2, Chapter
85, Vana Parva and Chapter 25, Anusasana Parva).
LAVA. Ason of Sita. (See under Kuga II for more
details).
LAVANA(M). A hell. (See under Kala I).
LAVANA I. Ademon. He was the son of a demon
called Madhu. Madhuvana on the banks of the river
Kalindi was the abode of this demon. This demon was
a great oppressor of the Devas and Satrughna had to kill
him. Satrughna then constructed a beautiful city there
and lived there. In recognition of the increasing pros~-
perity of the city it was named Madhura. After the
death of Satrughna his two sons lived there. (4th
Skandha, Devi Bhagavata) . :
A King who was 4 grandson of Haris -
LAVANA II. ,
candra. He once conducted a Rajasiya in his
imagination and became 4 Candala. (story im
Jfianavasistha). This story was narrated to Sri Rama
by Vasistha to teach him the truth that man does not
realise that this whole universe is an illusion only
because of his ignorance.

LAVANA II
Lavana was the King of Uttarapandava, a country of
great fame. He was the grandson of Hariécandra and
wished to earn fame by performing a Rajasuya yaga
as Hari§candra had done. Lavana decided to perform
the yaga in his mind only. He made grand prepara-.
tions for the yajiia. He invited the Rtviks and after
invoking the devas inflamed the sacrificial fire. For one
year he observed yaga like that and in the end gave
gifts to the brahmins and the poor. It was all an
imaginary performance that the King had in the
course of a single day when he indulged in a reverie.
In the evening as usual he continued his day to day
duties.
One who performs Rajasitya will have to bear woes and
sorrows for a period of twelve years and since -Lavana
had performed it mentally, Indra sent his agent to
give Lavana worries mentally. Indra’s agent appeared
in the court of King Lavana in the guise of a magician.
The magician bowing before the King with awe said,
“Lord, I shall show you a magic. See it sitting on
your throne. It will be as astounding as if seeing moon
rise on the earth”’,
Saying this the magician took a bundle of peacockfeathers and waved it against the face of the King.
That bundle was capable of producing different
objects and visions. The King fixed his eyes on the
several glittering spots on the feathers and soon he
saw a relative of the Saindhava King approaching the
court. Behind him was a beautiful horse. Holding the
horse by the reins the new-comer addressed the
King thus. “Lord, this horse is as good as Uccaiggravas
and ithas been sent by the King of Sindhu to be
presented to you. Best things should be given to the
best people and‘only then the value of the thing
would be correctly understood.”? The magician who
was standing near-by supported the statement of the
new-comer, He said “Lord, what he says is true. This
horse has wonderful powers. Take atour of all the
worlds riding on this horse”. The Kingsat staring at
the horse and he sat thus for an hour and a half. The
entire court was perplexed.
After some time the King awoke from his meditation
and looking at his courtiers in wonder he said thus
‘*T shall tell you what happened to me during the
short period I was sitting in meditation. While I was
looking at the peacock feathers of the magician I felt
a desire to go hunting riding on this horse. So I went
to the forest alone riding on this horse. Very quickl
the horse took me a long distance deviating from fhe
main path and I soon found myself in the dark depths
of a huge forest. By the time we reached that forest
my mind and body were equally tired and still we
went on moving till evening came. Somehow we
crossed the forest and reached Jangala. There I found
a cluster of lemon trees and to ease my body I caught
hold of acreeper hanging from one of the lemon trees.
As I did so, to my horror, I found the horse running
away from me and leaving me alone. Tired by the
day’s travel [ sat at a place and dozed. Darkness was
creeping in and soon the whole place was in complete
darkness. It was very cold also. Somehow I spent the
night and when morning came, with hopes J walked
around the place. The place was still i no living
thing was in sight. As I roamed about I saw a forestLAVANA II
girl coming with a pot of rice. I approached her and
asked for some rice. She did notpay any attention to
my request and moved on. I followed her and she
said she would give me rice if I promised to marry
her. In despair I agreed to her condition and she was
pleased with my reply. She gave me half of the rice
and curry she was carrying to her father and also some
lemon-juice to drink. After taking that food I rested
for a while. |
Her name was Harakeyiiri. As soon as her father
came from the fields she told him everything. The
candala was immensely pleased to hear about our
marriage and all of us went to their hut. The scene I
saw at the hut was astonishing. At one place was the
flesh of boars, horses, fowl and crows in a heap and _ on
the intestines of animals hanging from ropes sat birds
pecking at them. In the hands of children there were
pieces of raw meat and flies hovered round them. The
hut presented a disgusting atmosphere and yet I
entered and sat on a leaf and my marriage with
Harakeyiiri was conducted there. The celebrations of
the marriage lasted for seven days and all these days
people danced and shouted amidst loud noises 0
drumming in a hilarious mood of drunkenness.
Eight months passed by very soon and Harakeyur!
became pregnant. She delivered a girl first and soon
we had two or three children more. I had to do many
cruel and nasty deeds to feed my family and gradually
I became old. My hair became grey.
At that time there occurred a great famine and those
residing in the forests were put to great trouble. There
was no water to drink as all ponds and lakes went
dry. Some of us migrated to the vicinity of the
Vindhya mountain where there were plenty of waterfountains. A few committed suicide. We also left the
place and started walking, taking the children also
along with us. After some time we sat under a palm
tree completely exhausted. My wife began to weeP
profusely. She then kissed her children and lay down
and started sleeping. Thirsty and hungry my children
lay there awaiting death. Unable to witness the scene
I jumped up from there deciding to commit. suicide
myself. Suddenly my vision faded and I was able to
see this court and you all. This is the work of that
magician”’,
The courtiers sat dumb-founded at the incredible
story of the King. Suddenly the magician disappeared.
The magician after making the King experience the
woes of twelve years in a very short time left for the
court of Indra.
Next morning King Lavana in the h the
place and people of his dream in reality near the
pe Vindhya started with his retinue on the
—— ae that he was going to conduct a victory
rc hen he entered a big forest he met with many
of his dream. Then he saw
familiar places and hunters
the hut where he had lived. The same men and women
hen !e saw an old lady
wet there all around. T
amenting thus: “Oh my dear sons where di
: e did you go
many: at lap ? My dear daughter, have you forsaken
ad eb Prince, you came here abandoning all luxury
your palace and married
ope of seeing
your permanent wife. Th
€ river of lj e
worthless and mean path life has to tak
Ss forced by circumstances. A

LAVANA III
very virtuous
candala girl.”
Hearing this the King went to her and asked her all details. When she repeated the story the king knew that the
lady was the mother of his candala wife. ‘The King and
ministers were surprised to find that his vision was
real and within that short period of his meditation he
had lived a life of years. This perplexed the King.
He then gave the old lady whatever she wanted and
after consoling her started for the palace thinking
about the wonderful happenings and mysteries of life.
LAVANA III. A demon who lived in the island of
Ramaniyaka. He had come to the island long before
the serpents came to that place. Ihe serpents saw
a ie they went there to live. (Sloka 2, Chapter
, Adi Parva).
LAVANA IV. — King of the family of Hariscandra. Yogavasistha says that this King had participated in several Rajasuya yajiias.
LAVANAKA (LAVANAKA). A_ place of Puranic
fame near the country of Magadha. There are many
forests in this place suitable for hunting and so_ several
kings used to come and stay at Lavanaka in times of
old.
LAVANASVA. A sage. This sage showed very high
eee to Dharmaputra. (Sloka 23, Ghapter 26, Vana
arva).
LAYA. A King of old. He was a member of the court
of Yama. (Sloka 21, Chapter 8, Sabha Parva).
LEKHA (S). A deva-gana (set of celestial beings) of
Raivata Manvantara. In this set there are eight Devas
named Dhruva, Dhruvaksiti, Praghasa, Pracetas, Brhaspati, Manojava, Mahayagas and Yuvanas. (Brahmanda
LIKHITA I. An — sage. The King of that land
cut off his hands on a charge of theft. But they ie!
into their original form by, the power of the penance 0
his brother, (Chapter 23, Santi Parva).
It was a time when the celebrated King Sudyumna was
ruling over the country. On the banks of me tn
Bahuda in that country there lived two gs nan e
and Likhita, in two separate hermitages of ther Sun
Once Likhita went to the a4Srama of his elder a c
Sankha and finding none but feeling ae “8 While
vegetables from there on otaTTe, 7 Aes ms
he was eating his brother, waixe
the action of his brother taking the vege one hae
his permission as an act of theft. rh rake King
the culprit was the punishment accorde Pr iia in the
at that time to ‘the offender. ankha one sa and gave
King. The King received the sage me: P he happenhim a seat. The sage then fold faim 6” of Likhita to
ed and then Sudyumna ordered the ace S aman
be cut off. Blood was 0021n8 a The brother
Likhita went and bowed beers he punishment for
congratulated him on his accep nd take a dip in the
his crime and asked Likhita to &° “s t holy river and
Bahuda river. Likhita bathed in tha like lotus-buds
then he found both the hands Boe haat and showed
from his body. He rushed to | rie it was due to
him the hands and then Sankha sam” wt his hands.
th nance that Likhita § :
e power of his pe id not purify
' hy he d p
Then Likhita asked his brother wey lied that the power
him by his power before. Sankha rein and the King
of punishing was vested 1n the 5
King had to come and live with a
LINGAPURANA
Sudyumna had become great by executing the law
correctly.
LIKHITA II. An evil-natured priest of Hamsadhvaja,
the King of Campakapuri. Sankha his brother also was
the King’s priest. Harhsadhvaja blocked the sacrificial
horse of the ASvamedha yajfia of Dharmaputra and
Arjuna attacked the King to get the horse released. T’o
mobilise an army the King announced that each and
every soldier should assemble at the place by day-break
the next morning and added that those who disobeyed
would be put in burning oil. }
By early morning the next day all the soldiers excepting
the son of the King arrived at the palace. Sudhanva,
the King’s son, was a general of the army and his
absence annoyed the King. Harhsadhvaja was hesitating whether his son should be punished when Likhita
advised the King to execute the punishment.
The King put Sudhanva into a big cauldron of boiling
oil but Sudhanva escaped from it unscathed to the
surprise of all. Likhita and Sankha said that Sudhanva
escaped because the boiling of the oil was incomplete
and uneven. So they boiled the oil again and threw
Sudhanva into it. At this moment a huge palm tree
split into two and fell on them and they were killed.
(Jaimini ASvamedhaparva).
LILADHYA. A son of Vigvamitra. He was a Brahmavadi
(Sloka 53, Chapter 4, Anusasana Parva).
LILATILAKAM. The first book of Literary criticism in
Malayalam. The author of the book is unknown. The
book is divided into eight parts. Manipravala, Malayalagabdas, Alankara, MKavyagunas, Kavyadosas and
Rasa are critically examined in this book.
LILAVATI I. Wife of Dhruvasandhi,.King of Kosala.
(For details see under Dhruvasandhi)
LILAVATI II. A prostitute who attained Svarga by
simply observing the Suklastamivrata in the month of
Prosthapada in which was born Radhadevi. Chapter
seven, Brahmakhanda of Padma Purana contains the
following story.
In times of old in Krtayuga there was a_beautifu
prostitute of the name Lilavat. Once she went away
from her.own town to another in search of better prospects. There she saw a big assemblage of people in a
temple. They were observing Radhastamivrata and
worshipping their deity with scented flowers and incense
of sweet fragrance. Some were reciting prayers, some
were singing and yet others were dancing. The whole
atmosphere was filled with devotion. Lilavati went to
them and enquired about it. They told her that that
day was the birthday of Radhadevi, the Suklastami of
the month of Prosthapada, and if anyone observed
Vrata on that day worshipping Radhadevi he would be
absolved of all sins.
On hearing that, Lilavati decided to observe the Vrata.
She joined the devotees of the temple and observed the
Vrata with great devotion. Soon she died of snake-bite
and the servants of Yama canie to take her soul to hell
because of the sins she had committed as a prostitute.
But before the Yamaditas could touch her, Parsadas
of Mahavisnu wearing the insignia of Sankha, Cakra,
Gada and Padma came to her with a chariot drawn
by kingly swans and took her to heaven.
LINGAPURANA. See under Puranas.

LIPI 454
LIPI (ALPHABET, SCRIPT).
1) Origin. Lipi is the record in writing of the uttcrances by mouth. There are scientific and non-scientific
statements about the origin of lipi. In the beginning
people used figures of objects to express their ideas.
They were called pictorial writings and are found even
now in caves in Spain and France where the aborigines
lived. Gradually the pictures vanished and letters took
their place.
2) Ancient conception. Puranas give a different version. People of Java believe that the script originated from Java. The voice of Indonesia, a government
organ, published once a puranic story relating to the
origin of the script. Lipi came into being in 78 A.D.
Ajasikha, a saint among the Buddhists, was the originator
of the lipi. He had lwo disciples named Dora and
Sempada. All the three went and stayed in a village in
the valley of the mountains of Kontang. The country
of Menrangkamanal was then ruled by a King called
Baka. Ajasikha heard about this wicked King who had
ordered one of his subjects to go to him daily for his
food. The people were worried. They tried in secret to
find out someone to subdue this tyrant. One day they
approached Ajagikha and requested him to find out a
way to get relief from this cruel King. Ajagikha sent
them back promising to do something to help them.
Ajagikha sat in meditation for some time and then told
his disciples thus:— ‘“‘I have decided to help the people
of Menrangkamanal. Dora also should come with me.
Sempada should stay here keeping guard over my
sword and clothes. Never give them to anybody but
me. You should be prepared to give your life for it.”’
Ajagikha and Dora went to see Baka. People discouraged them and advised them not to go to the King. But
they did not heed that and straight away went to the
presence of Baka. Baka started to kill them but then
Ajasikha said, “Oh King, you can eat me tomorrow.
In return please give me today land as big as my
headwear”’. Baka agreed to that and Ajagikha spread
his clothes on the ground. As Baka looked with wonder
that small piece of headwear began to grow big and it
oe in “= to cover the whole of the country
aka got furious at this and attacked Ajaéi '
Baka was slain in the duel. aie wi
The people burst into joy and made Ajagikh at
King. Ajasikha then sent Dora to his My Sito a fa
his sword and apparels, little thinking of the instructions
he had given to Sempada. Dora went and asked for the
sword and apparel. But Sempada did not give and a
fight ensued in which both were killed.
Ajasikha felt very sorry when he heard about the death
of his disciples. He cursed himself for giving contradictory orders to his disciples and so wrote four lines,
each containing five letters, to keep alive the memory
of his dutiful disciples. Those twenty letters are the
first ones written not only in Java but the whole world.
They were the following:
He noco ro ko — ‘There were two disciples.
To toso vo lo — They became enemies because they
obeyed the orders of their guru.
Po dhojo yo fijo — Both of them were brave men.
Mo go bo do ngo— Both of them died. :
3) Bharata lipis. Different kinds of lipis were prevalent
‘4 ancient Bharata. Lalitavistara mentions about sixty-
< Veet. er fet ee rr rr
LIP
four kinds of lipisin Bharata during the time of Buddha.
From inscriptions on stones and other historical records
it can be gathered that the basis of all the lipis had been
two main lipis named Brahmi and Kharostri, Kharostri
was used in the northwest of Bharata and became extinct
by the 4th Century A.D. Brahmi was the lipi universally
used in Bharata. This lipi had different formsin the
north and south. The lipi in use in the south was called
Dravidi.
Kharosti lipi was written from right to left and the
Brahmi from left to right. Even the Brahmi was written
first from right to left and gradually for the convenience
of writing it was changed to one from left to right.
Linguists consider Brahmi lipi as the base of all the
lipis of Bharata. It underwent changes in different
parts and. took different names. The scholars of Europe
are of opinion that the Brahmi lipi was borrowed from
foreign traders in B.C. 800. Others say that the Brahm1
lipi was born out of the pictorial lipi of the Chinese.
There are those who say that the Brahmi lipi originated
in Greece and Phoenicia. The great linguist Bulhar
says that the Brahmi lipi came from the Semitic
languages. But Lassen and Cunningham refuted it.
There is a bundle of leaves in the hand of the idol of
Brahma in the temple of Badami. Hindus believe that
the Brahmi lipi found in those leaves was written bY
Brahma himself. The Aryans forgot that lipi and Vyas
found it out. This is a statement by the Arab traveller
Albariini who came to India in the 11th century A-V:
4) Kerala Lipi. The Brahmi lipi came to south India
by the 3rd century A.D. Many scholars on languages
say that ‘Vetteluttu’ is a changed form of the Brahm
lipi. The great lipi expert L.A. Ravi Varma says that
“Eluttu’ has come from the word ‘Elw’ or ‘Alu’? meaning
to mark by cuts’. The common method of writing 1
South India was to use a pointed stick, long metal 14!
or chisel to make marks on leaves, rocks or coppe
plates. Writing by making marks with the pointe
stick (Kol) got the name ‘Koleluttw’. Vetteluttu,
Koleluttu and Malayanma were the three lipis in use
in Kerala. Vetteluttu was in vogue in Tamilnadu also.
But the Pallavas who were using Prakrta language whe?
they conquered the northern Tamilnad introduce
Granthaksara and Granthatamil there. T.K.Krishn
Menon says that Granthaksara was a false creation t
write Sanskrit easily. In Pandyadeéa and MalanadU
Vetteluttu was in use even then.
oe un lenes of the Pallavas began to wane and the
. ee ip Slowly rose into prominence. Even the®
Sicha of Meleredy eue im the empire of Cera com,
7 ae alanadu, Mysore. Coimbatore, Salem 4?
: mineren Pee When Tamilnadu came under the
lpi there, Jayanagara those kings introduced Nag@"?
instead of wag ate, Qanam Monam also. In the south
ste using ‘Hari Sri’ people d ‘Namonarayanaya’ and the first oan oe
€ rst syllable ‘Na’ and _ the seco?
one ‘Mo’ were :
Monam’. used to name the language ‘Nana
When the Malayalis started likin
they started using <
. . 8 Arya eluttu’ a 7 Nig
IS script was known as form of Granthalip!
Tulu-Malayala l This
aed Relea wasn mee nce ee
; use In the north of ‘among
Muslims, The Alphabets now in use ‘by the differen!
g the Manipravala

LOBHA 455
languages of south India took shape only about two
centuries ago. ‘The lipi of Malayalam now in use came
into shape by the time of Eluttassan spreading the
belief that it was Eluttag§an who had made the
alphabet. It is wise to believe that the Malayalam
script came into use gradually from Arya eluttu than to
give credit to one individual for its origin.
LOBHA I. One of the spiritual sons of Brahma. Matsya
Purana mentions that Lobha was born from the lip of
Brahma while Bhagavata mentions that he was the son
of Maya. ;
LOHA I. An Asura. When the Pandavas were living incognito they kept their weapons in a secret place. Availing
of this opportunity Loha made an attack on the Pandavas, At once the devas made him blind and thus
helped the Pandavas. That place later became famous
as Lohanapura. (Skanda Purana |, 2, 65)
LOHA, II An ancient place of India. Arjuna conquered
this place during his victory march. (Sloka 25,
Ghapter 27, Sabha Parva). _¥
LOHAJANGHA. See under MAKARADAMSTRA.
LOHAMEKHALA. A follower of Subrahmanya. (Chapter
46, Sloka 18, Salya Parva).
LOHAVAKTRA. A soldier of Subrahmanya. (Sloka 75,
Chapter 45, Salya Parva). .
LOHITA I. (ROHITA). Son of Hariscandra. (For
details see under HARISCANDRA) : ae
LOHITA II. A king of ancient India. This king was
conquered by Arjuna. (Sloka 17, Chapter 27, Vana
Parva).
LOHITA III. A serpent.
the court of Varuna..
Parva). ~ 4
LOHITAGANGA. A place of Puranic fame. Sri Krsna
killed five notorious demons like Paficaja and Vir ene
at this place. (Chapter 35, Daksinatya Patha, panna
Parva). ' h
LOHITAKSA I. One the four Parsadas given to Subrahmanya by Brahma. The other three are ee
oe and Kumudamali. (Sloka, 24, Ghap
45, Salya Parva). fee i
LOHITAKS A pe A sage who was 4 Rtvik in the oa
; ; his sage who prophesie
satra of Janamejaya. It was t g Id never be
through a brahmin that the Sarpasatra hr Verse 15:
complete (Agramavasika sage h oa
51. Verse 6: Ch 53. Verse
LOHITAKSI. Ms "follower of Subrahmanya. (Sloka 22;
Chapter 46, Salya Parva).
LOHITARANT. A river of Puranic fame of a
(Sloka 18, Chapter 9, Bhisma Parva, MB <candra.
LOHITASVA (ROHITASVA) , So of uP
(See under HARISCANDR4)-
LOMTTAVANT, Daughter of Kd, Sant was
loster-mothers of uae (Sloka 40, Ghapter
pga 9 of the Kadamba tree. |
, Vana Parva). e of this rivet
LOHITYA, A great river. The pres in the court
1s Brahmaputra, The devi of am ka 22, Chapter 2.
of Varuna and worships him. (5/0 ‘
Sabha Parva).
LOKA. in the
i several views 1
(1) Origin of Loka. There, are . Loka oF the world
Puranas regarding the origin ©
(Universe) .
(i) In the beginning of the univers
This serpent is a member of
(Sloka 8, Ghapter 9, Sabha
ncient India
” Mahavishnu alone
LOKA
stood as the Eternal, unseen, unheard, unknown entity:
Then there was neither sky nor day nor night. When
the time of creation came Prakrti entered Visnu as
Purusa creating emotion. From emotion arose Mahat
or the Great Principle and from Mahat arose cosmic
egoism (Ahankara). Ahankara divided itself into
Vaikarika, Taijasa and Tamasa. From Ahankara arose
RAkaga with the quality of sound and from Akaga came
the air having the quality of touch and from air came
fire having the quality of colour and from fire came
water having the quality of taste and from water came
earth with the quality of smell. All these were born of
tamasic egoism. From taijasic egoism came into being the
organs of sense. From the Vaikarika egoism came the
ten Vaikarika devas and the eleventh organ of sense,
the mind. After that Mahavisnu discharged his virility
into water and that virility is life. (Chapter 17, Agni
Purana).
(ii) Mahavisnu with a view to creating many different
kinds of living things created water first and threw his
whole energy into it. That energy grew into a golden
mass of an egg and Brahma was born from that egg.
Mahavisnv. broke that egg into two, making one half
heaven and the other earth. Between the two halves he
created the sky. The earth was floating on the waters
and he fixed it by anchoring it at ten sides. Then he
created Prajapati, Kala, Manas, Vak, Kama, Krodha
and Rati. Then he created thunder, lightning, clouds,
rainbows and birds. Then for yajriasiddhi he created
from his face Rgveda, Yajurveda and Samaveda. He
did sacrifices with them. From his hands -he created
the different Bhitagramas and Sanatkumaras. He
created Rudra out of Krodha. From his mind were
born Marici, Atri, Angiras, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu
and Vasistha. He made these seven Brahmarsis. These
seven Brahmarsis and Rudra began to create the prajas.
Then Prajapati divided his body into two. One half of
‘+t became man and the other woman. Brahma started
creation through that woman. (Chapter 18; Agni
Purana).
(iii) In the beginning Mahavisnu in the form of a
child lay on a leaf of the Banyan tree. Lying there the
Lord began to think like this, “Who am I ? Who created
me ? Why was I created ? What should I do here ?”
At once from the sky came a voice which said :—
Sarvam khalvidamevaham -
Nanyadasti sanatanam /
(All these ani I. There is nothing eternal except me).
The Lord was surprised by the voice and there appeared before him Mahadevi with four hands bearing the
Sankha, Cakra,Gada and Padma one in each hand.
She wore divine garments and ornaments and was .accom-~
panied by Prosperity as her maid. She was surrounded
by such forces as Rati. Bhiiti, Buddhi, Mati, Kirti, Smrti,
Dhrti, Sraddha, Medha, Svadha, Svaha, Ksudha, Nidra,
Daya, Gati, Tusti, Pusti, Ksama, Lajja, Jrmbha. and
Tandri. Devi then addressed Mahavisnu thus : “Why
wonder ? You have always come into being whenever
creation was started by the greatness of great powers. The
Supreme Being is without quality of any kind. We are all
with quality. You have predominance of Sattvaguna.
From your navel will arise Brahma who will be dominated by Rajoguna and from the centre of the forehead
of Brahma will be born Rudra with Tamoguna
predominant in him, Brahma by the power of his pen-

LOKA
ance will acquire the energy to create and he will then
create the world. You will be the protector of this
world which willin the end be destroyed by Rudra. I
am the sattvic power to help youin your work and I
am always at your service.”
Accordingly Brahma and Rudra were born and Brahma
started his creation. (Ist Skandha, Devi Bhagavata).
(iv) In times of old during the great deluge everything
in this universe became extinct. It went on like that
for some time and then the five elements and Brahma
were born. Brahma was born in a lotus. Brahma
decided there should be mud beneath the lotus. He
went down through the stem of the lotus and travelled
for a thousand years and yet did not find the earth. He
came back and sitting inside the lotus started doing
penance. After a thousand years Madhu-Kaitabhas
rushed to attack Brahma (See under Kaitabha).
Fearing them Brahma went under water again. As he
went deep down he saw a great man sleeping there. It
was Mahavisnu and then only he knew he was sitting
on the lotus originating from the navel of Mahavisnu.
Mahavisnu killed Madhu Kaitabhas and gave permission to start creation and Brahma started his work
of creation.
(v) Before the origin of the Universe the shapeless
qualityless Paragakti permeated everything. From it
there were born three powers: Jfidnagakti, Kriyagakti
and Arthagakti. The power of Sattvaguna was Jfiana-
§akti, the power of Rajoguna was Kriyasakti and the
power of Tamoguna was Arthagakti. From the divine
power of ‘Tamasa came the five basic things, sound,
colour, touch, taste and smell. The quality of the sky
was sound, the quality of air was touch, the quality of
fire was colour, the quality of water was taste and the °*
quality of earth was smell. )
Rajoguna was born of Kriyzgakti. The five organs of
senses, car, eye, nose, tongue and skin and the five
organs of work, hand, leg, speech, organ of excretion
and the organ of sex and the five breaths, Prana, Apana,
Vyana, Samana and Udana are the offsprings of Rajasa.
These are the forms of Kriyagakti. Thesé are controlled
by the favourable activity of Cicchakti. The five gods
controlling the sense-organs like Vayu, Surya, Pagi
and A$vinidevas and the four gods controlling intelli
gence, conscience etc. like Candra, Brahma, Rudra.
and Ksetrajfia and the mind are ten Tattvas (Principles) born of sattvika empowered with Jfianagakti.
¢ made into five basic elements
through the process of Paficikarana and the Brahmanda
originated from it.
2) The constitution of Brahmanda. The Brahmanda is made
up of seven KoSas (coverings). The one in the extreme
interior is very small. The second Koga originates from
the centre of the first Koga. The third Koéa also has
its origin from the first one. Each of them envelops
the one before it. The seventh Koga thus originating
from the first Koga and bursting forth through the
other six Kogas spreads out for millions of miles around.
If you cut the Brahmanda ae igs the one in
the extreme interior is the earth. Then come Bhuvarloka, Svarloka, Maharloka, Janaloka, Tapoloka, and
Satyaloka in succession. The worlds in the lower half
are called Patala, Rasatala, Mahatala, Talatala Sutala,
Vitala and Atala. From Satyaloka to Atala there are
fourteen lokas. The Brahmanda consists of the Sirya,
LOKA
Candra, Stars, Sukra, Budha, Angaraka, Brhaspati,
Sani, Saptarsis, Dhruva, Siméumara and Rahu, called
the Jyotigcakra. Besides these there are twentyeight
hells also. (Visnu Purana, Athsa 1).
Rahu is ten thousand yojanas below Sirya. Ten thousand yojanas below Rahu is the loka of Siddhavidyadharas. Below that up to the path of the clouds is the
loka of the demons, geni and manes. Hundred yojanas
below this is the Bhiloka (earth). Ten thousand yojanas
below the earth and as many yojanas below the world
above each are Atala, Vitala Sutala, Talatala, Mahatala
Rasatala and Patala. (Sth Skandha, Bhagavata).
3) Origin of life. Brahma originated from the navel
of Mahavisnu. Brahma started creation after obtaining
permission from Visnu. In the beginning Brahma created
from the mind Marici, Angiras, Atri, Vasistha, Pulaha,
Kratu, and Pulastya. They are therefore called the
Manasaputras of Brahma. (Manas = mind, Putra, =
son). From his wrath came Rudra, from his lap came
Narada, from his right thumb Daksa, from his mind
Sanaka and others and from his left thumb, Virani.
Daksa married Virani.
Daksa got five thousand sons of Virani. They also got
sons. When the population began to increase thus
Narada intervened and questioned the advisability of
increasing the population before knowing the capacity °
the earth. The sons of Daksa realised the sense in it
and started to have a survey of the earth. Daksa was
disappointed that the children left him without showing
any interest in the work of creation. So he produced
another five thousand sons and asked them to start the
work of creation. But they were also sent away 25
before by Narada. Daksa became angry and he created
sixty daughters.
He gave thirteen daughters to Kasyapa, ten to Dharma,
twentyseven to Candra, two to Bhrgu, four to Arista
nemi, two to Krtaéva, and two to Angiras. Of these
most of the living things in the world were born t°
Kasyapa. (7th Skandha, Devi Bhagavata) .
Kafyapa was the last of the Prajapatis. KasyaP#
married the daughters of Daksa named Aditi, pit,
Danu, Kalika, Tamra, Krodhavaga, Manu, and Anala.
Aditi got thirtythree sons and their family consists of the
thirtythree crores of Devas. From Diti were born thé
daityas or asuras. From Danu was born the danav@
Hayagriva. Kalika got two sons, Naraka and Kalaka-
‘Tamra got five daughters, Kraufici, Bhasi, Syeni, Dhrtarastri and Suki. Kraufici gave birth to owls, Bhas}
to Bhasas and Syeni to Syenas (Vultures, Kites etc. ):
Dhrtarastri gave birth to Harnsas, Kalahamsas a?
Kokas. Suki gave birth to Nata and Nata in turn t0
Vinata. Krodhavasa gave birth to ten daughters:
Mrgi, _Mrgamanda, Hari, Bhadramada, Matang!s
Sardiili, Sveta, Surabhi, Surasa and Kadri. Of these
Mrgi gave birth to beasts, Mrgamanda to trees a
plants. Lions and monkeys are the children of Hari»
Bhadramada got a daughter named Iravati. Airavaté
was the son of Iravati. From Matangi were born the
elephants and from Sardali the tigers. “The Astadigg2”
Jas are the sons of Sveti. Surabhi got two daughters
named Rohini and Gandharvi. Cows are the childre®
of Rohini and horses are the children of GandharviSerpents are the sons of Surasa and Kadri’ gave birt
to snakes. From Manu were born men Trees are the
sons of Anala, Vinata gOt two sons named Aruna and

LOKALOKA
Garuda. To Aruna were born two sons, Jatayu and
Sampati.
4) The end of the World—There are different views in
the Puranas regarding the end of the world. The different Puranas give different views. For knowing the
views of Agni Purana on the subject see under the
heading ‘Pralaya’. The eleventh Skandha of Bhagavata
gives the following theory regarding the end of the
world.
All the material objects of the world will become
illusory. Fire will increase. There will be no rains for
hundred years together. The World will be burnt by
the heat. The heat will go down to the head of ¢Ananta
who holds this world on his head. The Saptameghas
(Seven Clouds) will rise up in the sunshine infested
with the poisonous breath of Ananta. Then rains will
start pouring down in streams as thick as_ the trunk of
an elephant. Everything will be drowned in that water.
Visnu alone will be left above the vast expanse of
water. (See under Manvantara) .
LOKALOKA. There is 4 mountain between Loka and
Aloka. This is called Lokalokaparvata and the land
beside it is called Lokaloka. The mountain is as long
as the distance between Manasottara and Mahameru.
This place is golden in colour and as smooth as glass.
Not a single being lives there. God has created this as
a boundary to the three worlds. All the planets like
the Sun get light from the brilliance of this mountain.
Brahma has posted four diggajas_ named Vrsabha,
Puspacida, Vamana and Aparajita in the four. corners
of this mountain. (8th Skandha, Devi Bhagavata ).
LOKAPALA. Indra, Agni, Yama and Varuna are
called lokapalas. (Sloka 35, Chapter 57, Vana
Parva).
LOKAPALASABHAKHYANAPARVA. A — sub-divisional Parva of Sabha Parva. The chapters five to
twelve are included in this. - = cece
LOK sacred place of Puranic umporte™
in og raised fl the worlds at this place.
If anyone bathes in a pond there he will be able =
liberate the souls of other people from sins. (Chapter
83, Vana Parva). ;
Siddhavira. Lola in
LOLA, Son.of a great sage eailee a OY altel
his | : born of a quee .
His ks ioe wk Tamasama. (Markandeya hi ).
LOMAHARSANA. Father of Sata who told Puranic ape
(Ist Skandha, Devi Bhagavata). He was @ "a, Sabha
the court of Yudhisthira. (Sloka Lay SRA “so
arva ). .
Liheanina I. (ROMAPADA). A King of the country
of Anga. ee: —_
] ‘cneainan Descending in order from ee oe
Atri— Candra —Budha —Pururavas, ~ om Tribhanu—
Yayati—Turvasu Vahni—Bharga- ev d Dusyanta )
Karandhama—Marutta—( Marutta fees i 5 ral
Dusyanta - Varitha — Gandira ee Bec etu—PuroCola —Pandya —Kola = Tenby cet —Sabhanara—
vasu—Gharma—Krta—Vidisa— Brace _— MahaKalanala—Sriijaya—P urafijaye ie 1 —Rusadratha—
$ala—Mahamanas —Usinara * D ‘ hivahana—DraviPaila —Sutapas _ Bali —Anga —e tvaratha —-Lomaratha—Dharmaratha—Citraratha— ayy
pada,
LOMASA I
2) Other details.
(1) He was a friend of Dagaratha. (Sloka 53, Chapter
110, Vana Parva).
(ii) Once there was no rain in the country of Lomapada. It was due to a curse from the brahmins and to
remove the curse Lomapada brought Rsyagrniga to his
country. Santa, daughter of Dasaratha was living with
Lomapada as his adopted daughter at that time.
Lomapada gave her in marriage to Rsyagrnga and
made him live in his country. The country got rains
from that time onwards. (See under Rsyagrnga and
Santa).
(iii) Lomapada constructed a new hermitage for Rsya-
$rnga. (Sloka 9, Chapter 113, Vana Parva).
LOMAPADA II. A King born of the Yadu dynasty.
1) Genealogy. Descending in order from Visnu—
Brahma - Atri-Candra- Budha-Purtiravas-Ayus-NahusaYayati-Y adu-Krosta-Vrjivan-Svahi-Rugeku- CitrarathaSaéabindu-Prthugravas - Gharma - Rucaka (Rukmakavaca )-Jyamagha-Lomapada.
2) Birth, Rukmakavaca, grandfather of Lomapada
conquered many countries and gave them all as gifts to
those brahmins who participated in his Asvamedhayajna. He got five brave sons, Rukmesu, Prthurukma,
Jyamagha, Parigha and Hari. Of them he made Parigha
and Hari live and rule in Videha. Rukmesu ruled his
father’s country and Prthurukma helped: his brother.
Jyamagha was sent out from his country and he lived
quietly in a hermitage. One day as per the advice of a
sage he left the place ina chariot with a flag flying
to the shores of the river Narmada. He had neither
servants nor the means for his daily food. He lived on
the mountain Rksavan eating only roots and fruits. He
was very old and his wife Saibya also was getting old.
They had no sons and still Jyamagha did not marry
again,
nek when Jyamagha gained a victory in a fight, he
brought a girl and entrusted the child to his wife
saying “This child is your daughter-in-law.”’ Saibya
was surprised and enquired ‘‘How can that be when I
have no son ?”? Jyamagha replied, ‘‘She is to be the wife
of a son who will be born to you soon.” By means of the
hard penance of that girl, Saibya got a handsome son
named Vidarbha. Vidarbha married her and got two
wise sons, Kratha and Kaisika and a third son Lomapada, who was righteous, virtuous and wise. All the
three were great warriors also. Descending in order from
Lomapada came Babhru-Heti-Kaisika-Cidi. From this
Cidi came the Cedi dynasty of Kings. (Srsti Khanda,
‘Padma Purana, Bhismapulastya Samvada).
LOMASA I (ROMASA) I. A sage, who was a great
story-teller. Many of the stories found as episodes in the
Puranas were told by this sage. Mahabharata gives the
following details about him.
1) Lomaga was very virtuous and
18, Ghapter 31, Vana Parva). |
(2) Once Lomaéga entered the court of Indra and spoke
to Indra about Arjuna sitting sharing a half of his seat
before him. (Sloka 1, Chapter 47, Vana Parva).
(3) Lomaga returned to Kamyakavana from the court
of Indra and gave Yudhisthira the messages from Indra
and Arjuna. (Sloka 33, Chapter 47, Vana Parva). _
(4) He prophesied to Arjuna that he would get divine
weapons from Siva. (Sloka 10, Chapter 91, Vana Parva).
(5) Lomaga consoled Yudhisthira when he came to the
longlived. (Sloka

LOMASA II 458
forests in exile leaving all his happy surroundings in the
country. (Sloka 17, Chapter 94, Vana Parva).
(6) He told Dharmaputra the story of Agastya.
(Chapter 96, Vana Parva).
(7) Lomaga told Dharmaputra the stories of Sri
Rama and Paragurama. (Sloka 40, Chapter 99, Vana
Parva).
(8) Asuras defeated all the Devas and the latter were
perplexed. It was Lomasga who then advised them to
make weapons out of the bones of the sage Dadhica.
(Chapter 100, Vana Parva).
(9) Lomaga mentioned to the Devas a trick to kill
Vrtrasura. (Chapter 101, Vana Parva).
(10) ‘The story of Bhagiratha, the episode of Rsyasrnga
etc. were all told by Lomaga. (Chapters 103 to 113,
Vana Parva).
(11) Lomasa told Yudhisthira the story of the Yaga of
King Gaya, the story of the river Payosni, the glory of
the mountain of Vaidirya and the river Narmada, and
the story of Cyavana the great sage. (Chapter 121,
Vana Parva).
(12) He told the Pandavas the story of Mandhata.
(Chapter 126, Vana Parva).
(13) Lomaéga told Yudhisthira the story of Somaka and
Jantu. (Chapter 127, Vana Parva),
(14) He praised the glory of the holy place Yamunatirtha, known as Plaksaprasravana also, near Kuruksetra. Chapter:129, Vana Parva).
(15) It was Lomaga who told the story of the emperor
Sibi who gave his own flesh to protect a dove which
went to him for refuge. (Chapter 130, Vana Parva).
(16) Lomaga told the story of the sage Astavakra to the
Pandavas. (Chapter 133, Vana Parva).
(17) He described the story of Yavakrita and Medhavi
to the Pandavas. (Chapter 135, Vana Parva).
(18) Dharmaputra heard the stories of Bharadvaja,
Raibhya, Arvavasu and Paravasu from Lomaéa.
(Chapter 137, Vana Parva).
(19) Lomaga told Dharmaputra the story of Narakasura and the incarnation of Visnu as Variaha. (Chapter
142, Vana Parva). |
(20) Lomaéga visited Bhisma lying on his bed of arrows
(Santi Parva).
(21) Lomafa praised the glory of giving ri ri
hie hasten 67, Renseacnn car. aS easly
omasa was a sage from the north.
Chapter 165, Vana Parval. ne (lola a
(23) Lomasa relieved many nymphs like Pramohini
from their curses. (See under Pramohini). |
LOMASA II. A cat. (See under’ Dindika).
LOPAMUDRA. Wife of Agastya. (For details see under
Agastya).
LUSA. A Regvedic hermit. It is mentioned in Reveda
that Luga and Kutsa were rivals to win the mercy of
ra.
Bone Luga and Kutsa invited Indra at the same time.
But Indra refused Luga and put him in prison. Even
from the prison Lusa pr ayed to Indra to Visit him,
(Reveda, Mandala 10, Anuvaka 88, Sutkta 5; Jaiminiya Brahmana 1.128).
_ This letter has the following three — meanings--
gy honour and mother. (Agni Purana, Chapter
MACAKBUTA. A sacred place on the border of
MADHAVA II
Kuruksetra. A Yaksa of name Macakruta keeps guard
over this place. If one bows down before this Yaksa
one will have to his credit the benefit of a thousand
Godanas (giving away cows in charity). (Chapter
83, Vana Parva, M.B.).
MADA I. An Asura. This demon came out of the
sacrificial fireof Cyavana to kill Indra. (See under
Cyavana).
MADA II. One of the Manasaputras (spiritual sons)
of Brahma. Matsya Purana states that Mada was_ born
of the Pride of Brahma.
MADADHARA. A mountain. Bhimasena, while on his
victory march to the east conquered this mountain.
(Sloka 9, Chapter 30, Sabha Parva).
MADALASAI. A Vidyadhari. She was married to a
Vidyadhara named Campaka. (See under Campaka) .
MADALASA II, Wife of Rtadhvaja, King of Kasi.
Once a demon named Patalaketu carried away
Madalasa and Rtadhvaja took her back after defeating
Patalaketu in a fight. Alarka was the son of this couple.
MADANAMALA. A celebrated prostitute of the city of
Pratisthana. Narasimha, King of Pratisthana, did not
surrender himself to Vikramaditya, emperor of
Pataliputra. The resourceful Vikramaditya went to
Pratisthana and caught hold of the prostitute Madanamala first and then through her subdued the King
Narasimha. After that Vikramaditya took Madanamala to his place and made her stay there. (Taranga
4, Ratnaprabhalambaka, Kathasaritsagara).
MADANAMANCUKA. A heroine of ‘Vatsarajacarita -
Her mother was a nymph in her previous birth. By 4
curse of Devendra she was born on earthas Kalingasen@
and lived serving in the palace of Udayana, King ©
Vatsa. She desired to make Udayana her husband. 19
the meantime a Gandharva named Madanavega fell 10
love with Kalingasena. Knowing that Kalingasena w45
in love with Udayana the Gandharva followed her 1”
the garb of the King Udayana and at last they were
married. Kalingasena soon delivered Madanama!-
cuka, an incarnation of Ratidevi. When she grew UP
she married Naravahanadatta, son of Udayana-
(Madanamajicukalambaka, Kathasaritsagara, Tarang@
MADANAVEGA. A Gandharva. (See under Madanamajicuka) . |
MADANIKA. A nymph, a daughter of Menaka. 4
demon named Vidyudriipa married her. But Kandhar@
of the family of Garuda killed Vidyudrapa and took
Madanika for himself. They got a child named
Varksi. (Markandeya Purana, Chapter 2).
MADAYANTI. Wife of King Kalmasapada. He was
known as Mitrasaha and Saudasa also. When Kalm4sapada lay cursed Vasistha begot a child of Madayanti
named Agmaka. Madayanti gave her ear-rings to the
sage Uttanka. (For details see under Uttanka aD
Kalma sapada).
MADHAVA 1. A synonym of Sri Krsna, Because
ri Krsna could be properly understood by Manana,
Dhyana and Yoga he got the name Madhava. (Sloka
4, Chapter 7, Udyoga Parva).
MADHAVA Il. Son of Vikrama, King of Taladhvaja.
The Kriya Khanda of Padma Purana gives the following story about him. -
Madhava desired to marr
a beautiful -natur-
= Ksatriya y autiful and good-na
girl named Candrakala. She was not

MADHAVA III
prepared for that and she informed Madhava thus :
“There isa princess in the island of Plaksa named
Sulocana. She is far more beautiful than myself and
is fit to be your consort. Do try to get her”
Madhava accepted the advice of Candrakala and
started for the island of Plaksa with a servant of his
named Pracesta. The news that welcomed him when he
reached the island was that the marriage of Sulocana
had been fixed with one Vidyadhara. Undaunted
Madhava sent a love-letter to the princess mentioning
his arrival in the city, seeking her hand in marriage.
In reply to that Sulocana wrote that if Madhava appeared on the marriage-dais in time she would accept him as
her husband.
The marriage day arrived and Madhava waited for the
time of the function. But when the auspicious hour
came Madhava was asleep. Pracesta, his servant, took
advantage of the opportunity and carried away Sulocana. But Sulocana was determined to marry only
Madhava and she escaped from the custody of Pracesta
and reached the palace of a King called Susena and
stayed there as a servant wearing the robes of a male,
calling himself Viravara. a=
=e +e Sulocana in disguise, saved Vidyadhara
and Pracesta from committing suicide. At that time
Madhava also in despair was about to, commit suicide
when Sulocana appeared before him in time and stopped
him from doing it. Sulocana then told him all that had
happened and they were happily united as husband and
wife. ; .
Yadu of his Naga wife
MADHAVA III. A son born to 1 : )
Dhimravarna. The renowned Yadava dynasty was
established by this Yadu and his son Madhava.
Harivamsa) .
MADHAVA Wy. A virtuous brahmin. Once when he was
about to sacrifice a goat in the sacrificial fire the goa)
in human voice told the story of its previous birth oe
requested the brahmin to sacrifice It after nei fo
ninth chapter of the Gita. Madhava did so and the go
got salvation. (Uttara Khanda, Padma eres mile
MADHAVII. Daughter of King Yayat. a I nee
she always wore deer-hide as her garment an ues ms
observing a Vrata called Mrgavrata: Yayati g
: Chapter 145,
daughter in marriage to Galava. (Gloke oa Vasiman
Udvoga Parva). Madhavi bore a son [
ates ene to Haryasva, King of Ayodhya, oe
of Divodasa, King of Kasi, another son age Sibi.
dana; of the King of Usinara she gO ‘ha of Vigvamitra.
Besides these she got a 80D named Astaka © ‘+ of Yayati
(See under Galava). When the scene’ pe rata!
Was exhaisted and he fell down from neav
erit to
consented to part with half of her stock of m
ayati. (See under Yayati). (Sloka 7,
MADHAVI Il. A follower of
Chapter 46, Salya Parva).
MADHU I. One of the Asuras
Subrahmanya.
m the ear-wax of
born fro (For
Mahavisnu. The other was named Kaitabha.
details see under KAITABHS). |
MAD _ Once there 7
on. he dapete. ef the Yamuna an Asura of name
ished
Madhu. Satrughna killed this Madhu an anda,
there a city “alled Mathuraputl., son of Ravana,
Kamba Ramayana). While eo ie away a demonwas performing penance Madhu cal i dafight on that
ess named Kumbhinas! and there ensu 2
in a forest-garden
MADHUVILA
account between Madhu and Ravana in which Madhu
was killed.
MADHU III. A king who used to sit in the court of Yama
and worship him. (Sloka 16, Chapter 8, Sabha Parva).
MADHUCCHANDAS. A sage who observed correctly
the Agrama of Vanaprastha. He was one of the Brahmayadi sons of Vigvamitra. (Sloka. 50, Chapter 4, Anu-
$asana Parva). ViSvamitra had a hundred sons like
Madhucchandas. (10th Skandha, Bhagavata). The first
Sakta of Rgveda was written by this sage.
MADHUKAITABHA(S). Two Asuras named Madhu and
Kaitabha. (See under KAITABHA).
MADHUKUMBBA. A follower of Subrahmanya. (Sloka
19, Chapter 46, Salya Parva).
MADHULIKA. A follower of Subrahmanya. (Sloka 19,
Chapter 46, Salya Parva).
MADHUMAN. A place of habitation of ancient India.
(Sloka 53, Chapter 9, Bhisma Parva).
MADHUPARKA. One of the children of Garuda. (Sloka
14, Chapter 11, Udyoga Parva).
MADHURA. A soldier of Subrahmanya. (Sloka 71,
Chapter 45, Salya Parva).
MADHURASVARA. A celestial maiden. She once conducted a dance performance in honour of Arjuna. (Sloka
30, Chapter 43, Vana Parva).
MADHUSAKTA. An Asura. During the time of the emperor Prthu, the earth was turned into a cow and people
milked from her the things they wanted. Madhusakta
was the person who did the milking for the Asuras.
MADHUSRAVA. A sacred place in Kuruksetra, situated
near another holy place called Prthudaka. If one
bathes in a pond there one will have to his credit the
benefit of making a thousand Godanas. (Sloka 15,
Chapter 83, Vana Parva). ;
MADHUSUDANA. Another name for Sri Krsna. Because
he killed an Asura named Madhu he was called
Madhusiidana. (Sloka 16, Chapter 207, Vana Parva).
MADHUSYANDA. A sage who was the son of Visvamitra. (Sarga 62, Bala Kanda, Valmiki Ramayana).
MADHUVANA. A forest-garden owned by the great monkey-King Sugriva. After finding out the whereabouts
of Sita, Haniman and Angada accompanied by other
monkeys entered this garden and drank honey to their
heart’s content. (Chapter 282. Vana Parva and Sundara
Kanda, Valmiki Ramayana).
MADHUVARNA. A soldier of Subrahmanya. (Sloka 72,
Chapter 42, Salya Parva).
MADHUVATI. A sacred place on the border of Kuruksetra. If one bathes in a sacred pond there and worships the Manes one will have to one’s credit the benefit
of making a thousand Godanas (giving away cows in
charity). (Sloka 94, Chapter 83, Vana Parva) .
MADHUVIDYA. A special mystical lore of the Devas. This
was imparted to the sage Dadhyan by Indra. (See
under DADHYAN).
MADHUVILA (MADHUBILA) ‘A river which flows in
the neighbourhood of Kardamila ksetra. This river has
another name Samanga. This is a very sacred tirtha.
Indra who became a Brahmanatya-sinner by killing
Vrtrasura was absolved of his sins by taking a bath in
this river. Astavakra, the sage with eight bends in his
body, got himself perfect by taking a bath in this river
obeying the orders of his father Kahodaka. (Chapter 130,
Vana Parva).

MADIRA
MADIRA. Wife of Vasudeva, . father of Sri Krsna. Vasudeva had seven wives named Rohini, Bhadramanini,
Madira, Ila, Rocana, Pauravi and Devaki (9th Skandha,
Bhagavata). Of these Devaki, Rohini, and Bhadra
abandoned their lives by jumping into the funeral pyre
of Vasudeva. (Sloka 18, Chapter 7, Mausala Parva).
MADIRAKSA (MADIRASVA) I. A brother of Virata,
King of Matsya. When the Kauravas made Trigarta
carry away the cattle of Viradta it was Madiraksa who
faced Trigarta in a fight. A great fight ensued between
Trigarta and‘ Madiraksa. He had shone as one of the
chieftains of the army of King Virata. He was a very
charitable man well-versed in Dhanurveda (archery).
He was killed in the big battle by Dronacarya. Chapters 31, 33, 82 Virata Parva; 171, Udyoga Parva and 9,
Karna Parva). 7
MADIRAKSA II (MADIRASVA). A king of the dynasty
of Iksvaku. He was the son of King Dagagva. Madiragva
was a saintly king well-versed in archery. He was a very
righteous person also. (27-8, Anusdsana Parva).
Madirasva had a son named Dyutiman and a daughter
named Sumadhya. (2, 8, Anusdsana Parva.) After giving
Sumadhya in marriage to a sage named Hiranyahasta
Madirasva attained Svarga, (226: 34 Santi Parva, and
137 : 24 AnuSsasana Parva).
MADOTKATA "A ferocious lion mentioned in Paficatantra (See under Pajicatantra).
MADRA. One of the ten wives of Atrimaharsi. Atri got
of Madraa son named Soma. (Brahmanda Purana).
MADRA (M). An ancient place of habitation in Bharata.
This is situated near the river Jhelum, Madri,
the wife of Pandu was a princess of this place. Bhisma
went to Madra and brought MaAdri for Pandu. ( Chapter
112, Adi Parva). At the time of Arjuna’s birth there
was a voice from heaven which said, “This child will
grow up and capture many countries like Madra”.
ASvapati, father of Savitri, was a king of Madra. Karna
condemned Madra and Vahika as countries which had
fallen low in virtue. (Chapter 44, Karna Parva).
MADRAKAT. A Ksatriya king of ancient Bharata. He
was born of the partial spirit of the demon Krodhavaéga,
warns at or 67, Adi Parva).
- Soldiers of the country of Ma
called Madrakas. Madrakas were taclided ap Ban.
rava army. (Sloka 7, Chapter 51, Bhi P
MADRAKALANGA. A’ place lage
of habitati
India. (Sloka 42, Chapter 9, Bhisma ama of ancient
MADRAVATI I. Wife of Pariksit, son of Abhimanyu. She
her of Janamejaya. (Sloka 85
oS Rai —, Jaya. (Sloka 85, Chapter
MADRAVATI II. Another name for Madri, wife of
Pandu. (Sloka 56, Chapter 52, Sabha Parva).
MADREYAJANGALA. A place of habitation of ancient
India. (Sloka 39, Chapter 9, Bhisma Parva),
MADRI. Madri who was the second wife of Pandu was
a daughter of the King of Madra. She was the sister
of Salya. Nakula and Sahadeva took birth from Madri.
Pandu expired when he embraced his wife Madri. It
was because of a curse of the hermit Kindama. Madri
ended her life in the pyre with her husband. (For further details see under the word PANDU).
MADYA. Wine. There is a story in the seventh Skandha
of Devi Bhagavata showing how Madya happened to be
an intoxicant. Once Indra sent out the Aévinidevas
from Devaloka and banned wine to them. They took
MAGA
.— eee _ = ee EO et el ecoeceSeeS].=- -- —————S er eh
ia ee —e
crs oe
MAGADHAS
refuge in Cyavana a great sage. Cyavana conducted a
special Yaga and invited the Agvinidevas to partake of
the Yajnamsa. Indra objected to this and Cyavana had
to face Indra in a fight. Then Cyavana produced from
the sacrificial fire a demon named Mada and he rushed
at Indra to kill him. Indra then bowed down before
Cyavana and craved for pardon. Cyavana withdrew
the demon and tearing him into four pieces put one
each in dice, hunting, wine and women. That was how
all the four became intoxicating.
In ancient.India there were certain social conventions
regarding drinking of alcoholic preparations, All those
drinks which were intoxicants were not listed as
‘Alcohol’. Wine, honey, toddy, juice of sugarcane,
juice of Iruppa and Kutampuli, and sweet toddy of
palm tree were not considered alcohol. Sura (liquor)
chiefly meant Paisti (liquor made out of rice paste) .
Drinking of Sura was banned to the three castes, Brahmana, Ksatriya and Vaisya. If they drank Sura they
had to performa penance for a year drinking only water
or eat long pepper for a year. To be free from the sin of
drinking Sura one should wear dress made of animal
hair. Even if one drinks water in a pot in which Sura
was taken, one should observe Vrata for seven days.
(Chapter 173, Agni Purana).
MAGA (8S). The brahmins residing in the island of Saka
are generally called Magas. The Brahmaparva of Bhavisya Purana and the Samba Purana speak about the
Magas thus :
Samba, son of Krsna, did sever
deva and pleased with
Samba, Sirya gave hima
for worship. Samba constr
the side of the Gandrabhag
there. He then brou
called M
ple.
and s
€ penance to please Saryathe unwavering devotion of
luminous replica of himself
ucted a beautiful temple by
a river and installed the idol
ght from Sakadvipa the brahmins
agas for conducting the ceremonies of the temAll the eighteen families of Maga brahmins came
tayed near the temple at the request of Samba.
DHA. A famous city of ancient India. Its present
name is Rajagrha. The Puranas mention many great
Kings who had ruled Magadha. Brhadratha was once
King of Magadha. (Sloka 30, Chapter 63, Adi Parva)
Jayatsena one of the Kalakeyas was once the King of
Magadha. (Sloka 48, Chapter 67, Adi Parva). Pandu
father of the Pandavas once attacked Magadha and
Dirgha the then King of Magadha was killed by Pandu.
(Chapter 112, Adi Parva). While Brhadratha was ruling
(Sloka 10, Chapter 13, Sabha’ Parva). Dur; ime
of the Mahabharata Jarasandha 2 “the King of
Magadha. Sri Krsna made Bhimasena kill Jarasandha.
After his death Sri Krsna made Sahadeva brother of
Jarasandha the King of Magadha. (Sloka 43 Chapter
24, Sabha Parva). Bhimasena conquered this countr y
during his victory march. The people of Magadha
outed gifts to Yudhisthira at his Rajasiiya. (Sloka 18,
‘ apter 52, Sabha Parva). The King of Magadha and
te people there fought on the side of the Pandavas in
the great battle (Sloka 2, Chapte
MAGADHAS. A particular eae ae. Udyoga Parva)
of Siitas was to drive chariots and t
(Chapter 151, Agni Purana). This work of
a flatterer was given to them by Brahma. When the

MAGADHI
So de | Prthu was born, Brahma conducted a Yaga.
n the day of sutya at the place of Somabhisava of the
Yaga a very intelligent Sita was born. At the same yaga
a Magadha also- was born. He was a great scholar. Then
= sages told Magadha and Sita thus: ‘‘Praise this king
rthu, who is the valorous son of Vena. Praising is the
fittest work suited to you both. Prthu deserves praise.”
Then the Sita-Magadhas placing their hands on their
breasts with respect said, ‘What do we know of the
qualities and capabilities of a king just born ? His fame
is not known. Based on what should we sing praises of
him #7” Hearing this the sages said that they should
praise him for the qualities which he would be possessing in future. ‘The king was pleased to hear that. SiitaMagadhas started singing eulogistic songs based on the
qualities and exploits of a Prthu to be. Prthu then
appointed Sita as his charioteer and Magadha as his
adulator, From then onwards the Sita family became
charioteers and the Magadha family flatterers. (Chapters 13—70 Arnsa 1, Visnu Purana).
MAGADHI. A river which flows through the middle
of five mountains. (Sarga 32, Bala Kanda, Valmiki
Ramayana :
MAGHA I. A sacred place. If one visits this place one
would get the benefit of performing the yajiias like Agnistoma and Atiratra. (Sloka 51, Chapter 84, Vana
Parva).
MAGHA II. One of the twentyseven constellations. The
importance of this constellation is mentioned in the
Mahabharata in_ several places.
(i) When the planet Kuja (Mars), during its retrograde
motion, comes near the constellation of Magha many
unhappy incidents occur in the world. (Sloka 14,
Chapter 3, Bhisma Parva) .
(ii) If Candra stays near Magha it is an ill omen. (Sloka
2, Chapter 17, Bhisma Parva).
(iii) If one gives away land in charity on the day of
agha one willbe rich in children and cattle. (Sloka
12; Chapter 64, Anugasana Parva). ¢
(iv) If one gives pudding to the poor on the day ©
Magha which comes in the black half of the month
Tula (October) the Manes _ be pleased. (Sloka
, Chapter 88, Anugasana Parva). 7
(v) If eae worships the Manes on the day of ea
Sitting in the shade of an elephant, the manes will be
Satisfied. (Sloka 8, Chapter g8, Anusasana Parva).
(vi) If one conducts the obsequia
charity on the day of Magha one We
most excellent member of the family. -(
89, Anugasana Parva).
MAGHA. A Sanskrit poet who lived in the
A.D. The only work of his which has "om
isupalavadha known popularly as Magha.
Upama K<alidasasya
Bharaverarthagauravam /
Dandinah padalalityam
© rca santi trayo gunah //
is is a very famous verse mean”: 7
of Kalidasa’ the depth of meaning oe Pe A
Bharavi and the simplicity of language of ea a poet
Present in Magha’’. This ‘ndicates how 8
agha was. ;
Poors the last part of this Kavy4 i an be eee
that Magha was the son of Dattaka an cs of a King
Suprabhadeva. Suprabhadeva w4 the munis
7th Century
e to light 1s
ing thus : “The simile
MAHADHRTI
called Dharmadeva. Magha was born in Gujarat. A
literary critic named Jacobi fixes the period of Magha
as the 6th century A.D. while others fix it as the 8th
century A.D. Magha has made references to the drama
‘Nagananda’ written by Harsa. Harsa was a King
during the period 606 to 649 and that is why the
period of Magha is fixed after that period.
MAGHA. A month (February). This is so called because it is closely associated with the constellation
Magha. This month is between the months of Pausa and
Phalguna. Mahabharata makes some statements about
the importance of the month of Magha.
(i) He who bathes at Prayaga during this month will
be free from all sins. (Sloka 37, Chapter 25, Anusasana
Parva). .
(ii) He who gives gingelly as cift to Brahmins during
this month will never go to hell. (Sloka 8, Chapter 66,
Anusadsana Parva).
(iii) If one takes food only once a day during the whole
of this month one will be born very rich in the next
birth.. (Sloka 31, Ghapter 106, AnuSasana Parva).
(iv) Ifone worships Sri Krsna fasting on the Dvadasi
day of Magha one will get the benefit of conducting a
Rajasiiya yajia. (Sloka 5, Chapter 109, Anus dsana
Parva).
(v) Bhisma expressed his desire to Krsna to end his
life on the astami day falling in the bright fortnight
of the month of Magha. (Anusasana Parva, Chapter
MAHABAHU. One of thie hundred sons of Dhrtarastra.
Bhimasena killed him in the Bharata Yuddha. (M.B.
Drona Parva, Chapter 157, Verse 19).
MAHABALA I. Minister of Sridatta
word Sridatta).
MAHABALA II. A follower of Lord Subrahmanya.
(M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 71).
MAHABALI. See under the word Bali.
MAHABHAUMA. Son of Ariha, a King of the Puru
dynasty. He had a son Ayutanayi by his wife Suyajiia.
(M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 95, Verse 19).
MAHABHAYA. A Raksasa. He was born to Adbarma
by his wife Nirrti. Mahabhaya had two brothers named
Bhaya and Mrtyu. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 66,
Verse 54).
MAHABHISAK. A King of the [ksvaku dynasty. He had
another name Santanu. (For further details see under
Santanu).
MAHABHOJA. A Yadava
Skandha).
MAHACUDA. A woman follower of Subrahmanya.
(M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Verse 5).
MAHADANA. Theie are sixteen Mahadanas or ‘“‘Great
gifts’. They are: (1) Tulapurusadana, (2) Hiranyagarbha dana, (3) Brahmanda dana, (4) Kalpakavrksadana, (5) Gosahasradana, (6) Hiranyakamadhenudana, (7) Hiranyasva dana, (8) Hiranyasvaratha
dana, (9) Hemahastiratha dana, (10) Paficalangalakadana (11) Dharadana, (12) Visvacakradana (13)
Kalpalata dana, (14) Saptasagaraka dana, (15) Ratnadhenu dana, (16) Mahapitaghata dana. (Agni Purana,
Chapter 210).
MAHADEVA. Siva. (See under Siva).
MAHADHRTI. A King of the Solar dynasty. Bhagavata, 9th Skandha).
(See under the
King. (Bhagavata, 9th

he Penta oN ie ee —e—e eee ee +
MAHADYUTI I
MAHADYUTI. I. A King in ancient India, (M.B. Adi
Parva, Chapter 1, Verse 232).
MAHADYUTI II. One of the sons of the Yaksa Manibhadra by Punyajani.
MAHAGANGA. A holy place. Mahabharata, Anusasana
Parva, Chapter 25, Verse 22 says that abstaining from
food for a fortnight after a bath in this place will secure
admission to Svargaloka.
MAHAGAURI. A prominent river in India. (Mahabharata, Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 33).
MAHAGO*’ A. A river (Nada) celebrated in the Puranas.
It is also known as “‘Sonabhadra”’ and Mahagona. It is
after crossing this river that Krsna, Bhima and Arjuna
entered Magadha, the capital of Jarasandha. (M.B.
Sabha Parva, Chapter 20, Verse 27).
MAHAHANU. A naga born in the family of Taksaka.
In Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 57, Verse 10, we
read that this naga was burnt to death in Janamejaya’s
‘Sarpasatra’.
MAHAHANUS. One of the sons of Vasudeva by Rohini.
(Matsya Purana).
MAHAHAYA. A King of the Yayati dynasty. (Bhagavata, 9th Skandha).
MAHAHRADA. A holy place. One who takes a bath
here will never be in misfortune. M.B. Anusgasana
Parva, Chapter 25, Verse 48 says that one who takes
bath here and spends a month fasting with a pure heart
will attain salvation.
MAHAJANU. A_ Brahmana. When Pramadvara lay
bitten by a serpent, this Brahmana came near her with
tearful eyes. (See under Pramadvara).
MAHAJAVA. A woman follower of Subrahmanya.
(M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Verse 22).
MAHAJAYA. One of the two Parsadas presented to
Subrahmanya by Vasuki, the King.of serpents. The
other one was Jaya. (M.B. Salya Parva. Chapter 45,
Verse 52).
MAHAJVALA. A hell. (See under K4la I).
MAHAKADAMBA. A tree standing on the ta!l peak
of Suparéva mountain. The Puranas declare that five
big rivers take their sources from the hollow trunk of
this big tree. These rivers fall on thé fop of Supargva
mountain and flow through the western side of Ilavrta.
The region around this place to a distance of a-hundred
yojanas is filled with the fragrant air breathed out by
the gods who feed upon the essence of the waters in
these a ae Devi who lives in this sacred place
is called ‘“‘Dharegvari’. (Devi Bhai ,
Skandha) . ( gavata, 8th
MAHAKALA I. A Siva parsada. Mahabharata, Sabha
Parva, Chapter 10, Verse 34 mentions that Siva Parsadas known as Mahakalas flourished in the assembly of
Kubera.
MAHAKALA II. A sacred place situated in the Sipra
river valley in Ujjain. The Sivaliiga installed in this
place is called ‘‘Mahakala.” Mahabharata, Vana Parva,
Chapter 82, Verse 49 says that those who take a bath
in the Kotitirtha at this place, get the same effect as
that of an Agvamedha yaga. :
MAHAKAPALA I. A minister of the Raksasa Diisana.
(Valmiki Ramayana, Aranya Kanda, 25rd Sarga).
MAHAKAPALA II. A Raksasa who attacked Rama
and Laksmana at Paficavati. In Valmiki Ramayana,
Aranya Kanda, 26th Sarga we read that when Rama
and Laksmana fought with Khara, Dusana and Trigiras
MAHAMERU
there were three terrible Raksasas named Mahakapala,
Sthalaksa and Pramathin.
MAHAKARNI I. A wicked minister of Ambubica,
King of Magadha. There is a_ reference to him in
Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 203, Verse 19. _
MAHAKARNI II. A woman follower of Lord 5Subrahmanya. (M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 263 Verse, 26).
MAHAKASA, A particular subcontinent in the Saka
island. (M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 11, Verse 25) -
MAHAKAYA. A woman follower of Lord Subrahmany4
(M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Verse, 24).
MAHAKRAUNCA. Amontain in the Krauifica island
(M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 12, Verse 7).
MAHALAYA. A holy place. Mahabharata, Vana
Parva, Chapter 84, Verse 54 mentions that one who
observes a fast at this holy place for one month, will be
absolved of all sins.
MAHAMALI. A Raksasa hero of Ravana’s army- He
was killed in the battle at Paficavati between Rama a”
Laksmana on one side and Khara, Diisana and Trisira®
on the other, over the affair of Sirpanakha. Mahamali
appeared on the scene as a commander of Khara®
army. (Valmiki Ramayana. Aranya Kanda, |
Sarga).
MAHAMANAS. Grandson of Janamejaya, a King of
the Anga dynasty. Mahasgala was the son of Janamejay®
and Mahamanas was the son of Mahaégala. Usinat
7) the son of Mahdamanas. (Agni Purana, Chapte
MAHAMATI. The seventh son of the sage Angitas
There isa reference to him in Mahabharata, V2"
Parva, Chapter 218, Verse 7. ‘
MAHAMERU. The golden coloured peak of Himava®
The seat of Lord Siva, according to the Puranas.
1) General features. Mahameru surpasses even the ae
in its dazzling golden brilliance. Devas and Gandhatv@
attend on it on all sides. It is inaccessible to sinner
There are celestial herbs and serpents at its base. “‘, :
Mahameru that keeps Heaven in its place by supp? Oe
it. ‘he atmosphere there, is always alive with a
sweet songs of various kinds of birds. Precious sto” if
are scattered all over its surface. All the 33 croré® Adi
gods dwell on the sides of this Mountain. (M.B.
Parva, Chapter 17).
Saptarsis like Vasistha rise and fall on Maham@ _
Maha Visnu and Brahma have their places in Mah*
meru. Visnu’s place is in the east. There is a spe“
place there for the residence of Maharsis. Those ae
go to Mahameru never return. The Sun and Moo? 7
round- Mahameru everyday, Parv4)
Chapter 163). ryday. (M.B. Vana
There are twent
On the eastern
Devakita. On t
y mountains surrounding Mahamer™
side there are two mountains, Jara 2”
he western side there are two mountaine:
Pavamana and Pariyatra. On the southern side are ¢ a
two mountains, Kailasa and Karavira and on the north:
ern side, the two mountains, Trigrmga and Makaragi!):
Thus Mahameru shines like the sun in the midst °
eight mountains, In the middle of Mahameru is situal
ed Brahmaloka, the abode of Brahma ina square
extending over 10,000 yojanas. This region is of ine*
pressible splendour. At eight places around this
Brahmapuri, are situated the eight posts or abodes °
the Astadikpalas, each of the abodes being 25000
yojanas in extent. Thus there are nine Puris or Cities

MAHAMUKHA
on the top of Mahameru. They are:— (1) Brahma’s
Manovati in the centre. (2) Due east of it, Indra’s
Amaravati. (3) In the south-east corner, Agni’s
Tejovati. (4) On the southern side, Yama’s Samyamani.
(5) In the south west corner, Nirrti’s Krsnanjana,
(6) On the western side, Varuna’s Sraddhavati. (7)
In the north-west corner, Vayu’s Gandhavati. (8) On
the northern side, Kubera’s Mahodaya.(9) In the north
cast corner, [gan’as YaSovati. (Devi Bhagavata,
8th Skandha).
2) Mahameru and Laika. Ravana’s place of abode Lanka
was really a peak of Mahameru. (For further details, see
the previous history of Lanka in Para 9 under the word
Kubera).
3) How Mahameru got its golden colour.
The Puranas
declare that the sun keeps going round Mahameru.
Once, while the sun was thus going round, he
wished to takea little rest. He asked permission to
place the axle of his chariot for a short while on Mahameru. The mountain agreed to it. The grateful Sungod (Strya) blessed Mahameru that it would thenceforth have golden colour. Until it received this blessing,
Mahameru had the colour of ordinary mountains.
4) Other details.
(i) Two daughters named Ayati and Niyati_were born
to Mahimeru. They were married by Dhata and
aoe respectively. (Visnu Purana, Part I, Chapter
(ii) Vasistha had an asrama near (M.B.
Adi Parva. Chapter 99, Verse 6).
(11) Mahameru attends on MKubera in Kubera’s
assembly. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 12, Verse 73).
(iv) The extensive Jambt Vrksa stands on the southern side of Mahameru. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Ghapter
into a cow and all living \
necessaries by milking her. It was Mahameru who
stood as milking man on behalf of the mountains.
(M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 69, Verse 18).
Mahameru which was
Mahameru.
At the time of Emperor Prthu, the earth was turned
beings obtained all their
(vi) In Tripuradahana, it was
erected as ae flag-staff in Sjiva’s chariot. (M.B. Drona
Parva, Chapter 202, Verse f pe Parsadas named
(vii) Mahameru_ presente
ln and Meghamali to Subrahmanya.
Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 48).
(viii) Mahameru once presented
Emperor Prthu. (M.B. Santi Parva,
Verse 1).
(ix) Mahameru is anointed a
(M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter
(x) Mahabharata, Sant Parva,
22 says that Vyasa once stayed on
disciples. —"
(xi) Sthilasiras and Badavamu =e
i on Mahameru. (M.B. Santi Farv
MAHAMUKHA. A warrior of Emme Jayacr tet nl
bharata, Vana Pare, Jags ee ‘nthe battle which
that he was killed ey aaron of Paficali y
(M.B.
heaps of gold to
Chapter 59,
s the King of mountains.
9, Verse 18).
or Chapter 34], Verse
Mahameru with his
a once performed
a, Ghapter 342,
followed the forcible
Jayadratha. . acty, He was_ the
MAHAN I. A King of the Pare oy Chapter 94, Verse
son of Matinara. (M.B, Adi
MAHARAUDRA
MAHAN Il. The son of the Agni Bharata, who was a
Prajapati. Mahabharata, Vana Parva Chapter 219,
Verse 8 states that he was a much revered person.
MAHANADA. A Raksasa. In V almiki Ramayana,
Yuddha Kanda, we see that he was a Minister and
the uncle of Ravana.
MAHANADI I. A river, celebrated in the Puranas and
flowing through the region Utkala (Orissa). Arjuna
once took a bath in it. Mahabharata Vana Parva,
Chapter 84, Verse 8#, states that those who bathe in this
river will obtain “Aksayaloka”.
MAHANADI II. A river in_ the Saka island. (M.B.
Bhisma Parva, Chapter 11, Verse 32).
MAHANANDA I. See under Taraka I.
MAHANANDA II. A King of Madra land. Dama, the
son of Narisyanta killed Mahananda at the Svayamvara
of Sumana. (Markandeya Purana, 130.52 }.
MAHANANDA III. A holy place. Mahabharata, Anu-
¢asana Parva, Chapter 25, Verse 45, says that those
who worship in this place will obtain entry into
Nandanavana.
MAHANANDI. A Magadha King who was the son of
Nandivardhana. He was the last King of the Sigunaga
dynasty. King Nanda was the son of Mahanandi by a
Sidra woman. According to Matsya Purana, Vayu
Purana and Brahmanda Purana, he ruled the country
for 46 years. |
MAHAPADMA I. The first King of the Nanda dynasty.
According to Vayu Purana and Matsya Purana,
Mahapadma was the son of Mahanandi, the last King
of the Sisunaga dynasty. He was the son of Mahanandi
by a Sidra woman. He killed his father and founded
the Nanda dynasty.
MAHAPADMA II. An elephant in Ghatotkaca’s elephant army during the Bharata Y uddha. (M.B. Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 60, Verse OLA s
MAHAPADMA III. One of the Astadiggajas. (The eight
elephants guarding the eight cardinal points). (M.B.
Bhisma Parva, Chapter 64, Verse 57).
MAHAPADMAPURA. An ancient place in the south of
the Ganga river valley. (M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter
353, Verse 1).
MAHAPAGA. A famous river in ancient India. There
‘. a reference to this river in Mahabharata, Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 28. )
MAHAPARISADESVARA. A follower of Lord Subrahmanya. (M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 66).
MAHAPARSVA I. One of the heroic warriors of Ravana.
In the battle between Rama and Ravana, all those
warriors were killed. (Agni Purana, Chapter 11).
MAHAPARSYVA II. A mountain to the north-east of
Siva’s abode on the top of Mount Kailasa. There is a
reference to this mountain in Mahabharata, Anusasana
Parva, Chapter 19, Verse 21.
MAHAPRASTHANIKA PARVA. A subsidiary Parva
in Mahabharata which describes the Mahaprasthana
conducted by the Pandavas after the Bharata Yuddha.
MAHAPUMAN. A mountain. (Mahabharata, Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 11, Verse 26).
MAHAPURA. A holy place. Mahabharata, Anusasana
Parva, Chapter 25, Verse. 26 states that if one takes a
bath in this place and leads a pure life here for three
nights, one will become fearless.
MAHARAUDRA. A Raksasa who was the friend of
Ghatotkaca, He was killed by Duryodhana at the battle

MAHARAURAVA (M)
of Kuruksetra. (M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 91, Verse
MAHARAURAVA(M) . A naraka (hell). (See the section
on Naraka under the word Kala I).
MAHARAVA. A King of the Yadu dynasty. In Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 218, we read that this
Ksatriya King had participated in the festival conducted by Yadavas at the Raivataka mountain.
MAHARLOKA. A world which was believed by the
ancient people to be situated one crore yojanas above
the ““Dhruvapada”’. Visnu Purana, Part 1I, Chapter 7
says that it is there that sages like Bhrgu live till the end
of Kalpa. _
MAHAROMA. A King of the Solar dynasty. He was
the son of Krtirata and father of Svarnaroma. (Bhagavata. 9th Skandha).
MAHASALA. A King of the Anga dynasty. He was the
son of Janamejaya and father of Mahamanas. (Agni
Purana, Chapter 277).
MAHASANKHA I. A _ crocodile celebrated in the
Puranas. He had a wife named Sankhini. The seven
children born to Sankhini became the Maruts in the
Svarocisa Manvantara. There is a story in Chapter 72,
Vamana Purana about these children who became
Maruts.
Rtadhvaja, son of Svarocisa Manu had seven heroic
sons. ‘They went to Mahameru and began to worship
Brahma for gaining Indra’s place. Indra was alarmed.
Fe sent the Apsara woman Pitana to the sons of Rtadhvaja to obstruct their tapas. There was a river flowing
by the side of their asrama. Rtadhvaja’s sons came to
the river to take their bath. Just at that time, Patana
also came there and began to take bath. At her sight,
the young men had an involuntary emission of semen.
Sankhini, wife of the crocodile Mahaégankha swallowed
it. The princes whose tapas was interrupted returned
to the palace. Putana returned to Indra and reported
the matter.
After some years, Sankhini happened to be caught in
a fisherman’s net. The fisherman caught her and informed Rtadhvaja’s sons about his catch. They took her to
the palace and put her in a tank there. In due course
Sankhini gave birth to seven children. Immediately
after that she attained moksa. The children began to cry
for mother’s milk, moving about in the water. Then
Brahma appeared to them and told them not to er
and assured them that they would become the Devas of
“Vayu Skandha”. He took them up to the sky and put
them in Vayuskandha. These children were the :
of the Svarocisa Manvantara.
MAHASANKHA II. A Naga. Bhagavata, 10th Skandha
says that this Naga revolves along with the sun in the
month of Margasirsa.
MAHASENA I. Another name for Subrahmanya. (M.B.
Vana Parva, Chapter 225, Verse 27).
MAHASENA II. A prince of Ujjayini.
Angaraka I).
MAHASIRAS I. An ancient sage. In Mahabharata.
Sabha Parva, Chapter 4, Verse 10 we find that this
sage shone in the assembly of Dharmaputra.
MAHASIRAS II. A Naga. Mahabharata, Sabha Parva,
Chapter 9 states that this Naga worships Varuna in
’s assembly. |
wre RGR AMA. ri holy place. Mahabharata, Vana
Parva, Chapter 84, says that a person who spends a
(See under
Maruts .
MAHENDRA II
night here observing a fast, would obtain “‘Subhaloka”’.
One who spends three months like that will become a
‘“‘Paramasiddha’’. (M.B. Anusasana Parva, Chapter 25,
Verse _1L/):
MAHASURA. One of the Asura leaders who fought
against Subrahmanya. (Skanda Purana, Asura
Kanda). _
MAHASVA. A King celebrated in the Puranas. Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter 8, Verse 19 says that
this King now lives in Yama’s assembly.
MAHASVANA. A follower of Subrahmanya. (M.B.
Salya Parva, Chapter 40, Verse 26).
MAHATALA. A section of Patala. The descendants of
the serpent Kadri live here. These serpents are manyheaded and terrible monsters. Chief among them are
Kahaka, Taksaka, Susena, K4liya and others. All these
serpents have long and slender bodies, large hoods and
are of very cruel nature. Still they are all afraid ©
Garuda and so live quietly with their familics in Maha
tala. (Devi Bhagavata, 8th Skandha).
MAHATAPAS. A great sage. Varaha Purana states that
this sage advised King Suprabha to worship Visnu. ,
MAHATEJAS. A warrior of Subrahmanya. (M.B. Saly4
Parva, Chapter 45; Verse 70). .
MAHATI. Narada’s Vina (Lute). It was this Mahatl
which became the lute in the world, as the result of
curse. (See under Narada).
MAHATTARA.. One of the five sons of the Agni Pancé
Janya. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 22, Verse 9).
MAHAUJAS I. A King of ancient Bharata. The Pand@-
vas had invited this King to take part in the gre*
battle. (Sloka 22, Chapter 4, Udyoga Parva).
MAHAUJAS II. A dynasty of Ksatriyas. King Varay¥
yas ~ 7 in this dynasty. (Sloka 15, Chapter 74, Udyo8*
arva).
MAHAVEGA. A woman follower of Subrahmany*
(M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Verse 16). a
MAHAVIRA I. A son of Priyavrata, Svayambhu¥
Manu had two famous sons named Priyavrata 4?
Uttanapada. Of them, Priyavrata married Surupz _
Barhismati, the two beautiful and virtuous daughters —
Visvakarma Prajapati. By his first wife Surapa, Pry
vrata had ten sons, namely, Agnidhra, Idhmajihv®
Yajiiabahu, Mahavira, Rukmagukra, Ghrtapr gthm
Savana, Medhatithi, Vitihotra and Kavi. The young°*
of his children was a daughter named Orjjasvati. (D a
Bhagavata, 8th Skandha).
MAHAVIRA II. Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 67»
Verse 68, refers to a Mahavira, who was the re-birt
of the Asura Krodhavaéa. .
MAHAYASAS. A woman follower of Subrahmany
(M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Verse 28).
MAHENDRA I. Father of the princess Patali, (See unde!
Pataliputra) .
MAHENDRA I, One of the holy mountains. This
) Ve . Puranic importance.
| ter slaughtering the Ksatriyas to extinction sa8°
Paragurama made Mahendra hi r oka
— Chapter 129, Adi Parva). his place.of abode. =
2) Once Arjuna visited th ra.
(‘Sloka 13, Chapter 214. Adi — Mahend
(3) The presiding deity of this mountain sits in the
court of Kubera worshipp} .
10, Sabha Parva). PasES NE (Sloka 30, Chapte

MAHENDRA VIKRAMAVARMA
(4) If one bathes in the pond of Ramatirtha on the
top of this mountain one would get the benefit of performing an Agvamedhayaga. (Sloka 16, Chapter 85,
Vana Parva).
(5) Brahma once went to this mountain and conducted
a yaga there. (Sloka 22, Ghapter 87, Vana Parva).
(6). Yudhisthira during his pilgrimage visited
mountain. (Sloka 30, Ghapter 114, Vana Parva).
(7) ParaSurama gave a dargana (Interview) to Yudhisthira on a Caturdasi day on this mountain. (Sloka 16,
Chapter 117, Vana Parva).
(8) Hanaman when he was going 10 search of Sita
visited this mountain also along with the other monkeys.
(Sundara Kanda, Valmiki Ramayana ).
MAHENDRAVIKRAMAVARMA. A Sanskrit instructor
in histrionics who lived in the 7th century A.D. He was
a Pallava King and ruled his country during the period
600 to 630 A.D. He is the author of the drama Mattavilasa. Many verses from Mattavilasa have been quoted
later in many other books. Kajici was the capital of
Vikramavarma.
MAHESA. An incarnation of Siva. When once Vetala,
his gatekeeper was born on earth, Siva and Parvati
incarnated as Mahesa and Ssrada on earth. (Satarudra
Samhita, Siva Purana).
MAHESVARA. Another name of Siva.
MAHESVARAPURA. A holy place. H. one worships
Sankara (Siva) at this place, all desires would be
fulfilled. (Sloka 129, Chapter 84, Vana Parva). 7
MAHESVARIDHARA. A holy place. He who visits
this place would have to his credit the benefit of doing
an Agvamedhayajiia. (Sloka 117, Chapter 84, Vana
Parva).
MAHEYA. A place of habitation of ancient India.
(Sloka 49, Chapter 9, Bhisma Parva).
MAHIDASA. An acarya (Preceptor) ‘
to be the author of ‘“Aitareya
‘“‘Aitareya Aranyaka”’. See
According ‘ to Chandogyopanisad and Jaiminiya
Upanisad Brahmana, Mahidasa lived for 117 years.
Although this 4carya was a victim of diseases he was
quite indifferent to the painful sufferings caused by
them. ( Chandogyopanisad 3; 16; 7—Jaiminiya
Upanisad Brahmana, *: s 11). ' 7
MAHIJIT. A King of Mahismati who lived in Dvapara
Yuga. He was childless and got a son by observing
Vrata on the Ekadasi day falling in the bright lunar
fortnight in the month of Sravana (August). (Uttarakhanda, Padma Purana). .
MAHIKA. A place of habitation
(Sloka 46, Chapter 9, Bhisma Parva) .
MAHILAROPYA. 5ee under Paficatantra.
MAHIMAN. An Aditya. Bhagavata 6th Skandha says
that Mahiman was the son of Bhaga by Siddhi. |
MAHIMABHATTA. A Sanskrit critic who lived in
India in the 11th century A.D. His chief work wes
entitled “‘Vyaktiviveka”, treatise on “‘Alankara
4. ded into three parts. He was a scholar
‘ara ig en the author of another book
“Tattvoktikosa”’. £ oak oneal By
MAHIRATHA. A Kin who earned gre
observing Vrata in ie month of Vaisakha | (May).
This King gave to those in hell his one day's punya
and all of them were released from hell,
this
He is believed
Brahmana” and
of ancient India.
MAHISA
Mahiratha was 2 King who became prosperous by
accrued punya. Kasyapa was his guru. The King
entrusted the affairs of the state to his ministers and
led a very immoral life. The country began to decay
day by day and one day Kagyapa gave Dharmopadesa
to Mahiratha. The Guru said : “Oh King, your body
which was in a state of sinning has attained a_ state of
virtue by your association with me. ‘Those well-versed
sn the Vedas say that the body is of three different
kinds. Firstly there is the one which is evil-natured
without either virtue or knowledge. Secondly, there 1s
the virtuous one with good conduct. Thirdly, there is
the agonising body which hides both virtue and evil.
The body without virtue and salvation is always a
body of sins. Your body has now become virtuous
by becoming devotional to your guruand attending to
my words. You are now fit to do virtuous deeds and I
shall now make you enjoy the benefits of V ais akhasnana
(a bath with religious rites in the month of Vaisakha
(May).
After that Kasyapa made him take the bath and worship
with proper Vedic rites in the month of Vaisakha. The
King became old and died. At once the servants of
Kala. (King of Death) came to fetch the soul of
Mahiratha. But angels from Mahavisnu came and
thrusting aside the agents of Kala took charge of the
soul of Mahiratha. Nymphs from above sang in praise
of the King whose sin had waned because of Vaisakhapratassnana (early morning bath in the month of
Vaigakha). The angels from Visnu carrying the soul
of the King to Svarga took him through hell. The King
heard the agonising cries of those suffering from
different kinds of torture in hell. The King made
enquiries and feeling compassionate requested those in
charge of the hell to release those there in hell then
by accepting a portion of the punya acquired by him.
The angels agreed to that and the King gave away the
Punya he had acquired during one day by observing
the Vaisakhavrata. At once all those in hell were
released from the agony and were sent to heaven.
(Vais akhamahatmyaprakarana, Padma Purana, Patalakhanda) .
MAHISA. An Asura.
1). Birth. Long ago there was a famous Asura King
named Danu. Two sons named Rambha and Karambha were born to him. Having no. issue, they decided
to worship Malavata yaksa, praying to be blessed with
children. They started tapas, Karambha, in the
middle of water and Rambha in the middle of
Paficagni. Indra was alarmed at their tapas. He took
the form of a crocodile and went. into the water in
which Karambha was standing and caught hold of his
feet, pulling him down. Karambha was drowned. The
mighty Rambha who was enraged at the death of his
brother, decided to cut off his own head and offer it
as sacrifice in the fire. He drew his sword and was
about to cut off his head, when Agni, the god of fire,
appeared before him and stopped him saying :—‘‘Do
not kill yourself. Killing another person itself is a sin.
Suicide is a more serious sin. Ask for any boon you
wish to have; I shall grant it. Do not put an end to
your life.”’
Then Rambha replied :— “Jf you are prepared to
grant me a boon, let me have a son who is more
brilliant than yourself and who will be the conqueror

MAHISA
of all the three worlds. He should not be defeated by
Devas or Asuras, and he should be as mighty as the
wind, handsome and an expert archer.” Agni replied :-
“You will have such a son by the woman who wins
your heart’’.
When god Agni had left after saying this, Rambha
went to visit Malayaksa, who was attended to by
Yaksas. ‘There, they had a treasure known as Padma
and numerous animals like elephants, horses, buffaloes,
cows and sheep. Among them was a three-year-old shebuffalo of exceptional charm and Rambha fell in love
with her. She was also irresistibly attracted by him,
As fate would have it, a sexual union took place
between them.
The she-buffalo became pregnant and Rambha_ took
her with him to his own house in Patala. There, the
other Danavas, his kinsmen who came to know of his
connection with the she-buffalo, expelled him from
their midst as one who had committed a forbidden act.
So he returned to Malavatayaksa. The pretty shebuffalo accompanied her husband to the holy Yaksamandala.
While they were living there, she gave birth to an
attractive buffalo-calf. After that a he-buffalo came
across her. But she remained loyal to her Danava
husband who drew his sword and rushed towards
the he-buffalo. The terrible beast with his mighty
horns attacked Rambha who fel] dead on the ground.
The widowed Mahisi (she-buffalo) sought the protection of the Yaksas. They saved her from the Mahisa
(He-buffalo). The disappointed and love-stricken
Mahisa drowned himself ina holy lake and was_ reborn
as a mighty and heroic Asura named Namara. The
Mahisi spent some time under the protection of the
Yaksas. When they cremated Rambha’s body, she
jumped into the funeral pyre and burnt herself to
death. At once from the middle of the fire there arose
a monstrous being. That terrible monster, armed with
a sword drove away the Yaksas and killed all the
Mahisas. Mahisa who was the son of Rambha alone
was spared. He was the Asura named Raktabija. He
defeated all gods like Indra, Rudra, Sirya, Vayu and
others.
Mahisasura became the King of the
a a a) disarmed no agradg —
onour. € worlds wer
Vamana Para, Chenpres 17). plunged in darkness,
2) Mahsasura’s Reign. Mahisasura who was intoxi
cated with pride on account of the boon he haa
received, became the undisputed and sole em ep f
the three worlds. He formed a strong eolasreil of
Ministers. Ciksura who was puffed with pride and an
expertin military Science, was installed as WarMinister and Tamra, the gifted economist as Finance
Minister. The Prime Minister was Asiloma. Bidala
was Foreign Minister. Udarka became Militar
Commander. Baskala, Trinetra and Kalabandhaka
were assigned the posts of Members of the Executive
Council, Sukracarya was the Education Minister.
Mahisa strengthened his army. The State Treasury
overflowed with wealth. Kings of the neighbouring
states paid tribute and bowed their heads to him. The
Beshareves offered the share of yajfia to Mahisasura
and prostrated before him. (Devi Bhagavata, 5th
Skandha).
MAHISA
3) Outbreak of War. After strengthening his position
as Emperor of the world, Mahisa contemplated the
conquest of Heaven. He sent a messenger to Indra.
The messenger ordered Indra to surrender to Mahisasura. Indra answered with utter contempt to the
messenger and his master Mahisa. The messenger
returned and reported the matter to Mahisisura who
began to tremble with anger. .
Although Indra sent away the messenger with scorn,
he had no peace of mind. He called together the
Devas and discussed what was to be done. They decided to declare war on Mahisadsura. Brahma and_ Indra,
accompanied by the other Devas set out to Kailasa.
From there, taking Paramasiva with them, thcy
proceeded to Vaikuntha. On arrival there, they offered
prayers to Mahavisnu who appeared before them.
They submitted to him their grievances and sufferings
under the rule of Mahisdsura. After deep deliberations,
Mahavisnu supported the proposal for war, Thus the
war between Devas and Asuras started.
4) Devadsura Yuddha. It was a dreadful war. Mahisa
himself appeared on the scene of battle. He struck at
Indra with his mighty club. Before he received the
blow, Indra broke the club with his Thunderbolt. The
Asura named Andhaka encountered Mahavisnu. The
five arrows of that Asura were broken to pieces by
Mahavisnu in the sky itself. Then they started a
terrible fight with various weapons such as sword,
spear, axe, arrow, discus etc. It lasted for about 50
days without a break. Baskala fought against Indra,
Mahisa against Rudra, Trinetra against Yamadharma,
Mahahanu against Srida, and Asiloma against Pracetas.
In the course of the battle, Andhaka, struck a blow at
Garuda with his cudgel. Garuda, the vehicle of Visnu
was stunned by the blow, but Visnu restored his energy
_by stroking him gently with his right hand. After that
he took up his bow Sarnga and tried to kill Andhaka
with a shower of arrows. But the Daitya warrior
countered all of them with 50 arrows which he shot at
Visnu. Visnu smashed all of them and sent his
destructive weapon “Sudaréana Cakra” against
Andhaka. Without the slightest fear, Andhaka stopped
it with his own Cakra weapon and kept Visnu’s
weapon at bay and shouted in triumph. Finding that
Visnu’s weapon had failed and hearing the scornful
Shout of Andhaka, the Devas were filled with panic.
At this critical moment, Visnu took up his club
‘“Kaumodaki” and rushed into the midst of the Asuras
and struck Andhaka with it. Under the blow, the
Asura hero reeled and fell down unconscious. At his
es ‘6 king up his wer
a mighty blow at Visny? an
brought It down with deadly effect Ones — “plow,
even Visnu fell unconscious on Garuda’s back. Visnu’s
condition made Garuda withdraw from the scene of
attle temporarily, with Visnu on his back. Indra and
the other gods began to cry aloud. Siva, who saw this
desperate plight of the Devas, at once came to the
battlefield, carrying his trident, ready to fight against

MAHISA
Mahisa. When he tried to pierce the Asura’s chest
with his trident, the latter thwarted the blow with his
own lance and aimed it at Siva’s breast. Although it
actually hit him, Siva disregarded it and gave another
thrust to Mahisa with his trident. By this time Mahavisnu had recovered from his swoon. At once he returned to the field of battle and joined Siva in his attack on
Mahisa. When Mahisa saw that both Siva and Visnu
were launching a combined attack against him, in his
wild fury he assumed his own buffalo form and lifting
up his tail and shaking his head rushed towards his
mighty adversaries. With his terrible horns he lifted
up mountain peaks and hurled them at the enemy.
But the Deva leaders stopped them with their shower
of arrows. Visnu sent his Cakra against him and it
made the Asura chief drop down senseless. But he
soon recovered and rushed forward to renew his attack
with a terrible roar. Visnu then sounded his divine
conch ‘‘Paficajanya’’ and drowned the sound of his
roar. Just as the roaring of the asura frightened the
Devas, the sound of Paficajanya struck terror in the
minds of the Asuras.
5) Mahisa’s Death.
sound of Paiicajanya.
The Asuras were terrified at the
In order to encourage them,
Mahisa assumed the form of a lion and rushed into
the midst of the army of Devas roaring. Even the
Trimiartis were alarmed for a short while when they
saw the fierce beast advancing through their battlearray killing and mauling hundreds of the Devas on
either side. Mahavisnu at once sent his weapon Cakra
agdinst the lion. The lion was reduced to ashes by it,
but Mahisa rose up again in the form of a buffalo and
rushed forward. He gave.a severecut om Mahavisnu s
powerful horn. Mahavisnu
chest with his long and
started fleeing to Vaikuntha. At the sight of this, a
concluded that Mahisa was proof against killing an
on his bull. When
so he also fled to Kailasa_ riding np a a
Visnu and Siva took to their heels, Brahma also ew
Satyaloka, riding on this swan. Although the leaders
der the leadership
left the field, the rest of the Devas un = drew his
of Indra, encountered Mahisa again.
Vajra. The Astadikpalakas assisted Bim. The ec
raged fiercely again. The Devas began 0 a hee nom
Taking this opportunity, fag es soe wighle i
into Heaven. He planted his Valty In this way the
drove out.al] the remaining Devas.
took
Asuras took possession of Devaloka. The Devas to
mountains.
shelter on the tops of Te Dew acsembled and
Several centuries ‘passe. 7
j a.
prayed to Brahma. He took them again to Vaikunt
iva also arrived there. The Devas — devise
grievances to Visnu. They prayed . Id be killed.
some method by which Mahisa ae no Man was
Brahma had given hima boon ma
capable of killing him. ;
Mahavisnu said to them :-—“By a A ple
Mahisa could be killed only ye - Devas with their
create a woman who is part © , : Ip. S
coat with her help. »0
Jd kill bim concentrating
power and glory, we cou
a iohty woman, |
let us try tocreate such a MIS y creation, we must
all our powerson her. After he
give her all our weapons.”
As soon as Mahavisnu spe
dazzling effulgence issue
Both Visnu and Siva were amaze
ords, a figure with
from Brahma’s face.
at the sight of this
‘MAHISMAN I.
MAHISMATI
figure radiating beams of light which were partly cool
and partly warm. Simuar figures, embodying the
peculiar powers and qualities of Visnu, Siva, Indra,
Kubera, Varuna and all other gods, emanated from
them. In a moment all these figures merged into a
single figure and transformed themselves into a single
woman with celestial beauty and having eighteen arms.
This woman of exquisite beauty combining all the
powers and glories of all the Devas was Devi herself.
The devas supplied her with jewels and ornaments and
gorgeous clothes. Decked in all glory and with fascinating beauty, riding on a lion. she took her stand at
the entrance of Devaloka and challenged Mahisa. At
the very first sight of Devi, Mahisa fell in love with
her. She declared she would become the wife of the
person who could defeat her in battle.
So Mahisa made up his mind to defeat her in a fight.
It wasa terrible battle. All the Ministers of Mahisa,
like Baskala, Durmukha, Tamra, Ciksura, Asiloma
and Bidala were slain. At last Mahisa himself appeared
on the scene to fight with Devi. Mahisa started with
a shower of arrows and Devi countered them al] with
her own arrows. In the end she attacked him with
Visnu Cakra. The Cakra cut off his throat and he
dropped down dead. The devas raised a thunderous
shout of joy and triumph. (Devi Bhagavata, 5th
Skandha).
MAHISADA. A woman follower of Lord Subrahmanya.
(M.B. Salya Parva, Ghapter 46, Verse 28).
MAHISAKA. (MAHISAKA): A_ special tribe. They
were once Ksatriyas but they became Siidras by their
evil mode of living. (Slokas 22, 23, Chapter 33, Anusasana Parva). Arjuna during his victory march conquered this tribe in the south. (Chapter 83, ASvamedha
Parva).
MAHISAKA (M).
people to modern Mysore.
Chapter 9, Verse 59).
MAHISAKSA. An Asura who came into conflict with
Subrahmanya. (Skanda Purana).
MAHISANANA. A follower of Subrahmanya. (Sloka
95, Chapter 46, Salya Parva).
A King of the Hehaya royal family.
It was this King who constructed on the banks of the
river Narmada, Mahismati, the capital city of
Kartaviryarjuna. It got the name of Mahismati because it was constructed by Mahisman (Chapter a
Brahmanda Purana).
MAHISMAN II. A King of the Vrsni dynasty. He was
the son of a King called Kuni. (Kuni is called Kunti
The name given by the Ancient
(M.B. Bhisma Parva,
in’some of the Puranas). Kuni had three other sons
named Sabhajit, Bhadrasena and Durdama. (9th
Skandha, Bhagavata).
Mahismati
Sixth daughter of Angiras.
MAHISMATI.
loka 6, Chapter 218,
was known as Anumati also. (S
Vana Parva).
MAHISMATI. An ancient city on
Narmada. There is reference to t
places in the Puranas and a few 0
below :
(i) King Nila was reigning in a country with Mahismati as its capital. Sahadeva, one of the Pandavas
during his victorious march to the south conquered
this country. (Chapter 31, Sabha Parva).
the banks of river
his place in many
f them are given

ee —
MAHODARA I
ae aoe Ve tenth son of Iksvaku, had made this
Parva). capital. (Sloka 6, Chapter 2, Anusasana
sos artaviryarjuna who had made Mahismati the
Soka ey Be Kingdom had subdued many kings.
eswaE Ob © lapter 152, Anugasana Parva). (See under
M Fee aD
; ae. nee I. A serpent born to Kagyapa of his wife
MAHODAR A ay Joe Chapter 35, Adi Parva).
acta Bhi One of the hundred sons of Dhrta-
(Sloka | masena killed him in the great battle.
M SEC sane Chap ter 157, Drona Parva).
MATIODARA III. An BEE’ “Bed.
Mnspalamocana ge. (See under
OD:
eer IV. An army chief of Ravana. (Uttara
M
Pea wae se of Ghatotkaca son of
to conquer anaes eee started for Pragjyotisapura
him. (Skanda Mesa Mahodara also followed
We ie of the sons of Ravana. In the
Angada and late ae sighodara fought first with
Mila! Hé~was & a + a combat with the monkey soldier
Valmiki Bataauada (Sargas 70, 81, Yuddha Kanda,
incon “ae The minister of Sumali, grandfather
Mahodara pee te In the Rama-Ravana battle
Ravana (Uttara Kand Vea he = Bact yeep
1a. i nda, <1 Ramayana).
tae ea wee of the sons of Niteavas born
the Rama-Rawon i a killed this demon in
70, Verse 66 = cay el te Kanda, Chapter
3 Ayan iE
ee A King who is worthy of being thought
Barwa)” morning. (Sloka 55, Chapter 155, Anugasana
Viévamitra a Rt a a conducted a yaga with
invited Vasistha se ce for that yaga Visvamitra
Maliodaya ears. a si Mahedaya also. But
‘ serit a message pict pant Jo fac invitation . and
Triganku as Gandalas on Ee peth _Visvamitra and
message Visvamitra cur a Me ee i Tee
Sidra. (Verses 20-21 Bala ian waters to become
Ramayana). anda, Chapter 59, Valmiki
Ae ated a eo of Kubera. This
vata) ; andha, Devi BhagaMAHOTTHA. A Janapada of Purani
Bharata. The chief of this place, Akroga wean tet
by Nakula during his victory march. (Sloka 6 Glee:
32, Sabha Parva. >
MAINAKA I. . |
1) General information. A mountain, Uhite mountain was
dhe or of — os father of Kraufica. (Sloka 13,
ay 18, Harivamsa).
oy Ho the mountain helped flaniiman. There is an
unbreakable tie between Mainaka and the Kings of
Tksvaku family. There is a story In Brahmanda
Purana that the sagara (ocean) was constructed by the
sixty thousand sons of the a Sagara of Tksvaku
family. This sagara once gave re poe Mainaka and
brought it up. There 1s 4 reason for that :—
MAINAKA IT.
MAINAKA III.
MAITRA I.
MAITRA II. An
MAITRA II
In the early yugas mountains had wings and they used
to fly and drop to the ground as they liked. People
used to live in fright always and at the request of the
people Indra made the mountains stand in a row and
cut off their wings. At that time the god Vayu (wind)
took away his friend Mainaka and put him in the
ocean. From that day onwards Mainaka and the
ocean developed an intimacy which even death could
tot wipe off. Haniiman was the son of Vayu, the
friend and saviour of Mainaka. It was because of that
that Mainaka gave refuge for Haniman on his way 19
Lanka. Because the ocean gave refuge to Mainaka
after its escape from the sword ofIndra and because
the ocean (Sagara) was the creation of the sons of
Sagara, a King of the Iksvaku race, Mainaka felt
indebted to Sagara and the entire race to which he
belonged. Mainaka thus had great respect for Sri
Rama who belonged to the Iksvaku race. This was
also responsible for Mainaka giving relief to Hanuman
on his way to Lanka. (See under Parvata).
2) Other details.
(3) ‘This mountain is situated near the lake Bindusarovara which was to the north of Kailasa. Bhagiratha
did penance to bring Ganga to the earth on this
mountain. (Chapter 3, Sabha Parva).
(ii) Pandavas who went to the north crossed the
mountain Mainaka and went further. (Sloka 1,
Chapter 139, Vana Parva).
(ii) The mountain Mainaka shines with golden
peaks. (Sloka 44, Chapter 145, Vana Parva).
A holy place on the west coast on the
banks of the river Narmada. This is also on a mountain. (Sloka 11, Chapter 89, Vana Parva).
Another mountain, (This is 1
Krauficadvipa. (Sloka 18, Chapter 12, Bhisma Parva).
MAINDA. One of the monkeys who helped Sri Rama
in the search for Sita. Puranas give the following
information regarding this monkey :
(i) Mainda lived ina cave in Kiskindha. While he
was living there Sahadeva one of the Pandavas came
that way during his victory campaign in Daksina
Bharata and fought with him. Sahadéva was defeated.
But Mainda was pleased with him and gave him many
valuable presents and advised him that no difficulties
should be put against Dharmaputra achieving his
object. (Sloka 18, Chapter 31, Sabha Parva).
(ii) Mainda was the minister of Sugriva, King of the
monkeys. He was mighty, intelligent, and kind to
others. (Sloka 23, Chapter 28, Vana Parva).
(iii) Mainda was one of the leaders who led the
monkeys who went in search of Sita. (Sloka 19,
Chapter 283, Vana Parva).
(iv) In the Rama-Ravana battle Mainda and others
also fainted along with Laksmana and others. It was
only when they washed their faces with the water
given by Kubera that they could see things clearly.
(v) Mainda was the son of A vinidevas. (10th
Skandha, Bhagavata).
A demon tribe. Once a sage named
Lomaga persuaded Dharmaputra to attack this tribe.
auspicious time (Muharta). Sri
Kysna started on his historic journey to Hastinapura at
Maitramuhirta. (Sloka 6, Chapter 83, Udyoga
Parva).

MAITRA III
MAITRA III. A constellation. Krtavarma joined the
Kaurava side on the day of this constellation. (Sloka
14, Chapter 35, Salya Parva).
MAITRAVARUNA. Another name _- for Vasistha.
Agastya also is‘known by this name, Because they were
born as the sons of Mitra and Varuna they got this
name. How they came to be reborn as the sons of
Mitravarunas is told in Devi Bhagavata.
There was once a celebrated emperor named Nimi in
the Iksvaku line of Kings. Nimi was the twelfth son
of Iksvaku. The agrahara found near the agrama of
Gautama Maharsi, called Jayantapura was constructed
by Nimi. Once Nimi decided to perform a big yaga
and after taking the consent of his father made _preparations for the same. He invited such great sages
as Bhrgu, Angiras, Vamadeva, Pulastya, Pulaha and
Rcika He then went to their family preceptor Vasistha
and requested him to be the chief priest. But Vasistha
had already promised Indra to conduct a yaga for him
and so advised Nimi to postpone his yaga to a later
date. But Nimi was unwilling to postpone his'yaga and
so he performed it with Gautama Maharsi as the
chief priest. It took five hundred years for Nimi to
complete the yaga. After five hundred years Vasistha
after completing the yaga of Indra came to see Nimi
and found that he had already conducted the yaga
without him. Vasistha was angry and he cursed Nimi
saying that Nimi would become bodiless. But powerful
Nimi cursed Vasistha also.and separated his soul from
his body.
Griefstricken, WVasistha went to Brahma and complained to him. Brahmd said, ‘‘Oh son, you go and
merge with the brilliance of Mitravarunas and stay
there. After some time you will be able to be born
without being in a womb; you will then have a memory
of the past and you will be very learned and will be
worshipped by all’.
Vasistha was pleased to hear that and he circumambulated Brahma and prostrated before him and then
went to the agrama of Mitravarunas. He _ then
abandoned his body there and merged with the
brilliance of Mitravarunas. One day Urvagi with
her companions came to the aframa of Mitravarunas
and attracted by her charm they spent a- night with
her. ‘Their semen:at one time fell into a jar nearby
and from it were born two people, Agastya and
Vasistha, (Skandha 6, Devi Bhagavata).
MAITREYA. A sage of great brilliance of ancient
India.
1) Genealogy. Descending in order from Visnu : —
Brahma—Atri—Candra—Budha-——Purtravas — Ayus—
Anenas—Pratiksatra—Srfijaya—Jaya—Vijaya— Krti—
Haryasva—Sahadeva—Nadina—]J ayasena —- Sankrti ——
Ksatradharma—Sumago tra—Sala—Ar sh scna—K ofa—
Dirghatapas—Dhanvantari— Ketuman—Bhimaratha—
Divodasa—Maitreya.
Somapa was born as the son of Maitreya.
2) Other details.
(i) Once Maitreya went to Hastinapura and told
Duryodhana that he should behave kindly to the
Pandavas. Duryodhana who did not much relish the
advice sat tapping on his thighs with his hands, not
seriously attending to the sage. Maitreya was displeased at the discourtesy and cursed that Bhima
469 MAKARADAMSTRA
would one day break Duryodhana’s thighs. (See under
Duryodhana). .
(ii) Maitreya was a courtier of Yudhisthira. (Sloka
10, Chapter 4, Sabha Parva).
(iii) Maitreya was one among the sages who visited
Bhisma while he was lying on his bed of arrows.
(Sloka 6, Chapter 47, Santi Parva). |
iv) Once he discussed with Vyasa topics on Dharma.
(Chapter 120, Anusasana Parva),
(v) When 5ri Krsna died, the spiritualistic ideology of
Dharmaputra became more dominant and he approached Vidura for Dharmopadesga. Vidura sent him to
Maitreya. Dharmaputra went to the Asrama of
Maitreya on the banks of the river Ganga and after
paying respects to him accepted Dharmopadega
(Instruction in law, duty and morals) from him. (3rd
Skandha, Bhagavata). .
MAITREYI. Wife of the sage Y4ajiiavalkya. She was
one of the most learned and virtuous women in ancient
India. There are innumerable references to her in the
Puranas. (For details about her splendour see under
Candrangada) .
MAITRI. Daughter of Daksa. Thirteen daughters of
Daksa were married to Dharmadeva. Maitri was one of
them. Maitri bore a son named Abhaya to Dharinadeva. (4th Skandha, Bhagavata).
MAJJANA. A soldier of Subrahmanya. (Sloka 70, Chap.
ter 45, Salya Parva). |
MAKANDI. A city of the King Drupada. This city was
on the banks of theriver Ganga. (Sloka 73, Chat.
137. Adi Parva). See under KAPATABHIKSU. e
MAKARADAMSTRA. A prostitute of Mathura, the birth
place of Sri Krsna. ‘The story of this woman who had
made prostitution and cheating her aim in life Was cata
to Vasavadatta wife of Udayana by Vasantaka_ Th
curbing of the arrogance of Makaradamstra by a po c
brahmin of name Lohajangha with the help of Vibhizene:
emperor of the demons, is the theme of the st ae na,
Makaradamstra had a daughter named Ripiniks
The mother tried to make the daughter also a Prostity if
Once Ripinika went toa far-off temple for Worghi te.
instructed by her mother. There she met a poor brah as
named Lohajangha and Rupinika was attrac,
him by his handsome features, She sent w Cd to
her maid requesting Lohajangha to come to her h
Ripinika carne back and waited for her lover to Ouse.
After some time Lohajangha came, Makarad es
scrutinised the new-comer with suspicion but Reve ua
took him to her bed-room. Both of them, + Upinikg
there making love. Makaradamstra finding h €mained
ter going against the principles of a prostitute ct hto her side and said: “Dear daughter, why do you ee
this poor brahmin ? Is this the duty of a prose rep
Love and prostitution never go together. We abe die.
dusk. The twilight of love remains for a fey a ake
0 has om
ord through
only. So do send away this brahmin wh
ey.
Rapiniks discarded the advice of her eis |
Makaradamstra felt annoyed. She decided ee and
Lohajangha somehow. One day a prince ae put
way and Makaradarhstra enticed him to her house 4/2
requested the prince to accept Ripinika te an q
Lohajangha out of her house. | Ha
The prince accepted et ot the mother-pre |
tute. At that time Rapinika had gone to i Pro i

MAKARADAMSTRA 470
and Lohajangha for a walk. After some time Lohajangha
came as usual and entered the house. and Makaradamstra introduced Lohajangha to the prince. At once
the servants of the prince beat Lohajangha and carrying
him away out of the house put him in an excrement pit.
Lohajangha somehow escaped from there and ran away.
He was sorry to part with his love and he went on a
pilgrimage. He walked for a long distance in the hot
sun and feeling tired searched for a shady place to take
some rest. hen he saw the carcass of an elephant.
Jackals entering through the buttocks had eaten all
flesh and the animal lay hollow inside with the skin in
tact on the skeleton. Lohajatigha entered the inside
of the elephant and slept there. That night it rained
heavily and the hole at the buttocks contracted with
little space for Lohajangha to get out. The rains continued, the water-level in the river Ganga rose and soon
the carcass of the elephant was carried away to the
river and it gradually reached the ocean. At that time
a great kite taking it to be flesh for food drew it up and
took it to the other side of the ocean. When it pecked
it open it found a man inside and frightened
left it there and flew away. By this time Lohajangha
awoke from his slumber and while he was looking
around him in surprise he saw two demons approaching
him. The demons thought he had come to the place
crossing the -ocean like Sri Rama to bring disaster
to them and so they immediately ran up to Vibhisana
and told him of the incident. Vibhisana asked his servants to bring Lohajangha before him and when he
_was brought before him enquired very politely who he
was and why he had come there and how he had come.
In reply to the enquiries Lohajangha said thus : “I am
a brahmin from Mathura. I did penance to please
Visnu to get relief from my poverty and one day Visnu
appeared before me in person and said, ‘Go to my
devotee Vibhisana, and he will give you enough wealth
to live happily’. It wasina dream and when I awoke
I found myself on this shore. I do not know how it all
happened.”’
Vibhisana was immensely pleased to hear the story of
Lohajangha and gave him immense wealth including
many precious diamonds, golden replica of the emblem
of Visnu consisting of Sankha, Cakra, Gada and
Padma and a small kite from the mountain of Svarnamila. Accepting all these Lohajangha flew on the back of
the kite back to Mathura and alighted at a deserted place
there. Keeping all his valuable articles in a secret place
he took one diamond and selling it acquired some cash
and with that purchased some ornamental dress for
himself. At dusk he dressed himself and holding the
emblem of Visnu flew on the back of the kite io the
ae Rupinika and addressing Ripinika in private
said, “I am Visnu. I have come to you~ for a
vaica pecause YOU are virtuous . Hearing that Riapinika
lly surrendered herself to him. Before d:
respectully SU house and flew bacl See
Lohajangha left the hous 2ack to the deserted place. Riupinika felt herself to bea goddess and
‘id wes speak to anybody in the morning. The mother
lexed to find het daughter observing a vow of
was perplexcd \\ | ~ RSninike a
s+joned her. Rupinika then told her
silence and ques d h .
hat had happened on the previous nicht.
mother all that . Ene 4h 8
: damstra wanted to connrim e Story of her
pn and so she kept awake that night to see what
Poole place She found Lohajangha arriving as Visnu
MAKARADAMSTRA
on the back of Garuda and fully believing him to be
Mahavisnu was overjoyed at the fortune of her daughter
and running to her the next morning said ‘On,
dear daughter, by the grace of Sri Narayana you
have become a goddess. How fortunate am I? You
should do one thing forme. You must send me to
heaven with this body of mine along with your husbandod.’’
Rapinika agreed to do so. That night she téld the fake
Visnu the desire of her mother. Then Lohajangha said:
“Your mother who is a great sinner is not eligible to 8°
to Svarga in her present state. Day after tomorrow
on the Dvadasi day the gates of heaven will ope”:
Early morning on that day the goblins of Siva would
enter Svarga. I shall then try to send your mother
along with them. But your mother should then appe4?
as a goblin. The hair on the head should be shaved at
five places and the remaining hair locked to form five
tufts of hair. She should wear a garland of bones an
the body should be painted black on one side with charcoal and red on the other side with saffron. The painung
should be in oil and she should not wear any clothes.
This would make her appear like a goblin of Maheés vara
(Siva) and then there will be no difficulty for me to allow
her to enter Svarga. . 4
Lohajangha left the place early in the morning an
Ripinika told her mother all that her husband told
her. Makaradarnstra dressed herself as instructed ry
Lohajangha and awaited the arrival of the fake Mahavisnu. Lohajangha came at night and Riapinika
showed him her mother dressed as desired by her
husband. Lohajangha took Makaradamstra on the
back of his kite and flew up. As he rose high he saw 4
tall flagstaff of a temple nearby. It had a wheel on 1ts
top. Lohajangha placed her on the wheel and said,
“Do sit here for a while. I shall soon come back 19
you and bless you”. To the people assembled 19
the temple he spoke from the air, ‘Citizens, today the
goddess ‘Mari’, destroyer of everything, will fall on
you. If you want to avoid that, remain in this
temple and worship Visnu’’. .
People were frightened when they heard the warning
from air and all remained in the temple chanting prayers and reciting devotional songs about Visnu. Makaradamstra sat there for a while dreaming about the happiness in store for her in Svarga and awaiting her
daughter’s husband to come and take her, But Lohajangha had come to the temple in an ordinary dress
and was with the crowd in. the temple. Time dragge
on and it became midnight and Makaradarhstra sitting
on the wheel of the flagstaff felt uneasy. She could not
sit there any longer and she cried aloud, ‘‘Oh, I am falling’’. People mistook her for M@riand cried back, ‘“‘Oh;
goddess, do not fall’’. It became morning and in the
sunlight they saw a figure sitting on the top of the flagstaff and were surprised. The King was informed and he
came to the temple and soalso all people from the place.
When the people on scrutinising the figure knew it was
Makaradarnstra, they all clapped their hands laughing
loudly. Hearing the news Ripinika also came to the
temple and she somehow got her mother down from the
flagstaff. The King then made the prostitute tell her story
and when it was finished he declared thus: ‘*Who has
thus played fraud on this prostitute who had throughout
her life cheated other people ? If he comes before me

MAKARAGIRI
now I will give him my crown and Kingdom”. Hearing
that Lohajangha appeared before the King and confessed that he had done the mischief. He then narrated
his story to the king and placed before the king the
golden Seal of Visnu’s emblem which Vibhisana had
given him. The king as per his promise gave Lohajangha his kingdom and Ripinika once more became
his. ‘The arrogance of Makaradarhstra was thus curbed.
(Kathamukhalambaka, Kathasaritsagara ),
MAKARAGIRI. A mountain near Mahameru. Mahimeru is two thousand yojanas long and six hundred
yojanas high and stands in the inidst of eight mountains
two on cach of the four sides. Makaragiri and Trisrnga
are on the north side. On the east are Jathara and
Devakuta, on the south are Kailasa and Karavira andon
the west are Pavamana and Pariyatra. (8th Skandha,
Devi Bhagavata).
MAKARAKSA. Son of the demon Khara. In the epic
battle between Rama and Ravana after the death of
Kumbha and Nikumbha the most prominent fighter
who entered the battle-field on the side of Ravana was
Makaraksa. He gave a great fight to Rama but was in
the end killed by him. (Sarga 79, Yuddha Kanda, Valmiki Ramayana).
MAKARADHVAJA I. A son of Haniman. He was born
to a crocodile living in the ocean as the perspiration
drops fell on her from WHanaman. (Sarakanda,
Ananda Ramayana).
MAKARADHVAJAII. One of the sons of Dhrtarastra.
He was killed in the great battle by Bhimasena. { Chapter 92, Drona Parva).
MAKARIT. A river of Puradnic fame.
9, Bhisma Parva).
MAKSOPETA. A daitya. This dai tya whirls round along
with an Aditya, known as Visnu in the month of
Karttika. (November) (12th Skandha, Bhagavata) .
MALA. A place of habitation of ancient India. (Sloka
39, Chapter 9, Bhisma Parva).
MALADA, One of the wives of Sage Atri. (Brahmanda
Purana, Chapter 38 Verses 74-87).
MALADA (S) A community of people who lived in
ancient India. From Mahabharata, Drona Parva,
Chapter 27, we learn that they were the partisans of
the Kauravas. !
MALAJA,. An ancient town celebrated in the Puranas. It
Is also known as “‘Arigamalaja’’, (See under (ANGAMALAJA),
MALATIKA. A follower of Subrahmanya.(Sloka 4, Chapter 46, Salya Parva).
MALAVA, ‘A Puranic river to be remembered. (Sloka
25, Chapter 165, Anusdsana Parva),
MALAVA. An ancient country on the west coast of India.
Mahabharata contains the following statements regarding Malava :
(1) The people of Malava participated in the Rajasiiya
of Yudhisthira. (Sloka 11, Chapter 34, Sabha Parva),
(ii) Armed young Ksatriyas of Malava presented
Yudhisthira with great wealth. (Sloka 15, Chapter 52,
Sabha Parva).
(111) Karna conquered Malavadeéa. (Sloka 20, Chapter
254, Vana Parva).
(iv) Malava was one of the prominent and renowned
countries of ancient India (Sloka 60, Chapter 9, Bhisma
Parva).
(Sloka 23, Chapter
471 MALAYAPRABHA
(v) Obeying the order of Bhisma the people of Malava
attacked Arjuna. (Sloka 76, Chapter 59, Bhisma
Parva). :
(vi) ag Krsna once conquered Malavadesa. (Sloka 16,
Chapter 19, Drona Parva). iy atl
(vii) Paragurama exterminated the Ksatriyas of Mlalava
deSa. (Sloka 11, Chapter 70, Drona Parva). — Hf
MALAVA(S). The Ksatriyas born to king Asvapat °
his wife Malavi are known as Malavas. (Sloka 49,
Chapter 297, Vana Parva).
MALAVIL. The queen of Becapt king of Madra. She
was the mother of Savitri. Asvapati begot of Malavi
a hundred sons called Malavas. j
Yama took to Kalapuri the soul of Satyavan who was
shortlived. Savitri, wife of Satyavan, followed Yama.
Yama blessed Savitriand said she would have oe
children and gave life to Satyavan again. Yama ee
“‘Satyavan will live for four hundred years and you .
get a hundred sons of him. Your father Asvapatia
will get a hundred sons of Malavi and the earth w1
get the name of Savitri also”. Accordingly ae got
a hundred sons and they were called Malavas. (Chapter
297, Vana Parva). __ hye ae
MALAYA J. A son of King aaa at ee
riyavrata dynasty. (Bhagavata, 9th Ska )s
MALAYA (don of Garuda (M. B. Sabha Parva
hapter 99, Verse 14).
aR III. A son ‘ Garuda. (Sloka 14, Chapter 101,
eee ca ae mountain in South India. The ae
pieces of information are gathered about this mountain
from the Puranas:— _ ole
(1) The sovereign deity of this
Kubera in we) assembly.
yapter 10; Verse 32 '
0) The Pandya and Cola Kings collected Sandal a
essence from the Malaya and Dardura aie atone
them in golden pots and presented them uahisthira,
(M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 52, Verse 3 Rte tela
(3) The monkeys who went in search of ; a ae
this mountain. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter <ov,
(4) Malaya is cons
mountains of India. (
petOnee Mrtyu deity performed tapas on a mountain. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 54, Verse + ss i
(6) In Tripuradahana, Siva used this menue a
flagstaff of his chariot. (M.B. Drona Parva, P
Verse 73). ae
ALA Vv. te Mahabharata there is @ ie.
of another Malaya Mountain besides the oa genie aed
tain of South India. When the sage’ i sath The
Heaven, he saw a Malaya mountain on Me tg ‘dance
celestial women, Urvasi and Vipracitt! Tee Kailasa.
there daily. This Malaya is somewhere ;
(M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter 332, Verse A A bharata,
MALAYADHVAJA (PANDYA). Me ~pandya King
Karna Parva, Chapter 20, we read abou the Kuruksetra
named Malayadhvaja who took pert ae Aevatthatad.
battle and was killed in the fight 48 Puranas. He
MALAYAPRABHA. A King celebrated 1! was a famine
ruled over Kuruksetra. Once when pee ss al jects
in the Jand, King Malayaprabha ae not like it and
from all taxes, The greedy ministers di
mountain attends on
(M.B. Sabha Parva,
idered as one of the seven chief
M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9,

MALEYA (8)
they advised him against it. The King yielded to the
advice of his ministers. On one occasion Malayaprabha’s
son Induprabha pleaded with his father and told him
that he should not oppress his subjects at the instigation
of his evil ministers. He added that the King was their
‘‘Kalpavrksa”’ and the subjects were his ‘““Kamadhenus.”’
But the King did not heed the advice of his son. He
jokingly said that Induprabha was also their “Kalpavrksa’’. Stung by this taunt, Induprabha took a solemn
oath that he would either become a ‘“‘Kalpavrksa”’ or
lay down his life in the attempt. He left the palace at
once and began an austere tapas. Indra was pleased and
appeared before him. Receiving his blessing, Induprabha
returned to his capital and stood there asa “‘Kalpavrksa’’. He fulfilled the desires of the people. A few days
later, Indra came to the tree to test Induprabha. He
told Induprabha : “Your mission of service is over; now
you may come to Heaven”. But he insisted that his
subjects also should be taken with him to Heaven. Indra
was pleased at the devotion and love of Induprabha for
his subjects and agreed to take all his subjects also with
him. Induprabha gave up the form of the tree and
resuming his own shape, accepted “‘Bodhisattvacarya”’.
(Kathdasaritsagara, Sasankavati lambaka,.5th Taranga).
MALEYA(S). The collective name of the ministers of
Vibhisana The four ministers were : Anala, Anila,
Hara and Sampati. (Uttar Kanda, Valmiki Ramayana)
MALI. A demon of great valour.
1) Genealogy and birth. There were two very brave
brothers in the demon tribe named Heti and Praheti.
They were inseparable companions of Mahabali. Praheti was unmarried and spent his time in religious
pursuits. Heti married Bhaya sister of Kala and got a
son named Vidyutkesa. Vidyutkesa married Salakatanka daughter of Sandhya and got a son named
Sukega, Sukefa married Devavati, daughter of Gramani,
alias Manimaya. Devavati delivered three sons, Mali
Symali and Malyavan.
2) Boon to Mali. The three brothers, even while young
decided to acquire great strength and started performing
penance. When their penance became very fierce
Brahma appeared before them in person and asked them
what boon they wanted. They said, ‘ We must be invincible, we must be destroyers of our enemies, we must
have long life, we must become rich and powerful
ever remaining friendly with each other’. Brahma
granted the boon asked for.
3) Family life. After obtaining the boon they went
to Vigvakarma and asked him to construct a place of
abode for them. Visvakarma was frightened and he
hastened to suggest a beautiful place for them to live.
He said, ‘There is a mountain named Trikita on the
shores of the southern sea. There is a mountain on it
called Subala. Its main top grazes the sky. Its four
sides have been beautifully chiselled. No birds fly to its
I have constructed there at the request of Indra
a beautiful city surrouniles Py be of gold and adorned
1] sides with festoons of gold. That city is called
on ie aiid demon-lords, can stay there. You will
Lan 7 and prestige which even Indra could not
get glory nis Amaravati. Ifyou live in Lanka with
acquire 1 u will be unconquerable’’,
our followers Y° th. ihel Pal f.
‘demons wit their people went to Lanka.
The ri A de daughters of a Gandharva woman
ee Narmada, Mali married Vasudha ; “Sumali,
MALYAVAN I
Ketumati; and Malyavan, Sundari. Mali begot of
his wife Vasudha four sons named Anila, Anala, Hara
and Sampati. Sumali got of his wife Ketumati ten Sons
named Prahasta, Akampana, Vikata, Kalakamukha,
Dhimraksa, Danda, Suparsva, Sarnhrada, Prakvata and
Bhasakarna and four daughters named Veka, Puspotkata, Kaikasi and Kumbhinasi.
4) Death. The three brothers attacked Devaloka under
the leadership of Mali and a great fight ensued and
Mali a by the discus of Mahavisnu. (Uttara Ramayana).
MALINII. A river which flowed by the side of the
asrama of Kanva Muni. The river Cukka which flows
through the district of Saharanpur today was the Malini
of old. Some believe that Ma4lini starts from the Himalayas. Sakuntala was born on the shores of this river-
(Sloka 10, Chapter 72, Adi Parva).
MALINIII. One of the seven mothers of Subrahmany4-
(Sloka 10,,Chapter 228, Vana Parva).
MALINI III. A demoness. This maiden was sent to
serve Visravas, father of Ravana, by Kubera, Vibhisana was the son born to Visravas of Malini. (Sloka J;
Chapter 275, Vana Parva).
MALINIIV. Acity of Puranic fame in the
of Ariga. Jarasandha gave this city to Karna.
Chapter 5, Sabha Parva).
MALINI V. The name of Sabari in her previous birth.
(See under Sabari). Pe
MALINI VI. Anymph born to Puskara of Pramloca.
(Chapter 8, Verse 14, Virata Parva). King Rucl
married this nymph and they got a son named Raucy4:
The lord of Raucyamanvantara was this Raucy4-
(Markandeya Purana).
MALINI VII. A brahmin woman of very bad character.
Because of her evil deeds she was born as a dog in_ Bet
next birth. It observed then the Sukladvadasi Vrata
and so was born again as the nymph Urvasi. (2. 7. «*
Skanda Purana). |
MALLARASTRA. A country in ancient India. ‘The
capital of Mallarastra was the present city of Kus.
the time of Mahabharata, this country was ruled by. *
King named Parthiva. There is a statement in the
Mahabharata that this King was defeated by Bhimasen@4When the Pandavas discussed the countries in whic
they were to live ‘‘incognito”’, the name of Mallarastr@
was also mentioned. (Mahabharata, Sabha Parva,
Chapter 30, Verse 3 ; Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Verse
44; Virata Parva, Chapter 1, Verse 13).
MALYAPINDAKA. A serpent born in the family of
Kaéyapa. (Sloka 13, Chapter 103, Udyoga Parva).
MALYAVAN I. A Parsada of Siva. The most intimate
friend of Malyavan was Puspadanta. ;
1) Curse of Malyavan. Once Siva was telling Parvati 4
story of the Gandharvas and Puspadanta heard it as DN
sat hiding in a place nearby. Parvati got angry an
was about to curse when Malyavan intervened and recommended for mercy. Parvati got angrier and curse
them both to be born on earth as men. They begse
for relief and Parvati said : ‘In the deep depths of the
forest of Vindhya mountains there lives a Yaksa name
Supratika who has been turned into a devil calle
Kanabhiti by a curse. Puspadanta should narrate the
story he has now heard to Kanabhiti and he will then
be released from.-the curse. Kanabhiti would narrate to
Malyavan what he has heard from Puspadanta and
country
(Sloka 6,

ORB POE is 2 _——
MALYAVAN II 473
Kanabhiti would then be released from his curse.
Malyavan should then make public the story he has
heard and then he will also be released from the curse’’.
Puspadanta was born as Vararuci in the city of Kausambi and Malyavan as Gunadhya in the city of
Supratisthita. (See under Gunadhya).
2) Another curse to Malyavan. By another curse Malyavan was born as a spider and Puspadanta as an elephant
in the south of Bharata. (See under Puspadanta)
3) Partin Devasura battle.Released from curses Malyavan
poached the presence of Siva. It was the time of the
rile battle and Malyavan fought on the side of
: e “— Malyavan played a prominent part in the
attle. Malyavan had to fight against a fierce archer
named Kolahala. Kolahala sent three arrows one each
on the forehead and the two shoulders. Malyavan
returned the fight with arrows. Then Kolahala showing
his swiftness of hand tormented him with several
Srrnealy weapons. Unmindful of this vehement attack
2 alyavan plucked ‘a hillock and threw it at Kolahala.
hen suddenly a fierce figure blazing with fire having
nine pairs of hands and feet and three heads looking
ae in colour Jumped out of the demon and made
alyavan faint by the terrible heat it gave out.
Malyavan accepted defeat and ran away to the mountain.
i et ae wat Agni Purana).
. Son of the ' ces :
A ecstran aPetiae 4 ee demon Sukesa. He was the
This Malyavan was the father of Ravana’s mother.
They were all living in Patala but’ when Ravana
obtained his boon he sent away Kubera from Lanka
and became the ruler of Lanka. Malyavan and other
demons followed Ravana to Lanka and stayed with him
confirming his sovereignty over the place.
In the Rama-Ravana battle Sugriva stole the crown of
Ravana and kicked him on his face. Ashamed of the
insult Ravana went back to his palace and the first person he saw was Malyavan. The old man had come to
advise Ravana to give back Sita to Sri Rama. But
acon ee not es the advice and tore to pieces the
er of advice. (lor more details see under Mali).
MALYAVAN III. A mountain. This mountain is feted
ated between the mountains of Meru and Mandara in
the country of Ilavrta. This mountain shines like gold.
(Chapter 7, Bhisma Parva),
MALYAVAN IV. Another mountain near the Himalayas. The Pandavas visited this mountain on their way
to the mountain Gandhamadana from the agrama of
Arstisena. (Chapter 153, Vana Parva).
MALYAVAN V. A mountain situated in the country of
Kiskindha. The fight between Bali and Sugriva took
place near this mountain. This is oh the banks of the
river Tungabhadra. Uttara Ramayana states that the
palace of Sugriva was on the top of this mountain. Sri
ice acayee “2 op agen peak of this mour:tain for
ur months. oxa 40, Chapter 280, Vana Parva).
MAMANKAM. Mamankam uns a very important ae
festival of Kerala. This festival used to be conducted on
the sandy beach of Tirunavaya. It represented the crowning ceremony of the sovereign of Kerala. There used to
be a grand assembly of all the artistes of Kerala. There
was an exhibition of the arts, trade and commerce of
the land attracting a huge crowd of people from different parts of Bharata. Scholars believe that the word
Mamankam is derived, from the Sanskrit word ‘‘MahaMAMANKAM
magha’’. Some say that it was so called because it was
conducted on the day of Magha in the month of
Magha.
The festival was conducted under the auspices of the
supreme power in Malabar. Fora long period Perumals were in power in Malabar and so Mamankam was
conducted under the control of the Perumals. The last
of the line of Perumals handed over the right to the
then mighty chief, the King of Valluvanad and for
several years Mamankam was conducted under his auspices. The foreign traders who came to Malabar, the
Mohammadans and the Portuguese, persuaded Samitiri
(zamorin) to take control of this festival and with the
help of the foreigners Sdmitiri wrested from the King
of Valluvanad the right of conducting the Mamankam.
After some time the King of Valluvanad made an
attempt to get back the right from Samiutiri. This
enraged Samitiri and there ensued a fight between
them resulting in much shedding of blood. An agreement was reached that after twelve years each would
relinquish the right in favour of the other. So after
twelve years Samitiri was compelled to relinquish his
right but by resorting to many sly tactics he retained
the right. The strength of Samitiri increased and he
became a great power in Malabar.-He was bold enough
to send away the Portuguese from the coast and
Samitiri maintained his position till the advent of
Tippu Sultan to Malabar in the year 1788 A.D. Every
twelve years Samitiri had to show his might to retain
the right of the Mamankam and those days of exhibiting strength were ghastly. Te hae
The place of this Mamankam wasat Tirunavaya in Tirur
taluk. A Siva temple of historic fame stands on the
shores of the river Bharata flowing through Tirur taluk.
There was an expansive sand beach on its shores,
become famous by being the scene of many socio-political events there. It was the venue of the mighty _
Nambadiris of Malabar to discuss matiers of sociopolitical importance. Every year on the full-moon day
in the month of Magha all the ruling chiefs of Kerala
would assemble there and on a special dais there
Samiatiri would sit with royal robes and a sword in his
right hand presiding over the assembly. The sword was
given to the Samitiris by Ceraman Perumal and was
considered the symbol of undisputed sovereignty of
Kerala. It was also a sanction to conduct the Mamankam. The Samittiris came prepared to give a fight if their
authority was challenged by anybody. The ruling
Samiatiri would send an invitation to, all. chiefs of
Kerala. On either side of Samittiri would sit the relatives and friends of Samitiri. There wore be re pee
I 1 ide an only a
of Nairs and Tiyyas ready outside oe die datat
defeating them could anybody appt
Samitiri. The dais was called Nilapattutara, Daraeae
The whole atmosphere would resound with ru g
ts adorned
and shots from pop-guns. Majestic clep aie The
with golden headdresses would be arraye Aare
conference of the chiefs would last for ee ae
the festival for twentyfour days. The Menten» ecev wel
e] a huge crowd from far and wide ee ear The
then many items of interest a” inform antec
Mamankam commenced on a fixed day at ie eats
hour in the morning when the sapere. a sl ea
started moving to the accompan ee. AD By the
pipes, The last Mamankam was im 1/29 0" St

M AMATA
time of Marttanda Varma the centre of power shifted
from Malabar to the south. Even today the memories
of the same are brightening spots in the history of
Malabar.
MAMATA. Mother of the sage Dirghatamas. (See
under Dirghatamas).
MAMMATA. An Indian | scholar. who lived about
1100 A.D. He was a great scholar and critic in Sanskrit
and was born in Kashmir. His masterpiece was a
great book “Kavya Prakasa”. Itis divided into ten
chapters. Each chapter is entitled ““Ullasa”. There is a
view expressed by some people that Mammata wrote
only the first nine chapters of this book and the last
chapter was written by another scholar named Alaka.
Numerous commentaries on Mammata’s Kavya Prakasa
have been published. Itis said that Patafijali’s commentator Kayyata was the brother of Mammata. “Sabda
Vyapara Vicara”’ is another book written by Mammata.
MAMTI I. The disciple of Gautama and the guru of
Atreya. (Brhadaranyaka Upanisad).
MAMTI II. A devotee of Siva. He was the father of
the famous K4labhiti. (See under Kalabhiti).
MANAGARVA. A celestial maiden who was born as a
she-monkey in the vicinity of the Himalayas by a curse
of Brahma. She became the wife of a monkey named
Kesari. She was named Afijana and was the mother
of Haniman. (For details see under Haniman).
MANASA I. A serpent born of the family of Va4asuki.
This serpent was burnt to death at the Sarpasatra of
Janamejaya. (Sloka 5, Chapter 57, Adi Parva).
MANASA II. Aserpent born of the family of Dhrtarastra. This serpent was burnt to death at the Sarpasatra of Janamejaya. (Sloka 16, Chapter 57, Adi
Parva).
MANASA IV. (MANASASARAS). A lake on the peak of
the Himalayas. Arjuna visited this lake once. (Stoka
4, Chapter 8, Sabha Parva). In the precinets of this
lake many devotees conduct Siva-worship. They believe
they would merge with Siva at the end of the yuga.
Those who bathe in that pond would acquire moksa.
Manasasaras is called Ujjanaka also. Vasistha and
Arundhati became realised souls at this place. (Sloka
14, Chapter 130, Vana Parva). A sage who lived in
Manasasaras in the form of a swan visited Bhisma
while he was lying on his bed of arrows. (Sloka. 98
Chapter 119, Bhisma Parva). Once a Devi named
Upaéruti pointed out Indra who was _ hiding amongst
the lotus stems in Manasasaras. It was Brahma who
made this lotus lake and the river Saray starts from
here. (Balakanda, Valmiki Ramayana).
MANASADEVI. A devi born of the mind of Kas yapa
Prajapati. She is known as Jaratkaru also. (F
details see under Jaratkaru IT). =
MANASADVARA. A mountain near Manasasaras.
Because the entrance to the lake of Manasasaras was
through this mountain it got the name of Manasadvara.
In the centre of this was an aSrama of Paragurama.
(Sloka 12, Chapter 130, ae Parva).
RAS. The Prajapatis created by Brahma
a pies oe are called the Manasaputras or spiritual
sons of Brahma. They are Bhrgu, Pulastya, Pulaha,
Kratu, Angiras, Marici, Daksa, Atri and Vasistha.
They are nine in number. ( Chapter 7, Arnfa 1, Visnu
Purana) . They are all Prajapatis and their wives are in
MANDAKINI VI
order Khyati, Bhati, Sambhiti, Ksama, Priti, Sannati,
Urjja, Anasiya and Prasiti.
MANASVINJ. A daughter of Daksaprajapati. She
became the wife of Dharmaraja. Candra was born of
this Manasvini. (Sloka 19, Chapter 66, Vana Parva).
MANASYU. A King of the Piru dynasty. He was the
grandson of Piru and the son of Pravira. His mother
was Siraseni. Manasyu begot of his wife Sauviri three
sons named Sakta, Sarhhana and Vagmi. (Sloka 6,
Chapter 94, Adi Parva).
MANAVA. Ascholar and an authority on Dharmaastra. He was the author of three books namely;
Manava Upapurana, Manava‘rautasitra and Manavavastulaksana.
MANAVARA. She was the wife of Arthalobha who
was the house-keeper of Bahubala, King of Kajict.
This Manavara divorced her husband to marry one
who was more wealthy. (Kathasaritsagara) .
MANAVARJAKA. A place of habitation of ancient
India. (Sloka 50, Chapter 9, Bhisma Parva).
MANAVI. A prominent river of ancient India. (Sloka
32, Chapter 9, Bhisma Parva).
MANDAGA I. A river of Puranic fame. (Sloka 33;
Chapter 9, Bhisma Parva).
MANDAGA II. A place in the island of Saka. The
Sidras who reside there are all virtuous peop!®:
(Sloka 38, Chapter 9, Bhisma Parva).
MANDAKA I. One of the sons born to
Manibhadra of his wife Punyajani.
MANDAKA II. A place of habitation of Puranic fame
in ancient India. (Sloka 43, Chapter 9, Bhisma Parva) -
MANDAKARNI (SATAKARNI). A sage, Once this
sage spent ten thousand years in a pond performing
penance. Devas were bewildered and they sent five
beautiful celestial maidens to divert the attention _ f
the sage from his severe austerities. They enticed him
ard the sage constructed a grand and _ palatial house
for them and stayed there with them. ‘There W4°
always music and dance there. The pond was there
after known as ‘Paficdpsaras’. Rama and Laksman@
during their exile in the forests with Sita visited this
place. (Sarga 11, Aranyakanda, Valmiki Ramayana) -
MANDAKINI I. A maid who fell in love with Bhartthari. (See under Bhartrhari).
MANDAKINIII. A river which flows near the mouttain of Citrakiita. If one bathes in this river one W!
have to one’s credit the benefit of performing one A$va
medha yajfia. Ifone lives there bathing in that rivet
daily, one will become possessed of Rajalaksmi (wealth
and majesty of a King). -(Sloka 29, Chapter 29;
Anugasana Parva).
MANDAKINI. Ill. A river celebrated in the Puranas»
taking itssource from the chain of Kedara mountai®s
in Uttara khanda. It is also known as Mandagni an
oe (M.B.Bhisma Parva, Chapter 89, Verse
the Yaksa
MANDAKINI Iv. Kubera’s park. Since this park 1s
watered by Ganga, it acquired the name Mandakini.
(M.B. Anusasana Parva, Chapter 19, Verse 82).
MANDAKINI V. Akaga Ganga.
MANDAKINI VI. One of the two wives of Viéravas:
son of Pulastya. A son, Kubera was born to her by
_ the blessing of Siva. (Padma Purana, Patala Khanda) -

MANDALAKA 475 MANDHATA
MANDALAKA. A serpent born of the family of MANDARAVATI. A heroine in Kathasaritsagara. She
Taksaka. This was burnt to death in the Sarpasatra
of Janamejaya. (Sloka 8, Chapter 57, Adi Parva).
MANDAPALA. A sage. This sage went to the land of
the Manes by his powers of penance but returned to
earth unable to obtain merit there. He then married
a bird and led a family Iife. (For details see 8th para
under Khandavadaha) .
MANDARA [.. A tortoise which is a character
book Paficatantra. (See under Pajicatantra) .
MANDARA II. A brahmana who is greatly extolled in
Sivapurana. (See under Rsabha) .
MANDARA. One of the wives of Vigvakarma. The
monkey named Nala was_ the son of Mandara. This
monkey was the chief of those who helped Sri Rama
to build a bridge to Lanka. Vigvakarma had once
blessed Mandara saying that her son would one day
become great. (Sarga 92, Valmiki Ramayana).
MANDARA I. Eldest son of Hiranyakasipu. Receiving
a boon from Siva he fought with Indra for crores of
years. Maha Visnu’s weapon Cakra and Indra’s
weapon Vajra, were smashed to pieces when. they hit
his strong body. (M.B. Anugasana Parva, Chapter 19,
Verse 32).
MANDARA II. A son of the sage Dhaumya. He
married Samika, the virgin daughter of the Brahmana
Aurva who was a native of Malava land. (Ganesa
MANDARALAKSMI. Queen of the King
Sirnhadhvaja. (See under Sirnhadhvaja ).
MANDARAPARVATA (MANDARACALA). A moun
tain of Puranic fame. The following information 1s
gathered from Mahabharata regarding this mountain -
(1) This mountain rises UP to ten thousand yojanas
and also goes down to ten thousand yojanas. (Chapter
18, Sloka 17, Adi Parva). - ama d
(2) During the time of the churning of Ksirabdh
(ocean of Milk) the serpent An nta brought a
mountain as per instructions from Mahavisnu. (Sloka
6, Chapter 18, Adi Parva) ..
(3) It a8 this mountain that was used as the Matis
(churning stick) when the milk-ocean was churned.
- 18, Adi Parva).
Dock the Hie of churning the oo
many inhabitants of Patala and animals in the ocean
ge killed because 0 ay of
loka 26, Chapter 18, 440), BLVar yp:
(5) This L oumiat resides in the court = Kubera as
Devatma. (Sloka 81, Chapter 10, Sabha ie Bighty-
(6) This mountain is dneat ave ae
eight thousand Gandharvas and four times as cee
Yaksakinnaras reside on the top of = Manivara.
along with Panera, oy a Se
loka 5, Chapter 139, Vane: | i
(7 Once in dream Arjuna CE bie war fc
Kailasa accompanied by Sri Krsna and oD then shone
halted at this mountain. The oie songsters.
with the presence of nymphs anid: HEAVEN Y
in the
named
Sloka 33, Chapter 80, Drona Parva), | 4
(Soka 83, Chapter fh Prijoriaus deme, (Soka 70
Tripuras, Siva used this mountain 2° ©
Gi Parva).
(9) “Onc So dae Gough Astavakra was conducting 4
| this mountain
tour of the northern parts ne stay “Anusasana Parva).
for some time. (Sloka 54, Chapter *™?
‘s the heroine of the story told by the second Vetala to
King Trivikramasena, (See under V etala).
MANDAVI. Wife of Bharata. Rama married Sita;
Bharata, Mandavi; Laksmana, Urmila and Satrughna,
Srutakirti (Sarga 73, Balakanda, Valmiki Ramayana).
Mandavi, Urmila and Grutakirti were the daughters
of Kugadhvaja, brother of Janaka. (Bala Kanda,
Kamba Ramayana). Bharata got two sons of Mandavi
named Subahu and Sirasena. Both of them defeated
the Gandharvas and established cities one on each
side of the river Sindhu. (Uttara Ramayana).
MANDAVISARPINI. A louse, a character in a_ story
of Paficatantra. (For details see under Paficatantra ).
MANDAVYA. _ A sage. He is known as Animandavya
also. Once Ravana, beat Mandavya because of his
not respecting Ravana. That day Mandavya’ cursed
him saying “You will also be beaten like this by a
brave monkey”. (Yuddha Kanda, Kamba Ramayana).
(More details can be had from the entry Animandavya). The asrama of Mandavya is considered a holy
place. Once the King of Kasi went to this agrama and
performed severe penance there. (Chapter 186, Udyoga’
Parva).
MANDEHA(S).
MANDHATA.
of Iksvaku.
1) Genealogy. Descending in order from V isnu were
born — Brahma — Marici — Kagyapa — Vivasvan —
Tkevaku——Vikuksi—Sasada—Purafijaya—Kakutstha
Anenas — Prthulasva — Prasenajit — Yuvanasva —
Mandhata.
2) Birth. Yuvanasva, father of Mandhata had a
hundred wives. Still he had no children. Greatly
griefstricken by the lack of a son he went to the forests
to see people of virtue and piety. During his
wandering in the forest he happened to reach a club
of sages. Yuvanasva went and sat in their midst. He
was happy to be in their midst but was worried in his
mind and so he sent up deep sighs as he sat there sad and
silent. The sages asked him why he looked so sad and
the King crying like a child told them the cause of his
grief. The sages took pity on him and made him
~onduct the yaga ‘Indradaivata’. ‘They brought a jug
of water made potent by recitals of mantras to be
given to the queens to make them pregnant and placed
the pot in the yagaéala. The yaga was coming to an
end. One day the King felt unusually thirsty and
unwilling to disturb the sages who were taking rest the
King entered the yagasala and finding a jug there
full of water drank from it and quenched his thirst,
little knowing that it contained the water made
otent for a specific purpose by mantras. The next day
when the sages went to the yagasala they found the
jug almost empty and were worried and started
making enquiries. The King then confessed what he
had done. The sages said that it was futile to fight
against fate and somehow finished the yaga and went
to their aSramas.
The King became pregnant and after ten months a
child came out bursting open the right side of his
stomach. The King consulted his ministers as to
what should be done with the child and on their
advice the child was taken to the forests and left
there. But the child was protected by the Devas and
See the 2nd para under Pakal.
A King of pre-eminence in the dynasty

MANDHATA 476
they enquired among themselves as to whose breastfeeding it would get when Indra appeared and said
“Mar Dhata’’, meaning it would drink me. That was
how the child got the name ‘Mandhata’. Indra thrust
the child’s big toe into its mouth and the child began to
suck milk through it. Mandhata who grew thus drinking its own toe became a mighty man of renown. (7th
Skandha, Devi Bhagavata) .
3) Administration of the state and marriage. When
Mandhata became a man of great strength his father
died and he ascended the throne and became an
imperor of great fame. He conquered many kingdoms.
He made his enemies flee from him. Because he intimidated the dasyus he got the name Trasadasyu. He
married the perfect-figured chaste daughter Bindumati
of Sagabinduraja. She got two sons named Purukutsa
and Mucukunda.
MANDODARI II
(vi) Once Mahavisnu came to Mandhata disguised as
Indra and conversed with him on ‘Rajadharma’ (duties
and responsibilities of a King.) (Sloka 16, Chapter 64,
Santi Parva).
(vii) Utatthya, son of Angiras, once taught Mandhata
the outlines of Rajadharma. (Chapter 90, Santi
Parva).
(viii) Mandhata conquered the whole world in one
day. (Sloka 16, Chapter 124, Santi Parva).
(ix) On another occasion Brhaspati conversed with
him on the subject of Godina. (The giving away of
cows as gifts). (Sloka 4, Chapter 76, Anusasana
Parva).
(x) Mandhata gave away as gifts millions of cows.
(Sloka 5, Chapter 85, Anugasana Parva),
(x1) Mandhata hated non-vegetarian food. (Sloka 61,
Chapter 115, Anugasana Parva).
The Puranas state that Mandhata had another ‘son MANDODAR{YI I. (MANDODARI). (In South India
named Ambarisa and fifty daughters who were all
married to a sage named Saubhari.
+) How he caused rains in the country. Mandhata ruled
the country very virtuously without at any time going
against truth and justice and his country became
prosperous. Once it so happened that there were no
rains for three successive years in the country and
the greatly worried King went to the forests to know
from the great sages there the reason for such a
calamity. The sages told the King thus: “Oh King,
ofall yugas Krtayuga is the best. This yuga is a
brahmin-predominant one and Dharma stands on
four legs. Penance is for brahmins only and no man
of any other caste can do penance in this yuga. But
in your country a Sidra js performing penance and
that is why the clouds refuse to shower.rains. Kill him
and then the evil will go’, Hearing this Mandhata
replied, “I will never kill an innocent ascetic. Teach
me my duty at this time of peril”, The sages were
pleased at the reply of the King and advised him thus :
“Oh King, start observing Vrata on the ekadasi day.
(Eleventh day in each half of a month). The ekadasi
which falls in the bright half of Bhadrapada is called
‘Padmanabha’, and if you observe it by its cogency you
will get not only rains -but prosperity and happiness free
from misery of any kind. You must persuade your
subjects also to observe this”.
The King on returning to his palace started observing
‘ekadasi’ along with his subjects of all the four castes
and then it started to rain, Rains came in plenty and
all the crops were rich. The subjects became happy.
(Chapter 59, Padma Purana),
5) Other details.
(i) Mandhata had to fight once against Lavandsura
but had to accept defeat before the god-given spear
which Lavanasura possessed. (Uttara Ramayana),
(ii) Agvinidevas once helped Mandhata in his work as
an owner of land. (Sukta 112, Anuvaka 16, Mandala L,
Rgveda). 2.
(iii) Mandhata became pure cc ae and attained
Svarga. (Sloka 5, Chapter 257, ana Parva).
(iv) Once Narada spoke to Safijaya — the greatness of Mandhata. (Chapter 62, at rae
;) At another time Sri Krsna spoke in glowing terms
bol the yajfia of Mandhata. (Sloka 81, Chapter 29,
Santi Parva).
MANDODART IT.
the name Mandodari is current). Wife of Ravana.
The Uttara Ramayana contains a story about the
previous history of Mandodari.
Maya, an asura, was born to Kasyapaprajapati of his
wife Danu. Once Maya went to Devaloka to sec the
dances of the celestial maidens there. Devas came to
know that Maya was in love with the nymph Hema
and they married her to Maya. Maya went to the
southern valley of Himavan and lived there with Hem2
constructing there a city called Hemapura. They g9§
two sons Mayaviand Dundubhi. But they grieved over
the lack ofa daughter and she went to a side 0
Himavan and started penance there to get the blessings of Siva.
Once a celestial damsel named Madhura after observin§
Somavaravrata went to Kailasa to pay obecisance tO
Siva. Parvati. was absent from the place then, having
gone to attend the birthday celebrations of one of her
sons. So Madhura met Siva sitting lonely and this led to
a clandestine sexual union between them. When Parvati
returned she saw traces of the ashes from the body ©
Siva on the naked breast of Madhura and Parvati 1
her anger cursed Madhura 'to live in a well for twelve
years as a frog. Siva was stupefied at the curse and he
went to the well and consoled her by saying that she
would after the twelve years of life as a frog become
a very beautiful maiden and would be married by #
man of great fame and valour. It was near this wel
that Maya and his wife were performing penance
to get a daughter.
After twelve years the frog changed itself into a beautiful maiden and cried loudly - from the well. Hearing
een ays and Hem, who were nearby peeped int
brought her up Bivins ieee he a re pe — on
returning after his victor | cg, cee en
M ‘Y march by that way visite
aya and seeing the girl fell in love with her and
married her according to Vedic rites and took her to
Lanka, Ravana got three sons of he =
Atikaya and Aksakumara. oF Det, Mephanae,
Mandodari was a very beautiful w
when he entered the bed-room of Ray
Sita was dumb-founded at the beauty of Mandodari
— her for a second for Sita, (Vaimiki RamaOman. Hangman
C A virtuous princess of the kingdom
of Sirnhala. She determined to live an Cithaeniett life

MANDUKA
but was forced by destiny to marry a cruel and uncharitable husband. The story of this Mandodari as
related to Devi by Mahisasura is given below.
Candrasena, King of Sirihala, got of his wife Gunavati
a very beautiful daughter named Mandodari. Even
when: she was ten years old the King started searching
for a suitable husband for her He found out Kambugriva son of Sudhanva, King of Madradesa and informed his daughter about his desire to make him his
son-in-law. But Mandodari replied that she never intended to marry and desired to spend her life worshipping
God. Candrasena {felt miserable at her reply.
Years went by and Mandodari became a blooming
lady and yet she rernained firm in her determination.
One day she was playing in the royal gardens with her
companions when the prince of Kosala, Virasena came
that way by mistake. The extraordinary beauty of the
princess attracted him and he made a request to her
through her companions to marry him. But Mandodari
refused.
Time rolled on and soon the marriage of her younger
sister Indumati came. Candrasena invited all the neighbouring Kings for that. The King of Madra Ciadrudesna
was also present for the marriage. The King was very
charming to look at but was very bad in character.
Mandodari was attracted by his external beauty and she
expressed her willingness to marry him. Her father was
immensely pleased and on the nearest auspicious day
she was given in marriage to Ciarudesna.
Mandodari went to the palace of Garudesna and they
lived happily for some time. One day she saw her
husband having sexual acts with the wife of one of the
palace servants. She reproached her husband and yet
two days later she saw her husband with another
Scrvant girl. She was greatly disappointed and she
left the palace for the forests where she started performing penance. .
MANDUKA. A class of horse. These _highclass horscs
helped Arjuna in his campaign of victory. (Sloka 6,
Chapter 28, Sabha Parva). | Pte
MANDUKA(S). A_ tribe. The King of Uns ae
Ayus. The daughter of Ayus, Susobha coc
to Pariksit of Iksvaku dynasty. They had three sons,
ala, Dala and Bala. (Chapter 190, Vana Par va).
MANGALA. A deity in the form of Kuja or Se ie
There are different versions in the Puranas regarel iS
the birth of Mangala. : ;
(1) Sati sete = suicide at the Daksayiiga ae ote
greatly griefstricken at the loss of eae of Siva
ie A sweat drop fell init | a che son born
olng severe penance an ;
of ae drop. Siva then installed Mangala apne
avagrahas and according to the cietene* ea
this Graha is considered the pre a Patan Rudra
property and the wife of a person. 7) ants
Samhita 1-10 and Skanda Purane " Hi - Aksa. One
(2) Siva married Vikesi daughtet Eel ‘lays Agni
day while they were engaged 1 U0 eves of Siva
Came to their presence. Enraged at ” een from his
blazed with anger and a drop of Het
eyes fell on the face of Vikes! and she sible to bear the
After some days Vikesi found 1 te aborted it. A
embryo of Siva thus forme and earch took it and
child was born and_ the goddess os
MANIBHADRA I.
became pregnant. ;
MANIBHADRA 1
fed it with breast milk. It was that child who later on
became Mangala. (Skanda Purana).
(3) Mangala was born of the blood drops of Siva.
(Bhavisya Purana).
(4) Mangala was
Purana) .
(5) Mangala was the son of Bhumidevi. Devas, sages,
Brahmanas, Manus and Gandharvas all worshipped
Bhami at the time of Varahakalpa. It 1s also said in
the Vedas that Bhiimidevi is the wife of Mahavisnu’s
incarnation as Varaha. Mangala alias the planet Mars
was born to Bhimidevi of Mahavisnu as Varaha. (9th
Skandha. Devi Bhagavata) .
MANGALACANDIBA. A devi. Vedas and Vedavids
alike praise this goddess who is always interested in
granting the requests of her devotees. Because she
showers prosperity on her devotees she-became known
as Mangalacandika. There is another version that she
got the name because she was worshipped by Mangala
(Kuja) and because she grants the requests of Mangala.
Yet another version is that she got the name because
she was worshipped by the ‘King Mangala chief of
the seven islands. Born of the species of Durgadevi she
is very kind and affectionate to her devotees. ParamaSiva worshipped this Devi before he went to destroy
the demon-trio Tripuras. (9th Skandha, Devi Bhagavata).
MANII. A serpent born of the family of Dhrtarastra.
This serpent was burnt to death in the Sarpasatra of
Janamejaya. (Sloka 19, Chapter 57, Adi Parva).
MANI II. A sage. This sage was a member of the
Brabmasabha. (Sloka 24, Ghapter 11, Sabha Parva).
MANI III. One of the two Parsadas given to Subrahmanya by Candra. The other one was named Sumani.
(Sloka 32, Ghapter 45, Salya Parva).
MANIIV. Ason born to Kasyapaprajapati of his wife
Kadra. Mani lived near the city of Girivraja. This serpent did penance to please Siva and obtained a boon
that Garuda‘ should give refuge to him. (31:6, Adi
Parva and Brahmanda Purana).
A Yaksa. He who worships _ this
Yaksa would get his desire fulfilled. This Yaksa is
installed in a temple near the city of Tamralipti. If anybody commits adultcry in that place Manibhadra would
take him to the temple and keep him there for the night.
“Next morning he would take the couple before the
King and exposing the sin would get them killed by
the King.
Once a Vaigya named Samudradatta committed adultery and another house-holder found it out and took
them to the temple of Manibhadra and kept them there.
Gaktimati, the virtuous. wife of Samudradatta came to
know of the mishap to her husband and the intelligent
woman went to the temple with materials for worship
and under the pretext of worshipping made the priest
of the temple open the doors. When she entered
Gamudradatta felt ashamed and sat with his head bent
down. Saktimati gave the other woman her own dress
taking hers in return and sent her outas Saktimati without raising the least suspicion in the priest. Then she
remained with Samudradatta, and when in the morning officers of the King came to take them they were
surprised to find that the culprits were really husband
and wife. The house-holder was punished for giving
the son of Bharadvaja. (GaneSa

MANIBHADRA II
wrong information and Samudradatta was set free with
his wife. (Kathamukhalambaka, Kathasaritsagara) .
MANIBHADRA II. A King of the Lunar dynasty. This
King had many children of his wife Kavika. Of these
seven sons learned magic from Maya. The seven palm
trees which Sri Rama broke by an arrow while on his
search for Sita were but the cursed forms of these seven
sons. The Puranic story relating to Sri Rama giving them
relief from the curse isnarrated in the Kiskindha Kanda
of Kamba Ramayana.
The seven sons of Manibhadra after learning magic
from Maya created a huge cobra and travelled all
over the world on it. One day they reached a
mountain near Rsyamukacala. They saw the sage
Agastya coming that way and just to tease him they
coiled that cobra and hid it beneath the ground in the
form of a circle and they themselves stood on it as seven
palm trees in a circle and caused obstruction to the sage
in his path. The sage as he came near the trees knew
by his spiritual powers what trick had been played on
him and said cursing, ‘‘May you stand like this for ever”’.
The princes knew the hideousness of the curse and
pleaded for redress and the sage said, “‘After centuries
the incarnation of Visnu as Sri Rama would come and
give you salvation”’.
The princes stood there as trees grown to unusual heights
with round black trunks casting shades all around.
Underneath grew a shrubbage deep and thick and the
seven trees stood there presenting to the onlookers a
sight of wonder.
Sri Rama and party reached the place of the seven trees.
Suddenly Rama took his bow and arrows and _ pressing
his foot on a stone beneath sent an arrow and to the
wonder of all, the seven trees standing in a circle fell
all together and the arrow returned to his quiver. ‘
When Rama pressed the stone on the ground with his
foot he was pressing on a vital point on the head of the
cobra lying coiled in a circle under the ground bearing
the seven trees. The cobra got a shock and instantly
straightened itself for a second and the trees thus came
in a row straight on the path of the arrow of Sri Rama.
They were all cut at once and before they had time to
fall down the serpent coiled itself again and regained
his original position and so the trees fell down in the
circle in which they stood. All these happened so quickly
that nobody was able to see what happened and so every
body was surprised to see all the seven trees in a circle
falling down by a single arrow. The princes were thus
relieved from the curse.
MANIBHADRA ITI.
1) General information. A Yaksa. He was <a deity of
merchants and travellers. (Sloka 130, Chapter 64, Vana
Parva).
2) Other details.
(i) He stays in the court of Kubera. (Sloka 15, Chapter
10, Sabha Parva).
(ii) Once this Yaksa on the request of a cloud named
Kundadhara gave a boon to a brahmin. (Sloka 21,
Chapter 171, Santi Parva).
iii) The sage Astavakra once gear this Yaksa.
(Sloka 33, Chapter LY, en — ‘ 43 idk
en Arjuna went to Marutta to bring his wealt
(iv) eal this Yaksa and the Yaksa blessed
him. (Sloka 7, Chapter 69, Aégvamedha Parva).
478 MANIKYAVACAKAR
MANIBHADRA. ‘A Parsada of Siva. (See under Candrasena II).
MANICARA. A Yaksa. In the fight between Ravana
and Kubera this Yaksa helping Kubera created great
havoc in the army of Ravana. (Uttara Ramayana). |
MANIDVIPA. The abode of Devi. Devi resides in this
island which is far beyond Kailasa. (3rd Skandha, Dev!
Bhagavata).
MANIGRIVA. A brother of Nalakibara. (See under
Nalakibara).
MANIJALA. A prominent river in Sdkadvipa. (Sloka
32, Chapter 11, Bhisma Parva).
MANIKANCANA. A land portion of Sakadvipa situated
near Syamagiri. (Sloka 26, Chapter 11, Bhisma
Parva).
MANIKUTTIKA. A follower of Subrahmanya. (Sloka
20 Chapter 46, Salya Parva).
MANIKYAVACAKAR (MANIKKA-VASAHAR).A de&
votee and poet who lived in Tamilnadu. He is believe
to have lived during the period between the eighth an
ninth centuries A.D. He was born in Tiruvadavur 1
an Adisaiva brahmin family. ‘Tiruvadavir was a village
near Madura, the capital of Pandya kingdom. Fils
father was Sambhupadaégrita and mother Sivajiianaval):
The name given by his parents to Manikyavacakar as
still unknown. Because he was born in Tiruvadavut
everybody called him Tiruvadavirar. He became 4
scholar in his sixteenth year. The Pandya king cal ed
him to his palace and appointed him as his ministe?
He gave him the honour of the title ‘Tennavar Brahm
rayar’. Manikyavacakar showed more interest in d€V?
tional matters than in matters of the state. ,
Once when the King was holding his durbar he got ail
formation that in one of the eastern ports had landed @
set of good war-horses for sale. He sent Tiruvadavur@
to that place. The minister, when near the port
‘Tirupperundurai, heard a sound of Vedic utterances an d
he immediately went to the place from where the soul
came. He saw Lord Siva sitting under a tree in the guis’
of aGuru. Forgetting all state affairs he became engros
ed in the meditation of Siva. Suddenly he develope
a talent for poetry and music and sweet attrac
ive poems in praise of Siva started flows?
from his tongue. Siva was immensely pleased and gav
him the name Manikyavacakar meaning that every
Vacaka (sentence) coming out of his tongue was equ 4
in value to a manikya (Ruby). The guru gave hi
ruby too. Manikyavacakar in the garb of a mendica”
joined a troop of Siva devotees and spent all the money
he had for the service of the devotees of Siva and 4 50
for the reconstruction of a dilapidated Siva temple i
Tirupperundurai,
Manikyavacakar reached Madura and informed the
King that the horses would arrive at the palace on the
day Avani-miila (Mila star in the month of Sravan)
ae presented the king with the ruby which his Gur
ad given him. The king was not satisfied and he i™
prisoned him. On the Avani-mita day at the stipulat
ed time the horses arrived at the palace. The horse?
were led by strange foreigners. It was $1i Pararmmesv@"*
himself who had come as the chief of the horseme?’
Manikyavacakar was released from jail and he also ca™
to see the horses. The King gave the leader of the troope"®
a silk shawl] as present. The head of the troopers received
it by the end of his whip. The King resented this but t®©

MANIMAN I
troopers went back without any trouble. The horses
were put in stables and Manikyavacakar went to his
asrama.
At midnight all the new horses in the stables turned into jackals and roamed about in the streets howling
loudly and disturbing everyone. After some time they
all disappeared. The anger of the king knew no bounds.
He imprisoned Manikyavacakar again. ‘The servants
of the king took him to river Vaigai. That day there
was an unusual flood in the river and the city of
Madura was submerged in waters. The king then realised his mistake and begged pardon of Manikyavacakar.
Manikyavacakar asked the king to repair the dam in
the Vaigai. The king assented to the proposal but to
save money the work was entrusted to the citizens of
Madura.
At that time there was an old woman in Madura called
Vanti. She earned her livelihood by selling sweetmeats.
The servants of the king ordered her also to join the
work of the dam. She prayed to Paramasiva and
then a young man came to the old woman and offered
to work for her in her stead. The young man representing
Vanti went to Vaigai and started to work for her. When
the king came to inspect the work he found the young
man not doing his work satisfactorily and struck him
on his back with a whip. A basketful of sand the young
man was carrying fell down and: the work of the dam
was instantly completed. Not only that; all the persons
including the king felt as though they were struck.
Vanti attained Svarga and Manikyavacakar went to
Cidambaram. The king repented. .
Manikyavacakar saw Siva in person several times. Many
wonderful events happened at the Cidambaram temple
after the arrival of Manikyavacakar there. The King
of Lanka hearing about the greatness of Manikyavacakar
brought his dumb daughter to him and she gained the
power of speech. The Buddhist saints of Lanka aa
to Manikyavacakar and entered into philosop a
discourse with him. They became dumb. The king o
Lanka and his followers became devotees of Siva.
Manikyavacakar sat in his a¢rama and composed divine
songs. Once Siva in the guise of a bees name HE
am pl nes written by him. Bven WwW’
Stocking ‘his divi he devotees his soul
was reciting his divine Fe “ : rycen
left his body and merged wl 1a a —_—
The divine phe in praise of Siva by Manikyavace Ot
constitute the eighth Khanda of Saivite hy em on antl
“Tirumurai’. They include Tiruvaca aa a
“Tirukkovaiyar’’. The Tiruvacakam See AN) eeries
in 51 hymns and the Tirukkovaiyar contavne = or vent
All these are songs in praise of Siva sung on
occasions. (Divyacaritam ).
MANIMAN : A king. Mahabharata gives the following
details about him.
(i) Maniman was born of an aspe
asura Danayu. (Sloka 44, Chapte :
(ii) This king was present at the marrlag
—- 22, Chapter 185, Adi Parva) - oe ae
Bhimasena while on his early V :
ed this king. (Sloka 11, Chapre Dee een aa
(iv) This king fought on the side a i 90, Chapter 4,
ing the great Kuruksetra battle. (510 ;
Udyoga Parva). ,
(v) Maniman was killed in the fight betwe
ct of Vrtra, son of the
r 67, Adi Parva) .
of Draupadi.
en Maniman
MANISKANDHA
and Bhirigravas. (Sloka 53, Chapter 23, Drona
Parva). |
MANIMAN II. A serpent. This serpent is a member
of the court of Varuna. (Sloka 9, Chapter 9, Sabha
Parva) .
MANIMAN III. A sacred place. If one spends a night
there one would get the benefit of performing an Agnistoma yajiia. ‘Sloka 101, Chapter 82, Vana Parva).
MANIMAN IV. A Yaksa who was a friend of Kubera.
Once the sage Agastya cursed him that he would be
killed by the hand ofa man. The yaksa_ was killed by
Bhimasena. (Sloka 59, Chapter 160, Vana Parva and
see under AGASTYA, Para 10).
MANIMAN V. A mountain. Once, when Arjuna went on
a pilgrimage to Siva’s presence with Krsna in a dream, he
saw this mountain Maniman. (Sloka 24, Chapter 9,
Drona Parva).
MANIMAN VI. A.parsada of Siva. This parsada joined
hands with Virabhadra to injure the sage Bhrgu at the
Daksayaga. (4th Skandha, Bhagavata ).
MANIMANTHA. A mountain. (Sri Krsna performed
penance here to please Siva for crores of years together.
Sloka 33, Chapter 18, Anusasana Parva).
MANIMATIPURI (MANIMATPATTANDAM). A meeting place of the asuras. The notorious asura Ilvala
lived here for some time. (Sloka 4, Chapter 94, Vana
Parva). ‘The demons Nivatakavacas hid here in this
city and Ravana challenged them to a fight after coming
to the gates of the city. (Uttara Ramayana) .
MANIMAYA. Father-in-law of a demon called SukeSa.
Sukega married Devavati daughter of Manimaya and had
three sons, Malyavan, Sumali and Mali. (Uttara Ramaana ).
MEMINAGA. I. A serpent born to Kagyapa Prajapati of
his wife Kadri. This serpent resides near Girivraja(Sloka
50, Chapter 21, Sabha Parva).
MANINAGA II. A sacred place. If one spends a _ night
here one would get the benefit of making a thousand
Godanas. If one eats from the offerings made to a deity
there one would ' be free from the effects of any snakepoison. (Sloka 106, Chapter 84, Vana Parva).
MANINI. Mother of Visravas, father of Ravana. She
was the daughter of the sage Trnabindu. (See under
Trnabindu ).
MANIPARVATA. A mountain of Puranic fame.
Narakasura kept the sixteen thousand and one hundred
maidens he had stolen in this mountain. (Daksinatya
Patha, Chapter 38, Sabha Parva). ‘W
MANIPRAVALA. A kind of language formed by mixing
Sanskrit and Malayalam together. ‘‘Bhasasarnskrtayogo manipravalam”’. This is its definition. A great
many of the important literary works in Malayalam
are in Manipravalam.
MANIPURA (MANIPUR). The birth place of Citrangada wife of Arjuna. Arjuna during his pilgrimage
came to this place and after marrying Citrangada stayed
there for three years. Babhruvahana was the son of
Citrangada. (See under Citrangada ). ,
MANIPUSPAKA. Sahadeva, one of the Pandavas, used
to blow a conch named Manipuspaka. (Sloka 16,
Chapter 25, Bhisma Parva).
MA™ISKANDHA. A serpent born of the family of
Dhrtarastra. This serpent was burnt to death in the
Sarpasatra of Janamejaya. (Chapter o2, Adi Parva) :

MANIVAHANA 480
MANIVAHANA. Another name for King Kusamba.
(Chapter 63, Adi Parva).
MANIVAKRA. One of the sons of the Vasu, Apa.
MANIVARA. One of the sons born to Rajatanatha of
his wife Manivara. This Yaksa married Kratusthala’s
daughter Devajani. The sons born to them are called
‘Guhyakas’. (Brahmanda Purana, 3.7.127-131).
MANIVARA. A Yaksa. He lives on the mountain of
Mandara. (Sloka 5, Chapter 139, Vana Parva). :
MANIVATTAPPARA. A rock of Puranic fame. Ravana
spent one night on this rock with Rambha. Rambha
was going to her lover Nalakiibara one night ‘alone and
Ravana seeing her on the way carried her away to
this place. (Uttara Ramayana).
MANJULA. A river of Puranic fame. (Sloka 34.
Chapter 9, Bhisma Parva).
MANJUGHOSA. A nymph. The sage Medhavi cursed
this nymph and made her into a_ devil. (See under
Medhavi).
MANKA. A place of habitation in the island of
Saka. This place is inhabited mostly by dutiful
brahmins. (Chapter 11; Bhisma Parva).
MANKANA (MANKANA). A barber of Varanasi
who was a great devotee of GaneSa. During the time of
King Divodasa II Siva wanted to destroy the city of
Kasi and deputed his son Ganesa ( Nikumbha) for the
same.
Ganeséa came to Kasi and appearing in person. before
his devotee Mankana, asked him to build a temple on
the outskirts of Kagi. Mankana completed the temple
and Ganega (Nikumbha) installed himself in that
temple getting for it the name Nikumbhamandira.
Devotees began to flow into the temple and Nikumbha
sitting there answered the prayers of all. But he never
fulfilled the prayer of the King to have a son. This
annoyed Divodasa and he destroyed the temple and
then Nikumbha cursed that the city of Kagi would
become desolate. Siva’s desire thus became fulfilled.
(92. 33, Vayu Purana and 3; 67, 43,
Purana).
MANKANAKA (MANKANA). A sage: ?
1) General information. He was born to Vav a
of his wife Sukanyaka. (Sloka. 58, Chater. igs
Parva).
Vamana Purana, 38th Chapter states that
was one of the spiritual sons of Kasyapaprajapati
2) juice of potherb flows from finger. “The sage was living
in Saptasarasvatatirtha and one day by accident his
thumb was cut off from his hand by the sharp edge if
‘Kuéa grass. But instead of blood, the juice of ac Tieh
began to flow from the thumb and the Sage alae ed
at this strange phenomenon, started dancing. she
with Mankana the arth and the sky also stated
dancing and the dancing showed no signs of stoppin
Siva then appeared before Mankana and asked him the
cause of his non-stop dancing. Siva was in disguise and
Mankana did not recognise the new-comer and the
sage told him about the strange phenomenon, As they
were talking Siva hoc hen pi thumb of the Sage with
his little finger and lo! the Mow from the finger changed
t-herb juice to sugar-candy juice. Wamana
from po - it was ashes which 4,
Purana states that if w rica Owed from the
: The hermit was ashamed. He understood that
finger. A dhe fell at his feey: &:
ast was Siva aud He cet. Siva blessed
the gues ‘ : ted him ‘boons,
the hermit and gran
Brahmanda
Mankana
MANKI I.
MANMATHAKARA.
MANODARI.
-MANOGUNA |
3) Mankana falls in love with Sarasvatt Devi. One day
Sarasvatidevi came to the place of his residence in the
guise of a very attractive woman. Mankana had seminal
emission on seeing her and the semen fell on the surface
of the water. The sage stored the water with semen
in a pot and soon seven sons were born from it. They
all became sages named Vayuvega, Vayubala,
Vayuha, Vayumandala, Vayujvala, -Vayuretas and
Vayucakra, (Chapter 83, Vana Parva and Chapter 38,
Salya Parva).
4) Birth of hadaligarbha. Besides the seven sons
Mankana got a daughter named Kadaligarbha. Menaka
was her mother. (See under Kadaligarbha),.
9) Maikana diverts the river Sarasvati. It was sage
Mankana who invoked the river Sarasvati and made
it flow through Wuruksetra. Chapter 38, Vamana
Purana).
A great sage. It was Bhisma, while he was
lying on his bed of arrows who narrated the story of
this sage. Manki was an aspirant of worldly things and
once he got two bullocks. He was ploughing with them
one day when a camel came and carried them away.
Disappointed he came to the agrama and lamented
deeply over it. This lamentation became known later
as the famous Mankigita. By the time the eita reached
its end the mind of the sage was changed and he became
one bereft of all worldly desires and he acquired
moksa. (Chapter 177, Santi Parva).
MANKI II. A sage who. lived in Tretayuga. He was
the son of Kausitakibrahmana and was a Vaisnavite of
great virtue. This sage had two wives named Suraipa
and Viriipa. Both had no sons and as per the advice of
his guru he went to Sabarmatitata and did penance
there. After several years of rigorous austerities he got
very many children. The place where Mankimaharsi
sat and did penance was known later as Mankitirtha.
It is also called Saptasarasvata. In Dvaparayuga the
Pandavas visited the place and gave it the name Saptadhara also. (Uttara Khanda, Padma Purana).
‘A warrior of Subrahmanya.
There is.a reference to this warrior in Mahabharata,
Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 72.
Wife of Darukasura. (See under Ghantakarna).
MANOGUNA. Manmay do. many things, right or
wrong, good or bad, but it is the purity of your mind
that matters. The following story is to illustrate how
much your life depends on the quality of your thoughts
(Manoguna).
Once on the shores of Ganga a Brahmana and a
Candala sat side by side and performed penance, After
some days of foodless penance the Brahmana felt hungry
and his thoughts went to the fishermen he had seen
earlier. He thought thus, ‘Oh how happy are these
fishermen. They catch good fishes and eat to their
heart’s content and are happy. They are the luckiest
people of this world’’. ‘The thoughts of the Candala
also went to the fishermen, But he thought thus: “Oh
how cruel are these fishermen ! How many innocent
lives do they destroy to fill their belly. They must be
demons to do so.’’ Both of them died after some days
and the Brabmana was born as a fisherman and the
Candala a prince. Both of them were re-born near
their abodes in their previous birth and both remembered their previous lives. The Candala was happy but

MANOHARA I 481
the Brahmana regretted his fault. (Taranga 1, Madanamaficukalambaka, Kathasaritsagara ).
MANOHBARA I. Wife of the Vasu, Soma. Varcas was
born of her first. Then she had three more sons named
pion, Prana and Ramana. (Sloka 22, Chapter 66, Adi
arva).
MANOHARA II. A nymph of Alakapuri. Once when
Astavakra went to the court of Kubera this nymph
gave a performance in dancing in honour of that sage.
(Sloka 45, Chapter 19, Anugasana Parva).
MANOJAVA I. The eldest son of the Vasu Anila.
Anila begot this son of his wife Siva. (Sloka 25,
Chapter 66, Adi Parva).
MANOJAVA II. During the Manvantara of Caksusa,
the sixth Manu, Indra was Manojava, the leader ‘of
the Devas. (Arnéa 3, Chapter 160, Visnu Purana).
MANOJAVA III. A follower of Subrahmanya. (Sloka 17,
Chapter 46, Salya Parva). Ae
MANOJAVA IV. Asacred place situated in Vyasavana
in Kuruksetra. If one bathes in a pond there one will
have to one’s credit the benefit of making a thousand
Godanas. (Sloka 93, Chapter 88, Vana Parva).
MANONUGA. A place near the mountain Vamana in
a — of Kraufica. (Sloka 11, Chapter 12, Bhisma
rva).
MANORAMA I. Wife of Dhruvasandhi King of
Kosala. (See under’ Dhruvasandhi for details).
MANORAMA II. A celestial woman. She was the
daughter of Kasyapa Prajapati, born of his wife
Pradha. (Sloka 50, Chapter 65, Adi Parva). She
participated in the Janmotsava of Arjuna. (Sloka 62,
Chapter 122, Adi Parva).
MANORAMA III. Once by his spiritual powers the
sage Uddalaka brought the river Sarasvati to his place
of yajfia_and that diversion was then known as Manorama. (Sloka 25, Chapter 38, Salya Parva).
MANORATHA. A calf once created by Sri Krsna by
his spiritual powers. (See under Surabhi).
MANOVATI. The city of Brahma. This city is situated
in the centre of the nine cities on the top of the
mountain Mahameru. Around it are the cities of the
Astadikpdlakas. (8th Skandha, Devi Bhagavata).
MANTHARA I. A maid of Kaikeyi the wife of
Dafaratha. This hunchbacked woman was born of the
species of a Gandharvi named Dundubhi. (Sloka 10,
Chapter 276, Vana Parva). When everything was
made read tocrown Sri Rama as the heir-apparent
of Ayodhya, it was Manthara who persuaded Kaikeyi
to go to Dagaratha and ask him to send Sri Rama
to the forests. Had not the cruel tongue of Manthara
played like that, the history of the solar dynasty itself
tine have been different. (See under Kaikeyi).
NTHARA IT. Daughter of Virocana. (Sarga 25,
Balakanda, Valmiki Ramayana). Indra killed this
Manthara.
MANTHINI. A follower of Subrahmanya. (Sloka 28,
Chapter 46, Salya Parva).
MANTRA. See under Veda. |
MANTRAPALA. One of the eight ministers of the
freat King Dagaratha. The other seven were : Jayanta,
Dhrsti, Vijaya, Asiddhartha, Arthasadhaka, Asoka and
Sumantra. (Sarga 7, Bala Kanda, Valmiki Ramayana) .
MANU I. See under Manvantara. .
MANU II. Son of the Agni Paficajanya. Paficajanya
had three wives Supraja, Brhadbhasa and Nisa. He
prostitution, boundary disp
MANUSMRTI
got of his first two wives six sons and of his third wife
Niga, a daughter and seven sons. (Chapter 223, Vana
Parva).
MANU III. Accelestial maiden born to Kasyapa of
Pradha. (Chapter 59, Verse 44, Adi Parva).
MANUSATIRTHA. A sacred pond lying on the
outskirts of Kuruksetra. There is a legend showing
the origin of this pond. Once a hunter wounded a
deer with his arrow and the deer ran and dropped
itself into the pond. When it rose up from the water
it became a man. From that day onwards the pond.
became holy and got the name MaAnusatirtha. (Sloka
65, Chapter 86, Vana Parva).
‘MANUSMRTI. A code of conduct written by Manu
alias Manavacarya who was the father of man-kind for
the harmonious existence of a social life. The book
contains twelve chapters. The first chapter deals with
the origin of the Smrti and_ the origin of the world.
No other Smrti begins like this and so it 1s believed
that this chapter must have been added to it later.
The contents of each of the other eleven chapters are
given below :
Second chapter. It deals with the sense organs and
stresses the importance of conquering and controlling
them. It describes the qualities of a brahmin. ~~
Third chapter. It contains the duties of a householder
after his course of study of the Vedas. Eight different
kinds of marriages are described in it. It also deals with
methods of giving protection to women and children.
Fourth chapter. Duties of a brahmana, study of the
Vedas and responsibilities of a Snataka are all described in this chapter.
Fifth chapter. This deals with pure and impure foods,
impurity and methods of purification, women and
their responsi bilities.
Sixth Chapter. This conta
have entered the aframa of Vanaprast
ascetics. é .
Seventh chapter. It deals with the duties of Kings and
ministers re
Eighth chapter. It deals with law and justice. It contains laws for the proper conduct of justice and includes
ways and means of settling disputes and handling cases
of debts, sale without right, partnership, duels, theft,
sutes. and all such matters
as are tobe decided by a court of law.
Ninth chapter. It deals with the duties of a husband and
wife. It also contains matters relating to — property
rights, partition and the duties of a King with regard
to these. "
Tenth chapier. It deals with the duties of the different
castes, mixed castes and the duties of one in lmes of
danger.
Eleventh chapter. It deals first with pe
of Vratas, Yagas, Yajfias and fee
el alga with punishments of crimes,
murder, prostitution etc.
Twelfth Tide It deals with the theory of pole Metin
describes how your deeds in the present life ti ad
tive of the nature of life of your next ee Sed " :
deeds would fetch you what life 4s also oP ne abs
contains instructions on Atmajfiiana @© lle 8
obtain moksa (absolute bliss) .
The basis of the present Hindu Law
it is believed to have been written 1)
‘ns the duties of those who
ha and also of
nance, observation
to the priests. It
expiation for
-s Manusmrti and

MANUSYA | 482
MANUSYA (MAN) The Puranas have not given a
definite explanation regarding the origin of Man, the
most important of all living beings. Many stories
regarding the origin of Man were current among the
ancient people. According to Hindu Puranas Man
was born of Svayambhuva Manu who in turn was born
of Brahma. According to Valmiki Ramayana (Sarga 14,
Aranya Kanda) all the living beings including man
‘were born to Kasyapaprajapati of his eight wives,
Aditi, Diti, Danu, Kalika, Tamra, Krodhavaga, Manu
and Anala. From Aditi were born the devas; from
Diti, the daityas; from Danu, the danavas; from Kali,
the asuras Kalaka and Naraka; from Tamra, the birdflock Kraufici, Bhasi, Syeni, Dhrtarastri and Suki;
from Krodhavaga the animal flock, Mrgi, Mrgamanda,
Hari, Bhadramadé, Maéatangi, Sardili, Sveta and
Surabhi; from Manu, mankind and from Anala, the
flora.
There is basis to believe that the Greeks and the people
of Bharata accepted with slight modifications the
theory of evolution. The Dasavataras of Visnu almost
represents the progressive changes in the form of a
living thing from a fish into man. The theory of
Darwin that life was first formed in water was current
among the sages of ancient Bharata, even from very
early times.
Apa eva sasarjadau
‘Tasu viryamapasrjat //
(He created water first and cast virility therein) .
In the Dagavataras (ten incarnations of Visnu) the
first avatara is Matsya (Fish). The next one is Kirma
or Tortoise which isa progress in the form of fish.
The third is Varaha or boar which is another step
forward in evolution. The fourth is Narasimha (Man
cum lion) which is the first step towards the formation
of Man. That avatara has got the traits of both man
and animal. The next one is Vamana or a small man.
Then Sri Rama and Sri Krsna, both fully grown men
but with different kinds of culture.
MANVANTARA (M).
1) Kalpa, Manvantara and Caturyuga. The Prapajica
(universe) is perishable. At one time, it takes its origin
at another time it perishes. Brahma, the creator or
the universe has birth and death. The period between
the birth and death of a Brahma is known as a **Mahakalpa”’. The flood that comes at the death of a Brahma
is called ‘““Mahapralaya”’. One day of Brahmi js called
Kalpakala. In the Puranas one Kalpa or one day of
Brahma is divided into fourteen parts. The master or
ruler of each of these divisions is a Manu. There are
fourteen Manus. The life span of each Manu is called
a “‘Manvantaram’’.
There are seventy one Caturyugas in each Manvantara.
The four yugas namely Krtayuga,.Tretayuga, Dvaparayuga and Kaliyuga make np one Caturyuga. At the end
of seventyone such Caturyugas, that is, at the end of
every two hundred and eightyfour (71 x 4) yugas, a
Manu completes his life-span. Along with that, the
Devas who were born at the time of the birth of that
Manu, also come to the end of their lives, F ourteen such
Manvantaras make one day of Brahma. It is at the end
of that day that the original universe perishes. Brahma’s
life-span is 120 years. At the end of that ie that
Brahma perishes. That 1s to say, at the end o every
14 Manvantaras
MANVANTARA(M)
42,200 divine days(120 x 360) which is the life-span of
a Brahma, a deluge takes place. Thus in one Brahma’s
time 42,200 Kalpas take place. A Brahma’s life span
is known as ‘‘Mahakalpa”’ and the close of a Brahma’s
period is called ‘‘Mahapralaya’’.
2) Human year (Manusya varsa) and Divine year (Deva
varsa). When two leaves are placed one over the other
and they are pierced by a needle, the time required
for the needle to pass from the first leaf to the second
is called ‘‘Alpakala”’. Thirty such alpakalas make one
‘Truti’”’. Thirty trutis make one “Kala”, Thirty Kalas
make one ‘‘Kastha”, which is also known as ‘“‘Nimisa
“Noti” or ‘Matra’. Four ‘Nimisas’? make one
“Ganita’’. Ten Ganitas, one “‘Netuvirppu”’. Six netuvirppus, one “Vinazhika’’. Sixty vinazhikas one
‘Ghatika”, Sixty ghatikads one day (day and night
together). Fifteen days, one ‘“‘Paksa’’, Two Paksas, one
“Candra masa” {lunar month). One Candramasa for
human beings is one ‘“‘ahoratra’”’? (one day and night
making up one full day) for the pitrs. Twelve Candra
masas make one year for human beings. One year for
human beings is one ahoratra for the gods. Three
hundred ahoratras of gods make one “Deva Vatsara
or “Divya vatsara’’. 4,800 divyavatsaras make one Krtayuga. 3,600 divyavatsaras make one Tretayuga, 2,400
divyavatsaras make one Dvaparayuga. 1,200 divyavatsaras make one Kaliyuga. 12,000 divyavatsaras
comprising a set of Krta, Treta. Dvapara and Kaliyugas
make one Caturyuga. A Manu’s period is complete
at the end of 71 Caturyugas. With that, the first
group of gods also comes to an end. At the end of fourteen such Manus, one “‘Kalpa’’ is over and a deluge
takes place. The whole of this period comprises one
night for Brahma. Night is the time of complete inactlvity. With the end of the night, creation is starte
again. When 360 such ahoratras of Brahma are completed, he completes ‘one year. After completing 12
such years, a Brahma perishes. Again a period of abs0lute inactivity. follows for the length of a Brahma ®
life-span. After a period of 120 Brahma varsas (the lifespan of a Brahma) another Brahma comes into being.
The life-span of Brahma is shown in the following
tabular form :
360 days for gods
12,000 Deva vatsaras
—QOne Deva vatsara.
—lcaturyuga (36 lakhs years
for human beings).
Manvantaram
Manu’s life-span) .
—l Kalpa (one day time for
Brahma )
—One day (and night) for
Brahma. (Ahoratra)
360 days of Brahma —1 Brahma Varsa
120 Brahma Varsas —QOne Brahma’s life-span.
This life-span of one Brahma is therefore 30 crores
lakhs 17 thousands 376 hundreds of years of huma?
beings.
It is said that a Manu’s period of reign is 4,32,000
anusyarvarsas. (Bhagavata, 3rd Skandha).
3) The caturyuga scheme. A caturyuga consists of the
four yugas, namely Krta, Treta, Dvapara and Kall
yugas. At the end of each Caturyuga, the Vedas perish
Then the ‘‘Saptarsis”? (seven sages) come down from
heaven to the earth and restore them again. Manu
who is the propounder of Dharma Sastra, is also born
71 caturyugas —l
(One
2 Kalpas

MANVANTARA(M)
in every Krtayuga. The Devas of each Manvantaram
feed upon the share of Havis (offerings at sacrifices) of
the yaga till the end of that Manvantara. During the
whole period of the Manvantara, the earth is protected
and preserved by the sons of Manu and their descendants. Thus Manu, the Saptarsis, Devas, Indra and the
Kings who are the sons of Manu are the authorities of
the Manvantara. After 14 Manvantaras a Kalpa of
about 1,000 yugas, comes to an end, After that there is
a night extending over the same period in duration. At
that time Mahavisnu sleeps on his bed Ananta in the
ocean of deluge. After that, he wakes up again and
performs creation. Manus, Kings, Indra, Devas and
Saptarsis are the Sattvika aspects of Mahavisnu, who
performs the work of protecting the world. In Krta
yuga, Mahavisnu assumes the form of Kapila and others
and preaches ‘‘Paramajiiana”’. In Treta yuga he assumes
the form of an emperor and destroys the wicked people.
In Dvapara yuga, he assumes the form of Vyasa and
after dividing the Veda into 4 sections, classifies each
of the sections into the various branches. At the end
of Kaliyuga, Mahavisnu assumes the form of Kalki and
restores the vicious to the path of righteousness. This is
the “‘CGaturyuga scheme” of Mahavisnu. (Visnu Purana.
Part III, Chapter 2).
4) The fourteen Manus. The
Manus of one Kalpa are given below :
(1) Svayambhuva (2) Svarocisa (3) Uttama (Auttami)
(4) Tamasa (5) Raivata (6) Gaksusa (7) Vaivasvata (8) Savarni (9) Daksasavarni (10) Brahmasavarni
(11) Dharmasavarni (12) Rudrasavarni (13) Raucyadevasavarni (14) Indrasavarni.
Each of the above Manus is described below :—
(1) Svapambhuva. a
(a) General. Svayambhuva was born as the spiritual
son of Brahma. This Manu got his name because he
was “Svayambhuva” or born from Brahma. He married
the goddess Sataripa, the spiritual daughter of Brahma.
After that, he went to the shore of the ocean of milk,
made an image of Mahadevi there and worshipped her
by chanting Vagbhava mantra and performed an. au
tere penance. After a hundred years of such Sears the
goddess was pleased. She appeared before Svayambhuva
lessed him to attain the
and granted him boons. She bless Se ion
‘ da
highest place in Heaven (Paramapa ) Vindhya mounvast progeny. Then the goddess went to Thy:
tain atid hecainie the deity of Vindhya. Svayaimbhuva
returned and started his reign by worshipping the
soddess. d th
= ae or alidasa says that the
famous work ‘‘Manusmrti’’. .
Kings of the Raghu dynasty lived in Smt ail
to the laws laid down by this Manu. (Devi Bhagavata,
ogee Skandha).
ther details. ici
(i) The Saptarsis of first Manvantara er
Angiras, Atri, Pulaha, Kratu, Pulastya an had vari
Devas are known as Yamas. The first aha Medhasons namely Agnidhra, Agnibahu, Me Sane am
tithi, Vasu, Jyotisman, Dyutiman, ae efarivenhie
ae and they ruled over the country: ( °
apter 7). into
(ii) Cenpaeae Prthu turned Svayambh are viking het
a calf and obtained medicine.from Bham! DY
as a cow. (Bhagavata, 4th Skandha).
author of the
names of the fourteen
MANVANTARA(M)
(iii) Born from Virat anda. (M.B, Adi Parva Chapter
l.. Verse 92):
(iv) Sage Cyavana married this Manu’s daughter.
(M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 66, Verse 46).
(v) This Manu taught Soma, the art of Caksusi. (M.B.
Adi Parva, Chapter 169, Verse 43).
(vi) Since this Manu had blessed the clouds ‘of the
Magadha country they sent periodical rains to that
region. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 21, Verse 10).
(vii) Manu came to the world, riding in the chariot of
the gods to see Arjuna’s fight. (M.B. Virata Parva,
Chapter 56, Verse 10).
(viii) This Manu had a wife named Sarasvati (Satariipa). (M.B. Udyoga Parva, Chapter 117, Verse 14).
(ix) This Manu lives in Bindusaras. (Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 7, Verse 46).
(x) He came at the time of Subrahmanya’s birth. (Salya
Parva, Ghapter 45, Verse 10).
-(xi) Manu held discussions with Siddhas. (Santi Parva,
Chapter 36). :
(xii) He was the King of men. (Santi Parva, Chapter
67, Verse 21).
(xiii) This Manu is called ‘Prajapati Manu’’. Once
he had a talk with Brhaspati on the subject of Dharma.
(Santi Parva, Chapter 201).
(xiv) Upamanyu saw Svayambhuva Manu sitting by
the side of Siva. (Anugasana Parva, Chapter 14,
Verse 280).
(xv) He talked with the sage Suparna about the greatness of flowers, fumes, lights, offerings and cifts. (AdiParva, Chapter 65, Verse 45).
(2) Svarocisa.
(a) General. Svayambhuva had two great sons Priyavrata and Uttanapada. The second Manu was_the son
of Priyavrata and his name was Svarocisa. He was a
glorious and adventurous man. He went to the banks
of the river Kalindi, made a hermitage there, installed
an idol of Devi made of earth and offered worship most
fervently. At the end of 12 years of tapas when he ate only
dried leaves, Devi appeared before him in her dazzling
brilliance and blessed him. The name of this Devi was
‘‘—Dharinidevi”. After a reign of many years this King
went to Heaven. (Devi Bhagavata, 10th Skandha).
(b) Other Details.
(i) Paravatas and Tusitas were the Devas in this
Manvantara. The mighty Vipagcit was Devendra. ‘The
Saptarsis were Urjja, Stambha, Prana, Rama, Rsabha,
Niraya, and Parivan. Caitra, Kimpurusa and others
were the sons of Svarocisa Manu. (Visnu Purana, Part
3, Chapter 1).
(ii) In Harivarnsa, Chapter 7 we read that the
Saptarsis of this Manvantaram were Aurva, Stambha,
Kagyapa, Prana, Brhaspati, Datta and Niscyavana.
(iii)° Brahma taught this Manu, Satvatadharma.
Svarocisa taught this dharma to his son Sankhavadana.
(Santi Parva, Chapter 348, Verse 40).
(3) Auttami (Uttama).
(a) General. Uttama was also the son of Priyavrata.
ie went to Ganga tirtha and offered worship to Devi
for three years with Vagbija mantra. At the end of it,
Devi was pleased and blessed him with worthy sons and
a kingdom without the threat of enemies. After a happy
reign of many years, at the close of the Manvantara, he
reached the highest place in Heaven. (Devi Bhagavata,
10th Skandha).

MANVANTARA (M)
(b) Other details. Susanti was thename of the Devendra
of this Manvantara. ‘There were five groups of Devas,
namely Sudhamans, Satyas, Japas, Pratardanas and
Sivas, each group consisting of twelve Devas. The seven
sons of the sage Vasistha were the saptarsis of this
Manvantara. These seven sons of Vasistha by his wife
Urjja were Rajas, Gotra, Urdhvabahu, Savana, Anagha,
Sutapas and Sukra. Aja, Paragudipta and others were
the sons of the Manu Uttama. (Visnu Purana, Part I.
Chapter 1).
(4) Tamasa.
(a) General. The fourth Manu Tamasa was the son of
Priyavrata. That King performed penance to Devi on
the northern bank of the river Narmada with Kamaraja
mantra. As a result of Devi’s blessing, he obtained a
prosperous Kingdom and worthy sons. After a long
reign he attained heaven. (Devi Bhagavata, 10th
Skandha).
(4) Other details. At the time of this Manu, there were
four groups of Devas, namely—Suparas, Haris, Satyas,
and Sudhis. Each of these groups contained 27
Devas. Sibi who had performed a hundred yagas was
the Indra. The Saptarsis of this Manvantara were
Jyotirman, Prthu, Kavya, Caitra, Agnivanaka, and
Pivara and Nara. Khyati, Keturipa, Janujangha and
others were the sons of Tamasa Manu. (Visnu Purana,
Part I, Chapter 1).
(5) Raivata.
(a) General. The fifth Manu Raivata was the younger
brother of Tamasa. He worshipped Devi with Kamabija mantra on the banks of the river Kalindi, With the
blessing of Devi he ruled for many years and then
attained Heaven. (Devi Bhagavata, 10th Skandha).
(b) Other details. The name of the Indra of this
Aes ve Vibhu. ‘There were four groups of
—Amitabhas, Bhitarayas, Vaikunthas and
Sumedhas. Each of these Sroups contained fourteen
Devas. The Saptarsis of Raivata Manvantara were—
Hiranyaroma, Vedasri, Urdhvabahu Vedabahu
Sudama, Parjanya and Mahamuni. The sons of Raivata Manu, Balabandhu, Sambhavya, Satyaka and
Saatertt mighty Kings. (Visnu Purana, Part 3,
(6) Céksusa.
(a) General, ‘This Manu was the son of Anga. Once
he went to the Rajarsi (royal saint) Pulaha and pra ed
for prosperity, mastery of the whole world invincible
power and profound scholarship. Pulaha sent him to
Devi. The Rajarsi taught him the worship of Devi
After acquiring the mantra Caksusa went to the
banks of the river Viraja and offered worship to Devi
At the end of twelve years, Devi appeared before
him and blessed him with “‘Manuhood”, mastery of the
Manu kingdom and brilliant sons After many years
he distributed his kingdoms among his sons and at last
attained “Devipada”. (Devi Bhagavata, Dagama
Skandha).
(6) Other detatls. oo, ' ; 7
(i) The following account is given in Visnu Purana,
Part I, Chapter 13, about the birth of Caksusa Manu.
Dhruva and his wife Sambhu had two sons, namely
Sisti and Bhavya. Succhaya, the wife of Sisti gave
birth to five sons, Ripu, Ripuiijaya; Vipra, Vrkala and
Vrkatejas, who were all sinless. Caksusa was born to
MANVANTARA (M)
Brhati, the wife of Ripu. Caksusa begot Manu by
Puskarini, daughter of Virana Prajapati. This was the
sixth Manu. By his wife Nadvala, the daughter of
Vairaja Prajapati, he had 10 sons, namely, Kuru,
Puru, Satadyumna, Tapasvi, Satyavan, Suci,_ Agnistoma, Atiratra, Sudyumna and Abhimanyu. Agneyi,
wife of Kuru, gave birth to six sons who were Anga,
Sumanas, Khyati, Kratu, Angiras and Sibi. Sunitha,
wife of Amga, gave birth to Vena. Prthu was the son of
Vena. He is also known as “Vainya’’.
(ii) The Indra of that period was Manojava. There
were five groups of Devas—Akhyas, Prasitas, Bhavyas,
Prthukas and Lekhas, each group consisting of eight
Devas. The Saptarsis of this Manvantara were—
Sumedhas, Virajas, Havisman, Uttama, Madhu,
Atinaman and Sahisnu. Satadyumna and other mighty
Kings were the sons of Caksusa Manu. (Visnu Purana,
Part I, Chapter 3).
(i111) The sons of this Manu became famous under the
name “‘Varisthas’” (M.B. Anugasana Parva, Chapter
18, Verse 20).
(7) Vaivasvata.
(a) General. We was born from Sarya. It is this Manu
who rules the world today. All living beings that we
see today were born from him. Vaivasvata Manu 18
Satyavrata Manu who escaped from the last deluge:
To save him Visnu took up the incarnation of Matsy@
(fish). Vaivasvata Manu was also the first of the Kings
ofthe Siarya varnéa (Solar Dynasty) who ruled ove!
Ayodhya,
(5) Other details. (i) In Devi Bhagavata, Saptama
Skandha, we see that the sons of Vaivasvata namely
Iksvaku, Nabhaga, Dhrsta, Saryati, Narisyanta,
Pramsu, Nrga, Dista, Kariisa and Prsadhra were also
called Manus. -
(1) This Manu worshipped Devi and received he!
blessing and attained Heaven after a long reign. (Dev! |
Bhagavata, 10th Skandha)
(ili) Vaivasvata Manu had another name, ‘‘Sraddhadeva.”” The Devas of this Manvantaram are Adityas,
Vasus and Rudras. The name of the Indra of this
period is Purandara. The Saptarsis are, Vasistha,
Kasyapa, Atri, Jamadagni, Gautama, Visvamitra an
Bharadvaja. The nine Dharmikas (virtuous ones)»
Iksvaku, Nrga, Dhrsta, Saryati, Narisyanta, Nabhaga,
Arista, Karisa and Prsadhra are the sons of Vaivasvata Manu. (Visnu Purana, Part 8, Chapter 1).
(iv) Ten sons were born to this Manu: who were Vena;
Dhrsnu, Narisyanta, Nabhaga, Iksvaku, Kariasa;
Saryati, lla, Prsadhra, and Nabhagarista. (M.B. Adi
Parva, Chapter 75, Verse 13): -
(v) Mahavisnu incarnated as Matsya for the sake of
Vaivasvata Manu. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 187).
) a —— Yogavidya from Sirya and Iksvaku
mceived it later from him. (M.B i
Chapter 122, Verse 3D). \ eee Ta
(vii) At the beginning of Tret3
i hone he oO retayuga,
: Satvata - Dharma”? to Manu eae Manu taught
it to Iksvaku for the protection of all creatures (M.B.
ant) Parva, Chapter 348, Verse 51).
(viii) The sage Gautama taught Sivasahasranama to
Vaivasvata Manu. (MB 65
17. Vere 77) (M.B. Anuéasana Parva, Chapter
Sirya taught
ee —

MANVANTARA (M)
(8) Sdvarni.
(a) General. Even in his previous birth he was a
devotee of Devi. In his former birth (during the
period of Svarocisa Manvantara) Savarni was born as
a King of Caitravamga under the name Suratha. The
origin of the dynasty known as Caitravam$a was as
follows :—Atri, son of Brahma had a son named
Nisakara. This Nigakara became an emperor by
performing Rajasiya. Emperor Nisakara had a son
Budha and Budha had a son named Caitra, both of
whom were greatly renowned. It was Caitra’s family
which lateron became the reputed Caitra dynasty.
The son of that Caitra was Viratha, Suratha was
the son of Viratha. This was the previous birth of
Savarni Manu. Suratha was a great hero and poet.
Once another King besieged his city and defeated him.
Suratha left his kingdom and went alone on horseback
and took shelter in a dense forest. While wandering
in the forest like a mad man with a broken heart, he
happened to reach the 4grama of the sage Sumedhas.
The sage advised bim to worship Devi in order to
retrieve his lost kingdom and prosperity. Accordingly
the King worshipped Devi who was pleased and
restored to him his kingdom and _ prosperity. Besides,
she blessed him that in his next birth he would become
Savarni, the King of the Solar dynasty and would be
revered as the eighth Manu. Thus the eighth Manu
Savarni will be the second birth of Suratha. (Devi
Bhagavata, 10th Skandha). ;
(6) Other details. Savarni is also the son of Surya.
How, he came to be called Savarniis explained below:--
Surya had three children Manu, Yama and Yami by
Samjfia, the daughter of Vigvakarma. This Manu was
Vaivasvata Manu, the seventh Manu. Unable to bear
the intense heat of Surya, Samjfia once sent her maid
Chaya to Sirryain her own disguise and went to the forest
for tapas. Sirya had three children by Chaya, »analcara, another Manu and Tapati. This Manu is known as
Savarni who will become the eighth Manu. In hs time
there will be three groups of Devas—Sutapas, /imitabhas and Mukhyas. Each of th
twelve persons. The Saptarsis 0
are Diptiman, Galava, Rama, Krpa, in en
of Drona, Vyasa son of Parasara aN" sii
la ' Indra. Virajas,
Mahabali, son of Virocana will be the ne a ee
Urvariyan, Nirmoka and others are the Oe art Il
the sons of Savarni Manu. (Visnu Purana, s
Chapter 2).
(9). Daksa Savarni. .
General. At the time of this Man
groups of Devas namely, Paras,
Sudharmans. ' Each of the grouPs Cc
A sis of this Manvante scar
Hee a at Vasu, Medhatithi, Jy0t gre va
Satya. Dhrtaketu. Diptiketu, Paficabasie 1 visnu
Prthugravas are the sons of Daksasavarnt
Purana, Part III, Chapter 2).
(10). Brahma Savarni. Devas are SudhaGeneral. In this Manvantara, the ups will contain
mans and Visuddhas. Each of these ee anti. The
100 Devas. Their Indra will be os Satya Tapomirti,
Saptarsis will be Havisman, ae Brahma Savarnl
Nabhaga, Apratimaujas and Satya Suksetra, Uttamwill have ten sons, three of whom at% “""
ese groups will consist of
f the eighth Manvantara
Agvatthama son
u there are three
Maricigarbhas and
ontains 12 Devas.
MANVANTARA(M)
aujas and Bhitisena who will become Kings. (Visnu
Purana, Part III, Chapter 2).
(11). Dharma Sdavarni.
General. In this Manvantara there will be three
groups of Devas namely, Vihangamas, Kamagas and
Nirvanaratis, each of the groups consisting of 30 Devas.
Vrsa, Agnitejas, Vapusman, Ghrni, Aruni, Havisman,
and Anagha will be the Saptarsis. The sons of Dharma
Savarni viz., Sarvatraga, Sudharma, Devanika and
others will be the kings of that time.
(12). Rudra Savarnz.
General. This Manu is the son of Rudra. The Indra of
this Manvantara will be Rtudhaman. There will be
five groups of Devas namely, Haritas, Rohitas, Sumanases, Sukarmans and Suparas. Each group will contain 10 Devas. Saptarsis.are Tapasvi, Sutapas, Tapomiirti, Taporati, Tapodhrti, Tapodyuti and Tapodhana.
The sons of this Manu, Devavan, Upadeva and Deva-
$restha will be mighty kings. (Visnu Purana, Part III,
Chapter 2).
(13). Raucyadeva Savarni. (Ruci).
General. There will be three groups of Devas during this
period called Sutramans, Sukarmans and Sudharmans.
Each of these groups will contain 33 Devas. The mighty
Divaspati will be their Indra. Nirmoha, Tattvadarsi,
Nisprakampya, Nirutsuka, Dhrtiman, Avyaya and
Sutapas are the Saptarsis of that period. Citrasena,
Vicitra and other sons of this Manu will be kings.
(Visnu Purana, Part III, Chapter 2).
(14). Indra Sdvarni (Bhaumt).
General. The Indra of this Manvantara will be Suci.
Under his control there will be five groups of Devas.
They are Gaksusas, Pavitras, Kanisthas, Bhrajakas and
Vacavrddhas. The Saptarsis of this period are Agnibahu, Suci, Sukra, Magadha, Agnidhra, Yukta and
Jita. At that time the sons of the Manu who would rule
the earth will be Uru, Gambhirabuddhi and others.
(Visnu Purana, Part III, Chapter 2).
5). ‘Some more details. Fourteen Manus have _ been
mentioned above. Of them, the seventh Manu, Vatvasyata Manu is the Head of the present Manvantrara.
Some general facts about the Manus are given below: -
1) The six Manus after the eighth one namely,
Daksasavarni, Merusavarni, Suryasavarni, Candrasavarni, Rudrasavarni and Visnusavarni are
respectively the re-births of Kariisa, Prsadhra, Nabhaga, Dista, Saryati and Trisanku who were the
sons of Vaivasvsata Manu. There is a story about their
taking re-births. All the six persons mentioned above
were once offering worship to the idol of Devi on the
banks of the river Kalindi. After twelve years, Devi
appeared, under the name of Bhramarambika and blessed
them that in their next births they would become
rulers of Manvantaras. (Devi Bhagavata, 10th Skandha).
2) Itis said that the four Manus, Svarocisa, Uttama,
Tamasa and Raivata belonged to Priyavrata’s family.
It was because Priyavrata who was a RaAjarsi offered
tapas to Visnu that four Manus were born in his family.
(Visnu Purana. Part III, Chapter 1).
3) Itis the power of Visnu that dominates all the
Manvantaras as the basic divinity. In the first Svayambhuva Manvantara it was a part of that power of Visnu
itself that originated as Yajfiapurusa in Abhiti. After
that when Svarocisa Manvantara came it was again that
divinity that took its origin in Tusita as Ajita among the

MANY AVATI
Tusitas. In Uttama Manvantara that divinity Tusita him
self was born again under the name of Satya as the son of
Satya in the group of Devas called Satyas. When Tamasa
Manvantara began, that divinity was born again as the
son of Harya as a Hariin the group of Devas called
Haris. It was that divinity Hari himself . who was born
in Sambhiiti under the name of Manasa among the
Devas called Raivatas in Raivata Manvantara. In Caksusa
Manvantara that Visnu Bhagavan took birth in Vikunthi
as one of the Vaikunthas. In the present Vaivasvata
Manvantara, Visnu has incarnated in Aditi as Vamana,
the son of Kafyapa. That great Vamana conquered
all the three worlds and presented them to Devendra.
(Visnu Purana, Part III, Chapter 2).
Besides the fourteen Manus mentioned above, certain
other Manus are also referred to in the Puranas. Some
details about them are given below: —
(I) ft is seen from Valmiki Ramayana, Aranya Kanda,
14th Sarga, verse 11, that Kagyapa had a wife named
Manu.
(2).There is a reference to a Rajarsi (Saintly king)
named Manu in Rgveda, first Mandala, 16th Anuvaka,
112th Sakta.
(3) A son named Manu was born to the Agni Tapa or
Paficajanya. This Manu has another name Bhanu. He
had three wives named Supraja, Brhadbhasa and Niéa.
Six sons were born to him by the first two wives. By
his third wife he had one daughter and seven sons,
(M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 221, Verse 4).
(4) In Mahabharata, Saati Parva, Chapter 57, verse 45.
we find a reference to another Manu named Pracetas.
MANYAVATI. Wife of Aviksit, son of Karandhama.
Manyavati daughter of Bhimaraja was carried away by
force by Aviksit from the marriage hall on the marriage
day. (Markandeya Purana).
MANYU I. A Vedic god. The origin of this god is described in Brahma Purana as follows :—
Once a terrible war broke out between Devas and
Asuras. ‘The Devas who were defeated, went to the
Gautami river valley and performed penance to Siva
praying for victory. Siva produced Manyu from his
third eye and presented him to the Devas. In the
battle which followed they defeated the Asuras with the
help of Manyu.
MANYU II. A king of the Piru dynasty. Bhagavata, 9th
Skandha states that Manyu, the son of Bharadvaja, had
five sons including Brhatksaya.
MANYUMAN. Second son of the Agni Bhanu.
Vana Parva, Chapter 221, Verse 11).
MARANA (M) (DEATH). Death is a goddess whose
name is Mrtyu. The Puranas state that there was no
death in the world before the birth of this goddess. In
Mahabharata, Drona Parva, Chapter 53 there is the
following story about the circumstances in which
Brahma created me Pin
— ings mu tip 1€a endatess y On earth. As the
need ier . the goddess Earth found their weight wet
much for her to bear. She went weeping to Brahma and
prayed for his help. At that time, Rudra and Narada
were present in Brahma's assembly. Brahma said that
he did not like destroying living beings. _ Because of
the pressure of Rudra and N arada, Brahma created out
of Vigvaprakasa (Cosmic Light) a woman. She
was born from the south and Brahma gave her the
(M.B.
MARICA I
name “Mrtyu’’. He gave her permission to destroy
human beings.
When she heard that she was to kill living beings, she shed
tears and Brahma gathered those tears. She went to
Dhenukasrama and other places and performed tapas. At
last Brahma called her back and assured her that it was
not against Dharma to kill living beings. He changed
the tears he had gathered from her face into the various
diseases and returned them to her. He gave those diseases and the god Yama as her companions. Thus the
goddess Mrtyu started her dance of destruction. (See
also under the word PUNARJANMA).
MARDAMAHARSI. One of the sons of Vigvamitra who
was a Brahmavadi. (Sloka 57, Chapter 4, Anugdsana
Parva).
MARGANAPRIYA. A daughter born to Kasyapa Prajaped <j his wife Pradha. (Sloka 45, Chapter 65, Adi
arva).
MARGASIRSAMASA. The month of Dhanu (December). The month has got great Puranic importance.
Ifone lives taking food only once during the whole of
this month one will be free from all sins and diseases.
(Sloka 17, Chapter 106, Anugasana Parva). If on the
Dvadasi day in this month one fasts the whole day
and night and worships Kegava one will get the
benefit of conducting an Asvamedha yajfia. (Sloka 3,
Chapter 109, Anugasana Parva).
MARICA. A Danava. There is a reference to him in
Uttara Ramayana.
MARICA f. The uncle of Ravana.
1). Birth. On the banks of the river Sarayi, there were
two states lying adjacent called Malada and Karisa.
The great sages conducted Jaladhara (showering of
water) on the head of Indra to absolve him of his sin
of killing Vrtrasura at this place. At that time Mala (excreta) and Karissa (spittings)of Indra fell at those places
and so they got the name of Malada and Kariisa. At
that place was born after a few years a demoness named
Tataka who had the strength of a thousand elephants.
A demon called Sunda married Tataka and she got
two sons named Marica and Sub4ahu. (Sarga 24, Bala
Kanda, Valmiki Ramayanaand Bala Kanda, Kamba
Ramayana).
2) Marica in his previous birth. Marica was the servant
of the gate-keepers of Vaikuntha. One day Mahavisnu
was displeased by a conduct of his and he cursed him
to be born as a demon on earth. But he added that
Maricawould get salvation from the curse when he was
killed by Sri Rama in which capacity Visnu would in-.
carnate soon. He would then return to Vaikuntha to
his original place. That was how Marica was born as
the uncle of Ravana.
3) Asrama life. Marica arid Subahu were two inseparable brothers. They learned all tactics of war and their
hobby was to torment the innocent sages of the forests
(Sarga 19, Balakanda, Valmiki Ramayana). When
the exploits of Marica became unbearable, Vis vamitra
brought Rama and Laksmana from Ayodhya for help.
The instant Marica heard the fierce twang of Rama’s
bow he fled to the other shore of the sea. From that
day onwards Marica grew matted hair and wore
barks of trees and spent his life in an arama. (Sargas
35 and 36, Aranyakanda, Valmiki Ramayana).
4) Death. When Rama and Laksmana were living in
the Dandakaranya with Sita they were annoyed by a

MARICA It 487 MARICI I
demoness named Sirpanakha. In the fight that ensued and Parniman by Kala. This Kasyapa was the original
very many demons were killed. Sirpanakha complained ancestor of all living beings. But Pirniman’s family did
| to Ravana who decided to kill Rama and carry away not become well-known. Purniman had two sons, Virajas
4 sita. For this he sought the help of his uncle Marica. and Vigvaga and a daughter Devakulya. Devakulya
Flying in his golden Vimana and crossing mountains and washed the feet of Mahavisnu and merged with Akasa
oceans he approached Marica and told him of his plan. Ganga.
Marica who was aware of the force of Ramabana dis- Urna was another wife of Marici. Six sons were born
suaded Ravana from such a venture. But Ravana to Urna.. Under a curse of Brahma they were born first
persisted in his plan and gave Marica the following as the sons of Hiranyakagipu andin their next birth
as the sons of Vasudeva and Devaki. It was these six
children who were born as Sri Krsna’s elder brothers
whom Karnsa killed immediately after their birth.
instructions : “Become a golden deer with beautiful
white spots all over the body and roam about near the
asrama of Rama for his wife Sita to see. I am sure Sita
will request her husband Rama to catch hold of you. (See under Krsna).
Rama and Laksmana will follow you and Sita will be Marici had another wife named Sambhiti. She gave
left alone. I will then carry away Sita as Rahu takes birth to Paurnamasa. In Visnu Purana, Part I, Chapter
Candrika (moonlight) and live happily with her. I will 10, we see that Paurnamasa who was a Mahatma had
be contented if I can then tease Rama who will be two sons Virajas and Parvata. Dharmavrata was yet
that it would be better to die at the hands of Rama Dharmavati by Dharmadeva.
| a e
| lamenting over his separation from his wife”. Thinking another wife of Marici. She was a daughter born to
| d. Marici lived happily for long
than at the hands of Ravana, Ma@rica agreed to do as 3) Dharmavrata curse
his nephew desired. with his wife Dharmavrata. Once he returned from
Ravana and Marica came near the 4grama of Rama in the forest, carrying darbha grass, flowers etc.
Ravana’s aerial chariot. Marica on alighting from it He was tired after a long walk. After taking food, he
took the form of a beautiful fawn and entered the pre- wanted his wife to massage his legs. While she was
cincts of the agrama. The false fawn was capable of massaging him Marici fell asleep. Just then Brahma
attracting the attention of anybody. It is described happened to come there. Dharmavrata was in a fix.
thus : “It appeared as a wonder to those who saw it. She had to attend to her husband and at the same time
receive Brahma with due respect. She could not leave
It ine golden in colour with blue horns with white | h
lines on it. The ears were like leaves of blue lotus and her husband’s guru (Sire). It was her duty to honour
the face was of the colour of red lotus. The lips were like him properly. in
sapphire and the body beautifully shaped with sides At last she got up and welcomed Brahma, offering
like yellow flowers. The waist’ was thin and well-shaped him the customary honours. Meanwhile Marici woke
s wife near him cursed her to be
and a rain-bow-coloured tail adorned its back. The up and not finding hi
whole body was silver-spotted and the deer was a feast turned into a stone. Dharm
for the eyes of anybody.” at the curse pleaded innocence
_ The deer went and grazed in places where it could be that she had been honouring his g
seen by Sita. It would run away from the 4grama and that he would incur the curse of Siva. a
graze hidden from Sita but would .come back again to Under Marici’s curse Dharmavrata was ee Nahe
the vision of Sita. It would mix with the deer of the him. She performed penance in the midst of i 2 Aa$rama for some time and run away from them to dis- visnu appeared before her and asked ea’ Ww a wee
tant places. Like a butterfly it flitted about always she wanted. She prayed that her curse mig A = ah
trying to attract the attention of Sita. Other deer appro- Visnu replied :—‘‘It was Marici who curse ou ‘That
ached it but on getting its scent flew away from it. The curse cannot be withdrawn. You will be turne into a
false deer suppressing the demon-instinct in him to kill sacred stone. Your name ‘“Dharmavrata” will be ~
and eat the animals which came near it played well the changed into ‘Devavrata’”’. In future, that stone will
role of a fawn, become famous under the name ‘‘Devavrata’” or DevaSita was enamoured of the deer and expressed to Rama éjla’. Brahma, Visnu, Maheévara and goddesses like
her desire to get it. Rama followed it and finding it Laksmi will dwell in that stone.” a
keeping a distance always got suspicious and shot it — After saying this, Mahavisnu disappeared. epee
down with an arrow. The deer cried “Ha Laksmana” Dharmadeva held this Devagila above the deni n eae
and fell down dead. The cry was intended to mislead and the place became famous under the name 0 aya
Laksmana and draw him also away from Sita. tirtha”’. (See under Gayatirtha).
(Chapters 43-44, Aranya Kanda, Valmiki Ramayana). 4) Other details. i
MARICA II. Kasyapaprajapati. Marici was the father (i) Marici had participated in the celebration cone
of Kagyapa and so Kasyapa was known as Marica also. ed with Arjuna’s birth. (M.B. Adi Parva; Chapter 142,
avrata who was distressed
and explained to him
uru. She warned him
(Sarga 46, Valmiki Ramayana)
MART 7 yar is a Verse D2). B.
aa I. A Maharsi (sage) born from Brahma’s (ii) Marici was a member of Indra’s assembly. (M.B
1) Birth and Genealogy. The six great sages born from Sabha Parva, Chapter 7, veo a on connected with
Brahma’s mind were :—Marici, Angiras, Atri, Pulastya. (iii) Marici attended the ce Salya Parva, Chapter 49,
Pulaha and Kratu, according to Mahabharata, Adi Subrahmanya’s birth. (M.B.
Parva. Verse 10). -.* yvicited Bhisma
| 2) Domestic life. Marici had several wives and children. (iv) After the Bharata Yuddha, a oe ya (MB.
He married Kala, the daughter of Kardama Prajapati who was lying on “Sara Sayy2 (be
by his wife Devahiti. Marici had two sons KaSsyapa Santi Parva, Chapter 47, Verse 10).

MARICI Il
(v) Mahabharata, Santi Parva, Chapter 334, Verse 35,
mentions that Marici is a Prajapati.
(vi) Marici is one of the group of sages known as Citragikhandins. (M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter 335, Verse 29).
(vii) Mahabharata, Santi Parva, Chapter 340, Verse
44, describes Marici as one of the Astaprakrtis.
(vill) Marici once visited Dhruva who was. performing
penance and gave him advice. (Visnu Purana, Part I,
Chapter 11).
MARICI II. A celestial woman. In Mahabharata, Adi
Parva, Chapter 122, Verse 62 we find that she attended —
a dance at the celebrations at the time of Arjuna’s
birth. |
MARICI III. An author of Dharmagastra. His statements are quoted in Apararka, Smrticandrika, Mitaksara and other works.
MARISA I. A nymph created as a maiden of the Flora
(See under Kandu).
MARISA II. A river of Purdnic fame. (Sloka 36,
Chapter 9, Bhisma Parva) ..
MARISA. A place of habitation of ancient’ Bharata.
(Sloka 69, Chapter 9, Bhisma Parva).
~ MARJARA. Son of Jambavan. It is said in Brahmapurana
that the marjaras (cats) have their origin from this
son of Jambavan.
MARKA. See under the word Sandamarka.
MARKANDEYA. The son of Mrkandu. He was a great _
devotée of Siva.
1) Genealogy. Bhrgu, son of Brahma, begot of his wife
Khyati a daughter named Laksmi and two sons named
_ Dhata and Vidhata.
Dhata and Vidhata married Ayati and Niyati daughters
of Mahameru. Dhata begot of his wife Ayati a son
named Prana and Niyati bore Vidhata a son named
Mrkandu. Markandeya was the son of Mrkandu and
Vedas iras was the son of Markandeya. | Se.
2) Birth, Mrkandu did not have sons for a long time and
so he performed penance for several years to please Siva
to get a son. Siva appeared before him in person and
asked him thus “Do you desire to have a virtuous, wise and
pious son who would live up to sixteen years or a dullwitted evil-natured son who would live long ?” Mrkandu
chose the first type and soon a son was born. He was
named Markandeya. Even from boyhood Markandeva
knew all the Vedas and Astras. His pleasing eae ces
got the approval of his teachers and the boy was liked b
one and all. But the parents were sad and whenever thie
looked at their son a gloom spread over their face The
secret of the short span of his life was hidden from him
The sixteenth year was fast approaching and one day
unable to control their grief they wept before him. Markandeya asked them the reason why they wept. Mrkandu
with tears running down his cheeks told him the story,
From. that day onwards Markandeya started performing
penance wearing barks of trees for his dress and growing
matted hair. The boy was soon engrossed in severe aus.
terities.
The day of his death came and _ the boy sat before the
idol of Siva in deep meditation. The servants of the sod
of Death could not approach Markandeya for the radiation from him was too hot for them. So Yama, the god
of Death, himself came to fetch him. Then Markandeya
crying loudly for help embraced the idol before him.
Yama threw his rope in a loop and it went and circled
round the idol also. Angry Siva rose from the idol and
MARKANDEYA
| coming down killed Yama to save the child. From that
day onwards Siva got the names Mrtyufijaya and Kalakala. After that at the request of the devas Siva gave
life to Yama again and made Markandeya to be of six-
‘teen years for ever.
3) Penance of Markandeya. ‘The Puranas state that after
getting the blessing from Siva, Markandeya lived for ten
crores of years. While he wasin deep meditation six
Manvantaras passed away. When Markandeya continued his meditation to the seventh Manvantara Indra
got frightened and he made an attempt to abort the
penance of Markandeya. Indra sent his troops of
Gandharvas, nymphs, Manmatha and Vasanta to the
asrama of Markandeya. The aframa of Markandeya
was at a place which was on the northern side of the
Himalayas and was famous by the presence there of
the river Puspabhadra and the rock Citra. The agents
-of Indra came there and tried to entice him with many
temptations. Beautiful celestial maidens danced around
the asrama. Flowers fell from their hair when their
waists shook by the weight of their heavy breasts. Enchanting girls played with balls here and there. As they
played the bracelets on their waists fell down and the
thin garments that hid their bodies flew up showing an
alluring nakedness. Kama (God of Love) sent his arrows .
at that time against the sage. But Markandeya sat unconcerned as rigid as arock and Indra accepted defeat.
When Indra and kis troops returned disappointed Mahavisnu with many sages went to Markandeya. He awoke
from his meditation and worshipped Visnu.
4) Vision of Pralaya. On one evening at dusk Markandeya was sitting at Puspabhadratira when from somewhere a wind began to blow. The’ wind increased 17
strength and the sky became covered with clouds. The
place resounded with peals of thunder and soon it began
to rain. Rains became heavy. Rivers became flooded an
water-level in the oceans rose. Everything around was
submerged in water and Markandeya alone stood there
with his matted hair swinging in the wind. It was impossible to know the directions and Markandeya starte
walking. He fell into whirlpools but was the next instant
thrown up on to the top of surging waves. Then he s4W
on thestop of a high wave a banyan tree. Ona branc
on the north-east of the tree he saw an infant lying, devouring the darkness by its effulgence. He was attracted
to the infant by its vital force and went inside the infant
as it inhaled. Inside the belly of the kid Markandey4
had a vision of the entire universe. He saw the sky; the
horizon, the stars, the oceans, the mountains expanses of
land, Suras, Asuras, forests and all that the univers®
contained in its proper set-up. He saw passing befor®
~ eyes the elements, the Yugas and the Manvantar a
ter some time he was thrown out by an exhalation 9
the infant. He stood on the waters. The old bany4?
tree was still there. An infant was stil] lying on a leaf 0”
that tree. Markandeya then knew it was MahavisnuU:
He rushed to embrace the child; but .
; the child ear
i he reached it, Markandeya a eied Mea
9) Parvati and Paramesvara com
Mahavisnu disappeared from his vision he felt he was
sitting _at Puspabhadratira and he again went into
meditation. At that time Parvati and Paramegvara came
that way and appeared before Ma e
worshipped them and they bot arkandeya. The sag
h blessed Markandey4
e to Markandeya. Whe?

MARKANDEYA
and said “‘Every desire of yours will be fulfilled. You
will never be rugous or grey-haired and will live virtuous and famous till the end of tle world. Omniscience
will be an asset for you”. After having said so much
Parvati and Paramesvara disappeared. The Puranic belief is that the realised soul of Markandeya is moving
oe in universe. (10th Skandha, Chapters 8 to 11,
agavata).
6). Details from Mahabharata relating to Markandeya.
(1) This sage shone in the court of Dharmaputra.
(Sloka 15, Chapter 4, Sabha Parva) .
(ii) He sitsin the court of Brahma and worships him
(Sloka 12 , Chapter 11, Sabha Parva). |
(iii) Once Markandeya gave Dharmopadefa to ~ the
Pandavas. (Chapter 29, Vana Parva).
(iv) Markandeya sitting on the banks of the river Payosni sang praises about river Payosm and king Nrga.
(Sloka 5, Chapter 88, Vana Parva).
(v) Once Markandeya narrated to Dharmaputra stories
about Kings and Rsis. (Chapters 186 ‘to 232, Vana
Parva). | | |
(vi) Markandeya had a vision of
(Chapter 188, Vana Parva). }
(vii) This sage entered the belly of Balamukunda.
(Sloka 100, Chapter 188, Vana Parva). gl
(viii) Markandeya gave a description of Kaliyuga.
(Sloka 7, Chapter 190, Vana Parva). . _
(ix) He described at another time the incarnation of
Kalki. (Sloka‘93, Chapter 19, Vana Parva). AYA
(x) Once Markandeya narrated the story of ‘Tripuravadha to Dharmaputra. (Sloka 2, Chapter 33; Karna
Parva). | : :
(xi) Markandeya was also one among the several
sages who visited Bhisma
(Sloka 11, Chapter 47, Santi Parva). _ joe
(xii) Markandeya learnt Sahasranama (thousand
names) of Siva from Naciketas and taught the same to
Upamanyu. (Sloka 79, Chapter 17, Anusasana Parva) .
(xiii) Once Markandeya discussed with Narada topics
on many different subjects. (Daksinatya Patha,
Chapter, 22, Anusasana Parva).
(xiv) Once Markandeya explained
flesh as ‘food. (Sloka 37; “Chapter
pane - of Markandeya was
xv) The name of the wife. 0 arkan¢ |
ieee. (Sloka 4, Chapter 146, Anusasana ie a
(xvi) Yudhisthira worshipped Markandeya also es ae
he worshipped great sages before Cae hata
Mahaprasthana. (Sloka 12,
Parva, M.B.). stewing synonymé fe
(xvii) Mahabharata gives the followin i
Mase lenavaRiaeeava, Bhargavasattama, Bhrgukula
Pe srahmarsi and Waprant
§4rdila, Bhrgunandana, Brahm holy place. This
the great deluge.
dthe evils of taking
115, Anusasana
Chapter ] ’
MARKANDEYA: (M). A famow |
e+ je : a th of
place is situated about sixteen aan aet 4 Comat
the ea ‘aetld get the benefit
Kaéi ata place where
Not only that, | he would
meet, He who visits this plac
of doing an Agnistomayajia. ter 34
lift the belie of his family. (Sloka uae *
Vana Parva). One of thts eighteen
MARKANDEYAPURANSA. yO
Puranas. The number of granthas in 1 |
It contains a critical study of Dharma
It is considered to be very good to give
t is ninethousand.
and Adharma.
this Purana as
lying on his bed of arrows.
MARUTS
gift on the full-moon day in the month of Karttika
(November). (Chapter 272, Agni Purana ).
MARKANDEYASAMASYAPARVA. A sub-Parva of
the Vana Parva of Mahabharata. This contains
chapters 82 to 242 of Vana Parva.
MARMAN. According to Indian Sastras there are 108
Marmans in the body of a living being. Of these the
most important are forehead, eyes, eye-brows, . armpits, shoulders heart, chin etc. Bhavisya Purana,
Chapter 34 says that a snake-bite or a heavy blow on
any one of these marmans would prove fatal.
MARTTIKAVANA (M).. An ancient country in
Bharata. During the time of the Pandavas this country
was ruled by Kirig Salya. (Sloka 14, Chapter 16, Vana
Parva). Paragurama killed all the Ksatriyas of this
country. (Sloka 12, Chapter 70, Drona Parva).
Arjuna once made the son of Krtavarma the King of
this country. (Sloka 69, Chapter 77, Mausala Parva).
MARUI. Acking of the Iksvaku dynasty, the father of
Prasugruta and son of Sighra. He had become
“Cirafjivi’ (immortal) by his Yogic power. According
to Bhagavata Purana, all Ksatriya families’ would
perish in Kaliyuga. At that time, Maru would come
back to’ the world to revive the Ksatriya race.
(Bhagavata, 9th Skandha).
MARU II. A’ Videha king of the. Nimi dynasty.
(Bhagavata, 9th Skandha) .
MARU III. One of the chief lieutenants of Narakasura.
He was slain by Sri Krsna. |
MARUBHUMI (MARUDHANVA). The ancient
name of the present Rajasthan. In Mahabharata,
Sabha Parva, Chapter 32, Verse 9 we see that Nakula
had won a victory over Marudhanva during his
triumphal march over the western country. Kamyakavana in which is included Trnabindu sarovara, is in
Marudhanva. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 258,
Verse 13). Marudhanva was also known as
‘“Marvata”’. ‘The sage Uttar.ka lived in Marvata.
In Mahabharata, ASvamedha Parva, Chapters D3) 0+
and 55 it is stated that once Sri Krsna showed his
Viévariipa to this sage at Marvata. :
MARUDHA. A country of Puranic fame. Sahadeva
conquered ‘this place while he was on his victory march
to the south. (Sloka 14, Chapter 31, Sabha Parva).
MARUTA. The fortynine Vayus. (For details see
under DITI).
MARUTA.(M). An. ancient place of habitation of
‘south Bharata. Those who stood on the right side of
the Krauficaruna Vyiha (a battle array) constructed
by Dhrstadyumna in the Kuruksetra battle were the
‘people of Maruta from south Bharata. (Sloka 57,
Chapter 50, Bhisma Parva).
MARUTAGANATIRTHA. ( MARUDGANATIRTHA )
A sacred place, (M.B. Anusasana Parva, Chapter 25;
Verse 38). | :
MARUTANTAVYA. One of the sons of Visvamitra.
(Sloka'54, Chapter 4, Anusdsana Parva) .
MARUTASANA. _A soldier of Subrahmanya. (Sloka
62, Chapter 45, Salya Parva).
MARUTASKANDHA. An army of the Devas. The
commander of the forces was Subrahmanya. (Sloka
55, Chapter 231, Vana Parva).
MARUTS. .In the Puranas there are references: to 49
gods who.are known as ‘“Maruts”. All of them are
the sons of KaSyapa. The story of how thé child‘ in ~

MARUTTA I
Diti’?s womb was cut into 49 pieces which became 49
Maruts. is given in Chapter 71 of Vamana Purana as
follows:
Kagyapa’s first wife Aditi became the mother of Devas
and his second wife Diti became the mother of Daityas.
The chief of the Devas was Indra and the chiefs of
Daityas were Hiranyaksa and Hiranyakasipu. At the
request of Indra, Hiranyaksa and Hiranyakagipu were
slain by Mahavisnu. Diti who was grieved at the death
of her sons, approached Kagyapa and requested him
to give her a son who would be strong enough to kill
Indra. Kasyapa told her that if she could perform
tapas for 10,000 Divyavarsas with due observances,
she would get a son who would be able to kill Indra
and conquer the three worlds. He gave her a long list
of conditions to be observed during the tapas, some of
which were as follows :—Do not injure any creature;
do not curse; do not tell lies; do not cut nails or hair;
do not touch any unclean object; do not get angry, do
not speak to wicked people; do not wear soiled clothes;
do not wear garlands used by others; do not eat what
is left over by another; do not eat meat touched by a
Sadra woman. Putting on clean, white dress, carrying
auspicious substances, everyday before breakfast, cows,
Brahmanas, goddess Laksmi and Kaégyapa_ himself
should be worshipped.” This observance is known as
‘Pumsavana.”’ He said that if she performed the tapas
with this austere observance, a son capable of killing
Indra would be born to her.
Diti started the observance as advised by her husband.
Ka¢ yapa left for Udaya mountain. After his departure,
Indra came to the Asrama and pretending friendship
offered to serve Diti as an attendant. Diti accepted his
offer and allowed him to serve her. One day Diti who
was utterly tired fell asleep and Indra took advantage
of this opportunity and gained entrance into her womb
through her nostrils. He cut the child in Diti’s womb
with his weapon Vajra into seven pieces. At that time
the child cried aloud and Indra said to it ““Ma ruda’”’
which means ‘‘Do not cry”, Hecut each of the seven
pieces again into seven pieces and thus 49 Maruts were
born out of the 49 pieces. Since Indra said ““Ma ruda”’
they came to be known as “Maruts”. All these
Maruts subsequently became Indra’s servants.
After this, Indra with his weapon came out of Diti’s
body. With joined palms he begged Diti’s pardon and
explained to her that he destroyed the child in her
womb since he was destined to be his (Indra’s) enem
MARUTTA I. A wealthy king who lived in Ketayilecs,
\. Genealogy. Descended from Visnu in the following
order :—Brahma, Marici, Kasyapa, Vivasvan, Vaivasvata Manu, Mahabahu, Prasandhi, Ksupa, Iksvaku
Virhga, Kalyana, Khaninetra, Suvarcas, Karandhama
and Marutta.
2) How Marutta got gold. As soon as Marutta became
king he began to perform a Yaga. Money was required
for it. He was puzzled as to how to raise funds. Besides, Indra was trying to obstruct the Yaga. At last
he consulted Narada who told him that Brhaspati’s
brother Sarnvartaka was performing tapas in the forest
and if Marutta approached him, he would give him
enough money for this purpose. So Marutta went to
Samvartaka. He advised Marutta to worship Siva.
Accordingly Marutta went to Kailasa and got plenty
of gold by worshipping »1va and returned with it and
MARUTTA I
began his Yaga. In spite of their efforts, Indra and other’
gods were not able to spoil Marutta’s Yaga. After the
Yaga Marutta stored up the surplus wealth’ in the
neighbourhood of Himalayas where his capital was
situated.
After the Bharata Yuddha, Dharmaputra was in need
of money to re-establish his administration and for
conducting an Agvamedha yaga. At that time sage
Vyasa informed him about the gold which Marutta
had left in the neighbourhood of the Himalayas.
It was by fetching that gold that the Pandavas conducted their Agvamedhayaga. (M.B. Aévamedha Parva,
Chapters 3-10).
3) Marutta and Ravana. Once Ravana started on
a triumphal tour in his Puspaka Vimana with his
followers. It was at that time that Marutta was performing his famous Yaga. The various gods were also
present on that occasion. Alarmed at the sight of
Ravana who was invincible by virtue of a boon he had
received, the gods assumed the shape of different
animals and birds. Indra became a peacock, Dharmaraja (Yama) became a crow; Kubera became 4
chameleon; Varuna transformed himself into a swat,
and so on. Ravana entered the precincts of the Yajfi@
and said to Marutta :—“Either you fight with
me, or else admit defeat from me.” To this Marutta
replied calmly :—“May I know who you are?
Ravana answered with a smile ofcontempt :— ‘“‘l am
amused at your strange pretence ! Do you mean to S4y
that youdo not know Ravana who is the younge!
brother of Kubera ? There is no one but you im 4
the three worlds, who does not know me. I have wo”
the Puspakavim4na after defeating my elder brother.’
Marutta retorted with bitter irony :— ‘“‘As a younger!
brother who has defeated his elder brother, you ar
certainly a great man. There is no praiseworthy hero
equal to you in all these three worlds. Do you brag
that you have defeated your elder brother ? I do not
know whether you have received the boon by your
righteous conduct. I have not heard the stories which
you have told just now. You wicked fellow, stop there !
I don’t think that you will return alive! Saying
this Marutta took his bow and arrows and got ready
for a fight.
But Sathvartaka stopped Marutta saying “O King
If you would please heed my advice, do not prepare
for a fight here. We have started ‘‘Mahe<varasatra’
If we do not bring it to a conclusion, the whole family
will come to anend. One who performs this Y4g4
should not be engaged in a fight. He should not eve?
become a victim to anger. This Raksasa (Ravana) is
invincible. Your victory is doubtful.” At this;
Marutta put down his. bow and began to occupy
aol again with the affairs of the Yajfia. Just then
ukra shouted, ‘‘Ravana has won.” The Raksasas an
their leader Ravana continued their tour after eating
the Maharsis who had come to tak =
After Ravana left the place th D. POSE ape tiie ¥ ant
forms. (Uttara Ramayana) Sreasinis Tegiemec <leean O60"
4) Other Details.
(i) Marutta flourished in Y ,
Sabha Parva, Chapter 8, Vetse 16). assembly. (M.B-
(ii) Marutta is considered am
= as one of the “Paz hazs an a
samrats” (five great emperors). The five great emperors

MARUTTA II
are—Yuvanasva, Bhagiratha, Kartavirya, Bharata and
Marutta. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 15).
(iii) Once Siva presented him a golden peak of the
Himalayas. Indra, Brhaspati and other Devas attended
Marutta’s assembly. His Yajfiamandapas were all
golden. His cooks were groups of Maruts. He was able
to make all his subjects strong and healthy.. In Mahabharata, Drona Parva, Chapter 99, we see that Marutta
ruled over the country for 1000 years as an ideal
emperor.
(iv) Once Marutta received a sword from King Mucukunda. Marutta gave it to Raivata. (M.B. Santi Parva,
Chapter, 166, Verse 77).
(v) Marutta gave his daughter to Angiras and attained
Heaven according to Mahabharata, anti Parva,
Chapter 234. Verse 18.
(vi) In Bhagavata, 9th Skandha, we find a passage
which says that since Marutta had no sons he had
adopted Dusyanta, a King of the Piru dynasty, as his
son. '
MARUTTA II. A_ great sage. He entered into a
dispute with Sri Krsna, who was on his way to Hastina_ pura as the messenger of the Pandavas. (M.B. Udyoga
Parva, Chapter 83, Verse 27).
MARUTVAMALA.. In south India, at the southern tip
of the Sahya ranges, a mountain reputed for medicinal
herbs, may still be seen. This mountain is known by the
name ‘“Marutvamala”. <A legend connected with the
origin of this mountain, is given in Uttara Ramayana,
as follows:—
It was the time of the battle between + te
Ravana. Ravana’s younger brother Vibhisana joined
the side of Rama and _ fought against Ravana. The
enraged Ravana shot his arrow at Vibhisana. In his
endeavour to save Vibhisana, Laksmana fell down
unconscious. Rama and his followers discussed how
rj Rama and
Malayalam Tamil Arabic
1. Cinnam Avani Muharram
2. Kanni Purattasi Safar
3. -Tulam Aippasi Yulavan
4. Vrécikam Karttikai Utsanl
3. Dhanti Markali J amadul
Avval
6 Makaram Tai Jamatuise
£5 Rajab
7. Kumbham Masi ao
8. Minam Pankun! MeN
9.. Medam Cittiral ene
10. Idavam Vaikasi opt
ll. Mithunam Ani it
12. Karkatakam Ati
MASA (S)
Laksmana could be revived. Jambavan observed that
there was a herb called ““Dronam” in one of the peaks
of the Himalayas and if it was brought at once,
Laksmana could be restored to his senses. Haniman
flew to the Himalayas immediately. But although he
combed the forests there, he was not able to find the
herb Dronam. So he tore away and lifted a whole peak
which was full of all kinds of medicinal herbs and
returned to Lanka. Jambavan took the needed herbs
from it and deposited the peak at the southern end of
India. This is the present Marutvamala. (Mala means
mountain ).
MARUTVAN. See under MARUTVATI.
MARUTVATI. The mother of two Marutvans. This
Marutvati was the daughter of Daksa, and the wife
of Dharma. The ten daughters of Daksa, namely, Arundhati, Vasu, Yami, Lamba, Bhanu, Marutvati, Sankalpa,
Muharta, Sadhya, and Visva were the wivesof Dharmadeva. Vigvadevas were born to Visva, Siddhas were born
to Sadhya, Marutvans were born to Marutvati, Vasus
were born to Vasu, Bhanus were born to Bhanu, Ghosa
was born to Lamba and Nagavithi was born to Yami
(Visnu Purana, Part I, Chapter 15).
MARYADA I. A princess of Vidarbha. She was married
by the king named Arvacina. In Mahabharata, Adi
Parva, Chapter 95, Verse 18, it issaid that a son named
Ariha was born to them.
MARYADA Il. A daughter of the king of Videha, Devatithi a king of the Puru dynasty married her. Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 95, verse 23 says that a son,
Ariha was born to them.
MASA. A measure of weight in ancient Bharata. (See
under Trasarenu) .
MASA (S) (MONTHS).
1h). General information. It is believed that every where
for a year there are twelve months. There are six
different kinds of months in force in Bharata. They
are the following :—
Sanskrit English Suriyant
Sravana August Of
Prosthapada September Tlan
Asvina October Tagrinkadim
Karttika November Tesrinhroyi
Margasirsa December Kontnkadim
Pausa January Konunhroy1
Magha February Sibottu
Phalguna March Odor
Caitra April Nison
Vaisakha May lyor
Jyestha June Harson
Asadha July Tommus

MASA (S)
2%. What the names of the months indicate.
1). Malayalam months. ‘The months are named based
on certain beliefs. It takes twelve months for the earth
to goround the Sun once, When the earth passes through
the twelve divisions, it facesa separate set of constellataions in the universe in each of these divisions. In the
month of Cinnam the earth faces a cluster of constellations in the shape of a lion and so the month is called
Simha (lion) or Cinnam. In the next division the
earth faces the constellations in the shape of a Kanyaka
‘and so the month was called. Kanni. The earth faces
next the constellations in the shape of a balance and so
the month was called Tulam (Tula=balance). In the
next division the earth faces the constellations in the
shape of a scorpion andso the month was called Vrscikam (scorpion). The set of constellations which faces
the earth in the next division is shaped like a bow
(dhanus) and so'the month got the name Dhanu. In the
next division the earth faces a set of constellations in
the shape of a Makaramatsya (makara-fish) and so
the month was called Makaram. Kumbha means a jar
and Minam means a fish and Medam (Mesa) means
a goat and Idavam (Rsabha) means an ox. The shapes
of the constellations in those divisions are like the things
mentioned and the months were so named after them.
In the next two divisions the constellations. appear as
twins anda crab respectively and the months were so
called Mithunam (twins) and Karkatakam (crab).
2). English months.
i) January has come from the word Janus, the name of
a Roman devata. Janus is twinfaced, one facing the front
and the other back.
ii) February means ‘to purify’ and the festival of purification of the Romans is conducted in that month.
iii) March is Mars, a devata of War. Rome was built
by the brave warrior Romulus. In his time there were
only ten months in.a year and the: number of days
in amonth varied considerably. There were months
with twenty days and thirtyfive days. It was in the
year 700 B.C. that the then King of Rome, Numa
divided the year into twelve months and added Januar
and February to it. Till then March was the fir h
st month
of the year.
iv) April—Aperio ‘means ‘blossoming’ and since the
trees and plants blossom in that month it got the name
of April.
v) May is named after Maia daughter of th
(devata) Atlas. There is an spinion that it ene
after Maius, another name of Jupiter.
vi) June gets its name after the devata Juno though there
is a version that it is named after a Roman tribe called
Junius. :
vii) July was formerly known as Quintilis meaning the
fifth counting from March which was the first month of
the year till the time of Numa. It was to commemorate
the name of Julius Caesar that the name was changed
to July.
viii) August. This month was formerly known as Sextilis meaning the sixth month. But it was renamed August in honour of Augustus Caesar. But it still lacked
the importance of July as it contained thirtyone days and
August only thirty days. So Augustus took one day
from February and made the number of days in August
irtyone.
_ ) Sepeamber means the seventh month from March.
MASARSARA. A king of the Rgveda period.
MATANGA I
x) October means the eighth month.
xi) November means the ninth month.
xii) December means the tenth month.
MASAKA (M). A place in the ancient island of Saka.
Mahabharata, Bhisma Parva, Chapter 11 says that in
ancient times, Kings used to live there for the ful filment of their desires.
Reveda,
Ist Mandala, 18th Anuvaka, 122nd Sikta says that this
king used to persecute the Aryans.
MASAVRATOPAVASA. Puranas mention about the
months in which Vratas are to be observed with efficacy
and the details are given below :
(1) He who fasts for half a day in the month of Tulam will
get children and vehicles in plenty and would become
pure. (Sloka 29, Chapter 106, AnuS4sana Parva).
(2) He who fasts the whole day of the Dvadasi in Tulam
and worships Visnu will get the benefit of making 4
Sahasragodana (giving away thousand cows as gift).
(Sloka 3, Chapter 106, Anusasana Parva).
(3) He who fasts for one time of _ the day in Vrécikam
will become a very brave and valorous man at
acquire many wives and fame. (Sloka 30, Chapter
106, Anugasana Parva).
(4) All men and women who worship Visnu on the
dvadaési day.in Vrécikam fasting for the whole day W!
get the benefit of a. Godanayajna. (Sloka 14, Chapt!
109, Anugasana Parva). |
(5) He who fasts for one time a day during the month
of Mesa will get gold, diamonds and pearls in plenty
and will be born ina high family in his next birth.
(Sloka 23, Chapter 106, Anugasana Parva).
(6) If one .fasts the whole of the Dvadaégi day in the
month of Mesa one would get the benefit of conducting
a Pundarika. (Sloka 7 Chapter 109, Anug4sana Parva) -
(7) He who fasts for one time in a day in the month 0
~Mithuna will become very prosperous. (Sloka 25, Chapter 106, Anu‘ asana Parva). |
(8) Ifone fasts the whole day and night of the Dvadasi
in Mithuna and does Trivikrama pija one would nol
only get the benefit of conducting a Gomedayajfia bu
will be able to enjoy sexual pleasures with celestial
maidens. (Sloka9, Chapter 109, Anugdsana Parva)-
MASIRAM. A place of habitation in ancient India. Ther¢
is a reference to this region in Mahabharata, Bhis™
Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 53.
MATANGA I. An _ ancient sage. The Ramayana in
Aranya Kanda describes the asrama of Matang@:
Ramalaksmanas after crossing the forest of Kraufic@
came to the aSrama of Matanga. Kabandha was slain
at this place After abandoning his demoniac bo?Y
Kabandha extolled’ the greatness of Matangasram@
to Rama and Laksmana. “The flowers of this a$ra™4
are never plucked and worn on heads. Even if they 37°
not plucked they never fade. They remain fresh always:
There is a reason for this. The disciples of Matang
once brought a heavy load of fruits for their guru and
when they reached the Asrama they ' were. tired and
drops of perspiration fell on the plants and they became
flowers. Sabari is performing penance in this agrama.””
Matanga once cursed Bali. It happened that:while the
eee was living on the mountain of Rsyamiika Bali. a?
ae asura Dundubhi fought against each other a”
eed flowing from the body of Dundubhi by a blow
of Bali spurted out and fell on the hands of the sag®

MATANGA Ii
Matanga then cursed Bali saying that his head would
blow off if he entered Rsyamikacala again. (Sarga 46,
Kiskindha Kanda, Valmiki Ramayana and Kamba
Ramayana,. Purva Kanda). Matangasrama was a holy
place. (Chapter 84, Vana Parva) . |
MATARIGA II. Another name of Triganku. The name of
Matanga is used for Rajarsi Triganku in Verse 31, of
Chapter 71, of Adi Parva. For more detail see under
Triganku.
MATANGA III. A maharsi born fo a barber of a
brahmin woman. This clandestine birth was not known
- either to the brahmin husband or Matanga for a long
time. Once his brahmin father sent him to the fields
for ploughing. He put a donkey to the yoke and ploughed. When the donkey slowed down its work Matanga
beatit hard. The mother of the donkey saw it and wept.
She called Matanga to her side and told him that he
was the son of a barber and that was why he behaved
like a candala showing no kindness towards the animal.
Matanga ran to his house and told his parents what
the mother-donkey said. After that he left his house
and did penance to become a brahmin. Indra was
pleased and he asked Matanga what he wanted and he
replied he wanted to become a brahmin. Indra. made
him a brahmin and sent him back. (Chapter'27, Anuésasana Parva). e
MATANGA IV. A preceptor. He was the guru of Sabari.
(Aranya Kanda, Valmiki Ramayana).
MATANGA Sage Matanga was known by this name
also. (See under Matanga).
MATARIGAKEDARA. A sacred place. He who bathes
in a pond there would get the benefit of making a
thousand Godanas (Chapter 89, Vana Parva).
MATANGI. The great grandmother of the elephants.
Matangi was the daughter of Krodhavasa, daughter of
Daksa and wife of Kaéyapaprajapatl. Matang) had au
sisters. Elephants were born of Matangi. (Sarga '*;
Aranya Kahda; Valmiki Ramayana).
MATALI. Charioteer of Indra. Chapter 9.
Purana gives the following story about
Matali. |
: ‘the time
A chi sage Sam It was
child was born to sag vrny of Asuras under the
of Devasura war. A great i
leadership of Andhaka ‘attacked Devaloka and eee
ed it. In the great battle with Anda in Ae a
yudha of Indra broke ‘into two. Indra was : a eefore
new weapon for him. Mahavisnu then SpE Tae
him and advised him to praise the glory of Se me
did so and then a divine weapon Tost es wea ot
Indra flew at the asuras carrying the Fe avid af
ae was no aleve chee se given to
ndra. Still, seated in the Pee
him by the Vasue Indra drove very swiftly agains’
asuras. The earth shivered by the din ©
wheels. , ika wWhen the earth began to quake the saB© ees a auld
ing directions of his wife Tapasyy astrologer had
on the ground outside the hermitage: two if it was
told her that a child would bees earth-quake.
placed in an open ground at the a s00n as her child
Tapasvini wanted one more child. 5 5S
hild identical in
was placed on the ground anos bord by the side oO
every respect with: the first ons vid, 28 8008 age! AE
the other. But the secon © sae
, 69 of Vamana
the birth of
ika.
493 MATSYA II
was born: rose up and ran to Indra for driving his
chariot.
When the Gandharvas knew he was coming ‘to help
Indra, they showered him with brilliance and the child
approaching Indra said ‘Oh, Lord of the Devas, I
shall be your charioteer.” Indra asked him, “Child,
whose son are you ? How will you drive my horse ? J
doubt your competence.” The child replied, ‘‘I am the
son born to Samika on the ground. I have been given
power and brilliance by the Gandharvas and so | am
capable of driving your chariot.” On hearing this, Indra
accepted him as his charioteer and named him Méatali.
MATARISVAN. A_ devata (demigod). There are
several stories in the Vedas regarding the birth of Agni
(fire). Though Agni originating from the clouds reaches the earth as lightning it hides itself making it invisible to man. It was Matarigvan who took its form from
the earth and gave it to the Bhrgu family and made it
ossible for them to make it as and when it was required. (Rgveda).
This Matarigvan was one of the prominent sons of
Garuda. (Sloka 14, Chapter 10, Udyoga Parva).
MATHANA. An asura on the side of Tarakasura. Mahavisnu killed him. (Chapter 152, Matsya Purana) .
MATHARA 1. A demigod deputed by Indra to serve
Sarya (Sun). This demigod always sits on the right side
of Surya, (Brahma Parva, Bhavisya Purana). 7
MATHARA II]. One of the Astadagavinayakas (Eighteen
Vinayakas). (Samba, 16).
MATHARA III. An acarya (teacher). He is believed to
be the author of the book Sankhyakarikavrtti. (Kausitaki Brahmana) .
MATHARAVANA. A holy place in Daksina Bharata.
The victory pillar of Matharaka, an aide of Surya, is
situated here. (Sloka 10, Chapter 88, Vana Parva).
MATHURA. The birth place of Sri Krsna.
MATI. A daughter of Daksaprajapati. She became the
wife of Dharmaraja. (Sloka 15, Chapter 66, Adi
Parva).
MATINARA. A King of Puruvamsa. The line from Puru
is as follows : Puru - Janamejaya-Pracinvan-ManasyuVitabhaya - Sundu - Bahuvidha - Samyati-RahovadiBhadragva-Rkseyu-Krseyu-Sannateyu-Ghrteyu - Sthan-.
dileyu-Dharmeyu-Sarnvidheyu-Krteyu-Matinara, Matinaira got two sons, Santurodha and Pratiratha. Dusyanta, husband of Sakuntala, was the son’ of Santurodha. (Chapter 278, Adi Parva).
MATKULIKA. A _ follower of Subrahmanya.
19, Chapter 467, Salya Parva). )
MATRTIRTHA. A sacred place situated on the outskirts of Kuruksetra. If one bathes in a holy pond
there one would be rich in children. (Sloka 58, Chapter
83, Vana Parva).
MATSYA I. The first and foremost incarnation of Mahavisnu. (See under Avatara).
MATSYA II. An ancient country of Puranic fame. The
people of this country are called Matsyas. The details
available regarding Matsyadeéa from the Mahabharata
are given below :
(1) The Pandavas wandering through the forests. came
to Matsyadega. (Sloka 2, Chapter 155, Adi Parva).
(2) The people of Matsyadesga in fear of Jarasandha
migrated from the north to the south. (Sloka 28,
Chapter 14, Sabha Parva).
(Sloka

MATSYA TI 494
(3) Bhimasena during his victory march to the east
conquered this country. (Sloka 8, Chapter 30, Sabha
Parva).
(4) Sahadeva during his victory march to the south
conquered the people of Matsyadeéa. (Sloka 4, Chapter
31, Sabha Parva).
(5) Matsyadega was one of the countries suggested by
Arjuna to spend their life incognito. (Sloka 12,
Chapter 1, Virata Parva).
(6) Virata was the chief of Matsyadesa during the
time of Mahabharata. (Sloka 17, Chapter 1, Virata
_ Parva). :
(7) In the Kuruksetra battle Virata, King of Matsyadega, came to the help of Yudhisthira with an Aksauhini (army). (Sloka 12, Chapter 18, Udyoga Parva).
(8) The Pandavas spent a year of their life incognito
at the palace of Virata, king of Matsyadesa. (Chapter
7, Virata Parva).
(9) Matsyarajya was one of the prominent kingdoms of
ancient Bharata. (Sloka 40, Chapter 9, Bhisma Parva).
(10) Bhisma slaughtered many soldiers from MatsyadeSa,
(11) Dronacarya killed at a stretch five hundred
Matsyas in the great battle. (Sloka 31 Chapter 190,
Drona Parva).
(12) Karna once conquered Matsyadeéga. (Sloka 18,
Chapter 8, Karna Parva). |
‘(13) The people of Matsyadesa were honest and charitable. (Chapter 45, Sloka 28, Karna Parva).
(14) Those who were left out among the Matsyas in
the great battle were killed by A¢vatthama. (Sloka 158,
Chapter 8, Sauptika Parva).
MATSYA III. A King. He was the brother of Satyavati, mother of Vyasa, Satyavati and Matsya were both
found in a fish by the same fisherman. (See under Adri. )
MATSYAGANDHI(MATSYAGANDHA). Another name
for Satyavati, mother of Vyasa. (See under Satyavati).
MATSYAKALA. A King of Piruvaméa. He was one of
the seven celebrated Kings known as Girikaputras. The
others were : Brhadratha, Kuga, Yadu, Pratyagra, Bala
and Vira. The seven sons were born to Girika of he
attendants. (Chapter 278, Agni Purana). |
MATSYAPURANA. One of the eighteen Puranas. This
P urana was_ told to Manu Satyavrata by Mahavisnu
during his incarnation as Matsyu. There are thirteen
thousand §lokas in it. For prosperity this Purana should
be given as gift on the Visuvat day along with a golden
image of Matsya. (Chapters 2 and 272, Agni Purana)
MATSYODARI. Another name for Satyavati, mother
of Vyasa. (See under Satyavati) .
MATTA. A demon. He was born to the demon
Malyavan of his wife Sundari. Matta had six brothers
named Vajramusti, Viriipaksa, Durmukha, Suptaghna
Yajfiakoga and Unmatta. This Matta was killed in the
Rama-Ravana battle. (Chapter 10, Agni Purana).
MATTAMAYURA(S). A special tribe of Ksatriyas.
Nakula, one of the Pandavas, defeated these people
during his victory march to the west. (Sloka 5, Chapter
39, Sabha Parva).
MAUDGALYA (MAUDGALA).
maharsi once cursed Ravana. wat
Once Maudgalya was sitting 10 Svastikasana resting his
shoulders on his yogic staff in the forest of Kadamba.
Ravana returning after his victory march came that way.
Seeing the sage sitting in a wonderfully queer posture
A maharsi. This
MAYA
Ravana was amused and playfully tapped the staff
with his Candrahadsa. The staff broke into two and
Maudgalya fell flat on the ground breaking his spine.
The sage was furious and he cursed Ravana saying
that his Candrahasa would thenceforth have no effect
at all. (Yuddha Kanda, Kamba Ramayana).
MAUHURTTIKAGATI. When the Sun passes through
the centre of Puskaradvipa it covers a path equivalent
to a thirtieth part of the earth and this journey of the
Sun is called Mauhirttikagati. (See under Sirya).
MAUNJAYANA. A maharsi. This sage shone in the
court of Yudhisthira. (Sloka 13, Chapter 4, Sabha
Parva).
MAURAVAPASA. See under Mura.
MAURVI. A kind of grass. It is with this grass that
ascetics make mekhala (waistlet). (Sloka 33, Chapter
17, Drona Parva).
MAUSALAPARVA. A Parva of Mahabharata. This
Parva contains the story of the end of the Yadavas by
killing each other.
MAVELLA. The fourth son of Uparicaravasu. Mavella
attended the Rajasiiya of Yudhisthira. (Chapter 63;
Adi Parva and Chapter 34, Sabha Parva).
MAVELLAKA. An ancient place of habitation in India.
Suéarma, King of Trigarta, fought against Arjuna
taking along with him the warriors of Mavellaka. Arjuna
killed them all. (Sloka 20, Chapter 17, Drona Parva):
MAYA. A Danava king who served Devas and Asuras
as their architect and builder.
1) General. KaSyapa Prajapati, son of Marici and
grandson of Brahma married the thirteen daughters °
Daksa. Among them, the first was Aditi, the secon
was Diti and the third was Danu. Aditeyas were bor?
to Aditi, Daityas were born to Diti and Danavas were
born to Danu. The chief among the sons of Danu
was Maya. :
Maya was found to be very proficient in the art of architecture even from his boyhood. He worshipped Brahma
in the Himalayas to gain unrivalled skill in architecture
Brahma was pleased and appeared before him. He
blessed Maya to become the unequalled architect of the
Devas. Asuras and Danavas. After that Maya was en
gaged in building magnificent mansions for Devas an
Asuras. He was also anointed King of the Danavas.
It was a period of friendly co-operation and brotherly
relitions between Devas and Asuras. Once there was 2
dancing show in Devaloka. Maya was also invited to
see the performance of the women of Devaloka. All the
dancers acquitted themselves creditably. But what
attracted Maya most, was the dance of Hema, the
Apsara woman. Maya and Hema were mutually
attracted and fell in love with each other. The Devas
who came to know of this, gave Hema in marriage t°
Maya. (Uttara Ramayana).
2) Domestic life. Maya and Hema went to the valley
south of Himavan and built there acity named ‘“HemaVee le leading a happy life there, two sons;
¢yavi and Dundubhi were born to them. But they had
or eabi So they worshipped Siva, praying for 4
At about that time,
Madhura, after observ
Siva and did obeisance
at the moment. Fascina
embraced her, Parvati
one day, an Apsara woman,
ing Somavara Vrata, came t°
to him. Parvati was not at home
ted by Madhura’s charm, Siv4
who came to know of it, cursé

MAYA
Madhura and turned her into a frog. But she said that
after twelve years, the curse would be lifted and she
would become a woman again. It was in a well near
the place where Maya and Hema were performing tapas
that Madhura fell as frog. After twelve years, the frog
recovered her former shape as a woman. At that time
Maya saw her, and taking her to be the daughter
given to him by Siva, took her with him to his palace.
He gave her the name ‘“Mandodari’’. It was this
“‘Mandodari’? whom Ravana married Jater.
Besides these three children, Maya had some other
sons and daughters. In Devi Bhagavata, 8th Skandha
there is a reference to the Danava named Bala, the son
of Maya, living in Atala,a_ section of Patala. In Katha
saritsigara, Madanamaficukalambaka, 3rd Taranga we
find that Maya had two daughters named Svayamprabha and Somaprabha. Of them, Somaprabha was
married by Nalakibara, the son of Vaisravana.
3) Alliance with Arjuna and construction of Indraprastha.
Once Krsna and Arjuna offered Khandavavana to Agnideva as a feast. (See under the word ‘‘“K handavadaha”’).
While Agni was furiously feeding upon the forests, the
human and animal inhabitants in it began to flee from
it. Krsna and Arjuna shot them down with arrows. At
that time Maya was hiding himself in the disguise of
Taksaka. When the flames of fire approached that place
Maya left his shelter and rushed out. Sri Krsna aimed
his weapon Cakra at him. Crying aloud with fear,
Maya ran to Arjuna praying for protection. Arjuna
stopped Agnideva and Sri Krsna and thus saved Maya.
(M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 240).
From that time, Maya became a loyal follower of
Arjuna, After Khandavadaha, Krsna and Arjuna were
taking rest when Maya approached them with joined
palms and asked Arjuna what he should do in return
for saving him from the fury of Krsna and the blazing
fire. Arjuna replied that he expected no return from
Maya for saving his life but wanted only his friendship. Maya was not satisfied. He insisted that Arjuna
should accept some service from him as a token of his
deep gratitude. On hearing this, Sri Krsna suggested
that Maya _ should build a beautiful palace for
the Pandavas. Accordingly he built a magnificent
palace for the Pandavas at the place called Khandavaprastha. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 1). ;
4) Maya settled down in Vindhya. Once Maya sought
shelter from Mahavisnu. Visnu offered shelter to Maya
and so he built a mansion called ‘«Sudharma for all
the Devas. It was a building of inexpressible beauty and
rare architectural - workmanship. The Asuras who
became angry with Maya for his allianee with the Dae
made preparations to attack him. larmed at it, ve
fled southwards with his family and reached Vin« ye
There he built a lovely mansion and settled down in ee
( Kathasaritsagara, Madanamaficukalambaka, r
Taranga) .
In Valmiki Ramayana, nda, 50th sang?
nderful mansion
Kiskindha ka
also there is a reference to this WO :
which M . -.dhya mountain In their
icarch nee built on the Vind Ys omother monkeys
Sita, Haniman an
; combed the
reached the Vindhya mountain. There they came to
forests and cav -.4 When they
es to find out Sita. 3
the peak to the south west of the mountal, wy aoe
huge’ dark caves ‘They entered it apd CAO
Orward. After a long and tedious walk t
MAYA
were exhausted with hunger and thirst. When they
proceeded alittle further, they came across a bright
place. There they saw a woman sitting alone, dressed
in deer skin and barks of trees. She greeted them and
in the course of her talk with the monkeys she told
them that the cave was made by the magician Maya
and that her name was Svayamprabha. Her mother was
Merusavarni and that she (Svayamprabha) was entrusted with the task guarding the wonderful mansion.
Then she gave them fruits and fresh water.
5) Building of Tripuras. lt was Maya who built three
magic dwellings for the three Danavas, Kamalaksa,
Tarakaksa and Vidyunmali. (For details see under the
word Pura).
6) Other details.
(1), Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 227, Verse 41
says that Namuci the Danava was the brother of Maya.
(ii) Maya had two sons named Sunitha and Sudandika
They became human beings under a curse. (For details
see under the word Siryaprabha).
(iii) In Kathasaritsagara Madanamaficukalambaka,
8th Taranga we see that Maya was an incarnation of
Vigvakarma.
(iv) At the time when Mahavisnu as Vamana tock the
three worlds from Mahabali, Maya joined with other
Danavas and fought against Vamana. (M.B. Bhavisya
Parva, Chapter 55).
vy) Once Maya was relaxing with his friends on the
Malaya mountain. Knowing about it Maheésvara sent
Indra to that mountain. Indra challenged the Danavas
for a fight. In the battle that followed, Indra killed the
Danava named Paka. Thushe got the name, ‘‘Pakag4sana’’. Indra killed Pura, the son of Mahabaii also in
that battle and so came to be known as ‘‘Purandara’?
The remaining Danavas under the leadership of Maya
fled to Patala. (Vamana Purana, Chapter 71).
MAYA. i mi
1) General information. A consort of Mahavisnu, Maya
has got a very prominent place in Hindu Puranas. The
Puranas state that this whole universe is unreal, illusory
and if we feel it real it is because of the working of this
Maya.
2) Birth. How was Maya born? Agni Purana in its
iwentieth chapter gives a genealogy of Maya. Hirhsa
(injury) is the wife of Adharma (evil). They got two
children named Anrta (falsehood) and Nikrti (wickedness). From them were born Bhaya (fear) , Naraka (hell)
Maya (illusion) and Vedana(pain). Maya in turn gave
birth to Death, the destroyer of all pain produced from
Hate or Misery. Mrtyu, (death) produced Vyadhi
(disease), Jara (rugosity) , Soka (sorrow), Trsna (desire)
and Krodha (anger).
3) Exhibition of Maya. MahAavisnu once told Narada thus:
‘There is nothing like living beings on earth. All is an
‘iJlusion due to Maya.’’ Narada requested Mahavisnu
to show him that and Visnu took Narada to the banks
ofa river and exhibited the wonderful working of
Maya. (For details see under Taladhvaja I).
4) How Gathi, a brahmin, saw Maya. In the country
of Kosala there was once a brahmin named Gathi.
He went to the forests and standing there in water in
a pond, immersed up to his neck, started doing penance.
For eight months he did penance thus and then Mahavisnu appeared before him and asked him what hoon

MAYA 496 MAYASIVA
he wanted. The brahmin said he wanted to see Maya- lamented that such a mass suicide was due to him and
devi. Visnu granted the boon and disappeared. he also made a fire-pit and jumped into it.
Several years passed after that and nothing happened. The heat of the fire-pit woke him from his day-dream
One aay the panna as usual went to battle in eee and Gathi found himselfin the pond where he had
When he took a dip in the waters he forgot all his come to bathe. “an at! Who am I? What all roles did
prayers and mantras. There was a change of mind. He I take just now?’ These puzzling thoughts filled him
felt he was lying dead in his house. Relatives were and he went back to the 4grama and _ started life as
sitting around weeping. His wife wasin tears and was usual. One day an old friend of his came to the asrama
holding his legs. In an atmosphere of mourning, his own and after the daily routine they lay down to sleep.
people weeping bitterly carried his body to a frightening During their conversation Gathi asked his friend why
burial ground and put it on a funeral pyre. It was burnt he had become fleshless and so lean. Then his friend
to ashes. He then felt himself in the womb af a Candala narrated a story exactly similar to the experiences
woman living ina village near Htnamandala. The which Gathi had in the country of Kira. He added
foetus developed and a black boy was ‘born. The boy that to atone for the sin of his association with the
grew passing the stages of infancy, childhood and boy- Candalas he was conducting Prayagasnana (bath in
hood and became a.man, black and stout. He started Prayaga), Japa and Candrayanamahavrata. All those
enjoying sexual life with a beautiful candala girl. The things he explained, made him lean.
eiatou: plays were dowe0a. [eat beds, ~ reaps Hits Gathi knew that the story of the guest related to him
bushes and in caves and soon. many evil-natured sons and he was eager to visit the country of Kira. When he
were born to him. Gradually his health faded and he went to Kira he saw everything there in the same .way
constructed a hermitage and lived there as a. hermit. a: his dream. Then he realised that it was an €*-
. His children grew up and he became old and then all hibition by Visnu of the working of Maya. Gathi then
on a sudden all his children and wife and other renounced everything and went into a cave and. started
members of his family died and he was left alone. He doing penance there. After some years Maha Visnu
then left the place and travelling much reached the appeared before him and blessed him. (Jianavasistha) -
capital city of Kiramandala. The city gates were deco- MAYADARSANAPARVA. A subdivision of Adi Parva,
rated and inside people stood in groups. The road to in Mahabharata. Chapters 227 to 233 of Adi Parva,
the palace from the gate had been beautified ‘and a are included.
s he
caer the palace gates he saw an elephant as big and se See An asura. Indra got down Pururavas
se Mas eeu deplm there well caparisoned. It ° 4 t me phee! this seton who was always giving
iecictnees mesh : ee ays to post an elephant well ae e 4 : e a aa killed Mayadhara 1n <
The elephant he a Oe ote aha hon: dace le are pecquct in Haut of Sochaen tkiee fae wpanquet
| to select a new King in the place of the one who h ad there was a dance performance by Rambhia and as she
jut died. The elephant on scing him took him by its Wat dancing belore Acirys Tumbura, Purdravas oPet))
they saw it shouted ‘‘The Srey ag se pa committed ‘then, Tombura Sh ae cu C
were beaten and people shouted with joy. Te aia cursed Purtiravas saying that Puriravas would beat a
taken to the palace where he was received by young separation from his wife Urvagi. It was because of this
and beautiful girls. He was dressed in royal robes and curse that Urvasi was once carried away from the palace
he took over the administration of the state. Gradually of Purtiravas by the Gandharvas. (Kathdsaritsagat
he accepted as his wives the wives of the former Kin; Taranga 3, Lavanakalambak
a Te ee the name of Galava. He MAYAMRGA. Marica, uncle of Ravana, took the form
yesie, One das die Des oes of all for eight a beautiful deer to tempt Sita and went to er
ae-auordinary aia. any oe high a stroll dressed ane bags Nae was staying. This deer is calle
a set of Candalas were sitting si € gate of the palace M RY PUST i, ee under MARICA).
accompaniment of a violin Ae nging songs to the MAYAST a city of the asuras. (See under Kraufica)-
one of. the Candalas, a rede “hae ime they saw Galava a th a aed Rama and Laksmana were in exile
the group ahd addressing the Kin sie Bot up from Brie ? ee | ‘ith Sita, Ravana came ‘to carry away
shouted loudly, ‘Friend, where eh ne Hi, Kalafiju” aad ia i a time. the real_ Sita disappeared in Agn
time ? It is a long time since we saw yeu Deen all this: eS of ace : false Sita, was installed. It was th!%
we saw you at least now’. The me ¢ tas our luck wae lived sig MAE oO was carried away by Ravana a?
ihe the words of the Candela aye ene ve not ean fies Ae cere ne time of Ravana’s death. -
man. The queens and others standing on the ¢ the old are Gees ‘ae a om coma asked to jump into. ure
the palace could see thisscene, They were sh errace of peared and th P G3 _Atthat time Mayasita disaP
repivited they had all along be eo sore they under STA), e real Sita came out from the fire. (5€°
The news spread like wild eae in the state. The King MAYASIVA. Padma Purana gives a story of how once 3?
had to live in the palace without the help and co-oper- asura named Jalandhara approached Parvati iva tO
ation of anybody inside or outside the palace. induce her to surrender to his Hees he ze Pe 3
People wanted to atone for the crime they had commit- jean MayAasiva. . is Siva
ted in installing a Candala as their King. They made aN battle between the devas and asuras was going
small firepits throughout the country and started ed at agin were winning and the devas got fright?”
committing suicide by jumping into it, The King seed . strength of the asuras and. so fia himself
| ell | ed the battlefield. Jalandhara who. led the army °

MAYASIVA
the asuras found the fight against Siva very tough and
smelt defeat, He decided to cheat Parvati, the consort
of Siva, to compensate for his defeat in the battle-field
and so making an asura named Sumbha as the chief,
he left for Kajlasa. Sumbha became a maya Jalandhara
and continued the fight.
Taking another asura named Durvarana, Jalandhara
went to a cave in Kailasa and there changed himself
into an exact replica of Siva. He made Durvarana look
like Nandikeéa.
Then they went to the top of the mountain where Parvati and her companions were staying. Siva approached
Parvati on the shoulders of NandikeSa with wounds all
over his body and blood oozing from them. Parvati
seeing Siva thus, with tears rolling down her cheeks
asked him, “Oh, Lord of the gods what happened to
your lordship ? Who defeated you in the battle ? Why
do you weep like a low-bred man ?’? Mayasiva took
from his body all his ornaments like Vasuki and gave
them, to the companions of Parvati. When Parvati saw
the beads of Ganapati and Subrahmanya in the hands
of her husband she cried in bitterness. Siva told her
that all his parsadas like Manibhadra, Virabhadra,
Puspadanta, Damana, Dhamatamra and Kiismanda
were killed in the battle. Candi, Bhrngi, Kiriti, Mahakala, Srikhali, Candisa and Guptanetra were all killed.
Mayaésiva told her that he had picked up the heads of
Ganapati and Subrahmanya found lying in the battlefield, He requested Parvati to console him by embracing
him, Parvati resented the request. She said, “What
you say is unfit for the situation. Sexual enjoyment is
forbidden in times of misery, fear, meditation, vomiting
fever, performing offering to the manes, journey, royal
visits, marriage festivities and in the presence of elders
and teachers. Why do you make this request to me
when I am mourning the death of my sons ?
Pretending to be grief-stricken Mayasiva said “She who
does not give sexual pleasure to a man in distress would
goto hell. I have no parsadas now. I have lost my
sons also. I lost my house. Now you also hate me. I am
y life there. Come
going to my cave. Let me end m
on, Nandikesa, Vajra, we will go.
Hearing this Parvati went near him. A
At this time there happened 4 few bad omens in the
ocean:of milk where Visnu “As residing, and calling
Garuda to his side Visnu 45
about the battle that was going On between the devas anc
asuras. To prevent him from being deceived by the pete
of the asuras Visna dropped into the mouth of Cae ia
a pill of great potency. Garuda reached tue pea e
very soon but ‘could not find anything out of the ee
and so flew to Kailasa. H Parvati first u
hearing a noise from somewhere else peeped in ant
saw Mayasiva. Garuda could understand him bee 3
the power of the pill and so flew swiftly back to “14
visnu and told him what he saw.
Mahavisnu knew that Parvatt had beet ce By
Jalandhara. So he -decided to cheat Vrnda, ¥ vee
Jalandhara. Mahavisnu filled with aaa con :
avoiding Mahalaksmi, covering ¢ HE nae Heros y
yellow scarf and taking the figu'* of an ee
"fis abode taking An?n
or his compan He went to ar tie
Ea eo ‘They constructed 4m asrama pd monkey
wild animals like the lon, tiger, boar;
ked him to go and enquire >
MAYASIVA
became their disciples taking human form. Then Visnu
created mental agony in Wrnda to attract her to his
sérama. Wrnda started getting hot and her maids
fanned her continuously and anointed her with sandalwood paste. She thought of her husband in the battleGeld and often fainted. She had a very bad dream. She
saw her husband Jalandhara lying wounded on his
head, ears and nose, with his body smeared with ashes
and his eyes pecked by vultures. She saw Kali, with her
hair lying lose, her face reddened with blood, with a
skull in her hand dancing before the body of her husband before starting to eatit. At this moment she was
awakened by the music of the Magadhas and loud
chanting of family praises by Kimpurusas. She at once
stopped the music and prayers and paid them off. Then
she sent word for pandits to explain the dream she saw.
The Pandits said “Devi, this appears to bea dream
iving unimaginable fear. To calm the fear give as gifts
to brahmins, diamonds, garments, cows and elephants.”
Then the brahmin pandits sprinkled on her, water made
potent by mantras. There was no waning of the fever.
Dismissing the pandits, queen Vrnda went and sat
alone upstairs. She felt the whole palace burning and
by the craft employed by Visnu she found living inside
the palace unbearable.
She got out of the palace and boarding a chariot drawn
by mares she went to her play-garden. The sight of
the garden filled with beautiful flowers and celestial
maidens where no one else but pleasing breeze could
enter made her remember her husband. She then
brooded on how to find out Jalandhara, and there also
she did not get peace of mind. So she accompanied
by her maids started for another garden. That garden
gave a ghastly sight with huge trees standing crowded
interspersed with black rocks and the place resounding
with the roars of lions and tigers. Vrnda got frightened
and she hastened to say “‘Smaradiati, I feel frightened.
Please drive back the chariot home.”’
Hearing this Smaraditi said, ““Oh, Devi, I do not know
the place. I do not understand the directions also. ‘To
which direction am I to drive ? The horses look tired.
There.is no way here. Anyhow let it go as directed by
God. If we stay here we will be eaten by man-eaters.”’
So saying the maid drove the chariot and soon they
reached a forest more grisly than the former. It was a
forest where great yogins lived. There was no light
there neither water nor wind. Nosound came. Even
the sounds of the bells on the horses and the chariot
stopped. Vrnda moaned, ‘Where are we to go now,
maid! There 1s no peace of mind for me anywhere in
this world.”
Smaraditi looking ahead cried, ‘“‘Look Devi, there is a
great black mountain in front of us. The horses refuse
to move, for they are afraid of it.”’
Cold with fear the queen stood up from the chariot and
keeping her hands on the pearl necklace on her breast
jumped out of the chariot. Then a very fierce demon
came towards them. He was yellow in colour with three
legs, five hands, seven eyes -and ears like a tiger’s and
the shoulders and chin like those of a lion. It was a
horrible sight and Vrnda hid her eyes with her hands
and trembled like a plantain leaf. The maid jumping
out of the chariot cried aloud “Oh, my queen, help me.
This demon is going to cat me.’ The demon approaching

MAYASURA
them took the chariot with the horses and whirled it
round in the air. Both the queen and the maid fainted
at this exhibition of strength. The demon ate all the
horses and then catching hold of the hands of the queen
he roared, “If you want your life make me your husband.
Your husbend has been killed by Siva in the battle. If
you join me you can live for years together without
fear. Come on, drink this sweet liquor with flesh’’.
Vrnda became half dead when she heard that.
At that time Mahavisnu in the guise of an ascetic
wearing barks of trees and matted hair appeared
before them. An angered look form Visnu sent the
demon away from the place. Vrnda took refuge in the
ascetic and the false ascetic said, ‘‘I am Devasarma, son
of Bharadvaja. Renouncing all worldly pleasures I have
come here to do penance and if it pleases you, you can
come and stay in my arama and do penance. We can
go to another forest far away from here.”? As soon as
they reached the agrama Mahavisnu appeared before
her in the figure of Jalandhara. They embraced each
other and lived there joyfully for many days. One day
at the end of a sexual act Vrnda saw instead of Jalandhara the ascetic in embrace with her. She was shocked
and stood up separated from him. Then Mahavisnu
said “‘“Vrnda, I am Visru husband of Laksmi. Your
husband has gone to conquer Siva and get Parvati for
himself. I am Siva also. We appear separate. Your husband Jalandhara has been killed in the battle. Join with
me,”
Vrnda got angry. She cursed Visnu ; she said, “You
cheated me by pretendiug to be an ascetic. Let your
wiie also be once cheated by a false ascetic.’? The
cursed Visnu disappeared and Vrnda started penance.
Many Gandharva ladies came with temptations to dissuade Vrnda from continuing the penance. But all such
attempts failed and Vrnda ended her life doing penance.
The nymphs showered flowers on her from above and
the dead body of Vrnda was cremated by Smaraditi
and Smaraditi jumped into the funeral pyre of Vrnda
and gave away her life. The nymphs made an image of
her with the ashes from the funeral pyre and floated it
on the river Ganga, .
Parvati did not consent to having any sexual enjoyment
with Mayasiva and she escaped from the place and went
to Akasaganga and started doing penance there. One da
Parvati called her maid Jayato her side and said “Jaya
you go in my dress to Siva and find out whether He's
really Siva or not. If he kisses you and embraces you he
Bat he as you cheapo Py he Ma
a welfare
Go and tell me what Hiaepens® nwa beFeal Sina.
Jaya went to Mayafiva. Jalandhara when he saw her
mistook her for Parvati and caught hold of her and
immediately semen flowed out from him. Jaya returned
and told Parvati that it was Jalandhara and not Siva
Parvati afraid of J alandhara hid in a lotus and her
companions became beetles sitting on the lotus. In the
meantime the guards of the palace finding the queen
absent from the palace reported the matter to Sumbha
fighting against Siva. He sent Candamundas to Jalandhara to inform him of the situation. Jalandhara-. came
back to the battle-field running and took up the fight
against Siva again.
MAYASURA. An asura. He had a daughter named
Somaprabha. (Kathasaritsagara) .
MAYIL (PEACOCK).
498 “MAYIL(PEACOCK)
- MAYAVASISTHA. There was once a King called Mitrasaha among the Kings of the Solar dynasty who ruled
Ayodhya. One day while he was hunting he saw two
demons roaming about as tigers and Mitrasaha killed
one of them. The other demon waited for an opportunity to wreak vengeance and an opportunity presented
itself. Mitrasaha was conducting an Agvamedha yaga to
which Vasistha was the chief priest. The demon went
to the King as Vasistha and privately told him that
he desired to eat meat and the King accordingly prepared meat which was greatly resented by the real
Vasistha and the sage cursed Mitrasaha to become a
demon. The false Vasistha who played the trick on the
King is called Mayavasistha. (See for details under
Kalmasapada).
MAYAVATI. An incarnation of Ratidevi. An asura
named Sambara made her his wife. But Pradyumna,
son of Krsna, carried her away to Dvaraka. (See under
Pradyumna ).
MAYAVI. An asura.
1) Birth, Méayavi was born to the great architect of
the Danavas, Maya, of his wife Hema, a nymph. Maya
fell in love with Hema when he once found her dancing
in Devaloka and the devas coming to know of it gave her
in marriage to Maya. Maya took Hema to the southern
side of the Himalayas and constructing a city there
called Hemapura stayed there happily. They got two
sons ae Mayavi and Dundubhi. (Uttara Ramayana).
2) Death, Valorous Mayavi fought against anybody and
everybody. He once challenged Bali to a fight. But the
mighty blows of Bali were unbearable to him and the
defeated Mayavi ran away from Bali and hid himself
ina big cave. Bali followed him and when he reache
the mouth of the cave he posted his brother Sugriva
there with instructions to shut tight the opening of the
cave in case he died in the cave in the fight. He said
that if blood flowed from the cave the dead person was
Mayavi and ifmilk flowed from the cave the dead person
was himself. In the cave a great fight ensued in which
Mayavi was killed. But Mayavi by his powers of magic
made the blood that flowed out look like milk for
Sugriva and the latter thinking that it was his brother
who was killed shut tight the mouth of the cave and went
his way. (Sarga 9, Kiskindha Kanda, Valmiki Ramayana
and Pirva Kanda, Kamba Ramayana . ;
In Uttara Ramayana there 15
a story about how the peacock got its beauty. Mayil in
Malayalam means peacock.
Once Ravana set out in his Puspaka Vimana with his
army of Raksasas, determined to gain victory over all
Kings. They got down on the mountain called UgiraviraRavana examined the valley to see whether there were
any Kings doing tapas anywhere there. A King named
Marutta was performing a yaga called “Maheévara’’ i
an asrama. Indra and other gods were also present to
receive the share of offerings (Havirbhiaga) At the sight
of Ravana, the gods took different disguises and fle
in panic. At that time Indra assumed the form of a big
peacock. As soon as Ravana left the place, the gods reqepace ee From that time, Indra who put on the
Bh RTA oe peacock felt a special attachment to that
led the peacock and said:—*Till now you
were blue in colour. But from A :
feathers will have varj Rite
lous colours. All my thousand eyes

MAYURA 499 MEDHAVI I
I transfer to you. Besides, you will be immune from all daughters including Medha were married by Dhara:
diseases. Whoever kills you, will meet with death, soon deva. (Chapter 7, Visnu Purana).
after. You will dance at the commencement of the rain MEDHATITHI I. Grandson “of Svayambhuva M
season. People will greet you with enthusiasm ri , Svayambhuva Manu had two sons sanied BH entendl
It is because of Indra’s blessing that Peacocks are so Uttanapada. Of these Priyavrata married Sarupa and
beautiful in appearance and dance at the onset of the Barhismati, daughters of Viévakarmaprajapati. Medharainy season. tithi was the son born to Priyavrata of Sariipa. AgniMAYURA. An asura who fought against Subrahmanya. dhra, and others were the brothers of Medhatithi.
Skanda Purana, Viramahendra Kanda describes the Medhatithi became the King of Plaksadvipa after the
terrible battle between Mayiura and Subrahmanya. death of Priyavrata. (8th Skandha, Devi Bhagavata)
Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 65 says that after Medhatithi got seven sons named Santahaya Sigira
eae, Mayira was reborn in the world as a King named Sukhodaya, Ananda, Siva. Ksemaka and Dhruva. They
ifva, all became Kings of Plaksadvipa, T i
MAYURADHVAJA. A King of Ratnanagara. After per- ruled were acted after them oe MS era oe
forming seven ASvamedha yagas this King started varsa, Sukhodayavarsa, Anandavarsa, Sivavarsa, Ksemaanother Agvamedha in the Narmada river valley. The kavarsa and Dhruvavarsa. There are seven mountains
task of protecting the sacrificial horse was undertaken showing the boundaries of these states and they are
by the King’s son Sucitra or Tamradhvaja. He set out called Gomeda, Candra, Narada, Dundubhi, Somaka
for the conquest of the world with the chief minister Symana and Vaibhraja. In these beautiful countries
Bahudhvaja. On his return, he came across Yudhisthira’s and grand mountains live a great many Devas,
Agvamedha horse at the city of Manipur. The heroic Gandharvas and_ virtuous men. (Chapter 4, Arhga 2,
Sucitra encountered Sri Krsna and Arjuna who were Visnu Pur ana).
leading the horse. After making them unconscious, MEDHATITHI II. A Rajarsi of the Piru dynasty.
he entered the city with the sacrificial horse. Genealogy. Paru—Janamejaya Pracinvan—Manasyu—
When they recovered their senses, Sri Krsna disguised Vitabhaya—Sundu—Bahuvidha—Sarhyati— Rahovadi—
himself as a Brahmana and Arjuna as a Brahmana boy Bhadragva—Matinara—Pratiratha— Kanva — Mechaand they went to Mayiradhvaja’s palace. The King tithi.
welcomed them respectfully. 6rij Krsna, in his disguise This Medhatithi got two sons named Dusyanta and
as Brahmana told the King that he was coming from Pravira. It was this Dusyanta who married Sakuntala.
Dharmapuri to meet the King’s priest, Krsna who was (Chapter 278, Agni Purana).
to officiate at the marriage of his (Brahmana’s) son. He Medhatithi was a celebrated sage of Bharata. The
added that unfortunately on his way through a forest meharsi referred to in Sakta 12, Anuvaka 4, Mandala
alion caught hold of his son. Although he prayed to 1 of Rgveda is Medhitithi son of Kanva. Once
Lord Narasimha, the boy could not be rescued. ‘The Indra coming in the form of a goat drank the soma of
lion told him that he would release his son, if the Medhiatithi and the latter called him ‘goat’ (Mesa)
Brahmana persuaded Mayura and thenceforth Indra got the name Mesa. (Sukta 51,
dhvaja to offer one half of set adaia To Reved
hi : ee Anuvaka 10, Mandala 1, Kgveca).
s body as food to the lion We get the following details Sout Medhatithi from the
Mahabharata.
1) He was a King in the court of Indra.
(2) Medhatithi had a son named Kanvamuni who was
popular on the east coast of Bharata. (Sloka 23,
Chapter 107, Santi Parva).
(3) Medhatithi observed Vanaprastha and attained
Svarga. (Sloka 7, Chapter 336, Santi Parva).
(4) Medhatithi was considered to be a sage deserving
worship and when he went to see Bhisma once DharmaOn hearing the Brahmana’s story, Mayuradhvaja agreed
to give half of his body to the lion. Just then his queen
Kumudvati appeared before them and said, “IJ am the
left half (Vamabhaga) of the King. You may take me
and offer me as food for the lion.”’ But the a
replied that the lion wanted the right half of the King’s
body. d ive the
When the King heard this, he readily agre® ee teas d
right half of his own body. Accordingly, eer
cutting his body into two halves. d ust then See Brahe
coming down from Mayuradhvaja $ [ett Sye, SS” I do
mana said:—I find that you are. isha ay yholenot wish to accept a gift which is not given anal
heartedly.” Mayiradhvaja explained ae ee ee disnot caused by pain oF sorrow. His leit A e avid
appointed in not being able to be of as much ser
the right side.
Whee Sri Krsna heard these were: al the Fee
resumed his own shape and embrace leted his yaga and
him. After that Mayuaradhvaj@ comp Gi on Vudhisthira’s
Started with Krsna and Arjuna, §, ae Aévamedha :
aes horse with them. (
MEDA. A serpent of the clan of eae
‘E. burnt to death at the Sern
loka 11, Chapter 57, Adi Parv?/
MEDHA. One of tte twentyfour a wee Beier
Daksaprajapati of his wife Prasel:
This serpent
Janamej aya.
MEDHATITHI III.
MEDHATITHI IV. A sage
putra received him with respect and worshipped him.
(Sloka 3, Chapter 26, Anusasana Parva).
A river. This river is the place
of birth of Agni. (Sloka 23, Chapter 222, Vana Parva).
who was the father
of Arundhati, wife of Vasistha. This Medhatithi who
was living in an asrama on the banks of the river
Candrabhaga performed a Jyotistoma yajia. (Kalika
Purana ).
MEDHAVI I.
A fierce sage. His father was a
For a very long time Baladhi
had no children and so, griefstricken, Baladhi did
penance and Medhavi was born as a result of his
penance. Even from boyhood the child showed wonderful powers of grasping things and so he was named
1) General information.
sage known as Baladhi.
-Medhavi. (Chapter 135, Vana Parva).

MEDHAVI II
9) How Medhavi cursed a nymph. One day in spring,
Majjughosa (Sucismita), a nymph, was playing with
other companions in the Caitrarathodyana. Medhavi
was doing penance in a place nearby and Mafijughosa
fell in love with the sage and she went near him and
made love to him by dance and music. Medhavi was
attracted by her and the sage accepted her advances
and lived with her for along time.
One day Majijughosa sought permission to go to Devaloka. “Wait till daybreak” said the sage. When it was
morning the nymph renewed her request and the sage
said “Wait till I finish my evening prayers.’ Hearing
this Sucismita said ‘“‘Oh, best of brahmins, how many
mornings and evenings have gone by this time ! Fiftyfive
years nine months and three days have gone by since we
started living together”. The sage then counted the
years and found she was correct. The astounding fact
that his penance had such a long break made the sage
angry and he cursed herand made her into an evil
spirit, She begged for pardon and the sage said “If you
observe with fasting the Caitrakrsnaikadasi called
Papamocini it will absolve you of all sins and give you
release from the curse”. (Chapter 48, Part 4, Padma
Purana).
3) In Rgveda. The Agvinidevas once gave rice to this
sage. (Sukta 117, Anuvaka 17, Mandala 1, Rgveda).
MEDHAVI II. A brahmin boy. This child once gave
Tattvopadega to his father. (The philosophy that the
human soul or material world is identical with the
supreme spirit pervading the universe). Chapter 377,
Santi Parva).
MEDHYA. A holy place on the west coast. A river
flows through this place. This sacred river is. believed to
be the place of origin of Agni. This is one of the rivers
worthy to be remembered every morning and evening.
(Chapter 155, Anugasana Parva).
MEDINI. A synonym for Earth (Bhimi). (See under
Kaitabha for details).
MEGHAHASA. A sonof Rahu. When he heard that
Mahavisnu had cut off the head of his father he went
to the banks of the river Gautami and practised severe
neers As a per of that Rahu, his father, got a
place among the other pla
Prabmand’: Duran’) : "ges he ein Mae Ma,
MEGHAKARNA. A female follow
(Sloka 30, Chapter 46, Salya Parva’, ‘i eubralmanya.
MEGHAMALA. A female follower of
(Sloka 30, Chapter 46, Salya Parva).
MEGHAMALI I. Ademon who fought against Rama
and Laksmana in the forests. He was one of th
captains of the army ofthe great demon Khara The
other captains were Syenagami, Prthugriva, Yajfiag atru
Vihangama, Durjaya, Karaviraksa, Parigha Kalakamukha, Mahamali, Sarpasya and Rudhiragana., (Sarga
96, Aranya Kanda, Valmiki Ramayana).
MEGHAMALI II. One of the two parsadas given to
Subrahmanya by Mahameru. The other was Kajficana.
(Sloka 47, Chapter 45, Salya Parva).
MEGHANADA.
Subrahmanya.
given here.
1) Synonyms of Meghandda. Kanina, Ravani, Mayavi,
Indrajit. The origin of each name is given below:
(i) Kanina. Son of a virgin. In olden times, once, the
Sea of Milk was churned. From it arose a beautiful
MEGHANADA IL.
Indrajit, son of Ravana. (Only MEGHAPUSPA. A horse-of di
portions which were left off under the entry Indrajit are MEGHASANDHI
MEGHASARMAN. A brahmin w
500 MEGHASARMAN
maiden called Sulaksana. She became an attendant of
Parvati and one day while bathing in a pond in the
garden she sent Sulaksana to fetch some clothes for her.
Siva who was then in Parvati’s chamber alone, lost his
control when he saw the beautiful Sulaksana and had
intercourse with her. The maid was perplexed and then
Siva assured her that she would give birth to a child
only after her marriage.
But when Sulaksana returned with the dress Parvati
felt suspicious and she cursed her and made her into a
frog and pushed it into that same pond.
Time passed on. Once Maya performed severe penance
to please Siva to get a daughter and Siva persuaded
Parvati to release Sulaksana from the curse and she did
so turning her into a beautiful maiden named
Mandodari and Siva gave her to Maya. Ravana marric
her and their first son was Kanina.
(ii) Ravani. Son of Ravana.
(ili) Meghandda. (One having the sound of thunder )-
When he was born he made a sound as loud as thunder
and so he was called Meghanada.
(iv) Mayavi. He accepted Siva as his Guru and learned
all the divine arts of magic like Mrgendrajala, Brabmendrajala, Surendrajala, Mahendrajala Khagendrajala, Vayustambha, Jalastambha, Agnistambha, Akasasaficdra, Parakayapraveia, Ritpabhedasvikara 4”
Tirodhana. Because he knew all these tricks he w4°
called Mayavi.
(v) Indrajit. When Ravana attacked svarga he pushed
forward too much and so was caught inside an army
of the Devas which surrounded him. When Meghanada
saw it he broke the army circle of the devas and getting
in caught Indra as a prisoner and brought him to
Lanka. Indra was later released by the mediation °
Brahma and the latter gave him the name Indrajtt
meaning “‘Conqueror of Indra’”’.
2) Boons. When Ravana was conducting his world
campaign he performed at Nikumbhila many yag®
and got from Brahma many _boons. Meghanada
acquired powers which had not been possible for
mAnavas, danavas, vanaras or raksasas to acquire. iI
got a Vimana (divine car) which could travel 19 4
directions, backwards and forwards, up or down. H
received an armour against which no weapon would D&
of any use. He possessed a weapon which would be
effective against anything. Above all these, he had
power to remain invisible. He could be killed by onl
one person of his age who lad lived for fourteen year
dutifully and virtuously without ‘sleep. Only Indra}!
knew about this.
Ina battle Mayavi would show many tricks. If one was
found ineffective he would use another, He had in }™
stock over a thousand such tricks all of which he ha
acquired with very little effort. (Yuddha Kanda
Kamba Ramayana).
A soldier of S a. (Slok#
97, Chapter 44, Salya Comal, preereus> 4
vinity drawing the chariot
, Chapter 45, Virata Parva)
A prince of ancient Magadha. Ones
Meghasandhi fought agai 7
ent against Ar u . f ate
(Chapter 82, Agvamedha oe. ean eae eee
of Sri Krsna. (Sloka 27
: ho was a creat devote
of Sirya. When there was a dr "
dian: , : )
uring the reign of Santanu this brahmin by his worsb!P
ought in the country

MEGHASVANA |
of Sarya brought rains to the country. (Bhavisya
Purana, Pratisargasamhita ).
MEGHASVANA. A female follower of Subrahmanya.
(Sloka 8, Chapter 46, Salya Parva).
MEGHAVAHANA. A King. He was a dependant of
Jarasandha. (Sloka 13, Chapter 14, Sabha Parva).
MEGHAVAHINI. (MEGHAVASIND) . A female follower of Skandadeva. (Sloka 17, Chapter 49, Salya Parva).
MEGHAVARNA I. Acharacter ina_ story of Pajiicatantra. (See under Pajicatantra) .
MEGHAVARNA II. A son of Ghatotkaca. Meghavarna
was also present with Arjuna when he went to protect
the sacrificial horse of the ASvamedha conducted by the
Pandavas.
MEGHAVASA. An asura. This asura sits in the council
of Varuna and worships him. (Sloka 19, Chapter 9,
Sabha Parva).
MEGHAVEGA. A very brave soldier who fought
against the Pandavas on the Kaurava side. Abhimanyu
killed him. (Sloka-15, Chapter 48, Drona Parva).
MEKHALA (MEKALA). Mekhala was a country which had
attained Puranic fame in ancient India. The inhabitants
of this place were called Mekhalas. They were the bodyguards of Bhisma. (Chapter 51, Bhisma Parva). They
formed a separate division in the army of Brhannala,
King of Kosala. (Chapter 87, Bhisrna Parva). Once
Karna conquered this country. (Sloka 8, Chapter 4,
Drona Parva). Mekhalas were Ksatriyas formerly. But
they became persons of low caste when they showed
Chapter 35,
jealousy towards the brahmins. (Sloka 17;
Anugdsana Parva).
MENAI. Wife of Himavan.
daughter of Mahameru.
Himavan lord of the mountains and the seat of many
minerals and fossils had two daughters of unparallelled
beauty and their mother was the lovely Mena, daughter
of Mahameru and wife of Himavan. (Sarga 35, Bala
Kanda, Valmiki Ramayana) . | :
Ramayana states that Mena had two daughters
extraordinary beauty named Ganga and Uma. They
were both married by 5iva. :
But Vamana Purana in chapter 51 states that Mena
me
ane three beautiful daughter’ and 2 casint with
wi => augnter wa asi
unabha. Mena’s first daug dress. Her
red nd wearmg 2 t .
body and eyes a shite in colour,
second daughter named Kutila was W
re dress. The third was
had lotus eyes, and wore white ie
a oir] ing beauty named Kali.
girlof enchanting «like the blue lotus leaf.
blue-black i ] ith eyes lik
in colour with eyes Sani
i ~ ; Z a. an
ltean hesurmised that the UR o Ra following
Kali were one and the same by -
verse in the Amarakoésa. ;
Uma Katyayani ne)
Kali Haimavatis vari r . ke
F > gre ta en
When the statements of the {we ae daughters,
together Mena should have had aa 2
Ganga, Ragini, Kutla and Kali
MER Bee (Manes). Pitrs are of
NAII. Daughter of the Pitrs Anaenis are those who
two kinds : Anagnis and Sagnis. A185
form yagas
do > hose who Pe
not perform yagas and "0", 4
al ec
person
Agnisvattas an
ee called Sagnis. Anagnis are © Cyadha was the
Agnis are called Barhrsa Svadha got two daughtcommon wife of all the Pitrs. both very well5 i i a were
ers, Mena and Dharm. They
Beautiful ‘Mena was the .
MEPPATTUR NARAYANA BHAT TATIRI
learned, virtuous girls and were Brahmavadinis.
(expounders of Vedanta philosophy). (Chapter 10,
Arméa 1, Visnu Purana).
MENAKA. A nymph of extraordinary
‘nstructions from Indra, Menaka used
sages and destroy their power of penance. There are
innumerable stories of this kind in Puranas. Some
important events connected with Menaka are given
below : :
1) Mother of Pramadoara. Once Menaka became pregnant by a Gandharva named Vis vavasu. On the day she
delivered she threw the child on the banks of a river
and went to Svarga. A sage named Sthilakega who was
doing penance nearby took the babe and brought it up.
When she grew up she was named Pramadvara and
Ruru married her. (See under Pramadvara ).
2) Birth of érkuntala. When Visvamitra was perform-.
ing penance in the forests, Menaka, under instructions
from Indra, went and enticed Vigvamitra and broke the
continuity of his penance. A girl was born to Menaka
and became later the-celebrated Sakuntala. (See under
Sakuntala).
3) Again with Visvamitra. Once again when Vigvamitra
was performing penance in Puskaratirtha, Menaka approached him and again Visvamitra fell in love with her and
they lived together for ten years. Then one day Vigvamitra realised his folly and leaving her went again to
the forests for penance.
4) Maiikana was enticed See under
5) Other details.
i) When once Durvasas visited Devaloka it was
Menaka who presented him with a flower garland. This
‘ncident led to the churning of the milk ocean ata
later period. (See under Amrta).
(ii) Menaka was one amoung the six prominent celestial
maidens. Urvesi, Purvacitti, Sahajanya, Menaka,
Ghrtaci and ViSVACl are the six. (Sloka 68, Chapter 74,
Adi Parva).
(iii) Menaka attended the Janmotsava of Arjuna and
sang on the occasion. (Sloka 64, Chapter 122, Adi
Parva).
ivy Menaka was a dancer in the court of Kubera
(Sloka 10, Chapter 10, Sabha Parva).
(v) Menaka once gave a music performance in the
court of Indra in honour of Arjuna. (Sloka 29,
Chapter 43, Vana Parva).
MENDA (MENDHA). A Sanskrit poet who lived in
the 5th century A.D. Among his works only one is
known Viz. Hayagrivavadha (the assassination of Hayagriva) . This book is known by another name ‘“Hastibeauty. Taking
to entice many
Mankana
paka”.. Hes
MEPPATTUR NARAYANA BHATTATIRI. A Sanskrit poet who lived in Kerala.
1) General information It 1s believed that this poet
lived during the period from 1560 to 1648 A.D. He was
born in the village of Kurumattir in Malabar district
The illam (house of nambitiris) which became famous
by his birth was a mile to the east of the Bhagavati
temple, Candanakkavu, which itself is situated just
two furlongs to the north of the well known Tirunavaya
temple. Meppattir illam became impoverished and was
merged with another illam of name Maravaniceri
Tekketattu.
Narayana Bhattatiri had a brother named Matrdatta.
He was younger to Narayana and his work was to take

MERUBHUTA
down the verses which Narayana composed. Meppattur
(Narayana is more well-known under the name of his
illam) studied under different preceptors. His father
taught him Mimarhsa and such other subjects. He
studied Veda under Madhavacarya and Tarka under
Damodaracarya. Acyuta Pisdroti taught him Vyakarana.
The poet became a rheumatic patient in his old age
and he stayed in the Guruvayar temple worshipping
the deity there. His famous work Narayaniyam was
written sitting in the temple of Guruvayur and the
mandapa (raised dais) where he sat and wrote is even
now preserved for pilgrims to see. He took hundred
days to write the Narayaniyam.
2) His works. Itisnot yet known how many books
Meppattir had written but the following have been
recognised as definitely written by him: (1) Narayaniyam (2) Sripadasaptati (3) Guruvayupureésastotram
(4) Gofrinagaravarnanam (5) Matamahisapragasti (6)
Sailabdhigvarapragasti (7) Saktaslokas (8) A‘valayanakriyakrama (9) Prakriyasarvasvam (10) Dhatukavyam
(11) Apaniniyapramanyasadhanam (12) Manapariccheda
of Manameyodaya (13) Tantravarttikanibandhana (14)
Rajasiyam (15) Ditavakyam (16) Paicalisvayamvaram (17) Nalayanicaritam (18) Sundopasundopakhyanam (19) Subhadraharanam (20) Kaunteyadstakam
(21) Kiratam (22) Kailasavarnanam (23) Matsyavataram (24) Nrgamoksam (25) Niranunasika or Siurpanakhapralapa (26) Raksasotpatti (27) Ahalyamoksa
(28) Balakanda story (29) -Daksayajiia (30) Tripuradahana (31) Astamicampu (32) Svahasudhakaram (33)
Kotiviraham.
MERUBHUTA. A _ place of habitation of ancient
Bharata. (Sloka 48, Chapter 9, Bhisma Parva).
MERUDANA. Merudanas (gifts of heaps like Meru)
are all very effective and productive of good results.
The Merus for the danas are the following :
1) Dhanyameru. A dhanyameru or a thousand dronas
of dhanya (grain) is considered the best ; a dana of
half that quantity (i.e. 500) was fair and half of the
latter, the worst.
2) Lavanameru. A dana of sixteen dronas of lavana
(salt) is considered to be Uttama (best) ; with half
of that as Madhyama (fair) and with half of the latter
as Adhama (worst).
3) Gudameru. One with ten bharas of guda (
is considered Uttama ; with half of that as M
ee half of ie latter as adhama.
varnameru. svarnameru with a
of Svarna (gold) is considered Ueda cone
that as madhyama and with half of the latter as
adhama.
5) Tilameru. One with ten dronas of tila (
considered Uttama ; with half of that as ma
with half of the latter as adhama,
6) ft arpasameru. A Meru with twenty bharas of Karpasa
(cotton) 1s considered Uttama ; with ten as madhyama
and with five as adhama.
7) Ghrtameru. One with twenty jars of ghrta (ghee)
is Uttama ; with ten, madhyama and five, adhama.
8) Rajatameru. One with ten thousand palas of silver
is deemed Uttama ; with half of that as madhyama
and with half of the latter as adhama.
9) Sarkarameru. One with eight bharas of sugar is
deemed Uttama ; with half of that as madhyama and
jaggery)
adhyama
gingelly) is
dhyama and
502 MITHI (MITHI JANAKA)
with half of the latter as adhama. (Chapter 210, Agni
Purana).
MERUDEVI. A daughter of Mahameru. The nine
daughters of Mahameru are: Merudevi, Pratirupa,
Ueradamstri, Lata, Ramya, Syama, Nari, Bhadra and
Devavithi. They were married to Nabhi, Kimpurusa,
Hari, Ilavrta, Ramyaka, Hiranmaya, Kuru, Bhadrasva
and Ketumala respectively. All these nine Kings were
born to a King Agnidhra of the nymph Purvacittt.
(Paficama Skandha, Bhagavata). -
MERUMANDARA. A mountain. This supports Mahameru. The mountains which support it from the four
sides are Mandara, Merumandara, Supargva and
Kumuda. (5th Skandha, Bhagavata).
MERUPRABHA. A forest. There were three beautiful
forests about the waist of the mountain Latavesta;,
situated to the south of Dvarakapuri. Meruprabha 1s
one of them. The other two are Talavana and Puspakavana. (Chapter 26, Sabha Parva, Daksinatya Patha).
MERUSAVARNI. A Manu. (See under Manvantara) -
‘The daughter of this Merusavarni named Svayamprabha
was met by Haniman on his way in search of Sita.
(Sarga 51, Kiskindha kanda, Valmiki Ramayana) .
MERUVRAJA. A city of ancient India. A demon named
Virapaksa lived there. (Sloka 19, Chapter 17, Sant
Parva).
MESA I. A synonym for Indra. Once Indra taking the
shape of a goat went and drank the Soma of the sa8°
Medhatithi. Then that sage called Indra ‘goat’ (mesa)
and that name of Mesa stuck to him. (Sukta 51,
Anuvaka 10, Mandala 11, Rgveda).
MESA II, A soldier of Subrahmanya.
Chapter 45, Salya Parva). ,
MESAHRT. A son of Garuda. (Sloka 12. Chapter 101,
Salya Parva).
MISRAKA I. A special tribe of horses. (Daksinaty
Patha, Chapter 38, Sabha Parva). .
MISRAKA Il. A garden in the city of Dvaraka. The city
shines more by this divine garden. (Daksinatya Path
Chapter 38, Sabha Parva). | a:
MISRAKA III. A sacred place within the boundaries °
Kuruksetra. If one bathes in a holy pond there one
would get the benefit of bathing in all the sacred ponds
in India. (Sloka 91, Chapter 81, Vana Parva). ;,
MISRAKESI I. Acelestial woman. She was the beav¥?
ful daughter born to Pradha wife of Kagyapaprajap"’
Raudragva son of Piru married Migrakegi and beg?!
a son named Anvagbhanu and ninesons more who were
all good archers. When once Arjuna went to Indra
loka Misrakesi gave a dance performance in his honow!
(Chapter 65, Adi Parva and Chapter 43, Vana Parva):
ae ae II. Wife of King Vatsaka, brother _°
oe a Skandha, Bhagavata, and Chapter DY)
MISRI. A serpent. This ser
(Sloka 64,
pent also w thos©
oo which came to take away Miki Ts BalalaCrarama to Patala at the time Bo lhe Soka
15, Chapter 4, Mausala Parva), obi: eat, |
ge Mit ae King of Videha. According
Janaka. itadhvaja was the son of DharmadhvaJ@
MITHI (MITHI JANAKA). Son of King Nimi. T°
sixth chapter of Devi Bha :
Agavat 1
story about the birth of Mithe agree Ela

MITHILA
There was once an emperor of great renown in the line
of Iksvaku named Nimi. He was the twelfth son of the
celebrated Iksvaku and was devoted to the welfare of
his subjects. He was a very honest, virtuous, righteous
and good-natured man ofa charitable disposition. The
agrahara (village where brahmuins reside) named
Jayantapura near the asrama of Gautama Maharsi was
constructed by, this emperor. This emperor ofa Rajasic
mind decided to perform a yaga which would take
years for its conclusion and in which land was to be
given as gifts. He went to his father Iksvaku, and took
permission from him to conduct the yaga. He made all
preparations for the yaga. He invited Bhrgu, Angiras,
Vamadeva, Pulastya, Pulaha and Reika all of whom
were well-versed in the Vedas and were worthy of being
priests in a Yaga of the kind he was conducting. He
then went and invited his Kulaguru (family priest and
preceptor ) Vasistha for the Yaga. But Vasistha had to
officiate at a Yaga conducted by Indra and so he
commanded Nimi to postpone the Yaga by five hundred
years, Nimi did not act according to itand he performed the Yaga with the help of the other sages and completed it successfully. After five hundred years when
the Yaga of Indra came to a close, Vasistha came to see
Nimi. Nimi was asleep then and the servants in the
palace hesitated to go and inform him of the arrival of
the sage. Vasistha got angry and cursed him and made
him Videha (without body). At once the body of the
King fell to the ground and the soul got out of it, But
before the soul separated from the body Nimi cursed
Vasistha also and separated his soul from his body.
Vasistha was again born as the son of Mitravarunas.
The other sages present there took the lifeless body of
Nimi and after sacrificial ceremonies and worship of
gods started to churn the body. After some time a mighty
and perfect man of great brilliance was born out of it.
Because he was born by Mathana (churning) he was
named Mithi, Because he was born from his father
(Janaka) he was called Mithijanaka and because he was
born of Nimi, a Videha, he was called Videha also.
The country which was ruled by Mithi got the name
of Mithila. It is the country of Sita.
MITHILA.
1) General information. A celebrated country of ancient
Bharata. This is situated on the north-eastern side of
Bharata. Its modern name is Tirhut. Mithila was rule
by the renowned Janaka Kings. See under Mithi to
know how the country got the name Mithila. |
2) The-wealth of Mithila. Mithila was the capital of the
extensive country of Videha. Successive generations of
1 naka ruled the country. Mithila was not
Ey ee virtues than for the pomp and 6
Ra ryday on the protruding breasts of an sty)
jasa-rajalaksmi (embodiment of rope) PP
asma (ashes) and candana (sandalwood paste) “es
aa smeared, In the middle of Tretayus* Naeeue WS
th ed by a Janaka who brought fame and aad Z 4
sSitt successive generations. a devotee (observing
‘vic disposition he was a Nityabrahmacam aa
a a throughout life) and his wife a_ disciple ©
eee well-versed in Advaitavedanta was. @
rahmacarini. ? :
aad grew prosperous with agriculture dager |
by th work put up by the peasants an ae ee.
€ virtuous deeds of the King and the peoP g
lory of kings.
idol o
ed more for .
MITRADEVA
culture was given importance, so much so that the
royal emblem itself was the figure of a plough. Rains
were there in season and in plenty because of the y2gas
conducted properly by the King. (Balakanda, ara
Ramayana).
3) Other details.
(i) Once Pandu, father of the Pandavas, attacked this
country and conquered it. (Sloka 28, Chapter 112, Adi
Parva).
(i1) Sri Krsna, Arjuna and Bhima once visited this
country when they were on their way to Magadha from
Indraprastha. (Sloka 28, Chapter 20, Sabha Parva).
iii) Karna once conquered and captured the country
of Mithila. (Sloka 8, Chapter 254, Vana Parva).
(iv) Sita was born in Mithila. (Sloka 9, Chapter 274,
Vana Parva).
(v) Because she was born in Mithila she is known by
the name of Maithili. (Sloka 2, Chapter 277. Vana
Parva).
(vi) Once Mithila was ruled by a King called
Dharmadhvaja. Hearing about his great Dharmajiiana
dge about virtues and dutics) a female ascetic
named Sulabha visited him in the guise of a beggar
woman. (Sloka 4, Chapter 390, Santi Parva).
(vii) Suka the great sage, with the permission of his
father Vyasa came to Mithila and took Dharmopadesa
fom King Janaka. (Sloka 6, Chapter 325. Santi
Parva).
MITHU. A very valorous danava. Once Bharata son of
Arstisena was making preparations for an Agvamedha
on the banks of the river Sarasvati with Upamanyu as
his priest when Mithu came and took them both to
Patala. Then Devapi, son of Upamanyu, got his father
and the King released from there by continuous worship
of Siva (Brahma Purana—127. 56-57).
MITRA. ,
1) General information. One of the twelve Suryas. The
twelve Siuryas born to Aditi of Kagyapaprajapati are
Visnu, Sakra, Aryama, Dhata, Tvasta, Pisa, Vivasvan,
Savita, Mitra, Varuna, Bhaga and Améa. (Chapter 15,
Arméa 1, Visnu Purana).
Mitravarunas are two devatas of great intimacy. They
are always found together. If you pray to Mitravarunas
you will get plenty of rains. (Sakta 2, Anuvaka 1,
Mandala 1, Rgveda).
See para 2 under Agastya to understand the story of
how Mitravarunas became the father of Agastya.
2) Other details.
(:) Mitra came and stood in the sky at the time of the
birth of Arjuna. (Sloka 66, Chapter 122, Adi Parva).
(ii) Mitra was one among those sent by Indra to fight
against Krsna and Arjuna at the time of the burning
of the forest Khandava. (Sloka 36, Chapter 226 Adi
Parva).
(iii) Mitra was a member of the Indra sabha. (Sloka
91, Chapter,7, Sabha Parva).
(iv) He presented two Parsadas named Suvrata and
Satyasandha to Subrahmanya. (Sloka 41, Chapter 40,
Salya Parva).
MITRA. A female companion of Parvati.
Chapter 231, Vana Parva).
MITRABHEDA. _ See under Paficatantra.
MITRADEVA. Brother of Sugarma, King of ‘Trigartta.
Arjuna killed him in the great battle. (Sloka 3, Chapter
27, Karna Parva).
(knowle
(Sloka 41,

MITRADHARMA 504
MITRADHARMA. Son of the Agni called Paficajanya,
(Sloka 12, Chapter 220, Vana Parva).
MITRAGHNA. Ademon who fought on the side of
Ravana in the Rama-RAavana battle. Sri Rama killed
this demon. (Chapter 34, Verse 27, Yuddha Kanda,
Valmiki Ramayana).
MITRAJNA. Son of the Agni named Paficajanya. He
was one of the five Devavinayakas. (Sloka 12, Chapter
220, Vana Parva).
MITRASAKHA (MITRASAHA). A King of the Solar
dynasty. He was known as Kalmasapada also. (See
under Kalmasapada) .
MITRASENA. A King who fought on the side of the
Kauravas in the great battle. Arjuna killed him. (Sloka
20, Chapter 19, Karna Parva).
MITRAVAN I. Sonof the Agni named Paficajanya.
He was one of the Paficadevavinayakas. (Sloka 12,
Chapter 220, Vana Parva).
MITRAVAN II. An ascetic who lived in the city of
Saupura. He acquired complete peace of mind by
reading ‘the second Chapter of the Gita sitting in a Siva
temple. Once a brahmin of name Devasarma approached a sage named Muktakarma seeking advice to obtain
peace of mind. The latter directed Devasarma to Mitravan andMitravan advised him to read the second Chapter of the Gita. (Padma Purana, Uttara Khanda, 176).
MITRAVARDHANA. Son of the Agni called Parficajanya. He was one of the Paficadevavinayakas. (Sloka
12, Chapter 220, Vana Parva).
MITRAVARMAN. Brother of Susarma, King of Trigarta.
Arjuna killed him in the great battle. (Sloka 3,
Chapter 27, Karna Parva).
MITRAVARUNA(S). The combined name of two of
the Dvadasadityas (twelve Siryas) Mitra and Varuna.
These two are always seen together. Agastya and
Vasistha were born as sons of Mitravaruna. It was due
to a curse by Mitravarunas that Urvasi had to marry
King Purtravas, a man of the earth. Manu had no
children and he performed a y4ga to placate Mitravarunas. But since there were many faults in the
ceremony a girl was born to him. (For details see under
Ila, Nimi, Urvagi, Vasistha and Mitra).
MTTRAVINDA. A deva. The havis (clarified butter
which is put in the Agni called Rathantara is intended
for this deva. (Sloka 19, Chapter 220, Vana Parva)
MITRAVINDA. Daughter of Sri Krsna’s father’s sister
Mitravinda’s mother’s name was Rajadhidevi, Rajadhidevi, queen of Avanti, got three children named Vinda
Anuvinda and Mitravinda. In the Svayarhvara Mitravinda chose Krsna as her husband. Vinda and
Anuvinda did not like it and joining the Kaurava side
fought against Krsna. But Krsna defeated them all and
took Mitravinda to Dvaraka. (10th Skandha, Bhagavata ).
MYEREYU. A King of the Lunar dynasty. He was the
son of Divodasa and father of Cyavana.
MLECCHA. A tribe of people of ancient India. This tribe
was born from the tail of the celestial cow Nandini,
kept by Vasistna for sacrificial purposes when there was
a fight between Visvamitra and Vasistha. Mahabharata
gives the following information regarding them.
(1) The miecchas who sprang up from the tail of the
celestial cow Nandini sent the army of ViSvamitra
flying in terror. (Sloka 38, Chapter 174, Adi Parva).
MOHAKA
(2) Bhimasena defeated the mlecchas living in the
coastal regions and took from them several valuable
diamonds as tax. (Sloka 25, Chapter 30, Sabha Parva).
(3) The miccchas living in the coastal area were once
defeated by Sahadeva, one of the Pandavas. (Sloka 66,
Chapter 31, Sabha Parva). | 7
(4) Nakula also once defeated the mlecchas. (Sloka 16,
Chapter 32, Sabha Parva).
(5) Bhagadatta was the King of the mlecchas. (Sloka 14,
Chapter 51, Sabha Parva).
(6) Bhagadatta accompanied by the mlecchas living 0”
the coasts attended the Rajasiya of Yudhisthira. (Sloka
14, Chapter 51, Sabha Parva).
(7) Different tribes of mlecchas will be born on earth
at the beginning of the era of Pralaya. (Sloka 34,
Chapter 188, Vana Parva).
(8) Kalki, the incarnation of Visnu, will destroy the
mlecchas who are found everywhere in the worl:
(Sloka 97 Chapter 190, Vana Parva).
(9) Karna during his world campaign conquered many
Eel, countries. (Sloka 19, Chapter 254, Vana
arva).
(10) A place of habitation in Bharata is called
Mleccha. (Sloka 57, Chapter 9, Bhisma Parva).
(11) Anga, a mleccha warrior was killed in the battle
by Bhimasena. (Sloka 17, Chapter 26, Drona Parva).
(12) Once the mlecchas attacked Arjuna with arror
Arjuna killed the hairy soldiers. (Sloka 43, Chapter 993
Drona Parva). :
(13) Satyaki killed many mleccha soldiers in the grea
war. (Sloka 43, Chapter 119, Drona Parva). 9g
(14) Nakula killed Anga, a mleccha King. (Sloka !%
Chapter 22, Karna Parva), 40
(15) Arjuna had to face a great army of mlecchas -
ace the Yagasva. (Sloka 23, Chapter 73, Agvamed
arva ).
(16) The wealth that remained in the Yagaéal@ a
Yudhisthira after the distribution as gifts to brahmi
was taken away by the mlecchas. (Sloka 26, Chapt
89, ASvamedha Parva). he
(17) The mlecchas drove angered elephants on 10 ‘ na
army of the Pandavas. (Sloka 10, Chapter 22, Ka™
Parva). .
MODA I. A demon who was a companion of Hiranyak*?
In the Devasura battle Vayu killed him.
MODA II. A serpent born of
This serpent was burnt to death in the sarpasatr
Janamejaya. (Sloka 10, Chapter 52, Asramavasis®
Parva).
MODAGIRI. A country of ancient Bharata. The Kins
of this country was killed by Bhimasena. (Sloka Shs
Chapter 30, Sabha Parva).
MODAKI. A vast area of land in Sakadvipa neat ae
mountain Kesara. (Sloka 26, Chapter 11, Bhis™
Parva). | '
MODAPURA A country of ancient Bharata. Arjun?
defeated the King of this country once. (Sloka ai
Chapter 27, Sabha parva).
MOHA. A son born of the lustre of Brahma. (ar
Skandha, Bhagavata).
MOHAKA. Son of Suratha, a devotee of Sri Ram.
When Suratha blocked the Agvamedha horse of Sr
Rama, a fight ensued in which Moh art
? Ic lk
(Padma Purana, Patala Khanda). papas Cae
the clan of Airavat?s.

MOHANA
MOHANA. An ancient place
This place was conquered by
254, Vana Parva). ,
MOHANA. Wife of Sugriva.
of habitation in Bharata.
Karna. (Sloka 10, Chapter
Mohana helped her husband in bringing water from the Sarayu river to bathe
the Agvamedha horse of Sri Rama. (
Patala Khanda).
MOHINI. The female form of Mahavisnu.
other over the right of
obtained from the sea of
Asuras quarrelled with each
partaking the Amrta (nectar )
Milk. At that time Mahavisnu
in the guise of a beautiful
Padma Purana,
Devas and
appeared before them
maiden of maddening charm
and the asuras were guilefully made to turn their
attention on her for some time
nectar was carried away by the Devas.
Mahavisnu was called. Mohini.
iva fell in love with Mohini an
during which time the
The female form
d by the union of the
two was born Sasta. (See under Amrtam). (8th
Skandha, Bhagavata) .
MOKSA I. One of the seven divisions of the island
of Plaksa. The seven divisions are Siva, Yavasa,
Subhadra, Santa, Moksa, Amrta and Abhaya. (5th
Skandha, Bhagavata).
MOKSA II. 'Moksa means liberation and is generally
meant to convey the meaning of the deliverance of the
soul from recurring births. The Jivatma enshrined in
the body has the delusion that
it enjoys Or
suffers happiness or woe. In truth it neither suffers nor enjoys anything.
It is detached from all. It is the Supreme
. When Jivatma deserts its Woes
atma. When once
jivatma 1s devoid
be enshrined in any
one body joins
hus a Jivatma in succession
h time without
its woes. In the
“Jivatma, which is
hs searches for
earing a golden neckbrahman)
i.e. Jivatma gets merged with Param
Jivatma meérgés with Paramatm
ofhappiness or woes.
another new body and t
enters thousands of bodies and eac
ing the absolute Truth laments
words of a Rsi it is explained thus : “J!
bliss in itself living in births after birt
bliss elsewhere just as a person W
a round his neck searches fo
he passage of Jivatma from one
the bodies that enshrine it each tin
Jivatma
worldly- life. When once 4
In Sarhsara (mundane existence )
the knowledge that
and the same, then that jivatm
ee liberation from recurring
ul rahman. This is called MoksaOKSADHARMAPARVA. A 5
age Parva. It contains the Cc
anti Parva.
MRGADHUMA. A sacred place 07 |
setra. If one
(SI get the benefit of conducting
MR oka 101, Chapter 83, Vana Pa
<GAMANDA, A daughter of
rgas) .
MRGANKAKA. A sword. Once Kubera ©
d it to guar
and making him a lion poste
= ivatma=The individual soul
aramatma=The Supreme spirit 2
Sathsira=The circuit of life consis
It need not
body. A Jivatma getting released from
Jivatma and P
4 gets fi
births. It merges wit
a,
over
Being (Parait gets moksa
knowr the same elsewhere.”
birth to another and
time constitutes the
thus
involved
gets real knowledge,
ub=divisional
hapters 17
an
rva)-
Kagyapa. (See
enshrined in
r Brabma
ting of b
aramatma are one
nal emancipaParva of
4 to 365 of
he border : Kuru-
-_. Mahadeva one
goes there and worst edhayajlla
under
ursed a Yaksa
d the palacethe human bod
n
irths and
y imparting to it life,
rebirths with
MRTASAJNIVANI
He said he would be released from
man on earth defeated it. Once a
brahmin warrior named Sridatta defeated this lion and
at once the lion changed into a Yaksa and the Yaksa
presented Gridatta with the sword named Mrgankaka.
(Kathapithalambaka, Kathasaritsagara ).
MRGANKAVATI. Daughter of an ancient King called
617 Bimbaki. (See under Sridatta).
MRGAS (DEER). All the animals originated from
Kagyapaprajapati. Kagyapaprajapati, son of Marici,
married the eight daughters of Daksa named Tamra etc.
From Tamra were born birds. Krodhavaéa gave birth
to ten girls named Mrgi, Mrgamanda, Hari, Bhadramada, Matangi, Sarduli, Sveta, Surabhi, Surasa and
Kadru. Mrgas (deer) are the children of Mrgi. (Valmiki Ramayana, Aranya Kanda, Sarga 4).
MRGASVAPNODBHAVAPARVA. A subsidiary Parva
of the Vana Parva of Mahabharata. Chapter 298 of
Vana Parva constitutes this Parva.
MRGAVATI. See under Udayana.
MRGAVYADHA. The disguise
went to test the devotion of Parasurama,
once went to the forests and did penance to please Siva
to learn archery from him. Siva in the form of a
Mrgavyadha (forest hunter) appeared before Parasurama and tested his sincerity in his penance in several
ways. Siva was pleased to fnd Paragurama’s devotion
to Siva unwavering and blessed him. He gave instruct-
‘ons in archery and also permitted him to go round the
earth. (Chapter 69, Brahmanda Purana) .
MRGAVYADHA II. One of the Ekadasarudras (eleven
9, Chapter 66, Adi Parva).
gates of Mahabali.
the curse when any
Siva took when he
Parasurama
Rudras). (Sloka
MRGI. The mother of all types of deer. (See under
Mrgas) -
MRKANDU. Father of the sage Markandeya. (See
under Markandeya).
MRSA. Wife of Adharma. Adharma begot of Mrsa two
children nazned Dambha and Maya. (4th Skandha,
Bhagavata) .
MRTAM._ See under Pramrtam.
MRTASANJIVANI. This +; a medicinal herb to give
life to those who are dead. When in the Rama-Ravana
battle Laksmana and others fell dead, Sri Rama
wanted Mrtasafijivani to be brought to revive them
back to life. Jambavan the oldest among the monkey-
-etructed Haniman to get it from the
mountain Mahameru explaining to him the way to
reach there. He said : “If you go a hundred yojanas
(1200 Kilometres) from here to the north you would
reach Ramesvara the southernmost point of Bharata.
From there if you go to the north another thousand
ojanas you would reach the Himalayas which is the
northern-most point of Bharata. Himavan is thousand
ojanas high, two thousand yojanas wide and is
jong enough to reach the two oceans on the east and
the west.
On that mountain is the marriage-dais
Parameévara and you will find places where Parames -
vara had sat for practising penances. On the northern
side under a big Kiivala tree lies Kamadhenu. This
cow gives milk to the sages and tourists who go there.
of Parvati and
motion and sensation as opposed to Paramatma.
sufferings and enjoyments of woes and happiness.

MRTTIKAVATI
Nine thousand yojanas to the north of this there are
two mountains named Hemakita and Ratnakita. The
centre of that is Rsabhavarsa. ‘On a big Karaskara
tree there will be hanging a king with his face downwards after being cursed by the sage Durvasas. He
will be released from the curse by you. If one eats the
fruits of this tree one will be free from greying of hairs
and rugosity.
If you go farther north from Hemakita you will reach
the mountain Nisadha. There is a lake there. If one
bathes there one will be granted all prosperity by
Laksmidevi. Farther to the north is situated Mahameru.
The greatness of this mountain is indescribable.
Mahameru has got four supporting mountain pillars
named Mandara, Merumandara, Suparsva and
Kumuda. The abode of the three deities is on the top
of this mountain. Ona peak in the centre is living
Brahma with his wives Vani, Gayatri and Savitri as
creator of the universe. This place is called Satyaloka
and to-the west of it is Sri Vaikuntha the abode of
Mahavisnu~ Madevi and Bhidevi are his two wives.
He is the god who protects us all. To the east of
Satyaloka is Kailasa, the abode of Siva. He lives there
with his wives Ganga and Parvati and sons Ganesa
and Subrahmanya. To the south of Satyaloka is the
city Sarhnyamani the abode of Yamadharmaraja. He
lives there with his wife Kalini and sons Vidava,
Mahima and Dipaka. To the east of this is the wonderful Devaloka. There lives Indra, his wife Sacidevi and
son Jayanta with thirtythree crores of Devas. Celestial
nymphs like Urvagi, Rambha and Tilottama live there.
Kamadhenu, the Kalpa tree, Airavata, Uccaisgravas,
and Cintamani are all there. You will find Amaravati
the Capital of Indra and Sudharma his court there.
On the northern side of Meru is a tall Aégvattha tree.
To the north of that is the Nila-mahagiri (the great
blue mountain). Kagyapa has installed a deity named
Svetavarahamirti there. Beyond that is the Rsabhadri
((ox-shaped mountain). It is believed that a divine ox
became a mountain there. Itstwo horns are like two
peaks. This mountain contains many divine medicines
of which Salyaharani, Visalyakarani, Sandhanakarani
and Mrtasafijivani are the most important.
Once the asuras defeated the Devas. Then Parameévara and Mahavisnu gave the Devas these four
medicinal herbs. They planted them here and watered
them from the Milk-sea. Around these precious plant
stand guard the parsadas of Siva and the Discus
Sudarsana of Visnu.” (Yuddha Kanda isis
Ramayana). ea ;
There is another statement in the Mahabharata that
Safijivani 1s an art, the use of a mantra. Sukracarya
by this art brought to life all the asuras killed in a war
with the devas. (Sloka 8, Chapter 76, Adi Parva)
Again Sukracarya brought to life three times his disciple Kaca whom the asuras killed three times. Sukricarya taught the art to Kaca. (Sloka 28, Chapter 76,
Adi Parva).
MRTTIKAVATI. A_ place of habitation in ancient
Bharata. (Sloka 10, Chapter 254, Vana Parva).
MRTYU. The goddess of Death. Agni Purana gives
details about the birth of Death. Himsa was the wife
of Adharma. They got a son named Anrta and a
daughter named Nikrti. From them were born Bhaya,
MUCUKUNDA
Naraka, Maya and Vedana. Of these Maya
birth to Mrtyu, the destroyer of matter.
Mrtyu has been described both asa god and goddess
in Mahabharata. The statements regarding Mrtyu as
a deva are as follows :—
(i) Three sons were born to Nikrti, wife of Adharma.
One of them was Mrtyu. Mrtyudeva has neither wile
nor children because he is the destroyer of all. (Sloka
54, Chapter 66, Adi Parva).
(ii) Once the son of an old Gautami was bitten by 4
snake. A hunter seeing it rushed to kill the serpent
but Gautami objected to it. She advised him that 1¢
was a sin to injure any living being. The serpent then
said, “It isnotmy fault that I bit the boy. I was
persuaded by the god of death te do so.”’ The god of
death Mrtyudeva also appeared there then. He com
firmed the snake’s statement and added that God had
programmed all events beforehand and the boy s
death was not due to any mistake on anybody’s part
(Sloka 50, Chapter 1, Anugdsana Parva)
Gii) Once Mrtyu followed the King Sudargana, but
Mrtyudeva had to withdraw after accepting defeat
because the King had been living a virtuous life of high
standard. (See under Sudargana).
The statements regarding Mrtyu as a goddess are the
following : 4
(1) This devata was born. from the body of Brahma
in the shape of a woman. (Sloka 17, Chapter 53;
Drona Parva).
(2) Brahma gave the work of destruction to MrtyuWhen she got that work she wept aloud. (Sloka 21;
Chapter 257, Santi Parva).
(3) The goddess of Mrtyu once did severe penanc®
(Sloka 17, Chapter 54, Drona Parva).
(4) Brahma assured the goddess of death that ayy
destruction by her would not be deemed as 2 9
(Sloka 44, Chapter 54, Drona Parva). |
(5) The terrible strength of Mrtyudevata is describe
in Chapter 819, Santi Parva, Mahabharata.
gave
MUCUKUNDA. A celebrated King of the Solat
dynasty.
1) Genealogy. Descending in order from Visnu~—
Brahma—Marici—Kagyapa — Vivasvan — Vaivasvaté
Manu—Iksvaku—Sagada — Purafijaya (Kakutstha) pe
Anenas — Prthulagva — Prasenajit — Yuvanasva —-
Mandhata—Mucukunda.
Mandhata got three sons named Ambarisa, Muc"
kunda and Purukutsa and fifty daughters and all the
fifty were married to a sage named Saubhari.
2) How Mucukunda attained salvation. (For the story
see para 72, under Indra).
3) Other details.
(1) Mucukunda had a daughter named CandramukhiShe was married to Sobhana, son of Candrase?4:
On ) i
ce, when Sobhana came to his wife’s house it w4®
an Ekadasi day and all were observ; °
rving fast and §
reonate also did so. The next day Silica, es see
ying dead. ‘The soul of Sobhana went to the valley °
the mountain of Mandara and st
. ‘ arted enjovi heaven
7 oe es day a pilgrim from eas conite? of
n : i
Sobhana a named Somagarma met the soul of
and coming to know that ; inbd . at it -1n
law of their King he started was the son
: maki iri bout
him. Sobhana then said that all "Es iene way

MUDAVARTA
due to his observing the Ekadasi Vrata. On hearing the
gladdening news about her husband Gandramukhi
became happy. (Chapter 61, Bhaga |, Padma
Purana).
(ii) This Rajarsi shines in the court of Yama. (Sloka
21, Chapter 8, Sabha Parva).
(iii) Once being greatly pleased with him Kubera
offered him all the worlds as gift. But Mucukunda
refused to accept itsaying that he would enjoy only
what was earned by him by his own efforts. (Sloka
97, Chapter 132, Udyoga Parva).
(iv) Once Mucukunda just to Uy the might of
Kubera attacked him. The demons sent by Kubera
defeated him. He then meditated on Vasistha and he
was able to defeat the army of asuras of Kubera.
(Sloka 4, Chapter 74, Santi Parva) .
(v) Once Parasurama gave dharmopadega_ (Instruction on morality, piety etc) to Mucukunda. (Sloka 7,
Chapter 143, Santi Parva).
(vi) Once the King of Kamboja gave him a sword
and he gave that sword to Marutta. (Sloka 77,
Chapter 166, Santi Parva).
(vii) He believed in making gifts of cows (Sloka 2D,
Chapter 76, Anusasana Parva ).
(viii) Mucukunda hated eating flesh. (Sloka 6l,
Chapter 115, Anugasana Parva).
(ix) Mucukunda is listed among those kings who are
worthy of being remembered morning and evening.
(Sloka 54, Chapter 165, Anugasana Parva).
MUDAV AE Eas A King born in the ee : .Hehaya
ings. (Sloka 13, Chapter 74, Udyoga Farva }.
MUDGALA I A ot of ancient Bharata. This
country was once conquered by Sri Krsna. (Sloka 16,
Chapter 11, Drona Parva )- : |
MUDGALA II. A serpent born of the family of
Taksaka-. This serpent was burnt to death at the
Sarpasatra of Janamejaya. (Sloka 10, Chapter 57,
Adi Parva). iN
a DGALA III. ‘(MAUDGALYA). A sage of Puranic
a la had never been
1) Mudeala and Durvasas. Mudgala_
oneal even once by anger: Durvasas once pes
the aérama of Mudgala in Kuruksetra where
es ‘ao, Durvasas came
living on alms received by peee ie got (eat day *%
naked. Mudgala gave all th ,
tigate nea ee ate to fig east” ee gi
smeared on his naked body what remained mae ve
meal. Mudgala never got angry: This aus eae
days together and not for once did Mudgala ane
pe was immensely Paes with F
ol Mudgala e offered to sen Sa
his bretiy. — came with & VE ea bey
Mudgala after enquiring about the Sehintre Vana
luxuries of heaven refused to go: (Chapter
arva ),
2) Other details.
(1) Mudgala, who was we ejaya.
a priest in the Sarpasatra e) J
Chapter 53, Adi Parva). wien) Hit, Bed CF
(ii) Mudgala visited Bhism4 Deaeva Ys
arrows, (Sloka 9, Chapter 47; Adi * deala a golden
(iii) Once Satadyumna ave, Ms ane Parva).
house. ($loka 21, Chapter 137, Meda Yaga making
(iv) Once the King of Cola © . 130, Part IV,
Mudgala the chief priest.
he Vedas, was
ll versed 1 i (Sloka 9,
07 MUKTAPHALAKETU
Padma Purana ).
MUDGARA PARNAKA. A serpent of the family of
Kasgyapa. {Sloka 153, Chapter 103, Udyoga Parva).
MUDGARAPINDAKA. A _ serpent born to Kadri of
Kas yapaprajapati. (Sloka 9, Chapter 35, Adi Parva).
MUDITA. Wife of the Agni named Saha. (Sloka 1,
Chapter 222, Vana Parva).
MUDRAS. When he recites the mantras a Mantrika
‘should use different kinds of gestures with his hands
to suit the recital. They are called Mudras. The
Mudras in general are given below :
The first mudra is called An jalimudra. Afijali means a
cavity formed by folding the hands and joining the
open hands together. If the hands thus folded are placed
on the breast it becomes a Vandini mudra. The hands
should be placed on the breast with a slight slant to
the left for Vandini mudra. The third mudra is called
’ Urddhva mudra. Hold the left hand first in such a
way that the thumb comes on the top and then with
the fingers of the right hand bind the thumb of the
left.hand. The thumb of the right hand should also
come to the top. This is called Urddhva mudra. The
lowering of the left palm opened up is called Varahamudra. (Chapter 26, Agni Purana).
MUKAI. Aserpent born of the family of Taksaka.
This serpent was burnt to death at the Sarpasatra or
Janamejaya. (Sloka 9, Chapter 5, Adi Parva).
MUKA II. An asura. This demon once went to
Arjuna who was engaged in penance in the forests. He
had assumed the form of a boar and Arjuna killed
him. At once Siva appeared there in the guise of a
forester and contended that the boar was killed by him.
A quarrel ensued which ended in a fight between
them. In the -42 Siva appeared before Arjuna ‘in his
real form and,, yar him the missile Pasupata. (See
under ArjUlRetaag oS-_eee
MUKA III. A Cardala devoted>much to his parents.
A Brahmana named Narottama went to this candala
to learn moral lessons from him. (Srstikhanda,
Padma Purana).
MUKHAKARNI. A follower of Subrahmanya. (Sloka
99, Chapter 46, Salya Parva).
MUKHAMANDIKA. One of the evil spirits tormenting
‘afants. This is called Diti also. (Sloka 30, Chapter: 23,
Vana Parva).
MUKHARA.. A serpent of the family of Kagyapa.
(Sloka 16, Chapter 103, Udyoga Parva).
MUKHASECAKA. A serpent born of the family of
Dhrtarastra. This serpent was burnt to death at the
Sarpasatra-of Janamejaya. (Adi Parva, Chapter 4/,
Sloka 16).
MUKTAPHALAKETU, A Vidyadhara youth. The
story of this young man who was born to kill Vidyuddhvaja, a fre-brand of an asura, is told thus in Kathasaritsagara. .
An eminent asura of name Vidyutprabha performed
nance to propitiate Brahma to get 4 son. As a
result of the blessings of Brahma he got a son invincible
to the Devas. He was named Vidyuddhvaja. Even
from boyhood he was very brave and daring. Once
when he saw some demons standing guard to protect
the asura family he said “‘At present our country is
being protected by the hands of others. I shall, therefore, perform penance and obtain boons to remove
this disgrace. I will conquer our enemies.”’ WVidyud-

MUKTAPHALAKETU
dhvaja went straight to the forests and performed penance
to propitiate Brahma. When the austerities became _
severe, Vidyuddhvaja observed fasting without break
and the whole world became excited due to anxiety.
So Brahma appeared before him in person and gave
him many divine weapons like Brahmastra. For
‘Brahmastra the only counter-missile was Pagupata
and so Brahma warned him that it should be used
only when it was found absolutely necessary.
Vidyuddhvaja became arrogant with the possession of
such divine weapons and started for Indraloka with
his father and his army to conquer Indra. He knew
that Indra was ready to face him with a big army
headed by Gandraketu and Padmagekhara.
The battle that ensued was very grim. Even Brahma
and Rudra came to see the fight. In a combat with
Indra, Vidyutprabha was killed. Vidyuddhvaja saw
his father killed, got furious and sent BrahmAstra
against Indra who in turn opposed it with Pasupata.
Vidyuddhvaja fainted. Devas sounded the trumpets of
victory and left the place.
After some time Vidyuddhvaja awoke from the swoon
and lamented thus to those of his men who were
around:—‘“My tapobala (strength resulting from
penance) was of no use. [have decided to die fighting
against Indra. Ido not want to return to a country
where my father is not alive. On hearing this his aged
minister pointed out to him his mistake
used the BrahmAstra untimely.
Vidyuddhvaja decided to attain more powers and so
he went to the base of the MHimialayas to perform
penance to propitiate Siva. Pleased at his penance of
five thousand years Siva appeared in person and asked
him to name the boon he we *Vidyuddhvaja
demanded “‘I must be able to kill’ his “in-a battle.”
Siva granted him the hoon. ~ - tall
Vidyuddhvaja once again attacked Indra with a huge
army. In the fierce battle that followed Indra fell
down fainting by the weapons of Vidyuddhvaja. At
once a voice from the air commanded, “Take away
Indra from the battlefield. It is dangerous to keep
him there.”? Vayu came anid carried him away swiftly.
When Indra awoke from fainting he went to
Brahmaloka with all the other devas.
Vidyuddhvaja established himself in Amardvati, the
capital city of Indra and lived there enjoying his life
as Indra. In the meantime Candraketu, King of the
viayadharas wae siting Vayuloka musing thus, “How
5 isplaced from our
positions ! There is no waning of the power of Vidyuddhvaja. My friend Padmasgekhara, King of Gandharvas, has gone to Sivapura to perform penance. I do
not know whether he has been bl
: essed b Clin oA
I will act after hearing from him.” y go nyhow
As his musings came to anend Padmasekhara himself
appeared before him and said: “I have come to tell you
the glad news that Siva told me. Siva said “Son, do
not grieve. You willget your country back. You will
get a son and a daughter. They will be top-ranking
men in all activities. The husband of your daughter
will kill Vidyuddhvaja.” a.
A happy Candraketu went to Kailaésa with his wife
Muktavali and started penance. Padmagekhara went
and mentioned to the devas all that had happened.
The devas then went to Mahavisnu and told him of
in having
MUKTAPHALAKETU
the boons which Vidyuddhvaja had received from Siva
and how he was ruling Indraloka then. After hearing
them patiently Visnu said that only Siva could do
‘anything in that matter. They all then went to the
temple of Siddhigvara’ and sat there meditating oP
iva.
In the meantime Bhagavan appeared before Candraketu
and blessed himand said he would get a very valorous
son who would kill Vidyuddhvaja and restore Devaloka
to the devas. But after that he would be born as a man
on earth by a curse. Padmavati daughter of 4
Gandharva King, would by the strength of her penance
release him from the curse and help him to get his
original state as a Gandharva. He would then marty
Padmavati and remain as emperor of the Widyadharas
for ten Kalpas together. Candaraketu and wife came
back to Vayuloka. —
At this time Siva appeared in person to those sitting
in the temple of Siddhigvara and said that a son wou
be born to Candraketu from a part of his and that
valorous youth would kill Vidyuddhvaja. Muktavali
wife of Candraketu became pregnant at that time 4”
soon delivered a son. He was named MuktaphalaketuEven from boyhood he became an ardent devotee °
iva and started performing penance to propitie™
Siva. Siva appeared before him and gave him ¢
secrets of many techniques in archery. d
Vidyuddhvaja was once bathing in a river when mud ‘,
waters flowed from up the river and the arr ogal
demon sent a servant to find out the cause theree™
When he went up by the shores he saw an ox and
elephant bathing in the river, They were the yarn”
of Siva and Indra. The elephant was the famor
Airavata. He came back and intimated to Vidyuddhvay"
what he saw. The demon then ordered his people ‘d
bring the culprits to his side. But the Vahanas kille
those who went to capture them and then they we
to their masters, Siva and Indra. Hearing about We
audacity of the demon-chief the Devas challenged * ‘
asuras toa fight. This time the army of the devas re
led by Muktaphalaketu. to
A Gandharva princesss named Padmavati grew UP ye
be a beautiful maiden at that time. She was 10 is g
with Muktaphalaketu. Padmavati was one day pluck?
flowers from a pond in the Gandharva land thinkin€
about Muktaphalaketu who had gone to war agaune
the asuras. A demoness who was going to eat flesh in € ok
battle-field ofthe devas and asuras saw Padmavati, Oe
her and went up. Muktaphalaketu coming to know a
this went up with her and got back Padmavati who is f
struggling in the hands of the demoness like strea*® e
lightning among clouds. Then he asked her maids abo"
ner and they said, ‘She is the daughter of the Gandhar¥"
King Padmagckhara. Padmavati is her name. She “
unmarried. But she is betrothed to the son of Candra~
ketu named Muktaphalaketu, who is born to dest! y
Vidyuddhvaja. She has come here to practis®
penance for the success of her father and Muktapha!@
ketu in this war between devas and asuras.”?
Padmavati recognised Muktaphalaketu from the wo! ds
of his follo
wers. But the latter ha Dev@"
loka under instructions from = 5 aedar eal became fierce. By the valour and skill of Muktaphalaket¥
many of the asuras were killed. The war was W0®
Muktaphalaketu was given a grand reception at devalok?

MUKULA
and was then sent back. Muktaphalaketu did not seem
to be happy and everybody thought that it might be
due to his having killed Vidyuddhvaja. But the real
cause was his separation from Padmavati.
A sorrow-stricken Padmavati sent her female companion
Manoharika to the country of Vidyadharas to enquire
about Muktaphalaketu. What she saw there was a sad
Muktaphalaketu pining to see Padmiavati. Both now
understood each other and Manoharika returned with
presents for Padmavati from Muktaphalaketu.
At that time Muktaphalaketu went to see a Maharsi
named Tapodhana. Disregarding the objections of
the disciple Drdhavrata who stood guard outside the
asrama Muktaphalaketu entered the arama with his
friend. Drdhavrata followed them. When they entered
the aérama they found the asrama empty and at once
Drdhavrata cursed them both to be born on earth as
men, Padmavati fainted when she heard the news.
When she regained her consciousness she started
le devoted to
practising austerities sitting in a temp
Gauri, wife of Siva. She meditated on her husband
Muktaphalaketu in his life on earth and performed
he grace of Siva
d he married
(Taratga 2,
penance to propitate Siva. By -t
Muktaphalaketu got his original life an
Padmavati and led a happy married life.
Padmavatilambaka, Kathasaritsagara. )
MUKULA. A King of the dynasty of Puru. Mukula,
Srfijaya, Brhadisu, Yavinara and Krmila were the sons
of King Bahyagva. All these five are known as Paiicalas.
OF these the family of Mukula comprised of Maukulyas.
Mukula got a son named Paficagva. (Chapter 20),
Agni Purana.)
MUKUTA. A Ksatriya family.
that the wicked King Vigahana was
Chapter 74, Udyoga Parva).
MUKUTA. A follower of Subrahmanya.
Chapter 46. Salya Parva).
MULAKA, A son of Kumbhakarna. Milaka was born
on Mila day and Kumbhakarna deeming that day and
the constellation inauspicious threw the baby away. The
abandoned child was brought up by honey-bees giving
the babe honey. When Milaka grew UP he became a
mighty demon who always tormented people. He was
killed by Sita with the help of Sri Rama. (Ananda
Ramayana, Rajyakanda).
MUMUCU. A sage who lived in
(Chapter 165, Verse 39, Anusasana Par
MUNDA I. A warrior of the country of Munda.
the great battle the Mundas were present in the
Kaurava’s army. (Sloka 9, Chapter 56, Bhisma Parva).
MUNDA II. An asura. (See under Candamundas.
MUNDAKA. A forest. During his exile Sri Rama entered this great forest of Mundaka and paid homage to the
sage Agastya. (Aranya Kanda, Kamba RamAayana) .
MUNDAVEDANGA. born of the family of
Dhrtarastra. This serpent W death at the
Sarpasatra of Janamejaya. Chapter 5/,
It was in this family
born. (Sloka 16,
(Sloka 23,
Daksinabharata.
va).
In
a
(Sloka 17,
di Parva).
ie ae ei follower of Subrahmanya. (Sloka
, Chapter 46, Salya Parva).
MUNI ie The i oiler of the distesaa, It is stated that
Kagyapaprajapati begot of his wife Muni, the Yaksas.
(Chapter 19, Agni Purana). The Gandharvas also
were born of Muni. She g8av© birth to sixtecn
509 MUNNU (THREE)
CGandharvas of which the first was named Bhimasena.
(Sloka 42, Chapter 65,-Adi Parva).
MUNI II. Sonof a Vasu named
(Sloka 23, Chapter 66, Adi Parva).
MUNI III. Son of Kuruof the Puru line of kings.
Kuru begot of his wife Vahini five sons named A§vavan, Abhisyanta, Caitraratha, Janamejaya and Muni.
(Sloka 50, Chapter 9%, Adi Parva).
MUNI IV. One of the seven sons of a King named
Dyutiman. (Markandeya Purana 9. 24).
MUNIDESA. Acountry in the island of Kraufica.
(Sloka 22, Chapter 12, Bhisma Parva).
MUNIVIRYA. One of the eternal Visve Devas.
(Sloka 31, Chapter 91, Anusasana Parva).
MUNJA. An ancient sage of Bharata. This sage respected Yudhisthira very much. (Sloka 23, Chapter 26,
Vana Parva).
MUNJAKESA. A Ksatriya King of
He was the re-birth of an asura
(Sloka 21, Chapter 67, Adi Parva).
sent an invitation to this King to participate in the
creat battle. (Sloka 14, Chapter 4, Udyoga Parva).
MUNJAKETU:. A Ksatriya King of ancient Bharata.
He was a member of the court of Yudhisthira. (Sloka
21, Chapter 4, Sabha Parva).
MUNJAPRSTHA. A place on a mount in the
Himalayas. Rudra once practised penance sitting on
this mount. (Sloka 4, Chapter 122, Santi Parva).
MUNJAVAN. A mountain. This is in the range of
the Himalayas. Paramasiva performs “his frequent
penances at this place. Siva freely rambles for
pleasure with his army of goblins in the caves and
shades of trees in this place. Everyday the Sadhyas,
Rudras, Visvadevatas, Vasus, Yama, Varuna, Bhitas,
devils, Nasatyas, Agvins, | Gandharvas, celestial
maidens, Yaksas, Devarsis, Adityas, Maruts, and
Yatudhanas come to this mountain to worship iva.
There is neither heat nor cold here. Greying of hairs or
rugosity 1s unknown here. There is no hunger or
thirst either. None dies here. On the sides of this
mountain gold lies spread like sunlight. (Verses 1-12
Aévamedha Parva, Chapter 8).
MUNJAVATA I. A holy place of pilgrimage devoted
to Siva in the neighbourhood of Kuruksetra. If one
resides here for one night one will get the position of
Ganapati. (Sloka 22, Chapter 83, Vana Parva).
MUNJAVATA II. A holy place of pilgrimage devoted
to Siva on the banks of the river Ganga. If a man
goes to this place and does circumambulation of the
“491 there singing songs in praise of Siva he would get
the position of Ganapati and if he bathes in the Ganga
river also, he would be absolved of all sins. (Sloka 67,
Chapter 85, Vana Parva).
MUNJAVATA. A place on the
Parasurama went to this place and ¢
there instructed them to keep their tufts knotted together. (Sloka 3, Chapter 112, Santi Parva).
MUNNU (THREE). The importance of the number
Ahar (i.e. Ahah)
ancient Bharata.
called Nicandra.
The Pandavas had
Himalayas.
alling the sages
three is indicated below :
1) Agnutraya (Three agnis). The three agnis are
Daksina, Garhapatya and Ahavaniya. Of these the
first is in the shape of a semi-circle, the second in the
shape of a full circle and the third, a square.
2) Adhamatraya. (Three kinds of low people). The

MUNNU (THREE) 510 MUNNU (THREE)
~ three classes of people who are considered to have a
very low position in society are the wifeless, sonless and
servantless ones.
3) Abhijatavihitatraya. (Three dealings with men of
equal nobility), The three iraportant dealings which
should be had with only people of equal nobility are
alliance, marriage and litigation.
4) Abhinayatraya. (Three kinds of acts). The three
kinds of acts are the Hascabhinaya (actions with the
hand), Angyabhinaya (actions with gestures) and
Rasabhinaya (actions with expressions of sentiment ).
5) Avasthaétraya. Man livesalways in any one of the
following states : Wakefulness, Dreaming and Sleep.
6) Avasthabhedatraya. The three different forms in
which matter exists are as Ghana, (solid) Drava( liquid)
and Vataka (gas).
7) Asanatraya. Three kinds of important’ postures are
Virdsana, Padmasana. and Svastikasana.
8) Itivrtiatraya. ‘The three kinds of plots in a story
are Prakhyata, Utpadya and Misra.
9) Rnatraya. The three different kinds of debts of
man are Deva-rna (debts to gods), Pitr-rna (debts to
the Manes) and Rsi-rna (debts to rsis).
10) Esandtraya. Esana means desire. The three kinds
of esanas are Putraisana (desire for children), Vittaisana (desire for wealth) and Daraisana (desire for
wife ).
11) Karanatraya. ‘The three instruments of action are
mind, speech and body.
12) Karmatraya. ‘The three actions are Srsti (creation),
Sthiti (maintenance ) and Sambhara{ destruction). Yaga,
Vedapathana and Dharma also form one Karmatraya.
13) Karmakaranatraya. ‘The three kinds of causes of
action are knowledge, what is to be known and what
has already been known ( Jfiana, Jiieya and Jfata).
14) Kalatraya. Past, present and future are the three
divisions of time.
15) Kavyatraya. Gadya (prose), Padya (verse) and
Misra (combination of gadya and padya) are the
three different constituents of literature.
16) Kauvyagunatraya. The three chief qualities of poetic
compositions are Prasada( clearness of style), Madhurya
(sweetness of style) and Ojas (force of expression ),
17) Kduyopadhitraya. The three main attributes of
poetic compositions are Vastu (plot), Riti ( diction )
and Rasa (sentiment).
18) Gandharvadharmatraya. The three duties assigned
to a Gandharva are Pijyaseva (serving venerable
people worthy of worship), Nrtyagitavadyaparijiiana
(study ofdance, music and instrumental music) and
remaining devoted to Sarasvati (goddess of learning ).
19) Gunatraya. ‘The three distinguishing properties of --
nature (gunas ) belonging to all created beings are
Sattvaguna, Rajoguna and Tamoguna The three good
qualities (gunas ) of Man are Satya (truth), Sadacara .
(good conduct ) and Lajja (modesty). The three results
or benefits (gunas) to which man aspires are Dhana
(wealth), Kirti(fame) and Svarga (heaven),
90) Gurutraya. The three gurus are Mata (mother)
Pita (father) and Acarya (preceptor). Guru, Paramaguru and Paramesthiguru are also three gurus.
91) Tapatrayas The three kinds of miseries (which
human beings have to suffer in this world are Adhyatmika (of the body and mind), Adhibhautika (inflicted
by animals) and Adhidaivika (by fate). The other
three tapas (agonies) are Anaksarajfiasambhasana
(conversing with illiterate persons), Dusprabhusevana
(serving arrogant masters) and Lambapayodharalingana (embracing women with hanging breasts ).
22) Tauryatrika. The three constituents of triple
symphony are Dance, Music and Instrumental music.
23) Fatitraya. The three distinguishing types of all
created beings are Uttama (best), Madhyama
(mediocre) and Adhama (worst ).
24) Dosatraya. The disorders of the three humours of
the body are Vata (wind), Pitta (Bile) and Kapha
(phlegm). Avyapti, Ativyapti and Asambhava are
also three dosas (fallacies).
25) Triputikas. Jfiata (knower), Jiana (knowledge)
and Jiieya (the object of knowledge) are the three
putikas. Subject, predicate and object are also three
putikas.
26) Tripuras. The three demons who always formed
a group are Tarakaksa, Kamalaksa and Vidyunmali.
27) Tribhuvana. Svarga (heaven), Bhimi, (earth) -and
Patala (Netherworld) are the three bhuvanas. ( worlds).
28) Trimadhura. The three sweet things are honey,
sugar and Kadali ( plantain fruit). 2
29) Trimiirtis. The three Mirtis (deities) are Brahma,
Visnu and Maheévara.
30) Yriliiga. The three lingas (genders) are Pulling
(masculine), Strilinga (feminine) and Napurhsaka
(neuter).
31) Triloka. The three worlds are Manusyaloka
(world of men), Pitrloka (world of the Manes) 4?
Devaloka (world of the gods).
32) Trivarga. The following groups of three are
classed as Trivargas (a) Dharma (Virtue), Artha
(wealth) and Kama (desire), (b) Vrddhi (increase)
Sthana (same Position) and Ksaya (decrease ). Cc
Sattva, Rajas and Tamas.
33) Pralayatraya. The three pralayas (floods) ate
Naimittika (floods due to rains in and out of season
Prakrtapralaya (floods arising out of sarhvarttag™
and Atyantikapralaya (floods due to heavy rains) - |
34) Trividhayajtas. Yajiias are of three kinds:
Karmayajiia, Upasanayajfia and Jfanayajfia. The
are six divisions in Karmayajfia namely, Nityakar™ _
Naimittikakarma, Kamyakarma, Adhyatmikakar™??
Adhidaivikakarma and Adhibhautikakarma. Fo
Upasanayajfia there are nine divisions namely; Nur
gunopasana, Sagunopdsana, . Bhitapretopas@?%
Mantrayogayidhi, Astangayogavidhi, Layayogavidb»
Rajayogavidhi, Avataropasana and MaharsidevoP”
sana. Jiianayajfia has got
a Nididhyasana and Sravana. . tie
rivrtti, Waidarbhi. Pancaly ; PF
ay Kavyavrttis. amphL Faneal and (Ganga are
Triveda. The th —
and Samaveda. © Fires Vedasiare Regveda, Yajurve
37) Trigak ti.
wealth and
three divisions namely
The three kinds of powers are, power of
position, power of endeavour and powe
‘ acy d counsel (Prabhugakti, Utsdhagakti and Manta
38) Trifariras. juncts
of a soul are Sthila, Siksma and Rod ihe three
bodies of Paramatman are Téa, Sitra and Virat
toh Trisandhyads. Prabhata (morning) Madhyahna
= day) and Sayahna (evening) are the three
andhyas (union of two divisions of time).
The three bodies

MURA I 51] MURA II
40) Disanatraya. Vata, Pitta and Kapha are the eyed deva, fight with me or leave this place’. On hearthree diisanas (disorder of the humours in a body). ing it Indra left his place and came to earth. Then Mura
41) Néditraya. The three nadis of the body are Ida, took possession of Airavata and Vajra. He lived in
Piigala and Susumna. ) devaloka with Maya, Tara and other danavas enjoying
42) Purusairaya. The three classes of men are Uttama the luxuries there. Along with his wife, son and other
(best), Madhyama(mediocre) and Adhama (lowest). devas Devendra established himself on the southern bank
43) Pramanatraya. The three kinds of means of valid of Kalindi river.
knowledge are Pratyaksa (what can be seen) , Anumana Then one day Murasura came to the earth on the Airalace on the banks of the river
(what can be logically inferred) and Agama (Verbal vata and landed at ap
testimony. ) Sarayu where Raghu a king of the solar dynasty was
Murdsura went to Raghu and said
44) Brahmalaksanatraya. Suddha, Siva and Santa are conducting a yaga.
the three Brahmalaksanas. ‘Come on, fight with me or you should stop this yaga.
45) Munitraya. The celebrated trio of sages are Panini, You should not worship the devas.” Then the great and
Patafijali and Katyayana. brilliant Maitravarumi sage, Vasistha told him, ‘‘Daitya,
46) Yogatraya. The three kinds of yogas are: Jhana- what use is there In conquering vr" eine, jenn eae
yoga, Bhaktiyoga and Karmayoga. should win against those who are never defeated. If you
47) Rititraya. The three ritis are Vaidarbhi, Pajicali want to fight go and challenge Antaka, the god of Death.
Oh, King of asuras, that boy of an Antaka would never
and Gaudi. :
48) Riipakatraya. Natya, Nrtya and Nrtta are the obey your orders. If you conquer him you will have dethree riipakas. feated all the world.” |
On hearing the words of Vasistha, Mura started to fight
49) Vaisyavrttitraya. The three duties of a Vaisya are Ae oe : Se Mie
Krs (agriculture), Pasupalana (Breeding of cattle) and Dharmaraja. Yama on hearing tone ee ee.
Vanijya (trade). to fight him went to ee on eae as he knew
50) Sar Sanel e he could kill him. Mahavisnu asxed hun to send Mura
) Saranatraya. Buddha, Dharma and pangs @ to him. Yama returned to his place to see Mura there
the three Saranas. |
51) Siddhitraya. The following groups of three are ready AS 0) wpm ine ines sa he bee do ane
considered to be Siddhitrayas. (a) Karmasiddhi, ever Mura ordered him and ten nee cate ae ould
Yogasiddhi and Jianasiddhi. (b) Aigvaryasiddhi, stop killing people pe will chop your head off.
Jfidnasiddhi and Vairagyasiddhi. fc) Sraddha, Vitta Dharmaraja replied “Mura, iL you Tae peer the person
and Bhagya. (d) Mani, Mantra and Ausadha. (Siddhi se agg gt aa a this fol Two tere a
means atcainment, accomplishment ). | ing?y 7 Fee yee aoe, Pe sae He er i
52) Svaratraya. ‘The different kinds of vowel are three control of somebody Se as é OH e
in number namely Hrasva (short), Dirgha (long) and person er a: rel sae - " oe defeat
Pluta (prolated). Udatta Anudatta and Svarita are him.” Yama sal 3 ere is an ini B uals ed Visnu
also three different kinds of accent, i.e. the acute, grave holding a Cakra and a eae “ his hands anne an Asan
_ and circumflexed ). _ dvipa. He 1s the person who has appoints me.’? Mura
MURATA ae ) a anxiously asked Where 1s his abode: I shall go there
1) Birth and eo ae | boons. Mura was the asura myself to conde Th Poca ay aia go
born to Kas 3 aprajapati of his wife Danu. Once to the Oceano - ‘ tis there tha aaa be omniNiewerwae ch a a vie huge tieap of dead bodies present protector of t Wig i is es ing. ura said
of the sen ialled by the devas. Mura got ais St Well, Iam going to him: But you shou gn ae am
dent ' asuras killed by the ¢ vars to propitiate his time discontinue your work of killing people.”” Yama
ath and did penance {OF z d before him and replied “Go and win him. If you defeat him I shall
grandfather and Br ahma appears ted. Mura said abide by your instructions.
__ - aga too oe Price a ’ cece ia Mura went to fight Mahavisnu. Tt was at this time that
, anybody whom I touc ld die.” Brahma Sri Krsna the incarnation of Mah4visnu attacked the
battle, even if they are +mmortal, shoul@. ir ae capital city of We claaira, Praujvotea. Muna wear to
the father of the universe grante him the help of Narakasura, The boundary of the city was
(Chapter 60, Vamana P urana ). d of the well-fenced' with ropes but Krsna cut them all and re2) Family life. Mura _ became the Bef Naraka- moved the barrier. In the fight that ensued both
Narakasura and Mura were killed by the celebrated
boundaries of Pragjyotisa, the capital city OF
a Net OF these tet Sudargana of Krsna: From then Krsna
sura. Mura begot four thousand sons. Mura weapon
were posted to guard the palace of the quecl®: a. got the name of Muramathana. (10th Skandha,
ae : d boons. He fenced Phagavata).
performed penance and obtained
the bowler of Pragjyotisa with s1x rhode aes MURA II. Son of Talajangha, an asura born of a part
and arrested the approach 0 uy at sah “(Chapter of acon ys el ae of this valorous Murasura was
were known in Puranas as the aura in the city of Gandravati. |
38, Daksing = bha Parva): . Murasura who possessed the brilliance of Brahma was a
sindtya Patha, na rs). Mura who nightmare to the devas. Once Murasura. fought against
3) Dienst f th
era: | Gone f the boons he possessed Visnu and in the fierce fight that took place Visnu was
e Yaksas @ from the battlefield and
ecame arrogant by the power ©
went to ot in challenged fioht with him. defeated and he ran away aN. ni ;
Gandharvas to a fight. But none dared to U6 qd Indra started sleeping in a cave named Sirnhavati in the neighhen he went to naravatl and challenge paved bourhood of Badarikasrama. Mura went there too. Then
hallenge- Then he enterec. Mahavisnu created a Devi through his Yogamaya and
Indra also did not accept the ¢ A hina. -
maravati with a rifed hand. Nobody i thousand made her kill Mura,
oing to the palace of Indra he 54

~MURA III
Pleased at the slaughter of Mura, Visnu blessed her and
said “From today onwards you will be known as ‘Ekadagi’. You will be capable of wiping off all sins on
earth.”? (Padmapurana, Uttarakhanda 36. 50-80).
MURA III. (MURU). A Ydadava King. He was one
of the neighbours of Jarasandha. The daughter of this
Yadava king called Kamakatankata was married to
Ghatotkaca. (13. 13. Sabha Parva and Skanda Purana).
MURA IV (MURU). A country of ancient Bharata. A
King called Bhagadatta was the King of this country.
(Sloka 14, Chapter 14, Sabha Parva).
MURARI. A Sanskrit dramatist who lived in the 8th
century A.D. in India, His father was Bhattaérivarddhamana. Murari is the author of the drama ‘Anargharaghava’. This drama has eight acts. Murari has mentioned in his works about Anangaharsa who lived in
700 A.D. and Ratnakara who lived in 750 A.D, It is
therefore, surmised that Murari must have lived during
the latter part of the 8th century. In the writing of
dramas Murari has excelled the Mahaviracarita of
Bhavabhiti and his verses indicate he had the style of
Magha.
MURMURA. Ariver. Agni originated from this river.
(Sloka 25, Ghapter 222, Vana Parva).
MURTI. One of the thirteen daughters of Daksaprajapati. This girl was married to Dharma. Nara and Narayana are the sons born to Murti of Dharma. (4th
Skandha, Bhagavata).
MUSAKA. An ancient place of habitation in Bharata.
(Sloka 56, Chapter 9, Bhisma Parva).
MUSAKADA (MUSIKADA). A_ serpent born to
Kag yapaprajapati of his wife Kadri. This serpent sits
in the court of Varuna and worships him. Once Narada
introduced this naga to Matali. (Sloka 10, Chapter 9,
Sabha Parva and Sloka 14, Chapter 103, Udyoga
Parva).
MUSALA. A Brahmavadi son of Vigvamitra. (Sloka 53,
Chaptér 4, Anusasana Parva).
MUSIKA. An ancient merchant. In the Kathapithalambaka of Kathasaritsagara a storyis told to demonstrate that even without any capital an ingenious and
industrious man can earn money.
A merchant got this name by means of his industry.
Once a poor man of no resources went to the house of
a great merchant named Visakhila. He was then admonishing a young man of his own caste. The merchant
was saying, “See, here is a dead rat on the ground. A
clever man would earn money by using thisas a capital.
To you I have given money for business on several
occasions. Not only that you have not increased it but
also you have lost it.”
The poor man who went to him requested the merchant
to give him the dead rat. Vigakhila greatly amused at
the request gave him the rat. A rich man bought it for
his cat to eat and gave him instead two measures of
Bengal gram. He roasted it and made it palatable and
then with a pot of water went outside the city gates and
sat under a tree on the road-side. Wood-cutters were
passing that way carrying loads and he sold the
roasted gram and water to them who purchased it with
eagerness to ease their weariness. They gave him in
exchange firewood and in the evening he took it to
the market and sold it. With the money he purchased
more Bengal gram and continued the trade as before and
after a few days he purchased from them a great stock
NACIKETAS
of firewood. Suddenly there were heavy rains and there
was a scarcity of firewood in the market and he sold
his stock for good price. With the money thus received
he purchased some goods and started a grocery shop.
Gradually his business increased and he became a big
merchant. Because he started the business from a Misika
(rat) he got the nick-name Misika.
MUSIKASTRI. See under Paficatantra. :
MUSTIKA. Anasura who was a servant of Karhsa. This
asura was killed by Balabhadra. (See under Krsna).
N
NA. In Agni Purana, Chapter 348, the meaning of this
syllable is given as ‘vrnda’ (collection) and ‘Buddha’
NABHAGA. A brother of Iksvaku, who had ten brothers
named Nabhaga, Saryati, Dista, Dhrsta, Narisyanta,
Nabhaga, Prsadhra, Kavi, Kartisa and Vasuman.
(Bhagavata, Skandha 8).
NABHAGA. A brother of Iksvaku. The famous Ambar1sa
was Nabhaga’s son. After conquering all the worlds he
ruled the kingdom strictly along the path of truth. an
righteousness. (Vana Parva, Chapter 25, Verse 12). In
the evening of his life Nabhaga gifted away the whole
land to Brahmins. Since she could’ not leave Nabhaga;
Bhimidevi herself assumed physical form and went t0
him on the occasion. This emperor never consume
meat. He livesin Brahmaloka according to Chapter
115, Anusasana Parva. (Santi Parva, Chapter 96,
Verse 124).
NABHAGARISTA. Asonof Vaivasvata Manu. (Adi
Parva, Chapter 75, Verse 17). :
NABHAKANANA. An ancient country in South India.
(M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Stanza 59).
NABHASVAN. A son of Narakasura. Tamra, Antariksa,
ravana, Vasu, Vibhavasu, Nabhasvan and Arupé
were the seven prorninent sons of Narakasura. (Bhag@°
vata, Skandha 10). |
NABHODA. An eternal Vigvadeva. (A class of 304
concerned in the Sraddha offerings to the Manes) -
(M.B. Anugasana Parva, Chapter 91, Stanza 34)-
NAGIKA. One of the Brahmavadin sons of Vigvamitra
(Anugasana Parva, Chapter 4, Verse 58).
NACIKETA (NACIKETA). A sage of olden days. 50”
of Uddalaki, he lived for along time in the agrame
serving his father, who devoted his time to performin’
yajfias. Naciketa, who was once sentinto the forest '°
flowers etc. did not find them anywhere there, and %
returned to the Aasrama without them. Angry at this
his father cursed him to be taken: to YamalokAccordingly he went to Yamaloka. He waited at the
gates fora long time to see Yama, who appeare
last when he sang the praises of Yama. The advice
np given by Yama to Naciketa forms the Kathopani$@
ter studying the advice he returned to his father, W
was pleased to find hi scan
Parva, Chapter 71 ). Im a great scholar. (AnuS4s
NACIKETAS. A famous hermit.
exhortation given by Yamadeva (God of death) to this
er There is a story to oo this _——
Thi ather Of Naciketas was the hermit Vajasravas:
is hermit gave as alms, cows which had grown lea?
a old age and lack of food, at the time of sacrifices:
aciketas felt’ grieved at this action of his father. H¢
wert tohis father and sadly asked him “Father, to who™
are you going to give me?’ The father got angry at the
Kathopanisad is the

513 | NADIJANGHA
NACINA
question of the son, and replied; ‘‘You are to be given Krkala in food, Devadatta in yawning and Dhanaiijaya
to Yama.” *n sound, Dhanafijaya does not quit the body even after
On hearing these cruel words of his father, the boy went death.
to the palace of Yama who had been away. For three Life, Prana, travels through the nadicakra depending on
t food and ten different courses, i.¢. Sankranti, Wisuva, Ahar,
days and nights the boy waited there withou
drink. When Yama returned the boy was happy and Ratri, the two ayanas (Daksina and Uttara), Adhivasa
cheerful and Yama was pleased with him. Yama pro- Rna, Unaratra and Dhana. Unaratra means hiccough,
d asked him what boon he Rna cough, Dhana breathing and Adhivasa yawning.
mised the boy three boons an
wanted. The first boon he asked for was, “Give me the Of the two ayanas, Uttara. and Daksina, the former is
boon that father will be pleased with me and not angry the course towards the left and the latter towards the
with me.” The second was, ‘Advise me how to attain right and Visuva is the centre between the two.
heaven.” The third was, ‘Tell me the solution of the Sankranti is the change of position ef Visuva. On he
mystery, whether the soul remains after death.” Yama left side of the human body is the nadi called Ida, on
nd said to him, “Boy, this the right side Pingala and between the two Susumna.
for another boon such as
d, all the pleasures of the
granted the first two boons a
is a difficult question. So ask The prana above these three nadis is Ahari.e. day and
long life, power over the worl seep deo is sate i.e. night. Thus every vayu assumes
world and-so on.” ten different forms. |
The boy replied: “The things you havé promised to There are various kinds of pranayama (control of
give me are useless things because after a while the breaths). Pranayama practised with the prana contained
organs of sense will become fragile. The life also will in the centre of the body. 1s called Candragrahana :
end. So,. please tell me. I want the answer to my that which supersedes physical ‘principles is called
question.” Being ereaily pleased at the reply of the boy Siryagrahana. To fill the stomach with as much of vayu
Dharmadeva expounded to him about the immortality as is desired is Pirakapranayama. To remain like a full
of the soul and the essence of things regarding God pot, all breathing stopped, (Pot completely filled )
Almighty. (Kathopanisad ). | having closed all the openings’ ~ doors’— of the body js
NACINA. An ancient region of the country mentioned Kumbhaka. The yog} practising Kumbhaka. should
in Chapter 38 Sabha Parva. direct the vayu upwards in one breath, and that practice
NADA. See under Pattu. is called Recaka. He who does 1t should be conversant
NADAGIRI. An intelligent elephant with discriminative with the yoga of inhalation. _Erudite people call it
power Mention is made about this elephant on several Japa, because when it is practised Siva resident in one's
secasions in Kathasaritsagara | own body awakes within. Siva, the King of yogins,
NADICAKRA. The ten ais where the yogi in medita- chants the mantra ( japa) 21,6000 times within the course
tion retains the five pranas form the nadicakra. of one day and one night. The soul chants the mantra—
At the bottom.of the nabhi (nabhikanda) innumerable Gayatri—of which Brahma, Visnu and Siva are the prenadis or nerves originate OF sprout up. 72,000 such siding deities, and that 1s called Ajapa. He who chants
nadis exist at th se ap 4 bhi . The whole Ajapa will have no future births. Pranayama should be
back 3 Rs h sdis sprea llel and followed by Kundaliniyoga, Kundalini meaning primoriy 38 filled with these nage er ‘st in the form 0O dial force. The force is a compound of Sun, | fire and
ae ace ara and et sdis are promi- Moon and its seat is the heart, where it exists in the form
circles entwined with on® angle ne val Susumna, — of a sprout. Since creation is dependent upon this force
nent amongst them, 1. © _Ida, mate mbusa, Muha ower for creation should be invoked on it. The yogin
Gandhari, Hastijihva, Prtha, Yasa, oa't0 any one should picture in his mind that nectar flows out of
and Sankhini. Any defect OF bare on Kundalini. He should also realise that the soul within
linac the body possesses form while pure:soul is formless. He
of these ten nadis may lead even to -
rae * be . The five Pranas ° °
There are ten Vayus (winds )1n the oer ad Vyana, an should address this soul as ‘Harnsa Harhsa’. Hamsa
a means Siva. Siva exists and functions inside and outside
called Prana, Apana, Samana.
- é Devadatta f anes
the five Vayus called Naga, Kurma, Krkala, the body just as oil is in the gingelly seed and fragrance
Vayus. : :
the ten Y ‘n flower. Soul possessing form is of five kinds. Accordand Dhanafijaya. together constitute : the
Prana is ihe: rat important Vary Oe hee Bee vayus ingly Brahma’s seat is the heart, Visnu’s the neck,
emptying’ as well as the ref auntie e iy as its existence Rudra’s, the Lae of the throat; Maheévara’s. Ae
and thus sustains life. The pran oe q fills the body forehead; and Siva’s, the tip of the prana. Soul without
ever in the chest of living beings ‘. coughing etc. t form is just contrary to the above. Its place is where
with air through breathing 1”) ou iE ayii -as it moves the prana ends. By pranayama the - formless soul may
depends on life and it +5 called Prana y _be experienced. (Agni Purana, Chapter 214).
or travels with life. — | .. Apana which directs NADIJA. An ancient King. In Mahabharata, Udyoga
Apana leads vayu downwards. It is APY". 5. fold ‘urine Parva, Chapter 4, Stanza 19, it 1s mentioned that the
it keep : Pandavas had sent an invitation to this King to take
man’s food downwards. Also it Keet sD’. . fanction IS ; 2
and semen. This vayu 1s called Apan@ as its Ted above. art in the Bharata battle. bpimets)
adhonayana (leading d ownwar pl Se arts os a NO ae tad I. A nt ks a lives 7" ageing
Car Oe: che different Pr : t called Indradyumna as an eternal being, without death.
amanavayu conveys to ‘ch living beings ©4!'> Gee under Indradyumna ,
in equal the things [Ww d. vata.
ict cea oeeipe as es d, bile, phlegm (ra, e an NADIJANGHA It. A kite,;who was @ son of Kasyapa.
smell as ; hing © , a
Udana th hivering © lips, flush 8 aces the A friend of Brahma, it was known as Rajadharma as well.
causes the § ae Vyana © Nadijangha was once killed for food by an ungrateful
eye . oints etc: . iseases- : :
yes and excitement of j it excites dis prahmin. (For details see under @aurina V).
limbs to be closed and strecched, 4 ‘ng of the eyes
Naga exists in nausea, Karman the bulgins

NADVALA
NADVALA. (a) ‘The -wife of Manu, the son of
Caksusa Manu. Ten sons named Uru, Piru, Satadyumna, Tapasvi, Satyavak, Kavi, Agnistu, Atiratra,
Sudyumna and Atimanyu were born to Manu by
Nadvala. (Agni Purana, Chapter 18). | |
(b) The daughter of Prajapati Vairaja. Manu married
this woman. Kuru, Piru, Satadyumna, Tapasvi,
Satyavan, Suci, Agnistoma, Atiratra, Sudyumna and
Abhimanyu were the ten -sons born to Nadvala from
Manu. (Visnu Purana, Améa 1, Chapter 13).
NAG. I. An asura (demon). (See under Nagastra).
NAGA II. Acclass of serpents. It is stated in Valmiki
Ramayana, Aranya Kanda, Sarga 14, that of the ten
daughters of Kasyapa, from Surasa, the nagas and
from Kadri, the Uragas (both are serpents) came into
the world. |
NAGADATTA. One of the hundred sons of Dhrtarastra.
This Nagadatta was killed by Bhimasena. (Mahabharata, Drona Parva, Chapter 157, Stanza 197).
NAGADHANVATIRTHA. An ancient holy place of
bath, situated in the basin of the river Sarasvati.
Vasuki stays here. It was at this holy place that Vasuki
was anointed as the King of the Nagas. (M.B. Salya
Parva, Chapter 37, Stanza 3).
NAGADVIPA. A region inside the island Sudargana.
This region has the shape of the ear of the hare in the
Moon. (M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 6, Stanza 55).
NAGALOKA. _The world of the Nagas or Patala. Vasuki
is its chief. (Adi Parva, Chapter 127, Verse 60). There
isa pond in Nagaloka and a drink of its water bestows
the strength of a thousand elephants. (Adi Parva,
Chapter 127, Verse 68). Patala is thousands. of miles
away from earth. Its area exceedsa thousand yojanas,
and it is surrounded by magnificent forts studded with
gems. The steps at the entrance of the fort are also
decorated with gold and gems. There are beautiful
gardens, fountains and singing birds in Patala. Its outer
doors are hundred yojanas in length and five in width.
{Asvamedha Parva, Chapter 58, Verse 37).
NAGAPURA. A place situated-on the basin of the
river Gomati in Naimisadranya. It is mentioned in
Mahabharata, Santi Parva, Chapter 355, Stanza 3
that in this place, a Naga named Padmanabha lived. —
NAGARA. In ancient days there were rules and principles regulating the construction of a city. The name
‘city’ could be applied to them only if they conformed
to the rulesand principles in vogue. The principles
and rules of the erection of a proper city are given
below :— ,
One yojana or a half of land should be selected as
site.1 The planning of the city should be commenced
after worshipping the deity of Vastu. There should be
four main gates on the four sides, East, West, North
and South. The South gate should be in the position of
Gandharvapada, West gate in the place of Varuna, the
North gate in the place of Soma (Moon) and the East
fort gate in the place of Suryapada (the position of the
Sun). The hattas (minor gates) should be wide enough
for elephants mt 2 pass through. The main gates
ix rods wide.
Te city is completed goldsmiths should _be
settled in the Agni corner® (i. €. South East). The
courtesans who live by dancing etc. should have their
houses on the south side of Am 4 The houses of
, ; i imately twelve Kilometres.
> ae civ the Sorners see softer Astadikpalakas,
NA
NAGARI. One of the
NAGASATA
NAGASATA
actors, those who extract oil, fishermen etc. should be
in the corner of Nirrti (South West). Sheds for chariots,
_weapons, swords etc. should be on the western side.
Dealers in liquor, carpenters, blacksmiths, masons etc.
and servants should be given houses in the Vayu
corner i.e North West. The houses of Brahmins, hermits,
sages, saints, and such others should be on the north
side. In the Igana corner (North East) merchants of
vegetables and on the eastern side, the authorities of
the army should have their houses.
The army (Infantry, cavalry, chariots and elephants)
should be put up in the Agni corner. On the south the
goddesses who are protectors of women-folk should be
consecrated, Archers should live in the Nirrti corner.
Most honourable people, Treasury officers, Leaders of
the people, Brahmin groups and such others shoul
have their abodes on the western side. So also Ksatriyas should have their houses on the eastern side;
Vaigyas on the south and Sidras on the west of the
city. Vaigyas and horses should be placed on all four
sides. The army also should be placed thus. The
movable wealth should be placed on the east side
and the funeral place on the south. The cattle
etc. should be kept on the west, farmers on {1%
north, and the outcastes on the corners. ag
should be the plan of a city as well as that of
villages too.
On the east fort-gate of cities and villages Vaisravan@
and Sri Bhagavati should be consecrated. They W!
confer prosperity upon those who visit them. Temples
dedicated to Gods should be erected on the westet®
side facing the east. If temples are erected on the east
they should face the west and those erected on te
south should face the North. For the protection of the
city, there should be temples dedicated to Indra, Vis?"
and such other Gods. If there is no worshipping place
in a city, a village, a fort, or a house, such places wil
be haunted by devils and troubled by diseases etc. d
cities are built according to this plan they will affor
both salvation and prosperity.
On the east there should be the house of Laksmi, ™
the Agni corner, the kitchen on the south, bedrooms
in the Nirrti corner the weapon-house, on the W®
the dining hall, in the Vayu corner, the granary, a
the north, the treasury, and the place of worship i
the [gana _ corner. ;
Houses could be erected with four blocks, three plocks
or only one block. Houses with four blocks could.
made in two hundred and fiftyfive ways by makin
changes in each block and the open verandas. House
with three blocks are of four types; with two plocks
are of five types; and houses of only Stig block are °
four types. There are houses and cities with twenty;
eight open verandas. There are fiftyfive types of
houses -with four open verandas and seven ope”
verandas, Houses with six open verandas and eight
open verandas are of twenty types. In cities hous
should have eight fe
Chapter 105). gat open verandas. (Agni Purané,
GARJUNA. Minister of
i ira ils
see under Cirayus). King Cirayus, (For detal
prominent child da.
(Udyoga Parva, Chapter 101, Verse 9) ? eng Sav
- The moyntain where Pandu did tapas

NAGASRI 515 NAHUSA 1
Agnistoma sacrifice. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 83,
along with Kunti, Madri and _ others. (Adi Parva,
Stanza 14).
Chapter 118, Verse 47).
a no pe Wife of King Dharmadatta of Kosala. NAGATIRTHA II. A holy place which is situated car
fa atta was their daughter. (See under Dharma- Gangidvara or Kanakhala and which keeps up the
atta). memory of Kapila, the King of the Nagas. (M.B.
Vana Parva, Chapter 84, Stanza 66).
NAGAVITHI. Daughter born to Yami, the daughter of
Daksaprajapati. (Visnu Purana, Part 1, Chapter 15).
NAGNAJIT I. A Ksatriya King. It is mentioned in
Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 37, Stanza 21 that
this King was born from a portion of an _asura called
Isupada. This Nagnajit who was the King of Gandhara was killed by Karna and his sons were defeated
by Sri Krsna. (Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter
254 and Udyoga Parva, Chapter 43).
NAGNAJIT.II. An asura. This asura who had been
the disciple of Prahlada took rebirth asa King named
NAGASTRA. A destructive weapon (arrow). The
following story about the astra is told in the Yuddha
Kanda of Kamba Ramayana.
In olden times there wasa very powerful and mean
asura called Naga. Brahma resorted to virulent black
magic to kill Naga, and from the fire-pit arose a terrible goblin called Nagapasa. It was deputed to kill
Naga and the Trimirtis followed it. Nagapasa went
to the city of Nagasura called Viramahendra, ascended
its tower and made a terrible noise the echo of which
caused abortion in all the pregnant naga women. Many
children fainted and many died. Nagasura deputed his
army chieftain Virasena with an army to kill the naga = Sybala. (Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 63,
goblin. At the sight of the army the goblin eee Stanza 11).
another terrible cry, which blew d off A a iets NAGODBHEDA. A holy place near Vinasana tirtha.
army, reducing them to powder. gnen "N26 Sarasvati is supposed to dwell here in invisible form.
He who bathes here will attain nagaloka. (Vana
Parva, Chapter 82, Verse 112).
NAHUSA I. A famous King of the Lunar dynasty.
1) Genealogy. Descended from Visnu in the following
order:—Brahma-Atri - Candra - Budha-Puriiravas-AyusNahusa.
2) Birth. Ayus, the son of Purtravas, married the
rincess named Indumati (Svarbhanukumari ). Nahusa
was the son born to the couple, thanks to the blessing of
the. great hermit Dattatreya. Nahusa married Asokasundari, the daughter of Siva.
minister with a big army attacked the goblin. But the
minister was devoured by him, and the army annihilated.
Enraged at this defeat of his minister, Nagasura attacked the goblin with an army of crores of soldiers. But,
within seconds the goblin devoured the mighty army.
At last Nagapasga and Nagasura engaged ‘themselves 1n
a duel which lasted for years. Ultimately the goblin
swallowed up Nagasura also. Then he’ went to the
Trimirtis and saluted them. They granted him many
boons, and Siva, in excess of joy, wore It as One® of the
ornaments round his neck. Some time later agape
set out on a tour to see the fourseih worlds, ant sad! There is a’story about the birth and marriage of Nahusa
specially instructed him not to visit the Salmalt ae and Agokasundari in Padma Purana as given below :
He visited the various worlds carting. ark ae Once Siva and Parvati ele engaged iy lSve mgkne, in
oe - sae et
gnd started for mount Kaildss, Of gi “violation of Faden ever created by Brahm. Siva (60k her): @
iva’s erteens he entered the island. The nagas Nandanavana, where she saw the Kalpa_ tree, which
there did not honour him and his false pride meee on was beautiful all over, and she asked Siva about its
tremble with rage. Then the nagas of ie se ve special features. oe oN ae miler asked ie it
a le Mg ae he "umptuously e ee ia re Ralea sree er a gil ques ce
will devour all of us for food He is to come today; ign Instantly a very beautiful girl was born from the tree.
if you are capable enough, you defeat and drive Parvati named her ASokasundari and brought her up as
p her daughter. Once ‘Parvati gave her a boon that. she
as our
off and save us. If you do so, We shall crown you
King and honour you.”
2 Garuda and he
The powerful enemy of tue mat ‘tah Garuda then
came. All the nagas ran O pas nattacked the meta Nagapasa, who Was ee a ve
perturbed before him. There being 0 ok “refuge wit
tory for the goblin he ran away’, and nd demanded 0
iva. Garuda also followed him, a soblin. Siva
iva to return to him, his enemy: i (the goblin)
told Garuda thus: —“If, in i ake: i ou, you may
interferes with anybody connected WIEN Fo) Vit him
either punish or eat him. Do not do any’ :
sow. ‘va. From
Garuda agreed to the above propos! Marre enthat day onwards Nagapasa_ hive vow called nagatwined with nooses. He became the an i
Pasa or nagastra.
AGATIRTHA I.
dary of Kuruksetra. Those W 10
this holy bath will obtain the #
| n the boun-
‘“ Pa ra me ‘the water of
uit of performing an
would become the wife of King Nahusa of the Lunar
family, who would be equal to Indra.
One day; when the beautiful Agokasundari was walking
with celestial maids in the Nandanavana an asura
named Hunda the. son of Vipracitti, came there. The
moment his eyes fell on Agokasundari he fell in love
with her. The asura spoke to her of his love and requested her to be his wife. Not only did she refuse his
request but also told him that according to the boon
iven by Parvati she would become the wife of Nahusa,
the King of the Lunar dynasty.
Hearing this Hunda smiled and said : “That righteous
man named Nahusa is yet to be born in the Lunar
dynasty. You willbe much older than he. He will not suit
youas he will be too young. So don’t waste your blooming
‘youth. Gome and enjoy life with me.’ But Agokasundari
did not concede. Hunda was disappointed. So he began
to think about ways to get her. He disappeared from
there and reappeared ia the guise of a beautiful woman

IS eee
NAHUSAI. _
and told Agokasundari thus:—‘‘Lady, I have taken a
fast. Hunda has killed my husband. I am doing penance
to curse him. You may come to my hermitage on the
banks of the Ganga’.
Agokasundari believed these false words. She went with
her. Both of them walked on and at last entered a
palace. Then only did she understand that it was the
palace of Hunda, who assumed his original form and
tried to violate her chastity. ASokasundari became angry
and cursed Hunda that he would die at the hands of
Nahusa, and ran away to Kailasa.
Hunda was sad for two reasons. On the one hand
he did not get Agokasundari and on the other hand
he had incurred the curse that Nahusa would be his
slayer. Now what was the way to get out of the trouble ?
He asked his minister Kampana to take Indumati the
wife of Ayus by stealth and bring her to his palace. They
decided to destroy Nahusa in the womb of Indumati, in
case it was not possible to carry her away. They waited
for an opportunity.
Ayus was an emperor of righteousness. After the marriage, for a long time he was childless. Once he visited
the hermit Dattatreya, in his hermitage. Dattatreya
who was the son of Atri and the most famous and
the noblest of all the hermits, was quite senseless and
red-eyed because of drinking, and without even the
Brahmasiitra, was playing with a young woman,
seating her in his. lap. His body was besmeared with
sandalwood and aloe and adorned with garlands and
necklaces of pearl and he was surrounded by many
women. The King seeing the divine hermit bowed
him with reverence and fear. The moment the hermit
saw the King, he sat in deep meditation. This continued
for a hundred years, at the end of which period, seeing
the devotion of the King, he said, ‘“‘Oh King ! why do
you take this trouble. I have left off the customs and
manners of Brahmins. I have no Brahmanya (Brahminism). I am immersed in liquor, meat and women. So
you had better go and serve another Brahmin.”
Ayus refuted all that the hermit. said and requested him
to bless him that he might get a son.’ Finally the. hermit
ordered the King to bring meat and liquor in a skull.
The King obeyed him. Dattatreya was pleased at the,
devotion and willingness to serve asa disciple and told
the King that ason would be born to him ; that the
gon would be a worshipper of Devatirthas (Holy. baths)
that he would not be defeated by devas, asuras, Kinnaras
giants, and Ksatriyas, that he would be the protector of
his subjects and that he would be a great scholar iz:
Wedas and Sastras. Saying this he gave the King a
fruit to be given to his wife. The King returned to his
palace.
The King gave the fruit to his wife Indumati. She ate
it and became pregnant. One night she gave birth to a
son, When the servant-maid went out of the room of
confinement Hunda entered into her body and went
-n. When all were asleep he took the child and ran to
his palace at Kaficanapura. He gave the child. to his
wife Vipula and asked her to make a sauce of the child
for him. Vipula gave the child to the servant woman. to
cook it. With the aid of the cook she hid the child and
repared a sauce with some other flesh. The cook took
the child to the hermitage of Vasistha and placed it at
the door of the hermitage, in the night. At dawn
Vasistha came out of ihe hermitage and seeing the
NAHUSA I
child took it, named it Nahusa and brought him up.
The King and his wife Indumati cried for a long time
over the loss of the child. At that time Narada came
there and told them that their son would return
soon.
Once Nahusa was bringing Samits (butea-fuel) when
he heard some devacaranas (heavenly singers) say!ng
among themselves the history of Nahusa. Nahusa heard
it. He told Vasistha all that he had heard. Vasistha
told him all the stories from the beginning to his being
kidnapped by Hunda. Nahusa was amazed at what
he heard. He -wanted to kill Hunda instantly. So he
bowed before Vasistha and taking bow and arrow went
away to kill Hunda.
Believing that he had eaten Nahusa, Hunda approached
Asokasundari again and told her that he had actually
eaten Nahusa. Agokasundari felt very sad when she
heard this. At that time a Kinnara named Vidyuddhara
and his wife came there. They consoled Agokasundar!
and told her that Nahusa was alive. He continued. __
“Oh beautiful lady, that great sage will kill Hund
sura and marry you, and live with you as an emperor
in this world, as Sakra (Indra) in heaven. From Nahus
will be born to you a son named Yayati, who will be
righteous, kind and loving towards his subjects 4”
equal to Indra, and a: hundred daughters who w0¥
be exceedingly beautiful and of very fine character. Then 7
Nahusa will go to heaven and become Devendra:
At that time your son Yayati will be the emperor 4?
will rule his subjects with kindness. Four sons, W 4
would possess prowess and valour, who would be seco”
to none in archery will be born to him. They will |
known by the names Turvasu, Puru, Kuru and YaduPowerful and mighty sons called Bhoja, Bhim;
Andhaka, Kukkura, Vrsni, Srutasena, Srutadhara 4”
Kaladamstra will be born to Yadu. They will become
famous by the name Yadavas. Several sons will be be
to them. Thus the family of Nahusa and yourself wi
increase.”
By this time Nahusa had arrived at the spot fully at ee
and. ready tc fight Hunda, who was killed in the terrib!
battle which ensued. Nahusa married Agokasundar! a
the midst of devas and. afier the marriage the coup
reached the palace of Nahusa. (Padma Purana, fiftce?
chapters from 102).
3) Nahusa became Indra. ;
Became a python by the curse of Agastya. To get remissio”
from the sin of Brahmahatya, incurred by killing Vrtre
sura, Indra hid himself in a cluster lotuses in the M4™4°
lake. The devas who were worried due to the absenc®
of Indra, elected Nahusa as Indra temporarily. Nahu4
wanted to get Indrani. Agastya cursed Nahusa_ 2?
changed him to a python. At the sight of the Pandav?°
he regained his original form and went back to ¢
world of Indra. (For detailed story see under
Agastya),
4) Other details.
(1) Nahusa had six sons Yati, Yayati. Samyvati Ayatl,
Ayati and Dhruva, (M.B Mae ates Pai at 75
Stanza 30). He Are AGL Parva, Chapter ©?
(ii) Nahusa was allowed to enter heaven because 2
made himself pure by performing the sacrifice Val
ae yajfia, (M.B., Vana Parva, Chapter 257, Stanza

NAHUSA II 517
(iii) Nahusa once came down to the world in the aerial
chariot of Indra to see the battle of Arjuna. (M.B., Virata
Parva, Chapter 56, Stanza 9).
(iv) Nahusa got a famous sword from his father Ayus.
(M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter 266, Stanza 2)
(v) Nahusa had once a talk with the hermit Gyavana
about the wealth of cows. (M.B. Anusasana Parva,
Chapter 51).
(vi) On another occasion the hermit Cyavana granted
Nahusa a boon. (M.B. Anugasana Parva, Chapter 51,
Stanza 44).
(vii) Once Nahusa gave to Brahmins lakhs of cows
5) alms. (M.B. Anusasana Parva, Chapter 81, Stanza
(vili) It is stated in Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter
8, Stanza 8, that Nahusa, after death, stays in the palace
of King Yama (God of death).
(ix) Mention is made in the Rgveda, Mandala 1,
Anuvaka 7, Sakta 31, about Nahusa’s becoming Indra.
(x) The names Devaraja, Devarat Devendra, Jagatpati,
Naga, Nagendra, Suradhipati, Surapati etc. are used in
Bharata as synonyms for Nahusa.
NAHUSA II. A famous naga (serpent ) born to Kasyapaprajapati by his wife Kadri. (Mahabharata, Adi Parva,
Chapter 35, Stanza 9).
NAIDHRUVA. A gotra-originator of the Kasyapa dynasty.
He was the grandson of Maharsi Kasyapa an son of
Avatsara maharsi. He was one of the six Brahmavadins
of the family of Kagyapa the other five being Kasyapa,
Avatsara, Raibhya, Asita and Devala. (Vayu Purana,
Chapter 52; Matsyapurana, Chapter 145).
NAIGAMEYA. A younger brother of Subrahmanya. He
had three younger brothers, 1.€., Sakha, Visakha and
Naigameya. (Visnu Purana, Part 1. Chapter 15). j
NAIKABAHU. A synonym of Parvatt. (Agni Purana,
Chapter II).
NAIKAPRSTHA. A particular region in ancien
(Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 41).
NAIMISA. (NAIMISARANYA). . It
1) General. Naimisa is very famous in the Puranas. i
is considered to be a sacred place. Ni Bi Sita Ne
modern name for the place, andiif 1s: /t Ess 7
zilla of North India.
Saunaka conducted a yajia astt
years. All the reputed Rsis participated in it, and there
= : he Maharsis
Sita (Sauti) the son of Vyasa recited [0 ; t
Meher composed by Vyasa. (Adi Parva, Chapter
1; also see under Sita).
2) Other information.
Devas once came to this plac
there. (Adi Parva, Chapter
(ii) Arjuna once visited here t P
(Adi Parva, Chapter 214, Vets ): +. Naimisa will at
(iii) Half of the sin of these Hs
once be dispelled. The remain” lace.
will be fe before they retur? Hote Taine all the
Who stays for a month and bathes here aiid life here DY
results of Gomeda yajiia- He who Ee 4 (Vana Parva,
fasting will attain all the sacred. 1OX#S:
t India.
here which lasted for twelve
e and conducted a yajn@
96, Verse !)-
he river called Utpalini.
Chapter 84, Verse 59)
) ° | : and the
(iv) River Gomati, Yajiabhum! oe Aace (Vana~
yajfiic vessel of Surya are found at 5 hi
it 1S
Parva, Chapter 87, Verse 6
lace W
(v) Dharmaputra once came 0 this P
rtion of the sin also.
NAKSATRAYOGA
brothers and bathed here and made gifts of cows.
(Vana Parva, Chapter 95, Verse 1).
NAIMISAKUNJA. An ancient sacred place on the
borders of Kuruksetra. The Rsis of Naimisaranya built
this place. A bath here gives the same results as an
i lel (Vana Parva, Chapter 83, Verse
NAIMISEYA. A sacred place. River Sarasvati which
flowed westwards changed its course here towards the
east so that it (river) might see the sages of Naimisaranya. There isa story about it in Mahabharata as
follows :—
The Yajfia conducted by Saunaka at Naimisaranya
ended in the twelfth year. The Rsis who came from .
various parts of the country were put up im asramas
built on the banks of river Sarasvati. But, many Rsis
did not get accommodation there and they moved eastwards. The River Sarasvati which felt sorry that the
Rsis could not be accommodated also turned and moved
eastwards, and thus afforded space for asramas to be
built on her banks. (Salya Parva, Chapter 37):
NAIRRTA. An urban region in ancient India.
(Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Verse L)..
NAIRRTI. A Raksasa. His name also occurs in the list
of the ancient guards or protectors of the world. (Santi
Parva, Chapter 227, Verse 52).
NAKSA. The son born to Prthusena by his wife Akiti
Mention is made in Bhagavata, Skandha 5, that he had
a son named Gaya of his wife Druti. é
NAKSATRAKALPA. A part of the Atharvaveda. The
great hermit Mufijakega had divided the Atharvaveda
ato. five parts called Naksatrakalpa, Vedakalpa,
Sarnhitakalpa, Angirasakalpa and Santi Kalpa.
Naksatra Kalpa deals with the order of worshipping the
Naksatras (stars) , Veda Kalpa deals with the activities of
Brahma as a Rtvik (family priest), the Samhita Kalpa,
the mantras(spells and incantations) . In Angirasa Kalpa
sorcery and enchantment and in Santikalpa, Santis
(Alleviation or cure) of horse, elephant etc. are given.
(Visnu Purana, Aréa 3, Chapter 6).
NAKSATRAYOGA. It is ordained in the Puranas that
alms-giving on each star or day will be rewarded by
articular attainments. This is called Naksatrayoga.
The Naksatrayoga of each star is given below:—
1) Afvayuk:— Those who give horses and chariots as
alms on this day, would be born again in a noble
family.
2) Bharant:— If lands and cows are given to Brahmins
on this day, one would get a large number of cows and
will become famous in heaven.
3) Krtttka:— If rice-pudding is given to Brahmins to
their satisfaction on this day the giver will attain the
rominent worlds after death.
4) Rohini:— If milk-rice and venison mingled with
ghee is given to Brahmins on this day, his indebtedness
to the manes would end.
5) Mrgasiras:— (Candra naksatra). If a milch-cow
is given as alms on this day, one would attain heaven.
6) Ardra:— If fast is taken and gingelly oil is given as
alms on this day, the giver will become capable of
crossing mountains and trenches.
7) Punarvasu:— He who gives bread on this day will be
born again in a good family.
8) Pusya:— He who gives gold as alms on this day
will enter the world of bright planets.

NAKULA
$$$ ee ee ee =
Soe See a
9) Aslesé:— He who gives an ox made of silver as alms
on this day, will become fearless.
10) Maghé:— He who gives gingelly as alms on this
day will become prosperous with cows.
11) Pérvaphalguni:— If ghee-rice is given to Brahmins
taking fast on this day, the giver would become happy
and prosperous.
12) Uttaraphalgunt:— He who gives rice of Nivara
varicty mixed with milk and ghee on this day will be
honoured in heaven.
13) Hasta:— If one gives four horses and an elephant
as alms, on this day, one will attain the world of bliss.
14) Citr@:— He who gives oxen and perfumery as alms
on this day, will enter the parks in which celestial
maids play.
15) Svatt:— He who gives any sort of wealth as alms
on this day will become renowned in the worlds.
16) Visakha:— He who gives as alms on. this day, oxen,
milch-cow, grain-box, cart, paddy and diamond will
attain heaven.
17) Anurddha:— He who gives cloth, rice and blanket
on this day will be honoured in heaven for a hundred
yugas.
18) Fyestha:— If Brahmins are given yams and greens
on this day one could realize one’s wishes.
19) Mala: The manes will be contented, if Brahmins
are given roots and nuts on this day.
20) Pirvasadha:— If Brahmins who are expounders of
Vedas are given as alms pots of curd, after observing
fast, the givers will take birth again in families with
many cows.
21) Uttarasadha:—- WHewho gives milk and ghee to
wise men will be honoured in heaven.
22) Sravana:— Those who give cloth and ‘rug on
this day will enter a white conveyance and reach
heaven.
23) Sravistha:— Those who give cattle, cart and cloth
on this day will enter heaven.
24) Satabhisak:— Those who give sandalwood and
aloe wood on this day, will go to the world of devas
(gods).
25) Pirvaprosthapada:— He who gives coins on this day
will reach the world of bliss.
26) Uttaraprosthapada:— Those who give mutton on
this day will be pleasing the manes.
27) Revatt:— He who gives cows which could sive
potfuls of milk, could reach any world. (M.B. Anu-
§asana Parva, Chapter 64) |
NAKULA.
1) Birth, The fourth of the Pandavas. MAdri, the
second of the two wives of Pandu meditated onthe twin
gods Agvinidevas, and recited one of the Mantras given
to Kunti by the hermit Durvasas and the two sons
Nakula and Sahadeva were born to her from those
gods. It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Adi Parva,
Chapter 67, Stanza 111 that Nakula and Sahadeva
were immensely handsome. —
2) Story of Nakula till the Bharata bettle. Naming and
such other rituals after birth were performed for Nakula
also as in the case of the other Pandava children,.by the
hermits who lived in Satasrnga. ‘The ceremony of investiture with the Brahma string was conducted by
Kaéyapa the priest of Vasudeva, The royal hermit Suka
taught Nakula archery and swordsplay, in his
boyhood. When Pandu died, Madri jumped into the
NAKULA
funeral pyre and died leaving her two sons with Kunti.
After this the hermits of Satafrnga took Kunti and her
five sons to Bhisma at Hastinapura.
At Hastinapura, Nakula learned archery under the great
teacher Drona. According to the instruction of the
teacher, Arjuna had to fight with him (teacher) on the
completion of the teaching and during that fight Nakula
and Sahadeva were the guards of Arjuna’s chariotwheels. As Nakula was such an expert in wielding the
weapons, he got the name ‘Atirathi’. (M.B.. Adi Parva,
Chapter 138, Stanza 30). When the lac-palace was
completed at Varanavata, the Pandavas shifted to that
mansion by the instruction of Dhrtarastra. When the
lac-palace was set fire to, the Pandavas escaped by way
of an underground passage and reached the banks of
the Ganga: There Nakula and Sahadeva fell down
weary and exhausted. Bhima carried them on his
shoulders. After Baka had been killed, they proceeded
to Paficalapura, where at the Svayarhvara (marriage)
Paricali became the wife of the Pandavas. They returne
to Hastinapura. A son named Satdanika was born to
Nakula by Paficali. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 99:
Stanza 75).
After that Nakula married Karenumati, the daughter
of the King of Cedi. A son named Niramitra was born
a3 couple. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 95, Stanza
Nakula was then sent to the kingdoms of the west for
regional conquest, by Dharmaputra. The wealth of the
kingdoms he had conquered, was carried on te?
thousand camels to the capital Hastinapura. (
Sabha Parva, Chapter 32). After the Rajasuy4
(imperial consecration) of Yudhisthira, Nakula went
to Gandhara to escort Subala and his sons. After the
defeat of Yudhisthira in the game of dice, the Pandavas went to live in the forest. At that time Nakula put
soil all over his body and sat on the ground because _°
his profound grief. In the forest, once Jatasura carrie
away Nakula. (See under Jatasura), Nakula killed
Ksemankara, Mahamaha and Suratha in the forest
At Dvaitavana (a forest) Nakula went to a lake t
fetch water and was killed by Dharmadeva who appe@t"
ed in the form of acrane. At the request of Dharmaputra, who came afterwards, all the Pandavas including Nakula were brought to life again, by Dharma.
During the pseudonymity of the Pandavas at the city of
Virata, Nakula assumed the name Granthika. Whe"
the period of pseudonymity expired, Nakula fought
with the Trigartas on behalf of the King Virata. O8
the return of the Pandavas after the expiry of their
forest-life and’ pseudonymity, when Duryodhana
announced that he would give not even a single dot of
land to them, Nakula was very eager to decide the
matter by a battle. He proposed that the King Drupada should be made the chief captain of th army.
3) Nakula in th: Bha 2 -
2? Bharata-battle. The following is the
Part played by Nakula in the battle of Kuruksetra.
(i) There was a combat between Nakula arid Dussasana on the first day of the battle (M.B. Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 45, Stanza 25) : a
(ii) Nakula fought with Salva
A d d.
(M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 83). Was wounde
(ili) He fought with Sakuni ;
Chapter 105, Stanza 11). unl.. (M.B, Bhisma Parva;

NAKULA. An_ ancient country sy
NALA f, Nala the King of Nisa
NAKULA
(iv) He engaged Vikarna in a combat. (M.B. Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 110, Stanza !1). |
(v) Nakula defeated Vikarna. (M.B. Drona Parva
Chapter 106, Stanza 12). ;
(vi) Nakula defeated Sakuni. (M.B. Drona Parva,
Chapter 169, Stanza 1G).
(vii) He defeated Duryodhana in a fight. (M.B.
Drona Parva, Chapter 187, Stanza 50).
(viii) Nakula killed the King of Anga. (M.B. Karna
Parva, Chapter 22, Stanza 13).
(ix) He retreated on being defeated by Karna. (MB.
Karna Parva, Chapter 24, Stanza 45).
(x) He fought with Drona. (M.B. Karna Parva, Chapter
48, Stanza 34).
(xi) Nakula fought with Duryodhana again and was
wounded. (M.B. Karna Parva, Chapter 6, Stanza 7).
(xii) He fought with Vrsasena. (M.B. Karna Parva,
Chapter 61, Stanza 36). |
(xiii) Nakula killed Citrasena, Satyasena and
te the sons of Karna. (M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter
4) After the Bharata-batile. .
(i) After the battle, Nakula explained to Yudhisthira,
the duties of a house holder. (M.B. Santi Parva,
Chapter 12).
(ii) On the instruction 0
the chief captain of the army.
Chapter 41, Stanza 12).
(iii) After the battle, the. palace of Durmarsana the
son of Dhrtarastra was given to Nakula by Dharmaputra. (M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter 44, Stanza 10).
(iv) After the battle when Yudhisthira performed the
horse sacrifice, Nakula and Bhimasena stood as protectors of the city. (M.B. Aévamedha Parva, Chapter
72, Stanza 19). te
(v) Nakula went to the forest to see Kunti, who was
engaged in penance during her. latter days. (M.B.
éramavasi a Parva, Chapter 25, Stanza 8) . i
5) The end. At the ‘great departure” (Mahaprasthana)
of the Pandavas, Nakula died in the forest. It 1s
mentioned in Mahabharata, Svargarohana vane
Chapter 4, Stanza 9, that after death *Nakule a
Sahadeva attained the position of the Aavinideye :
6) The name Nakula. It is stated In Ma fi ae e
Virata Parva, Chapter 5, Stanza 95 that the nas
‘Nakula’ was given to him because there Wnt Fa the
pe handsome than he in the family (Kula) ©
andavas. India. (M.B.
f Yudhisthira, Nakula became
Santi Parva,
Stanza 3) .
dha. (As the history of
i e
Nala is included under the wore pore ee here),
points which are not given there, are a Oeniaaline
(i) Nala was the son of ve sua ee
M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter ~*> to the Palace of
(ii) Once the hermit Brhadas va ca d spoke
Virasena and praised Nala 4 good deal ann
.B. Vana
highly of his good qualities to his father. (M.B. Van
Parva, Chapter 53, Stanza a} den some swans
(iii) When Nala was playing in th6 or pander: Nala
with golden wings flew ‘0 the lake 1» ° the swan said
caught hold of one of them JN ae ‘il tell Damayantl
to Nala, “If you will let me 0; wi -eward it flew to
about you.” So it was released. AS a reyes:
Bhisma Parva, Chapter 59,
NALAKUBARA
the country of Vidarbha and persuaded Damayanti to
love Nala. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 53). _
(iv) After death Nala sat in the aerial chariot of Indra
and witnessed the battle fought by Arjuna with the
Kauravas at the end of the forest life of the Pandavas.
(M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 56, Stanza 10). if
(v) Previous birth. Two different stories are narrated
about the previous birth of Nala.
1) In the previous birth Nala was a Vaisya of the
city of Pippala in the Gauda country. This Vaisya
became abstinent and after leaving off everything he
had, he went to the forest. ‘There, according to the
advice of a hermit he undertook the fast of GaneSa.
As a result he was born as Nala in the next birth
(Ganega Purana).
2) Nala and Damayanti were foresters named Ahuka
and Ahuka. Siva was pleased with the couple. So they
were born in royal families in the next birth, and Siva
‘1 the form of a swan, helped them. (Siva Purana,
Satarudra Sarbhita).
NALA II. An ancient hermit. In Sabha Parva, Chapter
7, Stanza. 17, it is mentioned that this hermit lives in
the palace of Indra.
NALA III. A monkey. This monkey was the son of
Vigvakarma. Sri Rama and the monkey-army went to
redeem Sita from Lanka and reached the sea-shore. A
bridge had to be made to cross the sea and reach
Lanka. Immediately Varuna the King of the seas
appeared there and said, “Nala who is in the monkeyarmy, is the son of Vigvakarma . His father had given
him a blessing that he would become as expert an
architect as his father. So let the construction of the
bridge be commenced under his supervision.*? Accordingly under the supervision of Nala, Rama’s bridge of
rock was completed and Sri Rama and the army of
monkeys reached Lanka by walking over this bridge
(Valmiki Ramayana, Yuddha Kanda, Sarga 22).
In the battle hetween Rama and Ravana, Nala fought
with the giant Tundaka. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter
985, Stanza 9).
NALAKUBARA. A son of Vaisravana. He had a
brother called Manigriva.
1) Cursing Ravana, It was the time when Ravana was
ruling over Lanka and terrorising the fourteen worlds
As he was carrying on his conquests, once he came to
a round rock near Kailasa. It was night. Rambha had
fixed a rendezvous near the rock ‘that night with
Nalakiibara. The full moon shone bright. The radiance
of the moonrendered Kailasa and its vicinity most
beautiful. Filled with passion Ravana could not sleep
at all. In the silence of that calm night he heard the
tinkling of bangles. Ravana opened his twenty eyes
and looked in that direction. He saw an extremely
beautiful woman clad in splendid garments and ornaments going along the way. He ran to her and caught
hold of her hand. She was flurried and confused at his
sudden appearance. So she said, “Oh Lord! I am the
wife of Nalakibara who: is the son of your brother
Kubera. My name is Rambha. Your brother’s son is
your son too. So don’t do any harm to your son’s wife.”
But Ravana did not pay any heed to her words. He
lifted her up and placed her on the round rock and
raped her. Before dawn Rambha, who had become
like the lake of lotus trodden by a mad elephant, went
to Nalakibara and told him everything. Nalakibara

NALASETU 520
became very angry and cursed Ravana. “You,
who have become blind with lust, shall not touch a
woman who does not reciprocate your love. If you do
so your head will be split into seven pieces.” It was
because of this curse that Ravana did not touch Sita
though she was kept in his harem, (Uttara Ramayana;
Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 28).
9) Another wife of Nalakubara. It is mentioned in
Kathasaritsagara, Madanamaficukalambaka, Jaranga
3, that, of the two daughters, Svayamprabha and
Somaprabha of Maya, Somaprabha was the wife of
Nalakubara.
3) The curse of Narada. Nalakubara and Manigriva,
the sons of Kubera were playing with celestial maidens
in the Ganges in nudity, when Narada came by that
way. The hermit was returning after visiting Visnu.
The moment the celestial maids saw Narada they put
on their clothes and stood aside bowing before Narada.
Nalakaibara and Manigriva did not see Narada. They
ranhere and there, playing with no clothes on. At
this, Narada got angry and cursed them that they
would become two ‘‘Maruiu’’ trees (Terminalia alata)
on the earth. They became very sad and requested for
liberation from the curse. Narada told them they
would get liberation from the curse when they saw
Sri Krsna, the incarnation of Visnu. Accordingly
Nalakibara and his brother took birth near the house
of Nandagopa in Ambadi, as double ‘‘Marutu”’ trees.
It was the period of the childhood of Sri Krsna. Once
Sri Krsna swallowed mud, and'Yasoda tied him to a
mortar. The child dragged the mortar to the Marutu
tree and got himself between the double trees. Immediately the trees regained the original forms of
Nalakibara and Manigriva. They paid homage to
Sri Krsna, who blessed ‘them, and both of them
returned to Vaigravanapuri. (Bhagavata, Skanda 10).
NALASETU. The rock bridge built by the monkey
named Nala. The bridge over which Sri Rama and _ the
monkey-army crossed the sea to Lanka was built under
the supervision of Nala and so the bridge came to be
called Nalasetu. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 283
Stanza 45).
NALATANTU. One of Visvamitra’s sons who were
expounders of Brahman. (M.B. Anusa
NALAYANI. See under Paficali.
NALAYIRAPRABANDHAM. See under Nammalvar.
NALINI. A branch of the Ganges. When the heavenly
Ganga came down to the earth as a result of the
penance of Bhagiratha, Siva received it on his head. It
is seen in Valmiki Ramayana, Bala Kanda, Sarga 43
that when the Ganga fell drown from the head of Siva
it split into seven river-arms called Hladini, Pavani,
Nalini, Sucaksus, Sita, Sindhu and Ganga. The Ganges
which flows through North India.is one of these -seven
river-arms.
NALOPAKHYANAPARVA. A-sub Parva (section) of
Mahabharata. This sub section consists of Vana Parva,
Chapters 52 to 79.
NALU (FOUR). Various things mentioned in, the
Puranas having some association with four
(Nalu) are given below :—
1) Four distances. In the case of an elephant one must
keep a distance of 1000 kols, a horse 100 kols,
NALU (FOUR)
horned animals 10 kols, evil people, unlimited numbet
of kols. (1 kol is equal to a metre).
2) Four Adhikarins. Manda (the very ordinary )»
Madhyama (medium standard), Uttama (best) and
Uttamottama (the very best) .
3) Four Anubandhas. (Factors). In philosophy there
are four factors called Visaya (subject matter );
Prayojana (purpose), Sambandha (relationship between
factors) and Adhikarin (the deserving or eligible person )-
4) Four Antahkaranas (Internal organs). Manas (mind) ,
Buddhi (intellect), Cittam (heart)and Ahankara (ego) -
Imagination is the function of the mind, decision that
of Buddhi; to retain knowledge gained in orderly
form is the function of Cittam.and self-respect that ©
Ahankara.
5) Four Anvavayas. Satyam (truthfulness), Dama
(Self control), Arjavam (straightforwardness) and
Anrgarhsyam (not to be cruel). h
6) Anvavedas Four. Yajfia (sacrifical offerings) , Dan
(alms-giving, gifts), Adhyayana (learning) and Tapa
(penance) . ,
7) Four Apatrikaranas. (Not suited to the particular
station or place in life). Brahmins are forbidden for
receiving bribes, engaging in trades, service of Sadras
and uttering lies. | | P
8) Abhinayas Four. (Acting). Angikam (where gest
and bodily actions are used to convey ideas). Sattv}
Subjective feelings expressed by perpiration etc
Aharyam (extraneous), Vacikam (by words of mouth)
9) Abhydsavisayas Four. (Subjects for practice noe
training). Vinaya (humility), Damana (control
mind), Indriyanigraha (controlling the sense- organs
and Bhitadaya (kindness).
10) Amrtas Four. (Nectar). Good wife, talk of childre”:
present from King and honourable food. =
11) Alankaras Four. (Ornaments), For the stars, Mot i
for women, husband; for earth, King and for all, €
cation (learning). ‘os
12) Alankarasddhanas Four. According to phicton
Atigaya (excellence), Samya_ (simile), Vastav th
(matter of fact, as itis) and Slesa (one word W™
two meanings) are the Alankarasadhanas.
13) Avasthas Four. ( States, conditions). | d)
A, Saigavam (childhood), Kaumaram (boyho° ,
Yauvanam (youth) and Vardhakyam (old ag® 4
B. Jagrat (wakefulness), Svapnam (dream), Susuy
(sleep) and Turiyam (being one wit
supreme soul). ‘i
14) Astraprayogataksyas Four. ( Objects of shooting 47 rows
Sthiram, Galam, Calacalam, Dvayacalam. ‘
When the archer and the object of his shootin -
, 5 Mee n
remain motionless the object is called Sthiram. whe
the object is moving but the archer is not, the objec.
is Called Calam. When the case is just the opposite
the above it is Calacalam. When both are movit8
is called Dvayacalam.
15) Akhyayikagunas Four. Factors of the novel).
~.Kathabandha (plot or theme), Patraprakataoay
(exposition of characters iment)
and Gadyariti (prose style) as ery =
16) Abharanas Four (Ornaments). For man, shape ale
form; for form, quality or merit; for quality knowled8°
or wisdom and for wisdom, patience or forbearance.
17) Ayudhas Four. ( Weapons) . Mukta, Amukta, Mukt@
- mukta and Yantramukta, (See under Dhanurveda) -

NALU (FOUR)
18) Avaranas Four. (Covering, Protection). For earth
the sea, for house the compound wall, for country the
King, for women chastity.
19) Aharaddis Four. (Food etc.). Ahara (food), Nihara
(Evacuation), Maithuna (sexual act), Nidra (sleep).
20) Ahdravastus Four. (edibles). Khadyam (eaten by
munching with teeth.and chewing), Peyam (that which
is drunk), Lehyam { licked with the tongue )and Bhojyam
(that which is not included in the above three).
21) Rnas Four. (Obligations, debts). Debts due to
Devas, Rsis, Pitrs and Men. One pays back one’s debts
to Devas by performing yajfias. By Svadhyaya (selfstudy) and tapas one pays the debt due to Rsis; by
procreation of children and libation offerings that due
to Pitrs and by truthfulness, hospitality etc. that due to
people are repaid.
22) Rtviks Four. Adhvaryu, Udgata, Hota and Brahma.
The first of the four should be an erudite scholar in
Yajurveda, the second in Samaveda, the third in
Atharvaveda and the fourth in all the four Vedas. _
23) Kavis Four. (Poets). He who boasts about himself
in secret is called Udatta; he who cries down others
and indulges in self-praise is known as Uddhata; he
who proclaims others’ merits is called Praudha and he
who shows humility is called Vinita. :
24) Kukkutagunas Four. (Traits of the Cock). ‘To rise
early in the morning, to struggle for existence, to share
whatever is got with relations and to work and earn
one’s own food—these are the qualities of the Cock.
25) Grahyas Four. (Acceptables).
A. Nectar even from poison, good advice even from
boys, good action even from enemies and noble and
chaste brides even from low families are to be welcomed.
B. Literacy (learning of alphabets) should be
pan from
accepted from brahmins, food from mother,
wife and bangles from King. :
26) Caturangas Four, Elephant, Horse, Chariot an
Infantry.
27) Agamas Four. Brahmacarya (student _ life),
Garhasthya (married life), Vanaprastha (anchorite,
forest-life ) and Sannyasa (Renunciation ). dea
28) Yugas Four. Krta, Treta, Dvapara an 3 at ae
29) Vargas Four. Dharma, Artha, Kama se Hane
30) Upayas Four. (Expedients). Sama, Wane, ;
anda, 7
31): Cikitsapadas Four. (Four elements 1n the seein
of patients). Vaidya (doctor) » Rogin en D
Ausadham (medicine) and Paricaraka (atten ee
32) Fatis Four. (Castes). Brahmana, Ksatriya,
and Sidra. ie
33) Tyajyas Four. ( things to be shunned)- Pi!
Pia Horse pt after bath, elephant 1n 1s rut
love-lorn bull and wicked scholar.
B. Evil action, unhealthy region,
ie iven without
34) Danas Four. (Gifts). Gifts daily Bree aiven to
€xpecting return or result 1s Nityadana. neiation. of at
Scholars (pundits) for the sake of a Gifts given for
redemption from sin is Naimittikadan?. 2 eine rade
welfare and prosperity is Kamyakadana.
to propitiate God is Vimala. es
35) Nayakas Four. ( Heroes) Dhirodatta,
lralalita, Dhiraganta,
evil wife and bad
Dhiroddhata,
NAMBUTIRIS
36) Naris Four. (Women). Padmini, Sankhini, Citrini,
and Hastini.
37) Pramanas Four. (Means of valid knowledge), Pratyaksa, Anumana, Upamana, and Sabda.
38) Moksas Four. (Salvation). Salokya,
Saripya and Sayujya.
39) Four Yogas. Jiianayoga, Bhaktiyoga, Karmayoga
and Dhyanayoga,
40) Four Satrus (Enemies). Mother leading an immoral life; father who incurs debt; foolish son and beautiful wife.
41) Four Sastras. Nitigastra, Tarkasgastra, Manusmrti
and Kamasastra.
Samipya,
NAMASYU. A King of Yayati’s family. (Bhagavata,
Skandha 9).
NAMBUTIRIS. (Malayala Brahmins). Logan says that
the Nambitiris were the batch of Aryans that settled —
down in Kerala after the Nairs. The historians like
Sankunni Menon and others have stated that the Nambutiris had come to Kerala from the banks of the rivers
Godavari, Narmada and Kaveri. Famous historians have
inferred that the progress of the. Aryans to the south
took place between 1000 and 325 B.C. But ‘Thomas
Fawlks thinks that there were Nambitiri priests and
hermits in South India, during the time of Buddha.
N.K, Datta, the author of the book ‘‘Aryanisation of
India’, is of opinion that during the time of the invasion of Alexander, the Aryans had spread all over
India and Ceylon. Thus historians have not yet come to
anagreement as to the correct period of the exodus of the
Aryans to the south. Anyhow in the Geography of
Ptolemy mention is made that half a degree east to
Taibis there was a place called Brahmagara. It may
be assumed that Brahmagara may be Brahmagara
(settlement of Brahmins). It has been decided definitely
that the period of Ptolemy was A.D. 2nd century, and
in that case the Brahmins must have settled in the
south before that period.
Though the period of the ‘Sangha poets and their works’
has been assessed differently by different scholars, the —
majority have fixed it as the first few centuries of A.D.
In these Sangha poems the gods of the Aryans are
praised. The gods Surya (the Sun), Candra (the moon),
Varuna (god of water), Baladeva (Sri Krsna’s elder
brother) and Visnu (Supreme God) are specially mentioned in ‘Cilappadikara’. The Sangha work ‘Purananurw? is an encomium to the purity of the Vedas and
Agnihotra Brahmins (Brahmins who maintain the holy
fire by burnt offering). In those days the King carried
on the administration of the country with the advice —
of Brahmins. Economics, Grammar and law were taught
jn royal palaces. Paficaksara and such other spells,
reading of the scriptures, Aryan ways of marriage, Recitations of Puranic stories etc. were prevalent in those days.
Manimekhala is stated to have reached the capital
of the Cera King and learned Vedas. and Sankhya
doctrines (one of the six systems of Indian Philosophy
dealing with evolution) from the prominent teachers
here. The diction of both the works ‘Cilappadikara’ and
‘Manimekhala’ is, to a certain extent, indebted to Sanskrit. Many of the Sanskrit poetic traditions are used in
these poems. When these proofs are taken into account,
‘tis mot wtong to presume that in the period from Ist
century to 5th century A.D. Aryan civilization prevailed
jn south India. If, during this period, Aryan civilization

NAMBUTIRIS
had taken root to such an extent in south India, the
advent of the Aryans to south India must have taken
place at least two or three centuries prior to this period.
The Nambitiris of Kerala are called Malayala
Brahmins. Between them and the Brahmins of other
countries there are differerices in manners and customs.
They are given below:—
1) The Brahmins of other parts of India do not’ perform agnihotra rites (maintaining the holy fire by burnt
offering) so elaborately as the Malayala Brahmins.
2) Among the sixteen purificatory rites, Agnisvikara (or
taking up of sacrificial fire) is an important item in
Malabar. From Vedic period Agni (Fire) had become a
prominent God. Most of the verses in Rgveda are concerned with fire. The attachment of the Brahmins of
Kerala to fire shows their antiquity.
3) Much importance, is attached to the learning of
scriptures and priest-hood in Kerala. There were 18
Mathas and res:dential institutions in Kerala for giving
religious education.
4) The peculiar type of recitation of the Vedas of
the Malayala Brahmins and the accompanying gestures
of their hands and the movements of the head at the
time of recitation are considered by them to be ancient.
Even today certain sounds are produced by them in the
Vedic way. (For instance Samral—Samrat; Vasar—
Vasat; Ide— [le ete.).
5) In Malabar there isa customary atonement or expiation called Vratyastoma for those Brahmin boys who
had not undergone investiture with the sacred thread
within the stipulated time. This shows the stress laid on
the need of religious education.
6) The custom that all the male members of the family
except the family chief should be engaged in ‘Snatakavrtti? (should remain celibates even after education) is
prevalent only in Malabar.
7) Much importance is attached to evening worship
in Kerala. At that time the Vedic gods are not hailed.
But Brahmins of other places do not seem to attach so
much importance to this practice.
8) The Brahmins outside Kerala repeat the mantras
uttered by the priest and perform the functions, at the
time of meditation and worship. But in Kerala for meditation and worship with or without incantations a priest
is not necessary. This indicates the practice in vogue
during Vedic period before the priestly class became
predominant.
9) The Nambitiris have recognized only three Vedas
10) The Kerala Brahmins wear only one sacred thread,
The Nambitiris became predominant in Kerala nie
began to have a hand in the various spheres of activities.
Thus the Aryan civilization shook the customary faith
and religion of Kerala from top to bottom and the
Aryan religion hoisted its flag of victory here. Aryan
literature also found its way into Kerala. The authors
and scholars in Kerala began to imitate it. The Nambiris erected temples in Kerala with the help of local
chieftains. The sounds of alphabets, sentence pattern,
grammar, poetic tradition etc. of Malayalam language
underwent a thorough change. Sanskrit education spread
far and wide. They spread Aryan civilization through
‘Kittu and Kitiyattam (Narration of mythological
stories with gestures tc. and collective dance) Pathaka
and Sanghakkali (Musical lectures and dramatic performances), in connection with festivals in the temples.
‘Dae
NAMMALVAR
They absorbed many of the customs and manners of
Kerala. The Nambitiris who had adopted priest-hood
as their career had amassed wealth and landed property
in the capacities of priests and authorities of the
temples. Some of them became Kings (e.g. King of
Idappally, King of Campakaséeri etc. ). They kept up
the contact with the people of the locality by means of
morganatic marriages and made their positions secure.
Thus these people, though a smal] minority, were able
to hold sway over the people of Kerala for a long
time. |
NAMMALVAR. The first of the twelve great Alvars. The
Saivite devotees of South India are called Nayanars an
the Vaisnavite devotees, Alvars. The word alvar means,
a devotee of God. The Vaisnava religion says that the
twelve alvars are the incarnations of Adigesa and Garuda
the followers and the embodied deities of the Conch and
the discus the weapons of Visnu. It is mentioned
in Srimad Bhagavata that divine persons who are
followers of Visnu will incarnate on the earth in Kaltyuga and that their native places will be the banks of
the holy rivers in Dravida such as Tamraparni, Krtamala
(Vaigai), Payasvini (Papanagini) and Kaveri. It 18
stated about these divine persons in Visnumahatmy4
that they would take birth in any caste and compost
Dravida songs and thereby propagate lofty truths. The
collection of Dravida songs thus composed by the
alvars is called ‘Divya Prabandha’ (Divine Compos”
tion).
There are four thousand songs in four parts in the
Divine composition and hence it has the name Nalayir4
Prabandham ‘Four thousand composition’. The theme
of the Ist and 2nd thousands, isa secret know? as
‘Tirumantra’ (the divine spell)..The third thousap
is concerned with the “Caramagloka” (the verse Oo
death) and in the fourth ““‘Dvayamantra”’ is dealt with.
The Tirumantra (the divine spell) is the collection °
of three words Om, namah and Narayanaya. d
‘Om’ and‘namah’are explained in the first thousand ant”
the word Narayanaya in the second thousand of the
composition. The Caramaégloka (the verse of death) *
the last utterance of the songster-priest. It is a prop?
gation of the theme of seeking refuge. The individua
soul has to seek refuge under the universal soul, “
conditionally. This is what is called ‘Prapatti. Dvay".
mantra (the two fold mantra) deals with the aim a”
the ways for the realisation of that aim, It woul Re
possible only by the help of Laksmi Bhagavati (the
goddess Laksmi). It is a verse of only two lines. 7
The first and foremost among the Alvars is Nammalvat-
“Tiruvaymoli’ is his work. It had been predicted iD
Vaisnava Purana that at the beginning of Kaliyug?:
Visnu Senani named Visvaksena would incarnate #
Nammialvar and that he would reinstate the Vaisnavilé
religion. Itis hinted in Brahmanda Purana t)@
Nammalvar would incarnate in Srinagari (Tirunaga”™
on the banks of river Tamraparni in the Kingdom of
Pandya. As was fore-told Nammalvar was bor? !
Tirunagari. The present name of this place is ‘Alvat
tirunagari’,
There is a traditional lore about the birth of Nammalvar. ‘There was a ruling chief named Kariyar in Tiru"?”
gari. Udayamankayar was his wife. The couple once
went to the Vaisnavite temple near Mahendra mount
ain known as Tirukkurunkuti temple and prayed to the ©

NAMUCI I.
NAMUCI I
god consecrated there called Nambi, for a son. Reply
was given through the priests that the god himself
would take birth as their son. Accordingly Udayamankayar gave birth to Namméalvar. Scholars say that the
birth of Nammalvar was on the 43rd day of Kailyugathat is in B.C.3102.
Nammialvar had another name Parankuga. Some believe
that he was the incarnation of portions of Senefa and
the jewel Kaustubha. Some say that there are portions
of Mahavisnu, Paficayudha,
Nammalvir. The Vaisnavites have given Nammalvar a
lofty place, The infant born to Kariyar and Udayamankayar was not an ordinary one. Generally infants at
birth are covered with a case of air called ‘Satha’.
Because of this they lose the memory of previous birth.
But Nammalvar had no Satha. So he got the name
‘Sathakopa’. The parents were amazed at the infant
which lay still without beating its legs, and crying or
sucking its mother’s breasts. The bright infant was taken
to the Vaisnavite temple on the twelfth day. Because
of his difference from ordinary infants he was name
Mara. A golden cradle studded with jewels was hung
on the branch of a tamarind tree and laying the child
in it, the parents went home. That tamarind tree still
stands there. The devotees believe that that tree also 1s
a portion of Adigesa.
Nammilvar spent sixteen years under the tamarind tree
without opening the eyes or uttering a single word. af
the sixteenth year a wise man who could -understan
the dignity of Nammalvar came there, The person wae
the Madhura Kavi Alvar. After this Nammalvar sat
under the tamarind tree and sang Songs of praise 4
Narayana. Madhura Kavi set tunes for a on
sang them. Everybody who heard them was ance ye
wonder and stood still. Nammalvar spent his ae
under the tamarind tree in meditation and contemp/ation. At the age of 35 he entered heaven.
= -ant). It is stated in
Afierce Rasa? Leg Stanza 22, that
Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter , th
this “dant Was the son of Prajapatl eg By
Danu. This fierce giant was killed by In ee Atel ne
astory in the Puramas describing how
killed. ‘
Under the leadership of Namuct @ great, army Oth
giants invaded the realm of the gods. 10 ann
an army of devas. Though the Sor gg CE iy. To save
the battle Indra was not able to kill JNamn ot info the
himself from the attack of Indra, Mikes fines found
radiance of the Sun and id himself t he conditions O
him out and made a treaty with him, the
which were as said by Indra:—
“Oh, noble giant, I will not kill Ar
dry thing, in the night or in the day:
true,”’ she . for Indra
According to this treaty it became impossie dry things
to kill Namuci either with wet ee ht. Only when
and either in the day time OF a the id ‘Namuci come
Indra had agreed'to these conditions 7
out,
The battle continued
and Nigumbha the el
to Patala. Indra ran afte
Indra found him hiding ©
by wet thing Of
What I say 35
and Indra 4
der brothers @
r Namuc! a
n the sea shore an
“tn the evening
ndin id killed him
Adigesa and Senega in |
NAMUCI III.
NANDA IV. A serpent born in the family
NANDA V. A warrior of Subrahmanya.
NANDA VI.
NANDA I.
NANDA II.
NANDA II
with the foam of the sea. As Indra had violated the condition of the treaty the severed head of Namuci followed
Indra. With this Indra incurred the sin of Brahmahatya (killing.a Brahmin). To get remission from this
sin Indra approached Brahma. He was advised to bathe
in Arundsangama and doing so Indra got remission of
his sin. From that day onwards Arunasangama became
a holy bath (tirtha). (M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 40).
NAMUCI II. An army-captain of Hiranyaksa. In the
battle with Indra, Namuci made him unconscious and
the elephant Airavata thrust its tusks on the ground.
After that by his magic and sorcery he created many
creatures. But Visnu destroyed all those creatures _ with
his discus Sudargana. At last Indra killed Namuci.
Padma Purdna, Srstikhanda) . !
Another valiant captain of Hiranyaksa.
He sent five arrows against Indra in a fierce battle. But
Indra cut all the five arrows in the midway: Then by
his magic and sorcery Namuci spread darkness everywhere. Indra defeated that strategy also. Then Namuci
dashed forward and taking hold of the tusks of Airavata
shook Indra down. Indra stood up and cut off the head
of Namuci with his sword. (Padma Purana, Srsti
Khanda).
NANAGABHU. A King of the family of Yayati. (Bhagavata, Skandha 9).
NANDA I. (NANDAKA). See under Nandagopa.
NANDA II. (See under Vararuci).
NANDA III. A son of Dhrtarastra. In the battle of
Kuruksetra, Bhimasena killed him. (M.B. Karna
Parva, Chapter 51, Stanza 19).
of Kasyapa
(Mahabharata, Udyoga Parva, Chapter 103, Stanza
(M.B. Salya
Parva, Chapter 45, Stanza 64).
Asynonym of Bhagavan Visnu. (M.B..
Anuéasana Parva, Chapter 149, Stanza 69).
Wife of Harsa the third son of Dharmadeva.
(M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 66, Stanza 33).
A river. Mention is made in Mahabharata,
Adi Parva, Chapter 214, Stanza 6, that while Arjuna
had been engaged in a pilgrimage visiting the holy
laces in the east, he reached the banks of the rivers
Nanda and Aparananda. Many of the scholars are of
opinion that this river flowed through the eastern side
of the forest Naimisaranya. When the hermit Dhaumya
talks about the holy places of the east to Yudhisthira,
he says as follows about the river Nanda. ““I’he beautiful mountain ‘Kundoda’ is a place which abounds in
roots, fruits and water. Nala the King of Nisadha, who
was weary of thirst, rested here. There is a holy temple
here called Devavana which is thronged by hermits.
Near, this temple there is a mountain through the top
of which, two rivers Bahuda and Nanda flow.” (M.B.
Vana Parva, Chapter 87).
During the time of the forest life of the Pandavas,
Yudhisthira travelled with the hermit Lomaga, through
the basin of the rivers Nanda, and Aparananda. During
the Pauranic times some deities had lived in the basin
- of the river Nanda, and men began to come there to
visit the deities. The devas ( gods) did not like this and
so they rendered the place inaccessible to men. From
that time onwards the river basin of Nanda and the

NANDABHADRA
mount Hemakita have become prohibited area for
human beings. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 110).
NANDABHADRA. A righteous VaiSya. Having been
childless for a long time this Vaigya, who was an ardent
devotee of God Kapilesvara, got ason in his old age.
But he died after his marriage. With this calamity
Nandabhadra became aman of abstinence and began
to try to acquire spiritual knowledge. After a while a
seven-year-old boy appeared before the Vaisya and
quenched his thirst for spiritual knowledge. Later with
meditation on Siva and the Sun, Nandabhadra attained
heaven. (Skanda Purana, Chapters 1, 2 and 46).
NANDAGOPA. Foster-father of Sri Krsna.
1) Previous birth, There are two stories about the
previous birth of Nandagopa. )
(i) Drona, one of the eight Vasus and his wife Dhara
once committed a mistake, not becoming the gods.
Brahma who found it out, cursed the couple to take
birth in the family of cowherds. Drona and Dhara
prayed for remission. Brahma told them that Mahavisnu would incarnate as their son as Sri Krsna and
that after that birth they would be liberated from the
curse. Accordingly Drona took birth as Nandagopa and
Dhara as YaSoda. (Bhagavata, Skandha 10).
(11) Once a King named Candrasena sat in the Mahakala temple in Ujjayini to perform penance. Siva was
pleased at his penance and gave him a jewel. That
brilliant precious stone fulfilled all his desires. Other
kings heard about this jewel and came to war to take
possession of the jewel. The King came and _ took
refuge in the temple.
At this time a son named Srikara was born toa cowherdess in Ujjayini. He was god-fearing since childhood.
Srikara came to Mahakala temple and sat in worship
and meditation and attained the goodwill of Siva. The
Kings who came in chase of Candrasena could not
approach the temple because of the unearthly brilliance
that radiated from Srikara. Not knowing the reason the
kings stood staring and Haniman instantly appeared
before them and said. “Hear this, oh Kings! Srikara
is not a mere cowherd boy. The God is pleased with
him. In his eighth birth from today he will be born in
Ambadi under the name Nandagopa. Then Mahavisnu
will incarnate as the son of Nandagopa under the name
Sri Krsna.”
Nandagopa was the eighth birth of this Sri
Purana, Sanipradosamahatmya) .
_ 2) Varuna carried away Nandagopa.
was living in Ambadi as the foster-so
Nandagopa went to bathe in the river Yamuna, While
he was taking a dip under the water a servant of
Varuna carried him away to the realm of Varuna. As
Nandagopa disappeared the people of Ambadi ran
here and there in grief. At last Sri Krsna jumped into
the water and reached the city of Varuna, who praised
Sri Krsna and said that it was to see Sri Krsna that he
had carried Nandagopa away, and requested for
pardon. Sri Krsna pardoned Varuna and brought
Nandagopa to Ambadi. (Bhagavata, Skandha 10).
3) Nandagopa swallowed by a great mountain-snake. (See
under Krsna, Para 21). |
NANDAKA I. A tabor. Whenever the flag of Yudhisthira was hois ted, two tabors called Nandaka and
Upanandaka used to be beaten. (M.B. Vana Parva,
Chapter 27, Stanza 7).
kara. (Siva
While Sri Krsna
n of Nandagopa, .
NANDINI I
NANDAKA II. Asword of Mahavisnu. (M.B. Anusasana Parva, Chapter 147, Stanza 15). ,
There is a story explaining how Mahavisnu came by
this sword Nandaka. In days of old Brahma performed
a sacrifice on the banks of the heavenly Ganga on a
peak of mount Mahameru. While Brahma was sitting
in deep meditation in the sacrifice Lohasura was seen
~ coming to cause disturbance to the sacrifice. Immediately amale being came into existence from the meditation of Brahma. The male being paid homage to
Brahma and the devas (gods) became glad and they
encouraged the male being. Because the gods greeted the
male one, he was changed toa sword called Nandaka
(that which is greeted or thanked for). That sword
was received by Mahavisnu at the request of the gods.
When Mahavisnu slowly took it Lohasura came near.
He was an asura of blue complexion, with thousand
hands of adamantine fists. By wielding his club he
drove away the gods. Mahavisnu cut down his limbs
one by one and those organs became metals by the
touch of the sword. Then Mah4visnu killed the asura.
Then Mahavisnu granted Nandaka a pure body and
various boons. Afterwards Nandaka became the deity
of weapons on the earth. Thus Brahma, who got 1!
of the disturbance by the aid of Visnu, completed the
sacrifice. (Agni Purana, Chapter 245).
NANDANATI. Son of Hiranyakasipu. Nandana wh
had been ruling over the Sveta island had obtaine
boons from Siva and had become invincible. He rule¢
over the kingdom for ten thousand years and then
attained Kailaisa and became a gana of. Siva. (Siva
Purana, Uttara Khanda, Chapter 2).
NANDANA II. One of the two attendants given %
Skandadeva by Aégvinikumaras. (M.B. Santi Parva,
Chapter 44).
NANDANA III. A divine park in the world of dev
(gods); Mention is made in Mahabharata, Anus4san@
Parva, Chapter 25, Stanza 45, that those who ha
brought the organs of senses under control and who ha
not killed any living being, would be pérmitted
enter this park.
NANDASRAMA. A holy place. Amba, the daughter of
the King of Kagi once performed penance in this hol
place. (M.B. Udyoga Parva, Chapter 186, Stanza 26):
NANDII. A Deva Gandharva. He was present at the
birth celebration of Arjuna. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chaptet
12, Stanza 56).
NANDIII. One of the divine attendants of Siva. (Se
under Nandikefa).
NANDIGRAMA., Itis stated in Valmiki Ramaya?
Ayodhyakanda . that while Sri Rama had been leadin§
forest life, Bharata lived in Nandigrama for twelve
years worshipping the sandals of Sri Rama. 715
andigrama is situated nearly fourteen miles aw2Y
from Ayodhya. (Faizabad).
NANDIKESA. The chief of the Bhata Ganas_ (the
attendants) of Siva. For the story of how NandikeSa
once took the form of a monkey and cursed Rava
see under Ravana.
NANDIKUNDA. A holy place. In Mahabharata,
Anuégasana Parva, Chapter 25, Stanza 60, jit ig men
tioned that the sin incurred by causing abortion, wi
be washed away by taking a bath in th; holy pl
NANDINII. A cow of the world de eae i ‘
(See under Kamadhenv) . one a tie: Gods he :

NANDINI II
NANDINIII. A holy place. In this place there is a
well esteemed by the gods. It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 84, Stanza 15, that those
who bathe in this holy well will obtain the fruits of
Naramedhayajfia (human sacrifice).
NANDISENA. One of the four attendants given to
Subrahmanya by Brahma. Lohitaksa, Ghantakarna and
Kumudamali were the other three attendants. (M.B.
Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Stanza 24).
NANDISVARA. See under Nandikesga.
NANDIVARDHANA I. The name of the conch of
Satyaki. (M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 61, Daksinatyapatha).
NANDIVARDHANA II. A King of the solar dynasty. He
was the son of Virada and the father of Suketu. (Bhagavata, Skandha 9). '
NANDIVEGA. A ‘Ksatriya family of ancient India. A
famous King named Sama was born in_ this family.
(M.B. Udyoga Parva, Chapter 74. Stanza 17).
NAPTA. An eternal god concerned with offerings to the
Manes: (M.B. Anusasana Parva, Chapter 91, Stanza
NAPUMSAKA. (EUNUCH). . Mention is made in
Brahmanda Purana, Chapter 48, that the semen 1ntroduced into the womb of the woman by the man at
the time of coition, will get mixed with the blood in
the womb, and that the issue will be male, female oe
eunuch according to the proportion of the mixture. in
the mixture of semen and blood, if blood exceeds semen
the issue will be female and if semen exceeds, it will be
male child and if both are equal the child will be a
% eunuch. Aas
ARAI. A hermit of divine power.
= deva from his
1) Birth. Brahma created ae a i arene ee
breast. Truthful and righteous |
daughters of Daksa. Several sons were born to pee
of his ten wives. But foremost among them ycrs Hat ,
Krsna, Nara and Narayana. Hari and Ree oe
great yogins and Nara and Narayana eae &
hermits of penance. The Nara-Narayanas IV
holy Asylum of Badarikasrama |
n the vicinity of the
i nance to
Himalayas for a thousand years performing pe
Brahma. (Devi Bhagavata, Shans i, Para 1.
2) Giving birth to Urvasi. See un a at (gods) aad
3) Keeper of Amyta ( Ambrosia). The a the gea ofmill
the asuras (demons) together shepapeen ~ of immortaland obtained Ambrosia (the ce I nec inating woman
ity), Mahavisnu took the guise of a pene ‘Vs asuras
and obtained the Amrta by steal ed a terrible
and gave it to the devas. dhe esues ithe request of
war with the devas. At that nm: at ides with the
the devas, Nara and Narayana 5s a consequence
d ht against the asuras a shharata,
ne wien ane ae were defeated. In Mahabha
‘+ is stated that
Adi Parva, Chapter 19, Stan2@ 3). od the keeping
from that ‘day ownwards Indra aie 4 Nara.
of the celestial Nectar with fe tel See under
4) Dambhodbhava brought under ©
Dambhodbhava).
5) Conflict with Siva.
Sacrifice by Daksa, Siva got ane
against Daksa’s sacrifice. The nak
troyed the sacrifice and flew ogee ea
there. Then it reached Badary@ es ed in
of Narayana who was sitting ©€98 §
invited to the
Because he eet his trident
ane completely a
the air here an
and hit the breast
penance. By
NARA I
the force of the utterance of the sound ‘Hum’, made
by Narayana, the trident was ejected from his breast.
Finding no accommodation there it flew back to Siva,
who getting angry at this rebut approached NaraNarayanas with the intention of exterminating them.
Nara took a grass from the ground and discharged it at
Siva. Instantly the grass became an axe. It flew round
Siva to attack him. Siva broke the axe. From that day
onwards Siva got the name ‘Khandaparasu’ (one who
broke the axe). In this story it is said that the trident
which had returned from the breast of Narayana heated
the hair of Siva to such an extent that they were
dried as dry grass. So Siva came to be called ‘Muijijake$a’ (with hair having the colour of dry grass): (M.B.
Santi Parva, Chapter 343).
6) Fight with Prahlada. Once Cyavana the son of Bhrgu
went to Nakulesvara tirtha (Bath) to take his bath in
the river Narmada. As soon as he got into the water
the serpent called Kekaralohita caught hold of him.
Cyavana meditated on Visnu. So the poison of the serpent did not affect him. The huge serpent dragged
Cyavana to Patala (the Nether world). But as his
poison did not affect the hermit the serpent left the
prey and went away. The Naga damsels welcomed
him and showed hospitality. Being greeted by the Naga
damsels he travelled through Patala and reached the
great city of Danavas. The asurachiefs greeted him with
respect. Prahlada met Cyavana, and received him with
pleasure. The hermit said to Prahlada. ‘‘I came to bathe -
in the Mahatirtha and worship Nakulegvara. When I
got into the river a serpent caught hold ofme and
brought me to Patala, and made it possible for me to
meet you.” Hearing these words of Cyavana the King
of the asuras said : “Oh good Lord ! which are the holy
baths in the earth, the sky and the Patala? Would you
be pleased to tell us?’? Cyavana replied : “Oh ! powerful and mighty King! The holy baths are Naimisa on
the earth, Puskara on the sky and Cakra tirtha in Patala;
these are the most important ones.”’
The King of the Daityas decided to go to Naimisa and
said :—‘‘We must go and bathe in the Naimisa tirtha.
We could visit and worship Visnu with eyes as beautiful
as lotus.’’ Obeying the words of the King, preparations
were made instantly and the asuras started from Rasatala for Naimisa.
The mighty host of Daityas and Danavas reached
Naimisa and bathed in the tirtha. After that Prahlada
went to the forest for hunting. As he was walking thus
he saw the river Sarasvati. Near the river- there was a
Pine tree with very big branches, all of which were
covered with arrows, the head of one at the tail of another. Prahlada saw near the tree two hermits, with
matted hair, clad in the hide of black antelope, performing penance. Near them were two perfectly made divine
bows named Sarnga and Ajagava and two quivers which
would never become empty. Prahlada questioned them
without knowing that they were Nara and Narayana.
The questioning ended ina contest. The hermit Nara
stood up and taking the bow Ajagava began sending
showers of arrows at Prahlada. Prahlada checked every
one of them. The hermit made his fight more severe.
Prahlada also withstood it. At last pushing Nara back
Narayana came to the front. The fight between Prahlada
and Narayana was fierce. In the end Prahlada fell down,
his breast being pierced by the arrow of Narayana.

NARA II 526
Prahlada realized that the hermit Narayana was none
- but Visnu. He praised Narayana (Vamana Purana,
Chapter 8). -
7) Other information. |
(i) On the occasion of the stripping of Paficali ‘of her
clothes at the palace of the Kauravas, Paficali cried,
calling Nara and Narayana. (M.B. Sabha Parva,
Chapter 68, Stanza 46 ).
(ii) Arjuna and Sri Krsna were the rebirths of Nara
and Narayana. (See under Arjuna).
(iii) It is stated in Mahabharata, Santi Parva, Chapter
334, Stanza 9, that the hermit Nara was one of the
four incarnations taken by Mah4visnu in the Manusya
yuga (age of man) of the Svayambhuva Manvantara.
(iv) It is mentioned in Padma Purana, Uttara Khanda,
Chapter 2, that, of the two viz. Nara and Narayana,
Nara was of fair complexion and Narayana of ‘dark
complexion.
(v) It was because of the curse of the hermit Bhrgu
that Nara-Narayanas took birth as Arjuna and Krsna
‘in the Dvaparayuga. (Devi Bhagavata, Skandha 4).
(vi) The meaning of the word ‘Nara’ ishe who is not
damaged. The universal soul named Nara has created
water and so water got the name ‘Naram’. ‘Because he
lives in that water which has the name Naram, the universal soul got the name Narayana. (Manusmrti, Chapter
1 Stanza 10).
(vii) For the other incarnations of Nara see under
Raktaja.
NARA II. A Gandharva (semigod). It is stated in
Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter 10, stanza 14 that
this Nara stays in the presence of Kubera.
NARA III. A King of Ancient India. He never tasted
meat in his life. (M.B. Anugasana Parva, Chapter 115,
Stanza 64). .
NARA IV. . One of the wives of Uginara, a King of the
family of the Anga Kings. Usinara had several wives
such as Nrga, Nara, Krmi, Dasa, Drsadvati and so on.
Nrga was born from Nrga, Nara from Nara, Krmi from
Krmi, Suvrata from Dag4 and Sibi from Drsadvati. All
these sons became Kings. (Agni Purana, Chapter 277).
NARA V. An ancient place in South India. (M.B.
Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Stanza 60).
NARAGA. A particular type of arrow.
NARADA I. _ A very famous sage of the Puranas.
1) Birth. Narada was the son of Brahma, ‘born from
his lap. Brahma mentally created the famous saptarsis
Marici, Angiras, Atri,» Pulastya, Vasistha, Pulaha and
Kratu. From Brahma’s anger was born Rudra, from his
lap Narada, from his right thumb Daksa, from his mind
Sanaka and others and from his left thumb a daughter
called Virani. Daksa wedded Virani. (Devi Bhagavata,
5th Skandha ). 3
2) Various births of Narada. ‘The Puranas refer to more
than seven prominent births of Narada. He-was first
born as the son of Brahma, and after that, on account
of Brahma’s curse he was born as the Gandharva called
Upabarhana. Following that he was born as the son of
emperor Drumila and was named Narada. Again born as
the son of Brahma under the name Narada, he married
Malati and ended his life asa monkey. He was again
born as the son of Brahma and was cursed by Daksa.
Afterwards he was born as the son of Daksa and also
as a worm. All these births did not occur in one and
NARADA I
the same Manvantara. Narada may be noticed doing
something or other in connection with the various
characters in the Puranas. There is no other character
in the Puranas occupying so popular a place in them as
Narada. The important five births of Narada are described below.
(i) The Gandharva called Upabarhana. Narada born
from the lap of Brahma desired to remain a celibate..
But, Brahma suggested that he should assume respons!-
bility for procreation as his (Brahma’s) other sons like
Marici and Sanaka had already become celibates.
Narada did not accept this suggestion of Brahma at
which the latter got angry and cursed Narada to lose
his knowledge and to marry fifty beautiful wome”.
Brahma continued :—“You will be born as a Gandharva
known as Upabarhana and will become a great music
jan. You will be unrivalled in the handling of the
Vina. After your death as the Gandharva you will be
born as the son of a servant woman, and as such you
will be a great devotee of Visnu.. Afterwards you W!
be born as my son when I will impart knowledge ©
you.”
There was a Gandharva called Citraketu, who performed
penance on the banks of the Puskara lake to propitiat©
Siva for achild. Siva appeared and blessed Citraket¥
to the cfect that Narada, the son of Brahma, woul
born as his son. Accordingly the wife of Citraket™
delivered a son whom the family priest named UP _
barhana. The boy grew up as a devotee of Visnu. Brhaspati taught him the worship of Hari (Visnu). Upabat
hana lived on the slopes of the Himalayas performin&
penance. While Upabarhana was one day engaged 1n ie
madhi fifty daughters of the Gandharva called Citrarath@
passed that way, and they fell in love with U pabarhan®s
' who was in Samadhi. He awoke from Samadhi on hear!9&
the melodious songs of the fifty damsels who stood ape
with palms joined in reverence. Upabarhana too ell 1
love with them, and he married all the fifty girls. for
returned with them to the palace and lived there 5
thousands of years. Once the Gandharvas anC ©".
Apsaras were invited to sing the story of V1snU : .
Brahmaloka. Upabarhana accompanied them. He ps 4
came lustful towards Rambha. The Prajapatis, W’ d
noticed it got angry, and Upabarhana well-nigh a
due to their curse returned home. He told his wives # ,
that had happened to him. He spread a darbha grae
on the ground and lay on it and died, Malati, the eldes
of his wives, got ready to curse Brahma, Yama 4”
Mrtyu. In great consternation they sought refuge U2 ee
Visnu, who comforted and sent them back to Mala":
They saluted her. Then a brahmin, who went there
questioned Brahma about the death of Upabarhana:
The brahmin told him that, according to previous dect
sion, life for another thousand years remained for pa
barhana, but he died in the meantime on account ¥
the curse of Prajapati. Immediately the brahmin assu™®
the form of Visnu. The brahmin’ blessed Upabarha#4
who woke up from death rubbing his eyes. He lived
happily at home with his wives. He was blessed w}
children and grandchildren. Knowing that his end W?
near Upabarhana and Malati spent their time in
austerities on the banks of the Ganga, At last Upabat
hana expired, and MaAlati ended her life in his funet
pyre.. (Bhagavata, 7th Skandha).

NARADA I
(ii) Son of Kalavati. There lived in Kanyakubja the
emperor called Drumila. He, along with his wife
Kalavati, performed penance on theb anks of the Ganga
for an offspring. Kalavati pleased Kagyapa, by her
worship and with his blessing she became pregnant.
Drumila,-who in the meantime had renounced everything in life, decided to spend the rest of his lifein the
forest itself. He gifted away all his wealth to brahmins
and died in the forest. Though Kalavati got ready to
follow him in the funeral pyre, a celestial voice stopped
her and she refrained from committing self-immolation.
She returned to the village and lived as a slave ina
brahmin’s house. In due course of time she delivered a
son. On the birth of the child it rained in the land
which was suffering from failure of rains, and because
of that the brahmin master of Kalavati named the child
Narada, meaning he who gives water. When the child
Narada grew up he told his mother the story about his
former birth. He turned out to be a great devotee of
Visnu. Meanwhile, Kalavati, who went to milk the
cow one night, was bitten to death by a snake, and
Narada was orphaned. Siva and three attendants of his
who went there in disguise were pleased at Narada’s
great devotion for Visnu and his service-mentality. He
lived on the left-overs given by them. He repeated songs
sung by them about Visnu. Gradually Narada became
perfect devotee of Visnu and a unique master of music.
iva and others imparted Bhagavata to Narada before
they left him. Narada who thus attained divine EneW
ledge performed penance for many years 01 the bane 0
the Ganga and died there. (Bhagavata, 7th Skan eee
(iii) Birth as Kapi (Monkey). Narada, who eis a
the banks of the Ganga was again born as the son
Brahma. Though the father wanted the aoe i e
married the latter preferred to spend his days are ames
tation on God. Brahma then told his son as 10MOWS.
i -holder’s life?
‘Why are you so much afraid of the house-holde
Many eeepts have attained salvation by plows the
ife) like that of the celibate,
four agramas (stages in aus
. n n In
sf nchorite and the sannyasin.
the house-holder, the a sie to serveanalna nd
fact, only such people will be ie
; o nit anti is born to
i alias Damay ae ee the
God. A girl named Malati :
maharsi Safijaya, and Siva has gran ae
boon . that in "this birth you will ean bine
You, therefore, go to Naranarayanas engae ‘n marriage
on the Himalayas. They will give Malate
to you.”’ 4, 2 in the
Aerortal Narada went to Badarileaérama where!m" .
presence of Naranarayanas he crim ata started on
During those days Narada and sage a went to the
a pilgrimage in the course of which t AD turmasya- [he
palace of emperor Safijaya to observe " disposal of the
emperor left a well-furnished house at t aia rs
pilgrims. He also deputed his daughter.
. fDamayanti Pp*
serve them. The humble ser Teyouion towards Narada
them both, But, Damayantis this fact.
was iene salen} and both of aes (es patiaventl
One day Parvata asked Naraca Narada) and to
zon in him
did not take a special interest “| er so’. Parvata
this Narada answered Net) rade and told him thus:
got angry at this answer O we started on this
WwW he time when have
e had agreed at the er, Now you
; to cach other Re about
tour to divulge all secrets |
i not te
broken that contract. Why did ie Siete
amayanti’s partiality for your
s therefore,
NARADA I
a monkey”. Narada, in turn, cursed Parvata as follows:
‘You will live in hell in Yamaloka for a hundred
years.”” a
Accordingly Narada became a monkey and Parvata
lived in hell. At this juncture Safijaya’s ministers
advised him to marry his daughter to a. prince, and the
news made her very sad. Safijaya understood the reason
for his daughter’s sadness from her nurse. The father
had ultimately to yield to her wishes and Damayanti
married Narada, who had_ been turned into a monkey.
Hundred years rolled by, and Parvata, the period of
his curse being-over, returned to the palace of Safijaya.
Narada treated Parvata duly well, and pleased at the
treatment, he gave redemption to Narada from the
curse. Narada lived very happily with Damayanti for a
long time at the palace, and after the demise of
Damayanti he attained Brahmaloka. (Bhagavata, /th
Skandha).
(iv) Born as Daksa’s son. After the creation of the
Devas was over, Brahma called Daksa to him and asked
him to marry Virani and procreate, and Daksa
accordingly begot five thousand sons of Virani. They
were called Haryasvas. Finding that the Haryagvas also
were interested in the procreation of children Narada,
the Devarsi, approached and told them as follows:—
“Oh ! Haryagvas! You who are exceptionally vital
people seem to be trying to procreate children. But, you
have not enquired as to whether there is enough space
on earth for such large numbers of people. You are just
like children who know nothing about the world. How
will you procreate people? Since you could live absolutely free m the sky, why do you not find out the limit of
the earth?”’
The Haryagvas thereupon ran away in different places
to find out the limit of the earth, and they have not,
like the rivers which entered the ocean, returned yet.
At the loss of the HaryaSvas in the above manner,
Daksa created the Sabalasvas, whom also Narada sent
away to various parts of the earth. Daksa again created.
five thousand people whom also Narada drove away in
the above manner. Angry and sad at this, Daksa cursed
Narada thus:— “Well, Narada! my children roam
about like this because of you. Therefore, you too in
future will be roaming about without a permanent
abode. Moreover, you will have rebirth as my son.”’
Narada became a world-trotter on account of the above
curse of Daksa. He was alsg reborn as the son of Daksa.
Devi Bhagavata, 7th Skandha and Visnu Purana, Part
1, Chapter 15).
(v) Born as a worm. There is a story about Narada
being born as a worm. On the approach ofa chariot
the worm moved quickly away from its route lest its
wheel should crush it to death. The King seated in
the chariot burst out into laughter at the above sight
when the worm told him as follows:—‘‘There is nothing
to be laughed at in my action. In every birth the body
is much dear to the atman (soul). Just as you love
your body I also love and protect my body. (Mahapharata ).
3) Visnu showed Narada the function of Maya. See under
Taladhvaja I
4) Narada became a woman. While staying once with
Krsna at Dvaraka, Narada and the former went out on
atour in an aerial chariot.. On the way they sawa
stream and Krsna stopped the chariot there as Narada

NARADA I 528 NARADA I
wanted to quench his thirst at the stream. Narada drank
water from the stream disobeying Krsna’s injunction that
he should bathe before drinking water, and lo! the next
moment Narada was turned into a woman and when ‘she’
looked around neither Krsna nor the chariot was to be
seen. She wandered about in the forest and at last reached
an agrama. When the Rsi of the 48rama awoke from his
samadhi he saw standing before him a beautiful woman
who requested him to accept her as his disciple. He readily granted her request. The preceptor married the disciple and in due course of time she became the mother of
sixty children. One day all the sixty children and their
father expired together. The grief-stricken widow felt too
weak to perform the obsequies of the dead. An-extraordinary hunger also held her in its grips. She raised her hand
to pluck a fruit from the mango tree that stood nearby
but could not reach the mango above. She placed
together the corpses one on the other, mounted upon
the heap of dead bodies and plucked the mango-fruit.
Immediately a brahmin arrived on the spot and exhorted
the widow on the impropriety of taking food without
bathing after the death of husband and children. ‘Then
the widow entered the stream and dived in its waters
holding above water the hand in which was held the
mango, and lo! it was Narada who came out from the
water. Only the hand, which had been held above
water and did not therefore get wet, remained like that
of a woman with bangles thereon. The brahmin, who stood
there on the banks of the stream transformed himself into
Krsna. As ordered by Krsna Narada again dived with the
whole of his body in the water when the hand also
turned into that of aman. The mango held in the hand
turned into an excellent Vina. And Krsna told Narada:
‘The Rsi who lived with you as your husband and
who is no more is Kalapurusa, and the sixty children
are years Prabhava, Vibhava etc.
Krsna and Narada then returned to Dvdraka. (Bhagavata. 7th Skandha).
5) Narada met the woman called Bhakti. When Kalikala
held the earth in its grips Narada, on a particular
occasion, went round the world viewing the evils
of Kali, and he saw a young woman immersed in grief
sitting on the banks of the Yamuna, the sportsfield of
Krsna. On both sides of her two old men were breathing in an unconscious state, and the woman, we
was trying to restore them to consciousness. Many
other women were fanning the unconscious men and
trying to comfort the woman. Narada approached the
young woman when she spoke to him as follows: ‘Oh!
great sage, please put an end to my grief, because your
words will remove all grief. I am called Bhakti and
these two old men are mysons, one of whom is known
as Jnana (knowledge) and the other Vairagya (renunciation), and they have become old due to the impact
of time. The others found here are sacred rivers, who
have come to serve me. But, the service of nobody will
do me good. . : :
I was born in the Dravida region, grew up in Karnataka,
lived here and there in Maharastra and became old at
Gujarat whereat, atheists due to the evil of Kali inflicted wounds on me for a long time so thatI became
very weak. I did then go with my sons to the worshipful Vrndavana where | regained my old form and
became ayoung woman in the shape of a ghost. My
children suffer here in an unconscious state and] have
eping.
to leave this for another place. Iam so very sad that
my sons have become old. Why did I become a young
woman when my sons were old people? We three were
touring together, and how then did this difference arise
with regard to us? Is it not the proper thing for the
mother to be older, and her children younger? You
will please explain the reason for all these.”’
Narada read out the Vedas and the Vedangas to her,
to no purpose. Then Sanaka, Sanandana, Sanatkumara,
Sanatsujata and others (all of them the mental offsprings of Brahma and gifted with eternal youth) asked
Narada toread out Bhagavata to the sons of Bhakti.
Narada did so, and they became immediately young.
(Padma Purana, Uttarakhanda).
6) Tested Sri Krsna. Krsna was living in Dvaraka with
his 16008 wives. Narada once wanted to know how
Krsna managed to maintain so many wives without
any difficulty or quarrels among them. To test it he
first went to the palace of Rukmini where both Krsna
and herself welcomed and treated him duly. Narada
next visited Satyabhama’s house where also Krsna an
herself welcomed and treated him well. In the houses
of all the 16008 wives of Krsna, Narada had the same
experience as above. He was wonder-struck at the
divine powers of Krsna and returned home praising
Krsna (Bhagavata, 10th Skandha).
7) Mahdvisnu put down Ndrada’s haughtiness. Narada
had been very proud about his greatness as a musician.
Visnu decided to put an end to this conceit of Narada
for which purpose he took Narada to a forest. ‘There
they saw many women, whose limbs had been cut, cry"8
on account of insufferable pain. Mahavisnu asked t©
women who they were and why their-limbs were cul
They answered Visnu that they were Raginis, t°
presiding deities over the various tunes and that they
were reduced to their present plight by the totally
erroneous singing of the tunes by Narada.
Narada hung his head down in shame at the above
_answer of the women and he was cured of his concelt.
(Adbhuta Ramayana). “
8) Haniiman shamed Narada. Narada once met Hanuman, who sang a song for him. Enjoying the musi¢
Narada placed his Vina on a rock which had bee?
melted by the song of Haniman, and Narada $
Vina sank into the melted rock. When the singing by
Haniim4an was-over, the rock, as of old, became hat
again and the Vina got stuck up with it. Hanuma?
asked Narada to melt the rock again with a song of his
and take away his Vina. Narada sang and sang, 4 oe
no purpose. The rock did not melt again. Then Hanv
man sang a song and the rock melted. After praising
Haniman Narada left the place ashamed. (Adbhut@
Ramayana).
9) Sri Krsna instructed Narada about Maya. Narada once
requested Krsna to teach him about Maya (illusion
and Krsna told him that he would be taught sometime
later. Afterwards, one day while Narada was walking
about, it began to rain and he took shelter from the r2!™
in a hut near at hand. There was a beautiful young woman
in the hut and Narada fell in love with her. Narad@
lived with her for many years and a number of childre?
were born to them. But, a flood washed the mother 22
children off into the sea, and Narada was grief-strickenThen Krsna appeared there and asked Narada whether
he loved Maya. Narada confessed that he understo°

japartment. In fact, she felt some
NARADA I
Maya very well and requested Krsna to save him from
attachments on account of Maya.
10) Narada and Sanatkumara. Once Narada went to
Sanatkumara and requested him to instruct him in spiritual wisdom telling the latter that he had already learnt
the Vedas and all other scriptures and-arts. Sanatkumara accordingly taught him about the perfect
nature, without either beginning or end, of supreme
bliss. He taught Narada thus: ‘Everything is God.
God exists in all animate and inanimate objects, and
God is superior to everything.” (Chandogyopanisad). |
11) Other information about Narada.
(1) Once Brahma advised him sixteen names which
would wash off all the evils of Kali, i.e. Hare Rama
Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare, Hare Krsna Hare
Krsna Krsna Krsna Hare Hare. (Kalisantaranopanisad ).
(2) It was Narada who gave the impetus to Valmiki
for the composition of Ramayana. Once Valmiki asked
Narada, who had returned after a tour of the three
worlds, who the greatest of men was. Narada replied
‘Sri Rama’ and related to Valmiki a brief history of
Rama. Narada departed from there and Valmiki went
to the banks of the river Tamasa. It was there that
Valmiki, at the sight of a hunter shooting down one
of the Kraufica birds, sang the famous verse ‘Ma nisada’
etc. (See under Valmiki).
(3) Narada once went to Veda Vyasa, who was very unhappy because he had no children. Questioned by Vyasa
as to the means to have a son Narada advised him to
worship Paragakti (the supreme power ). Accordingly
Vyisa worshipped Parasakti at Kailasa and was gifted
with the son Suka. (Devi Bhagavata, Ist Skandha),
(4) When once Narada came to Vaikuntha playing on
his Vina Laksmidevi went bashfully into the smner
; love towards Narada
who asked Visnu for the reason thereof. Visnu replied
that none existed who had absolutely conquered Maya
(illusion ) and that Laksmidevi felt love towards ea
for a few moments because of the influence of Maya.
Devi Bhi h Skandha).
(Devi Bhagavata, 6t unt Vindhya and
9) O astva kicked down mo-.
Nevada Seta small share in it. Vindhya had Sin
above the path of the sun as Narada told him ae
lously that the Sun was circling Meee dre
ignoring Vindhya. ( Devi Bhagavata, 10th an : ne
(6) Narada once went to patalaloka ana Saag ue ae
having been duly treated as guest by Prahlaaa. (
Purana, Chapter 23). ae
(7) Narada once cursed Nalakibara and ec
(sons of Kubera) and turned them info “euched by the
regained their former form oD yeas e under Nalamortar drawn by Krsna 4° a boy. (¢
kibara ). tin Ae
(8) It was Narada who told Kae his
in Ambadi. He also col ear . ©
tory. (Bhagavata, 10th okan¢ : Tri-
(9) Maer once asked Narada we a Loe
mirtis used to be pleased ae asura performe
tioned Siva. It was ther (Bhagavata, 10th
penance to Siva and please ”
Skandha).
Sri Krsna was
previous his529 - NARADA I
(10) The following story occurs in the Vayu Purana
as to how Narada’s Vina became the musical instrument
of the world. Once Narada was in Indra’s court when
the latter asked Urvasi to give a dance performance.
She did so and in the course of the dance saw Jayanta,
son of Indra seated before her. She was swept over by
a passion towards Jayanta as a result of which some
mistakes were made by her in dancing. Narada, who
was playing his Vina called Mahati, also committed
some mistakes. Narada did so to attract the attention
of the audience to Urvasi’s mistakes. Noticing the mistake Agastya, who too was present on the occasion,
cursed Urvasi to become a bamboo. He cursed that
Narada’s Vina should become the Vina of the world
(Vayu Purana).
(11) Narada’s curse was also one of the causes for
Ravana’s death. Ravana once requested Narada to exlain to him the meaning of ‘Om’, and when Narada
refused to oblige him he threatened to cut Narada’s
tongue. Narada in return cursed that the ten heads
of Ravana would be cut. (Kamba Ramayana, Yuddha
Kanda). | :
(12) During one Kalpa, Narada was born as a Devaandharva as the son of Kagyapa by his wife Muni.
(Adi Parva, Chapter ! and Svargarohana Parva,
Chapter 5).
(13) On one occasion Narada recited Mahabharata
which included three lakhs of glokas. (Mahabharata,
Adi Parva, Chapter 1; Svargarohana Parva, Chapter 5).
14) Since he imparted Sankhya wisdom to the sons
of Daksa they renounced the world and departed for
different places. (Adi Parva, Chapter 75, Verse 7).
(15) He was present at the birthday celebrations of
Arjuna. (Adi Parva, Chapter 122, Verse 57).
(16) He also was present in the company of Devas and
women, who attended Paficali’s Svayarvara. (Adi
Parva, Chapter 186, Verse 1
17) After Pancali’s Svayamvara he once went to the
Pandavas at Indraprastha and advised the five brothers
not to quarrel over Paficali. It was he, who told them
the story of the Sundopasundas. He also arranged that
Paficali should live by turns of one year each with each of
the five Pandava brothers. (Adi Parva, Chapter 207,
Verse 9).
(18) It was he who consoled and sent the apsaras called
Varga, who was in the grip of a curse, to the south.
(See under Varga ).
(19) In the form of a catechism he gave advice on
various topics to Dharmaputra. (Sabha Parva, Chapter
(20) When proposals for building @ palace at Indraprastha for the Pandavas were under discussion Narada
went there and gave descriptions of the courts of Indra,
Yama, Varuna, Kubera and Brahma. (Sabha Parva,
Chapters 5-11). .
(21) He related the story of Hari§candra to Dharmaputra. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 12, Verse 23).
(22) It was he who conveyed the information to
Dviraka that Krsna’s grandson Aniruddha was imprisoned in the house of Bana. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 38).
(23) He bathed Yudhisthira’s head with holy waters at
the Rajasuya Yajfia. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 59, Verse

NARADA I
(24) He prophesied that the Kauravas would get annihilated. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 80, Verse 33). |
(25 When, Pradyumna decided to kill Salva it was
Narada re saved him. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 19,
Verse 22).
(26) Narada too was in the company of the Gandharvas
we ns i Bae be Bepee Nan at Indraloka.) Vana
arva, Chapter 43, Verse 14).
(27) It was Narada who informed Indra about the
Svayathnvara of Damayanti. (Vana Parva, Chapter 54,
Verse 20).
(28) It- was he who informed Sagara that his
60,000 children had been burnt to ashes in the fire
of ee anger. (Vana Parva, Chapter 107,
Verse 33). :
(29.) On another occasion he prevented Arjuna from
using divine arrows. (Vana Parva, Ghapter 183, Verse
(30) While the Pandavas were living in the Kamyaka
forest. Narada went theré and enjoyed hearing stories
fate bts Markandeya. (Vana Parva, Chapter
(31) Once he went to the palace of Agvapati the
father of Savitri and described the good qualities and
merits of Satyavan’ as a result of which Savitri was
married to Satyavan. (Vana Parva, Chapter 294, Verse
(32) Once in the course of a search fora suitable
husband for his daughter, Matali was taken by Narada
po Verupelora ane ne ies ey wonderful, sights.
yoga Parva, Cha :
‘ 33°) ee that he al Matali to Garuda loka. (Udyoga
arva, Chapter 101).
ee ok (ua he got ae daughter married by
\ryaka. yoga Parva, Chapter 104, Verse 1).
(35) He related Galava’s history to Dharmaputra.
(Udyoga Parva, Chapter 106),
(36) When fighting started between Bhisma and Paraguei tried to stop them. (See under
mba).
Ss ae er eoerana We Ms ove over the
a is son. (Drona Parva, Chapter
ee ee Genie oo er tag in marriage.
: a, er 02, Verse :
(39) Sage Parvata cursed Narada and he, in turn,
cursed Parvata. (Drona Parva, Chapter 55, Verse 7).
( 40 ) He sees geet a gon ee Bi to King
anjaya. rona rarva, Chapter 55, Verse :
(41) Hc consoled Safijaya who was sad over the
absence of children by telling the story of Varuna.
(Drona Parva, Chapter 55, Verse 26).
(42) He spoke about the charitable nature of King
Suhotra in the presence of Dharmaputra, who was
feeling sad about the great war. (Drona Parva, Chapter
(43) He extolled the charitable nature of King Paurava.
(Drona Parva, Chapter 57).
(44) He extolled the yajfia conducted by emperor Sibi
and also his generosity. (Drona Parva, Chapter 58),
(45) He related the story of Sri Rama to Yudhisthira.
(Drona Parva, Chapter 59).
(46) He related the story of Bhagiratha, (Drona Parva,
Chapter 60).
NARADA TI.
NARADAGAMANAPARVA.
NARADAGAMANAPARVA
(47) He convinced Yudhisthira about the reasons for
the prosperity of Dilipa. (Drona Parva, Chapter 61).
(48) He-told Yudhisthira the stories of Mandhata,
Yayati, Ambarisa, Sagabindu, Saha, Rantideva, Bharata,
Prthu, Parasurama. and Srfijaya. (Drona Parva,
Chapters 61-70).
(49) Narada too was present to see the pond created with
arrows by Arjuna during the great war. (Drona Parva,
Chapter 99, Verse 61).
(50) He lighted the lamp for the Pandavas during the
great war. (Drona Parva, Chapter 163, Verse 15).
(51) He prompted Vrddhakafiya to get married. (See
under Vrddhakanya).
(52) It was he who conveyed the news about the annihilation of the Kauravas to Balabhadrarama. (Salya
Parva, Chapter 54, Verse 25). '
(53) He prevented Arjuna and Agvatthama from using
Brahmastra during the great war. (Sauptika Parva,
Chapter 14, Verse 11).
(54) He informed Yudhisthira about the curse 07
Karna..(Santi Parva, Chapter Zz Je
(55) On another occasion he related to Yudhisthira the
story of Suvarnasthili, son of Safijaya. (Santi Parv@
Chapter 31).
(56) He was also present in the company of the sage
who visited Bhisma on his bed of arrows. (Santi Parv4
Chapter 45, Verse 8).
(57) It was he who prompted Dharmaputra to raat
tion Bhisma on topics of Dharma (righteousness) ( antl
Parva, Chapter 54, Verse 3),
(58) Once Narada told wind that the Salmali tree
claimed itself to be greater than wind. The next mor”
ing wind smashed the branches and leaves of the tre®
(Santi Parva, Chapter 155, Verse 9).
(59) Once he entered into a discussion about the creat
ion of the world with Asitadevalamuni. (Santi Parva,
Chapter 275, Verse 3).
(60) He gave advice to sage Galava about the means KO
achieve progress and prosperity. (Santi Parva, Chapt
(61) Once ke advised sage Suka. on topics of renunciation. (Santi Parva, Chapter 329).
(62) He praised God once with two hundred names
(Santi Parva, Chapter 338).
(63) He once explained to the Apsara woman Paiic@-
caida the aspects and characteristics of women. (A?4”
Sasana Parva, Chapter 38, Verse 6).
(64) He related to Bhisma the greatness of feeding
peels with rice. (Anusasana Parva, Chapter 63, Verse
(65) He advised Marutta to appoint sage Samvarta as his
priest. (ASvamedha Parva, Chapter 6, Verse 18).
(66) It was he who informed Dharmaputra about the
death of Dhrtarastra, Gandhari and Kunti in a Wi
fire. (Agramavasika Parva, Chapter 37).
(67) He was also present with the sages: who cursed
Samba, son of Krsna, to deliver an iron. rod. (Mausala
Parva, Chapter 1).
(68 ) Synonyms for Narada : Devarsi, ParamesthijaParamesthi, Paramesthiputra, Surarsi etc.
One of the Brahmavadi sons of Vigvamitr®
Parva, Chapter 4, Verse 53). |
A sub parva of Agram@-
(Anuédsana
vasikaparva, Chapters 37-39,

NARADI | 231
NARADI. One of the Brahmavadi sons of Visvamitra.
(Anu§asana Parva, Chapter 4, Verse 59).
NARADIYAPURANA. One of the eighteen Puranas.
See under Puranas).
NARAKA I. (NARAKASURA) . A valiant Asura.
1) Birth. Osce the Asura Hiranyaksa was amusing
himself by wading through the ocean and beating at
the waves with his club. Varuna, the god of water, was
alarmed at this and ran to Mahavisnu and told him
every thing. Hearing this Mahavisnu got up to kill
Hiranyaksa. Hiranyaksa who had assumed the form of
a Boar carried the earth on his tusks and ran to Patala.
As the goddess earth had come into contact with the
tusks of Hiranyaksa she became pregnant and gave birth
to an asura infant of immense might and power. That
infant was . Narakasura.
Taking the infant born from impurity the sad goddess
Farth went to Mahavisnu and requested him to save
the child somehow. Mahavisnu pitied him and gave
him Narayanastra (Narayana’s weapon) and said:
‘“Naraka ! So long as this weapon is with you, nobody
but me could kill you.” Saying this he. disappeared.
(Bhagavata, Skandha 10).
2) Administration. Narakasura made Pragjyotisa his
capital and ruled over the asuras as their emperor for
a long time, all the while terrifying the Devas. Once
this asura raped Kaseru the daughter of Tvasta.. He
brought sixteen thousand and one hundred maidens
from the women of the earth and the world of gods. He
NARASIMHA
Skandha 10).
4) Death. Narakasura who had. been causing devastation and terror inthe three worlds entered the world
of the gods once. The gods were not able to withstand
the fury of Naraka, who carried away the ear-fings. of
Aditi: the mother of Indra, and the large white royal
umbrella of Indra to Pragjyotisa. Indra went to Dvaraka
and told Sri Krsna of the molestations he had received
at the hands of Narakasura. Sri Krsna rode on his
Garuda with his wife Satyabhama to Pragjyotisa. They
flew over the city round and understood the lay-out of
the city, and the precautions taken. by Narakasura. The
battle began after this reconnaissance. Sri Krsna,
Satyabhama and Garuda fought with the’ asuras. . The
mighty asuras such as Mura, Tamra,Antariksa, Sravana,
Vasu, Vibhavasu, Nabhasvan, Aruna and ‘others “were
killed. At last Narakasura himself entered’ the _ battlefield. A fierce battle ensued in which Naraka was killed.
The divine weapon Narayanastra of Naraka_ was given
to his son Bhagadatta. After the battle Sri Krsna and
Satyabhama went to the world of the gods and returned
the ear-rings to Aditi and _ the umbrella to Indra.
(Bhagavata, Skandha 10).
NARAKA II. Mention is made about another Narakasura who was born to Prajapati Kasyapa by his wife
Danu, in Mahabharata; Adi Parva, Chapter 65, Stanza
98. Once Indra defeated this Narakasura. It is seen in
Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter 9 that this asura
after his death, stayed in the palace of Varuna worshiping him.
: Audak the top of the
made them captives at /Audaka Ca r hty and. NARAKA III. Bhagadatta the son of Narakasura ruled
mountain Maniparvata. He appointed four mig
Paficanada and
fearful asuras: Hayagriva, Nisunda,
Mura as gate-keepers of Pragjyotisa. As they stoo
blocking the way up to Devayana, nobody dared to
enter Pragjyotis z
the harem. At the boundary of the country Mura
had tied six thousand ropes with a sword at the end 0
each. So enemies dared not come near the boundany:
When Sugriva gave instructions to the monkeys who
were sent in search of Sita, about the route they Ae
to follow, he had mentioned about the city of é ie
jyotisa. Mention is made im Valmiki at ave
them special instructions to search for Sita }
mi Saye 63). *
jyotisa, (M.B. Visnu Parva, Chapter
3) ok Se birth of Naraka. Long ago a Line oder 8
the father of Sixteen thousand daug hein ee sitting in
~ country. While the father and daughters Nera . “The
the palace Mahavisnu came there as 4 ge ere
sixteen thousand damsels gathered round daughters
Their father got angry and cursed them.
shed tears and entreate -. the
the curse. He gave them remission a Se aie
next birth they would become wivi® Oh, a ee
d
the damsels ha
Another version of this story say® pg ct the curse
requested Brahma for | laa cena mit Narada, and
according to the advice of the her from the curse.
that Brahma had given them pet ade himself gave
In some versions it is stated that 4X4
them liberation from tt eae father of the sixteen
Narakasura.
It was this King, who was the ‘
k birth agra Beeb born as
thousand damsels, who too
N
over the part of Patala called Naraka, and being the
ruler of Naraka, Bhagadatta seems to have been known
by the name of Naraka also.
. srakasura guarded ARAKA. IV See under Kala I.
a. The ten son® of Narakasyte F NARANARAYANAS. Two hermits Nara and Narayana.
These two hermits had spent many thousands of years in
Badaryasrama doing penance. Arjuna was the rebirth of
Nara and Sri Krsna was the rebirth of Narayana. (For
detailed story see under Nara and Narayana).
NARANTAKA I. A captain of the army of Ravana. It
:s stated in Agni Purana, Chapterl0,that the captains of
Ravana, viz., Kumbha, Nikumbha, Makaraksa,
Mahodara, Mahaparsva, Matta, Unmatta, Praghasa,
Bhasakarna, Virupaksa, Devantaka, Narantaka, Trifiras,
Atikaya and other Raksasas fought on the side of
Raven? against Sri Rama and that all of them were
killed.
Of these Devantaka and Narantaka were mighty and
valiant warriors. Angada killed Narantaka after a
Gerce. battle. (Valmiki Ramayana, Yuddha Kanda,
Chapter 69). by
; ion from
d their father for liberation : NARANTAKA IT. Son of Rudraketu, an asura. This
asura terrorized the three worlds by his wicked and
cruel deeds. When the wickedness and cruelty of this
asura became unbearable Ganapati incarnated in the
house of Kasyapa to protect the three worlds. Knowing
this Narantaka resorted to various means to kill -
Ganapati. But his attempts were futile. Finally he was
killed by Ganapati. (Ganega Purana).
NARARASTRA. A kingdom of ancient India. In Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter 31, Stanza 6, it is
mentioned that Sahadeva one of the Pandavas, conuered this country.
; damels wh? ives b
Those sixteen thousand 4a ne taken captives y NARASIMHA. See under Avatara.
princesses in different place? Wetaka. (Bhagaval
Narakasura and were kept 12

NARAVAHANA 532 NARAYANA
NARAVAHANA. A Ksatriya King who had obtained
singing praises of Visnu in intense devotion and blessed
remission of the sin of Brahmahatya (slaughter- of
Brahmin) by taking the fast of Vaisakhavrata.
This man who was a Ksatriya of Paficala once
happened to kill a Brahmin with an arrow. To get
remission of this sin, he discarded his Sacred thread,
“mark on the forehead and forelock and had been
wandering here and there when he met a Brahmin
named Munigarma. Naravahana told him his story.
This .Brahmana who was a lover of God advised him
regarding the importance of the Vaisakha fast. By
taking this fast the King obtained remission of sin.
(Padma Purana, Chapter 88).
NARAVAHANADATTA. A_ famous Vidyadhara.
Udayana the King of Vatsa had been spending his time
in play and pleasure with his wives. Padmavati and
Vasavadatta, when once Narada appeared before them.
The king greeted the hermit and showed hospitality.
The King and the queens were childless. Narada told
them: “‘Hear, oh King. Your wife Vasavadatta is the
incarnation of Ratidevi blessed by Siva. The son born
to her would become the emperor of the Vidyadharas.
Not long after this Vasavadatta conceived and gave
birth to a radiant son. He was named Naravahana-datta.
At this time Kalingasena, who had been transformed into
a woman by the curse of Indra, gave birth to an
extra-ordinarily beautiful girl. (For detailed story see
under Kalingasena). That child was named Madanamaficuka. Even.in infancy she was surrounded by a halo
of unearthly beauty. Hearing of this child, Vasavadatta
brought Kalingasena and tbe infant to the palace. To
the wonder of everybody, the infants looked at each
other and they were not satisfied how soever long they
looked at each other. The king and his wives understood this perfectly well and at the proper time their
marriage was conducted.
Naravahanadatta wads anointed as the Heir-apparent.
Once he was playing in the garden in the spring season,
with his ministers Gomukha and others, when the most
beautiful Ratnaprabha came there. (See under Ratnaprabha).
Once Naravahanadatta went for hunting -with his
minister Gomukha and retinue. Somehow or other he
was separated from Gomukha and army in the deep
forest. Then he heard a divine song and sound of a
heavenly lyre. He went in the direction from which
the music came. and reached a Saivite temple.
in, he saw an excessively beautiful damsel stan
the midst of her attendants and companions singing
and playing on a lute, in praise of Siva. At this time a
grown-up Vidyadhara woman came down from the sky
and getting near the damsel, gave her to Naravahanadatta. The name of the Vidyadhara damsel was
Alankaravati. (For other details see under Alankaravati ).
As a was spending his days, enjoying the
pleasing company of his wife Alankaravati, once he
went for hunting, with his army. Being very tired they
went in search of water, and entered a thick forest.
There they saw a lake full of golden lotus flowers and
four men plucking flowers. Naravahanadatta approached
them. They said that they had been plucking flowers
to worship Visnu. Naravahana followed them to the
presence of Visnu. Mahavisnu was greatly pleased at
Naravahanadatta who was standing with folded hands
Getting
ding in
him to become the emperor of the Vidyadharas.
(Kathasaritsagara ).
NARAYANA. One of the two Rsis famous as Naranaraanas.
1) Birth. Dharma, son of Brahma was Narayana’s
father. Dharma married ten daughters of Daksa, and
four sons, 1.e. Hari, Krsna, Nara and Narayana were ©
born to him of them. Of the four, Nara and Narayana
were inseparable sannyasins. In the holy Badarikasrama
on the slopes of the Himd@layas they did tapas to please
Brahma for a thousand years.
2) N@rdyana’s tapas. The whole world was, so to say,
burnt by the intense tapas of Naranarayanas. Indra
was alarmed. Believing that their tapas was for the
attainment of Indrahood and fearing his own displacement Indra went to Badarikasrama mounted on Airavata to break their tapas, and told them thus: ‘Ob
ascetics, who shine like the rising sun, I am pleased with
your tapas. You may choose any boon you like.”’
The Naranarayanas did not even recognise the thunderlike voice of Indra; nor did they answer him. This
increased Indra’s alarm, and he decided to disturb
them with Maya, productive of fear, desire etc. and thus
break their tapas. Indra began threatening them
with cruel animals created by him like wild cat, leopat
tiger, lion, elephant etc. and also with aberrations |
created in nature like storm, rain, wild fire etc. Bul
none of the above affected or moved them in the least.
After all, why should they be moved? You woul
threaten only those who are subject to desires, love °
comfort, any particular object in life or likes and d!slikes. Since Naranarayanas had none of the above,Indra §
attempts to threaten them failed. Thus disappointed he
returned to Svargaloka and after thinking for a lon8
time he called Kamadeva to him and spoke as follows:
“You should go, along with Rati and the spring, '
Badarikaésrama. Also take with you any number of
apsaraé women you want. You will find Naranarayan4®
at the 4frama performing tapas and will weaken them
from their resolution by using your arrows (erotic shafts)
and tempt them into erotic life. I am also deputins
apsara women like Rambha to help you.”’
Kamadeva accordingly started for Badarikasram4
accompanied by all the apsaraé women. When they
reached the place spring season had set in there.
Varieties of beetles flew about from flower to flowet
humming. Trees like the mango and Palaga were thick
with flowers. Creepers (Comparable to young wome?
entwined and embraced trees (lovers), the forme!
carrying puspas (flowers, in the case of young wome?,
coming of age). A fragrant breeze swept the whole
region. In this erotic background Kama and Rati, wit
their five arrows and accompanied by celestial wome”
came to the arama, and there they began singing a0.
dancing. The erotic flow enchanted the soul of Naran@"
rayanas. Ndaradyanarsi awoke from his tapas an
whispered something in the ears of Nara. By now
Kamadeva had entered the presence of Naranarayanas
accompanied by the reputed beauties of Svarloka like
Menaka, Rambha, Tilottama, Sukesgini, Manorama,
Mahe§ vari, Puspagandha, Pramadvara, Ghrtaci,
Candraprabha, Somaprabha, Vidyunmala ; Ambujaks!
and Kaficanamala. These beauties were accompanie
by 10080 of their beautiful attendants. Naranarayanas

NARAYANASRAMA
were wonder-struck to see this army of Kama. All those
gréat beauties stood before Naranarayanas in salutation.
Some of them began -to sing, others to dance and yet
others to take up the tunes. Narayanarsi could easily
ba the reason for the show.. He thought to himself
thus —
“None but Devendra could have sent all these people
here, and his object must be to hinder our tapas. But I
shall prove to Indra that all these mean nothing to me.
Let Devendra understand that I can create more
beautiful ladies than these women of his here and that
I am not in the léast attracted by any of them here.”’
Thinking thus Narayana beat gently on his thigh and
immediately arose therefrom an exceptionally beautiful
woman. Since that woman, the most beautiful in all the
three worlds, was created from the Uru (thigh) of
Narayana she came to be known as Urvasi. Others were
wonder-struck by this mew creation. He created
some other beauties also, and an equal number of
other women to serve them. All of them stood before
him in humble salutation.
The celestial women almost fainted with fear. In repentance they begged the munis pardon for, their
mistake. The munis were kindly disposed towards them.
They told them that they ( munis ) cherished no
animosity towards them, but in fact were pleased with
them, and they further asked them (celestial women)
to choose their boons. The munis also asked them to
take Urvasi to Devaloka as a present from them toIndra.
Let the Devas prosper. :
Having heard Nara spea
returned in great humility
and the other women. (Devi B
3) Other information.
(i) Nara and Narayana were
Mahavisnu. (Santi Parva, Chapter 384 ) eee
(ii) A dark hair of Narayanarsi was bom os ott
and a white one as Balabhadrarama. (Adi farva,
Chapter 196 se 32). | a
(ii). He ‘Gu @ ee member in Brahmas assembly.
(Sabha Parva, Chapter 11, verse 52) dhata in the guise
. Man
(iv) Once he appeared pet 64, Verse 14).
k like this the celestial women
to Devaloka with Urvasi
hagavata, 4th Skandha).
two incarnations of
of Indra, (Santi Parva, : Sa th
(v) He he fought with Siva and won. ( antl
Parva, Chapter 382, Verse 110) ander Nara
about Narayanars! see
(Vana Parva,
For complete details
Arjuna and Krsna) |
holy place.
NAKAYANASRAMA. A
apter 29, Verse 6) TIRTHA). A |
NARAYANASTHANA. (SALAGRAM Soy present.
sacred place where Mahavisnu udras
Brahma, Devas, Sannyasins, Adityas, yee Vi snu.
are also ever present here 1n the Nhe thus worshippe
ignu is called Salagrama as he isbenS ut enjoy the
at alagrama Those. who visit the p 7 is Vaikuntha.
fruits of Agvamedha yajfia and Ae .
Vana Parva, Chapter 84, Verse | A
NARAYANASTRAMOKSAPARVA: ih aed
rona Parva comprising of Chapt rted by VisvaNARAYANAVARMAMANTBA., mp2) 4 is competent
Tupa, Siti of Tvasta to Indra, this Pant this mantra
© destroy enemies. He who dasire i washed his hands
Should do so silently. after having i han
and feet and holding Kus4 grass 10
NARISYANTA II.
ds with face
NARMADA I
turned towards the north. The mantra is to be chanted
when some danger is imminent.
NARI. A daughter of Meru. She and her sisters were
married by the following sons of Agnidhra, i.e. Nabh:,
Kimpurusa, Hari, [lavrta, Ramyaka, Hiranmaya, Kuru,
Bhadragva and Ketum4la. (Bhagavata, 5th Skandha).
NARISYANTA I. Son of Vaivasvata Manu. He was a
brother of Iksvaku. (Bhagavata, Skandha 8).
A. KXing who was the son of Marutta.
Indrasena was his wife; Dama was his son. While
Narisyanta was‘ leading the life of a house-holder in the
forest, Vapusman killed him. Indrasena jumped into
the funeral pyre of her husband and died. (Markandeya
Purana).
NARITIRTHA. Common name for the five tirthas, i.e.
Agastya tirtha, Saubhadratirtha, Paulomatirtha, Karandhamatirtha and Bharadvajatirtha. Once Arjuna bathed
in Bharadvajatirtha. The Apsara women called Vargas
were living in the five tirthasin the form of crocodiles as
the result of a curse. With the arrival of Arjuna there, the
crocodiles resumed their previous forms as Apsara women and returned to Devaloka. (For the curse etc. see
under Varga).
NARMADA I. A famous holy river of South India. This
river which springs from Amarakantaka flows through
the valley called Khambhata and falls into the ocean.
i) Birth. This river which is considered to be a holy
river was the rebirth of Tapati the daughter of the Sun.
(To. know how Tapati was reborn as Narmada,see under
Tapati).
2) The divine nature of the river Narmada. Mention 1s
made in most of the Puranas about the river Narmada
which is one of the holy rivers of Bharata. Once Narada
said to Yudhisthira about the river Narmada as follows:
“Ganga has more divinity in Kanakhala and Sarasvati
has more divinity in Kuruksetra. But Narmada is a holy
river everywhere, whether in the villages or in the forests.
Sarasvati purifies us in three days and Ganga in one day.
But the moment we see Narmada we are purified.”
The river Narmada, the former half of which embraces
the mountain Amarakantaka in the country of
Kalinga, is the purest of rivers in the three worlds. The
devas, asuras, Gandharvas and hermits bathe in the
river and attain eternal bliss. He who controls his
organs of senses and takes fast for one night and bathes
in this river would be prosperous for hundred generations.
_ This great river is hundred yojanas long and two yojanas
wide. There are sixty crores and sixty thousand holy
ghats in this river around the mountain Amarakantaka. Anybody who dies by fire, by drowning or by
fast on this mountain Amarakantaka, will never have
rebirth. (Padma Purana, Chapter 13).
3) Mahabharata and Narmada. ‘Throughout Mahabharata mention 1s made about Narmada. Important of
them are given below :
--¢:) Goddess Narmada stays in the palace of Varuna
worshipping him. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 9,
Stanza 18).
(ii) While leading forest life Dharmaputra with his
brothers visited Narmadadevi. (M.B. Vana _ Parva,
Chapter 121, Stanza 16). |
(iii) Indra and the ASvinidevas once drank Soma
sitting on the mountain Vaidirya on the banks of the
Narmada. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 12), Stanza 19).

NARMADA II
(iv) Narmada is the origin of Agni (fire). (M.B. Vana
_ Parva, Chapter 222, Stanza 21). .
(v) A king named Duryodhana, who ruled over the
city called Mahismati on the banks of the Narmada
once married Devi Narmada. A daughter named
Sudargana was born to them. She was extremely beautiful. (M.B. Anugasana Parva, Chapter 2, Stanza 18).
(vi) He who observes fast for two weeks bathing in the
waters. of Narmada will be born as a prince in the next
birth. (M.B. Anusasana Parva, Chapter 25, Stanza 50).
(vii) Once Narmada took Purukutsa, the son of Mandhata, as her husband. (M.B. Aéramavasika Parva,
Chapter 20, Stanza 12). For the importance of Narmada,
see under Pramohini).
NARMADA II, See under Puspotkata.
NARMADA III. Wife of Purukutsa, the son of Mandhata. (Visnpu Purana).
NARYA. A King of the age of Rgveda. It is mentioned
in Rgeveda, Mandala .I, Anuvadka 10, Sikta 54, that
Devendra had rescued the Kings Narya, Turvasu and
Yadu.
NASATYA. One of the Agvinikumaras. (Mahabharata,
Santi Parva, Chapter 208, Verse 17).
NASIKA. The grandson of Lomapada. (Bhagavata,
Skandha 9). |
NATAKEYA. A particular region in ancient India.
(Sabha Parva, Chapter 38).
NATOTINATAKA. A _ kind of dramatic performance
in ancient Kerala. (See Tirayattam).
NATOTIPPATIU. (FOLK-SONGS). Every literature
has a section known as natotippattus (folk songs). In
Kerala (Malayalam) literature the period of folk songs
was a golden era. Worship of devatas, honouring heroes,
entertainments, philosophy, science, caste-professions,
morals, ethics etc., generally formed the themes for ’
folk songs. There are a number of folk-songs in Malaya-~
lam called Sanghakkali, Tiyattu, Olappavakkittu,
Ezhamatu Kali, Kanippattu, Nattuppattu, Vattippattn,
Puarakkalippattu, Ataccuturappattu, (Pulluvarpattu,
Nizhalkittuppattu, Bhadrakalippattu, Tirayattu etc.All
these ‘songs are reflective of the spiritual thoughts and
ideas of the masses. Also, there is a special series of
folk-songs called Vatakkanpattus (songs of the north).
All the Vatakkanpattus are heroic songs. They are
folk-songs eulogising the heroic deeds and achievements
of certain heroes and heroines of exceptional courage
and prowess who flourished in olden days in north
Malabar. Though there are more than four hundred
such songs, only thirtyfive of them have bee:: printed
and published yet. These songs, which call for no
special training or gifts for their singing or require any
special knowledge in music for their appreciation, take
their roots in the hearts of the common people. Almost
all these songs are connected with Kalaris (schools
where gymnastics are taught), Atavu (strategic feats of
the duel fight), Payattu (physical training) and Ankam
(fight) . Descriptions of the challenges by heroes,
clashing of arms and the way how youngsters get out of
danger by their intelligence and prowess are really
exciting and exhilarating toread. _ ows
Most of the heroes in the Vatakkanpattus lived either
in Katattanadu or its suburbs. A good majority of the
songs sings the praises of two powerful families Puttiram
house and Taccolimanikkattu,. the former a Tiya and
the latter a Nayar family. Taccolimanikkattu house
534 NATOTiPPATTU
was at Meppa in Putuppanam village near Vatakara in
Katattanadu, and most of the songs relate to the great
hero Otenakkuruppu of this house. Otenakkuruppu
_ was born in 1584°A.D. and lived for thirtytwo years.
Therefore, the Vatakkanpattus may generally be placed
in the 16th and 17th centuries A.D. Aromalcekavar,
Aromalunni, Attummanamel Unniyarcca, Taccolt
Otenan, Taccoli Candu, Palattu Komappan, Bambay!
Alikutty, Putunatan Kelu and Kalpparampil Kannan
are the chief characters in the pattus. Especially the
song about Unniyarcca is thrilling. Brief notes about
the heroes and their families in the pattus are given
below.
1) Putttiram Vitu. (Puttiram House). Aromal Cekavar,
Atturhmanamel Unniyarcca and Aromalunni were the
star heroes of the house. Unniyarcca was the sister 0
Aromalcekavar and mother of Aromalunni whose father
was Kannappan. It may be understood from the song
‘puttiriyankam’ that Aromalcekavar was born (0
Kannappan when he was fortytwo years old. One OF
~ two songs about Aromalcekavar are extant, one about
his playing a game of dice and the other about his
fighting the ‘puttiriyankam’. .
As for the game of dice, Aromalcekavar went to his
uncle at Mikavil Mikaccerivittil—an expert in the game
of dice—to study the art. There he spent a night with
his uncle’s daughter Tumpolarcca, who became preg”
nant by him. Though people ridiculed her at this
development Aromal cekavar took her as his wife whe?
she had delivered his child. Aromal Cekavar had als°
another wife called Kuficunnili of Alattiir house.
With regard to the puttiriyankam, Aromar as the Cekavat
(Sevakan, one who served) of Unnikkondr,once went ‘O
fight with Arinnotar. Candu, his father’s nephew:
accompanied him as his assistant. Candu hated Ar omar
from the day the latter stood in his way of marry!n8
Unniyarca. i
Arinnotar brought over to his side Candu, assistant °
romar. Aromar killed Arinnotar in combat and on 1°
way home he slept lying on the lap of Candu weary
after the combat when the treacherous Candu thrust
heated handle of the lamp into a wound in the stomay
Aromar, who managed to reach home only to i
there.
2) Attummanamel Unniyarcca. Unniyarcea, overruling the
Opposition of her father-in-law and mother-in-law, one
day went with her husband Kufjuraman to witnes®
Kuttuin the Allimalar temple. When they came 1%
Etavattam market after passing Tanir market certa!?
ruffians confronted them. The coward that he wa®
Kufijuraman trembled before the ruffians, but Unmly”
rcca routed them with her skill in combat.
3) Aromalunni. Aromalunni, who as a youth heard from
his mother Unniyarcca the story about the treacheroU
killing of his uncle, Aromal Cekavar, by Candu rushe
to Kolattunadu and killed the latter in combat
4) Taccoli Otenan. Otenan was a powerful Naya!
Kuruppu) born in Taccoli manikkattu - house. H
father was a nayar chief well-known both as PutuP*
panattuvazunnor and Cinarvittil Tannal. His mothe
was Uppatti, daughter of a woman called Teyi. He ha
an elder brother called Komappan and a younger sister
called Unicciruta (Uniccira). tenan’s father begot
son (Kantacceri Cappan) of Makkam, the maid-servan®
of Uppatti. Cappan grew up to be a constant com”

_ There is also a story abou
NATOTIPPATTU
panion of Otenan. Komappan (Komakkuruppu)
brother of Otenan was a peace-loving, sedate person.
Otenan mastered all the tricks of Kalarippayattu at the
gymnasium of Matiloor Gurukkal. Otenan had also
mastered the use of the Urumi (a thin sword). He was
such a master in the use of the Urumi that he could, by
one sweep of it, graze the throat of a man without cutting and shedding a drop of blood. He was an expert
in necromancy also. What could not be managed by
the physical strength of Otenan, Cappan used to manage
with his intellectual powers.
Otenan was born on the slope of a hill at Meppa one mile
east of the present Vatakara railway station. Relics and
remnants of Manikkattu family are there yet to be seen.
Many songs have been composed about Otenan. One
of them is his going to receive presents of cloth on Onam
day from a stingy chief who, after the death of Otenan’s
father, had become ‘Putuppanattu -Vazhunnavar’.
Another song relates to his collecting taxes from Kotumala Kufifikkannan on behalf of Raja of Kottayam. Yet
another song is about his putting down the conceit and
pride of Kunkiamma of Kekki house. And, another song
is about his killing Kaiteki Otenan Nambiyar. His fight
with the mappilas on behalf of the Raja of Cirakkal
forms the theme of yet another song. Another interesting song is about his making Kottakkal Kufifiali Marakkar, who wasa bosom friend of his, , though a philanderer
put on the attires of a female and thus teaching him a
good lesson in life. Another song describes the escape
of Otenan, who went to see the construction of the
Karimala fort, with the help of Cappan. There are also
many other songs about Otenan. |
The very marriage of Otenan is an interesting. story.
Mateviamma of Kavilum cate had 8 CAB map
Ciru. dteviamma went to Mani cattu hous
een daughter Ciru. Otenan
requested Otenan to marry her
refused to oblige her. But, Ciru grew up to be very
beautiful girl, and Otenan, who saw her in that state
felt a Deel passion for her. He sent Capp a ee De
a pan (betel leaves for chewing) wate bie erson
At last Cappan took Otenan disguised as a D! a sea
to Ciru’s house. Ciru and Otenan E vised thet when
the knowledge of Ciru’s mother, who curse
she knew about the marriage. ;
There is another story about Otenan ane ira copue
(Katattanatu) Kuffiikkann!, the on 4 d Kela an of
Raja of Katattanatu. A row dy oa! ws ae Raja,
P onnapuram fort forcibly carried her hid to return
who tried to bring back -his daughter napuram fort
wounded. Otenan came to know Bat nil aad Kelaphad once been given as dowry tons won of it. Otenan
Pan was in illegal and forcible occup4 “a ‘he fort. He
along with Cappan went and captur
: , “ity and took Kelappa
released Kufifiikkanni from captivity was very muc
tu :
captive. The Raja of Katattana: ‘ed KuninikSiecee with this smlott of Otenan and martis
kanni to him. |
Sa ; appilas
mappilas of Cirakkal.The mappl" cs,
Raja of Cirakkal during 0m es “haughtiness of
he :
asked Otenan to put down t la Kunkiamma, the
mappilas, and he did so. nee others are referred
Raja Pulinadu, Matilur G
to In this story.
535 NATOTIPPATTU
Katirir Gurukkal was a very powerful enemy of Otenan.
The Gurukkal one day kept his new gun leaning against
a jack fruit tree, and Otenan, in derision, commented
about it thus : ‘‘Who is it that has kept the spear made
of earth leaning against the tree on which usually spear
made of gold is kept so ??’ The Gurukkal, angry at the
insult challenged Otenan for a combat within three
months from Wednesday, the ninthof Kumbham, On the
appointed day Otenan went to Gurukkal’s combat field
and killed him, Parintukil Emmenpaniykar and others.
On his way home after the victory, Otenan remembered
that he had forgotten his dagger on the platform of the
peepal tree, and paying no heed to the advice of his
friends he returned to the combat field and got killed
there.
5) Taccoli Candu. Candu was Otenan’s nephew and was
reputed for his great prowess. Malu of Tazhattumatham was his wife.. One day she went for worship
in the Omallur temple where Kandar Menon of Tulunatan fort abducted her into his court. Candu was at
the time, twentytwo years old. On hearing: about his
wife’s mishap Candu, disguised as a Sannyasin, entered
the fort and fought singlehanded against Menon and
his army of.400 soldiers.
6) PalattuKoman. Koman Nayar, another nephew of
Otenan, the son of Kunkiamma of Kappullipalattu,
became famous under the name Komappan. The family
feud between the Kuruppus of Tonnuiramvitu and the
Nayars of Palatu was a long-standing affair. There
were seven Kuruppus during the days of Koman, and ©
they had two sisters named Unnicciruta and Unniamma.
Koman felt a great passion towards -_Unniamma, who
was bathing in the tank, and her brothers rushed to kill
Koman. But Koman outlived all obstacles created by
the seven brothers of Unniamma and the tale-bearing
Unicciruta because of the cleverness of the very intelligent Unniamma. Koman also got settled by Otenan
the fortytwo items of family quarrels and married
Unniamma., _ |
7) Bambayi Alikkutti. In the song about Adiraja it is
said Alikkutti, an expert in the science relating to elephants, was invited for help when the seventh elephant
of the Raja escaped back into the forest. Alikkutti
hailed from Bombay. According to the song under reference Alikkutti brought back the elephant from the
forest to the Raja, who, greatly pleased with him, gave
his daughter, Kufifiikkanni, in marriage to him.
8) Putunatan Kelu. Putunatan Candu and Kelu_ were
brothers. Candu married a woman named Matu.
One Vattoli Menon became Matu’s paramour by bribing her with a golden chain worth three thousand
anams, and she got her husband killed by this paramour. Candu had two dogs called Malli and Cokkan,
and one of them kept guard over Candu’s dead body
while the other went and informed Kelu about Candu’s
death. Kelu, in great rage, rushed to the place, saw the
golden chain presented to Matu by Menon and blinded’
one of her eyes. —
9) Kurumparampil Kannan. ‘This tiya youth had a very
chaste wife called Arya. One day when Kannan was
away from: home for tapping coconut palms for toddy
Putukolotiu raja saw Arya, and having felt a great passjon for her he presented her one night four pieces of
silk and a gold ring. The next day Arya dressed her
husband as a brahmin with the sacred thread on, and

NAUBANDHANA 536
deputed him to return to the Raja’s wife the presents
made by her busband to her (Arya). Kannan succeeded
in his mission, but the revengeful Raja ordered him to
be executed. Arya went to the Raja and after various discussions with him returned home.
NAUBANDHANA. A peak of the Himalayas. The peak
came to be known by this name on account of the
following cause. Once upon a time Hiranyakasipu stole
the Vedas and with them hidin the bottom of the
ocean. Mahavisnu incarnated himself as fish to restore
the Vedas. The world then was submerged in water
and the maharsis escaped in a boat attached to the
_horns-of the Makara fish. On earth flood rose upto the
peaks of the Himalayas. The Saptarsis attached their
boat to a peak of the mountain and that came to be
known as Naubandhana. (nau=boat ; bandha=tie).
(Vana Parva, Chapter 187, Verse 50).
NAUKARNL.A female attendant of Subrahmanya. (Salya
Parva, Chapter 46, Verse 29).
NAVAGVA. ‘The Navagvas are a group of the Angirases.
In Rgveda, mention is made about them in several
places.
NAVAKANYAKA(S). An important item of Navaratripuja (A festival of 9 days, as observed by Sakti worshippers ) is the worship of virgins. The nine kinds of
virgins (irom two to ten years in age) thus worshipped are called Navakanyakds (nine virgins). (See
under Kumaripuja ).
NAVAMIVRATA. (Fast on the ninth lunar day). This
is a special fast taken in the month of Tulam (OctoberNovember ) with a view to obtain ‘Bhukti’ (enjoyment
or possession) and ‘Mukti’ (Beatitude). The important
rite of this worship is to take fast on the ninth night of
the bright Junar fortnight in the month of Tulam and
worship goddess Gauri. This navami is also called
Gaurinavami. Another name of this navami is Pistaka
navami. This name is given because on that day
Pistam (ground rice) is eaten and the goddess is worshipped. In the bright lunar fortnight of the month of
Tulam (Asvina), on the eighth night when the star is
Mulam and the Sun is in the zodiac of Kanya if there
is the touch of Navami, it is called Aghardananavami or
Mahanavami.
Worship could be conducted on the d
by consecrating the goddess Dur
or in one temple only. When t
secrated in nine temples ,they are meditated upon as
nine separate beings. In such cases Goddess Durga
should be consecrated with eighteen hands and the rest
of the goddesses with sixteen hands. -Of the eighteen
two should be holding Antimony and damaru (a small
drum shaped like an hourglass), and the remaining
sixteen hands should hold weapons that the other
goddesses hold. The nine goddesses to be worshipped
are Rudra, Canda, P racanda, Candogra, Candanayika
Candavati and Candarupa and in the middle of these
eight beings the great goddess Durga who is Ugracanda
and the slayer of Mahisasura. Durga is addressed with
the spell of ten letters “Om, Durge Durgeksini Svaha.”?
Adoration, offering to ancestors and exclamation in
sacrifice (Namaskara, Svadhakara and Wasatkara)
should be denoted by six words and the Angas (organs)
beginning with heart also should be imagined. This rootspell should be repeated resting the organs such as heart
€ days mentioned,
ga in nine temples
he goddess is conNAVARATRI
etc. on the fingers. He who repeats this secret spell of
goddess, will never be troubled by enemies.
‘he goddess should be worshipped by meditating upon her
as carrying the weapons such as Kap§la (skull) , Khetaka
(shield) Ghanta (bell), Mirror, Tarjani, bow, dhvaja
(flag), damaru (drum) and paga (rope) in the left hands
and Sakti (dart) Mudgara, trident, vajra, sword, spear,
conch, wheel and Salaka (antimony) in the right hands.
These weapons also should specially be worshipped.
In the worship of the goddess, a cow (sacrificial animal )
should be beheaded with a sword repeating the spell
Kali Kali and the blood and flesh of that cow should be
offered as oblation to the goddess Piitana uttering the
spell, Kali Kali Vajresvari, lauhadandayai namah.
Offering to Pitana should be made in the south west
corner of the shrine of tlie Devi. In the same way
offerings of blood and flesh should be made to the
goddesses Paparaksasi in the North West corner, Caraki
in the North East corner and Vidarika in the South
East corner. The same form of offerings should be made
to the god Mahakaugika in the south East corner. The
King should bathe in front of this god Mahakausika
and making an image of his enemy with rice flout;
should break it. Then give that rice flour as obe
to the gods Skanda and Vigakha and worship the fema'c
‘ancestors such as Brahmi and such others in the nig iC.
As ordained in the Vedas, the Devi should be bathed 1
Paficamrta (milk, curds, butter, honey and water) 20°
then worship before her, uttering the spell “Jayanue
mangala Kali, Bhadrakali Kap4alini, Durga Siva
Ksama Dhatri Svadha Svaha Namostu te’. (As”
Purana, Chapter 185).
NAVARATNAS I. (The nine precious Jewels). The nine
precious stones are pearl, ruby, Chrysoprasus, bery"
diamond, coral, jacinth, emerald and sapphire. vt/
Mukta - manikya - vaidirya - gomeda vajra -vidrumé
Padmarago maratakarh nilasceti yathakramam/ /
NAVARATNAS II. Legend says that there were 10°
scholars who handled philosophy and arts, in the pass
of the emperor Vikramaditya. These nine scholars we
known by the name Navaratnas (the nine jewels). + A
were Dhanvantari, Ksapanaka, Amarasirhha, »4" , '
Vetalabhatta, Ghatakarpara,K4lidasa, Varahamihira 4
Vararuci.
NAVARATRI. Navaratripija (nine nights’ worship)
done to goddess Durga. Though thisis observed throug?
out the whole ofIndia,it is more prominent 1n Nor i
India than anywhere else. (To know the details ee ‘iing the origin of this worship, see under Sudarsa, 4
kala and Vijayadagami). a
As ordained in the Vedas, the Nine nights’ worship 3
to be made in the seasons of spring and autumn. hes
two seasons are called Kaladarmstras (the tusks
seasons ). Diseases and deaths occur in these seasons ;
excess, and so it is ordained that this fast and wo! :
should be conducted in the months of Medam (Mes@
and ‘Tulam.
Vyasa has ordered that navaratri worship should oe
conducted as follows. The things necessary for .
worship and oblations should be collected on the new
moon day. Only clarified butter could be eate? e h
that day. An open temple should be erected wit
pillars and flag-posts in an open flat place which is pure:
It will be good if the shed has a circumference of sixtes
cubits, There should be sixteen pillars. The shed shoul

NAVAVYUHARCANA
| be floored with the mixture of cowdung and white clay.
| In the middle of the shed there must bea dais having
| _ aheight of one cubit and a circumference of four cubits.
This is the place for the seat. The shed and the dais
should be decorated. :
The throne placed on the dais must be covered with a
white silk and Devi ( goddess) should be consecrated on
it. A calm Brahmin should read the Vedas and at that
time the worship of the goddess should begin. This
worship will continue for nine days. Another ritual of
this ‘navaratripaja’ is the worship of virgins. (See
| under Kumaripuja )
NAVAVYUHARCANA. This is a worship conducted to
prevent epidemics. In olden days Mahavisnu advised
Narada on the form of this worship. The form of this
worship is. given below:
In the centre of the circular lotus, consecrate Vasudeva
with the first syllable of mantra (spell) ‘A’. To the
south of him consecrate and worship Sankarsana and
Pradyumna with the syllable ‘A’; in the S.E. corner,
Aniruddha with the syllable ‘Ah’; in the west, Narayana
with the syllable ‘Om’; Brahma in the N.W. corner
with the syllables “Tatsat’; Visnu in the North with the
syllable ‘Hum’; Nrsirnha with the syllable ‘Ksau
ith the syllable
Le, and Varaha in the N.E. corner wi
| ‘bhim’.
first syllables
Consecrate Garuda with spells having as frst sy
‘Kam’,‘tam’, “sam’’ and‘éam’ at the western entrance of
| the lotus figure; Pirvavaktra, with syllables ‘Kham
| ‘cham’,Vam’and humi’at the southern entrance of the lotus
| figure; Gada (club), with the syllables ‘Kham , tham
| and ‘Sam’ at the Northern entrance; consecrate Iga
with the syllables ‘bam’, ‘nam’, ‘mam’and ‘Ksam, in the
North East corner. Then consecrate Sri with the
syllables ‘Dham’, ‘Dam’, ‘Bham’ and Ham | o the
| southern side; Vanamali with the gable ae oo as
‘Vam’ and ‘Sam’, on the northern side; rivaisa WI :
| the syllables ‘sam’, ‘ham’ and ‘lam’, to the Be o
| Vanamali; and Kaustubha, wit ae abe CRAM
‘Tam’ and ‘yam’, to the west of sriva'sa.
After faving consecrated and worshipped sete ti
mentioned above, in the order of the ten mermber-p
AVI hould be consecrated below
i NAN EVEy arae ait f the ten member
the seat of the deity and in the order 0 |
| onent parts called Maheparts of Ananta, the four comp Par the four directndra and so on shou!d be consecrate secrate in the same
ions such as east and so on, and conse pe Tenth
way all the decorations, flags, canopy ©'v
4 ; (fire) and Indu
three spheres of Vayu (Air), ae ie a syllables
moon) should be consecrate e AY
the’ spells suited to each and meditating 0” tion.
Tee eae a ai th individual soul
| Then imagine that the subtle form of the i? Ala cre
is staying in’ the sky. Then meditate that t si Heat iie
soul is reborn by harmony with the univers
1 he snow-
| having been dipped 4n washed in the
: moon. After
White ambrosia emanau:ng from i j Visnu himself
that saying to yoursel Oe mantra or spell.
reborn’’, utter the twelve-syllab'e pon respectively on
Place heart, head, turban and W and Netra (eye
( - of hair
chest, head, hindpart of the lock © age body w!}
lace Jesoons is beth hands. After this your Y
dividual soul
ecome divine. This placing © Ue pee (god )
should be repeated in the same WY °:- onducted in
and Siva. When this worship of Vist
537 NIKSUBHA
heart in imagination (without the aid of materials) it
is called ‘Anirmalyapija, and when it is done with the
aid of lotus figure etc., it is called Sanirmalya puja.
At this paja (worship) the disciple should stand with
eyes tied. Then on whichever deity he places flower it »
should be given that name. Place it on the left side
and burn gingelly, paddy and ghee in the sacrificial
fire. After performing hundred and eight burnings
perform another burning for the purification of the
body. To each of the member-parts of the Navavyiha
deities also burnt offering should be made, no less than
hundred times to each. Then put the entire thing in
fire as burnt offerng. Then the disciples should take
fast, and the. disciples should offer wealth etc. to the
teacher. (Agni Purana, Chapter 201). |
NAVYASRAMA. An 4srama built by Lomapada
Maharsi. Rsyasrmga came to Lomapada’s country in a
boat. Hence the name Navyasrama (See under
Rsyasrnga.
NAYANAR. The protagonists of Southern Saivism are
known as Nayanars while those of Vaisnavism are
called Alvars.
NEMI. The real name of DaSaratha. (See under
Dasaratha ).
NEMICAKRA. A king, who once ruled Hastinapura,
Once, when Hastinapura was washed away by floods of
Yamuna Nemicakra built a new city in Kausambi,
(Bhagavata, 9th Skandha).
NEMIHAMSAPADA. An important place in ancient
India. The place is near Aksaprapatanam in the Anarta
region. It was here that Krsna killed Gopati and
Talaketu. |
NEPALA. The kingdom of Nepal on the boundaries of
the Himalayas has been famous from Puranic times. It
is the only. ‘Hindu’ State in the world. Karna, during
his triumphal tour, had conquered Nepal also. (Vana
Parva, Chapter 254, Verse 7).
NIBIDA. A mountain in the Kraufica island. (Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 12, Verse 19).
NICANDRA. A Raksasa referred to in verse 26, Chapter
65 of Adi Parva. _
NICITA. A holy river of ancient India. (Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 18).
NIDAGHA. Amaharsi. (For details see under Rbhu)
NIDHRUVA. One who actually saw the Siktas. He was
the son of Vatsara Rsi born in Kasyapa dynasty. He
married Sumedhas the daughter born to Cyavana and
Sukanya; and Kundapayins were their sons. (Vayu
Purana).
NIGHNA. A King of Ayodhya and son of Anaranya.
He had two sons called Anamitra and Raghittama.
‘Padma Purana, Srsti Khanda).
NIKHARVATA. A Raksasa in Ravana’s camp. He
fought with the monkey called Tara in the RamaRavana war. (Vana Parva, Chapter 235, Verse 80).
NIKSUBHA. An Apsara woman about whom the following story occurs in the Brahmaparva of the Bhavisya
Dyrana. On account of the curse of Sarya, Niksubha, the
eat beauty in Svarloka, was born on earth as daughter
of Sujihva a brahmin of Mihira Gotra. At the instance
of her father, she used to keep the yajfa fire ever
burning. One day the fire held in her hands abruptly
burst into flames, and her unique beauty revealed in
the light kindled the passion ef Surya. .
Next day Sirya went to Sujihva and told him that his

NIKUMBHA I
daughter, Niksubha was carrying since he had married
her. Assoon as he heard Sarya’s words Sujihva cursed
his daughter thus: “Since the child in your womb is
enveloped by fire the child born to you will be despised
and rejected by people.”’
Then Sirya went to Niksubha and told her that though
her child might be despised he would be a scholar, very
well-bred and eligible for the worship of Agni.
As years passed many children were born to her by Surya.
While she was living in the Saka island Samba, the son
of Krsna, deputed her sons to perform rites in the Siirya
temple at Sambapura. Niksubha’s sons were married to
girls born in the Bhoja family.
NIKUMBHA I. A very mighty Raksasa. Son of Kumbhakarna (R4&vana’s brother) by his wife Vajramala.
He had an elder brother called Kumbha.
When Kumbha was killed in the Rama-Ravana war
Nikumbha rushed to the front line and fought fiercely,
and he was killed by Haniman. (Valmiki Ramayana,
Yuddha Kanda, Canto 77).
NIKUMBHA II. Third son of Prahlada. (Adi Parva,
Chapter 63, Verse 19).
NIKUMBHA III. An asura born in the dynasty of Hiranyakagipu. Sunda and Upasunda were his sons. (Adi
Parva, Chapter 208, Verse 2).
NIKUMBHA IV. A warrior of Subrahmanya (Salya
Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 58).
NIKUMBHA V. A king born in the Iksvaku dynasty.
He was :he son of Haryaéva and the father of Samhitaéva
(Brahranda Purana, Chapter |). '
NIKUMBHA VI. Another form of Ganapati. The
following stoiy about him in the Nikumbha state is
told in Vayu Purana.
Suyasa, wife of Divodasa used to worship in the
Nikumbha temple of Varanasi for the sake of a child. As
the worship did not yield the desired effect, Divodasa
smashed the idol in the temple into pieces. Then
Nikumbha cursed that Varanasi should decline. Asa
result of the curse the Hehayas like Talajangha and others
destroyed Varanasi and drove Divodasa away from
there. At last the Nikumbha temple was rebuilt and
_ Varanasi became prosperous again.
NIKUMBHILA. A particular spot in the forest outside
Lankapuri. (Uttara Ramayana).
Spa RG (LS Caine ee
NILA IT. yoke ae alae
1) General. A King born in the Hehaya dynasty. His
was a rebirth of the asura called Krodhavaéa. ‘Nila
was called Duryodhana also. Mahismati was the capital
of hiskingdom. He attended the Svayarhvara of Draupadi. (Adi Parva, Chapter 67, Verse 61).
2) Other Informaizon
(i) Once he fought a fierce battle with Sahadeva, but
ultimately yielded to the latter at the instance of
Agnideva. (See under Agni, Para 8),
(ii) He gave his daughter Sudargana in marr
Agnideva. (See under Agni, Para 8).
ii) During bis triumphal tour, Karna defeated Nila.
(Wana Parva, Chapter 254, Verse 15).
(iv) In the battle of Kuruksetra he fought on the side
of the Kauravas.(Udyoga Parva, Chapter 19, Verse 23).
(v) He was reckoned as one of the maharathis on the
side of Duryodhana, (Udyoga Parva, Chapter 164,
Verse 4).
lage to
NIMI I
(vi) Sudarfana was a daughter born to him of his
wife Narmada. (Anug4sana Parva, Chapter 2). ;
NILA III. A monkey-chief, who was a dependant of Sri
Rama. He was Agni’s son. ‘Nila, son of Pavaka (fire)
shone forth like agni (fire). He stood foremost among
the monkeys in the matter of effulgence, reputation and
prowess’. (Valmiki Ramayana, Balakanda, Canto 17).
This monkey-chief was also included in the set of
monkeys deputed by Sri Rama to search for Sita. In
the Rama-Ravana war Nila killed Pramathi, the younger
brother of the Raksasa called Diisana. (Vana Parva,
Chapter 287, Verse 27).
NILA IV. A warrior who fought on the Pandava side.
He was king of AniipadeSa. He fought against Durjaya
and Agvatthama and was killed by Aévatthama. (Drona
Parva, Chapter 31, Verse 25).
NILA V. A famous king in nothern P&ficala. The
Puranas refer to sixteen famous kings of this royal dynasty from Nila to Prsata.
NILA. I. A daughter born to Kapiga of Keéini. (Brahmanda Purana, Chapter 3). oy
NILA. II. A Gopika. Sri Krsna was one day picnicking
in Vrndavana with the Gopi women, and they wet
proud that he was mad after them. To dispel ae
pride Krsna disappeared abruptly from their midst an
sported with the woman called Nila. Then she also
became proud that Krsna loved her more than the
others, and she asked him to carry her on his shoulders.
He stood there ready stretching his neck to carry her.
But, when she stood with her legs parted to mount .
Krsna’s neck and looked for him he was missing 5 he ha 4
already disappeared. The Gopikas ultimately she
their pride and then Krsna appeared before them-
(Cerugseri’s Malayalam Epic Krsna Gatha). d
NILAGIRI. Name of a mountain in the region calle
Ilavrta of Jambi island. In Ilavrta there are three
chief mountains called Nilagiri, Svetagiri and Srngavan:
and in their middle three Varsas (regions) calle
Ramyaka, Hiranmaya and Kuru. (Devi Bhagavata,
8th Skandha).
NILAKANTHA DIKSITAR. A _ Sanskrit poet wild
flourished in the 17th century A.D. He was the sen :
poet of King Tirumala-Nayaka. He has written WO?
in all the branches of literature. His more importar™
works are Sivalilarnava, Gangavatarana. Nilakanthav}
jaya Campi, and Kalividambana. Sivalilarnava contains
twentytwo cantos. Its theme is the sixtyfour lilas( Divi?¢
sports) of Siva installed at Madura. (South India
Gangavatarana is a poem in eight cantos which describes the story of Bhagiratha bringing Ganga down? to
the earth. In the first canto of Nilakanthavijaya, A.
1638-39 is referred to as the period of its compositio?:
and this reference helps us to determine the date of the
poet.
NILI. Second wife of King Ajamidha. Two sons called
Dusyanta and Paramesthi were born to the king of Nill.
(Adi Parva, Chapter 94, Verse 32). d
NILINI. A wife of Sunagsepha. A daughter calle
ory was born to him of Nilini. (Agni Purana, Chapter
NIMESA I. A son of Garuda. (Udyoga Parva, Chapter
NIMESA TI,
NIMI I.
Tksvaku,
See under Kalamana.
A famous emperor who was the son of

NIMI I
1) Genealogy. Descended from Visnu thus: Brahma—
Marici-—Kasyapa — Vivasvan — Vaivasvata Manu—
Iksvaku—Nimi.
Among the sons of Iksvaku, Danda, Vikuksi and Nimi -
became famous.
2) Vasistha’s curse. Emperor Nimi was very generous
with his gifts. He was interested in performing - yajias.
The feeding hall that can be seen even today near the
Asrama of Gautama Maharsi was built by emperor Nimi.
The emperor, a person of rajasic nature, decided, to
conduct a Yajiia which would take a long time to end
and. which required much money for gifts; and he got
his father Iksvaku’s permission for it. Arrangements
were made for the Yajiia, and Rsis like Bhrgu, Angiras
Vamadeva, Pulastya, Pulaha and Rcika who were
competent to perform yajfia and great scholars in the
Vedas were invited for the Yajfia. Lastly he met - his
family preceptor Vasistha and told him thus: “Oh
preceptor! I have made all arrangements for a Yajiia,
which it is my desire should last for five hundred years.
You would also come with me and see that the Yajfa.
is duly performed.”’ | |
Vasistha listened to Nimi’s request with great attention. But, he had already been invited. by
conduct a Yajfia which would last for five hundred
years, and he would be able to oblige Nimi only after
that period of time. So Vasistha asked the emperor to
postpone his proposed yajfia by five hundred years.
Nimi returned disappointed. | |
Nimi had no patience to wait for five hundred years.
So he started the yajiia with Gautama as his preccpioe
After Indra’s Yajfia for 500 years was over, Vasistha
came to Nimi’s Yajfia hall. Nim), at the time, was In.
the inner apartment of his palace. Though his
went to him to tell him that his preceptor
had come, they waite
We hen. Within a few moments Vasistha
ee Rs peti anger. He raised his hands and cured
- Nimi thus: “Oh! Nimi, you have insulted, ae aie
preceptor. You disobeyed my injunction a bee a
Yajfia. Therefore, let your body be parte | |
soul and fall on ne roune ss :
This curse of Vasistha aJarm d told him all
much that they roused him from sleep re vad Bro:
imi Vasis
about the affair. Nim1 hurried, to. VAS:
tiated ai his feet. But, he did not shed his anger. This
made Nimi also angry. He also raised up sa recs
cursed Vasistha thus: “Ob mum ! you, we cs a ee
without reason are worse than a Canc a a ee
let your body also be parted from the so
the ground.”’
; rse.
Vasistha got alarmed at the an ONG cad
and submitted his grievance tO , P Fea
thus :— “My son, your ee m a your
Yet, I shall advise you 4 Way a of Mitra and Varuna
dissolve your-self in the effulgence After sometime you
and remain there per
manently. a
will be able to be born without ae 8 remember everywomb of a woman. Then you Ys ire sense O
thing about your previous birt
h will acquire =
| ll become
righteousness and knowledge of ee Viens wl
nd will be omniscient.
Vasistha
He ran up to
; him
respected by all a bod
The soul of Vasistha parted ioe hana, 4 ent to the
of the curse of Nimi, salute got mixed with their
agrama of Mitravarunas 4?
Indra to .
servants
d outside his chamber as he .
he servants of Nimi .soNIMROCI.. A King born in
present in the
539 NIRAMAYA
effulgence. Meanwhile Urvasi one day came to the
agrama of Mitravarunas, who had seminal emission at
her sight. ‘The semen fell into a pot. The pot duly
burst open and there emerged from it Agastva and
Vasistha.
Nimi returned to the Yajfia hall and told the munis
about the curse on him of Vasistha. While the. munis
were helplessly’ looking on, Nimi’s body got separated
from the soul and fell down. The munis placed the
dead body in an uncovered coffin, kept it free from
putrefaction with the help of medicines and mantras
and continued with the Yajfia. At the close of the
Yajfia the Devas appeared and asked Nimi which did
he prefer to have, a human body or body of a Deva.
He preferred to have a Deva body, and accordingly
ascended to Svarga along with the Devas.
As Nimi had- no sons to perform his obsequies the
munis began churning the corpse repeating mantras
and there arose from it an ideal person as glowing as
Nimi. As he was created: by ‘mathana’ (churning) the
munis named him Mithi. Again, as he was created
from a dead body he came to be known as Janaka also.
Further,-as he was born from the body from which the
soul had departed he was called Videha also. ‘The
famous kingdom of Mithila on the banks of the Ganga
was founded by this Janaka. | AL
Janaka, the father of Sita, was a King born in this
dynasty. To all the Kings born in this dynasty the
surname ‘Janaka’ came to be applied. This dynasty is
known as Janakavarhéa and VidehavarhSa after emperor
Mithi. (Devi Bhagavata, 6th Skandha).
3) Other information.
i) He ‘worships Sirya’s son Yama
(Sabha Parva, Chapter 8, Verse 9)-.
(ii) He gave gifts of land to brahmins.
Chapter 234, Verse 26).
(iii) He did not eat flesh. (Anusasana Parva, Chapter
“Wad boWVerse G5)
NIMI H. Son of Dattatreyamuni of the Atri family.
(Anus asana
in his court.
(Va na Parva,
Parva, Chapter 91, Verse 5). .
NIMI III. Son of the King of Vidarbha. After giving
his daughter in marriage to Agastya he attained
heaven. (Anufasana Parva, Chapter 137, Verse 11).
NIMNA. A YAdava. (Bhagavata, 9th Skandha).
the Yadava dynasty.
Nimroci, son ‘of Bhoja had two brothers called Kinkana
and Vrsni, (Bhagavata, 9th Skandha).
NIPA I. A famous King of the Piru dynasty. A son
called Brahmadatta was born to the King by his wife
Krti alias Kirtimati. Brahmadatta begot hundred sons
like Kirtivardhana and all of them became famous by
the name Nipas. (Bhagavata, 9th Skandha).
NIPA II. An ancient kingdom in India. The King of.
this place participated in Yudhisthira’s Rajastiya.
(Sabha Parva, Chapter 51, Verse 24).
NIPA Ili. A Ksatriya dynasty. King Janamejaya
belonged to this dynasty. (Udyoga Parva, Chapter 74,
Verse 13). ne ‘
NIPATITHI. A Rsi extolled ia the Reveda. He was a
Saktadrasta (one who realized the Vedic hymns).
NIRAMARDA. A King of arcient India. (Adi Parva,
Chapter 1, Verse 237).
NIRAMAYA. A King of ancient India. (Adi Parva,
Chapter 1, Verse 137).

NIRAMAYA 540
NIRAMAYA. Ariver, the water of which was very dear
to the people of ancient India. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter
NIRAMITRA T.. Son of Nakula. His mother was the
noble lady called Karenumati. (Adi Parva, Chapter
NIRAMITRA II. . A Trigarta prince killed in the great
war by Sahadeva. (DronaParva, Chapter 107, Verse
NIRAVINDA. An ancient mountain. It is believed
that he who bathes in the pond on this mountain will
attain salvation. (Anugasana Parva, Chapter 137).
NIRMOCANA. The Palace of Murasura. (Udyoga
Parva, Chapter 48, Verse 83).
NIRRTII. A Deva. The Puranas contain the following
information about him.
(i) He is one of the Astadikpalas (guards of the
eight quarters). He isin charge of the south-western
corner. (See under Astadikpalas) . |
(ii) He is one of the Ekadagarudras. (Adi Parva,
Chapter 66, Verse 2). |
(iii) Brahma was his grand-father and Sthanu his
father. (Adi Parva, Chapter 66, Verse°2).
(iv) He attended the birth-day celebrations of Arjuna.
(Adi Parva, Chapter 129, Verse 63).
(v) In temples his idols are installed with sword in
hand and seated on an ass. (Agni Purana, Chapter 51).
NIRRTIII. Wife of the Deva called Adharma. She had
' three sons called Bhaya, Mahabhaya and Antaka.
These Raksasas are known as Nairrtas. (Adi Parva,
Chapter 66, Verse 5+). :
NISA. The third wife’ of the Agni called Bhanu. To the
couple were born seven:sons called Agni, Soma, Vaisvanara, Visvapati, Sannihita, Kapila and Agrani, and a
daughter called Rohini. (Vana Parva, Chapter 211).
NISADA I. A forest dweller. The grand sire of the nisada
tribe living in forests was one Nisdda. Those forestdwellers came to be known as nisadas as they were the
descendants of this Nisada. The Puranic story about
the origin of Nisada is as follows :— = ies :
Once upon a time there lived a King called Vena. A
very immoral ruler, he was hated by the people. As
dharma declined in the country due to the misrule of
Vena the maharsis killed him with darbha grass sanctified by mantras. Then the maharsis saw dust rising
up everywhere and people told them that the poor
people, in the absence of king, had turned into thieves
and the dust was formed by the onrush of the thieves.
To remedy the problem thus created the maharsis
churned the thigh of Vena, who had died ‘childless, for
a son, and from the thigh was born a malechild, dark in
colour, dwarfish and with a compressed face. Sadly he
asked the brahmins (maharsis) what he should do. They
asked him to sit (nisida) and hence he became Nisada
(forest-dweller). His descendants settled down on mount
Vindhya and they by their sinful lives divested Vena
of his sins. Vena was absolved of his sins through the
Nisadas, and thus the Nisadas became responsible for
the ending of Vena’s sins. (Visnu Purana, Part 1,
Chapter 13). oN ;
NISADA II. A particular region in ancient India.
(Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 51). '
NISADANARESA. A King well known in Bharata. He
was born from aspects of the daityas, Kalakeya and
Krodhahanta. (Adi Parva, Chapter 67, Verse 50),
_. below:—
NISAKARA II
NISADHA I. A King born in Sri Rama’s dynasty. Kuéa
was born as the son of Sri Rama, Aditi as Kuga’s
son and Nisadha as Aditi’s son. This Nisadha was the
father of King Nabhas. (Bhagavata, 9th Skandha).
NISADHA II. A King of Bharata’s dynasty. Nisadha
was the grandson of King Puru and the fourth son of
Janamejaya. A great humanitarian, Nisadha ruled the
country to the satisfaction of everybody. (Adi Parva,
Chapter 94, Verse 56).
NISADHA III. A mountain near mount Meru. During
his triumphal tour, Arjuna defeated the people of this
region. 7
NISAKARA I. A maharsi. Honoured even by the Devas
he lived in his 4grama on the heights of Mount Vindhya.
One of those days Jatayu and his elder brother Sampatt,
under a bet, flew up to the Sun’s sphere. In his attempt
to shield Jatayu, who flew with great speed and neared
the Sun’s sphere, from the scorching heat of the Sun,
‘Sampati’s wings got burned and he fell down on the
heights of Vindhya where he lay unconscious for 51*
days.
Nisakara maharsi heard Sampati crying and he saved
the bird, which lived there for many years as the
maharsi’s slave. The maharsi, who could foresee things
told Sampati about Sri Rama’s incarnation which was
to happen in the future. He entered Samadhi after
finally telling Sampati that monkeys would go there
then in search of Sita, that Sampati would point ou!
to them where Sita was and that onthat day his wig> -
would automatically reappear and his legs would become
strong. Afterwards for eight thousand years Sampati le
a solitary life in the aSrama. It was during this pero
that monkeys, in the course of their search for Sita got
information about her from Sampati. (Kamba Ramayana; Valmiki Ramayana, Kiskindha Kanda, Gant?
NISAKARA II. A great muni, who attained Svarg@
after passing through many lives. His ‘story is give?
There was a great. ascetic. and ‘erudite scholar in all
branches of knowledge called Kogakara, son of munt
Mudgala. Kogakara’s wife was Dharmistha, daughter
of Vatsyayana. To them was born a son, an idiot and 4
deaf and dumb child, whom they forsook at the gates
of the mother’s house. At the same time an evil-minde
Raksasa woman called Sirpaksi, who was in the habit
of lifting children came there with a lean child. She T&
placed Dharmistha’s child with the lean one 4?
returned with it to the Salobharaparvata where het
blind husband asked her what she had_ brought for 5's
food. She told him about the changelling child with her
when he said as follows ‘‘Return the child at once t©
where it was found. The child’s father is a great man °
knowledge and wisdom and when he hears about your
action, he will curse us. So, return the child and bring th¢
child of some one else.’’ As soon as she heard these words
of her husband she rose up in the sky in great alarm.
Hearing the cries of the Raksasa child left at theil
gates Dharmistha and her husband came out, a0
the child which, in its colour and shape resembled their
child exactly, Kogak4ara said thus : “Oh! Dharmistha !
this must be some ghost. Some one is lying here in the
same form as our child to hoodwink and cheat US:

NISAKARA II
Saying so he tied the child to the ground by chanting
mantras with darbha grass in his hands.
At the same time Sirpaksi came there in invisible form.
She threw Dharmistha’s child from a distance into the
courtyard. Kogakara took his child. But all the attempts
of the Raksasi to lift her child from the ground failed.
ae Briratcken Raksasi reported the matter to her
usband.
As soon as Sirpaksi left the place the magnanimous
Kogakara handed over the Raksasa child to his wife.
He brought up his own child by feeding it on cow’s milk,
curd, juice of sugar-cane etc. Both the children grew
up to seven years of age. The Raksasa boy was named
Divakara and the other child Nisakara. Both the children were invested with the sacred thread in due course
of time. Divakara learned the Vedas. but Nisakara did
not, and he was despised by all. His father pushed
him into a neglected well and covered its mouth with
stone. |
Nisakara lived in the well for many years. The fruits
of a cluster of plants in the well served as his food. Some
ten years afterwards when Nigakara’s mother found the
mouth of the well closed with a big stone she asked
as to who did so, and from the well came the answer,
“Mother, it was father who covered this well with that
stone.”’ Alarmed at this the mother asked who was within the well, and she was answered, “Your son, Nisakara.
Then she argued that her son was named Divakara and
that she had no son called Nigakara. But, Nisakara
told her about his’ past life and what had happened
to him during the present life, upon which the mother
rolled away the stone and Nijakara came out of the
well and prostrated before his mother. He then went
home with his mother. Questioned as to how and _why
these things happened by Kosakara his son Nisakara
described his previous life as follows:— eT
Father, you would please hear about the reason 4 y
became dumb and idiotic. In my previous life tee
born in a noble family, my father being called Nae a :
and mother Mala. My father taught me all the sas'tas
and theVedas. I became conceited.over my unique oa
ai = doing evil acts. Gonceit
ing and erudition and began 8
: scholarship. I became
led to avarice, and I lost all my sct I began comindiscreet. Having thus become 4 tpl ee Ae
mitting sins. I had to hang myself to deat a6; stealing
of my association with others women ne rava hell.
others’ money. I, therefore, fell into the Jxau
. ‘ned attached to
After ears some sin remained 4
a thousand y | was born as a tiger, anda
me as a result of which =: t When
King trapped and took me 10 ine wen and
was caged Sastras about Dharma,
Kama came up in my mind. pai) el
One day the King went ou worth his wife Ajita,
cloth and with a club in his hands. ah one of my taate
a unique beauty came to me, and beca
* ‘ heart. I
in my previous life sexual rare also felt like me. So,
told her about my feelings. 5 assion
She anekatwed me ae [ approached her e ered ae toa
and seeing me thus the King ea
peepal tre d thrashed me to ace™: nd years
eal Abani returned to hell. After 4 thousand yea!
I was born as a white ass fea a
named Agnivegya, who ha mind. My
knawledze and swindon were reflected Tey back. One
duty was to carry the brahmin wome
ly one piece ote
NISKA
day the brahmin’s wife Vimati of Navardastra started
tor her father’s home mounted on my _ back. Half-way
home she dismounted and went toa stream to bathe.
The exquisite beauty of that lady with wet clothes upset me, and I ran up to her on the stream, pushed her
into the water and myself fell upon her. Then a. person
came and tried to tie me down. I escaped from his
grips and ran southwards. While thus running the
saddle slipped into my mouth and I fell down. And,
within six days I died thinking about her. Thus I fell
again into hell. My next birth was as a parrot. A
hunter caged me in the forest and he sold me to a
Vaisya merchant, who put me up in the women’s
quarters. Ihe young women fed me on rice and fruits.
One day the wife of the Vaigya merchant hugged me
to her breast and petted me. Her touch kindled in me:
sexual feelings and I embraced her with my wings. In
my hurry about the affair I slipped down and got
crushed between the doors. Thus I fell again into hell.
Afterwards I was born as an ox in a camp of a
Candala. One day he yoked me to his cart and
started for the forest in it with his wife. On the way
she sang a song, and mentally excited by it I looked
back. At once I slipped my feet, fell down and died.
Again I returned to hell. |
After another one hundred years I was born as your
(Kogakarad) son in this house. All facts about my
previous lives linger in my memory and now I am free
from evils and am a virtuous person. I am going to the
forest for tapas. Let the good boy, Divakara live here
as house-holder. Nisakara thus did tapas for many
years and attained Vaikuntha (Vamana Purana,
Chapter 91).
There is no definite evidence in the Puranas to establish that the NigSakara, the protector of Sampati and
the Nisakara mentioned above were the same person.
NISANGI. A son of Dhrtarastra. He was killed in the
great war by Bhimasena. (Karna Parva, Chapter 84,
Verse 4).
NISATHA I. A prince of the Vrsni dynasty; son of
Balabhadra born of Revati. (Harivaméa). Nigatha also
had participated in the utsava celebrations held at
Raivata mountain by the Yadavas. It was Niéatha
who went to Khandavaprastha with the dowry of
Subhadra. He was present at the Asgvamedha and
Rajasuya of Yudhisthira. After death he was absorbed
into the ViSvadevas. (Adi Parva, Chapter 328, Verse
90; Sabha Parva, Chapter 34; Agvamedha Parva
Chapter 66; Svargarohana Parva, Chapter 5). ;
NISATHA II. A King of ancient. India. After death he
lived in the court of Yama worshipping him. (Sabha
Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 11). |
ISCIRA. A river glorified in the Puranas. It is well
known in all the three worlds. A bath in the river Is
as good as performing an a§syvamedha yajiia, Those
who bathe in the confluence of Nigcira will attain
Indraloka. (Vana Parva, Chapter 84, Verse 138).
NISCYAVANA. Second son of Brhaspati. He was sinless, pure and holy. (Vana Parva, Chapter 209).
NISITHA. A King of Dhruva’s dynasty. Pusparna was
the son of Utkala, the son of Dhruva, and Nisitha was
Pusparna’s son by his wife Prabha. Nisitha had two
brothers, Pradosa and Vyusa. (Bhagavata, 4th
Skandha ).
NISKA. One palam (about one-sixth of a pound) of

NISKRTI
gold. (Manusmrti, Gnapter 8),
NISKRTI. An agni (fire). A son of Brhaspati, he
came to be known as Niskrti as he redeemed( Niskrama )
people from unhappiness. (Vana Parva, Chapter 229,
Verse 14).
NISKUMBHA. A great asura. A dependant of the asura
called Vrsaparvan, Niskumbha, took part in many
Devasura wars. (Bhavisya Parva, Chapter 59) .
NISKUTA. An ancient region in India. The people of
the region were defeated once by Arjuna. (Sabha
Parva Chapter 27, Verse 29).
_NISKUTIKA. A female attendant of Subrahmanya.
(Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Verse 12).
NISTANAKA. A prominent naga (serpent) begot by
Kagyapaprajapati of his wife Kadri. (Adi Parva,
Chapter 35, Verse 9). 4 | |
NISTHURAKA. Avery prominent King, who lived
in ancient times in South India. Once he had to
depend on Sridatta, a King of North India. (See under
sridatta) . :
‘NISTHURIKA. A naga born in the Kasyapa dynasty.
(Udyoga Parva, Chapter 106, Verse 12).
NISUMBHAI. Anasura. Two of the sons of Kasyapa
Prajapati by his wife Diti became notorious fellows
called Sumbha and Nigumbha. They were born and
brought up in Patala. But as young men thay came to
the earth and began rigorous tapas taking neither food
nor drink. After ten thousand years Brahma appeared
and asked them to choose their boons. They requested
for eternity, deathlessness. But, Brahma _ refused to
grant that boon. Then they thought of another boon,
which would in effect be as goodas the first one; they
wanted death to come, but to come in amanner impossible to happen. So, they requested Brahma as
follows : “We shall not meet with death at the hands
of males among Devas, human beings as also by birds,
animals etc. In short we should be killed only by
women; we fear them not.”
Brahma granted them such a boon and they returned
to Patala. They lost their head over the boon and
appointed Sukra as their preceptor. Sukra was so
pleased at this that he made Sumbha sit on a golden
throne and crowned him King of Daityas. Following
this, lesser Kings began coming to salute the great
King and pay tributes. Great daityas like the Candamundas, Dhimralocana, Raktabija etc., became attendants of Sumbha and Nigumbha.
After having established the power of the daityas thus
Sumbha—Nisum bhas_ gradually turned their attention towards extending the. boundaries of their kingdom.
The whole earth they subjugated. Then Nigumbha
witha large army marched to Devaloka to conquer
Indra. A Devasura war started. In the fight all the
Dikpalakas were on one side and Nifumbha alone on
the other side; the latter side was slightly defeated.
Smitten by Indra’s Vajrayudha Nigumbha fainted; his
army also was broken.
As s00n as news about the defeat of his brother was
reported to him, umbha, with the remaining Danavas
hurried to Devaloka. In the battle that ensued the
Devas were routed. umbha assumed Indra-hood by
faseeand. the standard (flag) of the daityas was hoisted
on the flag-staff of Sudharma, the palace of Indra.
Sumbha captured Kamadhenu, Airavata, Uccaissravas
etc. The Nandana garden and the shades of the
NITAMBHU
Kalpaka tree were turned into resting places of the
daityas. Fragrant flowers of the Kalpa tree adorned the
hairs of daitya women. Sumbha drove away Kubera
and took over Alakapuri also from him. As Yama ran
away from the kingdom, Kalapuri also came under
Sumbha. All the Dikpalakas took refuge in forests and
caves. Thousand years rolled by thus. By then the
Devas worshipped Mahadevi, who appeared before
them. Kausiki devi, born from the body of Mahadev!
stood before the Devas. As Kausiki was dark in colour
she came to be known as Kalika also. Mahadevi,
along with Kalika started for the capital of SumbhaNigumbhas. At the capital they ascended a mountaiD—
and sat on two rocks. Mahadevi sang such a melodious
song that birds and animals lost themselves in 1ts
sweetness and stood motionless. | |
The Candamundas, who were at the time passing that
way were also attracted by the music. Having under
stood what it all meant they hurried upto Sumbhasuré
and gave him a description of the supreme beauty ©
Mahadevi and Kalika. The description kindled great
interest in Sumbha and Nigumbha about the devis 4m
they deputed their minister Sugriva to bring the ean
over to them. Having heard Sugriva’s mission Mahadevi told him as follows :— ‘We do not have @9Y —
objection to becoming the wives of your masters But,
in the matter of my marriage there is a special problem
While playing with my friends as a child I had
accidentally taken a vow. I was at that age a bit prove
about my capabilities and strength, and the vow I took
was that I would marry only someone who was stronge!
than Iam. My friends called me a ‘fool’ and ridicule
me about the vow. That only hardened my stubbor#
ness and I stand by my vow even now. Therefore:
please tell Sumbha first to defeat me in fighting.” :
When Sugriva carried this information to Sumbha, au d
Nigumbha, they felt amused that a woman challeng°
them to fight. But, they had no alternative but ve
fight. So they deputed the mighty daitya Dhamrak*?
with an army to fight Devi, and there ensued 4 fier Or .
fighting between Devi and Kalika on one side and the
big daitya army on the other side. The whole army an
finally Dhamraksa too was killed. |
Devi then retired from the battlefield to a place nearby
and blew the conch. Sumbha-Nigumbhas heard ¢
sound from it, and the next moment a messenge),
came and told them about the fate of the army 4! .
Dhimraksa. They then sent a much greater army
under Candamundas against Devi. But Kalika devou*”
ed them all. Raktabija, who. next encountered
with a great force, also became food for Kalika. The?
Sumbha-Nigumbhas entered the battlefield and they ce
were killed. Devas thus victorious regained Svarg4:
(Devi Bhagavata, 5th Skundha).
NISUMBHA II. The Mahabharata mentions anot 7
Nisumbha, a dependant of Narakasura. Sri Krsn@
killed this asura who towered upto the path of ¢ ‘
devas (devayana) from the earth. (Sabha Parv@:
Chapter 38).
NISUNDA. An asura killed by Sri Krsna.
Parva, Chapter 12). a.
NITAMBHU. A great maharsi. He too was present av
the company of the munis, who visited Bhisma 0?
bed of arrows, (Anusasana Parva, Chapter 26,Verse °/"
Cvaee

NITHA 543
NITHA. A king born in the Vrsni dynasty.
Parva, Chapter 120, Verse 9).
NITIGOTRA. A king born in the Bhrgu dynasty.
(Bhagavata, 9th Skandha). :
NIVATAKAVACA(S). A sect of Daityas.
1) Birth. Daityas were the off-springs of Kagyapaprajapati by Diti. Two sons called Hiranyaksa and Hiran-
(Vana
yakasipu and a daughter called Simhika were born to
the Prajapati of Diti. Sirmhika was married by Vipracitti
and to them were born Rahu and others who became
famous as the Sairhhikeyas. Hiranyakagipu had four
famous sons called Anuhlada, Hlada, Prahlada (the
great devotee of Visnu) and Samhlada. (Some texts
refer to them as Anuhrada, Hrada, Prahrada and Samhrada). Hlada’s son was called Hrada, Sarhhlada’s sons
were called Ayusman, Sibi and Baskala, and Prahlada’s
son was called Virocana. Mahabali was Virocana’s son
and Bana was the eldest of the hundred sons of Mahabali.
Four crores of asuras called Nivatakavacas were born
in the family of Prahlada. The army of the Asuras,
which routed the Devas many a time, was formed by
the Nivatakavacas and Kalakeyas. (Agni Purana,
Chapter 19).
2) Fight against Ravana. After securing boons from
Brahma Nivatakavacas lived in the city of Manimati and
they were a terror to‘the world. Ravana longed once to
defeat them and so besieged’ their city with his army.
The two sides fought fiercely for hundreds of years. At
last Brahma intervened and conciliated them, From
that day onwards the Nivatakavacas became friends of
Ravana. (Uttara Ramayana).
3) Annihilation. The Nivatakavacas i company a
the Kalakeyas attacked Devaloka. | Indra, who Fe
not withstand the attack, sent his charioteer att aii
Arjuna aad brought him down. Most of he nets
kavacas and Kalakeyas were killed in the hg y
Arjuna. (See under Kalakeya).
NIVATAKAVACAYUDDHAPARVA. A sub pene :
Vana Parva of Mahabharata comprising of Cor
NIVIT. A mantra or hymn. ‘t
ae after the offerings in a yaga.
nuvaka 14, Sukta 86).
NIVITA. Brahmin’s ads upper ela ie aes ee
thread on the left shoulder and un ni shoulder and
is called Upavita; the same on the nig d the same
under the left hand is called pr pares tee Nivita.
worn as a garland around the nec 1 a (Bhagavata,
NIVRTI. A’ king of the Yayati dynasty.
9th Skandha).
‘Wktha and Nivit are rese “(Reveda, Mandala 1.
NIYATAYU. Son of Srutayu. He was se By a
in the great war. (Drona Parva, Chey a 9 sons called
NIVATT, A daughter called Laksm1 a ; Bhreu of his
Dhata and Vidhata were born to mahar PN Ayati and
wife Khyati. Dhata and Vidhata Ras ed Prana was
Niyati, daughters of Meru. A So? ne tathet of Mrkorn to Vidhata, and this Prana ee Visnu Purana,
andu and erandfather of Markandeya. \"'*
Part 1, Chapter 10).
Niyati after her death becan
hues to worship Brahma in his
Chapter ] 1, Versé 43 ). ,
NIYOGA. During the Vedic perio
and she contiame a mide Gabha Parva,
court.
d there prevailed a
NRGA
system or custom which permitted either the husband or
the wife who had no child by his wife or her husband
to procreate a child in another woman or beget children by another man. That custom,'called Niyoga fell
into disuse after the Vedic period. (Agni Purana,
Chapter 256).
NODHAS. A muni who lived in the Revedic period. He
achieved all his desires by praising the Devas. ‘Rgveda)
NRCAKSUS.. A king of the Yayati dynasty. (Bhagavata, 9th Skandha).
NRGA. A king born in the dynasty of Vaivasvata Manu.
1) Genealogy. Descended from Visnu thus: Brahma—
Marici — Kasyapa — Vivasvan — Vaivasvata Manu—
Mahabahu—Prasandhi—Ksupa—Nrga.
Nrga was the younger brother of Iksvaku. From Nrga
was born Sumati, from him the king called Jyotis, from
Jyotis Vasu and from Vasu Pratika.
2) Nrga became chameleon. Nrga was an_ extremely
righteous and generous King. Once, at Puskara he
gifted away thousands of cows to brahmins. There was
a brahmin called Parvata living near Puskara. He too
was given a cow and it was after that the brahmin
named Anarata came. By then there remained no cow
to be gifted. Anarata came after Parvata had gone
into the forest after leaving the cow at the pond (Puskara). Nrga had forgotten the fact that the cow had
already been gifted away to Parvata and finding it there
owner-less he gave it to Andrata, who went away with
the cow very much pleased. The King and his ministers also returned to the palace. |
A very short time afterwards Parvata returned to the
pond and felt very sorry to miss his cow. He searched
for it here and there and at last found it at Anarata’s
house. Quarrel ensued between the two, Parvata
alleging that Anarata had stolen his cow while the
latter contended that it had been given to him by the
King. Now, it was decided that the question should
be submitted for arbitration to the King, and the
contending parties went to the capital to see the King.
At the palace they asked the gate-keepers to tell the
King about their arrival, But, they did not tell the
King, nor did he come.
Angered at this the brahmins cursed that Nrga be
converted into a chameleon and live as such for a
thousand years. The King heard about the curse and
ran up tothe brahmins and requested for absolution
from it. The brahmins then said that after one thousand years Mahavisnu would incarnate as Sri Krsna
and that at his touch Nrga, the chameleon would
resume his former form as. King, According to this
curse Nrga was born as a chameleon in a _ neglected
well at Dvaraka. One day Samba and others who
happened to go near the well tried their best to take
the chameleon out of it, to no purpose. At last Krsna
with his attendants came and took it out of the wel.
At Krsna’s touch it resumed its form as King Nrga,
and related the story of his curse to the onlookers,
who stood there wondering
3) Other information.
(i) After his death Nrga lived in Yama’s court worshipping him.. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 8, Verse 8).
. (ii) Nrga once conducted a yajfia on the banks of the
river Payosni in Varahatirtha at which Indra drank
soma so much as to get intoxicated, and the brahmins

NRSAD
danced with pleasure at the very liberal gifts made to
them. (Vana Parva, Chapter 8, Verse 5).
(iii) Nrga was a King very dear to Indians. (Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 9; Verse 7).
(iv) Krsna granted salvation to Nrga who changed,
at his touch, from chameleon to his former form as
King Nrga. (Anugasana Parva, Chapter 70, Verse 29).
(v) He did not eat flesh. (Anusasana Parva. Chapter
NRSAD. A maharsi, who was the father of sage Kanva.
(Rgeveda, Mandala 10).
NRSART. ARsi, who lived in the Rgvedic period.
His son was deaf. (Rgveda, Mandala 1, Anuvaka 17).
NYAGRODHA. A son of Ugrasena. When Krsna killed
Kamsa Nyagrodha fought with Krsna and others and
was killed by the blow of Balabhadra’s shield. (Bhagavata).
NYAGRODHATIRTHA. A holy place on the banks
_of the ancient river Drsadvati in North India, (Vana
Parva, Chapter 90, Verse 11}.
O
O. This sound signifies Brahma. (Agni Purana; Chapter
ODRA (M). An ancient province of India, Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter 51, Verse 23 says that
the King of this province had come to Dharmaputra
with presents. | i
OGHARATHA. Son of the King named Oghavan.
(M.B. Anugasana Parva, Chapter 2, Verse 38).
OGHAVAN I. Grandson of King Nrga. He had a son
named Ogharatha and a daughter named Oghavati.
(M.B Anuégasana Parva, Chapter 2).
OGHAVAN II. A warrior on the side of the Kauravas.
(M.B. Karna Parva, Chapter 5, Verse 42).
OGHAVATII. There are seven Sarasvatirivers in the
world. These are Suprabha, Kaficanaksi, Visala,
Manorama, Sarasvati, Oghavati and Surenu. In the
Mahabharata, Salya Parva, Chapter 38 we find that
Oghavati was invoked and brought tc Kuruksetra. It
was on the bank of this Oghavati that Bhisma fell and
lay on the Sarafayya. (Bed of arrows). (M.B. Santi
Parva, Chapter 50, Verse 5).
OGHAVATI II. Daughter of the King named Oghavan.
Sudargana, the son of Agni married her. (M_.B.
AnuSsasana Parva, Chapter 2).
OM. This sound is a combination of the three letters —
A, U and M. The A—sound signifies Visnu, the U—
sound signifies Siva and the M--sound signifies
Brahma.
Akaro Visnuruddista
Ukarastu Mahesvarah |
Makarastu smrto Brahma
Pranavastu trayatmakah| |
(Vayu Purana).
The sound “Om”? is called ‘‘Pranava” or “Brahman.”
All mantras begin with the sound ‘Om’. Because of its
sacredness, Sudras and other low-caste people are not
allowed to utter it or to hear it. They may pronounce
it only as “Aum.” This sound includes all that has
happened and all that is to happen. (Mandikyopanisad) . - ;
OMPATU. (Malayalam word for nine).
Nine grahas (nine planets). Sun, _Moon, Mars, Budha
(Mercury), Guru (Jupiter), Sukra (Venus), Sani
(Saturn) , Rahu and Ketu.
PADMARAGA
Nine Dosa. Gulika, Visti, Gandantam, Visa, Usna,
ekargalam, Sarpasiras, latam and Vaidhrtam.
Nine Karmasaksin(s). Surya, Candra, Yama,
Akaéa, Vayu, Agni, Jala and Bhimi.
Nine Rivers. Sarasvati, Vaitarani, Apaga, Mandakini,
' Madhusrava, Amlu, Kausiki, Drsadvati and Hiranvati.
Nine Diti (s). Duti, Dasi, Sakhi, Ceti, Dhatrey!,
Prativesini, Lingini, Silpini and Svastri.
Nine treasures (nidhis). Mahapadma, Padma, Sankha,
Makara, Kacchapa, Mukunda, Kunda, Nila and
Kharva.
Nine Prajapatis. Bhrgu, Marici, Atri, Daksa, Kardama,
Pulaha, Pulastya, Angiras and Kratu.
Nine Yogins. Kavi, Hari, Antariksa. Prabuddha,
Pippalayana, Avihotra, Dramida, Camasa and Karabhajana. -
Nine Varsa(s). (Sub continents). Bharatavarsa, Kimpurusavarsa. Harivarsa, llavrtavarsa, Ramyakavars4,
Kala,
Hiranmayavarsa, Kuruvarsa, Bhadragvavarsa 4”
Ketumalavarsa.
Nine kinds of Rajas. Sarvabhauma, Adhiraja. Nare?
dra, Parsnika, Pattadhrk, Mandalegvara, Bhattabhak;
Praharaka and Srotragrahi. )
Nine kinds of Angels. Bhaktijvalaka, Jmanadhiky?
Bhadrasana, Nathakrtya, Tattvaka, Balavad, Sam
dhanamukhya and Mukhyadevadita. ©
P
PA. A garden. (Agni Purana, Chapter 348}. . ‘
PADAPATHA. An ancient system of studying the Vedas.
(See under Ghanapatha).
PADARTHA. See under Paficabhita.
PADATI. One of the eight sons of Janamejaya, 4 Kn S
of Kuruvamsa. The others are Dhrtarastra, Pandu,
Balhika, Nisadha, Jambiinada, Kundodara and Vasaltl-
(The Pandu and Dhrtarastra mentioned here are oe
the fathers of Kauravapandavas.).—
‘PADMA I._A serpent born to sage Kagyapa of his wile
Kadri. (Sloka 10, Chapter 35, Adi Parva). ¢
PADMA II. A King. This King shines in the court ©
Yama. (Sloka 39, Chapter 10, Sabha Parva). 45
PADMA III. Asoldier of Subrahmanya. (Chapter
Salya Parva).
PADMA IV. _A nidhi (treasure). This nidhi belong®
Kubera. (Sloka 39, Chapter 10, Sabha Parva’?
Saikhanidhi, Padmanidhi and a Puspakavimana W°\
presented to Kubera by Brahma. (Uttara Ramaya}4 .
PADMAKARA. A Character in the story in 51%?
Purana describing the greatness of a Sivayogin. (Se
Rsabha). —
PADMAKETANA. One of the children of Garud*
(Chapter 101, Udyoga Parva). f
PADMAKUTA. ‘The palace where Suprabha wile ©
Sri Krsna used to reside. (Daksinatya Patha, Chapte*
38, Sabha Parva). “
PADMANABHA I. One of the hundred sons of Dbr!*
rastra. (See under Kauravas).
PADMANABHA II. A serpent. This serpent resides OY
the shores of the river Gomiati which flows throu’
Naimisaranya. This serpent once went to Bhisma 2”.
talked to him about Dharma. (Chapter 355, San!
Parva).
PADMAPURANA. One of the eighteen Puranas. (5°
under Puranas). ;
PADMARAGA, See under Navaratna,

PADMASARAS
PADMASARAS. A lotus pond of Uttara Bharata. The
Pandavas on their way from Khandavaprastha to
Girivraja met Sri Krsna at this place and talked with
him for a long time. (Chapter 20, Sabha Parva).
PADMASAUGANDHIKA. A lotus pond situated near
Cedidega. During the period of the Mahabharata a
company of merchants were attacked-by wild elephants
at this place. This is very nicely described in Chapter
66 of Vana Parva of Mahabharata.
PADMASEKHARA. A Gandharva King. Padmavati
of whom many stories are told in Kathasaritsagara was
the daughter of Padmagekhara. Padmavatilambaka of
the said book is entirely devoted to stories about
Padmavati.
PADMAVATII. A river which 1s
Mahdalaksmi. (See under Ganga ).
PADMAVATI II. Wife of Emperor
under Udayana).
PADMAVATI III.
Sahasramukharavana.
ravana ).
PADMAVATIIV. A female follower of Subrahmanya.
(Chapter 46, Salya Parva). |
PADMAVATI V. Daughter of Satyaketu, King of
Vidarbha. Ugrasena married her. After marriage she
went and stayed once in her father’s house for a nee
period. During that time through illegal intimacy wit
a messenger from Kubera named Gobhila she became
regnant. She start
inside a voice said “I am being born _ to wae VeERgeance on Mahavisnu for killing Kalanem!. le e€ ei
born thus was Karisa. (Srstikhanda, Padma Purana).
PADMAVATI VI. Wife ofa Waisya named Pranidi.
ap: : ‘ne village for trade.
Once Pranidhi went to a Heigu Pow RS ae bathing
Padmavati and her companions W
in a river nearby when 4 Sidra passed ae ae
Attracted by her dazzling beauty He tere was
talking to her. The Ssdra named Dharma Litt af
greatly enamoured of her and Ue Pray: sea]
Padmavati, noticing that, Just to make fun er
. where the rivers
: e point s
“Tf you abandon your life at ne P cae Padmavati.”’
193 Yamuna meet you %¢ ;
Mato He hesitation, thinking ae RES ae
was true. he went and en ed his life a ¢ p nidhi and
ed. Immediately he became 4 replica 0 aki ‘ also came
stood before Padmavati. The real ate eae the real
there then. Padmavati was 1m 4 fix oF ; them then and
husband. Mahavisnu appeared ae s her husbands
asked Padmivati to accept both of nee 5 omneli
Padmavati pleaded it was forbidden 10
one
community to accept more Behe
the incarnation of
Udayana. (See
of Candragupta son of
Wile
under Sahasramukha-
(See
ios k all the three 2 ChapMahaviens tok ll He dina Porta, Ch
ter 4). pitation of ancient India.
PAHLAVA. A place of human ha (Sloka 68,
e.
This is situated in ‘a western a
Chapter 9, Bhisma Parva). _ ted a grand
PAIJAVANA. A S$idra. This sadra conduc fees to
ee ve as
Yajfia similar to Aindragnay4 het 6 Santi Parva).
priests a lakh of gold vessels. (ne? h five disciples of
PAILA. A disciple of Vyasa It 45 "14° Suka an
Vyasa named Sumantu, seablicity to the original
Vaigampayana who gave P arampara ‘
Mahabharata. (See under GuruP
ed to destroy the foetus when from
along with him toPAKHANDA
He was the son of a person named Vasu and attended
the Rajasiiya of Yudhisthira. (Sloka 35, Chapter 33,
Sabha Parva). Paila was also one among those who
visited Bhisma while he was lying on his bed of arrows.
(Sloka 6, Chapter 17, Santi Parva).
PAILAGARGA. An ancient sage. Amba, daughter of the
King of Kasi, once practised austerities in the asrama
of this sage. (See under Amba).
PAISACA. A kind of marriage. (See under Vivaha) .
PAITHAKA. An asura. This asura was killed by Sri
Krsna. (Chapter 38, Sabha Parva).
PAKA. A mighty asura. Once this asura gathered a big
army and went to fight against Indra. A grim battle
which lasted for several days took place in which the
asura army was destroyed and Paka killed. Indra got
thenceforth the name Pakagasana. (Chapter 70, Vayu
Purana) .
PAKAL. Malayalam word meaning Day. A story about
the origin of day, night, dawn and dusk is contained in
Visnu Purana. At the time of the great Deluge everything from gods down to the rocks lay submerged in
Parabrahman (Supreme Being). Brahma sat in meditation to initiate what he termed as Jagatsrsti, the
four species of living beings like the devas, asuras, pitrs
and men. When the meditation proceeded, the Tamoguna
in Brahma became prominent and so first and foremost
of all, the asuras were born from his waist. Then
Brahma discarded his Tamoguna and the manifestation
of the discarded Tamoguna became Night. Brahma sat
again in meditation and from his face sprang out the
devas, who were embodiments of sattvaguna. Brahma
discarded. the sattvaguna and it then became Day. That 1s
why asuras are powerful at night and devas by day.
Then another manifestation with sattvaguna predominating sprang out from Brahma and it was called Pitrs.
Brahma discarded that also and it became Dusk.
Brahma sat again in meditation and then were born
men who were a manifestation of Rajoguna. Brahma
discarded that also and it then became Dawn. That is
why ‘men are strong at dawn and the pitrs strong at
dusk. It is because of these that it is said that day,
night, dawn and dusk are bodies of Brahma. All the
above four are an asylum of the three gunas.
Night is called Usa and day, Vyusti. Sandhya (dusk)
is the time between Usa and Vyusti. When the fierce
and terrible Sandhya commences, a_ set of ferocious
demons called Mandehas desire to eat the Sun. A fight
ensues then between the Sun and the demons and by a
curse of Prajapati the demons die daily though their
bodies never perish. At that time the best of Brahmins
with the sound of ‘OM? vibrating recite the gayatri and
throw water upwards. That water transforms itself into
Vajrayudha and burns to death the wicked demons.
The first oblation to the sacrificial fire is performed
reciting the mantra which begins with “Siryojyotih’’.
‘OM? is but Bhagavan Visnu, lord of the Vedas with
the lustre of Rk, Yajus and Sama. The very utterance of
the word ‘OM’ therefore, destroys the demons
Mandehas. (Chapter 8, Ama 2, Chapter 5, Améa 1,
Visnu Purana).
PAKHANDA. An ancient place of habitation in Daksina
Bharata. Sahadeva one of the Pandavas sent his messengers and subdued the country. (Sloka 70, Chapter 31
Sabha Parva).

PAKKANAR
PAKKANAR. Vararuci, the celebrated astronomer, got
ofa Candali wife twelve sons. They were called
‘‘Paracci petta pantirkulam (‘The twelve sons born of
a Candali).
They were
1, Agnihotri. 2. Rajakan 3. Uliyantr Taccan. 4. Vallon
5, Vayillakkunnilappan. 6. Karakkalmata. 7. Vatutala
Nayar. 8. Uppukuttan. 9. Pananar. 10. Narayanabhrantan 11. Akavar Cattan 12. Pakkanar.
Pakkanar’s wife was a very chaste woman devoted to
her husband. There are two stories demonstrating the
devotion she showed to her husband.
(i) It was usual for all the sons of Vararuci excepting
Vayillakkunnilappan to assemble at the house of Agnihotri for the Sraddha of their father annually once.
Once after the Sraddha, all of them sat together for
their meals and the antarjanam (wife) of Agnihotri
refused to serve an assembly consisting of Pakkanar, a
Candala. When Agnihotri compelled her to do it she
came to the place hiding her face with an umbrella.
Pakkanar enquired about the purpose of the umbrella
and Agnihotri replied that it was the duty of chaste
and devoted wives to hide their faces from other men.
Then Pakkanar argued that still the brahmin wives who
hid their faces were lacking in devotion and chastity
and the Candala women were the only class of women
who were chaste and devoted to their husbands. Everybody present there joined sides with Agnihotri and
opposed the argument of Pakkanar. To demonstrate
the devotion of Candali wives Pakkanar took Agnihotri
to his house. On reaching there Pakkanar called his
wife and asked ‘“‘“How much paddy do you have here?’’
‘‘Five measures’’, she replied. ‘‘Pound half of it and
bring it to me’’, Pakkanar instructed. The dutiful wife
pounded the paddy, cooked the rice and brought it to
Pakkanar. Pakkanar “asked her to throw the rice into
the drain. She did it without the least hesitation. Pakka
nar then asked his wife #o pound the remaining paddy
and bring the rice cooked as before.She did so and when
she brought it before Pakkanar he asked her to throw
that also away. into the drain. She instantly obeyed.
That day both of them went without meals. They were
sO poor.
The next day Pakkanar along with Agnihotri went to
the illam (house) of Agnihotri. Pakkanar then asked
Agnihotri to make his wife do exactly like what
Pakkanar’s wife was made to do. Agnihotri immediately called his wife and asked her to take two and a_ half
measures of paddy, pound it, cook it and bring it to
him. ‘“There is rice here ready in stock and so why
should we pound paddy now?” Agnihotri’s wife
questioned. But Agnihotri insisted and so surrendering to the compulsion she did as she was instructed.
When she brought the rice before him cooked, Agnihotri
asked her to throw it away into the drain. She hesitated
first but when Agnihotri insisted she did so very
reluctantly. Then Agnihotri asked her to take another
two and a half measures of paddy, pound it and bring
the cooked rice once again. The antarjanam (wife)
flew into fury and showered on her husband a heap of
abuses. She went and hid inside and despite repeated
requests from Agnihotri she never showed her face out
again. Agnihotri admitted — defeat and accepted
Pakkanar’s view that a Candali woman was more chaste
than a brahmin woman.
PALLANTU
(2) Once Agnihotri came to the hut of Pakkanar.
Pakkanar called his wife to bring a ‘palaka’ (a wooden
plank. used for sitting) for Agnihotri to siton. She was
at that time drawing water'from a well and the bucket
was midway in the well with water. The instant she
heard her husband call her she left the grip on the rope
and rushed to the side of her husband. She did what
‘was asked of her to do and then returned to the well.
Pakkanar followed her taking Agnihotri along with
him. When they reached the well Agnihotri was dumbfounded. The bucket with water was staying in mid-air
in the well exactly at the position at which Pakkanar’s
wife had left it. The power of the chastity of the
woman. (See under. Vararuci).
PAKSA. See under Kalamana.
PAKSALIKA. A female follower of Subrahmanya.
PAKSIVAMSA. The Puranic version of the origin of
birds is given below:
Descending in order from Visnu came Brahma—Maric1
—Kaégyapaprajapati. The latter got of his wife Tamra
(daughter of Daksa) five daughters named Kraufici,
Bhasi, Syeni, Dhrtarastri and Suki. From Kraufici were
born the Ulikas, Bhasi gave birth to Bhasas, Syeni to
vultures and Dhrtarastri to swans and geese. From
these originated the entire bird family of the world.
(Chapter 4, Aranya Kanda, Valmiki Ramayana) .
PAKTHA. A King of Vedic times who was a protege
of the Agvins. Indra was kind to this King. In the
Daéarajfia battle Paktha fought against Sudas on the
side of Trasadasyu. (Mandala 7, Rgveda).
PALA. A measure of ancient times. (See under Tras@-
renu ).
esa” A serpent born of the race of Vasuki. This
serpent committed suicide at the Sarpasatra of Janamejaya. (Sloka 51, Chapter 57, Adi Parva).
PALAKA. Ason born to the King Candamahasena of
his wife Angaravati. Angaravati got two sons. The other
son was named Gopdlaka. (Kathamukhalambaka,
Kathasaritsagara ). :
PALAKAVYA. The author of the famous book ‘Hasty4yurvedasamhita’. This book . contains 160 chapters
dealing with Maharogasthana (great diseases) , Ksudrarogasthana (minor diseases) , Salyasthana (extraction ©
extraneous matter from the body) and Uttarasthana
(diseases of the head). Palakavya taught this Ayurvedasamhita to Ramapada, King of Angadega. (Agm}
Purana). .
PALALA. One of the seven mothers of Subrahmany2The other six are: Kaki, Halima, Brahmika, Malin},
Arya and Mitra. (Sloka 10, Chapter 228, Vana Parva).
PALASAVANA. A sacred forest. Once the sage Jamadagni performed a sacrifice in this forest. On that occa
sion all the rivers in the world were present there
carrying their water. The sage at this Yaga gave wine to
all the other sages to their heart’s content. (Sloka 16,
Chapter 94, Vana Parva).
PALI. A corrupt form of Sanskrit.
PALITA. A rat, a character in ‘Bidalopakhyana’. This
rat held a conversation with Lomafa, a cat. (See under
Bidalopakhyana).
PALITA. A female. follower of Subrahmanya. (Sloka 3;
Chapter 46, Salya Parva).
ee 1. The name of the devotional songs sung by
] evotional poet, Visnucittar,

PAMKTI 547 PANCACUDA
PAMKTI. A horse which draws the chariot of Surya. According to Nydya Vaisesikasttras there are seven
There are seven horses to draw the chariot. The others
are Gayatri, -Brhati, Usnik, Jagati, Tristubh and
Anustubh. (Chapter 8, Améa 2, Visnu Purana).
PAMPA. A pond near Rsyamikacala. Sugriva used to
stay near this pond. (Chapter 279, Vana Parva).
PAMSU. An ancient country of Bharata. Vasudana,
king of this country helped the Pandavas in the great
battle with twentysix elephants and two thousand horses
(Sloka 27, Chapter 52, Sabha Parva).
PANASA. A soldier of the army of monkeys of Sri
Rama. This soldier was the commander-in-chief of an
army of fiftyone crores of monkeys who fought against
Ravana. His chief object of attack was the army of a
demon named Patuga. (Chapter 283, Vana Parva).
PANCABHUTA. Prthvi: (earth), Ap (water), Tejas
(fire), Vayu (air) and Akasa ( ether) are the Paficabhiitas (five elements). The whole visible world is composed of one or more of these five elements. This is
called the Paficabhautikasiddhanta (doctrine of five elements). Besides these five dravyas (elementary substance), people in Bharata have reckoned Time, space,
soul and mind also as Padarthas or categories. Dravya,
one of the seven categories according to Nyaya Vaisesikasutras, has nine svabhavas (inherent properties) . The
seven Padarthas.of Vaisesika are Dravya, Guna, Karman
Samanya, Visesa, Samavaya and Abhava.* i,
The word ‘Padartha’ has got a very wide meaning. °°
word ‘matter’ in English cannot indicate the full signi
ficance of the word Padartha. Kanada in his pane
siitras has given the name ‘Artha’ combining 1n a i
three svabhavas, Dravya, Guna and Karman. He
above seven padarthas Pragastapada, the enn ee
ian, has included only the first six In his DO
: ; igesikas of a later
Padarthadharma Sarhgraha’. The Vatenne’ © wumber
eriod included ‘abhava’ also an sca, te a
of arthas 7 a Gautama, the Sl earth oe
Vatsyayana, the Nyayabhasyakara, and all their
accepted the number of arthas as seven. Mat. oataE:
All that can be perceived by the ue Fangs
ed in the seven Padarthas according enact an the
tems of Nyaya and Vaisesiia. Cee TS with ‘abhava’
other six are bhavas. Kanada has oe tapada has not
but has not treated it asa category. Prapastap
ith sixmee autama deals w!
mentioned about‘abhava’ at all. G ke into account only
t srthas. The Mimarhsakas '@ ly. two
fb epee and the Sankhyas a agains rePadarthas viz., Prakrti and Furuse. they are Cit and
ckon ‘only two Padarthas ae tS ee advaitins add 6°
Lae Anatman). 3! darthas
ae es len and make the number oo ae
Padarthas and they comprise nine kinds of Dravyas which
are the Paficabhitas (five elements), Kala (time), Dik
(space), Atma (soul), and Manas (mind). They are
described below:
1) Prithvi. (earth). The characteristic of this padartha
is smell. Prthvi is of two kinds, Nitya (eternal) and
Anitya (perishable). Nitya is in the form of atom
(paraménu) and anitya inthe form of Karya. They
are classified into body, sense organs and objects.
2) Jala (water). Jala has a cold touch. It is of two
kinds Nitya and Anitya. Nitya isin the form of paramanu
(atom); Anitya in the form of Karya.
3) Agni (fire). It generates heat. It is of two kinds,
Nitya and Anitya. Nitya is in the form of paramanu
and Anitya, in the form of Karya. There are four kinds
of Agnis : Fire of the earth, fire of the sky, fire of the
stomach (digestive power) and the fire commonly used. |
4) Vayu (air). Itis without form but with the sense
of touch. It is also of two kinds. Nitya in the form of
param4nu and Anitya in the form of Karya.
5) Akasa (ether). This is the carrier of sound. It is
single and eternal.
6) Kala (time). Itis general cause for al] actions embracing the elements. It is also single and eternal.
7) Dik. Places like north, south, east and west which
are eternal.
8) Atma (soul). It is related to knowledge and is of
two kinds, Jivatma and Paramatma.
9) Manas (mind). It is the sense-organ to enjoy
pleasures. It is in the form of paramanu and eternal.
To know the views of Manu on the origin of the Paficabhitas see under Srsti.
PANCABRAHMASANA. This is a divine cot with
Brahma, Visnu, Rudra and I[§vara as its four legs and
Sadagiva as the couch. Devi rests on this cot always.
(7th Skandha, Devi Bhagavata).
PANCACUDA. A nymph. Once Suka, son of Vyasa by
his yogic powers entered the Akasa. Then a host of
celestial maidens led by Paficaciida stood watching him
in admiration. (See under Suka)
Bhisma once told Dharmaputra that women were fickleminded and the cause of evils. To explain his statement
he pointed out to the conversation between Narada
and Paficacuda. Narada once conducted a world tour
during the course of which he met Paficacida and asked
her the characteristics of women. She replied thus :
‘Even beautiful, venerable and noble ladies would stoop
to folly. It is not the habit of women to leave away
charming men of wealth if they get them conveniently.
Any woman can be tamed if you please her in the
proper way. If women remain faithful to their husbands
three. ; of Philosophy founded by Kanada.
. = é or system
ncipal darsanas aa
. 1S ik . One of the Six pr ed ; a categ
poe Anything which can be ee substratum of pr
Dravya. An elementary re tall substances.
Guna A characteristic or prope
Karman. Motion, a¢
Sdmdnya. Genera\ che
Wilson. A peculiar attribute,,
Samavaya. Intimate Mak
9. Abhdva. Nullity of a Pea philosophy.
Sankhyas followers ofthe Sank" ee philosophy: nilosophy.
Advaitins followers of the Adve ai ga system of p
Mimdrsakas followers of the Mime }
lea! The supreme pal ensbrined in the bo@yivatma The individu
Karya Evolute.
co
the exis
nsepara
ow
ple inherence OF
cost HOT he G9 xe)
operties.
tion. ; feach of the nine dravyas. -
1 r . Ls + } ctor 0 eac * * y
haracteristic eternal distinguisbing een fone thing in ANOthES.

PANCADEVIS
it is because they are afraid of scandal. They will enjoy
men without looking into their age or figure. The desire
for men in women can be compared to that of Antaka
(god of Death) for the lives of men. This is the secret
of womanhood.”’ (Chapter 38, Anusasana Parva).
PANCADEVIS. Durga, Radha, Laksmi, Sarasvati and
Savitri are the Paficadevis. They are different forms’ of
nature. (See under Devi and Prakrti).
PANCADHANUS. A King of the race of Piru. He was
the son of Srfijaya and the father of Somadatta. (Agni
Purana, Chapter 278).
PANCAGANA. An ancient kingdom of Uttara Bharata.
During the time of the Pandavas this country was
prospering and Arjuna once conquered the ruler of
this country. (Sloka 12, Chapter 27, Sabha Parva).
PANCAGANGA. A sacred place of Uttara Bharata.
The god of Death once sat at this place and practised
penance. From then onwards the place was considered
holy. (Sloka 23, Chapter 54, Drona Parva).
PANCAGNI. Rohini, a daughter and Soma, a son, were
born to Nisa the third wife of Manu, an Agni. Besides
these they got five sons in the form of Agni (fire) and
these five are called Paficagnis. They are Vaisvanara,
Visvapati, Sannihita, Kapila and Agrani.
PANCAJA I. (PANCAJANA). A mighty asura. This
asura lived inside a conch. Sri Krsna killed this asura.
Sri Krsna and Balabhadrarama were having their
education in the agrama of the sage Sandipani. On the
eve of their completing their education an asura
named Pajicaja carried away the son of the sage while
the child was bathing in the Prabhasatirtha and kept
him inside a conch where the asura lived. The sage,
greatly griefstricken asked his disciples to get him back
his son as his Gurudaksina (fees for the preceptor).
Accordingly Sri Krsna and Balarama went to the
banks of the river and prayed to Varuna. Varuna
appeared before them and then they told him about
the mishap. With the help of Varuna they killed the
asura Paficaja and. got back the son of their guru. The
conch in which the asura lived was taken by Krsna.
Because the conch belonged to Paficaja the conch got
the name Paficajanya. (10th Skandha, Bhagavata).
PANCAJATII. Sagara of the solar race got a son named
Asamafijasa of his wife Kesini. He became famous as
Paficaja. He was the father of AmsSuman and grandfather of Dilipa. (Chapter 15, Harivarhéga).
PANCAJANA. A Prajapati. He gave his daughter
Paficajani (Asikni) in marriage to the great sage and
law-giver Daksa. (6th Skandha, Bhagavata).
PANC AJANAS. Brahmins, Ksatriyas, Vaigyas and
6=dras are the four castes. Nisadas form the fifth caste.
All these five are collectively called Paficajanas. (Sakta
g9, Anuvaka 14, Mandala 1, Rgeveda).
SCATANI. A beautiful daughter of Viévaripa. King
ee of the lunar race married this girl and they
rte HOG named Sumati, Rastrabhrt, Sudarsana,
yawn and Dhimraketu. (5th Skandha, Bhagavata).
PANCAJANYA I. The conch of Sri Krsna. (See under
Paticaja)- fi the mountain of
sas NYA II. A orest near ountain 0!
Se , (Daksinatya Patha; Chapter 38, Sabha
Parva).
PANCALI
PANCAJANYA III. An agni (fire). It was so called
because it was born of the parts of five sages. It was
called Tapa also. (Chapter 220, Vana Parva).
PANGAKA. One of the two soldiers presented to
Subrahmanya by Indra for the battle between the
devas and asuras. The other was named Utkrosa.
(Sloka 35, Chapter 45, Salya Parva).
PANCAKARNAVATSYAYANA. A_ Vedic preceptor..
Because Paficakarna was born in the family of Vatsya
he got the name Vatsyayana. .
In the language of Yogic treatises the seven life-winds
in the human head are called the ‘Saptasiiryas’ (seven
suns). Paficakarnavatsyayana had a clear knowledge
of these Saptasiiryas and has given a vivid description ©
them. (Taittiriya Aranyaka).
PANCAKARPATA. An ancient country of western
Bharata. Nakula, one of the Pandavas, conquered this
country. (Chapter 32, Sabha Parva).
PANCAKSARAMAHATMYA. Namaéséivaya composed
of five letters (Na—mah—si— va— ya) is called the
mantra of Paficaksara. There is a story in Siva Purana
about the powers one can acquire by uttering this
mantra. (See under Kalavati).
PANGCALA I. An ancient village of Bharata.
9, Bhisma Parva).
PANCALA II. A sage. He worshipped God according
to the doctrines laid down by Vamadeva and by the
(Chapter
blessing of God attained the Kramavibhaga in the
Vedas. (Sloka 102, Chapter 342, Santi Parva).
PANCALAIII. An ancient country of Bharata.
Draupadi, wife of the Pandavas, was the daughter °
Drupada, King of Pajicala. (See under Drupada) .
PANCALI. Draupadi, wife of the Pandavas.
i). Previous births. Paficali had many previous births.
During all these births many gods blessed her saying
that she would have five husbands when she was borp
as the daughter of Drupada. Stories about her previous
births lying scattered in the Puranas are given below: —
1) Mayasita. When Rama and Laksmana_ were A
exile in the forest with Sita, Agni came to Rama oe
and told him in private thus: “Oh Rama, you ee
incarnated on earth to kill Ravana. The time for ll
is drawing nigh and ere long Ravana would carry, awa)
Sita. It is not proper that Sita, the incarnation 2
Laksmi, should be touched by Ravana. Therefore
shall keep Sita safe with me and I am giving yoU
phantom Sita to be with you in her stead.”’ Sri Rama
took the Mayasita from Agni without even Laksmap@
knowing it and handed over the original Sita to the
custody of Agni.
While thus Sri Rama, Laksmana and Mayasita were
living together in their hermitage a golden deer W2:
seen one day in the precincts of their agrama. Sita
was enamoured of the beautiful deer and wanted it. 5°
Rama keeping Laksmana to watch over Sita went an
search of the deer. Sri Rama tried his best to captur®
the deer alive. But all his efforts failed and by that
time he had come far from the Aasrama following the
deer. So he discharged an arrow and killed it. whe
falling dead the deer raised a cry imitating that e
Rama’s and called Laksmana for help. The deer was
none other than Marica, the unclé of Ravana.
hearing the call for help Laksmana rushed to the spot
from where the sound came and Sita was left alone

PANCALI
for some time. Ravana came to the agrama at that
time and took the Mayasita away to Lanka.
Rama and Laksmana went to Lanka with an army of
monkeys and after killing Ravana took back Sita to
Ayodhya. Then Rama in deference to public opinion
put Sita into the fire to test her purity. At that time
god Agni taking back Mayasita gave the real Sita to
Rama, unscathed by the fire. Then, when Mayasita
was thus abandoned by Rama she bowed down before
Sri Rama and Agni and asked them thus “What am I
to do now ? Where should I go ?” They advised her
to go to Puskara and do penance there and _ blessed
her saying that at the successful end of her penance
she would become Svargalaksmi. Paramasiva was
pleased by her penance and appearing before her
asked her what boon she wanted. Mayasita who had
become Svargalaksmi by then requested Siva. to give
her a husband. She repeated the request ‘Patim dehi’
(Give me a husband) five times and Siva said that she
would have five husbands in her next life as the daughter of the King of Paficala with the name Krsna.
(9th Skandha, Devi Bhagavata).
Once there was an aged sage
ii) Naldyani ( Indrasena).
part en lias Indrasena was the
named Maudgalya. Nalayani a 2
wife of Maudgalya. Even though the wife was young
and the husband old, Nalayani was very chaste. The
sage became very old, grey-haired and rugous, arco
like with a foul smell emanating from his body. e
was always in an angry mood, Still Nalayam stuck to
1 h 1 I WI As time
him as aC aste loving and dutiful ife. :
C leper. One day while
pass d on Maudgalya became a ze i : to
the sage was eating, a finger 0
the rice. With great calmness 4
removed the finger from the rice and ate ata
Greatly pleased at this act of hers the sage a8 sane:
what boon she wanted an_ she replied she esir eae
have an amorous life with him as Pajicasarira.
ey both travelled
galya granted her the boot a ete When _ the
the whole world enjoying 42 BO ciseant became 4
sage took the form of a mountain Nie tes "a flowering
river and when the sage took the shape 0 They spent
tree she became 4 creeper on It. dealya
d then Mauagaty
thousands of years like 2 alle
became tired Of a sexual life and returned
‘od of erotic
ascetic life. Even after such a long perio
: resented the
life Nalayani was still he
lustful and s : f
ae t the life of 4
decision of her husband to 8° sa zs continue the
hermit. She begged her hus t cross
sine Ute Far sata AnOES. time. Maul Tapanee an
when she thus caused hindrance in her next life be
ou gon
a e Kin g of Paficala
cursed her saying that
fy her ust. Greatly
born as the daughter 0 scsf at
would have five husbands 0 él severe austerities
srieved at this curse she Practsc® Greased with her
of Paficagnl. sed her 8aYPenance Siva appeared before her oy ae: in a very
ing that she would be born 1 er aa e husbands,
noble family and she would then nd equa
good-natured, doing godly work shat
to Indra. She then pleaded fn
ranted the boon to remain @ ae eanite
with each of her husbands. ave a
hen Siva sent her to the ve sie te
to fetch a beautiful yours man
Standing in the midst
PANCALI
seeing there. Accordingly she went to the river to do
as she was directed.
At that time all the devas joined together and performed a Yaga at Naimisdranya. Kala, the god of
Death, was one of the chief priests for the function.
The Yaga lasted fora long time and since Kala was
consecrated for the Yaga he did not attend to his
duties as the god of Death. Death came to a dead
stop and men increased in alarming numbers and the
devas were perplexed. They went to Brahma and
acquainted him with the frightening situation. Brahma
sent them to Naimisaranya. They went there and were
talking to Kala when they saw a few golden flowers
coming down the river. Getting curious Indra walked
up the river to locate the origin of these flowers. When
he reached the place of origin of Ganga he saw
Nalayani there. Nalayani took the beautiful young
man to Siva. Siva was at that time engaged in a
game of dice with Parvati and Indra did not then recognise Siva. Indra in his arrogance argued that the
whole universe belonged to him. Siva jumped up
enraged and ran after Indra who ran to the mouth of
a cave. Siva caught him and said that he would show
‘him four Indras inside that cave. Both of them entered
the cave and to the amazement of Indra he saw four
other Indras sitting inside the cave. They were all the
creation of Siva and with the original Indra the
number of Indras came to five. Then addressing
Nalayani who had followed them Siva said, “Oh
beautiful girl, do not be. worried. All these five are
your husbands. You will be born as the daughter of
the King of Paficala. Then all these five will
be born in the lunar race and will marry you.”’
The Indras agreed to be born on earth and do the
work of God. After that they all went to Mahavisnu
and requested him to give them mighty accomplices to
fulfil their mission. Then Mahavisnu plucked two hairs
from his body, one white and the other black, and
dropped them on the ground. The black hair was
born as Sri Krsna and the white hair was born as
Balarama, to help the Pandavas later.
Paficali’s two previous births can be explained thus:
Agnideva created Mayasita who in turn became Svargalaksmi to be born as Paficali. Mayasita was a part of
Mahalaksmi and so also Nalayani who became Panicali
was a part of Laksmi. Pandavas are known to be the
sons of . five gods and they used for the procreation of
the Pandavas Indrarn$a (part of Indra) thus making
them all Indras. (Chapters 197 and 198, Adi Parva).
2) Birth of Pafcal?. Paficali was born in the palace of
Drupada, King of Paficala. She had a brother named
Dhrstadyumna. There is a story about their birth in
the Puranas:
Drupada insulted Drona his classmate in the Gurukula
and Drona kept in mind the insult to wreak vengeance
on Drupada. Drupada, therefore, wanted a son to be
porn who would defeat Drona ina battle. Brahmins
advised him to conduct a Yaga for that purpose. He
decided to conduct one on a large scale and went about
*n search of a Yajva (one who performs sacrifices
according to Vedic rites) and reached Kalmasapuri on
the banks of the river Ganga. There he saw a brahmin’s
house where lived two sages named Yaja and Upayaja.
They were in figure and nature alike. At first Drupada
went to the younger of the two, Upayaja. He went near

PANCALI
him and after massaging his feet and legs requested him
to officiate in a Yaga aimed at getting for him a son
to conquer Drona ina battle. He promised to give
him ten crores of cattle for that and also anything else
the sage wanted. These promises did not make the sage
consent to conduct the Yaga andso the King stayed
at the agrama serving the sage. A year went by and
one day the sage appeared cheerful and told Drupada
thus: “Oh King, my brother who was walking one day
in a storm saw a fruit lying on his way and ate it without first ascertaining whether the fruit was pure or not.
Again, I have seen him taking food from others freely
and eating it. I think he is wishful about wealth and,
perhaps, if you approach him he may help you.”
Drupada went to Yaja and after serving him to _ please
him made his request promising him much wealth. Yaja
was ready to perform the Yajfia. Upayaja came to them
at that time and Y4aja consulted his brother before going
to perform the Yajfia. The Yaga was successfully
conducted and at the end the priest Yaja called the wife
of Drupada and gave her havya (clarified butter).
Because the havya was prepared by Yaja and was offered
by Upayaja the sages said that the queen would get two
children. While Yaja was offering oblations to the
sacrificial fire a boy with a crown on his head and
bearing a sword and a bow in his hands rose from the
fire. The rsis present there then said that, that boy would
kill Drona. He was named Dhrstadyumna. Then from
the dais~of the Y4ga-fire emerged a beautiful lady of
dazzling brilliance. Immediately a voice from heaven
was heard to say thus: “This Sumadhyama (a girl in
her blossoming youth) would work on the side of God
and will cause terror to the Kauravas.”’
Yaja blessed the wife of Drupada saying that the
two children would thenceforth call her mother.
Yaja himself named the boy Dhrstadyumna and the
girl according to the ethereal voice, Krsna. Krsna was
dark in complexion. Krsna was called Parsati because she
was the grand-daughter of Prsata and Draupadi because
she was the daughter of Drupada and Paficali because
she was the daughter of the King of Paficala. Paficali
grew up in the palace of Drupada. (Chapter 167, Adi
Parva). |
3) Marriage. After escaping from the lac palace the
Pandavas reached a village named Ekacakra after
walking a long time through the forests. There they
stayed ina brahmin’s house. Every morning they
would go in disguise for begging and return with the
alms in the evening. ‘This was their daily routine and
one day while they were in their daily round they saw
a group of brahmins and they said they were going to
the Svayamvara of the daughter of ‘the King of
Paficala. The brahmins invited them also to come
along with them describing in detail the beauty of the
girl and the elaborate and festive arrangements made
for the marriage. The Pandavas went to Paficala along
with the brahmins. On the way they met Vedavyasa
and receiving blessings from him they went to the
capital city of Paficala and took their abode in the
house of a potter. Nobody knew who they were.
Drupada had placed a mighty steel bow in the
marriage hall. When all the distinguished guests were
seated in the marriage hall, the King announced that
his daughter would be given in marriage to him who
bent the steel bow and with it shot a steel arrow,
PANCALI
through the central aperture of a revolving disc, at a
target placed above. Many valiant princes from all
parts of Bharata including the Kauravas had gathered
there. When it was time for the ceremonies to begin
Paficali clad in beautiful robes with a bewitching
charm which excited the royal assemblage entered the
hall with a garland in her hands. Then Dhrstadyumna
brother of Paficali said “Hear ye, oh princes, seated _1n
state in this assembly, here is the bow and arrow. He
who sends five arrows in succession through the hole
in the wheel and unerringly hits the target shall wi?
my sister.”
Many noted princes rose one after another and tried
in vain to string the bow. It was too heavy 4?
stiff for them. Then Arjuna rose and meditating ©?
Narayana, the Supreme God, strung the bow W!
ease and hit at the target. Paficali then put the gat”
land on Arjuna’s neck and accepting him as her
husband went with him and stayed that night at the
house of the potter. Drupada that night went 140 the
house of the potter to make enquiries about his daughter andson-in-law. His joy knew no bounds whe?
knew that his son-in-law was none other than“
celebrated Arjuna. The Pandavas then took Pafica””
to their home in Ekacakra and as soon as Kuntidev?
heard the footsteps of her sons outside she said from
inside asking them to share that day’s alms a
themselves little knowing that it was a pride ¢
had been brought by them. Thus Pajficali became thé
common consort of the five Pandavas. The? 34
marriage of Paficali was ceremoniously conduct’
after inviting friends and relatives. The Pandavas weit
built a new palace at Indraprastha and lived thet
(Chapters 190 to 220; Adi Parva). ng
Sri Krsna was present there along with the lead De
members of the clan of Vrsni. He could recogms
the
the Pandavas in spite of their disguise. ST! Rr
went to the potter’s house and visited them. 41° eit
them valuable presents on the occasion 0 t
marriage. 2
4) Making Draupadi naked. Once Duryodhana challene
ed Dharmaputra to a game of dice: Dharmap” di
lost all and in the end in despair pledged Dr aup@ ra
and lost her. Immediately Duryodhana asked vide
to bring Draupadi to his palace and make her serV©
a servant-maid. Vidura did not consent to that. ‘le
Duryodhana asked Pratikami to bring her. Whe
entering the palace of Draupadi, Pratikam wo
timid as a dog about to enter the cage of a lion.
informed Draupadi of his mission. Draupadi sent
back and then Duryodhana sent another messens” *
iraupadi went with him to the court of the Kaul ay f
As soon as Dussasana saw Draupadi he jumped at Be
and caught hold of her hair and dragged her t0
centre of the assembly. When Dugfasana dragged |
thus she said in piteous tones “I am in my month’
period and I have only the upper garment oP S
Please do not take me to the assembly.”’ . Dugsasae®
we not moved by these pleadings and he dragged
still,
Bhima could not hold himself calm against this atrocity
any longer and in a roar ofwrath he abused Dharm
putra for pledging Paficali thus and _ losing her
Arjuna however remonstrated gently with Bhime
Then to the consternation of all, Dugsasana started ue
him
the
er

PANCALI
ee ee
her of all the clothes. All earthly aid having failed
Draupadi in utter helplessness implored divine mercy
and succour. Then a miracle occurred. In vain did
Dusgasana toil to pull the garments completely and
make her naked. As he pulled off each, fresh garments
were seen to come from somewhere and cover her
nudity. Dugégdsana retired from his work exhausted and
disappointed. Then Karna ordered that Draupadi
should be sent to the palace of Duryodhana as a
servant-maid. Hearing this Duésasana once again
started dragging her. Draupadi wept. Bhima roared
in fury and said that if his brother, Dharmaputra,
gave him permission he would at that instant smash to
death the Kauravas just like a lion killing the animals.
Bhisma and Drona interfered and pacified him.
Duryodhana stood up and striking his right thigh with
his right hand challenged Bhima to a fight. Bhimasena did not like Duryodhana exhibiting his naked
thigh in front of Draupadi and an angered Bhima
declared that he would in a battle break Duryodhana’s
thigh with his mace. Dhrtarastra came to the
scene and pacified both. of them and turning to
Paficali asked her to name any boon she wanted from
him. Paficali said : “In order that my son, Prativindhya, should not be called a ‘dasaputra’ (son of a
servant) his father Dharmaputra should be released
from his servitude.”? The boon was granted. Then she
requested that all the other Pandavas should be set
free. That was also allowed. Dhrtarastra then asked
her to namea third boon. Paficali then said that all
Ksatriya women were entitled only to two boons and
so there was no need for a third one. Then Draupadi
took a vow that her hair which was let lose by the
wicked Duéasana would be_ tied properly only by a
hand tainted by the blood of Dussasana. After pang fe
strict obedience to the egnditions oS a atie ie!
Pandavas started for the fores
ic .. the forests and one year
spend twelve years im hapter 68, Sabha
incognito. (Ten Chapters from C
Parva).
9) Vonaviis of Patcali. (Life in the igs) epee
the exile of the Pandavas in the ee erie
involved in many events of which a few imp
ones are given below :
(i) Kirmira’s attack. When the :
Kamyakavana, Kirmira, the brother of eae eee i
the 4grama where Pajficali was Ne eit ai fokeed
was such a fierce-looking giant that Pafica a ea iee
to shut her eyes by fright and she became ;
@ river in the midst of five hillocks.
Bhimasena ane
diately ran to her-rescue and killed Kirmira. (Chapter
11, Vana Parva).
(ii) Paficali console
Pandavas were in the
d Dharmaputra by her soothing
words. (Chapter 27, Vana Parva )- me unbearable she
(iii) On hen her woes. beca ;
nieces the devas. (Chapter 9, brie ee
(iv) While the Pandavas were oh to bring for
andhamadana, Pajicali persuaded B one Bhima).
her the Saugandhika flower. See ie the Badarik-
(v) While the Pandavas were living on had gone
asrama waiting for the return of AT ied away by
Oona year’s pilgrimage, Paficali was
Jatasura, (See under J atasura ).
PANCALI
(vi) After she was rescued from Jatadsura, Paficali
along with her husbands dwelt in the hermitage of
Arstisena. (See under Arstisena) .
(vii) Once Draupadi gave instructions on the duties
of a wife to Satyabhama who came to the forests
along with Sri Krsna. (Chapters 233 and 234, Vana
Parva). : |
(viii) Once Durvasas with his disciples came to the
forest as the guests of the Pandavas. They came late
and Paficali had taken her food already. The
Aksayapatra (the never-empty pot) could not be
invoked to produce anything that day and Paficali was
greatly agitated and worried. She prayed to Sri Krsna
for succour and Sri Krsna also coming hungry searched
in the pot for soraething to eat and finding a bit of
spinach sticking to the sides of the pot grabbed it
with avidity and ate it. The guests felt as if they had
enjoyed a sumptuous feast and left the place well
pleased. (See para XII under Duryodhana).
(ix) Jayadratha carried away Paficali from the
forests once. The Pandavas rescued her. (Para 4 under
Jayadratha).
6) Life incognito. After their twelve years of exile in
the forests the time for living in disguise for a year
came and Dharmaputra and his brothers with Paficali
spent that period in the palace of the King Virata.
Each assumed a new name and accepted different
types of service under the King. Paficali took the
name of Sairandhri and served as a companion and
attendant to the princess. One day Kicaka, the
mighty brother-in-law of the King, tried to molest
Paficali and Bhimasena killed him. (See under
Kicaka). It was at the time when the incognito life
was coming to an end that the Kaurava army headed
by Duryodhana carried away the cattle of the King
Virata. The King was absent from the palace at that
time and the prince, Uttara, had not ihe guts to go
and attack the Kaurava army. It was Paficali who
then suggested sending of Brhannala of the palace
(Arjuna) to serve as charioteer of Uttara. (See under
Arjuna, Para 24).
7\ Subsequent events. The thirteen years of life in
exile and incognito came to anend. But the Kauravas
were not prepared to give half of the kingdom to the
Pandavas. The differences between them increased and
it led to a great war. Sri Krsna agreed to go as a
messenger to the court of Dhrtarastra and ask for the
share of the Pandavas. Before leaving he asked each a. -
the Pandavas what he should say at the court of
Dhrtarastra. Paficali then approached Krsna in
rivate and said she desired for a war to defeat the
Kauravas. She then reminded Krsna of a vow taken
by Bhimasena that he would tie her hair with his
hands smeared with the blood from the thigh of
Du§éasana.
The peace-mission of Krsna failed and the famous
Kuruksetra battle started. Many valiant warriors on
both the sides were killed. When Abhimanyu was
killed Subhadra wept bitterly and Paficali who went
to console her fainted. Sri Krsna revived her. Paficali
asked Bhimasena to bring to her the inborn jewel on
the head of Afvatthama, son of Drona. She wanted to
take revenge on him for killing her brother Dhrstadyumna,

PANCALIKA
After a fierce battle for eighteen days the Kauravas
were defeated and their tribe annihilated. Pandavas
took hold of Hastinapura and PAaficali was one among
those who persuaded Dharmaputra to take charge of
the administration of the state as its ruler. Dharmaputra performed an Agvamedhayajiia and Paficali gave
presents to Citrangada and Ulupi who were present
for the function then. After the ASvamedha_ Draupadi
- lived in Hastinapura serving Kunti and Gandhari
alike for a long time. It was at that time that
Dhrtarastra, Gandhari and Kunti went to the forests
and Draupadi expressed her desire to go along with
them to be of help to them. But they did not allow
her to do so. While the Pandavas were living in
Hastinapura as the rulers of the country eminent sis
from different parts of the country visited them and
some of the Siddhas (realised souls) among them saw
Paficali as the goddess Mahalaksmi herself. (Sloka 9,
Chapter 25, Agramavasika Parva).
8) Death of Patcali. At the fag end of their life the
Pandavas crowned Pariksit as the King of Hastinapura
and started on their Mahaprasthana. They travelled
for long through the Himalayas and reached Mahameru. At that time Paficali fell down dead. Then
Bhimasena asked Yudhisthira why without any particular ailment Paficali died. Yudhisthira replied that it
was because she showed special interest in Arjuna The
Pandavas walked on and all of them excepting
-Dharmaputra died on the way one by one. Even
before Dharmaputra entered svarga Pajicali and the
four brothers had reached there. (Chapters 1 to 4,
Mahaprasthanika Parva).
9). Sons of Paficalt. Paficalihad five sons one each
from each of the five husbands. She got Prativindhya
of Yudhisthira, Srutasoma of Bhimasena, Srutakirti of
Arjuna, Satanika of Nakula and Srutakarma of
Sahadeva. (Sloka 73, Chapter 95, Adi Parva).
PANCALIKA (PANCALIKESA). A Yaksa who was
a son of Kubera. In some parts of Bharata this Yaksa
is worshipped as a deity. Itis believed that Siva had
given Paficalika a boon that he who worships him
whether he be man or woman, young or old, would
become intoxicated with vigour. There is a’ story
behind Paficalika obtaining this boon :—
When Sati who was insulted at the Daksayaga was
cousumed by fire a bereaved Siva sat inactive and
moody at a lonely place. When this continued for a
long time Kamadeva (god of love) at the request of
the other devas sent arrows against him and made him
lustful. Siva then started running passionately calling
the name of his wife and finding her nowhere jumped
into the river Malindi to commit suicide. (The
waters of Kalindi became black from that time onwards). Kalindi was unable to bear the burden of
the soul of Siva and so he had to get out to the shore
and run again. At this time Kamadeva sent another
arrow, unmadastra (arrow of intoxication) also against
Siva. Siva could not bear the impact of the two
arrows together and he laboured under great strain.
Just then he saw Paficalika son of Kubera coming that
way. iva then made him understand his difficulties
and requested him to take | charge of the force of the
arrows from him. Paficalika did so and saved Siva
from his toil. Pleased at this Siva blessed him. He
said that Paficalika will be worshipped by people in
PANCAMAHAYAJNA. For a Grhasthaframi
PANCANADA I.
PANCANADA II.
PANCAPRANAS
the month of Caitra and all those who do so will be
invigorated. He added that henceforth he would be
known as Paiicalikega also.
PANCALYA. An 4srama of ancient Bharata. This was
the place where Nyagrodha, King of Paficala, performed penance fora long time. (Sloka 11, Chapter 90,
Vana Parva).
(householder) the following five apparatuses are unavoidable :
A sifter, a grinding stone, a broom, a wooden mortar
and a water-pot. It is believed that a sin is committe
when each of these is used and to remove the sins thus
committed the ancient sages have prescribed five
yajfias and these five yajfias are called the Paficamahayajfias. They are the Brahmayajiia, Pitryajia,
Devayajfia, Bhitayajiia and the ManusayajReciting of Vedas is Brahmayajfia. Pleasing the
manes by offering rice or libations of water is cal©
Pitryajiia. Giving offerings to the demi-gods-in the
sacrificial -fire is called Devayajiia and religious
offerings of rice to the crows is called Bhitayaj2@
Giving food for the guests is Manusayajfia. One ae
does not dothe Paficamahayajfias isno better than dea ;
Some scholars have classified the Paficamahayaj"@
as Huta, Prahuta, Brahmyahuta, Pragita and Ahul@ »
Japo huto huto homah
Prahuto bhautiko balih //
Brahmyam hutam dvijagnyarcca
Prasitam pitrtarpanam. // 55
Ahuta is Brahmayajfia, huta is devayajfia, prahula
bhitayajfia, brahmyahuta is manusikayajiia |
prasita is pitryajfia. Even if at times. one finds 1t ly
possible to do manusikayajfia one must perform dat
brahmayajfia and daivayajfia. The offerings give’ wn
gods in the sacrificial fire go to the Sun. a
sends rains to the earth which in turn make the pie
flourish. Vedas say that thus living beings increase- J for
as all animals and objects depend on life-breath asi
living, a Brahmacari, a Vanaprastha and a Sanay
depend upon a grhastha for sustenance. Therefore: 3,
Grhasthagrama is the best of all agramas. (Chapter
Manusmrtt1).
PANCAMI, An ancient river of Uttara Bharata. PeoP
= oma
used to drink water from this river. Chapter 9, Bhis™
Parva). AieO8
A land of the north-western sid? n
Bharata. This is at present called the Punjab. WwW ed
Nakula conquered the western states he conque’
Paficanada also. (Sloka 11, Chapter 32, Mahabhara! 4)
Five rivers of names Vipaéa (Vyasa), Satadrii (Sut os
Iravati (Ravi), Cndrabhaga (Chenab) and Vit@_
(Jhelum) run through this place and that is W y
place is called Paficanada. ne
. A sacred place in Kuruksetra. If 2 id
bathes in the holy pond of Kotitirtha there, one wor at
get the benefit of performing an Agévamedha. Chap
83, Vana Parva).
PANCAPRANAS. The five pranas (life breaths) of i
living being are Prana, Apana, Vyana, Samana ¥
Udana. There is a story in ‘Devi Bharavata’ regardin®
the origin of the Paficapranas. in
Once Sri Krsna met Radhadevi at Rasamandala and, y
seclusion they spent in sexual sport the period of one ©
of Brahma. Then Krsna selecting an auspicious ne
dropped his vital fluid into her womb at the end °

a
PANCAPSARAS
PANCAPSARAS. A lake
PANCARATRA., An gam
sexual sport. Tired by the prolonged carnal sport and
shaken by the impact of the hot semen Radhadevi perspired profusely and the exhaustion produced deep and
long breaths. The whole universe was covered with her
sweat and her sighs became the goddess of the life-giving
breaths of all created animals. From the left side of
goddess was born Vayupatni and to her were born the
Paficapranas. Besides these, another five younger pranas
were also born. From the sweat of the Devi was born
Varuna and from the left side of Varuna was born
Varunani. (9th Skandha, Devi Bhagavata ).
Mandikyopanisad gives the following details regarding
the working of the Pranas in the body :—Praua was
first used in the sense of breath. Later it got the meaning of life. Life is in fact breath to all living beings. Only
when a man is awake, his mind and sense organs
are active. But Prana is active always both in the state
of wakefulness and sleep. Therefore Prana is the vigour
of life. It may be said that when a man is asleep his
senses merge with his mind and his mind with the
prana. The five factors of Prana are the Paficapranas.
The first of the five is called Prana itself. It is called
Mukhyaprana or chief Prana. Just as a King appoints
his ministers at different places to do specified jobs the
chief Prana posts the other pranas at different parts 1n
the body with specific purposes of their own. Prana 1s
seated in the heart and does the work of breathing.
Apana is seated in anus and directs the organs of
excretion of the body. Vyana is spread throughout the
body and it is this life-wind which keeps one alive even
ed for some time. When an
when breathing is stopp 1€.
archer stands fe deep concentration with his bent bow
without breathing he lives with the help of Vyana.
Samana controls the breathing-in and breathing-our fa
a specified rhythm. Samana (equaliser ) | 18 SO eas
because it balances the force of the in-coming an 3 outgoing breaths. There is a school of thought that trana
is not seated in the heart but spread over the ous ie
nose and face. Samana is seated at the navel mi vay
between the seats of Prana and Apana. ne if a se
reason why life-wind got that name. This ; rea a
the work of prompting digestion. The jour ae ae
Prana, Apana, Samana and Vyana poariee 1 jo "
fifth one, Udana, takes the soul of the being
the body when it dies. se taticetam During the. exile
of Sri Rama in the forests, Agastya glows re ri ss rate
this lake and described its orig? thus : 7 is hep
a sage named Mandakarni built ts ee net
living on air alone stood in the waters an s Pete
practised severe austerities for tem thous Dake (ek
Devas were frightened by the rigorous ne (celestial
Mandakarni and they sent five devakanye ey Lert
damsels ) to the earth to entice the ae ae peaaly
penance. Tke sage was attracted PY, cand building
of the girls and he lived with them 1m @ g
ssin
constructed within the lake itself. Even ey i a
away of the sage and the damse ee eke Because five
dance and music from
inside A ace:
i nown as fa
apsaras lived in that lake it became k
psaras.
ts of I
( Apsaras = celestial damsels who are amayana ;
(Sarga 1, Aranya Kanda, 1G system of philosophy).
ndra).
(Chapter 218, Santi Parva):
553 3 PANCATANTRA
PANCARATRA. A book of spiritual doctrines. He who
learns this will attain the position of Uparicaravasu.
Sloka 25, Chapter 325, Santi Parva).
PANCASIKHA. A sageofancient times. The Puranas
give the following details about him. f
He was a disciple of Asuri. He was brought up _breastfed by Kapila, wife of Asuri and so he was known as
Kapila also. He dwelt in Paficasrotas and performed a
Yaga for a thousand years and got his name Paficagikha.
He went to the assembly of the learned king Janaka and
entered into a polemic contest with him and defeated
him. The defeated King gave Paficasikha great respect
and he lived in the court of Janaka as his Guru for a
number of years. (Chapter 218, Santi Parva).
PANCASVA. AKing of the Puru race. (See under Puru-
' vamga).
PANCATANTRA.
A.General information. An ancient book of distinction
written by the scholar Visnusarma in the form of
stories for the use of children to give them an idea of
the different aspects of life.
1) Origin. There is a statement in the preface itself
regarding the composition of this book : ‘““Three sons
were born to an emperor named Amarasakti. All the
three were dull-witted. The emperor was very sorry
for them but found no way to improve them. Greatly
disappointed the King called the royal council and
told them about his sons. Then one of the members of
the council, a man named Sumati, stood up and said
“Oh best of Kings, let usnot try to teach your children
the ‘dstras one by one. It will not only be unpleasant
study but would also take a long time to complete.
If we can mix all the sastras cleverly and make it palatable like sweetmeats the children would take it
easily. There is a suitable man also for this work in our
state, He is WVisnufarma, a kind-hearted scholar who
is not only well-versed in all the sastras but also an
adept in the art of the up-bringing of children. I am
sure he would make your children wise and learned.”’
When the emperor heard this he sent for Visnugarma
and told him everything. After understanding well the
nature of his would-be disciples and the ambition of
their father, VisnuSarma took charge of his wards and
within six months he taught the sons of the emperor
the science of government. The stories which he ysed
to teach them the science of administration were all
‘compiled into a volume called Paficatantra.”’
9) A general idea of the book. ‘The book contains five
divisions each division illustrating one tantra (tact,
diplomacy) by several stories. It contains prose and
verse. The first tantra is called Mitrabheda. Stories
under this head explain the philosophy of “Divide
and rule’? in politics. The main characters in these
stories are two foxes named Karataka and Damanaka.,
Stories under Mitrabheda relate to how these sly foxes
enjoy themselves in breaking the intimacy between a
tion and an ox using slander against each other.
‘Mitralabha’ is the theme of the next tantra. It is an
advice that you should select your friends with
care selecting them only after studying them in detail
properly. The author has selected as characters in
his stories for this purpose 4 tortoise a deer, a crow
and a rat. The third tantra is called -—Kakolikiya. This
deals with the evils behind an intimacy between born
enemies. The main characters in the stories relating

PANCATANTRA
to this are a crow and an owl. The fourth tantra is
called Labdhapranaga. It describes how aman loses
what has come into his possession by his foolishness. A
monkey and a crocodile are the characters in this story.
The fifth tantra is Apariksitakaraka, It deals with the
bad side of not looking into all the possible aspects of
what you hear. Several stories are there to illustrate
this point. .
3) Popularity of the book. Though no correct records
are there in history in support of the belief, it is believed that Amaragakti was the ruler of Mahilaropya in
Deccan and that Paficatantra must have originated
from there. But Paficatantra received a global publicity
and popularity and was translated from Sanskrit into
many other languages. Directed by King Kosru Anusirva, a Persian poet named Buryoe translated it into
the Persian language during the peridd 531-575 A.D.
That translation is not available at present. In the year
570 A.D. it was translated into the Syrian language by
a poet named Bud. A scholar named Abdulla Ibaal
Mogaffa in the year 750 A.D. translated it into the
Arabic language. It was from this Arabic translation that
it was translated into many European languages. ‘The
Greek translation appeared inthe year 1080 A.D.,
Hebrew in 1100 A.D., Latin in 1270 A.D., German in
1480 A.D., Italian in 1582 A.D. and French in 1678
A.D. Next to the Bible this is the book which has
received the greatest publicity and popularity. The
great linguist Hertel says that Paficatantra has appeared
in about 200 translations in fifty different languages.
4) Period of composition. Because the translation into
the Syrian language appeared in the year 570 A.D it
must have been composed earlier than that date. Again,
since it takes at least two centuries for a work to get
popular enough to be translated intoa foreign language,
the composition must have been done early in the fourth
century A.D. Some believe that the work was done in
Kashmir. While others assert that it was written in
Magadha. The original title of the book is believed to
be ‘Karataka and Damanaka’ by a few.
5) Two editions. Two different editions of the book are
now found. One edition popular in Kashmir is known
as Tantrakhyayika. The other is in the form found in
Kathasaritsagara and Brhatkathamafijari. The original
Sanskrit work is very rarely found. There are
several editions of this in Daksina Bharata. Changes in
the stories according to the change of times are also
noted. (History of Classical Sanskrit Literature) .
B. Contents (Stories).
1) Mitrabheda. ‘Yhere was once a very good merchant
in the land of Mahilaropya called Vardhamana. He
was once travelling in .a bullock-cart. One of the
bullocks drawing the cart was named Safijivaka. The
leg of Sajfijivaka broke on the way striking against a
stone. Leaving the bullock to the charge of four of his
attendants Vardhamana continued his journey. When
night came the attendants were frightened by the
surrounding forests and so, leaving the bullock to. its
fate the attendants left the place. The bullock got well
and it roamed about in the forests bellowing loudly,
The King of the forests, Pingalaka the lion, was
frightened by the bellowing of the bullock. a
The lion remained in the forest without stirring out
from its cave. The minister of the lion was a fox. That
fox hadtwo sons named Karataka and Damanaka,
PANCATANTRA
Damanaka wanted to know what made the lion worried
and told his brother about it. Karataka advised him
not to interfere unnecessarily with the affairs of others
and told his brother Damanaka a story to stress his
point.
A group of sawers were sawing wood near a temple
for its construction. At lunch time one of the sawers
placed a wedge on a half-sawn timber and went for
his midday meal. One of the monkeys sitting on the
branch of a tree near the temple jumped on to the halfsawn timber and pulled out the wedge. His tail had
fallen without his knowing into the space between
the sawn planks and when the monkey later jumped
out from the timber his tail was wedged between the
planks and the tail got crushed. If you poke your nose
into the affairs of others without any purpose such
dangers are sure to happen. | ;
Hearing that, Damanaka said, “Brother, are we serving
the lion, our master, just for our food ? If we want only
our food what difference is there between ourselves and
the dog? Have you not seen the uproar the dogs
make when they see food. A dog has no modesty;
humility or self-confidence. Some men are also like that.
But some others are not like that. Look at the elephant.
It never makes an exhibition of its happiness when 1¢
gets its food. Its majestic stand, look and gestures are
worth noticing. The best of men are also like this. _
Everybody should keep this in mind. He who earns his
livelihood without depending on others but does it by
his own wits and efforts is the most revered of men.
But food is not enough, we must earn fame also.
So even though we are children we must try to remove
the worry that hangs over our lord, the lion.” ,
The brother was not moved by this philosophy of
Damanaka and so hesaid again, ‘‘Anywhere and in any
venture success is difficult to achieve and failure is very
easy. It is difficult to rise up but it is easy to fall down.
It is a very hard labour to roll a stone up a mountain
but to push it down from the top is very easy. He 4
blessed who can read correctly the thoughts of other
people. I have, looking at the face of our King, understood that something big is worrying him.”’
Karataka said, ‘‘Admitting what you say to be correct
how are we to know the thing that worries the King?
It is adangerous task.’? Damanaka said ‘“‘Regarding the
achievement of success, there are three kinds of people
namely the Uttama (best), the madhyama (mediocre)
and the adhama (worst). The adhama type will never
start a venture fearing failure. The madhyama type
would start his endeavour but ‘would turn back at the
sight of obstacles. But the Uttama type would never
turn back’ without achieving success. They are the
adorable type of men in this world. The Uttama
would act according to the circumstances of the situation. If he wants to talk to another and obtain a favour
from him he would not go to him at random without
looking into the time, place and opportunity to do s0Even Brhaspati has his moods. In fact, there is nothing
impossible in this world. Disappointment and failures
are due to want of experience and lack of endeavour:
The great ocean with its huge rolling waves gives one
a fright at first sight. But if he starts bathing in it for
a long time he finds it not so unapproachable or
ghastly.”
When Karataka heard these moral preachings of his

= = eee ee
PANCATANTRA
brother he allowed him to do what he wanted to do.
Damanaka went.-to the cave of the lion. Far from the
cave itself Damanaka started walking humbly with his
head bent down. The lion saw Damanaka walking
thus to him and was immensely pleased. The King of
the beasts asked him thus ‘‘Damanaka, it is a long time
since J saw you and your brother, Why is it that you |
both, sons of my minister, do not come and see me as
often as your father ?”
Damanaka replied very humbly “Oh mighty King, of
what use can we insignificant creatures be to you? Yet,
if one thinks over it, even little things can also be of use
at times togreat people.’’ Damanaka then recited to the
King a poem which in substance was thus: “Even grass
over which we trample while walking, is ofuse as fodder
to the cattle. Some are used for cleaning the teeth and
still some, dry and brittle, to tickle the ear when it
itches badly. Great men retain their greatness even
when they fall. A burning torch would send its flame only
upwards even when you keep it upside down. Similarly
all things will shine only in their proper places. An
ornamental waistbelt would not shine round a neck nor
would bangles shine on one’s ears. Anyhow let me ask
your highness one question. Is 1t true that when your
highness went to drink water something happened to
make your highness worry ?”’
Pingalaka the lion said: ‘“‘What you say 1s correct. When
I went today to drink water in the river I heard the
was frightened.
horrifying bellow of a fierce animal and wa:
I am thinking of leaving this forest and going to some
other one.” h Lord, be not frightened, Appear
AES ord, be no os 5
Damanaka said “Ob and cannot be believed. I
ances are often deceptive ed. I
shall tell you the story of a fox who mistook an ordinary
drum for an animal with good flesh. Once a fox 4
a drum lying in a battlefield. It was making eck
when the wind blew over it. The fox mistook it for oi
animal with plenty of flesh and blood. Rejoicing at t .
prospect of having 4 hearty meal the fox sya
courage and went near it. It tore the leather open. Only
then could it understand its Be an me «dL
The King liked the story very NG ale ieee ith
he
Damanaka to enquire where t and told him
Damanaka found out Safijivaka, ee been sent by the
hat he
everything and added 4 stivaka was at first
King to fetch him to his Presa eel at Damanaka
afraid to go but the . consoling he-lion. The lion and
1: i nt tot Sie
gave him courage and ale and gradually the intimacy
th eat fr ts
decaispet ts atl an extent that the ee eine ler
Started becoming indifferent to ne mite Pirigalaka
beasts in the forest. The subjects of t
were in trouble. eam
Feeling sorry for his own actions "9" ise of our own
brother and said, ‘‘All this happen elf-made calamity.
fault. I shall tell you a story elca ate was afraid 0
Once an ascetic name Dey ee ee i the money he
robbers. So he stitched into his ro 4 Asadhabhiti came
possessed. Somehow a robe ads with the ascetic and
to__know of it and he mac Hat to be very faithful.
ing one day he went
naka went to his
acted as his servant preter d
: an Awe
Devagarma got confidence 1 naeeaed wealth into the
to bathe handing over all his gv ack from the river
n his way D
w two goats fighting against
hands of Asadhabhati. O
after his bath Devasarma $4
555 PANCATANTRA
each other. Blood was flowing from the heads of both
the goats and still the: fight continued. A fox came
there to drink the fresh blood flowing from their heads
and he went and started licking the blood that had
dropped between the two fighting goats. The goats
came again and hit against each other with force and
the fox that was standing between the two and licking
the blood greedily was crushed to death. When he
returned after witnessing the fight the ascetic found
that his servant had gone away with his cash.”
Karataka liked the story very much. They then discuss_ed ways and means of getting out of this calamity.
Damanaka said that any object can be achieved by
cleverness and told his brother a story to illustrate his
point.He said ‘‘Once a crow made his abode on a tree:
with his wife and children. After some time his wife
began to lay eggs but all of them disappeared one by
one. They made enquiries and found that the culprit
was a big cobra living beneath the same tree. They
were no match to the cobra and so they sought the
advice of their friend, a fox.
The fox said, ‘‘I shall suggest a way to get out of the
danger. Have you not heard the story of an old- stork
who got his food by his cleverness? The stork went to
the banks of a pond feeling hungry. There were plenty
of fishes in the pond. The stork stood still on the banks
pretending to be sad. A crab seeing the sad-looking
stork came and enquired the cause of his grief. The
stork said ‘You well know that we storks live on flesh.
and fish. I now understand that a fisherman has planned
to catch all the fish in this pond. This is the cause of
my worry.” The fishes who overheard this conversation between the crab and the stork came before the
stork frightened and requested him to save them from
the fisherman somehow. The stork said ‘I am not strong
to fight the fisherman. But I can do what little help
I can give you. I shall every day remove you one by one
from this pond to another one without the knowledge
of the fisherman.” wes
The poor fishes agreed to the proposal and the stork
carried away one fish everyday from the pond and ate
it at a place hidden from the view of the others. This
went on for one or two months without break and
somehow the crab got suspicious and he requested the
stork to take him also to the other pond. The stork
carrying the crab reached its usual place and the crab
was horrified at the sight of the bones of the fishes
eaten before by the stork. The crab knew its death
was sure even if it did not fight with the stork and so
started a fight and in the end killed the stork by
crushing the neck of the stork.”
The crows crew hilariously when they heard the
story of the fox. The fox then told them a plan.
“When any ofthose who come to bathe in a pond nearby removes the necklace and places it on the shore you
are to pick it up and hang it on a branch of the tree.”
The crows did like that and pedestrians going that way
saw the necklace hanging from the branch and took it
after killing the cobra in the hole beneath the tree.”
On hearing the story told by Damanaka the idea of
putting the lion against the ox gained strength in
Karataka’s mind. To confirm the idea in his brother’s
mind Damanaka told another story. Damanaka said.
«<Once there was a lion named Madotkata. He lived
in a forest harassing all the beasts. that lived there,

PANCATANTRA
All the subjects of King Madotkata joined together,
went to him and represented to him that they would
go to his cave one by one every day to be killed and
eaten by him. The lion agreed to that and the beasts
one by one went to his cave each day. One day it was
the turn of a clever hare. The hare walked slowly and
reached the lion’s den late. The King was very cross
at this and asked him to explain why he waslate. The
hare said “Oh lord, on my way another lion accosted
me and I had to take a round-about route to get away
from that lion.”” The lion got angry and asked the
hare to take him to the other lion who dared to come
to that forest and question his authority. The hare
took the lion to a well and asked his lord to peep in.
When Madotkata did so he saw his own reflection in
the still waters of the well and mistook it for another
lion. It jumped into the well and was killed.”
Karataka had implicit confidence in Damanaka after
hearing all these stories and he sent his brother to the
King to create a rupture between the lion and the ox.
Damanaka went to the King Pingalaka and apologised
for the mistake he had committed. Then the King
enquired what the mistake was. Damanaka said that
the ox Safijivaka was not such a simpleton as he took
him to be. He was ambitious and wanted to snatch
away the kingdom from Pingalaka. It was unwise to
keep one single minister always. “After all what can an
ox do? Hecan plough the fields. I have come to
inform you all these out of my regard for you.”
Damanaka said.
Even after hearing all these, Pingalaka did not have
the heart to abandon the ox. Pingalaka asked what a
poor bullock could do against a lion. Damanaka then
said that one would come into grief if one believed too
much in any body.. ‘‘Have you notheard the story of
the louse which believed the bug?’’ Damanaka asked.
Then he narrated a story. ‘‘Mandavisarpini was a
louse which was living happily on the silken bed of a
King. A bug went there and made friends with the
louse. The poor louse believed the bug to be harmless
and allowed itto stay that night with him. The
bug said that it was very greedy to suck the blood of
the King. At night the bug bit the King. The King
woke up and ordered his servants to search for the
thing that bit him. When lights were brought the
clever bug slipped away. The royal servants conducting the search found out the louse and killed it.”’
The lion liked the tale very much and yet was reluctant to dismiss the ox. The lion wanted proof that
the ox was at fault. So Damanaka went straight to the
ox in his house and said ‘‘We are all small people.
What does the master do for our welfare ? If small
people seek the friendship of big people the small ones
will always suffer.’ The ox endorsed the view and_ told
a story to illustrate the truth. “Alion named Madotkata had a tiger, a fox and a crow as his ministers.
When the ministers were once walking in the forest
they saw a camel. They had never seen a camel before
and so they were wonderstruck by the animal. They
went and talked with it, and gathered that the curious
animal was a camel which had been carrying loads for
a merchant. It had now escaped from the merchant
because of the heavy work it had to do. The camel
wanted to remain in The ministers took the
hiding.
new animal to the lion. The lion liked the camel very
PANCATANTRA
much and soon they became good and intimate friends.
The intimacy increased and soon the King lost all
‘nterest in his other subjects. At this stage the ministers found out a plan. They advised the King to kill
and eat the camel but the King refused to do so. Then
the crow went before the King and requested the lion
to kill and eat it. But the crow was so small a_food for
the lion and so it refused to kill the crow. Then the
fox made a similar offer but the lion refused to kill the
fox also. Then came the tiger with the offer and the
lion refused to kill the tiger also. Seeing all this the
camel also made a similar offer and the moment his
consent was out from his mouth the fox and the tiger
together killed the poor camel and ate it. So one
should be careful in believing others. In my cas€ I
am sure some wicked persons must have advised him
against me and that is the reason why the lion 1s
angry with me. But. I will always work true to my conscience. There isno harm in fighting either for self
protection or for destroying one’s enemies. So if 1t 15
necessary I will fight the lion.”
Hearing this Damanaka said “T’o go to war without knowing the strength of the enemy 1s wrong. Once
upon a time a water-fowl quarrelled with the ocean.
The water-fowl was living happily on the shores of 4”
ocean with his mate. They ate the worms’ that live!
on the shores. The she-fowl got pregnant and when 1!
was time to lay her eggs she asked her mate to show her
a safe place to lay the eggs. The male mate asked her
to lay the eggs on the shore itself. But the she-fowl
said that the waves would carry away the eggs and sO
it was not wise to do so. The male fowl assured her that
the ocean was not bold enough to do anything against
his interests. But the she-fowl still hesitated.
Then the male fowl said “I am the nearest relative TO"
ponsible for your protection and welfare. If one does not
heed the words. of a relative one will fall into danger:
I shall tell you the story ofa tortoise which came LO
grief by not obeying the instructions of its friends. +”
olden times there lived on the banks of a pond a tO,
toise who had two swan-friends in the lake name
Sankata and Vikata. Once the lake became empty °
water and the swans decided to go to another lake with
water. They never wanted to part with their friend the
tortoise and so decided to take the tortoise also along
with them. But the tortoise could not fly and %°
they found a plan to carry the tortoise to the other lakeThey brought a stick.and the tortoise was asked to hang
at the middle of the stick clutching the stick tightly
with its teeth. The swans then took the stick by}
two ends each holding one end in its beak. The sw@?°
gave strict instructions that the tortoise should not ope?
its mouth and then rose up into the air and flew
towards the other lake. On the way some children saw
the funny sight in the air and so hooted and howle?-
The tortoise got angry and abused the children. ~,
moment it opened its mouth it lost hold on the s¥°
and fell down to the ground This happened because the
tortoise cid not heed the words of its friends.” The
water fowl continued ‘It is cowardice and foolishness to
poueere sad expecting dangers in future. Just hear this
story’ he said ‘Once in a pond there were three fishe*
named Andgata, Utpannamati and Yadbhavisya. He")
ing that fishermen were coming to fish in that pon
Anagata warned them and suggested going to anothet

PANCATANTRA
pond to escape from the fishermen. But Utpannamati
and Yadbhavisya did not care. They said that some
plan could be found out when the danger came. But
Anagata felt diffident and so he went away to another
pond. Soon the fishermen came and spread their nets.
Utpannamati lay still pretending to be dead. The
fishermen took it and deposited it on the shore and
started to fish again. The moment the fishermen turned
their heads Utpannamati slipped into a mud pit nearby
and remained there_ till. the departure of the fishermen.
But poor Yadbhavisya could not think of any plan and
so was caught and carried away by the fishermen. So
just like Utpannamati I will also come across some plan
when the danger comes and so you do lay your eggs
on the shore of the ocean itself.”
Hearing the assuring words of her husband the shefowl laid her eggs on the shore. But very soon waves
came and carried them away. She complained to her
husband. The water fowl called a conference of all the
birds living there and explained to them his mishap
and all of them went on a deputation to Garuda, the
best of the birds and requested him to find out a remedy. Garuda represented the matter to Mahavisnu
who in turn called Varuna to his side and ordered him
to give back the eggs to the fowl.
After telling this story Damanaka went to the lion and
told him many misleading lies about the ox. Gradually
the lion and the ox became enemies. Damanaka then
triumphantly went and informed his brother Karataka
of his achievement. But Karataka said “Brother, you
have done a very unjust thing. There are four methods
to achieve your object namely, Sima, Dana, Bheda
and Danda. Of these Bheda is to be used only last of
all. I shall tell you a story - 7
Once achetty (Merchant) had two sonsnamed Dae
buddhi and Dustabuddhi. Once they were both travel
ling through a forest when Dharmabuddhi got a ‘hi
sure from a hole at the base of a big, tree- Dustabudahi
advised his brother not to take the treasure to the | se
as it was dangerous to do so and made him bury 1t 4
tree.' That night itself
a place beneath the same A cota
eee dani went and dug que the teagan aoe
Aaa : davs both of them
buried in his own room. After some a Aene place
went together to see the treasure and foun Pp
empty of the treasure. They accused cacus ae e
stealing the treasure. Both of them compa ae
King. The King asked them whether ag! as there
witnesses and they replied that only the se i cll
as a witness. The King decided born eds in burning
go beneath the same bre" ae ae stabuddhi went to his
:; sige GG: cra
oil to prove their innocen at he should hide in the
father and requested him that» Dharmabuddhi
hollow of that tree ane say IBAY ain this the father
who h n the trea
aid “Child, when you think of 2 tick youn
think of the danger involved in it. Our ing inthe same
stork with his wife on a tree. A solaris cee and the
tree began to eat the young ones of t * it. The clever
stork complained to his friend fox obeu as a mongoose
fox suggested to him @ plan. There drop fishes in
living near the tree. The stork Wa ane! P continue
front of the hole of the mong e abode of the
dropping fishes in a line leading om b led to the hole
serpent. The mongoose would thus ais the mongoose
of the serpent. The stork did so and Ww
PANCATANTRA
reached the hole of the serpent it saw it and killed it.
I cannot do such cruel things.’ But when Dustabuddhi
insisted, the father half-heartedly agreed to it and went
and sat in the hollow of the tree. Next day the servants
of the King came to the footof the tree with burning
oil. They asked the tree to tell the truth regarding
the theft. Then there came a voice from the tree denouncing Dharmabuddhi as the culprit. Dharmabuddhi then
said there was no truth in the bodiless voice and requested them to fumigate the tree from beneath. The royal
servants did so and then the father came out and confessed everything. The servants of. the King nailed
- Dustabuddhi on a spike and killed him.
After having told the story Karataka tried to dissuade
his brother from his deceitful intentions. Karataka
said:— ‘‘Pingala and Safijivaka are kind-hearted and
simple people. There need be no treachery with them.
Treachery is allowed against wicked people. I shall tell
you the story of a merchant:—
This merchant had as his entire wealth a thousand
pounds of iron and one day he went on a pilgrimage
after entrusting his entire wealth to a friend and
neighbour of his on the understanding that the latter
should return it on his return after the pilgrimage.
After ten months the merchant returned but the friend
did not give back the iron. He regretted that all the
‘ron was eaten by rats in which his house abounded.
- The merchant knew that his neighbour was speaking
falsehood but kept silent over the matter. After a few
days the merchant somehow enticed the only son of his
neighbour to his house and locked the young boy in a
room. The friend went in search of his son to the
merchant’s house and asked him whether he had seen
his son anywhere. The merchant replied that he saw
the boy being carried away by a kite. The friend could
not believe the story and suspecting some foul play on
the part of the merchant went to the king and reported
the matter to him. The king sent for the merchant and
asked him about the missing boy. ‘The merchant gave
the king the same reply he gave his friend. The king
was surprised and asked the merchant whether it was
believable that a boy aged eighteen would be carried
away by a kite. The merchant very coolly replied that
such things could happen in a country where rats could
eat a thousand pounds of iron. The king asked the
merchant to explain and he then told him every thing
that had happened. The king ordered the friend to
return the iron and the merchant got back his wealth.
Karataka after telling this story added that deceit in
return for deceit was no sin. Damanaka stuck on_ to
his plan and made the lion and ox fight each other. The
poor ox was killed and the lion became his old self
again.
3y Suhrllabha. (Gaining friends). Once there lived on
a tree a Crow named Laghupatanaka. The crow saw a
hunter coming and spreading a net beneath the tree.
A flock of doves coming that way was caught in the net.
But the doves flew up in a body and the net was
carried from the ground freed of the pegs that held it.
The crow followed them and when they were safely
landed at another place Citragriva the leader of the
doves, told the crow thus “I shall now show you the
benefit of gaining friends.’’ Citragriva and his doves flew
again with the net and landed before the hole of a rat
named Hiranyaka. The rat was a friend of Citragriva.

PANCATANTRA
On hearing the voice of Citragriva outside,’ Hiranyaka
came out and felt sorry for the plight of the doves. ‘The
rat pointed out that nobody could oppose fate and
proved it with illustrations. He added :—‘‘Though
elephants and cobras are mightier and fiercer than men,
it is because of fate that they are being controlled by
smaller people than they themselves. Hiranyaka cut
to pieces the threads of the net and set the doves free.
Next day the doves flew away to their places. Seeing |
the generosity shown by the rat, the crow wanted to
be friendly with the rat. The crow mentioned this to
the rat. But the rat refused to be friendly thinking that
it was a ruse to get him killed for his food. But the
crow promised to be grateful for ever to the rat for
saving the doves which belonged to the community of
birds to which the crow also belonged. But the rat
retorted that gratitude was a quality which was absent
in any living being and generally harm was the reward
for any favour done. The crow was greatly grieved to
hear the words of Hiranyaka and told him that he
(crow) would commit suicide if the rat did not take
him as his friend. At last the rat took pity on the
crow and they became friends. Time passed on and then
there broke out a famine in the land. The crow decided
to shift his abode and told the rat about it. He said
he was going to a lake on the banks of which lived a
friend of his, a tortoise. The tortoise, he added, would
fetch for him from the lake plenty of fish to eat. The
rat was also affected by the famine and so he also decided to accompany thecrow.. The crow took the rat
in its beak and they both reached the lake where lived
the tortoise named Manthara. The crow introduced
Hiranyaka to the tortoise and the tortoise asked him
the reason why he left his previous abode.
The rat said:—“‘“There was a bhiksu (one who lives on
alms) named Cudakarna living in a house in my place.
He used to eat only what was required to maintain
life in him. He would cook his own food and keep the
remains everyday in his kitchen. I used to eat that
food and live. Then one day another Sannydsin named
Brhatsphik (Vinakarna) came to this house. Every
night Vinakarna used to read the Puranas to Cidakarna. Ciudakarna would sit and make a sound on the
bow kept nearby to drive me away. The first time he
did so Vinadkarna who was reading resented the
interrupting sound and asked Cudakarna why he made
it. He then explained that it was intended to drive
away the rat coming to steal the food. I was forced to
starve and I became lean and weak. Even rivers would
go.dry if there are no rains. Only those with wealth
would have friends. Begging is a nuisance to others.
Everywhere it is important to acquire good and faithful friends. When a good man is in danger only good
men rush to help him. When an elephant falls into a
pit it is always another elephant which comes to its
rescue. Therefore I desire to make friends with you.”
All the three, the crow, the rat and the tortoise lived
together happily. Then one day a deer named Citrangada escaping from a hunter came frightened to their
midst and started living with them. One day the deer
which went in search of food did not return even after
dusk and so the crow went in search of the deer and
found it trapped in a hunter's net. The crow informed
the rat about it and the rat immediately came and
started gnawing at the strings of the net. In the meanPANCATANTRA
time the tortoise desirous of knowing the plight of
Citrangada crawled to the place of accident. The rat
had already torn to’ pieces the net and the crow and
the rat said that it was unwise of Manthara to have
come so far crawling as there was danger from the
hunter coming to the place soon. Before the deer
could endorse the views of his friends the hunter came
to the scene. The deer, the crow and the rat escaped.
The hunter saw the crawling tortoiseand caught It.
Binding it with a string the hunter placed it on the
ground. In the meantime the friends of Manthara who
had escaped hit upon a plan to rescue the tortoise.
The deer lay down pretending tc be dead at a place
far away from the place but within the sight of the
hunter. The crow sat perched on its body as if pecking
at its flesh. The hunter saw it and went to take the
dead body of the deer. The moment the hunter turnet
away from the tortoise the rat went and cut the string
binding the tortoise and set it free. Before the hunter
reached the deer it ran away. So.all were saved. This
is the benefit of having good friends.
3) Sandhivigraha (Peace and war). We must mar
friends with people only after knowing them we
There was once a big banyan tree in a forest whic
was inhabited by many crows. Their leader was ®
crow named Meghavarna About three kilometres 2W4Y
from this tree was another banyan tree on which live
a number of owls. Their leader was an owl name
Amardana. The crows and the owls were gre
enemies. |
One day Amardana king of the owls with a large cee
of a lakh of his subjects attacked the crows at MIS" ”
The crows could not see at night and so all the cror
excepting a few of the top ones were killed. Megha
varna, the king, and his ministers, Uddipaka, Sandip4 a
Anudipaka and Cirafijivi and a few other subjects W
the only ones who escaped from there somehow.
satin council at a place and thought of the ways 4”
means to. wreak vengeance on the owls. Uddipaka a
that when the strength of the enemy was great it W
advisable to move away to another place, or to S¢*
the aid of mighty people or to surrender to the enemy:
It was the nature of dogs to leave one’s place an :
to another place, Sandipaka said. Others also W® é
of the same opinion, Cirafijivi alone did not expr”
any opinion.and so the king asked him why he W®
sitting silent. f
Cirafijivi said:— *‘Oh King, we became enemies =f
the owls because of our bad tongue. I shall tell yo F
the story of an ass which met with its death because of 3
bad words. Once a washerman had a donkey to carry
his load of clothes to and fro. The poor washermay
did not have sufficient earnings to feed the donkey W©
and so he let it loose to go and eat of its own accord 10
appease its hunger. The donkey started going to i
fields of other people and eating their grains. PeoPp
started hurting the donkey and so the washerman did
clever thing. He covered the donkey with the hidé
a tiger and let it loose. People mistook it for a tige?
and. did not dare to go near and hurt it. Then one CP)
a farmer keeping watch over the fields at night el
suspicious of the fake tiger and covering himself with a
eee: and with a bow and arrow in his hand stealt”
=) eprogehes the donkey. The poor donkey misto”
armer for a she-donkey and brayed and approac

PANCATANTRA
him with amorous movements of its body. The farmer
knew from its voice that it wasa donkey and so
removed his disguise and stood before the donkey. The
be-fooled donkey got angry and abused the farmer
using very vulgar language. The farmer got angry and
killed him with an arrow. a
Cirafijivi continued:—Once upon a time a few birds
joined together and decided to elect their leader. The
owl was the bird selected to lead them. An aged crow
condemned it. The crow said; “Are you making this
ugly bird which is blind all day your leader? If only
you make a worthy creature your leader you will be
respected. I shall tell you a story to illustrate my
point.’’, He then narrated the following story:
Once upon a time there camea period of twelve
continuous years without any rain at all on the earth.
Wells, ponds, lakes and rivers were all empty. A huge
herd of elephants walking in the forests represented to
its leader the grave situation and the leader sent
messengers to all sides to find out watering places with
water. One of the messengers came | back and reported
that he had found out a beautiful lake full of water and
that on its banks lived a number of hares. The elephants
immediately went to that place and started enjoying
swimming and bathing in the waters of the lake.
Many rabbits on the bank of the lake died when trodden
upon by the elephants. The aggrieved rabbits sat in
a council to consider the steps to
deadly nuisance of the elephants. One of the hares,
Vijaya by name, promised to handle the matter by
himself. He knew it would be unwise to go anywhere
near the elephants. So Vijaya climbed on to the, top
of a hill near the lake and when he saw the elephants
coming to the lake as usual hailed them from the top
of the hillock. When the elephants turned their heads
to the place from where the sound came they saw 4
hare speaking to them. The hare bawled out thus: “We
are all servants of Candra, the moon-god. This lake
him. Candra Bhagavan has
has been given to usb
deputed me +o mene a eon ‘which has reached him
that some elephants are making the water of the lake
muddy. He will surely be cross with you if you agein
enter the lake. So it is better for you to go away oe
this place.” The elephants were frightened and t oY
all left the place. Cirafijiv1 added that this happens
to the elephants because of the lack of a wise an
Proper leader. ae
The aged Cirafijivi continued: “It is unwise ta pac
confidence in eal people. I had an experience. Near
, ifijala.
my abode on a tree there lived a ye oa Slaps
e became friends. One day Kapinja! ;
ome as usual. Taking advantage ©" Ce SEO acct
to Kapifijala’s abode and started living preney Lee
like it and I told the rabbit about it, Eu K ifjala
id not mind it. After four five ay pe ‘aet
returned home and on finding a rabbit? iy rabbit.
angry and asked him to leave the place. bbit said
refused to go and an argument ensued ed did not
that lakes, rivers and trees were i oe
Clong to any particular in
possession of it isits owner, the Tarr. . a
€cided to take the case for arbitration on rna doing
Purpose approached a cat namec Dadhi 1 followe
Penance on the banks of the river Yamuna, ©
be taken to stop this _
559 | PANCATANTRA
them curious to know the decision of the ascetic cat.
They did not see me. Both of them on approaching
him ‘started presenting their case before the cat. The
cat pretended to be deaf and asked both of them to
come nearer and talk into his ears. They moved
nearer and the cat caught hold of them both and ate
them. Those poor beings lost their lives by placing too
much confidence in the aged cat.. That is why I say
that we should not select a small being like an owl as
our leader.
On hearing the story of the crow the birds withdrew
from their first decision of selecting an owl as their
leader. -The owl was offended and felt insulted and
roared that his community would one day wreak
vengeance on the crows..A wound made by an arrow
would healin due course and a tree would grow even
if its branches are cut but any wound on the pride of
an individual is never healed.
Cirafijivi continued:—“This is how the crows and owls
became enemies. We have to fight the owls. It is imossible to serve mean people. I shall tell youa story
of what would happen if one believes in mean people :—
Once a brahmin decided to perform a Yaga to increase
the prosperity of the land.
He wanted a goat for the same and some
wicked young people knew that he was going to buy
one. They worked out a plan to deceive the poor
brahmin. They sat hiding at different places on the way
the brahmin was returning with the goat. As he came near
the first of the wicked young men accosted the brahmin
and -asked him where he was taking the dog. The
brahmin was surprised that the young man mistook his
goat for dog and went his way. When he walked some
distance more the second of the group came to him and
put the same questidn. This time the brahmin was a
bit perplexed that two people should have put the same
question which he thought was absurd. Whena third
man put this question again he became worried and ©
when this same question was repeated two more times
the brahmin got mad and left the goat on the road and
went his way. The wicked youngsters took the goat
cooked it and ate it. mors
After narrating several such stories and maxims Cirafjivi said he would lead the owls into a trap and come
back. Cirafijivi then went to the owls and their friends
on the top of Rsyasrnga.
Cirafijivi shaved his head and smearing the blood of the
dead crows on his body went and sat alone on a branch
of their former abode, the banyan tree. When night
came the owls came and surrounded the tree. Cirafijivi
made some pitiable groans and. the owls took him before .
their king. The king questioned Cirafijtvi and he said
thus :—
“J am Cirafijivi the minister of Meghavarna. Once
I praised your greatness before my king and he
shaved my. head and dismissed me from his service.” The
king of the owls asked hisministers what should be ~
done with Girafijivi. The minister of the king of
ow)s, Baka, immediately jumped from his seat and said:
“Qnce a fox went to steal the cow of a brahmin. On his
way he met 4 Brahmaraksasa and they became. friends.
The Brahmaraksasa was going to kill and eat the brahmin. Both exchanged their ideas and when they reached
the gate of the house of the brahmin the fox said he

PANCATANTRA
would go first and eat the goat. But the Brahmaraksasa
said he would enter first and eat the brahmin. The
quarrel developed into a noisy one and hearing the
sound outside the brahmin came out. The fox accused.
the Brahmaraksasa of having come to eat the brahmin
while the Brahmaraksasa accused the fox of having
come to eat the goat. The brahmin was glad that he
escaped from a danger and pardoning them sent them
both with presents. This is the benefit of a split
among the enemies.
The king of the owls gave refuge to Cirafijivi and the
latter expressing gratitude for the favour done took a
vow that he would wreak vengeance on the crows after
getting himself born as an_ owl in his next birth. At
once the king said “Oh Cirafijivi, it is not wise to
change one’s clan. Once a kite picked up a girl rat and
flew up. On the way the young rat slipped from the
beak of the kite and fell down into the open palm of a
sage doing his sandhyavandana. ‘The sage by his yogic
powers made it into a beautiful girl and presented her
to his wife. The girl attained womanhood and the sage
was anxious to get her married to a suitable person.
He first approached the Sun and the Sun replied ‘‘You
are in search of a powerful husband. Megha (cloud) is
more powerful than myself since at any time it can cast
a shadow over my brilliance. So go and ask Megha
about this.’? The sage went to Megha and Megha said
that wind which could carry him away at his will was
more powerful than himself and so directed him to the
wind. ‘The sage approached the wind and it said that
the mountain which could obstruct its path was more
powerful and so the sage went to the mountain. The
mountain said that the rat which could make holes in him
was more powerful and so finally the sage went to the
rat. The rat agreed to marry her but asked how it could
keep her in the hole which was his abode. The sage said
that i¢ was easy and changed her into a rat. This is
how a girl rat became a girl rat again. So do not change
your clan, be a crow and live with me.”
Cirafijivi from that day onwards started living with the
owls. During day time when the owls slept, the old crow
would fly hither and thither and collect such easily
combustible materials as hay, dry grass and cotton and
stock them beneath the tree covered with dry leaves.
Two months went by like this and one day when the
owls were sleeping Cirafijivi set fire to the stock of dry
materials beneath the tree. The owls were all burnt to
death. Meghavarna and his friends congratulated Cirafijivi on his success. Cirafijivi said: To obtain difficult
positions great men pass through difficult situations. If
one is prepared to suffer hardships any object can be
achieved. Once a cobra began to starve for want of food.
It went to the land of frogs and told the king of frogs
thus: ‘Friend, I am in difficulties. I happened to bite
a brahmin boy and that boy died. The boy’s father cursed
me. I asked for forgiveness and then he said:—‘‘You
must carry your enemies, the frogs, on your back from
one pond to another pond and live on the food they
give you.” The king of the frogs. believed him and
allowed his subjects to be carried away to another pond
from the one in which they were then staying. The
cobra ate all the frogs on the way and at last the king
Thus to destroy the enemies one will
lso was eaten. .
a. em on one’s backs sometimes. The crows
have to carry th
were happy their enemies the owls were destroyed and
PANCATANTRA
they lived more happily and peacefully than before.
4) Labdhanasa.. (Losing what you got). Once a monkey ~
named Balimukha separated himself from his group and
came to a fig tree on the banks of a river. When he
jumped from branch to branch on the tree a great many
ripe figs fell into the river. Seeing this a crocodile
named Sirnéumara came to the foot of the tree and
started eating the fruits. This went on for a few days
and then the crocodile and the monkey became goo
friends. One day the crocodile sat chatting with the
monkey and eating fruits and did not go home. The
wife of the crocodile got worried on not seeing her
husband back at home and sent a maid of hers to
go and enquire what happened to her husband. The
maid came and reported that the crocodile was spending
his time with a she-monkey. The wife of the croco ile
was very sad and angry to hear this and she sent ie
through her maid that she was seriously ill and if ;
wanted to see her alive he must return to her imme
iately. The crocodile returned home immediately 2”
he called a doctor to examine her. The doctor who a ,
been previously bribed by the crocodile’s wife said thee
she should be given the heart of a monkey if she woe :
to be saved from her present ailment. The crocodile us
in a fix. He weighed in his mind the lives of his W
and friend and then decided to take the life of his Ce
to save the life of his wife. The crocodile went dn
place near the fig tree as usual and the monkey a his
enquiries about his family. Then Simmgumara said tha him
wife wanted to see the monkey-friend and had asked the
to take him home that day. The monkey believe’.
story and started for the house of Sirngumara ree
back, When they reached half way in the river Sit?
mara told Balimukha thus : “My wife is seriously h
The doctor has prescribed the heart of a monkey 45 with
only medicine for it.’” The monkey went pale-white <aid
fright but instantly he hit upon a plan. Balimukha |
“Siméumara, what a fool you are. Why did oo
tell me this at least at the time of our departure : nate
my heart on the tree before starting, for I pur we?
you were in need of it, Let us go back and take |
The poor crocodile believed the story and went *
with the monkey to the fig tree. As soon as b
ed the shore the monkey jumped from the qile
of the crocodile and ran to the tree. The croco
asked the monkey to bring his heart soon hee aid
monkey laughed from the top of the fig tree aD" tive
thus:—‘‘Dull-witted crocodile, I am not an ass fy
you. Have you not heard the story of the foolish 45°" _
The monkey then narrated the story of the ass poe aid
“Once a lion calling hisminister, the fox, to his side dy
that he wanted to eat the flesh ofan ass as @ rem +00
for the stomach trouble he was having by drinking rob
much of elephant’s blood. The minister started in se?” —
of an ass and found one in the house of a washer,
The fox said that he was surprised that the ass wa®
ing such heavy work daily with a washerman whe ple:
happy life in the palace of the lion was easily availé 'pThe ass was tempted and it went to the den of the of
When it reached there it got frightened and taking ng
opportunity of the absence of the lion for his even cox
worship left the place in a hurry. The lion sent t 4 at
again to fetch the ass. The fox came and laughe? ¢ 4
the timidity of the ass. He said that the lion was ass
loving nature and last time when it approached the
pn
ept

PANCATANTRA
to embrace him out of affection he ran away like a fool.
The lion knew that the asses were as a class good musicans and the lion himself a great lover of music was
anxious.to hear the ass sing. The poor ass believed the
story and went to the lion along with the fox When
the ass reached the lion’s den the lion was waiting. for
him and the ass in all simplicity bowed before the lion.
The lion with one stroke killed the poor beast and leaving the carcass to the care of the fox went for his
Sandhyavandana. When the lion returned the fox had
already eaten the heart of the ass. The King of the
beasts not finding the heart in its place questioned
the fox and the fox replied that the asses do not possess
either a heart or neck :
When the monkey concluded his story by adding that
never again would he be trapped like this, Simgumara,
the crocodile, went its way. Labdhanasa is the act of
losing what came into your possession once.
5) Asampreksyakérita, This is a tale which explains
the danger behind doing things adventurously without
properly studying the pros and cons of an Issue.
Once upon a time there lived in GaudadeSa a brahmin
named Devagarma. His wife Yajiiasena became
pregnant. ‘The father started saying that the son to be
born would be a very fortunate boy. One day the
wife of the brahmin told him thus :— “It is not good to
build castlesin the air. Once a brahmacari walked
home carrying the fried grain he got as his daksina in
a pot on his head. He started thinking thus—‘‘I will
sell this fried grain and with the money will buy a
lamb. The lamb will grow and give birth to two kids.
I will then sell the goat and the kids arid buy a cow.
The cow will give birth to calves in a short time. I
will buy some land to raise paddy. After selling the
paddy I will renovate my old house and then I will
marry. She will deliver a beautiful son. I will name
the child Somagarma. At times leaving the child
alone my wife will go to milk the cow and then I will
hit her like this.’? So saying the brahmacari hit with his
head containing the fried
stick the mud pot on his 2
grain. The pot broke and the whole thing inside fel! on
the road.
Devagarma on hearing the story
pensive. After five or six days ¥:
son. Days went by and one morning
for her bath in the river.nearby enttus :
the care of her husband. Some moments later
messenger came from the palace asking him to g0 ove
there: The brahmin was in a fix. There bia A oe
around to whose care he | leave the chud. ie
had a mongoose. The brahmin asked the mongoos
; he palace. some
look after the child and went on ‘ Aer. the
time later a big cobra came Crt'r, 5; 1
child. The mongoose Jumpe at i oe Ue ree
The mongoose was smeared with bloo ee 4 ie -
brahmin returned hurriedly from the P
| iting at
see the blood-smeared mongoose WA edt have killed
step. Thinking that the mongoose
p hinking tha beeched the poor
his son the brahmin t she
death. But on entering the roo™ hild was. the dead
out his mistake, for there neat the or regretted his
body of a deadly cobra. br eewitd ane: well,
foolish act of doing a deed before her bath and was
when Yaifiasena came
of Yajfiasena became
Yajfiasena delivered a
Yajfiasena went
ting the child to
a
brahmin found
PANCAVATI
greatly disturbed by the foolish deed of her husband.
She said :—‘‘Once there was in a place a very poor
brahmin boy. He was an orphan with nobody to help
him and he suffered from hunger daily. One night
the boy had a dream. He was told that at midday
next day three beggars would come to his place and
if he slew them they would turn themselves into treasure jars and that the boy could become rich by
using the wealth so received. Next day the brahmin
boy was having his head shaved when as predicted in
the dream three beggars entered his house. The
brahmin boy ran away from the barber and taking a
stick thrashed the three to death. All the three turned
into treasure jars. The barber was astonished. The
brahmin boy gave the barber a sovereign taken from
the jar as his wages. The barber thought that beggars
would turn themselves into treasure jars if they were
thrashed to death. So he waited daily in his house
for beggars to enter his house. One day after a long
waiting three beggars entered his house and the barber
with a hard stick which he ‘had kept ready started
thrashing the beggars. The beggars shrieked and
shouted and ran away abusing the barber. Servants of
the King came on hearing this and took the barber
away and by the command of the King killed him
nailing him on to a spike. Yajfasena concluded by
saying that even death would be the result if one does
anything without properly understanding things.
PANCATIRTHA. A holy place. There is a pond at
this place. Once a nymph called Varga with her four
companions lived in this pond as crocodiles as a result
of a curse. Arjuna came to that pond and rescued them
from their curse. From that day onwards the pond
came to be known as Paficatirtha or Saubhadrakatirtha (For details see under Varga and Saubhadraka
tirtha ).
PA MGAVAKTRA. A soldier who fought bravely against
the asuras on the side of Subrahmanya.
PANCAVATI. The sacred place where Sri Rama built
an agrama and lived for some time with Sita and
Laksmana during their exile in the forests. There is a
story about Paficavati in the Kamba Ramayana.
Paficavati is on the southern bank of the Godavari.
Five Vatavrksas (banyan trees) stand here ina circle
and therefore, the place got the name Pajficavati. There
is a legend about these banyan trees. Once five Gandharva youths encircled the sage Agastya in the forest
as a sport and prevented him from moving towards any
direction. The enraged sage cursed them to stand in
the same position as banyan trees. Thus by obstructing
the movements of a divine man they were forced to
remain without movement as trees. Before they took
the form of trees they begged the sage for deliverance
from the curse. Agastya said, ‘“‘One day SriRama with
his wife and brother will come and stay inan asrama
built in your midst. Their holy presence will give
you salvation from my curse.”
6,7 Rama and Laksmana when they care to that
forest decided to build an 4srama in the centre of the
circle formed by the five banyan trees. Laksmana
started to build the hermitage. At first he cut down one
of the trees standing tall and straight and to the
d astonishment of all the fallen trunk of the
surprise an
d there in its place lay the dead
tree disappeared an

PANCAVIRA | 562 PANDAVAS
body of a demon youth. It was the body of Sambhu- While she was living in the palace of Kuntibhoja the
kumara, son of Sirpanakha. He was doing penance sage Durvasas came and stayed in the palace as the
there when Sri Rama came there with Sita and becom- king’s guest. Kunti was a little girl then and yet she
ing lustful at the sight of Sita he stood there as a tree. served the sage with such care, patience and devoIt was he who was cut down by Laksmana. | tion that the sage was greatly pleased with her and gave
$17 Rama understood the thing that happened. He her a divine mantra. He said : “If you call upon any
then explained to Sita and Laksmana many things god repeating this mantra he will manifest himself to
about the frauds and deceits of the demons. After that you and bless you with a son equal to him in glory an
they built their hermitage there and dwelt there for a valour. You can use this only five times.”? The impalong time. (Aranya Kanda, Kamba Ramayana) . tient curiosity of youth made Kunti give a test to the:
PANCAVIRA. A Sanatana Vigvadeva (one of the ten power of the mantra and though unmarried she invoke
deities supposed to be the sons of Visva). (Chapter 91, the Sun. The Sun immediately presented himself beAnugasana_Parva). fore her and by his grace she conceived and gota son
PANCAYAJNA. A sacred place of Bharata. He who whom she secretly set afloat in a river. A childless
visits this place would get moksa. (Chapter 84, Vana charioteér named Adhiratha happened to see the chi
Parva). and he took it home and brought it up. When he grew
PANCAYATANA. An idol of Siva in Kasi. This idol 1s up he was sent to Hastinapura and the sons of Dhrtacalled Orkara also. Bhagavan Parameévara who gives rastra took him in their service. He. was Karna, the
moksa to men dwells in this idol in the form-of Pafica- celebrated warrior of the Kauravas. Kunti marie’
yatana. The five souls - of Siva are the five ayatanas. Pandu after the birth of Karna.
They are Santi (tranquillity), Atitaganti (passed beyond Dhrtarastra got of Gandhari a andrea soxs and a
tranquillity ),Paraparavidya (Greater and smaller know- daughter named Dugfala. The children of Dhrtarast©4
ledge), Pratistha (celebrity) and Nivrtti (Recession) .
Because these five ayatanas dwell in the idol of Siva
‘at Kagi it got the name Paficayatana. (Chapter 34,
Padma Purana).
were known as Kauravas or Dhartarastras. Pandu Ss 4
a curse that he would die the moment he on
into sexual sport with his wives. (See under Kindam4 7,
te So under instructions from her husband Kunti jnvoxe
PANDA. One of the sons born to Kanva of his wife Dharma, Vayu and Indra and got the sons Yudhisthir
Aryavati. He married Sarasvatiputri and begot seven- = ; ‘ing oD
ae ' ining ~.
teen sons. They all became 1n the future originators of ee ar pie bears Seba mi a i Agvinlraces. (Pratisargasamhita, Bhavisya Purana). devas, Nasatya and Dasra and got two sons 1
PANDARA. A serpent born of the race of Airavata. This Nabala and Sahadeva. All these five were accepted as
serpent was burnt to death at the sarpasatra of Janame- the sons of Pandu and so the me of
: ad y got the na
jaya. (Sloka 11, Chapter 57, Adi Parva). Pandavas. (Upto Chapter 123, Adi Parva).
PANDAVAS. er the
< : 2) Life in inapura and the lac- incident. After ,
1) Origin. Santanu, a celebrated King of Candravamsa 2) eee artes tO a Oe ae Gee wc and child-
(lunar dynasty) had two wives, Ganga and Satyavatt. ren spent a very long time in the forest of Satasrng>”
Bhisma was the son of Ganga. After the birth of Bhisma Kagyapa, the royal priest of Vasudeva, performe p
Ganga his mother went to heaven. After that Santanu Upanayana (investiture with the sacred thread) 2”
married Satyavatl, mother of Vyasa. Satyavati got two such other religious ceremonies ordained for boy oc :
sons, Citrangada and Vicitravirya. Even while a They-were educated under the sage Suka. One day E
bachelor, Citrangada was killed by a Gandharva of the Spring season Pandu’s resolution broke dow?
che: sates, Bae PO) pabeay any 3 became King on under the exhilarating ‘influence of the season and b
Santanu’s death. Bhisma forcibly brought the three ht hold of Madri and embraced h despite ©7"
Aanchters of the Kine of Kasi n a Ashe ree caught hold o adri and embrace er Of p orice
Og wee ing of Kasi named Amba, Ambika nest and repeated protests from Madri. At |
and Ambalika for Vicitravirya to marry. But knowing the curse of the sage took effect and Pandu oe
that Amba was in Tove with the King of Salva, Bhisma dead. It was the custom then that the wife should ¢?
let her off on the way. Ambika and Ambalika became len Wife in. the ff 1 f her husband and S°
the wives of Vicitravirya. But for .a long ti er lite in. the funera pyre of her husbat adr}
no. sons i or a long time they had Kunti and Madri came forward to do so. But Mone
” 3 Sat a phe said that one of them should live to take car of re
At that time satyavat, mother of Vicitravirya, sent children and so entrusting her children also to the ©
for Vyasa her eldest son and asked him to beget sons of Kunti, Madri jumped into the funeral pyr ar
of Ambika and Ambalika. Ambika got Dhrtarastra of ended her life. The sages of the Satasrnga forest t0®
Vyasa and Ambalika, Pandu, father of the Pandavas. the children and Kunti to Hastinapura and handin6
Dhrtarastra was born blind and he married Gandhari. them over to the charge of Dhrtarastra came back.
5 s born ale-white in colour and h : ‘. : ee a at
Pando wether of the Pandavas, e married The Pandavas grew up in Hastinapura along wilt
, Kauravas. But there was no real affection or intimacy
Kunti was the sister of Vasudeva, father of Sri Krsna. P
‘between them. The naturally strong Bhima found *",.
The real name of Kunti was Prtha. urasena, King of sport to tease and torment the Kauravas whenever,
the Yadavas, W45, the father of Kunti and Vasudeva. got an opportunity. Gradually as the teasings of Bhim?
Because Kuntibhoja son of Sirasena’s sister, had no became unbearable a wicked thought of somehow py
issues Kunti was sent to the palace of Kuntibhoja_ and ting an end to Bhima’s life found place in the mi? fe
she grew Up there. Prtha got the name of Kunti be- of the Kauravas. They once poisoned Bhima and bi? at
cause of that. Besides Kunti, Pandu had another wife ing him tight with ropes threw him into the ocean.
named Madi. Bhima went to the world of the Nagas and came pac

PANDAVAS 563 PANDAVAS
unscathed with added siddhis (acquired power). This
annoyed the Kauravas. ;
It was at this time that Drona a renowned preceptor
in archery, came to Hastinapura. Bhisma enrolled the
Pandavas and the Kauravas as disciples of Drona. Arjuna
became an extraordinarily brilliant bow-man. This came
off as another reason for the Kauravas to drift away
from the Pandavas. After the: end of their course of
education a contest was held in which Arjuna ranked
first. The time came for Gurudaksin . (fees paid in
bulk at the end of the studies to a preceptor). Drona
asked his disciples to bring king Drupada bound hand
and foot before him. The Kauravas failed in that
mission and the Pandavas under the leadership of
Arjuna fulfilled the demand of their Guru.
When the training and Gurudaksina were over, Dhrtarastra crowned Yudhisthira as the heir-apparent and
this increased the power and status of the Pandavas
in Hastinapura. The jealousy of Duryodhana knew no
bounds when he found the Pandavas in the pinnacle of
power and popularity. He decided .to kill them. He
therefore, built a new palace in a place called Varanavata and with the permission of Dhrtarastra made
them change their residence to the new building.
The new building was cunningly built of lac aad
other combustible material. The wise and intelligent
beforehand and so he had
Vidura knew this deceit
warned the Pandavas of the danger through a messenger named Khanaka. The Pandavas had, therefore,
made ready a secret passage by underground te,
cape from the building when an emergency a :
passage was to lead them from the palace to ean
nearby. One night Purocana, a minister of Dee ae
came stealthily and set fire to the palace. The pe hes
with their mother Kunti escaped from the palace to the
fe ight a huntress and her five sons
Ee et ep ofthe building and they were
were sleeping in a part :
Bare tg dent, They wre a SSE roan ae
t ulldalllg -
so could not escape be ie nas Pandavas had to go
was burnt to death. Hl US ef period
away fi Hastinapura ior 4 f t
3) The Exile and vad. The Kauravas ea eet
Pandavas died in the fire and in nt padavad after
the funeral rites of their brothers. long distance
their escape from, the fire walled ks of the river
through the forests and came, 60 the ae aaiba attackGanga. On their way 4 demon named AN request 0
ed them and Bhima killed him but ridimbi- After -that
Dharmaputra married bis sistel Gos ossing the
ee ir journey Ct
while they were continuing tnetaratha attacked them.
river a Gandharva of nam d he later became
Citraratha was defeated in 4 sites them many vaiua le
friendly with the Pandavas. ae the story of Tapatipresents and also narrate ‘nthe house 0
Sarnvarana. Then they went and stayed as at that
f Eee eae held. The
a brahmin in the village 9° paficali was
time that the Svayamvaré of Fi ara and miarrie
Pandavas went for the Svayar pandavas were not
Paficali. The news then spread that sent for theman
dead but still alive. Dhrtarastt 1 “in Hastinapura.
2 ace 10
the Pandavas returned to their pf half of the country
Yudhisthira was crowned 4s is as Khandavaand he : ° ‘1 a place know? , demon
he built his palace 12 i ned an puilt by oe a5.
prastha. The palace was és! ostly di
Named Maya with beautiful Or ystals and ¢
When the Pandavas were living there Narada
went to them once. He suggested that Paficali should
remain ‘as wife to the Pandavas in turn, one year each
to one of them. They accepted the suggestion and
started living like that. Yudhisthira married Devika,
daughter of King Sibi, also. (Sloka 70, Chapter 95, Adi
Parva). Bhimasena and Arjuna with the help of Sri
Krsna slew Jarasandha. After that they conducted a
victory march over the country and established their
overlordship by conducting successfully a Rajasiya yajiia.
Duryodhana and his brothers once visited Indraprastha,
the palace of the Pandavas. They were fooled at the
palace and this enraged them. Duryodhana invited
Dharmaputra for a game of dice and the latter lost
everything. Yet Dhrtarastra gave them back everything
and sent them to Indraprastha again. Before Dharmautra reached the palace Duryodhana once again
challenged him for a game of dice. Despite protests
from all sides Dharmaputra went and played and lost
again everything. To fulfil the conditions of the game
Yudhisthira went to the forests with his brothers and
wife to spend twelve years in exile anda year incoynito. At that time Kunti lived with Vidura.
It was during this period of exile that the Pandavas
ot the Aksayapatra (never-empty pot) from the Sun.
They dwelt first in Dvaitavana and then in Kamyakavana. Then they went to the mountain of Gandhamaidana and from there to Badarikasrama. From
there they came back again to Kamyakavana and
while they were living there Duryodhana and his men
went to that forest to see the sufferings of the Pandavas
and gloat on their sad plight. But Citrasena, a Gandharva, captured Duryodhana and Arjuna got him
released. Duryodhana sent Durvasas to tease Dharmautra but the sage was sent back after being received
duly and well-attended to earn his blessings. During
their stay in that forest Jayadratha kidnapped Paficali
but the Pandavas rescued her immediately. ‘They went
from there again to Dvaitavana. Dharmadeva tested
them once while they were there. The twelve years of
exile came to anendandas per directions from Dharmadeva they spent their incognito period of one year in
the court of the King of Virata. After the end of their
incognito life the King of Virata gave in marriage his
daughter Uttara to Abhimanyu son of Arjuna.
Even after the return of the Pandavas from the
forests after successfully fulfilling the conditions of the
ame, Duryodhana showed obstinate reluctance to part
with even five pin-points of land in favour of the
Pandavas. A peace mission of Sri Krsna from the
Pandavas to avoid a war and settle matters amicably to
Dhrtarastra failed and the ‘stage was set for a grea
battle between the Pandavas and the Kauravas. |
4) Ascension to Heaven. A great and grim battle was
fought at Kuruksetra between the Pandavas and the
Kauravas lasting for eighteen days. Sri Krsna neither
fought nor took arms even once against the Kauravas
but acted as the charioteer of Arjuna. When the war
came to an end the Kauravas were completely annihilated.
Yudhisthira became King. He
medha Yaga. After a few years of reign the Pandavas
crowned Pariksit, son of Abhimanyu, as the King and
started for their Mahaprasthana (departing this life).
They walked in a line in the order of their age,
performed an Aéva-

- PANDU I.
-pRNDAVAPRAVESAPARVA
Dharmaputra leading and Parcali following last. At
Grst Paficali fell dead, but nobody turned back. Then
Sahadeva fell and nobody worried, This continued
thus till Dharmaputra was left alone. A dog which
followed them from their very start also remained
alive with Dharmaputra. The dog was none other than
Dharmadeva, father of Dharmaputra. When Dharmaputra reached the top of the Himalayas Indra was there
ready with the divine car to take him to heaven. But Dharmaputra said that he would not come to heaven leaving
his brothers and wife elsewhere. Then Indra informed
him that they were already in heaven and so Dharmaputra went to heaven with Indra. (Only a general and
succinct history of the
head. For details see under the heads of each of the
Pandavas as well as Paricali, Kunti, Bhisma and
Vyasa).
PANDAVAPRAVESAPARVA. A. sub-divisional Parva
of Virata Parva. This includes chapters two to eighteen
of Virata Parva.
PANDITAKA. One of the hundred sons of Dhrtarastra.
He was killed in the great battle by Bhimasena.
(Chapter 88, Bhisma Parva).
Father of the Pandavas.
1) Genealogy. Refer to the genealogy of Arjuna.
2) Birth. Santanu, a King of Candravamsa, had two
wives, Ganga and Satyavati. Even while Satyavatl was
amaiden she got of the sage ParasSara a son named
Vyasa. But because of the blessing of the sage Satyayati did not lose her maidenhood. She got of Santanu
two sons, Citrangada and Vicitravirya. Citrangada
died young. Vicitravirya married the two daughters,
Ambika and Ambalika, of the King of Kasi. Vicitravirya died before any progeny was born to him. To
save the dynasty from extinction Satyavati asked her
first son Vyasa to beget children of Ambika and
Ambalika. Accordingly Dhrtarastra was born to
Ambika of Vyasa and Panduto Ambalika. (Chapters
63 and 105, Adi Parva)
3) How Pandu got his name. Vyasa came to Hastinapura by the command of his mother to beget sons of
Ambika and Ambalika. Vyasa was an ugly sage with
matted hair and he was dressed in garments of
deerskin. Satyavatithat night called Ambika to her
side and in secret commanded her to go and lie with
Vyasa. She was reluctant to have a sexual union with
that old and ugly sage. Yet obeying the orders of her
mother-in-law she did so shutting her eyes during the
whole period. The result was she got a child born
blind who became known. later as Dhrtarastra. The
next day Satyavati ordered Ambalika to go and le
with Vyasa. Ambalika on entering the bed chamber
went pale on secing the ugly Vyasa and the result was
she gota child that was pale white in colour. That
child became known as Pandu. The third day Satyavati asked her servant-maid to go and lie with Vyasa.
She did it with pleasure and she remained happy and
cheerful during the whole period. The result was she got
4 beautiful child who became an intelligent scholar of
reat wisdom. He was known later as Vidura. (Chapis 1, 63, and 105, Adi Parva).
4) Boyhood and kingship. Bhisma took care of Dirtarastra, Pandu and Vidura as his Own sons. Bhisma
taught them all the Vedas including Dhanurveda, and
Pandavas is given under thisruled the country well. Once.
PANDU I
all warfare like mace-fight. They were trained in the
use of elephants also. Bhisma. taught them law_ and
acquainted them with all the Itihasas and Puranas.
Pandu became second to none in archery. The people
were all happy. When the boyhood was over Pandu
was crowned as Yuvaraja. Pandu was the most eligible
of the three to become King, for Dhrtarastra was 4
born blind man and Vidura was the son of a servantmaid. (Chapter 109, Adi Parva). ;
5) Married life. Obeying the behest of Bhisma, Pandu
married Prtha, daughter of the Yadava King Siirasena.
She was the sister of Vasudeva, father of Krsna. She
got the name Kunti because she grew up in the palace
of King Kuntibhoja. While Kunti was staying 1” the
palace of Kuntibhoja Durvasas came and stayed 1n on
the palace as a guest of the King. Kunti then serve
the sage with such devotion and patience that Durvasas at the time of his departure gave Kunti a divine
mantra for begetting children, The mantra was to a
used only five times. If she called upon any at;
repeating that mantra, that god would manifest himse®
before her and bless her with a son equal to him 1”
glory, Out of impatient curiosity of youth Kunti trie
it before getting married. One morning, seeing th©
beautiful and brilliant sun in the sky she invoked him
by the mantra and instantly the Sun stood in 4
bewitching brilliance before her and she got of him #
son who was known as Karna later. Unmarried as 52°
was, Kuntisent the child afloat in the river nearbyEven after a child-birth Kunti remained a virgin |
the blessing of the Sun and so got married as a virgin.
Many Kings were present for the Svayarnvara ©
Kunti and she put the wedding garland round the nec
of Pandu. :
Once Bhisma went to the country of Madra. The King
of Madra received Bhisma with respect and Bhismé
took Madri daughter of Madra as a bride for Pandu.
He brought her to Hastinapura and married _her nd
Pandu. Pandu lived with his _two- wives happily 4”
Pandu attacked Dasarn4
with a huge army and defeated him. Later he defeate
Dirgha, King of Magadha. Then he conducted #
victory march capturing many kingdoms like ast,
Mithila, Suhma and Pundra. Thus many of the King»
of Uttara Bharata became feudatory princes of PanduIn consultation with his brother Dhrtarastra, Pandu
gave all the wealth he got by his might to Satyavatt
and Bhisma. He gave enough riches to Vidura also.
Then Pandu went and stayed with his wives in 4
forest to the south of the Himalayas. (Chapters 110 to
114, Adi Parva). |
6) Curse of a sage. While Pandu was once walking
with his wives in the forest’ he saw a ‘couple of deet
playfully running about and the hunting nature _™
him made him send an arrow against one of them. The
deer was none other than the sage Kindama who 12
the guise of a deer was having sport with his mate.
While falling dead Kindama cursed Pandu thus “Oh
wretched King, you will fall dead the moment you
touch your wife in amorous sport.’’ From that day
onwards Pandu could not touch his wives. (For details
see under Kindama).
7) Sannyasa and death. With the death of the innocent
sage Kindama there occurred a great change in the
life of Pandu. At first he thought of committing suicide:

PANDU II 565 PANDYA II
But he changed that decision and started for the PANDURASTRA. A place of habitation in ancient
Himalayas to perform penance there. Kunti and Bharata. (Sloka 44, Chapter 9, Bhisma Parva).
Madri accompanied him. They gave away all their PANDYA. I. A King of Vidarbha who was a great devotee
jewels and ornaments as gifts to brahmins. People of Siva. One day while he was performing “Sivapaja at
followed them to the border of the forests and returned dusk he heard a loud noise outside the city and before
to the country weeping. Pandu and his wives visited completing the worship he went out and faced the
such holy places as NagaSatadri, Gaitraratha, Kalakuta, enemies who were attempting to enter the city and
Himalayas, Gandhamadana and the lake Indradyumna. killed its leader. He returned- after the fight and
Then they went to Satagrnga and started performing without completing the worship took his meals. It was
penance. Once Pandu and wives along with a few a sin to do so and the King was therefore born in his
sages went to Brahmaloka to attend a Yaga there. The next birth as Satyaratha, a King, and was killed by
long travel toiled them much and on the way Pandu his enemies. (Satarudrasamhita, Siva Purana).
wept thinking of his pitiable state of having no issue. PANDYA. II. (A Tamuilian dynasty of Kings.) A place of
Then Pandu told them of his helplessness in the matter Puranic fame in Daksina Bharata. The three states
because of the curse of the sage Kindama hanging over Cera, Cola and Pandya were from early times renownhim. Then Kunti confided in him the secret of the ed states of Daksina Bharata. Historically and Puranicdivine mantras in her possession. Pandu was extremely ally Pandya was a state of eminence.
pleased and with his permission Kunti got three sons, (A.) Historically. The Pandya dynasty of Kings 1s
Yudhisthira, Bhimasena and Arjuna. She gave one very ancient, I'he exact period of its beginning 1s stil]
chance to MAadri and she got two sons out of it named unknown. Megasthanes who lived in the fourth century
Nakula and Sahadeva. B.C. has made mention of the Pandya dynasty in his
Pandu was living happily with his children in Satasrnga diary. Julian, an emperor of Italy, who lived in 361
A.D. is stated to have received vis.tors from Pandyawhen spring time arrived in the forest with. all its , (
déga. The Pandya dynasty was revived and elevated
blossoming brilliance and fragrance conducive to ’ Wage
amorous thoughts in all living beings. Pandu one day under the leadership of Katunka in the 7th century A.D.
walked alone with Madri enjoying the sight of the From that time till the 16th century Madura was the
flowering plants and trees. Bees and Beetles hummed capital of Pandyadesa. The Uccangi dynasty which was
around the flowers and on the branches sat the Guckoos ruling the places to the south of Tungabhadra during
singing. There was a seductive fragrance all around and the period from 9th century to 13th century A.D. is
Pandu was excited beyond controllable limits. Panau’s believed to be a part of the Pandyavamga which had
resolution broke down under the exhilarating influence ae from Madura. continuous history of the Pandya
of the season and despite repeated protests from Madri, line of Kings is not available. Many Kings bear names
Pandu caught hold of her and embraced her. The like Jatavarma or, Maravarma. The Pandya Kings
curse of the sage took effect instantaneously and were devotees of Siva even from the period of the
Da ins fell GOwh Mead: Jane At pines Hey, Bae cet oer the combined
The inhabitants of Satagrnga assembled there weeping. hel Bite ed acne EN eee ae ee ee
the relatives
who had come down from Hastinapura the dead body
of Pandu was cremated according to religious rites.
Gve of thé most valiant rulers and at that time the
Pandyadeéga included all the places in south India up
to Nellore. But the power of the Pandyas waned when
In the presence of a huge crowd including
Both the wives came forward to end their lives in the ee ower of the Sultans who ruled Delhi s
\ : pread to the
funeral pyre of Pandu. ae Kunt anes ee ape south. After 1370 A.D only on rare: occasions has the
to take care of the sae FED han) ej into the funera power of the Pandyas spread to the north of river
children to the care of Kunti Jump Kaveri. In 1312 A.D. Kerala got herself free from the
ended her life. It was the sage Kasyapa who | A ren aries aby (Pane versie)
+ (Chapters 115 to
du.’ P (B) Purdric fame. The statements found in Mahabharata about PandyadeSa are given below :—
pyre and : i
performed the funeral rites of Pan
126, Adi Parva) .
shining in the
8) After the demise. Pandu’s soul 1s = *\ Sri Krsna once slew a Pand .
7. Sabha Parva ). (i) Sri Krsna once slew a candya King who was the
San t of Yama. (Sloka ae a ties from Devaloka. father of Malayadhvaja. Malayadhvaja who was a very
andu sent a message a eae, & Rajasiiya Yajfia. valiant archer started for Dvaraka to kill Krsna to
that Yudhisthira _shou'e 4 by Narada. ($loka 24; avenge the death of his father. Friends dissuaded him
The message was Carri oie ‘1 Indraloka with from his attempt and so he dropped the idea. During
Chapter 12, Sabha Parva ). ae ter 5 Svargarohana the time of Mahabharata Malayadhvaja was the King
Madri and Kunti. ( Sloka 15, Pees of Pandya. (Chapter 23, Drona Parva).
Parva). “€ ee under the (ii) Malayadhvaja, King o Pandya, was 4 frequent
9) Synonyms of Pandu. Pandu 1s <P Wha, Bharatasat- visitor to the court of Yudhisthira. (Sloka 24, Chapter
following names. Bharata, Bharatars$@ K » sravarsabha, 4, Sabha Parva).
( ili ) The King of Pandya presented gifts at the
Rajasuya of Yudhisthira. (Sloka 35, Chapter 52,
Sabha Parva).
(iv) In the Kuruksetra battle the Pandya King
fought on the side of the Pandavas with a large army.
(Sloka 9, Chapter 19, Udyoga Parva) .
(v) On the chariot of the Pandya King flags bearing
tama, Kaurava, Kauravanandana, , na,
Fn eae. yadayada, Kae eee spat
Kuridvaha, Kurukulodvaha, Kurunan ane a.
Kurupravira, Nagapuradhipa and NagaPp ( Chay ter
PANDU II. The second son of, Janamejay® ,
94, Adi Parva).
PANDURA. A_ soldier of Subrahmany4:
Chapter 45, Salya Parva).
(Sloka 73,

PANI (S) 566 PARABRAHMAN
the insignia of ocean flew. The Pandya King wounded the wife of the Guru and_ she took great interest in
Drona. (Sloka 72, Chapter 93, Drona Parva). Panini. One day she called Panini to her side and
(vi) The King of Pandya fought against Vrsasena and advised him to go to the Himalayas and do penance
Agvatthama. (Sloka 46, Ghapter 20, Karna Parva). to propitiate Siva to get knowledge from him. Panini
PANI (S). A tribe which opposed the Aryans during the obeying instructions went and performed penance.
time of Rgveda. Yaska’s Nirukta states that their Siva was pleased and he granted him knowledge about.
profession was trade and commerce. . a new grammar. By the time Panini came back from
PANIKHATA A holy place on the border of Kuru- the Himalayas with his grammar another . disciple of
ksetra. If one bathes in the sacred pond there and Varsa, Vararuci by name, had come down. with a
performs worship of the Manes one will get the benefit grammar from Indra. Panini challenged Vararuci for a
of conducting the three yajfias, Agnistoma, Atiratra polemical contest. It took eight days and on the eighth
and Rajasuya. (Sloka 89, Chapter 13, Vana Parva). day Vararuci defeated Panini. At once there was 4
PANIKURCCA. A soldier of Subrahmanya. (Sloka 76, great humming sound from the sky and the grammar
Chapter 45, Salya Parva). book of Vararuci was destroyed. After that Pann!
PANIMAN. Avserpent. ‘This serpent is a member of defeated all his co-disciples in polemics and emerge
the court of Varuna. (Sloka 10, Chapter 9, Sabha as the greatest grammarian of the world. (KathapithaParva). lambaka, Kathasaritsagara, Taranga 4).
PANINI. The author of the Sanskrit Grammar, Pani- 5) The birth of Pamniya. When Panini was doing
nya. ; penance to propitiate Siva the latter appeared before
1) General information. There is nowhere else in this him -and started dancing. He sounded his musical
world a grammar S0 scientific and so complete as ‘nstrument dhakka (a large double : drum) fourteen
Paniniya. The book contains about four thousand times. Each of it produced a different sound as follows
aphorisms. Panini was an inspited sage and he got his (1) Aiun (2) Rik (3) Eon (4) Aiauc (5) Hayavarat
knowledge from Siva. It has not been possible to gather (6) lan (7) famanananam (8) Jhabhai (9) Ghadhamuch information about the life of such a celebrated dhas (10) Jabagadadaé (1 1) Khaphachathathacatata®
grammarian. Patafijali believes that he was the son of (12) Kapay (13) Sasasar (14) Hal. Panini accept
Daksi. He addresses Panini as Acarya, Bhagavan and these fourteen sounds as fourteen sutras (aphorisms):
Maharsi. The Chinese traveller Huen Tsang says that They are called Pratyaharasutras. (The comprehensi0” :
the grammar of all the languages in this ‘world has its of several letters or affixes into one syllable effected
origin from Paniniya. Ramabhadradiksita says that by combining the first letter of a Sutra with its na
Panini was the son of the sage Pani. | indicatory _ letter.) These Sutras are now known as
2) Life period. There is difference of opinion regarding Maheévarasitras. —
the period during which Panini lived.Dr. Goldstucker and Panini’s grammar contains eight chapters and each —
Bhandarkar believe that Panini lived before 500 B.C. ~ chapter has got four padas and each pada contains
while Vincent Smith and Belvelkar fix the period in many sutras. He has taken examples from wOF dly
700 B.C. Patafijali, the author of the celebrated and spiritual texts in literature. He has dealt with the
‘Mahabhasya’ (commentary on Paniniya) lived in origin of sounds, connection between two words and
200 B.C. Patafijali has contradicted many of the un- all such etymological details. Panini’s grammar is not @
just criticisms made by Katyayana about Paniniya. So mere grammar book. It is a science of language a
Panini must have lived before Katyayana. Panini has self.
made, no reference to Buddha and so he must have PANITAKA. One of the two parsadas presented to
lived before Buddha. Panini has shown great grasp Subrahmanya by a deva named Pisa. ° The name of
over the laws of Smrti and so he must have lived after the other parsada was Kalika. (Sloka 43. Chapter 45;
Manu. Considering all these facts together it will be Salya Parva). Me
proper to fix the period of the end of the sixth century PANKADIGDHANGA. A deva who fought pravely
or the beginning of the seventh century B.C. against the asuras along with Subrahmanya. (Sloka 68;
a) Place of birth. Evidences are lacking to correctly Chapter 45, Salya Parva
fix the birth-place of Panini. Many pandits believe PANRAJIT.. “eed of ae (Sloka 10, Chapter 101;
that Panini was born in the village of Salatura in the Udyoga Parva). — LU;
city of Attock im tie state o: Gandhore: Bur Fagior Nes PAPASODHANA. Asacred place of Bharata. Indraspent the major portion of his life in Pataliputra. So datta, King of Cedi, once constructed a temple neat
some pandits are of opinion that only the ancestors this place. (Taranga 8, Kathasaritsagara ).
of Panini belonged to the village of Sslatura and PARAT. An ancient Kin ae Wharat (Sloka 934;
Panini was born and brought up in Pataliputra. Chapter 1, Adi Parva) g of lipeate.
Jaimini and Bhartrhari have stated that Panini was 4 pARA IT ‘ owe ye ye ee
Sista. Sistas were brahmins well-versed in the Sastras auenterd Fiase? mavadi son of Vigvamitra. (Slo
and devoid of earthly pleasures who inhabited the area x. apter 4, Anusasana Parva). )
surrounded by the Himalayas in the north, Kalakavana PARA. Another name for Kaugiki river. (Sloka Je
(Bengal) in the east, Vindhya mountains in the south Chapter 71, Adi Parva). 7
and the Adarsa (Aravalli mountains) in the west. PARABRAHMAN. The Supreme Spirit.
4) A legend. There ea prceeE named Varga 1n 1) General information. Brahman is the root cause of
Pataliputra and Panin had his education under. him. this universe. From Brahman originated Akasa (sky):
Varsa gradually acquired.a large number of disciples From sky came air, from air came Agni and #*
and Panini was the most dull-witted among them. But Agni came water and from water was born this earthhe was greatly devoted to his Guru and this pleased (Chapter 377,-Agni Purana). °

PARABRAHMAN
2) General characteristics. Brahman is such that he who
says he knows ic does not know it and he who says he
Joes not know it, knows it. It is beyond the experiences
of time and space. The chief attributes of Brahman
are Sat, Citand Ananda. Sat means existence, the
really existent truth. The one and undivided existence.
There are pandits who say. that it was undivided,
Nastitva (nonexistence) that was at the beginning
of the Universe. Since nothing can be born from
‘nothing’ the world should have started from astitva
(existence). There is a saying. in Rgveda explaining
the position thus ._“There was neither Astitva nor
Nastitva (existence or non-existence) at the beginning.”
It is a matter to ponder how strongly conscious Was
the Rsi who made the above statement about the
Parabrahman’s Nirgunatva (devoid of attributes) and
how clearly he tries to make it understandable to
those who have not exper! nced the idea.
Cit means knowledge, splendour, consciousness. Ananda
means bliss. Paul Deussen writes that the ancient
Upanisads do not snclude in the definition of Brahman
the term ‘ananda’.
3) The two forms of Brahman. Brahman has two forms—
Parabrahman and Aparabrahman. Parabrahman 1s
Amirta (formless, incorporeal ) and Aparabrahman 18
Marta (embodied, corporeal). The Amurta Brahman
is known by such names as Parabrahman, Paramatme
and Nirgunabrahman. The | corporeal oF material
Brahman is Aparabrahman and thus this whole world
is Aparabrahman.
4) The Upanisads about Brahman.
AS abdamasparsamaripamavyayar)
Tathasrasam. nityamagandhavacca yat |
Anadyanantam mahatah param
ica tyumukhat ramucyate //
Vicarya tanmrty¥ ; P Se aigadl)
form, taste or smell, oe
neither beginning nor end Brahman 1s imperishab e).
Na tatra caksurgacchati na vak gacchati no ma
Na vidmo na vijanimo yathaitadanusisyate |
Anyadeva tadviditadatho avicitegee ys ey
i = wesarn ye nastaavy ire. ;
Iti éugruma purvesam y a undakopanigad)
(No eye goes there, no word goes there, no mind, no
describe it—
; = ot see it, We cannot
soeepe tec mie cas or can you understand it—It
ou cannot imagine itn ae
i distinct from the eee ae above the unkno
We have heard it spoxe? thus). :
Yasyamatam tasya matarh matath Yaey ene veda.sab |
Avijiatam vijanatam vijnatam ay) (Kenopanisad)
3 - and he
(He understands It who compr chgnee ae Rieee It is
understands It not who feels he has Oo veal knowthe unknown to those w20 have Aer are ignorant
ledge while it is the known to
of true knowledge) - ;
Yat caksusa na pasyatt ©
Yena caksims! Po:
a vidal
Tadeva Brahma tvam cate. /
‘> wadidamupas®
Nedam y4 aad
(With no sound, touch,
those W
bu
(That which is not seen by tnt alone is
the eves are able to see ~ A
not that which people do worship here,
PARAMATMA
Yato vaco nivartante
Aprapya manasa saha. (Taittiriya Upanisad) .
Avijiatarh Vijanatam vijflatam avijanatam.
(Kenopanisad )
(It is unknown. to people who think they know but
- known to those who did not profess to know” it).
Naiva vaca na manasa praptum gakyo na caksusa /
Astiti bruvatos nyatra katham tadupalaksyate. //
| (Kathopanisad)
(It is not possible to reach it by speech, mind or the
eyes. How is it to be identified; or described?) —
Digdes agunadiphalabhedasunyam hi paramartha—
Sat tad advayam Brahma mandabuddhinam | asadiva
pratibhati. |
(Sankaracarya) .
The sublime Truth (Brahman) is beyond time, place
and attributes. Brahman is one (not two) and it is
Sat (existent ) but for the dull-witted, ignorant people
it is Asat (non-existent)
Satyamevopasate, tadetat tryaksaram satyamitl;
Sa ityekamaksaram, tya ityekamaksaram, prathamottame aksare satyam madhyato
Anrtam tadetatamrtamubhayatah satyena parierhitam satyabhiyameva bhavati.
| (Brhadaranyaka ).
Kohamasmiti satyamitl brayat kim tad yat
Satyamiti yadanyad devebhyagca pranebhyasca/
Tatsadatha yaddevasca pranasca tad utadeTayapicabhivy4hriyate satyamitye
Tadapatitam sarvamidam -
(Kausitaki Brahmana) .
Idarh sarvarh khalu brahma iti 4ntaupasita
Antarhrdaye esa me Atma manomayah
Pranaégarirah bharapah satyasankalpah akagatma sarvakarma sarvakamah sarvagandhah sarvamidamabhyatti.
| (Chandogya).
PARADA. An ancient place of Bharata. Those who
resided there were called Paradas. The descendants of
these people live in north Baluchistan. Paradas gave
Dharmaputra many valuable presents. (Chapter 51,
Sabha Parva). They followed Bhisma. (Chapter 87,
Bhisma Parva).
PARAHAN. A king of ancient Bharata. (Sloka 238, Chapter 1, Adi Parva, Mahabharata).
PARAMAKAMBOJA Aplace of habitation situated on the
northwestern side of Bharata. Arjuna conquered this
land. (Sloka 95, Chapter 27, Sabha Parva).
PARAMAKRODHI. One of the Visvadevas who are
worthy of accepting a share of the obsequial oblations.
The others are : Balandhrti, Vipapma, Punyakrt,
Pavana, Parsniksema, Samiha,. Divyasanu, Vivasvan,
Viryavan, Hriman, Kirtiman, Krta, Jitatma, Munivirya,
Diptaroma, Anukarman, Pratita, Pradata, Améuman,
&ailabha, Dhirosni, Bhipati, Sraja, Vajrivari, Vidyudyarcas, Somavarcas, Siryasri, Somapa, Siryasamitra,
Dattatma, Pundariyaka, Usninabha, Nakoda, Visvayus,
Dipti, Camihara, Suregéa, Vyomari, ankara, Bhava,
Iga, Karta, Krti, Daksa, Bhuvana, Divyakarmakrt,
Ganita, Paficavirya, Aditya, Rasmiman, Saptakrt,
Somavarcas, Visvakrt, Kavi, Anugopta, Sugopta, Napta
and Iévara. (Chapter 91, Anugasana Parva).
PARAMANU. See under ‘Trasarenu. ,
PARAMATMA. The Supreme Spirit. The vitality behind
Jivatma (soul). (See under Jivatma and Brahman).

PARAMESTHI I
PARAMESTHI I. A king of Candravamsa (Lunar race).
He was the son of Indradyumna and the father of
Pratihara. (Chapter I, Arméa |, Visnu Purana).
PARAMESTHI I. A Vaidikasiktadrasta. He was a
disciple of Brabma. (Brhadaranyaka Upanisad) .
According to Jaimini Brahmana Paramesthi was the
disciple of Prajapati. |
PARAMESTHI Ill. A king of Paficaladega. He was
born to Ajamidha of Nilt. Paramesthi and the sons of
Dusyanta, his brother, are known as Paficalas. (Adi
Parva, Mahabharata) .
PARANTA. A place of habitation of ancient Bharata.
(Sloka 47, Chapter 9, Bhisma Parva).
PARAPURANJAYA. A prince of the Hehaya race. He
once sent an arrow against a sage mistaking him to be
a wild animal. (See under Aristaneml).
PARASARA I.
1) Genealogy. Descending ‘1 order from Visnu-—Brahma
—Vasistha—Sakti—Parasara.
2) Birth. Sakti, son of Vasistha begot of his wife
Adrsyanti the son named Parasara. Even at the time of
his birth he was a scholar. (For details regarding birth
see under Adrsyanti).
3) Raksasayaga. Even before the birth of Parasara,
Kalmasapada in his demoniacal form ate his father,
Sakti. Therefore Paragara nurtured an obstinate hatred
against the Raksasas. So he performed a Yaga to “kill
all the raksasas. Thousands of raksasas were burnt to
death at this yaga and Vasistha, grandfather of
Paragara felt sorry for the innocent raksasas. He
approached Parasara and said “Son, do not give way
to such anger. Abandon _ this wrath. What harm have
these poor raksasas done? Death was in the destiny of
your father. Every one has to suffer the result of his
own deeds. Anger destroys the fame and austerity which
one has attained by years of toil. Therefore abandon
_ your anger and wind up your Yaga.” .
Paragara accepted the abvice of his grandfather.
Vasistha was pleased with his grandson and at that
time Pulastyamaharsi son of Brahma also came there.
Vasistha gave arghya (water and flowers) and received
him. Then Vasistha and Pulastya jointly blessed him
and said he would be the author of Puranasamhita.
Thus Paragara became the best of the Guruparampara
(traditional line of preceptors). (Chapter 1, Amsa |]
Visnu Purana). ;
4.) Birth of Vyasa. Paragara begot a son of a fisherwoman named Satyavati and the boy became later the
celebrated Vyasa.
5) Other detauls.
(i) He got the name Paragara because even from the
womb of his mother he consoled Vasistha when his son
Sakti, father of Paragara was eaten by the demoniac
form of Kalmasapada.
(ii) See under Guruparampara the status of Paraéara in
that traditional line of Gurus.
(iii) Among the Suktas, Sukta 65, Anuvaka 12, Mandala
| of Reveda was sung by Parasara.
(iv) Paragara was one among the several sages who
visited Bhisma lying 0? his bed of arrows. (Chapter 4/7,
Santi Parva). 7 k
(y) Once Paragara visited lang Jane a and talked with
him on Adhyatmika topics (spiritua matters ). (Chapter
990, Santi Parva).
PARASURAMA
(vi) Chapter 150 of Anugasana Parva mentions Parasara
as describing the power of Savitrimantra to an
audience. a
PARASARA II. A_ serpent born of the family of
Dhrtarastra. This was burnt to death at the sarpasatra
of Janamejaya. (Sloka 19, Chapter 57, Adi Parva).
PARASARYA I. Vyasa, son of sage Paragara. (See unde!
Vyasa ). ;
PARASARYA Il. This sage is different from Vyasa. This
Paragarya was a member of the court of Yudhisthira.
(Sloka 13, Chapter 7, Sabha Parva). He was 4 member
of the court of Indra also. Sri Krsna once met him while
he was going to Hastinapura from Dvaraka. (Sloka 64,
Chapter 83, Udyoga Parva).
PARASAVA. Achild born toa brahmin of a sadra WO"
man. Vidura was a son born to Vyasa of a gadra wo"
man:‘and was therefore called Parasava. (Sloka 25;
Chapter 101, Adi Parva). . ef
PARASIKA. A place of human habitation in ancie®
Bharata. (Sloka 25, Chapter 9, Bhisma Parva). .
PARASURAMA. An incarnation of Mahavisnu, as man.
1) Genealogy. Descending in_ order from Mahavisnu
Brahma - Bhrgu-Cyavana - Urva- Rcika - Jamadage’
Paragurama. —
2)\Canse for incarnation. Once god Agni went to gnc
viryarjuna and begged for food. The king allowed 4! d
to take from his vast territory as much food as he acne
from anywhere he liked. Agni started burning fores
and mountains and consuming them. Deep inside ©
of the forests a sage named Apava was performin§
penance and the fire burnt the aSrama of pava ms
Enraged at this the sage cursed thus : “Kartaviryanu™ ?
‘5 at the root of this havoc. The arrogance of Ksatriy®”
has increased beyond limits. Mahavisnu would there
fore be born on earth as Paragurama to destroy * 4
arrogance of the Ksatriyas.” Accordingly Mahavis?™
was born as ParaSurama in the Bhargava race. Chap
ter 40, Harivarnga).
Brahmanda Purana gives another version: Vist vii
mised Bhimidevi (mother earth) that he would be ber
on earth as Paragurama when Bhimidevi went to him Fs
the form of a cow and complained -to him about ¢
atrocities of the wicked Ksatriya kings. -
3) Barth. Paragurama was born as the son of $08
Jamadagni of his wife Renuka. Their aSrama was -
the shores of the Narmada river. Renuka, mothet
Paragurama, was the daughter of King Prasenajit:
had four sons even before the birth of Paragura™
(Chapter 58; Brahmanda Purana). d
4) Boyhood and education. ParaSurama spent his boyho°
with his parents in the aSrama. An 1
in his life then was his slaying his mother at the
of his father. (See under Jamadagni, Para 6). Th
Paragurama was a brahmin there is nothing om ree
to show that he did study the Vedas. Perhaps he mig
have had the Vedic instructions from his father durin’
his life with him. He had even from the begin’
shown an interest in learning Dhanurvidya (archery /
For obtaining proficiency in archery he went to ¢
Himalayas and did penance to please Siva for many
years. Pleased at his penance Siva on several occasio?
one
u TO"
extolled the virtues of Parasurama. At that time ae
asuras (demons) acquired strength and attacke le
devas. The devas complained to Siva. Siva cal
Paragurama and asked him to fight with ard defe

PARASURAMA
the semdon. Paragurama was without weapons and he
asked Siva how he could go and fight the demons
without weapons. Siva said: “Go with my blessings
end you will kill your foes.” Para urama did not wait
fora moment. When Siva thus assured him of success,
on he went straight to fight with the demons. He
defeated the asuras and came back to Siva when the
latter gave him many boons and divine weapons.
Till that time his name was only Rama and he became
Paragurama because among the weapons given to him
by Siva was a weapon named Parasu (axe). There is a
story behind this weapon Paragu. Once Siva was not
invited for a Yaga conducted by Daksa. An angered
Siva threw his spike into the Yagasala (sacrificial hall).
The spike spoiled the Yaga and smashed the hall and
after that roamed about aimlessly for sometime and
then turned towards Badaryasrama where at that time
Naranarayanas were engaged in penance. The spike
went straight to the heart of sage Narayana. Narayana
made the defiant sound ‘hum’ (hurnkara ) and the spike
turned away. Siva felt angry for thus showing disrespect to his spike and he attacked the sage. At once
- Nararsi plucked a grass and reciting a mantra threw it
at Siva. The grass became 4 Paragu (axe) and it
attacked Siva. Siva broke it into two. Then NaraNarayanas bowed before him and worshipped him. Thereafter the two pieces of the Paragu remained with Siva.
It was one of these that Siva gave to Parasurama.
When Paragurama was returning happy and glorious
with boons and weapons he got on his way 4 disciple
named Akrtavrana. (See under Akrtavrana) _ Guru and
an agrama and Paragurama became a
( Chapter 34,
dhanurveda, ( archery ).
disciple lived in
Parva and Chapter 18,
noted Guru in
Karna Parva; Chapter 49, Santi
Anugasana Parva). 7
5) Instruction in archery. According
rama did not spend his life as.an imstruc
There are statements, however mien?
and Drona took instructions Irom ;
Pretending to be a brahmin Karna commence? eae
instructions in archery from Paraguramas Tt kim
education was complete Paragurama [tallg
Brahmastra. One day tired after 4 long walk in the
forests Paragurama took rest placing bas head at
lap of Karna and soon fell asleep. At oe re thigh of
‘came and started sucking blood fa h : yea lest
Karna. Karna remained still, bearing ' te leep of
f his body should disturb the sie F ‘
fro highs and 1
any movement 0 :
his Guru. Blood was oozing ; 4
slowly made the body © u_also wet. Parasuram
woke up and the sight oF!
calm demeanour of Karna fs a.
questioned Karna saying tha »rna had to
bear such a pain with such calmness aS ce for deceit
tell the truth. Then Para‘ urama ould never be able
against his Guru saying that he ‘a the time to Use
to remember the Brahmastra W
it came. e that bit
AIM cory behind Arka IB Pa demon
Karna. This beetle was in his prev olest the wife of the
named Darhéa. Damsa once tried to are made him into
nage Bhrea, The Maharsi cursed "°° ‘pe said he won
a beetle, On his request 107 ae gurama. So the beetle
get release from the curse by Pare
to Puranas Paras utor in archery.
g that Karna
PARASURAMA
ini, se ae a ee
(Santi ‘Parva, Chapter 3). ne os
Another famous disciple of Paragurama was Drona
There is a story behind Drona getting Dhanurveda
from Paras urama. After travelling throughout the world
exterminating the Ksatriya race Paragurama gave all his
wealth to Kagyapa. On hearing that ParaSurama was
giving away all his riches as gifts to brahmins Drona
rushed to Mahendraparvata to see Parasurama. By then
Parafurama had distributed all his wealth excepting
Dhanurveda. Paragurama called Drona to his side and
said that only two things remained with him, his body
and Dhanurveda. Drona, he added, could take anyone
of the two and then Drona took Dhanurveda from him
After that ParaSurama went to Maharanya for the Bake
of penance. (Chapter 130, Adi Parva).
There are some apparent inconsistencies in the above
stories: It is said Drona taught Dhanurveda to Karna
Drona was the last person to receive Dhanurveda from
Paragurama because the latter, surrendering his Dhanurveda in entire, left for the forests for doing penance
Then, when did Karna learn Dhanurveda from Paragurama? Could it be before Drona went to Paragurama?
Then it must be accepted that Drona had not vrudied
under Parasurama when he was teaching the
the Pandavas and Kauravas. He learnt it from somewhere before he became the preceptor of the Pandavas
Karna after studying under Drona for some time went
to Paragurama for higher studies and Drona approached
Paragurama after Karna had left him.
6) The destruction of the Ksatriyas. The most important
event of his life was the total extermination of the
Ksatriya race. The Puranic belief 1s that he went
round the world eighteen times to massacre the
Ksatriyas.
In many places in the Puranas it isstated that Paraésurama
fought against the Ksatriyas eighteen times. But in
chapter 29 of ASvamedha Parva it is stated that Paraéurama fought against the Ksatriyas twentyone times
So it is to be surmised that Paragurama fought eighteen
big battles and three minor ones.
There are some old stories to explain this revengeful
enmity of Paragsurama towards the Ksatriyas.
(1) Family enmity. The Hehaya dynasty was the most
powerful kingly race then. Parafurama was a descendant of Bhrgu, a brahmin sage. That is why he gets
the name Bhargava also. The Bhargavas were for generations the family preceptors of the Hehaya kings
Taking advantage of their supreme position in the royal
palace the Bhargavas accumulated great wealth at the
cost of the royal riches. Gradually the Bhargavas rose
in prosperity in inverse proportion to the decline of
the Hehaya wealth. It was at the time of Rcika, grandfather of Parasurama that they touched the rock-bottom
of their wealth and they found funds lacking even for
the day to day administration of the state. In despair
they went and requested the Rcikas to lend them some
money. But they hid their money and refused to give
them anything. The Ksatriya kings got angry and
killed the brahmins. What stock was left of them went
to the base of the Himalayas. The wife of Rcika who
was pregnant then kept the child in her womb for twelve
years afraid to bring forth the child. After that the

PARASURAMA
child came out breaking open the thigh (iru) and
so the child was called Aurva. Even at the time of his
birth Aurva shone like a brilliant torch and‘not only
that; the child cried aloud “Oh, wicked Ksatriyas, I
will kill every one of you. 1 heard from my mother’s
womb the din of the swords you raised to kill my
ancestors. I will never wait for another moment to wreak
vengeance On you.”
The fire that emanated from the face of Aurva burnt
even Devaloka. Ksatriyas as a class came and prostrated
before him. The devas came and requested him to
abandon his anger and Aurva agreed, The devas picked
up the fire sparks from Aurva’s face and deposited
‘hem in the ocean. From those sparks put in the ocean
was born Badavagni alias Aurva.
(ii) Curse of the sage. From Aurva was born Jamadagni
and from Jamadagni was born Paragurama. In the
race of the Hehayas was born at that time a very valoroug king named Kartaviryarjuna. Once Kartaviryarjuna
gave a dinner to Agnibhagavan. Agni began to devour all
the mountains and forests in the world. The burning was
so indiscriminate that it burnt the aframa of a sage
named Apava also. The sage cursed Kartaviryarjuna
saying that the thousand hands of the latter would be
cut off by PasaSurama born in the family of Bhargavas.
From that day onwards the latent feud in him against
the Bhargavas was roused into action.
(iti) Varuna’s ridicule. Kartaviryarjuna who got a thousand hands by a boon from a sage named Dattatreya
subdued all enemies of his status and not satisfied
with that he went to the shores of the ocean and _ challenged Varuna for a fight. Varuna came before him and
very modestly admitted that he was incapable of meeting the challenge thrown and suggested that perhaps
Jamadagni’s son, ParaSurama might accept the challenge and give hima fight. Hearing this Kartaviryarjuna turned towards the asrama of Jamadagni on the
shores of the Narmada river.
(iv) Causes of the war (zmmediate ). Kartaviryarjuna went
for hunting in the forests and feeling exhausted after
some time went to the asrama of Jamadagni with his
retinue. Jamadagni received them well and with the
help of the Kamadhenu (wish-yielding cow) named
Susila, Jamadagni gave a sumptuous feast to the King
and his followers. When after the meals were over
they started to take leave of the sage, Candragupta, a
minister of Kartaviryarjuna brought to the notice of the
king the superior powers of the Kamadhenu, Suégila. The
king wanted to get the cow and asked Candragupta to
tell the sage about it. Though the minister told Jamadagni about the royal desire the sage refused to part
with the cow. Then the minister with the help of the
other royal servants took the cow by force and the sage
followed the cow weeping. On the way Candragupta
beat Jamadagni to death and brought the cow to the
presence of the king. The king was pleased and the royal
hunting party returned to the palace happy.
J amadagni’s wife Renuka went in search of her hus-
‘band and to her grief found him lying dead. Renuka
wept beating her breast twentyone més and by that
time her son Para urama came there and he declared
that he would travel round the world twentyone times,
the number of times his mother beat her breast, to kill
and exterminate the Ksatriyas from this world. ‘Then
the dead body of Jamadagni was placed on a pyre and
PARASURAMA
they were singing Visnugita before placing fire on the
pyre when ukramuni appeared there and brought
Jamadagni to life by invoking the art of Mrtasanjivanl.
By that time Susila somehow escaped from the custody
of the King and came there without the calf. Then
Paragurama vowed that he would bring the calf soon and
taking with him his disciple Akrtavrana he left for the
city of Mahismati the abode of Kartaviryarjuna. There
they fought a grim battle and after killing Kartaviryatjuna and many of his followers brought back the ca:
T’o atone for the sin of this massacre Jamadagni advised
his son to go and perform penance in Mahendragt?.
Taking advantage of the absence of ParaSurama from
the agrama, Surasena son of Kartaviryarjuna, with his
followers went to the asrama of Jamadagni and chopped off his head. Parasurama returned from Mahendragiri at once and cremated the dead body of his father.
Renuka, his mother, jumped into the funeral pyt®
and abandoned her life. From that moment onwar?®
started Paraéurama’s fierce programme of mass . mass”
acre of the Ksatriyas.
(v) Victory march. Para‘urama’s world-tour was COD"
fined to an all-Bharata tour. The wars of Paraguram4
are not described in detail in the Puranas. They men
tion that Paragurama killed the Kings of Cola, Cera
and Paundra. To stop the birth of Ksatriyas in fot
Paragfurama destroyed even the embryo in the worn®
of Ksatariya women. ‘Then the Bhargava ancestors ike
Reika and others came to the sky and requested Paras 0°
rama to stop this slaughter. They gid: “Ob 50%
Rama, stop this slaughter. What good do you get by
killing innocent Ksatriyas ?”’ By that time Paragurame
had made twentyone rounds around Bharata killing Ke
Ksatriyas. (Chapter 64, Adi Parva; Chapter 35, Sab 5
Parva; Chapter 116, Vana Parva; Chapter 49, ons
Parva and 10 chapters from chapter 83 of Brahmat
Purana). “ee
A) Samantapaficakanirmana. Samantapaficaka 15 Kut
ksetra itself where the great battle was conduct® .
This is a holy place and it was Parasgurama a cs
constructed it. He stored the blood of the Ksatriya
killed in the twentyone rounds of killing in five /4 em
Samantapaficaka. He offered blood to the Manet ore
those lakes. The Manes led by Rcika appeared be -
him and asked him to name any boon he wanted. The
Paragurama said, “Revered Manes, if you are pleas® :
with me you must absolve me from the sin of this
massacre of the Ksatriyas and declare the five
where I have stored their blood as holy.”” The Marie
declared, ‘Let it be so”? From then onwards \ "
place became holy under the name Samantapanc ce
‘At the end of the Dvaparayuga and the beginning
Kaliyuga a great battle lasting for eighteen days Oe
place at this holy place between the Pandavas 4” :
Kauravas. (Chapter 2, Adi Parva). 4
8) Atonement. To atone for the sin of slaughtering Ns
innocent Ksatriyas, Paragurama gave away % ins
riches as gifts to brahmins. He invited all the brahmi”
to Samantapaficaka and conducted a great Yaga SyI6E 3
The chief Rtvik (officiating priest) of the Y48* wa
the sage Kasyapa and Parasurama gave all the Jan i.
he conquered till that time to Kagyapa. Then 4 pia 5
form of gold ten yards long and nine yards wide Z
made and Kagyapa was installed there and worshipP® ¢
After the worship was over according to the instruc?

ee
PARASURAMA
from Kagyapa the gold platiorm was cut into pieces
and the gold pieces were offered to brahmins.
When Kaéyapa got all the lands from Parasgurama he
said thus: ‘Oh Rama, you have given me all your
land and it is not now proper for you to live in my
soil. You can go to the south and live somewhere on
the shores of the ocean there.” Paragurama walked
south and requested the ocean to give him some land to
live. Varuna then asked him to throw a Wwinnow into
the ocean. There is a legend saying that it was a
Paragu that Paragurama threw. Paragurama threw the
sieve ($irpa) and the ocean gave Way to land for a
distance where the winnow fell from where he stood.
This is the place Sarparaka now known as Kerala.
(Sirpa=Winnowing basket). After giving this land
also to the brahmins, Parasurama went and started
doing penance at Mahendragiri. (Chapter 130, Adi
Parva; Chapter 11/, Vana Parva and Chapter 49,
Santi Parva).
9) Other exploits of Parasurama.
(1) Meets Sri Rama. &3 Rama and Laksmana were
returning to Ayodhya from Mithilapuri after the
marriage along with the sage Wasistha through a deep
forest when Paragurama blocked their way and addressing Sri Rama said thus ,“Oh Rama, son of Dasaratha,
I heard that you broke during the marriage of Sita the
sreat Saiva bow of the palace of Janaka. It was @
Gaiva bow andI have now come here to test your
prowess. I am giving you 4 Vaisnava bow now. Can
you string this bow ?” ;
Vasistha tried his best to pacify im, i
Paragurama without heeding it started describing the
story and greatness of the Saiva bow ang ne Boake
bow. (See under Vaisnava bow). Then 91 - ama Be
the bow from Parasurama and started to string it. 5
brilliance of Sri Rama dazzled him and he ie
dumbfounded at his skill. Paragurama was at
pleased and he blessed Sri Rama. “Alter that he we
again to Mahendragiri “ pe peat 5
Thi e story is told 1m a
se slight apatices ._—Paras urama die not like Sri
Rama breaking the et a fn 5 Me
angered Paragurama blocks !
challenged him to string and take aim with ae ee
Vaisnava bow he (Paragurama) was ae ere
then. Sri Rama with perfect ease took the wy ‘awit
it, and taking the missile asked Pate
target. Paragurama was astonished an
The missile could destroy ¢V fare
Sa = + the accumu
Parasurama asked a by nenntiee) of his self and
tapobala (power accru® dered ‘to ST!
r 2 EBS sgurrendere :
Rama did so. Then Paragurama the Vaisnava
a . arrow an 24
Rama the Vaisnava bow and him, Parasurama after
tejas (divine brilliance) 12 ‘eld on
; ; jg incarna
having carried out the purpose at ose of his
a
) i Ra tinue the PUurP
instructions to Sri Rama tO continu P
ti after blessing ri Ram
incarnation and then =
again to do penance at his holy ae,
zoe same story is_ tol by the ae ots This Ya b
anda ing t : . When the
much acetate ‘trom the previous or ings spread far
fame that Sri Rama ws t ihe Sri Rama.
and wide Parasurama once wet sh which he ha
Giving him the bow and arrow fives he challenged
done the mass massacre of the Ksatr!)
Parasurama. But
en the entire Universe. %°
Lomas
PARASURAMA
him to string it and take aim. W ith a smile Sri Rama
did so and then Paragurama_ said Rama should draw
the string up to his ears. Sri Rama got angry and then
on the face, which became fierce, by his anger, Parasurama saw besides himself, Aditya-Vasu-Rudras, Sadhyas, Balakhilyas, Devarsis, oceans, mountains, the
Vedas and all such things of this universe. Sri Rama
sent out his missile from the bow. The whole universe
was thrown into chaos. Thunder and lightning rocked
the world. Heavy rains flooded the whole land space.
Burning stars and meteors fell to the ground. Parasuama then knew that Sri Rama was the incarnation of
Mahavisnu and he stood bowing before him. Ashamed
of his defeat he took leave of Sri Rama and went to
Mahendragiri. When he reached there he found he had
lost all his brilliance. Then the manes appeared and
advised him to go and bathe in the river Vadhisara. Accordingly Parasurama went and bathed in the
river and regained his lost brilliance. (Chapter 99,
Vana Parva).
(ii) Parasurama and Sri Krsna. The Puranas describe
two important occasions when Paragurama met orl
Krsna.
The first meeting was at the mountain of Gomanta.
Once Sri Krsna and Balarama with a view to enjoying
the abundance of Nature went to the beautiful
mountain of Gomanta and ascended to its top. On their
way they met Parasurama engaged in penance there. They
exchanged greetings and talked to each other for some
time. Then Parasurama requested Sri Krsna to kill
Srgalavasudeva, King of Karavira on the base of that
mountain. S+i Krsna promised to do so and left the
place carrying with him the blessings of the sage.
The second meeting was when Krsna was going to the
court of the Kauravas as a messenger of the Pandavas.
On his way Sri Krsna saw a company of sages coming
and, alighting from his chariot Krsna talked with them.
Parasurama who was in that company then embraced
Krsna and said that he should give a true picture of
the situation to the Kauravas when he was conducting
his mission. The sages blessed Krsna and wished Krsna
all success in his mission. (Chapter 83, Udyoga Parva;
10th Skandha, Bhagavata ).
10) Other details.
(i) Paragurama along with a few other sages , was
resent at the Sabhapravesa of Dharmaputra. (Sloka
11, Chapter 53, Sabha Parva).
(ii) Paragurama was present at the cour: of the
Kauravas when 971 Krsna was speaking to Dhrtarastra
on behalf of the Pandavas. When the Kauravas did not
reply the questions put by Sri Krsna, ParaSurama rose
up to tell a story to illustrate the evils resulting from
the arrogance of man. There was once a King calle
Dambhodbhava who was very arrogant because of his
great strength. He wanted to diffuse his energy by
fighting and laboured much to get good opponents and
roamed about in search of fighters. One day the
brahmins directed him to Naranarayanas and accordingly Dambhodbhava went to their agrama at
Badarika and challenged them for a fight. They refused
to fight and yet the King showered arrows on them.
Then the sages took a few blades of the isika grass and
threw them at him. They filled the sky as great
missiles and the King begged ta be pardoned and
prostrated before the sages. They sent back the be-

PARASURAMAKUNDA 572
fooled King to his palace. (Chapter 96, Udyoga
Parva ).
(iii) Once a grim battle was waged between Parasurama and Bhisma. (See under Amba).
(iv) ParaSurama sits in the court of Yama. (Sloka 19,
Chapter 8, Sabha Parva). i
PARASURAMAKU®’DA. Another name for Paraguramahrada. Paraguramakunda comprises of five pools
of blood called Samantapaficaka constructed by Parasurama on the borders of Kuruksetra. (See under
Parasurama). )
PARASUVANA. A forest in hell. The sinners after
climbing out of Vaitarani, a river in hell in which hot
blood flows, reach Asipatravana. There the bodies of
the sinners are cut by the leaves of asipatra which are
as sharp as a sword’s edge. Leaving that they reach
Parasuvana. (Sloka 32, Chapter 322, Santi Parva).
PARATANGANA. A place of habitation of ancient
Bharata. (Sloka 64, Chapter 9, Bhisma Parva).
PARAVAHA. One of the seven forms of Vayu. Pranavayu has got seven forms :—
1) Pravaha. This vayu makes lightning in the sky.
2) Avaha. It is by this vayu that the stars shine and
waters of the ocean go up as water-vapour and down as
rains.
3) Udvaha. This vayu makes movements among the
clouds and produces thunder.
4) Sarmwvaha. This vayu beats the mountains. Sarmvaha
is also engaged in shaping the clouds and producing
thunder.
5) Vyavaha. Preparing holy water in the sky and
making Akagaganga stay there static is the work of this
vayu.
6) Pidiiahi. This vayu gives strength to one who sits
in meditation.
7) Pardévaha. Itis this vayu that fans the devas to
make them cool. (Chapter 329, Bhisma Parva).
PARAVARTANAKA. One of the twentyeight hells.
(See under Kala).
PARAVASU. Son of a sage called Raibhya. He was_ the
brother of Arvavasu. (See under Arvavasu ).
PARAVATA. A serpent born in the family of Airavata.
This serpent was burnt to death at the Sarpasatra of
Janamejaya. (Sloka 11, Chapter 57, Adi Parva).
PARAVIDYA. See under Aparavidya.
PARIBARHA. One of the children of Garuda. (Chapter
101, Udyoga Parva).
PARIBHADRIKAS. The inhabitants of the place called
Paribhadra. The soldiers from Paribhadra fought on the
side of Duryodhana during the great battle. (Sloka 9,
Chapter 51, Bhisma Parva).
PARIGHA I. One of the five parsadas_ presented to
Subrahmanya by the deva, Amsa. The other four are:—
Vata, Bhima, Dahati and Dahana. (Chapter 138,
Santi Parva). eds a:
PARIGHA II. A forester. (See under Bidalopakhyana ).
PARIHARA. A King of the country of Kalafjara
situated near Citrakuta. Parihara who was an
Atharvaparayana (devoted to the Atharvaveda) ruled
the country for twelve years and during his reign he
gave a strong opposition to the spread of Buddhism.
(Pratisarga Parva, Bhavisya Pur ana ). by hae
PARIHYANGA. A maharsi. One of the sons born to
Rsi Matic: of his wife Urna. There were six sons and
the five others were Smara, Udgitha, Ksudrabhrt,
PARIKSIT I
Agnisvatta and Ghrni. In his next birth he was born
as one ofthe relatives of Sri Krsna and was killed by
Karhsa. (10th Skandha, Bhagavata).
PARIJATA I. The sage who came to the court of Maya
along with Narada. (Chapter 5, Sabha Parva).
PARIJATA II. See under Kalpavrksa. . a
PARIJATA III. A serpent born in the family of Airavata. This serpent was burnt to death at the Sarpasatra of Janamejaya. (Sloka 11, Chapter 51, Adi Parva).
PARIJATAKA. A sage who was a_ brilliant member of
the court of Yudhisthira. (Sloka 14, Chapter 4, Sabha
Parva).
PARIKSITI. A brilliant King of Candravarnia. He
was the grandson of Arjuna and son of Abhimanyu.
(For genealogy see under Abhimanyu) .
1) Birth. Pariksit was the son born to Abhimanyu of
Uttara. This was a still-born child and it was 9!
Krsna who gave it life. There is a_ story in Mahabharata about this :
Uttara, wife of Abhimanyu, was pregnant when the
war between the Pandavas and Kauravas started at
Kuruksetra. Agvatthama, son of Drona, entered the
camp of the Pandavas at night and slew Dhrstadyumn@-
He then sent the most fierce Brahmagirastra (missile °
Brahmagira) to exterminate the Pandavas. To face }!
and oppose it Arjuna also sent an equally fierce
Brahmaégirastra. The sight of two such powerful weapo?®
opposing each other made all the sages anxious 4!
they led by Vy4sa entered the field and requested them
to withdraw their missiles. It was in vain. The missile
of Aévatthama went and struck the womb of Uttara.
Once when the Pandavas after their exile wel
staying in the village of Upaplavya a brahmin had
predicted to Uttara that at the fag end of the life 0
the Pandavas Uttara would bear a son who would be
tested even while in her womb and that the chil
should be named Pariksit. (Pariksa =test). 3
The child in the womb died when the missile struck 1t.
Sri Krsna was greatly agitated by this wicked act ©
Asvatthama and he said thus: “Oh Agvatthama, (©
child now dead in its womb would surely come to le
again. You will be called asinner because of this 10°
fanticide. Because of this you will roam about on eart
for three thousand years and during that time nobo?y
would mingle with you. You will not get a seat any”
where. All diseases will find an abode in your body:
But this infant would grow up into a king and rule the
country for sixty years. He would become celebrate
as the next Kururaja.”’ (Sauptika Parva, Mahabharata
When the Bharatayuddha came to an end Dharmapul!™®
performed an asvamedhayadga. Many prominent PC
sons including Sri Krsna assembled at Hastinapura or
this purpose. Vidura received them all. At that time
they were informed that Uttara had delivered a still”
born child. Pariksit was born when the embryo was
only six months old (Sloka 82, Chapter 85, Adi
Parva). Everybody assembled there was sad and dePressed when he heard this news. Sri Krsna went in and
saw the dead infant. Uttara wept bitterly and every”
body asked Sri Krsna to give life to the infant somehow:
ri Krsna did so and the child was named Pariks!®
remembering the prophetic words of the brahmana.
2) f Marriage. Pariksit married a princess named Madravati and got of her four sons named Janamejaya, Sruta-

PARIKSIT I
sena, Ugrasena and Bhimasena. Chapters 3, 4,5, Adi
Parva). |
3). Curse of a sage. Pariksit was greatly interested in
hunting. Once he went to a big forest with his large
retinue to hunt. While hunting he followed a deer
which the king had struck with his arrow and _ he separated from the rest and went a long way deep into the ~
forest. It was midday and the king was tired. Then he
saw a sage sitting there and the king went in and asked
him about the deer. The sage engrossed in his meditation did not hear that. The king mistook his silence to
be arrogance and taking the dead body of a cobra lying
nearby with the tip of his bow threw it round the neck
of the sage and went his way. . The sage did not know
even that. The king returned to the palace after the
hunting.
The sage hada son named Gavijaéta (In many places
the name Srngi is used for Gavijata). He was playing
with the sons of other sages. One munikuméra (son of
a sage) said, ““Oh Gavijata, your father is equal to Siva.
Both have a serpent round their necks. But there is only
one difference. The serpent round your father’s neck
is a dead one.”? Gavijata was greatly disturbed by this
jeer and he immediately went to the asrama to make
enquiries. When he knew that an unknown person had
done that foul deed he took water in his hand and said
“Whoever be the person who put this dead snake round
the neck of my father will die being bitten by the fierce
> Only after pronounccobra Taksaka within seven days.’
ing this horrible curse did he find out that the perpetrator of that crime was none other than the most noble
and charitable king, Pariksit. Gavijata repented | creatly
and immediately sent word to the king about his curse
through Gauramukha, a munikumara. The king pee a
bit frightened first but then he started thin aoe
the way to escape from the curse. (Chapter 40, 1
Parva, and 2nd Skandha, Bhagavata). Bales
4.) Taksaka gets ready. As soon as the messenger Gau
Pariksit called the
mukha departed from the Pare aet ee to find a
ministers to his side and c
way to escape from the cobra les) ure Oar
building on a huge pillar and gave al Ane mantras
the building. Brahmins well-versed in . sane eee
and Visavaidyas (physicians in the Wen nd the pillar
Poisoning) of fame were asked to sit aroun
ing sat in a
and the place was well-guarded. 756 eae seventh
room tightly closed. Six days went
day he maideested Visavaidya Ka‘ yapamahat © Lane.
his way to the palace at the summons 0 the guise
Taksaka was also on his way to the pa wi though
of a brahmin. They met on the ae cae aced
Kagyapa did not know him first Taksa ‘going to the
himself when he knew that Kas yap® eared He said
Palace to treat the king if anything Bape
3 ne of your wils
Oh Kas yapa, J] am Takers ane ects of my poison.
would be able to fight agains trial.” Saying
If you want to know it we shall make pa tree standing
so Taksaka went and te a big oes burnt to ashes by
nearby, and lo! the whole tre ‘1 oly recite
y, and lo! the Kasyapa smiling!ly Aitie
the stren h ison tone
rength of the poison. “>” some water
the Visahari mantra and sprink’s place 48
ashes and lo! the tree stood in } ksaka was astounded.
e ould give him
a single mutilation anywhere. 4 Vy
He then bribed Kagyapa- He said foe the king and
more than what could be expecte
ofall queens (Rajarajesvari).
PARIKSIT 1
requested him to return home. Kasyapa returned and
Taksaka went to the palace.
5) Death of Pariksit. Taksaka went and inspected the
palace of Pariksit. There wasno way to step in and
‘Taksaka was astonished at the perfect protection given
to the king. Taksaka called all his relatives to his side
and asked them to go to the King in the guise of
brahmins carrying several kinds of fruits as presents.
Taksaka crept inside a beautiful fruit in the shape ofa
worm and was carried along with the fruits taken to °
the king. The servants of the king took the fruits
brought by the brahmins to the king and the king struck
by the size and beauty of a fruitamong them took it and
cut it open. He saw a worm inside red in colour with
two black spots as eyes. The king took it in his hand and
at that instant it changed into Taksaka and bit the king.
After that it rose up into the air and disappeared. ( Chapters 42 to 49, Adi Parva and 2nd Skandha, Devi
Bhagavata). |
6) Pariksit as a king. Many researches have been made
to fix the period of the reign of Pariksit.
‘“‘Saptarsayo maghayuktah
Kale Pariksite sbhavan // }
(Chapter 271, Matsya Purana),
“Te tu Pariksite kale
Maghasvasan dvijottamah”’
(Chapter 24, Amsa 4, Visnu Purana)
Following these statements in the Puranas, astronomers and astrologers searched for the year or years in
which the Saptarsi mandala (the constellation of a
group of seven stars) and the month of magha came into
the same zodiac. It came in B.C. 3077 and then in B.C..477,
This would again occur in 2223 A.D. Pariksit, according
to other facts, also must have lived in B.C. 3077.
Pandavas went for their mahaprasthana after entrusting
the administration to the care of Pariksit. The Mahabharata battle was fought in the year 3138 B.C.
Dharmaputra ruled for 36 years and so Pariksit must
have taken charge of the administration in 3102 B. C,
Pariksit ruled for 60 years and his son Janamejaya became king in 3042 B.C. It was this Janamejaya who
conducted the famous Sarpasatra.
7) Parikstt attained Svarga. Pariksit did not enter heaven
as soon as he died. So Janamejaya at the advice of Narada
conducted a yaga called Ambayaga for the salvation of
the spirit of his father. It was during the navaratri
period that this was done. Many eminent sages took
part in the ceremony. All were received well and given
gifts in plenty. He made pure brahmins read the
Devibhagavata with devotion in the presence of the
deity to please Jagadambika (mother goddess), queen
When it was over, a
divine brilliance like burning fire was visible in the sky
and Narada appeared before Janamejaya and said “Oh
Janamejaya, King of Kings, your father was lying bound
by the shackles of his life on earth. But today he
acquired a divine form and wearing divine apparels and
ornaments went to the divine seat of Devi ina sacred
Vimana from Indrapura while Indra, devas and the
celestial maidens stood praising him (Skandha 12, Devi
Bhagavata).
8) Other detazls.
(i) Pariksit ruled the country for sixty years, with all
virtues and goodness. (Chapter 49, Adi Parva).

PARIKSIT IT
(ii) After the great battle, one day at the request of a
few, Vyasa by his yogic powers arrayed all the dead
great ones of the Pandava-Kaurava company. Pariksit
was also called then to the Ganga where it was arranged
and Janamejaya who was present to witness the show
then gave an Avabhrtasnana (ablution after a sacrifice)
to his father. Pariksit disappeared after that. (Chapter
35, Agramavasika Parva).
(iii) The synonyms of Pariksit are (1) Abhimanyusuta
(2) Bharatagrestha (3) Kirititanayatmaja (4) Kurufrestha (5) Kurunandana (6) Kururaja (7) Kuruvardhana (8) Pandaveya.
PARIKSIT II. There is a story about another Pariksit
belonging to the Iksvaku dynasty of kings in chapter 192
of Vana Parva:
Once this Pariksit went after a deer while hunting in a
forest and he traversed a long distance following it. On
the way he felt tired by hunger and thirst. He saw a
green grove and a river running still by its side, then.
The king entered the waters of the river with his horse
and after quenching the thirst of the horse and drinking
some water to quench his own thirst, he bound the
horse to a nearby tree and lay on the shores to take rest.
Then he heard from somewhere a melodious song.
The king raised his head and enjoying the music,
waited to see the origin of it. Then a beautiful damsel
appeared before him and the king talked with her and
their conversation ended in the king requesting her to
be his wife. The beautiful maiden consented on one
condition that she should not be made to touch water.
The king agreed and by that time the king’s followers
came and the king took her to his palace in a decorated
palanquin followed by his retinue. The king took her
to a secret chamber and stayed with her allowing nobody to enter the room. The chief minister came to
the palace and engired what was happening there and
the maidens attending on the queen said that it was
strange that no water was allowed inside the room.
Then the minister arranged a garden with beautiful
flowers and fruits with no water anywhere and a pond
in the middle in which water was not visible from
outside. He then went to the king and told him of his
arrangement and the king took his wife into the garden
and started having amorous sport with her there.
After some time they reached the pond; water was not
visible and so they entered the pond. The moment
they entered the pond they touched water and the
queen disappeared in the water. The King asked the
water of the pond to be emptied and then he sawa
frog sitting at the bottom. The king accused the frog
of having eaten the maiden and he started killing all
the frogs of his state. | The frogs became frightened and
they went to their king and complained. The frogking in the garb of a maharsi went and requested the
king to stop this massacre of frogs but the king refused
to yield saying that a frog had eaten his wife. Hearing
that, the sage was shocked and revealing his identity
said Oh King, be pleased with me; I am Ayus, the
king of the frogs. Your wife was my daughter. She is
called Sugobhana and she is an obstinate bad-natured
girl. Even from times of old she has cheated many kings
like this.”’
-.¢ this the king pleaded to the frog-king to give
ae eek eukabhand. He gave Susobhana to Pariksit.
PARNASA
But he cursed his daughter that she would bear
misbehaving children because of her cheating many
kings before. Ayus disappeared then. Pariksit begot
of Sugobhana three princes named Sala, Bala and Dala.
When Sala grew up Pariksit crowned him as king and
left for the forests for doing penance.( Chapter 192, VanaParva ).
PARIKSIT III.
Kuru line of kings.
got six sons named Kaksasena,
Indrasena, Susena and Bhimasena.
virtuous scholars
Parva). ee
PARIKSIT IV. Son of Anagva, a king of the Kuru line ©
kings. His mother was Amrta. This Pariksit begot ©
his wife Suyag4 a son named Bhimasena. (Sloka 41,
Chapter 95, Adi Parva).
PARIKSIT V. A king of the Kuru line of kings. (Chapter
150, Santi Parva).
PARIPLAVA I. A king of the race of Bharata. He was
the son of Nrcaksus and the grandson of Nala.
Pariplava got a son named Medhavi. (10th Skandha,
Bhagavata). der
PARIPLAVA II. A holy place situated on the bor id
of Kuruksetra. If anyone visits this holy place. he wou
get the benefit of conducting an Agnistoma Yajna ae
an Atiratra yajiia. (Sloka 12, Chapter 83,: Ver
Parva).
PARISRUTA.
Salya Parva). |
PARIVAHA. A Vayu (wind). (See under Paravaha)-
PARIVYADHA. One of the nine sages who lived 19,
western regions of Bharata. ‘The others were : Usans
Kurusa. Dhaumya, Suviryavan, Ekata, Dvita, Trita ae
Sarasvata (Chapter 208, Santi Parva) ity
PARIYATRA. A mountain of Puranic fame. The de!
of this mountain Pariyatra was a member % |.
court of Kubera. The 4Srama of the celebrated 548 5
Gautama, was on this mountain. The sage Markandey
once saw this mountain in the belly of Balamukun
This mountain is situated on the western side of 44
meru. (Sloka 115, Chapter 188, Vana Parva).
PARJANYA. A deva. See under Devavati Ill. a
PARNADA I. An ancient sage of Bharata. He ee HE
member of the court of Yudhisthira (Sloka .
Chapter 4, Sabha Parva).
PARNADA II. A brahmin of the country
It was Parnada who was sent out to know whe
Nala was alive and he found out Nala livin8 .
disguise under the name of Bahuka and after collect!
all information about him returned to Vidarbha.
under Damayanti). Bas
PARNADA III. A sage who acted as priest for 4 yas".
conducted by a brahmin named Satya who lived 19, _” 4;
country of Vidarbha. (Sloka 8, Chapter 273; Sap
Parva).
PARNASA. A river of western Bharata. This river
in the court of Varuna in the form of a nymph.
9, Chapter 1, Sabha Parva). Srutayudha,
soldier who fought against Arjuna in the great K ne
ksetra battle was the son of Parnasa. Varuna was : a
father of Srutayudha and at the time of the ‘birth of n
son for her she requested Varuna to grant her 4
that her son would not be killed by anybody. Vat nat
while granting her the boon gave the son a mace- I
He was the son of Aviksit, a king of the
Pariksit was the eldest son and he
Ugrasena, Citrasena,
They were all
A soldier of Subrahmanya. (Chaptet 45,
ng
and Jfidnins. (Chapter 94, Adi |

PARNASALA
mace had a peculiarity. If the mace was used against
anybody who was not fighting, the mace would turn
back and kill the user. With the help of that mace
Srutayudha gave Arjuna a fierce fight and in the
midst of the heat he forgot the condition stipulated by
Varuna and used it against Sri Krsna who was standing
nearby watching their fight. The mace turned back
and killed Srutayudha. (Chapter 92, Drona Parva).
ARNASALA. A Village situated in the valley of the
mountain Yamuna. This mountain stands between the
rivers Ganga and Yamuna. During the period of
Mahabharata this village was the abode. of a great
number of eminent scholars. Once there lived in that
village a brahmin of Agastyagotra, well-learned, named
Sarmi. One day the messengers of Kala (god of death)
came to that village and by mistake took Sarmi to
Yamaloka. It was only when they reached there that
they understood their folly and Kala then asked his
men to carry him back to earth. Then Sarmi said he
would spend the balance of life due to him in Yamaloka itself. But Yama did not allow that. Kala then
told Sarmi the greatness in giving as gifts Til and
Vastra (Gingelly and clothes) and sent him back to
earth. (Chapter 68, Anusasana Parva).
PARNAYA. A demon of Rgvedic times. He had two
friends named Karafijaya and Vanigrda. They attacked
Aryas named
the two Kings belonging to the group of
Atithis va et Rjisva. The asuras were ee
because of the help sent to the kings by Indra. (Sakta 94,
Anuvaka 10, Mandala I, Reveda).
PAROKSA. A King of Candravamsa. (9th Skandha,
Bhagavata ). :
PAROPAKARI. See under Kanakarekha. 9]
PARSNIKSEMA. A Visvadeva. (Sloka 30, Chap tt 2
Anugasana Parva). ( Vis vadevas a5 oa iam
group of deities, ten in number, supposed to
of Visva). on named
PARSVAMAULI. Another name for the en getting
; ind this
M is a story behind ;
anicara. ‘There (See un der Manicara) -
: joes of Nene te habitation of
RSVAROMA. piac .
ancient Bharata. (Sloka 56, Chapa ?; paras ae Sh
PARTHA. Son of Prtha (Kunti). ( gies ho was a
PARUCCHEPA, A sage of Vedic, 0° Fron in his
Siktadrasta. He used some sounds t90 ©"
talks.
Nrmedhas and sana ti
ir mantri ill. One day . jon t
mnclinrey ae iy wet firewoor Panay eet 1
and then Parucchepa Pro uced fire te Samhita). |
Nrmedhas admitted defeat. (Tartan sy King extolled in
PARUNITHA (PURUNITH a
the Reveda. (Mandala l, Revie was one a
PARUSA. A Raksasa dened Khara when t
twelve demons who supporte a 26, Arany4
fought against Sri Rama. (Sarg ils. ParPARVANA ( S) een of rake ae Haris,
vanas, "Patanas, Jambhas, ea € A
Prarujas, Arujas and Praghas* beans Srj Rama ©"
invisible demons and they fous. yalmiki Ramayan? 7
the side of Ravana. (Chapter 20>) yaidiary, Parva ©
PARVASASIGRAHAPARVA.. 4 ged in this Parva
Adi Parva, Chapter twenty is incl¥
‘ed with each other in
Nrmedhas in great pride
mong / the
he latter
Kanda,
PARVATA II
PARVATA I. A sage who was the nephew of Narada.
1) Genealogy. Descending in order from Visnu—
Brahma—Marici— Paurnamasa—Parvata.
Prajapati Marici got of his wife Sambhiti a son named
Paurnamasa. Paurnamasa got two sons Virajas and
Parvata. Parvata’s mother was the sister of Narada.
(Chapter 10, Arhga 1, Visnu Purana).
2) Narada and Parvata. These two sages lived for a
long time as inseparable friends. Once they travelled on
earth in the form of human _ beings. They decided that
each should speak out what he felt without reserve and
if anybody broke the arrangement the other had the
right to curse him.
During their travels they reached the palace ofa King
called Sriijaya (Safijaya) and they stayed there as his
guests for a long time. Damayanti (Madayanti)
daughter of the King served them both and Narada
fell in love with her.. Narada hid this fact from
Parvata and within a few days Parvata came to know
‘t and he according to the agreement cursed Narada to
take the form of a monkey. Narada gave a counter
curse disabling Parvata from attaining Svarga. Both
separated from there and after some time both lost their
bitterness against each other. Parvata met Narada in
his monkey form in a forest. Both were sorry for their
curses then and each withdrew his curse and Narada
got his original form. He married Damayanti and
started living together and: Parvata went to Svarga.
(Chapter 30, Santi Parva).
3) Other details.
(i) Parvatamuni was a member of the assembly of
sages at the Sarpasatra of Janamejaya. (Sloka 8,
Chapter 53, Adi Parva).
(ii) Narada and Parvata were present for the Draupadisvayamvara (marriage of Draupadi ). (Sloka 7,
Chapter 156, Adi Parva).
jii) Parvata and Narada were members of the court
of Yudhisthira. (Sloka 15, Chapter 4, Sabha Parva).
iv) This uncle-nephew combination was present in
Indrasabha also. (Sloka 10, Chapter 7, Sabha Parva).
y) They were members of Kuberasabha also. (Sloka
96, Chapter 10, Sabha Parva).
(vi) When the Pandavas were living in Kamyakavana,
Parvata went there and advised them to conduct a
pilgrimage. (Sloka 18, Chapter 93, Vana Parva).
(vii) Parvata showed the Pandavas daylight at night
one day when the great battle was going on. (Sloka
15, Chapter 163, Drona Parva).
(viii) Parvata swore that he was
theft of the lotus of Agastya.
94 Anugdsana Parva).
PARVATA II. It 1s believed that in Krtayuga all
mountains had wings. They flew all over the world
with the swiftness of Garuda or Vayu. All beings
including rsis and devas lived in a state of suspense
since at any moment any mountain might fly and land
down on their heads. They complained to Indra and
Indra asked the mountains to remain at one place
which they flatly refused. Indra got angry and started
cutting down the wings of the mountains with his
Vajrayudha. No mountain was able to escape from
this punishment; but Vayubhagavan carried away his
bosom friend, the mountain Mainaka, and put it in
the ocean without anybody noticing it. So Mainaka
not aparty to the
(Sloka 34, Chapter

PARVATESVARA
alone did not. lose its wings. It was this Mainaka
which rose from the ocean and gave a resting point to
Haniman, son of Vayu, when he took a leap from the
shores of Bharata to Lanka. This was but an expression
of gratitude to Vayu whose son Haniman was, for the
help he had given when Indra was cutting off the
wings of all mountains. (Sarga 1, Sundara Kanda,
Valmiki Ramayana).
PARVATESVARA. A_ King
tortured his people because of his greed for money and
Yama sent him to hell when he died. In his next birth
he was born as a monkey. At that time a priest of the
King had taken life as a Sarasa bird. One day the
monkey tried to catch the bird and then the bird
(priest) reminded him of his previous birth and told
him that in their next birth both of them: would be
swans and in the birth after that they would become
men again. (Uttara Khanda, Padma Purana).
PARVATEYA., A rajarsi (A King who is also a rsi).
He was born of the species of a demon named Kapata.
(Sloka 30, Chapter 67, Adi Parva).
PARVATI. Wife of Siva.
Parvati is known under different names and worshipped
in different forms. Amarakoéa (Sanskrit lexicon) gives
the following synonyms for Parvati :
Uma, Katyayani, Gauri, Kali, Haimavati, I[évari,
iva, Bhavani, Rudrani, Sarvani, Sarvamangala, |
Aparna, Durga, Mrdani, Candika, Ambika, Arya,
Daksayani, Girija, Menakatmaja,
moti, Carccika, Bhairavi.
Some of these names refer to the various dispositions of
Parvati, while a few are the names in the various incarnations of Parvati. The origin of Parvatiand her
other prominent births are given below :—
1) Incarnation of Sati. Siva was born from Brahma. To
make Siva active, Sati, an aspect of Mahamaya, was
born as the daughter of Daksa, one of the Prajapatis.
The 9th Skandha of Devi Bhagavata gives the following
story about the incarnation of Sati :
While Brahma was engaged in creation a few daityas
named Halahalas were born. They were very valiant
and ferocious and they did penance to propitiate
Brahma and after obtaining boons from him conquered
the three worlds and asserted their supremacy in all the
three worlds. ‘They defied the Trimirtis( trio of Brahma.
Visnu and Siva). Siva and Visnu in despair went to
war against them. The war continued for sixty thousand
years and both the daityas and Devas were exhausted.
Visnu and Siva refused to attend to their duties. Brahma
understood the situation and taking into his hands the
work of Siva and Visnu also and calling his sons,
Sanaka and others to his side said “Oh sons, Siva and
Visnu are incapable of doing their work now. I have
therefore, taken on myself the charge of their duties also
and hence I do not find time to do penance. You must
therefore, do penance to propitiate Mahamaya. Let
her be pleased and when she incarnates in this universe
the world will be a ee
they heard this the Prajapatis headed b
dio asad to a forests on the side of the Eialavas.
They started doing penance reciting the mantra of
Mayabija. The penance lasted for a hundred thousand
years and then the goddess was pleased. She graciously
appeared before them with three eyes and four hands
Camunda, Karnaof _Vindhyadesga. He .
PARVATI
bearing paga, ankuga, vara and abhiti. Daksa and others
praised her and she granted them boons. She did also
promise to be born as the daughter of Daksa. Daksa and
others returned happy.
Mahamaya incarnated as Sati in the house of Daksa.
Sati blossomed into a beautiful maiden and all the
Prajapatis joined together and made Siva marry her.
The bride and bridegroom lived in the bride’s house. _
At that time the sage Durvasas worshipped Jagadambika
seated at Jambinada meditating on her and reciting the
mayabija mantra. The devi was immensely pleased an
appearing before him gave him the divine garland lyin
round her neck. The garland was highly perfumed.
Honey flowed from it always. Wearing that garland ee
sage travelled through air and reached the palace ©
Daksa, father of Sati, and gave that garland to him.
Daksa received it with great delight and took it to his
bed-room and placed it there. That night Daksa inhaled the perfume of the divine garland and enjoyed 4
amorous sport with his wife. This act made the garlan'
impure and the latent curse in it made Daksa _ hate *
daughter Sati and her husband Siva. After that Daksa
conducted a Yaga and insulted Siva by not invitins
either him or his wife. Sati, however, attended the ¥48
uninvited and she was insulted. Unable to bear the
sult Sati leapt into the fire and committed suicide. From
that day onwards Siva roamed about in the wo
crying ‘‘Sati, Sati.” 4
2) Sati, Parvati (Kali). During that time a son Og
Vajranga was born to Kasyapa of his wife Dit. Th!
virtuous asura practised austerities for a thousa®
years and when he opened his eyes after his long penanc
he did not see his wife. Vajranga started in na
of her collecting fruits and roots for his food ©
the way. Then he came across her standing underneat
a tree weeping and she said : “All the time you Wr :
doing penance, Indra was teasing me. I was living
without food on the banks of the river keeping a VOW d
silence. Indra came there in the form of a monkey 4? i
threw away all my articles used for worship. The?
came in the form ofa lion and frightened me. The &
again he came in the form of a serpent and bit me. ty
lord, am I, your wife, an orphan ?”’ Vajranga got ane :
and decided to do penance again to find a remedy a
this unjust act of Indra. Then Brahma coming to kno -
of the fierce decision of Vajranga appeared before hi
and said ‘‘Why do you go in fora penance again? 4 <
me what you want and I shall grant you.”’ Vajranee,
said “Oh Lord, I did penance all these thousand y |
to get rid of the demoniac disposition of mine. Bu
when I was engaged in meditation Indra tormented 3)
virtuous wife very much without any reason. If you yer
bless me I must get a son named Taraka to kill all !
devas including Indra.”’ Brahma granted the boon.
Varangi became pregnant and after twelve months yi
born a son to her named Tarakasura. Taraka did seve Ot
penance sitting in the midst of Paficagni (five fires ) é
a long time and Brahma was pleased and app?’ st
before him. Taraka then said : “If I were to die *
die at the hands of a seven-day-old babe. You aps
grant me a boon like that.’ Brahma granted the oe
Taraka became arrogant with that boon and jo!’ 4
hands with such fierce demons as Prasena, Jambha ee
Kalanemi to create havoc in the three worlds of Svat
SE EEE EEE

PARVATI
PARVATI 577
Bhimi and Patala. They blessed the wicked and killed
the virtuous. It was the time when Siva was sadly roaming about in search of his lost wife Satz. i
All the devas headed: by Indra went and complained to
Brahma. Brahma said:—‘‘After all, this calamity is not
without remedy. There is an escape from the boon I
have given him. Tarakasura himself has allowed him
to be killed by a sevenday-old babe. If there should be
such a babe it should be from the virility of Siva.
Tarakasura thinks that since Siva is observing brahmacarya after the death of Sati there is no chance of.a babe
being born to him. That was why he was prepared to
allow that clause in that boon. I shall therefore suggest
a plan. Sati herself should be born as the daughter
of Himavan and Mena in the name of Kali. Kali should
do great penance and break the vow of celibacy of Siva.
If Siva accepts her as his wife and a child is born to
them we are saved.”’
Siva was all this .time spen
Sati. Once during this time
Kalindi and then the waters 0
came black and the waters remained bla
that.
Indra and others on théir-return from Brahma went to
Brhaspati to think about further procedure in the
matter. Brhaspatisaid -—‘‘No obstacle would ever come
to any act of the devas. Himavan was doing penance
fora long time to obtain’ a°child and by the grace of Siva,
Sati has already been born as the daughter of Himavan.
(Skanda Purana m ‘ts Sambhava K4nda states thus
about the birth of Sati as Parvati. ‘‘Sati before
jumping into the fire meditated on Siva and prayed
that she should be born in her next birth as his wife.
Siva granted that request. It was at that time that Himavan along with his wife Mena went to the vicinity of
Amrtasaras and started doing penance to get a child.
One day when Himavan and his wife were bathing in
fa girl in the waters and
the saras they saw 4 gem 0 Lin tl
they took it. Then they found the child wit four panes
and all other emblems of goddess on her. me Pee
. Vedas and soon the divine emo
her with verses from ave the child to his wife.”’)
faded away and Himavan §
Brahma neve wante <aka to know that Hie Gea
was an incarnation of Devi and so_he eal ae
babe black by sending Niga to do so. Nie ente ae
womb of the pregnant Mena while she was § wa ise ani
her mouth open one Gay: The child was likea SDP ah en
Himavan was surprised to sce the child. ‘ A a on
do severe penance and obtain Siva as her nik ae a
and Sati will never be separated in any 0! thei ane
Oh Indra now go and try to get Siva interes
married aan ad ates daug
Hi =n and Mena ha “_Rapini
The devaswere watching who among the hadere ea,
Kutila and Kali—wou become eee Hvis
All the three wer’ interested heed her to Brahma
took Ragini to Brahmaloka and *-0r" as incapable of
and the latter declared that eae "ot an an
bearing the virility af Siva. © “snto Sandhyaraga
Brahma cursed her an¢ made hen devas too
and she took her place 7
Kutila to Brahma 4? the latter ie Giva. Kutila also
also incapable of being 4 let er into
got angry and Brahma ma Pas greatly
her in Brahmaloka. a
ding his time thinking of
Siva bathed in the. river
f the river Kalindi beck ever since
hters and a son.
the loss of her two daughters and so she advised Kali,
her third daughter to go home, discontinuing the
penance. She at first said Uma (Ma=do not) and so
she got the name of Uma She was the daughter of a
Parvata (Himavan is a parvata (mountain) and so she
got the name Parvati (mountain-girl) also. Kali later
went home. But after some time the natural inclination
in her led her to start a severe penance again.
The young Kali, who was only a small girl then, accompanied by two of her girl companions went to the shores
of a river deep in the forests. and started practising
austerities. In summer she would sit in the midst of
Paficagni (five fires) and in the rainy season she would
sit in water and do penance. The penance lasted for a
thousand years. .
Siva who was roaming about in search of Sati went once
to the palace of Himavan. Siva agreed to stay there for |
some time at the persistent request of Himavan. Durin
his stay there Siva understood that one of the daaphtes
of his host was doing penance meditating on Sankara
Curious to know more about her, Siva one day ent
to the asrama of Kali. Kali saw Siva and she stood u
bowing before him. Siva was pleased with her But
before Kali could have another look at Siva, he Vanished
from there.
Kali was disappointed and continued her penance again
Years went by and one day there came to her agrama
a Vatu( a brahmin brahmacari ).Kali and her companions
stood up and worshipped the Vatu who looked brilliant
with ashes on his body and wearing rudraksa and
aksam4ala (berry of a tree and rosary made of it) and
carrying in his hand a danda (stick) and a Kamandalu
(water pot). After formal introduction the Vatu asked
Kali the purpose of her penance and Kali told him all
about it. Then the Vatu asked her in tones of surprise
why such a beautiful girl like herself born to be the wife
of aking, should go after a crudely dressed aged man
like Siva who goes on the back of a bullock always
Parvati resented the statement of the Vatu and oe
angry with him. Then Siva appeared before her in his
real form.and married Parvati (Kali alias Uma) in the
presence of devas and maharsis.
3) Parvati changes into Gauri. Siva and Parvati spent
their honeymoon travelling throughout the world: Years
went by like that. One day Siva in a spirit of sport
called Parvati ‘Kali, Kali’. Kali meant black one ae
Parvati was as black as sapphire. Parvati misunderstood
Siva addressing her thus two times and thought, perha
Siva did not like her black body and cantine wath
ef said “If a wound is made by an arrow it will heal
in due course; if the top of a tree is chopped off it will
again. blossom when the season comes ; but the wound in
theminds of others by harsh words is never healed. It was
not my fault that I was born black and I would never again
comenear you with this black body. Tam going.”’ Saying
thus with a firm determination, she rose up into the air and
travelling for some time reached a big forest. She created by her reciting the smaranamantra four attendants
for her named Somaprabha, Jaya, Vijaya and Jayanti
and started doing penance there. She practised severe
austerities standing on one foot for a hundred years and
then Brahma appeared before her and sought the reason
why Parvati, wife of Paramesvara should do such severe
penance and then she narrated to him all that had
happened, Brahma after hearing her story told her thus;—~

PARVATI
‘*Virtuous woman, from today onwards, your black complexion would change into one of the hue of a lotus
petal. Because of that ‘gaura’ hue you would be called
‘Gauri’.”” By the time Brahma finished blessing her the
colour changed into the one described by Brahma.
4) Gauri changes into Katyayani, Vindhyavasini, Candika and
Gamundika. When Devi became Gauri her superficial
skin peeled off and dropped down, it is said.
At that time there were two great demons called
Rambha and Karambha. They had no sons and they
started severe penance. Karambha was doing penance
standing in deep waters and a crocodile swallowed him.
The crocodile was none other than Indra. Rambha did
penance standing in the midst of fire and finding no
result even after a long time decided to sacrifice himself
into the fire. Agnideva then appeared before him and
blessed him thus: ‘‘Oh Rambha, you will get a mighty
son of the woman you love.” Rambha stopped his
penance and returned home with the boon. On the way
he saw a beautlful she-buffalo and passion rose in him
and he made contacts with the buffalo. The buffalo became pregnant and in due course delivered a child
which later on became the notorious Mahisasura. In
the meantime a buffalo loved MahisAsura’s mother and
it attacked Rambha and gored him to death. The
Yaksas burnt his dead body ina funeral pyre and the
she-buffalo jumped into the pyre and abandoned her
life. From that pyre there arose then another demon
and he was the notorious Raktabija. Mahisasura became
the king of demons and Raktabija, Canda and Munda
became his ministers. They attacked the devas and drove
them to exhaustion. The devas took refuge in Brahma
to think of a plan to kill those asuras. Visnu, and Siva
took part in the conference. Visnu the eternal, got
angry along with Siva and became fierce like the fire
of death. Brahma and the devas also became angry and
from the face of everyone a brilliance emanated and all
these brillances joined together and reached the holy
asrama of Katyayana maharsi and that eminent sage
also sent out a brilliance. The ascetic brilliance joined
with the divine brilliance and the combined brilliance
shone like a thousand suns. Then this superior brilliance
entered the peeled-off skin of Kali to produce the
fierce and divine form of a goddess named Katyayani.
Each limb of the new form was made up of the brilliance from a particular god as follows : From the brilliance
of Mahendra was formed the face; from Agni,
from Yama, the hair; from Visnu, the eightee
from Indra, the central parts; from Varuna, the hip
and the thighs ; from | Brahma, the feet ; from Surya,
the toes ; from Prajapati, the teeth; from Vasus, the
fingers of the hands ; from Yaksa, the nose; from Vayu
the ears and from the ascetic brilliance,the erotic eyebrows.
Thus Katyayani shone in the world with a figure formed
with distinctive perfection.
All the gods and devas presented Katyayani with gifts: —
Siva gave her a trident (tristila) ; _Visnu a. Discus ;
Varuna, aconch; Agni, a javelin ; Vayu, a bow; Surya,
a mnever-empty quiver ; Indra, Vajraghanta ; Yama,
a danda (stick); Vaisravana, a mace ; Brahma, a rosary
garland - Kala, a sword and shield ; Candra, Camara
(white brush-like fan) and a pearl necklace ; Ocean
a garland ; Himavan, a lion ; Visvakarma, a moondisced Cidamani, earrings and a dagger ; the King of
Gandharvas, asilver-plated drinking cup ; the King of
the eyes;
n hands;
PARVATI
nagas, a nagahara; and the Rtus (seasons), neverfading flowers. The three-eyed Katyayani on getting
all these was highly pleased and made a roaring sound.
Devi, thus worshipped and adored by all, mounted on
the lion and went to the topmost peak of the Vindhyas.
Indra and Agni went and served Katyayani thus living
there. Vindhya called Devi, Kausiki and Agastya
called her Durga. |
Mahisasura once went to the Vindhyas after conquering
all the three worlds. He was accompanied by his
ministers, Raktabija, Ganda, Munda, Ciksura and
Naraka. They met there the goddess Katyayant.
Mahisasura fell in love with the beautiful and wellfigured Katyadyani and he sent Dundubhi as messenger
to the goddess to make her know his desire. Dundubhi
approached Katyayani and told her to become the wife
of Mahisa, the emperor of all the three worlds. Dev!
replied that she would accept as her husband one who
defeated her and that was the custom also in her
caste. Mahisadsura with a huge army and heavy equipments went towar with her. But Katyayani entere
the field alone mounted on her lion and the devas
watching her enter the battlefield without wearing
even an armour were shocked. Devi went forwar
reciting the mantra of Visnupaficaksara given to her
by Siva and lakhs and lakhs of demons were killed by
the adroit sword-swinging- and the dinning roar 0°
Katyayani. Mahisa and his ministers surrounded her
and Devi stepping down from the lion started to dance
wielding her sword. Swinging her swerd to the rhythm
of her dance-steps Devi picked up the leading demons
one by one and killed them. Seeing that, Mahisasur@
_ approached her, burning with rage like the pralayagn!-
All the attendants of Devi fled. Those who remaine
were trampled to death by Mahisdsura. Devi at first
killed the ministers and then faced Mahisasura. Mahi5@
became an elephant and Devi cut off its trunk. Di
elephant became a buffalo then. Devi sent a spike an
it broke. Even Devi’s Discus, grantéd to her by Visnu wa
blunted when it hit the rock-like body of MahisasuraVarunapafa, Yamadanda and Indravajra were 4
alike fruitless against the mighty Mahisasura. Anger
Devi jumped on the buffalo form of the demon and.
drove it to exhaustion and when at last its power 9
resistance had failed, Devi plunged her- spear into the
ears of the buffalo and the demon fell dead.
Many years went by. Kagyapa begot of his wife Danv
three great sons named Sumbha, Nisumbha and Namucl.
All were fierce demons. Namuci attacked Indra but
they soon came to a compromise. But Indra hid in the
foam of the ocean which entered the ears, nose 20
mouth of Namuci while he was playing in the ocean.
Indra used his Vajrayudha from inside and killed himSumbha and Nisumbha were angry and they entere
svarga and defeating everyone there, carried all the
riches from there to the earth. They met Raktabija am
he said “Oh Lords, I am Raktabija, minister of Mahi
sasura. Katyayani Devi killed virtuous MahisasuraHis two ministers Canda and Munda are hiding inside
the ocean afraid of Katyayani devi.””While he was spe@5~
ing thus Ganda and. Munda also came there. Whe?
they all exchanged ideas Sumbha called one of his me?
and said ‘‘Bho: Sugrivasura, go and tell Katyayani to
be my wife.’’ Sugriva went to Katyayani and returne
disappointed and said ‘‘Lords: Sumbha and Nisumbha,

PARVATI
I told Devi your message and she only laughed. She
said that Sumbha and Nisumha might be mighty lords
but only those who defeated her could marry her.”
Enraged at this arrogance of Katyayani, Sumbha sent
Dhimraksa to drag Katyayani down to him. Dhimraksa
with six Aksauhinis of soldiers went to the seat of
Katydyani and challenged her to a fight. Devi stepped
down from her seat and stood before Dhiimraksa and
the latter leaped forward to catch hold of her. But
Dhimraksa was burnt to death by the humkara fire
of the goddess. Not only that, the humkara sound
reached the ears of Sumbha. Sumbha felt small by this
prowess of the Devi but his rage increased. umbha
then sent Canda, Munda and the great demon Ruru
also with an army ofa hundred crores of demons to
face Devi Kaugiki, When the enemies reached Vindhya
the bhiatas of Devi made loud and shrill noises. The
lion of Katyayani roared and she leaped into the midst
of the army sword in hand. Lakhs and lakhs of asuras
fell dead by the sword of the goddess. Devionce opened
her mouth and lakhs of asuras entered it and then she
shut her mouth keeping in her stomach the asuras till
they all died. Devi beat. the demon Ruru to death.
Devi plucked her matted hair and struck it on the
ground and from there arose the fierce form of Camundi.
Canda and Munda fled but Camundi followed them to
Patala and catching hold of them chopped off their
heads and presented them to Katyayani. Then Devi,
Camundi and the bhitas together tore to pleces all the
remaining asuras and stored them ail in their stomachs.
Hearing this Sumbha’s rage knew no bounds and he
started with an army of thirty crores of men. The aioe
swept on like an ocean and finding it moving forwar«
Camundi roared. Katyayani made a sound like a lion’s
roar. Brahmani holding high the dagger jumped down to
psi tees Rape d the spike, with the
fight. Mahegvari with snakes ae i ee Kaumart
three eyes open got down in
with ae sages fanoine round her waist and ie
eyes entered the field. Vaisnavi swinging her swor
whirling the mace wit
field. Varahi breaking open , ==
: to fight. Indrani
bearing a large woot Be nets fight. Narasirhi
with diamond on her sid
brushing the manes on a vine
irli he planets an LARS “ -
Eat he field. (Camundi, Br ahmant Me forms
Vaisnavi, Varahi and Nat an saveauaes (seven
They are we born when-Katyayamt
breast, shaking the stars and
a fierce appearance
of Katyayani. d
mulher ), These saptamatrs were are matted hair).
in her wrath beat, the au wine ark. Hearing
Camundi roaced. The world bec The Asuras
Id. )
the roar Siva descend Se all fell dead with
su he Devi agal . ‘es of the
Stet teat in a stream. The dea Oe DHA ee
asuras became heaped up and in despa ot angry and
asuras became heer fae, Reka £0 ee and
vushed at Devi... The Saptamats © *f Camundi touched
opened her mouth. The lower a
Patala when she open Sse
Raktabiya, wounded and blee h
Cimundi, fell into the mou ered an
SPP eared, Then Nis umbha aD yi. The fat and sturdy
came one between Nigumbha and” he was carrying Te
hands of Nifumbha a? the mace struck him with
by an avtow sent by Devi. Then Dev
_ PARVATI
her spike and Nigumbha was killed. Both Sumbha and
Nigumbha who came to wreak vengeance on her were
thus killed. (See under Lankalaksmi to know how Parvati
became Lankalaksmi).
5) Parvati takes the forms of Elephant and monkey. Siva
and Parvati went about enjoying amorous sports in the
forests. Siva turned himself into a tusker and Parvati
became a she-elephant then. Ganapati was born as a
result of that sport. Siva became a monkey and Parvati
became his mate and Haniiman was born as a result
of that sport. (See under Ganapati and Hanuman).
6) Parvati became Sita. This happened when Rama and
Laksmana along with Sita were in the forests. One day
Sita went to the Godavari river nearby to bring water
to the agrama and she stayed for some time watching
two swans playing in the midst of lotuses in the lake
there. Hearing a sound she looked into the river and
saw Sri Rama bathing there. She was surprised. When
she left the asrama Rama was sitting there. At the
same time another thing happened in the agrama. Sri
Rama found Sita coming to him and when he arose to
receive her the: figure disappeared. Then Sri Rama
found bathing by Sitadevi also disappeared. When an
astonished Sita reached the asrama she found an equally
astonished Sri Rama sitting there. They then told
each other their experiences and Sri Rama on meditation understood that in the guise of Rama and Sita Siva
and Parvati had come from Kailasa to know about
the welfare of the princes in exile.
7) Parvati, Vihunda and Falandhara. See under those
names.
8) Other detatls.
i) Parvati shines in the court of Brahma. (Sloka 41,
Chapter 11, Sabha Parva).
(ii) When the Pandavas were in exile Parvati guarded
Arjuna always. (Vana Parva, Chapter 37, Sloka 38).
(iii) Once Parvati appeared in person and blessed
Dharmaputra. (Chapter 6, Virata Parva).
(iv) Once Sri Krsna pleased Parvati and she granted
Krsna boons. The first was that he would have sixteen
thousand wives. The next was a beautiful form for
Krsna and the next was love of his relatives. Another
boon was that Krsna would have the prosperity to be
able to give food for seven thousand travellers daily.
(Sloka 7, Chapter 15, Anufasana Parva).
(v) It was because of a curse of Parvati that devas do
not.get sons by their own wives. There is the following
story behind that.
Siva and Parvati went to the Himalayas after their
marriage and started living there. Siva and Parvati
were so much engrossed in their amorous sport that they
were oblivious of the happenings outside. After a long
time when their sport continued without a break the
devas went in and informed Siva that the whole universe
was trembling by their sport and if Siva produced a
son the world would be incapable of bearing it and so
he should withdraw from the act of producing a child.
Siva agreed and drew his virile strength upwards.
Parvati did not like that and she cursed the devas that
they would never have sons of their own wives. (Chapter 84, Anusasana Parva).
vi) Parvati once taught Gangadevi the duties of
women. (Sloka 33, Chapter 146, AnuSasana Parva).
(vii) Parvati resides in the mount of Mufijavan in
Kailasa with Paramagiva. There is a mount called

PARVATIYA
Mufijavan in the Himalayas. Bhagavan Umapati (Siva)
shines there on treetops, underneath the trees, on the
mounts and in ‘caves. (Chapter 8, ASvamedha Parva).
(viii) The Mahabharata uses the following synonyms
for Parvati : Ambika, Arya, Uma, Bhima, Sailaputri,
Sailarajasuta, Sakambhari, Sarvani, Devenri, Devi,
Durga, Gauri, Girisutaé, Girirajatmaja, Kali, Mahabhima, Mahadevi, Mahakali, Maheé'vari, Parvatarajakanya, Rudrani, Rudrapatni and Tribhuvane’vari.
9) Parvati pratistha. The installation of the goddess
Parvati in temples is done with the following sacred
rites. 3
An inner temple should be constructed and the idol of
Devi should be installed there. Before that, on the
bed of the platform bearing the idol, amulets with spiritual inscriptions on them should be deposited . there
just as in the case of the installation of Maheévara.
Then Paragakti should be consecrated there with recitals of mantras followed by the deposition of Paficaratnas meditating on Pindika. Then the idol of Devi
should be fixed on the platform. After that Kriyagakti should be consecrated on the platform and Jfianafakti on the idol. Finally Ambika named Siva should
be invoked with the mantras as ordained in the
scriptures.
The different zones like the east and the west and the
guards of the Universe like Indra should also be worshipped. (Chapter 98, Agni Purana; Sarga 36, | Bala
Kanda, Valmiki Ramayana; Chapters 51 and 53, Va- —
mana Purana; 7th Skandha, Devi Bhagavata; 4th Skandha, Bhagavata; Chapter 43, Brahmanda Purana; Aranya Kanda, Uttara Ramayana, Kamba Ramayana;
Chapter 121, Padma Purana; Chapter 186, Adi Parva;
Chapter 37, Vana Parva, Chapter 6, Virata Parva;
Chapter 23, Bhisma Parva; Chapter 202, Drona Parva;
Chapter 283, Santi Parva; Chapters 15, 84, 140 and
146, Anusgasana Parva; and Chapter 8, Asvamedha
Parva).
PARVATIYA I. (PARVATIYA). A king who lived
during the period of Mahabharata. He was born of the
species of the danava called Kuksi. (Sloka 56, Chapter
67, Adi Parva). |
PARVATIYA II (PARVATIYA). Those who resided
in the country called Parvatiya in ancient Bharata were
called Parvatiyas. Parvatiyas were also present for the
Rajasiya of Dharmaputra. When the Pandavas had to
fight against Jayadratha during their exile in the forests these parvatiyas fought on the side of Jayadratha.
Arjuna killed them all. In the Kuruksetra battle the
Parvatiyas fought on the side of the Kauravas. Parvatiya was a very important country of ancient Bharata.
Once the Parvatiyas fought against Krsna and Krsna conquered them. In the great battle the parvatiyas fought
against the Pandavas under the banners of Sakuni and
Ulika. The Pandavas destroyed them all. (Chapter 52,
Sabha parva; Chapter 271, Vana Parva; Chapter 30,
Udyoga Parva; Chapter 9, Bhisma Parva; Chapter 11,
Drona Parva; Chapter 46, Karna Parva and Chapter 1,
Salya Parva).
PASA. A divine weapon of Varuna. There is nothing.
to excel this in swiftness. (Sloka 29, Chapter 41, Vana
Pave ATIRTHA. A sacred place. This is located in the
Jamadagnivedi in the temple of Sirparaka, (Sloka 12,
Chapter 38, Vana Parva).
PATALA
PASASINI. An ancient river of Bharata. (Sloka 22,
Chapter 9, Bhisma Parva).
PAST. One of the hundred sons of Dhrtarastra. Bhima
killed him in the great battle. (Sloka 5, Chapter 84,
Karna Parva).
PASIVATA. A place of habitation in ancient India.
(M. B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 64) -
PASUBHUMI. The country of Nepal. The place got
the name of Pagubhimi because it is located near the
birth place of Pagupati (Siva). (Chapter 30, Sloka 9,
Sabha Parva). .
PASUDA. A female follower of Subrahmanya. (Sloka
28, Chapter 46, Salya Parva). es
PASUPATA I. An aged brahmin. (See under Virapaksa) -
PASUPATA. II. The missile of Siva. Arjuna during
his exile in the forests performed penance to propitiate
Siva and got this missile from him.
Siva has a bow named Pinaka. Pasupata is the arrow
that is used on that bow. Pinaka is a serpent with the
colours of a rainbow. It has seven heads and has fierce
canine teeth. Poison flows from them always. The string
of the bow is wound round the neck of Siva. The
arrow, bright like the sun and’ equal to the fire O
death, is the Pagupata. It will burn all that it touches.
Neither Naradyandstra, Brahmastra, Agneyastra roe
Varunastra can stand against this. In times of old or
burnt the Tripuras (three cities of the notorious thre
demons) by this arrow. Even Brahma and Visnu ney
be killed by Pagupata. (Chapter 14, Anus asana lee 5
Devotees worship Pasupata as a deity. If the Pagup4
mantra is recited once it will remove all obstacles fr om
the way and if recited a hundred times it will end a
our calamities and bring success in any war for yO". “1g
PASUPATA (S). The bhiitaganas (Spirits and dew”
attending on him) of Siva as a class are called pasu
patas. (Chapter 67, Vamana Purana).
PASUSAKHA. Husband of Ganda, servant-maid of
the saptarsis. (See under Saptarsis). hiPATACCARA. A place of habitation in ancient Bh ;
rata. During Puranic times the people of this place pag
rated to south India because. they were afraid of J ane
sandha. (Chapter 14, Sabha Parva). Sahadeva, One ©
the Pandavas during his victory tour of the south, 5¥
dued the people of this place. The pataccaras foug
against the Kauravas on the side of the Pandava*
(Chapter 31, Sabha Parva). It was the pataccaras w 7
stood at the back of the Kraufica Vyiha construct©
by the Pandavas. (Chapter 50, Bhisma Parva).
PATAKI. A soldier of the Kaurava army. Duryodhan?
gave instructions to Sakuni to attack Arjuna takin’
Pataki along with him for help. (Chapter 156, Dro?
Parva).
PATALA. A monkey. This monkey met Sri Ram4 “
Kiskindha when the latter was going to Lanka ‘
ae Vibhisana. (Chapter 88, Srsti Khanda, pad
urana ).
PATALA. The last.of the seven regions or worlds unde?
the earth said to be peopled by Nagas. The ate
regions one below the other are (1) Atala (2) Vitel
(3) Sutala (4) Talatala (5) Rasatala (6) Mahatala 2?
(7) Patala. In all these regions there are beautiful cille
and buildings built by Maya, the great architect.
daityas, danavas and nagas live in these regions. |.
Patala is seveniy thousand yojanas high each divisio”
being ten thousand, yojanas high. The earth in thes®

PATALA
regions is of different hue like white, black, red and
yellow. It is filled with rubbles, black granite and
gold, Once Narada on his return to Svarga from
Patala said that Patala was more beautiful than Svarga.
The ornaments worn by nagas are profusely studded
with shining diamonds. Daytime is lighted by the Sun
and the night by the Moon. There is neither heat nor
cold there and the happy nagas living contentedly do
not feel the passage of time.
Under the Patala is Adigesa, a témasic form of Mahavisnu, known to the Siddhas as Ananta. He has a thousand
heads and Svastika as his badge. Holding in one hand
a plough and in the other a wooden pestle he sits worshipped by S-idevi and Varunidevi. At the time of the
end of the world the Sankarsanamirti, Rudra, is born
from the face of Adigesa_ shining brightly like poisonous
Gre and it consumes all the three worlds. Adigesa
worshipped by all gods bears this earth on his head
like a crown and sits in Patala. When Ananta yawns
this world begins to quake along with its oceans, rivers
and forests. Nobody has seen an end of his qualities
and that is why he is known as Ananta (no end). It
was by worshipping this Ananta that the ancient sage
Garga learned the truth about the results of Nimittasastra (predictions by omens) a division of Jyotisa-
$astra.
The distinguishing ch
divisions of Patala are given below -—
1) Atala. The first region of Patala. Here lives Bala,
the celebrated son of Maya. He has created ninetysIx
kinds of magical arts capable of giving everything one
desires. Those interested in magic are even now using
some of these. When Bala yawns three kinds of women
will come out of his mouth. Purhscalis (harlots ),
Svairinis (adulteresses ) and Kaminis (lustfu
These women have a charm called Hataka to tempt
all who enter Atala. This hataka is a rasayana which
will excite sexual passion in men so that the woes
can enjoy a sexual life with them fora prolonger BeHey
These women after enticing the men ne S wer We
them enjoying a life of bliss produced by Poe oe meee
‘1 smiles, erotic embr:
sates ee who live with them will bé
amorous talks. The men
in such a state of bliss that they would say with
pride “I am perfect, JT am god. J am one with the
might of ten thousand elephants.
2) Vitala.
none other than Parama
by Bhavanidevi and surrounded: by him) and
(prominent demigods who aren | s ncreasing
shipped by devas, presides OVCE ie Pen virile 0
the prajas created by Brahma. oe river _Hataki.
Parvati-Paramesvaras flows there as t alt
The gold named Hat
wind-blown Agni alte
The wives of daityas
gold.
3), Sutala. This is the
Mahabali meditating 0?
and grandeur than Inet’:
visnu once went to
took ali his poss
Varunapasa pushee 1
aracteristics of each of the seven
éjva.
abali lives
f Mahabali. Here
ae with more glory
To please Indra, Mahan earth and by cccer
gions 4 binding aes
hi to Sutala through @ hole
] maidens).
PATALA
on earth. Later Mahavisnu felt he did a wrong in
thus sending away Mahabali from earth by deceit and
to remedy the sin committed he even now acts as a
gatekeeper to Mahabali in Sutala. Once Ravana
went to Sutala to attack Mahabali and then Mahavisnu
keeping watch over the palace-gate in the form of
Vamana gave Ravana a kick and sent him back.
4) Taldtala. This is the place where Maya lives. This
Maya is a mighty magician among demons. After the .
Tripuradahana (burning the three demons to death)
Siva blessed Maya and. the latter is living as Tripuradhipati (chief of Tripura) in Talatala. Mayais the
preceptor of all demon-magicians and many fiercelooking demons worship him always.
5) Mahdtala. This is the abode of Kadraveyas. They
ot the name because they are all children of Kadri
the cobra.. All these cobras are fierce-looking Pelt
headed ill-tempered ones. The prominent ones among
them are Kuhaka, Taksaka, Susena and Kaliya. All
these are long lean serpents possessing big hoods and
great strength. These bad-tempered cobras live with
their family terribly afraid of Garuda.
6) Rasatala. This is the residence of the. notorious
Nivatakavaca-Kalakeyas. They were enemies of the
devas and they tormented them in many ways. The
majestic authority of Mahavisnu decreased their
virility. They are now living in Rasatala frightened by
the threats and beatings with a magic wand of Sarama
a mantraripini (a sacred chant incarnate) deputed by
Indra.
7) Patala. This is the abode of serpents. The
nagalokadhipatis (chiefs of the serpent world) like
Vasuki, Sankha, Gulika, Sveta, Dhanafjaya Mahagikha, Dhrtarastra, Sankhacuda, Kambala, Asvadhara
and Devadatta live here. These are all strong, longbodied, greatly poisonous snakes with very bad tempers.
They all possess hoods varying in numbers from five to
hundred and the lustre of the diamonds on their hoods
keeps the region of Patala always illuminated. At the
base of this Patala-world is a place, separated from the
rest, thirty thousand yojanas in area, It is here that
the tamasic Visnukala resides under the name Ananta.
Adigesa or Ananta 1s the manifestation of this Visnukala. Sri Ananta has gota name Sankarsana meaning
one who proudly and arrogantly pulls at every thing
that is seen and unseen.
It is well-known that all the worlds are being borne on
his head by the thousand-hooded Adigesa. When
veile bearing the worlds like this, he feels that he
should destroy the animate and inanimate objects of
the worlds, he brings forth from his forehead Rudra
named Sankarsana with eleven demigods and weapons
like trigula | (trident). Ananta is very beautiful with
divine brilliance. Other serpent chiefs prostrate before
him and at that time they see their reflection on the
diamond-mirror-like nails on the toes of Ananta and
for some time the serpent chiefs lie there pleasantly
looking at the reflection of thier own faces in the nails.
The earrings of dazzling brilliance worn by these serpent chiefs reflect on their cheeks and the serpents feel
extremely happy when they see the reflection of their
faces on the nails.
The daughters of the serpent kings are all beautiful
damsels with fair, spotless and lustrous bodies. ‘They

PATALAKETU
smear their bodies with fragrant pastes made from Aloe,
Sandal and Saffron, They then stand around Adisesa
with their bewitching smiles and amorous movements of
their bodies accompanied by erotic side glances expressing their carnal desires. The mighty, virtuous, celebrated Adigesa sits there surrounded by serpents for the
welfare of the world. He sits there worshipped by
Devas, Siddhas, Gandharvas, Vidyadharas and Maharsis, bearing the divine garland ‘Vaijayanii’, and
wearing fragrant flower garlands, blue apparels and
ornaments in ears and neck and holding in his hand the
Halayudha. Suppressing his anger and keeping calm
and serene he pleases all around with his pathetic look.
_(9th Skandha, Devi Bhagavata). 3
PATALAKETU. A demon. This demon once carried
away Madalasa, daughter of Visvavasu to Patala.
Rtadhvajaraja defeated Patalaketu and rescued Madalasa from Patala. (See under Rtadhvaja).
PATALARAVANA. A leader among the demons. Ravana,
the lord of Lanka, and Patalaravana are different.
Patalaravana was the son of the sister of Malyavan. Heti,
son of Brahma, begot of his wife Bhaya a son named
Vidyutkega. Vidyutkega married Salakatanka and got of
her Sukega. Suke’a married Devavati and got of her
three sons, Malyavan, Sumali and Mali. Of these
Sumali got Prahasta and others who were the ministers
of Ravana. Patala-Ravana was the son of Malyavan’s
sister.
A set of demons afraid of Mahavisnu, the destroyer of
demons, fledto Patala. Their leader was Patalaravana.
On reaching Patala he became their leader and emperor
and he got the name of Patalaravana from then
onwards.
Patalaravana performed severe austerities to propitiate
Brahma and got from him three extraordinary boons:—
(1) To travel freely in all the worlds without the use of
any vehicle (2) To be well-versed in all magical arts
(3) To be alive till the beetle-shaped blue diamond in
_ his possession is broken into two.
Patalaravana used all these boons for the welfare and
emancipation of his own people. He was interested in
teasing hisenemies by the power of his boons. Ravana,
king of Lanka, had an alliance with Patalaravana. _
‘Patalaravana had a cruel and huge brother named
Kumbhodara who was an adept in magic. This
brother always helped Patala-Ravana in all his activities.
The Rama-Ravana Yuddha was going on and Ravana
began to suffer defeat after defeat in quick succession.
Ravana then sent for Patalaravana and his brother
Kumbhodara. Patalaravana felt sorry at the pitiable
plight of Lanka and both the Ravanas sat together to
discuss future plans. Though they had lost a major
portion of their army, Ravana suggested they should
ficht with the rest of the army and kill Rama. Patalaravana was to kill Rama and Lanka-Ravana was to
marry Sita. Patalaravana said that it was unwise to
continue the fight with a small army but promised he
would make a trial by using his magic powers.
Patalaravana and Kumbhodara on leaving Lanka made
themselves invisible and travelled above the camp of
6; Rama to investigate the strength and manoeuvres of
the Rama-army. It was night and the whole place was
lit by moonlight. The monkey soldiers were taking rest
‘n ‘different places. Vibhisana and Sugriva were talking
PATALAVATI.
PATALIPUTRA. An ancient city of Puranic
. sons while living there. After some
PATALIPUTRA
in secret about grave matters. Sri Rama was lying
resting his head on the lap of Laksmana and Laksmana
was mildly massaging the divine body of his brother.
Hanim4n was sitting on a big dais created by his tail
and keeping watch over the whole camp.
Patalaravana knew from what he saw that any attempt
to carry away Rama from the surface of the ground was
impossible and so he returned to Patala, From there
they made a tunnel up to the base of ‘the seat of Hanuman and from there to where Ramalay. Then
they carried Rama and Laksmana to Patala before anybody could find it out by making them smell a sammmohanadivyausadha (divine medicine causing unconscle
ness). They brought them toa temple of Mahakail
with the intention of offering themin a aes?
to the deity the next day morning. They ™é@ ;
all preparations for the same. Haniiman used to inspec
the camp often and yet when after midnight he looke
at the place where Rama and Laksmana were sleeping
he could not find them. He immediately woke uP “f
and made a search and they then found the big hole Ks
a tunnel near the place where Rama and Laksmar
were sleeping. All the leaders including Sugriva oF r
Vibhisana assembled there and then Vibhisana te ‘
them what had happened. He then took sugny 4
Haniiman, Jambavan and Angada anda big army fe.
Patala and went. straight to the Mahakali CE 3
There Patalaravana had already started the ceremo”
for the sacrifice. the
Vibhisana then asked Haniimain to go and get ret
beetle-shaped diamond of Patalaravana from 4 ee ,
place in his bed chamber. Haniman took it and re
it in his mouth and attacked Patalaravana who © aa
running to slay him. Patala-Ravana faced Hanum
in a very indifferent manner and a_ fight ensued. che
sometime Haniman lost patience and cracked ied
diamond within his mouth and the moment it crac™
Patala-Ravana fell down dead.(Yuddha Kanda, ka™
Ramayana). a
A holy river of Uttara Bharata. . (Slok
11, Chapter 9, Bhisma Parva) 2 in
fame
Uttara Bharata. The former name of this city
Pataliputraka. Thereis a story behind the city
this name :-— on
There was once a sacred pond named Kanakhala | aathe banks of river Ganga. A brahmin from Daks! 2
bharata along with his wife came to this pow nree
started practising severe austerities there. He got th ts
time the pare?
died. The three sons went toa place named Rajagi ey
and studied there. The three were very poor an eate
went from there to perform penance to propre ey
Subrahmanya (Kuméarasvami). On their b. ing
entered the house of a brahmin named Bhojika liv he
on the sea-coast. Bhojika had three daughters 2? nis
brahmin after knowing all details about them g@V° ith.
daughters in marriage to them along with all his wea ee
The brahmin went to perform penance and the thr
brahmin boys with their wives lived in that house .,
Once there occurred a famine and the three bra :
left their home leaving their wives alone. The s¢©? rs
girl was pregnant at that time and she and_ her gist© d
went to the house of a friend of their father nari!
Yajfiadatta. In due course she delivered a son 2”

PATALIPUTRA
the three women looked after the child as their common
son.
Siva and Parvati were travelling by air once and seeing
this child Siva said thus :—-“I am blessing this boy.
This boy in his previous birth jointly with his wife
worshipped me with great devotion. They are now born
again to enjoy life. His wife in his previous birth was
born as the daughter of King Mahendra. Her name
was Patali and she would again be the wife of this boy
in this life.”
That night Paramagiva appeared before the mother oi
the boy in a dream and said “You must name this boy
Putraka. Everyday morning when he rises up a lakh of
small gold coins will fall to the ground from his
head.”’
They therefore, named the boy Putraka and every
morning they would collect and store the gold coins
falling from his head. When Futraka grew up he was
immensely rich and started giving away his riches to
orahmins as gifts, The news of this spread far and wide
and brahmins from all sides began to flock to his
house.
One day among the brahmins who flocked to his house
were his father and his two brothers. The fathers felt
envious of the extraordinary progress in wealth and
fame.of their son and they cleverly took the son to a
lonely place in a temple in the heart of the Vindhya
mountains to kill him. Aiter engaging some murderers
to kill him they left the place. Putraka bribed
the murderers with his costly dresses: and ornaments
and escaped from there. There was a great storm nee
and Putraka walked through it. On his way he aor ane
two sons of Mayasura quarrelling for the three things
left over to them by their father. The paternal property
: i t all
consisted of a stick, a pair of gt sit gn a
of which had some strange Powers.
the ground with the stick you les tes dal aed ei
anything you desire. If you wear the an a i ee nat
travel in the air. If hes es your hands i
you will get plenty of 1000. | the
Putraka immediately, hit upon 4 plan ae cee eat like
quarrelling brothers thus i Why aes etitive race.
this ? It is better you decide 1t by a col pe ie pedlihe
He who wins the race should have te ae leaving ~the.
things.’? The two brothers agreed by - When they had
things with Putraka started running. + Putraka put
gone a long distance away from the a ‘pot with him
on the sandals and taking the stick an he away from
rose into the air. He lande he house of an 0
the spot and started living at ine da daughter named
woman. The King of that country had a him the beauty
Patali, When the old lady described ‘wanted to marry
and good qualities of Patali, Futwat,
her. So at night when everybo y
asleep Putraka put on his aanuee Patali woke up; sie
of Patali through the windows. "“". 4 according to
liked Putraka and_they eae Oe eat out of the
Gandharva rites. Then el ae
Palace by air with the help ° i : b
- at a place on the shores of the city. there with the
request of Patali Putraka made 4 rie’ Pataliputraka.
help of the stick and_they senee gara):
(Kathapithalambaka, Kathasat
Ganga. hen at
PATHIKRTA
PATANGA. A mountain. There are twenty small
mountains around Mahameru and Patanga is one of
them.
PATANJALI. A celebrated commentator in Sanskrit.
Patafijali is one of the best commentators of Panini’s
Vyakarnasitras. Pandits are ofopinion that he got his
name Patajijali to mean that people should worship
(afijali) at his foot (pada). He was such an adorable
person. Pandits believe that Patafijali is the author of
Yogasiitra and Carakasamhita. A few believe that
Patafijali was the incarnation of Adisesa. But modern
scholars are of opinion that Patafijali, the commentator
and Patajijali the author of Yogasiitras are two different
persons. !
In his book on Patafijalicarita, Ramabhadradiksita
writes about the birth of Patafjali:—‘‘Once
Gonika, daughter of a sage, prayed to the Sun-god for
ason At once Ananta, King of the serpents, fell on
her palm in the form of a sage. The ascetic girl brought
up that sage as her son. After some years the sage
went to Cidambara.and prayed to Siva to bless him
with enough knowledge and wisdom to write a commentary on Katyayana’s Vyakaranavarttika (explanatory rules on Panini’s siitras ). Siva blessed him and the
sage wrote the commentary. Many disciples went to
him to learn the commentary and the sage accepted
them all as disciples and promised to teach them provided they would abide by a condition, namely, that nobody
should remove a curtain he would place between him
and the disciples while teaching. The teaching went
on for some time. He would reply to their doubts
but the replies were peculiar and ambiguous and the
disciples, getting disappointed, removed the curtain
one day. The sage cursed them all. One of the disciples was away from the place then and the sage
cursed him for leaving the place without permission
during the course of study. He begged for relief and
the sage was pleased. The Guru said if he could teach
his commentary to one who would say logically that
the Bhiitakarmavacyakrdanta (past participle of a
verb) of the root ‘Pac’ was ‘Pakva’ he would be
released from the curse. Gandragupta who came
from Ujjayini gave the correct answer and he was
taught the Mahabhasya. Bhartrhari was the son born
to Candragupta of a Sidra woman.
‘Patafijali, according to Professor Goldstucker, was a
courtier of King Pusyamitra and was alive when
Menander attacked Saketa: This would mean that
Patafijali lived before B.C. 150.
PATANA (S). A company of devils. (Chapter 285,
Vana Parva). _ .
PATATRI. A valiant warrior who fought on the side
of the Kauravas in the great battle. He lost his chariot
in a fight with Bhimasena. (Chapter 48, Karna Parva).
PATAVASAKA. A serpent belonging to the race of
Dhrtarastra. This serpent was burnt to death at the
sarpasatra of Janamejaya. (Chapter 57, Adi Parva).
PATHARVAN. A _ rajarsi well-praised in Reveda.
Sakta 112, Mandala 1, Rgveda).
PATHYA. A great preceptor in the tradition of ancient
Gurus. (See under Guruparampara) .
PATHIKRTA. Anagni. If a Yaga comes to a stop
during its course this Agni is to be worshipped.
(Chapter 921, Vana Parva).

PATINETTARAKKAVI(S)
PATINETTARAKKAVI(S).
men).
Manavikrama, the zamorin who ruled the old state of
Kozhikkotu in the beginning of the seventh century
(Malayalam Era) was a talented man well-versed in
‘all arts. He kept in his court a company of nineteen
wise men whom he called by the well-known name
Patinettarakkavis meaning eighteen and a half kavis.
The kavis of the zamorin were the nine Patteris of
Payyar, the five Nambitiris of ‘Tiruvegappura,
Mullappilly Nambitiri, Uddandasastri, Kakkag$er1
Bhattatiri, Cennas Nambitirippadu and Punam
Nambitiri. Of these eighteen were scholars in Sanskrit
and the nineteenth, Punam Nambitiri was a vernacular
poet and so the then zamorin gave only half a unit
value to the vernacular member and thus named_ the
assemby as a company of eighteen and a half members.
There is another explanation given to the word
‘arakkavi?. ‘Ara’ means ‘half; but modern pandits say
that ‘ara’ was a prefix toshow a sign of royalty as -is
found in the words ‘aramana’ meaning royal mana or
palace of the King. So ‘arakkavi' would mean a Kavi
attachéd to a King. Then the question comes, which
of the nineteen was not included in the original company to reduce the number to eighteen. We can leave
the matter for further research.
Payyur Accan Bhattatirippadu, the top-most of Kerala
pandits, was the president of the council of Patinettarakkavis. The illam (house) of this Bhattatirippadu
belonged to the Kunnamkulam taluk near Guruvayur
of Cochin state. He was known as Maharsi also
Uddandaéastrikal in his Mallikamaruta states that one
of the Patteris was Payyur Mahabhattatirippadu named
Paramegvara. Uddandagastri belonged to Kaficipura.
Kakkaggeri Bhattatiri was born to defeat the invincible
Uddandaéastri. Cennas Nambitiri was the author of
Tantrasamuccaya. Many poets and pandits were born
-.in the family of these Kavis after their death.
PATIVRATAMAHATMYAPARVA. A subsidiary Parva
of Vana Parva of Mahabharata. ‘This comprises’ six
chapters commencing from Chapter 293 of Vana Parva.
-PATRESVARA. A sacred place. This is situated on the
northern shore of river Narmada. If one bathes .in the
tirtha (pond) there, one will be able to enjoy the
company of celestial maidens for five thousand
(Chapter 17, Padma Purana) years.
PATTATTANA. This was a custom which was in force
in the ancient temples of Kerala from the 9th century
A.D. Patta means a ‘Sanskrit pandit’ ‘Pattas’ is used
as its plural. To give instructions in S4stras and.-upanisads to the three upper classes and to read in public
at fixed times the Puranas, to make people more and
more religious minded, it was the custom to appoint
Pattas in temples in ancient Kerala. This position which
was the loftiest that could be attained by a pandit of
those times was called by the name Pattattana. From
the 9th century A.D. references are found about
Pattattana in official records, dn all important temples
a mavaratapatta used to be appointed, His duty wasto
read and explain Mahabharata to people.
Uralars who conducted the day to day administration
of the temples and the Koiladhikari who represented
the supreme authority, and the King, jointly granted
the Pattattana to deserving people. Pandits used to
come to temples and engage themselves in religions
(Eighteen and a half wise
, Pattattana. The Pattas were entitled to
oe
PATTI. A divf§ion of the army. (See under Aksaubin})«
PATTORNA. A Ksatriya King. He brought
PATTU (TEN)
polemics to make themselves worthy of the grant of
some profits
from the temples. Records of the 3rd century Malayalam
Era regarding the routine expenditure in the Tiruvalla
temple mention about ‘five nazhis of rice to be given to
each of the Pattas within the temple’. Pattas also were
given many lands free of tax as were given to Uralars.
In the Manalikkara order of 1236 A.D. and the
Padmanabhapwra order of 1237 A.D. mention 1s made
about these grants. Pattasthana and Uraymasthana
became hereditary after some time and began to
decline in importance. |
Even the meaning of the word Pattattana underwent 4
change. In Cochin it meant the ceremony of giving
feasts followed by money-bags to invited brahmins by
the Kings to obtain punya for the dead members of the
royal family. The zamorins of Calicut meant
Pattattana the act of giving fifty-one bags each cole
taining fiftyone rupees to the successful candidates 1
éastrartha contests held at the Tali temple during tn®
period between Revati and Tiruvatira (Ardra) in ¢ .
month of Tulam. There is a difference of opinion
regarding the number of money-bags and the amour
in each. Ullar §. Paramegvara Iyer in his Vijhan®
dipika (page 148) states that the number of bags woe
46 and the money in each was two hundred rupees. O
these, twelve bags each were sanctioned for Prabhakarté
Mimarhsa and Bhattamimamsa, nine for Vyakarana, wr:
thirteen for Vedanta. According to certain records 4
bags were given in the year 1679° A.D. Contests i
Prabhakara MimarhsA were held on the souther””
temple-tower gate of the Tali temple and in Vyakaran 2
on the southern platform of the northern temple tow”
gate of the same temple. The custom of giving re
red and one rupees each to one hundred and ¢8
scholars in Sri Padmanabhasvami temple of Trivandru
is also called Pattattana.
fo
gifts 59,
the Rajasiya of Yudhisthira. (Sloka 18, Chapter
Sabha Parva).
PATTU (TEN).
C. Ten Commandments.
A) The ten books on rhetorics. (Alankaragranthas) The
(1) The Sahityadarpana of Visvanatha
Kavyadaréa of Dandi (3) Kavyaprakasa_ of DF eae
(4) Dagaripaka of Dhanafijaya *(5) Kavyalank@ of
sutravrtti of Vamana (6) Sarasvatikanthabharan@ B
Bhojadeva (7) Alankarasarvasva of Bhamaha \ 2.
Alankarakaustubha of Kavikarnapiraka (9) Kuvalay
eee of Appaya Diksita (10) Candraloka of Jay
eva.
B. Ten Indriyas. { organs of sense). There are ten org i
. sense comprising five Jiianendriyas and five Kar®
riyas. :
igb
en The commandments of Chr.
are ten in number. (1)Thereis no other God but ye p?
va. (2) Do notinstal.idols and worship’ them. (3) rhe
not use God’s name vainly. (4) Do not do work 0? uct
Sabbath day but observe that day as sacred.( 5) Resp
your parents..(6) Do not kill. (7) Do not commit adv
tery. (8) Do not steal. (9) Do not give false eviden?
(10) Do not desire for others’ possessions. . (@
re The ten Kamavasthas. (1) Abhilasa (desire )- i)
intana (Reflection). (3) Smrti (remembrance): 03)
Gunakathana ( Talking about the good quali’

-PATTU (TEN)
(5) Udyoga (effort) (6) Pralapa (gabble) (7) Unmad
madness) (8) Vyadhi (di . a leash
(10) ae tee oa aa (9} Jadata (slothfulness)
E. The ten gunas. The good qualities are ten in number.
(1)' Satya (truth) (2) Vinaya (modesty) (3) Devataradhana (worship of God) (4) Adhyayana (study) (5)
Kulasuddhi (purity of family ) (6) Susila (good conduct )
(7) Sakti (strength) (8) Dhana (wealth) (9) Sirata
(valour) (10) Yuktiyukta Sambhasana (intelligent and
rational talk).
F. Rsi gotras: There are ten Rsi Gotras (families of sages ):
(1) Bharadvaja gotra (2) Kaugika gotra (3) Vatsya
gotra (4) Kaundinya gotra (5) KaSyapa gotra (6) Vasistha gotra (7) Jamadagnya gotra (8) Visvamitra gotra
(9) Gautama gotra (10) Atreya gotra. (All these ten
gotras were brought down to Daksinabharata by Parasurama). .
G. Camatkaras. There are ten kinds of Camatkara
(poetical charm) according to the poet Ksemendra. CR}
Avicarita ramaniya (2) Vicaryamanaramaniya (3) Samastasiktavyapi (4) Suktaikadegavyapi (5) Sabdagata
(6) Arthagata (7) Ubhayagata (8) Alankaragata (9)
Vrttigata (10) Rasagata.
H. Cittavasthas. There are ten states of mind. (1)
Kama (lust) (2) Sankalpa (imagination) (3) Vicikitsa
(doubt) (4) Sraddha (attention) (9) Aéraddha (negligence) (6) Dhrti (resolution) (7) Adhrti (wavering) (8)
Lajja (shame) (9) Dhi (devotion) (10) Bhiti (fear).
I. Nadas There are ten nadas (sounds) according to
Harhsopanisad. (1) Ciniti (2) Cificini (9) Kanthanada
(4) Sankhanada (5) Tantrinada (6) Talanada (7)
Venunida (8) Mrdanganada (9) Bherinada (10)
Meghanada.
J. Sins (papas). There are ten papas (sins). (1) Murder (2) Theft (3) Adultery (4) Calumny (5) Harshness
(6) Deceit (7) Nonsensical utterances (8) Inflicting
pain on others (9) Desire for another’s property (10)
Atheism.
wers..
K. Dafapuspas. There are ten holy flo raed at
(1) Pavankuruntal (2) Muyalcceviyan (Suta‘reni— a
thericum Tuberosum ) (3) Karuka (Ananta—Bent grass )
Orchioides )
; = = lika—Curculigo ;
(4) Nilappana (Talamui a Peailifie Eclipta) (6)
(5) Kayyanya Bhrngaraja— 11a!
ules Mc tpnakrant Clikoria Ternated, ok,
Cherupila (Illecobrum lanatum (8) Oe (Sri es
tini—Asparagus Racemosus 9) Ulinya (J acco
leaved heart-pea ‘“Cardiopermum Halicacabum
aioe 4li—Sensitive lant).
(10) Mukkatt (Gandakah—“© are ten in number : (1)
L. Prajapatis. ‘The prajapatis (4): Pulaha (5) Pulastya |
Marici (2) Angiras (3) Atri :
(°) ae (7) Vasistha (8) Daksa (9) Bhreu (10)
arada. in ete
M.. Prinas. There are ten Pranas Gifeswins met,
Prana (2) Apana (3) Vyana (4) Samana | de (10)
iG) Bags (7) Karma (8) Krkara (9), Devada
hanajijaya.
N. Strength. There are ten lems oh eal aa
[nana (eaowledge) (2) Praia (wigtom’ i neness)
(heroism) (4) Ksama ( patience ) (5) sila (Up ee aya
(6) Dana (charity) (7) Bala (might) . peat fe
pee (9) Dhyana (intuition) (
pow f observation ). 4 re
IT. (1) ‘Buddhi (intelligence) (2) Ksama (paticnrs)
(3) Virya (heroism ) (4) Dhyana (divine mntunts
- must be sixteen haughty a
PATTU (TEN)
Jfiana (knowledge) (6) Krpa (grace) (7 Sila ( upright:
ness) (8) Bala (9) Dana (10) eee es ey
III. Then there are the following ten balas : (1) Milabala (strength inherent) (2) Bandhubala (Strength of relatives) (3) Rajasainyabala (strength of the royal army)
(4) Svakiya Senabala (strength of own army) (5)
' Bahya senabala (strength of reinforcement from outside)
(6) Kattalabala (strength of foresters) (7) Gajabala
(strength of the elephants) (8) Turagabala (strength
of horses) (9) Bandhusainyabala (strength of the
army of relatives) (10) Padatibala (strength of footsoldiers) .
O. Dafamila. ‘There are ten important medicinal roots:
(1) Kumbil (Cayaphal). (2) Kuvala (Sriphala—Aegle
Marmelos) (3) Mufija (Sriparna—Permna_ Spinosa)
(4) Patiri (Krsnavrnda Trumpet Flower Tree) (5)
Palakappayyan! (Sonaka—Bignonia Indica) (6) Orila
(Padmacarini—Hibiscus Mutabilies) (7) Mivila (Kalasi
—Hedysarum Lagopodioides)} (8) Karuttacunta (Pracodani—small _egg-plant) (9) Veluttacunta (white . pracodani) (10) Nerifijil (Gokantaka—Barleria longifolia).
P. Limbs of the king (Angas). The ten angas of a king
are (1) Nadu (country) (2) Mala (mountain) (3) Nadi
(river) (4) Uru (village) (5) Kottara (palace) (6)
Kutira (horse) (7) Ana (elephant) (8) Murasu (War
drum) (9) Koti (flag) (10) Cenkol (sceptre). ¢
. Ripakas. (dramatic compositions). There are ten
classes of rupakas :
1, Nataka. (drama). ‘The chief sentiment in a drama
should be one of the three following rasas: (1)
Virarasa (sentiment of heroism) (2) Srngararasa
sentiment of love) (3) Karunarasa (pathos). There
should be five to ten acts. The singer should be a famous
one. It must have Paficasandhis (five junctures).
Sakuntala and Uttararamacarita are perfect Natakas.
2) Prakarana. In this kind of drama the plot is invented
or fictitious and deals with the social life of the day.
The hero of the play can be either a hero or a meek
person. The heroine can be a noble lady or a harlot.
The main sentiment should be Srngara (love). Malatimadhava, Mrcchakatika are examples of Prakaranas.
3) Bhana. There is only one character and one Act in
this species. The plot is fictitious and the hero is an
expert humorous libertine. Lilamadhura and Mahisamangala Bhana are examples.
4) Prahasana. This is a farce. The plot is f ictitious and
is in the nature of alow comedy. Satire is the chief
sentiment of this species. :
5) Dima. This has got four Acts. The plot will be famous and _ the chief sentiment will be one of wrath and
fierceness. There will be no Viskambha (interlude between Acts to give connection to the story between Acts)
or Pravesaka (introducer explaining portions of the
plot which may not be put on stage but an understanding of which is necessary to follow the story). ‘There
nd excited characters like a
Deva, Gandharva, Yaksa and Raksasa. Tripvradahana
is an example. accreted
6) Vpayoga. Female characters will be rare in this kind
of dramas. There will be only one Act. The sentiments
of satire of love or calmness should not be predominant. The hero should be a famous divine sage. Saugandhikaharana ig an example.
7) Samavakara. The plot should be based on a story of
the devas and asuras. There will be three Acts. There

PATUSA
must be twelve brave heroes in it. Fhe chief sentiment
will be heroism. The seizure of-a city, declaration of
war or a big fire should be part of the play. Sumudramathana is an example.
8) Vithi. This will have one Act and one actor. Any of
the sentiments can be portrayed. The story must be completed by Akagabhasita (speech to which reply is_given
on the stage as if spoken from the sky) Candrika is an
example.. )
9) Arka. This has only one Act. The heroes should be_
people of the prakrta type. Pathos is the chief sentiment.
This should contain the pathetic wail of many women.
This is called Utsrstikanka also. Sarmistha-Yayati-is an
example.
~ . ‘10. Lhamrga. This will contain four Acts. The heroes of
the play should be valiant. There must be ten PatakaNayakas (producers of different kinds of episodical incidents in the drama). They will be Uddhatas (haughty
and excited persons). © |
R. Metals. There are ten chief metals : (1) Gold (2)
Silver (3) Copper (4) Tin (5) Lead (6) Zinc (7) Iron
(8) Steel (9) Brass (10) Mercury.
S. Avataras.The incarnations of Visnu are ten. See
under Avatara.
T. Upacaras. There are ten articles of worship : (1)
Arghya (oblation_of valuables) (2) Padya (water for
washing feet) (3) Acamana (water for cleansing mouth)
(4) Madhuparka (a mixture of honey with four other
sweet articles) (5) Punaracamana (water for cleansing
mouth again) (6) Gandha (Sandal paste) (7) Puspa
(flowers) (8) Dhipa (frankincense) (9) Dipa (light)
(10) Nivedya (articles of food offerings).
U. Upanisads. ‘There are many Upanisads of which
only 108 ones are in print; of these the most important
are ten in number and they are the following : (1)
Igavasya (2) Kena (3) Katha (4) Pragna (5) Munda
(6) Mandikya (7) Chandogya (8) Taittiriya (9) Aitareya (10) Brhadaranyaka.
- PATUSA. A demon. During the Rama-Ravana battle this
demon fought against Panasa a monkey warrior on the
side of Rama. (Chapter 285, Vana Parva).
PAUDANYA. An ancient city of Bharata. The founder
of this city was ASmaka son of King Saudisa. Pandits
believe that the present city of Paithan on the northern
banks of river Godavari was the old Paudanya.
PAULASTYA. The demons born in the race of Pulastya
are called Paulastyas. They were born like the brothers
of Duryodhana. Ravana born in the family of Pulastya
is also called Paulastya. (Chapter 67, Adi Parva).
PAULOMA. A tirtha (holy place). Another name of
Paficatirtha. (See under Pancatirtha). |
PAULOMAS. The sons of the demon named Puloma,
PAULOMAPARVA. A subsidiary Parva of the Adi Parva
of Mahabharata. (See under Bharata).
PAULOMI. Sacidevi, wife of Indra. (See under Saci).
PAUNARBHAVA. See under Bandhudayada.
PAUNDRA I. One of the barbarous tribes of
had originated from the tail of Nandini.
Chapter 174, Adi Parva).
PAUNDRA II. A resident of the state of Paundra. This
state was in existence during the Mahabharata period.
The king of the state was also called Paundra. Paundra
was present for the marriage of Paricali. (Chapter 186,
Adi Parva). Paundras were also present for the Rajamen who
(Sloka 37,
PAURUSEYA
siya conducted by Dharmaputra. During the big battle
the Paundras fought against the Kauravas constructing
a Krauficavyiha (a battle array in_the shape of a
stork). (Chapter 50, Bhisma Parva). Krsna and Karna
on two different occasions conquered this country.
(Santi Parva, M. B.) The Paundras were Ksatriyas
once. But the brahmiins cursed them and changed them
into Sudras. (Chapter 85, AnuSasana Parva).
PAUNDRA III. The conch of Bhimasena. He blew his
conch at the beginning of the Mahabharata battle and
also at the time when Duryodhana fell down dead.
(Chapter 61, Salya Parva).
PAUNDRAKA I. A son of Nikumbha. When during the
Rama-Ravana battle Nikumbha died, his son Paundraka took up the fight against Rama and was killed.
(Ananda Ramayana).
PAUNDRAKA II. (Paundrakavasudeva) .. A king of ancient Kariisa. Once he sent a messenger to Dvaraka an
told Krsna thus : “Oh Krsna, I am the real Vasudeva:
Therefore put down all your royal emblems and robes
and come and worship at my feet.” As soon as Krsp@
heard it he got angry and moved to Karisa with 4
large army and killed Paundrakavasudeva. 10th Skandha, Bhagavata) .
PAUNDRAKA III. The name of the buffalo which is the
vehicle of Yama (Chapter 9, Vamana Purana). ‘
the
PAUNDRAMATSYAKA. A Ksatriya king. He was 1
son born to the demon Vira of a woman named Dan@
yus. (Sloka 43, Chapter 67, Adi Parva). -
PAURAVAT. An ancient Rajarsi. He became ParvatarajJ@
when he grew up after being born of the species of t
daitya, Sarabha. Once Arjuna defeated this king. The
Pandavas invited him for the Mahabharata battle. But
he did not accept it but joined sides with the Kauravas
against the Pandavas. Paurava was considered a prom”
nent commander in the Kaurava army. In the Kur!
ksetra battle he at first fought against Dhrstaketu an
then was wounded when he fought against Abhimany™
It was Arjuna who killed him in the end. (Chapter © g
Adi Parva; Chapter 27, Sabha Parva; Chapters 4, 1205
Udyoga Parva; Chapter 116, Bhisma Parva; Chapter
14, Drona Parva; Chapter 5, Karna Parva).
PAURAVA II. Those born in the Puru line of kings 4°°
as a class called Pauravas. Both Kauravas and Panda
vas have been mentioned as Pauravas in the Purana:
(Chapter 172, Adi Parva).
PAURAVA III. An ancient king of the kingdom of Ang@:
This Paurava was also one among the kings who 84%
money to king Srfijaya when he conducted an ASV
medha (Chapter 57, Drona Parva). z
PAURAVA IV. One of the Brahmavadi sons of Visv®
mitra. (Sloka 55, Chapter 4, Anufasana Parva). ,
PAURAVAKA. A Ksatriya tribe. These people fought!
against the Kauravas joining the Krauficavyaha con
structed by Dharmaputra in the great battle. (Chapt
50, Bhisma Parva). |
PAURAVI I. Wife of Vasudeva, father of Sri Krsna- He
_ had many other wives. (9th Skandha, Bhagavata).
PAURAVI II. Wife of Yudhisthira. Yudhisthira begot 4
son eo Devaka of Pauravi. (9th Skandha, Bh28*"
vata).
PAURUSEYA. A demon who travels along with the 84
in “4 month of Jyestha.(June), (11th Skandha, Bhag4"
yata).

PAURIKA
PAURIKA. A king of the ancient country Purikanagari.
He was such a sinner that he was reborn as a jackal
in his next birth. (Chapter 111, Santi Parva).
PAURNAMASA. Son of Marici. His mother was called
Sambhiti. Paurnamasa had two sons named Virajas
and Parvata. (Chapter 10, Araéa 1, Visnu Purana).
PAUSAJIT. One of the sages belonging to the tradition
of the disciples of Vyasa. (See under Guruparampara).
PAUSAMASA. The month of Pausa (January). During
this month, on the full moon day the constellation
Pusya and the moon join in a zodiac. He who takes
food only once a day during this month will get beauty,
fame and prosperity. (Chapter 106, AnuSasana Parva).
PAUSPINJI. A sage belonging to the tradition of
disciples of Vyasa. (See under Guruparampara)
PAUSTI. Wife of king Puru. Puru begot of Pausti three
sons named Pravira, Ivara, and Raudrasva. Pausf1 1s
called Kausalya also. (Sloka 11, Chapter 9, Adi
Parva). + ah
PAUSYA I. A Ksatriya king. The queen of this king
gave her earrings as a gift to a sage called Uttanka.
(See under Uttanka).
PAUSYA IJ. Son of Pisa, king of Karavira. Pausya had
three wives and yet was not fortunate enough to get a
son. At last by the grace of Siva, he got a son named
Candragekhara. The palace of Candrasekhara was 1n
Karaviranagari situated near Brahmavarta on the
banks of the river Drsadvati. (Kalika Purana, Chapter
+ ee A subsidiary Parva of Adi Parva.
is included in this. tay
PALISTARIL, A preceptor of the tradition of disciples of
Vvasa. (See under Vyasa). nae te
PAVAKA. A son of Agni. Agni got of his wife arene
three sons, Pavaka, Pavamana and a ack alas
illiant sons got tog and
cated Batts, Thus there were 49 Agnis mae Dp ier
father, his three sons andatheir 45 pe av
another name also—Mahan (Chapter
1. An Agni (fire). | ;
Oe nah got of his wife Svaha theese. ae rae
a i.
sea ice gee Fs Agnis. Thus, father, He ee
their fortyfive sons constitute the 49 Agnis. (Chap ;
ns i ana 2 . e . .
ote a a mountain. This _ ees, is
Se a | me (ar ie ne ed of eV ijitagva.
III. Oneo
a im is previous birth an Agni Lisi ced a (ath
by Vasistha to be bor
Skandha, Bhagavata). af the ten sons of
PAVANA I. A Viévadeva (one La ta Danial
MN (Sloka zs mee e a of Mitravinda.
PAVANA II. A son DO rsy
Oe ag Bhagaya situated on the border of
PAVANA III. A sacred pla we Devas. an 4 Manes at
Kurukgetra. 1 ow peytes benefit of conducting an
this place one would ge na Parva).
p Aivamedia, (Chane aragana srtha ce Fate
situated on the border ‘ of a oke
in this one would attain ViS0 avidhi
PAVITRAROPANA.
worship ). If you perform
(a mode of
orship you
, Vana Parva).
The eldest son of ,
589 PAYYANNUR PATTU
will get the benefit of worshipping Visnu for a year.
This worship is to be conducted in the months of
Asadha (July), Sravana (August) Prausthapada ~
(September), Agvina (October) and Karttika (November) A sacred Pavitra (sacred thread or ring of Kusa
grass) is to be prepared either in gold,. silver, copper,
cotton or silk. A -specially purified cotton thread is
also enough The Pavitra is to be made of three threads
woven together. The Payitra is to be made holy by.
reciting 108 times the Gayatri mantra or even half
of that number is enough. Reciting 108 times or more
is considered to be Uttama (best) ; half of it is considered
Madhyama (tolerable) and less than it is considered
adhama (worst). The Pavitra should then be tied
to mandalas and the mantra tobe recited at the time
of tying it, is this :
Or Narayanaya vidmahe Vasudevaya Dhimahi
tanno Visnuh pracodayat. )
(Chapter 34, Agni Purana).
PAVITRAVANI. Asage who shone in the courts of
both Indra and Yudhisthira.. (Sloka 15, Chapter. 4,
Sabha Parva).
PAYASYA. Son of the sage Angiras. He had eight sons
named Varunas. They were :—Brhaspati, Utathya,
Payasya, Santi, Ghora, Viraipa, Sarmvartta and
Sudhanva. (Sloka 130, Chapter 85, Anusasana Parva).
PAYODA. A female attendant of Subrahmanya. (Sloka
28, Chapter 46, Salya Parva). »
PAYOSNI. A holy river. This river starts from the
Vindhya mountains and flows to the west. Nala and
Damayanti walked through the banks of this river.
(Chapter 61, Vana Parva). Those who bathe in_ this
river will get the benefit of doing a thousand godanas
(gifts of cows). There is a sacred place on the shores of
this river called Varahatirtha. King Nrga performed a
Yaga at this place at which Indra came and had
Somap4na and the brahmins received daksina (fees)
and got drunk. (Chapters 88 and 121, Vana Parva).
Even the mere contact of water-drops of Payosni river
would absolve one of all sins. The musical instrument
Sriga of Siva is in this river. Dharmaputra once came
to this river and stayed there for some time drinking
its water. (Chapter 120, Vana Parva). On another
occasion Gaya son of King Amiurtarayas conducted
seven agvamedhas at this place and pleased Indra.
(Chapter 21, AnuSasana Parva). :
PAYYANNUR PATTU. This is a work in Malayalam
written during a very ancient period of Malayalam
literature. A complete edition of the same has not
yet been received. The plot as could be gathered
from records available is the following :
Nilakei, a woman born in a very noble family in
Trigsivaperir did not have any sons though she accepted many husbands for the sake of progeny. At last
she decided to perform penance. She left her place
alone on a pilgrimage and _ reached Kaccil, a famous
trading centre near Ezhimala. There lived a merchant
named Nambucetty alias Cormbucetty who was the
chief man of the place. He talked with Nilakesi and
accepted her as his wife. She got a son of him named
Nambuéari Aran... Pleased at the birth of a son the
parents gave a grand feast at the big Payyannir plains.
At that time the brothers of Nilakesi reached the place
in a ship. They climbed the fort-walls and tried to

PEDU
enter the grounds. Some people objected to it and at that
time Nambucetty came there and beat them to death. On
hearing about this Nilakesi left everything behind including her son and went again on a pilgrimage. When
the son grew up the father taught his son everything
about trade and ships. The father gave him a new ship
for trading and the son taking along with him Pandyas,
Jonakas, Coliyas, Pappavas and a Yavana and a huge
stock of goods put the ship into the sea and fearlessly
went for trading. After passing through many ports
and crossing another ocean he reached Ponmala (the
mountain of gold) and bartered his goods for a heap of
gold. He came back to his own land and was one day
playing chess with his father when a SannyAsini (female
ascetic) came there. When she was given alms she
requested to be allowed to talk to the young merchant.
The Sannydsini was none other than Nilakesi_ the
mother of Nambusari Aran, the young merchant. She
requested him to come to Payyanntr for a feast conducted by a woman there and he agreed to that. But the
father objected to it. But when the son persisted in
going, the father sent him with the sons of a cetty, a
few people from Manigrama and a huge stock of goods
for trade. The poem ends there thus with 104 verses.
There are different opinions about the story among
literary critics and historians. Gundert writes about it
thus :—‘““This is a pieceof Malayalam work most ancient
of all that I have seen. This isa creation in Malayalam: before that language became diluted with meaningless indeclinable Sanskrit words.’? According to
Gundert this poem was written before the poem
Ramacarita was written and thus in the 3rd century
PEDU. A Rajarsi otherwise named Ankagva. (Mandala
1, Reveda).
PERIYALVAR. Visnucittar, father
under Visnucittar). —
PERUKA. A King of Vedic times. He was the 4g rayadata (one who gives refuge) of Bharadvaja. (Anuvaka
63, Mandala 6, Reveda).
PHA. ‘This letter means Jhafijhavata. Phi is phitkara,
a sound resembling hissing and means ‘useless’ also,
(Chapter 348, Agni Purana)
PHALAKAKSA. A Yaksa. This Yaksa was a member
of the court of Kubera. (Sloka 16, Chapter 10, Sabha
Parva ) :
PHALAKIVANA. A sacred place. Once the devatis
started practising severe austerities at this place and it
a ie a long Dai ig Seale: to thousands of years.
rom then onwards this became a holy place.
83, Vana Parva, Sloka 86). do ‘noes
PHALAUDAKA. A Yaksa. This Yaksa lives in the
court of Kubera. (Chapter 10, Sabha Parva).
PHALGU. A holy river. If one visits this place one
would get the benefit of doing an Agvamedha. (Sloka
98, Chapter 84, Vana Parva).
PHALGUNA. Another name of Arjuna. Arjuna was
born in the Uttaraphalguni constellation in a
mount of the Himalyas. So he was called Phalguna
and also Phalguna. (Sloka 9, Chapter 44, Virata
Parva).
PHALGUNA. A month (March). It is so called
because the phalguninaksatra yoga occurs im that
month. He who gives away as gift his meal for a
time of the day will become more loved by his wife.
of Andal. (See
PINDIKA
Not only that, the Puranas declare that such a man
would attain Candraloka. (Chapter 109, Anusasana
Parva).
PHALGUTANTRA. The father of Sagara. During the
old age of Phalgutantra the Haihayas led by Talajanghas attacked Ayodhya and drove out the royal
family from the palace. Phalgutantra fled from the
palace with his wife and stayed in the.asrama of Aurva.
The King died before long. The queen who was pregnant then delivered a son in due course and he became
the celebrated Sagara. (Chapter 3, Brahmanda
Purana).
PHALODAKA. A Yaksa of the court of Kubera.
(Sloka 16, Chapter 10, Sabha Parva).
PHENA. A King of the race of Usinara. His son was
Sutapas and his grandson Auéginara. (Harivam ‘a, I,
PHENAPA. A gotra-maker of the Bhrgu family.
Phenapa is mentioned in the context of describing [
Yudhisthira the greatness of cows. Phenapa’s origina
name was Sumitra. He lived on the shores of the river
Kulaja in the mountain of Trigikhara drinking the
foam of cow’s milk alone and thus getting for him the
name Phenapa. (Phena= foam; Pa=drink). (Anusasan@
Parva, M.B.)
PICCHALA. A serpent born in the family of Vasukt
This serpent was burnt to death at the Sarpasatra ©
Janamejaya. (Sloka 6, Chapter 57, Adi Parva).
PICCHILA. A river of Puranic fame which runs through
Uttara Bharata. (Sloka 29, Chapter 9, Bhisma Parva):
PINAKA. The bow of Siva. Pinaka was formerly the
three-forked spike of Siva. Once it fell down from tbe
hands of Siva and on falling down took the shape of 4
bow. From then onwards it was used as a bow:
See under Pagupata. (Chapter 38. Sabha Parva:
Chapter 141, Anugasana Parva; Chapter 289. 5404
Parva).
PINAKI I. One of the eleven Rudras. He was the
grandson of Brahma and the son of Sthanu. Pinak!
attended the Janmotsava of Arjuna. (Chapter 66, rf
Parva; Chapter 208, Santi Parva; Chapter 122,
Parva).
PINAKTE II. Siva got this name because he wields th¢
bow named Pindka. ' ; f
PINDARAKA I. A serpent born in the family °
Kasyapa. This serpent was burnt to death at lee
Sarpasatra of Janamejaya. (Sloka 17, Chapter 57; A
Parva).
PINDARAKA II. A sacred place _ situated ie
Dvaraka in Saurastra. He who bathes in a holy rivet
there would get immense gold. The place is worshipP®
by the sages. He who stays there for one day bathi? g
in that river would get the benefit of conducting 2”
Agnistomayajfia. (Chapter 82, Sloka 62, Vana Parv@>
Sloka 21, Chapter 88, Vana Parva; Sloka_ 57, Chaptet
25, Anugasana Parva). : ;
PINDASEKTA. A serpent of the race of Taksaka. This
sa eas to death at the Sarpasatra
anamejaya. (Sloka 8, Chapter 57, Adi Parva).
PINDIKA. A stool to ‘nstall idols. The — of this
stool should be equal to that of the idol. The breadth
should be its half and the thickness equal to that i
the breadth. The exact place where the idol is fixed id
called Mekhala and the hole in the mekhala shou!

' PINGALA I.
PINGAKSA
slightly slant towards the north. The pipe (exithole for
the water to flow out) called Pranala should be as
wide as a fourth part of the area of the pitha. For a
pranala of a Siva temple the length of the same should
be half of that of the Pindika.
The sanctum sanctorum of the temple should be divided into seven divisions and the Pindika should be
fixed by a learned priest in the Brahmabhaga of the
garbhagrha (sanctum sanctorum). (Chapters 50 and
60, Agni Purana).
PINGAKSA. See under Durmukha.
PINGAKSI. A female follower of
(Sloka 18, Chapter 46, Salya Parva).
A deva who is an attendant of the Sungod. Sirya (Sun-god) rides in a _one-wheeled
chariot drawn by seven horses and he bears in his
hands two lotuses. On his right side stands the attendant Dandi with an ink-pot and a writing stick and
on his left side stands the attendant Pingala witha
stick. Both these are demi-god attendants of Surya.
(Chapter 51, Agni Purana).
PINGALA II. A prominent s
Kaégyapa of his wife Kadru. (Sloka 9,
Parva).
PINGALA III.
Sarpasatra of Janamejaya. (Slo
Parva). :
PISIGALA IV. A King of the Yaksas. He isa friend
Siva who spends his
of Siva. He acts as body-guard to
This Yaksa gives happiness
1, Chapter 23, Vana Parva).
acter in the book
Subrahmanya.
erpent born to the sage
Chapter 35, Adi
A sage. He was a Yajva (priest) in the
ka 6, Chapter 53, Adi
time in cremation grounds.
to all in the world. (Sloka 5
PINGALA V. A lion, who is a char
Paficatantra. (See under Paficatantra ).
PINGALA VI. A brahmin of very bad manners. This
own wife who was 4
brahmin was killed by his \
birth Pingala became a
prostitute. In their next
vulture and the prostitute, a parrot. Both had
us birth and the vulture
memories of their previo
(Pingala) with vengeance killed the parrot. After that
Pingala was eaten one day by a raha A abe ate
residing on the shores of Ganga read to their S
ita lvation and
fifth chapter of Gita and they got s4
entered Pitrloka ( ). (Chapter 40,
world of the Manes
et Khanda, Padma eet n)
NGALA VIL. A raksasa (demon:
demon was going through a forest he el? OoThen
The latter got afraid and climbed up e* - ar Ganeéa
a branch broke and it fell on the Se worship and
sitting beneath that tree. It was an ary Ween were
because of that both the as and the
elevated. (Ganeéa Purana) .
PINGALA ‘ A prostitute. (See under een Ome
PINGALA II. A prostitute of the country Angad
Pp r of King Candrangada
Once when this
Piigala was born as the daughter © he did
: gs act sne 1
in her next birth because of the ae King named
in doing service to the sage Rsabha.
the girl Kirtimalint and’ Bhadray¥ a
und Ayu ). ; 4. Once
HNGAL A woman of the city By See eaoraus
this woman approache ri actly observing 4
intentions and Sri Rama who was Sy desive and said :-—
vow of one-wife refused to satisfy her will be born as a
“During the incarnation of Krsna ill in my form 4s
servant maid of Karnsa an ae
d the
Krsna accept you.”
d her. (See
589 PIPPALADA
Sita on hearing this cursed Pingala. She said “Oh
beautiful woman who has approached my husband
with amorous intentions, you will have three bends in
your body when you are born next as the servant maid
of Karsa.”? Pingala weeping bitterly craved for
pardon and then Sita said that Krsna would make her
perfect. (Vilasa Kanda, Ananda Ramayana).
PINGALARAJA. A Yaksa_ who lives in cremation
grounds. He always acts as a pilot to Siva in his
travels. ( Sloka 51, Chapter 231, Vana Parva).
PINGATIRTHA. An ancient holy place. (Chapter 82
Vana: Parva. )
PINJALA. Ariver of Puranic fame. The greatness of
this river is described in Sloka 27, Chapter 9, Bhisma
Parva).
PINJARAKA. A son born to the sage Kasyapa
wife Kadri. Sloka 6, Chapter 35, Rai Parva) oe
PIPPALA I. The youngest of the threesons born to the
daitya named Mitra of his wife Revati. (Bhavisya
Purana ).
PIPPALA II. A brahmin born of the race of Kasyapa.
Pippala did severe penance and became arrogant of
the power acquired by it. Once he happened to see
the eminent sage Sukarma serving with devotion his
own mother and father and that made his arrogance
fade a bit. (Bhimi Khanda, Padma Purana, Chapter
PIPPALADA. An ancient sage belonging to the tradition of preceptors. (See under Guruparampara). It is
said that this sage got that name because he was in the
habit of eating Pippali in large quantities daily.
Pragnopanisad tells a story of how the sages Sukega
Saibya, Satyakama (KaSyapa), Kausalya, Bhargava and
Kabandhi went to Pippalada seeking Atmajfiana
(spiritual knowledge) and how he gave them instructions on the sane.
Padma Purana gives the following information regarding Pippalada:—‘‘Once Kundala, a brahmin residing
in Kuruksetra, got a son named Sukarma. Sukarma’s
arents were old and Sukarma spent most of his time
looking after his sickly aged parents. Kundala taught
his son all the Vedas and Sastras. At that time in the
gotra of Kasyapa was born a brahmin named PippaJada. Controlling his senses and abandoning all
passions he did severe penance in a forest called
Dafaranya. The greatness of his penance made the
animals of the forest leave their mutual enmity and live
in perfect peace. Even the devas were astonished at
the power of his penance.
Pippalada did penance sitting as majestic and motionless as a mountain for a thousand years. Ants made a
sand-heap over him. like a mole-hill. The sage sat
inside without any motion; poisonous black cobras
circled round him and yet the sage made no movement.
Three thousand years went by like that and then the
devas showered flowers on him. Brahma appeared and
ave him the boon ‘Sarvakamasiddhi’ (getting all that
is desired) and by the blessing of Brahma he became a
very learned person also.
Pippalada became arrogant v
kamasiddhi’ in his possession.
vith the boon of ‘SarvaOne day while he was
sitting on a river-bank a_ swan appeared before him
and in clear tones said:—‘‘Pippalada, why are you so
proud of your greatness? I do not believe you have that

PIPPALASTHANA
power of universal attraction. This art is arvacina
(modern) ; you do not know Pracina because
you are illiterate. You take pride unnecessarily
for having done penance for three thousand years. Do
you know Sukarma, the wise son of Kundala ? He is
the man who has acquired this power of attraction.
There is no mahajfani (one possessing spiritual knowledge) like him anywhere else in this world. Sukarma
has given no gifis, he has not practised meditation, he
has not performed yagas or yajfias nor has he ever done
a pilgrimage. He has not done any of these virtuous
deeds and yet he is well-versed in all the gastras and
Vedas. Even though he is a child you do not possess
enough knowledge to equal his. Why? Because he is
always engaged in the care and welfare of his parents.
You take pride in your achievements without reason.”’
Hearing that Pippalada went and met Sukarma. Pippalada knew that the bird was none other than Brahma
himself. They talked to each other for a long time and
then Pippalada admitted that Sukarma was a greater
man than himself. (Chapters 60-62, Padma Purana).
PIPPALASTHANA. A division of land included in the
Jambidvipa. (Sloka 37, Chapter 6 , Bhisma Parva).
PIPPALAYA. One of the nine sons born to Rsabhadeva
of his wife Jayanti. Pippalaya was a very pious king.
4th Skandha, Bhagavata)
PISACA I. (Devil, Satan)
1) Origin. A malevolent being which is the very
manifestation of evil. Everybody, everywhere in the
world, from the very birth of this universe believed in
the presence of such a wicked soul. According to Hindu
Puranas, Pigaca is a creation of Brahma. In the beginning Brahma created the eighteen prajapatis headed by
Daksa, the Yaksas, the Gandharvas and the Pisacas.
(Chapter 1, Adi Parva). This wicked being is called
in English a ‘Devil’. This word is derived from the
Greek word ‘diabolos’. People of the West and East
equally believe that Pisaca (Satan) is an enemy of men
and gods alike. |
2) Bible and the Pisaéca. It is not clearly stated in Bible
how Satan was born but it is being referred to at several
places as a wicked soul which leads men to evil.
3) The Bhératiya Saikalpa. Pisaca, the creation of
Brahma, has taken important roles in the Puranic
stories. Though Pigaca is the instigator of all evils its
manifestation appears in many contexts in the Puranas:—
(i) PiSaca lives in the court of Kubera and worships
him. (Sloka 16, Chapter 10, Sabha Parva).
(ii) Pisaca lives in the court of Brahma and worships
him. (Sloka 49, Chapter 11, Sabha Parva).
(iii) Pigsaca lives in the Gokarnatirtha and worships
Siva. (Sloka 25, Chapter 85. Vana Parva).
(iv) Pisaca is the head ofall evil spirits. Marici and
sages like him have created many evil spirits. ( Sloka 46
Chapter 272, Vana Parva). : :
(v) The bhutas (evil spirits) made Ravana their king.
(Sloka 88, Chapter 275, Vana Parva).
_ (vi) The food of Pisaca is flesh and its drink, blood.
(Sloka 9, Chapter 50, Drona Parva).
(vii) In the battle af Bharata, the horses attached to
the chariot of Alambusa were Pisacas. (Sloka 38,
Chapter 167, Drona Parva).
(viii) The Pisacas fought Karna acting as helpers to
Ghatotkaca. (Sloka 109, Chapter 175, Drona Parva).
(ix) Arjuna conquered the Pisacas at the time of
PITR(S)
Khandavadaha. (Sloka 37, Chapter, 37; Karna Parva).
(x) The Pigacas were present during the fight of
Arjuna with Karna (Sloka 50, Chapter 87, Karna
Parva).
(xi) The Pigacas worship Parvati and Paramesvara
doing penance on the top of the mountain Mufijavan.
(Sloka 5, Chapter 8, ASvamedhika Parva). a
(xii) During the time of Mahabharata many Pis acas
incarnated as kings. (Sloka 6, Chapter 31, Agramvasika
Parva ).
PISACA II.
Parva).
PISAGA III. An inhabitant of the country of Pisaca 1"
ancient Bharata. These Pisacas fought against the
Kauravas on the side of the Pandavas during the great
battle. It was these pigacas that stood on the souther?
side of the Krauficavyaha of Yudhisthira in the great
battle. (Sloka 50, Chapter 50, Bhisma Parva). A .
_ of these Pigacas were with Bhagadatta in the army ©
Duryodhana. (Chapter 87, Bhisma Parva). Sri -Krsn4
cursed the pigacas. Chapter 11, Drona Parva). _
PISANGA. A serpent born of the family of Dhrtarastr4This serpent was burnt to death at the Sarpasatra 0
Janameyaya. (Sloka 17, Chapter 57, Adi Parva). |
PISTAKANAVAMI. See under Navamivrata. f
PITAMAHASARAS. A sacred place i o
the Himalayas. If one bathes in the holy pond ther
A Yaksa. (Sloka 16, Chapter 10, Santi
one would get the benefit of doing an Agnistoma. (Stoke
148, Chapter 84, Vana Parva). ka
PITHA. Ademon. He was killed by Sri Krsna. (Slo
5, Chapter 11, Drona Parva). rt
PITHARA. A daitya who was a member of the cou
of Varuna. (Sloka 13, Chapter 9, Sabha Parva). t
PITHARAKA (PITHARAKA). A prominent serPe
born in the family of Kagyapa. This was burnt
death in the Sarpasatra of Janamejaya. (Sloka 19, Chap
ter 57, Adi Parva).
PITR (S). Pitrs are aset of demigods. :
prajapati, son of Brahma, were born the Saptars!® . 405
Marici and they in turn created the Pitrs. me
Marici and his set many others like Virat Purus? |
Brahma have created Pitrs. Some Puranas state ing
Pitrs are of daily creation. Brahma in the begin hb
created three sets of Pitrs with form and four © of
brightness making thus seven sets. The three iia pas
bodied pitrs are Agnisvattas, Barhisadas and Somé nd
and the four bright ones are Yama, Anala, Som?
Aryaman (10th Skandha, Devi Bhagavata).
‘Manor hairanyagarbhasya
ye maricyadayah sutah /
Tesamrsinam sarvesam
putrah pitrganah smrtah”’ //
(Sloka 194, Chapter 8, Manusmrtl ) apie
Pitrs (manes) are classified into two types : he *"? go
svattas and Barhisadas. Of these the Agnisvatt@ ho
not perform Yagas and the Barhisadas are those hey
perform yagas. Besides these two major divisions
are classified into many other groups as follows : ¢ hes”
1. Somasadasya (s). Virat Purusa is the creator °
Pitrs. Somasadasyas are the Pitrs of Sadhyadev4>-
2. Agnisvaita (s). They are the pitrs of devas. gabe
3. Barhisadas, These Pitrs are the creation of the gas
Atri. They are the manes of daityas, danavaé, y ons)?
gandharvas, uragas (serpents), raksasas dem
suvarnas and kinnaras,

PITRTIRTHA
4. Somapa (s). They are the sons of the sage Bhrgu and
are the manes of brahmins.
5. Havirbhuk (s). The sage Angiras is the father of
these Pitrs who are the manes of Ksatriyas.
6. Ajyapa (s). These are the sons of the sage Pulastya
and are the manes of Vaisyas.
7. Sukalika (s). Sons of the sage Vasistha, these Pitrs.
are the manes of the Sudras.
To the seven sages like Marici ‘were born the pitrs and
to the pitrs were born the devdsuras (devas and asuras )
and to the devasuras were born everything else in this
universe, animate and inanimate.
smrti) .
Performing a Sraddha (offering obsequial oblations
to the departed) is just like a yajfia. The oblations
should be offered in either silver or silver cum copper
pots.. Visvadevas are the guardians of the pitrs. Therefore the oblations should be offered after worshipping
the Vigvadevas first and then the pitrs and then Visnu.
(See under Sraddha). |
PITRTIRTHA. The Kumbhipakanaraka (the bet of
calle
Kumbhipaka) in the land of the manes is ca
Pitrtirtha. There is a story about this in Devi Bhagavata:
Once the sage Durvas
' ashes and wearing sacre
tering “Sivagankara sarvatman
The lord of the Pitrloka received him with respect and
worshipped him. While they were talking, Durvasas
heard cries of agony from somewhere and the sage
then asked Pitrnatha thus : “Oh lord of the Pitrs, I
have heard you described asa very virtuous man. How
be heard from
‘nful cries of distress
can then such Paving beaten”, “Ob, I am being killed”
here? “Oh, I am dying beaten’’, 1
“Oh, Iam dying” and “Oh, Iam being burnt are
some of the woeful shrieks I hear. What is the reason
for this ?”’
Hearing this Dharmaraja said :
fact a land of virtue. Nothing b
done here. I can tell you from Ww
: - d Samyaman ‘
sail, Le ee te nish the sinner’. Yama is a
There Yama sits to punis 7
dispenser of Justice and he bat got Fyre eae aoe
out his 0 :
Ey Se aaah ers and of these Kumeighty-six hells to punish the sinn
bhipaka is the seer horrible. Great sinners like those
j insult
who insult the gods, fornicators any thos Va a
their parents are put in this hell an , pea Be at
are now hearing the cries of such s
hell.”
Durvasas was curious to an the
the Manes gave ‘permission 4)
show Durvasas the Kumbhipe
found to change into a hea .
laughing, singing dancing and doing
Te ats of Yama were astonished, ane "Vamaraja
and reported to Yamaraja this sudden Hee uinediiately
was also amazed to hear the news. ell to learn ha
rode on his vehicle, the buffalo, tot out the cause for
details personally. He could not tthe Svargaloka of
the change. The place looked ae to Indra with the
Indra. King Yama sent a messens it must be due to
news and Indra at first thought that!
as with his body smeared with
d berries went to Pitrloka mutérimatar bhuvanesvari .
“Great sage, this is in
ut righteous things are
here you hear that
hell and the lord of
ked his servants to
eae The hell was
The residents were
such acts of
00 EES "ee
(Chapter 3, Manuiis nearby. °
PRABHA IV
some maya and so came to the place swiftly on
his Airavata. The news spread and one by one Brahma
Visnu, the Astadikpalakas (the eight guardians of the
quarters) and all such people came to Kumbhipakanaraka. Nobody could find an explanation for this
change and so Mahavisnu accompanied by a few devas —
went to Kailasa and reported the matter to Siva and
Siva: said smilingly “Oh Visnu, all this happened
because of the greatness of the holy ashes. When the
sage Durvasas bent down to have a good look at the
‘hell, particles of ashes from his body fell into the hell.-
From that moment onwards Kumbhipakanaraka bkLecame a holy place for the Manes. ‘This hell will henceforth be known as Pitrtirtha and those pitrs who bathe
in the holy pond there will become virtuous people.
Do install on the shore of this pond an idol of mine, —
a Sivalinga, and by my side the idol of Uma, which is
my power in an embodied form.’’ The devas returned
and did as they were directed. .
PITRVARTTI. See under Brahmadaita I.
PIVARI. Wife of Sukabrahmarsi, son of Vyasa. Suka
got of Pivari four sons named Krsna, Gauraprabha
Bhiri and Devaégruta and a daughter named Kirti. ( See
under Suka). :
PLAKSADVIPA. One of the seven dvipas (islands). (See
uncer Saptadvipa. ) |
PLAKSAJATA. A tributary of river Ganga. It is believed
that this river isan incarnation of Sarasvati and that the
sins of those who drink the water of this river will vanish.
(Chapter 169, Adi Parva).
PLAKSAPRASRAVANATIRTHA. The place of origin
of the river Sarasvati. This is a very holy place.
(Sloka 11, Chapter 54, Salya Parva).
PLAKSAVATARANA. A sacred spot at_ the place of
origin of Yamuna. The ancient people of Bharata used
to worship this place as a gate of Heaven. (Sloka 4
Chapter 90, Vana Parva). ‘
PLAKSAVATI. A. river. This is referred to. as a holy
river in the Puranas. (Sloka 25, Chapter 165, Anu§Asana
Parva). |
PLAKSAYANA. A Vaiyakarana (grammarian). His
opinion on Visargasandhi (a point in grammar) is described in Taittiriyapratis akhya. |
POTAKA. A serpent born of the family of
(Sloka 13, Chapter 103, Udyoga Parva). j iii
PRABAHU. A brave soldier who fought against the
Eengavae on the ace of the Kauravas in the great battle
‘of Kuruksetra. He showered arrows o irr
(Chapter 37, Drona Parva). Oa
PRABALAKA. A Yaksa. This Yaksa sat in the court of -
Kubera and worshipped him. (Sloka 17, Chapter 10
Santi Parva). .
PRABHA I. A devi. This devi sits in the court of Brahma
worshipping him. (Chapter 11, Santi Parva).
PRABHA II. A celestial maiden of Alakapuri. Once when
the sage Astavakra went to Alakapuri this maiden gave a
dance performance in his honour. (Sloka 45, Chapter 19,
Anu 4sana Parva).
PRABHA III. Daughter of a danava called Svarbhanu.
She was married to king Ayus and Ayus begot of her
sons like Nahusa and others (Brahmanda Purana,
PRABHA IV. One of the two wives of King Pusparna,
(4th Skandha, Bhagavata) :

PRABHADRA
PRABHADRA. Wife of the son of Karna, King of Anga.
She is called Bhadravati also. (Jaimini Bharata, Agvamedha Parva, Chapter 63).
PRABHADRAKA,. A special division of the army of
Paficalaraja. This division comprises of Ksatriyas only.
. Dhrstadyumna and Sikhandi were its leaders. During the
Kuruksetra battle Salya slew many of the Prabhadrakas.
The rest of the Prabhadrakas were killed by AgSvatthama
while they were sleeping. (Chapter 8, Sauptika Parva;
Chapter 57. Udyoga Parva; Chapter 19, Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 11, Salya Parva).
PRABHAKARA I. A serpent born of the race of Kagyapa.
Sloka 15, Chapter 35, Adi Parva).
PRABHAKARA II. A great sage born of the race of
Atri. This sage married the ten daughters of Ghrtaci
born of Raudrasva (Bhadrasva) of the family of Piru.
The names cf the daughters are Rudra, Sidra, Malada,
Bhadra, Malaha, Khalada, Nalada, Surasa, Gocapala
and Striratnakata. |
Once when the Sun was in distress while he was being
devoured by R&ahu, Sage Prabhakara said ‘Svasti’ to give
salvation for the Sun and instantly the Sun came out
from Rahu’s hold and shone brightly as before. It was
as a result of this virtuous deed that the sage got the
name Prabhakara. By his great knowledge and eminence
he kept glowing the fame of Atrikula earned by generations.
Sage Prabhakara conducted a Yaga and on the occasion
the devas presented him with great wealth and ten sons
(Harivarnsga, 1. 81-8.17).
PRABHAKARA III. The sixth division of the land of
Kufadvipa. (Sloka 13, Chapter 12, Bhisma Parva).
PRABHANJANA I. The first son of Citravahana, king of
Manipura. Citravahana who was without a son for a long
time did penance for obtaining a son. Siva was pleased
with his penance and he blessed him and assured him of
a son soon. (Sloka 29, Chapter 214, Adi Parva).
PRABHANJANA II. A king. He performed Siva-worship
for ten thousand years and attained Dikpalakatva. The
a of his son was Pitatma. (Skanda Purana, 41,
PRABHANJANA III. A Ksatriya king. Once this king
killed a deer while it was breast-feeding its child and by
a curse of the mother-deer Prabhafijana had to live as
a tiger for a hundred years. When the period of the
curs€ was coming to an end, the tiger heard the advice
of a cow called Nanda and got himself transformed into
his original form of the king. (Chapter 18, Srsti Khanda
Padma Purana). ne ida,
PRABHANU. A son born to Sri Krsna of his wi
Satyabhama. (10th Skandha, Bhagavata). oat Wan
PRABHASA I. A son born to Dharmadeva of his wife
Prabhata. This Prabhasa.is considered to be one of the
astavasus. Prabhasa’s wife was the sister ‘of Brhaspati, a
widely travelled virtuous woman of renowned chastity
and great yogic attainments. (Sloka 17, Chapter 66, Adi
Parva ; Chapter 15, Améa 1, Visnu Purana),
PRABHASA II The sacred place called Prabhasatirtha.
This place of Puranic importance is situated in Saurastra on the west coast. This-is called Somatirtha also.
Some facts about this tirtha from the Puranas are
below : '
Fy During the pilgrimage of Arjuna he did penance
for a thousand divine years standing on one foot at Prabhasa, Sloka 15, Chapter 12, Vana Parva),
So
PRABHAVATI V
(ii) Agnideva resides in this place. One who bathes_ in
the holy pond there would get the benefit of doing
Agnistomayajfia. (Sloka 58, Chapter 82, Vana Parva) .
(iii) Once Yudhisthira along with his brothers came —
and did penance here. (Sloka 15, Chapter 118, Vana
Parva).
(iv) Prabhasatirtha is dear to Indra. (Sloka 7, Chapter
130, Vana Parva). , _ |
(v) Those who bathe in the holy pond in Prabhasa are
taken to heaven in Vimanas and they then by songs ©
yraise wake up the celestial maidens there.. (Sloka 9;
Chapter 25, Anugasana Parva). :
(vi) It was at this Prabhasatirtha that the Yadavas
fought against one another and destroyed themselves.
(Sloka 10, Chapter 3, Mausala Parva).
(vii) Sri Krsna and Balarama merged with the Supreme
spirit at this place. (Chapter 4, Mausala Parva). b
(viii) The son of sage Sandipani was kidnapped i
Paficajana while the former was bathing at this tirtha.
(10th Skandha, Bhagavata).
(ix) It was while standing on the shore of the 1!
pond that Arjuna first heard about Subhadra.
Skandha, Bhagavata).
PRABHATA. See under Srsti.
PRABHATA. Wife of Dharmadeva. Dharmadeva
of her two sons named Pratyiisa and Prabhasa.
were Vasus. (Sloka 17, Chapter 66, Adi Parva). E
PRABHAVATI I. A woman who was engaged in anon
at the abode of May4sura. One of the batches of mo” net
that went to different places in search of Sita ®
Prabhavati. (Sloka 4, Chapter 282, Vana Raney 8,
PRABHAVATI II. The wife of Siryadeva. (Sloka
Chapter 117, Udyoga Parva). seule
PRABHAVATI III. A female follower of Subrahmany
(Sloka 3, Chapter 46, Sal a Parva). |
PRABHAVATI IV. Wife of Citraratha, king 2
This Prabhavati was the eldest sister of Ruci, W\”
Devagarma. (Sloka 8, Chapter 42, Anusasana rary’ id -
PRABHAVATI V. Daughter of the demon Vajran@
She was married to: Pradyumna, son of Sri Krsna. «pha:
There was once a very valiant demon called Vajran® ce
He went into the valley of Meru and performed pem hie
to propitiate Brahma. Brahma appeared pele et
and he got from him boons such as strength to ©” ‘ay
and subdue all kings, the secret of leaving the
Prabhas
(10th
begot
Both
hes©
and entering that of others etc. Empowered with ot a
boons he made Vajranabhapura his capital. He d
daughter named Prabhavati. His’ brother Sunabha :
two daughters named Candramati and Gunavatl- aig?
While he was thus living there, he set out on a camp the?
of victory. He conquered the whole world 4?! ka be
turned his eyes towards Svarga. Going to Indralow” of
told thus : “Hi, son of Kafyapa, I am also Py are
Kagyapa. Your mother Aditi and my mother cyare4
both wives of Kagyapaprajapati. You ruled over
s le]
till this time. Now, let me rule over it far some ald
Indra was embarrassed by this logical challenge and “het
not give any reply to him. Ka‘yapaprajapatl ware gue
performing a long Yaga and Indra replied he would “ed
a solution to his demand when their father ret dr4
after the Yaga. From that moment onwards ©
started thinking of plans to destroy Vajranabha. He aka
and sought help from Sri Krsna residing in Dvat
Krgna promised to help him when the time came

PRABHU
‘cee Teniiting to Devaloka, Indra started planning to
ajranabha, Vajranabhapuri was surrounded by skyscraping fortresses and admission inside was restricted.
He, therefore, called the gaily loitering swans of Devaloka to his side and told them thus : ‘“‘Look here, swan—
ladies. You should go to Vajranabhapuri and see
Prabhavati and then describe to her the beauty and
goodness of Pradyumna. Your description should be
such that Prabhavati should fall inlove with Pradyumna.
After that you should go to Pradyumna and tell him
about Prabhavati in a similar way. On completing your
mission you should come and report to me.”’
Obeying the orders of Indra the swans flew to Vajranabhapuri. They saw Prabhavati in a secluded spot and
told her just what they were asked to tell her, Then they
flew to the side of Pradyumna and told him about
Prabhavati. After successfully completing their mission
they flew to Devaloka. The marriage day of Prabhavati drew near. The swans went to Prabhavati again
and made her request her father to include the performances ofa dramatic troupe also in the programme
of marriage festivities. Vajranabha agreed and a troupe
was invited. The dramatic troupe comprised among
others many Yadava soldiers, Sri Krsna, Pradyumna
and his brothers, all in disguise. Their drama was Ramayana. The performance was superb and even Vajranabha
stood amazed at their skill. The troupe was encamped in
another palace and treated as royal guests. The companion maid of Prabhavati, Sicimukhi, united her with
Pradyumna during the dark hours of the night and they
spent the nights in amorous, sports. The daughters of
Vajranabha’s brother, Candravati and Gunavati came
| d they requested
to know of these secret meetings an
Prabhavati to find out suitable persons among the Yadavas for them also to enjoy with. Prabhavati introduced them to Gada and Samba both sons of Krsna.
f them continued freely
The amorous sports of all o
during the nights. ang
When things progressed so far, Indra ene Krsna shat ee *
Pradyumna to kill Vajranabha. Pra sara Caer
war with Vajranabha and in the great
sued Prada killed Vajranabha. Pradyumna and
his brothers then took the demon girls to Dvaraka.
Pradyumna, Gada and Samba married | Braene ys
Candrayatt and Gunavati respectively. y t a
Kas yapaprajap to Devaloka after his long
ati returned
yaga. (Visnu Purana, Chapters 91 to 95).
PRABHU. A_ soldier Ss Subrahmanya.
‘Iva Parva).
P ee at i king born of the line of Priyavrata,
son of Manu. (4th Skandha, Bhagavata )}. AEN.
PRACANDA. A demon. Pracanda fought 26h Tripura
keya_ in the fight between Paramasiva an
Chapter 1, GaneSa Purana ).
(Chapter eit,
(Sloka 69,
PRACETAS. The emperor had ae ee as
named Antardhana and Vadi. Anta ini, Dhisana of
named Havirdhana of his wile, Ee awit hana She
the race of Agni became ee wile racinabarhis, ukra,
got of Havirdhana six sons named h ter'14, Améga 1,
Gaya, Krsna. Vraja and ee ora ten sons named
Visnu Purana) . Pracinabar ® was born of the ten
Pracetas. They w
Prajapatis to Varksi alias
name Pracetas. (Sloka 2)
ere Prajapatis. Therefore he got the
75, Adi Parva).
PRADYOTA IT
PRACINAVITA. Wearing of an upper apparel or sacred
thread by brahmins on the left shoulder and through
the right arm-pit is called Upavita and vice versa is
called Pracinavita. If it is worn as a necklace it is called
i Rat Kena er Sloka 63, Manusmrti).
. A prajapati. (For ;
under Prthu). ate , alia Abita
Prthu got two sons named Antardhana and Vadi who
were very virtuous. A son named Havirdhana was
born to Antardhana of his wife Sikhandini. Dhisana
born of the family of Agni became the wife of Havirdhana and they got six sons named Pracinabarhis
Sukra, Gaya, Krsna, Vraja and Ajina. Of these Pracinabarhis became a great Prajapati. He carpetted the world
with darbha grass with its head turned towards the
east and thus got the name (Praci=east ; barhis=bed
of Kuga grass) Pracinabarhis. He performed great
penance and married Savarna, daughter of the oceans.
They got ten sons who were called Pracetases and who were
all masters of dhanurveda (archery). They all performed penance for ten thousand years lying submerged
in water. Brahma persuaded Pracinabarhis to request
his sons to refrain from remaining unmarried. Pracinabarhis informed his sons about Brahma’s wish. They
sat in meditation in the ocean for ten thousand years
as per directions from their father and sang songs in
praise of Visnu. Mahavisnu was pleased and he gave
dargana (vision of god) to them on the surface of the
ocean itself with the brilliance of blue lotus. Pracetases
went into ecstasy when they saw Bhagavan coming to
them riding on the back of Garuda and they bowed
down in great devotion before him. Mahavisnu asked
them what they wanted and they reported they wanted
a boon for the progress and prosperity of the prajas.
Granting them the boon Mahavisnu disappeared
and the Pracetases went back to their father. (Chapter
14, Améga 1, Visnu Purana).
PRACINVAN. A king who was the son of Janamejaya
and grandson of Piru. His mother’s name was Ananta,
This king conquered in one day all the countries in the
east (praci) and got his name Pracinvan. He got of his
wife Agmaki a son named Samyati. (Sloka 12, Chapter
95, Adi Parva). Pracinvan got a son named Manasyu.
(Chapter 278, Agni Purana).
PRACYA. A place of habitation of Puranic fame.
(Sloka 58, Chapter 9, Bhisma Parva).
PRADATA. Vigvadeva. (Sloka 32, Chapter 91, Anugasana Parva).
PRADIPAKA. A character in Pajicatantra.
Paficatantra).
PRADHANA. An ancient Rajarsi. A learned woman
named Sulabha was born in his family and king Janaka
conducted scholarly discussions with her. (Sloka 184,
Chapter 320, Santi Parva). |
PRADOSA. The grandson of Dhruva. Pusparna, son of
Dhruva, begot of his wife Prabha three sons named
(See under
Pradosa, Nigitha and Vyusta. (Bhagavata, 4th
Skandha).
PRADVES!. Wife of Dirghatamas. (See under Dirghatamas ).
PRADYOTA I. A Yaksa. He was a member of the court
of Kubera. (Sloka 15, Chapter 10, Santi Parva).
PRADYOTA II. The first king of the dynasty of Pradyota. He was the son of a king called Sunaka.
Pradyota is referred to as Sunakaputra in Vayu Purana,

PRADYUMNA
Ksemaka alias Sunaka father of Pradyota was killed by
Mlecchas (a barbarous tribe). To avenge the death of
his father Pradyota under the advice of Narada decided
to conduct a Mleccha Yajfia and for that purpose dug a
Yajfiakunda seventeen miles long and seventeen miles
wide, The Yajfia started and in that Yajna different
kinds of Mlecchas were burnt to death. From then
onwards Pradyumna got the name ‘Mlecchahanta’
(killer of Mlecchas). (Bhavisya Purana).
PRADYUMNA. |
1) General information. A son born to Sri Krsna of his
wife Rukmini, Pradyumna was the rebirth of Kamadeva. (For genealogy see under Krsna).
2) Birth. It was at the time when Kamadeva and
Ratidevi were living together that Parvati, daughter of
Himavan, started her penance to get Siva as her husband. It was a need of the devas to get a son of Siva to
kill the fierce demon Tarakadsura. The devas employed
Kamadeva to create feelings of love in the ascetic Siva
and make him marry Parvati. Taking instructions from
Indra, Kamadeva took aim at Siva with his bow and
arrow. Siva was then in deep meditation and Kamadeva broke his concentration and Siva got angry. He
opened his third eye and burnt Kamadeva to death.
Griefstricken by the death of her husband Ratidevi performed penance near the Himalayas to propitiate
Mahadevi. Mahadevi appeared before her and consoled
her thus: “Little girl, Kamadeva would be reborn as
the son of Sri Krsna of Rukmini. He would then be
named Pradyumna. The devas have cursed Sambara
the leader of the asuras, during the battle between the
demons and the demi-gods that he (Sambara) would be
killed by Pradyumna. So Sambara is now searching
for the infant which is a rebirth of Kamadeva. So you
abandon your present body and be born again as Maya-
‘vatito be the wife of Sambara. Pradyumna, the reborn Kamadeva, would kill Sambara and accept you as
his wife.”? Devi disappeared after saying this.
Obeying the instructions of Mahadevi, Rati abandoned
her life and was born in the world of asuras. She grew
up under the name Méayavati and became the wifé
of Sambara.
While Sri Krsna was living as the chief of Dvaraka his
first wife Rukmini was yearning for a child. Krsna was
deeply moved by the grief of Rukmini and he flew on
the back of Garuda to Kailasa to obtain a boon for the
birth of a child for her. On the way he alighted in the
agrama of Naranarayanas and after obtaining the blessings of the sages there, went to Kaildsa and bowed
before Siva and explained to him the purpose of his
visit. Siva blessed him and said that Kamadeva who
was burnt to death by the fire of his third eye would
take birth again as the son of Rukmini. Krsna returned
to Dvaraka well-pleased. Rukmini became pregnant
and gave birth to Pradyumna, a rebirth of Kaniadeva.
The demon Sambara knew of this birth and coming to
Dvaraka in an invisible form carried away the infant
when it was seven days old.
The demon threw the child into the ocean and*a great
fish swallowed it. The fishermen of the country of
Sambara caught this fish and following the custom prevalent there presented the king with the fish. Sambara
called his wife Mayavati and asked her to take the fish
PRADYUMNA
and get it cooked. When MAyavati cut open the fish fot
cooking she found to her surprise a beautiful child in°
side it. Even from the first sight of the child Mayavat
had a great liking for it and so she took the child and
brought it up-as her own child.
When Pradyumna grew into a youth all the charm
and beauty of Kamadeva were found in him. Mayavatl
was excited to find a resemblance in him of her lost
husband Kamadeva. One day the great sage Narada
came that way and calling Mayavati to his side secretly
revealed to her that Pradyumna was the incarnation ©
Kamadeva and was thus her lost husband. From that
day onwards Mayavati’s affection for him changed into. .
one of love. She taught him all the magic and witchcraft of Sambara. When Pradyumna found that Mayavati’s affection for him was gradually changing into on€
of passionate love he questioned her about it. May
then told him everything that happened and
Avati
Pradyumna decided to kill Sambara and take Mayavatl
away. . a
3) War with Sambara. Pradyumna waited for :
opportunity to kill Sambara. One day Pradyumna wr
under the flagstaff of Sambara which flew the royal as
of the king with anemblem of the figure of a lion ae
bossed on it. He dropped it down by one stroke of Kill
arrow. Hearing of this Sambara ordered _ his sons to 4
Pradyumna.,. The eleven sons of Sambara, viz., Atuse? ;
Citrasena, Visvaksena, Srutasena, Susena, Soma
Akkala, Vikala, Kumbhaketu, Sudamstra and Ke -
attacked Pradyumna. The devas came in their cei
and joined sides with Pradyumna. The army ° like
demons teased him with various kinds of weapons pee
javelins, arrows, spears and battle axes. But a]
dyumna cut them all by his arrows and cut to pieces a
the sons of Sambara. Then Sambara sent an eel
against him. They were also made to flee by the art f
of Pradyumna. Then Sambara himself came 0?
scene. The fight became horrible. The continuous
of arrows made it impossible for even Sun’s ray®
reach the earth. Then Sambara started his magica a
But Pradyumna faced that also. Sambara sent le ra
lions; but Pradyumna made them immobile. Sam ser
then in turn created storms, rains, wild anima*; yur
pents and vultures. All of them were killed by Pr ated
mna. Then with a well-aimed arrow Pradyumna ku Ae
Sambara. Then he rushed to Dvaraka carrying Moy d
vati with him. The people of Dvaraka were aso uke
to see them. Pradyumna went to Sri Krsna an@
mini and told them the whole story. They were ©
joyed to find them and blessed them.
ow
ss as
Aniruddha who married Usa the daughter of Ban@ rot
the son of Pradyumna. (Chapters 103 to 108,
Skandha, Bhagavata) .
4) Prabhavatiparinaya. Marriage
(See under Prabhavati).
5) Other details.
(1) Pradyumna was born of a part of Sanatku
(Sloka 152, Chapter 67, Adi Parva). £6
(ii) Pradyumna was one among those who came ith
Arjuna from Dvaraka with dowry for his marriag®
Subhadra. (Sloka 31, Chapter 220, Adi Parva). ig
(111) Pradyumna was present for the Rajasiya aj?
of Yudhisthira. (Sloka 16, Chapter 34, Sabha Parva)
(iv) Pradyumna consoled and encouraged the yada
dugdttt
with Prabhav®
mara:
] wat: -

PRAGAHI
army which stood dumb-founded before the valorous
exploits of King Salva. (Chapter 17, Vana Parva).
(v) Pradyumna fainted during a fierce fight between
| and King Salva. (Chapter 17, Sloka 22, Vana
(vi) Pradyumna slew King S4lva in the end. (Chapter
19, Vana Parva).
(vii) Pradyumna means the merging of Bhitajala during Pralaya. (Sloka 37, Chapter 340, Santi Parva).
(viii) Pradyumna fell dead by the beatings of the
Bhojas during the Mausala fight. (Sloka 33, Chapter
3, Mausala Parva).
(ix) After his death Pradyumna took the form of
tae a (Sloka 13, Chapter 5, Svargarohana
arva).
PRAGAHI. A preceptor. He has expressed his views on
Yajiias in the book Sankhyayana Brahmana. Pragahi
describes what should be done in case any of the
Karmans is left out by mistake during a Yajiia.
(Sankhyayana Brahmana).
PRAGHASA I. A raksasi (demoness).
_among the several leading demonesses who sat around
Sita in Lanka to coax her into accepting Ravana as
her husband. An ill-tempered woman, this demoness
tried several methods to win Sita to the side of Ravana.
(Sarga 23, Sundara Kanda, Valmiki Ramayana).
PRAGHASA II. A female follower of Subrahmanya.
(Sloka 16, Chapter 46, Salya Parva).
PRAGHASA(S). A_ tribe of raksasas
(Chapter 285, Vana Parva).
PRAGHOSA. A son of Sri Krsna.
Bhagavata). r 1
PRAGJYOTISA. The palace of Narakasura. Narakasura was known as Bhaumasura also. After the death
of this asura Bhagadatta became King there. — After
Bhagadatta Vairadatta became ruler there. Pragyyotisa
was an invincible fortress of the asuras. (Chapter 23,
Verse 28, Sabha Parva; Chapter 48, Udyoga Parva
and Chapter 79, Aévamedha Parva).
A + born of the family of DhrtaCOTE deceit Wi sara to death at the Sarparastra. This serpent was
satra of Janamejaya. (Sloka 16, Chapter 57, Adi
Parva). L
PRAHASA II. _ A soldie
Chapter 45, Salya Parva) «aba
PRAHASTA. A minister oF NAYS." Sh BAe,
1) Genealogy. Descending i order from WAG
Brahma— Heti — Vidyutkesa — Sukesa —
Prahasta. - wt eat
The demon Sukesa got sf his ee
named Malyavan, Sumai an Fy wane
‘. wife Ketumati ten 9
got of his wife Kalakamukha,
Akampana, Vikata, 4 Z
Dands, Suparsva, Sarnhrada, ape
and four daughters named Veka, were
and Kumbhinasi. Most of the sons
of Ravana.
2) Other detarls.
(i) Prahasta was t
Ramayana).
(ii) In the
against Vibhisana and w
4, Chapter 286, Vana Parva). ashen’
PRAHETII. A demon. ~ nae er he P
- became hungry and in his ang
She was one
(demons).
(10th Skandha,
r of Subrahmanya. (Sloka 68,
vavati three sons
Of these Sumali
d_Prahasta,
Dhumraksa,
and Bhasakarna
kata, Kaikast
ihe ministers
he chief minister of Ravana. (Uttara
m ttle
Rama-Ravana, Po ue latter:
as ki
the creator,
roduced some
Prahasta fought
(Sloka
PRAHLADA 1
sounds which became Raksasas and Yaksas. When
one said “‘Raksamahe”’ the raksasas (demons) came
into being and when the other said ‘Yaksamahe’ the
Yaksas came into being. It was Praheti who became
the father of the raksasas and Heti, the father of the
Yaksas. Both of them became mighty and powerful
like Madhu and Kaitabha. Of these Praheti knew that
only by virtuous life could one attain happiness in the
next world and so remaining unmarried went to the
valley of the Himalayas and doing penance there
attained moksa. Heti when he came of age married
Bhaya, sister of Kala, and got a son named Vidyutkesa.
Vidyutkega married Salakatanka, daughter of Sandhya,
The raksasa race born of them lived in Patala and
Lanka. In the Rama-R4avana battle all were killed.
PRAHETI II.- A demon. This demon travels along
with a Sarya named Aryaman during the month of
Vai akha (May). (12th Skandha, Bhagavata).
PRAHLADA I.
1) General information. Son of a raksasa King who
saw Mahavisnu by means of his devotion in the form
of Narasirhha (man-lion). His father was Hiranyakasipu and mother Kayadhu. ,
2) Genealogy. Descending in order from Visnu.—
Brahma — Marici — Kasyapa — Hiranyakagipu =
Prahlada.
3) Birth. KaSyapaprajapati got of his wife Diti two
sons named Hiranyaksa and Hiranyakasipu and a
daughter named Simhika. Of these two, Hiranyaksa got
boons from Brahma and roamed about as a very valiant
hero destroying everything on earth and finally pulling
down the earth to the depths of the ocean. Mahavisnu
then incarnated as Varaha and after killing Hiranyaksa lifted the earth from the ocean and put it in its
original position.
Hiranyakagipu became very angry at Mahavisnu for
killing his brother and with a view to wreaking
vengeance on him performed penance to propitiate
Brahma. When the emperor of the demons, Hiranyakagipu, thus went to the forests for performing penance
the Devas attacked the land of the demons. A great
fight ensued in which the devas were defeated. While
fleeing away thus Indra took away Kayadhu wife of
Hiranyakasipu by force. Narada who heard the
moanings of the poor woman under the clutches of
Indra got her released from Indra’s hold. For some
time she stayed in the agrama of Narada worshipping
him. Kayadhii was pregnantthen. Narada taught the
child in Kayadhi’s womb lessons in Vedas, moral
philosophy, duty and spiritual knowledge. When
Hiranyaka’ipu returned after his penance Kayadhu
joined him and very soon gave birth to a son. That boy
was Prahlada.
Hiranyaka‘ipu begot of Kayadhii five sons, Prahlada,
Samhlada, Anuhlada, Sibi and Baskala. Prahlada got
three sons named Virocana, Kumbha and Nikumbha.
The celebrated emperor Mahabali was the son of
Virocana. Bana was the son of Mahabali. Usa,
daughter of Bina, was married to Aniruddha, son of
Pradyumna and grandson of Sri Krsna. (Chapter 65,
Adi Parva; Chapter 19, Agni Purana; Chapter 15,
Arnéa 1, Visnu Purana and 7th Skandha, Bhagavata).
4) Boyhood and education. Hiranyakasipu decided to
make Prahlada an instrument to wreak vengeance on
Mahavisnu. Entrusting the education of his son to
ee

PRAHLADA I
able preceptors he instructed that the boy should never
mutter ‘Narayanaya namah’ but should on the other
hand mutter ‘Hiranyaya namah’ only. Not only that,
he wiped out the name of Narayana from the land
altogether. Prahlada stayed in the house of the
preceptor and studied his lessons. One day Prahlada
went to see his father along with his preceptor. Hiranyakasipu was drunk then. Prahlada went and_ prostrated
before his father and Hiranyakasipu lifting the boy up
from the ground asked him with affection to repeat to
him all the good things he had learned so far and
Prahlada quickly repeated thus :—‘‘I bow down to
Mahavisnu, the root cause of all things seen and unseen,
the protector of this visible universe, who is without
beginning, centre and end and who is without origin;
growth and decay.”
The words of Prahlada struck his father like a thunderbolt. With his lips trembling with anger Hiranyakagipu
stared with his blood-red eyes at the preceptor. The
frightened Guru again and again submitted that he had
never taught him any of the kind the boy had repeated
before his father. Then who must have taught him those
things ? the emperor enquired. Then Prahlada said
that all those things were put into his mind by Mahavisnu himself. A hot discussion then took place between
Prahlada and his father and in the end Hiranyakaéipu
ordered the preceptor to take away Prahlada and make
another earnest attempt to correct him and bring him
round to the emperor’s liking. Prahlada stayed for another period with the Guru serving him with devotion
and studying well. After a long time Prahlada was
again taken before his father and the latter as before
asked him to repeat what he had studied so far. To the
shocking disappointment of Hiranyakagipu Prahlada
again repeated verses in praise of Mahavisnu. The emperor’s rage knew no bounds and he ordered his men to
kill his son. (Ghapter 17, Améa 1, Visnu Purana).
5) Torturing Prahlada. On hearing the order of Hiranyakasipu many armed soldiers surrounded Prahlada.
Prahlada addressed them thus : “Oh daityas, Mahavisnu resides in your weapons, in you all andin me also.
Since that is the real truth your weapons will not injure me.”’ The daityas struck him hard with their weapons but Prahlada did not feel pain at all.
Hiranyakagipu then sent thousands of POlsonous serpents led by great ones like Taksaka. When they started
thrusting their venomous fangs into his body, Prahlada
stood cheerfully meditating on Mahavisnu and he did
not even feel the bitings. On the other hand the fangs
of the serpents dropped out from their mouths and the
gems on the heads of the big ones burst out and all the
snakes felt sorry for their action. |
Hiranyakasipu then sent the astadiggajas (the eight
elephants who bear the burden of this earth) to kill
Prahlada. The huge animals bigger than the biggest of
mountains threw the boy to the ground and struck him
with their long and pointed tusks. Prahlada lay meditating on Mahavisnu and the tusks that hit the body of
Prahlada were broken to bits. Prahlada was then
thrown into a pit of fire. But the wind-blown ferocious
fire was not able to burn him and as he lay in the firepit meditating on Mahavisnu he felt he was lying on a
bed of lotuses. '
When things progressed so far the astonished priests of
the palace advised the emperor to put a stop to torturPRAHLADA I
ing Prahlada. Their consoling words alleviated his rage
and he sent Prahlada again to his Guru for another
term of study. He stayed with his Guru and continued
his studies. Whenever he got leisure he taught the other
inmates of the 4grama lessons in Visnumarga. Hiranyakagipu was informed of this and obeying orders from him
the asuras gave poison to Prahlada. That too was of no
avail. The royal priests got angry and they created a
devil as ferocious as the flames of fire. The devil with
mighty thumpings on earth dashed towards Prahlada
and hit him on his breast with its spike. The spike
broke into pieces and the devil turning back cursed the
priests. Then the daityaraja took him to the top of a
mountain twentyfour miles high and pushed him dow?
from there. The boy fell down meditating on Mahavisnu and the goddess of earth received him with “le
tended hands and prevented a painful impact with te
ground. The father became furious and sent Sambarasura to kill his son. Sambara tried many magical attacks.
Prahlada without any ill-feeling towards Sambar”
sat meditating on Mahavisnu and then Visnu sent 1!
Sudaréana wheel against the demon and he was. force
to retreat. Then by orders from Hiranyakasipu the Wi"
god entered the body of Prahlada. Prahlada knew '
and he sat meditating on Visnu and the latter entenne
the body of Prahlada drank the wind inside him. Wee
Hiranyakaéipu was defeated in all his attempts tO ‘ie
Prahlada he sent his son again to his Guru. Then!
preceptor taught him everything that was neede pee
king and also the science of justice written by - “he
carya. When Prahlada completed his education an ak
Guru felt the boy had become humble he took him ba
to Hiranyakasipu.
Once again Hiranyaka“ipu entered into a discussl0
god with his son and dissatisfied with his continue
votion to Visnu decided again to kill his son. He ry
thrown into the ocean bound hand and foot. With reat
movement of Prahlada the ocean became turbulet
and water rose on all sides. There was a deluge a
earth. Hiranyakasipu called the daityas to his side ae
said : “Oh daityas, bring all the mountains on sew?
and create a barrier round the ocean so that my W! “tl
son cannot get outside the ocean. Fire does 10% <
this boy; he is not wounded by any of the weapon
wind, poison, devils, magic, falls from heights and ¢v"
the diggajas could not kill him. So let him rema!? he
water for thousands of years together and the?
will die.” 4
The daityas and danavas brought mountains and ary
ped them over Prahlada lying inside the ocean. a
mountains ‘!ay spread over thousands of miles. Lyi:
thus in the ocean the pious boy prayed to Mahavis?
and the latter appeared before him and granted nis
boons. Escaping from the ocean Prahlada went t? xis
father and prostrated before him. Hiranyakasipu
astounded to see him alive and taking him in his at ks
embraced him and with tears rolling down his chee
for having tortured him so far asked him “My son, ne
are still alive, are you not ?”’ After that he started Lee
ing him as his son. (Chapter 20, Améa 1, Vist?
Purana).
6) The incarnation of Narasimha. But as days went EY
Hiranyakasipu got wild again. He could not beat
son’s increasing devotion to Visnu. He hated to he !
Prahlada’s chantings of Visnu’s name and so one da
n on
as

PRAHLADA i
while Prahlada was repeating his chantings of Visnu’s
name Hiranyaka‘ipu ,umped up from his seat with
sword in his hand and asked Prahlada where his Visnu
was. Prahlada very calmly replied that Visnu was present everywhere even in stones, trees or the pillars of
the palace. Hiranyakasipu in uncontrollable rage struck
the nearest pillar with his sword. Then to the shocking surprise of HiranyakaSipu Mahavisnu in the form of
a fierce man-lion (Narasimha) jumped out from the
pillar. The figure was terrifying to look at. It had fiery
eyes, a dagger-like tongue with blood oozing from it,
shaggy neck with trembling eyebrows, two teeth one
on each side curved like the crescent moon, a black face
inside a cave-like heap of manes, hairs strong and pointed like diamond needles, nails white and cup-like and
a body as bright and brilliant as a thousand crores of
suns. Only Prahlada could stand before the figure and
look at it,
The man-lion jumped on the body of Hiranyakasipu
and tearing open the belly of Hiranyakasipu took the
bloody intestines out and wearing it round its neck
performed a naked dance. Everything happened in no
time and the Narasimha changing into the form of
Mahavisnu blessed Prahlada and then disappeared.
(7th Skandha, Bhagavata). y
7) Prahldda and Naranarayanas. When Hiranyaka“ipu
was killed Prahlada was crowned as emperor of the
demons in Patala. At that time, once Cyavana the best of
the Bhrgus, went to Nagakulesvaratirtha to bathe in the
Narmada. He saw Mahadeva there. When he entered
the waters of the river a serpent Kekaralohita by name
bit him and took him to Patala, Cyavana meditated on
Visnu when he was bitten by the serpent and so pees
not affected by the poison of the serpent. He reapers
roamed about in Patala accepting the hospitality or the
: i hus he reached the land
serpent maidens. Travelling thu ae
of the dinavas. He was worshipped by the daityas ther
indi i : intliness honA nding an ascetic of great saintiin
and Pranlag ¢ t le received him with
oured and worshipped by his peop fea We agile
respect and worshipped him and eau A ee eas
“1. TI came today to see
eyavans oh ver. But as soon as I end bathe in the Narmada ri
aie tite viver I was caught A le ee pteuel a
brought to Patala. I was thus able ee esata « «Ot
the lord of the J
ee eee all the sacred tirthas. of the earth,
which are in the heavens and which nae aera
Please do enlighten us.” Cyavana peers Puskava
king ‘Naimisa is the best of all tirthas on earth,
in the heavens and Cakratirtha A eee and said
The daitya emperor turned to t na We must go to
“Make all preparations re agate We can then
earth to bathe in the holy HE iat sitting there as
see Pundarikaksa (lotus-eyed) | Hearing this danavas
Pitambara (robed in yellow).
. stala with their
with heavy equipments started from Patal
forest of Naimisa
king to the earth. the
All the mighty danas 4° reached d there went for huntand after bathing in the holy Phe found the river Saring. During their wandering ae On the shore! of
7 aleli _L :
asvati, owing died cryst e covered wit ie
sa : nother.
ee ate’ suCRIng to st Ore a reine sight roused
ents and the gt ascetics wearows looked like serp ar that tree sat two asc
e
Prahlada’s anger.
ee
PRAHLADA
ing the hide of Krsna deer and matted hair on thei
heads. By their side were two divine bows, Sarnga and
Ajagava with two never-empty quivers. Prahlada mistook them for two fake sanny4sins and theréfore questioned them thus : ““‘Why are you thus falsely trading on
virtuousness ? What connection is there between matted
hair and penance and weapons of such supreme quality ??? Then one of the rsis, Nararsi, said ‘‘King of daityas, why do you think like that ? If one is powerful
whatever one does will be right.” Prahlada jeered and said
“When I, who have fixed limits for virtue and righteousness, am here what power can you wield ?”’ Nara
replied “Oh king, our ability is really supreme. There
is nobody in the three worlds to conquer us in a fight.”’
Prahlada got furious on hearing the boasting of the rsi
and took a vow thus immediately : “I will fight and
win against Naranarayanas.”’ Then the great Prahlada keeping aside his army in the forest took his bow
and made a thundering noise with it.
At once Nara took his Ajagava bow and showered arrows on Prahlada with it. But Prahlada broke them all
with his gold-plated matchless arrows. Nara got angry
when he found all his arrows broken to pieces so easily
by Prahlada and he sent different kinds of arrows in
ishing rapidity. For one arrow of Nara the daitya sent
two and the fight became grim. Nara covered the whole
world above with arrows and the daitya emperor smashed them all to pieces by his gold-plated ones.
The fight then turned to one with divine weapons. The
asura chief took the divine Brahmastra and then Nara
took the fierce Narayanastra. They met in the air and
fell down powerless. When his Brahmastra got fused
Prahlada got wild with anger and taking a mace jumped out of his chariot and rushed at Nara. When Narayana saw the daityachief rushing towards Nara with
his mace he asked Nara to step aside and faced the
demon himself. Prahlada then attacked Narayana and
hit him with the mace. But the mace broke into a hundred pieces and Prahlada was forced to use other weapons. The fight became ghastly and even devas assembled above to witness the fight. When Prahlada found
it was getting more and more difficult for him to defeat
the Naranarayanas he prayed to Mahavisnu for help.
Visnu appeared before him and when Prahlada asked
him the reason why he could not defeat Naranarayanas,
Visnu replied that they were the sons of Dharmadeva
who were invincible by weapons. They could be won
over only by devotion.
Hearing that Prahlada returned to Patala and entrusting the administration of his kingdom to his cousin
Andhaka, son of Hiranyaksa, Prahlada returned to
Badarikasrama and erecting an aérama there started a
penance to propitiate Naranarayanas. When Naranarayanas appeared before him Prahlada requested to
be pardoned for fighting against them. They pardoned
him and blessed him and Prahlada returned to Patala.
Even after his return Prahlada did not take back the
administration from Andhaka. He constructed an
asrama away from the palace and lived there performing
penance. He spent many years there as an advisor
to the asura Kings. (Chapters 7 and 8, Vamana
Purana).
8) Blessings of Sukra. Andhaka, son of Hiranyaksa,
ruled over the empire only for a short time. At that time
quick succession. But the daitya king replied with aston- |

PRAHLADA I
there was a fight between the asuras and the devas in
which the asuras were defeated. After a truce with the
devas. Bali, son of Virocana, and grandson of Prahlada
was crowned the emperor of the asuras. Prahlada then
went to the mountain Gandhamadana and started doing
penance to increase his personal power. Bali ruled as
an antagonist. of the devas and so very soon a grisly
-battle ensued between the devas and the asuras
and Mahavisnu defeated them. They fled from their
land and took refuge under their preceptor Sukracarya.
Sukra then told them thus : “You remain here without
fear. I shall protect you by my power of mantra and
medicines. I shall devote my cogent brilliance to your
advantage. It is enough if you remain here with full confidence in me.” ;
The devas understood all these plans of .the daityas
through spies and they met in conference to consider
their future plans. They knew that Sukracarya was very
powerful and if the daityas attacked them with the
help of Sukracarya the defeat of the devas was sure.
They feared that they might even be compelled to flee
from Svargaloka. How could the daityas under the
shield of the mighty Sukra be destroyed ? That was the
worrrying thought of the devas.
They were thus worrying about this when Sukracarya
went to do penance for attaining more power. The
daityas awaited the return of their acarya. In the meantime they sent Prahlada who was, though a daitya, a
friend of the devas to talk peace terms with the devas.
The mission was successful and the devas agreed to a
no-war treaty. Prahlada returned triumphant.
Sukra did severe penance to propitiate Siva and Siva
appeared before Sukracarya and when he knew that
the purpose of Sukra was to defeat the devas he was
a bit embarrassed. So he told him thus: “Oh sage
Sukra, you take a vow and do penance with your head
downwards over smoky incense for a thousand years.
You will then attain power and happiness as you
desire.”’ In fact Siva thought Sukra might not be able
to complete the penance and so not succeed in his plan
of destroying the devas. But Sukra started the penance
in right earnest.
The devas were frightened when they knew the deceit
of the daityas and the strategy of their preceptor. They
decided to go to war with the daityas immediately. The
daityas were in a fix. They knew that if they fought
without the help of their guru defeat to them was sure.
So they ran to the mother of Sukra and sought her help.
The devas rebelled against Sukra’s mother and she invoked the goddess of sleep and put all the devas into
deep slumber. Mahavisnu stealthily carried away Indra
lying asleep. Indra persuaded Mahavisnu. to kill Sukra’s
mother and he cut off the head of Sukra’s mother by
the divine discus, Sudarsana.
Bhrgumaharsi. father of Sukra, was angry at that
arrogant and cruel deed of Mahavisnu and cursed him
saying that he would be born on earth several times as
man, After that he brought to life by sprinkling water
his wife lying dead with her head severed from her body.
Knowing well the havoc that would be created
when Sukra came back after his penance Indra
sent his daughter Jayanti to destroy the penance of
-Sukra. She went in the guise of a demon girl to serve
Sukracarya. In the meantime at the request of Indra
Brhaspati took the form of Sukracarya and presented
PRAHLADA II.
PRAHLADA III.
PRAHLADA IV
himself before the daityas. The daityas believed him to
- be their real guru Sukra and were pleased.
Ten years went by and one day Sukracarya remembering the old events left Jayanti and went to his court
in the demon land. Brhaspati had by that time returned
to devaloka fully satisfied with his mission. The devas
not knowing that Sukra had returned started for a war
with the daityas. Sukra when he came back went wild
when he knew that his people had been worshipping
Brhaspati for ten years. The angered preceptor was not
to be pacified by any amount of arguments and so _ they
sent Prahlada to Sukracarya and Prahlada pleaded for
controlling his anger and Sukra did so.
Sukra then saw with his divine vision the maneuvering
in mind of the devas and was convinced that a war wit
the devas at that juncture would be an utter failure. »°
he advised the daityas to desist from war and assure
them that during the period of Savarni Manu to come,
emperor Bali would become all-powerful and he woul
then fight and win the devas. Prahlada returned 4?
told the asuras the message of Sukracarya. But the
daityas were not satisfied and compelled Prahlada to 89
to war with the devas. At last Prahlada was force
to agree and a fierce devasura_ battle ensued: Prat
lada met Indra in a single combat and it prolonged for
a hundred years. In the end Prahlada won. Indra
prayed to the goddess and fearing that she might des
troy the demon world, Prahlada also prayed to her.
The devi was pleased with both of them and she Pp4°™
fied them both and each went back to his own plac®
(4th Skandha, Devi Bhagavata).
9) Other details.
(i) Once there was a fight between Prahlada 2?
Kala. (Bhavisya Parva, Chapter 59).
(ii) Bali who was trampled down to Patala built ?
Visnu temple and worshipped Visnu following the 4°
vice of Prahlada. (See under Bali). d
(iii) Once Prahlada taught Indra the rules of g°°
conduct. (Sloka 28, Chapter 124 Santi Parva).
(iv) Once USsanas sang in honour of Prahlada. (Sloka
50, Chapter 139, Santi Parva). '
(v) Once Prahlada learnt the importance of Ajagat@
vrtti from a sage. (Chapter 179, Santi Parva). re
(vi) During the reign of emperor .Prthu when the 8°
dess of earth (Bhimidevi) was milked, the asuras US°
Prahlada as the calf to milk madya (wine) from a
(4th Skandha, Bhagavata ).
(vii) Prahlada sits in the court of Varuna and worship?
him. (Sloka 12, Chapter 9, Sabha Parva).
(viii) Prahlada once went to the court of Brahm4 i.
worship him. (Sloka 19, Chapter 11, Sabha Parva) -
(ix) Prahlada acted as mediator in the controversy P&
ween Virocana and Sudhanva. (See under Sudhanv4)
(For knowing more details about Prahlada please §
under Virocana and Bali. )
A Ksatriya King born of the family
of Balhika. This King belonged to the line of king®
under the demon king Salabha. (Sloka 30, Chapter 67,
Adi Parva),
d
A serpent. This serpent sits 10 ee
court of Varuna and worships him, (Sloka 10, Chapt
9, Bhisma Parva).
PRAHLADA IV. A place of human habitation of
Puranic fame. (Sloka 46, Chapter 9, Bhisma Parva) -

PRAHUTA
PRAHUTA. A great yajfia.
Manusmrti states that respecting each of the following
A devata, a guest,
servants, parents and the self. Of these the first 1s
fourth
brahmyahuta and fifth, pragita .(Slokas 72: 73, Chapter
five is considered asa yajiia initself :
called Ahuta, second, huta, third, prahuta,
3, Manusmrti). ‘
PRAJAGARA. A celestial lady. Once when Arjuna went
to the court of Indra this celestial maiden gave performat the request of Indra. (Sloka 30, |
‘ance in dance
Chapter 43, Vana Parva).
PRAJAGARAPARVA. A sub-division of Udyoga Parva of
Mahabharata. This comprises chapters 33 to 40 of
Udyoga Parva.
PRAJANGHA. A raksasa (demon) of the party. of
Ravana. This demon was killed by Angada. (Sarga
76, Yuddha Kanda, Valmiki Ramayana) .
PRAJAPATI (S).
Atri, Pulastya, Pulaha, K
_ 384, Santi Parva).
PRAJAPATIVEDI.
are called Prajapativedis. The aforesaid five -
Parva; Chapter 85, Vana Parva).
PRAJAPATYA. A kind of marriage.
Sahobhau caratam dharmamiti vacanubhasya ca/-
Kanyapradanamabhyarcya
Prajapatyo vidhih smrtah /; eth
(Sloka 30, Chapter 3, Manusmrti).
Giving in marriage to a brahmacari one’s daughter
after inviting him to his house and worshipping him 1s
called Prajapatya. tt aie.
PRAKALA. A serpent born of the family of Vasuki.
This serpent was burnt to death at the Sarpasatra of
Janamejaya. (Chapter 97, Adi Parva).
PRAKASA. A brahmin born of the family of Bhrgu. He
was the son of Tamas who belonged to the race of
a Parva).
Grtsamada. (Sloka 63, Chapter 30, Anué4asan
PRAKKOSALA. The place east of Kosala. Sabadeva
in Daksinabharata (Sloka
conquered this place situated
13, Chapter 31, Sabha Parva) . his
PRAKRTA. A Yaksa. He became very rich: within
twelve days. (Sloka 19, Chapter 134, Vana Parva).
PRAKRTI ; PURUSA. Prakrti (matter) and Purusa
(spirit) are two basic factors essential for production of
_ the Prapafica (the visible world which is the scene ©
manifold action) as man and woman are for the prodigy
ion of progeny. From Purusa (male), Prakrt (female)
originated and then they together cr eated the Prapafica.
ents .everywhere
The Vedas and Puranas make statem :
regarding Prakrti and Purusa and three of the most
important ones are given below baie He ais
1) ‘Pra’ means ‘principal’ and ‘Krti’ means ‘creation -
Therefore the word is meant to convey the meaning
‘one that is the principal factor for creation’, ‘Pra’ means
. three gunas’.
: Creators of the world. With a view to .
making creation easy Brahma at first created twentyone ©
Prajapatis (creators). They are Brahma, Rudra, Manu,
Daksa, Bhrgu, Dharma, Tapa, Yama Marici, Angiras,
ratu, Vasistha, Paramesthi,
Sarya, Candra, Kardama, Krodha and Vikrita. (Chapter
the entire Prapanca.
This. is a holy place situated in the
middle of four sacred places in Kuruksetra named
Tarantuka, Arantuka; Paraguramakunda and Macakruka.
This place is called the Uttara (north) vedi of Praja-.
pati also. Besides this, four other places, Pratisthanapuri (with Prayaga), Kambala, Agvatara and Bhogavati
sacred
Places are called Brahmavedi also. (Chapter 53, Salya
3 ' Prapafica.
‘thing but this. There was only
the great delug
PRA KRT
‘sattvic’, ‘Kr’? means ‘rajasic’ and ‘ta’ means ‘tamasic’
and the word ‘Prakrti’ thus conveys the power of the
‘Pra? means. ‘before’ and ‘Krti’. means”
creation and so Prakrti means that which existed* before creation. :
Before creation Prakrti lay merged with the Supreme
Spirit without separate existence. But when the desire
for creation was aroused, this Supreme Spirit divided
-itselfinto Prakrti and Purusa. Then the right half
becomes ‘Purusa’ and the left half ‘Prakrti’ Even though
they are thus two yogindras (kings among sages)
they see themselves as merged with the eternal One like
fire and heat and assert the truth Sarvam Brahmamayam (everything is Brahman, the Supreme Spirit).
It was this basic Prakrti that took forms as, the five
goddesses, Durga, Laksmi, Sarasvati, Savitri and
Radha. (Sth Skandha, Devi Bhagavata ).
2) Purusa is the vital sentient Truth that sets in action
This Purusa is Supreme among
the Supreme, beyond human comprehension, without
form, colour, name, without origin, growth, change or
end, residing in himself and that which ‘can only’ be
imagined to exist. This purusa has got two different
forms, the visible and the invisible and. also a third
imaginary one, time. The sages call Purusa the Suksmaprakrti (The subtle all-pervading spirit, the supreme
soul). ‘This Siksmaprakrti which cannot be measured
by any unit of measure, is not attached to anyhing, is
imperishable, is without decrepitude, is immovable and
is without the senses of sound, touch smell or form.
This Prakrti endowed with the three gunas, without
beginning or end is eternal, is the root cause of this
This Prakrti pervaded over Prapafica from
the beginning of the great Deluge to the beginning of
creation. Brahmajfanins who were great seers and who
knew the truth of the V edas speak about Prakrti thus:
“There was no night or day then, neither the earth
nor the sky, neither light nor darkness. There was noone Brahman merged in
; and Purusa, a brahman which ©
could not be understood by any of the five senses nor by
intelligence. It was from. the supreme being of Visnu
that the two forms Prakrti and Purugsa originated.
These two were separated from Visnu at the time of
e and again joined together at the
time of creation. The form of Visnu trom which these
occurred was termed Time. During the last great deluge
this visible Prapafica merged with it and so, this deluge
was called Prakrtapralaya. Time is eternal, having no
end and so the process of Srsti, Sthita and Sambhdara
(creation, existence and destruction) continued without
any interruption.
After that, during Pralaya (deluge), Prakrti and Purusa
stand apart due to equality of the gunas, Sattva, Rajas
and Tamas in Prakrti. Visnu in the form of Time starts
the work to join them both together. Then when the
time of creation came Visnu, the Supreme Being, the
reme soul, the god of all living beings, omnipresent
by his will entered the emotionless
Purusa and emotional Prakrti and created sensations in
them. Smell is the sense which creates sensation in one
by its nearness to it. Just like that Visnu by his very
presence near them created disturbances in them. It is
Visnu, the best of Purusas, who acts as Prakrti which
can disturb and which can be disturbed, which exists
which were Prakrt
sup
and omnipotent
TT ESSE_S’

PRALAMBA I
in states of contraction and expansion. It is Visnu, the
god of the gods, who exists in forms of Siksma and
Sthila, and as the great tattva and as the devas like
Brahma.
The Mahattattva originated from Prakrti, which was
existing as emotionless due to the equalisation of the
three gunas, when at the time of creation Visnu, Truth
in the form of Ksetrajiia (knower), merged with Prakrti.. The Mahattattva in its three forms, Sattva, Rajas
and ‘T'amas lay. enveloped by Prakrti just as a seed
is covered by its husk. From this Mahattattva originated the three egos, Vaikarika, Taijasa and Tamasa, the
cause of the Paficabhitas. Because that ego contained
the three gunas it became the cause of the origin of the
bhitas (elements) and indriyas (senses). Ego pervaded
the Mahattattva just as the Mahattattva. pervaded
(Arnga 1, Chapter 2, Visnu Purana).
3) In the beginning during the Deluge the world was
all water. Then Siva tore open his thigh. and dropped
a drop of blood in the waters. It became a huge egg. He
broke it and from it came out Purusa and from Purusa
he made Prakrti for the creation of the Prapafica. These
two, Prakrti and Purusa, created the. Prajapatis and
they in turn created the prajas. Purusa seeing the vast
creation going on due to him became arrogant and
Siva chopped off his head. Siva became repentant of his
hasty deed later. To atone for his sin he took the skull
in hishand and vowed that he would ever carry a skullin
his hand and thathe would live in cremation grounds.
The two halves of the great egg became akaéa and
bhimi (earth andsky). (Taranga 2, Kathapithalambaka,
Kath4saritsagara) . |
RALAMBA I. A notorious danava born to Kafyapaprajapati of his wife Danu.. (Sloka 29, Chapter 65,
Adi Parva).
PRALAMBA IJ. Anasura (demon). He attacked Sri
-Krsna and Balarama and was killed by Balarama. (10th
_ Skandha, Bhagavata). a |
PRALAYA (Destruction). Pralaya is of four kinds. The
first is nityapralaya. This is the destruction going on daily
for all animate and inanimate objects born on earth.
‘Thesecond is Brahmapralaya or naimittikapralaya. The
thirdis Prakrtapralaya. This is the great deluge made by
prakrti (nature) at the end of a thousand Caturyugas
(four yugas).The fourth is atyantikapralaya. This is the
union of the soul with the Supreme Being due to Jfiana.
Of the above the Brahmapralaya, or naimittikapralaya
happens at the end of a Kalpa or a day of Brahma or
a thousand yugas. The nature of this pralaya is as
follows : At the end of a thousand yugas the -world
will look famished. Then there will be excessive
drought for a hundred years together and everything
in this world would be destroyed then. Then Mahiavisnu, lord of everything in this universe, would present himself in the seven big rays ofthe Sun and
drink to emptiness all the waters of all the three
worlds, earth, ocean and patala. Then by the divine
power of Mahavisnu the seven rays of the Sun which
had grown fat by drinking this water would become
seven separate Suns. These Suns would burn all the
three worlds including Patala.' Then the earth would
look like the back of a tortoise (Kiirmaprstha) At
that time Rudra, equal in brilliance to Kalagni, would
from beneath burn the patala sending breaths from
Adigesa. After patala Kalagnirudra would burn the
PRAMADVARA
earth and then the heavens. Because of this all the
worlds would look like globes of fire. Then the inhabitants of these worlds would go to Maharloka unable to
bear the heat and from there to Janaloka. Thus Visnu
in the form of Rudra would destroy everything.
Then from the face of Visnu would originate clouds
and lightning in different forms. Those clouds would
rain incessantly for a hundred years and destroy the
fire prevailing everywhere. When the rains become
unbearable Vayu would encroach upon the seats of the
Saptarsis in the ocean and by the breath of Visnu
destroy all the clouds, At that time Visnu, lord of all,
would lie on the back of Adigesa in that one big
ocean drinking vayu (air). Visnu will lie thus” for a
period of a Kalpa in yogic slumber meditating 9?
Vasudeva taking the name Madhusiidana and form
of Brahma praised by the siddhamunis inside the
ocean. After that he would take the form of Brahma
and start creation. a,
In Prakrtapralaya this whole universe would. lie 1°
extinction for a period of two pararddhas. On
pararddha is 100000000000000000 years (one followé
by séventeen zeroes) and so the period of a_prakrtapralaya is double the above number of years. The worl
would then come into the grip ofa _ great drought;
fire would break out and burn away everything 1°
this world from Mahattattva to Vigesa. Then prompt¢
by the desire of Visnu, pratisaficarana (back inte
nature) would occur. Then Jala (water) woul d
absorb the gunas of bhiimi like gandha (smell) a?
when the qualities of the earth are thus absorbed th
earth would merge with pralaya. Jala is rasatmaX4Agni will absorb the rasa of Jala and Jala would be
kindled. The guna of Agni is form and is in the for™
of Sun. Vayu would absorb it and Agni would pe
destroyed. Vayu would then become powerful ate
shake the world. The quality of Vayu is touch and ¢ 4
ether would absorb that. guna of Vayu and Vayu wo"
be destroyed. The quality of ether is sound and !
would be absorbed by ‘the elements. If the elemen!
are absorbed one by one the earth would merge inte
water (Jala) and Jala in Agni, and Agni in Vayu 4? 4
Vayu in ether and ether in Ahankara (ego). Ahankat
would merge in Mahattattva. This Mahattattva WOU”
be absorbed by Prakrti. Prakrti has got two acigee
Vyakta and Avyakta (Manifest and Un-manifest) . be
Vyakta would merge with. Avyakta. Purusa is sing é
pure and without decay. But he is also part of Pat@
matma (the Supreme Being). So Prakrti and Purv%
would both merge into the Supreme Being. There ar
no distinctions, fabrications in Paramatma, the lord. ™
all. It is only an existence. It is such a Paramat™
that should be known and which itself is knowled8°&
The Paramatma is beyond the Atma (soul). It is }
such an indescribable Paramatma that all are dissol¥;
ed during a Prakrtapralaya. (Chapter 368, A8™
Purana).
PRAMADA. A son of Vasistha. He was one of the
Saptarsis of Uttama Manvantara.
6th Skandh
Bhagavata ). (
PRAMADVARA, Wife of Ruru.
1) Birth, Pramadvara was the daughter of the nymph
Menaka born of the Gandharva Vigvavasu. AS be
as the child was born, Menaka threw the child im!
the forest and left for Devaloka,

PRAMAGANDA
Sthilakesa, a sage who was engaged in penance in that
forest ina hermitage heard the cry of a child and
came out of his arama. On seeing a new-born child
lying unclaimed and uncared for, he took the child to
his rama and named her Pramadvara and brought
her up. She grew into a charming maiden and
one day Prince Ruru coming that way while hunting
saw her and fell in love with her, The sage was pleased
to give her in marriage to the King and so fixed the
date of marriage.
The day previous to her marriage she trampled over
a poisonous snake while walking in the forest with her
companions and immediately she fell dead by the bite
of the serpent. Ruru’s grief was uncontrollable.
He wept bitterly crying aloud “If I have from my very
birth with great devotion taken vows, let Pramadvara
rise up alive.”? Then a devadita (messenger from god) —
appeared before him and said that all his wails were of
no avail since it was only in the order of things that
one whose ayus (period of life on earth) was over
should die. Ruru then enquired of him a way of escape
from this inevitable calamity and then the devadita said
that if Ruru was prepared to surrender half of his ayus
in favour of Pramadvara she would come back to life.
Ruru agreed and they went to Dharmaraja (god of
Death) and told him of his wish. Dharmaraja brought
back Pramadvara to life and she stood before Ruru
as if just woken up from sleep. Their marriage was duly
conducted. (Chapters 8 and 9, Adi Parva).
PRAMAGANDA, The King of Kikatas mentioned in
Reveda. (Siikta 14, Anuvaka 53, Mandala 3, Rgveda).
PRAMANAKOTI. A sacred place on the banks of the
river Ganga. There is a great banyan tree named
Pram4anakoti at this place. It was at this spot of the
river that Duryodhana poisoned Bhimasena and_threw
him into the river, bound hand and foot. The Pandavas who went for their exile in the forests spent their
first night at this spot. (Sloka 41, Chapter 1, Vana
Parva). ,
PRAMANDHU. A Yaksa who was the custodian of the
wealth of Harigcandra. Visvamitra removed the bad
smell of the body of this yaksa by pouring holy water
over his body. (Chapter 2, Skanda Purana) .
PRAMATAKA. A sage. He was one of the members of
the Sarpasatra of Janamejaya. (Sloka 7, Chapter 53,
Adi Parva). \
PRAMATHA I. A son of Dhrtarastra. (Sloka 13,
Chapter 116, Adi Parva).
PRAMATHA II. One of the two parsadas given to
Subrahmanya by Yamaraja. The other one was named
Unmiatha. (Sloka 30, Chapter 45, Salya Parva). _
PRAMATHA III. A raksasa (demon). This raksasa
was a minister of demons Khara — and Disana.
(Sarga 23, Aranyakanda, Valmiki Ramayana).
PRAMATHAGANA. Siva’s attendants. They were
well-versed in Dharmadharmas (What is virtuous and
what is not). (Chapter 131, Anusasana Parva). _
undred sons of Dhrtarastra.
PRAMATHI I. One of the h
He was killed by Bhimasena in the great battle.
(Chapter 157, Drona Parva). ?
PRAMATHI II. Brother of Dusana who was an
associate of Ravana. When Rama and Laksmana were
in exile in the forests they had to fight Kharadisanatrifirases. Then the captains of their army,
Mahakapala, Sthilaksa and Pramathi attacked RamaPRAMOHINI
Laksmanas. Pramathi attacked Laksmana and then
Nila an army-chief of the monkeys killed Pramathi.
(Sarga 26, Valmiki Ramayana and Sloka 22, Chapter
287, Vana Parva).
PRAMATH I III. A raksasa who was a friend of Ghatotkaca. In the Kuruksetra battle Duryodhana killed
this Pramathi. (Sloka 20, Chapter 91, Bhisma “Parva).
PRAMATHINI. Acelestial woman. This woman gave
a dance performance during the Janmotsava of Arjuna.
(Sloka 21, Chapter 122, Adi Parva).
PRAMATI I. (PRAMITT).
1) General information. Great Sage Bhrgu, got of his wife
Puloma Cyavana and Cyavana got of his wife Sukanya,
Pramati. This sage Pramati married the - beautiful
Pratapi and their son was Ruru.
2) Other details.
(i) Pramiti visited Bhisma while he was lying on his
bed of arrows. (Sloka 5, Chapter 26, Anugasana Parva).
(ii) Pramiti is described as the son of Vagindra born
in the family of Grtsamada son of Vitahavya. (Sloka
58, Chapter 30, Anusdsana Parva). For details see
under Ruru).
PRAMATI II. Son of a brahmin named Sara of Prayaga.
During the fag end of Krtayuga the brahmins made
Pramati their army-chief and defeated the Ksatriyas.
(Visnudharmottara Purana ).
PRAMATI III. One of the four ministers of Vibhisana.
(Yuddha Kanda, Chapter °7. Verse 7, Valmiki Ramaana ).
PRAMILA. Chief of the Strirajya (country of women)
in the Himalayas. The Pandavas conducted an aSvamedhayaga after the great battle. It was Arjuna who followed the sacrificial horse. Roaming about without anybody daring to tie it the horse reached Strirajya and
Pramila tied the horse. Arjuna challenged her and in
the fight that ensued Pramila defeated Arjuna. At that
time there was a voice from heaven which said ‘‘Arjuna,
you will never be able to take back the horse after defeating Pramila. So if you want to save the sacrificial
horse, enter into a truce with her and make her your
wife.” Arjuna took the advice and saved the horse
after marrying Pramila. (Jaiminiya, ASvamedha Parva,
PRAMLOGA. A nymph who enticed the sage Kandu.
See under Kandu).
PRAMODA I. A serpent born of the family of Airavata.
This serpent was burnt to death at the Sarpasatra of
Janamejaya. (Sloka 11, Chapter 57, Adi Parva).
PRAMODA II. A soldier of Subrahmanya. (Sloka 65,
Chapter 45, Salya Parva).
PRAMODA III. One of the Manasaputras (Spiritual
sons) of Brahma. Pramoda. was born from the neck of
Brahma. (Matsya Purana).
PRAMOHINI. A Gandharva maiden. Pramohini and
four Gandharva maidens were absolved from their curses by a drop of water from the river Narmada. The
story recounted to Yudhisthira by Narada is as follows :
Five Gandharva maidens Pramohini, Suzila, Susvara,
Candrika and Sutaéra were friends. Pramohini was the
daughter of Sukasangiti, Suéila that of Susila, Susvara
of Svaravedi, Candrika that of Candraka and Sutara
of Suprabha. On a day in spring all the five went about
collecting flowers in a forest. As they went on walking
they reached the pond named Acchoda. They bathed in
that pond and after that made an idol of Ambika with
j

PRAMRTA
clay and adorned it with golden ornaments. Putting
marks on it with Kumkum (Saffron)and Candana (Sandalwood-paste) they danced around the idol with devotional songs. As they were doing so, the eldest son of
sage Vedanidhi came to bathe in the Acchoda pond.
He was very charming to look at with eyes like lotus,
broad chest and round and brawny hands. He looked
like another Kamadeva (Cupid). He was wearing a
deer-hide and around his waist was a yellow waist-band
of Mufija grass. The five girls were attracted by the
ascetic youth and stopping their dancing they at first
thought of making him their guest. The more the girls
looked at him the more they saw a resemblance of Kamadeva in him and they decided to make him their husband. The girls started to approach him with amorous
looks and perplexed by this move, the ascetic youth
fled away from the place. The girls searched for him
everywhere and he was not to be found. They found an
emptiness on all sides. They thought that perhaps he
might be a magician. They felt themselves in the plight
similar to that of the gopis who searched for the missing
Krsna. Somehow taking courage they reached their homes
and fell down before their mothers. The mothers asked
them why they were so late and they replied they knew
not the passage of time.speaking with the Kinnaris who
arrived there. Their bodies were hot and the mothers
thought that it might be due to their brisk walking for
such a long distance.
Telling a lie like that to hide their secret, they lay on
the ground thinking about him and him alone. They
did not make the Kelimayira (peacock kept for pleasure) dance, didnot teach the parrot in the cage, did
not pet the mongoose nor did they converse with
their pet Sarika. The night seemed to them like a yuga
and as soon asit was morning they ran up to the Acchoda
pond. The brahmin boy came there that morning also
for bathing. The five girls encircled him and requested
him to marry them. He made several excuses and tried
to get awayfrom them. Then Pramohini breaking the
circle went and caught hold of him by his legs, Susila
and Susvara caught hold of his hands, Sutara embraced
him and Candrika kissed him on his cheeks. At last in despair the brahmin boy cursed them and turned them into
devils. The girls were not to be subdued like that. They
also cursed him in return and made him also a devil.
All the devils formed like that by curses and countercurses lived in the same place in the forest. After a
long time one day the sage Lomaga came that way by
chance and the burning effulgence of Lomaga due to his
severe penance made him unappraachable to the devils
and they stood ata great distance from him. But the
brahmin devil by the strength of his penance in his
previous life knew Lomasa and falling before him in
prostration told him everything that had happened.
Lomafa was greatly moved by his story and he took
them to the banks of the river Narmada. At that time
a wind blew and drops of water from the river, changed
them into their original forms and they stood praising
Narmada. Then following the advice of Lomaga the
brahmin boy married the five girls and lived on the
shores of Narmada bathing in it, drinking its water and
worshipping it. They lived there for long happily and
then attained Visnuloka. (Chapter 22, Padma Purana)
PRAMRTA. One of the ways of earning wealth. There
are five ways according to Manusmru,
PRANADHARA
Rtamrtabhyam jivettu
Mrtena pramrtena va |
Satyanrtabhyamapi va
Na gvavrtya kadacana.//
Sloka 4, Chapter 4, Manusmrti).
Rtam, Amrtam, Mrtam, Pramrtam and Satyanrtam are
the five ways.
Each has been described thus:
Rtamufichasilarmh jfleyam
Amrtar syadayacitam /
Mrtantu yacitarh bhaiksam
Pramrtam karsanarh smrtam //
Satyanrtantu vanijyam
tena caivapi jivyate /
Seva évavrttirakhyata
Tasmat tarh parivarjjayet | /
(Slokas 5 and 6, Chapter 4. Manusmrti)
(Rtam is the collection of grains from paddy fields with
two fingers. Amrta is that which is obtained without
begging and Mrta is that which is obtained by begg!98:
Wealth that is obtained by agriculture is Pramrta an
that which is obtained by trade is Satyanrta. Wealth
obtained by sev (flattery and service) is to be avoided. )
PRAMSUNRGA. A Manu. Iksvaku, Nabhaga. Dhrsta;
Saryati, Narisyanta, Pramégunrga, Dista, Karusa all
Prsadhra are all Manus. (7th Skandha, Devi Bhagavata
PRAMUCGI (PRAMUGA). A sage who lived in Daksi24
bharata. (Sloka 29, Chapter 208, Santi Parva). —s., fe
PRANA I. Grandson of sage Bhrgu. Bhrgu got of his W)
Khyati a daughter named Laksmi and two sons rae
Dhata and Vidhata. They married Ayati and Nuy@
respectively and they got two sons named Prana 4?
Mrkandu. Markandeya was the son of Mrkandu.
(Chapter 10, Arh¢a 1, Visnu Purana).
PRANA II. A son born to the Vasu named Soma of his
wife Manohara. This Prana wasthe younger brothe!
of Varccas. These brothers had two other brother.
named Sigira and Ramana. (Sloka 26, Chapter 66,
Parva ).
PRANA III.
Paravaha ).
PRANADHARA. A carpenter of Puranic fame. 3
There were two celebrated carpenters in the country, g
Kafici named Pranadhara and Rajyadhara when Kin y
Bahubala was ruling that country. They learnt ene: ‘
mechanical artsin carpentry and architecture from 4 ef
great architect, Maydsura. Pranadhara, the el
brother, became an addict to winé and women ae a
gambling and lost all his wealth. Rajyadhara gaver®
portion of his wealth to his brother and before long
both became poor. Then Pranadhara found out 4 pi o
and they both together madea mechanical bird and tyi? 2
a rope to its legs sent it into the treasure-house 0
King through a window. The bird picked up diamo? -
or ornaments which it could carry in its beak and ca
back to them. This continued daily for some days ae
then Rajyadhara advised his brother to stop it acquai” |
ing him with the dangers if it was ever found, Os
But Pranadhara did not heed the advice and continue :
the theft. When the keeper of the treasury found thingy
missing he was worried. He mused : ‘‘Doors arte “ig
open. Can it be rats? No, there has never been 4 sing e
rat here before. Then how did it happen ?” Think
thus he went and reported the matter to the king: T
Pranavayu. The wind of life. (See under

PRANAKA
King was confident of the keeper. Soon he put guards over
the treasure-house to keep watch over it at night. Little -
knowing that he was being watched Pranadhara put
his bird into action that night also. The watchmen
caught hold of the rope as soon as the bird came out with
the booty from the treasure-house. Pranadhara knew
that the trick had been found out and he rushed to
his brother and told him what had happened. Immediately Pranadhara made a Vimana and escaped from the
place with his family. Rajyadhara also made a Vimana
and escaped. When he had travelled in the Vimana for
four hundred Katas ‘Kata=four miles) he reached a
sea-shore and then leaving the Vimana there started
walking. On the way getting tired he slept inside a
garden. When he woke up, a man ona peacock came to
his side and said “You live here. When you are hungry
and feel like taking food go.to the second floor of this
house and you will find there whatever you want.
The visitor disappeared and he found a house in front
of him. When he had finished his daily ablutions he
went inside the house which was empty. But when he
went up hesaw ample food in gold vessels arranged there.
He never heard about his brother again. (Taranga 9,
PRASENAJIT II
PRASADA. A King of .the family of Manu. (4th
Skandha, Bhagavata ). 7
PRASAMI. A nymph of Alakapuri. This nymph once
gave adance performance in honour of Astavakra.
(Sloka 45, Chapter 19, Anusdsana Parva).
PRASANDHI. Ason of Vaivasvata Manu. Ksupa is
the son of Prasandhi. (Sloka 2, Chapter 4, Agvamedha
Parva). } '
PRASANTATMA. A synonym of Sirya (Sun). (Sloka
27, Chapter 3, Vana Parva).
PRASASTA. A holy river. During their pilgrimage
' the Pandavas came to this place and bathed in this
river. (Sloka 2, Chapter 118, Vana Parva).
PRASENA I. A son of Karna. He was killed in the
great battle by Satyaki. (Sloka6, Chapter 82, Karna
Parva ).
PRASENA II. A King of Vrsnivaméa.
1) Genealogy. Descending in order from Visnu —
Brahma Atri—Candra—Budha—Purtravas— Ayus —
Nahusa—Yayati—Yadu— Sahasrajit—Satajit—Hehaya
— Dharma — Kunti— Bhadrasena — Dhanaka —
Krtavirya — Kartaviryarjuna — Madhu — Vrsni —
Yudhajit—Anamitra—Snigdha (Nimna )—Prasena.
Snigdha had two sons, Prasena and Satrajit.
Ratnaprabhalambaka, Kathasaritsagara) . Sst 2
i Prana. (Sloka 1, Chap- 2) Prasena and the Syamantaka, Satrajit and Surya
gece. antes agni called Prana. (Sun) were friends. Once Satrajit requested Surya
awal ty eight hells. (See to give him: some gift as a token of their friendship.
PRANARODHA. One of the twenly ©ip Then Strya gave him the Syamantaka gem. If that
under Ka4la). aay oa : : ee a a crn
x - he wind in the body and stone was worshipped daily with pijas by brahmanas
ies vee ee anevats means ‘restraining it would yield eight loads of gold daily. When once
eee the floor a piece of Satrajit travelled by air with that gem round his neck
Spread .on
Kuga grass and sitting on it the people of Dvaraka mistook him for Visnu. Sri
meen ae a all actions of the sense-organs Krsna was attracted by the beauty and power of that
cross-legged, controlling e single object do pranayama stone and he asked Satrajit that gem for a good price.
and concentrating Fesaul a are three different Sri Krsna offered as much money as he wanted and
for the purification of the , Recakapranayama, Pura- still Satrajit did not part with it. é;
kinds of pranayamas namely Once Prasena went hunting with that gem round his
or suspending breath.
kapranayama and oR Sei uand ‘and massaging neck and he was attacked and killed by a lion. The
Holding the nostrils we done sends out theair within lion while carrying the Syamantaka was killed by
the belly with the ors ee ranayama. Doing just the Jambavan and the latter carried the gem to his den
the belly. It 1s called aia? F de is called Piirakaprana- and gave it to his children to play with.
reverse and getting air ins with his belly full of air. When Prasena did not return from his hunting and
= oj sits : : .
yama. Then the yog} Sil, . ir out or letting was found later lying dead without the gem the news
Sitting thus without either te ae the yogi sits spread that the stone might have been stolen by
it in is called Kumbhakapranay Krsna after killing Prasena. The slander reached the
‘ body of man isa
like a pirna-kumbha Guy Ie a q ae charioteer ears of Krsna also and he went to the forest in search
chariot, the sense organs its cia ae 373, Agni Purana ). of the Syamantaka. He found the cave of Jambavan.
and pranayama the whip. (¢ Ae d Paficajanya. ( Sloka and on peeping in found the children of Jambavan
PRANIDHI. Son of an Agni ca playing with the gem. Jambavan attacked Krsna and
9, Chapter 220, Vana Parya) « own wife by the grace after a grim battle which lasted for several days
PRANITA. A Son born to ones 119, Adi Parva). Jambavan was defeated. When he knew that it was
Chapter ; Krsna who had defeated him he gave him along with
of great men. (Sloka IY, isits this place
PRANNADI. A sacred plage. He Chapter 84, Vana the Syamantaka his daughter Jambavati also Krsna
would attain Indraloka. ( loka 19; brought the gem and the girl to Dvaraka and gave
back the gem to Satrajit. (Chapter 38, Harivam§$a;
Parva).
PRAPANCA. Sce under Srst. ne. Chapter 13, Part 8, Padma Purana). ’
PRA EAR GARUDIET A beggar with astonishing pRasENAJIT I. Father of Suyajfia, wife of Mahationed !n Kathasaritsagara. rf bhama. As a King he did godana (gift of cows) for
cleat Eve had two wives @r many years and attained Punyaloka in the end.
; 4eq, Kamsa S
PRAPTI. A wife “Lar vnn 10th Skandha, Bhagavata). (Sloka 20, Chapter 95, Adi Parva).
the other was calle ; (demons) and PRASENAJIT II. Father of Renuka, wife of the sage
ery: Aksasas
PRARUVJA I. A qe et ane 985, Vana Parva). Jamadagni. Jamadagni abandoned the beautiful
Pigacas (devils). (Sloka !, Ps guarded the Amrta Renuka once but fearing a curse Prasenajit gave her
PRARUJA II. A_deva he ee, between Praruja and again to Jamadagni. (Chapter 58, Brahmanda
re was a fight
98, Adi Parva). Purana).
(nectar). Once the
Garuda, (Chapter

PRASENAJIT III
PRASENAJIT Ill. A distant brother of Satrajit called
Bhava. (Daksinatya Patha, Chapter 14, Sabha Parva).
PRASENAJIT IV. A King who lived in the city of
Sravasti. Once a very virtuous brahmin came to this
city. Finding him to be a man of great virtues a Vaisya
took him to his house and kept him there worshipping
him. Many rich men coming to know of the brahmin
came and worshipped him with offerings of costly
clothes and ornaments. Within a short time the .poor
brahmin got a huge heap of gold and silver. He collected his lot and at night without letting anybody know
went and buried it in a secret place in the forest.
After some days he went and looked for it and found
his buried wealth missing. When the brahmin returned
weeping, the host, the Vaisya, gathered from him all
that had happened. The house-holder* consoled him
but the miserly and greedy brahmin was not to be
pacified thus and he started to commit suicide. He
went to a pond nearby and was about to jump into it
when Prasenajit who heard about this came to the
spot and told him thus:—‘‘Do not grieve over your
loss. I shall make enquiries about it and if the stolen
wealth is not recovered I shall give you compensation
from my treasury.”’
After consoling the brahmin thus the King went to
his palace. He pretended to be ill and called the
physicians of the city to his side. He asked them about
their patients, their illness and the medicines prescribed
for them. One of the physicians during the enquiry
said thus : “Oh lord, Matrdattavanik is my patient.
Yesterday I prescribed to him the root of Uraka
plant.”? The King soon dispersed the physicians and
sent for Matrdattavanik and asked him who had
brought for him the root. When Matrdattavanik
replied that it was his servant the King sent for the
servant and on questioning the servant the latter
confessed having taken the hidden treasure. Thus
because of the intelligence and wisdom of the King
the brahmin got back his wealth. (Taranga 7, Madana-
- maticukalambaka, Kathdasaritsagara) .
PRASITA. One of the Paficamahayajiias. The five
yajfias are Ahuta, Huta, Prahuta, Brahmyahuta and
Pragita. (Sloka 73, Chapter 3, Manusmrti).
PRASKANVA.I A King who was the
Medhatithi. The Kings of Praskanva line were
Ksatriyas formerly but they became brahmins later.
(9th Skandha, Picrandil is later
PRASKANVA II. A sage who was the son of Kanvamuni. The sukta 44 of anuvaka 9 of mandala one of
Reveda was written by this sage. -
PRASRAYA. A King of the family of Manu. (4th
Skandha, Bhagavata). |
PRASRTA. A demon. This demon was killed by
Garuda. (Sloka 12, Chapter 105, Udyoga Parva).
PRASTHALAI. The palace of Suégarmé. (See under
Susarma).
PRASTHALA IJ. A greatly condemned place. (Sloka
47, Chapter 44, Karna Parva).
PRASUHMA. A country which was conquered by
Bhimasena during the Mahabharata times. (Sloka 16,
Chapter 30, Sabha Parva).
PRASUSRUTA. A King who was a descendant of Sri
Rama. (9th Skandha, Bhagavata) .
PRASUTI. A daughter of Svayambhuva Manu. Svayarnbhuva Manu had two sons named Priyavrata and
son. of
PRATIKAMI
Uttanapada and_ three daughters named Akiti,
Devahiti and Prasiiti. Akiiti was married to Ruciprajapati, Devahiiti to Kardamaprajapati_ and Prasiti to
Daksaprajapati. Yajfia is the son of Akutt. Kapila 1s
the sonof Devahiti. Prasiti got only a number of
daughters. (8th Skandha, Devi Bhagavata).
PRATAPA. A prince of the country of Sauvira. He
stood behind the chariot of Jayadratha holding his
flag. Arjunaslew him. (Sloka 10, Chapter 265, Vana
Parva).
PRATAPAMUKUTA. Father of Vajramukuta. Vajramukuta is the hero in the tale of Vetalakatha described
beautifully in Kathasaritsagara. (See under Vetala).
PRATAPI. Cyavanamaharsi got of his wife Sukanya @
son named Pramati. Pratapi is the beautiful wife °
Pramati. Ruru is the son born to Pramati of Pratap)
(2nd Skandha, Devi Bhagavata).
PRATARA. I. Aserpent born of the Kauravya race
This serpent was burnt to death at the Sarpasatra ©
Janamejaya. (Sloka 13, Chapter 5, Adi Parva).
PRATARA II. A son born to Dhata, the seventh
Aditya, of his wife Raka. (6th Skandha, Bhagavata) -
PRATARDANA.
1) General information. A King of the line of Puru.
Pratardana who was the son of the daughter of were
Yayati ruled the country after making Ka$1 his capita’.
Pratardana’s mother was Madhavi, Yayati’s daughte?;
and father, Divodasa. Pratardana once a
on his way his grandfather, King Yayati, who ha
fallen from Svarga. (See under Yayati).
2): Other details.
(i) Emperor Sibi gave Pratardana a sword.
Chapter 166, Santi Parva). :
(ii) He once gave a gift of a netra (eye) to the
brahmins. (Sloka 20, Chapter 224, Santi Parva).
(iii) He slew the son of Vitahavya. (See under vila
havya). his
(iv) Pratardana courted death after appoinung
sons for the service of brahmins. (Sloka 5, Chap!
137, Anugasana Parva). a
PRATIBHANU. A son born to Sri Krsna of S5aly)
bhama. Bhanu, Subhanu, Svarbhanu, ‘Prabha?
Bhanum4n, Candrabhanu, Brhadbhanu, HavirbhaP .
Sribhanu and Pratibhanu are the sons born to Saty@
bhama. (10th Skandha, Bhagavata).
(Sloka 89,
PRATICYA. A King born of the race of Bhara‘®
(9th Skandha, Bhagavata).
PRATICYA. Wife of Pulastyamaharsi. (Sloka
Chapter 116, Udyoga Parva). a
PRATIHARA. A King born of the race of Bharat’:
Pratihara was the son of Paramesthi and the father
Pratiharta. (Chapter 1, Arnga 2, Visnu Purana). \ his
PRATIHARTA. A King who was celebrated f0F ef *
yajfiakarmans. His father was Pratiha and mothe
Suvarcala. Pratiharta got two sons of his wife Sty
(Sth Skandha, Bhagavata). ae
PRATIJNAPARVA. A sub-divisional Parva of DF oh a
ah This comprises chapters 72 to 84 of prov
arva,
PRATIKA. Son of a King called Vasu. (9th Ské ages
Bhagavata) . $
PRATIKAMI. The charioteer of Duryodhana. It wee
Pratikami who brought Paficali to the court of!
Kauravas when the Pandavas were defeate at | e
game of dice by the Kauravas, He was killed in

a Rea ieee,
PRATIKSATRA aie
Kuruksetra battle by the Pandavas. (Chapter 67,
Sabha Parva; Chapter 33, Salya Parva).
PRATIKSATRA. A King born of the family of
Parasurama. (9th Skandha, Bhagavata).
PRATIMATSYA. A place of human habitation m
ancient Bharata. (Chapter 9, Bhisma Parva).
PRATIPA. A King of Candravarhga (Lunar dynasty).
Fle was the father of King Santanu. There is a story
behind the birth of the son Santanu to Pratipa.
One day this Rajarsi was worshipping the Sun-god in
the waters of the river Ganga, when a_ beautiful
maiden rose from the waters and sat on the right thigh
of the royal ascetic. The King was embarrassed and
he told her thus :—“‘Oh sweet girl, who are you?
Do you realise what an unrighteous deed you have
done ? Why did you thus climb on my thigh without
seeking my permission ? The right thigh is for the
daughter and the wife of the son. Since you have thus -
sat on my right thigh, you shall be the wife of my son
when one is born to me.”
Hearing this the maiden jumped out from the thigh of
the King and left the place and the King went to his
palace. After some time Pratipa got a son named
antanu. Santanu was none other than emperor
Mahabhisak who was forced to be born on earth due
to a curse of Brahma. When Santanu came of age
Pratipa decided to spend the rest of his life in forests
and calling his son to his side gave him all advice and
added “Son, perhaps a maiden may come to you an
if she comes accept her as your wife. Do not ask her
about her identity. By making her your truthful wife
you will acquire a great many benefits.””
Pratipa, thereafter, entrusted the kingdom to his son and
after performing severe penance in the forests attained
divyaloka. (2nd Skandha, Devi Bhagavata ).
PRATIPADA. A King of the race of Bharata. He was
the son of Gandhamadana and the father of Svavalkala(?) (Navama Skandha, Bhagavata) | ae
PRATIRATHA. A King of the Paru line of kings.
Pratiratha, Dhruva and Sumati een sons of King
Antibhara. (9th Skandha, Bhagavata)-
ARATeRae ‘An asura (demon). This demon who
held sway over all the worlds also died. His poy ee
told to illustrate that there was 4” end to all lives.
(Sloka 53, Chapter 227, Santi Parva). |
PRATISAKHYA. See under Kramapatha. re
PRATISRAVAS. A son born to the queen aie a
king Bhimasena of the family of king ee ra
§ Reies had a son named Pratipa. ( Sloka 42, Chapter YY;
di Parva).
ohare I. A female follower of Subrahmanya
- ($loka 29, Chapter 46, Salya Parva).
PRATISTHA II. The installatioh © } eee.
oes Agni Purana it is the installation of Siva
linga that is called Pratistha.
: : , ir is Siva. It is the
Piha ty Sabo aay of Oe aod Siva in the form
union of Sakti in the form 0! ft é qe ts ae
of linga that is called Pratistha. This Pree diferent
ed by means of Sivamantras. There a
kinds of Pratisthas :— Aya sas
1) Visesapratistha. Any pratistha ™ yt ae a
is used in combination 1s called VisesaP™ ha ( latform)
2) Sthapana. Fixing the linga on the pitha (p
is called Sthapana.
on of deities in temples. -
PRAVAHANA
3) Sthitasthapana. The fixing of the linga (idol) on
the pitha (platform) when the linga gets shaky on it
is called Sthitasthapana.
4) Utthapana. Taking the idol out from the platform
and refixing it, is called Utthapana.
5) Asthapana. A pratistha in which after the fixation
learned priests eonduct purification ceremonies, is called
Asthapana.
PRATISTHANAPURA. A sacred place in Prayaga. The
place is at present ‘called Jhiisi. Once this place was
ruled over by a king called Yayati. The sage Galava
accompanied by Garuda visited this king one day.
(Sloka 9, Chapter 114, Udyoga Parva) .
PRATITA. A Visvadeva. (Sloka 32, Chapter 92, Anugasana Parva).
PRATIVINDHYA I. Ason born to Pafical of Dharma-
' putra. The details available about him from Mahabharata are the following :—
i) Prativindhya was born from a part of a Vigvadeva.
(Sloka 127, Chapter 37, Adi Parva).
(ii) On the first day of the Kuruksetra battle Prativindhya fought against Sakuni. (Sloka 63, Chapter 45,
Bhisma Parva).
ili ) Prativindhya was defeated in fight with Alambusa
(Sloka 39, Chapter 100, Bhisma Parva).
(iv) He fought against A‘ vatthama. (Sloka 29, Chapter
95, Drona Parva).
(v) °Prativindhya accepted defeat after fighting with
Dugéasana. (Sloka 34, Chapter 168, Drona Parva).
(vi) He slew king Citra in a battle. (Sloka 20,
Chapter 14, Karna Parva).
vii) Prativindhya died fighting A vatthama at night.
(Sloka 48, Chapter 8, Sauptika Parva).
(viii) The synonyms found used in theMahabharata for
Prativindhya are the following :—Yaudhisthira and
Yaudhisthiri.
PRATIVINDHYA II. A violent king born of the family
of Ekacakra. Arjuna defeated this king during his
victory march. ( Sloka 5, Chapter 25, Sabha Parva)
PRATYAGRAHA. An ancient king of Bharata. He was
the second son of Uparicaravasu. (Sloka 238, Chapter
1, Adi Parva). |
PRATYANGA. An ancient king of Bharata. (Sloka
238, Chapter 1, Adi Parva).
PRATYUSA. A son born to Dharmadeva of his wife
Prabhata. Pratyiisa is one of the Astavasus. The
Astavasus are Apa, Dhruva, Soma, Dharma, Anila,
Agni, Pratyiisa and Prabhasa. The sage Devala is the
son of Pratyaisa. (Sloka 17, Chapter 66, Adi Parva).
-PRAVAHA. A vayu (wind). This wind of life in the
body always moves upwards. (Sloka 21, Chapter 301,
Santi Parva).
PRAVAHA. A soldier of Subrahmanya. (Sloka 64, Chapter 45, Salya Parva).
PRAVAHANA. A king of Paficdladega. -He was a contemporary of Uddalaka. | |
Pravahana was a great Daréanika (philosopher) and he
once held a Tattvajfiana Parisad (seminar of philosophers). With a view to defeating the king in a discussion Svetaketu also attended the seminar. But Svetaketu
was unable to answer the five questions put to him
by Pravahana. Ashamed of the defeat Svetaketu went
to his father Uddalaka, who was his Guru in Jfianavidya
also, and asked him +the questions put by Pravahana.
TJddalaka also was unable to answer the questions and

PRAVALAKA
they both went to Pravahana and the latter gave as a
gift to those brahmins whatever knowledge he had on
Tattvajfiana then. (Chandogyopanisad).
PRAVALAKA. A Yaksa of the court of Kubera (Sloka
17, Chapter 10, Sabha Parva).
PRAVARA. A Yadava. He was one of the ministers of
~ Sri Krsna. (Chapter 71, Visnu Purana).
PRAVARA. Ariver of Puranic fame. (Sloka'23, Chapter 9, Bhisma Parva).
PRAVARAKA (PRAVARA). An ancient Puranic place
included in Krauficadvipa. (Sloka 22, Chapter 12,
Bhisma Parva).
PRAVARAKARNA. An owl without death living in the
Himalayas. (See under Indradyumna).
PRAVARASENA. A Sanskrit poet who lived in the sixth
century A.D. He is the author of the book ‘Setubandha’
written in Prakrit language. The book is called ‘Setukavya’ and ‘Ravanavadha’ also.
PRAVARSANA. A peak of the mountain Gomanta. Sri
Krsna and Balarama once went to its top to observe the
movements of their enemy Magadha. (10th Skandha,
Bhagavata) .
PRAVASU. A son born to Ilina of the Candravamsa
(lunar dynasty) of his wife Rathantari. Pravasu had
four brothers named Dusyanta, Sira, Bhima, and Vasu.
(Sloka 17, Chapter 94, Adi Parva).
PRAVENI. Kanvasrama was on the shores of this river.
(Sloka 11, Chapter 88, Vana Parva).
PRAVEPANA. A serpent of the fa (‘vy of Taksaka. This
serpent was burnt to death at tus Sarpasatra of Janamejaya. (Sloka 9, Chapter 57, Adi Parva).
PRAVIRAI. A king of the Piru dynasty. His father
was Santurodha. He had two brothers named Dusyanta
and Sumanta. (Chapter 278, Agni Purana).
PRAVIRA II. A son of Puru, a king of the Piru dynasty
His mother was Pausti. He had two brothers named
Igvara and Raudragva. Pravira got of his wife Siraseni
a son named Manasyu. He was known by the name
Janamejaya also. After conducting three aSvamedhas,
Pravira accepted Vanaprastha (third stage of life).
(Sloka 11, Chapter 95, Adi Parva).
PRAVIRA(S) III. A special class of Ksatriyas. King
Vrsadhvaja was born in thisclass. (Sloka 16, Chapter
74, Udyoga Parva).
PRAVIRA IV. A candala (the lowest and most despised |
of all classes of people). In order to keep his word of
honour Harigcandra allowed himself to be sold to this
candala Pravira. He was none other than Lord Siva
himself. (See under Hariscandra).
PRAVRSEYA. A place of human habitation in ancient
Bharata. (Sloka 50, Chapter 9, Bhisma Parva).
PRAVRITA. All religious ceremonies are divided into
two classes, Pravrtta and Nivrita. All ceremonies connected with worldly life are classed under Pravrtta and
those of a spiritual nature under Nivrtta. (Chapter 262,
Agni Purana).
PRAYAGA. A sacred place situated at the meeting point
of Ganga and Yamuna. He who bathes at this holy
spot would get the benefit of doing ten agvamedhas.
(Sloka 35, Chapter 84, Vana Parva).
it isbelieved that at Prayaga there is the presence of
Brahma, devatas, dikpalakas (guardians of the quarters),
lokapalakas (guardians of the world ), Sadhyas (realised
souls ),Pitrs(manes ) ,Maharsis like Sanatkumara,Angiras,
Brahmarsis, Nagas, Garuda, Siddhas, Suryadeva and
PRAYASCITTA
Mahavisnu. There are three fire-pits there. The river
Ganga runs through the centre of these pits. The
Centre of the confluence of Ganga and Yamuna is believed to be the waist of the world. There is at Prayaga
the world-famous Triveni confluence. If one bathes at
that place one gets the benefit of ASvamedha and Kajasiya together.
The greatness of Prayaga is described thus : Prayagatirtha, Pratisthanatirtha, Kambalatirtha, Aévataratirtha,
and Bhogavatitirtha are said to be the Yagavedis ©
Prajapati. At such a Prayaga Vedas and Yajias live
personified. If one praises it or chants its name 1?
songs or smears the mud from it on one’s body, one
would be absolved of all sins. If one gives away anything in charity at this place or conducts Sraddha
(ceremony of giving offerings to deceased relatives)
does pious mutterings one would get benefits of an
imperishable nature. There are about seventy thousa?
tirthas in this world, ten thousand of one kind and sixty
thousand of another kind. Prayaga has the presence .
all these tirthas and so it is considered as the best 01 @
tirthas. Here is the Bhogavatitirtha of Vasuki and the tirtha
called Harmsaprapatana. If one bathes in the po?
there for three days together one would get the cred}
of giving as charity a crore of cows. The three imp”
tant places are the Gangadvara, Prayaga and Ganga
sagarasangama. Chapter 211, Agni Purana).
PRAYASCITTA. In ancient Bharata sacred injunctio™’
existed about religious rites to be performed for t :
atonement of sins committed. The following are a 1%
of them. Ho
Murder is that act which ends in loss of life. One W ”
kills a brahmin is a Brahmaghataka, Even if murder ©
actually committed by one man, all those involved eis
a conspiracy for murder are murderers. If death aor
while treating a patient it is no murder. If dea fe
eccurs when you punish your son, disciple or wife it
no sin. If he who has:killed a brahmin or 4 te
commits suicide he will be absolved from his sin. OF of
should go about begging with a skull and the orga? rs
generation of any animal. If he spends twelve yor :
begging eating little and with repentance in his 4
the Brahmaghataka will be absolved of his sin ®
he will become pure. If the murder is done to s¢ 7 “76
purpose of his he should live as a beggar for twe
years but if it is not done to gain any end of his, in
need live only for six years as a beggar. If a braht
attempts to murder another brahmin he should obser de
the above vow for three years. If the attempt 15. me a
by a Ksatriya he should double the period ; if DY is
Vaigya or Sidra, triple the period. Ifa brahmin aie
a Ksatriya he need observe only three fourths of he
prayascitta. If a brahmin kills a Vaigya or a aE :
need observe only aneighth part of the prayas citta. I -
kills a woman he should observe the punishment fix
for killing a Sidra.
Ifa brahmin does ‘gohatya’ (killing a cow) he
practise penance drinking Paficagavya (five produc’® we
the cow taken collectively). He should sleep in 4 oo eye
shed and go about feeding the cow and should als° g a
away cows as gift. If a gohatya is committed by af ee
son of any other caste, he need observe only ¢
fourths of the prayagcitta. Hitting the cows PY ns
piercing their body with nails and cutting the!! ho at
are to be classified under gohatya. If one kills
spould

a
RAYUTA 607
ape oa — dog, or a bird, one should drink milk
aoe wine, date-palm-juice sugar-cane-juice,
ack-palm-juice, tamarind-juice and toddy are intox!-
cants they are not classified under alcoholic liquors
Real liquor or sura is that made from rice flour.
Drinking liquor is prohibited to Brahmins, Ksatriyas
and Vaisyas. If any one of these castes drinks he shoul
drink water after performing penance or live eating
Pippa’ (long pepper )for a year or eat oil cake at night
or a year. If one drinks water in a pot used for taking
liquor one should observe the prayascitta for seven days.
if he drinks water from acandala he should observe the
prayagcitta for six days. If one eats rice from a candala
one should observe Gandrayana. (an expiatory penance
of decreasing and then increasing food according to the
waxing and waning of the moon). If one eats food in
the house of a Sidra during times of distress, one
would be absolved of the sin by repentance alone.
aking another man’s property and appropriating it to
himself is called theft. He who steals gold should be
struck on the head by a wooden pestle by the king and
killed. Alternatively he should live for twelve years
with matted hair, eating one time a day only such
things as leaves, fruits and roots and lying on eagtit fe
who steals diamonds, pearls, corals, copper, silver, iron,
bronze and granite stones should fast for twelve years.
He who enjoys sexual intercourse with his father’s wife,
own sister, daughter of his preceptor or wife of the
preceptor should burn himself in a hot iron pot. Altermela ag seo oun it a red hot iron idol of a
oman and die. (Chapters 183 and 184, Agni Purana).
PRAYUTA. A Devagandharva. He aie ‘born “
Kasyapaprajapati of his wife Muni. (Sloka 43, Chapter
65, Adi Parva).
PREKSAGRHA. A building for staging dramas, and
conducting festivals well-designed and ornamentally
constructed. Dronacarya made the royal architects construct a Preksagrha for exhibiting the skill of the
Pandavas and Kauravas in archery. (Sloka 11, Chapter
133, Adi Parva).
PRETAGRANTHA. A very ancient book of the Egyptians. There ‘are only two books which can claim to be
as old as the Rgveda, the most ancient treasure-book
of mankind. One of them is Pretagrantha which the
English people call the Book of the Dead. The other is
Gilgamish of the Babylonians.
PRITI. _ Wife of sage Pulastya. Priti gota son named
Dattoli of her husband Pulastya, That Dattoli was in
his previous birth the Agastya of Svayambhuva Manvantara. (Chapter 107, Aréa 17, Visnu Purana).
PRIYABHRTYA. An ancient King of Bharata. . (Sloka
236, Chapter 1, Adi Parva).
PRIYADARSANA I. _ A soldier of Subrahmanya. (Sloka
59, Chapter 45, Salya Parva).
PRIYADARSANA II. Ason of the king Drupada. In
the battle that ensued after the marriage of Draupadi,
Karna killed him. (Adi Parva, Mahabharata).
PRIVAKA. A soldier of Subrahmanya. (Sloka 65,
Chapter 45, Salya Parva).
PRIVAMALYANULEPANA. A soldier of Subrahmanya
(Sloka 60, Chapter 45, Salya Parva). .
PRIYAMVADA. A companion of Radhika. This girl
gave all protection and service to Arjuna when the
PRSADHRA I
latter was conducting Jalanusthana taking the form ofa
woman named Arjuni. (Chapter 74, Patala Khanda,
Padma Purana). ~ vy
PRIYAVARCCAS. A nymph of the court of Kubera.
Arjuna saved her when she was lying as a crocodile
due to a curse. (Chapter 1, Skanda Purana).
PRIYAVRATA. ‘The eldest son of Svayambhuva Manu.
He had another son named Uttanapada and three
daughters named Akuti, Devahati and Prasiti. The
daughters were married to Ruci, Kardama and Daksa
respectively. (8th Skandha, Devi Bhagavata) .
Priyavrata married Barhismati daughter of Kardamaprajapati. He got of her two daughters named Samrat
and Kuksi and ten sons named Agnidhra, Agnibahu,
Vapusman, Dyutiman, Medhas, Medhatithi, Bhavya,
Savana, Putra and Jyotisman. Of these Jyotisman was
really possessing jyotis (brilliance). All the . sons,
Medhas, Agnibahi and Putra, were interested in the.
practice of yoga and were aware of their previous births.
Priyavrata disributed seven islands to seven of his sons
as follows :
Jambidvipa to Agnidhra ; Plaksadvipa to Medhatithi;
Sdlmalidvipa to Vapusman ; Kugadvipa to Jyotisman;
Krauficadvipa to Dyutiman ; Sakadvipa to Bhavya ;
and Puskaradvipa to Savana.
Agnidhra had nine sons named Nabhi, Kimpurusa,
Harivarsa, Ilavrta, Ramya, Hiranvan, Kuru, Bhadrasva
and Ketumala. (Chapter 1, Amsa 9, Visnu Purana).
Priyavrata once circled round Meru in his chariot. As
if competing with the Sun Priyavrata started his circling
along with sunrise and ended it at sunset. He did so
seven days making nights look like day and the sun
im and faded. The Sun was dejected and it
appear d
was at the request of the Trimirtis that Priyavrata
stopped his cjrcumambulation. It was the path of Priyayrata’s circling for seven days that later became the seven
oceans of Puranic fame. (Yuddha Kanda, Kamba
Ramayana).
PROSAKA. An ancient p
western Bharata. (Sloka 61,
PROSTHA. An ancient city of Bharata.
Chapter 9, Bhisma Parva).
PRSADASVA. An ancient King who gota dagger from
king Astaka. (Sloka 80. Chapter 166, Santi Parva).
PRSADHRA I. The ninth son of Vaivasvata Manu. He is
described as one of the sacred and virtuous persons to
penance
be remembered during early mornings. He did
at Kuruksetra and attained Svarga. (Sloka 11, Chapter
20, Afvamedha Parva).
Even from boyhood Prsadhr
penance. He got disgusted with life even from his
boyhood. A_ story is told how it happened so. Once
his Guru, a tiger
when Prsadhra was studying under ge
entered the shed of the cows at night. Hearing the pitiable wails of the cow he went to the shed with. his sword
and gave a strong and fatal cut to the uger with it. Unfortunately the stroke fell on the cow instead of the ger
and not knowing the truth in the darkness Prsadhra
went and slept peacefully. In the morning when he
went to the shed he cow lying dead with
his sword-cut. He then knew the mistake he had made
at night and was so distressed with the accident that he
at once left for Kuruksetra and started doing penance
there,
lace of human habitation in
Chapter 9, Bhisma Parva) .
(Sloka 6l,
a started practice of

PRSADHRA II
PRSADHRA II. A son of King Drupada. He was killed
in the great battle by Asvatthama. (Sloka 18, Chapter
156, Drona Parva).
PRSADHRA III. A brahmin boy. One night while he
was living in the 4Srama of his Guru he saw a lion going
out from the premises of the arama with an asrama
cow in its mouth. The brahmin boy rushed at it and
struck the lion with a sword. But due to want of proper
light the sword-cut fell on the cow and the cow fell
down dead. The next day the Guru finding the cow
lying dead mistook it for a deliberate killing by his
disciple and cursed Prsadhra to death. to be born as
a Sidra. When Prsadhra was thus roaming about in
the forests in his cursed form he fell into a big forest
fire and was burnt to death. (Chapter 2, Srsti Khanda,
Padma. Purana; Chapter 1, Amsa 4, Visnu Purana).
PRSATA. A king of Paficala. He was the father of Drupada and a friend of the sage Bharadvaja. It was from
Prsata that Paficali, daughter of Drupada, got the name
Parsati. (Sloka 41, Chapter 129, Adi Parva).
PRSATASVA. A King of the Siryavarnga ‘(solar dynasty). He was called Viraipa also. Himself, Ketuman
and Sambhu were the sons of king Ambarisa. (9th
Skandha, Bhagavata).
PRSNI I. Wife of the Prajapati named Sutapas. (See
under Aditi).
PRSNI II. An anciént sage. He approached Drona
during the Kurupandava battle and commanded him
to stop the battle. (Sloka 34, Chapter 190, Drona
Parva). He attained svarga by the power of his penance.
(Chapter 26, Santi Parva).
PRSNIGARBHA. A name of Mahiavisnu. There are
two opinions in the Puranas regarding how Visnu got
this name. —
1) In the early part of the period of Svayambhuva
Manu the Prajapati named Sutapas and his wife Préni
did penance for twelve thousand divine years to get
Visnu as their son. As a result of that Visnu was born
in the womb of Préni as Prénigarbha. The name was
suited for Sri Krsna the incarnation of Visnu also.
(Chapter 3, 10th Skandha, Bhagavata).
2) Anna (rice), Veda, Jala (water) and amrta (nectar)
are called Préni and so Mahavisnu (Krsna) who bears
these inside is called Prénigarbha. (Sloka’ 45, Chapter
342, Santi Parva).
PRTANA. The name of a division of the army. (See
under Aksauhini).
PRTHA. See under Kunti.
PRTHASVA. An ancient king who worships Yama.(Sloka
19, Chapter 9, Sabha Parva),
PRTHU I. (VAINYA). A King of great virtue born in
the line of Dhruva. )
1) Genealogy. Descending in order from Visnu—
Brahma—Svayambhuva Manu—Uttanapada—Dhruva
Sisti—Ripu—Caksusa Manu—Kuru—Anga—Vena—
Prthu. :
Manu, son of Caksusa, got of his wife Nadvala eleven
sons Puru, Kuru, Puru, Satadyumna, Tapasvi, Satyavak, Suci, Agnistu, Atiratha, Sudyumna = and
Abhimanyu. Of these the second son Kuru got of his
wife Atreyi seven sons named Anga, Sumanas, Svati
Kratu, Angiras, Gaya and Sibi. Anga married Sunitha.
She delivered a very wicked son named Vena. Prthu
was born to Vena. Prthu got six sons named Antardhana, Vadi, Sita, Magadha, Palita and Vijitasva,
PRTHU I
2) Birth and Coronation. Sunitha, wife of Anga, was
the eldest daughter of Yama. Vena was born of her.
Vena, the grandson of Yama, because of hereditary
traits from his grandfather, was very wicked even from
birth. When Vena was crowned king by the mahars!s
and he became the supreme lord of the world he announced to the world thus: ‘‘Yagas should not be performed; gifts should not be given; no kind of homa
should be done. There is nobody but me to accept 4s
Yajiiapurusa the share of yajfias. I am the sole lord and
consumer. of yajfias.”’
The sages were dumbfounded. They all approached
Vena and impressed upon him the necessity of performing a Yaga to propitiate Mahavisnu. Vena who got
angry at this request of the sages told them thus :
‘“‘There is nobody greater than I and I have none to ae
worshipped. Who is Hari, your Yajfiegvara ? (lord o
the yaga). All such great powers who can bless an
curse alike and such eminent deities and entitles like
Brahma, Visnu, Siva, Indra, Vayu, Yama, Varula,
Sarya, Agni, Dhata, Pisa, Bhami and Candra are
merged in me, the king. Do understand this fact an
obey my orders.” . _
Despite repeated requests Vena did not give permission
to conduct a Vaisnava yajiia. The sages got angry an
cried aloud “‘Killh this wicked man’’, ‘‘Kill this wicke j
man’’. Saying thus the sages killed Vena by Kusa 8 a
- made sacred and powerful by mantras—Vena, who W4
spiritually dead because of ‘his contempt of the goa°
even before. Then the sages saw dust rising i column
from all sides and asked the people the cause of t .
same. The people said ‘“‘When they knew that there a
no king poor people have turned themselves into 108.
and are plundering the wealth of the rich. The sw
movements of these running in haste are raising dus
from the ground below.”
The rsis conferred together and to get a son hee!
the dead Vena they churned the thigh of the wit ole
king. Then from the thigh came out a short and Pee
(as black as a burnt pillar) man witha compressed ¢h
who stood before the sages in distress and asked ~~ W ‘eit
am I to do?” The sages said ‘Nisida’ meaning te
down’.. He thus became Nisada (an illiterate ae d
dweller). He went to the mountain of Vindhya ne
along with him went all the sins of Vena. Nisadas ape
after are said to be those who have destroyed the §?
of Vena.
Then the sages churned the right hand of Vena and
from it came out a brilliant boy of great strengt His
power and he was named Prthu. At the time of ‘a
birth there dropped from heaven the divine bow J f
gava and many powerful arrows and a. divine armor.
All animate objects of the world were happy at his esse
Vena attained svarga for having delivered such a bY?
ant son. For the coronation of Prthu the oceans br oug -
very many precious diamonds and the rivers holy war
Brahma along with Angirases came and crowned. Pr nis
as the emperor. Brahma saw the line of Candra_ 1 he
right hand and was, therefore, pleased to know that }-
was part of Mahavisnu. Thus Prthu, valiant and br? le
lant, was crowned their emperor by the virtuous peoP
of Bharata.
He united his people by his love for them. Wher ;
travelled through the ocean the water stood still 4

J
PRTHU I
when he travelled on land the mountains gave way and
his flag-pole was never obstructed anywhere. |
3) Séata-Magadhas. Brahma performed a yaga as soon
as Prthu was born. From that yaga was born a very
wise and intelligent demon named Sita. A scholarly
Magadha also was born from the yaga. The. maharsis
commanded the Siita-Magadhas to praise Prthu and
they then said ‘‘Oh revered sages, we do not know
anything good or bad about this kingjust born. He
has not earned a nameor fame. Thenon what basis
are we to sing praises about him??? The maharsis said
that they should praise him for the qualities he should
have in future. Prthu heard that and feeling elated
decided to become a very virtuous emperor. When
Prthu was thinking like that the Sita-Magadhas sang
in melodious tones thus: “This king speaks the truth
always, is charitable, is one who keeps his promises,
is valiant and full of all good qualities.” ‘Thus with the
blessings and good wishes of all, Prthu started his reign.
4) Prthu attacks the Earth. The people were hungry
for want of proper food crops. They approached Prthu
and told him that during the short interval between
Vena’s death and Prthu’s assuming charge the goddess
of earth drew inside all her vegetations and so _ the people were put to great difficulties. They requested him
to generate végetations again.
Prthu got angry on hearing this and taking his bow
Ajagava and several arrows went in search of the goddess of earth. The goddess got frightened and fled taking
the form of a cow. She went to all lokas but Prthu followed her with his bow and arrows everywhere. At last
desiring to escape from the arrows of such a valiant
king Bhimidevi went to him and trembling with fear said
“Oh king, why do you make such a persistent attempt,
to kill me which would be the great sin of Strivadha ?
(killing a woman).’? The Raja replied that: there was
no sin in killing wicked persons. The goddess asked
what refuge was there for the people if the earth was
destroyed. The king said that he would protect his
people by the power of his yoga. Bhimidevi was frightened and she said ‘“‘Oh king, I shall give you back all
‘I have destroyed in the form of milk. Therefore, virtuous as you are, if you are really interested in the welfare of the people I shall allow you to milk me and
take back everything you want. Do bring a calf.
5) Prthu milks the Earth. Prthu by the end of his bow
put in arrangement at one place the thousands of
mountains which were lying scattered over the country.
The grounds were not even and so there were formerly
no divisions into villages and towns. There were no
grain-plants like paddy or wheat, no agriculture, ae
cow-protection and no trade. It was sinc’ the time 0
Prthu that all these came into being. People eh
to live in places where the grounds were oo ee
the people lived on fruits, leaves and roots. en they
were all destroyed people found it difficult to live.
Therefore. Prthu making Svayambhuva Manu as ca
i . le all plants from the
milked for the welfare of his peop 5" ae Be wate
earth. People do live even today by | | make
then. Peak because he gave life to Bhumidevi,
became her father and she got the name Prthvi. |
the cow of earth again.
The brahmin sages milked th a
Then Agastya eee the calf and nee os
When the planets milked, Candra became the ¢
PRTHU I
again Brhaspati milked. The devas even now feed on
the Urjjaksira (milk rich in food value) they got then.
All the animals live because of their virtue and truth,
The rsis milked truth and virtue. The manes made
Yama the calf and Antaka the milker. They milked
Svadha in a silver pot. The cobras and serpents
making Taksaka the calf milked poison making
Dhrtarastra the milker. They live by their poison
which is their great defence also. The daityas and
danavas.using Virocana as calf and making the twoheaded Rtvik Madhu as the milker milked jointly
courage, valour and the sarvaSatruvinasini maya
(maya, the destroyer of all enemies). They milked in
an iron pot. All their knowledge, bodily health,
strength, vigour, brilliance and valour are made from
this and that is why they are adepts in the art of
maya even now.
Yaksas milked in an iron pot milk that disappeared
from the earth. Rajatanabha milked using Vaisravana
as calf. That Yaksarajaputra was sarvajiia (knowing
all) and Sarvadharmajfia (conversant with all charitable
‘th two heads and eight hands. The raksasas,
things) wi :
pisacas and wicked maruts using Rajatanabha as milker
and Sumali as'the calf milked blood in a pot made of a
skull. They live on this.
The Gandharvas and nymphs using lotus as their pot,
Suruci as milker and Citraratha as calf milked music
from her. The mountains making Mahameru as milker
and Himalayas as the calf milked diamonds and
medicines. The sacred trees made Sala the milker and
plaksa the calf and milked in a pot of palasa Chinnadagdhaprarohana (the power of growing again even
if cut or burnt). The siddhaguhyakacaranavidyadharas
also milked her each using different pots, calves and
milkers and they all got what they wanted.
6). Asvamedha. rthu’s land became rich. and
prosperous. ‘Then he performed an Asvamedha. The
Yaga horse was led by Vijitasva, son of Prthu. Indra
did not like Prthu conducting the yaga. Indra hid at
a place on the path of the yaga horse. The sage Atri
helped Indra. Indra bound the horse and a fight
ensued between Indra and Vijitasva in which Indra
was deplorably defeated and confessing his guilt he
craved for pardon and Prthu granting him pardon
became his great friend. (4th Skandha, Bhagavata).
7) Prthu’s rule. In the history of Bharata the period
of Prthu’s rule is considered a golden period. When
Prthu became the emperor, Brahma divided the universe into several kingdoms and made a separate ruler
for each of them. Soma was appointed King of the
stars, planets, brahmins, plants, yagas and austerities.
He appointed Kubera as the lord of Kings, Varuna as
the lord of all waters, Visnu, as the lord of all adityas
and Pavaka as the lord of all Vasus. Daksa was given
lordship over prajapatis, Indra over maruts, and
Prahlada over all daityas and danavas. Yama, the
Dharmaraja was made lord of the manes. Airavata
was made King of all elephants and Garuda King of
all birds. Uccaissravas was made King of all horses
and Vrsabha of all cattle. The lion was made King of
all beasts and Himavan the lord of all immovable
things. Kapila became chief of all sages and the tiger
the leader of all beasts with nails and snouts, Plaksa
was made the King of all trees.
After distributing kingdoms thus, Brahma appointed

‘PRTHU I
Dikpalakas (guardians of the zones). In the east he
posted Sudhanva, son of Vairajaprajapati, in the
‘south he posted Sankhapada son of Kardamaprajapati,
‘in the west he put Ketuman, son of Rajas and in the
north Hiranyaroma. ‘Thus Brahma organised a
- universe with suitable emperors to control and supervise. (Chapter 22, Arnéa 1, Visnu Purana).
8) The endof Prthu. After several years of benign
rule Prthu became old. He then entrusted the affairs
of the state to hisson Vijitasva and left for penance
with his wife Arccis. After doing severe penance for
a long time he merged with Parabrahman. Arccis who
was all along serving her husband with devotion
~ ended her life by jumping into the funeral pyre of her
‘husband following her husband like Laksmi following
Visnu.
9) Prihu’s sons. Prthu had five sons named Vijitasva,
Haryaksa, Dhimrakega, Vrka and. Dravina.
The eldest of these Vijitasva, with the help of his
brothers ruled the country. Haryaksa ruled over the
east, Dhimrakega over the south, Vrka, west and
Dravina, north. (Padma Purana).
PRTHU II. A virtuous brahmin of good conduct.
Once when Prthu was travelling he met five ugly
devils. They became devils for their sins of not doing
any charity and behaving rudely with beggars. Prthu
gave them advice on ahara (food), acara (conduct)
and vrata (vow) so that they might get salvation from
their devil-lives. (Chapter 27, Srsti Khanda, Padma
Purana).
PRTHUDAKA. A sacred pond on the borders of
Kuruksetra. ‘This is one of the celebrated tirthas of
Bharata. He who bathes in this pond would get the
benefit of doing an asvamedha. (Chapter 83, Vana
Parva; Chapter 39, Salya Parva).
PRTHUDARA. A celebrated Yaksa. This Yaksa got a
daughter named Saudamini. Her father took her to
different mountains to entertain her. One day while
she was playing with ,her companion Kapisabhrii she
met a Yaksaputra named Attahasa. They fell in love
and Saudamini’s father agreed to their marriage and
fixed it. After fixing the marriage Prthidara took his
daughter to his house. Next day her companion Kapi-
§abhra came to Saudamini in a sorrowful mood and
when she asked her the reason she said “Friend, how
am I to report to you this sad news. On my way to you
I passed through a garden named Citrasthala in the
valley of the Himalayas. To have some sport with the |
love-stricken Attahasa his friends staged a drama in
which Attahasa was made Vaisravanaraja and his brother
‘ Diptasikha, Nalakubara, and the rest, his ministers.
They were thus acting and enjoying when Nalakibara
himself came that way and seeing his servant
Attahasa in the robes and form of his father was
angry and calling Attahasa ‘to his side said: “A servant
like you is ambitious of becoming a king. Let this ambition be the cause of your downfall. You will be born
as man.’? Attahasa was shocked and he craved pardon
“Oh Lord, I did this only for some entertainment. I did
not do it with any desire for a big position. Pardon
me for my mistake. Nalakibara then by his divine
power understood everything and taking pity on him
consoled him and said “She with whom you are in love
will be your wife in your life as man. Your brother
610 PRTHVIRUPA
Diptagikha will then be born as your son. Both of
you will then be released from the curse. Diptasikha
after ruling the country for some time will also be free
from this curse.” Attahdsa and Diptasikha soon disappeared by the power of the curse. _
Attahasa was born as king of Trigartta in the name of
Pavitradhara and Saudamini became his wife. A son
was born to them named Diptagikha and as soon as he
was born the parents were released from the curse an
entered heaven. (Sagankavatilambaka, Kathasarit
sagara, Taranga 6).
PRTHUDARBHA. A king of the race of Anga. (Chapter 277, Agni Purana). —
PRTHUGRIVA. When Rama and Laksmana were
staying in Paficavati a demoness named Sarpanakha
made approaches to them and Laksmana cut off her
limbs and sent her away. Then a raksasa army came
under the leadership of Khara, Disana and Trisiras 4?
Prthugriva was one of the twelve prominent soldiers ©
that army.
(Sarga 26, Aranya Kanda Valmiki Ramayana).
PRTHUKA. A devagana of Raivata Manvantara.
PRTHULAKSA. A King born of the race of Anga. This
king lived in the court of Yama and worshipped him.
(Sloka 22, Chapter 8, Sabha Parva). He
PRTHULASVA. A king of the race of Iksvaku.
was the son of Prthu and father of Adra. (Chapte® »
Brahmanda Purana). | és
PRTHURASMI. One of those who are named “Yalt|
The Yatis were a people of anti-yajfia feelings
were all burnt to death in Indra’s fire of wrath. a
three yatis, Brhadgiri, Rayovaja and Prthurasm1 we
taken care of by Indra and Indra taught them Bra me
vidya, Ksatriyavidya and Vais yavidya, -
Prthuragmi compelled Indra to grant him Ksatratey
also along with Ksatravidya. There is now a sama €V
in the name of-Prthuragmi. ( Pafica-virnga-Brahmane
PRTHUSENA. A King of ancient Bharata.
Skandha, Bhagavata). ara
PRTHUSRAVAS I. A King of Rgveda times. mea
killed the enemies of this King. (Sakta 116, Anuv@
17, Mandala 1, Reveda). ing
PRTHUSRAVAS Il. Father of Kama, wife of “
Ayutanayi. He lived in the court of Yama. (Sloka **
Chapter 8, Sabha Parva). ; ho
PRTHUSRAVAS III. A sage of ancient Bharata “06
was- a friend of Yudhisthira. (Sloka 22, Ghaptet “”’
Vana Parva).
PRTHUSRAVAS IV. A
(Chapter 46, Salya Parva). t
PRTUSRAVAS V. A serpent. This serpent was prese?
at Prabhasatirtha to carry the soul of Balabhadraram*
to Patala (Sloka 15, Chapter 4, Mausala Parva)- a
PRTHUVASTRA. A female attendant of Subrahmany
(Chapter 46, Salya Parva), 9
PRTHUVEGA. A King of the court of Yama. (Sloka 145
Chapter 8, Sabha Parva). ted
PRTHVIRUPA. A beautiful king of a country cal ie
Pratisthana. Once three wise yogins came to him id.
said “Oh King, we have travelled round the wor
There is a princess in Muktidvipa called Rapalat-, g
beauty she will be a good match for you.” On hear”!
this Pr thviriipa calling the court artist Kumiaradatt@,
his side said **Paint a picture of mine and gO along
soldier of Subrahmany®

PRTHVITIRTHA
these three sannydsins to Muktidvipa and give the
painting in private to the princess there and also bring
me an exact painting of hers.”
The painter went to Muktidvipa and the King coming
to know of the talents of the artist Kumaradatta commissioned him to paint a picture of his daughter
Ripalata. He did the work beautifully, The King was
immensely pleased and he enquired if Kumaradatta
had seen a suitable prince for Rupalata, Kumaradatta
immediately showed him the portrait of Prthviripa.
The king found the prince extremely suitable and entrusted the artist himself with the task of negotiating the
marriage with Prthviripa. Kumaradatta returned to
his King with the portrait of Riipalata and Prthviripa
was infatuated with the dazzling beauty of Rupalata.
Before long the marriage of Prthvirupa with Ripalata
was conducted in all grandeur. ( Alankaravatilambaka,
Kathasaritsagara, Taranga 1).
PRTHVITIRTHA. A sacred pond on the borders of
Kuruksetra. He who bathes in this pond would get
the benefit of doing a sahasragodana (giving away as
gift a thousand cows). (Sloka 13, Chapter 83, Vana
Parva).
PUCCHANDAKA. A serpent of the family of Taksaka.
This serpent was burnt to death at the Sarpasatra of
Janamejaya. (Sloka 8, Chapter 97, Adi Parva).
PUJANI. A bird of superior intellect. The story of
Pijani was told by Bhisma to illustrate that Ksatriyas
can never be believed.
There was once a king call
try of Kampilya. The King
Piijani was very intelligent
ed Brahmadatta in the counhad a bird named Pujani.
and all-knowing and the king
treated her as his friend. Days went by and one day ac
queen delivered a son. At the same time Pajani also
got a child. The prince and the little bird grew up as
great friends. The little bird used to bring to the Ps
whatever eatable it could take in its little beak. They live
as such thick chums. .
One day while Piajani was away from the cage ate
prince caught hold of the little bird and Aiae eye
to death, When Pajani came back she oe ‘ er aHly
missing and went about crying loudly: ade and
what had happened and got vely at bade farewell
pricked blind the eyes of the prince an a ote
to the King. The parting Scell pi hig ‘believed
Piijani declared that Ksatriyas, were So" 1 D°
and flew away. (Chapter 139, Santi aide states: the
PUJAVIDHI. Chapter te ibe Micke daily
various acts of worship that show «i ved by all
nd they are the acts of worship 9 Hy y
brahmacarins during the time of eee our eXYou should rise up at Brahmamuhirta. 11 Y
time and
Te “8 ‘no north during day
cretory routine sitting he tne If it is at dusk or dawn
facing south during nigh ; It should never
it should be done as during 44Y oF grass. Wash with
be done in public roads, see Brash your teeth.
sand after your excretions a0
ix kinds : NityaAfter that take your bath. Baths a of arshE
snana, Naimittikasnana, Kamyasnan 4 Any religious act
Malakarsanasnana and herefore you should
done without a bath is of no Wir b thing, water from
bathe early, Well-water is good it Ve :; much better,
a fountain is. better, water of fics
r of a tirtha
river-water is still better and wate
PUJAVIDHI
7 still better. The water of the river Ganga is the
est. | if tel
After washing after excretions you should enter into
the waters and wash again and then wash your body.
While washing you should recite the following mantras
‘‘Hiranyavarnah, Sanno devih, 4pohi stha and idamApah.” You should submerge yourself in the waters and
recite the mantras there under the water. You should
also recite Aghamarsana sukta or the Rk named
Drupada. Gayatri should be chanted specially. After
the Japa you should rub. dry with a cloth your head
and body and then offer water to the devas and manes.
Then you should worship with water reciting Purusasikta.
You should give way to anybody carrying a load, a
pregnant woman and preceptors. Never look at the
Sun at the time of rising or setting. Never look at- the
reflection of the moon in waters. Never look at a nude
woman. Do not peep into a well. Never trample over
clothes and sacred ashes. Never enter the bedroom or
the treasure room of another man. Those who rub mud
blocks against mud block, cut their teeth or bite their
nails will perish. Never enter a house through any
other opening than its proper gate. Never interrupt
when others are talking. Never use the clothes of another man. Tell everybody ‘Bhadram’ ‘Bhadram’ (well
well). Never speak to displease anybody. Never walk
on the shadow of an individual. Do not pass through
the space between two respectable persons sitting and
talking. Do not look at falling stars. Never mention
the name of another river while in ariver. Do not
scratch your body with both your hands. Never cross a
river before offering water to the devas and manes. Do
not throw your excretions into the waters. Never
bathe naked. After bath you should pray to gods for
your welfare. Never take out a garland from your body
by yourself. Avoid dust from the hooves of donkeys
sticking to your body. Never laugh at low-caste people,
nor live with them nor live in their places. Never live
in a place where there are no rivers, doctors or a king.
Nor live in a place ruled by barbarous people ora
woman or by a number. of people together. Never
talk: with women during their period of menses. If-you
have talked with them think of Visnu. Never laugh,
sneeze or yawn without covering your mouth. Wise
man should hide the disgrace to one superior to himself and protect the words of the superior or his own.
Never encourage too much activity of the senses nor
should you check the pressure of excretions. Do not
belittle even the smallest of ailments or the smallest of
enemies. If you walk through public roads you should
wash yourself. Never walk bearing water or fire. Do
not hiss in ‘the presence of respectable and virtuous
people. Do not place one leg over the other leg. Never
speak directly or indirectly things which are unpleasant
to others. Avoid contempt of Vedas, Kings, sages,
science and devas. Do not be jealous of women nor do
place confidence in them. Always listen to virtuous talks,
be devoted to the gods and observe righteous acts daily.
On your birthday worship the moon, gods and brahmins.
Never take an oil bath on the fourth (caturthi), sixth
(sasthi) and eighth (astami) days of lunar fortnight.
Throw away your excretions far away from home.
Never be unfriendly with venerable and noble
people.
Sen —:nn—_'”CS”SC

PULAHA 612 PULASTYA
PULAHA. One of the Prajapatis. The references about Havirbhii alias Manini. Visgravas had two wives named
him in the Puranas are the following :
(1) Pulaha was one of the spiritual sons of Brahma.
(Sloka 12, Chapter 204, Vana Parva).
(2) Ksama, wife of Pulaha, delivered three sons named
Kardama, Urvarivan and Sahisnu. (Chapter 10, Améa 1,
Visnu Purana).
(3) Pulaha got of his wife Ksama another son named
Karmasrestha. (Chapter 20, Agni Purana).
(4) Pulaha is included in the group of six powerful
sages. (Sloka 4, Chapter 66, Adi Parva).
(5) From Pulaha were born the butterflies, lions, tigers,
lambs, wolves and Kimpurusas. (Sloka 3, Chapter 66,
Adi Parva).
(6) Pulaha took part in the Janmotsava of Arjuna.
(Sloka 52, Chapter 122, Adi Parva).
(7) Pulaha was also among the sages who dissuaded
Parasara from conducting a yaga to kill all the raksasas.
(Sloka 9, Chapter 180, Adi Parva).
(8) Pulaha was a member of the court of Indra. (Sloka
17, Chapter 7, Sabha Parva).
(9) Pulaha was a worshipper of Brahma. (Sloka 18,
(Chapter 11, Sabha Parva).
(10) Pulaha did penance at a place on the shores of
Alakananda, a tributary of river Ganga. (Sloka 6,
Chapter 142, Vana Parva). )
(11) He took part in the Janmotsava of Subrahmanya.
(Sloka 9, Chapter 45, Salya Parva).
(12) Pulaha is included in the twenty one Prajapatis.
(Sloka 35, Chapter 334, Santi Parva).
(13) Pulaha is one among the group of Saptarsis
called Citragikhandins. (Sloka 29, Chapter 335, Santi
Parva).
(14) Pulaha is also one of the Astaprakrtis. (Chapter
340, Santi Parva).
PULAKA,. A daitya who was transformed into an animal.
There is a story in the Skanda Purana about him thus —
Pulaka performed penance and got from Siva a boon
that he should possess astonishing smell in his body. The
demon used to entice even celestial ladies by means of
his smell. He thus became a menace to the three
worlds. Devas complained to Siva. Siva got angry
and commanded him to abandon his demoniac form
and become an animal. Pulaka agreed to do so but
requested Siva to grant him the smell even in his state
of an animal. Siva granted that.
PULASTYA. One of the Prajapatis.
1) Birth and marriage. Pulastya is one of the six spiritual sons of Brahma. Pulastya was born from the
Karna—ear—of Brahma. (Chapter 65, Adi Parva and
Bhagavata). | |
Pulastya had a son named Dattoli (Dambholi) of his
wife Priti. This Dattofi in his previous birth was the
Agastya of Svayambhuva Manvantara. (Chapter 10,
Arméa 1, Visnu Purana). :
Pulastya had a son named Visravas of his wife Havirbhi. (4th Skandha, Bhagavata) . Mahabharata states that
Pulastya had two wives named Sandhya and Pratici.
Havirbha mother of Visravas had another name,
ai aes statements taken together indicate that Pulastya had four wives named Priti, Havirbhi, Sandhya
ratici. 2 ed
~. oie The race formed by Pulastya is given
below : Pulastya got a son named Visravas of his wife
Kaikasi and Devavarnini alias Ilabila. Kaikasi had
three sons, Ravana, Kumbhakarna, and Vibhisana and
a daughter named Sirpanakha. Ravana got of his
wife Mandodari three sons, Meghanada, Atikaya and
Aksakumara. Kumbhakarna got of his wife Vajramala two sons named Kumbha and Nikumbha. Vibhisana got of his wife Sarama seven sons. Visravas got
of his wife Ilabila a son named Vaigravana alias Kubera.
3) Birth af Visravas. In olden times in Tretayuga
Pulastya Maharsi was doing penance on Mt. Meru. On
a nearby hillock the sage Trnabindu was also doing
penance. Celestial maidens, Naga maidens and their
lovers came to the Agrama and by their erotic sports
and dances vitiated the precincts of the 4grama.Pulasty4
got angry and cursed all the maidens to become pres"
nant if they entered the agrama area. Without know"
ing this curse M4nini, daughter of Trnabindu came 1
that spot and got pregnant of Pulastya. Pulastya the?
married her and the celebrated Maharsi Visravas’ w4°
born to her.
4) How he saved Ravana. Once Ravana who started 0?
a victory campaign met Kartaviryarjuna on the shores
of Narmada. Kartaviryarjuna chained Ravana 10 the
former’s prison. Pulastya was grieved much to heat
about the plight of his grandson and going to Karle
viryarjuna and explaining things got the release ©
Ravana. (Chapter 46, Brahmanda Purana).
5) Other details. ‘a
(i) Pulastya once blessed Paragara for the writit
Puranas. (Chapter 1, Amga 1, Visnu Purana) . h-
(ii) Raksasas, Vanaras (monkeys), Kinnaras, Gand é
arvas and Yaksas were born from the intellige”
Pulastya. (Sloka 7, Chapter 66, Adi Parva).
(iii) He was present for the Janmotsava of Arju?*®
(Sloka 52, Chapter 122, Adi Parva). i
(iv) Paragara once started to perform a Yaga to po
roy all the raksasas. Pulastya along with other 548
went and persuaded him to withdraw from his venture
(Chapter 180, Adi Parva). L
(v) Pulastya was a member of the court of Indra
(Sloka 17, Chapter 7, Sabha Parva). we
(vi) Pulastya sits in the court of Brahma and worship
him. (Sloka 19, Chapter 11, Adi Parva). d
(vii) Once Pulastya taught Bhisma the importance ee
greatness of all the holy places of Bharata. h
g of
From the
onwards Pulastya is called the Guru of Bhism@ aise:
(Chapter 82, Vana Parva). d
(viii) Pulastya got of his wife Gau'a son name
Kubera. (Sloka 12, Chapter 274, Vana Parva) ;.
(ix) Visravas was born of half of the body of P ulasty*
(Chapter 274, Sloka 13. Adi Parva). ‘5
(x) Pulastya was present for the birth day celebratio”
of Subrahmanya. (Sloka 9, Chapter 45, Salya Parva) - f
(xi) Pulastya also visited Bhisma lying on his be ‘
arrows. (Sloka 10, Chapter 47, Santi Parva).
(xl) Pulastya was one among the twentyone PrajaP
(See under Prajapati) +
(xiti) Pulastya is included in the group of Saptat®);
called Citragikhandins. (Sloka 29 Chapter 339, san
Parva). f
(xiv) Pulastya is o Chapt ©
0, Sanu et. ne of the Astaprakrtis. ( (
*v) “As synonyms of Pulastya the following terms @
used: Brahmarsi, Viprayogi. (Mahabharata).
atis:

PULINDA (8) I 613
PULINDA(S) I. The people of the country of Pulinda.
Information available regarding them from the Mahabharata is given below :
(1) Pulindas were originally Ksatriyas. But they became Siidras by a curse of the brahmins. (Chapter 33,
Anusasana Parva).
(2) Pulindas who belong to the mleccha tribe became
rulers in Kaliyuga. (Chapter 186, Vana Parva).
(3) Pulindas were born from the foam of the celestial
cow Nandini of sage Vasistha® when she got enraged.
(Chapter 165, ASramavasika Parva).
(4) Bhima fought against the Pulindas and destroyed .
all their big cities. (Chapter 26, Sabha Parva).
(5) In the great Mahabharata battle Pulindas fought
on the side of Duryodhana. (Chapter 158, Udyoga
Parva).
PULINDA(S) II. A mleccha tribe of ancient Daksinabharata, The Vamana Purana gives some details regarding them. .
PULINDI. See under Candaka.
PULKASA. A son born to a Ksatriya woman of a Sadra
is called Pulkasa. (See under Caturvarnya).
PULOMA I. A demon. This asura belongs to the asura
race born to Kagyapa of Diti. This asura fell in love
with Pulomi, wife of the sage Bhrgu. (See under Cyavana). Sacidevi, wife of Indra, was the daughter of
Puloman. (Chapter 19, Agni Purana).
PULOMA II. (PULOM1I). Wife of the sage Bhrgu. (See
under Cyavana for details).
PULOMA III. A demoness. Her sons are called Paulomas. This Puloma had a sister named Kalaka. Both
of them together did severe penance and pleased Brahma.
They got a boon from Brahma to the effect that their
sons would ‘never be killed.” The’ Paulomas were Sivey
a golden city in the air to live and he declared that that
city could never be destroyed by anyone. (Chapter 175,
Vana Parva). '
PUM, PUT, PUTRA. Pum alias Put 1s a hell. Those
who die without children go to this hell ane he who
saves one from this hell is called Putra. (Sloka 38,
Chapter 74, Adi Parva).
Purnnamno narakadyastu
Trayate pitaram sutah /
Tasmat putra iti proktah seueamn
) vayam .
Bs slo 138, Chapter 9, Manusmrt!).
(Because a son of his own, by birth, saves a father from
the hell called ‘Put’ he is called Putra) Le iadiie)
There are twelve different kinds of oe i ae a a
1) Aurasaputra. A son born to a wife of fis rae
Sayin eer et ‘ aU aed cerldeen ‘or is
2 ak one dies” Ween pens
eSkeC oe named of a disease, his ee cg
allowed to lie with the brother of the husban Bred
child. The son born of such @ union
3) Dattaputra. When one is worrying, mise TD ite a3
base dae by mutual consent
ting a son an
. them
in son born to
gly hand over a - «This son becomes your own
with the following words ° ing of water, Ba
from now’? with a religtou
son is called Dattaputra. 6
| ; rom O
4) Krtrimaputra. A son 4 a jal cere
for the purpose of doing the obseq |
the manes ig called Krtrimapue?
K setrajaputra.
S sprinkl
ne’s own caste
monies for
PUNARJANMA
5) Gidhotpanna. A son born to one’s wife by another
man is called Gidhotpanna.
6) Apaviddhaputra. When a son is rejected by eithera
father or mother or by both and that son is taken care
of and brought up by another man, that son becomes
an apaviddhaputra.
7) Kaninaputra. If a son is born to a virgin before
marriage while living with her father, that son is called
a Kaninaputra.
8) Sahodhapuira. When a girl is married while pregnant the son born to her after marriage is called a
Sahodhaputra.
9) Kritakaputra. A son purchased and brought up by
a sonless man is called Kritakaputra.
10) Paunarbhavaputra. A son born to a woman after
becoming a widow or after being divorced by her
- husband by her willingly going with another man is
called a Paunarbhavaputra.
11) Svayamdattaputra. When a son after becoming an
orphan or after being abandoned by his parents goes
willingly to another man and remains with him as
his son, that son 1s called Svayamdattaputra.
12) Saudra (Paragava) Putra. A son born to a brahmin
of a Sadra wife.
PUNARJANMA. It is the theory that the soul of a man
is born again after his death. The Puranas and Vedas
contain many statements regarding this of which the
following are a few :
1) What 2s Death? When the Jivatma (soul) of an
sndividual leaves his body with all its upadhis (attributes and adjuncts) it is called Death. By upadhis are
meant the folllowing four things. (i) Mind and thesenses.
(ii)The five Pranas namely Prana, Apana, Udana, Vyana
and Samana. (iii) The Stksma¢arira, that is, the Pranamanovijfianako, asanghata (the subtle body that is invisible with the grosser elements). (iv) Karman (action).
All these four things follow the soul even after his death.
Only when the soul attains _moksa (salvation) do the
upadhis leave it. It is the life breath Udana that guides
the soul out of the body. It is the Suksmasarira that
gives. heat to the body while there is life and that is.
why when the soul leaves the body with the upadhis the
body becomes cold.
2) After death. When the soul leaves the body with the
upadhis it becomes active again and its activities and
movements depend upon the actions of the soul while
living. The spiritual actions of the individual are
classified into three.
(i) Aparabrahmopasana. He who has done all his deeds
according to scriptural injunctions is said to be one who
has done upasana of aparabrahma. When such an
individual dies his soul with all the upadhis attains
Candra. He goes to Candra through dhima (smoke) ,
ratri (night), Krsnapaksa (the dark fortnight), daksinayanakala (the sun’s passage south of the equator ),
pitrloka (world of the manes) and Akaga (ether). He
enjoys the rewards of the deeds done on earth there
and reserving some to be enjoyed or suffered in his
next birth the soul with the upadhis comes back to
earth to enter another body. The soul comes back to
earth through ether, vayu, dhima, megha, varsa, vrihi,
yava, ausadhi, vrksa, Tila, Purusabija and strigarbha.
When the Jivatma goes to Candra its padarthatva
(attribute) diminishes gradually and when it comes back
to earth it increases gradually. Thus the jivatma takes

PUNARVASU ATKEYA
thousands of births going to and from the moon. The
jivatma coming back from the moon evolves from a
plant toman. Plants are the food of man and the soul
entering the plant enters the purusabija (semen virile)
through food. The souls coming out as rebirths do
accept wombs according to a definite principle. In
the order of the merit of their good deeds on earth
they are born in Brahmin, Ksatriya, Vaigya or Sidra
wombs, lhe souls with great sins are born as worms and
insects. ‘lhis passage of the soul from earth to Candra
and vice versa is called Pitryana.
(11) Aparavidyopdsana. There are some people who do
not consider performance of religious rites as important
but worship Brahman. They do ‘net treat Brahman and
jivatma as one but vicw them’ .as separate entities.
Such devotees are called Aparavidyopasakas. Their souls
as soon as they leave the body move towards aparabrahman. The path to aparabrahma is through Agni,
Jyotis, daytime, Suklapaksa (the white fortnight),
Uttarayana (the passage of the sun to the north) , samvatsara (year), Sarya (sun), Candra (moon) and Vidyut
(lightning). The dhanyas (blessed ones) who attain
Vidyut go to Varunaloka, Indraloka and Prajapatiloka
and then merge with parabrahma’ {the supreme being).
This path is called Devayana. Since for both Pitryana
and Devayana the jivatma has to depend upon Candra
it is to be surmised that there is some special connection
between jivatma and Candra. Those who attain Aparabrahma by the path of devayana do not come back to
earth. They have no rebirths. Those who have merged
with aparabrahma attain Brahman by the end of a lifetime of Brahma. Thus those who attain Brahman and
do not believe that jivatma and Brahman are one
and view them separately attain Parabrahma through
the merger with aparabrahma. This is called Kramamukti. Some sages are of opinion that those who attain
aparabranma enjoy prosperity by mind. Those who
live attached to worldly pleasures but not do things
prohibited by the Vedas attain Pitrloka by the path of
Daksinayana. After enjoying all the accrued ‘punya’
there, they come back again to earth to be born
again.
(iii) Pdpopdsana. The jivatma of one who does not
follow the injunctions of Astras correctly does not
attain Candraloka. It is born again as pests and insects
attaining a place called Trtiya. There is no evidence
in the Puranas of their attaining moksa. How
a soul subjected to rebirths attains moksa is described
under ‘Moksa’. ( Chandogya Upanisad, Gita, Bhagavata, Svetasvatara Upanisad),
PUNARVASU ATREYA. An ancient preceptor of
Ayurveda. He was the Guru of Agnideva author of
the book ‘Agnivesatantra’ which is the basis of Carakasambhita and also of his classmates like Bhela.
Punarvasu was the son of the sage Atri who was one
of the spiritual sons of Brahma. In support of this
statement it can be found in many places in Caraku
samhita his name referred to as ‘Atrisuta’ or Atrinandana’.
Atri maharsi was also a learned preceptor of Ayurved.
According to Kasyapasamhita Devendra taught Ayur
veda to Kagyapa, Vasistha, Atri and Bhrgu. The incomplete work ‘Ayurvedacikitsatantra by Atri was
completed by Punarvasu according to Aésvaghosa.
PUNDARIKAMUKHA
Punurvasu’s mother’s name was Candrabhaga. Gettin8
knowledge in Ayurveda from his father and also from
Bharadvaja, Punarvasu became an authority on yur
veda. His important work is ‘Atreyasamhita’. There are
about thirty prescriptions in his name. The prescriptions
regarding ‘Balataila’? and ‘Amrtaditaila’ are found
Carakasamhita, ;
PUNASCANDRA. A sacred place. This is situated 1n
the Jamadagnivedi in Sirparakaksetra. (Sloka 12,
Chapter 88, Vana Parva). 3
PUNCU. A King of Siryavarbga (solar race). He was
the son of Harita and father of Vijaya. (Brahmanda
Purana, Chapter 1).
PUNDARIKA I, A King korn of the race of Sri Rama.
He was the son of Nisadha and father of Ksemadhanva-
(9th Skandha, Bhagavata),.
PUNDARIKA II. One of the Astadiggajas (elephant
guarding the eight zones). (See under Astadiggajas) -
PUNDARIKA III. A brahmin who lived during
period of Narada. Narada once held a scholarly: co?”
versation with him on virtue. He saw Mahavisnu 1?
person and attained saéyujya (intimate union with @
deity). (Chapter 124, Anug4sana Parva). 5
PUNDARIKA IV. A great yajfia. (Sloka 100, Chapter 9? |
Sabha Parva).
PUNDARIKA V. A holy place situated on the borde!
of Kuruksetra. One who bathes in a sacred po?
there would get the benefit of doing a Puridarikayaj®*
(Sloka 83, Chapter 83, Vana Parva). ) t
PUNDARIKA. VI. Anymph. This maiden was pres
for the Janmotsava of Arjuna and performed a dane’
then. (Sloka 13, Chapter 122, Adi Parva). His
PUNDARIKAMUKHA. An eminent serpent King. ie
subjects, Pundarikamukhas, lived with him ™ aA
beautiful serpent-city surrounded on all sides by 8°
castles. Gandharvas and Kinnaras of both sexes ae
inside the city. A Gandharva of name Lalita fell 3
love with a Gandharva lady named Lalita and ¢ ay
lived there happily enjoying amorous sports. One “i
Pundarikamukha held a music concert in which Lali vé
was asked to sing as the leading musician, His lo’
Lalita was absent at the assembly and Lalita oT
not sing or dance in proper form that day. Karkata .
a serpent chief, privately informed his King the ré4§ ot
for the poor display of Lalita that day. The King aa
angry and cursed Lalita thus : “Wicked one, you ™?
be born as a man-eating raksasa. This is the penalty
for thinking about your wife while singing for me”,
Lalita immediately became an ugly, fierce-lookin’
demon. Lalita deeply mourned over this pitiable pli8?.
of her husband and followed him in the forests Whee
he roamed about making loud roaring sounds. Whi Z
they were thus wandering in the forests, they found
pretty asrama in which there was an ascetic eng28°
i penance, Lalita stood before him with tears rolling
down her cheeks. When the sage opened his © .
Lalita told him that she was the daughter ° b
Gandharva named Viradhanva and that ‘her husba?
had become a demon by th King
; e€ curse of the serpent
Pundarikamukha. The sage advised her 2 observe
ee Vrata. She observed the Vrata with devout
nd he |
: r husband Lalita, was freed from the curse: -
They th the = ae. handsome Gandharva once 28749,
, i¢y then went back to Gandhar: . (Chapter
Bhaga 4, Padma Purana). es

PUNDARIYAKA : 615 PUNTANAM NAMBUTIRI
Pufijikasthala was the dancer at the court of Kubera.
(Chapter 10, Sabha Parva). She took part in the
Janmotsava of Arjuna. (Chapter 122, Adi Parva).
PUNTANAM NAMBUTIRI.
1) General information. The illam (house) of this
PUINDARIYAKA. A Visvadeva. (Chapter 91, Anuéisana Parva).
PUNDRA I. Anancient King in Bharata. (Sloka 224,
Chapter 1, Adi Parva).
PUNDRA II. An ancient region of Bharata. The
_and started living in a
region comprised then the present district of Malada,
certain portions on the east~coast of river Kosi and
certain portions of Dinajpur. King Pandu conquered
Pundra. (Chapter 112, Adi Parva). The people of
Pundra came to the Rajasiya of Yudhisthira with
presents. The Paundrakavasudeva mentioned in the
Bhagavata was the King of Pundra. Karna and
Arjuna conquered this country at different times.
(Chapter 52, Sabha Parva; Chapter 8, Karna Parva;
Chapter 82, ASvamedhika Parva).
PUNJIKASTHALA. A nymph. She. was the servantmaid of Brhaspati. One day she was collecting flowers
for her Guru in a garden when a set of young men
and women came to the garden for amorous sports.
They were roaming about in the garden in pairs doing
all sorts of erotic acts and Pufijikasthala stood watching
them for some time with passion aroused in her. She
returned to the 4grama thinking all the way about her
miserable lot of having no husband to enjoy a similar
life. She was full of lust when she returned to the
Asrama and on seeing Brhaspati she caught hold of him
by the hand and pleaded, to satisfy her passion.
Brhaspati was angry at this improper request and
cursed her “You have become rotten. You have _become lustful by seeing the amorous 5 Of .
May you be born as a monkey. Get out of this 4grama.
Pufijikasthala came to her senses and regretting her
hasty act begged her Guru to grant her release irom
the curse. Brhaspati felt pity on her and said : Go an
enjoy to your full sexual life with a lover w ome il
like best. Then you will get a son from the ue ie o
Siva. When that son is born yoy will be. released from
the curse and you will go fo ry ate) named Anjana
PHE peCane inoiedt ate oe, oP ne a Autre itself. She
fell in love with a monkey boy named Kesari there and
‘Ovi life. She did
lived fe ears enjoying an amorous die
‘at wet a hild fee after several years and then she
i ra child. ! Naa soee
ee oat time that Parvati ate akon bede
played amorous sports in_ the ore e ed velhelance
Parvati became pregnant. Parvati Sai aie aaa
to be the mother of a monkey child an virile through
his divine powers deposited his anus De A oniaiot
Vayubhagavan (god of wind) ees for a child.
Afijana who was then prays. tebee da and fearing
Coming to know of this through Dee be lost if
that his lordship over the Mommy! pi; poured ee
s were eee , ve
be: belly a giana molten liquid of Liege * she
metals). Afijana was nét the Mas ee che’ Became
gave birth in due course to 4 ae ae of the Ramathe celebrated Haniman, the ewe Ramayana;
Ravana tussle. (Parvakanda, svana)
Kiskindha Kanda, Valmiki Ne mous set of eleven
This Pufijikasthala belongs to ne “Sahajanya, Karnika,
devakanyakas. They are : Menaka, Purvacitti, Ulloca,
Putijikasthala, Rtusthala, Ghrtaci, were the celebratPramloca, Urvagi and Visvacl. Hg 3 Adi Parva).
ed courtezans of Svargasports of others. °
Nambutiri who was a contemporary of Meppattar
Narayana Bhattatiri was in Nenmeni arbga of the taluk
of Valluvanadu in south Malabar. Though some say
that his original name was Brahmadatta there are no
sufficient records to support the statement. His Guru
according to the work ‘Sri Krsnakarnamrta’ was a
nambiutiri named WNilakantha. Pintanam had only
ordinary education. He worshipped Krsna at the temple
of Guruvayur for a very long time and became a great
devotee of Krsna. He lived for ninety years. When he
became very old he found it difficult to come to
Guruvayir for worship and so one day he bade farewell
to the deity. Then a voice from heaven said “Do not
worry. I will be near you on your left side.” He went
and satona_-hill named Tirumandha and to his astonishing ecstasy he found Krsna sitting on his left side. He
then constructed a temple there and installed his deity
Krsna there and continued his worship. That was the
Vamapura (left place) of Pantanam.
2) Kytis (works). The following are the works of
Pantanam : (i) Bhasakarnamrta (ii) Kumaradharanam
(Pana) (iii) Jianappana (iv) P&arthasdrathistava (v)
Ghanasangha (vi) Narayanakirtanas (vii) Govindakirtanas (viii) Anandanrtya (ix) Dvadasaksarandamakirtana
(x) Srikrsnakirtanas, (xi) Astaksarakirtana (xii)
Brahmaparagovindakirtana (xiii) Gopdlakrsnakirtana
(xiv) Gaurikirtana (xv) Vamapuregakirtanas (xvi)
Padmanabhakirtana (xvii) Vivekodayakirtana ( xviii )
Jayakrsnakirtana (xix) Vitakolkirtana (xx) Sri Rama
Kirtana (xxi) Mukundakirtana (xxii) DasAavatarastotra.
Besides these he has composed some philosophical
songs in Tamil also.
3) Fndnappana. Puntanam got a son after a long time
of prayer and for the ceremony of Annapragana_ (feeding rice for the first time) all the people of his community were invited. The women who came for the
function threw their upper garments on to the cradle
where the little child was suffocated to death. Pantanam
thereafter became disgusted with life and Jfianappana
was written at that time,
4) Santanagopalam. Pintanam spent most of his time
in the temple of Guruvayur after the death of his child.
It was at this same time that the great scholar Narayanabhattatiri, author of the famous Narayaniya, was
in the temple worshipping the deity there. Pantanam
had written a poem ‘Santanagopalam’ in the pana style
and he took it to the great pandit Narayana Bhattatiri
for correction. With the haughtiness that was his trait he
said “‘What is there for correction in a Malayalam
poem ? Nothing but blunders will there be in it. Especialy when Puntanam is not well-versed in Sanskrit
grammar. It will therefore be full of mistakes.’’ Pinta.
nam could not contain the rebuff and he wept bitterly.
Then from the inside of the temple came a voice which
said ‘““Though Puntanam is not a grammarian like you
Bhattatiri, he is agreater devotee of mine than you.
His Bhakti is more appealing tome than your vibhakti,”’
The divine voice made Bhattatiri feel sorry and ashamed
of his behaviour and he begged Paintanam to grant him

PUNYA I
pardon and immediately went through his work giving
suggestions for improvement.
PUNYAI Son ofthe sage Dirghatamas. The-story of
Punya as found in Jfianavasistha is the following:—
There is a mountain called Mahendra in Jambidvipa.
Dirghatamas who was doing penance there had two
sons named Punya and Pavana. Punyakumara grew
up into a boy abounding in virtues. Pavana was not
so broad-minded. When aiter some time Dirghatamas,
their father died, Punyakumara controlling his sorrow
did all the funeral! rites; but Pavana unable to control
his sorrow left the place and wandered in the forests weeping bitterly. After some days Punyakumara went in
search of his brother and on finding him consoled him
and told him that there was nothing to be worried about their father’s death. On hearing the learned
and moral teachings of Punya, Pavana also got enlightened and after living in that forest for a number of
years both of them abandoned their lives.
PUNYAII The name of the agrama of the
Vibhandaka. (Sloka 23, Chapter 110, Vana Parva).
PUNYAJANA. A raksasa. Raivata, king of Kuéasthali,
born of the race of Saryati, went to see Brahma. Taking
advantage of his absence from the place Punyajana
took control over Kusasthali. Afraid of the demon all
the hundred brothers of Raivata left the country. After
some time the Saryati dynasty merged with that of
Hehaya. (Chapter 2, Amga4, Visnu Purana).
PUNYAJANI. Wife of Manibhadra, one of the Sivaparsadas. Her father’s name was Kratustha. Manibhadra
got thirteen sons of Punyajani. (Chapters 3 and 7,
RBrahmanda Purana).
PUNYAKRT. A Viévadeva. (Sloka 30, Chapter 91,
Anugasana Parva).
PUNYANAMA. A soldier of Subrahmanya.
45, Salya Parva). |
PUNYANIDHI. A king of the lunar race. The King
was a great devotee of Visnu and he went to Rameévara
to do worship of Visnu there. Pleased with the pure
devotion of the king Mahdvisnu started living at RameSvara under the name of Setumadhava. (Chapter 3,
Skanda Purana).
PUNYASILA. A brahmin who was residing on the banks
of the river Godavari. Once Punyagila engaged a
brahmin widower for officiating ina Sraddha ceremony.
As a result of that sin Punyagila’s face became that of
a donkey. To be freed from the sin he went and
bathed in the Svamitirtha and AkasgagangAtirtha of
Venkatacala. His sin was washed away and his face
regained its original form. (Chapter 2, Skanda Purana)
PUNYASRAVAS. A sage. This maharsi who was a great
devotee of Visnu was born to the brother of Nandagopa, during the incarnation of Visnu as Krsna, as a
daughter named Lavanga. (Patala Khanda, Padma,
Purana Chapter 72).
PUNYATOYA. A river seen by the sage Markandeya
when he moved about inside the belly of Balamukunda.
(See under Markandeya) .
PURA. Ademon. | me -
PURAMALINI. A river of Puranic fame. (Sloka 21,
Chapter 9, Bhisma Parva).
PURANDARA I. Indra. ' L
PURANDARA II. Tapa, son of the agni called PAficajanya. Indra once became the son of this Purandara,
(Sloka 3, Chapter 221, Vana Parva).
sage
( Chapter
PURANJAYA
PURANDARA III. The name of Indra in Vaivasvata
Manvantara. (See under Manvantara). In Matsya
Purana Purandara has been considered tobe one among
the eighteen VAstus dstrakaras(adepts in house building) .
The other seventeen are: Bhrgu, Atri, Vasistha, Visvakarma, Maya, Narada, Nagnajit, Visalaksa, Brahma,
Kumara, Nandiga, Saunaka, Garga, Vagudeva, Sukra,
Brhaspati and Aniruddha. (Matsya Purana, Chapter
252, verses 2 and 3).
According to Mahabharata Lord Siva wrote a book
‘“Vaisalaksa”’ containing ten thousand chapters dealing
with Dharmarthakamas. Purandara condensed it into
a book of five thousand chapters called ‘Babudantaka.
Purandara gave that book that name in honour of his
mother who was called Bahudanti. (Chapters 59, 89
and 90, Santi Parva).
PURANJANA. A king. The story of this king was told to
king Pracinabarhis by Narada to illustrate the truth
that those who kill yajria cows on earth would surely
suffer its consequences at.one time or another.
Purafijana once started on a tour after killing a few
yaifia cows. His aim was to build a new palace. After
walking alone for a long time he reached the neigh
bourhood of Himalayas. While wandering in the forests
he saw a beautiful garden and by its side a big castle
with nine tower-gates. It was the residence of the
Gandharva lady Purafijani. She had innumerable §!7
companions and her castle was guarded by a five-hoode
cobra called Prajagiri. sat
Purafijani fell in love with Purafijana at first s!8 -
and their greetings and subsquent talks ended in the!
marriage. -Thus Purafijana became the husband ©
Purafijani and they lived happily an erotic. life for @
hundred years. Then one day the king went for huntin8
alone. Even that separation for a little while fron
Purafijani was unbearable to Purafijana and he returne
to his palace soon. Purafijani did not come to recelv
him. On enquiry her companions informed the king
that Purafijani was lying on the floor with grief una” ~
to bear the separation from the king. Purafijana eS
soled her and they lived again for many years in P®
fect happiness. Then one thing happened. - antl
Kala had a daughter named Kalakanyaka who liv 4
a very wicked and vicious life. She wanted to get mat t
ed but nobody wanted to be her husband. She wer d
about in search of a husband. Piru became her husbar
for some time but she was soon divorced by him. 5 a
approached a Yavana king named Bhaya who had Ke
brother called Prajvara. Bhaya did not want to '@
that woman as his wife and so ‘sent her back wit
boon that she could stand in hiding and enjoy 7.
men she liked. He sent his brother Prajvara for b¢
help. She roamed about like that for some time 2”
came back again to Bhaya. Kalakanyaka, Bhaya ae
Prajvara joined together and gathering a strong ar 7
attacked Purafijana. A grim battle followed whic
lasted for several years in the end of which Puraiija®
was defeated and taken captive. While he was Po?
taken as a prisoner a herd of wild cows attacked FP ure
njana and he was killed. After that he was bor? as
Princess named Vaidarbhi. Malayadhvaja, kins :
Pandya, married her and got seven celebrated so” z,
Agastya married the daughter of Malayadhv4
(4th Skandha, Bhadgavata). "
PURANJAYA, A king of Ayodhya. See under Kakutst

PURANA
PURANA.
1) General information. ‘The Amarakoésa describes a
Purana thus :
Sargasca pratisargasca
Vamséo manvantarani ca /
Vamsanucaritam capi
Puranam paiicalaksanam //
According to this definition, Purana is one which describes Sarga, Pratisarga, Vamisa, Manvantara ard
Varnéanucarita. Among these Sarga and Pratisarga
are natural creation and renovation (Cosmogony) .
Varhga means history of sages and patriarchs. By Manvantara is meant the period of different Manus. Vamsanucarita means Genealogy of kings. In the Puranas
which are current now some of these five divisions are
wanting.
Statements about
Brahmanas. Therefore it 1
Puranas are found even in the
s to be surmised that Puranas
existed even before historic times. Mahabharata has
used the term Purana to mean stories about devas and
siddhas. The Upanisads say that Puranas are itihasas
and as such constitute the fifth Veda. Smrti says
that Puranas are commentaries on Vedas. From all
these statements it can be gathered that Puranas have
a hoary past. The great Sanskrit scholar Rangacarya
has defined Purana as Pura nava (Pura =old ; nava
=new) meaning things which are as good as new
though existing from olden times. Though there are
large portions of wide imagination dealing with the
truths about the
‘de in the Puranas many
human side 1m d from them. All the Puranas
universe can be graspe
contain praises of Brahma, Visnu and Maheégvara. In
most of the Puranas of old, new additions and interpolations are seen. The Puranas in original were In €XIStence before Christ.
Akhyanaiscapyu akhyanair
Yeathabhin alpad uddhibhih /
Purdnasamhitam cakre
Puranarthavisaradah [|
(Sloka 15, Ghapter 6,
Astadagsa Puranani ,
Krtva Satyavatisutah |
Bharatakhyanamakhilam
Cakre tadupabrinhanam lj
Améa 3, Visnu Purana)
3, Matsya Purana )
Sloka 70, Chapter 9 x
hat it was Vyasa
e gathered t :
Meg ee re Bana who lived in the
speaks about Vayu Purana. Kumaon the eighth century and Sankarath century speak about the
e therefore taken their prenth century A.D.
From the above it
who composed all
seventh century A.D.
rila Bhatta who lived
carya who lived in the nin
Puranas. Puranas must hav
cent forms before the sixth or SVT" 4. other eighteen
There are eighteen major P uranas au te aver four'l woh
minor ones. The major Puranas nk eee like Mahaof Slokas, All the P uranas are ate as Mahabharata
bharata, But none of them. 1% e Puranas splendidly
as a piece of literature: Seid ne Puranas are ne
rect he cul of Taian en te Inn
‘ti ve
j Itura}, reli 1 we sagt Puranas are
see ae form Porn the Puranas. TS oe those
classified into three, ¢
pertaining to Visnu 2m
2) A. Visnu-based Puranas.
-have composed Pura
PURANA
(i) Visnu Purana. This is one of the most important of
all the Puranas. This contains the five technical
divisions of the Puranas. This is divided into six amsas..
This deals with the events of Varahakalpa and contains
twentythree thousand glokas. The theme is the ten
incarnations of Mahavisnu. Visnu Purana is the most
ancient of all the Puranas and has got the name
Purdnaratna (gem of Puranas).
The method of narration is in the form of teaching
his disciple Maitreya by sage Parasara. Since
there is a reference in it to the Maurya dynasty it is to
be surmised that this was composed in the first or second
century A.D. The narrator h.imself states thus :—
“Vyasa an adept in the compositon of Puranas composed
this Puranasamhita with akhyanas, Upakhyanas, gathas
and Kalpanirnayas. A Sita named Romaharsana was
Vyasa’s chief disciple. The broad-minded Vyasa gave
that samhita to that sita. Romaharsana had six disnamed Sumati, Agnivarcas, Mitrayus. SamésapaAkrtavrana, and Savarni. Of these Akrtavrana,
Saméapayana born in the Kasyapagotra -
nasamhitas. There is yet another
sarnhita composed by Romaharsana which was the basis
of thesamhitas of his three disciples. I have composed
Visnupurana basing on the above four samhitas.”
Ifa man gives as gift a book of Visnu Purana on
the full moon day in the month of asadha (July) with
Jaladhenu he will attain Visnupada.
(ii) Bhagavata Purana. This is the most popular and
widely circulated of all the Puranas. It is dear to
Visnu-devotees. Divided into twelve Skandhas this contains eighteen thousand glokas. All the incarnations of
Visnu are described in this. The most interesting
Skandha is the tenth Skandha in which the author has
described the life and activities of Sri Krsna. There
was once a belief that it was Baladeva who lived in the
thirteenth century A.D. that had composed this Purana.
But this belief was smashed when it was found that Vallalasena of Bengal who lived in the eleventh century A.D.
had made references to this Purana in some of his works.
accepts Kapila and Buddha as incarnations
ciples
yana,
Savarni and
Bhagavata
of Visnu. This has been translatedinto all Indian
languages. This book has tobe given as gift on the fullmoon day in the month of Prosthapada (September).
Agni Purana instructs that this book is to be given
along with a golden image of a lion.
(iii) Naradiya Purana. This is in the form ofa
narration by Narada to Sanatkumara. In this book of
twentyfive thousand verses Narada teaches the dharmas
of Brhatkalpa. If this is given as gift on the full-moon
day in the month of Asvina there will be great prosperity.
(iv) Garuda Purana. This is in the form of instructions
to Garuda by Visnu. This deals with astronomy,
medicine, grammar, and with the structure and qualities
of diamonds. This Purana is dear to Vaisnavites. The
latter half of this Purana deals with life after death.
The Hindus of north-India generally read this Purana
while cremating the bodies of the dead. This has given
great importance to the origin of Garuda. There are
eighc thousand verses in this book. This book should be
given as gift along with an image in gold ofa swan to
get prosperity.
(v) Padma Purana
divided into six Kh
(Padma Purana). This book is
andas comprising fiftyfive thousand

PURANA
verses. ‘I'he six Khandas are Srstikhanda, Bhimikhanda, Svargakhanda, Patalakhanda, Uttarakhanda
and Kriyayogasara. The Uttarakhanda describes
the importance of all months and also the lotus, the
seat of Brahma. This contains the stories of Sakuntala
and Sri Rama as described by KaAliddsa in his works
Sakuntala and Raghuvamga which has made some
believe that this Purana was written after K4lidasa.
If this Purana is given as gift with a cow in the month
of Jyestha (June) it brings prosperity.
(vi) Varaha Puréna. The mode of narration is in the
form of narrating the story by Vardha, the third incarnation of Visnu. The theme is about holy places and
mantras. It states that the goddess of earth prayed. to
Mahavisnu and that prayer took the form of a goddess.
This book contains fourteen thousand verses. If one
copies down this Purana and gives it as gift along with
a golden image of Garuda on the full-moon day in the
month of Caitra (April) one will attain Visnuloka.
B. Puranas relating to Brahma.
*(i) Brahma Purana. This is in the form of teachings by
Brahma to Daksa. This contains twentyfive thousand
verses. This is called Adi Purana also. There is a special
treatise in this book on Orissa, an ancient holy region
of Bharata. There is in this a special annexure explaining the intimacy between Siva and Sirya which is a
deviation from other Puranas. Brahma Purana states
about a siiryaksetra (sun-temple) situated at a place
called Konarka near the holy place of Puri, installed
there in the year 1241 A.D. If this Purana along with
Jaladhenu is given as a gift on the full-moon day in the
month of Vaisakha (May) the donor will attain heaven.
(ii) Brahmaénda Purina. This deals with the origin of
the universe as told by Brahma. In the beginning
there was a golden egg and the prapafica (universe with
its activities) was formed out of it. Portions of Adhyatma Ramayana, references to Radha and Krsna and
the incarnation of Paragurama are included in this.
‘This book contains twelve thousand verses and it is
believed to be uttama (best) to give this book as a gift
to a brahmin.
(ili) Brahmavaivarta Purina. This was instructed to
Savarnika by Narada. The theme is the story of
Rathantara. There are four kandas in this Purana called
Brahmakanda, Pr akrtikanda, Ganeégakanda and Krsnajanmakanda. This deals with Prapaficasrsti (creation
of the universe). It. says that Prapafica is nothing
but the Vaivartta ( transformation) of Brahman, It is
considered to be holy to give this book containing eighteen
thousand verses as a gift on the full-moon day in the
month of Magha (February),
(iv) Markandeya Puréna. This is one of the ancient
Puranas. There are many stories regarding Indra,
Stirya and Agni in this. This includes a division called
Devimahatmya containing praises about the goddess
Durga. This contains nine thousand verses aud it is
considered as uttama (best) to give this bdok as a gift
to abrahmin on a full-moon day in the month of
Karttika (November) .
(v) Bhavisya Purdna. ‘This is what is told to Manu by
Siirya (Sun). This contains statements about future
‘events. The book praises the worship of Surya (Sun),
Agni (fire) and Naga (serpent). There is an annexure
dealing with the several holy places of Bharata and the
PURANA
rights of pilgrims. The book contains fourteen thousand
verses and it is considered to be uttama (best) to give
this book along with treacle as a gift to a brahmin on
the full-moon day in the month of Pausa (January).
(vi) Vamana Purana. There is a great similarity between
the contents of this Purana and that of Varaha Purana.
All the incarnaiions of Visnu from Vamana downwards
are described in this Purana The scene of Siva marrying Parvati is vividly described in this book. Ths
Purana contains ten thousand verses and it is consider ed
to be uttama (best) to give this book as a gift in the
autumn season or at the time of Visuva to a brahmin.
C. Puranas relating to Siva. -
(i) Vayu Puraéna.. This Purana is told by Vayu. Banabhatta who lived in the seventh century A.D. makes
references to this Purana in his works. ‘There are many
references in this Purana about the Gupta Kings aoe
ruled Bharata in the 4th century A.D. So it is believe
that this Purana must have been written in the fifth or
sixth century A.D The book contains plenty of verses
in praise of Siva. There are fourteen thousand verses 10
the Vayu Purana and it is considered to be best to giv
this book as a gift toa brahminon the full-moon day
in the month of Sravana (August). .
(ii) Littga Purana. This contains instructions of Siva 0?
Dharma sitting in the form of linga (Phallus). The
twentyeight different forms of Siva are described i
this. This contains twelve thousand verses and if th's
book is given as a gift to a brahmin with tiladhenu 0”
the full-moon day in the month of Phalguna (March
the donor will attain Sivasdyujya. b
(iii) Ska@nda Purana. This Purana is narrated PY
Skanda. The theme is the slaughter of the demo”
Tarakasura by Skanda (Subrahmanya). There 35 ®
great similarity between this Purana and the Kumara
sambhava of Kalidasa. There are eightyfour thous?"
verses in this Purana and giving this book as a gift }
thought to be good. We
(iv) Agni Purdna. This Purana was instructed to ae
sage Vasistha by Agnideva. There are several re =
ences in this to Sivalinga and Durgadevi. The inicar
tions of Rama and Krsna are also dealt with in ¢ a
Distinct from other Puranas this book deals with 4f :
and science like Kavyalankaranatakas (Poems, a.
figures of speech), Jyotissastra (Astronomy) and Silp? 4
kala (architecture), This Purana contains twe e
thousand verses and is capable of imparting knowledg
on all arts and sciences. -
(v) Matsya Puréna. This Purana was taught to ‘aioe
by Matsya, the incarnation of Visnu, The incarnate 3
of Matsya is dealt in this. Several subjects like jaine
mata (religion of Jainism), Buddhamata (Buddhis™)»
Natyasastra (histrionics) and Andhrarajavarnsa Cpe
dom and Kings of Andhra) are discussed in this boo 7
The book contains thirteen thousand verses and this?
to be given as gift along with a golden image of 4
atthe time of Visuva. —_
(vi) Rirma Purana. This Purana is taught by” Kom
murti (incarnation of Visnu as Kirma (tortoise ) se P
narrating the story of Indradyumna at Patala. A J ae
seven islands and seven oceans are described in ¢
book. Bharata is situated in the centre of all these ”
is called Jambidvipa. Though it is believed that the -
were four sarhhitas for this, only the Brahmasarihita ©
available now, It includes [. Varagita and Vyasagit®

PURANA
The book contains eight thousand verses and is to be
given as gift along with a golden image of tortoise.
3) Upapuranas. There are eighteen minor Puranas
besides the eighteen major ones. They are :—(1)
Sanatkumara (2) Narasimha (3) Naradiya (4) iva
(5) Durvasas (6) Kapila (7) Manava (8) Usanas (9)
Varuna (10) Kalika (11) Samba (12) Saura (13)
Aditya (14) Mahesvara (15) Devibhagavata (16)
Vasistha (17) WVisnudharmottara (18) . Nilamata
Purana.
The two Upapuranas mentioned lastly are associated
with Kashmir. The first is about the Vaisnava religion
there and the second about the wise saying of a Naga
King of the place called Nila.
_ (Puranas; History of Sanskrit Literature). |
PURANA. An ancient sage. He was one among the
rsis who visited Bhisma lying on his bed of arrows.
(Sloka 12, Chapter 47 Santi Parva). 1
_PURAVATY. A river of Bharata of Puranic fame.
(Sloka 24, Chapter 9, Bhisma Parva).
PURAYA. A King of Vedic times. He 1s mentioned in
the danastuti of Rgveda. - deal bale
PURIKA. Acity in ancient Bharata. This city was
ruled by a King named Paurika. (Sloka 3, Ghapter
111, Santi Parva). — mee
PURNA I. A serpent born of the family of Wasuki.
ey burnt to death at wae Sasa of Janamejaya.
loka 2, Chapter 57, Adi Parva).
P ORMA II. A Devagandharva aaa ¥ Kasyapa of his
-adha. (Chapter 65, Adi Parva).
PURNA ce re ee of the tithis (lunar ae)
Paficami, Dagami and Paficada: i. Yughisthir ee ‘ ue
on the Paficami day called Parva. (Sloka 6, pley
phan 1. A celebrated ae ot im family
of Kagyapa. (Sloka 12, Ghapter 35, A : cae ‘aited
PURNABHADRA II. The son : :
Ratnabhadra living on the mountain Gandhamadana
He had a son named Harikesa ( Pingala ) Sear
a devotee of Siva atid. so) >" a al his house.
devotee of Kubera sent Hari “a and made one
Harikega was.then taken care of by Cha ter 18).
of his attendants. (Matsya Purana, of the race of
PURNAMUKHA. A_ serpent bom © | aeath at the
Dhrtarastra. This serpent was oy Chapter 9/, di
Sarpasatra of Janamejay4. (Bloke 43 !
Parva). porn of the family of
PURNANGADA. A_ serpen” | mt to death at the
oka 16,.Chapter 57, Adi
Dhrtarastra. This serpent w2
Sarpasatra of Janamejay4.
PURNAYUS. A Devagandharva ee ens ei 65, Rdi
Kaéyapa of his wife Pradba. (Sloka 40;
pda qa. It was under
PUROCANA. A minister of Det tie lac-palace was
ide 1] the Pandavas.
the guidance of this ministe to ki
ree) the lac-palace
constructed.and set fire toi OU a on
Purocana was also burnt £0 mei Arakkilla ).
was destroyed by fire. (See unde f the Vasu, Prana,,
PUROJAVA. The youngest 9". e ati, (6th Skandha,
born to him of his wife Sr baie H
He
a line of Kings.
ae, d over the country
PUROVASU. A King of th
was the son of Babhrusetu.
of Gandhara. (Chapter 270
e€ poe
He ru} sf
: Agni Purana) ,
PURUMITRA I
PURU I. A Ksatriya King. He was the son of Manu.
Manu had eleven sons of his wife Nadvala.
PURU II. A mountain. (Sloka 22, Chapter 90, Vana
Parva). ;
PURU I. Acelebrated king of Candravaméa.
1) Genealogy. Descending in order from Visnu are BrahmaAtri — Candra—Budha—Puriravas—Ayus—Nahusa—
Yayati—Piru. |
Yayati had two wives named Sarmistha and Devayani.
armistha gave birth to Druhyu, Anu and Piru. Devayani gave birth to Yadu and Turvasu.
2) Piru becomes king. Yayati, Piiru’s father, was turned
into an old man bya curse of Sukracarya. The king
called all his sons to his side and requested each to take
his old age and give him their youth. All the elder
sons refused to do it but Piru agreed to do so. Taking
the youth of Puru, his father, Yayati lived a sensuous
life for a thousand years. Then the king gave back Puru
his youth and crowned him as the heir apparent to his
kingdom. (See under Devayani).
3) Other details.
(i) Paru got of his wife Kausalya alias Pausti three
sons named Janamejaya (Pravira), Isvara and Raudraéva. (Chapter 94, Adi Parva). 7“
(ii) After his death Piru entered the court of Yama.
Sloka 8, Chapter 8, Sabha Parva).
(iii) Piru along with Indra in the latter’s Vimana
witnessed ile war between Arjuna and the Kauravas.
(Sloka 10, Chapter 56, Virata Parva).
(iv) A king called Mandhata once defeated Puru in a
battle. (Sloka 10, Chapter 62, Drona Parva).
PURU Il The name of the charioteer of Arjuna. (Sloka
30, Chapter 33, Sabha Parva).
PURUCCHEPA. (PARUCCHEPA). A _ sage praised
in the Rgveda. He was the son of Divodasa. (Mandala
1, Rgveda).
PURUJIT. A king who was the son of Kuntibhoja and
brother of Kunti, mother of the Pandavas. He hada
brother named Kuntibhoja. In the great battle he
fought against Durmukha of the Kaurava army. When
he died Purujit went to Yamaloka. (Chapter 14, Sabha
Parva; Chapter 6, Karna Parva, Chapter 23, Drona
Parva).
PURUKUTSA. The son born to the celebrated king,
Mandhata of his wife Bindumati. (See under Mandhata
for Genealogy). Purukutsa had a brother named Mucukunda. Descending in order from Purukutsa were
Aranya — Brhadas va—Haryasva—Tridhanva—Aruna—
Satyavrata—Trisanku.
One Purukutsa is praised in the Reveda. It is not
known whether both are one and the same person.
Purukutsa with his wife Narmadadevi went to the forest of Kuruksetra and doing penance there attained
moksa. (Chapter 20, Aérarnavasika Parva).
PURUMIDHA. A king of Piruvam a. He was the son
of Brhatputra. Brhatputra had two more sons named
Ajamidha and Dvimidha, Of these three sons the most
valiant Ajamidha became the propagator of the dynasty.
(Chapter 278, Purana).
PURUMITRA I. One of the eleven valiant sons. of
Dhrtarastra. In the great battle of Mahabharata
Abhimanyu wounded this soldier. (Chapter 73, Bhisma
Parva) .

PURUMITRA II
PURUMIIRA. II. The first Mandala of the Reveda
mentions a Rajarsi youth Vimada marrying the daughter
of Purumitra.
PURUNITHA. See under Parunitha.
PURURAVAS. I. A prominent king of Candravarhia
(lunar race).
1) Origin of Candravamsa and birth of Puriiravas. Descending in order from Brahma came Atri—Candra—Budha
Purtravas. Thedynasty which came from Candra was
called the Candravamsa. Though Budha was the first
king of Candravarhga it was Puriravas who became
celebrated. The story of the birth of Purtravas is given
below :
Brahma in the beginning deputed the sage Atri for the
work of creation. Atrimaharsi started the penance
called anuttara to acquire sufficient power for creation.
After some years Saccidananda brahma with an aura of
lustre reflected in the heart of that pure and serene
soul. In sheer ecstasy tears rolled down his cheeks and
the glittering flow of water was lustfully drunk by the
zones taking the form of women with a view to producing progenies. They became pregnant but were unable to bear the embryo of Atri and so they threw them
away. Brahma took them all and made them into one
armoured youth and took him in his chariot to his land.
Then the brahmarsis requested Brahma to make him
their lord. When the rsis, devas, gandharvas and
nymphs praised him reciting samaveda the majestic
lustre of the youth increased. It was from this that
ausadhas (medicines) originated and that is why
Candra is considered to be the lord of medicines, dvija
and WVedasvaripa. The Candramandala is full of
chemicals. It increases and decreases according to the
white half and black half of the moon-based month.
Daksa gave in marriage to Candra twentyseven beautiful maidens. Then Candra did penance meditating
on Visnu for ten thousand Kalpas. Visnu pleased by
his penance asked him to name a boon and Candra said
‘When I perform a yaga in svarga all the devas like
Brahma should come in person to my yagagala and
take the yagabhaga. Silapani should remain asa
watchman at my RaAjasiya.”’ Accordingly with the
blessing of Visnu, Candra conducted the yaga in which
Atri, Bhrgu, Brahma, Visnu, Devas, Vasus, Maruts
and ViSvadevas took part. Candra gave as yaga-fees
to Rtviks all the three worlds. The yaga was complete
and when Candra rose up after a bath nine devis fell in
love with the amorous beauty of Gandra. Laksmi. wife
of Visnu, Sinivali, wife of Kardama, Dyuti, wits ef
Vibhavasu, Pusti, wife of Dhata, Prabha, wife of
Sarya, Kuhi, wife of Havisman, Kirti, wife of jJayanta,
Amégumiali wife of Kasyapa ana Dhrti wife of Nanda,
abandoned their husbands and went with Candra.
Candra treated them all as his own wives and gave
them erotic pleasure to their hearts’ content. Those
who saw this non-virtuous act stood dumbfounded unable to curse Candra. _ 8
Attracted by the dazzling brilliance of Candra Tara,
wife of Brhaspati, went with him. Fnraged at this, Brhaspati joining with other devas prepared for a fight
against Candra. Devas took sides and by the ‘mediation of Indra a conference of both the parties was
held and Tara was sent back to Brhaspati. Tara was
pregnant then and Tara confessed that the child in her
womb was that of Candra. So when that child was
PURURAVAS I
born Candra took it away and named it Budha. Brahma
and other rsis gave Budha a seat among the planets.
Budha married 11a and they got a sonnamed Pururavas.
(See under Ila). After that Budha performed a hundred
Aévamedhayagas. He then enjoyed world prosperity
as lord of Saptadvipa living in the beautiful Himadrimga. worshipping Brahma. (Chapter 12, Bhaga 4,
Padma Purana).
2) Testing Puriiravas and the curse. Puraravas by his brilliance performed a hundred Agvamedhayagas and lived
in glory at Himadrigrnga. Great demons like Kes1
became his servants. Urvasi attracted by his beauty
‘became his wife. While he was living llke that Dharma,
Artha and Kama went in disguise to his palace to test
him. He received them all well but paid more attenHion to
Dharma. Artha and Kama got angry and cursed him.
Artha cursed him saying that he would be ruined by
his greed and Kama cursed him saying he would go
mad by being separated from Urvasi. Hearing- that
Dharma blessed him thus : “You will live long lea i
ing a virtuous life. Your race will increase @?
rernain in glory till the end of the moon and the sta! S.
The insanity caused by your passion for Urvasi wou
end by the end of sixty years. That celestial maiden
would remain then with you for one Manvantara.
(Chapter 12, Bhaga 3, Padma Purana),
Puriravas used to visit Indra daily. One day while he
was going through air wellarmed with a bow 49°
arrows he saw a demon named Keéi carrying away
by force Urvasi and Citralekha and after defeaungs
KeSi in a fight recovered the nymphs and gave then
back to Indra. Indra praised Puriravas and 19 Be
honour a drama, Laksmisvayamvara, was enacted
Urvasi, Menaka and others. Urvaéi taking the part r
Laksmi started to dance but seeing Pururavas befor"
her she became lustful and made wrong steps. na
who was present at the function got angry and cursed : °
“You will forget all you have learnt. Not only ¢ ie
you will live as a creeper separated from Purtravas gi):
a period of sixty years.” (For details see under Urv4 ed:
Padma Purana says that it was Bharata who ieee |
Urvasi. This story is slightly diferent from that foun’.
in the other Puranas.
3) Sons of Puriravas. Urvasi got eightsons of Purt
named Ayus, Drdhayus, Vasyayus, Danayus, Vrttl
ravas
man;
Vasu, Divijata and Subahu. Of these Ayus became, is
propagator of; the dynasty. Of. the sons born to y ;
five sons, Nahusa, Vrddhagarma, Raji, Dambha ans
Vipapma became celebrities. A hundred sons wig
born to Raji. They were called Rajeyas. (Chaptet
Bhaga 3, Padma Purana). Je
Some Puranas state that Puriravas had six sons wh!
some state that he had seven sons.
4) Other details. The following references
about him in the Mahabharata.
(1) Once Puriiravas stole the wealth of some brah
The brahmins'took Sanatkumara along with them oat
made representations to the king. Purdravas d! 1 as
give back their wealth. The brahmins cursed him 20© —
a result the prosperity of the King waned. Then be aa
ravas brought down from svarga three Agnis and Pt
formed a yaga and thus regained his lost splende
and prosperity. (Chapter 75, Adi Parva).
are made

PURURAVAS II
(ii) Purtiravas got six sons of Urvasi named Ayus,
Dhiman, Amavasu, Drdhayus, Vanayus and Satayus.
(iii) Once he asked Vayu the wind-god about the origin
of the four castes and the superiority of the brahmins
over other castes. (Sloka 3, Chapter 72, Santi Parva).
(iv) At another time he discussed about yajiiapurohitas
with Kagyapa. (Chapter 73, Santi Parva).
(v) Iksvaku gave Pururavas a sword which in his old
age he gave to his son Ayus. (Chapter 166, Santi Parva).
(vi) He once declared that one can attain svarga by
the mg 8 ° brahmins. (Sloka 31, Chapter 6, AnuSasana Parva).
(vii) Puriiravas was famous asa donor of cows. (Sloka
26, Chapter 76, Anugasana Parva).
(vii) Purtravas never ate meat.
111, Anugdsana Parva).
PURURAVAS Il. A king of the race of Diptaksa.
(Sloka 15, Chapter 74, Udyoga Parva).
PURUSA. See under Prakrti.
eS poem An ancient place. (Chapter 57, Sabha
arva ).
PURUSANTI. A maharsi well-praised in the Rgveda.
The Aévinidevas once saved the following ‘from trouble
viz. Turviti, Dabhiti, Dhvasant and Purusanti. (Sukta
113, Anuvaka 16, Mandala 7, Rgveda).
PURUSOTTAMA. Sri Krsna. He got this name because
= Bie ng (filling) and Sadana (sitting) (Chapter
, Udyoga Parva).
PURUYASAS. A king of Paiicala. He was the son of
Bhiariyagas. The King became more and more prosperous
observing ‘Vaisakhadharma’ following the instructions
ie the King’s preceptors Yaja and Upayaja. (Chapter 2,
kanda Purana).
PURVABHIRAMA
Chapter 9, Bhisma Parva). et yee.
PURVACITTI. A celebrated celestial maiden. She
belongs to the group of six celebrated nymphs named
Urvasi, Pirvacitti, Sahajanya, Ghrtaci, Visvacl | and
Menaki. (Sloka 68, Chapter 74, Adi Parva), urva:
citti was present for the Janmotsava of Arjuna. (Chapter
122, Adi Parva). Once when Arjuna went tou aane
Parvacitti and others danced in his honour. (Chapter
43, Vana Parva). 7
PORVADISA (PURVADIK). The East.
OF all the sides Parvadisa 1s the most prominent.
1) The Sun rises in the east.
2) The sadhyas come and do sever e pe
at dusk.
3) The moon rises here.
4) The result of offering havya © '
the east. .
2 The daughters of Dabs al becoming the
aéyapa delivered in the ca"
6) Devas made Indra the king of the ane “nthe east.
7) Indra and the devas did penance dae "rst ( piirva)
8) Because the devas accepted this sl )
the side got the name Parva. |
| . The sun gives away 45 5!
this place. - -. facing the east
(10) The devas drink the some Pee and attain11) Varuna once entered Patala by
ed prosperity. “iN t this place.
12) Indra selected the sacrificial animals ae ‘Le eart
Svarga
13) The soul of man comes to Seana)
through the east. (Chapter 108 Udyoga 5
(Sloka 65, Chapter
_ A river of Puranic fame. (Sloka 22,
nance in the east
e fire spreads to
wives of
fts the yajur Mantras at
a EEEE'S'=S’CD
621 PUSKARAS |
PURVAPALI. An ancient king. The Pandavas invited
this king for the great Mahabharata battle. (Sloka 17,
Chapter 4, Udyoga Parva).
PURVASRAMA. A sacred place on the shores of the
river Saray. While going along the shores of this
river with Rama and Laksmana, Vis vamitra showed the
boys this 4grama and explained to them its importance.
It was at this place that Siva burnt Kamadeva (god of
love) to death. Kamadeva got the name Ananga at
sy place. (Bala Kanda, Valmiki Ramayana, Sarga
23 ic
PUSANA. A female follower of Subrahmanya. (Sloka 20,
Chapter 43, Salya Parva).
PUSA I (PUSAN). Pusa attended the Janmotsava of
Arjuna. (Chapter 122, Adi Parva). When Arjuna and
Krsna fought against Indra at Khandavaprastha Pisa
stood as an ally of Indra. (Sloka 35, Chapter 226, Adi
Parva). Once all the devas together performed a yaga
and not knowing the importance of Siva, they cid not
invite him to the Yaga. Siva attended the function
uninvited. The devas did not like it aud they attacked
Siva. The twelve Adityas as a team fought against Siva
and in the fight Pisa lost his teeth. (Chapter 18,
Sauptika Parva). Once Pusa presented to Subrahmanya
two warriors named Panitaka and Kalika.
PUSA II. (PUSAN). Another name for the Sun. (Sloka
16, Chapter 3, Vana Parva).
PUSKALA I. A valiant soldier who fought on the side
of Ravana. Haniman fought a gainst this soldier
fiercely. (Bhaga 2, Padma Purana).
PUSKALA II. The youngest son of Bharata, son of
Dagaratha. Mandavi was the mother of Puskala.
(Chapter 88, Vayu Purana, Chapter 6, Brahmanda
Purana; Chapter 4, Visnu Purana; Chapter 11, Agni
Purana) .
Details available about Puskala from Padma Purana
and Valmiki Ramayana are the following :
(1) Puskala was with Satrughna when the latter served
as the guardian of the horse in all the three aS vamedhayagas conducted by Sri Rama. (Padma Purana, Patala
Khanda, Chapters | and 22).
9) He defeated Damana, son of Subahu, while he was
following the sacrificial horse. (Padma Purana, Patala
Khanda, Chapter 34).
(3) He fought fiercely against the demons, Vidyunmali and Ugradarnstra. (Padma Purana. Patala
Khanda, Chapter 34).
(4) He fought against Rukmangada and Viramani.
(Padma Purana, Patala Khanda, Chapter 41).
(5) He was defeated by Lava who checked the progress
of the sacrificial horse. (Padma Purana, Patala Khanda,
Chapter 61). AN
6) Puskala conquered the country of Gandhara and
built there a city called Puskalavati alias Puskalavata
and made it his capital city. (Valmiki Ramayana,
Uttara Kanda).
(7) His wife’s name was Kantimati. (Padma Purana,
Patala Khanda, Chapter 67).
PUSKARA I. Son of Varuna. Soma’s daughter was
attracted by the beauty of Puskara and married him.
(Sloka 12, Chapter 98, Udyoga Parva).
PUSKARA Il. The younger brother of Nala. It was
this Puskara who jointly with Kali defeated Nala in a
game of dice and drove him away from his country.

PUSKARA III
At last Puskara apologised to Nala and gave him back
his country. (See under Damayanti).
PUSKARA III. A sage. He was the Guru of Paragurama. (Chapter 151, Agni Purana).
PUSKARA IV.
1) General information. This is a holy place situated
36 Kilometres to the north of Ajmer. Brahma once did
penance there. There is a temple of Brahma there.
Padma Purana gives a story about the origin of this
tirtha :— |
Once Brahma came toa place holding a lotus. Then
Brahma saw Vajranabha who was engaged in penance
for the destruction of the devas. Suddenly the lotus in
the hands of Brahma fell down making a thundering
noise. ‘I’he sound was so loud that its vibrations killed
Vajranabha. From that day onwards the place was
known as Puskara.
2) Other details.
(1) Arjuna spent the period after his pilgrimage in this
tirtha. (Sloka 14, Chapter 220, Adi Parva).
(ii) Once sage Pulastya praised. the greatness of
Puskara. (Sloka 20, Chapter 82, Vana Parva).
(111) Sage Dhaumya praised the greatness of Puskaratirtha. (Sloka 16, Chapter 89, Vana Parva).
(iv) Once the god of death came and did penance at
this place. (Sloka 26, Chapter 54, Drona Parva).
(v) Once Brahma performed a Yaga at this place and
then Sarasvati rose up from the place in the name of
Suprabha. (Sloka 5, Chapter 38, Salya Parva).
(vi) If one performs penance at this place peacefully
on€ can attain moksa. (Chapter 297, Santi Parva).
PUSKARA V. -A mountain in the island of Puskara.
This mountain is full of precious stones. (Sloka 24,
Chapter 12, Bhisma Parva).
PUSKARA VI. One of the seven islands. The other six
are Jambudvipa, Plaksadvipa, . Salmalidvipa, Kuéadvipa, Krauficadvipa, and Sakadvipa. (8th Skandha,
Devi Bhagavata).
PUSKARADHARINI. The wife of a sage. There was
once a sage named Satya in the country of Vidarbha.
Puskaradharini was the wife of Satya. Satya who believed in Ahimsa performed a Yaga with fruits and
roots. It is believed that no yaga is perfect if performed
without a sacrificial goat. But even his wife for fear of
a curse did not object toa Yaga of the kind.
‘There was another sage living in that forest in the form
of a deer due to a curse and he was a great friend of
Satya. The deer came to the place of the Yajfia and
requested Satya to kill him as the sacrificial animal to
make the Yaga a success. Satya did not agree to that
but then Savitridevi appeared in person and compelled
him to kill the deer and conduct the Yaga. With great
reluctance Satya killed the deer and conducted: the
Yaga; but the power of penance of Satya faded away
by that deed of his. Then Puskaradharini performed
penance to regain the power of her husband and
Dharma appeared in person and blessed Satya.
(Chapter 272, Santi Parva) ‘ ;
PUSKARAKSA J. A King of Puranic fame,
There wag once a King called Bhadraksa in Taksagilanagara. He worshipped Bhagavati with 108 lotus
flowers daily in order to obtain a son. One day he
found one flower missing and the brave king tore open
his heart and made the number complete. The goddess
was pleased and she blessed him saying that he would
622 PUSKARAKSA I
have a son worthy of becoming an emperor. Puskaraksa
was the son thus born. oa
The boy grew up and after crowning him as King
Bhadraksa left for the forests. Puskaraksa worshipped
Siva daily to get a suitable wife. After some time piva
blessed him saying that he would get a very good wife.
One day he went for hunting. He saw a camel trying
to eat two cobras engaged in the act of mating. Instantly the King sent an arrow against the camel and We
camel falling down turned into a Vidyadhara and tha
Vidyadhara told the King thus :—‘‘Oh King, there was
once a Vidyadhara named Rangamali. A vidyad iat
maiden named Taravali was attracted by the ao
some form of Rangam4li. She married him without ™¢
consent of her parents. ‘Lhe angered father separate™
them by a curse. The curse took effect and they -
got separated losing their way in the forest. Pining -
see her husband Taravali roamed about in the fores :
and reached the other shore of the western sea. It W4
a colony of rsis and there was a fig tree there standing
in full blossom. Taravali took the form of a beetle a
sat on the tree sucking honey. After some days Rané d
mali also came to the place. On seeing her husban A
she had emission and from the virile fluid was war? ne
fig fruit. After that both of them flew to the ale
dharva loka. I am Rangamali. One day 4 Ture
named Jitasu came that way and this fruit fell be f
him. From the fruit came out a beautiful maiden © ie
Jitasu with his divine power understood the W ait
story behind it and so took the girl to -his asram@ atic
named her Vinayavati. Vinayavati grew into a ae:
ful maiden and stayed in the 4grama. One day het
accident I happened to see her and attracted by ing
beauty tried to rape her. She cried aloud and pei
the noise the sage came out and cursed me and tut ae
me intoacamel. J pleaded for mercy and the °°°.
said I would be released from the curse when +. sa
killed by the future husband of Vinayavati, Puskart?
by name. Oh King, I am now released from the a a
and you should go to the forest named Surabhim®™ vat
on the other side of the western sea and marry
maiden.” oind
Puskaraksa was pleased to hear this and the king Le “of
back to the palace and entrusting the administratl© phithe state to his ministers left for the forest of Sur as
‘maruta. Reaching the shore of the western sea DE by
thinking of ways to cross the sea when he on the
Bhadrakali temple nearby. When he went t0 ‘+ be
temple he saw a violin in front of it and taking i tO
played on it a few songs in praise of Kali and we? his
sleep in the temple. The goddess was pleased wit ¢ the
songs and took the sleeping king to the other side 0 self
sea. When he woke up next morning he saw ™*"1y¢
on the other shore and was pleasantly surprise¢-
walked about on the shore and saw an agrama
peeping in saw a sage sitting inside. On seeing ar
king the sage told him thus “Oh Puskararaja, Vin “vy
vati in search of whom you have come here as J ie
gone to pluck flowers for her worship. She will oat
just now and you can then accept your wife of
Previous birth as your wife of this life.” a. seta patt
The king wanted to know more about Vinay outs
when the sage said she was his wife in his Pre’ . a
birth also. Then the Sage said : “‘Once there wrie?
Vaisya called Dharmasena in Tamralipti. He me
and
é€

PUSKARAKSA II
a girl named Vidyullekha. All their wealth was stolen
by thieves and grief-stricken they attempted to commit
suicide by jumping into the fire. They saw two swans
flying towards them and without waiting for them to
reach them they committed suicide. In their next birth
they became a swan couple. They lived on a date tree
during rainy seasons. Once in a storm the tree
fell down and in the darkness each went its own way.
In the morning the male swan started searching for his
mate, In the end he found her in the lake of Manasa
in Svarga. They lived there happily till the rainy
season was over and then they went and stayed on a
mountain. One day a forester killed the she-swan and
while coming with the dead swan in his hands he saw
a set of armed men coming that way and the frightened
forester threw the dead swan into a lake nearby.
Lhe dead swan came in touch with’ the Mrtasafjivani
herb in the pond and coming to life flew away.
The husband swan went into another group of swans
and lived there in sorrow. One day a fisherman came
and caught all the swans in a net. At that time the sheSwan came there and finding her husband in the net
felt very sad. She was thinking of some way to get her
husband released from the net when a man came to
bathe in the pond. He wrapped the diamond necklace
of his in a cloth and placed it on the shore. The sheswan took the necklace and flew making the fisherman
see everything before him. Seeing the swan going
with the necklace the fisherman went after it. The swan
flew to a mountain nearby and placed it on its top.
The fisherman started climbing up and the she-swan
then flew back and released her husband from the net.
One day while they were flying making a lotus as an
umbrella a hunter shot them down with arrows. Fortunately the lotus fell on an idol of Siva and by the power
of Siva they were born in their next birth as a king
and a woman. The king is yourself and the woman is
Vinayavati,”’
Puskaraksa married her there and returning to his
land lived happily for a long period. (Taranga Me
asankavatilambaka, Kathasaritsagara ).
PUSKARAKSA II. A king. Puskaraksa,
ucandra, was cut to death by Paragurama. (B
manda Purana, Chapter 3).
PUSKARAMALINI. A very virtuous woman. She was
the wife of a sage named Satya who lived on alms in
the country of Vidarbha. Because she was very strict and
perfect in the observance of vratas she became lean
but pure. She was very obedient to her husband and
she made her own dress out of peacock feathers gathered from forests. Puskaramdalini was against sacrificing
cows in yajfias. (Chapter 246, Santi Parva).
PUSKARINI 1. Wife of Caksusa Manu. Caksusa got
of Puskarini a son named Manu. (Chapter 18, Agni
Purana),
PUSKARINI II. Wife of Bhumanyu, | empé
Bharata. Bhumanyu got of his wife Puskarini, six sons
named Suhotra, Diviratha, Suhota, Suhavis, Suyaus
and Rcika, (Chapter 94, Adi Parva). :
PUSKARINI III. Wife of king Unmukha, Unmukha g0' ©
is Wi 2 gt - oq. Sumanas, Khyatl,
is wife Puskarini six sons named Angas sae ata)
Kratu, Angiras and Gaya. (4th Skandha, Bhagava : i
PUSPA. A serpent born of the family of Kasyapa. (Sloka
13, Chapter 103, Udyoga Parva).
son of king
rahemperor of
623 | PUSPAKA I
PUSPADAMSTRA. A prominent serpent of the family
of Kagyapa..(Sloka 12, Chapter 35, Adi Parva).
PUSPADANTA I. One of the Astadiggajas. (The eight
elephants of the quarters).
PUSPADANTA II. One of the three soldiers given to
Subrahmanya by Parvati. The other two were Unmaca
and Sankukarna. (Sloka 51, Chapter 45, Salya Parva).
PUSPADANTA III. One of the attendants of Siva. Due
to a curse Puspadanta was born on earth as Vararuci.
(See under Vararuci). There was another curse also on
him. (See under Jambukegvara ).
PUSPADANTI. A relative of a Gandharva named
Citrasena. Puspadanti was once dancing in the court
of Indra with Malyavan and other Gandharvas. Puspadanti faltered in her stepsas she was admiring the beauty
of Malyavan and Indra cursed them both and turned
them into devils. They then observed the Ekadasi (eleventh day of every lunar fortnight) called ‘Jaya and
got themselves released from the curse. (Chaperer 43,
Uttara Khanda, Padma Purana).
PUSPAKA I. A divine Aerial Chariot.
1) Origin. ViSvakarma had a daughter named Samyjiia.
She was married to Sirya. But Sarnjfia could not live
with Sirya for long because of the terrible heat and so
she came back and told her father about it. At once
Vis vakarma ordered Sirya to come to him and the
former then tried to reduce his brightness by rubbing
him.on a grindstone. However much he tried he was
not able to reduce even an eighth of his brightness.
The brightness of the Sun which was rubbed out spread
in the atmosphere as suspended lustrous particles.
Vigvakarma collected that lustrous dust and from it
created four brilliant things. The Cakrayudha of
Mahavisnu is one, the Tristila of Siva is another, and
the third is Puspakavimana (Puspaka Aerial chariot).
The fourth is Sakti, a weapon of Subrahmanya. Vis vakarma gave them all as presents to Brahma. (Chapter
9, Arn’a 2, Visnu Purana).
2) How Kubera got the Puspaka. Vaigravana alias
Kubera was the son born to Visravas of his wife
Devavarnini, daughter of sage Bharadvaja. Visravas
did penance to please Brahma to get a son and Vaisravana was born by the blessing of Brahma. Kubera
also, even while he was a boy, went to the valley of
Himavan and did penance there. Kubera did penance
for ten thousand years with his head downwards in
cold water and another ten thousand years in Paficagni
standing on one leg. At that time Brahma appeared
jn person and asked what boon he wanted. ‘He said he
wanted to be one of the lokapalakas (guardians of the
universe). Granting Kubera that, Brahma gave him
two treasures named Sankhanidhi and Padmanidhi
and also the Puspakavimana. After that Kubera built
a city named Lanka on the mountain of Trikita in the
southern ocean and started living there.
3) How Ravana got the Puspaka. Visravas had three
more sons named Ravana, Kumbhakarna and VibhiThey did penance and acquired divine powers.
Lanka and after defeating Kubera
th captured Lanka and made it
k by force the Puspaka from
sana.
Ravana then went to
’ and sending him nor
his capital. He also too
Kubera. 7
All the victory marches of
Once Ravana was going 10
Ravana were in this Puspaka.
his Puspaka with a Yaksa

PUSPAKA II
beauty kidnapped from Alakapuri when the girl cried
loudly attracting the attention of Sampati, a vulture
King. Sampati attacked Ravana with his fierce beak
and powerful claws. Ravana’s weapons proved futile
against Sampati and the bird broke the Puspaka into
pieces. But the Vimana was a_ divine one and it
regained the original shape and utility soon. All the
weapons of Ravana were destroyed, the great weapon
Candrahasa was thrown away. [The crown of Ravana
was struck down and trampled upon. With his sharp
beak and piercing claws Sampati made bruises on the
face of Ravana. Unable to bear the attack of the
mighty bird Ravana begged for peace. Sampati asked
Ravana to release the Yaksa girl which Ravana did at
once. Ravana then returned to Lanka in the Puspaka
(Kiskindha Kanda, Kamba Ramayana). It was in
this Puspaka plane that Ravana kidnapped Sita. ~In
the battle that followed, Ravana was killed and the
Puspaka Vimana came into the possession of Vibhisana
who gave it asa gift toSri Rama. Sri Rama sent it
back to its original owner, Kubera. But Sri Rama used
it again for once.
A gudra. named Sambika started performing penance
in Ramarajya as a consequence of which there started a
series of infant deaths in the country. Sri Rama knew
the cause and he got down by meditation the Puspaka
Vimana from Kubera. When the plane came from
Kubera Sri Rama got into it and flew to the place
where Sambika was doing penance and on reaching
there killed the Sidra and saved the country from a
calamity. The Vimana was then sent back to Kubera.
Uttara Ramayana) .
PUSPAKA II. The great, forest lying on one side :of the
mountain Latavesta situated to the south of Dvarakapuri. (Chapter 38, Daksinatya Patha, Sabha Parva).
PUSPANANA. A Yaksa. He lives in the court of Kubera.
(Sloka 17, Chapter 10, Sabha Parva).
PUSPARAGAPRAKARA. (RATNASALA). The Puranas state about a fort made of diamonds called Pusparaga shining red above the heavenly place called ~
Manidvipa above Brahmaloka. This fort is seven
yojanas high. All things inside it, the ground, the trees,
the birds, the animals, plants, creepers and gardens are
pusparaga-studded and look red like saffron. Therefore
sne fort is called Ratnasala also. All the dikpalakas of
the universe live with their family and attendants in
this fort. (12th Skandha, Devi Bhagavata).
PUSPARATHA. The chariot of the King called Vasumanas. ‘This chariot was capable of travelling through
air, mountains and océans. (Chapter 198, Vana
Parva) . me
PUSPARNA. A King born of the family of Dhruva.
He married a girl named Prabha. (Skandha 4, Bhagavata).
STSPAVATIANA, A King of Rathantarakalpa. He
got ten thousand sons of his wife Lavanyavati. Puspavahana was a hunter in his previous birth. He used to
give daily lotus flowers to a harlot who was doing
worship of Visnu observing the Dvadasgivrata. He was
doing this service with such devotion that in the next
birth he was born under the name Puspavahana
(carrier of flowers). The sage Bhrgu once told him
about his previous birth and asked him to observe
dvada§sivrata. Puspavahana observed the vrata and
attained bliss. (Srsti khanda, Padma Purana).
PUTANA I
PUSPAVAN. A King. This King who ruled supreme
over all the three worlds also met with his death. The
story of this King was quoted by Bhisma to illustrate
that everything is transitory in this world. (Chapter
277, Santi Parva).
PUSPAVATI. Asacred place. If one stays here for
three nights fasting and bathes in the holy pond there
one would get the benefit of making a thousand
godanas (cow-gifts) and his family will be absolved of
all sins. (Sloka 12, Chapter 85, Vana Parva).
PUSPOTKATA. Mother of Kubera.
1) Genealogy. From Brahma were born two demons
Heti and Praheti. Heti married Bhaya, daughter of
Kala and to them was born a son named Vidyutkesa.
Vidyutkega married Salakatanka daughter of Sandhya
and to them was born a son named Sukesa. They
abandoned the child in a forest and went away. Slva
took care of the child SukeSa who married Daivavati
daughter of the Gandharva called Manimaya and she
delivered three sons named Malyavan, Sumali and
Mali and all the three started living in the crystal
palace built at Lanka by Vigvakarma. ;
At that time a Gandharva woman called Narmada
delivered three daughters named Sundari, Ketumah
and Vasudha. When they came of age Sundari was
married to Malyavan, Ketumati to Sumali and
Vasudha: to Mali. Malyavan got of Sundari seven
demons named Vajrapusti, Virapaksa, Durmukha,
Suptaghna, Yajnakesa, Matta and Unmatta and a
demoness of name Nala. Sumali got of Ketumati ten
sons named Prahasta, Akampana, Vikata, Kalakamukha, Dhamraksa, Danda, Suparsva, Sambhrada,
Prakvata and Bhasakarna and four daughters named
Veka, Puspotkata, Kaikasi and Kumbhinasi. Mali got
of Vasudha four sons named Anala, Anila, Aha and
a in the forests with his daughters. He
gave all the four daughters in marriage to Visravas,
son of Pulastya. Visravas got of Kaikasi three sons
named Ravana, Kumbhakarna and Vibhisana and a
daughter named Sarpanakha. Visgravas got of Puspotkata
a son named Vaisravana or Kubera. (Chapter 11,
Aeni Purana; Chapter 975, Vana Parva, Uttara
Ramayana). bolle
PUSTI. A daughter born to Daksaprajapati of his wife
Prasuti. Dharma married her. Pusti had twelve sisters.
Dharma married them also. Besides these thirteen
daughters Daksa got of Prasiiti another eleven daughters. They were Khyati, Sati, Sambhiti, Smrti, Priti,
K sama DL nkatt. Anasuya, Urjja, Svahadevi and
Svadha. They were married in order to Bhrgu, %1V4,
Marici, Angiras, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, tri,
Vasistha, Agni and the Pitrs. (Chapter 7, Am$sa lt
Visnu Purana).
PUSTIMATI. Another name for the agni called
Bharata. If this agni is appeased there will be health.
(Chapter 221, Vana Parva).
PUTANA I. A demoness who was killed by Krsna at
Ambadi. Her previous birth, her relationship with
Katnsa and such other details are found differently in
different Puranas.
1) Kamsa and Pitana.
(i) Pitana was the daughter of a demoness called
Kaitavi and was the servant maid of the wife of

PUTANA II
Kamsa. She had a younger si @ i
Ma oie ae ee ty. ger sister called Vrkodari.
G). peas steed a pre (foster-mother) of Karhsa.
e entere okula in t ( ivams,
Chaser), Ware 6). e form of a bird. (Harivamésa,
(iii) Piaitana was the sister of Karnsa and the wife of
Ghatodara. (Brahmavaivarta Purana).
2) Pirvajanma ( previour birth), )
fe ne
(1) Pitana in‘her previous birth was born as the ~
daughter of Mahabali bearing the name Ratnamala.
When Vamana appeared before Mahabali during the
time of the latter’s Yajna, Ratnamala mentally desired
thus :—‘‘Oh if only this Vamana became my child! I
could have then:breast-fed him.” Vamana, the omniscient, understood the desire of Ratnamala So during
the incarnation as Krsna, Ratnamala ole born as
Pitana and ISrsna gave her salvation by drinking her
Fe eet (Brahma Vaivarta Purana, Chapters 4 and
(11) Once when the sage Kalabhiru and his daughter
Carumati were travelling together they saw the sage
Kaksivan doing penance on the shores of the river
Sarasvati. Kalabhiru saw in Kaksivan a suitabl
husband for his daughter and so gave Cer ines an
marriage tohim. They were thus living happily together when once Kaksivan had to go ona flecima e
alone leaving Carumati in his agrama. Takin: Soave
tage of her loneliness a Sidra made her his a bi
and when Saksivan returned he found out the ‘d eit
and cursed her to be:bornas a demoness. She beosed
for relief and the sage said she would cet relief ren
Visnu incarnated as Krsna. Pitana was the cursed
form of Carumati. (Chapter 18, Adi Parva).
PUTANA Il. An evil spirit. This spirit which torments
children stays with Subrahmanya (See der Gral
pida. (Chapter 23, Vana Parva). er reat
PUTT . aaa This can be used in Yagas as a
Parva). or Somalata. (Sloka 33, Chapter 35; Vana
PUTRADARSANAPARVA. A sub-divisional Parva of
Agramavasika Parva. It comprises chapters 29 to 36
PUTRAKA. A King. (See under Pataliputra)
PUTRIKAPUTRA. A son born to a woman who is
either a prostitute or one without :
Chapter 3, Manusmrti). a ere ea lara
PUYAVAHA. A hell. (See under Naraka).
R
R. This letter means “sound’’,
RA. The letter ra means fir t :
Purana, Chapter 348), e, strength, Indra. (Agni
(Agni Purana, Chapter
RABHASA I. A monkey in Sri Rama’s army. (Valmiki
Ramayana, Yuddhakanda, Canto A),
RABHASA II. A Raksasa on Ravana’s side. (Valmiki
Ramayana, Yuddha Kanda, Canto 9).
RABHYA. An ancient king wedded to justice and fairplay in ruling the kingdom. (For details see under
Ekavira ). |
RADHA I. Sri Krsna’s dearest consort. Radha is considered to be one of the two forms of Laksmidevi. When
Krsna lived in Gokula as a man with two hands
Radha was his dearest consort. But when he lives in
Vaikuntha as four-handed Visnu, Laksmi is his dearest
RAGHU
consort. (Devi Bhagavata 9, 1; Brahmavaivarta Purana,
9, 49 and 56-57 and Adi Parva Chapter 11).
Different versions about the birth of Radha are given
in the Puranas, as follows :—
(i) She was born in Gokula as daughter of Vrsabhanu
and Kalavati. (Brahmavaivarta Purana, 2, 49; 35-42 ;
Narada Purana, 2. 81).
(ii) She was got as Bhami-kanya (earth-girl) when
King Vrsabhanu was preparing the ground to conduct
a Yajiia. (Padma Purana; Brahma Puraéna 7).
(iii) She was born from the left side of Krsna. (Brahmavaivarta Purana). |
(iv) At the time of Krsna’s bi
attendants to be born on earth. Accordingly Radha,
dear consort of Krsna, took her birth in Gokula
under the star Jyestha in the morning of Suklastami
day in Bhadrapada month. (Adi Parva 11);
(v) Krsna once went with Viraja, the Gopi woman, to
the hall of enjoyment (rasamandalam ). Knowing about
+t Radha followed them to the hall, but both of them
were not to be seen. On another occasion when Radha
found Viraja in the company of Krsna and Sudama
she, in great anger, ‘nsulted Krsna whereupon Sudama
cursed her to be born in human womb and experience the:
pangs of separation from Krsna. (Narada Purana 2. 8;
Brahmavaivarta Purana. 2.49) and Radha cursed him
in turn to be born in the danava dynasty. It was on
account of this curse of Radha that Sudama was born
as the asura called Sankhacuda. (Brahma Vaivarta |
(vi) Radha is considered to be one
which help Visnu in the process
Bhagavata 9. 1 ; Narada Purana 2. 8
(vii) Radha is ay mental Rae. oO
r Paficapranas) .
RADUA TI. rede Reni the foster-father of Karna
and the foster-mother of Karna. (See under eee): }
RAGA. One of the seven daughters of Brhaspati—Ang]1ras. As she was loved by all pope came to be
Cz sea. (Vana Parva, Chapter <
RRA RDAVAL A. cake-like thing formed in a
Yajna performed by King Dilipa. (Drona Parva,
Chapter 61, Verse 8).
RAGHU.
1) General.
rth Visnu asked his
of the five forces
of creation. (Devi
f Sri Krsna. (For
A famous king of the Solar dynasty. The
great king Dilipa was his father. (For Genealogy, birth
etc., see under Da’aratha and Dilipa ).
2) Other information. ; .
() Raghu also occupies_a place in the list of aoe
kings of ancient days. (Adi Parva, Chapter 1, Verse
(ii) is the fight between the king of Virata ae
Kauravas (over the lifting of cows) Raghu was Pp
along with Indra to see Arjuna fight. ( Virata Parva,
Chapter 56, Verse 10). ‘i
(iii) Raghu got from King Yuvanasva a eal 166,
he presented to Harinas va. (Santi Parva :
Verse 78). ey) ‘
(iv) He did not eat flesh. (Anusasana
(v) oe who praise Raghu rl ea aaa
in war. (Anus asana Parva, Chapter a Sheen eva
(vi) In the list of kings to be Teme m™ sey ah aires
at dusk Raghu too is included. (Anu
Chapter 165, Verse 51).
arva, Chapter

RAGINI
RAGINI. A. celestial woman, daughter of Himavan
and elder sister of Parvati.. (For details see under
Parvati).
RAHASYAVEDA. A Veda composed by mni Arvavasu.
This Veda is about Surya. (Bharata, Chapter 137,
Verse [9}.
RAHODARA (RAHODARA). A muni of ancient days.
There is a story in Chapter 39 of the Vamana Purana
about a skull falling on the muni’s neck and the place.
where the skull was removed from his neck coming to
be known as Kapalamocana. ,
Sri Rama killed the Raksasas who lived in Dandaka
forest. The head of one of the Raksasas cut by a very
sharp knife was thrown ofi at a distance in the forest and
it fell on the neck of Rahodara, who happened to be
walking at the time in the forest. It (the head) cut
deep into the bones of the Sage and that made it
dificult for him to move about. Yet, he visited all the
holy ‘places on the earth with the skull of the Raksasa
around his neck. At last he told the noble Rsis about
his misfortune and they directed him to visit ‘Auganasatirtha’, and the moment he touched the water in the
tirtha the skull fell into the water. Having been told
about the incident, the Rsis named the tirtha ‘Kapalamocana’, |
RAHOVADI.
son of Samyati and the father of BhadraSva. (Agni
Purana, Chapter 278).
RAHU,. An Asura. |
1) Birth. Son of Kasya,:aprajapati by his wife Simhika.
(Adi Parva. Chapter 65, Verse 31).
2) Rahu and the Solar eclipse.
R4hu is that about the solar eclipse. (See under Candra
IV, Para 4).
3) Other information.
(i) Rahu is a member of Brahma’s court. (Sabha
Parva Chapter 11, Verse 29),
(ii) Safijaya once spoke to Dhrtarastra about Rahu.
(Bhisma Parva, Chapter 12, Verse 40).
(iii) Rahu exists 10,000 yojanas below the Sun. (Bhiagavata, 5th Skandha). ‘
(iv) Rahu is installedin temples as wearing a half-moon
on his head. (Agni Purana, Chapter 51).
RAHUGANA. A sage who lived in Rgvedic times.
It was his son Gotama, who composed the 74th Sukta
of the first Mandala of Rgeveda.
RAIBHYA I. A hermit who was famous in the Palace of
Yudhisthira. Information about this hermit, found in
the Mahabharata is given below :
(1) Raibhya who was a friend of Bharadvaja had two
sons named Arvavasu) and Pardvasu. They were
great scholars. (M.B. Wana Parva, Chapter 135,
Stanza 12).
(2) Bharadvaja once forbade his son Yavakrita from
going to the hermitage of Raibhya. Getting angry at
this, Raibhya struck his matted hair on the ground and
created a wicked fairy and ordered her to kill Yavakrita.
Knowing this Bharadvaja ran to that place and cursed
Raibhya that his eldest son would kill him.
Once Paravasu, mistaking his father for a cruel animal
killed him. By the effort of his second son Arvavasu,
Raibhya was brought to life again. (M.B. Vana Parva,
Chapter 138, Stanza 1S?) . J« +
(3) Raibhya was the son of Angiras. (M.B.° Santi
Parva, Chapter 208, Stanza 26).
RAIBHYA II.
RAIBHYA III.
A king of the Piru dynasty. He was the >
RAIKVA. There was a_ noble
The oldest story about.
RAIVATA II.
RAIVATAKA I
(4) Raibhya was once an assistant at the sacrifice of
Uparicaravasu. (M.B. Anusasana Parva, Chapter eter
Stanza 7). ;
(5) Raibhya was one of the hermits who visited Bhisma
in his bed of arrows. (M.B. Anufdsana Parva; Chapter
26, Stanza 26).
An ancient hermit. This hermit learned
the Satvatadharma from Virana. After that he taught
his son Dikp4ala, this dharma. (M.B. Santi Parva.
Chapter 343, Stanza 42).
The father of Dusyanta, the husband of
Sakuntala. This Raibhya was the son of Sumatl.
(Bhagavata, Skandha 9).
RAIBHYA IV. One of the sons of Brahma. Once Raibhya
went with Vasu and Angiras to Brhaspati and asked him
several questions, about the attainment of Supernal Be
Brhaspati replied that attainment of heaven could €
had, not by action but only by devotion. Raibhya
immediately started to Gaya to do penance. There
he met with the Sanatkumaras. (Varaha Purana).
Urvasi made an earnest effort to hinder the severe vOW
and penance of Raibhya. But it was of no use, and fe
his curse, that celestial woman became ugly. oh
-entreated him for liberation from the curse. Raibhy4
blessed her and said that she could obtain her orig!?<" —
form by bathing in Yodhinikunda. (Yogini Kunda).
Urvagi bathed in Yodhinikunda and from that yt
onwards that tirtha (holy bath) came to be known
Urvagiyoginikunda.
* 7 King in ancient Ind!
named Janagruti. The following is a story about ue
fame of this King. |
One night while this King was sleeping, some h :
took the form of swans and were flying through the ane
One of them saw the radiance of the fame of JanastU 2
shining brightly. The other swans said that the wi
of Raikva was far greater than this. Jana’rutl wet
this. He found out Raikva and placed all his we@
at the footof Raikva and gave him his daughter
marriage. the
ermits
RAIVATA I. Information about this King found in
Mahabharata is given below :— | the
(1) An ancient King in Bharata. Once he heard the
Gandharvas singing. songs from Samaveda es
arbours of Mandara mountain in the south and ce
coming so much immersed in it, he desired to renoun
his country, city, wife and everything and go to |
forest. (M.B. Udyoga Parva, Chapter 109, Stanza 9). 4
(2) He got a sword from Marutta. He gave that meee
oe eae (M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter 166, stan
(3) Raivata never ate meat. (M.B. Anug4sana P
Chapter 115, Stanza 63).-
(4) He is one of the Kings who should be praised a
the mornings and evenings. (M.B. Anus 4sana Parv’”
Chapter 165, Stanza 53). atl
One of the eleven Rudras. (M.B5- San
Parva, Chapter 208, Stanza 19).
arvas
RAIVATAKA I. A mountain in Gujarat. It stands 2
the present Junagadh. The present name of Raiva
mountain is Girnar. In Mahabharata it is spoken © Je
Ujjayantagiri. It is stated in Mahabharata that pa |
riKrsna and Arjuna were travelling through Prabhas a
setra ‘once, they got to the top of this ‘mountal
(Adi Parva, Chapter 217, Verse 8).
taka

RAIVATAKA II 627 , RAJANITI
The Yadavas once celebrated a
great festival on the also the blessings of the preceptor the Ki hould
pe scclighcime se ps It was during this festival’ that “attend court. (Agni Purse, Gleave: 239) « begs
ee fo away Subhadra, the sister of Sri Krsna. According to Chapter 8 ‘of the Manusmrti (a great
.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 219; Bhagavata, Skandha authority on law and ethics) Kings are born from the
10). shoulders of Indra, Vayu, Yama, Surya, Agni, Varuna,
RAIVATAKA fi A mountain in Saka Island. Mention Candra and Kubera.
made about this mountain in Mahabharata, Bhisma RAJA (S). One of the seven sons of Vasistha by Urja
Chapter 11, Stanza 18. the other six being Gotra, Urdhvabahu, Catia.
\IVATAKA (RAIVATA). Son. of Priyavrata, the Anagha, Sutapas, and Sukra. Holy souls, these seven
brother of Uttinapada. Priyavrata had two wives were Saptarsis in the third Manvantara. (Visnu
Suripa and Barhismati. Suripa gave birth to ten Purana, Part 1, Chapter 10). "
sons beginning with Agnidhra. Three sons Uttama, RAJADHARMA. A stork, which was a_ friend of
Taimasa and Raivata were born to Barhismati. These Brahma and a son of Kasyapaprajapati. This stork was
three sons became Lords of Manvantara, in course of known as Nadijangha also. (See under Nadi jangha).
time. (See under Manvantara). RAJADHARMANUSASANA PARVA. A sub-Parva of
RAJA I. A warrior of - Subrahmanya. (Salya Parva, Santi Parva, Chapters 1-130).
Chapter 45, Verse 78). RAJADHIDEVI. The youngest of the five daughters of
RAJA II. A Sage. He was one of the sons born to the solar King Sara by Marisa. King Jayasena of Avant
Vasistha of Urja. married Rajadhidevi. (Bhagavata, 9th Skandha).
RAJA. - One of the two gate-keepers of Saryadeva. RAJAGRHA (GIRIVRAJA). An ancient city in India,
(Bhavisya Purana, Brahmakanda). capital of Magadha. Dirgha King of Girivraia was killed
RAJA (N). All the important Puranas have laid special - by King Pandu. (Adi Parva, Chapter 112, Verse 27)
emphasis on the importance of rule by Kings. All living Another King, Ambuvica, had for a time ruled over the
city. (Adi Parva, Chapter 203, Verse 17). Afterwards
beings will have Kings of their own. It was Brahma f
who first assigned or ordained Kingship. After: the Jaradsandha became its King. Girivraja is a holy place
creation of the Prajapatis, Brahma made Candra the as well. He who bathes here will become as pleasantKing of the stars and medicines; Varuna was appointed looking as King Kaksivan. (Vana Parva, Chapter 84,
Ki f waters like sea, river etc; Vaisravana was Verse 104) - ' |
ng OWA ee RAJAMUKHI. A celestial woman. (Skanda Purana).
appointed King of Kings; Visnu, King of Devas; Agni, a : ,
; ‘PP : ‘ee same Tile King of Maruts; Daksa King of RAJANI. A holy river in ancient India. (Bhisma Parva,
the Prajapatis; Prahlada King of the danavas; Hima- Chapter 9, Verse 21). Pee mlne
van, King of mountains; Citraratha, King of Gandhar- RAJANITI. (Politics and administration) oH
vase Vasnki, King of nagas; Garuda, King of birds; Politics and administration or administrative politics in
Airdavata King as elephants; Ox, King of cattle, Tiger, ancient India is dealt with in Manusmrti and Agni
King of animals Peepal tree, King of trees and Becca eee 5 acd cpap ie yr: even peat
ae ) Sra aa\s se six kinds of army formation
Uccaiggravas, that of horses. (Agni Purap worship A Devas eaaly and then set Ae for aoe
an-kind should be and
As to what type the King of ee anata as follows. The Mialabala, Bhitabala, Srenibala, Suhrdbala, Satrubala
ae ee eons i Sceetine ora brahmin as and Atavikabala are the six kinds of army formations.
eae ee (50 Baer ‘1 = chief. The Commander-in-chief The list is given in order of the comparative importance ©
waitla be of noble birth and well-versed in law. Only of the bala. The army has six parts i.e. Mantra (adviUd: be 0 no hea PE boldly and openly should sers}, Kosa ( treasury), Padati (infantry), Turaga
: strong eae Se 4 ie ambassador. Either a male (Cavalry), Gaja (elephant) and Ratha (chariot).
e appointe emissa Y cate d to catry chewing mate- If an attack is feared either against the forts or across
ora female may be apP hould be loyal, friendly and rivers Or trenches, the army should be marched for their
rials. But, that person § hardships. The body-guard protection. The Army Chieftains surrounded by mighty
t warriors should lead the divisions. The King and his
capable of putting UP yi words-man. Ministers
of the King should be we ley astras (moral and wife should be at the centre of the army-division along
should be conversant with the treasury and first class soldiers. On both sides
ethical codes). ded by the royal of the King should march the cavalry and the chariots
should form the farther wings. Elephants should proceed
of surroun
Also, the King should be ‘ion of the army,
a : div] :
physician, chief of the elephant on the two:sides of the chariot and soldiers recruited
‘ce. master of the
the mahout, chief of the cavaty Os and the chief from forests must march on the sides of the elephants.
forts, the architect, preceplo! ‘of the palace. The supreme commander will march behind all the
of the internal administration — ‘he dawn, the King others guiding the army.
When itis yet three HOU sic, praises by courtiers If there is cause for fear in front of the army durmg
should wake up from sleep. As soon as he has the march, three Vyahas (Phalanxes) Makara, Syena
1 his waking UP. talks with his spies. or Sici should be put in the Vanguard. - The makata
Vyiha is more suited to meet an attack from behind. if
etc. should heralc hold
woken up, the King shou sags gall only after this
count: attack is feared from the flanks then also the SakataThen he should examint tr After his puja (worship )
should he begin the ablution®- be gifted to brahmins. vyiiha is advisable. When attack from all the sides 1s
is over, cows with gold should i. Bee ‘nto the mirror feared sarvatobhadravyiha is indicated. It is the duty
With their blessings he must log Then he must look of the Supreme Commander to safe-guard his army
and suppress reactionary forces whenever the army gets
and then in ghee along with ee etc, And after having /
up the almanac for the day ted py the physician and weakened, when it marches through caves, mountains or
taken the medicine presc

RAJAPURA I | | 628
rocks or other difficult terrain or weakened by the
persistent attacks of the enemy.
When the time, place and the people’s attitude are
favourable, the King should engage himself in open war
with the enemy, and if they are unfavourable he shall
not goin for war. If confrontation with the enemy
occurs under circumstances in which the King is visible
to the enemy, powerful divisions of the army consisting
of warriors of great calibre should be stationed either at
the front or in the rear.
In the formation of vyihas (phalanx) there are seven
factors called Uras (breast), Kaksas (arm-pits), two
Paksas (sides), two Madhyas (centre) and Prstha
(rear). ‘The commanders should be surrounded by
bold soldiers. The leader is the very life of the war.
At the Uras of the vyitha powerful elephants, at the
Kaksas chariots and at the Paksas cavalry should be
stationed, This is called paksabhedivyaha. If at the
centre cavalry and at Kaksas and Paksas elephants are
stationed, it is called antarbhedivyiha. If there are no
chariots, cavalry or infantry may be put in their place.
Certain authorities maintain that in every vyaha
elephants may be stationed in the place of chariots, if
chariots are not available. (Agni Purana, Chapter 242).
RAJAPURA I. An ancient and famous cily in Kamboja.
Here Karna defeated the Kambojas. (Drona Parva,
Chapter 4, Verse 5). |
RAJAPURA II. Capital city of King Citrangada of
Kalinga. Innumerable kings gathered together in the
city in connection with the Svayarhvara of the princesses. (Santi Parva, Chapter 4, Verse 3).
RAJASEKHARA. A Sanskrit dramatist who lived in
India in 7th century A.D. Balabharata or Prakandapandava, Balaramayana, Viddhag alabhafjika and Karpuramanjari are his more famous dramatic works.
Karpiramaiijari refers to him as the preceptor of a
king of Kanauj. Rajagekhara was known by the name
Kaviraja also.
Balaramayana, called also Mahanataka, is a drama in
ten Acts. Balabharata contains only two Acts. Its theme
is the wedding of Draupadi and the ruin caused by
the game of dice. Viddhasalabhafijika is a drama in
four Acts. He has a further work to his credit, Kavyaoe a Aiea chapters.
ome scholars hold the view Ajas i
tae WE iceuneg Cu. that Rajagekhara lived in
RAJASUYA. A great yajiia. Harigcandra and also
co performed it. (Sabha Parva, Chapters 33,
RAJASUYAPARVA. A sub-Parva of Sabha Parva
(Chapters 33-35).
RAJASUYARAMBHA PARVA. A sub-parva of Sabha
Parva, Chapters 13-19.
RAJATANABHA. A Yaksa. He married ‘Manivara,
daughter of Anuhrada and two sons, Manivara and
Manibhadra were born to them.
RAJAVAN. A muni born in the Bhrgu dynasty. To
Bhrgu were born of his wife Khyati, Laksmi, the wife
of Visnu and also two sons called Dhaté and Vidhata.
They married Ayati and Niyati daughters of Meru.
Two sons, Prana and Mrkandu were horn to the couples. From Mrkandu was born Markandeya and ‘from
him Veda‘iras. Prana had ason called Dyutiman and
he a son called Rajavan. It was from Rajavan that the
E
RAKA II. A Raksasa girl. She served, at the instance -
RAKSAS. A particular sect of asuras. Yaksas
RAKSAS
Bhrgu dynasty multiplied. (Visnu Purana, Part |,
Chapter 10).
RAJAYOGA. See under Yoga.
RAJI (RAJI). A prominent king of the Puaru dynasty.
He was one of the fivesons of Ayus by Svarbhanu the
other four being Nahusa, Ksatravrddha, (Vrddhagarman)
Rambha and Anenas. (Agrama Parva, Chapter 70;
Verse 23}.
Puranas contain stories that Indra destroyed people
born in Raji’s dynasty as they hated the former. That side
in which the powerful Raji fought used to win. In a fight
between the asuras and the Devas, when Indra felt that
his side was losing, he secured the participation of Ka)!
in the fight on condition that the latter would be given
Indra-hood. The asuras were defeated and Raji w4
made king of svarga.
Raji had thousands of children and they were known under
the common name Rajeyaksatriyas. But they were 2
foolish lot and lacked the capacity to distinguish themselves in Indra’s place. Therefore, at the instance °
Brhaspati, preceptor of the Devas, Indra destroye
them all and resumed his former position and Stee
(Bhagavata, 9th Skandha ; Vayu Purana, Chapter ~*
Verse 76; Brahmanda Purana 11 ; Harivamsa 1, 4%
Matsya Purana. Chapter 24, Verses 34-49).
RAJJUKANTHA. A grammarian. In Panini’s astadhy@y?
ledgé
he is depicted as a maharsi possessing great know
of the Vedas.
RAJNI. Second of the three wives of Vivasvan. The
couple had a son called Revata.
RAJYAVARDDHANA. A_ king .of Vaigali. Rajy®
varddhana was a great ascetic, who could comprehen f
the past, the present and the future. Knowing that wit
death was near, he told his subjects about it and W
into the forests for tapas. ee:
Sorry over the departure of their king, his subject ve:
well as ministers began worshipping Sarya, who appr ae
ed and blessed them saying that their king would a
for ten thousand years in perfect health, victory te
with all wealth and prosperity and other resources @
with unimpaired youthfulness. boon
The ministers and subjects greatly elated over the reedell
informed their king in the forest about it, but he on'y ren
sorry about it. He told them that during his life se of
thousands years he would have to witness the deat ° tO
his sons, grandsons and subjects and would thus hav
be sad throughout life. he
The king consoled and made them return. The? ihe
did rigorous tapas to Sirya and secured from en
boon that during his life-time none would die. (
kandeya Purana).
O
RAKAI. The presiding Devi of the full moon. She, °
( Saly®
was present at the birth of Subrahmanya.
Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 14). his
Rakadevi was the daughter of Angiras, who had by aka
wife Smrti four daughters called Sinivali, Kuha,
and Anumati. (Visnu Purana. Part 1, Chapter |).
a
Kubera, Maharsi Visravas, and a son called Khara ee
a daughter, Sarpanakha, were born to her by the m4
rsi. (Vana Parva, Chapter 275, Verse 3). a
a
et ob
Raksas were offsprings born to KaSyapa prajapatt .
his wife Muni. (Agni Purana, Chapter 19).

RAKSASA II. An appro
RAKSASAGRAHA. An_ evil spit
RAKSASA I
RAKSASA I. A particular sect of asuras. The ancients
had ordained that Raksasas should not be killed at dusk. -
Valmiki Ramayana, Balakanda, Canto 22, Verse 22):
Uttararamayana, contains the following story about the
origin of Raksasas. When Brahma was reciting the
Vedas at the beginning of Krtayuga he felt very hungry
and certain forms emanated from his face. Those who
were born from his anger assumed the form of Raksasas and those from his hunger that of Yaksas. The
Raksasas turned out to be evil folk killing and eating
cows and brahmins. Praheti and Heti were the
first born Raksasas, the latter of whom wedded Bhaya,
daughter of K4la, and to them was born a son called
Vidyutkega, He married Salakatanka, daughter of
Sandhya. Though a child was born to them they
forsook it in the Himalayan slopes and went their own
way.
Rete time Siva and Parvati. came that way and after
blessing the child returned to Kailasa. The child was
named Sukeja. He married Devavati, daughter of the
Gandharva called Manimaya and three children ae
born to the couple, viz. Malyavan, Sumali andl a
They did tapas to propitiate Brahma and when ne
appeared requested him thus : “We must defeat Yaksas
Kinnaras, Gandharvas, Siddhas, Vidyadharas, ¥ a.
Kubera, Vasava, Naga kings and daityas SUR nny
and we must not be defeated by any, Ones c ae
kill all enemies and they shall not kill us. We ¢
Shall never quarrel among ourselves.
: -oud and
Brahma granted all their prayets. penta aah conhaughty due to these boons, began F AN TI6 5
saci cows and brahmins. They ashe ae aaa
to build a city for them and he Dea e brothers
on Mount Trikita in the south sea. Sumali and
took their abode in Lanka. Meee cumatll and
.Mali married respectively hpi es woman Narmada
Vasudha, daughters of the Gandharva Spe
Malyavan becet of Sundari seven cn utah ann. ta
Virupaksa, Durmukha, Suptaghna, Ned Nala.
4nd Unmaita. and also adauebten ca and also four
To Sumali wer born of Ketumati ten sons
daughters. | Vasudha, and
Four sons were born to M Hreeere
they became the ministers of Vibhisar as sons, grandThen thousands of Raksasas wer® sos and they lived
sons, brothers, nephews, €tc- to the eae
in Lanka, a terror to the whole wo Veka Puspotkata,
While the daughters of Sumali, walking in the
Kaikasi and Kumbhinasi were ais to Brahma in all
f Kubera on bera OWE
Sip pe eloty, They understood Laat Sitaeis ne
his pomp and glory to his bes the son Kaikagi, went
therefore, the next day one of t 4 for children by him.
to Visravas’s agrama and pray phisana and KumbhaThree sons called Ravana, 9 vakba were born [0
karna and a daughter called Sirp2? ns by performing
her by Vigravas. They secured oe as king of the
tapas and Ravana lived in Lan
Raksasas.
ali of his wife
ed system of marriage. (See
ected with ue
iJ] immediately
Raksasas. Affected’ by_this spirit Ben eras aa
become mad. (Vana Parva, Chapter *~
under Vivaha). : conn
629 . RAKTABIJA
RAKSASAYAJNA (RAKSASASATRA). Paragara
Muni once conducted a yajfiato annihilate the Raksasas
altogether. (Adi Parva, Chapter 180). The provocation
for Para§ara to conduct the yajia was that a Raksasa
called Kalmasapada ate Sakti, the father of the muni
and the son of Vasistha. When the yajfia had reached
its climax Pulastya, Pulaha and Kratu went to Parasara
and held conciliatory talks with him, and Parasara,
ended the yajfia. The Agni that he had made to devour
the Raksasas was discarded on the slopes of the Himalayas. According to the Puranas that fire, even to this
day, continues consuming the Raksasas, trees and rocks.
(For details see under Kalmasapada and Parasara) .
RAKSITA. A celestial woman, daughter of Kas yapaprajapati by Pradhadevi. (Adi Parva, Chapter 65,
Verse 50). |
RAKSOBHAKSA. A hell. (For details see under Kala.)
RAKSOVAHA. A kingdom in ancient India. The Ksatriyas there were annihilated by Paragurama. (Drona
Parva, Chapter 70, Verse 12).
RAKTA. A son of Mahisasura. He had two sons called
Bala and Atibala. He had also a number of mighty
army generals like Dhimraksa and thousand aksauhinis
under each general.’ (Skanda Purana, 7.1.119).
RAKTABIJA.
1) General. Rebirth of Rambhasura, father of Mahisasura. Stories of Raktabija and Rambhasura are
inextricably intertwined.
2) Origin of Raktabyja, Once upon a time there lived an
asura king called Danu. His two sons, Rambha and
Karambha who had no children, did tapas at Paficanada
for the blessing of having issues. Rambha and Karambha
meditated upon Malavata Yaksa, the former seated at
the centre of the five fires and the latter standing in the
water. Indra in the guise of a crocodile dragged
Karambha away by the feet and killed him. Angry at
the death of his brother, Rambha decided to cut off his
head and offer it in fire. When he was about to do so,
Agni appeared and told him that suicide was worse
than killing others, and promised to grant him whatever he desired. Accordingly Rambha requested Agni
for a son more effulgent than the latter, who would
conquer the three worlds and would not be defeated
even by the Devas and the Asuras. Rambha further
wanted that son to be as powerful as Vayu, exceptionally
handsome and skilled in archery.
Agni blessed Rambha that he would have, as desired, a
son by the woman whom he coveted. On his way
back home he saw a beautiful she-buffalo, which he
married. He took the buffalo which got pregnant by
him, to Patala to protect it from the attack by
other buffaloes. One day another buffalo felt a passion
for Rambha’s wife and in the fight that ensued Rambha
was killed by it. Rambha’s wife died in his funeral
yyre. It was from the centre of the fire that the very
powerful Mahisasura was born. Rambhasura also rose
from the fire under the name Raktabija. (Vamana
Purana, Chapter 17; Devi Bhagavata, 5th Skandha).
3) Boon to Raktabija. Raktabija secured from Siva a
boon according to which if one drop of blood from
his body fell on the battlefield, many Raktabijas would
arise from the blood and fight the enemies. Each of
these Raktabijas would also be like the others in the
matter of strength, form and weapons. (Devi Bhagavata, 5th Skandha).

RAKTAJA
4) His death. War between Devas and Asuras broke out
andin the fight between Devi and Raktabija blood from
his body flowed. When Devi found it impossible to
kill the lakhs of Raktasuras who arose from the blood,
she resorted to a trick. She asked Camundi to lick off
the blood flowing from Raktabija before it fell on the
ground. Accordingly Devi began killing the asuras and
Camundi consuming their blood and flesh. When the
artificial Raktabijas were all killed thus, the original
Raktabija alone remained and in the fight between
them, Devi cut off his head with her sword. CAamundi
did not permit even a drop of blood to fall on the
ground. (Devi Bhagavata, 5th Skandha).
RAKTAJA. A form assumed by Arjuna in his previous
birth. The following story is told in Padma Purana
(Chapter 14) about Arjuna being reborn as such at the
meeting of Kali and Dvapara yugas and Svedaja being
born as Karna during the same period.
Once during a quarrel between Siva, and Brahma the
former nipped off Brahma’s head. (For detai!s see under
Brahma). Some drops of sweat appeared on the forehead of the angry Brahma, and from the sweat which
Brahma wiped with his hand arose a person wearing a
thousand shields, bow and quiver. That person was
Svedaja. Heasked Brahma what he should do and
the former granted him permission to destroy Siva. He
then approached Siva with bow drawn and the frightened Siva ran to Visnu and sought refuge. Svedaja
followed Siva and when Visnu, seeing him, raised a
loud noise ‘Hum’. Siva prostrated at Visnu’s feet. Siva
extended the skull in his hand towards Visnu_ requesting something to be given to him. Mahavisnu, who had
nothing else to give Siva, put his right hand into the
skull as alms, Siva wounded the hand with his Sala
(three-pronged weapon) and pure red blood began
flowing from the hand into the skull. The blood continued flowing for a thousand yearsin a length of fifty
yojanas and thickness of ten yojanas. At the end of
the period Visnu asked whether the skull was not filled
yet, and looking into the skull with his three eyes Siva
answered that it was full. Then Visnu stopped the
flow of blood, and Siva, in the presence of Visnu, looked
into the blood for athousand years and stirred it with his
hand. The blood gradually turned into a bubble, and
a person possessing thousand hands and as glowing - as
fire appeared in the skull. He had a crown on his head
and he held in his hands a bow and quiver. He wore
gloves on his hands. And, that was Raktaja, an incarnation of Nararsi. )
Looking at Raktaja, Siva told Visnu thus : ‘*This master
in archery is Nara. You spoke Nara, and let his name,
therefore be Nara. Oh Narayana, you both will be
called Naranarayanas. This Nara will be of help to
behalf of the Devas and also in the sustenance
and protection of the world. He will further help you
to kill the asuras. Nara, the great intellectual that he
5 will become a muni, of surpassing wisdom. Brahm4’s
divine fifth head possesses so much of effulgence. Nara
is created from that effulgence and also from the blood
~ hands and my look at it. He will annihilate
you on
from you .
all enemies in war. He will be a terror to those persons
who cannot be conquered by you, Indra and the other
Devas.
od there amazed Raktaja praised him
While Visnu sto ded hands and asked from the skull
and Siva with fol
_ yuga you should sce that Svedaja is
RAKTAJA
what he should do. Then Siva ordered him thus:
You kill this asura (Svedaja) created by Brahma with
his own effulgence.”’ And Siva led Raktaja out of the
skull by his hands and told him again :—‘‘Look, here
lies the terrible person I spoke about made unconscious
by the cry of ‘Hum’ by Visnu. Awake him immediately.”” After having said this Siva disappeared. Nara,
in the presence of Narayana, kicked the unconscious
Svedaja with his left foot, and he came out of his unconscious state.
The fierce fight that ensued between Raktaja and
Svedaja continued for two years. By then Svedaja had
lost everything but one of his shiclds and Raktaja had
only his two arms to fight with. At this stage Vasudeva
(Visnu) in great alarm went and asked Brahma
whether Raktaja might not kill Svedaja. Brahma _
answered, ‘In the next birth Nara may defeat Svedaja’.
Saying ‘Right, let that be so’, Visnu returned to the
battlefield and withdrew them from fighting with the
assurance that they would be given an opportunity to
fight again during the period of the Wali and the
Dvapara yugas. _ _
Afterwards Visnu directed Aditya (Sun) and Akhandala (Indra) to look after Raktaja and Svedaja. He
told Aditya further :—‘‘At the end of the Dvapara
reborn, in the
interests of the Devas, as your son. In the Yadu
dynasty will be born a very powerful fellow called |
Sora and-he will have a very beautiful daughter named
Prtha. Durvasas wiJl advise her some mantras as 4
boon and she will have some sons from the Devas
whom she will invoke with the mantras. With that
object in view, while in her periods, she would, at the
time of dawn gaze at you with love. Then he (Svedaja )
will be born as the son called Vasusena of Kunti, the
virgin.” ;
The Sun-God agreed to obey the above instructions 0
Visnu and told him further :—‘‘I shall procreate in the
virgin a very powerful and valiant son, who will become
well-known in the world as Karna. He will gift away
all wealth to brahmins.’’ After saying this Surya disgia Visnu told Indra as follows :—“You
should, at the end of the Dvapara yuga see that this
Nara, born from blood, 1s reborn as an aspect 0
yours on earth. King Pandu will one day go into the
forest with his wives, Kunti and Madri, and he will
then become the object of an animal’s curse. He will
therefore, in a spirit of renunciation, go to mount
atafrnga where he would ask Kunti to: become 4
mother by another ian. Unwilling to do so Kunt
will desire to have sons by Devas, and when she prays
to you, you should favour her with this Nara as son.
Devendra raised a Jegal objection to the above injunction of Visnu as follows :—‘‘You, who incarnated yourselfas Rama in the twentyseventh yuga of the last
Manvantara for the purpose of killing Ravana, killed
my son Bali. Therefore I do not wish to procreate
Nara as my son.” To this objection of Indra Visnu
assured him that as a penalty for the mistake of killing
Bali, he would be a companion of Nara (Arjuna) who
would be born as Indra’s son. im '
According to the above terms _and conditions fighting
between Raktaja and Svedaja ended. In the next
birth Raktaja was born as Arjuna and Svedaja as
ae wwe ee
eee

RAKTANGA 631 RAMA
Karna. Mahavisnu incarnated himself as Sri Krsna.
The meeting of the three in the battle-field is wellknown.
— ee seae born in Dhrtarastra’s dynasty. It
was burnt to deathat the yajfia of Janamejaya. (Adi
Parva, Chapter 57, Verse 18). - ee
RAMA. A synonym for Mahalaksmi. There is a story
in the eighth Skandha of Devi Bhagavata as to how the
name Rama came to be attached to Laksmi.
To havea son, Dataratha took as his second wife
Kaikeyi, daughter of the King of Kekaya and younger
sister of Yudhajit. But she turned out to be barren.
Then he married Sumitra, daughter of the King of
Kaégi. Even after many years none of the three wives
of Dz aratha presented him with a son.
One of those days Da aratha went deep into the forest,
hunting. While resting on the banks of river Sarayu
he heard a sound like that of an elephant drinking
Kevanta, the very handsome son of Sirya one day came
to Vaikuntha mounted on his horse Uccaiggravas
to pay his respects to Mahavisnu. Even Laksmidevi
stood aghast speechless for a very short time at the
charm of Revanta changing her looks between him and
his horse. Mahavisnu did not at all like this and cursed
that since Laksmi’s eyes enjoyed the sight of some one
sne would come to be called Rama also and that she
would be born as a mare on earth.
RAMA (SRI RAMA.).. -The-‘séventh dnearnation of
Mahavisnu, a very powerful king of the solar dynasty.
1) Genealogy. Descended from Visnu thus: Brahma -
Marici - Kas yapa-Vivasvan - Vaivasvata Manu-Mahabahu - Prasandhi - Ksupa-Iksviku - Vikuksi - SagidaKakutstha (Purafijaya ) - Anenas-Prthulas va-PrasenajitYuvanas va-Mandhata-Purukutsa-Trasadasyu-Anaran aHryas va-Vasumanas-Sutanva - "Tid vyaruna Satyeriae
(‘Triganku )-Harig candra - Rohita va - Harita - CuficuSudeva > Bharuka - Bahuka - Sagara - AsamajijasaArhé uman-Bhagiratha-Srutanabha- Sindhudvipa-Ayutayus-Rtuparna - Sarvakama - Sudas - Mitrasakha (Kalmasapada) - ASmaka - Milaka - Khatvanga - Dilipa
(Dirghabahu) -Raghu-Aja-Dagaratha-Rama ;
2) Reason for his birth, When Ravana-was ruling’ over
Lanka as a terror to the world, evils and svueliies like
matricide, patricide, fratricide, killing of cows. hatred
for good people, children’s death, abduction of women
killing of munis, thefts etc. became rampant. When the
world became grief-stricken Bhimidevi (Goddess of
earth) assumed the form of a cow and took refuge with
Indra in ‘Svarga. She told him about the atrocities
committed by Ravana and the other Raksasas. Then *
Indra took Bhumidevi (cow) to Brahma, who took
them to Siva at Kailasa as killing Ravana was beyond
his (Brahma’s) power. Siva thought it improper on
his part to kill Ravana and so he took Brahma and
others to Visnu and submitted their grievance to him
Visnu consoled them by saying as *Mlowse | var
decided to incarnate myself as the son of Dagaratha, king
of Ayodhya. You Devas also should take birth on earth
to help me to kill Ravana and i Ales:
to protect Bhimidevi and ereae esas 7, ie
earth.” (Kamba Ramayana, Parva Kanda) 4 ,
3) Birth King Dasaratha of the. solar “dynasty ‘ruled
Kosala with Ayodhya ashis capital. Maharsi Vasistha
was his family preceptor. With ;
eight ministers such as Sumantra and others he ruled
the country in the path of supreme welfare and prosperity. A daughter, Santa, was born to him of his wife
Kausalya. Years passed by, yet he had no son. One
of those days King Lomapéada, close friend of Dagaratha
visited Ayodhya. Lomapada, who was childless
requested Dasaratha for S nt&a and she was given
as his adopted daughter by Dagaratha. Lomapada gave
her in marriage to Rsyasrnga, who had once caused
rain-fall in Anga. (for details see under Rsyasrnga ).
the cooperation of
water in the river. Without realising the fact that the
voice was that of the son ofa muni filling water ina
pot for his aged parents, the King released an arrow
against him. When Da aratha walked to the spot, he
realised his mistake. He had hit unknowingly a brahminboy, a muni’s son. The boy lay wounded about to
die. The boy explained to Dagaratha who he was and
how he had come to the river to carry water to his
aged parents. After telling the King details about him
he breathed his last. Sobbing at his misadventure,
Dagaratha went to the aged parents of the dead boy
with the pot filled with water. The parents, who were
blind thought that it was their son who was
approaching them when Dagaratha revealed the sad
story to them. After cursing Dagaratha that he too
would die of separation from his son, the aged muni
expired; his wife also died in his funeral pyre. ‘Ihe
grief-stricken King returned to Ayodhya. !
Only Vasistha and Sumantra were told about t :
curse, which, though a cause for great sorrow, implie
that Dagaratha would have sons. Vasistha, therefore,
advised Da ’‘aratha to get the yajna, called Bae
performed by Rsya rnga. Accordingly the a ieee
his. daughter Santa and _ his son-in-law, sya ee
to Ayodhya, and the yajfia began. Rsyasrnga ee €
offerings in the sacred fire chanting the putra es
hymn. Then a divine person arose from the fire wit "
golden vessel full of pudding (nectar of the Devas) eh
disappeared again in the fire after giving the vessel to
Rsyasrnga. Rsyasrnga handed it over to pec
thay who as advised by the mahars1 divided the pudding between Kausalya and Kaikeyi. They gave a part
of their shares of the pudding to Sumutra also. The
three queens conceived, and in due course of time
Kausalya and Kaikeyi delivered a son each and
Sumitra two sons. The son of Kausalya was named
Rama, the son of Kaikeyi, Bharata, and sons of Sumiutra
were named Laksmana and Satrughna. (Valmik1 Ramayana, Balakanda). 3
4) Boons granted to Kavkeyt. Before the sons were born to
Dagaratha, the mighty asura called Sambara once
attacked Devaloka. Dagaratha was at that tume Enews
as Nemi, and he was a great friend of Indra, and a
his invitation Nemi, along with Kaikey!, wen “A
Devaloka ina chariot. Nemi killed the asura ae
within half an hour. . Then Sambara a a
form of ten Sambaras and attacked Ts ea “a
points. In this context Nemi turned an ae sae
chariot in all the ten directions at the sam 1 Naa
killed-all the ten Sambaras and recaptured Magi Tes
was from that day onwards that Nemi came to
as Dasaratha. 1% q
In the fight with the Sdmbaras on all points a ee
chariot was so violently shaken that the noe sae
was about to slip off and fall OME eer ne
threatened danger Kaikeyi applied her finget

RAMA
proper place of the axle and thus averted the mishap.
When Dasaratha knew about this timely action of
Kaikeyi he was so very pleased that he asked her to
choose any two boons she desired, and she asked him
to keep the boons with him to be granted whenever
she requested for them. Daégaratha and Kaikeyi took
leave of Indra and returned to Ayodhya. (Kamba
Ramayana, Balakanda).
5) in the company of Visvdmitra. The four sons of
Dasaratha grew up in Ayodhya. Though they were
equally friendly to one another, intimacy between Rama
and Laksmana and also between Bharata and Satrughna
came to be thicker. Once Visvamitra decided to conduct a yajfia for the happiness and contentment of all
people. At the very commencement of the yajfia,Raksasas,
in batches, tried to spoil it, and M@rica and Subahu,
sons of ‘ataka were the leaders of the obstructionists.
Visvamitra knew that Rama was the most effective
weapon against the Raksasas and requested Dasaratha
to lend him Rama’s help. Daégaratha felt sad about it
and Vigvamitra was getting excited over the former’s
attitude when Vasistha advised Dasgaratha to send Rama
along with Vigvamitra. Accordingly DaSaratha sent
Rama to the forest in the company of Vig vamitra.
Laksmana too followed his brother.
While walking in the forest Visvamitra related many
old stories to Rama and Laksmana. They crossed
river Sarayu, passed by many asramas of munis and
reached the Pala forest. Here Visvamitra imparted to
Rama and Laksmana, who felt too weak on account
of hunger and thirst the two mantras Bala and Atibala,
which would ward off hunger and thirst. He also
taught them the use of certain rare arrows. Sri Rama
was specially taught the use of a divine arrow called
Jrmbhakastra.
6) Yataka killed. While Visvamitra was relating to
them the story of Tataka, who dwelt in the forest, they
saw the fierce Raksasi coming fast with a long spear in
her hand. She threw a big rock at Viévamitra. Rama
shattered the rock with an arrow. Next, Tataka dashed
forward against Rama roaring furiously, and Rama,
with another arrow killed her. The soul of the dead
Tataka assumed the form of a Gandharva woman and
ascended to heaven.
7) Salvation to Ahalyg. Raksasas like Subahu lined up
to obstruct the yajfia, which Visvamitra began after
the killing of Tataka. Rama killed Subahu ; Marica ran
away in fright and hid himself in the sea. Rama drove
away the other Raksasas.
Next, Visvamitra, hearing about the Svayarhvara of
Sita, daughter of King Janaka started for his palace with
Rama and Laksmana, and on the way he told the boys
many Purdanic stories. They bathed in the river Ganga
and a short walk took them to the vacant agtama of
Gautama. The great muni called Gautama had once
lived in this asrama with his dutiful wife Ahalya and
their son Satananda, an erudite scholar in all sciences.
Indra, who lost his head over the great beauty of Ahalya
wemt to the asrama one midnight in the form ofa
cock and crew. Thinking it was already dawn Gautama
went to the river for bath when Indra assumed’ the
form of the muni, entered his bed room and slept with
When Gautama understood the fraud thus
a him, he cursed her into a stone. She was
ts resume her old form when, during Tretayuga, Sei
RAMA
Rama trod upon the’ stone. Accordingly, as soon as
Rama trod on the stone Ahalyacast off her form as stone
and resumed her old form as Ahalya. Immediately
Gautama and Satananda also appeared on the scene.
Ahalya ascended to the sky as a devi.
8) Marriage. VlSvamitra came to king Janaka’s palace
with Rama and Laksmana. Janaka’s daughter Sita and
his younger brothers’ daughters Mandavi, Urmila and
rutakirti were living in the palace as sisters and very
good friends. One day the princesses who were playing
in the garden could not pluck jasmine flowers from 4
height. Sita.then brought the Saivacapa (Siva’s bow)
from the weapon-room and,shot down Jasmine flowers
with it. As Janaka watched Sita’s action of shooting
with the Saivacapa an idea came into his head. He
announced that the hero, who succeeded in shoot
ing with Saivacapa, would be given Sita in marriage. ;
Just as Rama and Laksmana were inseparable compa?
ions Sita and Urmila were always to be found together
and Mandavi and Srutakirti were particular friends.
Sri Rama shot an arrow from Siva’s bow and he i
selected as Sita’s husband. Janaka informed Dagaratn®
of the marriage and he came with his attendants
Bharata married Mandavi, Laksmana, Urmila 4”
sath ae . ee ‘ eSatrughna, Srutakirti. After living in Mithila for cece
time Dagaratha and others returned to Ayodhya. V!
mitra went to the Himalayas for rest. cheit
9) Parafurdéma’s threat. Dagaratha and others on :
way back to Ayodhya passed the Videha kingdom jen
reached the suburbs of Bhargavagrama. All of a su ne
a shining form of a brahmin with Ksatriya ele e
appeared in front of the procession. Vasistha um :
stood that it was Paragurama and Dagaratha_ @
others were alarmed. Paragurama approached Sri een ‘
who was viewing the former with quiet serenity. Per eiva
rama was very angry that Rama broke the bow 0 nies.
who was his (Paragur‘ima’s) preceptor. All Rama's oke
ciliatory talk failed to pacify Paragurama, who a eA
thus to Rama: “You, impudent fellow! you ae
me and my preceptor. All right, let me see your P°
Take this my bow, and shoot with it.” 4. And
Sri Rama took hold of the bow and bent it easily, che
fixing an arrow on it asked Paragurama to point oS oi
target for it. As Paragurama feared that if the . sked
was sent, it might crush the whole univese, N° tapas
Rama so choose the result of his (Parasurama § be
as target for the arrow. Both the bow and the —
were of Visnu’s power. That power as well as rarer:
Vaisnava power, Paragurama transferred to 9! ion
and having thus fulfilled the object of his incaree
Paragurama went to Punyadgrama for permanent a Gri
10) Ruin of the country. Dasgaratha decided to insta edly
Rama as crown prince. The’ people whole-heat a ae
welcomed it. During the night previous to the © ing
tion, while the wives of Dagaratha were gladly discu*, of
the happy incident, Manthara, the tale-bearing ™4"" ya
Kaikeyi advised her mistress to prevail upon Dasara”.
to exile Rama into the forest and install Bharaté ut
crown prince. Manthara also reminded Kaikey! @ cha
the boons, which had been promised to her by Dasart ap
during the devdsura war. Kaikeyi fell into the and
thus set by Manthara. Kaikeyi putona wrathful face 7 og
shut herself up in a room. When Dagaratha eM4"" ve
of her the reason for her anger she asked him 0 mn fot
her son Bharata, the crown prince and exile Rama

RAMA
fourteen years’ life in forest. The king fainted when
he heard the demand. But, Sri Rama, on hearing about
it, put on an anchorite’s apparel and got ready to start
for the forest. Sita and Laksmana also got ready to
follow Rama into the forest. While the entire population of Ayodhya stood there weeping, Rama, Laksmana
and Sita wearing the forest-dwellers’ garb started for the
forest.
11) Death of Dasaratha and Bharata’s decision, As soon
as Sumantra, who had accompanied Rama and others
returned to Ayodhya, Dagaratha expired on account
of unbearable grief caused by Rama’s exile. Messengers
brought to Ayodhya Bharata and Satrughna from Kekaya
where they were put up with their uncle Yudhajit at
the time of their father’s death. But, they were kept in
the dark of all that had happened in their absence till
their arrival at the palace. Bharata, who heard of everything from his mother-was greatly upset and got ready
to go to Rama in the forest. Satrughna too got ready
to accompany him. Arundhati and Vasistha in a chariot
in the fore-front, Kausalya and Sumitra in another
chariot just behind the first one, Bharata and Satrughna
behind them—in this manner the great journey into the
forest started. Leaving all others behind him, Bharata
went forward and: prostrated before Rama-and. Laksmana at Citrakita. Sri Rama broke into tears on hearing. about. the death of their father. But in spite of
Bharata’s pressing request Rama refused to return to
Ayodhya. At last Bharata yielded to Rama’s injunction
and returned to.Ayodhya with the latter’s sandals. But
he did not enter the palace ; ins
at Nandigrama and worshipping
there. kate :
From Mount Citrakuta Sri
12) Trip to Pavicavati.
oe a others started towards the forest. When they
continued their journey after visiting the Sage Atri’s
aérama a Raksasa called Viraddha ran away earns
off Sita. Rama killed Viradha and ee ares fe
isi =’rama of sage Sarabhan
they visited the. 4°rama of Sag Edie: Mykandu
from they went |
Kumuda forest. There ie apna Agastya, and there
: they visit ther
ae ee ae om to kill Ravana and other evil Raksasas and thus render the land s
tapas. Agastya presented to Rama
Brahma arrow and a Saiva quiver.
with Agastya himself to be given to
Then Agastya gave Rama 4 divine
Rama’s sandals lived
a Vaisnava bow, a
Rama kept them
him when required.
ornament such as
was not available in all the three worlds. Rae oe
round Sita’s neck. Taking leave SENSES hi h peak
others went to the - Dandaka forest. Last ee ae t Fata u
of Mount Mahakraunca in the Me 4 eR acia
brother of Sampati: and a Very close td fri dship and
lived. Rama and Jatayu renewed their © a Are that
decided to be of mutual service 17 alee banks of
Rama and others rested themselves on
the near-by Godavari. — __ guts
13) Stay at Paticavati. Banca? (peepal trees) of the
bank of the Godavari. pele and so the place was
same size stood there in 4 -\ rj Rama de-
© =f cavatl .
called: Paficavati. (See under Pani Me those trees.
here to put up 4
cided to build a a : aa
Laksmana cut down a : eared ana the
3 - log aarr ere: it was
ala he
parnaéala (hut) At once t
dead body of a Raksasa youth was ee Sarpanakha. He
the corpse of Sambhukumara, son 0
on the southern
tead he built an arama
was not good
d safe for sages to perform —
RAMA
was performing tapas there to propitiate Siva when he
was overcome by the beauty of Sita and to look at her
from a hidden spot he had assumed the form of the
ebony tree. It was him that Laksmana had cut down.
Sri Rama understood the situation and explained to his
wife and brother about the trickeries of the Raksasas.
Then the parnasala was constructed and they lived
there. Hearing about the coming of Rama all the sages
of the Dandaka forest visited them. They lived in
Pajicavati for thirteen years.
14) Test by Paramesvara (Siva) and Parvati. Paramesvara and Parvati, who knew that many tricky changes
would occur in the thirteenth year of the life of Rama
and Sita there, decided to submit them toa test. The
object of the test was to see whether Rama and Sita
would recognise each other under all circumstances. _
When Sita one day entered the river Godavari to
fetch water, she saw two swans enjoying themselves in
a lotus pool in the middle of a sand-shoal in the river.
When Sita went near the pool she saw Rama bathing
in it. But on a closer look she recognised that it was
not Rama, but Siva, in the guise of Rama, who was
bathing there. To befool Sita Siva, who was disguised
as Rama, told her :—Dear one ! Please come to me
quickly. Why were you so late ?
Sita :—Oh, Deva-! salutations. Why did you alone
come to the bath ? sh
Rama :—I had to come alone as Devi did not come
with me at once and was late in coming.
Sita :—Why did not the Devi come? You two are
might be alone at Kailasa just now. It
that you did not bring her also with you.
! salutations to your divine
Kailasa after saluting Sri
unique. Devi
Siva : Oh great Devi
greatness.,Let me return to
Rama. Hail unto thee.
Meanwhile SriRama was waiting impatiently for Sita to
return. Then Sita approached him looking into a lotus
flower she held in her hand and also throwing, off and
on, amorous glances at him. (She was in fact Parvati
in the guise of Sita). And she told Rama :—My Lord !
you would excuse my delay in returning. The delay was
due to my tarrying there to look at the play of two swans.
$ri Rama looked closely and recognised that it was not
Sita and replied as follows :—Oh Devi! my salutations.
Did you come alone ? Where is Deva ? How is it that
you are separated from him ? Mahadeva and Mahadevi
are one and inseparable. Then how this separation ?
Sita (Parvati) :—Salutations. Thou art omniscient and
omnipotent. I retufn to the presence of Siva. !
15). The incident of Sirpanakha. Sirpanakha was the
wife of a Raksasa called Vidyujjihva. Once in a war
which Ravana, Vidyujjihva and other Raksasas fought
at Devaloka Vidyujjihva was killed by mistake. Ravana,
therefore, permitted Sirpanakha to choose whomsoever
she liked as her husband, and she went about the
world in search of asuitable husband. She liked some
persons, but they did not like her, and vice versa. Thus
she was roaming about discontented. She was also on
the look-out for an opportunity to take vengeance on
Laksmana for killing her son, Sambhukumara.
Sarpanakha, who heard about the beauty of Rama and
Laksmana came to Paficavati disguised as Lalita, Sri
Rama alone was there in the asrama at the time and
she told him that she was love-sick. ‘Sri Rama rejected
her prayer on the plea that he was already married,

ee LL A Ee eee
RAMA
Then she approached Laksmana with thesame request.
He too refused-to oblige her. Then she saw Sita there
and decided to shatter her married life and also to make
a present of her to Ravana. She also thought that if
Sita were got rid of she would have Rama for husband.
Maddened by such thoughts she rushed into the 4$rama,
But, Laksmana drove her out. Then, carrying
Laksmana with her she rose into the sky and he cut away
- both her ears, breasts and nose. Thus disfigured she
resumed her form of Raksasi. She flew away in the sky
roaring loudly.
16) Khara killed. Having heard about the disfigurement of Sirpanakha Khara sent fourteen Raksasas to
Rama’s agrama. -Laksmana killed them very easily.
Next, Khara, his brothers Diisana and Trifiras with |
fourteen thousand, Raksasa soldiers came to fight Rama.
Rama and Laksmana killed them also., This saddened
Sirpanakha very much and she reported the entire
affair to Ravana at Lanka. She told him that Rama and
Laksmana were very courageous warriors and he was
not to enter into direct fighting with them, but. was to
abduct Sita whose loss would cause Rama’s death. She
also assured Ravana that if Rama died, Laksmana
would himself end his life. |
17) Sita abducted: Next day a spotted deer was. found
playing near the 4Srama. Sita desired to have the deer
and Sri Rama, after asking his brother to take care of
Sita, followed the deer, which enticed him to a great
distance in the forest.. At last, finding it difficult to
catch the deer. alive, Rama shot an arrow at it. Hit by
the arrow the deer - transformed itself into a. gigantic
Raksasa and fell down deadcrying. “Oh! Sita O'!
Laksmana, a Raksasa is killing me. Come and save
The Raksasa, who. thus fell a prey to Rama’s arrow was
really -Marica, uncle of Ravana.
gone in the form of a deer to Rama’s arama -at the
instance of his nephew to cheat Rama. Sita heard the
false cry of Marica andasked Laksmana to hurry up
to the spot-for'Rama’s protection. Laksmana at first
did not want to leave Sita there alone and go after
Rama. But,-when-she used hard-and cruel words
against him Laksmana quitted the aframa and went
into the forest. When Rama and Laksmanawere thus
absent at the 4Srama an old Sannyadsin came for alms
at the courtyard. Sita, who came out to offer alms
was forcibly carried away by Ravana (the sannyasin
was Ravana in. disguise) in his puspaka aerial chariot
to Lanka. On the way Jatayu saw Ravana and put
up a fight with him to get Sita released, But,
had to fall down.wounded by the sword of Rava
he lay there awaiting Rama’s arrival.
Rama and Laksmana réturned to the agrama only to
find Sita missing. While they advanced some distance
na and
lamenting over the loss of Sita they saw Jatayu lying
in the forest, his wings cut, but happy in expectation
of salvation and repeating the name of Rama. Jatayu
gave Rama all details about Sita and then gave up his
body and ascended to Vaikuntha, |
18) Salvation to Kabandha. Rama and Laksmana moved
towards the south in quest of Sita. An asura woman
called Ayomukhi, sister of Sirapadma tried to entice
Laksmana, who went alone toa pool to fetch water.
When Laksmana resisted and kept away from her
allurements, she tried to carry him away into the sky.
_ search for’ and find out Sita for Rama. | .
,Marica had =, Though the above pact was made, Sugriva wa
‘heap of bones and at the instance of Rama,
jJatayu
RAMA
But, he drove her away disfigured. When the brothers
continued their search for Sita they were caughtin the
arms stretched out in semi-circular form. It was 4 _
Raksasa called Kabandha, and they cut away one arm
each. At once the fierce Kabandha (headless body)
form disappeared and a Gandharva youth appeared 10
his place. After offering moksa to Kabandha Rama
and Laksmana continued their search for Sita. (See
under Kabandha). d
19) Salvation to Sabari. Rama and Laksmana neacue
Sabaryaérama andwere duly received by the female
hermit Sabari. She presented them with fruits. Not
only that, she personally tasted each fruit for its quality
and then gave the best to the guests. Rama was sO ya
pleased with her pure devotion that he offered
salvation. (For details see under Sabari). :
20) Rama-Sugriva alliance. Rama and Leer
bathed in the Pampa river and thus refreshed : a
travelled upto the height of Mount Rsyamika Raat
Sugriva lived with Haniiman as his Prime Mums a
Sugriva, who saw Rama and Laksmana coming, depu “a
Haniman to find out whether they were frien
foes. Haniiman, in the guise ofa brahmin boy tal ee
with them, who related their story from the abduey
of Sita. Having understood the matters Hanuma? a
sumed his actual form and carried Rama and Laksm*.
on his shoulders into the presence of Sugriva. Ision
Sugriva related to Rama the story of his expU 5va
from Kiskindha by Bali, his elder brother. arc
wanted a powerful ally to recapture the country. aie
larly Sri Rama too wanted ‘a powerful ally to ee
Sita. ‘So both. the parties entered into an allian¢
Rama undertaking to kill Bali and restore his kins
and his wife. to Sugriva and Sugriva undertakin&
s doubt
e
ful about Rama’s capacity to honour his part ° be,
contract, and Rama, knowing this suspicion of Sue un
wanted to dispel it. The mountain-like body of V¥:,
dubhi, the Raksasa killed by Bali, lay there ee ana
be
threw it into the distant southern sea with. the b iB reat
of his left foot. Sugriva was wonder-struck at this
of Laksmana-and praised him. Yet Sugriva Ly "thet
quite cured of his doubt and Rama wanted to 1U
convince him of their prowess.
‘There were seven big trees there known as |
Bali used to wrestle with the trees due to his ove" Rams
vitality and power. (See under Saptasala). ~~" pis
went near the trees and suddenly fixed an arrow i the
bow-string and shot it by drawing the bow, ey The
big toe of his right foot pressed against a rock: same
arrow Cut down the seven trees at one and t = iver:
time and then autoniatically returned to its IY” of
Sugriva was taken aback by this. marvellous 5°
power. ie ate
21) Exhibition of ornaments. They ‘came aga” a
Rsyamikacala and Sugriva placed before’ Rav? ow!
bundle of ornaments and said that it was dropped | pad:
by a weeping woman from an aerial chariot, whic qm
a few days. back, passed above the mountain. - d gat
recognised them as Sita’s ornaments, shed tears aD and
there motionless for some time. At last Sugt¥? — gle
Laksmana consoled him and he handed over thé
of ornaments to Laksmana,
Saptasal
flow?

RAMA
22) Kingdom restored to Sugriva. ‘he very next day
Sugriva took ‘Rama to Kiskindha, and the former
challenzed Bali for a combat. Rama, from a distance,
viewed the fierce fight .between the brothers, but he
could not do anything as it wasimpossible to distinguish
between Bali and Sugriva on account of their very
clase resemblance. Sugriva, who was defeated in the.
first round and retired from fight felt angry towards
Rama, but was soon satisfied with Rama’s explanation
for his inaction. To distinguish Sugriva from Bali Sri
Rama, the next day, puta garland on the former’s neck
and wearing the garland Sugriva challenged Bali a
second time to a duel. Though Bali's wife, Tara,
this time prevented him from accepting the challenge
Bali paid no heed to her protests and rushed forth for
the duel.
Bali and Sugriva fought again,
from his concealment behinda t
the chest of Bali. Rar
Laksmana then came into the open and, Bali spoke
disparagingly to Rama about shooting the arrow from
concealment. Rama answered him saying that if he
had seen him (R4ma) face to face he would have
become his devotee and he had to shoot Bali from his
hiding place as it was not proptt to kill one's devotees.
At last, after handing over charge of ‘his sake and son
Aigada, to Sugriva, Bali breathed his last. Sri Ree
decided to crown Sugriva as King and install Angada
as crown prince and returne RS 3
rest after trating under the supervision of Laksmana,
Hanaman and Jambavan with the duty on ee
preparations for the coronation. Thoug : ug Me
invited Sri Rama to Kiskindha when preparations 10)
the latter declined the invitation
mana to represent him at
snstalled Sugtiva as the
prince, Ruma as queen
and. this time Rama
ree shot an arrow at
coronation were OVET,
gracefully and deputed Laks
the ceremony. Laksmana
Maharaja, Angada as crow? Siena
and Tara a queen-mother. Also, Hanuma
a . hose things over,.
appointed as Sugriva’s minister. T
i akacala.
ama at Rsyamukaca
Laksmana returned to mri next four months were
23) Laksmana’s wrath. 3 rot make
say poviail Even after that Sugriva dit ve Rama’
necessary arrangements to searct dha to-enquire
instance Laksmana went to Kiskin keys were alarmed
a reason for the delay. Bete met d Tara came
“! earance : ere soon
ef creel sine to him. — AS ee Ww
finalised for the quest of Sita. Arm
of monkeys were deputed to t {chief of the army for
for Sita. Susena was APPOm Vi ata for the east am
the west, Satabali for the north, Vivith was the chie
Afigada for the south, As te ic A
place for the search, monkeys Bae 4
Vivida, Nala, Nila, Kumuda, Teed
in various ways, Were any his assista
matters. Every chief an kemana af
suitable instructions by. 278 oakeys - began its
accordingly the army of an.
under the leadership of i age avince oita that
24) Words of recognition. ae ee went her t
réally the emissary ° Ramé 1 wing
waparted to Haniimin the ‘ay te ., exile in the
imel ; ife 1m
(i) When 1 rant leave of you wl ae inner apartment
forest you (Sita) who were thea
The arrow felled him. Rama and
d to Rsyamikacala for.
RAMA
dressed in ordinary fashion came out in the same dress
prepared to follow me saying ‘I too...’ feigning anger’.
(ii). When, for our life in. the forest, we had left — the
city and approached a shrubbery, Sita in her childish
ignorance and goodness of heart told me ‘This place
will do for our forest life.”’
(iii) While she was one day massaging my leg in our
bedroom she threw away from her finger the ring
studded with stones. When I asked her the reason for
it she answered me as follows :—This ring studded with
stones may prove to be of danger to me. When your
feet touched the hard granite rock it turned out into a
world beauty (Ahalya). Under the circumstances how
much more beautiful would be the woman, who would
be created by the touch of your foot on the beautiful
stone of the ring ? And, because of that beauty you
may...me...and then...”. We two—I and Sita—alone
knew about the above incident.
Carrying thus Sri Rama’s signet ring and words of recognition Hanuman went along with the army, which
started for the south. Sugriva gave one month’s time
to the searching parties to find out Sita and warned
them that their throats would be -cut if they failed in
their mission.
25) Saw Svayamprabha. Angada, Hanuman, Jambavan
and others during their search came to an extensive
forest. They were dead tired with hunger and thirst.
The leader of the party looked about for something to
eat and drink when he saw small birds flying up from
a distant pit. From drops of ‘water falling from the
wings of the birds it was inferred that the pit contained
water. When Hanuman and others entered the pit.
(cave) and walked a great distance they came toa
spacious garden. They were astonished to find a solitary
beauty there, and she related to them her autobiography
as follows:— .
I am the faithful maid of Rambha. The powerful asura
called Caturasya wanted me to procure Rambha for
him and he got this garden city . built by Mayacarya,
the architect of the Daityas, for me as reward for my
service to him in the matter of Rambha.. Various kinds
of gems light this place and creepers and trees supply
food materials. Catuarsya, I and Rambha alone were
living here. But, Indra came to know of it, came here,
killed Caturasya and took away Rambha with him.
He cursed me to lead a solitary life here as punishment for having helped Caturasya.I prayed for redemption from the curse and Indra told me, that after.
thousands of years a company of monkeys would come
here in search of Sita and that after entertaining them
with food I must see Rama and then return to Svarga.
I have thus been awaiting your arrival and now I am
leaving the place, which will vanish as soon as I quit
:t. All of you, please stand there with eyes closed and
I shall send you back to the place, where you were
before coming here.
Accordingly the monkeys stood there with eyes closed
and when they opened their eyes there was neither the
arden city nor Svayamprabha there but they were
standing in the old plain. Svayamprabha appeared
before Rama, praised him and then went to Svarga.
96) Met Sampatt. The monkeys again went southward,
reached Mahendragiri and descending on its southern
side came to the shores of the southern sea. They could
advance no further to the south. They were suffering

RAMA
from great hunger and thirst and if they returned with
no tangible information about Sita, Sugriva would kill
them. They preferred death by fasting on the seashore
to death by the sword of Sugriva.
Having decided thus the monkeys spread darbha grass
on the extensive plain of Mahendra mountain and lay
on the grass to die. Ina large cave in the mountain
was living Sampati. The huge bird Sampati was starving without food and was not able to fly as it had lost
its wings. But it dragged itself to the mouth of the cave
and saw the monkeys lying there awaiting death, and
it thought of eating the monkeys one by one. The
monkeys, who understood this idea of Sampati cursed
their fate and sang the praise of Jatayu.
Hearing the word ‘Jatayu’ Sampati approached the
monkeys, who related to him the object of their journey.
Being told about the death of Jatayu. Sampati
shed tears and told the monkeys as follows:-
Jatayu was my younger brother. Our mother was Mahasveta and father Siryadeva. On account of the boon of
our parents I was King of all the birds and Jatayu the
crown Prince. As our brotherliness grew thicker our
haughtiness due to our power and speed also increased.
Once we flew up towards the orbit of the Sun to see him,
our father. In his youthful enthusiasm my younger
brother, Jatayu, climbed higher up in the sky leaving
me behind. Due to the heat of the Sun his wings lost
their power and energy. Then, to save him, I flew up
above him and shaded him. Therefore he could descend
to the earth without his wings being burned and thus
lalled. But, my wings got burned and I fell down on -
the Mahendra mountain and got my legs broken. Thus
I lost the power either to fly or to walk.
I stayed here as the attendant of Nisakara Maharsi,
who could divine the future also. He told me the story
about Rama’s incarnation. He told me further that
monkeys in search of Sita would come here when I
should tell them where Sita was and that then I would
regain my health.”
After telling the monkeys the above facts Sampati, with
their cooperation, performed the obsequies of Jatayu.
Then the King of birds (Sampati) raised its head and
surveyed the ocean and he saw the following: Mountain
Subela in the heart of the southern sea; the plain at
the heights of the mountain constituting the base of
Lanka;in the centre of Lanka there was Ravana’s
capital; nearby the ladies’ quarters; near the quarters
the asoka garden; at the centre of the garden the
Sim ‘apa tree and under the tree Sitadevi.
As soon as Sampati had finished tellin
the above details he regained his health.
Sampati told the monkeys another story also as follows: -
Ravana once abducted a Yaksa beauty from Alakapuri
and carried her away in his Puspaka Vimina.
Sampati clashed with Ravana on his way and destroyed
his plane. But the plane, which was self-generating
came again into existence. Sampati threw away by
its beak the Candrahasa (Ravana’s sword) and kicked
his crown down. .At last, at the request of Ravana, he
and Sampit' signed a non-aggression pact. That was
the reason why Sampati could not fight Rayana in
person. B
97) Haniman saw Sita. Angada said that for the search
for Sita in Lanka as told by Sampati, some one should
jump across the ocean. Though many a monkey tried to
g the monkeys
- by. Brahma.
RAMA
dosoitwas Haniiman, whosucceeded in crossing the sea.
At one jump he reached the heights of Mahendragirl
whence he took another jump forward. But, midway
Surasa, mother of the nagas, swallowed him, and he
came out through her ear and continued his journey
towards Lanka. When he had advanced some more
distance an evil spirit called Chayagrahini obstructed
his way by’a mysterious attack on his shadow.
Haniiman quickly understood what had happened and
killed the evil spirit with one kick of his left foot. He _ .
again continued his flight. But, he very soon became
weak and exhausted. Then Mount Mainaka emerge
from the ocean and fed Haniman with fruits and roots.
He reached Lanka at dusk. He defeated Lankalaksm1,
who tried to prevent his entry into the city. In fact
Lankalaksmi was Vijayalaksmi, who had been curse
(For details see under Vijayalaksmi)-
After defeating her, who was thus absolved from the
curse, Haniman saw Sita seated under the aSoka tree:
But, none saw him as he was perched ona tree. _
28) Haniman’s return. That night Ravana dressed 1
all splendour visited Sita and tried to secure her favou!
by soft words and cajolery, all to no purpose. Then 7
threatened her with punishments, which too prove
to be of no avail. After instructing the Raksa5¢
women that Sita should be somehow brought rou?
within a month’s time, Ravana returned to his palace:
Raksasis surrounded Sita and described to her the
greatness and various merits of Ravana. Sita continue f
to sob. Then came there Trijata, daughter °
Vibhisana, the gréat devotee of Visnu, and Saram@,
to console Sita. Trijata had boundless devotion '
wards Rama and great love for Sita. She repeat
to Sita certain dreams she had had. (atl
Left to herself Sita began saying to herself varie
things regarding her past. She roferred to her infancy:
beginning of youth, wedding, stay at Ayodhya, fore g
life and life in Paficavati and wept over her recurriy) ms
thoughts about them. Hanimin, who heard Sit?,
soliloquy completed Sita’s story ‘by relating, from sii
place on the tree, about Jatayu’s salvation, salen i
given to Kabandha and Sabari, alliance with Sug!*"?
killing of Bali, expedition of the monkeys in seare re
Sita, meeting with Sampati, himself (Haniman) ¢T° 5
ing the sea and his finding out Sita. Hearing the Wi ae
of Haniman, Sita looked up in astonishment. Imme .
tely Haniiman came down the tree and presented | ng
Signet ring at Sita’s feet. When she examined the < an
her hands shook and tears dimmed her eyes. Hanum ;
talked to her in detail and told her that he would,
only Sita permitted him, carry her on his shoulders
Rama. He told her further that if she did not welc° r
the idea of thus returning to Rama, he would f etu
with Sri Rama and others, defeat Ravana in wat er
take her back. Sita was not convinced about the eer
and prowess of Haniiman. He then increased his sp
in size so that his limbs grew into the size of a mounta”. ¢
hands into that of trees, head into that of a mount®
peak, tail into that of a river etc. His breathing bec?’ at
akin to a storm. Then he roared in such a manner
Sen the very ends of the world shook and the PP
of Lanka were awakened by it.
ae See absolutely convinced of Haniman’s
nf Caan aithfulness. She handed over ©
“amani (Ornament worn on the hea
him
pon4
to Pe

_ lying on the cot in feigned sleep. Quie
RAMA
given to Rama and also told him the following three
words of recognition so that Rama might be all the
more convinced.
(1) When Rama first came to the garden near the
palace in Mithila I (Sita) saw his reflection in the
blue mirror in the veranda of my palace and the
beauty of the reflection attracted me. I looked towards
the garden to see the original of the reflection. Then he
(Rama) was looking down into the waters of the glass
pond. He also saw my face reflected in the water and
suddenly he looked at me. Our eyes met and in all
shyness I hurried to and hid myself in the ladies’
quarters,
(2) Before our wedding I sent him through a faithful
maid, a love letter to which he gave me a suitable
reply. ;
(3) After our wedding while we were living in Ayodhya
when one day I returned to our bedroom after a long
chitchat with my younger sisters, my lord (Rama) was
tly I went up
to him and kissed him on the lips. Because of the
pressure on his lips and as my breast then touched his
chest he pretended to have suddenly woken up and
embraced me.
Having received thus from Sita the Cuidamani and
these words of recognition Hanuman took leave of Sita
and with her implied sanction went about to have a
look at Lanka. At one place he heard Vibhisana
reciting Visnu’s names.” After wishing that this house
of the devotee should turn into a royal abode he passed
Vibhisana’s house. Then he came to Ravana’s palace
and gathered information about the Raksasa power.
“Now 1 must see Ravana in person, let him know
personal ly the fact of my visit and I would give him
righteous advice’’-—with this object in view Hanuman
began destroying the garden. He drove away the
Raksasas, who came to punish him and some of them
were killed. At last Meghanada (Indrajit ) attacked
Haniiman. Hiding in thesky he shot the Brahmastra
against Hahiiman, who yielded to it. The Raksasas
took Haniiman captive to Ravana. He freed himself of
the cords that bound him, extended his tail which he
shaped into circles, one over the other so that the last
one rose more in height than Ravana s throne ne
seated himself on its top. Ravana and Haniman | -
began a conversation. Ravana, who got angry at ae
disrespect shown ‘to him by Haniman, ordered the
latter to be killed, but Vibhisana opposed it saying we
to kill emissaries and messengers was Worse than killing
Ravana ordered that
one’s own mother. Finall ;
Hanimin’s taj] be set fire to pe he be insulted and
humiliated. = man’s tail
Immediately Raksasas began to cover Hanuma® : and
with clothes. But, ths tail began growing pepe 5
longer with the result that no quantity oe tail
sufficed to ‘completely cover ¢ e ever-extend ae pr
At last the Raksasas poured oil over the tail an ae
fire to it, Then Hanaman broke loose Praise: by
and jumped up into the air causing wniversa 2 ce O
fire in Lanka. The fire did not affect the PSimsa a
Vibhisana and also the platform around the ee
tree where Sita sat. After thus burning oa ing it
Haniman extinguished the fire on his tal By as Sita,
in the ocean, Taking, leave OF Mehendragiri.
Haniiman crossed the sea and reached Ma
Ravana then sent his two expert spies,
RAMA
29) Rama-Ravana war. Sri Rama and Sugriva, who
received Haniiman’s report about his visit to Lanka
started for it with an army of monkeys. They camped _
on the shores of the south sea. Ravana held a meeting
of his war council attended by his brothers and others.
He expelled Vibhisana, who opposed war and advised
his brother to return Sita to Rama and to apologise to
him. Vibhisana quitted Lanka and took refuge with
Rama. "
_ Rama and others, who had assembled on the sea-shore
decided to build a bund to Lanka. The first thing Rama
did, for the successful conclusion of the expedition, was
to install a Sivalinga at Rameégvara. (See under Ramesvara). Then he prayed to Varunadeva for a passage
across the sea. But, Varuna did not present himself
and Sri Rama, angry with him, shot the agneya
(fiery) arrow into the heart of the sea when Varuna
appeared, saluted him and advised him to build a
bund across the sea. As a reward for Varuna Sri Rama,
as requested by the former, killed with one arrow all
the Raksasas, who lived in Gandhara island on the
north-western shore of the ocean. Varuna returned to
his abode. The construction of the bund was begun
under the leadership of Sugriva with Nala as chief
planner and Nila as his co-planner. Jambavan and
Haniman functioned as supervisors and other monkeys
as workers. Mountains, hills, rocks etc. were brought from
yarious quarters and the construction of the bund was
begun.
Meanwhile, Ravana sent a great
Marutta disguised as King Janaka t
her to the side of Ravana. But, the attem
magician called
o Sita to convert
t failed.
uka and
Sarana disguised as monkeys to Rama’scamp. Jambayan and Hanuman captured and brought them before
Sugriva.- Weepingly they both sought refuge im Rama,
who set them free. They returned to Lanka and
reported matters to Ravana, who felt a desire to have
a look at Rama for which purpose he, with his attendants, climbed to the top of the northern tower. Rama,
who knew about it by his spies climbed the heights of
Subela mountain whence he ‘stared at Ravana. Their
eyes met in anger seeing which Sugriva by one leap
reached Ravana and kicked off to Rama the crown
fom the central head of Ravana. After performing
something like a destructive dance on Ravana’s head
Sugriva by another leap returned to Rama. _
Full of disappointment Ravana returned to his palace.
His father-in-law, Malyavan, tried his best to dissuade
Ravana from war, all to no purpose. Rama sent an
emissary to him to ask him to send Sita back. Ravana
declined to oblige, and immediately war began. During
the first day of the war, the majority of the Raksasas
including their great leaders like Mahabahu, Mare
parsva, Mahodara, Mahakaya ete were killed. Be :
second day the Raksasa army under the some a et
Atikaya, son of Ravana, set out from ai oe :
tower to fight. Laksmana killed Atikaya wit rahmastra. The other ) two Raksasa-commanders were
a encountered them.
Trigiras and Meghanada. Laksman
When the latter failed to win by righteous fighting he
resorted to cunningness. That too did not bring victory
+o him, and then he hid himself in the sky and shot
the nagastra given to him by Siva against the enemy.
That arrow rendered Laksmana, Sugriva and all the

RAMA
monkeys unconscious. At that time Vibhisana was away
to arrange for food.
When Vibhisana returned with food he was taken
aback to find Laksmana and others lying in an unconscious condition. Rama was informed about the matter
and when he came to the battle-ground and saw
Laksmana, Sugriva, Hanim4n and all the others lying
there unconscious he lost self-confidence for a short
while and remarked that it was all the result of his
having put faith in Vibhisana, Ravana’s brother whom
he had put in charge of the battlefield. This comment
of Rama pained Vibhisana much; but Sri Rama soon
treated him kindly.
Even the Devas who witnessed the scene were alarmed.
But Rama sat there for sometime immersed in meditation and thena light emerged from his right eye,
shot towards the north and disappeared in the horizon.
At once Garuda appeared.on the scene from the west
and removed with -his beak the nagastra from
Laksmana’s body. Laksmana jumped up from his
unconscious state; Sugriva and others also regained
consciousness. In the fighting that followed all the
Raksasa leaders were killed. It was Haniman, who
killed Kumbhakarna. At the time of his death
Kumbhakarna made a last request to Rama, i.e. his head
should be cut off and thrown into the sea as otherwise
the Raksasas would laugh at him to see the head, from
which the ears have been bitten off by monkeys.
Accordingly Rama got Hanuman to throw Kumbhakarna’s head into the sea.
Then Sri Rama told Laksmana thus: Today I shall
fight Indrajit. The war shall not continue yet further.
Today Indrajit and tomorrow Ravana should be killed
and the next day we will return to Ayodhya. Laksmana
answered :—‘‘I shall fight Indrajit. I have told Vibhisana
that I will kill Indrajit within three days.”’
With Sri Rama’s blessings Laksmana began fighting
again. Indrajit shot Narayanastra which attracted by
the ‘seven-letter-Mantra’ (Namo WNarayanaya) of
Laksmana circled him thrice and entered his quiver.
The Raksasa minister called Mahodara converted his
elephant into Airavata and himself changed into
Devendra and encountered Laksmana. Saying that he
had no quarrel with Indra and would not fight him.
Laksmana put down his bow, and Indrajit, exploiting
the situation shot Brahmastra against Laksmana under
cover of the clouds. Laksmana, Sugriva and others
fainted. Then Sri Rama was in the army-camp,
worshipping weapons to render them more powerful.
Rama returned to the battle-ground to find Laksmana
and others in life-less condition and crying like a mere
ignorant fellow he lay by the side of Laksmiana.
Vibhisana, who returned with food prayed for the grace
of Devas. Indra appeared, gave to Vibhisana Ganga
water in a golden vessel and asked it to be given to
Haniman and Jambavan, who, though unconscious
dead.
ete did so and both Hanuman and Jambavan
regained consciousness. Jambavan ra Haniiman that
if mrtasafijivini (herbal medicine w - will put life
back into the dead) were brought from the distant
Himalayas before dawn the next day all the dead ones
like Laksmana and Sugriva could be brought back to
life. (See under Mrtasafijivini) . Aesoringly [ionuipan
started for the Himalayas. Meanwhile indrajit had
RAMA
told Ravana about his victory, and as suggested by the
latter Raksasa women took Sita to the battlefield in the
Puspaka Vimana, showed her Rama, Laksmana and
others lying there in a life-less condition and _ told her*
that all of. them were dead. Sita wept aloud, but Trijata
consoled her by saying that the Puspaka Vimana would
not carry widows and therefore Rama was not dead.
Hanuman returned before dawn the next day. As he
could not distinguish mrtasafijivini he had brought
with him a mountain peak where the -four medicinal
plants, Salyaharani, Visalyakarani, Sandhanakarani
and Mrtasafijivini grew. Jambavan distinguished
mrtasafijivini from the others and carried the four
herbs into the battlefield. Contact with the air, which
carried the smell of mrtasafijivini brought the dead back
to life. Visalyakarani removed all the arrows from their
bodies and Sandhanakarani healed the wounds.
Laksmana again went out to fight Indrajit. Reluctant
to fight with the former, Indrajit resorted to a new
magical trick. He created an artificial or illusory
Sita and with her seated in a chariot he rose up in the
sky and said as follows: ‘‘Ravana has abandoned Sita
who brings about humiliation to the Raksasas and
ruin to Lanka. So, I cut her to pieces.’? So saying he
cut into two, by one stroke of his sword, Sita, who
cried Oh! my lord! oh! brother.”? Blood fell on the
battlefield and Indrajit disappeared. Though Rama
and others were alarmed by all these, Vibhisana explained that it was all the magic of the Raksasas, and in the
fierce fighting that followed Laksmana killed Indrajit._
By now all the important and prominent Raksasas
were killed. At last Ravana himself entered the battlefield. His first encounter was with Laksmana. Then
the fighting turned into one ' between Rama and
Ravana. The former broke the bow of Ravana and did
not want to fight with the weaponless Rakgsasa King.
Next day Ravana brought Patala Ravana and
Kumbhodara to Lanka. Both of them entered Rama's
camp during night, but Patala Ravana, who realised
that nothing could be achieved there returned to
Patala with Kumbhodara. He built a tunnel from
Patala upwards to earth, where in the fort created by.
Hanaman’s tail twisted in.a circle lay Sri Rama’ and
others. The tunnel. opened into this ‘fort’, and Patala
Ravana and his brother made Rama and Laksmana
unconscious by making them inhale ‘sammohana
medicine and carried them off into Patala. Rama and
Laksmana were laid in the court-yard of a Kali temple
to be sacrificed to Mahakali the very same night..
Arrangements for the sacrifice were completed.
Hanuman had been frequently looking inside. the fort.
As soon as the absence of Rama and Laksmana was
noticed, Sugriva and others, under the leadership. of
Vibhisana reached the Kali temple through the tunnel.
In the fighting that followed Haniman killed | Patala
Ravana and Angada killed Mahodara. The only son
of Patala Ravana, Sum4li, was crowned King of Patala,
Ravana entered the field again against Rama. Rama
shot the Mahendra arrow against Ravana. The arrow,
which represented in itself the effulgence of Mahendra,
the hardness of diamonds, the intensity of fire and
Visnu’s glow cut off the ten heads of Ravana. His
physical body fell on earth and his spirit ascended to
heaven. :
N

RAMA
30). Return, Rama and others, who were pleased with
the turn of events, crowned Vibhisana King of Lanka
Trijata was put in charge of dressing Sita in new
clothes. Apsaras appeared on the scene. Sacidevi
presented. to Sitaa chain, Urvasi an ornament for
the head, Menaka, two bangles, Rambha a waist-let
Tilottama a set of chains for the feet,and Anasiya wife
of Atri, a Cudamani. When she wore all these ora:
ments Sita appeared to be equal to Laksmidevi in
grandeur and charm. She was brought in a palanquin
to Sri Rama by Vibhisana and others. Rama was Bik
aback by the glamorous dress, ornaments etc. of Sita
and immediately a suspicion arose in his mind, and he
kept mum after asking Laksmana to do whatever Sita
wanted. As soon as she heard those words of Ram ‘
Sita asked Laksmana to light a funeral pyre sayin shat
the woman suspected by her husband should ee liv
and so she (Sita) would quit her life in th :
presence of Rama. . : aie
Laksmana cast a pathetic look at Rama; but his face ©
exhibited no change of feelin Sita
2 no ¢ elmg. He granted ’s request by his silence. ‘Those present Here he devel 3
ments with bated breath: Laksmana, with the bals
of the monkeys got a pyre ready. After going rou HN
Rama with folded hands Sita leapt into the glowi fire
Within a very short time three divine forms eae cd
om the fire, Svahadevi, Sitadevi and God Agni her
Lis suspicions having thus vanished Ra | l
Sita back and the next day they left for edna aan
Puspaka Vimana. Vibhisana, Sugriva, Havana wand
others followed them. After reaching Ayedye Reams
_ returned the Puspaka to Kubera. Bharata came back
from Nandigrama. In the pres of. PNKE
and others concerned the coronation Al Sly pea ions
took place. Bharata was appointed crown Princsatene
mana Commander-in-chief of armies and § tr pas
Finance minister.’ — 1 Satrughna,
31) Sita abandoned. ~ Under Rama’s ri < |
overflowed with milk and honey. Nobody: neg Se
anything from enemies. He made Sita kill Sahasratn kha
Ravana. (For details see under Sahasramukharavan: ih
Sri Rama used to go about the country in disg a o
enquire about the welfare of his subjects. Ona ical ie
dawn he happened to be standing outside the thouse of
a: washerman. The washerman scolded his wif ie h
had gone out of the house that night for) hac an a
He suspected that she had gone to meet her ane,
He bluntly told his wife that he was not eae oe
act like Rama, who had accepted Sita, thou ih Se os
lived with another person. Sri Rava fe . e had
above talk, returned to his palace very a ah ae
thinking about for ‘a long time he decided that + ter
his duty to abandon Sita in the interests of his b: was
Then Sita was in the seventh month of her pre nia She
had on the previous day, expressed a desire to O ye the
forest areas once again. Rama considered ie # ae
most suitable opportunity to abandon Sita in the f ;
and Laksmana was entrusted with the matter That
day at Sun-rise Laksmana took Sita.in a chariot to ne
suburbs of Valmiki’s 4srama, abandoned her ther 4
returned to the palace. (According to the Baca an
written by Kamba, a Tamil author, it is said th het ‘
was left in the suburbs of Gautama’s hut. Th iy a
who was pregnant was looked after by Adaiva Ke Phe
of Gautama.) Weeping aloud Sita fell down. Young
' by the army, was
the latter got defeate
spirit got salvation. Aft
medha. Now, since the real Sit
RAMA
munis—Valmiki’s disciples—saw her and took her to
the arama. At the agrama she delivered two sons, Kuga
and Lava. :
32) Asvamedha. After abandoning Sita in the forests
Rama led a sad life for five years. Yet, he decided to
perform an Agvamedha yajfia. As soon as Rama thought
of him, Hanaiman appeared and he was deputed to invite Vibhisana, Sugriva and others from Lanka and
Kiskindha and the feudatory princes and armies from
other countries.
Sugriva was put in charge of the armies, Vibhisana in
charge of finance, and central authority was vested in
Laksmana. Then the yajfiic horse, accompanied
he a let loose to travel all over the
country. Accompanied by cavalry, the elephant division,
infantry and the chariot-force the horse went about the
various kingdoms. The army, onits way back to Ayodhya
with presents collected from many kingdoms, encamped
for rest near Valmiki’s asrama when Kusa and Lava
tied the yajiiic horse, which was strolling there unfettered. Consequent upon this action of Kusa and Lavaa fight
broke out between them and the king’s army in which
| d. Even the arrows of Laksmana
failed to have any effect on the boys. The boys having
not returned.even though it had become very late in
the evening, the Agramites, went m search of them and
it was only when they came to the scene of fighting did
Laksmana and others know who the boys really were.
During this period of time infants’ death was very much
on the increase in, Ayodhya. ‘It was believed that such
deaths increased when Sadras did tapas, and to find out
if any Sidra was engaged in tapas Rama flew ale the
Dandaka forest where he found a pace ies keeles
performing tapas hanging a r ied al eee
ith his head. down. Ze ae
tree with Fels appreciating the beauties
of the forest Rama came near Valmiki’s 4Ssrama where
he and Sita met face to face. Kuga and Lava also came
there and they noticed with surprise the change in
appearance brought about 1 their mother as sa
on their meeting each other. When they heard from
Haniman the real facts about Rama they withdrew
their arrows and prostrated at the feet of Rama.
6; Rama then, with the consent of all and in accordance with his own desire, took back Sita and returned
with her to Ayodhya. Laksmana and others followed him.
Kausalya and others received Sita most heartily. Sri
Rama, who till then es ee no wife, ne ae
i ita e purposes 0 vaa golden image of Sita for t s De Pose fo tees He
was an unnecessary thing. The Agvamedhayajna went
ff ell.
33 \ The end. 6r; Rama’s reign became all the more
; . riod that Rama, as
prosperous. It was during this aaa plain, killed
desired by the munis in the Y
poten aides: son of Madhu in the great oe ate
Durga in the centre of the Madhu forest. (For details
», death, a sect of
_ After Lavana s
see under Lavana). A ho. lived on the shores
Gandharvas called Sailtisas, :
be enemies of Ayodhya.
of the eastern sea, prove to be nikeyi began setting
§ri Rama annihilated them aT opines of Sita. One
. jealous of the prosperity a paper the forest, Kaikeyi
day when Rama had gone
closely questioned Sita over pa
prevailed upon her, overruling
rticulars in Lanka and
her unwillingness, to

RAMAHRADA
draw a picture of Ravana. Sita drew ona piece of
‘sitting-plank’ Ravana’s figure with the ten heads.
Kaikeyi took away the picture on the pretext of exhibiting it in the ladies’ quarters, and gave it to Rama,
when he returned from hunting, to sit on at the time
of Puja (worship). Rama got angry to find Ravana’s
picture drawn on the ‘sitting plank’. Kaikeyi then told
him that it was Sita, who had drawn the picture and
also that she usually praised Lanka and Ravana. Rima
pronounced the death penalty on Sita for having drawn
Ravana’s picture. The inmates of the palace
shuddered to hear the judgement. When Laksmana
seated Sita on the floor to kill her, Bhamidevi (earth)
rent itself open into two and carried her off through the
opening. |
Sri Rama grew sadder and sadder following the disappearance of Sita. Il] omens began to appear in
Ayodhya in increasing measure. One day a divine. Rsi
whom the people of Ayodhya had not seen till then,
came to Rama’s palace. He told Rama that he had to
impart certain secrets to the latter and after making
Rama vow that no one would enter the room while
they were conversing and that ifany one did come
when. they were talking, he should either be killed or
forsaken for ever, he began to talk with Rama ina
secluded spot. Rama posted Laksmana at the entrance
with the strict injunctions that nobody should come
into their presence. Within a short time great munis
like Sanaka came there and told Laksmana that they
wanted to see Rama. They were not prepared to wait
even for a short time as requested by Laksmana, but
threatened ruin to the royal family. Laksmana then,
was prepared to suffer the consequence, and went_to
Rama and told him about the arrival of Sanaka and
others. Rama, in keeping with his vow, banished
Laksmana immediately. But, when Rama came out. and
looked for Sanaka and others no one was to be found
anywhere there. When he returned to the inner apartment the Rsi also was not to be seen. In fact they were
Kala and his emissaries deputed by Brahma to recall
Rama as the object of his incarnation was already
achieved.
Rama, who had already been suffering mental agony
on account of Sita’s departure, lost all peace of mind
as Laksmana’s banishment followed Sita’s departure.
He decided to put an end to his life for which purpose
he went to the river Saraya. All the dependants followed
him. While ‘the great mass of people who thronged
both the banks of the river burst out into weeping Sri
Rama and his followers drowned themselves in the
waters of the Sarayi, and their spirits attained Vaikuntha. (Valmiki Ramayana, Kamba Ramayana and
Tulasidasa Ramayana),
RAMAHRADA. A _ holy place on the boundary of
Kuruksetra. Amba, daughter of a King of Kaégi
once bathed here. (Udyoga Parva, Chapter 186, Verse
RAMAKA. A mountain. Sahadeva, during his triumphal
tour of the south, conquered this mountain.
Parva, Chapter 31, Verse 68). °
RAMANA ,I. A son born_to the Vasu known as Soma
of his wife Manohara. (Adi Parva, Chapter 66, Verse
RAMATHA (S). I.
(Sabha.
RAMAYANA
RAMANACINA. A particular region in ancient India.
(Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 66).
RAMANA (M). (RAMANAKAM). An_ island near
Dvaraka where, according to Chapter 38 of the Southern
Text of Bharata, there was a forest. It was in this island
that Vinata, mother of Garuda and Kadri, mother of
the nagas lived. Garuda, after freeing his mother from
her slavery evicted the nagas from this island. ( Brahmanda Purana, Chapter 17). Following the eviction,
many. of the prominent nagas lived in Patala. a
Kaliya, in fear of Garuda, lived in Ka4lindi. After ‘
suppression by Sri Krsna Kaliya, with his family, a
advised by Krsna returned to Ramanakam. (Bhagavata,
10 th Skandha). f
RAMANAKA. The third son of Yajfiabahu, son °
Priyavrata. (Bhagavata, 5th Skandha).
RAMANIYAKA. The island called Ramanakam where
the nagas live. (See under Ramanaka). =. ¥he
A mleccha tribe who lived in ¢
kingdom of Mandhata. (Santi Parva, Chapter 6l,
Verse 14). ;)
RAMATHA (8). II. People of a low caste (mlecchas,
who lived in South India during Puranic time»:
Nakula, subjugated this caste, and from that a
onwards they became devoted to the Pandavas. TI é
were invited to the Rajasitya conducted by Yudhisthir-
(Vana Parva, Chapter 51, Verse 25). +.
RAMATIRTHA I. A holy place in the river Gon.
He who bathes in this tirtha will derive the results _
performing the ASvamedha yajfia. (Vana Parva, Cher
ter 34, Verse 73). rf the
RAMATIRTHA If. A holy spot on the top ° path
Mahendra mountain where Paragurama lived. A ae
here brings the benefits of. performing the asvame
yajiia. (Vana Parva, Chapter 85, Verse 17). ver
RAMATIRTHA III. A holy place in the plains of ™!
Sarasvati. (Salya Parva, Chapter 49, Verse 7).
RAMAYANA. . first
1) General. Ramayana is considered to be a Mire
poetic composition in the world or at least in| p
and hence it is called the Adi Kavya (First Epic):
to
s * s e . s S
1S an epic as it contains descriptions and an ce
ancient themes. Valmiki is its author, an i al
Valmiki is known as the ‘Adi kavi” also. Valmixt ye
Sri Rama were contemporaries. During his life 11 . was
in the forest Rama visited Valmiki’s asrama. done
in this 4grama that Sita. lived after being aan fe 0
by Rama. The connection in many ways of the 1 for
Valmiki with the ‘Rama story’ was an incentive
him to write the Ramayana. : from
2) Composing of Ramayana. Once while returning Hing
the river Tamasa Valmiki witnessed a hunter sh0° he
down one of a Kraufica(akind of bird) couple it 25
intense emotion created by the incident burst 0
follows in verse form.
Ma nisada pratistharn tvamagamah
§a$vatih samah /
Yat krauficamithunadekamavadhih |
kamamohitam. // an
Immediately Brahma appeared on the scene “pe
advised Valmiki to write the story of Rama mM pout
same pattern as that verse. Brahma taught him 5
the past and the future of the history of Ram nik
Sita, Kuga, and Lava were living in his agrama V4" ve
was well in the know about the present, In the 4

RAMAYANA
background Valmiki completed writing the Ramayana
Story in 24,000 verses. The epic is divided into seven
kandas (sections) of five hundred chapters. The seven
sections are the Balakanda, the Ayodhyakanda, the
Aranya kanda, the Kiskindha Kanda, the Sundara
Kanda, the Yuddha Kanda and the Uttarakanda.
Valmiki taught the poem to Lava and Kuga and when
they went with Valmiki to Ayodhya during the
as vamedhayajiia of Sri Rama, they sang the poem in
the open assembly there.
3) Different views about the author. Tradition ascribes
the authorship of the Ramayana to Valmiki. But,
western scholars hold the view that a part of Balakanda
and the whole of Uttarakanda are interpolations of a
future date. The following are the reasons for this view.
(i) Two different texts are found for cantos one and
three of Balakanda. In one of them many of the stories.
mentioned in the other are missing. It may, therefore,
be surmised that the two texts were composed during
different periods.
(ii) In the early texts of Ramayana stories like GangaVataranam are not to be found. So they must be interpolations of a later period.
(iii) Only in Kandas one and seven is Sri Rima treated
as an Incarnation. In the other Kandashe is considered
in the capacity of a hero only.
(iv) Uttarakanda is not te be found among the early
translations of Ramayana into other languages.
(v) In the Balakanda it is stated that Valmiki composed the Ramayana, taught it to Kuga and Lava, and
that they recited the whole poem before Sri Rama at
Ayodhya. Many of the things mentioned in this Kanda
arerepeated in Uttarakanda, which, therefore, must
have been written by someone else.
4) The period of Ramayana. According to Indian belief
Sri Rama lived at the end of Tretayuga, which came to
its close in 8,67,100 B.C. As per Ramayana Sri Rama
ruled the country for 11,000 years. He was for ty. years
old when he ascended the throne. Valmiki began
Writing the Ramayana after Lavakusas were bor
In the light of the above facts. certain scholars on ae
that the Ramayana was written near about & d
B.C. But, western critics and some eastern ini at ee
not accept this view. Professor Jacob holds eS yh
that the original of Mahabharata 1s anterio’
Ramayana. Most scholars do not agree with oe eds
A great majority of critics are of opinion that ; prey a
is anterior to Mahabharata. They argue 45 1p eee a
(i) The traditional belief in India is that Ramayay
was written much earlier than Mahabharata. MPR.
(ii) Ramayana makes no reference '0 any 0
characters of Mahabharata. , anya
(iii) The Sri Rama story is referred to in many
Jataka story of the Buddhists.
(iv) Valmiki has made no menu
Pataliputra established near abou
: - Rs d passed by the city.
irrefutable fact that Sri Rama sia the Prakrta lan-
(v) During the reign of emper the incidents men-
§uage was spoken in the areas et Ramayana was
tioned in Ramayana took place. PU ence of Prakrta
written much anterior to the emers
langua
ge. > a Th
ccording to Professor Keith Ramayal
on about the city of
t 380 B.C. It is an
a was written in
RAMBHA I
5). Different readings of Ramayana. In various parts of
India three original texts or readings are found of the
original Ramayana. In each of the three texts nearly
1/3 of the portions differ from one another. The Bombay
text is popular in northern and southern India, The
second is the Bengal text. The third, the Kashmir text,
is popular in the north-western parts of India. The inference to be made from the existence of these three
different texts is that the original epic was composed in
a Prakrta language, which was most popular at the time
and that it was later translated into Sanskrit by different persons at different times. This theory will
explain the existence of the different texts. For many
years it continued to be handed down from mouth to
month till it assumed written form in Sanskrit.
6). Other Ramdyanas. The Ramayana story in other
forms and garbs, isalso prevalent in India. One of
them is Vasistharamayana or Jfianavasistha. The |
authorship of it also is ascribed to Valmiki. Most of
the Ramayanas like V4sisthottararamayana, Sitavijaya,
Adbhutaramayana, Adbhutottararamayana etc. found
in different parts of India are believed to have been
written by Valmiki. Adbhutaramayana is composd of
twentyseven cantos. According to this Ramayana, it
was Sita, who killed Ravana of ten heads. There is another Ramayana in Sanskrit called Adhyatma-Ramayana.
Itisa poem separated from Brahmandapurana. It is
written in the form of a conversation between Uma
(Parvati) and Siva. Ananda-Ramayana and MialaRamayana extol the greatness of Haniman.
RAMBHA. An asura. (For details see under Karambha).
RAMBHA I.
1) General. One of the m
women. Urvasi, Tilottama
for their beauty.
5 Sn ‘All the famous Celestial women were daughters
<vapaprajapati by his wife Pradha. Devarsi
Ck asyapa ) beget ‘the: following daughters of his wife
Pradhdi.e. Alambusa, Misrakesi, Vidyutparna, Tilottama,
Aruna, Raksita, Rambha, Manorama, Subahi, Kesini,
Surata and Suraja. (Adi Parva, Chapter 65).
3) Ravana cursed. Ravana raped Rambha and Nalakabara cursed him. (See under Nalakubara)
4) Puritravas and Rambha. Indra once killed an asura
chief named Mayadhara and held a festival in honour
of the victory. At the festival Rambha danced before
eceptor Tumburu. Purtravas too was present on
asion and he ridiculed Rambha for her mistakes
in dancing. Moreover he claimed that he was a greater
master of dance than Tumburu preceptor of Rambha.
‘Enraged by this claim Tumburu cursed that Purtiravas
would be separated from his wife Urvasi. (Kathasaritsagara, Lavanakalambaka, Taranga 3).
5) Rambha and Susena. There was a King called Susena
on mount Citrakita. This handsome bachelor prince
used to sit alone in the lotus pond near his palace. When
once Rambha passed through the sky above the bord
her eyes met those of Susena and she alighted on 1e
spot and the long talk between the two ended in their |
F nage. Susena enjoyed life there for a long time with
Rambha without knowing that she was an apsara
woman. He had attempted many a ume to oc ae
real facts about her, to no PUTpoOse: ae a did
even think about her native Svarga. Her com=
canoe a Yaksi, showered gold all over Susena’s
ost beautiful of the apsara
and Rambha are really
her pr
the occ

a
RAMBHA II
kingdom. In due course Rambha delivered a beautiful
female child and then she told the King that she was
Rambha and that she had continued as his wife till
then as she felt love towards him. She further told him
that now she had begot a daughter, she was leaving
him and that she had a curse upon her which had been
redeemed now. She also assured him that they would
meet in Svarga in case the daughter was duly wedded.
Rambha departed to Svarga. Susena named the
child Sulocana and when she came of age he married
her to Vatsamaharsi and then went to Devaloka where
he lived happily with Rambha for a long time. ( Kathasaritsagara, Madanamajicukalambaka, Taranga 2).
6) Other information.
(1) The powerful asura called Caturasya once felt a
great yearning for Rambha and her maid Svayamprabha managed things for him. He built a garden-city
and presented it to Svayamprabha in return for her
service stated above. (Kamba Ramayana, Kiskindha
Kanda).
(ii) The Sage Gautama alias Saradvan experienced
seminal emission on seeing Rambha and from the
semen was born Krpi whom in due course of time
Dronacarya married. (Kathasaritsagara, Madanamaificukalambaka, Taranga 6).
(iii) Indra once deputed Rambha to break the vigorous
tapas Vigvamitra was observing. She approached him
in the guise ofa nightingale and with her song disturbed his meditation. —The muni cursed her as follows
and turned her into a rock. “Oh! evil woman Rambha,
you have cheated me, who have mastered desire and
anger and so you be turned into a rock fora thousand
years. The great brahmin ascetic, Bhiritejas will absolve you from my curse and you will then resume your
own form.” (Valmiki Ramayana. Balakanda, Canto 64).
(iv) Rambha-gave a dance performance on the occasion of the birthday celebrations of Arjuna. (Adi Parva,
Chapter 122, Verse 62).
(v) She had lived for sometime in the court of Kubera
serving him. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 10, Verse 10).
(vi) When Arjuna livedin Svarga as- Indra’s guest
Rambha danced in honour of the former. (AnugAsana
Parva, Chapter 43, Verse 29).
ie) On anrorer cceasion she danced in Kubera’s court
in honour o stavakra muni. $a
Chapter 19, Verse 44). VrMHEARaNa PAN,
RAMBHA Il. Wife of Mayasura. The couple had the
following seven childreni.e. Mayavi, Dundubhi, Mahisa
Kalaka, Ajakarna, and Mandodari. (Brahmanda
RAMESVARA. There is in South India a
holy place called Ramesvara and a Siva temple there
Rama and others encamped on the sea shore to cross
over to Lanka to release Sita from Rayana’s custody.
This temple, according to Kamba, was built by Rama at
that time. The following story is from the Yuddha Kanda
of Kamba Ramayana. a
To make the passage over to Lanka easy, Rama decided to
build agreat temple at Ramefvara and install a Sivalinga
in the temple. Under the expert supervision of the great
architects, Nala and Nila, all the monkeys cooperated to
build the temple. As ordered by Rama, Hantman went to
Kailasa to fetch Sivalinga. Haniiman did not return
with the linga though the auspicious time for the installation was very near. How could the installation be
very famous |
RANTIDEVA
made without the idol and the installation had to be
made at the appointed time.
Sri Rama stood ready near the installation platform.
It was the exact time for the installation of the idol.
A divine effulgence was seen to emerge from Rama and
immediately a Sivalinga automatically appeared at the
spot where rituals were conducted for installation.
Everyone was wonder-struck by this mysterious happening.
Haniiman by now, returned with the linga and _ he felt
sorry that the installation of the idol had already been
made. Sri Rama told him: ‘Please remove the 140
already installed, we shall install a new one.” _
Happy at the words of Rama, Hanuman entwined the
idol with his tail and jumped directly upwards. ee
his tail was cut, head clashed against the roof which
was broken and Haniman fell down unconscious. °7
Rama held him up and patted him on the head a”
Hanuman was more pleased than ever. Afterwards, [0
fulfil Haniiman’s desire and for the prosperity of the
temple Haniman was made to install the new
Sivalinga in front of the eastern tower of the temp C
Sri Rama laid down the following rule also. Only ae’
worshipping the idol at the tower, should the God 1
side the temple be worshipped.
The rule was also recorded there. Hae
RAMOPAKHYANAPARVA. A sub-parva of Mabé
bharata comprising chapters 273 to 292 of Vana eer
RAMYAGRAMA. Capital of a State. Sahadev®
during his triumphal tour, conquered Ramyagram™
(Sabha Parva, Chapter 31, Verse 14). by
RAMYAKA I. A son of Agnidhra, who had nine sons '
his wife Parvacitti. (Bhagavata, 5th Skandha ) i
Ramyaka ruled the Kingdom called Ramyaka Vay
near Nilagiri. Arjuna,during his triumphal tour et ;
quered Ramyaka and levied taxes from the people t
' (Sabha Parva, Chapter 28). one
RAMYAKA II. A particular region in Ilavrfa, tg
of the seven Continents. On the eastern part oO ee
there exist three mountains called Nilagiri, Svetagin are
Srmgavan. These mountains jut into the sea, 2” hou"
separated from one another by a distance of two te
sand miles each and are the source of many river": Ad
between the three mountains are three regions 0 nage
called Ramyaka, Hiranmaya and Kuru. (Dev! Bhé
vata, 8th Skandha). -. the
RANA. A Raksasa. He was killed by Vayu deva sina
war between Hiranyaksa and the Devas. Pa
Purana, Srsti Khanda). veda)
RANAYANI. A Preceptor in the line of the Sama (
disciples of Vyasa. (Jaiminiya Grhyasitra 1, 14)
RANGADASA. A great Sidra. devotee of God.
a number of temples on mount Venkatacala
Purana).
RANGAVIDYADHARA. A _ Gandharva.
Sudeva III. parv4
RANOTKATA. A warrior of Subrahmanya. (Saly4
Chapter 45, verse 68). ¢ the
RANTIDEVA. The Kindest and the most libera! °
Kings in ancient India. © . anes
1). Genealogy. Descended from Visnu thus: Atri-C2 rue
e bull!
(Skand?
(See unde
Budha - Purtravas - A - Yaya a
; yus - Nahusa aye ay
Janamejaya-Pracinvan - Pravira - Namasyu- Vita a”
undu - Bahuvidha - Sarhyati - Rahovadi - Rau ott
Matinara - Santurodha - Dusyanta - Bharata ~ u

RANTU (The Malayalam wor
RANTU
Suhota-Gala-Garda-Suketu-Brhatksatra - Nara - Sankrti
Rantideva.
2). His importance. Rantideva’s unique kindness is very
famous in history. After the great war was Over,
Narada once narrated the stories of sixteen kings to
Dharmaputra. There are a number of stories relating
to Rantideva’s kindness, hospitality etc. He had engaged 20,000 people to cook food for guests who came to
the palace everyday. He was very vigilant about treating guests day and night alike. He gifted away all
wealth which had been righteously earned, to brahmins.
He learned Vedas and subdued enemies by Dharma
(righteousness ). The very blood that flowed from the skin
of cattle killed to entertain his guests formed itself into
a river called Carmanvati. (Santi Parva, Chapter 29.
21,000 cows were daily killed for the guest. (Drona
Parva, Chapter 67).
3. Other information. belt
(i) Rantideva entered Svarga by giving Vasistha warm
water. (Santi Parva, Chapter 934, Verse 17) .
with fruits and yegeii) He once worshipped maharsis
tie and achieved is desire. (Santi Parva, Chapter
ae ) He never ate fle
, Verse 67). f :
(iv) He eet heaven once by making pee to
Vasistha. (Anugasana Parva, Chapter Ls ee Le
(v) He is recognised as one of the Mahara ie a bets
to be remembered both at dawn and at dusk. (A
0, Verse 51).
§4sana Parva, Chapter 19%. d for ‘two’)-
Chapter
sh. (Anusasana Parva,
1. Ayanas two. | ey
A. een from July-August ee ec ie
femme Be a Ae {7 Ror the Devas
(Makaram) to June-July ( ithune™ “cht. ReligiousUttarayana is day and Daksinayan@ rhe ‘san auspiciminded Hindus believe that Uttarayan
ous period for death. | alth)
2. Arthadiisanas 2.. (Misuse fourposes and not spending
(i) Spending money for ba
money for good purposes. ie
(11) Stealing a ee or wealth and not giving
poor deserving people.
3. Alankdras 2. (Figures of speech
Sabdalankara. 0 2
4. Ausadhas 2. (Medicines )- a ou rgative
oils and ghees, honey etc. ene d
(enema), recanam (purgall
(vomiting). ad sexu
5. Aids for health 2. erent preceptor oF PreceP”
money to
). Arthalankara and
al continence.
6. Gurus 2. (Preceptors
tor in effect and casual precep ah er) and Marica
7. Katudvayam. Pippali Core i d
( Pepper) Causes for quarrel). Golaie
8. Kalahakgranam 2. \YO0r:
woman (Kanaka an Kamm Ve and boy: (ultimate
9. Kayadvayam (Two bodies). Upadanam
10. Karanadvayam (Two. cases) cause)
enue) and Nimittam (immedi yaline salt (Saltp etre)
l. Ksaradvayam (Two sar) Is.
Sodium Carbonate. 2) Women and trees
12. Capaladvayam (Fickle one “5. Superficial ate
13. Fianadva ae (Knowledges): © aad Drdhajian4 :
and deep en owled ee (Mandajn?
643 RASMIKETU
14. Dharmadvayam (Duties 2). Action aud renunciation.
(Pravrtti and Nivrtti).
15. Nisadvayam. Turmeric and Amonum Xanthorrhizon
16. Nisthadvayam. Sadhya (knowledge) and Sadhana
(action) . |
17. Paksadvayam. Krsnapaksa (dark fortnight) and
Suklapaksa moon-lit fortnight.
18. Padyakavyadvayam (Poetry 2).° Lyric and Maha- -
kavyam (epic). :
19. Papadvayam (Sins 2). Original sin and acquired,
(Janmapapa and Karmapapa).
20. Moksakaranadvayam. Causes ior salvation, 2). Yoga
and death in war. 3
21. Yogadvayam. Karma (action) and Jfana (knowledge).
99. Ragadvayam (colour). Purnam (unmixed) and
Janyam (mixed). |
23. Rogadvayam. (Diseases 2). (a) Physical and mental
(Kayika and Manasika). (b) Congenital and acquired. (Sahaja and Agantuka).
94, Viryadvayam. Heat and cold.
95. Srigdradvayam. Love or the erotic sentiment 2). Love
in union and that in separation. (Sambhoga and
‘Vipralambha). |
96. Srutidharmadvayam (Musical cadence 2). High pitch
and low pitch (Ucca and nica).
27. Samadhanakaranadvayam (Two causes for peace). Patience or forbearance and generosity. (Ksama and
danasila) . |
RAPHENAKA. A naga born in Taksaka’s dynasty. It
was burnt to death at’ the serpent yajiia of Janamejaya.
(Adi Parva, Chapter 57, Verse 8).
RASATALA. A particular part of Patala where, according to the Paranas, the Nivatakavacas live. The
Mahabharata contains the following information regarding Rasatala.
(1) During the deluge the Agni called Samvarta rent
the earth and reached up to ‘Rasgatala. (Vana Parva,
Chapter 188, Verse 69).
(2) The Raksasi called Krtya created by the asuras
once carried away Duryodhana to Patala. (Vana Parva,
Chapter 251, Verse 29).
(3) Rasatalais the seventh stratum ofthe earth. Surabhi
the mother of cows born from nectar lives there.
(Udyoga Parva, Chapter 102, Verse 1).
(4) It is more comfortable and happy to live in
Rasatala than to live either in Nagaloka or Svarga.
(Udyoga Parva, Chapter 102, Verse 14).
5) It was in. Rasatala that Mahavisnu incarnated as
Boar and killed the asuras with his tusk. (Santi Parva
Chapter 206, Verse 26). ;
(6) Mahavisnu, who assumed the form of Hayagriva
went to Rasatala, killed Madhu and Kaitabha and
resurrected the Vedas. (Santi Parva, Chapter 347, Verse
(7) King Vasu went to Rasatala because he uttered
one lie. (Anugdsana Parva, Chapter 6, Verse 34).
(8) Rasatala is Ananta’s abode. Balabhadrarama who
was an incarnation of Ananta, gave up his material
body at Prabhasa tirtha and attained Rasatala. (Svararohana Parva, Chapter 5, Verse 28).
RASMIKETU. A Raksasa who fought on the side of
Ravana against Rama. (Valmiki Ramayana, Sundara
Kanda; Sarga 9).

RASMIVAN
RASMIVAN. An eternal, universal Deva ( Vig vadeva).
(AnuSasana Parva, Chapter 91, Verse 36).
RASTRAVARDHANA. A minister of Dagaratha. (Agni
Purana, Chapter 6).
RATA. A daughter of Daksaprajapati. Dharma married
her and the Vasu called Ahar was born to the couple.
(Adi Parva, Chapter 66, Verse LY}
RATHACITRA. A river famous in the Puranas. (Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 26).
RATHADHVAYJA. Father of king Kugadhvaja of Videha.
Vedavati was his grand-daughter. (See under Vedavati).
RATHADHVANA. Another name of Viragni, son of
armyu. (Vana Parva, Chapter 219, Verse 9).
RATHAGRANI. A warrior. He had accompanied
Satrughna who led the Agvamedhic horse of Rama.
(Padma Purana, Patalakhanda), !
RATHAKRTA, A Yaksa who rotates in the month of
Caitra along with the Aditya called Dhata. (Bhagavata
12th Skandha),
RATHAKSA. A warrior of Subrahmanya. (Salya Parva,
Chapter 45, Verse 63).
RATHANTARA I. A Saman, which, having assumed
form, worships Brahma in his court. (Sabha Parva,
Chapter 11, Verse 30). This Rathantara saman possesses the power to cure fainting fits. Once Vasistha restored Indra to consciousness with this Saman. (Santi
Parva, Chapter 281, Verse 21 is
RATHANTARA II. Son of the Agni called Paficajanya.
He was also called Tarasahara. (Vana Parva, Chapter
222, Verse 7).
RATHANTARYA (RATHANTARI). Mother of King
Dusyanta. She was the daughter of King [lina and
had five sons, i.e. Dusyanta, Sara, Bhima, Pravasu and
Vasu. (Adi Parva, Chapter 94).
RATHAPRABHU., A synonym of Viragni, son of Sarhyu.
(Vana Parva, Chapter 219, Verse D4
RATHASENA. A valiant warrior who fought on the
Pandava side against the Kauravas. His horses were
very magnificent ones. (Drona Parva, Chapter 23,
Versé 62).
RATHASTHA. A Yaksa who rotates in the month of
Jyestha in the company of the Aditya called Mitra.
(Bhagavata, 12th Skandha).
RATHASTHA. One of the seven tributaries of the
Ganga. According to the ancients, bathing in the river
o wash off all sins. (Adi Parva, Chapter 169, Verse
RATHATIRATHASANKHYANAPARVA. A sub-Parva
of Santi Parva, Chapters 165-172.
RATHAVAHANA. Brother of the Virata King. He
fought against the Pandavas, (Drona Parva, Chapter
RATHAVARTA. A holy place considered to be on the
right side of Sakambharidevi. He who visits this place
will, due to the grace of Siva, attain salvation. (Vana
Parva, Chapter 84, Verse 23). _
RATHAVITI. A maharsi. He lived in a hilly region
very far away from the Himalayas. Once the maharsi
called Syavasva invited Rathaviti to perform a homa
at the yajfia conducted by King Taranta, and when he
came for the homa with his daughter the father of Syavava asked him to marry his daughter to Syavaéva.
Rathaviti not only refused, but also dismissed Syavagva
from the yajfiic platform. At last Rathaviti married
RATI I |
his daughter to Syavaéva at the request of King
Taranta. (Rgveda, Sayanabhasya).
RATHITARA. A king of the solar dynasty. He was_ the
son of Prsatagva. (Bhagavata, 9th Skandha).
RATI 1. Wife of Kamadeva and some Puranas hold
the view that Kama was the son of Dharma whose
father was Brahma. But, the story of Kama and Rati
is described in the Kalikapuranaas follows. .
Brahma created ten prajapatis. A beautiful lady
called Sandhya was his next creation. As soon as she was
born, seeing her exquisite beauty Brahma and the pr pe
patis jumped to their feet. All of them thought a .
same way. While the court of Brahma was in suc r
perplexed confusion, an extremly handsome aes
emerged from his mind. Fish was the symbol on at
flag , and he aked Brahma thus: “Oh father, Ww
should I do? Give mea suitable name and you shou: fe
also decide upon a place and position and also a wi
for me.” Brahma told him as follows:—You be movin’
about everywhere in this world (full of men- ae
women) engaged in the eternal function of creation w!
the five arrows of flower in your hands and thus ae
the population. Your arrows will go everywhere an oe
one, not even’ the Devas will dare to obstruct ae
arrows. Everyone will yield to your behests. Visnu, :
and I also will yield before your arrows. You will ee
the hearts of living beings in invisible form and o The
them happiness engage yourself in eternal creation. he
chief aim and object of your arrows of flower will be le
hearts of living beings. You> will be given a suita
name just now.” Le
The prajapatis, who understood the wish of Bra ing
after mutual consultation said: “You emerged churn :
our minds. Therefore, you will become famous err
the name Manmatha (he who churns the mind) : best
will lay low Siva’s haughtiness and conceit. Oh - on
among men, Daksa, chief among the prajapatis,
ive you a wife.” 7 i a
Happily pleased at the above words of Brahma eae
held up in his hands the bow and arrows of f | 3a5*
and decided to shoot five arrows, i.e. harsanam ed ;
ing or gladdening), Rocanam (attracting or care ee
mohanam (deluding or infatuating), §osanam (wea che
ing) and maranam (killing). He decided to Or eaiae
arrows first against Brahma and then against the Pama
patis. Accordingly the arrows shot forth and Pre iol
and all the prajapatis overwhelmed by sexual Ee ne
stared at Sandhyadevi. Sandhya also got excite "65
from her body sprouted up 49 parts; 64 kalas a
also were born from her. She used. incessantly age 6
the leaders of the world (Brahma and others) ows
were downed by the arrows of sexual passion, _ ne "
dear to Manmatha. The expressions of Brahma ™
Sandhya sick with love. ng
iva, who was just then travelling along the sky, tee no
the boisterous exhibitions of passion by Brahma. aise
others alighted there. He ridiculed Brahma for his aii
play of passion towards his own daughter Sandhya He
spoke further like this: ‘“This Kama too is a fool. , ety
tested his arrows here itself, he has nosense of prop!
and discretion.” Siva.
Brahma was thoroughly ashamed at the words of »} at
He perspired and'swept with his hands the drops he
Sweat that oozed from his body. With great difficuly a
Controlled his Passion and gave up Sandhya. z

RATI II
the drops of sweat falling on the ground from the body
of Brahma were born the pitrs called Agnisvattas and
the Barhisadas, the former 64,000 in number and the
latter 4,80,000. Drops of sweat from the bodies of the
prajapatis also fell on the ground and from them were
born the Devas. The pitrs called Somapas are the sons
of Kratu; those called Svakalikas are the sons of
Vasistha; sons of Pulastya are called Ajyapas and
Havirbhuks are the sons of Angiras.
Brahma, who was angry that Kama shot his arrows
against him in the presence of Siva cursed the former
that he would be burnt to ashes in the fire of Siva’s
eyes, and Kama trembling with fear at the curse prostrated at the feet of Brahma and wept Then Brahma
said that though he would die in the fire of Siva’s eyes,
he would be born again.
From the drops of perspiration that fell on the ground
from Daksa’s body arose a beautiful woman, and Daksa
his daughter would
told Kama that the woman,
become famous as Rati devi. Daksa gave Rati Devi
to Kama to be his wife. Thus did Rati become
Kama’s wife. (For the second birth of Rati see under
Pradyumna and for other details see under Kama. )
RATI II. An apsara woman of Alakapuri. She danced
on the occasion of Kubera welcoming Astavakramuni.
(Anusasana Parva, Chapter 19, Verse 45).
RATI III. Wife of Vibhu born in the dynasty of King
Rsabhadeva of Ajanabhavarsa.
daughter, (Bhagavata, 5th Skandha) .
RATIGUNA. A Devagandharva whose father was
Kat yapaprajapati and mother Pradha. (Adi Parva,
Chapter 65, Verse 47). my
RATIVIDAGDHA. A _ courtesan of ‘Hastinapura. As
she performed the pious deed of feeding brahmins _she
attained Vaikuntha after her death. (Padma Purana,
Kriyakhanda).
ananagari who was 2
RATNAGRIVA. A king of Kane
d
great devotee of Visnu. He peor ee hat
tai 4 d a Purana,
ained Vaikuntha. (Paam killed by an ox, but
RATNAKARA. Vaigya. He was, 5
he lo SL ae a brahmin cal Dh
sprinkled Ganga water on him. (Padma fur pat y
khanda) : }
RATNAKUTA. One of the wives
(Padma Purana, Patala Khanda) -
RATRIDEVI. The presiding de!ty
once worshipped Ratridevi for the
desires. (Udyoga Parva, Chapter ! ?
RAUBHYA. A hermit. It is seen ree
that this hermit called on Sri Rama OF
Lanka,
RAUDRA. A class of giants who li
Mandara mountains. The hermit to th
ing to the Pandavas, when they wee ” Raudras, (M.B.
ing their forest life, to be careful iy, <
ana Parva, Chapter 139, Stanza
RAUDRAKARMA. One of the, cpharata, Drona
hrtarastra, Mention a eer 62 that Raudrakarma
anze,; ;
Parva, Chapter 127, imasena.
was killed in the battle of Bharata a nn nal Piru of
RAUDRAS§VA I. A son born ( ee thers Pravira and
is wife Pausti. Raudrasva had two DF®
§vara.
of Atrimaharsi.
Indrani
ight.
of ie f her
fulfilment oO
Verse 25.).
Uttara Ramayana
return from
yed on Kailasa and
Lomasa gav
hundred sons of
Prthusena was her
RAVANA
Once Raudragva fell in love with the celestial maid
Mifgrakesi. Mention is made in Mahabharata. Adi
Parva, Chapter 94, that as a result of the married life
of these two, ten archers beginning with Anvagbhanu
were born.
RAUDRASVA II. A hermit who was the disciple of the
hermit Katyayana. Once Mahisasura came in the guise
of a beautiful woman to the hermitage of Raudrasva to
hinder his penance. The hermit cursed Mahisasura,
‘You will die because of a woman’, (Kalika Purana
Chapter 62). tie
RAUMYA (S). A group of ganas (warriors of Siva). It
is mentioned in Mahabharata, Santi Parva,Chapter 284
that these Raumyas were born from the hairpores of
Virabhadra, the chief of the guards of Siva.
RAUPYA. A Puranically famous river of Ancient India.
The holy bath Prasarpana of the hermit Jamadagni is
situated on the banks of this river. (M.B. Vana Parva, .
Chapter 129, Stanza 7).
RAURAVA. One of the twentyeight hells.. For details
see the part Naraka under the word Kala.
RAVANA. The Raksasa King of Lanka who had ten
heads.
1) Genealogy. Descended from Visnu thus :—Brahma—
Pulastya—Visravas—Ravana.
9) Birth. Vi§Sravas, grandson of Brahma and son of
Pulasty2 married Kaikasi, daughter of Sumali. While
Vigravas and Kaikasi were living in the forest Slesmataka, Kaikasi became pregnant. She delivered four
children in four Yamas, with an interval of one yama
between them. The elder three were the famous
Raksasas, Ravana, Kumbhakarna and Vibhisana; the
fourth one, a girl, was named Sirpanakha. (Kamba
Ramayana, Balakanda ).
Kubera was another son of Visgravas born of another
wife called Devavarni alias Ilabila. As soon as he
came of age Kubera captured the Puspaka chariot and
began ruling the kingdom with Lanka as capital.
(Uttara Ramayana ).
3) Previous lives of Ravana. See under Jaya XI.
4) Ravana secured boons. Kaikasi {Ravana’s mother)
who became envious of the pomp and prowess of Kubera
advised her son to secure boons from Brahma by tapas
and become equal to Kubera. Accordingly he went to
Gokarna with his brothers and began tapas. Kumbhakarna did tapas for 10,000 years; Vibhisana also did
tapas for 10,000 years standing on one foot. Ravana
standing in the middle of the five fires, meditated upon
Brahma. Though 10,000 years passed thus, Brahma did
not appear yet. Ravana then cut one of his ten heads
and made an offering of it to Brahma in the fire. Thus
within 9009 years he cut nine of his heads and offered
them to Brahma in the fire. Lastly when he was about
to cut off his tenth head, Brahma appeared and asked
him to choose whatever boon he wanted. Ravana
chose the boon that from none but men should he
meet with his death. Kumbhakarna desired to secure
the boon of ‘nirdevatva’ (Absence of the devas) but
secured by a slip of the tongue ‘nidravatvam’ (sleep).
Vibhisana chose devotion to Visnu. On his return
after securing the boons, Ravana occupied Lanka,
drove away Kubera and took his puspaka chariot.
Ravana further declared Mahavisnu to be his eternal
enem _Hearing about Ravana’s victory the Raksasas
from Patala came to live in Lanka.

RAVANA 646
5) Family life. Ravana married Mandodari, fosterdaughter of Mayasura and three sons, Meghanada,
Atikaya and Aksakumara were born to the couple. He
then conquered the whole world with the cooperation
of his sons and other Raksasas. The Astadikpalakas |
(protectors of the eight regions) were subjugated. He
attacked Devaloka, but was defeated and imprisoned.
Meghanada by magical trickery captured Indra and
released Ravana from custody. Meghanada came to be
called Indrajit from that day onwards.
6) Kartaviryarjuna and Ravana. See under Kartaviryarjuna, Para 6.
7) Curses heaped on Ravana. Asa result of ruling the
land, as a terror to the whole world, for many years
and of his triumphal journey Ravana had invited on
his head eighteen sapas (curses) as follows.
(i) Nalakibara Sapa. Ravana once insulted Rambha,
the betrothed wife of Nalakibara during her tour at a
place near Alaka. On hearing about the insult Nalakaibara cursed that Ravana should die with his ten
heads broken.
(ii) Vedavatifapa. While Vedavati, the only daughter
of sage Kugadhvaja, was doing tapas to secure Sri
Madhava as her husband. Ravana committed rape on
her and she cursed him thus :—‘“‘You and your family
will be ruined by Lord Narayana on account of me.”
(iii) BradhmanasGpa. Ue invited a Vedic brahmin to
install the idol of Tripurasundari given to him by
Siva. As the brahmin happened to be a bit late to
come, Ravana imprisoned him for seven days, and
the old brahmin cursed that Ravana would be imprisoned seven months by a man.
(iv) Nandtkefvarasapa. For calling him ‘monkey’ at
Kailasa, NandikeSvara cursed that Ravana and his
kingdom would be destroyed by monkeys.
(v) Vasisthasgpa. As Vasistha refused’ Ravana’s invitation to teach the Vedas etc. he took the former
captive. When he was released from captivity by the
solar King Kuvalayasva, Vasistha cursed that Ravana
and his family would be destroyed by those born in the
solar dynasty.
(vi) Astavakrasapa. Ravanaonce saw sage Astavakra
at Slesmataka and gave him a kick saying, ‘Oh!
handsome fellow ! J shall cure your eight hunches’?
and the sage cursed Ravana as follows :—For kicking
me, a poor innocent sage, you will be kicked from head
to foot and foot to head by monkeys.”’
(vii) Dattdtreyasapa. Ravana once poured on his own
head water kept purified by mantras by Dattatreya to
bathe the head of his Guru, and the latter cursed that
Ravana’s head would be polluted by the feet ofmonkeys.
( vill) Doaipayanasapa. When Ravana molested and
wounded the lips of Dvaipayana’s sister in his own
presence he cursed that RAavana’s sister would be
mutilated by a man and he would be humiliated by
monkeys.
(ix) Mandavyasapa. During a pleasure trip of his with
Mandodari Ravana cruelly manhandled Mandavyamaharsi, when the latter cursed that Ravana _ too
would be roughly handled by a monkey.
(x) Atrifapa. Ravana once dragged by hair the wife
of Atri in his very presence, and Atri cursed that
Ravana will have to witness his wife being denuded
of her dress and dragged by the hair by monkeys.
RAVANA
(xi) Néradasapa. Narada refused to explain the
meaning of ‘Om’ to Ravana and the latter threatened
to cut the tongue of Narada. Narada then cursed
that all the ten heads of Ravana would be cut by a
man.
(xii) Rtuvarmasépa. Ravana once raped Madanamafijari, wife of Rtuvarman, who lived as an anchorite
in the marutta forest, and the latter cursed that
Ravana would be killed by a man.
(xiii) Maudgalyasapa. Once maharsi Maudgalya was
sitting in the svastika pose resting his neck on_ the
yogadanda (a short stick-like piece of wood with a
handle) Ravana happened to come there and he cut
into two the yogadanda with his Candrahasa (sword)
with the result that the maharsi fell down with face
upwards and broke his back-bone. ‘The maharsi then
cursed that Rdavana’s Candrahasa would prove ineffective in future.
(xiv) Brahmanajananisapa. Certain young brahmin
girls who had gone for sea-bath were humiliated by
Ravana in the presence of their mothers when they
cursed that the wife of Ravana would be insulted in
his very presence by monkeys.
(xv) Agnisapa. Ravana once humiliated Svahadevi,
wife of Agni in his very presence and Agni cursed _ that
Ravana’s wife would be humiliated by monkeys in his
presence. .
(xvi) Anaranyasépa. Ravana killed by one blow on
his chest King Anaranya of the solar dynasty who
sought refuge with him, and the King cursed that
Ravana would die with all his ten heads cut by the
arrows of a prince of the solar dynasty.
(xvil) Brhaspati Sapa. When Ravana was about to
return after conquering Devaloka and taking the devas
captives, Sulekhadevi, daughter of Brhaspati tried to
take shelter somewhere when Ravana attempted to
catch her by force. Then Brhaspati cursed that Ravana
would die hit by the arrows of Rama. “a
(xviii ) Brahmadevasépa. Ravana tried to humiliate
Pufjikadevi, daughter of Brahma, and the latter curse
that Ravana would die with all his ten heads broken
+f he touched unwilling women.
8) Ravana got Candrahasa. See under Candrahasa.
9) He threatened Devas. Ravana, during his triumphal
march with the armies, once came to the Ufgiravira
mountain. Then the King called Marutta was performing Maheégvara yajna on the plains of the mountain. Indra and the other devas came to receive their
f the offerings. But they ran away in fear on
the arrival of Ravana. Indra assumed the form of a
peacock, Yama_ that of a crow, Kubera that of a
chameleon and Varuna that of aswan, and the devas,
thus assuming various forms went away in different
directions. Marutta got angry and got ready to fight
Ravana. But, as the maharsis prevented him from it no
fighting took place. Ravana returned with the
glories of victory. '
10) He defeated Kala. Once Narada felt the urge to
witness a quarrel. He went to Lanka and told Ravana
tales about Kala, that Kala was more powerful than
Ravana, that Kala would soon be causing Ravana’s
death etc. These stories awakened the anger in Ravana
against Kala, and the former, with a strong army
challenged Kala, and war between the two started.
portion o

pa
RAVIT
RAVII. A prince of Sauvira. It was
RAVI II. A son of Dhrtardstra.
RAYANA. Brother of Yagoda, moth
Brahma was in a fix, for he had given Ravana
the boon that the latter would be killed only by a man.
At the same time he had given the boon to Kala that
anybody thrashed with his (Kala’s) club would die.
Brahma, therefore, decided to end the fighting between
Kala and Ravana somehow, and he approached Kala
and requested him to withdraw from fighting. Accordingly Kala acknowledged defeat and thus the fighting
ended.
11) Ravana attacked Patala. Afterwards Ravana marched with his army to Patala where he defeated Taksaka,
the naga King and exacted tributes from him. Then
he attacked Nivatakavacas. When the fighting became
very fierce Brahma intervened and brought about a
compromise between the two. Next, Ravana attacked
Surabhiin Varuna’s palace, but the Raksasas who
emerged from the pores on Surabhi’s body drove . away
Ravana. ,
12) Raped Rambha. See under Nalakibara.
13) His death, Ravana’s sister, Sarpanakha met Sri
Rama and Laksmana at Paficavati and wanted first
Rama and then Laksmana to marry her. - But,
Laksmana cut away her nose, breasts etc. Enraged by
this Ravana abducted Sita. Sri Rama, with the help of
the monkey-army, killed Ravana in war. (See under
Rama.
14) Synonyms of Ravana, Dagakandhara, Daganana,
Dasgasya, Paulastya, Pulastyatanaya, Raksahpati,
Raksasadhipa, Raksasamahesvara. (Valmiki Ramayana
and Kamba Ramayana).
thi
stood with the flag behind the chariot ‘of y ea
who had come to carry away Draupadi. He was killed
by Arjuna. (Vana Parva, Chapter 221, Verse 27).
He was killed by
Bhima in the great war. (Salya Parva, Chapter 26,
Verse 14).
RAYA... A King of the lunar dynasty and son of Puriravas. Urvasi, who had many sons like Ayus, Srutayus,
Satyayus, Raya, Vijaya and =
Skandha),. Jaya. (Bhagavata, 9th
: f Sn
(Brahmavaivarta Purana, 2.39, 3 7:39), of Sri Krsna
RBHU I. An ancient sage. He was the son of Brahmi.
He was an extraordinary scholar who became the
preceptor of Nidagha who was the son of Pulastya and
the grandson of Brahma. Rbhu conveyed all knowledge to Nidagha. But he saw that although he taught
Nidagha all branches of knowledge, the latter did
not take any interest in “Advaita”. So he lett him
in disappointment but later got him interested in
Advaita, (Visnu Purana, Armia 9. Chapters 15-16).
RBHUS.
_1) General information. Rbhus are a group of divine beings who attained divinity by performing tapas. Mahabharata, Anusasana Parva, Chapter 137, Verse 25 Says
that even other gods worship the Rbhus.
2) Who were Rbhus? Angiras, the son of Brahma had a
son named Sudhanva. Sudhanva had three children
Rbhuksan, Vibhvan and Vaja. These three persons form
the Rbhus as mentioned in Reveda. Ist | |
Anuvaka, 111th Sikta. “gveda, Ist Mandala, 16th
3) Rbhus and Miracles.
(i) Long ago, a cow belonging toa Rsi died. Its calf
began to cry. The Rsi took pity on it and prayed to the
647 RCIKA (AJIGARTA)
Rbhus. They made a cow and covered it with the skin
of the dead cow and placed it in front of the calf. Because of its likeness to its mother, the calf believed 1t to
be its mother.
(ii) Rbhus restored their parents who had become old,
to youth. (Rgveda, Ist Mandala, 16th Anuvaka. 11th
Sukta). |
(iii) Rgveda says that it was the Rbhus who made
Indra’s horses, the ‘chariot of the Asvinis and Brhaspati s
cow.
RCEYU. A king of the Piru Dynasty. .
1) Genealogy. rom Visnu were descended in the following order:-Brahma-Atri- Candra-Budha-Puriravas.AyusNahusa. Yayati-Piru-Janamejaya - Pracinvan - PraviraNamasyu-Vitabhaya-Sundu-Bahuvidha-Samyatl - Rahovadi-Raudragva and Reeyu.
2 Other details.
th His mother, Misrakesi ic a goddess. (M.B. Adi
Parva, Chapter 94, Verse 10). ; ¥
(ii) He had two other names; Anvagbhanu Be Mela
vrsti. Matinara was the son of Reeyu. (M.B. Adi Parva,
Cre pias 94, Von a 3). é suas
RCIKA I (AJIGARTA). 4 famou a, !
TD) eee From Visnu were descended in Hoe follow:
ing order-Brahma-Bhrgu-Cyavana-Urva-Rei 2. ste
was the father of Jamadagni and grandfather 0
rama. $83
2) Reika’s marriage. Gadhi, a king of the x aga
had a daughter, Satyavati. Rcika wishe ae aeeentes
beautiful princess. Gadhi agr eed to BY 000 horses with
in marriage to the sage if he gave |; to help him
black.ears. Rcika offered worship to ves a thousand
in the matter. Varuna was pleased a Roika married
horses rose up from the river Canes wards both of
Satyavati after giving the horses. Aiter
: e forest. .
them went and settled down in th woiatimade a request
‘rth of FJamadagni. One day Saty 3 uest-
| 2 Retka ae she should have a son. ee a oo
ed him that her mother should be Bie erformed a
so thatshe might have 4 brother. eae Pt rice and
“homa” and after that he made two Pee eat one of
gave) them) ,ta, Satyavall, Etc acy’ 2°) ey sr ctput
them and to give the other to her mother. the first rice-
‘‘Brahmatejas” (brilliance of Brahmins ) et as) in the
ball and ‘““K satratejas’’ (brilliance of ay ihe riceother. When Satyavati and her mother ‘i ded for her
balls, it so happened that the rice-ball inten tended for
mother was eaten by Satyavati and the rans sika came to
Satyavati was eaten by the mother. Later © es and her
know of this mistake. In due course, Sabjaval Bea
mother gave birth to sons, Satyavati s ner 57).
Vis vamitra. (Brahmanda P ora! Cher sons were born
4) Other sons of Reika. After this three see Synahpuccha,
to Rcika. The eldest of them was ee and the third,
the second was named Sunassepha
Sunolangila.
5) Thesale of Sunassepha. Once king 4
tole the sacrificial
yaga. Indra who was jealous of ie : Ae eh ava:
cow. Since it was an evil omen, eagle being in its place
barisa that either the lost cow Or 4 In spite of searey
must be obtained to comple = oe eoule not be traced.
mee s doing tapas
ches made in many places, ge a
een ais, Ate ioe ee son, Sunassepha
19a. Recjka so BAO cowie,
io Roe exchange for the price of 100,
mbarisa started a

RCIKA II
The king took Sunaggepha with him and came to Puskara
tirtha. There they happened to meet Viévamitra.
Sunasgsepha complained to Vigvamitra and lamented
over his ill-fate. Visvamitra wished to save him and to
send one of his own sons in his place with Ambarisa.
But none of his sons was willing to oblige. Vig vamitra
cursed them and turned them into eaters of human
flesh. Then he turned to Sunaggepha and said :—
‘When you stand ready to be sacrificed near the altar,
offer your prayers to Agni. If you do so, you will attain
siddhi.”’ (salvation or moksa). He also taught him two
songs of praise to Agni.
While standing at the altar ready to be sacrificed
Sunag epha recited the two songs of praise. Indra and
the other gods appeared and after saving. Sunassepha
rewarded Ambarisa for his yaga. (Valmiki Ramayana,
Balakanda, 62nd Sarga).
6) Reika and the Vaisnava bow. Once Viévakarma made two
mighty bows. One of them was taken by Siva to burn
the Tripuras. That bow is known as “Saivacapa”. The.
other bow was given to Visnu. It is called “Vaisnavacapa’’. The Devas wished to see a trial of strength between Siva and Visnu. They prompted Brahma to bring
about such a conflict. Brahma succeeded in causing a
quarrel between Siva and Visnu. A fight began between
Siva and Visnu. Both the Saivacapa and Vaisnavacapa
went into action. But Siva was defeated. After that, Siva
gave his bow to Devarata, king of Videha. By inheritance
itcame into the hands of king Janaka, the father of Sita.
It was this bow which was broken by Sri Rama at the
time of Sita’s Svayarhvara.
After the battle with Siva, Visnu gave his bow to
Rcika who, in turn gave it to Jamadagni. Jamadagni
presented it to his son Paragurama. It was ‘with this
Vaisravacapa that Paragurama corfronted Sri Rama
who was returning after Sita’s Svayathvara. (Ramayana,
Balakanda, 75th Sarga).
7) Other details.
(1) Rcika was given 1,000 white horses with black ears
which could run fast, by Gadhi as dowry. Varuna
presented these horses on the bank of the river Ganga,
The place in Ganga where the horses rose up, came to
be called “‘Agvatirtha”, Gadhi gave Satyavati to
Rcika at the place called ‘Kanyakubja’. (M.B. Aranya °
Parva, Chapter 115),
(it) Mahabharata, Agvamedhika Parva, Chapter 29
Verse 23 says that Rcika once tried to stop Paragurama
from killing Ksatriyas.
111) Once Dyutiman, King of Salva, present —
[ nd to Rcika. (M.B. Anugasana Parva, Chapier q a
Verse 28). °
(iv) Rcika attained Vaikuntha and his wife Satyavati
accompanied him in her earthly body. It is said that
after it, Satyavati transformed herself into a river under
the name ‘“‘Kaugiki” and began to flow in north India.
(Valmiki Ramayana, Balakanda, 34th Sarga).
RCIKA II. One of the twelve Adityas. (M.B. Adi Parva,
' Chapter 1, Verse 42).
RCIKA III. A King who was the grandson of emperor
' Bharata and son of Dyumanyu. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 94, Verse 24).
RDDHI. Varuna’s wife. (M.B. Udyoga Parva, Chapter
REVATI Il
RDDHIMAN. A great serpent. In Mahabharata, Vana
Parva, Chapter 160, Verse 15, there isa reference to
the killing of this serpent by Garuda.
RENU I. A teacher-priest, who was the son of hermit
Visvamitra and the author of a Suakta in Rgveda.
(Aitareya-Brahmana 7. 17. 7; Rgveda 9. 70). }
RENU Il. King of the dynasty of Iksvaku. Reduly
the wife of the hermit Jamadagni, and the mother z
Paragurama was the daughter of this King. Renu ha
other names such as Prasenajit, Prasena and Suvenu.
(M.B. Anusasana Parva, Chapter 116; Verse 2).
RENUKA I. The wife of the hermit Jamadagni. (For
further details see under the word Jamadagni) . :
RENUKA II. A holy place frequented by Sages. Se
mentioned in Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter ° fe
Stanza 82 that those who bathe in this holy bath wae
become as pure as Candra (Moon). It is stated ;
Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 82, that this ho'y
place lies within the boundary of Kuruksetra. ho
RENUKA. A powerful Naga (serpent). This serpent W 7
was a dweller of Patala, (nether world) once went ‘A
the Diggajas (Eight elephants supporting the globe); Me
accordance with the instruction of the gods, and as i
them questions pertaining to duty and righteousn¢s
(M.B. Anugasana Parva. Chapter 132, Stanza 2) the
REPHA. A hermit of the period of Rgveda. Once fo
asuras threw this hermit into water. This was the per
ishment for the sins committed by him in his prev!©
life. (Rgveda, Mandala 1, Anuvaka 17, Sakta 116)-
REVANTA. A son of the sun. mi
1) Birth. The sun married the daughter of Vis vakat od
named Sarhjfia. She gave birth to three children en:
Manu, Yama and Yami. Once, being unable to est
the radiance of her husband, Sarnjfia went to the io of
to do penance. During this period Chaya the pene
Samjiia attended on the sun. Three children, pane eva
Manu and Tapati were born to the Sun of G Sun
Once Chaya cursed Yama. Then only did the beet
remember about Samjia. At that time Sarnjfia had The
doing penance in the forest in the form of a mare. he
Sun took the form of a horse and lived with her 12 last
forest. From this union Agvinikumaras and also the p
son Revanta were born. (Visnu Purana, Améa 3, Chap
r
2) Laksmi astounded at the sight of Revanta. For the story
of how Laksmi was astounded at the sight of ahem,
handsome figure and how Mahavisnu cursed Las*
consequently, see under Ekavira. adr2”
REVATA. The father of Revati, the wife of Balabha dso?
rama. Revata was the son of Anartta and the gra” ta;
of king Saryati. It is mentioned in Devi Bhagav" ed
Skandha 7, that Revata was the first king who ere,
his capital in the Island Kugasthali and began to *
over it. of
REVATI I. Wife of Balabhadrarama, Revata the 50, ©,
Anartta and the grandson of King Saryati was 1 ith
over the island Kuéasthali. Hundred sons beginning I a.
Kukudmi, were born to him. As the youngest of 3”
daughter named Revati was born. At the instr uctio® to
Brahma the beautful Revati was given in marriag evi
Balabhadrarama. (Bhagavata, Skandha 10;
Bhagavata, Skandha ZL).
REVATI II. In Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter
Stanza 29, the name ‘Revati’ is used as a synony™
Aditi Devi,
2 af

REVATI III
apices i One of the twentyseven stars. The following
ane gene ae in the Mahabharata about the import1) Sri Krsna started on his journey at the icl
moment of Maitra on the ca ed in the mous
Karttika. (M.B. Udyoga Parva. Chapter 83, Stanza 6).
(i1) If a cow is given as alms on the day of this star
that cow will go to heaven and make preparations for
the comforts and convenience of the giver. (M.B.
Anugasana Parva, Chapter 64, Stanza 33).
(iii) He who gives offerings to the manes on Revati
day would become wealthy. (M.B. Anugasana Parva
Chapter 89, Stanza 14),
REVATI1V. The mother of Raivata, the lord of the fifth
Manvantara (age of a Manu). There is a story in the
Markandeya Purana about the birth of RKevati.
A son was born to the hermit Rtavak on Revati day.
By and by he became wicked. Having learned from
the hermit Garga that his son became wicked because
he was born under the star Revati, Rtavak cursed the
star Revati and kicked it down from its place. The spot
on which the star fell became a lake. After a time a
beautiful damsel was born from the lake. The hermit
Pramuca took the girl home and brought her up.
She was called Revatt. When she came of age, she was
given in marriage to Durgama, the son of king
Vikramasgila. At the request of Revati her marriage was
conducted at an auspicious moment on the day of the
star Revati. The hermit blessed the couple “Let a son,
who would become the Lord of the Manvantara, be
born to you.”’ As a result of this blessing the bright and
valiant son Raivata was born to them. This Raivata
was the Lord of the fifth Manvantara.
RGVEDA. The Rgveda is the oldest recorded work of
the human race. The Egyptians claim that another book
entitled “‘Book of the Dead’’ was also written during the
ians have an ancient
period of the Rgeveda. The Babyloni
work called ‘Gilgamish’, which according to scholars, 1s
not as old as the Rgveda. Reveda is the work that forms
the basis of Hindu religion. Of the four Vedas, Yajurveda, Sdmaveda and Atharvaveda were composed
after Reveda.” The Rgveda suktas wer¢ interpreted for
the Geet time Gi Waska’s “(Niruktat end Sayana’s
‘“*Vedarthaprakasa”’.
The most important of the fou
is divided into ten ‘‘Mandalas”’.
and 10472 Rks in it. Although there
Siktas called ‘“‘khilas,” they are not usua
the Reveda.
Mandalas two to seven of the R f
different Rsikulas. The second Mandala was 0°
Bha f Vigvamitrakula, the fourth
arpavl Kole, tee or Aah the sixth of Bharadvaja
of Vamadeva, the fifth of Atri,
ae the seventh of Vasistha. The se Meee a =
rst 50 Siiktas of the first Manga’ We
Kanvakula. The general view is that the tas Mandala
was written by someone at a later Paiva, f the
Most of the Rgveda siiktas are praises. But a e :
Siktas in the tenth Mandala are of a al ae iter
We can see in many suktas oe ane wine
experienced by the Aryas when they cenit ] : believe
ful land of India for the first time. Most scho ng eriod
that the Rgveda_ was composed during the P
between 2, 500 and 2,000 B. ©.
, Vedas is Rgveda. It
There are 1017 suktas
are il more
lly included in
gveda were composed in
RKSADEVA
Ancient Belief about Rgveda. The four Vedas—Rgveda,
Yajurveda, Samaveda and Atharvaveda emerged from
the four faces of Brahma. In Krtayuga, Brahma gave
these Vedas to his sons. In Dvaparayuga, the Rsis got
these Vedas. Mahavisnu incarnated on earth for the
preservation of Dharma, in the person of Veda Vyasa.
Vyasa distributed the Vedas among his son Sakalya and
his disciples. akalya received Rgveda. He communicated it to his disciples. (Bhagavata, 12th Skandha. See under the word Veda).
RIPU. Grandson of Dhruva. Two sons called Sisti and
Bhavya were born to Dhruva by his wife Sam bhi.
Sisti’s wife Succhaya deliverd five sons, i.e. Ripu,
Ripufijaya, Vipra, Vrkala and Vrkatejas. Caksusa Manu
was Lorn as the son of Ripu by his wife Brhatt.
(Visnu Purana, Part 1, Chapter 13).
RIPUNJAYA. I Son of Suratha, lord of Kundala city.
When Suratha captured Sri Rama’s yajiiic horse there
ensued a fierce war between him and Satrughna.
Ripufijaya too was present at the fighting. (Padma
Purana).
RIPUNJAYA. II A brahmin, who was born as Divodasa,
king of Kasi in his rebirth. When once fire ceased to
be in Kagi, he took upon himself the function of fire.
(Skanda_ purana, 4,2, 39-48).
RIPUNJAYA III. See under Ripu.
RISTA. A king. He worships Yama in his assembly.
(Sabha Parva, Chapter 8),
RJISVA. A king mentioned in the Rgveda. Once he
besieged the city of another King, Vamgrda, with the
help of Indra.. (Rgveda, Ist Mandala, 10th Anuvaka,
53rd Sukta).
RJRASVA. A muni (sage) celebrated in the Rgveda.
Some details.(1) RjraSva was made blind by his father
(Rgveda, Ist Mandala, 16 th Anuvaka, 112th Sukta)
(2) Rjrasva was the son of the royal sage, Vrsagir.
Once the donkey which is the vehicle of the Agvinidevas
assumed the shape of a she-wolf and went to Rjrasva.
Rjrasva gave it 100 sheep belonging to the people of
the country and cut them to pieces and offered the same
as food to the she-wolf. This plunder of the people’s
wealth enraged Vrsagir. He cursed Rjragva and made
him lose his eye-sight. |
Rjrasva who thus became blind offered prayers to
Agni, who restored his eyesight. (Rgveda, lst Mandala,
17th Anuvaka, 116th Sakta).
RK. A small section of the Veda. The Veda which issued
from the face of God at the time of creation, consisted
of 1,00,000 books in four sections, beginning with Rk.
(Visnu Purana, Part III, Chapter 4). The root “RC”
means “to praise”. It got the name “RK” meaning,
“to praise gods”’. |
RKSAI. A king of the Piru dynasty. He was the father
"of Samvarana. For genealogy see under the word
Sarnvarana (M. B. Adi Parva, Chapter 94).
RKSA II. King Hariha had a son named Rksa born to
‘him by his wife Sudeva. Mahabharata, Adi Parva,
Chapter 95 says that this Rksa had a son named Matinara, by his wife Jvala. ‘ Bass
jamidha, who was 4 ing of the lunar
RKSA, Wife of Ajamicha, wie ean
dynasty. (M.B, Adi Parva, Chapter
RKSADEVA. § Mahabharata, Drona
"Parva, Chapter horse with white and
red colour,
on of Sikhandi.
93 refers to his

RKSAMBIKA
RKSAMBIKA. A woman follower of Lord Skanda.
(M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Verse 12).
RKSARAJAS. A monkey who was the foster-father of
Bali and Sugriva. He was the king of Kiskindha. He
had no issue for along time. Bali and Sugriva were
brought up by Ahalya at Gautama’s asrama. Rksarajas,
with the permission of Indra, went to the 4agrama and
took Bali and Sugriva with him to Kiskindha. From
that time, Bali and Sugriva remained with him as his
foster-sons. (Uttara Ramayana ).
There is a story in Valmiki Ramayana, Praksipta Sarga,
about the origin of this monkey. ,
Once when Brahma was in a state of meditation on the
Meru mountain, tears rolled down from his eyes and
he gathered the tears in his- own hands. From those
tears, a monkey came into being. Rksarajas was that
monkey.
One day, Rksarajas went toa lake to quench his thirst.
Seeing his own image reflected in the water, he thought
++ was some enemy and jumped into the lake, to
attack him. But he soon realized his mistake and
returned to the shore. As soon as he came out of the
water, he felt that he had become a woman. Seeing her
fascinating beauty, Indra and Surya were filled with
lustful passion. Both of them had involuntary emission
of semen. Bali was born from Indra’s semen which
fell on the head and Sugriva was born from Surya’s
semen which fell on the neck of Rksarajas. Towards the
end of the night, Rksarajas lost his female form and regained his former shape as a male. At once he took the
two children with him to Brahma and told him the
whole story. Brahma sent a messenger with Rksarajas
and had him anointed king of Kiskindha. After the
time of Rksarajas, Bali became king of Kiskindha.
RKSASRIGA. The younger son of Dirghatapas who
was performing tapas in Mandaravana on the northern
part of Kasi. Since he was killed by Citrasena, all
others committed suicide. But Dirghatapas who was
left behind collected their bones, and deposited them in
the sacred Siilabhedatirtha. Skanda Purana says that
consequently they attained Heaven.
RKSAVAN. One of the seven mountains in India.
(M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 11).
ROCAMANA. An attendant of Skandadeva.
Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Stanza 23%,
ROCAMANA I. A. Ksatriya King. The following
information is available from Mahabharata about
him. :
(i) Rocamana was born from a portion of an asura
named Aé¢vagriva. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 67,
Stanza 18). ‘
(ii ) Rocamana also was present at the Svayamvara
(M.B.
(marriage) of Draupadi. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter
185, Stanza 10).
(iii ) Rocamana was the King of the country Asvaena, at the time of his regional conmedha. Bhimas
(Mahabharata, Sabha
quest, defeated this King.
Parva, Chapter 99, Stanza 8).
(iv) At the beginning of the battle of Kuruksetra, the
Pandavas sent an invitation to this King to join the
catic. (NEB Udyoga Parva, Chapter 4, Stanza 12).
) Rocamana was 4 mighty warrior on the side of the
edad ‘n the battle of Kuruksetra. (M.B. Drona
Parva, Chapter 70, Stanza 47).
650 ROHINI IV
(vi) Rocamana was killed by Karna in a combat.
(M.B. Karna Parva, Chapter 56, Stanza 49).
ROCAMANA II. Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter 27, Stanza 19, mentions another Rocamana who had
been defeated by Arjuna in his regional conquest.
ROCAMANA III. Mention is made in the Mahabharata,
Karna Parva, Chapter 6, Stanza 20, that teacher
Drona had killed two brothers with the name Rocamana in the Bharata-battle.
ROCANA I. The daughter of the King Devaka.
Vasudeva married Rocana. Two sons Hema and
Hemangada were born to her. (Bhagavata, Skandha
ROCANA II. Grand-daughter of Rukmi, the King of
Vidarbha. Aniruddha the grandson of Sri Krsna married
her at Bhojakata, (Bhagavata, Skandha 10). |
RCCANAMUKHA. An asura. It is mentioned in
Mahabharata, Udyoga Parva, Chapter 105, Stanza 12
that Garuda killed this Asura.
RODHA. A hell. See the part Naraka under the word
Kala.
ROHINI I.
is a story ab
Ramayana, Aranya Kanda, Sarga 14.
The mother of all the cows. The following
out the origin of Rohini, given in Valmiki
Prajapati Kasyapa married Surabhi the seventh daugh- |
ter of Daksa. ‘Two daughters Rohini and Gandharvl,
were born to Surabhi. In later years cows and oxen
were born in the world from Rohini and_ horses from
Gandharvi. In the Mahabharata, Sabha Parva,
Chapter 66, it is mentioned that two daughters Vimala
and Anala were born to Rohini and that from these
two, in later years cattle were born.
ROHINI UH. .
1) General information. One of the wives of Candra
(Moon). The twentyseven stars are the wives 0
Candra. Of these twentyseven Wives, Rohini was_ love
most by Candra. (See under Candra) .
9) Rohini and Dagaratha. (See under Dagaratha, Para
Kacy itl Ill. The mother of Balabhadrarama. :.
1) General information. Vasudeva had two wives Devaki
and Rohini. 5ri Krsna was born from Devaki and
Balabhadrarama from Rohini. |
2) Previous Birth of Rohini. Vasudeva was the rebirth
of Prajapati Kasyapa- When Kagsyapa took birth as
Vasudeva, his two Wives Aditi and Surasa took birth 45
Devakiand Rohini respectively. (They took birth thus,
because of the curse of Varuna. For details of the
curse see under Kasyapa, para 6).
3) The birth of Balabhadra. The seventh child of
Devaki was placed in the womb of Rohini and Balabhadrarama was born. (For this story see under
Krsna, para 6, Karhsa, para 6 and Sadarbhaka).
4) Tisath, Ag s00n O25 B Massager named Daruka
brought the news that the entire race of the Yadavas
had perished in Dvaraka,
“because of grief, Vasudeva, Devaki and Rohini forsook
their bodies.”’ (Bhagavata, Skandha 11).
ROHINI IV. Nisa the third wife of the Agni ( fire)
called Manu or Bhanu gave birth to a daughter name
Rohini. Because she had done some misdeeds, she
became the wife of Hiranyakasipu. (M.B. Vana Parva,
Chapter 221).
_ ee ee ee ll ll a lm

ROHINI V
ROHINI V. The mother of Utatthya, a famous hermit.
For details see under Satyatapas).
ROHITA (ROHITASVA). The son of Harigcandra.
This son, who was born by the blessing of Varuna, was
wanted to be sacrificed by Varuna himself. In connection with this Harigcandra had to bear much sorrow
and misery. (For details see under Harigcandra).
ROHITAKA (ROHITAKARANYA). A mountain
famous in the Puranas. Places surrounding this mountain also were known by the name Rohitaka It is
mentioned in Mahabharata, Sabha Parva Chapter oe
yaa 7 re See the regional conquest of N akula,
e passed through this country. :
this country is Bote eres ls a amie:
ROMAHARSANA. A famous disciple of Vyasa. The
great Vyasa gave the collection of Puranas to Romaharsana. Sumati, Agnivarcas, Mitrayus, Sarhéapayana
Akrtavrana and Savarni were the six disciples af
Romaharsana. (See under Guruparampara).
ROMAKA. A country in ancient India. The inhabitants
of this country were called the Romakas. Mention is
made in Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter 51
Stanza 17, that the Romakas .came with resents t 5
the horse-sacrifice performed by Yudhisthi , :
ROMAPADA. See under Lomapada. _ ~
ROMASA. A daughter of Brhaspati. The reply given
by Romasa to her husband when he teased tier is
given in Reveda, Mandala 1, Anuvaka 19, Sikta 126
RSABHA I. A King of the Lunar dynasty. He was the
Van cheer cay bt Uparicaravasu.
ahabharata, Drona Parva, Chapter 20, Verse 12
a na fought within the Garudavyiha formed
ek pene (sage) who was the grandson of
i Caner information.
.sabha was the son of King Nabhi
devi. One. hundred sons were born Pe anne by he
ae ae After en rusanE his kingdom to Bharata
e est of his sons, Rsabh
did tapas in Pulaha’s ects Se Sia aig
2) Rsabha and Rsabhakiita Rsabha did tapas in the
forest for many years. The mountain peak on which
he performed his tapas got the name ‘“‘Rsabhakita”’.
The sage who wished to observe strict silence did not
like the presence of strangers and visitorsin the vicinity.
So he pronounced a curse that the mountain should
drop boulders on any one who ventured to come there
Once he ordered the wind to.blow without noise as it
passed by the side of the mountain. He declared that
anyone who made noise in Rsabhakiita would be
struck with thunder. A place of holy waters came into
existence there. (M.B. Aranya Parva, Chapter 11)
3) The power of Rsabha’s Yaga. Rsabha became a
devotee of Siva by worshipping him. |
Once a Brahmana named Mandara had an illicit
alliance with Pingala, a prostitute. Both of them died
together. Mandara was re-born as Bhadrayu, the
grandson of Nala and Pingala as Sumati, the wife of
King Vajrabahu (Amsuman). Sumati became pregnant.
Her co-wives who were jealous of her poisoned her
Asa result of it, she and the child born to her fell
victims to diseases. Dasarna abandoned them in the
forest. Sumati lived in the house of a Vaisya with her
child. While living there, the child died of disease. Rsabha went to the grief-stricken Sumati and comforted her.
(Siva Purana).
4) Rsabha’s End. Rsabha performed tapas according to
the rules of Vanaprastha agrama and conducted yagas
as ordained by Sastras. On account of his austerity he
became so lean and thin that all the veinsin the body
could be seen. Putting a pebble in his mouth, he went
about in the forest, determined to renounce his body.
(Visnu Purana, Chapter 1, Section 1).
In the course of his wanderings in the forest_a wild fire
broke out in which his body was burnt up. Siva Purana
says that the soul of Rsabha who died in the wild fire,
attained Siva Loka.
RSABHA III. A Naga born in the Dhrtarastra family.
In Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 57, Verse Ll,
we read that this naga was burnt to ashes at Janamejaya’s Sarpasatra. (Snake sacrifice).
RSABHA IV. An Asura. (M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter
RSABHADVIPA. A holy place on the banks of the
" river Sarasvati. Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter
84 says that by bathing in this place, one would obtain
Devavimana.
RSABHAKUTA. See un
parvata.
RSABHAPARVATA. ‘There are twenty mountains on
the four sides of Mahameru. Rsabha is one of them.
(Devi Bhagavata, Astama Skandha) . ;
There is a reference to Rsabha Parvata when Sugriva
gave instructions about the way to the army of monkeys
a speaks about the
oing out in search of Sita. Sugriva §]
Rsabha mountain as situated in the middle of ee Gan
of milk. (Valmiki Ramayana, Kiskindha Kanda, 4t
Sarga, Verse 44). -
RSABHATIRTHA. An ancient place of holy waters in
' Ayodhya. Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 84 says
that an observance of fast at this tirtha is equivalent
to the gift of 1,000 cows and a Vajapey2yaju4. |
RSI. Agni Purana, Chapter 348 states that _the letter
“<R” means “sound”. The word ‘‘Rs1" 1s derived from
this root. During the period when the art of writing
was not known, Vedas, Sastras and other sacred lore
were communicated through the mouth of the Rsis.
The voice of Arsa Bharata stself is the..voice of the
Rsis. Hindus believe that the Vedas are the outcome
of the inspiration, introspection and spiritual vision of
the Rsis. There is a Sarmskrta stanza defining a Rsi,
which is given below :
Urdhvaretastapasyagah
Niyatagica sarnyam1
Sapanugrahayoh gaktah
Satyasandho bhavedrsih/ / F
India has given birth to numerous Ksis. The wee
“Ri? may be found throughout the Vedas. Res oe
in all classes of people had lived in India. The gener
belief is that the number of Rsis may come to abou
i the names of all of them.
feline Rese Boe wine: when Sri Rama returned
In the Ramayana we find that ;
to Ayodhya after his life in the fore ene oe uP pee
reign, many Rsis came to Ayodhya irom Pp ie
the country. Among them, Visvamitra, | Yavakrita,
ame with their party of
Raibhya, Kanva and Garga ©
isc a uci
disciples from the east; Dattatrey4, Namuci, Pramuci,
Valmiki, Soma, Kundu and Agastya came Wl
disciples from the south; Vrsangus Kavisa, Kaumya,
der Rsabha II and Rsabha-

RSIGIRI 652
Raudreya, Narada, Vamadeva, Saubhari, Astavakra,
Suka, Bhrgu, Lomaga, Maudgalya and others with their
disciples came from the west and Kafyapa, Vasistha,
Atri, Gautama, Jamadagni, Bharadvaja, Sanaka and
party, Sarabhanga, Durvasas, Matanga, Vibhandaka,
Tumburu, the Saptarsis and others with their party of
disciples arrived from the north, according to Uttara
Ramayana. There are three classes of Rsis—Brahmarsi,
Rajarsi and Devarsi. Vasistha was a Brahmarsi,
_ Visvamitra, a Rajarsi and Kagyapa, a Devarsi.
RSIGIRI. A mountain situated near Girivraja, the
capital of Magadha kingdom. This mountain is also
known as ““Matanga’’ (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 21,
Verses 2 and 3).
RSIKA I. A Rajarsi. Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter
67, Verses 32 and 33 state that he was the rebirth of
Arka, the Asura leader.
RSIKA II. A town in North India. A terrible battle
took place here between Arjuna and Rsika,; the Rajarsi.
(M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 27, Verse 25).
RSIKULYA. A sacred river in ancient India. Mahabharata, Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 47 mentions
that those who bathe in this river will attain Moksa
(salvation).
RSYAMUKA. A mountain. Mahabharata, Vana Parva,
Chapter 25, Verse 9 statesthat Rama and Laksmana
visited the sage Markandeya on the top of this mountain. It was here that Rama and Laksmana met
Sugriva. Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 279,
Verse 44 states that the river Pampa runs round the
Rsyamika mountain.
RSYASRNGA. Son of the sage Vibhandaka.
1) Birth, Vibhandaka, son of Kasyapa was the father
of Rsyasrnga. There isa strange story about him in
the Mahabharata.
Once sage Vibhandaka happened to see Urvaégi at
Mahahrada. At the very sight of her, the sage had an
involuntary emission of semen. The semen fell in. the
water and just then a female deer came there to drink
water. It swallowed the semen with water and in due
course became pregnant and gave birth to a human
child. But the child had the horns of a deer. Consequently Vibhandaka named the boy “Rsyagrnga’’,
Vibhandaka and Rsyaégriga lived together in the
aSrama. Rsyasriga grew up into a youth, but he had
never scen anyone except his father Vibhandaka,
2) Rainfall in the kingdom of Anga. At that time, the
kingdom of Anga was ruled by Lomapada, a friend of
Dagaratha. Once he cheated a Brahmana. Consequently
all the Brahmanas in that country left the place and
emigrated to other lands. From that time there was no
rain in the land of Anga. A severe drought and famine
followed. Lomapada invited devout Brahmanas and
consulted them how they could bring rain to the land.
They told him that if he could get a Muni (sage) who
had never seen women to perform a yaga, there would
be rainfall in the land. The King sent his men far and
wide to find a Muni who had never set eyes on a woman. At last he got news that Rsyagrnga, son of
Vibhandaka was the sage who had never seen women.
De in bapen to plan how Rsyaégrnga could be brought
ga. ;
namie al ed together some prostitutes and asked
them whether they could bring Rsyasriga to his
country. Allexcept one of them said it was quite
RSYASRNGA
impossible. One of them, however, agreed to try. AS
desired by her, the King sent her with several other
damsels.
The young women went to the forest and made a
floating 4srama in a boat in which they sailed in the
river by the side of Vibhandaka’s 4grama. They stopped
the boat close to the 4srama and one of the girls entered the aSrama when Vibhandaka was not there. She
had a talk with Rsyagrnga in the course of which she
used all the amorous enchantments ofher sex to captivate
the young Muni. She told him that she, was the
daughter of a Muni, living in an a4srama, three yojanas
away. Rsyagrnga felt a peculiar fascination for her and
tried to please her by offering fruits etc. When she left
him, he felt deeply distressed and unhappy. He was in
that depressed and gloomy state of mind when Vibhandaka
returned to the 4grama. Finding him unusually restless
and dejected, the father asked him whether anyone
had come there. Rsyagrnga who was an entire stranger
to the feminine world told his father that a handsome
youth of irresistible charm had visited him during
Vibhandaka’s absence. But from Rsyagrnga’s description
of the ‘‘youth” Vibhandaka understood that the visitor
must have been a woman. But he could not guess who
it was.
On another occasion, the same woman came again (0
the 4grama in the absence of Vibhandaka. At her sight
Rsyagrnga was enraptured and before his father
return, they left the 4grama. They entered the floating
asrama in the boat and the woman set the boat sailing
in the river. It glided slowly down the river and <
last reached near the palace of Lomapada. They lande
there and the King married his daughter Santa ©
Rsyasrnga.
To appease Vidhandaka, Lomapada sent him rich
presents and much wealth. When Vibhandaka returne
to his arama he was met by the King’s servants wi?
had brought the presents and wealth. Ignoring the™
and their rich presents, the furious Maharsi set out
the city of Campa, thecapital of the Anga Kingdom.
At the royal command, Vibhandaka was welcome BY
the people with honour. When the sage found ne
the whole kingdom belonged to his son, his anger W#
allayed, After ordering his son to return to his asram@
after the birth of a son, Vibhandaka left the palace
As a result of Rsyagrnga’s yaga there was rainfal -
Anga and famine ended. After the birth of his child h
returned to the forest as ordered by his father.
Aranya Parva, Chapters 110-112). E
3) Rsyasrnga in Ayodhya. King Dagaratha of Ayodhy#
had no children for a long time. His Ministe?
Sumantra advised him to invite Rsyasgrnga to per form
a yaga for the purpose. Lomapada sent Rsyasrnga ©
Ayodhya at the invitation of Daé aratha. He arrive
Ayodhya and performed a yaga called Putrakamest!:
From the sacrificial fire there arose a dark monstrous
figure, with a pot of pudding in his hand, Dagarath@
received it from him and gave one half of it to Kau"
salya and the other half to Kaikeyi. Both of them g4V°
half of their shares to Sumitra. Thus Sumitra got ¢ “
shares while the other two wives of Dagaratha got only
one share each. As a result Kausalya and Kaikeyi gave
birth to a son each, while Sumitra had two s?05°
Kausalya’s son was named Rama, Kaikeyi’s son W?°

RTA I 659. } RTUPARNA
Bharata and Sumitra’s sons were Laksmana and
rT a? (Valmiki Ramayana, Bala Kanda, Chapters
RTA I. One of the 11 Rudras. (M.B. Anusasana Parva,
Chapter 150, Verse 12).
RTA II. See under the word Pramrta. .
RTA III. This word has a general meaning “truth”.
Besides, in Agni Purana, Chapter 152, we see that it
also means “‘Something obtained by begging”’.
RTADHAMA. Another name of Sri Krsna. (M.B.
Santi Parva, Chapter 342, Verse 62).
RTADHVAJA I. (KUVALASVA—DHUNDHUMARA).
A famous King of the Iksvaku dynasty.
1) Genealogy. From Visnu were descended in the
following order—Brahma—Marici—Kaés yapa—Vivasvan
—Vaivasvata Manu —Iksvaku — Vikuksi — Sagada —
Kakutstha—Anenas—Prthula; va—Visvagas va— Adri—
Kuvalasva (Dhundhumara).
2) How he got the name Dhundhumara. The most
heroic exploit of Kuvalagva or Kuvalayasva was his
kitling of the Asura Dhundhu.
Madhu and Kaitabha were two Asuras born from the
ears of Mahavisnu. The Asura Dhundhu was their
son. After his birth, Mahavisnu killed Madhu and
Kaitabha, Dhundhu was furious over the death of his
fathers. He worshipped Brahma who granted him
unconquerable strength. After defeating the gods he
went to the desert called Ujjalaka and lay beneath the
sands. Whenever he heaved a sigh clouds of dust rose
up to the sky and the‘earth shook for seven days. It
caused great damage to life and property in the world,
like a storm. Uttanka, a sage who lived in the
neighbourhood of Ujjalaka was the person who
suffered most from Dhundhu’s misdeeds. A
Brhadagva, of Iksvaku dynasty and father of Kuvalasva
in his old age entrusted the rule of the country to_ his
son and prepared to go to the forest. At that time,
sage Uttanka came there and advised the King to §°
to the forest only after killing Dhundhu. Brhadasva
called his son-Kuvalaéva and after giving him the task
of killing Dhundhu, proceeded to the forest.
Kuvaladea had 91,000 sons. Leading them, Be ated
the desert Ujjalaka to kill Dhundhu. Uttanka dec ae
that anyone who killed Dhundhu would Be od aa
Mahavisnu’s strength. Kuvalaéva’s sons a. fire
Dhundhu. The Asura awoke with anger. Bie here
from his eyes, all the 21,000 sons of Kuve rae with
burnt to ashes. Next Kuvalasva came Into enh ods
Dhundhu. In that fight Dhundhu was Killed’ 2 ae ae oe
gave Kuvala‘va many boons. From that day, a killed
got the name, “Dhundhumara’’ (one Be fe) 201)
Dhundhu). (M.B. Vana Parva, 4 Chapters trom named
3) His sons. Kuvalagva had three more ear draéva
Drdhagva, Kapilasva and Candrasva, a ‘Chapter
pide the 21,000 sons. (M.B. Vana Parva,
4, Verse 40).
4) Vamana aes Chapter 59 gives OF pele
aan of how Kuvalaéva won the favour
dlava. in
Long ago while sage Galava was perio distuth
is 4rama, an Asura called P atalaket Ye looked up
his meditations regularly. One day, the aan phe
to Heaven and heaved a sigh. At a was
down from the sky. A mysterious pang nmands oF
Sayinge—‘This mighty horse will trave
yojanas in a day.” The sage received that horse and
presented it to Rtadhvaja, King of the lunar dynasty.
Rtadhvaja mounted the horse and killed Patalaketu.
It was Vigvavasu who dropped this horse from Heaven.
Patalaketu had once fallen in love with Visvavasu’s
daughter, Madalasa. It was in revenge that Visvavasu
had done like this.
RTADHVAJA IT. A Maharsi (sage). The sage Jabali was
his son. (For further details, see Para 2 under the
word Visvakarma ).
RTAMBHARA. An ancient King. He worshipped
Kamadhenu and obtained a son who was a devotee of
Visnu. The son’s name was Satyavan. In connection
with Sri Rama’s Agvamedhayaga, Satrughna who was
leading the horse, arrived in Satyavan’s city during
his tour of the eastern lands. (Padma Purana, Patala
Khanda, Chapter 30).
RTASTUBH A Muni (sage) celebrated in the Rgveda.
(Rgveda. Ist Mandala, 16th Anuvika, 112th Sakta).
RTAYU. See under Kalinga.
RTEYU I-A king of the Lunar dynasty.
RTEYU II. A Maharsi (sage) of the western country. He
’ was a rtvik (priest officiating at a yaga) of Varuna.
M.B. Anugasana Parva, Chapter 150, Verse 36).
RTUKALA. The time that is most auspicious for sexual
"intercourse for a woman with her husband. In ancient
India certain days were prescribed as the best period for
women to become pregnant. This period is called
Rtukala. (Rtu—Menstruation. Kala—time, period.)
The sixteen days following menstruation ate supposed
to be good; but the first three days are not very good
and it is advisable not to have sexual intercourse during
those days. The next even days beginning with the
fourth day (4th, 6th, 8th, Pe ne Cen
est days for coitus ifa male 1ssuc )
renee] Phe sda days (5th, 7th, 9th, llth 13th, 15th)
are to be preferred if a female issue (daughter ) is desired.
(Agni Purana, Chapter 151). |
RTUPARNA. A king of the Iksvaku dynasty.
"1. Genealogy. From Visnu were descended in the following order-Brahma-Ka$yapa-Vivasvan-Vaivasvata ManuIkevaku-Vikuksi-Sasada-Purafijaya-K akutstha - AnenasPrthulaéva-Prasenajit-Yuvanas va-Mandhata- PurukutsaTrasadasyu-Anaranya -Aryasva - Vasumanas - Sutanva -
Trayyaruna - Satyavrata (T riganku) - HariscandraRohitag¢va-Harita - Cuficu - Sudeva - Bharuka - SagaraAsamafijasa-Ams uman -Bhagiratha-Srutanabha-Sindhudvipa-Ayutayus-Rtuparna.
2) Other Details.
i) Nala’s incognito life. While Nala was wandering in
the dense forest after leaving Damayanti, he was bitten
by the serpent, Karkotaka, His complexion turned blue
owing to the effect of the poison. Karkotaka gave him
a garment by wearing which Nala could regain his form.
As advised by Karkotaka, Nala went to the palace of
Rtuparna, king of Ayodhya, assuming the ae
Bahuka. He lived there as the chief aes O : t e
king. He had mastered the art AS VARIC aye. y Heke
he could drive the chariot-horses with astonishing apes
Rtuparna appointed him as his Catt oe an I gave
him two assistants, Varsneya and Jivala. (M.B.,
Aranya Parva, Chapter 67). | |
(12 ) Riunaris and the second marriage of | Damayanti.
Damayanti came to know that Nala was living in Rtuparna’s palace, through the messenger Parnada. She

RTUSTHALA
sent a secret mesage to Ayodhya through a Brahmana
named Sudeva that her second marriage was fixed for
the next day and that Rtuparna should attend the
ceremony. Rtuparna started at once with Bahuka as his
charioteer. On the way, Rtuparna’s cloak happened to
fall down from the chariot. At once he asked Nala to
stop the chariot. But he told him that within a moment,
the chariot had covered a distance of one yojana from
the place where the cloak fell.
They saw a tree in the forest which was heavily laden
with fruit. Rtuparna was able to tell at a glance, the
exact number of leaves and fruits on that tree. He told
Nala that he was able to do so with the help of the art
“Aksahrdaya” and he taught it to Nala. In return for
it, Nala taught the king the art of Asvahrdaya. At last
they reached the city of Vidarbha. Damayanti managed
to recognize Nala even in his disguise. Rtuparna who
was happy over the reunion of Nala and Damayanti
returned to Ayodhya on the next day. (M.B. Vana
Parva, Chapter 77).
RTUSTHALA. A Celestial damsel. In Mahabharata, Adi
Parva, Chapter 122, we find that she attended the birth
festival of Arjuna.
RTVA. A Deva Gandharva. Mahabharata,Adi Parva,
Chapter 122 states that he had taken part in Arjuna’s
birth-festival.
RTVIK. A Priest who officiates at a yaga.
Those who perform yagas like Agnisandhana, Agnistoma,
Pakayafia etc. are called Rtviks. Manusmrti, Chapter ad
Verse 143).
RUCAKAPARVATA. (The mountain Rucaka) A mountain
standing near the mountain Mahameru. It is mentioned
in Devi Bhagavata, Skandha 8, that there are twenty
mountains including Rucaka on the four sides of
Mahameru.
RUCII. A celestial maid of Alakapuri. This celestial
maid danced in the Palace of Kubera on the occasion
of the visit of Astavakra. (M.B. Anuéasana Parva,
Chapter 19, Stanza 44).
RUCI I. A son of Brahma and a Prajapati. This prajapati married Akiati the daughter of Manu Svayambhuva.
A son and a daughter were born to Ruci of Akiti. The
son was the incarnation of Visnu. He was named Yajfia.
The daughter who was incarnation of Mahalaksmi was
named Daksina. Yajfia was brought up in the hermitage
of Svayambhuva and Daksina grew up in the hermitage
of Ruci. When they grew up Yajfia married Dakeina.
Twelve sons, named Tosa, Santosa, Pratosa, Bhadra,
Santi, Idaspati, Idhma, Kavi, Vibhu, Vahni, Sudeva
and Rocana, were born to the couple. In the time of
Manu Svayambhuva these twelve were called the
Tusitas, a group of devas (gods). ’
RUCI [lIl. The wife of the hermit named Devagarma.
(For detailed story see under Vipula).
RUCIPARVA. Son of the king Akrti. In the Bharata
battle, to save Bhimasena, Ruciparva confronted the
elephant of Bhagadatta and was killed by Bhagadatta.
(M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 26, Stanza 51).
RUCIRASVA. A king of the Lunar dynasty. (Bhagavata,
Skandha 9}.
RUDHIRAMBHAS. A hell.
Kala). ;
RUDHIRASANA. A giant-chief who came to fight with
Sri Rama, under the leadership of the giant Khara. In
that fight the captains of the army of the giants were
(See under the word
RUDRA
Rudhiradsana etc. All of them were killed by the arrow
of Sri Rama. (Valmiki Ramayana, Aranya, Kanda
Sarga 26).
RUDRA. A form of Siva.
1) General information. ‘The birth of Rudra 1s from
Brahma. Even before the creation of the Prajapav’;
Brahma had created Sanandana, Sanaka, Sanatana an
Sanatkumara. These four were not desirous of mundane
pleasures and were not prepared to beget children.
‘They were great sages and scholars, of abstinence an :
without any discord and animosity. When these 10U
showed no interest at allin the creation of the wor ;
Brahma became angry to such an extent that he Wee
prepared to destroy the three worlds. At that time at
whole of the three worlds shone in the radiance a
emanated from the fire of the fury of Brahma. ber
from his shining eyebrows which were curved with at
a figure of unbearable radiance like the mid-day, or
came out. That figure was Rudra. Half of the He F
body of that Rudra who was very furious, was a a
and the other half was a man. Brahma, saying; ae
body”, disappeared. Instantly Rudra split himself }
the figure of a man and the figure of a woman. arte
again divided the body of the man into eleven P
These eleven figures are the eleven Rudras. ently
The names of the eleven Rudras are given differ :
in different Puranas. In a text it is said that the “Diy.
Rudras are, Manyu, Manu, Mahinasa, Mahan, Siv4 *
dhvaja, Ugraretas, Bhava, Kama, Vamadevaan
vrata. According to some other Puranas, t ee ‘A,
Rudras are Aja, Ekapada (Ekapat) ,Ahirbudhny “ ¢,2na
Rudra, Hara, Sambhu, Tryambaka, Aparajita; leven
and Tribhuvana. Brahma apportioned to the ©
ae rgaP
Rudras the eleven positions of the heart, the pa Y ore
of senses and the organs of action and to art)
the eight positions of life, ether, air, fire, water, 7 dra
the sun and the moon. It was said before that an’
was divided into man and woman. From the WOF ace
portion eleven Rudranis came into being. * ‘A bika
Dhi, ‘ Vrtti, USana, Uma, Niyuta, Sarpis, Ila, peca™”
Iravati, Sudha and Diksa. The eleven Rudramis Aéa J.
the wives of the eleven Rudras. (Visnu Purana,
Chapter 7). , abou.
2) Other information regarding Rudra. Detai : cout ip
the orgin, life, character etc. of Rudra which ©
other Puranas are given below. sas wend Kary
(i) Thirtythree children were born to Prajapa sas an
pa, by his wife Aditi, as Adityas, Vasus, Ru rga 14):
Agvins. (Valmiki Ramayana, Aranya Kanda, 5a fro"
(ii) From the fury of Brahma, Rudra was bo. right
the lap of Brahma, Narada was born; from ™” ines?
thumb, Daksa; from the mind, Sanaka and the ani we
and from the left thumb, a daughter named Vir@™ 4)
born. (Devi Bhagavata, Skandha 7). praboris
(iii) In the beginning of Kalpa (Age of ?imsé
Brahma meditated upon getting a child LiKe is jap’
and a child of blue complexion appeared oP ked bys
He ran here and there crying aloud. Brahm@ me nee a
‘Why are you crying?’’ He replied: “I must be Brahh, es
Because he was crying (doing rodana en ti ey
named him Rudra (He who cries). He cried sev DD nd
more. Brahma gave him seven more nan ca? ot
were Bhava, Sarva, Iéana, Pagupati, Bhim: aol py
Mahadeva. Thus there were eight Rudras. TO oe
them, Brahm4 gave a position and wives 2”

RUDRAKETU
The Sun, water, earth, air, fire, ether, Brahmin who
has taken vow and the moon were allotted to them as
their positions and figures. Their wives were Suvarcala,
Usa, Vikesi Siva, Svaha, Disa, Diksa and Rohini.
This world is filled by the sons and grandsons and so on
of these wives. ‘Their sons respectively were Sanaiscara
Sukra, Lohitanga, Manojava, Skanda, Sarga, Santana
and Budha. ‘This Rudra who is described above,
married Sati the daughter of Prajapati Daksa. (Visnu
Purana, Aréa 1, Chapter 8). (For further information
see under SIVA also).
RUDRAKETU. An asura. Two sons named Devantaka
and Narantaka were born to this asura by his wife Sarada.
The hermit Narada was greatly pleased at the valour of
these two sons,-and taught them ‘Paficaksarimahavidya.”? Devantaka and Narantaka, who became haughty
and arrogant by their prowess were killed by Ganapati.
(Ganega Purana, Kriya Kanda 2).
‘ RUDRAKOTI. A holy place in North India. Once alarge
number of hermits gathered in this place to worship
Siva. Greatly pleased at this Siva appeared before them
in the form of many phalluses. From that day onwards
the place Rudrakoti became a holy place. (M.B. Vana
Parva, Chapter 82, Stanza 118).
RUDRAKSA. (Elaco Carpus seeds) Beads for rosaries.
1) General information.
In the Puranas much importance is attached to Rudraksa.
In Devi Bhagavata, Skandha 11, there is a story stating
how Rudraksa came to be honoured in this way.
Once there lived an asura chief who was mighty, and
valiant. His name was Tripura. He defeated Devas an
deva chiefs and became emperor of the asuras. The Devas
were much grieved because of him. They went to Siva an
represented their grievances. Siva thought for a while,
how to kill Tripura, and sat with open epes. This sitting
continued for a thousand divine years. After this prolonged time Siva winked his eyes and tears fell down
from them. ‘The Rudraksa tree originated from these
tears. From the Sun-eye of Siva twelve types of
Rudraksas came into being; from the moon-eye sixteen
kinds of Rudraksas and from the fire-eye ten kinds of
Rudraksas originated. Those which originated from
the Sun-eye are bloodcoloured, those from the moon-eye
white Rudraksas and from the fire-eye black rudraksas.
| d a Brahmin caste, red
Boiled Rudraksa 1s considere 4
rudraksa a K satriya caste, white one 4 Vaisya caste
and the black rudraksa a Sidra caste. :
2) Division of rudraksa hased on quality.
rudraksa according to the number of faces, .
thereof are given below: Be, F
With one face. Rudraksa with only one face is the age
of Siva. By wearing this at from the sin ©
Brahmahatya could be procures’.
| With two Wea Padeaiced with two faces is the eae of
Devideva. This is known by the name Gaus eeu
By wearing this remission from all sins 2 aah no
ingly and unknowingly, would be obtainec.
With three faces: This 1s the figure of Bi jer
wearing this the sin sacurred by Strina ya
woman ) would be washed away: heds
With four faces: Rudraksa with four face 3
of Brahma. By wearing this, the sin neat
hatya (killing 4 man) could be Bot ala i
With five faces: This is the figure ° g
Kala the God of death). By wearin
The division of
(fire). By
(killing a
is the figure
d by Nara-
(Fire of
A holy thing worn by devotees. ©
and qualities }
g this, remission OF.
RUDRAMARGA
sins incurred by eating food which ought not to have
been eaten and enjoying woman who ought not to have
been enjoyed, could be obtained. All sorts of sins would
be absolved by five-faced rudraksa.
With six faces; Six-faced rudraksa 1s the six-faced god
Karttikeya. By wearing it on the right hand, remission
from all sins, beginning with Brahmahatya could be
obtained.
With seven faces: Rudraksa with seven faces is the
figure of Kamadeva (Cupid). Ifthis is worn, sins such
as theft of gold etc. could be removed.
Eight faces; Rudraksa with eight faces is the figure of
Vinayaka, the general of the great army. By wearing
this, sins incurred by deceit such as selling rice of low
quality as good quality, keeping false weights and
measures, giving gold of lower carat as good carat
gold, by enjoying woman of wicked families, touching
the wife of teacher, and so many other kinds of sins
would be absolved, and impediments would be avoided
and finally one can attain supernal bliss.
With nine faces:-This rudraksa is the figure of Bhairava.
This should be worn on the left hand. By doing so
one would become as mighty as god and would become
devoted to god and would attain salvation. The sins
incurred by killing the child in the womb a thousand
times and killing Brahmins a hundred times would be
got rid of by wearing this rudraksa.
With ten faces :—This 1s the figure of the real Janardana.
If one wears this, the devils, wicked planets. Ghosts,
goblins, spirits haunting funeral places, Brahmaraksagas (a kind of demon) etc. will not come near him.
Moreover, snake-bite would not affect him.
With eleven faces -—Rudraksa with eleven faces is the
figure of the Eleven Rudras. This should be worn on
the head. By doing so one could obtain the fruits of
performing 4 thousand horse-sacrifices and a hundred
Vajapeyay2gas (A kind of sacrifice).
With twelve faces .—Rudraksa with’ twelve faces is the
dwelling place of the twelve Adityas. This should be
worn on theear. If it is done so, the sun-god will be
leased. The wearer will obtain the fruits of performing
horse-sacrifice, cow-sacrifice etc. He will not be wounded by animals with horns, or quills or teeth. He need
not fear disease or WOITY. He need not fear to go anywhere. Wherever he goes he will be honoured as God.
All the sins incurred by slaughter of elephant, man,
- gnake, rat, frog ett. will instantly be absolved.
With thirteen faces >— He who wears rudraksa with
thirteen faces will be equal to Karttikeya. Allhis wishes
will be realized. He will get rasa (mercury) and
rasayana (sweetened medicine) and all the pleasures and
luxuries of the world. The great sins of killing parents,
brothers etc. will be removed.
With fourteen faces -_-He who wears rudraksa with
fourteen faces will be exactly like the real Paramasiva.
3) The mode of wearing Rudraksa. He who wears thirtytwo rudraksas on the neck, forty 0m the head, six on
each ear, twelve on each hand, sixteen on each of the
upper arms, one on each eye, oné on the lock of hair,
and one hundred and eight on the chest is really Sri
Nilakantha Paramasiva Himself.
RUDRAMARGA. A holy place. Ifa day and a night’s
fast is taken in this place, one will attain the world of
Indra. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 83, Stanza 181),

RUDRANI
RUDRANI. Another name of Parvati. (For further
details see under Parvati).
RUDRANIRUDRA. A holy place in India. It is
mentioned in Mahabharata, Anugasana Parva, Chapter
19, Stanza 31, that the great hermit Astavakra visited
this holy place, on his journey to the northern countries.
RUDRAPADA., A holy place in India. It is mentioned
in Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 82, Stanza 100,
that if Siva is worshipped in _ this holy place, one will
obtain the fruits of performing the horse sacrifice.
RUDRAROMA. An attendant of Subrahmanya. (M.B.
Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Stanza 7).
RUDRASAVARNI. A Manu. (See under Manvantara).
RUDRASENA. A King who was the helper of Yudhisthira. Mention is made. about this King in Mahabharata, Drona Parva, Chapter 158, Stanza 39.)
RUDRATA. A Sanskrit critic who lived in the 9th
century A.D, The famous Book of criticism known as
“Kavyalankara”, was written by this scholar who
belonged to Kashmir.
RUDRAVARTTA. A holy place. Mention is made in
Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 84, Stanza Sty
that by taking a bath in this holy place, one could
attain heaven.
RUHA. Daughter of Surasa, the mother of Nagas. She
had two sisters called Anala and Virudha. (M.B. Adi
Parva, Daksinatya Patha, Chapter 66)
RUKMAKESA. The youngest of the five sons of Bhismaka, King of Vidarbha. (Bhagavata, 10th Skandha).
RUKMANGADA I. A son of Salya the King of Madra.
Mention is made in Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter
185, Stanza 14, that this Rukmangada, the brother of
Rukmaratha, attended the Svayarmvara (marriage) of
Draupadi.
RUKM/NGADA II. Father of a Vaisnavite named
Dharmangada. This Rukmangada was the son of
Rtadhvaja, the King of the city of Vidiga. (See under
Dharmangada).
RUKMARATHA I. Son of Salya, King of Madra.
(i) He attended the wedding of Draupadi in the
company of his father
Chapter 185, Verse 14). 7
(11) In the great war he fell unconscious shot. b the
arrows of Sveta. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 47, Verse 48).
(iii) He was killed by Abhimanyu in’ the great war.
(Drona Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 9). .
RUKMARATHA II. A synonym of Dronacarya. As he
rode in a golden chariot Drona came to be known by
this name. ( Virata Parva, Chapter 58, Verse 2).
RUKMARATHA III. A particular sect of Trigartta
Kings, who fought on the side of the Kauravas in the
great war. (Drona Parva, Chapter 112, Verse 19).
This sect of Kings attacked Arjuna. ,
RUKMAREKHA. The wife of King Raibhya. She was
the mother of Ekavali. (See under Ekavali).
RUKMASUKRA. ‘son of Priyavrata. the brother of
Uttanapada. Prajapati Visvakarma gave in marriage
to Priyavrata, his two daughters Suripa and Barhismati, who were exceedingly beautiful and good-natured.
By the first wife, ten sons were born to him. Devi
Bhagavata, Skandha 8). a ose
RUKMAVATI. The daughter of Rukmi. Pradyumna
married this lady. Aniruddha was the son born to
Pradyumna of Rukmavati (Bhagavata, Skandha 10).
and brothers. (Adi Parva,
RUKMI
RUKMI. .
1) General information. King of the Province Bhojakata in the country of Vidarbha. It is stated in Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 67, Stanza 62, that this
Rukmi was born from a portion of the Asura name
Krodhavasa. _
2) Birth. Father of Rukmi was the king Bhismaka.
Two children were born to Bhismaka, named Rukm
and Rukmini. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 31, Stanza
3) — abow. Sri Krsna took Rukmi’s acre
Rukmini by force and married her. Rukmi did not J
this and so he confronted Sri Krsna. In the contest os
Krsna reviled him. Rukmi got angry at this and went
Kailasa and did penance before Siva. Siva apper
before him after three years, and gave him a BOF be
destroying the enemies. Siva told him that: it woul ef
broken, only if it was used against Mahavisnu. A 5
getting this bow he returned to Bhojakata and liv
there. | ecu
4) The details regarding Rukmi, given in the Mahabhar" j
(1) Rukmi accepted the suzerainty of Sahadeva at a
time of his regional conquest. (M.B. Sabha Parv®s
Chapter 21, Stanza 62). 6 his
(11) Rukmi paid tribute to Karna at the time ° 954,
regional conquest. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter |
Stanza 14), - for head
(iii) The Pandavas had sent invitation to Rukmi 10° ily
Bharata-battle. (M.B. Udyoga Parva, Chapter
Stanza 16). enows
(iv) Bhismaka, the father of Rukmi, was n aul
by the name ‘Hiranyaroma’ also. Rukmi bee xf
famous throughout all the countries. He accrE ar
Druma, a famous Kimpurusa (Kinnara) as his me d
in archery. Druma presented him with a pow. vans
Vijaya. This Vijaya was ona par with the Gan
Rukmi fought with SriKrsna and was defeated.
wo
place at which he was defeated by Sri Krsna is kn°
as Bhojakata. ht
After having been defeated by Sri Krsna, a posit
arose in the mind of Rukmi to keep amity and con®
with Sri Krsna. Knowing this, the Pandavas = evel
Rukmi to their palace. He promised his help } q and
Arjuna feared to do battle. At this Arjuna laughet this
said that he was not in need of any help. eet ip.
Rukmi went to Duryodhana and promised to ne Pyyos?
But Duryodhana also rejected his help. (M.B. |
Parva, Chapter 158). Pa, ey he OS Oe Ruka
5) Death of Rukmi. Discontented with everybody; “pods:
lived in Bhojakata, having no contact with any ched
During this period the king of Kalinga once appro” ma
Rukmi and advised him to challenge Balabha rar in8
for a game of dice. The challenge was made Ene ae
that Balabhadra was not a good player. Knowine ra
to reject a challenge was not honourable, ‘Balaboe” of
went to play the game. Rukmi won the first ron thé
game. . Staking everything, the- second round ™ put
game began and Balabhadra won the game: , tbe
Rukmi and the king of Kalinga did not acceP sided
victory, All the kings who witnessed the game abh*®
with Rukmi. Instantly an ethereal voice said “B J
drarama has won the game.” The friends of
did not accept the ethereal voice. They began *° ca
atumult in the hall. Balabhadrarama who parle
furious at this ridicule took a pestle of iron a? |
eat?

RUKMINI
Rukmi with one blow. The rest of the kings fled from
the place. (Bhagavata, Skandha 10).
RUKMINI. The chief queen of Sri Krsna.
1) Birth. From the following Puranic statements, it
could be understood that Rukmini was the. incarnation
of goddess Laksmi.
(i) “Sri Devi (Laksmi) by her portions, took birth in
the earth as Rukmini in the family of Bhismaka”’.
(M.B, Adi Parva, Chapter 67, Stanza 156).
(ii) Formerly Laksmi Devi took birth as the daughter
of Bhrgu by his wife Khyati. Next she took birth from
the sea of Milk at the time of the churning of it by the
combined efforts of the devas and the asuras, to take
Amrta (ambrosia), When Visnu took birth as Aditya,
Laksmi took birth from lotus. When Visnu incarnated
as Paragurama Laksmi Devi became the earth-goddess.
In the incarnation of §ri Rama she became Sita and in
that of Sri Krsna she was Rukmini. (Visnu Purana,
Amga 1, Chapter 9).
It was in the kingdom of Vidarbha that Laksmi Devi
took birth as Rukmini during the incarnation of Sri
Krsna. To Bhismaka, the King of Vidarbha, five sons
beginning with Rukmi, were born. The sixth was a
daughter who was named Rukmini. She grew up into
a beautiful damsel. (Bhagavata, Skandha 10).
2) Marriage. Rukmini fell in love with Sri Krsna. Her
parents agreed to her choice. But her brother Rukmi
was an enemy of Sri Krsna. Rukmi desired to give his
sister to Sigupala. The date of the marriage was fixed
and the heart was burning within Rukmini. She sent a
Brahmin as messenger to Krsna.
The time of marriage drew near.
Kalinga, Malava, Kekaya, Vanga, Magadha, Kosala,
Salva, Cola, Pandya, Kerala and so on took their seats
in the nuptial hall. Sri Krsna and Balabhadra came
with their army. The army under
Balabhadra remained behind and Sri Krsna went alone
to the nuptial hall. While preparations were being
made to give Rukmini to Sigupala, Sri Krsna took her
All the other
in his chariot and quickly left the place.
kings who ran after Sri Krsna to fight had to confront
with the mighty army of Balabhadra, _ who defeated ns
kings and returned to Dvaraka. (Bhagavata, Skandha
3) Sons. It is mentioned in Bhagavata,
that ten sons were born to Sri Krsna ster
They were Pradyumna, Carudesna, Sudesna, Carudeha,
Sucaru, Carugupta, Bhadracaru, Carucandra, Carubhadra and Caru. But a slight difference 18 observed in
the description of the sons of Riukmini given im
Mahabharata, Anusasana Parva, Chapter 14, Stanzas
4) Yoked to the chariot by Durvasas.
Para 3.
3) ; Consoled Arjuna.
Arjuna visited Dvaraka.
without rulers and the wome )
cried aloud. Rukmini Devi ran ‘0 him and console
him and seated him on a golden chair. (M.B.
Mausala Parva, Chapter 5, Stanza 12). ee
6) Death. After the death of Sri Krsna, Rukmini, yD
the other wives of Sri Krsna jumped ‘nto a burning Py
and died.
‘“Saibya, Rukmini, Gandhari,
The kings of Anga,
Skandha 10,
by Rukmini.
See under Durvasas,
After the death of Sri Krsna,
Seeing the dilapidated city
n without husbands, he
Haimavati and Jambathe leadership of
RURU I
vati jumped into the fire.” (M.B.
Ghaprer 7, Stanza 73). eee ae
7) The Palace of Rukmini. There is a statement in the
Mahabharata, Daksinatya Patha, Sabha Parva, Chapter
98, about the palace of Rukmini. ‘“Vigvakarma built
a palace for Sri Krsna at the instance of Indra. The
highest dome of it is covered with gold. So this dome
dazzled as the peak of Mahameru. It was this dome
that was set apart for his beloved wife Rukmini by Sri
Krsna’. |
RUMA I. A noble woman obtained from the sea of Milk
at the time of its churning by the devas and the asuras
to get Amrta (Celestial honey of immortality). At the
time of the churning, many beautiful and noble things
were obtained from the sea of Milk. Jyestha, Airavata
Uccaigéravas, Kalpa tree, Cintamani, Kaustubha, Candra
(Moon), Celestial maids, nymphs of heaven, Mahalaksmi, Tara, Ruma and soon were some of them.
(Kamba Ramayana, Yuddha Kanda) .
RUMA II. The wife of Sugriva. She was the daughter
of the famous monkey called Panasa. (Brahmanda
Purana, 3:7:221). After driving Sugriva away from
Kiskindha, Bali took Ruma by force. After the death
of Bali, Ruma returned to Sugriva. (Valmiki Ramayana, Kiskindha Kanda, Chapter 20, 21; Padma
There was-Ruma also, among the women who came to
see Sri Rama on his return to Kiskindha after visiting
Vibhisana. (Padma Purana, Srsti Khanda).
RUMANVAN. Son of Supratipa, a captain of the army
of Udayana. (See under Udayana).
RUMANVAN II. The eldest of the five sons born to
Jamadagni by his wife Renuka. The sons of Jamadagni
were, Rumanvan, Susena, Vasu, Visvavasu. and
Paragurama. It was Rumanvan that Jamadagni ordered
to kill Renuka who was late in fetching water from the
river. But Rumanvan did not obey his father. The
angry hermit cursed Rumanvan. According to the curse
Rumanvan became dull-witted like birds and beasts.
M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 116, Stanza 10).
RUPAKA. See under Pattu (Ten)
RUPAVAHIKA. A country in ancient India. Mention
is made about this country in Mahabharata, Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 50, Stanza 43,
RUPAVATI. A harlot who lived in Tretayuga. It is
mentioned in Padma Purana, Patala Khanda, that
Ripavati and her lover Devadasa attained salvation
by adopting the life of a house-holder in the forest.
RUPAVIDYA. The figure of Devi. The figure of Devi,
shown as __ sitting with twelve hands, is called
Ripavidya. (Agni Purana, Chapter 50).
RUPINA. A son born to the emperor Ajamidha by his
wife Kegini. He had two brothers named Jahnu and
Vraja. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 94, Stanza 32).
RURUI. A hermit famous in the Puranas.
1) Genealogy. Descended from Visnu in the following
order: Brahma-Bhrgu -Cyavana - Pramati - Ruru.
9) Birth. The beautiful Puloma was the wife of Bhrgu.
Bhrgu got the son Cyavana by Puloma. Cyavana
married Sukanya the daughter of Saryati. A son_named
Pramati was born to them. The hermit Pramati
married the beautiful damsel Pratapi. Ruru_1s their
son, He grew up to be a famous hermit. (Devi Bhagayata, Skandha 2).

RURU II
3) Marriage. Ruru happened to see the exceedingly
beautiful Pramadvara the daughter of Vigvavasu by
Menaka. The moment he saw her he fell in love with
her. The father of Pramadvara came to know of this
and he decided to give her in marriage to Ruru.
Preparations for the marriage were being made. One
day during that time Pramadvara who had been running here and there joyfully, was bitten by a snake
and she fell down dead. Ruru instantly reached the
spot.
Ruru who was greatly sad and disappointed, got down
to the Ganges and bathed. Then rinsing his mouth
he took some water in his hand and said “By the
favour of God I have acquired by my devotion and
worship of gods, devotion and service to my teacher,
by my scripture-study, my worship with Gayatri, my
prayer, and meditation, my penance, my offerings: to
the holy fire, and my oblations, let her come to life.
If she does not come to life, I will die in this Ganges
water.’’ Making this prayer, making the gods witnesses
he poured the water down.
Immediately a messenger from heaven appeared in the
sky and said that she would come to life again provided
Ruru was prepared to give half of his life to her. Ruru
agreed to it. Thus Pramadvara came to life again and
Ruru married her. (Devi Bhagavata, Skandha 2).
4) Hatred towards Serpents. A relentless hatred grew up
in the heart of Ruru against serpents, because a serpent
had killed his wife. He wandered about destroying
every serpent he came across. Finally when he confronted
Dundubha he was given exhortations and good advices
regarding righteousness by Dundubhla. (M.B. Adi Parva
Chapter 9, Stanza 19). Moreover it is mentioned in
Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 12, that Ruru had
taken a lively interest in the sacrifice of Janamejaya
meant for the extermination of serpents.
RURU II. A mighty and valiant Asura. After procuring a boon from Brahma, Ruru became arrogant and
attacked the realm of gods. The Devas who were defeated by Ruru ran to the Blue mountain and prostrated before the goddess Sakti, who had been doing
penance there. This goddess Sakti had been born from
the matted hair of Siva.
Ruru followed the Devas and reached the Blue mountain. When Devisaw Ruru and his mighty army a
loud laugh burst out from her. From that laugh thousands of devilish figures came into existence. ‘They
completely annihilated the army of Ruru. After _ this
Devi killed Ruru with the nail of. her toe. (Padma
Purana, Srsti Khanda).
RURUKA. A King of the Iksvaku dynasty. This King
was a scholar in. economics and administration.
(Harivamésa, 1 ; 13; 29).
RUSABHANU. Wife of Hiranyaksa, an asura, (Bhagavata, Skandha7). _
RUSADRATHA. A King of the Anga family. He was
the son of Titiksu and the father of Paila, a member
of the line of Vyasa’s disciples. (Agni Purana, Chapter
oe A King in ancient India. It is mentioned
bharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter 8, Stanza 13,
in Maha c
that this King stays 1 the palace of Yama.
RUSAMA. A Priest who had studied the Vedas well.
*Paficavims abrahmana’, about
A story occurs in the
this priest.
SABALASVA II
Once Indra and Rugama bet on going round the
world. Both got ready and started. But Rusgama
walked round Kuruksetra and returned, while Indra
travelled the whole of the way round the world and
kept the conditions. ‘The question arose as to who won
the bet. The devas gave the decision, ‘‘Kuruksetra 1s
the dais of Brahma, and so Kuruksetra contains the
entire world. Therefore both Indra and Rugama were
declared to have won the bet.”
RUSANGU. An ancient hermit. Once the great
hermit Arstisena came to the hermitage of Rusangu and
did severe penance. Visvamitra obtained Brahmanatva
(Brahminhood ) by doing penance in this place. Towards the end of his life Rusangu and his sons came to
Prthidakatirtha and sang laudatory songs about
Prthidakatirtha. Rusangu said that those who did
penance and died in this holy bath would not have to
undergo miseries after death. (M.B. Salya Parva,
Chapter 39, Stanza 24).
RUSARDDHIKA. A wicked King of the Saurastra
dynasty. Mention is made about this King in Mahabharata, Udyoga Parva, Chapter 74, Stanza 14.
RUYYAKA (RUCIKA). A Sanskrit playwright who
lived in the 12th century. He has another name
‘Rucika’ also. The book of criticism called ‘‘Alankarasarvasva” is written by him. He was the teacher of
’ Manikha, the author of Srikanthacarita’. Some are 0
opinion that Ruyyaka had written only the Sutras in
the book ‘Alankarasarvasva’ and that the gloss oF
commentary was given by Mankha, Some of the other
works of Rucika are Sahrdayalila, Alankaranusaran!
etc.
The letter Sa means to lie down and also
Samkara. ‘Sam’ means comfort or happiness. (Agn!
Purana, Chapter 348). :
Sa means noble, sublime. (Agni Purana,
Chapter 348).
The sound ‘Sa’ means indirect; ‘Sa, Laksm!
as dteas of wealth and prosperity) and ‘sam’ means
hair. (Agni Purana, Chapter 348). !
his wife
SABALA. A naga born to Kagyapaprajapati of
Kadra. (Adi Parva, Chapter 85, Verse 7). i
SABALAKSA.-A_ divine maharsi. He _ once visited
Bhisma. (Anugdsana Parva, Chapter 26, Verse 7).
SABALASVA I. ‘The thousand sons born to Daksa of
his wife Virani, are known as Sabalasvas. To procre
ate man-kind Daksa_first created five hundred sons by
his wife Asikni and named them Haryasvas.
Daksa had to create the Sabalagvas as the Haryasvas
were misled by Narada. But, Narada approached an
told the Sabalasvas also that it was not correct 0?
their part to procreate children before they had studie
the interior, exterior, bottom and top of the earth.
Believing Narada’s advice the Sabalagvas also set out
to measure the extent of the earth and they have not
yet returned. Because of this Brahma cursed that
Narada, instead of living at one place, should always
be on the move. (Visnu Purana, Part 1, Chapter 15)-
SABALASVA II. A King born in the dynasty of King
Kuru. His father, Aviksit or ASvavan was the grandson of King Kuru. Aviksit had, besides Sabalaéva;
seven sons calied Pariksit, Adiraja Viraja, Salmalt,
Uccaiggravas, Bharmgakara and Jitari. (Adi Parva,
Chapter 94, Verse 52).

SABARIMALA
SABARA
Now, Rama
SABARA. A mleccha—low caste. The Mahabharata
has the following about Sabaras.
(1) Sabaras were born from the dung and urine of
Nandini, the cow of Vasistha. (Adi Parva, Chapter 174,
Verse 16).
(ii) When Satyaki annihilated the Kauravas the dead
bodies of thousands of Sabaras were heaped on _ the
battle-field. (Drona Parva, Chapter 119, Verse 46).
(iii) In early days the Sabaras lived in the kingdom
of Mandhata, their profession being murder and _looting. (Santi Parva, Chapter 65, Verse 13).
(iv) Siva had once taken the form of forest-dwellers
and Sabaras. (Anug4asana Parva. Chapter 65, Verse
(v) Many Ksatriyas lived for many years hidden in
caves for fear of Paragurama, and as they had no
association with ksatriyas during the period, they
became Sabaras. (Aévamedhika Parva, Chapter 29,
Verse 15).
SABARI. A woman of the tribe of forest-dwellers. Sri
Rama, during his life in the forest, gave her salvation.
1) Former life. Sabari, in her former life, was the only
daughter Malini of the Gandharva King, Citrakavaca.
An erudite scholar, Vitihotra, married her. As he was
ever immersed in contemplation of Brahman his wife
Malini, (later Sabari) kept one hunter, Kalmasa, as
her paramour, and her husband cursed her thus : «Ag
you have become a lover of the hunter, you turn out
to be a hunter-woman.”’
2) At the Suburbs of eagle hermitage.
Malini in tears sought redemption from the
her husband, and he told —s she ete ove
solution from her infamy and the curse from Sri Rama
Immediately she was transformed into a hunter-woman
and she came to the suburbs of Matangagrama. She took
a special liking for the place, the reason being that the
flowers in the aSrama possessed a special fragrance.
Once while the disciples were carrying a load of
flowers for the muni (Matanga) a few drops of sweat
from their bodies fell on the ground, and the muni
blessed that the trees and creepers, which grew up
from the sweat and their flowers would never fade.
This is described as follows in Canto 73, Aranyakanda
of Valmiki Ramayana. Ty
“Oh! Rama! nobody plucks and wears those flowers.
They neither fade nor fall down. While the disciples of
Matanga were carrying a load of flowers for him, they
sweated on account of exhaustion and some drops of
sweat fell on earth which developed themselves into
flowers due to the prowess of the guru’s tapas. Even
today may be seen there Sabari, who has taken to
sannyasa and who tends the flowers. She will attain
heaven only after seeing you.”’
Sabari lived for long there serving Matanga’s disciples,
performing tapas and_ learning knowledge about
Brahman. At the time of the munis giving up their
physical bodies they blessed Sabari that without further
delay she would meet Rama and get redemption from
the curse. They also blessed that she would Possess
divine eyes to see hidden things and also the past and
the future. After that she was spending her days awaiting the arrival of Rama.
It was the period of the life in the forest of Rama and
Laksmana. After visiting various aéramas Rama at
last came to Matangasgrama. Hearing about Rama’s
_ reach mount Rsyamika.
a lot of fruits.
Sabari received them most
visit Sabari had gathered
came and »@ iP Mee ctaite
rape. adr, hel MME he eave
taste she gave the fruits for them *”_ mEeasebad
to
of Sabari appeared as nectar
told Rama:thus: ‘When you 8° © "oq Pampa. You
wards there is the beauty! ‘nie! further and you will
cress Pampa and advance 4 n the top of that mountain
. ter into alliance
and at t and getting
Oh! Lord!
un, )
eed in finding 0U
emies.
lives Sugriva, os of S
with him you will succee¢
back Sita after annihilating the en
Mee cate thus, Sabari the ie ere aK
chaste woman closed her cyt ae aes pened
transformed into Malini, the, Gancaa appeared there
ll at once a handsome Gandharva prince ae yushand of
a dix ine plane. It was Vanhoues uy SENN
Malini. After saluting Sri Rama he Kamba Ramaina chariot to the Gandharva city. d
kanda) . ieiAMsacre
gABARIMATA (SABARI MOUNT As of Kerala on
lace in South India in theseasters ot quite certain
: ntain called Sabarimala. alee way relate
itieibied the name of thismountain is inany
i lvation. At
to Sabari, to whom Sri Rama nee a Gast ee the presidany rate a very ancient temple wit ‘mala today. It 1s
ing deity therein is found at Sabarl
4 he anci-
: “+ attached to t
proof positive of the great eit devotees from all
le that every year s. mountains
parts of India visit It Ore aE al evidence
and wild beasts a aa eat Puonats philosophical
igin of tne i more illuimportance is sparse, but there. is 82280. yappan)
minating than facts of history; nee The legend is as
the deity installed in the temp’
follows—
. =,dvas divided
In olden days the royal family a ei maid down at
itself into two branches, one ot tes When the king of
Velliyar and the Orne ae sie Sian the forest he met
Madura one day went ahunting ous Malayali
d courag 2
a ee eet eely tbok a liking for him and
ith. The king imme 3 ese Saag ee 1e youth
eer him as an officer in his eka de che
radually rose up in military service ee eect
Gamiander-int Chicl The other rea pan—began
jealous due to the rise of the yore Be ee became a
conspiring to drive Ban out, ee and at their
weapon in the hands of the COnspa 2 and lay in
instance she pr etended herself to be vey, ‘ed ed defeat
a fainting fit. All the physicians acne conapira:
in curing her. Thena physician, an agent that he would
tors. came forward and assured the king 4 a half hours
cure the queen of her illness within one STE king told
if a leopard’s milk was made available.
about it. to the
Ae spen went into the forest and see leads
palace with many she-leopards. He . o* rt were frighting the leopards. People in the roy King realised
ened by the sight of the leopards. B eing
that Ayyappan wa
questioned about him by the King, le world his
that God was his father and t eae
As he did not like to live any rae le
and conspirators he returned to Keraia.

SABHAKA
Ayyappan’s departure made the King sad and very
-restlessin mind, After giving all his immovable property on rent the King followed Ayyappan to Kerala
taking all his ornaments, jars and other utensils, and
came at last to Pantalam. This region of Kerala was
then in the control ofa petty Chieftain called Kaippuzha ‘Tampan. The King of Madura purchased some
land from the Tampan, put up a palace there and lived
therein with the members of his family.
Ayyappasvami on his way back to Kerala met Paragurama, who told the former that he had already, for the
protection of Kerala, installed on mountains and the
sea-coast idols of his (Ayyappasvami) and that he would
install another idol of Ayyappan at Sabarimala where
they had now met each other. From that day onwards
Ayyappasvami took his abode there.
One of those days the Pandyan king living at Pantalam had a dream, and in that dream Ayyappasvami
appeared and told him that he (Ayyappan) was living
at Sabarimala and the King might meet the Svami if
he went there. The next day morning the King with
his retinue started for Sabarimala. At Sabarimala the
King got the forest cleared and madea_ search of the
ground where he found an idol installed by Parag urama.
The King built a temple there and installed the idol of
Ayyappasvami therein. He also got necessary purificatory ceremonies conducted in the temple by the famous
tantri (high-priest) Tazhaman. A routine programme
for the conduct of affairs in the temple was fixed. As
it was difficult for men to live in the forest infested by
wild beasts and conduct pija etc. daily, it was fixed that
pujas need be conducted only for five days in every
month and that Makarasamkranti should be the annual
festival day. From the first of Makaram (January) for
five days it was to be utsava with the deity led in procession. On the fifth of Makaram every year a
‘Kalabham’ and on the seventh day a ‘guruti’ also were
ordained.
On the annual festival day the temple priest, the senior
pilgrim, marars and other employees go to Sabarimala
carrying with them rice etc. for food and calling
aloud ‘Svamiye Saranam Ayyappa’ (Oh! lord Ayyappa!
you are our refuge), devotees climb the mountain today also repeating this slogan. (See under Sasta).
SABHAKA (SALAKA). See under Dhanafijaya oH
SABHANARA. A King of the Bharata Dynasty. He was
son of Anudruhyu, and the father of
(Bhagavata, Skandha 9),
SABHAPARVA. An important section in the Mahabharata. The main theme mentioned in this section is
ne a of the palace of the Pandavas, (Sabha=
alace ).
SABHAPATI. A prince who took the side of the Kauravas
and fought against the Pandavas. Mention is made in
Mahabharata, Karna Parva, Chapter 89, Stanza 64, that
this prince was killed by Arjuna.
SACI. Daughter of Puloma and wife of Indra. The
ee information about Saciis gathered from the
Mahabharata.
(1) It was from an aspect of Saci that Paficali, daughter
. "a was born. (Adi Parva, Chapter 67,
rse ,
(2) ‘Saci is seated on the best throne in the assembly of
Devas in the court of Indra. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 7,
Verse 4).
Kalanara.
SADACARA (Good conduct).
SADACARA
(3) She worships Brahma also in his court. (Sabha
Parva, Chapter 11, Verse 42). ;
(4) It was gacidevi, queen of Indra, who took Sri Krsna
and Satyabhama, during their visit to Devaloka to the
Devamata. (mother of Devas). (Sabha Parva, Daksnatyapatha, Chapter 38). ree:
(5) When Indra, afflicted by Brahmahatya, hid himse
away from Devaloka Sacidevi was kept under the Pl
tection of Brhaspati. (Udyoga Parva, Chapter *°
Verse 20). ke
6) While he was made Indra, Nahusa wanted to a
aci for wife and she tried hard not to fall into ™
clutches. (See under Nahusa). 4
(7) Saci was present at the birth of Subrahmany*
(Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 13) .
m1) General information. Each country has good ha or
ary practices ofits own. A man with good ace an
behaviour is considered as having conquered th
worlds. ‘The sound ‘Sat’ denotes ‘Sadhus’. Sadaw 0
those who are without any bad conduct or behav! ile
The habits and practices of the Sadhus are © rhe
Sadacara. The Saptarsis, (the seven hermits) ; (the
Prajapatis (Lords of all creatures) and Manus Keep
fathers of men), were persons who were careful ee vised
up the good practices. Once the hermit Aurva Sparata
Sagara, what the good usages of the people of Bha Oo
ought tobe. The laws of good conduct according
hermit Aurva are given below : ould
2) The passing of excrement and urine. Every one ‘pefore
wake up in the Brahmamuhirta (Two hours uthdawn). After having risen, he should go to the o
west corner of the village or house at a distance d not
arrow-shot for stooling and passing urine; shou legs
pour the water used for washing the face and the own
in the courtyard; should not pass urine in one - the
shadow, or in the shade of a tree, or facing er gelds»
Sun, fire, wind, teacher and Brahmin. Ploughe leshe
fields where grains are ready for harvest, catt Jace>
crowd, path, lakes or rivers and their banks, are here is
forbidden for stooling or passing urine. When © ng the
no danger, a wise man should pass urine, faci he?
north in the day and facing south at night. d wit?
passing excrement the ground should be covers yould
grass and his head should be covered with cloth.
not sit long or talk much when stooling.—
3) The conduct of ablution after answering ! a
nature and rinsing the mouth after meals. Soil such -" ats:
from white ant-hill, ground thrown up by moles se by
soil at the bottom of water, remainder of soil wor
another, soil taken from the wall, soil gathered yy Ju’
and flies, ploughed soil etc. should not be used a 18
tion. By using soil, do the cleansing of the pot?
once, the anus thrice, the left hand ten times, 4?" pure
the hands together, seven times. After this + ch has
water (in which there is no mud or foam and we wp
no foul smell) and rinse the mouth. Take 80! e
and wash the legs withit. Rinse the mouth thric
wipe the face twice. Then holding water in te -
touch the apertures‘in the head such as eye ©
Crest of the head, both upper arms, navel
With this rinsing take bath. After bath, with yiue
of'a mirror, tie the hair, anoint the eyes with © y yld
and wear flower garlands etc, carefully. Bathing * tase
be done in river, rivulet, lake, jungle-stream, ™
are
he calls 9g
he |

SADAJIT
or holy bath (tirtha), or draw water from the well and
bathe there or carry well-water home and bathe there.
After the bath put onclean dress. Then take some
water in the hand, offer it as oblation to gods, sages, and
the manes with care. Throw water thrice for the
blessing of the gods and hermits and to Prajapati once,
as ordained. In the same way, to the manes and the
great ancestors also give oblation of water thrice.
After so much is done do the customary sacrificial
offerings, prayer etc. to Devi. Then invite guests to the
house and welcome them. (Visnu Purana, Am§ga 3,
Chapter 11).
SADAJIT. A king of the dynasty of Bharata. He was the
son of Kunti and the father of Mahisman. (Bhagavata,
Skandha 9). ,
SADAKANTA. A river in India, Puranically very famous.
Mention is made of this river in Mahabharata, Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 9, Stanza 25.
SADANIRA. A river in India very famous in the Puranas.
Mention is made of this river in Mahabharata, Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 9, Stanza 904. Some scholars are of
opinion that this river is the same as the Karatoya of
Modern India.
SADARBHAKA (S). Six sons of Marici. Subjected to a
curse they had to live many lives and ultimately they
resumed their old forms as children of Devaki. (For
details see under Karhsa, Para 2).
SADASVA. A king of ancient India. It is mentioned in
Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter 8, Stanza 12, that
this king remains in the palace of Yama, glorifying him.
SADASYORML. A king. He is a worshipper of Yama.
(M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 8, Stanza 11).
SADGUNAI. The six qualities or attributes of Bhagavan (God). Alsvaryam (prosperity ), Viryam
(prowess), Vairagyam (non-attachment or renunciation) ,
Vijfianam (super-knowledge), Sri (welfare and prosperity) and Yagas (fame, reputation) are the six attributes
of Bhagavan.
SADGUNA II.
Vigraha, Yana,
Six kingly or political policies. Sandhi,
Asana, Dvaidha and Agraya are the six
Chapter 8,. Verse
policies of state-craft. (Manusmrtl,
1) Sandhi. To enter into peace and concord with the
One may make peace for one’s own
enemy is Sandhi.
benefit with the enemy,
There are. sixteen kinds
etc. No kind of peace or treaty §
twenty kinds of kings, j.e. infants ;
ing from chronic disease; cast out by on
coward; one whose supporters are cowar
whose people are misers; who is very muc
women and such other material things;
not a mind of one’s own and is ruled by ™ eahintnss
adviser; he, who does not respect Devas ane a a bieet
one hated or forsaken by God; blasphen ie ek
to scarcity and sorrow; one not with satis ae dave ate
local person; one with many enemies, ce ee hteousness.
numbered and one devoid of truth an aoe vith the
One shall only fight and not enter into p
above types of people. ey: is the
2. es Fighting, ic. war ie igen al ot pier
result of mutual evil-doings. The vee v1 whose favour
perity who is troubled by others 4 «fOr
: uld g9°
time and circumstances Ate ae ‘he following :
war, The main causes of war 4
who is powerful and is fighting.
of eats called Kap4lasandhi,
hould be made with
old men; one suftere’s own people;
ds; miser; one
h addicted to
who has
SADHYA (S)
the desire to capture kingdom, woman, position
etc. haughtiness and imperiousness, obstruction to
duties and rights, the interest of friends and allies,
destruction to one’s allies, both parties getting interested
*n one and the same thing etc. Enmity is engendered
chiefly due to the following causes:-rivalry of co-wives,
disputes about property and women, verbal controversies
and wrongs committed. The following kinds of wars
should not be fought:-Wars the benefit of which is
meagre or futile; war which would cause harm in the
present as also in future; with the enemy whose strength
is not correctly known; incited by others, for others, on
account of women, which would continue for long; with
brahmins, where time and fate are not in favour;
with him, who has powerful allies, though of temporary
advantage but which will not be so in future; though
of advantage in future but useless at present.
The king should always do what will be of advantage
at present as also in future. If one’s own army is strong
and enthusiastic and when the army of the adversary is
not so, one may go in for war. Also, when all circumstances are in one’s favour and against the antagonist
one may fight.
3) Yana, Yana means marching for war. One may
start for war after declaring it, after making peace, after
making alliances; and incidentally also.
4) Asana. To remain quiet or doing not
also of four kinds as yana. ! :
5) Dvaidha. To get in between the contending parties
to support with words only and to remain without joining either side is dvaidha. He who takes up the stand
should, on meeting both the parties, serve the stronger
side. But if he finds that both the parties are making
peace, and not in need of his aid, he should approach
their enemy, who is more powerful than they, or he
should fight by himself.
6) Afraya. When one *s attacked by a stronger enemy
and if one finds no means to retaliate, one should depend
upon another person, who is noble, truthful and powerful. To put ona supplicant’s look, to understand the
moods of that person whose help is sought and to be
humble to him—these are the characteristics and traits of
the dependent. (Agni Purana, Chapter 240.
SADHU. An incarnation of Siva. The Brahmanda Purana
contains the following story about it.
When the Himalaya and Mainaka mountains once
began a very intense tapas, the Devas and Rsis fearing
great ruin to the world in case the mountains got salvation, sought Siva’s protection and prayed for a solution
for the problem. So Siva, in the guise of a brahmin
named Sadhu, went to the mountains, spoke to them
condemning Siva and thus made them retract from their
devotion to Siva.
SADHYA. Mother of the Sadhyas. (See under Sadhyas).
SADHYA (S).
1. General. A Ganadevata.
n important role in Puranic mov
lay a ste
Dae The Sadhyas were born from the seed Virat
Purusa. (Adi Parva, Chapter 1, Verse 35). But according to Visnu Purana (Part I, Chapter 35) _ the Sadhyas
were the grand-children of Daksa-prajapati. Of the sixty
daughters of the Prajapati by his wife Asikni, ten were
married by Dharmadeva; The Visvadevas were the
sons of Dharmadeva by his wife Viéva and the Sadhyas
were his sons by Sadhya.
hing which is
These Devatas often used to
ements and inci-

SADYASKA
2. Other information.
(1) The Sadhyas fought with Garuda, who went to Devaloka for Amrta and got defeated. (Adi Parva, Chapter
(ii) The Sadhyas feared Vigvamitra. (Anug4sana Parva,
Chapter 71, Verse 39).
(i11) Sadhyaganas participated in the birthday celebrations of Arjuna. (Adi Parva, Chapter 122, Verse.70).
(iv) Sadhyas took their place in planes above the palace
of Drupada to witness Draupadi’s wedding. (Adi Parva
Chapter 186, Verse 6).
(v) ‘They were present at the Devayajiia conducted at
Naimisa forest. (Adi Parva, Chapter 195, Verse 3).
(vi) They were present with various Kinds of arrows at
the battle between Sri Krsna and Arjuna on the occasion of the burning of the Khandava forest. (Adi Parva,
Chapter 226 Verse 38).
(vil) They live in Indra’s court. (Sabha Parva, Chapter
/; Verse 22),
(viii) They go to the court of Brahma also and worship
him. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 11, Verse 44).
(ix) In the battle between Subrahmanya and Tarakasura
they fought on the side of the former. (Vana Parva,
Chapter 231, Verse 71).
(x) Once they made a prayer to Dattatreya muni.
(Udyoga Parva, Chapter 36, Verse 3):
(xi) On the occasion of the battle between Karna and
Arjuna at Kuruksetra the Sadhyas wished success for
the flatter. (Salya Parva, Chapter 44, Verse ao}
. (x1) They served as store-keepers at the yajfia performAas king Marutta. (Santi Parva, Chapter 29, Verse
(xiii) They remain on Mount Mufijavan worshipping
Siva. (Asvamedhika Parva, Chapter 8, Verse 1).
SADYASKA. A yajiia ordained for Rajarsis. It could be
performed in one day. (Vana Parva, Chapter 204,
Verse 16).
SAGARA. A king of the solar dynasty, Sagara ruled
Ayodhya.
1) Genealogy. Descended from Brahma thus: BrahmiKas yapa-Vivasvan-Vaivasvata Manu-Iksvaku - VikuksiSag ada-Purafij aya-Kakutstha-Anenas-Prthulaég va-Prasenajit - Yuvanasva - Mandhata - Purukutsa - TrasadasyuAnaranya-Aryasva-Vasumanas- Sudhanva - TraiyarunaSatyavrata (Trisanku )-Hariécandra-Rohitaé va-HaritaGuficu-Sudeva-Bharuka-Bahuka-Sagara. |
2) Birth. Bahuka, father of Sagara, was known as
Subahu also. Sagara was Bahuka’s son by his wife
Yadavi. (Brahmanda Purana, Chapter 16). Though
Sagara was a prince he was born at the aérama of
Aurva, and there was a reason for it.
Subahu and Yadavi did not have a child for long. But,
as a.result of many yajfias conducted for the gift ofa
child, Yadavi conceived. While she was in the seventh
month of her pregnancy her co-wife administered poison
to her with the result that she did not further advance
in pregnancy and deliver in due time. Thus she continued as a pregnant woman for seven years. (Brahmanda
Purana, Chapter 16). The King became an old man.
During this period Talajangha, king of Hehaya, attacked Ayodhya with his army, and Subahu, despite his
old age, fought back. But the fighting grew fiercer.
Subahu found that he would not be ableto defeat
Talajangha and so he escaped into the forest with his
sravana mountain.
SAGARA
wife Yadavi. They took shelter in the 4srama of sage
Aurva. Sub&ahu expired there due to old age and
Yadavi got ready to follow him in his pyre. The Mun
prevented her from doing so by pointing out to her
that the child in her womb was a very fortunate one
and would become emperor of the seven islands when
he grew up to manhood. YdAdavi delivered shortly.
As the poison (gara) given to her by the co-wife ha
immobilised her pregnancy for so long Aurva nati
her child Sagara. (Brahmanda Purana, Chapters !
and 17).
3) To Ayodhya. Sage Aurva conducted the Upanayana
ceremony ofthe boy and taught him the Vedas ete:
Once Yadavi wept to hear the boy address the mun!
‘father’, and when the son asked her the reason for 1
she told him that the muni was not his father, who
was really greater than the muni. She also told oe
their previous history, and Sagara decided to return
Ayodhya somehow.
The people of Ayodhya lived scattered here and there
in fear of Talajangha, and disgusted with such an €x)*
tence, they came together and took refuge with ven
tha, who told them that king Subahu had expired ‘a
Aurvasrama, but that his son Sagara was there -
the agrama. He further advised them to bring nee ie
back and reconquer Ayodhya. Yadavi wept at ved
sight of the people from Ayodhya and they 1nsis ey
upon Sagara’s return to the state as their king. Geil
waited in the 4$rama for five days for Sagara. T -
Sagara and his mother, with the blessings of the pee
returned to Ayodhya along with the people. ee ont 7
fought Talajangha, reconquered Ayodhya and ner
himselfas king. (Brahmanda Purana, Chapters 20 to aii
4) Family life. Sagara had two wives called Sum -
alias Vaidarbhi and Keéini alias Saibya. Sumati W
the daughter of Garuda.
As he had no issues for long, Sagara, with his goo
went to Himalayas and began doing tapas at ik ee
After hundred years B nid
appeared and blessed Sagara thatone of his wives W°
give birth to 60,000 sons and the other to one,
would add to the glory of the dynasty. Sumat! ©
60,000 sons and Ke§ini the one son. xh
n
The king and the queens returned to Ayodhya a! om
due course Sumati delivered the son called AsamavJ ati
who was to bring prosperity to the dynasty. Sum nto
gave birth toalump of flesh, which developed - nd
60,000 children. They were put in pots of ghee mili
they grew up to become young persons. (va
Ramayana, Balakanda, Canto 33).
Some Puranas contain stories somewhat different os
the above about the birth of the 60,000 childre’
€.g. in the 9th Skandha of Devi Bhagavata, the § 50D
is related as follows ; ‘‘Kegini delivered the :
Asamafijasa and Sumati did not deliver at all. plessdid tapas for Siva for children and because of his P red
ing she conceived. Sumati delivered only hu" that
years after continuing to be pregnant, and even -
was only a piece of flesh, and she began weeping ar
ressing Siva, who appeared before her and cut flesh
mass of flesh into 60,000 parts. Each piece of
transformed itself into a very powerful and efful
man.
hose
gen"

SAGARA 663
5) Loss of children. Kapila turned into ashes the
60,000 sons of Sagara. Bhagiratha revived them. (For
details see under Bhagiratha).
6) Triumphal tour. Sagara ruled the kingdom well and
while living happily thus with his sons, he set out on a
triumphal tour. After conquering’ the northern regions
he moved towards the south, his object being Mahismati, Kingdom of the Hehayas. He destroyed the
Hehayas completely in battle. (Brahmanda Purana,
Chapters 89 and 90).
7) Evening of life. Sagara ruled the kingdom for 300
years. (Brahmanda Purana, Chapter 91). His son,
Asamafijasa was a tormentor of his subjects. In the
evening of his life, Sagara transmitted the throne to
his grandson Arguman (son of Asamafijasa). ‘The
rest of his life he spent in Aurvagrama with his wife
engaged in meditation. ~
8) Other informaiton. ! ah
(i) Sagara worships Yama in his court, (Sabha Parva,
Chapter 8, Verse 19).
(ii) Sagara ousted Asamafijasa
he led an immoral life. (Vana Parva,
ai Sagara went to
throne to Amsuman.
Verse 64).
(iv) Sagara had _ gone, in the plane of Indra to
Viratanagara to witness the fight between Arjuna and
Krpa. (Virata Parva, Chapter 56, Verse ED Daren
(v) Sri Krsna once described the yajfia and dana of
Sagara. (Santi Parva, Chapter 29 Verse 130).
(vi) Sagara never ate flesh in his life. Anusasana Parva,
Chapter 115, Verse 66).
(vii) He is considered to be one of the kings to be remembered both at dawn and dusk. (AnuSasana Parva,
Chapter 165, Verse 49).
SAGARA. Ocean. Samudra (ocean) got the name
Sagara as it was formed later at the place where the
60,000 sons of King Sagara dug the earth in the course
of their quest for the missing yajfic horse. (See under
ShOARAKA. A Ksatriya king who lived . ae Blac:
called Sagara. He participated ee a ira’s
Rajasiya. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 52, ore } ae
SAGARODAKA. Holy water of the sea. He o bi 168
in it will go to heaven in an aerial chariot. (Anusgasa
Parva, Chapter 29, Verse 9). a
SAGNI (S). Pitrs, who are sons © Hs ne
Barhisadas, Anagnis and Sagnis are the
Brahma. (Agni Purana, Chapter 29). epee
SAHA I. One of the hundred sons of Dhrtarastt
was killed in the great war by Bhimasena.
Parva, Chapter 51, Verse 8).
SAHA II. A very powerful Agn!. (
222). of ae
rank A Celestial woman. She an ie ube
apsara women who were present er “Chapter 43,
Arjuna. (Mahabharata, ana Parva,
Vente BO od fs i f the ofisprings of
SAHABHOJA. A bird 37 eres i i yetee 12).
Garuda. (Udyoga Parva, andavas.
‘The fifth among the vane the headings,
from the palace, because
Chapter 107, Verse
heaven after handing over the
(Vana Parva, Chapter 107,
hma. Agnisvattas,
rs born from
arma
Vana Parva, Chapter
SAHADEVA I. yamnorg
pets, apo Sahat jin; Nakula and Pandavas,
Dharmaputra, Bhima,
anybody to distinguish his face.
‘Chapter 67, Verse 111).
(5) He had also married the.
SAHADEVA I
Only those facts, which have not been so related are
given hereunder.)
1) A brief biographical sketch. Sahadeva was the son of
Pandu by his wife Madri. T'wo sons, Nakula and
Sahadeva were born to Madri by the Agvinidevas.
Along with Yudhisthira, Bhima and Arjuna, sons of
Kunti, Nakula and Sahadeva spent their childhood in
the company of Sages at Satasrnga mountain. Pandu
died and Madri followed him in the funeral pyre. After
that the Pandavas lived at Hastinapura under the care
of Kunti. When the ‘lac-palace’ was burnt down, they
took themselves to the forest and ruled the kingdom
with Indraprastha . as capital. The Pandavas, who
were defeated in the game of dice went again into
the forest. Their going into the forest has been described as follows by Vidura.
Yudhisthira, covering his face with cloth and Bhima |
stretching out his powerful hands moved into the
forest. Arjuna followed them throwing up sand particles. Sahadeva went rubbing his face with earth,
Nakula, the most handsome of men, followed them,
his body smeared with dust. Paficali, her face concealed in hair and weeping went behind the king. Sage
Dhaumya with Kuésa grass in his hands, accompanied
them chanting Vedic hymns. (Sabha Parva, Chapter
, ura why the Pandavas assumed
Dhrtarastra asked Vid
these different poses and attitudes and Vidura answered
him thus : Yudhisthira covered ‘his face to show that
he would not retaliate in anger though he had, lost the
kingdom due to cheating. Bhima stretched out his
hands to show that he was unrivalled in manual power.
Arjuna threw out sand to say that he would shoot his
arrows into the enemy camp like particles of sand.
Sahadeva rubbed earth on his: face as he did not want
Nakula, the most
handsome of men, smeared his face. with dust so that,
on the way, women should not desire him.
When the Pandavas returned after twelve years’ stay in
exile in the forest and one year’s stay incognito
Duryodhana refused to allot them even a single house,
and war for eighteen days between the Kauravas and
the Pandavas was fought in the field of Kuruksetra.
The Kauravas were wiped out. - Yudhisthira became
king and performed the Rajasiyayajfia after which the
Pandavas went out on the great Journey and gave up
their lives. |
2) Other information about Sahadeva.
(1) He was dedicated to the, service of elders.
Parva, Chapter 1, Verse 114).
2) He was exceptionally handsome.
(Adi
(Adi Parva,
(3) In the fight that followed Arjuna’s endeavour to
capture king Drupada to be presented as Gurudaksina
(tuition fee to Drona, who trained the Pandavas in the
use of arms) Nakula and Sahadeva protected the wheels
of Arjuna’s chariot. (Adi Parva, Chapter 137, Verse
(4) Ason calld Srutasena (Srutakarman) was born
to him of Paficali. (Adi Parva, Chapter 220, Verse
daughter of King Dyutiman
led Vijaya and the couple had a son
of Madra cal
Chapter 95, Verse 80).
called Suhotra. (Adi Parva,

SAHADEVA I
(6) He defeated Virata, the Matsya king in battle.
(Sabha Parva, Chapter 31, Verse 2).
(7) He conquered the southern kingdoms on the
orders of Yudhisthira. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 30).
(8) He defeated Dantavaktra in battle. (Sabha Parva,
Chapter 31, Verse 59).
(9) He defeated Nila, king of Mahismati,in a fierce
battle and collected taxes from him. (Sabha. Parva,
Chapter 31, Verse 59). =
(10) He deputed Ghatotkaca to collect taxes from
Vibhisana, king of Lanka. Vibhisana sent Ghatotkaca
back with a lot of gold and gems. Vibhisana also deputed 88,000 Raksasas_ to carry the gold etc. (Sabha
Parva, Southern text, Chapter 31).
(11) He was Yudhisthira’s minister during the
Rajasiya yajfia. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 33, Verse
(12) After the yajfia was over, he conducted Drona
and Asvatthama back to their palaces. (Sabha Parva,
Chapter 45, Verse 48).
(13) He took the vow that he would kill Sakuni.
(Sabha Parva, Chapter 77, Verse 9).
(14) In the battle that followed the abduction of
Draupadi by Jayadratha, the chariot of Yudhisthira
went out of action and he, therefore, rode in the chariot
of Sahadeva. (Vana Parva, Chapter 271, Verse 15).
(15) During his life-incognito he thought of assuming
the name Tantripala. (Virata Parva, Chapter 3,
Verse 9),
(16) He went to king Virata disguised as Vaisg ya
called Aristanemi and got himself appointed as head of
the king’s dairy. (Virata Parva, Chapter 10, Verse Js
(17) He, inthe guise of a dairy-man, used to give
milk, butter-milk etc. to the Pandavas. (Virata Parva,
Chapter 13, Verse 9).
(18) Safijaya emphasized the fact that Sahadeva was a
heroic warrior to Dhrtardstra, (Udyoga Parva,
Chapter 50, Verse 31).
(19) When Yudhisthira, during the great war, divested
himself of his armour and started towards the Kaurava
army, Sahadeva questioned the action. (Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 43, Verse 19).
(20) On the first day of the battle he fought a duel
= Durmukha. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 45, Verse
(21) He defeated Vikarna, Salya and others in the
battle. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 71, Verse Bo).
(22) He annihilated the cavalry of the Kauravas,
(Bhisma Parva, Chapter 89, Verse SZ},
(23) He ran away from the battle-field. (Bhisma Parva
Chapter 105, Verse 16).
(24) He fought a duel with Krpacarya. (Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 110, Verse 12).
(25) He fought with Sakuni. (Drona Parva, Chapter
14, Verse 22). a,
(26) He fought again with Durmukha. ( Drona Parva,
Chapter 106, Verse 13).
(27) He killed Nirmitra, the Trigarta prince. (Drona
Parva, Chapter !07, Verse 25).
(28) In the fight with Karna he got defeated. (Drona
Parva, Chapter 167, Verse 15).
(29) He defeated DuéSasana in battle.
Chapter 188, Verse 2).
(Drona Parva,
SAHADEVA II.
SAHADEVAV.A Raksasa, son of Dhimraksa an
SAHADEVA V
(30) When Satyaki was about to kill Dhrstadyumna,
he pacified the former by a tactful speech. (Drona
Parva, Chapter 198, Verse 53).
(31) He defeated Paundraraja. (Karna Parva, Chapter
22, Verse 14).
(32) He defeated DusSasana again.
Chapter 23).
(33) He got wounded in-the fighting with Duryodhana.
(Karna Parva, Chapter 56, Verse 7).
(34) He defeated Ulika. (Karna Parva, Chapter 61,
Verse 43),
(35) He killed Salya’s son. (Salya Parva, Chapter LI,
Verse 43).
(36) He killed Ulika, son of Sakuni. (Salya Parva,
Chapter 28, Verse 32).
(37) He killed Sakuni. (Salya Parva, Chapter 28, Verse
(38) After the war, Yudhisthira allotted Durmukha $
palace to Sahadeva. (Santi Parva, Chapter 44, Vers¢
(39) In the matter ofdharmarthakamas (righteousnes*s
material wealth and enjoyment of love life) he attacher
more importance to artha (material resources). (%2"
Parva, Chapter 167, Verse 22). 3
(40) During the Rajasiiya the duty of managing or
stic affairs was entrusted to him by Vyasa and Yudils
thira. (Asvamedha Parva, Chapter 72, Verse 20). ti
(41) After the great war he visited and saluted Ku" ie
who lived in the forest then. (Asramavasika Parv®
Chapter 24, Verse 8). ked
(42) In the great journey (Mahdprasthana) he wal as
in front of Paficali and behind Nakula. (Mahapr4
thanika Parva, Chapter 1, Verse 31). a:
(43) Synonyms used in Mahabharata for Sahadev?
Asvineya, Agvinisuta, Bharatagardila, Bharatasattan”’®
Kauravya, Kurunandana, M4§adriputra. Madrey™’
Nakulanuja, Pandava, Pandunandana, ‘Tantr!p@”
Yama, Yamaputra. t of
A maharsi, who lived in the cout
(Karna Parva,
Indra. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 7, Verse 16). lived
SAHADEVA III. A King in ancient India. ae pha
in the court of Yama worshipping the latter. ("4
Parva, Chapter 3, Verse 17).
he
SAHADEVA IV. A son of Jarasandha about whom ¢
following facts are collected from the Mahabharat4- the
(1) Asti and Prapti, two wives, of Karnsa were | 4
sisters of this Sahadeva. (Sabha Parva, Chapter
Verse 31). . (Adi
(2) He was present at the wedding of Draupadi.
Parva, Chapter 185, Verse 3). fuge
(3) After the death of Jarasandha he took 1°07
with Sri Krsna, who crowned him King of Mat ter
puri. (M.B, Southern text, Sabha Parva, Chap
(4) In the great war he came to the help of Yu og
sthira with one aksauhini (division of army ). (Udy
Parva, Chapter 19, Verse 8). the
(5) He was one of the seven Maharathins e180
eae army. (Udyoga Parva, Chapter 187;
a
(6) He was killed in the great war by Drona. (Deer
Parva, Chapter 225, Verse 45). ef
qd fath
of Kréagva. (Bhagavata, Skandha 9).

SAHADEVA VI
SAHADEVA VI. A King of the Solar dynasty, son of
Dharmandhana (or Dharmanandana) and father of
Jayatsena. (Bhagavata, Skandha 9).
SAHADEVA VII. A King of the Solar dynasty, son of
Sudasa and father of Somaka. (Bhagavata, Skandha
SAHAJA. A Cedi King. (Udyoga Parva, ‘Chapter 74,
Verse 16).
SAHAJANYA. An apsaraé woman. The following information about her occurs in the Mahabharata.
(1) She is one of the six noble celestial girls, the other
five being Urvasi, Parvacitti, Menaka, Ghrtaci and
Vigvaci. (Adi Parva, Chapter 74, Verse 69).
(2) She was present at the Birthday Celebrations
of Arjuna. (Adi Parva, Chapter 122, Verse 64).
(3) She is an actress in Kubera’s court. (Sabha Parva,
Chapter 10, Verse !1).
(4) Sahajanya was amon
danced when Arjuna came to Deval
Chapter 43, Verse 30).
SAHAJIT. A King of the
one of the sons of Mahabhoja. (Bhagavata,
g the celestial women who
oka. (Vana Parva,
Bharata dynasty. He was
Skandha
SAHASRABAHU. A warrior of Subrahmanya. (Salya
Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 59’).
SAHASRACITYA. Grandfather of King Satayipa.
Sahasracitya was King of Kekaya. A very righteous
person, he abdicated the throne in favour of his elder
brother’s son and performed tapas in the forest. He gave
up his body for a brahmin and attained heaven.
(Anugasana Parva, Chapter 127, Verse 20; Agramavasika Parva, Chapter 20, Verse 6).
SAHASRAJIT. A King of the Bharata dynasty, Sahasrajit'was a son of Mahabhoja. (Bhagavata, Skandha 9).
He gave up his life for brahmins and attained heaven.
(Santi Parva, Chapter 234, Verse 31).
SAHASRAJYOTI. One of the three sons
Samrat. He had a million sons. (Adi Parva,
Verse 46).
of King
Chapter 1U
ori is place
SAHASRAKA. A holy place of pilgrimage. This p Sa
is situated in Kuruksetra. It is mention iD a
bharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 83; a inerits Oo
those who bathe in this place will get !
sion thousand coe a er ‘e
HASRAMUKHAR i, a
1) General. A Daitya King, who mee Bag, Ais
country thousands of miles away from “0 He was a
puri was an island at the centre of the es thousand
terror to the whole we A possessee @
heads and two thousand hanes. kA
2) Secured boon. This Ravana once a : 0 Oe ye
and performed the most intense tapas he bega
Yet, Brahma did not appc4? and poe ie
his heads one after the other and 0 “of his heads were
fire. Nine hundred and a ee a 3
cut thus. he was about [0 ©: d an
Beahme, aes ae en O the world: appeare
granted him the following three oe ‘of anyone, but
(i) You will not die at the hanes
a woman.
(ii) Brahmastra, whic
your disposal.
(iii) You will also po
as you please,
h would annihilate, will be at
ial chariot for travels
sess an acl
SAHASRANIKA
Sahasramukha, who returned to his country with the
boons became emperor of all Daityas and then conquered heaven, Patala, Kailasa, Vaikuntha and the
eight regions of the world. i
He then defeated Patalaravana and wedded his only
daughter Indumukhi. He got asa present a weapon
called Kathorakuthara. He propagated in the world
the customs and practices of heaven with the result
that all the customs of the Devas were derogated. Good
people felt harassed. In the rise of unrighteousness
righteousness became helpless.
3) Curse. Once on his way
house Sahasramukharavana raped a _ WVidyadhara
woman, Caficalaksi, who was performing tapas of
Laksmidevi and Caficalaksi cursed him that Laksmidevi would kill him. |
4) Son. Vajrabahu_ was Sahasramukha’s son. He
secured from Siva Pa§upatastra and an armour impenetrable by anyone. Vajrabahu captured Indra and
Subrahmanya killed the former.
5) Death. Sahasramukha ;had an army-chief named
Bana and both of them together did incalculable harm
to the three worlds. Sri Rama was King of Ayodhya
at the time, and Devas and sages complained to him
about Sahasramukha and as soon as the complainants
left Ayodhya, Sugriva and Vibhisana came there. They
he abduction by Sahasramukha’s
to his father-in-law’s
told Rama about t
second son, Candragupta of Sugriva’s daughter and
daughter-in-law. At once Sri Rama,
Vibhisana’s
along with Laksmana, Sugriva, Vibhisana, Haniiman
and a great army of monkeys reached Sahasramukha’s
capital city. 67i Rama sent word to him through
Haniman that Sugriva’s daughter and Vibhisana’s
daughter-in-law should be returned, Indra should be
released and that pardon should be begged for, for
Sahasramukha
his errors. Angered at this message
deputed Bana to fight Sri Rama. Bana was killed in
Then ensued a fierce
See under Bana IV).
battle between Rama and Sahasramukha, the latter
aided by Candragupta. Angada was about to be
overpowered by Candragupta, and then the following
celestial voice was heard : “‘Candragupta will not die
as long as his wile Padmavati is reciting Brahmamantra
imparted by Brahma.” Then Vibhisana sent Hanaman
en’s quarters and as a result of the latter
battle. (
to the wom
using a ‘Kitatantrayantra’ great confusion and
uarrels broke out among the women-folk, and
utilising the opportunity Angada killed Candragupta.
Sahasramukha fought Sri Rama single-handed. All
tactics of Rama proved to be of no use. Then he
remembered Brahma’s boon to Sahasramukha and
Caficalaksi’s curse upon him. Immediately Sri Rama
Sita from Ayodhya and the latter shot
brou ht down
the eautikea arrow at the throat of Sahasramukha and
he was killed. (Kamba Ramayana, Uttarakanda),
SAHASRANAMA (N). (Sahasra = thousand; nama =
name)» |
Hymns containing the thousand names of Visnu,
Giva and Devi are generally known 4s Sahasranama.
these names is considered to be
The recitation of
sins. Sahasranama of Visnu 1s more
annihilative of all
popular.
sAHASRAN
details see
IKA. A King of the lunar dynasty. (For
under Udayana) ;

SAHASRAPADA
SAHASRAPADA (SAHASRAPAT).
1) General. A maharsi, who was transformed into a
serpent by the curse of Khagama, another maharsi.
But a talk with King Ruru restored him to his former
self. (For details see under Ruru, para 4).
2) Other information. Ruru desired to get some
information about serpent yajiia from Sahasrapat, who
answered the former that he would hear the-story of
Astika from brahmins and then disappeared. (Adi
Parva, Chapter 12, Verse 3),
SAHASRAVAK (SADAHSUVAK). One of the hundred
sons of Dhrtarastra. (Adi Parva, Chapter 67, Verse
SAHISNU. One of the three sons of Pulaha Prajapati
by his wife Ksama, the other two being Kardama and
Urvariyan. (Visnu Purana, Part 1, Chapter 10).
SAHODHA. A child conceived by a girl while she is
unmarried but delivered after she is married. (See
under Putra)
SAHYA. A mountain on the plain of Lavanasamudra
(salt sea). Monkeys, in the course of their search for
Sita crossed this mountain, which is one of the saptakulaparvatas (seven great mountains) in India.
Nahusa once picnicked on this mountain along with
apsara women. (Udyoga Parva, Chapters 11 and 12;
Vana Parva, Chapter 282; Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9).
SAIBYA I. An ancient King of India. He was the
father of Srfijaya and a close friend of Sage Narada
and Sage Parvata. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 55,
Verse 7). | .
SAIBYA II. King of the Sibi land. Mahabharata gives
the following pieces of information about him :—
(i) Govasa, King of Sibi land was the father-in-law of
Yudhisthira. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 95, Verse 76).
(ii) Saibya adorned Yudhisthira’s assembly. (M.B.
Sabha Parva, Chapter 4, Verse 25),
(iii) Saibya and the King of Kasi had come to Upaplavya city with an ‘“‘Aksauhini’’ (division of the army )
to attend the marriage of Abhimanyu. (M.B. Virata
Parva, Chapter 72, Verse 16). |
(iv) Duryodhana admitted that Saibya was the greatest
archer in the army of the Pandavas. (M.B. Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 20, Verse 5).
(v) During the Bharata Yuddha, Saibya and the King
of Kasi were standing to protect Dhrstadyumna’s
‘““Krauficavyiha”’. (M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 50,
Verse 56).
(vi) This Saibya was the grandson of
Drona Parva, Chapter 10, Verse 64).
SAIBYA III. Name of a horse tied to Sri Krsna’s
chariot. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapters 20, 22, and 283).
SAIBYA IV. A Ksatriya hero barn in the Vrsni family,
In Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter 4, Verse 34,
we read that he learnt Dhanurveda (science of archery )
from Arjuna and shone in Yudhisthira’s assembly.
SAIBYA V. A Ksatriya King who was defeated by
Sri Krsna. There is a reference to this Saibya in
Mahabharata, Daksinatya Patha, Sabha Parva, ChapSAIBYA VI. <A warrior who fought against the Pandavas
on the side of Kauravas. He fought from the
‘“‘Sarvatobhadravyuha” formed by Bhisma. (M.B.
Bhisma Parva, Chapter 2), Verse 2 ).
SAIBYA VII. King of Sauvira land. When Jarasandha
jnvaded Gomanta city, Saibya was put in charge of
Usginara. (M.B.
SAINDHAVA I
the defence of the western gate of that city. ( Bhagavata, 10th Skandha). His daughter Ratna married
Akrira. (Matsya Purana, Chapter 45, Verse 28).
SAIBYA ‘I. One of the wives of King Sagara. Sagara
had two wives named Sumati and Keéini. In Devi
Bhagavata, 9th Skandha we see that Sumati had
another name, “Vaidarbhi” and Keégini had another
name, “Saibya’’. Prince Asamafijasa was the son of
aibya,
SAIBYA II. Queen of Dyumatsena, the King of S4lva.
This Saibya4 was the mother of Satyavan. (See under
Satyavan). |
SAIBYA III. One of the wives of Sri Krsna. When her
husband Sri Krsna renounced his body, this Saibya
jumped into the fire and was burnt to death. (M.B.
Mausala Parva, Chapter 7, Verse 73). 7
SAIKHAVATYA. An ancient sage. Amba who was
forsaken by the King of Salva went and mourned ove
her misfortune in Saikhavatya’s agrama. This a
consoled her. (M.B. Udyoga Parva, Chapter 179,
Verse 38). .
SAILABHA. A Sanatana Vigvadeva. (M.B. Anusasan@
Parva, Chapter 91, Verse 32). B
SAILAKAMPI. A warrior of Subrahmanya. (M-BSalya Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 63). he
SAILALAYA. A King of ancient time. He: was a
grandfather of Bhagadatta. After performing tapas ta
the tapovana at Kuruksetra he attained Indralok® |
(M.B. A¢ramavasika Parva, Chapter 20, Verse 10)- . ‘
SAILODA. A river flowing between the two mountalh:
Meru and Mandara. Arjuna coriquered and auld
the low class people who inhabited the valley of * Z
river. A low-class people known as ‘‘Khasas’’ use@ he
live on the banks of this river under the shade of ‘1
dense growth of bamboo trees. These low class ae
had brought presents of gold for Yudhisthira’s RY
siya. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 52. Verse 2).
SAILUSA. A Gandharva. A class of Gandharvas
also known as “‘Sailiisas’”. Some references found in
Puranas concerning Sailiisas are given below :— ag
(i) Sri Rama sent Bharata and completely dest
the class of Gandharvas called Sailiisas who ai
causing trouble on the shore of the eastern 0°
(Kamba Ramayana, Uttara Kanda). him,
(ii) During the reign of Sri Rama, as ordered by , ke
Bharata killed with his shower of arrows, the Ww! 5
Gandharva named Sailiisa and his three aur ni
sons who lived on the banks of the river Sindhu. (48
Purana, Chapter 11),
(i111) Ravana’s brother, Vibhisana had married
the daughter of a Sailisa Gandharva.
Ramayana ). nd
(iv). The Gandharva named Sailisa serves Kubera “ies
remains in Kubera’s assembly. (M.B. Sabha P
Chapter 10, Verse 26). ere
SAIMHIEEYA (S). The Asuras (Demons) who WU
the sons of Sirhhika. Two sons named Hiranyaks4 7
Hiranyakagipu and a daughter named Simhika ika
born to Prajapati Kagyapa by his wife Diti. 51? this
was given in marriage to Vipracitti. The sons ° Rah
couple were known by the name Saimhikeyas- Chap
was the first of the Saithhikeyas. (Agni Purana.
ter 19). For further details see under Rahu. aka:
SAINDHAVA I. A disciple of the hermit Saum
(See under Guruparampar4)}.
1S
the
Sarama
(U ttar@

SAINDHAVA II
SAINDHAVA II. Mention is made in Mahabharata,
- Vana Parva, Chapter 51, Verse 25, that the inhabitants of the kingdom of Sindhu were called Saindhavas.
SAINDHAVARANYA. An ancient holy place of
pilgrimage in Bharata. This holy place is mentioned
in Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 89, Verse 15).
SAINDHAVAYANA. One of Visvamitra’s sons, who
were expounders of Vedas. (M.B. Anusasana Parva,
Chapter 4, Verse 51).
SAINYANIRYANA PARVA. A sub-section of Udyoga
Parva in Mahabharata. This subsection comprises
Chapters 151 to 159 of Udyoga Parva.
SAIRANDHRI. The pseudonym assumed by Paficali,
when the Pandavas lived incognito in the palace of
King Virata. (See under Paficalt).
SAIRISAKA. Aregion in India, celebrated in the
Puranas. Nakula, in the course of his triumphal march
in the western regions, conquered this land also. (M.B.
Sabha Parva, Chapter 32, Verse 6).
SAISAVA. A land famous in the Puranas. The
Ksatriya Kings of this country brought presents for
Yudhisthira’s Rajasuya. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter
52, Verse 18).
SA:SIRAYANA. A Maharsi. The famous Kalayavana
was hisson, born to him by his wife Gopali. Saisirayana
was the priest of King Trigarta. Once the king ordered
the sage to have sexual union with his wife Vrkadevi
to test his virility, (Harivarhsa, 1; 395 12).
SAISIREYA. An Acarya who was the
“Sais iriya Samhita”, a work produc
sidered to be an authoritative treatise oD the
branch of knowledge. , :
SAISIRINDHRA. A country in ancient India. Mention
is made about this country in Mahabharata, Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 57. i
SAIVAGAPA. Giva’s bow. It was made by Vit vakarne:
He made a Vaisnavacapa and a §aivacapa for the purelt fought once between Visnu
pose of a battle which was tous der theword
and Siva. (See the 7th sub para, 7th para un
Visnu).
Long ago when Siva set ©
was armed with this bow.
and breaking up the yag@,
sented the bow to his devotee, th rot V1 ee
king took the bow to his palace, kept 1 in his armoury
; - dants
and used to offer due worship to Pe ee Me aavanes
also continued to worship it. (Kam j
Bala Kanda). mint ee
SAIVALA. A townin India. The'® ie Eee 16.
in Mahabharata, Bhisma Parva, Chap SF pstleuend
SAKA. A particular sect of people or soak cd from the
‘formation about the Sakas i g20a
Mahabharata. «aT is-
(i) Sakas nes: born from the breastol Naa Vasis
tha’s cow. (Adi Parva; Chapter ni va ae the eastern
(at) Bhimasena, during js erin pha Parva. Chapter
regions subjugated the Sakas. a
32, Verse 14).
(iii) Nakula conquered them. we
3 ‘ +hira’s Rajai, Verse 1) Sakas participatedin Yudlegy és *
suya. (Sabha Parva, Chapter Jf; take part in the
(v) The Pandavas invited them 0 4. Verse 15).
: ( Udyoga Parva, Chapter *;
ed by him is conSakalya
ut to break up Daksayaga, he
After defeating the ae
-, cooled down and pre
_ : king of Videha. The
(Sabha Parva, Chapter
great war.
disciple of Sakalya.
667 SAKATAYANA
(vi) They did along with Sudaksina, king of Kamboja,
service in Duryodhana’s army. (Udyoga Parva, Chapter
19, Verse 21).
(vii) Sri Krsna once conquered them. (Drona Parva,
Chapter 119, Verse 45).
(viii) Karna once defeated them and conquered their
country. (Karna Parva, Chapter 8, Verse 18).
(ix) Sakas who were originally Ksatriyas were demoted
as Siidras as they incurred the displeasure and anger of
brahmins. (Anugasana Parva, Chapter 33, Verse 21 ):
(x) As the Sakas and the Yavanas had helped the -
Haihaya kings Paragurama, Sagara and Bharata defeated them in war and drove them off from the country. —
(Bhagavata, Navama Skandha).
6KRKA. Atreein the Saka island. Theisland got the
name from this tree. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 11,
Verse 23).
AKADVIPA. One of the Saptadvipas (seven islands).
Safijaya once gave Dhrtarastra a description of this
island. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 11). Jambidvipa,
Plaksadvipa, Salmalidvipa, Kusadvipa, Krauficadvjpa,
Sakadvipa and Puskaradvipa are the Saptadvipas.
(Devi Bhagavata, 8th Skandha ). ‘ ;
SAKALA. A city made famous in the Puranas. Once it
was the capital of the Madra kingdom. (Sabha Parva
Chapter 32, Verse 14), Modern scholars opine that
the modern Siyalkot was the old Sakala.
SAKALADVIPA. An ancient kingdom referred to in the
Puranas. Prativindhya, king of this kingdom was
defeated by Arjuna. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 32, Verse
SRKALYA. A maharsi in the lineage of gurus ( preceptors). (See under Guruparampara). He systematised
the Vedasamhitas. It was Badarayanakrsna, who
became later famous as Vedavyasa, who first arranged
in systematic order the Vedasamhitas. Prominent
scholars hold the view that Vyasa lived between 13001500 B.C. The sambita text now popular systematised
by Sakalya is called Sakalya sakha (Sakalya branch). —
Sa4kalya is reported to have saved Kagyapa maharsi
once. When king Pariksit was cursed that he would
die by Taksaka’s poison Kagyapa started for his court
to save the king from the calamity. But, Taksaka met
him on the way and sent him back laden with presents
of gems, ornaments etc. People derided Kas yapa, who
on account of covetousness, retreated from the duty of
saving the king’s life and non-cooperated with him in
every way. In this contingency Kasyapa sought the
help of Sakalya, who advised the former to bathe in the
sacred tirthas in the rivers Godavari and Sarasvati.
Kasyapa did so and regained his old reputation.
SAKAMBHARI. A sacred place dear to Devi. He, who
fasts for three nights here, will derive the same benefits
as of eating tesivee Ae ar twelve years. (Vana
a, Chapter 84, Verse ;
SAKATA. se ae (See under Krsna, Para 9, Sub
ara 2).
a MeRT ALA. An intelligent minister. (For details see
der Vararuci). ¥
SRKATAYANA. , A famous grammarian. He ied Be
fore Yaska and Panini. He .4s ; considered to be i he
author of the well-known text on gianna ca
‘Unadisitrapatha’. He is referred to as the opener
among the grammarians in the astadhyayi of Panini,
(Paninisitra, 1, 4, 86 and 87).

SAKAVAKTRA
SAKAVAKTRA._ A warrior of Subrahmanya. (Mahibharata, Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 78).
SAKAYANYA. A maharsi. (For details see under.
Brhadratha).
AKHA. According to one view Sakha was the
younger brother of Subrahmanya while there are others
who maintain that he was Subrahmanya’sson. In verse
37, Chapter 44 of Salya Parva it is stated that Sakha
was the son of the Vasu Anala and the younger
brother of Subrahmanya and that he had two brothers
called Vaisakha and Naigameya. It is stated in
Chapter 15, part 1 of Visnu Purana as follows:- ‘Apa,
Dhruva, Soma, Dharma, Anila, Agni, Pratyiisa and
Prabhasa are the astavasus. Vaitanda, Srama, ‘Santa,
and Dhvani were sons of Apa. Kala, who annihilates
the entire world is the son of Dhruva and Varccas is
Soma’s son. Varccas gives people the vital glow.
Dravina, Hutahavyavaha, Sigvara, Prana and Varuna
were the sons of Dharma by Manohara. Anila’s wife
was Siva, and two sons, Manojava and Avijiiatagati
were born to the couple. Kumara, son of Agni was born
in Sarastamba and he had three brothers called Sakha,
Visakha and Naigameya.”’
The following story about the birth of Sakha is from
Taranga 6, Lavanakalambaka of Kathdsaritsagara:
Defeated in battle by Tarakasura, Indra decided to
have no more fight with him and retired to Mount
Mahameru. Devas and maharsis sought asylum with
Subrahmanya, who gave them protection. Indra
came te know of it and fought with Subrahmanya
feeling that the latter had captured his kingdom. Two
sons, Sakha and Viéakha were born from the face of
Subrahmanya wounded by the Vajrayudha of Indra.
SAKRA. A synonym of Indra. (See under Indra.)
SAKRADEVA. A prince of Kalinga, who fought on the
Kaurava side in_ the great. war and got killed by
Bhima. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 54, Verse 24).
SAKRAKUMARIKA. A sacred place from very olden
days. ‘Those who bathe there will attain heaven. (Vana
Parva, Chapter 82, Verse 81).
SAKRAVAPI. Anaga, which lived in a forest near
Girivraja. The forest was near the arama of Gautama.
(Sabha Parva, Ghapter 21, Verse 9).
SAKRAVARTTA. A holy place. He who worships
7 Devatas and the souls of his ancestors ‘here will attain
the holy world. (Vana Parva, Chapter 84, Verse 29
SAKRDGRAHA. A _ rural area in ancient Tdi,
(Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 66).
SAKTA. Son of Manasvi, the great-grandson of emperor
Piru. Sauviri was his mother. He had two brothers
called Samhanana and Vagmi, both of them great in
warfare. (Adi Parva, Chapter 94, Verse vy
SAKTI I.
(1) General. Son of Vasistha by Arundhati. He was
the first-born among the hundred sons of Vasistha.
Kalmdasapada, the Raksasa captured and ate Sakti
and his pregnant wife Adré yanti spent her days in
great grief with Vasistha. Paradsgaramuni, father of
Vyasa, was Adrsyanti’s son. (For details see under
(Adr§yanti ).
2) Other information —
A) It was oe who incarnated himself as the son of
Vasistha.
(ii) Gopayana, Bharadvaja, Apastamba and Arnodara
SAKUNA
belong to the line of disciples of Sakti.
Purana, Chapter 6).
SAKTIII. The weapon of Subrahmanya is called
Sakti, and it was made by Vigvakarman. Visvakarman
once grilled Sirya (sun) on his machine and reduced
his glow. The glow thus released by Visvakarman fell
on the earth and ViSvakarman made with that glow
the cakra (disc) of Visnu, the trigila (trident) of Siva
the Puspaka, aerial chariot of Kubera and the Sakti of
Subrahmanya. { Visnu Purana, Part 3, Chapter 2).
SAKTI III. The sound ‘S’ means welfare or prosperity
and ‘kti’ prowess. Therefore Sakti means she, who is
the embodiment of prosperity and prowess or she, who
grants prosperity and prowess. The definition of
‘Bhagavati’ is, she who combines in herself knowledge
affluence, wealth, reputation, power and the female
organ. Therefore the word ‘Sakti’? may be taken to mean
Bhagavati and Parvati, and what are termed as Bhagavati, Sakti, Devi, Ambika, Parvati etc. are the manlfestations of Sakti, Siva’s spouse. This Sakti exists
fractionally in all Devas. When, once upon a time the
devasura war broke out the Saktis of Devas like
Brahma emerged to help Candika. The vehicle, ornaments, weapon etc. of each Deva, his Devi also possessed.
The Saktis (Devis) of the Devas appeared in the following manner. Brahmani, wife of Brahma, rode on the
swan wearing beads around her neck and holding the
water-vessel in her hands. She was followed by Vaisnavl
Visnu’s Sakti on Garuda wearing yellow clothes and
with the conch, disc, lotus etc. in her hands. Sankar
Siva’s Sakti rode on the ox with the crescent moon an
serpents as ornaments and holding in her hands the
Sala. ‘Kaumari’, Subrahmanya’s Sakti rode on
Airavata with gala in bands. The Sakti called ‘Varahi
in the form of a great boar rode carrying a corpse;
Narasimhi’ Sakti took the form of narasimha (half man
and half lion). Yamya, Yama’s §akti, rode on
buffalo holding in her hands a long stick. Saktis
called Kauberi and Varuni took their respective forms
and in this manner all the Saktis came to the help
of Devi. This sight pleased not only the Devas, but
the mother of the universe also. Along with them incarnated on earth Sarhkara, who gives ‘garh’ (happiness
to the world and blessed CGandika on the battle-fiel
(Devi Bhagavata, 5th and 9th Skandhas),
SAKTIBHADRA. A dramatist in Sanskrit, who lived
in the seventh century A.D. He belonged to Chengannur in the Kerala State. He was.a disciple 0
Sankaracarya. The Dramatic composition ‘Agcaryacudamani’ is his work. _
Saktibhadra, after writing his drama, once read it out
to Sankaracarya. As the acarya was observing silence
that day, he made no comments about the drama.
Disappointed at this silence of his Guru, the dramatist burnt his work to ashes in fire. When his observance of silence was over, the Guru asked his disciple
for the drama. When told about the burning of the
drama the acarya repeated from memory the whole
(Vamana
drama. The above legend is widely prevalent in
Kerala.
SAKUNA(OMENS).
1) General. In ancient times people in all countries used
to consider Sakunas to be harbin gers of good or evil thingsToday also many people believe in omens. In India
oo See - re

SAKUNA
Sakuna had developed as a science even in olden days.
A general description about omens, good and bad,
according to the Indian concept, is given below.
Mixed medicines, black grains, cotton, grass, dried cowdung, charcoal, molasses, one whose head is shaven clean
or whose body is smeared with oil or who is naked; flesheater; iron, dirt, skin, hair of the head, insane person,
eunuch, prison, guard; women, who are either carrying
or are widows; oil cake, paddy husk, ashes, skull, bone,
broken vessel etc. are evil omens. Broken, fierce or murmuring instrumental music also is a bad omen.
It isa good omen to hear the voice of beckoning (come)
in front of the traveller, but it is not good if the voice is
heard from behind. It is good if the voice of farewell (go)
is heard from behind, but is bad to be heard in the front.
Disapproving or prohibitive words like “‘Where are you
going, stop, don’t go’’, ‘‘what is to be done by going
there?” etc. will cause death. It isa bad omen to see
carnivorous birds perched on the top of flag-staff etc.
For vehicles to bump, weapons to break and head to
get wounded by dashing against doors etc. as also for
umbrella or clothes to fall down are ill omens. Praising
or worshipping Visnu will do away with the inauspicious
results of ill omens. But, if evil omens are seen continuously the traveller should return home.
White flowers are good omens. Full pots are the best
ofomens. Flesh, fish, sound from afar, old man, solitary man, Cow, goat, ox, horse, elephant, devas, burning
fire, Durva grass, fresh cow-dung, prostitute, gold,
silver, gems, Orris root, mustard, medicinal herbs rooted
out of soil, Bengal gram, weapon,. sword, stool, royal
symbols, dead body being carried without lamentation
fruits, ghee, curdled milk, milk, aksata, mirror honey,
conch, sugarcane, auspicious words, music by devotees.
loud thunder and lightning are auspicious omens.
2 ) Two kinds of omens. Omens are divided into two varieties, dipta (glowing) and ganta (quiescent, mild) . Glowing omens bring about auspicious results and the other inauspicious results. There are six ways orelements, which
make omens diptam, i.e. vela (time), dik (region), dega
(place) , Karana (action), ruta (cry )and jati (kind). The
power or effect of dipta increases in ascending order.
To see creatures, which move about during day time as
moving about during night and vice-versa is veladipta.
In the case of stars, lagnas (the dominant zodiac) and
planets, those which are virulent are considered to
be diptas. With regard to stars and lagnas, those
which the Sun enters into are dhumita, those wherein the Sun is already present are jvalita and those from
which the sun has left are Arm arini. These three are
diptas and the rest $antas. (This is called veladipta).
When dik (region) is dipta it is called digdipta.
To see forest animals in village and village-animals in
forest is digdipta. To see good brahmins at inauspicious places is desadipta. To see some one doing work
not ordained to his caste is karanadipta. To hear different horrible voices is rutadipta. To see purely flesheating animals is jatidipta. If all the characteristics of
dipta do not synchronise but differ from one another it
is called Santa and if the characteristics of dipta and
ganta are mixed up it is called migra.
3) Birds, animals etc. If the casa bird (wild crow) makes
sound when the king gets out of the palace,he will meet
with dishonour. If the sound is heard on the left side,
there will be quarrel, but food willbe served. If the
SAKUNA
bird is sighted on the right side at the start of the
journey, it is a good omen. If the peacock makes different sounds, threats from thieves will result. Ifa_ deer
is seen in front of the king going out on a journey, death
will happen to him. To see the monkey-bear, rat, tiger,
lion, cat and donkey coming in the opposite direction
also will bring about death. Donkey braying in awkward
notes is also inauspicious. To see kapifijala bird on the
left side is an excellent omen; on the right side also it is
not bad. But, behind the person, itisa bad omen.
Tittiri bird also on the rear is not good.
It is always a good omen if the deer, boar and spotted
deer cross the path from the left to the right side; the
opposite of it is badomen. It is a favourable omen if the
ox, horse, jackal, tiger, lion, cat and donkey pass from
the right to the left side. It is auspicious to see the
females of the jackal etc. on the right side and the
males on the left. To hear the serpent, hare, boar and
wild lizard-named is good, but to see them 18 not so.
Contrary to this is the effect to see the monkey, ox etc.
The result of the important and powerful omens wee
ed at the start of the journey will be Serr eyo e€
very same day. The omen of the neces , poe
craving for food, children, people quarreiing a” ese
who stand away from the Jimits of the a eea aae
° once twice, . .
To hear the jackal howl > it. five or six times
times is a good omen, but to hear 1
is bad, The seventh time 4s good. | ‘+ will have no
If heard for more than the seventh tme1 ill horripilate
effect. Dipta omen facing OG) ie bee eles and is to
men, cause fear in the _case of ve te dlephant
be greatly feared. Ifsaranga (lotus, raet Br het fairer
peacock, cuckoo, lion, horse te: 1 ffect will last for
thing in an auspicious place its g0° ie auspicious place
one year, and if these are met at the a ee ees
the result will be bad. Everybody snou =
at some auspicious place every ae ri the left side of
If the crow is found crowing in tea! King, the head of
camps put up for the army of ae ne iP lhe haw
the army will have to face a is gat oS slippers,
perches on and pecks on the sha 2 chose things will
umbrella, clothes etc. the owner 0O Fonodn aval
die. If they are respected by ny wi about the
accrue to their owner. If the crow Se had left
entrance of the house it means that he, ae ab catter
the house will return. If the crows bring an a ie
red coloured and baked things in the cou If
owner of the house will meet with inp rset Ms
the crow carries to a house something yellow in >
h
gold or silver, the owner of the Bone Has yee
things. Whatever thing the crow at eee tie ite
house, such things therein will f the house, the
crow vomits raw flesh in the rear ae alth: if soil is
owner of it will come into possessi0? ceca if gem 1s
deposited thus, land will | be acqu -o the owner of
deposited, extensive lands will come direction as the
the house. If the crow flies in the a ey and success
one chosen by the traveller, PrOSP’ ie direction
will result to him and if it flies in the OPPs Cb iect but,
not only will the traveller nonae? ows come crowing
he will also meet with danger. If the (UT) hindered.
against one starting on a journey, ; ood omen. [fit
To see the crow on the left side ae eel not end in
is seen on the right side, the ioe ates in the same
success. It is very good if the cro

SAKUNI I
direction as the traveller on his left side, if on
the right side the result will be of medium nature. If
it flies in the opposite direction on the left side the traveller will face hindrance. Ifthe crow flies into the
house when one is about to start on the journey, it
means the journey may be begun. The crow which
looks at the sun with one eye and perched on one leg
is surely indicative of fear for the traveller. If it is in
the hollow of a tree great calamities will happen. To
dream of crow with its mouth full of excretion is indicative of all-round success.
If the dog enters and barks in the house the result will be
sure death of the owner of the. house. But, if the dog
smells on the left side of the man it is good, and if it
smells on the right side, itis bad. If the dogs come
against the person about to start on a journey, it will
cause hindrance to him. If the dog stands blocking his
path there will be threat from thieves. If it comes facing him with a piece of bone in its mouth, he will fail
to achieve the object of his travel; if it comes biting a
cord, the same will be the result. It is auspicious to see
dog, which carries a slipper in its mouth or the mouth
of which is filled with flesh. Fear will overtake him in
front of whom the dog urinates and goes away. But if
not a bitch and if, after urination, it goes to an auspi-
‘cious place, to the shade of an auspicious tree or towards an auspicious thing, then it is a good omen. The
same considerations are valid in the case of the jackal
etc..
If cows cry without cause or reason, it indicates ruin
to the master. If the cry isin an awkward tone, death
will result. If the ox murmurs during night, it is good
for the master. Ox tied to a cord also is good omen.
If cows are found to treat their calves without love, it
spells ruin for pregnant women. It is a good omen to
see cows which have got wet and whose horns are smeared
with earth. These considerations apply to buffaloes as
well.
If eleph
augurs il
ants indulge in the sexual act in villages, it
] to the villages. If the she-elephant delivers
or gets mad-in the country, i.e. not in the forest, it
spells ruin to king. Ruin to the King will be the result if
the elephant objects to his mounting it or runs back
home or if the mad elephant is found without madness.
It is an auspicious omen if the elephant places its right
foot on the left foot of it and also if it holds its tusk
with its trunk. a!
KUNI I. A serpent born in the Dhrtarastra dynasty.
a “wag bu rnt to death at the serpent yajfia Sdn tncted
- yanamejay2- (Adi Parva, Chapter 97, Verse 16).
An asura who was the son of Hi sk
6AKUNI {I. fe 7 iranyaksa
¢ Sambara, Trimirdha, Sank
and brother . Chapter 18). uand Arya.
A ni Puran . ‘
SEIN ill. A king born in the dynasty of Bharata,
SA Dusyanta. Sakuni was Bhimaratha’s son and
(Bhagavata, 9th Skandha).
¢ Urudbhi. “
SAKUNI IV. A son Iksvaku. (For details see under
Vakarma, Para 2).
Lakeman of maharsi to whom were born nine sons
SAKUNI, ‘iva, $ali, Budha, Tara, Jyotisman, Nirmoha,
called D Dhyanakastha, and Gunadhika. The first
m led nouseholder’s life while the last four
five O gr ne even as children. (Padma Purana
too" nanda, Chapter 31).
SAKUNI VI
SAKUNI VI. The notorious uncle of Duryodhana. Son
of King Subala of Gandhara and brother of Gdandhiri.
Sakuni, staying at Hastinapura, pulled the strings for
all the evil actions of Duryodhana. It was Sakuni’s
hands, which worked in the background in driving the
Pandavas out of the kingdom and in denuding Paficali
of her clothes. It was also his evil tactics, which tore
asunder all chances of conciliation with the Pandavas
on their return from the forest and thus led to the great
war that lasted for eighteen days. At last he was killed
by Sahadeva during the war. (Salya Parva, Chapter
28, Verse 61). , A resume of the part played by Sakuni ©
in the Bharata story is given below : |
(1) It was with his help that Duryodhana defeated
Dharmaputra in the foul game of dice. (Adi Parva,
Chapter 61, Verse 50). '
(2) He was born, due to the anger of the Devas, to
destroy righteousness. (Adi Parva, Chapter 63, Verse
(3) He was Dvapara re-born. (Adi Parva, Chapter 67,
Verse 78). ,
(4) It was he who took the initiative in marrying
Gandhari to Dhrtarastra. (Adi Parva, Chapter 109
Verse 15).
(5) He was present at the wedding of Draupadi. ° (Adi
Parva, Chapter 185, Verse 2)
(6) He once advised Duryodhana to annihilate the
Pandavas, root and branch. (Adi Parva, Chapter
7) He was present at the Rajasiya yajfia performed
by Yudhisthira. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 45, Verse
+ Even after the yajfia was over and everyone had
departed, he remained there for some time more with
Duryodhana. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 68).
(9) It was he who first discussed with Dhrtardstra the
question of inviting Dharmaputra for a game of dice so
that the wealth of the Pandavas might be extracted
from them. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 49).
(10) By foul play he defeated Dharmaputra in the game
of dice. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 60, Verse 61).
(11) It was he who cooperated with Duryodhana to
invite Dharmaputra again for a game of dice fixing the
bets and in defeating him in the game. (Sabha Parva,
Chapter 76, Verse 9).
(12) He once prophesied that the P andavas would not
return after their life in forest. (Wana Parva, Chapter
7, Verse 7).
(13) While the Pandavas were living in the Dvaita
forest Sakuni suggested the need for leading a
procession to them. (Vana Parva, Chapter 238, Verse
114) Sakuni and Duryodhana led the procession. In the
forest he got wounded in fighting with the Gandharvas
and he returned home. (Vana Parva, Chapter 241,
Verse 17).
(15) Afterwards he once advised Duryodhana to restore
the kingdom to the Pandavas. (Vana Parva, Chapter
251, Verse 1).
(16) He too participated in the great war and on the
first day of the war he fought a duel with Prativindhya.
(Bhisma Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 63). :
(17) In the battle that followed, Iravan killed five
brothers of Sakuni. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 90, Verse

SAKUNI
(18) He then fought with Yudhisthira, Nakula and
Sahadeva and got defeated. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter
105, Verse 8).
(19) He fought with Sahadeva. (Drona Parva, Chapter
14, Verse 22).
(20) Then Sakuni resorted to certain magical tricks.
Arjuna successfully faced the tricks and Sakuni ran
away from the battlefield. (Drona Parva, Chapter 30,
Verse 15).
(21) He fought with Abhimanyu.
Chapter 37, Verse 5). :
(22) He fought with Nakula and Sahadeva. (Drona
Parva, Chapter 96, Verse 21).
(23) He fought with Satyaki.
(24) Bhimasena killed the seven maharathis and five
oat es a pala. ng Parva, Chapter 157, Verse 22).
akuJa Geleated Sakuni. (Drona Par 4
569. Verse. 16). ( na Parva, Chapter
(26) He attacked the Pandava army at the instance of
od en is Coie. Chapter 170, Verse 66)
rjuna defeated Sakuni. (D
161, Vewe 25). (Drona Parva, Chapter
(28) On the death of Dronacarya Sakuni ran awa
from the battlefield in sreat fear. (D 3 z
ter 195, ‘Verse 9). 5 amas salad eh ay
(29) In the fight that followed he defeated Srutasena.
(Karna Parva, Chapter 25, Verse 40).
(30) Sakuni was defeated in the fighting with Satyaki.
(Karna Parva, Chapter 61, Verse 48). 7
(31) In the fight with Bhima he fell down. (Karna
Parva, Chapter 77, Verse 66).
(32) In the next fight he killed the Kalinda prince.
(Karna Parva, Chapter 85, Verse 7).
(33) Cavalry of the Pandavas attacked Sakuni and he
got wounded. (Salya Parva, Chapter 23, Verse 41).
34) In the battle that followed Sahadeva killed
akuni. (Salya Parva, Chapter 28, Verse 61 yt
(35) After the war was over Vyasa summoned the
souls of those killed in the war to the surface of Ganga
and Sakuni’s soul waspresent among them. (Agramavasika Parva, Chapter 32, Verse 9).
(36) After his death he joined Dvapara.(Svargarohana
Parva, Chapter 5, Verse 21).
(37) Synonyms of Sakuni used in Mahabharata:
Gandharapati, Gdandhararaja, Gandhararajaputra,
Gandhararajasuta, Kitava, Parvatiya, Saubala, Sauba_ laka, Saubaleya, Subalaja and Subalaputra.
SAKUNI. A maharsi, who lived in Madhu forest. Of.
the nine sons of Sakuni, Dhruva, Sila, Budha and Tara
were house-holders and agnihotris (those who sacrificed
; offerings in fire). (Padma Purana, Svarga Khanda 81):
SAKUNIGRAHA. Vinata, in her fierce attitude or
aspect is Sakunigraha. Brahmins call it Skandapasmara
also. (Vana Parva, Chapter 280, Verse 26).
SAKUNIKA. A female attendant of Subrahmanya.
(Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Verse 15). |
SAKUNTA. A son of Vigvamitra. He was a Vedantin.
(M.B. Anugasana Parva, Chapter 4, Verse 50).
SAKUNTALA. F oster-daughter of sage Kanva.
1) Birth. Sakuntala wasa daughter born to Vi§vamitra of the Apsara woman called Menaka. Vigvamitra
was engaged in intensé tapas-on the banks of river
Malini in the Himalayas. Indra deputed Menaka to
break the maharsi’s tapas. She enticed him away from
(Drona Parva,
(Drona Parva, Chapter
SAKUNTALA
his tapasand got pregnant by him. But she forsook
the child on the banks of Malini .and returned to
Devaloka.
2) Childhood. Birds gathered round the forsaken
orphan-child. While Sakuntas i.e. birds were petting the
child Kanva came that way, saw the child and took it
with him to the asrama. As gakuntas had petted it, the
child was named Sakuntala.
3) As queen. King Dusyanta of the lunar dynasty
married Sakuntala and to the couple was born the
famous Bharata. This is the original story about
Sakuntala’s married life. All the Indian languages
contain two different versions of Sakuntala’s life. One
version is that related in Vyasa’s Bharata and the second
is that contained in Kalidasa’s Sakuntala. Many scholars opine that in the matter of the Sakuntala episode
Kalidasa has gone a step further and for the better, and
therefore both the versions of the story are to be carefully studied by us. MA:
Ni) Vyasa’s Sakuntala. Sakuntala, now grown up as a
maiden, was alone in the asrama when King Dusyanta,
out in the forest on a hunting expedition, came there.
In the absence of her foster-father Kanva, Sakuntala
welcomed the King. They fell in love with each . other
and the King married Sakuntala according to the
Gandharva way of marriage and lived w1 th her for a
few days. Sakuntala became pregnant. The King
turned to his palace.
anve reiterate the agrama and he was pleased that
what had been destined to take place had happened.
In due course of time Sakuntala delivered a boy, who
was named Sarvadamana. When the child _was grown
up, Kanva sent his mother along with him es ee)
yanta’s palace. The King did not recognise them, ant
a celestial voice convinced him that the child we is
own son. The King heartily welcomed his wie and
son and Sakuntala lived in-the palace as his honoured
wife.
(11) Kalidasa’s Sakuntala. Kanva brought up poe
born to Vigvamitra of Menaka in his asrama an 5 1
had two companions oats se cg ae an
All the three grew up and became Malice’:
King Dwyane i serwent out hunting 10 an forest
followed a deer to Kanva’s asrama where he saw
Sakuntala watering the garden with her pe ae
Kanva was then away at Cakratirtha. Dusyanta, who.
fell in love with Sakuntala, married her according to
the Gandharva rules and lived with her at the asrama
for a few days. Meanwhile Sakuntala became spree
nant, and emissaries from the palace caer an ae
King returned with them. He left the 4 pag on eS
promising Sakuntala that he would soon
her. He gave her his signet ring. | :
Sad ger thie separation from Dusyanta and immersed
‘+ting there in the
in thought about him, Sakuntala was See ei d Fae eee
agrama when Durvasas came _ therethe maharsi nor welcome him respect ea Oy
angry at this and cursed her that sue hinking. Sakunhim about whom she was so intensely tp Gon anions
tala did not hear the curse either; sae ae behalf
who heard it begged pardon of the from the curse.
of Sakuntala and prayed for absolution the King any
Then he said that if Sakuntala showe ould remember
sign about their relationship the Pre iacaiala about the
her. Her companions did not —

SALA I 672
above incidents. Kanva gladly welcomed Sakuntala’s
wedding with Dusyanta.
Days and months passed by, yet Dusyanta did not
return and Kanva sent Sakuntala, in whom signs of
SALAGRAMA
the surface of the Ganga by Vyasa (Aéramavasika
Parva, Chapter 32, Verse 10).
(8) After death he became one with the Visvadevas.
(Svargarohana Parva, Chapter 5, Verse 16).
pregnancy had become prominent, to the palace of the SALA V. Son of King Pariksit of the Iksvaku dynastyKing in the company of Gautami and Sarngarava.
Anasiya reminded Sakuntala to take particular care
of the signet ring. On their way to the palace
Sakuntala and others bathed in the Somavaratirtha, and
nobody noticed Sakuntala losing from her finger the
ring in the tirtha: They reached the King’s palace.
Sugobhana, daughter of the Mandika King was his
mother. He had two brothers called Dala and Bala.
Sala did not return some horses, which he had taken
as loan from Vamadeva maharsi. Angered at this the
maharsi created some Raksasas, who killed Sala. (Vana
Parva, Chapter 192).
None noticed them. Dusyanta did not remember SALABHA I. An asura, son of Kas yapaprajapati by
having even seen her. The signet ring was missing.
After leaving Sakuntala at the palace her companions
returned to the arama. Menaka, whose heart melted
his wife Danu. He was born in his next life .
Prahlada, the Balhika King. (Adi Parva, Chapter ©’,
Verse 30).
at the pathetic wailings of Sakuntala led her to SALABHATI.. A’ warrior, who fought against the
Kagyapa’s agrama, left her there and returned to
Devaloka.
Kauravas on the Pandava side. He was killed by
Karna. (Karna Parva, Chapter 56, Verse 49).
The signet ring lost by Sakuntala was swallowed by a SALABHA. Wife of Atrimaharsi. (Brahmanda Puranas
fish, which was netted by a fisherman, who went about
the streets to sell the ring extracted from inside the SALABHI. A female attendant of Subrahmany4
fish. Servants of the King took the fisherman captive.
(Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Verse 26).
At the sight of the ring thoughts about the past dawn- SATLAGRAMA. A stone emblem of Visnu.
ed on the King and he remembered all about Sakuntala.
His days became sad pondering over separation from
Sakuntala.
Sakuntala delivered a boy at the agrama of Kagyapa.
The child was named Sarvadamana and he grew up
as a courageous boy.
On his return from the devasura war, Dusyanta entered
Kagyapa’s aSrama where he saw Sarvadamana counting
the teeth of a lion he had captured. Having heard
details about him from the boy the King went inside
the agrama and saw Kagyapa and Sakuntala. He
returned with Sakuntala and the boy to the palace
with Kaégyapa’s blessings. It was this boy Sarvadamana, who afterwards became Bharata, the famous
emperor of India.
SALAI. One of the three pugilists deputed by
Kamsato attack Krsna at Mathura, the other two
being Canira and Mustika. Krsna kicked Sala to
death. (Bhagavata, 10th Skandha).
SALA II. A serpent born in Vasuki’s dynasty and
burnt to death at the serpent yajfia of janamejaya.
(Adi Parva, Chapter 57, Verse 5)
SALA III. One of the hundred sons of Dhrtarastra.
He was killed in the great war by Bhi
Parva, Chapter 84, Verse 3). : oe ene
SALA IV. Son of Somadatta, a King born in the Kuru
dynasty. He had a brother called Bhiriégravas.
(1) Sala was present at the wedding of Draupadi.
(Adi Parva, Chapter 185, Verse 15),
2) He was present at Yudhisthira’s Rajasava ifia.
‘Sabha Boonen Chapter 34, Verse 8). ee a
(3) He was a fierce warrior in Duryodhana’s army.
(Udyoga Parva, Chapter 55, Verse 68). |
(4) He fought from the southern wing of the great
vyuha set up by Bhisma. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 51,
Verse 57).
(5) He fought with ‘Abhimanyu in the great war.
(Drona Parva, Chapter 37).
(6) He was killed by Srutavarman in the battlefield
of Kuruksetra. (Drona Parva, Chapter 108, Verse 10).
(7) He was one among the valiant souls brought to
1) Origin of the name. Salagrama is the kind ot
ammonite, used for making the image of va
Mahavisnu ‘is known by the name Salagrama ® ra
This name originated from the name Salagrar es
which is the name of the place from where the This
Gandaki, which flows through Nepal, starts. “en
Salagrama is considered to be a holy place. Maney ;
and other gods always dwell in this place. Salagt B.
is the name of Visnu who dwells in Salagrama.
Vana Parva, Chapter 84, Stanzas 123 to 125). ale
2) The importance of Salagrama. The place Salagren
is at the origin of river Gandaki. There are vat ail
kinds of stone figures which are called Salagree oo
These SAdlagramas themselves have orginated ed
portions of Visnu. That is why those stones are,
for making images of Visnu. There is a story eatin
Devi Bhagavata, Skandha 9, stating that the deriv
of these stones is from a portion of Visnu.
During the early days, Sarasvati, Laksmi and
were wives of Mahavisnu. One day there arose 4 :
quarrel among them. (See under Tulasi). As @ i
of this quarrel, the Devis cursed each other. | plan
cursed Laksmi and changed her to holy bas! Z to
(Tulasi) on the earth. When Laksmi was anook
depart as Tulasi, Mahavisnu blessed her thus. 7 and |
Laksmi ! you will live in the world as a holy bast pack
when the curse has been completed you will con start
to me. On that day, a river named Gandaki, Wr" yoly |
from your body which will be in the shape of t endas
basil plant. (It is also said that the river “% ron
has taken birth from the sweat of Siva an f that
Refer to the word Gandaki). On the bank a be 8°?
river, I will remain as a stone image. ‘There wil ier c@
many worms with strong tusks and teeth, which w} r op
the stone into the shape of Sudaréana cakra (the WET DE
of Visnu) and will create numberless Salagramas” aD
Salagramas thus made, will be of various siZ
shapes.”’ de 1
3) Different classes of Salagrémas. Mention is ™ They
the Puranas about nineteen classes of Salagram™*
are given below ;
Gang?
family

SALAGRAMA
(i) Laksmindrayana. With one hole,
(wheels) and Vanamala (a line like the garland) and
of the colour of clouds.
(ii) Laksmijandrdana.
yana, with the difference
Vanamala, |
(iii) Raghunatha.
mark of the hoof of a calf.
Vanamala.
(iv) Vamana.
the colour of the cloud.
Vanamiala.
(v) Sridhara. This is the same as Vamana with the
exception that it will be having Vanamala. The house
in which this is placed will have a prosperity and well
being of its own. |
(vi) Damodara. Will be large and round with two
cakras (wheels) and with no Vanamala.
(vii) Ranarama. Neither too large nor too small, but of
medium size and round, with. two wheels and the
marks of child’s kick, bow and quiver.
(viii) Rajardjesvara. Of the size of Ranarama with
seven cakras, (wheels), ornamented with the mark of
kingly
This is the same as Laksminarathat there will be no
With two holes and four wheels and
This also will have no
With two very small wheels and
This too will have no
umbrella. This will earn for the possessor
wealth,
(ix) Ananta, Somewhat thick with fourteen wheels, .
and as en
the four Purusarthas (objects of life) ‘Dharmartnakamamoksa’ (Duty, wealth, desire and salvation).
(x) Madhusiidana. A salagrama in the shape of a wheel
with two wheels, and impression of cow's: hoof,
having the shade of cloud, of ordinary size. This will
be very bright. |
Sudargana will have only one cakra
(xi) Sudarsana.
(wheel). ;
(xii) Gadadhara. This also will be having only one
wheel which will not be bright. |
(xiii) Hayagriva. This will have two w
of a horse. |
. (xiv) Narasimha.
and awful shape.
lf-rez jation. be Ae ee
(sev) Laksminarasiniha. This also will be ian pics
mouth and two wheels. Besides these, there will be the
Vanamaila also. This, will make house-holders cosy
rt a with two Whee, at
‘the region of the hole shape giant
vividness and brightness,
all desires.
(xvii) Pradyumna.
heels and the face
With a very wide mouth, two wheels,
‘Il cause instant
This Salagrama wl
The Salagram
and with round
ig Vasudeva.
This wili have only a minute wheel.
But on thé outer
The colour will be that of 81.13
ide, there vill be a hole in the inside of which there
will be a number of cuts oF dents. This will give householders comfort always. Filge
(xviii) Sankarsana- n the ae
will be joinec face to face. The ci ee
ner than the hind-part. This als
house-holders.
2. dha. The colour of vy. ‘Tl
i) round and bright. This also will give
comfort to the house-holder. (Devi Bhagavata
Skandha 9; Agni Purané, oe aaa 7 these, the stones
Standha 8; Aen Pane. OF gonna
with cakras (the weapon Discus), af
two wheels
will be thindo good to
this is yellow. This
four cakras
black as a cloud. This Salagrama will give men ~
SALIHOTRA
Thosé who worship this stone with mark of
have to take another birth. He who
habitually worships Salagrama, should avoid arrogance and should be charitable. He who worships
Salagrama with the mark of wheel should not covet
others’ wealth and women. The cakra from Dvaraka
and the stone from Gandaki will bring atenement in
a moment for sins incurred in a hundred births. Even
-¢ one has incurred thousands of sins, one will get remis- |
sion for all of them by drinking the water of Salagrama.
Brahmana, Ksatriya, Vaisya and Sadra will attain
heaven if they become house-holders according to
Vedic convention and worship Salagrama. On no
account should women worship Salagrama. If by
ignorance, 2 woman, whether she is good-natured or of
a higher status, happens to touch Salagrama, all her
merits earned by good deeds will be lost and she will
go to hell. Brahmin sages say that women throwing ~
flowers as oblation on Salagrama, commit the greatest
sin. If a woman touches a Salagrama, the offering of
Sandal-wood will be like poisoned rice, flowers like
diamond, and meals presented to god before being
eaten by the servants in the temple, will be like Kalakata (the poison of Vasuki), to Bhagavan Visnu. If
a woman touches Salagrama, she will have to remain
in hel! for the duration of fourteen Indras. Even the
sin of Brahmahatya (killing a brahmin) will be remitted by drinking the water of Salagrama and he will
attain heaven. Basil (tulasi) sandalwood, water, conch
tinkling bell, wheel, stone, copper pot, and name of
Visnu comprise ‘Padamrta’ (the celestial nectar of
in reality.
cakra, need not
words) which is said to have the power of remitting sins. The merits obtained by bathing in all
d the performing ofall the yagas (sacrithe tirthas an a E
fices) dwell in eacb drop of water of Salagrama.
Padma Purana, Patala Khanda, Chapter 20).
SALAKA. Wife of maharsi Dhanatjay@, who belonged
to Vasistha gotra. (For details see under Dhanafijaya
SAL AKARA. A naga born in Taksaka’s dynasty. It was
burnt to death at the serpent yajfia of Janamejaya. (Adi
Parva, Chapter 57, Verse 9). ao!
§ALAKATANKATA (SALAKATANKA) I A synonym
for Alambusa. (See under Alambusa).
SALAKATANKATA II. A giantess who was the daughter of Sandhya. The giant VidyutkeSa married this
giantess Salakatankata. A son named Sukesa was, born
to them. (See under Vidyutkega).
SALAKATANKATI. Another name ‘of the giantess
Hidimba. (See under Hidimba).
ALANKAYANA. Ason of Vigévamitra. He was an expounder of the Vedas. Mention is made ia Mahabharata,
Anugasana Parva, Chapter 4, about this Salankayana.
GALI. A maharsi in the lineage of Gurus {preceptors).
See under Guruparam para.
6ALIHOTRA. A muni of ancient days. Vyasa had once
lived in his aSrama. There was a treenear the asrama
which had outlived time. A drink of the water in the .
pond here quenches hunger and thirst. The tree and the
pond were created by the power of Salihotra’s tapas.
during their lifein exile m the forest,
} of Hidimbi and
hunger and thirst by drinking water
Chapter 154).

SALIKA
Salihotra was. an adept in agvasastra (science about
horses). To bathe in the tirtha called Salisirya created by the muni is to derive the same result as that of
making a gift of a thousand cows. (Vana Parva; Chapter 71, Verse 27 and Chapter 83, Verse 107).
SALIKA. A divine maharsi. He met Krsna once on
his (Krsna’s) way to Hastinapura and had a talk with
the lord. (M.B. Udyoga Pava, Southern Text, Chapter
SALIPINDA. A naga born to Kagyapaprajapati of | his
wife Kadri’ (Adi Parva, Chapter 35, Verse 14).
SALISIRAS. A Devagandharva, son of Kasyapaprajapati by his wife Muni. He participated inthe birthday
celebrations of Arjuna. (Adi Parva, Chapter 65,
Verse 4).
_SALISURYA. A holy spot in Kuruksetra: It is said to
have been the place where muni SAlihotra lived. To
bathe at this place is to derive the same result as that
of making a gift of a thousand cows. (Vana Parva,
Chapter 83, Verse 10).
SALMALI. A King of the lunar dynasty. He was the
srandson of Kuru and son of Aviksit. He had seven
brothers. (Adi Parva, Chapter 94, Verse 52).
SALMALIDVIPA. One of the seven islands.
1) General. Salmali island, which is double in extent
of Plaksa island is surrounded by Iksurasa (sugar-cane
juice) ocean on all four sides of it. ‘Thete are seven
mountains there which produce gems and they are
seven boundaries which separate the regions. Just like
this, there are alsosevenrivers there. Thesevenrivers are
Yoni, Toya, Vitrna, Candra, Mukta, Vimocani and
Nirvrti. Mere remembrance of the seven rivers is
sufficient to annihilate all sins. Here peopie
divided into the four classes live. Brahmins, Ksatriyas
Vaigyas and Siidras here are called Kapilas, Arunas,
Pitas and Krsnas. These devout people worship Visnu
in the form of Vayu by sublime yajfias. Devas are ever
present on this most beautiful island. A tree named
Salmali which gives mental comfort grows in this
island. The island is surrounded on all four sides by
an ocean of Sura (liduor).: (Visnu Purana, Part II,
Chapter 4).
2). Salmali island and nadgastra, See under Nagastra.
SALUKINI. A sacred place in Kuruksetra. To bathe
in the Dasasvatirtha there, is to derive the same benefit
as performing ten a$vamedhas. (Vana Parva, Chapter
83, Verse 13).
SALVA I.
1) General information. ‘Yhe lover of Amba (q.v) the
daughter of the King of Kasi. It is mentioned in
Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 67, Stanza 16 that
this Ksatriya King Salva was born from a portion of
Ajaka the younger brother of Vrsaparva.
2) Other details. .
(i) Salva was the ruler of the city named Saubha.
Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 102, Verse 61).
(ii) He was present at the Svayarhvara marriage of
Draupadi. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 186 Verse 15).
(iii) He was present at the sacrifice of Royal consecration (Rajasiya ) of Yudhisthira. (M.B. Sabha Parva,
Chapter 34, Verse Dje 2 8, ;
(iv) At the death of Sigupala, King Salva became
angry and besieged Dvaraka. In the battle which
followed Sri Krsna killed Salva. (M.B. Vana Parva,
Chapters 15 to 22).
SALVAYANA. A king in ancient India.
SALYA
(v) Salva had several friends such as Damaghosa,
Anga , Kalinga, Malava, Kekaya, Vanga, Magadha,
Kosala, Konkana, Hehaya, Cola, Pandya, Kerala and
others. (Bhagavata, Skandha 10).
SALVA II. There is a story in Mahabharata, Adi Parva,
stating that three Salvas and four Madras were born
to Bhadra from the dead body of her husband Vyisitagva. (See under Bhadra IT).
Here, ‘Salvas’ means the rulers of Salva. It is stated in
Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter 14, Stanza 26 that
the people of Salva fled to the south in fear of Jarasandha. Satyavan, the husband of Savitri, was a native ’
of Salva. It is also mentioned that the soldiers of Salva
- who joined the army of the Kauravas fought against
the Pandavas... There were Salvas on the side of the
Pandavas also. Mention is made in Drona Parva,
Chapter 154, that the Salvas on the side of the Pandavas,
attacked Drona, the teacher.
SALVA III. A king of the low castes. The details given
below about this king are from Mahabharata.
(1) This king attacked the vast army of the Pandavas
in the battle-field of Kuruksetra.
Chapter 20, Verse 1 ). 7
(2) The elephant of this Salva was as big as a mountain
and belonged to the family of elephants called Mahabhadra. (Salya Parva, Chapter 20, Verse 2).
(3) Duryodhana had honoured this low caste King
Salva. (M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 2, Verse 2).
(4) Satyaki killed this king Salva; and Dhrstadyumna
killed his elephant in the battle of Bharata. (M.B. Salya
Parva, Chapter 20, Verse +).
SALVA IV.. In Uttara Ramayana a Salva, who was 4
contemporary of Kuéadhvaja, is mentioned. Kugadhvaja
once approached this king Salva and requested for some
financial help. But the covetous Salva did not give any
help. So Kugadhvaja performed a sacrifice to obtain
wealth and prosperity. Sita was born from that sacri
ficial fire. (Uttara Ramayana).
SALVA V. Astory occurs in Brahmanda Purana, describing how Renuka, the wife of Jamadagni, was infatuat
ed at the sight of a handsome Salva, and how this event
subsequently led to her death. (See under (Renuka).
SALVASENI. An ancient place in South India. (Bhisma
Chapter 9,, Verse 61).
ee ~ He ran away to
South India with his brothers and attendants in fear
of Jarasandha. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 14, Verse 27) -
SALYA. A king who gave advice and leadership to the
Kauravas. He ruled over the Madra or Balhika kingdom.
Madri, wife of Pandu was Salya’s sister. Yet, in the
great war he stood firmly on the Kaurava side and die
at Kuruksetra. The following role he played in the
Bharata story. ~.
(1) At the instance of Bhisma he gave his sister Madri
in marriage to Pandu. (Adi Parva, Chapter’l12).
(2) He was present at the wedding of Draupadi in the
company of his sons Rukmangada and Rukmaratha.
(Adi Parva, Chapter 185, Verse 18). |
(3) At the Svayathvara of Draupadi hé withdrew from
stringing the bow, owning defeat. (Adi Parva, Chapter .
(4) Bhima defeated him at the wedding of Draupadi.
(Adi Parva, Chapter 189, Verse 23)
(5) During his triumphal tour of the west, Nakula be-
(M.B. Salya Parva,

SALYA
friended his uncle Salya d =s
Parva Chapter 32, A ba a | entertained him. (Sabha
e participated in Yudhisthira’s Rajasi -
ie Si cong: Chapter 34, ene s Rajasiya yajfia.
isupala once opined .
ber rena: (Sabhe Daron ae Salya was nobler than
(8) He presented 3 Mbapter 37; Verse 14).
Yudhi E cada good sword and a golden ‘
udhisthira on the occasion of his coronati jar to
(9) When Dha 53, Verse 9 ). se eee (Sabha
en Dharmaputr fs
thé game oF dice, a a to Hastinapura to play
earlier. (Sabha Parva A ere ae faa arrived there
( i eee the great war began he vi Nee P
- DACase them. Moreover he agreed to act as Ka mi
c wk aoe and render him impotent so that the Pa Ae s
cou become victorious. (Udyoga Parva in + andavas
(11) Salya joined the Kauravas in the reat as
an aksauhini (a particular division of eats ee
ck Chapter 19, Verse 16) ers). (Udyoga
( alya wished that —
in O og ag Chapter i Gevmetias ier ae
n the first day of ;
Yudhisthira. (Bhi ie oa a he fought a duel with
(14) Salya killed Uttara, the Vi 1apter 45, Verse 28)
(io) = ia Verse 35) irata prince.
l e defeated Sankh me:
Parva, Chapter 49, Vek aan Virata prince. (Bhisma
] e fought with Dh .
Chapter’ 62). rstadyumna. (Bhisma Parva,
(17) Bhimasena defeated S «
64, Verse 27). ed Salya. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter
(18) He fought with Yudhisthi =
Chapter 71, Verse 20). sthira again. (Bhisma Parva,
(19) Nakula and Sahad
Parva, Chapter 81, Veta 26) attacked Salya, (Bhisma
(20) Sahadeva defeated 7
88, V erse 51). ed Salya. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter
91) Salya attacked Sikhandi z
Ge ere 27). ikhandi. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter
(22) In the battle that followed
lot of Pandavas and wetnded aeres Sie Pee
Parva, Chapter 105, Verse 30). sthira. (Bhisma
(23) Bhima and Arjuna fought with z
oot tg oe ae 113 and 1145. with Salya. (Bhisma
(24) Salya fought a duel with Yudhisthi ws
—, Ar ates. Chapter 116 versed see
e fought wit ;
vi en 3] ‘ : Nakula. (Drona Parva, Chapter
(26) Abhimanyu and Salya f es :
(Drona Parva, Chapter 14 Verse a with each other.
(27) Afterwards in a club-fight Kidney ae
defeated. eas Parva, Chapter , 5) ima, Salya got
(28) He fought again wit} et
Chapter 25, Verse 15). 1 Yudhisthira. (Drona Parva,
(29) In the fight with Abhi
cious. (Drona Parva, Chapter 37, ae views
(30) Abhimanyu defeated him again
Chapter 48, Verse 14). +
(31) He fought for the fifth ti ssh ae
(Drona Parva, Chapter 26, Vane coe ek Yudhisthira.
(32) Afterwards he clashed with Arj :
of Jayadratha. (Drona Parv % Chapter 145 ierey et
(33) He killed Satanika, b aie
Parva, Chapter 137, Verse 80), a Virata. (Drona
(Bhisma
(Drona Parva,
SALYAPARVA. An important Parva of
86 | BAMA
(34) When Drona was_ killed Salya ran away from
the battlefield. (Drona Parva, Chapter 193, Verse 11).
(35) Srutakirti attacked Salya. (Karna Parva, Chapter
(36) Duryodhana insisted upon Salya acting as
_charioteer of Karna. At first Salya got angry about
the suggestion, but finally he took up the charioteership. (Karna Parva, Chapter 32): '
(37) As the charioteer of Karna Salya cried down the
former and praised Arjuna. (Karna Parva, Chapter 37,
Verse 33):
(38) Karna threatened to kill Salya. (Karna Parva,
Chapter 40).
him the
(39) Salya cried down Karna by relating to
nine of the swan and the crow. (Karna Parva, Chapter
(40) When Bhima wanted to cut off Karna’s tongue
Salya reminded him of Arjuna’s vow and thus made
Bhima retract from his plan. (Karna Parva, Chapter
50; Mahabharata, Daksinatyapatha ).
(41) When Karna attempted to kill Nakula, Sahaacva
and Yudhisthira, Salya prevented him from doing so.
(Karna Parva, Chapter 63, Verse 21).
who got alarmed by the
(42) He consoled Karna,
prowess of Bhima. (Karna Parva, Chapter 84, Verse
who grieved over
(43) Salya comforted Duryodhana,
Chapter 92, Verse
the death of Karna. (Karna Parva,
( Me As desired by Duryodhana, he assumed charge
over the army as_ its commander-in-chief.. (Salya
Parva, Chapter 6, Verse 28).
(45) He fought a fierce battle withBhima and Dharmaputra. (Salya Parva, Chapters 11 and 12).
(46) Dharmaputra defeated . Salya. (Salya Parva,
Chapter 16, Verse 63).
(47) In the battle that followed, Salya was killed by
Yudhisthira. (Salya Parva, Chapter 17, Verse 52).
(48) Among the souls of those killed in battle beckoned to the surface of the Ganga, Salya’s soul also was
present. (Asramavasika Parva, Chapter 32, Verse 10).
(49) Samhlada, brother of Prahlada and son _ol
Hiranyakagipu was another birth of Salya. (Adi
Parva, Chapter 67, Verse 6).
“1 the Mahabharata for Salya :
(50) Synonyms used 1 bara
Artayani, Ralhikapungava, Madradhipa, Madraja,
Madrajanadhipa, Madraka, Madrarat, Sauvira etc.
See under Mrtasafijivani.
the Mahabharata.
AMATI. Son of the Vasu called Aah. Aah had,
besides Sama, three sons called Jyoti, Santa an
Muni.. (Adi Parva, Chapter 66, Verse 28) -
SAMA II. One of the three sons of Dharmadeva, the
ama’s
ing led Ka and Harsa.
other two beig _catle ama 6. Verse 32),
wife was Prapti. (Adi Parva, Chapter 6
SAMA. A dog which followed Yama. It was 0 eS
two offsprings of Sarama. (Brahmanda Purana 3./. 2).
SAMA. One of the hundred sons of Dhrtarastra. He
was killed in the Bharata-battle, by Bhimasena. (M.B.
Karna Parva, Chapter 51, Verse 7).
SAMA. A populous centre ™® front
island (Puskaradvipa). In Puranic
thirtythree regions in this centre.
Vamana, Airavata, Supratika, Anjana
of the- Puskara
days there were
Devas such as
and so on dwell
se ~~

rl _—= NS eeeeES—E————E——
SAMA
here. The people of this place live by inhaling the
breath coming from the noses of these gods. (M.B.
_Bhisma Parva, Chapter 12, Verse 32)
SAMA. One of the Caturupayas (four tactics). (See
under Caturupaya).
SAMADHI. The state when the soul (4tma} and the
mind become one. When the soul and the mind’
mingle with each other as salt and water, it is Samadhi
(contemplation). (For more details see under Yoga.
SAMADHICHETTI. A Vaigya who became learned
_ and abstemious by the grace of Devi. The story of this
Vaigya, who ran away from the cruel and wicked
treatment that he had suffered from his wife and
children, and took to spiritual knowledge by the force
of circumstances was told to Janamejaya by Vyasa.
After telling several stories about the kind regard of
Devi towards those who worship her with devotion,
_ Vyasa continued as follows :—
During the time of Svarocisa Manu, there lived a
King named Suratha. Because of his liberality and
truthfulness he had very few enemies. While he ‘was
ruling over the kingdom known as Kolapura, once the
low caste people of the mountains fought a battle with
the King. Though the army of the low castes was
small it was the King who sustained defeat. He
returned to the palace thoughtful. He hadno peace of
mind. So he went to the forest to get peace. After
travelling for a long time on horse-back, he reached the
hermitage of the sage Sumedhas. Forgetting himself
in the peaceful stillness of the hermitage, the King got
down from the horse and sat under a tree. The hermit
Sumedhas came there and talked with the King.
The King told his story to the hermit, who invited the
King to live with him. Thus the King lived in the
hermitage eating fruits, roots étc.
The King found it difficult to reconcile himself with
the purity and simplicity of the hermit’s surroundings.
Fie always thought of his wife and children. He was
troubled in mind by thinking that the money kept in
the treasury would be wasted by others. Thus thinking
about many things, with a troubled mind, the King
was sitting under a tree near the hermitage once when
he saw another man coming towards him, with a
troubled mind like himself. They talked with each
other. The new-comer said to the King “I am a
Vaigya. My name is Sam adhicetti. My wife and
children love wealth. They want to tak
my wealth and to waste it. But I was 2
not favour unnecessary expenditure. They resolved to
remove ihe obstacle from their path, and began to
make preparation for it secretly. I understood it and
fearing death I ran away from the house.’”?
As soon as the king heard this story he said his own
story to the Vaisya. The Vaigya continued. “Oh |!
Still, my mind is troubled. I am worried about m
wife and children. They will be put to much difficulty
if I am not there to look after them. Who is there to
support them without me ? All the children are lean.
My wife also is likewise, lean. They are all always
ili. What will they do without me ? While I think of
all these things I have no peace of mind at all.”’
Suratha : “What a fool are you! You yourself have
said that all your children are wicked and cruel.
Moreover they and their mother joming together had
gainst it. I did
€ possession of |
SAMANGA IT.
SAMANTAPANCAKA
been trying to murder you. Why do you feel so
miserable about such a wife and children ?”
When the King had finished saying thus —
Sumedhas came there. To remove the darkness 0
illusion from their minds, the hermit taught them the
Nine-lettered Mantra (spell) with prayer and meditation. Thus giving them the’ mantra, the teaet
hermit advised them to go to the bank of the river an
select a suitable place and worship Devi with devotion
and concentration of mind. Accordingly they went to
the bank of the river and selected a pure and solitary
place, and concentrating their minds on Devi, ia en
to meditate and worship her taking only very ae
food. Thus engaged in deep meditation they spent Bae
years. One day ina dream Devi appeared to rata
She was clad in red clothes, and wore gee onal
ornaments. They were full of joy on seeing the god oe
The third year of the penance was over. But Devi
not appear directly before them. In the third a
they took only water. They finished the fourth Yee
without seeing the goddess. They decided to do s¢€V
penance. Their intention was to offer ‘heir oe _
Devi. So they made a triangular cavity, with io .
parts each having an extension of li ft. and m 5
the walls of the cavity firm and kindled a large fire of
it. ‘he King and the Vaigya began to cut pe a
flesh from their bodies and offered to Devi 11 they
fire, and with the blood coming from the body ae
performed sacrifice to Devi. Instantly Devi appe cad.
before them and asked them what boon they ae ail
The King wanted to get his kingdom back.
= the
said. ““You return home. Your enemies shall en
kingdom. Your ministers will fall at your feet " ste
your pardon. You can rule over your country ! as
— years. After that you will take rebirth
$4varni Manu, theson of the Sun.” eaitt
What Samadhi Cetti wished was a life of ee 6
ciation. Devi gave him the wisdom and knowledg
of
renounce everything he had and to live @ li “phe
complete abstinence. Then Devi disappearet’ ruleKing returned to his kingdom and resumed IS about
Cetti renounced everything and wandered
immersed in meditation on Devi. (Devi Bhagavat™
Skandha 5). , e Vy
SAMAGA (S). A particular line of disciples ©
(See under Guruparampara). . after
SAMANGA I. A cowherd who had_ been logkine aptet
the cattle of Duryodhana. (M.B. Vana Parva,
289, Verse 2).
asa-
: it
An ancient hermit. Once this her™,
talked to Narada, about his comfortable life. (
Santi Parva, Chapter 286, Verse 5). ted in
SAMANGA III. A river. Because Astavakra oper er
this river, his bents were straightened. (See ¥
Astavakra) . | |
SAMANGA iv. A country in South India. 1
made about this country in . Mahabharata,
Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 60.
SAMANTARA. A country in India. Mention is
about this country in Mahabharata, Bhisma i
Chapter 9, Verse 50. nded
SAMANTAPANCAKA,. A holy tirtha (bath) fou
y Paragurama.
1) General information. See under Paras urama, Pa
Mention .
Bhis™
madé
Parv4:

SAMARA
4) ne detatls.
i) Paragurama made here five rivers through which
blood flowed. ‘There, with hands dipped in load, he
offered oblations to the manes. (M.B. Adi Parva
Chapter 2, Verse 4). _
(ii) By the blessings of the ancestors of Paragurama
this place became a holy bath. (M.B. Adi Parva
Chapter 2, Verse 8).
(iii) At the ending and the beginning periods of the
two yugas Dvapara and Kali, the Kauravas and the
Pandavas fought the great battle at this place. Because
of that this place got the name Samantanajiicaka.
(M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 2, Verse 13).
(iv) It was according to the advice of Balabhadrarama
that this place was selected as the battlefield. (Salya
Parva, Chapter 55, Verse 5).
(v) Duryodhana was killed at Samantapaficaka.
(Salya Parva, Chapter 89, Verse 40).
SAMARA = One of the hundred sons of Prthusena, a
King of the Bharata dynasty. (Bhagavata, Skandha 9).
SAMARATHA. A brother cf King Virata. He was a
prominent helper of the Pandavas in the Bharata
battle. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 158, Verse 42).
SAMASAURABHA. A Brahmin who was well-versed
in the Vedas and the Vedangas. Mention is made in
Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 53, S.ianza 9, that
he was a guest at the snake-sacrifice of Janamejaya. *
SAMATHA. A learned brahmin. He once gave Yudhisthira a description of the yajna performed by King
Gaya, son of Amurtarayas. (Vana Parva, Chapter 99,
Verse 17).
SAMAVEDA. See under Veda\
SAMAVEGAVASA. A country of South India. (M.B.
Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 16). aa
SAMAYAPALANAPARVA. A sub-section _ of -Virata
Parva, consisting of Chapter 13 of Vir ata Parva.
SAMBA I. ‘The son born to Sri Krsna by his wife Jarnbavati. ;
bout the birth of Samba, occurs 1m
L) Birth. A story dha 4, as follows :
Devi Bhagavata, Skandha 4, a5 ae
een ene born to Rukmini and the other wives gt
Sri Krsna. But Jambavati alone did not give pay if
children. Jambavati was filled with sadness bi € ae
saw the children of her co-wives. One day she aie :
the presence of Krsna and requested him to-give
son like Pradyumna. Hearing this, a Sie ck di
the mountain egg rE
where the hermit
penance and making the hermit his teacher, according
to his advice, did penance
giv di
before Paramas!v4. e
penance for the period of 4 month holding 4 skull: and
. nt
a hermit’s rod. He did penance 1? | the ee a eae
standing only on one leg and drinking ae oe the
In the third month Krsna did penance ou
toes using only air as food.
continued for a
appeared as Samba
boon he wanted. Sri Krsna express" jon: Jambavati
said that Jambavati wou™ § "d Samba.
gave mr to a son. +4 child wes eee the beautiful
2) Marriage. Samba marrie
Caughter of Duryodhana. femnba went
vara marriage 0 |
and took hee by force from patel ad the
who were present there. Dury° Dvaraka through
: : reac”
captured him. This news
when Arjuna ma
SAMBA I
Narada. Sri Krsna and Balabhadrarama went - to
Hastinapura and rescued Samba and took the bride
and the bridegroom to Dvaraka. Ten sons beginning
with Sumitra were born to Samba by his wife Laksana.
(Bhagavata, Skandha 10). .
| 3) Prabhavati abducted. Prabhavati was the daughter
of Vrajanabha, the King of Supuranagari. Samba,
with his brother Pradyumna entered the city Supura
in the guise of drama-actors with a view to kidnap the
beautiful daughter of Vrajanabha. They produced four
performances such as ‘Rambhabhisara’ and three other
dramas and earned the praise of everybody in Supura.
In this way they got access to the palace of the King,
and when the time suited, they took away Prabhavati
to Dvaraka. (HarivarnSa, 2 : 93).
4). The delivery of an iron rod. Once some Yadavas
with Samba at their head abused Kasyapa and some
other hermits who came to Dvaraka. They cursed the
Y adavas, in conséquence of which Samba gave birth
to an iron pestle, which caused the extermination of
the Yadavas. (See under Krsna, Para 39, Sub Para 2).
5) The curse of Sri Krsna. “Samba was extremely handsome, and even the wives of Sri Krsna fell in love with
him. Under the circumstances Samba tended to become wicked. Sri Krsna came to know of the unnatural attachment between his wives and Samba, from
Narada and cursed Samba that he would become a
leper, and cursed hisown wives, that they would be
carried away by thieves and plunderers. Accordingly
leper and the wives of Sri Krsna were
Samba became a
carried away by the Abhiras, after the submerging of
Dvaraka. ae
After a few years, according to the advice of Narada,
Samba began to worship the Sun, at a place called
Sambapura in the basin of the river Candrabhaga, to
get recovery from leprosy. A brahmin also was brought
from Suka (Kus a) island to perform the fast and vow correctly. ( S3mba.3; Bhavisya Purana, Brahma Parva, 66.
6) Other details. |
i) Samba was present at the Svayarhvara marriage
of Draupadi. (M.B. Chapter 185, Verse 17).
(ii) Among the Yadavas, who brought the dowry,
rried Subhadra there was Samba
also. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 220, Verse 31).
(iii) Samba learned archery from Arjuna. After this
he was a member of the court of Yudhisthira. (M.B._
Sabha Parva, Chapter 4, Verse 34).
+) Samba was one of the seven great chariot-fighters
of Dvaraka. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 14, Verse
(v) Samba was present at the Rajasiya (royal consecration-sacrifice ) of Yudhisthira. (M.B. Sabha
Parva, Chapter 34, Verse 16).
vi) Samba was defeated in the battle he fought with
Ksemavrddhi the minister of: Salva. (M.B. Vana
Parva, Chapter 16, Verse 80.)
vii) Samba killed the asura Vegavan in a battle.
(M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 16, Verse 17).
(viii) Samba participated in the marriage of Abhimanyu conducted at the city Upaplavya. (M.B.
Virata Parva, Chapter 72, Verse 22).
(ix) Samba came with Sri Krsna to Hastinapura and
took part in the Rajasaya of Yudhisthira. (M.B.
Agvamedhika Parva, Chapter 66, Verse 3).

SAMBA II
(x) When the Yadavas died by hitting one another
with the iron pestle, Samba also was killed. (M.B.
Mausala Parva, Chapter 3, Verse 44).
(xi) After his death, Samba entered the group of
Visvadevas. (M.B. Svargarohana Parva, Chapter 9,.
Verse 16).
SAMBA II. A Brahmin scholar. When Dhrtarastra
started for the forest towards the close of his life, the
people bade him farewell. This Brahmin stood among
the people and spoke words of consolation. (M.B.
Asramavasika Parva, Chapter 10, Verse 13).
SAMBARA I. An asura.
1) General. Various Puranas refer to this leader of the
asuras as having played a prominent part in the devAsura war. After many such wars he was killed by
Siva.
2) Sambara’s magic power. He possessed marvellous
magic powers. Once while fighting with him, the
Devas were non-plussed by his magical powers, and
they hid themselves in a forest. Sambara was pleased
and he roamed about freely without any fear and
burnt the palaces of the protectors of the world. The
Devas left their homes and disappeared in disguise.
The Devas began killing those whom Sambara had
appointed as army-chieftains. To counter ‘this attack
by the Devas, he created three powerful asuras by his
powers of magic. The three asuras called Dama,
Vyala and Ghata began killing the warriors of the
Devas, and the Devas told Brahma at Satyaloka about
the depredations of the asura. Brahma encouraged
them for further fighting, and the three asuras were
killed and Sambara ran away and hid himself.
(Jiianavasistha Sthitiprakaranam ).
3) Sambarain Rgveda. ‘There are various reference:
toSambara in the Rgveda. He was King of the
Dasyus. He had mastery over hundred cities. The forts
and trenches in those cities were very strong. The
forts are referred to as ASvamayi, Ayasi, Satabhuji etc.
in the Rgveda. The chief enemies of the Aryans were
the race of people called Panis in the city. There is a
hint about, the killing of Sambara in Sakta 17, Anuvaka
8, Mandala 1 of the Reveda.
4) Other information.
(i) Sambara was Kasyapaprajapati’s son by his wife
Danu.
(ii) Dasaratha had, at the request of the Devas defeated Sambara in a war fought’ in Devaloka. (See
-under DaSaratha, Para 5).
(iii) Indra, on another occasion, defeated Sambara.
(Adi Parva, Chapter 137, Verse 43). .
SAMBARA II. An asura.
He was the son of Hiranyaksa and brother of Sakuni,
Dvimurdha, Sanku and Arya. (Agni Purana, Chapter
17). Sambara, who-was a great adept in magic, was
killed in the company of his wife Mayavati, by
Pradyumna, the son of Sri Krsna. (See under
Pradyumna) . ;
SAMBHALA (SABHALA, SAMBHALA). A _ village
famed in the Puranas. According to Mahabharata
Mahavisnu will incarnate as Kalki in this village. (For
details see under Kalki). |
SAMBHAVA, A King of the Puru dynasty,-son of Urja
and father of Jarasandha. (Agni Purana, Chapter
SAMBUKA
SAMBHAVAPARVA. A _ Sub-Parva of Adi Parva
Chapters 65-139).
SAMBHU f. Dhruva’s wife. The couple had two sons
called Sisti and Bhavya. (Visnu Purana, Part I,
Chaptor 13). ;
SAMBHU II. Grandson of i'vasta, son of KaSyapa by
Surabhi. Tvasta had a son called Viévarispa who begot
fourteen sons of whom Hara, Bahurtpa, Tryambaka,
Aparajita, Vrsakapi, Sambhu, Kapardi, Raivata,
Mregavyadha, Sarpa and Kapali these eleven sons” of
Visvarapa form the Ekadagarudras. (Agni Purana,
Chapter 18).
SAMBHU III. One of the three sons of Ambarisa, the
other two being Viripa and Ketuman. (Bhagavata,
9th Skandha). Sambhu never tasted meat in his life.
(Anusasana Parva, Chapter 115, Verse 66).
SAMBHU IV. A Raksasa, the son of Vidyujjihva by
Sairpanakha. Sambhu, who was engaged in tapas a
Dandaka forest when Sri Rama visited the forest yi
attracted by the beauty of Sita and transformed himse
into a tree to enjoy her beauty with his eyes. Laksman®
who was felling down trees to build an asrama felle
this tree also, which disappeared immediately leaving
behind the dead body of a Raksasa. It was the aed ae
of the Raksasa and Rama comforted Sita and Laken?
by revealing the fact to them. (Kamba Ramayav™
Aranyakanda).
Uttara Ramayana contains a story of how D :
(or Vedavati) daughter of Kugadhvaja once —_—
Sambhu. Devavati was born from the mouth ng
KuSadhvaja (son of Brhaspati) while he was. eae an
the Vedas. Sambhu wanted to marry the child W”
she was grown up, but Kugadhvaja did not conse?” ;
it, and Sambhu, in retaliation, killed KuSadhvaJ@
his sleep. Next morning Devavati awoke from sie st
see the dead body of her father. She cursed Sam
Her curse was a contributory cause for the deat
Sambhu by Laksmana. | to
SAMBHU V. An agni, which occupies a status et fatie
that of a brahmin well-versed in the Vedas.
Parva, Chapter 221, Verse 5). ‘aj
SAMBHU Vi. A son born to = Krsna _ by ‘Rukm
devi. (Anusdsana Parva, Chapter 14, Verse 33). He
SAMBHU VII. A King of the Bharata dynasty: ip
was one of the eighty sons of Ugrasena. (Bhagavatés
Skandha). fathet
SAMBHUTA. A King, son of Trasadasyu and © nhevavall
of Anaranya. (Vayu Purana, Chapter 88, vere
SAMBHUTII. Wife of Marici, son of Brahma, 14,
(Agni Pur
couple had a son called Paurnamasa.
Chapter 20), | had 4
SAMBHUTI II. Wife of Jayadratha. The couple
son called Vijaya. (Bhagavata, Skandha 9). f Gri
SAMRUKA. A Sidra muni. During the reig? err!
Rama a greatnumber of children died in the o 1088 o
and many parents wept before the king about ie Ram
their offsprings. According to Vasistha’s advic¢ , not
enquired whether anybody indulged in schon thé
proper tohis station in life. Sri Rama survey© e
country from the air in a Vimana, and durin’ ib
survey he found Sambika, the sidra muni hanginé ef
his head down and inhaling smoke from a fire iy that
him, Thus, having found out that the tapas PY. ame
Sidra was the reason for the -children’s deat®,

SAMEDI
killed Sambika immediately. (Kamba Rama
Uttarakanda). | mo i
SAMEDI. An attendant of Subrahmanya. (M.B. Salya
Parva, Chapter 46, Verse 1S)
SAMGATA (SANGATA). A King of the Maurya
_ dynasty. He was the son of King Suyasas and, the
father of King Salisiiraka. (Bhagavata, Skandha 12).
SAMGAVA (SANGAVA). The supervisor of the
cattle-shed of Duryodhana. It is stated in Mahabharata,
Vana Parva, Chapter 228 that this Sangava helped
Duryodhana in the fight which ensued at the time of
the great procession conducted by the Kauravas, to
the Pandavas in the forest.
SAMGHAM (SANGHAM). An organisation formed in
olden dsys for the cultivation of Sentamil (classic
Tamil) literature, which took its origin Im south
Dravida land in the 4th century B.C. The Pandyas set
up three Sanghams for the promotion of this literature,
the first one in southern Madura. When ‘the city was
swept: by erosion of the sea they set up the second
Sangham at Kapatapura. When Kapatapura also was
destroyed by the sea, the third Sangham was founded
in Dravida Madura. The first Sangham was called
Mutarcankam, the second Itaiccankam and the third
one Kataiccankam. Reliable informatron
first two Sanghams is not available. But, there are
reasons to believe thata Sangham called Kataiccankam
flourished for about six hundred years from 2nd
century B.C. to the close of the 4th cenfury A.D.
(History of Kerala Literature by Ullar, Pat 1, Page
The Pandyan d built , at Madura a hall
(mandapa ) fo scholars of the third
Sangham to assemble together to produce their works.
Even to this day there exists a temple called
Sanghattarkovil at .the south-western corner of the
outer sector of the Sundareé vara temple. There the
idols of Sarasvati and mt tne fore
are being worshippe even today. — ro"
Sa anette of ie Buddhist and the Jain aeligions
and also that of the Pallava royal dynasty; contribute
2 jgham. e Sangham poets
to the déwnfall of “i sien) ae We cordine: to
have written man
r of the first
lesends, Agastyam 1S 4 text on gramma
aati at Tolkapyam of the second SIE iy
There were authoritative. text hoes ened Hr we lee
the last poets of the Sangham. Puls no
bas een unearthed yet. ee Pee oe ae ee
j $ a an ptue : or
he nee al, Jaye ye mahakavyas (Epic
atte Iso belong t° anes
— Purananaru. FE atittuppar” ee
pute, Kalittokai, Kurunto ais Paerk called
Nattinai are included 1 the Sang oe eeu
Ettuttokai. Most of them ar© ia Sar edey aE
3 eee 160 poets.
ositions. The authorship O
P is distributed @™ 8 nd songs ae Bue
collected
Purananuru ;
a * os ins five hu
Aim Kurunuru contal i
oets. These five Ha ee songie orders of the ©
Katalir kiznar, cae -. a collection
scholars ralirurapozbal Patitti pp ise of the Cera
osed by ten P o nine are
ar tera am 1 aut of these from two he followKings. But, only & m rised of the 19
available vet. Pattuppatt4 co
King ha
r the poets and
about the .
SAMI. A king,
SAMICI. A celestial mai
SAMICI
ing works like Tirumurukattuppatai, etc. Tirukkural,
Nalatiyar etc. are among the eighteen works under
the group. Patinenkizhkkanakku. Cilappadikaram
Manimekhalai, Jivakacintamani, Kundalakesi and
Valaiyapati are the five great kavyas and Nilakesi
Ciaidamani, Yasodakavyam, Nagakumara-Kavyam and
Udayakumarakavyam (Udayanankatai) are the five
short (laghu) kavyas. Amongst the above kavyas
Manimekhalai and Kundalakesi are Buddhist kavyas
and Cintgmani and the five short kavyas are Jain
works. The last seven books might have been written
after the Sangham period. Tiruttakkatevar, author of
Cintamani, lived in eighth century A.D. Some of the
songs in Purananuru are the oldest among the works of
the Sangham period. References to Cera Kings are
found in many of these works.
SAMGRAHA. One of the two attendants. given to
Subrahmanya by the sea,. the other being Vikrama.
(Salya Parva, Chapter 45; Verse 37).
SAMGRAMAJIT One of the ten sons of Sri Krsna by
his wife Bhadra. (Virata Parva, Chapter 54, Verse 18).
SANMHANA. A King of the Puru dynasty, grandson of
Paru and son of Manasyu. ‘Sarhnhana was the son of
(Adi Parva,
Manasyu_ by his wife called Sauviri.
Chapter 94, Verse 5). |
SAMHATA. Second wife of Dhrtarastra. She was the
niece of Gandhari.
SAMHATAPA. A naga born in the Airavata dynasty.
It was burnt to ashes at the serpent yajfia of Janamejaya (Adi Parva, Chapter 57, Verse 11).
SAMHITA. Collection of hymns addressed to various
Devatas in nature. These songs are in the form of mantras. (See under Veda).
SAMHITAKALPA. A section of samhitas of Atharva
Veda. The five sections of Atharva Veda composed by
Munjikesa and called Naksatrakalpa, Vedakalpa
Samhitakalpa, Angirasakalpa and Santikalpa are held
in great respect. (See under Veda).
SAMHITASVA. A king of the Bhrgu dynasty, grandson
of Haryagva and son of Nikumbha. Renuka, granddaughter of Sammhitasva and daughter of Prasenajit was
married by maharsi Jamadagni. (Brahmanda Purana,
Chapter 1).
SAMHLADA (SAMHRADA) I. A son of Hiranyakaé ipu.
Two sons called Hiranyaksa and Hiranyakagipu and a
daughter called Sirnhika were born to KaSyapaprajapati
by his wife called Diti, and Hiranyakasipu had four sons
called Anuhrada, Hrada, Prahlada and Sambrada.
Garnhrada had three sons named Ayusman. Sibi, and
Baskala. (Agni Purana, Chapter 19). According to
verse 17, Chapter 69 of Adi Parva, Prahlada, Samhlada,
Anuhlada, Sibi and Baskala were the sons of Hiranyakagipu. This Samhlada, in his next life, was born. as
Salya, the Balhika king.
SAMHLADA II. A Raksasa, son of Sumali by Ketumati,
both of them Raksasas. Sumali had ten sons called
Prahasta, Akampana, Vikata, Kalakamukha, Dhumraksa, Danda, Suparsva, Sarhlada, Prakvata and Bhasakarna. (Uttara Ramayana). ;
son of Usinara. (Bhagavata, 9th Skandha).
d. She wasthe companion of the
celestial maid Varga. (For further details see under
Varga ).

SAMIKA I
SAMIKA I.
1) General. A muni. He remained with herds of cattle
and performed tapas feeding himselfon the foam from
the mouth of calves drinking their mother’s milk. He was
the father of Srngi, who’cursed king Pariksit, who once
threw a dead snake on the neck of Samika. The curse
was that he wonld die within seven days of the incident
by snake-bite. For details see under Pariksit, Para 3).
2) Other information. :
i) Samika worships Indra in his court. (Sabha Parva,
Chapter 7, Verse 16). ,
ii) Samika too was present on the occasion when Vyasa
called up and showed Janamejaya the souls of dead
kings. (Agvamedhika Parva, Chapter 35, Verse 8).
SAMIKA II. (SAMIKA). A great warr‘or of the Vrsni
dynasty and one of the seven maharathis in_Dvaraka.
He was present at the wedding of Draupadi. (Adi Parva.
Chapter 14, Verse 58).
SAMITINJAYA. One of the seven great heroes, who
fought in chariot, in the clan’of the Yadavas. (M.B.
Sabha Parva, Chapter 14, Verse 58).
SAMITRA. A particular rite performed during a yajfia.
(Adi Parva, Chapter 196, Verse 1).
SAMIVRKSA (SAMI TREE). (For the connection between this tree and fire see under Agni, Para 12).
SAMJNA. Wife of Sun (Sirya).
1) Birth. Sarbjfia was the daughter of VigSvakarman
according to the Visnu Purana (Part 3, Chapter 2) and
of Tvasta according. to Mahabharata, Adi Parva
(Chapter 66, Verse 35). Most of the Puranas refer to
Samjia as the daughter of Visvakarman.
2) Separation from husband. Samjfia lacked the power to
put up with the heat of Surya. She once went into the
forest to perform Tapas after deputing her companion,
Chaya, to serve her husband. Samjfia left her three
sons Manu, Yama, and Yami also in the charge of
Chaya, who in the guise of Samjfia served Sarya. He
took her to be his wite and begot three children, Sanaiscara, (another) Manu and Tapati of her. Chaya once
got angry and cursed Yama, son of Samjfia. Then it
was that Siirya realised that she was not his wife.
Siarya felt very sad at this separation from his wife and
went to the forest in search of her. He knew, by the
power of his meditation, that SamjfidA was doing tapas
in the guise of amare. ‘Then he assumed the form ofa
horse and begot of the mare the Agvinikumaras and
Revanta. The Aévinikumaras named NAsatya and Dasra,
were born through the mare’s (Samjfia) nose. (Anugasana Parva, Chapter 150, Verse 17).
3) Reunion. Sitrya brought Sarnjfia back with him. She
complained to her father Visvakarman, that lifé with
Surya was impossible on account of his excessive heat,
and
machine and reduced his heat, But, only 1/8 of the heat
(effulgence) could be so reduced, and it was with that
fraction of effulgence that Visnu’s disc (cakra), Siva’s
trigala (trident), Kubera’s puspakavimana and Subrahmanya’s weapon called akti were made. (Visnu Purana
Part 3, Chapter 2; Harivamsa, Chapter 41 and Bhavisya
Purana For details see under Tapati.
SAMKHVYA. In ancient India digits up to 19 were in vogue.
Bhaskaracarya the great mathematician, has in his work,
“<T jlavati’’, given the following names to the nineteen
digits,
so Vigvakarman ground Sirya on his drilling
SAMSARA
1 Ekam 1G Dagam 100 Satam 1000 Sahasram 10000
Ayutam 100000 Laksam 1000000 Prayutam 10000000
Koti 100000000 Arbudam 1000000000 Abjam
10000000000 Kharvam 10000000000000 ‘Trikharvam
Parardham 1000000000000000000 Dagaparardham. |
SAMKHAYA. An 4carya, who worked in the Rgveda
branch of the Vedas.
SAMKRAMA (SANKRAMA) One of the three attendants given to Subrahmanya ry Visnu, the other two being Cakra and Vikrama. (Salya Parva, Chapter 49,
Verse 37) :
SAMKRAMA II.
by Mahavisnu.
44, Verse 23).
SAMKRTI. A king of the Bharata dynasty. He was the
son of king Naraka and father of Rantideva. (Bhagavata
9th Skandha). i
SAMMARDANA. One of the sons of Vasudeva by Devaki.
(Bhagavata, Skandha 9). ,
SAMMITEYU. Aking of the Piru dynasty, being one
of ten sons of Bhadragva (Agni Purana, Chapter 28).
SAMPAKA. A very pious brahmin, whose slogan in life
was that renunciation was the greatest asset ini life.(Sant
Parva, Chapter 176, Verse 4).
SAMPATII. A bird. The elder brother of Jatayv.
1) Birth, Aruna and Garuda were the sons born to
Prajapati Kagyapa by his wife Vinata. T'wo sons named
Sampati and Jatayu were born to Aruna. (For farther
details see under Jatayu, para 1). r
2) Sampati in the Ramayana. Once Sampati and ils
younger brother Jatayu flew to the Sun. To protect his
younger brother Jatayu who had neared the Sun,Sampatt
opened his wings which were burnt and he fell on ihe
shore of the salt sea. At this time an army of the
monkeys, with Haniman at,their head came there, in
search of Sita. Sampati gave them directions of the pa
they were to follow. (Detailed story is given under
Rama and Mali. J
SAMPATI II. A Raksasa (giant). The son of Kumbhinadi the sister of Kaikasi. (See under Kaikasi) .
SAMPATI III. A warrior who fought against the Pandavas on the Kaurava side. He took his place at the
‘hrdaya’ (centre ) of the Garudavyiiha set up by Drona.
(Drona Parva, Chapter 20, Verse 12).
SAMPRIYA. A princess of the Madhu dynasty. King
Vidura married her, and a son called Anasva Was
born to the couple. (Adi Parva, Chapter 95, Verse 40).
SAMRAJ. Son of Citraratha by Urna. He married
Utkala and the couple had a son called Maric, who
became very famous in after years. (Bhagavata,
Skandha 5). .
SAMRAT. The grand-daughter of Manu Svayambhuva
and the daughter of Priyavrata, who had married the
daughter of Kardama. Ten sons and two daughters
named Samrat and Kuksi were born to Priyavrata.
(Visnu Purana, Arfa 2, Chapter 1).
SAMRDDHA. A naga (serpent) born in the family of
Dhrtarastra. This serpent was burnt to death in the
sacrificial fire of the serpent sacrifice of Janamejaya.
(M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 57, Verse 18).
SAMSARA. One in the line: of Gurus.
Guruparampara As
One of the followers given to Skanda
(Mahabharata, Santi Parva, Chapter
(See under

SAMSAPTAKAVADHAPARVA 681
SAMSAPTAKAVADHAPARVA. A sub-Parva of Drona
Parva comprising Chapters 17-32.
SAMSATI!. Wife of the Agni called Pavamana. The
couple had two sons called Sabhya and Avasathya.
(Matsya Purana, Chapter 51, Verse 12).
SAMSRUTYA. One of the Vedantist sons of Vigvamitra.
(Anu; asana Parva, Chapter 4, Verse ay
SAMSTHANA. A region in India mentioned in the
Puranas. Armies from this region protected Bhisma
during the great war. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 51).
SAMUDRAKATIRTHA. A holy place near Arundhativata. He who bathes here and fasts for three days
will derive the same benefits as those of performing the
a vamedha yajfia and gifting away of thousand cows.
(Vana Parva, Chapter 84, Verse 81).
SAMUDRANISKUTA. An urban area in India famous
SAMYAMA
(iv) He got back the kingdom by Vasistha’s help and
then he performed a Yajfia with the latter as high
priest. (Adi Parva, Chapter 94, Verse 45).
(v) A son called Kurt was born to him by Tapati
daughter of Sirya. (Adi Parva, Chapter 94, Verse 48).
(vi) He was a devotee of Sarya. (Adi Parva, Chapter
(vii) No other king more handsome than he had yet
been born. (Adi Parva, Chapter 170, Verse 15).
(viii) Once there was no rainfall for twelve years in
his kingdom. (Adi Parva, Chapter 172, Verse 38).
(ix) He is one of the kings to be remembered at dawn
and at dusk. (Anugasana Parva, Chapter 165, Verse 54).
(x) Words like Ajamidha, Arksa, Paurava, Pauravanandana and Rksaputra have been used-in Mahabharata as synonyms of Sarvarana.
in the Puranas. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 49). SAMVARTA. Son of Angiras.
SAMUDRASENA. A Ksatriya king. He was a wise
man, well-versed in Economics. He was the rebirth of
Kaleya, an asura. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 67, Verse
54). Bhimasena defeated this Samudrasena, during
his regional conquest of the east. Samudrasena was
killed by the Pandavas in the Bharata battle. (M. B
Sabha Parva, Chapter 30; Karna Parva, Chapter 67) ;
SAMUDRAVEGA _ A warrior of Subrahmanya ( M.B
Oey, caper 45, Verse 63). as ey mn
SAMU . A warrior of Subr
Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 68). Gan
SAMUS ey Stet Maia ci (god concerned with
offerings to the manes). (Anugdsana P
ote ee 30). ( arva, Chapter
SAMVAHA. A wind which moves the aerial chariots of
the Devas. According to Vy4sa there are seven winds
While once he was teaching his son Suka Vedas A
storm blew and the teaching had to be stopped for
some time. Then Suka asked his father about winds
and Vyasa answered as follows :
There are seven vayus (winds). The first one called
Pravaha moves the clouds. The second one, Avaha
causes thunder while the third vayu, Udvaha, converts
sea-water into vapour and causes rain. The fourth
one Samvaha moves clouds inthe sky. The clouds are
the aeroplanes of the Devas. The fifth is Vivaha, which
gives form and shape to the clouds. The sixth Vayu,
Parivaha, keeps Akagaganga motionless while due to
the action of the seventh Vayu, Paravaha, the souls
1) General. Angiras had eight sons called Brhaspati,
Utathya, Sarnvarta, Payasya, Santi, Ghora, Viriipa and
Sudhanva. (Anugdsana Parva, Chapter 85, Verse 30).
Sarnvarta was the third among the sonsand he lived on
inimical terms with his eldest brother Brhaspati. When
once Brhaspati forsook king Marutta it was_ Samvarta,
who managed for the king his yajna. (Santi Parva,
Chapter 29, Verse 20).
2) Other information.
(i) Samvarta is a mem
Parva, Chapter 7, Verse 19).
(11) He lives in Brahma’s court an
(Sabha Parva, Chapter 11, Verse 12). _ rth
(i11) He once got conducted at Plaksavatarana See
for King Marutta a yajfia. (Vana Parva, Chapter ,
Verse 13): ria
(iv) Sarhvarta and Brhaspati disliked ane aise :
(Drona Parva, Chapter 55, Verse g85. oan ‘sai
Chapter 29, Verse 29). ‘vy
(v) He was one of those who visited B 9)
of arrows. (Santi Parva, Chapter 47, Meee to king
(vi) It was he, who recited the praises © Gh cihera text
Marutta so that the latter got a (M.B. Sou ;
Asvamedha Parva, Chapter 8). se a
(vii) Once he paralysed oat any (Agva
medha Parva, Chapter 10, Verse 1/).
(viii) It was he, who invited and got down be eae
yajfia conducted by Marutta. (Acvameana :
Chapter 10, Verse 25). aprajapati of
ber of Indra’s court. (Sabha
d worships him.
hisma on his bed
travel. (Santi Parva, Chapter 329). . “
) SAMVARTAKA I. A naga born to _Kasyapapestny!
SAMVARANA. A king of the lunar dynasty.
Biciod Z ; 395;
Ee fe Saduat ACA ers wen burning always
1) Genealogy. Descended from Visnu thus : Brahma— TAT 1 as
) ma— SAMVARTAKA II. An agni, W Parva, Chapter 7, Verse
Atri-Candra - Budha - Puriravas - Ayus- Nahusa -
Yayati - Puru - Janamejaya - Pracinvan - Manasyu =
Vitabhaya - Sundu - Bahuvidha - Samyati - Rahovadi - SAMVARTAVAPI. A holy place (tank )
Bhadragva - Matinara - Santurodha - Dusyanta -
Bharata - Brhatksatra - Hasti - Ajamidha - Rksa -
on mount Malyavan. (Bhisma
27) _ Those, who
Parva,
bathe there will become handsome (Wane
Chapter 85, Verse 31). thes here will
Samvarana. SAMVEDYA. A holy place. He who ar Verse |).
2) Marriage. Sarthivarana married Tapati, daughter of
Sirya. (For details see under Tapati).
3) Other information. |
(i) King Paficala once attacked and ‘subjugated him.
(Adi Parva, Chapter 93, Verse 37), SAMVRTTI. A Devi, who wors
(ii) He gave up the throne in fear of the enemy and
SAMVRTTA. A naga born in
Chapter
arva, the Kasyapa dynasty.
Verse 13).
hips Brahm
master learning. (Vana P
(Udyoga Parva, Chapter 103, 5 in his court.
(Sabha Parva, Chapter 11, Vere tied Satagrnga. He
went and lived on the banks of the river Sindhu. (Adi SAMYAMA. A son of the Raksasa aaaBY of Ambarisa.
Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 39),
(iii) To regain his kingdom he appointed Vasistha as
his priest. / Adi Parva, Chapter 94, Verse 42).
was killed by Sudeva, chief of the a™ Chapter
(Mahabharata, Southern Text, ames Parva, P

SAMYAMANA I
SAMYAMANA I. Another name of King Somadatta.
(Bhisma Parva, Chapter 61, Verse 33).
- SAMYAMANA II.A king of K4éi. By nature non-attached
to worldly things and very righteous, he studied Sankhya
and Yoga from: Paficasikha and went into the forest
renouncing everything. (Santi Parva, Chapter 1).
SAMYAMANI. Another name of Sala, son of Somadatta.
(Bhisma Parva, Chapter 61, Verse 11)
SAMYAMANTI. The name of Yama’s Capital city. (See
under Amaravati).
SAMYANIPATA. A particular measure of distance. If
a strong man throws a thing the distance between the
man and the spot where the thing thrown by him falls
is called Samyanipata. (Vana Parva, Chapter 84,
Verse 9),
SAMYAPRASA. A sacred place on the banks of river
Sarasvati. Here Vyasa once built an agrama and lived
there. (Devi Bhagavata, 6th Skandha).
SAMYATI I. Third son of Nahusa, his other sons being
Yati, Yayati, Ayatiand Dhruva. (Adi Parva, Chapter
75, Verse 30).
SAMYATI II. A king, who was the great-grandson of
emperor Piru and son of Pracinvan. Asmaki, born of
the Yadu dynasty was his mother. He married Varangi
daughter of Drsadvan and a son called AhamyAati was
born to the couple. (Adi Parva, Chapter 95, Verse 14).
SAMYODHAKANTAKA. A Yaksa, an attendant of
Kubera. (Valmiki Ramayana, Uttara Kanda, Chapter
14, Verse 21).
SAMYU I. The eldest son of Brhaspati. This agni(Samyu)
is worshipped in Caturmasya and agvamedha yajfias.
Satya, daughter of Dharmadeva was Sarnyu’s wife, and
tothe couple were born a son and three daughters.
(Vana Parva, Chapter 219, Verse 2).
SAMYU II. An acarya. He is believed to have a special
method of performing yajfias. (Satapathabrahmana).
SANAKADI (S). Sanaka, Sanandana, Sandtana and
Sanatkumara, the four Sages.
The Sanakadis are the mental sons of Brahma. When
they stood in the form ofinfants they were asked to
create subjects. But they, were the incarnation of ‘Sattva’,
(the attribute of purity), and so were not prepared to
undertake creation. Even at the age of four or five the
four of them learned the Vedas, and travelled together.
‘They were celibates for ever. While the Sanakadis were
travelling thus one day they reached Vaikuntha, and
cursed Jaya and Vijaya who showed disrespect towards
them. (See under Jayavijayas),
It is mentioned in some places that the Sanakadis were
the incarnations of portions of Mahavisnu. Once Brahma
praised the incarnations of Visnu.
It is clear that the Kumaras (Sanakadis) had taken
incarnation before the present Brahma began the work
of creation. (Devi Bhagavata, Skandha 1; Skandha 7;
Bhagavata, Skandha 7, Bhavisya Purana),
SANANDANA I. A hermit who was one of the Sanakadis.
SANANDANA II. A disciple of Sankaracarya. (For further |
i] under Sankaracarya, Para 6).
SANATANA 1.A hermit. Itis mentioned in Mahabharata,
Sabha Parva, Chapter os Stanza 16, that this hermit
shone in the court of Yudhisthira.
682 SANDHYAKARANANDI
SANATSUJATA PARVA. A sub-section of Udyoga
Parva in Mahabharata, Chapters 42 to 46.
SANCARAKA. A warrior of Subrahmanya. (Salya
Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 74).
SANDAMSA. A hell. (See under Kala).
SANDHAMARKA. The two rsis called Sandha and
Marka, who were priests of the asuras and whose
presence made them invincible. The Devas enticed the
two priests to their side by offering them Soma and
thus rendered the asuras powerless. When the Devas
after some time, began a yajiia, Sandha and Marka
approached them for the promised Soma, but the Devas
did not keep their word, and the disillusioned Sandhamarkas were driven out of the yajfiic hall. (TaittiriyasamSANDHANAKARANI. (See under Mrtasanjivani).
SANDHYA I. The previous birth of Arundhat?, wife of
Vasistha. (For more details see under Vasistha Para |,
Sub-Section 1). . ; .
SANDHYA II. Mother of the giantess Salakatanka.
It is stated in Uttara Ramayana that this Salakatanka.
the daughter of Sandhya was married by the giant
VidyutkeSa. . .
SANDHYA III. Time ofunion or conjunction. There are
three Sandhyas in a day. These are morning sandhya
(Pratahsandhya), noon sandhya (Madhyahna sandhya )
and evening sandhya (Sayan Sandhya). The meeting
time of night and day, is morning Sandhya, the joining
time of the first half and the second half of the day,
is noon (Madhyahna Sandhya), and the joining time of
day and night, is evening Sandhya (Sayarh sandhya).
Brahmins should keep the three Sandhyas properly.
The morning sandhya 1s of three kinds. Good, Medium
and Bad. When the morning stars are seen and the sunrise is approaching it is good morning; when the stars
are not seen and the sun is not risen it is medium
dhya and the morning time after the sunrise is bad
Sadie a. In sayamsandhya also there is this difference
meet as good, medium and bad. The time till the sunt is ood; the time after the sunset and before the
vis * the stars is medium and the evening after the
ing of the stars is bad. In the Vedas it is metaphoricsity cagesioned that Brahmins are trees, and the three
"ah as are their roots, the Vedas, their branches and
he ie and rituals ordained in the Vedas their leaves.
From this it is clear that Brahmins should on no
account leave unobserved, worships at these three
sandhyas. The Brahmin who does not observe these three
sandhyas_ carefully will, in his life time, become a
éadra and after the death, will be born again as a dog.
Moreover the Brahmin who does not do the three evening, morning and noon worships, will have no right to
conduct any other Vedic rites. ia
After the sun-rise and sun-set, within three nazhikas
(a nazhika-24 minutes) the morning and evening worship should be finished. There is atonement ordered
for morning and evening prayers conducted after the
stipulated time. (Dev! Bhagavata, Skandha 11).
SANDHYA IV. A holy river who worships Varuna 1n
his assembly. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 23).
SANDHYA V. The presiding Devata of dusk. She is
called Praticyadevi as well. (Udyoga Parva, Chapter
SANDHYAKARANANDI. :
the 12th century A. D. A poetic work of this
kadis.
ANA II. One of the Sanakadis. -
SC eUMARA. One of the Sanakadis.
SANATSUJATA. Another name of Sanatkumara, who
is ous of the four Sanakadis. (See under Sanatkumara).
A Sanskrit poet who lived in
author

SANDHYAVALI.
SANDHYARAGA
a _“Ramapalacarita”’ This book is about the king
a ae tian ruled over Bengal at the end of 11th
sir asoiaant sa lg The red colour seen in the sky in
“a evening is Sandhydraga. Ragini the daughter of
# “igh did penance to obtain Paramasiva as husband.
e Devas took her before Brahma, who said that she
“ not able to bear the radiance of Siva. Hearing
this opinion Ragini got angry and Brahma cursed her
and changed her P em (See under Parvati).
Ys andhyavali
a eee (See rane: Gieoramtenda < lem.
le 2 A daughter of Daksa. She was married by
armadeva and a Vasu called Anala was born to the
ine (Adi Parva, Chapter 67, Verse 17)
ANDILI II. A yogini famed in the Puranas. She once
cursed Garuda as aresult of which he lost His feathers
gird ait see under Garuda). |
ae HT A very chaste Devi living in Devaloka.
e once taught Sumanas, the Kekaya princess the
duties of a chast a
193, Verse 3) © woman. (Anuéasana Parva, Chapter
SANDILYA I. A great maharsi.
ai are ee: hereunder
1) King Satanika and his wifes v;
wife I
no sees aporosched the ashes ie aes wag
a result of eating rice given by the maharsi Visnumati
ecame the mother of a son, who b i 2
famous as emperor Sahasranik CU icatha ae ae
Kathamukhalambaka, Taraiga = ( Kathasaritsagara,
(2) A member of Yudhisthira’s court
Chapter 4, Verse 17);
3) He had
a ee ia i ascetic daughter. (Salya Parva, Chapter
(4) He once opined that the gift of
equal to the gift of water in z soldenioae Gonaatas
(SG Chapter 65, Verse 19)
5 e visited Bhisma hig Anti
Parva. Chapter 47, Vers6i6) is Beds of aro aan
(6) King Sumanyu once gave th i
o materials. (Anugasana Pada Cee ees ny tee
SANDILYA II, A maharsi born in the dynasty of
Kaégyapa, son of Marici. As Agni was born inthe
family of the maharsi it came to be called ‘Sandilyagotriya’ (born in the family of Sandilya) . King
Sumanyu once gave him food and other edible things.
(Anu. asana Parva, Chapter 137, Verse 22).
peeecie ene A King, a great devotee of Siva. Asa
yout e ene a philanderer with the result that
he honour of women was in jeopardy. The King being
a devotee of Siva even Yama could not punish him. At
last, when Siva came to know of the immorality of his
devotee he cursed the King to be turned into a
tortoise for thousand years,
SANDILYA IV. A maharsi, who desired to worship
Visnu not in the Vedic method for which purpose he
even wrote a book to propagate non-vedic principles.
For the above sinful action he had to live in hell
and at last he was born as Jamadagni of the Bhrgu
dynasty. ( Vrddhaharitasmrti, 180, 193).
SANDILYA V. A maharsi whose Bhaktisiitras (Aphorisms
on devotion) are as famous as those of Narada. He
taught bhakti in a scientific way (by Sandilya science) .
Some details about
(Sabha Parva,
SANJAYA I
SANDIPANI. Preceptor of Sri Krsna and Balabhadra
Rama from whom they learned all the Vedas, art of
drawing, astronomy, gandharva Veda, medicine,
training elephants and_ horses and archery. (For
details see under Krsna, Para 12).
SANI (SANAISCARA-SATURN).
1) General. Sani is the son of Surya
maid-servant of Sarhjfia. Sirya had three
Chaya, Manu, Tapati and Sani. (See under Chaya).
2) Other information. \ :
(i) Sani worships Brahma in Brahmasabha. (Sabha.
Parva,.Chapter ll, Verse 29). te
(ii) Sani is very effulgent and intense in his form and
character. When Sani threatens the star Rohini, great
disasters occur on earth. (Udyoga Parva, Chapter 143,
Verse 8). ;
(iii) Sani will incarnate as Manu in the coming Yuga.
(Santi Parva, Chapter 349, Verse 55). eb e
(iv) Sani is one of the planets to be daily worshipped.
(Anusasana Parva, Chapter 165, Verse 17). ok
(v) In the battle between Siva and Tripura, ae
mounted in a chariot clashed with Narakasura. (Bhagavata, 6th Skandha).
SANIYA. A country in south
Puranas. Mention is made
Mahabharata, Bhisma Parva,
NJAYA I. Minister of Dhrtarastra. :
A) Birth. Safijaya, who was equal to 4 Pace nie
born as the son of Sata from 4 portion 0 avaiganla.
(Adi Parva, Chapter 68, Verse 93) . : fis
2) The boon of Saftjaya. Sanjaya who was oni uD
the circle of the friends of the Kauravas, eae Sais s
minister of Dhrtarastra. The grea work tha jay
STE =-L Ls Dhrtarastra every
Se eee hae ae in the battle-field without
taking place 10 | aap ae
the smallest events 1D the order
a eerie | Safijaya was able to do this because of
the boon granted by Vyasa.
th mies of the Kaurav
hee hei camps on either side of the Ee
Vedavyasa came to Hastinapura and saw Se a
Dhrtarastra heard about he Ie Sa sar ot an
- e did not like to go ‘leaan ir ihe events of the Pate He a sO s
nj nd sal
‘asa. Then Vyasa called Sanjaya to him am
renee shall ve all the events of the battle directly.
He shall have such a divine inward eye. Vee aa
tinued. ‘‘O king ! Safijaya has inward eyes. He Wi ic
you everything about the battle. He will be MnO ai
Whenever he thinks of it he will see everyl te oe
takes place in the day ae in Be bao: son ee
t. No weapon will cu j
will affect him. He is the son of Gavalgana and will
come away unhurt from the battle. he igen
Because of this blessing a u
by Chaya, the
sons by
about this country 17
Chapter 9, Verse 63.
vas and the Pandavas
Sanjay a
Dhrtarastra of all the events in the battle (oe yea oi the
of the occurrence. Safijaya informed Deana, When
news up to the death of can cvatthama grew
Duryodhana was killed the cry O ee enlan al
louder. Safijaya who hear Sa. broken Laane.
morning, ran to the battlefield we 2 Sfinward eye
With the death of Duryodhana the 4 ‘M.B. Bhisma
given to Safijaya by Vyasa 2° “chapter 9).
Parva, Chapter 2; Sauptika Parv,

SANJAYA I
3) Other details.
(i) Safijaya stood as the host in the Rajasuya sacrifice
of Yudhisthira, and received the guests and showed
them hospitality. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 35,
Verse 6). ;
(11) When the Pandavas were defeated in the game
of dice and were sent to the forest Safijaya came to
Dhrtarastra and reviled him. (Sabha Parva, Chapter
81, Verse 5).
(iii) Vidura got angry because the Pandavas were
sent to live in the forest, and leaving the Kauravas he
also went to the forest. Knowing that Vidura was in
the Kamyaka forest, Dhrtarastra sent Safijaya and
brought Vidura back. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 6,
Verse 5).
(iv) Sri Krsna and the others vowed at the Kamyakavana to kill Duryodhana. Safijaya gave DhrtarAstra
a detailed description of that Vow. (M.B. Vana Parva,
Chapter 51, Verse 15).
(v) Dhrtarastra sent Safijaya to learn about the welfare of the Pandavas who had returned after completing the forest life and Pseudonymity. (M.B. Udyoga
Parva, Chapter 23, Verse 1).
(vi) Safijaya went to the court of the Pandavas and
gave the message of Dhrtaradstra to them. (M.B.
Udyoga Parva, Chapter 25).
(vii) Safijaya who had returned from the court of the
Pandavas, informed Dhrtarastra of the news and
reproached him much. (M.B. Udyoga Parva, Chapter
va, verse LI). |
(viii) Safijaya repeated the message of Arjuna in the
court of the Kauravas. (M.B, Udyoga Parva, Chapter
(ix) Safijaya told Dhrtarastra, who the prominent
helpers of Yudhisthira, were. (M.B. Udyoga Parva,
Chapter 50). |
(x) Safijaya advised Dhrtarastra to put Duryodhana
under control. (M.B. Udyoga Parva, Chapter 54).
(xi) Safijaya gave Duryodhana a description of the
horses and the chariots of the Pandavas. (M.B. Udyoga
Parva, Chapter 56, Verse 7).
(xii) Safijaya repeated the message of Arjuna to
Dhrtarastra. (M.B. Udyoga Parva, Chapter 66).
(xiii) Safijaya described to Dhrtarastra the greatness
of Sri Krsna. (M.B. Udyoga Parva, Chapters 68-70).
(xiv) Safijaya told Dhrtarastra the fact that the
Pandavas and the Kauravas had pitched their tents in
the battlefield of Kuruksetra. (M.B. Udyoga Parva,
Chapter 159, Verse 8).
(xv) At this time Vyasa came there and gave
Safijaya the boon that he would see directly every
thing that took place in the battlefield and would
inform Dhrtarastra. (M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 2.
Verse 10).
(xvi) Safijaya informed Dhrtarastra of the good
qualities of the earth, the island of Sudargana, the
death of Bhisma, and so on. (M.B. Bhisma Parva;
Drona Parva). —_— j ;
te fijaya gave the names of every one who was
Lied eg Cue of the Kauravas. (M_.B. Karna Parva,
Chapter 5). r
=) Soetavqa reported to Dhrtarastra about those
Sieg ee fa ide of the Pandavas also. (Karna,
Parva, Chapter 6).
SANJAYANTI. An_ ancient
SANJIVA
(xix) Safijaya told Dhrtarastra about those who were
alive on the side of the Kauravas. (Karna Parva,
Chapter 7).
(xx) Satyaki took Safijaya as a captive. (Salya Parva,
Chapter 25, Verse 57).
(xx1) Due to the blessings of Vyasa Safijaya escaped
from the captivity of Satyaki. (Salya Parva, Chapter
Z7,, Verse 39).
(xxil) Safijaya consoled Dhrtarastra. (M.B. Stri Parva, _
Chapter 1, Verse 23).
(xxiii) Yudhisthira entrusted Safijaya with the duty of
post-war-reconstructions. (M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter
(xxiv) Towards the close of his life Safijaya went with
Dhrtarastra and Gandhari to theforest. (Asramavasika
Parva, Chapter 15, Verse 8).
(xxv) On the first day of this journey to the forest,
they reached the basin of the river Ganges. On that day
Safijaya made the bed for Dhrtarastra. (Asramavasika
Parva, Chapter 18, Verse 19). ;
(xxvi) Safijaya introduced the wives of the Pandavas
to the hermits. (Asramavasika Parva, Chapter 25).
(xxvii) On reaching the forest Safijaya observed
complete fast for two days. (Ag’ramavasika Parva,
Chapter 37, Verse 13). .
(xxviii) Safijaya always walked close behind Dhrtarastra and in places of ups and downs he led the King
by the hand. (Asramavasika Parva, Chapter 37, Verse
- ' The End. While Dhrtaradstra and the others were
walking along the forest a jungle-fire was seen. Instantly it encircled them. Dhrtarastra cried out to Saiijaya
to run for his life. But Safijaya did not like to forsake
them in that danger. Dhrtarastra said that since they
had left home and country there was no wrong in
dying by jungle fire. At last yielding to the compulsion
of Dhrtarastra, Safijaya ran away from _the jungle-fire.
Dhrtarastra, Gandhari and Kunti died in the wild-fire.
Safijaya reached the basin of the Ganges and informed
the hermits of the death of Dhrtardstra and the others,
and then went to the Himalayas. (M.B. Agramavasika,
Chapter 37, Verse 19).
SANJAYA II. A prince of the country called Sauvira. /
It is stated in Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 265,
Verse 10, that it was this prince Safijaya who carried
the flag and walked in front of Jayadratha, on his
journey to carry away Paficali. In the fight which
ensued Arjuna killed this Safijaya. (M.B. Vana Parva,
Chapter 271, Verse 27) - | ;
SANJAYA III. Another prince of the country of Sauvira.
Vidula was the mother of this prince. This prince once
ran away from the battle-field and by the instigation
of his mother went to the battlefield again. This story
occurs in Mahabharata, Udyoga Parva, Chapter 1 6.
city’ of South India.
Sahadeva, during his regional conquest of the south
sent his messengers to this country and conquered it
easily. Mention is made in Mahabharata, Sabha
Parva, Chapter 31, Verse 70, that Sahadeva got tribute
i untry.
SANJAYAYANABARVA. A sub-section of Udyoga
Parva in Mahabharata. ‘This comprises Chapters 30 to
32 of Udyoga Parva.
SANJIVA. A character in the Paficatantra. (See under
Paficatantra).

SANJIVANAMANI
SAN
NITY ANAMANI, The jewel in the head of serpents.
Ae ats pee ition among the poets that this jewel is
ee rk € serpent’s life. There is a story in Maha
statin ib prec Parva, Chapter 30, Verse 42
Saaji Se abhruvahana brought Arjuna to life by
SANIRALPA. (For details see under a eBhewe sh ccnp
his wife & ‘a ne of the sons born to Dharmadeva b
SANIRALPA. a pas (Bhagavata, Skandha 6). :
mvarsier! 2tve Tilsen of Daksa. Dharmadeva
Ammadbatis Wie ing ten daughters of Daksa, 1.e.
Saatatwa “he a Yami, Lamba, Bhani, Marutvati
garinkalpa, Mubarta, Sadhya and Viva.
\ I. Asynon f Si
SANKARA Il. A’ sateen oe
wife. ‘This cube ee who was killed by his
Kalipriya. Af in had a very mean wife called
ei bee i ter killing her husband she left the place
fete aoe hoe But, wild animals killed him on
eSiarmed tigen Sa In all repentance Kalipriya
Setar ete after worshipping the corpse of her
i sal ee Karttika vrata at the instance’ of
“and stained ae ereby she got absolution from sin
Gbapter 10). en. (Padma Purana, Brahmakhanda,
SAN KARACARYA.
- brig spiritual and philosophical preceptor
a " ame was born in the village of Kalati
Gere ee of the holy river Periyar, also called
heen Tansee ae According to certain scholars he was
ae Fes certain others contend that he
epeinaret - t of day in 84 A.D. Yet others place his
a eee in various periods between 509 B.C. and 84
7 ‘ F ever that may be, the great Acarya is beyes to have lived only for 32 years
a Rac cqee name of Sankara’s father was Sivaguru
ae t of his mother Aryamba. This nambidiri couple
ad no issues for a long time. So they went to TrSsivaperir (Trichur) to worship Siva in the famous Siva
Gee there. The idol in that temple is known as
Sages nal and Vatakkunnatha also. Ere long Lord
se ees them with ason. The belief is still held
ee please with the prayer of Sivaguru and Aryamba
iva himself was born as their son. The child began
eae extraordinary intellectual powers. At the age
hi five the boy Sankara was invested with the sacred
thread. By the time he was eight years old he had
earned deep erudition in the Vedas, Sastras, Puranas,
ae chayean | etc. His father was no more by then
tae b e mother devolved the duty of bringing the
3) Crocodile-attack. ‘The boy showed no taste for or
interest in childish plays, but evinced a tendency towards a life of renunciation. This attitude of the son
pained the mother much and she wanted her son to get
married. But, the boy did not like the idea. As fate
would have it, an incident which proved to be a turning
point in the boy’s life occurred soon. One day the
mother and her son were bathing in the Periyar,
when a crocodile caught hold of the boy. He cried
aloud, and the mother got greatly alarmed. There wasa
custom for one to take tosannyasa, irrespective of circumstances, when danger or death threatened one, and that
is called apatsannyasa. Sankara prayed to his mother
for permission to take to sannyasa at that moment when
his end was near, and willynilly the mother granted permission. All at once the crocodile, which had so unex685 SANKARACARYA
pectedly attacked him, disappeared equally unexpectedly.
The boy came out of the river absolutely unhurt. ‘The
decision to take to sannyasa was taken once for all.
Sankara assured his mother, before he started on a tour
of the country, that he would be present at her bedside
during her last days and also that he would duly perform
her obsequies.
4) In the presence of the preceptor. Sankara, who then
was not even seven years old, started for the north in
quest of a preceptor, and on the banks of the Narmada
he saw Govinda - bhagavatpada, the disciple of Sri
Gaudapada. The Bhagavatpada was sitting in a cave
surrounded by many wise people. Sankara approached
and requested him to admit him as a disciple and grant
him sannydsa. Sankara’s prayer was granted.
5) Controlled flood. A wonderful thing happened while
Sankara was living at the asrama. The Narmada was
in spate and the huts on its banks were about to be
submerged in water. People got alarmed. Then Sankara
put his kamandalu (vessel which sannyAsins keep with
them for water) and chanted the Jalakarsana Mantra.
(hymn to attract water). At once the water which had
flooded the banks flowed back into the river. People
and their huts were saved. Afterwards his Guru asked
Sankara to go to and live in Kasi and write Bhasyas
(commentaries) on the Prasthanatrayam, i.e. the Brahmasiitras, the Upanisads and the Gita.
6) Padmapada. Accordingly Sankara went to Kasi. It
was there that he took as his first disciple Visnusarman,
a young man from the Cola region of the country.
Sankara called him Sanandana. Afterwards other disciples also came in. But, gradually jealousies cropped
up in the ranks of the disciples. The other disciples of
partial towards
Sankara thought that the latter was
Sanandana and showed special affection and regards
to him. Sankara then decided to prove to the others
that Sanandana iscl cCE. ional talents and
merits. One day Sankara was bathing with his other
disciples in the Ganga, and he called Sanandana who
was on the other side of the river to go to him. Sananer to his Guru,
dana walked on the surface of the wat
flower appeared beneath
and as he took each step a lotus
and held him up from sinking into the water. From
that day onwards he came to be called Padmapada,
and his colleagues also realised his greatness.
7) Hastamalaka. Hastamalaka was one of the best discibout his becoming
ples of Sankara. There is a story a )
Sankara’s disciple. He was born dumb. His father,
Divakara took Hastamalaka to Sankara believing that
due to the blessing of the great Guru his son would gain
powers of speech. Sankara asked the dumb boy;
are you?’ and the boy answered, ‘J am the :
has no relationship with the parts and attributes of bo y
and mind and whichis also entirely different from them’.
There were certain verses, whic the boy ate =
answer to Sankara’s question and each verse ende wa
‘nityopalabdhisvarapohamatma’ (I am the 4tman ks
eternal knowledge, consciousess, 18 1tS Saeed :
The boy’s answer pleased Sankara, who took him ae?
disciple of his. The boy was given sane? a
the name Hastamalaka the meaning of whic ck is
he who is in possession of knowledge like the goos
berry in one’s palm.

SANKARACARYA
8) Totakdcadrya. Totakacarya was a disciple, who came
soon after Hastamalaka. ‘The name Totakacarya has a
story behind it. This disciple approached Sankara with
his request for discipleship in verse praising the latter.
The verses were composed in the difficult totaka metre.
The verses attracted Sankara very much and he took the
applicant as disciple. His real name was Kalanatha, but
the Guru named h’m Totakacarya in view of his verses
in that metre.
9) The Candélaguru. There isa story about Siva going
to Sankara at Kasi in the guise of a Candala and
Sankara receiving him. One morning Sankara, after
bathing in the Ganga, was returning to the Visvanatha
temple. A Candala with his hunting dogs and a pot of
liquor was advancing from the opposite direction of
Sankara, who asked the former to move away from his
path. Immediately the Candala asked, which, the
body or soul, is to remove itself from the path? The
body of everybody is composed of blood, flesh, bones
etc; the constitution of it alsois the same. But, the
Atman is universal and omnipresent. Whom-which of
the two-are you asking to move away from your path?
Sankara realised from the above answer that the Candala
was an extraordinary person. In fact, it was Siva, who
had disguised himself as a Candala. Sankara prostrated
before him. Sankara thought about God saying that
he who had attained Brahman and the consciousness
of oneness with all, was his Guru, whether he be a
Brahmin or a Candala.
10) Derisive of the grammarian. Sankara has composed
a hymn named Mohamudgara, in which he ridicules a
grammarian. One day walking along a street in Kasi
Sankara saw a grammarian learning by rote rules of
grammar, and then he composed the very sweet and beautiful poem—Bhaja Govindam—to reveal the foolishness
of the grammarian repeating the useless rules of grammar. By the very first verse of the poem Sankara revealed
the following truth: “Oh! fool! worship Govinda
(Bhaja Govindam) meditate upon Him. You meditate
upon Govinda realising the truth that when death
approaches, the grammatical siitra ‘“‘Dukrfi Karane”’ will
not come to your aid.”
11) Saw Vyasa. Siva, when he appeared in the guise
of a Candala to Sankara, had asked him to visit Badarikasrama, and accordingly he went there and visited
Vyasa. It was there that Sankara met his supreme
preceptor, Govindapada. He returned to Kaéi with the
blessings of Vyasa and Govindapada and engaged himself in the writing of books.
12) Sankara’s age. There isa legend about Sankara’s
life. Brahma had allotted to him only eight years’ life.
Before Sankara left his house at K4lati, a batch of
sannyasins including Agastya and Narada came to the
house. The sannyasins, who were pleased with the
reception accorded to them blessed Sankara to live for
sixteen years instead of the eight Brahma had permitted
him.
While Sankara was writing books at Muktimandapa at
Manikarnika Ghat in Kasi Vyasa came there one day
in the guise of an old man, and there ensued a~ lengthy
discussjon between the two. Padmapada recognised
Vyasa in the old man and told him and Sankara thus:
“Eow would there be peace and happiness in the world,
‘¢ Sankara, the incarnation of Siva and Vedavyasa, the
SANKARACARYA
incarnation of Visnu quarrelled with each other?’’ As
soon as his identity was revealed thus, Vyasa admitted
that Sankara’s Bhasya on the Brahmasiitras was correct and biessed him to live for thirtytwo, instead of
sixteen years.
13) Controversy between Sankara and Mandanamisra.
Pandits (scholars) view the controversy or discussion
between Sankara and Mandanamigra as the most important event in Sankara’s life. Three incidents, Sankara’s
meeting Kuméarilabhatta, his defeating Mandanamisra
and his entering the dead body of another person—may
be found in connection with the above controversy.
A: Meeting with Kumarilabhatta. Sankara’s object was
to expose thedefects and draw-backs in Pirvamimamsa
(the ritual part of the Vedas). Kumiéarilabhatta was the
most competent person for a discussion on the subject.
Sankara, for this purpose, went to Prayaga from Kaéi.
But, Kumarilabhatta was not in a condition fit for discussion. He was slowly burning himself to death in a
heap of paddy husk set on fire. He courted this punishment voluntarily to atone fora wrong he had committed. Years back he had put on Buddhistic attire and
studied the secrets of Buddhistic religion from its preceptors with the object of refuting that religion, Kumarilabhatta had great faith in Karmakanda, and he
therefore, decided that it was his duty to make atonement for the wrong he had purposely done according
to injunctions laid down in Karmakanda. Sankara was
very sorry to find Kumarilabhatta in this condition in
which discussion could not be held with him on the
defects of Parvamimamsa. Kumiéarilabhatta directed
Sankara to the great scholar, Mandanamigra at Mahismati for a discussion on Piurvamimamsa.
B. Mandanamisra defeated. When Sankara reached
Mandanamigra’s house a ceremony connected with
obsequies was being conducted there. The door for
entry to the house was closed. Sankara, by his yogic
power entered the home and revealed the object of his
visit to Mandanamisra, who agreed to the proposal of
Sankara. Accordingly a debate began between the two.
Bharatidevi, wife of Mandanamifgra and an erudite
scholar in her own title acted as the arbiter in the discussion. Before the debate started she put a garland of
fowers on the neck of both the contcnders and announced that he would be considered as defeated in the
debate the garland on whose neck began fading first.
The debate continued for a number of days and the
Mandanamisra’s neck began showing signs
of fading. According to the terms and conditions of
the debate Mandanamisra acknowledged defeat. He
accepted Sankara’s discipleship.
C. Parakdyapravesa (Entering the dead body of another
person). But, Bharatidevi argued that it was not enoug
that Sankara had defeated her husband in debate. She
challenged him to defeat her as well, and Sankara
accepted the challenge. Many topics dealt with in
the various Sastras were debated upon and Sankara
won all those debates. Ultimately Bharatidevi raised
certain points connected with the science of sexual
love in the course of her arguments. Sankara admitted
that he did not possess sufficient mastery over the
subject as he had taken himself to sannyasa even from
infancy. But, he told her that if he was allowed _necessary time for it he would debate on that topic also.
garland on
Pow
oN

SANKARACARYA
Bharatidevi granted him time for it and the debate
was adjourned,
Sankara prepared himself for the study of the science
of sexual love. Just at that time a King called Amaruka
died. After asking his disciples to take especial care
of his body Sankara entered by yogic power the dead
body of Amaruka. The dead King came back to
life and his people felt very happy about the mysterious happening. Sankara, who had thus entered the
body of King Amaruka, lived in the palace enjoying
all royal pleasures. He gained practical experience
in the matter of sexual love from the queens in the
palace. People found the resurrected King Amaruka
to be better and more intelligent. The ministers suspect- —
ed that ae soul which dwelt in the body of the king
ie = — one else. Under the impression
at it might be that of some yogin the ministers
deputed agents to various parts of the country to find
out if there was anywhere the dead body of a yogi, and
ad age out Sankara’s body. It was about ‘to be
ped a when the disciples of Sankara met
oe en i. the palace and informed him about
Hie awa bed ee Immediately Sankara quitted
cake Cnet y entered his own body now lying on
pyre. He prayed to Srilaksminarasimha and
eae out from the burning pyre.
Sonkara returned "immediately to Mandanamifr’s
€ debate was started again. Bharatidevi
realised that Sankara could not be defeated in topics
related to_ the science of sex. Thus Sankara oained
absolute victory in his debate with Mandanamiéra who
then requested the former to grant him sannyisa and
accept him asa disciple. Sankara did so. Bharatidev
E90 followed her husband in accepting sannyasa.
et gail et i Sankara now knew that it was time
ee We er’s death. According to his promise to
er that he would be by her side at the time of her
death Sankara returned to KAalati. His mother expired,
and he made arrangments for cremation. But his relations did not cooperate with him and argued that it was
against the injunctions in the Sastras for a son, who had
taken to sannydsa, to perform the cremation etc. of his
mother. At last, Sankara had to cremate his mother by
himself without others’ help. He made a pyre with plantain stems in the compound of his house, and cut his
mother’s corpse into pieces, carried the yieces to the
funera pyre and thus cremated the body
ieee er Hein es After the.cremation of his mother
Bete AG eel aks his triumphal tour of the country.
f Sw eau ‘ee, travelled throughout India three
MES. rever he went he gained friends and also
ee ice was during these tours that he estaPe Me mathas (centres) in the four regions
of the country. Srfgeri in the south, Jaganatha in the
east, Dvaraka in the west and Badarinatha in the north
were the four chief mathas established by Sankara and
they continue to function even to this day
The Siva, Visnu and Devi temples and ‘other Hindu
religious institutions to be found in India today very
eloquently Pecan the achievements and unique
ae 2 aa _It is traditionally believed that
ankara brought five lingas from Kailasa and installed
them 1n the five great temples. Muktilinga in Kedara
Paralinga in the Nilakantha temple in Nepal Moksa
jinga at Cidambaram, Bhogalinga in oe igen and
SANKHA III
Yogalinga in Kajfci oF
Satara: The oeannue ae ease
also propounded hy him Aes in paren ee te
Aditya, Ambika, :'Visau, (Genes (ate ceeaieee ee
icc. » Visnu, nanatha and Mahesvara
Lj y worshipped, special i
given by the worshipper to his snecialy AeroeS “ies
appointed one disciple of his each in each of “ie canting
as its head and these mathas play the most important role
in the maintenance and propagation of the Advaita philosophy. The heads of these mathas during various periods
have been reputed Vedantists and noble souls. Jyotirmatha in Badarikagrama, Govardhana pitha in Jagannathapuri, Sarada pitha in Srngeri and Kamakotipitha
in Kaficiare the most important of the Sri Sankara pithas.
Having thus completed his philsophic mission or object
in life Sankara entered mahasamachi at the age of thirtytwo. Some scholars believe that he disappeared in a
cave at Kedara while certain others hold the view that
he ascended the Sarvajiiapitha (the omniscient state) at
Kaficiand spent his closing days there.
16) His works. The literary compositions of Sankara may
be classified into four divisions, viz, Bhasyas (commentaries), original works, hymns to various deities, and
mantras.
Father of Upavarsa. (See under
SANKARASVAMI.
Upavarsa ).
SANKARI. Wife of Varatanu, the brahmin. (See under
Varatanu for the reason why the couple had no
children in their next life) .
SANKARSANA. Balabhadra Ram
the derivation of the name se
Rama).
SANKASYA.
Yama’s court. (Sab
a. (To know about
e under Balabhadra
A King of ancient days, who lived in
ha Parva, Chapter 8, Verse 10).
SANKASYAPURA. A Kingdom in ancient India. The
King of this country Sudhanva once attacked the
kingdom of Mithila. (Valmiki Ramayana, Balakanda,
Canto 75).
SANKHA I.
found in Kubera’s
Paficala attained heaven as
good brahmins. (Santi Parva,
Anugasana Parva, Chapter 137). Sankha appeared on
earth, according to one belief, from the bones of
Sankhacida. (For details see under Tulasi, Para 2).
to Kagyapaprajapati of
Considered to be a great, sublime treasure,
court. Brahmadatta, King of
he used to give Sankha to
Chapter 234 and
6ANIKHA II. A naga born
Kadri. The following information about it 1s from the
Mahabharata. ‘sae
(i) Narada once introduced Sankha_ to Matali,
charioteer of Indra (Udyoga Parva, Chapter 103,
Verse 12),
hich came to
(ii) Sankha was one of the chief nagas wH1ct
lead the soul of Balabhadra to Patala at the time of his
death. (Mausala Parva, Chapter 4, Verse 7).
6ANKHA III. Son of the Virata King.
(i) He was present at the wedding of
company of his brother Uttara and sister
Parva, Chapter 31, Verse 16).
(ii) He also came out to fight
when they lifted the cows of the
Parva, Chapter 31, Verse 16).
“3) On the first day of the great
Se ee Ga (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 49, Verse 26).
(iv) He was killed in fighting os ne 17) at Kuruksetra. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 5, Verse ‘
Uttara.
a and others
dhan
Oe (Virata
Virata King.
war he clashed with

é ANKHA IV
v) After death he got absorbed in the Visvadevas.
ohana Parva, Chapter 5, Verse 17).
SANKHA Iv. A maharsi, who was the elder brother of
Likhitamaharsi. Likhita once punished Sankha for
tucking fruits from his garden without his permission.
‘Js see under Likhita).
Svargar
{ For deta
SANIKHA Vv. A Kekaya prince. atte and his four
brothers were maharathas on the side of the Pandavas.
(Udyoga Parva, Chapter 171, Verse 15).
6ANKHA VI. The asura called Hayagriva. (See under
Hayagriva) ‘ ;
6ANKHACUDA I. An Asura. Sudama _ became this
asura as the result of a curse. (For details see under
Tulasi, Para 5).
&ANIKHACUDA II. A slave of Kubera. While Krsna
and Balabhadra were enjoying pleasures with naked
Gopastris at Vrndavana Sankhacida, attracted by the
Gopi women, went there. He abducted the women and
in the fight that ensued was killed by Krsna, who gave
to Balabhadra the precious stone taken from his
Sankhacida’s) head. (Bhagavata, 10th Skandha).
SANIKHALIKA. A female attendant of Subrahmanya.
(Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Verse 15).
SANK HAMEKHALA. A maharsi. Once he went to the
f sage Sthilakesga to see Pramadvara who was
= féyama O
ag bitten by a snake. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter
lying there,
6ANKHANAKBA. A naga that lives in the court of
Varuna worshipping the latter. (Sabha Parva, Southern
text, Chapter 9). _ |
SANIKHAPADA. Son of Svarocisa Manu, who once
taught him Satvatadharma and Samkhapada imparted the dharma to his son Suvarnabha. (Santi Parva
Chapter 348, Verse B71) is .
SAKIKHAPARVATA (MOUNTAIN). A_ mountain
nar Mount Meru. (See under Kuranga Parvata).
S$ANKHAPINDA. A naga born to Kas yapaprajapati
of Kadri. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 35, Verse 23).
SANKHASIRAS (SANKHASIRSA). A naga born to
Kagyapaprajapati of Kadru. (Adi Parva, Chapter 35
Verse mer ‘
6ANKHASRAVAS. A female attendant of Subrahmanya
(Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Verse 26). _
SANKHATIRTHA, A sacred place on the banks of the
river Sarasvati. (Salya Parva, Chapter 37°,
SANKHYAYANA. An 4carya (preceptor) who was a
prominent disciple of Sanatkumara, Brhaspati. bein
another equally prominent disciple. (Bha , te tg
Skandha 8). - 8 ?
SAXIKHYAYOGASASTRA. See under Kapila,
SANIKKHINII. A sacred spot at Kuruksetra. A bath
in the Devitirtha there will add to one’s beauty, (Vana
Parva, Chapter 83, Verse 51).
SAKIKHINI II. Wife of Mahagankha,
(For details see under Mahasgankha).
SANKOCA. One of the Raksasas, who, in ancient days
ruled the earth and ultimately died. The story of
Sankoca was told by Bhisma to Yudhisthira to prove
the truth that even the greatest and most powerful has
one day or other, to quit life and die. Among such
great ones are included Prthu, Aila, Maya, Bhauma
Naraka, Sambara, Hayagriva, Puloma, Svarbhanu,
Prahlada, Namucl, aksa, Vipracitti, Virocana,
Suhotra, Vrsa, Vrsabha, Kapilasva, Viripa, Bana,
Kartasvara, and Visvadamstra. Though all of them
a crocodile.
688 SANNATEYU
were once emperors they had to give room to the next
generation. Bhisma, on his bed of arrows, was thus
ee the transience of life. (Santi Parva, Chapter
SANKRTII. A King, who lives in the court of Yama
_worshipping him. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 8, Verse 10).
SANKRTI Il. A muni born in the Atri dynasty. After 7
giving his disciples lessons on impersonal (attributeless)
God he went and lived in Devaloka. (Mahabharata
Santi Parva, Chapter 234, Verse 22).
SANKU I. A son of Hiranyaksa. Sambara, Sakuni,
Dvimirdha, Sanku and Arya were the sons of Hiranyaksa. (Agni Purana, Chapter 19).
SANKU II. A Yadava King who was present at the
5 of Draupadi. (Adi Parva, Chapter 185, Verse
He was a member of the company of Yadavas, who
carried Subhadra’s dowry at her wedding with Arjuna.
He was a maharathi also. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 14
and Adi Parva, Chapter 220).
SANKUKARNA I. Amuni, who lived at the sacred
Kapardigvara tirtha in Varanasi. There lived a brahmin
in the temple there performing tapas. One day a lean
and bony ghost, hungry and panting came to the
brahmin. To the brahmin’s question the ghost replied
thus ; ‘“‘In my previous life I was a rich brahmin. I
looked after my family well, but did not worship
Devas, guests or cows. Nor did I do any pious deed.
But, one day I happened to worship Lord Visvanatha
and touch his idol. Within a short period after that I
died. You will please tell me the means, if any, for me
to attain heaven.”’
Sankukarna answered the ghost as follows :—‘‘There
lives no man on earth, who is more fortunate than your
good self, who could touch and prostrate before Lord
Vigvanatha. That good fortune has led you to me. You
bathe in this holy tirtha and you will lose your ghosthood. The ghost, accordingly dived in the water and
immediately rose up to heaven. (Padma Purana, Adi
Khanda, Chapter 34).
SANKUKARNA II. Anaga born in the Dhrtarastra
dynasty. It was burnt to death at the serpent yajjia
conducted by Janamejaya. (Adi Parva, Chapter 57,
Verse 15).
SAKIKUKARWNA III. An attendant of Siva. He lives in
the court of Kubera. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 10, Verse
SANKUKARNA IV. One of the two attendants
presented by Parvati to Subrahmanya, the other being
Puspadanta. (Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 51).
SANIKUKARNA V. A_ warrior of Subrahmanya.
(Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 56).
SANKUKARNESVARA. A _ mirti (aspect) of Siva
whose worship is ten times more productive of good
than the afvamedha Yajifia. (Vana Parva, Chapter 82,
Verse 70).
SANKUROMA. A naga with thousand heads, one of
the sons of Kasyapa by Kadri. (Matsya Purana
Chapter 6, Verse 4). ,
SANNATEYU. A son born to Raudrasva, the third son
of emperor Puru, by Misrake‘i, the apsara woman. He,
a great archer,had nine sons called Rceyu, Vaneyu,
Jaleyu, Pakseyu, Krpaneyu, Sthandileyu, Tejeyu,
Batyaye and Dharmeyu. (Adi Parva, Chapter 94, Verse

SANNATI I
fa ahaa I. The wife of ‘Kratu, the grandson of
ermit Pulaha. To Pulaha the sons Kardama, Sahisnu
<n were ee The extremely bright Balakhilere born to Kratu by hi i
Pan, Chastain y his wife Sannati. (Agni
SANNATI II. The wife of Kin |
df. g Brahmadatta. Sh
a sera Both the husband and nel wife did
penance at MAnasasaras. (Padma Purana
ee fay. (Padma Purana, Srsti Khanda,
SANNIEAT LRT An ancient holy place. The
evas such as Brahma and others visit this place
monthly. Those who bathe in this place, at the time of
the solar eclipse will obtain the fruits of conducting six
Teenie eerie i believed that giving offerings to
e manes at this place is of great i
Vana Parva, Chapter 83, Were inte Race an
SANNIHITA. An Agni (fire). This agni creates the
power of activity inside the living things. It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 221, Stanza
19, that this fire was the third son of Manu.
SANNIVESA. One ofthe sons born t a i
wife Racana. ( Bhagavata, Skandha 6). pe gs
SANTA. Son of Satya who was born of the family of
King Vitahavya. He hada son called Sravas. (M.B
Anuéasana Parva, Chapter 30, Verse 62). es
SANTA I. Son of Apa, one of the eight Vasus. He had
four sons called Vaitanda, Srama, Santa and Dhvani.
In Verse 18, Chapter 66 of Adi Parva, it is stated that
this Santa was the son of Ahar, the Astavasu, and that
chetn aE pees called Sama, Jyotis and Muni
N : ing, the son of Priyavrat Apav:
Ne ‘Skasdha) | yavrata. (Bhagavata,
ANTA. Daughter of DaSaratha. She was brought u
By pe eee ae sei and was married bit me iin
2. syagrnga. (For details see Para 9, under DaSaratha :
SANTANAGOPALA. The story of how Arjuna tried lee
save a Brahmin’s son who was dead. (For the detailed
story see under Arjuna Para 17, sub-sectiond ).
SANTAMAYA. A King of ancient India. (Adi Parva, —
Chapter 1, Verse 236).
SANTANAVA. A grammarian, anterior to Panini. He
has written a book called ‘Phitsitra’ about the svaras
(Accents) in the Vedas. This book of 87 siatras is
divided into four Chapters called antodattam, adyudattam, dvitiyodattam and Paryadyodattam.
SANTANIKA. A female attendant of Subrahmanya.
_ (M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Verse 9). a
oa (SANTANU) . King Santanu, on a par with
the Devas, was a great physician (Mahabhisak).
SANTANU (SANTANU). Son of King Pratipa of the
lunar dynasty. : |
(i) For previous life and birth S
Aieue, Pare UF as a teas see under
(ii) Married life. (See under Bhisma, Paras 2, 3).
3) Other information.
(i) He was the second son of Pratipa. His elder brother
was called Devapi, younger one Balhika and his mother
Sunanda. (Adi Parva, Chapter 94, Verse 61; Chapter
95, Verse 45).
(ii) He was called Santanu as things touch
his hands used to become youthful SU ea alee
(iii) Santanu became King as his elder brother Devapi
had, as an infant, renounced the throne and left for the
SANTIKALPA
forest. (Adi Parva, Chapter 94
Wess { 5). , Chap , Verse 62; Chapter 95,
(iv) It was he, who brought to the palace and brought
up Krpa and Krpi, who were found in the forest as
orphans. (Adi Parva, Chapter 95, Verse 46).
(v) Santanu worships Yama in his court. (Sabha
Parva, Chapter 8, Verse 25).
(vi) He attained heaven by doing tapas on Mount
Arcika. (Vana Parva, Chapter 125, Verse 19).
(vii) He is one of the Kings to be remembered both
at dawn and dusk. (Anusasana Parva, Chapter 165,
Verse 58).
(viii) He was absolutely wedded to truth and he
possessed great prowess. (Adi Parva, Chapter 96, Verse
(ix) He conducted thousand aévamedhas and, hundred
rajasayas. (Adi Parva, Chapter 96, Verse 2).
(x) Synonyms used of him in the Mahabharata :—
Bharata, Bharatagopta, Bharatasattama, Kauravya,
Kurusattama, Pratipa etc.
SANTARAJAS. A King of Kaégi. He was the son of
King Trikakalpava and father of King Raji. (Bhagavata,
9th Skandha). |
SANTARDANA. The son of Dhrstaketu who was the
King of Kekaya. He was present at the Rajasiya
sacrifice of Yudhisthira. (Bhagavata, Skandha 9).
SANTARJANA. A_ warrior of Subrahmanya. (Salya
Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 58) .
SANTI I. Daughter of Daksa |
Prasiiti delivered including Santi
Visnu Purana, Part 1, Chapter Dee
SANTI II. A king bornin the dynasty of Bharata, son of
Dusyanta. He was the son of Nila, grandson of
Ajamidha and father of SuSanti. (Bhagavata, Sth
Skandha ).
SANTI ni Name of the Indra of the fourth Manvantara
(Adi Parva, Chapter 196, Verse 29)-
SANTIIV. A maharsi. Sonof Angiras, he was called
Atmeyu also. He had participated in the Yajfia con-
“(Santi Parva, Chapter 336,
ducted by Uparicaravasu ( Boyce 30% Ae
Verse 8; Adi Parva, ae i
apter 89, Verse : ‘
PENSE who was a disciple of the Rs1 called
Bhuti, who did once g° to participate in a yajiia conducted by his brother Suvarccas, leaving matters con:
nected with his asrama with Santi, who discharged his
One day
duties quite well in the absence of his master. ‘
- became very scarce in the arama he praised
by his wife Prasiiti.
twentyfour children.
when agni er)
Agnideva, and noucing that the Deva was pleased
d him to bestow a son on the maharsl.
ter on beSanti requeste
Accordingly a son W
came pou as ‘Bhautyamanu. pleased
with the devout life of his disciple (Santi ) taught him
Sangaveda. Markandeya Purana)
SENTIDEVI Vs Daughter of King Devaka.
SANTIDEVA 3 :
oe eee by Vasudeva. (Vayu Purana, | Chapt
96, Verse 130). -pita sections of the
One of the five eae kefa, the other
SANTIKALPA.
Atharvaveda co | ae
four sections being naksatrakalpam, veces Pe eo zy
takalpam and. Suey Meet reiakalpam
tains rules for the wors! the § arSS evil; sarhbicontains the rites regarding Brahman, ete me x
takalpam contains the rules about ™ 5 * sikalpam
Angirsakalpam deals with black magic 4M
rship of

SANTIPARVA 690
contains rules about propitiating deities by offerings of
horse, elephant etc.
SANTPARVA. An important Parva of the Mahabharata
(See under Mahabharata).
SANTURODHBHA. A king of the Piru dynasty. He was
the son of Matinara. (Agni Purana, Chapter 278).
SANU. A country of ancient India. (Mahabharata,
Bhisma Parva Chapter 9, Verse 43).
SANYASA (SANNYASA) One of the four stages of
Brahminical life. The four stages are Brahmacarya
(Religious student), Garhasthya (householder), Vanaprastha (Forest-dweller)and Sannyasa (hermit or sage).
(For further details see under Agrama).
Duties of a hermit. Manu has ordained that one should
perform sannyasa (renunciation) at the fourth stage of
life renouncing every tie with the world. After becoming
a hermit he should travel daily alone. He should enter
villages only for food. He should have renounced
wealth. He should not acquire any wealth. He should
be a sage filled with knowledge. He should have a
skull as the pot for taking alms. . He should sleep under
trees. He should wear poor cloth and should be solitary.
He should consider everybody as equal. Having become
a hermit he should not delight in death or life.
A hermit should put every step looking straight down to
the earth. He should drink water filtered by cloth.
Words and deeds should be pure andtrue. The shells
of water-gourd (pumpkin), wooden pots and earthen
pots are the Vaisnava sign ofhermits. A hermit should
beg for food daily- from houses where no smoke comes
out, where pestle is placed and where there is no charcoal, and after all. have taken food andthe pot for preparing food is placed upside down.
It is said that the food got by hermits by begging is of
five types. They are Madhukara (collected alms),
asarnkipta (unlimited), Prakpranita (prepared much
earlier), Ayacitam (got by not begging). and tatkalika
(for the time being). In whichever stage of life he
may be, he should be staunch in that stage and should
perform the duties with honesty.
Ifby ignorance a hermit engaged himself in killing
animals by day or night, to remove the impurity and get
purity, he should bathe and perform six pranayamas
(restraints of the breath) daily. The hermit should
discard his body made of five elements.
The signs of duty are, resolution, forbearance, selfrestraint, not robbing, cleansing, control of. sense-organs,
modesty, knowledge, truth, not resorting to anger, and
so on. Hermits areoffour grades, such as Kuticaka,
Bahidaka, Harnsa and Paramaharnsa, the last-mentioned
being the noblest grade. ‘The hermit who wears one or
three dandas (rod) will be freed from ties of birth and
death. — |
The five Yamas or restraints are not killing (Ahimsa),
truth, not stealing, celibacy and not receiving. The
five Niyamas or religious duties are cleansing, joy or
contentedness, penance, self-study and meditation on
God. The sitting postures suitable for hermits are
Padmasana etc. (Agni Purana; Chapter 161).
STAPADA. A famous Puranic region in India.
— of this kingdom, fearing Jarasandha, ran away
to the south with his son. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 14,
Verse 28).
SAPTADVIPAS
SAPTACARU. A holy place. Thereason for giving this
place the name Saptacaru is given in Mahabharata,
Vana Parva, Chapter 82 as follows: ‘
The word ‘Carw’ means sacrifice. Once devas (gods)
and men together put the fat parts of sacrificial animals,
as burnt offerings in the sacrificial fire, each singing
seven verses from the Rgveda. By this sacrifice they
obtained more prosperity than the fruits of giving one
lakh of cows as alms or performing hundred Rajasuya
sacrifices or thousand horse-sacrifices.
“The wise said that it was an endless gift to the
manes. The gods, the manes, the Gandharvas, the
celestial maids, the ganas, the yaksas, Kinnaras, the
siddhas, the Vidyadharas, the people of the earth, the
Raksasas, the daityas, the Rudras, Brahma, all these
joined together with vow and fast taken for a thousand years and performed a sacrifice each exalting
Visnu by singing seven verses from Rgveda. Kesava
was much pleased at the caru and gave them Astaisvaryasiddhi (the eight miraculous attainments) and
everything they wished. Thus giving them all kinds of
prosperities, the god Mukunda disappeared in this place
as lightning in the clouds, Therefore this place became
famous everywhere by the name Saptacaru.”’
SAPTADVIJA (S). ‘The seven Brahmins who killed and
ate on the way the cow brought for the teacher.
These seven Brahmins were the disciples of a teacher
in Kundinapura. Once owing to a severe famine people
were in a very difficult situation. The teacher sent these
seven disciples to beg for a cow from his son-in-law
who had a very large number of cows. They did
accordingly. The son in-law gave them a cow for his
father-in-law. The disciples began the return journey
with the cow. When they reached half-way they became
so weary and tired of hunger and walking that they
could not proceed a step further. When they reache
the stage of death, those celibates killed the cow
according to the Vedic rites, and ate the flesh. Carrying the remaining flesh they reached the house of the
teacher and told him all the truth. As they had tried to
be righteous as far as possible, the teacher only felt
proud of his disciples. (Kathasaritsagara, Madanamancukalambaka, Taranga 1).
SAPTADVIPAS (SEVEN ISLANDS).
1) General information. ‘The seven islands are Jambidvipa Plaksadvipa, Salmalidvipa, Kuéadvipa,
Krauficadvipa, Sakadvipa and Puskaradvipa. Each of
these islands is surrounded by sea. The sea that surrounds |
badvipa is the Lavana sea (salt sea), the Plaksa
tink is, surrounded by the sea of Sugarcane-juice,
Salmalidvipa by the sea of liquor, Kugadvipa by the sea
of ghee, Krauficadvipa by the sea of curd Sakadvipa
by the sea of milk and the Puskaradvipa by the sea of
pure water. In the centre of all, lies the Jambidvipa
and in the centre of this island, stands the golden
mountain meru. (Visnu Purana, Armga 2, Chapter 2).
2) Origin. There is a story about the origin of these
seven islands and the surrounding seas, in Devi Bhagavata Skandha 8.
Two famous sons named Priyavrata and Uttanapada
were born to Svayambhuva Manu. Priyavrata and his
children ruled the country for a period of eleven arbudas, that is a hundred million years. Though he was
aged so much the power of his mind and body did
—ve
re a

SAPTAGANGA
not show any sign of weakness. At this time he saw once
the sun travelling on the first side of the earth, and
began to think. ‘“‘When the sun is walking on one
side of the earth, the other side must naturally be dark.
Will it happen so in our time? In all places at all
times it should be bright and there should be no darkness.’’ Thinking thus he got into a chariot as bright as
the sun and travelled round the earth seven times.
During these travels the wheels of the chariot made
seven furrows on the earth. These furrows became the
seven seas and the beds between the furrows became
seven islands.
3) Soveretgn powers. Priyavrata made his seven sons
sovereigns of the seven islands. These seven sovereign
rulers were .Agnidhra, IKIdhmajihva, Yajiiabahu,
Hiranyaretas, Ghrtaprstha, Medhatithi and Vitihotra.
SAPTAGANGA. An ancient holy place. It is mentioned
in Mahabharata, Anusdsana Parva, Chapter 25, Verse
16, that if one goes to this place and gives offerings to
gods and the manes and worships them, one would
attain heaven and become adeva (god).
SAPTAGODAVARA. A holy place near the temple of
Sirparaka. Those who bathe in this would attain
heaven. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 85, Verse 44).
SAPTAJANASRAMA. A holy place where seven
hermits called the Saptajanas, went to heaven by
standing head downwards in water. This was the
place through which Sri Rama and Sugriva went to
Kiskindha. Sugriva told Sri Rama about the hermitage
of Saptajanas as follows : :
“Oh ! Raghava! This vast area is the hermitage where
rest could be taken, as sweet fruits and pure water
could be obtained and the forest looks like a garden.
Here the seven hermits called Saptajanas, who did
penance and took vow and fast by standing in water
always, with heads downwards, did live in days of
old.”? (Valmiki Ramayana, Kiskindha Kanda, Sarga
SAPTAJIT. One of the daughters born to Kasyapa by
his wife Danu. (Matsya Purana 6 : 19).
SAPTAKRT. An eternal god concerned in Sraddha
(offerings to the manes). (M.B. Anusasana Parva,
Chapter 91, Stanza 36).
SAPTAMATR (S). (SEVEN MOTHERS).
1) General information. Saptamatrs are
goddesses named Brahmani, Vaisnavi,
Kaumari, Varahi, Indrani and Camundi.
2) Origin. Some are of opinion that the Saptamatrs
are connected with Siva. Theirnames reveal that they
were born from the bodies of Brahma, Visnu and such
other gods. There is another story that when Siva and
Visnu joined together and tried to kill the asura named
Andhaka and failed, they created the seven mothers to
kill the asura. From each drop of blood of Andhakasura
that fell on the ground an asura arose. ‘These seven
matrs joined with Yogegvari, the creation of Siva,
drank the blood of the asura without allowing it to
fall on the ground and so it became easy for Siva to
kill the asura.
There is a story in Vamana Purana, Chapter 56,
ahout the birth of the Saptamatrs, as follows In
olden days a fierce war broke out between the devas
and the asuras. When the fierce asuras Canda and
Munda were killed the famous asura named Raktabija
the seven
Mahe§ vari,
SAPTASARASVATA
entered the battlefield with an aksauhini of army
(21870 chariots, so many elephants, 65610 horses and
109350 infantry). Seeing this immense army of the —
asuras drawing near, Kausiki, MaheSvari and Kalimade
a loud roaring sound. Then from the mouth of
Mahe§g vari, Brahmani came out seated on a swan and
wearing rosary and water pot. From her eyes Mahesvari with three eyes came out seated on a bull and
wearing great snakes as bangles and ear-rings and
holding a trident. From the loins came out Kaumari,
seated on a peacock and holding a_ lance. The beautiful Vaisnavi came out from her fiand, seated on
Garuda, holding a conch, discus, club, sword, the bow
é4rnmga and arrow. From her posterior came out the
horrible Varahi (Boar) with a great pestle, seated on
the Naga (serpent) Sesa, and furrowing the ground
with her fierce tusks. From her heart came out the
awful Narasimhi (woman-lion) with fierce claws, who
at the shaking of her mane displaced the planets and
the stars, and from her foot Camundi came out. (See
under Palala).
SAPTANAGA (S). (Seven serpents). ‘The Saptanagas
are Ananta, Taksaka, Karka, Padma, Mahapadma,
Sankhaka and Gulika. All of them should be consecrated in temples as wearing Brahma-string and having the
face. with the: expanded hood of a_ serpent. (Agni.
Purana, Chapter 51).
SAPTARAVA (SAPTAVARA) _ One
children of Garuda. (M.B. Udyoga Parva,
Verse 11).
SAPTARSIS. (The seven hermits) . A group of hermits.
There are seven hermits in this group. The Saptarsis
in each Manvantara (age of Manu) are different. As
there are fourteen Manvantaras before a great deluge,
by that time ninetyeight Saptarsis_ will be born and
dead. The father of the Saptarsis 10 each Manu’s age
will be different. The Saptarsis of the present Magu 5
age, Marici, Angiras, Atri, Pulastya, Vasistha, ; u aha
and Kratu are the mental sons of Brahma. (For further
details see under the word Manvantara) .
SAPTARSIKUNDA. A_ holy bath: (tirtha ) __ situated
within Kuruksetra. It is mentioned 1n Mahabharata,
Vana Parva, Chapter 73 that those who bathe in this
tirtha will obtain the merit of good actions. ss rags
SAPTASALA (S). The cursed forms of the King
Manibhadra’s seven sons who were sorceht a Due to
the curse of Agastya they became seven palm trees
from the curse during
(salas). They obtained liberation
the incarnation of Visnu as Sri (For detailed
story see under Manibhadra II \
of the famous
Chapter 101,
Rama.
SAPTASAMUDRAS. (The seven seas): See under
Saptadvipa(s) .
SAPTASARASVATA. i 4
1) General information. A holy place situated within
Kuruksetra. This is a holy bath ce ee.
Mention is made in Mahabharata, >. i eBalabha aie.
ter 37, Verse 61, that during his pilgrimas
rama visited this holy bath. Skee
2) Origin. A story occurs 1D. Me athe le
Parva, Chapter 38 about the orlg!® ©
iven below:—
Once Brahma performed a sacrifice ey islene uot
Puskara. All the devas (gods and 8° ati alone did
the sacrifice. Among the rivers, Sarasyv

SARADANDAYANI.
SAPTASVAS
not come at first. Then Brahma remembered
Sarasvati and she appeared under the name Suprabha.
Thus she appeared before the hermits who were doing
penance in that place assuming seven different figures.
From that day onwards the place became famous under
the name Saptasdrasvata. (See under Sarasvatt).
SAPTASVAS. The seven horses of the Sun. The chariot
of the Sun is nine thousand yojanas long and its shaft
is eighteen-thousand yojanas long. The length of the
axle is fiftéen million seven lakhs yojanas. The wheel
is secured to this axle. The entire whee! of ‘Time’
(Kalacakra) stuck fast in the undiminishing figure of
‘year’ with three naves of the wheel, five spokes and
sixty rings. The chariot is drawn by seven horses.
They are the seven Vedic metres with their theory.
They are Gayatri, Brhati, Usnik, Jagati, Tristup,
Anustup and Pankti. (Visnu Purana, Arnéa 2, Chapter
SAPTOPAYAS. (The seven expedients). See under
Caturupayas.
SARABHA I. A naga born in the Taksaka dynasty. It
was burnt to death at Janamejaya’s serpent yajfia. (Adi
Parva, Chapter 57, Verse 8).
SARABHA IF. A naga born in the Airavata dynasty.
It was burnt to death at Janamejaya’s serpent yajiia.
(Adi Parva, Chapter 57, Verse 11).
SARABHA III. A notorious Danava, son of Kas yapaprajapati by his wife Danu. (Adi Parva, Chapter 65,
Verse 26).
SARABHA IV. A maharsi, who worships Yama in _ his
court. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 8, Verse 14).
SARABHA V._ Brother of Dhrstaketu, King of Cedi. He
wasa friend and supporter of the Pandavas. During the
a$vamedha he helped Arjuna to lead the yajfiic horse.
(Asvamedhika Parva, Chapter 83, Verse 3).
SARABHA VI. A brother of Sakuni. He was killed in
the great war by Bhima. (Drona Parva, Chapter 157,
Verse 24).
SARABHA VII Virabhadra incarnated himself as
Sarabha to defeat Narasirmhamirti. (Siva Purana,
Satarudrasarhhita)
SARABHANGA. A Maharsi, who lived in the Dandaka
forest during the ‘forest-life’ of Sri Rama. (V4lmiki
Ramayana, Aranyakanda, Canto IV). When Sri
Rama visited Sarabhanga’s Asrama, Indra too came
there, but went away saying that he would meet the
maharsi after the great mission of Rama was over. The
maharsi told Rama that he was waiting tosee him and
did not accompany Indra to Devaloka as he wanted to
go there only after seeing Rama. Raima answered the
Maharsi that he would take upon himself all the
spiritual assets and good results of the actions of the
Maharsi, and wanted him to point out a place for
them (Rama and others) to live. Sarabhaiga directed
them to the agrama of Sutiksna, and after that ended
his life by leaping into the fire and attained Brahmaloka.
SARABHANGASRAMA. A _ holy place. Those who
visit the place purify their families. (Vana Parva,
Chapter 85, Verse 42).
A Kekaya King. His wife,
rutasena was the younger sister of Kunti. As the
couple did not get a child even very long after their
marriage, the King got performed, with Srutasena’s
permission, the ‘Purmsavana’ yajiia with the result that
692 SARALOMA ~
three sons (Durjaya and others) were born to them.
(Adi Parva, Chapter 111).
SARADVAN. A muni, the son of Gautama. From his
very infancy he preferred learning the dhanurveda
(science of archery) to the other Vedas. While a
brahmacarin (Religious student) he performed tapas
and secured divine arrows. Afterwards, having been
overcome by the charms and appeals of an apsara
woman named Janapati, Saradvan had seminal
emission from which were born Krpa and Krpi. (For
details see under Krpa).
SARADVATI. Anapsaraé woman. She
birthday celebrations of Arjuna.
SARAGULMA. Amonkeyin Rama’s army. (V4lmiki
Ramayana, Kiskindha Kanda, 41, 3)..
SARAKATIRTHA. A famous sacred place in Kuruksetra. He who takes his bath here on Caturdagi day
of the dark half and worships Siva will have all his
desires fulfilled and will attain heaven. (Vana Parva,
Chapter 83). Within this tirtha there are a crore of
other tirthas called Rudrakoti, Kipakunda etc. The
sacred place to the east of it is said to belong to Narada.
SARALOMA. A maharsi, the father of Déasira.
Vasistha once told Sri Rama the story of Dagira to
prove that the world is all an illusion.
Dasara was the only son of Saraloma, a muni, who
performed tapas in the plains of the mountain in
Magadha. Dasara too did tapas in another part of
the mountain. While the father and the son were
living happily the father entered samadhi and the son
wept over the loss of his father. Then a forest-nymph
comforted him with celestial advice.
Dagira performed his father’s obsequies. He began
thinking that the earth was impure and that the top of
trees was pure and decided to do tapasinsuch a manner
that he got power to sit on the branches and leaves of
trees. Accordingly he made a big pit of fire and began
making offerings of flesh cut from his body into the fire.
Agnibhagavan (Fire-deity) appeared and asked him to
choose the boons he wanted. Dagira told Agni as
follows: ‘Oh Lord; I do not find any pure spot on this
earth, which is full of created living beings. You should
therefore, grant me the power to live on the tops of
trees.”? Agni granted him the boon,
Daéira then climbed a big tree in the forest -and occupied, without the least fear, a tender leaf at the top of
the topmost branch of the tree. He there assumed the
Padmasana (the lotus seat for meditation). His mind
was functioning actively as it had not been turned inwards into true knowledge. With his mind in such a
state he performed yajiia. He continued performing
yajiias like gomedha, a” vamedha etc. mentally for ten
years. Then self-illuminating knowledge arose in his
mind. and he saw a beautiful forest-nymph seated
beautifully attired at the end of the tender leaf on
which he was sitting. She was looking very sad, her
head bent down. Dagira asked her, who she was so
much beautiful and attractive as to evoke love even in
Kama (the God of love). She answered him in a sweet
voice as follows: ““Very rare desires in life may be got if
great men are requested for. I am the forest-nymph
of this forest beautified by the tree you sit on and by
trees and creepers equally beautiful. An assembly of the
forest-enymphs has been held.to celebrate a festival for
attended the
ee we

SARALOMA
the worship of Kamadeva on trayodasi in the Suklapaksa
of the month of Caitra. I too went there. and I, who
am childless, felt sorry in mind to see theothers petting
their children on their laps. But, why should I be sad
when you, who can give supplicants anything they wish
for, are here? You should, therefore, bless me with a
child or else I will end my life in fire.’’
Dagira blessed her to have a son within a month. He
told her also that it would be difficult for the son to
acquire knowledge as he was got on the insistence that
she would die in fire unless she got him. He did not
grant her request for permission to live with him: he
went into the forests leaving her behind him.
The son of the forest-nymph became twelve vea
Then, one day, she took the child to the ae te
with him and went away. One day the father began
telling the sona story, on the top of the tree, and
Vasistha, who was going by the sky in invisible form
to bathe in Kailasaganga, heard the story. Vasistha
hid himself on the tree and listened to the story. *
It was the story of king Svottha that the muni was tell-
-ng his son as follows -—‘‘He was famous for his noble
qualities and unique prowess. He possessed three bodies
which possessed capacity to rule the country. One of
the three bodies was the best, the other midway between
good and bad and the third bad. The very origin of
the King was in the wide and extensive sky; like birds
he lived in the sky. He built a city in the sky with
fourteen streets and three divisions or sectors. There
were also forests, woods and mountains for games in
the city; seven big tanks, wavy-white with creepers of
pearl and two lamps, spreading heat and coolness,
burning always. The King, who went about all his time
In this vast city, built in it many movable inner dwellings, and they were divided between the upper and
lower parts of the city. They were thatched witha
kind of black grass. Each inner house had nine doors
some of them windows, which admitted air always. In
each house five lamps burned, the lamps resting on three
pillars and a white piece of wood. Each house was
glitteringly plastered and had courtyards. A particular
sect of bhitas, who ever feared light, guarded the
houses. When the houses created thus by magic moved
from one place to another, King Svottha enjoyed, like
birds in nests, playing various games therein. The
king, who possessed three bodies, used to go out
after playing for some time with the guards, and run
about, like one possessed of a Uesire: to occupy houses,
newly built, and then reach the city, which was like a
Gandharva city. Frail and unsettled in mind, the king,
off and on, developed a will to die, and accordingly he
died. Just as waves come up in the sea, the king used
to be born again from the sky and to attend to worldly
affairs. At times he used to repent about and weep over
his actions asking himself what he, the fool, was doing
and why he should be sad like that. At other times he
used to feel elated and enthusiastic. Briefly put, he
used to be, by turns drinking, walking, jumping, expanding, contracting, feeling, drowsy and then exuberant.
The great and handsome king was actually, like the
sea, rendered restless by wind, possessed by various
moods.
The father was describing a philosophy of life figurative
to his son, but the boy undéiatood eathine oT hea, a
SARALOMA
requested by the son, the father explained to him the
meaning of the story as follows:
Svottha was concretised conception born out of the
ultimate sky. Conceptions originate and die automatically. The whole visible world is imaginary. The world
is there only when there is conception and in its absence
no world exists. Brahma, Visnu, Siva and Indra are
only parts of that conception. It is conception itself,
which creates the world of three cities in nothingness or
vacuum. On account of the blessing (will) of that
fundamental Caitanya (awareness, life) the formless conception attains Brahmanhood (the universal self) and
engages itself in the process of creation. The glittering
city said to have been created in the sky is the fourteen
worlds, the gardens in it are forests and woods, the play
hills therein are mountains like the Himalayas, Meru
etc. The two eternal lamps of heat and cold of the
story refer to the Sun and Moon. The creepers or
f pearl refer to rivers. Special gems have
garlands o
been described as tendrils of lotus and fire in the ocean
and the seven seas are described respectively as lotus and
the seven tanks. The statement that in this three-tiered
city the king of conception built play-houses referred to
the creation of individual bodies. The houses were connected as those in the upper, middle and lower parts
to denote living beings in the three worlds, Devaloka, Manusyaloka and Patala. Movement is the
dies due to the flow of Prana (breath).
journey of bo (br )
Pieces of wood refer to bones and the plastering 1s skin.
Black grass said to have been used for thatching is hair
on the head. The nine doors are the nine openings In
the body. Windows refer to the ear, nose etc. The
hand arms etc. are roads and the five sense organs,
lamps. The guards, who shun and quit light, are the
egoes which run away from knowledge and discretion.
The king of conception or imagination born from nonmaterials finds enjoyment in the. house of the body,
but the enjoyment is only ephemeral. Imagination
develops a moment and 1s extinguished, like the lamp,
the next moment. The place or status of conceptions
in the body may be compared to that of waves in the
ocean. When desire takes place for things conceived it
returns to the ‘body-house’, which is to be born, and it
ends or perishes on achievement. Rebirth due to desire
(will-power) is never for happiness, but ts for unending
sorrow and pain. Ihe wide world causes sorrow because it is felt to be real. Absence of this feeling ends
the sorrow as night swallows clouds. Lamentation 1s
the appeal or expression of the mind remembering forbidden practices in life and ananda happiness, 's the
proud state of mind remembering noble practices.
The three bodies of the king according to the three
states-the best or highest, the middle one and the lowdenote the three attributes (Sattva rajas-tamo gunas )
Causative of the existence of the world. The oe
of the attributes (tamoguna) or conceptions accor ing
to them, getting more and more pain-giving on accoun
. er forms of life like
of uncultured action lead one to low of real knowledge
the worm, tree, grass etc. Conception ‘shteousness and
* ‘ . F dut rig :
and truth is realisation o Y> ¢ salvation called
wisdom. It is next to the state 9
§ =s eal una
Devesvara state. Rajasa (the middle attribute) gut
: 2 Pigey wee ment
functions as material activities in the fone of ile aa
to wife, son, wealth etc. When one as rey sec ss
forms of gunas (conceptions) and the very concep

SARAMA I 694
is thus annihilated, one attains the supreme _ state.
Therefore, Oh ! son ! you reject all external perceptions,
control the mind by itself and completely annihilate all
internal and external conceptions. Whether you live in
heaven, on earth or in patala and do intense tapas for
thousands of years, unless conception is eliminated you
will not attain salvation.
After hearing the above explanation about the illusions
in life, from his hiding place Vasistha went away.
(Jiianavasistha, Canto 17).
SARAMA I.
1) General. Bitch of the Devas. Syama and Sabala,
sons of Sarama, were two prominent messengers of
Yama and they possessed four eyes each. The offsprings of these dogs are called Sarameyas. The Rgveda
and Mahabharata contain a story about Sarama cursing
Janamejaya. (For details see under. Srutagravas III).
2) Other information.
(i) Sarama worships Brahma in his court.
Parva, Chapter 11, Verse 40).
(ii) Sarama is a graha (Evil spirit) of Subrahmanya
which enters the womb of pregnant women and steals
the babies. (Vana Parva, Chapter 230, Verse 34).
(iii) Sarama after having once drunk milk from
dasyus lied about it to Indra, and he punished her.
(Varaha Purana).
(iv) Indra once deputed Sarama to find out the place
where the Panis had hidden the cows on condition that
he would feed her children. Sarama found out the
place and informed Indra about it thus earning for her
children their livelihood. (Rgveda, Mandala 1, Chapter
(Sabha
SARAMAII. Wife of Vibhisana and daughter of the
Gandharva called Sailisa. Sarama consoled Sita weeping under the Agoka tree in Lanka. (Valmiki Ramayana, Yuddhakanda, Canto 33, Verse 1).
SARAMA III. Daughter of Daksaprajapati by his wife
Asikni. She was married by Kasgyapa maharsi and
from her were born the ferocious animals on earth.
(Bhagavata, Skandha 6).
SARAMEYA TI. A King of the dynasty of Bharata. It
is stated in Bhagavata, Skandha 9, that Sarameya was
the son of Svavalka. (Svaphalka).
SARAMEYA II. The son of the dog Sarama. (See
under Sarama IT).
SARAMEYASANA. A hell. (See the section Naraka
under Kala).
SARANA. A serpent born in Vasuki’s dynasty. It was
burnt to death at Japan riaya’s serpent yajfia. (Adi
Parva, Chapter 57, Verse 6).
SARANA I.
1) General information. A Ksatriya of the Yadu clan.
It is stated in Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 218,
Verse 17, that he was the son of Vasudeva by Devaki
and the brother of Sri Krsna and Subhadra.
2) Other details.
(i) This Sarana was one of those who took the dowry
to. Hastinapura at the marriage of Arjuna and
Subhadra. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 220, Verse 32).
(ii) Sarana shone in the court of Yudhisthira: (M.B.
Sabha Parva, Chapter 4, Verse 30). |
(iii) Sarana participated in the Rajasiiya sacrifice of
Yudhisthira. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 34, Verse 15).
(iv) When Sri Krsna went to Hastinapura from
Dvaraka to take part in the horse-sacrifice of YudhiSARASVATA II
sthira, Sdrana also accompanied him. (M.B. Aévamedha Parva, Chapter 66, Verse 4).
(v) Sarana was the foremost of those who disguised
Samba the son of Jambavati as a woman, and abused
the hermits. (M.B. Mausala Parva, Chapter 1, Verse 15).
SARANA II. A minister of Ravana. (For details see the
word Sukasaranas) .
SARANYA. A wife of Sirya. (Rgveda, 10, 17, 2).
SARARI. A monkey, who accompanied Haniman to
the southern regions in search of Sita. (Valmiki
Ramayana, Kiskindha Kanda, Canto 44).
SARASA TI. Achild of Garuda. (M.B. Udyoga Parva,
Chapter 101, Verse 11).
SARASA II. A son of Yadu. He founded the city
Krauficapura on the banks of the river Vena in South
India. (Harivarhsa, 2, 38, 27).
SARASANA. See under Citragarasana.
SARASTAMBA. Asacred place in ancient times. He
who bathes here will attain the state where he is -served
by apsaras. (Anusasana Parva, Chapter 25, Verse 28).
SARASVATA I. See under Apantaratamas.
SRRASVATA II. Anancient hermit. It is mentioned
+n Mahabharata, Salya Parva, Chapter 51, Verse 7,
that Sarasvata was the son of Dadhica. Dadhica once
happened to see the celestial maid Alambusa and
became excited, and seminal discharge occurred to him.
The semen fell in the river Sarasvati. The river became
pregnant and delivered a child. This child grew up
and became the famous hermit named Sarasvata.
After the death of the hermit Dadhici, due to scarcity
of rain a great famine occurred which lasted for twelve
years. When the famine became unbearable all the
hermits on the basin and banks of the river Sarasvatl
began to migrate to other places leaving all their
possessions behind, to save their lives. But Sarasvata
alone remained onthe banks of Sarasvati, living on
fsh obtained from the river, engaged in meditation
and study of Vedas. .
After twelve years the famine ended and the country
became prosperous as before. The hermits who had gone
to other places began to come back to their hermitages.
The desire to study Vedas grew up in their minds.
But there was not a single person, well-versed in the
Vedas, except Sarasvata. So all the hermits accepted
him as their teacher. Thus Sarasvata taught the Vedas
to Sixtythousand hermits, who had returned to their
hermitages. (M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 50). . F
In course of time the place where the hermitage 0
Sarasvata stood, became famous under the name
Ssrasvata tirtha. Tungakaranya is another name 0
this place. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 83, Verses
a De days there were two schemes of study known?
as ‘Kandanukramapatha’ and ‘Sarasvatapatha’ for the
Taittiriya-collection (Sarnhita). But today _ the
Kandanukramapatha has become quite extinct. ‘The
following is a description, given in Sarmskararatnamala
stating how the ‘Sarasvatapatha’ attained so vigorous 4
vogue. ;
Once owing to the curse of the hermit Durvdsas, the
river Sarasvati took birth as a: woman in the house of
a Brahmin, who belonged to the Gotra of Atreya.
Later from that same Brahmin she conceived and gave
birth to ason named SAarasvata. The river Sarasvai
herself, taught her son the Vedas completely, and then

SARASVATA III 695
sent him to Kuruksetra to do penance. As a result
of the penance Sarasvata got an original Kramapatha
(serial lessons) of the Taittiriya samhita. He taught
those serial lessons to his disciples. In course of time
these serial lessons got the name Sarasvatapatha.
which earned metaphysical and philosophical importance.
SARASVATA It. A hermit who lived in the western
regions. Itis stated in Mahabharata, Santi Parva
Chapter 201, Verse 30, that this Sdrasvata was the soni
of the hermit Atri.
SARASVATA IV. Mention is made in Pad
kat earey tie about another hermit Sa
taught the Vedas to several disciples in Tungaka
SARASVATA V. The people ihe lived in ee aetie
region of Western Bharata. (Bhagavata, Skandha 9)
SARASVATI I. Goddess of learning. ‘a
1) Birth, Sarasvati is the daughter of Brahma.
Kamadeva was born from Brahma’s heart; Krodha
(anger) was born from his eyebrows; Lobha, from his
lower lip, Sarasvati, from his face; the Sindhus from
his genitals, and Nirrti, from his anus.
The following story about the birth of Sarasvati is
from Brahmanda Purana, Chapter 43 :—
Brahma got ready for creation, and while in meditation
sattvaguna (sublime quality) began swelling up in his
mind wherefrom a girl was born. Brahma asked her
who she was. She answered : “I am born from you.
You fix for me a seat and duties.””» Then Brahma told.
her that her name was Sarasvati and ordained that she
should stay on the tip of everybody’s tongue. You
dance especially on the tongues of learned people. You
should also exist on earth in the form ofa river. and
assuming a third form you should live in me too.”
Sarasvati agreed to this.
2) Curse of Sarasvati. See under Ganga.
3) Misled Kumbhakarna. When Kumbhakarna requested
Brahma for a boon, Sarasvati, at the instance of the
latter, lodged herself in the tongue of Kumbhakarna and
made him ask for Nidravatva (Sleep ), something different from what he really desired to get Viz. Nirdevatva (absence of Devas). |
4) Received Badavagni. (all-consuming fire). Badavagni
was born at the quarrel between the Bhargavas and
Hehayas. Badavagni is flames of Aurva, the Bhargava.
(See under Aurva). It was Sarasvati who took the
Agni to the ocean es ae of this, Sarasvati, became a river in India. The story j i Srsti
khanda of Padma Purana as ile nae ike
The world was about to be'burnt in. Badavagni, which
originated from Aurva, when Indra requested Sarasvati
thus: “Oh ! Devi! you should deposit this agni in the
western ocean; or else the world will be consumed in
its flames.” To this Sarasvati told Visnu as follows:
ce am not a free person. I will do nothing without the
permission of my father. Therefore, please think
of some other means.’’
The Devas, who understood Sarasvati’s nature, went
to Brahma with their case. Immediately he called
Sarasvati to him and asked her to deposit Badavagni
in the western ocean for the safety of himself and the
Devas. Unable to disobey her father, Sarasvati, with
tears in her eyes, agreed to do so. Then Ganga followed
her and she told the former that she (Ganga) would
ma Purana,
rasvata, who
SARASVATI I
see her flowing northwards when she reached the eastern
region surrounded by Devas.
Sarasvati sent back her companions like Ganga, Yamuna
Manorama, Gayatri and Savitri who followed her. ‘Then
she appeared at the 4grama of Uttanka under the
Plaksa tree in the presence of the Devas. Just as Siva
carried Ganga, the Plaksa tree bore Sarasvati and
immediately did Siva give to her Badavagni ina pot.
Because of his blessing the agni did not burn her hands.
She went towards the north with the pot and came
to Puskarini, and she stopped there to redeem the
sins of people. It is believed to this very day that those
who drink water from the Puskara will attain Brahmaloka,
From Puskara Sarasvati flowed towards the west and
reaching a date-garden not far off from Puskara it rose
up again where Sarasvati is known as Nanda as _ well.
There is also another reason for the name Nanda.
Once upon a time there was a King called Prabhahjana.
While hunting in the forest he saw a deer inside a
cluster of shrubs and he shot an arrow at it. Then the
deer told the King: ‘What a crime is this ! You have
wounded me, who am feeding my child. I have heard
that the King shall not kill a deer while it is engaged
in drinking, sleeping or mating. May you, who have done
this cruel act, be transformed into a tiger and roam
about this thorny forest.’? Saying again and again
that he did not notice that the deer was feeding its
child, the King begged for absolution from the curse.
Taking pity on the weeping king the deer told him that
he would be redeemed from the curse when he had
talked with the cow called Nanda, which would go there
after a hundred years.
According to the above curse the king got transformed
into a tiger and spent hundred years cating wild
animals. After hundred years were over a herd of cows
came there grazing under the leadership ofa cow called
Nanda. Beautiful Nanda used to walk ahead of the
other cows and graze alone at a secret place in the .
forest. There was a mountain called Rohita there, on
the banks of the river. The northern side of the mountain
was a dense forest infested by cruel animals. There
lived there a very cruel and terrible tiger as big as a
mountain. A generous person called Nanda was feeding the cows with grass etc. Nanda, the cow, got separated from the herd and came to the river when the
tiger ran after it asking it to stop. Crying aloud the
cow said: Oh tiger; I have a child, which has not
begun even tasting grass and it is awaiting the return of
its mother to the cow-shed at dusk. I shall go and take
leave of the child and return so that you may eat me.
Taking pity on the cow the tiger granted its prayer. It
returned duly to the tiger at dusk. The tiger, taken by
surprise, by the honesty of the cow enquired of it ne
name, and the cow answered that it was named Nan 2
by its master, Nanda. As soon as the name was ee
Prabhafijana was released from his old curse an f
became the former king. Dharmadeva then ee By ae d
there and asked her to choose the boon a "i Sida
she replied as follows:— “I, with my child, sae lace
the ultimate place and position, and . : Hid aie ae
become a sacred place for munis. Also, le se ti32
Sarasvati, come to be known as Nanda, by my name.”
ne heaven and PrabhahNanda immediately ascended to Ne ewe ibe
jana returned to his palace. River Sarasvati c :

SARASVATIII
called Nanda from that day: After flowing through the
above-mentioned date-garden towards the south for some
distance Sarasvati (Nanda) flowed again towards the
north. She reached the ocean and deposited therein the
pot of Badavagni. (Padma Purana, Srstikhanda).
5) Sarasvati as Brahma’s wife. ‘The Puranas mention
three wives of Brahma, Sarasvati, Savitri and Gayatri.
But, the three are, according to Matsya Purana, one
and the same person. The Matsya Purana mentions:—
Brahma created, from his own effulgence, a woman,
who became famous under the names Satariipa, Savitri,
Gayatri and Brahmani. Brahma fell in love with his
daughter and noticing the fact she turned away to the right
side of her father. Then did a face appear on his right
side. To avoid the. amorous looks of the father, she
slided off to both his sides, and faces appeared on those
sides of Brahma. Then Sarasvati jumped up to the sky
and a fifth face appeared on his head, turned upwards.
Finding escape impossible she yielded to the desire of
Brahma and they enjoyed honey-moon for a hundred
years. To them was born ason called Svayambhuva or
Virat.
At one place in Skanda Purana, Savitri and Gayatri
are referred to as different individuals. (See under
Savitri).
6) Idol of Sarasvatt. Sarasvati, clad in white clothes,
sits on a white lotus. She holds in her hands a string of
beads, book and Vina. She is depicted in sitting, standing and dancing postures. She is conceived as Sakti
related to Visnu as also to Siva. In certain old works
in Bengal, Sarasvati, instead of Bhimidevi, is to beseen
along with Visnu. Agni Purana, Chapter 50, enjoins
that idols of Sarasvati in temple should hold in its
hands book, string of beads and Vina.
7) Other information. |
(i) It was on the banks of Sarasvati that Vyasa per-
‘formed tapas and Suka_ was born. (Devi Bhagavata,
Skandha 1). |
(ii) There are various references to Sarasvati in the
Reveda.
(iii) Sarasvati shines forth in Indra’s court.
Parva, Chapter 7, Verse 19).
(iv) Once Sarasvati advised the muni called Tarksya
(Vana Parva, Chapter 185).
(v) During Tripuradahana (burning of the city of the
be age Sarasvati served as a passage for the chariot
of Si Eb
(Sabha
va to advance. (Karna Parva, Chapter 34, Verse
(vi) Muni Yajfiavalkya’ once thought of Sarasvati and
she appeared before him wearing ornaments of vowels
and consonants and sounding ‘Om’. (Santi Parva,
Chapter 318, Verse 14).
SARASVATI II. River Sarasvati, flowing through north
India is, according to Puranic conception, Sarasvati
devi who has assumed the form of a river. (See under
Sarasvati I). The following. information about river
Sarasvati famed in the Puranas is from the Mahibharata.
(i) King Matinara once performed a yajfia on the
banks of river Sarasvati. At the close of the yajfia
Sarasvatidevi appeared and chose the King as her husband, and a son called ‘Tamsu was born to the couple.
(Adi Parva, Chapter 99; Verse 26). ; ;
(ii) River Sarasvati 1s one of the seven tributaries of
river Ganga and its source 1s under the Plaksa tree. One
SARAVINDU
who drinks its water will become free from sin. (Adi
Parva, Chapter 16, Verse 19).
(iii) Sarasvati worships Varuna in
Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 19). ee
(iv) The Pandavas, while travelling in ;
crossed the river. (Vana Parva, Chapter 9, Verse ee
(v) Sri Krsna conducted a yajfia in the plains of riv
Sarasvati. (Vana Parva, Chapter 12, Verse 14)- ~:
(vi) Kamyaka forest is on the banks of Sarasval™
(Vana Parva, Chapter 36, Verse41). ships
(vii) It is a holy river. If one bathes in it and Me Tae
one’s ancestors one will attain Sarasvataloka. (
Parva, Chapter 84, Verse 66) -
(viii) Dadhica had his agrama on the banks of th
river. (Vana Parva, Chapter 100, Verse 13). 6 river
(ix) Muni Lomaéga once extolied the greatness ©
Sarasvati. (Vana Parva, Chapter 129, Verse 20). ;
(x) The river disappears in Vinasanatirth? oo
reappears at Camasodbheda. (Vana Parva, Chapte
Verse 3).
(xi) It is the source of Agni.
292, Verse: 22). .» of the
(xii) There are many holy places on the plains 6 Salya
river. They are described in Chapters 35-54 0
Parva. ad We
(xiii) River Sarasvati once carried Vasistha in 1" flo
his court. (Sabha
the forest, 7
(Vana Parva, Chapter
(See under Vasistha) . ae andet
(xiv) Vigvamitra cursed Sarasvati. (See
Vasistha). iyo bel
xv) Sarasvati returned to Dadhici mahars! as
foes to her by him and he blessed her. (Salya bat
Chapter 51).
(xvi) Balabhadrarama once 33)
of Sarasvati. (Salya Parva, Chapter 54, Ae ee tie
(xvii) Arjuna appointed the son of ama "ie river’
master of a particular region on the banks of t
(Mausala Parva, Chapter 8, Verse 71). oi 16008
(xviii) Following the death of Sri Krsna caval yatiwives. drowned themselves to death in »@
(Svargarohana Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 25). parva
SARASVATI III. Wife of Manu. (Udyog# ~~
Chapter 117, Verse 14). uple
SARASVATI IV. ai of Dadhici mahars!. The os rs :
had a son called Sarasvata. (Brahmanda Purat@,
ess
extolled the grea™
rse 9). , here
SAR ASVATISAGARASANGAMA. The porn. poly
Sarasvati joins the ocean. It is considered to ve b
place. Candra regained his brilliance once hv iat's (For
the curse of Daksa by bathing at this holy pJ@
details see under Candra IV, Para 6). +m and
SARASVATISANGAMA. A sacred place. Bra 2 who
the maharsis once worshipped Visnu here. parva
bathes: here will attain Brahmaloka. (Vana
Chapter 83, Verse 151). Jace jp
SARASVATYARNUASANGAMA. A sacred a ree
Kuruksetra. One who bathes here and fasts i, mahaty®
nights will be freed from the sin © Bra 83):
(killing of a brahmin). (Vana Parva, Chapter ad
SARAVANA. The place where Subrahmany4 Ww
(See under Subrahmanya) . King por:
SARAVINDU (SASABINDU). A famous is father :
in the dynasty of Bharata, son of Dusyanta. ale and 4
name was Citraratha. He was a_ great asc ha
powerful emperor. (Bhagavata,
or:
ru
9th Skandha)- **°

SARAYU Aye
no less than ten thousand wives and lakhs of children
by each wife.
SARAYU I. A river very famous in the Puranas. The
most important things associated with the river are
given below : :
(i) Seven tributaries of Ganga originate from the
golden peaks of the Himalayas and Sarayu is one of
them. Those who bathe in the river will be absolved
from sins. (Adi Parva, Chapter 169, Verse 20)
(ii) The river exists in Varuna’s court worshipping him.
(Adi Parva, Chapter 8).
(iii) Sri Krsna, Arjuna and Bhima, on their way to
Girivraja from Indraprastha crossed this river. (Sabha
Parva, Chapter 20, Verse 28).
gv) It was at Gotara (or Gopratara) in this river that
ri. Rama drowned himself to death and attained
Visnupada. (Vana Parva, Chapter 84, Verse 70).
(v) This river is the source of Agni (fire). (Vana
Parva, Chapter 222, Verse 22):
(vi) Vasistha once blocked the course of Ganga on its
way to Kailasa at Manasasarovara. But, Ganga broke
the obstruction and flowed on, and Sarayu is the
stream that started from there. (Anusasana Parva,
Chapter 155, Verse 23).
(vii) It is one of the rivers to be remembered both at
dawn and dusk. (Anusasana Parva, Chapter 165, Verse
vii The city of Ayodhya is situated on the banks of
Saraya. (Valmiki Ramayana, Balakanda, Canto 9,
SARAYU II. Wife of the Agni Vira. The couple had a
son called Siddhi. (Vana Parva, Chapter 219, Verse
SARDULA. A spy of Ravana. It was he, who intormed Ravana about the arrival
Yuddhakanda, Canto 80). 3. Oke
ati by his wife
DULL D h f Kagyapaprajap
DULI. . Daughter of Kasye is wil
ae oabaneel te had ten daughters including Sardali.
Tiger, leopard etc. were born ae (Valmiki
aid Aranyakanda, Canto .
_ Ramey*’GREATION). Agni Purana, Chapter 20
as follows.
fers to various sargas
The first creation 1s that of greatness (Mahatva ) 1.€.
A cond creation 18 that of tanmatras
pera cen anenel The third iS. Vaikarikasarg also
walled Ainariyikasarga. These three kinds of wet
a called Prakrta srsti (natural creation) ra ri “
conscious and intelligent a he
gerne se any it Yanctions snare it 1s
is tiryagyonisrsu. ; -. the creation
The sixth is the cr ;
called tiryaksrols The seventh 18
{ arga. ‘
srotas, called | devas | :
f rvaksrotas, called manusasarg4 De ries
cate -. both sattvic and tamasic. é
: and prakrtasargas
nugrahasarga, :
anktasargas a pee) eee eae: whic
sa
tne Tae and. Praha. TDG nine creations
ots of te aes yf tee ay
a Bra raimittike (casual) and SaaS ;
(Oe ate. is the creation atte ae s of Garuda.
Nityasares Oue af the prominent son
(Udyoge Parva; awh was @ promi :
SARIE ‘1 of rent jsthira. Mentzon is made about
the coun?
of Rama. (Valmiki »
ent member of
SARMISTHA
pa ‘in Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter 4, Verse
SARIMEJAYA. A King in ancient India. It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 185, Verse 19
that this King was present at the Svayarhvara
(marriage) of Draupadi.
SARIRA. (BODY). Body is constituted of the five
elements, earth, water, fire, air and sky (ether). What
is solid or hard in the body is earth; liquid, is water;
hot or burning, fire; what gives motion to the body is
air and what are pores in the body is sky. |
Body is that which exists and functions with the five
organs of knowledge eye, ear, nose, tongue and skin
and the five organs of action like Upastha (sex organ),
Pani (hand), Pada (leg) and Vani (speech). The body
depends on the six tastes, sweet, sour, saltish, bitter
hot and astringent. (Katu, amla, madhura, lavana,
tikta and kasaya). The body is composed of seven
internal elements (dhatus) of seven colours, white, red
dark (black), black and white, yellow, brassy and
faint-white (Pandura). Vatapittakaphas (wind, bile
and phlegm) are intertwined in the body. Since the
body is formed of vital fluids from the sex organs of
the father and the mother it is dviyoni (males with male
and females with female organs of reproduction). The
body exists by four kinds of foods, bhojya, bhaksya, khadya and lehya. After coitus, within one night, the male
and female semen and blood combine into one body in
the womb (Kalala). Within seven days it becomes foamy
(budbuda). After a fortnight it becomes solid (pinda)
and after one month hard (kathina). During the
second month the head of the child is formed; in the
third month its feet: in the fourth its ankles, stomach
and waist are formed. In the fifth month is formed
the back (Prstha) and face, nose, eyes and ears are
formed in the sixth month. During the seventh month
life enters the child’s body. By the eighth month all the
signs of the human being are completed in the child.
If the vitality and effulgence of the mother are more
than those of the father the off-spring will be female
and vice versa; if both are in exactly equal proportions
the child will be a eunuch, neither male nor female. If
the parents were sad and worried during the time of
the mother’s conception, the child born would be either
blind, lame or a pigmy. If the semen is cleftinto two
by wind (in the womb ) the mother would give birth to -
twins. In the ninth month the child will be gifted
with knowledge and it will remember to what caste it
belonged and what all good and evil actions it did in
its previous life.
SARISRKKA. Son of the bird Mandapala. (See under
Khandavadaha, Para 8).
SARNJAYA. A Srfijaya King. Mention is made about
this King who had been the support of the Bharadvajas, in Rgveda, Mandala 6, Anuvaka 47, Sukta 20.
6ARKA. A son of King Kusamba. Sarka had a brother
called Gani. (Brahmanda Purana, Chapter 57).
ARMAKA. A famous rural region in the northeast of
India. Bhimasena conquered the region during his
_triumphal tour. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 30, Verse 13).
SARMI. A brahmin scholar. (See under Parnasala’ .
6ARMISTHA. Daughter of Vrsaparvan, King of the
asuras. (For details see under Devayani) .

SARNGA
SARNGA. Sri Krsna’s bow. The following facts about
the bow are gathered from the Mahabharata.
(1) When Krsna exhibited his Vigvariipa (cosmic form)
in the assembly of the Kauravas he had held in one
hand this bow. (Udyoga Parva, Chapter 131, Verse 10).
(ii) Krsna’s SArnga ison a par with Indra’s bow called
Vijaya. (Udyoga Parva, Chapter 158, Verse 4).
(iii) Sarnga is one of the three divine bows. (Udyoga
Parva, Chapter 158, Verse 5).
(iv) Sariga was made by Brahma and presented to
Krsna. (M.B. Southern text, Anuséasana Parva, ChapSARNGAKOPAKHYANA. The story of the Sarigaka
_ bird. (See under Khandavadaha) .
SARNGARAVA. A maharsi. He was one of the
officiating priests at the Sarpasatra of Janamejaya.
(Adi Parva, Chapter 25, Verse 6).
SARPA. A son of Tvasta. According to Agni Purana
the sons of Tvasta were called Ekadagarudras; But
according to Mahabharata, Sarpa, one of the Ekadagarudras is the son of Sthanu and the great-grandson of
Brahma. (Adi Parva, Chapter 66, Verse 2).
SARPABALI. An offering made by Hindus in South
India to propitiate serpents. Serpents are pleased by
songs by Pulluvan and Pulluvartii (Male and female
members of a Hindu sub-caste). To draw Kalams
(drawings on floor conveying certain esoteric meanings) ,
to make offerings and for the Pulluvars to sing—these
form important elements of Sarpabali. The bali has
a connection with the story of Khandavadaha. The
legend behind the bali is that a Pulluva woman saved
Taksaka, who escaped to the ocean after the Khandava
forest was burnt down. Songs by Pulluvan and Pulluvatti are unavoidable items in Sarpabaili.
Drawing the Kalam is a very important item in Sarpabali. Itis drawn on a platform made of puttumannu
(small heaps of earth thrown up by earthworms and termites), the platform being demarcated by four pieces
of arecanut wood. ‘The platform is covered with silk
and tender coconut leaves are hung all around it. The
Kalam is drawn with rice powder, and other coloured
powders. The husk of paddy burnt into charcoal is
powdered and with it serpents are sketched first on the
mandapa (platform). The naga drawings. are tinied
with colours. The (colour) powders are collected in
coconut shells and sprinkled on the drawings through
holes in shells. Pulluvas exhibit wonderful artistic talents
in making the drawings.
When the kalam is drawn worship of naga is begun
compulsorily by a male member of the house, and he is
technically called ‘Kalattil Kaimal’. He has been observing ‘vrata’ during two days previous to the puja
(worship). Having taken his bath and wearing an
additional cloth across his shoulders (Uttariya) he
comes with water in a jar. Four lamps should be burning on four sides of the kalam. Also, paddy, rice,
tender coconut, milk, fruit etc. should be placed on its
four sides. As directed by the Pulluvan the ‘Kaimal?
conducts the worship by offering flower, water. etc. The
Kaimal is to sit on each of the four sides of the kalam
and do the paja. Then wicks (made of cloth) should
be lighted, water sprinkled on it and with that the
Kaimal should go around the kalam thrice. With the
wicks placed on a leaf with paddy underneath it and
also with burning camphor he should go round the
SARVABHAUMA III
kalam. Then the Pulluvan playing on the Vina in front
and a male member of the house with a vessel containing milk, a female member holding a lamp, two girls
holding brass plates and the Kaimal and all of ai
following the Pulluvan go round the Kalam thrice an
proceed to the serpents’ temple in the compound, ee
and return. After all these persor.: are seated, t i
Kaimal washes the feet of and puts flowers on the hea :
of the two girls, who had held the brass plates; TT =
them on two pieces of round wood in the kalam. i
girls will have mirror etc. in their hands. ‘They aoe
concentrate their eyes on the heads of the serpents. he
begins the Pulluvan pattu (song by Pulluvan ). ~ nt
time of the worship they will be beating tunes on a DF*** —
pot, music being made on the Vina. |
‘Pulluvan pattu’ is the most important item 1n
programme. ‘Thesongs relate to the burning
khandava forest, Kaliyamardana (suppression © Ps
naga king) etc. One Pulluvan sings songs and a - me
one repeats them. A minimum of two ne i
and two females are required for the purpose. “hei?
songs acquire momentum the girls begin to shake Pe.
heads and to wipe off the kalam. Then the git ane
asked questions and they answer. Within a short a
the girls will swoon and fall on the ground. TREY ae
brought back to consciousness by water being Seat
on them and by fanning. This is in general the ®
of a Sarpabali. Sg i, a
SARPADEVI. Sarpadevi, also called nagatirtha, ve.
sacred place in Kuruksetra.; A bath here 1s a vata
ficial as the performance of an agnistoma yajna.
Parva, Chapter 83). _ |
SARPAMALI. A a gifted with divine poet
He had a talk with Sri Krsna a the ane s wa
astinapura. (Udyoga Parva, Chapter \. sa cam
SARPANTA, A bicd Con in the line of Garuda'’s childre
(Udyoga Parva, Chapter 101, Verse 12)
SARPASATRA. See under Janamejaya, Part 9. . chief
SARPASYA. A Raksasa. He was the commanderit7 og
of the army of Khara and Disana, who ha tail aie
with Rama and Laksmana at Pajicavati. K . i ading
Disana. had twelve reputed army-chiefs, 10
Sarpasya. (Valmiki Ramayana, Canto 27). ‘
SARPIRMALI. A maharsi, who flourished in ¢
the whole
of the
f ihe
e court
of Yudhisthira. (Sabha Parva, Chapter hates pirthSARU. A Devagandharva. He participated in te 122;
day celebrations of Arjuna. (Adi Parva, Chap
Verse 58). 2 swag 6th
SARVA. One of the eleven Rudras. (Bhagavat*>
Skandha). rva;
SARVA. —— name of Sri Krsna. (Udyoga Pe
Chapter 70, Verse 12). 89,
apter
SARVA. A Puranic river. (Bhisma Parva, Chapt
Verse 36), | _ He
SARVABHAUMA I. A king of the Bharata dynes) oe
was the son of Vidiratha and the father of Jay
Bhagavata, Skandha 9). ‘3 at at? O
sRRU AGH AAEe i 2 born to King Abathye ta :
the Lunar dynasty, by Bhanumati, daughter daughter
virya. This Sarvabhauma married Sunanda, C95),
of the King of-Kekaya. (M.B Adi Parva, Chaptt™ 1, of
SARVABHAUMA 111. An elephant born in the ope).
the Diggajas (Eight elephants supporting nabharats
Mention is made about this elephant 1n Maha
Drona Parva, Chapter 121, Verse 26.

SEE EE A = !ltttti‘i«*S
SARVABHAUMA IV
SARVABHAUMA IV. An incarnation in the Manvantara
(Manu’s age) of Savarni Manu. Sarvabhauma was
begotten by Devaguhya and was born of Sarasvati.
(Bhagavata, Skandha 8).
SARVADAMANA. Bharata, the heroic son of Sakuntala.
(For details see under Bharata I).
SARVADEVATIRTHA. A sacred place in Kuruksetra.
He who bathes there will derive benefit equal to that
of gifting away thousand cows. (Wana Parva, Chapter
SARVAGA. Son of Bhimasena by his wife Balandhara.
(Adi Parva, Chapter 95, Verse 77)
SARVAKAMA. Son of King Rtuparna. (Bhagavata,
Skandha 9). |
SARVAKAMADUGHA. A daughter of Surabhi. She
holds up the northern region. (Udyoga Parva, Chapter
SARVAKARMA. Son of King Saudasa. When Parasurama killed the Ksatriyas it was Paragaramuni, who
saved Sarvakarma from death. (Santi Parva, Chapter
SAR VAPAPAPRAMOCANARUPA. A Kupa (well)
which drives away all. sins. It isa tirtha. He who
bathes in its waters will never have to face evil fate.
(Vana Parva, Chapter 84, Verse 126).
SARVARTUKA.A beautiful forest near mount Raivataka.
(M.B. Southern text, Sabha Parva, Chapter 38 )
SARVASARANGA. A naga born in Dhrtarastra dynasty.
It was burnt to death at Janamejaya’s serpent yajna.
Adi Parva, Chapter 57, Verse 18). ‘
gait VASENA. face of Kasi whose daughter ST
was married by emperor Bharata. The our. Ee
son called Bhumanyu. (Adi Parva, Chapter 99,
orn in Dhruva’s dynastyndha 4).
SARVATEJAS. A King b
(Udyoga Parva,
Vyusta was his father. (Bhagavata, Ska
SARVATOBHADRA. Varuna’s home.
Chapter 98, Verse 10).9 >
A A son of Vaivasvata Manu. fie.
et Iksvaku, Nabhaga;, Dhrsta, i Bort
Narisyanta, Prarbgu, Nrga, Dista, ee eres pan
dhra were sons of Vaivasvata Manu. aye Beit
called Anarta and a daughter ga u ay ae
was married “by the aged and blind ens a dundee
son named Pramati was born to the. coupe: (
Cyavana).
2) Other information.
(1 Saryati lives 30 Yama rh)
(Sabha Parva, Chapter 8, Verse !4 a carnebat Heath
(ii) Cyavana performed for Saryati nls Y aes aE
the Agvinikumaras, in disobedient ,
Somarasa. (Vana Parva, Chapter 4) akan
(iii) ‘Two famous Kings, Haihaya, Mr ¢asana oe
were born in Saryati’s dynasty- (
*s court worshipping him.
Chapter 30, Verse 6). : He was the
P : a1 dynasty. He
SARYATI Il. A King of the ape Seat (Agramason of Pracinvan and father 0
visika Parva, Chapter 90, Verse 14). Crema ee
SARYATIVANA. A sacred forest. | “ye Badge!
gaurse of his ‘dream-trip’ to Kailasa im ¢ Be aoe.
Sri Krsna crossed this forest also. (Drona )
ter 80, Verse 82). Ey
6ASABINDU. See under Saravindu.
SASADAI. Son of Vikuksi, the King of Ayodhya.
699 SASIKALA
Purafijaya was §aéada’s son. (Brahmanda Purana.
Chapter 1).
SASADA II. A son of Iksvaku. His real name was Vikuks1.
(For the detailed story as to how ‘Vikuksi’? became
‘Sagada’ see under Vikuksi) . |
SASAKA. A caste. Karna, during his triumphal tour,
defeated the King of the Sasakas. (Vana Parva, Chapter 254, Verse 21).
SASALOMA. A King very much reputed in the
' Puranas. He did tapas at Kuruksetra and attained
heaven. (Agramavasika Parva, Chapter 20, Verse 14).
SASAYANA. A sacred place. In the waters of river
Sarasvati at this place the full moon reflects ‘in the
form of aéasga (hare). A bath here will make a man
as bright and lustrous as the moon. (Vana Parva,
Chapter 82, Verse 114). |
SASIKA. A rural area in ancient India. (Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 46). |
SASIKALA. Daughter of Subahu, King of Kasi. She
was married by a prince Sudarsana who had been
driven out of his kingdom by Yudhajit.
As she became a young woman Sagikala heard about
Sudargana, who lived in the forest with his mother and
fell in love with him. One night Devi appeared in
dream to her and told her that marriage with Sudargana
would take place, and at those words of Devi she
awoke from sleep and began laughing. Though her
mother asked Sagikala about the reason for her laughing thus, she answered not, but continued laughing.
One day while she was picnicking in the Campaka
forest, an old brahmin came there and described to
her about the great personality and beauty of Sudargana, who then was staying with his mother at
Bharadvajasrama. Sacikala’s heart yearned to be with
Sudargana.
Sudargana, after the death ofhis father Dhruvasandhi,
lived with his mother Manorama and her father. But,
Yudhajit killed Manorama’s mother also. It was after
this that Sudargana and his mother took refuge in the
aérama of Bharadvajamuni. One of those days, Nisada,
King of Srigiverapura and a friend of Sudargana’s
father (Dhruvasandhi) came to Bharadvajasrama and
presented a chariot, which possessed mysterious powers,
fo Sudarfana. The munis were pleased at this and
imparted to Sudarsana the Kamara jamantra, which gave
one who practised it all that one desired, and after the
above incident Sudargana began slowly to come out of
the agrama. He went about the forests in the chariot
presented by Nisada, and he was astonished to find
many an armed soldier surround him wherever he
went, This happened because of the mysterious Powers
of the chariot.
It was at this time that King Subahu decided to conduct the Svayarhvara of his daughter Sasikala. Kings
from all lands came. 62éikala told her mother in secret
about her desire to marry Sudarsana, and the mother
in turn told about this to the father. But, he was not
for it. Then Sasikala sent a messenger secretly to
Sudargana to request him to be present at the
Svayarhvara, and Sudargana and his mother started for
the palace of the King of Kasi and when they reached
it, kings like Yudhajit had already come there. — A
rumour was spread that Subahu, insultingly ignoring
all the crowned heads, was going to marry his daughter

SASTA
to Sudargana, a mere beggar. The assembled Kings,
therefore, got themselves ready to pick a row with.
Subahu, but, he pacified them with the assurance that
the Svayarnvara of Sasikala would formally be conducted and her husband could then be selected by herself.
That night Sagikala’s parents tried their best to divert
her heart away from Sudarsana, to no purpose and the
same night she was duly married to him. By the next
morning news about the marriage became public and
all the Kings, who had come for the Svayarnvara
decided in conference to kill Sudargana on his way back
home with his wife, and abduct Sagikala. Accordingly
on the fourth day after the wedding when Sudarsana
and Sagikala were returning to Ayodhya escorted by
the army allotied to them by Subahu, King Yudhajit
and his followers attacked them from their hiding place.
In the battle that ensued Devi appeared and helped
Sudargana, who defeated the enemies. People of
Ayodhya received with enthusiasm the victorious Sudargana and he was crowned their King. In later years he
became famous as emperor Sudargana.
SASTA. The presiding deity (idol installed) in the
Sabarimala temple.
1) Birth. Siva fell in love with Mahavisnu in his
assumed form as Mohini and Sasta was the result of
their union. (Kambaramayana, Balakanda). This story
occurs in the 8th Skandha of Bhagavata and the Asura
kanda of Skanda Purana, but only the Skanda
Purana refers to the child by name SAsta.
2) Other information.
(i) In the battle between Indra and the asura called
Sirapadma the former deputed Sasta for the protection
of Sacidevi. (Skanda Purana, Asura Kanda).
(ii) SAsta is supposed to have two wives called Purana
and Puskala anda son called Satyaka. (Astottarasatakam about Sasta; also see under Sabarimala).
SASTHIDEVI.
1) General. A Devi bornout of 1/6 part of original
nature (Milaprakrti). Since she was born out of | 6
part, she is called Sasthidevi. Also called Devasena,
Sasthidevi is the patron-devi of children. She grants
them life. She protects them as the real mother and
always remains by their side. She has earned Siddhis
by the practice of yoga, is the best among the astamatrs
(eight mothers) and is the wife of Subrahmanya.
2) Blessings of the Devi. She is foremost among the
devis, who bless children. There is a story in the ninth
canto of Devi Bhagavata revealing the importance of
Sasthidevi.
Though Priyavrata, sonof Svayambhuva Manu was at
first averse to marriage he, at last, married, on the
insistence of Brahma, a woman called Malini. For long
he had no issues and sad at heart he got a putrakamesti
yajfia performed by Kasyapaprajapati as a result of
which Malini got pregnant, and delivered in the twelfth
year. But, the child was still-born and Priyavrata set out
with the corpse for the burning ohat, But, he could
not make up his mind to give it up and so decided
himself also to court death. Then he saw a divine plane
stop there with a woman In It, who spoke to him as
follows: ‘I am Devasenadevi, the mental daughter. of
Brahwta.and wite-of Skandadeva. It 1s I, who grant ser
‘to the sonless, wife to the wifeless, husband tothe
husbandless, wealth to the poor and the results of their
SATAHRADA
actions to all.’? So saying the Devi took from Priyavrata
the corpse of his child and brought it back to life.
SASTHIHRADA. A sacred place. Bathing here is more
beneficial than gifting away food. (Anusasana Parva,
Chapter 25, Verse 36).
SASOLUKAMUKHI. A female attendant of Subrahmanya. (Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Verse wa)s aa
SASVA. An ancient King in Bharata. It 1s said 1n
Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter I, Verse 17, a
this King remains in the palace of Yama and_ glories
him.
SATA. A great yaksa friend of Vaisravana. (See unde
Dipakarni for the story about how Sata became
cursed Yaksa). at
SATABALA. A peepal tree on the peak of oe
Kumuda. From the branches of the tree milk, butter
ghee, juice of Sugar-cane etc. descend carryins aa
them divine rice, clothes, ornaments etc. to the rie
mountain and flow in rivers towards the north. at
people in those places get their rice, clothes oF
ments etc. from the river. Minaksidevi praise ma
Devas has her abode here. Those who drink milk =,
flowing in the river will not be affected by age fo
thirst and signs of old age. Nor will any danger
take them. They will live long. (Devi Bhagavata,
Skandha). . ge. BE
SATABALI. A great monkey under the, leadership
Sugriva. He was the leader of the monkeys gee
the northern regions to look for Sita. (Valmiki Ra
yana, Kiskindha Kanda Canto 43).
SATABHISAK. A star. 1wood
He who gives gifts of fragrant materials like sanda ae
on the day of this star will, after death, live a sua
apsaras and enjoy fragrant smell. (Anusasana a
Chapter 64, Verse 30). “Je of
SATACANDRA. A brother of Sakuni. In the batt anid
Kuruksetra he fought on the side of the. Kauravas ‘4
got defeated by Bhima. (Drona Parva, Chapter
Verse 23). 7 king:
SATADHANUS (SATADHANVA). A _ Yadava
(For details see under Krtavarma Para 2). now
SATADRU. The Puranic name of the Indian river <0
called Sutlej. Grief-stricken over the death of his"
Vasistha once jumped into this-river, which, re# -eself
that the maharsi was as powerful as fire, divide ions:
into many branches and flowed in various oa adruand hence the river came to be known as °@ 1king
(Adi Parva, Chapter 176, Verse 8°). Once 10 a this
about sublime rivers to Siva, Parvati mention® 18)-
river also. (Anugasana Parva, Chapter 146, Verse the
Satadrii is also one of the ten rivers referred to ™
Reveda. ‘eee ‘ji of
SATADYUMNA, A King in ancient India, oni 4
Caksusa Manu by his wife Nadvala. (Visnu, P sons
Part 1, Chapter 13). Nadvala had ten brilliant
including Satadyumna. Satadyumna once gifted "
a house of gold to the brahmin called Mudgala 934;
thereby attained heaven. (Santi Parva, Chapter
Verse.32).. ; : nya:
SATAGHANTA. A female attendant of Subrahm@
(Salya’ Parva, Chapter 46, Verse If) .
. = Atha:
SATAHRADA. Mother of the Raksaga called viradh .
alCM 2 a xeana
His father’s name was Jaya. (Valmiki Ramayan”
Aranyakanda) .

SATAJIT I
SATAJIT I. A King of the Yadava dynasty. Satajit
son of. Sahasrajit, had three sons called Mahahaya,
Venuhaya and Hehaya. (Bhagavata, 9th Skandha).
SATAJIT II. Son of Sri Krsna by Jambavati. Satajit
met. with his death in the quarrels among the Yadavas
at Prabhasatirtha. (Bhagavata, 9th Skandha).
SATAJYOTI. Son of King Subhrat. The King had one
lakh sons. (Adi Parva, Chapter |, Verse 44),
SATAKARNI I. See under Mandakarni.
SATAKARNI II. Son of King Parnotsanga. He ruled
the country for fiftysix years. (Matsya Purana).
SATAKSI. Another form of Devi. (For details see
under Durgama).
ene perme? sacred river, considered to be the
source of agni. (Vana Parva, Chapter 222, Verse 22).
SATALOCANA. A warrior of Subrahmatiyas Baia
Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 60). —
SATAMUKHA |. (SATAMUKHA RAVANA). Father
of Indumukhi, the wife of Sahasramukha Ravana.
Satamukha had defeated Patala Ravana in battle. He
gave the eternal weapon called Kathorakuthara as
dowry for his daughter’s . wedding. (See under’
Sahasramukha Ravana).
SATAMUKHA Il. An asura, a great devotee of Siva.
He did very intense tapas for hundred years making
offerings of his flesh in the fire. Siva, who was pleased
with his ‘tapas, granted him many boons. (Anusasana
Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 58).
SATANANDA I. Priest of King Janaka. He was the
son of Gautama by Ahalya. (Bhagavata, 9th Skandha
and Agni Purana, Chapter 978). Satananda felt elated
old sanctity and
that Sri Rama restored to Ahalya her
also that his father Gautama received back his mother
and lived with her. It was Satananda, who acted as
high-priest.at the wedding of Sita with Rama.
SATANANDA II. A maharsi, who_ possessed divine
gifts. He once paid a visit to Bhisma. (Anusasana
Parva, Chapter 26, Verse Sete
SATANANDA. A female altendas of Subrahmanya.
Salva Parva, Chapter 46, Verse : Oy
SATANIKA [A King born in the dynasty of Yayat.
He was the son of Brhadratha and father of Durdama.
(Bhagavata, 9th Skandha) . | An
kula. The Mahabharata
SATANIKA II. Son of Na TRE) oy Saahihe
contains the following information aDoOw 4
i) kul born of Draupadi a son calle
(i) ska, (Adi Par hapter 63, Verse 123).
Satanika. (Adi Parva, C a
(ii) This Satanika was born from aD
Vigvadeva. (Adi Parva, Chapter 67, Verse uf :
(iii) Once upon 4 time there' was 1? the sure
dynasty a Rajarsi called Satanika and H ae -
perpetuate that Nakula_name is 8
‘Gatanika’. (Adi Parva, Chapter 220, Yung
(iv) This Satanika defeated in the great wee ae i cat
Duskarna and Citrasen@. (Bhisma Fares Se
Verse 42; Chapter 79, Verse 46 and VFor ,
Chapter 168, Verse 12). ANSE ee
(v) Gatanika fought ji sah ana (Drona Bata,
son of Dhrtarastra ae te Parva, Chapter 25, Verse
Chapter 167, Verse /;
13and Chapter 85, Verse 14). aa
(vi) He kjlled Bhatakarman and é ue ie :
in the great war. (Drona Parva, ap
Karna Parva, Chapter 89, Verse 2!)-
ce of Kalinga
95, Verse 23:
701 SATARUDRA
(vii) He died in the great war hit by the arrow of
Asvatthama. (Sauptika Parva, Chapter 8, Verse 57).
(viii) He is referred to by the following names also
in the Mahabharata, viz. Nakulaputra, Nakuladayada
Nakuli. |
SATAN IKA III. A prince born as the son of Janame--
jaya (Pariksit’s son) of his wife called Vapustama. He
married the princess of Videha and to the couple was
‘born a son called As vameghadatia. (Adi Parva, Chapter 96, Verse 88). He had also another son named
Sahasranika. (Kathasaritsagara ). (See under Udayana).
SATANIKA IV. A well-known Rajarsi born in the
Kuru dynasty. It was to perpetuate his name that.
Nakula called his son Satanika. (Vana Parva, Chapter
SATANIKA V. A brother of Virata, the King of
Matsya. He was called Siryadatta too. Further he
was the commander-in-chief of the army of Virata:
When Virata’s cows were lifted by the Kauravas,
Satanika went to war against them along with the
Trigartas, who wore golden helmets on their heads.
(Virata Parva, Chapter 31). He was an ally of the
Pandavas in the great war. He was wounded in the
war by Bhisma and killed by Salya. (Drona Parva,
Chapter 167, Verse 30; Bhisma Parva, Chapter 118,
Verse 27).
Younger brother of the Virata king.
SA TANIKA VI.
He was killed by Drona. (Drona Parva, Chapter 21,
Verse 18).
SATAPATRAVANA. A forest on the western side of
Dvaraka. The mountain called Sukaksa is at the centre
of the forest. (Sabha Parva, Southern text, Chapter 33)
SATAPARVA. Wife of Sukracarya. (Udyoga Parva,
Chapter 117, Verse 13):
SATARATHA. A King in ancient India. He lives in
the court of Yama and worships him. (Sabha Parva,
Chapter 8, Verse 26). 7
SATARUDRA. The story of Satarudra was imparted
‘to Sri Rama by Vyasa to show that all life is mere
illusion or different complexes of the mind. Satarudropakhyana is the story of a contemplative sanny4sin.
Whatever subject or object he conceived in his mind
used to assume its form as water changes into waves,
and it was a boon or great asset, which his heart had
acquired as a result of its purity. He confined himself
to his arama and thought about things one after the
other. +
To start with, Satarudra thought to himself that he
was a ‘dream person’ called Jivata. While picnicking
in the streets of a ‘dream-built city’ the ‘dream person’
overcome by the effect of liquor remained in an
unconscious state for some time. He also felt immediately to be a brahmin learned in the Vedas. ‘Jivata’,
who transformed himself thus into a brahmin slept
during day-time overcome by exhaustion on account
of work. At once he dreamt himself to have been
transformed into a feudal lord or tributary King, who,
after taking his meals went to sleep when he dreamt
that he was changed into a great King. The King,
who ruled the country peacefully changed himself one
day in dream into a celestial woman. The next dream
was that the woman, while in deep sleep after a
hilarious sexual act, was turned into a she-deer. The
- ghe-deer, in dream turned into a creeper, and it duly
bore leaves, flowers and fruits. The creeper felt that it

SATARUPA
entwined and climbed some trees. Then he (Jivata)
went into deep sleep, absolutely unaware of himself,
for some time. Then he dreamt himself to have changed into a beetle. The beetle felt attracted towards a
lotus flower and.got captured therein. An elephant
from the forest nearby entered the ‘lotus pond’, plucked
and tore into pieces the lotus flower. As the beetle had
got fixed in its mind and imagination the picture of
the elephantit became a tusker elephant after its death.
While roaming about in the forest the elephant fell
into a deep pit and the King’s men captured and listed
it in the army. A number of beetles gathered round
the elephant to suck its ichor (madajala). Because
it thought about the beetles the elephant, after its
death in battle, again became a beetle, which imagined
about the swan in the lotus-pond. The beetle one day
got captured in the lotus-flower and became a swan on
being killed by the elephant. Thus the beetle, after
taking many births and forms, became ultimately
Brahma’s vehicle, the swan. While the swan once
moved about the surrounding places of mount Kailasa
it saw Rudra and imagining itself to be Rudra
(Rudroham—I am Rudra) attained Rudrahood.
While living happily with all the paraphernalia of Rudra he remembered his past lives, and
wondering about the many continuous dreams of his,
in solitude he thought like this :—‘*The power of
Maya (illusion) which rules over everything in the
world is really wonderful. How curious and peculiar
is the cunningness or trickeries of Maya in creating,
like mirage, the illusion. that things, which did not
really exist, existed. Mistaking Maya or mirage as the
truth and the fact, I roamed about in many a material
desert. In one form of lifeI was born as Jivata, in
another, King: in yet another, swan etc. andnow I
have attained Rudra-hood. Hundred Caturyugas and
thousand years have passed in this ‘show’? Now, I
will return and personally see all past episodes and I
shall identify them all with myself after bestowing
knowledge on them.
Having made up his mind like this, Rudra descended
to the state of the old Sannydsin. He infused life and
vitality into the dead body of the Sannyasin that was
there. The Sannyasin remembered his old illusions
and hallucinations. He had attained Rudrahood after
Crossens Various stages from being Jivata.. Thet: both
of them together came to the Jivata stage,awoke the
‘dream-person’ by giving him mind and vitality. Afterwards the three of them, who assumed single form by
the composition of different personalities, attained
various stages like brahmin etc., awoke them too and
added them to themselves (the three). Thus there came
about to be hundred persons formed from aspects or
fractions of Rudra, and at the instance of the real
Rudra they returned to their homes and lived there
happily with their sons, relations etc. Those hundred
persons are the Satarudras. (Jiianavasistha, Satarudropakhyana). In Verse 13, Chapter 150 of Anugasana
Parva, Mahabharata also is found references to the
Satarudras.
TPA. Wife of Svayambhuva Manu, who took
—— _ 4 herself as his wife. _The couple had
two sons called Priyavrata aud Uttanapada and two
daughters Prasiti and Akiti. Prasiiti was married to
SATRAJIT
Daksaprajapati and Akiti to Ruciprajapati. (Visnu
_ Purana, Part I, Chapter 7).
SATASAHASRA. A well-known sacred place in Kuruksetra. Bathing here is productive of the same _ result
as gifting away thousand cows. This place is thousand
times more beneficial than other places. (Vana Parva,
Chapter 83).
SATASAHASRAKA. A holy place at Ramatirtha on
the river Gomati. He who bathes here and takes food
as per Sastraic injunctions will get results equal to those
of giving in gift a thousand cows. (Vana Parva, Chapter 84, Verse 74),
SATASIRSA. Wife of Vasuki, King of the nagas
(Udyoga Parva, Chapter L17, Verse 17),
SATASRNGA I. A muni, who lived on Mount SataSrnga. It was this muni, who cursed Pandu that he
would die on his coming into physical contact with his
, wife. (For details see under Pandu and Mahabharata) .
SATASRNGA II. A Raksasa, who had three sons called
Sathyama, Viyama and Suyama. (Santi Parva, Southern text, Chapter 98).
SATASRNGA Ill. A mountain where Pandu once
practised austerities. (Adi Parva, Chapter 118, Verse |
50). The Pandavas were born here and they were
named in the presence of Munis who lived there. (Adi
Parva, Chapter 122). Also, here it was that Pandu
died. Once in the course ofa dream-trip of Arjuna in
the company of Krsna to Kailasa they saw Satasrng@
also. (Drona Parva, Chapter 80, Verse 32).
SATATAPA. Author of a Smrti in prose and poetry in
six Chapters.
SATAVAHANA. A King.
Gunadhya, author of
Brhatkatha was a minister of :
this King. (See under
Gunadhya).
SATAVANI. A Rajarsi. His son was known 45
_—_— (Reveda, Mandala 1, Anuvaka 11, Sakta
SATAYUPA. A Kekaya Rajarsi. He abdicated the
throne in favour of his son and went to perform taps
in Kuruksetra forest where he saw Dhrtarastra an
others and spoke about the rules to be observed i?
‘forest life”. (Agramavasika Parva, Chapter 19, Vers¢
ne His eG father’s name owas Sahasracity4
Sramavasika Parva, Chapter 20, Verse 60).
SATAYUS I. One of the six sons of —_ by
. Urvasi. (Adi Parva, Chapter 75, Verse 24).
ATAYUS II. A warrior, who fought on the Kaurav4
side against the Pandavas. He fought from the ‘waist’
ei op the woe made by Bhisma and courte
eath. sma Parva, Chapt 7 99. a
. Parva, Chapter 2, Verse 19}, or is Verse si ay
gph ioe An Cee son of Kaé
ee anu. (Adi Parva, Chapter 65
SATT. A " ee Pi er 3 Verse 29).
under Parag DPM PAA. (For "more dail se
sae Lt. A king of the solar dynasty. It is stated in
SATODART, a fees hat be was the son of Jayatsena.
; . att
gs Salya Parva, Chapter 46, one toh Ben
BRAUIT. A Kingof the Yadavas, Tt ic mentioned in
agavata Skandha 9, that he Was th “of NG
and the brother of Prasena, (T ne NS
birth of Satrai: - (To know the previous
yapaprajapati by his

SATRUGHNA
caused Satrajit to be murdered. (More details about
Satrajit occur under the entries Prasena, Krtavarma,
(Para 2) and Satyabhama).
SATRUGHNA. A brother of Sri Rama. He and Laksmana were the sons of Sumitra, and Srutakirti was_ his
wife. As ordered by Rama he killed Lavanasura, who
lived in Madhu forest, and established there the city
called Madhurapuri. After the death of Satrughna two
sons of his lived in Madhurapuri, and after the disappearance of the solar dynasty the city went to the
Yadus. (For details see under Sri Rama and Haniman,
Para 10). |
SATRUJIT. A prince, the son of Dhruvasandhi by his
second wife Lilavati. (See under Dhruvasandhi).
SATRUMARDANA. The third son of King Rtadhvaja by his wife Madalasa. (Markandeya Purana,
Chapter 23, Verse 26).
SATRUNJAYA I. A Sauvira prince, who followed Jayadratha with a flag. Arjunakilled him in a_ battle consequent to the Svayarnvara of Draupadi. (Vana Parva,
Chapter 271, Verse 27).
SATRUNJAYA II. A son of Dhrtarastra. The following
facts about him are gathered from the Mahabharata.
(1) Duryodhana deputed him for the protection of
Bhisma in the great war. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 51,
Verse 8).
(ii) He attacked the five Kekaya kings. (Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 79, Verse 56).
(iil) Bhima killed him. (Drona Parva; Chapter 227,
Verse 29), |
SATRUNJAYA III. A warrior and a brother of Karna
who fought on the Kaurava side and got killed by
Arjuna. (Drona Parva, Chapter 31 Verse 62).
SATRUNJAYAIV. Another warrior, who fought on
the Kaurava side whom Abhimanyu killed. (Drona
Parva, Chapter 56, Verse 181).
SATRUNJAYA V. A son of Drupada. In_ the
great battle Agvatthama killed him. (M.B. Drona
Parva, Chapter 56 Verse 151).
SATRUNJAYA VI. A King of Sauvira. Kanika, the
son of Bharadvaja, taught him political science and all
other cunning ways. (Mahabharata, Santi Parva,
Chapter 140). _
SATRUNTAPA. A King, who fought in Duryodhana’s
army. Arjuna killed him on the occasion when the
Kauravas lifted Virata’s cows. (Virata Parva, Chapter
SATRUSAHA. A son of Dhrtarastra. Bhima killed him
in the great war. (Drona Parva, Chapter 127, Verse 9)
SATRUTAPANA. .An asura, the son of Kasyapaprajapati by his wife Danu. (Adi Parva, Chapter 65, Verse
20 Ji
SATVADANTA. A YaAdava prince. This Satvadanta
was one of the sons born to Vasudeva by his wife
Bhadra. (Vayu Purana, 96::71).
SATVATA I. A King of the Yadu dynasty and son of
Devaksatra, Satvata had seven sons called Bhaja, Bhaji,
Divya, Vrsni, Devaprstha, Antaka and Mahabhoja.
Satvata was one of the Satvatas and the men born in
his dynasty are called Satvatas. (Sabha Parva, Chapter
2, Verse 30).
SATVATA II. Another name of Sri Krsna.
SATVIKA. A brahmin, who was turned into a Raksasa
due to a curse after he had entered heaven. His story
SATYA IT
has been told by sage Saunaka to Bharata, trother of
Sri Rama.
It was Bharata, who led the yajiiic horse towards the
north in connection with the Agvamedha yajiia performed by Sri Rama after he was crowned King. The
horse, which ,started on its journey from Ayodhya
reached, after six months, Hemakiita on the limits of
India. As soon as it got into a beautiful garden it was
rendered stationary as though paralysed. AJl attempts to
make the horse move failed. Satrughna and some soldiers tried to lift the horse by its legs, to no purpose.
Hantman bound its legs with his tail and pulled, again
to no oa and surprised at this failure of his he
spoke to Satrughna and others thus. ‘‘It was only just
now that I pulled out with my tail the Drona mountain
so very easily; but this small horse does not stir at all.
May be, it is all fate.’? Following Hanim4an’s speech,
Satrughna asked Sumalithe explanation for this state of
the matter, but the latter could not find one for it. Then
it was decided to find out amaharsi and ask him for
the explanation. The soldiers accompanied by Bharata
went in search of a maharsi, reached Saunaka’s agrama
and submitted the case to him.
The maharsi remained in meditation for some time and
the condition of the horse became vivid in his mind.
Then he spoke as follows:— ‘“There was oncea brahmin
named Satvika in Gauda(?) land on the banks of river
Kaveri. Once he began performing tapas. He spent
three days. drinking only water the first day, consuming
air the next day and fasting completely the third day.
He continued his tapas repeating the above course until
one day he entered samadhi (expired). He got into
a decorated plane sent from Devaloka, went to the peak
of mount Meru and thence came to river Jambi, which
flowed from the great Jambi tree on the mountain.
There in Jambi were many maharsis, who had acquired
merit by bathing in the golden water of the river, enjoying all comforts in the company of apsara women.
Satvika, one day, haughty with the thought that he was
the master of the maharsis, did something which quite
displeased the latter, and they cursed him. When he
prayed for absolution from the curse they told him thus:
‘‘When you paralyse the feet of Sri Rama’s horse, you
will happen to hear Rama’s story and thenyou will be
redeemed from curse.”
On Saunaka informing them thus that it was the
brahmin transformed into a Raksasa, who had paralysed the legs of the horse, Bharata returned to the
horse and recited the story of Ramaand immediately an
effulgent person came there in a plane and said, ‘‘Oh.
intelligent King ! I have now heard the story of Rama
andso Have become pure; so, please let me go to
heaven.” After saying this he returned. Bharata and
others were pleased to know that the visitor was Satvika
brahmin. The horse became free from its paralysed
condition. The party resumed its journey. (Padma
Purana, Patalakhanda, Chapters 47 and 48).
SATYAI. A hermit. Mention is made about this hermit
who shone in the court of Yudhisthira, in Mahabharata,
Sabha Parva, Chapter 4, Verse 10.
SATYA II. An Agni (fire). This Agni Satya was the son
of the Agni Nigcyavana. He was a worker of Kaladharma (‘The god of Death). He reduces the pain of
living beings who are suffering. So this Agni Satya
got the name Niskrti also, This Agni brightens the

= ee Se ee
ET ee ee —
SATYA III 704
houses and gardens where people stay. It is stated in
Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 219, Verse 13,
that this Agni had a son named Svana.
SATYA III. A warrior who served in the army of the
King of Kalinga. This warrior fought against the
Pandavas in the battle of Bharata. This warrior who
stood as the wheel-guard of Srutayus the King of
Kalinga, was killed by Bhimasena in the Bharata-battle.
(M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 54, Verse 77).
SATYA IV. A hermit in the country of Vidarbha, This
hermit who was a brahmin wasa believer in ahimsa also.
Once he performed a sacrifice without any killing. His
wife Puskaradharini helped him in thesacrifice. Dharmadeva came there in the form of an antelope to test the
non-killing principle of Satya. Theanimal came near
Satya and said : “I am a deva (god) belonging to the
Sukra-clan. I dwell in this forest asan antelope, due
to the curse of Dharmadeva. Kill me and complete
this sacrifice.” |
Though Satya heard this, he did not wish to kill the
animal. At last the antelope decidedto go and walked
eight steps and then returned. Due to the delusive
arts of the antelope Satya saw there celestial maids
and the aeroplanes of Gandharvas. The antelope said
that if he was killed he would attain heaven. A desire
arose in Satya for killing and forthwith he lost all the
attainments he got bypenance. (M.B. Santi Parva.
Chapter 272) .
SATYA V. Another name of Sri Krsna. (M.B. Santi
Parva, Chapter 342, Verse 75),
SATYA VI. The son of Vitatya, born in the dynasty
of the King Vitahavya. It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Anugasana Parva, Chapter 30, Verse 62, that
this Satya had a son called Santa.
SATYATI. A wife of Sri Krsna. Mention is made about
this wife in Mahabharata, Daksinatyapatha, Sabha
Parva, Chapter 38.
SATYAIT. The wife of the Agni called Sarnyu. So
beautiful a woman as Satya is said to have not existed
in any of the three worlds. Bharadvaja was the son
born to Sarhyu by Satya. Bharadvaja had three sisters.
| (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 219, Verse 4).
SATYA (8). A group of Devas (gods). “This group of
devas lived in the third Manvantara. ‘The name of the
then. Manu was Uttama and the
King of the dev
the Indra Suéanti. There were then five Weare acs
udhamas, Satyas, Japas, an
1). and Vasavartis. (Visnu Purses ue As 3) Chav
SATYABHAMA. The wife of Sri Krsna.
1) Introduction. Once Sri Krsna himself said about the
previous birth of Satyabhama. There was an occasion
for saying that.
Once Narada came from the world of the gods to
Dvaraka. He had brought with him some flowers of
the Kalpaka tree. Narada gave all those flowers to
Sri Krsna. Sri Krsna divided them among his wives,
but he had forgotten Satyabhama. Being unable to
subdue het sorrow and anger she got into her bedroom
and wept and sighed and lay there. Sri Krsna came to
know of this. He took Satyabhama with him onthe
back of Garuda and went to the world of Gods. They
reached there and asked Indra for some Kahlara
flowers. Indra refused to give. Garuda got ready to
SATYABHAMA
uproot the tree. ‘Then Indra wielded his thunderbolt.
To honour the weapon thunderbolt, Garuda left a
feather of his there and returned to Dvaraka. Because
of the hitting of the thunderbolt, the peacock, mongoose and jungle crow were born from Garuda. Sri
Krsna who won the war, returned with Satyabhama
mounted on Garuda, to Dvaraka. The Kalpaka tree
brought from the world of gods,‘ was planted in the
garden in front of the palace ofSatyabhama. When
Sri Krsna and the Kalpaka tree became her own,
Satyabhama became proud. At that time Narada
came there. She asked Narada what she should do so
as to have Sri Krsna and the Kalpaka tree with her in
all births. Narada said that, for that, she had only to
do Tulapurusadana. She instantly placed Sri Krsna
and the Kalpaka tree in the balance and all the things
placed in equal weight were given to Narada himself.
Narada received them and went to the world of Gods.
Satyabhama became overjoyed. She asked Sri Kr sna,
what good deeds she had done to earn so much _happiness. Sri Krsna described the previous birth of Satyabhama. (Padma Purana, Uttara Khanda, Chapter 90).
2) Previous birth of Satyabhimaé. Towards the close of
the Krtayuga, there was a Brahmin named Devas arma
who was born of the clan of Agni in Mayapuri. This
Brahmin was well-versed in the Vedas and the
Vedangas. In the old age a daughter named Gunavatl
was born to him. He gave his daughter to his
disciple Candragarma.
Once Devagarma and Candragarma went to the forest
to bring Darbha (poa) and Samit (butea). While they
were walking here and _ there in the Mango grove
the Himalayas a giant closed with them. Because of
terror their bodies were stiffened and so they could not
run. The fierce giant killed both of them. ‘The escor®
sent by Visnu came and took both of them to Vaiku®
tha. Gunavati cried aloud when she heard that her
father and husband were killed by a giant. il
lamented for a long while and then fainted and fe
down. When she came to herself she began to cr
again. At last she sold the furniture and conducted
the funeral rites of her father and husband. After th
she lived by manual labour. She observed fast and thé
vow of Krttika and Ekadagi.,
Gunavati, who was weak and lean because of old a8°
and fever once walked slowly to the river Ganges °°
bathe. When she got into the river she shivered P&
cause of cold. Then an aerial chariot came dow
from the sky. The messengers of Visnu took her)”
the chariot, to Vaikuntha. The celestial maids fanne
her with the whisk of yak. After this Mahavisnu 12°
carnated as Sri Krsna _ to destroy the wicked. Thos
who were the dependants of Visnu in Vaikuntha tools
birth in Dyaraka. Devaé arma the father of Gunavati to?
birth as Satrajit Candragarma ae
> ; rma became Akrara. Gu?
vati became Satyabhama., Beca arne
by the fast of Krttika, she use of the goodness € of
had beco ne
Because she made a er Sea oa Ch eo a
ove of holy basil (tulas?
at the gate of Visnu in the previous birth the ealpa .
tree came to her garden in this birth. Because §
5 month Maha i live
permanently in her house. esc pt and
vow in Karttika imagining Visnu as her husband, 8°
became the wife of Sri Krsna in this birth ( Padm4
Purana, Uttara Khanda, Chapter 9] ).

SATYADEVA
3) Family life. See under Krsna, Para 16 and Naraka
Para 4).
4) Other details.
(i) The sons Bhima and others were born to Sri
Krsna by Satyabhama. (Agni Purana, Chapter 276).
(11) Narakasura stole the ear-rings of Aditi, the mother
of the devas. Sri Krsna and Satyabhama went to
fight with Narakasura. They killed him and recovered
the ear-rings and gave them back to Aditi. At that
time Aditi blessed Satyabhama thus: “Till Sri Krsna
forsakes his body you will not be affected by old age.
Moreover you will always have a divine fragrance and
good qualities.” (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 38).
(111) Satyabhama had a_ beautiful white palace in
Dvaraka. The steps of the palace were paved with
jewels. ‘T’o those who pass over its steps, hot season will
appear tobe cold. (M.B. Daksinatya Patha, Sabha
Parva, Chapter 38),
(iv) When the Pandavas were living in the Kamyaka
forest at the time of their. forest: life, Sri Krsna and
Satyabhama paid them a visit. (M.B. Vana ‘Parva,
Chapter 183, Verse 11). ,
(v) At this time Satyabhama asked Paficali about the
means and ways to bring the husband over to her side.
(M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 238, Verse 4).
(vi) When Arjuna came to Dvaraka, after Sri Krsna
_had forsaken his body, Satyabhama lamented with the
other queens for a long time. (M.B. Mausala Parva,
Chapter 5, Verse 13). | .
(vii) After this Satyabhama went to the forest for
penance. (M.B. Mausala Parva, Chapter 7, Verse 74).
SATYADEVA. A prominent ‘warrior of the army of
Kalinga. He took part in the Bharata-battle and served
_ as the guard of the wheel of King Srutayus of Kalinga
and was killed by Bhimasena. (M.B. Bhisma Parva,
‘Chapter 54, Verse 74).
SATYADEVI. The. daughter of King Devaka. This
Satyadevi was one of the seven wives of Vasudeva.
(Matsya Purana, 44-73). >
SATYADHARMA I. A King of the lunar dynasty. He was
a helper of Yudhisthira. (M.B, Udyoga Parva, Chapter
SATYADHARMA II. A brother of Sugarma, the King
of Trigarta. Arjuna killed him in the Bharata-battle.
(M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter 26, Verse 36). .
SATYADHRTI I. A son of Satananda. It is mentioned
in Agni Purana, Chapter 278, that this Satyadhrti had
two children called Krpa and Krpi.
SATYADHRTI II. . A warrior who fought in chariot on
the side of the Pandavas in the Battle of Bharata. The
following information is given about him in Mahabharata.
(1) Bhisma considered Satyadhrti as one of the
prominent fighters in chariots. (M.B. Udyoga Parva, _
Chapter 17, Verse 18). |
(ii) This Satyadhrti had been present at the Svayamvara marriage of Draupadi. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter
(iii) ‘This Satyadhrti who was the son of Sucitra continued helping Ghatotkaca the son of Hidimbi, during
the battle of Bharata. (M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapt
93, Verse 13). , phew
(iv) Satyadhrti was an expert in the wielding of all
Weapons, especially in archery. He was a scholar jn the
705 | : SATYAKAMA
Vedas and Vedangas.'’ (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter
(v) In the Bharata-battle he was, killed by Dronacarya. (M.B. Karna Parva, Chapter 6, Verse 34). —
SATYADHRTI III. The son of the King Ksemaka. In
the Bharata-battle he fought on the side of the Pandavas against the Kauravas. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter
23, Verse 58),
SATYAHITA. . A King of the Piru dynasty. He was son
of Rsabha and the father of Sudhanva. (Agni Purana,
Chapter 278). |
SATYAJIT I. A King belonging to the dynasty of Yayati.
He was the son of Sunita and the father of Ksema.
(Bhagavata, Skandha 9).
SATYAJIT II. A brother of Drupada, the King of
Paficala. He appears in the story of Mahabharata for
the first time at the battle between Drupada and Arjuna.
When the education of the Kauravas and the Pandavas
was over, Drona asked his pupils to bring Drupada tied
as teacher’s gift. An attempt was made to_ bring
Drupada before Drona, in which attempt Drupada and
Arjuna confronted each other. In this fight it was
Satyajit who stood as the right hand of his brother
| Drupada. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 137, Verse 42).
Arjuna defeated this Satyajit. Immediately Satyajit ran
away from the battle-field.
After the marriage of Paficali, Pandavas and Drupada
became relatives. With this Satyajit also came to be on
good relation with the Pandavas. In the battle of
Bharata this Satyajit was the bodyguard of Yudhisthira.
(M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 17). In the battle which
followed Drona killed Satyajit. (M.B. Karna Parva,
Chapter 6, Verse 4).
SATYAKA. Aking of the Yadava clan. He was the
father of Satyaki. Satyaka also took part in the festivals”
conducted on the Raivata-mountain by Sri Krsna and
the others. It is stated in the afvamedha Parva, Chapter
62, Verse 6, that Satyaka conducted offerings to the
manes in respect of Abhimanyu.
SATYAKAMA (SATYAKAMA JABALA). A noble hermit. There is a story as given below, in the Chandogyopanisad about the greatness of this hermit.
As his father died in his boyhood, Satyakama was
brought up by his mother Jabali. Whan it was time to
begin education, the boy told his mother, ‘‘Mother, I
would like to be educated under a teacher, in the
Vedas. But I don’t know what clan I belong to.
What answer shall I give, when the teacher asks me
_about my clan ?’’ His mother Jabali replied. ‘I also
do not know much about the clan of your father who
married me when I was a girl. From that day onwards
I was engaged in house-keeping. I did not ask your
father about the clan. In my younger days I gave birth
to you. Shortly after that your father died. Tell your
teacher that you are Satyakama the son of Jabali.”
Having heard this Satyakama went in search of a
teacher. At last he reached the hermitage of the sage
Gautama and told him every thing. The hermit was
attracted by his truthfulness and behaviour. Believing
that Satyakama was a Brahmin boy, Gautama accepted
him as a disciple. The hermit entrusted the boy with
four hundred lean cows to look after. The boy accepted
the work, and said to the hermit. ‘When this becomes
a group of thousand fat cows, I will bring them back.”
He lived in the forest looking after the cows. The Devas

SATYAKARMA I
sympathised with him. . Vayu (wind), the Sun, Agni
(fire) and Prana together gave him divine knowledge and
wisdom. After this Satyakamareturned to the hermit
Gautama with thousand fat cows. Seeing the boy whose
face shone with the light of God, the hermit was
amazed. ‘‘Who gave you divine knowledge ?” asked
the hermit. Satyakama told the hermit all that took
place. Fully satisfied with the boy, Gautama imparted
to htm knowledge about the universal Soul (Paramatma)
and Satyakama became a noble hermit.
Satyakama got several disciples of whom Upakosala
was prominent. He approached Satyakama as a student.
For twelve years he served his teacher and kept up the
fire in the firepit for burnt offering, without being extinguished throughout the twelve years, and worshipped
the fire god. Yet the teacher did not impart knowledge
to him. The teacher’s wife recommended to her husband that Upakosala should be given learning. But the
teacher was silent. Upakosala took a vow and fast
before the burnt-offering fire pit. Agni Deva felt pity for
him and informed him that God is all-pervading and
that his teacher would show him the way toGod. When
he came to the teacher, his face was seen shining.
Satyakama asked Upakosala for the reason. Upakosala
told the teacher what the fire god had told him.
Immediately Satyakama taught his disciple the path of
yoga (union) by knowledge of the Sankhyas.
SATYAKARMA I. A king of the family of Bharata. He
was the son of Dhrtavrata and the father of Anuratha.
(Bhagavata, Skandha 9).
SATYAKARMA II. The brother of Sugarma the king of
Trigarta. Though he took a vow in the Bhirata battle
that he would kill Arjuna, what happened was that he
was killed by Arjuna. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 17,
Verse 17; Salya Parva, Chapter 27, Verse 39).
SATYAKETU I. A king of the Solar dynasty. He was
the son of Dharmaketu and the father of Dhrstaketu,
(Bhagavata, Skandha 9). _
SATYAKETU Il. A king of Paficala. Mention is made
in Brahmanda Purana, Sloka 73, of a Pafcala King
_Satyaketu who fought with Paraéurdma.
SATYAKETU III. A king belonging to the Paru dynasty.
This Satyaketu was the son of King Sukumara. (Agni
Purana, Chapter 278).
SATYAKI (YUYUDHANA). A Yadava, who was a
warrior of the Vrsni dynasty and a friend of Sri Krsna
1) Genealogy. Descended from Visnu thus ; Brahma -
Atri - Gandra - Budha- Puraravas - Ayus - Nahusa -
Yayati - Yadu - Sahasrajit - Satajit -Hehaya-Dharma -
Kuni - Bhadrasena - Dhanaka - Krtavirya - Karttaviryarjuna - Madhu - Vrsni - Yudhajit - Sini - Sat aka -
Satyaki -
Sini was the younger son of Yudhajit. Satyaki alias Yuyudhana, a companion of Sri Krsna and a great friend of
the Pandavas, was Sini’s grandson.
2) His relation to other prominent Yadavas. The dynasty of
Anamitra, first son of Yudhajit, became famous through
Prasena, Satrajit, Svaphalka and Akrira. Of the four
sons of Andhaka, predecessor of Krsna, Kukura and
Bhajamana deserve special mention. Ahuka, in the
dynasty of Kukura had two sons named Devaka and
Uprasena. Devaki, daughter of Devaka, became wife
of Vasudeva and mother of Krsna. Karhsa was the son
of Ugrasena. Sira, seventh in the line of Bhajamana,
gon of Andhaka had twelve children, His first son
SATYAKI
Vasudeva was Krsna’s father.
Srutadevi and Rajadhidevi the four daughters of
Sira were married respectively by Dhrstaketu,
king of Kekaya, Damaghosa, king of Cedi, Vrddha-
§arman, king of Karisa and Jayasena, king of
Avanti. Dhrstaketu was a great ally of the Pandavas.
Sigupala was the son of Damaghosa, and Dantavaktra
the son of Vrddhagarman. Sigupala and Dantavaktra,
the third human incarnation of Jaya and Vijaya were
war-crazy and haughty persons. Winda and Anuvinda,
sons of Jayasena, were great friends of the Pandavas. As
Kunti, daughter of Sira became the adopted daughter
of Ugrasena, she became also the niece of Vasudeva and
Krsna’s father’s sister. Kunti married Pandu and she
delivered four sons, Karna, Yudhisthira, Bhimasena and
Arjuna,
3) Other information I. The following facts about Satyaki
are extracted from the Mahabharata.
(1) Satyaki was born from an aspect of the Maruddevatas. (Adi Parva, Chapter 185, Verse 18).
(2) He was present at the wedding of Draupadi. ( Adi
Parva, Chapter 185, Verse 18),
(3) He was in the company of the Yadavas, who went
to Indraprastha with the dowry for Subhadra. (Adi
Parva, Chapter 220, Verse 31)
(4) Amember in the court of Yudhisthira, Satyaki
learned dhanurveda (science of archery) from Arjuna.
(Sabha Parva, Chapter 4, Verse 34). |
(5) He was one of the chief Yadava warriors, (Sabha
Parva, Chapter 14, Verse 57).
(6) At the coronation of Yudhisthira he held the royal
umbrella over his head. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 5;
Verse 13). :
(7) He also was present at the wedding of Abhimany¥
held at Upaplavya city. (Virata Parva, Chapter 725
Verse 21).
(8) He went to Yudhisthira with a big army to part
cipate in the great war. (Udyoga Parva, Chapter 19;
Verse 1).
(9) He informed Sri Krsna, who went to the Kaurav4
assembly as the messehzer. of the Pandavas, that ©
desired war. (Udyoga Parva, Chapter 81, Verse 5).
(10) Sri Krsna started for the Kaurava assembly
with Satyaki after making him leave his weapons in the
chariot. (Udyoga Parva, Chapter 83, Verse 12).
(11) On the first day of the great war, he fought 4
duel with Krtavarman. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 45,
Verse 12),
(12) He saved Arjuna, who was in difficulties oO?
account of the rain of arrows from Bhisma (Bhisma
ie ee 69, Verse 78). =
€ tought with Bhiri¢
Ghipter 64. Bore 1), urisravas,
(14) When his charioteer was kill
drove the chariot himself,
73, Verse 28).
(15) Bhirigravas killed ten sons
Parva, Chapter 74, Verse 1):
( em Alambiisa. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter
(17) He rendered Agvatthama
Parva, Chapter 101, Verse iia
(18) He fought with Bhi
104, Verse 29), sont.
Srutakirti, Sruta‘ravas,
(Bhisma Parva,
ed by Bhisma, Satyaki
(Bhisma Parva, Chapter
of Satyaki. (Bhisma
unconscious. (Bhisma
Bhisma Parva, Chapter

SATYAK]
(19) He fought with Duryodhana. (Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 110, Verse 14).
(20) He fought with Bhagadatta.
Chapter 111, Verse 7).
(21) He fought with Aévatthama.
Chapter 116, Verse 9).
(22) Following that he fought with Ksemamirti and
Brhanta on the Kaurava side. (Drona Parva, Chapter
25, Verse 47).
(23) His chariot was thrown off by Bhagadatta’s elephant. (Drona Parva, Chapter 26, Verse 43).
(24) Karna and Satyaki fought each other. (Drona
Parva, Chapter 32, Verse 67).
(Bhisma Parva,
(Bhisma Parva,
(25) At the instance of Arjuna he remained on the
battle-field protecting Yudhisthira.
Chapter 84, Verse 35).
(26) He fought with Dusgasana. (Drona Parva, Chapter
(27) He saved Dhrstadyumna from being killed by
Drona. (Drona Parva, Chapter 97, Verse 32).
(28) He fought Drona again and broke six bows of the
latter. (Drona Parva, Chapter 98).
(29) He fought with Vyaghradatta. (Drona Parva,
Chapter 106, Verse 14). |
(30) He killed Vyaghradatta. (Drona Parva, Chapter:
(31) Drona wounded Satyaki. (Drona Parva, Chapter
110, Verse 2).
(32) Satyaki wounded Krtavarman. (Drona Parva,
Chapter 113, Verse 46). |
(33) He killed Jalasandha. (Drona Parva, Chapter 115,
Verse 52).
(34) He defeated Duryodhana. (Drona Parva, Chapter
(35) He defeated Drona. (Drona Parva, Chapter 117,
Verse 30),
(36) He killed Sudargana. (Drona Parva, Chapter 118,
Verse 15). |
(37) He defeated Duggasana. (Drona Parva, Chapter
(38) He killed kinz Alambisa. (Drona Parva, Chapter
(39) He killed Bhirisravas. (Drona Parva, Chapter
(40) He defeated Karna in fighting. (Drona Parva,
Chapter 144, Verse 64).
(41) He killed Somadatta in battle. (Drona Parva,
Chapter 162, Verse 33).
(42) He killed King Bhiri.(Drona Parva, Chapter 166,
Verse 12),
(43) He defeated Vrsasena, son of Karna. (Drona Parva,
Chapter 170, Verse 30).
(44) Bhima and Sahadeva prevented Satyaki, who
rushed forward with his club, from killing Dhrstadyumna. (Drona Parva, Chapter 198, Verse 6).
(45) He routed six maharathas of the Kaurava army.
(Drona Parva, Chapter 200, Verse 53). |
(46) During the battle with Agvatthama he fell unconscious. (Drona Parva, Chapter 200, Verse 56).
(47) He killed Anuvinda, King of Kekaya. (Karna
Parva, Chapter Is, Verse 11) )
vee _ Vinda. (Karna Parva, Chapter 13,
(49) He killed the Ki
Chapter 22, Verse 13), *
(Drona Parva,
g of Vanga. (Karna Parva,
" manyu.
SATYARATA
(50) He defeated Sakuni. (Karna Parva, Chapter 61,
Verse 48).
(51) He killed Prasena, son of Karna. (Karna Parva,
Chapter 82, Verse 6). : |
(52) He fought with Salya. (Salya Parva, Chapter 13).
(53) He killed Salva, the mleccha King. (Salya Parva,
Chapter 20,. Verse 26). |
(54) He killed Ksemamiarti. (Salya Parva, Chapter
(55) He captured Safijaya alive. (Salya Parva, Chapter 25, Verse 57).
(56) Though he got ready to kill Safijaya, yet he set
him free on the advice of Vyasa. (Salya Parva,
Chapter 29, Verse 38). |
(57) After the great war was over he went to Dvaraka
from ‘Hastinapura in the company of Sri Krsna.
(ASvamedhika Parva, Chapter 52, Verse 57).
(58) He participated in the celebrations held at mount
Raivataka in the company of Sri Krsna. (Asvamedhika
Parva, Chapter 59, Verse 3). .
(59) He performed the after-death ceremonies of Abhi-
(AgSvamedhika Parva, Chapter 62, Verse 6).
(60) He participated in the afvamedha yajria held by
Yudhisthira at Hastinapura. (Asgvamedhika Parva,
Chapter 66, Verse 3). | a)
(61) Under the influence of liquor he ridiculed Krtavarman for killing sleeping children. (Mausala Parva,
Chapter 3, Verse 16). 1 oe |
(62) For Satyaki’s part in the Syamantaka incident see
under Syamantaka. | ?
(63) When Satyaki, after killing Krtavarman, rushed
forth to kill many others, Krsna, and Pradyumna interfered. Yet, he killed many others. (Mausala Parva,
Chapter 8, Verse 29). :
(64) Arjuna appointed Yauyudhéni, son of Satyaki,
chief of the region in the plain of Sarasvati. (Mausala
Parva, Chapter 7, Verse 71)‘
(65) After death his soul went to the Marudganas.
(Svargarohana Parva, Chapter 4, Verse 17).
(66) Synonyms used for Satyaki in the Mahabharata:
Anartta, Saineya, Saineyanandana, Sauri, Siniputra,
inipautra, Sininapta, Sinipravara, Dagarha, Madhava,
Madhavagrya, Madhavasimha, Madhidvaha, Satvata,
Satvatagrya, Satyaka, Varsneya, Vrsni, Vrsnisardila,
Vrsnikulodvaha, Vrsnyandhakapravira, Yadava, Yadidvaha, Yadittama, Yuyudhana.
4) Other information IJ. From Bhagavata
(1) In all the wars in which Srj_ Krsna was engaged, it
was Satyaki, who was his most powerful supporter. In
the battle between Krsna and Bandsura, Satyaki clashed
with Kumbhanda, Bana’s minister. (Bhagavata
Skandha 1).
(2) When Jarasandha attacked Mathurapuri, Satyaki
who guarded the city’s western entrance, fought the
former and routed his forces. (Bhagavata, Skandha 1).
(3) He participated in the Salya and Paundrakavasudeva
wars. (Bhagavata, Skandha 1).
SATYALOKA. The world of Brahmi. (See under Brahma )
SATYAPALA. A hermit.
SATYANRTA. See under Pramrta.
It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter 4, Verse 14, that this hermit shone in the court of Yudhisthira.
SATYARATA, A Kekaya princess. Satyavrata (Triganku )
the king of Ayodhya married this princess. (Vayu Purana,
Chapter 88; Verse 117).

SATYARATHA
SATYARATHA. The brother of Sufarma the king of
Trigarta. (M.B. Udyoga Parva, Chapter 66, Verse 11).
SATYARTHAPRAKASA. A commentary on the Veda
siktas by Svami Dayadnanda who founded the. Arya
Samaja.
SATYASANDHA. I. (SATYAVRATA, SATYASENA,
SANDHA). One of the hundreds ons of Dhrtarastra. The:
following information about this Satyasandha is- from
Mahabharata. : .
(1) This Satyasandha was one of the eleven great
chariot-fighters in the army of the Kauravas. (M.B. Adi
Parva, Chapter 63, Verse 119). |
(2) This Satyasandha stood as the bodyguard of Salya
and fought in the Bhiarata-battle. (M.B. Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 62, Verse 17). )
(3) Abhimanyu wounded him in the Bhirata-battle.
(M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 73, Verse 24). :
(4) Satyaki showered arrows on Satyasandha. (M.B.
Drona Parva, Chapter 116, Verse 7). . oo
(5). Bhimasena killed Satyasandha in the. battle of
Bharata. -(M.B. Karna Parva, Chapter 84, Verse 2). —
SATYASANDHA. IL. One of the two followers given to
Subrahmanya by the god Mitra. The other follower
was Suvrata. (M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 41).
SATYASANDHA III. An ancient king in India. There is
astory in Mahabharata, Santi Parva, Chapter 234,
Verse 16, as to how, this king Satyasandha, who was an
_ observer of vows and fasts, saved the life.of a Brahmin
by sacrificing his own life. | |
SATYASENA I. See under Satyasandha. .
SATYASENA IT. A brother of Sugarma, the king of Trigarta. It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Karna Parva,
Chapter 27, Verse 3, that this Satyasena confronted
. Arjuna in the Bharata-battle and was killed by him.
SATYASENA IIT. A son of Karna. He served asthe guard
of the wheel of the chariot of his father Karna in the
eon (M.B. Karna Parva, Chapter 48, Verse
SATYASRAVAS I. A warrior
side aor ne Pandavas Abhimanyu killed this warr10r. -6b. Drona Parva, Chapter 45
SATYASRAVAS Il. A jeoclionatedy of Ps "ite oe the
pee eecipien of Vyasa. H 3
arkandeya. (Vayu Pura :
SATYATAPAS (UTATHYA) L.A brahmin boy who was
changed into a cobra by the curse ofa saint called
Godila. The original name of this youth was Utathya.
Later he came to be known as Satyatapas. The story of
a paniarapas is given in Devi Bhagavata, .Skandha 3
‘as follows: - :
In days of old, there was a Brahmin named Devadatta
in Kosala. His wife was called Rohini. Though ‘much
time elapsed no child was born to them. At last Devadatta performed the iaauies ers Putrakamesti, on the
banks of the river lamasa. Several saintly persons
took part in the sacrifice. Suhotra was detailed as
Brahma, YAajiiavalkya as officiating priest, Brhaspati as
sacrificer, Pailatorecite Vedas and Godila tosing Saman
hymns. The singing of Godila, an expert singer, caused
horripilation to everybody in the sacrificial hall. But in
the middle of singing he had to take breath, and there
occurred a solecism in his voice. Devadatta did not like
‘t. He warned Godila, who instantly became angry and
said to Devadatta. ‘‘Since you called 'me Cobra, the son
born to you will becomea cobra.
who fought on the Kaurava
e was the son of the hermit
SATYATAPAS II
Devadatta .became miserable and begged Godila bY
holding his feet to pardon him. He _ gave liberation
from the curse that his son would be a cobra and
said that he would become a sage. |
The wife of Devadatta became pregnant and gave
birth to a son. He was named Utathya. In the
eighth year, the ceremony of investiture with the
_ Brahma string was performed and the boy commenced
education. The teacher began to teach the Vedas.
From that day onwards the boy became self-conceited.
All the attempts made by the teacher to change his
behaviour were futile. His father tried the four expedients in vain. Thus twelve years elapsed. The
boy did not even learn the evening prayer. Everybody
_ thought that he was a cobra. All scoffed at him.’ His
own people disliked him; with this, self-renunciation
took root in his boyish mind and he left his home and
went away. He reached the banks of the Ganges and
made a hut there and lived there observing rigorous
celibacy, and vow of truth. Thus the boy-hermit
began severe penance. a
He had learned no rites or rituals according to the
Vedas. He would rise early in the morning, and after
cleaning the teeth he would take a dip in the Gangetic
waters, without any spells or actions and return to the
_ hut. He would eat anything that came by. He woul
cause no harm to anybody, though he had no power tO .
do good to anybody. Everybody in the neighbourhood
"began to realize that he was a boy who would on 70
account utter falsehood. So all began to call, him
Satyatapas. Satyatapas had no peace of mind. Life
seemed to bea burden to him. He became thoughtful
day and night. Thus he spent fourteen years there. _
People firmly believed in his truthfulness. So they
named him Satyavrata. Once a forester came near his
hut. He sent an arrow ata hog, which ran into the
_. hermitage with the arrow sticking on its body. Blood
was oozing from its wound. The jungle-dweller also
came into the-hut followlng the hog: Seeing Saty:
vrata the man asked ‘Where is the hog that I had
shot ?’’ Satyavrata who knew that killing animals was 4
sin, kept silence to save the beast. Devi was pleas
at the moral courage and truthfulness of Satyavrata.
is said that the moment the hog got into the hermita8°
the Sarasvata syllable ‘Ai’? arose from the tongue °
Satyavrata. The moment he had pronounced the.
rootsound of Sarasvati, ‘Ai’, by the grace of Devi,
became a poet like Valmiki. Looking at the foreste!
' Satyavrata said : . |
| “Yah pasyati na sa brite
Yo brite sa na pagyati |
Aho ! vyadha, svakaryarthin
" Kam prcchasi punah punah //
He who sees does not speak, He who speaks, does not
see. Selfish hunter, whom do you ask again and again! .
When the forester heard these words of Satyavrata, the
| bow and arrow fell from his hands. With self-renunClation he went away from the hermitage. The fame
of the great poet Satyavrata spread everywhere. His
father also heard about this from others. He came (0
the bank of the Ganges and took his son home. Even
today Brahmins ‘sing ab :
: as vey moon dave, ? ‘idea the fame of that hermit of
TYATAPAS II. A hermi -
celestial maid who had Heat Once he cursed 2
hinder his penance, , t0

oe
SATYAVAN I
become a phoenix tree. Later this hermit liberated her
from the curse. (Padma Purana, Uttarakhanda, Chap-
-SATYAVAN I. Husband of Savitri who was famous
for matrimonial fidelity. (For detailed story see under
Savitri IT),
SATYAVAN II. See under Rtambhara.
SATYAVAN III. One of the commanders of the army
of the Kauravas. Mention is made about this commander in Mahabharata, Udyoga Parva, Chapter 167,
Verse 30.
SATYAVAK I. Ason-of Caksusa Manu. Ten sons
including Satyavak, were born to Caksusa Manu by
his wife Nadvala. (Agni Purana, Chapter 18).
SATYAVAK II. A Deva Gandharva. This Gandharva
was the son bornto Prajapati Kasyapa by his wife
Muni. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 65, Verse 43).
SATYAVARMA. A brother of Sugarma the King of
Trigarta. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 17, Verse 17).
SATYAVATI I. The mother of Vyasa.
1) A short history. Satyavati was the daughter of ‘the
celestial maid Adrika. Because of a curse she lived as
a fishin the river Ganges. Once the semen of King
Uparicaravasu happened to fall in the Ganges and
this fish swallowed it in consequence of which it became
pregnant. A fisherman caught this fish and cut it. He
got two human babies, male and female from the
stomach of the fish. The fisherman gave the two
infants to the ;King who took the male child. This
child later became the Matsya King. The female child
had the smell of fish. The King called her MatsyaGandhi (She who has the smell of fish) and gave her
back to the fisherman, who took the child to his hut
and brought her up as his daughter. As the child was
dark in complexion the fisherman called her Kali. ‘Thus
the girl was known by two names KAli and Matsyagandhi. Later she got the name Satyavati also.
The fisherman was engaged in the work of ferrying
people across the river. Matsyagandhi helped her
father in this work. She became a full-bloomed young
woman. One day the hermit Paragara came by that
way and when he saw Matsyagandhi, he fell in love
with her. She ferried the hermit across the river. In
the middle of the river Paragara created an artificial fog
inside which Paragara took Matsyagandhi as his wife.
From that moment Matsyagandhi became Kastirigandhi (she who has the smell of Kastiri (musk).
Kali became pregnant and delivered instantly. ParaSara. left the place. after having blessed her that she
would not lose her virginity.
he son born to Kali, immediately grew up to be a
youth. After promising his mother that he would
come to her when she thought of him, the youth went
to the forest for penance. The name of the son was
Krsna. This Krsna later became famous by the name
Vyasa. Satyavati again engaged herself in helping her
father.
One day Santanu, a King of the lunar dynasty, came to
the forest for hunting. The fragrance of musk emanatthe from the body of Kastirigandhi spread throughout
fre wnole forest, The King walked. on through’ the
ots a Nae the origin of the smell of musk and
Satyay ty € Hsherman’s hut. The King fell in love with
A wif c ‘he King had a son named Bhisma by his
n¢ Ganga. Bhisma made it easy for the King to
709 SATYEYU ~
marry Satyavati. Twosons Citrangada and Vicitravirya were born to Santanu by his wife Satyavati.
Citrangada was killed in his boyhood. Vicitravirya
became a youth and married Ambika and Ambalika
the daughters of the King of Kagi. Vicitravirya met
with untimely death before a child was born to him.
When Satyavati saw that the family was about to
become extinct, she thought of her son Vyasa, who
instantly arrived at the palace. From Vyasa, Ambalika
got the son Pandu and Ambika, the son Dhrtarastra.
Both the sons Dhrtarastra and Pandu got married..
Pandu died. The death of her son struck heavily at
the heart of Satyavati. She did not wish to live much
longer after this. She mentioned about the fearful
things yet to happen. Then taking her daughters-inlaw Ambika and Ambalika with her, Satyavati went to
the forest to do penance and finally attained heaven.
(M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 127). (For further details
see under Adrika, Vyasa and Santanu).
2) Names. Dageyi, Gandhakali, Gandhavati, Sali
Satya, Vasavi, Yojanagandha and such other words
are used in the Mahabharata as the synonyms of
Satyavati.
SATYAVATI II. The sister of ViSvamitra. (See under
amadagni; Para 2).
SATYAVATI III. A princess of the country of Kekaya.
She was the wife of Trisanku and the mother of Hariscandra. (Mahabharata, Daksinatyapatha, Sabha Parva,
Chapter 12).
SATYAVATI! IV. It is mentioned in Mahabharata,
Udyoga Parva, Chapter 117, Verse 15, that one Satyavati was the wife of Narada. .
SATYAVRATA I. Another name of Triganku. (See
under Triganku).
SATYAVRATA II. The Brahmin boy Satyatapas.
(See under Satyatapas) .
SATYAVRATA III. A son of Dhrtarastra. It is seen
that he was known by other names also such as
Satyasena, Satyasandha, Sandha etc.' (See under Satyasandha).
SATYAVRATA IV. Brother of Sugarma, the King of
Trigarta. It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Drona
Parva, Chapter 17, that this cursed warrior took in
vain a vow in the battle of Bharata that he would kill
Arjuna. )
SATYAYUGA. Another name of Krtayuga. (See under
Krtayuga).
SATYAYUS. One of the six sons born to Puriravas by
Urvasi. The six sons were Ayus, Srutayus, Satyayus,
Raya, Vijaya and Jaya. (Bhagavata, Skandha 9).
SATYESU I. Brother of Sugarma the King of Trigarta.
It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Drona Parva, Chapter
17, and Salya Parva, Chapter 27, that this Satyesu was
killed by Arjuna in the Bhiarata-battle.
SATYESU II. A Raksasa (giant). Mention is made
about this giant who had ruled over the world in
ancient .days and had to go, leaving this world due to
fate, in Mahabharata, Santi Parva, Chapter 227, Verse
SATYEYU. A King born in the dynasty of King Piru.
This Satyeyu was one of the ten sons born to RaudraA by the celestial maid Ghrtaci. (Bhagavata, Skandha
According to the statement that ocdurs in Mahabharata,
Adi Parva, Chapter 94, the father of Satyeyu was

SAUBALA
Raudragva and mother, Misrakesi. The son Satyeyu
was born to Raudragva by the celestial maid Migrakesi.
SAUBALA. A Vaigya. It is mentioned in Devi
Bhagavata, Skandha 2, that King Dhrtaradstra had two
wives, One a Ksatriya woman, named Gandhéari, the
daughter of the King of Gandhara and the other a
Vaigya woman named Saubali, the daughter of Saubala.
SAUBHA. The acrial chariot or Vimana of the King
of Salva. This was also called Saubhanagara. When
Sri Krsna killed Salva, this Vimana was smashed by
the power of his weapon, the Cakra (Discus). (M.B. .
Vana Parva, Chapter 22, Verse 33).
SAUBHADRATIRTHA. A holy place on the coast of
the southern sea. (For further details see under
Padmatirtha and Varga).
SAUBHAGYAGAURI. A particular kind of image of
Devi Parvati. When the image of this goddess Parvati
is fixed and consecrated as having the posture with one
of the left hands touching the head and shoulder and
the other hand holding a mirror, one of the right
hands holding fruit and the other one being held high,
itis called Saubhagyagauri. (Agni Purana, Chapter
SAUBHAGYASUNDARI. A feminine form of Narada.
(See under Taladhvaja [),
SAUBHAPATI. The King Salva. As he had been in
possession of an aerial chariot called Saubha, he is said
to have got this name.
SAUBHARA. A fire. This agni (fire) was born from a
portion of Varcas. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 220,
Verse 6).
SAUBHARI I. A hermit who had performed penance,
sitting on the banks of the river Kalindi. (For detailed
story see under Garuda, para 11).
SAUBHARI II. A hermit who had put up his hermitage on the Vindhya. At the time of the horse-sacrifice
of Yudhisthira, Arjuna called on this hermit Saubhari.
On that occasion the hermit told Arjuna about the
previous history of Candi, who had been cursed by the
hermit Uddalaka. It is mentioned in Jaimini Agvamedha Parva, Chapter 96, that Arjuna later redeemed
Candi from the curse.
SAUBHART III. A hermit famous in the Puranas, A
Puranic story about this hermit’s marrying the fifty
daughters of Mandhata is given below.
Saubhari saw two fishes engaged in coition, while he
was doing penance on the banks of the Yamuna. This
sight aroused matrimonial thoughts in the hermit’s
mind. He instantly approached MAndhata and informed him of his desire to marry a princess.
Mandhata did not like to give his daughter in marriage
to the old hermit. Concealing his thought, he told the
hermit as follows:— “Out of my fifty daughters, she
who wishes to be your wife, shall be given to you,”
Saubhari, who had already read the thought of
Mandhata entered the harem in the shape of a handsome fine youth, and all the fifty damsels liked him.
Thus Saubhari married all of them, and begot hundred
sons of each of them.
This matrimonial life lasted for some time. At last the
hermit grew weary of this life. Discarding everything,
Saubhari went tothe forest. His wives, who also had
become disinterested in worldly enjoyment, followed
him. (Bhagavata, Skandha 9; Visnu Purana, 4, 2, 3;
SAUNAKA I
Padma Purana, Uttara Khanda 262; Garuda Purana,
SAUDASA. A King of the Iksvaku dynasty. He was
known by the name Kalmasapada also. (For details
see under Kalmasapada).
SAUGANDHIKA. A flower-garden of Kubera. It is assumed
that Vayu (the wind-god) carried fragrance from _ this
garden and remained in the palace of Kubera, praising
him. This garden was full of sweet-scented lotus
ye ence Rowen) - (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter,
SAUGANDHIKAVANA. A holy place. It is assumed,
that the gods such as Brahma and others, hermits,
Siddhas, Caranas, Gandharvas, Kinnaras, Big Nagas,
and so on dwell in this place. All the sins of a man
are washed away, the moment he visits this holy place.
(M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 34, Stanza 4).
SAUHRDA. An ancient country in South India, famous
in the Puranas. (Mahabharata, Bhisma Parva, Chapter
9, Verse 59).
SAUMADATTI. Bhirigravas the son of Somadatta. (See
under Bhirigravas) .
SAUMANASA I. One of the eight elephants supporting
the globe. (See under Astadiggajas).
SAUMANASA II. The peak ofa mountain. It was on
this golden peak, witha girth of one yojana and an
elevation of ten yojanas, that Bhagavan Visnu placed
the first of his three steps during the incarnation as
Vamana, the second step being on the peak of Meru
and the third on the head of Mahiabali.
‘There is a golden peak called Saumanasa, with girth
of one yojana and a height of ten yojanas. It is: said
that in days of yore Mahavisnu placed the first of his
three steps on this peak the second being on the peak
: — Valmiki Ramayana. Kiskindha kanda, Sarga
SAUMYAKSADVIPA. An island famous in the Puranas
ee Daksinatyapatha, Sabha Parva,
ter ;
SAUNAKA I.
1) General. A renowned Acarya. He is believed to be
the author of the famous works — ‘“Reveda Anukramani’’, ‘‘Aranyakam”’, “‘Rkpratigakhya’’, etc.
The famous Aésvalayanacarya was Saunaka’s disciple.
Acaryas like Katyayana, Patafijali and Vyasa belonged
to his class. Saunaka’s real name was “Grtsamada’’. It
was because he was the son of Sunaka that he got the
name “‘Saunaka’’,
2) Birth. Saunahotra,
once performed a yaga.
Chapae son of the sage Sunahotra;
i. Indra attended that yaga. At
that time Saunahotra rescued Indra from an —— of
oe Asuras. Indra who was pleased at this, blessed
aunahotra that he would be born in his next Birth in
a aren family under the name ‘“Saunaka’’.
ses aabogy In Vayu Purana his genealogy is given in
i) Ruru (Pramadvara) - Sunaka - Saunaka -
il) Dharmavrddha — Sunahotra — Gr os el
‘ tsamada —
aunaka. (Vayu Purana, 92, 26).
4) Important works. Saunaka is believed to be the author
of numerous works. The mae:
: . Ost Import
given below :— portant of them are
(1) Rkpratisakhya (2) Revedaccha
Revedarsyanukramani (4) Reveda
Revedasiktanukramani
ndanukramani (3)
Anuvakanukramani
Revedakathanu-

SAUNAKA II 711
kramani (7) Rgvedapadavidhana (8) Brhaddevata (9)
aunakasmrti (10) Caranavyitha and (11) Revidhana.
Matsya Purina, Chapter 252 mentions that Saunaka
had written a work on the science of architecture. _
J) Disciples. The chief disciple of Saunaka was Agvalayana. Once Agvalayana wrote and dedicated to his
Guru (master) two treatises entitled ‘“Grhyasittra” and
‘‘Srautasiitra” to please him. After reading it, Saunaka
destroyed his own work on “‘SrautagAstra”. Aévalayana
wrote his treatise after having studied the ten works of
aunaka on Rgveda.
Katyayana, the disciple of Agvalayana later received
the ten books written by Saunaka and the three books
written by Agvalayana. Katyayana gave his disciple
Patafijali, the two works, “Yajurvedakalpasitra’’ and
‘“Samaveda Upagrantha” which were written by himself. From this we may infer that the series of Saunaka’s
disciples was as follows:— Saunaka — Agvalayana —
Katyayana — Patanjali — Vyasa.
SAUNAKA II. A Brahmana who went to the forest with
Yudhisthira. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter Jin
SAUNDIKAS. A Caste. Originally they were Ksatriyas.
Mahabharata, Anugasana Parva, Chapter-35, Verse 17,
mentions that they were debased on account of a curse
by a Brahmana.
SAUPTIKAPARVA. A Parva (section) in Mahabharata
(See under Bharata).
SAURABHEYI. A celestial maid. For details see under
Varga.
SAURABHI. A cow which was the daughter of Surabhi.
Having drunk too much of celestial honey (amrta)
which is the essence of the six tastes (sadrasas), Brahma
had to vomit, on which occasion, the. cow Surabhi
sprang up from his face. Her milk having accumulated
ina low place the milk-sea was formed. The hermits
known as the Phenapas live on the shore of the milk
sea, the foam that settles on the shore being their food.
Around them, there are four cows which protect the
four directions. Saurabhi is one of them. She supports
the east. Harhsika bears the south, Subhadra the west
Tao Dhenu the north. (M.B. Udyoga Parva, Chapter
SAURI. Vasudeva, the son of Sirasena.
SAUSALYA. A country in ancient India very famous 1n
the Puranas. (Mahabharata, Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9,
stanza 40). . !
SAUSRUTI. Brother of Susgarma the King of Trigarta.
Sausruti who had fought on the side of the Kauravas
in the battle of Bharata, was killed by Arjuna. (M.B.
Karna Parva, Chapter 27, Verse 3).
SAULKAYANI. A sage who belonged to the series of
Vy4sa’s disciples. |
SAUTI. A famous son of hermit Romaharsana. The
real name of this son was Ugragravas. This teacher is
responsible for the arrangement of the Mahabharata.
in the form that we see today.
The Story of Mahabharata composed by Vyasa ahd
te bene oe contained only a graphic description of
pea ee of Bharata. No vivid description of Sri
rind Matte of the Yadava dynasty and of the Yadavas,
adden n in it. To remove this deficiency, Sauti
an appendix called ‘Harivarhga’ to Svargarohana
Bharsia: ) Mahabharata, (For further details see under
SAVARNA I
SAUVIRA. An ancient country near the river-Sindhu.
It is stated in Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 133,
that during the peridd of Mahabharata, the King of this
country was killed by Arjuna.
SAUVIRI. The wite of King Manasyu, the son of
Pravira and the grandson of emperor Puru. (Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 94, Stanza 5).
SAVANA. I.
1) General. Son of Priyavrata who was the son of
Svayambhuva Manu, by his wife, Suripa. Suripa had
ten sons including Savana. (Devi Bhagavata, Skandha
3} Birth of son. Savana married Suveda, daughter of
Sunabha; but he expired before children were born to
him. According tothe Vamana Purana, Chapter 72,
seven children were born from the dead Savana. The -
story about it is as follows :—
Suveda, heart-broken at the death of Savana, did not
permit the dead body to be burnt, herself holding it in
embrace. Then a celestial voice. said to her : ‘Cry
not. If you are really chaste and true, enter the
funeral pyre along with your husband.”’ To this Suveda
answered thus : “‘I cry because of grief that he died
before making me the mother ofa son.”’ The celestial
voice said to her again : ‘‘You enter the pyre without
weeping. Your husband will have seven sons.”
Sudeva now permitted her dead husband to be cremated and meditating upon her chastity she jumped into
the funeral pyre. But within minutes Savana came
alive out of the fire with his wife and rose to the sky
with her. He stayed in the sky for another five days
and on the sixth day had the sexual act again with
her. His semen dropped on earth from the sky. The
King then with his wife went to Brahmaloka.
Samada, Nalini, Pusyati, Citra, Visala, Harita and
Alinila, all of them wives of munis saw the semen in
the sky and when it fell into the water they thought it
was amrta, which conferred eternal youth, and with
the permission of their husbands swallowed it. As soon
as they swallowed it their divine effulgence was diminished and their husbands, therefore, abandoned them.
Those women delivered seven children, who cried
fiercely and that sound filled the entire universe. Then
Brahma appeared. and asked the children not to cry and
also told them that they would come to be called
Maruts. Brahma himself called them Maruts. They
were the Maruts of the first Svayambhuva Manvantara.
SAVANA IT, One of the seven sons of Bhrgumuni,
the other six being Cyavana, Vajragirsa, Suci, Aurva,
Sukra and Vibhu. They are called Varunas also.
(Anugasana Parva, Chapter 85, Verse 129).
SAVANTA. A King born in the dynasty of emperor
Prthu. He was the son of Yuvanagva and father of
Brhadasva. (Devi Bhagavata, 7th Skandha).
SAVARNA. Wife of the muni called Pracinabarhis.
Savarna was the daughter of Samudra (ocean). (Visnu
Purana, Part 1, Chapter 14). The couple had ten
sons called the Pracetases, and they were very efficient
in Dhanurveda. All of them engaged themselves in
obserying the same dharma (duty) and did tapas for
10,000 years under the sea. (For details see under
Pracinabarhis),
SAVARNA I. A_ hermit. This hermit shone in the
council of Yudhisthira. (Mahabharata, Sabha Parva,
Chapter 4, Verse 15.)

scone’ Se a
SAVARNA II
SAVARNA II. (SAVARNI). A Manu. (For further
details see under Manvantara).
SAVARNI I. The eighth Manu. (For further details
see under Manvantara),
SAVARNI II. A hermit. This hermit shone in the
council of Indra. (Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter
7, Verse 10). This hermit Savarni did penance for six
thousand years in Satvayuga. (M.B. Anusasana_ Parva,
Chapter 14, Verse 103).
SAVITA. One of the twelve sons of Kasyapaprajapati
by his wife called Aditi. These sons are called Adityas.
So, Savita also is one of the Dvadasadityas. Visnu,
Sakra, Aryama, Dhata, Tvasta, Pisa, Vivasvan, Savita,
Mitra, Varuna, Amsu and Bhaga are the Dvadagadityas. |
Prgni, wife of Savité, gave birth to three daughters
called Savitri, Vyahrti and Trayi and three sons called
Agnihotra, Pasusoma and Caturmasya the great
sacrifices. (Visnu Purana, Part 1, Chapter 15).
SAVITRAI. One of the eleven Rudras. (M.B. Santi
Parva, Chapter 208, Verse 20). |
SAVITRA II. One of the eight Vasus. (Mahabharata,
Anusdsana Parva, Chapter 150, Verse 16).
SAVITRA III: A lofty peak of the mountain Sumeru.
Jyotiska is another name of this peak, which is
not approachable. It is adorned with precious stones
and is glorified by all. Siva and Parvati once sat on
this peak and did penance. It was on this peak that
Devi Ganga did penance to Siva, assuming a divine
figure. (M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter 283, Verse 5).
SAVITRI I.
1) General information. The daughter of the Sun. This
Savitri is the elder sister of Tapati. Brahma married
these sisters. It is stated in some Puranas that Savitri,
Gayatri, Sarasvati all these are one and the same. But
there is a story in Padma Purana, Srstikhanda, Chapter
17, stating that Brahma once went to Gayatri in the
absence of Savitri, who got angry at this and cursed all
the Gods.
Once Brahma went to Puskara to perform a sacrifice.
Siva, Visnu and all the hermits came there. Eve
was ready for the sactifice according to convention
But Savitri, who had been engaged in household duties
had not yet arrived. So a priest was sent to bring her
Savitri said to the priest, ‘I have not finished dressin
There are so many things to be done _ here. Moarcovel
Laksmi, Bhavani, Ganga, Svaha, Indrani celestial
women, wives of Rsis (hermits), none of these have
arrived yet. How can I enter the hall as the only
woman ?” The priest returned and reported’ that it
was not convenient for Savitri to come just then, as she
had so much work to do. Brahma became angry. and
said to Indra. ‘“‘Lord Indra, it is up to you to bring
me a wife from wherever you like. But it must be
done instantly.”” Hearing the order of . Brahma,. Indra
selected GAdyatri who was a good-natured damsel of a
cowherd’s family, and brought her to the. sacrificial
dais. With the blessings of the hermits and gods, Brahma
held her hand and acknowledged her as his wife.
Savitri dressed well, adorned herself with ornaments and
reached the sacrificial hall. She saw-the marrige ‘scene
and became furious. Everybody in the hall held their
breath, thinking of the approaching danger. Trembling
with anger Savitri said “Lo; Brahma, how is it that you
have committed this sin? Have you not married me with
rything
Se ee - ; a ae ee ee .
a ap _
A a
SAVITRII
fire as witness ? I am your wife. Are you not ashamed
of this?” The three godheads shivered with fear.Savitri
cursed everybody. The curse given to Brahma was that
no body should worship himon any other day except
the month of Ka4rttika in the year. She cursed Indra
that enemies would enter the world of gods and would
make Indra their captive. Savitri cried out that Visnu
would take the birth of man by the curse of Bhrgu. She
cursed Siva that he would lose his manliness. She gave
Agni the curse that he would eat anything and everything without the discrimination of purity or impurity.
She cursed the Brahmins that they would, in future perform sacrifice merely with a view to obtain gifts and
that they would be wandering about from temple to
temple and from tirtha to tirtha merely for gain.”
Uttering these words of curse, Savitri left the sacrificial
hall. Laksmi and some other goddesses followed her a
little while. Then they begged for permission to return.
Savitri said to them, ‘‘Laksmi ! You are leaving me. Is it
not so? Right. Hereafter you shall be permanent nowhere. May you become the companion of the wicked,
the wavering, the low-minded, the sinner, the cruel, the
foolish etc. Indranialso wants to return. Hear this:
Indra will kill Vrtra and incur the sin. of Brahmahaty4
and at that time Nahusa will capture heaven. Then
Nahusa will abuse you.”
Looking at the celestial women who were going to the
sacrificial hall, Savitri said; Look, Ye celestial wome"-
None of you will give birth to child. and you W!
not enjoy the pleasure of nurturing a child.” Says
these words Savitri left the hall. Not knowing what ‘©
do, all sat there. Instantly Gayatri rose up and looking
at everybody, said as a remission of curses: “I shall rem!
all curses. Those who worship Brahmi, will be. bless¢
with the pleasure of wife and children and wealth and
they will unite with Brahma. Even if Indra is . take"
captive, he will be made free by his son and will beco™?
the king of heaven again. Visnu will rescue his wife 42
kill the enemy. The phallus will be worshipped in al
the worlds. As Brahmins are the gods on earth the gift
you take, will be considered your dues. Laksmi! yOU
need not worry. Everybody will worship you. He who™
you favour will become a well-to-do person and he who™
you forsake will become miserable. You Indrani ! Becaus©
of Nahusa’s arrogance Agastya will change him to 4 big
python and he will fallto the earth. The celestial maids
will have no desire for children. So childlessness W?
not make you miserable.’’ By these words of blessings
oa aban everybody in the sacrificial hall was pach
i me details. |
Savitri shines in the palace of B a M B.
Sabha Parva, Chapter 11, Verse $4).
it) Savitri is the sovereign: deity of th tra Gayatri.
aoe goddess Savitri rosé up on the * sacrificial a oO
a ae ivapai and gave him a boon, and accordingly 4
one — ape Savitri was born to the King This
88 was Savitri the wife of 5
Gaya Chapter 290). SaSENAaNE: (OLE, Ven’
(nt) Siva, on starting for Tripuradah i
of ‘Tripuras) , placed Savitri : the bh aye Late pasar
he bri ’
-B. Drona Parva, Chapter 202, Verse 7), his horses
(iv) Once Japaka Brahmin w : -
orshi = Oaqs
who appeared before him and gave eye ag
ahmin was engaged in deep meditation aéad prayel;

SAVITRI II 713
he did not see the Devi when she appeared. It was due
to this piety that the Brahmin was given boons. (M.B
Santi Parva, Chapter 199).
(v) Once Devi Savitri appeared before Satya, a brahmin of Vidarbha. (M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter 272, Verse
(vi) Once Devi Savitri praised the giving of rice as alms.
(M.B. Anugdsana Parva, Chapter 57, Verse 8).
SAVITRI II, A hand-maid of Devi Uma. (Mahabharata,
Vana Parva, Chapter 231, Verse 49).
SAVITRI III. A Savitri who was the wife of a king and
a righteous woman ig mentioned in Mahabharata, Santi
Parva, Chapter 234, Verse 24. This Savitri gave two
ear-rings as alms and attained heaven.
SAVITRIIV. The wife of Satyavan.
1) Birth. In the country of -Madra, famous in the
Puranas, there was a king named Agvapati. His wife was
Malati. ‘Though the-couple grew old they were childless. At last they worshipped Devi Savitri. After vows
and prayers for eighteen years the Devi appeared before
them, and giving them the boon that a daughter would *
be born to them, she disappeared. The couple returned
to the palace and Malati conceived and delivered a
daughter whom they named Savitri. (Skandha 9, Devi
Bhagavata; Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 293).
2) Marriage. Savitri grew up as though Laksmi had
taken an incarnation and bloomed into a beautiful
damsel. But nobody came forward to marry her. On
a New moon day she bathed and purified herself and
getting the blessings of Brahmins, came and bowed
before her father. The King felt sorry as nobody had
offered to marry her though she was in the full bloom of
youth. He advised her to travel in the outside world
and to select a husband by herself. According to the
order of her father she took the aged ministers of the
aoe and travelled through the forests in which hermits
ived,
Once Narada came to the palace and while he was
talking with King Aégvapati, Savitri and the aged
ministers returned. She bowed before her father and
Narada. As soon as Narada saw her, he asked with
curiosity about her marriage. The father replied that he
had sent her in search of a husband. Savitri said ‘‘I have
accepted the Prince Satyavan as my husband. He is
the son of King Dyumatsena of Salva. Dyumatsena
became blind in his old age, and taking this opportunity
his enemies captured his country. Dyumatsena with
his wife and son went to the forest and lived there.”
Narada described the qualities of Satyavan. “‘Satyavan
Is as radiant as the sun, as intelligent as Brhaspati,
as valiant as Indra and as patient as the Earth.
Svapati was immensely pleased at hearing about the
good qualities of Satyavan, and asked Narada, if
there was anything to say against him. Narada said
that he had nothing to say against Satyavan except
that he would die “within one year from this date.”
(Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 294).
The King felt miserable when he heard this. Savitri
said that she had accepted Satyavan as her husband
ame that nothing could make her waver from her
or noes if he is not going to live more than a
freGaraiis ne agreed to the wish of his daughter and
sence i.e for the marriage were begun. The King
ii Savitri to the forest and saw Dyumatsena
SAVITRI IV
who gladly consented to the marriage. Agvapati returned to the palace leaving Savitri with Satyavan and his
parents. Assoon as Agvapati had returned, Savitri discarded her ornaments and assumed the dress suitable
to life in the forest and lived with them.
3) The death of Satyavan. It was nearly a year and the day
of death of Satyavan was fast approaching. There were
only four days more. Savitri had taken a vow lasting
for three days. Dyumatsena dissuaded her from taking
fast. She completed the fast. There was left only one
night more. She kept awake for the whole night.
Morning came. Though she ended her fast she had not
taken any food. Dyumatsena wanted to know the
reason. She humbly said that she would eat only after
sun-set.
As usual Satyavan took his axe and started for the wood.
Savitri also followed him.
Satyavan:-“You have never accompanied me before.
Moreover you are very weak on account of the fast.
Then how can you come with me?”
Savitri: ‘“‘I am not at all weak by the fast and vow. I
want to come with you. I pray, don’t hinder me.”
At last Satyavan consented after getting the permission of
his parents. Both went to the forest to gather fruits and
roots. They gathered fruits and roots. Then Satyavan began
to cut wood. By that exertion Satyavan sweated all over.
He was affected by headache. ‘‘Let me lie down !°° Hesaid.
The axe fell from his hand. Savitri caught her husband
who was falling down and laid him on her lap. Savitri
saw a person clad in blood-coloured garmenis, with red
eyes and a rope in hand, coming towards them. He
came to the spot and stood there looking at the body of
Satyavan. Realizing the person to be Kala (Deathgod)
Savitri stood up instantly and bowed before him.
Savitri:— ‘‘Who are you Lord. What may be your
object in coming here?”’
- Yama:— Hei, Savitri. As you are a hermitess of chastity I may converse with you. I am Yama. I am come to
take away the life of your husband.”’
Savitri :— ‘‘Lord, I have heard that your messengers
come and take away the souls. How is it that you have
come in person today?”’
Yama:— This Satyavan is a righteous man whois an
ocean of good qualities. Messengers are not sent, in the
cases of persons like him.”’ |
Saying thus Yama cast his rope and caught the soul of
Satyavan. SAvitrisaw the body of her husband lying
without life and soul. Savitri followed Yama who had
gone to the south with the soul of Satyavan.
Yama:— Child, you go back and conduct his funerals.
You have followed your husband as far as you can.
Savitri:— I am coming to the place where my husband
is being taken. That is the duty of a wife. What impediment is there on my way to follow you, when I
have the merits of vow, fast, devotion to my elders, love
and regard for my husband and the good will of yourself, my Lord.”
When Yama realized that it was difficult to send
Savitri back, he asked Savitri to ask for any boon. Yama
was prepared to give anything except the life of Satyavan. She requested for the recovery of sight by Dyumatsena. Yama granted it. Still Savitri did not turn back.
Yama asked her to pray for one more boon. She

SAVYA
requested for the recovery of the lost kingdom of Dyumatsena. Yama sanctioned that request also. Still she
followed Yama, who was ready to grant her a third
boon. She requested: ‘‘My father may, please be given
a hundred sons who would continue the family. Yama
granted that too. But she did. not turn back. Yama
told her that she might ask for a fourth boon. She said:
“TI may be given a hundred sons born directly from
Satyavan. Yama granted this fourth boon also. Then
Savitri asked Yama how the boon would be realized
unless the life of Satyavan was given back to him.
Yama was pleased with her at her love and devotion
for her husband and returned the life of Satyavan. Yama blessed her that she and Satyavan would
live for hundred years.
Yama disappeared. Savitri returned and sat there
taking the body of Satyavan on her lap. Satyavan
came to life. Both of them rose up. Night came on. It
was dark. They could not find the way. Satyavan
wanted to reach their hermitage somehow. Savitri
took the axe and supporting her husband in the dim
moon light, walked to the hermitage.
Dyumatsena got sight. He started with his wife in
search of his children, and walked about in the forest.
At last all of them met together. They reached home.
Then Savitri told them all that had happened. Everyone was delighted. Then some people from Salva came
to the hermitage. They said that the minister had
killed the King, that the people had expelled the
minister, and that they had come to request Dyumatsena to return to his country and to resume the reign.
Accordingly all of them returned to Salva. Dyumatsena
was anointed as the King of Salva. (M.B. Vana Parva
Chapters 293 to 299).
SAVYA. A son of Angiras, Savya is actually Indra himself. The story is that Angiras began worshipping the
Devatas for a son equal to Indra and that Indra, thinking that there should not be another person equal to
him, got himself born as the son of Adtgiras. That son
is Savya. (Reveda, Mandala 1, Anuvaka 10, Sikta 51).
SAVYASACI. Another name of Arjuna. (Virata
Parva, Chapter 44, Verse 19). ;
SAVYASIVYA. One of the sons of Vipracitti
Simhika. ‘This asura was killed by Paragurama.
manda Purana, 3.6. 18-20).
by
(BrahSAYAMVAISVADEVA. The sacrificial offering given.
by the wife with the food prepared in the evening without any spell or incantation, is called Sayamvaiévadeva.
(Manusmrti, Chapter 3, 121),
SAYANA. A hermit who was an expounder or the Vedas.
In course of time, due to the differences in languages
and grammar, the Vedas became difficult to be grasped. It was Yaska and Sayana who saved the Indians
from this difficulty. For the Vedas to be grasped easily,
Yaska made the Nirukta (Etymology) and Sayana
wrote the Book Vedarthaprakasa.
6AYU. A maharsi. (Rgveda, Mandala 1, Anuvaka 112,
maa A naga (serpent) born in the family of
Dhrtarastra. This serpent was burnt to death in the
sacrificial fire of the serpent-sacrifice of Janamejaya.
/M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 52, Verse 14). |
SEDUKA. An ancient King in India. Once some
brahmins approached this heroic King who was _wellversed in the art of wielding weapons, for Daksina to
SENAJIT IIT.
SENODYOGA PARVA
their teacher. But Seduka directed them to King Vrsadarbha. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 196, Verse 4).
SEKA. An ancient country in India. It is mentioned
in Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter 31, Verse 9,
that this country was conquered by Sahadeva during
his regional conquest of the south.
SEKKIZHAR. Author of the Tamil song ‘Periyapuranam
(See under Arulmozhitevar).
SENA. Son of King Rsabha. It is mentioned in Bhagavata, Skandha 5 that this king had nineteen sons
including Sena.
SENABINDU I.
1) General information. A Ksatriya King who lived in
the age of the Puranas. This King was born from a
portion of an asura called Tuhunda. (Mahabharata
Adi Parva, Chapter 67).
2). Other details. 3
(1) Senabindu was present at the Svayarvara marriage
of Draupadi. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 185, Verse 9)
(ii) Arjuna, during his regional conquest of the north,
with the King of Ulaka had attacked this King who
lost his kingdom. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 27,
Verse 10).
(11) The Pandavas had invited this King to take part
in the Bharata battle. (M.B. Udyoga Parva, Chapter
4, Versé 13).
(iv) Itis said that Senabindu was known by another
name Krodhahanta, He was as valiant as Sri Krsna
and Bhimasena. (M.B. Udyoga Parva, Chapter 171;
Verse 20).
(v) He was killed in the battle of Bharata. (M.B.
Karna Parva, Chapter 6 Verse 32).
SENABINDU II. A warrior of Paficala who had taken part
in the battle of Bharata on the side of the PandavasKarna killed him. (M.B. Karna Parva, Chapter 48:
Verse 15).
SENACITTA. A King of the dynasty of Bharata. Tb'S
King was the son of Vigada and the father of Rucira$ V4
(Bhagavata, Skandha 9),
SENAJIT I. A King who lived in the period of Mahabharata. It is stated in Mahabharata, Udyoga Parva:
Chapter 4, Verse 13 that the Pandavas had decided t
send a letter of invitation to this King, for the battle °
Bharata.
SENAJIT II. A King. He lived in tears because of the
loss of his son. At last by the advice of a brahmin he
oO peace of mind. (M.B. Santi Parva, Chapters 25 and
A King who was the son of King Vigada
ane a father of Ruciragva. Besides Rucira§ a Senajit
a re€é more sons named Drdha: Kagy nd
dep ied DhaBavata, Skandha 9). One mae S
nis King is mentioned as the son of King Visvajit in
pei Purana and Vayu Purana and Bag a of
ese in Matsya Purana. It is mentioned in Mahaarata, Santi Parva, Chapter 26, that this King had
SEMAN on justice (duties of a King)
Aksauhini) . misron of an army. (See under
SENANI (SENAPATI). One of the hundred sons of
Dhrtarastra. He was killed by Bhimasena in the battle
of Bharata. (M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 54, V 32)
SENODYOGAPARVA. A sub-section oma T ,
in Mahabharata. This sub
“section : ;
1 t0 19 of Udyoga Parva in Mahabharath, ees Sapies

SESA
SESA (ADISESA). Ananta. (q.v)
Additional information
(i) Ananta is the reposing bed of Visnu. It is this
Ananta who dislodged Mandara mountain at the time
of Ksirabdhi mathana: (churning of the ocean of milk)
(M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 18, Verse 8).
(ii) Ananta is the noblest of the nagas. (M.B. Adi
Parva, Chapter 35, Verse 2).
(iii) When there were mutual dissensions among the
nagas, Ananta visited holy places such as Puskara.
(M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 36, Verse 3).
(iv) Ananta obtained from Brahma the boon to be
able to stand firmly on Dharma. (M.B. Adi Parva,
Chapter 36, Verse 17).
(v) Ananta carries and supports the earth at the behest
of Brahma. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 36, Verse LS).
(vi) Ananta’s father is Ka$yapa and his mother is
Kadri. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 65, Verse 41 ys
(vil) Balabhadra Rama was born from a portion of
Ananta. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 67, Verse 152).
( ra ee - Tripuradahana, Ananta served as
€ axle of Siva’s chariot. (M.B. Dr
002, Verse 72) ( ona Parva, Chapter
SETU. A King of the family of Bharata. He was the
son of Babhru and the father of Andrabdha. (Bhagavata, Skandha 9).
SEYA. One of Visvamitra’s sons who were expounders of the Vedas. (M.B. Anugasana Parva, Chapter 4,
Stanza 58),
SIBI I. Grandson of Hiranyakasipu, who had four sons
called Anuhrada, Hrada, Prahlada and Samhlada, and
of the four, Sarnhlada had three sons called Ayusm4n,
Sibi and Baskala. (Agni Purana, Chapter 19).
(1) This Sibi was the son of Hiranyakasipu. (Adi
Parva, Chapter 65, Verse 18).
(2) This Asura took birth again and lived as a King
be — Druma. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 67,
erse 8), 3
SIBI II. Inhabitants of the country called Sibi; they are
called Saibyas also. The following information about
the country is gathered from Mahabharata.
(i) Sunanda, mother of King Santanu was a princess
. oa country. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 95, Verse
(i ) Govasana, father-in-law of Yudhisthira, was a
King of Sibi. (Adi Parva, Chapter 95, Verse 76).
(iii) Nakula, during his triumphal tour of the western
regions, conquered the kingdom of Sibi. (M.B. Sabha
Parva, Chapter 7).
(iv) People of Sibi attended the Rajasiya yajiia
conducted by Yudhisthira with presents. (Sabha Parva,
Chapter 52, Verse 14).
(v) A King called Usinara, once ruled the country.
(Vana Parva, Chapter 131, Verse 21).
ad The kingdom of Sibi was once under the jurisdicIt), of Jayadratha. (Vana Parva, Chapter 267, Verse
ae Arjuna annihilated the armies of the kingdom of
S1D1 which followed Jayadratha to the battlefield.
(Vana Parva, Chapter 971, Verse 28).
Avi a maharathas of Sibi, with their armies,
Pal under the banner of Duryodhana to fight the
(ay has (Udyoga Parva, Chapter 195, Verse 7).
(Dy once subjugated the kingdom of Sibi.
ona Larva, Chapter 91, Verse 38).
SIBI V
(x) The people of the country in earlier days were
illiterate and ignorant. (Karna Parva, Chapter 45,
Verse 34).
SIBI III. A King born in the dynasty of Usinara. He
was present at the wedding of Draupadi. He fought on
the side of the Pandavas in the great war and was
killed by Drona. (Drona Parva, Chapter 155. Verse 19).
King Sibi had four sons Bhadra, Suvira, Kekaya and
Vrsadarbha. (Bhagavata, 9th Skandha).
SIBI IV. AnIndra. There were four sects of Devas
called Suparas, Haris, Satyas and Sudhis in Tamasa
Manvantara, and there were twentyseven Devas in
each Sect. Sibi, who performed hundred yajiias then
was Indra. (For details see under Manvantaram).
SIBI V. An ancient Rajarsi.
1) Genealogy. Descended from Visnu thus :—
Brahma-Atri-Candra-Budha-Purtravas- Ayus - NahusaYayati- Anudruhyu - Sabhanara - Kalanara -Srfijaya -
USinara-Sibi.
Sibi was born to USginara of Madhavi, daughter of
Yayati,
2) Suhotra made to give way. King Suhotra of Kuru
dynasty once on his return from a visit of maharsis saw
King Sibi coming in the opposite direction in his
chariot, and both the Kings saluted each other as_ their
age ordained. But, they did not give passage to each
other as they thought themselves to be equal in merit.
At that time Narada came there and asked the kings
why they stood there thus blocking the path. ‘They
answered Narada thus : ‘‘He who is more noble or
clever on account of former actions etc. is usually
given way to by the other person. Both of us are
comrades and are equals.”’
Narada then spoke as follows :—
“Oh ! King of the Kuru dynasty ! You are cruel to the
gentle and gentle tothe cruel. To the evil you are
good; then why not be good to the good. Devas have
ordered that he who does good will get it hundredfold by return. King Usinara is more noble and gentle
than you are. The miser is won over by liberality,
the liar by truth, the cruel by patience and the evil
person by good. But, both of you Kings are noble
peer Therefore, one of vou should give way to the
other.”’
Listening to Narada’s advice, Suhotra gave way to
we and proceeded on his way. (Vana Parva, Chapter
3) Sibi tested. Sibi’s fame spread in the three worlds,
and an idea was mooted among the Devas that it should
be tested how much of the reputation of the King was
genuine. Accordingly, Agniin the form of a dove
and Indra in that of a kite hunting after the dove,
rushed to King Sibi. The dove took refuge in the lap
of the King sitting in ‘divya’ posture, and the priest
told the King that it was the latter’s duty to protect
the dove, which took refuge with him for its life. The
dove also told the King thus ; “I am really a muni,
who has entered the body of the dove. I take refuge
in you for my life.” .
By that time the kite too had flown up to the King. It
asked the King to return the dove, which it had been
chasing. The King was surprised to hear the kite talk
and told the bird that it was not proper for him to give
up the dove who had sought refuge under him, but
that he would give the kite any other flesh in lieu of the

: << = = OL a a Ee ee RR IIE I
aS —— Se
| tun
i}
SIDDHA I
dove. The kite replied as follows’: ‘“You’must give me
flesh cut from your right thigh equal in weight to that
of the dove. If you do so, the dove will be saved and
you will be praised by people.”
Accordingly, the King cut a piece of flesh from his
right thigh and weighed itin the balance against the
dove. But, the dove weighed more. The King cut more
flesh from his thigh and weighed, but the dove still
weighed more. Thus, by instalments the King cut his
whole body and weighed the flesh against the dove,
yet it weighed more. Then the King himself sat in the
balance, seeing which the kite flew away. Then the
dove assumed its original form and told the King that
it was Agni and the kite, Indra. The Devas were
greatly pleased with the firm sense of sacrifice of the
King; they blessed him and told him that a son called
Kapotaroma will be born to him. (Vana Parva, Chap4) Other information.
(i) When Yayati fell down on earth from heaven, Sibi
promised to transfer to him the merits acquired by
him (Sibi). (Adi Parva, Chapter 93, Verse 3).
(ii) Sibi worships Yama in his court. (Sabha Parva,
Chapter 8, Verse 10).
(iii) Sibi too was present in the company of Indra to
witness the fight between Arjuna and Drona in the
battle between King Virata and Kauravas at the
Virata city in connection with the lifting of Virata’s
cow by the Kauravas. ( Virata Parva, Chapter 56, Verse
(iv) Sibi loved Indra very much. (Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 9, Verse 7). —
(v) People of the Yadu dynasty presented Sibi a sword.
(Santi Parva, Chapter 166, Verse 89).
(vi) He gifted away his son to the brahmins, and
therefore he attained heaven. (Santi Parva, Chapter
234, Verve 19; Anus asana Parva, Chapter 137, Verse4).
ee an eat flesh. (Anus4sana Parva, Chapter
, Verse 61),
5) Conclusion. The story of two Kings connected with
the episode of the dove and the kite is mentioned in
the Mahabharata. One of the Kings is Sibi and the
other Usinara, father of Sibi. (See under Usinara) .
SIDDHA I. _A Deva Gandharva. This Gandharva was
born to Prajapati Kasyapa by his wife Pradha. (Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 65, Verse 46) .
SIDDHA II (THE SIDDHAS). A group of Devas. The
group of devas called Siddhas lived on the
near the hermitage of Kanva. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 70, Verse 15). It is mentioned in Mahabharata,
Sabha Parva, Chapter 8, Verse 29, that this group
of Gods stay in the palace of Yamaserving him.
SIDDHA. ‘The Devi (goddess) consecrated in Rambhivana, wearing a water-vessel with a snout, rosary, boon,
and fire, is called Siddha. (See under Devi).
SIDDHAGRAHA. An evil spirit. Those who are cursed
by the group of devas called Siddhas are afflicted by
this spirit and they become maniacs. (M.B. Vana
Parva, Chapter 230, Verse 49).
SIDDHAPATRA. A warrior of Subrahmanya. (Mahabharata Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 66).
SIDDHARTHA I. A King. This King was the rebirth
of the asura Krodhavaga. (Bharata, Adi Parva, Chapter
67, Verse 60).
Himalayas
SIKHANDI
SIDDHARTHA II. A warrior of Subrahmanya. (M.B.
Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 64). .
SIDDHARTHA III. The name of Buddha in his childhood. (See under Buddha).
SIDDHARTHA IV. A minister of King DasSaratha.
(Valmiki Ramayana, Ayodhya Kanda, Sarga 36). _
SIDDHASRAMA. A hermitage. The place at which
Vamana thrust Mahabali down to Patala. This place
became a hermitage later. When Visvamitra took Sri
Rama and Laksmana to the forest for the protection ol
his sacrifice, he showed them this hermitage. (Valmiki
Ramayana, Balakanda, Sarga 29, Verse 22).
SIDDHII. A daughter of Daksa. Thirteen daughters
including Siddhi were married by Dharmadeva. (Visnu
Purana, Améa 1, Chapter 7).
SIDDHI II. A goddess. Kunti the mother of the
Pandavas was the human rebirth of this goddess. (M.5.
Adi Parva, Chapter 67, Verse 120). This goddess
Siddhi had walked in front of the army of Subrahmanya,
in the great battle between the Devas and the -asuras.
To attain the object in any matter, the blessing of this
goddess is essential. (M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 46,
Verse 64),
SIDDHI Ill. The son ofan Agni (fire) named Vira.
Siddhi was born to this Viragni, by his wife Saray¥-
The story stating how this agni once screened the sun
by his radiance, occurs in Mahabharata, Salya Parva:
Chapter 218.
SIGHRA. A King of the Solar dynasty. In Bhagavata,
9th Skandha, it issaid that he was the son of Agnipurna and father of Maru.
SIGHRAGA. One of the sons of Sampati.
SIGRU. A particular caste of people. In the Dasarajn@
war they fought against Sudas and got themselves defeated. (Reveda, 7-18-19).
SIKATA. An ancient hermit. When the Bharata-battle
was going on this hermit approached Drona and reques*”
ed him to stop the battle forthwith. (M.B. Drom
Parva, Chapter 190, Verse 34).
(Matsya
SIKATAKSA. A holy place. Once Yudhisthira visited th
holy place. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 125, Verse 12).
SIKHANDAM. Things which were born from the blood
of Vrtrasura and which Brahmins, Ksatriyas and Vaisy?°
are forbidden from eating. (Santi Parva, Chapter 282,
SIKHANDT (SIKHANDINI I). Rebirth -of -Amb4,
daughter of the king of Kagi. Amba ended her life with
the vow that she would take revenge on Bhisma and was
born in the next life as the daughter . of king Drupada
under the name Sikhandini, and Sikhandini helped
Arjuna in the war at Kuruksetra to /kill Bhisma. (For
the history of Amba ending in two lives see under Amb4Certain pieces of information not included under that
head are given below). |
tL} Sikhandini was present at the wedding of Abhimanyu in the city of Upaplavya.(Virata Parva Chapter
- Verse 17).
rikhandi learned archery at the fe ACALry4-
(Udyoga Parva, Chapter 199. Verse 60). eee
(3) On the first day of the great : ht
between Sikhandi and Age war a duel was foug
vatthama, , ;
Chapter 45, Verse 46). ama. (Bhisma Parva
(4) Sikhandi retreated fr
om hattle- f
Drona. (Bhisma Parva, ee i ies
Chapter 69, Verse 31 )

SIKHANDINI It
(5) A second duel was fought by himand Asvatthama.
(Bhisma Parva, Chapter 82, Verse 26).
(6) Sikhandi broke the arrow of Salya with his divine
arrow (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 85, Verse 29).
(7) He tried to kill Bhisma. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter
(8) Sikhandi attacked Bhisma at the instance of Arjuna.
(Bhisma Parva, Chapter 119, Verse 1).
(9) He followed that attack with many other attacks.
(Bhisma Parva, Chapters 114, 118 and 119).
( 10) Safijaya praised the prowess of Sikhandi to Dhrtarastra, (Drona Parva, Chapter 10, Verse 45). ,
(11) Bhirigrava and Sikhandi fought with each other.
(Drona Parva, Chapter 14, Verse 43).
(12) Sikhandi and Karna fought with each other.
(Drona Parva, Chapter 26, Verse 7).
(13) Sikhandi. and Balhika fought with each other.
(Drona Parva, Chapter 96, Verse 7).
(14) In the fight that followed, Sikhandi was defeated
ee oe ae 114, Verse 82).
rpe y S < 1 :
Chapter 169, Verse 22). panaie Klee. Se
16) In the battle that followed with Krtavarman,
Sikhandi fainted. (Karna Parva, Chapter 26, Verse 26).
(17) Defeated by Krpacarya, Sikhandi had to run away
for life. (Karna Parva, Chapter 54).
(18) Karna defeated Sikhandi. (Karna Parva, Chapter
(19) Annihilating the army of Prabhadrakas Sikhandi
fought fiercely with Krtavarman and Krpa. (Salya
Parva, Chapter 15, Verse 7). .
(20) Sikhandi resisted the advance of Aésvatthama.
(Salya Parva, Chapter 16, Verse 6).
(21) In the fierce battle that was fought after the fall
of Bhisma Aévatthama killed Sikhandi.( Sauptika Parva,
Chapter 8, Verse 65).
(22) Synonyms of Sikhandi used in Mahabharata.
Bhismahanta, Sikhandini, Draupadeya, Drupadatmaja,
Paficalya, Yajiiaseni etc.
SIKHANDINI (II). Wife of Antardhana born in the
dynasty of emperor Prthu. ‘The emperor had two sons
called Antardhana and Vadi. To Antardhana was
born of Sikhandini a son called Havirdhana, who
married Dhisana born in the dynasty of Agni, and the
_ couple had six sons called Pracinabarhis, Sukra, Gaya,
Bet} Vraja and Ajina. (Visnu Purana, Chapter 14,
art 1).
SIKHAVAN A maharsi, who lived in the court of Yudhir sthira. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 4, Verse 14).
IKHAVARTA. A Yaksa, who lives in the court of Kubera
repping him. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 10, Verse 17)
ee A naga born in the Kagyapa dynasty. (Udyoga
ave Chapter 103, Verse 12).
tai atic hi A king, who ruled over Malava during
the first Dvaparayuga in the seventh Manvantara.
Cudala, daughter of the king of Saurastra was Sikhidha s wife. The Jianavasistham contains a story about
aow the royal couple renounced all attachments in life
as the result of intense tapas.
ikhidhvaja and Cidala began practising jnanayoga
(Communion through knowledge). It was Cadala, who
lap Siddhis first. Though the king was pleased with
or Lp co of his wife he felt sorry about his
etey or drawbacks. Ciidala had attained the Siddhi to
even in air. Though she told her husband emphaSIMHALA
tically that he could practise jfianayoga living in th®
palace itself, he quitted the city for the forest and began
performing tapas there. Then on one day, she went
to the presence of the king in the forest in the guise ofa
brahmin boy and stood there without touching the earth
with his feet. The king treated the boy with honour
and respect taking him for some Deva. ‘Then she revealed her actual form, and the king agreed to return with
her to the palace and practise jfianayoga there. At that
juncture Cudala created by her’ soul-power celestial
women like Urvagi and also Indra and lined them upbefore her husband. This was to test whether the king
yielded to any of the temptations by the celestial
women or by Indra and Cidala returned with the king
to the kingdom.
SIKSAKA. A warrior of Subrahmanya.
Chapter 45, Verse 76).
SILA. Daughter of Dharmarsi. She was wedded by Marici
maharsi. For some reason the maharsi cursed her and
she was transformed into a stone in the Gaya temple.
(Vayu Purana, 108).
SILAVAN. A divine sage. In Mahabharata, Daksinatyapatha, Udyoga Parva, Chapter 83, there is a reference
to a conversation between this Maharsi and Sri Krsna.
STLAVATI. A heroine reputed for her chastity and
fidelity to her husband. Her husband, Ugravravas was
cruel and vicious. Yet Silavati used to adore him. Once
Ugraéravas fell a victim to the disease of leprosy. From
that time, Silavati used to go about begging in the
houses of Brahmanas to feed and support her husband.
After some time by her constant nursing, his condition
was slightly improved. After that she continued her
begging from door to door, carrying him on her shoulders.
Once they happened to arrive in front of a huge mansion. Water was flowing in front of the gate and so
Sclavati returned from there with her husband without
stepping into the water. When they reached home,
Ugrasravas asked his wife why she returned without
entering the mansion. She explained that it was the
house of a prostitute and to touch the water coming out
of that house was sin. On hearing it, Ugragravas felt
an irresistible desire to visit that brothel. He expressed
his desire to her. Quite obediently Silavati took up her
husband on her shoulders and went to the prostitute’s
house. (For more details see under Ani mandavya,
Anasuya and Atri). |
SILAYUPA. A Vedantist son of Vigvamitra. (Anugasana
Parva, Chapter 4, Verse 54).
SILI. A naga born in the Taksaka dynasty. It was burnt
to death at the serpent yajfia conducted by Janamejaya.
(Adi Parva, Chapter 57, Verse 9).
SIMANTINI. The wife of King Citrtangada. The story
of this Simantini is given in Somapradosavrata mahatmya. in Skanda Purana.
SIMHACANDRA. A king who had helped Yudhisthira.
(M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 158, Verse 40).
SIMHAKETU. A warrior who took the side of the
Pandavas and fought against the Kauravas. (Mahabharata, Karna Parva, Chapter 56, Verse 49, ) This Simhaketu was killed in the battle of Bharata by Karna.
SIMHALA. Modern Ceylon. In ancient days this place
was called Simhala and the inhabitants were called
Simhalas. The following statements about Simhala
occur in the Mahabharata.
(Salya Parva,

_ SIMHASENA II.
SIMHAPURA
(1) The low caste people of the Simhalas originated
from the sides of Nandini, the cow of the Devas. (M.B.
Adi Parva, Chapter 174, Verse 37).
(2) The king of Simhala had taken part in the sacrifice
Rajasiya of Yudhisthira. (Mahabharata, Sabha Parva,
Chapter 34, Verse 12).
(3) The Ksatriyas of Simhala gave Yudhisthira, Chrysoprases, pearls and such other wealth of the sea as present. ‘The people of Simhala wore clothes studded with
jewels. hey were of dark complexion with eyes the
ends of whichwere red. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter
58, Verse 35).
(4) The Simhalas took the side of the Kauravas in the
battle of Bharata. In the Garuda vyiha formed by
Drona, the Simhalas were stationed in- the position of
the neck. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 20, Verse 6).
SIMHAPURA. A city in Bharata, famous in the Puranas.
This city was situated in the mountainous region of
North India. During the period of Mahabharata,
Citrayudha was the king who ruled over this city.
(Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter 27, Verse 20).
Arjuna during his regional conquest of the North, defeated this king.
SIMHASENA I. The commander of the army of Kartaviryarjuna. (Brahmanda Purana, Chapter 46). This
Simhasena captured and imprisoned Ravana.
A warrior of Paficala. In the battle
of Bharata he took the side of the Pandavas and was
‘ killed in the battle by Drona. Drona Parva, Chapter
16, Verse 32).
SIMHASENA III. Another warrior of Paficala. Karna
killed him in the battle of Bharata, (Karna Parva,
Chapter 56, Verse 44).
SIMHAVAKRA. An asura. (Skanda Purana, Asura
Kanda, ) This asura fought Subrahmanya.
SIMHIKA. A giantess. (Visnu Purana, Aréa 1, Chapter
15, and Agni Purana Chapter 19). Two sons named
Hiranyakagipu and Hiranyaksa and a daughter named
Simhika were born to Prajapati Kagyapa by his wife
Diti, Simhika was married by Vipracitti. Two sons
named Rahu and Ketu were’ born to them. Because
they were the sons of Simhika. they came to be k
by the name Sairhhikeyas. * Pe
(But it is stated in Mahab
65, that Simhika was the d
and the wife of Kagyapa.)
A story DORNER ae Ramayana, that this Simhika caught
hold of Hanuman by his shadow and swallowed him,
while he was jumping to Lanka, and that Hanuman
escaped fromher. (See under Rama, para 27),
SIMSUMA, Daughter of a Gandhara King. She is also
known as Sukegi. She was married by Sri Krsna
(M.B. Southern text, Chapter 38).
SINDHU I. A river in India, very famous in
Puranas.
1) General information. It is assumed in the Puranas
that this river is a branch of the heavenly Ganga. By
the efforts of Bhagiratha, the heavenly Ganga fell on
the earth in the Lake Bindu. After that it had six
channels. Three channels flowed to the east and three
to the west. The rivers which flowed to the East were
Hladini, Pavani and Nalini, The three rivers Sucak sus,
Sita and Sindhu flowed to the west. This seventh branch
followed Bhagiratha and flowed to Patala to perform
obsequies to the sons of Sagara.
harata, Adi Parva, Chapter
aughter of Prajapati Daksa
the
SINIVAK
2) Other details.
(i) Sarnvarana, a King, who was defeated by his
enemies, hid himself for a while in the natural arbours
on the basin of Sindhu. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 94,
Verse 40).
(ii) Sindhu remains in the palace of Varuna and
glorifies him. {M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 19).
(111) Once Markandeya happened to see the river
Sindhu in the stomach of child Mukunda. (M.B. Vana
Parva, Chapter 188, Verse 103).
(iv) Sindhu is considered to be the origin of Agni
(Fire.) (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 242, Verse 22).
(v) Sindhu is one of the seven channels of Ganga.
(M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 6, Verse 48).
(vi) By bathing in the river Sindhu, one could attain
heaven. (M.B. AnugAsana Parva, Chapter 25 Verse 8) -
(vii) Once Parvati held a talk on the duties of women.
All the rivers met to hear the talk. Sindhu was prominent among the rivers who were present. (M.B. Anusasana Parva, Chapter 146, Verse 18).
(viii) This is one of the rivers which ought to be
remembered every morning and evening. (M.B. Anu-
‘Sasana Parva, Chapter 165, Verse 19).
(ix) Mention about river Sindhu occurs throughout the
Rgveda. Prominent rivers mentioned in Reveda are
Kubha, Sindhu, Suvastu, Vitasta, Asikni, Parus,
Vipasa, Satadri, Sarasvati etc.
SINDHU II. Acountry very famous in the Puranas.
Jayadratha the King of Sindhu was present at the
Svayarvara marriage of Draupadi (Mahabharata, Adi
Parva, Chapter 185, Verse 21). “
SINDHUDVIPA. A King of the Solar dynasty. (Mahabharata, Anugasana Parva, Chapter 4, Verse4). This
King was the son of Jahnu and the father of BalakasvThis King did penance in the holy place called Prthudakatirtha and attained Brahminhood. (M.B. Salya
Parva, Chapter 39, Verse 37).
It is mentioned in Bhagavata, Skandha 9, that Sindhudvipa was the son of Srutanibha who was the son °
Bhagiratha.
SINDHUPRABHAVA. A holy place. The river Sindhu
starts from this place. This is a place frequented by
the Siddhas and the Gandharvas. He who bathes here
for five days with fast can obtain heaps of Gold. (M.B.
Vana Parva, Chapter 86, Verse 84),
Pathe Pee A kingdom of India very famous
in the Puranas. ahabha i r
9, Verse 40), Aen, OR ain wee a
SINDHUSAUVIRA. A place in the North-west part of
India, famous in the Puranas. (Mahabharata, Vana
Parva, Chapter 86, Verse 84 Th arthiis
sauvira do not know dharma vas people ohne
oI NDHUTAMA. A holy place. (Mahabharata, Vana
arva, Chapter 82, Verse 79). This is one of the famous
holy places in the world and that by bathing in this
tirtha one can obtain heaps of gold, :
SINI. A Kin 3
i g of the Yadava dynast
vale to be wedded toVasudeva after alge rs singlea = ae oa the kings. A flerce battle was
€etween this Sini of D e :
gqeomadatta, (Drona Parva, Chapter 11a)” ally ane
‘council of Yadhinita, THiS bermit had” shone in the
4, Verse 14), sthira. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter
He secured

SISU. A
SINIVALI I is
SINIVALT I.
1) Birth, A daughter of Angiras. The wife of Angiras
was Smrti. She gave birth to four daughters named
Kuht, Raka, Anumati and Sinivali. (Visnu Purana,
Améga 1, Chapter 10).
(It is mentioned in Bhagavata, Skandha 6, that
Sinivali was the third daughter of Angiras by his wife
Sraddha.
2) Other details.
(1) Drsgyadrgya is another name of Sinivali. Her body
is small. So sometimes she can be seen and sometimes
she cannot be seen. It is in this meaning that she
gets the name DrfSyadrsya (seen and unseen). Siva
bears her in his forehead. So she has another name
Rudrasuta. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 218, Verse 5).
(ii) Siva used Sinivali as the yoke of the horses of his
Chariot in the battle with Tripuras. (M.B. Karna
Parva, Chapter 34, Verse 32),
(11) At the time of his birth Sinivali had come to see
the child Subrahmanya. (M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter
45, Verse 13).
(iv) It is mentioned in Atharva Veda that Sinivali is a
wife of Mahavisnu.
SINIVALI II. A daughter born to Brhaspati by his
wife Subha. It is stated in Vayu Purana, Chapter 90,
that though Sinivali was given in Marriage to Prajapati Kardama, she abandoned him and lived with
Soma (Moon).
SIPHA. Ariver extolled in Reveda. It is stated in
Sakta 104, Anuvaka 15, Mandala 1 of the Reveda that
the asura named Kuyava should be thrown into the
depths of Sipha ashe stole money.
SIRADHVAJA. Janaka the father of Sita. (For further
details see under Janaka),
SIRISAKA. A naga born in Kagyapa dynasty. (Udyoga
Parva, Chapter 103, Verse 14),
SIRIST, A Vedantist son of’ Vis vamitra. (Anus asana
Parva, Chapter 4, Verse 59).
SIRKALI, A sacred place in South India. Brahmapura
is another name for this place which is near Kumbhakonam in Tanjore District. The place was sanctified by
the birth of Tirujfianasambandhar. (For further details
see under Tirujfianasambandhar).
SISIRA. Son of Soma the Vasu, of his wife Manohara.
To the couple were born four sons called Varcas,
Prana, Ramana and Sifira. (Adi Parva, Chapter 66,
Verse 22),
SISIRAPARVATA, A mountain near Mount Meru.
(See under Mahameru).
SISTA, Dhruva’s son by Dhanya. Sista married Succhaya, daughter of Agni. Four sons, Krpa, Ripufijaya,
ioe and Vrka were born to them. (Matsya Purana,
SISTT. A son of Dhruva. Dhruva had two sons, Sisti
and Bhavya, by his wife Sambhu. Sisti’s wife, Succhaya
gave birth to five sons, namely, Ripu, Ripujijaya,
Vipra, Vrkala and Vrkatejas. The eldest of them Ripu
was the father of the Manu, Caksusa. (Visnu Purana,
Arisa 1, Chapter 13), ) |
of Sick son born to the Saptamatrs due to the blessing
ubrahmanya. The eyes of the child were. blood-red,
It was called Vira
D8. Van, ye as well. (Vana Parva, Chapter
SISUPALA
SISUMARA I. A Rsi. This Rsi used to live in water in
the form of a crocodile. There isa story about him in
the Paficavimga Brahmana.
Once all the Rsis joined together in praising Indra.
Sigumara alone remained silent without taking part in
it. Seeing this, Devendra ordered Sisumi4ra to praise
him. The sage answered proudly that he had-no time
for it and that he would praise Indra for as much time
as was needed to throw the water upwards.
Accordingly he started praising Indra. The sage to
whom Indra’s praise was at first disagreeable, subsequently felt that he could not do it too much. By his
austerity he acquired “Samavidya’’. He even composed a ‘‘Sama’’ (a hymn) in praise of Indra. In later
times it became famous as “‘Sarkarasama’’.
SISUMARATI. A constellation so called because it is in
the form of a Sigumara (Crocodile). It is said to be
the starry form of Visnu. At the tail-end of it is
Dhruva, which automatically rotates and also makes
planets like the Sun and the moon to rotate. Stars
follow the self-rotating Dhruva and rotate like a wheel.
The Sun and the moon along with stars and planets
are bound by the cord of atmosphere to Dhruva.
The basis and support of this constellation of Sisumara
is Mahavisnu, who is the support:of all ght and
effulgence. Dhruva, son of Uttanapada came to be
installed at the tail-end of Sigumara as he had worshipped Visnu. Sigumara is dependent upon Visnu, the
Lord of all, and Dhruva is dependent upon Sigumara.
Sarya is dependent on Dhruva. (Visnu Purana, Part 2,
Chapter 9).
SISUMARAMUKHI. A woman follower. of Subrahmanya. (M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Verse 22).
SISUNAGA. The first King of the Sigunaga dynasty.
He founded the dynasty after defeating Nandivardhana
of Pradyota family, King of Magadha. Though he
first belonged to Kasi region, later on he settled down
in Magadha. Kakavarna was Sigunaga’s son.
The following ten Kings of Sigunaga dynasty ruled the
country for 360 years. (1) Kakavarna (2) Ksemadharma (3) Ksemajit (4) Vindhyasena (5) Bhamimitra (6) Ajatagatru (7) Varmsaka (8) Udasi (9)
Nandivardhana (10) Mahanandi. (Matsya Purana,
SISUPALA. King of Cedi.
1) Previous birth. Jaya and Vijaya, gate-keepers at
Vaikuntha were born thrice in asura womb as a result
of the curse by munis like Sanaka. They were first
born as Hiranyaksa and MHiranyakagipu, next as
Ravana and Kumbhakarna and the third time as
Sisupala and Dantavaktra. (See under Jayavijayas) .
2) Birth. Sig§upala was the son of King Damaghosa
of Cedi by his wife, Srutagravas (Bhagavata, 9th
Skandha). He was born with three eyes and four
hands, and at the time of birth he brayed like an ass,
so the parents decided to abandon the ugly and awkward
child. Immediately a Jin (ghost) appeared and told
the father that the child would grow up to become very
strong and powerful, and that only one person would
be able to kill him and that person had already been
born on earth, Further questioned by Sisupala’s
mother, the Jin said that as soon as the son saw the
person born to kill him, he would lose his third eye,
and that if he was seated on the lap of the person, two

$1SU PALAVADHAPARVA
out of his four hands would be lost. After having said
this the Jin disappeared.
News about this peculiar child spread far and wide
and many kings visited him. Damaghosa placed the
child on the lap of each of them. But, no physical
change occurred to him. Then one day Sri Krsna and
Balabhadra came to see the child, whose mother
Srutagravas (she was also the sister of Krsna’s father )
placed him on Krsna’s lap. Immediately two hands and
the third eye of the child vanished, and with tears “in
her eyes the mother prayed Krsna never to kill
Sigupala, and Krsna promised that he would forgive
the crimes of Sigupala a hundred times. (Sabha Parva,
Chapter 43).
3) Other information. :
(i) Sigupala was present at the wedding of Draupadi.
In his attempt to draw the bow he fell down on his
knees. (Adi Parva, Chapter 185, Verse 23).
(ii) He was present at the wedding of the ‘daughter
of the King of Kalinga also. (Santi Parva, Chapter 4,
Verse 6).
(iii) He was the Commander-in-Chief of the armies
of Jarasandha. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 14, Verse 10).
(iv) When Bhima conquered all the kingdoms Sig upala
honoured him. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 29, Verse 11).
(v) He too was present at the Rajasiiya of Yudhisthira.
(Sabha Parva, Chapter 234, Verse 14).
(vi) At the Rajastya, Krsna heaped insulting words
on Sigupala. {Sabha Parva, Chapter 37).
(vii) Sisupala objected to the selection of Krsna as
president of the Rajastiya and controversy followed it.
(Sabha Parva, Chapter 39, Verse 11).
(viii ) Sigupala insulted Bhisma at the
(Sabha Parva, Chapter 41).
(ix) Once in the absence of Krsna Sigupala attacked
Dvaraka. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 45 Verse 7).
(x) He stole the sacrificial horse of Vasudeva. (Sabha
Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 9).
(xi) He abducted the wife of Babhru. (Sabha Parva
Chapter 45, Verse 10). 7
(xii) He abducted the daughter of his uncle, the King
of Visala. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 11). :
(xili) Following the above he was killed in battle by
an. Pa pe sae Verse 25, Sabha Parva).
xiv) After death his effulgence got abso i
(Sabha Parva, Chapter Ae Verse 26). meena
(xv) Krsna once told Arjuna that he killed Siéupa
for his (Arjuna’s) good. (Drona Parva, cat
Verse 21). :
SISUPALAVADHAPARVA. A Sub-Parva of SabhZ
Rajastya.
Parva, Chapters 40-45.
SISUROMA. A naga (serpent) born in the family of
Taksaka. This Naga was burnt to death in Janamejaya’s Sarpasatra. (Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter
SITA. A warrior of Subrahmanya.
Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 69).
SITA. Wife of Sri Rama. |
1) Who is Sita? Sita is the incarnation of Mahdlaksmi.
Laksmi took the birth of a woman because of the curse
of Sarasvati. Vedavati, Sita, Paficali, all these women
of chastity were the incarnations of Laksmi The stories
of Laksmi passing from birth to birth such as Vedavati,
Tulasi, Sita, Paficali and so on until at last she reached the
(Mahabhara ta,
SITA
world of Visnu, occurring
collected and given here. _
Laksmi, Sarasvati and Ganga were the wives of Mahavisnu. One day Visnu was sitting with his three wives
and entertaining them with conversation when Devi
Ganga looked at Visnu amorously. Instantly a quarrel
arose.-among the three of them. When the row became
uncontrollable, Sarasvati cursed Laksmi to take birth
in the earth as a plant. Ganga cursed Sarasvatl and
made her a river. Sarasvati cursed Ganga and made her
ariver, At the end of all these rows and curses Visnu
stood up and said to Laksmi. “Laksmi! you will take
birth as the daughter of Dharmadhvaja on the eart™
with the name Tulasi. In order that the curse of Sarasvall
may come true, a plant called Tulasi (holy basil) will
grow up on the earth froma portion of you. While
you are living as the daughter of Dharmadhvaja, 4”
asura named Sankhaciida born from my portion Ww!
marry you.”
The curse was realized. Sarasvati and Ganga became
rivers. Laksmi was about to be born as the daughtet
of Dharmadhvaja. Who was Dharmadhvaja? He w@s
aman of righteous deeds and good qualities, born °
the family of Daksasavarni who was born from a portio?
of Mahavisnu. Brahmasavarni was born from Daksas@
varni. Dharmasavarni begot Rudrasavarni, Indrasavarni begot Vrsadhvaja. Rathadhvaja was the 50”
of Vrsadhvaja. Two sons named Dharmadhvaja 4%
Kugadhvaja were born to Rathadhvaja. Dharmadhvaj4
and KuSadhvaja were performing penance before Dev!
Laksmi to regain the wealth and prosperity lost by thé
curse of the Sun. ,
How did Dharmadhvaja and Kuégadhvaja lose their
prosperity? Their grandfather Vrsadhvaja was a devotee
of Siva. He performed penance before Siva for a 10ng
time. Siva became pleased with Vrsadhvaja and live’
in his hermitage for the period of three Devayugas. This
king Vrsadhvaja made a proclamation that none other
than Siva should be worshipped. As all the other gods
were despised, the Sun got angry and cursed Vrsadhvaj4-
“Let the prosperity of yours and your posterity be dest
royed.” Siva did not like the action taken by the sun
against his favourite. Siva took his trident and went
against the Sun, who took refuge near his father Prajapati Kagyapa. Kagyapa complained to Brahma.
Brahm4 ran to Vaikuntha. Siva also came there wit
his trident. Visnu looked at them and said ‘“YOU
gods, hear this. What is the need of all this hurt y'
Within the short time you have'taken to run up to this
place so many years have elapsed in the world. It is 4
long time since Vrsadhavaja died. His son Rathadhva)®
also is dead. Rathadhvaja has two sons named Dhat
madhvaja and Kufsadhvaja. They both have become
Kings. But because of the curse of the Sun. they are
devoid of any radiance, They are now worshipping
Mahalaksmi for radiance.” Hearing this tatk of Mah@
visnu all of them returned to their places
It has been mentioned that Dharmadhvaija and Ku$4°
dhvaja had been engaged in penance befits Mahalaks™-
Devi Mahalaksmi appeared before them a srante
their wish, Devi promised them that sh ‘ee id take
birth as the daughter of each of them calla
So f , 2 , and. she wou
ver for thent all the wealth and prosperity they b4
mae Accordingly Mahdlaksmi took birth by fee portio®
as the daughter of Madhavi, the wife of Dharmadhvaj?
in various Puranas are

SITA I
under the name Tulasi. (For the rest of the story of
Tulasi see under Tulasi, Para 4).
Malavati was the wife of Kugsadhvaja. As Laksmi had
promised to take birth as their daughter, both of them
waited for the birth of the child uttering the Vedas. At
this time achild was born from the mouth of Kusadhvaja. This child was the incarnation of Laksmi. With
the birth of the child Kusadhvaja regained all the
wealth and prosperity he had lost. The child was namrd
Vedavati (Devavati). She grew up and became a young
woman. Her desire was to get Mahavisnuasher husband.
Once an asura named Sambhu came to the hermitage
of Kusadhvaja. When he saw Vedavati he fell in love
with her. He asked Kusadhvaja tor the hand of his
daughter, but Kusadhvaja did not give his consent.
Sambhu got angry. He came back in the night and killed Kugadhvaja with his sword. Hearing the sound Vedavati woke up and saw the dead body of her father lying
in a pool of blood. She looked at Sambhu angrily. In
that fiery look Sambhu was burnt to ashes.
Vedavati began to perform very severe penance to get
Visnu as her husband. It was at this time that Ravana
had begun his campaign of conquest. He defeated all
kings and was proceeding victoriously through the
vicinity of the Himalayas, when he saw the beautiful
damsel Vedavati sitting alone and performing penance.
Seeing so beautiful a girl engaged in penance, he told
her that he was the famous Ravana with ten heads and
requested her to throw away the garment of bark of the
tree and the matied hair and to accept him as her
husband. She rejected his request. The angry Ravana
caught hold of her hand. She resisted using her teeth and
finger-nails. She cried out that she wanted no more to
retain the body made impure by the touch of a wicked
person. She made a fire and jumped into it. Thus in
the sight of Ravana, she burnt herself to death. Before
death she vowed that in the next birth Mahavisnu would
become her husband and would kill Ravana.
Ravana who himself was burning ir the fire of amour,
was extremely sorry at the death of the beautiful girl.
He took the ashes of hers to Lanka and put them ina
golden box and kept the box in a solitary place. tle used
to visit the place daily. Since the arrival of the ashes,
bad omens began to occur in Lanka. One day Narada
came to Lanka. Ravana asked Narada for the reason of
constant occurrences of bad omens in Lanka. Narada
replied that the cause of bad omens was the golden box
he was keeping and that if it was kept in Lanka any
longer, it would cause destruction and that if it was
destroyed, great disaster would follow. Narada advised
Ravana to remove the box without opening it to somewhere else outside Lanka. Accordingly Ravana caused
the golden box to be dropped in the sea. By and by it
came with the waves to the shore of Bharata (India).
_ Robbers took it and went to the north and hid it ina
forest. They were not able to take it away again. Thus
the box came to be deposited on the basin of a river in
Mithila, - oh as
It was this river -basin that King Janaka selected as
the place for sacrifice. Being kept in this holy place,
the ashes of the body of Devavati in jthe box mingled
with her spirit and was taking shape into a child. When
the place was ploughed for preparing the spot of sacrifice, for Janaka, this golden box was discovered. The
child which was inside the box, was taken home and
SITA I
brought up by the king who named her Sita. It was
the portion of this Sita herself that took birth next as
Paficali. (Devi Bhagavata, Kamba Ramayana)
Other versions.
(i) The King Padmaksa performed penance before
Mahavisnu with a view to get Mahalaksmi as daughter.
Mahavisnu gave the King a great Phallus to realize
his wish. From that a beautiful girl was born. The
King named her Padma. When she attained marriageable age, the King made preparations for her Svayamvara (the bride herself choosing a husband). On the
day fixed for the marriage Raksasas came and destroyed all the preparations and killed King Padmaksa.
Because of her sorrow at this disaster Padma jumped
into the fire. The giants searched for Padma every
where, but they could not find her. They returned in
disappointment.
One day, during this period, Ravana was travelling in
his Aerial chariot. When he reached this place, he
saw Padma who had come out of the fire. Ravana was
fascinated by the beaufy of Padma. So he turned
towards her. Seeing this, Padma again jumped into
the pile of fire for safety. Without any delay Ravana
made a search inthe pile of fire. At last he got the
body of Padma (Sita) in the form of five jewels. _ The
disappointed Ravana placed the five jewels in a
box and took it to Lanka and gave it to his wife
Mandodari. One day Mandodari opened that box
and saw Padma sitting in the form of a beautiful
virgin. Thinking that it was not propitious to keep
her who was the cause of destructioa to Padmaksa, his
family and ‘kingdom, Mandodari exerted pressure on
Ravana to cast the box out of Lanka. Ravana with
his men took the box from Lanka and buried it in
Mithila. Before the box was closed Padma cursed
Ravana. “I will come to Lanka again to kill you and
your clan.”’ :
One day when a brahmin of Mithila was ploughin
his field he got this box. Thinking that it belonged to
the King, the brahmin took the box to King. Janaka.
The King took the child in the box and brought it up.
He nan:ed the child Sita. (Ananda Ramayana, 7-6),
(ii) In Adbhuta Ramayana we see another story which
is somewhat different from that we see in Ananda
Ramayana. It is given below :—
Ravana who had become the harasser of the entire
world began to harass the hermits and sages also. He
used to shoot arrows at the hermits who were sitting in
meditation in the forests, and taking’their blood in the
arrow-head, he stored it in a big pot. In the same
forest a hermit named Grtsamada was engaged in
penance to get a daughter who would be equal to
Laksmi in everyway. He took milk with the head of
Darbha grass and stored it daily ina pot. One day
Ravana came to his hermitage and took the pot of
milk stealthily. He poured the milk into the pot in
which he had stored the blood and stirring it well gave
it to his wife Mandodari. Seeing the character of her
husband becoming worse and worse every day, Mandodari became miserable. One day she decided to
commit suicide and drank the contents of the pot
given by Ravana. The thing which was taken for
suicide, made her pregnant. Mandodari buried that
foetus in Kuruksetra, After a while a girl was born

SITAI
from it. That child was Sita, the daughter of King
Janaka.
(iii) There is a story in Devi Bhagavata stating how
Sita was born as the daughter of Ravana. It is as
follows :
Ravana wished to marry Mandodari, the daughter of
Maya. Then Maya said to Ravana thus :—‘**According to the horoscope of Mandodari, the first child born
to her will be the destroyer of its clan.
better to kill that child.” Not acting upon the advice
of Maya, Ravana put the first child in a box and |
buried it in the city of King Janaka. This child was
Sita, the wife of Sri Rama.
2) Marriage. Sita grew up in-the palace of King
Janaka, Kugadhvaja the younger brother of Janaka
had three daughters. They were named Mandavi,
Urmila and Srutakirti. Sita grew up along with these
three sisters. The four of them grew up as sisters and
friends. Sita grew up tobe a young woman. Several
young men wished to marry her. Janaka refused
everyone of them. One day the princesses were playing with their maids in the garden of the harem. Sita
sat on the dais in the centre of the garden to make a
flower garland. All their attempts to gather the jasmine
flowers from the twigs of a large mango tree in the
garden ended in- failure. Sita instantly ran to the
weapon-house and taking a bow and arrow, shot down
the flowers. The flowers fell down on the cloth placed
on the ground without being damaged. Janaka saw the
shooting of Sita, from the palace. He was amazed at
‘the expertness of Sita. The bow which Sita took was
Saivacapa (the bow of Siva). Siva had used this bow,
in days of old, to destroy the sacrifice of Daksa. Siva,
who was pacified by the destruction of the sacrifice of
Daksa and the victory over his enemies, gave this bow
to his devotee, the King of Videha. That King kept
the bow in his weapon-house and used to worship it.
Sita had taken that bow and shot with it.
The King who had been thinking about the marriage
of Sita thought that what he saw was a good omen. So
the King made aproclamation that only he who could
take the bow of Siva, draw it, and shoot with it would
become eligible to marry Sita. Hearing this many
adventurers came to the palace and tried to handle the
aivacapa and retreated admitting defeat. It was at
this time that Vig vamitra brought Rama and Laksmana
to the forest for the protection of sacrifice. Hearing
about the Svayarmvara of Sita, Visvamitra took the
princes to the palace of Janaka. The King was greatly
pleased when he learned'‘that the princes were the sons
of Dagaratha, of the solar Dynasty. Next morning
at the instruction of his elders and priests and teachers.
é7. Rama stood on thesdaisin, the middle of the hall
where the Saivacapa was placed, ready to handle it.
He lifted up the bow with his left hand, drew it easily
and fastened the string tightly and the bow was broken..
When the Kings who were present, heard the roaring
sound of the breaking of the bow, they shivered with
fear as serpents at the sound of thunder. Sita jumped
with joy like a peacock. A letter wassent to Dagaratha
then and there. Friends and relatives arrived. Under
the guidance of the presiding priest Satananda, the
marriage ceremony was conducted. Rama married
Sita, Bharata married Mandavi, Laksmana married
Urmila, and Satrughna married Srutakirti. The brides
So it would be °
SITA I
and bridegrooms went to Ayodhya with their varents
and relatives. (Kamba Ramayana, bDalakanda) .
3) Anasiya’s gift of clothes and ornaments. Dagaratha
who had become old, wished to hand over the realm to
Sri Rama. Since Kaikeyi stood as a hindrance, the
kingdom fell into the hands of Bharata. Moreover
Sita had to live in the forest with Sri Rama and
Laksmana for fourteen years. In the early period of
their forest-life they visited the hermitage of Atri.
Seeing the devotion of Sita towards her husband,
Anasiuya the wife of hermit Atri, blessed her and
gave her a fine garland, clothes and ornaments an
cosmetics. Anasiya blessed Sita again and said that
she would shine as Laksmi if she besmeared her body
with the divine cosmetics. (Valmiki Ramayana, Ayodhya
Kanda, Sargas 118-120).
4) Test by Parvati and Paramesvara. In the last year of
forest-life Parvati and Parameévara tested the firmness
i love of Sita and Rama. (See under Rama, Para
5) Phantom Sita. A few days before the abduction of
Sita by Ravana, Fire god took the guise of a Brahmin
and approached Sri Rama and said :‘‘O, Sri Rama
The Devas have sent me to tell you certain things
which will take place shortly, Your incarnation has
the aim of killing Ravana. Sita is meant to be a cause
for the same. The death of Ravana is imminent. He
will come and carry Sita away. So entrust Sita with
me. Iwill keep her carefully. Make a phantom
(Maya) Sita and keep her here, instead of the real
Sitadevi. After the killing of Ravana, when Sita enter
fire as a proof of her purity, I will return Devi Sita.”
Sri Rama agreed to it. Fire god by his power of conterm”
plation, created a phantom Sita, exactly like the Te
Sita in shape and figure and nature.and placing her beside
Rama, he disappeared with thereal Sita. Even Laksman@
was not aware of this fact. The real Sita Devi was under
the care of Fire god till the moment of the test of chastity
of Sita by fire, after the killing of Ravana. During the
ae of ee ‘o fire the illusory Sita vanished 10
the fire and the real Sita came out. 7 Acavata,
Skandha 9)-. ai aliaiia
6) Sita killed Sahasramukha.
) See under Sahasramukha
Ravana.
7) Abandonment of Sita. See under Rama, Para 31.
8) .Sitd in the hermitage of Valmiki. Abandoned Sita, wh°
was. pregnant, wandered about in the forest and at last
reached the hermitage of Valmiki, who gave her protect
ion and shelter. The Story of an occurrence at this
Bene ere in Kathasaritsagara, Alaikaravatilambak@,
The other hermits did not like Valmiki’ i oi 1D :
shelter to Sita. They said “Sita is rk gg ae
her husband would not have abandoned her. By he!
association we also would become sinners. As the hermit
Valmiki is kind, he will not cast her — especially
when she is pregnant So the best thing for all of-us is
to go. to another hermitage.” This murmuring of ‘the |
hermits reached the ears,of Valmiki. He said “She is
pure and chaste. I know it with my inward eyes.” But
they did not believe it. Then Sita said “Tord ! rou can
test my chastity in whatever way you like, and if { am
found to be impure you may cv¢t off my head.”
ae hermits tested Sita in the Tittibhasaras (4
vine lake near the hermitage of Valmiki) and wer

SITA I
convinced that she was chaste and pure. (See under
Tittibhasaras to know the greatness of this divine lake).
9) Cursed Sita. Sit& was spending miserable days in the
hermitage of Valmiki. Her matrimonial life was a hell.
Is there any special reason for misery? Yes. It is the
curse of a bird. Once Sesa told this story, of the cursing
of Sita by a bird, to the hermit Vatsyayana. That story
is given below:
The event took place when Sita was a young girl in the
palace of Janaka. One day while Sita was playing in
the garden she saw two parrots, cock and hen, which
talked well. The spouses were delightfully engaged in
love-making. As soon as the couple saw Sita they flew
up to a tree and sang thus: ‘‘A handsome king will take
birth on the earth. His name will be Sri Rama. His
wife’s name will be Sita. Their wedded life will be
happy.
Hearing the song, Sita thought that they were some
divine persons, and asked her maids to catch them and
give them food. The maids caught the parrots and
brought them before Sita. She asked the birds.
“Ton’t fear. Who are you ? Where do you come from?
Who is that Rama? Who isSita? How did you come to
know of them ? Tell me all. I will not hurt you!
The birds replied. ‘‘In the forest there is a hermit named
Valmiki. We live in his beautiful hermitage. That
hermit has composed the story Ramayana, which is yet
to happen, and has taught it to his disciples. We have
heard those songs. _Having heard them over and over
we also have learned them by heart. We will tell you
who Rama is and who Janaki is and what would happen
to her who lives happily with him. Hear it ! Saying
thus the parrots passed on to the story of Rama. Due to
the sacrifice of the hermit Rsyasrnga, Mahavisnu incarnated as four persons, of whom Rama the eldest, with his
younger brother and Visvamitra, would come to
Mithila. He would draw the bow and marry Sita.....
Sita was extremely pleased with the sweet song of
the birds and asked them somany questions repeatedly
with curiosity. Seeing the excitement of the questioner
the parrots understood that she was Sita herself. They
asked her. ‘Beautiful girl! who are you? Why are you
so much interested in knowing about Rama? What is
your name ?”? Sita disclosed everything about her to
the birds, and said “I am the same Sita, the daughter
of Janaka you have sung about. I will let you go only on
the day when that handsome prince Rama comes and
marries me. Your conversation has made me so curious.
You can live comfortably in my house, eating sweetmeats.’? The birds were in great fear when they heard
this. They looked at each other and replied to Sita.
Good child ! we birds fly about in the sky and perch on
trees and bush. Houses are not comfortable to us. Moreover I am pregnant. After my delivery in our own place
I will come here. You need not haveany doubt.” The
female parrot said thus. But Sita did not let them go.
Then the male parrot prayed humbly with anxiety.
Sita, allow her to go. Why do you detain my beautiful wife ? Allow us to have our own way in the forest.
My wife is pregnant. After the confinement both of us
will come back.” Sita said “Let her live with me. You
The go as you please.” .
ne € parrots were in great sorrow. Ifthey had not made
pa noise on that tree this detention would not have
curred, These pitiable supplications had no effect on
723 SIVA (RUDRA)
Sita. The male bird cried to Sita to let him take his
mate along with him, and beat his head on the ground.
Sita was adamant. The female bird, filled with misery
and anger cursed Sita thus. ‘“‘You have separated me
from my husband. I am pregnant. May you too be
separated from your husband when you become pregnant”, When she had finished saying, she fell on the
ground and wriggled and died. An aerial chariot came
down to the earth from heaven for the soul of that bird
which had died exalting and glorifying Sri Rama. The
soul of the bird got into the chariot and went up to
heaven. The male bird, being unable to bear the death
of his beloved wife, dipped himself in the Ganga. Before
his death he cried out in anger. “I must be born in the
city of Rama. By my words, this Sita should be separated from her husband and fall into misery.” He died
in the Ganges in Krodha (anger) and fear. So he took
rebirth with the name Krodhana as a washerman by
caste and profession. It was this washerman who spoke
words of calumny about Sita. Due to the calumny of
this washerman, Sri Rama abandoned Sita and she
had to take shelter in the hermitage of Valmiki.
(Padma Purana, Patala Khanda, Chapter 57).
10) The end of Sita. (See under Rama, Para 33).
SITA II. Ariver. Mention is made in Mahabharata,
Vana Parva, Chapter 188, Verse 102, that once the
hermit’ Markandeya saw this rever also in the stomach
of child Mukunda (Sri Krsna). This is one of the seven
branches cf the river Ganges. (See under Sindhu).
SITAPUTANA. A ferocious she-devil. (Mahabharata,
Vana Parva, Chapter 230, Verse 28). This terrible monster causes abortion in women.
SITASI. A river flowing through Sakadvipa and famous
in the Puranas. (Mahabharata, Bhigma Parva, Chapter
Ll, Verse 32).
SITIKANTHA. A naga which was in the company of
the nagas that came to lead the soul of Balabhadrarama
to Patala. (Mausala Parva, Chapter 4, Verse 16).
SITIKESA. A warrior of Subrahmanya. (Salya Parva,
Chapter 45, Verse 61) ).
SIVA (RUDRA). One of the Trinity.
1) Birth. The seers or spiritual giants of India imagined
three forms to God, dividing all the activities into three
departments, i.e. creation, sustenance and destruction or
annihilation. Brahma, for creation, Visnu, for sustenance and Siva, for annihilation - they are the Trinity.
Visnu was born first, Brahma next and Siva last. The
essence of Indian spiritualistic thought is that these three
visible forms of God will, at the close of the Kalpa
cease to be and become one with the cosmic power, and
that the trinity will be born again at the commencement of the Kalpa and will take up their respective
functions.
The dominant quality or attribute of Siva is Tamas
(darkness). Many stories, with slight variations, are told
in the various Puranas about the birth of Siva. Some
of the more important stories are summarised below.
(i) At the begining of the Kalpa, while Brahma was
meditating upon the birth of a son like himself, a child
deep blue in colour, appeared on his lap, and the child
began running about crying aloud. Brahma asked the
child why it was crying; then the child asked Brahma
to give him a name. Though Brahma told him that
his name was Rudra and asked him not to cry, he
cried seven times more. Then Brahma gave him another

SIVA (RUDRA)
seven names, and for the total eight names eight
Mariis (forms) wives and children were allotted. Bhava,
arva, I§ana, Pasupati, Bhima, Ugra and Mahadeva
were the additional seven names, and Sun, Water,
Earth, Wind, Fire, Sky, the Brahmin who has taken
diksa and Moon were the eight Mirtis and the presiding
deities allotted to them. To these deities the following
wives were also allotted, i.e. Suvarcala, Usa, Vikedi, Siva,
Svaha, Disa, Diksa and Rohini. The world is full with
their progenies. Sanaigcara, Sukra, Lohitanga, Manojava, Skanda, Sarga, Santana and Budha are the sons of
the above eight wives. This Rudra married Sati, daugh-
-ter of Daksaprajapati. ( Visnu Purana, Part 1, Chapter 8).
(i1) Brahma whose predominant quality or attribute
is rajas was born from the navel of Mahavisnu. From
the Centre of the brow of Brahma was born Rudra of
Tamasic quality. Brahma, by the power of his tapas,
acquired the power of creation and created a red-coloured world by his attribute of rajas. ‘The very same
world is annihilated by Rudra at the close of the Kalpa
period. (Devi Bhagavata, 7th Skandha).
(iii) From the wrath of Brahma was born Rudra, from
his lap Narada, from his finger Daksa, from his mind
Sanaka and others, and from his left finger a daughter
called Virani. (Devi Bhagavata, 7th Skandha).
(iv) Four ‘mental sons’ of Brahma Sanaka, Sanandana
Sanatana and Sanatkumara showed disinclination to
beget progenies. Brahma got angry at this attitude of
the four sons and from the centre of his brow was born
a body blue and white in colour, and he, in tears,
requested Brahma for names and stations. Blessing him
by saying ‘m4 ruda’ (do not cry) Brahma allotted him
names and stations. He became famous by the name
Rudra. He was also given eleven more names by
Brahma as follows: Manyu, Manu, Mahinasa, Mahan,
iva, Rtudhvaja, Ugraretas, Bhava, Kama, Vamadeva
and Dhrtavrata. These names are otherwise famous as
follows: Aja, Ekapada, Ahirbudhnya, Tvasta, Rudra,
Hara, Sambhu, Tryambaka, Apardjita, gana and Tribhuvana. The eleven Rudras were also allotted the
following ‘eleven positions by Brahma i.e. heart, the five
organs of the body, vital force (Prana) wind, fire
water, earth, sun and moon. Rudra has eleven wives,
called Dhi, Vrtti, Usana, Uma, Niyuta, Sarpis, lla, Amb.
ika, Travati, Sudha and Diksa. Rudra, under the name
Siva, is considered to be the third of the trinity. The
doctrine is that as long as time is real, deluge, or annihilation does not take place. Therefore, Rudrasarhhara
(annihilation by Rudra) may be taken to mean only as
the beginning of new creation,
(v) At the commencement of Yuga (era) Brahma was
born from the navel of Visnu. Two asuras called Madhu
and Kaitabha rushed up to kill Brahma, and from the
brow of Visnu, who got angry towards the asuras was
born Siva holding in his hands Sala (the three-prongod
trident). (Vana Parva, Chapter \2):
2) Family life. Siva has two wives, Ganga and Parvati
(See under Ganga and Parvati). He lodges Ganga on
his head. Uma, Katyayani, Gauri, Kali, Haimavati
Igvari, Siva, Bhavani, Rudrani, Sarvani, Sarvamangala
Aparna, Parvati, Durga, Mrdani, Candika, Ambika,
Arya, Daksayani, Girija4, Menakatmaja, Camunda,
Karnamoti, Carcika and Bhairavi—these are synonyms
of Parvati. Siva lives on the top of the Mahameru,
where there are nine cities. At the centre is Brahma’s
SIVA (RUDRA)
Manovati; exactly to the east of it is Indra’s Amar4avati;
at the south-eastern corner is Agni’s Tejovati; on the
south is Yama’s Samyamani; at the south-western
corner is Krsnafijana of Nirrti, on the west is Waruna’s
Sraddhavati, at the north-western corner is Gandhavati of Vayu, on the north is Kubera’s Mahodaya, at
the north-eastern corner is Siva’s Yagovati—this is the
set of the nine cities.
T'wo sons called Subrahmanya and Ganapati were born
to Siva of Parvati, and they are his actual sons. Some
other sons also were born to him in his assumed forms
and by other women. Such have been Indrajit, Haniman
and others. For details see the respective words. (Devi
Bhagavata, 8th Skandha, 9th Skandha; Kathasaritsagara, Kathamukhalambaka).
3) Incarnations, Siva has taken several partial incarnations, the chief of which are given below.
(1) Durvdsas. (See under Durvasas).
(ii) Vanara (Monkey). Siva, Parvati and their attenders like Nandikegvara once transformed themselves into
monkeys and played about on the Himalayas. Ravana,
who came there on the occasion ridiculed Nandikegvara,
who, in great rage, cursed Ravana that monkeys would
destroy him. Being thus cursed Ravana _ raised
Kailasa from its foundations and played with it.
(Uttara Ramayana). on
(iii) Sakti. Siva incarnated himself as Sakti, son of
Vasistha and was devoured by Kalmasapida, who
ba _ form of a Raksasa. (Vamana Purana, Chap-
(iv) Varuna. Siva once assumed the form of Varuna
and conducted a yajfia which was attended by the
Vedas in assumed forms. (M.B. Anuégadsana Parva,
Chapter 85). |
4) Boons granted by Siva. The Puranas refer to various
persons, who had earned boons from him and _ others
who attained heaven on account of their devotion for
him. The following are important among such persons.
(i) Simhavaktra— (Skanda Purana, Asura Kanda)
(ii) Rukmi—(Bhagavata, 10th Skandha)
(iii) Bana—(Bhagavata, 10th Skandha),
(iv) Sudaksina—(Bhagavata, 10th Skandha),
(v) Salva—(Bhagavata 10th Skandha),
(vi) Vrkasura —(Bhagavata, 10th Skandha).
(vii) Ratidevi— (Kathasaritsigara, Lavanakalambaka,
Taranga 1).
(viii) Indrajit—( Uttara Ramayana).
(ix) Bhrgu— (Padma Purana, Adi Khanda, Chapter 2) .
af eee Adi Parva, Chapter 109, Verse
a A rsi girl—(M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 168, Verse
(xii) Prabhafijana—(M.B. Adi
Paar j ( 1 Parva, Chapter 214,
a Svetaki—(M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 222, Verse
ve) eel nas Sabha Parva, Chapter 14,
(xv) Bandsura—(M.B. Sabha PSouthern text). \ rung Parva, Chapter 33,
ey Mankana— (Vana Parva, Chapter 83, Verse
(xvii Sagara—(Vana Parva, Chapter 106, Verse 15)

€I1VA(RUDRA)
(xvili) Parva, Chapter 10),
Verse 1).
(xix) Jayadratha—(Vana Parva, Chapter 272, Verse
Bhagiratha —(Vana
(xx) Amba—(Udyoga Parva, Chapter 187, Verse 12).
(xxi) Somadatta—(Drona Parva, Chapter 143, Verse
(xxii) Visnu—(Drona Parva, Chapter 201, Verse 56).
(xxili) ParaSurama--( Karna Parva, Chapter 34, Verse
116; Santi Parva, Chapter 49, Verse 33).
(xxiv) Skanda— (Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Verse
(xxv) Arundhati—(Salya Parva, Chapter 48, Verse
(xxvi) A Brahmin boy— (Santi Parva, Chapter 153,
Verse 114), |
(xxvii) Tandi muni—(Anufasana Parva, Chapter 16,
Verse 69).
5) Assets of Siva. Siva possesses a mass of matted hair,
red in colour. It is known as Kaparda also, and hence
he is called Kapardi as well. Siva is also stated to be
Agni. He has three eyes, the third one on the forehead
being all fire. Siva is called Trinetra, Phalanetra,
Agnilocana etc. because of theabove facts. It is only
just and proper that Siva, who is the destroyer of all
things should have relation to Agni. Siva, the alldestroyer, carries the Sila in his hands always. Another
weapon is named Pindka, and therefore Siva is called
Pinakapani (he who holds Pinaka in his hands). Both
iva and his vehicle, the Bull, are white in colour. The
white colour indicates the justice observed in the
process of annihilation. Siva kas been described as
possessing two, four, eight and ten hands. Besides the
Pinaka, he holds in his hands the club called Khatvanga,
the bow called Ajagava, a deer, beads, skull, damaru
(a musical instrument) and many other sacred articles.
Ganga and Candra (moon )dwell on his head, and he is,
therefore, known as Gangadhara and Candracida also.
A Garland made of human skulls adorns his neck. Siva
wears the skin of the leopard for cloth and uses the skin
of the elephant for blanket. All over his limbs snakes
are worn as ornaments. |
The Puranas contain stories as to how Siva earned most
of the above assets. The wives of many Rsis felt enamoured of Siva, who once appeared in the garb of a
beggar. The Rsis,; who got angry with Siva on the
above account, decided to kill him. From the pit they
dug on the ground, a tiger emerged. Siva killed it and
wore its skin. A deer followed the tiger from the pit.
Siva held it in his left hand. <The next to emerge out
of the pit was a red-hot iron rod. Siva took it in his
hands as a weapon. Lastly snakes came out of the pit
and Siva wore them on his body. On another occasion
an asura called Gaya assumed the form of an elephant
and chased the munis, who iook refuge ina Siva temple.
iva appeared, killed the elephant and wore its skin on
his body. Since Siva wore snakes as ear-rings he came
to be known as Nagakundala. Brahma ordered that
Rudra should create people and accordingly he created
people. But, his creations were very cruel beings.
‘Brahma feared that they would eat up the other creatons. Brahma, who trembled with fear, asked Rudra
- ere from the act of creation and to train himself
cel © creation in the proper. manner as_ ordained.
“cordingly, Rudra started practising tapas.
SIVA (RUDRA)
6) Inetdents.
(i) How Siva got the name Jimitaketu. (See under
Jimitaketu).
(ii) He became Kapali. (See under Kapali).
(222) Sin of Brahmahatya on Siva. As he plucked off the
head of Brahma Siva became subject to the sin of
Brahmahatya. Blue in colour and with grey hair,
terrible Brahmahatya approached Siva who asked
her who she was and why she came. She answered that she was Brahmahatya and asked Siva to
take her into him. She entered his body so that he felt
a burning sensation all over him. In this condition Siva
went to Badaryagrama. But, the great Rsis, Naranarayanas were not therein the agrama. Sad at heart Siva
went to the river Yamuna to take a bath, But the river
dried up. Then he went to Plaksa island to bathe; but
the island disappeared. Then he went to Puskararanya, Magadharanya, Saindhavaranya, Naimisaranya,
Dharmaranya etc. all to no purpose. He got worn out
but could not have a bath. The terrible Brahmahatya
did not leave him. Though he visited sacred rivers,
agramas and temples and practised Yoga, Siva did not
get redemption from sin. At last, in great disappointment he went to Kuruksetra, where he saw Visnu. With
folded hands Siva praised Visnu who advised him the
following means for absolution from sin. “A Bhagavan
born from my aspect under the name YogaSayi 1s
living at Prayaga. The great river Varuna which has
started from the right leg of Yogagayi and which
redeems all sins as also the sublime river Asi, which has
started from his left leg are both worshipped by the whole
world. The temple of Yogas4yi is at the centre of these
rivers, and that is a sacred place most important in the
three worlds and annihilative of all sins. That city is the
great Varanasi. Even materialistic or worldly people
get salvation there. It is my (Visnu) asrama. There
dwells Sarya called Lola destroying all sins. The place
where Kegava my aspect lives, is Dasagvamedha. If you
go there you will get redemption from sin.”
Thus directed by Visnu Siva went to Varanasi and
achieved absolution from the sin of Brahmahatya by
bathing in the holy tirthas there. (Vamana Purana,
Chapter 3).
(iv) Birth of Virabhadra.
(v) Water in Kalindt got dark in colour.
Parvati, Para 2).
(vi) Siva became Nagabhisana. (See under Nagastram ).
(vii) Blessed Sukefa. WVidyutkeéa, the Raksasa married
Salakatanka, daughter of Sandhya. While they toured
the world round enjoying their honeymoon Salakatanka
conceived and delivered in due course a son in the
valley of Mount Mandara. Siva and Parvati, who passed that way in an aerial chariot saw the child and
came down toit. By the blessing of Siva the child
grew up toa youth very quickly. Siva named him
SukeSa and after blessing that he would grow up to
become a pious soul disappeared from the scene.
(Uttara Ramayana).
(viii) Siva, the father of Indrapit.
Para 2).
(ix) Four faces of Siva. (See under Tilottama, Para 2).
(x) Sword of Siva. Siva holds a sword in his hand to
destroy the asura tribe. The following is told in
a 166 of Santi Parva about the origin of the
sword,
(See under Daksa) ,
(See under
(See under Indrajit,

SIVA (RUDRA)
Brahma when he created the universe also laid down
laws to keep living beings in the path of righteousness.
But, the asuras did not conform to those laws. So, the
maharsis decided that there should be some other
means to instruct the asuras. They conducted a Brahmayajfia at the Himalayas. A terrible Jin (Evil Spirit )
emerged from the sacrificial pit. |
At the emergence of the Jin the earth shook; the
great sea grew wild with waves and eddies. Lightning
and shooting stars appeared and branches of trees were
torn asunder. A vicious whirl-wind swept the ten
regions. All living beings trembled at the sight of the
in,
Brahma appeared to the frightened maharsis and told
them that it was nota Jin, but only the sword for
the destruction of the asura tribe. Siva took the sword
in his hand, and as soon ashe touched it he became
possessed of four hands. “Siva, whose head touched
the sun, who had the third eye and from whose mouth
flames of fire emerged, who changed himself to various
colours like blue, white and red, who wore deer skin
with golden spots, who had on his forehead an eye as
effulgent as the Sun—such Siva took in his hands the
fiery sword and raising his shield he swirled the sword
in various directions.”
When Siva, who thus became terrible, walked with the
sword amidst the asura army the entire asura forces
were annihilated and the Devas came out victorious.
7) Daring deeds of Siva.
(i) Clash With Visnu. Though there were differences
of opinion between Siva and Visnu on many occasions,
only very rarely had occurred actual clashes between the
two. The Puranas refer to two such important clashes.
One has reference to a direct fight Siva fought with
Visnu and the other is about Siva’s fight with Narayanarsi, an incarnation of Visnu. |
There was no reason for the direct fight between Siva
and Visnu. The Devas wanted to test who was the
more powerful of the two, Siva or Visnu, and they told
Brahma about the idea By carrying tales to them, one
against the other, Brahma made Siva and Visnu mutual
enemies. The enmity led to a fight between the two.
Visvakarman made a bow for each of the contestants.
In the fight between the two Siva got defeated. Siva,
who got angry at his temporary defeat presented his
bow and arrow to Devarata, King of Videha. It was
this bow, which Sri Rama broke at the wedding of
Sita in a later period. As soon as the fight was over
the Devas realised that Visnu was greater than Siva.
After the fight Visnu gave his bow to Rcika, the
Bhirgava muni. Jamadagni got it from Rcika, and he
gave it to Paragurama. It was with this bow that
Paragurama confronted Sri Rama on his way back
after wedding Sita. (Valmiki Ramayana, Balakanda,
Canto 75). di
The following story is related in the Anusdsana Parva
of Mahabharata about the fight between Narayanarsi
incarnation of Visnu and Siva. ~
Siva, in great fury, threw his Sila into the Yajfia hall
of Daksa, and the Sala after reducing the Yajfia, to
ashes, hit the breast of Narayanarsi, who was doing
tapas in Badarikagrama. Narayana raised the sound
‘um’ as a result of which the Sila returned to Siva’s
hands, who, in great anger, rushed forward to Narayana.
Narayana placed his hand on Siva’s throat with the result
LS
SIVA (RUDRA)
that it became dark in colour. Thenceforth Siva came
to be known as Sitikantha also.
Narayana plucked a blade of grass and recited some
yana Pp S
mantras. It became a parasu (axe). He threw it at
Siva, who broke it into pieces, which act gave him the
additional name of Khandaparagu also. ‘The fighting
became fierce and the world began burning. Fire
refused to receive offerings made; Rsis could not
recollect the Vedas; Rajas and ‘lamas attacked Devas;
the earth shook; planets became dim and dark;
Brahma fell down from his seat; sky came down; oceans
got dry; the Himalayas crumbled. On the continuous
appearance of such ill omens Brahma and all the
Devas came to the battlefield. Saluting Rudra Brahma
told him thus : “Oh! Lord! Let good happen to the
world. In the interests of the welfare of the world. you
would please give up arms. The Naranarayanas are
upholders of righteousness; they are the incarnations of
the indestructible and supreme sages. I was born from
their pleasure. You were born from their wrath.”’
On hearing these words of Brahma Siva cooled down.
(11) Rendered Kamadeva bodiless (limbless). See under
Kamadeva, Parva 4).
(111) Bore Ganga on the head. See under Ganga.
(iv) Consumed Kdalakita. Owing to the curse of
Durvasas the D e e f
evas were subjected to symptoms 0
old age, and to produce amrta (nectar) as remedy for
this unfortunate development, the churning of Ksirabdhi (ocean of milk) was started. Vasuki, the snake,
was nav as cord to rotate mount Mandara, which
eee ae. fue si eae rod. When the churning
a. aera t = mortal poison Kalakita emergete 1's ae . (Another view is held that
ae rose out of the milk-sea). On the emergence 0
the deadly poison the asuras ran off in ereat fear, the
Devas got bewildered, Bali and Sugriva too got frightpie, and without exhibiting his fright Visnu covered
is face; on the whole it appeared as though the entire
world would be reduced to ashes.
re this critical moment, Siva, reputed for his reckless
aring, put all the Kalakita into his mouth. Frightened
it Parvati held Siva’ aa
at it Parvati Siva’s throat by her t
y her hands so _ tha
the poison did not enter his stomach. At the same
time Mahavisnu covered with hij iy Glen's an
so that the poison w ee
the p vas not spitted out. Kalakita thus
prevented from going down into the stomach or being
vomited from Siva’s throat got itself digested in the
throat giving it a blue colour. Thus did Siva h e
Nilakantha (of the bl AON cod. Ceaatitl
Uakantha (of the blue throat). Visnu and Parvati
who were affected by the flames of the ‘poison became
Nilavarna and Kali respectively, (Kamba Ramayana
Yuddhakanda ). ——e
me Destroyed Daksa’s yajita.
vi) Fought Sankhacida. 7
(Vii) B 8 sone (See under Tulasi, Para 5).
11) Burned the Iripuras. (See under Tr} ura )
(vill) Fought Sarya. Siva once plucked o t Be 4? d
(See under Kapali 1 ), and Brahma i i ve
should beg for food with that head (skuil) in yas ho
This § ‘ skuil) in his hands.
+ nis Herce curse of Brahma affected Siva so much that
in uncontrollable wrath, he beat )
whomso ét.
Thousands of Devas and others were kj — oe
waltched : J ere killed. Sirya, who
ed not these atrocities of Siva confronted hi ’ with
out-stretched hands. 7.
Siva held with o j
: ‘ ; h f h Ss
both the hands of Sirya from the Pg |
blood began to flow. Siva turned Sirya round and
See under Daksa Para 3) -

SIVA (RUDRA)
round by his hands with the result that the hands of
Sirya became short. When Starya became completely
drenched in blood Siva let him free and walked to
another side when Surya, laughingly challenged him
again to fight. Greatly enraged by the challenge Siva
fisted him on the face with the result he lost all his
teeth. Also he fell down unconscious. As Surya fell
thus Bhaga looked with fierce eyes at Siva, who then
struck the former on his face, Both the eyes of Bhaga
fell down. and the Devas were alarmed by it. Then all
the Adityas, under the leadership of Indra ran off to the
ten regions along with the Maruts and Agni. Only
prominent asuras like Prahlada remained on the scene.
They saluted Siva. Siva surveyed the yaga hall, the
Devas and the asuras with his three eyes. All of them
then ran away to different places. Siva looked at the
three Agnis with his three eyes and they were reduced
to ashes.
When Siva’s anger subsided Sirya was installed in his
former form. (Vamana Purana, Chapter 9).
(ix) Fought with Andhaka. Sec under Andhaka.
(x) Made five Indras Pandavas. ‘The Pandavas, in. their
former life, were Indras. (Adi Parva, Chapter 199).
The Devas once conducted at Naimiséranya a lengthy
yajfia of which Yama was the manager. In the absence
of Yama there was no death on earth. Thus, human
beings also, like the Devas, became Amartyas (deathless). Alarmed at this the Devas submitted their
erievance to Brahma who pacified them by saying that
Yama would return as soon as the yajfia was over and
then men will, as usual be subjected to the process of
death. TheDevas then returned to Naimisaranya,
the scene of their yajfia when they saw a woman,
lustrous as fire, descending the steps of Ganga to
carry:water. She was sobbing and each drop of tear
that fell into the waters of the river transformed itself
into a lotus flower. As deputed by the Devas Indra
approached the woman io get facts from her.
Indra asked her who she was and why she was weeping.
The woman answered him not, but walked in silence,
to the source of the Ganga. Indra followed her. When
they had thus walked some distance Siva and Parvati
were found in the forest ata game of dice, and Indra,
afraid of Siva, ran way. But, Siva called him back and
asked him to enter the cave there. When Indra did so
afterremoving the mountain at the entrance of the cave
he saw four Indras sitting there. They were called
Visvabhuk, Bhiitadhama, Sibi and Santi. The woman
whom Indra had followed was Sridevi. Siva blessed that
the five Indras, in their next birth, would wed Sridevi.
When the Indras saw Mahavisnu after this he also
blessed them, and promised them that he would incarnate and help them when they were born as men in
their next life. Then Visnu plucked a black and a
white hair and put them on earth. The black hair
was Lorn as Sri Krsna in Devaki’s womb and the white
hair as Balabhadrarama in the womb of Rohini.
(xi) Kiratarjuniyam. Arjuna once did tapas to Siva, who
appeared to him in the garb of a hunter in the forest
and presented to him the Pagupata arrow. (Tor details
see under Arjuna, Para 20).
(xii) Fought with Mahisasura. (See under Mahisasura).
(xiii) Fought with Vrtrdsura. See under Vrtrasura.
(xiv) Burnt Himavan. Siva once did tapas on the top of
fimavan when Parvati came behind him and covered
SIVA (RUDRA)
his eyes with her hands. At once darkness enveloped
the whole world, and when people suffered in the
absence of day-light Siva opened his third eye.
Himavan began getting burnt by the fire emitted by
Siva’s eye. Parvati got alarmed at this and woke Siva
up. He closed his third eye and Himavan resumed its
former shape. (Anugasana Parva, Chapter 104).
8) Worship of Siva. Innumerable people in India
worship Siva and they follow different forms or systems
of worship. ‘There are forms of worship which follow
the Vedas and which do not as also forms which are
sattvic and which are not. The form of worship called
Parasupadam (? Pasupatam) is a very ancient one. Its
believed that the parasupadas once honoured and aiterwards opposed the Vedas. The Siva linga at the place
called Gitidamillam is supposed to be as old as the
second century B.C. |
One of the many symbols, which represent Siva, Sivalinga
is the most important. They are of two kinds, the
movable and the immovable. The immovable are those
which appear by themselves or installed in temples. The
movable are those made of earth, stone, timber, gems
etc. There are alsc temporary lingas, which are placed
on stools of various shapes. Lingas are made of ne-stones
and stools of ‘she-stones’.
There are also various types of lingas indicative of the
different attributes of Siva; for example Liigocbhava,
Candrasekhara, Raudra, Umasahita etc. Kamantaka,
Gajari, Kalari, Tripuradahaka etc. represent the Lord
in his fierce aspects. Siva is also represented 1n poses of
blessing Candesa, Visnu, Nandigvara, VighneSvara and
Arjuna. He is also presented in various poses of dancing,
Daksinamirti is represented in four forms, i.e. Vyakhyana
Jiiana, Yoga and Vinadhara. Biksataka, Kapaladhari.
Gangadhara, Ardhanarigvara _ Vrsabhavahana - and
Visabhaksaka are other forms of Siva. Rarely is he depicted in the form of. Sadagiva, MaheSsvara, Ekadas‘arudras
Vidyey vara and Mirtyastaka, There are Agamas descriptive of these forms.
Ganapati occupies the most prominent piace among
Devas connected with Siva. Ganapati came to be worshipped from 6-7 centuries B.C. His present idols might
bave been made after this period.
There are many temples dedicated to Ganapati in South
India. Chief among the idols are itampiri (proboscis
turned to the left side) and valarhpiri (proboscis turned
to the right side). Ganapati is a physical aspect of
Siva. Being the God who removes obstacles in the
devotee’s path, Ganapati is called Vighnegvara. The
universe is contained in his big stomach.
Next to Ganapati in imporiance is Subrahmanya. He
is worshipped in South {[ndia only. Kumara, Muruka,
Karttikeya, Skanda, Arumukha, Guha, etc. are some of
his popular synonyms There are a number of Subrahmanya temples in Tamil Nadu, many of them on ‘the
tops of hills. In North India Subrahmanya temples are
rare. But, books written during the Sangha period go
to prove that Subrahmanya was worshipped in South
India from very olden times. He is depicted in many
postures, sitting, with six faces, with only one face, with
two hands, with four hands, with wife, wearing the
sacred thread ete.
Now, about Sakti idols. Sakti is the Devi closest to Siva.
In South India there are special Sakti temples called
Saktipithalayas. Durga is the most important among

SIVA (RUDRA)
the manifestations of Sakti. There are idols of Durgas
as standing in the lotus flower and also as mounted on
the lion. Agamas refer to nine kinds or forms of Durga
ie. Nilakanthi, Ksemankari, Harasiddhi, Raudra, Vana,
Agni, Jaya, Vindhyavasini, and Ripunagini. Durga’s
most terrible form is as Mahisdsura-mardini, found at
Mah4balipuram, Ellora and other places. Durga is also
called Candika and Katyayani. Durga is worshipped as
Nanda, Bhadrakali, Amba, Rajamatangi etc.
9) Siva’s life-period. Thousand Caturyugas constitute
one day of Brahma. According to the Puranas fourteen
-Indras fall dead from heaven during the life time of one
Brahma. ‘Two such life times of Brahma form one life
time of Visnu; at the end of the period he too will
expire. Siva’s life time is double that of Visnu, according to Devi Bhagavata, 5th Skandha. (For details see
under Manvantara).
10) Siva and creation of the universe. See under Creation).
11) Maya Siva. (See under Maya Siva).
12) Sahasrandmas (thousand names) of Siva. The thousand
names of Siva are mentioned mainly in Chapter 285 of
Santi Parva and Chapter 17 of Anugasana Parva of
Mahabharata. There are substantial differences between
the two lists of names.
13) Afsvatthémaé and Siva.
Para 6).
14) Rudras. The Ekadasarudras, viz. Mrgavyadha,
Sarpa, Nirrti, Ajaikapat, Ahirbudhnya, Pinaki, Igvara,
Kapali, Sthanu and Bharga are the sons of Siva. (Adi
Parva, Chapter 66).
15) Sivabhasma (Ashes worn by Siva) The Puranas
contain many references to the great power of Sivabhasman. The following story about even Visnu turning
out to be a devotee of Siva on account of the sanctity of
Sivabhasma is related in Chapter 101, Patalakhanda of
Padma Purana.
In the beginning or during the Brahmapralaya (deluge)
Mahavisnu was lying in the great waters of the deluge.
On both sides of Visnu hundred universes each and on
both sides of his feet and at the centre of hishead twenty
universes each remained attached. One universe glowed
as a gem on Visnu’s nose. Maharsis like Lomaga did
tapas seated on his navel. Meanwhile Visnu sat in deep
meditation ready for creation. But, he did not find
anything and began, therefore, sobbing. Then appeared
an extra-mundane light at which he got frightened and
closed his eyes. Siva, rotating in both his hands a
garland each made of a crore of universes appeared
before Visnu. He then stood up and enquired of the
visitor who he was. Siva exhibited his form. Siva told
Visnu that he had not attained sufficient wisdom for
creation and also advised him to achieve enough knowledge by first taking the Varuna bath and' then the
Bhasma bath.
To this Visnu answered by saying that there was nowhere waiter enough for him -to bathe, and he, who was
closely surrounded by universes, satin water. But, it
came only up to his thighs. Then Siva said laughingly
that there was enough water for Visnu to bathe and
cast a glance at him with his (Siva) eye on the forehead and also his left eye. And, immediately Vignu’s
body became very small and it began to shiver. Then
Siva said as follows:- “‘Oh! Visnu ! here is deep water.
you may bathe in it. But Visnu could not get into the
tremendous pool created on Siva’s lap. So, he requested
(See under Aégvatthama
SIVA(RUDRA)
Siva fora passage to get into the pool. Siva “Oh!
Visnu ! Before this even though you sat in water, one
crore yojanas in depth, it came only up to your thighs.
But, now though you are on your legs you say you cannot enter the water. Look here, the water comes only
up tomy thighs. You may descend into it. I shall see
to it that you can step into the water. A Vedic saying
I recite will serve as the step.”
Visnu :—Nobody can step on sound. One may ascend
on what is material, i.e. with form; but, how could one
step on that which is formless?
Siva:—Why can younot get hold of that which is and
ascend ? You receive this great Veda.
Visnu received it, but it appeared that his hands were
not strong enough to hold it. Siva smiled at the inability of Visnu and asked him to get down into water by
the steps made of Veda and when Visnu descended the
steps into the water, it came only up to his thighs. He
had his bath and then asked Siva what he should do
next. Siva:--- “What do you feel in| your mind ? Is it
that you do not feel anything”
Visnu:— I feel not anything.
Siva :— If you get sanctified by bhasmasnana you will
receive the ultimate knowledge. I shall give you the
bhasma.
Siva, took a pinch of bhasma from his breast and chanting the Gayatri and paficaksara (Om namaségivaya
mantras sprinkled it all over the body of Visnu. He
also said to Visnu, “You live, you meditate, now what
do you feel in your mind?”’’ Visnu meditated whereupo®
he saw a very bright light in his heart. When he told
iva that a light was being seen by him the latter
ala a
t I aso thatit might become
perfect. Visnu accordingly consumed the bhasma, a2
lo ! he, who was till then red-blue in colour became
as white as pearl. He began to be called Suklavari4
(white in colour) from that day onwards.
ee felt hepPpy and contented having seen Siv4;
who asked the former what it was he saw in his mit
a In his mi
just then. Answering that he saw the blissful form 2
Siva before him Visnu fell at the latter’s fect. T iva’s
query as to what boon he desired Vienu.
that he wanted to become a devotee of Siva and because
of the greatness of the bhasma Visnu thenceforw4r
became a devotee of Siva. eu
16) Sivalitiga (Phallus) . Worship of
popular practice in India.
number of stories about the
achieved so as to make it an obje
of the more important stories are given below:
( Ds ewe a the world lamenting over the
° idevi atthe Yajiia conduct aks@»
ssa followed him with his Sie oceait re
= : ‘ 1va’s SOrry predicament, During his wandering®
ae ne Sage to the Vindhya mountain, Kamadev4
oe im : ere too and began attacking Siva wit
took fap anc to escape from the fierce onslaught Si¥#
took refuge in the terrible Dary forest. Th ° Mahar
= ore their wives lived. Siva saluted — and te
qt _ : oe ae But, the Maharsis only kept mum. They
ra — t . wives saluting Siva. Siva went about
Anasiva r ‘llo si the women €xcept Arundhati and
Fn ya, 10 ‘owed him Overcome by lust- for him:
raged at this, munis like Bha . oo d
argava and Angiras curs¢
to have, Visnu repli¢
Sivalinga is
The Puranas contain 4
importance Sivaling4
ct of worship, Three

SIVA (RUDRA)
Siva that his phallusshould drop to the ground. Immediately it felldown and Siva disappeared. Th: phallus
rent asunder the earth, reached Patala and rent the
universe also. The whole universe shook at which
Brahma met Visnu at Patala and enquired of him the
reason for the universal upheaval. Visnu answered him
that the world shook because of the weight of Siva’s
phallus, which the maharsis had caused to be dropped.
Then Brahma, along with Visnu, came _ to the spot
where Siva’s phallus lay. At the sight of the limitless
phallus Visnu, in great wonder, descended to Patala
mounted on Garuda. Brahma, on his plane, toured
above. Both Visnu and Brahma returned to earth,
having failed in their attempt to find the end of the
phallus. They then praised Siva, who appeared to them.
They requested him to take back his phallus from the
earth. Siva insisted that he would do so only if the
Devas agreed to worship his phallus. Visnu agreed to
the suggestion. Brahma took the phallus, golden
brassy in colour. Thereafter. Mahavisnu _ created
the four castes and various ¢ astraic texts for each of the
castes to worship the phallus. The four texts are known
as Saivam, Pasupatam, Kaladamanam and Kapalikam.
After making the above arrangements Brahma and
Visnu returned. Siva took back his phallus. (Wamana
Purana, Chapter 6).
(ii) Eightyeight thousand Balakhilyas were born from
the mind of Brahma. They emaciated their bodies by
constant baths, fasting and worship of Siva. Though
they worshipped Siva thus for one thousand divya years,
he did not appear in front of them.
Afterwards, when Parvati was travelling by sky one day,
the latter saw and took pity on the Balakhilyas and told
Siva thus: ‘These maharsis are suffering like anything.
For my sake, you should put an end to their sufferings.
Has their evil fate no end? They are reduced to mere
skin and bones, and yet they aredenied realisation.”
Smilingly Siva told Parvati as follows “You do not know
the real course of righteousness. ‘These people do not
understand righteousness; they are not free from lust
and anger. They are mere fouls.’’ At these words of
Siva, Parvati told him thus: If things be as you have
said please show me their nature, I feel interested. ‘Then
Siva asked Parvati to remain where she was, telling her
that he would go to the Balakhilyas and show her how
they behaved. Accordingly Siva went to them.
iva approached the Balakhilyas in the guise of a handsome youth, wearing the Vanamala garland on his
head, holding the alms bowl in his hands and completely in the nude and requested for alms. The Womenfolk of the Advaitins were much attracted by the handsome youth and came to him with a lot of fruits, roots
etc. by way of alms. Siva wished them good and
Parvati espied her smiling lord from her seat.
After giving him alms the women spoke to him as
follows -*Oh ! anchorite, what penance are you
practising ? You have no clothes on you, but you wear
Vanamala. You are a handsome sannyasi. If you
have no objection, please tell us about you.” The
Sannydsi (Siva) answered them by saying that his was
a very secret penance and could not be imparted to
others. Especially in the presence of so many others it
eld not be revealed. So, you may please go. But,
the women said that they wished very much to hear the
secret, and they caught hold of his hands saying ‘Come’.
SIVA (RUDRA)
The women were overcome by lust and one of them
caught hold of his neck, another of his hands, another
of his knees, another of his hair and yet another of his
waist. Seeing the excitement of their wives the maharsis cried, ‘Strike him’ and struck down his phallus
with sticks and stones. As soon as the phallus was
thus felled down, Siva disappeared from the spot and
returned to Kailasa with Parvati.
When the phallus fell down the whole universe shook
and the maharsis were alarmed. A very intelligent
maharsi among them said :—‘“‘We know not the real
facts about the great ascetic. Let us take refuge in
Brahma. He may know the facts.” Accordingly the
maharsis went to Brahma, who found fault with their
ignorance and indiscretion and asked them to shed
their anger and please Siva. Accordingly they went to
Kailasa and praised Siva, who appeared to them and
told them as follows :—‘“You may now return, The
phallus will belong to you. I shall be pleased if you
would duly install it. Nothing will be impossible
to those who worship my phallus with devotion. Even
sins consciously committed will be removed by the
worship of my phallus. You install the phallus you
struck down in the great pond of Sannihita. That
will achieve for you all your desires. Even the Devas
will worship it under the name ‘Sthanu’. Being installed at Sthanvifvara it will be known as Sthanvisvara
also. Constant meditation upon Sthanu will remove
all sins. The sight of Sthanu will bring about salvation.”
After this the maharsis, along with Brahma, returned
to Daru forest to carry the phallus to Sannihita. But,
they could not move it even by an iota. They returned
again to Kailasa, but could not see Siva there. When
Brahma sat in meditation for sometime to know where
Siva was, he saw in his mind Siva, in the guise of an
elephant, standing in the stream praised by munis.
Immediately Brahma and others went there, but missed
Siva there. But Parvati appeared there and served
them amrta (nectar). When they had consumed the
nectar they saw Siva standing in the stream, and they
spoke about their difficulties to him.
Siva, in the guise of the elephant, accompanied them to
the Daru forest where he, in sport, took the phallus
by his proboscis and installed it on the banks of
the stream. All those who witnessed the installation attained ultimate realisation. Upon the phallus
thus installed Brahma built another phallus with stone.
After a period that phallus became one with the
effulgence of the first phallus. Those who saw that also
achieved ultimate realisation. Immediately Brahma
built, for the pleasure of the Devas, seven phalluses
one upon the other, and sages attained ultimate realisation by smearing their bodies with the dust of the
phalluses. The spot where the phallus was installed
became famous by the name Sthanutirtha. (WVamana
Purana, Chapter 45).
(iii) In the beginning Brahma entrusted Siva with
the duty of creation and to earn the power for creation
he lived under water for many generations. Siva
having not returned though Brahma waited for him
long, the latter created the prajapatis and got done by
them all creations. Then it was that Siva, having
acquired all the more power, came out of water. Siva
who got angry that all creations were effected in his

SIVA (RUDRA)
absence plucked his phallus and threw it into the
earth. He said that, since matters of creation had been
managed by Brahma, he needed the phallus no further.
The phallus thus thrown by Siva stuck to the earth
and remained pointed upwards. Next, Siva performeda
dance of annihilation among the Devas .Ultimately, on
the request of the Devas Siva deposited his fire of wrath
in water. It is that fire which dries up water in seas,
rivers etc. When Siva had shed his anger and become
quiet the Devas worshipped the- phallus, which had
stuck to the earth, and thenceforth worship of Siva’s
phallus became popular. (M.B. Sauptika Parva, Chapter 17).
17) Stvalilas ( Sports of Siva). The Puranas refer to the
following sixtyfour lilas (sports) of Siva. (1) Devendra
redeemed from sin. (2) Airavata redeemed from sin.
(3) Building of Madhurapura in Kadamba forest. (4)
Sri Parvati born as Tatataka..(5) Pandyadeva wedded
Tatataka. (6) Dancebefore sage Patafijali (7) Kundodara granted power to consume much rice (8) Quench-—
ed Kundodara’s hunger and thirst with rice etc. and
waters of river Vaiga (9) Brought the seven seas near
to please his wife (10) Brought Malayadhvaja down
to earth from Devaloka (11) Created the son called
Ugra (12) Ugra given three weapons like égila (13)
Removed the sea from his side (14) Broke the crown
of Indra (15) Ugrapandya given gold from Mahameru
(16) ‘Taught the maharsis the meaning of Vedas (17)
Sold gems to the King to make a crown (18) Made the
clouds drink water from the ocean (19) Stopped excessive
rain-fall (20) Exhibited the prowess of realisation (21)
Made ‘stone-elephant’ eat sugar-cane (22) Killed the
elephant which a Buddha sannyasin had sent after being
subjected to black magic (23) Blessed a brahmin girl (24)
Did various kinds ofdances (25) Brought to light and
proved the death of brahmin woman (26) Annihilated
the evil or sin of having slept with the mother and
killed the father (27) Killed Siddha to save the wife
of preceptor, who taught archery (28) Made the snakes
sent by Buddha sannyAsins poisonless (29) Killed cows
sent by the same sannyAsins (30) Exhibited innumerable
soldiers to save the commander-in-chief of the Pandya
army (31) Gave the Pandya King a money-bag, which
would never become empty (32) Disguised himselfas a
VaiSya and sold bangles (33) Granted astasiddhis to
Yaksis. (34) Opened the door of the temple for the
Cola King (35) Supplied water to the Pandyan arm
(36) Converted base metals into gold etc, (37) De.
feated the Cola King (38) Gave a Sidra a vessel filled
with gingelly seeds (39) A Vaigya boy given victory in
a suit (40) Redeemed'the Pandya King from the ae
of brahmahatya (41) Carried firewood to save th
devotee named Bhadra (42) Wrote a letter to she
Cera King on behalf of Bhadra (43) Bhadra presented
with a plank (44) Bhadra’s wife granted victory in
nagavidya (45) Assumed the form of pork and saved
the small offsprings (46) Small pork made minister
(47) A Khafijarita bird was taught the mrtyufijaya
mantra so that it could escape from the attack of crows
(48) A Sarari bird granted salvation (49) Boundaries
of Madhurapura shown by serpent (50) Defeated the
Cola King (51) Dravidian scholars given the Sarhgham
plank (52) Wrote a verse for a brahmin at the instance
of the Pandya King (53) Saved Nakkira (54) Nakkira
taught siitras (aphorisms) (55) Made a comparative
SIVA (RUDRA)
study of theses (56) Visited northern Halasya (57)
Wedded fisher-girl (58) Jfanadiksa (initiation into
knowledge) given to the minister called Vatapuresa
(59) Sold magic horses to the Pandyan King (60)
River made bigger (61) Carried mud for pancakes (62)
Cured the fever and hunch-back of Kubja Pandya
(63) Made Jiianasambandhar kill the naked ones on
the gala (64) Brought tree, tank, Sivalinga etc. to
Madhura as witnesses. (Halasyamahatmya, Chapter
18) Bull of Siva. Cows were born on earth from
Surabhi. The foam of milk which flowed Sike sca
from cows rose into waves and fell in Sivabhimi (Siva
land). Siva did not like it. He opened his third eye
and looked at the cows. The flames from the eye
caused different colours to the cows. The cows took
refuge with Candra. But, the fire of Siva’s eye followed
the cows there also. At last the Prajapatis pacified
Siva and presented him a bull for vehicle. From that.
day onwards Siva came to be known as Vrsabhavahana
and Vrsabhanka also. (Anuéasana Parva, Chapter 77)-
19) Other information.
(i) The son Suka was born to VyZsa because of the
blessing of Siva. (Devi Bhagavata, Ist Skandha) .
(11) During the: period of emperor Prthu when the
Devas made the earth a cow and milked resources, 51¥4
served as calf. (Drona Parva, Chapter 69, Verse 2%}.
(111) Siva occupies a seat in Kubera’s court. (Sab 1a
Parva, Chapter 10, Verse 21).
(iv) Siva once presented an armour to Indra. (Drom@
Parva, Chapter 94, Verse 61 ).
(v) When the battle with the Tripuras reached 1
climax in intensity Siva mounted the Bull and looke
at the capital of the asuras. As a result of the fiery look
the breasts of cows were cut and their hoofs rent into
two. The hoofs of cattle came to be cleft from that
day onwards. (Karna Parva, Chapter 34, Verse 105). f
(vi) Living beings are kept healthy by the kindness ©
Siva. (Sauptika Parva, Chapter 18, Verse 20).
(vii) It was Siva, who organised the penal code in thé
world, (Santi Parva, Chapter 59, Verse 80).
(viii) Once in the war between the Devas and the
Asuras Siva gave refuge to Sukracarya. (Santi Parv4:
Chapter 389, Verse 36).
(ix) Siva performed the thread- wearing ceremony of
uka, the son of Vyasa. (Santi Parva, Chapter 240;
Verse 19),
(x) On the occasion when Siva burnt Tripuras and
their city to ashes they saw him as a boy with five
horns. (Anug4sana Parva, Chapter 160, Verse 32)-
(xi) There is a story in Santi Parva of Mahabharat
about Siva’s bringing back to life the dead child of ?
brahmin. The story was told by Bhisma to YudhisthirThe brahmin took his dead child to the burning gh?!
when a fox asked him to wait at least till dusk to s&°
if the child would regain life, At the same time ®
vulture, which came there pointed out to the brahm!”
that the dead never came back to life and asked him
leave the dead body there and return home, As advise
by the fox and the ‘vulture the brahmin took to the
urning ghat and took back from there the dead body
of his child. Parvati took pity on the brahmin and 2°
requested by her Siva brought the child back to Life:
The logic and reasoning advanced by the fox and th¢

zz
SIVA I 731
vulture for their selfish ends is famous under the name
Grdhragomayusamvada.
(xii) The following words are used in the Mahabharata
as synonyms of Siva :
Aja, Ambikapati, Anangangahara, Ananta, Andhakaghati, Andhakanipati, Atharva, Bahuripa, Bhagaghna,
Bhava, Bhavaghna, Bhima, Sankara, Sarva, Sitikantha,
Smag dinavas!, Srikantha, Sukra, Silabhrt, Saladhara,
Saladhrk, Silahasta, Salanka, Silapani, Sali, Daksakratuhara, Dhanvi, Dhruva, Dhirjati, Digvasas,
Divyagovrsabhadhvaja, Ekaksa, Ganadhyaksa, Ganesa,
STVASARMAN
worshipped. Then chanting the mantra ‘Ham, him,
ham Sivamirtaye’ Siva.is to be worshipped. Siva is to
be worshipped with angas (with limbs, touching certain
portions of the body) and with Vaktra (mouth, chanting). Angas are to be worshipped with the chanting,
Haum Sivaya haum’ Vaktra with the chanting ‘Ham
Iginaya’. Gauri should be worshipped with the bija
‘Hrim’, Ganapati with ‘Gam’ and Dikpalas like Indra,
his arrows and Candegvara should be worshipped by
touching the heart etc. of the worshipper. (Agni Purana,
Chapter 21).
Gaurisa, Gaurihrdayavallabha, GiriSa, Govrsanka, SIVARATRI.
Govrsabhadhvaja, Govrsottamavahana, Hara, Haryaksa,
Jatadhara, Jatila, Jati, Kamanganagana, Kapali,
Kapardi, Khatvangadhari, Krttivasas, Kumarapita,
Lalataksa, Lelihana, Mahadeva, Mahaganapati,
Mahayogi, Mahesvara, Mahisaghna, Makhaghna,
Midhvan, Mrgavyadha, Munindra, Nandisvara, Nisacarapati, Nilagriva, Nilakantha, Nilalohita, Pas ubharta
Pagupati, Pinakadhrk, Pinakagopta, Pinakahasta,
Pinakapani, Pinaki, Pingala, Prajapati, Rudra, Rsabhaketu, Sarva, Sarvayogesvaresvara, Sthanu, Trisulahasta, Trisalapani, Trilocana, ‘Trinayana, Trinetra,
Tripuraghati, Tripuraghna, ‘Tripuraharta, Tripuramardana, Tripuranasana, Tripurantaka, Tripurantakara, Tripurardana, Tryaksa, Tryambaka, Ugra,
Ugre'a, Umiapati, Visalaksa, Vilohita, Virupaksa,
Vrsabhadhvaja, Vrsabhanka, Vrsabhavahana, Vrsaketana, Vrsavahana, Yamya, Yati, Yogesvara.
(xiii) Names of Siva. Sambhu, Isa, Pagupati, Siva,
Sali, Mahegvara, Isvara, Sarva, Igana, Sankara,
Candragekhara, Bhitega, Khandaparagu, Girisa,
Giriga, Mrda, Mrtyufijaya, Krttivasas, Pinaki, Pramathadhipa, Ugra, Kapardi, Srikantha, Sitikantha, Kapalabhrt, Vamadeva, Mahadeva, . Viripaksa, Trilocana,
Kréanuretas, Sarvajfia, Dhirjati, Nilalohita, Hara,
Smarahara, Bharga, Tryambaka, Tripurantaka,
Gangadhara, Antakaripu, Kratudhvams1, Vrsadhvaja,
Vyomakega, Bhava, Bhima, Sthanu, Rudra, Umapati,
Ahirbudhnya, Astamarti, Gajari, | Mahanata.
(Amarako’a).
SIVA. I Wife of Angiras. Consumed by lust she once
slept with Agnideva and then flew away in the form
of a she-kite. (Vana Parva, Ghapter 225).
SIVA II. Wife. of the Vasu called Anila and mother of two
sons called Manojava and Avijiiatagati. (Adi Parva,
Chapter 66, Verse 25).
SIVA III. The very noble wife of Angiras. (Vana Parva,
Chapter 225 Verse |) |
IVA IV. A river in India made famous in the Puranas.
(Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 25).
SIVA (M) One of the seven sectors of Plaksa island. Sivam
Yavasam, Subhadram, Santam, Moksam, Amrtam and
_ Abhayam are the seven sectors.( Bhagavata, 5th Skandha.
SIVABHASMA. See under Siva, Para 15. ~
ST VARA. See under VisnujvaraALINGA. See under Siva, Para 16.
SIVAPUJA (SIVA WORSHIP). There are certain injunctions: with regard to the worship of Siva. Nandikega and
Mahakala are to. be worshipped first. Then should
Ganga, Yamuna, the ganas, Vastupurusa, Sakti, and
Dharma be worshipped. Next, the navasaktis (nine
Powers) i.e. Vama, Jyestha, Raudri, Kall, Kalavikarini
(Kalavikalini) Balavikarini (Balavikalini) Balapramathini, Sarvabhaitadamani and Manonmani should be
1) General. Sivaratri is a holy day. Sivaratri is observed
on the eve of New moon day (Caturdasi) falling in the
middle of Magha and Phalguna (fF ebruary-March).
During this night, penance should be done with
fasting. On Caturdasi day penance (vrata) should be
observed without sleep and food and Siva worshipped.
2) Origin. There is the following Puranic story about
the origin of the observance of Sivaratri as a sacred day.
Brahma took his birth in the lotus that originated from
the navel of Visnu. Brahma trying to know the source
of the lotus saw Visnu only. He asked, ‘Who are you?’
and was answered ‘I am Visnu, your father’. ‘That
answer did not satisfy Brahma and a quarrel ensued
between him and Visnu which ended in fighting.
Brahma shot the Brahmastra, which Visnu countered
with Pagupatastra and neither of the two was able to
withdraw it, which went round the world. While both
stood aghast not knowing what to do, Sivalinga appeared
betwixt the two. Both the ends of the linga were invisible. To find the ends Brahma went upwards and Visnu
downwards. Though they travelled a great distance
they could not find out the ends, and, so, returned to their
old seats. Immediately Siva appeared betwixt the two
and withdrew the pasupatastra. It was on Caturdasi day
in the month of Magha that Siva thus appeared, Siva
enjoined that in future Caturdasi night every year
should be observed as a holy day, which should be
known as Sivaratri. (Kannaéga Ramayana).
3) The greatness of Sivaratri. The following story about
a sinner, who attained Sivaloka by observing Sivaratri
is related in Sivaratrimahatmya.
A son named Sukuma4ra was born to the Brahmin manager of the king of Kufijara, a kingdom on the banks of
river Sindhu. The boy grew up to be an immoral fellow
and he married a Candala girl with whom he lived for
seven years. Five daughters and two sons were born to
him of the Candala woman. The father, Sukumara,
himself married the daughters. One day he, in the
course of his search for a flower to be worn on the hair
of the Candala woman, came near the Siva temple called Nagegvara. A Sivaratri festival was being celebrated there that day and Sukuméara, participated in it.
Shortly afterwards Sukumara died. Messengers of Kala
and Siva arrived to carry off his soul and a battle
ensued between the two for the soul. His soul attained
Sivaloka as he had, though by accident, participated in
Sivaratri festival.
SIVASARMAN, A_ brahmin well-versed in all § astras
(sciences) . Sivagarman, who lived in Dvaraka had, by
his wife Gunavati five sons called YajfiaSarman, Vedagarman, Dharmagarman, Visnu’arman and Somasgarman, all of them deeply devoted to their father. ‘Ihe
father decided to test the devotion of each of the sons,

SIVASARMAN
Sivagarman had, due to Siva’s blessing, achieved all
kinds of siddhis (spiritual gifts). By the power of illusion
he showed the sons their mother lying dead and all the
sons wept uncontrollably. Then he asked his eldest son
Yajfiasarman, to cut the dead body of his mother into
pieces and throw them off. After having done so he came
and saluted his father.
After bidding adieu to YajiiaS arman, who proved his devotion to his father as above, SivaSarman called his second
son Vedasgarman to him and told him thus: “I find it
difficult to get on without a woman. Look, there is a
beautiful woman there endowed with all qualifications.
(And he created such a woman by illusion). You go and
fetch her to me.’”’? Vedagarman, after saluting his father
went to the woman and requested her to become the
wife of his father. But, the woman did not want to
become the wife of an old man, and she told Vedagarman that she would love him, and not his father, to
have as her husband. He shuddered to be told thus,’
and by the power of his tapas he got down Indra and
other Devas on earth and showed them to her. She
then told him in indifferent tone the following: “‘Yes, I
have seen the prowess of your tapas. But, I have nothing
to do with Devas. Ifyou want me as wife for your
father, please cut off your head with your own hands
for my pleasure.” WVedagarman drew his sword and
very happily cut off his head and presented it to the
woman. She came to Sivagarman and requested him to
accept his son’s head, which he (son) had voluntarily cut
off for the sake of his father.
The other sons of Sivasarman shuddered at the sight of
their brother’s head. They told among themselves thus:
“Our mother entered eternal Samadhi, but this brother
of ours, who courted death. on behalf of father is really
blessed.’’ Then Sivagarman asked his third son DharmaSarman to receive his brother’s head. He received it
and went out with it and prayed to Dharmadeva, who,
on his appearance, was requested to restore Vedaéarman
to life. Dharmadeva did so, and the first question
asked by Vedagarman, who returned to life as though
awakened from sleep, was about the woman, whom he
had brought as his father’s wife. Then Vedagarman
and Dharmas arman returned to their father, and Dharmahea ee “> about his bringing back to life
is dead brother. Though th
about the great dedofon sh a at ee oe gS 1)
him (son). )
ivaSarman fell into contemplation fo
then told his fourth son, Vigne arman ie pallies on
go immediately to Indraloka and bring amrta (nectar)
for me to drink along with this woman. Nectar removes
diseases. Now, this woman has no interest in me. It is
only natural that young, beautiful women will feel no
love towards an old man and unless I regain my youth
this woman of mine may sleep with others. You, my son
should act in such a manner thatI can enjoy life sei,
this woman in all the three worlds.
As soon as he heard his father, Visnus arman, by the
power of his tapas ascended to the sky and started for
Indraloka. Being told about the object of his visit Indra
deputed Menaka to make him withdraw from the plan.
Immediately Menaka put on her best clothes and singing sweet music occupied the hanging seat in Nandanavana, and Visnu’arman lost not a minute to divine
the object of her presence. Without even casting a look
son he did not answer
SKANDAGRAHA
upon her, he hurried forward. But, she jumped down
from her seat, blocked his path and made enquiries
about him. She also tried to make love to him. But,
Visnusgarman turned down her overtures of love. At
this stage Indra adopted many magical tricks to frighten
away the unwelcome visitor. Angered by such attempts
VisnuSarman got ready to destroy Devaloka along with
Indra, who then begged pardon of him and _ handed
over to him a pot full of nectar.
When Visnugarman gave the nectar to his father the
latter asked him to choose any boon he wanted, and
according to his request the father brought back to life
Gunavati. Now SivaSarman very much pleased with his
sons sent the first four of them to Visnuloka. He decided
to live forsome time more on earth with his youngest son,
and he told the latter that he was going on a pilgrimage
and asked him to keep the pot of nectar with him. The
son kept it very carefully for ten years. Now Sivafarman
with his wife returned from pilgrimage. By magic he
had become a leper, and made his wife also a leper.
Somagarman, his youngest son felt pained that his
parents had fallen victims to such a fell disease and
served them with meticulous care in every way. He
foresaw their wants and desires and satisfied them to the
full. Yet, the father lost temper with the son and used
even to fist him. But, the son did not lose his temper
in any manner and to the least degree. He continue
to serve his parents most cheerfully.
A century was over in this manner, The parents were
greatly satisfied and pleased with their son, and ultimately the father cast one more illusion on the sonAfter stealing away by magic the nectar from the pot;
he asked the son for it. When Somagarman looked into
the pot for nectar, to his horror it was missing. But, he
took the pot to his father saying to himself, ‘Let there
be nectar in itifI am truthful, if I have served my
elders well and if I have observed pure tapas’, and lo!
the pot was filled with nectar,
Sivasarman blessed his son, and by the power of his
yoga ascended to Vaikuntha in the company of his wife.
After this Soma‘arman began practising the most intense form of tapas. When the time for his death was
near asuras approached him. Fear about asuras grippe
him, who was in deep meditation, and as he breathe
his last thinking about asuras he was born in his next
life as Prahlada, son of Hiranyakasipu and got killed by
Visnu in the war between Devas and Asuras, (Padma
Purana, Bhimi Khanda),.
VASVAMI. A great poet in Sanskrit in the court of
king Avantivarman, who ruled Kashmir between 854
and 884 A.D. Only one poem by him, Kapphinabhyui age composed on the model of Kiratarjuniyam, has
een unearthed yet.
SIVODBHEDA. A sacred spot. One, who lives here taking
the holy bath will derive the benefit of making a gift 0
ae ee cows. (Vana Parva, Chapter 82). §
called Sara ama ce’ fo thls place in fear of the asura
padma and did tapas there. (Skanda
Purana),
ubrahmanya. (For further details see under
SI
SKANDA. §
Subrahmanya),
SKANDAGRAHA. An evil spirit which afflicts boys upto the age of sixteen. It is mentioned j Abha
ed in Mahabharata,
Vana Parva, Chapter 230, Stanza 43, that this spirit

SKANDAPASMARA 733
is also known by the name Matrkagraha or Purusagraha.
SKANDAPASMARA. A demon derived from the body
of Subrahmanya. This would enter the womb of
pregnant women and afflict the child in the womb.
(M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 230, Verse 26).
SKANDHA. A naga (serpent) born in the family of
Dhrtarastra. This serpent was burnt to death in the
sacrificial fire of the serpent sacrifice of Janameyjaya.
(M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 57, Verse 18).
SKANDHAKSA. A warrior of Subrahmanya. (Mahabharata, Salya Parva, Ghapter 45, Verse 60).
SLESMAKA (M). (SLESMATAKAM). A forest. It
was when Visravas, the grandson of Brahma and
Kaikasi, the daughter of Sumali were living in this
forest, that Ravana, Kumbhakarna, Vibhisana and
irpanakha were born to them. (Kamba Ramayana,
Parva Kanda).
SLISTI. Son of Dhruva. Dhruva had two children
Slisti and Succhaya by his wife Sambhu. Slisti married
Succhaya. Five sons, Ripu, Ripufijjaya, Punya, Vrkala
and Vrkatejas. were born to them. Ripu, the eldest
of them, was the father of Gaksusa Manu, according to
Harivam’a, Chapter 2.
SMARADUTYI. A maid of Vrnda, the wife of Jalandhara.
(Padma Purana 3 : 9).
SMRTI. The sovereign deity of remembrance. It is
mentioned in Mahabharata, Salya Parva, Chapter 46,
Verse 64, that this goddess Smrti had walked in front
of the army of Subrahmanya. Smrti was the wife of
Angiras. Four daughters, named Sinivali, Kuht, Raka
and Anumati, were born to Angiras by his wife Smrtidevi. (Visnu Purana, Arhga 1, Chapter 10).
SNANA. Bathing. The Puranas have ordered six kinds
of bathing. They are Nitya snana (daily bath), Naimittika snana (incidental bath), Kamya snana (Desirable), Kriya snana (ceremonial), Kriyanga snana
(bathing only the limbs used for rites) and Malakarsana snana (Bathing to drag out excrements). (Agni
Purana, Chapter 155).
SOBHANA., Son-in-law of Mucukunda. (See Para 3
under Mucukunda).
SODARYAVAN. A chariot of Indra. The peculiarity of
this chariot was that two chariot-fighters could sit and
fight at the same time in this. It is mentioned in
Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter 24, Verse 12,
that Indra had, sitting in this chariot, killed ninetynine asuras (demons). This chariot passed hands from
Indra to Uparicaravasu; from him to Brhadratha. and
from this King to Jarasandha, on whose death, indra
took possession of it again. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 24, Verse 48).
SODASARAJAKA. The story of sixteen famous Kings
related by Vyasa to Yudhisthira who, after the death
of Abhimanyu in the war became averse to fighting.
The Kings were (1) Marutta (2) Suhotra (3) Paurava
(4) Sibi (5) Sri Rama (6) Bhagiratha (7) Diltpa (8)
Mandhata (9) Yayati (10) Ambarisa (11) Sagabindu
(12) Gaya (13) Rantideva (14) Bharata (15) Prthu
ee Parasurama. (Drona Parva, 16 Chapters from
SOMA I. A son born to fire Bhanu by his third
wife Nig a, who had given birth to two sons Soma and
pe and a daughter named Rohini. (M.B. Vana
arva, Chapter 221, Verse 15).
SOMADATTA III
SOMA II. One of the eight Vasus. The eight Vasus are
Apa, Dhruva, Soma, Dharma, Anila, Agni, Pratyiisa
and Prabhasa. (Visnu Purana, Amsa 1.15).
SOMA III. A son of Jarasandha. It is stated in Bhagavata, Skandha 9, that Jarasandha had four sons named
Soma, Sahadeva, Turya and Srutasru.
SOMA. A celestial maid. This celestial beauty performed a dance at the birth festival of Arjuna. (M.B. Adi
Parva, Chapter ]22, Verse 61).
SOMA. Juice extracted from Soma creeper. [tis believed that the devas accept Soma in sacrifices.
SOMADA. A Gandharva damsel. (For further details
see under Gilt).
SOMADATTAI, A King of the Iksvaku dynasty.
Genealogy. Descended from Visnu_ in the following
order :—Brahma-Marici-Kasyapa-Vivasvan-V aivasvata
Manu-Iksvaku-Dista-Nabhaga - Phalantana-VatsaprittPraméu - Pramati - Khanitra- Caksusa-Rambha- Kaninetra -Karandhama-Aviksit-Marutta-Dama - Rajyavardhana -Sudhrti- Nara- Kevala - Bandhuman-Vegavan -
Trnabindu-Alambusa-Vis ala-~Hemacandra- Dhumraksa
Sriijaya-Sahadeva-Krs asva-Somadatta.
SOMADATTA II. A King of Paficala. He was the
great grandson of Sriijaya and the grandson of Sahadeva. The father of Somadatta was Krsagva. (Valmiki
Ramayana, Sarga 47).
SOMADATTA III. A King of the Kuru dynasty.
1) General information. This King was the son of
Balhika and the grandson of King Pradipa. T’hree sons
named Bhiri, Bhirigravas and Sala were born to
Somadatta.
2) Other detazls.
(i) Somadatta and his sons were present at the
Svayarnvara marriage of Draupadi. (M.B. Adi Parva,
Chapter 185, Verse 14).
(ii) Somadatta had participated in the royal consecration sacrifice of Yudhisthira. (M.B. Chapter 34, Verse
(iii) This Somadatta was present at the Svayarhvara
of Devaki. Atthat time there occurred a_ hand to
hand fight between Sini and Somadatta. (M.B. Drona
Parva, Chapter 114, Verse 14).
(iv) The defeat from Sini being unbearable, Somadatta
did penance, to get power to vanquish him and Siva
appeared before him. Somadatta made the following
_ request :- “God ! May I be granted a son who would
be powerful enough to kick down the son of Sini in his
palace.”’ Siva granted his wish. Bhiri7ravas was the
son born in conformity with this boon. He grew up
and defeated the son of Sini and kicked him in the
palace of the King. This story occurs in Mahabharata,
Drona Parva, Chapter 144.
(v) Somadatta fought against Satyaki and Bhimasena
in the battle of Bharata and fell down unconscious.
(Drona Parva, Chapter 157, Verse 10).
(vi) In the battle which followed this, Satyaki killed
Somadatta. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 162, Verse
(vii) It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Asramavasika
Parva, Chapter 11, Verse 17, that Dhrtarastra performed the sacrifice of giving offerings to the spirit of
Somadatta.
(viii) Somadatta was one of the spirits which appeared

SOMADHEYA
on the surface of the Ganges when invoked by Vyasa.
(M.B. Agramavasika Parva, Chapter 32, Verse 12).
SOMADHEYA. An ancient country in east Bharata. It
is mentioned in Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter
30, Verse 10, that Bhimasena defeated the people of
this country.
SOMAGIRI. A mountain. This mountain ought to be
thought of every morning and evening. (M.B, Santi
Parva, Chapter 165, Verse 33). 7
SOMAKAI. It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Adi
Parva, Chapter 122, Verse 40, that all the Ksatriyas
of the Somaka dynasty are called Somakas.
SOMAKA IT.
1) General information. A King of Paficala. This generous King was the son of Sahadeva and the grandson of
Subhasa. In accordance with the advice of Brahmins,
the King once sacrificed his son. It is mentioned in
Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 128 that on
completion of the sacrifice he got one hundred sons.
2) Other details.
(i) This King Somaka travelled with his _ priests,
through the holy worlds and hell and returned. (M.B.
Vana Parva, Chapter 128, Verse 11).
(ii) King Somaka made offerings of cows as alms and
attained heaven. (M.B. Anugdsana Parva, Chapter 76,
Verse 25).
(iii) Never had he eaten flesh in his life.
Anugasana Parva, Chapter 115, Verse 63).
(iv) Mention is made in Mahabharata, Sabha Parva,
Chapter 8, Stanza 8, that this Somaka stays in the
palace of Yama praising him.
SOMAKIRTI. One of the hundred sons of Dhrtarastra.
(M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 67, Verse 99).
SOMAPA. I. A warrior of Subrahmanya. (M.B. Salya
Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 70). |
SOMAPA II. An eternal god of offerings to the manes.
(M.B. AnuSisana Parva, Chapter 91, Verse 34).
SOMAPA (SOMALA). One of the seven Pitrs. It is
mentioned in Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter 11,
Verse 49, that this god dwells in the palace of Brahma.
SOMAPADA. A holy place. It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 34, Verse 119, that
those who bathe in the particular holy bath called
Mahegvarapada in this place will obtain the fruits of
a horse-sacrifice.
SOMASARMA 1. A brahmin, (See under Gunadhya).
SOMASARMA II. Son of the brahmin Sivagarma.
(For detailed story see under Sivagarma) :
SOMASRAMA. A holy place. He who visits this holy
place will be praised by others. (Mahabharata, Vana
Parva, Chapter 84, Verse 157).
SOMASRAVAS. A hermit. His father was Srutagravas.
Once King Janame)aya approached Srutagravas and
requested him to let him have Somafravas as sacrificial
priest. (For further details see under Srutagravas ITT) ;
SOMASRAYAYANA. An ancient holy place situated
in the basin of the Ganga. The Pandavas visited this
holy place while they were on their way to Paiicala
from Ekacakra. It was in this place that Citraratha
the Gandharva who had been defeated by Arjuna, had
enjoyed bathing sports with girls. It was because of
these two facts that Somasrayayana became a holy
place. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 169, Verse 3).
SQOMATIRTHAI. An ancient holy place situated in
Kuruksetra. It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Vana
(M.B.
SRADDHAVATI
Parva, Chapter 83, Verse 19, that one could attain the
fruits of the sacrifice of royal consecration by bathing
in this holy bath.
SOMATIRTHA II. Another ancient holy bath situated
in Kuruksetra. In Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter
83, Stanza 114, it is mentioned that by bathing in
this holy place, one could attain the world of Candra
(Moon). (See under Prabhasa Tirtha also) .
SOMAVARCGAS. An eternal god of offering to the
manes. (Mahabharata, Anugasana Parva, Chapter 91,
Stanza 33).
SONA NADI. Ariver famous in the Puranas. Some
important facts about this river are given below :-
(i) River Sona remains in Varuna’s assembly woree him. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 9, Verse
(ii) Lord Sri Krsna crossed this river cn his way from
Indraprastha to Rajagrha. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 20, Verse 27).
(ili) There is a sacred place called “‘Vaméagulma
tirtha’’ in river Sona. By bathing in it one gets the
benefit of ASvamedha Yaga. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 85, Verse 8).
(iv) River Sona is regarded as the source of Agm!.
(M.B. Vana Parva. Chapter 222, Verse 25).
(v) Visvamitra, Rama and Laksmana took rest for 4
night on the banks of river Sona. (Valmiki Ramay2?4>
_ Bala Kanda, 31st Sarga). )
SONITAPURA. The capital city of Bandsura. This
city was protected by Siva, Karttikeya, Bhadrakal\,
Agni and other divinities, In the battle between Stl
Krsna and Bana, the former defeated all the sentries
and entered the city through the northern gate. Within
the fort, Bana was defeated. Mahabharata, Sabha
Parva, Daksinatya Patha, Chapter 38 mimtions hat
Sri Krsna released Aniruddha a fr heir
‘ilies and Usa from t
SONITODA. A Yaksa. Heremains ; _
ly and worships him, - Heremains in Kubera’s assemb
Verse 17). (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 10,
eer aces ‘ A daughter born to Daksa Prajapati by
is wife Prasiti, T'wentyfour daughters were bern t?
them. Of them, thirt
: , cen were t madeva including Sraddha. the wives of Dhat
Dharmadeva had a son named
, $e Purana, Part 1, Chapter 7)
ice ng Surya’s daughter. She had several othe!
mes Suc as, Vaivasvati, Savitri, Prasavitri etc. (FO
more details, see under Savitri I) |
SRADDHA III. ;
sry aivasvata Nene. of Vaivasvata Manu. (See unde!
=e Daughter born to Kardama Prajap@")
ie son U, 1e became the wife of Angiras. They had
Siatvalr ere and Brhaspati and four daughter
a 1, Kuhu, Raka and Anumati. (Bhd : x
kandha) . . (Bhagavata,
SRADDHA. The offe
the Puranas Sraddh
NY c a : .
Here, ‘‘Pitrs”? coh important aaa
P; € souls of ea
ltrs belong to a special class of sods bie
SRADDHAPARVA
mgs - A’ sub-divis; ee in
Mahabharata. It comprises Chast oe ad BF of
Stri Parva.
city of Varuna, (See und
Kama by Sraddha.
ring given to
IS a ver
does not mean *
Pitrs. According tO
SRADDHAVATI, A
Astadikpalakas) .

SRAJA 735
SRAJA. An eternal god concerned with offering to the
manes (Vigvadeva). (M.B. Anugadsana Parva, Chapter
91, Verse 33).
SRAMA. Son of Apa, one of the Astavasus. Apa had
four sons named Vairunda, Srama, Santa and Dhvani.
(Visnu Purana, Am‘a 1, Chapter 15).
SRAVA. Son of Santa, a Maharsi who belonged to
Grtsamada’s family. He was the father of ‘Tamas.
(Mahabharata, Anusasana Parva, Chapter 30, Verse
SRAVA. Son cof Yuvanagva, a King of the Iksvaku
dynasty. He was the father of the King Sravasta.
(Maha Bharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 202, Verse 3).
SRAVANA I. -A son of Murasura. Muradsura had seven
sons. They were : Tamra, Antariksa, Sravana, Vasu,
Vibhavasu, Nabhasvan and Aruna. They were all
killed by Sri Krsna. (Bhagavata, Skandha 10). ©
SRAVANA II. One of the twentyseven stars (naksatras) .
Those who perform Sraddha on the day of this star
will attain heaven. (M.B. Anugasana Parva, Chapter
39, Verse 11).
SRAVANA. See 3rd Para under DaSaratha.
SRAVANADVADASI. A holy day. Observance of a
fast on this day after a bath at the confluence of two
rivers is believed to bring Moksa.
SRAVASAUCA, Defilement attached to the flux due to
abortion. It is ordered in Agni Purana, Chapter 258,
how to observe this defilement. It is said that women
should observe defilement for as many nights as the
number of the months of pregnancy, till the flux. If the
flux took place in the fourth month, defilement should
be observed for three nights. If it was in the fifth
month that the flux had occurred, pollution for ten
days would have'to be observed. This is meant for
Brahmins. In the case of a Ksatriya woman if the
flux occurred in the fifth month, she has to observe
defilement for four days; and five days fora Vaisya.
woman, and eight days for a Sidra woman. In the
case of a Sidra woman, if the flux is after five months,
she has to observe pollution for twelve days. In this
stage the father will be purified by a bath.
SRAVASTA. Son of the King Srava. (See under Srava).
SRAVASTIPURA. Capital city of Sravasta, King of
the Iksvaku dynasty. It was named ‘‘Sravastipuri’’ or
“Sravastipura’’ because it was built by Sravasta,
envordiig to Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 202,
erse 4.
SRENIMAN. A Rajarsi. Mahabharata, Adi Parva,
Chapter 67, Verse 51 says that he was the rebirth of
the fourth Kalakeya. The following pieces of information about this Rajarsi are gathered from Mahabharata :-
(i) Sreniman was present at the Svayarhvara of
Paficali. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 185, Verse LT}.
(ii) He ruled over Kumaradega. Bhimasena, in the
triumphal march of the eastern lands, defeated Srenim4n.
(M. B. Drona Parva, Chapter 30, Verse 1).
(iii) Sahadeva, in his conquest of Southern lands
defeated him. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 31,
Verse 5).
(iv) In the course of the Bharata Yuddha, Sreniman
was killed by Drona. (M. B. Karna Parva, Chapter 6,
R Verse 35).
RGALA. A King of the “Stri rajya’”’.. This king had attended the Svayarhvara of the daughter of Citrangada,
SRIDATTA
king of Kalinga. (Mahabharata, Santi Parva, Chapter
4, Verse 7)
SRGALAVASUDEVA. Sce under Krsna, Para 13, Sub
Para 5.
SRIBHANU. A sonof Satyabhama. She had ten sons
including Sribhanu. (Bhagavata 10th Skandha).
SRIBIMBAKI. Father of Mrgankavati. (See under
Sridatta)
SRIDATTA. SonofKalanemia Brahmana of Malava
land. Kalanemi and Vigatabhaya were the sons of
a Brahmana named Yajfiasena. After the death of
their father they went to Pataliputra for education:
The teacher gave his two daughters 1n marriage to
them. By the blessing of goddess Laksmi, Kalanemi
became rich in course of time and he was also blessed
with a glorious son. Since he was given by the
blessing of Laksmi (Sri) he was named Sridatta.
Sridatta grew up and became an expert in archery.
Kalanemi’s younger brother, Vigatabhaya left home
and went on a pilgrimage after his. wife’s death by
snake-bite. Kalanemi’s king, Vallabhasaku was pleased
with Sridatta and invited him to live in_ the palace.
In this way, he became the intimate friend of the
king’s son, Vikrama Sakti. After that, Bahusali and
Vajramusti, the princes of Avanti became the friends
of Sridatta. Mahabala, Vyaghrabhata, Upendrahala
and Nisthtiraka, who were ihe Minister’s sons, also
sought the protection of Sridatta. _
One day, Sridatta along with Vikramagakti and_other
companions went to bathe to the banks of the Ganga.
While they were there, the party of friends began to
engage in some amusements. Sridatta assumed the role
of a king and the others posed as his subjects.
Vikramaéakti, the king’s son, could not tolerate it. He
challenged Sridatta for a fight. In the fight Vikramaéakti was defeated. But he secretly resolved to kill
Sridatta by hook or by crook. Sridatta understoed his
secret plan. .
After leaving Vikramasaku, Sridatta was walking with
the others along the river-bank when he saw a woman
struggling for life because she was caught in a whirlpool
+1 the middle of the river. Sridatta at once left his
companions and jumped into the river and swam up
to her. Whenhe was almost within reach of her hair
the woman sank into the water. Sridatta also sank and
followed her, but after some time, he found neither the
woman nor even water. He found himself ina Siva
temple. He offered worship there and took rest in a
park close by. The next morning a woman came to
worship in the temple. When she returned after
worship, Sridatta followed her. ‘The woman who was
alarmed, walked faster and at last reached a heavenly
abode. She entered the house and took her seat on a
cot inside. Sridatta also got in and sat near the cot.
Many other women came and stood around her.
Without any apparent reason she began to cry. Sridatta
who was puzzled, asked her why she was crying. She
replied to him in the following words :—
“T am the grand-daughter of the Asura king, Mahabali.
I am the eldest of his one thousand grand-daughters.
My name is ‘Vidyutprabha’. Visnu has captured and
imprisoned our grandfather, Mahabali. He has also
killed our father in battle. After that he has expelled
us all from our Capital city. To prevent us from
entering it again, he has posted a lion as sentry

SRIDATTA
at the palace gate. That lion is a Yaksa who was cursed
by Kubera. If any one defeats him, he would be liberated from his curse. By defeating that lion, you will
get a divine sword. With that you can defeat anyone.”
As soon as he heard this story, Sridatta rushed towards
the lion. In the fight that followed, the lion was defeated and it was suddenly transformed into the old
Yaksa. Pleased with the hero who was instrumental in
lifting his curse, he gave Sridattaa sword called ‘“Mrgankaka” and then disappeared. Vidyutprabha entered the
palace, accompanied by her sisters and Sridatta. She
gave a ring to Sridatta which had the power to destroy
the effects of poison. She fell in love with him. She
asked him to take a bath in the tankclose by after giving
the sword to her, and undertook to kill any crocodile
which might attack him. Sridatta, keeping the sword
in his own hand, stepped into the water and sank into
it. But he rose up in the river Ganga into which he
had jumped earlier. He reached the bank of the river
and. went in search of his companions. On the way, he
met with Nisthiraka. In the course of their talk,
Nisthiraka informed Sridatta that, Vallabhasakti passed
away and Vikramagakti was then ruling over the country. The new king had killed Kalanemi and was on
the look-out for murdering Sridatta. Both of them
resumed their journey and when they reached U)jjayini,
they met with the rest of their friends. On their way,
a woman joined their party. She had lost her way
while going to the land of Malava. Sridatta and NisthaGraka walked in the company of that woman and at
last they arrived at a deserted city. They spent the
night in that city. During the night when Sridatta
happened to wake up, he saw to his horror, that the
woman had killed his friend Nisthtiraka and was eating
his flesh. Sridatta at once drew his sword and caught
hold of her hair and was about to cut off her head when
she was transformed into a Raksasa woman. She prayed
to him not to kill her and told him her story. She had
become a Raksasa woman by a curse. Long ago Vis vamitra did tapas to obtain Kubera’s place. At that time
Kubera sent her to break Visvamitra’s tapas. Since she
failed in her attempts to attract him by her charms, she
tried to subdue him by assuming the form of a terrible
monster. The sage thereupon cursed her to become a
Raksasa woman with that figure. He declared that the
curse would be lifted when Sridatta grasped her hair.
She added that she had been killing and eating the
inhabitants of that city for along time and that explained why the city had become deserted. Now that she was
liberated from the curse, she asked Sridatta what boon
he wished to have.
He replied that he only wanted his friend to be restored
to life. After reviving Nisthiraka, she disappeared.
Early next morning they reached Ujjayini. There, they
met their old friends, Bahusali and others. Sridatta
described to them his experiences after sinking in the
Ganga.
Later, once when Sridatta went toa festival, he happened
to meet Mrgankavati, daughter of a King named Sripimbaki. They fell in love with each other. When she
left the place, Sridatta felt very much depressed, Bahuéali and others also knew about it. They offered to take
him to Mrgankavati. But just then she fell down unconscious, bitten by a snake. Sridatta soon restored her
with the help of the magic ring which Vidyutprabha
SRIDATTA
had given him earlier. After that he returned with his
friends to Bahusali’s house, leaving behind the ring
with Mrgankavati. The King who was deeply grateful
for the cure of his daughter sent plenty of wealth and
gold to Sridatta. But Sridatta gave all of them to
Bahus4li’s father. He was always doting on Mrgankavati and was much pained at his separation from her.
At this stage, the princess’s favourite maid came to him
on the pretext of returning the magic ring and informed
him that Mrgankavati was also pining for him and was
even prepared to die for his sake. Sridatta sent her
back with a secret message of love and cheer. After that
in consultation with his friends he made a plan to take
the princess secretly to Mathurapuri. On the next day;
Bahugali with three of his friends left for Mathura
pretending to go there for trade. He made all arrangements on the way for the secret conveyance of the
princess. That night, Sridatta sent a woman and her
daughter to the palace after making them senseless with
heavy drink and arranged for their sleeping there. As
directed by Sridatta, Bhavanika set the palace on fire
and slipped out of the building with the princess. Sridatta sent them at once to Mathurapuri. The woman
and her daughter who were burnt alive in the palace
were supposed to be the maid and the princess. Sridatta
set out to Mathura to meet Mrgankavati. On the way
he saw several evil omens, On arrival at Vindhyavana,
he saw his friends lying helpless, after having been
severely beaten up by unknown enemies. They informed
him that a stranger leading a powerful army ove!
powered them and galloped away on horseback, taking
the princess with him.
ridatta immediately started in pursuit of the unknow?
enemy. Shortly after, he caught sight of the army led
by a Ksatriya prince who was taking Mrgankavati 0?
horseback with him. After a fierce fight, Sridatta
rescued the princess from the youth, captured his hors¢
and rode on it with her towards his friends. When they
had gone a short distance, the horse which had bee?
wousieed in the battle, fell dead on the way. At that
time he went in search of water to quench their thirst;
leaving Mrgankavati at the spot. By the time hé
returned with water, the sun had set. So he lost his
ns and wandered about in the forest till day-bre@
when he reached the place where he had left Mrgankavati. But she was not seen anywhere there. To get #
better view of the neighbourhood in the hon ° gnding
om be a to the top of a tree Bn aa tier placing
ord on the gro 4
Sabara came that ser a 6 Line le :
Midatta « hi up Sridatta’s swore
aw this, but he got down f nd
instead of attacking him, mere] Lae the tree @ e
Cae abou! ie ahem: erely asked him whether ™
€ whereabouts of Mroank >; To this
Sabara said that he thou ht th Pad cecchad i
cottage and asked Srid p that she had reached Be
es. ae eottame, Ele oe accompany his follower
promised to return his sword ee i alan oh ol
ison sen ehes the cottage ih them. Being atterl¥
exnhauste int " c
up he found that hislese were swumber. When he wo
was lying thus. a = ae oa together. While
hic ord ms pak Whe me Mocanika approach
oh Fe you come here to CO"
soon as he returns he wi een, emis businest
1e € will offer y
Bhadrakali, It is for that es ee ht
at purpose that he has brovg

SRIDATTA
you here and put inchains. But there is yet one way
of escape for you. This Sabara hasa very beautiful
daughter. She has fallen in love with you. If you marry
her everything will turn out well.”
For his own safety, Sridatta married Sabara’s daughter
according to the Gandharva method. Shortly after, she
became pregnant. Her maid Mocanika informed her
mother all about it. That kind and affectionate mother
came to Sridatta and said :—‘‘Sabara is a very cruel
man. If he comes to know of this, he will never forgive
you. Therefore you must leave the place at once, but
you should never forget my daughter.” With these
words she took leave of him. Sridatta disclosed the story
of that sword to her and started: on his journey again,
in search of Mrgankavati. From a hunter whom he
happened to meet on the way, he came to know that she
was living in a place called Nagasthala near Mathura,
under the protection of Vigvadatta a Brahmana.
Sridatta at once went to Vig vadatta’s house and made
enquiries about his wife. Vis vadatta informed him that
he had entrusted her with a Brahmana who.was the
minister and priest of King Sirasena. He suggested
that Sridatta should stay with him that day and they
could proceed to Sirasena’s place next morning.
Sridatta accordingly stayed there and started for
Mathura at day-break on the next day. On _ the way
he took bath in a tank just outside the city. While bathing he happened to get a silk cloth and a necklace of
beads from the bed of the tank. After his bath, he
entered the city with the silk and necklace. Mistaking
him fora thief, the police arrested him. Really the silk
and necklace had been hidden in the tank by thieves.
Sridatta was produced before the King with the stolen
articles. The king condemned him to death. Mrgankavati who was staying in the custody of the minister
happened to see Sridatta being taken to the place of
execution. She immediately ran up to the minister and
told him that Sridatta was her husband. When the
King came to know it, he ordered him to be brought
back to the palace. As.soon as Sridatta saw the minister,
he felt certain doubts about his identity. The minister
had a striking resemblance to his father’s brother
Vigatabhaya who had left home years. ago. His doubts
were confirmed when the minister revealed his identity
and the two embraced each other after their long
separation. Sridatta narrated the whole story of his
sufferings and misfortunes beginning from the murder
of Kalanemi up to that time. On hearing his tragic
story, the minister burst into tears and told him that he
had received a boon froma Yaksi by which he had
obtained 5000 horses and plenty of wealth. All this he
gave to Sridatta and his wife. |
The king of that country had a daughter. Sridatta’s
next plan was to marry her also. Vigatabhaya gave
him the necessary help. The minister took her with
Sridatta and his friends on the pretext of offering worship at the temple in Avanti. They had to encounter
a band of robbers on the Vindhya mountain. Sridatta
was overpowered and the robbers plundered all their
wealth. Vigatabhaya and others were captured.
Sridatta was taken to be sacrificed to Bhadrakali. When
he was about to be sacrificed, his wife, the daughter of
abara arrived there with her son. Itwas within the
territory of Sricanda. She-stopped the robbers from
performing the sacrifice and returned to her own house
SRT RAMAKRSNA PARAMAHAMSA
with Sridatta. The Candala band took Vigatabhaya and
others to Sridatta and they were released. After the
death of King Sabara, Sridatta became the King of
that wood. He got back his sword Mrgankaka. He
married the daughter of Surasena. Sridatta’s friends
also came there. All of them joined together and killed
Vikramagakti in a battle. After that Sridatta was crowned king of the whole country up to the ocean. (Kathasaritsigara, Kathamukhalambaka, ‘Taranga 2)
SRIDEVA. Daughter of King Devaka. This princess was
married by Vasudeva. They had six sons including
Nandaka. (Bhagavata, Navama Skandha; Visnu
Purana, 1. 18),
SRIDHARA. A king who lived in Tretayuga. (For more
information see under Varatanu ).
SRIKRSNA. See under Krsna. |
SRIKUNDA. A holy place. If one worships Brahma at
this holy place famous in the three worlds, one would .
get the benefit of the gift ofa thousand cows. (M.B.
Vana Parva, Chapter 82, Verse 85).
SRIKUNDALA. Son of the Vai ya Hemakundala. (See
Para 2 under Yamuna). ?
SRIKUNJA. A Sarasvati tirtha situated in Kuruksetra.
By bathing in this tirtha, one gets the same reward as
by performing an Agnistoma yajfia. (Mahabharata,
Vana Parva, Chapter 83, Verse 105).
6R IMADBHAGAVADGITA PARVA. A sub-division of
Bhisma Parva in Mahabharata. Chapters 13 to 42 of
Bhisma Parva, are included in it,
SRIMAN. Son of Nimi, who was the son of Dattatreya.
SRIMATA. An aspect of Devi who incarnated to kill the
Raksasa named Karnataka who used to abduct the
wives of Maharsis in the disguise ofa Brahmana. (Skanda
SRIMATI I. A Gandharva maid. In Kamba Ramayana,
VYuddhakanda there is a story associating this Gandharva
maid with the churning of the ocean of milk:-
A Gandharva maid named Srimati who had acquired
incomparable proficiency in music used to sing hymns in
praise of Laksmidevi. Devi appeared before her and
presented a garland of Kalpaka flowers to Srimati, As
she was returning with the garland, she met sage
Durvasas on the way. She offered the garland to him.
Durvasas who reached Devaloka with the garland gave
it to Indra. Indra used it for adorning the tusk of
Airavata. Airavata who was annoyed at it threw it away
in a fury. Durvdsas took it as a personal insult to him
and in his rage cursed all the gods to be subjected to
the infirmities of old age. It is to save them from the
effects of old age that the ocean of milk was churned to
obtain Amrta. (For more details see under Amrta).
SRIMATI II. A woman follower of Subrahmanya. (M.B.
Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 3).
SRIPARVATA. A sacred mountain. Those who go to
this mountain and offer worship to Sankara after bathing in the forest rivers get the same reward as from an
Aévamedhayaga. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 85,
Verse 18).
SRI RAMA. See under Rama. —
SRIRAMAKRSNA PARAMAHAMBA. .
A great thinker who shed new light on Indian spiritual
philosophy. He was born on February 18, 1836 in a
village called Kumarpukkir. His father was Khudiram
Cattopadhyaya and his mother was Candradevi,

SRITIRTHA 738
SRITIRTHA. A holy place in Kuruksetra. In Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 83, Verse 46 it is stated
that by bathing and worshipping gods and pitrs at this
holy place, one would be blessed with issues.
SRIVAHA. A naga who was born to Kaéyapaprajapati
by his wife Kadra. (Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter
SRIVATSA. A mole on Mahavisnu’s chest. (For more
_ details see under Bhrgu).
SRMARA. A young deer. Mrgamanda daughter of
Kagyapa gave birth to Rksas (Bears) Srmaras (young
deer) and Camaras (a kind of deer called Bos grunniens). (Valmiki Ramayana Aranya* Kanda, Sarga 14).
SRNGA. Siva’s special musical instrument. - (M.B. Vana.
Parva, Chapter 88, Verse 8). :
SRNGARAVALLI. Mother of Kambar the celebrated
Tamil poet,and author of Ramayana.
SRNGAVAN I. 7
1) General. A mountain. It is situated to the north of the
region called “‘Ilavrtta”. Devi Bhagavata, 8th Skandha
refers to three mountains—Nilagiri, Svetagiri, and Srngavan—which are the sources of many rivers and which
stand at intervals of 2,000 miles.
2) Other details
(i) Arjuna crossed this mountain and entered Kuruvarsa in the course of his triumphal campaign over the
northern land. , |
(ii) This mountain isrich in minerals, is of outstanding brilliance, and is the abode of Siddhas and Caranas.
(M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 6, Verse 5).
(iii) Safijaya ‘spoke at length about this mountain to
Dhrtarastra. (M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 8, Verse 8).
(iv) This mountain is glorious enough to be remembered
with reverence at dawn and dusk. (M.B. Anu§sasana
Parva, Chapter 165, Verse 32). i ,
SRNGAVAN II. An ancient sage. He was the son of
Galava. He married by force,‘a woman named Vrddhakanya. After a night’s married life, Vrddhakanya
departed. The sage then renounced everything and
followed her. \M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 82).
SRNGAVERA. A naga born in Kauravyakula. This naga
was burnt up in Janamejaya’s Sarpasatra, (M.B. Adi
Parva, Chapter 57, Verse 13).
SRNGAVERAPURA. A sacred place. Guha, ruler of this
place ferried Rama and Laksmana across the river -
Ganga. It becanie a holy spot by the touch of Sri
Rama’s feet. (See under Guha). |
SRNGAVISA. A sage. In Rgveda, Mandala 8, Anuvaka
17, Sukta 13, it is mentioned that Indra was born from
the stomach of this sage.
SRNGERI. A Math was founded here by Sankaracarya.
(See under Sankaracarya).
SRNGI. The young sage who cursed Pariksit. (See the
3rd para under Pariksit).
SRNJAYA I. |
1) Genealogy. See under Somadatta.
2) General information. A king of the Iksvaku dynasty.
His father was Sviti. This king Sviti was also called
Svitya King. On the death of his father Srfijaya became
king.
The hermits Narada and Parvata were friends of Srfijaya. Once both of them came and _ lived in the palace
of the King as his guests. Srfijaya had a beautiful
daughter named Sucismita. Both Narada and Par-
. vata loved her.» One day Narada directly asked SriiSs
SRSTI
jaya, for the hand ofhis daughter. Parvata got angry
at this and cursed Narada that he would not attain
heaven. Narada retorted with the same curse. Srfijaya
pacified both.
Sriijaya had no sons. He informed the hermits of this
sad state. Narada blessed the king and said that a son
named Suvarnasthivi would be born to him and that
with his birth everything in the palace would become
gold. Accordingly the son Suvarnasthivi was born to
Sriijaya and everything in the palace became golden.
When the son became four years old, by the sorcery of
Indra the child died. Narada brought him to life again.
(See under Suvarnasthivi) . |
The fact that gold was accumulating in the palace of
Srfijaya due to the boon given to Suvarnasthivi, reached
the ears of robbers. One night they carried the child
away, and killed him. . Then only did they come to
understand that there was no gold inside him. Srfjay?
cried aloud at the loss of his son. To pacify the King,
Narada and Parvata told him stories of sixteen kings.
(M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter.55).
cy qe details.
i) Sriijaya sits in the palace of Yama, praising him.
(M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 8, Verse 15) :
(ai) When Narada told the King the stories of sixteen?
Kings, his sorrow subsided. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 71, Stanza4). .
(111 ) By the power of Narada Srfijaya’s son was brought
to life again. (Drona Parva, Chapter 71, Verse Oye
(iv) Sri Krsna told Dharmaputra the story of Sriijay4,
ed 3) aah to pacify him. (M.B. Santi Parva, Ghap-
(v) Srfijaya had never eaten fl in his li
Anus asana Parva, Chapter tee vaen 63) ue -_
RNJAYA II. A royal hermit.
the father of the mother of Amb
and a friend of Paragurama. A
who had been forsaken
This royal. hermit was
a, the princess of. Kasi,
‘eg ie request of Amba
z y Salva, Sriijaya first approaSin to marry Arba ge ama and perguaed
mba. :
175. Stara, 15 tn 27) { -B. Udyoga Parva, Chapter
SRSTI (CREATION
is given below: ). The Indian theory of creation
1) Trigunas (The th *
universe is the set of cng iascai The base of the
: . three, attributes. They are
“at th so Wg in upesign) and: Tamas Gnertia)-
attributes. Things whic € seen, possess these three
"The indéshineubie iy could be Seen are perishable.
_ is an attribute. God has be. seen. Shape or form
no form. So god ; :
| has 1 thou
attributes. The God devoid of attribintes can be veg ited
ledge is the power of Sattva, activity
and reason the power of Tamas.”
Belts cl From he vine power of Tara
‘ 3 me into being, su
cm and smell. Sound is th ch as sound, touch, for™s
€ attribu fr ,
: ee of re ; form, the attribute of fire: taste, the
These are th ne sss smell, the attribute of earth.
senses h ernie ie senses or essentials. These five
is aving the divine powers j,;
rs, .
the five minute essentials, make ee i agree at
Tamas, up the attribute °
the power of Rajas

SRST
From the attribute of Sattva .- having the power of
knowledge, the ten essentials, such as air, the Sun,
Pasi (Varuna) two Asvini-gods, Candra (Moon),
Brahma, Rudra, Ksetrajfia and mind, came into being.
From these essentials the formation of five matters took
place. They are the five elements. When vigour
enters the quintupled elements, egoism is given a form.
This vigour with perceptible body is called Adi Narayana (Primordial Narayana). Anyhow, quintupled
elements will be bright with firm attributes. Ether has
the attribute of sound only. Air has the attributes of
sound and touch. Fire has the three attributes of sound,
touch and form. Water has the four attributes of sound,
touch, form and taste, and earth has the five attributes
of sound, touch, form, taste and smell. The variegated
expression of these five elements is called the universe.
It is stated in Devi Bhagavata, Skandha 3, that the
number of species of living beings found in the universe
is eightyfour lakhs. :
3) The embodied three (Trinity). It has been mentioned
in the last section how the three attributes came into
existence and how the five elements originated from the
three attributes and how vigour or energy acted upon
the five elements and Adi Narayana or Visnu came.into
being. In this section the birth of the three divine figures
is being dealt with. |
In the known beginning, on the surface of. the wide
waters, covering the universe made of the five elements,
Mahavisnu lay on a banyan tree, as a child. ““Who am
I? How was I made, and what for ? What have I to
do ?”, and so on were the thoughts of the child. Instantly a voice from the ether fell into his ears saying,
“TI am everything. There is nothing eternal except me.”
Mahavisnu lay contemplating on the voice he heard,
when Mahadevi appeared before Mahavisnu and said
thus :—“Lo !| Mahavisnu ! Whenever the universe
required creation, preservation and destruction, by the
potentiality of the Omnipotence or the Brahman with
no attributes, you too had taken origin. Understand
that the Omnipotence is beyond attributes. We all are
within the purview of attributes. Your attribute mainly
is Sattva. From your navel, will be born Brahma with
Rajas as his main attribute and from the forehead of
that Brahma, Siva with Tamas as his main attribute
will be born. By the power of penance, Brahma will
acquire the power of creation and with the help of the
attribute of rajas, he will create a world of the colour
of blood. You will be the protector and preserver of
that world, and at the end of the Kalpa (world-age)
iva will destroy that world. 1 am that power of purity,
which stands as help and assistance to-you in creation.”
Accordingly, Brahma was born from the navel of Visnu
‘and Siva was born from the forehead of Brahma.
(Devi Bhagavata, Skandha 1).
4) Creation. Sprouts, Animals and Humanity. After the
birth of the Trinity, while Brahma was contemplating
on creation, some creations of the attribute of Tamas
originated from him unknowingly. It was Avidya
(Ignorance), having inertia, desire, great desire, darkness and great darkness as its five branches. That god
continued his contemplation. Then five kinds of immovables without the power of knowledge or brightness in
and out alike, and with souls covered with darkness,
originated, As these immovables are said to be prominent, the creation of them is called prominent creation.
SRSTI
These are called Sprouts (Udbhids). Seeing ‘that. this -
creation was not sufficient, the god again sat in
contemplation. This “time animals having horizontal
back bonesand organs of sense were created. They
were called tiryaksrotas, as they walked horizontally.
They, such as cow etc. are having more of the attributes
of darkness and less of knowledge. They traverse
wrong paths due to lack of knowledge though they think
otherwise. -Egoism, pride .and twentyeight kinds of
incapacities are their qualities. Though they possess
knowledge inwardly they do not know each other.
Thinking that this creation also was not sufficient,
Brahma again engaged himself in contemplation, and
there came out another creation. It wascalled ‘Urddhvasrotas’ (flowing upwards). This third creation
having the attribute mainly of Sattva moved in a lofty
level. Those who were born in this creation, desired
for comfort and pleasure and were with the light of
knowledge inwardly and outwardly. When the third
creation called Devasrsti (creation of gods) originated
from Brahma he grew happy and contented.
Even after creating thus much, Brahma did not feel
satisfaction. So he madethe creation of ‘Arvaksrotas’
(moving downwards) . The creatures of this group were
having the attributes of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas in an
advanced degree. So they are miserable and full of
activity. They are human beings.
Thus having completed the creation of Udbhids
(Sprouts) , Tiryaks (animals) and Arvaks (human beings)
Brahma passed on to the creation of heavenly beings.
(Visnu Purana, Amésa 1; Chapter DS). .
5) Creation. Night, Day, Evening, Morning. After this
Brahma again sat in contemplation for water-creation
which is the creation of Devas, Asuras, Pitrs and
Manusyas (Gods, Demons, the Manes and Man). As
he was sitting in contemplation, the attribute of
Tamas (inertia) advanced in him and the asuras
(demons) were born from his loins. Then Brahma
discarded the figure of Tamas in him. That discarded
figure of darkness became the night. Next, from. the
face of Brahma, the Devas (gods) were born. They
were having the attribute of Sattva (purity). Brahma
discarded that figure of purity also. That figure
became the bright day. So the asuras are powerful in
the night and the Devas are powertul in the day. After
this, the manes were born from Brahma. ‘They were
also discarded. They became the evening between the
day and night. Then Brahma assumed the figure
having the attribute of Rajas. From this, man, who
was having more of the attribute ofrajas was born.
Brahma discarded that figure also. It became a very
shining thing which is called the Dawn. So men
are powerful in the dawn and the manes are powerful
in the evening. The four creations of Day, Night,
Evening and the Dawn are considered to be the bodies
of Brahma. (Visnu Purana, Arméa 1, Chapter 5).
6) Creation. Raksasas (Giants), Yaksas (Demi-gods),
Serpents, Devils, Gandharvas Brahma again assumed
another figure having the attribute of Rajas. Due to
this Brahma felt hungry. Along with hunger desire
also grew in him. Then the Prajapati (Lord of
Emanation) sat in the darkness and created some
creatures which were very hungry. Uncouth with
plenty of hair on the face, they ran towards Brahma.
Of them those who said, ‘don’t do so, save him’

RSTI 740
became Raksasas (giants). Those who said “We will
eat him”, became Yaksas. (demi-gods). Because of
Yaksana (Bhaksana-Food), they got the name Yaksa.
Because of the dislike at seeing these creatures the
hair had fallen from the head of Brahma. They crept
back again intohis head. Because they did ‘sarpana’
(creeping up) they were called sarpas (serpents) and
as they were ‘Hina’ (fallen) they were called Ahis
(serpents). After this the Lord of creation became
very angry and created some creatures. Because of
their colour which was a mingling ofred and black,
they were horrible and they became pigitaganas (those
who eat flesh). Then Brahma began to sing and from
his body the Gandharvas were born. Because they did
‘dhayana’ (Appreciate) of ‘go’ (word) when they were
born, they were called Gandharvas. ,
7) Creation. Birds, animals. After creating all these creatures, Brahma created birds, from his ‘vayas’ (strength),
as free agents, according to their actions in the previous
lives. ‘Then Brahma created sheep from his breast and
goats from his face. From his stomach and flanks he
created cows, and from his legs he created other creatures such as the horse, elephant, donkey, wild bull, deer,
camel, mule, antelope etc. He created plants bearing
fruits and bulbs from his hairs. Though Brahma had
created vegetables and animals at the beginning of the
Kalpa (world-age), they came to be properly used in
sacrifices only from Tretayuga (one of the four ages)
The animals such as the cow, sheep, goat, horse, mule
and donkey are called domestic animals and flesh-eaters
such as the leopard, animals with forked hoof such as
the wild bull, elephant, monkey, birds, and other
animals and reptiles, are included in the word ‘wild
animals’.
8) Creation-The Vedas etc. After having completed creation of the things rhentioned above, the Prajapati created
from his face looking to the east, the Vedic metre
Giyatri, Rgveda, Trivrtstoma, the sama song called
Rathantara and the sacrifice called Agnistoma; from .
his face looking to the south, Yajurveda, the Vedic metre
Traistubha, Paficadaga stoma. Brhatsama and the sacrifice Uktha; from his face looking to the west, Samaveda,
the Vedic metre Jagati, Saptadas astoma, Vairiipasima
and the sacrifice Atiratra. Thus all the creatures lofty
and lower originated from the body of Brahma. After
having created Devas, Asuras, the manes and men
Brahma again at the beginning of the world age, created
Yaksas, Devils, Gandharvas, celestial maids, Naras
Kinnaras, Raksas, cows, birds, animals, serpents etc.
such as have long life and short life, movable and immovable, that we see in the world. Creatures which are
created again and again do perform functions which
creatures of their kind had been doing previously,
Habits of killing or not killing, kindness or cruelty,
righteousness or evil, truth or falsehood are adopted by
them as becoming to their kind in previous lives, It was
Brahma who had created the uses and differences seen
in the sense organs, elements and bodies. Brahma took
from the Vedic voice the shape, form, name, activities
etc. of various creatures such as the Devas etc. and
allotted them to each particular kind. So also he allotted
names, work etc. to hermits as seen in the Vedas,
9) Creation of the four castes. See under Caturvarnya.
10) Creation of Prajapatis. When Brahma saw that the
subjects he had created, did not flourish, he created first
SRSTI
the Sanaka brothers and the mental sons of Bhrgu,
Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Angiras, Marici, Daksa, Atri
and Vasistha, and gave these nine the name Prajapatis
(Lords of Emanation). Then he created nine women
named Khyati, Bhiti, Sambhiti, Ksama, Priti, Sannati,
Urja, Anastiya. and Prasiiti and gave in marriage
Khyati to Bhrgu, Bhitito Pulastya, Sambhiti to Pulaha,
Ksama to Kratu, Priti to Angiras, Sannati to Marici,
Urja to Daksa, Anasiiya to Atri and Prasiti to Vasistha.
The great hermits such as Sanandana and the others
created before the Prajapatis, were not desirous of propagation as they were wise sages who had- renounced
allattachments and who had been indifferent. When
Brahma saw that they were not mindful about producing subjects he grew angry. (It was from the middle of
the eye brows which were curved by his fury, that Siva,
one of the three divine figures was born). After this,
Brahma appointed Svayambhuva, who originated from
himself, and was of the same shape, asthe first Manu
for the protection of the subjects. This divine Manu
Svayambhuva took his sister Sataripa as wife. Two
sons named Priyavrata and Uttanapada and two
daughters named Prasiti and Akiti were born'to them.
Of the two daughters Prasitti was given to Prajapatl
Daksa and Akiti to Prajapati Ruci. A son name
Yajfia and a daughter named Daksina were born as
twins to Prajapati Ruci. Twelve sons were born to
Yajiia by Daksina. They were devas named the Yamas
of the Manvantara of Svayambhuva. Daksa begot
twentyfour daughters of Prasiti. They were Sraddha,
Laksmi, Dhrti, Tusti, Medha, Pusti, Kriya, Buddhi,
Lajja, Vapus, Santi, Siddhi, Kirti, Khyati, Sati, Sambhiti, Smrti, Priti, Ksama, Santati, Anasiya, Urja,
Svaha and Svadha. Of these the first thirteen
were given to Dharmadeva as wives. Of the remaining
daughters, Khyati became the wife of Bhrgu, Sati, the
wife of Siva, Sambhiti of Marici, Smrti, of Angiras,
Priti of Pulastya, Ksama of Pulaha, Santati of Kratu,
Anasiya of Atri, Orja of Vasistha, Svaha of Agni, and
Svadha of the manes. (Visnu Purana, Améa 1; Chapter
11) The children of the Prajapatis. To Prajapati Bhrgu,
Laksmi who became the wife of Visnu and two sons
named Dhata and Vidhata were born by KhyAti. These
two married Ayati and Niyati the two daughters of
Meru. To the two couples two sons named Prana. and
Mrkandu were born. From Mrkandu, Markandeya was
born, and from Markandeya, Vedagiras was born. T0
Prana a son named Dyutiman and to him'a son named
Rajavan was born. From this Rajavan the Bhrgu
dynasty grew up. Oo
Sambhiti the wife of Marici gave birth to a son named
Paurnamasa. To Angiras four daughters name
Sinivali, Kuhi, Raka and Anumati were born by Smrti.
Three sinless sons named Candra Durvasas and
Dattatreya were born to Atri by Anasiiya Of them
Dattatreya was a hermit. A son named Dattoli was
born to Pulastya by Pratiti(Priti). ‘That Dattoli was the
Agastya of Svayambhuva Manvantara. K sama the wife
of Pulaha gave birth to three sons named Kardama,
Urvariyan and Sahisnu. Santati the wife of Kratu gave
irth to sixty thousand hermits called Balakhilyas.
Seven sons named Rajas, Gotra, Urdhvabahu Savana,
ei sree Sutapas and Sukra were born to Vasistha by
is wife Orja. These sons were the seven hermits of

SRUTA I
the third Manvantara. Three bright sons Pavaka
Pavamana and Suci were born te god Agni (fire) by his
wife Svaha. Fortyfive sons were born to them. (Visnu
Purana, Amga 1, Chapter 10).
12) Creation—Living things. Creations of Sprouts, animals, Men, Devas, Danavas and so on have been dealt
with. But all these creations were pertaining to the
world of gods only. Sprouts and animals were born in
the earth only from Prajapati Kagyapa, the son of
Marici,
Prajapati_ Kas yapa married Aditi, Diti, Danu, Kalika,
Tamra, Krodhavaga, Manu and Anala, the eight
daughters of Daksa. From Aditi, the Devas, Adityas,
Vasus and the Rudras were born. Daityas were born
from Diti and Danavas from Danu. The asuras Naraka
and Kala were born to Kalika. Five daughters named
Kraufici, Bhasi, Syeni, Dhrtarastri and Suki were born
to Tamra. Owls were born from Kraufici. Bhasi gave
birth to the Bhasas. Hawks and Vultures were born from
yeni; Swans, geese and ruddy geese were born from
Dhrtarastri. Nata was born from Suki and Vinata
was born from Nata Ten daughters named Mrgi,
Mrgamanda, Hari, Bhadramata, Matangi, Sardili
veta, Surabhi, Surasa and Kadri, were born to
Krodhavaga. Mrgi gave birth to animals. From
Mrgamanda, bears; young deer and Bos grunniens were
born. Lions and monkeys were the sons of Hari. A
daughter named Iravati was born to Bhadramata.
Airavata was theson of Iravati. Elephants were born from
Matangi. Tigers were born from Sardili. The eight-elephants supporting the globe were born from Sveta. Two
daughters named Rohini and Gandharvi were born to
Surabhi. Cattle were born from Rohini, and_ horses
were born from Gandharvi. Surasa gave birth to
Nagas (serpents) and Kadri gave birth to Uragas
(reptiles), Men were born from Manu. The trees were
orn from Anala. Garuda and Aruna were born from
Vinata. Sampati and Jatayu were the sons of Aruna.
(Valmiki Ramayana, Aranya Kanda, Sarga 14).
(Facts about creation seen in various Puranas do not
agree with each other. This essay is based on facts
gathered from various Puranas. So disagreements may
occur in it.)
oot I. Son of Bhimasena. (Agni Purana, Chapter
SRUTA II. A King of the Solar dynasty. Bhagavata,
9th Skandha refers to him as the son ef Subhasana and
father of Jaya.
SRUTA IIT. A King belonging to Bharata’s dynasty. He
was the son of Dharmanetra and father of. Drdhasena.
¢ (Bhagavata, 9th Skandha).
, ota IV. A son born to Sri Krsna_ by. Kealindi.
gn hagavata, 10th Skandha). _
RUTADHVAJA. A brother of King Virata. He was a
supporter of the Pandavas. Virata’s brothers. w re—
ae prutanika,, Virabhadra, Sudarsana, me Saal
iValja, alanika, ayanika, :Jayapriya, ijaya,
pobdhalaksa, Jayasva, Jaen , Pondrndaye and
| ital (M.B. Drona Parva, Q apter 158, Verse
SRUTADEVA. A devotee of Sri Krsna. In Bhagavata,
ihe andha it is stated that once he had described
Story of Sri Krgna.
SRUTARVA
SRUTADEVI. A sister of Vasudeva, father of Sri Krsna.
Vasudeva had five sisters who were:—Manini, Prtha,
Srutadevi, Srutakirti and Srutasravas. (Bhagavata,
9th Skandha).
SRUTAHVA. A King who was on the side of the
Pandavas. He was killed by A‘vatthama at the Bharata
battle. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 136, Verse 82).
SRUTAKARMA I. Son of Sahadeva, one of the
Pandavas.
Other details:
(1) Srutakarma fought a duel with Sudarsana on the
first day of Bharata battle. (M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 66).
(ii) Durmukha defeated Srutakarma. (M.B. Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 79, Verse 35).
(iii) He fought a duel with Citrasena’s son. (M.B.
Drona Parva, Chapter 25, Verse 27).
(iv) Srutakarma killed Sala. (M.B. Drona Parva,
Chapter 103, Verse 10).
(v) He killed Citrasena, King of Abhisara. (M. B.
Karna Parva, Chapter 14, Verse !).
(vi) He fought against Asvatthama. (M.B
Parva, Chapter 55, Verse 13).
(vii) Srutakarma killed Devavrddhakumara. (™ B
Karna Parva, Chapter 88, Verse 18).
(viii) ASvatthama killed Srutakarma in Bharata battle.
(M.B. Sauptika Parva, Chapter 8, Verse 50). |
SRUTAKARMA II. (SRUTAKIRTI). A son of Arjuna,
(See under Srutakirti II). |
SRUTAKIRTII. Wife of Satrughna. Rama married
Sita; Bharata married Mandavi: Laksmana married
Urmila, and Satrughna married Srutakirti. Of these
Sita was the daughter of Janaka and the other three
were the daughters of Janaka’s younger brother, »
Kugadhvaja. (Kamba Ramayana, Balakanda ).
SRUTAKIRTI II. Ason of Arjuna. Paficali had five
sons by the five Pandavas. Of these Prativindhya was
the son of Yudhisthira; Sruta was the son of Bhimasena;
Srutakirti was the son of Arjuna; Srutakarma was the
son of Sahadeva and Satanika was the son of Nakula.
(Agni Purana, Chapter 278). Mahabharata, Adi Parva,
Chapter 67, Verse 127 mentions that this Srutakirti was
born from a portion of Visvadeva. In the Bharata
battle he had fought against Jayatsena and the son of
Dué$asana. In the end he died by the arrow of Asvatthama. (M.B. Sauptika Parva, Chapter 8, Verse 61).
SRUTAKIRTI III. See under Srutadevi.
SRUTANABHA. A king of solar dynasty. He was the
son of Bhagiratha and father of Sindhudvipa. (Bhagavata, 9th Skandha). |
SRUTANIKA. A brother of King Virata. He wasa |
supporter of the Pandavas. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter
SRUTANJAYA. Brother of Sugarma, the king of Trigarta.
He was slain by Arjuna in the course of Bharata Yuddha.
(M.B. Karna Parva, Chapter 27, Verse 12). |
SRUTANTA (CITRANGA). A son of Dhrtarastra. He
was slain at Kuruksetra in his fight with Bhimasena.
(M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 26).
SRUTARVA (SRUTARVA) I. A king who lived at the
time of Agastya. Once the sage Agastya approached him
for some wealth. In Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter
98 there is a story of how the king solved the problem
Karna

SRUTARVA (SRUTARVA)
by presenting the accounts of his income and expenditure to Agastya and convincing him that he was unable
to oblige the sage: _
SRUTARVA (SRUTARVA) II. One of the hundred
sons of Dhrtarastra. In the course of the Bharata battle
he attacked Bhimasena with twelve of his brothers and
in the battle which followed Srutarva was killed, by
Bhimasena. Among the Kauravas, Srutarva was one
of the mighty archers. The terrible hattle fought
against Bhimasena under his leadership alarmed the
other warriors. (M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 26).
SRUTARYA. A sage. In Rgveda, Mandala 1, Anuvaka
16, Sukta 132, there is a passage which says that the
Agvinidevas once turned a river into honey and pleased
sage Vasistha and protected two sages Srutarya and
Narya. |
SRUTASENA I. A brother of King Janamejaya. In
Mahabharata, there is a reference to an incident in
which Srutasena beat a dog which entered the place
where Janamejaya was performing his Yaga. (For further
details see under Srutagravas III).
SRUTASENA II. Younger brother of the serpent Taksaka.
There is a reference to this Naga in Mahabharata, Adi
Parva, Chapter 3, Verse 141.
SRUTASENA III. Son of Sahadeva. He is also known
as Srutakarma. (See under Srutakarma).
SRUTASENA IV. An asura. Garuda killed this asura.
(See under Srutaégri).
SRUTASENA V. A warrior on the Kaurava side. He was
killed by Arjuna. (M.B. Karna Parva, Chapter 27,
Verse 10).
SRUTASRAVAS I. A _ sister of Sri Krsna’s father
Vasudeva. (See under Srutadevi). :
SRUTASRAVAS II. A king of Magadha.
9th Skandha.)
SRUTASRAVAS III. A Maharsi. He had a son named
Somasravas. There is the following story in Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 3, about the way in which
these two sages came to be associated with King
Janamejaya.
| Janamejaya, son of Pariksit, along with his brothers performed an elaborate Yaga at Kuruksetra. His three
brothers were Srutasena, Ugrasena and Bhimasena.
While they were performing the Yaga, a dog which was
the son of Sarama came there. Janamejaya’s brothers
attacked the dog without any provocation. Sarama became angry and she cursed Janamejaya. The curse
frightened him. After the Yaga he reached Hastinapura
and went out in search of a priest who would be able
to liberate him from the curse.
Once, as he was returning from a hunt, he happened to
come across an a§rama within his country. A sage
named Srutagravas lived there. He had a son named
Somagravas. Janamejaya invited Somafravas to be his
priest. At that time Srutasravas said to him:-““This my
son was born to .a serpent-woman and he is endowed
with the power of my austerity. He is capable of releasing you from all sins except ““Mahadevakrtya’’. Ifa
Brahmana prays to him for anything, the prayer would
be fulfilled. If you can set it right, you may take him
with you.”’
Janamejaya agreed and took Somasravas with him to
the palace. He made him priest and completed the
Yaga. Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 58 states that
Srutagravas was also amember of Janamejaya’s Yaga.
( Bhagavata,
SRUTAYUS II
He was among the sages who attained Siddhi (superhuman powers) by performing tapas. (M.B. Santi Parva,
Chapter 292, Verse 16).
SRUTASRAVAS IV. A Rajarsi. He remains in Yama’s
assembly, offering worship to Yama. (Mahabharata,
Sabha Parva, Chapter 8, Verse 9). :
SRUTASRAVAS V. Wife of Damaghosa King of Cedl.
She was the sister of Sri Krsna’s father and mother of
Sisupala. She requested Sri Krsna (who came to her
place after Sigupala’s birth) not to kill Sigupala. Sri
Krsna agreed to forgive Sijupala’s wrongs a hundred
times. (For further details, see under Sis upala) .
SRUTASRI. An asura. Garuda killed this Asura. Once
Garuda happened to go to Indraloka and he began to
brag about his own greatness. He claimed that he had
killed Srutasri, Srutasena, Vipasvan, Rocanamukha,
Kalaka, Ahar, Prastuta and other Asuras. (M.B. Udyoga
Parva, Chapter 105, Verse 12).
SRUTAVATI. Daughter of Bharadvaja Muni. Once
Bharadvaja happened to see the Apsara woman Ghrtac!
and he had an involuntary emission of semen, Srutavatl
was born from that semen. She observed an austere
tapas with the object of getting Indra as her husband.
(For more information see Para 30 under Indra).
SRUTAYAJNA. A king who belonged to Bharata Vams4.
Bhagavata, 9th Skandha states that he was the son ©
Karmajit and grandson of Vivanava.
SRUTAYUDHA. A king of the Kalinga land. He was
the son of Varuna by Parnasa. (M.B. Sabha Parva,
ee 4, Verse 23; Bhisma Parva, Chapter 16, Verse
In Bharata battle he took his stand on the Kaurava side
and at first clashed with Bhimasena. Even at the beg!”
ning of the battle, Bhima killed Satya and Satyadeva,
twoof the assistants of Srutayudha. (M.B. Bhism4
Parva, Chapter 50, Verse 69). In the end, he used b!§
cudgel—which was given tohim by Varuna—against 9
Krsna who did not take part in the battle at all, Srut@”
yudha died by his own Cudgel. (M.B. Drona Parv4
"ee 67, Verses 43-48). (See also under Srutayus
SRUTAYUS I. A son of Puriravas. (See under puri
ravas) .
SRUTAYUS II. (SRUTAYUDHA.) A Kalinga king: _
1) Birth, Srutéyus was son of Varuna by Parnasé
(For more details see under Parnaga),
2) Other details.
(1) He was a member of Yudhisthira? M.B:
Sabha Parva, Chapter 4, Verse 26). B agemiaty> §
(ii) Srutayus participated in Yudhisthira’s Rajasly?
yajna and presented precious stones to him.
mae Patha, Sabha Parva, Chapter 51)
(ii) He had attended Draupadi? S M.B.
a Parva, Chapter 185, Verse 13) i eee ;
iv) In Bharata Yuddha he joi P
, he joined th cam
and assumed command of an Abgauhint ts, Siotion O the
py (M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 76, Verse 16)-
V fierce fight took place b 5 D
} t ae
Bhimasena in the field of Kanthgete Cd ee at sme
Parva, Chapter 54, Verse 67). _
(vi) In the above battle, Satya and Satyadeva who were
the supporters of Sruta ae
- yus, were s] 7maseD
(M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 54, Verse 76)

SRUTAYUS III
(vii) Another battle was fought between Srutayus and
Arjuna. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 92, Verse 36).
(viii) Srutayus was killed by his own cudgel. (Mahabharata, Drona Parva, Chapter 92, Verse 54). (See
also under Srutayudha).
SRUTAYUS III. A Ksatriyaking. He was born from a
portion of the Daitya, Krodhavaga. We get the following details about him from Mahabharata:
(i) Srutyayus was the re-birth: of Krodhavaga, the
Daitya. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 67, Verse 64).
(ii) Srutayus, who was a Maharatha (a great warrior)
was present at the Svayarhvara of Draupadi. (M.B.
Adi Parva, Chapter 185, Verse 21).
(iii) This Srutayus was a member of Yudhisthira’s
assembly. (M.B..Sabha Parva, Chapter 4, Verse 28).
(iv) On the first day of Bharata battle, there was a
clash between Srutayus and Iravan. (M.B. Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 69).
(v) He was the King of Ambastha country. In the
Bharata battle he enccuntered Arjuna. (M.B. Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 59, Verse 75).
(vi) It was this Srutayus who stood in the middle
portion of the Kraufica Vyaha formed by Bhisma in
the above battle. (M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 75,
Verse 22),
(vii) Yudhisthira defeated Srutayus.
Parva, Chapter 84, Verse 1).
(viii) At Kuruksetra, Arjuna killed Srutayus in the
battle. Arjuna had to fight a fierce battle in order to
kill Srutayus. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 98) .
SRUTAYUS IV. A warrior who fought on the Kaurava
side. He was the brother of the hero Ayutayus. In
Bharata battle, both these brothers joined the Kauravas.
Both were assigned the task of defending the southern
wing of the Kaurava army. After a life-and-death
struggle, Arjuna killed both of them. (M.B. Drona
Parva, Chapter 95, Verse 7). oe ;
SRUTI. An ancient King in India. (Mahabharata, Adi
Parva, Chapter 1, Verse 238).
STAMBAMITRA. A bird. This bird was born to the
hermit Mandapala by his bird-wife Jarita. (For further
details see under Mandapala). :
STAMBHA. One of the Saptarsis (seven hermits) of
the Manu-age (Manvantara) of Svarocisa. The seven
rsis of Svarocisa Manvantara are Urja, Stambha,
Prana, Vata, ‘Vrsabha, Niraya and Parivan. (For
further details see under Manvantara).
STANAKUNDA. A holy place. Those who bathe in
this tirtha, which is one of the holy places of ancient
Bharata, would obtain the fruits of performing the
sacrifice Vajapeya. (Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 34, Verse 152).
STANAPOSIKA, An ancient country of South India.
(M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 68).
STANAVALA, An ancient place in South India.
(Mahabharata Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 63).
STEYA. Theft. In the law ofchastisement of ancient
Bharata, appropriation of the property of others unjustly, was counted as theft (steya). The punishment
awarded for theft in ancient Bharata, is mentioned in
Agni Purana, Chapter 173, as follows. ‘All thefts are
Violation of justice. The thief of gold, will have to be
caten to death with a pestle. Then only his sin will
€ remitted. Or, he must live for twelve years, lying
On the earth, wearing matted hair and eating only
(M.B. Bhisma
743 STHULASIRAS I
leaves, roots and fruits, once a day. The thief of pearl,
coral, copper, silver, iron, bronze and stone, will have
to eat millet rice (Kananna) for twelve days. Those
who steal food products, vehicle, bed, chair, flowers,
fruits, roots etc. will be made to eat Paficagavya
(Milk, curd, butter, urine and dung of cow). He who
steals grass, firewood, tree, dried rice, saccharum,
cloth, hide, meat etc. will have to be made to fast for
three days.
STHANDILEYU. A son born to Raudragva, the third
son of King Puru. The celestial maid Misrakesi was the
mother of Sthandileyu. This Sthandileyu was a great
archer. (Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 94, Verse
STHIANU I.’ Siva, the son of Brahma. The eleven
Rudras were born from Sthanu. (Mahabharata, Adi
Parva, Chapter 66).
STHANU II. One of the eleven Rudras. (M.B. Adi
Parva, Chapter 66, Verse 6).
STHANU III. A hermit. This hermit shines in the
palace of Indra. (Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter
y, Verse 17 ja
STHANUSTHANA. A holy place. This place is situated
on the eastern bank of the river Sarasvati. Vasistha
had once built his hermitage here. This place became
a holy tirthasince god Sthanu had performed penance
here. It is said that the devas anointed Subrahmanya
as the commander of the army, at this place. (M.B.
Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 48). -
STHANUTIRTHA (STHANUVATA). An _ ancient
holy place, situated in Kuruksetra. It is mentioned in
‘Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 83, Verse 178, that
these who bathe in this holy tirtha and remain there
for a night will attain the world of Rudras.
STHIRA. One of the two followers given to Subrahmanya by Meru. The followers given to Subrahmanya
were Sthira and Atisthira. (M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter
45, Verse 48).
STHULAKESA. An ancient hermit. He was the fosterfather of Pramadvara the wife of Ruru. (See under
Pramadvara).
STHULAKSA I. A giant. He was one of those giants who
‘fought with Sri Rama while Rama and Laksmana were
living in the forest. in Paficavati. It is mentioned in
Valmiki Ramayana, Aranya Kanda, Sarga 26, that
when Khara, Diasana and Trigiras were killed, Mahakapala, Sthulaksa and Pramathi confronted Sri Rama
and were killed.
STHULAKSA II. A Saintly hermit. He was one of
those hermits who had visited Bhisma in his bed of
arrows. (M.B. Anu‘ asana Parva, Chapter 26, Verse 7).
STHULASIRAS I.
1) General information. A hermit. It is observed that
he was alive in the ages of both Ramayana and Mahabharata.
2) Other details.
(i) He shone inthe court of Yudhisthira.
Sabha Parva, Chapter 4, Verse 11).
(ii) Itis mentioned in Mahabharata, Vana Parva,
Chapter 135, Verse 8, that Yudhisthira once visited his
beautiful hermitage.
(111) In olden days this hermit had performed penance
on the North East side of Meru. (M.B. Santi Parva,
Chapter 243, Verse 59).
(M.B.

STHULASIRAS II
(iv) It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Anufasana
Parva, Chapter 26, Verse 5, that this hermit Sthilaéiras was one of the hermits who had visited Bhisma on
his bed of arrows.
(v) Kabandha ‘became a Raksasa (giant) because of
the curse of Sthilagiras. (For detailed story see under
Kabandha).
STHULASIRAS II. A giant. Once a servant of Vaigravana made friends with this giant and VaiSravana
cursed his servant. (See under Gunadhya)}.
STHULAVALUKA. A river famous in the Puranas.
(Mahabharata, Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 15).
STHUNA. One of Vigvamitra’s sons who were expounders of the Vedas. (Mahabharata, Anugadsana Parva,
Chapter 4, Verse 51).
STHUNAKARNA. A hermit in the assembly of Yudhisthira. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 26, Verse 23).
STHUNAKARNA. A Yaksa. It was this Yaksa, who
gave Sikhandi virility. (For detailed story see under
Amba).
STRI. ;
1) Origin. In both Hindu and Christian scriptures,
the story about the origin of woman appears to be
similar. It is stated in Manusmrti, Chapter 1, Verse
32, that Brahma divided his body into two and made
one part male and the other partfemale and the male
embraced the female, from which union was born the
Viratpurusa.
Dvidha krtvatmano dehamardhena purusosbhavat /
Ardhena nari tasyarn sa
Virajamasrjat prabhuh //
In the book of Genesis in the Bible, the origin of the
first woman is given. It is somewhat similar to theone
given above. God created Adam as the first man. God
caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam. Then he took
a.rib from Adam, made a woman with it, and gave
that woman, who was called Eve, to Adam as wife.
2) Fascination. A story as given below occurs in Devi
Purana, which states how woman acquired fascination.
Once Indra prohibited Agvinidevas from drinking the
liquor called Soma. They complained to the hermit
CGyavana, who agreed to recover for them the lost
right, for which purpose he began a sacrifice. Indra
caused obstruction to the sacrifice. Instantly by. the
power of Cyavana, an asura named Mada rose up from
the sacrificial fire. Finally Indra begged the hermit for
pardon. Cyavana divided the asura into four parts
and placed one portion in gambling, one portion in
hunting, the third portion in liquor andthe fourth
part in woman. Thenceforward woman began. to have
fascination.
3) Manu, about women. The following is the place in
society of womenin ancient days, according to Manu.
Husband or relatives should give women no freedom.
Even if they became immoral, they should be kept
under the control of men. As woman has to be under
the protection of father in childhood, under the protection of husband in youth and under the protection of
son in old age, she does not deserve freedom at*any time.
‘‘Pita raksati kaumare
Bharta raksati yauvane /
Raksanti sthavire putrah
Na stri svatantryamarhati.”’
SUBAHU IX
The father who does not give his daughter to a suitable
husband before she attains puberty, the husband who
does not engage in coition with his wife after puberty,
and the son who does not support his mother after the
death of her husband, are men of mean character.
(Manusmrti, Chapter 9).
STRIPARVA. An important section of Mahabharata.
(See under Bharata).
STRIRAJYA. A kingdom in ancient India. It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 51,
Verse 25 that the King of this country had participated in the RaAjasiya (sacrifice of royal consecration) of
Yudhisthira. ;
STRIVILAPA PARVA. Asub-section of Stri Parva 1m
_ Mahabharata comprising Chapters 16 to 25.
STUBHA. Son of Agni (fire) named Bhanu. (M.B.
Vana Parva, Chapter 221, Verse 14).
SUBAHU 1. A naga born to Kasyapaprajapati by bis
wife Kadri. (Adi Parva, Chapter 85, Verse 14).
SUBAHU II. An apsara, daughter of Kag yapaprajapaul
of his wife Pradha. (Adi Parva, Chapter 65, Verse 50).
This apsara had participated in the birthday celei of Arjuna, (Adi Parva, Chapter 122, Verse
SUBAHU III. A Ksatriya King who was in fact Hara
the asura reborn as such. The Pandavas, thought of
despatching a letter inviting this King to the gt cat
war. (Udyoga Parva, Chapter 4, Verse 14).
SUBAHU IV. A Ksatriya King who was Krodhvaga,
the asura, reborn. (Adi Parva, Chapter 67, Verse 60)-
SUBAHU V. One of the hundred sons of Dhrtarastr4:
He was killed by Bhima in the great war. (Bhism@
Parva, Chapter 96, Verse 26). :
SUBAHU VI.
1) General. A King of Kagi. Sub&hu had a very
beautiful daughter called Sagikala, who was marrle
by Sudargana, son of Dhruvasandhi. (For details s¢
under Sagikala) . |
2) Other information. :
(i) Though he had never been defeated till then ™
battle, Bhimasena, in the course of his triumphal or
of the gant defeated him. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 2%
erse 6).
(ii) He was present at the wedding of Draupadi in an
company of his son Sukumara. In this context a )
referred to as Sucitra as well. ( Adi Parva, Chapter 18 .
Verse 10). eB
SUBAHU VII. A Raksasa. One of the two sons %
Tataka, the other being Marica. A Gandharva na™°
Sunda was their father. Subahu and: Marica possessed?
like Tataka, great power and adeptness in mag
Agastya once cursed Tafaka and-her two sons who W&
to fight him for his having cursed Sunda to ashes wher
he attacked his arama. Subahu was killed in a pattle
with Sri Rama during his stay in exile in the fore
(Sabha Parva, Chapter 38). -
SUBAHU VIII. A King of Cedi, son of Virabahu 4%
Fe ther of Sunanda. (Vana Parva, Chapter 65, V& -
SUBAHUIX. A ‘King of Kulindas whose kingdom inet
in the suburbs of the Himalayas, (Vana Parva, Chapt®
140, Verse 40). The kingdom was rich in many CU”
on ones ane ae and horses. Kiratas, Tate,
nas an ulindas lived there. Ki ahu rece!’
the Pandavas with great respect ee. we g be
when they visitet

Si
SUBAHU X
kingdom during the period of their forest-life. They
actually entered the forest after spending one day there.
Subahu fought on the Pandava side in the great war.
(Vana Parva, Chapter 140, Verse 24).
SUBAHU X. Awarrior who fought against the Pandavas
in the great war. Both his hands were cut off in_his
fizht with Yuyutsu. (Drona Parva, Chapter 25, Verse
SUBAHU XI. A warrior of Subrahmanya. (Salya Parva,
Chapter 45, Verse 73).
SUBAHU XII. There is a reference in Verse 66, Ghapter 115 of Anugasana Parva, Mahabharata, about a
Subahu, who never consumed flesh in life.
SUBAHU XIII. Father of Sagara of Solar dynasty. (For
details see under Sagara).
SUBAHU XIV. A Cola King. A great devotee of
Visnu, the King performed many yajnas. Though he
lived according to the spiritual advice of his preceptor Jaimini he was denied the sight of Visnu. Ultimately Subahu and his queen attained heaven as they
listened to Vijvala, their second son, reciting hymns
addressed to Vasudeva, (Padma Purana, Bhumi
Khanda, Chapter 94).
Though Subahu and his queen worshipped Visnu for a
long time in the Ananda forest, the lord did not appear
to them. Ultimately they forsook their bodies in the
forest and after a very long walk came to the abode of
munis. The king queried them as to why he failed to see
Visnu though he performed penance fora very long time.
The King and queen were done up due to hunger and
thirst and the munis asked them to return to Anandaérama and eat the corpses left there. While they
were accordingly eating the corpses, Vijvala_questioned Kufijala a bird which lived nearby, why his
parents were eating dead bodies. The bird answered
that when the King and queen had recited the praises
of Vasudeva they would see Visnu. Tt also taught Vijvala songs in praise of Visnu. After having studied
the songs, Vijvala went and sat on a tree at ananda: -
rama and sang the songs. Subahu and his queen repeated them and immediately Visnu appeared before them
and conducted them to heagen.
SUBALA I.
1) General. A King of Gandhara. Subala was the
father of Sakuni, uncle of the Kauravas. Sakuni was the
rebirth of Nagnaijit, disciple of Prahlada. Sakvni inherited the name Saubala from his father Subala whese
only daughter was Gandhari, mother of Duryodhana.
Both Sakuni and Gandhari were economic experts.
( Adi Parva, Chapter 63). At the time of the marriage
proposal of Gandhari the fact of the blindness of
Dhrtarastra, the prospective bride-groom, worried
Subala much, but he married his daughter to the
blind King considering the great reputation of the
royal family. (Adi Parva, Chapter 109, Verse 11).
2) Other information. (i) Subala, in the company of
his sons Sakuni, Acala and Vrsaka participated in the
Rajasiiya performed by Yudhisthira. (Sabha Parva,
Chapter 34, Verse 6).
745 SUBHADATTA
(ii) After the Rajasiva was over it was Nakula, one
of the Pandavas, who léd Subala and his sons beyond
the boundaries of the Kingdom safely. (Sabha Parva
Chapter 45, Verse 49).
SUBALA II. A King of the Iksvaku dynasty. His son
was a great friend of King Jayadratha. (Vana Parva,
Chapter 265, Verse 8).
SUBALA III. A son of Garuda. (Udyoga Parva, Chapter 101, Verse 3).
SUBANDHU. An Aacarya, who was the high priest of
King Asamati. Once the King removed the priest
from his job and appointed two priests, Kirata and
Akuli in his stead, and after some time, the new priests, atthe instance of the King, killed Subandhu.
But, three brothers of his joined together and brought
Subandhu back to life again by chanting hymns from
the Vedas. (Reveda 10, 57. 60; Brhaddevata. 7. Sa)
SUBELA. A mountain near Lanka. (Vana Parva, Chapter 234, Verse 21).
SUBHA. Dhruva’s mother. According to Harivaméfa,
Chapter 2, she was born from Agvamedha.
SUBHA. Wife of Angiras and mother of seven sons like
Brhatkirti. (Vana Parva, Chapter 218, Verse 1).
SUBHADATTA. A wood-cutter who lived in Pataliputra.
Subhadatta earned his living by cutting wood in the
forest and selling it for fuel. One day, while cutting
wood in the forest he saw four Yaksas by chance. When
he understood from their dress and bearing that they
were divine beings, Subhadatta was frightened. The
Yaksas spoke to him and when they came to know that
he was poor, they engaged him as their servant. Subhadatta served them with devotion. Whenit was time
for their meal they pointed to him a pot and asked him
to serve them food from it. But when Subhadatta saw
the pot empty, he was confused. The Yaksas, with an
amused smile asked him to put his hand into the pot
and assured him that he would get anything he wished
to get from it.
Subhadatta accordingly took out all the things they —
wanted from it and served them. They took their food
and were satisfied. A few days passed in this way and
then Subhadatta began to think of his family. The
Yaksas understood that he was longing to return home.
So they allowed him to go after getting whatever boon
he wished to ask them. Subhadatta asked for that
magic pot which would supply whatever he wanted.
On hearing it the Yaksas told him that he would not
be able to keep that pot and that if it was broken
everything would be lost. So they advised him to ask
them something else. But Subhadatta was not prepared
to accept their advice. At last they gave him the magic
pot.
Subhadatta reached home happily with the pot. He
told the whole story to his people at home. His neighbours grew suspicious when he stopped going to the
forest to cut trees, after he returned with the pot. To
their enquiries about it, he replied haughtily and informed them of his good luck. One day in his frantic joy,
he danced, carrying the pot oan his head and as dl-luck
would have it, he slipped his foot and fell down. The

SUBHADRA I
pot crashed to the ground and was broken te pieces.
So he was forced to become the wood- itter again.
(Kathasaritsagara, Saktiyagolambaka, Taranga 1).
SUBHADRA I. Sister of Sri Krsna.
1) Birth. Subhadra was the daughter of Vasudeva by
his wife Devaki. She had two brothers, Krsna and
Sarana and she was her father’s pet child. (Adi Parva,
Chapter 217, Verse 18). :
2\ Married to Arjuna. During his one year’s pilgrimage
Arjuna, after visiting various holy places, came at last
to Prabhasa tirtha in the plains of the western mountain. He met Gada there who described to him the
unique beauty of Subhadra. The description evoked
in him the desire to marry her for which purpose he
assumed the form of a Sannyasin and sitting under a
tree thought about Sri Krsna who understood the fact
while lying on the bed with Satyabhama and immediately he began laughing. Asked for the reason for his
laughing thus, Sri Krsna told her about Arjuna thinking about him etc. Krsna then went to Arjuna and
questioned him about the reason for his pilgrimage and
the latter explained the circumstances of it. They then
went to the Raivata mountain where Arjuna revealed
to Krsna his desire to marry Subhadra. Krsna agreed
and, after leaving Arjuna at the mountain, returned to
Dvaraka.
Within a few days the Yadavas celebrated a festival at
Raivata attended by prominent leaders like Balabhadra,
Ugrasena, Pradyumna, Sri Krsna and others. The sight
of Subhadra among them evoked uncontrollable love in
Arjuna who asked Krsna secretly about the means for him
to marry Subhadra. Krsna answered him thus: ‘“‘Svayarhvara (marriage by self choice by a woman) is ordained
for Ksatriyas. But, how would we know whom Subhadra
loves. Abduction also is ordained for Ksatriyas. So
you abduct Subhadra.”’
Arjuna immediately sent word about the matter through
emissaries to Indraprastha. After the festival at Raivata
was over, Subhadra returned to Dvaraka. As for Arjuna,
he sat on a rock in the forest thinking about Subhadra
when Yadava heroes like Bala, Samba, Sarana, Pradyumna and Gada came that way by chance. They saluted
the Sannyasin (Arjuna) and after blessing them he made
them sit on the rock around him and related to them
various stories. Then Yadavas felt great respect for the
Sannyasin and invited him and took him to Dvaraka.
Krsna and others arranged for thestay of the Sannyasin
who pretended to spend Caturmasya there. He was to
be fed from Subhadra’s house and the Sanny4sin was
overwhelmed with joy. !
As days passed on thus, Arjuna grew more and more
sick with love. Subhadra felt unbounded affection for
him. She heard from him many stories about the valiant
Pandava, Arjuna. When he was convinced that Subhadra
cherished strong love for him, Arjuna revealed the truth
about him. When he told her that he, the fake SannyAsin,
was really Arjuna who was living there without the
knowledge of his mother and brothers, Subhadra bent
down her head in shyness.
Subhadra’s wedding was decided to be held on the
twelfth day from that date. Balabhadra and Uddhava
both of them short-tempered, were not informed about
the decision. Sri Krsna took the lead in making prepartions for the wedding and he saw Subhadra and gave
all good wishes.
SUBHARYA
Many of the Yadava chiefs wanted Subhadra to be
wedded to Duryodhana, a disciple of Balabhadra and
against this desire of theirs Subhadra and Arjuna _together drove themselves away in a chariot through lines
of people and this created a stir among the Yadavas.
But, Krsna pacified them all. (Adi Parva, Chapters
213-228; Bhagavata, 10th Skandha).
2) Other information.
(i) Later on, the wedding of Subhadra with Arjuna was
duly consecrated. (Adi Parva, Chapter 220, Verse 10).
(ii) Arjuna came to Indraprastha with Subhadra disguised as a Gopi. Many cestly things, by way of Subhadra’s dowry, were duly sent from Dvaraka to Indraprastha. (Adi Parva, Chapter 220).
(iii) A sonnamed Abhimanyu was born to the couple.
(Adi Parva, Chapter 220, Verse 65).
(iv) During the period of the ‘forest life’ of the Pandavas Subhadra and her son lived with Krsna at Dvaraka
(Vana Parva, Chapter 22, Verse 3).
(v) Subhadra too was present at the wedding of Abhimanyu at Upaplavyanagara. (Virdta Parva, Chapter 72
Verse 22).
(vi) When Abhimanyu was killed in the great war,
Subhadra wept before Krsna. (Drona Parva, Chapter
78; Verse 2),
(vil) Following the death of Abhimanyu Subhadra re_ turned with Krsna to Dvaraka. (Asvamedha Parva,
Chapter 52, Verse 85). -
(viii }Remembering about Abhimanyu’s death Subhadra
swooned. (Asvamedha Parva Chapter 61, Verse 4)-
(ix) She went from Dvaraka to Hastinapura to atten
the Asvamedha yajiia performed by Yudhisthira. (Agvamedha Parva, Chapter 66, Verse 4).
(x) Subhadra joined herco-wives, Ulipi and Citrangada and embraced them. (Asvamedha Parva, Chapter?
83, Verse 3).
(xi) Fellowing the death of Abhimanyu Subhadra spent
her days in sad silence. (Mahaprasthana Parva,
Chapter 1).
SUBHADRA II. A daughter of Surabhi. She lives 3”
ie western region. (Udyoga Parva, Chapter 102 Verse
SUBHADRA A banyan tree. Garuda went to Devaloka
to fetch amrta after marking this tree as a sign-post. S€©
under Garuda. (Aranya Kanda, Canto 35).
SUBHADRAHARANAPARWA. A sub-parva of Mahabharata, (Adi Parva, Chapters 218 and 219).
SUBHAGA. A brother of Sakuni. He was killed in the
great war by Bhima. (Drona Parva, Chapter 157;
Verse 26).
SUBHAGA I. Daughter of Kasyipaprajapati by his wife
Pradha._ (Adi Parva, Chapter 65, Verse 46).
SUBHAGA IT. A term of address.
According to Manusmrti (Chapter 2, 129) one should
use this word when one addresses the wives of others
and women who are not one’s relatives,
Parapatni tu ya stri syadasambandha ca yonitah i
Tam _ briiyad bhavatityevarh subhage bhaginiti ca ||
SUBHANU. One of the ten sons of Satyabhama the other
nine being Bhanu, Svarbhanu, Prabhanu Bhanuman,
Candrabhanu, Brhadbhanu, Havirbhanu Sribhanu and
‘ Pratibhanu. (Bhagavata, 10th Skandha), |
UBHARYA (SUDARYA). A daughter of Syaphalka;
son of Préni. Sh Mia: A
9th Skandha). © was Akrira’s sister. (Bhagavata,

SUBHANGADA 747
SUBHANGADA. A king. This king had attended Draupadi’s Svayarnvara. (Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter
SUBHANGI. A virgin born in the Dagarha tribe. Kuru,
King of the Lunar dynasty married her. They had a
son named Vidira. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 99,
Verse 39).
SUBHASANA. A king of Solar line son of Yuyudhana
and father of Sruta. (Bhagavata, 9th Skandha).
SUBHAVAKTRA. A female attendant of Subrahmanya.
(M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Verse 7).
SUBHIMA. A son of Paficajanyagni called Tapa. ‘This
Agni is one of the fifteen Agnis which cause hindrances
in Yajiias. Subhima, Atibhima, Bhima, Bhimabala.
Bala, Sumitra, Mitravan, Mitrajiia, Mitravardhana,
Mitradharman, Surapravira, Vira, Suvarcas, Vesa
and Surahanta are the fifteen Agnis which cause
hindrances in Yajiias. (Vana Parva, Chapter 220,
Verse 1.1):
SUBHRAJA. One of the two attendants given to Subrahmanya by Sirya, the other one being Bhasvara. (Salya
Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 31). ,
SUBHRU. A female attendant of Subrahmanya. (Salya
Parva, Chapter 46, Verse 8).
SUBHUMIKA. A holy place of ancient days in the plains
of river Sarasvati where Apsaras used to come daily and
bathe. Deva-Gandharvas visit this placeevery month.
Sri Krsna bathed there once and distributed money to
brahmins. (Salya Parva, Chapter 37).
SUBRAHMANYA. Son of Siva.
1) Reason for birth. A son named Vajranga was born to
Kagyapaprajapati by_ his wife Danu and he married a
girl called Varangi. Vajranga performed penance to
Brahma so that he might shed his 4suric aspect. When
he came out of his penance, Varang! was missing and he
wandered about the forest in search of her. Finally he saw
Varangi crying under a tree. When he asked her the reason
for her Weeping, she told him about harassments by Brahma
during the thousand years when Vajranga was immersed in trance. Indra one day threw about the vessels
used by her in worship, appearing before her in the
guise of a monkey; on another occasion he threatened
her in the form of a lion and on a third occasion he
came disguised as a snake and bit on her legs. Very
much grieved over the story Vajranga again took to
penance with the grim determination to punish Indra
and ‘when Brahma appeared before him he prayed for
the boon of a son who would surpass the Devas including Indra in prowess. Brahma granted him the boon.
Varangi delivered a son twelve months after the boon.
The child was christened Tarakasura.
Tarakasura, asa child, began practising penanee and
Brahma duly appeared before him and granted him
the boon that ifhe were to die, he would die at the
hands of a child only seven days old. Haughty over the
boon Tarakasura very soon conquered the three worlds.
The devas found no means to suppress the asura. Children would not be born to them and there was a reason
for it. Once Siva and Parvati started the marital act
and it did not come to a close even after a hundred
divya - years, with the result that the world-shook like
anything. Frightened at this the Devas requested
Siva to stop the act and he obliged them. Then he
asked them who would bear the semen which had been
discharged and they replied, “Tet earth itself bear the
SUBRAHMANYA
semen.’ Accordingly it was discharged on the earth.
It filled and over-flowed forests and mountains.
What next was the problem. Ultimately the Devas
asked Agni (fire) to consume it. When Agni consumed
and burnt it down absolutely, the ashes thereof formed into a white hill and it became a forest.
Parvati did not atall relish the action of the devas and
spoke to them thus: “You prevented my sexual intercourse entered into with the desire to have a son.
Therefore, in future you will not have children by your
wives.” Parvati cursed the earth also as follows:
“You will become one of various forms and also a wife
to many people. You, who prevented me from having
a son, will not enjoy happiness from children.” (Valmiki Ramayana, Balakanda, Canto 36).
Tarakasura could be killed only by a child not more
than seven days old and the Devas realised that such
a child could be begot only by Siva. It was the occas-
‘on when Siva was lamenting over the death of Sati and
Parvati was doing penance to secure Siva as husband.
None could stir Siva immersed in deep meditation
and the Devas entrusted the responsibility for it to
Kamadeva. Not only did Kama not succeed in the
endeavour but also he got reduced to ashes by the fire
from Siva’s eyes. When Parvati’s penance reached its
climax Siva appeared before her and wedded her.
2). Birth of Subrahmaiya. Because of the power of
6‘ vas semen consumed by Agni, his clow began getting
diminished. Agni complained of it to the Devas who
sent him over to Brahma. On his way to Brahma Agni
met Gangadevi whom he told thus: “J canin no way
bear this semen of Siva and if I get rid of it, it will
burn the entire world. So, you please take charge of it
so that you will have a noble son. Ganga’s reply to
this was simply to ask Agni to throw the semen into
her waters and Agni did so. As the semen had remained
with Agni for nearly 5000 years, his flesh, blood
hair, eye etc. had become golden in colour and hence
Agni came to be called from that day onwards
Hiranyaretas. :
Time passed by and the semen of Siva became a burden
to Ganga. She complained about that to Brahma.
Brahma asked her from whom she had received the
semen. Ganga detailed her story to him and concluded
by saying that though it was 5000 years since Siva’s
semen was put into her, she did not deliver yet. Then
Brahma told her as follows: ““You go to the Udaya
meuntain (where the sun rises). There is a forest there,
a forest hundred crores of yojanmas in extent, where
Sara, a particular variety of grass (Saccharam munja
Roxb) grows. You deposit the semen there and a male
child will be born after 10, 000 years
As directed by Brahma Ganga went to the Udaya
mountain and deposited the foetus there through her
mouth,
By the power of Siva’s semen all the trees and animals
and birds in the forest became golden in colour.
When 10,000 years were completed a child, as effulgent
as the rising sun, was born and Subrahmanya was the
child. The child cried in a thunderous voice and six
divine Krttikas who came that way saw the child and
taking pity on it vied with one another to breast-feed
it. Since the child looked at the six Krttikas one after
the other it developed six faces and since it was breast-fed
by Krttikas it came to be named Karttikeya as well.

SUBRAHMANYA
Brahma informed Agni about the birth of the child
and the latter, in great happiness, hastened to it on a
fast goat. Ganga who met Agni on the way and asked
him about his hurried trip was told about the birth of
the child and between the two developed an argument
about the ownership of the child. Mahavisnu who came
that way just then listened to the above argument and
directed them to Siva for settlement of their claims. .
Agni and Ganga asked Siva to which of them the child
really belonged. Siva then told Parvati ‘‘Fortunate,
fortunate.”’ Only after seeing the child could it be
decided as to whose it was and so Siva, Parvati, Agni
and Ganga proceeded together to the forest where they
saw the child in the lap of the Krttikas. Siva then
said ‘‘Let us see whom the child looks at before settling
its parentage.”’ Understanding the ideas of the visitors
the child, by its yogic power, assumed four bodies
called Kumara, Visakha, Sakha and Naigameya. —
Kumara looked at Siva, Visakha at Parvati, Sakha at
Ganga and Naigameya at Agni and all of them felt
immensely happy. The Krttikas asked Siva whether
Sanmukha (child with six faces) was his son to which
Siva answered as follows : ‘‘Let him be your son under
the name Karttikeya; Ganga’s son under the name
Kumara; Parvati’s son under the name Skanda; my
son under the name Guha and Agni’s son viih the
name Mahasena and under the name Saravana ‘Saravana’s (the forest where it was born) son. He is a
great yogi and will be known by these various names.
As he possesses six faces he will become famous as
‘Sanmukha’ also.
After having spoken thus Siva thought of the Devas
and under the leadership of Brahma and Visnu all the
Devas appeared there. They looked at the child tc heir
hearts’ content and then told Siva thus : “Oh! Lord !
You made Agni serve the’ purpose of Devas. Let us
immediately start for Aujasa_ tirtha and crown Sanmukha at Sarasvatiin Kuruksetra. Let him flourish
as army-chief of Devas, Gandharvas and Kinnaras and
let him kill the terrible Mahisasura and TarakAsura.
3) Coronation. Brahma, Visnu, Siva and others reached
Kuruksetra with the child to crown him (Subrahmanya)
as army-chief. Siva and Visnu performed the consecration ceremony with holy water from the seven seas.
Gandharvas, Rsis and others sang for joy and Apsaras
danced. Parvati placed the child thus consecrated on
her lap and kissed him repeatedly on the head.
4) Presents. After Guha’s consecration, the Devas
presented the army-chief valorous armies, He was
given by Siva four Pramathas, equal in prowess to
Indra, called Ghantikarna,.Lohitaksa, Nandisena and
Kumudamali. Brahma and other Devas gave their
own Pramathas to him. Brahma gave him the Pramatha called Sthanu and Visnu gave him three sets of
Pramathas called Sankrama, Vikrama and Parakrama.
Indra gave him Uiklefa and Pankaja; Sun (Stirya)
gave Dandakapinjalas; Moon gave Manivasumanis;
the Asvins gave Vatsanandis etc. In short, important
Devas, Matrs, Tirthas etc. gave Subrahmanya priceless presents too numerous to be named.
Seeing the rush of presents the great Garuda presented
his own son, the fast-going Peacock to Subrahmanya.
Aruna gave his own son, the cock. Agni gave the Vel
(three-pronged weapon, trident), Brhaspati the danda
(club, stick) Ganga, the Kamandalu (water-pot of
SUBRAHMANYA
Sannyasins) Visnu the garland, Parvati clothes, Siva
the locket and Indra the string of pearls.
5) Devadsura war. The consecration of Subrahmanya
as Commander-in-Chief of the army kindled a new
hope and enthusiasm in the Devas. They challenged
the Asuras for war and they took it up. The asura
army entered the battle-field under the leadership of
unrivalled warriors like Tarakadsura, Mahisa, Bana,
son of Mahabali, Taraka’s sons, Tarakaksa. Kamalaksa, Vidyunmali etc. In the furious battle that ensued
Subrahmanya killed Tadrakasura. The other asura
chiefs too were killed.
6) Vow of celibacy. After the killing of Tarakasura
Subrahmanya became the object of too much of petting
by Parvati with the result that his life became unbridled and wayward. His lust was everyday on the
increase and he committed even rape on Deva women,
who were ultimately forced to complain about him to
Parvati. Immediately she called Subrahmanya to her
and showed her own image in all other women and he
became so much repentant about his past actions that
he took the vow before Parvati that in future he would
look upon all women in the world as equal to her, his
mother, (Brahmanda Purana 8] Ts
7) Marriage. See under Devasena.
(Valmiki Ramayana, Canto 36; M.B. Vana _ Parva,
Chapter 223; Anusasana Parva, Chapter 85; Skanda
Purana, Sambhava kanda: Kathasaritsagara, Lavanakalambaka, Taranga 6; Uttara Ramayana Kamba
Ramayana, Balakanda; WVamana Purana, Chapters
57-61; Bhavisya Purana).
8) Other information.
(1) On the occasion of the burning of the Khandava
forest Subrahmanya went there carrying his weapon
called ‘Sakti’ to fight Krsna and Arjuna. (Adi Parva,
Chapter 226, Verse 33).
(it) Skanda was born from the semen of Siva which
fell into Agni. So he got the name Skanda. (Skand —
fall). (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 225, Verse 16).
(111) He once cut asunder the Kraufica mountain.
(For details see under Kraufica I is
(iv) Noticing the very great effulgence of Skanda,
Indra feared loss of his place and immediately he
clashed with the former. Indra’s Vajra ( thunderbolt)
hit Skanda on his right and from the wound emerge
a person wearing golden armour, divine ear-rings an
holding the Vel in his hands and he was named
Visakha. Frightened by his sight Indra sought refuge
with Subrahmanya. (Vana Parva, Chapter 227).
(v) When he married Devasena his six mothers came
and blessed him and his wife; he then told the mothers
thus : ‘You live with my father, Siva. Until I become
sixteen years of age I will be functioning as a spirit
which kills children and the children killed by me will
serve as your food.’’ As soon as he finished speaking,
a terrible person just like Agni emerged from his body
and it was called Raudragraha, which is known also
Patan Skandapasmira, Sakunigraha,
a anagraha etc. This Graha is supposed to causé
children’s death. (Vana Parva, Chapter 230).
Vsted the holy piece BAe ampanY af Rudeadev
ime 231, Vecse 56). oe ee ee
Vii) Vayubhagavan assumed responsibility for his
Protection. (Vana Parva, Chapter 231. Verse 56) 5

SUCAKRA
(viii) He killed Malrsdasura.
(ix) Synonyms or sacred names of Subrahmanya :—
Agneya, Skanda, Diptakirti, Anadmaya, Mayuraketu,
Dharmatman, Bhitega, Mahisardana, Kamajit,
Kamada, Kanta, Satyavak, Bhuvane vara, Sis usighra,
Sucicanda, Diptavarna, Subhanana, Amogha, Anagha,
Raudra, Priya, Candranana, Pragantatman, Dipta-
§akti, Bhadrakrt, Kiitamohana, Sasth priya, Pavitra,
Matrvatsala, Kanyabharta, Vibhakta, Svaheya, Revatisuta, Vigakha, Prabhu, Netéa, Naigameya, Sudu ‘-
cara, Suvrata, Lalita, Balakridanakapriya, MKhacari,
Brahmacarin, Sara, Saravanodbhava, VisSvamitrapriya,
Devasenapriya, Vasudevapriya, Priyakrt etc.
Those who repeat the above sacred names of Subrahmanya will attain fame, wealth and heaven. (Vana
Parva, Chapter 232).
(x) In the Devadasura war he killed important leaders
of the asuras like Mahisa, Tripada and Hradodara.
(Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Verse 90).
(xi) He defeated Bandsura and killed the sons of
Tarakasura. (Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Verse 90).
(xii) Siva consecrated him as lord (Srestharaja) of the
Bhitas, (Santi Parva, Chapter 122, Verse 32).
SUCAKRA. A warrior of Subrahmanya. (M.B.
Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 59).
SUCAKSUS. One of the seven
__ (See under Sindhu).
SUCANDRA I. A King of Iksvaku dynasty. A son
named Vigalaniti was born to King Iksvaku by his wife
Alambusa. The city WVisalanagara was founded by this
Visalaniti. A son named Hemacandra was born to
Vigdla. Sucandra was the son of Hemacandra.
Dhimragva was the son of Sucandra. (Valmiki
Ramayana, Bala Kanda, Sarga 47).
SUCANDRA II. An asura. This asura was the son of
ete (Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 66, Verse
SUCANDRA III. A Gandharva. (Mahabharata, Adi
Parva, Chapter 66, Verse 46). This Gandharva was the
son of Prajapati Kagyapa, by his wife Pradha, ‘This
Gandharva participated in the birth celebration of
Arjuna. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 122, Verse 98).
SUCANTI, A muni who was an adorer of Atri Maharsi.
There isa reference to him in Rgveda, Mandala 1,
Anuvaka 16, Sakta 112.
SUCARU I. A son. of Dhrtarastra. With his seven
brothers he attacked Abhimanyu. (M.B. Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 79, Verse 22). .
SUCARU II. A son born to Sri Krsna by his wife
Rukmini. (M.B. Anugasana Parva, Chapter 14, Verse
33). The sons born by Rukmini were Pradyumna
Carudesna, Sudesna, Carudeha, Sucaru, Carugupta
and Bhadracaru. (Bhagavata, Skandha 10).
SUCCHAYA,. The wife of Sisti, the son of Dhruva. Two
sons named Sisti and Bhavya were born to Dhruva by
his wife Sambha. Succhaya, the wife of Sisti gave birth
to five sons who were sinless. They were Ripu, RipufiJaya, Vipra, Vrkala and Vrkatejas. (Visnu Purana,
Amhga 1, Chapter 13). |
SUCETAS. The son of Grtsamada who was born in the
ynasty of Vitahavya. A son named Varcas was born
a eens. (M.B. Anusasana Parva, Chapter 30, Verse
(Vana Parva, Chapter
Salya
channels of Ganga.
SUCI (NEEDLE)
SUCI I. A deva (god) who was born in Agnivamsa.
This Suci was the son of Agnideva who was the eldest
son of Brahma, and his wife Svaha. Suci had two
brothers by name Pavaka and Pavamana. These
brothers had fortyfive sons. They are also known as
‘¢ Agnis”., Thus there are on the whole fortynine Agnis,
including the father, three sons and their fortyfive children. (Visnu Purana, Part 1, Chapter 10).
SUCI II. Caksusa was a son of Manu. Ten sons were
born to Manu by his wife, Nadvala. They were, Kuru,
Puru, Satadyumna, Tapasvi, Satyavan, Suci, Agnistoma, -
Atiratra, Sudyumna and Abhimanyu. (Visnu Purana,
Part 1, Chapter 13).
SUCI III. There isa passage in Chapter 19 of Agni
Purana which says that Kagyapa Prajapati had six
daughters by his wife Tamra, who were, Kaka, Syeni,
Bhasi, Grddhrika, Suci and Griva and that different
classes of birds took their source from them.
SUCI [V. A King of the Solar dynasty. From Bhagavata,
9th Skandha we learn that he was the son of Sakradyumna and the father of Vanadvaja.
SUC] V. In Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter 8,
Verse 14, there isa reference to a King Suci_ who
worships Yama, the son of Sirya, in Yama’s assembly.
SUCI VI. The leader ofa band of merchants. It was
he who met and comforted Damayanti who lost her
way in the forest after Nala left her. (Vania Parva,Chapter
SUCI VII. One of the sons of ViSvamitra. (M.B. Anusasana Parva, Chapter 4, Verse 54).
SUCI VIII. A son of Bhrgu Maharsi. (Mahabharata,
Anugasana Parva, Chapter 55, Verse 128).
SUCI IX. A Maharsi born in the family of Angiras. By a
curse of Vasistha, this Maharsi was born as 2 mortal,
as the son of King Vijitasva. (Bhagavata, 4th Skandha).
SUCI. The son of Suddha and the grandson of Anenas.
Trikalpava was the son of Siici, (Bhagavata, 4th
Skandha).
SUGI (NEEDLE). Iron needle is Puranically important. There is a story connecting the iron-needle of
Bharata and Vibhisana as follows:—
Having killed Ravana, Sri Rama anointed Vibhisana
as the King of Lanka and returned to Ayodhya. During
the reign of Vibhisana, Lanka reached the highest stage
of prosperity. Among the five metals, only gold
was seen in Lanka. At this stage Vibhisana got an iron
needle from Bharata. He kept it as a rare and valuable
treasure, in his palace.
Vibhisana who was an ardent devotee of Sri Rama used
to cross the sea, come to Rame‘vara-temple and offer
flower at the feet of Sri Rama, every day. Flower was
brought in abig golden pot. Once Vibhisana placed the
golden pot in the courtyard of the temple and went in
with the flower. After the worship, Vibhisana came out
and taking the pot on his head returned to Lanka. Being
immersed in the thought of Sri Rama, Vibbisana did not
look inside the pot. After reaching the palace he looked
into the pot and saw a Brahmin sleeping in it. He was
very pleased to see the Brahmin. So after welcoming
him with hospitality, he brought the box in which he
had kept the most precious treasure and placed it before the Brahmin who returned with the box to Bharata.
He eagerly opened the box and saw only an iron needle
in it. The consternation of the Brahmin need only be
imagined.

SUCIKA
SUCIKA. ° An Apsaras. She had participated in Arjuna’s
birth festival. (Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter
SUCIKA. A figure of the giantess Karkkati. (See
under Brahma, Para 12).
SUCIMUKHA. A hell. (See under Kala the section on
hell).
SUCIMUKHI. Companion maid of Prabhavati, daughter of Vajranabha. (See under Prabhavati V).
SUCIRATHA. A King bornin Bharata’s dynasty. He was
the son of Citraratha and Dhrsama’s father. (Bhagavata,
9th Skandha).
SUCIROSITA. A minister of Dagaratha.
_ Ramayana, Ayodhya Kanda, Sarga 32). :
SUCISMITA I. A Brahmani who was devoted to her
husband. (For further details see under Dhanafjaya V).
SUCISMITA II. An Apsaras. She attends Kubera’s
assembly (Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter 10,
Verse [0), :
SUCITRAI. A naga (serpent) born in the family of
Dhrtarastra. This serpent fell in the sacrificial fire of the
serpent sacrifice of Janamejaya and was burnt to
death. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 57, Stanza 18).
SUCITRA II. (SUMITRA). Father of Sukumara the
King of Pulinda. (See under Sukumara I.) -
SUCITRA III. A son of Dhrtaradstra. He attacked
Abhimanyu in the battle of Bharata. (Mahabharata,
Bhisma Parva, Chapter 79, Verse 22). .
SUCITRA IV. A King who fought on the side of the
‘Pandavas. He was a good fighter from chariot. (MahaBharata, Karna Parva, Chapter 6, Stanza 27). While
this king and his son Citravarma were walking in the
battlefield, Drona killed them.
SUGIVAKTRA. A warrior of Subrahmanya. (M.B. Salya
Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 72).
SUCIVRATA. A king of ancient
Parva, Chapter 1, Verse 236).
SUDAKSINA 1. The son of king Paundraka. SriKrsna killed Paundraka in battle and his head, cut
off by Sri Krsna, fell in the country of Kasi. Sudaksina who learned about the death of his father, went
to Kasi and recognized the head by the eur-rings. Sudaksina made up his mind to kill Sri Krsna somehow
or other and began to do penance in KaA&gi_ before
Siva. Pleascd with his penance Siva appeared before
him and advised him to create a wicked fairy froin
the fire of sorcery. Accordingly Sudaksina prepared a
fire of sorcery, from which a wicked fairy came out and
ran towards Sri Krsna. Si Krsna sent his weapon the
Discus which cut offthe head of the wicked fairy and
from there the Discus flew to Kasi and turned Sudaksina to ashes, and returned to Dvaraka. (Bhagavata,
Skandha 10).
SUDAKSINA. II A king of Kamboja (Kabul). The
following information is taken from Mahabharata
about this king.
(i) Sudaksina had been present at the Svayamvara
marriage of Draupadi. (Adi Parva, Chapter 185,
Verse 15).
(ii) He came with an aksauhiai of army to help
Duryodhana against the Pandavas in the battle of
Bharata. (M. B. Udyoga Parva, Chapter 19, Verse
ae “
(iii) Sudaksina was a valiant fighter in the army of
(Valmiki
(M.B. Adi
times.
SUDARSANA Iil
the Kauravas. (M. B. Udyoga Parva, Chapter 160,
verse 1. },
(iv) On the first day of the battle of Bharata, there
was acombat between Srutakarma and Sudaksina.
(M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 66).
(v) There was another combat between Abhimanyu
and Sudaksina.(M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 49,
Verse 66.)
(vi) Arjuna killed Sudaksina in the battle of Bharata.
(M. B. Drona Parva, Chapter 92, Verse 61).
(vii) The younger brother of Sudaksina confronted —
Arjuna to avenge the death of his brother and was
killed by Arjuna. (M.B. Karna Parva, Chapter 56,
Verse 110). 4
SUDAKSINA III. A warrior who fought on the side
of the Pandavas. Dronadcarya shot him down from
the chariot with an arrow. (M.B. Drona _ Parva,
Chapter 21, Verse 56). |
SUDAKSINA. The wife of Dilipa. (See under Dikipa). .
SUDAMATI. A minister of king Janaka. ( Valmikt
Ramayana, Balakanda, Sarga 70).
SUDAMA II. A king of Dagarna. This king had tw
daughters of whom one was married by Bhima,
the king of Vidarbha, and the other by Virabahu
king of Cedi. (M. B. Vana Parva, Chapter 96, Verse
SUDAMA III. A country of North India. Mention 45
made in Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter 27, Vers¢
Il, that this country was captured by Arjuna.
SUDAMA IV. An attendant of
Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Verse 10).
SUDAMA V. A cowherd. This Sudama was rebor®
as an asura, because of the curse of Devi Radha. (Pot
further details see under Tulasi, para 5).
SUDAMA VI. A warrior who took the side of the
Pandavas and fought against the Kauravas. (M.
Drona Parva, Chapter 23, Verse 43) i
SUDAMA VIL. The watcher of the garden of Kams@-
Te me in Bhagavata, Skandha 10, that this Sudam*
iene ri Krsna and Balabhadra Rama with flow®
SUDAMA VIII. The real name of Kucela who was the
friend of Sri Krsna in boyhood. Though _ his name
occurs everywhere in Bhagavata. as aests his real
name is Sudama., (See under Kucela)
SUDAMA IX. A river famous in
. tioned in Valmiki Ramayana, A
Subrahmanya.
en”
this
the Puranas. It 1s™
r odhyaka rg@
that Bharata, the brother of Sn mgt
river while he was returning fr
g from Kekaya.
SUDANDIKA. See under Stryaprabha ‘
gr orci. L, A king of ancient India. He was 4 ae
ia ary of Sri Krsna. This king who was esteem”
even by the gods, was once captured and ma
oe by another king named Nagnajit Sri Kr3n?
vecated Nagnajit and all the other Kiass and m9
is King free. This story occurs in Mahabha “2 ta Udy"
‘ Parva, Chapter 48, Verse 75 , —
UDARSANA IT.A kins who . a
z who t side av
vas and fought against t ie ee sett
ae : he Pa: d ; uk
This king was killed by 33 tandavas in Kur ay
P Ghapter 113, Verse i (M.B. Drona Pa
SUDARSANA III. A
A king of Mal. Ts gine
davas in the lava, ‘This king - wae
the side of the Pan battle of Bharata a?

SUDARSANA IV
killed by ASvatthima. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter
200, Verse I3).
SUDARSANA IV. A son of Dhrtarastra. In the battle
of Bharata, he attacked Bhimasena and was killed by
him. (M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 27, Verse 31).
SUDARSANA V. Son of Dhruvasandhi, king of Kosala.
Manorama was the mother of Sudargana. (For further
details see under Dhruvasandhi) .
SUDARSANA VI. One of the five sons of Bharata.
Bharata, the son of Rsabha, had married Paficajani,
the daughter of Vigvaripa. Five sons named Sumatl,
RAastrabhrt, Sudargana, Avarana and Dhimraketu were
born to Bharata, who divided Bharata among his five
sons and went to Salagrama and did penance there and
died. (Bhagavata, Skandha 5).
SUDARSANA VII. The son born to god Fire by his wife
Sudar. ana. (Sudar’ ana was the daughter of Duryodhana
(Nila) of the dynasty of Iksvaku. For the story of her
marriage see under Sudar.ana). Sudar. ana, the son of
Fire, married Oghavati the daughter of Oghavan. That
story is given below:-
Oghavan had two children a daughter named Oghavati
and a son named Ogharatha. Oghavan gave his daughter
in marriage to Sudargana who was wise and learned.
The couple lived in Kuruksetra. Once Sudarsana said
to Oghavati thus:-““You should honour guests in all
ways. If it is the desire of a guest, you should not draw
back from giving even your body. Whether I am present
here or not a guest should not be insulted.’’? Oghavati
promised to obey the order of her husband to the letter.
Sudargana had been trying to become victorious over
Mrtyu (Death) and so Death had been waiting to find
out some vulnerable point in Sudargana’s life. While
Sudargana had gone to cut firewood, a brahmin entered
the hermitage and said to Oghavati: -“‘If you do observe
the duties of a house-holder show hospitality to me.”
Hearing this, Oghavati welcomed the brahmin and performed the usual hospitality and asked him “What
shall I do for you ?”’ ‘Give yourself to me’’, was the
answer. Seeing that the guest was not contented with
the usual hospitalities and remembering the words of her
husband, Oghavati gave herself to: the guest. Both of
them entered the interior of the hermitage. At this
moment Sudar’ana returned with firewood, and looked
for Oghavati and called her aloud, several times. He
got no reply. Then the Brahmin who was lying inside
called out: -“‘Hei ! Son of Fire ! A guest has come. Your
wife showed all kinds of hospitality. But I was not contented with them. Now she is offering herself to me.”
These words did not seem to make any change in
Sudar’ana. Dharmadeva was much pleased, as Sudargana had come out victorious in all these tests. He came
out and appeared in his own form and blessed Sudargana. Due to the blessing of Dharmadeva, half of the
body of Oghavati flowed as the river Oghavati and the
other half was dissolved in the soul of her husband.
Sudargana thus earned victory over Mrtyu and obtained
prosperity. :
SUDARSANA VIII. A Vidyadhara. Because of the curse
of Angiras, this Vidyadhara was changed into a mountain snake. That story occurs as follows in Bhagavata,
Skandha 9,
While Sudaréana was playing about in the world of
Gods with some Gandharva damscels, Angiras and some
Other hermits came by that way. Sudarégana ridiculed
a en
751 SUDARSANA XI
them. Angiras became angry and changed him toa
mountain snake by a curse. Sudarsana prayed for liberation from the curse. Angiras said that in Dvze parayuga,
Mahavisnu would incarnate as Sri Krsna and when Krsna
trod upon him, he would regain-his original form.”
Sudarsana became a big snake and began life in
Ambadi. Once the people of Ambadi went to Devi
forest and worshipped MaheSvara. They spent the night
on the banks of the river K4lindi. In the night the snake
mentioned: above, caught hold of the leg of Nandagopa.
Seeing the snake swallowing Nandagopa the rest of them
crowded there and struck at the snake with burning
faggots. But it was in vain. Finally Sri Krsna came, and
gave the snake athrash, Instantly Sudarsana got his old
form. He went to the world of gods.
SUDARSANA IX. A brahmin sinner who lived in the
Tretayuga. The moment he touched the water in which
Visnu washed his feet, he obtained remissicn of his
sins and entered Vaikuntha.’ This story which is given
under, occurs in Padma Puréna, Brahma Khanda,
Chapter 17.
There lived a brahmin sinner in Tretayuga. He used
to commit sins such as eating food on the eleventh lunar
day, ridiculing conventional fast and vow, etc. When he
died, the men of Yama-took his: soul to the world of
Yama. At his order Sudargana was laid in horrible
excrements for the period of hurdred Manvantaras.
When he was released he was born on earth as a_ hog.
Because he ate fcod on Harivasara (a fast-day) he
suffered hell for along time. His next birth was that
of a crow and lived on excremenis. Once the crow
drank the water which fell on the steps while washing
the feet of Visnu. The crow obtained remission of all
its sins. On the same day it was caught in the net of
a forestman and died. Then a divine chariot drawn by
swans came and took the crow to the world of Visnu.
SUDARSANA X. The son of Dirghabahu who was born
in the family of Manu. He conquered all the kingdoms
and ruled as an emperor. The famous hermit Vasistha
was his priest.
Once Devi Mahakali appeared to him in a dream and
said to him: ‘Very soon a flood will occur in the world.
So go to the Himalayas with your wife and the priest
Vasistha and stay there in a cave.’ According to the
instruction of Devi, Sudargana took everybody with him
and went to the Himalayas.
The prophecy of Devi came true. The earth was filled
with water. This deluge lasted ‘for ten years. After
that the earth resumed its original form and Sudargana
returned to Ayodhya. (Bhavisya Purana, Pratisarga
It is mentioned in Kalika Purana that Sudargana had
broken off a piece of a forest region of Himalaya and
taken it to his country and founded on it the city called
Khandavinagara and that after a short period king
Vijaya of the Bhairava dynasty killed king Sudarsana
and became the ruler of the city, (Kalika Purana, 92).
SUDARSANA XI. A wife of God Fire. This Sudargana
was the daughter of Duryodhana, the son of Durjaya
of the Iksvaku dynasty. The mother of Sudargana
was Narmada. It is said that so beautiful a woman as
Sudar‘ana had never been born. The Go: Fire was
once fascinated by the beauty of Sudar’ana who had
been instructed to serve him, and wished to accept her
as his wife. So he informed her of his desire. Being

SUDARSANA XII
of a noble race, she said that a virgin ought to be given
away by her parents. TheGod Fire approached the
father of Sudargana and informed him of every thing.
When he knew that the person who made the request
was the God Fire, the king gave his daughter Sudarsana
as wife to the God. (Duryodhana had another name
Nila). In the Purinas there is another statement also
that Nila was the ruler of Mahismati. (See under
Duryodhana II and Agni Para 8). .
SUDARSANA XII. An island. This is another name of
Jambidvipa. Once Safijaya talked to Dhrtarastra
about this dvipa (Island). (M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter
Swe
SCE ReNICA XIII. A tree in the Jambiisland. It is
mentioned in Mahabharata, Bhisma Parva, Chapter 7
that this tree was eleven thousand yojanas high.
SUDARSANA XIV. (The Discus Sudargana-weapon).
1) General information. .The weapon of Mahavisnu.
Two stories areseen about the origin of this weapon.
(i) The sun married Samjia the daughter of Vigvakarma. Sarnjfia complained to her father that she could
not bear the radiance of the Sun. Visvakarma put the
Sun in a turning machine and turned him and decreased his radiance. Out of the dust of the sun produced
by this process, Visvakarma made the discus-weapon,
the aerial chariot Puspaka, the Trident of Siva, and
the Sakti (lance) of Subrahmanya. Of these. weapons
the discus-weapon Sudarsana was given to Mahavisnu.
This is one story. (Visnu Purana, Améa 3, Chapter 2).
(ii) During the burning of the forest Khandava, Indra
showered rain, against the fire. According to the second
story, the God Fire gave the discus weapon Sudargana
to Sri Krsna and the Gandiva to Arjuna to fight
against Indra. (See the word Khandavadaha).
Besides these two stories, several statements occur in
various Puranas, about this weapon Sudargana. As
Sudargana was in existence even before the incarnation
of Sri Krsna, the story that Visvakarma made it, ought
to be given prominence. Very often Mahavisnu used to
destroy enemies by this Sudargana. ‘Though Mahavisnu
had taken several incarnations, only- Sri Krsna is
mentioned in the Puranas as having used this weapon
Sudarsana very often. |
2) The power of Sudarfana. Sudargana flies up to the
ranks of the enemies, burning like fire. Once Mahavisnu sent the weaponSudargana towards the asuras.
Then the havoc and destruction caused by this weapon,
is described as follows
The moment he thought of Sudargana, to destroy the
power of the enemy, it made its appearance like the
Sun in the Solar region. It was a fearful sight. Emanating light and radiance from the blazing fire, the
Sudar ana rested on the hand of Visnu; turning round
with a tremendous speed. Visnu threw it at the
enemies with his powerful hand like that of the trunk
of an elephant, witb a view to cleave the city of the
enemies into pieces. ‘That weapon which was burning
in great flames like a great fire spreading radiance,
flew into the midst of the enemy’s army and instantly
every one near it fell dead. Thus it flew about among
the asuras and burnt them to ashes. Then turning
round and round in the air it drank the blood shed
on the earth. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 19).
SUDARSANA XV. Indra had a chariot named
Sudargana. (Mahabharata, Virata Parva, Chapter 56,
SUDEYA II
Verse: 3).
SUDASA I. A King of Kosala. This Sudas a was a King
who ought to be remembered every morning and
evening. (Mahabharata, Anusasana Parva, Chapter .
SUDAS II. An Aryan King named Sudas is stated in
Reveda. It is mentioned in Rgveda Mandala 1, Anuvaka 11, Sikta 63, that Visvamitra saved this King from
a danger. (See under DZ§ardjfia).
SUDASA III. A King of Ayodhya. He was the son of
Sarvakama and the father of Kalmasapada. (Bhagavata,
Skandha 9; Visnu Purana, 4, 4, 30).
SUDATTA. One of the prominent wives of Sri KrszaThe palace Ketuman in Dvaraka, was given to tas
wife. (Mahabharata, Daksinatya Patha, Sabha Parva:
Chapter 38),
SUDDHA. A King of the Bhrgu dynasty. Bhagavata,
9th Skandha mentions that he was the son of Anenas
and Suci’s father.
SUDESNA I. The wife of Virata, the King of Matsya.
1) General information. It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Virata Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 6, that this
Sudesna, the daughter of the King of Kekaye, had the
name Citra also, .
2) Other details.
(1) During the pseudonymity,
Sudesna in the guise 3
Parva, Chapter 9),
(ii) Sudesna agreed to the request of Kicaka to 8&
Sairandhri for him, as he was fascinated by her beauty: —
(M.B. Virata Parva, Chapter 14, Verse 6). |
(iii ) Sudesna sent Kicaka to the house of Sairandht’:
(M.B. Virata Parva, Chapter I3 ).. :
(iv) Draupadi consoled Sudesna ; ble at
the death of Kicaka, ye whe maganscks
M.B. Vira 16
Verse 48). ( Virata Parva, Chapter '¥
(v) Sudesna asked D
palace. (M.B. Virata
(vi) In connection wi
Uttara, Sudesna wen
Paficali lived with
of Sairandhri. (M.B. Virata
raupadi to go away from the
Parva, Chapter 24, Verse 3)-
th = marriage of her daught?
das t to Upaplavya with Draup@¢
sine Parva, Chapter 79, Verse 30).
2 € Mee The wife of the King Bali. Five sons
te b nga, Vanga, Kalinga, Pundra and Suhm
ae orn to the hermit Dirghatamas_ by this quee®
udesna. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 98 : 30: Bhagavat
Skandha 9; Harivaméa 1, 39). —
SUDESNA I. Ason born to Sri
: one under Rukmini),
Verse 4), © rat@, Bhisma Parva, Chapter “”
"ee aig brahmin who was a favourite of ni
‘i 8 : . idarbha. It was this: brahmin who was sen!
(S © Sing of Vidarbha to search for Damay@?""
SUDEVA TL aayantl) |
He a rt Captain of th
déath ina
Krsna by Rukmins:
© army of King Arab ar ic -
battle and *. Sudeva met with a of
attained heaven, Indra gave h ‘si
place. Lat i
er Ambarisa died and cam® as

SUDEVA III
took place. Indra continued :— ‘‘Once Ambarisa_ sent
Sudeva to subdue the asuras and giants. Sudeva entered the battlefield and looked at the vast army of the
enemy. Finding that it was impossible to defeat the
army of giants, he sat down and meditated on Siva,
who appeared before him and encouraged him. A fierce
battle followed in which Sudeva annihilated the army
of the giants completely and he himself met with a
heroic death. That is how he obtained heaven. (M.B.
Daksinatyapatha, Santi Parva, Chapter 98).
SUDEVA III. The son of Haryasva, the King of Kasi.
He was quite valiant and radiant. After the death of
his father he was anointed as King of Kasi. As soon as
he became King, the sons of King Vitahavya attacked
Sudeva and captured him. After this Divodasa became
the King of Kali. (M.B, Anusasana Parva, Chapter
30, Verse 13).
SUDEVA IV. A famous King. Nabhaga married
Suprabha the daughter of this King Sudeva. The
following is a story taken from Markandeya Purana
stating how: this Sudeva who was a Ksatriya by birth,
became a Vaigya by the curse of hermit Pramati.
Once: Nala, the friend of Sudeva, and the relative of
Dhimraksa, after having drunk too much liquor, tried
to rape the wife of the hermit Pramati. All this happened while King Sudeva was standing silently near Nala.
Pramati requested King Sudeva repeatedly to save his
wife. Sudeva replied : ‘ The Ksatriya who could help
the needy, could save your wife also.. But I am a
Vaisya.”? This arrogance of the King made the
hermit angry. ‘‘May you become a Vaisya.”’
The hermit cursed the King. Sudeva repented
and requested for liberation from the curse. “When a
Ksatriya steals away your daughter-you will recover
the lost feelings of Ksatriya.”’ The hermit gave this
liberation from the curse. 7
Because of this curse Nabhaga stole away Suprabha
the daughter of Sudeva and Sudeva got back the lost
feelings of Ksatriya.
SUDEVA I. A daughter of the King of Anga named
Ariha. The King Rksa was her son. (M.B, Adi Parva,
Chapter 95, Verse 24).
SUDEVA II. A princess born in the dynasty of King
Dagarha. Vikuntha, a King of the Piru dynasty
married Sudeva. The King Ajamidha was their son.
(M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 95, Verse 36).
SUDEVA III. The wife of Iksvaku who- was the son of
Manu. This Sudeva was the daughter of Devarata the
King: of Kagi, Iksvaku and Sudeva are said to be the
incarnations of Visnu and Devi Laksmi respectively.
While the couple were walking about 1n the forest, they
saw a she-hog. That hog was the cursed form of a
Brahmin woman named Sudeva. Sudeva, the wife ol
Iksvaku gave the merits she had earned in one year by
her good deeds to Sudeva the she-hog and liberated her
from her curse. This story occurs in Padma Purana
Bhimikhanda, Chapter 42. The story 1s given below:
Once King Iksvaku and his wife Sudeva were hunting
on the banks of the Ganga. Then a big hog came there
with his wife and children. The hog was afraid of
Iksvaku. So he said to his wife -—‘*Look ! beloved !
Iksvaku the valiant, the son of Manu, is come for hunting. I am going to fight with him.” His wife said. ‘“How
did you get this bravery to fight with the king, you who
always try to evade the forest-men ?” “It is not
SUDEVA III
bravery, my love. It is because I could go to heaven if
I fight with the king valiantly and meet with heroic
death’, replied the hog. The wife tried her utmost to
dissuade her husband from his attempt. The children
also tried to stop him. They could not change his mind.
So all of them decided to help him as much as they
could in his fight. They got ready for a fight against
Iksvaku and his army.
The king’s army saw the preparations of the hogs and
their resolute stand. Struck with fear, they informed
Iksvaku about it. The king ordered the noble hog to be
caught. Iksvaku and his wife mounted on horse and
followed the army. All the hounds ran towards the
hogs barking. The army sent a volley of arrows at the
hogs. The hog and his wife stopped the arrows. The
army could not defeat the hogs. At last the king himself killed the hog with a club. While the king was
looking: on, that noble hog was changed to a noble
Gandharva with four hands and divine clothes and
ornaments. Leaving his old body of hog on the earth
he rose up into the sky like the Sun and went to heaven.
Seeing this sight Sudeva was struck with fear. She got
down from the chariot and called the wife of the hog
towards her. The wife of the hog, wounded. all over,
came to the queen Sudeva. Sudeva asked her about
the previous history of her dead husband. The hog’s
wife said: ‘Lady ! If you feel interested I shall tell you
about the previous life of my dead husband and myself.”’
‘(My dead husband was a Gandharva named Rankavidyadhara, in the previous birth. Once he sat in the shade of
a tree near the hermitage of Pulastya and began to sing
with accompaniment. As the singing caused disturbance
to his solitude the hermit Pulastya came and requested
the Gandharva to shift to some other place. Rankavidyadhara did not like to comply with the request
of the hermit. At last Pulastya removed his hermitage
to another place. Rankavidyadhara walked in search
of Pulastya. Finally the Gandharva saw Pulastya.
Seeing that he was alone, the Gandharva took the shape
of a hog and entered the hermitage and began to wound
with his tusk and to molest that radiant sage Pulastya. Thinking it to.be a mere animal Pulastya suffered
it for along time. The hog continued its actions of
molestation. It passed excrements in front of the sage,
danced before him, played in front of him, fell down jn
the courtyard and rolled and did various other things.
As it was ananimal Pulastya forgave him. One day
Rankavidyadhara entered the hermitage as a hog, roared
aloud, laughed aloud, cried aloud, sang aloud and in
various other ways tried to change the mind of the hermit. Seeing all these, Pulastya began to think that it
was notahog. “A hog will not try to molest one continuously. I forgave him thinking him to be a mere
animal. This must be that wicked Gandharva.”” Thus
recognizing him Pulastya got angry and: cursed him
thus: “You tried to violate my penance in the shape of
a hog. So you, great sinner; take the next birthas a
hog.” With grief the Gandharva ran to Indra and informed him of everything. Indra requested Pulastya
to liberate the Gandharva from the curse. Accordingly
Pulastya gave him remission that he would regain his
original form when he was killed by the hands of the
immensely good king Iksvaku,”

SUDEVA III
Sudeva was amazed on hearing this story of the dead
hog, and asked her again. ““You hog! You speak like a
human being. How is it ?”
The wife of the hog continued the story. “Lady ! I also
have taken rebirth as a hog. In my previous birth I was
the daughter of a Brahmin named Vasudatta ( Vasudeva)
in the city of Sripura in Kalinga. They named me
Sudeva (Vasudeva). Because of the unlimited caressing
and fondling of my father I grew up as an arrogant
girl. In the meanwhile a Brahmin youth named Sivagarma, who was well-versed in all the branches of knowledge, and whose parents were dead, came to my house.
My father gave me to that brahmin. I lived with him
in my father’s house. Being proud of the wealth and
prosperity of my parents I did not care to render the
services due to my husband. My husband who was a
peaceful man bore everything. By and by I became wicked.
At last because of my wickedness and immorality my
husband left the country. My father hated me and
expelled me from the house. My father feared that
some calamity would happen to me as Karnsa was born
to Padmavati, the wife of Ugrasena, by her illegal connection with persons other than her husband.’’
Hearing about the birth of Karnsa, Sudeva asked the
she-hog to tell her about the circumstances which led to
the illegal connections of Padmavati. The wife of the
hog continued. ‘In days of old there was a king in
Mathurapuri named Ugrasena, who married Padmavati
the daughter of king Satyaketu of Vidarbha. While the
couple were living happily in Mathurapuri Satyaketu
wanted to see his daughter. He sent a messenger to
Mathurapuri and brought Padmavati to Vidarbha. She
walked along the vicinity of the palace in which she was
born, enjoying the beauty of the scenery. She walked on
and arrived on the mountain called Puspavan, and sat
on the bank of a lake. At that time a Gandharva named
Godila (Dramila) came there. He fell in Iove with her.
Fle took the shape of Ugrasena and came near her and
talked with her. Thinking that her husband had come
from Mathura to see her she embraced him. After a
while she understood that the visitor was not her
husband. She began to curse him. The visitor admitted
that he was Godila an attendant of Vaifravana. Godila
went on his way. But she had become pregnant by that
time. Her parents tried in various ways to destroy the
child in her womb. One day the infant lying in her
womb told her thus: “Mother ! you do not know who
Iam. Iam the rebirth of a powerful asura named
Kalanemi. In ancient days Visnu killed me in a battle
between the gods and asuras, I have entered into your
womb for revenge. Mother! you need not take the
trouble to destroy me.”’
speaking. After ten years Padmavati gave birth to the
mighty and strong Karnsa. He was killed by Sri Krsna
and he attained heaven.”’ ual
Sudeva was struck with wonder at the story of Karnsa.
She asked the she-hog to continue her own story. She
continued her own story. “I have said that my father
expelled me. Being shameless I walked away from there
soon. Nobody helped me. Those who saw me scolded
me. Days passed. Afilicted by a horrible disease, and
travelling in this manner, I came to a big house. I
entered the courtyard and begged for alms. It was the
house of my husband Sivafarma. When I abandoned
him he married another woman named Mangaia and
Saying so, the infant stopped
SUDHANVA II
was leading a prosperous life. Mangala gave me food.
Sivagarma asked me who I was. I told him my story.
He remembered me, his former wife. Mangala also felt
compassion forme. ‘They gave me gold ornaments and
made me stay there. But my conscience pricked me.
‘Thus burning internally I died.
My soul went to hell. After the suffering of a very long
period, I took birth again as a Jackal. Then I became
a dog, and thenasnake. After that I passed through
the births of a hen, a catand arat. Thus Brahma had
put me in the wombs of all kinds ofanimals. Now I have
taken the birth of a she-hog. Lady! Your husband
Iksvaku is the incarnation of Visnu in portion and yourself, that of Laksmi in portion. Ifyou would give me
the merits you have earned for one dav by your good
deeds, I could leave off all these mean births and attain
heaven.”’ |
The eyes of Sudeva were full when she heard the story
of the hog. She gave to the she-hog, the merits she had
earned by good deeds for one year. The hog was changed
to a divine woman of youth and beauty. Immediately
a divine chariot came down from heaven and took her
to heaven, while everybody was looking on. Iksvaku
and Sudeva returned to their palace much pleased at
the redemption of the she-hog.
SUDHAMATI. A group of Gods. The name of the Manu
of the third Manvantara was Uttama. The ruler of the
devas was the Indra. named Suéanti. There were
five groups or ganas of twelve devas each, called the
Satyas, the Japas, the Pratardanas, Sudhamas and the
VaSavarttins. (Visnu Purana, Aréa 1, Chapter 3).
SUDHAMA II. A golden mountain in the Kuga island.
(M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 12, Verse 10).
SUDHAMA III. One of the sons of King Ghrtaprstha-
(Bhagavata, Skandha 5),
SUDHANUS I. A King of the Puru dynasty. He was
the son of King Kuru who had founded Kuruksett@:
Four sons named Sudhanva, Sudhanus, Pariksit a0
Tal were born to Kuru. (Agni Purana, Chapte?
SUDHANUS II. A King who was the son of Kuru and
the father ot Suhotra. The King Uparicaravasu was 4
King of this dynasty. (Bhagavata, Skandha 9).
SUDHANUS III. A warrior from Paficala who took
the side of the Pandavas. This mighty warrior was th
son of King Dtupada and the brother of Viraketu. 1”
the battle of Bharata, when Viraketu was killed:
Sudhanus gathered his brothers and attacked Dron#:
In that fight Sudhanus was killed by Drona. (M-B3Drona Parva, Chapter. 98, Verses 37-40).
SUDHANVA I. A guard of the ends of the quar ter®-
In the beginning of creation Brahma made four gua? :
of the four ends. They were Sudhanva in the East:
Satkhapada in the South, Ketuman in the West 2P
ayaroma in the North. (Agni Purana, Chapter 19):
SUDHANVA II. Son of hermit Angiras. Some. inform”
ation gathered from R d Fe ie
given below. “sveda and Mahabharat
pter 26, Verse 7).
(iil) Sudhanva was the eighth son of Angiras.

a
SUDHANVA ITI
(iv) It is stated in Mahabharata, Anusasana Parva,
Chapter 86, Verse 24, that this Sudhanva gave
Subrahmanya a chariot, in the battle between the
Devas and the asuras.
(v) Sudhanva had three sons called Rbhu, Vibhva
Th) (Rgveda, Mandala 1, Anuvaka 16, Sukta
SUDHANVA III. A great warrior who fought against
the Pandavas in the battle of Kuruksetra. ,He was
killed by Arjuna. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 18,
Verse 42).
SUDHANVA IV. A Sudhanva who was the son of
Drupada, is mentioned in Mahabharata, Drona Parva,
Chapter 23, Verse 44. This warrior sided. with the
Pandavas in the battle of Kuruksetra and fought
against the Kauravas. When his brother Viraketu was
killed, he and his brothers joined together and attacked
Drona. In that fight Drona killed Sudhanva. (M.B.
Drona Parva, Chapter 122, Verse 45).
SUDHANVA V. An ancient King of Bharata. A story
that King Mandhata defeated this Sudhanva in battle,
occurs in Maha Bharata, Drona Parva, Chapter 62
SUDHANVA VI. A King of Sankasya. This King
surrounded the city of Mithila and sent word that
unless the bow of Siva and the princess Sita were given
to him he would kill Janaka, who subsequently fought
a battle with him. In this battle Sudhanva was killed.
Sankagya, the kingdom of Sudhanva_ was given to
Kusadhvaja by his brother Janaka. (Valmiki Ramayana, Bala Kanda, Sarga 71).
SUDHARMA I. The assembly hall of the Devas. (the
gods). (Bhagavata, Skandha 10).
SUDHARMA II. The great assembly hall of the
Yadavas. It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Adi Parva,
Chapter 219, Verse 10, that at the time of the carrying
_ away of Subhadra, the soldiers ran to Sudharma and
reported the matter there. This hall had_ the name,
‘Dagarhi’ also. This great hall was one yojana_ long
and one yojana broad. It was in this hall that Sri
Krsna received Indra. (M.B. Daksinatya Patha, Sabha
Parva, Chapter 38).
SUDHARMA III. Wife of Matali, who was the
charioteer of Indra. It is mentioned in the Mahabharata, Udyoga Parva, Chapter 95, that a daughter
named Gunake§gi was born to Matali by Sudharma.
SUDHARMA IV. A prince of the Vrsni dynasty. It 1s
‘Stated in Maha Bharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter 4,
Verse 18, that he was a member of the assembly of
Yudhisthira and that he had learned archery from
Arjuna.
SUDHARMA y. A King of Dasarna. Bhimasena who
was pleased at the good fighting of this King, appointed him as his captain. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 29,
Verse 5).
SUDHARMA VI. A warrior who had fought against
the Pandavas in the battle of Kuruksetra. (M.B.
Drona Parva, Chapter 18, Verse 20). | |
SUDHIS. A group of Gods of ‘Tamasa Manvantara. In
this Manvantara there were four groups of devas
(gods) called Suparas, Haris, Satyas and Sudhis. In
each of these groups there were twentyseven gods. (See
under Manvantara).
SUDHRTI. Another name of Satyadhrti, the King of
755 SUGATI
Videha. He was the son of Mahavirya and the -father
of Dhrstaketu. (Bhagavata, Skandha 9).
SUDINA. A holy place in Kuruksetra. It is mentioned
in Maha Bharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 83, Verse 100,
that by bathing in this holy tirtha one could attain
the world of the Sun.
SUDIVA. A hermit who had observed only Vanaprastha
(life in the forest) the third of the four stages of life,
and attained heaven. Mention is made about this
hermit in Mahabharata, Santi Parva, Chapter 244,
Verse 17.. :
SUDRA. See under Caturvarnyam.
SUDRAKA. A Sanskrit dramatist. He is believed to
have lived in the second century A.D. The drama
‘Mrcchakatika’’ has been discovered as his work. It is
divided into ten Acts. It is believed to be the oldest
Sanskrit drama. Some people think that Sadraka was a
King. The authorship of another drama, ‘**Padmaprabhrtakam’’ is also attributed to him.
SUDRSTA. A country in Bharata, very famous in the
Puranas. (M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 51).
SUDYA. A King of the dynasty of Yayati. He was the
grandson of Namasyu and the son of Carupada.
Bahugava was the son of Sudya. (Bhagavata, Skandha
oye
SUDYUMNA I. A son of Manu Caksusa. Ten sons
full of radiance, including Sudyumna were born to
Caksusa (who was the Manu of the sixth Manvantara)
by his wife Nadvala, the daughter of Prajapati Vairaja. _
(Visnu Purana, Arméa 1, Chapter 13).
SUDYUMNA II.
1) General information. A King who was born as a
woman and then became a man and then became a
woman, allin the same birth. (For detailed story see
under [la I).
2) Other detarls. )
(i) This royal hermit stays in the court of Yama
glorifying him. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 8, Verse
(ii) While Sudyumna was the King, to do justice
properly, both hands of the hermit Likhita were cut
off. (For detailed story see under Likhita) .
(iii) Because he had executed the duties of the King
properly and righteously, Sudyumna attained heaven.
(M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter 28, Verse 45).
SUGANDHA. A giant. Itis stated in Padma Purana,
Srsti Khanda, Chapter 75, that this giant was one of
the seven, who were killed by Agni (Fire) in the
battle between Hiranyaksa and the gods.
SUGANDHA I. A celestial maid. Mention is made in
Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 122, Verse 63, that
this celestial maid danced in the birth festival of
Arjuna.
SUGANDHA II. A holy place. It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 84, Verse 10, that by
visiting this.place one could obtain remission of sins
and attain heaven.
SUGANDHI. One of the thirteen wives of Vasudeva.
A son naméd Pundra was born to Vasudeva by his wife
Sugandhi. (Vayu Purana, 96, 161).
SUGATI. A King of the Bharata dynasty. It it mentioned
in Bhagavata, Skandha 5, that he was one of the sons
of Gaya.

SUGHOSA
SUGHOSA. The conch of Nakula, one of the Pandavas.
(Mahabharata, Bhisma Parva, Chapter 25, Verse 16).
SUGOPTA. An eternal Visvadeva (god concerned with
offerings to the manes). (Mahabharata, Anugdsana
Parva, Chapter 91, Verse 37).
SUGRIVA I. Bali and Sugriva were brothers. Their
mother was Aruna who once put the guise of a woman.
At that time he was called by the name Aruni. Bali
was the son born to Indra by Aruni and Sugriva was the
son born to the Sun by Aruni. Both of them were
brought up in the hermitage of Gautama. When the
King of Kiskindha Rksarajas died, Bali was anointed
the king of Kiskindha. Sugriva lived with Bali, serving
him. At this time Bali engaged in a battle with the
asura Dundubhi. Bali chased Dundubhi into a cave.
Placing Sugriva at the mouth of the cave, Bali went
in. By the magic and sorcery of Dundubhi, it appeared
to Sugriva that Bali was killed by Dundubhi. Sugriva
returned to Kiskindha. Bali who came out, followed
Sugriva to kill him due to misunderstanding. Bali chased
Sugriva all over the world. It is mentioned in Valmiki
Ramayana, Kiskindha Kanda, Sarga 46, that the knowledge of the lay-out of the various countries in the
world that Sugriva got in this running, helped him
later, in the search for Sita.
At last Sugriva entered Rsyamikacala. Bali had been
once cursed that if he entered this mountain his head
would be broken into pieces. Haniman became the
minister of Sugriva. It was during this period that Sri
Rama and Laksmana came by that way in search
of Sita. Sugriva and Sri Rama entered into a treaty.
Bali should be killed and Kiskindha should be given
to Sugriva in place of which Rama should be helped to
find out Sita and get her back.
Sri Rama killed Bali and gave Kiskindha to Sugriva,
who sent monkey-armies in all directions to find out
Sita. Haniiman found out Sita and returned to Sri
Rama, who fought a great battle with Ravana, in which
battle Sugriva took a prominent part. It was Kumbhakarna, who oppressed the monkey army much. When
he caught Sugriva, Kumbhakarna lost his ears and
nose. Then he caught hold of the monkey warriors and
Sri Rama cut off his hands with arrows. (Agni Purana,
Chapter 1). After the war, when Rama and others
returned to Ayodhya, Sugriva also accompanied them.
After that Sugriva returned to Kiskindha. After a few
years Candragupta, the second son of Sahasramukha
Ravana, carried away the daughter of Sugriva. Hearing this, Sri Rama confronted Sahasramukha Ravana
who was killed by the arrow of Sita. ~~,
Sugriva participated in the horse-sacrifice performed by
Sri Rama. The control of the army wasin the hands
of Sugriva, the financial affairs, with Vibhisana and
central powers, with Laksmana. When the sacrifice
was completed, Sugriva returned to Kiskindha. ,
SUGRIVA II. An asura. This asura was the minister
of Sumbha, an asura-chief. (Devi Bhagavata).
SUGRIVA III. A horse of Sri Krsna. It is mentioned
in Mahabharata, Drona Parva, Chapter 147, Verse 47,
that five horses Kamaga, Saibya, Sugriva, Meghapuspa
and Valahaka were yoked to the chariot of Sri Krsna.
SUGRIVI. A girl born to Kasyapa by Tamra. It was
from this Sugrivi, that the horse, camel. and donkey
originated in the world for the first time. (Matsya
Purana).
-SUHOTRA VI.
SUHOTRA V
SUHANU. An asura who livesin Varuna’s court worshipping him. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 13).
SUHASTA. Oneof the hundred sons of Dhrtarastra.
Bhimasena killed him in the great war. (Drona Parva,
Chapter 157, Verse'19).
SUHASTYA. A muni extolled in Rgveda. He was the son
of Ghosé. (Rgveda, Mandala 1, Anuvaka 17, Siakta
SUHAVI. A King born in the Bharata dynasty. He was
the grandson of emperor Bharata and son of Bhumanyu.
His mother wascalled Puskarini. (Adi-Parva, Chapter
94, Verse 24).
SUHMA I. A country famous in the Puranas. It is stated
in Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 112, Verse 29,
that Pandu had conquered this country which was
situated on the Eastern part of Bharata. Bhimasena
also conquered this country during his regional conquest
of the east. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 30, Verse 16).
SUHMA II. A country situated in the mountainous
region of North India. It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter 27, Verse 21, that Arjuna
conquered this country during his regional conquest
of the North.
SUHOTA. See under Suhotra II.
SUHOTRA I. A son of the hermit Jamadagni. Five sons
named Rumanvan, Suhotra, Vasu, Vigvavasu 20d
Parasurama were born to Jamadagni by his wife Renuk@
(Brahmanda Purana, Chapter 58).
SUHOTRA II. A son of emperor Bharata, (For genealogy, see under Bharata I).
Five sons were born to Bharata, the son of Dusyanta.
They were Suhotra, Suhota, Gaya, Garbha and Suketu.
(Agni Purana, Chapter 278),
SUHOTRA III.
I). General information. A king of the Candra dynasty:
It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chaptet
94, Verse 24, that he was the grandson of emperor
Bharata and the son of the elder brother of Bhumany¥:
Puskarini was the mother of this Suhotra.
2). Other details. |
(i) This Suhotra got suzerainty over the entire earth.
After this he conducted horse-sacrifice and sever@
a sacrifices. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 94, Vers
(ii) . Suhotra married Suvarna, a princess of the Iksvaku
dynasty. Three sons, Ajamidha, Sumidha and Purumidha were born to them. (M. B. Adi Parva, Chapt
94, Verse 30).
(i111) Suhotra was a
Parva, Chapter 56).
(iv) Being pleased at his hospitality, Indra showered
arain of gold in the country fora year. Rivers wet®
full of golden water, Indra showered golden fishes 4/59
in these rivers. But the king divided all this gold
among Brahmins. (M. B. Santi Parva Chapter 29;
Verse 25).
SUHOTRA IV. Son of Sahadeva, one of the Pandav2*’
Sahadeva married Vijaya, daughter of Dyutiman, the
generous king. (M. B. Dronaking of Madra. The son Suhotra was b to thet:
(M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 95, Verse 80 /<
SUHOTRAV. A hermit. This hermit honoured
Yudhisthira toa great extent.
Parva, Chapter 26, Verse 24) ,
pee © .» Aking of the Kuru d ty. Once thi?
king obstructed the way of Sibi, Born ii. the family of
(Mahabharata, Var

SUHOTRA VII 757
King UsSinara. He let Sibi go only after the intervention of Narada. (See under Sibi).
SUHOTRA VII. A giant. This giant was one of those
kings who had ruled over the entire earth and had to
leave the place due to fate. (M. B. Santi Parva.
Chapter 277, Verse 51).
SUHU. A Yadava king who was the son of Ugrasena.
(Bhagavata, Skandha 9).
SUHVA. (SUHMA) A king of the Bharata ‘dynasty.
Suhva was the son of Bali, and grandson of Sutapas.
Bali had no direct sons. Being miserable due to the
absence of sons, Bali approached the hermit. Dirghatamas, by whom the queen gave birth to six sons. They
were Anga, Vanga, Kalinga, Suhva(or Suhma), Pundra
and Adripa. (Bhagavata, Skandha 9).
SUJANU. A great saint. This hermit stopped Sri Krsna
on his way to Hastinapura and conversed with him.
(Mahabharata, Daksinatyapatha, Udyoga Parva,
Chapter 83).
SUJATA I. One of the hundred sons of Dhrtarastra.
He attacked Bhimasena in the battle of Bharata and
Bhimasena killed him. (M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 26,
Verse 5).
SUJATA II. A monkey King. Sujata was one of the
sons born to Pulaha by his wife Sveta. (Brahmanda
SUJATA. The daughter of the hermit Uddalaka. (See
under Khagodara).
SUJYESTHA. A King who was the son of Agnimitra
and the father of Vasumitra. (Bhagavata, Skandha 12).
SUKA I. (SUKADEVA). The son of Vyasa.
1) Birth, The sage Vyasa once wished to have a son.
So he began to worship Siva for the purpose. His
desire was to have a son who would combine in him
the essential qualities of fire, earth, water, air and ether
He did tapas for a hundred years. Because of the
austerity of his tapas, his locks of hair began to blaze
like flames of fire. At last Siva -appeared and blessed
him to have a son according to his wish.
After receiving his boon, Vyasa returned to his a$rama.
Soon after his arrival there, an Apsaras named Ghrtaci
came there in the form of a parrot. On seeing her
beauty Vyasa had an involuntary emission. of semen.
Suka’s birth was from this semen. (For further details
see Para-2, under Ghrtaci).
2) Suka’s Boyhood, It was 6:ya who performed the
Upanayana (wearing the sacred thread) ceremony of
uka. Since he was born out of the semen which was
the result of the fascination for a parrot, the boy was
named “Suka’’. He was a divine boy. Soon after his
birth, he grew up into an exceptionally brilliant boy.
He went to Brhaspati and mastered all knowledge.
After staying with Brhaspati for some years, he returned to his father’s arama. :
3) In Vydsa’s hut. Wyasa was very happy at the arr ival
of his son after completing his education. In due course
he thought of getting his son married to a suitable girl
and to prepare him for,an_ ideal Grhasthagrama. But
Suka did not fall in with his father’s proposal. All the
efforts of Vyasa to persuade him were in vain. At last
he told Suka that he was pleased with his stern resolve
and allowed him to pursue his life as a Sannyasi, if he
wished for it. . 1
From that time Sukadeva and Siita, the disciple of
yasa began the study of Bhagavata. But Suka did
SUKA I
not find happiness in that study either. Vyasa taught:
him spiritual philosophy. Even then Suka could not
fnd mental satisfaction. So his father sent him to
Mithila. At that time there was none who equalled
Janaka, the then King of Mithila. Before sending him
away, Vyasa made his son promise that he would
return to his agrama, immediately after leaving
Mithila.
4) Suka in Mithila. Suka started his journey to
Mithila on foot. He passed through many lands and
cities on his way. He visited many places inhabited by
different classes of people like yogins, sages, mendicants,
Vaikhanasas, Sdktas, Pasupatas, Sauras, Saivas,
Vaisnavas, etc. After taking two years to cross Mahameru and one year for crossing Himalaya he reached
Mithila. At the very sight of the land of Mithila with
‘ts inhabitants living in luxury. and prosperity, Sukadeva was filled with wonder.
One of the sentries at the palace gate who saw the
dignified bearing and majestic figure of Suka, standing
at the entrance, greeted him with joined palms and
conducted him into the royal palace. From there, a
minister took him to the interior of the palace, where
a passage led him toa beautiful park full of flowering
trees and swimming pools. After giving him a seat in
the park the minister left the place. There, he was
attended by women who were like celestial beauties.
But Suka was not happy even in their company or
attentions. He spent the whole night in deep meditation.
The next morning King Janaka visited Suka. After the
exchange of customary greetings, Janaka enquired of
him the object of his visit. Suka answered that he came
there to learn from Janaka the way to salvation, as
directed by his father.
On hearing this, Janaka said -— “After Upanayana,
(investiture with the sacred thread) a Brahmana
should study the Wedas. He should discharge his debts
to the Devas and to his Pitrs by tapas, worship of the
guru and Brahmacarya. After the study of the Vedas,
after mastering the senses, he should give Gurudaksina
(fee to the teacher) . Then the pupil may return home
with the permission of the Guru (preceptor )., After
reaching home he should begin erhasthagrama. After
the birth of children, he should follow Vanaprasthaérama. In that asrama, a Brahmana should kindle
fire in his soul. He should then renounce the dual state,
rise above all desire and remain in Brahmasrama.”’
After receiving Janaka’s advice, Suka returned to his
father.
5) Domestic Life. Sukadeva married the beautiful
Pivari, daughter of the Pitrs and thus began his
grhasthagrama in Vyasa’s aSrama. He had four sons
named Krsna, Gauraprabha, Bhiri and Devasruta and
a daughter named Kirti, by Pivari. Kirti was married
by Anu, the son of King Vibhraja. (Devi Bhagavata,
Ist Skandha).
6,) Other details.
(i) Vyasa composed Bharata and taught it to Suka.
(M.B. Chapter 1, Verse 104).
(ii) Sukadeva recited the Mahabharata story containing 14 lakhs of stanzas to Gandharvas, Yaksas and
Raksasas. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 1, Verse 106;
Svargarohana Parva, Chapter 5, Verse 59.)
(iii) Sukadeva taught them the entire Vedas and the

SUKA II
Mahabharata story. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 63,
Verse 89).
(iv) Suka attended Yudhisthira’s assembly. (M.B.
Sabha Parva, Chapter 4, Verse 11).
7) The End. While Sukadeva was thus leading his family
life, teaching the Vedas and reading the Puranas,
Narada happened to pay a visit to him. His conversation with Narada drew Sukadeva nearer to the path of
Moksa. He left his father, Veda Vyasa and his own
family, went to the peak of Kaildsa and stayed there
doing tapas to Paramagiva. At last he became a perfect Siddha and rising up to the Heavens shone there
as a second sun. Devarsis began to praise Sukadeva.
His father Vyasa was in deep grief at his disappearance
and left his 4irama in search of Suka. After wandering
in many places he came to Kailasa where Suka had performed tapas and called him. Siva who saw him utterly
tired and weak took pity on him and comforted him in
the following words: ‘Did you not pray to me for a
son who would combine in himself the essences of the
Pancabhitas? Asa result of the tapas you have done
and by my blessing, such a glorious son was born to
you. Suka has attained the highest position which is
inaccessible to those who have not conquered their
senses and difficult to attain even by the gods. Why do
you worry about Suka? The glory acquired by your
eminent son will continue undiminished as long as the
mountains and oceans exist. I give you my blessing
that an image exactly like your son will always accompany you from today.’ Just then, an image which
closely resembled his son appeared before Vyasa who
was filled with rapture.
It is believed that even today if any one calls Siva at
the place where Siva spoke to Vyasa in answer to his
call, Siva would respond to the call. (M.B. Santi
Parva, Chapters 332 and 333: Devi Bhagavata, Ist
Skandha).
SUKAII. A messenger of Ravana. This Suka had a
friend named Sdrana. These two persons were expert
spies who used to gather secret and important pieces of
information from the strongholds of Ravana’s friends
and enemies and passed them on to Ravana.
Soon after Sri Rama eatered Lanka, Ravana sent Suka
and Sarana to Sri Rama’s camp. After taking a distant
view of the surroundings, they entered the camp of
Sri Rama in the form of monkeys. Taking care not to
come within ; the observation of Vibhisana, they went
about the military camps, gathering secret information.
Just then they were met by Jambavan and Haniman.
After closely observing them fora considerable time
they understood that they were enemy spies. The
monkey-heroes. promptly seized them and produced
them before Sugriva. Confused and frightened under a
shower of questions they sought the protection of §rj
Rama. While Sri Rama was interrogating them,
Vibhisana happened to come there. At his sight, Suka
and Sarana were alarmed. Grasping the whole situation
in an instant, Vibhisana kicked both of them when
they assumed their former shapes as Raksasas. The
monkey-leaders sprang at them. ‘T’he Raksasas begged
for pardon and prayed for Sti Rama’s protection, Sri
Rama forgave them and set them free. (Valmiki
Ramayana, Yuddha Kanda; Kamba Ramayana, Yuddha
Kanda).
SUKESA
SUKA III. A king of the Lunar dynasty. (Bhagavata,
9th Skandha). .
SUKA IV. A king of the Saryati dynasty. He was the
son of Prsata. He had conquered all countries in the
world and after performing many yagas, he renounced
his kingdom and attained Moksa by doing tapas on
Satasrnga mountain. (Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Daksi_ natya Patha, Chapter 123).
SUKA V. Son of Subala, king of Gandhara. He was
slain by Iravan in the course of the Bharata Yuddha.
(Mahabharata, Bhisma Parva, Chapter 90, Verse 26).
SUKA VI. Son of the monkey Sarabha. Rksa was the
son of Suka by Vydaghri. (Brahmanda Purana, 3, 8,
SUKA VII. A Maharsi who was the contemporary of
Anuha of Daksina Paficala and of king Brahmadatta.
This sage lived before the time of the other Suka who
was the son of Vyasa.
This sage Suka had six sons, named Bhiari§ravas,
ambhu, Prabhu, Krsna, Saura (Sauraprabha) and
Devaégruta by his two wives Pivari and Ekasrnga.
(Brahmanda Purana, 3-8-93: Vayu Purana, 70-84;
Devi Bhagavata, 1-14; Narada. 1-58).
SUKALA. A woman who Joved and honoured her busband.
SUKAKSA. A mountain. It is mentioned: in Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter 38, that this mountain,
which is famous in the Puranas, stands on the western
side of Dvaraka.
SUKAMALA. A Yaksa. This Yaksa was the son born to
Manivara by Devajani. (Brahmanda Purana, 3. 7. 129).
SUKANABHA. A Raksasa on the side of Ravana.
(Valmiki Ramayana, Sundara Kanda, Sarga 6).
SUKANDAKA. A country inancient India. (Mahabharata
Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 53.)
SUKANYA I. The wife ef the hermit Cyavana. See under
Cyavana, Para 3.
SUKANYA II. The wife of the hermit Matarigva. The
hermit Mankanaka was the son born to Matarigva by
Sukanya. (See under Mankanaka).
SUKARA. A country celebrated in the Puranas. Kru,
King of Sikara had presented thousands of Elephants
at Yudhisthira’s Rajasiya yaga. (M.B. Sabha Parva,
Chapter 52, Verse 25).
SUKARA. A hell. (See under KA4la, the section ‘Hell’ ).
SUEARAMUBHA, A hell. (See under Kala, the section
‘Hell’).
SUKARMATI. One of the two followers given to Subrahmanya by Vidhata. Suvrata was the other follower:
(M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 42 1
SUKARMA II. One of the teacher priests of SamavedaThis Sukarma, the son of Sutva, divided the Samaveda
into a thousand branches. (See under Guruparampara.)
SUKARMA III. A Brahmana who had earned merits of
good deeds by serving his parents. (For further details
see under Pippalada I).
SUKASANGITI. A Gandharva.
under Pramohini).
SUKESA (SUKEST).
I) General information A raksasa (giant) who was the
son of Vidyutkeéga and Salakatanka. When Brahma
asked the Subjects to look after his creation those who
said ‘Raksamahe’ became Raksasas ‘(giants ) and those
who said ‘Yaksamahe’, the Yaksas (a clan of semi gods)-
Once,two brothers named Heti and Praheti were born
(For further details see

SUKESA
inthe clan of Raksasas. Praheti remained unmarried and
entered the lifeof penance, Heti married Bhaya the sister
of Kala. A son named Vidyutkega was born to the couple. Vidyutkesa married Salakatanka, the daughter cf
Sandhya. Sdalakataika delivered a son. But wishing
to enjoy the company of her husband, she abandoned
the son and lived with her husband. The child which
was as bright as the rising Sun, putting its folded fist
in its mouth, cried aloud. Paramagiva and Parvati
who were travelling along the sky mounted on the bull,
heard the cry of the infant and looked at the spot from
which the cry arose. On seeing the infant, Parvati took
pity on it. Siva blessed the child, which instantly grew
as old as its mother. Siva gave the Raksasa prince
immortality and a city which could travel through the
sky. Parvati said that Raksasa women would, in future
deliver the moment they became pregnant and that the
child would grow equal to its mother in age, as soon as
itwas born. SukegSa was the son of Vidyutkesa and
Salakatanka. Sukesa was delighted at the boons he
got, and travelled wherever he pleascd, in his city.
Sukega married Devavati the daughter of Gramani a
Gandharva. Mali, Sumali and Malyavan were the
sons of this couple. (Uttara Ramayana).
2) The city of Sukesafell on the ground. Sukega pleased
iva by penance. Siva made him invincible and gave
him a city which travelled through the sky. Because of
these boons, the Raksasa became righteous and pious.
He lived in the city with other Raksasas. Once Sukesa
went to the forest Magadha and visited the hermits
there. ‘He asked them about the means to attain prosperity in this world and the other worlds. The hermits
gave him long exhortations. They told him about the
various hells given to sinners. Thus Sukesga became
righteous-minded and saintly. He returned to his
city and called together all the other Raksasas and
spoke to them about what he had learned from the
hermits. He said: “The hermits taught me the means
to attain heaven. They are Non-killing, Truth, not
stealing, cleanliness, contrcl of all outward going energies, liberality, kindness, forgiveness, abstinence, good
usages etc. So it is my order that all of you observe
these good things.” The Raksasas were pleased at the
words cf Sukega. They began tolead a righteous life.
In this way they got wealth and prosperity. Their
radiance increased to such an extent that the Sun and
the moon and the stars found it difficult to continue
their travels.
Thus the city of the Raksasa shone as the sun in the day
and as the moon in the night. ‘The progress of the Sun
in the day became indiscernible. Due to its brightness
the Raksasa city seemed to be the moon and thinking
that it was night, the lotus flowers folded in the day
and bloomed in the night. Havoc was caused in the
earth as well as in the world of-the gods. The sun became unpopular. So he tried to find out the cause. At
last he found out the cause. He became angry. He
looked with fury at the city of the Raksasas. Hit by
the look, the city lost its merits and began to sink down
to the earth.
When the city fell down Sukeéga called Siva and cried
aloud. Siva looked round to see what happened to his
devotee. He understood that the sun was the culprit.
siva looked at the sun with furious eyes. Instantly the
sun was dropped from the Solar region to the air. The
SUKLA
hermits saw the Sun coming slowly to the earth. They
called out loudly. “If you want to be well in falling,
go and fall in Hariksetra.*’ The sun called out, ‘“What
is Hariksetra?”’ ‘‘Hariksetra is Varanasi from Yogasayi
to Kegavadarsana’’, the hermits replicd. Hearing this
the Sun fell in Varanasi. ‘Then to lessen the heat the
sun dipped and splashed in Asi tirtha and Varuna
tirtha. ;
Brahma knew this, and informed Siva of it. Siva came to
Varanasi and took thesun by his hands and gave him thename ‘Lola’ and sent him back in the chariot. After
that Brahma went to SukeSa and sent his city with the
Raksasas in it, back to the sky, and the Sun was fixed
in the sky as before. (Vamana Purana, Chapter 15)
SUKESI I (SUKESA). See under Suke’a.
SUKESI II. The daughter of the king of Gandhara.
This Sukegi was the wife of Sri Krsna. It is mentioned
‘ in Mahabh2rata, Sabha Parva, Chapter 38 that SriKrsna gave her a palace, the doors of which shone
as the gold of Jambinada.
SUKESI III. Acelestial maid of Alakapuri. It is
mentioned in Mahabharata, Anu’ asana Parva, Chapter
19, Verse 45, that she performed a dance in honour
of the visit of Astavakra, in the palace of Kubera.
SUKESI IV. The daughter of Ketuvirya the king of
Magadha. She was married to Marutta (the third),
(Markandeya Purana, 128).
SUKETANA. A king of the Bhrgufamily. He was the
son of Sunita and the father of Dharmaketu. (Bhagavata, Skandha 9).
SUKETUI. A king of the Solar dynasty. It is stated in
Bhagavata, Skandha 9 that this king was the son of
Nandivardhana and the father of Devarata.
SUKETUII. A. king of the Piru dynasty. He became
famous under the name Viratha. He was one of the
five sons of Bharata. The five sons were Suhotra,
Suhota, Gaya, Garbha and Suketu. (Agni Purana,
Chapter 278).
SUKETU III. A king of ancient India. It is mentioned
in Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 185, Verse 9, that
this Suketu and his son Sunama were present at the
Svayarhvara marriage of Draupadi.
SUKETU IV. A son of Sigupdla. He was killed in the
battle of Bharata by Drona. (M.B. Karna Parva,
Chapter 6, Verse 33).
SUKETU V. A mighty king who stood on the side of
the Pandavas and fought against the Kauravas in the
Bharaia-battle. ‘This king who was the son of Citraketu,
was killed by the arrow of the teacher Krpa. (M.B.
Karna Parva, Chapter 54, Verse 21).
SUKETU VI. The father of Tataka. It is stated in
Kamba Ramayana, Balakanda, that this Suketu was the
son of the Gandharva King Suraksaka. (See under
Tataka for further details) .
SUKI. A daughter of Kagyapa Prajapati. Five daughters
named Kraufici, Bhasi, Syeni, Dhrtarastri and Suki
were born to KaSyapa by his wife Tamra. Kraufici
gave birth to owls. Bhadsas were born to Bhasi and
eagles and kites were born to Syeni. Dhrtarastri gave
birth to swans and Cakravakas. Suki gave birth to
Nata and Vinata was the daughter of Nata. (Valmiki
Ramayana, Aranyakanda, Sarga 14).
SUKLA. A warrior who fought on the side of the
Pandavas. He was a native of Paficala country,
RRR Se ee as -

SUKRA I
Mahabharata, Karna Parva, Chapter56, Verse 45, mentionsthat he was slain by Karna during the Bharata
battle.
SUKRA (SUKRACARYA) I. Preceptor of the Asuras:
1) Birth. Views differ as to whether Sukra was the
son or grandson of Bhrgu. The Puranas state that
Puloma was the wife of Bhrgu. Sukra has another name,
Kavya. Kavya means the son of Kavi. Some authorities say that Kavi was Bhrgu’s son, while others think
that Kavi was Bhrgu himself. Sukra’s mother is referred to as ‘‘Kavyamata” in many places. Sukra is referred to as the strongest of the seven sons born to
Bhrgu and Puloma. In the light of these references it
is reasonable to consider Sukra as the son of the sage
Bhrgu. ‘‘Kavi’? must be supposed to be another name
of Bhrgu. Uganas was another name for Sukra.
2) Love story. Once the sage Bhrgu lived in the valley
of Mandara mountain, performing‘austere tapas. Sukra
who was then a boy, used to attend on his father. One
day when Bhrgu was absorbed in ‘‘Nirvikalpasamadhi”
(deep meditation) the lonely Sukra was appreciating
the beauty of the sky above him. There was no one
else by his side. At that time he happened to see an
exceptionally beautiful Apsara woman passing across the
‘sky. His heart was filled with delight at the sight. All
his thoughts were centred on her and he sat absorbed
in her bewitching charm. In his imagination he followed Indra and reached Indraloka. Indra greeted him
with honour. After that Sukra, attended by the heavenly beings went about sight-seeing in Heaven. There
he unexpectedly came across the Apsara beauty whom
he had seen earlier, in the midst of several other
women. They fell in love at first sight. ‘To fulfil his
desire Sukra enveloped the whole place in darkness.
The other women left the place. The apsara beauty
approached Sukra and both of them entered a hut formed by the thick foliage of creeping plants and indulged
in sensual pleasures. Since dikes spent a period of
eight Caturyugas like this in her company, he became
weak in his virtue and descended to the earth. Then
he became conscious of his physical being. His depraved
soul was stopped at the moon. It reached the earth
through mist and grew up as paddy plants. A Brahmana
who was a native of Dagarna land ate the rice which
was cooked from the ears of those paddy plants. Sukra’s
soul in the shape of Sukra entered the womb of the
Brahmana’s wife and in due course took his birth.
Because of his close association with Munis, that boy
grew up like a sage and spent a period of one Manvantara, jeading an austere life in the valley of the Meru
mountain. At that time his Apsara woman had been
born as a female deer, as the result of a curse. By
their connection in the previous birth, the Brahmana
fell in love with that female deer and begot a human
child by his union with her. With that the austerities
of his life were at an end, All his thoughts were now
directed towards the future glory of his son and he
ignored even his spiritual duties. Not long after, he died
of snake-bite. Later, he was born as the son of the king
of Madra and ruled the country for many years, After
that he took birth in many other wombs and af last was
born asthe son of a Maharsi living on the bank of the
river Ganga. Sukra’s body which was by the side of
Bhrgu dropped to the earth after being exposed to the
wind and sun for along time. But owing to Bhrgu’s
SUKRA i
power of tapas and the holiness of the asrama, birds and
animals did not eat the body. After 1,000 divyavatsaras,
sage Bhrgu opened his eyes from his samadhi but he did
not find his son near him. A famished and worn out body
was lying before him. Within the wrinkles of the skin,
small birds were nesting and frogs took refuge in the
hollow of the stomach. Enraged at the premature death
of his son, he was about to curse Yama, the god of Death.
Coming to know of this Dharmaraja (Yama) appeared
before him and said :— ‘‘We honour and adore you 4s
a great tapasvi. You should not ruin your tapas. I have
devoured numerous Brahmandas. I have already swallowed Rudras and Visnudevas many times. All of you
are my food. It is ordained by Fate. Even Brahma is not
indestructible at the end of a Kalpa. Knowing all these
facts, why do you think of cursing me? Your son fell
into this state because of his own act. While you were 1
a state of Samadhi your son’s mind left its body
and went up to Heaven. There he spent many years 19dulging in sensual pleasures in the company: of the
celestial beauty Visvaci. Then he was born as a Brahmana in Dasarna country. In his next birth he became
the King of Kosala. After that passing through mary
births in succession he is now performing tapas on the
bank of the river Samanga as the son of a Brahman,
under the name, Vasudeva. Open your inner eye 4?
see for yourself.”’
After saying this Dharmaraja revived the body of Sukra
who rose up and did obeisance to his father. (Jfan4vasistha, Sthitiprakaranam) .
(3) Domestic Life. It is seen that Sukra had several
wives and children. In Devi Bhagavata there is a story
of Jayanti, daughter of Indra who was Sukra’s wife foF
about ten years. (See under Jayanti II). Priyavrata, th¢
brother of Uttanapada had a daughter named Urjjasval}
by his wife Surapa. In Devi Bhagavata, 8th Skandha
it is stated that Sukracarya married Urjjasvati and_hé
had a daughter Devayani by her. Mahabharata, di
Parva, Chapter 65 mentions that Sukra was the acary4
(preceptor) of the Asuras and his four sons were the
priests of the Asuras. Sukra had a daughter name
“Ara’’. (See under Ara). Besides, Sukra had anoth&
wife named Sataparva.
But no child was born to Sataparva.
Devi, wife of Varuna’s elder brother, was a daughter
ukra. Urjjasvati was the most famous among Sukr4 .
wives.
4) Revived his mother. See under Kavyamata.
9) Famadagni was restored to life. See.the 8th para undef
Jamadagni.
6)Sukra cursed Dandai. See under Ara,
7) Cursed Yayati. See the 4th Para under Devayani8) How Sukra lost his eve. Sukracarya lost one of his ey
during the time of Mahabali, the Asura King. Maha
visnu incarnated as Vamana and begged three feet °
earth from Mahabali. Since Sukra tried to obstruct 2”
Visnu put out one of Sukra’s eyes with the point of 2
a darbha grass. (For more details see 3rd Para under
Mahabali).
9) Siva.swallowed Sukra. Once Sukra invaded Kuber®
and plundered all his wealth. The distressed Kubert
informed Siva about it. Siva at once started up
his weapon, shouting “Where is he?” Sukra appear’
on the top of Siva’s trident. Siva caucht hold of hie
and swallowed him, Sukra who moved about in SiV®

SUKRA I
stomach found the excessive heat there, unbearable and
soon became exhausted. In his helpless state he began
to worship Siva for his mercy. At last Siva permitted
him to escape through his penis and Sukra thus came
out. (M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter 290).
10) Other details.
(1) Once Sukracarya had adorned the office of Education Minister of Mahisdsura. At that time Ciksura
was the War Minister, ‘Tamra was Financer Minister,
Asiloma was the Prime Minister, Vidala was the Foreign
Minister, Udarka was the Military Commander and
ukra was the Education Minister. (Devi Bhagavata,
Sth Skandha).
(11) Agni Purana, Chapter 51 states that Sukra should
be installed in temples with his Kamandalu (a _ vessel
for carrying water) and wearing his garland.
(iii) At the time of the war between Devas and Asuras.
Sukra taught Surasi a mantra to destroy everything.
( Skanda Purana, Asura Kanda).
(iv) Sukra was Prahlada’s Guru (preceptor). (Kamba
Ramayana, Yuddha kanda).
(v) Sukra worshipped Siva and received from him
“Mrtasafijivani Mantra” (Mantra having power to
revive the dead). (Vamana Purana, Chapter 62).
(vi) Sukra had prohibited drinking. (M.B. Adi Parva,
Chapter 76, Verse 57).
(vii) He had shone in Indra’s assembly. (M.B. Chapter 7, Verse 22, Sabha Parva).
(viii) Sukra exists in Brahma’s assembly in the form of
a planet. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 11, Verse 29).
(ix) Sukra resides with other Asuras on the top of the
Meru mountain. All precious stones are in the possession
of Sukra. Even Kubera (the god of wealth) lives by
borrowing one- fourth of Sukra’s . wealth. (M.B. Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 6, Verse 22).
(x) Sukra was among those who visited Bhisma as he
lay on the bed of arrows. (M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter
47, Verse 8).
(xi) Once Sukracarya was the priest of Emperor Prthu.
(M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter 59, Verse 110).
(xii) On another occasion Sukra sent Indra to Prahlada
to obtain prosperity. (M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter 124,
Verse 27). .
(xiii) By his power of Yoga Sukra once grabbed all the
wealth of Kubera. (M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter 289,
Verse 9),
(xiv) He got the name “Sukra” because he came out
through ‘“Sivalinga’? (Siva’s penis) and thereby
became a son of Parvati. (M.B. anti Parva, Chapter
(xv) Sukra learnt Siva’s Sahasranama (Thousand
names) from the sage Tandi and taught it to Gautama.
(M.B. Anugasana Parva, Chapter 17, Verse 177).
(xvi) Mahabharata, Anugdsana Parva, Chapter 85,
Verse 129, mentions that Bhrgu had seven sons-Cyavana,
Vajrasirsa, Suci, Aurva, Sukra, Savana and Vibhu.
(xvii) Once in answer to a question of Mahabali,
Sukra referred to the importance of Puspadana (gift of
flowers). (M.B. Anuéasana Parva, Chapter 98).
(xviii) In his old age Sukra observed Vanaprastha and
attained Heaven. (M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter 244,
Verse 17).
{xix) In Mahabharata, several other names like Bhargava, Bhargavadayada, Bhrgusrestha, Bhrgidvaha,
SUKTIMATI I
Bhrgukulodvaha, Kaviputra, Kavya and Usanas are
given for Sukra.
SUKRA II. A son of Vasistha. Seven sons were born to
Vasistha byhis wife Urjja; they were, Rajas, Gotra,
Urddhvabahu, Savana, Anagha, Sutapas and Sukra. All
these seven persons were the Saptarsis of the third
Manvantaram (Visnu Purana, Part 1, Chapter 10).
In Agni Purana, Chapter 20 the names of the seven
sons of Vasistha and Urjja are given as Rajas. Gatra,
Urddhvabahu, Savana, Alaghu, Sukra and Sutapas.
SUKRAIII. A king who belonged to the dynasty of
Emperor Prthu. ‘Two sons, Antardhana and V adi were
born to Prthu. Antardhana had a son named Havirdhana by wife Sikhandini. Havirdhana married Dhisana
who was born in Agnikula. Six sons were born to them.
They were, Pracinabarhis, Sukra, Gaya, Krsna, Vraja
and Ajina. (Visnu Purana, Part 1, Chapter I4).
SUKRATU. A King in ancient India. When once
Safijaya talked in praise of the ancient Kings of fame
in India, this King Sukratualso was mentioned. (M.B.
Adi Parva, Chapter 1, 235). 7
SUKRSA. A liberal hermit. A story about this hermit
occurs in Markandeya Purana.
Once Indra wanted to test Sukrsa. So he came in the
guise of a bird and requested for human flesh. ‘Then
the hermit called his sons and asked them to give their
flesh to the bird. They were not prepared to do so.
Sukrsa got angry and cursed his sons that they would
be born.as birds. Accordingly the sons of the hermit
took birth in the Garuda family under the names
Dronaputra, Pingaksa, Vibodha, Suputra and Sumukha.
As a remission ofthe curse, the hermit said that even
as birds they would be having wisdom and knowledge.
After this, to keep his word, Sukrsa got ready to cut
his own flesh for the bird, Then Indra appeared in his
own form and blesssed the hermit.
SUKSATRA. A_ heroic warrior who fought in the
Kuruksetra on the side of the Pandavas. He was the
son of the King of Kosala. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 23, Verse 57).
SUKSMA. A notorious Danava, who was born to
Prajapati Kagyapa by his wife Danu. The King
Jayadratha, was the rebirth of this Danava. (M.B. Adi
Parva, Chapter 6/, Verse 18).
SUKSMAPRAKRTI. The cause which is indestructible,
not clear and having always goodness as its form is
Siaksmaprakrti. That unspeakable nature has no base.
Saksmaprakrti. is immovable and indestructible. There
is no sound or form or touch in it.-This nature which
has no beginning or end, which has only three attributes
is the root cause of the universe. This entire universe
was pervaded by this power from the beginning of the
great deluge to the beginning of creation. Then there
was no night or day, no earth or Sky, no light or
darkness. Then there was only Brahman the union of
Prakrti and Purusa which could not be perceived by
sense organs or intelligence. (See under Prakrti).
SUKSMASARIRA. See under Punarjanma.
SUKTIMAN. A mountain which was subdued by
Bhimasena in the course of his conquest of the eastern
country. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 30, Verse 5)
SUKTIMATII. A river which used to flow by ‘he
side of Uparicaravasu’s capital city. There is a story
about this river. Once the Kolahala mountain tell in
love with this river and kept it within himselt. Upari-

SUKTIMATI II
caravasu who came to know of this, gave a kick to the
mountain. The kick. produced a hole in the mountain
and the river emerged through that hole. Suktimati had
a son and a daughter by Kolahala mountain. The river
presented them to the King. The King appointed the
son as his military commander. Girika, the daughter of
the river became the King’s wife. (M.B. Adi Parva,
Chapter 63, Verse 34). 3 :
SUKTIMATI II. The capital city of Dhrstaketu, King
of Cedi. (Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 22,
Verse 50).
SUKUMARAI. A Pulinda King. The name of the
capital of this King was also Sukumara. It is stated in
Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter 29, Verse 10, that
King Sukumara was the son of King Sumitra. It is stated
in some other Puranas that Sucitra was the father of
Sukumara and that during his regional conquest of
the east Bhimasena had defeated both. On another
‘occasion Sahadeva, who had gone for the regional
conquest of the south, also defeated both Sukumara
and his father. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 31, Verse
When the battle of Bharata was about to begin,
Sukumara, the King af Pulinda joined the side of the
Pandavas. It is stated in Mahabharata, Udyoga Parva,
Chapter 171, Verse 15, that King Sukumara became
one of the prominent chariot-fighters of the Pandava
army.
SUKUMARAII. A naga (serpent) who was born in
the family of Taksaka. This serpent was burned to
death in the sacrificial fire of Janamejaya. (M.B. Adi
Parva, Chapter 57, Verse 9).
SUKUMARA III. A King ofthe Puru dynasty. The
father of this King was Vibhu, the son of Varsaketu.
Two sons named Anarta and Sukumara were born to
Vibhu. The King Satyaketu was the son of Sukumara.
(Agni Purana, Chapter 278).
SUKUMARA IV. A Sanskrit poet. There is a story
about the devotion of Sukumara to his teacher. Though
Sukumara was a dutiful student his teacher used to
scold him always. Consequently Sukumara harboured _
malice in his heart against his teacher. One night
Sukum4ra got on the upper attic of the house of the
teacher with a big stone. His aim was to drop the
stone on the head of the teacher. But that night the
conversation of the teacher and his wife was about
Sukumara. The wife asked the teacher why he was
scolding his disciple so often, when he was so dutiful
and righteous. The teacher said that he loved him
most and that the chastisement was meant to make him
better and better. When Sukumiara heard this his heart
was broken. With tears in his eyes, he got down with
the stone and disappeared in darkness.
Next morning Sukumara had no peace of mind. He
approached the teacher. He asked the teacher “What
is the punishment destined for him who had tried to
kill his teacher 2?” The teacher replied that he should
die a slow death in the fire made by the husk of paddy.
Instantly Sukumara madea pit and stood in it and
filled the pit with husk up to his neck and’set fire to
the pile. When the teacher knew that the culprit was
Sukumara, he was filled with grief. He tried his best to
dissuade his beloved disciple from his attempt. But it
was in vain. While he was‘slowly burning in the fire
he composed and sang the great poem ‘Sri Krsna
SUMADA
Vildsa’. The poet was not able tocomplete the twelfth
Sarga of Sri Krsna Vilasa.
The sixtysixth stanza was the last one he sang. Sri
Krsna was showing Satyabhama, the various countries
and describing the prominence ofeach, when they had
reached the earth after obtaining the Parijata flowers
from the world of the gods. After having described the
kingdoms of Pandya and Cola, the poet was beginning
to. describe the natural beauty of ‘Saptakoikanas’ (the
seven Konkana countries). Thestory says that when
he had sung the last line of that stanza his tongue was
burnt and he could not proceed with the rest of the
poem.
SUKUMARA V. The son of King Bhavya who was the
ruler of Saka Island. (M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 12,
Verse 26).
SUKUMARA VI. An ancient place. This place was near
the mountain Jaladharagiri in the Saka Island. (M.B.
Bhisma Parva, Chapter 11, Stanza 21).
SUKUMARA VII. The capital city of the Pulindas. (See
under Sukumara ITI).
SUKUMARII. A river in the Saka Island. This river
is famous in the Puranas. (Mahabharata, Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 11, Verse 3). ;
SUKUMARTII.Daughter of King Srfijaya. This Sukumar
was a wife of Narada. (See under Parvata, Para 2).
SUKUNDALA. One of the hundred sons of Dhrtarastra-
(M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 67, Verse 98).
SUKUSUMA.A female attendant of Subrahmanya. (M.B
Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Verse 24). ,
SUKUTA. An ancient country in India, very famous 1
the Puranas. The people of this country were called
the-Sukutas. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 14, Verse 16):
SULABHA. A female ascetic (Sannyasini). She acquired
several powers (Siddhis) by tapas. Ste had the power
of giving up her body and receiving nuw bodies. Once
she went to Mithila and held a learned discussion w't
King Janaka. She went to Mithila as a beggar womanBy her yogic powers she entered the mind of Janaka.
She and Janaka were thus in the same body when they
carried on the discussion. After remaining in Janaka
body for a day, she Jeft the palace. (M.B. Santi Parv:
Chapter 320). |
SULAKSANA. Aking. It was this king who ordered
Mandavya maharsi to be pierced with a gula a5 #
punishment for stealing a horse. (Padma Puran@,
Uttara Khanda, 121).
SULAKSMI (LAKSMI). One of the four divine wome?
who rose out of the Ksirabdhi (Sea of Milk).They we =
Sulakgmi, Varuni, Kamoda and Srestha. (Padm4
Purana, Bhimi Khanda, 119). 7
SOLAPROTA. One of the twentyeight Narakas. (see
the section on Naraka under Kala) .
SULOCANA. One of the hundred sons of Dhrtarastt4Bhimasena killed him in battle of Kuruksetra. (Mahé r
Bharata, Bhisma Parva, Chapter 64, Verse 37).
SUMADA. A muni who did penance at Vimala on thé
Hemakita mountain. When twelve years had passed
thus Indra got frightened and deputed Kamadeva
disturb the muni’s penance. Many Deva women 45°
op es a peiap cen All their attempts failed ‘9
any eliect on the muni. Ultimat i eare
before him and asked him to choose hie "men ta ‘which
he answered thus: “I do penance to regain my kingdo™

SUMAHA
lost to enemies. Also, I should develop eternal devotion
to you and finally attain salvation.”
Devi assured him recovery of his lost kingdom which he
would rule till the sacrificial horse of Sri Rama in connection with the a§vamedha yajfia came to his kingdom.
Accordingly Sumada conquered his enemies and became
king in Ahicchatra. After many years, in connection
with Sri Rama’s agvamedha, Satrughna with the yajfiic
horse reached Ahicchatra. Sumada welcomed Satrughna
and in his company went to Ayodhya and'detailed
everything to Sri Rama. He then abdicated his throne
in favour of his son and attained salvation. See under
oo (Padma Purana, Patala Khanda, Chapter
SUMAHA. The charioteer of Paragurama. (M.B. Southern Text, Virata Parva, Chapter 12).
SUMALI I. A Raksasa, who was Sukega’s son and brother
of Mali, When Agastya cursed and transformed Tataka
and her sons into Raksasas it was Sumali who put
‘them up in Patala and Lanka. (See under Mali).
SUMALIT II. Aso of Patalaravana. After killing Patalaravana Sri Rama gave asylum to the rest of the
Raksasas of Patala and crowned Sumali, the only son
of Patalaravana king of Patala, subject to Vibhisana’s
control. (Kamba Ramayana, Yuddha Kanda).
SUMALI III. An asura,son of Praheti and a follower
of Vrtra. (Brahmanda Purana, 3,7, 99).
When the asuras milked the earth (the earth became a
cow in the time of King Prthu) this asura acted as
calf. (Bhagavata, Skandha 6).
SUMALLIKA. An urban area in ancient India famous
in the Puranas. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Verse55).
SUMANA. Wife of Somagarman, a brahmin. (See under
Somagarman) .
SUMANAS I. A kirata (forest tribe) king who flourished
in Yudhisthira’s court. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 4,
Versé 25) ;
SUMANAS II. A king in ancient India who worshipped
Yama in his court. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 9, .
Verse 13),
SUMANAS III. A Kekaya princess who lived in Devaloka. She once held a discussion on spiritual topics
with Sandilidevi. (AnuSdsana Parva, Chapter 123).
SUMANAS IV. A son of Paru in Dhruva’s lineage. Piru
had six mightysons by his wife Atri, viz. Anga, Sumanas,
Svati, Kratu, Angiras and Gaya. (Agni Purana,
Chapter 13).
SUMANDA. A brother of king Dusyanta. Two sons,
Santurodha and Pratiratha were born to king Matinara
of Piru dynasty and to Santurodha were born three
valiant sons called Dusyanta, Pravira and Sumanda.
To Dusyanta was born of Sakuntala, Bharata. (Agni
Purana, Chapter 278.) ;
SUMANDALA. A king in ancient India. Arjuna, the
course of his triumphal tour of the northern kingdoms
conquered him. (Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 32).
SUMANGALA. A female attendant of Subrahmanya.
(Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Verse 12}.
SUMANIT. One of the two attendants given to Subrahmanya by Moon the second one being Mani. (Salya
Parva, Chapter.45, Verse 32).
SUMANOMUKHA. A Naga born in the KaSyapa
S dynasty. (Udyoga Parva, Chapter 103, Verse 12)"
SUMANTRA. A minister of king Das aratha of Ayodhya.
The king had eight ministers called Jayanta, Dhrsti,
763 SUMITRA III
Vijaya, Siddhartha. Arthasadhaka, Asoka, Mantrapala
and Sumantra and two priests called Vasistha and
Vamadeva. (Valmiki Ramayana, Balakanda, Canto 7).
Sumantra was the right-hand-man of Dasaratha in all
his activities. It was Sumantra who brought down to
the palace sage Rsyasrnga for the yajfia conducted by
the king to have issues. According to chapter 12,
Virata Parva of Mahabharata (Southern Text) Sumantra was Dagaratha’s charioteer as weil.
SUMANTU.
1) General. A maharsi, disciple of Vyasa. Asita, Devala,
Vaisampayana, Sumantu and Jaimini were the chief
disciples of Vyasa. (See under Guruparampara and
Bharata) .
2) Other information. :
(i) Vyasa taught him all the Vedas and the Mahabharata. (Adi Parva, Chapter 63, Verse 89).
(ii) He was a member in the court of Yudhisthira.
(Sabha Parva, Chapter 4, Verse 11).
(iii) He was one of the munis who visited Bhisma on
his bed of arrows. (Santi Parva, Chapte: 47, Verse 5}.
SUMANYU. A king in ancient India. He once presented
to sage Sandilya an enormous quantity of food-grains
(a mountain of food-grains). (Anusasana Parva,
Chapter 137, Verse 22).
SUMATII. A Raksasa who lives in Varuna’s court
worshipping him. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 13).
SUMATI II. A great maharsi who was one of the munis
who visited Bhisma on his bed of arrows. (Anugsasana
Parva, Chapter 26, Verse 4).
SUMATI III. A sister of Garuda and wife of King
Sagara. (See under Sagara).
SUMATI IV. A king, son of Kakutstha of solar dynasty.
(Valmiki Ramayana, Balakanda, Canto 47, Verse 7).
SUMATI V. A King, grandson of Rsabha and son of
Bharata. (Visnu Purana, Part II, Chapter 1). He was
a righteous ruler. After ruling the country well for
long and performing many yajfias his father Bharata
crowned Sumati king and practising meditation in
Salagrama temple he gave up his life. (See under
Bharata ITT).
SUMATI VI. A king, son of Dyumatsena and father of
Subala. (Bhagavata, Skandha 9).
SUMBHA. An asura. (See under Nigumbha).
SUMBHA. An asuta; the eldest of the three sons, more
powerful than Indra, born to Kasyapaprajapati by his
wife Danu, the other two sons being NiSumbha and
Namuci. (For details see under Nigumbha).
a ni A maharsi. (See under Samadhi Chettiyar ).
SUMERU. See under Mahameru.
‘SUMIDHA. A son of Suhotra, the Solar King. He had
by his wife Aiksvaki three sons called Sumidha,
Ajamidha and Purumidha. (Adi Parva, Chapter 94,
Verse 30).
SUMITRA I. A Yadava King, son of Vrsni and
brother of Yudhajit. (Bhagavata, Skandha 10).
SUMITRA II. A King in ancient India. (Adi Parva,
Chapter 1, Verse 236).
SUMITRA III. A Sauvira King, also called Dattamitra. He was Krodhavaga, the asura reborn as King.
(Adi Parva, Chapter 67, Verse 63). He was a partisan
of the Pandavas and a member in Yudhisthira’s court.
(Sabha Parva, Chapter 4, Verse 25).

SUMITRA IV
SUMITRA IV. A maharsi who was a star-member in
Yudhisthira’s court. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 4, Verse
SUMITRA V. AkKing of Kalindanagara. He had a
son called Sukumara. Bhima in the course of his
triumphal tour of the east defeated both the King and
his son. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 29, Verse 10).
SUMITRA VI. Son of Tapa, the Paficajanyagni, one
of the Agnis who causes hindrances to yajfias. (Vana
Parva, Chapter 220, Verse 12).
SUMITRA VII. A charioteer of Abhimanyu. (Drona
Parva, Chapter 35, Verse 31).
SUMITRA VIII. A King of the Hehaya dynasty. He
once went hunting and followed a deer for a long
distance to no purpose. The sad King then entered a
-tapovana and conversed with the munis about the
desires and attachments of man. Then the muni called
Rsabha related to the King the stories of the munis,
Viradyumna and Tanu and as a result of Rsabha’s
advice the King renounced all desires and turned
to the path of salvation. (Santi Parva, Chapters 125,
SUMITRA TIX. Son of King Suratha. Considered to
be the last King of the Iksvaku dynasty, Sumitra was
acontemporary of Ksemaka of the Piru dynasty and
Nanda of Magadha dynasty. Alexander conquered
India during his period. Sumitra is called Sumialya
also. (Bhagavata, Skandha 9),
SUMITRA X. Son of Sri Krsna by Jambavati. In the
Yadava war he met with death. (Bhagavata, Skandha
SUMITRA ie
Daésaratha) .
SUMITRA II. A wife of Sri Krsna. (M.B. Southern
Text, Sabha Parva, Chapter 38).
SUMUKHA I. A naga, son of Kagyapa Prajapati by
his wife Kadri. Sumukha was the grandson of the naga
called Aryaka of the Airavata dynasty and his mother
was the daughter of Vama. (Udyoga Parva, Chapter
103, Verse 24). For the story about the marriage of
Sumukha with Gunakegi, daughter of Matali see under
Gunakeéi.
SUMUKHA II. A King who made many presents to
Yudhisthira. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 51 ).
SUMUKHA III. A son of Garuda. (Ud
Chapter 101, Verse 2) . , eae ieee,
SUMUKHA IV. A bird in the lineage
(Udyoga Parva, Chapter 101, Verse 12) whee tic
SUMUKHII. Mother of the serpent called Agvasena
whe dwelt on the serpent faced arrow (Sarpamukhabana) of Karna in the battle of Kuruksetra. She got
the name Sumukhias she protected her son by her
mukha (face). (Karna Parva, Chapter 90, Verse 42),
SUMUKHIII. Anapsaraé woman of Alakapuri. She
once danced at Kubera’s. court in honour of Astavakra
muni. (Anugdsana Parva, Chapter 19, Verse 45).
SUNABHA I. (PADMANABHA). One of the hundred
sons of Dhrtarastra. He was killed in the great war by
Bhima. (M.B. Southern Text, Bhisma Parva, Chapter
88; Adi Parva, Chapter 116).
SUNABHA Il. Minister of Varuna. He lives at Puskara
tirtha with children and grandchildren in the worship
of Varuna. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 28),
SUNABHA III. A danava, brother of Vajranabha. His
Consort of King Dagaratha. (See under
SUNANDA II
daughters, Candravati and Gunavati were abducted by
Gada and Samba. (Harivarhéa) .
SUNABHA IV. A divine mountain the presiding deity |
of which worships Kubera. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 10, —
Verse 32),
SUNAKAT. A King of the Solar dynasty. In Bhagavata,
9th Skandha it is mentioned that he was the son ol
Krta and father of Vitihotra.
SUNAKA II. Minister of Purafijaya, a King of Kaliyuga. In Bhagavata, 12th Skandha, there is a story
that this Sunaka murdered his King and made his
own son King.
SUNAKAIII. A Rajarsi. He wasborn from a portion
of the asura named Candrahanta. This Rajarsi attained
.Samadhi (passed away) atCandra tirtha. During his
life he received a sword from King Harinagva and he
presented it to another King Usinara. (M.B. Adi
Parva, Chapter 67; Vana _ Parva, Chapter 123; Santi
Parva, Chapter 166).
SUNAKA IV. A Maharsi. In the Puranas it is said
that Sita read Puranas in an assembly at which
aunaka and others had been present in Naimisaranya.
There are two inferences about this Saunaka. In
Bhagavata, 9th Skandha we find that the sage Grtsamada who pr onged to Bhrguvarnga had a son named
Sunaka and this Sunaka’s son was named Saunaka.
son named Sunaka was born to King Ruru by his wife
Pramadvara. Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter
mentions that this Sunaka was an exceptionally brilliant
scholar in Vedas and Sastras and was the grandfather
of Saunaka. Ruru’s son, Sunaka wasa member 9
Yudhisthira’s assembly. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter
4, Verse 10).
SUNAKSATRA. A King of Bharata dynasty. It is stated
in Bhagavata, Skandha 9, that he was the son ©
Niramitra and the father of Brhatsena.
SUNAMA TI. Son of King Suketu. He was present a!
the wedding of Draupadi.: (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter
185, Verse 9).
SUNAMA II. Son of King Ugrasena, Brother of KarnsaSunama was killed by Sri Krsna and Balabhadraram4-
(Sabha Parva, Chapter 14, Verse 34).
SUNAMA III. A son of Garuda who had many children. (Udyoga Parva, Chapter 101, Verse a)
SUNAMA IV. A warrior of Subrahmanya. (Saly@
Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 59).
SUNANDA I. A Gopa. (See under Ugratapas ).
SUNANDA II.. Son of King Pradyota. The epic story
_ in Bhavisya Purana closes with the story of Sunanda-
‘Lhe Maharsis, who lived in Naimisa forest feared that
following the death of Sunanda, the world wou
become absolutely mean and base, and all of them,
therefore, went to the Himalayas and there, at Visa
lanagara recited the Visnu Purana. (Bhavisya Purana;
Pratisarga Sarbhita). .
SUNANDA I. A princess of Kekaya. She was married
by Sarvabhauma, a King of the Kuru dynasty. ‘The
son Jayatsena was born to this couple. (M.B. Ad
Parva, Chapter 95, Verse 16). |
SUNANDA Il. Daughter of Sarvasena the King of
41. Bharata, the son of Dusyanta, married this 54
nanda. It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Adi Parv®
Chapter 95, Verse 32, that a son named BhumanyY
was born to the couple.

SUNANDA III
SUNANDA III. A princess of Sibi kingdom. She was
married by King Pratipa of the lunar dynasty and the
couple had three sons called Devapi, Santanu and
Balhika. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 95, Verse 44).
SUNANDA IV. Sister of Subahu, King of Cedi. It was
her whom the queen of Cedi appointed as companion
of Damayanti, who lost her way and arrived at Cedi.
She detected Damayanti conversing with-the brahmin
named Subahu, who came to Cedi in search of the
latter and reported about their meeting to the queen
mother. The name of the father of Sunanda and
Subahu was Virabahu. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapters
SUNARTAKA NATA. The name Siva assumed when
he appeared before Parvati, in disguise. Parvati was
engaged in tapas then. (Siva-StotraSataka, 34).
SUNASSAKHA. Indra. Once Indra disguised himself as
a Sannydsi and travelled in the company ofa dog. At
that time, he made an attempt to steal lotus flower
from Brahmasaras in Kausiki tirtha. Indra struck down
at a single blow, Yatudhani, the woman guard of the
saras, who opposed him. From this time when Indra
went about in the company of the dog, he got the name
“Sunassakha”. (M.B. Anugdsana Parva, Chapter 94).
SUNASSEPHA (DEVARATA). The story of a Brahmana youth who was to be offered as human sacrifice
and who was saved by Viévamitra, is famous’ in the
Puranas. The name of the Brahmana youth was SunaésSepha. But even in the Puranas there are two versions
of this story. In one of them, Sunaggepha is referred
to as the son of Rcikamuni. In the other, it was Haris -
candra. who performed the yaga and Sunassepha who
was brought for sacrifice, was the son ofa Brahmana
named Ajigarta. After Vigvamitra saved the boy, he
got another name, ‘‘Devarata”. (For details of the two
versions, see under Ambarisa and the 4th Para under
Visvamitra) . :
unafgepha later became a Maharsi. He composed
Reveda, Ist Mandala, Ist Astaka. Besides in Rgveda,
Ist Mandala, 6th Anuvaka, 30th Sukta it is stated that
Indra had given a golden chariot to Sunnagé epha.
SUNAYA I. A King, son of the King of Pariplava and
father of Medhavi. (Bhagavata, 9th Skandha). Pramati
aj. high priest of Sunaya. (Markandeya Purana;
SUNAYA II, A region famous in the Puranas. (Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 64).
SUNDA. An asura. He had a_ brother named Upasunda,
and their father was Nigumbha alias Jharjha. Sunda
and Upasunda were very cruel asuras. ;
The two brothers performed tapas on the Vindhya
mountain with the object of conquering the three
worlds. All attempts made by Devas to break up their
penance failed and ultimately Brahma appeared before
them. They secured from Brahma a boon to the effect
that they would not be killed by anyone else but only
mutually by them. Swollen-headed by the boon the
brothers conquered the three worlds and none could
kill them. Ultimately the Devas sent Tilottaméa, the
celestial damsel to them and she made them quarrel
with each other. Both of them who fellin love with
Tilottama and wanted her as wife fought with each
Other and got killed. (Adi Parva, Chapter 221, Verse
S 19). For details see under Upasunda and Tataka).
UNDARA I. A Gandharva, the son of Virabahu. Due
765 SUNITHA
to Vasistha’s curse he was born as a Raksasa whom
Mahavisnu later on raised from his fallenstate. ‘Skanda
Purana).
SUNDARA II. An Andhra monarch, son of Pulindasena
and father of King Satakarni. (Visnu Purana, Part 4).
SUNDARI. A Raksasa woman, the wife of Malyavan. The couple had seven sons called Vajramusti,
Viripaksa, Durmukha, Suptaghna, Yajfakesa, Matta
and Unmatta. (See under Malyavan and Mali).
SUNDARIKA. A sacred place. He who bathes at a
particular spot here called Sundarikakunda will become -
very handsome. (Vana Parva, Chapter 84, Verse 50).
SUNDARIVALLI. A daughter of Mahavisnu. Sundarivalli and Amrtavalli, another daughter of Mahavisnu
once performed penance on the banks of Akasaganga
for securing Subrahmanya as husband. (Skanda Purana,
Sambhava Kanda).
SUNDIKA. A town made famous in the Puranas, which
existed in the eastern part of India. -Mahabharata,
Vana Parva,: Chapter 254, Verse 8 mentions that this
town was conquered by Karna.
SUNDU. A King of the Puru dynasty. Manasyu was
the son of King Pracinvan, the son of Janamejaya and
grandson of Puru. Vitabhaya was the son of Manasyu.
Sundu was. Vitabhaya’s son. Sundu’s son was Bahuvidha. (Agni Purana, Chapter 278). :
SUNETRA I. One of the sons of Dhrtarastra, the other |
sons being Kundaka, Hast, Vitarka, Kratha, Kundina,
Havigravas, Bhumanyu, Pratipa, Dharmanetra, Sunetra
and Aparajita. (Adi Parva, Chapter 94, Verses 58-60).
SUNETRA II. A son of Garuda. (Udyoga Parva, Chapter 10,, Verse 2). :
SUNGA. Adynasty. Pusyamitra was the founder of
this dynasty. Pusyamitra was the military commander
of Brhadagva, the last King of the Maurya dynasty. It
was after killing Brhadasva that Pusyamitra founded
this independent dynasty. The Kings who belonged
to this dynasty, namely Pusyamitra, Vasujyestha,
Vasumitra, Antaka, Pulindaka, Vajramitra, Samabhaga
and Devabhimi ruled for 112 years. (Matsya Purana,
Chapter 272, Verses 26-31).
SUNI. A King of the lunar dynasty. Bhagavata, 9th
Skandha mentions that this King was the son of Vivanava and father of Sruta.
SUNITHA I. A maharsi who lives in the court of Indra
worshipping him. (Adi Parva, Chapter 58, Verse 28).
SUNITHA II. A King who lives inthe court of Yama
worshipping him. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 8).
SUNITHA III. Another name of Sisupala. (See under
Sigupala) . |
SUNITHA IV.. King of Sunitha. He was jealous of
Yudhisthira being crowned King. (Sabha Parva, Ghapter 39, Verse 14).
SUNITHA V. A King of the Vrsni dynasty. He was
taught the science of archery (dhanurveda) by Pradyumna, son of Sri Krsna. (Vana Parva, Chapter 183).
SUNITHA VI. A King of the Bharata dynasty, son of
Susena and father of Nreaksus. (Bhagavata, 9th
Skandha).
SUNITHA. Mental daughter of Mrtyudevata (lord of
death). Famous forher beauty in all the three worlds,
Sunitha begot a son called Vena by King Anga. (See
under Vena).

SUNITHA (M)
SUNITHA (M). A hymna, the recitation of which will
keep away serpents. (Adi Parva, Chapter 98, Verse
SUNITI. Mother of Dhruva. Svayambhuva Manu had
two sons called Priyavrata and Uttanapada; the latter
wedded two wives named Suruci and Suniti. Suruci’s
son is called Uttama and Suniti’s son Dhruva. The
father had not much love for Suniti and Dhruva. (See
under Uttanapada ).
SUNRTA. A daughter of Dharmadeva. Uttanapada
married her. Mention is made in Harivarmhga, Chapter
2 that four children were born to the couple.
SUNYAPALA. A Maharsi. This sage was an inhabitant
of the divine world. (Mahabharata, Daksinatya Patha,
Udyoga Parva, Chapter 83).
SUPARA (S). Aset of Devas who flourished in Tamasa
Manvantara. Besides the Suparas there were three other
sets of Devas during the Manvantara, called the Haris,
Satyas and Sudhis. (For details see under Manvantara).
SUPARNA I. A Devagandharva, son of KaSsyapa
Prajapati by his wife Muni. (Adi Parva, Chapter 65,
Verse 42).
SUPARNA II. Another Devagandharva,
Kaf yapaprajapati by his wife Pradha. (Adi
Chapter 65, Verse 47).
SUPARNA III. Younger brother of the asura called
Mayura. Suparna in after life was born as King KaAlakirti on earth. (Adi Parva, Chapter 67, Verse 36).
SUPARNA TV. Another name of Garuda. (See under
Garuda).
SUPARNWA V. Amaharsi, who taught Vayubhagavan
Satvatadharma and also attained salvation by performing penance with mind under perfect control. (Santi
Parva, Chapter 348).
SUPARNA VI. A Synonym of Mah4visnu. (Anus asana
Parva, Chapter 149, Verse 34),
SUPARNA. See under Parvati.
SUPARSVA I. A Ksatriya King; who was the rebirth
of the Asura, Kapata. (Adi Parva, Chapter 67, Verse
son of
Parva,
SUPARSVA II. A King bornin Yayati
was the son of Drdhanemi and father
Bhagavata, 9th Skandha).
SUPARSVA lil. A Raksasa, brother of Prahasta. a
minister of Ravana. (See under Akampana).
SUPARSVAIV. A son of Sampati. It was this son who
looked after the aged and weak Sampati. (Valmiki
Ramayana, Kiskindha Kanda, Canto 99, Verse 8).
SUPARSVA V. A mountain in Jamba Island. On the
high peak of the. mountain there is a tree called
Mahakadamba from the hollows of which five great
rivers take their source. These rivers fall on the peak
of Supargva and flow by thé western side of Llavrtta.
The air in an area ofa hundred yojanas is fragrant as
itis mixed with the fragrance emanating from the
mouths of Devas who drink the water from the above
five rivers. (Devi Bhagavata, 8th Skandha).
SUPARSVAKA I. A YAadava King, son of Akrira by
Agvini. (Matsya Purana, 45-12).
SUPARSVAKA II. Son of Vasudeva by Rohini. (Vayu
Purana, Chapter 96, Verse 168). | .
SUPARVAN. Another name of King Bhagadatta. (See
under Bhagadatta ).
"s dynasty. He
of Sumati.
SUPTAGHNA
SUPRABHA I. A wife of Sri Krsna who put her up in
the mansion named Padmakita at Dvaraka. (M.B.
Southern Text, Chapter 38).
SUPRABHA II. An asura woman, daughter of Kas yapaprajapati by Svarbhanu. (Agni Purana, Chapter 19).
SUPRABHA III. River Sarasvati, which runs through
Puskaratirtha. (See under Sarasvati) .
SUPRABHA IV. Daughter of the maharsi
Vadanya. She was married by Astavakra.
SUPRABHA V. A daughter of Daksa. Arrows and other
weapons took birth from Jaya and Suprabha, daughters
of Daksa. (For details see under Jaya V).
SUPRABHA VI. Daughter of King Suratha and wife of
Nabhaga. Sage Agastya who became displeased with
her as she once threatened him, cursed her to be born
in Vais ya caste as aresult of which Suprabha and her son
Bhalandana became Vaifyas. But, as Suprabha taught
her son, when he came of age, about the duties of the
Ksatriya he regained his former form. (Markandeya
Purana ).
SUPRAJA. Wife of Bhanu, the Agni. Bhanu had two
wives named Supraja and Brhadbhasa and six children
By each of the wives. (Vana Parva, Chapter 221, Verse
called
SUPRASADA. A’ warrior of Subrahmanya. (Salya
Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 71).
SUPRATARDANA. A King in ancient India. He
had come down to earth in the company of Indra to
witness the battle between Arjuna and Krpacarya-
(Virata Parva, Chapter 56, Verse 9).
SUPRATIKA I. A King in ancient India. ( Adi Parva,
Chapter 1, Verse 235).
SUPRATIKA II. A maharsi whom his brother Vibhavasu cursed and turned into an elephant. (For details
see under Garuda, Section 5).
SUPRATIKA III. A diggaja (One of the eight
elephants, that support the earth). In the dynasty
of Supratika were born the elephants Airavata, Vamanas
Kumuda and Afijana. (Udyoga Parva, Chapter 99). .
SUPRATIKA IV. Name of Bhagadatta’s elephant. Th!
elephant which did so many heroic deeds in the gre!
war was killed by Arjuna. (Drona Parva, Chapter 29;
Verse 43).
SUPRATIKA V. A Yaksa: (See under Gunadhya) .
SUPRATIMA. A King once referred to by Safijaya 3°
chief among Kings in ancient India. (Adi Parv@
Chapter 1, Verse 235).
SUPRATISTHA. A female attendant of Subrahma?y2"
(Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Verse 29).
SUPRAVRDDHA. A prince of Sauvira. He walked
behind King Jayadrathawho came to abduct Pancali:
carrying the standard of the King. He was killed 1°
battle by Arjuna. (Vana Parva, Chapter 271, Verse g4)8
SUPRAYOGA. A river in India famous in the Purat4:
his sacred river is considered to be the source of Ag™
(fire). (Vana Parva, Chapter 222, Verse 25).
aia An apsaras daughter of Kaé yapapraj apal)
y Pradha, daughter of Daksa. (Adi Parva Chapt
65, Verse 51 )é Supriya participated in the birthday
ee enna of Arjuna. (Adi Parva, Chapter 122, verse
SUPTAGHNA. One of the seven sons of Malyavan the
Raksasa, by his wife S - m dari:
Malyavan and Mali). undari, (See under Sun

a
SUPUNJIKA
SUPUNJIKA. Sonof Vipracitti by Simhika. He was
killed by Paragurama. (Brahmanda Purana, 3.6; 1312).
SUPUNYA. Ariver in India famous in the Puranas.
(Bhisma Parva, Chapter 221, Verse 9).
SURAI. A King of the Lunar dynasty. He was the son
of Vidiratha and father of Sini. (Bhagavata, 9th
Skandha).
SURAII. A son of Karttavirya. Of the hundred sons
of Karttavirya, the most important were, Sia, Sirasena,
Dhisana, Madhu and Jayadhvaja. (Brahmanda, Purana,
Chapter 46). |
SURA T1I. A King in ancient India. (Mahabharata,
Adi Parva, Chapter 1, Verse 232).
SURAIV. A son of the King named Ilina by his wife
Rathantari. This Sira had four brothers named
Dusanta, Bhima, Pravasu and Vasu. (M.B. Adi Parva,
Chapter 94, Verse 17).
SURAV. A prince of Sauvira land. (Mahabharata,
Vana Parva, Chapter 265, Verse 10). ‘This Sara was
slain by Arjuna at the time of Draupadi’s marriage.
_(M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 291, Verse 27).
SURA VI. A Yadava King. He was the father of Vasudeva and grandfather of Sri Krsna. By his first wife,
Marisa, he had ten sons and four daughters. The sons
were, Vasudeva, Devabhaga, Devasravas, Anaka,
Srfijaya, Syamaka, Kanka, Samika, Vatsaka and Vrka.
The names of the daughters were, Prtha, Srutadeva
(Srutaveda), Srutasrava and Rajadhidevi. The eldest
of these, Prtha was given as an adopted daughter to
Kuntibhoja. (Harivarnéa, 2-34; 17-28; M.B. Adi Parva,
Chapter 43; Verse 3. Chapter 104. Verse 1; Bhagavata,
9th Skandha). In Vayu Purana it is stated that he had
three more wives besides Marisa, and from them Devas
_and mortals were born. (See under Sarasena I).
SURA VII. Father of Dagaratha’s wife, Sumitra. He was
invited to the Putrakamesti Yaga performed by
Dagaratha, (Valmiki Ramayana, Bala Kanda, Sarga 19,
Verse 26).
SURABHI. The cow of the Devas. (For details see
under Kamadhenu and Saurabhi).
SURABHI II. Acow born from the ‘Aumkara’ (the
sound ‘hum’) of Brahma. As the cow grew up, milk
began dripping down on earth from its udder and
gradually it formed into the Ksirasagara (ocean of
milk), Four daughters, Suripa, Harhsika, Subhadra
and Sarvakamadhuk were born to Surabhi and they
are considered to be protectors of the four regions.
Surabhi lives in the seventh world beneath the earth i.e.
Rasatala. (Udyoga Parva, Chapter 100).
SURABHIMAN. An Agni (fire). (Vana Parva, Chapter
SURABHIPATTANA. An urban area of olden days in
South India. During the Mahabharata days Sahadeva
deputed an envoy to this place and brought it under his
control. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 31, Verse 68).
SURABHU. A sister of Karnsa. Ugrasena, the Yadava
King had 80 sons including Karhsa and five daughters
Kaihsa, Marisa, Kaka, Surabhi and Rastrapalika.
(Bhagavata, Skandha 9).
SURADEVI (VARUNI). A daughter of Varuna born
of Devi, his brother’s wife. She was the apple of the eye
to the Devas. She is the presiding Devata over liquor
She lives in the court of Brahma worshipping him.
(Sabha Parva, Chapter 11, Verse 42; Adi Parva, Chapter 18, Verse 35 and Chapter 66, Verse §2).
767 SURASENA I
SURAHANTA. A son of Tapa, the Paficajanyagni who
is one of the Agnis who cause hindrances to Yajfas.
(Vana Parva, Chapter 220, Verse 13).
SURAJA. An apsara woman, daughter of Kasyapa
prajapati by his wife Pradha. (Adi Parva, Chapter 69,
Verse 50). Suraja gave a dance performance at the
birthday celebrations of Arjuna, (Adi Parva, Chapter
SURAKRT. A Brahmavadi son of Visvamitra. (M.B.
Anugasana Parva, Chapter 4, Verse 57).
SURAKSAKA. A Gandharva King. He was the grand_ father of Tataka (See under Tataka).
SURAPADMA. An asura hero. This asura invaded
Devaloka witha huge army. Skanda Purana mentions
that in the battle that followed, Indra, who was defeated, fled to the place called Siyali in Tanjore District
in South india and did tapas to Siva. |
SURAPRAVIRA. Son of Tapa, the Paficajanyagni, one
of the Agnis which cause hindrances to yajnas. (Vana
Parva, Chapter 220, Verse 13).
SURARI. A King in ancient India. He was invited by
the Pandavas to participate in the great war. (Udyoga
Parva, Chapter 4, Verse 15).
SURASA I. Mother of nagas (serpents) .
1) Birth. Ten daughters were born to Kagyapaprajapati by his wife Krodhavasa, daughter of Daksa including Surasé. From Surasa were born all the nagas.
(Valmiki Ramayana, Aranyakanda, Canto 14).
Nagas and Uragas are two sects of serpents.From Surasa
were born Nagas and from Kadri, Uragas. (Valmiki
Ramayana, Aranya Kanda, Canto 14, Verse 28).
Surasa was born from the wrath of Krodhavasa and the
former had three daughters called Anala, Ruha and
Virudha. (Adi Parva, Chapter 66, Verse 61).
2) Obstructed the passage of Haniiman. To test whether
Haniman, who jumped into Lanka to seek out Sita,
possessed power enough for the purpose, Devagandharvas
backoned Surasa to them and told her as follows: “You
mother of nagas, do please assume a terrible form like a
big mountain and appear before Haniiman and obstruct
his passage. As soon as she heard the injunction, she
jumped before Haniiman and attempted to devour him.
In spite of Haniiman’s earnest pleadings she stood
before him with her mouth opened wide. Hanuman
then, by his power of illusion, grew ten yojanas in size.
Then Surasa opened her mouth twenty yojanas wide.
Haniman then grew thirty yojanas in size and Surasa
opened her mouth forty yojanas wide. In this competition ultimately when Surasa opened her mouth hundred
yojanas wide, Hanuman reduced his size to that ofa
finger, entered Suras4’s mouth and came-out through
her ear. Surasa was pleased and blessed Hanuman.
(Valmiki Ramayana, Sundara Kanda, Canto 1).
3) Other information.
(i) Surasa lives in the court of Brahma worshipping
him. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 11, Verse 39).
(ii) Rohini, mother of Balabhadrarama, was an incarnation of Surasa. (Devi Bhagavata, Skandha 4).
SURASA II. A déva woman who danced at the birthday celebration of Arjuna. (Adi Parva, Chapter 222,
Verse 63).
SURASENA I. A King of Yaduvarnéa.
1) General. Siirasena’s kingdom was Mathurapuri.
This country was originally ruled by Kings of the Solar

SURASENA II
dynasty. Devi Bhagavata, 4th Skandha explains how
the Yadava Kings came to rule over Mathura.
There was a region called Madhuvanam in the Kalindi
river valley. Madhu, the Asura, who lived in Madhuvana had a son named Lavana. Lavana who was a
tyrant and an oppressor of the gods, was killed by
Satrughna who established his rule there. In course of
time, the place came to be known as ‘‘Madhura’’. After
Satrughna’s time his two sons ruled over the country.
Thus the Solar dynasty came to an end and Mathura
purl came under the rule of Yadus. The first King of
Yaduvamsa was Surasena. Vasudeva, father of Sri
Krsna was the son of this Sirasena. After the death of
his father, since Vasudeva took up the occupation of
tending cows, Ugrasena became King there. Karhsa was
the son of this Ugrasena.
2. Other details.
(i) Sirasena’s daughter Kunti was adovted and brought
up by the king named Kuntibhoja. (M.B. Adi Parva,
Refer Chapters 67, 109 and 110).
(ii) Devamidha, father cf Sirasena had another name,
‘*Citraratha”’. (M.B. Anusdsana Parva, Chapter 147,
Verse 29).
SURASENA II. A son of KaArttavirya. In Brahmanda
Purana, Chapter 86, it is mentioned that this Sirasena
killed Jamadagni. (See under Siira II)
SURASENA III. ‘‘Siirasena was the old name for the
region now known as Mathuramandalaor Vrajamandala.
The natives of this place were called “Sirasenas’’. The
following pieces of information are given about the Sirasenas in the Mahabharata :—
(i) The Sirasenas who were afraid of Jarasandha, fled
to the southern lands. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 14,
Verse 26).
(11) In the course of his southern campaign, Sahadeva
conquered the Siirasenas. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter
ol, Verse'l’.
(iii) The Strasenas offered presents at Yudhisthira’s
Rajasuya. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 52, Verse 13).
(iv) It was between the two countries, South Yakrllomam and Sirasenam that the Pandavas travelled from
the land of Paficala to Matsyadeéa. (M.B. Viradta Parva
Chapter 5, Verse 4).
(v) Sirasenas were the body-guards of Bhisma during
the Bharata Yuddha. (M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 18,
Verse 42),
(vi) The Siirasena forces once stopped Arjuna on
the way. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 91, Verse 37).
(vii) Siirasena attacked Arjuna and Satyaki in Bharata
battle. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 141, Verse 9).
(viii) Yudhisthira soaked the earth with blood by
killing the Stirasenas at Kuruksetra. (M.B. Drona Parva
Chapter 157, Verse 29).
(ix) Bhimasena butchered the Ksatriyas of Sirasena
by hundreds. (M. B. Drona Parva, Chapter 169, Verse
(x) Krpacarya, Krtavarma and Sakuni from the
Pandava side fought against the Sirasenas. (M.B.
Karna Parva, Chapter 47, Verse 16).
STIRASENA IV. A king who fought against the Pandavas from the Kaurava side in the Bharata Yuddha.
He stood by Duryodhana in the “Krauficavyitha”
formed by Bhisma. (M. B, Bhisma Parva, Chapter 75
Verse 18).
SURATHA XI
SURASENA V. A king of the Somavarnga of Pratisthanapura. Sirasena,who was childless, tried to propitiate the gods in many ways to obtain a son. In the end
he got ason in the form of a serpent. But to keep
it a secret, he performed the usual ceremonies connected with his son’s Upanayana, marriage etc. in the
usual manner. At last by the mercy of Gautamidevi
Sirasena’s son obtained human form. (Brahmanda
Purana, 111).
SURASENAPURA. The city of Mathura.
SURASENI. Wife of Pravira, the son of King Puru.
A son named Manasyu was born to Pravira by Siraseni
(M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 94, Verse 76).
SURASTRAM I. A kingdom of Puradnic fame on the
south-western part of ancient India. Akrti, king of
this country,was once defeated by Sahadeva, one of
the Pandavas. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 61). Holy place
like Camasodbheda, Prabhasaksetra, Pindaraka etc.
are situated in this area. (Vana Parva, Chapter 81,
Verse 19).
SURASTRAM. II A Ksatriya dynasty. Rusarddhika
was a wicked King born in this dynasty. (Udyog@
Parva, Chapter 74 Verse 14).
SURATA. A celestial damsel, daughter of Ka‘ yapaprajapati by his wife Pradha. (Adi Parva, Chapter 69,
Verse 50). She gave a dance performance at the
birthday celebrations of Arjuna. (Adi Parva, Chapter
SURATARA. A king who killed the mighty Raksas4
named Pataccara. During the Bharata Yuddha, Pataccara had taken his stand on the Kaurava side. (M.BDrona Parva, Chapter 22, Verse 58).
SURATHATI. A king in ancient India.
Samadhi Chettiyar).
SURATHA II. A king of the Puru dynasty. Suratha
was one of the sons of Jahnu, the other sons being
Srutasena, Ugrasena and Bhimasena. (Agni Purana,
Chapter 278).
SURATHA III. One of the two sons of Janamejay4
the other one being Mahiman. Suratha had a 50”
called Vidiratha. (Agni Purana, Chapter 278). f
SURATHA IV. Husband. of Citrangada, daughter ©
ViSvakarman. See under Viévakarma, Para 2. —
SURATHA V. A king born from an aspect of asuré
ame Krodhavaga. (Adi Parva, Chapter 67, Vers
SURATHA VI. Father of King Kotikasya of SibideS
(Vana Parva, Chapter 265, Verse 6).
SURATHA VII. A king of Trigarta. He was a depen4:
ant of Jayadratha. In the battle that follow®
Jayadratha’s abduction of Draupadi, Suratha was killed.
(Vana Parva, Chapter 271, Verse 18)
SURATHA VIII. A warrior who fought against the
Pandavas in the great war. (Drona Parva Chaptet
18, Verse 20).
SURATHA IX. A son of Drupada. He was killed by
Agvatthama in the ti Chapter
156, Verse 180). great war. (Drona Parva, P
SURATHA X. A Pan
(See under
cala maharatha who fought 0? the
Pandava side in the great war. He was killed -
battle by Aévatthami. (Salva Parva, Chapter 14,
Verse 37).
SURATHA XI.
Son of Jayadratha by his wif Dussal4
Jayadratha was killed by Acne. When Suratha g°.
the news that Arjuna, leading the yajiic horse ha

ee
SURATHA XII 769
reached Sindhudeéa, he ended his life. in great fright.
(As vamedha Parva, Chapter’ 78, Verse 28).
SURATHA XII. A king who ruled over Kundalanagari. He captured Sri Rama’s yajiiic horse and also
took Hanim4an, Sugriva etc. prisoners. At last Sri
Rama himself appeared on the scene, defeated Suratha
and released the captives: (Padma Purana, Patala
SURATHA. Mother of Emperor Sibi.
Chapter 197 Verse 25). |
SURATHAKARA. A particular region in the Kufa Island. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 12, Verse 13).
SURAVAN.. Name of the horse attached.to the chariot
given to Agastya by the maharsi called Hvala. (See
under Agastya). |
SURAVITHI. A famous orbit of ‘stars in Indraloka.
(Vana Parva, Chapter 43, Verse 12).
SURENU. A tributary of the river Sarasvati flowing
(Vana Parva,
through Rsabhaisland. (Salya Parva, Chapter 38, —
Verse 26) :
SURESA I. A. son of Tala, the Paficajanyagni, one of
the fifteen Agnis who cause hindrances to yajfias. (Vana
Parva. Chapter 220, Verse 13); |
SURESA II. A Sanatana Visvadeva (eternal lord of
Universe). (Anusasana Parva, Chapter 91, Verse 35).
SURESVARA. One of the eleven Rudras. (Santi Parva
Chapter 208, Verse 19). | :
SUROGANA. A female attendant of Subrahmanya
(Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Verse 29).
SUROGIS. A son of Vasistha by Arundhati. (Bhagavata,
Skandha 4) | :
SURODA. One of the seven seas, filled with’ Madya
(wine). (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 12, Verse 2)
SUROMAN. A serpent belonging to the family of
Taksaka. He was burnt at the Sarpasatra of Janamejaya. (Adi Parva, Chapter 57, Verse 10).
SORPANAKHA. Ravana’ssister. ,
1) Vigravas, son of. Brahma and Kaikasi daughter
of Sumali lived in the forest.’ called Slesmataka.
Once Kaikasi had a sexual union with Visravasat an
untimely hour. Asa result of this union, Kaikasi
gave birth to four children at intervals of one Yama
each. These children were, R&avana, Kumbhakarna,
Vibhisana and Sarpanakha. (Kamba Ramayana, Bala
Kanda). : 3
2) Domestic Life. Sarpanakha. was married to the
Raksasa, Vidyujjihva. The son who was born to the
couple was named Sambhukumara.
The Kalakeyas were the~ brothers of Vidyujjihva. At
the time of Ravana’s return after his triumphal march,
a battle took place between him and the Kalakeyas.
The Kalakeyas fell under the sword of Ravana. Enraged
at the death of his brothers, Vidyujjihva encountered
Ravana. In the battle that followed, Vidyujjthva was
killed. On hearing about her husband’s death, Siarpa_ nakha went to Ravana wailing and lamenting. Moved
to pity at the sight of her tears, - Ravana .said:~ ‘‘Dear
Sister! You may travel through the three worlds and
“accept any man you like as your husband. Is there any
‘one who would not wish to become my relative? Go |
and marry a husband suited to you. Ifany one turns
down your proposal, just inform me. ‘YT shall come and
make him your husband.”
Sirpanakha was pleased,. She at once started going
SURUCGA
round the three worlds with Khara, Diisana and ‘Trigiras.
(Uttara Ramayana; Kambaramayana, Aranya Kanda).
3) Before Laksmana. Sirpanakha’s son, Sambhukumara
was performing tapas to Siva in Dandakaranya. It was
at this time that Sri Rama and Laksmana arrived in the
forest, accompanied by Sita. They reached the place
‘called Paficavati in Dandakaranya. Sri Rama wished
to set up his hermitage in the middle of the five “vata”
, trees in Paficavati. |
At the very sight of Sita, Sambhukumara fell in love
with her. He stood there in the form of a tree. While
building the hermitage, Laksmana felled that tree and
thus Sambhukumara was killed. (See under Sambhukumara).
The widowed Sarpanakhd, in her search for a suitable
husband happened to reach and settle down at the
southern border of Dandakaranya. She had failed in
her search so far. |
It was at this stage that she came to know of Sri Rama
and his party. She’ disguised herself as Lalita and
entered Sri Rama’s asrama. The sight of Sri Rama —
made -her a victim to carnal passion. She submitted
her desire to him, but he turned down her prayer. The
disappointed Sirpanakha left the 2Srama at once. But
she appeared again in front of Sita. Feeling that so long
as Sita was alive, Sri Rama would not be. prepared to
court her, Sirpanakha rushed furiously at Sita.
Laksmana who was watching the whole scene, suddenly
rushed to the spotand pushed her out of the asrama.
He cut off her ears, nose and breasts.
Sirpanakha, bleeding profusely from her mutilation,
hastened to her brother Ravana to inform him of the
calamity. In obedience to Ravana’s command, Khara,
Disana and others who came .and encountered
Rama and Laksmana, were also slain in the battle.
(Kamba Ramayana, Aranya Kanda). |
SORPARAKA. Another name for Kerala. In Brahmanda
Purana, Chapter 99, we read that ParaSurama threw a
‘«Sarpa” winnowing basket from Gokarna southwards
and the ocean up to the spot where the Sirpa fell, be-
-camedry land. | Since the land was formed by throwing
the Siirpa, it came to be called “Siarparaka’’. References
to Sarparaka in the Mahabharata, are given below: -
(i) In the course of his triumph of the southern lands,
Sahadeva conquered. “Stirparaka’’. (M.B: Sabha Parva,
Chapter 31, Verse 65). .
(ii) There is a sacred bath here, known as “Sirparaka
tirtha’’. By bathing here, one would obtain golden
ragsis. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 85, Verse 43).
(ii) In Sirparaka Ksetra, there is a sacrificial platform
originally used by Jamadagni. Close by, there are two
holy places called ‘‘Pasana tirtha” and ‘‘Candra tirtha”’.
(M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter-88, Verse 12).
(iv) Yudhisthira once happened to visit this sacred
place. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 118, Verse 8).
(v) Sirparaka is the land formed by the withdrawal of
the ocean. It is also called ‘‘Aparantabhimi”. (Santi
Parya, Chapter 49, Verse 66). :
(vi) Mahabharata, Anugdsana Parva, Chapter 25,
Verse 50 states that by bathing in the water of Sirparaka
Ksetra and observing a fast fora fortnight, one would
be born as a prince in the next birth.
SURUCA. A son of Garuda. (Udyoga Parva, Chapter
101, Verse 3).

SURUCI
SURUCI. A wife of Uttanapada. Svayambhuva Manu
had two sons called Priyavrata and Uttanapada. Uttanapada married Suruci and Suniti. A son called Uttama
was born to Suruci and to Suniti was born Dhruva,
(For details see under Dhruva).
SURUPA. A daughter of Vi§vakarman. Priyavrata, son
of Svayambhuva Manu married Suriipa and Barhismati,
the beautiful daughters of Visvakarman. Suripa had
ten sons. They had a younger sister called Urjasvati.
(Devi Bhagavata, Skandha 8).
SURYA I. The God who gives light to the worlds.
1) Birth. It is said that the Sun was. born to
Kasyapa by his wife Aditi. _Mahavisnu begot Brahma
and Brahma begot Marici. Prajapati Kasyapa was
born from Marici. Several sons were born to Kasyapa
by Aditi the daughter of Daksa. They are known by
the names Adityas, Vasus, Rudras and so on. Of these,
Adityas are tewelve in number. (Aditya means the son
of Aditi). There is a difference of opinion as to who
these twelve Adityas are. According to Agni Purana,
Chapter 51, the twelve Adityas are Varuna, Sarya (the
Sun), Sahasraméu, Dhata,, Tapana, Savita, Gabhasti,
Ravi, Parjanya, Fvasta, Mitra and Visnu. (See under
Dvadasadityas). But in Mahabharata, Adi Parva,
Chapter 65,. Stanza 15, it is stated that the twelve
Adityas are Dhata, Aryama, Mitra, Sukra, Varuna,
AmSsa, Bhaga, Vivasvan, Pisa, Savita Tvasta and
Visnu.
Very often these names are used as synonyms of the Sun.
So it is better to assume that there are several - Adityas
and that it is the sun who gives light and heat to the .
worlds. Vivasvan is this sun because it is said that from
this Vivasvan the Manu Vaivasvata was born and from
this Vaivasvata, Iksvaku, the first king of the Solar
dynasty, was born. ?
2 The chariot of the Sun. The sun rises in the east and
sets in the west, in consequence of which days and
nights occur. The Puranic assumption is that the sun
travels in a very big chariot. The chariot of the Sun
is nine thousand yojanas long. The wheel is fixed to
this. The great wheel of time with three centres, five
tyres and stx spokes, is fixed on that indestructible year.
It has seven horses, which are the seven Vedic metres
called by the names Gayatri, Brhati, Usnik, Jagati,
Tristubh, Anustubh and Pankti. Another axle used
for the chariot of the Sun is fortyfive thousand five
hundred yojanas long. The length of each half of the
Yoke is proportionate to the length of the axle. The
short axle of the chariot with the small half of th
is fixed on Dhruva. The wheel fixed: on
rests on the mount Manasottara.
e yoke
the other axle
Separate Adityas, hermits Gandharvas, celestial: maj ae
Yaksas, serpents and giants sit, in the chariot of the Sun
every month. In the month of Caitra, which is also
called Madhumasa, the seven officers of the month who
travel daily in the chariot, are the Aditya Dhata, the
celestial maid Kratusthala, the hermit Pulastya, the
serpent Vasuki, the Yaksa Rathabhrt, the gaint Heti,
and the Gandharva Tumburu. In the’ month of
Vaisakha also called Madhava, the Aditya Aryaman,
the hermit Pulaha, the Yaksa Rathaujas, the : celestial
maid Pufijikasthala, the giant Praheti, the serpent
Kacavira and the Gandharva Narada sit in the chariot.
In the month of Jyestha, the Aditya Mitra, the hermit
Atri, the serpent Taksaka, giant Pauruseya, the celesSURYAIL
tial maid Menaka, the Gandharva Haha, and the Yaksa
Rathasvana, sit in the chariot. In the month of Asadha,
the Aditya Varuna, the hermit Vasistha, the serpent
Naga, the celestial maid Sahajanya, the Gandharva
Huhi, the giant Ratha and the Yaksa Citraratha,
travel in the chariot. In the month of Sravana, the
Aditya Indra, the Gandharva, Vigvavasu, the Yaksa
‘Srotas, the serpent Elaputra, the hermit Afgiras, the
celestial maid Pramloca, and the giant Sarpi travel in,
the chariot. In the month of Bhadrapada the Aditya
Vivasvan, the Gandharva, Ugrasena, the hermit Bhrgu,
the Yaksa, Apirana, the celestial maid Anumloca, the
serpent Sankhapdla and the giant Vyaghra sit in the
chariot. Inthe month of Agvani, the Aditya Pisa,
the Gandharva Vasuruci, the giant Vata, the hermit
Gautama, the serpent Dhanafijaya, the Yaksa Susena
and the celestial maid Ghrtaci sit in the chariot. In
the month of Karttika, the Gandharva is another
ViSvavasu, the hermit Bharadvaja, Aditya Parjanya,
the serpent Airavata, the celestial maid, Vigvaci, Yaksa
Senajit and the giant Apa, sit in the chariot. In the
month of Margasirsa, the Aditya Améa, the hermit
Kasyapa, the Yaksa Tarksya, the serpent Mahapadma,
the celestial maid Urvzaéi, the Gandharva Citrasena,
and the giant Vidyut travel in the chariot. In the
month of Pausa, the hermit Kratu, the Aditya Bhaga,
the Gandharva Urnayu, the giant Sphurja,
the serpent Karkotaka, the Yaksa Aristanemi and
the celestial maid Puarvacitti travel in the chariot.
In the month of Magha, the Aditya Tvasta, the
hermit Jamadagni, the serpent Kambala, the celestial maid Tilottama, the giant Brahmopeta, the Yaksa
Rtajit and the Gandharva Dhrtarastra sit in the chariot.
In the month of Phalguna the Aditya Visnu, the serpe™!
ASvatara, the celestial maid Rambha, the Gandharva
Suvarcas, the Yaksa Satyajit, the hermit Vig vamitra, and
the giant Yajfiopeta travel in the chariot. These seven
persons live in the region of the Sun in their time.
The hermits praise the Sun; the gandharvas sing; the
celestial maids dance; the giants walk behind as guards.
The serpents prepare. the: horses to be yoked; the
Yaksas hold the bridle and the Balakhilyas stand round
the Sun. These groups of seven in each month aré
responsible for heat, coldness, rain etc.(Visnu Purana,
Ama 2, Chapter 8). ;
3) The Vedic figure of the Sun. Even though the sun }
only one of the seven groups, he is above the others i”
Prominence. ‘The complete power of Visnu is the three
Vedas Rg, Yajus and Sama. ‘The power in the form 9%
the three Vedas blazes in the form of the Sun. That
power destroys all the sins in the world. Visnu stay®
inside the sun in the form of Rg, Yajus and Sama 10?
the Sustenance and protection of the world. As said be
fore, the three Vedas are the parasakti, or the feminine
supreme power of Visnu. She is the three Vedas the™
selves. Every month she Stays inside that particu ar
Aditya ‘of the month. In the morning the Rgv¢ “
praises the Sun. At noon the Yajurveda praises the Sup
and in the evening+the Samans such as Brhad Rathantat4
and so on. The three Vedas Rg, Yajus and Saman_ ar¢
portions of Visnu. This power of Visnu stays in Adity@
always. It Stays not only in the Sun. but also in the
three godheads Brahma, Visnu and Gian At the. time
: of creation Brahma was pervaded by Rg. At the time
sustenance, Visnu is pervaded by Yajus. At the ¢

ee a ae
SURYA I
Rudra will be pervaded by Saman. So the sound of .
Saman will be unpalatable. Thus this Vaisnavite power
which is having the attribute of purity (Sattva) and
Vedas, pervades mainly the sun though it remains
on the seven groups also. Being the seat of this power,
the Sun blazes with his rays and destroys the darkness
in all the worlds.
Such a Sun is praised by the hermits. The Gandharvas
sing in front of the Sun. The celestial maids dance
before him. The giants guard him, the serpents prepare
his chariot, the Yaksas hold the bridle and the Balakhilyas stand around him. Visnu who is having
the figure of the Sun pervaded by the power of the
Vedas, never rises or sets. ‘he seven groups are separate
from that Visnu. As the figures of those who approach,
are reflected in a mirror fixed on a post, that power of
Visnu, without separating itself from that chariot,
pervades them who come every month in turn. (Visnu
Purana, Armga 2, Chapter 11).
4) The direction of the sun. ‘The Sun starts from the
east and goes to the western ocean. The directions east
and west originate from this rising and setting. As a
matter of fact when the sun rises in the east it 1s bright
in places behind it. But it does not shine in the palace
of Brahma on the top of Mahameru. The rays of the
sun which enter the palace are driven back by the
radiance of the palace. The Mountain Meru is north to
all islands and countries. So on one side of that mount
it is always day and on the other side it is always night.
When the Sun sets his light enters fire. So at night the
light of fire goes far. In the same way, at day time, the
light of fire enters the sun. So the sun shines more. Thus
because the light of the sun and fire enter each other
the day and the night wax when the sun shines on
the southern and northern hemi-spheres. The dark nights
and bright days enter water gradually. The water seems
a little red, in day time because darkn. °s has entered
it in the night. After sunset the water seems 4 little
white because the day has entered the water.
Thus when the sun passes through the middle of the island
Puskara, the change of the Sun to one thirtieth
portion of the earth is called ‘Mauhirtikagati’ (covering
the distance in a muhirta —48 minutes) . The sun, like
a fly sitting on the circumference of the wheel of a potter
travels round the earth inclining a portion of a thirtieth of
the earth, and making day and night. In the beginning
of the transit to the Tropic of Cancer, the sun passes
into the zodiac of Makara, and then to Kumbha and
Mina. Alter having completed the three zodiacs, the
sun makes the day and night equal and enters Visuva.
At the end -of travelling in the Northern hemi-sphere
the sun enters the zodiac of Karkataka and transit to
the south begins. (Visnu Purana, Améa 2, Chapter 8).
5) The Sun in the clutches of the giants. The Sun is being
attacked daily by a kind of giants called the Mandehas.
6) Family life. ‘The Sun married Samjfia, the daughter
of Vigvakarma. Three children Manu, Yama and
Yamiwere born to him by Samjfa. By Chaya, the
maid of Sarmjiia, three children, Sanaigcara, Manu and
Tapati were born to the Sun. Asvinikumaras and Revanta were born by Sarhjfia to the sun who took the form of
a horse. (See under Sarmjna and Chaya).
On several occasions other sons such as Sugriva, Kalindi
Karna and so on were born to the Sun. (For details see
under those entries ).
SURYA I
7) The rising delayed. A story stating that the rising of
the sun was delayed because of the curse of Silavati, is
stated in Mahabharata. (See under Silavati).
8) The Sun and the Syamantaka. Once the King Satrajit
did penance and got the jewel Syamantaka froni the Sun.
(For detailed story see under Prasena) .
9) The Sun and Raku. Once the Sun and the moon
pointed out Rahu who had come to partake of the
Amrta (Ambrosia) in stealth and Mahavisnu cut off his
head. (For detailed story see under Amrta, Para 4).
10) The Sun the teacher of Hanuman. The Sun is the
teacher of Hanuman. (See under Haniman).
11) The Sun and Ravana. Once Ravana happened to
reach the Solar region, while he was ccnducting regional
conquest. That night he rested on Mahameru, and then
got into his plane Puspaka, ready for fight in the
morning. Seeing the Sun rising up, Ravana called his
minister Prahasta and said to him. “Minister, go and
convey my words to the Sun. “Ravana has come to fight.
Either get down and fight or admit defeat.’ Prahasta
walked towards the sun and told the words of the King
to the two gate-keepers Pingala and Dandi. The Sun
was informed of this by Dandi. The Sun told Dandi
thus: “Dandi, I don’t mind whether I defeat or I am
defeated by Ravana. The thing is, that [have no t me.”’
Dandi informed Ravana of this. Ravana went away
shouting that he had defeated the Sun.
12) Fight wrth Siva. See under Siva Para 7, Sub
para 7.
13) The Sun lost his lustre. See under Sukeésa.
14) Artificial Sun. See under Brahma, para 13.
15) The Sun and Karna. See under Karna.
16) The hermit Atri and the Sun. See under Atri, para 4.
17) The names of the Sun. Once the hermit Dhaumya
repeated to Dharmaputra the one hundred and eight
names of the Sun. Those names are given in Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 3.
13) Other details.
(i) Once Paficali worshipped the Sun. The Sun created
an unseen giant for her protection. (M.B. Virata
Parva, Chapter 15, Verse 19). ?
(ii) Paficali did penance before the Sun and procured
the-‘Aksayapatra’ (the pot that never became empty).
(See under Aksayapatra) :
(iii) The Sun destroys the ungrateful asuras (demons).
(M.B. Udyoga Parva, Chapter 108, Verse 16).
(iv) There is a story connecting the Sun and the South.
In days of old the Sun performed a sacrifice according
to the Vedas, and to Kasyapa who was the ministerial
priest, he gave the South as daksina (offering). So the
south got the name ‘Daksina’. (M.B. Udyoga Parva,
Chapter 109, Verse 1).
(v) The west is the place where the Sun pours his rays
after the end of the day. (M.B. Udyoga Parva, Chapter
(vi) When Karna and Arjuna confronted each other
in the battle of Bharata, the Sun boasted to Indra that
Karna would come out victorious. (M.B. Karna Parva,
Chapter 87, Stanza 57).
(vii) The Sun gave Subrahmanya two attendants
named Subhraja and Bhasvara. (Salya Parva, Chapter
45, Verse 31).
(viii) Once Siva anointed the Sun as the King of all
the planets. (M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter 112, Stanza

SURYA II -
(ix) The Sun once gave Y4Ajfiavalkya the boon that he
would get knowledge of the Vedas. (M.B. Santi Parva,
Chapter 318, Verse 6).
(x) The story of one who had attained the region of
the Sun by ‘Ufichavrtti’ (Living on the grains fallen on
the field) is given in Mahabharata, Santi Parva, a few
Chapters from 353, as follows :
There was a Brahmin in aplace called Mahapadma on
the banks of the Ganges. He .wandered here and there
for knowledge of Vedas. Once a hermit met him and
directed him towards a Naga named Padmandbha.
Padmanabha is the serpent which supports the chariot
of the Sun. The Brahmin-hermit started in search of
Padmanabha. At last he found out his house. But
there was the wifeof Padmanabha only. She said that
her husband would return within a few days. Accordingly he remained on the banks of the Ganges without
any food. Padmanabha returned and both of them met
together. The hermit asked the naga what he should
do in order to get merged in God. The Naga replied
that he could become one with God by Ufchavrtti. The
Naga continued. ‘The Sunis a god who had invoked
into himself a saint who had lived only by the fallen
grains in the field. The activities of that Sun are wonderful. The hermits and saints attach themselves to the
rays of the Sun as birds attach themselves to the
branches of trees. The great storms arising from the
Sun spread wide in the sky. I saw once a person sitting
inside that Sun who was a wonder of wonders. When
that person as shining as the Sun came to him in the
noon the Sun embraced him and seated him inside him.
‘I asked him who he was. The Sun replied that he was
a person who had attained heaven by Uatchavrtti.”
Hearing the advice given by the Naga, the Brahmin
engaged in Unchavrtti and attained heaven.
(xt) The Sun gave Subrahmanya shining beauty.
(M.B. Anugasana Parva, Chapter 86, Verse 23 )s
(xii) The Sun gave the hermit Jamadagnian umbrella
and slippers. (See under Cherippu).
(xiii) In olden days when a war between the Devas
and the Asuras was drawing near, Rahu wounded the
Sun and the moon. Along’ with that the. universe fell.
in darkness, and the asuras began to destroy the Devas.
At this time according to the prayer of the gods the
= Atri rk aaa sn figure of the Moon and made
the Sun as shining as of old, (MB. ga
Chapter 156; Starza 2),° (M-B+ Anusasana Parva,
(xiv) The Synonyms of Sun according to the Amarakoéa
are given below :— ;
(Sara, Sirya, Aryama, Aditya, Dvadasatma, Divakara,
Bhaskara, Ahaskara, Bradhna, Prabhakara, - Vibhakara, -
Bhasvan, Vivasvan, Saptasva, Haridagva, Usnaraémi
Vikartana, Arka, Martanda,-Mihira, | Aruna, Pisa,
Dyumani, Tarani, Mitra, Citrabhanu, Virocana, Viévavasu, Grahapati, T'visampati, Aharpati, Bhanu, Harnsa,
Sahasraméu, Savita, Tapana, Ravi, Padmaksa, Tejas.
Amrasi, Chayanatha, Tamisraha, Karmasaksi, Jagaccaksus, Lokabandhu, Trayitanu, Pradyotana, Dinamani,
Khadyota, Lokabandhava, Ina, Bharga, Dhamanidhi,
Armsumali and Abjinipati. : ;
SORYA II. Anasura (demon). It is stated in Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 65, Verse 26, that this
asura was the son born to Prajapati Kagyapa by his
wife Kadra. The King Darda was the rebirth of this
asura.
SURYAVAMSA
SURYABHANU. A gate-keeper of Alakapuri. A statement occurs in Uttara Ramayana, that in the fight
between Kuberaand Ravana, this gate-keeper helped
Kubera.
SURYADATTA. A brother of King Virata. It is stated
in- Mahabharata, Virata Parva, Chapter 31, Stanza 11,
that this Siiryadatta was known by the name Satanika
also. Suryadatta also took part in the fight following
the theft of the cattle of Virata by Duryodhana and
others. After killing the hundred warriors in the army
of Trigarta, this Siryadatta entered into the midst of
the enemies and was killed by Drona in the battle of
Bharata. (M.B. Karna Parva, Chapter 6, Verse 34).
SURYADHVAJA. A King in Ancient India. He was
present in the Svayamvara marriage of Draupadi.
(M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 185, Stanza 10).
SURYAGRAHANA. To know in detail about the
view of the Puranas regarding the Solar eclipse, see
under Candra IV, Para 4.
SURYAKETU. A daitya (demon). Once this: daitya
conquered the world of the gods and expelled Indra.
At that time Purafijaya was the King of Ayodhya, who
was born in the Solar dynasty. Indra requested for his
help. Purafijaya agreed to help Indra, on condition that
Indra should stand as an ox and that he would sit on
the hump of that ox and fight. Accordingly he sat on
the ‘Kakud’ (hump) of the ox and fought in the battle,
killed Stiryaketu, and reinstated Indra in his former
position. Because he sat on the ‘Kakud’, Purafijaya got
the name Kakutstha. The dynasty of the King came to
be called by the name Kakutstha. (Kamba Ramayana,
-Yuddhakanda). .
SURYAKSA.,: A King in ancient India. It is stated 10
Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 67, Stanza 57, that
this King was born from a portion of the King Kratha.
SURYAMASA. A warrior who fought on the side of the
Kauravas in the battle of- Bharata. Abhimanyu killed him, (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 48, Verse 15)-
SURYANETRA. A bird born in the family of Garuda.
Mention is made about this bird in Mahabharata, |
_Udyoga Parva, Chapter 101, Stanza 13.
SURYASAVITRA. An eternal god of offérings to the
pias (M.B. Anugasana Parva, Chapter 91, Stanz4
SURYASRI. An eternal god concerned with offering®
to the manes. (M.B. Anugdsana Parva, Chapter 9!)
Stanza 34). )
SURYATIRTHA. An ancient holy place situated 17
Kuruksetra. It ‘jis mentioned in Mahabharata, Van
Parva, Chapter 88, Stanza 48, that by bathing here a?
worshipping the manes one may attain. the fruits °
performing the sacrifice of Agnistoma and go to the
region of the Sun... -. |
SURYAVAMSA. An important dynasty of anciett
Bharata. - It jg stated in Devibhagavata, Skandha 7, -45
follows about the origin of this Solar dynasty. |
The Lord of creation Brahma originated from the lotus
in the navel of Visnu. That Brahma did penance -
ten thousand years and pleased Paragakti, the gre?
goddess of power, and started creation. First of al! be
created seven mental sons. Of them Marici becam©
©xpert in creation. Prajapati Kagyapa_ the son of
farici became a greater expert. The Sun is the son 9
Kasyapa. Nine sons named Iksvaku, Nabhaga, Dhrs!4;
aryati, Narisyanta, Prarméu, Nrga, Dista, Karasa 2°

SUSARMAN II.
SORYAVARCAS
Prsadhra were born to the Sun. Of these Iksvaku became King. This line of Kings born from the Sun is
logy). Saryavarhia (Solar dynasty). (See the GeneaOBy )-
SURYAVARCAS. A Deva Gandharva. It is stated in
Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 122, Stanza 55,
that this Deva Gandharva born to Prajapati Kasyapa
took part in the birth celebration of Arjuna.
SURYAVARMA. A King of the country of Trigarta.
This King had a brother called Ketuvarma. Suryavarma and Ketuvarma fought with Arjuna when he
was leading the sacrificial horse of Yudhisthira. Both
the Trigartas were killed in that fight.” (M.B. Asvamedha Parva, Chapter 74).
SUSAMAN. A noble Brahmin porn in Dhanaiijaya
Gotra. He participated in the Rajasuya conducted by
Yudhisthira. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 33, Verse 34).
SUSANKULA. A famous urban area in North India.
Arjuna once conquered this region. (Sabha Parva,
Chapter 27, Verse 11).
SUSANTI. I. A King of the Bharata dynasty. He was
Santi’s son and father of Puruja. (Bhagavata, Skandha
SUSANTI II. Indra during the third Manvantara.
(See under Manvantara).
SUSARMA I. King of Trigarta deéa. The following
information about him is gathered from Mahabharata.
(i) Sugarman, son of Vrddhaksema attended Draupadi’s
wedding. (Adi Parva, Chapter 185, Verse 9).
(ii) Once he incited Duryodhana to attack Matsya,
the Virata King. Accordingly Duryodhana attacked the
Virata city and Sugarman aided him in the battle.
(Virata Parva, Chapter 30).
(iii) In the battle that followed the lifting of the cows
of the Virata King by the Kauravas, Sugarman took the
Viradta King as captive. (Virata Parva, Chapter 33,
Verse 7).
(iv) In the battle that followed the above incident
Bhima caught Su’arman as _ prisoner. (Virata Parva,
Chapter 33, Verse 25). )
(v) At the instance of Yudhisthira Bhima set SuSarman
free. (Virata Parva, Chapter 33, Verse 58)
(vi) Sugarman fought against the Pandavas and on the.
first day of the great war he fought a duel with Cekitana. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 60).
(vii) Arjuna defeated Susarman. (Bhisma
Chapter 82, Verse 1).
(viii) He fought with Arjuna, Bhima_and Dhrstadyumna. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 114; Drona Parva,
‘Chapter 14). :
(ix) He vowed that he would kill Arjuna. (Drona
Parva, Chapter 17, Verse 11).
(x) When Dronacarya was killed, he ran. away from
the battle-field. (Drona Parva, Chapter 193, Verse 18).
(xi) Arjuna killed’ Sugarman. (Salya Parva, Chapter
(xii) Names like. Prasthaladhipa, Rukmaratha, T'raigarta and ‘Trigarta are used as synonyms of Susarman,
A Pajicala warrior who fought .on the
Pandava side in the great war. He was harassed in
various ways by Bhisma and was ultimately killed by
Karna. (Karna Parva, Chapter 56, Verse 46).
SUSARMAN III. Last of the Kings in the Kanva
Parva,
SUSENA VIII. A king ef the Bharat.
773 | SUSILA II
dynasty. He was killed by his minister Bali. (Bhagavata, Skandha 10). :
SUSENA I. A naga born in th. Dhrtarastra dynasty.
The naga was burnt to death at the serpent yajha of
Janamejaya. (Adi Parva, Chapter 97, Verse 16).
SUSENA II. One of the hundred sons of Dhrtarastra.
He was killed by Bhima in the great war. (Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 64, Verse 34).
SUSENA III. A king of the Puru dynasty. He was the
grandson of Aviksit and son of Pariksit. (Adi Parva,
Chapter 94, Verse 52).
SUSENA IV. A son of Sage Jamadagni. The Sage asked -
Susena to kill his mother, but he d'd not obey his fa er.
Jamadagni, therefore, cursed him and Parasurama
redeemed him from the curse. (Vana Parva, Chapter
SUSENA V. Father in-law of Bali, the monkey king.
Susena, father of Tara, deputed one thousand crore
monkeys to search for 5ita. (Vana Parva, Chapter 283,
Verse 2). Susena, an expert in the science of medicine
and the art of warfare, was the son of the monkey
called Dharma. (Valmiki Ramayana).
In the Rama-Ravana war Susena fought the Raksasa
forces and killed Widyunmali. Laksmana swooned
on being hit by the arrows of Ravana who fought with
redoubled vigour following the death of Indrajit. Many
monkeys also swooned. Then Susena, the medical
expert, brought back to consciousness the swooned folk
with the help of Visalyakaranl, Sauvarnyakarani,
Safijivani and other herbs. ;
Susena also attended the coronation ceremony of Sri
Rama. (Valmiki Ramayana, Yuddha Kanda, Chapters
SUSENA VI. A son of Karna, He fought with Nakula
in the great war. Uttamaujas killed him in battle.
Karna Parva, Chapter.75, Verse 13}
SUSENA VII. Another son of Karna. Nakula killed him
in the great war. (Salya Parva, Cl ayter 10, Verse 49).
dynasty. He was
the son of Dhrsa and father of Sunitha. (Bhagavata,
Skandha 9).
SUSENA IX. A king, who married Rambha. (See under
Rambha, Para 5).
SUSILA I. A daughter of the Gandharva named Suésila.
(See under Pramohini).
SUSILA IL. A brahmin who got rich due to the observance
of Navaratri-penance. He led a very hard life with
many sons and was naturally thinking of means of mak-.
ing money and a noble brahmin taught him about the
greatness Navaratri. Accordingly Susila observed for
nine years the Navaratri-penance and at last Devi
appeared before him and made him rich. (Devi Bhagavata, Skandha 3).
SUSILA I. A Gandharva lady (See under Pramohini).
SUSILA II. A cow, the sister of Surabhi. She was the
cow used in connection with sacrificial offerings made in
the a’rama of the sage Jamadagni.
Jamadagni once got his wife Renuka killed by Parasurama. Though he brought her back to life as desired by
Paragurama, Jamadagni felt deep sorrow for having got
his wife killed. So, he went to Goloka and pleased
Surabhi by his penance and she gave him Susila, her
sister. Jamadagni gave the cow (Susila) to Renuka. It
was this Sugila which later on Karttaviryajuna took away

~SUSKA | '
by force, (See under Jamadagni, Para 8). (Brahmanda
Purana, Chapter 61) ; |
SUSKA. A Maharsi who lived in the Gokarna temple.
When Bhagiratha brought Ganga from heaven to the
earth, sea water began to rise and the temples situated
near the sea were submerged. At that time Suska went
along with other Maharsis to visit Paragurama at the
Mahendra mountain. In response to Suska’s prayer,
Parasurama raised the submerged temples including the
Gokarna temple, above the wate.
SUSNA. An asura. In Reveda we find that once Indra
bound the magician Susna in chains and put him in
prison,
SUSOBHANA. A Mandika princess. King Pariksit of
Iksvaku dynasty married her and three sons Sala, Dala
and Bala, were born to the couple. (See under Parkisit
ID).
SUSRAVAS I A Vidarbha princess. King Jayatsena of
the Puru dynasty married her and a soncalled Arvacina
was born to them. (Adi Parva, Chapter 95, Verse 17).
SUSRAVAS II. A king of the Rgveda period. When
enemies encircled him he prayed to Indra who helped
him by diving away the 10099 enemy warriors. (Rgveda,
Mandala 1, Anuvaka 10, Sakta 53).
SUSRAVAS III. A spy of the Devas. He once informed
Sarasvati secretly about the penance by the Sage
Katyayana. Sarasvati appeared before the Sage and told
him that he would get from Sage Sarasvata the knowledge he wanted. Accordingly Katyayana ended his
penance and went to Sage Sarasvata.
SUSRUTA. Reputed master of the science of Surgery,
Susruta was the grandson of King Gadhi and son of
Visvamitra. (Anug4sana Parva, Chapter 4, Verse 55) .
Fe is the author of Susrutasamhita, one of the famous
texts on Ayurveda.
SUSTHALA. A place of Puranic fame in ancient India.
The people who lived here were called Susthalas. (Sabha
Parva, Chapter 14, Verse 16).
SUSUPTI. One of the four states or conditions of man.
Jagrat, Svapna, Susupti and Turiya are the four states
ofman. (For details see under jJagrat).
SUSVARA. A Gandharva woman. (See under Pramohini) ‘
SUSY AMA, An apsara woman. She was the wife of
Rtadhvaja. son of Arstisena. The couple had a daughter
called Vrddha. (Brahmanda Purana).
SUTA I
1) General information. A hermit who recounted the
Puranas to other hermits at Naimisa forest. Hewas a
disciple of Vyasa. Vyasa composed the Puranas and
taught them to his son, hermit Suka who was a man of
abstinence and who was not born of womb. At this time
Vyasa had another disciple named Sita. It is stated in
Devi Bhagavata, Skandha 9, that this Sita who was a
fellowdisciple of Suka, who had learned all the Puranas
directly from the teacher Vyasa, and who was capable
saying stories so convincingly, was the son of the hermit Lomaharsa.
2) In Neimisdranya. Stta who had learned the Puranas
directly form Vyasa, happened to reach Naimisaranya
once. (See: under Naimisaranya) . Naimisaranya is
the abode of hermits in the Kali-age. In days of old,
hermits, who were miserable because of the evils of Kaliyuga, which was fast approaching, gathered here at the
end of Dvaparayuga. They went to the world of Brahma
to consult about the means and ways of preventing the
SUTAPAS V
-evils of Kaliyuga. Having heard their complaints Brahma
brought a wheel of the figure of mind and placing it before the hermits told them thus: ‘You follow this wheel.
The place where this wheel falls down will be a place of
purity, which will not be affected by the evils of Kallage. There you can live in peace, without being affected
by the evils of Kali-age till the coming of the Satyayuga.”’ Saying these words Brahma set the wheel rolling
in front of them. The hermits followed it. The wheel
rolled on till it reached the earth, fell down and was
crumbled to powder in a particular place. That place
became famous later under the name NaimisaranyaSuta came to this place.
As soon as they saw Siita, the hermits such as Saunaka
and’ others who were living there welcomed Sita with
hospitality and told him thus: “‘Oh! hermit, you are
the disciple of Vyasa. You have learned the eighteen
Puranas from Vyasa We are eager to hear them. ~°
please recite to us the Puranas, the hearing of which
will remit all sins and secure heaven.”’
According to this request Sita recited the eightee?
Puranasto the gathering of the hermits. It is in the for™
of the teaching of Sita to Saunaka and the others, 1-°
in the form of a dialogue between Sita and Saunaka,
that the people got the Puranas. (Devi Bhagavata
Skandha I).
3) Sita was beheaded. In Bhagavata, Skandha 10, le
" occurs a story, stating how Balabhadrarama cut off ! 7
head of Sita as the battle of Kuruksetra had starte
when Sita had been reciting the eighteen Puranas a
Naimisaranya and how his head was fixed in its place
again and he was brought to life. (For further details S¢
under Balabhadrarama, Para 6). se divocaitl
4) Other details, Sita was one of the hermits who visité
Bhisma on his bed of arrows during the battle ©
Bharata. (MB. Santi Parva, Chapter 47 Verse 12). -
SUTA II. One of Visvamitra’s sons who were expounder®
of the Vedas. (Mahabharata, AnuéAsana Parva, Chapt
*, Merse 5/,)
SUTA. Tf. A blended class of people. (See under lek
SUTALA. A part of Patala (netherworld). (See U?
PRIS). « ng
SUTANU I. The wife of ASvasuta, the son of the Ki Si
of Vajra. Sutanu was the daughter of Yudhisth'
(Vayu Purana, 96, 250). ied
SUTANU II. The daughter of Ahuka otherwise C# ,
Ugrasena. (Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter “i
Verse 33) Sri Krsna made Akrira marry this Sule i
SUTAPAS IT. A KKing of the dynasty of Bharata. He
the son of Homa and the father of Bala. (Bhagaval™”’
Skandha 9). | é:
SUTAPAS II. A Prajapati who lived in days of ase
A son named Pr¢ nigarbha
by his wife Préni.
of Maha visnu.
Para 7),
SUTAPAS III. A son of Vasistha. Seven sons nam
Rajas, Gotra, Urdhvabahu, Savana, Anagha, Soe
and Sukra, were born by his wife Urjja. All the ee
of them were the Saptarsis (seven hermits) of the ia
anvantara. (See under Manvantara ).
SUTAPAS IV. Father of the hermit —_—
SUTApS Purana, Chapter | ie
SV. Ahermit of th me
under Ugratapas), Seay it
; eer!
was born to this Praja? n
That son was a partial incarn@ qiti
(For further details see under
(Brahe
see

SUTAPAS VI
SUTAPAS VI. A hermit who was born in the dynasty
of Bharadvaja. This hermit had two wives. A son
named Kalyanamitra was born by Pitrkanyaka, one
of the two wives.
The glamour of the second wife of Sutapas attracted
the sun, who raped her once and from this, the son
Agvinisuta was born. On seeing that his wife was a
harlot, Sutapas abandoned her with her son. Afterwards, at the instance of Sri Krsna, the hermit
an his wife and her son back. (Brahmavaivarta: |:
SUTAPAS VII. A hermit. This hermit once approached
the princess Utpalavati and requested her for coition
with him. The princess refused. Then he cursed her,
to become an animal. Utpalavati begged for liberation
from the curse. Sutapas felt pity for her and blessed
her thus:_—“‘A son named Lola will be born to you.
He will become the Manu of Tamasa Manvantara.”
(Markandeya Purana, Chapter 17).
SUTARA. A Gandharva damsel who had been cursed.
(For further details see under Pramohini).
SUTASOMA. The son born to Bhimasena by his wife
Draupadi. The information regarding this Sutasoma,
taken from Mahabharata, is given below:
(i) Sutasoma took birth from a portion of the Visva-
. devas. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 67, Verse 127).
(ii) It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Drona Parva,
Chapter 23, Verse 28, that this prince was given the
name Sutasoma, because he was born by the blessings
of Gandra (Moon).
(iii) Sutasoma hada combat with Vikarna on the
first day of the battle of Bharata. (M.B. Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 45, Verse 58). | .
(iv) He rescued Srutakarma from the hold of Durmukha
in the battle of Bharata. (M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 79, Verse 39).
(v) Sutasoma fought with Vivirn, ati. (M.B. Drona
Parva, Chapter 25, Verse 24).
(vi) Sutasoma fought with Sakuni’and was defeated.
(M.B. Karna Parva, Chapter 29, Verse 18).
(vii) There was a severe fight between Sutasoma and
Agvatthama. (M.B. Karna Parva, Chapter 55, Verse
wits Mention is madein Mahabharata, Sauptika Parva,
Chapter 8, Verse 55 thatin the battle of Bharata, As vatthama entered the camp of the Pandava army in the
night and killed Sutasoma.
SUTEJANA. A King who was a friend of Yudhisthira.
(Bharata, Drona Parva, Chapter 158, Verse 40).
SUTIRTHA. An ancient holy place in Kuruksetra. It
is stated in Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 83,
Verse 54, that the Devas and the manes would come
to this place, and that if offerings to the manes are given
at this place, one would get the merits of performing
horse sacrifice. ,
SUTIKSNA. A hermit. While 6>; Rama and Laksmana
were living in the forest with Sita, they visited the hermiof hermits such as Sarabhanga, Sutiksna and others.
Once Indra came to the hermitage of Sutiksna and
invited him to the world of gods. It was at this time
that Sri Rama came to the hermitage with Sita and
Laksmana. When they were nearing the hermitage,
Indra said “I shall see Rama later when he has completed his great task.’? Saying thus Indra went away from
the hermitage. Sri Rama and his wife and brother
7795 ' SUVARCAS IX
asked the hermit, where in the forest, they were to live,
The hermit told them that they:could live in that hermitage itself.
This hermit was the brother and disciple of Agastya,
Once Sutiksna changed a wicked and cruel man
named Duspanya to a good and righteous man by sprin_kling holy water of Ganga on him. (See under Duspanya). (Valmiki Ramayana, Aranya Kanda, Sarga 7).
SUTRA (VEDASUTRA). See under Veda. :
SUTVA, A son of Sumantu, the teacher and ‘hermit of
Samaveda. (See under Guruparampara ).
S{UJVAHA. A warrior of Subrahmanya. (Salya Parva,
Chapter 45, Verse 66). 3
SUVAK. A maharsiin ancient India who held Yudhisthira.
in great respect. (Vana Parva, Chapter 26, Verse 24).
SUVAKTRA. A warrior of Subrahmanya. (Salya Parva,
Chapter 45, Verse 73). |
SUVAMA. A holy river in India famous in the Puranas.
(Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 29).
SUVARCALA I. Daughter of the maharsi called Devala.
Syetaketu (son of a sage) married her and the couple
attained salvation by performing the duues of the householder. (M.B. Southern Text, Santi Parva, Chapter
st ARCALA II. A wife of Surya.
Chapter 146, Verse 5).
SUVARGCAS I. One of the hundred sons of Dhrtarastra.
He was killed by Bhima in the great war. (Karna Parva
Chapter 84, Verse5). | |
SUVARGCAS II. Son of Suketu. Both the father and the
son attended the wedding of Draupadi. (Adi Parva,
Chapter 185, Verse 9).
SIIVARCAS III-A son of Tapa, the, Paficajanyagni.
(Adi Parva, Chapter 185, Verse 9).
SUVARCAS IV. A very truthful Sage who lived in
ancient India. Dyumatsena father of Satyavan lived’ in
the agrama of this sage. He consoled Dyumatsena when
Satyavan and Savitri who had gone out to collect
frewood were very late to return. (Vana Parva,Chapter
STIVARCAS V. A son of Garuda. (Udyoga Parva, Chapter
SUVARCAS VI. A soldier who fought on the Kaurava
side and got killed by Abhimanyu in the great war.
(Drona Parva, Chapter 48, Verse 15).
SUVARCAS VII. One of the two attendants given to.
Subrahmanya by Himavan, the other one beint Ativarcas. (Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 46).
SUVARGAS VIII. A son of the king Khaninetra. He is
known as Karandhama as well. (See under Karandhama ).
SUVARCAS IX. Wife of sage Dadhici. At the request
of Indra, the maharsi sacrificed himself so that the former
might use his bones. Suvarcas who hated the Devas
especially Indra as the cause of her husband’s death
cursed Indra that he and his dynasty be ruined. She
decided to end her | fe in the pyre of her husband when
the following celestial voice was heard: ‘“‘You are
pregnant.”’ Then she opened her stomach with a shar
stone, took out the foetus and placed it near a Banyan
tree and ended her life in her husband’s pyre. (Padma
Purana, Uttara Khanda, 135; Sivagataka, 24-25). The
child born from the foetus is the famous Pippalada. (See
under Pirpalada).
(Anusasana Parva,

SUVARMAN
SUVARMAN. One of the hundred sons of Dhrtardstra.
He was killed by Bhima in the great war. (Drona Parva,
Chapter 127, Verse 66).
SUVARNA I. A Devagandharva. A famous celibate, he
attended the birthday celebrations of Arjuna. (Anusasana Parva, Chapter 122, Verse 58).
SUVARNA II. A Brahmin sage with his body golden in
colour. He once held a talk with Manu about meritorious acts and sins. (Anusasana Parva, Chapter 98).
SUVARNA. - A princess of the Iksvaku dynasty. Suhotra
of Piru dynasty wedded her and to the couple was
born a son called Hasti who Jater,on became a King.
(Adi Parva, Chapter 95, Verse 34).
SUVARNA (M). A unit of measurement in ancient
India |
SUVARNABHA. A King, grandson of Svarocisa Manu
and son of Sankhapada. The father once advised the
son on the various aspects of Satvatadharma. (Santi
Parva, Chapter 348, Verse 38).
SUVARNACUDA. A_ prominent son of Garuda.
— (Udyoga Parva, Chapter 101, Verse 9).
SUVARNASIRAS. A Sage of very olden days. His
father’s name was Pingalavarman. He lived in western
India spending his days in singing Samaveda. (Udyoga
Parva, Chapter 110, Verse 12).
SUVARNASTHIVI. Son of King Srfijaya. While sages
Narada and Parvata were living in that King’s palace
the following incident took place.
Srfijaya exprersed his sorrow over having no. issues to
Narada who then blessed him to have a son called
Suvarnasthivi. The King began performing Yajiias
from that day onwards and his queen conceived and in
due time delivered a child who was named Suvarnasthivi and he became an ascetic even as a boy. Indra
got alarmed by the penance of Suvarnasthivi and tried
to frighten him by assuming the forms of various -cruel
beasts. He also sent his Vajrayudha against the ascetic,
but all tono purpose.
The boy became four or five years old when one day
while strolling in the company of his mother on the
banks of the Ganga, a tiger jumped upon him. This
tiger of illusion had been sent by Indra and the tiger
killed the boy. His mother wept aloud and people in
the palace gathered around her. Sriijaya wept bitterly.
Ultimately Narada appeared, consoled the King and
with the permission of Indra brought the boy back to
life. (Santi Parva, Chapter 31; also see under Sriijaya )
SUVARINATIRTHA. A very ancient holy spot in
India. Before creation Mahavisnu once did penance
here to please Rudra whe appeared before him and
granted him boons. That is the great importance of
the place. He who worships Siva here will derive
benefits equal to those of conducting an Aévamedha
yajfia and also will attain the status of
(Vana Parva, Chapter 84, Verse 18).
SUVARNAVARMAN. A King of Kagi. King Janamejaya had married his daughter Vapustama. (See under
Janamejaya )-
SUVASTRA. An Indian river famous -in the Puranas.
(Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 25).
SUVASTU.. <A river of India extolled in the Reveda.
SUVASTUKA. A Kingin ancient India. He had also
been invited by the Pandavas to participate in the
great war. (Udyoga Parva, Chapter 3, Verse 13)
Ganapati.
‘SUYASA I. A daughter of Kin
SUYASA II
SUVEDA. Wife of Savana, son of Priyavrata.
under Savana I).
SUVELA. A mountain on the banks of the southern
sea. Rama and Laksmana, before entering Lanka with
the monkey-force, had surveyed the city from the top.
of this mountain. (Valmiki Ramayana, Yuddha Kanda
Chapters 38 and 39).
SUVENA. A river famous in the Puranas. Sage Markandeya once saw the river in the stomach of child Krsna.
(Vana Parva, Chapter 188, Verse 104).
SUVIRA I. A King of the Bharata dynasty, son of
K semya and father of Ripufijaya. (Bhagavata, Skandha
a
(See
SUVIRA II. A King bornfrom anaspect of the asura
called Krodhavaga. (Udyoga Parva, Chapter 74, Vers
SUVIRA III. Son of King Dyutiman, Suvira was 4
famous ruler equal in prowess to Indra. (Anugasana
Parva, Chapter 2, Verse 13).
SUVIRAIV. A Ksatriya dynasty. The wicked King;
Ajabindu was born in this dynasty. (Udyoga Parva,
Chapter 74, Verse 14). ,
SUVISALA. A female attendant of Subrahmamya-
(Salya Parva; Chapter 45, Verse 66).
SUVRATA I. A King of Bharata dynasty. He was the
son of Ksema and father of Visvajit, (Bhagava!
Skandha 1). :
SUVRATA II. A King of the Anga royal dynasty- He
was the son of King Uginara who begot of his wife Nrgé
the son called Nrga, Nara by his wife, Nara; Krm!i ?.
,the wife Krmi; Daga by the wife Suvrata and Sibi by his
wife Drsadvati. (Agni Purana, Chapter 277).
SUVRATA III. Son of the brahmin Somagarman. (FOF
details see under Dharmangada).: ~ a
SUVRATA IV. A muni of ancient days who lived }
North India. He was extraordinarily effulgent and ™
puted. (Vana Parva, Chapter 90, Verse 12). .
SUVRATA V. One of the two.atiendants given to _
_ brahmanya by Mitradeva, the other one being: 54"Y
sandha. (Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 41 ) to
SUVRATA VI. One of the two attendants give? ‘ie
Subrahmanya by Vidhata, the other, one being Suk4"
man. (Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 42). . she
SUVRATA. Daughter of Daksaprajapati by Virani. Y" 5
had four sons one each from Daksa, Dharma, Bra ah
and Rudra. They were respectively » Daksasavat.'
Dharmasavarni, Brahmasavarni and’ Rudrasava™
(Brahmanda Purana, 41, 39-59).
SUYAJNA. Daughter. of King Prasenajit of the Re
dynasty. She was wedded to King. Mahabhauma
. King Ayutanayi-was their son, (Adi Parva, Chapte
SUYAJU. A King who was the grandson of Emper
Bharata and son of Bhumanyu. His mother Ww
an
Puskarini. (Adi Parva, Chapter 94, Verse 24). ‘iy
SUYAMA. Third son of the Raksasa called SataSt*2%},
Sudeva, a, _ wilt
the army-chief of King Ambarisa, * "or
Savas. (M.B. Southern - text, Santi: Parva, Chapt?
ies , Bahuda and wife d
Pariksit, son of Anafva. The > had a son callet
Bhimasena. (Adi Parva, Chapter 95, Verse 41).
SUYASA II. Consort of Kj ae ay a
details see under Nikumbha)” Divodasa of
(For

SVABHOJANA(M)
SVABHOJANA (M). A _ naraka (Hell). (For further
details, see the section on Naraka, under Kala, Yama).
SVADHADEVI. Wife of the Manes. There is a story,
as given below, in Devi Bhagavata, Skandha9, about
the birth of this goddess.
At the beginning of creation Brahma created seven
groups of Manes of whom four were embodied and
three were lustrous ones. The deities called the Manes
are the Agnisvattas, the Barhisadas, the Somapas,
Yama, Anala, Soma and Aryaman. The Sraddhas
(oblations offered to the manes) were stipulated as
the food of these manes. It was ordered that the
Brahmin who does not make offerings to the manes,
will be as mean and despicable as the Brahmin, who
has not learned the Vedas, who has not eaten meals
presented to an idol in temples, and who has not
worshipped Devi (goddess) , and that he would not be
eligible to perform any religious ceremonies. ‘Thus
Brahmi meant Sraddha as food for the manes. But the
portion of the rice balls offered by the Brahmins stipulated as the food of the manes, seldom reached them. At
last the manes complained to Brahma. Then Brahma
created a woman of beauty, youth, knowledge and
power to grant boons, and of good character, from a
portion of pure nature. She was named Svadha, and
was given to the manes as wife. Then Brahmins were
ordered to give offerings to the manes only with the
spell (Mantra) of Svadha. When the Brahmins began to
do as they were ordered, the manes also began to get
food, and they became contented.
Two daughters named Mena and Dharini were born to
the manes by Svadhadevi. It is mentioned in Visnu
Purana, Améa 1, Chapter 10, that both of the daughters
were expounders of Vedas, full of knowledge and the
seat ofall good qualities.
SVAHA. A daughter of Brhaspati. This Svaha who was
always angry had a son named Kama. (M.B. Vana
Parva, Chapter 219, Verse 22)
SVAHADEVI.
1) General information. Wife of god Agni (fire) . There
‘sa story about the birth of this goddess, as given below,
in Devi Bhagavata, Skandha 9. .
In the beginning of creation sufficient arrangements
had not been made for food to be supplied to the
Devas (gods). They were in misery. At last the devas
reached Satyaloka and requested Brahma to make some
arrangements for their food. Brahma pacified them by
saying that he would make available to them, the
‘havis’ offered by Brahmins as food. Then Brahma
meditated on the Mala-Prakrtl. A particle of MilaPrakrtiappeared before Brahma and asked him what
boon he required. Brahma said thus :—Oh Goddess +
The gods are miserable due to lack of food. The fire
is not powerful enough to digest the ‘havis’ offered by
Brahmins in the fire so as to convert them as food for
the gods. The fire would become powerful to digest the
havis only if your esteemed self would reside in fire as
the power of digestion. Only the havis offered, with the
mantra, (spell) ending with the holy name of your
glorious self could be digested by fire and taken to the
gods as food, and they could accept it as food. So it is
my request that your §&
power that dwells in fire as i
prosperity, adored by men and gods.” |
But that goddess said that her desire was to get
racious self would become the
the figure of wealth and
SVAPNA
Sri Krsna as her husband. She did penance to Sri
Krsna, who appeared and said : ‘Devi !you will take
birth as the daughter of King Nagnajit in Varaha
Kalpa (a world-age) and then you will become my
wife. Now you have to become the wife of Agni under
the name Svahadevi and become the power of digestion,
and part of the spell (mantra). You and Agni will be
worshipped together by all. From that day onwards
Syahadevi became the wife of Fire. It 1s mentioned in
Visnu Purana, Arnga 1, Chapter 10, that three sonsPavaka, Pavamana and Suci, were born to the couple.
(See under Devi).
2) Other details. :
(i) Itis mentioned in Mahabharata, Sabha Parva,
Chapter 11, Verse 42, that Syahadevi remains in the
court of Brahma, glorifying him.
Gi) Once Svahadevi appeared among the wives of
hermits. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 225, Verse 7).
(iii) When Subrahmanya was anointed as captain of
the army, Svahadevi also was present. (Mahabharata,
Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 13).
6VAITREYA. Son of Svitra. There is a story in Rgeveda,
Ist Mandala, 7th Anuvaka, 33rd Sukta that Svaitreya
once hid himself under water for fear of enemies.
SVAKSA. A_ region in India, very famous in the
Puranas. (Mahabharata, Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9,
Verse 45).
SVANA. Son of the Agni (fire) called Satya. It is said
that this Agni is the agent which causes disease to
living things. This agni got the name Svana because
human beings produce Svana (pitiable cry) when they
are afflicted by diseases. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter
SVANAYA. Son of King Bhavayavya. The daughter of
this King, who is praised in the Reveda, was married
by the hermit Kaksivan. (For further details see under
Kaksivan I, Other details, Para 6).
SVAPHALKA. F ather of Akrira. Vrsni, a Yadava King
had two sons Svaphalka and Citraka. It was divinely
ordained that there would not be epidemics and drought
in the place where vaphalka lived. Once there was no
rain for a period of three years in the land of the King
of Kagi. So the King of Kasi took Svaphalka with him
to his country. With his arrival there was rainfall in
the land and the King who was pleased at it gave his
daughter Gandini in marriage to Svaphalka.
There is a story about the birth of Gandini also.
Gandini remained in her mother’s womb for many
years. At last the King of Kagi called to the child
1 the womb and said, ‘Take . birth at once, why do
you remain there so long?” The child replied, “I shall
come out if you allow me to offer a cow as gift every
day.’ The King allowed it and the child was born.
She was named ‘“‘Gandini.” She used to offer the gift of
cows to Brahmanas daily. After she married Svaphalka,
several sons including Akrura were born to her,
(Harivaringa, Chapter 34, Bhagavata, 10th Skandha).
SVAPNA (DREAM).
1) General information. One of the four states of mind.
2) Result of Svapna. The Indians believe that there are
two kinds of dreams and that they have the power to
suggest things going to happen in future. So Indian
sages have classified dreams as good dreams and bad
dreams,

SVAPNA
Bad dreams:—
Seeing the following in dream is bad.
(1) Grass and trees have grown all over the body except .
the navel. (2) The dust of bronze was sprinkled on
the head (3) The head was completely shaved. (4)
One (the dreamer) had been nude. (5) He (the
dreamer) had worn dirty clothes (6) He had applied
oil on the body. (7) One is smeared -with mud. (8)
He had fallen from a higher level to a lower level.
(9) He had married. (10) He had sung. songs.
(11) He had amused himself by playing a lute
etc. (12) He had got on a swing (13) He had
obtained lotus flower and metals. (14) He had
killed serpents. (15) He had climbed on _ trees
with red flowers or on the back of low caste people,
hog, dog, ass, or camel. (16) He had eaten flesh of
birds or sesame oil or oil-cake. (17) He had entered
the womb ofhis mother. (18) He had got on a
funeral Pyre. (19) The flag post of Indra had been
broken down. (20) The Sun and the Moon had
fallen down. (21) The gods, Brahmins, Kings or
teachers have been angry. (22) Stars or planets have
fallen. (23) He had engaged himself in dance or playing musical instruments or singing. (24) He had played
musical instruments except the lute (Vina).(25) He
had been carried down by the current of a river. (26)
He had taken bath in,muddy water or cowdung water
or Ink. (27) He had embraced virgins. (28)
He had engaged in pederasty. (29) Limbs of the body
were damaged. (30) He hadvomited and passed excrements. (31) He had gone to the south. (32) He
had caught disease. (33) Fruits have been destroyed
(34) Cleavages occurred in minerals, (35) The
house was covered with dust. (36) He had swept
the house clean. (37) He had played with devils or
cruel animals or monkeys or low caste people. (38)
Had suffered molestation and hurts from enemies.
(39) He had worn hermit’s coloured cloth or played with coloured clothes, (40) He drank oil and
got immersed in water. (41) He has worn bloodcoloured garland and cosmetics.
If the dreams mentioned above are seen it should
not be mentioned to anybody. After the dream, either
he should sleep again or take bath. To counteract
the effects of bad dreams, do one of the following
such as offering sesame as oblation in fire; worshipping Visnu or Siva, or the Sun or Ganes vara; singing hymns of praise; reciting stktas (verses)
as Purusasukta etc. The dreams seen in
watch of the night. willcome into effect within one
year; dreams seen in the second watch of
the night will take effect within six months;
those seen in the third watch of the night
wil. take effect within three months and those seen
in the fourth watch of the night will take effect within
half a month and those seen at dawn will be realized
within ten days. If a bad dream anda good dream
are seen in one night, the last one will take effect. So
it is better not tosleep any more inthe night after
seeing a good drear:.
B. Good dreams. Seeing thai--
(1) he has climbed on a mountaian or the upper storey
of a building, or on the back of an elephant, or horse,
or bull or on the top of trees having white flowers, or
the first
such -
SVARNA
in the sky. (2) grass has grown in the loins. (3) several
heads have grown. (4) hair is turned grey or adorned
with white flowers. (5) one is wearing white cloth. (6)
he has caught the Moon, or the Sun or the stars and
patted them. (7) one has embraced the flag of Indra
or hoisted the flag of Indra. (8) held the earth
and fountain. (9) one has attacked the enemies. (10)
he has won a controversy, or gambling or a battle.
(11) he has eaten raw flesh or pudding. (12) one has
bathed in blood. (13) one has drunk Sura (liquor)
or blood or milk. (14) one has handled weapons. (15)
the sky is clear. (16) drank the milk of cow, buffalolioness, elephant or mare, by mouth as their calves do.
(17) one got blessings from the gods, or Brahmins, oF
teachers. (18) one is anointed with water in the horn
of cow or water oozed from the lunar region, or anointed
as the ruler ofa kingdom. (19) the head is wounded
or he himself was dead. (20) houses etc. have caught
fire. (21) one received the emblems of kings. (22) he
has played the instrument lute. (23) aking or elephant
or horse or gold or an ox or a cow comes before.
If at the end of the dream he is seen as having climbed
on the back of an ox or an elephant or on the top of a
house or a mountain or a tree, or as having smeared
ghee or excrement on the body or gone toa prohibited
woman, or seen white cloth, clear water, tree with
fruits, or a clear sky, it forebodes good future. (Agni
Purana, Chapter 229).
SVARASTRA.A country in India famous in the Puranas.
Mention is made about this country in Mahabharata,
Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 48.
SVARAVEDI. A celestial maid. (For further details see
under Pramohini). :
SVARBHANAVI. The daughter of Svarbhanu. Ayus, tbe
son of Purtiravas married Svarbhanavi. Five sons begin
ning with Nahusa were born to the couple. (M.B. Adi
Parva, Chapter 75, Verse 26).
SVARBHANU I. A Danava (asura) born to Kasyapaprajapati by his wife Danu. It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 67, Verse 12 that Ugrasena the father of Kamsa was the rebirth of this
Danava.
SVARBHANU II. An son born to Sri Krsna by Satya
bhama. (Bhagavata, Skandha 10).
SVARGADVARA, An ancient holy bath, situated i?
Kuruksetra. It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Vana
Parva, Chapter 83, Verse 167, that one could attain
heaven by bathing in this holy tirtha.
SVARGAMARGATIRTHA. A holy place. It is mentioned
in Mahabharata, Anugasana Parva, Chapter 25, Vers
61, that those who bathe in this holy place will attain
the world of Brahma.
SVARGAROHANA PARVA. An important section i?
Mahabharata. (See under Bharata).
SVARGATIRTHA. A holy place. This place is in the
forest Naimisa. It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Anus asana Parva, Chapter 25, Verse 33, that he who lives 1°
this place for a month and gives offerings to the manes,
will obtain the fruits of performing Purusamedha yaji@
(A sacrifir °
SVARIA. A celestial woman. By the blessings of Kraufic4
a daughter named Vrnda was born to Svarna. There
were none who were not fascinated by her beauty. Once
Sukra asked Svarna, and obtained Vrnda, for the asuré

SVARNABINDU 7 79
named Jalandhara. (Padma Purana, Uttara Khanda,
Chapter 4).
SVARINABINDU. A warrior of Subrahmanya. ( Mahabharata, Salya Parva, Chapter 45).
SVARNAGRIVA. A warrior of Subrahmanya. (Mahabharata, Salya Parva, Chapter 45).
SVARNAROMA. A king of the Solar dynasty. It is
stated in Bhagavata, Skandha 9, that this king was the
son of Maharoma and the father of Prastharoma.
SVAROCIS. A son born to the king Dyutiman by his
wife Varathini. He had learned the languages of all
the living creatures from Vibhavari, the daughter of
Mandara a Vidyadhara, and the art called ‘“‘Padminividya” from Kalavati the daughter of Para, a Yaksa.
Three sons, named Vijaya, Merumanda, and Prabhava
were born to Svarocis by his three wives Manorama,
Vibhava, and Kalavati. Later from a jungle goddess
another son named Svarocisa also was born to Svarocis.
Svarocisa who was also called Dyntiman, became an
emperor afterwards. (Markandeya Purana, 61).
SVAROCISA. A Manu. See under Manvantara.
SVARUPA. Anasura. This asura remains in the palace
of Varuna and serves him. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 9,
Verse 14).
SVASA. A daughter of Daksaprajapati. Dharmadeva
married her. Anila, the Vasu, was born as their son.
(M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 66, Verse LF ye
SVASTIKA I. <A naga (serpent) who lived in Girivraja. It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Sabha Parva,
Chapter 9, Verse 9, that this serpent lives in the
palace of Varuna. !
SVASTIKA II. A warrior of Subrahmanya. (M. B.
_Salya Parva, Chapter 49, Verse 65).
SVASTIMATT. An attendant of Subrahmanya. (M. B.
Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Verse 12):
SVASTIPURATIRTHA. An ancient holy place in
Kuruksetra. Those who visit this holy place will
obtain the fruits of giving thousand cows as alms.
(M. B. Vana Parva, Chapter 83, Verse 174).
SVASTYATREYA. An ancient hermit. Mention 1s
made jn Mahabharata, Santi Parva, Chapter 208,
Verse 23 that this hermit had lived in South India.
SVASVA. A king praised in the Regveda. Witha view
to obtain a son, he worshipped the Sun and the Sun
himself took birth as his son. The son grew up and
became king. Once there arose a fight between this
king and hermit Etaga, in which fight Indra saved the
hermit. (Rgveda, Mandala 1, Anuvaka ll, Sikta
SV ATT. A grandson of Caksusa Manu. Tensons were
born to Caksusa Manu, by his_ wife Nadvala. Svat
was the son of his son Uru by his wife Agney | Svati
had five brothers named Anga, Sumanas, Kratu,
Angiras and Gaya. (Agni Purana, Chapter 18)..
SVAVATKA (SVAPHALKA). Father of Akrira. (See
under Svaphalka )
SVAVILLOMAPAHA. A holy place situated in Kuruksetra. (Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 83,
Verse 61).
SVAYAMBHU.. A teacher—priecst. This teacher was
the first one who had given precedence to the ceremonial rites of Sraddha (offering to the manes).
_ (M.B. Anugasana Parva, Chapter 191).
SVAYAMBHUVA MANU. Son of Brahma and the
first of the Manus.
SVETA I
1) Birth. Svayambhuva Manu was born as the
mental son, and Satariipa as the mental daughter, of
Brahma. Svayambhuva did penance and acquired
boons for ruling over the subjects. He married
Satarupa herself. Brahma appeinted him as the
first Manu to rule over the subjects. Two sons named
Priyavrata and Uttanapada and two daughters named
Prasiti and Akiati, were born to Svayambhuva by
his wife Sataripa. Of the two daughters Prasiiti was
given to Prajapati Daksa and Akiti to Prajapati
Ruci as wives. Ason named Yajfia and a daughter
named Daksinad were born to Ruci by Akuti. The
children were twins.
It is believed that Svayambhuva and Satariipa are
the first human beings. A. story as_ given below,
occurs in Matsya Purana. Brahma took birth as a
man somewhere in Kagmira. Brahma who took birth
as man, created Sataripa from his own body, without any decrease in its radiance. Svayambhuva
(Brahma) appreciated the beauty of Sataripa. He
erew amcrous. But Brahma was ashamed of his
feeling, as Sataripa being half of his body, was his
daughter. Being subjected to love and shame at the
same time Svayambhuva stood | there, looking at
Satarapa. To avoid the look of Brahma, Satarupa
moved to one side. Brahma hadno courage to turn
his face tothat side. Soanother face sprang up
on that side for him. Satariipa © turned to four sides
and Brahma thus got four faces. His amour subsided.
When the desire subsided,a man originated from
Brahma. That manis Svayambhuva. (For further
details see under Manvantara).
SVAYANJATA. A son born to aman by his own wife.
(M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 119 Verse 33).
SVAYAMPRABHA. Adaughter of Maya, an asura.
Two daughters named Svayamprabha and Somaprabha were born to Mayasura. From birth Svayamprabha became a celibate. Nalakibara the, son of
Vaisravana married Somaprabha.
Svayamprabha, the celibate, became the maid of
Rambha. (For the rest of the story, see under Rama
Para 25). (Kathasaritsagara, Madanamajiicukalambaka,
Taranga 3). |
SVAYAMVARA I.. A. sub-section of Adi Parva in
Mahabharata. This sub-section comprises Chapters 183
to 191 of Adi Parva.
SVAYAMVARA II. A Ksatriya custom of princesses
selecting their husbands themselves. There are three
kinds of Svayarhnvara. These three types are stipulated
for Kings only. The first type is Icchasvayamvara, the
second one is Savyavasthasvayamvara and ihe third is
Sauryagulkasvayamvara. No condition is attached to
Icchasvayarnvara. Anybody may be chosen as husband
according to the wish of the bride. Damayanti Svayamvara is an example of this. In the second it will be
stipulated that the bridegroom will have to possess
certain qualifications. In Sita-Svayamvara Sri Rama
drew the bow of Tryambaka, and married Sita. This is
an example of the second type of Svayarhvara. The
third typeis meant for adventurous. heroes. Arjuna’s
marrying Subhadra is an example of the third type of
Svayathvara. (Devi Bhagavata, Skandha 3):
SVEDAJA. An asura (demon). (See under Raktaja).
SVETA I. A King in ancient India. By his moral and
spiritual power he was able to restore his dead son to
IN

' SVETA II
life. He did not eat meat. Mahabharata, AnuSsdasana
Parva, Chapter 150 mentions that he was one of the
few Kings who deserve to be remembered with reverence
at dawn anddusk. (M.B.Adi Parva, Chapter 1, Verse
233; Santi Parva, Chapter 153, Verse 68; Anu§dsana
Parva, Chapter 115, Verse 66). |
SVETA II. A King. Mahabharata, Sabha Parva,
Daksinatya Patha, Chapter 14 mentions that he was
one of the prominent Kings in India. ;
SVETA III. A son of the Virata King. Sveta was the
son of Kinz Virata by his chief wife Suratha, who was
a princess of Kosala. Sveta had attended Yudhisthira’s
Rajasiiya. This distinguished warrior was killed by
Bhisma in Bharata Yuddha. (M.B. Daksinatya Patha,
Virata Parva, Chapter 16; Sabha Parva, Chapter 44,
Verse 20; Bhisma Parva, Chapter 48).
SVETA IV. A warrior of Subrahmanya. (Mahabharata,
Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 64).
SVETA.V. Son of the ‘elder brother of King Sudeva.
There is a story of how Sveta, who was a sinner,
attained moksa (salvation) by a vision of sage Agastya.
Towards the end of his life, Sveta attained Moksa by
performing austere tapas. But since he failed to earn
God’s grace by giving food to the hungry, even in
Heaven, he was tormented by hunger and thirst. His
hunger was so severe that he began eating his own flesh.
At last as suggested by Brahma he was born again on
earth and after a visit to Agastya re-entered Heaven.
SVETA VI. A daughter of Daksa. Ten daughters were
born to Daksa by his wife Krodhavasa, including
a (Valmiki Ramayana, Aranya Kanda, 14th
arga).
SVETA VII. A mountain in Uttara Khanda. In
Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 139, Verse 1, we
find that the Pandavas crossed the Sveta mountain
during their life in the forest.
SVETA VIII. A country situated on the northern side
of the Nila mountain. The region known as ‘“Hiranyakam”? is situated to the north of this country. (M.B.
Bhisma Parva, Chapter 6, Verse 37).
SVETABHADRA. A Gubyaka (guardian of treasury ).
Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter 10, Verse 15
mentions that he serves Kubera in Kubera’s assembly.
__ He was the guardian of Kubera’s treasury.
SVETADVIPA. An island. It was on this island that
Mahavisnu performed his austere tapas for obtaining
“Brahma Vidya”. It is situated on the northern side of
the ocean of milk. It is 32,900 miles above Meru
mountain. The inhabitants of Svetadvipa are without
the sense organs. They do not take food. They are rich
in “‘Jfiana” (knowledge). Their bodies give out perpetual fragrance. These sinless people are of white complexion. Their bodies and bones are as hard as
Vajrayudha. Their heads are as broad and flat as
umbrellas and their voice as loud as thunder. Each of
them has four arms and sixty teeth. All of them worship
Siva. (M.B. Santi Parva, Daksinatya Patha, Chapter
$VETAKETU. A Maharsi.
1) Birth. Svetaketu was the son of the sage Aruni or
Uddalaka who was born in the Gautama clan. Svetaketu had a sister named Sujata. Astavakra was her son
by the sage, Kahotaka. Thus Svetaketu was Astavakra’s
uncle. Svetaketu and Astavakra grew up together in
Uddalaka’s arama. (See under Astavakra).
SVETAKI
2) Pride perishes. Under his father’s training Svetaketu became a great scholar. With the increase in his
scholarship, he became very proud. The father who
understood this called him to his side and asked him :-
“By studying all about what youcan see, hear and
understand, have you learnt anything about‘what you
cannot see, hear or understand?” Svetaketu admitted
that he did not know. Then Uddalaka explained to
him the mystery of Paramatma (universal soul) which
is without beginning or end. (Chandogyopanisad ).
3) Svetaketu in Paficala. After completing his education
under his father, Svetaketu went to Paficala. There, 1n
the royal assembly Jaivali, the Pravahana King asked
him the following questions :—‘‘Where do people g0
from this world ? How do they return? Where do
Devayana and Pitryana meet ? From where do they
diverge ? Why is Pitrloka imperfect ? What is the fifth
yajiiabali ?”
Svetaketu answered that he did not know because his
father had not taught him these things. Then he went
to his father Aruni and told him abcut his failure to
answer these questions. The father admitted that he
too did not know them and suggested that they should
ask Pravahana himself. Since Svetaketu refused to g°
with him to see the King, Uddalaka himself went [0
Pravahana. The King enlightened him on the above
topics and sent him back. (Chandogyopanisad 1.8).
4)-Acarya of Yajia Rules. In Kausitaki Brahmana,
vetaketu is described as the Acarya of the rules of
Yajfia. He has laid down definite rules and procedures
for priests officiating in Yajfias. Besides, he has suggest€
the different customs and practices to be observed by
Brahmacarins and tapasvins. In the treatises dealing w!!
Dharmaégastra before his time, food of sweet taste wa®
denied to Brahmac@rins. But Svetaketu. has pointe
out that it was an entirely wrong doctrine. (Gopath
Brahmana, 1.33;Samkhyayana Brahmana, 1.33).
Once anacarya named Jatukarnya became the priest
ofthe Kings of Kasi, Kosala and Videha. Svetaketu
who was angry at this complained bitterly about this
to his father. Then Uddalaka reminded his son that
priests should yearn for wisdom instead of be!r8
attracted by worldly pleasures.
5) Author of Kamasastra. It is more or less clear that
it was Svetaketu who abridged the original work ©”
Kamagastra by Nandi, into 500 chapters. This abridg&
ment of Svetaketu was again abridged after some ye4"?
by Babhravya. It was after abridging it again am
adding Dattakacarya’s ‘“‘Vaisika” and Suvarnanabha §
““Samprayogika”’ etc., that Vatsyayana composed )!
famous treatise ‘““Kamasitra”. Really speaking, the
basis of Vatsyayana’s ‘‘Kamasiitra”? was the works °
Babhravya and Svetaketu on Kamafgastra.
It has been observed that the first person who raised
his voice against the evils of drinking and adultery by
the Brahmana community was Svetaketu. There 15
story in the Mahabharata about the fact which prompt"
ed him to bring marriage within the framework of 14°
Svetaketu was Uddalaka’s son, born to his wife by one
of his disciples. (M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter 35, Verse
22). Once his mother was abducted by a Brahman:
This incident inspired him to make stringent Jaw®
insisting on monogamy for men and women.
SVETAKI. A King. He was mostly occupied in perfor™

SVETAPARNA 781 SVISTAKRT II
ing Yajiias. Mahabhirata gives the following details wife Silavati. She touched the elephant and iImmediabout this yajfia lover: ately it stood up. Ratnadhipa was very much pleased
(i) Svetaki performed numerous Yajhas. He was a and married Silavati’s sister ‘Rajadatta. After offering
King who was deeply absorbed in Yajnias. (M.B. Adi many rich presents to Silavati and Harsagupta RatnaParva, Chapter 222). dhipa took Rajadatta on the back of Svetarasmi to a
(ii) Once the Yajiia he performed was so prolonged deserted island Catussaladvipa and left her there under
| that the Rtviks were utterly tired and left the Yajiia in the protection of several women attendants. The King
the middle. After that the King had to bring in other spent his nights at Catugéaladvipa and days in his own
Rtviks to complete it. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 229, palace.
Verse BT. One day Rajadatta was remaining alone in her resi-
(111) He worshipped Siva and propitiated him to get a dence. The attendants had gone out to attend to various
blessing to enable him to perform many Yajiias. Siva duties. At this time a man happened to arrive there
advised him that he should do “‘ahuti’”? (homa or sacri- from somewhere. He was Bhavanasena, the son ofa
Vaisya. He reached the island with the help ofa piece
fice) in Agni continuously for twelve years. Accepting Isla
of wood which was floating in the sea after a shipwreck.
this advice, the king invited Durvasas to make arrangements for the Yajia. Appointing Durvasas as Rtvik, Rajadatta who heard his story, was irresistibly attractvetaki continued the Yajiia for a hundred years. (For ed by him and she embraced him. Just then the King
more information see under Khandavadaha ). arrived on the scene. Consoling himself by thinking
SVETAPARNA. King of the city of Bhadravati, which that this was also the will of Fate, he let off the Vaisya
was situated to the east of Hastinapura. In Jaimini youth.
Agvamedha Parva, Chapter 10, Verse 15, it is stated The King returned to his palace and decided to spend
that Bhima after a fight captured and took with him the rest of his life by doing tapas In the forest, after
the beautiful horse of this King for the purpose of giving away all his wealth and property to the poor.
Yudhisthira’s A¢vamedha Yajia. When he was about to mount Svetarasimi, the animal
SVETARASMI. An elephant. A Gandharva happened suddenly transformed itself into a man of divine glory,
to be born as a white elephant in the Kalinga country, dressed in gorgeous clothes and jewels. He spoke to the
King as follows:—‘‘I am a Gandharva. My name 1s
as a result of a curse. Svetaragmi is the name of that
elephant. The King Ratnadhipa mounted that elephant Somaprabha. There Is my elder brother Devaprabha
and did many exploits. who lives on the Malaya mountain. My brother had a
King Ratnadhipa was the ruler of the island Ratna- wife named Rajavati. Once ail the three of us went to
kiita. He was a prominent Vaisnava. He did tapas to worship in a Visnu temple at a place called SiddhaVisnu with the object of conquering the whole earth vasa. At that time my sister-in-law Sang a devotional
and to get all princesses as his Wives. Mahavisnu song. A Siddha who was enchanted by her song was
appeared before him and said: —‘‘A Gandharva has been looking fixedly at her. Kor aged at it, my brother asked
born in the land of, Kalinga by a curse as a white the Siddha why he was staring at his wife with lustful
elephant. His name is Svetaragmi. As directed by me, eyes. The innocent Siddha was naturally provoked by
he will come to you. You may ride him and he will the question and pronounced a curse that my brother
take you through the air across the sky. All the Kings and his wife would be born in human wombs and in
against whom you fight, will be defeated and they will that birth, he ‘would see his wife having sexual union
offer their daughters to you as tribute.” with a stranger. When | heard my brother being cursed
Next day, the elephant &etaragmi descended before him ' J became very angry. I hurled a toy elephant which
| _ through the air. As advised by Mah4visnu Ratnadhipa was in my hand at the ume, at the Siddha. He then
mounted the elephant and conquered the whole ae a me oe a> a — just like
4 ; h a e toy with wh . ounger
nd secured numerous Princesses. One day as the g Lenthtnandoyatareniy © Hee lrothed, "Thi Ravadatt =|
was riding the elephant and travelling through the air, . : fof a
an eagle came and pecked at the forehead of the ele- your queen iy my sister-in-law Rayjavati. Our curse
phant. Ratnadhipa drove it away by a thrust with his is now over.”’ As soon as he concluded, all the three
spear. But the elephant fell down unconscious. Even of them renounced their earthly bodies and were restored
after five days he did not rise. The King offered prayers to their original forms. (Kathasaritsagara, Ratnato the “Lokapalakas”. He was about to cut off his own prabhalambaka, Taranga 2).
-head and offer it as sacrifice to them. Just then he Snag : earner - Subrahmanya. (Salya
heard a mysterious voice saying:—‘‘Do not be rash; arva, Chapter 40, Verse :
vetaras mi wil rise at the ‘anol of a chaste woman.’ SVETASVATARA. ue was the author of the famous
The King.al ander wee ai the patel and brought his Upanisad knewn as “Svetasvatara. Many spiritual and
chief queen who was kept closely guarded and asked iss a a topics are discussed in this work divided
her to touch the elephant. But he did not rise. Then into six chapters.
he ordered all the — of his wives in turn to touch the oe Another name for Arjuna. (See under
elephant. Still the elephant did not rise. When he found rund) .
that none of his 30,000 wives waka “chaste woman”, SVETAVAKTRA. A _ warrior of Subrahmanya. (M.B.
the King was ashamed «of himself. Then he brought Salya Parva, Chapter 49, Verse /:)
every one of thé women in his kingdom and made them pa de hy oe. — of a ie ‘owen h oa i
touch th i it was all in vain. At mentioned in Mahabharata, Vana arva, apter
1 the animal one by one. But t We Verse 22, that this Agni was the sixth son of Brhaspati.
this stage, when Ratnadhipa was very much depressed,
& merchant named Harsagupta from Tamralipti SVISTAKRT Il. The Agni (fire) called Vas vapati,
happened to come there. He was accompanied by his who was the second son of Manu. Rohini the second
EE eC te le

SVITRAPUTRA
daughter of Manu also is known by the name Svistakrt.
It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter
221, that the offering in fire, of the fat portions of the
sacrificial animals, is carried out properly by the help
of this fire. ;
SVITRAPUTRA. See under Svaitreya.
SVOTTHA. A King. (See under Saraloma).
SYAMA. One of the nine daughters of Meru, including
Syama. They are called Navakanyas. They were married
by the sons of Agnidhra. (Bhagavata, 5th Skandha).
SYAMA. A mountain in Sakadvipa. It is as dark as
clouds and very tall. (M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 11,
Verse 19). _
SYAMABALA. A heroine of great prosperity.
under Bhadrasrava ).
SYAMAKA. Ason of Sira by Marisa. (Bhagavata, 9th
Skandha),
SYAMANTAKA. A divine jewel. (For further details
see under Prasena).
SYAMASRAMA. An ancient holy place. By bathing
and living here for a fortnight one would obtain the
power of “Antardhana’’ according to Mahabharata,
Anugasana Parva, Chapter 25, Verse 30.
SYAMAYANA. One of the sons of Vi§vamitra. (M.B.
Anusésana Parva, Chapter 4, Verse 55).
SYANDIKA. A river in Kosala. This is very famous in
the Puranas. Itis mentioned in Valmiki Rami4yana,
Ayodhya Kanda, Sarga 49, Verse 12, that Sri Rama,
who had started for forest-life, crossed the river ‘‘Syandika where peacocks and swans called.’’
SYAPARNA (S). A_ priestly community. They were
the priests of King Vis vantara. Once Vig vantara decided
to perform a Somayaga. Without allowing Syaparnas
to take part in that yaga, the King invited other priests
for the purpose. At that time, Ramabhargaveya, one of
the Syaparnas devised a new method concerning Somayaga and established his claim to priesthood. (Aitareya
Brahmana, 7, 27).
SYAVASVA. Son of the sage Arcananas. (See under
Arcananas). :
SYENA I. A class of birds. A daughter named ‘‘Syeni’’
was born to Kagyapa Prajapati by his wife Tamra.
yenas were the sons of Syeni. (M.B. Adi Parva
Chapter 66, Verse 56).
(See
SYENA II. An ancient sage. Mahabharata, Sabha Parva
Chapter 7, Verse 11, describes him as shining in Indra’s
assembly.
SYENACITRA. A King in ancient India.
had never eaten meat, (M.B. Anu‘ dsana Pa
ter 115, Verse 63).
SYENAGAM I. A military commander of Khara the
Raksasa. In his battle with Sri Rama, Khara had twelve
military commanders including Syenagami. (Valmiki
Ramayana, Aranya Kanda, Sarga 26),
SYENAJIT I. Son of Dala, a King of the Iksvaky
dynastv. Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 192
Verse 63 mentions that he was the most beloved son of
his father.
SYENAJIT II. Uncle of Bhimasena.
Parva, Chapter 141, Verse: 27).
SYENI. See under Syena.
SYUMARASMI. An ancient hermit. It is stated in
Mahabharata, Santi Parva, Chapter 238, that this
hermit got into the stomach of a cow and sitting there,
talked with the hermit Kapila about the ways of Karma
This King
rva, Chap-
(M.B. Udyoga
'TAKSAKA I
and renunciation. This hermit Syimaragmi isasancient
as the Rgveda. A statement as follows, occurs in Rgveda, Mandala 1, Anuvaka 16, Sikta 112. “*“Ye Aégvins
who are the Leaders, Come here also with those protective weapons by which you gave protection to Att),
Sarhyu and Manu, and the arrows by shcoting which
you saved Syiimarasmi.”’
TA (@). This letter means a thief or the inner down of 4
bird. (Agni Purana, Chapter 348).
TA (¢). This letter means the act of singing. (Agn!
Purana, Chapter 348).
TADITPRABHA. A female follower of Subrahmanya.
(Verse 17, Chapter 46, Salya Parva).
TAIJASA. A holy place. This is situated in Kuruksetra
The importance of this place lies in the fact that it wa
at this place that all devas together crowned Subra:!
manya as their Commander-in-chief. (Sloka 16, Ghapter
6&3, Vana Parva).
TAITTIRI. A celebrated sage of the Taittiriya branch
of sages. He attended the Yaga conducted by Upat!
caravasu. (Santi Parva). 5
TAKSA. A son born to Bharata of his wife Mandav?-
This prince along with his brother Puskara conquer
Gandharadefa and created Taksagilanagar! there.
(Uttarakanda, Valmiki Ramayana, and Vayu Purana}:
TAKSAKA I. A fierce serpent.
1) Genealogy and birth. Descending in order from
Visnu—Brahma—Marici — Kaé yapa— Taksaka. J
Kasyapamuni got of his wife Kadri serpents 2”
T’aksaka was one of the serpent chiefs. (Sloka 5, Chap*
ter 35, Adi Parva). See also under Kadri). ‘
2) YLaksaka and Pariksit. In his boyhood Taksaka ee
out from the family. The reason was a curse by hi
mother. Once Kadri and Vinaté, another wife in
Kagyapa, entered into a controversy regarding ¢
colour of the hair of the tail of the horse Uccai§$ra¥*"’
Kadri said, it was black and Vinata saidit was W2! 4
It was decided that she who lost the wager
become the servant of the other. That night x
called her children and asked them to go and hangs cm
the tail of the horse so that it should appear plata!
Some of the righteous children opposed this dec
attempt of their mother and refused to go. Ka th
cursed them saying that they would be burnt to cet
at the Sarpasatra of Janamejaya. Kadri sent tho”
as out from home and Taksaka became the
eader.
e
At that time Pariksit (King of Bharata) becam© ,
victim of acurse that he would die by the bite i]s
laksaka within seven days. (To know more deta
regarding this curse of the sage see under Astika)- ae
worried King in consultation with his ministers de”,
to take protective measures. At first he move ey:
seven-storeyed palace and stayed on the seventh sto? as
Physicians of fame and those well-versed in mann ty
were posted at the palace. Brahmins were put on av €
cr prayers. The entire palace and precincts ts
guarded by huge elephants. Security arrange!
were such that even wind found it impossible to C
the palace without permission. The King did all
daily routine activities in the palace itself.
his

TAKSAKA I 783 TAKSASILA
At that time Kagyapa[There is a version that it was
Dhanvantari who was thus sent back by Taksaka. 9th
Skandha, Devi Bhagavata] was the greatest of all
physicians and mantrikas and, greedy that he was, he
started to the palace of Pariksit thinking that it would
be the best opportunity to obtain some money from the
King. Taksaka also was going to the palace in the guise
of a brahmin, On the way Taksaka met Kagyapa and
knowing well that the presence of the celebrated
Kasyapa at the palace would be an obstacle to the
achievement of his mission, he approached Kasyapa.
They talked on the way and Kasyapa said he was going
to the palace to save the King from the bite of Taksaka.
Then Taksaka, revealing his identity, said that it was
impossible to save anybody from the result of his bite.
Both then decided to test their skill then and there. A
huge banyan tree with many branches spreading wide
was standing nearby and Taksaka gave it a bite.
Within seconds the huge tree was charred to destruction; Kagyapa then took some water and reciting a
mantra poured the water over the ashes of the tree and
then :to the surprise of Taksaka, the tree rose up and
stood in its original form. On seeing that Taksaka
confessed that Kagyapa was superior to him. Taksaka
then coaxed him to his side and giving him a huge
amount as bribe bade him return home.
Six days went by and on the seventh day Taksaka
reached the palace of Pariksit. He found the palace
well-guarded and watched. There was no way to go in.
Taksaka then called all his relatives and had them
disguised as brahmins. He sent them in with fruits and
roots, like people who had come to pay homage to the
King. Taksaka crept into one of the most attractive of
the fruits as a tiny worm. The guards at the gate stopped them. The fake brahmins then said that they had
come a long way from a far off tapovana and should be
allowed to see the King. The information was carried
to the King. The King said he would see the brahmins
the next day but ordered their gifts to be brought to
him. When the fruits and roots were brought to him,
he gave a fruit cach to the ministers, himself taking
the most beautiful fruit of the lot. When he cut the
fruit open he saw a worm with two black eyes and a
red body sitting inside it and was a bit surprised. Then
he addressed his ministers thus : ‘‘Oh, best of ministers,
by your earnest and_ sincere endeavour nothing has
happened to me till now. The Sun is going to set and
the term of the curse is going to end. There is no need
to be afraid of any poison now. But let not a curse of
a sage go futile. Let this worm bite me and fulfill the
curse.’? So saying the King took the worm and placed
it on his neck. The worm changed itself into the fierce
Taksaka and bit the King and the King fell down
dead. (12th Skandha, Devi Bhagavata) .
3) How Taksaka became Indra’s friend. Once the son of
a sage of great divine splendour named Uttanka was
studying under a Guru named Veda. When his education was complete, the Guru asked him to bring
as daksina (fees) the ear-rings worn by the Ksatriya
wife of King Pausya. Indra made Taksaka steal the
ornament and created many obstacles onthe way.
(For details see under Uttanka). That incident made
them mutual friends and gradually Taksaka became an
intimate friend of Indra.
From that day onwards Uttanka waited for an opportunity to take vengeance on Taksaka. Itwas at that
time that Janamejaya, son of Pariksit, became the king.
Janamejaya was only eleven years old when he became
king and he was not then aware of the details of the
death of his father. Uttaka went to him and told
him how Taksaka killed his father. Janamejaya became
furious and asked him how to wreak vengeanceon him.
Uttanka suggested the performance ofa Sarpasatra to
which all the serpents should be attracted by mantras.
and burnt to death there. The young king agreed and
Uttanka with other rsis commenced the Sarpasaira.
One by one all the serpents came and fell into the sacrificial fire but Taksaka was not to be found. Where is
Taksaka? This question was heard from many lips.
Taksaka was specially invoked by Uttanka. Taksaka
could not bear the power of Uttanka and he ran and
prostrated before Indra. Indra not only did give refuge
but gave him half of his seat in the throne and Taksaka
sat on it fully confident of security. Uttanka was
enraged, when after repeated calls by mantra, Taksaka
did not appear and so he sat in meditation for some
time to know the cause. He then saw Taksaka sitting
on the throne of Indra and the sight threw him into
fury and he invoked Taksaka, Indra and the throne
and all. Lo! in an tnstant Indra, Taksaka, the throne
and all started moving towards the sacrificial fire !
Within seconds all would have been burnt to death
but for the timely intervention of abrahmin boy named
Astika, son of the sage Jaratkaru. (See under Astika,
Taksaka escaped death that time ).
Taksaka by instructions from Indra was living in the
forest of Khandava and when that was burnt by Agni,
‘t was Indra who saved Taksaka from the fire. (Sce
under Khandavadaha).
4) Other details.
i) A king called Candrangada lived in the house of
Taksaka for some time. (See under Candrangada) .
ii) Taksaka in the guise ofa brahmin named Ksapanaka went to the sage Uttanka and stole the ornaments
from him. (See under Uttanka).
(iii) Once the Earth was made into a cow and everybody milked from her what each wanted. The serpents
milked poison from her anc they then used Taksaka as
the calf. (See under Prthu).
(iv) During the burning of the forest of Khandava,
Arjuna slew the wife of Taksaka. (See under Khandavadaha) .
(v) When the sou! of Balabhadrarama, after his death,
reached Patala, Taksaka received it with respect. (Sloka
15, Chapter 4, Mausala Parva).
(vi) Taksaka livesin the court of Varuna worshipping
him. (Sloka 8, Chapter 9, Sabha Parva). |
TAKSAKA II. The elder of the two sons of Laksmana
of his wife Urmila. The other was Chatraketu. Following the instructions of Sri Rama, Laksmana went to the
east sea coast, defeated the forest tribe there. Tle then
constructed a city there named Agati and made Taksaka
the king there. He then went to the west sea-coast
and destroying the barbarous tribe there constructed a
city there called Candramati and made Chatraketu
(? candraketu) the king. (Uttara Ramayana).
TAKSASILA. A place of Puranic celebrity situated in the
north-west of Bharata. Even from ancient times this

TALA
was an educational and cultural centre. From the descriptions of the Chinese traveller Huen ‘T’sang itis found
that Nalanda and Taksasila were two great universities
before Christ. The famous Sarpasatra of Janamejaya
was conducted at this place situated on the banks of
the river Vitasta. The story of Mahabharata was first
told at this place and at the end of the narration Brahmins were given gifts. (Chapters 3 and 5, Adi Parva).
TALA. A hell. There are many hells under water including Tala. (Chapter 6, Arhga 2, Visnu Purana).
TALACARA. A place of human habitation in ancient
Bharata. (Sloka 26, Chapter 140, Udyoga Parva).
TALADHVAJA. The phantom husband of Narada. Once
Narada became a woman and a king called Taladhvaja
married’her (Devi Purana). It was to show how the
mind is covered with illusion that Mahavisnu made
Narada into a woman.
Once Narada went to Mahavisnu and asked him about
the secret of life. Mlahavisnu said that there was nothing
éalled life and life exists because of Maya the illusion
of the mind. Narada insisted that he should see ‘Maya’
(illusion) and so Visnu started from Vaikuntha with
Narada on the back of Garuda.
Crossing forests, rivers, cities, lakes, villages and mountains they reached Kanyakubja. There they saw a
beautiful lake. Garuda landed and Visnu and Narada
got down. They walked along the shore of the lake
for some time and then they sat beneath a tree for some
time, After some time Mahavisnu asked Narada to
take a bath in the lake. Pleased at this command
Narada placed his violin and deer-hide on the shore
and after first washing his face and feet and doing
‘Scamana’ with Kusa grass in his hand stepped into
the water for his bath. Mahavisnu stood near the violin
and deer-hide of Narada and Narada dipped himself in
the water. What a surprise ! Narada was changed into
a woman of great beauty. She had no memory of her
previous birth and getting herself on to the shore she
stood there watching the surroundings there. Then a
king called Taladhvaja came on horse-back that way.
He addressed the beautiful woman as Saubhagyasundari
and started talking with her. Within hours they got
married and Taladhvaja took her to his palace and
spent the honey-moon there happily. ‘Twelve years went
by and Saubhagyasundari became pregnant. In due
course she got ason named Viravarma. After another
two years she got another son named Sudharma. Thus
she delivered a son every two years for twentyfour
years becoming the mother of twelve sons. After some
time she bore eight more §_ s also. When all the twenty
sons came of age they were married according to the
custom and in due course those sons also got sons. Thus
Taladhvaja and Saubhagyasundari became the heads of
ly of children and grand-children and lived
happily. One day a king from a far-off place with a
great army suddenly came and surrounded Kanyakubja.
In the fight that ensued most of the sons and grand-sons
of Saubhagyasundari were killed. The king fled from
the battlefield and came to the palace. Saubhagyasundari
was in great distress and when the enemies left the battlefield she secretly went there to have a last look at her
sons and grandsons lying dead. The sight terrified her.
They lay there without heads, hands or legs, eyes protruded, stomach cut open, intestines lying out and blood
oozing out from everywhere. She fell to the ground
a large fami
784 TAMAS II
and wept bitterly. Then Mahavisnu came there disguised as an old brahmin and talked to her. He gave
her instructions on some truths about life. Saubhagyasundari then called Taladhvaja and they both went to
the old lake and as instructed by the old brahmin
Saubhagyasundari took a dip in the water. Lo! she
became the old Narada.
When Narada got up from the lake Mahavisnu was
still standing near his violin and deer-skin smiling at
him. The sight of Visnu gave him knowledge of all
that had happened. He stood there recounting in his
memory how he had requested Visnu to show him
Maya and how he had taken a bath in that lake and
how he had spent a long period of marricd life ending
in misery and how Visnu had eome to her in the form
of an old brahmin when she had cried to him in agony
and how the old brahmin had taken her and Taladhvaja to the lake again and how he had become his
old self again. He stood there still pondering over these
when Visnu called him and said ‘‘Come on Narada
how slow you are. Finish your bath and come soon.
What are you thinking about ?” Tdladhvaja, however
was unmoved by any of these. He was puzzled to find
a bearded Sannyasi rising up from the place where his
beautiful wife had dipped herself fora bath. He went
to Narada and asked ‘‘Oh best of sages, where is my
wife who has just dipped herself in this same place ?
From where do you come ?”’ Even before waiting to
hear a reply from him the King began to make a hue
and cry about the loss of his wife. Then Mahavisnu
went to him and consoled him by saying with illustrations that ‘human ties are only ephemeral’ and asked
him to take a bath in the lake. Taladhvaja after his
bath became disgusted with life and after doing penance
in the forests attained moksa. (8th Skandha, Devi
Bhagavata) . .
TALADHVAJA II. See under Simhadhvaja.
TALAJANGHA. Jayadhvayja, fifth son of Karttavirya,
got a son named Talajangha. The sons of this valiant
man are called Talajanghas. "here was once a great
fight between Vitihotra, the eldest of these sons, and
Paragurama. (Chapter 88, Brahmanda Purana).
TALAKATA. An ancient place of habitation of Daksina
Bharata. (Sloka 60, Chapter 31, Sabha Parva).
TALAKETU. A demon. ri Krsna captured this demon
from the Mahendra mountain In the Jravati river and
killed him at Harsanemipatha. (Sloka3 4, Chapter
12, Vana Parva).
TALAKKULATTU BHATTATIRI. He was a great
writer and celebrated astrologer of Kerala. He was born
‘7 AD. 1537 ina village called Alattir in a place
called Talakkulam, two miles to the south of Tirur in
South Malabar. He lived upto A.D. 1595. His great
work is ‘Dagadhyayi a book on astrology.
TALAVANAIL. An ancient place of Daksina Bharata,
This place was conquered by Sahadeva. (Sloka 61,
Chapter 31, Sabha Parva).
TALAVANA II. A garden on the side of the mountain
of Latavesta near Dvaraka. (Chapter 38, Sabha Parva).
TAMA. A King who_ was the son of Srava of the
race of King Grtsamada. (Sloka 63, Chapter 30, Anuéasana Parva).
TAMAS I. A hell. -
TAMAS II. One of the three qualities of the soul. Sattva,
Rajas and ‘Tamas are the three qualities. It is through

TAMASA
the union of these three qualiti
enters the life of all aistenats ail usa erat oer The
attributes of Tamas are greed, sleep ae = =
disbelief in god, bad habits, begging and aaah ae
It is because of the action of tamoguna that aie bie |
comes a prey to lust. It is the worst result of tamasic
activities that people are born as inanimate objects
worms, insects, fishes, serpents, tortoises, cows and weer
As a better result of Tamasic activities people are born
as elephants, horses, Sidras, barbarous people lions
tigers and hogs. It is the good result of tamasic deeds
that produce pilgrims, good castes, egoistic people
demons and devils. (Chapter 12, Manusmrti) "ling
TAMASA,. A sacred river. People of Bharata were usin
the water of this river for drinking. (Sloka 3, Cha —
9, Bhisma Parva). The famous a4§rama of Valmiki Bee
on the banks of this river. This place was the scene of
the well-known episode of the Kraufica birds and the
famous curse of Valmiki beginning with ‘Ma nisada’
(Bala Kanda, Sarga 2, Valmiki Ramayana). )
TAMASA. ‘The fourth Manu. (See under Manvantara)
Svayambhuva Manu, son of Brahma, was the first Manu.
He had two sons of Puranic fame named Priyavrata
and Uttanapada. Of these Priyavrata married the
beautiful and virtuous daughters of Visvakarma the
Prajapati. They were Suripa and Barhismati. Of his
first wife Surupa, he got ten sons Agnidhra ‘and others.
The youngest child was a daughter named Urjjasvati.
Of the sons, Kavi, Savana andMahavira became detached from worldly life and became learned in spiritual
knowledge. Priyavrata got of his second wife Barhismati
three sons named Uttama, Tamasa and Raivata. They
were very valiant and they gradually became chiefs of
Manvantaras. (8th Skandha, Devi Bhagavata).
TAMISRA. A hell. (See under Kala).
TAMO NTAKRT. A soldier of Subrah Slok
58, Chapter 45, Salya Parva). manya. (Sloka
TAMRA. A demon, son of Murasura. The demon
Mura had seven children named Tamra, Antariksa,
ravana, Vasu, Vibhavasu, Nabhasvan and Aruna. Of
these Tamra was Mahisasura’s minister for a long time.
The Chief Minister of Mahisasura- was Asiloma;
Defence Minister, Ciksura; Foreign minister, Vidala
and Finance minister, Tamra. Udarka was the
Commander-in-chief and Baskala, Trinetra and
Kalabandhaka were Cabinet Ministers. He was killed
along with his father Mura, by Sri Krsna. (10th
Skandha Bhagavata and 5th Skandha, Devi Bhagavata).
TAMRA. Daughter-of Daksa. Tamra was married to.
KaSyapa and he begot of her five daughters named
Kraufici, Bhasi, Syeni, Dhrtarastri and Suki. Of these
Kraufici delivered owls, Bhasi delivered Bhasas, Syeni,
Kites and Vultures, Dhrtarastri, swans, geese and
cuckoos, and Suki delivered Nata and Nata in turn
Vinata. (Sarga 14, Aranya Kanda, Valmiki Ramayana).
TAMRACUDA. A female follower of Subrahmanya.
_(Sloka 18, Chapter 46, Anufdsana Parva).
TAMRADVIPA. An_ ancient place of habitation of
Daksina Bharata. This place was conquered by Sahadeva in his victory march. (Sloka -68, Chapter 3],
_ Sabha Parva).
perder eon A ing in ancient Bharata. Sahadeva
daring his victory march con i i
04. Chapter 30, eos me this King. (Sloka
TAPATI
TAMRALIPTAKA. An ancient place of habitation
on the north-east side of Bharata. (Sloka 57, Chapter
9, Bhisma Parva).
TAMRAPARNI. A holy river of Daksina Kerala. Once
the Devas did penance on the banks of this river to
obtain salvation. (Sloka 14, Chapter 88, Vana Parva).
TAMRARUNATIRTHA. A sacred place. He who
visits this place would get the benefit of doing an
agvamedhayajiia and he would go to Brabmaloka.
(Sloka 154, Chapter 84, Vana Parva).
TAMRAVATI. Anancient river. It is believed that
fire is generated from this river. (Sloka 23, Chapter
922, Vana Parva).
TAMROSTHA. A Yaksa_ who sits in the court of
Kubera. (Sloka 16, Chapter 10, Sabha Parva) .
TAMSU. A King of Piiruvarnsa. He was the son of
Matinara and father of Ilina a King. (Chapter 94, Adi
Parva) . |
TANAYA. A place of habitation of ancient Bharata.
Sloka 64, Chapter 9, Bhisma Parva).
TANDI. A celebrated sage. It was the sage who repeated to Brahma the thousand names of Siva. (Chapter 14, Anugasana Parva).
TANDULIKASRAMA. A. sacred place of - ancient
Bharata. He who visits this place would enter Brahmaloka. (Sloka 43, Chapter 82, Vana Parva).
TANDYA. A sage. He was a friend of Indra. He once
took part in the Yajia of Uparicaravasu. Fie
observed correctly the duties of eo
attained svarga. (Sloka 17, Chapter 944, Santi Parva).
TANGANA. An ancient place of habitation of Bharata.
(Sloka 64, Chapter 9, Bhisma Parva).
TANTRIPALA. The false name adopted by Sahadeva
when he lived incognito in the city of Virata. (Sloka
9, Chapter 3, Virata Parva ). | |
TANTU. A Brahmavadi son of Vigvamitra. (Chapter 4,
Anugasana Parva).
TANU. An ancient sage. This sage lived
of King Viradyumna for a long time.
and 128, Santi Parva).
TAPA. A Deva of fire-like splendour. Born of the power
of penance of five sages named Kagyapa, Vasistha,
Pranaka, Gyavana and ‘Trivarcas, this Deva has got a
name Paficajanya (born of five) also. He did severe
penance (tapas) and got the name Tapa. His head is
like fire, his hands like Sun, his skin and eyes are of
golden hue and his waist, blue. (Sloka 4, Chapter 220,
Vana Parva).
TAPANA. A soldier of the country of Paficala.
killed by Karna in the Mahabharata battle.
Chapter 48, Karna Parva).
TAPASARANYA. A Sacred place crowded with sages.
(Sloka 20, Chapter 87, Vana Parva). ¥
TAPASVI. A son born to Caksusa Manv of Nadvala.
(Chapter 13, Ama 1, Visnu Purana).
TAPATI. <A daughter of Sirya. :
1) Genealogy. Descending in order from Visnu are
Brahma—Marici—KaSyapa—Surya— Tapati.
2) Birth. Strya married Samjfia daughter of Vigvakarma. He begot of Samjfia two children named
Kalindi and Yama. At that time Surya (Sun) was not
of the form as seen now. Samjna, unable to bear the
splendour of Sirya who was of the shape of 4p egg
entrusted her maid Chaya with the work of serving her
husband and left for a temple in the guise of amare to
in the palace
(Chapters 127
He was
(Sloka 15,

TAPATYA
“odo ‘penance. Chaya disguised as Samjiia served Suirya
~for’a_ very long period: Sirya begot of her two children, Sanaiscara and Tapati. Besides these, Sirya had
another “daughter named Savitri also. (Chapter 47,
- Bhavisya Purana). ;: .
3) Marriage... There'was a mighty king in the Lunar
race called Rksa in the beginning of Krtayuga. He
-hadason named Sarnvarana. He was made king of
his country by his father even while he was a boy.
He wasa pious and righteous man. Vasistha was his
~ Guru and he taught Samvarana the Vedas along with
the Angas, - |
. Once Sarhvarana entrusting the administration of the
State to Vasistha went to do penance in the forests. On
his way he followed a deer for a long distance on horseback and reached a deep forest named Vaibhraja
~ alone." “There he saw a lotus pond full of blossomed
_lotuses and Kalhara flowers. Celestial maidens were
~~ playing there without interruption. Amcng them he
,Saw a very beautiful maiden. She was Tapati daugh_ terof Sarya. Even at first sight. they became lovers.
~ The king looking at her lost his balance and fell from
the horse. At once great and charming Gandharvas
_ approached the king and sprinkling water on his face
~~ brought him back from swoon. Tapati was also upset
...and the other nymphs took her to her father’s house
--,and consoled her. oe
Samvarana returned. on horse-back to his residence
_.the.city of Pratistha, But the king neither slept nor ate
any.food. The sage Vasistha.knew that all the. ailments of the king were due. to his love for Tapati,
daughter .of Sirya. So he flew up by his yogic powers
, and met. Stirya sitting in his chariot in all splendour.
The sage described to Sirya the love affair between
Sathvarana and-Tapati and pleaded on behalf of the
king for giving Tapati to Sarhvarana. Sirya was
»jpPleased, to hear that. and~ sent Tapati along with
-. Vasistha to Sarnvarana, Before long the marriage of
Tapati with Samvarana was celebrated solemnly at
5 Pratisthanagara. The celebrated emperor Kuru . was
the son born to Tapati. of Sarnvarana. (Chapter 21
Vayu. Purana).:. | r
10k): How.) she, got .that..name. Because~ she was. the
, ined of py: who eee the, sky hot (tapa).. by
» his»briluance,. shé was call apati. 6.2
O8ET ks Adi Barvadigia\ ait se Lapats (Sleka 6,;Chapter
9). Tapati becomes river Narmada.
Tapati, blessed her’ and said’ she ‘would thereafter
flow west from the Vindhya as a river named Narmada.
The present holy river Narmada © is but Tapatidevi
transformed. (Chapter 47, Bhavisya Puranay, 2 A1/
TAPATYA. Kuru was the son born to king Sarmvarana
of his wife Tapati. All the descendants of Kuru ‘were
known as Kauravas and because they were of the
generation of Tapati, they were known as Tapatyas also.
The young’ Gandharva, Citraratha; who fought against
Arjuna on the banks of the river, Gaiiga addressed
Arjuna as Tapatya. (Sloka 79, Chapter. 169, Adi
Parva) .
TAPOLOKA. The place of abode of Vairajas who could
not be burnt by fire. Thisis above Dhruvapada by
eleven crores of yojanas. (Chapter 7, Arméa 2, Visnu
Purana). -
Sirya, father of
TARAKA I
TAPTAKUMBHA. A hell. There are twentyeight hells
according to Visnu Purana including Taptakumbha.
TAPTAMURTI. A hell. (See the section Naraka under
Kala). ; ;
TARA. A monkey who was a devotee of Sri Rama.
This big monkey was the son of Brhaspati. Brhaspatl
made this monkey greater in size and intellect than
all other monkeys. This Tara was the minister of Bali.
(Sloka 10, Sarga 17, Bala Kanda, Valmiki Ramayana
and Uttara Ramayana). In the Rama-Ravana battle
this monkey fought against the demon Nikharvata.
(Sloka 9, Chapter 285, Vana Parva) .
TARA I. Wife of Bali, best of Vanaras (monkeys).
T
~ due course Tara delivered a son. He was Budha,
There are two stories different from each other regarding the birth of Tara. One version is that ‘Tara was
born during the churning of the Milk-Ocean.
Airavata, Uccaigsravas, Kalpavrksa, Cintamam',
Kaustubha, andra, Apsarases, Mahalaksmi ‘1are
and Ruma rose from the sea of Milk. (Yuddha
Kanda, Kamba Ramayana). The second version }°
that Tara was the daughter of Susena. Pali at the 2
of his death is said to have spoken thus of his wife ‘1ar@
“Tara, daughter of Susena, is well learned and ~
capable of assessing a situation and © suggesting the
correct thing to be done at that time. If she says 2
thing is good, it is never otherwise.” (Chapter a
Kiskindha Kanda, Valmiki Ramayana). From this !
can be understood that Tara was the daughter a
Susena and we get an idea of the character of Tara a]so
from this. (See under Bali). "
ARA Il. Wife of Brhaspati. She was extremely beaull
ful. Once she fell in love with Candra (Moon) | ~ aah
leaving’ her husband: started living with him. Can@!
was the'disciple of Brhaspati.. The devas were angry |
-when they found the wife. of their preceptor ere
with a disciple of his. Brhaspati. sent word to her: :
return home but she did not. heed. At. last.. the evas
decided to fight against Candra. Then they came t0 In
compromise and Tara was sent back. to. Brhas Pa os
: B » vy : aT]
. Of .Puriiravas. There arose then a_ dispute betwe~
tc
eo 4
a JS
_of Candra and so Budha was looked after at the | ho
A)
_ celestial maiden named Surabhidatta came to
_of Candra. (9th Skandha, Bhagavata). r.
Candra and Brhaspati regarding the fatherhood of the
child. Then the Devas called Tara and asked her: to
mame the child’s father. Tara said that the child ae
ARADATTA.. Wife of Kalingadatta,
‘Situated on the shores of the river Vitasta.
King of Taksasi!?
3 Once
be bor?
: gee ry : ; Aya.
as the daughter of Taradatta due toa curse of Indi
She was then called Kalingasena. (See under Dharm*
atta) ser 3 mm ial . |
TARAKA (TARAKASURA ) I. An asura chief (demon) j
to propitiate Siva and got a bonn to the effect.‘
_ boon and soon became a terror to the world.
nance
pat
none other than a son born to Siva should be. able a is
kill him. He became arrogant with “the POW er, oS to
kill Tarakasura Subrahmanya was born: as the 8°? ai
Siva. In the great battle between the devas and the 254
Taraka was killed by Subrahmanya. dena
‘Tarakasura was the father of Taraksa, Kamalaks a
Vidyunmialika. (See under Subrahmanya) - (Sloka
Chapter 33, Karna Parva ) splaamie.
This demon even while he was very young did pe

TARAKA II 787
TARAKA Il. Siva Purana mentions about a Taraka,
son of the minister of Bhadrasena, a King of Kashmir.
This Taraka was the rebirth of a he-fowl. Bhadrasena
had a son named Sudharma. He was the rebirth of a
monkey ‘There is a story regarding how this fowl and
the monkey came to be born in Kashmir as above.
Once in the village of Nanda there was a prostitute
named Mahananda. Though she was a great devotee
of Siva she was living the life of a prostitute for her
livelihood. She was having a monkey and a he-fowl
as pets. She would adorn the necks of her pets with
the rudraksa necklace (rosary) made of berry beads
favourite of Siva and when she sang songs in praise of
Siva those pets danced to the tune. By:
One day a Vaisya came there. He had a diamond Siva
linga with him. Mahananda felt a great fancy for that
‘and so promised the Vaigya that if he gave her the
diamond linga she would remain a faithful wife to him
‘for three days. The Vaisya agreed and the diamond
‘litga was kept in a very secure place That night when
both the Vaigya ‘and Mahananda were sleeping tired
after a hectic amorous sport, the house got fire and. the.
diamond ‘was’ burst into pieces. The Vaisya ereatly
sriefstricken by the loss of the diamond,jumped into the
fire and committed suicide. Mahananda faithful to the
promise that she would remain his wife for three days
started to jump into the fire and abandon her life. At
once Siva appeared before her in person and said thus:
‘Oh, Mahananda, do not commit suicide. I came to
you disguised: as a Vaisya to test your devotion. You
can now ask of me any boon.”’
With tears of joy running down her cheeks she said
she wanted to live with Siva. So)Siva carried her soul
to Kailasa. Not only that, Siva blessed the fowl and
monkey and said they would be born as devotees of Siva
in their next birth and attain moksa at the end of their
life on earth. Accordingly the monkey and the fowl were
-born in Kashmir as Sudharma and Taraka.
TARAKSA (TARAKAKSA). A. son. of the demon
Tarakasura. This demon was thelord of a golden city
called Tripura. Siva killed him during Tripuradahana
‘(burning of the Tripuras). See under Tripuradahana.
‘(Chapters 33, 34, Karna Parva). Us
TARALA. | A. place of habitation of ancient Bharata.
This place was conquered by Karna. (Sloka 20, Chapter
8; Karna Parva). .
TARANTUKA. A Yaksa: | This) Yaksa 1s installed on
the boundary of Kuruksetra. If one. spends one night
in this holy place one would get the benefit of .giving
away a thousand cows as’ gifts. (Chapter 83, Vana
Parva). Yo }wod 9 “id
TARKSYA I. » Garuda. See under Garuda.
TARKSYA II. A sage. He was a member of the court
‘of Indra. He was known as Aristanemi also. He had no
fear of death. He once discussed with Sarasvatidevi
‘about the soul. (Chapter 184, Vana Parva).
TARKSYA Ill. .A Ksatriya youth of the country of
Tarksya. He came to the Rajasuya of Yudhisthira and
gave much wealth for the purpose. (Sloka 15,, Ghapter
93, Sabha Parva), | |
TARKSYA IV. A ‘synonym. of Siva. (Sloka 98, Chapter
il 7, Anugasana Parva) ’ | erie
TARUNAKA. - A:serpent born of the family of Dhrtarastrais This serpent was burnt to death at the SarpaTEJASVATI I
satra of Janamejaya. (Sloka. 19,:. Chapter 57, Adi
Parva). roar ‘3 2 § isiilog
TATAKA. A fierce demoness. It was because of a scurse
of the sage Agastya that Tataka became.a demoness->
There was once a great Yaksa named Suketu, a som of
Suraksa. He did penance to propitiate Brahma to: get
a child and by the» blessing of Brahma Suketu got ‘a
daughter named Tataka, Brahma gave her the strength
of a thousand elephants.’ Tataka was by natureanterested in cruel and violent deeds and doing deeds of magic.
She made Sunda, son of Jharjha, her husband. She got
two sons named Marica and Subahu. They also became
mighty ones great in deeds by magic. OJ ;
Once Sunda attacked the 4grama of Agastya’in a mood:
of intoxicated arrogance.» Sunda was burnt to death in
the fire of his fury. Tataka coming to know of the\death
of her husband got angry and attacked. the asrama' of
Agastya with her sons. Agastya cursed them.and» made
them into demons. Tataka and her sons who: immediately turned themselves into fierce-looking demons ‘went
Grst to Patala with Sumali, father: of the demon race
and then-went with Ravana, King of the demons): to
Lanka and'stayed there. With the help of Ravana,
Tataka conquered the great deep forest near Karisaiand
stayed there with her sons. None; devas, ‘demons
or men, dared to step into that. forest. Even the Sun
or Clouds avoided passing above that forest. |
It was at that time that Sri Rama.and Laksmana came
to that forest with Vis vamiitra. Tataka attacked Sri Rama
and Rama killed her with one:arrow. ‘The heavy body
of the demoness fell to the ground like. a: big mountain.
Her soul then rose up as a beautiful Gandharva lady
and Tataka who was thus released trom the curse praised
Sri Rama and left the place. Chapters 24 to 26 of Bala
Kanda, Valmiki Ramayana and-Kamba Ramayana).
TATAKAYANA. A Brahmavadi son of Visvamitra.
(Sloka 56, Chapter 4, Anuégasana Parva).
TATANKA, -The name of Sirnhadhvaja,’' King -of
Sirnhala, in his previous birth. (See under Simhadhvaja). Ter i
TEJASCANDA. A deva ‘who adorns the god Surya with a
flower garland daily. The idol of 'T eja candais also used
to be installed in.temples.. The idols figured as one
with a huge face and holding a sword and a lotus in his
-hands.. (Chapter 51, Agni Purana). bAS
TEJASVATI I. A heroinein a story in Kathasaritsagara
intended to show that all happenings either good or bad
are but the workings of fate. minion vind
Tejasvati was the daughter of king Vikramasena ‘of
Ujjayini and was very beautiful. She never» liked any
male and so never wished to marry: One day while
_she was sitting upstairs in her palace, she happened’ to
see a young man passing that way and surprisingly was
attracted by him. She sent her companion’ to him and
informed him of her liking for him. He did ‘not like the
idea first, but the clever persuasions of the maid made
him agree to a clandestine meeting with the princess at
a temple at night that day. Tejasvati anxiously waited
for the night to come. Oh |
About that time a Rajput prince greatly grieved at the
loss of his father and subsequent: loss of ‘his kingdom
“started on a tour to.see an old friend of his father. That
night, by sheer accident, he came and rested in the
same temple ‘where the rendezvous of the princess was
fixed: When night fell the princess came to the temple

TEJASVATI It 788
and without the least suspicion went and embraced the
solitary -figure sitting in the temple. The prince did
not show any surprise and responded fully. The princess .then understood all details of her lover and
took him to his father the next morning. Somadatta
(that was the prince’s name) then told Vikramasena all
his mishaps and Vikramasena got back all the lost kingdom of Somadatta and also gave his daughter in marriage to him. (Taranga 4, Madana Maficukdlambaka,
Kathasaritsagara ).
TEJASVATIII. The queen of Adityasena a king of
Ujjayini.
TEJASVI. One of the five Indras. (See under Paficdli).
TEJEYU. A prince born to Migrakegi of Raudragva, son
of Paru. (Sloka 11, Chapter 94, Adi Parva).
TEJOVATI. The capital city of Agni. This is situated on
the south-east corner of Mahameru. In the centre is
Manovati, capital city of Brahma. To the east of it is
Amaravati, capital city of Indra. In the south-east
corner is Tejovati. In the south is Sarnyamani, city of
Yama. In the south-west isKrsnafijani of Nirrti. In
the west is Sraddhavati of Varuna. In the north west
is Gandhavati of Vayu. In the north is Mahodaya of
Kubera. In the north east corner is Yagovati of [gana.
(8th Skandha, Devi Bhagavata).
THA (4) This letter means taking food. (Chapter 348,
Agni Purana).
THA (8) This letter means Candramandala (moon-disc),
emptiness and Siva. (Agni Purana, Chapter 348).
TPHINTHAKARALA. A prodigal person who lived in
Ujjayini. He used to defeat all in the game of dice.
With the money so received from defeated persons he
would buy wheat and go to the burial ground and _ after
making bread with it would eat it dipped in ghee sitting
before an oil light placed before an idol of Mahakala
(lord of the burial ground). He would then lie there
itself and sleep.
One night he saw the idols in the Mahakala temple twinkling. He jumped up and challenged the idols for a
game of dice. The idols stood mute and Thinthakardla
‘taking their silence to be consent according to the rules
of gambling fixed a wager and played. He won and
then he said addressing the idols “I have defeated you.
Give me the money due to me.”? The idols stood silent
and he, therefore, wrestled with them. Still the idols
stood dumb. Then Thinthakarala took his sword.
Instantly the devas gave him the money due to him.
Early morning he went away from there and spent the
money lavishly. At night he came back again and
challenged the idols for gambling as before. This became a daily routine and the devas felt themselves
harassed. ‘They, therefore, approached the goddess
CGamundi and she advised them to refrain from playing
as there was no Joss of honour if one refused to take a
challenge to gamble.
That night also as usual Thinthakarala came and challenged the idols for a game of dice. Then the idols said
‘*‘We are not prepared to play.” Then he challenged
Mahakala himself to play. Mahakala also refused to
play. Then suddenly the mind of Thinthakarala
changed and he did penance to please Mahakala. Mahakala was pleased with him, appeared before him and
blessed him.
Once a few nymphs came to bathe in the Mahakali
pond and as per the instructions of Mahakala, ThinthaTHINTHAKARALA
karala took away their robes while they were bathing.
He demanded a nymph named Kalavati in return for
their robes and finding no other way they gave him
Kalavati.
Kalavati thus became the wife of a Man due to a _ curse
of Indra. Once she praised sexual enjoyment with men
on earth and decried the same with Devas. Indra heard
it and he cursed her ‘‘Then let her become the wife of a
man on earth and enjoy the pleasures there.’? All this
story Thinthakarala learned from Kalavati. She added
she wanted to go to Devaloka the next day for a dance
with Rambha. Thinthakarala consented and healso went
to Devaloka and saw the dance, sitting along with the
Devas.
When Rambha’s dance was over, there was the dance
ofa goat. Seeing that Thinthakardla said to himself:
“Why, this is a goat Lused to seedaily in Ujjayini. How
did it come here to dance?’? When the dances were over
and the people dispersed, Kalavati took Thinthakarala
to the Mahakali temple. Next day he met the same
goat in Ujjayiniand then he enquired ‘‘Hi, do ‘that
dance which you did yesterday before Indra in devaloka.
Let me see” The goat stood dumb thinking of how
this man on earth came to know of the dances in Devaloka. Thinthakardla once again compelled the goat '0
show its dance but when the goat still refused to dancer
he thrashed it with a stick on its head and the goat
immediately went to Devaloka and informed Indré
about the incident. Indra felt sad when he saw blood
oozing from the wound on its head. Indra by his divin
powers then understood that Kalavati was at the bottom
of all this trouble and cursed her to remain as a 4°
on a pillar in the temple belonging to King Narasimha
of Nagapura. Alambus4, mother of Kalavati, who heat
the curse begged for relief and Indra said she would a
freed from the curse when the king himself demolishe
the temple and razed the place to the ground.
True to the curse, Kalavati after giving all her es,
ments to Thinthakarala bid him good bye and wer
and remained as a doll on the temple-pillar at ia
pura. Deeply distressed at this mishap of his Ww! C,
Thinthakarala dressed himself as an ascetic and went
Nagapura. There he purchased five earthen pots 2?
filled them with the ornaments of Kalavati. He burl
four of the pots in the forests and ‘the filth in the baz@4"
near the temple. Then he built a hermitage on ;
shores of a near-by river and started living there. New
soon spread that a great yogi had come to the city 4°
the King went to see him. They talked for a while a
religious and spiritual matters and the King was abou
to leave when they heard the howl ofa jackal. a
yogi smiled and the King asked him why he smile:
He refused to answer but the King insisted and oer
the yogi said “Oh King, the jackal says that in a fores
to the east of the city under asilver plant is a treasure.
The King immediately ordered his men to go and
at the place and when they did they got the treasul©:
The King offered the treasure to the yogi but
refused to accept it. Thinthakarala then on three
different occasions pointed out to the King the at
other pots in the forests and the King got great co?
dence in the powers of the yogi. One day he went
the temple with the King and while they were walkin’
around a crow crow and the yori smiled. The King
again asked him the reason and the yogi said tha

TILABHARA
there was a treasure pot in the bazaar near-by. When
they searched at the spot directed by the yogi the
treasure was found.
On another day the King and the yogi went to the
temple and as they walked about they saw the doll on
one of the pillars crying. The King asked the yogi the
reason for the doll crying thus. The yogi replied
“Oh, King this temple is not located in a proper place.
Further the deity here was not installed at an auspicious time. If this continues the King will come to
ruin. ‘That was why the doll cried.” On hearing this
the King ordered the temple to be completely demolished and the place made a plain ground. The order
was carried out and Kalavati got release from the
curse. She went to heaven and told Indra all that had
happened. Indra immediately sent Kalavati to fetch
Thinthakarala to heaven and then both of them lived
happily in heaven. (Taranga 2, Visamasilalambaka,
Kathasaritsagara) .
TILABHARA. A place situated in the north-east part of
Bharata. (Sloka ‘53, Chapter 9, Bhisma Parva).
TILOTTAMA. A prominent celestial maiden.
1). Birth. Tilottama was born to Pradha, wife of
Kagyapa, grandson of Brahma and son of Marici.
Alambusa, Misrakegi, Vidyutparna, Aruna, Raksita,
Rambha, Manorama, Subahu, Keégini, Surata, Suraja
and Supriya were all sisters of Tilottama. (Chapter 65,
Adi Parva).
There is a story about the birth of Tilottama. ‘Two
demons named Sunda and Upasunda obtained - invincible powers by doing penance. To make these two
brothers quarrel with each other, by directions from
Brahma, Visvakarma created Tilottama. Visvakarma
collected from all inanimate and animate objects parts
of objects beautiful to look at and created the enchanting Tilottama. Tilottama was then made to come to
the world through the womb of Kagyapa’s wife. Because she was made by the tilamsa (small particle ) of
all the best (uttama) articles of the world she got the
name of Tilottama. (Chapter 215, Adi Parva).
The good girl named Tilottama was formerly created
by Brahma from small particles of diamonds. (Sloka 1,
Chapter 141, Anugasana Parva).
2) How Siva got four heads and Indra a thousand eyes.
When the two demon brothers Sundopasundas were
creating great havoc in the world by their cruel and
immoral deeds, it was Tilottama who was deputed by
Brahm to create a split between the brothers. On the
eve Of her departure to the world she went to’ Devaloka to bid adieu. Brahma stood facing south and
Siva stood facing north and Tilottama stood in the
centre surrounded by the Devas. Tilottama circled
round the devas worshipping them. Siva was enamoured of her beauty and wanted to see her always and so
a face on all the four sides of his head sprang up So
that he could see her always as she circled round him.
Indra was also enamoured of her and he found his_two
eyes insufficient to enjoy her beauty. So instantly a
thousand eyes sprang up in the face of Indra. (Chapter
215, Adi Parva).
3) How Tilottama
a5 Pune
tlottama and Sundopasundas.
5) Other details. peranaas
Tilottama partook in the Janmotsava (birthday
cursed Sahasranika. (See under
See under Sunda.
TIRAYATTAM.
TIRAYATTAM
festival) of Arjuna. ‘Sloka 62, Chapter 122, Mahabharata).
TIMIDHVAJA. A demon who was ruling in the state
of Vaijayantapura. He was called Sambara also. This
demon once attacked Devaloka. Indra was not able
to kill him. So he sought the help of Dasaratha.
Dagaratha went and fought against the demons.
Dagaratha was made -to faint in the battlefield by the
magic of Timidhvaja and Kaikeyi who: was there then,
took him away and gave him all first aid. Pleased at
this Dagaratha promised two boons for her and it was
these boons that Kaikeyi demanded of Dagaratha on
the advice of Manthara at the time of the coronation
of Sri Rama. (Sarga 9, Ayodhya Kanda, Valmiki
Ramayana ).
TIMINGILA. A King. Sahadeva defeated this King
during his victory campaign in the south. (Sloka 69,
Chapter.31, Sabha Parva).
TIRAGRAHA. An ancient place situated on the northeast part of Bharata. (Sloka 52, Chapter 9, Bhisma
Parva). |
A form of unrefined drama current in
Kerala. This ancient art originally came into being to
propitiate some gods. There are others of this kind like
‘Mutiyettu’ ‘Tiyattu’ and ‘Ayyappan Pattu’ which all
belong to a class of Ritualistic plays.
This folk drama is a colourful pageant devoted to
gods. Its artistic value 1s worth noticing. This is known
by different names like ‘Tira’, ‘Teyya’and ‘Kaliyattam’.
‘Tira’ in ancient language means ‘daivadarsana’ (sight
of gods) *Teyya’ is the corrupt form of ‘daiva’. ‘Tirayattam is a visible amusement where actors appear dressed
as gods. Because the actors dance:in the dresses of gods,
this is called devattam also. Teyyattam is the distorted
form of devattam. Because this is both a Kali(play) and
an attam (dance) this 1s called Kaliyattam also.
This is held in different parts of Malabar during the
period of January to April. It is a programme of three
days. The first programme is to exhibit an Alakolam.
This is done on the night of the first day. The second
programme is to exhibit the vellattukolam which will be
done on the second day evening. An indication of this
is given on the first night itself. The programme of the
second day begins with a dance called Velakkali. On
that day there will be worshipping of gods at intervals.
The Vellittukolam begins by five in the evening. The
chief actor will present himself before the public in the
colourful robes of a god and will begin to dance to the
accompaniment of drums and music. As the dance and
music continues even those without dresses would start
dancing. Gradually sounds of pop-guns and instrumental music will rend the air. The chief dancer after
dancing for some-time would place a stool before the
temple and spread a white cloth on it. Then the dancer
would sit in meditation and do the ceremony called
‘calling the gods’. He would then pray to the gods to
bless the function and appear at the zodiacal sign of
Virgin. The dance and music start again. Then the
people assembled would throw rice and flower into the
cloth on the stool. The dancer-god holds a weapon in
his hand and changes it often making huge uproars.
Then after finishing the ceremonies like Kavittu and
Arulappatu, the Vellattakkaran retires. ‘Then another
actor inthe dress of another god appears as Vellattak-

TIRUJNANASAMBANDHA (R)
karan and repeats the programme of his predecessor.
Because the dance (attam) is done before a white(vella)
cloth the dance is called Vellattam. !
After the veilattam before midnight Tirayattam begins.
The dresses of the teyyas differ slightly from each other.
Some Tiras wear jackets and skirts while some wear
flower garlands made of Tulasi leaves (basil plant) and
cetti (jungle geranium ). All the tiras rush to the temple
in great spirit and they are followed by lamp-holders
and torch-bearers to the accompaniment of loud sounds
of musical instruments and uproars from the spectators.
When the first round of dances is over, the “Teyya’ -
stands dancing, pouring blessings to the people and
deciding ways of atonement for the sins done. Then
food is offered to the gods and the function ends with
a ‘Vela’ circling the temple.
TIRUJNANASAMBANDHA (R). He was one of the
four Daksinatya Saivamatacaryas. He lived during the
early part of the seventh century. The book on Daksinatya Saivamata is called Tirumura. There are twelve
songs in that book. They were compiled by Nambiyandar Nambi who lived during the period of Rajaraja
Cola. The first seven of these are devotional songs
called Tevaras. They were composed jointly by Tirujianasambandhar, Tirunavukkaragar and Sundaramirti.
‘The first three tevaras are of Tirujhanasambandhar.
The twelfth tirumura is called Periyapurana. Its author
was Sekkizhar. He was called Arulmozhitteva also. He
was the chief minister of Anapayacola who ruled during
the period 1063 to 1112 A.D. The theme of Periyapurana is the life history of sixtythree Saivasiddhas who
were renowned as Nayanars and Atiyars. Itis in the
‘sixth chapter of the second part of this book that they
discuss Tirujfianasambandhar. _
He was born in the village of Sirkazhi (Brahmapura)
near Kumbhakonam in the district. of Tafijaviur. His
father was Sivapadaraya and mother Bhagavatiyar.
Once when Sivapadaraya went to bathe in the temple
tank called Brahmatirtha he took along with him his
son Sambandhar also. Keeping his son on the steps of
the tank Sivapadaraya plunged himself into the waters.
Siva and Parvati who came that way saw the child
sitting alone and Parvati went and fed him with her
breast-milk. From that moment onwards the child
started singing songs in praise of Siva and Parvati.
When he grew up, he did many wonderful deeds visiting
many Siva temples of Pandirajya. His father fixed u
a marriage for him and the bride’s party assembled
even before time at the Cidambara temple. ‘Tirujfianasambandhar came theré in time and standing before
the temple deity sang a song in praise of Siva. The song
was greatly appealing and at the end of the song before
all those assembled there Sambandhar to the astonishment of all merged with the deity.
TIRUNAVUKKARASA (R). He was a Saivaite like
Tirujfianasambandhar (Refer above) and a disciple also
of the latter. He was born in the village of Tiruvamur
in South Arcot district. His father was Pugalanar and
mother Madiniyar both of whom were Vellalas, They
got a daughier named Tilakavatiyar and a son named
Marulnikkiyar. It was this Marulnikkiyar who became
famous as Tirunavukkara ar. This siddha who acquired
divine knowledge has composed 4900 songs in praise
of Siva of which only 312 are in use now.
Dp -
TITTIBHASARAS
TIRTHA. A holy place. Even from very ancient times
the people of Bharata believed in the sacredness of holy
places and they considered a_pilgirmage to holy places
as a part and parcel of their life. Almost all the Puranas
have praised the greatness of holy places. ,
It is not true that all those who visit holy places and
bathe in the sacred ponds there would get salvation. In
Chapter 1! of Padma Purana it is stated thus:
He would get salvation whose limbs, mind, knowledge,
austerity and fame are under his own control. He who
lives clean in body, without egoism, contented and never
accepting gifis for services done would get salvation by
visiting holy places. He who would fast if he did not
get food, whose organs of sense are all under control
would get salvation if he visits holy places. He who 38
righteous, free from anger, treats all animate objects
like himself would get salvation if he visits holy place.
Once the great sage Cyavana told Prahlada thus: ‘Only
those who are pure in heart would get the benefit i
visiting sacred places. It is a sin for others to do pilgrimage. he banks of Ganga are crowded with villages.
and cities. Many types of people like Parayas, Fishetmen, Vargas, Khasas, Huns and Mlecchas live there.
They bathe in the holy river and drink the holy wate?»
but they do not get’salvation because their mind a?
heart are not clean,” (4th Skandha, Devi Bhagavata )-
TIRTHAKOTI. A holy place. He who visits this plac¢
would attain Visnuloka after obtaining the benefit ©
doing a Pundarika yajfia. (Sloka 121, Chapter 84;
Vana Parva). | -_ ! |
TIRTHANEMI. A female attendant of Subrahmany4-
(Sloka 7, Chapter 46, Salya Parva). 1 f
TIRTHAYATRAPARVA. A’ sub-divisional Parva’ °
a Parva. This comprises Chapters 80 to 156 of Vana
arva. . 3
TITIKSA., One of the sixteen daughters born to Dakss
of his wife Prasati. Of these thirteen were marrie ad
Dharmadeva. Titiksa was one of them. The other
were Sraddha, Maitri etc. (4th Skandha Bhagavata):
TITIKSU,/ a King born of the family of Turvasu.
was the son of Usinara and father of Rusadrath@
( Chapter 277, Agni Purana). :
TITTIBHA. An asura. This derion shines in the court
of Varuna. (Sloka 15, Chapter 9, Sabha Parva). f
TITTIBHASARAS. A sacred pond near the agrama@ °
Valmiki. There is a story about. this pond. Once
a water-fow] lived there with ‘his mate. One da)
the male fowl went. out for food ‘and. as he 2°
returning home -he found a few other water-fowls going
that way and the male fowl suspected the chastity of bi
wife. The male fowl decided to abandon his mate and
the innocent shefow
) | prayed to th dikpalakas, 10%
help. The Astadikpalatkas eh acu there and
made a pond and said that if the she-fowl could reat
from one shore to the other without’ getting hers
drowned she must be treated as chaste. The she-loW
_ Was accordingly put into the waters and asked to $s‘?
to the other shore which she did without any accio™
From that day onwards the pond was called Tittibhe
saras, (Tittibha = water fowl. Saras= pond). g
When Sita came to the asrama of Valmiki after being
abandoned by Sri Rama, Valmiki wanted to. test ne
chastity. So the sages asked Sita to enter the pond - me
reach the other shore. “Oh goddess of Earth, if even?

TITTIRA
my dreams no other person than my husband has
entered my thoughts, Jet me reach the other shore safe.”
So saying Sita entered the water and the goddess of
Earth placed her in her lapand took her to the other
shore. Sita did not get even wet. All the sages called her
‘Mahasadhvi’ meaning supremely chaste woman.
(Taratga 1, Alankaravatilambaka, Kathasaritsagara ).
TITTIRA. Aplace of habitation in ancient Bharata.
(Sloka 51, Chapter 50, Bhisma Parva).
TITTIRI I. A kind of bird. To know about the origin
of this bird see under the head Trisiras.
TITTIRI II. A celebrated serpent born to the sage
Kas yapa of Kadra, his wife. (Sloka 15, Chapter 35,
Adi Parva). |
TITTIRI III. A‘sage who was a member of the council
of Yudhisthira. (Sloka 12, Chapter 4, Sabha Parva).
TITTIRI IV. A special breed of horses. Arjuna got this
breed from Gandharvanagara during his victory campaign. (Sloka 6, Chapter 28, Sabha Parva ).
TOLA. A ereat satirical poet of the Malayalam - Literature. A great humorist, Sanskrit scholar and actor, he
was minister to Bhaskara Ravi Varma who was ruler
of Kerala during the period from 978 to 1027 A.D.
According to Kodungallur Kufjikkuttan Tampuran, a
creat Sanskrit ‘scholar and poet, ‘Tola was. born in
Kondolififiaru in the village of Airanikkulam near Adur
in Cochin ina Nambidiri family. His original name
was Nilakantha. When he was a young man, he was
ostracised from his community for having had illicit
connections with a low-caste servant-maid named
Cakki. He was wearing then a deerskin belt (Tol): on
his body as the usual mark of BrahmacaArins (bachelors )
and he threw it away of his.own accord earning for him
the name Tola. ‘There is another version that Tola_ is
the decayed form of ‘Atula’ meaning matchless. He
"was mainly interested in writing funny ridicules. . ‘There |
are many, such poems now available believed to. be
MRHOSe Ol Old,” 4, 94. oak ee ae
TOMARA. A’ place. of habitation situated on the north-
~ east part of Bh rata. (Sloka 69, Chapter 9, Bhisma
oMESEUE).© ays ot, canal egos base Ba <tiaue
TORANASPHATIKA. . Duryodhana, decided. to make
the Pandavas beggars by defeating them in,a false game
of dice. Dhrtara tra stood, as..an accomplice, to that.
To play the game ,, Dhrtarastra constructed a. palace
_ and that palace.was called Toranasph, tika.
That diamond:-studded palace hadia thousand pillars and
a hundred entrances:.,It- had. . crystal, fortresses and
_ golden). thrones jin’ .all the «chambers. This palace was
called, Dyitabhavana also. (Chapter 56, Sabha Parva) .
TRAISANI: A King of the: family of) Turvasu. He: was
» the father of Karandhama. (See under Varhsavali)
TRAIVALI | (TRAIBALI). °A sage. He shone as a
member in the court of Yudhisthira; (Sloka 13, Chapter
4, Sabha: Parva’). fibov01s & kK
TRAIVARNIKA:(S).' Brahmins, Ksatriyas and Vais yas
>care the threeccastes of people called» Traivarnikas.
TRASADASYU- A King’ of the Iksvaku ‘dynasty. He
accepted sannyasa (ascetic life) ‘and became a Rajarsi.
“1)° Genealogy. Descending in order from Visnu-BrahmaMarici-Kafyapa*Vivasvan- Vaivasvata’ Manu - IksvakuVikuksi-Sa‘ada+Purafijaya (Kakutstha) -Anenas- Prthudas va-Prasenajit - Yuvanasva - Mandhata - PurukutsaTrasadasyu. SIS t git
‘TRIDASYU
2) Other details... | rR 1 |
(i) Because he made dasyus (evil people) ‘tras’ (to
tremble with fear) he got the name of ‘Trasadasyu.
(7th Skandha, Devi Bhagavata). | iy
(ii). The Agvinidevas once saved him from defeat.in a
fight. (Sikta !12, Mandala 1, Rgveda).
(iii) Once Agastya, Srutarva and. Bradhnasva, three
eminent sages, came to the country of ‘Trasadasyu. On
hearing that. the sages were coming, Trasadasyu
abandoned all his work and went to receive the sages
at the state boundary. He asked. them the purpose of
their visit and they said they wanted some money. The
King then showed them his accounts and..convinced
them that he was poor. (Sloka 16, Chapter: 98, Vana
Parva). 3 7 i
(iv) Trasadasyu ‘was one among those whose name
should be remembered early in the morning. (Sloka 59,
Chapter 165, Anugasana Parva). — Rot:
TRASARENU. An ancient measure of weight of metals.
Jalantaragate bhanau
Yat suksmam drsyate rajah /
Prathamam tat pramananam
Trasarenum pracaksate. // :
. (Sloka 132, Chapter 8, Manusmrti).
Eight trasarenus make one Iru.. Three irus make one
Mankatuku. Three mankatukus make one Venkatuku.
Six venkatukus make one Madhyastriyava. I hree
madhyastriyavas make one kunnikkuru. Five kunnikkurus
make one Masa. Sixteen masas make one. Suvarna.
This is the weight of two and a_half ‘varahas. Four
suvarnas make one Pala. Ten palas make one Dharana.
TRAYI... Veda... Formerly. only, three Vedas, Rgveda,
Yajurveda and Samaveda were recognised and so r rayl
meaning group of three was used to denote the Vedas.
(See under Veda). | )
TRAYYARUNA. A King of the Solar, dynasty. He
~ was the.son of Tridhanva and. father of Lriganku.
.. (Chapter 57, Brahmanda Purana).
TRAYYARUNI. A sage of the line of disciples of Vyasa.
(See under Guruparam para)... |
TRETAYUGA. Second’of~ the four yugas. Krtayuga,
Tretayuga, Dvaparayuga, and Kaliyuga are the four
yugas. ‘There are three. thousand: deva-varsas (divine
~vyears) in Tretayuga. : :
Si Rama was born at the end of Tretayuga. Tretayuga
came to-an end in B.C. 867100. Sri Rama ruled the
country for ‘eleven thousand years. | .
Daéga-varsa-sahasrani. _
Daga-varsa-Satani ca /
Ramo rajyamupasitva
Brahmalokam prayAsyati. / / ©
(Valmiki Ramayana). !
(After serving his land for ‘ten thousand years and another ten hundred: years (ten thousand plus’ thousand
years): Sri Rama will go to Brahmaloka). When Rama
-took -over the reins -of administration she was: only
forty»-years old. ‘See. under Manvantara and syuga.
-o(Glassical Sanskrit Literature). ~ |
TRIBHANU. A King born of the family of Yayati. (9th
Skandha, Bhagavata) . ASE 2).
TRIDASYU. ‘The son’born to Agastya of Lopamudra,
(See under Idhmavaha). 3

TRIDHAMA 792 TRIJATA
TRIDHAMA,. The tenth incarnation of Siva. At this
time Bhrgu Maharsi was Vyasa. (Siva Purana, Satarudrasamhita) .
TRIDHANVA. A King of the Solar dynasty who was
the grandfather of TriSanku. (7th Skandha, Devi
was at that time that Rama started for his life in exile
in the forests. Before he commenced his journey to
the forests he gave immense wealth to all the Brahmins
who had assembled around him. At that time Trijata
never knew about it and when it came to the ears of
Bhagavata). Trijata’s wife she ran to the fields and persuaded
TRIDIVA. A river of Bharata. (Chapter 9, Bhisma Trijata to go and see Sri Rama. When Trijata came to
Parva). the scene, Rama had almost finished his distribution
TRIGANGA. A holy place. (Sloka 29, Chapter 84, but Trijata took courage and pushing forward throug
Vana Parva).
TRIGARTA. A powerful kingdom of ancient Bharata.
There are several references in the Mahabharata to the
Kings of Trigarta. The following are a few of them
worth noticing :— :
(i) The Pandavas passed through the country of
Trigarta while they were wandering in the forests after
the fire accident at the waxpalace. (Sloka 2, Chapter
155, Adi Parva).
(ii) Arjuna during his victory march to the north
defeated the King of Trigarta. (Sloka 18, Chapter 27,
Sabha Parva).
(iii) Nakula once conquered the country of Trigarta.
(Sloka 7, Chapter 32, Sabha Parva). |
(iv) The Kings of Trigarta used to pay tribute to
Dharmaputra. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 52, Sloka 14).
(v) A King of Trigarta once killed the horses tied to
the chariot of Dharmaputra and then committed
suicide. (Sloka 12, Chapter 271, Vana Parva).
(vi) A King of. Trigarta named Suratha was slain by
Nakula. (Sloka 18, Chapter 271, Vana Parva).
(vii) Sugsarma, King of Trigarta with his army joined
the Kaurava side and carried away the cattle of the
King of Virata and also fought with him. Arjuna
during his stay incognito at the palace of the King of
Virata killed many Trigartas. (Chapter 32, Virata
Parva).
(vil) Sugarma, King of Trigarta, took the King of
Virata as a captive and enraged at this Bhimasena was
about to kill Sugarma when Arjuna intervened and
stopped him from that. (Chapter 23, Virata Parva).
(ix) Satyaratha, King of Trigarta, had four brothers
and the Pandavas fought against all the five. (Sloka 9
Chapter 166, Udyoga Parva).
(x) In the Garuda-vyiha constructed by Bhisma
(battle oo Fs the ore of a vulture) five Trigarta
princes stood at the head of th i :
56, Bhisma Parva). the formation. (Chapter
(xi) Arjuna used the Vayavyastra again i
in the co battle. (Chapter 102, Guastcar
xii) Sri Krsna once defeated the Tri
iP drone Parva) . Barbie: hep
xiii) Once Paragurama killed many Trigartas. "
5 70, Drona Parva). “ae emia tae
xiv) There was a fight between SAtyaki an |
Foie eckas once. (Chapter 181, Drona Barwa |, sl ae
(xv) Arjuna who led the sacrificial horse of the
Agvamedhayajfia of Dharmaputra created. great havoc
to the ‘Trigartas. (Chapter 74, AS vamedha Parva).
(xvi) The Kings of Trigarta live in the court of Yama.
(Sloka 20, Chapter 8, Sabha Parva).
TRIJATA (GARGYA). A sage. Though he was a sage
he lived by farming. He had a wife and children and
his earnings from farm work were insufficient to make
both ends meet. They were living in poverty and it
the crowd approached Rama and said ‘‘Oh, famous
King, 1am a poor man with many children. Give
something for this poor man who lives by farming.”’
Hearing this, Sri Rama giving him a small stick asked
him to throw the stick into the midst of, the cattle
grazing nearby. The Brahmin tightening his clothes
and getting ready threw the stick with all his might
to the south. The stick fell beyond a lakh of cattle
grazing there. Sri Rama gave him all the cattle which
stood inside the area covered by the stick. (Chapter
32, Ayodhya Kanda Valmiki Ramayana).
Trijata was the son of Vigvamitra. (Sloka 55, Chapter
4, Anusasana Parva).
TRIJATA. A servant demoness of the palace of Ravana.
Trijata was one among the demonesses who were depul
ed to entice Sita, sitting dejected under the Agoka
tree, to the side of Ravana. All the demonesses slept
around Sita. Trijata had adream one night whic
described in Chapter 27 of Sundara Kanda thus:
“Sri Rama dressed in pure white robes and accom
panied by Laksmana dropped to the place from air ®
a chariot built with ivory and drawn by a thousat
swans. After that they came to Sita on the back ©
Airavata. Sri Rama took Sita in his lap and rose up
into the air. They went high to reach the Sun _ 4?
Sita was seen patting on the Sun and the moon. hen
Airavata which was carrying Rama, Sita 4"
Laksmana came to the top'of Lanka. Then they came
to this place in chariot. Then they travelled to :
north in a Puspaka vimana. Ravana with oil smeare
on his body and looking all red was lying oF |
ground. His head was clean shaven. He was drinkiné
oil from a pot and was shouting loudly. Then Ravan
went to the south on the back of a donkey. Whe?
he had travelled ashort distance he fell from '
donkey head downwards. Rising from there he we
muttering many vulgar words. Then Ravana 5a)"
into a foul-smelling dung-mire. A_ black yo
wearing ared saree and mud smeared all over h
body came near him and dragged him to the soul 1
Kumbhakarna also was subjected to her torture. “74 _
the members of Ravana’s family were seen smear’
with oil. After that they all travelled south 292?"
At that ume Ravana was seen on the back of 4 hogs
Kumbhakarna on the backof a camel and Indra
on the back of a crocodile. Vibhisana alone was 8° f
Standing near the Puspaka Vimana on the bac
a four-tusked elephant wearing white robes anil
white garlands and sweet-smelling pastes smeare' ie
over his body and holding a white umbrella with 11
four ministers by his side and the royal band player
At that stage the beautiful city of Lanka with its W =
army fell into the ocean. Then a monkey messeP
of Sri Rama burnt the city of Laiik§. All the woo!"
demonesses and Kumbhakarna were-seen lying in @ ni
dung pit wearing red dress,”

TRIKAKUBDHAMA
When Trijata repeated her dream to her companions
allwere frightened todeath. After the Rama-Ravana,
battle, it is stated in Valmiki Ramayana, that Sri
Rama gave presents to Trijata.(Sloka 41, Chapter 291,
Vana Parva).
TRIKAKUBDHAMA. Asynonym of Mahavisnu. (Sloka
20, Chapter 140, AnusSasana Parva).
TRIKUTA. A mountain. There are twenty mountains
on the four sides of Mahameru including Trikuta.
Puranas say that the city of Lanka, the abode of
Ravana, was at the top of Trikiitta. Mahameru is at the
north.of Bharata. Lanka is to the south of Bharata.
Then how is it possible for Lanka to be on the top of
‘Trikita ?
There isa story to substantiate this belief. Once there
arose a quarrel between Vasuki and Vayubhagavan
and they decided to find out who between the two was
more powerful. Vasuki went and lay wound round
Mahameru so tightly that even Vayu (air) could not
enter it. Vayu got enraged and broke into a cyclone
shaking the whole world. Even Mahameru began to
shake but Vasuki lay unaffected. The Cyclone began to
increase in vigour and the devas were frightened and
they went to Mahavisnu accompanied by Siva and
Brahma. After hearing their story Visnu called Vasuki
and Vayu to his side and commanded them to stop the
quarrel. Vasuki then unwound a partof his winding
and that was from Trikita. At once Vayu entered
there and separating Trikiita from other parts carried
it away and dropped it in the southern sea. It fell to
the south of the southern end of Bharata. Lanka is the
city built on it by the celebrated architect,
Vis vakarman.
TRILOKITILAKA. A Yogeévari mantra. If one mutters
this mantra (a sacred prayer addressed to a deity) one
hundred and one times daily, one will become omniscient. Not only that, he would be able to move about
to any place he wants. The mantra is this: ‘‘Hrim
Gauri, Rudramayi te yogesvari hum phat Svaha”’ (6th
Skandha, Devi Bhagavata) .
TRINETRA. A minister of Mahisasura. The cabinet of
Mahisasura was extremely strong and brilliant. Ciksura,
virile and an expert in military science, was the Defence
minister. The great economist, Tamra, was the minister
for finance. Udarka was the Commander-in-Chief and
the three advisory members were Baskala, Trinetra and
Kalabandhaka. $ukracarya was the minister for education. (5th Skandha, Devi Bhagavata).
TRIPADA. A demon. In the battle between the demons
and the devas Subrahmanya slew this demon. (Sloka
75, Chapter 46, Salya Parva).
TRIPURA. A phantom city built by Maya.
1) Origin. Kagyapa Maharsi son of Marici and grandson of Brahma had many wives. Of them Aditi got the
first place and Diti the second place. Both of them were
daughters of Daksa Devas were born of Aditi and ithe
asuras were born of Diti. Armies of asuras under. the
leadership of Sirapadma, Sirhavaktra, Tarakasura,
Gomukha, Hiranyaksa, and Hiranyaka$ipu gave immense
trouble to the devas. The devas joined together under
the leadership of Indra and fought the asuras, The
nectar received from the ocean of Milk always made
the devas the conquerors. When Subrahmanya slew
‘Tarakasura the asuras became very weak,
TRIPURA
At this stage Kamalaksa, Tarakaksa and Vidyunmali,
sons of Tarakasura, did severe penance and made Brahma
appear before them. They demanded a boon that they
would never be killed by anybody in any of the three
worlds. Brahma told them to ask any boon other than
that. Then they said: ‘Great Lord, we must live in
- three cities and then roam about freely in the three
worlds by your grace. Every thousand years all the
three of us should join together at a place with our
cities. After that meeting, we should separate and roam
about freely for another thousand years. If at all there
is death for us, it should occur only when we three
are together and that also by one arrow.’ Brahma
granted the boon and disappeared.
‘The asuras then approached Maya and asked him to
construct three separate cities for them. Maya built
three wonderful cities. One was with gold, another
with silver and the third with iron. Tarakaksa took
the golden one, Kamalaksa took the silver one and
Vidyunmali took the iron one. The asuras started
living in these cities. The three puras were respectively
in Svarga, Akaéa and the Earth. But each city had the
power to travel to any other place at will. The power
of controlling these cities was given to Bana. Hiranyakagipu’s son was Prahlada. Prahlada’s son was Virocana. Mahabali was Virocana’s son and Bana was
Mahabali’s son (Chapter 14, Padma Purana). All these
three cities together were named Tripura.
2) Mrtasatijivani Vapi. (The life giving tank). Even
with the existence of Tripura the asuras began to die in
numbers and the Tripuras thought ofa way to escape
from this calamity. Hari, son of Tarakasura, did penance
and made Brahma appear before him in person.
According to a request trom Hari Brahma made Maya
build a tank wonderful in nature. Brahma filled the
tank with nectar. If any asura died, it was enough if he
was dipped in the tank and the dead asura would soon
come to life with added strength and vigour. Asuras
became immortal since this and the. Tripuras started
teasing the devas and men with increased ferocity.
3) Consultation with Siva. The aggrieved devas approached Brahma and finding him incapable of helping took
him to Siva. Siva heard everything and assured them
that he would kill them when they next met together at
the end ofa thousand years. |
4) Siva makes preparations.As a first step to the slaughter ~
of the Tripuras, iva sent Narada to Tripura. Narada
by his unusual spiritual powers made the asura women
feel more and more attached to the devas. Siva at that
time thinking about the convenience for a fight with
the Tripuras came and settled down on the shores of
the river Narmada. That was how Narmada became
a holy river. (Chapter 15, Padma Purana).
S:ya had to make grand preparations for a fight with
the Tripuras. He invoked half the strength of the devas
to himself to make Sivagakti (Javelin of Siva) greater
than Asuragakti. The devas made Vis vakarma construct
a special chariot for Siva. Onthe banks of the river
Narmada. at a place which became renowned as.
Maheévara Siva stayed for a thousand years thinking
about the fight with the Tripuras. He made the mountain of Mandara his bow, Wasuki, the string and
Visnu his arrow. He installed Agni at the tip and Vayu
at the bottom of the arrow. Four devas stood as horses
to his chariot. The earth itself was the chariot and all
I ee a ed

TRIPURI
the animate and inanimate objects of the devaloka
arrayed at different parts of the chariot. On the wheels
stood the Agvinidevas and Cakrapani stayed on the
axle. Gandharvas took places on the spokes. Indra
stayed on the bow and Vaigravana on the arrow. Yama
took his place on the right hand and the dreadful Kala
on the left hand. Brahma acted as the charioteer.
Equipped thus, Siva stayed in the godly chariot for a
thousand years. When the three cities joined together
in the sky Siva split the cities by his three-forked spike.
Then he sent an arrow to the cities. Bad omens began
to appear in Tripura. People became lifeless in the
cities. Soon an arrow from Siva burnt the cities and
the Tripuras were burnt to death. (7th Skandha,
Bhagavata; Chapters 31 to 34, Padma Purana; Chapters
33 and 34,, Karna Parva). ,
TRIPURI. An ancient country of South India. Sahadeva
during his victory march conquered this country. (Sloka
60, Chapter 31, Sabha Parva). — |
TRIRATHIKA (S). (Three charioteers). Asvatthama,
Krpa and Satyaki, the three eminent bow-men who
took part in the Bharata battle were called Trirathikas
meaning three great charioteers. (See under Asvatthama).
TRIRAVA. One of the children of Garuda. (Sloka Ll.
Chapter 101, Udyoga Parva ).
TRISANKU TI. (SATYAVRATA, MATANGA). A
celebrated King of the Solar dynasty.
1) Genealogy. Descending in order from Brahma —
Marici — Kagyapa — Vivasvan — Vaivasvata Manu—
Iksvaku—Vikuksi—Sagada—Purafijaya (Kakutstha}—
Anenas—Prthulasva — Prasenajit, Yuvanaséva - Mandhata —Purukutsa—-Trasadasyu—Anaranya— Haryas va
Vasumanas — Sudhanva — Trayyaruna —
(Triganku) . )
2) Father discards him. When Satyavrata grew up he
became a lewd, lustful imprudent man. One day while he
was leading such a contemptuous life, a marriage was
being conducted in a brahmin house. Guests had
assembled, the bridegroom had come and the ceremony
was about to start when Satyavrata entered the
marriage hall and carricd away by force the bride to
the shock of all those present there. Some of the Brahmin
guests immediately went to .Trayyaruna and told him
what a shameful crime his son had committed. The enraged father at once sent Satyavrata out from the palace
Satyavrata left the country altogether and went and
stayed in a colony of harijans. Though he lived with
those low-caste people he did not adopt their mode of
living. He went out daily to the forests with his bow
and arrow and made his food. He never felt an
animosity towards his father who had thus sent him sist
froin his country. He thought thus ‘‘Of course my father
got terribly angry when he heard the complaints of the
Brahmins and in that mood punished me thus, though
the punishment was a bit too much. But our family
preceptor Vasistha, who' knows everything, who is a
moralist and a righteous man, who has the knowledge
and authority to prescribe atonement for all sins, did
severe punishment. That was very hard.” As he thought
more about it in this vein, he felt a great hatred towards
Vasistha.
3) Satyavrata and Visvamitra’s family. When his only
son Satyavrata was turned out from the family, King
Trayyaruna was greatly distressed. He went to the
Satyavrata
TRISANKU I
forests to do penance to get another son. At that time
the country did not have rains for twelve successive
years asa punishment for the King for sending out his
son. The people suffered much. Among the people who
were suffering were the wife and children of Vigévamitra.
Vig vamitra at that time had gone to the shores of river
Kaugiki for doing penance. Visvamitra’s family consist- |
ing of his wife and three sons during that famine lived
in hunger. At last the mother decided to sell the middle
son and buy food with themoney received by the sale.
She put a rope made of darbha grass round the neck
of the boy and took him to the market. On the way
Satyavrata saw them and on hearing their sad story told
them not to sell the child. He assured them that he
would take care of them till the return of Viévamitra.
He removed the darbha rope from the child’s neck and
the child got the name of Galava from that time .onwards. (Gala=neck). He promised them he would
daily place enough meat at the foot of a tree near the
aérama. True to his promise, he hunted in the forests
and brought to the foot of the tree fresh flesh of deer or
hare or boar and also fresh fruits. ‘The family lived
happily because of him.
4) Curse of Vasistha and the name of Trifanku. When
Trayyaruna went to the forests to do penance, it was
Vasistha who was managing the affairs of the palace.
The heir-apparent Satyavrata lived in the hut ofa
candala. Every minute Satyavrata’s hatred towards
Vasistha increased in strength. One day Satyavrata did
not get any game even after a day’s hunting and at
dusk he. happened to reach the agrama of Vasistha
where he saw Nandini, the beloved cow of the sage,
grazing by the side of the asrama. Anger, desire and
hunger made him imprudent and without thinking of
the consequences Satyavrata killed Nandini and after
eating enough to appease his hunger took the rest to
feed the family of Vigvamitra. The wife of Vigvamitra
little knowing that 1t was cow’s flesh cooked it and
ate it.
That night when Vasistha came to the agrama he found
Nandini missing and he went in search of it. After some
time the sage knew that Satyavrata had killed and eaten
it, The enraged sage called Satyavrata to his side and
cursed him thus “You will from today become a
candala. Three gankus (sins) namely wrath of a father,
abduction of another man’s wife and consumption of
cow’s flesh will give you life-long trouble and thus you
will earn a name, Trifanku (Three §ankus). Instantly
Satyavrata became 4 candala and started roaming
about in the streets.
5) Triganku becomes King. ‘Triganku, distressed at heart
by a father’s wrath and a Guru’s curse walked about
aimlessly in the forests. He expressed his desire to the
rsis and Brahmins to do a yaga and get himself absolved
of all his sins. But nobody was willing to help a wretched man cursed and abandoned by both his father and
his Guru, Feeling desperate, he decided to commit
suicide. He made a great fire-pit and prepared himself
to jump into it. Before doing that he prayed to the
goddess and when the goddess knew that his devotee
would jump into the fire and become ashes, she appeared before him in person and said thus: “Son, why do
you try to jump into the fire’? Your father has become
old and day after tomorrow he will crown you as King

TRISANKU I
and then go to the forests to do penance. Look, there
comes your father’s minister to take you to the palace.”
When the voddess disappeared Satyavrata returned to
his a4grama in apensive mood. Narada went and informed the king of everything that happened in the
forest and the king immediately sent his ministers to
fetch Satyavrata to the palace. When Satyavrata came
the king crowned him as king and then went to the
forests for penance.
6) Satyavrata becomes Candala again. Satyavrata ruled the
country for a long time. He was a pious ruler, devoted
to god and soon he developed a desire to go to heaven
with his mortal bedy. He approached Vasistha first
for this purpose. But the family preceptor told him
there was nothing in the $astras about any yaga which
could help one to go bodily to heaven. Disappointed
he approached the sons of Vasistha who ridiculed him
when he told them of his queer desire. Triganku got
anery and left them saying ‘“‘Let me sce whether there
are others in this country who could send me bodily to
heaven.’’? Those arrogant words annoyed Vasistha and
his sons and they cursed him and made him a candala
again, Triganku thereafter did not return to the palace,
but went to the forests to live there. He knew if he
returned to the palace as a candala he would not be
recognised by his wife and children.
Harigcandra, son of Triganku, heard about the curse on
his father and sent the ministers to fetch his father to
the palace. But Triganku did not come back and so the
ministers made Harigcandra the king of Ayodhya.
7) Visvamitra meets Trisanku. When Haris candra became
king, Triganku was living in Ambavana (forest of Amba )
as a great devotee of the goddess. It was at that time
that Vigvamitra returned home after his penance. Vis vamitra enquired of his wife how they managed to live
during the great famine. Then Satyavati, wife of Vis vamitra, told him the whole story of how Satyavrata helped
them, why he killed Nandini, Vasistha’s cow, and how
they ate cow’s flesh, how Satyavrata was cursed to be a
candala, how he wascalled back as king and how he was
at that’ time living in Ambavana. The eyes of Visvamitra became wet when he heard the sorrowful story
and he decided to end the candalatva (state of being a
candala) of Satyavrata. He went straight to Ambavana
and met Trisanku there.
8) Trifanku Svarga (Heaven of Trisanku) . Viévamitra promised Triganku that he would send him to heaven bodily
and made preparations for a yaga. No other sage partook in the yaga because of instructions from Vasistha.
But undaunted, Visvamitra conducted the yaga alone
and, as the power of his performances increased, Triganku started rising bodily from earth slowly and soon
rose up to heaven. When the devas found a Candala
standing with his physical body before the gates of
heaven, they ran to Indra and told him. Indra got
angry and pushed him out from heaven and Triganku
came falling down with his head turned downwards to
the earth. Trigadku cried loudly calling Vis vamitra
by name. When Vig vamitra, hearing the noise, looked
up he saw poor Tri’anku descending fast from heaven
with his head turned upside down. Visvamitra’s anger
knew no bounds and he roared aloud “Let Trisanku
stay where he is now.’”? Triganku stopped in mid-air.
Indra did not allow Triganku to come up and Visvamitra did not allow him to come down. Indra then made
TRISANKU II. A philosopher.
TRISOKA. A‘sage who was the s
TRISOKA
a separate heaven for Tris anku belowthke original
heaven. Then Vigvamitra started to create another Indra
and devas for the new heaven. The cevas were frightened
and Indra then approached Visvamitra and requested
him to desist from his attempt to make duplicate devas
promising him that he would give Trisanku a seat in
his heaven itself, Vigvamitra agreed to it. At once
Indra brought a golden Viména and took him bodily to
heaven. (Sargas 57-to 59, Balakanda, Valmiki Ramayana
7th Skandha, Devi Bhagavata; 9th Skandha, Bhagavata;
Chapter 13, MHarivamsa; Sundara Kanda, Kamba
Ramayana; Chapter 7), Adi Parva; Chapter 12, Sabha
Parva ).
He is mentioned in
several places in Taittiriyopanisad.
TRISAVANA. A sage. When he went to Hastinapura as
a messenger-of peace, he met Sri Krsna on the way.
(Chapter 83, Udyoga Parva).
TRISIRAS I. A demon who was a friend of Ravana. The
Khara-Disana-Trisiras combination led the attack on
Sri Rama in the forest of Dandaka when Laksmana cut
off the nose and breasts of the demoness Sarpanakha.
Rama and Laksmana killed all the three. Trigiras was
a powerful fighter and S+i Rama’s forehead was wounded
by an arrow from Trisiras. The latter came and fought
in a chariot drawn by four horses. He was kiiled by an
arrow from Rama. (Sarga 26, Aranya Kanda, Valmiki
Ramayana).
TRISIRAS II (VISVARUPA). Once there was a celebrated Prajapati of name Tvasta. Though he was of a pious
nature interested in the welfare of Brahmins, he hated
Indra. He thought of destroying Indra somehow. With
that purpose in view he produced by his wife Recana,
a powerful son and named him Visvarupa. Phe boy had
three heads and so he was called Trisiras (Tri=Three
Siras—head) also. He could use his three heads for
three different purposes at a time. He would drink wine
with one head and mutter the Veda-mantras by another
head and see the world by the third. ‘
Even from boyhood he disliked worldly pleasures and,
abandoning even food, started to do penance. During
the hot season he would sit amidst fire and during the
cold season he would sit in water to do penance. e
would stand with his head down and do penance. The
penance of Trigiras was 50 severe that Indra began to
get frightened. He sent celestial maidens to stop the
penance but all the attempts proved futile before ~ that
great ascetic. ‘Then Indra himself riding on Airavata
went and killed the sage by his Vajrayudha. | Indra
feared whether Trisiras would come to life again and
wreak vengeance on him. So he ordered a_ carpenter
standing nearby to bring to him the three heads separated from the body. The carpenter cut off the heads from
the body and as each head fell to the ground several
kinds of birds were found escaping from it. From the
head which used to mutter Vedic mantras rose the
Kapifijala birds; from the head used for drinking wine
rose Kalapinga birds and from the third rose the Tittiri
birds. When the birds thus rose to the air Indra was
convinced that Tri iras was dead and he went away
See under Visvarupa. (6th Skandha, Devi Bhagavata).
on of Kanva. The A§g vinidevas once redeemed the cows belonging to this sage.
(Sakta 112, Anuvaka 16, Mandala |, Reveda).

TRISRNGA
TRISRNGA. A mountain. This stands to the north of
Mahameru. Mahameru spreads over an area of eighteen
thousand square miles and is two thousand miles high.
It is surrounded by eight other small mountains two on
each side. To the east is Jathara and Devakita.
Pavamana and Pariyatra stand to the west while to the
south are Kailasa and Karavira. On the north are
Tri roga and Makaragiri. (8th Skandha, Devi Bhagavata).
TRISROTASI. A sacred river. This river lives in the
‘ court of Varuna worshipping him.(Sloka 23, Chapter 9,
Sabha Parva).
TRISTHANA. A holy place. If one lives and fasts here
for one month, one would be able to see God. (Sloka 15,
Chapter 25, Anugasana Parva).
TRISTUP. One of the seven horses tied to the chariot of
Surya. ‘The seven horses are; Gayatri, Brhati, Usnik,
Jagati, Tristup, Anustup and Pankti. (Chapter 8, Améa
2, Visnu Purana).
TRISULA. A weapon of Siva with the Vaisnava tejas
(brilliance of Visnu) obtained by churning Surya.
Vigvakarma made the following: Cakrayudha (Discus
weapon) of Visnu, Trigila (three-forked spike) of Siva,
Puspaka Vimana (Aerial chariot) of Kubera and the
weapon Sakti of Subrahmanya. (Chapter 2, Arméa 3,
Visnu Purana). (See under Visvakarma for more
details) .
TRISULAKHATA. A sacred place. Ifa man bathes at
this place and worships the devas and the manes, he
would attain a place equal to that of Ganapati. ( Chapter 84, Vana Parva).
TRITA.
1) General information. A son of the sage Gautama. He
had two brothers called Ekata and Dvita. (See under
Ekata ).
2) Other details.
(i) Ekata, Dvita and Trita were born to clean the
hands of the devas when they become smeared with
the sacrificial butter during the yagas. Of these Trita
once fellinto a well while drawing water and the
asuras Closed the well. But Trita escaped opening the
top. (Sikta 52, Anuvaka 10, Mandala 1, Rgveda).
(ii) Once Ekata, Dvita and Trita were stranded in a
desert and desperately needed water to quench an increasing thirst. At last they found a well and Trita after
getting down and quenching his thirst brought water
to his brothers. The cruel brothers, after drinking the
water pushed ‘T’rita into the well and covered the well
with the wheel of a bullock-cart. Trita prayed to the
Agvinidevas for help and they appeared before him
and rescued him from the well. (Sakta 105, Mandala 1,
Reveda).
TRIVARCAS (TRIVARCAKA). A sage who was the
son of Angiras. He joined with four other sages and ~
did penance and produced a son named Paficajanya
equal to the god Agni in splendour. The other four
sages were KaSsyapa, Prana, Cyavana and Agni.
(Slokas 1 to 5, Chapter 220, Vana Parva).
TRIVAKRA. A hunchback ofa woman who was engaged in the work of making scented cosmetics for
Kamsa. This woman saw Sri Krsna on his way to the
palace of his uncle Karhsa in Mathurapuri. Even at
the first sight she felt a great respect and devotion
towards Krsna and she gave him the scented cosmetics
she was carrying to Kamsa. Krsna placed a foot of
796 TRNAVARTA
his on hers and holding her chinby both the hands raised it up and lo! she stood straight without her hunch.
She requested Krsna to stay with her that night but
Krsna left her saying he would stay with her on another
day which he did the next day itself. (10th Skandha,
Bhagavata).
TRIVIKRAMA. Another name for Vamana.
TRIVIKRAMASENA. A mighty king.
TRIVISTAPA. A sacred place inside Kuruksctra. If
one bathes in the holy tank there and worships Siva
cone would go to heaven. (Chapter 83, Vana Parva).
TRNABINDU TI. A lake in the forest of Kamyaka. The
Pandavas once during their exile went to Trnabindusaras from Dvaitavana. (Sloka 13, Chapter 258, Vana
Parva).
TRNABINDU II. A_ sage. This sage sat and did
penance at a place called Rsitirtha. (Chapter 20,
Padma Purana).
1) Grandfather of Visravas. WVisravas, father of Ravana
was the son of M4anini, daughter of Trnabindu.. There
is a story about him in Uttara Ramayana.
Once the sage Pulastya was doing penance in a secluded place in the Himalayas when a few Deva Gandharva
women came to that place and disturbed his penance
by their dances and noise. The angered sage gave a
curse to that place saying that any woman coming to
that place would become pregnant. Manini, daughter
of Trnabindu went to this place unaware of the curse
and got pregnant. She came weeping to her father and
Trnabindu immediately took his daughter to Pulastya
and asked him to marry Manini. Pulastya married
Manini and Visgravas was born to her.
2) How he cursed Haniiman. Once Haniman caught
hold of a lion and elephant in fight and tied them
each to a post on the two sides of the a4grama of
Trnabindu. When the sage stepped out from the
hermitage, he was fora moment frightened by the sight
of two mighty animals on the sides of his 4grama and
knew by his divine powers that the perpetrator of that
deed was Haniman and so he cursed him saying that
he would lose all his divine powers forthwith.
Haniman begged for relief and the sage said that he
would regain his powers at the time of his going in
search of Sita when another member of his species
would remind him of his lost divine powers. Haniman
remained cblivious of his powers till the time when the
monkeys were trying to leap to Lanka from the
Mahendra mountain on the shores of Bharata. Jambavan, a mighty monkey chief called Haniman to his
side and made him understand the great powers latent
in him. From that moment onwards Haniim4n regained
his lost powers and became his old self. (See under
Haniman).
TRNAKA. A saintly King. He sat in the court of
Yama and worshipped him. (Sloka 17, Chapter 8,
Sabha -Parva) .
TRNAPA. A Deva Gandharva. He partook in the
Janmotsava of Arjuna. (Sloka 56, Chapter 122, Adi
Parva).
TRMASOMANIGIRAS. A sage who lived in the south of
Bharata. (Sloka 34, Chapter 150, Anusgasana Parva).
TRNAVARTA. A demon who was the son of Tarakasura. This demon was living serving Karnsa. Karhsa
once sent Trnavarta to kill Krsna growing up in
Ambadi. Trnavarta, in magic disguise went to the

TULASI | |
TRTIVYA 797
a a - ee, = entered the place TULASI. (Holy Basil plant.
= i, nr ae ‘oe ‘. was breast-feeding 1) General information. Tulasi is a plant held most
rst S In her lap. Soon Yagoda sacred by the Hindus. There is a Puranic background for
In fact
Tulasi attaining this spiritualistic importance.
it is Mahalaksmi, wife of Visnu, who had _ herself taken
the form of Tulasi. There is a story about it in Devi
felt the babe gaining weight and very soon she felt the
weight unbearable and rose up to place the child on a
mat on the ground. But even before that Yagoda was
fixed to the ground b ‘it
some] he laced y the weight of the babe. But Bhagavata.
ehow she placed the babe on a mat on the ground S
and went out to wash her hands and face. When she 2) The curse of Sarasvatit. Sarasvau, Ganga and
came back she could not find the babe on the mat Laksmi were all, in the beginning, wives of Mahavisnu.
Trnavarta had come in the form of whiel-Astae aed hed The Lord loved all the three equally. One day all the
already carried away the child. But after some time the four were sitting together when Ganga sent Justful
ihn 6 of the yah neveused so much that Trnavarta, gen at Visnu ie was Fea go noticed by
unable to carry the weight, wanted to dr ene ot arasvati an aksmi. Sarasvati got angry and
et op the child to nae 1 & S
the ground. But the child stuck on to sa neck and rising up caught hold of the hair of Ganga and dragged
breast tightly and Trnavarta finding no escape from her to the ground. Laksmi then caught hold of SarasGs High pk whlels eabtvowned tis, Hl so the goumih Seed all her ite ANT at eile vers Be
on a hard rock. h Skandha = O ier rage ;
TRTIVA. A river. This river sat in ee born as a plant on earth. Gangae oe could not bear
worshipping him. (Sloka 21, Chapter 9, Sabha Par this and she cursed Sarasvati to be born asariver on
TRUTI I. Thirty alpakalas make one Truti. (See under earth. Sarasvati retorted with a curse that Ganga also
would be born asa river. When the whole tumult was
side and said—‘‘Oh
Kalamana).
TRUTI II. A female attendant of Subrahmanya. (Sloka over Visnu called Laksmi to his
Devi, do not worry. Things hav
17, Chapter 46, Salya Parva).
: tined. You go and be born as the
e happened as_ predesdaughter of DharmaTRYAKSA. An ancient place of habitation. When the ivi
King of this place went to see Dharmaputra_ with cifts dhvaja and grow up there. From there by divine grace
you will be transformed into a plant sacred enough to
That plant will be
the gate-keepers did not allow him to enter the palace
make all the three worlds pure.
; Sl! ka l , Chapt S 2 7
premises. (Slo apter 51, Sabha Parva). named Tulasi, When you will be thus living as Tulasi,
, h part of my virile
TRYAMBAKA. One of the Ekadaga Rudr ]
a ares Aeeved a demon named Sankhacida wit
Rudras). See under Ekadasarudra).
TUGRA. A King extolled in the Rgveda. This King strength will be born and he will marry you. Then you
sent his son Bhujyu with a large army by sea to can come back to me. The holy river Padmavati will
conquer his enemies in dvipantara. When they were a also be another form of your spiitlong distance away from the shore the boats carrying 3) The story of Dharmadhvaja Who was this Dharmathem capsized ina storm and the prince and army dhvaja to whom was born Mahalaksmi as a daughter ?
Manu called Daksasavarni
In times of old there was a 4\
who was extremely virtuous
cending from Daksasavarni were :
Devasavarni-Indrasavarni
and a part of Visnu. Deswere drowned in the sea. The prince then prayed to
Brahmasavarnithe A vinidevas and they saved him and his army from
the sea and sent them back to'the palace. Those boats
could travel both in the sea and the air. (Sakta 116, Dharmasavarni-RudrasavarniMandala |, Reveda, Anuvaka 17). Vrsadhvayja. This last named was 4 great devotee of
TUHARA. A soldier of Subrahmanya. (Chapter 45, Siva and because of his great affection for this devotee
Salya Parva). Siva lived a whole period of a devayuga in the asrama
TUHUNDA. A demon. This demon was born to of Vrsadhvaja. King Vrsadhvaja by an edict prohibited
Kas yapa of his wife Danu. (Chapter 65, Adi Parva). the worship of any other deity than Siva in his country.
Accompanied by Tarakasura this demon once attacked © Eventhe worship of Mahalaksmi ordained by the Vedas
Subrahmanya. Tuhunda threw an iron mace against during the month of Bhadra (September) became exAll Yagas and worship of Visnu came to a Stop.
Ganapati who blocked his chariot. By a single stone — of tinct.
Ganapati, the diamond-studded mace of the demon Siarya (Sun-god) got angry at this belittling of other
broke into six pieces. When he found his mace gone gods than Siva and cursed the King Vrsadhvaja that he
the demon caught hold of Ganapati and beat him with would cease to be prosperous. Siva did not like it and
a spiked club on his forehead. Ganapati cut him with he went to punish Surya holding his trident in his
his weapon (Axe) ‘Venmazhu’. The demon fell to the hand. Surya was frightened and he approached his
father Kagyapa. Kagyapa and Surya went to Brahma
ground in two pieces but still his hold on Ganapati E
and acquainted him with all details. Brahma also was
> all the three of them went
was not released. Ganapati tried his best but could not
loosen the hold. Then Kundodara, a leader of the helpless in the matter and s
attendants of Ganapati smashed the hands of Tuhunda to Mahavisnu. They prostrated before Visnu and told
with an iron mace. Tuhunda was killed thus. (Chapter him all. At that time Siva also came there. Addressing
65, Vayu Purana). all of them Visnu said ‘‘Oh, Devas; within this half an
This Tuhunda was born in his next life in the world as hour twentyone yugas have passed by on the earth. He
a King called Senabindu. (Sloka 19, Chapter 6/7, Adi about whom you have come to speak to me Is dead and
Rathadhvaja is dead. The latter
TULADHARA ; ~~ gone. Even his son
lived da Weaai A charitable and righteous Vaisya who has two sons name
el “ asi. He gave the sage Jajali dharmopadesa = ‘They are dull and splendour!
oth of them entered heaven. (See under Jajali). of Sirya and are now wors
TULAPURUSADANA. See under’ Merudana. thus Visnu disappeared.
d Dharmadhvaja and Kusadhvaja.
ess now because of the curse
hipping Laksmi.’’ Saying

TULASI 798
4) Birth of Tulasi. Dharmadhvaja «and KuSadhvaja
did penance to propitiate Mahalaksmi. Kusadhvaja
had a wife named Malavati. She bore a daughter named
Vedavati. Sita, wife of Sri Rama, was a rebirth of this
Vedavati.
King Dharmadhvaja hada wife named Madhavi. Mahalaksmi entered her wombas an embryo and after a hundred years Madhavi gave birth to a daughter. Even at the
time of birth the child looked likea matured girl and was
extremely pretty. She was therefore, called Tulasi, meaning
matchless. (Tula=match). This Tulasi abandoning all
worldly pleasures went to Badarikasrama and started doing
penance there with the prayer that Mahavisnu should
become her husband. She did penance for twentyfour
thousand years sitting amidst fire in the hot season and
sitting in water in the cold season and taking only
fruits and water as food. Then she did penance for another thirtythousand years eating leaves only, another forty
thousand years taking air only as food and another ten
thousand years without any food. At this stage Brahma
appeared and asked her the object of her Penance. She
replied she wanted Mahavisnu to be her husband.
Hearing this Brahma said thus—‘‘Devi. you know the
cowboy Sudama born of a part of Sri Krsna. That
byilliant cowboy has now been born on earth, due to a
curse of Radha, as a demon named Sankhacida. He is
matchlessly eminent and has once fallen in love with
you seeing youat Goloka. You will become his wife and
later you can become the wife of Narayana. At that
time a part of your divine body will remain on earth as
a plant named Tulasi. Tulasi will become the most
sacred of all plants, dear to Visnu, and all worship
without using Tulasi leaves would be ineffective.”
5) Marriageof Tulasi. Due to a curse of Radha,
Sudama, the cowboy, was born on earth as a demon
named Sankhacuda. He did penance sitting at Badarikaframa and obtained Visnukavaca. Another object of
his was to marry ‘Tulasi. He obtained a boon from
Brahma that his death would occur only when the
Visnu Kavaca was removed from his body and the
chastity of his wife was lost. At that time Sankhacida
and ‘Tulasi met each other in the forests and were
married, Sankhaciida, brilliant and majestic, went
about with ‘Tulasi in amorous sports creating jealousy
even among the devas. His arrogance gave innumerable troubles to the devas and they along with Brahma
and Siva approached Mahavisnu for a remedy.
Visnu then sent Siva with his spike to kill Sanikhacida
and he himself started to molest the chastity of his wife
Tulasi. Sankhaciida took leave of Tulasi to go
and fight with Siva. When Tulasi was thus left alone,
Mahavisnu in the form of Sankhaciida approached
Tulasi and after some preliminary talks entered into
sexual acts. Tulasi found some difference in the usual
sexual methods and suspecting foul play jumped up to
curse the impostor. At once Mahavisnu appeared in
his true form and said “You have been doing penance
for a long time to get me as your husband. Your
husband Sankhacida was the chief of my Parsadas,
Sudama. It is time for him to go back to Goloka getting himself released from the curse. By this time Siva
would have killed him and he would have gone to
Goloka as Sudama&. You can now abandon your hody
TUMBURU I
and come with me to Vaikuntha to enjoy life as my
wife.
Your body will decay and become a holy river named
Gandaki; your hair willl become ‘Tulasi plant the
leaves of which will be held sacred in all the three
worlds.”
Tulasi then changed herself into the form of Laksmi
and went to Vaikuntha with Mahavisnu. (9th Skandha,
Devi Bhagavata).
6) The greatness of Tulasi. Everything of the Tulasi
plant, leaves, flowers, fruits, roots, twigs, skin and even
the soil around is holy. The soul of a dead one whose
dead body is cremated using Tulasi twigs for firewood
would attain a permanent place in Visnuloka. Even
great sinners would be absolved of their sins if their
dead bodies are cremated with Tulasi twigs. If at the
time of death one thinks of God and mutters His name
and if his dead body is later cremated with Tulasi
- twigs, he would have no rebirths. Even he who has
done a crore of sins would attain moksa ifat the time
of cremating his dead body a piece of Tulasi twig is
placed at the bottom of the funeral pyre. Just as all
waters become pure by the union with Ganga water,
all firewood is made pure by the addition of a small
piece of Tulasi twig. If the dead body of one is cremated using Tulasi twigs alone, one’s sins for a crore
of Kalpa years would be washed away. Yamaditas
would keep away from one whose dead body is cremated with Tulasi twigs and servants of Visnu would
come near. Ifa light is burnt for Visnu with a Tulasi
stick it would be equal to burning several lakhs of
lights for Visnu. If one makes the Tulasi leaves into a
paste and smears it on one’s body and then worships
Visnu for one day, one would be getting the benefit of
a hundred ordinary worships and also the benefit of
doing a hundred godanas. (gifts of cows). (Chapter 24,
Padma Purana).
TUMBURUI. A Deva Gandharva. He was the best
musician among the Gandharvas.
1) Birth, Tumburu was the son of Kagyapa, son of
Marici and grandson of Brahma, born of his wife
Pradha. Of the sons of Kasyapa the four Gandharva
Tumburu, Bahu, Haha and Huhi were noted for
i and pleasant conversation.
Teta a the Pandavas. Mahabharata states
about several occasions when ‘Tumburu has shown a
special and deep interest in the Pandavas. The follow1 j tion—
ing few are of special men |
(i) Tumburu attended_ the Janmotsava of Arjuna.
ka 54, Chapter 122 ,Adi Parva).
or Ones i eee gave Yudhisthira a hundred
horses. (Sloka 24, Chapter 92, Sabha Parva).
(iii) Tumburu welcomed Arjuna when the latter went
fo Devaloka at the invitation of Indra. (Vana Parva,
Chapter 43, Verse i a ar —
(iv) Once when the Pandavas were living incognito in
the country of Virata the Kauravas carried away the
cattle of the King. ‘Arjuna in disguise then fought
acainst the Kauravas and Tumburu watched the fight
with interest. (Sloka 12, Chapter 56, Virata Parva).
(v) Tumburu was present at the AS vamedhayaga of
Yudhisthira. (Sloka 39, Chapter 88, Agvamedha
sons,
3) Eas Tumburu was born as Virddha. When Rama and
Laksmana were in the forests in exile a demon named

TUMBURU II
Viradha attacked them. That demon was none other
than Tumburu. Once when Tumburu was living in the
city of Kubera he committed a sin and Kubera cursed
him and made him into a demon. Kubera had then
told him that he would get relief from the curse when
he was slain by Rama, son of Dasaratha. Sri Rama
killed Viraidha and the latter regaining the form of
Tumburu left for Gandharvaloka. (See under Viradha).
4) How he cursed Puriiravas. It is found in Kathasaritsagara that the temporary separation which Puruiravas
had from Urvagi was due toa curse by the Gandharva
Tumburu.
After marrying Urvasi Purtravas once went to Devaloka at the invitation of Indra, He was invited to help
Indra in his fight against the asuras. Indra celebrated
the day on which one of the best of the demons, Mayadhara was killed. Rambha was dancing before acarya
Tumburu on the occasion and Puriravas finding fault
with her dance mocked at her. Rambha felt insulted
and asked the King thus: “Fool of a King, what do
you know of the divine dances of Devaloka ?” Purtravas retorted that he had learnt more of dancing from
Urvagi than what her preceptor Tumburu knew. ‘Tum- >
buru. got angry and cursed Pururavas that he would
live separated from Urvasi till he did penance to please
Mahavisnu. The Gandharvas_ then carried away
Urvagi from Puriravas. (See under Puriravas ).
5) Other detatls.
(i) Tumburu was a member of the court of Indra. —
(Sloka 14, Chapter 7, Sabha Parva ).
(ii) Tumburu was a member of the court of Kubera.
(Sloka 26, Chapter 10, Sabha Parva). . |
(iii) The songs of ‘Tumburu who was a worshipper of
Kubera used to be heard from the mountain of Gandhamadana on the full-moon day. (Sloka 29, Chapter
159, Vana Parva). --
TUMBURUII. A sage.
Some details.
(i) This sage was one among the many sages who came
from the north to visit Sri Rama on his return to
Ayodhya after the exile. Those who came from the
north were—Kaégyapa, Vasistha, Atri, WViSvamitra,
Gautama, Jamadagni, Bharadvaja, Sanakadis, Sarabhanga, Durvasas, Matanga, Vibhandaka and Tumburu. (Uttara Ramayana ).
(ii) Tumburu was one among the rsis who visited
Bhisma lying on his bed of arrows. (Chapter 47, Santi
Parva).
TUNDAI. A King. The Pandavas invited this King to
take part in the great Mahabharata battle. (Sloka 21,
Chapter 4, Udyoga Parva).
TUNDA II. A demon. This demon who was one among
the army of Ravana fought against the monkey leader,
Nala, in the Rama-Ravana battle. (Sloka 9, Chapter
285, Vana Parva).
TUNDIKERA. An ancient place of Bharata. ‘The people
of this place took part in the great Mahabharata battle.
(Sloka 20, Chapter 17, Drona Parva) .
TUNGAKARANYA. A holy place. The sage Sarasvata
did Devatadhyayana on behalf of other sages at this
: place: (Sloka 46, Chapter 85, Vana Parva).
# UNGAVENA. An ancient holy river of Bharata. People
of Bharatae came pure by drinking the water of this
river. (Sloka 27, Chapter 6, Bhisma Parva).
TVASTA I
TURIYA. A state of existence of Man. (See under
Jagrat) .
TURVASA. A King extolled in the Rgveda. Narya,
Turvagéa and Turviti were contemporaries. (Sukta 54,
Mandala 1, Rgveda).
TURVASU. A son born to Yayati of his wife Devayani.
Yayati had two wives Sarmistha and Devayani. OF
Sarmistha, Yayati had three sons named Druhyu,
Anudruhyu and Piru and of Devayani, two sons named
Yadu and Turvasu.
Once Yayati called all his five sons to his side and asked them if any one of them would be willing to exchange his youth with his father’s old age. All the four
refused but Piru agreed to accede to his father’s request.
Yayati then cursed Turvasu and all the other three.
(See under Yayati). 7
TURVAYANA, A King
(Mandala 1, Rgveda).
TURVITI I. A King extolled in the Rgveda.
TURVITIII. A King. But since insome places he is
mentioned as a’sage, it must be presumed that he must
have been aKing who had become a sannyasin during
the latter part of his life. Once this sage was drowned
and Indra came in time and rescued him. (Sukta 61,
Mandala 1, Rgveda). |
TUSARA. A place of habitation of ancient Bharata.
Scholars are of opinion. that the present Tukharistan
was the ancient Tusara. The people of this place. used
to be called: Tusaras and their King Tusara. The King
of Tusara was the store-keeper during the Rajasuyayajna
of Yudhisthira, (Chapter 51, Vana Parva). The
Pandavas during their exile crossed this country of
Tusara on their way to Dvaitavana from the mountain
of Gandhamadana. During the great battle, the Tusaras arrayed themselves on the right side of the Kraufica
Vyiha (an army formation in the shape of a stork)
constructed by Bhisma. (Sloka 21, Chapter 75, Bhisma
Parva). There is a statement in Chapter 65 of Santi
Parva that a barbarous tribe called Tusaras lived in
the country of Mandhata.
TUSITAS. There were twelve good devas called ‘Tusitas
in the Caksusa Manvantara. When the Caksusa Manvantara ended and the Vaivasvata Manvantara commenced all the twelve were born as sons of Kasyapa of
his wife Aditi. Because they were born of Aditi they
were called Dvadasadityas. They were Visnu etc. Thus
the Tusitas of the Caksusa Manvantara were the
DvadagAadityas of Vaivasvata Manvantara. (Visnu
Purana, Arga 1, Chapter 15).
TUSTI. A daughter of Daksa. She became the wife of
Dharmadeva. Dharmadeva accepted as wives the
thirteen daughters of Daksa including Tusti. Their
younger sister Khyati etc were married to Marici etc.
(Chapter 7, Amga 1, Visnu Purana).
TUSTIMAN. A King of the Yayati dynasty. (9th
.Skandha, Bhagavata) .
TVASTA I. A Prajapati. ‘This Prajapati was an asura
also. (Sukta 94, Anuvaka 14, Mandala |, Rgveda).
1) Birth. There are contradictory statements in the
Puranas regarding the birth of Tvasta.
(a) Viégvakarma got four sons named Ahirbudhnya,
Tvasta Ajaikapat and Rudra. The great ascetic Vis varipa was the son of ‘Tvasta. (Chapter lo, Amsa l,
Visnu Purana).
extolled in the Rgveda.

TVASTA II
(b) Kafyapa got as his sons the Ekadasarudras of his wife
Surabhi. Surabhi who became pure by penance got by
the grace of Mahadeva five other sons named Aja,
Ekapat, Ahirbudhnya, ‘Tvasta and Rudra. The noble
and famous Vigvarapa was the son of Tvasta. (Chapter
18, Agni Purana).
(c) Ka yapa Maharsi got ason named Tvasta of his
wife Aditi. (Sloka 34, Chapter 226, Adi Parva).
Bacause of such varied statements it is not possible to
say whose son ['vasta was.
2) Indra’s enemy. Even from the beginning, T'vasta
hated Indra. Tvasta begot of his wife Recana a son
named Visvaripato kill Indra. Visvaripa was the
younger brother of Sannivega. ViSvarupa was called
Trigiras also. (See under Trifiras). While Visvaritipa
was doing penance Indra killed him by his Vajrayudha.
Enraged at this T'vasta produced another asura named
Vrtra to kill Indra. (See under Vrtra). Indra _ killed
Vrtrasura also. At last greatly disappointed Tvasta
cursed Indra that he would suffer from Putraduhkha
(loss of son) and then went to the mount Meru to do
penance.
3) Other details.
(i) Tvasta also treated as a Rudra. (Chapter 15, Am a
1, Visnu Purana).
(ii) When the forest of Khandavawas burnt, he stood
on the side of Indraand fought against Krsna and
Arjuna. He separated huge portions from the mountain
and threw them against Arjuna and Krsna. (Sloka 34,
Chapter 226, Adi Parva).
(iii) Tvasta shines in the court of Indra.
Chapter 7, Sabha Parva).
(iv) Kuseru, daughter of Tvasta was once abducted
by Narakasura. (Chapter 38, Daksinatya Patha, Sabha
Parva).
(v) ViSvakarma also used to be called Tvasta. (Sloka
24, Chapter 100, Vana Parva).
(vi) The monkey called Nala was the son of Tvasta.
(Sloka 41, Chapter 283, Vana Parva).
(vii) Tvasta presented Subrahmanya with two Parsadas named Cakra and Anucakra. (Sloka 40, Chapter
45, Salya Parva).
TVASTA Il. A King of the family of Bharata. This
Tvasta was the son of Bhauvana and father of Viraja.
(Sth Skandha, Bhagavata).
TVASTADHARA. One of the two sons of Sukracarya
who were deputed to do heinous acts of worship by Sukra.
(Sloka 14,
The other was Atri. (Sloka 37, Chapter 65, Adi
Parva).
U (S$). The letter ‘u’ means Siva. (Agni Purana,
Chapter 348).
U.(%) This letter means ‘protection’. (Agni Purana, ChapUCAKA. A King of the Solar dynasty. (Bhagavata, 9th
Skanaha).
UCATHYA. A muni in the line of the disciples of Vyasa.
(Bhagavata, Skandha 12).
UCCAISSRAVAS f.
1) Birth. A horse which emerged from water during
the churning of the sea of Milk. (See under Ksirabdhimathana). Devendra grabbed it the moment he saw it,
and thenceforth it became his vehicle. (M.B. Adi
Parva, Chapter 23, Verses 33-37).
UDAPANATIRTHA
~2\ Colour of the horse. Once, during a controversy, Vinata,
wife of Kas yapa, contended that the colour of Uccaissravas was white, while another wife of KaSyapa, Kadru
said that its tail was black in colour. It was decided to bet
that she who got defeated in this controversy should
become the slave of the winner. Because the serpents,
the sons of Kadri, cheated Vinata, she had to become
Kadri’s slave. (See under Vinata). (M.B. Adi Parva,
Chapter 20).
3) Laksmidevi became mare. Devi Bhagavata relates a
story of Mahalaksmi becoming a mare on account of
Uccaig ravas. King Revanta, son of Siryaand friend of
Indra, once went to Vaikuntha to pay his respects to
Bhagavan Visnu, riding on UccaigSravas,. Mahalaksm),
who was then with Visnu was surprised at the arr
val of Revanta. Seeing the scintillating form ©
Uceaissravas, her brother, Mahalaksmi sat looking at
the horse unmindful of all other things. (Mahalaksm)
and the horse were both born from the Sea of Milk anc
hence were sister and brother). Thus occupied Mahalaksmi did not hear Mahavisnu asking, ‘‘Who is this on©
who comes like a second Cupid ?”? Angry at this Visnu
said— © 4
“So much attracted by the horse, you have net answere
me. Because you enjoy (Ramasi) so much your name in
future willbe Rama. You will also become frivolous
like an uncultured woman. You have never been
constant. Because you felt so much attracted to thie
horse in my very presence, you will be born as 4 mare
in the world of men.”’
According to this curse Mahalaksmi had to be born as
a mare in the world; the Hehaya dynasty had its origi!
from her. (See under Ekavira). (Devi Bhagavata,
Skandha 6).
UCCAISSRAVAS II. A Maharaja of the Paru dynas'y
He was one of the six sons of King Aviksit. (M.B. A
Parva, Chapter 94, Verse 53). ka
UCCHIKHA. A serpent born in the family of Taksal’
It was burnt to death at Janamejaya’s serpent ya"
(M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 57, Verse 9).
UCCHRNGA. One of the two attendants give? “
Skanda_ by Vindhya. The other was named Ats rng
(M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 49). five
UDANAVAYU. One of the five life-breaths. The
life-breaths are Prana, Apana, Samana, Udana on
Vyana. _ the
UDAPANA TIRTHA. A holy bath on the bank of ©
river Sarasvati. It is said that Balabhadra Re
while going on a pilgrimage, had visited this holy ba
There is a story showing how this place became a,
holy bath. Long ago there wasa hermit named Gautar
who had three sons called Ekata, Dvita and ‘Tt ea
The father was much pleased at the dutiful and de a
tional character of his sons. One day he performe’ ie
sacrifice and went to heaven. Then the kings 2?° ‘to
priests who were present for the sacrifice beS?” ot
honour and respect Trita. Ekata and Dvita did “5
like this. The three brothers performed sacrifices “
acquired a large number of cows, With these kata
they started for the.east. Trita walked before: . E :
and Dvita who were behind, made a consultatior at,
drove the cows another way. Trita walked on it rand
alone. On the bank of the Sarasvati he saw @ wol S
getting terrified, he fell into a well in which thet eept
no water, .Standing in the well, he imagined 4 cr

UDAPEKS! 801
that was hanging to the well as ‘Soma’ (a herb used as
oblation in sacrifice) and performed sacrifice, chanting
the Vedas. His chanting was heard in heaven and
Brhaspati and other gods came to him and asked him
what boon he desired. ‘Trita told them that he only
wanted to be saved from the well. Immediately the
river Sarasvati flowed into the well and the waves began
to swell. Standing on the waves he praised and glorified the gods. Then he returned home and cursed
Ekata and Dvita and transmuted them into wolves.
Trita said that their children would become monkeys
and cattle. It happened so. The place where the Gods
appeared before Trita, became famous and got the name
Udapanatirtha. (M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 36).
UDAPEKSI. A son of Vigvamitra. He was a Vedantin.
(M.B. Anugasana Parva, Chapter 4, Stanza 99).
UDARAKSA. A warrior of Skanda Deva. (M.B. Salya
Parva, Chapter 45, Stanza 65).
UDARASANDILYA. A hermit ofthe Durbar of Indra.
(M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 7, Stanza 31).
UDARKA. A minister of Mahisdsura. The ministry
of Mahisdsura was very powerful and efficient. The brave
and haughty Ciksura was the war minister. Udarka was
the general of the army. (See under Mahisasura).
UDAYAGIRI I. The mountain of the rising. It is supposed by poets that the Sun and the Moon rise from this
mountain.
UDAYAGIRI II. An ancient place of pilgrimage. It is
mentioned in Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 84,
Stanza 93, that by conducting evening prayer and
devotion at this place once, one could obtain the fruits
of conducting evening prayer and meditation for twelve
years continuously.
UDAYANA.A renowned king of the Candravarhfa (Lunar
dynasty). .
1) Genealogy. Descended from Visnu in the following
order: Brahma-Atri-Candra- Budha - Purdravas - AyusNahusa - Yayati - Paru-Janamejaya-Pracinvan-PraviraNamasyu-Vitabhaya-Sundu-Bahuvidha-Samya ti - Rahovadi - Raudragva - Matinara - Santurodha - DusyantaBharata-Hasti-Ajamidha-Rksa-Sarhvarana-Kuru-JahnuSuratha - Vidiratha- Sarvabhauma-Jayatsena-RavyayaBhavuka-Cakroddhata-Devatithi-Rksa- Bhima - Pratipaantanu-Vydsa- Pandu - Arjuna- Abhimanyu - Pariksit
Janamejaya-Satanika-Sahasranika-Udayana.
2) Birth. There was a city called Kaus ambi situated in
the middle of the famous kingdom known as Vatsa in
North India. The palace of king Satanika, born of the
family of Arjuna, was in Kaug 4mbi.. Visnumati was the
queen of Satanika. She had been childless. One day
while Satanika was hunting in the forest, he met with
the hermit Sandilya, by whose blessings Visnumati conceived and gave birth toa son. That son was Sahasranika. When he came of age, Satanika left the country
with his son and went to the heaven to help the gods
in their battle with the Asuras, and he died there.
Sahasranika became a mighty emperor. Once he got an
invitation from Indra to go to heaven and help the
gods to fight the Asuras. After having defeated the
Asuras, one day, he was walking with Indra in the
Nandana Park, when he saw the gods playing with
their wives in the park. Immediately the unmarried
king became thoughtful and Indra read correctly, the
reason for the sudden change in the king and said to the
king. ‘Oh King! Don’t be worried. A girl becoming
UDAYANA
you in every aspect, is born in the world. Her name is
Mrgavati.”’ .
Sahasranika was greatly pleased at this and he returned
to the earth. In the chariot there were Tilottama and
the charioteer, with the king. The king who.was deeply
immersed in thinking about Mrgavati, did not attend
to the conversation of Tilottama, who getting .angry
cursed him thus:-‘‘May you be separated for fourteen
years from the person whose thought has prevented
you from attending to what.I have been telling you.”
The king married Mrgavati. She became pregnant.
One day she told the king about her desire to dip ina
pond of blood. The king got a pond ready, filled with
the juice of Laksa (a kind of wax, the boiled water of
which will look like blood ) and such other things. Mrgavati began to dip and splash in the pond of blood.
When she was dipping under the juice, taking her to be
a large piece of flesh, an eagle took her from the pond
and flew away. The king was overwhelmed with grief
and fell down. Then the charioteer came down from
heaven and informed the king of the curse of Tilottama,
and then he returned.
The eagle left Mrgavatiin the mount of the Rising Sun
and flew away. She cried aloud. A huge snake neared
her toswallow her. Then a divine person appeared
there and saved her from the snake and. vanished. Then
a hermit-boy came there and asked the lonely woman,
clad in only one garment, about her story and took her
to the hermitage of the hermit Jamadagni who blessed
her. After some days she gave birth to a son. At that
time an unknown voice was heard saying ““This boy
would become the most renowned king Udayana and
his son would become the supreme Lord of the Vidyadharas.’? Because he was born in the Udayadri (the
mount of the Rising Sun) he got the name Udayana.
The boy Udayana grew up in the hermitage.
3) Udayana to his father. The hermit Jamadagani who
knew the past, present and the future performed all the
rituals, necessary for a boy of Ksatriya caste (kingly
race) such as Caula, Upanayana etc. and gave him
education in every branch of knowledge. Because.of her
love and regard for her son, Mrgavati put on his arm a
bangle with the name Sahasranika inscribed in it,
which she had béen wearing so long. One day, while
Udayana was walking through the forest, he sawa
snake-charmer catching a snake. He felt sorry for the
snake. So he gave the bangle to the snake-charmer and
set the snake free. When the snake charmer was gone,
the snake told Udayana its story. That serpent was
Vasunemi, the elder brother of Vasuki. Out of gratitude the serpent gave Udayana the famous Lute
Ghosavati and betels and taught him the art of making
garlands and marks on the forehead which would never
fade.
The snake-charmer took the bangle to the capital for sale.
Seeing the name of the king inscribed on it, the king’s
men took him before the king. He told the king everything. The king who had been suffering for the last fourteen years form the pangs of separation, started for the
mount: of the Rising Sun, without any loss of time. The
hermit Jamadagni gave him his wife Mrgavati and son
Udayana. They all returned to Kausambi.
4) The anointment of Udayana, Sahasranika anointed his
son Udayana as the heir to his throne, and appointed
Yaugandharayana, Rumanvan and Vasantaka, the songs

UDAYANA
of three ministers, as ministers of Udayana. At the time
of the anointment there was a shower of flowers
from the sky and an unknown voice said ‘‘With the help
of these ministers Udayana would bring the whole of
the earth under his control.” After a time Sahasranika
went to the Himalayas with his wife for penance.
5). Vasavadatté became Udayana’s wife. A daughter was
born to the king of Ujjayini. Her name was V4asavadatta. Her father Candamahasena decided to give her
in marriage to Udayanathe king of Vatsa. How to
bring this to pass ? Candamahasena and Udayana had
been enemies. Finally he found out a way. It was
to entrust Vasavadatta to Udayana (who was a great
teacher of music) for teaching her music. Ultimately he
would fall in love with her and thus Udayana would
become his son-in-law. This was the plan.
King Candamahisena sent a messenger to Kaugambi.
‘The messenger was sent back witha reply that, if his
daughter was sent to.Kaugambi, he would teach her
music. Candamahasena did not like this. So he decided
to take Udayanaa prisoner somehow or other. The
king had an elephant called Nadagiri. He ordered for
an artificial elephant to be made equal in size to
Nadagiri, and placed some soldiers inside the elephant.
The artificial elephant with soldiers inside it was taken
to the great forest in the Vindhya mountain and placed
there. The men of Udayana saw this elephant and
reported it to the king. Udayana decided to see the huge
elephant which had appeared in the Vindhya. Udayana
went to the forest and saw the huge elephant standing
ata distance. The king found out a plan to catch it.
Playing mild notes on his lute, the king alone neared
the elephant. As the night was drawing and as
he was immersed in music, he did not understand that
it was an artificial elephant. As the king was nearing
the elephant it went on retreating, and thus: got the
king away from his men. Then the’soldiers got out of
the elephant, surrounded the king and took him a
prisoner. Thus Udayana began to live in the palace of
Candamahasena. His work was to teach Vasavadatta
music.
The news reached Kauéambi. Yaugandharayana entrusted the affairs of the government to Rumanvan and
started for Ujjayini with Vasantaka. At Ujjayini they
sot Yogegvara, a Brahmardaksasa as friend. According
to his advice Yaugandharayana took the guise of a
mad old man. Vasantaka adopted the guise ofa sick
man, suffering from pain in the stomach an uncouth
figure to look at. They entered the city. The madness of
Yaugandharayana was an entertainment to the people.
The ladies of the court liked him much. Vasavadatta
invited the madman to the harem. Udayana instantly
recognized the mad man. Vasantaka also got admittance
to the palace. He told Vasavadatta the story of Lohajaigha in an interesting way. (See under Lohajangha)
Vasavadatta began to be drawn more and more towards
Udayana. She seemed tq have forgotten even about the
fact that her father was an enemy of Udayana, who
had been thinking seriously of means of escape from
the palace. Vasavadatta agreed to accompany him.
Asadhaka got Bhadravati, the elephant of Vasavadatta,
ready for the flight. In the night Udayana and his
retinue got on the elephant Bhadravati and fled from
the palace. Kaficanamala the maid of Vasavadatta
also accompanied her mistress. When they had passed
UDAYANA
the Vindhya mountain the elephant Bhadravati ie
dead. When they all were standing around the dee
elephant sadly, they heard an ethereal voice saying, ~ ‘€
King! Iam a Vidyadhara woman called Mayavat.
had been an elephant for so long. The son you ote
going to get, will also be helped by me. Your wit
Vasavadatta also, is a goddess, born as a woman
purposely.’’ Next day, allreached the palace of Udayan@
and the marriage of Udayana and Vasavadatta too*
place shortly. Candamahasena recognized that matt!
age. |
6)“ Udayana’s marriage with Padmdvati. Udayana ‘nee
his days with Vasavadatta in the harem. The ere
Yaugandharayana, Rumanvan, Vasantaka and ot a
thought that the behaviour of the King was deerimey
to the well-being of the country. They wanted to be
move the King from the palace fora little while a
to form an alliance with the powerful King of Maga és
By a marriage alliance all these could be achieved. eg
King of Magadha had a beautiful daughter © aii
Padmavati. The ministers began to work with this
in view. eof
Once Yaugandharayana took Udayana to the forest :
Lavanaka and stayed there. It was reported a ss g
King of Magadha that the King of Vatsa was dra a
near to his kingdom. Fearing an attack from mie a
the King of Magadha began to think of concluc} ne
treaty with Vatsa. The King of Vatsa used to Br ace
hunting everyday. One day he went to a distant _
for hunting, and the minister went to the hous
Vasavadatta and informed her of their plans.
it was not at all palatable to her, she gave her ©® welland agreed to help them as it was meant for De eaol
being of the King and the country. Accor nid
Yaugandharayana took the guise of an old ad anVasavadatta that of a young Brahmin lady and eye:
taka that of a Brahmin celibate with only pa
They went to the kingdom of Magadha. ean the
set fire to the house of Vasavadatta and spre pee®
rumour that Vasavadatta and Vasantaka hae
burnt to death. Yaugandharayana, Vasavadath” ital
Vasantaka reached Magadha. They got into the “ie old
and saw Padmavati sitting in the garden. she
Brahmin conversed with the princess for a W®"
enquired about the young woman who was ~ yghter
The old Brahmin replied thus :—‘She is My ¢°® Jest
Avantika.
you to keep her with you till I find him out m
him here. She may not like to be separated fro nere
people. So let her brother, the celibate, also
with her.”’ gnara
Padmavati took them with gladness and Yauga"- aka.
yana, bidding farewell, returned to the forest aves sh
Avantika and the Celibate lived in the palact jyana
Padmavati. Vasavadatta who had learned from pence
the art of making garlands ans marks on the sn ac
which would not fade, had prepared them for
vati.
= nell
~ 4nd
The King of Vatsa returned to the forest Law’ sbes
and found the house of his wife burnt dow? me jdatl}
He fell unconscious when he heard that Vasa
and Vasantaka had been burnt to death. “a the
‘I'he spies of the King of Magadha who wert at the
forest of Lavanaka, reported the rumour abo
hile.
Her husband has left the a’ pring ,
a

UDDALAKA I.
UDDALAKA I
death of Vasavadatta and Vasantaka to their King in
Magadha, who wished to give his daughter Padmavati
in marriage to Udayana. The marriage proposal was
accepted by Udayana and wearing garlands and marks
that would not fade Padmavati entered the wedding
dais. Udayana married Padmavati. Yaugandharayana
made the King of Magadha take an oath that he would
gofor no more aggression. Udayana and his people
reached Kaugambi. On the way the King happened to
sec the mark on the forehead and the garland on the
neck of Padmavati and asked her who had made them.
Padmavati told the King the story of Avantika.
Udayana was definite that Avantika was Vasavadatta
herself, Avantika was brought before the King. Padmavati congratulated V4asavadatta. Both of them loved
each other and lived together as the loving wives of
Udayana. (Kathasaritsagara, Lavanakalambaka ).
7) Udayana gets a new throne. Once Udayana was
sitting in the court-hall, when a Brahmin came there
and made a complaint to the King that some cowherds had broken the legs of hisson. The Brahmin
said that a boy named Devasena sat on a Stone in the
forest and instantly he got kingly power. The leg of the
Brahmin boy was broken by the friends of Devasena
because he did not bow before Devasena.
When he heard the story, the minister Yaugandharayana said that that place must have some peculiarities.
Accordingly the men of the King dug the place. He
got a throne of gems. (Kathasaritsagara, Lavanakalambaka).
8) The son of Udayana. Vasavadatta became pregnant
and gave birth to a child. He was named Naravahanadatta. Narada granted him a boon that Naravahanadatta would become the emperor of the Vidyadharas.
(See under Naravahanadatta) .
The princess of Taksasila named Kalingasena fell in
love with Udayana and she came to Kaug ambi. But no
marriage took place. (See under Kalingasena). Naravahanadatta, the son of Udayana, married Madanamaficuka who was the incarnation of Rati Devi (the
wife of Madana). Udayana entrusted the country
to his son and led a life of retirement with his wives.
(Kath4saritsagara) .
) A disciple called Aruni of the teacher
Ayodhadhaumya. To know how Aruni got the name
Uddalaka, see under Ayodhadhaumya.
It is stated in Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter 7,
Stanza 12 that this hermit Uddalaka was a prominent
figure in the Durbar of Indra. Uddalaka had a son called Svetaketu and a daughter called Sujata. He gave
his daughter Sujata in marriage to his favourite disciple Kahodaka. The hermit Astavakra was their son. See
under Astavakra. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 132}.
Once Uddalaka caused the river Sarasvati to appear at
the place of sacrifice. From that day onwards Sarasvati
got the name ‘Manorama’ because when the thought
came to his mind (manas) the river made its appearance.
(M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 33). It is mentioned in
Mahabharata, Santi Parva, Chapter 57, Stanza 10, that
Uddalaka expelled his son Svetaketu from the house because the son was a hater of Brahmins.
UDDALAKA II. The story of another hermit of the name
Uddalaka is mentioned in the Mahabharata, Anus asana
Parva. Chapter 71. This hermit is known as Uddalaki
UDDANDASASTRI.
UDDHAVA
also. Once this hermit happened to forget that he had
left flowers, food and his waterpot on the bank of the
river and reaching his hermitage, he asked his son
Naciketa to fetch them from the bank of the river.
When Naciketa reached the bank of the river, those
things had been washed down by the current. The son
returned and reported the matter to his father. ‘Lhe
father got angry and cursed his son to death. Seeing
the son lying dead on darbha (mattress made of darbha
grass) the hermit cried aloud. In that flow of tears life
returned to the body and the son woke up as if from
sleep. The father asked the son about the news of the
realm of Yama (the god of death) and the son told the
hermit the news about the world of the dead.
One of the eighteen and a half
famous poets of Kerala. He was a Sanskrit poet. His
native place was Latapura on the bank of river Palar
in Tondamandala in the Tamilnad. The name of his
father was Sri Krsna and that of hismothter was Rangadevi. Poet Ulloorsays that Sastri had another name
Irugupanatha. He had a very good education. After
having completed his education, he travelled through
Andhra, Karnataka, Kalinga, Cola, Kerala and many
other countries and finally came to Kozhikode and
visited the King Manavikramamaharaja. At the instance
ofthe king he composed the drama called Mallikamarutam. Besides this we have obtained only the ‘Kokilasandega’ and some other single poems of Sastri. Itis said
that there is a thesis on dramas also. Sastri was not
in the habit of respecting those who did not pay respect
to him, however superior they might be. So some say
that he was arrogant. A Malayala Brahmin called
Bhattatiri of Kakkagéeri, rose against Sastri in Kerala.
UDDHAVA.,
(1 General information. A Yadava. He was a friend and
minister of Sri Krsna. In Mahabharata, Adi Parva,
Chapter 186, Stanza 18, mention is made that Uddhava
was present on the occasion of the Svayamivara (marriage )
of Draupadi. It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Adi
Parva, Chapter 218, Stanza 11], that at a famous celebration held in the mountain of Raivata, Uddhava was
present. (See under Subhadra).
Uddhava was a disciple of Brhaspati, and a man of
creat intelligence. It was this Uddhava who brought the
dowry of Subhadra to Indraprastha, when Arjuna
married her. (M. B. Adi Parva, Chapter 220, Stanza
Once a king named Salva besieged the city of Dvaraka. At that time Uddhava saved Dvaraka. (M. B.
Vana Parva, Chapter 15, Stanza Q).
2). The message carried by Uddhava. Karnsa sent Akrira
to Ambadi, and brought Sri Krsna to Mathura. Sri
Krsna killed Karhsa and made Ugrasena king, and
stayed in the city of Mathura for a time. At that time
Sri Krsna sent Uddhava to Ambadi to know about the
well-being of the people there. The moment Uddhava
entered Ambadi, the Gopas and gopa women, (cowherds) Yagoda and Nandagopa, all surrounded him to
hear about SriKrsna. They felt much pleased at
knowing that Sri Krsna was getting on well. They sent
through him many presents to Sri Krsna. He got
all those presents into his chariot and took them to
Sri Krsna in Mathura. (Bhagavata, Skandha 10).
3). Theend. SriKrsna informed Uddhava beforehand the fact that the Yadava dynasty was going

UDDIPAKA
to end. Uddhava felt grief and requested Sri Krsna
to take him also to Vaikuntha (the abode of Mahavisnu) .
Sri Krsna taught Uddhava the-doctrine that the body
of man and such other things seen in the whole universe
were nothing but mere delusion. At that time Uddhava
asked Sri Krsna twentyone questions about Bandha
and Moksa (Bondage and deliverance).
To all these questions Sri Krsna gave him satisfactory
answers. (Bhagavata Skandha 11).
Before the destruction of Dvaraka, the Yadus left the
city. They went to Prabhasatirtha, a place on the sea
coast and lived there. Uddhava who knew that the
destruction was imminent, bade farewell to them and
walked away alone. He was filled with a brightness.
Sti Krsna did not stop him. (M.B. Mausala Parva,
Chapter 3),
It is stated in Bhagavata, Skandha 11, Chapter 29,
that Uddhava went to the hermitage of Badarika and
engaged himself in penance.
UDDIPAKA. See under Paficatantra.
UDICYA. One of the disciples of Vyasa. (Bhagavata,
Skandha 12),
UDRAPARAKA. A serpent born in the family of
Dhrtarastra. This serpent fellin the sacrificial fire of
Janamejaya and was burnt to death. (M. B. Adi
Parva , Chapter 57, Stanza 17).
UDVAHA I. A Ksatriya king born from the family
of Krodhavaga, an asura. (M.,B. Adi Parva, Chapter
67, Stanza 64).
UDVAHA II. A part ofair. It is believed that air or
wind is the breath of Mahavisnu. In the Puranas
mention is made about 49 types of Maruts or winds.
Seven breaths are important among them. They are:(1)
Pravaha (2) Avaha (3) Udvaha (4) Sarmvaha (5)
Vivaha (6) Parivaha and (7) Paravaha. About Udvaha
mention is made in Bhasa Bharata, Santi Parva,
Chapter 329 thus: |
‘‘Which is the wind that takes water from the four
oceans and gives it to the clouds? That ever-blowing
great wind is Udvaha.”’
UDYOGAPARVA. A sub-section of Mahabharata. (See
under Bharata).
UGRAI. A military captain of Sirapadmdsura, Chief
of asuras. In the Viramahendra Kanda of Skanda
Purana, two warriors, Ugra and Mayira are reported
to have attacked Indrapuri.
UGRA ITI. One of the sons of Dhrtarastra. (M. B. Adi
Parva, Chapter 67, Verse 103). Bhimasena killed him
(M. B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 64, Verses 34, 35).
UGRA III. A Yadava prince. The Pandavas sent to
him also an invitation letter to help them in the war.
(M. B. Udyoga Parva, Chapter 4, Verse 12).
UGRA IV. A synonym of Lord Siva. (M. B.. Anuéasana Parva, Chapter 17, Verse 100). .
UGRA V. Son of Kavi, the Prajapati.
sana Parva, Chapter 85, Verse 133).
(M. B. AnuégaUGRA VI. See under Varna.
UGRADAMSTRI. A daughter of Mahameru. Merudevi
had nine daughters, Meru, Pratiripa, Ugradarnstri
Lata, Ramya, Syama, Nari, Bhadra and Devavithi.
They were wedded by the sons ofa king named Agnidhra. (Bhagavata, 5th Skandha )
UGRAKA. Aserpent. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 35,
Verse 7).
804 UGRASENA I
UGRAKARMA I. King of Salva. Bhimasena killed him.
(M.B. Karna Parva, Chapter 5, Verse 41).
UGRAKARMA II. Military Chief of the Kekaya prince,
Visoka. Karna killed him. (M.B. Karna Parva, Chapter
8, Verses 4, 5).
UGRARAVAS. A muni. He killed one Duspanya (Setumahatmya ). Duspanya was the last son of a merchant
in Pataliputra. He killed many children for sport and
his father sent him away. He went to the forest and
there drowned to death a muni called Ugraravas, who
was engaged in tapas. Ugraravas cursed him to death
by drowning and his soul to wander about as a devil.
The curse came true. (Setumahatmya).
UGRASENA I. King Ugrasena, father of Kamsa.
1) Genealogy. Descended from Visnu thus: BrahmaAtri-Candra-Budha-Puriravas- Ayus - Nahusa - YayAatiYadu-Sahasrajit-Satajit-Hehaya-Dharma-Kunti-( Kuni )-
Bhadrasena - Dhanaka - Krtavirya - KarttaviryarjunaMadhu-Vrsni-Yudhajit-Sini - Satyaka - Satyaki (Yuyudhana)-Yaya-Kuni-Anamitra- Prsni-Citraratha-Kukira
Vahni - Viloma - Kapotaloma - Tumburu - DundubhiDaridra-Vasu-Nahuka-Ahuka-Ugrasena-Kamsa.
2\Ugrasena became king. Ugrasena became king of Mathurapuri. His Kingship was not a hereditary acquisition.
There is a story behind it. In olden days, in the plateau
of Kalindi there was a famous place called Madhuvana.
The place was called so because it was the abode of an
Asura named Madhu. Madhu had a son, Lavana. Satrughna killed him as he was a very troublesome fellow
and a thorn on the side of the Devas. Satrughna then
established a beautiful kingdom there and ruled it. He
named it Mathura. After the death of Satrughna his
two sons ruled Mathura. Then, when the Solar dynasty
came toits end, Mathura came under the Yadavas.
A Yadava king called Sarasena ruled over the kingdom.
+ Vasudeva, father of Sri Krsna was the son of Sirasena.
After the death of his father Vasudeva took up the profession of herding cows, and therefore Ugrasena,
another king of the Yadava dynasty had to become king
of Mathura. (Devi Bhagavata, 4th Skandha).
3) Usrasena and Kamsa. ‘Vhere is a common belief that
Karhsa was the son of Ugrasena. But, the Bhagavata
relates the following to the effect that Kamsa was born
to a Gandharva called Dramila of Ugrasena’s wife.
When once Ugrasena’s wife was in her monthly periods,
she walked in the forest with her companions. A Gandharva called Dramila saw her then, felt attracted by her
and made her pregnant. Angered at this, she cursed
Dramila thus: ‘‘SSince you have procreated a son in me,
while I am in my periods this son will be killed by a
boy born in my husbarid’s family.’? Karnsa was the son
born to her in the above manner. Karhsa ascended the
throne after putting Ugrasena in prison. According to the
curse of Ugrasena’s wife, Sri Krsna was born in Ugrasena’s family and he killed Karnsa. Narada had informed
Kamsa of the Dramila interlude. Karsa told this story
secretly to Akrara when the latter was deputed by him
to invite Krsna to the dhanur yajiia. (Bhagavata, 10th
Skandha).
The name Ahuka. Genealogy states that Ugrasena was
the son of Ahuka. But, in certain contexts Ugrasena
is called Ahuka also. ‘‘Afterwards we made AhukaUgrasena King...... °°? (M.B. Udyoga Parva, Chapter

UGRASENA II
5) Ugrasena imprisoned. Vasudeva, father of Sri Krsna
was Ugrasena’s minister. Karhsa, when he attained
majority imprisoned Ugrasena and became himself king.
(M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 22).
6) Ugrasena regained kingdom. Sri Krsna killed Karnsa with
the permission of Ugrasena and made him king again.
During the reign of Ugrasena, Jarasandha and Salva
attacked Mathurdapuri. (See under Krsna).
7) Ugrasena and the iron rod. While Ugrasena was ruling
the Kingdom, the sages ViSvamitra, Narada and Kajija
once came to Dvaraka. To insult the sages, the Yadavas
brought before them, Samba dressed as a pregnant
woman. Ihe Yadavas told thesages that she was Babhru’s
wife, and wanted to be told whether the child she delivered would be male or female. The sages understood
their evil mentality, and prophesied that Samba would
deliver an iron rod fierce enough to annihilate the
whole Yadava race. According to the prophecy the
next day Samba delivered aniron rod. The Ydadavas
imparted the news to Ugrasena, who got the iron rod
reduced to powder and deposited the powder in thesea.
He also enforced prohibition of liquor in the country.
(To know how the powder of the rod ruined the Yadava
dynasty see under Krsna). (M.B. Mausala Parva,
Chapter 1).
8) After death. After his death, Ugrasena joined the
Vigvadevatas. Bhirigravas, Sala, Bhiri, KamsaUgrasena, Vasudeva, Uttara with his brother Sankha—
these kings (after death) joined the company of Visvaie (M.B. Svargarohana Parva, Chapter 5, Verses
UGRASENA II. A brother of King Janamejaya. He,
along with his two brothers thrashed the son of Sarama.
(M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 3, Verses 1 and 2).
UGRASENA III. Son of Kaégyapa by his wife Muni.
(M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 65, Verse 42). He was present at the birthday celebrations of Arjuna. (M.B. Adt
Parva, Chapter 122, Verse 52). He was also present to
witness the fight between Arjuna and Krpacarya at the
Virata city. (M.B. Virata Parva, Chapter 56, Verses
Il and 12). ;
UGRASENA IV. A king who was Svarbhanu, the asura,
an (M. B. Adi Parva, Chapter 67, Verses 12 and
os
UGRASENA V.. A son of Dhrtarastra. He is also called
Citrasena. (M.B. Adi Parva. Chapter 67, Verse 100).
This Ugrasena was killed by Bhima. (M.B. Drona Parva,
_ Chapter 137),
UGRASENA Vi. Son of Pariksit, king of the Lunar
dynasty. (MB. Adi Parva, Chapter 94, Verses 52-54).
UGRASRAVAS I. Son of Muni Lomaharsa. He is the
Sata who told Purdnic stories to the munis at NaimisaTanya. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 1, Verse 1).
UGRASRAVAS II. Ason of Dhrtarastra. Bhimasena
killed him in the battle of Kuruksetra. (M.B. Adi Parva,
Chapter 67, Verse 100, and Drona Parva, Chapter 157,
erse ] 9) é
UGRASRAVAS III. Husband of Silavati. (See under
ri, Para rae
ieee Son of Sutapas, a muni of the Bhreu
wa oe an nee he concentrated his mind and thoughts
near hae ee etsed in love of the Gopis with the
Gagida A © was born as daughter of Sunanda, the
pit in Ambadi, and served Krsna. (Padma Purana),
‘ ULUKA I
UGRATEJAS I. A synonym of Lord Siva. (M.B. Anué4sana Parva, Chapter 17, Verse 5).
UGRATEJAS II. A serpent. It welcomed Balabhadrarama once. (M.B. Mausala Parva, Chapter 4, Verse 15).
UGRATIRTHA. A Ksatriya king, who was Krodhavasa,
the asura, reborn. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 67, Verse
UGRAYUDHA I. A son of Dhrtarastra. (M.B. Adi
Parva, Chapter 67, Verse 99). He was present at the
wedding of Paficali. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 185).
UGRAYUDHA II. A Paficadla king and partisan of the
Pandavas. Karna wounded him in war. (Karna Parva,
Chapter 56, Verse 44).
UGRAYUDHA III. A powerful person, who fought on
the Kaurava side. (M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 2, Verse
UGRAYUDHA IV. An emperor killed by Bhisma. (M.B.
Santi Parva, Chapter 27, Verse 10).
UGRODHA. A king ofthe lunar dynasty. (Bhagavata,
9th Skandha).
UJJAYA. One of the sons of Visvamitra. They were
Brahmavadins. (M.B. Anusdsana Parva, Chapter 4,
Verse 58). ' |
UJJANAKA. The Asrama of Arstisenamaharsi was situated
near Mount Gandhamadana in front of Manasa_ lake.
Ujjanaka was a lake near the 4frama. A dip in the
waters of the lake, it was believed, would wash off all
sins. (M.B. Anugadsana Parva, Chapter 25, Verse 35 ).
UJJAPALAKA. A desert near the agrama of Uttanka
muni. Dhundhu, offspring of the asuras, Madhu and
Kaitabha, lived in this desert. (See under Dhundhu).
UJJAYANTAPARVATA. A mountain near the Pindais believed to possess
raka temple in Saurdastra. It
wonderful siddhis. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 88,
Verse 21).
UJJAYINI. One of the seven very sacred places in ancient
India. Its ancient name was Avanti. The seven sacred
cities are: Ayodhya, Mathura, Maya, Kasi. Kafici,
Avantika, and Dvaravati. The famous Mahakala temple
described by Kalidasa was on the banks of the river
Sipra flowing through Ujjayini. Jyotirlinga of Siva is
the presiding deity in the temple. There is also” a. holy
bathing ghat called Kotitirtha here. A bath init 1s as
beneficial as an A$ vamedha yajfia. (M.B. Vana Parva,
Chapter 82).
UKTHA. Agni, the father of Paravani. This agni 1s
saluted with three kinds of Uktha hymns. (M.B. Vana
Parva, Chapter 219, Verse 25).
UKTHA (M). A particular portion of Samaveda.
ULUKAI. ‘The son of Sakuni. (M.B. Udyoga Parva,
Chapter 57, Stanza 25). It isstated in Mahabharata, Adi
Parva, Chapter 182, Stanza 22, that Uluka was present
at the Svayarhvara (the Bride choosing a husband ) of
Draupadi. In the Bharata Battle Uluka was sent as a
messenger to the camp of the Pandavas by Duryodhana.
(M.B. Udyoga Parva, Chapter 161). After that he
returned to Duryodhana with the message of the Pandavas. (M.B. Udyoga Parva, Chapter 163). He combated
with the King of Cedi on the first day of the battle.
(M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 45). After that Sahadeva
attacked Ulika. (M.B. Bhisma Parva, Ghapter 72,
Stanza 5). Arjuna defeated Ulika. (M.B. Drona Parva,
Chapter 171, Stanza 40). After the death of the teacher
Drona, Ulika fled from the battle-field. (M.B. Drona
Parva, Chapter 193, Stanza 14). It 1s mentioned in

By \/
ULUKA II | 806 UNMADA
UMA. Parvati. (For details see under Parvati).
abharata, K Parva, Chapter 25, Stanzas 9 to a
Oa qs diese ? UMLOGCA. A celestial woman. Umloca with other
11, that Ulika defeated Yuyutsu. Next fight was between Sahadeva an Ulika in which Sahadeva killed
Ulaka. (M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 28, Stanzas 32 and
33). The following are the synonyms of Ulika, given
in the Mahabharata :—Sakuni, Kaitaka, Saubalyasuta
and Kaitavya.
ULUKA II. A Yaksa (a demi-god). It is stated in
Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 32, that Garuda and
this Yaksa fought with each other.
ULUKA ITI. A son of Vigvamitra. He became a hermit.
(M.B. Anusasana Parva, Chapter 4, Stanza 51). It is
mentioned in the Mahabharata, Santi Parva, Chapter
47, Stanza 11, that this Ulika visited Bhisma on his
Bed of arrows.
ULUKADUTAGAMANAPARVA. A sub-section ofa
Parva in the Mahabharata. (See under Bharata).
ULUKASRAMA. A holy place. (M.B. Udyoga Parva,
Chapter 186, Stanza 26).
ULUPI. Wife of Arjuna.
1) How she became the wife of Arjuna. Once Arjuna
happened to enter the palace in which Dharmaputra
was living with Pajicali. As a result, Arjuna had to go
on a pilgrimage for a year. (See under Iravan). Arjuna
reached Gangadvara. When he got down into the river
Ganga, he saw Ulipi the daughter of Nagaraja (King
of the serpents). He asked her a few questions. She
told him thus :—‘‘I am the daughter of the serpent
Kauravya of the family of Airavata. I came to bathe
in the river and when I saw you I grew amorous.”
Arjuna told her that Dharmaputra had imposed on him
celibacy for twelve months and that it was not
right to marry in the meantime. Ulipiargued with
Arjuna and convinced him that it was not wrong to
marry her. Arjuna married her. A sonnamed Iravan
was born to her.
2) How Ulipi caused Arjuna to be killed and how he was
brought to life again. (See paras 28 and 29 under
Arjuna).
3) The end of Ulapi. After having brought Arjuna back
to life, Ulipi reached Hastinapura with Babhruvahana
and Citrangada. (M.B. AsSvamedha Parva, Chapter
87). As soon asshe reached there she greeted Kunti,
Draupadi and Subhadra. She gave them various kinds
of presents. It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Agramavasika Parva, Chapter I, Stanza 23 that Ulapi served
Gandhari at one time. In Mahabharata, Asramavasika
Parva, Chapter 10, Stanza 46 it is mentioned that Ulupi
was greatly loved by the subjects. When the Pandavas
began the ‘great departure’ (Mahaprasthana) Ulipi
entered the River Ganges. Citrangada went to Manalirapura.
“Ulipi, the daughter of the serpent Kauravya, jumped
into the Ganges and to Manalirapura, went Citrangada.”” (Bhasa Bharata, Mahaprasthanika Parva, Chapter 1, Stanza 27).
4) The other names of Ulipi. Bhujagatmaja, Bhujagendrakanyaka, Bhujagottama. Kauravi, Kauravyaduhita,
Kauravyakulanandini, Pannaganandini, Pannagasuta,
Pannagatmaja, Pannagesvarakanya, Pannagi, Uragatmaja. These are the synonyms used in the Mahabharata for Ulipi.
ULUTA. A country in ancient India. (M.B. Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 9, Stanza 54).
celestial women participated in the birth celebration
of Arjuna. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 122, Stanza 65).
UNCHAVRTTI. A brahmin. His story is told as follows
in Jaimini ASvamedha Parva.
This poor brahmin who lived by begging got one day
some food grain powder. After offering a portion of it
to Agni and Brahmins, he divided the balance equally
between the children. Then he sat down to take his own
food when Dharmadeva, disguised as a brahmi,
appeared and demanded food. Unichavrtti gave all his
food to the guest. Since that did not satisfy the guest,
the sons also gave their shares of the food to him. Greatly pleased at the noble act of Usichavrtti, Dharmadeva
took the brahmin family with him to Svargaloka. One
day a few particles of the foodgrain powder which remained with the brahmin fell on the earth. A mongoose
came and played on that ground. That part of his body
which got smeared with the food-grain powder became
golden in colour. Though the mongoose went to the
yajiia ground of Dharmadeva and repeated the eyo
process there, the remaining portion of its body did no
become golden.
UNDRA (M) (UTRAM). A place in South India.
Sahadeva subjugated this place. (M.B. Sabha Pane
Chapter 31, Verse 71). People of Undram were peers
at the Rajasuya of Yudhisthira with presents. (M
Vana Parva, Chapter 51, Verse 22).
UNMADA. A celestial woman. . ten
|) Became a woman by the curse of Uravasi. WHamsa, the ,
King of Gandharvas (semi-gods) had a general of ns
army called Durmada. He was a dangler. He had -
eye on Urvasi. She was the wife of Puriiravas a famout
King. On several occasions Durmada followed ene ;
with lustful desire. He had expressed his amour 10F is
on several occasions. But Urvasi did not pay any hee
to his words.
One day Puriiravas and Urvagi were present the
durbar of Indra. Purtravas and Urvasi had eee =
a rendezvous for that night at the corner of the 1 a
dana Park. “Durmada understood this. He_ callec ©
celestial woman named Unmada to his side. They 44
a plan and accordingly Unmada disguised hersel bl
Urvasi and Durmada took the guise of Pururavas ; j
both of them entered Nandana park. Puriravas ee
Unmadaand conjugated with her. In the same a8,
Urvasi received Durmada, mistaking him for Purarav
After the conjugation Durmada laughed Joud as } ryhad played a trick on Urvagi. Urvagi understood ev éd
thing. Puriravas also arrived there. Urvasi a“
Durmada to take birth in the earth as a Raksasa ter
cursed Unmada to be born in the earth as the Gane ve
of a King and she said that at that time she would 0
one man and become the wife of another man.
aggrieved Durmada and Unmada prayed for liberal”
from the curse. Urvagi gave them liberation thus -_
“This Durmada will be born as the son of sence
Seeing the death of her husband and son, she nae
jump into fire. After that she will enter he atid
Durmada will be killed by the sword of an enemy ada
will obtain heaven.”? According to this curse Dur™
was born as the son of Dirghajangha, the emper? da
Hiranyapura, under the name Pingaksa and Un™
tio!
a

UNMADINI
was born as the daughter of the King of Videha. Her
name was Harini (Brahmanda Purana, Chapter 3).
2) The marriage and death of Harini. Harini grew up to
be a young woman. Once Pingaksa growing lustful took
Harini and went through the sky. She cried aloud for
along time. Pingaksa, the asura, left her in a wild
forest. At that time a King named Vasumanas came
by that way hunting. He killed Pingaksa and then
having heard the story of Harini got her_on_ the horse
called Jimiita and sent her to Videha (Mithila). Her
father was much pleased at eetting her back. He wanted to give her in marriage to Vasumanas. The date of
the marriage was fixed. Invitations were sent to many
Kings. Among them there was a king named Bhadraérenya, who took her by force and went away. There
was a fierce battle between the two Kings, Bhadra-
§renya and Vasumanas and Vasumanas was defeated. Seeing this Divodasa, the King of Kasi, attacked Bhadra§renya. Though Divodasa defeated Bhadragrenya, he did
not like to harm the beaten King. So he returned to his
kingdom. Bhadragrenya took Harini to his palace and
married her. A son was born to her and he was named
Durmada. This was the same Durmada wko had
taken birth and died as Pingaksa and who had been born
again as the son of Harini. This Durmada took by force
the daughter of his uncle called Citrangi and a child
was born to them. Bhadrasrenya again engaged in a
battle with Divodasa, the King of Kasi, and was defeated. Then his son Durmada got into the battlefield and
he also was defeated.
When all this news reached Vasumanas, the King
of Ayodhya, he became jealous of Bhadragrenya. A
battle was fought between them in which Wasumanas
was defeated. But a fierce battle was fought again in
which Bhadragrenya and his son .Durmada were killed.
Durmada obtained heaven. Stricken with grief at the
death of her husband and son, Harini got into fire and
went to heaven. (Brahmanda Purana, Chapter 3).
UNMADINI. A beautiful woman. She was the daughter
of a Vaigya in the city of Sravasti. He went to the King
Devasena and requested him to marry his daughter.
Because of the interference of his favourites, the King
did not marry her. The King’s general married_ her.
Once the King happened to see her by chance. When
he saw how beautiful she was, he felt sorry that he did
not marry her. From that day onwards the King grew
morbidly torpid and finally died. _
This story was told by Yaugandharayana, munister of
Udayana, the King of Vatsa. (Kathasaritsagara,
Lavanakalambaka; Taranga 1).
UNMATHA I. Yama (Kala) presented Skandadeva
with two attendants. One was Unmatha and the other
A (M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Stanza
UNMATHA II. An attendant presented to Skandadeva
Hi eacion (M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Stanza
UNMATTA. A warrior of a class of Raksasas (giants).
In Agni Purana, Chapter 10, it is mentioned that this .
warrior died in the battle between Rama and Ravana.
Genealogy. Descended from Visnu in the following
order :—Brahma—Heti—Vidyutkesa— Sukega—Malyavan—Uninatta.,
Vidyutkesa was born to Heti, the son of Brahma by
his wife Bhaya; Sukeéa was born to Vidyutkesa by his
UPAMANYU I
wife Salakatanka and Mali, Sumali and Malyavan were
born to Sukega of his wife Devavati, and to Malyavan
by his wife Sundari, seven sons named Vajramusti,
Viripaksa, Durmukha, Suptaghna, Yajfiakosa, Matta
and Unmatta and a daughter named Nala were born.
Prahasta, Akampana, Vikata, Kalakamukha, Dhimraksa and some more Raksasas were the sons of Sumali,
brother of Malyavan. Kaikasi, the mother of Ravana,
was the sister of Prahasta.
UNMUCA. A hermit of south Bharata. Mention is made
about him in Mahabharata, Santi Parva, Chapter 208,
Stanza 28. *
UPABARHANA. See the 2nd para under Narada.
UPACARA (Hospitality), They are sixteen in number.
(Things to be offered to the guest). They are called
Sodagopacaras. They are given below :—(1) Asana
(seat) (2) Padya (water to wash feet (3) Arghya (water
to drink) (4) Snaniya (bath) (5) Anulepana (ashes or
other fragrant things for besmearing) (6) Dhupa
(smoke) (7) Dipa (light) (8) Naivedya (food) (9)
Tambila (Betel) (10) Sitalajala (cool drinks) (11)
Vasana (clothing) (12) Bhisana (ornaments) (13)
Malya (garland) (14) Gandha (sweet-smelling things)
(15) Acamaniyaka (water to rinse mouth) (16) Sutalpa
(Good bed).
These are the sixteen offerings that we have to give to
our guests.
UPACITRA. A son of Dhrtarastra. (M.B. Adi Parva,
Chapter 67, Stanza 95). In the Mahabharata, Drona
Parva, Chapter 136 Stanza 22 it is mentioned that he
was killed by Bhimasena.
UPADEVA. A King of the Puru dynasty.
UPAGAHA. A son of Vig vamitra. He was a Brahmavadin. (M.B. Anugdsana Parva, Chapter 4, Stanza 56).
UPAGIRI. A hilly place in North Bharata. (M.B.
Sabha Parva, Chapter 27, Stanza 3).
UPAGUPTA. A King of the Candravamsa (Lunar
dynasty). (See under Genealogy).
UPAJALA. A river. In the Mahabharata, Vana Parva,
Chapter 13, Stanza 31, it is mentioned that by bathing
in this river the King Usinara got power and position
higher than that of Indra.
UPAKICAKAS. Kicaka, the brother-in-law of King
Virdta, had one hundred and five brothers. They are
called Upakicakas. Kicaka and the Upakicakas were
born of a portion of Kalakeya an asura. At the palace
of Virata, Kicaka harassed Paficali and was killed in
thenight by Bhima. (See under Kicaka). Hearing
about the death of Kicaka, the hundred and five Upakicakas came there and decided to burn Paficali also,
because they thought she was the cause of the death
of their elder brother. They bound and carried her to
the cremation ground. Hearing her loud cry, Bhima
jumped over the wall and ran to the cremation ground.
He uprooted a tree, killed all the hundred and five
Upakicakas and brought Paficali to the palace. (M.B,
Virata Parva, Chapter 23).
UPAKOSA. The daughter of the teacher Upavarsa. (See
under Vararuci). |
‘UPAKOSALA. See under Satyakama.
UPAKRSNAKA. A_ warrior of Skandadeva.
Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Stanza 57).
UPAMANYU I. A dutiful disciple of the teacher
Ayodhadhaumya. This teacher had three disciples of
prominence. They were Aruni, Upamanyu and Veda,
(M.B.

UPAMANYU II
To know how Upamanyu was put to test by the teacher
see under Ayodhadhaumya.
UPAMANYU II. In the Krtayuga, there lived a hermit
named Vyaghrapada who had two sons, They were
called Upamanyu and Dhaumya. Some learned men
are of opinion that Upamanyu the son of Vyaghrapada
and Upamanyu the disciple of Ayodhadhaumya, were
one and the same. Once Upamanyu visited another hermitage along with his father. He happened to drink the
milk of the cow there. After that they returned to their
own hermitage, Upamanyu went to his mother and
asked her to make milk pudding for him. But the
mother felt very sorry because there was no milk. At
last she mixed flour in water and made pudding and
gave it to him. Upamanyu did not accept it. His mother
told him that there was no way to get milkand that men
could get wealth, crops etc. only by the grace of Siva.
Upamanyu who was of a wilful nature did penance
with meditation and contemplation on Siva. Finally
iva appeared before him in the shape of Indra and
told him to ask for his boon. Upamanyu boldly . replied
that he wanted no boon from anybody else except Siva.
iva made his appearance in his own form and made
Upamanyu a deva (God).
Upamanyu said all these things when he talked with
Sri Krsna. (M.B. Anug4sana Parva, Chapter 14),
In the Book “Our hermits”, written by R&amasvami
Sastri in Tamil, itis mentioned that Upamanyu had’
written a book ‘Siva bhaktavilasa’? in which biographies of devotees of Siva of great attainments are given.
UPAMANYU III. In the Brahmanda Purana we come
across another Upamanyu as the son of a hermit named
Sutapas. Upamanyu reached the hermitage of Kas yapa,
with the idea of marrying Sumati, the daughter of
Kagyapa and the elder sister of Garuda. Nobody liked
the idea of giving Sumati in marriage to that old man.
The hermit got angry at this and cursed Kafgyapa that
ithe gave his daughter in marriage to any Brahmana
his head would break into a hundred pieces, (Brahmanda Purana, Chapter 18).
UPANANDA I. A sonof Dhrtarastra. Bhimasena killed
him. (M.B. Karna Parva, Chapter 51, Stanza 19),
UPANANDA II. A serpent. (M.B. Udyoga Parva,
Chapter 103, Stanza 12),
UPANANDA III. A warrior of Skanda. (M.B. Salya
Parva, Chapter 45, Stanza 64)
UPANISAD. The-four Vedas are Rk, Yajus, Sama and
Atharva. Each ofthese four has a Brahmana (a treatise
relating to prayer and - sacrificial ceremony).
Next come the Aranyakas (forest texts—writings meant
for the forest-dwelling hermit) as appendices to the
Brahmanas. Then come the Upanisads as appendices
to the Aranyakas. These four classes of literary works
(the Vedas, the Brahmanas, the Aranyakas and the
Upanisads) constitute the Vedic literature proper. The
Aranyakas and the Upanisads are inseparably connected
with each other. The Upanisads are called Vedantas
(the end of the Vedas). The bulk of these Vedantas
belong to different periods anterior to the Later Vedic
Period. The students begin the study of Upanisads
only after having completed the study of the Mantras
(Vedic hymns) and the Brahmanas (the ritual) .
UPAPURANAS. See un
UPARI CARAVASU.
808 UPARICARAVASU
The meaning of the word ‘Upanisad’ is that which is
most near. Upa = near. ni = most. sad = exist.
(or sit). The Upanisads can be called the Jianakanda
of the Vedas. They describe the nature of Brahman.
The figure of the supreme Spirit (Brahman) exists in
the Upanisads. Apparently the Upanisads are explanations of the mantras, but they are concerned more
with the allegorical significations and the mystic meanings of the tattvas or essence, of the origin of life, the
world, the soul, God etc. The Upanisads are the basis
of the Sad-darganas, the six systems of philosophy.
There area large nu ber of Upanisads. The most
important among them are 108 in number.
UPAPATAKA (UPAPAPA) (Minor sins). In accordance with the Rastramimarhsa (political philosophy )
of Ancient India, crimes were divided into two haar
They were called Upapatakas (minor crimes) Ba
Patakas (major crimes). To know about major crimes
(Patakas) see under Papa (sin). Upapatakas are given
below:—Cow-slaughter; sacrificing by one who =
unworthy to perform it; seducing another man’s wile;
forsaking one’s father, mother and teacher; forsaking
self-study, agni (fire) and son; becoming Parivetta (one
who gets married before one’s elder brother is married. .
Younger brother finishing education before the elder ;
giving an unmarried girl to Parivitti or Parivetta;
performing sacrifice by a parivitti or a parivetta; slandering an unmarried girl; Living on the interest 0
money that is lent; violating one’s vow; selling pond,
garden, wife or son; becoming an outcaste; forsaking
relatives; Teaching the Vedas after receiving remuneration ; selling things which should not be sold; working
in mines; working with big machinery; destroy]M8
medicinal herbs; living by women; to impede rites,
cut down fresh trees (not dried) for firewood; kidnaPping women; mingling with slanderers of women
selfish activities; eating forbidden rice; not keepin&
Sacrificial fire; theft; not repaying loan; learning for
bidden sciences; doing things which are bad and Ww!
cause grief to others; stealing of base metals, grains a0
cows; contact with drunken women; killing wont
Sidra, Vaigya and Ksatriya and becoming an inll ‘
are all Upapatakas,
Causing grief to a Brahmin; inhaling the smell of liquor
and other prohibited things; resorting to tricks 0
deceit and engaging in pederasty are sins which wou
make one an outcaste.
Slaughter of dog, donkey, camel, lion, sheep, jungle;
goat, fish, serpent and mungoose are sins of a mix¢
character.
Receiving money from the despicable; buying anc
selling; serving a Siidra; telling a lie ; acting so 4S "
render Oneself unworthy ; killing worms and birds;
eating food along with liquor; stealing fruits, flower
and butea; and becomin
a ins. _
UPAPLAVYA. A minor ay oe f Viral
"one ity in the country .o a
This minor city stood near the capital city of Vira?
Kingdom. After their incognito-life, the P andav@
are said to have lived in the city of Upaplavya. (
Virata Parva, Chapter 72, Stanza 14).
der Purana.
Genealogy. Descended from Visnu in th ing order
SI, e following
Atri— Candra— Budha — Puriiravas—- Ayus— Nahu#?

UPARICARAVASU
—Yayati—Piru— Janamejaya — Pracinvan — Pravira
Namasyu—Vitabhaya—Sundu—Bahuvidha — Samyati
—Rahovadi — Raudragva — Matinara — Santurodha
—Dusyanta — Bharata — Suhotra — Suhota — Gala
—Garda—suketu-Brhatksetra-Hasti- Ajamidha - RksaSamvarana -Kuru-Sudhanva - Sugotra - Cyavana-KrtiUparicaravasu.
2) How he got the name Uparicaravasu. Once Vasu built
a hermitage and began to perform penance in accordance with the advice of Indra. When the penance
became too severe Indra appeared and gave him an
aerial chariot. Since then Vasu used to travel through
air-in the chariot. So he got the name ‘Uparicaravasu’
(Vasu, who travels above). (Mahabharata, Adi Parva,
Chapter 63).
3). Vasu and Indra festival. Indra gave Vasu a garland
(Vaijayantimala) which would never fade, and gave a
boon that, so long as he wore that garland, he would
not receive any wound.’ He was given a bamboo stick
(Venudanda) and was instructed to fix that rod on
the earth and celebrate the festival of Indra. Vasu
celebrated the festival of Indra and from that day onwards the festival of Indra came to be celebrated in the
world. (See under Indrotsava).
4). The sons of Vasu. Five sons named Brhadratha,
Kugamba (Manivahana), Mavella, Yadu and Rajanya
were born to him. | oo
5). Kicking and splitting Kolahala, ‘The river Suktimati flowed through the capital city of Vasu. Once the
great hill Kolahala grew amorous of Suktimati and
caught hold of her. Uparicaravasu got angry at this
and kicked the mountain which was split into two and
Suktimati flowed out of the gap. Still two children
were born to the great hill by Suktimati. The river
was pleased at the freedom accorded by the king and
placed the two children at the feet of the king. They
grew up. The son became general of the army and the
daughter Girika became the wife of the king. (M. B.
Adi Parva Chapter 63).
6). Vasu goes ahunting. One day the king desided to
go to hunt. On the same day his wile had her monthly
course. Still without changing his programme he started
for the forest. Even after entering the forest the thought
of his wife lingered in his mind. The forest was in full
bloom as it was Spring. Seeing this the king grew
amorous and sat under a tree. A mild breeze was blowing.
Instantly the king had seminal flow. He collected the
semen in the leat of a tree and sent it to the queen
through an eagle. Thinking ‘that to be some food, another eagle got near and a quarrel arose. rhe semen
fell in the rivel Yamuna. A fish named Adrika swallowed it, (See under Adrika). A fisherman caught hat
fish. He got a male child and a female child from the
stomach ofthe fish. That girl is the famous Satyavati
Matsyagandha who became the queen of Santanu. (See
under Satyavati). The fisherman gave the boy he got
from the fish to king Uparicaravasu. (M. B. Adi Parva
bmg ce 62).
- Other information. . )
(i) Tt 4s is ee in Mahabharata, Sabha Parva,
Chapter 8, Stanza 20, that Uparicaravasu was famous
as amember of the council of Yama.
He was a friend of Indra, a devotee of Visnu and a
righteous and diligent man who loved and esteemed
his father, Because of the grace of Sri Narayana, he
UPAVITA
secured an empire. He consecrated everything before
god. Once Indra gave him half of his seat. (M. B.
Santi Parva, Chapter 355). Because of the grace of
Bhagavan (Lord), Garuda made him a traveller of the
sky. (M. B. Santi Parva, Chapter 337, Stanza 37).
(iii). In Mahabharata, Santi Parva, Chapter 337,
Stanza 38, itis mentioned that finally Uparicaravasu
entered the world of Brahma.
(iv). Once a controversy arose between Indra and
the hermits, whether cow-slaughter during sacrifices,
was desirable. At this time Uparicaravasu happened
to come there. As he was a man of truth, he was asked
to make a decision. Uparicaravasu stood on the side
of Indra and gave his opinion in favour of slaughter.
The hermits who were against cow-slaughter got
angry and cursed Uparicaravasu to go down to the
world of Patala (netherworld). (Matsya Purana,
Chapter 152).
. This story is seen with slight difference in Mahabharata
Santi Parva, Chapters 322-324.
UPASLOKA. A son born to Sri Krsna by Sairandhri.
UPASRUTI.
He learned all sciences and Philosophies and finally
became a follower of the Samkhya-Yoga cult. (Bhagavata, Skandha 10).
The patron-goddess of Uttarayana (The
sun’s progress towards North in the former half of the
year). In Mahabharaia, Adi Parva, Chapter 166
mention is made of how this goddess made it possible
for Indrani to see Indra through the holes of a stalk of
lotus. It was by the help of Upaégruti that Sacidevi and
Indra met together. (M.B. Udyoga Parva, Chapter
14, Stanzas 12 and 13).
UPATYAKA. A country in Bharata. (Mahabharata,
Bhisma Parva, Chapter 2, Stanza 55).
UPAVARSA. The younger brother ofthe Teacher Varsa. .
He also wasa teacher. For further information see
under Vararuci.
UPAVASA. Upavasa means going back from sin and
- leading a good life. (Upa (varta) =go back and Vasa=
A life). All actions which arenot good, must be relinquished. Those who observe Upavasa should abstain
from using flesh, Mastra (pulse), canaka (a kind of
gram), Varaku (akind of grain ), green leaves prepared) ,
honey, rice etc..and from contact with women. He
should not wear flowers, ornaments, or fashionable
dress; should not inhale fragrant smoke, and fragrance
of any sort. Cleaning the teeth and using collyrium
also are prohibited. Instead of cleaning the teeth in
the morning Paficagavya (Milk, curd, ghee, urine and
dung of: cow) should be taken in. Drinking water
several times, using betel leaves, sleeping in the day
time and sexual act also should be avoided. (Agni
Purana, Chapter 175).
UPAVENA. Ariver. This river is considered to be the
mother of Agni (fire). Some are of opinion that this
river is Krsnavena a tributary of the great river Krsna
(R.Kistna) of South India. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter
222, Stanza 14).
UPAVITA. The sacred string or Uttariya. The twice_born (the three upper castes) wear this. When it is
worn over the left shoulder and under the right arm. 1¢
is called Upavita, when it is worn over the right shoulder and under the left arm it iscalled Pracinavita and
if it is worn around the neck as a garland it is called
Nivita. (Manusmrti, Chapter 2 Stanza 63),

UPAVRTTA (M)
UPAVRTTA (M) A couniry in Bharata. (M.3. Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 91, Stanza 84).
UPAYA (S). See under Caturupaya.
UPAYAJA. Brother of the hermit Yaja. Both of them
lived on the banks of the Ganga. Dhrstadyumna and
Paficali were born to the King Drupada of Pajicala as
the fruit of the sacrifices performed by these hermits.
The story is given below:
The famous teacher Drona was the son of the hermit
Bharadvaja, who was a friend of the King Prsata of
Paficala. So King Prsata sent hisson Drupada to the
hermitage of Bharadvaja for education. Thus Drona
and Drupada were fellow students.
After completing his education Drupada became King
of Paticala, At that time the teacher Drona once visited
the palace of the King. But Drupada did not duly
receive his former classmate. Drona got angry at this
and went to Hastinapura and became the teacher of the
Pandavas and the Kauravas. As a remuneration
for teaching them Drona demanded that Arjuna should
bind Drupada and bring him before him. Arjuna did
so. Drupada gave Drona a portion of his kingdom and
got his liberty. From that day onwards Drupada wished
fora son who would take revenge on Drona, and
requested the hermit Upay4aja to perform a sacrifice for
getting a son. At first the hermit refused. The King
served the hermit fora year. The hermit was pleased
and asked the King to invite Yaja for the sacrifice. The
King did as he was told and Yaja and Upayaja came
to Paficala and performed the sacrifice for getting a
son. From the sacrificial dais Dhrstadyumna and
Paficali were born. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter i66
and Sabha Parva, Chapter 80, Stanza 45).
UPENDRA. A synonym of Visnu. Mahavisnu once took
birth by Aditi the wife of KaSyapaprajapati. In that
birth Mahavisnu had the name Upendra. He was known
as Vamana too. (Bhagavata, 10th Skandha).
UPENDRA. A river. (Mahabharata, Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 9, Stanza 27).
UPENDRABALA. Son of a minister of the King named
Sri Datta. (See under Sri Datta).
URAGA. A class of serpents. Ten daughters were born
to Krodhavasa wife of Kagyapa. The Uragas were born
from the daughter Kadri and the nagas were born
from the daughter Surasa. (Vahniki Ramayana, Aranya
Kanda, Sarga 14).
URDHVABAHU. Asonof Vasistha. His mother was
Urjja. (Agni Purana, Chapter 20). It is mentioned in
Mahabharata, AnuSasana Parva, Chapter 150, that this
Urdhvabahu did penance in South India.
URDHVABHAK. A fire. This Agni (fire) was the fifth
son of Brhaspati. (M.B) Vana Parva, Chapter 219,
Stanza 20).
URDHVAPUNDRA. A mark worn on the forehead
with yellow ochre. This mark should be made by earth
or ochre, which should be taken from the top ofa
mountain peak, banks of rivers, seashore, Saivite temple
serpent-hill or from under a holy basil. The fruits of
wearing the mark will vary according to the colour of
the ochre. Black ochre will afford peace, red soil wil]
procure docility, yellow soil wil] get prosperity, and
white ochre will give duty or righteousness. As the fruits
vary according to the colour, so also it will vary according to the finger used to put the sign. Ifthe mark is
URMILA
made with the thumb the man will become stout. If it
is done with the middle finger he will have long life. If
it is done with the fourth finger (anaimika), he will get
food and if it is made with the index finger (tarjani) he
will get salvation. The form of the mark also could be
changed. The mark may be made in the form ofa
flame, the leaf of bamboo reed, a lotus-bud, a fish, 4
turtle or a conch. If the mark is as large as ten finger
breadths it is superfine. If ofnine finger-breadths, 1t 15
medium super-fine; and if it is eight and a half finger
breadths, it is lower superfine. In the same way if oF
finger-breadth of the mark is seven, six or five they wil
be super medium, medium medium and lower medium.
If it is four, three and two they will be of the low,
medium low and lowest. _
It is also ordered that when one wears the Urdhvapundra in a particular spot of the body one will have 0
think ofa particular name of Visnu.
“Kegava in the forehead, Narayana in the stomac?,
Madhava in the heart, Govinda in the neck, Visnu he
the right side of the stomach, Madhusidana on oa
middle of right hand, Trivikrama on the left on ;
Vamana on the left side of stomach, Sridhara_ on t
left hand, Hrsikesa on the right ear. Padmanabha ae
the hinder Part, Damodara on the nape and Vasudes ;
on the head, shculd be meditated upon.” (Devi Bhas@
vata, Skandha 11). 4
URDHVAVENIDHARA. An attendant of Skandadev4-
(M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Stanza 18). =
URJJAI. A wife of Vasistha. Seven sons named Raja®,
Gotra, Urdhvabahu, Savana, Anagha, Sutapas on
Sukra, were born to Vasistha by his wife Urjja. aes
seven holy men were the seven hermits [ Saptarsis)
the third Manvantara. (Visnu Purana, Amsa ©
Chapter 10). --ocisa
URJJA II. One of the seven hermits of the Se ae
Manvantara. The seven hermits of the a aes ‘a
Manvantara were Urjja, Stambha, Prana, Vata, Prsa
Niraya and Parivan. (Visnu Purana, Ams4a
Chapter 1). he
ORJJA. ‘tr A King of the Hehaya dynasty. He was TE
grandfather of the famous Jardsandha. (Agni Pures.
Chapter 278). alli
URJJAKETU. A King of the dynasty of King Ja
(Bhagavata, Skandha 9). la
ORJJANL A daughter of the Sun. (Rgveda, Manda
1, Anuvaka 17, Sikta 119).
— = bed n
URJJASVATI. A daughter born to Priyavrata, the 5° f
of Manu Svayambhuva, by Suripa the nan: ee
Vigvakarma. Urjjasvati had ten brothers. (Devi B the
vata, Skandha 8). Priyavrata gave Unijasvat Ati,
teacher-priest Sukra. Devayani, the wife of tee
was the daughter born to Sukra by Urjjasvati. (8
_ vata, Skandha 5). were
URJJAYONI.. One of Visvamitra’s sons who Chap’
expounders of Vedas. (M.B. Anugasana Parva,
ter 4, Stanza 59). er of
URMILA, Laksmana married Urmila, the daught ana
King Janaka and the sister of Sita, When Laks™ Ja
went to the forest with Sri Rama and Sita, Ue ema
remained in Ayodhya. After the forest life, Sri Ama
and Laksmana returned with Sita. When 5?! rn tO
was ruling over the country, two sons were i med
Laksmana by Urmila. The elder son was atta
Taksaka and the second was given the name Cha

URNA
ketu. At the instruction of Sri Rama, Laksmana went
to the Eastern sea and killed the foresters there and
built there a city called Agati. ‘Taksaka was made the
King of Agati. Laksmanathen went to the western sea
and killed the Barbarians there and built a city called
Candramati and made Chatraketu the King of that
city. Being punished by Sri Rama, Laksmana drowned
himself in the river Sarayti.. (See under Laksmana).
After that Urmila jumped into a pile of fire and reach_ ed the world of Visnu. (Uttara Ramayana).
URNA. A wife of Marici. In the Svayambhuva Manvantara Mar ci had a wife called Urna and six mighty
sons by her. When they saw Brahma once, they teased
him by calling him ‘a father who had married his daughter.’ Brahma got angry with them, and cursed them to
take birth as Daityas (demons) on the earth. Accordingly they took birth as the sons of Kalanemi on earth.
(Devi Bhagavata, Skandha 4).
URNANABHA (SUDARSANA),. A son of Dhrtarastra.
(M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 67, Stanza 96). Itismentioned in Mahabharata, Drona Parva, Chapter 127, Verse
67, that Bhimasena killed him.
URNAYU. A Devagandharva. He had participated in
the Birth celebration of Arjuna. (M.B. Adi Parva,
Chapter 122, Stanza 52). Once this Devagandharva
fell in love with Menaka. (Mahabharata, Udyoga
Parva, Chapter 117, Stanza 16).
URU. A son born to Manu Caksusa by his wife Nadvala.
Uru had nine brothers named Piru, Satadyumna,
Tapasvi, Satyavak, Kavi, Agnisthu, Atiratra, Sudyumna
-and Atimanyu. Six great sons were born to Uru by his
wife Atreyi. They were Anga, Sumanas, Svat, Kratu,
Atgiras and Gaya. Vena was born to King Anga by
his wife Sunitha and the famous emperor Prthu was
born as the son of Vena. (Agni Purana, Ghapter 18).
URUKRAMA. Another name of Vamana. .
URVA (AURVA). A luminous hermit of the family of
Bhrgu. He was the son of Gyavana and the father of
Reika, He created a tremendous fire for the destruction
of the three worlds and extinguished it by putting it in
the ocean. (For details see under Aurva).
URVARA. A celestial woman in the palace of Kubera.
In the company of some other celestial women, she
danced before the hermit called Astavakra. (M.B.
Anué4sana Parva, Chapter 19, Stanza 44).
URVARIYAN. Son of the Prajapati Pulaha. ‘Three sons
named Kardama, Urvariyan and Sahisnu, were born to
Pulaha by his wife Ksama. ( Visuu Purana, Ara I,
Chapter 1).
URVASI I. A famous celestial damsel.
1) Birth of Urvasi. In days of old two hermits named Nara
and Narayana did penance to
mitage of Badarika for a thousand years. (Nara and
Narayana were the children born to Dharma, the son of
Brahma). Because of the severity of their penance Indra
was struck with fear. Thinking that they were doing
this severe penance with a view to become Indra, he
approached the hermits and told them that they might
ask for any boon. Even though Indra told them several
times, they did not speak a word nor did they make any
stir. Indra’s fear increased. So Indra decided to create
some delusions which would arouse in them fear, desire
etc., so that their penance might he broken. He began
to bring around them wild animals such as lion, elephant
wild snake etc. and natural phenomena such as storm,
URVASI I
heavy rain, forest-fire etc. to terrify them. The efforts
of Indra were futile. The disappointed Indra sent for
Kamadeva (Cupid) and consulted him, as a result of
which Kamadeva and his wife Ratidevi with many
celestial maids came to the hermitage in the mountain
of Gandhamadana with the intention of hindering the
penance of Naranarayanas. ‘The season of spring was
created in the forest. The celestial women such as
Rambha and others came before the hermits and began
to sing and dance. The hearts of the hermits began to
swell with passion. When they opened their eyes what
they saw was a beautiful sight. The famous celestial
women, Menaka, Rambha, Tilottama, Sukesini, Manorama, Mahes vari, Puspagandha, Pramadvara, Ghrtaci,
Candraprabha, Soma, Vidyunmala, Ambujaksi, Kafica-
. namala, and others with their ten thousand and _ eighty
Brahma in the holy her--
hand-maids stood before them. Hermit Narayana who
got terribly angry struck on his thigh with his hand
and instant], there arose a woman of extreme beauty.
Because she had originated from the Uru (thigh) of
Narayana, that woman, who was the most beautiful
in the three worlds, got the name Urvasi. All the others
were struck with wonder at the sight of this new oreation. After that so many other beautiful women also
were created. The hermit Narayana gave all of them
to Indra. With shame Indra accepted them and returned to heaven along with them. Thus Urvaési arrived
at the realm of the devas (gods). (Devi Bhagavata,
Skandha 4).
2) Position of Urvasi. Itis mentioned in Mahabharata
that Urvasi had the eleventh place among the singers.
The expert dancers were Aniicana, Adrika, Somakesi,
Migra, Alambusa, Marici, Sucika, Vidyutparna, Tilottama, Ambika, Ksema, Rambha, Subahu, Asita,
Supriya, Puncarika, Sugandha, Surasa, Pramathini,
Kamya and Saradvati. Urvagi got the first place among
the celestial maidsin beauty. (M B. Adi Parva, Chapter
oN) Urvati and Puriravas. Puriiravas was the son of Budha
born of Ila. He grew up and became a king of great
renown. His fame reached even the realm of-the gods.
One day during that period Brahma cursed Urvasi. “Go
and be bern onthe earth.” (It is stated in the Devi
Bhagavata that it was Brahma who cursed Urvasi and in
the Bhagavata that itwas the Mitravarunas who cursed
Urvagi). Urvasi had heard about the fame of Purtiravas
and had felt tender love for him. The celestial maid
reached the earth. She went to the palace of Purdravas
and saw him. Because of the perfection of their figures,
both loved mutually. The king asked her to become
his wife. She agreed. Butshe laid down three conditions.
(i) I have with me two lambs which I bring up as my
sons. You must take care of them. No harm should
befall them. ,
(ii) I take in onty ghee. On no account should you
compel me to eat any other food.
(iii) Don’t come near me in nudity except at the time
of coition.
The king agreed to all these conditions. From that day
onwards Urvagi lived in the palace of the king as his
wife. They lived happily for a long while without
separating from each other.
Urvagi became conspicuous by her absence in the realm
of the ,ods She was the most expert actress in heaven.

URVASTI I
Indra missed her. So a search was made and they found
out that she was in the palace of Puriravas. Indra
asked the Gandharvas to bring that celestial woman to
heaven somehow. Vigvavasu and some others of the
Gandharvas reached the palace of king Puriravas and
waited for an opportunity. One midnight they stole
the lambs and took them away’through the sky. At
that time the king was with Urvagi in the harem.
Urvasi heard the cry of the lambs and she was flurried.
She reviled the king who was not capable of taking care
of two lambs. Hearing her harsh words the king took
_ his bow and arrow and following the cry of the lambs
he was about to chase the thieves. Taking this oppor-:
tunity the Gandharvas caused a lightning to flashin the
king’s harem. In the light of the lightning Urvasi saw
the king standing nude. The Gandharvas having achieved their task had left the lambs and departed before
the king had got out of the room. The king caught
hold of the lambs and returned to the harem, within a
short while. But Urvagi had gone out of the palace
and was on her way,
The king was full of grief. He wandered all over the
countsy in search of Urvasi. At last he reached Kuruksetra and saw Urvagi there. He bowed low before
her and implored her to return to the palace. But
Urvasi replied thus: — ;
“Women are like wolves. Don’t have alliance with them
Oh King! Kings should not put faith in women and
thieves.’
Saying thus, Urvagi vanished. (Devi Bhagavata,
Skandha 1),
4) The reason why Pur dravas had to remain separate from Urvasi.
Puriiravas had once gone to heaven, in accordance with
the invitation of Indra to help the Gods in the battle
with the asuras. Indrahad killed Mayadhara, a noble
Asura,'in that-battle and had celebrated a festival. In
that festival Rambha was dancing before Tumburu, the
sage-priest, and detecting some flaw in her dance Puraravas teased her. Rambha retorted by asking the King
what he knew about dance, and the king replied that he
had learned from Urvasi more dance than Tumburu the
teacher of Rambha. Tumburu got angry at this, and
cursed the king Puriiravas to suffer from the pangs of
separation from Urvagi. Stricken with grief, Puriravas
returned to.his palace. It was after this that the Gandharvas took away Urvagi. Puriravas went to Badarikagrama and performed penance, meditating on God
Visnu tor the nullification of the curse. Urvaégi, agegrieved by separation from her husband, sat motianless as
a picture, in the custody of the Gandharvas. Lord Visnu
was pleased with the penance of Puriiravas. The Gandharvas brought her back to the King. Thus it became
possible for the king to meet Urvasi at least once a year.
(Kath4asaritsagara, Lavanakalambaka, Taranga 1).
5) The sons born to Puriravas by Urvasi. The king became
very sad when Urvasi was about to depart from him at
Kuruksetra. Seeing his grief Urvasgi told him. “Oh
King, if you want so much to live with me, you have to
worship the Gandharvas. They will be pleased and
will give me to you. Don’t be sorry. Now I am pregnant. Come to this place at the end of a year. We
can spend that night together. Then we will get another
son also that night.” Pleased at what Urvagi had
said, the king returned to his palace. On completion
of a year Puriravas went to Kuruksetra and spent a
URVASI I
night with Urvasi. Urvagi gave Puriravas a very
beautiful child and then she vanished. The king sat
there and praised the Gandharvas, who gave the king
an Agnisthali (a fire pot). Because of his derangement,
thinking it to be Urvasi the king took the sthali (pot )
and wandered about in the forest. At last placing the
pot in the forest, the king returned to his palace. On
that day Tretayuga (one of the four ages of the word }
commenced, and the Vedas dawned in his mind as
three in number. He returned to the place where
he had left the Sthali in the forest and took it. After
that he made two ‘aranis’ (wood from which fire Is
kindled by attrition)out of a banyan tree and placed his
body between them and made fire.-That fire is called
‘Jatavedas’. Thus Jatavedas became the son 0
Puriravas,
Puriravas generated three fires from Jatavedas. The
first of them is Pranava. The second is called N maak
and the third Agnivarna. (Srimad Bhagavata, Yt
Skandha). ¢
To Puriiravas six sons were born from the womb 0
Urvasi. They were Ayus, Srutayus, Satyayus, Raya,
Vijaya and Jaya. (A little difference is observed in ee
names in the Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 79,
Stanzas 24 and 25). d
6) ‘To know howa Gandharva named Durmada ant
a Vidyadhari named Unmada played atrick on Puri
_Yavas and Urvasi, see under Unmada.
7) How Agastya and Vasistha were born to Mitravarunas be
cause of Urvasi. In days of old there was a renowne ri
king named Nimi in the family of Iksvaku. He decide
to perform a sacrifice of a long duration. He bega?
preparation and invited famous hermits such as Bhrgus
Angiras, Vamadeva, Pulastya, Pulaha. Rcika and others.
Finally he invited Vasistha. At that time Indra «eo
begun another sacrifice in heaven. So Vasistha went
heaven for that sacrifice, telling Nimi that he wou
conduct the sacrifice on his return. The emperor ere
did not like it. Recognizing the hermit Gautama 2
the main priest, he began performing the sacrifice.
The sacrifice of Indra lasted for 500 years. When Vas!§
tha returned after that, the sacrifice of Nimi was Over,
Vasistha cursed Nimi. “You will become devoid °
body.”? Nimi cursed back. “Let Vasistha also become
thus.’’ .
The aggrieved Vasistha went to his father Brahma and
complained about the curse. Brahma told Vasisth@-
““You penetrate the brightness of Mitravarunas “a
stay there. In due course you will get a birth which !
not of awomb.” Hearing these words, Vasistha reache
the hermitage of Mitravarunas. .. He left his body there
and fused himself into’ their effulgence. During th!
period Urvasi came to that hermitage. Seeing he!
Mitravarunas had seminal flow. The semen fell in 4
pot. From the pot two bright and handsome sons were
born. The first of them was Agastya and the secon
Vasistha. (Devi Bhagavata, Skandha 8).
8) Indra cursing Urvasi. Once Agastya went to the durbar of Indra. On the occasion Indra asked Urvasi t?
dance. In the midst of the dance she saw Jayanta, ¢ .
son of Indra, and became amorous and her steps oe
wrong. Narada who was playing his famous lute calle
Mahati could not play well. Agastya got angry 2?
cursed Jayanta to become abud. He cursed Narada
also. So his lute became the lute ofthe world.. Urva>’

URVASI Ii
was born on the earth under the name Madhavi due to
the curse.
9) Urvasi changing Arjuna
Arjuna).
10) Other information.
(i) It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Sabha Parva,
Chapter 10, Stanza 11, that Urvasi had been in love
with Kubera once.
(ii) Urvagi was dismayed when Sukadeva attained Supreme Bliss. (See under Suka).
URVASIII. Another name of Ganga. As she sat on the
Uru (thigh) of Bhagiratha, Ganga got the name Urvasi.
(M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 60, Stanza 6).
URVASITIRTHA. A holy place and Bath, Those who
bathe in this holy bath will be honoured by the world.
(M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 84, Stanza 157). .
USA I. The daughter of Bandsura and the wife of Aniruddha.
1) Genealogy. Descended from Visnu in. the following
order:- Brahma - Kasyapa - Hiranyaka$ipu - PrahladaVirocana-Mahabali-Bana-U sa.
2) Marriage of Usa. See under Aniruddha. :
USA II; The daughter of a hermit. The king of Salva
once attacked Satyaratha, the king of Vidarbha, and
killed him. The queens of the king of Vidarbha went
to the forest. One of them who was pregnant gave
birth to a child on the bank of ariver. When she got
down into the river to drink water, a crocodile swallowed her. Then a hermit’s daughter named Usa brought
up the child. (Siva Purana). .
USAIII. The night is called Usa and the day, Ghust.
The time between Usa and Ghusti is called Sandhya.
(Visnu Purana, Arh’a 2, Chapter 8).
USANGU I. A hermit who lived in the western country.
(M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter 208, Stanza 30). .
USANGU II. A synonym of Siva.(M.B. Anusasana Parva,
Chapter 17, Stanza 105). | .
USANGU III. A king of the Yadu family. His father was
Vrjinivan and his son was called Citraratha. (M.B.
Ann’ dsana Parva, Chapter 147, Stanza 22) 6
USANGAVA. A member of the durbar of the king Yama
(god of death). (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 8, Stanza
into eunuch. (See under
USANKU (RUSANKU). A hermit. Seeing that old age
: Tr ‘+ forsook his body in the
was coming on him this hermit 10 he realm of Visnu.
Prthidaka tirtha*and went to ¢ a Pose
Arstisena, Viévamitra, Sindhudvipa, Devap! and -
others got Brahmanya (the state of being prabny ny
doing. penance in the hermitage of this hermit. {M.B.
Santi Parva, Chapter 38, Stanzas 33-39).
Maes The ie a Sukra, the son 0
rgu. (See under Sukra).
USIK L, " hermit about (an mention is made 1n the
Reveda. —
USIK II. One Uéik as the wife of the hermit Dirghatamas
is mentioned in the Rgveda Mandala jl, Anuvaka
16, Sakta 112. This Usik was the maid of the Eipest
of the old King of Kalinga. The king a ia
Dirghatamas to beget children by his queen. a CUUEE
dit not like this. She sent her maid Usikto Dirg at be
The hermit Kaksivan was the son born fo poe ore
ay Usik. (Reveda, Mandala |, Anuvaka lo, 5u
f -the hermit
USINARA I. A famous king of the Candravarhs a (Lunar
dynasty) :
USINARA IV
1) Genealogy. Descended from Visnu in the following
order:- Brahma-Atri-Candra-Budha- Puriravas - AyusNahusa-Yayati-Anudruhyu-Sabhanara-Kalanara - Sriijaya-Usinara. Usinara was the father of Sibi and Vena.
2) The reason for the curse of the eight Vasus. Once the
Astavasus (Vasus eightin number) came to the hermitage
of Vasistha, with their wives. The wife of Dyau, one
of the Astavasus, saw the cow ‘Nandini’ in the hermitage. She and the daughter of Usinara were intimate
friends. She wanted to get Nandini, so that she
might give it as a present to the daughter of Usinara. ~
According to her wish the Astavasus caught hold of
the cow and took her home. At that time Vasistha had
been away. When he returned, he knew about the
theft of the cow and cursed the Astavasus to take birth
in the wombs of women on earth. It was according to
this curse that the Astavasus took birth in Gangadevi
the wife of Santanu. See under Bhisma. (Devi Bhagavata,
Skandha 2).
3) Indra testing Usinara. USinara was a just and liberalminded King. Indra decided to test the King regarding his liberality. He got Agnideva (fire-god) for his
help. Indra took the form of a Kite and Agni that of
a dove. Both flew down to Usinara as if the Kite was
chasing the dove. Usinara agreed to protect the dove.
The Kite argued with the King that it was not meet
and right on his part to rob him of his lawful food.
The King agreed to give any other kind of flesh to the
Kite. But the Kite would have none of them. Finally
the Kite agreed to accept the flesh of the King instead,
equal to the weight of the dove. The King cut more
and more flesh from his body, but it could not weigh
equal to the dove.. At Jast the King himself got into
the balance. Then the gods had pity on the King and
the Kite andthe dove appeared in their real form and
blessed the King and. then they returned to heaven.
(M.B. Aranya Parva, Chapter 131). In Mahabharata
a story like this occurs about King Sibi also.
4) Other information. |
(i) Usinara gave Galava two hundred horses as dowry
and married Yayati’s damsel Madhavi. (See under
GAlava).
gH) The King Sunaka gave Ufinara a sword, (M.B.
anti Parva, Chapter 166, Stanza 79).
(iii) U§inara performed a sacrifice on the bank of the
river Vitasta and became equal to Indra. (M.B. Vana
Parva, Chapter 130, Verses 20-21).
(iv) Usinara attained heaven by giving cows as gifts.
(M.B. Anugasana Parva, Chapter 76, Stanza 25). .
USINARA Il. A King of the Yadavas. In the Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 185, Stanza 20, it is
mentioned that this: King was present on the occasion
of the Svayarhvara (the bride choosing a husband) of
Draupadi.
USINARA III. Mention is made in Mahabharata,
Anugasana Parva, Chapter 32, that Vrsadarbhi was
another name of Usinara and that he had once ruled ~
over the kingdom of Kasi.
USINARA IV. A country. It is stated in Mahabharata,
Karna Parva, Chapter 5, Stanza 47, that Arjuna had
killed the warriors of this country. In Mahabharata,
Anugasana Parva, Chapter 33, Stanzas 22 and 23,
mention is made that due to the curse of Brahmins the
K satriyas (the ruling class) had become Sidras (servile
class.)

USIRABIJA I
USIRABIJA I. A mountain in North India.
Vana Parva, Chapter 139, Stanza 1).
USIRABIJA II. A place on the northern side of the
Himalayas. Mention is made in Mahabharata, Udyoga
Parva, Chapter 111, Stanza 23, that the King Marutta
once fought a battle here.
USMA. ‘The son of the Agni (Fire) named Paficajanya.
(M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 221, Stanza 4),
USMAPA. A group of Pitrs (the Manes). It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter 8,
Stanza 30, that these Pitrs (the manes) live in the
palace of Yama.
USNADESA. An ancient place in Krauficadvipa (the
island of Kraufica). Krauficaparvata (the mountain
Kraufica ) stands near this place. (M.B. Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 12, Stanza 21).
USWNIGANGA. An ancient holy place in Bharata.
(M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 135, Stanza 7).
USNIK. One of the seven horses of the Sun. The seven
horses of the Sun are, Gayatri, Brhati, Usnik, Jagatt,
Tristup, Anustup, and Pankti. (Visnu Purana, Améa
2, Chapter 8).
USNINABHA. A Visvadeva (a class of gods). ( Mahabharata, Anugasana Parva, Chapter 91, Stanza +4).
USTRAKARNIKA. An ancient place in South India.
Mention is made in Mahabharata, Sabha Parva,
Chapter 31, Stanza 71, that this place was brought
under control by Sahadeva.
UTATHYA I.
1) General. Son of sage A giras. (M.B. Adi Parva,
Chapter 66, Verse 5). He gave advice on subjects of
statecraft to King Mandhata. (M.B. Santi Parva,
Chapter 90). He married Soma’s daughter Bhadra.
(M.B. Anugasana Parva, Chapter 154, Verse 12).
2) Utathya drank up the sea dry. Varuna deva had an
eye on Soma’s daughter Bhadra when Utathya married
her. Incensed at the marriage, Varuna carried Bhadra
off to the sea one day when Utathya was not present.
Narada informed Utathya that it was Varuna who
stole his wife. Though Narada, at the request of
Utathya, asked Varuna to return Bhadra to the former
he did not oblige. Enraged at this Utathya drank up
the sea dry. Yet, Varuna did not come round. Then
Utathya rendered all the lakes of Varuna dry. Trembling at this Varuna returned Bhadra to Utathya and
prostrated at his feet. He pardoned Varuna and gave
back the sea to him. (M.B. Anu§asana Parva, Chapter
UTATHYA II, The
Satyatapas.)
UTKALA I. A place in India where people lived in
safety. Karna conquered this place. (Drona Parva,
Chapter 4, Verse 8).Utkala is believed to be modern
Orissa.
UTKALAII. Son of Vaivasvata Manu. (Brahmanda
Purana, Chapter 31).
UTKOCA (M). A holy place. Dhaumya, the younger
brother of Devala lived in Utkocatirtha, The Pandavas went there and made Dhaumya a priest. (M.B.
Adi Parva, Chapter 182).
UTKOCAKA (M). An ancient holy place. Dhaumya
did tapas here, and it was here that the Pandavas took
(M.B.
muni Satyatapas. (See under
Dhaumya as their priest. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter
152, Verses 2-6).
814 UTTANABARHIS
UTKRATHINI. A female attendant of Skanda. (M.B.
Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Verse 16).
UTKROSA. One of the two attendants Indra gave to
Skanda; the other was called Paficaka. (M.B. Salya
Parva, Chapter 45, Verse 35).
UTPALAVANA. A holy bath in the Panjab. At this
place Vif vamitra performed a sacrifice. (M.B. Vana
Parva, Chapter 87, Stanza 15).
UTPALINI. A river flowing near the forest known as
Naimisaranya. Arjuna had seen this river. (Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 214, Stanza 6). "
UTPATAKA. Aholy bath. Those who bathein_ this
tirtha (bath) will get the merits of a fast. (M.B.
Anus asana Parva, Chapter 25, Stanza 41).
UTSAVA. Celebrations conducted in temples from
olden days. There are Sastraic (scriptural) injunctions
as regards conducting utsavas. Utsava is an indispensable celebration when once the deity (idol) 18 19°
stalled in the temple. Utsava should be celebrated for
one day, three days or seven days in the very same
month in which the deity was installed, because nom
celebration of Utsava will render the installation 3!"
effective. Utsava should be conducted either os
Uttarayana (movement of the sun from south to Nort a
or Visu (when the Sun is in the centre) or at a he
suitable to the temple authorities who conduct ! ;
utsava in Sayana, Upavana or Grha. It should com
mence with auspicious ceremonies like the sowing °
seeds of nine varieties of foodgrains, and with danc®
song, instrumental music etc. 7
UTSAVASANKETA. A place in the South Bharata.
(Mahabharata, Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Stanza 61).
UTTAMA. A King born in the dynasty of Syvayambhuv®
Manu who had two famous sons, of whom rau
married Suripa and Barhismati, two daughters ‘4
ViSvakarma. Priyavrata begot three children, ee
Tamasa and Raivata by his wife Barhismati. —
three sons attained exceptional prowess and becam
lords of the ages of Manu (Manvantaradhipatis) ;
Priyavrata, with his children ruled the country i .
happiness and prosperity for ten crores of years. De
Bhagavata, 8th Skandha). Uttanapada, the seco?
son of Svayambhuvamanu begot one son, Uttama ‘ee
his wife Suruci and another son’ Dhruva by his Ww?
Suniti. (See under Dhruva). (Visnu Purana, Part ©
Chapter 11).
UTTAMASVA. A particular place in ancient Ind)
(M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 41). :
UTTAMAUJAS. <A warrior who fought in the great ae
on the Pandava side. He belonged to the Pafica’@
country. f
It was Uttamaujas who guarded the right wheel °
Arjuna’s chariot. (Bhisma Parva, Chapter 19, Verse
19). He fought fiercely with Angoada. (Drona Parva;
Chapter 28, Verses 38-39). He fought Krtavarma als?
(Drona Parva, ‘Chapter 92, Verse 27-02) . He we
defeated in a fight with Duryodhana. (Drona Parva;
Chapter 130, Verses 30-43). Krtavarma also defeate
him. He killed Susena, son of Karna, (Karna Parve
Chapter 75, Verse 13). This valiant warrior W°
killed by Aévatthama. (Sauptika Parva, Chaptet bs
Verses 35-36). His ‘cremation is described in Vers’
34, Chapter 26 of Stri Parva.
UTTANABARHIS. The son of Saryati,a King of 2°
family of Vaivasvata Manu. (Bhagavata, Skandha 9):

UTTANAPADA 815 UTTANKA
UTTANAPADA. A King. He was the son of Svayam- children. But, both of them became calm quite soon
bhuva Manu, the son of Brahma. Svayambhuva Manu
had two sons Priyavrata and Uttanapada. (Devi Bhagavata, Skandha 8). Ason named Uttama was born to
Uttanapada by his wife Suruci. Uttanapada had another wife called Suniti. (Visnu Purana, Améga 1,
Chapter 11). See under Dhruva.
UTTANKA (UTANKA). An ideal disciple of Veda
who was the disciple of Apodadhaumya.
1) Uttanka and the Guru’s wife. Afier entrusting management of the 4srama to Uttanka, Veda once went out
on a tour of the country, and Uttanka stayed in the
Agrama carrying out the instructions of the Guru. Then
came the menstrual period of Veda’s wife, and his other
wives requested Uttanka to do the needful, so that the
fertile period of their co-wife was not wasted. Uttanka’s
reply to them was as follows:- “Asked by women, I
shall not do this improper act; and the preceptor has
not asked me to do such a thing though it mightbe
improper.”’ -
His Guru, Apodadhaumya returned to the ASrama some
time after this, and was very pleased to hear about the
above incident. He blessed Uttanka. (M.B. Adi Parva,
Chapter 3).
2) His tuition fee. His education being over, it was now
time for Uttanka to give due offerings—tuition fee to his
guru, and Uttanka enquired of the guru as to what he
would have by way of daksina. The guru asked
Uttanka to get his wife’s instruction in the matter and
act accordingly. Because of the aforesaid incident
(Uttanka not acting on the guru’s wife during her
menstrual period) she had a grouse against him, and
therefore, asked him to bring as his tuition fee the earrings worn by the Ksatriya wife of King Pausa.
Uttanka set out to procure the ear-rings. On the
way he saw an ox, and on its back a big man, who
called out to Uttanka to eat the excretion of the ox:
When Uttanka hesitated to do sO, the man on the ox
asked him again to eat it, pointing out that his Boeck
Veda, had done it. Then did Uttanka consume ot
the excretion and urine of the ox, and did his ee
ions, in his perplexed mood, standing. gee any? :
at the palace of King Pausa and told him Ri «3 es
object of his visit. The King agreed to it. But, w
Uttanka entered the Zenana Pausas Ksatriya wile
could not be seen. When Uttaiika told the King Lge
this, he remained thoughtful for some me an or
the former that he might surely have become moe
due to performance of oblations In the wrong oe ote :
and that his wife would not be Ms, a ei
chastity, to the eyes of such impure is i a ans
admitted to having, on his way; performe |
t down
aye " r and then he sa
not in the proper manner, hands, feet etc. and
facing the east after washing his
performed oblation in the correct manner. thea ie
wife of King Pausa become visible to him, an , plea:
a er her ear-rings to him.
ed athis humility, handed ov ET about tHe bat
She also advised him to be very care ‘
- ings as they had once been novare” eames Rot
of the serpents. Bidding adieu to te q ;
er to take food. No
Saw the King and they sat togeth was also found in it.
Only was the rice cold; but a hair j ind
ttanka cursed the King and pare Peete
and the King, in turn, cursed Uttan
and withdrew their curses.
On his way back to-the Agrama with the ear-rings, he
had only just stepped into a pool for a wash, when a
naked Buddha sannyasin, who was following him,
snatched and ran off with the ear-rings. It was really
Taksaka disguised as the sannyasin who thus snatched
the ear-rings. Uttanka chased him and caught him
when he assumed his original form of the serpent King
and disappeared intO a cave. Uttanka waited at the
mouth of the cave stupefied, when Indra deputed his
Vajrayudha to help Uttanka. The Vajrayudha cut a
tunnel-like route to Patala from the earth and through
the cave Uttanka reached Patala by this route and
found out the palace of Taksaka.
Though Uttanka praised and cajoled the Nagas (serpents) their King Taksaka did not make his appearance. Uttanka saw there two women, who had been
weaving clothes, and on one machine there were black
and white threads. The machine had one wheel with
twelve spokes and was turned by six boys. Also was
there a horse, and aman. When Uttanka praised them,
the horse and the man approached him. The man
advised Uttaika to blow through the anus of the horse
so that the snakes could be brought round. Uttanka
did so, when lo ! from all the pores on the body of the
horse, flames of fire began sprouting out. When the
Nagaloka (country of serpents) got thus filled with fire
and flames, Taksaka lost his nerves and came out with
the stolen ear-rings, which Uttanka received back. But,
that was the last day on which the rings had been
promised to be given to his guru’s wife by Uttanka,
who remained there gloomy and sorrow- stricken at the
thought that he would not be able to travel all the
distance before sunset and give the ear-rings to the
uru’s wife. Then the horseman gave the horse to
Uttanka, who reached the Agrama just in time when
the guru’s wife was about to curse Uttanka for not
returning with the rings though it was nearly dusk time.
Now the guru and his wife blessed Uttanka, who detailed to them his experiences since leaving the Agrama
in quest of the ear-rings. ‘Then the guru spoke thus to
Uttanka—“‘The two women whom you found engaged
in weaving were: Dhata and Vidhata, the white and
black strings, day and night, and the six boys who
turned the wheel with twelve spokes were the six
seasons. ‘The ox seen by you on the way was Airavata
(Indra’s elephant), the horse seen in Patala was Agnideva, and the horseman, Indra. The excretion you ate
on your way was nectar and that was the reason why
you did not die in the Nagaloka. Indra who is my
friend blessed you because of mercy towards you, my
disciple. You could bring back the ear-rings also because of Indra’s blessings.”’
Then the guru blessed Uttanka and the latter took
leave of thim. (M.B Adi Parva, Chapter 3).
3) Uttanka and Janamejaya’s serpent yajfia. Uttanka,
determined on taking vengeance on Taksaka, went
away directly from the arama to Hastinapura, where
he met Janamejaya and told him the fact that it was
Taksaka, who had bitten to death Pariksit, his (Janamejaya) father. It was thus prompted by Uttanka to take
revenge upon Taksaka that Janamejaya performéd the
serpent yajfia. (M.B, Adi Parva, Chapter 3),

UTTANKA
4) Uttanka and Dhundhumara. See under Dhundhumara.
9) Ulttanka attained salvation. Uttanka was put up at a
place called Ujjalaka. When he became old, he went
about visiting many temples. During this tour one day
Uttanka saw a hunter in the forest called Gulika
attempting to steal the golden plates on the dome of
the Visnu temple in Sauvira. Gulika raised his sword to
kill Uttanka, when he told the former that he would
have to suffer the results of sin during many births
if he committed a sin. This admonition of Uttanka so
touched the heart of the hunter that he fell dead on the
spot with a repentant heart. Uttanka sprinkled Ganga
water’ on the corpse of the hunter, who attained Vaikuntha (abode of Visnu). On the advice of Visnu,
Uttanka went to Badari where he did tapas and also
attained Vaikuntha. (Naradiya Purana).
In Chapters 53-58 of Ag’vamedha Parva of Mahibharata is related the.story of one Uttanka muni, under
the ‘caption ‘Utankopakhyana’. In Mahabharata
(original) he is referred to as Uttanka; but in its
Malayalam rendering he is called Utanka. There are
no substantial differences between the story of Uttanka
and that of Utanka, Veda’s disciple. But, since, there
are differences, in certain aspects some information
about the Uttanka of the ‘Utankopakhyana’ is given
below—
1) General. Uttahka was a disciple of Gautama, the
husband of Ahalya. The guru had more love for
Uttanka than for his other disciples, and therefore did
not permit the latter to leave the Agrama even after
the other disciples were sent away. Uttanka became
old; wrinkles attacked his body and greyness his head.
2) Tuttion fee (Gurudaksind). Uttanka once returned
from the woods with firewood, in a very tired condition.
The daughter of the guru shed tears at the sight.
Gautama called Uttanka to him and asked him about
the cause of his grief and sorrow. Uttanka replied that
the hairs on his head turned grey on account of sorrow
that he was not permitted toleave the Agrama although
it was hundred years since he had gone there first as
disciple. Then Gautama permitted Uttanka to quit the
Asrama. Uttanka asked Gautama what he should
offer as tuition fee. Gautama consulted his wife on the
topic and she suggested as tuition fee the two ear-rings
of gems worn by the wife of King Saud4sa, who used
to eat the flesh of man, Immediately Uttanka set out
to fetch the €ar-rings and on his way met Saudasa in
the forest, and told the latter about his mission. Saudasa tried to eat Uttanka, who told him that he was
in duty bound to obtain the ear-rings for his guru’s
wife and that, after fulfilling the mission, he would
return to Saudasa to be eaten up by him. Saudidsa
agreed to the proposition. He directed Uttanka to his
wife Madayanti, who spoke to him thus—*‘Devas and
Maharsis covet these €ar-rings. If I place them on the
ground, serpents will steal them; if handed over: to
Ucchista, Yaksas will steal them, and if the watchman
sleeps, Devas will snatch them off. Therefore, you
should bring some token for me to believe that you are
deputed by my husband.” Accordingly Uttanka went
back to Saudasa and returned to his wife with a token
from him, and Madayanti handed over her ear-rings to
Uttanka. Being told by Saudasa that Uttanka need
not return again to him, Uttanka started for Gautama’s
agrama with the ear-rings. Feeling hungry on the way,
UTTARA I
Uttanka tied to the branch ofa vilva tree the ear-rings .
bundled in deer skin and ate vilva fruits. Just -then the
bundle of deer skin got untied and the ear-rings kept 10
it fell on the ground. A serpent carried off the rings
between its teeth and concealed itselfina mole-hill.
Highly grieved and upset by the sight, Uttanka fell
down from the tree. For 35 days Uttanka dug the molehill. ‘Then Indra felt great sympathy for him, appear
ed on the spot, and passed his Vajrayudha through the
mole-hill. Then the earth burst open and Uttanka
entered Patala through the opening, and a horse, 155
tail white and the rest of the body black in colout
presented itself to him. It asked Uttanka to” Crh
through its anus. Uttanka did so and the Nagalo ‘
was filled with flames of fire. (The horse was Agnideva)
Then did the serpents return the ear-rings to Uttanka,
who returned with it to Gautama and presented 1t tO
him (Gautama) as tuition fee. t
3) Uttatika about to curse Sri Krsna. Uttanka once cao
to Dvaraka, and during their talk was about to inte
Krsna for not attempting to bring about a compromise
between the Kauravas and the Pandavas. At one
Krsna exhibited his Vigvaripa (himself as containing
the whole universe). Thereupon Uttanka saluted ae
who asked him to request for any boon. He prayed
the boon that water might be made available a
desert he visited. Krsna told him that whenever
required water he might successfully think of him. nite
4) Indra tested Uttanka. Some time afterwards, W at
roaming about quite thirsty and tired ina dest”
Uttanka thought about Krsna, and at once there es
peared before him a naked Candala, his body cove
with mud. Dogs encircled him. Uttanka hesitate *
drink the water given to him by this Candala, ye on
some water with him. The Candala again insiste
Uttanka drinking the water, but he again refused, 7
offer. Thecandala then disappeared with the C08
Within a few minutes a person with disc, conch, Sag
etc. about him appeared, and Uttanka recognised "6
as Sri Krsna. Uttanka told Krsna that it was “1a.
proper to give water to a brahmin through a a +0
Krsna’s reply to this was as follows;—“I asked In 7 ;
give you nectar instead of water, and he argued pe
was not proper that men should be given necta , he
pleaded for you again. Indra replied to this that. 4
himself would, in the guise of a candala give nectar
you, and he should not be found fault with,
refused the nectar. I accepted that proposition ©
But, you did not accept nectar thus offered to you:
you cannot be given nectar now. But, there will ap
water-laden clouds in deserts which you traverse; ail
would be known as ‘Uttanka clouds’ and they
give you sweet water. dss
Uttanka was pleased, and it is the Uttanka ©?
which form as per the above orders of Krsna that ¢
rain to fall, though rarely, in deserts even today- tsy"
UTTARAI. The son of King Virata of Mae’,
Mention is made in the Mahabharata, Virata Pa per
Chapter 35, Stanza 9 that Bhimifijaya was arte
name of Uttara. Uttara also accornpanied is es a
Virata, when he went to take part in the Svaya”™ vas
(choice, of a husband) of Draupadi. {M.B. Adi Par’
_ Uttara and Arjuna. See the paracraph Aji4
under Arjuna, ? panagrape y
his.
f So,
peat
aus
ravas@
if you.

UTTARA
3) The end of Uttara. Uttara had taken part in the
battle between the Pandavas and the Kauravas. It is
mentioned in the Mahabharata, Bhisma Parva, Chapter
45, Stanza 77 that a combat took place on the first day
of the battle between Uttara and Virabahu. Uttara
attacked Salya who killed Uttara. (M.B. Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 47, Stanzas 36 to 39). Uttara who met
with a glorious death in the battle, got a place in
heaven with the gods. (M.B. Svargarohana Parva,
Chapter 5, Stanzas 17 and 18).
UTTARA II. A King who had gone down because of
his contemptuous behaviour towards his superiors.
UTTARA III. A fire. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 221,
Stanza 29 and Sabha Parva, Chapter 22).
UTTARA.
1) General information. Daughter of Virata, the King
of Matsya. Her brother was called Uttara.
2) Up to marriage. The Pandavas led their incognito
life'in the capital of the Matsya Kingdom. Arjuna
adopted the name Brhannala and was employed as the
tutor of princess Uttara in music and dancing. At the
end of the life, King Virata gave his daughter Uttara
in marriage to Abhimanyu the son of Arjuna. (See
the paragraph Ajiiatavasa (incognito-life) under Arjuna).
3) Son. The'son born to Abhimanyu and Uttara was
Pariksit, who became a very famous King later. (M.B.
Adi Parva, Chapter 95, Stanzas 83 and 84). See the
seventh paragraph under Aégvatthama).
4) The death of her husband. Abhimanyu was killed in
the battle between the Pandavas and the Kauravas. It
is mentioned in the Mahabharata, Drona Parva, Chapter 78, Stanza 37 that Uttara fell unconscious, when she
heard of the death of her husband. Sri Krsna consoled
Uttara. In the Mahabharata, Stri Parva, Chapter 20,
Stanzas 4 to 28 the lamentation of Uttara over the death
of Abhimanyu is mentioned.
5) To the forest. Uttara also was seen among the
women who accompanied Dhrtarastra, to a little distance when he went to the forest after the battle. (M.B
§ramavasika Parva, Chapter 15, Stanza 10).
UTTARADISA. See under Galava. |
UTTARAJYOTISA. An ancient city which stood in the
western part of Bharata. It is said in the Mahabharata
that Nakula conquered this city. (Sabha Parva, Chapter
UTTARAKOSALA. An ancient country in Bharata. It
is mentioned in the Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter 30,: Stanza 3 that Bhimasena conquered Uttara
Kosala.
UTTARAKURU. A part of the Jambidvipa (Island of
Jambi). Mention is aie in the Mahabharata ste
during his conquest Arjuna had gone up [0 ie P ace
and carried away from there. plenty wea a
believed by common people that this place 1s een
ible to human beings. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter ie
Stanzas 7 to 20), The southern end of this piece - the
ilagiri and the Northern end Mount Meru. dc ear
abitants are gifted people, with trees bearing ae
and fruits, the flowers fragrant and the fruits swee “ok ’
A particular type of tree known as Ban Leh sss
Srows here from which milk will flow. There are a - “lief
which will give you whatever you ask. It was the be ld
of ancient people that with the fruits of lee ie e thi
Make garments and ornaments. he sou 0 id.
Place contains gems andin the sand there 18 gold.
VADI
Those who fall down from heaven live in this region.
The average age of the inhabitants of this place is said
to have béen eleven- thousand years. There isa kind of
bird in this place called Bharunda. These birds drag
dead bodies away to caves. (M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 8, Stanzas 2 to 13).
UTTARMANASA. A holy place of pilgrimage. Itis
stated in the Mahabharata, Anusgasana Parva, Chapter
25, Stanza 60, that those who visit this holy place will
get atonement from the sin of Bhrinahatya (causing
embryoctony).
UTTARAPANCALA. An ancient country in Bharata.
Drupada became the King of this country on the death
of King Prsata. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 129, Stanza
43). In course of time Uttarapaficala came under the
control of the Acarya Drona. (See under Drona). In the
Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 137, Stanzas 70 to
76 it is mentioned that this country was on the north
bank of the Ganga.
UTTARAPARIYATRA. A. mountain. (Bhasa Bharata,
Vana Parva, Chapter 313, Stanza 8).
UTTARAPATHA. North Bharata. (M.B. Santi Parva,
Chapter 207, Stanza 43).
UTTARA RAMAYANA. The second part of the Ramayana. Uttara Ramayana comprises the story from Sri
Rama’s return from the exile in the forest and assuming the ruling of the country onwards.
UTTARA ULUKA. The country of Ulika in North
India. It is mentioned in the Mahabharata, Sabha
Parva, Chapter 27, Stanza 11 that Arjuna conquered
this country.
UTTEJINI. A follower of Skandadeva. (M.B. Salya
Parva, Chapter 45, Stanza 6).
VA (q). This letter means Varuna and letter ‘Vi’ means
separation (of lovers). (Agni Purana, Chapter 348).
VABHRAVAYANI (BABHRAVAYANT). One of Vig vamitra’s sons, who were all Brahmavadins. (M.B. Anug4sana Parva, Chapter 4, Stanza 57).
VADANYA. Anancient hermit. (For further details see
under Astavakra).
VADHBA. Son of Yatudhana, a giant. It is mentioned in
Brahmanda Purana that this giant had two sons Vighna
and Sama. |
VADHRA. A country in ancient India.
Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Stanza oD)
VADHRIMATI. A princess, praised in Reveda. This
beautiful princess got a hermaphrodite as her husband.
She shed a good deal of tears and prayed to the Agvins
(Charioteers of Indra, celebrated as Gods of light and
helpers) in consequence ‘ef which she got a son named
Hiranyahasta. (Rgveda, Mandala 1, Sikta 116).
VADHUSARA. A river which flowed through the vicinity
of the hermitage of Cyavana, This river took its origin
from the tears of Puloma, the wife of hermit Bhrgu. (For
further details see under Cyavana). Because of a bath
taken in this river, the body of Paragurama shone with
radiance. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 99, Stanza 68).
VADHYASVA. A king in ancient India. It is mentioned
in Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter 8, Stanza 12,
that the spirit of this king stays in the palace of Yama,
praising him.
VADI.: Ason of emperor Prthu. Prthu had two righteous
sons called Antardhana and V4di. A son named Havirdhana was born to Antardhana by Sikhandini. Dhisana
(Mahabharata,

VAGBHATA
born in the dynasty of Agni became the wife of Havirdhana. Six sons named Pracinabarhis, Sukra, Gaya,
Krsna, Vraja and Ajina were born to the couple.
(Visnu Purana, Amsa 1, Chapter 14).
VAGBHATA. A Sanskrit scholar who lived in the 12th
century A.D. He is the author of the two medical
books ‘Astarnga-sangraha’ and ‘Astangahrdaya’. Another
work called ‘Neminirvana’ is also written by Vagbhata.
This work deals with the storyc of Neminatha, a Jain
hermit.
Not much is known about Vagbhata. He was a scholar
in rhetorical science. There are certain stories about
his writing the medical books. It was a period when the
muslims had beaten down the Brahmins. They had
taken away the medical science also from them. The
Brahmins considered this to bea disgrace to them. They
decided to select an intelligent boy and send him to a
Muslim physician. They selected Vagbhata. The Brahmins disguised Vagbhata as a Muslim boy and sent him
to the Muslim Physician on the other side of the river.
The boy went to the physician and told him that he
was coming from far away with the intention of learning
medical science. The teacher put certain questions
and understood that the boy possessed extraordinary
intelligence. He began to teach the boy the science
of medicine. Seeing the interest of the boy the teacher
asked the boy to eat food from his house and to learn
day and night. The Brahmin boy did not like to eat
the food of Muslims. The boy said that he had a relative
on the other side of the river and that he would go
there and have his supper and return for the night study.
The teacher agreed and thenceforward Vagbhata
began to learn day and night. Within a short time he
completed learning.
One day the teacher was sleeping on the seventh storey
of the building and his disciple Vagbhata was massaging his legs. ‘The boy soliloquised that fate had destined
him to massage the legs of a Musalman. Instantly he
cried bitterly, and the teacher awoke and understood
that the boy was not a Muslim, and tried to cut his
head. The boy thought: ‘‘The four Vedas and the six
Sastras say that there is a god. Ifitis true no harm
will come to me.” Then he jumped out of the window.
In consequence of this jump, he became a little lame
and no cther harm befell him. He swam across the
river and reached the other side and told the Brahmins
everything. The Brahmins asked him what he Imagined
when he jumped from the seventh storey. He replied
“T jumped with this imagination. The four Vedas and
the six Sdstras say that there isa god. If it is true no
harm will come to me.” As soon as the boy had finished the Brahmins became angry and they all got up.
They said ‘“‘You went wrong in using the doubtful ‘if?
instead of the affirmative ‘As’. The Brahmins joined
together and expelled him from the society. The boy
thought of going away somewhere. ‘But there won’t be
another chance for somebody else to go and learn
medical science from the Muslim physicians. So before
going away from here I must make the fruits of my
efforts available to these people.’’ Thinking so he lived
there for a little longer. He lived there without mingling with the Brahmins, cooking his food. It is believed
that Vagbhata wrote ‘Astangasangraha’ and ‘Astangahrdaya’, during this period.
VAIDARBHI II!
VAGDUSTA. One of the seven sons of hermit Kausika.
(Matsya Purana, 20: 3). The famous Pitrvartti was
the youngest brother of Vagdusta.
VAGINDRA. Son of the king Prakagaka born in the
family of Grtsamada. It is stated in Mahabharata,
Anusasana Parva, Chapter 30, Stanza 63 that he was
the father of King Pramiti.
VAGMI. A son born to Manasyu, the grandson of emperor
Puru, by his wife Sauviri. This son had two bubthel
Sakta and Samhanana. (M.B. Adi Parva, Ghapter 24;
Stanza 45).
VAHANA (CONVEYANCE).
conveyances of Rudra, Yama and so on,
Jaladhi. . 4
VAHI. A devil living in the river Vipaga. The devil ha
a friend called Hika. Their sons are called the VahikasThe Vahikas are not considered to be the creation
the Prajapatis. (M.B. Karna Parva, Chapter 44, 5tan?
ere A Brahmin who was well-versed in the pa
This Brahmin earned his bread by selling salt. In
To know about the
see under
life, he had committed sins. At last he was killed ae
lion. The flesh of his dead body fell in the es ae
consequence of which he got remission of hi
(Skanda Purana 2: 4: 1-28). aa
VAHINARA. A king who lives in the palace of ge
(Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter 8, Stanza Ls i).
VAHINI I. A division of army. (See under Alggu
VAHIN1I II. Wife of Kuru, a king of the Lunar Ve at
Five sons such as As vavan and others were born to ®©
by his wife Vahini. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapte!
Stanza 50). —ee
VAHNI I. An asura. It is mentioned in Mahabhat ura
Santi Parva, Chapter 227, Stanza 52 that this a
had been a lokapala (Indra, Agni, Yama and Waru’
were called lokapalas) in olden days. - had 4
VAHNI II. ‘The son of the King Turvasu. Vahn}
son named Bharga who became very famous.
vata, Skandha 9; Brahmanda Purana, 3: 74. |) ite
VAHNI III. One of the sons born to Krsna by
vinda. (Bhagavata, Skandha 10).
VAHNIJVALAM. A hell. (See the
under Kala). _ phey
VAHYAKA. The two daughters of King Sriyjay4- Three
were married by Bhajamana, a Yadava king- hem:
sons named Nimi, Krmilaand Vrsni were born to !
(Matsya Purana, 44: 49-50). | - onniittll
VAIBHRAJAKA. A garden, It is stated in Bhag? ne
Skandha 5, that this garden is situated on the top faba
mountain Supargva which stands as a prop tO
meru. _. pot
VAIDARBHI I. A wife of King Sagara. This kin 1),
of the Solar dynasty, had two wives named Val" od
and Saibya. Vaidarbhi was also called Sum two
Saibya had another name Keéini. Of these aiby4
Vaidarbhi gave birth to sixtythousand sons and
to one son named Asamajijasa. (See under Sagar med
VAIDARBHI II. Wife of the King Kuga. Four sons yn
Kugamba, Ku/anabha, Asiirtarajasand Vasu We pala
to Kusa by Vaidarbhi. (Valmiki Ramaya”
Kanda, Sarga 32). apter
VAIDARBHI III. A king. This King gave his 4407 ana
Lopamudra in marriage to Agastya. (M.B. A
Parva, Chapter 137: Verse 1] ) |
ka
portion Narak
ti 4
(Bhag*”.
ar
bi

VAIDEHA I
VAIDEHA I. The King of Videha.
VAIDEHA II. See under Varna.
VAIDEHA III. Another name of the country of Videha.
It has the meaning, that which is in Videha. (M.B.
Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Stanza 57).
VAIDURYAPARVATA. A mountain which stands near
Gokarnatirtha (holy place) in the country of Sirparaka
(Kerala). Agastya once built a hermitage on this
mountain. If one bathes in the river Narmada, after
having visited this Vaidtirya mountain one could attain
the holy worlds. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter oa;
Verse If): a
VAIDYA. One of the sons born to Varuna by his wife
Sunadevi. His sons Ghrni and Muni fought with each
other and died. (Vayu: 84: 6-8).
VAIHAYASA. A cavity or a sacred pit (kunda) situated
near the hermitage of Naranarayanas. (M-B. Santi Parva,
Chapter 127, Stanza 3).
VAIJAYANTA I. The capital city of an asura named
Timidhvaja, otherwise called Sambara. (See under
‘Timidhvaja) .
VAIJAYANTA II. Name of the flag of Indra. (M.B.
Vana Parva, Chapter 42, Stanza 8).
VAIJAYANTA III. A mountain standing in the m ddle
of the sea of Milk. It is mentioned in Mahabharata,
Santi Parva, Chapter 35, Stanza 9, that Brahma comes
to this mountain daily for devotion and meditation. ,
VAIJAYANTI, Two bells of Airavata. Indra presente
these two bells to Subrahmanya, who, in his turn,
gave one of them to Vigakha. (M.B. Vana Parva,
Chapter 231, Stanza 13).
VAIKARTANA. Another name of Karna. | —
VAIKHANASA. A philosopher. He had written a boo
known as ‘Vaikhanasadharmaprasna’. Matters concern
ing the duties of a forest-house-holder, Sen patoe
suitable for children born of wedlocks which < ' oe
accordance with natural law as well as ace aki
natural order, etc. are dealt with in ee ene
book. A large number of quotations from
nasadh §na occur In Manusmrti.
VAIKHANASAS, A group of hermits of the ven
age. There were hundred hermits as fn 2 a
(Reveda, 9: 66). They were omy occ ss aa
of Brahma. (Taittiriya, 1, 23). me:
VAIKUNTHA I, ‘The dwelling place trabee em TE
VAIKUNTHA II. Another name of Matin 349,
mentioned in Mahapaer at eeation with the
Stanza 80, that when Visnu mace hindrance
i an
five elements, his powers did not se oy a.
and so he got the name aikunt
(Kunthita) : . ho lived in the
VAIKUNTHA III. Se SA veliverance from sin,
Tretayuga. The living things 80° ©" th him. This
the moment they came Into ear s deliverance,
power of Vaikuntha to give living PNM) wnda, Chapis mentioned in Padma Purana, Brahma “a
ter 3,as follows: . resence of
Vaikantha once lighted a ghee-lamp ips FLt' time
Visnu in Karttika and returne@ ” a the ghee. Then
a rat came there and began to tie ae Was rerrified
the lamp blazed into a flame. race of Visnu the
at this, and ran away. But by jig 8
Tat got deliverance from all its sins:
hat rat was killed by snake-bite. oatasett
Came with ropes. Instantly the men
also Came on Garuda. Yama 8s
he men of Yama
gers of Visnu
afraid of
VAISALAKSA
Visnu’s messengers and humbly aksed them: ‘“‘For
what goodness of him are you taking this great sinner
to Vaikuntha?’”’ They replied: ‘‘He had blazed a lamp
before the presence of Visnu. That act has earned for
hima place in Vaikuntha. The goodness carned by
lighting a lamp with devotion and love in Karttika,
could be described only by Mukunda.” After that the
rat was taken to Vaikuntha.
VAIMANIKA. A holy place. Mention is made in
Mahabharata, Anugasana Parva, Chapter 25, Stanza.
23, that those who bathe in this holy place could freely
walk about in the world of the celestial maids.
VAIMITRA. One of the Saptamatrs (seven mothers).
They are Vaimitra, Kaki, Halima, Malini, Brhada,
Arya and Palala. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 228,
Stanza 10).
VAINATEYA I. One of the prominent sons of Garuda.
(M.B. Udyoga Parva, Chapter 101, Stanza 10).
VAINATEYA II. Son of Vinata. (Garuda).
VAINYA. Another name of emperor Prthu.- (See under
Prthu).
WATRATA One of the Sapta Pitrs (Seven Manes). The
Sapta Pitrs are, Vairaja, Agnisvatta, Somapa ; Garhapatya, Ekagrnga, Caturveda and Kala. (M.B. Sabha
Parva, Chapter 11, Stanza 46),
VAIRAMAS. A caste of people in Ancient India. The
people of this caste gave Dharmaputra, various kinds
of jewels and other costly things as presents and then
attended the Rajasiya of the Pandavas. (M.B. Sabha
Parva, Chapter 51, Verse 12).
VAIRATA. One of the hundred sons of Dhrtarastra.
It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Bhisma Parva, Chapter 96, Verse 26, that this Vairaia was killed in the
battle of Bharata by Bhimasena.
VAISAKHA. A month. This month comes after the
month of Caitra and before the month of Jyestha. It
is stated in Mahabharata, Anusadsana Parva, Chapter
106, that by observing the fast of taking food only once,
daily in this month, one could acquire prominence
among kinsmen and people of one’s own caste.
VAISAKHAVRATA. Sce under Dhrstabuddhi.
VAISALA. A city. This city was founded by King
Vigala, who belonged to the dynasty of Dista. Because
Nabhaga, the son of Dista had married a woman from
Vaigyacaste, healso became Vaisya. The writings of
Vatsa, the son of Bhalandana of this family, are included
in the Rgveda. The differentiation of castcs was not so
strict in those days as today. It is not known in what
country Dista and his people Anagas lived. The Kings
Karandhama, his son Aviksit and his son Marutta
of this dynasty were great and valiant. Marutta had
performed both horse sacrifice (aSvamedha) and imperial consecration (Rajastiya). To Trnabindu, who was
in the tenth generation from Marutta, a son was born
named Visala.: This Vigala founded a city and lived
there. That city is called Vai'ala. Many of the scholars
are of opinion that this city Vaisala is the same
as Ujjayini. Itis stated in Mahabharata that Somadatta of the seventh generation from Visala had performed ten aS vamedhas (horse-sacrifices ).
VAISALAKSA. The Law of conduct of Brahma. Since
Siva, who is Visalaksa (far-sighted ) had collected and
abridged them, it came to be called Vaisalaksa. (M.B.
Santi Parva, Chapter 59, Stanza 82).

VAISALINI 820
VAISALINI. The daughter of King Visala. She was
married by Aviksit, the son of Karandhama. The
famous Marutta was the son born to this couple.
(Markandeya Purana, Chapters 119-126).
VAISAMPAYANA.
1) General information. A prominent disciple of Vyasa.
It is mentioned in Devi Bhagavata, Skandha 1, that
the main disciples of Vyasa were Asita, Devala,
Vais ampayana, Sumantu, Jaimini, Paila and some
others. (See under Bharata ).
2) Other details.
(i) It was Vaigampa4yana who told the story of Bharata
composed by Vyasa, to King Janamejaya. (M.B. Adi
Parva, Chapter 1, Stanza 20).
(ti) Vaisampayana told Janamejaya the story of
Bharata at the instruction of Vyasa. (M.B. Adi Parva,
Chapter 60, Verse 22).
(iii) Vaisampayana praised Mahabharata and spoke
"5 7 greatness. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 62, Stanza
. ri
(iv) Once Vaigampayana was overpowered by ignorance, and he killed a Brahmin. It is mentioned in
Mahabharata, Anugasana Parva, Chapter 6, Stanza
36, that in spite of it he attained heaven. |
VAISNAVACAPA. The bow of Visnu. (For further
details see under Visnu, para 7, sub-section 7).
VAISNAVADHARMAPARVA. A. sub-section of
AS vamedhika Parva in Mahabharata.
VAISRAVANA. Kubera. (See under Kubera) .
VAISVADEVA (M). A sacrifice. It is mentioned in
Devi Bhagavata, Skandha 11, that a brahmin should
perform this sacrifice to protect himself from hurts
caused by oven, threshing stone, axe, cutting knife, and
other weapons. This sacrifice could be performed in a
cavity for kindling fire on the floor besmeared with
cowdung and mud. It should not be done in an
ordinary oven meant for cooking, in iron oven, in
earthernware or on ordinary floor. As all the deities
are having faces of fire, the sacrificial fire should not be
kindled by fanning the flame with hand, winnow, hide
of black antelope or cloth. By fanning the flame with
cloth, the sacrificer will contract disease ; by winnowing
he would sustain loss of wealth; and death, by fanning
with hand. Plums, fruits, roots, curd, ghee etc. could
be used as burnt offerings. When these are not available, firewood, roots of herbs, grass etc. could be used
instead. Things to be offered as burnt-offerings should
be purified, first by sprinkling ghee on them. In the
absence of ghee, milk, curd and water may be used.
Using things which are unfit as burnt-offerings will
invite bad results.
In Vais vadeva-sacrifice, half-burnt firewood used in
cooking, should never be used. So also salts of any
kind. After finishing VaiSvadeva, Gograsa (giving rice
to cow) also should be done.
VAISVANARA I. A hermit. It'is mentioned in Mahibharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter 7 Verse 18, that this
hermit stays in the palace of Indra. (Rgveda, Mandala
1, Anuvaka 11, Sikta 59).
VAISVANARA II. The first son of Agni called Bhanu.
In Caturmasya-sacrifice, this fire Vai§vanara also is
worshipped along with the fire Parjanya. (M.B. Vana
Parva, Chapter 221, Stanza 16).
VAISVANARAIII. One of the sons born to Kaég yapa
by his wife Manu. ( Bhagavata, Skandha 6) .
VAJASANEY!
VAIVAHIKAPARVA I. A sub-section of Adi Parva in
Mahabharata. This Comprises chapters 192 to 198 of
Adi Parva. _
VAIVAHIKAPARVA II. A sub-section of Virata
Parva. This comprises Chapters 70 to 72 of Virata
Parva.
VAIVASVATA MANU. Theseventh Manu. There is 4
description of Manu Vaivasvata under Manvantara.
|) Genealogy. Descended from Visnu in the following
order :—Brahma-Marici-Kas yapa-Vivasvan- Vaivasvata
Manu.
2) The incarnation of Matsya and Vaivasvata Manu. see
under Avatara, Section ‘‘Matsya.”’ -
3) Wife and children. The wife of Vaivasvata Manu
was Sraddha. Many sons were born to the couple.
Prominent among them were, Yama, Yami, A$viDlkumaras, Revanta, Sudyumna, Iksvaku, Nrga, Saryatl,
Dista, Dhrsta, Karisa, Narisyanta, Nabhaga, Pr sadhra
and Kavi. oe
VAIVASVATA TIRTHA. A holy place. It is men mt
ed in Mahabharata, Anusgadsana Parva, Chapter id
Stanza 39, that he who bathes in this holy bath woU
become himself a holy tirtha. ‘1s
VAISYA. One of thefour castes. (For further deta
see under Varna and Caturvarnya). &alya
VAITALI. A warrior of Subrahmanya. (M.B. 94'Y
Parva, Chapter 45, Stanza 67), ¥
VAITANDA. Son of Apa, one of the eight Vasus. Ap
had four sons named, Vaitanda, Srama, Santa an
Dhvani. (Visnu Purana, Amga 1, Chapter 15). -_
VAITARANTI I. A hell. (See under Kala, the Sect1©
Naraka).
VAITARANIII. The name of river Ganges when a
flows through the world of the Manes. (M.B. Ad}
Parva, Chapter 169, Stanza 22). his
VAITARANT III. A river. The prominence of t
river is given below : s
(i) This river stays in the court of Varuna and Er
fies him. (Mahabharata; Sabha Parva, Chaptet ~?
Stanza 20). . ot
(11) This river gives remission of sins. There is a Fe
called Virajatirtha, in this river. He who bathie ae
this holy place would shine like the moon. (M.B. V4
Parva, Chapter 85, Stanza 6). It
VAJA. Ason of Sudhanva, whose father was Ang kta
is mentioned in Rgveda, Mandala 1, Astaka, 1, ae
111, that Sudhanva had three sons named Rb»Y
Vibhvan and VAja.
VAJAPEYA. A sacrifice.
VAJASANEYA. _A religion or religious book. (scripture)
' At the end of Kaliyuga, people will become thieves on
lose all good qualities, and moreover fifteen brane g
of the Veda Vajasaneya alone will be accepte
Regulations of life. (Agni Purana, Chapter 16).
VAJASANEYI (VAJASANEYAS). A group of Priest®
Priest Yajfiavalkya was one of the disciples of a as
Veda-group of Vyasa. Of the line of disciples, a
valkya had fifteen disciples. They were called Vajasaney
ins or Vajasaneyas.
The Yajus—collection received from the god Sun wer
divided into fifteen groups by Yajfiavalkya and Mise
to each of his disciples. From that day onwards, his “7;
Ba) became famous by the. name Vajasaneyas.

VAJASRAVAS
VAJASRAVAS. Apriest who was the son of Naciketas.
(Brhadaranyaka Upanisad, 6-4-33).
VAJRAI. Son of Visvamitra. He was an expounder of
Vedas. (M.B. Anugasana Parva, Chapter 4, Stanza 52}.
VAJRA II. The son of Aniruddha, who was the
grandson of Sri Krsna. Mention is made in Mahabharata, Mausala Parva, Chapter 7, Stanza 72, that
after the extermination of the Yadavas by the mausala
fight (the fight with grass grown from the filings of the
iron-pestle), Arjuna anointed Vajra as the King of the
remaining Yadavas. When the Pandavas began the
Mahaprasthana (the great departure), Yudhisthira
called Subhadra and instructed her to look after Vajra
with particular care. (M.B. Maha Prasthana Parva,
Chapter 1, Stanza 8). ras
VAJRABAHU I. A notorious asura. Vajrabahu was
born of a Vidyadhara-damsel named Caficalaksi, when
she was raped by the asura Sahasramukha. This
Vajrabahu did penance before Siva and obtained Pasupatastra (a divine arrow) and an impenetrable armour.
After this, he caught hold of Indra and bound him.
Subrahmanya rescue
(Kamba Ramayana, Uttara. Kanda).
VAJRABAHU II. A monkey. With other monkeys
Vajrabahu got on the body of Kumbhakarna and
scratched his face and body and did much harm in the
battle between Rama and Ravana. Kumbhakarna
caught hold of them and ate them. (M.B. Vana Parva,
Chapter 287, Stanza 67). :
VAJRADAMSTRA I. A_ ferocious giant who was a
follower of Ravana. In Valmiki Ramayana, -Yuddha
Kanda, Sarga 54, mention is made that this giant was
killed by Angada in the Rama-Ravana battle. j
VAJRADAMSTRA II. A_ captain of the army ©
Tripurasura. It is stated in Ganesa Purana that Lee
sura gave his captain clothes, villages etc. as presents,
AVE pus atrol.
for bringing Patala (netherworld ) aie, He was
VAJRADATTA. The King of Pragjyotl : /
the son of Bhagadatta. Ele attacked the SE ie
Kings and defeated. them. He caught be as
sacrificial horse of Yudhisthira, led By, f Buna ae
fought with Vajradatta for three days an ‘ o4) .
(M.B. Agvamedha Parva, Chapters 69 af uae VairaVAJRAJVALA. A daughter of Mahabal.. Pe Lamnne A
jvala was the wife of Kumbhakarna- (Uttara au en)
VAJRAKAN TAKASALI. A hell. (See the pat
under Kala).
VAj RAMUSTI . A giant. Vajramusti was Ee ee ee
to Malyavan of his wife Sundarl. va Seah
brothers named Viraps ss? aes . sister damed
Yajfiakoga, Matta and Unmatta ane 4
Nala. (Uttara Ramayana) .
VAJRANABHA I. A warrior © 53)
Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Stanza 09): spsier Rina.
VAJRANABHA I, Aine he the ORama-Kusa-Aditi
The genealogy is the following: eee Devanika -
Nisadha-Nabhas-Pundarika-Ksem? Khagana was
Rksa-Pariyatra-Bala-Vinda-Vajrar® :
a-Ba -avata, Skandha 9).
the son of Vajranabha. (Baa e abhavatl whom PraVAJRANABHA III. An asur® ‘oq. was the daughter
dyumna the son of Sri Krsna cage Prabhavati) .
of this asura. (For details s° d over Mathura.
VAJRANABHA IV. A King whe ruled jest of hermit
tle was a friend of Pariksit.
f Subrahmanya. (M.B.
d Indra and killed Vajrabahu..
VAJRAYUDHA
Sandilya, Uddhava talked to Vajranabha about the
greatness of Bhagavata.
VAJRANGA. An asura. This asura was born to Kagyapa
of his wife Diti. Tarakasura was born to Vajranga of
his wife Varangi (For details see under Parvati, Para 2)
VAJRAPRASADA. A house in heaven. Manidvipa is
situated above the world of Brahma. Thisis an island
in the sea of Amrta with an area of several yojanas. All
the sand particles on the shore of the sea of Amrta are
jewels. Beyond the trees of jewels standing on _ the seacoast, there is an iron-wall with four towers. Those who
come here to see Devi (goddess) should get down from
their vehicles here. Beyond this wall of iron, there are
seven walls of bronze, copper, lead, brass, a mixture of
five metals, silver and gold. They are called Saptasalas.
Between the walls there are several parks such as Kalpa-
-yatika, Santanavatika, Haricandanavrksavatika, Mandaravatika, Parijatavatika, Kadambavati etc. On passing the seven walls, several houses are seen. They are
topaz-house, jacinth-house, beryl-house, diamond-house,
chrysoprase-house, sapphire-house, ruby-house, emeraldhouse, etc. (Devi Bhagavata, Skandha 11).
VAJRASIRSA. A son of hermit Bhrgu. It is mentioned
in Mahabharata, Anugasana Parva, Chapter 35, Stanza
125, that hermit Bhrgu had seven sons named Cyavana,
Vairagirsa, Suci, Aurva, Sukra, Varenya and Savana.
VAJRAVEGA. A giant who was the brother of Khara,
Diisana and Tri iras. In the battle between Rama and
Ravana Vajravega stood as the attendant of Kumbhakarna and fought with Sri Rama and was killed by
Haniman. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 287).
VAJRAVISKAMBHA. A child of Garuda. (Mahabharata, Udyoga Parva, Chapter 101, Stanza 10).
VAJRAYUDHA (Thunderbolt). The famous weapon
of Indra. ,
1) The making of this weapon. In olden. days a fierce
asura named Vrtra was born. The Kalakeyas and
many other asuras became his followers. ‘They began to
create havoc in the world, and cause harm to the
Devas. At last under the leadership of Indra, the Devas
went to Brahma and informed him of their grievances
and requested for advice as to the way of killing Vrtra.
Brahma told them that only with a weapon made of the
bone of the hermit Dadhica, could Vrtrasura be killed.
The Devas went to the bank of the river Sona and saw
the hermit Dadhica, who was the foremost of munificent
‘men, doing penance there. Indra told him the purpose
of their visit. He told the Devas to take his bone, if it
was useful to them. Saying this he forsook his body. The
Devas took the bones of the hermit and gave them to
Visvakarma who made a powerful weapon with them
and gave that to Indra. They named the weapon the
‘thunderbolt’. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 100).
2) The face of Subrahmanya was cut. Once Indra was
defeated by Narakasura. He went to the Himalayas and
hid himself there. Unable tosee their King Indra, the
devas went to Subrahmanya. When Indra knew this, he
thought that Subrahmanya had taken possession of the
world of the gods. So he came and fought with Subrahmanya. The thunderbolt of Indra touched the face
of Subrahmanya and wounded him. From the blood
which flowed from the face of Subrahmanya two noble
men appeared who eventually became warriors of
Subrahmanya. (Kathasaritsagara, Lavanakalambaka,
Taranga 6).

VAJRII
3) Daily thunderbolt. In Visnu Purana, Amsga 1, Chapter 5 and AmSa 2, Chapter 8, a process by which
thunderbolt is made daily in the evening from the water
particles thrown by Brahmins when they recite the spell
Gayatri, is described.
In the evening, the fierce giants called the Mandehas
wish to eat the Sun. Prajapati had given them a_ curse
that though their bodies would not perish they would
daily meet with death. So there is a fight between these
giants and the sun daily in the evening, At that time
the Brahmins recite the spell Gayatri with the Brahmapervading syllable ‘OM’, and throw up water. This
water becomes the Vajra weapon, and burns the giant.
4) The thunderbolt became a tiger. The hermits Narada
and Parvata once went to the palace of the King
Srijaya. The King worshipped them and_ served
them for a long time, as aresult of which a son was
born to him. Indra decided to lessen the superior
power of these hermits. Once the son of the King, who
was a mere boy, was playing in the forest. At the instruction of Indra, the thunderbold took the form of a
tiger and went to the forest and killed the boy. Sriijaya
became very sad. Narada and Parvata brought the boy
to lite again and gave him to the King. (M.B. Santi
Parva, Chapter 30).
VAJRI I. Indra who wields the weapon Vajra (q.v)
VAJRI II. An eternal god concerned in offering to the
manes. (Mahabharata, Anu asana Parva, Chapter 91,
Stanza 33). :
VAKA (BAKA). Sce under Baka.
VAKA. The daughter of the giant Malyavan. Vigravas
married her. Three sons Trigiras, Disana and Vidyujjihva and a daughter Anupalika were born to the couple
(Brahmanda Purana, 3: 8: 39-56; Vayu Purana, 70
34-50). But in maha Bharata, mention is made only
about three wives of Vigravas, named Puspotkata, Raka
and Malini .
VAKA DALBHYA (BAKA DALBHYA). Ahermit of
Ancient India. The information obtained from Mahabharata about this hermit is given below.
(He was a member of the council of Yudhisthira. (M.B.
Sabha Parva, Chapter 4, Stanza 11 7
(11) Once Vaka Dalbhya lectured to Yudhisthira about
the greatness of Brahmanas. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter
26, Stanza 6).
(iii). On another occasion he described the welfare of
eternal beings to Indra. (M.B, Vana Parva, Chapter
(iv) Once he stopped Sri Krsna, who was going to
Hastinapura, and conversed with him on the way.(M.B.
Udyoga Parva, Chapter 83, Stanza 65).
(v) The hermit Baka Dalbhya once talked about how
the kingdom of Dhrtarastra would be made burnt offering
to fire. (M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 41, Stanza Ds
VAKANAKHA (BAKANAKHA). One of Vigvamitra’s
sons who were expounders of the Vedas. (Maha Bharata
Anus asana Parva, Chapter 4, Stanza 58).
VAKPARUSYA (Using harsh words). One of the
wrongs brought under the rule ofchastisement in ancient
India. Without caring for the truth or falsity, a man
praising another with a view to tease or offend him,
is Wakparusya. The teasing may be aimed at somebody with disabled members of the body or disabled
organs of sense. Besides, using heart-rending words also
822 VALMIK II
comes under this crime. In olden days kings issued
orders to fine anybody found guilty of this crime. Ordinarily the fine was 25 Panas. If the crime was committed against one who was below the level of the culprit
the fine to be paid was only half. If harsh words were
used against other women or people of a higher level
the fine was double. (Agni Purana, Chapter 258).
VAKRA. A King in Ancient India. He is known by the
name Dantavaktra. (For further details see under
Dantavaktra).
VAKSOGRIVA. Vigvamitra’s son, who was an expounderof Vedas. (M.B. Anugdsana Parva, Chapter 4;
Stanza 53). :
VALA (BALA). An asura. It is stated in Padma Purana,
Bhumikhanda, how Indra killed this asura.
One day Vala went to the sea for his evening worship.
Devendra saw the asura, shining with the radiance
of celibacy and the divine rod and deer-hide, pray1ng
on the sea-shore. Instantly Indra cut him into two with
his weapon, the thunderbolt. Vala fell down motionless.
Mention is made about this asura in Regveda, Mandala
1, Anuvaka 4. (For further details see under Bala). |
VALAKA (BALAKA). A forester. (For further details
_ see under Balaka). :
VALAKASVA. See under Balakagva.
VALAKHILYAS. See under Balakhilyas.
VALALA. See under Ballava.
VALGUJANGHA. A son of Vigvamitra.
Brahmavadin. (See under Vig vamitra). "
VALIMUKHA. A famous monkey in the army of Sri
Rama. (Valmiki Ramayana, Yuddha Kanda, Sarg4
VALISIKHA. See under Baligikha.
VALKALA. See under Balvala.
VALLABHA I. The husband of Hemaprabha, an unchaste woman. (See under Hemaprabha).
VALLABHA IJ. Son of Balakagva. He was a righteous
King. Vallabha had a son named Kugika. (M.BAnuSasana Parva, Chapter 4, Stanza 5).
VALMIKI I. A hermit who was the first: among poets
and the author of Ramayana. ;
1) General information. Knowledge about this herm!t
who was the first among the poets of Bharata, is scanty:
So we have to depend mainly on some hearsay for the
life history of this sage.
He was 4
It is said that Valmiki was the tenth son of Varuna. But
in his younger age he fell into the hands of wicke
people and became a wicked man, like his friends. The”
his name was not Valmiki. Being a father, he had t©
support his family. For this purpose he used to plunde!
travellers. Once he happened to catch the Saptars!s
(the seven hermits) who passed by that way. The
hermits asked him whether his wife and children wou
share the sins he had incurred by plundering. The
plunderer could not answer that unexpected question:
He ran home and asked his wife and children if they
would share the sins incurred by him. They were not
prepared to do so. In a moment his life underwent
thorough change. He ran to the Saptarsis and knelt
before them. They imparted to the forester, knowledg®
of the Vedas. The forester sat under a tree and bega”
to sing’ ‘Rama Rama’. Days and months and years
passed, unknown to him. He did not know that white
ants had built a shelter above him. After several years
the Saptarsis returned by that way. They broke the

VALMIKI II
ant-hill and took the hermit out. Because he came out
of Valmika or white-ant-hill he came to be known as
Valmiki, He built his hermitage on the bank of the
river Tamasa and lived there with his disciples. It was
at this place that he composed the famous poem Ramayana. (For further details see under Ramayana ).
2) Other details. |
(1) Valmiki shines in the palace of Indra. (M.B.
Sabha Parva, Chapter 7, Stanza.16).
(ii) Mention is made in Mahabharata, Udyoga Parva,
Chapter 83, Stanza 27, that Valmiki met Sri Krsna
who was going to Hastinapura as 4 messenger of the
Pandavas. —
(ii) Satyaki recited a poem composed by Valmiki,
after having killed Bhurigravas in the Bharata-battle.
(M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 143, Stanza 57). .
(iv) Valmiki told Yudhisthira of the benefits of his
devotion to Siva. (M.B. Anusasana Parva, Chapter
18, Stanza 8).
VALMIKIII. One of the prominent sons of Garuda.
(Mahabharata, Udyoga Parva, Chapter 101, Stanza
bl) .
VAM. An attendant of Subrahmanya. (M.B. Salya
Parva, Chapter 46, Stanza La).
VAMADEVA. An ancient hermit. ‘ 4
1) Vamadeva and Sala. Three sons named Sala, Dala
and Bala were born to King Pariksit by his wife ee Obhana, a princess of Mandika. In due course, ing
Pariksit anointed his eldest son Sala as King and wen
to the forest for penance. : F
Once Sala went ho the forest to. hunt. While sige
a deer, the King asked his charioteer to bring ce
capable of overtaking the deer. The charioteer to
King that such horses were available at the ie Ee
of Vamadeva. They went to the hermitage 0 a
dition that they wou
deva and got the horses on con
be returned. |
After the hunting, Sala rea
beauty and the vigorous na
. ° oe he
hed his capital. Seeing t
on of the horses, the King
: A ent his
did not like to part with them. Wamadeva §
a : -e the horse€s back.
disciple to the court of the King to siete | Vamadeva
But i nt him back empty- :
got ery, Ee Gane jn person and demandes ed cat
The King replied that Brahmins did vellin Wad each
horses, While these two were eed Serge Sala
other. some fierce giants came el an in Daya,
with a trident and_ killed him. (M.»-
Chapter 192).
2) Other information. ay 2
1)He riend of V astern’ anza 3).
2s slhalese Balakanda. Sar See dea
(Gi) Mandala 4 of Rgveda was ee: had praised the
( iii) Vamadeva was a hermit a mother’s womb.
A“ vinidevas when he was in hl
(Reveda, Mandala |, Sakta eat the flesh of a dog
(iv) Once Vamadeva uy yiew to save Brahmins.
because of hunger, W!'! G6).
(Manusmrti, Chapter 10, Stanza Loy the assembly of
(v) He was a prominent m r 7, stanza 17).
4 Parva; Chapt¢ ish teousness
Indra, (M.B. Sabha dvice about rig
(vi) Once Vamadeva ae “anti Parva, Chapter 92).
haand a priest of Das aratha.
to King Vasumanas. a defeated this King»
VA A King. AU h.(M.B, Sabha
; ‘dusing his resitbi conquest of the Nori
Parva, Chapter 97, Stanza **/'
VAMADEVA ITI.
VAMANA I.
VAMANA I
One of the seven sons born to Manu
by his wife Satariipa. It is stated in Matsya Purana,
Chapter 4, that the Brahmin was born from the face,
Ksatriya from the hand, Vaisya from the calf of the leg
and Studra from the foot, of Wamadeva, who was an
incarnation of Siva. This Vamadeva who had five
faces and a trident in his hand, fought with Candra,
when Tara the wife of Brhaspati was carried away by
Candra. (Matsya Purana, 4-13).
An incarnation of Mahavisnu.
1) General information. There are ten main incarnations
of Mahavisnu. Of these, the incarnation of Vamana is
the fifth. |
2) Two Vamanas. Two different stories occur in the
Puranas about the incarnation of Vamana. One story
is about how Mahavisnu took the incarnation of Vamana
and thrust Mahabali an asura, down to the netherworld. This story is more widely known. In the second
story the place of Mahabali is given to the asura called
Dhundhu. ‘This is the main difference. For a comparative study, both stories are given below:
a) The first story of the incarnation of Vamana. The devas
(gods)such as Indra and the others were born to Prajapati Kasyapa by his wife Aditi and the asuras (demons)
such as Mahabali and others, by his wife Diti. The
Daityas (asuras) began to harm and harass the Devas
to a great extent. Once Aditi, the mother of the Devas,
complained to Kagyapa about this. He advised her to
take the fast called ‘Payovrata’ fixing the image of
Mahavisnu in her heart and that he will take birth
through her as Vamana and destroy Mahabal.. According to the advice of her husband, Aditi began to take
Payovrata, at the end of which Mahavisnu appeared
before her and asked her what her wish was. She told
Visnu; of her grievances and Visnu consoled her and
said “You have invoked me by your prayer and fast
for the safety of your sons. So I will enter your womb
through the penance of Kagyapa and take birth as your
son and rescue your sons.”’
Mahavisnu disappeared. Aditi worshipped her husband
with devotion. By contemplation Kasyapa knew everything. He infused the energy he had acquired by
penance into Aditi, who gave birth to a son. The birth
took place on the twelfth day of the month of Bhadrapada, in the bright lunar fortnight at the auspicious
moment called Abhijit, in the star of Sravana. The
infant had four hands. While Kagyapa and Aditi were
looking on, the infant changed its form and became a_
dwarfish Brahmin boy. The Devas brought presents
to the child. The Sun taught him the spell called Savitrimantra. Brhaspati gave the Brahmastring. Kasyapa
gave the string worn round the waist. ' The earth gave
the hide of a black antelope. Soma the Vanaspati gave
a rod; Aditi gave the cloth over the privities, the sky
an umbrella, the seven hermits gave Ku’a-grass, Brahma
gave a waterpot, Sarasvati gave a rosary and Kubera
gave a pot. |
At that time, the powerful Mahabali had brought the
three worlds of heaven, earth and Patala (the netherworld) under his control. That Asura King performed
a horse¢sacrifice with the help of a Bhargava Brahmin.
Hearing about it Vamana started for the place of sacrifice. Mahabali was performing the sacrifice at a place
called Bhrgukacchaka on the North bank of river
Narmada. ‘The priests who were performing the rites

VAMANA I
and ceremonies of the sacrifice saw Vamana coming
slowly to the sacrificial hall. They wondered whether it
was the Sun, Sanatkumara or Agni (Fire) coming to
see the sacrifice. While they were standing thus, Vamana
with his umbrella, rod and water pot ‘filled with water
- entered the sacrificial hall. Mahabali welcomed Vamana
and asked him the purpose of his visit. Wamana said
“Oh King ! Your words are sweet. Noble Asura ! give
me three feet of ground which I-‘measure with my feet.
That is all what I want.” |
Mahabali agreed. The teacher-priest Sukra felt some
doubts regarding the identity of Vamana. So he secretly told Mahabali that the boy Vamana was none other
than Mahavisnu and as such, he should not give any
promise. But Mahabali had already given the promise.
He refused to go back upon his words. The priest
ukra got angry at this and cursed Mahabali thus.
“You boast that you are wise and learned. But you are
disobedient, slow-witted and unwise. So all your
prosperities will be destroyed.”’
Though he was cursed, he did not deviate from the
path of truth. He gave the promised ground to
Vamana by pouring water with the water brought
in golden pot by his queen Vindhyavali. The names,
“Agana and Kotara also’ are used in the Puranas for
Vindhyavali the wife of Mahabali. She came out for
the purpose wearing golden ornaments. Mahabali
himself washed the feet of Vamana, who instantly
began to grow and became large beyond imagination.
Everybody on the spot was amazed at the unimaginable bigness of Vamana. On that huge figure, Mahabali
saw the priest, the performers of sacrificial rites, the sacrificial hall, the universe, the elements, the qualities the
senses, the mind, the individual spirits, and at the feet
of the figure the world Rasatala. He saw the earth on
its feet, mountains below the knees, birds on its knees,
the Maruts on its thighs, evening on its clothes, the
Prajapatis on its privities, the noble and mighty asuras
on its loins, the sky on its navel, the oceans on its stomach,
Dharma (duty) in its heart, rightness and truth on its
breasts, Mahalaksmi holding lotus on its chest, songs
of Saman and all other voices in its neck, all the gods
beginning with Indra on its hands, the points (directions) on its ears, the ether on its head, the clouds on
its hair, breaths in its nose, the sun in its eyes, fire on
its face, the Vedas in its words, Varuna in its tongue
day and night agreement and disagreement in its wink.
ing and anger on its forehead.
and ang In its touch there was
desire, in its radiance there was water, in its buttocks
Jawlessness, sacrifice in its steps, death in its shadow
illusion in its laugh, medicines in its hairs, rivers in its
veins, stones in its nails, Brahma in its intelligence
hermits, devas etc. in its life-breaths. Thus the figure
was seen by Mah4bali. Vamana had trodden on the
whole of the earth, which was completely under the
cont ol of Mahabali, with one foot, filled the whole of
the sky with his large body and the four points were filled
with his hands. The second step was put on Maharloka,
Janaloka and Tapoloka (three worlds). No spot was
left in the universe for a third step.
Vamana said :—‘‘You have given me three feet of
ground. I have measured two feet of ground. Shaw me
thé place to measure the third step. I have measured
the earth with one step and the heaven with the second
step. You have seen it. If you cannot keep your promise
-VAMANA I
you had better go down to Patala.” Bali requested him
to place the third step on his head. Vamana placed his
foot on the head of Mahabali and thrust him down to
Patala. ‘
Vamana brought Indra to the spot and anointed him
as the ruler of heaven, in the presence of all the gods
and hermits.. Indra sent Vamana with the Lokapalas
(Indra, Agni, Yama and Varuna) in a divine Vim4na
to the world of Visnu. (Bhagavata Skandha 8).
b) The second story of the incarnation of Vamana. Dhundhu,
an asura boy, was born to Kagyapa by his wife Danu.
That asura did penance and pleased Brahma. He spe
a request that he should not be killed by Indra an
the other gods or anybody else. Brahma, who an
pleased at his penance, gave him the boon he are
The boy Dhundhu, at the beginning of the fourt
Kaliyuga, during the period of Hiranyakasipu, went to
heaven and defeating Indra and the other Devas;
established his rule there as Indra. The mighty
Hiranyakagipu was travelling on the mountain Mandara
as an official under Dhundhu. b
The defeated and grief-stricken Devas went to tne
world of Brahma and lived there. Dhundhu, who knew
this, wanted to drive them out of that place also. He
requested Sukra, the priest and teacher of asuras, t©
tell him the means of doing it. h
Sukra said. ‘‘Devendra was enabled to enter the
presence of Brahma, because he had performed a
hundred horse-sacrifices. “Hearing this, Dhundhu, wit
the permission of the teacher Sukra, began to perform
sacrifice in. the holy place called Pracina tirtha.
Hearing that Dhundhu_had begun the horse-sacrifice,
Indra and the Devas trembled with fear and, leaving
the world of Brahma, went to the world of Visnu an
prayed for protection. Bhagavan came to know ‘
everything and consoled them and sent them bac ;
After this Mahavisnu took the form of a cn a
and jumped into the Devikajala and lay afloat like
Piece of dry wood. Dhundhu and the hermits saw
chance, Vamana sinking and coming up in the vane
They took the Vamana-Brahmin out of water and aske
him how he had fallen in water. Vamana replied a
shiver:—“Tn the family of Varuna there was a Brahm}
named Prabhasa, who was a scholar. I am Gatibhas?
the younger of his two sons. After the death of fathe ;
I requested my brother to divide the property of hat
father. My brother quoted several rules and: said t .
I was not entitled to get any portion of my father
wealth. Ispoke against him and getting angry It
caught me by my hair and threw me into the river.
i3 a year since I, being: not able to swim, began to a
‘tise come up in this river. Thus you have seen ™
ere,”’
The ‘Bhargavas who were present there, requested
Dhundhu thus. “Oh! King of the asuras ! Be pleas®
to give this boy a_well-furnished house, servant-man
and plenty of wealth.” Hearing this Dhundhu said ‘
amana., “I will provide you with wealth, serv4?
maids, house, gold, cows, land, clothes etc.” do
Vamana humbly said to Dhundhu “Oh Lord !! at
not want any wealth. It is my desire for wealth th
has brought me to this plight. T request you to 8!
me only three feet of ground,” st
8 soon as the asura-King complied with his requ ne
amana began to grow like the moon, He assumed ¢

VAMANA II
shape of Trivikrama to measure each of the three
worlds with a foot. In two steps he measured all the
worlds. Vamana whose body was bigger than Mahameru became angry when he did not see place to
measure the third step, and fell on Dhundhu. By this
heavy fall there appeared a great cavity thirty thousand
yojanas decp. Bhagavan Visnu took the asura Dhundhu
and threw him into that deep pit with a mighty force,
and by a shower of dust he filled the cavity.
Indra with the Devas occupied the world of Gods.
Leaving the asura King in the sea of dust, Bhagavan
jumped into the river K4lindi and disappeared. (Padma
Purana, Chapter 78).
VAMANA II. One of the eight elephants supporting
the universe. This elephant was one of the four sons of
Iravati. Airavata, Supratika and Afijana were the
Other three. (Brahmanda Purana, 3:7 :292). This
Amana was the conveyance of a famous giant in the
army of Ghatotkaca! during the battle of Bharata.
(M.B, Bhisma Parva, Chapter 60, Verse 56).
VAMANA III. A holy place situated on the borders of
Kuruksetra., By bathing in the particular spot called
Visnupida, in this holy place and worshipping Vamana,
one could enter the world of Visnu. (M.B. Vana Parva,
Chapter 86, Stanza 103). | ;
VAMANA IV. A holy place. It is stated in Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 84, Stanza 13, that those
who worship Hari (Visnu) in this place will never
€come miserable.
VAMANA V. A mountain in the Kraufica Island.
(Mahabharata, Bhisma Parva, Chapter 12) :
VAMANABHATTABANA. A great Sanskrit poet. Tt is
believed that he lived in_ the es gota al ks =
writte and plays. His poetic Wor
n several poems play hacarita’. The former
‘Nalabhyudaya’ and ‘Raghun at : )
consists of eight Kandas and the latter, thirty THT
It is stated that Vaman bhattaba a had
t t a a at 8 k h
: . major wo €
idyarany these two gor, WOES
anya. Besides ramas. Imitating the poem
written several poems an t
‘Mechasarrieta’et Kalidasa, he had written © =
work of the same type called ‘Harhsasan ae Nest
Drama called Srngarabhusana was written ie 2
Vamana, It is said that this sea cd see
ijayanagara, ‘The two plays, pane h ae ie
and ‘Kanakarekha’ were also written DY e : poet.
Vibtinca pre. Que of due Sear ete
(See under Purana ; |
VAMANIKA, An odie of Subrahmanya. (M.B.
alya Parva, Chapter 46, Stanza a the Puranas. The
VAMKSU. A river which 's ee sin. of this river,
low-caste people who lived on the )4 tion) of Yudhicame to the Rajasuya (imperial Be ig RianZ® LF.
sthira, (M.B, Sabha Parva, Chapter =" by his
VAMSA, A daughter born to Prajapat A Giana 45).
wife Pradha. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 0~ tal en
VAMSAGULMA. A hkgly bath. The jabharata, Vana
Narmada start from this bath. In
Parva, Chapter 85, Stanza 9, }t %
this holy bath one could obtain
a horse-sacrifice.
VAMSAMULAKA. ee
boundary of Kuruksetra. Tt 18 §
he fruits of performing
situated on the
A holy aes in Mahabharata,
s stated that by visiting ©
VANDANA
Vana Parva, Chapter 83, Stanza 41, that if a bath is
taken in this holy place one could bring about the uplift of one’s race.
VAMSAVALI. (GENEALOGY). The genealogy of the
characters in the Puranas is given separately at the
_ end of this book.
VAMYA. Name of the horse of the hermit Vamadeva.
(M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 122, Stanza 41).
VANAPARVA. An important Parva in Mahabharata.
VANAPRASTHA. (House-holder in the forest). One of
the four stages of life. (See under Agrama).
VANARA (MONKEY). Monkeys are given a prominent
place in the Puranas. Considering them as born. in the
family of Hanaiman, an ardent devotee of Sri Rama,
some worship monkeys. It is mentioned in Valmiki
Ramayana that the monkeys got a prominent place
first among the gods and spirits. It is stated in Valmiki
Ramayana, Kiskindha Kanda, Sarga 33, that the
leaders of the monkeys were Bali, Sugriva, Angada,
Mainda, Gavaya, Dvivida, Gavaksa, Gaja, Sarabha, »
Sairyaksa, Haniman, Vidyunmali, Virabahu, Subahu,
Nala, Kumuda, Jambavan, Tara, Supatala, Sunetra,
Nila and Dadhivaktra.
The social life of the monkeys, is described as follows
in the Valmiki Ramayana, Ki skindha Kanda, Sarga
33. “Mahendra mountain, the Himalayas, the Vindhya
mountain, the peaks of Kailasa and Sveta mountain,
Mandara mountain etc. are the places mostly inhabited by monkeys. On the mountains shining like the
rising sun, on the east of the western ocean also monkeys
live. The Monkeys which inhabit black soil are blue
in colour, Monkeys which live in red arsenic caves
are yellow in colour. Those which live in Maha Meru
and Dhimra (smoky) mountain have the colour of the
rising sun and are drunkards.”’
VANASPATI I. Those trees which produce fruits without
flowering are called Vanaspati according to Manusmrti
Chapter 1, Stanza 47. Atti (fig tree) is an example.
Apuspah phalavanto ye te vanaspatayas smrtah).
VANASPATI II. One of the seven sons of the King
Ghrtaprstha. (Bhagavata, Skandha 5).
VANAVA. A country famous in the Puranas. (Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 9, Stanza 54).
VANAVASIKA. A country in ancient India. (M.B.
Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Stanza 58).
VANAYU I. Ason born to Prajapati Kagyapa of his
wife Danu. It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Adi Parva
Chapter 65, Stanza 25, that he was the most prominent
of the ten sons of Danu.
VANAYU II. A son born to Urvagi from Puriravas.
The sons of Urvasi were Ayus, Dhiman, Amavasu,
Drdhayu Satayu and Vanayu. (M.B. Adi Parva,
Chapter 75, Stanza 25).
VANAYU III. A country in ancient India. Mention
is made about this country in Mahabharata, Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 56. ,
VANCULA. A bird. The cry of this bird, is believed to
forebode victory. (Valmiki Ramayana, Aranya Kanda
Sarga 69, Stanza 22).
VANDANA. A'hermit mentioned in Rgveda. Onee
this hermit was pushed into a well by Asuras. But he
was saved by the Aévinidevas. (Rgveda, Mandala I,
Anuvaka 1, Sikta 116). |
VANDANA. A river famous in the Puranas, (Mahabharata, Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Stanza 18)

VANDI 826 VARAHBA III
VANDI (BANDI, VANDINA). A scholar and scientist WAPUSMATI. Daughter of the King of Sindhu. She
in the palace of King Janaka. He defeated the hermit
Kahodaka in an argument and dipped him in water.
(For further details see under Astavakra).
VANDINA. See under Vandi.
VANEYU. A King who was the grandson of emperor
Piru and the son of Rudraéva. Vaneyu was born to
Rudrasva by a celestial woman named Misrakegi. Ten
sons named Vaneyu, Rceyu, Kakseyu, Krpaneyu,
Sthandileyu, Jaleyu, Tejeyu, Satyeyu, Dharmeyu
and Santateyu, were born to this celestial woman.
(M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 94, Stanza 8).
VANGA. An important state in ancient India. The
present name of this country is Bengal. Several statements occur in the Puranas about Vanga.
The following are the statements about Vanga given
in the Mahabharata.
(1) Arjuna visited this country during his pilgrimage.
(M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 214, Stanza os
(ii) Bhimasena attacked Vanga. (M.B. Sabha Parva,
Chapter 30, Stanza 23).
(iii) The Kings of Vanga visited Yudhisthira with
presents. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 52, Stanza 18),
(iv) Karna conquered this country during his regional
conquest. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 254, Stanza Os
(v) In the Bharata battle the King of Vanga confronted Ghatotkaca and was defeated. (M.B. Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 92, Stanza 6).
(vi) Once Sri Krsna conquered the country of Vanga.
(M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 11, Stanza 15).
(vii) ParaSurama exterminated the Ksatriyas of Vanga.
(M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 70, Stanza ae
(viii) The low castes of Vanga attacked the sacrificial
horse led by Arjuna who killed every one of them.
(M.B. ASvamedha Parva, Chapter 82, Stanza 29),
VANGRDA, An asura. It is mentioned in Reveda,
Mandala 1, Anuvaka 1, Sikta 10, that the Kings Atithigva and Rjisva, with their armies surrounded the
cities of the asuras Karafija, Parnaya and Vangrda and
that Indra helped the two Kings.
VANJULA. See under Vidura IT.
VAPUSI. A daughter of Daksa. Dharmadeva married
her. (Visnu Purana, Arméa 1, Chapter 7).
VAPUS II. A celestial maid. She made a futile attempt
to hinder the penance of the hermit Durvasas, and by
the curse of the hermit she had to take birth as the
daughter of Kundhara by Menaka in the next birth.
(Markandeya Purana, 1, 49, 96; 2; 41).
VAPUSMAN. Son of Sankrandana, the King of Vidarbha. Dama, a famous King of Dista dynasty carried
away by stealth Suman, the daughter of Caruvarma,
the King of DaSarna, in consequence of which Vapusman
and Dama became enemies.
Vapusman waited for an Opportunity to take revenge
and when a convenient moment came, he killed Narisyanta the father of Dama. Indrasena the mother
of Dama told him of his father’s murder and then
jumping into the funeral pyre of her husband, she died.
Because of grief at the loss of his parents and anger
towards the slayer, Dama started with a mighty arm
and engaged Vapusman ina fierce battle. He killed
Vapusman in the battle and with his blood he made
offerings to the spirits of his parents. ( Markandeya
Purana, 133).
became the wife of Marutta. (Markandeya Purana,
VAPUSTAMA,. The prominent queen of King Janamejaya. She was the daughter of Suvarnavarma, the
King of Kasi. (Devi Bhagavata, Skandha 2). Vapustama had two sons, Satanika and Sankukarna. (M.B.
Adi Parva, Chapter 95, Stanza 86).
VARADA. A warrior of Subrahmanya (Mahabharata,
Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Stanza 64).
VARADANA. A holy place near Dvaraka. It was here
that Durvasas gave Bhagavan Sri Krsna boons CY pia.
From that day this became a holy place. It is mentione
in Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 82, that eo
who take bath in this holy place would obtain the
fruits of giving a thousand cows as alms.
VARADASANGAMA. A holy place. Those who take bath
in this holy place would obtain the fruits of giving
a thousand cows as alms. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapte
85, Stanza 35).
VARAHA. An ancient hermit. It ismentioned in Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter 4, Stanza 17, that this
hermit stayed in the palace of Yudhisthira.
VARAHA II. A holy place in the middle of Kuruksetra.
It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Sgt
83, Stanza 88, that Mahavisnu stayed in this place =
a while in the shape of Varaha (Boar) and that thos
who bathe in this holy bath would obtain the fruits °
performing the sacrifice Agnistoma. af
VARAHA III. (Boar). One of the ten incarnations
Mahavisnu. .
1) Need for this incarnation. Jaya and Vijaya, two ual
keepers of Mahavisnu showed disrespect towar¢
the famous hermits Sanaka and others who went ‘el
visit Mahavisnu. The angry hermits cursed them to i
birth as asuras. Accordingly Jaya and Vijaya took bir
as the two asuras Hiranyaksa and Hiranyakasipu 4"
were born from Prajapati Kagyapa by his wife Ditl. , "
Even their birth itself was inauspicious. Once, while
Ka yapa was carrying on evening worship, his wife pe
filled with libid. She embraced Kagyapa. Because i
got pregnancy in an inauspicious moment, two 25¥ rn
sons were born. At the time of their birth darknes
spread over the whole of the world, and some ill ome”
were seen. The Devas (gods) trembled. d
The elder son was called Hiranyaksa and the seco”
son was called Hiranyakagipu. As Hiranyadksa grew ut
he began to quarrel with the Devas, When the fig ‘
grew fierce, he picked up the earth in his hands 45 ’
ball and went under water. There was left only wate ‘4
The Devas went to Mahavisnu and prayed to him }
order to get the earth back, 4
At this time Manu Svayambhuva, the son of Brabre 2
was living with his father looking after his welfare. ¥
father, who was pleased with the services of his 1!
said. ‘“My dear son, you should worship Devi, who
be pleased with your devotion and will bless you:
she Is pleased with you, you will become a fame””
Prajapati.”? Hearing the words of Brahma, SvaY ps
uva worshipped Devi with ardent devotion, coh
meditation and severe vows and penance, at whi
Jagadamba was pleased. She appeared before him ap
t
asked him what boon he wanted, Manu requested ee
he should be permitted to catry on creation with? u
any obstruction. oh
Devi gave him permission.

VAR AHA IV
returned to his father Brahma and said. ‘‘Father, point
out tome a solitary place. I will sit there and create
subjects by the blessings of Devi.” Only when he heard
the request cf his son, did Brahma begin to think about
the exigency of providing his son with such a place. For,
the earth was completely under water. For a long time
even Brahma was being subjected to much inconvenience to carry on creation. Only Bhagavan Adi
Narayana (Visnu) could do anything in this matter. So
Brahma with the Manus, hermits and others began to
meditate on Mahavisnu.
2) Incarnation. Instantly the young one of a Boar
jumped out of the nose of Brahma through his breath.
That divine figure of Boar stood in the air and began to ~
grow. Within a few moments, it became a colossal
Being. It grew up as big as an elephant. Soon it ma
came as large as a mountain. Seeing this, Brahma an
the others stood in amazement. The Boar made a grunt
in a loud roaring sound. The people of Janaloka, Satyaloka etc. understood that it was the sound of 9
visnu. They raised glory and praise to Bhagavan, w "i
heard ‘all these praises, but without Fotidescanene fe)
tell anything, looked at all of them with grace ‘on ove,
and with a mighty force jumped into the ac f oe
immensely troubled by the maneés of God om %
Varuna prayed to him to save him from them. ae
folded his mane and went eae, the deep water an
mnade a search for the earth. ihe
and snorting and found out the earth. He slowly ee
it on his tusks and started from there. On the yee Ze
fierce and wicked Hiranyaksa hindered him. Bhagava
Visnu used his club Nandaka and killed Ee fe
was besmeared with his blood; Mahavisnu ire " th
e earth. He set the ear
the surface of water with the e
firm over the water. Thus Brahma gave see See
in the earth which floated on the water KG 8
and empowered him to perform cret Ut marth, the
3) Incarnation of Boar again. The go ba a aiiei,
deity of earth which was raised to the on ed hind. “Fe
fell in love with Mahavisnu ane “al braces contiembraced her in return. These mutua es God) and
nued for one complete Devavers* eee and weak
Consequently the goddess Earth Riven a little under
and unconscious. So the earth alte 2 Boas again and
water. Bhagavan took the form ‘ e and returned to
lifted the earth to its original P 3 Devi Bhagavata
Vaikuntha. (Bhagavata, Skandha Cha ter5; Padma
Skandhas 8 and 2 Agni a eel P
Vv sey Bhaimikhanda, emp Girivraja, the pee:
AHA IV. A mountain ™ = Parva apcity of Magadha. (Mahabharata, Sabha ’
t : f DhrtaVARAH he ra T heiseal born 10 ie deere ncial fire
rastra, This serpent was burne 0 ha ter 57, Stanza
of Janamejaya. (M.B. Adi Parva, P uy
VARAHAKARNA, A Yaks@ (der ighabharata, Sabha
remains in the palace of ay A ( ,
wane Chapter 13, Stanza ye atiot is a nee a
R _ An asura. 227, Sta
in eit ein. Santi Parva. caren : ;
ARAHA PURANA Seeund? «ve, Brahma ha
VARAMANI, A beetle made O%! JET itn this jewelfiven a ed that only he who ere atala Ravana. This
beetle in his mouth could kill
Boar walked smelling.
VARANASI
secret was known only to the giants, such as Ravana.
and others. This Varamani was kept in an underground cell of a harem near the Kali temple in the
Patala.
The battle between Rama and Ravana was going on.
Haniman made a fort coiling his tail like a spring and
Rama and Laksmana stayed inside this fort. While they
were sleeping, Patala Ravana made a tunnel under the
earthand carried away Rama and Laksmana. Vibhisana
knew this, only next day morning. Instantly he sent
Haniman to Patala. In accordance with the advice of
_ Vibhisana, Haniman went directly to the cell in the
harem, took Varamani and put it in his mouth. Then
he fought with Patala Ravana and defeated him. Thus
with the help of the Varamani Hanuman rescued Rama
and Laksmana. (Kamba Ramayana, Yuddha Kanda).
VARANA. A river famous in the Puranas. It is mentioned in Vamana Purana that the river Warana which
flowed from the right leg and the river Asi, which
started from the left leg of Bhagavan, who lies in contemplation at Prayaga, are two holy rivers. (See under
Varanasi).
VARANA. A country in ancient Bharata. It is mentioned
in Mahabharata, Udyoga Parva, Chapter 19, Stanza 31,
that the army of the Kauravas had surrounded this
country.
VARANASI! (VARANASI). Kadi.
(Before reading the information given here refer
to the details given about Kasi under Kasi and
Divodasa ). |
1) The name Varanasi. Formerly this place was known
as Prayaga. Later it got the name V4aranasi and then
Kagi. The name Varanasi is originated from two rivers.
Bhagavan Yogasayi who stays in Prayaga was born from
a portion of Mahavisnu. From the right leg of Yogagayi the river Varana started and from his left leg the
river Asi started. These two rivers are praised and
worshipped all over the world. The temple of Yogagayi is situated in the place between these two rivers.
As the place is situated between Varana and Asi it is
called Varanasi. (Vamana Purana, Chapter 3).
2) Other information.
(i) Bhisma went to Kasi and took Amba, Ambika and
Ambalika, the daughters of the King of K4gi, to his
kingdom by force. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 102,
Stanza 3).
(ii) Varanasi is a holy place of pilgrimage. By bathing
in Kapilahrada, a holy bath there, and worshipping
Sankara, one could obtain the fruits of performing
the sacrifice Rajasiiya. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 84,
Stanza 78).
(iii) The middle part of Varanasi is called Avimukta.
Those who forsake their lives at Avimukta will obtain
heaven. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 84, Stanza 79).
(iv) Once Sri Krsna made Varanasi a prey to fire.
(M.B. Udyoga Parva, Chapter 48, Stanza 76).
(v) Avery great scholar named Tuladhara Vaiya
once lived in Varanasi. (M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter
961, Stanza41).
(vi) Once, in ancient days, Siva imparted to the hermit Jaigisu at this place, the eight miraculous attainments such as anima, garima etc. (M.B. Anuédsana
Parva, Chapter 18, Stanza 37).
(vii) Varanasi is equal to the capital city of Indra

VARANAVATA
(Amaravati). (M.B. Anugasana Parva, Chapter 30,
Stanza 16).
(viii) In ancient days a hermit named Samvartta
used to come here daily to worship Siva. It was at. this
place that the emperor Marutta accepted the hermit
Samnvartta as his priest. (M.B. Agvamedha Parva,
Chapters 6 and 7). |
VARANAVATA. The place where Duryodhana built the
wax-house for the Pandavas. It is believed that the
modern village Varnava, 19 miles north east to Meerut
in North India, is the place where this Puranic. Varanavata stood. Information about Varanadvata found in
Mahabharata, is given below ;
(1) Once the ministers of Dhrtarastra made a consultation about the festival in this city. (M:B. Adi
Parva, Chapter 192, Stanza 3).
(ii) Waranavata was one of the five villages requested.
for by the Pandavas, on their return after their life in the
forest. (M.B. Udyoga Parva, Chapter 31, Stanza Le)
(i1) Yuyutsu, theson of Dhrtarastra, carried on a
battle here for six months. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 19, Verse 58).
VARANGII. The wife of Vajranga, an asura. (For
more details see under Parvati, Para 2).
VARANGIII. Wife of Sarhyati,a King of the Lunar
dynasty. The father of this Varangi was Drsadvan. A
son named Aharhyati was born to Varangi. (M.B. Adi
Parva, Chapter 95, Stanza 14).
VARARUCI, An ancient Indian scholar in astronomy
and astrology. (Some details regarding Vararuci are
given under Bhartrhari).
1) Birth. It is stated in Kathasaritsagara, Kathapithalambaka, Taranga 1, that Vararuci was the rebirth of
a Gananayaka (guard of Siva) named Puspadanta.
Once Siva happened to tell Parvati some previous
stories of the Vidyadharas. Puspadanta eavesdropped
and heard everything. Parvati understood this and
cursed him to become a man. Accordingly Puspadanta
was born in the city of Kaugambi under the name
Vararuci or Katyayana. (For details about the curse
see under Gunadhya).
2) Of sharp intelligence. Wararuci was born as the son
of the Brahmin Somadatta at Kau‘ambi. AgniSikha was another name of Somadatta. Vasudatta
was the mother of Vararuci. In the previous birth,
Vasudatta was a hermit maid. Due to a curse she
lost her hermit-maidhood and took birth asa woman
under the name Vasudatta and became the wife of
Somadatta.
As his father died in his childhood, Vararuci was
brought up by his mother. She was in great penury
after the death of her husband. One day two travellers
came to her house. While they were Sitting on the
veranda, the sound of a conch was heard. Then the
mother called Vararuci and said to him. **Son, the
dance of Nanda, the friend of your father, is about to
begin.”” Vararuci requested his mother to let him ZO
to the temple and see the dance so that he might learn
it. Hearing this, the guests were amazed. How can
one learn dance by seeing only once? That was the
doubt in the minds of the travellers. ““Vararuci could
learn anything by hearing only once’, his mother
said. As a test, they recited to him a portion from the
Vedas. Vararuci repeated the portion to them without
any mistake. After this the guests took the boy and
VARARUCI
showed him the dance and brought him back. The boy
performed every item of the dance he saw, before the
guests. They were immensely pleased.
3) Getting a teacher. The guests had actually been
searching for a boy who could understand anything at
the first hearing. There was reason for it.
In the great city of Nandaradja, there was a grea
Brahmin named Safkarasvami. He had two sons
named Varsa and Upavarsa. Both married and lived .
separate houses. By and by Varsa became cruel way
wicked and poor. Upavarsa became learned an
wealthy. The rainy season approached. In those days
it was a custom for women to make a sweet food of ee
flour with sugar and give it to cruel Brahmins. lt _—
to prevent the extreme cold in the winter and the i
treme heat in the summer from affecting them severe >
The wife of Upavarsa made this sweet food and aay ‘
to Varsa. When he brought it home, his wife scol “
him. Varsa felt very sorry because of his rt
He gave up all his desires and began to wors a
Kumarasvami. Kumarasvami was pleased with hu :
and blessed him with all kinds of knowledge. ma
svami had ordered him to teach all of this knowle e
to one who could learn at first hearing. From that “|
onwards Varsa had been waiting for a disciple W
could learn at first hearing.
During this period there lived two Brahmins na J
Devasvami and Karambhaka in the city of Vetasapu'™”
They were friends. A son wasborn to each of the of
The son of Devasvami was named Vyali. The name¢ ali
the son of Karambhaka was Indradatta. When Vy4
was a child, his father died. Seeing their grief 1
father of Indradatta left the country. Both of the pe
having nobody to look after them, went to per! -
penance, before Subrahmanyasvami. Subr stage
ordered them in their sleep to go to Varsa in eet
the city of King Nanda, and to learn every thing King
him. The boys immediately went to the city of The
Nanda and enquired about the teacher Varsa. ere
people told them-that Varsa was a fool. They They
sorry to hear it. Still they did not turn back. hic
reached the house of Varsa, and entered the house W ore
was the abode of rats and bats, the walls of which eer
crumbling due to rain as it had not been thatche vi
along time. The courtyard was full of Cassiat nfs
plants. Inside the house, here and there on the yas
Cyperus-grass was growing. The wife of Varsa who told
in utter penury stood up and welcomed them. She !
them about her husband. “He is waiting for a ae et
who would learn everything at first hearing.’ VY
and Indradatta agreed to bring such a disciple
they started on a journey in search of such a boy:
were the two travellers who came to the hous
Vararuci. af
Vyali said all about these things to the mothe’ og
Vararuci. She was very glad and said. ““Fiveryt eal
fits well. At the birth of my son, an ether
voice said : “At first hearing he will learn ev ner
thing. He will learn everything from the teat a
Varsa. He will publish works in grammar an as '
nomy’’. If he has interest in good things he will BC est
name Vararuci. SoI had been thinking how and W
to find this teacher Varsa.”’
Next morning, with the permission of his ol
Vararuci started for the house of Varsa, with vyali
med
an
They,
O
ers
ae

VARARUCI
Indradatta. They reached the house of Varsa. Next
morning they smeared and purified the floor and: the
three sincere and simple disciples sat facing the east.
The teacher Varsa recited to them the divine spell
‘Om’, and instantly all the Vedas and the ancillaries of
Vedas made their appearance. The teacher | commenced
teaching. The three disciples learned, Vararucl
hearing only once, Vyali hearing twice and, Indradatta
hearing thrice. Hearing these divine recitations and
repetitions which were not to be heard anywhere else,
Brahmins crowded to the place. King Nanda of
Pataliputra praised the teacher Varsa and sent him
plenty of wealth and conferred on him ranks and
privileges.
4) Marriage. Vararuci learned everything from the
teacher Varsa. He went with his friends once to see
the Indra-festival. There, Wararuci happened to see
Upakoéa the daughter of Upavarsa and fell in love
with her. That night he did not sleep. At last he slowly closed his eyes. A divine woman clad in white
garments appeared before him It seemed to him that
the woman said to him. ‘You need not worry in this
matter. Upakosa was your wife in the previous birth.
She will marry only you. Iam Sarasvati who pervades
your body.’”? Vararuci woke up. Next day the elders
came to know of this, and gave her in marriage to
Vararuci. Astehetl
5) Vararuci becoming a Minister. Education was tints 1¢d.
presents
It was tirne for Vyali and Indradatta to give
to the teacher Varsa. The teacher demanded a crore
of Vilkas (a Venetian ducat used for neck-ornament).
They were not having so much wealth. They eR
with Vararuci to Nanda, the King of Ayodhya, and _ the
Brother-in-law of Vararuci. When they reached ae
they heard that the King had just died. Indra ane
said “‘By the practice of contemplation I a enter 2
body of the King. Vararuci should come and 8 money
of me, Till my return Vyali must keep my bo Ss 5 dedbae
“The spirit of Indradatta immediately ene Ti
King’s body. The dead King rose up. OPE
struck with wonder. They celebrated a. Seatac
kept the body of Indradatta within a tempt. ee
went to the presence of the King and Deere cial
crore of Vilkas. The King called his minister
eee ; of Vilkas.
and told him to give Vararucl a i doubt
Sakatala. who was an intelligent man, ©",
in the coming to life of the King. He a tise mee ie
one might have entered the al ‘ ie should be
ordered that every dead body 1 Saale ae Indradatta
burnt. Along with the bodies, the body this time the
also was taken by force from Vyali. om ar Vilkas.
King compelled Sakatala to g1V® the begg
; tala did not
But till the dead bodies were burnt, ee dalle had
obey him. Because his body was sae tala gave Warato remain in the body of the King. Serie was the
ruci the required amount, But of : Kin The King
money ? Indradatta had become the = a result O
and Vyali made a secret CO a ietet Sakatala
which Vararuci was made the Prime wuts ut into a
was charged with Brahmahaty@ OT he were allowed
dungeon with his hundred sons. | peat (a measure )
fried and powdered grain anda
of water as food for each. er
akatala said to his sons. “My 8° te
live with so little food. The most 10
all of us cannot
lligent one among
VARARU CI
us should live by eating the whole food, to take revenge
on the Yoga Nanda King. Who will do so?”
Sons :-—We don’t think that we are powerful to do that.
So you must live, father !
So Sakatala ate the whole food and lived while his sons,
one by one, died of hunger before his eyes. Sakatala
sat in the middle of the Skeletons with the sole purpose
of taking revenge. Vy4li gave the present to the teacher
and went home.
Indradatta and Vararuci lived as king and minister.
6) Loss of ministership. By and by Indradatta had fallen
into bad ways. The subjects were beset with famine.
The people hated the king and the minister. They made
a cry to bring Sakatala back. They obtained the permission of the king and brought Sakatala out of the
dungeon. Sakatala knew that ‘so long as Vararuci was
alive, he could do nothing to the King Yoga Nanda. So
he decided to wait -for an opportunity, and accepted
an office under Vararuci. One day Yoga Nanda went
out for a walk. Hesaw in the Ganges the palm of a
hand with five fingers. He cailed Vararuci and asked
him what the sight was. Vararuci showed two fingers
in that direction. Immediately the palm of the hand
disappeared. The King was amazed at this and asked
him for its meaning. He said ‘“The meaning of showing
fingers was that if five men unite together, they could
accomplish anything. I showed two fingers, to mean that
if two men unite together they also could achieve anything.’ At this reply the king was much pleased and
Sakatala felt miserable at the intelligence of Vararuci.
On another occasion the King sawhis wife looking at a
Brahmin guest through the window. He got angry and
ordered that Brahmin to be killed. When that Brahmin
was being taken to the scaffold, a dead fish, placed for
sale, laughed loud. The king asked Vararuci for its
reason. Saying that he had to consider about it before
giving a reply, he went out and meditated upon Sarasvati. Devi appeared and told him. “If you climb up to
the top of this palm tree and sit there to night you will
understand why the dead fish laughed.”’ Vararuci did
ashe was told. A fierce giantess came there with her
young ones. The children began to ask her for food.
The giantess told them that they would get the flesh of
a Brahmin next day, and that he was not killed that day
because the dead fish had laughed. The young ones
asked her why the dead fish laughed The giantess said
“‘The wives of the kings are not chaste. In all harems
men live in the guise of women. Without stopping this
the king was going to kill an innocent Brahmin. That
is why the dead fish laughed.” |
Vararuci, who heard this conversation, got down when
the giantess was gone. Hewent to the king and told
him why the fish laughed. The king made a sudden
search in the harem. He found out some men in the
dress of women. The king honoured Vararuci and
released the Brahmin. One day an artist who drew
portraits, came to the palace. He drew a portrait of
the king and the queen and placed it before the king.
The picture was life-like. The king gave the artist
several presents. Once Vararuci happened to enter the
bed-room of the king. He saw the picture on the wall.
The picture was beautiful. Still, considering the appear-
-ance of each part of her body the queen ought to have
amoleon her loin. Vararuci put that mole in the
picture. When Vararuci had gone the king entered the

VARARUCI
room and saw the mole in the picture. The kingasked his
servant, who that person was who had put that mole in
the picture. He replied that it was Vararuci. The king
thought that Vararuci had nocturnal connections with
- the queen. Perhaps it was in this way that Vararuci
found out men in the dress of women. The king called
Sakatala to him and told him to kill Vararuci secretly.
Sakatala felt pity on Vararuci and hid him in a place.
Vararuci told Sakatala “No body can kill me. My
friend is a giant. He will come to me the moment -
think of him. IfI tell him he will swallow the whole
world.’ When he heard this, Sakatala desired to see
the giant. Vararuci thought of him and the giant
appeared, Sakatala was terribly afraid of the giant.
Vararuci made him disappear. Sakatala asked him how
he got the friendship of the giant. WVararuci replied.
‘While you were in the dungeon, a city chief was disappearing daily from this city. The king asked me to find
out the reason. One night, while I was walking through
the city, I saw this giant. He asked me. “Who is the
most beautiful woman in this city ?”? I replied ‘Whoever
falls in love with a woman, to him, that woman is the
most beautiful. You who do not know this principle,
are a fool.”” The giant had no answer. He said “You
alone have defeated me. I am glad of it. The moment
you think of me I will come and help you.” Saying
this the giant disappeared. Thenceforward we became
friends.”
Sakatala felt great respect for Vararuci. Hiranyagupta,
the son of Yoga Nanda, went for hunting. His horse ran
fast and he was separated from his army and got into
a deep forest far away. He ate some fruits and plums
and got on a tree to rest for the night. At that time a
lion chased a bear, which climbed on the same tree.
The prince trembled with fear. The bear said “‘Do not
fear. I am your friend.” Both talked for a while and
became fast friends. Shortly, the prince began to sleep.
The lion asked the bear to push that man down. The
bear said that he would not deceive his friend. The disappointed lion sat under the tree. Then the bear slept
and Hiranyagupta sat awake. The lion asked the prince
to push the bear down. Thinking that he could save
his life by complying with the request of the lion, he
pushed the bear down. Fortunately the hold of the bear
was firm and so it did not fall. The bear cursed Hiranyagupta. ‘““May you become mad.’? The king was very
sorry when his son returned a mad man. The king
repented that he had killed Vararuci. For this was the
time when the king needed him most.
Sakatala went to the-presence of the king and said that
Vararuci was still alive. In accordance with the order
of the king, Sakatala brought Vararuci. The king
showed him his mad son. By the blessing of Sarasvati,
Vararuci understood that the prince had deceived his
friend, and informed the king of what had happened.
Immediately the prince was cured of his madness. Yoga
Nanda asked Vararuci, how he knew the cause of the
madness of the prince. He replied. “‘A man of intelligence can understand anything by symptoms and _inference.’? He also said that in this way he knéw about
the mole of the <= When the king heard this he
ed down his head.
eee this Vararuci left the palace. He did not stop to
accept the favours of the king. Nor did he pay any heed
to the compulsion of the king to stay. He reached his
VARATANTU. The preceptor of a hermit
VARATANU
house. Everybody who saw Vararuci began to cry. Not
knowing the reason, he stood dumbfounded. Upavarsa
came to him and said that when the news about the
slaughter of Vararuci reached home, Upakoéa got into fire and his mother died of broken heart. The griefstricken Vararuci went to the forest for penance. __
After this Sakatala waited for an opportunity to bring
Indradatta (Yoga Nanda) down. Once he had been
walking out side the city when he saw a Brahmin digging a pit. Sakatala asked him why he was digging the
pit. He replied “ I stumbled on this Darbha grass. 5°
I am rooting it out.” Sakatala resolved to make use of
this Brahmin to achieve his purpose. His name was
Canakya. Sakatala took Canakya to the palace.
ceremony of offerings to the manes was being conducte
in the Palace. Another Brahmin named Subandhu
also came there. The king ordered ‘agrabhojana’ (first
meal) to be given to Subandhu. Canakya tremble
with fury. At that time his lock of hair was loosened.
Fle took a vow that only after pacifying his anger by
killing Yoga Nanda within seven days, would he tie uP
his lock. Canakya began practising sorcery against the
king. The king caught burning fever and died on the
seventh day. Sakatala killed Hiranyagupta. After this
Sakatala made Candragupta, the son of the real Nanda
who died earlier, the king. Making Canakya his minis
ter, Sakatala went for penance.
7) Sons. See under Pakkanar.
8) Ihe end. Vararuci began to perform penance in the
Vindhya mountain. At that time a brahmin came
the hermitage of Vararuci. He informed Vararuci °
the death of Yoga Nanda. Thinking about the littleness
of the pleasures of the world, he began to walk throug
the Vindhya mountain when he saw the devil calle
K anabhiti. Telling everything to the devil Kanabhut:
Vararuci started for Badaryaérama to discard his boy:
On the way he saw a hermit who lived on water alone:
In the meanwhile his finger was cut with the tip e*
Darbha grass and blood oozed from the wound. var
ruci, by his attainments, changed the blood into th
juice of a pot-herb. The hermit cried out “Oh, I have
become a man of attainments.’ With a laug
Vararuci said ‘“You have not yet overcome your egoist*
I did so to test you. First of all you must overco™
your egoism and become wise.”’ d
After saying this Vararuci went to Badaryasrama aD©
reached there. He did penance there and Devi appear”
ed. According to her advice he made a fire by conten”
plation and burned his body in it. Then WVararu¢
became the old Puspadanta and went to the presenc®
of Siva.
VARASTRI. A sister of Brhaspati. The Vasu named
Prabhasa married Varastri. This woman who was 4
expounder of the Vedas, pervaded all the creations
the power of harmony with the Supreme Spirit. (
a Parva, Chapter 60, Stanza 96: Vayu Purana, 8%
called
Kautsa. (See under Kautsa ).
VARATANU, A King of the Kurus. Because of his $12
ful deeds in the previous birth he was denied the hapP*
ness of getting children in the next birth. In the rebir
his name was Sridhara. He lived with his wife Prabb@
vati for a long time, but did not get children. Wh
the hermit Vyasa came to his palace once, the King

VARATRI
asked him for the reason of his remaining childless.
Vyasa replied “Oh King, hear why you have only
one wife and why you do not get children. In the
previous birth you had been a brahmin named Varatanu. Your wife was called Sankari. When both of you
were going somewhere once, you happened to seea lowcaste child falling into water. Without paying any heed
to it, you went on your way. The child was drowned.
Though both of you have taken births in royal families
due to the several good deeds of yours, you have become
childless because of that one sinful act.”
According to the instruction of Vyasa, he gave Brahmins alms of gold, clothes, oxen, pumpkin etc. and
performed Bala vrata, the rite for the sake of children.
Thus he got remission of his sin. Within a year he got
a son loved and respected by everyone. That handsome
prince became an emperor who came to be the founder
of a.dynasty. (Padma Purana, Brahma Khanda, ChapVARATRI. One of the four sons
three were, Prthurasmi, Brha
Devendra killed them because they w
It is stated in Brahmanda Purana ¢
from the severed heads of these sons
Srew up.
VARAYU. A King born in the family of Mahavyjas.
(Mahabharata, Udyoga Parva, Chapter 74, Stanza 15).
VARCAS I. Son of Soma, one of the eight Vasus.
Manohara was the mother of Varcas. Abhimanyu, the
son of Arjuna was the next birth of Varcas. (For
further details see under Abhimanyu ). .
VARCAS II. The son of Sucetas, 4 Brahmin born i.
the family of Grtsamada. This Varcas had ason Se
Vihavya, (M.B. Anu‘asana Parva, Chapter 30, Stanza
of Suka. The other
dangiras and Rajata.
ere against sacrifice.
hat after a while
date palm trees
: ‘.¢ of Vrsni dynasty.
VARDHAKSEMI. A mighty King 0) fom MahaThe following details about him are ta
harata.
(1) He was a great warrior who fought o
ie Pandavas against the ‘ihe
arva, Chapter 171, Stanza t/)- ¢
(ii) He eda present at the Svayamvara (marriage) O
Draupadi. (M.B. Adi Parva, Ghapter i ae pa me
(iii) He confronted the Teac EB Karna
a battle and was ee by tant: My
arva, Chapter 6, Stanza 4*/-,
VARDHAMANA. A character 10 the story
tantra. (S der Paficatantra). ; hj
VARDH ae We of the sons ip er of his
wife Mitravinda. (Bhagavata, SKARE * (¢ Bhrou. The
VARENYA, One of the seven éuci, Aurva, Sukra
n the side of
(M.B. Udyoga
of Paficaseven sons of Bhrgu were Cyaan RB. Anusdsana
Vajragirsa, Savana, an Varenya.
Parva, Chapter 85, Stanza 126). story in MahaTHetes « ‘bing how Varga
descr!
ve crocodiles and had
VARGA. A celestial maid.
bharata, Adi Parva, Ghapter 22
and her friends were gee :
to live j er for a long "iD: . id) name
Once ior “lived an ‘apsaras’ ig eng sme called
Varga in Devaranya2. Cc a = Once they were
_Saurabheyi, Samici, Budbuda ir patton.
going to the house of Kubera : nt
they saw a hermit. They Te p
Shining with the radiance of to entice
of the hermit. They decided
ower of penance
the hermit
VARMA
somehow. With this intention they entered
his hermitage. Seeing their dalliance’ and coquetry, the hermit got angry and cursed them to
become crocodiles for a hundred years. They implored
him with tears, for liberation from the curse. The
hermit told them that in’due course a noble man would
come and get them out of water and that then they
ee obtain their original form. They walked towards
a lake.
On the way they saw Narada. They told him everything. He told them. ‘‘On the coast. of the southern
ocean there are five tirthas (holy baths) known as
Agastya, Saubhadra, Pauloma, Karandhama and
Suprasanna. You may go to these lakes and live there
as crocodiles one in each. In due ccurse Arjuna, the son
of Pandu will come and redeem you.”’
According to the words of Narada the five celestial
maids walked to the south and reached the Paficatirtha
(the five holy baths) and each of them entered a lake
as a crocodile. After this nobody dared to live near
those holy baths. After some time Arjuna started on his
pilgrimage. He passed through many places and reached the Paficatirtha. He enquired why the place was
forsaken by people. The hermits told him that there
was a crocodile in each of the five baths and that they
would eat anybody who got into the bath. Arjuna got
“into a lake. Immediately a crocodile came and caught
hold of him. With great difficulty he dragged it out of
the lake. Instantly the crocodile changed into a beautiful damsel. The celestial maid Varga told the amazed
Arjuna her story and she added that her four friends
were lying in the neighbouring four lakes. Arjuna redeemed every one of them. After this, Varga and her
friends went to Devaranya and Arjuna to Manalira.
From that day onwards the five tirthas came to be known
as Naritirthas.
VARI. An eternal God concerned with offerings to the
manes. (M.B. Anusasana Parva; Chapter 91, Stanza
BO )s
VARISENA. A King. This King stays in the Palace of
Yama and worships him. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter
8, Stanza 20).
VARISTHA. The son of Manu Caksusa. The following
story, how Varistha cursed the. hermit Grtsamada,
occurs in Mahabharata, Anuég asana Parva, Chapter 18.
Indra once performed a sacrifice which lasted for a
thousand years. Varistha and Grtsamada, as friends of
Indra were present at the sacrifice. Grtsamada committed some mistakes in the recitation of Samans. Varistha
got angry and cursed Grtsamada that he would wander
in the forest as an animal for ten thousand one hundred
and eighteen years. Accordingly Grtsamada wandered
through forests in the form of an animal for a very long
time.
VARITAKSA. Anasura. It is mentioned in Mahapharata, Santi Parva, Chapter 227, Stanza 52, that he
had been a King once and that fate made him an
asura.
VARKSI. Daughter of the hermit Kandu. It is stated in
(M.B..Adi Parva, Chapter 195, Stanza 15, that she
became the wife ofthe ten Pracetases. It is stated in
Bhagavata, Skandha 6, that Daksa was born from this
Varksi
VARMA. In ancient days it was the custom to add the
word ‘Varma’ to the names of Ksairiyas. Brahmanas

VARMACIT 832
had to add the word Sarma, Ksatriyas the word Varma
Vaigyas the word Gupta and Siidras the word Dasa to
their names according to rules. (Agni Purana, ChapVARMACIT. A King ofthe Lunar dynasty. (Bhagavata
Skandha 9).
VARNA. Caste. The four castes of Brahmana, Ksatriya,
Vaigya and Sidra and the eleven castes produced by
the intermingling of these four castes, only these are
taken into account when we speak of Varna. To understand about the four castes of Brahmana, Ksatriya,
Vaisya and Siidra, see under Caturvarnya.
To know about the eleven mixed castes that originated
from the four castes, see under Ekadagasankara Varnas.
VARNASANKARA. See under Ekadagasankara Varnas.
VARSA I. The teacher of Vararuci. (For details see
under Vararuci) .
VARSAII. See under Kalamana.
VARSAGANYA. Anancient hermit. The Gandharva
King Visvavasu learned about the connection between
the individual soul and the Universal soul, from this
hermit. (M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter 318, Verse 59).
VARSAKETU. A King of the Piru dynasty. The father
of Varsaketu was Ksemaka, and his son was Vipu.
(Agni Purana, Chapter 278).
VARSNEYA.I. A charioteer of King Nala. It was
» Varsneya who took the prince Indrasena and princess
Indrasena to Kundinapura when Nala, after being
defeated in the game of dice, went to the forest with
Damayanti. After this, Varsneya went to Ayodhya and
became the charioteer of King Rtuparna. Varsneya
played an important part in finding out Nala. (For
more details see under Nala).
VARSNEYA Ii. Another name of Mahavisnu. (M.B.
Bhisma Parva, Chapter 27, Stanza 37).
VARSNEYA III. An ancientcountry. It is mentioned
in Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter 51, Stanza 24,
that the King of Varsneya brought presents to the
imperial consecration-sacrifice (Rajasiya) of Yudhisthira.
VARTA. A King ofancient India. This King stays in
the palace of Yama _ praising and worshipping him.
(M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 8, Stanza 10).
VARUNA I. One of the eight guardians of the quarters.
1) Birth, Varuna was the son of Prajapati, KaSyapa
born of Aditi. He was one of the twelve sons of Aditi.
So he is considered to be one of the twelve Adityas (Sons
of ing» The twelve Adityas are Dhata, Aryaman,
Mitra, Sakra, Varuna, Amfa, Bhaga, Vivaévan, Pisa,
Savita, Tvasta and Visnu. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter
65, Stanza 15).
These twelve Adityas weré the twelve Devas (gods)
known as Tusitas in the Manvantara of Manu Caksusa.
A statement occurs in Visnu Purana, Améga 1, Chapter
15, that when Vaivasvata Manvantara was about to
begin after the end of Caksusa Manvantara, the famous
Tusitas united together and took birth as the sons: of
syapa. :
bY Rimship of the waters, In Krtayuga the Devas
approached Varuna and said to him. ‘You must be
the lord of all the waters, as Indra is our protector. You
can live in the heart of the ocean. All the rivers in the
world, and the ocean which is their husband will obey
you. You will wax and wane along with Candra
(Moon) .”’ Varuga agreed to comply with their request.
VARUNA I
All of them anointed Varuna as the King of the
waters. (M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 47). .
3) The Guardian of the quarter west. Brahma appointed
Varuna as the guardian of the western zone. Vaisravana
once did penance before Brahma, and when Brahma
appeared before him, he made a request that he should
be appointed as one of the guardians of the quarters.
Brahma replied. ‘‘I have already selected Indra, Varuna
and Yama as guardians of the points. I was thinking
who, the fourth, should be, when you came. So from
this day onwards, Indra shall be the guardian of the
East, Yama that of the South, Varuna, that of the
West and you Vaigravana shall be the guardian of the
North.”? After saying this, Brahma disappeared. Thus
Varuna became the guardian of the West. (Uttara
Ramayana). eg
4) Family. Varuna had several wives and children.
Prominent among them were Gauri and Varunani.
Mention is made about the sons Susena, Vandi and
Vasistha and daughter WV4runi. Carsani was another
wife of Varuna. Prajapati Bhrgu, who died in the
sacrifice of Daksa took birth as the son of Varuna an
Carsani. Devi Jyestha, the daughter of Priest Sukra was
another wife of Varuna. The children of Jyestha wer
Bala, Sura the Suranandini and Adharmaka the destroyer of the elements. The semen of Varuna fell 0?
Valmika (White-ant-hill) from which the great hermit
Valmiki was born. Besides them, Daksasavarni, th
_ ninth Manu was the son of Varuna. Puskara was 40°
other son of Varuna. The handsome Puskara Ww
received as husband by the daughter of Soma (Can
dra). Vandi, who was defeated by the hermit Ast4vakra at the palace of Janaka was the son of Varuna:
(M.B. Udyoga Parva, Chapter 117, Stanza 9; Adi
Parva, Chapter 66, Stanza 52; Adi Parva, Chapter 99,
Stanza 5; Vana Parva, Chapter 134, Stanza 24; Valmiki Ramayana, Balakanda Sarga 17, Stanza 13;
Valmiki Ramayana, Balakanda, Sarga 46, S:anza 36).
5) Carrying away Utathya’s wife. Bhadra, the daughtet
of Soma (Moon) was extremely beautiful. Soma g@¥°
her in marriage to the hermit Utathya. Varuna carrie
her away. Utathya got angry and drank up the oce@?
dry. Varuna returned Bhadra to Utathya. (Fort
further details see under Utathya),.
6) Theft of Varuna’s cow by Kafyapa. Kagyapa once
decided to perform a sacrifice. He made all prepat@
tions. But he did not get the required cow at the stipulated time. So he got the Homadhenu of Varul4
by theft and began to perform the yaga (sacrifice) d
Varuna knew this. Instantly he went to Kas yapa aD
demanded his cow. But Kagyapa refused to return t
cow. Varuna complained to Brahma, who sent !°
Kafyapa and asked him about the cow and b? 4
Brahma and Varuna cursed Kagyapa that he who ha d
taken the cow by stealth would take birth as a cowh&
in Ambadi. (For further details see under Kasy4P?
and Nandagopa).
7) Cursing Harigcandra. For detailed story see under
Hariécandra.
8) Other information.
(i) The Vaisnava bow received by Sri Rama fron.
Bhargava Rama, was given to Varuna. vali?
Ramayana, Bala Kanda, Sarga 77, Stanza 1).
(ii) The capital city of Varuna one of the eight guard

VARUNA I
Jans of the universe was called Sraddhavati. (Devi
Bhagavata, Skandha 8).
(iii) At the time of the burning of Khandava forest
Krsna and Arjuna helped Agni (Fire). Agni prayed
to Varuna to supply Krsna and Arjuna with weapons
so that they might fight with Indra. Varuna appeared
and gave Arjuna the bow ‘Gandiva’, a quiver which
would never become empty of arrows and a banner
with the emblem of a monkey depicted on it. (M.B.
Adi Parva, Chapters 234 and 237).
(iv) The image of Varuna should be dedicated in
temples as sitting on a horned shark with a rope in
hand. (Agni Purana, Chapter 51).
(v) Once Varuna gave exhortations to Puskara, which he
13 ae turn gave to Parasurama. (Agni Purana, Chapter
(vi) It is stated in Rgveda, Mandala |, Anuvaka 2,
Sikta 2, that Varuna and Mitra are the Deities of
rain.
(vii) Once the King Marutta performed a sacrifice at
which the guardians of the eight points were present.
Ravana came to the sacrifice and tried to do
harm to the hermits. At the beginning of the attack,
the guardians of the points assumed forms of various
creatures and escaped from the place. Varuna escaped
In the form of a swan. (Uttara Ramayana ).
( viii) Ravana defeated Yama. On his return he defeated the Uragas (serpents) of Patala (Nether world).
After this, he challenged Varuna, who came out wit
Is sons and army and fought with Ravana, who won
the battle. (Uttara Ramayana). ?
1X) Varuna is a member of the assembly of Brahma.
(M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 117, Stanza 51).
(x) When Arjuna went to the world of Devas, Varuna
Save him the weapon Pasa (rope) . (M.B. Vana Parva,
Chapter 41, Stanza 27).
(xi) Indra, Agni, Yama and Varuna tes
nally gave him blessings. (For details
aMayanti ). '
Xli) Once i performed penance along with a
gods in Vigakhayapa. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter ~©,
tanza 16),
(xiii) Varuna once gave Rcika thousan d black-eared
horses, (F or further details see under Ree). a made
(xiv) At the coronation of 5r! Rama, a vas chaste
is appearance and pr oclaimed that er nza 29)
and pure, (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 291, Te ataiOtt
(xv) Varuna had the bow Gandiva in wine: ter 43
for hundred years. (M.B. Virata Parva, P
tanza 6). , )
Kavi) Once Sri Krsna ideas Varuna. (M.B. Udyoga
arva, Chapter 130, Stanza 49). : ayudha
(avi) eaeece aD, Seether of the King er ena
once worshipped Varuna with vow rs tayudha. (M.B.
Bave her boons anda club [© rurey |
bes Parva, Chapter Se nik
Vili) Varuna gave Subrahmat
anit and Ativan. (M.B. Salya Parva,
anza 45 : ' ] hant.
(xix) Brailes Varuna gave Subrar zal 5 Mi ie?
Salya Parva, Chapter 46, SS Rajasiya
(xx) Once Varuna performee srtha. ( M.B.
Pesccration sacrifice) at Yamuna :
arva, Chapter 49, Stanza !1).
(xxi) When Balabhadra Rama
ested Nala and
see under
owers named
foll
ea Chapter 49,
(royal
Salya
died and his soul went
~VASATALA
to Patala (under world), there was Varuna also among
those who came to receive him. (M.B. Mausala Parva
Chapter 4, Stanza 16).
(xx1i) At the time of his great departure, Arjuna threw
the bow Gandiva and the arrows over the sea to return
them to Varuna. (M.B. Mahaprasthana Parva, Chapter
1, Stanza 41).
(xxiii) Words such as Aditiputra, Aditya; Ambupa,
Ambupati, Amburat, Ambvisa, Apampati, Devadeva,
Gopati, Jaladhipa, Jalesvara, Lokapala, Salilaraja
Salilesa, Udakapati, Varipa, Yadasambharta and so on
have been used as synonyms of Varuna in Mahabharata. | |
VARUNA II. A Deva Gandharva. It is mentioned in
Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 65, Stanza 42, that
this Devagandharva was the son of Prajapati Kagyapa
born of his wife Muni.
VARUNA (S). The sons of Angiras.
Payasya ).
VARUNADVIPA. An island famous in the Puranas.
Mention is made about this island in Mahabharata,
Sabha Parva, Chapter 33.
VARUNAHRADA. A lake of God Varuna. It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Udyoga Parva, Chapter 98,
Stanza 18, that the god Agni (Fire) always shines in
this lake.
VARUNANI. A wife of Varuna.
VARUNASROTASA. A holy place situated in Mathara
forest in South India. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 88,
Stanza 10).
VARUNATIRTHA. A holy place at the mouth of river
Indus. Mention is made in Mahabharata, Vana Parva,
Chapter 82, Stanza 63, that those who bathe in this
place will be filled with radiance and will enter the
world of Varuna.
VARUNI I. (Varunibhrgu). The hermit Bhrgu having |
died in the sacrifice of Daksa, took birth again from the
sacrifice of Varuna. At this stage the name of Bhrgu
was Warunibhrgu. (For further details see under Bhrgu
(See
under
VARUNI II. The daughter of Varuna. When the
Devas and the Asuras churned the sea of Milk, four
damsels were caused to arise by Varuna and holy pot
of Ambrosia, by Soma. The four damsels were Sulaksmi,
Varuni, Kamoda and restha, of whom VaAruni ‘was
married by Devas. (Padma Purana, Bhimi Khanda
Chapter 119). As
VARUNITIRTHA. A holy place situated in Pandyadegéa in South India. (Mahabharata, Vana Parva.
Chapter 88, Stanza 13). |
VARUTHA. A King of the family of Anga. (Agni
Purana, Chapter 277).
VARUTHINI. A celestial maid This celestial maid
erformed a dance in the-palace of Indra, in honour of
the visit of Arjuna. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 43,
Stanza 29).
VASA. A hermit who is praised in the Rgveda. (Rgvetia,
Mandala 1, Sukta 116).
VASANA. Wife of the Vasu named Arka. (Bhagavata,
Skandha 6).
VASANTAKA. A person in the story of Udayana. (Sée
under Udayana).
VASATALA. A country in India famous im the Puranas.
Mention is made in Mahabharata, Sabha Parva,

VASATI I | 834
Chapter 52, Stanza 15, that the princes of this country
gave presents to Yudhisthira at the time of his sacrifice
of royal consecration.
VASATII. A king of the Candra (lunar) dynasty. He
was the eighth son of Janamejaya. (M.B. Adi Parva,
Chapter 94, Stanza 57).
VASATI II. A country in ancient India. The Ksatriya
kings of this country took the side of the Kauravas in
the Bharata Battle and were employed to protect
Bhisma. (M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 51, Stanza 14).
VASATI III. A King who fought on the side of Duryodhana. When Abhimanyu entered Cakra-vytha of the
army formed by Drona this King took a vow that he
would commit suicide if he did not kill Abhimanyu and
then ran to the scene of the battle. In the fight between Vasati and Abhimanyu, Vasati was killed. (M.B.
Drona Parva, Chapter 43, Verses 8-10).
VASATIKA. A warrior who fought on the side of the
Kauravas against the Pandavas. He was killed in the
fight with Abhimanyu. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter
44, Stanza 8). :
VASAVADATTA. Wife of Udayana.
Udayana).
VASAVARTI. A group of devas(gods). It is said that
in the third Manvantara there were five groups of Devas,
each group containing twelve persons, known as the
Sudhamas, the Satyas, the Japas, the Pratardanas and
the Vasavartins. (For more details see under Manvan-
(See under
tara).
VASAVI. Another name of Satyayati the mother of
Vyasa. (Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 63).
VASAYU. A son born to Purtiravas by Urvagi. (Padma
Purana, Srsti Khanda, 12).
VASISTHA. A hermit who was the son of Brahma. .
1) The three births of Vaststha. Vasistha with the radiance
of Brahma, is very famous in the Puranas. He had three
births. |
i) First birth.
a) Birth. Vasistha is one of the mental sons of Brahma.
This is the first birth of Vasistha. |
‘‘Narada was born from the lap, Daksa was born from
the right thumb, Vasistha from the breath (prana)
Bhrgu from the skin, Kratu from the hand of Brahma.”’
In this birth, Arundhati was the wife of Vasistha.
Arundhati was known by the name Urja also. There ig
a Puranic story behind the marriage of Vasistha and
Arundhati. :
In her previous birth the name of Arundhati was
Sandhya. She was born from the passion of Brahma.
As soon as she was born she grew up. Seeing her exquisite beauty the Prajapatis were filled with excitement.
Even Brahma, her father, was some-what excited at her
sight. Siva, who understood this, teased Brahma.
Sandhya was ashamed. Even after Siva, Brahma, Prajapatis and the others had gone their ways, she remained
there blaming her birth. She said to herself: ““The moment I was born, I grew up to be a young woman. My
father and my brothers looked at me with desire. [
also looked at them excitedly. As an atonement for
this sin, I will burn my body in fire. I do not want a
body desired by my father and brothers. With this
decision she went to the mountain Candrabhaga, which
is the source of the river Candrabhaga, and began to
perform penance. Brahma who came to know of this,
‘of Medhatithi.
VASISTHA
was filled with pity and sent Vasistha to her. He went
there in the form of a Brahmin boy and taught her how
to perform penance. After the return of Vasistha she continued the severe penance to Visnu. Her penance became
the subject of talk and wonder everywhere. After a short
while Visnu appeared before her sitting on his conveyance Garuda. She praised Visnu. Visnu was please
with her and asked what her desire was. She said:
“Lord, creatures should not be sexually excited at their
birth. They should have sexual desire only when they
are grownup. The three worlds must know that I am
chaste. In all my births I should not look at anybody
except my husband with sexual desire. The man who
looks at me with sexual desire should lose his manliness
and become a hermaphrodite.”
Mahavisnu agreed to her request. It was from that day
onwards that sexual desire appeared in creatures 1)
their grown-up stage only, after they have passed the
stages of infancy and childhood. Mahavisnu told her.
“Tt is preordained that this body of yours will be burnt
in fire. Medhatithi, (Meghatithi), the son of Priyavrata
is performing the great sacrifice called Jyotistoma whic
is to be completed in twelve years. It is coming to 4
close. There is none equal to him because of this sact}-
fice. That great hermit’s sacrifice is being performed 17
the basin of this river Candrabhaga. Unseen by the
hermits, you should go there and get into the fire. Because of my blessing you will be born from that fire 4
the daughter of Medhatithi. You should go into the fire
thinking of him whom you want to be your husband 1
this birth.”’
Mahavisnu touched Sandhya with the tip of his fing
Sandhya walked to the sacrificial hall. Seen by non®
she got down into the fire. She was burnt in the blazing fire. By the order of Visnu; the God fire placed
Sandhya who was burnt in the sacrificial fire, in the
Solar region. Thesun divided that body into two 28
placed them in his chariot. The upper portion became
the pratassandhya (dawn) between the day and the
night and the lower portion became the Sayantana
Sandhya (the evening twilight). At the end of the
sacrifice, from the centre of the sacrificial fire a 81!
like the flame of fire rose up. Medhatithi took that
child in his hands and called her Arundhati. The chil
became famous throughout the three worlds, as t#©
name stood for the principle that on no reason what-80"
ever will righteousness be obstructed. (Rodha mean®
obstruction, So, Arundhatiis one who cannot be obstruct
ed). In some other Puranas Arundhati is given as
the daughter of Prajapati Kardama and Devahiti.
b) Marriage. Arundhati grew up in the hermitag°®
Candrabhaga holy bath which was ¢ ¢
playfield of Arundhati, is even today, known as Arury
dhatitirtha. Arundhati became five years of age. Brahmé
saw her when she was playing on the ground after having taken her bath. At the instruction of Brahm
Arundhati was entrusted to Savitri and Bahula !9education, Savitri is the wife of the Sun, Arundha?
lived in Manasa lake with Savitri Gayatri Babula,
Sarasvati, Drupada and such other salestial wore”
and completed her education. One day Arund -.
happened to see Vasistha who was shin : ,
ance. They fell in love with each othe
relatives and the elders came to know
patting Arundhati blessed her to bec
ing with a
r. Parents 4. 04
of this, Sav" ¢
ome the wll

VASISTHA
Vasistha. The marriage of Arundhati with Vasistha was
conducted in the presence of the Gods.
Cc) ‘Sons. Seven sons, named Citraketu, Purocis, Viraca,
Mitra, Ulbana, Vasubhrdyana and Dyuman were born
to Vasistha by Arundhati. All the seven of them were
Brahmarsis.
d) The meaning of the names Vast; tha and Arundhati. The
meaning of the name Vasistha is given by Vasistha
himself as follows:— :
I am known as Vasistha for two reasons. I am ‘Vasuman’. The Srutis say that Air, Earth etc. are Vasus.
I have become Vasistha because I have brought under
control the Vasus_ beginning with Anima (the power
of reducing the body to an atom). See what Arundhati herself says, about the mean
Arundhati.
‘I consider mountains, earth and heaven as elements
in which I live, only after considering my husband as the element in ‘which I live. My husband
is the first and foremost element in my life. Moreover
I conform (anurodha) with the mind of my husband.
So know me as Arundhati.”
e) Conjugal fidelity of Arundhati.
hermits) once left Arundhati a ]
to the Mountain Himalayas to gather fruits and roots.
In those days, due to severe summer, the earth
became a wilderness. SO the hermits lived in the
HimAlayas. Arundhati all alone did penance 10 the
fa Brahmin and
forest. On one day Siva took the form ©
going near Arundhati requested her for alms. She replied: ‘There are only Ziziphus fruits here, and nothing
else to eat.”? The Brahmin asked her to boil them. She
ts on the oven and sat
placed the pot of Ziziphus frul ,
there cee the good stories told by the Brahmin. Thus
slices thinking about her oles narrate
or twelve years hearing the stor ‘el =
Brahmin. When the Fasioits returned from Ee eat
iva assumed his original form and said, at mt
“his woman, sitting 10 the hermitagt: eo rela as
more penance than you have acquired in the te a
Good woman! What boon Hoy seu ee the holy
requested that that place should be ean ne fruits)
Place called ‘Badarapacan@ (cooking of Zizipnv dere 4
iva allowed it. Even today that place 1s con
a holy place.
The Saptarsis (the seven
lone in a forest and went
f) Death. When so many devas were dear! i a a
fice of Daksa, Vasistha also died HORE ah both of
Arundhati followed her husband. After ieee stars
them entered the firmament and becant™ aati of show8) Seeing Arundhati. In India there 18 pres ndhati is the
ing the women, the star Arundhati. oe nian fer life.
first of the women who took only on” gees mentality ©
he meaning of this custom is this that t ated women
Arundhati should be acquired DY the ont of the star
of India. Moreover, if the stat stands 1 Jamities 1n the
Vasistha, it is considered tO forebode © ;
= oe (Kalika Purana) -
11) Second birth.
General information. Vasistha wee a sacrific
of Daksa took birth again fro e this V asistha.
Brahma. Aksamala was '° wi att So, in. some
Akearala was the rebicth 08 O°" apis bietn Of. Vast:
Puranas, both are show? as ont: of empero
irse
tha was terminated by the curs
at the sacrifice
ing of the name
‘al fire of
r Nimi of
VASISTHA
the Iksvaku dynasty. (For details see under Nimi
(iii) Therd birth. In the third birth Wesohe sex born
from a pot as the son of Mitravarunas. In this birth
Vasistha was the brother of Agastya. (For detailed
story see under Agastya, para 2). In this birth the
wife of Vasistha was an Arundhati, who was the sister
of Narada. Thus according to the Puranas, it took
three births for Vasistha to complete his life. It is
difficult to ascertain, in which particular birth, a particular story, stated in the Puranas, took place. It is
probable that a large number of episodes might have
taken place in the second and third births.
Stories connected with the life of Vasistha are given
below: .
2 )Vaszstha and Visvamitra. Vasistha and YVisvamitra
were two herm its who quarrelled with each other throughout their lives. The quarrel between Vasistha a
Brahmin hermit and Vig§vamitra a royal hermit, is
given below:
(i) Reason for the enmity. Vigvamitra was a King who
cared much for the welfare of his subjects. Once he
went with his army to hunt. He became tired by the
hunt and reached the hermitage of Vasistha who
welcomed them with hospitality. He told them that
food would be ready when they returned after a bath.
The King and his men bathed quickly and when they
returned, a grand feast was ready forso many thousands. The King was in great perplexity. After the
meals Vigvamitra approached the hermit Vasistha
and asked him how he got such a grand feast ready.
He replied that the cow Kamadhenu in his hermitage was
capable of granting any wish. The king desired to have
the cow. He asked the hermit to exchange the cow for
a crore of ordinary cows. Vasistha did not agree to
this. Vigvamitra said that the noble and superior
things of the country belonged to the King. The hermit
did not agree to that also. Finally Visvamitra was
about to take away the cow by force. Thus the quarrel
began. Understanding the wish of Vasistha Kamadhenu
held her horns and tail up and stood as a fierce
and cruel figure. From the various limbs of the cow so
many thousands of warriors jumped out anda fierce
battle ensued in which the hundred sons and the huge
army of Visvamitra met with defeat. At last Vi§vamitra
tried to launch a direct attack against Vasistha. But
the arrows of Vis vamitra were changed to flowers when
they touched the body of Vasistha. At last the Kin
admitted that the power of the penance of a Brahmin
hermit was the real power and he admitted defeat from
Vasistha. From that day onwards a deep-rooted
hatred against Vasistha arose in the heart of Vis vamitra.
He left the administration of his Kingdom in the hands
of his relatives and went to the south where he erected
a hermitage and began ‘o do severe penance. He acquired great powers of penance and became a royal hermit
of immense attainments and the quarrel between the
two great hermits Vasistha and Visvamitra began
Valmiki Ramayana, Bala Kanda, 5 sargas irom 51)
(ii) Second confrontation. The next contest between the two
hermits was due to the king Triganku of the Solar
dynasty. Triganku wanted bodily attainment of heaven
Vasistha tried to discourage the king. Visvamitra took
up the matter. He began to perform a sacrifice to lift
up the king bodily to heaven, and Trisanku began to
rise up higher and higher. But Indra did not allow him

VASISTHA
to enter bodily into the heaven. At last Visvamitra, by
the power of his penance created an artificial heaven
midway between the-heaven and the earth and placed
Triganku in that heaven. With this the gap between
the two hermits widened. (For more details see under
Triganku ).
(iii) Third confrontation. By the blessing of Varuna, a son
named Lohita was born to Harigcandra. He had promised Varuna to sacrifice his son Lohita. But Lohita
came to know of this and he left the palace. Harigcandra was in a difficult situation. Vasistha advised him
to buy a son and to sacrifice him. Accordingly a Brahmin boy named Sunasgepha was bought. Vasistha
decided to sacrifice him. Vigvamitra said that he could
not be sacrificed. Harigcandra was loved by Vasistha.
So Visvamitra tried toharm him as far as possible.
Hari§candra fell in the trap of Vi§vamitra and lost his
country, city, wie, everything and‘had to live in funeral
places. (For detailed story see under Hariscandra. )
(iv) fourth confrontation. Vasistha did not like the
deception practised by Vigvamitra, on Harigcandra.
Once Visvamitra and Vasistha met in the forest by
chance. Vasistha scolded Visvamitra, who had only
the guise of a hermit, thus: “You wicked Vigvamitra !
Why do you put the truthful Hari§candra into so much
misery? You are deceiving him as the stork sits in
meditation and deceives the fish. So you will become
a stork.”
Visvamitra looked at the hermit Vasistha who had
cursed him and said. “‘So long asI am a stork you
shall be Kingfisher. Thus they cursed each other.
Both of them became birds and went to the shore of
Manasa lake and each building a nest on the top of
trees began to live there. There was nothing but quarrel between the two birds daily. Both pecked and
scratched each other to such an extent that they were
covered with bleeding wounds. They looked like an
Erythrina tree filled with flowers. Everybody who saw
them was filled with sadness. Thus they lived there
for a long time.
Once the Kind-hearted Brahma, the father of Vasistha,
saw their sorry plight. Having pity on them he came
there with the other gods and delivered them both
from the curse. (Devi Bhagavata, Skandha 6 iF
(v) Fifth confrontation. Vi§vamitra called the river
Sarasvati and asked her to bring Vasistha along with
her current. Sarasvatidid not like the idea. Still,
fearing the curse of Visvamitra she agreed todo so. The
river-basin. where Vasistha had been performing penance
was pulled down by the cutrent of the river, and taking
Vasistha in the current carried him down, Sarasvati
did not wish to leave Vasistha at the mercy of Visvamitra. So when they reached the door of the hermitage
of Visvamitra, she carried him further down in a swift
current. Visvamitra got angry and cursed Sarasvati.
“Let blood flow through the river.” With that the
water of Sarasvati changed to blood-colour. The gods
were perplexedat this. They all gathered on the banks of
the river. In the presence of the gods, both the hermits
came to a compromise. Thenceforward that place
became a holy tirtha under the name Vasisthapavaha.
(M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 42).
3) Other details.
(i) Vasistha changed Ma a woman, into a man.
(For details see under Ia I).
VASISTHA
(ii) Wives and children. Seven sons Rajas, Gotra,
Urdhvabahu, Savana, Anagha, Sutapas and 5Sukra,
were born to Vasistha by his wife Urja. These
seven pure and just persons were the Saptarsis
(seven hermits) in the first Manvantara. (Visnu
Purana, Amsa I, Chapter 10).
(Raja, Gatra, Urdhvabahu Savana, Alaghu, Sukra (and
Sutapas are the names given in Agni Purana, Chapter
20, of the sons of Vasistha born by his wife Urja).
(iii) Vasistha and emperor Nimi. (See under Nimi)
(iv) The Rgveda of Vasistha. There are ten Mandalas
in Rgveda, of which the seventh Mandala was compose
by the sages of Vasistha’s hermitage.
(v) Cursing Ravana. Once Ravana asked Vasistha to
come as his teacher and teach him the Vedas and the
other scriptures. Vasistha did not comply with x
request. The angry Ravana got Vasistha a captive. oe:
the King Kuvalaya&éva of the Solar dynasty, liberate
Vasistha from captivity. The rescued Vasistha curse
Ravana. You and your family will be exterminated by
those born of the Solar dynasty.” (Kamba Ramayana,
Yuddha Kanda). dr-
(vi) Vasistha jumped into the river. See under AGF
§yanti. 4
(vii) In uniting Tapati and Samvarana Vasistha play¢
a very prominent part. (See under Tapati). _—
(vill) It was Vasistha who put a stop to the sacrific
for the extermination of the Raksasas (giants) perfor™-
ed by Paragara. (See under Pardéara). g
(ix) Vasistha and Mucukunda. See under Mucukun¢4-
(x) Vasistha told Sri Rama the history of the dynes)
of Iksvaku. (Valmiki Ramayana Bala Kanda, Sars
(xi) The hermitage of Vasistha was situated in the
valley of mount Mahameru. (Mahabharata, Adi Parv@
Chapter 29, Stanza 6). ,
(xii) The cow of Vasistha was stolen by the eight Vasu
See under Astavasus. | —
(xiii) Vasistha was the teacher of Bhisma. (Mahabhara
Adi Parva, Chapter 103, Stanza45). ee
(xiv) Vasistha participated in the Birth festival
Arjuna. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 122, Stanza OE
(xv) Vasistha tried to commit suicide. (See U?
AdrSyanti). _ MB
(xvi) Vasistha shone in the assembly of Brahma. (MéSabha Parva, Chapter 11, Stanza 19), by
(xvii) In the Bharata-battle an effort was made ‘
Vasistha to dissuade Drona from the battle. But it 4
in vain. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 190, Stanza 33).
(xviii) Vasistha was one of the hermits who came ~~
visit Bhisma on his bed of arrows. (Santi Parva; Chap
ter 47, Stanza 7). 5
(xix) Once rain failed in the world and creature
became miserable. At that time Vasistha fed the ce
tures. (M.B. Anuédsana Parva, Chapter 137). he
(xx) Once Indra lost the Devaloka (the world of ~~
Devas) and he became gloomy and miserable. Vasis!
went to him and consoled him, (M.B. Santi Parv@?
Chapter 291, Stanza 91). 6 te
(xxi) Vasistha was one of the hermits who were Br 6
min tribal workers. (M.B. Santi Parva Chapter gn"
Stanza 17),
(xxii) Once Vasistha imparted knowledge to Kin’
Janaka. This exhortation is given in Mahabharal’’
(Santi Parva, six chapters from 302).

VASISTHA
(xxiii) Vasistha was one of the twentyone Prajapatis.
(M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter 334, Stanza 36).
(xxiv) Vasistha is considered to be one of the Citrasikhandis (Saptarsis—seven hermits) (See under CitraSikhandis }.
(xxv) Once Vasistha talked about Purusarthas (the
objects of life) to Brahma. (M.B. Anufgasana Parva,
Chapter 6).
(xxvi) Vasistha talked to Saudasa about giving cows as
alms. (M.B. Anugasana Parva, Chapter 78, Stanza 9).
(xxvii) On another occasion Vasistha gave advice to
Paragurama and talked about the origin of Gold. (M.B.
AnuSasana Parva, Chapter 84, Stanza 44).
(xxviii) Vasistha once told Arundhati how weakness
was caused. (M.B. Anusasana Parva, Chapter 93,
Stanza 31).
(xxix) Vasistha avowed that he was no .
who had stolen the lotus flowers of Agastya. (Anusasana
Parva, Chapter 23, Stanza 114).
(xxx) Apava, Arundhatipati,
Hairanyagarbha, Maitravarunl,
words are used as synonyms of Vasist
bharata.
VASISTHA. An Agni (fire). (Mahabharata, Vana
Parva, Chapter 990, Stanza 1).
VASISTHA (M). Vasistha tirtha. It is mentioned 1n
Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 84, that he who
bathes in this tirtha would become 4 Brahmin.
VASISTHA PARVATA. A mountain famous 1n the
Puranas. It is mentioned in Adi Parva, Chapter 214,
Stanza 2, that Arjuna came and sat on this mountain
during his pilgrimage. b
VASISTHAPAVAHA. An ancient holy bath on ot
banks of the river Sarasvati. (See under Vasistha, Hit
confrontation) .
VASISTHASRAMA.
Brahmarsi, Devarsi,
Varuni, and such other
ha, in the MahaA holy place near Nié cira-
; hroughout the
sangama. This holy bath 1s famous a aoe enjoy
three worlds, Those who bathe in this pla aye
the fruits of performing Vajapey® yas 40 )
sacrifice), (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 87, stan aed.
VASORDHARA. Wife of the Vasu named Agni. (Bhag
vata, Skandha 6).
VASTRAPA. A group of Ksatriyas.
ing to this group brought presents to
Sabha Parva, Chapter 52; Stanza |
VASTUPURUSA. In days of yore 28
size, who was feared by ee oN
€xistence, ‘s ghost was burle :
the Devas. Tata geoal is called No aan
the deity of whatever we build on t a
offering made to this Vastupurusa on P ee
house is called «<Pyravastubali”’. (Agni a
ter 40),
VASU I. A King named Uparicaravas'™
details see under Uparicaravasl/:
VASU II, Astavasus. (The eight Vasus).-
The princes belongYudhisthira. (M.B.
host of immense
hosts came into
e the earth by
He is
For further
(For further
€tails see under Astavasus/ + “noe of Kanyakubja
VASU IIT. ‘A son born to Kuta, ae cons, Kugamba,
Of them Kugamba
sanabha the city of
Dharmaranya an
bes in the middle
by his wife Vaidarbhi. Kusa
Kuganabha, Asartarajas ane s
ult the city of Kaugambi, K
ahodayapura, Asartarajas the city O :
Vasu the city of Girivraja which is ere
t one of them |
VASUDEVA
of five hills. The river Magadhi flows around this city.
(Valmiki Ramayana, Balakanda Sarga 32).
VASU IV. A Vasu is mentioned in Brahmanda Purana
Chapter 58, as the brother of Paragurama. Vasu
Rumanvan, Susena, Visvavasu and Parasurama wen
the five sons born to Jamadagni by his wife Renuka.
VASU V. Ason of Murasura. The sons of Murasura
were, Tamra, Antariksa, Sravana, Vasu, Vibhavasu
Nabhasvan and Aruna. (Bhagavata, Skandha 10). i
VASU VI. A mighty King of the Krmi dynasty. (Mahabharata, Udyoga Parva, Chapter 74, Stanza 13).
VASU VII, It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Adi Parva
Chapter 94, Stanza 17, that the King Ilina had five
sons, Dusyanta, Sira, Bhima, Pravasu and Vasu by his
wife Rathantari.
VASU VIII. A scholarly Brahmin-hermit. The hermit
Paila was the son of this Vasu. (M.B. Sabha Parva
Chapter 33, Stanza 35) .
VASUIX. Vasu is usedas.a synonym of Sivain Mahabharata, Anusasana Parva, Chapter 17, Stanza 140.
VASU X. A name of Mahavisnu. (M.B. AnuSasana
Parva, Chapter 149, Stanza 25).
VASU XI. AKing. He was born to Uttanapada by
Sanrta. A controversy arose among hermits once, about
cow-sacrifice and for a solution of the problem the
hermits approached this king Vasu, who told them his
perception that the sacrifice of cow was, Strictly speaking, a matter of slaughter and as such it was to be forbidden. As the hermits could not agree with the King,
they cursed him ‘Let the King go to Patala (underworld). Vasu then did very severe penance and attained
- heaven. (Matsya Purana, 143, 18-25).
VASUCANDRA. A King who was the supporter and
helper of Yudhisthira. He was as mighty as the powerful Indra. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 158, Stanza
VASUDAMA. An attendant of Subrahmanya. (M.B.
Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Stanza 5).
VASUDANA I. A Ksatriya King. This King who was
a member of the council of Yudhisthira. was the ruler
of Pamgu. It is stated in Mahabharata that this King
presented Yudhisthira with twentysix elephants and
two thousand horses.(Sabha Parva, Chapter 52, Stanza
97). In the Bharata battle this King was the support
of Yudhisthira and Dhrstadyumna. But he was killed
by the arrow of Drona. (M.B. Udyoga Parva, Chapters
151 and 171; Drona Parva, Chapters 23 and 190; Karna
Parva, Chapter 6).
VASUDANA II. Aprince of Paficdla, who f
the side of the Pandavas. He was killed bet teas
carya.. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 21, Stanza 55).
VASUDANAPUTRA. A_ King who had taken the
side of the Kauravas and fought against the Pandavas
He killed Abhibha, the son of King of Kasi. (MB.
Karna Parva, Chapter 4, Stanza 74). ‘i
VASUDATTA 1. Mother of Vararuci.
Vararucl ).
VASUDATTA II. (VASUDEVA). Father of Sudeva, a
woman who had taken rebirth as a hog. (See under
Sudeva III).
VASUDEVA I. Being the son of Vasudeva, Sri Krsna
was called Vasudeva. :.
VASUDEVA II. See under Paundrakavasudeva.
VASUDEVA. Father of Sri Krsna.
(See under

VASUDEVABHATTATIRI
1) Genentogy. See under Krsna.
2) Previous birth and current birth. Vasudeva was the rebirth
of Prajapati Kasyapa. Aditi and Surasa, the wives of
Kagyapa took birth as Devaki and Rohini respectively.
(For details see under Kagyapa).
3) Marriage and Family. Rohini, the wife of Vasudeva,
gave birth to Balarama, the fighter Sarana, Durdhara,
Dama, Pindaraka and Mahahanu. Of Devaki who
was also called Maya and Amavasi, the younger son
Krsna and his beautiful sister Subhadra were born.
Vijaya, Rocamana, Vardhamana and Devala were sons
born by Upadevi. The twosons Agavaha and Mandaga,
otherwise called Angada were born of Vrkadevi.
Revanta who could not be defeated in battle, was born
from Saptamidevi. The first son of Vasudeva was
Kausika, whose birth was from a Vaigya woman called
Sraddha Devi when Vasudeva wa’ travelling in the
forest. Kapila, a mighty son was born by the queen
rutandhara. Saubhadra head of the archers and
Abhava were born by his wife Jana. (Padma Purana,
4) Other details.
(i) Vasudeva was the son of Sirasena, and the husband
of Devaki, the father of Sri Krsna, the brother of
Kunti, and the minister of Ugrasena. It was Vasudeva
who sent the priest Kagyapa to Satasrnga to perform
the purification ceremonies such as naming etc. of the
Pandavas. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 123, Daksinatyapatha).
(ii) After the Bharata-battle, Vasudeva asked Sri
Krsna and learned from him the detailed news about
the battle. (ASvamedha Parva, Chapter 60).
(iii) Vasudeva fell into a swoon when he _ heard that
Subhadra had become unconscious. (M.B. Aévamedha
Parva, Chapter 61, Stanza 5).
(iv) The ceremony of offering to the manes (Sraddha)
of Abhimanyu was performed by Vasudeva. (M.B.
Asvamedha Parva, Chapter 62, Stanza 1).
(v) When the Yadavas foughtamong themselves after
drinking liquor, Sri Krsna went to Dvaraka and visited
Vasudeva, and requested him to protect his wives who
were awaiting Arjuna. Then after kissing the feet of
Vasudeva, SriKrsna and Balabhadra Rama went to
do penance. (M.B. Mausala Parva, Chapter 4, Stanza Bi
(vi) When the dynasty of Vrsni was completely destroyed Vasudeva thinking about the Supreme soul in his
heart forsook his body. (M.B. Mausala Parva, Chapter
7, Stanza 15).
(vii) Arjuna performed the funeral rites of Vasudeva
and aided his four wives to enter the funeral pyre.
(M.B. Mausala Parva, Chapter 7, Stanza 19).
(viii) Vasudeva entered heaven and took his place
among Vigvadevas (gods concerned with offering to the
manes). (M.B. Svargarohana Parva, Chapter 9, Stanza
(ix) The synonyms of Vasudéva, used in Mahabharata
are Anakadundubhi, Sauri, Siraputra, Sirasinu,
Yadiidvaha and so on.
VASUDEVABHATTATIRI. A Sanskrit poet of - Kerala.
Vasudevabhattatiri was a poet who used alliteration
abundantly. His important works are ‘Yudhisthiravijaya, Tripuradahana Saurikatha, Vasudeva Vijaya,
Gajendramoksa, Nalodaya etc.
VASUDHA. Daughter of Narmada, a Gandharva
woman. Narmada had three daughters Sundari, KetuVASUJYESTHA. A King. This King was
VASUKI.
VASUKI
mati and Vasudha. (For more details see under Puspotkata).
VASUDHARA. A holy place. Those who visit this
place could enjoy the fruits of performing horse-sacrifice. If one gives offering to the manes after getting
oneself purified by bathing in this holy tirtha (bath),
one will attain the world of Visnu. There is a lake 0
the Astavasus (eight Vasus) in this place. By bathing
there, one could become the subject of the love and
regard of the eight Vasus. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter
82, Stanza 63).
VASUHOMA. A King of the country of Anga. Once he
gave advice to Mandhata on righteousness. (M. B.
Santi Parva, Chapter 122, Stanza 1).
the son of
Pusyamitra. (Matsya Purana, 272, 28).
One of the famous Nagas (serpents).
1) Birth. The uragas and nagas (serpents) were born
to Prajapati Kagyapa by his wife Kadra. Vasuki, the
eldest son of Kadri spent his childhood with his
parents,
2) Difference of opinion. Vinata and Kadri staked 08
the colour of the tail of Uccaiggravas (A horse obtain©
at the churning of the sea of Milk. To win the stakes
Kadri asked her sons to hang on the tail of Uccarss”
ravas as black hairs. But the truthful Vasuki was 2°
prepared to do so. Kadri cursed Vasuki and the othe
who sided with him. From that day onwards Vasu ;
and those who were cursed, separated from their mothe
and formed into a serpent group. (M.B. Adi Parv®
Chapters 37 and 48). ;
3) The length of Vasuki. The Devas and the ast
decided to get Amrta (Ambrosia—the celestial honey :
immortalily) by churning the sea of milk. The a
went to bring Mandara-mountain, to be used as oad
churning rod, Their attempt was futile. The a
made a trial with the same result. The Bhitagay
(Guards) of Siva also made a vain attempt. On nie
instruction of Visnu, Garuda went and brought :
mountain as easily as an eagle takes away a frog. as
Vasuki should be brought. The Devas and Gandbar™
failed in that attempt also. Garuda who was haug
of his strength and speed, -went to the city of the nag
(serpents) and requested Vasuki to come to the s¢4 4
Milk. WVa4suki replied that if the matter was so ure
he had no objection for being carried to that place- up
took the middle part of Vasuki in his beak and flew aie
higher and higher and reached beyond the hor)?’
Still the lower half of Vasuki was lying on the grow ill
So he took Vasuki in his beak as folded ‘in two. ihe
the result was the same. Garuda became aware of d
impossibility of carrying Vasuki and returned, asha™ ce:
and disappointed. Visnu rebuked him for his arrogant ki
After this, Siva stretched his hand to Patala. var
became a small bangle on that hand. Thus Vasu¥! ne
brought to the shore of the sea of Milk. (Kam
Ramayana, Yuddha Kanda).
4) Other details. og
(1) For the safety and protection of the Nagas (sc
pents) Vasuki gave his sister Jaratkaru as wife
hermit Jaratkaru. (See under Jaratkaru). M Bp.
(ii) The nagas anointed Vasuki as their King. (M
Adi Parva, Daksinatyapitha,. Chapter 36). ily?
(iil) When Va4suki saw the serpents, born of his fam. g
falling into the sacrificial fire of Janamejaya an

VASUKITIRTHA
in large numbers, he sent his nephew Astika to find
out a way to rescue the perishing nagas. (M.B, Adi
Parva, Chapter 53, Stanza 20).
(iv) Vasuki participated in the birth festival of Arjuna.
(M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 122, Stanza 71).
(v) Vadsuki advised the Nagas to give the divine juice
to Bhimasena, in accordance with the request of Aryaka.
(See under Bhimasena) . —
(vi) Vasuki stays in the palace of Varuna worshipping
him. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 9, Stanza 8).
(vil) Arjuna once allured the sister of Vasuki. (M.B.
Virata Parva, Chapter 2, Slanza 14) « .
(viii) In Tripuradahana (the burning of Tripura)
Vasuki acted as the bow-string of Siva and as the axle
os is chariot. (M.B. Karna Parva, Chapter.34, Stanza
and Karna, Vasuki
(ix) I Arjuné
) Nn the fight between ryuna (M.B. Karna Parva,
was a well-wisher of Arjuna.
Chapter 87, Stanza 43).
(x) The Devas anointed V
Nagas. (M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 37, Stanza 30).
(xi) Vasuki eave Subrahmanya two followers named
4 oy and Mahajaya. ( Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Verse
asuki as the King of the
(xii) WVdasuki is one of the seven nagas which hold up
ae earth, (M.B. Anus asana Parva, Chapter 150, Stanza
he
vent to Patala after his
(xiii) When Balabhadrarama \
to receive him. (
death, Vasuki had gone there
Mausala Parva, Chapter 4, Stanza 15). ii
(xiv) Once Vasuki and Vayu tried to find out w :
was the more powerful of the two, in consequence 4
which contest Mount Trikiita ws broken eens te
Vicinity of Mahameru and was thrown into the southern Sea. (See under Trikita). a 5
(xv) Wovds such as oan Nagaraja, Sa bite
Pannaga, Pannagarat, cas anes te on
as synon asuki in MahabharatsASURTTIR TIA. “A holy place situated on {Pe Orr
of the Ganga in Prayaga. B hogavatitirths nabharata
name of this holy bath. It is mentioned in : a <r
ana Parva, Chapter 89, Stanza, > | ene Rats
bath in this holy tirtha one could attain
perf ' E fice. ;
vRetfomg the horsesserSS | xing ofthe avast
of Iksvaku. ; llowin
1) Genealogy. Descended from vig 2 tn gana
Order. Brahma -Marici-Kas yapa-Viv?tha (Puraiijaya) 2
Manu-Iksvaku.Vikuksi-Sasada-Kakuts “+ Yuvanasvanenas - Prthulasva- Visvagasva-Prastee a. Haryas vaMandhaia-Purukutsa-Trasadasyu-A"™ ;
asumanas. Saal 4 married
2) Birth, Haryaéva, the King, R An was their
Madhavi, the daughter of Yayaul. St nga: 5G).
son. (M.B, Adi Parva, Chapter 86, ane Harini was
Marriage proposal. A dams Vasumanas. But
Proposed to be given in marrage e ow the story see
another man carried her aw4y: To
ae II. . i
) Other information. | n the ear
(i) Once yevat who fell from heave nerit of minglaoe with Vasumanas. Because ae heaven again.
ng with good people Yaya! @ 56).
(M.B. Adi Paria ‘Chapter 86, Stanza OO with Kings
(ii) Vasumanas_ entered heaven
VASUMAN II. (VASUMANAS). A King
VASUMITRA I. An ancient Ksatriya King.
VASVOKASARA.
839 VATA
like Astaka and others. (M.B, Adi Parva, Chapter 93
Stanza 16). : ;
(iii) Wasumanas sits in the palace of Yama and prai
him. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 8, Stanza 13). -
(iv) He went on pilgrimages and earned fame and
wealth. (M.B. Vana Parva Chapter 94, Stanza 17).
(v) He was present at the horse-sacrifice of Astaka the
son of Visvamitra. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 198,
Stanza l).
(vi) He once got into the aerial chariot of Indra and
came and stood over the city of Virata and witnessed
the battle between Arjuna and the teacher Kropa.
(M.B. Virata Parva, Chapter 56, Stanza 9).
(vii) It was near Vasumanas and others who had been
performing the sacrifice of Vajapeya and worshipping
Mahavisnu, that Yayati fell from heaven. (M.B. Udyoga
Parva, Chapter 121, Stanza 10).
(viii) Vasumanas became famous under the name
Danapati (lord of donations) because he had given Yayati,
the fruits of his good deeds. (M.B. Udyoga Parva,
Chapter 122, Stanza 9).
(ix) While he was the King of Kosala he conducted a
consultation with Brhaspati as to how he could bring
about the prosperity of the country. (M.B. Santi Parva,
Chapter 68, Stanza 6).
who was
famous in the council of Yudhisthira. (M.B. Sabha
Parva, Chapter 4, Stanza 32).
VASUMAN (VASUMANAS) III. A fire, It is stated
in Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 221, Stanza 27,
that if a woman during her monthly course happens
to touch the holy fire, an astakapala should be offered
to the fire Wasuman. This fire called Vasuman now
stays in the palace of Brahma. (M.B. Sabha. Parva,
Chapter 11, stanza 30).
VASUMAN (VASUMANAS ) IV. A prince of the family
of Janaka. It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Santi
Parva, Chapter 309, that a hermit had given him
exhortations regarding righteousness.
It is
stated in Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 67, Stanza
4] that this King was born from a portion of the
asura named Viksara, the son of Danayu.
VASUMITRA II. A_King born of the dynasty of Sunga.
It is mentioned in Bhagavata, Skandha 10, that Bhadraka, otherwise called Udanka was the son of this King.
VASU PRABHBA. A warrior of Subrahmanya. (M.B.
Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Stanza 63).
VASUSARMA. See under Dharmaséarma I.
VASUSENA. A name of Karna at the time of his boyhood. He was called by the name Vasusena by his
foster-father Adhiratha and his foster-mother Radha.
(See under Karna).
V ASUSRI. An attendant of Subrahmanya. (M.B. Salya
Parva, Chapter 46, Stanza 14).
VASVANANTA. The father of Yuyudha, and the son
of Upagupta. He-was the King of Videha. (Bhagavata.
Skandha 9).
One of the seven branches of the
Ganges. {M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 6, Stanza 48).
VATA. One of the five attendants given to Subrahmanya
by the god Arhga. The five attendants were Vata,
Parigha, Bhima, Dahati, and Dahana. (M.B, Salya
Parva, Chapter 45, Stanza 34).

eee aon mere iat Rag _——_— al a re
VATA
VATA. One of the Saptarsis (seven hermits) of the
Manvantara (Age of the Manu) of Manu Svarocisa.
In this age of the Manu the Devendra was Vipaécit.
Lhe Saptarsis of that Age of the Manu were Urja,
Stamba, Prana, Vata, Vrsabha, Niraya and Parivan.
(Visnu Purana, Arh’a 3, Chapter 1).
VATADHANA. A Ksatriya King. This King was
born from a portion of the asura Krodhavaga
(Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 63, Stanza 67).
VATADHANA(M). A country in ancient India. The
people of this country were called the Vatadhanas. The
following information is available about them from the
Mahabharata.
(i) Nakula defeated the Vatadhanas who were Ksatriyas at the time of his regional conquest. (M.B. Sabha
Parva, Chapter 32, Stanza 8).
(i1) Once the Kauravas surrounded this country which
abounded in wealth and food. (M.B. Udyoga Parva,
Chapter 19, Stanza 31).
(111) Vatadhana was one of the foremost countries in
India. (M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Stanza 47).
(iv) Inthe Garuda Vyiha of the army formed by
Bhisma, Agvatthama and the Vatadhanas stood at the
head of disposition, in the Bharata-Battle. (M.B. Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 27, Stanza 4),
(v) Once Sri Krsna defeated the Vatadhanas. (M.B.
Drona Parva, Chapter 11, Stanza, 17).
(vi) It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Karna Parva,
Chapter 73, Stanza 17 that in Bharata-battle Arjuna
destroyed all the armies of the country of Vatadhana.
VATADHIPA. A King who is famous in the Puranas.
It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter
31, Stanza 15, that this King was subdued by Sahadeva
during his southern regional conquest.
VATAGHNA. One of Vigvamitra’s sons who were expounders of Vedas. (M.B. Anuéasana Parva, Chapter 4,
Stanza 54).
VATAJA. Acountry in Ancient India. (Mahabharata,
Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Stanza 45).
VATAPI I. A giant. See under Agastya, Para 5, for the
story of how this asura was eaten along with his food by
Agastya.
VATAPI II. A notorious asura (demon) born to
Prajapati Kasyapa by his wife Danu. (Mahabharata,
Adi Parva, Chapter 65, Stanza 28).
VATARODHA. A hell. For further details see the section Naraka under Kala.
VATASKANDHA. A hermit. It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter 7, Stanza 14, that he
_ sits in the palace of Indra praising and worshipping
him.
VATAVEGA I. (VAYUVEGA). One of the hundred
sons of Dhrtarastra. It is mentioned in Mahabharata,
Adi Parva, Chapter 195, that he had been present at the
Svayarmvara (marriage) of Draupadi and in the Karna
Parva, Chapter 84, Stanza 2, that he was killed by Bhimasena in the Bharata-battle.
VATAVEGA II. One of the famous sons of Garuda.
(M.B. Udyoga Parva, Chapter 101, Stanza 10).
VATIKA. A warrior of Subrahmanya. (M.B. Salya Parva,
Chapter 45, Stanza 67).
VATSA I. Son of Pratardana the King of Kaégi. It is
stated in Mahabharata, Santi Parva, Chapter 49, Stanza
79, that the name Vatsa was given to him because he
was brought up in his childhood by calves of cows,
VATSALA. An attendant of Subrahmanya.
VAYU
VATSA II. A King of the family of Saryati. This King
was the father of Talajangha and Hehaya. (M.B. Anu-
§asana Parva, Chapter 30, Stanza 7).
VATSA III (VATSABHUMI). A country in ancient
India. The following information is given about this
country in the Mahabharata.
(i) Bhimasena conquered this country during his regional conquest. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 30, Stanza
(ii) Karna once brought this country under control.
(M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 254, Stanza 9).
(iii) During the battle of Bharata, the people of Vatsa
were on the side of the Pandavas. (M.B. Udyoga
Parva, Chapter 53, Stanza 1. d
(iv) Deified beings (semigods) and heavenly singers ha
lived in this country. There is an asylum there for
holy men. Amba, the princess of Kasi once lived 1n
this hermitage. (M.B. Udyoga Parva, Chapter 186,
Stanza 34). :
(v) Amba became a river and still flows through this
country under the name Amba. (M.B. Udyoga Parva
Chapter 186, Stanza 40).
(vi) In the battle of Bharata, the warriors of va?
stood on the left side of the disposition of the army ca
ed Krauficarunavyiha, formed by Dhrstadyumna.(M.».
Bhisma Parva, Chapter 50, Stanza 53).
(M.B. Salya
Parva, Chapter 45, Stanza 72).
VATSANABHA. A hermit. Dharma, once took the form
of a she-buffalo and saved Vatsanabha from heavy ra!”:
After this he thought that he was an ungrateful man rd
so he decided to forsake his body. But Dharma dissuae
ed him from this attempt. (M.B. Anugd4sana_ Parva;
Daksinatya Patha, Chapter 12).
VATSARA. The younger of the two sons of Dhruv4Utkala, the elder was a man of abstinence. So th®
younger brother Vatsara became the prince app2r ent.
Vatsara married the princess named Svarvithi. Six sons
named Pusparna, Tigmaketu, Iga, Urja, Vasu and Jay?
_ were born to them. (Bhagavata, Skandha 4). 4
VATSYA I. A hermit belonging to the Guruparampat
(the line of teachers). It was this hermit Vatsya W2°
wrote the famous Vatsyayana Siitra (the science o
Amour). He was one of the guests at the serpant-sact a
fice( Sarpasatra)of Janamejaya.(M.B. Adi Parva Chap.
ter ‘53, Stanza 9).He visited Bhisma who lay on the be 4
of arrows. (M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter 47, Stanza). ae
under Guruparampara. ‘5
VATSYA II. A country famous in the Puranas. Th
country has the name Vatsa also. (See under Vatsa)
VAYASAVIDYA. The art of making the crow tell the P*"
and foretell the future. (For further details see unde
Kalakavrksika) .
VAYU I.- One of the eight guardians of the world.
(Dikpalakas) .
1) General information. Vayu was born from the preath
of Vig vapurusa. (Rgveda 10, 90). Tvasta was the a0
in-law of Vayu. The eight dikpalakas are Indra, V2>”
(F ire) » Yama, Nirrti, Varuna, Vayu, Kubera and a
Vayu is the guardian of the North West zone. T
palace of Bhagavan Vayu is known as Gandhavati. ii
2) Confrontation with Vasuki. Once Vayu and Vasu
tried to find out who of the two was mightier, in Ot:
sequence of which, Trikitaparvata, a peak of our

VA
— oe VEDA(S)
Himalaya, was br ; inte
) oken from its bed and thrown into (v) Mention i j shh rt
the southern ocean near Lanka. Later, the city of hee LL, eae, 20 fey poor Gea P ike
) e palace
Lanka was built on this mountain. (For details see
under Trikita).
if Children. Bhimasena and Haniiman are said to be
the prominent sons of Bhagavan Vayu. It is mentioned
rk Rgveda, Mandala 1, Anuvaka 7, Sikta 112, that
gni was the son of Vayu. To make fire from wood by
Sees thé hands obtain strength by the help of the
| 1 e breath called Vyana (a breath or vayu). It is from
is, that the idea that fire is the son of Vayu, came into existence. ‘T’o know how Vayu obtained the paternity
J Bhima and Haniman see under Bhima and Hanuman.
Hs Is stated in Brahma Purana that a group of celestial
maids called ‘Muda’ owes its origin to Vayu.
4) ‘Love of Vayu. Once Bhagavan Vayu happened to see
the six beautiful daughters of Kuganabha, a king, and
he was excited sexually. As the princesses refused to
satisfy his desire, Vayu changed the damsels into hunchbacks, by a curse. (For detailed story see under Kusanabha).
9) The Vayus (breaths) in the body. (See under Nadicakra) .
6) Curbing the arrogance of Silk-cotton tree. Long ag© a
silk-cotton tree grew up on the top of the Himalayas.
It grew up to be a big tree spreading its branches 11
all directions. Birds built their nests OF the branches of
that big tree and hermits and animals found shelter
under its shade. The silk-cotton tree became arrogant.
Once Narada came there and praised the tree: — “How
8igantic, this silk-cotton tree is ! Even ina great storm
its branches do not move:”’ Fhe praise of Narada made
the tree more haughty. It told Narada that the storm
etc. were its servants. Narada told Vayu, what the
silk-cotton tree said to him. Vayu got angry and comIng to the tree, said thus:- “You, wicked silk-cottol
tree, in da when Brahma was carrying on
’ ys of yore, aa ae while: That is why
Creation he took rest on you It is not because
mot fs : ] C . | me
am afraid of you. I knew en ee and fight with
Narada, If you are bold enous”:
e>
a
The silk-cotton tree accepted the challenge Nee Bee
agavan Vayu changed into @ storm and ee ga
the tree, The tree lost leaves, flowers ol epane
stood bare. Thus within a VeTy short time the 4 8
of the tree was curbed
; 4 ness hisma, to show
This story was told to Yudhisthira by ly make me
that renderin Oo
g help to 4 )
haughty. (M.B. Santi Parva, 3
Other details.
(i) When Indra cut off the wings of
d agavan Vayu saved the mountary
Sat , by hiding it in the ocean. o 2
ay aoe Kanda, Sarga 1, Stanz® - ;
ii) The image of Bhagavan Vayu shor
P Sitting on the mews 3 of a decr; polding 98:
(ii) Te Chapter.51). “aii
1) Ind A iso along W? s
{ii) Indra sent Vayu alo a ypile Menal es (MB.
in front of Visvamitra, Vayu displace
‘a Parva, Chapter 72, Stanza 1) aavdla Vana Parva,
(iv) It is mentioned in Mahabhare ? nessenger ©
Chapter 19, Stanza 22, that Vayu 3s
the gods,
the mountains,
ainaka from this
miki Ramayana,
ld be consecrated
(Agni
enaka to hinder
3 yiOhee praising him.
vi Once Pradvumna tried to kill Salva. A :
Vayu went to Pradyumna as the sien aloes a Bie
Be yaya | ne oe 19, Stanza 29), F
vii) Vayu proved that Damayanti w
(vil) ee ee 76, GS taniea 36). BSEE: NGM
viii) Wayu declared that Sita
ia) i ee 291, Stanza 97). wap eon
ix) In Tripuradahana (the burni . :
acted as the arrow of ee bow DEENA i TB. ae
ia) ashe ae 202, Stanza 76). i na
x) Vayu. gave Subrahmanya two attendants called
Bala and Atibala. (M.B. Salya Parv pes
Stanza 44). ya Parva, Chapter 45,
(xi) Once Vayu advised Purtiravas about th
aD one Santi Parva, Chapter 72, Sixavag 10.25).
(xii) ee otc haat talked elaborately- on the
secrets. cf goodness and badness. (M.B. ¥:
Parva, Chapter 128). ; eon SSaae
(xiii) Bhagavan Vayu once talked about the great
of Brahmins to Kartavir arjuna. M.B apnea aa
aout Chapter 152). ial ihe PUSaSaA
VAYU II. An ancient hermit of India. It i ge
in Mahabharata, Santi Parva, Chapter 47, hae peg
that this hermit visited Bhisma on his bed of arrows
VAYUBALA. See under Vayucakra. ;
VAYUBHAKSA. An ancient hermit. It is mentioned in
aE Pe Parva, Chapter 4, Stanza 13, that
this hermit had been a prominent fi
of Yudhisthira. i gure in te palate
VAYUCAKRA. A hermit. It 1s mentioned in Mahabharata, Salya Parva, Chapter 38, Stanza 39. that ee
Vayucakra was born from the semen kept in a pot b
the hermit called Mankanaka. From this same pot ane
other hermits such as Vayubala, Vayujvala and others
were born. (See under Mankanaka, Para 3).
VAYUHA. A sonof the hermit Mankanaka.
3, under Mankanaka).
VAYUJVALA. See under Vayucakra.
VAYUMANDALA. A son of the hermit Mankanaka
See para 3, under Mankanaka. eae ®
VAYUPURARNA. One of the eighteen Puranas. (See
er Purana). _
VAYURETAS. A son of the hermit Manka
ara 3, under Mankanaka). ankegaka. (See
VAYUVEGAI. A Ksatriya King in anci ;
mentioned in Mahabharata, Adi aia, Ona Ae
Stanza 63 that this King was born from a portion f
the asura named Krodhava§a. a
VAYUVEGA IJ. A-son of the hermit Mank
Para 3, under Mankanaka). it Mankanaka. (See
VAYUVEGA III. One of the sons of Dhrtarastra. He
was present at the Svayathvara (marriage) of Draupadi
we ek Chapter 177, Verse 2).
VAYYA. A royal hermit of the period of Rieveda. Menti
3; made about the royal Heceaiti such a anya are
ee and others in Rgveda, Mandala ‘i cae
VEDA. The sunofthe hermit Ayodhadh |
further details see under Avedbadhaedva ‘awl pae
vey I (oy
1) Introduction. The root ‘Vid’ in Sanskrit means *
know’. The books composed of the knowledge i. fe
(See para

VEDA (S)
Aryans, collected and compiled were called the Vedas.
2) The origin and importance of the Vedas. Itis said that
Brahm& was the creator of the Vedas. Many say that,
for the performance of sacrifices Brahma created from
Agni (fire), Vayu (Wind) and Ravi (the Sun), the
three Vedas Rg, Yajus and Saman which are eternal and
in accordance with regulations.
The Vedas have two sides, the spiritual and the mundane. Moreover all the explanations of the Vedas
from the Brahmanas to the Bhasya of Sayana, pertain
to sacrifices. The literary meaning of Veda is mundane.
Considering these two points and the facts that they are
religious books and that they reveal the mental and
social outlooks of the early Aryans, and as the origin of
all the thoughts of Indians, all the Vedas, especially
Rgveda, hold a lofty place. |
3) Parts of the Vedas. Mahavisnu incarnated as Vyasa
in Dvapara Yuga and divided the Vedas. The first
Veda consisted of four padas and a hundred thousand
granthas. Vyasa divided it into four parts known as,
Rgveda, Yajurveda, Samaveda and Atharvaveda.
The sage and seer Vyasa thus created by Rg, “‘Hautra”’
(a collection of lyrics in praise of different Gods, to be
recited by the priest styled the ‘hotr’), by Yajus
‘“Adhvaryava’”’, (a book of sacrificial prayer, of prose
formulas to be uttered by the ‘Adhvaryu’ priest, who
performed the manual work involved in a sacrifice), by
Saman, ‘“‘Audgatra”, (Songs meant to be sung at the
Soma sacrifice by a special class of priests ‘Udgatr’) and
by Atharva ‘“‘Brahmatva’’, (a collection of songs, spells
and incantations, for the healing of disease, the restoration of harmony, the exorcism of evil spirits and to
celebrate the power and omniscience of God) and
established them separately. Paila, a scholar in Rgveda, and a disciple of Vyasa, gave the original Veda
to Indrapramiti and its Samhita (collections )to Baskala
as gifts. Baskala divided the Samhita into four, and ~
gave each of them to Baudhya and others. Yajurveda
was divided into twentyfour branches. They were composed by Vaigampayana of extraordinary intelligence,
a disciple of Vyasa. Kandas (Chapters) such as Vajasaneya etc. were composed later by hermits such as
Yajfiavalkya and others in the form of Smrtis (tradition,
as handing down only the tradition derived from ancient sages, to whom the Vedas were ‘revealed’).
Jaimini the disciple of Vyasa, divided Saimaveda into
different branches. Sumantu and Sukarma compiled
separate Samhitas (collections) from them.
composed thousand Sarhhitas. Sumantu the disciple
of Vyasa took the Atharvaveda and taught it to
thousands of Paippalada disciples. By the blessings of
Vyasa, Sita made the Purana Samhita (the collection
of Puranas). (Agni Purana, Chapter 150).
4) Branches af the Vedas. It has already been mentioned
that the Vedas are four innumber called Rg, Yajus,
Sima and Atharva. Each of these Vedas has branches
called Sambhitas (collections) and Brahmanas (treatises
relating to prayer and sacrificial ceremony). Aranyakas
are appendices to the Brahmanas. Upanisads (secret
or esoteric doctrines) are appendices of the Aranyakas.
Thus each of the Vedas has Samhités, Brahmanas,
Aranyakas and Upanisads. All these are, ina way, expositions of the Vedas. In all these expositions there
are numberless Sikktas. All these taken together are
called Vedic literature.
- Sukarma -
VEDA(S)
In the Sambhitas there are lyrics in praise of different gods.
All these are spells and incantations (mantras) in the
form of songs. The under-currents of all these spells are
Vedas and stories from the Vedas. Generally speaking
the Brahmanas contain prose texts giving practical
observations on sacrifice which are mentioned in _the
songs of praise. Here and there stories from Puranas
and epics occur. The Aranyakas (forest-texts) got that
name, because they are books of instruction to be given
in the forest or writings meant for wood-dwelling hermits. As they contained esoteric spells and incantations which might cause injury even to those who were
not concerned with them instruction in them was not
given in towns or villages. The contents of the Aranyakas are the allegorical signification of the rites and
sacrifices and the mystic meaning of the Vedas.
It has been mentioned that the Upanisads are appendices of the Aranyakas. Still there is not much difference between the two and hence they cannot be separated from one another so easily. The Upanisads are
called Vedantas, (The aim and completion of the
Vedas), because they are the end of the Vedas. The
Vedantas belong to the later period of the Vedic age
Instruction in Vedantas was given only after completing
the study of the mantras (Vedas) and the Brahmanas.
The Upanisads contain philosophical speculations about
the conception of Brahman and the Vedas. ‘The wor d
Veda includes the Vedangas also. Vedangas (Ancillaries
of the Vedas) are SiksA (phonetics), Vyakarana
(grammar), Chandas (metrics), Nirukta (etymology ):
Joytisa (astronomy), and Kalpa (ritual). At_ first
instruction is given in the study of Brahman and the
study of Vedas. When more discussions and expositions
on them are needed, the study of Brahmanas a?
Aranyakas are resorted to.. In course of time the
Brahmanas and Aranyakas, which contain discussions
and expositions of the Vedas became independent
branches of study under these names. That is why they
contain mainly prose texts.
There are one lakh of mantras or spells and incantations in all the four Vedas taken together. They gil’
for blessing everybody and to make the four objects °
life easily attainable. Sankhyadyana and Agvalayan@
sorted and grouped the mantras. Accordingly there
are two thousand one hundred and ten mantras know”?
as Brahmanas. Dvaipayana and other hermits hav
stated the number of granthas (verses) in Rgveda. d
is said that there are one thousand nine hundred 4”
ninety nine mantras in Yajurveda. There are one
thousand ‘eightysix branches also. The branches, __
Yajus are known by the names Kanvi, Madhyandi2
Kathi, Madhyakathi, Maitrayani, Taittiriya, Vaise™
payanika and so on. , ‘ :
In Sama Veda there are branches such as Kauthu™”
Atharvanayini and so on; and songs suchas Aranyakere
Uktham, Uham and soon. The number of Samavé 7
vers are nine thousand four hundred and twem
ve.
Sumantu, Jafijali, Slokayani, Saunaka, Pippal@4%
Mufijakesa and such others were responsible for * 7
sorting and ‘grouping of the mantras in the Atharv®
veda. Altogether there are one thousand six bund"
Upanisads. (Agni Purana, Chant 7
5) Expositions of the Vedas. Pedic Arya”
ecame ane tabli h edas. The religion of the 417 thé
stablished one when Vyasa had create?

VEDA(S)
Vedasarhhitas.
tcc 1m ne religious observances by performing
eer rituals, religious ceremonies such as sacrifices
Ve, without any flaw. Following this a very wide
edic literature grew up. The study of the Vedas,
critical review of meaning, the connection. between
mantras and tantras (Chants and rituals), Grammar,
Ctymology, all these became -nevitable. As the Vedas
could be looked at from different points of view, from
very early days, various types of expositions of the
Vedas came out. Seven types of commentaries,
Nairukta, Yajihika, Valyakarana Jyautisa, Sampradayika
Adhyatmika, Aitihasika (pertaining 10 etymology,
Sacrifice, grammar astronomy, customs of a tribe,
Brahma or Spiritual legends and ancient lore) were
the prominent among them. When the westerners
egan research work i the Vedas, another branch ©
literature also took form, known as the Agamikas
(the historical), Even 10 the time of Yaska, who
Was an authority on Nirukta (etymology)
were expounded on the basis of legends and ancient
lore. Hints to this effect are sccm in Yaska’s works.
Mention is made about other types of expositions also,
7 them. The last book of importance in the Sampraclayika type of ex osition re
Sdyana, "Bat the F ommentary of Skandasvami, the
books Rearthadipika and Udgithabhasya of Madhava
cirya etc, have spread the sampradayika 'YPT
speculations i There 1s another cult 1n India
sin India. The the Vedas is
Which bell hi c
1eV at everything S° i
es that y S d incantations are
the spells an
jl the ods known today
scl Tose who are found
that is given % them now.
Spiritual and that
esoteric,
) The gods of the Vedas.
are not found in the Vedas.
O not have the prominence
e oO
or example, the deity Visnus worshippes at oe the
the three godheads today, is not as omnipo eau ;
Indra of the Vedas. Se
spells in Rgveda, when
€ was not of much Pp
. ’ ortance.
Incarnation of Vamana ig not Dray bid. mention
Even though Rudra is 4 recognized fa y is not a song
occurs about Kapardi, in the vel ae
of praise of Siva in the Rgve a Ph ‘lus Devi-an
at all, about the worship © the 14\ the Omniscience
on in the Vedas. The Vedas celebra ruts and so on.
of Varuna, Indra, Agni, Mitra, the aan med with the
The lustre of Indra was graduall libertine 12 the
efflux of time and he became a , deities such as
. Puranas. The imoortance of ae was reatly dimiaruna, Agni, Mitra, As vin an ‘ties pertaining
Nished in the Puranas. Se in the Vedas.
to Earth, Ether and Sky are PI") vedas
) The rites concerning instruction ; sar
a certain instructions as to”
edas should be conducte¢- ) mpara.
ywparamp
8) The teachers of Veda. See unde co Believe that the
The period of the Vedas. 3 erabmana
Spells and incantations a? the 5s tHe
eben! but are revelations y q _ The hermits
ered ta be beainnimeless =F [tis mentione
g of the spells. They are seers
compared n the Vedas the
Manu has
5 Vda dat a to be seers Of". oh”
Mantra, not makers): , i not necess4 ry to searc
Ccording to this maxim, *
The aim of Vyasa was to bring about
the Vedas ©
was Vedarthaprakasa, 0°.
Visnu 1S eee!
the teaching °
VEDASIRAS
for the creators or the period of creati
They hold that only ue Sutras renal,’ athe ae
ive aia are made/by man. ah est;
e westerners and the /modern thinker
not agree completely with this view. “They” bel =
that the early Aryans who entered India, first ccrtied
down in the Punjab and that the local civilization Which
they had assumed, broke out as songs of raise T
course of time, these songs of Praise took ihe form if
Reveda mantras (saying, song, formula). In the ee
ning there was only one Veda. Many believe that this
state continued up to B.C, 1500. It is a fact eataraell
acknowledged, that this Vedic literature is the m t
ancient literature of the world. There is differen af
opinion as to the period of origin of this Vedic ifierate :
Prof. Macdonell and Prof. Jacobi are foremost am ing
those who have made their opinions. In the opi sen
of Prof. Macdonell, the Vedic literature Re a
the period between B.C. 1500 and 1200, But. Jac bi's
opinion is that all the Vedas were made Befurs B.C.
VEDADISA. The son of Brhadratha, the King of Cedi
Mention is made about him in Bhagavata, Skandha 9
VEDAGARBHA. A name of Devi. ‘When Devi killed
Symbha and such other Asuras, Indra got ple
her and praised her as follows : a tor
“Arya, Durga, Vedagarbha,
Ambika, Bhadrakali; Bhadra, Ksemya
Ksemakari, Naikabahi, | praise you.”
(Agni Purana, Chapter 12).
VEDAKALPA. A section: of Atharvaveda. The nermit
Mufijakesa divided Atharva Veda into five Samhita
(collections) called Naksatra Kalpa, Veda ‘Kalpa
Samhita Kalpa, Angirasa Kalpa, and Santi
(Visnu Purana, Ansa. 3, pape a) anti Kalpa.
VEDANA. A goddess who caused pain to living things.
Adharma married Himsa. ‘Two daughters named Nrta
and Nirrti were born to them. From them Bhaya
Naraka, Maya and Vedana were born. Mrtyu was the
daughter of Maya. Duhkha was the son of Vedana.
(Agni Purana, Chapter 20).
VEDANGA. See under Veda.
VEDANIDHI. A hermit. For further details see under
Pramohini.
VEDANTA. See under Veda.
VEDASARMA I. The son of a brahmin named Sivacarma. (See under Sivasarma).
VEDASARMA II. See under Vidura.
VEDASIRAS I.
A-hermit born in the
RAM ) | clan of Bh
He was born to the hermit Mé€arkandeya by his wife
ade ae hae called Dhimra.. Pivari was the
wife O edasiras. : 7; Va A
“4 S. (Brahma :2, 11, 7; Vayu Purana
While Vedasiras was doing penance once, a celestial
maid named Suci came to make him deviate from penance. A daughter was born to him by her. Yamadharma
wished to kidnap that daughter. Vedasiras cursed
Yamadharma to become a river. (Skanda Purana, 4 :
VEDASIRAS Il. A hermit. He was the son born to
Kréagva by his wife Dhisana. Vedasiras learn
Wa Bed "i oa ied V
oc i (aaa (oma in Patala iets
‘wor nd taughtit to his discipl - :
Purana, 6 : 8:47). isciple Pramati. (Visnu

VEDASMRTA 844
VEDASMRTA. A river. (Mahabharata, Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 9, Stanza 17).
VEDASPARSA. A teacher-priest who was a disciple of
the hermit Kabandha. This teacher divided Atharvaveda into four parts and gave each of his four disciples,
a part. (Vayu Purana 61 : 50). |
VEDASRUTI. Ariver. famous in the Puranas. It is
mentioned in Valmiki Ramayana, Ayodhya Kanda,
Sarga 49, that Sri Rama crossed this river and entered
the hermitage of Agastya.
VEDASVA. An ancient river. It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Stanza 28, that the
people of Bharata drank the water.of this river.
VEDAVATI (DEVAVATI). A previous birth of Sita.
(See under Sita),
VEDAVYASA. See under Vyasa.
VEDI. Wife of Brahma. (M.B. Udyoga Parva, Chapter
VEDITIRTHA I. A holy bath impossible to reach.
This tirtha is at the origin of river Indus. He who
visits this holy place will attain the fruits of horse
sacrifice and will enter heaven. (M.B. Vana Parva,
Chapter 84, Stanza 47).
VEDITIRTHA II. A holy place situated on the border
of Kuruksetra. It ismentioned in Mahabharata, Vana
Parva, Chapter 83, Stanza 59, that those who bathe
in this tirtha will obtain the fruits of giving thousand
cows as alms.
VEGAVAN I. A naga (serpent) born in the family of
Dhrtarastra. It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Adi
Parva, Chapter 57, Stanza 17, that this serpent fell in
the sacrificial fire of Janamejaya and died.
VEGAVANII. An asura. It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 65, Stanza 24, that this
asura was the son born to Prajapati KaSyapa by his
wife Danu. It was this Vegavan who took rebirth as
the prince of Kekaya later. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter
67, Stanza 10).
VEGAVAN III. A daitya (asura). A follower of the
King of Salva. Mention is made in Mahabharata, Vana
Parva, Chapter 16, Stanza 17, that this daitya was
killed in a fight with Samba, the son of Krsna.
VEGAVAHINI. An ancientriver in India. This river
stays in ‘he palace of Varuna and exalts him. (M.B.
Sabha Parva, Chapter 9, Stanza 18).
VEHATA. A medicine which helps to fatten the body.
(Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 117, Stanza 17),
VEKA. Awoman of the race of Raksasas (giants).
‘Ehis woman was the sister of Puspotkata and Kaikasi.
(See under Akampana).
VENA I. An ancient King who was notorious for his
bad rule. ,
1) Genealogy. Descended from Visnu in the following
order : Brahma - Svayambhuva Manu - Uttanapada -
Dhruva-Sisti-Ripu-Caksusa Manu-Kuru-Anga-Vena.
2) Birth. Ten sons including Kuru, were born to
Manu Caksusa by his wife Nadvala. Agneyi, the wife
of Kuru gave birth to six sons Anga and others, Anga
married Sunitha. The son Vena was born by Sunitha.
Itis mentioned in Visnu Purana, Athéa 1, Chapter
13, that Sunitha, the mother of Vena was the eldest
daughter of Yama, and in Vamana Purana Chapter 47, that this Sunitha was the daughter born to K4la
VENA I
and Mrtyu. Vena who was born as the son of the
daughter of Yama was born a wicked man because 9
the badness of his grandfather. ,
Venagrew up asa great sinner. A story occurs 10
Padma Purana about an incident which caused Vena
to become a great sinner.
The story says that Sunitha was the mother of Vena. In
her play she used to imitate her father’s job which was
hurting others. One day when she went to the forest
for play with her maids she saw Sugankha the son 0
a Gandharva named Gitakolahala. That youth who
was handsome in every part of his body, was doing
penance meditating on the goddess Sarasvati for the
attainment of the art of music. Sunitha began to annoy
him daily. Sugankha bore this annoyance patiently,
He said only this -‘‘Go away, go away.” But she di
not pay heed to his appeals. Once she became angry
and struck him. Getting angry at this, Susankha calle
out, “You wicked girl! Why do you annoy me ? You
have beaten me, who am engaged in penance, for n°
cause.”” That righteous Gandharva youth curbed his
anger considering that she was a woman.
She told him “My father will beat everybody 1n aa
three worlds. He will harm the wicked, and will 1°
do any harm to the good. So he rules the country
righteously.’’ Sunitha told all about the story to
father. Though Yama, the incarnation of righteousness
heard all that his daughter said he did not give a?Y
reply. .
She again went to the forest and struck him with 4
whip. Suganka rose up, shivering with pain and curse
her thus :
“You wicked girl ! When you become a- house-holdet
and join your husband you will get a son who will be 4
scoffer of Devas and Brahmins and anall-round sinn¢e: ;
Thus cursing her he continued his penance. Vena W@
born according to this curse.
3) The wicked rule of Vena. The hermits anointed Ven
as the King. He became lord of the whole earth. |
made a proclamation thus:—‘‘Sacrifice is prohibite s
Giving alms, is prohibited. Offerings of no kind shov™
be made. Who else, other than I, can be the ya
purusa ? (the deity who eats the food of sacrifice) $
am the only lord and consumer of sacrifices’’. 4
Hearing this proclamation, the hermits approaché"-
him and toldhim that the Vedas were the basis -
righteousness, that sacrifices were ordained in them, 2” t
that if no sacrifice was performed the Devas would at
be pleased and so on. But this did not make any chang
in his behaviour.
The hermits became angry. They all gathered togethes
and recited spells and struck him with Darbha eat
grass and killed him. As there was no King the wor!
fell into darkness. Because of the troubles cause
plunderers, people gathered round the hermits. Her™
joined together and churned the left hand of ver”
from which a man of short stature came out, to W “—
the hermits said, ‘Nisida’ (sit). Because the hem"
said Nisida’, Nisada came into existence from =
dwarf born of the sins of Vena. Then the herm!
a oe right hand of Vena. At this churnine -
son as big as a mountain with div} ions came OF”
He had bow and arrows and in hie pod be o— wer
marks of a wheel and flag. Seeing this the Dev
ts
her:

VENA Ii
anointed him the King of the earth. He ruled righteously and brought the goddess earth (Prthvi) who had
estranged herself from his father Vena close to him.
Because he had conciliated Prthvi he became famous
as a King. (Vamana Purana, Chapter 47).
VENA II. One of the ten sons of Vaivasvata Manu.
(Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 79, Stanza 15).
VENA. A river famous in the Puranas. Information
about this river, taken from Mahabharata, is given
below .
(1) Vend-river stays in the palace of Varuna serving
him. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 9, Stanza 18).
(ii) Sahadeva defeated the ruler ofthe country at the
asin of river Vena, during his conquest of the regions
of the south. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 31, Stanza
(ili) Those who fast on the basin of this river for three
days will go to heaven in an aerial chariot yoked with
pea-cocks and swans. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 89,
Stanza 32). |
Ss river
which originate fire, thi
(iv) Among the rivers
also is, included. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 224.
Stanza 24) ; hl -
habharata, Anusasana Parva,
(v) It is mentioned in Ma
Chapter 165, Stanza 20, tha
V Le aia every mee
VASANGAMA. A holy piace
ed in Maha Bharata, Vana Parva, Chapter o> See
a that those who bathe in this Dee shall obt
ruits of performing a horse sacriice- |
VENATU, —_—" thernmost point
A small country situated on the a radually and
of India. This country gr a2 e Kerala State
became Travancore which fo ~
now, , :
his serpent fell in the sacrificial eath. M.B.
Rare of Janamejaya; 40 "al 7 , 7
Adi Parva. Chapter 57, 9tanz@ °“v" int the
VENIKA, "A holy acd in Saka ioland famous
guranas. (Mahabharata, Bhism4 ;
tanz ae Kaurava
VENISKANDA A naga (serpent) DOr aes ‘of
family, This serpent also fell Ee ea Wa burnt to
the serpent sacrifice of J anamejay® 7 Stanza 12).
Vv death. (M.B. Adi Parva; Chapter on ho lived in
ENKATADHVARL. A Sanskrit poet
th century A.D. Most iP iption 0
‘Yadavaraghaviya. This poem 15 esa hi
greatness of Rama and Krsna. ho lived in the 14th
VENKATANATHA. A Sanskrit Poct * aed and twenty:
century A.D, He completed nearly hun?’ sanskrit an
Ve poetic works. | These are wr wet havabhyuday4
Prakrta, The major poetic work ae das. This is a
of Venkatanatha consists of twenty ar as written 4
beautiful poetic work. Appayyadl Venkatanatha, whe
Commentary on this work. This por ntadesika”
was also known by the name, ve j
Sreat philosopher too. Jt %8
was Tuppil, near Khans!.
on theosophy and on the
With God.
enkatanatha was born in
. 9, as critics say. Eve
€nerated as a divine perso":
t this is a river worthy to
and evening. -
w in
rms a part 0
the
os
philosophy 0
1968 and died mn
n today B° ;
in India. It 1s mentionof his works; 18 —
VIBHANDAKA
VENKATURKU. A measure of weight in ancient India.
. ae eae Trasarenu)
NUDARI. A Yadava. This Yadava onc i
the wife of Akrira. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chasesaa
VENUDARISUTA. A Yadava. It is mentioned-in Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 254, Stanza 15, that this
Yadava was defeated by Karna during his regional
conquest.
VENUHAYA. A king of the Lunar dynasty (CandravarhSa ).
He was the son of Satajit and the brother.of Mahahaya
and Hehaya. (Bhagavata, Skandha 9).
VENUJANGHA. An ancient hermit. This hermit shone
in the assembly of Yudhisthira. (M.B. Sabha Parva
Chapter 4, Stanza 18).
VENUMANDALA. One of the seven divisions of Kufadvipa. Itis mentioned in Mahabharata, Bhisma -Parva
Chapter 12, Stanza 12, that, in all these seven divisions,
Devas, Gandharvas and men_ live like friends and
that death has no admission to this island.
VENUMANTA. A mountain very famous in the Puranas.
This mountain is white in colour. It is said that* this
mountain is on a par with the mountain Mandara in
the Northern region. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Daksinatyapatha, Chapter 33).
VENUPA. A country in ancient India. (Mahabharata,
Udyoga Parva, Chapter 140, Stanza PAS) ie
VENUVINADHARA. An attendant of Subrahmanya.
(M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Stanza 26). -
VETALA. An evil spirit. In the branch of fiction Fairy
stories have a prominent place. Fairy stories had'a good
place in India from very early times. In several stories
Vetalas (ghosts) have been introduced as_ characters.
Though Vetalas have got a place in most of the stories,
the Vetala, who had turned to the path of salvation
in ‘Jianavasistha’ and the narrator of twentyfive
(Paficavirhsatr ) Vetala stories of Kathasaritsagara are
the most prominent among them.
VETALAJANANI. An attendant of Subrahmanya. (M.B.
Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Stanza 13).
VETALAPANCAVIMSATI. The twentyfive stories told
by Vetala. (See under Vetala) .
VETASAVANA. An ancient holy place. The goddess
Mrtyu once did penance in this place. (M.B. Drona
Parva, Chapter 54, Stanza 23).
VETASIKA. A_holy place glorified by Brahma. It is
mentioned in Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 84,
Stanza 56, that those who visit this place will obtain
the fruits of Horse sacrifice and will attain the world of
. §ukracarya.
VETRAKIYAGRHA. A place near the city of Ekacakra.
_ (Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 159, Stanza 9).
VETRAK IYAVANA. A forest. It was in this forest that
Bhimasena killed Bakasura. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter
11, Stanza 30).
VETRAVATI. A river very famous in the Puranas.
(Mahabharata Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Stanza 16).
VETRIKA. A country in India. Duryodhana had sent
the army of the kingdom of Vetrika for the protection of
Bhisma. (Mahabharata, Bhisma Parva, Chapter 951,
Stanza 7).
VIBHANDAKA (VIBHANDAKA). |
1) General information. A hermit, born in the family of
Ka yapa. Once he happened to see Urvasi. When he
pondered over her, semmal flow occurred to him. An

VIBHAVARI : 846
antelope swallowed it and gave birth toa son. Thatson
was known as the hermit Rsyasriiga, when he grew up.
(For details see under Rsyasrniga).
2) Other details.
(i) Vibhandaka stays in the palace of Indra and glorifies him. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 7, Stanza 18).
(i1) Vibhandaka is as radiant as Prajapati. (M.B. Vana
Parva, Chapter 110, Stanza 32).
ViBHAVARI. A mental daughter of Brahma. She is
considered to be the personation of Night. It is mentionedin Matsya Purana, Chapter 154, that according to
the instruction of Brahma, VibhAvari entered the body
of Uma and from that day onwards the body of Uma
became dark.
VIBHAVASU I. A hermit who got angry quickly. This
hermit cursed his brother Supratika. (See under Garuda,
para 9).
VIBHAVASU II. A hermit. This hermit respected Yudhisthira much. (Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 26,
Stanza 24),
VIBHAVASU III. One of the sons born to Prajapati
Kasyapa by his wife Danu. Vibhavasu also was present
at the battle between Vrtrasura and Indra. (Bhagavata,
Skandha 6).
VIBHINDU. A king who was very liberal. It is mentioned
in Reveda, Mandala 8, that this king had given Medhatithi a gift of fortysix thousand cows.
VIBHISANA I. Brother of Ravana. The son Vigravas
was born to Prajapati Pulastya. Ravana, Kumbhakarna
and Vibhisana were born to Visravas by his wife Malini.
A daughter named Sarpanakha also was born to them.
Kumbhakarna and Vibhisana went to do penance under
the leadership of their eldest brother Ravana. They
did severe penance and obtained various boons. The
boon given to Vibhisana was to live as a righteous
man. After that they came back and defeated Kubera,
the ruler of Lanka and brought Lanka under
their control. Ravana became the ruler of Lanka.
Kumbhakarna and Vibhisana lived with their brother
in Lanka. Ravana married Mandodari. Kumbhakarna
took Vajrajvala the daughter of Mahabali and Vibhisana took Sardla, the daughter of Sailisa a Gandharva
as their wives, according to Uttara Ramayana. Ravana
conquered ‘the three worlds and was ruling as the
emperor of the whole world, when Sri Rama and Laksmana went to the forest, with Sita. Ravana carried Sita
away to Lanka. Rama and Laksmana, with the help
of the monkey-army entered Lanka. At this time Ravana
called together his ministers to consider the details about
the battle wich Sri Rama. Every one present except
Vibhisana voted for the ‘battle. Vibhisana advised
Ravana to return Sita, the stolen property and beg Sri
Rama for pardon. Ravana got angry and expelled
Vibhisana from Lanka. - Vibhisana joined the side of
Sri Rama and informed him of all the military secrets
of Ravana. In the battle which ensued Ravana was
killed and Vibhisana was made the king of Laaka by
Sri Rama. It is stated in Kambaramayana, Yuddha
Kanda that according to the instruction of Sri Rama
and at the instance of Indra, Viévakarma “came to
Lanka and renovated the city of Lanka,
Sri Rama returned to Ayodhya and became the king.
One day Candragupta, the second son of Sahasramukha
Ravana (Ravana with thousand heads) stole away the
daughter of Sugriva and the daughter-in-law of VibhiVIDAIVATA
sana. Vibhisana informed Sri Rama of this. Sri Rama,
with Laksmana, Vibhisana, Sugriva, Haniman an
the monkey-army went to the city of Sahasramukha
Ravana in the middle of Milk-sea. A fierce battle ensue
which lasted for three days. All the Raksasas were
killed. (See under Sahasramukharavana).
It is mentioned in Kamba Ramayana that in the horse
sacrifice performed by Sri Rama, the control of the
army was in the hands of Sugriva and financial contro
was vested in the hands of Vibhisana.
VIBHISANA II. Mention is made in Mahabharata, “i
given below, about another Vibhisana who had rule
over Lanka. he
Once Ghatotkaca went to the palace of Vibhisana as t
messenger of Sugriva. Vibhisana who heard cntior
Ghtotkaca about Yudhisthira honoured the messcng
greatly and gave him a large quantity of valua
presents. } B
VIBHISANA. An attendant of Subrahmanya.’ (M.-P:
Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Stanza 22). sti
VIBHRAJA. A King who was the descendant of Yay4 :
It is stated in Bhagavata, Skandha 9, that he was *
son of Krti and the father of Anuha. ‘he
VIBHRAJARAJA. Father-in-law of the daughter of e
hermit Suka. Suka, the son of Vyasa married Pivat’s
é rawho gave birth to four sons named Krsna, Gau
prabha, Bhari and Devagruta and a daughter seq
Kirti. This daughter Kirti was married by Anuha of
son of King Vibhraja. Brahmadatta was the son P°
to Anuha by Kirti. (Devi Bhagavata, Skandha 1). 54
VIBHU 1. A King of the family of Bharata. It
mentioned in Bhagavata, Skandha 5, that he was th
son of Prastota and the father of Prthusena. See
VIBHU II. Indra of the age of the fifth Manu. (
under Manvantara) . 2 hin
VIBHU III. Brother of Sakuni. Bhimasena killed tet
in the Bharata-battle. (M.B. Drona Parva, ChaP
157, Stanza 23). puta:
VIBHURASI. The son of the Agni (fire) called Adb
(M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 222, Stanza 26). ndVIBHUTI. One of Vigvamitra’s sons who were oR aid
ers of the Vedas. Anusasana Parva, Chapter 4, stam
VIBHVA. A son of Sudhanva who was the son of | ava
ras. The three sons of Sudhanva were Rbhu, Vib™*"
and Vaja. (Reveda, Mandala 1, Sikta 111). 10°
VICAKHNU. An ancient King of India. He was a Pl
tagonist of non-killing. He was of opinion that hig ed:
alcoholic medicine, honey, flesh, etc. should be av0! jd
It is not ordained in‘the Vedas that these things $ 738
rt ae (M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter 265, St
VICARU. One of the sons born to §ri Krs#4 a
Rukmini. (Bhagavata, Skandha 10). par
VICITRA. A Ksatriya King. It is mentioned in M@:.
bharata, Adi Parva , Chapter 67, Stanza 61, that ag 2
King was born from a portion of the asura Krodhav¥
VICITRAVIRYA. Father of Dhrtarastra. (For fur
details see under Dhrtarastra) . evil
VIDAIVATA. A devil. In the previous birth, this e08
was a Ksatriya King named’ Harihara. This “Vas
lived as a godless man in consequence of which,
born as a devil in his next birth, (Padma
Patala Khanda, Chapter uD).
thet
yran??

VIDALLA 847
VIDALLA. Minister of the king Dhruvasandhi. . (For
further details see under Dhruvasandhi) .
VIDANDA. A king in ancient India. [tis mentioned in
Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 182, Stanza 12,
that Vidanda and his son Danda were present at the
Svayarhvara (marriage) of Draupadi. .
VIDARBHA 1. A brother of Bharata. It is stated in
Bhagavata, Skandha 5, that Kuégavarta, Ilavarta,
Brahmavarta, Aryavarta, Bhadraketu, Sena, Indrasprk,
Vidarbha, and so on were brothers of Bharata, the son
_ Of Rsabha. Nimi was his son.
VIDARBHA II, See under Jyamagha.
VIDARBHA III. An ancient country in India. The 3nformation about this Puranically famous country obtained from Mahabharata, is given below:
(i) Once Sahadeva, during his regional conquest, captured Bhojakata, a part cf Vidarbha and expelled fhe
king Bhismaka from the country. (M.B. Sabha Parva,
Chapter 31, Stanza 11).
(ii) By the blessing of hermit 3
ong ae Damana and a daughter, penayen
were born to Bhismaka the king of Vidarbha. (M.
Vana Parva, Chapter 58, Stanza 5).
(iii) Having heard about the Svayamvara (Bride ab)
ecting a suitable husband from the candidates prese
, i" i he gods Indra,
of the princess Damayanti of Vidarbha, the § de:
Agni, Varuna and Yama came to Vidarbha; (See un
Damayanti).
iv) Damayanti is c
nee in Vidarbha. (M. B. Vana Parva,
tanza 12
v) Rakin the wife of Sri Krsna, Wes ae is car
ofa king of Vidarbha. Bhagavan 5" aye a Parva
Rukmini away by force. . B. YoS :
er 158, Stanza 13) :
IDEGHA MATHAVA A king 00" or .
of Mathu. There is an interesting stot ‘4 ate HE
king in the Satapatha Brahmana. It i a Sauk
Videgha put Agni in his mouin out. His priest
talking, fearing that Agni might Jump re ot extri
Rahigana tried to the utmost, but he co
cate fire from the mouth of the king. fthe mouth of
Once by chance the word Ghrta got out ni ‘nthe: king
ahiigana. Instantly the frei ee. f the mouth.
ieee into a big flame to consume
at fire ally imerea t even
the worki! Paper care dry. It seemed nial
Id be bu
) n that
Videgha and his priest wou. ee ipalie ast
Damanaka, three sons,
Den eS use she was
alled Vaidarbhi beca Stacie 55,
n of the dynasty
Sadablazing fire. At last Videgha g f his own
nira, Phiak flowed through the 0
ingdom, with the intention 0} statis
the ever-increasing fire. With this the ae Numi. (Set
VIDEHA I, Another name of empt
under Janaka.
VIDEHA II The kingdom of
which lies on the North East pat f Videha. It is statby Ksatriya kings of the dynasty © Chapter 99, that
ed in Mahabharata, Sabha Bary re jonal conquest,
himasena had during his easter) ie om which 1s
Conquered this country. About em ing information
the native country of ita, the ilo
WS available in Mahabharata.
«pia, ‘ERIS country
aes e dia was rule
VIDULA
(i) The hermitage of Parasurama was on the North
I a (M. B. Vana Parva, Chapter 130, Stanza
(ii) Thearmy of Videha attacked Arjuna in the
battle of Bharata. (M. B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 117
Stanza 32).
(iii) Karna defeated the Ksatriya princes of the country
of Janaka (M. B. Drona Parva, Chapter 4, Stanza 6).
(iv) ParaSurama cut the Ksatriyas of this country
into pieces.with his sharp arrows. (M. B. Drona Parva
Chapter 70, Stanza 11).
(v) This country had been giving tribute to Karna.
(M. B. Karna Parva, Chapter 9, Stanza 33). “ta?
VIDHATA. Ason born to Bhrgu. By his wife Khyati
two sons Dhata and Vidhata and a daughter named
Laksmi were born to Bhrgu. Laksmi was _ given in
marriage to Visnu. The daughter of Meru, Ayati, was
married by Dhata and Niyati by Vidhata. The sen
Mrkandu was born to Vidhata by Niyati. This Mrkandu
was the father of Markandeya. (Visnu Purana, Améa
1, Chapter 10).
The following statements occur about Dhata and
Vidhata in Mahabharata.
OL y gat Nakaloka (heaven) Dnata and Vidhata took
the form of women and allowed hermit Uttanka to
sce them. (M. B. Adi Parva, Chapter 3, Stanza 166).
(ji) Dhata and Vidhzta stood above the city of
Virata to see the battle between Arjuna and . Krpa.
(M.B. Virata Parva, Chapter 56, Stanza 11).
Gii) Dhata and Vidhata lived with Manu. (M. B. Adi
Parva, Chapter 65, Stanza 42).
(iv) Dhat&a and Vidhata gave to Subrahmanya | two
followers named Suvrata and Sukarma. (M. B. Salya
Parva, Chapter 45, Stanza 42),
VIDHAVA A woman whose husband is dead. In
ancient India, it was ordained how a widow should
live. It was allowed fora widow to get a son by her
younger brother -in law to continue the family line in
case the déath ofher husband occurred before the
couple had children.. The procedure about this is
given in Manusmrti, Chapter 9.
‘Te who goes to accept the widow with the permission
of great people, should besmear his body with ghee and
go to her bed in the night in a dark room. She should
have only one son 1n this manner. After she has become
pregnant, they should behave to each other as a
teacher and a younger brother-in-law.”’
VIDHRTI. Son of Khagana and the father of Hiranyanabha. He was a King. (Bhagavata, Skandha 9).
VIDISA. Ariver. Mention is made in Mahabharata,
Sabha Parva, Chapter 2, Stanza 12, that this river
stays in the palace of Varuna serving him.
VIDRAVANA. One of the sons born to Kasyapa by
Manu. ( Matsya Purana 6:18).
VIDRUTA. A King born in the family of Yayati. He
was the son of Rucaka. (Bhagavata, Skandha 9).
VIDULA. A heroic Ksatriya woman of India. In Mahabharata, Udyoga Parva, there is a story, how this
Vidula sent her son, who had fled from the battle-field
because of fear, back to the battlefield again.
The Pandavas, who had completed forest-life and
Pseudonymity successfully and returned to Hastinapura
were again deceived and put to shame. Sri Krsna’s
argument as a mediator was not successful, in the

VIDURA I
palace of the Kauravas. Sri Krsna came away from
the palace of Duryodhana and entered the house of
Vidura and visited Kunti. Sri Krsna asked her opinion
on the idea of waging a war against the Kauravas. It
is not meet and right on the part of a heroic mother to
welcome a son who comes home being defeated in
battle. To substantiate this point, she told Sri Krsna
the story of Vidula, as given below. )
Vidula was a brave woman, who lived in ancient India.
Her son Safijaya fought with the King of Sindhu and
was defeated. When he came home Vidula did not
receive him. She emboldened him by saying that she
would be more proud ofa son, who had sacrificed his
life. in the battlefield than one who returned home
defeated. All his arguments which were excuses for his
cowardice, were refuted by his mother. At last Safijaya
engaged again in a battle with the King of Sindhu.
On hearing this story ‘old by Kunti Sri Krsna became
immensely pleased. (M.B. Udyoga Parva, 3 Chapters
from 134).
VIDURA I,
1) General information. Vidura was a superhuman
being, very famous in the story of Mahabharata, as a
brother of Dhrtarastra, as a man of colossal intelligence
who had been closely watching the goings and comings
of the Kauravas and the Pandavas, as the adviser of
Dhrtarastra, and as a man of immense learning and
wisdom. |
2) Incarnation af Dharmadeva. Thereisa story in MahaBharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 107, which describes
Vidura as born from a portion of Dharmadeva. The
story is given below. |
Long ago there was a hermit called Mandavya in India.
As he was standing in deep meditation near his hermitage, the men of the King chased some thieves and came
to the place where the hermit stood. The robbers
placed the stolen property near the hermit and ran
away. ‘he king’s men caught the hermit, and the
thieves. The King ordered them to be placed on a
trident. ‘The thieves died on the trident. But Mandavya
was not dead. The King sawed the trident and got
Mandavya down. The hermit went to Dharmadeva and
asked him what his blame was for suffering the punishment of the trident on him. Dharmadeva replied that
the punishment was inflicted for a cruel deed he had
done in his childhood. He had caught some flies and
made a bunch of them by piercing them with the rib of
a coconui-palm leaf. But Mandavya argued that
Dharmadeva was not right in punishing him because
the Sastras and rules of righteousness said *hat mistakes
committed by boys below the age of twzlve could not
be considered to be sins. Further he cursed Dharmadeva
that he would take birth on the earth from the womb
of a Sadra. Accordingly Dharmadeva took birth from
the womb of the servant of Ambika and Ambalika.
3) Birth. Vidura was born as the brother of Dhrtarastra and Pandu. (For detailed story see under Dhrtarastra I, para 2). ;
4) Up to marriage. Dhrtarastra, Pandu and Vidura
spent their younger days in Hastinapura as inseparable
brothers. Their teacher was Bhisma. Vidura learned
the Vedas, Sastras, Puranas, Itihasas etc. also, along
with the education given to a prince such as archery,
club-fight, sword-fight, wrestling, controlling elephants
etc. He understood that to be righteous was far better
VIDURA I
than fighting. It isstated in Mahabharata, Adi Parva,
Chapter 108, that Vidura got the sense of righteousness,
and education in fighting, at the same time.
Ghildhood ended. As Vidura was born to a Brahmin
by a Sidra woman he had no right to become sg
When he grew up, the duty to find a wife for him fel!
on Bhisma. At that time a damsel bern to a Brahmin
by a Sadra woman was being brought up in the palace
of King Devaka. With the permission of Devaka, Bhisma
brought the girl and gave her in marriage to Vidura.
It is stated in Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 114,
that sons and daughters were born to the couple.
5)Partiality towards the Pandavas. Vidura was the most
intelligent and wisest man of his time, and: he aiways
favoured righteousness. Though he viewed the Kauravas
and the Pandavas with equal favour, in his heart he
felt some partiality towards the Pandavas, because they
were virtuous, whereas the Kauravas were becoming
more and more wicked. As this partiality arose from
his sense of righteousness, nobody could blame Vidura
for this. His aim was the prosperity of the Lunat
dynasty of Kings.
Many ill omens were seen at the time of the birt
of Duryodhana. Vidura understood that if that infan
grew up he would be a comet to the Lunar dynasty: 5
is mentioned in Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter J 19;
that Vidura advised Dhrtardstra that it would be bette
for him to throw away that infant.
The death of Pandu drew Vidura closer to the Pandavas:
Vidura took the lead in performing the funeral rite
and other ceremonies which followed. The Pandava*
were very sad and miserable at the death of their anal
It was at this time that Duryodhana poisoned Reson
sena, tied him with a rope and threw him into a
river Ganges. Bhimasena was carried to the ne
nagas (serpents). Kunti felt grieved at the loss 0
son Bhima, but Vidura consoled her.
It was due to the wisdom of Vidura that the P andava"
escaped from the disaster in the lac-house. As soo? a
Duryodhana had completed the lac-house, view
understood the deception lying hidden under i
and lie informed the Pandavas of everything about de
Moreover he senta man named Khanaka and He
an underground passage from the lac-house. Whe® ° y
lac-house was burnt down, the Pandavas escape of
the under-ground passage and reached the banks
the Ganges. Vidura had sent a ferryman secretly,
take them to the other side of the Ganges. Ww nt
Bhisma got the news that the Pandavas had been bu? is
to death in the lac-house he became very sad. arr
mentioned in Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chap
149, that Vidura informed Bhisma_ secretly that
Pandavas were not dead. ) |
After this event the Pandavas come into the scene ony
at the Svayarhvara (marriage) of Paficali. Bhisma *);
Drona proposed that the Pandavas should be brove «.
back and be given half of the kingdom. Vidura, PY | of
erugments convinced Dhrtarastra that the proposé ed
hisma and Drona was correct, Dhrtarastra # {0
Vidura to bring the Pandavas back. Vidura wen! ck
the city of Drupada and brought the Pandavas (ira
and consoled their mother Kunti. After this Yudhist® )e
performed Rajasiiya (sacrifice of royal consecral° ial
Vidura took part in it and took the charge of Anan’

6) Separated from the Pandavas.
VIDURA I
part of the sacrifice. It was after this that Duryodhana
challenged Yudhisthira for a game of dice. Vidura saw
beforehand that this move on the part of Duryodhana
was dangerous. So he talked forcibly against this, and
gave warning to all concerned, As Duryodhana did not
agree with Vidura, he was scolded. But Duryodhana
was firm and the game was conducted. Paficali was
harassed by means of stripping and the Pandavas went
to the forest. It is stated in Mahabharata, Vana:Parva,
Chapter 3, that Vidura had been witnessing all these
Scenes with wet eyes.
When the Pandavas
were driven to the forest, Dhrtarastra felt sorry. He
became more afraid of the people than he was sorry
for the Pandavas. He understood that his subjects
would unite and rise against his sons. He called
Vidura and asked him for a remedy. Vidura who was
full of impatience, made a speech against the wickedness of the sons of Dhrtarastra and advised him to
forsake his own sons and to bring the Pandavas back
and give them the kingdom. Dhrtarastra did not like
this approach. He said that Vidura was partial to the
Pandavas and asked him to go away from the palace.
Vidura became grieved at this. He followed the
Pandavas, and walking a long distance, reached the
a Kamyaka and met the sagt ery
; . -tarastra felt miser .
gang, ase ae Pe d Dhrtarastra
He sent for Vidura and when he returne ee
begged for pardon. Vidura again became the advise
of D z Parva, Chapter 6).
hrtarastra. (M. B. won advice of Vidura 1s
7) Advise taras tra.
famous in een The main duty of Vidura was
to console Dhrtarastra by speaking about pote i
when he became troubled in mind because of Ls hee
ant quarrels between his sons and the _ a on
Vidura fulfilled his duty well.” Duryodhana wes c He
the point that not a dot of land would be give? eae
andavas. Sri Krsna came to Hastinapura i icca dat d
~ uryodhana showed disrespect 0 him. fad a
in strong words that it was Wrong ©" 01 Fei
Duryodhana to have done 5° and aes ce Kraka.
rastra to show due respect and hospitality a
a and
Accordingly Dhrtarastr ; ou iT
Showed respect and hospitality. geen ls
dhana and his brothers trie 7 ler for this attempt.
Captive, Vidura harshly scold : the part of his
Ceing all these impudent action. Vi a consoled
Id Dhrtarastra about
sons, Dhrtarastra became
f the soul.
He to
him b i
y good exhortations.
the transience of life and the cs ae a the battlehen the battle was fiercely pene a. with Dhrtaground of Kuruksetra, Vidura re ood advice. The
astra consoling him and giving eee f to Vidura. He
death of Bhisma was an unbearable gre himself placed
took part in the funeral of Bhis™?- ‘Anugasana Parva,
the body on the funeral pyre. M. B.
Chapter 168, Stanza 11). 4 in his attempt to
8) Pilgrimage. When Vidura nue the Kauravas and
ward off a pitched battle between nie, Without
the Pandavas he felt extreme ae
taking part in the battle, he starte
Getting the news at Prabhasaksetr@
the battle, he went to the basi? » passing 2
the way he heard the news of the th Sri
Krsna, from Uddhava. Before 9
VIDURA II
revealed that Vidura had heard Uddhavagita
Maitreya. This book which is in the form ofa ee
sation between Vidura and Maitreya contains the talk
between Kapila and Devahiti. Description of the line
of Manus, sacrifice of Daksa, story of Dhruva, story
of Prthu, story of Purafijana etc. were the subjects of the
talk. (Bhagavata, 3--4).
9) End. The Bharata-battle came to an end. The
Kauravas were exterminated. Efforts were begun to
establish law and order. In all these efforts Vidura was
a help to the Pandavas. Still he spent most of his time
with the old Dhrtarastra. Yudhisthira came to Dhrtarastra and both embraced each other. Seeing this
Vidura cried aloud. Vidura advised Yudhisthira how
to carry on the administration of the new government.
After this he decided to go to the forest to spend his
last days. Dhrtarastra, Gandhari,Kunti, Vidura and
Sakuni went to the forest. ‘The Pandavas tried in vain
to prevent them from going. When Dhrtarastra,
Gandhari, Kunti, Vidura, Safijaya and others started
for the forest, even Bhimasena cried aloud. Pandavas
and the people of the city went along with them up to
the river Ganges. On the bank of the Ganges near the
hermitage of Satayipa, a hermitage was erected and
Vidura and the others lived there.
They lived there for nearly six years. The Pandavas became unable to bear the séparation from their elders.
Once Dharmaputra dreamt about his mother. Next day
the Pandavas went to the banks of the Ganges. Pajicall,
Subhadra, Uttara and many people of the city followed
them. They went to the Satayipa-hermitage and saw
Dhrtarastra and the others. But the great Vidura was
not there. When asked about it he got the reply that
having become .abstemious and having no more desires
he was wandering about. Yudhisthira was greatly
troubled.
Next day at dawn when Yudhisthira went to bathe in
the Ganges, on the way he saw Vidura sitting in contem-
‘ation with a stone in his mouth. Yudhisthira stood
with joined palms before the Jean and weak form of ©
that sage and said “Look, Dharmaputra bows before
you.” He repeated this several times. But there was
no change in Vidura. Yudhisthira’s disappointment
did not last long. For, ina short while Dharmaputra
saw that a divine radiance emanated from the body
of Vidura and passed on to his body and that the body
of Vidura fell lifeless on the ground. This union took
because both Vidura and Yudhisthira were port-
‘ons of Dharmadeva. After this Dharmaputra made
preparations to burn the body of Vidura. Then an ethereal voice said ‘Vidura isabstemious. His body should
not be burned.” Dharmaputra went to the hermitage
and informed all, about the death of Vidura. (M.B.
Réramavasika Parva, Chapters 26 to 28).
Mention is made in Mahabharata, Svargarohana Parva,
Chapter 5, Stanza 22, that Vidura entered Svarga
(heaven) and stays there in the form of Dharmadeva.
place
VIDURA II. A Ksatriya who lived in Paficala. The
| Chapter 91.
story of this Vidura, who had killed a Brahmin because
of his want, is given In Padma Purana, Bhimikhanda,
The story is given below:
Long ago there lived a Ksatriya, named Vidura, in
Paficala. Because of penury he killed a Brahmin, After
that the Ksatriya discarded his lock of hair and Brahma-

VIDURA 850
string and went to every house saying ‘“‘Look, here am
I, a slayer of Brahmin. Please, give alms to the drunkard and killer of a Brahmin.’ Saying thus he walked
from house to house and took alms. But he did not get
remission of Brahmahatya (killing of a Brahmin).
Filled with grief and sorrow and mental worry the
sinner Vidura sat in the shade ofa tree. At that time
Candragarma, a Brahmin of Magadha came there. He
was a wicked man who had killed his teacher because
of inordinate lust in consequence of which he had _ been
forsaken by his own people. Vidura asked Candragarma
who wore no sign of a Brahmana, what he was. CandraSarma told his story to Vidura who in return told him
his sinful acts.
At this time another Brahmin named Vedagarma came
there. He also was a sinner. The three of them told each
other about their sinful acts. At this time Vallala, a
Vaigya came there. He was a drunkard who had killed
cows. T’hese four desperate sinners travelled together
and visited several tirthas (holy baths). But they did not
get remission of their sins. At last they started for
Kalafijaragiri.
While these desperate sinners were living in Kalafijara
a poor Brahmin came there. He asked them why they
were so sad. ‘They told him everything. When he heard
their stories he felt pity for them. The old Brahmin said
“You sinners should goto Prayaga, Puskara, Sarvatirtha
and Varanasi and bathe in the Ganga on New Moon days
and you will become free from sin.” They obeyed the
old Brahmin and went to the holy places told by him.
. Thus Vidura and his friends became sinless.
VIDURA. A king of the Kuru dynasty. He was the son
born to the great king Kuru by Subhangi, a damsel of
Dasarha family. Vidira married Sampriya, a princess
of Madhu royal family. A son named Anagva was born
to her. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 95, Stanzas 39-40).
VIDURAGAMANARAJYALABHAPARVA. A sub-section of Adi Parva, comprising chapters 199 to 217, in
Mahabharata.
VIDURATHA I. A king of the Vrsni dynasty. Information got from Mahabharata about this king is given
below. |
(1) Vidiratha also was
riage of Draupadi. (M.
Stanza 19).
(ii) In Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 218, Stanza
10, mention is made that the brightness of this king
increased after his participation in the festival conducted
on mount Raivata.
(iii) Viddratha was one of the seven famous and mighty
kings of the Yadu dynasty. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter
60, Stanza 14).
(iv) Vidiratha was a close friend of Sigupala, Salva
Jarasandha and so on. Jaradsandha employed this
Vidiiratha as the guardian of the Eastern entrance
of the city of Mathura. When Sri Krsna killed his
brother Dantavaktra, Salva, Sisupala and others, Vidaratha ran to take revenge on Krsna. But he was killed
by Sri Krsna. (Bhagavata, Skandha 10).
(v) Te is mentioned in Mahabharata, Svargarohana
Parva, Chapter 5, Stanza 16, that after death he joined
the Vis vadevas.
VIDURATHA II. A king of the Piru dynasty. It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 49, Stanza
present at the Svayarmvara marB. Adi Parva, Chapter 185,
VIDYANATHA
75, that Rksavan hid the son of this king in a mountain
and saved him from the Ksatriya-extermination of ParaSurama and at that time spotted leopards brought UP
this child.
VIDURATHA III. A king who was the friend of the hermit Bhalanda, This king had two sons named Suniti an
Sumati and a daughter named Mudavati. One day while
Vidiratha was hunting in the forest, he saw a cleavage
on the earth caused by the yawning of Kujrmbhasura.
The king stood there for a while looking at the cleavage:
Then the hermit Suvrata who had been standing close
by approached the king and said. ‘‘This asura Kuj rmbha
has a divine pestle with him. Because of the possession
of this pestle he has become invincible and is a threat
to the whole world.”’ _
Vidiratha, who knew everything from Suvrata, live
cautiously. One day his daughter was carried away PY
this Kujrmbhasura. Suniti and Sumati confronted the
asura to rescue their sister but were made cap a
Finally Vatsapri, the’son of the hermit Bhalanda killec
the Raksasa (giant) and liberated princess Mudavatl.
(Markandeya Purana, Chapter 113).
VIDURATHA I. A king born in the family of Bharala,
the son of Dusyanta. The father of this king was ae
tha and hisson was Sarvabhauma. (Bhagavata, Skandha
VIDURATHA II. Brother of Dantavaktra. When Sri
Krsna had defeated Dantavaktra, his brother Vidiratha
came to fight with Sri Krsna and was killed 1n the
fight. (Bhagavata, Skandha 10).
VIDUSA. A king of the Anga dynasty. Ghrta was we
father of king Vidusa and Pracetas was his son. (48”
Purana, Chapter 277).
VIDYA I. A maid of Devi Uma. (Mahabharata, Van?
Parva, Chapter 231, Stanza 48).
VIDYA II. A deity. This deity is worshipped as the im
of three Vedas which are the most important of the nen
gious or Vedic literature. Mention is made about t
deity in the preface of Rgvedabhasya by Sayama, a
follows. on fh wall
Once Vidya approached a Brahmin and al - who
your wealth. Your duty is to impart me to discip a
are pure, celibate, law-abiding and active, and who P
tect the treasure. I hate disciples who are jealous.
VIDYADHARA(S). A group of semi-gods. Videa ae
Apsarases (celestial maids), Yaksas, Raksasas, Gan il
vas, Kinnaras and so on are semigods. Of these K10? |
as are lute-players, and Vidyadharas wear gar ay
and all these groups live in the sky. (Agni Pures’:
Chapter 51). Itis mentioned in Mahabharata, © y
Parva, Chapter 56, Stanza 8, that when attracte
spells and incantations, Indra went to the Sarpas? as
(serpent sacrifice) of Janamejaya, the Vidyadha
walked behind him (Indra).
VIDYANATHA (AGASTYA). A Sanskrit writer on pee
rics. Fle was also called Agastya. He is the autho .
Prataparudriyam. The real name of Prataparudriya™
Partaparudrayasobhisanam.
He was a member of the court of King Prataparudy?
deva who ruled over the Kingdom of Warangal f tS,
1295 to 1323 A.D. He has written a drama of five a a’
under the name ‘‘Prataparudra Kalyana.’ P rataP
rudriyam is a book on rhetorical f igures. |

VIDYASAGARA
VIDYASAGARA, Father of Bhartrhari. See under
Bhartrhari.
VIDYATIRTHA. A holy place in India. It is mentioned
in Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 34, Stanza 52,
that those who bathe in this tirtha (bath) would get
knowledge.
VIDYOTA.
a the daughter of Daksa. ( Bhagavata,
VIDYOTA. A celestial maid of Alakapur. Mention is
made in Mahabharata, Anusasana Parva, Chapter 19,
Stanza 45, that Vidyota took part in the dance
performed in honour of Astavakra, the hermit.
VIDYUDDHARA. A Deva Gandharva. (See under
Nahusa).
VIDYUDRUPA. A Yaksa
Kubera. This Yaksa marrie
of Menaka. Once when
The son born to Sage Dharma, by his wife
Skandha
who was the favourite of
d Madanika, the daughter
these two wee sitting on
mount Kaildsa and drinking liquor the bird Kanka
in of the family of Garuda came there. Vidyudrupa
silled Kar ¢ c ht.
Xaiika after a small BSh® Kanka, his brother
Hearing about the death oi
Kandar the death of his brother. A
ara came to avenge te =a aitiich Vidyu an
flerce battle ensued between the two, ch 3
rtipa met with death. After this Madanika gouel
aan as her husband. (Markandeya Purana, 4) *5
concerned with
srnal god A
ererna., ¢ Anugasana
( Mahabharata,
This Vidyujjihva
killed by Duryo-
(M.B. Bhisma Parva,
VIDYUDVARCAS. An
eueritigs to the manes.
arva, Chapter 31). ;
VIDYU]JIHVA I, t eae (giant).
was a friend of Ghatotkaca. **© was
ap in the battle of Bharata.
lapter 91, Stanza 20). A - A son
VIDYUJJIHVA II. Husband of Saran ple. As
named Sambhukumara Wa5 born to the
this son Sambhukumara was a C :
he the forest Dandakarany@: Laksmat ated (Kamba
fe coed lee Semunuuunesd =
ama ‘s anda) - ; ; a
Vipyuyy TVA “IT. rome oF the important ReaD
followers of Ravana. This giant, d - off from the
Witch-craft, showed Sita, the Be i to make her
Ody of Sri Rama and his ene Bee He repeated
consent to become the wife of Rav (Valmiki Ramathis Stratagem on several eerie
yana, Utta. 2 Sarga - Visravas
Viet tara Kanda Cocor the ons Po"yaya_ Pordns
by his wife Vaka. Mentio eee * called Arvaktala 1
that this Raksasa_ lives in eo cy natala
atala ‘arild) knowl & "1
VIDYUNMA ee ON y) a, Tarai
the Tripuras. (For details se u
VIDYUNMALI IL A mighty an ae
Was a friend of Ravana. After ala (u r he
this asura, who lived in the Ae ato Avene |
away the sacrificial horse ©
Lg of Ravana. Satrugy
edeemed the sacrificial ho” : d
succany, [1S state
vipbyury 1 maid, OF ASE er 19, Stans
. TA. A celestial - Parva d dance in
Mahabharata, Anugasane ; d perform
9, that this celestial mal
Onour of the hermit Astavak :
e was one of
VIGRAHA III
VIDYUTAKSA. A warrior of -ahn
Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Stanza SS i enrige (a
VIDYUTKESA. A Raksasa (giant).
under Praheti).
VIDYUTKESI. A R&aksasa King. The notorious
was the son of this King. (See under Sukes1)
VIDYUTPARNA, A celestial maid born to Kas yapaprajapati by his wife Pradha. It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 65, that celestial maids
such as Alambusa, Vidyutparna, Migrakesi Tilottama
and such others were famous for their beauty.
Sy EpReRtL 7 eee Muktaphalaketu.
? ermit. abha
eens Pes Chapter 125). nr aes ceee
VIDYUTPRABHA III. A Danava (Asur is
pleased Rudradeva by penance ae eel a
the control of all the three worlds for one lakh of years
the recognition as a follower of Siva and the Enodoe of
Kugadvipa, as boons. (M.B. Anusasana Parva, Chapter
(For details see
Ss ukesi
VIDYUTPRABHA I. Ten celestial maids of Northern
uarter .(M.B. Udyoga Parva, Chapter 111,5
VIDYUTPRABHA II. Geandidaueinen| of Mababalk
(See under Sridatta). | ‘
VIGAHANA. A famous King, born in Mukuta Varméa.
(Mahabharata, Udyoga Parva, Chapter 74, Stanza 16).
VIGHANA. A giant on the side of Ravana. (Valmiki
Ramayana, Sundara Kanda, Sarga 6).
VIGRAHA I. One of the two attendants given to
Subrahmanya by the ocean, ‘The other, one was Sangraha. (M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Stanza 50).
VIGRAHA II. One of the six attributes of Kings. (See
under Sadguna).
VIGRAHA III. (Image).
1) General information. God, who is not discernible to
the outward senses, is given embodiment and consecrated in places of worship by people. These figures are
called Vigrahas (idols or images). People worship
Salagrama, (a kind of ammonite found in the river
Gandaki) , Banalinga (Phallus), mystical diagrams
animals, birds, trees, rivers, lakes, places of death etc.
and so many other things.
9) The different kinds of Vigrahas. Vigrahas are of three
groups. They are :-( 1) Mysterious (2) Evident-mysterious (3) Evident. Salagrama, Phallus etc. belong to the
roup mysterious. The Mukhalinga, considered to be
the image of Trimiarti (Brahma, Visnu, Siva) in the
Blephanta cave, belongs to the group Evident. The
image of Phallus is Evident-mysterious. In the “first
there iene ie Ss figure. In the second there are parts
of the figure. The image which fir
of dire g ee the entire figure
Some gods and goddesses possess two a
eaceful and fierce. ‘Those ae wish to Ncaect ie
erforming cruel deeds and to vanquish enemies, worship fierce gods whereas those who wish for ‘peace
worship peaceful Gods, Visvaripa, (assuming all
shapes) » Narasimha (the man-lion) , Vatapatragayi (as
lying on banyan-leaf ) and Paragurama are fierce forms
of Visnu. estrone Kama (cupid) Gaja and Tripura
are fierce forms of Siva worshipped by some people
Generally temples with images in this form are erected
outside the village or city.
Owing to the differences, in the making and the matersals used, the images are divided into three groups.

VIGRAHA III
They are portraits, Half-portraits and corrupted
Portraits. (he whole of the figure will be made in
(portraits) citras. In half-citras only the front view
will be.completed. Corrupted Citras are images done
on the wall or rock.
3) Main images. Main images are mostly Saivite or
Vaisnavite. There will be one or two other images.
Worship of Devi (Goddess) is one of them. The Saivites will worship Parvati also after Siva and the Vaisnavites Mahalaksmi also after Visnu. In South India the
worshippers are Saivites and Vaisnavites.
4) Saivites. In India a large number of people worship
iva. There is not much difference in the mode of worship of these various people. There are worships which
are in accordance with the Vedas and which are not.
Forms of worship which are Sattvika (of goodness) and
which are not, could be seen. The Saiva worship called
Parag upada is very ancient. The phallus at Gudimalla
is considered to be as old as B.C. 2nd century. From
this it could be inferred how old, the Saivite worship is
in India. |
5) The Saivite images. Of the emblems denoting Siva,
the most important is the Phallus, which is of two kinds,
movable and immovable. Risen by itself and/or erected
and set firm and consecrated inside temples are immovable; that which is made of earth, metal, jewel, - wood
or stone, is movable. There are Phalluses made for the
time being. They are fixed on platforms or pedestals.
They are of different sizes and shapes. The Phallus is
made of male stone and the pedestal of female stone.
6) The portions of Siva. There are various kinds of images
meant to reveal various attributes of Siva. Lingodbhava
(originated from Phallus), Candrag ekhara, Raudra,
Umasarhhita (with Uma) etc. are some of them. Kamantaka (killing Kama or Cupid), Gajari (enemy of Gaja),
Kalari (Enemy of Yama) and Tripuradahaka (burning Tripura) are figures of extermination. Siva has
the figures of blessing Candega, Visnu, Nandié vara,
Vighnega and Arjuna also. There are a large number
of images in various dancing poses.
There are four other figures of Daksinamirti, such as the
explanation, knowledge, yoga (or meditation, contemplation and other ways of union with the Universal
Soul) and Vinadhara (carrying alute). A few other
forms are Bhiksdtaka (begging alms), Kapaladhiari
(wearing skulls), Gangadhara (bearing the Ganges),
Ardhanarigvara (God half of whom is a woman),
Vrsabhavahana (seated on a bull) , Visabhaksaka (eating poison) etc. The figures of Sadasiva, Maheéa,
Ekadagarudras (eleven Rudras) , Vidyesvara and Martyastaka are seen occasionally here and there. There
are scriptures describing these figures.
7) The Devas (gods) connected with Siva. Among the gods
connected with Siva, first place is given to Ganapati.
Worship of Ganapati was in vogue from 6th or 7th
century B.C. Perhaps the images that we see today
were made after this period.
In South India temples dedicated to Ganapati are not
scarce. The position of Ganapati is at the entrance of
villages and fortresses, at the foot of banyan trees, at
the entrance of temples and at the south-west corner of
Saivite temples.
There are images of Ganapati in the postures of standing and dancing. Main images are those with the trunk
859 VIHUNDA
turned to the right and to the left. The trunk is turned
to the right in some and to the left in others.
8) Subrahmanya. Subrahmanya is worshipped only in
South India. Subrahmanya is known by various names
such as Kumara, Muruka, Karttikeya, Skanda, Arumukha, Guha, and so on. Temples dedicated to Subrahmanya are seen in plenty in Tamil Nadu. They are all
situated on the tops of hills.
There is sufficient proof in the poetic works of the
Sangha period, to the fact that Subrahmanya-worshp
was prevalent in South India. On excavation at the
place Nagarjunakonda in the District of Guntur, images
of Subrahmanya were found under the earth. They
were as old as 3rd century B.C.
Images of Subrahmanya are seen in various postures
and shapes such as sitting, with six faces, with one face,
with two hands, with four hands, sometimes with wile,
in the state of having finished investiture with the
Brahma-string etc. There are figures sitting on the peacock also.
9) Other images. Images of Sakti, Laksmi, Earth-goddess,
Sarasvati, Saptamatrs (Seven Mothers), Jyestha, Visnu,
the ten incarnations, the planets such as the sun etc:
the deities of the weapon like the thunderbolt, akt
(lance), NandikeSvara, Candeévara, Sasta, Ksetrapala,
Brahma, Guardians of the zones, Agvinidevas, half gods,
etc. are also dedicated and worshipped in temples. :
VIHANGA. A serpent (naga) born in the race of the
Naga Airavata. It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Adi
Parva, Chapter 57, Stanza 12, that this serpent fell 10
the sacrificial fire of the serpent-sacrifice performed by
Janamejaya and was burnt to death. ,
VIHANGAMA. A soldier of the giant Khara. This Khara
who confronted Rama and Laksmana in Dandakarany@
(forest Dandaka) had twelve army captains under him,
including Vihangama, — (Valmiki Ramayana, Arapy4
Kanda, Sarga 26).
VIHAVYA. The son of Varcas who was born in ‘7
dynasty of Grtsamada. Vitatya was the son of thi
a (M.B. Anugasana Parva, Chapter 30, Stanz@
VIHUNDA. Anasura. This asura was theson of the mightY
and great Asura Hunda. At the time of the fierce battle
between the devas and the asuras, this mighty asul?
Hunda and Nahusa confronted eachother and Hun 7
was killed. After this Vihunda, the son of Hunda fough
with Nahusa. In the earlier part of the battle Vihud4
and his army suffered defeat. Vihunda began to A
penance in order to defeat the Devas who got terrific
at this and went to Mahavi snu and prayed for protect”
1on. Visnu consoled them saying that he would tak
mecessary steps. When the Devas were gone, Visnu toe
the form of a beautiful woman and went in searc
Vihunda, They met each other in the earden Nandan®
ahead fell in love with her. He wanted to marry a
ne said, “Oh, Handsome Vihunda, I have no object! t
to be your wife. But there’ IS a condition you, mus
gather seven crores of Kamoda flowers and offer the” f
as oblation to Siva, ‘and then make a garlan
amoda flowers and putit onmy neck, From
day onwards I am yours.”’
Vihunda agreed to it,
wandered over forests and
idea of such a tree or flowe
tion, laid by the damsel, w
that
He went for the flowers. ny
mountains. Nobody had “Ale
r. Thinking that this co™.
as a deceit played upon *
a

VIJAYA } 853
he stood perplexed when the hermit Sukra saw him.
Fe told the hermit everything. Then Sukra told him,
‘“‘Kamoda is neither a tree nor a flower. She is goddess
who came up from the sea of Milk at the tume of the
churning. She dwells at Gatigadvara. When she laughs
pure white fragrant flowers fall from her lips, on in
water of Ganga, every moment. When she is sad, the
flowers that fall from her lips will be red.’ hi
ihunda started for Gangadvara. Narada knew er
€ came to Vihunda and said, “It is difficult oe i
Gangadvara and please Kamoda, and obtain the low ae
So the easiest way is to gather the flowers that a
down through the water of Ganga.” Vihunda re i
He took his seat on the bank of Gaiiga and waite’ 1
€ flowers to come.
Narada decided to cause harm to Vihunda. So ie
to Kamoda and by way of telling her news, ie oS nel
€d her that the hermit Bhrgu had cursec ‘Kamoda
and changed him into a man. On hears Or ‘ were
€gan to cry. Red flowers fell from her lips. They
Carried down in cluster by the water of Mca of Siva.
Sete them and went to the dwelling Pi res, Parvati
iva and Parvati saw this by thei a i the feet
did not like the idea of offering eee TOS a remedy for
of her beloved husband. Siva found out fowers at his
it. He advised Parvati to offer pure white
R with red flower
feet Standing as a boy. Vihunda came Both began
arvati a d in the form of a OFF feet 0
a with each aol in offering pepe shang: be boy
Iva. Gradually it changed to 4 nee ~yilled. (Padma
and Vihunda. In the fight Vihunda page
V urana, Bhimi khanda, some coe PT alibi Ramayana,
gaya 1. Acminister-of Dalene (Va ;
Vijaya i kee “ Vaikuntha. (eee ie
aya), .. mentioned 1
ee ATII. A Son of Pururayas. Tern tayus. Satyayus
Agavata, Skandha 9, that AYU * on to Purura:
aya, Vijaya and Jaya were the son i
ae by Urvagi. , stated 1
VUAYA IV. A King of Rosa zt is King Vijay4
rabmanda Pur ana, Chapter a a ee was defeated.
Viz. Kosala confronted Paras ura e given [0 Arjuna
BA V. This was the secret
° ime O
( Me armaputra during the @ 5, Stanza f DhrtarastraVira ~ya. Ghaptet ~>
rata Parva, Pp son Kauravas ait
VUAYA VI. One of the each a
J©ined with Jaya and Durjay*> Gb
SUght with Nile Kas ya and a
arva, a 45). a synonym
VUaye reper 2e Se wiv 15 us V Chapter ’
ad Siva in Mahabharata, Anusase?® nonym
VI fanza 5] -. used as 4 oh ter
JAYA VIII. The name Vijaya” na Parvés Gre
14 isnu in Mahabharata, Anuie™ wy of Varanasi.
Vijay Stanza elis d over the eity_ © me forest
tA TX, A King who rule davi 5 Indra.
= av an
Kpeya destroyed the city of ae the forest t
* Udava rose there. ane % a ynastY was
=, Most powerful King © ., the
Vijaa hin’ urana, Chapter 92) - India famous
p
e
‘ts gs. A country of anciv” Parva
Sin 3vak- (Mahabharata, our
Vijtarodis). puring Bee
XI. The trident of Siva.
VIJAYALAKSMI
to Bhadravata, of Subrahmanya, this trident Vijaya of
Siva went behind King Yama. This trident had three
prongs. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 231, Stanza 37).
VIJAYA XII. A bow of Indra. This is as bright as
Gandiva and as strong as the bow Sarigadhanus of
Sri Krsna. The bows of the Devas, considered to be
mostdivine, are Vijaya, Gandiva and Sarnga. Vijaya
belongs to Indra, Gandiva te Varuna and Sarnga to
Visnu. Once Druma, a Kimpurusa(demi god) who lived
in the mountain Gandhamadana got Vijaya from Indra.
After that Rukmi, his disciple got this bow from Druma.
(M.B. Udyoga Parva, Chapter 158, Stanza 3). |
VIJAYA SLL. Lhe divine bow of Karna. It is said that
this bow was the most divine of all weapons. This’ bow
which was made by Visvakarma, originally belonged
to Indra. At that time Indra had defeated many asuras
with the help of this bow. Indra gave this bow to his
loved disciple Parasurama. Karna got it from Paras u-.
rama. It is said that this bow was superior to Gandiva.
Tt was with the help of this bow that Parasurama_conquered the Ksatriyas twentyone times. (M.B. Karna
Parva, Chapter 31, Stanza 42). ha
VIJAYA I.The daughter of King Dagarha. ‘The emperor
Bhumanyu married her. A son named Suhotra was born
to the couple. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 95, Stanza 33 )
VIJAYA II. Daughter of Dyutiman, the King of Madradega. This Vijaya was the wife of Sahadeva the son of
Pandu. It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Adi Parva,
Chapter 95, Stanza 80, that a son named Suhotra was
born to Sahadeva by Vijaya. ra hes
VIJAYA Il. A synonym of Devi Durga. (M.B. Virata
Parva, Chapter 6, Stanza 16).
VIJAYADASAMI. A festival of Indians. As this festival
* celebrated for nine nights from the Ist to the 9th in the
bright lunar fortnight of the month of Kanni (September-October ) it is known as Navaratri (Nine nights )
d as it continues up to Dagami (the tenth night) it
anc siled Dasra. The Hindus believe that the Vijayazl Pa (the victorious tenth) was the day on which
ah Durga killed Mahisasura and got victory. So this
oy considered to be a suitable moment to begin the
aay ts of all the arts which would enable one to carry
Se Micceweil life. Sarasvati is considered the transae tatioll of Durga. As people became less superstiti4s, they began to consider the story of killing Mahisaoe as a metaphorical saying, to mean the killing of
Soribecites So the day of victory of Devi Durga (the same
Bre rasvati) 1s considered to be the auspicious moment
a (a beginning of learning. The warrior places his
ibe ns the man of literature his books and pen, the
Wee a gahts musical instruments, at the feet-of Devi and
wae devotion and worship receives them back from
la on the Vijayadasami day at am auspicious
sag ie a festival celebrated everywhere in India. In
The a] native states this festival used to be celebrated
sane the sponsorship of the royal family as a State
un am As it is believed that Mahisasura had lived in
a #6 the celebration of Dasra jn that State generally
hye and scale. In Kerala, from olden times this
ig on a gt : ae
| was celebrated under the patronage of the Vafici
festiva cami
mliy.-
OP ALAK SMI. One of the eight Laksmis, The duty
va Vijayalaksmi was keeping the treasury of Brahma.
Once she showed carelessness in her duty. So Brahma

VIJITASVA
cursed her to go and guard the gate tower of Ravana.
Accordingly Vijayalaksmi guarded the gate of Lanka
under the name Lankalaksmi. When she was hit by
Hanaman she obtained her original form and returned
to the world of Devas. (See under Lankalaksmi).
VIJITASVA. One of the five sons of emperor Prthu.
VijitaSva decided to perform one hundred _horsesacrifices and completed ninetynine. Seeing this Indra
feared that he might be deposed. So he stealthily took
away the sacrificial horse of Vijitaéva.
There was a fierce battle between Indra and Vijitagva
in which Indra was defeated, and Vijitagva recovered
the stolen horse from Indra. It was from that day onwards that this son of Prthu got the name Vijitagva.
Being pleased with the King at this expert fighting,
Devendra taught him the art of vanishing. (Bhagavata.
Skandha 4).
VIJVALA. Son of the bird Kufijala which was a famous
scholar. (For further details see under Subahu. XIV).
VIKADRU. A noble Yadava. It was this Vikadru who
brought to the notice of Sri Krgna the fact that Jarasandha had dared to attack Mathurapuri for the eighteenth time. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 17).
VIKALPA. An ancient country of India famous in the
Puranas. (Mahabharata, Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9,
Stanza 59).
VIKANKATAPARVATA. A mountain in the vicinity
of Mount Meru. (Devi Bhagavata, Skandha 8).
VIKARNA I. One of the hundred sons of Dhrtardstra.
The following information is available in Mahabharata
about this valiant fighter.
(i) Vikarna, the son of Dhrtarastra was one of the
eleven maharathas. (great warriors). (M.B. Adi Parva,
Chapter 63, Stanza 39).
(11) Among the disciples of Drona, who attacked Drupada, Vikarna was one. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 137,
Stanza 19),
(iii) Vikarna was present at the Svayarhvara (marriage)
of Draupadi (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 185, Stanza 1).
(iv) Vikarna was one of those kings who stood silent
and sad, being unable to answer the questions put by
Draupadi when she was about to be stripped of her
clothes. (M.B.Sabha Parva, Chapter 68, Stanza ihe
(v) Once Karna reviled at Vikarna. (M.B. Sabha
Chapter 68, Stanza 80).
(vi) At the time of the theft of the cows of king
Virata by Duryodhana and his brothers. Vikarna
fought against Arjuna. (M.B. Virata Parva, Chapter 54.
Stanza 9). | |
(vii) A severe fight followed in which the defeated
Vikarna fled from the battle-ground. (M.B. Virata
Parva, Chapter 54, Stanza 41). )
(viii) Hitby the arrow of Arjuna, Vikarna was wounded
and he fell down from the chariot. (M.B. Virata Parva,
Chapter 51, Stanza 41).
(ix) On the first day of the battle of Bharata, Vikarna
entered in a combat with Srutasoma. (M.B. Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 45, Stanza 58).
(x) He fought with Sahadeva. (M.B. Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 71, Stanza 21).
(xi) Abhimanyu defeated Vikarna. (Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 78, Stanza 21).
(xii) Ghatotkaca defeated Vikarna. (Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 92, Stanza 36).
Parva,
VIKRAMADITYA
(xui) There was a combat between Nakula and Vikarna’
(Bhisma Parva, Chapter 110, Stanza 11).
(xiv) He fought with Bhimasena. (Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 113),
(xv) He fought with Sikhandi. (Drona Parva, Chapter
96, Stanza 31).
(xvi) He fought with Nakula and was defeated. (Drona
Parva, Chapter 107, Stanza 30).
(xvii) Bhimasena killed him. (Drona Parva, Chapter
137, Stanza 29).
VIKARNAII. A hermit devoted to Siva. Mention is made
in Mahabharata, Anugdsana Parva, Chapter 14, Stanz@
99, that Siva was pleased with the devotion of this herm1t
and appearing before him granted him boons.
VIKARNA III. A country of ancient India. The warrior
of this country joined the army of Sakuni and foug ;
against the Pandavas. (Mahabharata Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 51, Stanza 15). :
VIKARTANA. A king of the Solar dynasty who- was
afflicted with leprosy. It is stated in Padma Puram:
Uttarakhanda, Chapter 135, that he got recovery from
the disease by bathing in the river Sabhramati.
VIKATA I. A brother of Prahasta. (See under Akampana)
VIKATA II. A character in the story of Paficatan'@:
(See under Paficatantra). '
VISATA ITT. (VIKATANANA\). Onc of the hundred so”
of Dhrtarastra. In the Bharata-baitle, fourteen soPs 2
Dhrtarastra joined together and wounded Bhimasen4Vikata was one of them. This Vikata was killed
Bhimasena. (Mahabharata, Karna Parva, Chapter 51, =
VIKATA. A giantess in the harem of Ravana. She a
to entice Sita for Ravana, (Valmiki Ramayana, Sunda
Kanda, Sarga 23, Stanza 15). MB.
VIKATHINI. An attendant of Subrahmanya. (MSalya Parva, Chapter 46, Stanza 18). be
VIKRAMADITYA. Vikramadi tya, who is believed a ah
one of the mighty emperors of Bharata, was an € are
ordinarily wise, righteous and valiant ruler. ‘There ery”
several stories in all the languages of India, prevalent ae
where. They are generally called Vikramaditya stO” " ¢
Vikramaditya was the son of Mahendrdaditya, BOE nd
Ujjayini. Mahendraditya and his wife Saumyadars“ .
were in great distress as they were childless. Su
the Prime Minister, Vajrayudha, the army comm the
and Mahidhara, the priest, were as distressed ‘nett
royal couple. The King and the queen engaged t
selves in fast and prayer. ely
In the meanwhile, the Devas found life extrem” d
difficult due to the wicked deeds of the barbarians: pelt
they went to Kailasa and told Rudradeva 0
grievances. They said, “Oh! Lord! All the 1 yn
exterminated by yourself and Mahavisnu, aT¢ ©“ ins
on the earthas Barbarians. They commit gf eat “ce
such as killing the Brahmins, obstructing sate cial
Carrying away hermit damsels etc. The sac b
offeringsin the sacred fire with Vedic Mantra? les
Brahmins, is the food of Devas. Because of the troU are
caused by the Barbarians in the earth, the sacrifice of
hindered and the Devas ‘are in trouble due to *# ex
food. So a being, mighty and strong enough rake
terminate all the Barbarians on the earth, s| * 4
incarnation.”’ ‘ers. »!
ot 6"
“iva agreed and sent the devas back to tmhad or jrt?
Then he called Malyavan and told him to: com yin!
as the son of Mahendraditya in the city obn hi?

VIKRAMASILA 855
Siva added. **You should exterminateall the Barbarians
and reinstate rituals and ceremonies. ‘The Yaksas,
Raksasas, ghosts etc. will be under your control. You
will be an emperor there with divine powers.”’ Accordingly Malyavan took birth as the son of Mahendraditya. That infant was Vikramaditya who becameé a
mighty emperor later. (Kathasaritsigara, Visamasilalambaka, Taranga |).
VIKRAMASILA. A King praised in the Markandeya
Purana. Kalindi was his wife and Durgama his son.
VIKRANTA. A King who was the father of Sudhrti
and the son cf King Dama. It is mentioned in Vayu
Purana, Chapter 86, that Vikranta was an ideal King
who loved and cared for his subjects. :
VIKRTA. It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Santi
Parva, Chapter 196, that this was the name adopted
by Kamadeva (Cupid) when he argued with Iksvaku,
in the form of a Brahmin.
VIKRTI. A King of the family of Yayati. This King’s
father was Jimuata, and his son was Bhimaratha.
(Bhagavata, Skandha 9). |
VIKSARA. A noble asura born to Kasyapa Prajapati
by his wife Danu. The most powerful of the Danavas
(asuras) given birth to by Danu, were Viksara, Bala,
Vira and Vrtra. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 65, Stanza
33). Of these Viksara_ took rebirth later as King
Vasumitra. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 67, Stanza 41).
VIKUKSI. A son of Iksvaku. It is said that Iksvaku
was born from the spittle of Manu. It is stated in Devi
Bhagavata, Skandha 7, that after the death of Saryati,
the Raksasas (giants) attacked Ayodhya and the sons
of the King having fled to different directions, Tksvaku
continued the dynasty of Saryati in Ayodhya. Hundred
sons beginning with Vikuksi, were born to Iksvaku.
Of these hundred sons fifty were employed to rule
over the regions of East and North and fortyeight, to
rule over the regions in the south and the west. With
the remaining two sons the King stayed in Ayodhya,
and carried on administration. |
One day King Iksvaku resolved to conduct the great
sacrifice of offering to the mancs called Mahapralaya-
§raddha, for which preparations were speedily ma :
The hermits such as Vasistha and others: ag
according to invitation. He sent his son Vikuksi to : e
forest to bring the required amount of flesh es
a Vikuksi entered the forest and hunted hare,
og, deer etc. and collected
flesh; but on the way home, he became tired of hunger.
To appease his hunger he took a small Se oe ae
collection cooked it and ate it. He took the ba ate °
eased with his son an gav
the King who was much pl ; ;
the animals to Vasistha the family priest a ep cl
(sprinkling of holy water on ie ae 8 ete which
fice). But Vasistha got angry and wae » The king
constitutes remains is not acceptable. filled with
understood the truth only pens ST ae SOG
anger and distress. He expelle So vera daied
* ° use
country for this misdeed. ‘Thus Pehe name Sas ada.
a Saga (hare) Vikuksi got ano”. tune that beSasada not at all caring about log mee fruits and
fell him, went to the forest and ae devotion.
roots and worshipped Dev); with ci "ane returned to
Iksvaku died. Sasada knew He performed several
Ayodhya and assumed reign.
the required quantity of
VIKUNTHA
VIKUNTHANA.
VIKUNTHANA
sacrifices on the banks of river Sarayi. Tae famous
Kakutstha was the son of this Vikuksi. (Devi
Bhagavata, Skandha 7).
VIKUNDALA. A Vaigya who obtained heaven by
bathing during the month Magha in the waters of
Kalindi. This Vaigya was a deplorable sinner. 5till the
men of Kala (Yama) sent Vikundala to heaven without
minding his sins. This story occurs in Padma Purana,
Adi Khanda, Chapter 30, as follows:
In days of old there lived a Vaisya named Hemakundala in the great kingdom of Nisadha. He was a
devotee and worshipper of devas and Brahmanas. He
carried on trade and agriculture and by plundering
he amassed much wealth.
Hemakundala grew old. He thought about the frailty
of life and spent a sixth part of his wealth for charitable
purposes. For remission of the sins committed throughout the whole of his life, he gave alms as stipulated
in the Puranas. After entrusting the family affairs to
his sons Srikundala and Vikundala, he went to the
forests for penance.
His sons were young. They turned away from
righteous ways and followed a path of pleasures and
wickedness. They refused to pay any heed to the
advice of their elders. Drinking and going to other
women became their routine.
Within a short time they lost their wealth. They had
nothing to eat. Their friends and favourites all discarded them. Being forsaken by every body, they engaged
themselves in theft or robbery. They were afraid of
the king and the people, and so they shifted to the
forest. ‘They lived by hunting. At this time the elder
brother was caught by a tiger. The younger brother
was bitten by a snake. Thus, on the same day, both
sinners met with death. The messengers of Yama took
both of them to the world of Yama. According to the
order of King Dharma, Vikundala got heaven and
§ri7 Kundala got hell.
Vikundala who was glad at obtaining heaven asked the
men of Yama on the way, why he was given heaven.
They replied, ‘There was a Brahmin who was wellversed in all branches of knowledge. He was the son
of Harimitra. His hermitage was on the southern
bank of Yamuna. Yourself and the Brahmin became
friends in the forest. Because of that friendship. you
were enabled to take bath in two Magha months in
the holy waters of Kalindi which is capable of washing
all the sins away: By the first Magha bath you got
remission of your sins. By the second Magha-bath
you became eligible for the attainment of heaven.”
VIKUNJA. An ancient country in India. Mention is
‘1 Mahabharata, Bhisma Parva, Chapter 56,
made 1n
Stanza 9, that it was the warriors of this country who
stood with the king Brhadbala on the left wing of the
Garuda Vyiha of the army formed by Bhisma, in the
battle of Bharata.
(VAIKUNTHA). A group of Devas
(gods) in the Manvantara of Raivata. There were
fourteen Devas in this group. The mother of these
gods was Vikuntha. (Brahmanda Purana, 2, 36, 57}.
A son born to*Hasti, a king of the
Lunar dynasty by YaSodhara the princess of 'Trigarta.
Sudeva, a princess of the dynasty of Dagarna was his

VILASA
wife. Ajamidha was the son born to Vikunthana by
his wife Sudeva. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 95,
Stanza 35).
VILASA. A hermit who was the friend of Bhasa. This
hermit did penance in PaSscimatata. It is mentioned
in Yogavasistha that Vilasa and Bhasa attained heaven
by pure knowledge,
VILOHITA. A Raksasa (giant) who was the son of
Kas yapa. It is mentioned in Vayu Purana, Chapter 69,
that Vilohita had three, heads, three legs and three
hands.
VILOHITA (M).
under Kala). :
VILOMA (VILOMA). A King. In Bhagavata, King
Viloma is stated as the son of King Vahni (Fire) and
in Visnu Purana, as the son of Kapotaroma.
VIMADA. A truthful King. Once a princess named
Kamadyt accepted Vimada as her husband at her
Svayarhvara marriage. The Kings and princes who
were present became jealous of Vimada and prepared
for war. The helpless Vimada praised the ASsvinidevas.
The gods defeated the enemies and gave the bride to
Vimada. (Rgveda, Mandala 1, Anuvaka 17, Stkta
TTT).
VIMALAI. A King. Vimala who was the King of
South India was the son of Sudyumna. (Bhagavata,
Skandha 9).
VIMALA II.
time of the horse-sacrifice of Sri Rama, this King
rendered a good deal of help to Satrughna. (Padma
Purana, Patala Khanda, Chapter 17).
VIMALA. A female calf born from Rohini, the daughter
of Surabhi. Rohini had two daughters called -Vimala
and Anala. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 66, Stanza 67).
VIMALAPINDAKA. A naga (serpent) born to Prajapati Kasyapa by his wife Kadri. (M.B. Adi Parva,
Chapter 35, Stanza 8).
VIMALASOKATIRTHA. A holy place. It is stated
in Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 14, Stanza 69,
that he who spends a night in this holy place, observing
celibacy, would attain heaven.
VIMALATIRTHA. A holy place. In the lakes of this
place, fishes having the colour of gold and of silver play.
Mention is made in Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter
$2, Stanza 87, that those who bathe in this holy
bath would get remission ofall their sins and would
get to the world of Indra.
VIMALODAKA,. Once Brahma performed a sacrifice
on the Himalayas. Sarasvati attended this sacrifice, on
which occasion she adopted the name Vimalodaka.
(M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 88, Stanza 29).
VIMOCANA. A holy place on the boundary of Kurtksetra. By taking bath in this tirtha and leading a
life without anger, the sins incurred by receiving bribes
would be remitted. (M.B, Vana Parva, Chapter 83
Stanza 161). °
VIMSA. The eldest son of King Iksvaku. It is stated in
Aévamedha Parva, Chapter 4, Stanza 4; that he had a
son named Viviméa.
VIMUCA. A South Indian hermit. (Mahabharata, Santi
Parva, Chapter 208, Stanza 28).
A hell. (See the section Naraka
A King of the city of Ratnatata. At the
VINAYAKACATURTHI
VIMUKHA. ‘A hermit of ancient India. This hermit
is member of the assembly of Indra. (M.B. Sabha Parva,
Chapter 7).
VINADI. A river of India famous in the Puranas. (M-B.
Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Stanza 97).
VINASANAI. A tirtha (holy bath). It is mentioned
in Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 82, that in this
holy bath Sarasvati lives in invisible form.
VINASANA II. Another holy place. In Mahabharata,
Vana Parva, Chapter 84, Stanza 112, mention 15 made
that one could obtain remission of all sings and the fruits
of Vajapeyayajria by visiting this holy place.
VINASANA. An asura born to Prajapati Kasyapa by
his wife Kala (Kalika). (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter
65, Stanza 34).
VINATA. A captain of the monkey army which fought
for Sri Rama. Under Vinata, the son of Sveta, there
were eight lakhs of monkey-soldiers. (Valmiki Rama
yana, Yuddha K4nda, Sarga 26).
VINATA. A wife of Kasyapa. Kagyapa took the daughters
of Daksa such as Vinata, Kadri and others as wives:
Two sons, Aruna and Garuda and a daughter, Sumatt
were born to Vinata. (Details relating to Sumati are
given in Chapter 19 of Brahmanda Purana). The Nagas
(serpents) were horn to Kadri. For details see unde?
Garuda.
VINATASVA. The son of Ila (Sudyumna) and the
grandson of Vaivasvata Manu. After the time of his
father, he became the ruler of the Western Empit¢-
VINAYAKA I. A devata of the Ganas (guards of Siva).
das AnuSsasana Parva, Chapter 150, Stan ae
VINAYAKA II. Ganapati. —
VINAYAKACATURTHI. One of the important festiva ’
of the Hindus. “This is called the day of worship a
GaneSa. The Caturthi (4th day) of the bright pong
fortnight in the month of Sirha is the birth day °
Ganapati. It is a famous festival in North India. 1°
make the images of Ganapati, every year, and ma
offerings to them on this particular day. = lel
It is believed, that he who sees the moon on Vinay?
Caturthi, will be subjected to dishonour and deris!O™
This belief is based on the following story. wake
Ganapati is very fond of sweetmeat especially Kozhu is
katta (globular solid sweetmeat, called Modaka) - It by
the custom in North India to worship Ganapau ds
offering these sweetmeats, even today, with all kin 5€
of festivities. On one birthday Ganapati went from hou",
to house and ate belly-ful of modakas and return’
ome on his conveyance, the rat. On the way the 0
Saw a snake and began to tremble with fear. Ue ily
the shivering of its legs Ganapati fell down. The be ¢
of Ganapati was broken due to the fall and2 lane
quantity of modakas came out. Ganapati gat an
everything that fell out of his belly and stuffed one
again in the stomach and joining the cut edges e™" 1 O
ed the snake tightly round the stomach. Candra Ved
was standing in the sky seeing all these things laugt ed
se contempt. At this, Ganapati got wild and plu iet
's tusk and throwing it at the moot cursed him-

CE EE Oo EO OO LL te,
VINDA I
VINDUMAN. A King b
VINDHYA. One of the seven chief
nobody look at you on the Ganapati-festival day.”
(Brahmavaivarta Purana). This story is slightly different according to Ganega Purana. That story is, that
Sri Paramefvara gave a plum to his elder son
Subrahmanya without the knowledge of his younger son
Ganapati, on the 4th day ofa bright lunar fortnight
and the moon who smiled at it, was cursed.
VINDA I. One of the hundred sons of Dhrtarastra. It
is mentioned in Mahabharata, Drona Parva, Chapter
127, Stanza 34, that Vinda was killed by Bhimasena in
the battle of Bharata.
VINDAII. A prince of Avanti. It is stated that this
Vinda had a brother called Anuvinda. The information obtained about Vinda from Mahabharata is
given below :
(i) Sahadeva defeated this Vinda at the time of his
southern regional conquest. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 31, Stanza 10). : a
(ii) Vinda helped Duryodhana by fighting on his side
with an aksauhini of army. (M.B. Udyoga Parva,
Chapter 19, Stanza 24).
(iii) Bhisma once said that Vinda was a noble warrior.
(M.B. Udyoga Parva, Ghapter 166, Stanza 6).
(iv) Vinda was one of the ten commanders of Duryodhanain the battle of Bharata. (M.B. Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 16, Stanza 15). ;
(v) On the first day of the battle of Bharata, Vinda
fought with Kuntibhoja. (M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter
45, Stanza 72). ‘an
(vi) When Sveta, the prince of Virata, surrounded
Salya, the King of Madra, Vinda helped Salya. (M.B.
Bhisma Parva, Chapter 47, Stanza 48).
(vii) Once Vinda and his brother Anuvinda together
attacked Iravan. (M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 81,
Stanza 27). “+ ;
(viil) In a Bharata-battle, Vinda fought with oe
sena, Arjuna and Virata. Vinda was killed in the fig t
with Arjuna. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 99, Stanza
VINDA III. A prince of the kingdom of Kekaya. In
the battle of Bharata he took the side of the Kauravas
and fought with Satyaki, in wine oe — il
Parva, Chapter 13, Stanza 0).
et ey oe es of the dynasty of Bharata.
He was the son of Marici and the father of Madhu.
( Bhagavata, Skandha 9). mountain chains.
This mountain which separates South India from
North India is famous in various ways 10 the rem
(i) Agastya kicked Vindhya down. (See under ge Ns
(ii) Sunda and Upasunda, two asuras, did peng ie ie
Vindhya and got boons. M.B: Adi Parva, p
(iii) Because of the fierce penienes es eee be
mountain Vindhya became hot a i a
onwards smoke cue out ac Vindhya. .B.
ter 208, Stanza . |
(ay tthe deity of Vindhya stays 17 the palace ot yee
serving him. (M.B. Sabha Parva; Chapter +¥;
'y) On this mountain there #6 Ghapter 6, Stanza
Devi Durga. (M.B. Vira ,
a
(wi) Vindhya is one of the ee Donel
chains. (M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chap ?
857 VIPRACITTI
(vii) In Tripuradahana (the burning of Tripuras)
Vindhya appeared behind the chariot of Siva as the
emblem on his flag. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 202,
Stanza 71);
at Vindhya once became the axle of the chariot of
iva, (M.B. Karna Parva, Chapter 34, Stanza 22).
(ix) This mountain gave Subrahmanya two attendants
named Ucchriga and Atigrnga. (M.B. Salya Parva,
Chapter 45, Stanza 49).
(x) Mention is made in Mahabharata, Anugasana
Parva, Chapter 25, Stanza 49, that he who does penance on the Vindhya, for a month without killing any
living creature, could obtain all attainments.
VINDHYACULIKA. A Country in ancient India.
(M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Stanza 62).
VINDHYAVALI. Wife of Mahabali. A son named
Bana and a daughter named Kumbhinasi were born to
Bali by Vindhyavali. (Matsya, 187. 40).
VIPAPMA. An eternal Visvadeva (Semi-god concerned
with offering to Manes). Mention is made about this
Vigvadeva in Mahabharata, Anusasana Parva, Chapter
91, Stanza 30:
VIPASA. A Puranically famous river in the region of
five rivers (Punjab). Vasistha was stricken with grief
at the death of his son Sakti and jumped into this river
with the help of a rope to commit suicide. The waves
of the river untied the knots of the rope and saved him,
From that day onwards this river came to be known. as
Vipasa. (See under Kalmasapada) Other information
about this river given in the Puranas is given below:—
(i) Vipasa stays in the palace of Varuna serving him.
(M.B, Chapter 9, Stanza 19); i
(ii) Two devils named Bahi and Hika live in this river.
(M.B. Karna Parva, Chapter 44, Stanza 41).
(iii) If offering to the Manes is made in this river and
celibacy is observed there for three days without anger,
one could get away from death and birth. (M.B.
Anugasana Parva, Chapter 25, Stanza 24).
VIPASCIT I. The name of the Indra of the age of
Manu Svarocisa. (See under Manvantara) .
VIPASCIT IJ. Husband of Pivari, the princess of
Vidarbha. It is mentioned in Markandeya Purana, that
because of the sinful acts done by. this man towards his
wife he had to go to hell.
VIPATA. A brother of Karna. Arjuna killed him in the
battle of Bharata. B. Drona Parva, Chapter 32,
Stanza 62). 7
VIPATHA. An arrow. It is mentioned in Mahabharata,
Adi Parva, Chapter 138, Stanza 6, that this arrow was
larger and more powerful than other arrows.
VIPRA. A King born in the family of Dhruva. Two
- sons named Sisti and Bhavya were born to Dhruva by
his wife Sambhi. Succhaya the wife of Sisti gave birth
to Ripu, Ripufijaya, Vipra, Vrkala and Vrkatejas.
(Visnu Purana, Amsa I, Chapter 13). |
VIPRACI1TI.
1) General information. A Danava (asura) born to
Prajapati Kasyapa, by his wife Dani. Dani had given
birth fo thirtythree notorious asuras (demons). Vipra-'
citti was the eldest of them. His younger brothers
were Sambara etc. (M.B. Adi. Parva Chapter 65,
Stanza 25).
2) Other details. (1) Simhika was the wife of Vipraoitti:
This Sirhhika was the sister of Hiranvaka ipu and

VIPRTHU 858 VIRA VI
Hiranyaksa and the daughter of Kagyapa and Diti.
(Visnu Purana, Améa 1, Chapter 15).
(11) It was this Vipracitti who took rebirth later as
Jarasandha. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 67, Stanza 4).
(111) Vipracitti stays in the palace of Varuna praising
and glorifying him. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 9,
Stanza 12),
(iv) When Mahavisnu took the form of Vamana and
began to measure the three worlds, Vipracitti with
some asuras surrounded Vamana. (M.B. Sabha Parva,
Daksmatya patha, Chapter 38).
(v) In Mahabharata, Salva Parva, Chapter 31, Stanza
12, a statement occurs to the effect that in days of old,
Mahavisnu took the form of Indra and killed Vipracitti.
(vi) In the war between Devas and asuras, Vipracitti
was killed by Indra. (M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter 47,
Stanza 11).
VIPRTHU. A Ksatriya of Vrsni dynasty. The following
information is available about him in Mahabharata.
(1) Viprthu was present at the Svayarhvara marriage
of Draupadi. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 185, Stanza
(i1) He participated in the festival conducted. on the
Mountain Raivata. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 218,
Stanza 10).
(11) Viprthu was a member of the group of Yadavas
who took the dowry to Hastinapura in the marriage
between Arjuna and Subhadra. (M.B. Adi Parva,
Chapter 220, Stanza 32).
(iv) Viprthu stayed in the Palace of Yudhisthira.
(M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 4,Stanza 30).
VIPRTHU II. An ancient king in India. It is mentioned
in Mahabharata, Santi Parva, Chapter 294, Stanza 20,
that Viprthu had been the emperor of the world,
VIPULA I. Brother of Balabhadrarama. The sons born to
Vasudeva by Rohini were Balabhadrarama, Gada,
Sarana, Durdama, Vipula, Dhruva and Krta. (Bhagavata, Skandha 10).
VIPULA II. A mountain near Girivraja, the capital city
of Magadha. Mention is made about this mountain in
Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter 21, Stanza 2.
VIPULA III. A hermit who was born in the dynasty of
Bhrgu. There is a story showing how this hermit protected the wife of his teacher from Indra while he was the
disciple of the hermit Devagarma, in Mahabharata,
Anus asana Parva, Chapter 40. The story is given below:
Ruci, the wife of the hermit Devaé arma, was extremely
beautiful. Devagarma was aware of the fact that Indra
had often looked at his wife with covetous eyes. He had
to perform a sacrifice. But he feared that if he went
away from the hermitage his wife would be carried away
by Indra. At last he called his beloved disciple Vipula
and revealed the secret to him. The teacher told his disciple that Indra was a libertine as well as a magician
and that he would appear in various forms to entice
Ruci, and asked him to protect Ruci even at the cast
of his life. Then Devagarmé left the hermitage for the
sacrifice.
Vipula followed the wife of his teacher, wherever she
went. He feared that Indra might come even unseen by
anybody. So he decided to get inside Ruci by supernatural powers of Yoga. He made Ruci to sit in front of
him and stare into his eyes and through the rays of her
eyes he entered inside her.
Knowing that Devagarma had left the hermitage, Indra
came in front of Ruci. By the power of Stambhana
(suppressing the use of faculties by mantra) Vipula
made Ruci stand motionless staring into the face of
Indra. She did not give any reply to the questions of
Indra. At last Indra looked into Ruci with inward eyes
and saw as in a mirror Vipula sitting inside her. With
shame Indra left the place instantly.
When the teacher returned on completion of the sacrifice Vipula told him all that had taken place. The
teacher was pleased and told his disciple that he might
ask for any boon.
He got the boon to be a righteous man throughout his
life and left the hermitage. 7
It was during this period that the marriage of Prabhavati, the sister of Ruci, took place. The marriage of
Prabhavati with Citraratha, the king of Anga, was settled.
A messenger from Anga informed Ruci about it. Then
some flowers fell from the sky near Ruci. She wore
them and went to the marriage. Prabhavati wanted to
have the same flowers. Vipula was sent to bring flowers
of the same kind. As Vipula was returning with the
flowers, he saw two men turning a wheel. Each of them
cldimed that he had turned more than the other, and
quarrelled with each other. One of them pointing at
Vipula, said that he who told lies would get what Vipula
would undergo in hell. Vipula was worried at hearing
this. He proceeded on his journey. He saw six men gambling. One of them pointed at Vipula and said ‘‘A false
gamester would get what Vipula would get in hell.
Being flurried by these two talks, Vipula ran to his
teacher to understand its meaning. He went to Campapuri and saw the teacher and asked him the meaning ©
what he had heard. The teacher told him, that the two
who turned the wheel were day and night and the s1x
who were engaged in gambling were the six Rtus(s¢@~
sons) and that Rtus and day and night are witnesses ©
every sinful act committed any time. Vipula became
aware of his sin. While he was staying inside the wife ©
his teacher, his genital touched her genital and face
touched face. He had not told the teacher this. But the
teacher said that it need not be considered a sin because the deed was done with no bad intention.
VIRA I. An asura born to Prajapati Kagyapa by his wife
33) (Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 65, Stanz@
VIRA ITI. One ofthe hundred sons of Dhrtarastra. (M.B.
Adi Parva, Chapter 67, Stanza 103).
VIRA III, A fire. This Agni was the son born to the fire
named Bharadvaja by his wife Vira. This fire has other
names such as Rathaprabhu, Rathadhvana, Kumbharetas etc. It is said that along with Somadevata, th!
Agni also would get the second portion of Ajya (ghee
offerings). It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Van@
Parva, Chapter 219, Stanza 9, that this mighty fire has
a wife named Sarayii and a son named Siddhi.
ae 08 of one called Paficajanya. This agni
Onsidered one of the Vinayakas. .B, na Parvés
Chapter 220, Stanza 13). , een. ve
VIRA ¥. A king in ancient India. Mention is made ™
Mahabharata, Santi Parva, Chapter 4, Stanza 7, that
this king had attended the Svayarhvara marriage of the
daughter of King Citrangada of Kalinga,
VIRA VI.A king of the Paru dynasty. Brhadratha, Kus:
Yadu, Pratyagra, Bala and Matsyakala were brothers ?

VIRA 859
. this king. Girika was their mother. (Agni Purana,
Chapter 278).
VIRA. The wife of the Agni (fire) named Bharadvaja, the
son of Sarhyu. The Agni Vira was the son of this Vira.
_(M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 219, Stanza 9).
VIRA II. A river of India, very famous in the Puranas.
(Mahabharata, Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Stanza 22).
VIRA III. The wife of King Karandhama. She was the
mother of Aviksit. Once, when serpents began to do
harm to all the living and non-living things in the world,
Vira approached her grandson Marutta and advised
him to conduct a serpent-sacrifice. Marutta began the
sacrifice. he serpents were terrified and sought protection from the wife of Aviksit. She being kind-hearted,
made her husband intervene and stop the sacrifice.
(Markandeya Purana, Chapter 126).
VIRABAHU I. A brother of Subrahmanya. It is stated
in Skanda Purana, that this Virabahu stood with
Subrahmanya and fought bravely.
VIRABAHU III. One of the hundred sons of Dhrtarastra. In the battle of Bharata he fought with Uttara
and Bhimasena. Bhimasena killed him with his club.
(Mahabharata, Bhisma Parva, Chapter 64, Stanza 35).
VIRABAHU III. A king of the country of Cedi. The daughter of Sudama the king of Dagarna was his wife. It
was this king of Gedi who gave protection to Damayanti
when she was forsaken by her husband Nala. (M.B.
Vana Parva, Chapter 69, Stanza Lo Ji
VIRABHADRA. One of the guards of Siva. ;
1) Origin. There are two different opinions 1n the Puranas, regarding the origin of Virabhadra. ‘There 1s no
doubt that his birth was due to the anger of Siva. When
Siva knew that his wife Parvati jumped into the fire and
died at the sacrifice of Daksa, he struck his matted hair
on the ground and from that, Virabhadra and Bhadrakali came into being. This is the version given in Devi
Bhagavata, Skandha 7. According to Mahabharata,
Santi Parva, Chapter 284, Virabhadra was born from
the mouth of Siva. From each of the hairpores of Virabhadra, who was born from the mouth of Siva to destroy
the sacrifice of Daksa a fearful monster was born, all
of whom, formed a group of ghosts called the sauna
2) The Destruction of the sacrifice of Daksa. See unaer
Daksa.
3) Attainment of boon. Atter the destruction of the sacrifice of Daksa, the fearful monster Virabhadra, began é
exterminate the entire creation. Then Siva appear
and pacified him and said “‘You shall become a plane
in the sky called Angaraksaka (Bodyguard ) oe aes ;
(well being). Everybody will worship you. fe.”
Ith and long life.
thus exalt you, wee Hook 101, 909; Padma
(Bhagavata, 2 eae hae Pu
Purana, Srsti Khanga, , ac
hatte, | is Pn fice of Daksa, Vira
i ha a: ss adie, and from that
bhadra severed a portio sLaracarya) was born.
radiance, later Adisankar? C28 capt jae Parva.
This story occurs in Bhavisya vv vot © l follower of
4) Prowess Virabhadra was not oF We In the
Siva. He was a prominent genera) “i ‘he Jalandhar
wattle of the burning of Tripura 4m d foucht fiercely.
fight, Virabhadra stood with pee citec Khanda).
Pe ctna Purana, Patala Slant was the destroyer
. Vi
of ag een wee protector of the Devas. Once
VIRADHANVA I
‘Kas yapa and all the other hermits and sages with him
were burnt to ashes in the wild fire that occurred in the
Saukata mountain. Instantly Virabhadra swallowed
that wild fire and by the power of incantation, he brought to life from the ashes all the Rsis (hermits) who
were burnt to death.
On another occasion a serpent swallowed all the gods.
Virabhadra killed the snake and rescued all the Devas.
Once an asura called Paficamedhra put into his mouth
all the gods, all the hermits and Bali and Sugriva.
Those who escaped from the danger stood agape being
powerless to confront the Asura. At last Virabhadra
attacked the asura. That great and fierce battle lasted
for years. At the end Virabhadra killed the Asura and
rescued all.
Because Virabhadra had thus protected the Devas and
the others on three occasions, Siva became immensely
pleased with him and gave him several boons. (Padma
Purana, Patala Khanda, 107).
VIRADHA. A fierce Raksasa (giant) whom Rama and
Laksmana killed in the Dandaka forest. Viradha was
the rebirth of Tumburu, a Gandharva who had been
cursed to become a Raksasa. The story about Sri
Rama’s liberating the Gandharva from the curse and
sending him back to the world of Gandharvas, occurs
in Valmiki Ramayana, Aranya Kanda, Sargas 2 to 4,
as follows.
In days of old, Tumburu, a Gandharva had been serving Kubera. Once ‘umburu was asked by Kubera to
bring Rambha. Tumburu failed in bringing Rambha
at the stipulated time. Kubera got angry and cursed
Tumburu to become a Raksasa. Tumburu requested
for liberation from the curse. Kubera granted his
request and said “In Tretayuga, Mahavisnu will
incarnate as Sri Rama, who with his sword will change
your Raksasa form. You will regain your former form
and will come back to the world of Gandharvas.”’
Accordingly ‘Tumburu took birth as the son of giant
Jaya. This child born to Jaya by his wife Satahrada,
grew up and came to be known by the name Virdadha.
Two extra-ordinarily long hands and the outward
appearances of a giant aroused fear in every living
creature. He lived in the forest Dandaka. It was at
this time that Sri Rama and Laksmana came with Sita,
to live in this forest. As soon as Viradha saw them he
ran to them with a loud cry.
“With sunken eyes and swollen stomach, widened
mouth and an enormous body, with a fierce appearance,
of very great height an uncouth figure, body wet with —
fat, clad in the hide of a leopard; looking like Yama
with open mouth, with three lions, two wolves, four
leopards, ten spotted deer and the head of a big tusker
with tusks smeared with fat, all these caught pierced
+, an iron trident, and shouting in a roaring sound”,
he ran to them and after taking Sita, he began to run.
Rama and Laksmana followed him. Viradha placed
Sita down and, taking Rama and Laksmana on each
of his shoulders he began running. Rama and Laksmana
cut off each of his hands. But Viradha did not die.
Rama and Laksmana decided to bury him alive.
Viradha recognized Sri Rama and told him his story.
Instantly his demoniac form changed and he regained
his original form of a Gandharva. Thus Tumburu
returned to the world of Devas. (See under Tumburu).
VIRADHANVA I. Awarrior of the kingdom of Tri-

VIRADHANVA II
garta. He took the side of the Kauravas in the Bharatabattle and fought with Dhrstadyumna, in which fight
he was killed. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 107, Stanza
VIRADHANVA Il. A Gandharva. (See under Pundarikamukha).
VIRADHARMA. A King in ancient India. (Mahabharata, Udyoga Parva, Chapter 4, Stanza 16).
VIRADYUMNA. An ancient King in India. He had a
son named Bhiridyumna. Once this son was lost in the
great forest. Viradyumna wandered everywhere in the
forest in search of his son. On the way he met a_ hermit
called Tanu. He talked elaborately to the King about
the hopes of human mind. (M.B. Santi Parva, Chapters
VIRAJA. A cow-herdess. Once Sri Krsna duped Radha
and took the cowherdess Viraja to the region of loveplays. A mischievous maid informed Radha of this.
Radha ran to the dancing garden and searched for the
couple. Sri Krsna had made himself invisible. So she
could not find him. She found out Viraja. Radha opened her eyes wide and pretended that she was about to
curse her. Viraja was terrified and she melted and_becamea river; full of anger Radha went home. (Devi
Bhagavata, Skandha 9).
VIRAJA (S) I. A naga (serpent) born to Prajapati.
Kagyapa by his wife Kadri. (M.B. Adi Parva,
35, Stanza 13).
VIRAJA (S) II. One of the hundred sons of Dhrtarastra.
He was killed by Bhima in the battle of Bharata. (M.B.
Drona Parva, Chapter 157).
VIRAJA (S) III. A son born from the radiance of Mahavisnu. Havingno desire to rule over a kingdom, he
adopted penance. He had ason named Kirtiman. (M.B.
anti Parva, Chapter 59, Stanza 88),
VIRAJA (S) IV. One of the eight sons of Kavi, who was
the son of Vaivasvata Manu. He had eight sons. They
were Kavi, Kavya, Dhisnu, Sukracarya, Bhrgu, Kagi,
Ugra and Virajas. (M.B. Anugasana Parva, Chapter 85,
Stanza 132).
VIRAJA. A King of the Kuru dynasty. He was the
grandson of Kuru and the son of Aviksit. (MB.
Adi Parva, Chapier 92, Stanza 54).
VIRAJA (M). A particular tower in Dvaraki. Whenever Sri Krsna wanted to be alone he went to this
tower. (Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter 38).
VIRAKA (M). Acountry. It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Karna Parva, Chapter 44, Stanza 43, that this
country was to be avoided as the thought and customs
and manners of this country were full of defilement.
VIRAKA. A King of the dynasty of Anga. He was the
son of Sibi. Viraka had three brothers named Prthudarbha, Kaikaya and Bhadraka. (Agni Purana, ChapVIRAKETU I. A son of the King Drupada of Pafcala.
In the battle of Kuruksetra, Viraketu confronted
Drona and was killed by Drona. (M.B. Drona Parva,
Chapter 122, Stanza 33).
VIRAKETU II. A King of Ayodhya.
VIKAMAHENDRA. The dwelling place of the asura
named Naga. (See under Nagastra).
VIRAMANI. A King devoted to Siva. Srutavati was
his wife. One day at the request of Viramani, Siva
fought with Yoginis (women doing Sakti worship). In
that fight the Yoginis defeated Siva.
Chapter
VIRATA
VIRAMOKSA. A holy place. Itis mentioned in Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 84, Stanza 51, that by
visiting this holy place one could attain complete remission of one’s sins. 7
VIRANA. A Prajapati. Mention is made in Mahabharata, Santi Parva, Chapter 348, Stanza 41, that this
Prajapati learned the philosophy of purity and righteousness from Sanatkumara and taught the hermit
Raibhya what he had learned.
VIRANAKA. A naga (serpent) born in the family of
Dhrtarastra. This naga was burnt to death in. the
sacrificial fire of the serpent sacrifice performed by
Janamejaya. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 57, Stanza 18).
VIRANI I (VIRINI). A daughter of Brahma. First,
Brahma created the Saptarsis (the seven hermits) by
his mind. After this Rudra was born from the anger
of Brahma, Narada from the lap of Brahma, Daksa from
the thumb of Brahma, Sanaka and the others from the
mind of Brahma, and the daughter Virani from the left
thumb of Brahma. Daksa married this Virani. Narada
took rebirth as the son of this couple.
Daksa married Virani at the behest of Brahma. At first
this beautiful woman gave birth to five thousand sons.
N4rada misguided them. Daksa got angry at this. He
cursed Narada. Owing to that curse Narada had to
take birth again as the son of Daksa and Virani. (Dev!
Bhagavata, Skandha 7). ;
VIRANT II. A teacher-priest. According to Vayu Purana,
Virani was a disciple of the famous teacher Yajriavalkya
of the Yajurveda- line of disciples of Vyasa. _
VIRASA. A naga (serpent) born in the family of Prajapati KafSyapa. (M.B. Udyoga Parva, Chapter 103,
Stanza 16),
VIRASENA I. The father of Nala. It is mentioned in -
Mahabharata, Anuédsana Parva, Chapter 115, Stanza
65, that this King did not eat meat. (For further details
see under Damayanti) .
VIRASENA II. A King of Kosala. (See under Candrasena I).
VIRASIMHA I. The captain of the army of the asura
Vyalimukha, who came to fight with Subrahmanya.
(Skanda Purana, Viramahendra kanda).
VIRASIMHAII. A prince who was the son of King
Viramani and the relative of Rukmangada. It is stated
in Padma Purana, Patala khanda that this prince Virasithha tied the sacrificial horse of Sri Rama and fought
with Satrughna who led the horse.
VIRASRAMA. A holy hermitage. It is. mentioned 1
Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 84, Stanza 145,
that those who visit this holy hermitage would obtai?
the fruits of performing a horse sacrifice.
VIRAT I. The son of the daughter of Priyavrata. Svayambhuva Manu married Sataripa., Two sons Priyavrata
_and Uttanapada were born to them. A daughter wa
born to Priyavrata. Prajapati Kardama married het
Three sons named Samrat, Kuksi and Virat were bot?
to them. (Agni Purana, Chapter 18),
VIRAT IL. (VIRAT PURUSA). Virat Purusa is the
a of Brahma. (For details see under
rst).
VIRATA,
1) General information. The King of M try’
; ' : atsya coun
uring the pseudonymity of the Pandavas. this Kiné
sheltered them. At the end of the pseudonymity of one

VIRATA
year, the Kauravas had stolen the cows of Virata. In
the fight which ensued Arjuna entered the battlefield
with Uttara, the son of King Virata, and defeated the
Kauravas and proclaimed that the life of pseudonymity
was over. After that Abhimanyu married Uttara the
daughter of Virata, (M.B. Virata Parva).
2) Other details.
(1) This Virdta, the King of Matsya was born from a
portion of the Marudganas. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter
67, Stanza 82).
4H) King Virata had two sons named Uttara and
ankha. It was with these sons that he attended the
Svayarnvara marriage of Draupadi. (M.B. Adi Parva,
Chapter 185, Stanza 8).
(iii) In the regional conquest conducted by Sahadeva,
before the Imperial consecration-sacrifice of the Pandavas, Virata fought with him and was defeated. (M.B.
Sabha Parva, Chapter 31, Stanza 2).
(iv) King Virata attended the Rajasiiya (sacrifice of
Imperial consecration) of Yudhisthira. (M.B. Sabha
Parva, Chapter 44, Stanza 20).
(v) Virata gave as a gift to Yudhisthira two thousand
tuskers adorned with gold chains. (M.B. Sabha Parva,
Chapter 52, Stanza 26).
(vi) The name of the wife of King Virata was Sudesna.
(M.B. Virata Parva, Chapter 9, Stanza 6).
(vii) During the incognito-life of the Pandavas, King
Virata sheltered’ them in his palace. He took Yudhisthira as a court-favourite, Bhimasena as the over-seer
of his dining hall, Arjuna as the dancing master, Nakula
as the head of the stables, and Sahadeva as the head of
the cow-herds. (M.B. Virata Parva, Chapters 7, 8, 10,
(viii) The first wife of King Virata was Suratha, the
princess of Kosala. A son named Sveta was born to
Virdta by Suratha. After the death of Suratha, he
married Sudesna the daughter of Suta, King of Kekaya.
To Sudesna two sons. named Sankha and Uttara and as
the youngest, a daughter named Uttara were born.
(M.B. Viradta Parva, Daksinatya Patha, Chapter 16).
(ix) It is stated in Mahabharata, Virata _Parva,
Daksinatyapatha, Chapter 26, that King Virata had
ten brothers. =e
(x) Virdta had two brothers named Satanika ae
Madiraksa. Siryadatta is another name of atanika.
He was the commander of the army of Virata. Madiraksa was also called Visalaksa. (M.B. Virata Parva,
Chapters 31 and 32). ; =
(xi)* At the time of the theft of the cows, King Virata
engaged in combat with Sugarma. (M.B. Virata Fatyas
Chapter 32, Stanza 28).
(xii) Susarma caught hold o
irata Parva, Chapter 33, Stanza Ae, nd-
(xiii) Virata was one of the seven prominent one :
of the army of Yudhisthira. (M.B. Udyoga Farva,
hapter 157, Stanza 11). ,
(xiv) On the first day of the battle of BhateTe LE,
Was a combat between Virata and en . "
f Virita alive. (M.B.
Bhisma Parva, Chapter 45, Stanza B. Bhisma Parva, ©
(xv) Virdta attacked Bhisma.
Chapter 73, Stanza 1). a
(xvi) In the fight between Virata
a killed. With that vane a away:
arva, Chapter 82, Stanza m_ q AgvatXvil) There = a combat between Virata an
Drona, Sankha
and (MB. Bhisma
861 VIROCANA I
thama. (M.B, Bhisma Parva, Chapter 110, Stanza 16).
(xviii) Virata combatted with Jayadratha. (M.B.
Bhisma Parva, Chapter 116, Stanza 42).
(xix) Virata fought with Vinda and Anuvinda. (M.B.
Drona Parva, Chapter 25, Stanza 20).
(xx) In the fight with Salya, Virata fell down unconscious. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 167, Stanza 34).
(xxi) In the battle which followed, Dronacarya killed
Virata. (M.B. Karna Parva, Chapter 6, Stanza 6).
(xxii) Mention is made in Mahabharata, Stri Parva,
Chapter 26, Stanza 33, that the funeral ceremony ofVirata was conducted in. a befitting manner and in
Mahabharata, Santi Parva, Chapter 42, Stanza 4, that
Yudhisthira performed offering to the Manes for him.
(xxi) After death, Virata entered heaven and joined
the Marudganas. (M.B. Svargarohana Parva, Chapter
5, Stanza 15).
(xxiv) The synonyms used in Mahabharata for Virata
are, Matsya, Matsyapati, Matsyarat, Matsyaraja etc.
VIRATA (M). The country called Matsya. King
Virata was the ruler of this country. (See under
Virata).
VIRATANAGARA. The Capital of Matsya. Mention is
made in Mahabharata, Virata Parva, Chapter 30,
Stanza 28, that once the Kawavas and the Trigartas
attacked this country.
VIRATAPARVA. A prominent Parva (section) in
Mahabharata,
VIRAVA. A horse. The two horses yoked to the chariot given to Agastya by the giant Ilvala, were called
Virava and Surava. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 99,
Stanza 17).
VIRAVARMAI. A child born to King Taladhvaja by
Narada, when he assumed the form of an illusive
woman of beauty. (For further details see under
Taladhvaja J).
VIRAVARMA II. A King who ruled over the city of
Sarasvata. His chief queen was Malini, who was the
daughter of a Yaksa. Viravarma stopped the sacrificial]
horse of the Pandavas. When Krsna and Arjuna got
ready to fight with Viravarma to recover the horse,
Viravarma, with the help of Yama fought with them.
At last Krsna entered into a treaty with Viravarma
and got the horse back.
Viravarma had five sons named Subhala, Sulabha,
Lola, Kuvala and Sarasa. (Jaimini, Asva : 47 : 49).
VIRAVRATA. A King born in the family of Bharata.
To Viravrata who was the son of Madhu, two sons
named Manthu and Amanthu were born, (Bhagavata,
ifth Skandha).
winint (VIRANT). See under Virani.
IROCANA I.
“iD General information. -An asura. He was the son of
Prahlada and the father of Mahabali. Three sons Virocana, Kumbha and Nikumbha were born to Prahlada
by his wife Dhrti. Virocana, though an asura, performed rites and rituals carefully. He was kind towards
Brahmins. His son Bali became famous and got the
name Mahabali. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 65, Stanza
pa laser details.
(i) Once there was a controversy between Virocana
and Sudhanva. (See under Sudhanva IT).
(ii) During the time of emperor Prthu, when the

VIROCANA II
asuras milked the earth Virocana stood as the calf.
(M.B.-Drona Parva, Chapter 69, Stanza 20).
(i111) Virocana is included among the ancient Kings of
prominence. (M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter 227, Stanza
(iv) There isa story about the quest for knowledge
about universal and individual souls, by Indra and
Virocana, in Chandogyopanisad, as given below.
Once the Devas and the asuras approached Prajapati
to learn about Brahman, the impersonal God. Prajapati told them : ‘‘Atman (soul) ‘is the first tattva
(Essential being) which is sinless, eternal, desireless
and unimaginable in the earth.’’ Having heard this
philosophy about the soul, the Devas selected Indra,
and the asuras selected Virocana and to know the
details, they sent them to Prajapati as his disciples.
Indra and Virocana stayed with Prajapati for several
years to know more about Atman. But Prajapati did
not reveal to them the secret about Brahman. At last to
test them Prajapati said ‘Your reflection that you see in
water or mirror is the Atman (soul).”
Virocana, who mistook what the Prajapati said as truth
immediately took his bath, put on costly dressand ornaments and.stood near water and saw his reflection in water.
After that, taking the reflection for soul, he spread this
doctrine among his people. With this the asuras accepted body as soul. But the Devas did not recognize this
philosophy. They accepted the doctrine that Atman is
that essence of Nature which is alien to body and mind
and which is pure.
(v) There are two different statements about the death
of Virocana in the Puranas.
(1) In the battle with Tarakasura, Virocana was killed
by Devendra. (M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter 99.
Brahmanda 1.20.35; Matsya: 10: 11; Padma Purana,
Srsti Khanda 16).
(2) The Sun God was pleased with Virocana and had
given him a crown. The sun told him that death would
come only if that crown was removed from the head by
some body. Because of this boon Virocana became
arrogant. So Mahavisnu took the form of a beautiful
woman and enticed Virocana towards him and taking
away the crown killed him.(Ganega Purana A, 29):
According to Narada Purana, Mahavisnu took the form
of a Brahmin and reached the palace of Virocana. There
changing the righteous wife of Virocana into a mad
woman he killed Virocana,
(vi) Virocana had two wives called Vigalaksi and Devi.
Two children, Bala and Ya" ddhara were born by them.
The wife ot the famous Tvasta was this Yagodhara.
(Brahmanda. 3: 1: 86; Narada Purana 2: 32 - Bhagavata, Skandha 9).
(vi1) Virocana had five brothers named Kumbha, Nikumbha, Ayusman, Sibi and Baskali and a sister named
Virocana. (Vayu Purana, 84, 19).
VIROCANA II. A son of Dhrtarastra. He was also called Durvirocana. This Virocana was present at the
Svayasnvara marriage of Draupadi. (M.B. Adi Parva,
Chapter 185, Stanza 2).
VIROCANA I. An attendant of Subrahmanya.
Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Stanza 30).
VIROCANA II. Daughter of Prahlada the asura king.
Tvasta married her. A son named Viraja was born to
this couple. (Bhagavata, Skandha 5). In Vayu Purana,
(M.B.
VIRUPAKSA III
it is stated that the hermit Trigiras also was born to
Tvasta by Virocana.
VIROHAWNA. A naga (serpent) born in the family of
Taksaka. This serpent was burnt to death in the sacrificial fire of Janemejaye. (M.B. Adi Parva, ( hapte?
597, Stanza 9).
VIRUDHA. One of the three daughters of Surasa, the
mother of the nagas (serpents). The iwo other daughters
were Anala and Ruha. It is mentioned in Mahabharata,
Adi Parva, Daksinatya Patha, Chapter 66, that from
this daughter Virudha, the Viruts such as Lata, Gulma,
Valli etc were born.
VIRUPA I.A son of Ambarisa,a king of the Solar dynasty:
It is stated in Bhagavata, Skandha 9, that Ambaris@
had three sons called Ketuman, Sambhu and Virupa- |
VIRUPA II. It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Sant
Parva, Chapter 199, Stanza 88, that once Kro '
(anger) changed its form and assumed the nam
Virupa and conversed with Iksvaku.
VIRUPA III. An asura (demon) Sri Krsna killed we
asura. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Daksinatya Patha, Chapt
VIRUPA IV. One of the eight sons of Angiras. :
eight sons of Angiras were Viripa, Brhaspati, Utathy :
Payasya, Santi, Ghora, Sarhvarta and Sudhanva. acm
sons are called the Varunas or the Agneyas. (M.B. Anv*
sana Parva, Chapter 85, Stanzas 130-131). had
VIRUPAKA. An asura. In days of old this asura 0%
ruled over the world. (Mahabharata, Santi Parv®
Chapter 227, Stanza 51). the
VIRUPAKSA I. One of the elephants which hold up
earth from Patala (underworld). It is said that as ee
quake occurs when this elephant shakes its head. (
details see under Astadiggajas).
VIRUPAKSA II. A Raksasa (giant) who fought o?
side of Ravana against Sri Rama and Laksmana.
mentioned in Uttara Ramayana that this ae ae
born to Malyavan by a Gandharva damsel called a
dari. Seven sons named Vajramusti, Virapaksa, Dum a
kha, Suptaghna, Yajiiakoga, Matta and Unmatta a? norg named Nala were born to Malyavan by
ari.
All these sons held prominent places in the army }
Ravana. It is mentioned in Agni Purana, Chaptet en
that in the battle between Rama and Ravana, ur by
Kumbhakarna was killed, the army was command nar
Kumbha, Nikumbha, Makaraksa, Mahodara, M4".
parsva, Matta, Unmatta, Praghasa, Bhasakarna, viru
ksa, Devantaka, Narantaka, Trifiras and Atikaya- d
When Sugriva devastated the army of Ravana was
caused havoc among the giants, Virtpaksa, who tlean archer got on an elephant and entered the be re
field. He confronted Sugriva first. He thwarted the a 46
flung at him by Sugriva, and struck him. For 4 ‘ ¢
Sugriva found it difficult to withstand him. But i2 iy
battle which followed, Sugriva struck Virapaksa_ © oa
and uy him. (Valmiki Ramayana, Yuddha K4*"
VIRUPAKSA III. One of the thirtythree not!’ is
anavas (demons) born to Prajapati Kagyap@ vas
wife Danu. It is stated in Mahabharata, Adi pa ed
Chapter 67, Stanza 22 that it was this asura Oat
Viripaksa, who had, later, taken rebirth as King
varma.
the
It 15
of

om
VIRUPAKSA IV
VIRUPAKSA IV. An asura who was the follower of
Narakasura. This Virtipaksa was killed on the bank of
the river Lohitaganga. (Mahabharata, Sabha Parva,
Daksinatyapatha, Chapter 38).
VIRUPAKSA V. A Raksasa who was the friend of
Ghatotkaca. (Mahabharata, Drona Parva, Chapter 175,
Stanza 15),
VIRUPAKSA VI. This giant named Virtipaksa was
the friend of a stork called Rajadharma. (Mahabharata
Santi Parva, Chapter 170, Stanza 15). (See under
Gautama V).
VIRUPAKSA VII. One of the eleven Rudras.
VIRUPASVA. A King. This King had never eaten flesh
in his life. (Mahabharata, Anusasana Parva, Chapter
156, Stanza 15).
ViRUT. See under Virudha.
VIRYASULKA. In ancient days the Kings wanted to
give their daughters in marriage to the most valiant
youths. The custom of showing their valour before the
people, before getting the damsel became more prevalent, than giving money to get the girl. Thus marrying
a girl by showing his valour is called Marriage by
giving Viryagulka. (Sulka means Nuptial gift). (Agni
Purana, Chapter 4).
VIRYAVAN. An eternal Vigvadeva. (god concerned
with offerings to the Manes. (M.B. Anugsasana Parva,
Chapter 91, Stanza 31).
VISACIKITSA. (Treatment
Sarpa.
VISADA. A King who was the son of Jayadratha and
father of King Senajit. (Bhagavata, Skandha 9). 4
VISAKHA I. One of the three brothers of ‘Skan adeva. The other two were Sakha and ieee Bee
There is a story regarding them in Mahabharata, Sant!
Parva, as follows:—
Skandadeva approached his father S ae
time Siva, Parvati, Agni and Ganga, al W oe
in their minds that Skanda should come to ee (the
. Understanding the desire of each, by Yoga alssoul)
power obtained by union with the iste heen
Skanda divided himself into four persons, Skandal
Vigakha, Sakha and Naigameya and ee io (For
them respectively and fulfilled their qesire.
further details see under Subrahmanya). de in M.B.
VISAKHA II. A hermit. Mention 3s oy this hermit
Sabha Parva, Chapter 7, Stanza_ 19, A a
Stays in the palace of Indra, glori os It is believed
VISAKHADATTA. A Sanskrit playwrigh'-
that his period was between the cen gr dew is
A.D. His prominent play ip ne He was the son
known by the name Vis akhadeva ae af Vates varaof King Bhaskaradatta and the gran a o Geen toutid
datta. OF his works, only Mudraraksasa
till ileri . AE Os
VISAKHAYOPA. A holy place 2p Fra Chapter 90
mentioned in Mahabharata, Vana a Iy place because
Stanza 15, that this Potted pena BE
ther a pe - Walmi
v begs Varin a ova, Mention is made in Vito
Vigala was born to Iksvaku, A n Visala.
Alambusa and that Vigala built a ¢! tia Th was
This Visdla had a son naine’ ‘newt of Gautama,
near the city Vigala, that Ahalya, the
for poison). See under
868 VISNAPU
stood as stone, because of a curse. (See under Vigalapuri).
VISALA I. The queen of Ajamidha, a King of the Lunar
dynasty. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 95, Stanza 37).
VISALA II. The King Gaya once performed a sacrifice
in the country called Gaya. Mention is made in Mahabharata, Salya Parva, Chapter 38, Stanza 20, that
Sarasvati attended this sacrifice assuming the name
Visgala.
VISALA III. Wife of King Bhima the son of Mahavirya.
Three sons, Trayyaruni, Puskari and Kapi were born
to Bhima by his wite Vigala. (Vayu: 37 : 158). In
Matsya Purana, Visala is mentioned as the wife of King
Utaksaya.
VISALAKA I. A Yaksa (semi-god). Mention is made
in Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter 10, Stanza 10,
that this Yaksa stays in the palace of Kubera, glorifying him.
VISALAKA II. A King. Vasudeva married this King’s
daughter Bhadra. It is mentioned in Mahabharata,
Sabha Parva, Chapter 42, that after the marriage
Bhadra was kidnapped by Sig upaila.
VISALAKSA I. One of the hundred sons of Dhrtarastra.
Mention is made in Mahabharata, Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 88, Stanza 15, that this Visalaksa was killed
by Bhimasena in the battle of Bharata.
VISALAKSA II. Younger brother of King Viradta. He
had another name Madiraksa. (M.B. Virata Parva,
Chapter 32, Stanza 19).
VISALAKSA III. A son of Garuda, (Mahabharata,
Udyoga Parva, Chapter 101, Stanza 9).
VISALAKSA IV. A King of Mithila. He was present
at the sacrifice of Rajasiya (Imperial consecration) of
Yudhisthira. (Bhagavata, Skandha 10).
VISALAKSI. An attendant of Subrahmanya. (M.B.
Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Stanza 3)..
VISALAPURI. A holy place on the basin of the Ganges.
This place is in the forest Badari. It is stated in Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 90, that the hermitage
of Naranarayanas, stood in this place. This city was built
by the King Vigala. (See under Vigala).
VISALYA I. Ariver famous in the Puranas. Mention is
made in Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter 9, Stanza
20, that this river stays in the Palace of Varuna glorifying him. This is a holy river. One could obtain the
fruits of Agnistoma Yajfia (a sacrifice) by taking
a bath in this river.
VISALYA II. A medicine. This medicine is used to
extricate the arrow-heads that might have stuck on the
body. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 289, Stanza 6)
VISALYAKARANIT. See under Mrtasafijivani.
VISATHA. A son born to Balarama by Revati. (Vayu
Purana, 31:6).
VISIKHA. A King of the birds. It is stated in
Brahmanda Purana, that Visikha was one of the sons
born to Garuda by Suki.
VISIRA. An attendant of Subrahmanya. (M.B. Salya
Parva, Chapter 46, Stanza 29),
VISKARA. An asura who ruled over the world in days
of old. ( M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter 227, Stanza 53).
VISNAPU. A hermit who was the son of hermit Vié vaka.
This Visnapt was once lost and was found again by
the help of the Agvins. This story is given in Rgveda.
Mandala 1, Anuvaka 17, Sakta 114 re

VISNU
VISNU.
1) General information. Brahma, Visnu and Maheévara
are the Lords of creation, sustenance and extermination
of this perishable universe. These trimirtis (three
figures) also are perishable. It is said, that one day of
Brahma will constitute thousand four-fold (catur) yugas
and that during the life of Brahma, fourteen Indras will
fall down from heaven and die. This isa Brahma age.
The ages of two Brahmas constitute the age of one Vi snu.
At the end of the age Visnu also will perish. The age
of Siva is double the age of Visnu. Siva also will perish
at the end of his age. (Devi Bhagavata, Skandha 5 i
When everything perishes there comes the deluge (the
great flood). After that, for one hundred and twenty
Brahma years the universe will be desolate and void. In
that deep eternal silence, Visnu will be seen sleeping on
a banyan leaf on the surface of water. That is the
beginning of the next great age. In this stage, Balamukunda is the name of Mahavisnu. As he remains on
Nara or water he will be called Narayana also.
T’he name Visnu means he who possesses the habit of
Vyapana (To pervade). While Visnu, who has the
power to spread his control over everything in whatever
condition, lies on the banyan-leaf. From his navel, a
lotus-stalk grows up, and on the top of the stalk, in the
lotus flower, Brahma comes into being. Brahma _ does
penance before Visnu and extols him. Mahavisnu confers
on Brahma the power of creation of the subjects. That
Brahma perishes along with the deluge and in his place
another Brahma is born. Thus in the life-time of Visnu
two Brahmas come into being and perish.
2) Beginning. In days of yore, when Visnu was lying
on the banyan leaf as Bala Mukunda, he began to think
“Who am I? Who created me ? Why ? What have I
to perform ?’? - and soon an ethereal voice was heard,
‘“f am everything. Except me, there is nothing eternal.”
From behind the voice Mahadevi appeared, and said
‘*Look Visnu. What is there to wonder at ? Whenever
the universe is subject to creation, sustenance and
extermination, you have taken origin by the glory of
the Almighty. The Almighty or the omnipotence is
beyond attributes. But we are all subjected to attributes.
Your foremost attribute is Sattva (goodness - purity )
Brahma whose main attribute is the attribute of rajas
(activity - passions), will originate from your navel.
From the middle of the brows of that Brahma, Siva
will be born, whose main attribute is Tamas (inertia
darkness). Brahma, by the power of Tapas (penance)
will acquire the power of creation and build the world.
You will be the sustainer of that world. Siva will destroy the same world. I am Devi Maya (Illusion -
personified as the wife of Brahman), the great power
depending on you for the purpose of creation.” After
hearing these words of Devi, Visnu went into meditation and deep sleep of contemplation.
3) Avataras (Incarnations). When injustice and lawlessness abound in the universe, Visnu will incarnate in
the world in various forms andshapes, and will drive
away injustice and will reinstate righteousness, The basis
and the indeclinable semen virile of all the incarnations,
is this spirit of the universe, All Devas, all human beings
and all animals are created from a portion of this soul
of the universe, which in itself is a portion. Brahma,
first incarnated as Sanatkumara and lived the life of a
Brahmin student of chaste abstinence. The second
VISNU
incarnation was connected with the creation of Me
earth. It was the incarnation as a hog to redeem ; c
earth which was immersed in the world of Kasataia.
The third incarnation was taken to create the sages an :
hermits. The Supreme God incarnated as the pare
hermit, Narada and taught Paficaratra, the vane
Sastra explaining the ways of observing ae :
Fourthly, Visnu took the incarnation of is el
anas (two hermits) and performed tapas (penanc Ja
dificult to do. The fifth incarnation was that of ae
who taught his disciple Asuri, a Brahmin, Sankhya i
of the six systems of Indian philosophy dealing Ee
evolution), The next incarnation was taken, accor we
to the request of Atri, as his son under the . aie
Dattatreya, Seventhly he took incarnation as he he
son born to Prajapati Ruci, by his wife Akati wit ho
groups of devas (gods) such as Yamas and_ others ae
sustain the Manvantara (age of Manu) of a “i
bhuva. The eighth incarnation was as the son of B ae
van Nabhi by his wife Meru, and the ninth was, ca
inner soul of Prthu, according to the request af £5
sages and hermits, with a view to change the ea! ‘ aty
such a state that medicinal herbs may grow in pe ft
everywhere. The tenth was, as Matsya (Fish) tle,
Caksusa Manvantara deluge; the eleventh, as phat
to lift up the mountain Mandara; the twelfth as ing
vantari, and the thirteenth was as Mohini (Charm! :
woman ). The fourteenth was that of Man-lion, af
fifteenth was that of Vamana, the’ sixteenth that vs
Paras urama, the seventeenth, that of Vyasa, the he afl
eenth, that of Sri Rama and the nineteenth was tha af
Rama and the twentieth that of Krsna in the dynash)
Vrsni. The twentyfirst was as Buddha in the peer
of the age of Kali. The twenty second incarnate’, au:
in the name of Kalki as the son of the Brahmin ae
yasas. Each incarnation is explained in places W
that word occurs. See under Avatara. ands
The avataras of Mahavisnu are numerous. Tho aha
and thousands of incarnaticns originate from + all
visnu as streams flow from a lake which overflows aja
times. Hermits, Manus, Devas, Sons of Manus, , sos
patis, all these are marks and portions of Mahav! ay nl
(Valmiki Ramayana, Bala Kanda, Sarga 153, “dha
Purana, Chapter 5; Valmiki Ramayana, Be apie
Kanda, Sarga 40; Mahabharata, Vana Parva, ene
83; Devi Bhagavata, Skandha 1;_M.B. Santi. yatas
Chapter 121; Agni Purana, Chapter 12; Bhagat ia,
Skandha 10; ‘Bhagavata, Skandha 5; Mahabhat 49;
Vana Parva, Chapter 272: Vana Parva, Chapter
Santi Parva, Chapter 339). Maha
+) Family life. Vaikuntha is the dwelling place of N™™ jp
visnu. Mahalaksmi is the prominent wife. It 1s se evs
Devi Bhagavata, Skandha 9, that besides Laks gnu”
Ganga Devi and Sarasvati also were the wives 0 “she
Laksmidevi has taken several incarnations. OP” ‘at
took birth from Khyati, the wife of hermit Bhrg4 on
this birth Dhata and Vidhata were her brothers: nich
another occasion, she arose from a lotus-flowet a gut
grew up from the sea of Milk. (To know more det
the wives Laksmi, Ganga and Sarasvati, se©
Ganga ). 0
There is none to be mentioned as the legitimate 14 pe
Mahavisnu. But Brahma is the first that ©° - onc’
Imagined as the son of Visnu. Besides. Mahav1$? game
created a bright son, by his mind. That son was
on

VISNU
Virajas. Sdsta is another son of Mahavisnu. Siva beCame amorous with Mohini (fascinating woman )—the
form which Mahavisnu took at the time of the churning
of the Sea of Milk. They led a short family life as a
result cf which the son Sasta was born. (See under
asta ).
5) Curses. Mahavisnu had cursed and had been cursed
on many an occasion. The most important of them are
given below: .
(i) The curse of Mahalaksmi Once Mahavisnu looked
into the face of Mahalaksmi and laughed for no reason.
Thinking that Mahavisnu had been making fun of her,
she cursed him saying “Let your head be severed from
the body.”
At this period an Asura named Hayagriva had done
penance for a thousand years and obtained several boons.
One boon was that he should be killed only by a man with
the head of a horse. Hayagriva attacked the devas (gods).
Though the gods fought with Hayagriva for many thousands of years they could not kill him. Even Visnu,
admitted defeat. Using the bow as a prop to his chin he
stood thinking, for years. In the meanwhile white ants
began to eat the string of the bow. When the string
was broken, the bow straightened with a sudden jerk
. ' severed from the trunk
and the head of Mahavisnu was sev :
and was thrown away. Vigvakarma cut off the head o
a horse and joined it to the trunk of Visnu, who instantly rose up and killed Hayagriva. Thus satisfying the
; ksmyJ come
need of the gods and making the curse of Laks
a se form and returned to
true, Visnu regained his original
Vaikuntha. (Devi Bhagavata, kandha 1). ered in
(ii) The curse of Bhrgu. The Asuras who were de ake i ;
the war with Devas, approached ceeon> nica Halogen
their teacher-priest Sukra, and soug nos st to do penance
was the wife of hermit Bhrgu. She began fo ©
for the destruction of devas. Knowing this Visnu aimed
his weapon, the Discus, at her and Hilled ieee aad
got angry and cursed Visnu 0 take birt a en ate
suffer the grief of separation from his dee tstcie
years. This curse was the first cause of the 1
- - . Bhr u, Para 4),
of Sri Rama. (For ee SO dantue King Revaniii) T, Visnu. Once ie
(ii) The curs of Vins. Once Tr caitsravas and came 10
Vaikuntha. Looking at the aarti vad his horse.
stood for a while enchanted by Doaatrt cursed her to
Mahavisnu was displeased at this, ae rdingly she was
take birth on the earth as a mare. say f the curse was
born as a mare and when the Heat tale see under
Over returned to Vaikuntha. (For ce
avira ).
(iv) The curse of Vrnda. See unde few in the Puranas
6) Contests and wars. Wats are, ees directly or indirectin which Visnuhad not participates in Aeale with i
ly. As almost all of them have sae ati given Hate,
various places in this book, they g the nave mentioned
. on
Only a few of the prominent am
Kaitabha are two
here,
d
i) Madhukaitabhas. Madl:u an Mahavisnu. They
(i) Ma h ear-wae oO Killed them. (See
r Mayasiva.
asuras born from the ay
tried to attack Brahma ape
under Kaitabha). « a notorious asura.
(ii) Killing of Andhaka. Andhaka va 7 en war broke
He was the minister of Mahisasvt naka caused havoc
ut between asuras and Devas; 7
VISNU
among the devas. At last in the fight with Visnu
Andhaka was killed. (Devi Bhagavata, Skandha 5).
(iii) Killing of Vrirasura. See under Vrtra.
(iv) Raku. For the story of how Visnu cut into two the
asura Rahu, see under Amrtam.
(v) Contest with Brahma, The story of Visnu and
Brahma making a competitive journey to find out the
crest and foot of Siva, is given with slight variations in
most of the Puranas. (For detailed story see under
Brahma, Para 5).
(vi) For the story of how Visnu confronted the asuras Nemt,
Sumali and Malyavan see under each of those words.
7) The weapons and ornaments of Visnu. The following
are the prominent ornaments and weapons of Visnu.
(i) Srivatsa. This is a mark on the chest. It 1s said that
this is the mark imprinted by the angry Bhrgu who
kicked on the chest of Mahavisnu. (See under Bhrgu).
(ii) Paiicajanya. This isa white conch. Even by the
touch of this conch man becomes wise. (For further
details see under Paficaja I). ,
(iii) The Discus Sudarfana, Vajranabha is another
name of this weapon. Visnu uses this weapon to deal
wich fierce enemies. This is a wheel with a hole in the
centre and thousand arms going out from the centre.
The outer edge is sharp. This Sudargana Cakra
is operated by putting it on the first finger and turning
it round, and releasing it at the enemy. Though it is
terrible for the wicked and unjust, it forebodes good to
good people and so it is Sudarsana (good to look at).
(iv) Kaumodaki. This is the club. The syllable “Ku”
means the earth. Kumodaka means he who delights
the earth. He who makes the earth delightful is Visnu.
As the club is the property of Kumodaka (Visnu) it is
called Kaumodaki.
(v) Kaustubha. This is the jewel of Mahavisnu. (Ku=
the Earth. Stubhnati=Pervades (spreads). Kustubha=
ocean. Kaustubha-obtained from the sea. This jewel
obtained from ‘ie sea of milk at the time of its churning, is worn by Mahavisnu on his neck. This is a red
Jacinth. eg
(vi) Nandaka. This is the sword of Visnu. It is stated
in Mahabharata, Santi Parva, Chapter 166, that this
sword was obtained from Indra.
(vii) Saraig. This is the name of the bow of Visnu.
This is called Vaisnavacapa (the bow of Visnu) also.
A description is given in Valmiki Ramayana, Balakanda, Sarga 25, as to how this bow was obtained. It
is as follows :
Once the Devas made Visnu and Siva quarrel with each
other, to test their might. The fight between the two
began. ViSvakarma gave each of them.a bow. The bow
of Visnu was called Vaisnavacapa; the bow of Siva
was called Saivacapa. This Vaisnavacapa is Sarnga.
Due to the power of Sarnga, Siva was defeated in the
fight. Getting angry Siva gave his bow to the King
Devarata of Videha. It was this bow that Sri Rama
broke at the time of the Svayammvara marriage of Sita
After the fight, Visnu gave his bow to Rcika. That bow
changed hands from Rcika to Jamadagni and from him
to Parafurama, who presented this bow to Sri Rama on
his return after the marriage with Sita.
(vili) Vazayantt. This is the necklace of Visnu. This
necklace, made of five jewels stuck together, is ‘known
by the name Vanamala, also. Visnu has a charioteer
named Daruka and four horses named Sdibya, Sugriva,

VISNU
Meghapuspa and Valahaka. Garuda is the conveyance
of Visnu. He holds conch, discus, club and lotus in
each of his four hands. It is said that the discus was
made by Vigsvakarma with the dust of the Sun. In
Visnu Purana particular mention is made about the
ornaments of Visnu.
J) The names of Visnu. The names of Visnu given in
Amarakoga and their meanings are given below.
1) Visnu. He who is spread everywhere.
2) Narayana. (i) He who lies on water. (n4ram =
water). (ii) He who had adopted Nara (human body)
in incarnations. (iii) He who enters the human society
(Nara) as Jivatma (individual soul).
3) Krsna. (1) of dark complexion. (2) He who does
Karsana (pulling or dragging) on the agha (sin) of
jagat (world).
4) Vaikuntha. (1) The son of Vikuntha. There is an
incarnation as such. (2) At the time of creation twentythree Tattvas (essences-elements) did’ not join with one
another. So Visnu joined earth to water, ether to air
and air to fire; Thus their individual existence was
made Vikuntha-prevented. By achieving this he became ;
Vaikuntha. (3) Vikuntha means wisdom (knowledge).
So Vaikuntha is he who has acquired knowledge. (4)
Vaikuntha means holy basil (a herb). So Vaikuntha is
he who wears rosary of holy basil. (5) Kuntha means
Maya—lIllusion. So Vaikuntha is Maya Maya or he
who is blended with Illusion. (the female creative
energy). |
5) Vistara‘ravas. (1) Vistara—tree—banyan tree. He
who is universally known as banyan tree. (2) Vistara—
a bundle of darbha grass. (Poa grass). He whose earlobe is like this. (3) Vistara = is spread—He whose
fame is spread everywhere.
6) Damodara. (1) Stomach is tied by a rope. (2)
Dama—names of the worlds. He who bears all the
worlds in his stomach. (3) He whose habit is dama or
self-restraint, is Damodara.
7) HrsikeSa—(1)The Ka-lord, of hrsikas—organs of
senses. (2) He who makes the world hrsta—delighted—
bristling with his Keéas—hairs.
8) Kesava (Ka-Brahma. Iga-Siva). (1) The Lord of
Brahma and Siva. (2) He who has killed Keéi. (3)
ue who has three Kegas (heads) i.e. Brahma- Visnu -
Sa.
9) Madhava. (1) Dhava-husband of Ma-Laksmi. (2)
He who is born of the dynasty of Madhu. (3) He who
has killed Madhu.
10) Svabhi. He who comes into existence by himself,
11) Daityari the enemy of Daityas (the asuras, demons).
12) Pundarikaksa. (1) With aksis - (eyes) like pundarika-(lotus). (2) He who dwells in the lotus, that is
the heart of devotees.
13) Govinda. (1) He wholifted up the earth assuming
the form of a hog. (2) He who protects the heaven. (3)
He who redeemed the Vedas.
14) Garudadhvaja. He whose ensign is Garuda (Eagle) .
15) Pitambara. He who wears yellow silk.
16) Acyuta. He whose position has no displacement.
17) Sarngi. He who has the bow called Sarnga.
18) Visvaksena. He whose army spreads.
19) Janardana. (1) He who destroys janana-birth
(birth and death) (2) He who had destroyed the
asuras called Janas.
VISNU
20) Upendra. He who had become the younger brother
of Indra by taking birth as Vamana.
21) Indravaraja. Younger brother of Indra. .
22) Cakrapani. He who has cakra—the weapon Discus
—in his hand.
23) Caturbhuja. He who has four hands.
24) Padmanabha. He who has lotus in his navel.
25) Madhuripu. The enemy of the asura named Madhu.
26) Vasudeva. (1) The son of Vasudeva. (2) He who
dwells in all living beings as individual soul. 4
27) Trivikrama. He who has measured the three worlds
in three steps. (In his avatara as Vamana).
28) Devakinandana. The son of Devaki.
29) Sauri. Born in the dynasty of Siirasena.
30) Sripati. The husband of Laksmi.
31) Purusottama. The noblest of men. h
32) Vanamali. He who wears thenecklace which reaches up to the leg and is called Vanamala. led
33) Balidhvarmsi. He who had killed the asura calle
Bali.
34) Karhsarati. The arati - (enemy) of Karsa.
35) Adhoksaja. He who is not discernible to the organs
of senses. .
36) Vigvambhz-ra. He who rules over the Vié va / world).
37) Kaitabhajit. He who became victorious ove!
Kaitabha. .
38) Vidhu. Expert in all things. of
39) Srivatsalaficchana. He who has the mark or scar
rivatsa on his chest. .
40) Puranapurusa. The earliest man, a
41) Yajfiapurusa. He who is remembered in yagas
sacrifices. |
42) Narakantaka. He who had killed Naraka.
43) Jalagayi. He who lies in water.
44) Vigvariipa. One who has the cosmic form.
45) Mukunda. He who gives salvation.
46) Muramardana,. He who had suppressed Mura. The
10) Sahasra Namans. (‘Thousand names of Visnu). i
list of thousand names of Visnu, is present in P adm
Purana, Uttarakhanda, Chapter 72. In Mahabharata;
Anus asana Parva, Chapter 149, also all the thousa?
names are given. Variations are seen in these two Iists- s
11) Other details (i) Mention about Mahavisnu gan :
in several places in Rgveda. But more prominence
given to Indra. Though Visnu is exalted in five Rgv© .
mantras (incantations), when compared with other g°
Visnu is only a lesser god. The story of ‘Trivikramé
hinted in Rgveda. But there is no mention about t es
incarnation of Vamana or Mahabali. Rgveda oP :
Mahavisnu only the position of a. younger brother
Indra. That is why the author of Amarakoga has gi¥¢
Visnu synonyms such as Upendra, Indravaraja etc. |
(ii) Mahavisnu was one of those who came to ae
ivalinga (Phallus) when it was detached and fell dow
at the curse of hermit Bhrgu. (For details see un?°
Siva).
(iii) Mahavisnu gave Subrahmanya as attendants iw
Vidyadharas named Vardhana and Nandana.
Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Stanza 37), ‘ine
(iv) Mahavisnu Fave Subrahmanya the necklace Vaij@
yanti, (M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Stanza 49)- ‘
(v) Itis stated in Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chap'*
11, Stanza 25, that Mahavisnu Stays in the assembly
Brahma, 7

OO
VISNUCITTA
VISNUDASA. A Vaisnavite devote
(vi) Mahavisnu showed grace to Uparicara vasu.(M.B.
anti Parva, Chapter 337, Stanza 33).
(vil) Mahavisnu once took birth as the son of Aditi.
From that day onwards he got the name Aditya also. ( For
details see under Aditi). For further details regarding
Mahavisnu, see under Viratpurusa, Prakrti, Purusa,
Brahmasrsti, Avatara, Amrta, Garuda, Laksmi, Ganga
etc.
VISNUCITTA. A neble Vaisnavite devotee, who lived
in ‘Tamil Nadu. He lived in Villiputtur. It is said that
he was the incarnation of Garuda. Visnucitta had another name Periyalvar. Andal who was famous among
the Alvars was the daughter of Visnucitta.
Visnucitta sang holy hymns in praise of the beloved
god. The hymns of praise he sang are called Pallandu.
He got the name Periyalvar or the foremost of the devotees.
Once at Villiputtur, while he was getting beds ready to
plant holy basil, he was attracted by a divine infant. It
seemed to Visnucitta that the little girl was lying among
the basil plants. He took the child home and named
her Goda. It was this Goda who became the famous
Andal later. Legends say that the birth of Andal was
in 97 Kali Era. Scholars say that Goda was born in the
middle of 7th century. There is another story which
mentions that Andal was born from a portion of
oddess Earth. .
‘ e who lived in ancient
€ this devotee who defeated his king
Cola in devotion to Visnu, is given in Padma Purana,
Uttara Khanda, Chapter 110. The story 1s as an
In days of old there was a king named Cola in un
pura, It was because of his reign that the country g
1 sacrifices.
the name Cola. He had -performed several sé
On the’ bnaniké of the river ‘Tamraparm, stood his 5)
Yipas (pegs on which sacrificial is were tle
ed like Caitraratha.
that the place looked 1 commanded
days. The story o
orshipped
Sn eee ee of gold and jewels such as —
Visnu by offering flowers ) ;
ip cadens and “prostrated before. Visn ches a Rae
At that time a Brahmin named Vaengeet ee water
city came there to worship; with Holy, pik ‘
as offerings. He worshipped with the lea rship by holy
bunches of holy basil. Because of his ie dimmed. The
basil, the king’s worship by jee ae you are a.poor
emperor got angry and et to worship Visgu., What
_ man_who does not know — holy basil fter mine of
merit has your worship @ on this point. At last the
jewels??? Both began to contest oD r ll get oneness
king said ‘‘Let us see who between - Pro cy
After saying this the king went angrae to perform a
oo Mdgala, ie mae slink was going on with
Sacrifice to Visnu. ic was 1
pomp and festivities. Visnudast a0 pilities. ;
devotion to Visnu to the best al prayer and meditation
Once Visnudasa, alter lg at ody took away te maa
‘rice- Be Mae ring that he wo
Picea og Visnudasa. hae 4 d_not think
miss the time for his evening DP) ag he cooked food
of pee food again. Next sg day also the rice
and went for evening prayer_O8 day after cooking He
was stolen. This continued se by in a hidden corner. Te
Os
food, Visnudasa waited c wie
saw a low-caste man who wa
s-and flowermmersed in.
re skeleton because of
VISNUDATTA
famine, stealing the cooked rice and feeling pity on him
he said, “‘Stop, stop. How can you eat it without any oily
thing? See, take this ghee also.” Saying so he drew
near. The out-caste was terrified at this and ran away.
On the way he stumbled and fell. Visnudasa ran to
the spot and fanned him with his cloth. When he rose
up the figure in the place of the low-caste was that of
the real Sri Narayana with conch, discus and club held
in his hands. Because of devotion Visnudasa stood benumbed. While the King Cola and the people were looking on, Visnudasa got into the divine Vimana and went
to the world of Visnu.
VISNUDATTA. Son of the Brahmin named Vasudaita.
The story of Visnudatta is quoted to prove that bad
omens at the beginning of a journey is a warning that
the journey would not be fruitful and that it would be
rather dangerous.
When Visnudatta became sixteen years old he decided
to go tothecity of Valabhi for his education. Seven Brahmin boys of his age gathered together and joined him.
Deciding not toseparate from each other, they started for
Valabhi, without the knowledge of their parents. When
they proceeded a little further they saw a bad omen.
Visnudatta stood undecided, but the others pressed him
on and they continued their journey. Next day by evening they reached a village of forest tribes. After walking
through the village they reached the house of a woman.
They got her permission to stay there for the night.
They all lay in a corner. Immediately all slept. Visnudatta alone lay awake. When the night advanced, a
man entered the house. The woman and the man
talked for a while and carried on sexual sports, and
they lay together and slept. A light was burning in the
room. Visnudatta saw everything through the cleavage
of the shutters, and thought. ‘‘I am sorry that we have
come to this house. He is not her husband. Sure! she is
a harlot.’? As he was thinking thus, foot-steps were
heard in the courtyard. A young man fixed his
servants in their places. Then he entered the house and
saw Visnudatta and his friends. The new-comer was
also a forest-man. He had a sword in his hand. He was
the. owner of the house. Visnudatta said that they were
’ travellers. When he heard it, without saying anything
he got inside and saw his wife sleeping with her lover.
With the sword in his hand, he cut off the head of the
lover. He did not kill the woman, who did not know
that her lover was killed. The forester laid the sword
down and lay in the same bed and slept. The light was
burning.
After a while the woman woke up, and saw her husband who had cut her lover into two. She stood up
~ guickly and took the trunk of her lover and placed it
on her shoulder and taking the head in one hand, went
out and hid them in the pile of ashes. Then she returned and lay down. Visnudatta had followed her stealthily and seen what she had done. He also returned and
sat in the midst of his friends. She rose up and took the
sword of her husband and killed. him with it. Then
coming out she cried aloud. ‘Oh dear ! These travellers
have killed my husband.’ The servants woke up and
came to the house and saw their master lying dead.
They tried to attack Visnudatta and his friends.
Visnudatta told them everything that he had seen, and
showed them the head and the trunk of her lover, hidden in the ashes. When they saw this they understood

VISNUDHARMA
everything. They tried the woman. At last she admitted
the crime. ‘They expelled her and drove her away. After
this the travellers returned to their homes. (KathAsaritsagara, Madanamaficukalambaka, Taranga 6).
VISNUDHARMA. A child of Garuda. (Mahabharata,
Udyoga Parva, Chapter 101, Stanza 13).
VISNUJVARA. A great disease used by people to defeat
their enemies. The antidote for Visnujvara is Sivajvara. In ancient days, in the fight between Sri Krsna
and Bana, Sivajvara was sent against Sri Krsna by
Bana and to prevent it Sri Krsna sent Visnujvara
against Bana. ( Bhagavata, Skandha 10).
VISNULOKA. Vaikuntha. It is mentioned in Devi
Bhagavata, Skandha 7, that this world is situated on
the top of Maha Meru along with the worlds of Indra,
Agni, Yama, Siva, Brahma etc.
VISNUMATI. The queen of the king named
Satanika. Sahasranika was the son born to Visnumati
and Satanika. (Kathasaritsigara, Kathamukhalambaka,
Taranga 1).
VISNUPADA. A place at the source of the river Ganga
See under Ganga.
VISNUPADATIRTHA. A holy place. It is stated in
Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 83, that by bathing in this place and worshipping Vamana, one could
attain the world of Visnu. This place is on the bank
of theriver Vipasa. It is mentioned in Drona Parva,
Chapter 8, that Arjuna, in his dream, had travelled with
ti Krsna to the world of Siva and had, on the way,
visited this holy place.
VISNUPANJARA. A Mantra (spell) taught to Devi
Katyayani by Siva. (See under Parvati).
VISNUPUJA. (Form of worshipping Visnu). There are
conventions regarding the form of worship of Visnu
and his satellite gods. The general form of that worship
is given below:
Laksmi, Ganga, Dhata, Vidhata, Yamuna, Navanidhis
(nine treasures), Wastupurusa, Sakti, Karma (turtle)
Ananta (serpent) and Prthivi (Earth) are the satellites
of Visnu. First you must bow before. Acyuta, (Visnu)
with all his satellites. Then worship Dharma (Virtue)
Wisdom, self-renunciation, Supernatural power and
Lawlessness, Ignorance, Want of Self -renunciation and
want of supernatural powers, and then Bulb, Stalk,
Lotus, Filament and pericarp of the lotus and, the four
Vedas, four Yugas (ages) and the three attributes,
Sattva (purity) Rajas (passion) and Tamas (darkness),
After this the three Mandalas (regions)of Arka (the Sun)
Soma (the Moon) and Vahni (fire). After this the nine
powers should be worshipped. Vimal§, Utkarsini, Jiiana,
Kriya, Yoga, Prahva, Satya, Kanti and Téa are the nine
powers. In the same way, Durga, Sarasvati, Ganapati
and Ksetrapala also should be worshipped. As the next
step heart, head, lock of hair, armour, eyes and the
weapons should be worshipped. Then worship the
conch, the Discus the club, the lotus, the mark Srivatsa,
the Kaustubha, the Vanamala, the Earth, Guru and
Garuda. With prayer and oblations offered to Indra,
Agni, Yama, Nirrti, Varuna, Vayu, Kubera, Ifa,
Ananta and Brahma, who are the guardians of the ten
directions and the weapons and conveyance and
Kumuda and the others (the four mountains standing
near the Maha Meru) and Visvaksena (Visnu) Visnupuja will be finished. By performing this worship of
VISRAVAS
Visnu and his satellites, one could attain all one’s wishes. (Agni Purana, Chapter 21)
VISNUPURANA. One of the eighteen Puranas. Visnu
Purana is the description of the activities in Waraha
Kalpa (the age of Varaha—Boar). There are twentythree thousand granthas in this Purana. It is stated 1n
Agni Purana, Chapter 272, that if this book Visnu
Purana is given as a gift along with cow and water on
the full moon day of themonth of Asadha, the. giver
would attain the city of Visnu. (For further details see
under Purana).
VISNURATA. Another name of Pariksit.
VISNUSARMA. See under Sivagarma. oo,
VISNUVRATA. A Vrata (fast or vow) taken thinking
of Visnu in mind. By taking this vow, one could get
what one desires for.
Worship Visnu, after bathing his image on the first day
of the vow of four days, beginning with the second day
of the bright lunar fortnight in the month of Pausa;
with mustard; on the next day with gingelly seeds; 0”
the third day with Orris root and on the fourth day
with all the medicinal herbs. ‘All the medicinal herbs,
means medicine such as Maéafici, Oris root, Castus,
Bitumen (stone juice), Saffron, Curcuma, bulb oe
Kacciri, Flower of Michelia Champaca and bulb 0
Cyperus grass. After bathing the image as given aon
Visnu must be exalted on the first day by the ae
Krsna, on the second day by the name Acyuta, on t
third day, by the name Ananta and on the fourth day,
by the name HrsikeSa. The worship should be pene
ed by offering flower, on the feet on the first day, © d
the navel on the second day, on the eyes on the as
day and on the head on the fourth day, and Candr
should be given oblations and exalted by names suc
as Sasi on the first day, Candra on the ject
day, Sasanka on the third day and Indu on the ae
day. It is ordained in Chapter 177, of Agni einai gt #
that the worship of Visnuvrata should be conducted .
this way. This isa form of worship observed by Kin8*
women and Devas (gods) . ar
VISNUVRDDHA. A King. He was the son of Tras -
dasyu. It is mentioned in Brahmanda Purana that Vise. |
vrddha who was a Ksatriya by birth, became a Brahm
by penance.
VISNUYASAS, Another name of Kalki.
details see under Kalki). —*
VISOKA I. The charioteer of Bhimasena. In the Bharat ,
battle Bhagadatta struck him and he fell unconsci0US’
(M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 95, Stanza 76). ‘a
VISOKA II. A prince of Kekaya. It is mentioned at
Mahabharata, Drona Parva, Chapter 82, Stanza 3, a
this prince was killed by Karna in the battle of Bharat:
VISOKA III. A Yadava prince born to Krsna
Trivakra. This prince who was the disciple of Nara
had written the book, “Satvatatantra”’ (Bhagava’®
Skandha 10), 4
VISOKA I. Mention is made in Mahabharata, Sabh!
Parva, Daksinatyapatha, Chapter 38, that Sri Krs?
had a wife called Vigoka. B
VISOKA II. An attendant of Subrahmanya. (M-””
Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Stanza 5)
VISRAVAS, Father of Ravana.” —
1) General Information. Vigravas was the son bor?
Thastya the son of Brahma, by his wife Havirbbuk,
Ihe son Vaigravana was born to him by his
(For furthe!

VISRAVASRAMA
Nabila (Idabida) and Ravana and his brothers by his
wife Kaikasi. In Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter
274, there is a story about the birth of Vaisravana
(Kubera) asson to Visravas.
The son Vaisravana_was born to Pulastya. Vaisravana
rejected his father Pulastya and served his grandfather
Brahma, Pulastya did not like this. He generated another son Visravas from half of his body. Visravas
tried to wreak vengeance on Vaifravana, who took
refuge near Brahma, who was much pleased at Vaisravana and granted him immortality, the state of being
the owner of. wealth, the position of ‘Lokapala’, connection with Siva, ason named Nalakubara, the city of
Lanka, the Puspaka Vimana, the lordship of the
Yaksas and the title Rajaraja (King of Kings).
2)Family Life. Kubera engaged three beautiful Raksasa
damsels, Puspotkata, Raka and Malini to attend on
Vigravas. Puspotkata had the name Kaikasi also.
Kaikasi gave birth to Ravana and Kumbhakarna.
Khara and Sarpanakha were born to Raka and Malini
gave birth to Vibhisana. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter
2/5; Verse 7).
VISRAVASRAMA. A holy place situated on the boundary of the country Anartta. Kubera was born in this
place. (Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 89,
Stanza 5),
VISUCIKA. See under Brahma, Para 12).
VISUNDI. A naga (serpent) born in the family of
Kasgyapa. (Mahabharata, Udyoga Parva, Chapter 103,
Stanza 16).
VISUVAT. The time, when night and day are equal,
is called Visuvat. (Visnu Purana, Améa 2, Chapter
VISVA. A Ksatriya King. It is stated in Mahabharata,
Adi Parva, Chapter 67, Stanza 36, that this King was
born from a portion of Mayiara, an asure. ea
VISVA. A sey ites of Prajapati Daksa. (Mahabharata,
Adi Parva, Chapter 65, Stanza 12).
VISVABHUK r eA story about the birth of five ae
on earth, in the form of Pandavas, is given 1n ahaa 196, Stanza 29. Viévabhuk
cape be hg | ae le four were, Bhitadhama,
is =e. them. The remal
ibi, Santi and Teyjasvi. ;
VISVABHUK II. The fourth son of Bihaspat oid
mentioned in Mahabharata, Vana Parva, i pie + rt:
Stanza 17, that it is this igvabhuk, who $1
; This Agni
stomach of all living things and diges's Seale T e
(fice) is particular! worshipped in ape
rhe 9 sa that the river Gomati is the we
eni (fire). Ae
VISVAC. hn asura. Mention 38 made in eet
Mandala 1, Anuvaka 17, Sakta 117; that
evinidevas.
this Asura was destroyed by the Agvin ¢ the prominent
VISVACT. A celestial maid She is one 0
ee a _ Once King
celestial maids such as Urva®t aS ae oped in MahaYayati played with Visvacl. It 65, that
Bhar. Rai Parva, Chapter 122, ats Ariuia and
Viévaci had attended the birth rete "the palace of
sang some songs. Her duty is aap Patva Chapter
Kubera and serve him. (M.B. sabna
_ 10, Stanza 11).
VISVADAMSTRA. An asura.
dang agian Santi Parva, cne
that this asura also had been a ruler 9° f
VISVADEVAS. A group of Devas. Dharmadeva
tion is made in
Ne 997, Stanza 52;
pthis world.
married
869 VISVAKARMA
ten daughters of Daksa, Visva was one of them.
Visvadevas are the sons of Visva. The Sadhyas were
born from Sadhya, the Marutvans from: Marutvati, the
Vasus from.Vasu, the Bhanus from Bhani and the
Devas who boast about Muhirta (auspicious moment)
were born from Muhiarta. Lamba gave birth to Ghosa
and Yami to Nagavithi. (Visnu Purana, Amsa 1,
Chapter 15).
VISVAGASVA I. An ancient King in India. He was
the son of emperor Prthu born in the dynasty of
Iksvaku and the father of the King Adri. By giving
alms of cows, he became famous. Visvagasva was a
pure vegetarian. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 20, Stanza
3; Anugasana Parva, Chapter 76, Stanza 25; Anugasana
Parva, Chapter 115, Stanza 58).
VISVAGASVA II. A King born in the dynasty of
Paru. It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Sabha Parva,
Chapter 27, Stanza 14, that this King was defeated by’
Arjuna during his Northern Regional] conquest.
VISVAJIT I. A King of the Anga dynasty. He was the
son of Jayadratha. (Agni Purana, Chapter 277).
VISVAJIT II. A King descended from Yayati. This
King was the son of Suvrata and the father of Ripufijaya. (Bhagavata, Skandha 9).
VISVAJIT III. The third son of Brhaspati. He has the
intelligence of all the living beings in all the worlds.
That is why he was given the name Visvajit. (M.B.
Vana Parva, Chapter 219, Stanza 16).
VISVAJIT IV. An asura. It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Santi Parva, Chapter 227, Stanza 53, that in
days of yore, this asura had been ruling over the world
and that because of his fate he had to leave this world.
VISVAKA. A hermit of the period of Rgveda. Once
Visnapii the son of this hermit was lost. The father
praised the Agvinidevas, who showed him his son as one
shows a lost cow. (Rgveda, Mandala |, Anuvaka 8,
VISVAKARMA. The architect of the Devas.
1) Birth. Vigvakarma is the son of Prabhasa, the
eighth of the. Eight Vasus. Varastri, the sister of
Brhaspati, a celibate woman who had attained Yogasiddhi-( union with the Universal Soul) and travelled
all over the world was the wife of Prabhasa. Prajapati
Vigvakarma was born to Prabhasa by Varastri. This
Vigvakarma was the inventor of innumerable kinds of
handicrafts, the architect of the gods, maker of all
kinds of ornaments, and the most famous sculptor, He
was the maker of all the aerial chariots of the Devas.
(Visnu Purana, Améga 1, Chapter 15).
2) Children. Though mention is made about many
children of Visvakarma in various Puranas, five sons
and four daughters are mostly spoken of. When Mahavisnu took the incarnation of Sri Rama for a stipulated
purpose, the devas took birth as monkeys in forests, to
help Mahavisnu. Mention is made in Valmiki Ramayana,
Bala Kanda, Sarga 18, that Nala a very big monkey
was begotten by Visvakarma.
The other four sons of ViSvakarm& are mentioned in
Visnu Purana, Armfa 1, Chapter 15. Four sons named
Ajaikapat, Ahirbudhnya, Tvasta and Rudra were born
to Vigvakarma. The great hermit and sage Visvariipa
was the son of Tvasta. Hara, Bahuripa, Tryambaka,
Aparajita, Vrsakapi, Sambhu, Kapardi, Raivata,
Mrgavyadha, Sarva, and Kapili are the eleven Rudras.
They are the [gvaras (gods) of the three worlds. It is

VISVAKARMA
said that in this way there are one hundred Rudras with
shining radiance.
The daughters of Visvakarma:—The four prominent
daughters are Samjfia, Citrangada, Suripa and Barhismati. The Sun married Sarijfia, Sun got three
children, Manu, Yama and Yami by Samjjfia. (Visnu
Purana, Amsa 3, Chapter 2). Priyavrata, the brother
of Uttanapada, married Suripa and Barhismati. Of these
the first wife gave birth to ten sons named Agnidhra,
Idhmajihva, Yajiiabahu, Mahavira, Rukmasukra,
Ghbrtaprstha, Savana, Medhatithi, Vitihotra and Kavi
and last of alla daughter named Urjjasvati. Of these
Kavi, Savana and Mahavira became abstemious and
well-versed in Brahmavidya (theosophy). By the other
wife three other sons Uttama, Tamasa and Raivata were
born to Priyavrata. These grew up to be famous and
gradually became lords of Manvantaras. This Priyavrata lived with his. sons and ruled over the country
fer eleven Arbuda ages (Arbuda=ten crores). In
spite of his old age, his faculties or his body did not
become weak. (Devi Bhagavata, Skandha 8).
Citrangada was the fourth daughter of Vi§vakarma.
Ghrtaci was her mother. The young and beautiful
Citrangada one day went to bathe in the river in the
Naimisa forest. When she got into the water the prince
Suratha, the son of King Sudeva came there. Their eyes
met. Both fell in love with each other. In spite of the
advice of her maids she succumbed to the desire of the
King. Knowing this her angry father Vigvakarma came
to her and said, ‘‘Since you have deviated from the path
of righteousness and abandoned your soul to a libertine,
you will not have marriage, and hence you will not
enjoy the pleasures of having a husband or child.?? As
soon as she was cursed, the river Sarasvati carried the
prince Suratha thirteen yojanas down along with her
current, Because the King was washed away by the
current Citrangada felldown unconscious. The maids
sprinkled the water from the river Sarasvati on her face.
Still she lay there as dead. Thinking that she was dead,
_ her maids went in different ways to fetch firewood and’
fire. When the maids were gone, she came to herself
and looked on all sides. Seeing none of her maids in
the vicinity, she felt miserable and jumped into the river
Sarasvati, and the current carried her down and pushed
her into the great river Gomati. Being aware of her
future, the great river Gomati pushed her down and
placed her in a big forest where lions, leopards, tigers
etc. lived in plenty. - :
A Guhyaka (a section of Yaksas) who was going
through the sky, saw Citrangada in the forest, and in
reply to his enquiry she told her story to him. Guhyaka
blessed her and advised her to go to the temple close
by and to worship Srikantheg vara, so that every thing
might end well. Accordingly Citrangada reached Srikanthesvara on the south of Ka4lindi, bathed in the
Yamuna at noon and went to the temple and bowed
before Srikantha Mahegvara.
At that time the hermit Rtadhvaja, well-versed jn
Samaveda came there to bathe. The hermit called
Citrangada and enquired about her. She told the hermit
all that had happened to her. Hearing her story, the
hermit became angry and cursed Vifvakarma. “Tet
that Vig vakarma who has behaved so cruelly towards
his own daughter become a monkey.”’ Then he called
Citrangada and said to her. “Good girl, go to the holy
VISVAKARMA
place called Saptagodavara and worship Hatakesvara
Mahadeva. Devavati, the daughter of the asura
Kandaramali the hermit woman Damayanti, ve
daughter of Afijana, a Guhyaka, and Vedavati cs
daughter of Parjanya would come there. At pe
time when these three young women meet togetner
at Hatakesvara, you will unite with your busbane
Being overjoyed at the words of the hermit, Citrangac@
went to Saptagodavara, lived there and worshipped Siva.
Rtadhvaja went on his way.
Vigvakarma, transformed into a huge monkey, bs
causing havoc and devastation in the forest. Once t :
five-year-old son of Rtadhvaja, called Jabali had gon
to bathe in the river. The Vi§vakarma monkey chase
this boy and caught him and taking him to the top ©
a Banyan tree, placed him close to the branches ane
tied him fast with creepers. After this the monkey oo
to Mahameru. As the second adventure, the monkey
separated Damayanti from her father ene,
Guhyaka. Damayanti was born to Anjana by ‘
celestial maid Pramloca. Hermit Mudgala had a
prophesied that this Damayanti would become pie
prominent wife of a King. The delighted Dane
was once about to get into the water of the holy “-
Hiranvati, with her maids when the Vié vakarma-mon y
ran to the spot and the terrified Damayanti jump
_ Inte the river and was carried down by the current.
floated down and got into a forest. It was in this one
that Jabali was tied to the banyan branches. Damay4 ds
saw Jabali. Each said to the other about the cruel dee af
of the monkey. After that according to the advice ari
Jabali, Damayanti went to the temple of Srikamthesvr
on the basin of the river Yamuna. After worshipP! <
Srikantheé vara, she wrote on the wall of the bp!
a poem about the misfortunes of herself and a
stayed im that place engaged in worshipping god. i
The next sattidintaifon SE the monkey hes with Vedavat
the daughter of Parjanya. Vedavati was bor? ile
Parjanya by a celestial woman Ghrtaci. Once W ef:
Vedavati was playing in the forest, the monkey saW_ ng.
He addressed her Devavati, intentionally mispr onoune
her name. She replied, “You monkey. I am to
Devavati, I am Vedavati,”’ Instantly the monkey rahe
her. Vedavati quickly climbed on a hibiscus Beh cle
monkey kicked at the tree and broke it, Vedavatl”
fast to a strong branch of the tree. The monkey Mle
the branch and threw it on to the sea. Every move a8
and immovable thing in the world thought a tree ing
falling down from the sky. Seeing Vedavati {4 If
down, a Gandharva_ said, ‘Oh dear, Brahma him’ f
- had said once that this damsel would become the ©
wife of Indradyumna, the famous hero, the son of Me
the great King: who has completed thousand yas
sacrifices) .”? ‘the
Hearing the words of the Gandharva, Indradyumn4 es
son of Manu, broke that branch into thousand P aby his arrows. Though the branch was destroyed, ane.
dyumna could not find where Vedavati had fallen: 1ked
floated into a part of the forest. All alone she ie (2)
on and on and reached the temple of Srikanthes¥? ad
on the bank of Yamuna, Damayanti who per
reached the temple earlier and Vedavati met each “ é
and talked about their experiences, Thus due ' “of
wickedness of the Visvakarma-monkey Jabali the aoP nd
Rtadhvaja came to be tied, on to the banyan tree J

when she had gone there at
VISVAKARMA
Damayanti and Vedavati to be staying helpless in the
temple of Srikantheég vara.
At this time the hermit Galava reached the temple of
Srikanthe$vara. He saw Damayanti and Vedavati and
felt pity on them. Next day Galava started for Saptagodavara to take a bath in Karttika. Damayanti and
Vedavati followed the hermit. They reached Saptagodavara and dipped in Puskara bath. Under water
they saw several Virgin fishes gathered round a whale
begging him for love. The whale was saying harsh
words to them rejecting their request. The fish virgins
again told the whale. “Don’t you see the hermit Galava
going about with two beautiful damsels. If this righteous hermit does not fear slander, why should you, who
live under water fear it ?”? The whale rephed. “‘Galava
doesn’t fear people because he is daring and blind with
love.’ Hearing these words of the fishes, Galava
became ashamed of himseif. So without coming up he
stayed under water. The two girls finished bath and
got on the bank, and waited for Galava. Visvakarma’s
daughter Clitrangada, who had reached the place
earlier, met the two girls. They told each other their
stories. “As Rtadhvaja had prophesied, Damayanti
the daughter of Afijana and Vedavati the daughter of
Parjanya have arrived.’? ‘Thought Citrangada. “If
Devavati the daughter of the asura Kandaramali, also is
come, I could unite with my husband Suratha. Citrahis time Devavati, the daughter
ngada became glad. At t \
af Rondaramtlt, ran to the spot, being chased by the
Vi<vakarma monkey. ne
The reader might remember that Damayanti had written
temple at Srikanthesvara
aP gs arse Bw or meARiGHOR of Jabali iat
had been tied on to a branch of a tree. At noon on that
day Rtadhvaja had gone to the temple at aoa
vara and happened to see the poem. Then only did he
understand that his son Jabali had been tied ah ee
by a monkey. By then five hundred years had elapse :
Rtadhvaja was aware of the fact that the only perso
ing Jabali f Iksvcapable of liberating Jabali, was Sakuni we ie “al
aku. Rtadhvaja reached Ayodhya instantly
aku. ‘Oh, magnty King ! hear me, pleate! ee
has made my virtuous and learned son ‘ale i, a A p he
and bound him on a tree, within the boundary Pie
kingdom. Nobody in the world except your son
me : P 33 1 m anied
will be capable of rescuing him. ami nage _—
Rtadhvaja to the forest. They saw the he
tree week bulky roots hanging on all sides oo oF da
top of the tree, on a lofty place, the eae the netentangled and entwined by. me gee "eemits son,
work of creepers around the body of the ther and cut
akuni began to send arrows one -_: ali bed up the
off all the creeper’s knots. Riadhvala, © Herea to his
tree. Seeing his father, Jabali bowed . xtricating his
father. Rtadhvaja was not capable © ee and tried
son. The prince put down his bow and a his body to
to untie the knots of the creepers that ae not do it.
the branch. Though a sturdy man ae edly and got
At last they cut the branch close a . as stuck to his
Jak ali down. A piece of the brane. a rece of lumback. Thus with his son Jabali Pigg Ae an
oe on his back and Sakuni bearing 2°"
XLtadhvaja came to K4lindi. rs
Riadhvaja, Sakuni and Jabali wandered eee aa, a
in search of Damayanti and the others. After
d arrows, .
VISVAKARMA
hundred years, with despair Jabali bearing the lumber
on his back, went with his father to Kosala. The king
of that country was Indradyumna, the son of Manu. He
welcomed the hermit with hospitality. Rtadhvaja talked
about Damayanti. Indradyumna claimed that he had
once saved a young woman by his arrows from the
branch of a tree. They all started in search of the girls.
They reached Badaryagrama, where they saw a young
hermit. From the conversation it was revealed that the
young hermit was Suratha. When he learned everything
he stopped penance and accompanied them. Under the
leadership of Rtadhvaja, they reached Saptagodavara
and saw Citrangada.
In the meanwhile Ghrtaci, sad and miserable, was wandering over the mountain of the rising sun, searching
for her lost daughter Citrangada. She met the cursed
monkey form of Vig vakarma and asked it, ‘‘Oh ! monkey !
have you seen a girl?” The monkey told her every thing
that took place. Ghrtaci also reached Saptagodavara.
The monkey followed close behind her. As soon as
Jabali saw the monkey he got angry and jumped
forward to wreak vengeance. Rtadhvaja checked his
son and told him the history of Visvakarma. The monkey
separated the piece of the branch from the back of
Jabali, who had been bearing it on his back for the last
thousand years. Rtadhvaja was immensely pleased at
this and asked the monkey what boon he wanted. The
monkey said. “Brahman, if you wish to give me a boon,
lease recall your curse. Great hermit !Iam Visvakarma
the father of Citrangada. I became a monkey because
of your curse. Let all the sins I have incurred because
of the mischief of a monkey, be remitted.’ Hearing
this Rtadhvaja said. ‘‘Your curse will end when you get
a strong and sturdy son by Ghrtaci.”’
Hearing this Ghrtaci rose up in the sky. The monkey
also jumped up and followed _ her. The monkey was
attracted by the beauty of Ghrtaci. Later, on the.
mountain named Kolahala, the monkey enticed Ghrtaci
and wooed her. She consented and they lived thus for
a long time. Then they went to the Vindhya mountain.
On the bank of the Godavari, a sturdy son was born to
them. This son was the strong sturdy huge monkey Nala,
who helped Sri Rama.
On the birth of a son Vi§vakarma regained his former
form. He returned to Saptagodavara with Ghrtaci.
GAlava also came there. With the hermit Galava at
the head, the priests made burnt offerings and began the
performance of the marriage ceremony. The Gandharvas
sang and the celestial maids danced. The first marriage
was between Devavati the daughter of KandaramAli and
abali. Then Indradyumna married Vedavati. Next,
Sakuni married Damayanti, the daughter of Afijana,
and lastly Suratha married Citrangada. (Vamana
Purana, Chapters 63 and 64),
3) Other details.
(i) Vigvakarma shines in the assembly of Indra, in the
form of a hermit. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 7, Stanza
nf The palace of Yama was built by Vis vakarma. (M.B.
Sabha Parva, Chapter 8, Stanza 34).
(iti) Visvakarma lived in water and built the palace o
Varuna. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 9, Stanza 2).
(iv) Visvakarma stays in the palace of Brahma and
serves him. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 11, Stanza 31 i:

VISVAKSENA I.
VISVAKSENA II.
VISVAKRT
(v) ViSvakarma once performed a sacrifice in Brahmavana. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 114, Stanza 17).
(vi) The aerial chariot Puspaka was made by Viévakarma. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 161, Stanza 37).
(vii) It was with an illusive ensign, made by Viévakarma, flying in front of the chariot that Arjuna fought
against the Kauravas at Viradta. (M.B. Virata Parva,
Chapter 46, Stanza 3).
(vii) Once Vigvakarmaé quarrelled with Indra and
created the son Vigvariipa with three heads. (See under
Vis varipa).
(ix) Vigvakarma made the bow called Vijaya and gave
it to Indra. (M.B. Karna Parva, Chapter 31, Stanza a).
(x) During the burning of Tripura, Vigvakarma made
a divine chariot and gave it to Siva. (M.B. Karna
Parva, Chapter 34, Stanza 16).
(xi) To the reception and feast given by Bharadvaja to
Bharata, who was going to the forest in search of Sri
Rama. who had gone to live in the forest, Vigvakarma
and Tvasta were also invited. (Valmiki Ramayana,
Ayodhyakanda, Sarga 91).
(xii) Visvakarma once cut the face of a horse and attached it to the headless body of Mahavisnu. That
figure was given the name Hayagriva. It was this Hayagriva figure of MahAavisnu, which killed the asura Hayagriva. (See under Hayagriva).
(xii) Vis vakarma should be dedicated in temples in the
form of wearing Aksasittra. (Agni Purana, Chapter 51),
(xiv) It is stated in Kathdsaritsigara, Madanamaficukalambaka Taranga 8, that Maya, the architect of the
asuras, was the son of Visvakarma.
(xv) — was built by Visvakarma. (Uttara Ramayana).
(xvi) Visvakarma once made a heaven for hermit
Atreya. (See under Atreya).
(xvii) Tilottama was made by Vi¢vakarma. (See under
Tilottama) .
(xviii) Vi§vakarm4 once turned the sun in his turning
machine, (See under Sarnjfia).
VISVAKRT. An eternal god ( Visvadeva) concerned with
offerings to the Manes. ( M.B. Anu: asana Parva, Chapter
91, Stanza 36).
An ancient hermit. It is mentioned
in Mahabharata, Sabha Parva Daksinatyapatha, Chapter 7, that he shines in the palace of Indra.
A synonym of Visnu.
VISVAMITRA. A royal hermit of immense attainments.
1) Genealogy. Descended from Brahma in the following
order Brahma—Atri — Candra —- Budha — Puriravas
—V ijaya—Hotraka—Jahnu — Puru—Balaka—Ajaka—
Kusga—Kufganabha—Gadhi—Viévamitra. |
2) Birth. Six beautiful daughters were born to Kuéganabha the son of King Kuga. The hermit Brahmadatta
married them. After this ason named Gadhi was born
to Kusganabha. Two children named Satyavati and
Vig vamitra were born to Gadhi, Satyavati was married
to Rcika; As he was born in the family of the famous
king KuSa, Visvamitra got the name Kausika also. His
kingdom was Kanyakubja. (Valmiki Ramayana, Bala
Kanda, Sarga 34).
3) Becoming a hermit. VisSvamitra and Vasistha were
two hermits who were hostile to each other throughout
their lives. A quarrel with Vasistha, persuaded
Visvamitra tobecome a hermit. .
(Valmiki Ramayana, Bala Kanda, Sarga 51),
VISVAMITRA
The hermit Vasistha erected his hermitage and did
penance in the country of VisSvamitra. Once, while
engaged in hunting Visvamitra saw Nandiniin the
hermitage of Vasistha, and wanted to have her. In _the
battle which ensued between Vasistha and Vis vamitra,
the hermit Vasistha came out victorious. The ashamed
Visvamitra gave up his kingdom and went to forest
to do penance. Vigvamitra became a royal hermit ©
great attainments. There were constant confrontations
between the Rajarsiand the Brahmarsi (King-hermit
and Brahmin-hermit). (For the detailed story of the
quarrels between Vi§vamitra and Vasistha see under
Vasistha, para 2). ——
4) Visedmitra and Harigcandra. The histories of Visvamitra, Vasistha and Harigcandra are intertwined as
triple string. Vigvamitra made Harigcandra, the m0
renowned of the men of veracity, go begging. |
Hariscandra and Visvamitra. Their history begins from
King Triganku of the Solar dynasty. |
Formerly the name of Triganku was Satyavrata. Aruné
was the father of Satyavrata. When Aruna was reigning
the prince Satyavrata was leading a wicked life. °
once entered the wedding hall of a Brahmin and carr re
away the bride by force. When the king knew this, a
expelled the prince from the palace. Vasistha, as .
family priest, was behind the cruelty on the part of, ¢ *
king towards his son. It was because of this that ViSV4
mitra crossed the path of Satyavrata. ~
Satyavrata went to the forest and lived like a low-07
man. King Aruna repented his rashness. Entrusting =
kingdom to Vasistha, Aruna went to the forest to do pe
ance. For twelve years there was no rain in the coun a
Famine broke out. Vis vamitra’s wife and three childre
were in great difficulty. The hermit had been engae
in penance. So the wife of the hermit decided to aa
the middle son for the sake. of maintaining the rest a
started for the market with her children. pole
the way Satyavrata met them and learned the W q to
story. He told her not to sell the child. He agree
give them food till the arrival of Vigvamitra. The 28°° te
ment was that he would tie the meat, obtained by pal
ing, to a tree outside the hermitage, every day. say t
vrata carried out the promise. One day he did nol
anything from hunting. He caught hold of Vasisl, i
cow which had been grazing in the forest and kille rt
and gave its flesh to the family of Vigvamitra. On o his
ing to know this Vasistha cursed him and change”,
form into that of a candala (low-caste). Moreove?).
he had incurred three sins such asstealing of a bri pe
anger of father and cow - slaughter, he came 1 wo
called Trisanku from that day onwards. Weighed do ed
by these sins, he tried to commit suicide. Devi app? ad
before him and gave him back his original form
his kingdom. oy
After the death of Aruna, Triganku assumed the ree is
Hariscandra was his son. After giving the country tO Ae
son, Triganku requested Vasistha to perform the sact as
to send him to heaven bodily. Vasistha said that MS ak
possible for him. Vasistha’s enemy Vis vamitra yen
up the task. He lifted Triganku bodily, up to i yar
cme eptied admittance in heaven and <f : f
and heaven:a d ‘ ode Tei —— aes
she nd. made Triganku stay there. ds the
mitra was keeping up hostile attitude towaF

VISVAMITRA
kings of the Solar dynasty. In reality it was not the
hostility towards the Solar dynasty, but it was his
enmity against Vasistha. Visvamitra did not like
Vasistha’s being the family-priest of the kings of the
Solar dynasty. So Visvamitra kept up an attitude of
antipathy towards them. This is the background.of the
quarrel between Harifcandra and Vi§vamitra.
Harigcandra took Candramati, the daughter of Sibi,
as his first wife. Besides her, he had ninetynjne wives.
But they had no children. At last according to the
advice of Vasistha he went to the basin of the Ganges
and did penance before Varuna. Visvamitra did not
like this. Varuna appeared and said that Hariscandra
would get ason. The king had promised that he would
give his son asa sacrificial animal to Varuna.
Candramati became pregnant and delivered a son. He
was named Rohitagva. Even after the lapse of a month,
the son was not given to Varuna. On several occasions
Varuna demanded the child; and Hariscandra would
give some excuses. Finally the king agreed to hand
him over to Varuna at the ageof eleven — after his
Upanayana (investiture with the Brahma string). The
boy completed his tenth year. Preparations were being
made in the palace, for Upanayana, when Varuna
arrived. The prince, who was aware of the fact that his
father would sacrifice him after his Upanayana, ran
away from the palace at night. Varuna asked the king
to hand over the boy to him. The king was In ae
perplexity. Varuna cursed the king that he a ae
the disease called Jalodara(dropsy). Thus the king be
came asick man. Rohitaéva heard from pet cere ke
hi ill. On many occasions he dt
ee , d before him in
return to the palace. But Indra _appeare
the form ae Brahmin and dissuaded him from
oing to the palace. sa te
— Palle Vasistha and asked ou - era
a remedy for this woe and misery. bie ae oh i to
him to fulfil somehow or other, the promuse ma
ved, ‘Sons are of ten types.
Varuna. The hermit continued. +, this. Sowtt
A son bought for price also 1s included in thi betas
is enough if a son is bought for price | and ee to se
Some Brahmin may be found, who will eerie 4 Peed?
his son. If you please Varuna thus, leet He instructThe King was delighted to heat a was willed his minister to find out any Brabrun found out.
ing to sell his son. A greedy alegre pi Bend He was
His name was Ajigarta. He, had 1° The minister
Prepared to sell the second son; SSE en
agreed to give him hundred, cows 1D F waging only a
Up to this time Vis vamitra ome am Solar dynasty.
Shadow war against the Kings of the e of war. The
From this moment he entered HP ee him to the
Minister bought Sunassepha and eS the: palace. He
Palace. Yigyamitra also arrived a crying pitiably.
syMpathised with Sunassepha wie W boy, and gave a
He asked the King to release Be ee the sacrifice
warning that if the boy was DO” ". e was doing
would be obstructed. The King said eee give VisvaSo to get recovery from illness, d him not to
Mitra a good deal of wealth, ee ce. These words and
cause any hindrance to the or anger of Visvamutra.
the misery of the boy kindled t ht him ‘Varunamantra
He called Sunassepha and She mantra when he: was
(spell) and told him to? epeat * that he would escape
lying on the slaughter-stone and
VISVAMITRA
death. Sunag: epha did as he was told. Varuna became
pleased with him and appearing before the King said,
‘“Teave Suna¢gepha and perform the sacrifice. You will
get recovery.” Saying so Varuna disappeared. Immediately the King was cured of his disease. At the order of
the King Sunaséepha was set free. Thesound ‘Jaya Jaya’
(victory) reverberated in the sacrificial hall. Sunagsepha
got up and asked. ‘“‘Oh great men. Who is my father
now? Some said that it was Ajigarta. Some others
argued that it was Harigcandra. Some said that it was
Varuna.” At this time Vasistha stood up and said.
“Oh, great men, please stop arguing. I shall give reply
in accordance with the convention of Vedas. When he
bargained on the price of his son and received the cost
Ajigarta lost his paternity. Thenceforward Hariscandra
who bought the boy became his father. From the
moment he had issued orders to bind the boy and place
him on the slaughter-stone, he also had lost his paternity.
The claim of Varuna to his paternity, because the boy
had been saved from death by him, does not hold good.
Any god will be pleased, when praised and glorified
with great laudatory mantras and will confer upon the
supplicant wealth, life, cow, land, salvation etc. There
is nothing unusual in this. But it was Visvamitra who
taught him the Varuna-spell in his pitiable and dangerous situation. So ViSvamitra alone has claim to the
boy’s paternity.’ *
Those who were present, accepted this decision.
Immediately Visvamitra took Sunassepha with him and
went to his hermitage. Hearing about the recovery of
the King, Rohitasva returned to the palace from the
forest. Harifcandra received him with tears of joy. The
King, with his wife and son led a happy life and ruled
over his subjects with justice and truth. At this time,
Harigcandra (of Kakutstha’s family) accepting Vasistha
as the main .priest performed the famous sacrifice of
Rajasaya (Royal) consecration with ceremonies and
festivities. With this the fame of Hariscandra spread
far and wide.
At this point begins the next stage of confrontation
between Visvamitra and Harigcandra. Vasistha once
reached heaven. Visvamitra also reached there at the
same time. The devas greeted both honourably. But
Vigvamitra saw that Vasistha was shown some partiality. This was unpalatable to Visvamitra, who asked
Vasistha. ‘‘What excellence have you, more than I ?”
Vasistha replied. ‘Have you not heard about Hariécandra, the King of the Solar dynasty ? Itis the noblest
dynasty in the world. The familypriesthood of this
dynasty also 1s laudable. My disciple Harigcandra of
that royal family has recently performed the sacrifice of
Rajasiya. I was the Supreme priest of the function.
This is a covetable position not attainable to many.
Moreover, there is none in the world, more truthful,
firm of character, more charitable and more liberal than
Harigcandra. This is a fact.”
Visvamitra got up angrily and argued that Hariécandra was not truthful. He staked all the fruits of
his penance to prove this. From that day onwards Visévamitra began to make moves to instigate Harifcandra to
deviate from the path of truth.
Once Hariscandra, while he was hunting, met a _ tonely
woman in the forest.. She was moaning. The King
asked why she was lamenting. She replied. “Oh King.
I am Siddhirtpini(a goddess who helps people to attain

VISVAMITRA
anything). Visvamitra is doing penance to possess me. I
request you to protect me.”’ The King promised her to
see that she was not subjected to the molestation of
Visvamitra any longer. After that Harigcandra went to
the hermitage of Visvamitra and made an enquiry. He
then asked the hermit to stop penance, as his severe,
intense, penance was harmful to many people in the
country. The King returned to the palace. Vig vamitra
got angry and stood up. Up to this time only a cold war
existed hetween them. Hostility became open now.
Vig vamitra began to make moves against Harigcandra
quickly. He changed a fierce asura into a hog and sent
it to the garden of Harigcandra. The hog destroyed the
garden. All the attempts made by the guards- to drive
the hog away ended in failure. They informed the King.
Ihe King mounted on a horse and with. weapons
started for the garden. Without. paying any heed to
the arrows of the King, the hog ran away. The King
began to chase it. The hog seemed to be near. Then it
was away, then in front of the King and suddenly it
appeared behind him. Then it would disappear
instantly. In this manner the hog played around the
King. After a while, the King was separated from his
army and was entrapped, all alone, in a thick forest. He
did not find any way out. He lost his way in the forest.
As he was thus walking slowly, he saw a stream of pure
water in front of him. Both the King and the horse drank
from the stream. As he was standing thus without knowing the way to return home, Vigvamitra went to him in
the guise of an old Brahmin.
The King honoured the old man, and told him that he
was Fiari$candra, the King of Ayodhya, and that by
chasing a hog which destroyed his garden, he had
reached the forest. He continued telling the old Brahmin
who had helped him. “You might have heard that
Harigcandra, the King of Ayodhya, had performed the
sacrifice Rajasuya. I am that same King. It is my vow
to give anybody what he asks for. If you want money
or anything for sacrifice or for any other purpose, just
come to Ayodhya. I will give you whatever you want.”
The old man_ was pleased. He told the King that the
jungle-stream flowed through a holy place and that
it would be better to offer the gift after taking a bath
in the river. The King purified himself by bathing in
the river and then said. *‘Sir, I am ready to offer gifts.
State your needs. It is my vow togive what is requested.
At the time of the Rajasiiya I acted so towards all of
you and took a vow that I would do so in future also. I
am glad because I have met you on the bank of this
holy stream. So tell me quickly what you want.?
Brahmin:—“Oh King, I have heard about your. fame.
Moreover there is nobody in the world equal to Hariécandra, born of the Solar dynasty, the son of Triganku™
in liberality. Such is the opinion of hermit Vasistha.
There is nothing more to know about you, oh,,. King,
who is such a man of liberality. I have only one desire.
The marriage of my son is being conducted. I do not
possess enough money for the marriage. I want only a
help for the same.” The King thought it to be a very
simple request, and promised to give the required
amount. Vis vamitra by illusion customary to Gandharvas
created a young man and a young woman, and showed
them to the King saying that they were his: son and
daughter. Then the Brahmin who was delighted by the
promise, showed the King the way to the palace,
_ paying its price. The Brahmin led the mother ain
VISVAMITRA
After making all arrangements for the marriage, Le
mitra approached King Hariscandra. The King aske
him what amount he required. “Give me your cn EGOr
with all the elephants, horses, chariots, jewels “i
wealth in it”, said Visvamitra. The King who ha
been led to this deception by Vig vamitra, having no £0;
agreed. Thus Vigsvamitra obtained the kingdom ane
everything that Harigcandra possessed. It 1s conven
tional that whenever a gift is given to Brahmins, a
daksina (monetary gift) also should be given along
with it. Otherwise the gift will be futile. The King
asked the Brahmin what he wanted as daksina. He
demanded two and a _ half Bharas of gold as ig
The King agreed to give that also. But where to e
this amount from, since he had lost his kingdom —e
everything ? Having sunk deep in misery due to t)©
deceit of Visvamitra, the King sat on the soil, cursing
his fate. Seeing this, the queen ran to him Nee .
While he was telling his wife every thing, Visvamiu
came there and said : +r
Vigvamitra :—‘Hariscandra ! According to the 8}
hand over your country and everything instantly.
must have the daksina of two anda half Bharas of 8°
also just now.” .
Haris candra :—‘“‘Sir ! According to my promise rece!
everything now. We are leaving the country arias eee
But since I have given you everything that 1 had, _
can I give you daksina ? Everything I had, has spd |
yours. The amount for daksina has yet to be procu! 7
So receive the gift now. The daksina shall be given
early as possible.’’
pia sida everything to the hermit, the King left oe
country with only the cloth he had been wearing.
ve
_ wife and child followed him. The hermit also al
_ ed the King compelling him to give him the dak
_ The King told him that only after paying this
sin
ce
would he eat any food, and that he would pay th
amount within a month. Viévamitra, unwillingly agree
to this. ris”
With his wife Candramati and his young son, Ha
candra reached Kasi. After a month Visvamitra C4
to Kasi for the amount of daksina. Finding 10 oe
Candramati said to her husband. “My Lord ! sell ae
some one and clear off this debt.”” The King with “and
agreed to this proposal. Because of their woe hild
misery, both fell on the ground and fainted. The © eal
sat near them hungry and crying. Vis vamitra: stood Mig
them compelling them to pay the amount. When ad
candra came to himself,-he sold his beloved wile *
Brahmin in the village close by. The Brahmin wa
bought Candramati was Vis vamitra. Harigcandra Id
not aware of this. After counting out a crore 0 8 ae
Pieces in a cloth and placing it on the ground ¥ .°
mitra caught hold of Candramati by her hair 750
dragged her away. He bought the crying child, “the
child, beating and dragging them along, like animé
They disappeared from the sight of the King.
ts - * t : ked
Visvamitra again came before Harigcandra and the
or the money. Hariécandra gave Vigvamitra, 4”.
money he got. The hermit was not satisfied. Visva™ nt
said that the money given, was notan adequate an Ace
as” daksina when the importance of the oreal sacl he
Rajasiiya was considered and that if he was to 8% ny
full benefit of the sacrifice he had to satisfy him

VISVAMITRA
giving him the requisite amount. ‘he King accepted
everything the hermit said without any objection.
Vigvamitra compelled him for payment. The King
requested for time. Visvamitra allowed time till sunset
that day,
As soon as Vigvamitra had gone Hariscandra walked
on with bent head, calling out. ‘‘Does anybody want
ine ? Will anybody buy me for price?” Instantly
Yamadharma came there as an outcaste and bought
Harigcandra. The name of the outcaste was Pravira.
He bought Harigcandra to guard the funeral ground
and to collect tax on dead bodies. Vis vamitra quickly
ran to the place. The outcaste gave Visvamitra ten
yojanas of land which yielded jewels, in the region of
Prayaga and severed his connection. Vis vamitra went
on his way. The outcaste King took Hariscandra to
the funeral ground. Day and night Harigcandra had to
guard the entrance of the funeral ground.
At this juncture Harigcandra’s son died of snake bite,
while he was playing with other children on the bank
of the Ganges. His mother Candramati fainted and
fell down, the moment she. heard about it. As soon as
she recovered, she lamented over the death of her son
for a long time. Then she requested her master for
permission to go and see the dead body of her son. cae
she was not given permission. She repeatedly pleade
crying all the while. Then the Brahmin, her master, got
angry and said. ‘‘You slave ! If your son it dead, let
him be dead. Is it any loss to you ? It 1s my money
that is lost. You go and do your work. If not I will
operate this whip well on you. Remember os ae
know the biting pain of this whip. Stop walling an
lamenting.”
Candramati persisted in her request to me el >.
and see the dead body of her gon. Not ony © but
refuse to allow her to see the dead body of her son, Tt
also beat her. With tears she turned “s mee n
was night. The Brahmin took his meals and “ay an
to sleep. Candramati was sitting at his feet Ee
his legs. When it was nearly midnight that ee othe
old Brahmin said. “Now you may 8®- gots ae the
funeral and return before dawn. Your usua a know
morning should not be left undone. If so, y
the consequences.” .
Hearing these, words, Candramatl tam 1° 2° 0 the
where the dead body of her son lay: a turned blue
grass dead and stiff, with the face and “ nh of a lightdue to poison. She saw that face mn = veel of the
ning. She cried aloud. Hearing the cry P did
t. Candramati
neighbouring houses ran to the a Some thought her
not give any reply to their questic vehi
to — a ra, Sine wanted to ill ag re es q
her by the hair, Some struck at wie funeral place.
her with a rope and dragged her to the ding there, to
They asked Harigcandra who bao a woman. Lne
cut her into pieces. He refused to "Harié candra a big
Outcaste King came there and giving ut her into pieces.
sword asked him again and again fo ©U t recognize each
Candramati and Harigcandra did Abe his master,
other. At last, finding it difficult to auoDe)
Harigcandra raised the sword to cut ne- ‘My son is
Then Candramati shouted. « You outcast: ¢ me town.
lying dead on the bank of the Ganges ae y me this
Let me bring his body and cremate It - ¢ here to be
much time. After that I will come and §)
‘Vig vamitra. She c
VISVAMITRA
cut into pieces by you.”’ Haris candra agreed to it. Crying
all the way Candramati went to the bank of the Ganges
-and brought the dead body of her son to the cremation
place. Seeing her pitiable condition Hariscandra went
close to the dead body and removing the shroud looked
at the corpse. Because of poison the body of the child
was blue and ugly and as Hari§candra and Candramati
had undergone so thorough a change they did not
recognize each other. But from her lamentation and
talk, he understood that the woman was his wife
Candramati. He also cried aloud. Candramati recognized her husband. Still Hariscandra said that if the
child was cremated without collecting the usual fee, it
would be deceiving his master. At last both of them
decided to commit suicide before the night ended.
Without loss of time Harifcandra gathered half-burned
fire-wood, and built a pile big enough to burn the
child’s body and for them to jump into it. He laid the
child on it and set fire to it. Hariscandra and Candramati stood with closed eyes ready to jump into the
burning fire. Then Brahma appeared there and prevented them from jumping into the fire. Indra and the
Devas showered Amrta (Ambrosia). The child came to
life and got out of the fire. The King and the queen regained their shining bodies and royal garments and
ornaments. The outcaste who was the master of Hariscandra was really, Dharmadeva. All the Devas blessed
Harigcandra and Vis vamitra returned the kingdom to
the truthful Harigcandra. Their subjects were overjoyed
at the return of their King and queen. After that Rohita
was anointed as the King of Ayodhya and the Devas
went with Harigcandra to heaven. (Devi Bhagavata,
Skandha 7).
6) ae and the brothers Rama and Laksmana. See
under Rama, Paras 9, 6, 7 and 8.
7) Weapon Training. Vigsvamitra had proficiency in wielding all types of weapons. He taught Rama and Laksmana
all that he knew about weapons. See under Astra. |
8) Cursing Rambha. Once Vigvamitra was doing very
severe penance. Indra feared him. So wishing to hinder
the penance of Visvamitra somehow Indra called
Rambha to him and said to her. ‘‘Rambha, you dress
well and dance before Visvamitra. Somehow his penance must be hindered. I shall take the form ofa
cuckoo, and help you by singing.”
Indra and Rambha reached the forest of penance. The
cuckoo began to sing and there was the atmosphere of
Rambha danced before Visvamitra. The
concentration of the hermit was broken. The hermit got
angry and cursed Rambha and changed her intoarock.
She entreated for redemption from the curse. The hermit told her that after ten thousand years a Brahmin
named Bhiritejas would touch the rock, by which touch
she would get her original form, (Valmiki Ramayana,
Balakanda,-Sarga 64).
9) Vigvamitra and Trisaiku. See under Triganku.
spring season.
10) Visodmitra and Menaka. See under Sakuntalé and
Kadaligarbha. mi
11) Cursing Vidyutprabhad. Once Visvamitra did penance
to obtain the position of Kubera, who employed the
celestial maid Vidyutprabha to obstruct the penance of
ame to the forest in which Visvamitra
was doing penance and tried to entice the hermit by
her beauty. But when she saw that her beauty did not
attract the hermit, she assumed a fearful form. Seeing

VISVAMITRA
this form, the hermit cursed her. “You shall retain this
fearful form and live like a giantess.’’? She requested for
redemption. The hermit said that when Sridatta, the
son of Kalanemi, touched her hair she would be redeemed from the curse.
After many years Kalanemi was born in the country of
Malava as the son ofa brahmin named Yajfiasena. A
son named Sridatta was born to this Kalanemi. Once
Sridatta happened to see this giantess in a forest and
caught hold of her by the hair. Instantly she got her
original form. (Kathasaritsagara, Kathamukhalambaka,
Taranga 2).
12) Stealing the flesh of a dog. Once, at the end of
Treta Yuga and the beginning of Dvapara Yuga,
there was no rain for twelve years. Famine prevailed
every-where. The people were in utter want and misery.
Hermits left their hermitages and wandered about. In
a crowd Visvamitra lost his wife and children and
entered a forest and travelled all alone. He entered the
hut of a low-caste (Paraya) and begged for food. But
none of them even talked to him. He again requested
for something to eat. Nobody cared for him. The hermit fell on the veranda due to weakness.
Visvamitra sawin the hut some decayed flesh and intestine of a dog placed in a corner of the kitchen. He decided to steal some of it to appease his hunger. The
Candalas slept when the night advanced. But the lord
of the house lay pretending to sleep. Viévamitra slowly
entered the kitchen, and opened the pot in which the
intestine of the dog was kept. The owner of the house
asked, ‘‘Who is that?” Vi§vamitra replied that he had
stolen because of his hunger. The eyes of the candala
were filled with tears because of pity. He said:
“Dog is lower than jackal,
That is what men say,
Of all the parts of its body,
the lowest is its posterior.”
Though he said so, he felt glad since he had given
Visvamitra food. (M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter 141).
13). Cursing the river Sarasvati. See under Vasistha,
para 2, sub-para 5.
14) Sons. Vigvamitra had many sons. Their names are |
given in Chapter 4, Anugasana Parva.
15). Visvamitra and Reveda. Rgveda, Mandala 5, was
composed by the ViSvamitra-family, Variations are
observed in the two versions of statements about Viévamitra, occurring in Rgveda and the Puranas. The confrontations between Vasistha and Viévamitra occur in
Reveda also. The last four sections of Sakta 15 of
Rgveda, Mandala 3, Anuvaka 4, are meant to scold
Vasistha. Here Visvamitra curses Vasistha’s family in
various ways. In the ‘Annotations of Sayana’, mention
is made that the disciples of Vasistha freed Vié vamitra
from the vow of silence, and that instantly these mantras
(chants) dawned in his mind. Though the enmity between Vasistha and ViSvamitra is seen in Rgveda, such
elaborate stories as seen in the Puranas do not occur in
Rgveda. But Visvamitra procured a prominent place in
Rgveda because this hermit rescued Sudasa from danger
and forded him across rivers, and took Sunagéepha as
his son. Of these two incidents the first is not given
much importance in the Puranas. Though the second
one occurs in the Puranas, the version is different from
VISVAMITRA (M)
VI SVAMITRASRAMA. A
VISVANARA. A King. For’ a time
VISVANARA
that of Rgveda. From this it is presumed that the storie s
taken from Rgveda underwent a thorough change before
they appeared in the Puranas.
16) Other details. —
(i) The famous hermit Galava was the son and discip
of ViSvamitra. (For further details see under iaalasas
(ii) It was Vigvamitra who lighted the torch is
Kalmasapada in his quarrel with Vasistha. (See un
Kalmasapada ). #3
(iii) Visvamitra earned Brahminhood by td),
(penance). (M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 40, i “—
(iv) Mention is made in Mahabharata, Adi een
Chapter 122, Stanza 51, that Visvamitra was pres
at the birth festival of Arjuna. «it?
(v) Kalmasapada killed all the sons of Vasistha ee oe
of the persuasion of Viévamitra. (M.B. Adi Parva:
Chapter 175, Stanza 41). Kausiki
(vi) It was at a place on the bank of the river - a
that Vig vamitra got Brahminhood. (M.B. Vana }4
Chapter 87, Stanza 13). ‘fice
(vii) ViSvamitra and his sons once performed a sact a7,
at the forest Utpala. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter
Stanza 15). with
(vill) Vigvamitra once drank soma (a liquor ) wis
Indra at a place called Kanyakubja. After that 1 riya
proclaimed that Vigvamitra was no longer a ik 2
but a Brahmin. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 87,
17). bal
tie) Once Dharmadeva came in the guise of Vasistre
and tested Vis vamitra, who remained there with — 3)
his head for hundred years. (See under GAlava, Panitra
(x) During the time of the Bharata-battle Vi8v2 stoP
entered the battle-field and compelled Drona to 190,
the battle forthwith. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chaptet
Stanza 35).
(xi) Visvamitra was considered the most pro
of the hermits of the Northern countries. (M.B.
Parva, Chapter 208, Stanza 33).
(xii) Vigvamitra was one of the hermits Ww
Bhisma on his bed of arrows. (M.B. Anusasa
Chapter 26, Stanza 5). | ors of
(xiii) Once Visvamitra talked about the dang” cy
bribery to Vrsadarbhi. (M.B. Anuédsana Parva,
93, Stanza 43). uty’
(xiv) Once Vigvamitra explained the secrets of
(M.B. Anugdsana Parva,Chapter 126, Stanza 35) +
(xv) Visvamitra was one of the hermits who -
Samba to give birth to an iron pestle, when the ‘Parva
the Vrsni dynasty drew near. (M.B. Mausala
Chapter 1, Stanza 15).
. A holy place situated
boundary of Kuruksetra. It is mentioned in et
bharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 83, Stanza 131, tha tus
who bathe in this holy place will get the s@
a Brahmana.
mine t
Gan tl
na Parv4
rse
u of
th
on .-
ha°
Manne
of
panks od
holy place on the _D®".
gran2*
The hermitage of Vis vamitra
(M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 110,
as
this King of
miserable as he was childless. But by the bless? wile
Iva, Visvanara got a son named Grhapati by — up
ucismita. Grhapati was destined to have life aad pat
to three years. But it is mentioned in Skanda Pura?
the river Kaué iki.
in this place.

VISVANATHA
within this short period Grhapati learned the whole of
Sangaveda and obtained long life from Siva.
VISVANATHA. A Sanskrit literary critic who lived in
India in the 14th century A.D. Sahityadarpana is the
most important work of this poet of Orissa. This work
on criticism in ten chapters, deals with all the aspects of
a literary work.
Kuvalayasvacarita, Raghuvilasa, Prabhavati, Candrakala, Narasimharajavijaya etc. are the other works of this
author. Most of these are not yet found. Kuvalayasvacarita is a poetic work in Prakrta and Raghuvilasa is a
great poetic work. Prabhavati and Candrakala are
dramas. Narasirhharaja is a historic work.
VISVAPATI. The second son of the Agni (fire) called
Manu. It is mentioned in the Vedas that this fire is_ the
King of all the worlds. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 221
Stanza 17).
VISVARANDHI. The son of Prthu, a King of the Solar
dynasty. He was the father of the King Candra and
grandfather of Yuvanaéva. (Devi Bhagavata, Skandha 7)
VISVARUCI. A Gandharva King. At the time of
emperor Prthu, when the Gandharvas made the earth a
cow and milked her for various things, it was the
Gandharva Vigvaruci who did the milking. (M.B. Drona
Parva, Chapter 69, Stanza 25) any 5
VISVARUPA I. A Raksasa (giant). Mention 1s mace
in Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter 9, ae 14,
that this giant sits in the palace of Varuna glorifying
the son of VisvaTrigiras. (For
him.
VISVARUPA II. The son of Tvasta,
karma. This Vigvaripa is also known_as
further details see under Indra, Para 7). % twetated
VISVARUPA. The wife of Sage Dharma. It i S ee
in Vayu Purana that from eee eee iS
named Dharmavrata was — il tien fot 1, Anuvaka
VISVASAMBHU. A fire. Ma
2, Sikta 24, states that this fire exists 10 water.
VISVAVASU I _ A brother of Parasuramas yar, He as
brothers named Rumanvan, Noche ae ©
vasu. (Brahmanda Purana, Chapter | See Adiesvine
VISVAVASU II. A Gandharva Bint... Puranas.
information about this King 1s taken fro ie. Prajapati
(i) The father of this Devagand a" M.B Adi Parva,
Kagyapa and his mother was Pra ba
47). tie ial
Chapter 25, Stanza 4?) uo visvavasu by the cle
maid Menaka. (See under Pramaqy Birth-festival of
(iii) Vigvavasu_ was age at os Stanza 22).
Arjuna. (M.B. Adi Parva, 40aP " Caksusividya
. Soma
(iv) This Vis vavasu learned from one i eratting "2
th eing all) Chapter 169
Cent es dle a art. (M.B. ala : ;
Stan ,; -
(v) He pice resent at the Svayamvaré , { marriage)
D r a IME B Adi Parva; Chapt?’ . I dia glorifying
rae stays in the pala za 80).
Set (M.B Sabha P arva, a narata Sabha Panvey
ie at 0, entione)s, that he stays in the pares ©
a ; c
Kubera praising him.
(viii) This Gandharva reé
performed by J amadagn.
90, Stanza 18).
(ix) Kabandha,
t the sacrifice
a
a recited a poc™ Chapter
(M.B. Vana Parva,
a d
the asura, who stopped Rama an
877 VITANDAVADA
Laksmana, was the changed formof Visvavasu by a
- curse (See under Kabandha).
(x) It was this Vigvavasu who played the lute in the
sacrifice performed by emperor Dilipa. (M.B. Drona
Parva, Chapter 61, Stanza 7).
(xi) Once Visvavasu asked hermit Yajfiavalkya twentyfour questions. When he got satisfactory answers, the
Gandharva returned to heaven. (M.B. Santi Parva,
Chapter 318, Stanza 26).
(xii) It was Vig vavasu and some other Gandharvas who
took away Urvasi from Puriravas. (See under Pururavas).
(xiii) At the time of emperor Prthu, when the earth was
milked, the thing the Gandharvas got were those befitting them, In the course of the milking Visvavasu stood
as the calf. (Bhagavata, Skandha 4). |
VISVAVEDI. A minister of King Sauri. This minister
wanted the King to be just. Sauri and his four brothers
Khanitra, Udavasu, Sunaya and Maharatha were the
sons of Prajapati. The main ruler of the kingdom was
Khanitra. The others were Governors of the East, West
North and South divisions of the kingdom. The four
brothers had a priest each named Suhotra, KuSsavarta,
Pramati and Vasistha respectively.
Vigvavedi gathered these four priests together and
created four wicked fairies and sent them against
Khanitra the King. The fierce fairies attacked Khanitra.
But because of his purity and cleanliness the fairies
had to admit defeat. The fairies came back and
attacked their creators, the four priests and Vis vavedi
who had planned the programme, and kilJed all the five
of them. (Markandeya Purana, Chapter 314).
VISVAYU. An eternal ViSvadeva (gods concerned with
offering to the Manes). (Mahabharata, Anu<dsana |
Parva, Chapter 91, Stanza 34).
VITA. A ball made of wood. The Kaurava boys played
with this ball and by accident the Vita fell in a well. It
ss mentioned in Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 130,
Stanza 17, that the teacher Drona recovered it from the
well by shooting 2 number of arrows, one upon the tail
of another.
VITABHAYA. A King of the Piru dynasty. He was the
son of the King Manasvi and father of King Sundu.
(Agni Purana, Chapter 278 ).
VITABHUTA. An asura. Mention is made in Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter 9, Stanza 65, that this
asura stays in the palace of Varuna praising and worshipping him.
VITADHVAJA. A King of the dynasty of Janaka. He
was the son of Dharmadhvaja and the brother of Krtadhvaja. Vitadhvaja had a son named Khandikya.
(Bhagavata, Skandha 9).
VITADRU. A YAdava. It is mentioned in Mahabharata,
Sabha Parva, Chapter 14, that Vitadru was one of the
seven Kings of the Yadu dynasty.
VITAHAVYA. Anothername of King, Ekavira, otherwise known as Haihaya. (For further details see under
Ekavira).
VITALA. A part of Patala (underworld). (For details
see under Patala).
VITANDAVADA. When arguments, which do not serve,
either to establish one’s own points or to cut the points
of the opponent, are employed ina debate, it 1s called
Vitandavada. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 36, Stanza

VITARKA
VITARKA,. A son of Dhrtarastra of the Kuru dynasty,
(M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 94, Stanza 58).
VITASTA. A river famous in the Puranas. Mention is
made about this river in Rgveda. Important rivers
mentioned in Rgveda are, Kubha, Sindhu, Suvastu
Vitasta, Asikni, Parusni, Satadri, Sarasvati and
Yamuna. These rivers were more important than the
Ganges in those days. Mention is made about the
Ganges only once in Rgveda. Perhaps the Aryans were
not acquainted with the Gangetic basin in those days.
The region from the rivers Kubha to Yamuna was
Aryadeéa (the country of the Aryans). The information
about this river Vitasta given in Mahabharata is given
below :—
(i) The river Vitasta is the same river as Jhelum in
Kashmir. The deity (goddess) of this river stays in the
palace of Varuna and praises him. (M.B. Sabha Parva,
Chapter 9, Stanza 19).
(ii) By worshipping the Devatas and the Manes after
taking bath in this river, one could obtain the fruits of
performing the sacrifice Vajapeya. In Kashmir, Taksaka
the King of the Nagashas a famous palace known as
Vitasta. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 82, Stanza 39).
(111) Once four hundred horses with black ears, owned
by Brahmins were caught in the current of this river
and carried away. (M.B. Udyoga Parva, Chapter 119,
Stanza 8).
(iv) If anybody bathes in the waves of the river Vitasta, with vow and fasts, for seven days he would become
as pure as a hermit. (M.B. Anusasana Parva, Chapter
29, Stanza 7).
(v) Once Parvati made a speech before Siva on the
duties of women, after receiving advice from rivers.
The river Vitast&€ was one of the rivers which advised
Parvati. (M.B. Anugasana Parva, Chapter 146, Stanza
VITATHA. Another name of hermit Dirghatamas. This
Vitatha was the foster-son of Bharata. (For further
details see under Bharata |] and Dirghatamas).
VITATYA. Son of Vihavya, who belonged to the dynasty
of Grtsamada. It is mentioned in Mahabharata, AnuSasana Parva, Chapter 30, Stanza 62, that Vitatya was
the father of King Satya.
VITI. A fire. It is ordained that the offering (Purodaga)
prepared for oblation, should be put in the fire formed
by the blending of the fires Garhapatya and Ahavaniya
with Daksinagni (a fire), (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter
225, Stanza 25),
VITIHOTRA I. A King in ancient India. Vitihotra
was one of the ten sons born to Priyavrata by his wife
Barhismati, the daughter of Vigvakarma. Agnidhra,
Idhmajihva, Yajfiabahu, Mah§avira, Hiranyaretas,
Ghrtaprstha, Savana, Medhatithi and Kavj were the
brothers of Vitihotra. (Bhagavata, Skandha a)
VITIHOTRA II. The husband of Sabari in her previous
life. (See under Sabari).
VITIHOTRA III. The eldest of the hundred sons of
Talajangha. When Talajangha was defeated by Parasgurama, he and his men went to the Himd@layas under the
leadership of Vitihotra and hid themselves there. They
returned when Parasurama had gone to Mahendragiri
for penance. (Brahmanda Purana, Chapter 89).
VITIHOTRA IV. A Kingdom of ancient India, It is
mentioned in Mahabharata, Drona Parva, Chapter 70,
VIVARDHANA
Stanza 12, that all the Ksatriyas of this country were
exterminated by Paragurama.
VITTADA. An attendant of Subrahmanya. (M.B. Salya
Parva, Chapter 46, Stanza 28).
VIVAHA. An air (wind) which blows very speedily.
This wind will be transformed to a fierce storm which
will cause havoc everywhere. At the time of the greal
flood this Vivaha will blow away the cloud etsy
Valahaka in consequence of which destruction and
devastation will become rampant on earth. (M.B, Santi
Parva, Chapter 328).
VIVAHA (MARRIAGE).
1) General information. In ancient India marriage a
considered to bea sacrifice performed in accordance w!t
social customs. Marriage was allowed to those who ha
completed education at the age of sixteen. (Samavartana). Father or teacher teaches the pupil the a
and Vedangas. When the education is completed the
teacher or father makes him sit on a seat decorate
with flowers, sandalwood etc. anddo Godanavrata. Then
he is offered Paficamrta (milk, curd, butter, honey a”
water). This is called Samavartana. With this his
brahmacarya ends, and he is allowed to marry 22
lead the life of a house-holder,
Marriage is a ceremony with four secondary rites A
Kanyadana, Saciyaga, Vivaha, Caturthikarman. If t
husband is dead, or lost, or has renounced the wor! :
or has become a eunuch or is expelled from society, t?
woman is allowed to take another husband. If the
husband dies, the wife should be given to the brothet
of the husband. If there is no brother she could acceP
anybody whom she likes.
2) Eight kinds of marriages. The woman and
should not be ofthe same Gotra (family). One cou
marry a girlwho is above seven generations on .
paternal line and above five generations on the mater
nal line. Eight types of matriages allowed in Manu
smrti, Chapter 3, are given below :
(1) Brahma. A man of good qualities and good family
is asked to come and receive the damsel. This ne
Brahma. The radiance of this marriage will give ¢
man prosperity.
(ii) Arsa. After getting a couple of cows from the
bridegroom the bride is given to him.
(iii) Pra@japatya. The virgin is given to the man, W}°
had requested for her :hand.as a duty.
(iv) Daiva. The virgin is offered to the master who }
engaged in performing a sacrifice.
(v) Géandharva. Marriage between a man and a wom"
with equal love on either part.
(vi) Asura, Giving money in return for the damsel
and marrying her. This type is mean,
(vii) Raksasa. Carrying the damsel away by fight oe
force.
mat
ld
(viii) Paisaca, Marrying a damsel] when she is sleep! ng
or lying unconscious.
, sabha Parva, Chapter 4, Se
5 Was a prominent member 0
assembly of Yudhisthira. . =

VIVASVAN 879 VIVIMSATI
VIVASVAN I. The Sun.
Samjfia. There is another story that these two persons.
1) General information. Sirya (Sun) has a large number
of synonyms. But prominence is given to two of them,
Martanda and Vivasvan in the Puranas. Twelve devas
were born to Prajapati KaSyapa by his wife Aditi. As
these twelve were the sons of Aditi they were called
Adityas. The Dvadasadityas (the twelve Adityas) are
Visnu, Sakra, Aryaman, Dhata, Tvasta, Pisa Vivasvan,
Savita, Mitra, Varuna, Amsu and Bhaga. These twelve
Adityas were, in the previous Manvantara, (Age of
Manu) of Manu Caksusa, twelve Devas called the
Tusitas. When the Caksusa Manvantara came to an
end and the Vaivasvata Manvantara was about to
begin, the twelve Tusitas met together and after a consultation, they took birth as the sons of Aditi. In this
birth they were known by the name Dvadasadityas.
(Visnu Purana, Amga 1, Chapter 15).
2) The name Martanda. As Aditi was pregnant, Candra
went to the hermitage asking for alms. Due to her difficulties of pregnancy Aditi was not in a position to rise
up instantly and greet the visitor. Candra thought that
it was due to disrespect. So he cursed her. Let the
child in your womb die.”’ At this Aditi became miserable. Kagyapa saw her crying incessantly and asked for
the cause. Aditi told him all that had happened.
Kaégyapa blessed her and said that the infant would not
die. Thus the child which was lying dead in the womb
came to life again. As the ‘anda’ (egg-embryo) of
Vivasvan went mrta (died) by the curse of Candra, he
came to be called Martanda (he who has anda whic
has become mrta). When the child was born he was
given the name Vivasvan. on 4
3) Family life. Vivasvan married Samjna, the daughter
of Viévakarma. The first child born to Vivasvan by
Samjfia was Vaivasvata Manu. The Surya (Solar)
dynasty begins from this Vaivasvata Manu. Sane
again gave birth to two children Yama and Yami. : =
finding it difficult te bear the fierce brightness 2 he
sun Sarhjfia gave her place to her maid Chayaot eee
called Savarna, and went to — the house of her enn
Vigvakarma did not like this action on the part. of his
njfia d went
uchter. So Samjfia took the: form of a mare an
. ile pastures of North Kuru. Thinking en Oe
his wife Sarmjfia, Vivasvan went to bed wit : iho i
conceived and gave birth to two sons, and a ug ¥
The sons were named Savarnl and Sani and t ~ aug er
was named Tapati. Chaya loved her own chil Sea é.
The children of anne Mag ad in “i i a nes
is leg to kick her. “Le 3
Hee Pied him. The miserable Yama i his
father and said. ‘‘Father, this mother hates us and loves
Savarni and Sani more. It is true that I ited up ray
leg. But my leg did not touch mother's Beas ather, :
request you to pardon the wrong I have done because 0
my ignorance. Have pity on me and tell me how to save
my leg from breaking.”’ Vivasvan saidto Yama that his
but because of the curse worms
leg would nae Oe ae n understood that Chaya
bite. his leg. Vivasva a: yi
would : the real mother. He wen! to Visvakarma.
was no on his turning machine and
Visvakarma put Versa | htness. Vivasvan who was
ened his brightness. age:
a nl fo eniié by turning; found out ee Se
oe vd approache her. But ne er to be
ene bails else she moved away from ae ad : Ae of
wile two male persons were born from the nostrils
were the Agvinidevas. Vivasvan and Sarjiia came home.
As a retribution for the wrong he had done, Yama
ruled over his subjects justly and earned the name
Dharmaraja. (Vamana Purana, Chapter 21; Bhavisya
Purana, Chapter 47; Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter
alae
4) Some details about Vivasvan. (1) In Mahabharata,
Vana Parva, Chapter 3, the 108 names of Vivasvan
are given.
(ii) Vivasvan lived in this world and defeated all his
enemies. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 315, Stanza 19).
(iii) Vivasvan performed sacrifice in strict accordance
with the instructions given in the Vedas and gave as
Daksina (gift) to the priest, Prajapati Kasyapa, the
southern quarter. From that day onwards the south
got the name Daksinadisa. (M.B. Udyoga Parva,
Chapter 109, Stanza 1).
(iv) In days of yore Mahavisnu advised Vivasvan
“Anas varatakarma-yoga’’. Vivasvan advised this art to
his son Vaivasvata Manu. (M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter
28, Stanza |). 7
(v) Vivasvan is included among the twentyeight Prajapatis. (M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter 334, Stanza 36).
(vi) He learned from Mahavisnu Satvatadharma and
taught his son Vaivasvata Manu the same in Tretayuga.
(M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter 348, Stanza 50).
(vii) The Asvinikumaras, Nasatya and Dasra, are the
sons of Vivasvan. They were born through the nose of
his wife Sarnjfia (M.B. Anusdsana Parva, Chapter 150,
Stanza 17).
VIVASVAN II. An asura. Mention is made in Mahabharata. Udyoga Parva, Chapter 105, Stanza 12, that
this asura was killed by Garuda.
VIVASVAN III. An eternal god concerned with offerings to the Manes. (M.B. Anusasana Parva, Chapter 91,
Stanza 31).
VIVASVAN IV. The first human being who performed
sacrifice. This Vivasvan is considered to be the father
of Manu and Yama. (Rgveda 8.52; 10; 14, 16). In
Taittiriyasamhita, mention is made that people of the
earth are the children of this Vivasvan. (Taittiriya
Samhita, 6.5. 6).
VIVIDA. An asura who was the follower of Karhsa. It is
mentioned in Bhagavata, Skandha 10, that the asuras
Pralambaka, Canira, Trnavarta, Mustika, Aristaka,
Keéi, Dhenuka, Agha, Vivida and some others had
been the followers of Karnsa who caused havoc among
the people.
VIVIKTA. A king of Kusadvipa. He was the son of
Hiranyaretas. (Bhagavata, Skandha 5).
VIVIMSA. The son of king Virméa of the Solar dynasty.
Viméa had fifteen sons beginning with Khaninetra.
(M.B. Asvamedhika Parva, Chapter 4) .
VIVIMSATI. A son of Dhrtarastra. The following information about him is given in Mahabharata.
(i) This prince was present at the Svayamvara marriage
of Draupadi.
(ii) He was caught hold of and bound by the Gandharvas in’‘Dvaitavana (a forest). (See under Ghosayatra).
iii) In the battle between the Viratas and the Kauravas following the stealing of cows, this VivimSati, was
defeated by Arjuna. He ran away from the battle-field.
(M.B. Virata Parva, Chapter 61, Stanza 43).

VIVINDHYA
(iv) In the battle of Bharata, Vivirhsati confronted
Bhimasena and Sutasoma and was killed. (M.B. Drona
Parva, Chapter 25, Stanza 93).
VIVINDHYA. Anasura. Mention is madein Mahabharata
Vana Parva, Ch. 16, Stanza 22, that this asura fought
with Carudesna, the son of Rukmini and was killed.
VIVITSU. One of the hundred sons of Dhrtarastra. He
was killed by Bhimasena in the battle of Bharata. (M.B.
Karna Parva, Chapter 51, Stanza 12).
VIYAMA. One of the three sons of the hermit Satagrnga.
He killed Sudeva, the commander of the army of Ambarisa and he also was killed in a battle. (M.B. Santi
Parva, Daksinatya Patha, Chapter 98).
VIYATI. A son of Nahusa. (Bhagavata, Skandha 9;
Visnu Purana, Chapter 4).
VRAJA. A king born in the family of Manu Svayambhuva.
He was the son of Havirdhana. Six sons named Pracinabarhis, Sukra, Gaya, Krsna, Vraja and Ajina, were born
to Havirdhana by his wife Dhisana. (Agni Purana,
Chapter 16). |
VRAJANA, Aking born to emperor Ajamidha by his wife
Keéini. Itisstatedin Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter
94, Stanza 31, that he was the brother of Jahnu and
Ripina. _
VRAJIRAVAN. (VRJINAVAN). A king of the Yaduclan. He was the son of Krostu and father of KuSsanku
(Bhagavata, Skandha 9).
VRATA. Controls ordained by Vedic Samhitas are called
Vratas. It is known as tapas (penance) also. Vratas
are Avadama etc. Whenit involves mortifications of the
body (tapas) it is called tapas or penance. Controlling
the organs of sense is called niyama (control). Vrata,
fast and restraining or control are always good. (Agni
Purana, Chapter 175).
VRDDHAGARGYA. An ancient hermit. Mention is
made in Mahabharata, AnuSasana Parva, Chapter 125,
Stanza 77, that this hermit had conversed with the Manes
about offerings made to them. :
VRDDHAKANYA,. Daughter of the hermit named
Kunigarga. (For further details see under Kunigarga).
VRDDHAKSATRA I. The father of Jayadratha, the king
of Sindhu, (See under Jayadratha I).
VRDDHAKSATRA II. A king born in the Puru dynasty.
He favoured the Pandavas. It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Drona Parva, Chapter 200, Stanza 73, that in
the Bharata battle, Ag vatthama killed him.
VRDDHAKSATRA III. A king of the Vrsni dynasty.
This king took the side of the Pandavas in the Bharata
battle and was killed by Balhika. (M.B. Drona Parva
Chapter 24, Stanza. 49). °
VRDDHAKSEMA. The king of the country Trigarta.
He was the father of Susarma. (M.B. Adi Parva,
Chapter 185, Stanza 9). |
VRDDHASARMA. One of the five sons, born to the king
Ayus by his wife Svarbhant. The remaining four sons
were Nahusa, Raji, Gaya and Anenas. (M.B. Adi
Parva, Chapter 75, Stanza 25), |
VRDDHIKA. A kind of goblin. It is mentioned in MahaBharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 231, Stanza 16, that
once the semen of Siva fell scattered over the trees and
that these goblins were born from that. Human flesh is
the food of these goblins. It is said those who want
children need only worship these Vrddhikas.
VRIHIDRAUNIKA PARVA. A sub-section of Vana
Parva, comprising Chapters 259 to 261,
VRKA V. A warrior who fought on the side of a
VRKALA
VRJA. A hermit who was born in the family of emperor
Prthu. Antardhana and Vadi were the two sons 0
Prthu. A son named Havirdhana was born to Antardhana by his wife Sikhandini. Dhisana who was born
in the family of Agni, became the wife of Havirdhana. Pracinabarhis, Sukra, Gaya, Krsna, VrJa and
Ajina were the six sons of Havirdhana by Dhisana.
Of these, Pracinabarhis becamea great Prajapati.
(Visnu Purana, Arnéa |, Chapter 14). _
VRJINIVAN. The son of Krosta who was born in the
family of Manu. He was the father of hermit Usangu
(M.B. Anugasana Parva, Chapter 147, Stanza 23).
VRKA I. A son born to Dhrstaketu, the king of Kekaya
by his wife Dirva, (Bhagavata, Skandha 9).
VRKA II. Ason of Sri Krsna. born by his wife Mitravinda. (Bhagavata, Skandha 10). ™
VRKAIII. An asura. This asura wanted to bring ¢
Devas under his control. ‘‘How to achieve it? The i
way is to please one of the three god-heads. ‘
asura saw Narada and asked him which of the thre
god-heads could easily be pleased. Narada repjie =
that it was Siva. Vrka resolved to please Siva and Dl
gan to do penance. He cut each of his organs and o sit
ed it in the fire as oblation. At Jast when ioe a
was beginning to cut his head to offer it in fire, Ng
made his appearance, and asked him what his oe
was. The boon he requested for, was that any one W 1
head he touched with his finger should die instantly:
Siva granted that boon. » cell
The asura decided to try the boon, on the giver oon
first. Terrified at this, Siva began to run. The <i
chased him. At last Siva sought protection from Vie -
Assuming the form of a boy, Mahavisnu stood OB a:
way and stopped Vrkdsura, who was running after >? -
The boy asked him why he was running. The |
told the boy everything. Then the boy laughed —
said “Oh ! Asura ! What Siva said was a lie. He bas an
divine power now. He was makingfun of you. Not try
ant would die by the touch of your fingers. You J" ‘ the
on your head and see for yourself.” Hearing t)*
asura became dejected. He thought what the boy ° th
was true. The poor creature touched his own hea fell
his finger. The moment he touched his head, he has
down dead. (Bhagavata, Skandha 10). This story 16,
similarity with that of Bhasmasura. (See U”
Bhasmasura) Adi
VRKA IV. Aking. It is stated in Mahabharata,
Parva, Chapter 185, Stanza 10, that this king h adipresent atthe Svayarhvara (marriage) of Dravi ap”
Mention is made in Mahabharata, Karna Parva, C nter 25, Stanza 16, that this king was killed by 2 ™°
tain King in the battle of Bharata. €
e
Pandavas. He was killed. by the teacher Drona 1 ls
battle of Bharata. (M. B. Drona Parva, Chapte?
Stanza 16). ‘ane
VRKA VI. An ancient King who was a pure vegetari?
(M. B. Anufasana Parva, Chapter.115, Stanza 6
wife
VRKA VII. One of the sons born to Sura by his eek
Marisa. Vrka married Diarvaksi. Two sons 1°" oa
- ava
ag — were born to the couple. (Bhag@’
bao A grandson of Dhruve who was the 5°” ere
ttanapada. T'wo sons named Sisti and Bhavy4 ife
born to Dhruva by his wife Sambha. Succhaya, ¢ ‘

VRKATEJAS
of Sisti gave birth to five sinless sons named Ripu,
Ripufijaya, Vipra, Vrkala and Vrkatejas. (Visnu
Purana, Améga 1, Chapter 13).
VRKATEJAS. A brother of Vrkala. (See under Vrkala ).
VRKSA (8S). (TREES). It is stated in Valmiki Ramayana, Aranya Kanda, Sarga 14, Stanza 29, as. follows
about the origin of Vrksas (trees).
Prajapati Kagyapa married Anala, the. daughter of
Daksa. Trees yielding good fruits were given birth to by
Anala.
VRKSAPRATISTHA. The ancient Indians believed
that consecration of Trees and gardens ( parks) were
means of remission of sins and attainment of heaven. As
the consecration of trees is a divine ritual it has to be
performed as ordained in the Vedas. The rites are given
below:
As the first item of the consecration ceremony of a iree,
besmear it witb all kinds of medicinal herbs, and adorn
it with flour and flowergarlands and make it wear good
clothes. Then make on it perforations for the ears with
golden needle, and anoint ointment for eyes with golden
wire, Place on the dais prepared at the foot of each
tree, seven fruits and pots (Kalaégas) and make ‘invocations. After this, offerings and sacrifices to Indra and
the other gods should be given. Again invocation
should be made with burnt offerings to Vanaspati. From
the middle of the trees alms of cows should be given.
Brahmins should bathe the trees with pots placed on the
dais, reciting spells and incantations of anointment, and
of Rg, Yajur and Sama Vedas along with | instrumental
music. The owner of the trees should be given bathing
water by himself. Then the owner should give cows,
lands, ornaments and clothes as gift. .
After having done so much, food with milk should be
given for four days and burnt offerings should be made
with gingelly etc. and butea. The gift to the priest
should be double the gifts given to others. (Agni Purana
Chapter 70). . .
VRKSAVASI. A Yaksa. Mention is made 1
bharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter 10, Stanza 11,
Yaksa lives in the palace of Kubera. :
VRKSAYURVEDA. The name Vrksayurveda is used for
the conventional rules about planting trees near i
ling places. According to Vrksayurveda it 1s pone 2
plant Itti (wave-leafed fig-tree) on the ag at eo
the house. Ficus Indica (banyan ) should be planta on
the east. Mango tree on the south and Ficus Religiosa
(banyan ) on the west of the house. Thorny trees should
grow up by tiemselves on the south side of the house.
Carden should be close to the house. Svati, Hasta,
Rohini, Sravana and Mila are considered to be good
stars “for planting trees. Stars good for taking trees,
across river or in vehicle and to take down into ponds,
are Hasta, Magha, Aévini, Pusyam and Jyestha.
The stars ‘mentione good for planting Neem
ia Asoca Mimosasirisha, Acacia
een jones nd.pomegranate tree.
n Mahathat this
Ardra,
d above are
Calophyllum,
sa
Priyangu, Syzygium, ein ld be twenty rods. This
The distance between trees show ae, is | in But it
: . ixteen To
distance is the best. = Ive rods. If the tree does
never be less than twe
Ls a fruit, the stem should be examined by quinine
with a knife ‘Then mix powdered vermifuge seeds wit
ghee and smear ‘+ on the cut. Then water ag ee If
fruits are destroyed before they ripen, ™m1x the powders
VRSABHA II
of horse-gram, black-gram, green-gram, barley and sesam with ghee and smear the tree and water it. Watering the tree with water and ghee will make the tree
flower and yield fruits quickly. Mix powdered dung of
sheep, powdered Barley, sesam, and cow’s flesh with
water and keep it for seven days. Then water the tree
with this water. This will makeany tree yield more fruits
and flowers. Watering the trees with fish-water will
make them yield fruits more quickly. Mixture of Vermifuge seed, fish and rice is a good manure, This manure
is a good remedy for all diseases of trees. (Agni Purana >
Chapter 281). ;
VRNDA I. Wife of the asura named Jalandhara. (See
under Mayaéiva) .
VRNDA II. See under Svarna.
VRNDARAKA I. One of the hundred sons of Dhrtarastra. It is mentioned in Mahabharata. Drona Parva,
Chapter 127, Stanza 33, that he was killed by Bhimasena in the battle of Bharata.
VRNDARAKA II. A warrior who fought on the side of
the Kauravas against the Pandavas. Abhimanyu killed
this warrior. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 47, Stanza
VRSA I. A warrior of Subrahmanya. (M.B. Salya Parva
Chapter 45, Stanza 64).
VRSAII. Anasura (demon). He is included among
those who ruled over this earth in days of old. (M.B.
Santi Parva, Chapter 227, Stanza 951).
VRSA III. A King of the family of Bharata who was
the son of Sakuntala. It is stated that he had a brother
called Durmarsana. (Bhagavata, Skandha 9). —
VRSA IV. An incarnation of Siva in the form of an ox.
The following is a story that occurs in Siva Purana,
Satarudasamhita, about this incarnation. t
When the Devas and the Asuras united together
and churned the sea of milk, ever so many noble objects
rose up to the surface of the sea. Several beautiful
damsels also came up. Visnu grew amorous of them
and thus thousands of sons were born by them. These sons
who were born in the Patala (Nether world), by and by,
came up and began to do harm to the dwellers of the
earth. At this time Siva took the incarnation in the
form of an ox to study the situation properly. In this
disguise Siva entered Patala and took by stealth the
Sudargana (the weapon of Visnu) and drove him to
heaven. When Visnu had gone’ from Patala, he had
advised his sons to stay in Patala. Vrsa who came to
_ know of this, cursed them:— ‘“‘Any man, other than the
peaceful hermits-and Danavas (asuras) who are born
from my portion, who enters Patala shall die.”? From
that day onwards, the world of Patala became a forbidden place for men.
VRSA V. One of the sons of Kartaviryarjuna. It is mentioned in Brahmanda Purana, that this prince escaped
from the Ksatriya extermination of Paras urama.
VRSA. An Indian river famous in the Puranas. (M.B.
Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Stanza 35).
VRSABHA I. Son of Subala, the King of Gandhara. He
was the brother of Sakuni. In the battle of Bharata, this
Vrsabha, with his five brothers, attacked Iravan, who
killed the five brothers. Vrsabha alone escaped death.
(M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 90, Stanza 33).
VRSABHA Ii. An asura. Arista was another name of
this asura (See under Arista) .

VRSABHA III
VRSABHA III. A Yadava King who was theson of
Anamitra. This Vrsabha married Jayanti, the daughter
of the King of Kasi. (Matsya Purana, 45, 25-26).
VRSABHA IV. A mountain near Girivraja, the capital
city of Magadha. (Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter
21, Stanza 2),
VRSABHANU. A King. When Vrsabhanu was cleaning
the ground for performing sacrifice, once, he got a girl
named Radha. He brought her up as his own daughter
(Padma: Brahma: 7). In Brahmavaivarta Purana,
Vrsabhanu is mentioned as the father of Radha.
VRSABHEKSANA. Another name of Sri Krsna. (M.B.
Udyoga Parva, Chapter 70, Stanza 7).
VRSADAMSA. A mountain near the Mandara mountain. Arjuna once dreamt that he travelled to the
world of Siva with Sri Krsna. It is mentioned in M.B.
Drona Parva, Chapter 80, Stanza 33, that inthis dream
travel they visited this mountain Vrsadarhéa also.
VRSADARBHA I,
1) General information. An ancient saintly King in
Bharata. This King Vrsadarbha and another King
named Seduka were righteous as well as experts in
wielding main and subordinate weapons. After completing the education of Vedas, a brahmin once
approached King Seduka and begged as alms some
horses for giving gift to his teacher. The Brahmin said
“It is my wish that you will give me these horses as
alms.’’ Seduka said that he had not enough wealth or
horses to give the teacher’s gift. Seduka sent the
Brahmin to Vrsadarbha. The Brahmin went to Vrsadarbha and begged as alms a thousand horses. The
King whipped the Brahmin. He asked the King why he
was punished as he had done no wrong. The King
asked the Brahmin who was beginning to curse. Ho.
Brahmin ! Whom are you about to curse? Him who has
not given you alms or another Brahmin? The Brahmin
said. ‘‘O, King I am_ sent here by Seduka. I
begged as he had instructed.”
The King said. ‘This evening I shall give you all the
tax-collection of this day. You who have been whipped
ought not to be sent emptyhanded.” Accordingly the
whole of the taxcollection of that day was given to the
Brahmin. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 196),
2) Other details.
(1) it is mentioned in Mahabharata, Sabha Parva,
Chapter 8, Stanza 29, that Vrsadarbha stays in the
palace of Yama glorifying him. |
(41) When he was reigning, he made a law that all his
subjects should give gold and silver as alms
(M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 196, Stanza 3).
VRSADARBHA IT. Another name of Usginara the King
of Kasi. (See under Usinara),
VRSADARBHI I, A King of Kagi. Vrsadarbhi who was
the son of Vrsadarbha, was known by the name Yuvanaéva also. He gave as alms, various kinds of jewels,
women, beautiful houses etc. and entered heaven. (M.B
Santi Parva, Chapter 234, Stanza 24).
VRSADARBHI IT. A famous son of Sibi. The following is a story given in Mahabharata about this Vrsadarbhi. 7
Once the seven hermiis started for going round the earth.
At this ttme Vrsadarbhi had been performing a sacrifice. Vrsadarbhi inveked theseven hermits and gave them
his son as a gift. The child died before long, As famine
was prevailing everywhere the hermits were weak and
to Brahmins
VRSANASVA
worn out by hunger. They wished to eat the flesh of
the child. WVrsadarbhi tried to dissuade the hermits
from this beastly action in vain. At last the angry King
created a wicked fairy to kill the hermits. Though the
fairy attacked the hermits, Indra, who had lived with
the seven hermits killed the fairy. ng a
Vrsadarbhi was not at all behind his father Sibi in
liberality. There are various stories in Mahabharata to
illustrate this.
VRSADARPA. A son of emperor Sibi. He had three
brothers named Bhadra, Suvira and Kekaya. (Bhagavata, Skandha 9). ;
VRSADHVAJA I. A King born in the line of Pravira.
(Mahabharata, Udyoga Parva, Chapter 74, Stanza !6).
VRSADHVAJA II. See under Sita, Para 1. -
VRSAGIR. A royal hermit spoken of in Rgveda. Rjra-
$va was the son of this hermit. (See under Rjrasva) .
VRSAKA I. Son of Subala the King of Gandhara. The
following information about him is taken from Mahabharata. ;
(i) He was present at the Svayarhvara marriage of ae
padi. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 185, Stanza 5). He wa
present at the Rajasiya sacrifice (royal consecration)
Yudhisthira. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 84, Stanz
(ae
i He was a prominent archer of the army of ue
auravas. (M.B. Udyoga Parva, Chapter 168, Stanz
(iii) In the battle of Bharata this Vrsaka was killed by
Arjuns. (M.B. Drora Parva, Chapter 30, Stanza 2).
(iv) Vrsaka also was there among those brave men be
the Kuru family who appeared on the surface of t
Gangetic water by the invocation of Vyasa. ( '
Agramavasika Parva, Chapter 32, Stanza 12). ‘in
VRSAKA II. A Kalinga prince. It is mentioned, *
Mahabharata, Karna Parva, Chapter5, Stanza 33, t
he also was killed in the battle of Bharata. a
VRSAKAPI I. One of the eleven Rudras. The _
Rudr2s are Hara, Bahuraipa, Tryambaka, se
Vrsakapi, Sambhu, Kapardi, Raivata, Mrgavyaeon
Sarpa and Kapali. (Agni Purana, Chapter 18). (
under Ekadaga rudras). M.B:-
VRSAKAPI II. Another name of Mahavisnu. (M.
Santi Parva, Chapter 342). haVRSAKAPI III. A hermit. Mention is made in “oe
bharata, Anugdsana Parva, Chapter 66, Stanza 2 3, ¢ apie
with so many other hermits, he also attended the 54
fice performed by the gods. as
VRSAKETU. One of the sons of Karna. As he We
following the sacrificial horse of Yudhisthira 4s ini
protector, he was killed by Babhruvahana. (Ja'™
Bharata, ASvamedha Parva, 30). -
VRSAKRATHA. A warrior on the side of the Rares ss
It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Drona Parva, ChaP O
80, Stanza 33, that this warrior stood in the hear
the Garuda-disposition of the army formed by Dro” che
VRSALAKSA. A King born in the line of Bharat@: the
son of Dusyanta. He was the son of Caturanga a?
grandson of Romapada. (Bhagavata, Skandha9)- |.
VRSAMITRA. A hermit. Mention is made in
bharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 26, Stanza 24, that
hermit honoured and loved Yudhisthira.
VRSANASVA. A King praised in Rgveda. I
tioned in Reveda, Mandala 1, Anuvaka 10,
ave:
¢pis
t is wo)
sakta 2°

VRSANDA
that once Indra took birth as the daughter of this King
under the name Mena.
VRSANDA. An asura. Mention is made in Mahabharata, Santi Parva, Chapter 227, Stanza 53, that
this asura had once ruled over the earth and that because of the attacks of Kala, he had to leave the earth.
VRSANKU. An ancient hermit. When Sri Rama returned from his forest life, the hermits such as Vrsanku,
Kavisa, Dhaumya, Raudreya, Narada, Vamadeva,
Saurabhi, Astavakra, Srisuka, Bhrgu, Lomesa and
Maudgala, from the west came and bowed before him.
(Uttara Ramayana).
VRSAPARVA I. A noble Asura. The following information about him is taken from Mahabharata.
(i) Vrsaparva was born to Prajipati Kagyapa by his
‘wife Danu. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 69, Stanza 24).
(ii) He took rebirth in the earth as King Dirghaprajfia.
(M.B. Adi Parva Chapter 67, Stanza 15).
(iii) He had a daughter named Sarmistha, (See under
Devayani). .
VRSAPARVA II.
in Mahabharata, Vana
that an ethereal voice was heard b
were living in the forest, that they s
An ancient royal hermit. It 1s stated
Parva, Chapter 156, Stanza 15,
y the Pandavas, who
hould visit this royal
isited the hermit
hermit. Accordingly the Pandavas visite
is King rendered
and he received them cordially. ‘Th
them various helps such as giving them.
going through the forests. It is stated in Vana Parva,
Chapter 177, that on
Pandavas entered the hermitage of t
received hospitality.
VRSAPRASTHAGIRI. A holy
in Mahabharata, Vana Parva,
that the Pandavas visited this holy p
life in the forest.
The following informVRSASENAI. A son of Karna. \
ation is taken from Mahabharata about him.
i) Vrsasena was a famous warrior in the army of the
Se nb (M.B. Udyoga Parva, Chapter 167, Stanza
-") In the Bharata-battle he confronted the prominent
he such as Satanika, Pandya, Abhimanyv. Arjuna,
Drupada, Satyaki, Nakula and_ others. (M.B. Drona
Parva).
(iii) In the fight with Arjuna, he was killed. (M.B.
Karna Parva, Chapter 89, Stanza 35).
of the Kurus who were
iv) Among the brave souls i v
a ly io the surface of the river Ganga by Vyasa,
Vrsasena also was present. (M.B. Agramavasika Parva,
Chapter 32, Stanza 10). y
VRSASENA II. A King who shines in the council of
Yama. It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Sabha Parva,
Chapter 8, Stanza 13, that this ae | geal ere
_ Mention is made in ahabharata,
i; — Chapter 167, Stanza 23, about Sa proud
and honoured Vrsasena who eae : ee ajasilya
(sacrifice of royal consecraticn) of udhisthira.
VRSNI. A famous King of the - my followin
Ly Genealogy. Descended from Visnu 1? g
=_Atri- dra-Budha-Puriravas - Ayus -
order : Bram: oo Gahasraiit . Satajit - Hehaya -
Nahusa- Yayaii Bhadrasena-Dhanaka-Krtavir ya-KartaDharma- Kuntdhu-Vrsm.
his hermit and
place. It is mentioned
Chapter 95, Stanza 3,
lace during their
viryarjuna-Ma
hem directions for
the return journey also the
? | | VRTRA
2) Other details. |
(i) The birth of Sri Krsna was in the family of Vrsni.
(See the genealogy of Sri Krsna). ie
(ii) The line of Kings beginning with Vrsni is called
the dynasty of Vrsni. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 217,
Stanza 18).
(iii) Thinking that the jewel Syamantaka had been
stolen by Krsna himself, Vrsni took a hostile mentality
towards Krsna. (Brahmanda Purana, 3: 71 :1).
(iv) Vrsni had two wives named Gandhari and Madri.
Five sons were born to him by Madri. (Vayu : 94 :
14; Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter211; 1-2; 9: SB).
VRTRA (VRTRASURA). A mighty and fierce asura.
1) Reason for his birth. Vrtra was the rebirth of emperor
Citraketu. Citraketu and his wife Krtadyuti prayed to
Angiras, as a result of which a son was born to them.
That son died in his infancy. But Angiras brought him
to life again. Brahma and Narada taught Citraketu
theosophy. Citraketu sat in contemplation for eight
days and changing himself to a Gandharva he flew
through the sky. As he was flying, he saw Parvati sitting
on the thigh of Siva and laughed aloud. Knowing this
Parvati cursed him to become an asura. Vrtrasura was
the rebirth of the emperor according to this curse.
(Bhagavata, Skandha 6).
2) Birth. ‘Two stories are mentioned about the birth of
Vrtrasura. One story is that KaSyapa created him from
fire. The other story is that Vrtra was the son of Tvasta.
Both are given below :
(i) Hiranyakasipu_ was born to Prajapati Kagyapa, by
his wife Danu. Mahavisnu killed him on being requested by the Devas. Danu was grieved at the death of her
son. So Kagyapa gave her another son. He was Vala or
Bala. Indra killed him with his weapon, the thunderbolt. Kagyapa got angry and plucking a hair from his
matted hair, made a burnt offering of it, saying “‘Let a
son who would be the killer of Indra be born.”” Immediately a huge giant, as black as antimony with yellow
eyes was born from the fire. That asura, clad in the
hide of antelope with sword in hand, opening his mouth,
from which two huge tusks protruded, very wide, and
shining with radiance cried out in a voice of thunder,
“Oh ! Sage ! Order me, what am I to do ?”
Kagyapa ordered him to kill Indra. He named_ the
| on, i Vrtra. (Padma Purana, Bhimi Khanda, Chap-
(ii) It was Prajapati T'vasta who created Vrtra to kill
Indra. He had sufficient reasons for it. From the very
beginning Indra and ‘T’vasta were enemies. ‘I'vasta begot a son named Trigiras- otherwise called Visvaripa,
for the purpose of killing Indra. This Vigvaripa had
three heads. One was meant for drinking Sura (a
liquor), the second for drinking Soma (liquor) and _the
third for eating food. Vigvaripa was a Brahmana. Still,
as his mother was an asura, he loved the asuras and
mingled with them. Indra knew about the behaviour
of Visvarapa. He concluded that it was blasphemy and
wickedness. Indra who was afraid of Visvarupa, got
angry and cut off his heads. Of the heads of Vis variipa,
that which drank Soma became a bird called Kapifijala, that which drank Sura became a bird «called
Kalapinga, and that which ate food fecame the
bird Tittiri (partridge). Brahmahatya (the sin of kulling Brahmin) took shape and went against Indra.
Though Indra could have destroyed it, he joined his

VRTRA
hands and received it. At the end of the year he cut it
into four pieces and divided them among earth, water,
tree and woman. The earth received it with the boon
that depressions will be filled. That sin is now seen as
salt beds. Water got it with the boon, ‘Will be swollen
when joined’’, That sin is foam and bubbles. The tree
got it with the boon, ‘Will not die even if cut into
pieces”, That sin is the sap of the tree. Women got it with
the boon, “Amour will last without break”. That sin is
the menstruation of women.
When Tvasta heard that his righteous son was killed
by Indra unreasonably, he became angry and began to
make burnt offerings with spells and incantations of
Atharvaveda. This offering continued for eight days.
On the eighth day at night, an extremely bright male
person arose from the fire pit. He rose higher and higher
as the flame of fire. Then that figure of power asked
Tvasta. “Father ! what is my name ? What have I to
do for-you ? What is the reason for your grief >’? He
said that he was prepared to drink up the ocean dry or
smash the mountains, or prevent the sun and the moon
from moving or any such thing for the sake of his father.
The father ordered him to kill] Indra. From that day
onwards Vrtra got ready to kill Indra. (Devi Bhagavata,
Skandha 6).
3) The slaughter of Vrtrasura. Hearing about the prowess, strength, and the martial radiance of Vrtrasura,
Indra grew afraid of him and began to think about
means and ways to kill him. Indra called the Saptarsis
(seven hermits) and sent them to Vrtra. His intention
was to make a treaty. The seven hermits approached
Vrtra and requested him to make a treaty with Indra,
and told him that Indra was prepared to give half of
the position of Indra. |
Vrtra :—Look hermits ! If Indra honestly desires tobe
in peace withme, J have no objection. But what is the
surety that Indra will not deceive me ?
Hermits :—If Indra proves to be false and deliberately
deceives you, he has agreed to bear the sin of Brahmahatya incurred, by himself.
Vrtra agreed to make a treaty on this condition. The
hermits took Vrtra to the palace of Indra. Seeing Vrtrasura who was coming to be friends with him Indra rose
from his royal chair and offered half of it to Vrtra.
Both embraced each other and vowed that they would
be brothers born from the same womb,
Thus having engaged Vrtra in a treaty deceitfully,
Indra waited for an Opportunity to kill Vrtra, Once
Indra sent Rambha to infatuate Vrtra. ‘‘Look, beautiful girl ! Make Vrtra senseless somehow so that I may
kill him.’? Hearing this, with a beautiful laugh, Rambha
went with her maids to the Park Nandana and waited
for Vrtrasura. At this time Vrtra, with some Danava
friends, came to the park Nandana for entertainment.
Indra walked beside watching for the Opportunity to
kill him. Without fearing any danger from Indra, Vrtra
walked through the park, seeing the celestia] maids
singing and dancing and playing various Zames in the
garden, and they reached a corner where Rambha had
been singing sweet songs and swinging with her maids.
This sight made Vrtra amorous, He approached
Rambha and prayed to her to become his wife. Under
that sandalwood tree Rambha asked him. “Oh handsome youth ! lam Rambha. I came here with my
maids to play. Who are you, my Lord ?”
VRTTA, A
VYADHI.
VYADH
Vrtra : ‘Beautiful maid !I am the son of Kag yapa
and the friend of Indra. I enjoy half the position of
Indra. I, Vrtra, have brought the three worlds under
my control. I shall be complete in all aspects, if I
could marry you.” . -
Rarnbha agreed to the marriage on condition that
Vrtra would not gainsay her in anything. They engaged
in amorous plays and Rambha made the Brahmin
drink liquor in large quantities and he became unconscious. Indra took this opportunity and sent his thunderbolt which took away the life of Vrtra. Instantly Indra
became affected with sins such as Brahmahatya etc.
(Padma Purana, Bhimikhanda, Chapters 23 and 24).
4) Other details. . _—
(1) Indra washed away the sin of Brahmahatya _
red by killing Vrtra, at the place called Karisa. (See
under Angamalada). _ P
(ii) It was at the time of the killing of Vrtra by In ae
that Jatayu and Sampati made bets and flew up 3
region of the Sun. (Valmiki Ramayana, Kiskindha
Kanda, Sarga 58, Stanza 4). . x
(iii) Mention about the conflict between Indra an
Vrtrasura occurs in various places in the Rgveda.
Regveda, Mandala 1, Anuvaka 16, Suakta 80 refers to
the battle between Indra and Vrtra. In many other
Suktas songs about Indra and Vrtra occur. _ .
(iv) Mention is made in Mahabharata, Adi Parva,
Chapter 65, Stanza 33, that Vrtra was the son born to
Prajapati Kas yapa by his wife Danu.
(v) It was Vrtrasura who took rebirth later as King
Maniman. (M.B. Adi Parva. Chapter 67, Stanza 44). ‘
(vi) The thunderbolt of Indra hit on the head °
Vrtrasura and was broken into ten big pieces ce
hundred small pieces. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 169,
Stanza 50).
(vii) It is stated in Mahabharata, Udyoga Parva,
Chapter 9, Stanza 48, that Vrtrasura was born from
the fire of Sorcery and witchcraft of Tvasta.
(viii) In the fight betwéen Indra and Vrira, Indra was
swallowed by Vrtra. But Indra contracted the members
f his body and became smaller and smaller and an
out of Vrtra’s belly. (M.B. Udyoga Parva, Chapter 9;
Stanza 52),
(ix) Once the teacher-priest Sukra asked Vrtra certain
questions to allof which Vrtra gave proper answers.
(M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter 279, Stanza 13).
(x) Vrtra entered heaven after his death. (Santi Parva,
Chapter 180, Stanza De a
(xi) Everybody was terrified because the fight - of
Indra with Vrtra prolonged without any termination.
At last Vrtra gaped and taking this opportunity, padre,
sent his weapon the thunderbolt into the mouth 0
Vrtra. Thus Vrtra met with death. (M.B. Vana Parva,
Chapter 101, Stanza 15; Udyoga Parva, Chapter 10,
Stanza 30: Santi Parva, Chapter 232, Stanza 9; Santi
Parva, Chapter 283, Stanza 59).
(xii) In Mahabharata, the words, Asura, Asuragrestha;
Asurendra, Daitya, Daityapati, Daityendra, Danave,
anavendra, Ditija, Surari, Tvastar, Vigvatma etc. are
used as synonyms of V rtra. |
naga (serpent) born to Prajapati Kasyap?
by his wife Kad u. (M.B 1 ir ter 395
Stanza 10). ru. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chap

VYAGHRABHATA
ue : of Mrtyu (Death). (Agni Purana, ChapVYAGHRABHATA. The minister of King Sridatta,
described in Kathidsaritsigara, Besides Vyaghrabhata,
he had three more ministers named Mahabala, Upendrabala and Nisthiraka.
VYAGHRADATTA I. A King who fought on the side
of the Pandavas. This King who was a great fighter on
the chariot, fought with the teacher Drona. It is mentioned in Mahabharata, Drona Parva, Chapter 16,
Stanza 32, that he was killed by Drona.
VYAGHRADATTAII.. A prince of the country of
Magadha. He took the side of the Kauravas and was
killed in the battle of Bharata by Satyaki. (M.B. Drona
Parva, Chapter 107, Stanza 31).
VYAGHRAKETU, A warrior of Paficala, who fought
on the side of the Pandavas against the Kauravas.
Karna wounded him in the battle of Bharata. (M.B.
Karna Parva, Chapter 56, Stanza 44).
VYAGHRAKSA. A follower of Subrahmanya. (Mahabharata, Salya Parva, Chapter 45, Stanza 59).
VYAGHRAPADA. An ancient hermit. He was the father
of Upamanyu. (M.B. Anugasana Parva, Chapter 14,
Stanza 45).
VYALIMUKHA. An asura who fought against Subrahmanya. In the fight with Subrahmanya this asura was
killed. (Skanda Purana, Asura Kanda)
sie The sage Vyasa who is the author of the Mahaharata.
1) Genealogy. Descended from Visnu in the following
order: Brahma-Vasistha-Sakti-Paras ara-Vyasa.
2) Birth. Vyasa was born to hermit Parasara by a fisherwoman named Kali. His name when he was a child
was Krsna. As his birth took place in an island (Dvipa)
he got the nan.e Krsnadvaipayana. After dividing the
Vedas he got the name Vedavyasa. He is the composer
of Mahabharata, one of the greatest Gor tal EOE
. t men, generally :
literature. The births of grea Vyasa also there is a
wonderful. Behind the birth of
wonderful story. _
As has dvandiy HERE mentioned, Kali, a soa ee
was the mother of Vyasa. There 1s a story = 7 <=
Kali also. When king Vasu of Cedi went fo ah hes
for hunting, he saw the coition of animals an - =
seminal discharge. The king sent that et be Boe.
queen. But on the way itfell in the river a 1 -
was eaten by a fish. This fish was a cena ea
named Adrika transformed to fish by a curse. wr “i
conceived and got into the net of a fisherman, who live
on the banks of Kalindi. When this fish was cut open
a male and a female infant were seen inside. The male
child was given to the king himself. The fisherman
brought up the girl naming her Kali. As the girl had
the gandha (smell) of matsya (fish), she got the name
‘Matsya-gandha’, also. This fisherman was also a ferryman. Kali used to help her father in ferrying people
across the river Kalindi. She grew up and became a
young woman. t
QO : 5 me by that way to go to
Nce the hermit Paragara ca y the fisherman
e iver. At that time cat
Other side of the river the river, was sitting
Who has been taking people across te prt
On the bank of the oct and having his coarse
as Paragara came, the innocent iehernan Be Fd
father of Matsyagandha—called her, W ee Loe Mle
Close by and aiked her to take the herm
885 VYASA
river. The hermit got into the boat. Matsyagandha
began to row the boat. The beauty of the damsel sitting
in front of him and the little waves of the river, combined together had the effect of arousing passion in the
hermit. He became sexually excited and sat close to her.
Discerning his intention she moved away from him and
prayed to him humbly not to violate her chastity. She
repeated her prayer. The hermit Paragara created an
artificial foe around the boat. The smell of fish was
gone from her and the fragrance of Musk took its place.
The hermit created an artificial island in the middle of
the river. They got down on the island and acted a love
drama. She became pregnant. Paragara said to her.
“Beautiful girl! Even after your confinement you shall
remain a virgin. A son, who will be a portion of Visnu,
a man of purity, famous throughout the three worlds,
highly learned, the teacher-priest of the whole world,
shali be born to you. He will divide the Vedas and will
be exalted by the people of the world.”’
After this the great hermit took his bath in Yamuna and
went away. The pregnancy of Kali was completed instantly and she gave birth toa very handsome boy in
that island of Yamuna. As soon as he was born, he grew
up and became a hermit radiant with devotion and assuming a vow: of purity and abstinence he said to his
mother. “Mother ! You can go anywhere, as you please.
You need have no worry on my account. I am about to
go for penance. When anything unpleasant happens to
you, just think ofme. The moment you wish to see me,
I will be there by you. I wish youa happy life. I am
going.” Saying thus the brave boy walked away. (Devi
Bhagavata, Skandha 2; Mahabharata, Adi Parva,
Chapters 60 to 63).
3) Spiritual life. 1
i) Introduction. ‘Two sides, the spiritual as well as the
material, are seenin the life of Vyasa. It was after the
marriage of Santanu, a king of the Lunar dynasty, with
his mother Kali, otherwise known as Satyavati, that
Vyasa came into contact with Hastinapura, Participating
in allthe vicissitudes of the Pandavas and the Kauravas
was the worldly side of the life of Vyasa. But the major
part of his life was spent in living as a hermit in his
hermitage in the forest with a large group of disciples;
teaching them the Vedas. A small description of that
spiritual life is given below :
ii) In the forest. We do not see Krsnadvaipayana, who
had grown up to a youth at the time of his birth, for
many years after his departure, bidding adieu to his
mother. He might have been living with hermits in the
forests, learning Vedas from them. After this he appears
on the banks of river Sarasvati as a teacher and Priest.
As he was doing penance there, he saw two sparrows,
legs and beaks red, without even down feathers, crying
nd the parent birds, with the utmost care and
tenderness feeding them. They flew about here and there
and gathered food and came back quickly. Because of
‘oy at the sight of their parents, the little ones opened
rine ruby-red mouths with cries and throbbing. They
kissed the young ones and fed them. The young sparrows iid “under the wings of their father and mother
and enjoyed the surroundings by thrusting out their
for food, a
| heads and looking on all sides.
iii) Birth of son. Seeing this, the paternity instinct in
him was aroused. He understood that love of children
was merely for the sake of love, that this love was pure

VYASA
and simple. Moreover there is the maxim that a man
without a son has no right to aspire for heaven. Sad
and silent, thinking of these things he walked on unwillingly and reached the vicinity of the Himalayas. Still,
he was doubtful. He began to consider about the deity,
before whom he had to do penance for the fulfilment of
his wish. He could not decide. As he was sitting in
thought, Narada came there. From the talk of Vyasa,
Narada knew that childlessness was the cause of his
sorrow. Narada advised him that for the attainment of
Purusarthas (objects of life) penance was to be done
before Devi. Accepting that advice, Vyasa went toa
piace near Mahameru to do penance.
When Vyasa began penance, the celestial maids also
commenced their work of hindering the penance. It was
Ghrtaci who confronted Vyasa. She took the form of a
parrot of five colours and flew in front of Vyasa. The
hermit was excited at the beauty of Ghrtaci and sat
forgetting himself. As he sat there thinking of the infatuating beauty of the parrot, seminal discharge occurred
to him. He became a slave to this infatuation, when he
was engaged in making fire by attrition. In _ this
amorous state of mind he was quite unaware of the
seminal discharge or its falling on the pieces of wood
used for attrition. He continued attrition. Then a very
bright, divine person appeared from the pieces of wood.
At the birth of a person, without attachment to a womb,
all the worlds were delighted. The hide of black antelope, water pot, hermit’s rod etc. fell from the sky.
Birth rituals and ceremonies, according to the custom,
were conducted by Vyasa. As he was born from the
semen discharged at the sight of the Suka (parrot) the
infant was named Suka. As soon as he was born Suka
began to grow by divine power and shortly became a
boy of shining radiance. After investiture with the
Brahma-string, the boy was sent for education to the
hermitage of Brhaspati, the teacher of the devas. Suka
completed his education with Brhaspati and having
‘performed Samavarta and offering of gift to the teacher,
he returned home to his father.
iv) Disciples. Suka commenced advanced study under
his father Vyasa. Besides Suka, Vyasa had disciples such
as Vaigampayana, Sita, Paila, Jaimini and others also,
living with him. The hermitage of Vyasa soon grew up
to a great educational institution, with plenty of disciples.
v) Separation of son. In.the meanwhile Suka married and
lived the life of a householder in the hermitage of his
father, for a time. Then forsaking his family and his
father, Suka went to the peak of Kailasa and began to
do penance meditating on Siva. At last he became a
divine person who had obtained complete attainments
and breaking the top of the peak open, he rose up snito
the sky and shone there as a second Sun. The devas who
saw Suka rising up by breaking the peak of Kailasa and
staying up in the sky, praised him.
This untimely separation of his son had undermined the
firmness of the mind of Vyasa. Filled with grief, he left
his hermitage and wandered here and there calling out
his son by name. He could not find his son. At last he
reached the peak of Kailasa where his son had been
doing penance. Standing there he called aloud his son
by name cryingly. Paramasiva appeared before the
lamenting father and consoled him. Thus getting a little
bit of peace of mind, Vyasa returned to his hermitage
VYASA
and lived there. The sorrowing Vyasa, was made still
more sorrowful by the departure of his beloved disciples,
Asita, Devala, Vaigampayana, Sumantu, Jalmini an
others who had been living in the hermitage and who
had departed, having finished their education. All a
surroundings of the hermitage seemed to him fille
with pain. At last he thought about his mother.
(Devi Bhagavata Skandha 1).
4) Hts terrestrial life. d
i) Preface. Within this period many changes ha
taken place in Hastinapura and the bank of cca
Santanu the king of the Lunar dynasty had marre
Gangadevi, who had disappeared after giving the king
a son named Devavrata (Bhisma), Bhisma grew UP ‘
Once Santanu was hunting in the forest when he Li
attracted by the sweet smell of musk. Tracing t ‘i
origin of that smell, the king reached the fisherma?
hut on the banks of the Yamuna. That smell proceet -
from Kastirigandha (Satyavati) the mother of ve
The king fell in love with her. He returned to © 6
palace, sad and silent. Learning the cause of his aie
sadness, Devavrata went to the fisherman’s hut and —
Satyavatito the palace to be given to his father. De aii
vrata had taken a vow that the kingdom would be Bag
to the son born to Satyavati and that he would Oe
unmarried, throughout his life. Because he had ' ma
so terrible a vow, Devavrata came to be called Bhis
from that day onwards. _ were
Two sons named Citrangada and Vicitravirya, ng.
born to Santanu.”Citrangada died when he was eo ers
Vicitravirya married Ambika and Ambialika, daug ay
of the King of Kaéi. Vicitravirya also died before anily
children were born to him. It seemed as if the {4 yati
was about to become extinct. At thisjuncture 5aty@
thought about her son Vyasa. pout
ii) Vyasa in Hastindpurt. The mother thought of
him, and instantly he reached Hastinapuri. Becaus”
her compulsion, two sons were born, one each to **"
ka and Ambélika from Vyasa. The son of Ambika vi,
Dhrtarastra and the son of Ambalika was Pandu.
ura was the son born to Vyasa by their maid. _ me
ili) Vydsa and the Kaurava-Pandavas. From this the
onwards we see Vyasa as the spiritual teacher © ents
Kauravas and the Pandavas. Behind all the move! sa:
of these two families we could see the hand Of * 4 ice
Thus though he came to Hastinapuri and gavé *) ge
to the members of the family frequently, his main pu
was his hermitage. Vydsa’s contact with Hastine™ cat
could be seen up to the Mahaprasthana ( the ative
departure) of the Pandavas. In all the adminis¥” ye
affairs up to this period, Vyasa also had a part. jifesituations in which Vyasa had taken part the ived
voyage of the Kauravas and the Pandavas are
below. q be
(i) Vyasa gave the boon that hundred sons woul 114
born to Gandhari. (M. B. Adi Parva, Chapte*
Stanza 8),
b
(ii) Vyasa cut the mass of flesh given birth = ip
Gandhari into a hundred pieces and kept a2
oe pots. (M. B. Adi Parva, Chapter 114: >
tee ; i
(ili) Vyasa consoled Gandhari by telling her that oft
and above hundred sons a daughter also wou 16):
to her. (M. B, Adi Parva, Chapter 115, Stanz@

VYASA
(iv) Vyasa consoled the Pandavas who had been
living in the forest with their mother Kunti, after the
death of Pandu their father. (M. B. Adi Parva
Chapter 155, Verse 5). |
(v) On another occasion Vyasa came to the Pandavas
and told them the stories of the previous births of
Paficali.(Adi Parva, Chapter 168).
(vi) Vyasa rendered all possible help to the Pandavas
to marry Paficali. (M. B. Adi Parva, Chapter 195).
(vii) Very often Vyasa was a member of the council
of Dharmaputra. (M. B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 4,
Stanza 11).
(viii) It was Vyasa who sent Arjuna to the north,
Bhimasena to the east, Sahadeva to thé south and
Nakula to the west for regional conquest. (M. B. Sabha
Parva, Daksinatyapatha, Chapter 26).
(ix) Vyasa engaged himselfin making various arrangements in the Rajasiiya (sacrifice of royal consecration)
of Yudhisthira. (M. B, Sabha Parva, Chapter 33,
Stanza 34).
(x) At the end of the Rajasiya, Vyasa predicted the
future of Yudhisthira. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 46,
Stanza 1),
(xi) When the Rajasiiya ended, Vyasa anointed
Yudhisthira. (Sabha Parva, Chapter 53, Stanza IG)
(xii) Vyasa advised Dhrtarastra to prevent Duryodhana
from doing injustice. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapters 7
and 8).
(xiii) When the Pandavas
vana (forest) Vyasa visited
sthira the art of Pratismrti. (
(xiv) He sent Safijaya to Dhrtarastra to tell him about
the greatness of Arjuna and Sri Krsna. (M.B. Udyoga
Parva, Chapter 69, Stanza !1 ye
(xv) He gave Safijaya the power of having the eye of a
seer penetrating beyond time and space (Divya drsti).
(M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 2, Stanza 10).
(xvi) Vyasa consoled Yudhisthira who was stricken
with grief in the course of the battle of Bharata. (M.B.
Drona Parva, Chapter 71, Stanza 23).
(xvii) When Yudhisthira cried over the death of
Ghatotkaca in the battle of Bharata, Vyasa came to
Yudhisthira and consoled him. (M.B. Drona Parva,
ter 183, Stanza 58).
Cavin ) He talked to ASvatthama about the greatness of
Siva and Sri Krsna. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 201,
Stanza 56). | 7
(xix) When SAatyaki was_about to kill Safijaya, Vyasa
turned him back from the attempt and rescued Safijaya.
(M.B. Salya Parva, Ghapter 99, Stanza 39). =
(xx) Vyasa argued and established that the -act of
cursing Asvatthama on the part of Sri Krsna was
correct. (M.B. Sauptika Parva, Chapter 16, Stanza17).
;) Vyasa revented Gandhari Jrom her intention to
_ ie | (M.B. Sti Parva, Chapter 14,
Stanza 7).
(xxii) When the battle
advised Yudhig ve
administration of the country: ;
(xxiii) Yudhisthira felt grieved at the oa» a zlaave
and friends in the battle of Bharat an oe ed to
+ enicide, But Vyasa aissua
eoph. (VLE: Santi Parva, Chapter 27, Stanza 28).
were living in the Dvaitathem and taught YudhiM.B. Vana Parva,Chapter
of Bharata was over, Vyasa
+ matters regarding the
VYASA
(xxiv) Vyasa walked to the place where Bhisma lay on
the bed of arrows and visited him. (M.B. Santi Parva,
Chapter 45, Stanza 5).
(xxv) Vyasa advised Yudhisthira to perform Asvamedha (horse sacrifice). (M.B. As vamedha Parva,
Chapter 3, Stanza 8).
(xxvi) Vyasa advised the Pandavas to go to King
Marutta for wealth when the battle of Bharata was
over. (Agvamedhika Parva, Chapter 3, Stanza 20).
(xxvii) Vyasa consoled Uttara, who was lamenting
over the death of her husband. (Aévamedha Parva,
Chapter 62, Stanza 11).
(xxviii) He consoled Arjuna who was crying over the
death of his son. (Agvamedha Parva, Chapter 62,
Stanza 14).
(xxix) Vyasa advised Yudhisthira on the various
arrangements which were to be made for the conducting
of horse-sacrifice. (ASvamedhika Parva, Chapters 62 to
tale
( =a Vyasa went to Dhrtarastra, who had gone to the
forest after the Bharata-battle and pacified him. (M.B.
Agramavasika Parva, Chapter 28).
(xxxi) Vyasa brought the spirits of those who died in
the Bharata-battle, to the surface of the river Ganges,
by the power of his penance and Dhrtarastra and the
others saw them. (See under Dhrtarastra, Para Te
(xxxii) At the instruction of Vyasa, all the Ksatriya
widows immersed themselves in the river Ganges and
everyone of them entered the world of her husband.
(M.B. Asramavasika Parva, Chapter 33, Stanza 18).
(xxxlii) When the Yadu-clan was completely destroyed,
Arjuna went to the hermitage of Vyasa and talked with
him. (Mausala Parva, Chapter 8).
(xxxiv) Vyasa had been an adviser of King Janamejaya. (See under Janamejaya).
5) Saving a worm. Once a wicked man took rebirth as
a worm. This worm was crawling in haste for life in
front of a cart coming at great speed. He saved the
worm and gave it Brahminhood, and in the next birth
it became a Brahmin who lived in peace and comfort.
(M.B. Anuéasana Parva, Chapter 117).
6) The literary life of Vyasa. ‘Towards the close of his
life Vyasa again entered the caves of Himalayas. Vyasa
who had steered through a very wide and rough sea of
life, was in a position to understand clearly the
various sides of human life. In the mind of that sage,
who sat in deep contemplation in the eternally silent
caves of the Himalayas, the events of his past life began
to line up one after the other. From that inward _instigation the Puranetihasas (the Myths and legends) took
form. It might have been during this period that Vyasa
divided the Vedas and composed Puranas and: Upa-.
purdanas.
One does not go wrong in saying that it was the composing of the Mahabharata that brought Vyasa very
close tothe later generations, The stories of the Kauravas and the Pandavas, flowed through his mind as a
river flows down crushing down the banks on either
side. A scribe was necessary to take them down in the
form of verses. Vyasa informed Brahma of this need.
Brahma replied “‘Ganapati is the only person capable
of taking down every thing that you sing.” Recovery
Vyasa thought of Ganapati, who carue to the side of
Vyasa, and he informed Ganapati of his need, Ganapati
said that he was willing to do the work on condition

VY ASASTHALI
that Vyasa would go on singing unceasingly, so that he
might not have to stop the iron pen. Vyasa said that
while he would be singing the poems without stopping,
Ganapati should not take down this and that without
grasping the meaning. Both agreed to this condition
and the composing of the Mahabharata commenced.
Within two years and a half the great poetic work was
finished. The great disciples of Vyasa, such as Vaigampayana, Jaimini and such others sang them and learned
them by heart and published them in the world. (M.B.
Adi Parva, Chapter 1). |
7) Many Vydésas. It is stated in the Puranas that in
every Manu’s age, a Vydsa will be born. It is mention-
-ed in Visnu Purana, Aréa 3, Chapter 3, as to who
were the persons who took birth as Vyasa in a particular Manu’s age and which were the Vedas and
branches of Vedas they had divided. It is given below:
During the age of Manu Vaivasvata, in each of the
past Dvaparayugas, the Veda had been divided by
great hermits, twentyeight times. T'wentyeight VedaVyasas have passed, each of whom had divided the
Veda into four parts in each Dvydpara Yuga. It was
Brahma ‘himself who had divided the Veda into four in
the first Dvaparayuga. Prajapati was the Vedavyasa in
the second Dvaparayuga. In the third, Vyasa was the
teacher-priest Sukra;in the fourth Brhaspati; in the
fifth the Sun; and in the sixth the all powerful Dharmaraja. It was Indra in the seventh, Vasistha in the -
eighth, Sarasvata inthe ninth, and Tridhama in the
tenth. It was Trisikha in the eleventh, Bharadvaja in
the twelfth, Antariksa in the thirteenth, Varni in the
fourteenth, Trayyaruna in the fifteenth, Dhanafijaya in
the sixteenth, Kratufijaya in the seventeenth and Jaya
in the eighteenth. Next Bharadvaja comes as Vedavyasa
and Gautama after Bharadvaja. It was hermit Haryatma who was the next Vyasa, and then comes Vajasravas. ‘he Next Vyasa was Trnabindu born in the clan
of Somagusma. He was followed by Rksa. otherwise
called Valmiki born in the family of Bhrgu. Sakti is
the Next Vyasa. After that ParaSara, then Jatiikarna
and then Krsnadvaipayana. They are the twentyeight
Vedavyasas. Each one of these had divided the Veda
which had been one at the beginning of each Dvaparayuga, into four Vedas. It is Asvatthama, the son of
Drona, who is going to be the Vedavyaéa of the coming
Dvaparayuga.
8) Other details.
(1) Most of the scholars are of opinion that the period
of Vyasa was between 1800 and 1500 B.C.
(ii) Apantaratamas was the rebirth of Vyasa. (See
under Apantaratamas) .
(iii) In Mahabharata, the word Krsna, Krsnadvaipayana, Dvaipayana, Satyavatisuta, Satyavatyatmaja,
Parasarya, Paras aratmaja, Badarayana, Vedavyasa etc.
are used as synonyms of Vyasa.
(iv) The word Vyasa means he who describes elaborately.
“Fle became Vyasa because he had described all the
Vedas”. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 63, Stanza 88).
V yas=describe (Differentiate the branches and divide).
VYASASTHALIT. An ancient holy place on the border of
Kuruksetra. It is said that because of his grief due to
the separation of his son, Vyasa tried to commit suicide
at this place. He who visics this place would get the
VYUHA
fruits of giving thousand cows as alms. (M.B. Vana
Parva, Chapter 83, Stanza 93).
VYASAVANA. A forest near Kuruksetra. It is we
tioned in Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 89,
Stanza 93, that he who bathes in the holy bath a eng
Manojavati tirtha in this forest, would get the fruits ©
giving thousand cows as alms. ; Santi
VYASVA. A King. It is stated in Mahabharata, - :
Parva, Chapter 127, Stanza 3, that this King remain
in the palace of Yama. ter
VYAVAHARA. It is mentioned in Manusmrti, Chapt?
8, that administering the law was of eighteen types }
ancient India.
1) Pertaining to giving and taking. her
li) Pertaining to the property entrusted to anoth
for keeping. tts
lil) Selling the property by anybody other than!
owner. —
iv) Appropriating gain to oneself in a combin
transaction. : as
v) Not handing over the property which was give?
a gift.
v1) Non-payment of salary.
vil) Disobeying orders.
viii) Retaining and doubting the ownership after
completion of a transaction of selling or buying. the
ix) A law suit between the owner of the cattle and
cowherd or shepherd.
x) Dispute about boundary.
x1) Striking another.
xii) Reviling others
xiii) ‘Theft and robbery.
xlv) Violence.
xv) Stealing another’s wife.
xvi) Matrimonial responsibilities.
xvii) Partition.
xviii) Gambling.
Whenever difference of opinion arises betwee
persons on any of the matter given above, the
should interfere and make a decision. For one Fre
or another, if the King could not attend the a
three learned Brahmins should enter the court 6 Jd
conduct the trial sitting or standing, and they 5° 4.
not conduct the trial walking to and fro. This was
Practice of courts in ancient India. the
VYOMA. A King born in the dynasty of Bhara’’> dha
son of Dusyanta. It is mentioned in Bhagavata,oMy O
9, that Vyoma was the son of Dagarha and the fath
Jimita, ned
VYOMARI. An eternal Vigvadeva (deity eon ant
with offerings to the Manes). (Mahabharata, Anv
Parva, Chapter 91, Stanza 35),
VYOMASURA. Son of Mayasura. For the story
Krsna killed this asura, see under Krsna, para 2%- dred
VYUDHORU (VYUDHORASKA), One of the BE ath
sons of Dhrtarastra. Mention is made in Mahabh@ ru
Bhisma Parva, Chapter 96, Stanza 23, that VY"
was killed by Bhimasena in the battle of Bharaté- ap
VYUHA. (Disposition of an army). Dispositio? pants
army of four parts, (infantry, cavalry, €©© i ent
and chariots) in the battlefield, the arrane”’iod
of it, in various forms. It is said that during the Ptio®
ot Mahabharata, there were various forms of di8P°
of the army. Some of them are given below:
the
n two
King
asov
urt,
how

VYUKA | 889
1) Ardhacandravyiha. (like a Crescent moon) (M.B.
Bhisma Parva, Chapter 56)
ii) Garudavyitha. (M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 56).
iii) Krauficavyiha. (M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 60).
iv) Gakravyiha. (wheel-shaped) (M.B. Drona Parva,
Chapter 34).
v) Makaravyitha. (shark-like) (M.B. Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 69). |
vi) Mandalavyaha. (circular) (M.B. Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 81).
vii) Mandalardhavyiha. (Semi circular) (M.B. Drona
Parva, Chapter 20).
viii) Vajravydha. (Diamond-shaped) (M.B. Bhisma
Parva, Chapter 81).
ix) Sakatavyiha. (cart-shaped) (M.B. Drona Parva,
Chapter 7).
x) Syenavyiha. (Vulture-like) (M.B. Bhisma Parva,
Chapter 69).
xi) Sarvatobhadravyiha. (fortified all-round) (M.B.
Bhisma Parva, Chapter 99).
xii) Suparnavyaha. (kite-shaped) (M.B. Drona Parva,
Chapter 20).
xiii) Siicimukhavyitha. (Like the needle-eye ) (M.B.
Bhisma Parva, Chapter 77).
VYUKA. Acountry of ancient India. (M.B. Bhisma
' Parva, Chapter 9, Stanza 31).
VYUSITASVA. A King of the Paru dynasty, who was
righteous and just. He performed many sacrifices. His
wife was Bhadra, daughter of King Kaksivan. It is said
that this Bhadra was the most beautiful woman in India.
As the King led a libidinous life with this queen Bhadra
he met with an untimely death.
When the King died, he had no children. Bhadra cried
long while embracing the deac body of the King.
Shen Ge, ithout the body, said
Then the spirit of Vyusitas va, w!
to her. ‘“‘My love. Lie with me 1n your own bed on the
‘shth or fourteenth day of your menstruation. I will:
ae you sons.” She need according to the wish of the
King and got seven sons from the dead body. Her sons
were three Satvas and the four Madras. (M.B. Adi
Parva, Chapter 120). ade
VYUSTAL A King z the dynasty of Dhruva. ‘This King
was the son of King Pu‘parna, by his wife Prabha.
Pradosa, Nigitha and others were brothers of Vyusta. A
son named Sarvatejas was born to this King. (Bhagavata, Skandha 4).
VYUSTI. Another name for day-time.»
YA. (q) This letter means “Yaga”, “vata” (one who
goes) or “hero”. (Agni Purana, Chapter 348 )
YADAVA. See under Yaduvamsa.
YADAVI. Mother of the King Sagara- (For more details
see under Sa |
YADU I The ¢ ede of Yi Fail Varga or Yadu
Vaméa.
d in the
; descende
1) Genealogy, From Visnu ee Candie — Budha —
following order:—Brahma—Att!—
Purdravas_-Ayus_—Nahusa—Yayati—Yadu. of Yadu
2) Yadu Vamba (YadavaVamsa). The Orb streya
athéa is fromi Atri. Gandra, Durvase” an sirciva: dual
Muni were the sons of Atri by Ea Budha, Ayus
born to Candra, Puriravas was born a3 mm to AYUS.
was born to Puriravas, and Nahusa ee ; “ Nahusa.
Two children, Ayati and Yayati were Orn want, Three
Yayati had two wives, Sarmistha an
YADU I
sons, Druhyu, Anudruhyu and Piru were born to
Sarmistha. The Piru vaméa takes its origin from Puru.
Yayati had two sons by Devayani. They were Yadu
and Turvasu. The descendants of Yadu are the
Yadavas.
Four sons, Sahasrajit, Krosta, Nala and Ripu were
born to Yadu. Sahasrajit had a son, Satajit. Three sons
Mahabhaya, Venuhaya and Hehaya were born to
Satajit. Of ‘them Hehaya became famous under the
name of Ekavira and founded the Hehaya vamsa. The
Hehayas and Bhargavas were on terms of enmity.
Dharma was born to Hehaya, and Kunti or Kuni was
born to Dharma. Kuni had four sons—Sadajit, Mahisman, Bhadrasena and Durdama. Dhanaka was the son
of Bhadrasena and Dhanaka had four sons—Kriavirya,
Krtagni, Krtavarma and Krtaujas. Of them, Krtavirya
who was the eldest, was the father of Kartaviryarjuna.
From here, Yadu varhga continues from Kartaviryarjuna.
He had five sons, Jayadhvaja, Sirasena, Vrsabha,
Madhu and Unrijita. Vrsni was the son of Madhu, the
fourth of them. From this point, Yadu vamhsa continues
from Vrsni. Yadava varhSa from this stage is alsoknown
as Vrsni varhga. Vrsni had four sons—Sumitra, Yudhajit,
Vasu and Sarvabhauma. Yadu‘vaméa continues from
Yudhajit. He had two sons, Sini and Nimna. Sini’s son
was Satyaka and Satyaka’s son was Satyaki. Satyaki
had another name, Yuyudhana. Jaya was Satyak's son.
Kuni was the son of Jaya, Anamitra was the son of
Kuni and Préni was the son of Anamitra. Prsni’s sons
were Citraratha and Svaphalka. Vidiratha and Kukira
were born to Citraratha. Sara was the son of Viduratha.
Sini was the son of Sura, Bhoja was the son of Sini,
Hrdika was the son of Bhoja. Four sons, Devavaha,
Gadadhanva, Krtaparva and Sara, were born to Hrdika.
Sra married Marisa and their children were Vasu,
Devabhaga, Devasravas, Anaka. Srijaya, Kakanika,
Syamaka, Vatsa, Kavika and Vasudeva. Vasudeva
married Devaki, the sister of Kamsa. Sri Krsna was
their son. Pradyumna was the son of Sri Krsna. Aniruddha was the son of Pradyumna and Vajra was the son
of Aniruddha. The last known link of that branch of
Yadu vaméga was Vajra.
Karnsa also belonged to Yadu varnéa. Kukira who was
the brother of Vidiiratha was the ancestor of Kamsa.
Uerasena who was a lineal descendant of Kukura, was
the father of Karnsa. The Puranas mention Devaki, the
mother of Sri Krsna as Karhsa’s sister. But in fact she
t his direct sister. Ugrasena, Karhsa’s father, had
a brother named Devaka. This Devaka had three sons,
Devapa, Upadeva and Sudeva. Devaki, Sri Krsna’s
mother was the daughter of Devapa. Devaki had six
sisters who were—Srutadeva, Santideva, Upadeva,
érideva, Devaraksita and Sahadeva.
Akrira who went to Ambadi also belonged to another
branch of Yadu varnga. Prénji who was of the ninth
eneration from Vrsni, had two sons—Citraratha and
ae halka. Akriira was the son of Svaphalka.
3 ) Other details about Y adu Vaméa
(i)Once Yayati wanted hisson Yadu to transfer the latter’s
outhfulness to Yayati. The son refused to oblige the
father who therefore pronounced a curse that Yadu’s
descendants would not enjoy kingship. (For detailed
story, see under Yayati). |
adu’s descendants are called Yadavas. (M.B. Adi
(ii) Y
Parva, Chapter 99, Verse 10).
was no

YADU II
(111) Yadu was the son of Devayani and the grandson
of Sukracarya. Although Yadu was a hero, he was dullwitted. He did not obey his father. He used to despise
his father and brothers. His capital city was Hastinapura. Ele became dull-witted after the loss of his kingdom by the curse of his father. (M.B. Udyoga Parva,
Chapter 149).
4)The end of Yadu Vamsa. Sri Krsna was one of the most
important members of the Yadu Vaméa. That family
continued only for 36 years more after the end of the
Bharata Yuddha. At the end of the thirtysix years, evil
omens began to appear in Dvaraka. Whirlwinds began
to blow furiously. Frightened birds began to fly helterskelter. Rivers began to flow upwards. The whole land
was enveloped in mist. Comets continued to drop
from heaven, scattering sparks of fire. Thesun’s disc was
eclipsed with clouds of dust.
At that time, one day, the sages Viévamitra, Kanva and
Narada happened to come to Dvaraka. A band of
Yadavas, under the leadership of Samba, gathered round
the sages to make fun of them. They dressed Samba like
a pregnant woman and asked the sages what child “‘she”’
would bear. The enraged sages replied that the “Child”?
would be an iron pestle which would be the cause of
the death of all the Yadavas. Besides, they added that,
with the exception of Rama, (Balabhadra Rama )
and Krsna, the whole of Yadava Vaméa would come
to ruin.
Next day Samba did give birth to an iron pestle. The
frightened Yadavas recalled the curse of the sages. They
reported the matter to their king. The king, in deep
gloom, had the pestle filed into dust and ordered his
men to throw the dust into the sea,
People recalled Gandhari’s curse on Sri Krsna after the
Bharata Yuddha. The curse was that the family of Sri
Krsna who was the cause of all mischief, would be wiped
out within a period of 36 years.
At that time, women began to be stolen- from Dvaraka
every night by a dark woman monster. Sri Krsna’s
weapon, Cakra slipped out of Krsna’s grip and rose up
to heaven, in the very presence of the Vrsnis. Seeing
these evil omens, the alarmed Vrsnis and Andhakas
began to leave the place on a pilgrimage. They reached
the shore of Prabhasa tirtha, The Uddhavas parted
company with the Yadavas there. Nobody prevented
the Uddhavas. Sri Krsna who saw that the end of the
Yadavas was approaching, also kept silent. The Yadava
leaders in despair, took to drinking. Intoxicated by
drinking they began to quarrel. The particles of the
ton pestle thrown into .the sea, were Carried and deposited on the shore by the waves, They began to sprout into a kind of grass. The blades of this grass soon transformed themselves into iron pestles. The Yadavas pulled
them out and began attacking each other with them.
Most of them were beaten to death by their own kinsfolk. Sri Krsna who was in a state of trance in
‘“Yogasana’’, was hit on his toe by an arrow shot by a
hunter and he fell into Samadhi. Balabhadra Rama
renounced his body and went to Patala.
After that the sea advanced and submerged the whole
of Dvaraka. (M.B. Mausala Parva).
YADU II. There is another Yadu mentioned in the
Puranas, who was the son of Uparicara Vasu, Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 68, Verse 31, says that
this Vasu was never defeated by anyone at any time,
YAJNASARMA
YADU III. King of Yadus. There are references to this
king in many places in the Ist Mandala of Rgveda.
YAJA. A sage born in Kaéyapa gotra. (For further details,
see the word Upayaja and Paficali).
YAJATA.A Yajfiakarta (Performer of Yajfias) celebrated
in the Rgveda.
YAJNA. An incarnation of Mahavisnu. Svayambhuva
Manu had two sons, Priyavrata and Uttanapada and
three daughters, Akuti, Devahiti and Prasiiti. Rul
Prajapati married Akiuti. Yajfia was their son. ial
Bhagavata, 8th Skandha mentions that this Yajna Wwé
an incarnation of Adi Narayana.
Yajfia had a sister named Daksina. ‘They were _
They married each other. The twelve sons who were bor
to them were the Devas known as Yamas, ee
the Svayambhuva Manvantara. ( Visnu Purana, Part ?;
Chapter 7). |
Yajfia’s twelve sons were:—Tosa, Pratosa, Santos,
Bhadra, Santi, Idaspati, Iddhma, Kavi, Vibhu, ae poe
Sudeva and Virocaka. Their father Yajfia was the In ‘
of Svayambhuva Manvantara. (Bhagavata, 4th Skandha )-
YAJNABAHU. An ancient sage who was-the son of hae
vrata and grandson of Svayambhuva Manu. Svaya “dl
bhuva Manu had two famous sons named Priyavr?
and Uttanapada. Of these, Priyavrata married Sur ge
and Barhismati, the two daughters of VET
Yajfiabahu was the son of Priyavrata by Suripa. jo
sons born to Priyavrata and Surupa were:—Agnid at
Iddhmajihva, Yajfiabahu, Mahavira, Rukmasu =
Ghrtaprstha, Savana, Medhatithi, Vitihotra and ar -
They had a daughter, Urjjasvati. Bhagavata,
Skandha). . ;
YAJNADATTA I. A youthful sage. In Agni Pura :
Chapter 6, it is stated that this youth was shot a
with an arrow by Dafaratha, mistaking him = «i
elephant, on the bank of the river Sarayi. But Va oe a
Ramayana says that the name of the boy-sage who ah
shot dead by Dafgaratha was “Sravana’’. For ™
details see 3rd Para under Dafaratha.
YAJNADATTA II. A Brahmana. There was a Brahmav?
village called Mahat at the foot of the Yamuna mou his
ain, between the rivers Ganga and Yamuna. ne
Brahmana was born and brought up here. aoe
story in Padma Purana, Chapter 92, about him, W 1a’s
says that by mistake he was taken to hell by ie
messenger and that he was reluctant to leave hell.
story is as follows: — - i the
Once Yama. (Kala) ordered his agent to br a
Brahmana named Yajfiadatta, who lived in Mahat v1! and
born in Vasistha gotra and was gentle, scholarly ned
well-versed in Yajiia practices. He was specially — her
that he should not make a mistake as there was sa
Brahmana with the same name who lived in the 2@ ce;
bourhood and who resembled Yajfiadatta in appearan 5
learning and in every other respect. But in spite © Lien
specific warning, his agent brought the wrong per? due
Yama, with his sense of justice, received him with put
respect and allowed him to return to the world.
Yajfiadatta was not willing to return to the world.
YAJNADATTA ITI, See under Pataliputra. = nas:
YAJNASARMA. A Brahmana made famous in the Puré™’_He was the son of Sivagarmi. (Hor detailed story: ;
under Sivag arma).

YAJNASATRU 401
YAJNASATRU. A Raksasa who fought against Rama and
Laksmana in the forest. Khara, Disana and Trisiras
were the three Raksasas who declared war on Sri
Rama. Yajiiasatru was one of the twelve military commanders of Khara. Valmiki Ramayana, Aranya Kanda,
26th Sarga, mentions that the twelve heroes who were
Khara’s commanders were: - Syenagami, Prthugriva,
Yajiiasatru, Vihangama, Durjaya, Karaviraksa, Parusa.
Kalakarmuka, Meghamali, Mahamali, Sarpasya and
Rudhiragana.
YAJNASENA I. See under Paficatantra.
YAJNASENA II. Drupada, the son of King of Paficala.
(For more details see under Drupada).
YAJNAVAHA. A warrior of Subrahmanya. There is a
reference to him in Mahabharata, Salya Parva, Chapter
45, Verse 80.
YAJNAVALKYA. An ancient sage who was a profound
scholar.
1) General. Puranas say that this sage spent the major
part of his life at the court of King Janaka. He was
also. King Janaka’s priest. In Agni Purana, Chapter 16,
it is mentioned that Kalki was Yajfiavalkya’s priest.
Mahabharata, Anu§dsana Parva, Chapter 4, Verse | ol,
mentions that Yajfiavalkya was a’ “Brahmavadi son”’ of
Visvamitra,
2) Thousand cows.
Yaga. At that time he w
eminent among the sages.
Once King Janaka conducted a
ished to find out the most
He promised to present a
thousand cows to the sage who was a consummate
scholar. A bag of gold coins was also tied to each an
of the cows. Janaka announced that the sage who cpa
ed to be a consummate scholar might come forward an
take the cows with him. No one among the aay
sages who were present, dared to come aN ain.
valkya, however, ordered his disciple to law : ae
home wit uestionec on E 2
claim the cows. Yajnavalkya asserted his rig : to ee Ff
One of the sages named Arthabhaga stoo¢ up
asked him the ial wane TY whe has not acquired
Arta ite his “Jsanendriyas eit
aes | he ae bites ? ae
valkya:—Karma (action ) becomes the cause ol his re
Next Kaho and many other sage Fair talk is given
es a What have you to say about the invisible
and omnipresent Brahman ! ie Se ete:
aif Ikva :—Your soul is th
a tes no hunger or thirst, fear or desire, old age
or death. Those who wish to know the soul, become
ife, children or worldtranscending love of wife, cl
— The two qualities essential for sages are
bat knowledge.
scholarship a baa woof of everything :
aggt 2 VO “Do not ask further; if you do,
' ieces.
head will be broken to piec thin ? (Antaryami).
who exists Ww! nya
ox parte ° is contained in Jagat ( a met)
the knowledge of Jagat, he w ote oy is
ho controls Jagat 4s antaryami, = de
He cannot be seen, but he sees. He c
your
Arun
Yajiia :
without
Jagat, he w
every one.
YAJNAVALKYA
be heard; but he hears. He ts capable of thinking; but
he is beyond our thoughts. Heexists as one who sees,
hears and thinks, in all creatures.
Gargi :—I have two questions to ask. They are as sharp
and pointed as two arrows. By what force is fixed that
which is above Heaven, below the earth and that
which is between them, like warp and woof ?
Yajfia :—By the sky. |
Gargi :—By what force is the sky held in position like
warp and woof ?
Yajiia :—Under the command of God, the sun and
moon do not deviate from their orbits. The sky and the
earth remain in their respective places. Rivers run making the fields fertile. One who lives and works without
the ability to know God does not obtain immortality.
He who dies without knowing God isa Krpana (spiritual bankrupt). On the contrary, he who knows God
attains Moksa.
Sakalya :—How many gods are there ?
Yajna :—Thirtythree. They are—8 Vasus, 1] Rudras,
12 Adityas, Indra and Prajapati. The 8 Vasus are—
Agni, Prthvi, Vayu, Antariksa, Aditya, Dyau (Heaven),
Candra and Stars. The 11 Rudras are the combination
of the 10 jfianendriyas and the working of the mind.
The ruling deities of the 12 months are known as the
12 Adityas. They receive into them our lives and our
Karmans (actions). :
Yajfiavalkya gave suitable answers to all other questions of Sakalya. At last, he asked Sakalya :—‘‘Now I
will ask you a question. Whom do the Upanisads
describe ? If you do not answer, your head will break.”
Sakalya could not answer it. He dropped down with a
broken head. He asked the other scholars who had
gathered there, if any of them wanted to ask him more
questions. But no one came forward. All remained
dumb. Then he continued :—‘‘Fresh leaves sprout
from a tree which has been cut. If the seed is destroyed, the tree does not grow out of it. How is it that a
man is born again-after his death ?”
No one was able to answer that question. Thus after
defeating all of them in argument, Yajhavalkya went
home with the cows.
3) In Fanaka’s court again. On another occasion,
Yajfiavalkya went to see King Janaka. The King asked
him whether he had come for getting cows or to ask
abstruse question. The sage answered that he had come
for both. Their conversation continued as follows :—
Janaka :—Jita Muni has said that “‘Vacana”’ (word) is
Brahman or God. What is your opinion ?
Yajiia :—It is correct. But did he say which is the body
and abode of God ?
Janaka :—No.
Yajfia :—In that case he has said only onefourth about
God. Vacana is god’s body andsky, his abode. Brahmavidya depends on the word. The word is Parabrahman.
Janaka was highly pleased. He decided to give a thousand bulls to the sage. But Yajfiavalkya said that his
father’s principle was to give effective knowledge to the
upil and,not to receive any daksina (Payment) from
him. Janaka again wanted YAjfiavalkya to explain
clearly what ‘Brahma Vidya’’ means.
Yajfia :—Just as a person can reach his destination by
walking or by travelling in a chariot or by sailing in a
boat, in order to secure peace for the soul, you are
depending on the Upanisads. But although one is

YAJNAVALKYA 892 —
learned in Vedas and Agamas, or adored by others or
wealthy, or well-versed in Upani sads, unless one has
known God—unless one acquired Brahmajfiana—one
cannot be said to be gratified. Do you know where you
will go after renouncing your body?
Janaka :—I do not know.
Yajnia :—I shall tell you. The deity of the right eye is
‘‘Inda” (light). People call it ‘Indra’. The deity of
the left eye is Indrani, the wife of Indra. Indra is eater
and Indrani is food. In a state of consciousness they
are separated. (Then the soul is called Vaié vanara).
in a state of dream, the two are united. (Then the
soul is called Taijasa\. In a state of slumber, the soul
is in ‘‘Prjnaa’’ state. (Since there is no activity it is
called Prajna). In the fourth or ‘‘Turiya’’ state, one
becomes capable of transcending the three other states
and to attain Parabrahman. It js a state of fearlessness
transcending birth and death.
The King who was pleased by this teaching dedicated
the kingdom of Videha and even himself to the sage.
4) In Fanaka’s court for the third time. After some years
Yajfavalkya went again to Janaka’s court. At that time
also there was a philosophical discussion between the
King and the sage in the form of questions and answers.
Janaka :—Which is the light that gives us guidance
during the day time ?
Yajfia :—The Sun.
Janaka :—After sunset which is the light that guides us?
Yajfia :—The Moon.
Janaka :—And in the absence of the sun and moon ?
Yajfia :—Agni.
Janaka :—Which is the light that guides us in the
absence of the sun, moon and Agni ?
Yajfia :—Vacana.
Janaka :—Which is the light that shines in the absence
of all these luminaries ?
Yajfia :—Atmaijyotis (soul’s light).
Janaka :—Who is Atman ?
Yajiia :—‘‘Purusa’’ who is formed by the union of
“vyana”’ in pranas (lives) and jyotis (light) in the
heart. The soul is disposed to action with the help of
intelligence. In the end it transcends the body, senses
and mind and attains Moksa. In the state of conscious-~
ness the soul’s activities become manifest to us. When
in sleep, after deputing “Prana” for the protection of
the body, the soul remains outside the body. The senses
become inactive. Therefore we should never wake up
one who is asleep. When the soul remains in the body
and the senses are active, it is in a most vigilant state.
Thus the soul is above the states of wakefulness, dream
and slumber. The soul is the divine light of pure
energy.
Janaka who was pleased, gave the Sage a thousand
cows more. After that Yajfiavalkya spoke about liberation from worldly bonds.
Yajtia :—The soul has no connection with the three
conditions. Just as the actions in a dream do not affect
the soul, the actions in a wakeful state also do not
affect it. Just asa fish jumps from one side of the river
to the other and back again, life keeps jumping from
the state of wakefulness to the state of slumber and vice
versa.
Just as a kite goes up flying and then comes back to its
nest, one moves from the state of wakefulness to slee
and back again. In deep slumber, he merges with God,
¥AKRLLOMA,. An Indian town. (Mahabharata, Bh
YAKSA.
but he does not know that. In that state, the father or
the mother does not have the knowledge that they are
the father or mother.
After that Yajfiavalkya explained the nature of the sou
and the various aspects of its working in a state of wakefulness and of slumber. He added:—‘‘As long as there
is ‘‘Kama’’ (desire) there is “Karman” also. Life ee
on passing from birth to death and from death to birth.
One attains perfection when one is above all desires,
and acquires the highest divine knowledge. He is liberated from birth and death and becomes immortal. 4
By jfiana, dana and tapas we become self-purified pet
thus become worthy of the highest divine grace. i
have to go from the world of Karman (action) tot .
world of atman (soul). One who has acquired Brahma
jfiana (knowledge of Brahman) becomes a —__"-
Hearing these famous teachings of Yajfiavalkya, Jana
became his permanent disciple. , wos
5) His end. PYajnavalkya had two wives named Kalyan!
and Maitreyi. After giving his all to his wives he =
into immortality. (Brhadaranyaka; M.B. Santi Parva;
Chapters 3-9). che
6) His works. YaAajfiavalkya has written a Smrti on
subject of law. “‘Mitaksara” is its famous commentary”
Mitaksara is the highest authoritative treatise on La
in South India,
7) Other details. bly:
(i) Yajfiavalkya flourished in Yudhisthira’s assembly
(M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 4, Verse 12). B
(11) He was also a member of Indra’s assembly. (M.!
Sabha Parva, Chapter 7, Verse 12). a9
(1i1 ) Yajfiavalkya was the priest at the Rajasuya tia 3
of Dharmaputra. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter °~?
Verse 35), ) from
(iv) Yajfiavalkya had his knowledge of Vedas 6)
Siryadeva. (M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter 318, Verse 9/°
YAJURVEDA.
l) General, The Caturvedas are:—Rg veda, Yajurve?
Samaveda and Atharvaveda. Visnu P urana, P si ae
Chapter 5, mentions that Vaigampayana, the discip ae -
Vedavyasa, divided Yajurveda into twentyseven br ai ale
es and taught them to his disciples. Among those 415
ples there was YAjfiavalkya, the son of Brahmarata. .
was Vyasa who divided the Vedas. into four parts. ila;
dividing them, the sage Vyasa taught Rgveda to P a
Yajurveda to Vaigamp4yana, Samaveda to Jaimin!
Atharvaveda to Sumantu. ht
The rules for Japa, Homa etc. of Yajurveda were on
to Vyasa by Agnideva. If all thé rules of var tet:
are correctly observed, all desires will be fulfil fo
There are special rules for the observance of homa
the fulfilment of particular desires. oma
is
Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 46).
1) General. A class of Semi-gods. There are chic
three classes of inhabitants in Heaven :—Devass Ge 12
devas and Upadevas. Ganadevas consist of th “phasAdityas, 10 Viévadevas, 8 Vasus, 36 Tusitas, 64 A
Raa? 49 Anilas 220 Maharajikas, 12 Sadhyas 22
Rudras,. hey
Among the Upadevas there are 10 subdivisions- ial :
are, Vidyadharas, Apsaras, Yaksas, Raksasas, Ga? atasvas, Kinnaras, Pi§Acas, Guhyakas, Siddhas and i

YAKSAGRAHA
2) Origin. ‘There are different views relating to the
origin of the Yaksas. In Mahabharata, Adi Parva,
Chapter 1 we find that the Yaksas took birth after
Brahma’s birth from ‘‘Virat Purusa’s” anda. According
to a statement in Agni Purana, Chapter 19, Yaksas and
Raksasas were born from Muni, the grand daughter of
Kaé yapaprajapati. Thus Yaksas and Raksasas are related as brothers. In Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 66,
Verse 7, there is another passage which says that Yaksas
are the progeny of the sage Pulastya.
3) Other details.
i) Once Sukadeva sang the story of Mahabharata to the
Yaksas. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 1, Verse 108).
(ii) Lakhs of Yaksas remain in Kubera’s assembly,
worshipping him. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 10,
Verse 18).
(iii) There are Yaksas in Brahma’s assembly
(M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 11, Verse 56).
(iv) Kubera is the King of Yaksas. (M.B. Vana Parva,
Chapter 111, Verse 10),
(v) Bhimasena once drove away Yaksas and Raksasas.
(M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 16, Verse 57).
(vi) On another occasion, Sunda and Upasunda defeated
and persecuted the Yaksas. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 208, verse 7).
YAKSAGRAHA. A Graha (Evil Spirit) connected with
Yaksas. Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 930, Verse
53, mentions that people become mad owing to the adverse influence of this Grahax. :
YAKSAVATA. A place made famous In the Puranas. In
Devi Bhagavata, 5th Skandha, there 1s a statement noe
ing that it was at this place that the Danava calle
Rambha took a she-buffalo as his wife.
YAKSAYUDDHAPARVA. A sub-division of Vana Parva,
in Mahabharata, Chapters 158 to 164 of Vana Parva,
are included in this sub-division.
YAKSESVARA. An incarnation
were puffed with pride when they se
churning the rc of sos ae
iva took birth as Yakse ;
oie he put a blade of grass on the epounl, peor
them and asked them to take it ae ‘ t ough
the Devas tried their best, they were not adie ar e
move it. It was only then that they became cour : :
of their own incapacity. (Siva Purana, Satarudr
yeaa (VAKSINI). Women folk of Yaksas,
Purana, Chapter 50 mentions that the images of Ya “4
to be installed in temples should have fixed =
long eyes. Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter ea
Verse 105, states that Yaksini is a Devi and He cs ae
the prasada (naivedya) of the Devi one wate a =
ed of the sin of Brahmahatya (Killing oe eel
sac :
am of" ay a a bathing at this place
place is also
on the borders of Kurukse
one’s desires would be fulfilled. The ee aay this
famous for offering worship to the Pitr oe ae
lace will be rewarded with the bene Hee BG
Vi Mahabharata, Vana Parva, ie fa
Verse 93 mentions that this tirtha was
Pareeek (RG The disease of consumpAYAKSMA). onsu
© te urea aby Dak Pe
that this disease
at ot more details see under Candra).
also.
of Siva. The devas
cured Amrta_ by
der to allay their
YAMAJIHVA
YAMA. Kala. (For more details see under Kala).
YAMA (S): A band of special gods of the Svayambhuva
Manvantara (See under Manvantara).
YAMADUTA. One of the Brahmavadi sons of Vis vamitra.
(M.B. Anusasana Parva, Chapter 4, Verse 51).
YAMAJIHVA. A _ prostitute. In Kathasaritsagara,
Saktiyasolambaka, Ist Taranga, there isa story about
her as follows :—
In the city of Citrakita Ratnavarma a wealthy Vai‘ ya,
had a son named [gvaravarma. In order to avoid his
son falling under the influence ofprostitutes, the father
decided to teach “‘veSyatantram’’, to Isvaravarma
while he was a boy. Yamajihva, the prostitute undertook this task for a reward of 1000 Niskas. (a gold coin
of that time).
After completing his education on the wiles and. tricks
of prostitutes, he was sent by his father to start a trade
with a capital of five crores of Niskas. Isvaravarma
and his friend Arthadatta on their way, stopped at a
ark on ‘the outskirts of the city of Kaficanapura.
There he fell a victim to the bewitching charms of a
prostitute named Sundari. He spent the lion’s share of
the money given by his father, on her. On the advice of
his friend Arthadatta he was about to leave the place
- when Sundari pretended to be in danger of falling into
a well and asked for his help. Igvaravarma was again
caught in her trap and he was forced to spend the res
of his money also on her. When he was rendered penniless the prostitute and her mother deserted him.
1évaravarma returned home to his father, empty-handed. Ratnavarma took his son to Yamajihva again and
told her the whole story. He said that his son fell into
this plight because Yamajihva’s training was not effective. After listening to the whole story, Yamajihva
promised to recover the whole amount last by Ig varavarma. She brought her trained monkey named “Ala”
and placed 1,000 Niskas before him. She taught him to
swallow the whole amount. After that, she taught him
to give out by vomiting, the swallowed money in _instalments of twenty, thirty, forty etc., as ordered. ‘Then
Yamajihva said to ISvaravarma :—‘‘Take this monkey
with you and go to Sundari’s place. Make him swallow
the money in secret and get it again from him, in
instalments, in her presence. She would think that the
monkey is an inexhaustible source of wealth and
would be prepared to buy it at any cost— even
by offering her whole wealth in return. At first you
must pretend to be unwilling to part with the monkey.
In the end, you must make him swallow 2,000 Niskas
which he would be able to give out in two days at the
rate of 1,000 on each day. Exchange him for her whole
wealth and leave the place immediately.”
With this advice Yamajihva sent ISvaravarma with the
monkey. He went to Kaficanapura in the company of
his friend Arthadatta after receiving two crores of Niskas
from his father. When Sundari knew that Is varavarma
had come again with more money, she welcomed him
with due respect and invited him to live with her. He
er invitation and took up his residence there.
he brought the monkey into the house and in
the presence of Sundari.asked him to produce various
amounts of money for different purposes.
The monkey promptly vomited the various amounts
separately without making any mistake. Sundari and
her mother Makarakati were naturally amazed at the
accepted h
One day,

YAMAKA
marvellous performance of the monkey. Isvaravarma
explained that the monkey was capable of giving in this
way, 1,000 Niskas daily. Sundari made up her mind to
purchase the wonderful animal at any price. She requested Is varavarma to give her the monkey in exchange for
the crores of Niskas she had taken from him earlier.
But he turned down her request. At last she persuaded
him to sell the monkey to her for the entire wealth she
possessed. Igvaravarma secretly made the monkey
swallow 2,000 Niskas before handing it over to Sundari
and left the place at once to go to Svarnadvipa for
trade.
Ala, the monkey gave Sundari 1,000 Niskas on each of
the first two days, but on the third day she was disillusioned. In her disappointment and anger, she beat Alan.
The enraged monkey attacked both Sundari and
Makarakati and harmed them by biting and tearing
with its nails. They in turn, beat him to death. Thus
Sundari lost all her ill-gotten wealth and was reduced to
utter poverty and distress.
YAMAKA. A region in ancient India. The inhabitants
of this place were called ‘‘Yamakas’’. Mahabharata,
Sabha Parva, Chapter 52, refers to the presents offered
by the princes and people of Yamaka at Yudhisthira’s
Ag vamedhayajfia. )
YAMASABHA. Yama’s assembly. This assembly is
described in Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter 8.
It was Vigvakarma who built Yamasabha. It is 100
yojanas in length and 100 yojanas in width. Although it
is illuminated with sun-light it has an equable temperature. Sadness, old age, hunger or thirst are unknown
there. There is a dense growth of Kalpavrksas. All the
dead people who were famous in ancient times are
members of this assembly,
YAMI. A daughter of Sirya. One of the wives of Sirya
was Samjfia, the daughter of Viévakarma. Three
children, Manu, Yama and Yami, were born to Sirya
- by Sarmmjfia. (Visnu Purana, Part 3, Chapter 2).
YAMI. A wife of Dharmadeva. The ten wives of
Dharmadeva are—Arundhati, Wasu, Yami, Lamba,
Bhanu, Marutvati, Sankalpa, Muharta, Sadhya and
Vigva. (Visnu Purana, Part 1, Chapter 15).
YAMINI. A _ daughter of Daksa Prajapati. She was one
of the wives of Kagyapa. (Bhagavata, 6th Skandha).
YAMUNA. Another name for the river Kalindi. (See
also under Ka4lindi).
1) How the water in KGlindi turned Black :-The water in
the river Kalindi is black in colour. There is a story
behind the changing of the colour of this river-water
into black. Originally it was clear.
After the death of Sati, Daksa’s daughter, Siva broke
up Daksa yaga and went about rambling round the
world. Kamadeva who saw Siva who had lost his wife
(Sati) shot him with “Unmadastra” (an arrow causing
madness and excitement). Siva, in his excitement,
always thinking about Sati, wandered about, finding
peace and rest nowhere. In his excited and restless
state he plunged himself into Kalindi river. Just then,
the clear water of the river turned black. (Vamana
Purana, Chapter 6).
2) The greatness of Kalindi (Yamund). The Puranas
declare that by bathing in the holy K4lindi one attains
heaven. There is a story illustrating this in Padma
Purana, Chapter 30, as follows :—
Long ago, in Krtayuga, there lived in the country of
YAMUNA I.
YANA
Nisadha, a very wealthy Vaigya, by name Hemakundala. By doing various kinds of business, he had earned
eight crores of golden coins. By that time he was advancing in age. At this stage he began to think of the trans!-
toriness of worldly pleasures and set apart one-sixth of
his entire wealth for charitable purposes. He built two
temples—one for Visnu and the other for Siva. He
offered daily worship to the gods and spent money 11
generous hospitality. His two sons, Srikundala and
Vikundala were growing up. He entrusted the burden
of domestic affairs to them and went to the forest to
perform austere tapas, after which he attained Visnuloka.
His sons, who were intoxicated with their affluent and
luxurious life, deviated from the path of virtue an
began to indulge in all kinds of sensual pleasures. It
did not take long for them to be reduced to utter
poverty. Their relatives and dependants left them
their fate and at last, they began to resort to stealingFor fear of the King, the public and the law, they
changed their residence to the woods. One of them
went to a mountain and the other to a forest. One day,
the elder brother was caught by a tiger and the young¢™
was bit by a snake. Both of them died on the same day.
Yama’s agents took both to Yamaloka. DharmaraJ®
(Yama) ordered the elder brother to be sent to Naraka
(Hell) and the younger one (Vikundala) to be sent 1
Heaven,
Vikundala who knew that he did not deserve Heaven
by any standards, asked Yama’s agent how this ha
happened. The agent gave him this answer 2** There
was a Brahmana well-versed in Vedic lore, who was the
son of Harimitra. His 4grama was on the southern ait
of Yamuna. While you were living in the forest, you we!
associated with him. As a result of that contact, it 5°
happened that you bathed for two months in the
river K4lindi, the waters of which have the power! 9
absolving sinners. By your bath in the first a
you were liberated from all sins. By the second y° 4
have become eligible for Heaven. You have quali 1
yourself for the eternal bliss of Heaven, by that holy
act."
Yamuna is being worshipped as a goddess, Devote :
this goddess imagine her as riding ona tortoise, carry
ing a water pot in her hand and is of black complex!”
(Agni Purana, Chapter 50).
A town in ancient India. (Mahabharat,
Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 51 ). “.
YAMUNA ITI. A mountain, made famous in the Pura
nas, standing between the rivers Ganga and Yamun4:
M.B. Anuéasana Parva, Chapter 68, Verse 3). _ It
YAMUNADVIPA. An island in the river Yamuna. he
was on this island that Vyasa was conceived 45 tm
result of the union of sage Paragara with Satyaval
(M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 60, Verse 2).
YAMUNAPRABHAVA. A sacred place. Mahabharat;
Vana Parva, Chapter 84, Verse 44, mentions that wo
man who bathes here obtains the reward of AS vamed
Yaga and enters Heaven. ne
YAMUNATIRTHA. A holy tirtha on the bank of i
re Sarasvati. Mahabharata, Salya Parva, Chapt
— Verse 11, refers to a Rajastiya Yajiia performe 7
VA is Place by Varuna, the son of Aditi. ;
ate, (Fo oot the royal qualities like Sandhi, V4
r more details see under Sadgunas).
es of
grab?

YANASANDHIPARVA
YANASANDHIPARVA. A subdivision of Mahabharata,
Udyoga Parva, Chapters 47-71 of Udyoga Parva, are
included in this Parva. .
YASAHKETU. A King of the city called Sobhavati.
He was one of the chief characters in the sixth story
told by the famous Vetala in Kathasaritsagara.
YASAS. Father of Kalki, the tenth incarnation of Mahavisnu. Agni Purana, Chapter 16, mentions that towards
the end of Kaliyuga all people will become atheists,
there will be an intermixture of castes and all people
will become thieves and devoid of virtue. At that time,
the 15 branches of the Veda called Vajasaneyas alone
will be the authority. Mlecchas (low-class people)
assuming ‘the’ form of Kings will begin to eat human
beings. Agni Purana states further that at that time,
Lord Visnu will incarnate as Kalki, the son of Yasas
and Yajiiavalkya’s priest and after training himself in
archery and weapons, annihilate all Mlecchas.
YASASVINIT I. A woman follower of Subrahmanya. (M.B.
Salya Parva, Chapter 46, Verse 10)...
VASASVINI II. A sister of Paficali. (Bhagavata, Sth
Skandha). F
YASKA. A famous Sanskrit Grammarian of ancient times.
Although the people of India ‘always believed in the
greatness of the Vedas, the Vedas became unintelligible even to scholars owing to changes in language and
differences in grammar. It was Yaska and Saéyana who
saved the country from that plight. Yaska became famous
by composing ‘“Nirukta”™ (etymology) - There is areference to this ancient sage in Mahabharata, Chapter 342,
Verse 72.
YASOBHADRA. A son of King Manobhadra. PadmaPurana, Kriyakhanda mentions that Yasobhadra happened/to be bornin a royal family because in his previous
birth he had bathed in the Ganga.
YASODA. Foster-mother of Sri Krsna. How she became
6+; Krsna’s fostermother, 1s explained in a story given
‘n Bhagavata, 10th Skandha:— ee d
aie eran one of the Astavegs ae his wife tai
‘ispleasure to Brahma. In_ his anger, brat
iat ion ite born in the world as human beings
and to spend a life-time on eat tending one
, ‘th tears in his eyes, prayed to
ea th he should be bless-
‘nus dargana. Brahma granted that prayer.
ta a iatnent of this prayer that Drona was born
Yagoda in Ambadi.
d Dhara as I
vtODHARA I ; ‘Son of Durmukha, who fought on the
i f the Pandavas against the Kauravas. (Mahaa aiaia Drona Parva, Chapter 184, Verse5).
yASODHARA TI. Ason of Sri Krsna by Rukminidevi.
c=eana Parva, Chapter 14, Verse 33).
ER f King Trigarta. She was
SQDHARA. Daughter 0 !
eon by Hasti, King of the Piru dynasty and_ they a
had a son named Vikantha. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter
VASOVATI I. The name of
a city. Devi phe
tons that god Isana, the ruler of the
Bids ERE et lives in the city fags Yasovati,
eT i, A piincess: (Sea ee TE) are,
YATHAVASA. A muni (sage) who 10 epee ona
rasthadharma. He attained Heaven pve Vv a7
piace M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter 244, Lin ). 4
ep hin who was the eldest son of ee an
"ihe ddan brother of Yayati. Mahabharata, “ci ban
YAVAKSA
Chapter 75, Verse 31, mentions that he became a yogi
and lived in the forest.
YATIII.Oneof the sons of Visvamitra. (Mahabharata,
Anugasana Parva, Chapter 4, Verse 58).
YATI III. A community-group. They were perhaps enemies of yajfias. There are references to them in various
parts of the Rgveda.
VATINATHA. An incarnation of Siva. Ahuka, a forestdweller and his wife who lived in Arbuda (Abu) mountain were blessed by Yatinatha and as a result of the
blessing they were born as Nala and Damayanti in their
next birth. (Siva Purana, Satarudra Samhita).
YVATUDHANA. One of the sons of KaSyapa and Surasa.
All Raksasas who were born in this family are known
as “Yatudhanas”’.
YATUDHANI. A Raksasi who was born from the sacrificial fire when King Vrsadarbhi performed a yaga. As
directed by the king, she proceeded to the forest to destroy the Saptarsis. She remained there as the owner of
the tank in which the sages used to take bath. Seeing
her standing alone there, they enquired who she was.
She answered that she was guarding the tank. She allowed them to enter into the tank after each of them explained the meaning of his name. Accordingly, the sages
Atri, Vasistha, Kasyapa, Vis vamitra, Gautama and
Bharadvaja explained the meaning of their names before getting down into the tank. At last when sage
Synassakha’s turn came, he said that he was not prepared to explain in detail, the meaning of his name and
that she should be satisfied with his statement that he
was the sage Sunassakha. Yatudhani became angry on
hearing it and insisted on his giving the meaning of his
name. Sunassakha with a single stroke with his
“tridanda’”’ (trident) killed her. Sunassakha was really
Indra himself. (M.B. Anusasana Parva, Chapter 93).
YATUKARNA. A Devaguru. (See under Guruparampara) .
YAUDHEYA I. Ason of Dharmaputra. Mahabharata.
Adi Parva, Chapter 95, Verse 76, states that this prince
was born to Dharmaputra by Devikadevi, daughter of
Govasana, king of Sibi land.
YAUDHEYA II. A native of Yaudheya country. Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter 52, Verse 14, mentions,
that the Yaudheyas had participated in Yudhisthira’s
Rajasiiya.
YAUDHEYA III. A king. According to Matsya Purana,
he was the son of Prativindhya.
YAUGANDHARAYANA. Minister of Prince Udayana
who is celebrated in the Puranas.
YAUNA. A particular caste. Mahabharata, Santi Parva,
Chapter 207, states that they were Candalas and were
as ignorant as animals and birds.
YVAUVANASVA. Mandhata, the son of Yuvanaéva. (For
more information see under Mandhata).
YAUYUDHANI. Son of Satyaki the Yadava King. This
hero who escaped from the ruin of the Yadava dynasty
was presented with the region lying in the Sarasvati
river valley, by Yudhisthira. (M.B. Mausala Parva,
Chapter 8, Verse 19).
VYAVAKRITA I. A sage. (See under Arvavasu).
VAVAKRITA II. Mahabharata, Santi Parva, Chapter
908, Verse 26, refers to Yavakrita who was the son of
Angiras and the supporter of the eastern land.
VAVAKSA. A famous river in Bharatavarsa (Mahabharata, Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 30).

YAVANA 896
YAVANA.
1) General. There are many references to Yavanas and
the land of Yavanas in the Puranas. ‘There is a statement
in Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 85, Verse 34, that
the Yavana rase takes its source from Turvasu, the son
of Yayati. There is another version in Mahabharata,
Adi Parva, Chapter 174, Verse 36, that Yavanas were
born from the womb and the sides of Nandini.
2) Other details.
(i)Arjuna’s brother Sahadeva once conquered the Yavana
land. (M.B. Sabha Parva, Chapter 31, Verse 73).
(ii) Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter 32, Verse 17,
mentions that on another occasion, Nakula defeated the
Yavanas.
(iii) According to Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter
188, Verse 35, the world will be filled with Yavanas
and other Mleccha (low class) kings.
(iv) In the course of his conquests, Karna once subdued
the Yavanas. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 254, Verse 8).
(v) Mahabharata, Udyoga Parva, Chapter19, Verse 21,
mentions that king Sudaksina of Kamboja approached
Duryodhana with an ‘‘Aksauhini” along with the
Yavanas, to take part in Bharata Yuddha.
(vi) Mahabharata, Bhisma Parva, Chapter 9, Verse 65
states that at the time of Mahabharata, Yavana land
was part of India.
(vii) Originally Yavanas were Ksatriyas. But they became Sidras by the curse of Brahmanas. (M.B. Anus4sana Parva, Chapter 35, Verse 18).
(viii) Once there was a duel between a Yavana king
and Mucukunda. (For further details, see under Mucukunda).
YAVASA. A particular region of Plaksadvipa. Bhagavata,
5th Skandha says that Plaksadvipa had seven divisions
which were - Sivam, Yavasam, Subhadram, Santam,
Moksam, Amrtam and Abhayam.
YAVINARA. A king of the Piru dynasty. Bahyaéva was
his father. Five sons were born to Bahyasva. They were
Mukula, Srfijaya, Brhadistha, Yavinara and Kramila.
These five persons becarne famous in later ages under
the name of Paficalas. (Agni Purana, Chapter 278).
YAYATA. An ancient holy placein India. King Yayati
conducted a Yaga at this place. From that time the
place became sacred. (M. B. Salya Parva, Chapter 41,
Verse 32). :
YAYATI. An eminent king of the Lunar dynasty.
1.) Genealogy and Birth. From Visnu were descended
in the following order—Brahma—Atri—Candra—Budha
—Puriravas—Ayus—Nahusa—Yayati.
Sage Atri had three sons—Candra, Durvdsas and Dattatreya—by his wife Anastya. Candra’s son was Budha,
Budha’s son was Puriiravas, Puriiravas’s son was Ayus,
Ayus’s son was Nahusa who had six sons—Yati, Yayati,
Sarhyati, Ayati, Ayati_ and Dhruva. Yayati had two
wives, Devayani and Sarmistha. Two sons, Yadu and
Turvasu, were born to Devayani. Of them, Yadu became
the founder of YaduvarhSa. Sarmistha had three sons
who were Druhyu, Anudruhyu and Piru. The Puruvarnga traces its origin to Puru.
2). Yayati’s marriage. Yayati married Devayani, the
daughter of sage Sukra and Sarmistha, the daughter of
Vrsaparva. ;
There is a story behind this marriage, given in Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 76.
YAYATI
Once there was keen rivalry between Devas and Asuras.
For achieving victory Devas accepted Brhaspati and
Asuras accepted Sukra as their preceptors. Although
Devas slaughtered all Asuras they were restored to life
by Sukra by the power of his mantra. Devas and Asuras
resumed their battle. ““Mrtasafijivani’’ (the art of reviving the dead) was then unknown to the gods. Devas
sent the handsome youth Kaca to Sukra, to learn
Mrtasafijivani from him. There, Kaca fell in love with
Devayani, Sukra’s daughter. But after acquiring the
knowledge about Mrtasafijivani he returned, without
marrying Devay4ni. At the time of his departure, Kaca
and Devayani cursed each other. Devayani’s curse was
that Kaca’s newly acquired knowledge would not
produce the desired result, while Kaca’s curse was that
Devayani would not be married by any youthful rsi.
Sarmistha was the daughtcr of Vrsaparva, the Daitya
king. Devayani was the daughter of Sukra, the Daitya
preceptor. One day they were enjoying a bath in 4
forest brook with their maids, after leaving their clothes
on the bank of the stream. At that time Devendra who
came that way, transformed himself into a strong wind
and carried all the clothes to a place and put all of
them ina heap. Seeing this, the women rushed out of
the water and in the hurried confusion in snatching
their garments Devayani and Sarmistha happened to
put on each other’s clothes. A quarrel took place between them on this mistake and the angry Sarmistha
pushed Devayani into an unused well. Thinking that
Devayani was dead, Sarmistha and her maids went to
the palace.
At this time, Yayati who was aking of the lunar dynasty
happened to come there exhausted after his hunting:
After rescuing Devayani from the well and enquiring
about her identity and the circumstances in which she
fell into the well, he returned to his palace
Devayani sent her maid Ghirnika to her father and informed him about her mishap. The father, sage Sukra
became angry towards Vrsaparva, and came down from
Daityaloka and settled down in the forest with his dav
ghter. Afraid of his preceptor’s curse and anger, Vrs@
parva came to Sukra and offered profuse apologies to him
for his daughter’s misconduct. But Sukra answere¢
that he would be prepared to forgive only if Sarmist@
with 1000 maids would go and serve Devayani. Finding
no other way, Vrsaparva yielded to the condition. S00?
armistha and her 1000 maids went to the forest a2¢
began to serve Devayani. Sukra returned to DaityalokaSome time after this, Yayati came to the forest one d4Y
ae hunting. There he met Devayani, being attende
‘Dy many maids. In the conversation that followed, Dev
yani was able to recognize Yayati, She fell in love wit
him. But Yayati insisted that he was not prepare
marry her without the consent of Sukracarya. 5° she
her one of her maids to her father and informed him of
2 omg The sage readily agreed and had thet
triage performed. He also presented them Lv,
maids. After the ceremony, Yavit; d to his
palace with }; Y, Yayati returne 000
maids also a “ ba! Sarmistha and _ the oe
Chapters 76-81). Pe them. (M.B. Adi “ J
cy Bae demet it. Ate his ansival inhi AP
ade arrangements for Devayani’sresiG©
in his, own palace while Sarmisth; esidene”
stha took up her f

YAYATI
in Agokavanika. In due course, Devayani gave birth to
a son. The sight of the child roused the motherly instincts of Sarmistha who spent a thousand years in heartburning. One day, while she was brooding alone in her
garden, Yayati happened to come there. As they met,
their hearts were moved by tender feelings. Sarmistha
approached Yayati and begged for a son. But he tried
to evade her by pleading that it was not proper to do
anything in violation of Dharma. But in the end, he
had to yield to her earnest supplications and philosophical
arguments. ‘Thus Sarmistha conceived a son in secret.
When the child was born andit grew up, Devayani’s
mind was constantly vexed with the thought as to who
was the father. Once in an angry mood she questioned
Sarmistha ‘herself about it. She answered that, the
child’s father was a sage whose identity she could not
ascertain in the excitement of her union with him. Any
way, this answer satisfied Devayani.
Soon after, another son was born to Devayani. The
first boy was named Yadu and the second son, ‘Turvasu.
As a result of the secret relations between Yayati and
Sarmistha, three boys were born to her and they were
named Druhyu, Anudruhyu and Puru, respectively.
These boys also grew up in Ag okavanika. F
Once Devayani was in her garden with her shusban
and children. Just then, Sarmistha’s children also
happened to come there. Devayani who somehow had
her own suspicions, enquired of them their parentage
and the innocent children replied that their mother was
Sarmistha and their father was Yayati. Devayani who
became furious, immediately went to Asuraloka and
informed her father Sukra about it. On hearing Me ee
sage who was beside himself sla own t? ee
affection, cursed Yayati so ¢t
oe e, Yayati entreated Sukra to
the infirmities of old ag é L
Hila : the curse since he had not enjoyed his youth
to the full.
Sukra lifted the curse by assuring him that one of
sti’s sons would accept his father’s old age In CX
ae ceetet his youth and the son would be ower
King after Yayati. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapters
as Ati 1 Yadu for
] ‘on. Yayati asked his eldest son Ya
ne Ra falnest But the latter was not ee
change it for his father’s old age. Next the father
a roached his younger sons, Turvasu, Druhyu, and
‘Anudruhyy, with the same request, but all of them
in turn refused to oblige him. Even though Yayati
omised to return the youthfulness to them after a
ausand years, they refused to exchange it for his old
age, Yayati in his anger, cursed Yadu that his progeny
would never become Kings. Turvasu’s family would be
completely destroyed and Druhyu would float down the
river, with unfulfilled desires and faded prosperity. Puru
wholeheartedly accepted his father’s old age in exchange
for his youth and went to the forest. From that day
Vayati began his reign 7 fs heart. (M.B.
pa a 7 4 slightly different version
abort ay in which. Yayati fell a vie te the inaearg e way wa. Ut is as follows :—Seeing the rigorous
remket Yays ti’s virtuous life, Devendra began to
obgenvaaee 7 ie aunt that he might be dislodged
bei alanis ep e. He called his charioteer Matali an
oe A him 0 bring Yayati with him to Indraloka.
order
YAYATI
When Ma§tali failed in his mission, Devendra sent some
Gandharvas to enact the drama of “‘Vamanavatara”’
before Yayati. Enchanted by the charm and performance of Rati on the stage, the King became irresistibly
fascinated by the female sex.
Once the Raksasi named Jara and Madana got access
to Yayati’s body. While in that state, one day he went
to the forest for hunting. There he happened to meet
a beautiful girl named ‘“Asrubindumati’’. From her
companion-maid, Visala, the King came to know of her
history. Visala said to Yayati—‘‘Long ago when Kamadeva was burnt Rati was in deep grief. The gods were.
moved to pity by her tears and they restored Kama to
life. Rati who was extremely happy, began to shed
tears of joy. A beautiful girl was born from the tears
which fell from her left eye. This maid who is standing
before you is that girl. She is now looking for a suitabie
person for her Svayarnvara.”’ On hearing this story the
King expressed his desire to marry her. As rubindumaii
agreed to become his wife on condition that he exchanged his old age with some young person for his youthfulness. :
Yayati returned to his palace and asked each of his sons
to give him his youth. Puru alone fulfilled his father’s
desire. After this Yayati married Asrubindumati. But he
was compelled to submit to another condition also, that
he should not maintain any contact with his other wives.
Devayani and Sarmistha naturally, became distressed
and furious when they saw Yayati and Agrubindumati
as husband and wife. So Yayati asked Yadu to kill both
of them. But Yadu refused to obey him. Yayati who
became angry at this, cursed his son that one of his
descendants would marry his uncle’s daughter and
become heir to his mother’s wealth.
After some time, on Menaka’s advice, Agrubindumati
urged Yayati to go ona visit to Heaven. So he entrusted his kingdom to Piru and went to Vaikuntha.
5) Yayati’s reign. The Puranas describe Yayati as a
noble and eminent King. Some of the events which took
place during his reign and which deserve special praise,
are given below:
(i) Gift of cows. Once when King Yayati was in the
company of his subjects, a Brahmana approached him
with a request for Gurudaksinm® At once Yayati gave
cs a gift of 1,000: cows. (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter
(ii) Yayati and Galava. See para 6 under Galava.
(iii) His end. After a thousand years, Yayati handed
over his kingship to Piru and went to the forest. He
spent many years living in Bhrgutunga in the company
of sages, and feeding on fruits, roots, etc. and in the end
died in the forest and attained Heaven.
(iv) Yayati’s fall from Heaven. Yayati remained in Heaven
for many years. Once he insulted the Devas, Indra and
other gods and kings in the divine assembly. The gods
looked at one another, wondering who this proud fellow
was. They asked how this man reached Heaven without
renouncing his pride. In the meantime Yayati lost his
balance and fell down from Heaven to the earth. While
descending, he prayed that he should fall in the midst of
good men.
Just at this time, four kings named Pratardana, Vasumanas, Sibi and Astaka were performing a Yaga in
Naimisaranya. Yayati happened to fall head downwards into their midst, But since they caught him in

YAYATIPATANA 898
his fall he did not crash to the ground. He explained
his story to them. They allowed him to accept the
fruit of their Yajfia and to go to Heaven. But since he
was a _ Ksatriya he told them he had no right to it. Just
then, his daughter Madhavi arrived there. She allowed
him to take half of the divine grace which she had earned
and with the help of it Yayati ascended to Heaven
again. (M.B. Udyoga Parva, Chapter 120),
6) Other details.
(1) Yayati witnessed the battle between Kauravas and
Pandavas which was fought as a result of the theft of
King Virata’s cows. (M.B. Viradta Parva, Chapter 56,
Verse 9).
(i) In Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter 8, Verse
8, it is stated that King Yayati continues to be in
Yama’s assembly,
(11) Yaydati once gave I,000 cows to a Brahmana as
““Gurudaksina’’, (M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 195).
(iv) He came riding in Indra’s chariot and witnessed
the battle between Arjuna and Krpacarya, from the
sky. (M.B. Virata Parva, Chapter 56, Verse 9).
(v) Mahabharata, Udyoga Parva, Chapter 115, mentions that Yayati had conducted 1,000 Yagas and that
he was the leader of all Kings.
YAYATIPATANA. A holy place. Mahabharata, Vana
Parva, Chapter 82, Verse 48, mentions that a visit to
this place will give the same reward as an Agvamedha
Yaga.
YAYAVARA(S). A particular section of Brahmins.
Their special feature is that they wander about here
and there, following the course of life of the sages.
Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 13, mentions that
the reputed sage Jaratkaru was a Yayavara.
YODHYA. A country in ancient India. In Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 254, we read that this
country was conquered by Karna.
YOGA I. A sage who was the grandson of Svayambhuva
Manu and son of Sraddha. Yoga was born to Sraddha
by Dharma. (Bhagavata, 4th Skandha),
YOGA II. It is Jaana that reveals Brahman. Yoga is the
concentration on Brahman. Agni Purana, Chapter Ores
mentions that Yoga is the perfect union of Jivatma and
Paramatma.
In fact Yoga is activity with the body as its basis. It
may be doubted how a mere physical karman helps
Parabrahmadargana, But Maharsis assert that there
isan inseparable connection between matter and soul,
Matter and soul are merely the two phases of the
single “‘Astitva’”’. The object of Yoga is to achieve
union with Parabrahman; in other words, to attain
Moksa. The recitation of mantras is important in many
disciplines connected with the practice of Yoga. The
letters and words of mantras are so arranged that their
recitation in the proper manner produces profound and
favourable effects in the body. The habitual recitation
of mantras helps the practice of Yoga.
There are two broad divisions of Yoga—Hatha Yoga
and Raja Yoga. The two are interconnected and have
to be practised simultaneously. Hatha Yoga is mainly
concerned with disciplining the body by various kinds
of exercises. Standing in Paficagni with the arms held
aloft; standing on one leg or standing on the head are
some of these exercises, Raja Yoga aims at arousing
Prajfia by control of the senses.
YOGA II
Raja Yoga involves the practice of eight disciplines.
They are :—Yama, Niyama, Asana, Pranayama,
Pratyahara, Dharana, Dhyana and Samadhi. An
account of each of these is given below —
1) Yama. Yama means refraining from evil courses or
sinful things like cruelty or dishonesty. Yama nga
the practice of Ahirhsa, satya, asteya, brahmacarya an
aparigraha. ( Ahimsa =non-violence or not killing any
creature. Satya=truth; practising truth in thoughts,
words and deeds. Asteya=not stealing. Brahmacarya =
sexual continence. Aparigraha=not coveting wealth or
pleasures which are not absolutely necessary).
ii) Niyama. While Yama is a negative discipline,
Niyama isa positive one. It requires the positive practice
of virtuous courses. Niyama includes five things :—-
auca (cleanliness), Santosa (contentment), Tapas
(penance and austerities), Svadhyaya (study of the
Vedas and incantations or mantras) and Ig varapranidhana (prayer and meditating on God). Sauca means
not only cleanliness of the body, butalso of the mind.
The mind must be purged of all ‘malas’ like kama,
krodha and lobha. Tapas means ability to _endure
opposites (dvandvas) like heat and cold or joy and
sorrow. Svadhyaya is “study of philosophical works.
Ig varapranidhana—dedicating all actions unto God.
iii) Asana, The way of sitting or posture. Different
postures have been prescribed for different actions.
First of all, the yogi must choose a suitable place.
(Ihe place must be level, neat, free from stones, fire or
gravel, agreeable to the mind and not causing irritation
to the eyes). (Sveta§vatara).
Different asanas like Padmasana, Svastikasana and
Siddhasana have been prescribed for the practice of
Yoga.
Putting the left leg on the right thigh and the right leg
on the left thigh, holding the right toe with the left
hand and the left toe with the right hand, place the
chin on the chest and look at the tip of the nose. This
is Padmasana. ——
Sitting upright with the feet tucked under the hips is
Svastikasana, ;
Placing the left leg under the genitals, put the right
leg on it. Insert the chin into the pit of the throat;
control the senses; with steady eyes look at the point
between the eye-brows. This is Siddhasana which will
break open the doors to Moksa. |
iv) Pranayama. This is regulation of breathing. Inhale
air through the left nostril, retain the air in the lungs
for a few minutes and then exhale it through the right
nostril. The process may be reversed—that is inhalation through the right nostril and exhalation through
the left. This is the first step in Pranayama. Exhaling
the breath and then not inhaling for some time is
called recaka; the opposite process is called piuraka.
The object of pranayama is to awaken Kundalini.
Vv) Pratyahdra. This is a process of withdrawing the
five senses from the outer world. A man who practises
Pratyahara becomes oblivious of the outer world. This
helps the concentration of the mind on the Atman.
vi) Dharana. Withdrawing the mind from outer objects
and Concentrating it on the self.
Meditation, concentrating the mind of
like Bhrimadhya ang Abhicakra. Repeating the sacred syllable OM ‘is very useful in dhyana.

YOGAMAYADEVI
viii) Samadhi. In Samadhi the soul and mind unite,
the mind merging into the soul. Samadhi is defined
thus :—
When the mind and soul unite just as salt and water
unite, that state is called Samadhi.
YOGAMAYADEVI. The form of Devi in the state of
Yoga. It was Yogamayadevi who transferred the seventh
child of Devaki (Balabhadrarama) from her womb to
that of Rohini. (Devi Bhagavata 4th, Skandha) .
YOGAVATI. Third daughter of Mena. She was the
wife of the sage Jaigisavya. (Padma Purana, Srsti
Khanda).
YOGISVARA (S). A community of famous yogins.
Kavi, Hari, Antariksa, Prabuddha, Pippalayana, Avirhotra, Drumila, Camasa and Karabhojana belonged to
this community. They were the sons of the sage Rsabha and used to go about naked, everywhere. This
community of yogins participated in the yajfia of Nim,
King of Mithila and gave him advice on Bhagavatadharma. (Bhagavata, 4th Skandha).
YONIDVARA. A sacred place on the Udaya mountain.
(Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter 84, Verse 95).
YONITIRTHA. A sacred place in North India: A bath
in this place will make a person handsome and he will
get the reward of a gift of 1000 cows. (M.B. Vana
Parva, Chapter 82, Verse 84). ._
YOTIMATSAKA (POTIMATSAKA). A King in
ancient India. There is a passage in Mahabharata,
Udyoga Parva, Chapter 4, Verse 20, which mentions
that the Pandavas had sent an invitation to this King
ake part in the war.
YUDDHA (WAR) . (i) In ancient times 1 acca ie
was considered a ‘“‘Rajadharma . A war dec are
under this law was known as ‘«‘Dharmayuddha <a
(ii) Itis forbidden to use a weapon se aah it dae
as another weapon. tea une of arrows heated in fire,
also against Dharmayuddana. ' Rds
(ii) ft is also against the rules of Dhssay woes
kill a person who gets down SO vent he ean
e with joined palms, one who, 1,
oat za lotiselca refuge, one who IS ee: une ieee a
naked, an unarmed person, one who on a ae ae
ness the fight, one who is fighting wl! : es i pe
whose weapon 1s broken, one who a ere ie:
death of a son or other relative, one who 1s vanq ,
one who flees from battle, and one who refuses to attac
Miv) Ifa Be has fleeing from. battlefield is killed-by his
enemy, he carries with him his master's sins. P
(v) All the grace earned by the young man who flees
ttle, passes to his master.
(i) i fic soldier himself may take all booty in the
ept chariots, horses, elephants, umbrellas,
Pe, at, cows, women, weapons, silver and gold.
(vii) All costly articles, seized in battle, such as gold,
silver, jewels etc. are to be handed over to the King,
according to the Vedas. (Manusmrt, Chapter 7). :
ATIT I. A Kekaya King. This Yudhajit was the
ae. J f Kaikeyi Dagaratha’s wife, and the uncle of
Biakata Dagaratha’s death took place at the time when
Bharata as living in Kekaya country, at the ae hes
of Yudhajit (Valmiki Ramayana, Bala Kanda, 73:
YUVANASVA I
Iksvaku dynasty. In course of time their relations became hostile and they separated. At last Yudhajit exiled
Sudarsana from his country and crowned his own
brother, Satrujit as King of Ayodhya. (See under
Dhruvasandhi).
YUDHAJITA. A YaAadava King. In Padma Purana,
Srstikhanda and in Matsya Purana, it is stated that
Yudhajita was the son of Anamitra by Prthvi.
YUDHAMANYU. A warrior who fought against the
Kauravas from the side of the Pandavas. The following
references are made to him in the Mahabharata.
(i) Yudhamanyu was a prince of the Paficala royal
family. (M.B. Udyoga Parva, Chapter 17, Verse 5).
(ii) He took his position in the battle as the bodyguard
of Arjuna. (M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 15, Verse 19).
(iii) Yudhamanyu’s war-horse was a wonderful
animal, both in spirit and shape. (M.B. Drona Parva,
Chapter 23, Verse 3).
(iv) In Bharata Yuddha he fought against Krtavarma,
Duryodhana, Krpacarya, Citrasena the «brother of
Karna, and Asvatthama. Krpacarya defeated him. He
(Yudhamanyu) killed Karna’s brother Citrasena.
(Drona Parva, Chapters 92, 130; Karna Parva, Chap-
(v) Yudhamanyu met with his death in his fight against
Agvatthama. (M.B. Sauptika Parva, Chapter 8, Verse
YUDHISTHIRA. See under Dharmaputra.
YUGA. Seeunder Manvantara.
YUGANDHARA I (YUGANDHARAS). In the Pura_nas there are references to a mountain called Yugandhara. The inhabitants of that place were known as
Yugandharas. In Mahabharata, Vana Parva, Chapter
129, Verse 9, there is a statement that these people
used to drink the milk of camels and donkeys.
YUGANDHARA IJ. A warrior who fought against the
Kauravas from the Pandava party. He attacked Dronacarya in the battle and was killed by him in the end.
(M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 16, Verse 30).
YUGAPA. A Deva Gandharva. Mahabharata, Adi
Parva, Chapter 122, Verse 56, mentions that he participated in Arjuna’s birth festival.
YUKTASVA. A sage who was a Samavedin. There is a
story about this sagein Paficaviméa Brahmana :—
Yuktaéva who was a scholar in Vedas and Sastras once
abducted two new-born babies and killed them. Asa
result of that sin, he lost all his Vedic knowledge. To
recover his lost learning, he started an austere tapas.
After many years of tapas, he got back the whole of his
Vedic knowledge. |
YUPAKSA I. A military commander of Ravana. In the
battle between Sri Rama and Ravana, he was killed by
ie (Valmiki Ramayana, Sundara Kanda, 46 :
YUPAKSA II. A Raksasa. In the battle between Sri
Rama and Ravana, this Raksasa was killed by the
oe adi (Valmiki Ramayana, Yuddha Kanda
YUTAJIT. Ason of King Bhoja of the Yaduvarhfa.
King Bhoja had six sons, who were—Nimroci, Kinkana,.
Vrsni, Sahasrajit, Satajit and Yutajit. (Bhagavata, 9th
Skandha).
YUVANASVA I. A King of the Iksvaku dynasty.
1) Genealogy. From Visnu were descended in the
following order :—Brahma-Marici-Kasyapa- Vivasvan-

YUVANASVA ti
Vaivasvata Manu-Iksvaku-Vikuksi- Safada - Kakutstha
(Purafijaya )-Anenas-Prthulas va-Prasenajit- Yuvanaéva.
This Yuvanasva was the father of Mandhata.
2) Other detatls.
(i) Yuvanagva performed many Yagas. (M.B. Vana
Parva, Chapter 126, Verse 5).
(ii) Once he drank water which had been subjected to
special mantras (incantations) and as a result he became pregnant. Mandhata was born by cutting open
his belly. (For more details see under Mandhata).
(111) Yuvanasva once received a wonderful sword from
King Raivata. He presented that sword to King Raghu.
(M.B. Santi Parva, Chapter 166, Verse 78).
(iv) In Mahabharata, Anugasana Parva, Chapter 115,
Verse 61, it is stated that he had received “Paravaratattva”’ (ability to know the highest and the lowest) because he had renounced meat-eating.
YUVANASVA II. Another Yuvanagva was the grandson of Visvagasva of the Iksvaku dynasty and the son
of Adri. This Yuvanasva was the father of King Srava.
(M.B. Vana Parva, Chapter 202, Verse 3).
YUVANASVA III. Mahabharata, Santi Parva, Chapter
234, Verse 15, refers to another Yuvanagva who was the
son of Vrsadarbha. He attained Heaven by offering
gifts of jewels, women and dwelling houses.
YUVANASVA IV. A King of the Iksvaku dynasty who
was the grandson of Mandhata. There is reference to
him in the Rgveda. (Rgeveda, 10; 134).
YUYUDHANA. Another name for Satyaki. For further
details, see under Satyaki.
YUYUTSU I.
1) General. Son of Dhrtarastra by a Vaisya woman.
He is not included in the 100 sons of Dhrtardstra.
Yuyutsu is referred to by another name, ‘“‘Karana”’
in Mahabharata, Adi Parva, Chapter 68, Verse 113.
2) Other details.
(i) It was Yuyutsu who disclosed to the Pandavas that
once Duryodhana gave poisoned food te Bhimasena.
(M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 128, Verse 37).
(ii) Yuyutsu_was present at the Svayamvara of Draupadi. (M.B. Adi Parva, Chapter 185, Verse 2).
(iii) In Bharata Yuddha, Yuyutsu joined the Pandava
party. (M.B. Bhisma Parva, Chapter 43, Verse 100).
(iv) He was an eminent warrior and an honest and
YUYUTSU II
mighty hero. Many Kings attacked him in the city
Varanavata. He was not able to fulfil his desire to kill
all of them. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter 10, Verse
0) In Bharata Yuddha he fought with Subahu and
cut off his hands. (Drona Parva, Chapter 25, Verse 13).
(vi) The bullocks tied to Yuyutsu’s chariot were kille
by Bhagadatta’s elephant. (M.B. Drona Parva, Chapter
26, Verse 56).
(vii) Yuyutsu severely rebuked the Kauravas who rejoiced over the death of Bhagadatta. (M.B. Drona
Parva, Chapter 72, Verse 60). ;
(viii) Yuyutsu was defeated in his fight with Uluka.
(M.B. Karna Parva, Chapter 25. Verse 11).
(iz) As advised by Sri Krsna and Dharmaputra,
Yuyutsu went to Hastindpura with the ladies of the
royal family. (M.B. Salya Parva, Chapter 29, Verse
(x) On his return after the battle, Yuyutsu described
the details of the battle to Vidura. (M.B. Salya Parva,
Chapter 29. Verse 21).
(xi) At the suggestion of Dharmaputra, Yuyutsu began
to attend on Dhrtardstra to serve him. (M.B. Santi
Parva, Chapter 41, Verse 17).
(xii) Yuyutsu was guarding Hastinapura when the
Pandavas went to the Himalayas to get money from
Marutta. (Agvamedha Parva, Chapter 63, Verse 24).
(xiii) Under the leadership of Yuyutsu, the Pandavas
offered Jalafijali (offering libations of water) 0
Dhrtarastra. (Asramavasika Parva, Chapter 39, Verse
(iy) When the Pandavas departed on -their Mahaprasthana after handing over the reign of the county
to Pariksit, it was Yuyutsu who was entrusted with the
task of supervising Pariksit and the country. (
Mahaprasthana Parva Chapter 1, Verse 6).
(xv) In Mahabharata the following names are give?
for Yuyutsu :—Dhartaradstra, Dhrtardstraja, Dhrtarastraputra, Karana, Kx wavya, Kaurava and Vais yaputra.
YUYUTSU II. There is a reference to another YuyutsY
who was the son of Dhrtarastra by his wife Gandhari!
Mahabharata, Santi Parva, Chapter 67, Verse 93.

GENEALOGY
Mahavisnu
Brahma
The Prajapatis given below
(TF tt bt ct tf od Pee ee ee |
PREP VARS PPE PP SE REE EP ERE
oq ee oy oi be) ms ~ FS 5 Ef a x s ~A pa oo a, ct, i > D i be
7 48 & € & s of 8 @ Bae BME aw @ Arse’ B gs
a WS ‘ 3 So em oe BOR Sele Py Gg = nie a ©
~ HE | = 1p" @FRERS es Aas
cee — — Na wr SS 5
a
wm
| ANGIRAS
m m
Smrti Khyati
FE eee paged Pe eS
| Anumati. Raka. Kuhi. Sinivali. Utathya. a i. Samvartta.
| Svaha.
| ec i ge oe
| Pavaka. © Pavamana. Suci.
el ee
PULASTYA.
m m m
Havirbha. Priti. Manini.
Dattoli. Vigravas.
Pi i ey
Kaikasi. | Devavarnini (Ilabila)
Vaigravana (Kubera)
Vibhisana. Sirpanakha
Ravana Kumbhakarna.
mf mo m
Mandodari. Vajramala Sarama.
| 7 daughters
Kumbha. Nikumbha.
srealliagilil Atikaya. | Aksakumara
(Indrajit)

Ksama
ee ee
Kardama Urvariyan Sahisnu
a ee
Samrat Kuksi Virat
KRATU
m
Santati (Kriya)
eee ee ee a ey
Arundhati Balakhilyas (Sixty thousand in number)
(K) ATRI (K)
m
Anasiya
ns es
vanera Durvasas Dattatreya
m
Budha Ajamukhi
Vatapi Ilvala
Puriiravas (A6)
Ayus
Yayati Ayati
Sarmistha Devayani
= — Piru (A3) Yadu(H) Turvasy,
_ Sabhanara Cate Paroksa
aa Kalanara
Aranya Sriijaya
— Janamejaya Mahamanas ~— Titiksa
7 an perenne
—_ al. hors |
‘i 7 Vena Krmi Uri Darpa Kréadratha
Ghrta : | ) : Homa
ss ae Bhadra = Suvira = Kekaya Vrsadarbha Kapotaroma Sutapas
Pracetas Kicaka
Mlecchas
Bahi

Bali
Ana Se EE ee me og
ghadru aa I Kalinga Suhma Pundra Vanga Adriipa
Dadhivahana
Draviratha
Dharmaratha _
Satyaratha
Romapida (Lomapada)
a 2 a
Prthu
Calapa
(M) KARDAMA. (M)
=m m
Akati (A-2) Devahiti————____
Kapila
Grtsapati
see ep
Ksatriya Vaigya Sidra (Dirghatapas)
Brahmana
Dhanvantari
Ketuman .
Aviratha Divodasa Kala Anasiiya
m
Prataradana Marici Atri
Bharga Vatsa Kas yapa
Anarka Vatsabhimi
Ksemaka
oo
Vibhu
Anarta Sukum ara
Satyaketu

(A2) AKUTI
m
Ruci (Kardama)
Yajinia
m
Daksina
‘Siceelale anaes Nema ta a aL Ta ee es eee ee
Tora. Senisian om Bhadra. Santi. Idaspati. Idhma. Kavi. Vibhu. Sraghna. Sudeva, Virocana
(N) STHANU (N)
ae ee re ee. ee ee
s 424 2 # & ¥ YS fF KF F gg
oa re = sy rs oS = 3 3 zy
(O) Daksa
ri tc i. tf LS hr
ee ee Py SR PF S$ EF SS E
(Q) MARICI
m
Sambhiti
Kagyapa Paurnamasa
Viracas Parvata
(R) BHRGU
m m
Khyati _ Puloma
Laksmi Dhata Vidhata Cyavana (m)——-—-—____ Sukanya
m m
Ayati Niyati Orva Pramati (m) Pratap!
= on Rcika Ruru (m) Pramadvara
Dyutiman Markandeya Jamadagni Sunaka
Rajavan Vedas iras Renuka
| iciais di ecient
Rumanvan. Suhotra Vasu Visvavasu Parasurama

Sraddha Chaya.
(Sarhjfia) |
. al
22 8 2B ryEisedie § de 23
Ss} > id a rT a az ri =] a0 m
so DH hA S = > vA a Q a c is M4
4 4 BOF oe oe
Devabhrat Valkala Sumati
— Haya Jyoti
Dagajyoti (Ten thousand Sons) Vimala Vasu
Satajyoti (One lakh of sons ) Pratika
Sahasrajyoti (Ten lakhs of Sons) Oghavan | Oghavati
Sudarsana
(FP) VIVASVAN (P)
Il m
(S) VASISTHA
m m
Orja. Arundhati.
a—
o—
VUBALR S—
epluy—
sedejng—
nyVgG—
seleyy—
ae
QO £ for — pa) < o
. =: fp pgp FF B 3
@ - oer . oO
S i pes
F
Adrsyanti
a ara
Kali
Vyasa
(T) ADHARMA (T)
m
Hirnsa
gaps pee
| vie
Anrta Nikrti
Vedana Bhaya Naraka Maya
m m
Raurava “ee 7
Soka Trsna Krodha
Duhkha
Vyadhi Jara
Prsadhra

gr RE pO se ee
(Al) HETI
m
Bhaya
Vidyutkesa
Salakatankata
SukeSa
m
Devavati
| Is. be
Malyavan Sumali Mali
m m
Sundari Ketumati
[TTDFkOLC (CUCU UT EL UT TEE LL LO}
— mw ac ‘%
sag UPS & GS F Tesuse Sere eee eT _E
S&S 2 = U0 BS ¢ 8 & > FS pe fF Bw Fe B 8 BF |B
PB ee RF B PBs eR 2 RF ge" BE ag
Br E & § 5 PB ep mm Ss & gs 8B 4 BB
. “a >-> BS ww = me UG © 5 ot hae
not ES =
pe)
(U) DHARMA
sige nase deepal eins — ger a AN
(bdr f pereere bs -
ce a = 5 fa © c pa) &
m | m Varcas | | l
Varastri Devala ~_ | Vaitanda Srama Santa Dhvan!
Vig vakarma Manojava Avijiiatagati Manohara
m Kumara Sakha Visakha Naigameya
Surabhi
Varuna
Dravina Hutahavya Sisira Prana
Barhismati Rudra Tvasta Ahirbudhnya Ajaikapat Rechts
m
m
Priyavrata VisSvarupa Siva
m
Chaya
Sanaigcara Manu Tapati
Agvini devas Revanta Yama Yami
Manu

(V) SVAYAMBHUVA MANU
m
’ Satarapa
a
Priyavrata (G) Uttanapada Akiti Devahiti
m m
Suruci Suniti
Uttama Dhruva
m
Sambhi
ee
| Li
Bhavya Sisti
m
Succhaya
| | | oe nxt J
Vrkatejas Vrkala Vipra Ripufijaya sy
Brhati
Caksusa
Puskarini ( Virani)
Caksusa Manu
m
Nadvala
Le ema
| | | Saribavak ae | bin | Pie
Abhimanyu ee Atiratha Agnistu Suci
Satadyumna |
Kuru.
Atreyi (aney!)
| Tie
Svati Kratu Angiras Gaya Sibi
Anga Sumanas
m
Sunitha
Vena
Prthu : : |
Antardhana vidi Sita Magadha Palita
n
mm . a
Sikhandini
Havirdhana
m
Dhisana
p< TT rat
Pracinabarhis Sukra Gaya Krsna Vraja Ajina
m
Savarna

(W) *KASYAPA
Prominent Wives
Krodhayasa( D )
Tamra (C)
Kalika (B)
Dani (A)
Diti (x)
Aditi
Arista
Anala—tTrees
Mana—Humanity
Dvadagadityas (12 sons
of Aditi)
1 Dhata
2 Aryaman
3 Mitra
4 Sakra
5 Varuna
6 Améa
7 Bhaga
8 Vivasvan
9 Pisa
10 Savita
11 Tvasta
12 Visnu
Astavasus
(8 Vasus)
1 Dhara
2 Dhruva
3 Soma
4 Ahas
5 Anila
6 Pratyiisa
7 Prabhasa
8 Anala
Ekadasa Rudras
(11 Rudras)
1 Ajaikapat
2 Ahirbudhnya
3 Virupaksa
4 Suresvara
5 Jayanta
6 Bahuriipa
7 Aparajita
8 Savitra
9 Tryambaka
10 Vaivasvata
11 Hara
Surasa
Ira
Surabhi
Khasa

(A 6) PURURAVAS
m
Urvasi
ee
orl Suit | | |
| yus Satyayus Raya Vijaya Jaya
=e Vasuman Srutafijaya Eka Bhima Kajficana Hotraka
| re
Nahusa Ksatravrddha Raji Rambha Anenas Jahnu
| | | | 500 sons Rambhasa Suddha |
Yati | Samyati | Viyati Piru
-_ Kriya Suci |
Yayati Ayati Krti Balaka
m Trikakup |
Devayani | |
and Santaraya Ajaka
Sarmistha
Suhotra (A 8) Kuéga
Kars ya Kuga Grtsamada Kuganabha Vasu Kusamba
| Asirtarayas
Kausi Pratiksatra Gadhi
Rastra Safijaya Satyavati
m
Rcika
Dirghatamas Jaya
Dhanvantari Krta
Ketuman Haryaéva
Bhimaratha Sahadeva
Divodisa Jayatsena
Pratardana Sankrti
Alarka Jaya
Santati Ksatradharma
Sunitha
Suketana
Dharmaketu
Satyaketu
Dhrstaketu
Sukumara
Vitihotra
Bharge
sharon

(A5 TURVASU
— ee fe eA eel
— ES ST tad
a ee no ee ee Oe ae.
Vahni
Bhanu
Cabhion
a
Nsluets
Dusyanta adopted son)
Varittha
Gandira
Ganitidivs
Ketala
Cola
Pandya
Kola
ellen
a
oo
Gindbars
a
inte
Alte sa
Pracetas
_— Papataegfil
Sabhanara
fasilstore
Kalanara
Srfi =
Purafijaya
Semeadion
Mahasala
Mahamanas
m
Usinara
m m
a a Prsadvati——-—
Sibi
m
Krmi
Suvrata
m
Nrga Nara
Nrga Nara Krmi
Suvira Kekaya Bhatra
Vrsadarpa
Titiksu
oe509

Paila
Sutapas
Mahayogt Bl
al — anga Kalinga Pundra Baleya Balayogi
Draviratha
Dharmaratha
Citraratha
Satyaratha
Lomapada
Caturanga
Prthulaksa
Campa
Haryanga
Bhadraratha
Brhatkarma
Brhadbhanu
Brhadatma
Jayadratha
Brhadratha
seas
Karna
Vrsasena
Prthusena
; (E) aie ial
it a
Danda | -_ sit
Sasada
_— (Purafijaya)
Anenas
Prthulasva

Visvagasva
Adri
Yuvanasva
Sravasta
Brhadasva
( Satrujit)
Kuvalayaé va
Bhasas
(.....Gontd. )
Prasenajit
Yuvanagsva
Mandhata
Ambarisa) Mucukunda Purukutsa Fifty daughters
m
Trasadasyu Hermit Saubhari
Anaranya
Haryagva
Vasumanas
Sutanva
Trayyaruna
Satyavrata (Trifanku)
Hariscandra
Rohita$va
Cuficu
Sudeva
Bharuka (F)
—— ani
(C) Tamra
nh
aat Dhrtarastri Suki
Hawks and Swans and Nata
Eagles ruddy geese
Vinata
Aruna Garuda
TE eS Sees
Sampati | |
Jatayu Bali Sugriva

SS...
KASYAPA
m
(D) Krodhavasa
FiS rere ae \%
Sarduli Sveta Surabhi Surasa Kadri
Mrgi Mrgamanda Hari Bhadramata Matangi
Nagas Reptil:
Animals | | Elephants |
| | (Serpents)
| Lions Monkeys Iravati Tigers Leopards
| Airavata
Rksa Srmara Camara
, Eight elephants
holding the globe
Rohini Gandharvi
Cattle Horses
.o ae KASYAPA (m) Diti
The Daityas given below.
Soe acta sesshauilee Vajratiga Gomukha Hiranyaksa Hiranyakagipp | Ajamu
Mayasuta Vibhiti Varangl saa Sees
“a Mahaés ura Tarakasura Sakuni ‘igo
—" | Dvimirdhan | |
Agnimukha ; Anuhlada Rahu- Ketu
anku
Vajrabahu Hrada
Asva
Hirany@ Sarnhrada
(Y) See below
and
Prahlada
| (Z) See below.
(Y) wien woes
es ee
| L. ui
Ayusman Sibi Baskala
(Z) KASYAPA KASYAPA
m mm m
PRAHLADA (A) Danu (B) oa
Virocana Maya —
m
Hema — eat Kalaka
| ror"
Mahabali Mayavi Mandodari
Bana Dundubhi
Four Crores of
Nivatakavacas

(H) YADU
ee
Sahasrajit Krosta Nala (A7) Ripu
Satajit
Mahahaya Venuhaya Hehaya_ [Ekavira]
Dharma
Kuni
Sadajit Mahisman Bhadrasena Durdama
Dhanaka
Krtavira Krtagni Krtavarma Krtaujas
Karttaviryarjuna
Jayadhvaja Sirasena Vrsabha Madhu Urjita
Talajangha Vrsni (I) \
Vitihotra
Ananta
Durjaya
(I) VRSNI
Sumitra Sudhajit Vasu Sarvabhauma
La
_ Nimna
ny
Satyaka Satrajit Prasena
Satyaki | Yuyudhana) ©
Jays
Kuni
Anamitra
Prgni
Citraratha ; Svaphalka (J)
| ( Contd... eo )

Vidaratha ana
: toh
Sira Vahni
ek Viloma
Bhoja Kapotaroma
Hrdika Tumburu
Dee {=
| | | Dundubhi
Devavaha Gadadhanva Krtaparva Siira
m Daridra
Marisa |
Vasu
Vasu | Devasravas | Srfijaya_ | Syamaka | Kavika Vasudeva Nahuka
Devabhaga Anaka Kakanika Vatsa m
Devaki Ahuka
Krsna
Devaka Ugrasena
Pradyumna |
Kamsa
Aniruddha
Vajra |
Sons:—
Devala Upadeva Sudva
Daughters:
Devaraksita Sahadeva Deveaki
iodevs Srideva
(J) SVAPHALKA
| | er | ed
| Ksatroleksa Satrughna | Pratibahu
Srutadeva Santideva
oe Dh ddh
a armavrddha
seis Asaiga va | Mrduvadgin Sukarma Arimardana Gandhamada
rur
et
Upadevaka
Devaka
(G) PRIYAVRATA
m
Barhismati
Agnidhra Yajfabahu Hiranyaretas Savana al Kavi | Uttama Raivata
m Idhmajihva Mahavira Ghrtaprstha Medhatithi | Urjasvati Tamasa
Parvacitti Vitihotra =
ukra
| | a co ai ; he
Ilavrta Ramyaka Hiranmaya Kurt’ Bhadragva Ketumala Devayani
Nabhi Kimpurusa Hari
m m m m m ae m c m : m
Merudevi m Ugradarmstri Lata Ramya Syama Nari Bhadra Devavithi Yayati
| Pratiripa
Rsabha
Jayanti

s
Be] eleyg—
BAVA Sny—
BI AAv[I—
vywAvAly—
vAyle
vuoseipeug—
yidseapuy—
eqqtepiA—
BLeIA—
he
pam
. aficajani
Sumati Rastrabhrt Sudargana Avarana
Ind algae
Devatajit
Devadyumna
Paramesthi
eatin ys
Pratiharta
Aja
Bhai
Sita | Udgitha )
Prastota
v: bhu
Prthusena
stakia
Gaya
Citraratha Sugati Avarodha
Samrat
Marici
3induman
bi aiive
Viravrata
iden a OP
Tvasta
she
Hundred sons and a
daughter
Wen
jeddig—
esyueuy—
eyppnqeig—
VUPAP
Dhimraketu
BIJOYIIAY—
epiuriq—
BSeUIer)
yqeiey—
eurle

(A4) GALA
Garda
Suketu
Brhatksatra
N ‘ ra iain Garga Hasti
Sankrti Papaksaya Sini
| Purumidha Ajamidha Dvimidha
Rantideva Kuru |
Vipra
Rksa Brhadistha Nila
Samvarana Brhadbhanu Santi
Tumburu Brhatkaya Sug anti
is |
| Se | Le
Pariksit Sudhanus Japana Nisadhas va Jayadratha Puruja
Suhotra . Suratha Visada Arka
ae 3
Cyavana Vidiratha Senajit Bharmasva
Krti Sarvabhauma ( B4) Ruciras va Paficala
| Jayatsena
| Raviyan Drdhahanu Kas ya Vatsa |
Uparicaravasu
; | Bhavuka | | ab |
| | Mudgala Yavinara Kampilya Brhadistha Sanjaya
: [a ee
ea z ddhata
Gyhacren Kug amba Mavelavasu sili alee Ate
oe ee |
| | Pre a (m)
Kuésagraja Jarasandha ti Nia arias —
| paces es
Rksa Prsata Satanand
Rsada 40 al tL 1 : | a
= Be @ Suda
Jabhu = a a tai Saradvan
| Somaka
| Drupada
ee oe ee Deepens Hal a ae
Devap! Santanu Balhika Dhrstadyumna Krsna (Paficali)
(Mahabhisak) |
Dhrtaketu
Dhrstaketu

(A8) SUHOTRA
Brhatputra
austen Hive atie Purumidha
Keé ini
an Japan As bes
Aj akAsva Balakas va
Kus ika
caahi
a | Visvamitra
Devarata
(L) oe (L)
Hicbeasdrarke Brha —_ Brhadbh anu
Seen
Jayadratha
Vijaya
Dhrtavrata
Satyakarma
Atiratha
Karna |
Vrsasena
(A3) Piru
Janamejaya
Pracinvan
Pravira
Namesyx
Vitabhaya
Sundu
Bahuvidha
Samyati
Raudraég va
m
Mifrakeéj
(Contd...-)

ig he ocala
| (....Contd)
Rkseyu Krseyu Sannateyu Ghrteyu Citeyu Sthandileyu Dharmeyu Sammiteyu Rteyu Matinara
(Anvagdrsti )
(Anvagbhanu)
| Santurodha Pratiratha
ee
Kan
Daayeaits Pravira eld ai i”
| Sakuntala Medhatithi
| Bharata (Vitatha )
Suhotra
Suhota
Gala (A4)
(B4) SARVABHAUMA
Jayatsena —
| Ravaya
Bhavuka
Sakroddhata
Devatith!
Rksa
Bhimasena
Pratipa
(eek ee oe
we | "oles
\ Devapi Santanu Balhika
(Mahabhisak)
Te SNES 2
| | veal hl
, Vyasa = Bhisma Citrangada Vicitravirya
( Wife’s son )
‘ Dhrtarastra Pandu Vidura
m TE i nts
Gandhari Kunti Madri -
pias. a Newenk teas ) ee
Duryodhana and DuSssala Nakula Sahadeva {A8)
brothers 100 )
m
Renumati
Satanika
ee eee nal |
pon eae imasena Arjuna
ee es ee
| Ghatotkaca Abhimanyu
Devaka Prativindhya )
(Contd. .)
a

(A8)SAHADEVA
Srutagravas
Ayutayus
Sioeasttien
Sunaksatra
Brhatsena
Karmayjit
Srutayajfia
Vipa
Suni
Sra
Drdhasena
he iil
Sunita
Satyajit
Ksema
Suvrata
Visvajit
Purafijaya
(AP }EROBEA
Vrajinavan
éyahi
el eku
Pirherathon
Sag nd
Prthu§ ravas
Dharma
Rucaka
Jyamala
Vidarbha
Kara Kratha Romapada
Kuni
Rei
Nirrti
Dasarha
wale
Jimuta
Vikrti
Bhimaratha
Salluni
Ksremnbihi
Devarata
Devaksatra
Satvata
(....Contd.)
Pariksit
Janamejaya
Satanika
Sahasranika
AS heeseities
Anikrsna
Gubis
Citraratha
Suciratha
Dhrsaman
Senge
Sunita
Trceaksus
a“
tio hsbyliees
Medhavi
Ac tevatia
Nini
Satanika
Durdama
Vibhinara
Dandapani
Nini
Ksemaka

| (F) BHARUKA
| Bahuka
Sagara
m
Keégini Sumati
60,000 Sons
Asamafijas
Ams uman
Bhagiratha
Srutanabha
Sindhudvipa
Ayutayus
oF
Sarvakama
Sudas
| | — (Kalmasapada)
| Agmaka
wit
chtewd ga
Dilipa (Dirghabahu)
Raghu
Ave
Dagaratha
Kaikeyi Sumitra
Bharata
Satrughna
m
Kausalya
Rama
SS.
sant a Lava
Laksmana

(Bl) DiSTA (B2) NARISYANTA
Nabhaga Citrasena
Bhalandana Rksa
Vatsapri Midhvan
Pramsu Kirca
Pramati Indrasena
Khanitra Vitihotra
Caksusa Srutasgravas
Rambha Urufgravas
Khaninetra Devadatta
Karandhama Agnivega
Viksit Agni
Marutta >
Damaya
Rajyapravardhana (B3) NABHAGA
Sudhrti Ambarisa
Nara |
Virupa Ketuman Sambhu
Kevala
Prsatagva
Bandhuman
| Rathitara
Vegavan
Trnabindu
m
Alambusa
Tlabila Visala Sinyabandhu Dhimraketu
m
V isravas Hemacandra
Kubera Dhimraksa
Sriijaya
Sahadeva
Kréagva
Somadatta
Kakutstha
Sumati
Janamejaya

e-

ANCIENT INDIAN TRADITION
AND MYTHOLOGY
( IN ENGLISH TRANSLATION )
( MAHAPURANAS )
General Editor : Prof. J. L. Shastri M.A., M.O.L.
App., In Fifty volumes : Each Vol. Rs. 50
Postage Extra : Demy Size : pp. 400 to 500 each
Vol. : Cloth Bound with Gold Letters
and Plastic Cover.
Ancient Indian literature is a vast store-house
for getting insight into all aspects and phases of
ancient Hinduism. Being a veritable source of
Indian Traditionand Mythology, the Puranas occupy
a unique position in this respect, but hitherto their
circulation was limited to a few scholars who could
understand Sanskrit Language. This vast ancient
literature has remained untranslated so far in any
international language. A few English translations
of some Puranas that have appeared are incomplete
since they have left out many portions and failed to
satisfy the needs of indologists.
We have started the series «Ancient Indian Tradition and Mythology’ in 50 Volumes with the
English translation of the following Mahapuranas:
(1) Siva, (2) Vayu, (3) Garuda, (4) Kirma, (5)
Naradiya, (6) Linga, (7) Matsya, (8) Markandeya,
(9) Visnu, (10) Vamana, (11) Brahma, (12) Brahmanda, (13) Brahmavaivarta, (14) Agni, (15) Varaha,
(16) Padma, (17) Skanda, (18) Bhagavata and (19)
Bhavisya. ”
As desired, the translation of a Mahapurana is
accompanied by a critical introduction, general
index and footnotes. The task has been assigned
to a number of scholars whoare guided by a competent Board. Each Volume will cover 400 to 500
pages of Demy size, in uniform printing, paper and
binding in the manner of the Sacred Books of the
East Series which we have brought out in 50 Vols.
So far the English translation of the following
Puranas has been published.
Vols. : 1, 2,3, 4, Siva Purana (complete)
5, 6, Linga Purana (complete)
7,8, 9, 10, 11, Bhagavata Purana (complete)
12, 13, 14, Garuda Purana (complete)
Price of each Vol. Rs. 50
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS
Delhi :: Varanasi :: Patna

a i
s' a4
Th
if
a
é
s
cn ;
\ os
wr -
J
dia
A
ety «tee
r hey ’
She g Te’
ae hae hy
ie all 4
ee a ge toe

PS > “aa
re
yet
