READABLE DATASET
================================================================================
Original file: raman_how_to_judge_horoscope_2.json
Dataset number: 324 of 455
Format: valid JSON
Structure: Object / structured dataset
Original size: 651,282 bytes
Top-level fields: 11
Title: raman-how-to-judge-horoscope-2
Creator: —
Date: —
Description: —

CONTENT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
METADATA AND OTHER FIELDS
  • title: raman-how-to-judge-horoscope-2
  • creator: —
  • date: —
  • description: —
  • subject: —
  • identifier: —
  • source_folder: How to judge horoscope - XML
  • total_pages: 483
  • total_words: 117245
  • text_quality:
    • ocr_word_validity_score: 0.971
    • quality_tier: good
    • note: —

FULL TEXT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
BV Raman Series
How to Judge
A HOROSCOPE
Volume Two
B.V. Raman

How to Judge a Horoscope
Volume Two
VII to XII Houses
BANGALORE VENKATA RAMAN
GAYATRI DEVI VASUDEV
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS
PRIVATE LIMITED * DELHI

Second Edition: Bangalore, 1982
Fourth Edition: Delhi, 1992
Fifth Edition: Delhi, 1995
Reprint:Delhi, 1997, 2000, 2003
© MRS. RAJESHWAR] RAMAN
All Rights Reserved
Also available at:
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS
41 U.A. Bungalow Road, Jawahar Nagar, Delhi 110 007
I Mahalaxmi Chamber, 22 Bhulabhai Desai Road, Mumbai 400 026
236, 9th Main III Block, Jayanagar, Bangalore 560 011
120 Royapettah High Road, Mylapore, Chennai 600 004
Sanas Plaza, 1302 Baji Rao Road, Pune 411 002
8 Camac Street. Kolkata 700 017
Ashok Rajpath, Patna 800 004
Chowk, Varanasi 221 001
Printed in India
BYJAINENDRA PRAKASH JAIN AT SHRIJAINENDRA PRESS.
A-45 NARAINA. PHASE-I, NEW DELHI 110 028
AND PUBLISHED BY NARF.NDRA PRAKASH JAIN FOR
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PRIVATE LIMITED.
BUNGALOW ROAD, DELHI 110 007

CONTENTS
Preface to Fourth Edition
Preface to Second Edition
Preface to First Edition
Chapter XI—Concerning the Seventh House
XII—Concerning the Eighth House
XUI—Concerning the Ninth House
XIV—Concerning the Tenth House
XV—Concerning the Eleventh House
XVI—Concerning the Twelth House
XVII—Some Practical Illustrations
An Index to Technical Terms

PREFACE TO THE FOURTH EDITION
The third edition (wrongly printed as Second edition) of the
Second Volume of HOW TO JUDGE A HOROSCOPE, dealing
with Houses 7 to 12 was sold out within hardly a year after its
publication, thanks to the keen interest evinced by the educated
public in my writings on astrology.
The fourth edition herewith presented has been thoroughly
revised and some paragraphs re-writen.
Credit goes to Motilal Banarsidass for printing out this edition
attractively in short time.
It is my hope that the educated public will continue to evince the
same interest in my astrological writings, as they have been doing
for the past half a century.
Bangalore B. V. RAMAN

PREFACE TO SECOND EDITION
The first edition of the second volume of How to Judge a
Horoscope, dealing with Houses 7 to 12 was sold out within
hardly a year after its publication, thanks to the keen interest
evinced by the educated public in my writings on astrology.
The second edition herewith presented has been thoroughly
revised and some paragraphs re-written.
Credit goes to IBH Prakashana for bringing out this edition
attractively, in a short time.
It is my hope that the educated public will continue to evince
the same interest in my astrological writings, as they have been
doing for the past half a century.
Bangalore B. V. RAMAN

PREFACE TO FIRST EDITION
The first edition of the first volume dealing with Houses 1 to
6 was published in 1941. For various reasons not worth
mentioning preparation of the second volume had to be delayed
all these years until my daughter Gayatri Devi Vasudev came
forward a year ago and took up the preparation under my
guidance. But for her assistance, the second volume would not
have seen the light of day.
The second volume deals with Houses 7 to 12. It can be
considered as more important than the first volume because it
covers such important matters as marriage, occupation, etc.
The pattern of writing is more or less similar to that adopted
in the first volume results of the disposition of the lord of a house
in different houses, general combinations bearing on the house,
results of different planets occupying the house and the time of
fructification of such indications followed by a number of practical
illustrations.
In fact the treatment of the seventh and tenth houses is so
exhaustive that such details as the possibility and time of
marriage, its break-up and re-marriage, nature of wife, her
character, disposition, status, number of marriages, etc., have all
been dealt with exhaustively.
So far as the tenth house is concerned it is the pivot of the
horoscope—whatever is astrologically possible to indicate

the nature of profession in the present political, social and
economic set-up has been explained as clearly as possible.
The other houses, viz., eighth (longevity), ninth (general
fortune, foreign travels, father, etc.), 11th (financial gains) and
12th (losses, spiritual advancement, etc.) have not been underrated. They have also received due attention.
In the judgement of a horoscope an astrologer faces many a
pitfall. How to overcome such pitfalls and arrive at a judgement
have been explained with suitable illustrations.
The book has been illustrated with over 260 charts and is
therefore of great practical importance to all those who wish to
study astrology.
The first and second volumes covering the entire gamut of
predictive astrology, especially in its practical aspect, will be
found to be of immense use to all those who are interested in the
subject—professors, amateurs and savants
| hope the educated public will extend to this volume the
same indulgence it has done to my other writings.
Thanks are due to Messrs. P. N. Kamat and G. K.
Ananthram of IBH Prakashana for bringing out this volume
attractively.
Bangalore B. V. RAMAN

Concerning the Seventh House
The 7th house mainly refers to marriage, wife or husband
and marital happiness.
Marriage is a landmark in life. It is an institution founded on
love and affection. But it is also a most complicated structure
made up of a whole series of heterogeneous subjective and
objective factors. Since we are concerned only with the psychoastrological aspects of marriage, we shall exclude the objective
factors of legal and social significance in our study.
Marriage is not an institution for brute sense gratification. It
is not a civil agreement that affects only the parties to it. It is the
basis of the family and its dissolution as well as formation is a
matter of social interest. It is the mould out of which the future
generation comes out.
In our own country, marriage has been considered a
sacrament and comprehends the equality of the partner in
respect of Dharma (right conduct), Artha (financial position),
Kama (sex relations) and Moksha (final emancipation).
Main Considerations
In analysing the Seventh Bhava, due consideration must be
given to three important factors, viz., (a) the House, (b) the Lord,
and (c) the Karaka, who in this case would be Venus.

2 How to Judge a Horoscope
There are the secondary considerations also, viz , the occupants
of the 7th house and the planets associating with the 7th lord.
Results of the Seventh House Occupying
Different Houses
In the First House : -The native may marry someone he has
known since childhood or one who has been brought up in the
same house. The wife or husband of the native will be a stable
and mature person. He will be intelligent and capable of
weighing the pros and cons. Afflictions to the 7th lord may entail
constant travelling. If the 7th lord and Venus are afflicted, the
native may be sensual and seek clandestine relationship with the
opposite sex.
In the Second House :—The native will get wealth from
women or through marriage. If afflicted, one may earn money
through despicable means as trading in flesh, women, not
excluding his wife. He may eat food offered at death-ceremonies
(shraddha) and wander about seeking such food. If the second
house is a dual sign and afflicted, more than one marriage is
likely. If a maraka Dasa is on, the native may die during the
period of the seventh lord. The person will have a wavering mind
and will always be inclined sensually.
In the Third House : — This disposition gives lucky brothers
who may live abroad. If afflicted the native may indulge in
adultery with a brother's or sister's married partner. Affliction also
gives misfortunes to co-boms. Female issues servive.
In the Fourth House :—Gives a lucky and happy married
partner with many children and comforts. The native may have
the benefit of high academic qualification and own many
vehicles. If afflicted, domestic harmony may be spoilt through an
immature and mean partner. The native may run into endless
problems on account of his conveyances. If severely

Concerning the Seventh House 3
afflicted by the nodes and other malefics, the native's wife's
character becomes questionable.
In the Fifth House:—An early marriage, the partner may hail
from an affluent and well-to-do family. The wife or husband will
be mature and an advantage to the native. If the 7th lord is
weak, there may be no children. If severely afflicted, one may
get issues through the adulterous conduct of the wife. If there
are both afflictions and benefic influences on the 7th lord, the
native may get only female progeny. Trouble to one's office
superiors through foreign sources is likely. The native will
possess good character.
In the Sixth House :—The native may have two marriages
with both partners living. One may marry a cousin such as an
uncle's daughter. If badly afflicted and the karaka Venus is also
ill-disposed, one may suffer from impotency and many other
diseases. The native's wife may be sickly and jealous by nature
denying the husband happiness from marriage. If Venus is well
placed but the 7th lord is afflicted, the native may suffer from
piles. If Venus is weak but not afflicted, one may desert or lose
one's married partner through some indiscreet act.
In the Seventh House;—lf well placed, the native will have a
charming and magnetic personality. Women will flock to him and
seek him out for alliance. The wife or husband will be a just and
honourable person coming from a family of reputation and social
standing. If weak and afflicted, it gives a lonely life devoid of
marriage and friends, and loss through marriage negotiations.
In the Eighth House :—When well placed, marriage may
take place with relatives or the partner may be a rich person.
Affliction causes the early death of partner while the native

4 How to Judge a Horoscope
may die in distant lands. It gives a sickly and ill-tempered wife or
husband leading to estrangement and separation.
In the Ninth House:—lf fortified, the father may live abroad
while the native may make his fortune in foreign lands. He will
get an accomplished wife who will enable him to lead a
righteous life. If afflicted, the father may die early. Married
partner may drag the native from the right course (Dharmic) of
life and he may waste away his wealth and suffer penury.
In the Tenth House :—The native may flourish in a
profession abroad or his career may involve constant travelling
One will get a devoted and faithful wife or husband. The wife
may also be employed and contribute to the native's income. Or,
she may help in the advancement of the native's career. If
afflicted, wife will be avaricious and over-ambitious but without
sufficient capacity. Consequently native's career may suffer and
deteriorate.
In the Eleventh House :—There may be more than one
marriage or the native may associate with many women. If
beneficially disposed, wife may hail from a rich background or
bring in much wealth. If afflicted, the native may marry more
than once, but one wife may outlive him.
In the Twelfth House:— There maybe more than one
marriage in the native's life. He may marry a second time
clandestinely while the first wife is still alive. Or, if afflicted, he
may marry a second time after losing the first wife by death or
separation. But if the affliction is severe, the wife or husband
may die or separate soon after marriage and there may be no
second marriage. Death may occur while travelling or abroad. If
both karaka and the 7th lord are weak, the native may only
dream of women but never marry. The native's wife may hail
from a servant's family. He will be close-fisted and generally
Door.

Concerning the Seventh House 5
These results occur if the 7th lord is placed in the different
Bhavas. But they must not be applied literally to charts without
considering the entire chart as a whole after assessing the
strengths and weaknesses of the several planets.
Important Combinations
We give below important combinations on the seventh
house drawn from standard and authoritative works.
If the 7th Bhava reckoned from the Lagna or the Moon be
occupied or aspected by the 9th lord, or sign-lord or other
benefics, marriage will be happy and the wife, a loving and
fortunate woman. The 2nd, 7th and 12th lords in ker.dras
(quadrants) or trikonas (trines), aspected by Jupiter, can ensure
a happy marriage and a fertile wife. If benefics are placed in the
2nd, the 7th and the 11th houses from the 7th lord, the wife or
husband will be able to derive all happiness with healthy and
lucky children. If Mars and Saturn are in the 7th in Capricorn, the
wife will be chaste, beautiful and lucky.
If the 7th lord and Venus are in even signs, if the 7th house
is also an even sign and the 5th and 7th lords are not combust
or otherwise weak, the person will have a gooi wife and children.
If Jupiter occupies the 7th house, the native will be devoted to
his wife. If Venus be in exaltation or own vargas or has attained
Gopura or Vaiseshikamsa, the wife will be good and beautiful. If
the 7th house be a benefic sign or if Venus as 7th lord be
aspected by a benefic planet, the wife or husband will be
devoted and charming.
If there ere malefics in the 4th, 8th and 12th houses from
Venus, or Venus is hemmed in between malefics, the wife will
die soon after marriage. If there are malefics in the 7th from
Venus, the marriage will be unhappy. Venus in the 7th for
Taurus Ascendant threatens death to wife.

6 How to Judge a Horoscope
If the 7th lord is in the 5th or the 5th lord is in the 7th. the
native may not marry, as if he gets married, childless. When the
2nd and 7th houses in the case of men and the 7th and 8th
houses in the case of women are occupied or aspected by
malefics, the loss of wife or husband happens. If the 5th or 8th
lord is in the 7th, death of wife or husband occurs. Malefics in the
12th, 7th and Ascendant with the weak Moon in the 5th deny
marriage or children. If the Moon and Venus are in opposition to
Mars and Saturn, marriage is denied.
The Moon and Saturn in the 7th in a woman's chart
indicates remarriage while in a man's chart, they deny marriage
or progeny. Malefics in the 2nd, 7th and 8th from Lagna result in
demise of married partner. The Sun and Rahu in the 7th cause
loss of wealth through women.
Mercury in the 7th in Taurus or Jupiter in the 7th in
Capricorn or Saturn and Mars in the 7th in Pisces are injurious to
the life of the married partner. Mercury and Ketu in Lagna give a
sickly wife Saturn and Mercury in the 7th indicate a widow or
widower for a life-partner. If the Moon occupies the 7th house in
a malefic sign or Navamsa, the wife will be wicked, mean and
similar to a menial. If a strong Moon be in the 7th, the wife will be
good. Ketu in the 7th gives a shrew for a wife while Rahu gives
an outcaste woman.
If the 6th, 8th and 9th houses be conjoined with malefics
and be also aspected by malefics, the wife of the native will
indulge in adultery. If Saturn is in the 7th, or if the lord of the
Navamsa occupied by the 7th lord be a malefic, or if the 7th lord
or Venus be in a depression Rasi or Navamsa, the wife will be a
wicked woman.
If weak and afflicted Venus be in the 7th house, the wife
may be barren or the husband may be impotent. If Mars with

Concerning the Seventh House 7
a malefic occupies the 7th house, the native may suffer impotency caused by urinary problems. If Saturn and Venus occupy
the 10th or 8th and receive no benefic aspects, the person will
be impotent. If Saturn in a watery sign occupies the 6th and 12th
houses and is devoid of benefic aspects, the native will be a
eunuch. The following planetary positions cause one to be
impotent :
1. Saturn in depression in the 6th or 12th house.
2. Saturn in the 6th or the 8th house from Venus.
3. The Moon in an even sign and Mercury in an odd sign
and both being aspected by Mars.
4. If the Lagna, Venus and the Moon occupy odd
Navamsas.
5. If Mars is in an even sign and the Lagna is in an odd
sign.
6. The Sun and the Moon, Mars and the Sun, and Saturn
and Mercury—if each of these planets of a pair is in an odd and
even sign mutually aspecting.
7. Ifthe 7th lord and Venus are in the 6th house.
If the 7th lord or Venus be conjoined with Rahu or Ketu and
be aspected by a malefic, the native or his wife will be
adulterous. If Venus occupies a Navamsa of Saturn or Mars and
is aspected by Mars or Saturn respectively, the native's
character will be questionable. If Saturn or Mars aspect Venus in
the 7th house, the native will indulge in adultery. If Saturn, the
Moon and Mars occupy the 7th house, both the native and his
wife will be immoral. If the 2nd, 7th and the 10th lords occupy
the 7th, the native will be a profligate.
If the Moon or Venus moving towards depressions be in a
kendra in a cruel shashtiamsa and be aspected by or conjoined
with a malefic, the native may commit adultery with his own

8 How to Judge a Horoscope
mother. The same result occurs if the luminaries conjoined in
kendras be aspected by or associated with malefics. The 4th
house very badly afflicted causes similar results.
If Saturn in the 4th house be afflicted, the native will commit
incest. If the afflicted Moon or Venus be in the 9th house, the
native will violate his teacher's bed. The 9th lord and the Moon
or Venus similarly afflicted give the same result. If Gulika with a
malefic occupies the 7th house, or if the Sun be in the 7th house
and Mars in the 4th, or if Mars be in the 4th with Rahu in the 7th,
or if the 7th lord aspected by Venus occupy a sign of Mars, or if
malefics occupy 3 of the kendras, the native's sexual behaviour
will be coarse and crude like an animal's
If the 2nd and 7th lords occupy their depression signs and
benefics are placed in kendras and trikonas, only one marriage
is possible. If Jupiter and Mercury are in Navamsas owned by
the Sun and Mars, only one marriage is indicated. If Mercury in
the 7th house occupies a Navamsa of Jupiter, the native will
marry only once.
If the 7th lord and Venus be each in a common sign or
Navamsa, the person will marry at least twice. If Mercury or
Saturn be in the 7th with two planets in the 11th, two wives are
possible. If the 7th lord be Saturn and conjoined with a malefic,
the person will have many wives. Three or more malefics in the
7th, or Venus in depression, eciipsed or inimical sign with a
malefic, or 8th lord in the 1st or the 7th, or the Lagna lord in the
6th, or a malefic in the 7th while the 7th lord with a benefic is in
his inimical or depression sign, or the 2nd lord in the 6th anda
malefic in the 7th give two wives or more.

Concerning the Seventh House 9
If the 2nd, 1st and 6th lords be conjoined with malefics, in
the 7th house, or if the strong 7th lord occupy a kendra or kona
aspected by the 10th lord, or if the strong 7th and 11th lords
conjoin or mutually aspect or occupy trines, the native will have
many wives.
If the 1st or 7th lord be in depression or occupy an inimical
sign or be eclipsed in Navamsa, the native will have another wife
while the first is still living. If the 7th lord be weak and the 7th
house be aspected or occupied by a malefic, or if malefics occupy
the 7th and 8th houses and Mars is in the 12th house, or if the
2nd lord be weak while the 2nd house is occupied or aspected
by a malefic, the native will have another wife during the lifetime
of the first wife.
Planets in the 7th House
The Sun-.—The native will be fair and have thining hair. He
will have few friends and finds difficulty in getting along with
people. Marriage is delayed and troubled. Fond of travelling, he
will have loose morals. He likes foreign things. His wife's
character will be questionable and the native will run the risk of
loss and disgrace through women. He will incur the displeasure
of the Government and suffer humiliation. He will be deformed.
The Moon—The native will be passionate and easily roused
to jealousy. Mother may die while the native is young. Wife will
be good-looking but the native will seek other women. Narrowminded but sociable, he will be energetic and successful in life.
He hails from a good family if the Moon is waxing and otherwise
strong. He will suffer pain in the groins. He will be stingy. If the
Moon is waning, he will always be quarrelling with his enemies.

10 How to Judge a Horoscope
Mars :—The native will be hen-pecked by his wife and
submissive to women. Married life will have clashes and tensions
or there may be two wives. The native will be rash and indulge in
speculation. He will be intelligent, tactless, stubborn, peevish and
unsuccessful.
Mercury :—A man of virtue and geniality, he will dress well
and tastefully. He will have profound knowledge of law. He will
be skilled in business and trade tactics. He will have writing
ability and success through it early in life. Early marriage to a rich
woman. Learned in mathematics, astrology and astronomy, he
will be religious and of a devout temperament. Diplomatic but if
afflicted, the native will be cunning and deceitful. He will have a
good physique and looks.
Jupiter:—Diplomatic and kind-hearted the native gets a
virtuous, good-looking and chaste wife. He will get good
education and gains through marriage. He will be sensitive to
others' feelings. He has a speculative mind and is a good
agriculturist. He undertakes pilgrimages to distant places and is
superior to father in his qualities. The native will possess good
sons.
Venus: — Fond of quarrelling, sensuous and passionate, the
native has unhealthy habits, and a happy marriage and devoted
wife. He is fond of pleasure and drink, is suave and charming
with winning manners. He has a magnetic personality. He has
danger of loss of virility due to disease or excesses. He is
successful in partnership with those of the opposite sex.
Saturn :—The native will be under the wife's control. The
wife will be ugly or hunch-backed. He will have more than one
marriage or marriage with a widow, divorcee or one advanced in
age. He will be diplomatic and enterprising. He has residence
abroad, astable marriage and political success.

Concerning the Seventh House 11
He will get honour and distinction in foreign lands, suffers from
colic pains and deafness.
Rahu :—The native brings ill-repute to family, if a female. He
will be unconventional and heterodox. He will have affairs with
outcaste women or foreigners. His wife suffers from womb
disorders. He eats good and rich food, has luxurious habits and
suffers from diabetes, ghosts and the supernatural.
Ketu :—The native has an unhappy marriage with a
shrewish wife. He is passionate, sinful, lusts after widows. His
wife is sickly. The native suffers from cancer in the abdomen or
uterus, if a female. He will suffer humiliation and loss of virility.
These results are modified by the aspects and associations
received by the planet in the 7th house.
If the Sun is afflicted by Rahu, affairs with women may lead
to scandals or loss of money on account of blackmail or similar
trouble. If Mars afflicts such a Sun, married life will be striferidden and the partners will hate each other. In addition, the
native may suffer from blood-pressure and a diseased heart. The
body will suffer from excess heat which may result in piles and
fistula, if the Moon afflicts the Sun, he may have no marriage at
all and suffer from a wretched existence. If Mercury joins the
Sun, he will be highly intelligent and tactfully deal with troubles
accruing from Government or other sources. If Jupiter aspects or
associates with the Sun, the partner may be a highly evolved
spiritual soul and guide the native also. If fortified Venus be with
the Sun, marriage will be marked by spiritual harmony.
If the Moon be influenced by Jupiter, married life will be
smooth and happy. If afflicted Moon be with Jupiter, the native
will have intrigues with widows but will put on a noble

12 How to Judge a Horoscope
mask to deceive others. If the Moon be with Venus, it gives skill
in dying, textiles, craft but if the same Moon is afflicted, the
native may resort to unnatural methods of gratification. If the
Moon and Rahu combine in the 7th, life will be intolerable with
trouble from ghosts and goblins as well.
The following combinations have worked well in our humble
experience.
If Venus combines with Mars and Mercury, the marriage will
be stable and harmonious with both partners being successful
and distinguished intheir occupations. If afflicted, it gives
extramarital affairs. It also leads to trouble and controversy due
to writing or publishing obscene and degenerate literature.
Venus with Saturn gives patience, stability in marriage and skill
in dance and drama. If fortified, success on the stage or cinema
can also be predicted. If afflicted, troubie through these same
sources is likely. Venus and Jupiter give good children and a
healthy and happy wife. If afflicted by Rahu or Mars, the native
may indulge in immoral relations with preceptor's wife or elderly
ladies. Mars and Venus give a weakness for gambling, resorting
to dens of pleasure. If afflicted, living through these means and
trade in flesh are indicated. If fortified, the partner will be loving
but passionate and faithful. If Venus be afflicted by the Sun, the
marriage will lack physical attraction, the couple assuming
indifferent attitudes
If Saturn is afflicted by the Sun, stability of marriage is
threatened. More than one marriage is also likely but this may
also prove unsuccessful. Jupiter aspecting Saturn in the 7th
gives stability but inner turmoil and resentment between the
couple. If Mars afflicts, courts may intervene ; or violence, such
as suicide or murder, may destroy the marriage, provided

Concerning the Seventh House 13
of course there are other afflictions. If Saturn is with a waxing or
strong Moon, marriage may take place with a widow ; but if the
Moon is further afflicted, intrigues with servant-maids and
widows or an old decrepit, lecherous husband. If strong Saturn
is afflicted by Rahu, marriage is with a well-to-do but irrascible,
temperamental husband or wife. If Saturn is strong in his own
constellation, the partner will later become pious and devoted. If
Mercury afflicts Saturn, partner may be cowardly and deceitful;
but if Mercury is beneficially disposed, marriage will be with one
highly educated, refined and learned.
The mere occurrence of these combinations should not
allow one to jump to conclusions. The aspects of other planets,
not only as natural benefics or malefics, but also as functional
benef ics or malefics with reference to the Lagna must be taken
into account. The strength and associations of the karaka and of
the 7th house and 7th lord from the Moon must also be duly
weighed before making an assessment of the quality of
marriage.
This is especially so where the chastity of a girl or the
question of the faithfulness of the husbana is concerned. Such
delicate issues must be resolved only after a very careful and
diligent scrutiny of both horoscopes.
Time and Fructification of the Results of the
Seventh House
The factors governing the Seventh House are (a) the lord,
(b) planet or planets aspecting the 7th house, (c) planet or
planets occupying the 7th house, (d) planets aspecting the lord
of the 7th, (e) planet or planets in association with the lord of the
7th, (f) the lord of the 7th from the Moon; and (g) the karaka of
the 7th Bhava.

14 How to Judge a Horoscope
These factors are capable of influencing the 7th house as
lords of the Dasas (main-periods), as lords of Bhuktis (Subperiods) or as lords of the Antaras (Sub-sub-periods) or the still
minor periods.
The sub-periods of planets, capable of influencing the 7th
house in the major periods of planets also capable of influencing
the 7th house, produce results pertaining to the 7th house par
excellence or of great intensity. The sub-periods of planets
associated with the 7th house in the major periods of planets not
associated with the 7th house can produce results pertaining to
the 7th Bhava only to a limited extent. Similarly the Bhuktis of
planets, not related to the 7th house in the major periods of
planets associating with the 7th, can produce results pertaining
to the 7th house only to a limited extent.
Where the 7th lord is involved in a powerful yoga, he is
capable of producing in his Dasa or Bhukti, the results of the
yoga relating to the 7th house. If the 7th house is severely
afflicted, the 7th lord may, in his Dasa or Bhukti, cause
destruction of the marriage or make it extremely miserable. If
well fortified, it may give a successful, distinguished as well as
happy marriage.
Nature of the Results
The general principles enunciated in regard to the six
Bhavas in the first volume hold good in judging the seventh
Bhava also.
During the Dasa of the 7th lord who is well placed, the
native will enjoy the company of his wife and many pleasures
with her. He will acquire new and colourful apparel, jewels,
furnishings, beds and be healthy and radiant. He may go on
pleasures—jaunts, excursions and travel abroad. Auspicious
celebrations like marriages and similar festivities will take place
during the Dasa.

Concerning the Seventh House 15
If the 7th lord is ill-placed and afflicted, the native may suffei
separation from his wife. The son-in-law may undergo a period
of difficulty and strife. The native may get into trouble through
affairs with women of ill-repute and wander about aimlessly. He
may be stricken with disease in the private parts and come to
grief thereby.
If the 7th lord is well-placed with the Ascendant lord in the
7th, travel abroad will be lucky. The native may prosper abroad
and settle there itself. He may marry a lucky woman who will be
very helpful. If the 7th lord combines with bene-fics, he may
travel in a luxury-yatch or take up a job as a sea-captain. If the
7th lord is weak, one may be forced to beg in his Dasa. If the
Ascendant lord be feeble, the period of the lord of the 7th house
can be a maraka. If the Ascendant lord is placed in the 6th, 8th
or 12th from Navamsa Lagna, travel in his period may be
wearisome and profitless.
When the 7th lord joins the 2nd lord in the 2nd house, his
period may fetch much money and wealth through marriage. Or
marriage may take place with a working girl. The native may
earn money in distant lands through agency and partnership
business. If afflicted, the period may cause either the native's or
his wife's death. If longevity is good, then since the 2nd and 7th
are maraka places, the native may suffer separation from wife
and much mental agony. If the 7th lord is in the 8th from
Navamsa Lagna, the native's wife may not die but he may
instead marry a second wife in some distant place. If the 3rd and
the 7th lords combine in the 3rd house, wife may hail from a
good family. The wife's father will be a man of fortune. During
the sub-period of the 3rd lord, death or danger may befall a
brother or sister. It may also givea

16 How to Judge a Horoscope
second marriage. If the malefic influences predominate, the
evil is intensified ; otherwise, not much need be feared.
Much travelling is indicated in the period of the 7th lord if he
combines with the 4th lord in the 4th house. The native's life will
be marked by domestic harmony and many auspicious events
like marriages, engagements, etc., may occur. If afflicted, the
native's mother may die or pass through a grave crisis. His
education will begin paying, mostly in foreign lands. If fortified,
he may obtain cars and other vehicles during the period of the
Ath lord.
If a fortified lord of the 7th house is placed in the 5th house
with the lord of the 5th house, wife and children will be happy
and wealthy. If afflicted, children may die or mishaps may befall
them. Marital life will suffer and wife may die or separate from
the native. This is specially so if the 7th lord is in the 6th, 8th or
12th from Navamsa Lagna.
If the 5th lord is in the 6th from Navamsa Lagna, children
may be hospitalised for illness. If he is in the 12th, trouble
through thieves and enemies to children is indicated. If the
affliction to the 5th and 7th lords combining in the 5th is very
great, children may be murdered. If the 7th lord combines with
the 6th lord in the 6th, much evil is indicated. The wife may
suffer disgrace or some prolonged illness. Since the 7th lord is a
maraka, it forebodes death or dangers to one's maternal uncle.
Trouble from lawsuits and debts may crop up. The native may
lose quite an amount through theft or deceit If benefics are also
there, the evils will be mitigated and troubles may be only of a
temporary nature.
The 7th lord in the 7th house with benefics is generally very
favourable in his period. The native's life will be marked by a
series of festivities and joyous celebrations. Marriage will

Concerning the Seventh House 17
take place early in life. Wife will be beautiful with a good social
background. He may ecquire much wealth during this period as a
result of travels abroad. He will meet many influential people and
these contacts will be advantageous to his career. But if afflicted,
the native may fall critically ill or suffer various troubles. The
period may bring in humiliation and threat of being ostracised
from society. The 7th lord in the 8th will confer evil results in his
period. The native's partner may die or have serious health
problem. He may get an opportunity to go abroad but this may
only create many difficulties and problems. He may meet with an
accident.
Fortune comes through marriage in the period of the 7th lord
if he is placed in the 9th with the 9th lord. The native will
undertake pilgrimages and give away much money in charity.
There will be an inclination to be pious and virtuous. He will
amass a fortune through just and honest means. He will acquire
property and enjoy every kind of comfort. The wife will be a
noble woman and lead him on the path of righteousness. His
work will prosper abroad. Fame and distinction will follow him. If
the 7th lord in the 9th is afflicted, the wife will lead him astray
and away from his duties. He will harbour ill-will and hatred for
others and indulge in wicked deeds, if the 7th lord is placed in
the 6th, 8th or 12th Navamsa, the evil results are greatly
intensified.
If the fortified 7th lord is in the 10th with the 10th lord, the
native will gain much fame and reputation abroad. He will be
known for his generous and charitable instincts. His profession
in the period of the 7th lord will flourish well and he will obtain
renown and distinction in his field of activity. His wife will be
virtuous and respectable. If the 10th lord

18 How to Judge a Horoscope
is weak, the results will be quite contrary. If the 11 th lord is
strong, he will fare well in trade and partnership business. The
business may expand well and even spread abroad. The native's
elder brother may prosper well. If afflicted, elder brother may
suffer losses, if the 7th lord has both benefic and malefic
influences, gains from business will be moderate. If the 7th lord
is in the 12th house and the karaka is also very weak, marital
happiness will be lacking and one may lose one's wife through
death or separation. If the 7th lord and Venus be both strong,
wife may predecease husband only late in life. The native may
go abroad but he will be unhappy there with constant troubles
and worries. If the Lagna lord combines with the 7th lord in the
12th house with 12th lord both native and wife may reside
abroad in the Dasa of any one of these planets, particularly of
the 7th lord. If this combination has malefic afflictions, the native
may along with his wife indulge in immoral acts and vicious
pastimes. If the combination has benefic influences, the native
may take to a life of spiritual discipline in the period of the 7th
lord.
Timing Marriage
There are several methods suggested for timing marriage in
classical works.
The lord of the sign occupied by the 7th lord or that of the
sign occupied by the 7th lord in Navamsa are capable of giving
marriage in their Dasas. Venus, the karaka or natural significator
of the 7th house, and the Moon can also give marriage in their
periods. The strongest of these lords gives marriage in his Dasa.
The lord of the 7th house, if he associates with Venus, can also
give marriage in his Dasa or Bhukti. The 2nd lord or the ruler of
the sign occupied by the 2nd lord in Navamsa is also capable of
conferring marriage in

Concerning the Seventh House 19
his Dasa. The lords of the 9th and 10th houses are empowered
to give marriage in their Dasas if the earlier Dasas are fruitlessMarriage is also possible in the period of the planet with the 7th
lord or the planet occupying the 7th house.
Another method is to add the longitude of the lords of the
Lagna and 7th house. When Jupiter transits the resultant Rasi or
its trines, it is favourable for marriage. The resultant obtained by
adding the Moon's longitude to that of the 7th lord or its trines
when transited by Jupiter can also give marriage.
Although there are several planets enumerated as marriage
causing planets in their periods, due consideration must be paid
to delay caused by other factors. Saturn's aspect on the 7th
house and 7th lord both from Lagna and the Moon and on Venus
delays marriage if the Dasa lord is not very strong. The
association or aspect of the lord of the 6th, 8th or 12th on the 7th
house, 7th lord and karaka also rules out early marriage. Primary
importance must be given to the natal positions and Dasas and
only secondary consideration to transiting planets.
Loss of Married Partner
Loss of wife and more particularly of the husband is of
serious consequence in our society Besides the emotional void
created by the death of either partner, many other factors of
nearly equal significance demand importance. The economical
aspect apart, other practical questions such as running the
household and bringing up the children arise. As such any
horoscope should always be carefully scrutinised for loss of
partner.
We shall give below some important combinations pertain-

20 How to Judge a Horoscope
ing to loss of married partner and afflictions to married life
culled from authoritative sources.
If the 2nd as well as the 7th house are occupied by malefic
planets, death of wife occurs. But if the person concerned
marries a woman with similar planetary afflictions, the mutual
afflictions get neutralised and the couple will be blessed with
children and prosperity.
If the 5th or the 7th house from the Ascendant or the Moon
is occupied or aspected by a malefic, the native may not marry or
if he marries, his wife may not live. If the Sun occupies Virgo
which happens to be the Ascendant and Saturn occupies the 7th
house, wife will die. If the 7th house is occupied by Mars, the
wife will die. If the 7th lord from the Ascendant as well as Venus
be fortified and occupy the 7th house and if the 7th house be
strong and not afflicted, by aspect or association, by malefic
planets, the wife and husban will die at the same time. If the 7th
house has karmuka (an upagraha), either the native or his wife
will die early.
If the 2nd and the 7th lords be associated with Venus or
malefic planets and be badly placed, there will be loss of one or
more wives depending upon the number of planets with them in
dusthana. If Mars is in the 7th house in a Navamsa of Venus and
if the 7th lord is in the 5th house, the native will lose his wife. If
Venus and Mars conjoin in the 7th, the native will be bereft of
wife. If the 1st, 7th and 12th houses be occupied by malefics and
the weak Moon occupies the 5th, the native will have no wife or
marry a barren woman. If Mars occupy the 2nd, the 12th, the 4th,
the 8th or the 7th house, the native will lose, by death, his
married partner.
Other Afflictions
Ifthe 1st orthe 7th house be occupied by the Moon in

Concerning the Seventh House 21
depression with Rahu or Ketu or in a malefic drekkana such as
Sarpa, Pakshi, Pasa or Nigada or in a Rasi-sandhi (junction of
two signs), the native's wife will either go astray or be widowed.
If the 7th house from Lagna in the case of men be a sign ruled
by Mars or in an Amsa of Mars and if the 7th lord from the
Navamsa Lagna be weak or with Rahu or Ketu, the wife will be
rejected by the native, and she may become unchaste even
when young. In the case of women if the Lagna be owned by
Mars or in a Navamsa of Mars and if the 7th lord in Navamsa be
afflicted as stated above, the native will be a servant-maid or go
astray even as a girl and be rejected by her husband.
If the 7th house be occupied by malefics, the native will
become a widow. If there be both malefics and benefics in the
7th house, she will marry a second time. If the 7th house be
occupied by a weak malefic but aspected by a benefic, the
native will be repudiated by her husband. If the 7th house be a
malefic sign occupied by Saturn, the native will be widowed. If a
malefic planet occupying a malefic sign representing the 8th
house be aspected by a malefic planet at the same time, it
results in the death of husband. If in addition to this the lord of
the Navamsa occupied by the 8th lord is also a malefic the
affliction becomes more intensified. If there are benefic planets
in the 8th house, the native will predecease her husband. If
malefics occupy the 7th or the 8th house and benefic planets
occupy the 9th house, the native will live in happiness with her
husband for a long time.
If the 7th and 8th lords join in the 8th house; if Rahu
occupies the 7th house while the 7th lord is with the Sun
aspected by 8th lord ; or if Rahu conjoins Saturn and Mars in the
7th or 8th house, widowhood is denoted early in life.

22 How to Judge a Horoscope
If the 7th and 8th lords conjoin in the 12th house and the 7th
house is aspected by malefics, it also ieads to widowhood. If the
7th house and the 7th lord be subject to papakartari yoga, that is,
being hemmed inbetween malefic planets, with out any benefic
influence, the result is loss of husband.
If Venus and Mars exchange their Navamsa positions, the
native will be inclined to extra-marital relations. If Venus, Mars
and the Moon occupy the 7th house, she will associate with
other men with her husband's connivance. When the Ascendant
is ruled by Saturn or Mars and Moon or Venus aspected by a
malefic occupies it, the native and her mother will both indulge in
harlotry. When Venus and Saturn occupy each other's
Navamsas or aspect each other mutually, if the Ascendant in
Cancer falls in Aquarius in Navamsa, the native will be highly
lustful.
Summing up, the periods of the planets related to the 7th
house in Rasi or Navamsa, or of Venus, or of the planets related
to the 2nd house in Rasi or Amsa, or of the 9th or 10th lords or
of the Moon, subject to other factors, are capable of giving
marriage. Beneficial influences on the 7th house or its lord give
happiness in marriage while afflictions by malefic pianets cause
misery, death or separation in marriage. The 7th house or Venus
in dual signs gives more than one marriage.
The 7th House : The 7th house in Chart No. 1 is Pisces
occupied by 5th and 6th lord Saturn. Saturn's presence as a
malefic is not good causing affliction.
The Seventh Lord: The lord of the 7th, Jupiter, is in the 4th
house in the 10th kendra from the 7th house. He is aspected by
karaka Venus and malefic Saturn. Jupiter occu

Concerning the Seventh House 23
Chart No. 1.—Born 16-8-1937 at 8-31 a.m. (I.S.T)at 13° N.
Sun
Saturn | Ketu | Venus! Venue Ketu
Lagna
RASI
——— > = NAVAMSA, —
Sun f
Mere Moon
Mars Jupit Mars
Jupiter Rahu Lagna ||Mere, Saturn
Moon Rahu
Balance of Mercury Dasa at bitth : 6 years, O0 months and 8
days.
pies his moolatrikona sign Sagittarius both in Rasi and Navamsa.
But in Navamsa he is afflicted by Rahu and exalted Saturn.
Kalatrakaraka : Venus as 2nd and 9th lord is beneficially
disposed in a friendly sign in a quadrant. He is aspected by a
benefic as well as 7th lord Jupiter and by Mars, a malefic being
the 3rd and 8th lord. Venus is slightly blemished but quite
fortified by Jupiter's aspect.
Considered from the Moon: The 7th house is Taurus, a
benefic sign, aspected by the Moon and Mars and occupied by
Ketu. Mars, by himself, would not be a malefic but his
association with the Moon and Rahu afflicts him. The 7th lord
Venus is quite favourably disposed as analysed above.
Conclusion : The 7th house is quite strongly disposed but
the malefic influences are not negligible. The strength of the 7th
lord Jupiter gives a strong-willed husband while the

24 How to Judge a Horoscope
Moon with Mars and Rahu makes the native self-willed. The
afflictions result in temperamental clashes but the presence of
Saturn in the 7th and Jupiter and Venus in mutual aspect result
in a stable marriage with deep attachment between the couple.
Saturn's presence in the 7th house as the 6th lord causes
delay in marriage. The Dasas operating during the period of
marriageable age and after are of Venus, the Sun, the Moon,
Mars and Rahu.
Recollecting the periods propitious for marriage, (1) the lords
of the Rasi and Navamsa occupied by the 7th lord, (2) Venus, (3)
the Moon, (4) the lord of sign occupied by the 2nd lord, (5) the
10th and (6) 9th lords and finally, (7) the 7th lord or occupant of
the 7th house can give marriage in respective order in their
periods.
The following planets in Chart No. 1 would therefore be
empowered to give marriage in their periods :—
1. The lords of the Rasi and Navamsa occupied by the 7th
lord—Jupiter, Jupiter
2. Venus
3. The Moon
4. The lord of the sign occupied by 2nd lord VenusMercury
5. The 10th lord—Mercury
6. The 9th lord—Venus
7. The 7th lord—dJupiter, the 7th occupant-Saturn, and
the planet aspecting the 7th house—none.
The native's Mercury Dasa ends in childhood. The next Dasa
that can give marriage is of Venus. Jupiter Dasa and Saturn
Dasa operate very late in life. The Moon's period also comes
rather late in life. Saturn in the 7th, no doubt.

Concerning the Seventh House 25
delays marriage but the strength of karaka Venus and 7th lord
Jupiter cannot push it off too far. Venus would, therefore, be
empowered to give marriage in his Dasa. Of the sub-periods of
Venus, Jupiter, Saturn, Mercury and the Moon, Venus would be
ruled out as being too early. Jupiter is the strongest of the
remaining four contestants both by aspect, position anb lordship.
Marriage occurred in Jupiter Bhukti, Venus Dasa in April 1961.
Early or delayed marriage is determined according to the
times. Atone time in India, marriages were celebrated of boys
and girls at the tender age of 5 or 6 years. Later, as times
changed marriages were celebrated a little later, perhaps at 10
or 12 years. In the 1960's, marriage at 25 was considered
delayed while today it would be quite in order. Interpretation of a
chart must always be made keeping in mind the background,
period and society to which the native belongs.
The Seventh House : The 7th house Aquarius is occupied
by Vargottama Ketu in Chart No. 2. It is aspected by 7th lord
Saturn, benefic Jupiter and 4th and 9th lord, Yogakaraka, Mars.
Saturn is 7th lord and his aspect on the 7th is a stabilising factor.
Jupiter and Mars are functional benefics and their aspects fortify
the 7th house. Ketu should give the results of sign dispositor
Saturn or of Mars, both of whom are beneficially disposed. The
7th house has no afflictions.
The Seventh Lord: The 7th lord Saturn is placed in the 10th
house in a benefic sign Taurus hemmed inbetween benefics, the
Moon on one side and Jupiter and Venus on the other. The 7th
lord is well placed.
Kalatrakaraka : Venus is in a friendly sign very close to
benefic Jupiter and subject to a slight papakaratri yoga caused
by Saturn and the Sun. But this malefic yoga is balanced by
Jupiter's presence and the fact the Sun and Saturn are but the

26 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 2.—Born 3-8-1942 at 7-23 a.m. (I.S.T.) at 13° N.
` al Mars
Jupit. Jupiter
Moan Saturn Venus Venus Lagna Moon
Saturn
Ketu
NAVAMSA
Balance of Ketu Dasa at birth: 2 years and 7 months.
Lagna and 7th lords respectively being, therefore, benefic to
the Bhava and karaka concerned.
The 7th lord being free from afflictions and in a benefic sign
gives a good-looking wife with respect for conventions indicated
by Saturn. The 7th house having no afflictions gives a happy
married life. Ketu, fortified in the 7th, is good but nevertheless
gives some points of difference due to the wife's sensitivity in
some matters.
As for the period of marriage, it occurred in August 1972 in
the Moon Dasa, Moon Bhukti. (I) Venus and Mercury, (2) Venus,
(3) the Moon, (4) the Moon, (5) Venus, (6) Mars, (7) Saturn, Ketu
and Mars can give marriage in their periods. Ketu and Venus
Dasas end early in life. Mercury Dasa does not operate at all.
Mars and Saturn come rather late. Saturn's aspect on the 7th
cannot delay marriage as he happens to be the 7th lord himself.
Therefore, the Moon Dasa becomes effective. So also the Moon
Bhukti.

Concerning the Seventh House 27
Mercury
Lagna
NAVAMSA
Venus
Ketu
Lagna Saturn
Venus Moon | Marts || Sun Jupiter Mars
Sun Mercury
Balance of Jupiter's Dasa at birth : 14 years, 1 month and
20 days.
The Seventh House : Venus, the 7th lord, and the Sun, the
10th lord aspect the 7th house in Chart No. 3. There are no
planets in the seventh house itself.
The Seventh Lord : Venus the 7th lord is placed in the
Lagna with 10th lord the Sun. The Sun as a malefic but ruler of
the 10th house, a kendra, becomes a functional benefic.
Kalatrakaraka : Venus is not only the 5th lord but also the
natural significator of the 7th house. He is well disposed with
10th lord the Sun aspecting the 7th house.
Considered from the Moon : The 7th house is Aries
aspected by 10th lord the Moon, 9th and 12th lord Mercury,
Yogakaraka exalted Saturn and 7th lord Mars. The aspect of
Mars as 7th lord is good but being from the 12th gives some
moments of touchiness. However the combined aspect of

28 How to Judge a Horoscope
exalted Saturn and 9th lord Mercury is powerful enough to ward
off any problems.
Conclusions : The native is married to a chaste and devoted
wife. This is particularly evident from the aspect of a blemishless
Venus as karaka and 7th lord aspecting the 7th house.
The native married in May 1977. The following planets are
capable of giving marriage in their periods : -
(1) The lords of the Rasi and Navamsa occupied by the
7th lord Mars and the Sun
(2) Venus
(3) The Moon
(4) The lord of the sign occupied by the 2nd lord Jupiter
viz., Mercury
(5) The 10th lord the Sun
(6) The 9th lord the Moon
(7) The 7th lord Venus, no planets occupy the 7th, and
the Sun as the planet aspecting the 7th house.
Of these factors Mercury would seem appropriate since all
other Dasas begin very late. But Mercury Dasa itself begins
rather late in life, that is, after 33 years. The chart has no
indications for a late marriage. So, the planets in association with
Mercury, that is, the Moon and Saturn would be the next choice.
The Moon Dasa operates very late while Saturn Dasa occurs
during youth. Saturn would therefore be capable of giving
marriage. Venus Bhukti can be fruitful since he is the karaka as
also the 7th lord aspecting the 7th and well placed. Marriage
occurred in Venus Bhukti, Saturn Dasa.
777e Seventh House : The 7th house in Chart No. 4 is
Pisces occupied by the 11th lord Moon and Rahu. It is aspec-ted
by the 5th and 6th lord, malefic Saturn and another

Concerning the Seventh House 29
Chart No. 4.—Born 20-11-1950 at 3 a.m. (I.S.T.) at 18 N
Sat Lagna
Jupiter Rahu
RASI
ame NAVAMSA
Ketu Sun
Sun Ketu || Merc,
Venus Sat Jupit, Mars
Mercury Lagna | [Mcon Venus
Balance of Mercury Dasa at birth : 13 years, 7 months and 6
days.
malefic Mars, the 3rd and the 8th lord. There are no benefic
influences on the 7th house which is considerably afflicted.
The Seventh Lord : The lord of the 7th house is Jupiter
placed in a dusthana, viz., the 6th house. He is aspected by no
planet.
Kalatrakaraka : Venus is with the 12th lord Sun and Lagna
lord Mercury aspected by malefic Saturn. He gets no beneficial
influence and is quite afflicted.
Considered from the Moon : The 7th house is Virgo
occupied by malefic Saturn and Ketu. The 7th lord Mercury is
slightly better placed being with karaka but malefic 3rd and 8th
lord Venus and 6th lord the Sun. The 7th house from the Moon
also suffers affliction.
Conclusion: The native was married in September 1972 in
Venus Dasa, Venus Bhukti. Applying the principles of

30 How to Judge a Horoscope
timing marriage this is quite in order. In August 1973 discord
between the native and her husband began. The couple
separated in June 1974. Rahu and the Moon in the 7th are
afflicted by Mars and Saturn, two powerful malefics for Virgo
Ascendant, causing the husband to dissipate his energies in
extra-marital affairs with women of ill-repute. All factors relating
to the 7th house being afflicted with no redeeming beneficial
influences deprived the native completely of any marital
happiness.
The Seventh House : The seventh house is occupied by
Ketu and aspected adversely by Mars in Chart No. 5. Mars as
5th lord is a benefic but he is in the 12th house aspecting the 7th
house by his 8th house aspect which is very bad.
Chart No. 5.—Born 8-10-1935 at 11-30 a.m. (I.S.T.) at 13 N
| Ketu Lagna
| Ketu
D D aes O ieee ae
| Saturn | Mars | Sun
— RASI [— | ae NAVAMSA Sa
| ği ly Sat. | ¥
oon |Venus Stare. enus
Lagna Mars |
` Mercury | Sun Rahu Moon
Rahu Jupiter
Balance of Mars Dasa at birth: 4 years, 11 months and
20 days.
The Seventh Lord : Mercury is the lord of the 7th house and
is in the 11th house in a friendly sign but between malefics the
Sun and Mars.

Concerning the Seventh House 31
Kalatrakaraka : Venus is in the Sth house in an inimical sign
aspected by malefic Saturn and with no benefic influences.
Considered from the Moon : The 7th house is Cancer
aspected by Jupiter. The 7th lord Moon is hemmed inbetween
malefics, Saturn and Rahu. The seventh is afflicted except for
the aspect of Jupiter on the 7th from the Moon.
Conclusion : The aspect of Mars on the 7th house occupied
by Ketu has resulted in violent clashes in married life. The 7th
house from Venus is occupied by a malefic Saturn depriving
happiness in married life. Only Jupiter's aspect on the 7th house
from the Moon has prevented a complete break-up although life
itself is miserable.
Chart No. 6.—Born 24-3-7883 at 6 a.m. (L.M.T) at 13° N,
Lagna , Mercury M
Sun Ketu Saturn |Jupit. || Mars Rahu oon
Mercury
Mars
net hji] NAVAMSA) h
Venus Sat.
NH-48
Ketu
Rahu Moon aea Venus
Jupiter
Balance of the Moon Dasa at birth : 6 years.
The Seventh House : The seventh house is Virgo in Chart
No. 6. It is a dual sign, occupied by benefic 5th lord the Moon
and aspected by 2nd and 9th lord Mars from the 12th house

32 How to Judge a Horoscope
and by 6th lord the Sun. The 7th house is blemished except for
the Moon's presence.
The Seventh Lora’: Mercury, the 7th lord, is with Mars in the
12th house aspected by Lagna lord Jupiter and 10th and 11th
lord Saturn.
Kalatrakaraka : Venus is in the 11th house in a friendly sign.
Considered from the Moon : The 7th house is a dual sign
occupied by 12th lord the Sun. It is hemmed inbetween Mars
and Ketu. The 6th lord Jupiter is in the 10th in a common sign.
Conclusion: The presence of karaka Venus in the 11th
house, a common sign as the 7th house both from Lagna and
the Moon, and the 7th lord Jupiter in another dual sign resulted
in two marriages. Married life was unhappy.
Contrast this with Chart No. 1 where the 7th lord Jupiter and
Venus are in dual signs but where the native had only one
marriage. Jupiter is the 7th lord and Venus is the karaka. Mutual
aspects between the two planets have kept the marriage going.
The Seventh House : The Lagna being Taurus, Scorpio is
the 7th house in Chart No. 7. ft is aspected by no planet and is
free ef affliction.
The Seventh Lord: The lord of the 7th house Mars is in a
benefic sign with Ketu aspected by the Moon and Jupiter.
Kalatrakaraka : Venus, the Kalatrakaraka, is in a dual sign
aspected by Yogakaraka Saturn. He is in the 8th house, a
dusthana.
Considered from the Moon : The 7th house is Libra
occupied by Moon-sign lord Mars and aspected by Jupiter. The
7th lord Venus is in a dual sign in the 9th aspected by malefic
10th and 11th lord Saturn.

Concerning the Seventh House 3
Chart No. 7.—Born on 12-2-1856 at about 12-21 p.m.
Moan Lagna
Rabu Lagna | Sat, Jupiter Rahu
eee i ee AE: EE eh aA
Sun
Mercury
Jupiter
RASI | | NAVAMSA en A
NH-29
M Sun
ars
Venus Ketu Merc. | Ketu eurn Moon
Mars
Balance of Venus Dasa at birth : 12 years, 3 months and 9
days.
Conclusion : Due to the occupation of Venus as 7th lord and
as Kalatrakaraka of common sign, the native married a second
time after the death of the first. Both marriages were fairly happy.
The 7th lord Mars' association with Ketu gives tiffs between
partners and a touchy wife. Saturn in the 7th from Venus is not
so harmful as he would ordinarily be because he is a
Yogakaraka. Jupiter's aspect on the 7th lord Mars was also
responsible for a fair degree for happiness in married life. The
position of Mars, lord of the 7th and Ketu in the 6th (12th from
the 7th) is also significant.
The Seventh House : Leo the 7th house is occupied by 3
planets, viz.. Mars, Mercury and Venus in Chart No. 8. The 7th
house is fortified by 9th lord Venus and 5th and 8th lord Mercury.
Mars blemishes it slightly.

34 How to Judge a Horoscope
The Seventh Lord : The lord of the 7th house the Sun is in
the 6th, a dusthana, but aspected by Lagna lord Saturn and the
2nd and the 11th lord Vargottama Jupiter (Jupiter occupies the
same sign in Rasi and Navamsa).
Kalatrakaraka : Venus is in the 7th house with Mars and
Mercury.
Considered from the Moon : The 7th house Scorpio is
occupied by Vargottama Jupiter and aspected by 7th lord
Chart No. 8.—Born on 8-8-1912 at 7-35 p.m. (I.S.T.) at
Moon
Saturn Saturn Venus
Sun
aun Rahu
NAVAMSA
Mars Mercury
Mere, Moan
Venus Ketu
Jupiter Lagna | Jupiter
Balance of Mars Dasa: 6 years, 1 month and 6 days. Mars
and Yogakaraka Saturn. The 7th lord Mars is with the Moonsign lord and benefic 5th lord Mercury. These factors fortify the
7th house.
Conclusion : The native is happily married to a devoted and
chaste wife with religious propensities. Compare Chart No. 8
with Chart No. 7. Both have the 7th lord in the 6th aspected by a
functional benefic Jupiter. In Chart No. 7, Kalatrakaraka and 7th
lord from the Moon, Venus, is in a dual

Concerning the Seventh House 35
sign. In Chart No. 8, Kalatrakaraka Venus is in the 7th house with
two other planets. Yet the native of Chart No. 8 has had only one
marriage and a stable one. This is because, Venus, although, as
karaka in the 7th, is not good, here in this case the stigma is
countered by Venus being Yogakaraka. Further he is in a fixed
sign indicating fixity of affections. The 7th lord is aspected by
Lagna lord Saturn. From the Moon also, the combination of
Moon-sign lord Venus and Mars in Leo is desirable. Mars as 7th
lord aspecting the 7th house protects it. Chart No. 9.—Born on 3K Jupiter Venus
ely Saturn Sun Lagna
— RASI m NAVAMSA
Gil-54
Mais
Mercury
Saturn
Jupiter
Sun
Lagna
Moen Mercury
Balance of Ketu Dasa : 2 years, 7 months and 18 days.
The Seventh House: Aries is the seventh house in Chart No.
9 occupied by Yogakaraka but debilitated Saturn and 3rd and
6th lord Jupiter. The 7th lord Mars aspects the 7th from the 12th
house. Debilitated Sun as 11th lord aspects the 7th house.
The Seventh Lord: Mars as the 7th lord is with Rahu and
Lagna lord Venus is in the 12th house in a dual sign.

36 How to Judge a Horoscope
Kalatrakaraka : Venus is in the 12th house with Mars and
Rahu.
Considered from the Moon : The 7th house Gemini is
aspected by debilitated Saturn while the 7th lord himself is in the
12th from the Moon-sign. There are no benefic aspects on the
7th house.
Conclusion : The position of two natural enemies, the Sun
and Saturn, across the Lagna and the 7th Rouse leads to stiff
opposition or conflicts between married partners. Venus and
Mars, as Lagna and 7th lord, are together but with Rahu. This
gives physical attraction between the couple but the malefic
influences make harmony difficult. Jupiter although in the 7th is
the 6th lord and not very helpful. From the Moon, the 1st and 7th
lords are mutually adversely placed. This chart belongs to a
woman who married in 1961 and sepa. rated from her husband
in 1964. The marriage while it lasted was not at all happy.
Chart No. 10.—Born 13-3-1948 at 10-30 a.m. (I.S.T.) at 11
Lagna
Mars J Ketu
Moon upiter
Sat Sun
= NAVAMSA
Venus
Jupiter
Balance of Mercury Dasa : 3 years, 9 months and 27 days.

Concerning the Seventh House 37
The Seventh House : Scorpio is the 7th house in Chart No.
10 aspected by no planet.
The Seventh Lord: Mars as lord of the 7th house is in the
3rd house in debilitation. He is with Yogakaraka Saturn.
Kalatrakaraka : Venus is in the 12th, a malefic house, with
Rahu and aspected by Saturn, rendered malefic by association
with debilitated Mars. Venus is aspected by 8th lord Jupiter.
Considered from the Moon: The 7th house is Virgo,
aspected by 6th lord the Sun and a malefic Saturn. The 7th lord
Mercury is in the 12th from the Moon aspected by a malefic
Mars. There are no benefic influences on the 7th lord or 7th
house.
Conclusion: The native was deserted by her husband three
days after marriage. He was found to be a characterless cheat
and debauchee. The association of 7th lord Mars with
Yogakaraka Saturn gave a well-to-do and socially well-placed
partner but the debility of Mars made him debased.
The Seventh House : Pisces being the 7th receives no
aspects, benefic or malefic, in Chart No. 11.
The Seventh Lord: Jupiter, the 7th lord, is in the 9th house
aspected by Mars, lord of the 3rd and the 8th.
Kalatrakaraka: Venus, Kalatrakaraka, is well placed in the
Ath with Lagna lord Mercury and 12th lord Sun. Jupiter and
Venus have exchanged signs (parivartana), mutually benefiting
each other.
Considered from the Moon : The Moon being in Leo, the 7th
house is Aquarius. Seventh lord Saturn is exalted in the 3rd with
Yogakaraka Mars. The 7th house from the Moon is free from
aspects, malefic or benefic.

38 How to Judge a Horoscope
Balance of Sun Dasa at birth: 5 years, 10 months and 9
Chart No. 11.—Born 26-12-1953 at 11-47 p.m. (I.S.T) at
Mercury | Yenus
Jupiter
Lagna
Ketu Sat.
RASI — NAVAMSA
Rahu Moon sae
GIIt-20
Sun
Mars
Venus Saturn Lagna || Moon Jupiter
Mercury
days.
Conclusion : The strength of the 7th lord and Kalatra-karaka,
Jupiter and Venus respectively, and the blemish-free 7th lords
and 7th houses both from Lagna and the Moon have given a
happy marriage. The aspect of Mars on Jupiter is toned down by
the exaltation of Saturn in a benefic sign and has resulted only in
a headstrong but generally pleasant married partner.
The Seventh House : Sagittarius, a benefic sign, rises on
the 7th house in Chart No. 12. It is not occupied by any planet.
The 7th lord Jupiter aspects it from the 11th house while the 6th
and 11th lord Mars, and 5th and 12th lord Venus aspect it from
the Lagna. The 7th house is quite fortified.
The Seventh Lord: Jupiter occupies the 11th house with 9th
lord Saturn who is debilitated. Venus, the ruler of the sign where
Saturn gets exalted, is in a quadrant so that he gets
neechabhanga (cancellation of debility).

Concerning the Seventh House 39
Chart No. 12.—Born 21-5-1940 at 7-50 a.m. (I.S.T.) at 13° N,
Jupiter
Saturn
Jupiter
Ketu
NAVAMSA
c RASI =
Rehu
Saturn
Gl-1z
rr | rr fe |
Moon Rahu
Balance of Jupiter Dasa at birth: 1 year, 6 months and 22
days.
Kalatrakaraka : Venus occupies a friendly sign in
association with Mars who, as 6th and 11th lord, is a malefic.
Venus is aspected by 9th lord Saturn.
Considered from the Moon : The 7th house Taurus is
occupied by 8th and 11th iord Mercury and 10th lord Sun. The
7th lord Venus in the 8th is with Moon-sign lord Mars. The 7th is
fairly balanced.
Conclusion : There is a preponderance of benefic
influences on the 7th house due to the aspect of two benefics,
Jupiter and Venus, on it. Venus is not only a benefic lord but
also the Kalatrakaraka and so his aspect on the 7th house
becomes quite desirable. The aspect of Mars on the 7th is not so
welcome since he happens to be the ruler of malefic Bhr vas, but
his maleficence is kept in check by the aspect of 9th lord
neechabhanga Saturn. The native has a happy married life. The

40 How to Judge a Horoscope
aspect of 7th lord Jupiter on the 7th and of Karaka Venus also
on it have given the native a devoted wife.
The Seventh House : Cancer, the 7th house, is not
occupied or aspected by any planets in Chart No. 13.
The Seventh Lord: The Moon is placed in the 2nd house
aspected by Saturn, the Ascendant and 2nd lord, 3rd and 12th
lord Jupiter, and 4th and 11th lord Mars afflicted by Rahu.
Chart No. 13.-BoRN 16-10-1918 at 2 p.m. (L.MT.) at 13° N,
Jupiter
| Ketu |Jupit. eae
f w —. m
Moon Rahu Venus
RAS! = | Sees NAVAMSA See ES
Lagna Sat Moon Ketu
Mars Sun , Sun
Rani Mercury Venus || Mars Mercury Legna
Balance of Rahu Dasa at birth : 11 years, 8 months and 20
days.
Kalatrakaraka : Venus is debilitated in the 9th house. He
obtains cancellation of debility by virtue of his sign-dispositor
Mercury being in a quadrant from Lagna. He is in parivartana
with the 9th lord Mercury. Venus is also subject to a papakartari
yoga.
Considered from the Moon : The 7th house is occupied by
Moon-sign lord Saturn The 7th lord Sun is debilitated in the 9th
but obtains concellation of debility due to his exaltation

Concerning the Seventh House 41
sign-lord Mars being in the 10th from the Moon. The Sun is also
Vargottama (occupies the same sign in Rasi and Navamsa) and
forms a Budha-Aditya Yoga with Mercury, who as lord of 5th and
8th is Vargottama. The Sun is aspected by Moon-sign lord
Saturn and 2nd and 11th lord Jupiter.
Conclusion : The 7th house both from Lagna and the Moon
being free of malefic influences gives a happy married life. The
papakartari yoga caused to Kalatrakaraka Venus is toned down
by the Sun and Saturn being the significators of the 7th house
(that is, the lords of Lagna and the 7th house from the Moon) and
can have no adverse effect on the Bhava or karaka in question.
The extremely powerful situation of the 7th lord, particularly from
the Moon, has given the native a partner who is not only
materially well placed but also held in great reverence for his
character, integrity and learning. The Budha-Aditya Yoga relating
to the 7th lord has given an intellectual husband while making the
native also highly intelligent and learned in her own sphere of
activity.
The Seventh House : Gemini being the 7th house is not
occupied by any planets in Chart No. 14. It is aspected by the 6th
and 11th lord Venus from Lagna.
The Seventh Lord: Mercury, the 7th lord, is in the 11th
house with 9th lord the Sun and Rahu. The Lagna and 7th lords
are in dwirdwadasa (2/12 positions).
Kalatrakaraka ; Venus, the natural significator, is in the
Lagna in a kendra aspected by 5th and 12th lord Mars.
Considered from the Moon : The 7th house is Leo aspected
by Moon-sign lord Saturn, while the 7th lord Sun is debilitated
with Mercury and Rahu in the 9th. The Sun gets cancellation of
debilitation since his exaltation-sign lord Mars is in a quadrant
from Lagna.

42 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 14.—Born 3-11-1957 at 10-20 a.m. (I.S.T.) at
Rahu Venus
Ketu Sun Mercury Moon
Moon Mars
RASI ee | o NAVAMSA
Sat pre
G-IV-158 ii
Balance of Jupiter Dasa at birth : 4 years, 4 months and 17
days.
Conclusion : Both from Lagna and Chandra Lagna, the 7th
lords are afflicted by Rahu. Further from the Lagna, the 7th lord
is in the 11th with Rahu. This results in a husband who was
already married to another at the time of marriage with the
native. The Sun as 9th lord with 7th lord Mercury gives a partner
who is well-off but Rahu's presence makes him immoral. The
aspect of Venus on the 7th house is not very helpful since he is a
functional malefic for Sagittarius ascendant.
The Seventh House : Pisces, the seventh house, is
occupied by 3rd and 8th lord Mars in Chart No. 15. It is not
aspected by any planet.
The Seventh Lord: Jupiter, the 7th lord, is in the 9th house
with Saturn, the 5th and 6th lord. He is aspected by Lagna lord
Mercury and 12th lord, the Sun.

Concerning the Seventh House 43
Chart No. 15.—Born 8-12-1941 at 1-20a.m. (I.S.T.) at 13°
Venus | Ketu
| Jupiter
Saturn
NAVAMSA
Jupiter
Rahu
Mercury
Balance of Saturn Dasa at birth: 13 years, 2 months and 22
days.
Kalatrakaraka : Venus is in the 5th house aspected by 11th
lord, the Moon and 7th lord Jupiter.
Considered from the Moon: The 7th house is occupied by
Venus, who as 4th and 11 th lord, becomes a malefic for Cancer.
The 7th house is aspected by Jupiter, the 6th and 9th lord. The
7th lord Saturn is in the 11th with Jupiter.
Conclusion: The 7th lord in the 9th gives a well placed
partner. Saturn's association as 5th and 6th lord gives the partner
a rigid and conservative nature while the position of Mars as a
malefic lord creates tension and quarrels in married life, largely
due to temperamental differences. But the position of Venus and
the benefic disposition of Jupiter rule out any major trouble such
as separation or divorce in married life.
The Seventh House : The 7th house Leo in Chart No. 16 is
aspected by 7th lord the Sun and 2nd and 11th lord Jupiter. The
Sun is Vargottama.

a How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 16.— Born 25-2-1953 at 6-54 a.m. (I.S.T.) at 8°
Venus |
Mars Jupiter ra Rehu
Mercury | enys
Lagna | Moon
rai Ketu Sun Mercury
| A NAVAMSA =
Rahu
Jupiter
Ketu | Saturn
Saturn
Balance of Saturn Dasa at birth : 18 years and 2 months.
The Seventh Lord: The Sun as 7th lord is strongly placed in
a quadrant. He is not aspected by any planet.
Kalatrakaraka : Venus is exalted and Vargottama in the 2nd
house. He is with 3rd and 10th lord Mars and 5th and 8th lord
Mercury. Mercury is debilitated but gets cancellation of debility
due to Jupiter occupying kendra from the Moon.
Considered from the Moon : The 7th house is occupied by
Rahu, the 7th lord Saturn is exalted but aspected adversely by
Mars, the Yogakaraka. The 7th lord Saturn is aspected also by
6th and 9th lord Jupiter.
Conclusion : The native has a generally happy married life
but Rahu in the 7th, Mars aspecting Saturn adversely and
associating with Kalatrakaraka Venus can give domestic
bickerings.
The Seventh House : Scorpio is the 7th house occupied by
the 8th and 11th lord Jupiter and debilitated Moon in Chart No.
17. The Moon does not get neechabhanga.

Concerning the Seventh House 45
T fs
i Sun i
Rahu Lagna {| Venus]! Ketu | Mercusy . Saturn
Jupit,
Lagna
oun Venus
i RASI NAVAMSA
Merc |
Sat Moen Mars
GIV-T60 |
Moon | i 7 Rah
Jupiter | Ketu 21s ahu
Balance of Mercury Dasa at birth : 9 years, 2 months and 5
days.
The Seventh Lord : Mars the 7th lord is in the 5th in a dual
sign hemmed inbetween Saturn and Ketu and therefore subject
to papakartari yoga.
Kalatrakaraka : Venus is in the 2nd house from Lagna ina
dual sign.
Considered from the Moon : The 7th house Taurus is
aspected by debilitated Moon and 2nd and 5th lord Jupiter. The
7th lord Venus is in the 8th in a dual sign.
Conclusion: The 7th lord Mars and Venus both as karaka
and 7th lord from the Moon in dual signs gave the native two
wives. The 8th lord and debilitated Moon in the 7th resulted ina
clandestine marriaga with another woman before the native's
regular marriage took place. The papakartari yoga of the 7th
lord Mars resulted in disharmony in married life

46 How to Judge a Horoscope
when the wife left the husband on learning of his secret
marriage.
Chart No. 18.—Born 2-4-1947 at 7-02 a.m. (I.S.T.) at 26
Lagna
Lagna Rahu Mercury | Rahu
i Moon
Sat. Mars
RASI eee j paas NAVAMSA
Moon | |Venus Jupiter
Jupiter
Katu Sun Ketu Satin
Balance of Ketu Dasa at birth : 4 years, 9 months and 7
days.
The Seventh House : The 7th house Libra is not occupied
by any planet but is aspected adversely by Mars from the 12th
house in Chart No. 18.
The Seventh Lord: The 7th lord from Lagna Venus is in the
11th house with 3rd and 6th lord Mercury. He is aspected by the
Ath lord Moon.
Kalatrakaraka : Venus is in the 11th house with 3rd and 6th
lord Mercury aspected by the Moon.
Considered from the Moon: The 7th house is occupied by
2nd and 11th lord Mercury and 3rd and 10th lord Venus.
Conclusion: The relationship between the 7th and 11th
houses both from Lagna and Chandra Lagna has resulted in
dwikalatra yoga. The native has two wives, both alive.

Concerning the Seventh House 47
Chart No. 19.—Born 16-3-1938 at9-30 p.m. (I.S.T.) at 12 N
Saturn Moon
Venus
Mercuty Mars Ketu Lagna
Sun Ketu
Mars
RAS ee | meee NAVAMSA
Jupiter Sun
G.IV-156 i
Venus piter
Rahu Lagna |Moon Saturn Mercury | Rahu
Balance of Sun Dasa at birth: Oyear,1 month and 29
days.
The Seventh House: Mars, is the 7th lord, occupies the 7th
house in Chart No, 19. It is subject to papakartari yoga caused
by Ketu and Saturn.
The Seventh Lord: Mars is the 7th lord and occupies his own
sign in the 7th house. He is also subject to a papakartari yoga
caused by Saturn and Ketu.
Kalatrakaraka: Venus is exalted in the 6th house with
Yogakaraka Saturn, 11th lord, the Sun, and 9th and 12th lord
Mercury in a dual sign.
Considered from the Moon: The 7th house is occupied by
Saturn, Venus, Mercury and the Sun as 5th and 6th lord, 2nd
and 9th lord, 1st and 10th lord and 12th lord respectively in a
dual sign. The 7th lord Jupiter is in the 5th with cancellation of
debility.

48 How to Judge a Horoscope
Conclusion : The presence of 4 planets in a common sign in
the 7th house from the Moon in a dual sign, karaka Venus also
in the 7th sign and the connexion between the 11th and 7th
houses from the Moon gave the native two marriages, the
second occurring after the death of the first husband.
Chart No. 20.—Born 7-4-1893 at 9-31 a.m. (L.M.T.) at 20
Sun Rahu | | Y | Saturn
Mercury Jupiter Mars Lagna oon Mars Rahu
Venus
Sun | Jupiter
EN RAŠI ——| |--——_-: NAVAMSA
Venus
NH-62
a esd |e a oe
Moon : Ketu | Sat. |j Ketu sina Lagna
t
Balance of Ketu Dasa at birth : 6 years, 4 months and 4
days.
The Seventh House : The 2nd lord Moon occupies the 7th
house aspected by the 7th lord Jupiter and the 6th and 11th lord
Mars in Chart No. 20.
The Seventh Lord : Jupiter is the 7th lord placed in the 11th
house with Rahu.
Kalatrakaraka : Venus, the karaka, is in the 10th house
exalted with 3rd lord the Sun and Lagna and 4th lord Mercury
aspected by Saturn, the 8th and Sth lord but in a dual sign.
Considered from the Moon : The 7th house Gemini is a dual
sign and aspected by the 8th lord Moon and the 2nd and 3rd

Concerning the Seventh House 49
lord Saturn. The 7th lord Mercury is in a dual sign with Venus
and the Sun, the 6th and 11th lord and 9th lord respectively.
Conclusion: The 7th lord Jupiter in the 11th with Rahu, the 7th
occupied by the Moon and aspected by Mars, Venus in a
common sign in association with two planets aspected by Saturn
lends credence to the rumour the native had 5 wives. Of the fact,
he had at least two wives there is no doubt. Loss of Husband
or Wife
Just as in timing the event of marriage we should consider
the periods and sub-periods that operate, in judging coverture
(duration of married life), an assessment of the running Dasas
and Bhuktis is necessary. Although the Bhava is the seventh, we
must take into account the 8th and 9th houses also. The 8th
house rules 'mangalya’ or the strength of the
Chart No. 21.—Born 7-10-1954 at 10 p.m. (I.S.T.) at 12 N
| Merc. |
i Lagna | Ketu || Ketu
i Sat.
Sun
Jupit Moon
Venus
RASI ——||-—| NAVAMSA
Moon Lagna
Jupiter
GIll-32
a Fe
Mars v V teten
Rahu Snus | Saturn | Sua ij Mars Rahu
Balance of Moon's Dasa at birth: 1year, 9 months and
13 days.

50 How to Judge a
Horoscope
marital bond. The 9th house rules sowbhagya or good fortune.
Good fortune covers not only material affluence but also a longlived married partner.
The Seventh House: In Chart No. 21 the 7th house is
Scorpio occupied by Venus, lord of Lagna and the 6th. It is
hemmed in between malefics, exalted Saturn and Mars and
Rahu. It is aspected by exalted Jupiter lord of the 8th and 11th.
The Seventh Lord: Mars is the 7th lord placed in the 8th
house with Rahu and aspected by the exalted Yogakaraka
Saturn.
Kalatrakaraka : Venus is in the 7th house subject to a
malefic yoga caused by Mars and Rahu on one side and Saturn
on the other side. Venus is aspected by exalted 8th and 11th
lord Jupiter.
Considered from the Moon : The 7th house is Cancer
occupied by exalted Jupiter lord of 3rd and 12th and aspected by
exalted Saturn, lord of the Moon-sign. The 7th lord from the
Moon is himself being aspected by Jupiter in exaltation.
Conclusion : The presence of the 7th lord Mars in the 8th
and of Saturn's aspect on it together with Rahu's association
indicates loss of husband or 'vaidhavya’ during Mars and Rahu
Dasa. The native married in August 1976. Her husband died in a
drowning accident in June 1977, just 10 months after marriage.
Both events occurred in Venus Bhukti of Rahu Dasa. Rahu is in
the 8th afflicting the 8th house with Mars and Saturn. There is a
classical dictum that "if Rahu combines witfr Mars and Saturn
and occupies the 7th or 8th house, early widowhood is
indicated". Venus is the Kalatrakaraka and Lagna lord but his
presence in the 7th house only afflicts him by the papakartari
yoga to which the Bhava is subject. Afflicted

Concerning the Seventh House af
Venus, therefore, deprived the girl's married life in his subperiod.
Moon | Saturn Saturn
Jupiter Katu venue Ketu
Mars Lagna
RAS! —— NAVAMSA me
Mets.
Mars
Gul-38
Sun Lagna
Mercury |! Rahu Moon] Rabu Sus
Venus : Jupiter
Balance of Mercury Dasa at birth : 14 years, 8 months and
29 days.
The Seventh House : Capricorn the seventh house is not
occupied by any planet in Chart No. 22. It is aspected by
debilitated Saturn, lord of the 7th.
The Seventh Lord: Saturn is the 7th lord debilitated in the
10th house. He does not obtain cancellation of debility but is
afflicted by Ketu.
Kalatrakaraka: Venus, the karaka, is in the 5th house in
association with the Sun and Mercury, the 2nd and the 3rd and
the 11th lords respectively aspected by Jupiter lord of the 6th
and 9th from the 9th house.
Considered from the Moon : The 7th house is Virgo
aspected by the Moon-sign lord Jupiter and the 2nd and 9th
lord

52 How to Judge a Horoscope
Mars. The 7th lord Mercury is in the 9th with the 3rd and 8th lord
Venus and the 6th lord Sun.
Conclusion : The 7th house is afflicted because although the
7th lord aspects it, the aspect is of a planet rendered malefic by
debility and association with a node. The 8th house is occupied
by Mars who though a Yogakaraka is not welcome here. He is
particularly harmful in the 2nd, 4th, 7th, 8th and 12th houses
from Lagna or Chandra Lagna. The debilitation and eclipse of the
7th lord Saturn and Mars in the 8th house resulted in the death of
wife. The 9th house, though occupied by 9th lord, is subject to
papakartari yoga caused by Mars and Saturn. The 9th lord
Jupiter also suffers thereby and his aspect on Venus is not too
effective. Moreover, the 8th and 10th lords have exchanged
signs so that Saturn who is the 7th lord also is afflicted by this
parivartana. The marriage took place in 1968
Chart No. 23.—Born 16-3-1937 at 6-45 p.m. (I.S.T.) at 28 N
Sun Venus Lagna
Pe Moon Ketu a Mercury
Mercury
RASI ADELER || SSe NAVAMSA
Jupiter Jupit. oe
GIH-238
Mars
Lagna Moon Ketu
Balance of Venu6 Dasa at birth: 2 years, 2 months and
3 days.

Concerning the Seventh House
and wife died in 1970. Both events occurred in the sub-period of
Rahu in the Dasa of Venus. Venus is the Kalatrakaraka with the
3rd and 12th lord Mercury. Rahu afflicts the 7th lord by his
complement Ketu.
The Seventh House : Pisces, the 7th house, is occupied by
5th and 6th lord Saturn and 12th lord the Sun, both malefics in
Chart No. 23. It is subject to a subhakartari yoga caused by
Mercury on one side and Venus and the Moon on the other side.
The Seventh Lord: Jupiter the 7th lord is in debility in the 5th
house. He obtains cancellation of debility since his sign
dispositor Saturn is in a quadrant from the Lagna. He occupies
the same sign in Navamsa being Vargottama and has
exchanged signs with the 5th lord Saturn.
Kalatrakaraka : Venus is in the 8th with the 11th lord the
Moon hemmed inbetween malefics the Sun and Saturn on one
side and Ketu on the other.
Considered from the Moon: The 7th house is aspected by
its own lord Venus. The 8th house has two malefics Mars and
Rahu with no redeeming features.
Conclusion: Although the 7th lord Jupiter is strongly placed,
his exchange of signs with 5th lord Saturn is not desir able as it
can deny marriage or progeny. Further the affliction to the 8th
house from the Moon is heavy resulting in a Vaidhavya Yoga.
The native married in Ketu Bhukti of Rahu Dasa and was
widowed in the same Bhukti, exactly a year later. The strength of
the 7th lord gave a good husband and did not deny marriage. But
the several afflictions to the 7th house and 7th lord, to Venus and
particularly to the 8th lord from both Lagna and Chandra Lagna
and the running Dasa being that of the afflicting planet Rahu
resulted in death of

54 How to Judge a Horoscope
husband. The 9th lord Venus as lord of the house of good
fortune is in the 12th (house of loss) from the 9th house.
Chart No. 24.—Born 2-11-1755 (N.S.) at about 8 p.m. at 46
Mars Sun i Mars
Ketu Lagna Venus Jupiter
Rahu
Sat
Lagna
RASI —_— NAVAMSA
Saturn Ketu
NH-22
Sun Jupit.
Mercury | Moon Mercury | Moon
Rahu
Venus
Balance of Mars Dasa at birth: 2 years, 5 months and 9
days.
The Seventh House : Sagittarius is the 7th house in Chart
No. 24 aspected by 6th and 11th lord Mars. Mars is Vargottama
since he occupies the same sign in Navamsa.
The Seventh Lord: Jupiter as the 7th lord is with Rahu in
the 4th. He is aspected by 6th and 11th lord Mars.
Kalatrakaraka : Venus is in his own sign but with a
Vargottama 2nd lord, the Moon and 3rd lord, the Sun. He is
aspected by the 8th and 9th lord Saturn. Moreover, he is very
close to the Sun.
Considered from the Moon : The 7th lord Mars is in the 9th
in a dual sign Vargottama. The 7th house is aspected by
Kalatrakaraka Venus, the 10th lord the Moon and 11th lord the
Sun.

Concerning the Seventh House 55
Conclusion : The 7th lord afflicted by Rahu and Mars gave a
disgusting husband who was at once stupid and stubborn. The
8th lord Saturn is in the 8th but afflicted by Mars and eclipsed
7th lord Jupiter. The 9th lord Saturn is in the house of loss or the
12th house from the 9th which resulted in widowhood in Saturn
Dasa, Saturn Bhukti. Saturn is the 2nd lord and occupant from
the 7th house, Sagittarius, and becomes a maraka to the
husband.
Chart No. 25.—Born 7/2-2-7953 at 0-43 a.m. (I.S.T.) at 72
Lagna
RAS! wee | E NAVAMSA
Mercury Moon j! Ketu
Rahu } G.IV-326
Saturn
Moon
| Saturn
| Lagna Jupiter Venus
Balance of Venus Dasa at birth : 4 years, 2 months and 12
days.
The Seventh House : Aries, the seventh house, is occupied
by the 6th lord Jupiter and aspected by exalted Yogakaraka
Saturn in Chart No. 25.
The Seventh Lord: Mars, the 7th lord, is in the 6th house
having exchanged signs with the 6th lord Jupiter. He is
conjoined with Lagna lord Venus.

56 How to Judge a Horoscope
Kalatrakaraka : Venus is in the 6th exalted conjoining the
7th lord Mars.
Considered from the Moon : The 7th house Aquarius is
hemmed inbetween malefics, the Sun and Rahu on one side and
Mars on the other side. The 7th lord Saturn is exalted in the 3rd
aspected by 5th and 8th lord Jupiter.
Conclusion : The native's husband died in Venus Bhukti of
Mars Dasa. Both Dasa and Bhukti lords are in the house of loss
from the 7th house. The 8th house from the Moon is occupied by
Mars. Mars, the 9th lord, is in the 12th house from the 9th in
parivartana with 8th lord Jupiter. This weakens mangalyasthana.
From the Lagna itself both karaka and 7th lord are in the 6th
house which is the 12th house from the 7th house. Further the
exchange of signs between the 6th and 7th lords from Lagna,
namely, Jupiter and Mars respectively, only weakens the 7th
house.
Mars and Venus in Marriage
An Indian scholar, noticing the high degree of stability and
harmony in marriages in India, began collecting case-histories of
married couples. He managed to get 603 cases for study. The
age-group selected was 30 to 40. All the people concerned were
born between 1931-40 and married between 1955-60. The
economic background was mostly rural and agricultural though
22% of the case-histories concerned people who derived their
livelihood from commercial and industrial occupations. In most
cases, the informants were males. It was found that divorces and
separations were about 6% and deaths of husbands or wives
10%. The scholar's findings were that 47% was positive, 42%
neutral and 11% negative. By positive he means very successful
marriages. By neutral he means a fair degree of harmony in
domestic lives. And by

Concerning the Seventh House 57
negative he means disharmonious family lives. His conclusion
was that these figures proved the efficacy of astrology in marital
settlements. The system of matrimonial matching of horoscopes,
invariably resorted to by parents prior to the settling of marriages,
ensures to a certain extent their stability and harmony.
In our experience, apart from the other astrological
considerations, the mutual dispositions of Mars and Venus are
to be carefully studied. It cannot be a coincidence that divorce,
separation and crimes of passion increase whenever there is a
conjunction of Venus and Mars, especially when the
constellations involved are those of malefic planets. Children
born when there is a Venus-Mars conjunction should be brought
up in a disciplined manner and taught to avoid dissipating habits
of immediate pleasure. The adverse effects of conjunction
should be made to express themselves through constructive
channels if Jupiter aspects the combination or is in a quadrant
therefrom.
Venus is associated with many fascinating aspects of life.
He rules the wife, conveyance, sex-harmony and union, art,
attachment, family happiness, marriage in general, vitality,
fertility, physical beauty and friendliness. Mars abounds in
energy, aggressiveness, fortitude, driving force and in
association of Venus, a tendency to excess of sensual
gratification. It is therefore necessary that in the horoscope of a
couple, Mars-Venus conjunction or opposition should have the
benefic steadying effect of a favourable disposition of Jupiter; or
in the alternative the conjunction or opposition takes place in the
constellations of Jupiter or Mercury or even Venus, Jupiter and
Mercury being more preferable. Venus-Mars disposition is an
important factor for physical attraction. But in the absence of

58 How to Judge a Horoscope
Jupiter's or even Saturn's benign influence real compatibility may
be lacking. Venus-Mars conjunction makes one fond of pleasure,
demonstrative and adds a zest to one's sensual life. When
Venus and Mars are involved in adverse aspects, difficulty
through excesses and trouble through marriage follow as a
matter of consequence. Venus in a good sign or constellation
can temper the roughness of Mars, but if Rahu is also involved, it
makes one lascivious, lewd and wicked. Ketu-Venus-Mars
association (or even mutual aspect) is not desirable unless the
constellation involved belongs to Jupiter or Mercury or even
benefic Moon, though the last circumstance may render the
native's thinking highly sensual irrespective of the chart being of
a boy or of a girl. Ketu-Venus-Mars (or Saturn) denotes danger
cf scandal in marriage But if the 10th or house of Karma is well
disposed, the affliction is somewhat tempered.
Let us take the example of a person having Venus-Mars
conjunction in Taurus, the Lagna being Scorpio. Venus,
Kalatrakaraka, in the 7th is not generally favoured by ancient
writers on the theory of karako-bhavanasaya as the indications of
the 7th house are said to be inhibited. Experience has however
revealed that this textual dictum is not quite valid. In fact Venus
in the 7th is one of the finest combinations for a fairly happy
marriage, denoting affection between the couple. When, in the
case under reference, Venus is in Krittika ruled by the Sun and
Mars is in Mrigasira, the 7th house gains considerable strength
and the married life will be happy though crossed by frequent
emotional clashes. If such a native is married to one who has
Taurus rising with Venus and Mars in Scorpio, each will
constantly try to appease the dictates of the others' emotions and
over-indulge in sensual pleasures to the utter detri-

Concerning the Seventh House 59
ment of their health. Venus in Taurus is good but in a fiery
constellation (Krittika) it gives rise to stubbornness. In Rohini on
the other hand, the finer qualities of Venus find expression. It is
always better to look for trinal or quadrangular disposition of
Mars from the Lagna or the Moon, no matter even if they conjoin
provided they are in different constellations. A similar disposition
in the partner's horoscope is desirable though not essential.
In selecting partners for marriage, more than Kuta
agreement, it is the basic structure of the horoscopes that is
important. One may possess outer charm but may have a stony
heart, acute selfishness and seek only self-aggrandisement.
Generally those who have a conjunction of the Sun, Mars and
Mercury in the ascendant will be disposed as above unless there
are relieving features such as the aspect of Jupiter. We have
with us a number of horoscopes in which the Moon occupies a
martian constellation with the Sun and Saturn in the 12th
therefrom. Many of them have confirmed that their lives have
been beds of thorns. When the lord of the 7th is in the 6th with
Venus in the constellation of Rahu, one will be frigid, though
attractive. The need for assessing the structure of the horoscope
can never be overemphasized.
The method of comparing the horoscopes for purposes of
marriage has been fully discussed in my book Muhurta or
Electional Astrology.
The Seventh House : Gemini, a dual sign, is the 7th house.
It is occupied by Rahu aspected adversely by Mars, 5th and 12th
lord and malefic Saturn in Chart No. 26.
The Seventh Lord : Mercury, the 7th lord, is exalted in the
10th house ina common sign with 9th lord the Sun

How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 26.—Born on. 10-10-1871 at 2 p.m. (L.M.T.) at
Moon
Mercury Mandi
NAVAMSA
Saturn
Sun
Lagna
Ketu ;
Saturn dupiier
Mandi
Balance of Rahu Dasa at birth: 13 years, 8 months and
13 days.
and 6th and 11th lord Venus debilitated. This combination of
planets is afflicted by Saturn's aspect.
Kalatrakaraka: Venus is in the 10th debilitated with the Sun
and Mercury in a dual sign aspected by Saturn.
Considered from the Moon : The 7th house is aspected by
7th lord Saturn and Yogakaraka Mars. The 7th lord Saturn is ina
common sign with Ketu.
Conclusion : The 10th house occupied by lords of the 10th,
2nd and the 7th leads to Jara Yoga which results in the native
having extra-marital relations with many women. The native was
a glutton for sexual experiences and could never adapt himself
to the restraints of marriage. The 7th lord Mercury in the 10th
with Venus and the Sun aspected by Saturn, all in common
signs, with Rahu in the 7th made the native's wife too a social
cock who carried on affairs with all

Concerning tbe Seventh House 61
sorts of men. The couple had agreed between themselves that
each should have his or her own way in so far as their private
lives were consideled.
Chart No. 27.—Born on 6-4-1886 at about 6-30 p.m.
Sun Ae Sat, ||Jupit. | Mercury | Ketu
Ketu
Venus Sun
RASI —_ NAVAMSA
Aas hoes Mars
ts
THC-110 £ enus
Lagna jjupit. {ẹMandi] Rahu | Lagna | Moon
Mang
Balance of Venus Dasa at birth : 11 years, 9 months and 9
days.
The Seventh House : Aries is the 7th house occupied by
10th lord the Moon and 9th lord Mercury in Chart No. 27. There
is no aspect on the 7th.
The Seventh Lord: Mars, the 7th lord, is in the 11th with
Rahu aspected by Saturn and Venus.
The Kalatrakaraka : Venus is in the 5th with Ketu aspected
by Mars.
Considered from the Moon : The 7th house is aspected by
3rd and 6th lord Mercury and 4th lord the Moon. The 7th lord
Venus is the 11th with Ketu aspected by Mars.
Conclusion : The 7th lord Mars is in the 11th in combination
with Rahu both in the constellations of Venus and

62 How to Judge a Horoscope
aspected by Saturn from the constellation of Mrigasira. The
Kalatrakaraka Venus is, in turn, afflicted by association with Ketu
situated in the constellation of Rahu aspected by Mars. Both the
lord of the 7th and Venus have been much afflicted. The native
disliked his wife and was a profligate. All the attempts of the wife
to wean him away from his evil ways failed. Out of sheer disgust
the iady returned to her parents' house. The sensuai life led by
the native resulted in his contracting dreadful venerea!
complaints.
Some General Observations
When Venus, Mars and Jupiter in one horoscope are
situated in the other horoscope in a trine or 3 and 11 positions,
that is, if in the boy's horoscope Venus is in Taurus and in the
girl's horoscope, in Cancer or Virgo, it is a favourable position.
When the Sun and the Moon have similar harmonious positions,
except 2 and 12 (dwirdwadasa), there is usually a strong
attachment. Here again if the husband's Sun is in Cancer and
the wife's is in Virgo, the needed harmony exists. When the Sun
and the Moon are disposed as suggested above but Mars in one
case is in a sign, which happens to be the 12th from Venus in
the other horoscope, attachment exists, but there cannot be
normal happiness in their private lives. If Venus in one
horoscope is in a sign occupied by Saturn in the other a serious
and industrious partner is indicated. Mars in the 7th, unaspected
by benefics, indicates frequent quarrels leading to
misunderstandings. Saturn in the 8th aspected by Mars
(especially 4th or 8th house aspect) is not conducive to mutual
understanding. Saturn in the 7th confers stability in the marriage
but the husband or wife manifests coldness and not warmth.

Concerning the Seventh House 63
A strong malefic in the 4th affects married happiness unless
neutralised by a benefic aspect. If the Janma Rasi (Moon sign)
of the wife (or husband) happens to be the Lagna of the
husband (or wife), or if the Lagna of the wife (or husband)
happens to be the 7th from the position of the lord of the 7th (in
the other) the married life will be stable and built on mutual
understanding and affection.
If certain afflictions are present in one horoscope, it is said
they can be mitigated by looking for a partner whose horoscope
has similar afflictions.
One of the most misunderstood and misapplied astrological
dicta is the one relating to the so-called evil of Mars (Kuja
Dosha).
"If Mars is in the 2nd, 12th, 4th, 7th or 8th house (either
from the Ascendant or the Moon or Venus) in the horoscope of
the female, the death of the husband will occur; a similar
situation of Mars in the husband's horoscope causes the death
of the wife." It should be noted that the strength of the dos'ia in
2, 12, 4, 7 and 8 is in ascending order. In assessing the quantum
of dosha, Bhavas and not Rasis must be taken into account. The
dosha of Mars is said to get neutralised or minimised in the
following circumstances.
Mars in the 2nd is bad provided such 2nd house happens to
be any sign other than Gemini and Virgo. Mars in the 12th
causes dosha in al! signs except Taurus and Libra. Mars in the
Ath house causes affliction in signs other than Aries and Scorpio
; when the 7th is other than Capricorn and Cancer, the dosha is
given rise to. Mars becomes evil in the 8th in all signs except
Sagittarius and Pisces. Mars produces no dosha whatever in
Leo and Aquarius. The dosha is countered by the conjunction of
Mars and Jupiter or Mars and the Moon.

64 How to Judge a Horoscope
The Dosha is not absolute. Its intensity can vary not only
according to the exceptions given above but also according to
the sign—friendly, exalted, own, inimical etc.—involved. We can
therefore rate the afflictions as follows, taking Mars as the worst
malefic, Saturn, Rahu and Ketu as less malefic and the Sun,
least malefic, the maleficence being the highest in debilitation
and lowest in exaltation.
8th and 7th 4th 12tha nd 2nd
Mars Saturn Sun Mars Saturn Sun
Rahu Rahu
Ketu Ketu
The table helps make an assessment of the total dosha in a
chart so that if the dosha units in both charts are equal or nearly
so, the matching can be said to be good. If the dosha in the male
horoscope exceeds the dosha in the female horoscope by 25%,
it is passable. If the dosha in the male horoscope exceeds this
percentage or if the female chart has more dosha, then the
charts cannot be matched.
Unconventional Marriages
The younger generation seeking to act on its own has set in
a wave of unconventional marriages. The term unconventional
here is used in the sense of so-called love, inter-caste or
otherwise not traditionally and generally approved marriages.

Concerning the Seventh Hou«e 65
Chart No. 28.-Born 23-6-1894 at 10 p.m. (L.M.J.) at O W 5,
Mars Jupiter
Rahu Venus | 58" Lagna Ketu
Moon Mere
iii —-} | -— NAVAMSA
Sun
Page Moon Mercury
NH-64 Venus
Sat, Saturn
Ketu Rahu Mars
Jupiter
Balance of Rahu Dasa at birth : 9 years, 5 months and 12
days.
The Seventh House : Cancer the 7th house, in Chart No. 28 is
not aspected by any planet but occupied by 6th and 9th lord
Mercury.
The Seventh Lord: The Moon as the 7th lord is not afflicted
by aspect or association.
Kalatrakaraka : Venus is in his own sign with Jupiter, the
3rd and 12th lord.
Considered from the Moon : The 7th house Leo has no
afflictions but the 7th lord Sun is in the 5th aspected by an
afflicted Mars and an equally afflicted Lagna-lord Saturn. The
8th he use from Chandra Lagna is heavily afflicted by the
concentrated influences of Mars, Rahu, Ketu and Saturn.
Conclusion: The rative, a duke of the British royalty married
a common woman who was a divorcee. The proposed

66 How to Judge a Horoscope
marriage created a furore in the country but the native married
the woman of his choice for whom he had to abdicate the throne.
The 8th house signifying the martial bond is afflicted in Navamsa
also being occupied by Rahu and aspected by Saturn.
Chart No. 29.—Born 10-9-1938 at 9-00 a.m. (I.S.T.) at 13*
: j Mas |
Salum | Ketu i | paa i
i 4 Mercury
Moon sa |
Jupiter
. NAVAMSA =
Jupiter
E
E
Balance of Saturn Dasa at birth : 5 years.
The Seventh House : Aries being the 7th house, it is
occupied by Ketu and aspected by Lagna-lord Venus and Rahu
in Chart No. 29.
The Seventh Lord : Mars, the 7th lord, is in the 11th with the
11th lord the Sun and the 9th and 12th lord Mercury aspected by
10th lord the Moon and 3rd and 6th lord Jupiter.
Kalatrakaraka : Venus is in his own sign with Rahu aspected
by 3rd and 6th lord Jupiter.
Considered from the Moon : The seventh house Leo is
occupied by Mars, Mercury and the Sun and aspected by

Concerning the Seventh House 67
Jupiter. The 8th house is hemmed in between malefics Mars and
the Sun on one side and Rahu on the other side at the same
time being aspected by Saturn.
Conclusion : The presence of Ketu in the 7th, Rahu's
affliction to Venus coupled with the papakartari yoga to the 8th
house from the Moon resulted in the native, a Hindu, marrying a
Christian colleague. The 7th house and the 8th lord the Moon in
Navamsa are both heavily afflicted by the nodes. Mercury and
Mars.
Chart No. 30.-Born 23-1-1897 at about 12-00 noon (L.M.T.)
| Venus
Lagna Mars Sun Lagna
Venus Ketu | Mars
RASI — NAVAMSA
Sun
Rahu Jupit.
Mercury | NH-68
| Saturn
Balance of Sun Dasa at birth: 0O year, 4 months and 15
days.
The Seventh House : The seventh house Libra in Chart No.
30 is neither occupied nor aspected by any planet.
The Seventh Lord: Venus, the 7th lord, is placed in the 11th
house aspected by 9th and 12th lord Jupiter.
Kalatrakaraka : Venus is well placed in the 11th house
aspected by Juprter.

68 How to Judge a Horoscope
Considered from the Moon : The 7th house Pisces is
neither occupied nor aspected by any planet. The 7th lord
Jupiter is in the 12th aspected by Venus, Mars and Saturn.
Conclusion : The 7th lord from the Moon is afflicted by the
malefic aspects of Mars and Saturn. The 8th house from Lagna
is occupied by Saturn and aspected by Mars. The 8th lord from
the Moon, namely, Mars, is afflicted by Saturn's aspect. In
Navamsa, the 8th is afflicted by debilitated Mars and afflicted
Jupiter. The influence of Jupiter, as 9th lord in Rasi, on karaka
and 7th lord Venus, 8th lord Mars (from the Moon) in the 9th and
affliction to the 8th house (from Lagna both in Rasi and
Navamsa) by malefics in watery signs led the native to marry a
foreigner.
Ketu | Kew | Lagna | Mercury
Jupiter
Ls RASI NAVAMSA n A
Saturn Moon
Jupiter Mars
eae - i
Mercury | Moon |
Venus Rahu Mars |; Rahu Sun |
Sun Lagna | Venus
Balance of Venus Dasa at birth: 13 years, 11 months
and 12 days.

Concerning the Seventh House 69
The Seventh House: Aries, the 7th house, is occupied by
Vargottama Ketu and aspected by an afflicted 9th and 12th lord
Mercury in Chart No. 31.
The Seventh Lord : Mars, the 7th lord, is in the 11th
receiving no aspects, good or bad, but with the 10th lord the
Moon.
Kalatrakaraka : Venus is in the 2nd house aspected by 2nd
lord Mars and conjoining 11th lord the Sun.
Considered from the Moon : The 7th house Aquarius is
aspected by 4th and 9th lord Mars. The 7th lord Saturn is in his
own sign but in the 6th house with debilitated Jupiter.
Conclusion : The 8th house is aspected by 8th lord Venus
who, in turn, is aspected by Mars. From the Moon, the 8th lord
Jupiter is in the 6th with Saturn. The 8th house from the Moon is
aspected by Saturn and Mars. The 7th house from Lagna is
occupied by Ketu in Rasi. In Navamsa, the 8th house is hemmed
between Mars and Saturn coming under a papa-kartari yoga.
The native, a high-caste Hindu, married a Parsee widow with
children, a marriage that shocked the people of his times.
Afflictions to the 8th house and the 8th lord by Rahu, Ketu, Mars
and Saturn in Rasi and Navamsa usually result in marriages that
are socially not accepted or welcomed.
The Seventh House : Aries is the 7th house free of both
aspects and occupation in Chart No. 32.
The Seventh Lord : Mars, the seventh lord, is in the 10th
debilitated but with cancellation of debility as his exaltation sign
lord Saturn occupies a quadrant from the Moon. Mars is with the
11th lord Sun, 9th and 12th lord Mercury and Ketu.
Kalatrakaraka : Venus occupies his own sign Taurus with
3rd and 6th lord Jupiter.

70 How to Judge a Horoscope
Considered from the Moon : The 7th lord Mercury is in the
8th with 9th lord Sun, Ketu and 5th and 12th lord Mars.
Chart No. 32.— Born 24-7-1953 at 1-30 p.m. (I.S.T.) at 13
Venus | Rak |
Jupiter } ahu Lagna
ee ee aes a | |
Sun |
Mars | | ]
Merc | Moon |
Ketu | | |
RASI | NAVAMSA |
| | | Venus |
nan Jupiter |
seca asia | a | i Ea |
| 3 | Saturn
Moon Lagna | Sat. | Mercury
Ketu | Sun
Balance of Ketu Dasa at birth : O year, 11 months and 10
days.
The 7th house is aspected by Saturn, lord of the 2nd and
3rd from the Moon.
Conclusion : The presence of all malefics in the 8th and
Saturn's aspect on the 7th house from the Moon led the native, a
Brahmin, to marry a Christian youth. In Navamsa, the 7th lord
Jupiter is with Mars and the 8th lord Saturn is combust.

Concerning the Eighth House
The Eighth House deals with iongevity, legacies, gifts and
unearned weaith, nature of death, disgrace, degradation and
details pertaining to death.
The following factors are important while judging the 8th
house significations, namely, (a) The House, (b) Its Lord, (c) Its
Occupants and (d) The Karaka or indicator. The yogas formed in
the 8th house will produce their own effects. The same
considerations must be judged from the Navamsa chart also.
Although there are several significations to the eighth house, we
will focus our attention on the source and nature, time and place
of death.
Results of the Lord of the Eighth House being
situated in Different Houses
In the First House: - Penury and heavy debts will befall the
native who has the 8th lord placed in the Ascendant with the
Ascendant lord. Misfortune will follow him at every step. If the
8th lord is weak or placed in the 6th, 8th or 12th from Navamsa
Lagna, the intensity of misfortune is reduced. If the 8th lord is
severely afflicted the native will suffer bodily complaints such as
disease and disfiguration. His constitution will be weak and he
will have no bodily comforts. He will be the

72 How to-Judge a Horoscope
target of the displeasure of his superiors and higher-ups.
Trouble from Government will cause him worries.
In the Second House .-—The lord of the 8th house in
conjunction with the 2nd lord in the 2nd house brings in troubles
and problems of all sorts. The native suffers from eye and tooth
troubles. He will have to eat unhealthy and tasteless or putrid
foods. His domestic life will be filled with discontent and
quarrels. His wife will not understand him. This may lead to
estrangement and even separation. If longevity is good, he may
suffer some severe illness. If the 8th lord is in the 6th, 8th or
12th from Navamsa Lagna, the intensity of the results will be
reduced in degree.
In the Third House : If the lord of the 8th house combines
with the lord of the 3rd in the 3rd, the third house significations
suffer. The native's ears may cause problems or he may go
deaf. Misunderstandings will crop up with brothers and sisters
leading to quarrels. The native will be beset by all sorts of fears
and mental anguish. He may imagine things and suffer from
hallucinations. He may involve himself in debts and get into
trouble thereby. If malefics afflict the 8th lord in the 3rd with the
3rd lord, the sufferings of the native will be unbearable. But if the
8th iord combines with the 6th or 12th lords, benefic results may
come by. He may get a monetary windfall through writing or
through the agency of a co born.
In the Fourth House :- If the iord of the 8th house joins the
Ath lord in the 4th house, the native's mental peace will be
shattered Domestic bickerings, financial and other problems will
increase. Mother's health may suffer and cause great concern.
The native may be beset with problems regarding his house,
land and conveyance. Ifthe affliction is heavy his

Concerning the Eighth House 73
land and immovable property may slip from his hands due to
circumstances beyond his control. His conveyances may get lost
or be destroyed. His pets may contract diseases and die.
Malefics furthering the affliction may force him to seek his
fortune abroad where he will meet with all sons of troubles and
losses. Reverses in profession and the displeasure of superiors
are also likely.
In the Fifth House : -If the lord of the 8th is in the 5th with the
5th lord, the children of the native may get into trouble. They may
commit some crime and invite situations that could affect the
native's reputation. Or the native and his father may develop
misunderstandings. The native's child may fall sick and suffer
thereby. If the affliction is heavy, a child may die as soon as it is
born or cause much grief to the native due to some incurable
physical affliction or mental retardation. The native may also
suffer much bodily ill-health. If the 8th lord is in the 6th, 12th or
8th from Navamsa Lagna, the evil results are greatly mitigated.
But if fortified in a kendra (quadrant) or trikona (trine), the evil
results are intensified. Since the 5th house is the buddhisthana,
the native may also suffer nervous debility or breakdown or
mental aberration.
When the 9th lord conjoins the 8th lord in the 5th house and
the Lagna lord is debilitated, the native has neither knowledge
nor wealth ; he is hostile, lustful and ill-temprered. He tends to
be crafty, reviles God and pious men and is himself treated with
contempt by his wife and children.
In the Sixth House .—lf the lord of the 8th house joins the
6th lord in the 6th house, a Rajayoga results. Material affluence,
fame and acquisition of objects desired are the good results. But
because the 6th house is the house of disease the native may
suffer ill-health. If afflicted, the native suffers loss

74 How to Judge a Horoscope
of money through theft and trouble through courts and the
police. The evil is intensified if the 8th lord is in a kendra or
trikona. The native's maternal uncle may suffer much trouble. If
the 6th lord is fortified, he is able to overcome all his troubles
and emerge victor. No attempts made by his ill-wishers and
enemies to harm him will succeed.
In the Seventh House : The lord of the 8th house placed in
the 7th house with the 7th lord curtails longevity. The native's
wife may suffer ill-heaith. !f afflicted, the native will also suffer
from disease. He may go abroad where he will meet with illhealth and problems. If the 7th and 8th lords are strong, the
native will undertake foreign journeys on diplomatic missions
and distinguish himself.
In the Eighth House .-|f the lord of the 8th house occupies
the 8th house in strength, the native lives long enjoying
happiness. He will acquire lands, conveyance, power and
position through the merit acquired in former lives. If the 8th lord
is weak, he may have no serious troubles but may not also enjoy
any luck or good fortune of significance. The father of the native
may die or pass through some crisis. If the 8th lord is afflicted,
the native will fail in his undertakings. He will be prompted to do
the wrong things and thereby suffer loss.
In the Ninth House :-lf the lord of the 8th house joins the 9th
lord in the 9th house with malefics, the native may lose his
father's property. Misunderstandings with father may arise. If the
Sun, the natural significator of father is afflicted, father may die
during the period of the 9th lord. If conjoined with benefics, the
native acquires his father's property. Relations with father will be
harmonious. If the 9th lord is weak, the native suffers ail kinds of
hardships, misery and unhappi-ness. His friends and
kinsmen may desert him while his

Concerning the Eighth House 75
superiors will find fault with him. If the 8th lord is in the 6th, 8th or
12th from Navamsa Lagna, the evil results will be greatly
reduced.
In the Tenth House : If the lord of the 8th house is in the
10th house with the 10th lord, the native has slow advancement
in career. He faces obstacles and impediments in his activities.
In the appropriate period he may be superseded by his
subordinates and his merit may go unnoticed. He may resort to
deceit and unrighteous means to gain his ends. His thinking will
be clouded and his actions will invite the wrath of the
government or the law. He may suffer poverty. If the 2nd lord is
also afflicted and joins the 8th lord, his reputation may suffer due
to involvement in huge debts and inability to repay them. If the
8th lord is placed in the 6th, 8th or 12th from Navamsa Lagna,
the intensity of the evil is greatly reduced. The 8th lord in the
10th may also confer unexpected gains due to the death of the
superiors or elders.
In the Eleventh House :- If the lord of the 8th house
combines with the 11th lord in the 11 th house, there may be
trouble to close friends. Elder brother may pass through a
difficult time. Relations with him will be strained and troubled. Or
the elder brother may cause anguish to the native and his family
by his unscrupulous behaviour and conduct. Business may suffer
losses and run into debts. If benefic planets influence the
combinations there will be troubles but the native gets help from
friends and elder brother to overcome them. Afflictions will
aggravate the malefic results.
In the Twelfth House .—The position of the 8th lord in the
12th house with the 12th lord gives rise to a Rajayoga. If
benefics join the 8th lord, unfavourable results may be expected.
Treachery of friends will resultin many problems

76 How to Judge a Horoscope
and grief. Unexpected expenditure will arise and there may be
pecuniary losses. If the 8th lord is in the 12th house and the 12th
lord is favourably placed in a trine or quadrant, the native will
gain in religious learning and piety. Some post or seat of
authority may be thrust on him with all its attendant
paraphernalia. If afflicted by malefics, the native may resort to
vicious acts clandestinely. Such acts would include rape,
adultery, conterfeiting of money (the 12th house is the house of
secrecy end deceit. The 8th house signifies sudden gains of
money) and smuggling activities.
These results are general. They must be modified on the
strength of the Ascendant, the Moon and Dasas in operation.
Where results pertain to criminal acts or unrighteous acts, the
predictians must be made only after taking into account the
strength of the Ascendant, the Moon and the 10th house
(Karmasthana). If these factors are favuorably disposed, the
native may be tempted to act in a certain manner but he will
overcome the temptation and control himself. The act may be
nipped at the state of mind and not allowed to manifest itself in
action in such a case.
Other Important Combinations
If the 8th house is occupied by malefics, the native dies an
unnatural death such as suicide, murder or accident. If benefics
influence the 8th house, death will be natural, that is, through
disease or old age. If the 6th and 8th lords are related, death
follows ill-health. If the 6th house and 8th house in this case are
severely afflicted, death comes after prolonged suffering as in
the case of a chronic disease.
Longevity (length of life) can be divided into 4 groups:
1. Balarishta or Early Death upto 8 years
2. Alpayu or Short Life- 8 years to 32 years

Concerning the Eighth House 77
3. Madhyayu or Medium Life—32 years to 75 years
4. Purnayu or Full Life 75 years to 120 years.
The following combinations pertaining to the divisions of lifespan have been called from ancient, authoritative classical
works.
Balarishta
The following combinations indicate Balarishta.
(1) If the Moon occupies the 8th, 12th or the 6th house
and is aspected by malefic Rahu, the child dies early.
(2) If the Moon conjoins with Saturn, the Sun is in the
12th house and Mars is in the 4th house, both the child and
mother die.
(3) If the Moon in Lagna with no benefic aspects, and if
both be hemmed inbetween malefic planets, both the mother
and child will die.
(4) When the 6th, 3th and 12th houses are occupied by
malefics with no benefic associations and Venus or Jupiter is
between malefics, both the mother and child die.
(5) If malefics occupy the ist, 6th, 7th and 8th houses
from Lagna, both the mother and child die.
(6) If the eclipsed Moon joins Saturn in Lagna and Mars
occupies the 8th house, both the mother and child will die.
(7) If malefics occupy the 6th and 12th houses from
Lagna, the child dies soon after birth.
(8) If the waning Moon occupies Lagna and a malefic
planet occupies a kendra or the 8th house from Lagna, the child
dies soon.
(9) If benefic planets aspected by malefic planets occupy
the 6th or the 8th house from Lagna, the child diesin a month.

78 How to Judge a Horoscope
(10) If the Sun, Mars and Saturn conjoin the 6th or the
8th house from Lagna with no benefic conjunctions or aspects,
the child dies quickly.
(11) If the Sun, Mars and Saturn occupy the 5th house
from Lagna, death of the child occurs.
(12) If the Langa lord is debilitated and Saturn occupies
the 7th or the 8th house from Lagna, the child suffers much
and dies quickly.
(13) Ifthe Lagna lord conjoins the Sun and the 8th lord
is depressed, the child dies early-
(14) Ifthe Moon occupies a malefic sign or Navamsa with
no benefic aspects and maiefics occupy the 5th or the 9th
house, the child dies early.
(15) Ifthe Lagna, the 8th, the 9th and the 12th houses are
occupied by the Moon, Mars, Sun and Saturn respectivel the
child dies quickly.
(16) The Moon conjoined with maiefics in the 5th, 9th
12th, 7th and the Lagna causes the death of the child unless
aspected or conjoined with a benefic.
(17) When the Moon occupies the Lagna or 6th, 8th or the
12th houses from the Lagna aspected by a malefic without any
benefic aspects and there are no benefics in the kendras, the
child dies soon.
(18) When Lagna is a watery sign with the Moon in it and
Saturn occupies it or the 7th house with benefic planets in
kendras, the child dies early.
(19) If maiefics occupy the Lagna and the 7th house and
the Moon conjoined with a malefic is not aspected by any
benefic planet, the child dies early.
(20) If the waning Moon occupies the 12th house, the
maiefics are all in the 8th house and there are no benefics in the
kendras, the child dies quickly.

Concerning the Eighth House 79
(21) When the Moon and Rahu conjoin with a malefic and
Mars occupies the 8th house, the chiid dies early. If the Sun
occupies Lagna in this case, an operation will be the cause of
death.
(22) Ifa retrograde planet occupies the 6th or 8th house
or a kendra in a sign ruled by Mars and also aspected by Mars,
the child lives for 3 years.
(23) If the Moon and Mars occupy the Lagna in Cancer
and there are no planets in the 4th, 7th, 8th and 10th houses the
child dies in 3 years.
(24) If the 6th or 8th house is Cancer occupied by
Mercury and aspected by the Moon, the child dies in the 4th
year.
(25) If the Lagna is occupied by Rahu and aspected or
occupied by only malefics, the child dies in the 5th year.
(26) If Venus be in Leo or Cancer in the 6th, 8th or the
12th house aspected by a malefic, the child dies in the 6th year.
(27) Ifthe Lagna is afflicted by Mars or Saturn and the 7th
house is occupied by the waning Moon, the child dies in the 6th
or 7th year.
(28) If Saturn, Mars and Venus are in Lagna without
Jupiter's aspect and the waning Moon is in the 7th house, the
child dies in the 7th year.
(29) If the 6th and 8th houses are occupied by benefics
and malefics are in the 5th and the 9th houses, the death of the
child takes place in the 8th year.
Antidotes for Balarishta Certain dispositions of
benefic planets and the Moon can ward off death in childhood.
The following are some standard combinations:

80 How to Judge a Horoscope
If the Moon is full or occupies exaltation, a benefic sign or
Navamsa, the danger of childhood death is averted. When the
Ascendant lord is strong in a kendra in association with or
aspected by a benefic and is free of malefic aspects, any
Balarishta Yoga is nullified. If Jupiter, Venus or Mercury occupy
a quadrant free of malefic aspects, then also the child lives long
in spite of other afflictions to the chart. Rahu in the 3rd, 6th or the
11th house from Lagna counteracrs other combinations for early
death. Jupiter strong in a kendra protects a child from death in
infancy. If the birth occurs during night in the bright half of the
lunar month (Sukla Paksha) or during the day in the dark half of
the lunar month (Krishna Paksha), the child lives long even if the
Moon is in the 6th or 8th house aspected by both malefic and
benefic planets. The Moon in exaltation aspected by Venus or
the ruler of the sign occupied by the Moon in the Lagna aspected
by benefic planets protects the infant from death. If 3 planets at
birth occupy exaltation or own signs, it helps the child tide over
other malefic planetary yogas harmful to longevity. The
Ascendant lord, strongly placed in a quadrant or trine,
neutralises other afflictions. Rahu in Lagna in Aries, Taurus or
Cancer aspected by benefic planets protects the child.
Alpayu
Alpayu is the span of life that falls between 8 and 32 years
The following are some of the combinations for Alpayu :
(1) The Sun, the Moon and Mars in the 5th house from
Lagna may cause death in the 9th year.
(2) ifthe Lagna lord is a malefic and occupies the 12th
place from the Moon and is also aspected by malefic planets,
death occurs in the 9th year.

Concerning the Eighth House 81
(3) If the Moon be in Leo, the Sun and Saturn be in the
8th from Lagna and Venus in the 2nd, the child dies in the 12th
year.
(4) If the Sun occupies Taurus Navamsa and Saturn
Scorpio Navamsa, life ends at 12 years.
(5) When Saturn in Leo in Navamsa is aspected by Rahu,
the child can have a violent end at 15 years age.
(6) Ifthe lord of Lagna is exalted but not aspected by any
benefic planet; and Saturn in Navamsa, occupies Pisces or
Sagittarius and is aspected by Rahu, the native's term of iife is
19 years.
(7) When the Moon occupies the 6th or the 8th from
Lagna and malefic planets in kendras do not receive any benefic
aspects, death comes in the 20th year.
(8) If Mars and Jupiter are in Lagna, the Moon is in the
7th, and 8th house is occupied by a benefic or malefic, life ends
at 22 years.
(9) Ifthe Lagna lord is in Lagna, the 8th lord is in the 9th
and the planet in the 8th house is aspected by a malefic, the
native lives for 24 years.
(10) If the 8th and 12th lords are devoid of strength and
Saturn occupies Lagna in a common sign, death occurs at 25
years.
(11) If Mars is in Lagna and the Sun and Saturn occupy
quadrants, life ends at 20 years.
(12) If the 8th lord from Lagna or the Moon be in the 12th
or a kendra, the native lives for 28 years.
(13) If Saturn occupies the Lagna in an inimical sign and
benefics are in the 3rd, 6th, 9th or 12th houses, the native lives
for 26 or 27 years.

82 How to Judge a Horoscope
(14) When the Sun, the Moon and Saturn conjoin in the
8th house, the native lives for 29 years.
(15) When the 8th lord is in a kendra and Lagna lord is
weak, the native lives for 32 years.
(16) If Mercury in strength occupies a kendra and the 8th
house be free of occupation by any planet, the native dies in his
30th year.
(17) Ifthe Lagna lord and the Moon be weak and occupy
Apoklimas (3,6,9,12) and be aspected by malefics, the native
lives for 32 years.
(18) Ifthe Lagna be occupied by the Sun and hemmed in
on either side by malefics, the native lives upto 31 years.
(19) When there are no benefics in kendras and the 8th
house is occupied by a planet, the native lives for 30 years.
(20) When the 8th lord being Saturn, or a malefic in
conjunction with another malefic planet occupies an evil shashtyamsa, the native is short-lived.
(21) When the Lagna is occupied by malefics and the
Moon also is with malefics with no bencfics aspects, Alpayu is
the result.
Madhyayu
Madhyayu extends from 32 to 75 years.
The following combinations denote medium life :
(1) If Jupiter as Lagna lord is weak and malefics occupy
the 6th, 8th or 12th houses, quadrants and trines, the native will
have Madhyayu.
(2) If a malefic is in the 8th, Saturn is in the 6th, and a
benefic is in a trine or quadrant, Madhyayu is indicated.
(3) If malefics occupy the 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th, 8th, and 11th,
the native will have the medium term of life.

Concerning the Eighth House 83
(4) Ifthe Lagna lord is weak, malefics occupy 6th, 3th or
12th houses, Jupiter is in a trine or quadrant and malefic joins
the Lagna, the native has Madhyayu.
(5) Benefics in kendras, the Moon in exaltation and the
Lagna lord strong confer a longevity of 60 years.
(6) If a benefic occupies kendras, Jupiter is in Lagna and
the 8th house from the Moon or the Lagn3 is free from the
aspect or association of malefics, one lives for 70 years
(7) If Mercury occupies a kendra in strength, the 8th
house is not occupied by any planet but aspected by a benefic,
the native lives for 40 years.
(8) Ifa benefic planet occupies the 7th and the Moon is in
Lagna or in Cancer, the native lives for 60 years.
(9) if Jupiter is in a kendra, the Lagna and the Moon are
free from malefic aspects or associations, the 8th house is
vacant and a benefic is in a kendra, medium life is the result.
(10) Ifthe 8th lord be in kendra, and the Sun and Saturn
occupy the 3rd or 6th which should be Capricorn, the native lives
for 44 years.
(11) If the 8th lord is in Lagna and the 8th house is not
occupied by any benefic, the native lives for 40 years.
(12) If the Moon be in the Lagna or the 8th or the 12th
house, if Mercury be in the 4th or the 10th house and if Venus
and Jupiter join in any house, the native lives for 50 years.
(13) If the Lagna lord joins the Moon in the 6th, 8th or
12th houses but is otherwise strong (in vargas) and the Lagna
lord occupies Capricorn or Aquarius in Navamsa, the native lives
for 58 years.
(14) If all the planets are in the 5th house, the native lives
for 60 years.
(15) If benefics occupy their own Rasis and the Moon is
exaited in Lagna, the native lives for 60 years.

84 How to Judge a Horoscope
Purnayu
Long life or Purnayu (75 to 120 years) is indicated if
benefics occupy kendras and the Lagna lord is with benefics or
aspected by Jupiter. When 3 planets are in the 8th house
occupying respectively an exaltation sign, a friendly sign and
own sign, long life is the result. If Saturn or the 8th lord is
conjoined with an exalted planet, Purnayu results. In the
following cases, the span of life is long :
(1) Ifthe Sun, Saturn and Mars occupy movable Navamsa, Jupiter and Venus occupy fixed Navamsas and the Moon
and Mercury are in dual Navamsas, the native lives upto 100
years.
(2) Ifthe Ascendant lord is ina quadrant and malefics
a the 12th and the 6th houses, the person born lives very
ong.
(3) If the 10th lord is exalted and the 8th house has
maiefic planets, it gives the native long iife.
(4) If malefics occupy the 3rd, 6ih and 11th and the
benefics are grouped in the 6th, the 7th or the 8th from Lagna,
the native lives long.
(5) When the Ascendant lord conjoins or receives the
aspect of Venus and Jupiter and is himself in a kendra
(quadrant), the native will be long-lived.
(6) Ifthe Lagna and 8th lords are in the 8th or the 11th,
the native is long lived.
(7) If Saturn joins the 1st, the 10th and 8th lords in a
kendra, long life is indicated
(8) Ifthe 8th lord occupies his own sign or Saturn is in the
8th house, the native lives long.
(9) If Jupiter is exalted, benefics occupy their Moolatrikona Rasis and the Ascendant lord is powerful, the person
concerned lives for 80 years.

Concerning the Eighth House 85
(10) If benefics occupy the 5th and 9th houses and the
Lagna is a Keeta Rasi with Jupiter in it, the native will have a
lease of 80 years of life.
(11) Ifall the planets occupy the 9th houses, the native
will have Purnayu.
(12) Ifall the planets are in kendras and in malefic Navamsas, the native lives for 80 years.
(13) If malefics occupy Upachayas (3,6, 10, 11) in benefic Navamsas in depression and benefics occupy kendras, the
native gets Purnayu.
(14) Ifthe latter half of Dnanus (Sagittarius) be rising, all
the planets be in their exaltation and Mercury occupies 24° of
Taurus, the native lives the full period of life.
(15) If Saturn occupies the 1st or the 9th and the Moon
occupies the 12th or the 9th house, the native enjoys Purnayu.
The life of a native may be fixed as long, medium or short
according as the Lagna lord and all the benefic planets are in
kendras (1, 4, 7, 10), Panaparas (2, 5, 8, 11) and Apoklimas (3,
6, 9, 12) respectively. If the 8th lord and maiefic occupy kendras,
Panaparas or Apoklimas, the span of life is respectively short,
medium or long
Just because a chart contains the planetary positions given
above, a conclusion on the longevity cannot be made at once.
The relative strengths of the planets must be balanced before a
correct assessment of longevity can be made.
Planets in the Eighth House
The Sun :—lf the Sun occupies the 8th house in exaltation,
the native lives long. He will be charming and an eloquent
speaker. If the Sun is afflicted, he will be troubled with sores, in
the face and head and be disgruntled in life. His eyes will

86 How to Judge a Horoscope
be weak. He will suffer penury and an uneventful life. If
associated withthe 8th or 11th lordhe may gain monetary
benefits all of a sudden through speculation. He will have
limited progeny, mostly male. If the Sun is in the 8th, the
Moon or Rahu is in the 12th and Saturn is in a trine, the native
suffers from dental problems.
The Moon :—The native with the Moon in the 8th is subject
to mental aberration. He is apprehensive and suffers from
psychological complexes. He will be capricious and unhealthy.
The native may lose his mother in infancy or boyhood. His buiit
will be slender and eyesight will be weak. He acquires
possessions easily through legacies or inheritance. He will be
fond of fighting and amusement and be large-hearted. The
native suffers from excessive perspiration, if Mars and Saturn
conjoin and the Moon is in the 8th house, the native's eyesight
will be afflicted.
Mars :— The native willbe short-lived unless there are
other alleviating factors, and he may suffer the loss of wife (or
husband). He will have very few children. He may seek to
gratify his passions by resorting to extra-marital life. He will
hate his relatives. His domestic life will be marred by quarrels
and he suffers from bloodly complaints like piles. He will rule
over many people.
If Mars is in the 8th, the Lagna is a fixed sign, Venus is in
the 9th, the Moon is in the 7th and Jupiter is the 2nd lord, the
native will be condemned to lead a life of servitude.
Mercury. — When Mercury is in the 8th, the native will
possess many good qualities. He will be known for his breeding
and courteous disposition. He will inherit as well as earn much
wealth. He will be learned and famous for his scholarship in
many subjects. He will live long but have a weak constitution.

Concerning the Eighth House 87
Jupiter :—The native will be unhappy but generous hearted.
He will live long. He will have difficulty in speech. He may do
ignoble deeds but pretend to be noble. He may have liaisons
with widows. He will have dirty habits and suffer from colitis. He
will have a painless death. If Jupiter is debilitated and the Moon
is in the 4th house from Lagna, the native will be a menial, being
always ordered about.
Venus:-The position of Venus in the 8th gives many
blessings. The native will come by much wealth. He will live a
life of comfort and possess all the conveniences for such life.
The native's mother may suffer danger. The native himself may
meet with emotional disappointments early in life. As a
consequence he may resort to a life of piety in later life. If
exalted in the 8th, the native gains much wealth. If Venus in the
8th is debilitated in Rasi or occupies a saturnine Navamsa and
is aspected by Saturn, the native suffers subordination and
leads a life of drudgery along with his mother.
Saturn :—Saturn in the 8th house gives good longevity but
many responsibilites in life. The native will discharge his duties
through sheer perseverance against odds which will be many.
He will have defective eyes. He will have very few children. He
will have a paunch and be inclined to seek the company of
women outside his caste. He may be predisposed to suffer from
asthma, consumption and lung disorders. If afflicted by malefic
planets, his children will cause him pain and grief. The native will
be dishonest and cruel. When Saturn is in the 8th with Mars,
Rahu is in Lagna and Gulika occupies a trine, the native suffers
disease in his generative organs. If the Moon joins Saturn in the
8th, the result is flatulence and spleen troubles.

Q9
CO
How to Judge a Horoscope
Rahu :—The native will suffer from public censure and
humiliation. He will be troubled by many ailments. He will be
vicious, quarrelsome and unscrupulous. If the Moon conjoins
with a malefic planet and Rahu is in the 8th, 12th or 5th house,
the native will suffer from mental disorders.
Ketu : — If Ketu in the 8th is aspected by a benefic, the
native will enjoy much wealth and live long. If Ketu is afflicted,
the native covets others' wealth and women. He will suffer from
diseases due to disorders in the excretory system and also
those due to a life of profligacy and excesses.
The 8th house rules suffering and afflictions here cause
chronic or incurable bodily or mental diseases.
Saturn in the 8th with a malefic planet or Rahu in the Lagna
causes stomach complaints. If the Lagna is aspected by a
malefic planet, the 8th lord is weak and the 8th house is
aspected or occupied by Saturn, it results in a disease that will
prevent the intake of food. Depending upon the exact nature of
affliction, the disease may take the form of minor ailments like
severe colds or mumps or be something serious like cancer.
Nature of Death
Planets and afflictions to the 7th house indicate the nature
of death. If a benefic planet occupies the 7th house from Mandi
in Navamsa, death will be happy. Malefics in the same position
give a painful death. If Saturn occupies the 7th house from the
sign occupied by Mandi in Navamsa, death comes through
snakes or thieves or supernatural beings. If Mars occupies this
sign, the native is killed in a fight or battle. If either of the
luminaries occupy this sign, the native may suffer a sentence of
death passed by the courts or a political death. The Moon, in
particular, could cause death by being mauled by an aquatic
animal.

Concerning the Eighth House 89
If the 8th house is occupied by one or more malefics,
death is painful due to a grave disease or violent happening
such as accident, murder or suicide etc. But if there is a bene-fic
planet in the 8th house, the native has a natural and peace ful
end.
If the Moon occupies the 8th together with Mars, Saturn or
Rahu, death may be caused by epilepsy. Waning Moon in any
house afflicted by malefics also causes the same kind of death. If
the Moon in the 8th is aspected by a strong Saturn, surgery or
some ailment of the anus or the eye may be the cause of death.
If waning Moon in conjunction with Mars, Saturn or Rahu
occupies the 8th death may occur by possession or drowning or
fire or a weapon. If the Moon, the Sun, Mars and Saturn occupy
the 8th or the 5th or the 9th, death is caused by fall from
elevated place, drowning or thunderstorm or lightning. If the
Moon is in the 8th, Mars is in the 9th, the Sun is in Lagna and
Saturn is in the 5th, death may result by a thunderbolt or fall of a
tree. When the waning Moon is in the 6th or 8th and the 4th and
the 10th are occupied by malefic planets, death is brought about
through the scheming of an enemy.
If the Sun is in the 8th, the Moon is in Lagna, Jupiter is in
the 12th and a malefic planet occupies the 4th, the person may
die as a result of falling from a cot. When the Lagna lord
occupies the 64th Navamsa from Lagna or is combust or
occupies the 6th, death occurs due to starvation. If the Sun is in
the 4th, the Moon is in the 10th and Saturn is in the 8th, the
native may be hit accidentally by a log of wood and die. If the
Sun, the Moon and Mercury occupy the 7tb, Saturn occupies the
1st, and Mars the 12th, the end comes about peacefully in
tranquil surroundings outside the country of birth.

90 Hosv to Judge a Horoscope
If the Sun and the Moon occupy the 8th or the 6th, the native is
killed by a ferocious animal.
If Mercury and Venus occupy the 8th, the native dies while
asleep. If Mercury and Saturn occupy this house, the native will
be sentenced to the gallows. If the Moon and Mercury join the
6th or the 8th, poison will be the cause of death.
If the Moon, Mars and Saturn are in the 8th, death occurs by
a weapon. Mars in the 12th and Saturn in the 8th cause a similar
end. If Mars is in the 6th, the native is killed by a weapon. Rahu
in the 6th with the 4th lord causes death by violence involving
robbery or theft. Ketu gives similar results. The native dies
through burns or a weapon if the Moon occupies Aries or
Scorpio and is hemmed inbetween malefics. If the Moon is in the
8th, Mars is in the 10th, Saturn is in the 4th and the Sun is in
Lagna, death is due to a blunt object like a club ; and if Mars is in
the 7th and the Moon and Saturn occupy Lagna, one is tortured
to death.
If Mars and the Sun exchange signs and are in kendras to
the 8th lord, the native may be sentenced to death by the
government. If the Lagna and 8th lords are weak and Mars is in
conjunction with the 6th lord, the native may be killed in war.
When Saturn occupies Lagna, Rahu is in the 7th with the waning
Moon and Venus is debilitated, the person will suffer amputation
of the hands and feet. When the Lagna ruled by Mars (if the
Navamsa is ruled by Mars) is occupied by the Sun and Rahu,
Mercury and the waning Moon occupy Leo, the native dies as a
result of his belly being ripped. When Saturn is in Lagna with no
benefic aspects and the Sun, Rahu and waning Moon combine,
the native is either stabbed or shot dead.

Concerning the Eighth House 91
As a general rule, the Moon in a dusthana aspected by the
Lagna lord in conjunction with Saturn, Mandi and Rahu, causes
an unnatural death.
If the lord of the 10th from Navamsa Lagna is with Saturn or
occupies the 6th, 8th or 12th, the native dies through poisoning.
When the same lord is with Rahu or Ketu he may end his life by
hanging. When the 5th or the 9th sign from the Moon is aspected
or occupied by a malefic planet and when a Sarpa (serpent),
Nigada (fetters), Pasa (noose) or Ayudha (weapon), drekkana
rises in the 8th Bhava, i.e., the 22nd drekkana, the death is
brought about by suicide by hanging. When malefics occupy the
Ath and the 10th or the trines and when the 8th lord combines
with Mars in Lagna, the native kills himself hanging.
The 22nd drekkana is reckoned from the Lagna drekkana. If
the Lagna is 27° Aquarius, Lagna drekkana is the 3rd drekkana
of Aquarius. The 22nd drekkana from this is the 1st drekkana of
Libra.
(For details of different kinds of drekkanas that can indicate
unnatural death such as suicide, murder, assassination, accident
etc., see Table of Drekkanas.)
if Venus is in Aries, the Sun is in the Lagna and the Moon
conjoins a malefic planet in the 7th house, a woman is the cause
of death. If the Sun, the Moon and a malefic planet are in Pisces
which happens to be Lagna and if the 8th is occupied by a
malefic, death is due to a wicked mistress. If the Moon and
Saturn occupy the 8th, and Mars is in the 4th or the Sun is in the
7th ; or the Moon and Mercury are in the 6th, the native dies
through food poisoning.
When the Lagna lord or the 7th lord conjoins the 2nd and
Ath lords, death results through indigestion. When the Moon
occupies the 8th in a watery sign, consumption leads to death.

92 How to Judge a Horoscope
When Mercury in Leo is aspected by a malefic planet, death is
caused by fever. When Venus occupies the 8th house and is
aspected by a malefic, death is from consumption, rheumatism
or diabetes. When Jupiter occupies the 8th house in a watery
sign, affection of the lungs brings about death. If Rahu is in the
8th house aspected by a malefic, death follows an attack of
small-pox, boils, snake-bite, fall or biliousness. Diarrhoea is the
cause of death when Mars in the 6th house is aspected by the
Sun. If Mars and Saturn occupy the 8th house, death is caused
by affliction to the aorta. Mercury and Venus in the 9th house
also cause death by heart disease. The Moon in Virgo hemmed
in between malefics causes death through anaemia. When these
particular yogas are absent in a horoscope, classical works refer
to the lord of the 22nd drekkana to find out the cause of death. It
may also be determined from the decanate occupied by the
planet in the 8th house.
The 22nd drekkana falling in different signs gives a clue to
the cause of death :
Aries :
First decanate (ruled by Mars) spleen and bilious complaints or
poisoning.
Second decanate (ruled by Sun)—watery diseases.
Third decanate (ruled by Jupiter) —drowning in water.
Taurus :
First decanate (ruled by Venus) asses, horses, mules.
Second decanate (ruled by Mercury)—bilious complaints, fire or
murder.
Third decanate (ruled by Saturn)—fall from a horse or building.
Gemini :
First decanate (ruled by Mercury) —cough, lung infections,
bronchitis.

Concerning ihe Eighth House 93
Second decanate (ruled by Venus)—typhoid.
Third decanate (ruled by Saturn)—fall from a conveyance,
height.
Cancer:
First decanate (ruled by Moon)—drinks, thorns.
Second decanate (ruled by Mars)—poison.
Third decanate (ruled by Jupiter)—tumour, hallucinations,
syncope.
Leo:
First dscanate (ruled by Sun)—drinking contaminated water.
Second decanate (ruled by Jupiter)—water in the lungs,
dropsy.
Third decanate (ruled by Mars)—travel-sickness, surgery.
Virgo :
First decanate (ruled by Mercury)—headache, wind disease.
Second decanate (ruled by Saturn)—fall from a height. Third
decanate (ruled by Venus)—explosion, glass, drowning.
Libra:
First decanate (ruled by Venus)—woman,, fall, animal. Second
decanate (ruled by Saturn)—indigestion, gastritis. Third decanate
(ruled by Mercury)—water, snakes.
Scorpio :
First decanate (ruled by Mars)—poison, weapons. Second
decanate (ruled by Jupiter) — prostrate trouble, carrying heavy
weights, complaints in hip. Third decanate (ruled by Moon)—
earth (mines), stones.
Sagittarius :
First decanate (ruled by Jupiter)—anal and colon complaints.
Second decanate (ruled by Mars) - poison, arrows, sharp
instruments. Third decanate (ruled by Sun) —abdominal
complaints, water, or aquatic animals.

94 How to Judge a Horoscope
Capricorn :
First decanate (ruled by Saturn)—mauling by lion or wild
animal, scorpion sting.
Second decanate (ruled by Venus) snake-bite.
Third decanate (ruled by Mercury) - thieves, gun shot, fever.
Aquarius :
First decanate (ruled by Saturn)—woman, pelvic disorder,
venereal complaints.
Second decanate (ruled by Mercury)—disease in internal
organs of generative system.
Third decanate (ruled by Venus)- infection.
Pisces :
First decanate (ruled by Jupiter) dysentery, ascitis,
oesophagitis.
Second decanate (ruled by Moon) - dropsy, oesophagitis.
Third decanate (ruled by Mars)— distension of the stomach
Table of Drekkanas
Ayucha Pasa Nigala Pakshi Sarpa Chatushpada
(Weapon) (noose) {fetters) {bird} (serpent) (quadruped}
3rd of Leo 2ad of Ist of IstofLeo Istof lsat of Cancer
Scorpio Capricorn Scorpio
ard of Aries Ast of 3r¢4cf lad of Aries
Aquarius Cancer
3 3rd of 3rd of 3rd of 2ed of
g Sagittarius Taurus Pisces Taurus
es 3cd of Libra 2ad of Libra Ist of Len
a
D ard of
a Scorpio
a owdot |
E Gemini
Š ist of
© Sagittarius i
A Ist of Aries
2ad of Virgo
2nd of
Gemini

Concerning the Eighth House 95
If there are planets influencing the 8th house by aspect or
occupation, they cause ailments or wounds in the part of the
body represented by the sign ruling the house. If more than one
planet aspects or occupies the 8th house, death may come
about as a result of two or more diseases.
If the 8th house is occupied by a malefic, death is painful
whether natural or violent. But if the 8th house is beneficially
disposed, the native has a sudden and quick end.
Thus where the 8th house is neither occupied nor aspected
by any planet, the lord of 22nd drekkana gives the clue to the
cause of death. Planets occupying or aspecting the 8th house
indicate the cause of death. The Sun influencing the 8th house
causes death through fire, the Moon through water, Mars by
weapons, Mercury through fever, Jupiter through causes that
cannot be diagnosed, Venus through excesses and Saturn
through starvation, malnutrition, etc.
The place of death is indicated by the sign occupied by the
lord of Navamsa Lagna, or the sign occupied by the planet
aspecting the lord of Navamsa Lagna, or the lord of the sign in
Navamsa occupied by the lord of the Navamsa Lagna. These
places indicated by the signs give a general idea of the place of
death.
If the 8th house is a movable sign, the native dies in a
foreign country or in a place far away from his birth-place. When
it happens to be a fixed sign, death occurs in his place of birth.
When this is the case and planets are also so placed as to
indicate death at birth-place, no matter where the native is
settled or pursuing his occupation, he may be drawn to visit his
birth-place at the time of death. If the 8th house falls in a
common sign, the native dies while travelling or when
commuting from one place to another.

96 How to Judge a Horoscope
Time and Fructification of the Results of the Eighth Bhava
Determining Longevity
The longevity of a native can be determined by different
methods. But according to most classical works, it is not
possible to determine the span of life before twelve years after
birth. This is because the life of the new-born baby is regulated
by the actions (karma) of its parents. If the baby dies within the
first four years after birth, it is said to be due to the mother's bad
karma. Death between four and eight years is attributed to the
bad actions of the father. If the child dies between eight and
twelve years, it is because of its own sins from previous lives.
The correct determination of longevity has always been a
hard nut to crack. There are several methods in vogue, both
astrological and astrologico-mathematical. The maraka vichara
(inquiry into death) on the basis of Vimshottari Dasa has, at least
in our humble experience, proved quite satisfactory as it enables
one to judge fairly correctly, the probable length of one's life on
this planet. Of the mathematical systems, Pindayurdaya and
Amsayurdaya, especially the latter, seems to have received
considerable attention from several well-known ancient writers.
Varahamihira says that Satyacharya's view that the longevity
conferred by a planet depends upon its Navamsa position is in
conformity with the views of the majority of astrological writers.
The purely mathematical methods of longevity must be applied
to thousands of horoscopes before a conclusion can be arrived
at as to their workability. One should not reject these methods
basing the conclusions on a small number of instances. We
have been testing these various methods and find some of
them, particularly the Amsayurdaya, yield fairly approximate
results.

Concerning the Eighth House 97
The Pindayu Method
Pindayu is also called Grahadattayurdaya as it is the total of
the terms of life granted by all the planets when in a state of
deep exaltation.
Each planet is supposed to give a certain term of life when it
occupies its deep exaltation point and half the period when it
occupies its deep debilitation point. At intermediate positions it
gives the period equal to half the term plus the period
proportionate to the planet's distance from its debilitation point.
The term of life given by each of the planets in its deep
exaltation is as follows : -
Sun—19 years
Moon—25 years
Mars—15 years
Mercury—12 years
Jupiter—15 years
Venus—21 years
Saturn—20 years The same planets in debilitation give the
following terms : -
Sun—9 years 6 months
Moon—12 years 6 months
Mars—7 years 6 months
Mercury—6 years
Jupiter—7 years 6 months
Venus—10 years 6 months
Saturn—10 years
These are the terms of life each planet gives to the native,
provided, the planets are not affected otherwise, either by the

98 How to Judge a Horoscope
conjunction or by the aspect of malefics. But it is very rare that
we come across horoscopes, not affected in anyway by adverse
planetary positions. Out of these terms certain deductions are to
be made to substitute for the evil aspects and other malefic
influences. For this what is called Harana or reduction is
employed. There are various kinds of Haranas which require
careful application and which depend upon the intensity of the
evils in any particular horoscope.
Four kinds of Haranas of reductions should be applied.
They are :
1. Chakrapatha Harana,
2. Satruksehtra Harana,
3. Astangata Harana, and
4. Krurodaya Harana.
Chakrapatha Harana
The Lagna is the Ascendant. The 7th house from it or the
180th degree is the Descendant. The Descendant is the horizon.
The westward direction from the Ascendant to the horizon covers
the 12th, 11th, 10th, 9th, 8th and 7th Bhavas. Planets found
within 180° west of the Ascendant undergo this reduction, while
planets which at birth are below the horizon, i.e., occupying the
first six Bhavas are exempt from this reduction. Those that are
nearest to the Lagna in its western direction lose a great part of
their terms of life, while planets at the farthest distance from the
Ascendant are not subjected to so much loss. This reduction or
Harana varies also with the nature of the planet. In the case of
benefics, the amount of Harana is half of what it is in the case of
malefics. The Moon, Jupiter, Venus and well-associated Mercury
are benefics while the Sun, Mars, Saturn and badly afflicted
Mercury are malefics.

Concerning the Eighth House 99
Chakrapatha Harana To the
West of Ascendant.
Planet 12th 11th 10th 9th 8th 7th
Bhava Bhava Bhava Bhava Bhava Bhava
If there are two or more planets in any of these six houses,
the reduction must be applied only to the strongest planet in
each of the houses.
Satrukshetra Harana
After the Chakrapatha Harana is made, Satrukshetra Harana
must be applied. This is based on the position of planets in their
inimical houses. When a planet occupies an inimical sign, onethird of the term obtained after Chakrapatha Harana must be
deducted. This reduction should not be made if the planet is
retrograde or vakra. Some authors say that Mars is exempted
from Satrukshetra Harana, while others claim only vakra planets
must be considered. The Sanskrit word used is vakra. By this is
meant both Mars and retrogression. But for all practical
purposes, both planets in retrogression and Mars are not
subjected to Satrukshetra Harana. Astangata Harana
Asta means combustion. When a planet is very close to the
Sun it seems to lose all its vitalising influences by being
absorbed by the Sun's intense power, so much so that it
becomes practically useless. Therefore when a planet is within
certain degrees from the Sun, it is said to be in combustion and
one-half of the term left after the Chakrapatha and Satrukshetra
Haranas are carried out must be deducted. When the

100 How to Judge a Horoscope
Moon is 12° forwards or backwards of the Sun, he is Astangata.
If Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus and Saturn are 17", 14°, 11°,
10° and 5° respectively either backwards or forwards of the Sun,
they get combust. Mercury and Venus, if retrograde, get
combust only when 12° and 8° forwards or backwards
respectively of the Sun. But it must be noted that Venus and
Saturn are exempt from Astangata Harana even when combust
as almost all authorities agree on this point.
Krurodaya Harana
When one or more malefics occupy the Lagna, reduction
due to their presence must be made in the term already obtained
after the reductions due to Chakrapatha. Satrukshetra and
Astangata Haranas have been made.
This is done by multiplying the number of Amsas that Lagna
has passed by the total of the planetary terms. The product is
divided by 108. The quotient so obtained is deducted from the
total term of life. The remainder is converted into months, days,
etc., and added on to the quotient which represents years.
If malefic in the Ascendant is aspected by a benefic, the
Harana fraction so obtained is half of what it would otherwise be.
If two or more planets occupy the Lagna, the planet nearest to
the Lagna-degree must be taken into account. Thus if Lagna is
15° of a sign and Mars is 20° and Saturn 25° of the same sign,
preference is given to the nearest planet, namely. Mars.
The method of Pindayu is best explained by an illustration :
Chart No. 33.— Born 8-8-1912 at 7-35 p.m. (I.S.T.) at
Bangalore.

Concerning the Eighth House 101
Longitudes of planets at birth
Planet Degrees Minutes
Moon 55 03
Mars 141 49
Mercury 135 25
Jupiter 224 25
Venus 123 42
Saturn 41 36
Rahu 354 15
Ketu 174 15
Saturn
Moon Saturn Venus
Lagna Sun foe
un
RASI sf «= NAVAMSA ==
Venus Mareuty
Merc Moon
Mars Ketu
tei ed ne ee a e eea e
Jupiter Mars
Jupiter Lagna
Balance of Mars Dasa at birth: 6 years, 1 month and 6
days.
The Nirayana longitudes of planets are given for Chart
The arc of longevity is obtained by deducting the longitude
of exaltation point from the longitude of the planet. If the
difference is more than 180°, keep it as it is. If the
difference is less than 180°, rectify it by subtracting it
from 360°. This gives the Arc of Longevity.

102 How to Judge a Horoscope
A planet when in deep exaltation gives the full term of life
ascribed to it. If its position is otherwise, then the number of
years it gives is determined by the rule of three.
The period contributed by a planet
planet's full term of life x arc of longevity
We shall now determine the Arcs of Longevity of the
different planets.
Planet Its Longitude Its Deep Exaltation
Jupiter 224° 25' 95°
The following Arcs of Longevity obtain in the chart :
Planet Arc of Longevity
Degrees Minutes
Moon 337 57
Mars 203 49
Mercury 330 25
Jupiter 230 35
Venus 233 34
Saturn 201 36
Sphuta Ayurvarsha (period contributed by each planet's
longitude)
Sun tego 13 years 5 months 26 days

Concerning the Eighth House 103
Moon aT oe = 23 years 5 months 19 days
Mars Eel ee a 8 years 5 months 26 days
Mercury eu = 11 years 0 months O days
Jupiter ee = 9 years 7 months 9 days
Venus Se = 13 years 7 months 9 days
Saturn 201 age = 11 years 2 months 12 days
Applying the Haranas or reductions to the terms of life
obtained so far, we get the following results :
Planet Sphutavarsha Chakrapatha Satrukshetra Astangata
y. m. d.
Mercury 11 O 0 ==. —
Saturn 11 2 8 — —
Of Mars, Mercury and Venus in the 7th house, Mars as the
strongest suffers reduction. No Krurodaya Harana is necessary
since there are no malefics in Lagna.
The following terms are obtained after applying all the
reductions :
Planet Graha Ayurdaya
y. m. d.

104 How to Judge a Horoscope
Planet Graha Ayurdaya
y. m. d.
Mars 7 O0 26
Mercury 11 0 00
Jupiter 8 0 3
Venus 9 0 26
Saturn 11 2 12
Total period granted by the 83 y. 3m. 22d.
planets
We must still determine the terms of life granted by the
Lagna which is Aquaruis 9° 42". It has passed 2 Navamsas (6°
40') which gives 2 years and the balance of 3° 2' converted into
time gives 10 months 28 days. Lagna therefore gives 2 years 10
months 28 days. The total longevity would be 83 years 3 months
22 days + 2 years 10 months 28 days -86 years 2 months 20
days.
Longevity = 86 years 2 months 20 days.
The Amsayu Method
The Amsayu (longevity due to Navamsa) is held by
Bhattotpala to be the only correct method. Manitha and Saravali
suggest that Amsayu should be applied only when the Lagna
lord is more powerful than the Sun and the Moon. Whatever the
divergent views held in regard to the circumstances under which
the different methods of longevity determination are to be
applied, it seems to be clear that Varahamihira and his illustrious commentator Bhattotpala have
approved the Amsayu Method as of much importance.
Sreepathi has dealt with Amsayu in his Paddhati but as
usual, the average reader finds it difficult to understand the
method, not to mention of its practical application because the
language and terminology employed are too tough.

Concerning the Eighth House 105
According to Satyacharya, the longitude (sphuta) of a planet
is first converted into minutes (kalas). This is divided by 200.
The quotient denotes the total number of Navamsas passed by
a planet from the first point of Aries. The quotient is again
divided by 12 to obtain the number of Navamsas passed in the
sign considered. This number denotes the years. The remainder
will give the fraction of a year granted by the particular planet.
The longitude of the Lagna is also subjected to the same
calculations to get period of life it grants.
The period so granted by a planet is subject to both
Bharana (increase) and Harana (reduction) in the following
manner:
(a) A planet when exalted or retrograde gives thrice the
number of years obtained by the above calculations.
(b) A planet when vargottama or occupying own Navamsa
or own Rasi or own Drekkana gives twice the number of years.
(c) Where a planet is to be multiplied twice or thrice due to
its situation according to both (a) and (b), the multiplication is to
be done only once by the strongest factor.
The reductions are the same as in the Pindayu Method.
(d) Chakrapatha Harana: The reductions in respect o
Chakrapatha are as per details given on page 99 for Pindayu.
(e) Satrukshetra Harana : Every planet in an inimical house
loses one-third the term of life left after Chakrapatha reduction.
This reduction, however, does not apply to Mars and retrograde
planets.
(f) Astangata Harana : Planets when combust in the Sun
lose one-half of their period remaining after reduction due to
Chakrapatha and Satrukshetra occupation. Mars, Mercury,

106 How to Judge a Horoscope
Jupiter, Venus and Saturn are combust when within 17°, 14°,
11°, 10° and 5° respectively backwards or forwards of the Sun.
Venus and Saturn are exempt from this reduction.
(g) Krurodaya Harana : Even if evil planets occupy the
Ascendant, no reduction is to be made unlike in Pindayurdaya.
The method is best illustrated by an example.
Chart No. 34.-Born 29/30-12-7879 at 1 a.m. (L.M.T.) at 9 N
Kein :
Saturn Mars Moon Jupit, Ketu Moon
Jupiter Merc. Venus
RASI — | | — NAVAMSA
NH-46
Mercury Rahu
Venus Lagaa Sat. Mars Lagna Sun
Balance of Jupiter Dasa at birth : 4 years, 1month and
20 days.
Planet Longitude Longitude in Minutes

Concerning lhe Eighth House 107
In order to get the Navamsas passed in a sign (which
denote the number of years granted by each planet in whole
numbers), divide the longitude of a planet in minutes by 200.
Dividing again the quotient 77 by 12, we get a remainder of
5 which is the number of Navamsas passed by the Sun from the
first point of Aries. In other words, the Sun contributes 5 whole
years and 24/200 of a year, ie., 5 years 1 month 13 days.
Similarly find out the term granted by each of the planets.
Planet Term granted
y. m. d.
Mars 7 0 10
Mercury 10 4 17
Jupiter 11 4 19
Venus 3 7 2
Saturn 8 6 21
Lagna 6 8 8
Bharanas and Haranas
Bharanas : The Moon is vargottama. Mars occupies his own
sign in Rasi and Navamsa and Jupiter occupies his own sign in
Navamsa. Therefore, their periods are doubled.
y. m. d. y. m. d.
Jupiter = 08

108 How to Judge a Horoscope
Haranas
Chakrapatha : Mars, a malefic, is in the 7th house and
suffers reduction by 1 /6th his term got after Bharana.
The Moon, a benefic, is in the 9th house and suffers
reduction by 1/8th the term he gets after Bharana.
After the Chakrapatha reduction, we have
Mars = 11 years 8 months 17 days
Moon = 5 years 2 months 23 days
Satrukshetra : The Moon and Mercury occupy inimical
signs and suffer reduction by 1/3rd of their respective terms.
The Moon's term after Chakrapatha Harana = 5y. 2m. 23d.
The Moon's term after 1/3 reduction = 3y. 5m. 25d. Mercury's
term = 10y. 4m. 17d. Mercury's term after 1/3 reduction = 6y.
Astangata Harana
No planet is combust.
Adding up the terms granted by all the planets :
Planet Term of life
y. m. d.
Moon 3 5 25
Mercury 6 11 1
Jupiter 22 9 08
Venus 3 7 1
Saturn 8 6 22
Lagna 6 8 8
Total 68y. 10m. 5d.

Concerning the Eighth House 109
The native of Chart No. 34 died on 15-4-1950, that is, at the
age of 70 years 3 months 15 days which is quite close to the
term obtained on the basis of Amsayurdaya.
Other Methods
There are several other mathematical methods of
determining longevity like Jeevasarmayu, etc., but we feel that
their exposition in these pages is not necessary. The most
reliable methematical method, in our humble view, is that of
Jaimini. This has been elaborately dealt with, with examples, in
our book Studies in Jaimini Astrology, to which readers may
refer, in case they are interested in learning the Jaimini method.
Ashtakavarga method is equally important. But, it does not
seem to be quite reliable. The Ashtakavarga method of longevity
determination has been explained in detail in our book
Ashtakavarga System of Prediction.
Yet another method given in classical texts which seems, in
our experience, to be over-simplified is to add the longitudes of
Saturn, Jupiter, the Sun and the Moon. This gives a point in the
zodiac after expunging multiples of 12°. In the case of short,
middle and long life, death occurs when Saturn transits over this
point in his first, second and third cycles respectively.
Although Jaimini's method, Pindayurdaya and Amsayurdaya
yield fairly accurate results, it is wise to determine longevity on
the basis of the strength of the chart and the Dasas and Bhuktis.
The first step would be to see if a given chart belongs to Balarishta, Alpayu, Madhyayu or Poornayu, on the basis of the
combinations given earlier. Then, longevity can be fixed by
determining the most powerful marakas or death-inflicting
planets.

110 How to Judge a Horoscope
Determining the Period of Death
In the | Volume of this work, we have discussed in brief
under the caption "Determination of Longevity", the principles for
determining the killer-planets. In this chapter we propose to deal
with the same subject in somewhat greater detail, even at the
risk of repetition, so that the reader can understand the subject
more thoroughly.
Death dealing or maraka planets can be divided into 3
groups :
(a) Primary Determinants of Death,
(b) Secondary Determinants of Death, and
(c) Tertiary Determinants of Death.
Primary Determinants of Death : The 3rd and the 8th house
are the houses of life. The 12th houses from these two, namely,
the 2nd and the 7th are the houses of death.
(a) The 2nd and 7th lords cause death.
(b) The occupants, particularly malefics, of the 2nd and
7th houses.
(c) The planets, especially malefics, associating with the
2nd and 7th lords.
Of these, the planets in conjunction with the 2nd and 7th
lords are the most powerful in causing death. Secondary
Determinants of Death :
(a) Benefic planets in association with the 2nd and 7th
lords are less powerful in causing death than malsfic
planets.
(b) Lords of the 3rd and the 8th.
(c) The lord of the 3rd or 8th house associating with the
2nd or the 7th lord.
Tertiary Determinants of Death :
(a) Saturn in conjunction, aspect or association with

Concerning the Eighth House 111
any of the primary or secondary determinants of death.
(b) The lord of the 6th or the 8th house.
(c) The weakest planet in the horoscope.
The following planets are called chidra-grahas and the
strongest of them can cause death in his period :
(a) the lord of the 8th house
(b) the planet occupying the 8th house
(c) the planet aspecting the 8th house
(d) the lord of the 22nd Drekkana
(e) the planet in association with the 8th lord
(f) the lord of the 64th Navamsa occupied by the Moon
(g) the bitter enemy of the 8th lord.
The 8th house is the house of life and if afflicted terminates
life. If the 8th lord is in the 6th, 8th or the 12th house, death of
the person can occur,
(1) inthe Dasa and Bhukti of the 8th lord, or
(2) inthe Dasa of the lord of the sign occupied by Saturn
in the sub-period of the 8th lord, or
(3) inthe Dasa of the 8th lord and Bhukti of the 9th lord.
The planets most afflicted by maraka properties by aspect,
association or occupation will cause death.
If the Lagna lord is in the 6th, 8th or the 12th houses with
Rahu or Ketu, death takes place in the Dasa of the planet
associating with Lagna lord or in that of the 8th lord. If Lagna
lord is not associated with any planet, the ruler of the sign
occupied by Lagna lord or the 8th lord will be fatal. When Rahu
Dasa operates at the appropriate time (when life has been
determined to be short, medium or long), it can be a killer. !f out
of Saturn, the lords of Lagna, the 8th or the 10th

112 How to Judge a Horoscope
house, the weakest planet is associated with Rahu, this planet
can cause death in its period, according to Jataka Parljatha. If
the 8th lord is strong, the lord of Lagna can kill in his period. If
the Lagna lord is strong, the 8th lord can kill in his Dasa. If the
Lagna and 8th lords occupy a quadrant or trine with another
planet, death occurs in the Dasa of the planet in the 8th house. If
the 8th house is not occupied by any planet, death takes place in
the Dasa of Lagna lord when Saturn transits Lagna or the 8th
house.
If Lagna is a Seershodaya sign (Gemini, Leo. Virgo, Libra,
Scorpio and Aquarius), death takes place in the periods of the
lord of the 2nd or Lagna or of Rahu according as Lagna is a
movable, fixed or common sign. If the Lagna is a Prushtodaya
sign (Aries, Taurus, Cancer, Sagittarius and Capricorn), death
may come about in the periods of the lord of the Lagna
Drekkana, the planet aspected by the lord of Lagna Drekkana
and the planet in conjunction with the lord of the Lagna Drekkana
respectively if the rising sign is movable, fixed or common.
Death-inflicting Transits
Standard classical works on astrology give several methods
based on transits of certain planets by which the period of death
may be gauged with a fair degree of accuracy. Death indicated
on the basis of transits can happen only when the directional
influences in the birth charts warrant. Otherwise misfortunes
such as ill-health, loss of money, misunderstanings with kith and
kin and separations, may happen. Readers must clearly bear this
in mind when interpreting the following combinations bearing on
transits.
Saturn, the Ayushkaraka, is also the Mrutyukaraka. When

Concerning the Eighth House 113
Saturn passes through the houses occupied by the 8th lord or
the 12th lord from Lagna, death occurs. Passage of Saturn
through these houses or their trines with reference to any other
house in the horoscope results in the destruction of that house.
Saturn's transit of the sign (or its trines) occupied by the lord
of the 22nd Drekkana or Mandi brings about death.
When Saturn passes through the sign (Rasi and Navamsa)
denoted by the difference obtained by subtracting the longitude
of Saturn from that of Mandi, death is likely. Add up the
longitudes of the 8th, 12th and 6th lords. Saturn passing through
the sign (or its trines) indicated by the sum indicates death.
Saturn's transit of the sign as far removed from Mandi as Mandi
is from the 8th lord is also a fateful transit.
Jupiter also indicates death when he arrives at a sign that is
triangular to the one occupisd by the 8th lord. His transit through
the Rasi (or its trines) resulting from the sum of the longitudes of
the Lagna, the Sun and Mandi causes death. When Jupiter
crosses the Rasi indicated by the sum of the longitudes of Jupiter
and Rahu or through its trines, death can be expected.
Whan the Sun transits the Dwadasamsa he occupies in
Rasi, or the Navamsa occupied by the 8th lord or the Navamsa
occupied by Lagna lord or the trines of any one of these signs,
death may be apprehended. When the Sun passes through the
6th, 7th or the 12th house from Venus, then also death is
possible.
When the Moon crosses the Rasi or Navamsa occupied by
the 8th lord or the Sun or their trines, death is likely. Add
together the longitudes of Mandi and the Moon. The sign
indicated by the sum can also cause death when the Moon

114 How to Judge a Horoscope
passes through it. Death is possible when the Moon crosses the
sign occupied by the lord of the 22nd Drekkana reckoned from
the Moon or through the trines of these houses. The transit of
the Moon through the Lagna, the 8th or the 12th house also
causes death.
Find out the Navamsa, Dwadasamsa and the Drekkana
occupied by Mandi. The transits of Jupiter through the sign
indicated by the Navamsa, of Saturn through that of
Dwadasamsa and the Sun through the one (or its trines)
indicated by the Drekkana indicates death The Lagna denoted
by the sum of the Lagna, the Moon and Mandi indicates the time
of death.
| Sun
Mandi Saturn
j Venus
Mercury Moon M Mars
Rahu Jupit, oon Ketu
Ce RASI al ja NAVAMSA
Ketu || Rahu
Lagna |
Mars Saturn Mercury | Jupiter | Lagna
| Venus |
Balance of Mercury Dasa at birth: 5 years, 1 month and 6
days.
As earlier cautioned these transits must be looked into only
after determining the maraka Dasas and Bhuktis on the strength
of the Ascendant, the Moon and other planets. Transits are
always secondary inimportance. They are like

Concerning the Eighth House 115
catalytic agents. All conclusions must be primarily drawn on
the basis of Dasa-vichara (analysis of Dasa).
The 8th House : Cancer as 8th house is occupied by 8th
lord Moon in association with exalted Jupiter in Chart No. 35. It
is aspected by 5th and 12th lord Mars, exalted karaka and 3rd
lord Saturn and 9th lord Sun.
The 8th Lord: The 8th lord Moon occupies his own sign
Cancer in association with exalted Lagna lord Jupiter. Further
the 8th lord is full and very powerful. He is aspected by an
exalted 3rd lord Saturn and 5th and 12th lord Mars.
The 3rd house and lord: Saturn is the 3rd lord exalted in an
upachaya, the 11th house. He is also the ayushkaraka and
powerfully placed. The 3rd house is occupied by 7th lord
Mercury and afflicted by Rahu. Considered from the Moon, the
8th house Aquarius is occupied by afflicted Mercury, the 3rd and
12th lord. The 8th lord Saturn is exalted in the 4th. The 3rd lord
Mercury is in Ayusthana with Rahu.
Conclusion : The strong disposition of the Lagna lord, the
8th houses and 3rd house and their respective lords both from
Lagna and Moon-sign would place the native in the Poornayu
group.
Timing Death : In Chart No. 35, the Lagna is Sagittarius.
The 3rd lord Saturn is in the 11th exalted. The 8th lord Moon is
in own house with exalted Jupiter. The 2nd lord is again Saturn
exalted in the 11th while the 7th lord is in the 3rd (2nd Bhava)
with Rahu. From the Moon, the 2nd lord is the Sun and he is in
the 7th while the 3rd lord Mercury is in the 8th with Rahu. The
7th and 8th lord from the Moon is Saturn. Rahu is a malefic
associated with 7th lord from Lagna.
Coming to Navamsa. the 2nd and 3rd lords are Venus and
Mars respectively, while the 7th and 8th lords are Jupiter and

116 How to Judge a Horoscope
Mars respectively. From the Moon, the 2nd and 3rd are ruled by
Jupiter and Mars respectively. The malefic associate with the
2nd lord is Saturn. We give below a table showing the units of
maraka power that each planet gets by virtue of ownership,
occupation and association. Students af astrology will be able to
appreciate the whole procedure better.
Power of marakas obtained by No.
of
Planet Ownership Location Association Units
Sun 2nd lord 2nd from With 2nd 5
from Moon Lagna lord in Amsa
7th lord 7th from
from Moon Moon
in Amsa
Moon 8th lord 8th from 2
Lagna
Mars 8th lord in = as 3
Amsa
3rd lord in = =
Amsa
3rd lord from = =
Moon in Amsa
Mercury 7th lord 3rd from —
Lagna
3rd lord from 8th from =
Moon Moon
8th lord from 3rd from = 6
Moon in Lagna in
Amsa Amsa
Jupiter 7th lord in 2nd from With 8th lord 4
Amsa Lagna in from Lagna
Amsa
2nd lord from = =>
Moon in Amsa

Concernfng the Eighth House 117
Power of marakas obtained by oe
Planet___Ownership__ Location _Association Units
Venus 2nd lord in = With 7th lord 2
Amsa from Moon in
Amsa
Saturn 2nd lord = With 2nd lordin 6
Amsa
3rd lord With 7th lord
8th lord from from Moon in
Moon Amsa
7th lord from
Moon
Rahu 3rd from Malefic 3
Lagna associate of
8th from 7th lord
Moon
Ketu 2nd from With 8th lord 4
Moon in Amsa
With 3rd lord
in Amsa
With 3rd lord
from Moon
in Amsa
Out of a total of 35 units of maraka, Saturn and Mercury
each get 6 units while the Sun gets the next highest number of 5
units. As the lord of the 9th and powerfully aspected by

118 How to Judge a Horoscope
Jupiter, the Sun loses the maraka power in his Dasa, but would
produce the same in the Bhukti within the Dasa of another
malefic. Mercury Dasa comes very late in life (being also Dasa
at birth) so that possibility of death in his Dasa is out of question.
Saturn Dasa will come in the native's 90th year, which is far too
late. Saturn by virtue of his inherent affinity with Rahu (Sanivad
Rahu) delegates his maraka or killing power to Rahu.
Rahu, it will be seen, occupies the 3rd house and is in
association with Mercury, lord of the 7th from Lagna and who
owns the 8th from the Moon in Navamsa. As Rahu happens to
be a malefic associate of the 7th lord he has every qualification
to inflict death in his Dasa. As we have already noticed, Saturn
has the largest number of units for killing next to Mercury who
cannot do his job; and as Saturn himself cannot cause death, he
must naturally delegate his power on the planet occupying his
sign. Such a planet would be Rahu.
Rahu is in the 8th from the Moon. Hence Rahu gets the
power to kill in his Dasa. Mercury Dasa rules at birth with a
balance of 5 years 1 month 6 days. Then the Dasas of Ketu,
Venus, Sun, Moon and Mars last for 50 years bringing the total
to 55 years 1 month 6 days from birth. This will be upto about 73-1951. Then Rahu Dasa commences. When will he kill ? His
Dasa extends for 18 years. Will Rahu spare the native all the 18
years? Ketu is a likely candidate. Ketu should partake of the
characteristics of the Sun but as the Sun himself has 5 units,
Ketu has only 4 units of maraka power so that he would rather
assume the responsibility himself than allow Ketu to do it.
Gochara influences must also synchronise with the time of
death. The sub periods of Rahu, Jupiter, Saturn, Mercury,

Concerning the Eighth House 119
Ketu and Venus in the Dasa of Rahu last for 14 years 6 months
18 days. This will bring the age to about 69 years 7 months 24
days. Venus Bhukti in Rahu Dasa ends by about 25-9-1965 from
which date Sun Bhukti commences. The Sun as we have
already seen owns the 2nd from the Moon Lagna and occupies
the 7th maraka from the Moon while he is placed in the 2nd from
Lagna. In the Navamsa again he owns the 7th from the Moon
and is associated with the 2nd lord from Lagna. Moreover he is
a bitter enemy of Rahu and in Rasi the major and sub-lords are
in dwirdwadasa (2/12) while in Amsa, they are in shashtashtaka
(6/8). Thus the Sun is fully empowered to kill in his Bhukti which
runs between 25-9-1965 and 19-8-1966.
When maraka Dasa is operating the momentum of the last
signal for death is given by Ayushkaraka Saturn in his transits.
Death occurs when Saturn in his transit passes through the Rasi
and Amsa occupied by him at birth or its trines. Saturn occupies
Libra in Rasi and Gemini in Navamsa. Aquarius is in trine to
both these signs. Saturn enters Aquarius by February 1964. He
will occupy Aquarius Rasi and Gemini Navamsa by FebruaryMarch 1966.
The native died on 7-2-1966.
Balarishta
Predictions regarding the longevity of children are generally
not advisable. A chart with severe afflictions may give a sickly
childhood or make one prone to recurring accidents. But the
question of death itself is best left untouched. Anyway we give
here some charts illustrating death in childhood.
In Chart No. 36 the Moon is in the 8th house with Rahu and
is aspected by a malefic planet Saturn. Lagna is aspected by
Mars adversely. Jupiter, no doubt, aspects Lagna but as 8th

120 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 36.—Born on 16-12-1950 at 10-30 p.m.
RASI
Mars
GD.55
Mercury |
Venus |
un
Balance of Saturn Dasa at birth : 12 years, 4 months and 6
days.
lord his presence in the 7th is not welcome (the 7th is the 12th
from the 8th house). Afflictions to the Moon and Lagna generally
cause death in infancy or childhood. The child died at the age of
2,5 years.
In Chart No. 37 the Moon is afflicted by Rahu and Saturn.
He does not receive any benefic aspects. Both Rahu and the
Moon move into the twelfth Bhava. The child died in its 3rd year.
In Chart No. 38 the Moon is in a malefic sign afflicted by
Mars and Saturn. There is a particular yoga by which 'if the
Moon occupies a malefic sign or Navamsa with no benefic
aspects and malefics occupy the 5th or the 9th house, the child
dies early'. Here the Moon is not only in a malefic sign as well as
Navamsa but is also severely afflicted by two powerful natural as
well as functional malefics, Mars and Saturn. The

Concerning the Eighth House 121
Chart No. 37.-Born 2-2-1871 at 5-21 p.m. (L.M.T.) at 54 N
Moon
| Jupite
i TEENS Rahu
RASI -s | | ——— NAVAMSA a
Jupiter
ragon Saturn
GD-7
Mercury |
Saturn Mars | | Merc. Venus | Ketu
Ketu | '
Balance of Rahu Dasa at birth : O years, 2 months and 29
days.
Lagna Mercury
Rahu Venus Sat. Mars Ketu
Moon
Sun Sun
aeeie RASI Ea | [ee NAVAMSA -_—_——
Saturn
Moo Mere Venus Jupiter
n Jupit
GD-13
Ketu Rah |
Mars Lagna ahu
F Balance of Sun Dasa at birth: 1 year, 6 months and 27
ays.

122 How to Judge a Horoscope
5th house is occupied by a malefic planet Saturn. The child
died on 14-8-1873, hardly a week after birth.
Chart No. 39.—Born 22-10-1960 at 2-32 a.m. (L.M.T.) at
Jupiter
Moon
Mercury
ae || aa NAVAMSA
Satum
Jupiter
Venus
Balance of Jupiter Dasa at birth: 2 years, 7 months and
13 days.
‘Malefics in the Lagna and the 7th house and the Moon with
a malefic, if not aspected by benefic planets, causes early death
of the child.’ In Chart No, 39 Rahu occupies the exact Lagna
degree and Ketu is in the 7th aspected by Mars The Moon is in
the 4th with benefics but hemmed between malefics Saturn and
the Sun. He receives no benetic aspects. The child died in
Saturn Dasa, Ketu Bhukti. The Balarishta Yoga applying in Chart
No. 38 applies here also. The Moon occupies a malefic sign in
Rasi and is not aspected by any benefic planet. Saturn, a
malefic, aspected by another malefic Mars, occupies the 5th
house.

Concerning the Eighth House 123
Chart No. 40.—Born 14-4-1920 at9 p.m. (E.S.T.) at 14E
Venus Sun 5 Lagna
Mercury | Ketu un Rahu
Moon Jupit.
Per RASI —— | | —- NAVAMSA
Mars Mercury
oa Moon Saturn
GDB-109
Mars Moon
Lagna Ketu Venus Jupiter
Rahu
Balance of Rahu Dasa at birth: 12 years, 2 months and 2
days.
In Chart No. 40 the Lagna and 7th house are occupied by
Mars-Rahu and Sun-Ketu respectively. The Moon is in Aquarius
aspected by malefic Saturn and does not receive any beneficial
aspects. The Lagna is hemmed between Mars and Rahu
degreewise though all three occupy the same sign. The girl died
in April 1929 just at the end of the Balarishta span.
In Chart No 41 the Moon is not afflicted much and is
aspected by Jupiter who is combust. But powerful debilitated
malefics occupy the main quadrants, namely, Saturn occupies
the 7th and Mars, the 10th house, both aspecting the Ascendant.
According to classical works 'if the Lagna lord is debilitated and
Saturn occupies the 7th or the 8th house from Lagna, the child
suffers much and dies quickly', Venus is the Lagna lord and he is
not only debilitated but also eclipsed by Ketu and

124 How to Judge a Horoscope
l F
: Mere.
Saturn |
Rahu | Saturn Lagna Moon Ketu f
Venus t
Mars
Tio RASI H ea NAVAMSA =a
| Sua |
tJupit.
Merc.
Moon | tagna ‘Venus || Raku Jupiter Sun |
: | Ketu f
Balance of Ketu Dasa at birth: 5years, 4 months and
14 days.
in the 12th house. Debilitated Saturn occupies the 7th house.
The boy died in September 1975 in his 8th year.
In Chart No. 42 the Moon is in a dusthana afflicted by Ketu.
Malefics in the 6th and 12th houses with no benefic aspects
cause Balarishta. Here Ketu is in the 6th and Rahu is aspected
by Saturn and Mars is in the 12th. The boy died in March 1929.
Alpayu
In most cases of Alpayu, the Ascendant and 8th house and
their lords are weak either due to occupation, aspect or other
affliction. Benefics may also be weak while malefics may be
strong in kendras.
The Eighth House (Chart No. 43) : Capricorn is the 8th
house free of aspects or occupation. It is hemmed between
malefics Saturn and Ketu.

Concerning the Eighth House 125
Chart No. 42.—Born 21-2-1925 at 5-15 p.m. (C.E.T.) at 14
i l |
Mars | i Saturn !
i] e Sae]
5 j | | Moon
an i Ashy | j Lagna
Mercury H Ketu
RASI - - -—— NAVAMSA |
Venus Rehu |
Moon [Lagna i| Sun | Venus
Ketu GD-149 i
a meas Gai Gea ee || Renee pane Reesor ee eel
Jupiter Satuin į | Mercury | Mars
! | ! Jupiler
b
Balance of Moon Dasa at birth : 1 year, O month and 0
days.
Chart No. 43.—Born 19-10-1959 at 11-45p.m. (I.S.T.) at
Mercury
f 2 Renu
Ketu | Mecon Moon] saturn
ae aea eee
lagna Lagna
RASI | m] | —_. NAVAMSA pene
Satum |
Ketu
Jupiter
Sun Rahu | [Venus
Mara pees Mors
Jupiter
Sun
Balance of Sun Dasa at birth: years, months and 21
S.

126 How to Judge a Horoscope
The Eighth Lord: Saturn is in the 7th in a kendra but in the
12th house from the 8th house. He is aspected by a combust
Mars.
Ayushkaraka : Saturn is in his own sign but in a marakasthana and aspected by a malefic Mars.
Considered from the Moon : The 8th lord is in the 12th from
the 8th.
Conclusions: The Lagna is fairly strong being Vargottama
and Lagna lord is exalted but in an asterism of the 2nd lord Sun.
Strong malefics occupy kendras. Mars, who is combust, aspects
the Lagna adversely The 3rd house and 3rd lord are both
afflicted by Rahu. The native died at 16 years in Ketu Bhukti,
Mars Dasa.
Within the span of Alpayu, the Sun, the Moon, Mars and
Rahu (part) Dasas operate. Mars is the 7th lord from the Moon
Chart No. 44. — Born 4-4-1948 at 6 a.m. (I.S.T.) at 26 N
(sort. fo ae eee
Lagna Rahu Venus Venus Ketu Jupiter
Mercury
Mars }| Mars Mercury
Sat. Sat. Moon
RASI
=i NAVAMSA Se
Sua
GB-85
et rr | a re
Jupiter Ketu
Balance of Moon Dasa at birth: 1 year, 11 months and 7
days.

Concerning the Eighth House 127
and is with the 2nd lord from Lagna, namely the Sun. He is aspected by 7th lord Saturn. Ketu should give the results of Mars
and Jupiter. Jupiter is the 8th lord from the Moon and placed in
the 7th from there becoming a maraka.
The Eighth House (Chart No. 44) : Libra is occupied by a
malefic Ketu and aspected by a debilitated Mars.
The Eighth Lord: Venus is well placed in his own sign
Taurus but in the constellation of 6th lord the Sun.
Ayushkaraka : Saturn is in the 5th house aspected by 5th
lord the Moon but in very close conjunction with debilitated
Mars. He occupies the constellation of 7th lord Mercury.
Considered from the Moon : The 8th house is aspected by
3rd and 12th lord Jupiter from a nodal* asterism. The 8th lord is
in the 3rd with Mercury, 6th and 8th lord. Two powerful malefics
afflict the Moon.
Conclusion : Lagna is occupied by a malefic 6th lord Sun
and a maraka, Mercury. Lagna lord Jupiter is in a kendra but in
the asterism of a node who occupies the 8th house in affliction.
Either in the | Valume or in the II Volume of this work we have not so far touched
the significance of asrerisms or constellations as it forms a distinct subject by
itself. The significance of constellational lords is highlighted by Satyacharya and
hence its importance cannot be under-rated. The lordships of planets assigned to
constellations are on the basis of the Vimshottari Dasa lords. (Krittika, Uttara and
Uttarashadha—the Sun; Rohini. Hasta and Sravana—the Moon; Mrigasira, Chitta
and Dhanishta - Mars; Aridra, Swati and Satabhisha —Rahu; Punarvasu, Visakha
and Poorvabhadra—Jupiter; Pushyami, Anuradha and Uttarabhadra—Saturn;
Aslesha, Jyeshta and Revati— Mercury; Makha, Moola and Aswini—Ketu; and
Pubba, Poorvashadha and Bharani—Venus)
Thus in this chart Jupiter who is in the 3rd house is in the constellation of Moola
ruled by Ketu, one of the nodes.

128 How to Judge a Horoscope
Longevity must come within Alpayu due to the malefic
nature of the asterisms ocoupied by Lagna lord, 8th lord and
3rd lord and the severe affliction to the Moon.
Death occurred in Saturn Bhuktl, Rahu Dasa. Rahu in the
2nd house in a sign of Mars is a powerful maraka. His signdipositor Mars is the 2nd lord and in the 7th from the Moon with
2nd lord Saturn. Saturn, the Bhukti lord, is also a maraka,
particularly from the Moon both in Rasi and Navamsa.
Chart No. 45.—Born 26-5-1950 at 6-30 a.m. (I.S.T.) at 82
Venus | Lagna Sun
Rahu Mercury Sun Venus Ketu tagna
Jupiter
—— RASI ~a | f-m NAVAMSA =n
Sat Mars
Moon i
GD-51 Jupit.
Mars{ Moon
| Ketu | Mercury Rahu Saturn
Balance of Venus Dasa at birth: 2 years 1 month and
15 days.
The Eighth House: The 8th house is Sagittarius aspected
by 7th lord eclipsed Mars.
The Eighth Lord: Jupiter, the 8th lord, is in a kendra
aspected by Moon and Saturn. Jupiter is in an astorism of Rahu
who though in the 11th is aspected by 7th lord Mars.
Ayushkaraka : Saturn occupies his inimical sign Leo with
3rd lord Moon and is aspected by 8th lord Jupiter.

Concerning the Eighth House 129
Considered from the Moon: The 7th lord Saturn occupies
the Moon-sign while the 8th house is occupied by exalted
Vargottama but eclipsed Venus and aspected by an afflicted
Mars. The 8th lord Jupiter is in a kendra in the 12th from the 7th
house.
Conclusion: Both from Lagna and the Moon, the 8th lords
are well placed. But Lagna lord Venus though exalted is afflicted
by Rahu and Mars in the constellation of Mercury, the 2nd lord, a
maraka, placed in the 12th house. This would make the 8th lord
stronger than Lagna lord causing Alpayu. The native died in
Venus Bhukti of Moon Dasa. Venus occupies Pisces with Rahu
aspected by Mars and is in the asterism of 2nd lord Mercury.
The Moon occupies the 4th with karaka
Saturn (the 7th lord from Moon) and is aspected by 8th lord
Jupiter proving maraka there by.
Chart No. 46.-Born 29-1-1955 at 10 p.m. (I.S.T.) at 9 N 58,
Moon K Legna Sun
Mars etu ||Moon | venus Saturn
Rahu
Mercury Jupit, Jupiter
RAS] —— | | ——_—_. NAVAMSA
Sun Ketu
GB-59
Rahu
Venue Saturn |Legna f| Mars | Mercury
Balance of Mercury Dasa at birth : 3 years, 5 months and
9 days.

130 How to Judge a Horoscope
The Eighth House : It is aspected by an exalted ayushkaraka Saturn who is in the asterism of the 7th lord.
The Eighth Lord: In Chart No. 46 Mars is in the 7th house (in
the 12th from the 8th) with 11th lord Moon aspected by 7th lord
exalted Jupiter.
Ayushkaraka: Saturn is exalted in the 2nd and is aspected
adversely by 8th lord Mars.
Considered from the Moon: The eighth house is occupied
by exalted Saturn and aspected by 2nd lord Mars. The 8th lord is
in the 10th eclipsed and aspected by Saturn.
Conclusion : The 8th lord is in a kendra while Lagna lord is
weakly placed in the 6th house subject to a papakartarl caused
by Sun and Mars. Further he occupies the constellation of the
8th lord.
Venus Dasa, Jupiter Bhukti killed the native. Venus is the
2nd lord from Lagna, the 2nd and 7th lord from Navamsa Lagna
and in the 2nd from the Moon in Navamsa. Jupiter as 7th lord
from Lagna becomes a powerful maraka, more so being
aspected by 2nd occupant Saturn.
The Eighth House : In Chart No. 47 Taurus is aspected by
3rd and 6th lord Jupiter.
The Eighth Lord: Venus is debillitated in the 12th house with
12th lord Mercury.
Ayushkaraka: Saturn occupies his moolatrikona sign
Aquarius but in a nodal constellation.
Considered from the Moon : The 8th house is adversely
aspected by an afflicted Mars and Moon-sign lord Jupiter. Jupiter
is in parivartana with 12th lord Mars and is aspected by 2nd and
3rd lord Saturn. The 8th lord is the Moon himself afflicted by
Mars and Rahu.

Concerning the Eighth House 131
Chart No. 47.—Born 2-11-1935 at 5-40 a.m. (I.S.T.) at 13°
Saturn Mars
RASI —— | |= NAVAMSA
Venus
Sat.
Rahu Venus Hah Jupiter
e Jupiter Lagna |Merc, Lagna any Moon Mercury
ars
Balance of Venus Dasa at birth : 6 years, 1 month and
24 days.
Conclusion : The Lagna and 8th lord Venus is debilitated in
the 12th house. The Lagna is occupied by a malefic, debilitated
Sun. The Moon is also severely afflicted by maiefics. The chart
therefore comes within Alpayu.
Death took place in Venus Bhukti of Mars Dasa. Venus is
with Mercury who is the 7th lord from the Moon. He is in the 2nd
from Navamsa Lagna with 2nd lord Saturn. He is also the
afflicted 8th lord. Mars, the Dasa lord, is the 2nd and 7th lord
from Lagna and from the Moon in Navamsa. He is debilitated in
Navamsa and aspected by 2nd and 3rd lord Saturn which
renders him a first-rate maraka.
The Eighth House : In Chart No. 48 Scorpio is the 8th
house aspected by an exalted 4th lord Moon.
The Eighth Lord. Mars is in the 12th in exact conjunction
with 2nd and 7th lord Venus and is also combust. He is with
3rd and 6th lord Mercury.

132 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 48. -Born 3-4-1949 at 8am. (I.ST.) at13°N,
Sun
bagna
Mae e Moan Jupit, Moon Rahu Saturn
Mercury
RASI _—— | j—__— NAVAMSA a
Jupiter Sat, Sun
Mars ; $
Ketu Ketu Mercury] Lagna
Venus
Balance of Moon Dasa at birth: 9 years, 6 months and
23 days.
Ayushkaraka : Saturn is in the 5th in an inimical sign in the
constellation of Ketu who occupies marakasthana, the 7th
heuse.
Considered from the Moon : The 8th house has no aspects
and is not occupied by any planet either. The eighth lord Jupiter
is in the 9th debilitated.
Conclusion : Lagna is occupied by Rahu and Lagna lord is
in the 12th in exact conjunction with a maraka Venus in a
constellation ruled by Mercury who is the 3rd and 6th lord and
placed in the 12th. Further both Lagna and 8th lords are in
combustion. The Moon is exalted but is aspected by malefic
Saturn and debilitated Jupiter indicating a short life.
The native died in Venus Bhukti, Rahu Dasa. Rahu is in
Lagna in a martian sign. Mars is in the 7th, from the Moon. Rahu
should give results similar to Saturn who is the natural

Concerning the Eighth House 133
significator of death in an asterism ruled by Ketu, a maraka.
Rahu occupies the second from Navamsa Moon, Venus, the
Bhukti lord, is a maraka from Lagna, from Navamsa Lagna and
also from the Moon in Navamsa, being lord of the 2nd and 7th
from all these points.
Chart No. 49.—Born 24-8-1944 at 5-15 a.m. (W.T.) at 41
| Sat. | | Sun
Rahu on |
Lagna etu
Mars
Die RASI NAVAMSA
Rahu
Jupiter
Moon
Balance of Rahu Dasa at birth: 13 years, 7 months and
27 days.
The Eighth House : Capricorn is the 8th house aspected by
2nd lord Sun, 6th and 9th lord Jupiter and 4th and 10th lord
Venus.
The Eighth Lord: Saturn is the 8th lord placed in the 12th
house.
Ayushkaraka : Saturn is the 7th and 8th lord as well placed
in a dusthana, the 12th house.
Considered from the Moon : The 8th house is Taurus and
receives no aspects while the 8th lord Venus is in the 11th
house hemmed between Mars and Rahu.

134 How to Judge a Horoscope
The Lagna is occupied by a node and Lagna lord is ina
kendra. But Lagna lord is the Moon himself placed in a nodal
constellation. There are no other planets in kendras. The 3rd
lord Mercury is also afflicted being in a cusp and with malefic
Mars. The lord of longevity, Saturn, is in the house of loss, the
12th house. The chart therefore cannot give much longevity.
Death took place in Saturn Dasa, Saturn Bhukti. Saturn is a
first-rate maraka being the 7th and 8th lord. He is also the 2nd
lord from both Navamsa Lagna and the Moon in Navamsa and
occupies a marakasthana in Navamsa.
Madhyayu
Chart No. 50.-Born 25-12-1917 at 11-55 p.m. (G M.T) at O
Moon x ro
Jupiter bid eon
Jupiter
Rahu
Sat. Mars ; Sun
RASI — || — NAVAMSA
Sat
Venus Ketu
GD-79
Mercury
M
Sun foes Mare, Venus
Rahu f
Balance of Moon Dasa at birth : 7 years, 7 months and 6
days.
The Eighth House : The 8th house is Aries aspected
adversely by the 8th lord Mars and Saturn, the 5th and 6th lord
in Chart No. 50.

Concerning the Eighth House 135
The Eighth Lord : Mars the 8th lord is placed in Lagna
Kendra and aspected by 7th lord Jupiter and Saturn.
Ayushkaraka : Saturn is placed in the 11th house aspected
by 2nd and 9th lord Venus.
Considered from the Moon : The 8th house is Sagittarius
occupied by 2nd and 5th lord Mercury, 4th lord Sun and Rahu
and aspected by 7th lord Mars. The 8th lord Jupiter is in the
Moon-sign itself, a quadrant.
Conclusion: Lagna lord is in a kendra afflicted and eclipsed.
The 8th lord too is in a kendra aspected by 7th lord Jupiter. But
Jupiter occupies the asterism of a benefic Moon. So also Saturn
occupies the constellation of Lagna lord. Here both malefics and
benefics occupy trines and quadrants indicating medium life.
Also, there is a yoga ‘if the 8th lord is in a kendra and the 8th
house is not occupied by any planet, the native lives for 40
years’.
Death took place in Mercury Bhukti, Jupiter Dasa. Jupiter is
the 7th lord from Lagna and hence a killer. Mercury though
Lagna lord is heavily afflicted and becomes a maraka.
The Eighth House : In Chart No. 51 Aries is aspected by
6th lord Satum and 7th lord Jupiter.
The Eighth Lord: Mars is afflicted by Rahu and Saturn.
Ayushkaraka: Saturn occupies his moolatrikona sign but is
subject to affliction by Rahu and Mars.
Considered from the Moon : The 8th house is occupied by
malefics. Mars, Saturn and Rahu while the 8th lord being Saturn
is also heavily afflicted.
Conclusion : If Lagna lord is weak, malefics occupy the 6th,
8th or 12th houses, Jupiter occupies a trine or quadrant and
malefic occupies Lagna, Madhyayu is caused according to
Jataka Parijatha. Here Lagna lord is in a quadrant in own

136 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 51.—Born 12-7-1877 at 10a.m. (L.M.T.) at
Merc M Jupiter Sun
Sun ercury | Mars Saturn
= Noe 3
etu
Rahu Venus
RASI — NAVAMSA _
Lagna
Ketu |] Rahu
GD.73 Moon
Jupiter Lagna ||Venus
Balance of Mercury Dasa at birth: 12 years, 5 months and
28 days.
sign while being with 12th lord Sun and aspected by 7th lord
Jupiter weakens him. Malefics Mars, Rahu and Saturn are in the
6th and Ketu is in the 12th. Jupiter occupies the 4th house, a
quadrant and malefic Mars aspects Lagna adversely. The yoga
is literally fulfilled except for occupation of Lagna by a malefic.
Instead, there is malefic aspect on Lagna from Mars, Otherwise
too, Lagna lord in a quadrant and 8th lord is afflicted and weak
so that medium life can be expected.
Death occurred in Venus Bhukti, Sun Dasa. The Sun is the
12th lord aspected by 7th lord Jupiter. He is also the 2nd lord
from the Moon in the 12th from him with 3rd and 12th lord
Mercury. In Navamsa, he is the 8th lord both from Lagna and
Moon and is with the 2nd lord Saturn. Venus is not only an
apparent maraka but being in the constellation of Mercury who,
in turn, is influenced by 2 marakas Sun and Jupiter gets maraka
power.

Concerning the Eighth House 137
Chart No. 52.- Born 17-10-1867 at 2-30 p.m. (LM.T.) at 46 N
Moon Ketu ars
Mercury
Ketu Lagna
Jupiter Saturn
RAS! a | ea NAVAMSA
Lagna Rahu Moon
GD-75
Sun š
Venus Jupit un
Saturn Mercury Venus Rahu
Mars
Balance of Mars Dasa at birth : 5 years and 7 months.
The Eighth House : Rahu occupies the 8th house and is
aspected by 3rd and 12th lord Jupiter and Lagna lord Saturn.
The Eighth Lord: The Sun is in a kendra and with 4th and
11th lord. Mars, 6th and 9th lord Mercury and 5th and 10th lord
Venus.
Ayushkaraka: Saturn occupies an Upachaya, the 11th
house.
Considered from the Moon : The 8th house is Sagittarius
whose lord Jupiter is in the 10th with Ketu.
Conclusion : Both Lagna and 8th lords are fairly strong but
the 8th lord Sun is stronger than Lagna lord both by placement
and association. The 8th house is afflicted by Rahu but also
aspected by Lagna lord Saturn. Both benefics and malefics
occupy trines and quadrants indicating Madhyayu.
The native died in Rahu Bhukti of Saturn Dasa. Dasa lord
Saturn is a powerful killer being the 2nd lord from Lagna, 7th

138 How to Judge a Horoscope
occupant from the Moon and 7th lord from both Lagna and Moon
in Navamsa. Rahu in a sign ruled by 8th lord Sun shouid
additionally give saturnine results and becomes a strong
maraka.
Chart No. 53.-Born 29-5-1917 at 3-00 p.m. (E.S.T.) at 718
Jupiter
Mercury
Mara Sun Ketu Ketu Sun
Venus
Sat
— RASI —— | je NAVAMSA
Lagna
Venus
GD-99 Saturn
Rahu
Balance of Venus Dasa at birth: 1 year, O months and O
days.
The Eighth House : The eighth house is occupied by own
lord Mars and Lagna lord Mercury. It is aspected by 5th and 6th
lord Saturn.
The Eighth Lord : Mars is the 8th lord and occupies his
moolatrikona sign Aries with Lagna lord Mercury and is aspected
by Saturn.
Ayushkaraka : Saturn is in the 11th house in his own
asterism aspected by 8th lord Mars.
Considered from the Moon : The 8th house is Pisces free of
any afflictions by aspect or occupation. The 8th lord Jupiter
occupies the 10th house with Moon-sign lord Sun and 10th

Concerning the Eighth House 139
lord Venus. He is subject to a papakartari yoga caused by Mars
and Ketu.
Conclusion : The Lagna and 8th lord are together and
afflicted by Saturn. The Moon is also in the 12th house but two
benefics Jupiter and Venus occupy a trine. Jupiter aspects
Lagna. These planetary positions indicate Madhyayu.
The native died in Saturn Bhukti, Jupiter Dasa. The Lagna
being Virgo, Jupiter becomes a powerful maraka. Saturn is the
7th lord both from the Moon in Rasi and from Navamsa Lagna
and therefore empowered to kill in his period.
Chart No. 54 — Born 12-1-1863 at 6-33 p.m. (L.M.T.) at 22
y Moon
Mars Ketu enus | Mercury | Saturn Mars
Rahu
RASI —|!|——_;_ NAVAMSA
Mercury
Sun Sun Ketu
Venus NH-36
Moon I
Lagna Rahu Jupiter Sat Lagna Jupiter
Balance of Moon Dasa at birth: 3 years, 3 months and
27 days.
The Eighth House: In Chart No. 54 Cancer is aspected
by 9th lord Sun, 6th and 11th lord Venus and 7th and 10th
lord Mercury.
The Eighth Lord: The Moon is 8th lord in the 10th with
2nd and 3rd lord Saturn-

140 How to Judge a Horoscope
Ayushkaraka: Saturn occupies the 10th with 8th lord
Moon. He has exchanged signs with 7th and 10th lord Mercury.
Considered from the Moon : The 8th house is occupied by
8th lord Mars and aspected by 7th lord Jupiter. The 8th lord
being Mars himself is in his own sign in the 8th house.
Conclusion: The Lagna lord Jupiter is powerful in the 11 th
house but subject to a papakartari yoga caused by Rahu and
Saturn, while the 8th lord Moon occupies a kendra. The Lagna
lord and all the benefics are in Panaparas (2, 5, 8, 11) or
succeedent houses indicating Madhyayu.
Death came about in Sun Bhukti, Jupiter Dasa. Jupiter is
a strong maraka because he owns the 7th from the Moon,
occupies the 2nd from the Moon and is subject to a papakartari
yoga. In Navamsa, he owns the 7th from the Moon. The Sun,
Bhukti lord, occupies the 2nd house with 7th lord Mercury. In
Navamsa also, he is in the 2nd house.
Chart No. 55.—Born 24-3-1883 at 6 a.m. (L.M.T.) at 13° N.
Mercury
Rahu
Ketu Saturn jJupit. || Mars Moon
NAVAMSA —
Ketu
Lagne
Sua
Jupiter
SSS Hy SSSA
Balance of Moon Dasa at birth: 6 years.
Moon Venus

Concerning the Eighth House 141
The Eighth House : It is occupied by Rahu and aspected by
Lagna and 10th lord Jupiter (see Chart No. 55).
The Eighth Lord : Venus is well placed as 8th lord in the
11th house.
Ayushkaraka : Saturn is in the 3rd house aspected by 2nd
and 9th lord Mars and has exchanged signs with 3rd lord Venus.
Considered from the Moon: The 8th house is occupied by
Ketu and subject to papakartari yoga caused by the Sun and
Saturn. The Moon-sign lord Mercury and 8th lord Mars conjoin in
the 6th house aspected by 7th lord Jupiter.
Conclusion : The Lagna lord Jupiter is strong in a kendra,
the 8th lord Venus is also favourably disposed in the 11th and
Ayushkaraka Saturn is beneficially situated in the 3rd house,
which factors favour long span of life. But Lagna is hemmed
between malefics Mars and Ketu. So also is the 8th house
Chart No. 56.—Born 9-3-1894 at 3-00 a.m. (C.E.T.) at13E
i Lagna
Jupiter Sun
Jupit. Ketu
RAS I — | | —— NAVAMSA
Rahu
eee Ketu Mean Saturn Mercury
| Ma Venus
Balance of Saturn Dasa at birth: 1year, 9months and
19 days.

142 How to Judge a Horoscope
from the Moon while the Sun, a malefic, occupies Lagna
indicating medium span of life.
Death took place in Saturn Dasa, Mars Bhukti. Saturn
occupies the 3rd house aspected by 2nd lord Mars. Bhukti lord
Mars is a malefic being the 2nd lord and having joined 7th lord
Mercury. Mars is therefore a maraka.
The Eighth House : In Chart No. 56 Cancer is the 8th
aspected adversely by 5th and 12th lord Mars. It is powerfully
aspected by 2nd and 3rd lord and karaka exalted, Vargottama
Saturn. Venus, the 6th and 11th lord, also aspects the 8th
house.
The Eighth Lord : The Moon occupies a quadrant with 7th
lord Mercury and Rahu. He is aspected by Mars.
Ayushkaraka : Saturn is very powerfully placed in the 11th
house in Vargottama exaltation.
Considered from the Moon : The 8th house Libra is
occupied by a powerful karaka. The 8th lord Venus is in the 11th
house in exchange of signs with Saturn. He is aspected by
Moon-sign lord Jupiter from the 3rd house.
Conclusion : The Ascendant, the 8th lord, and the Moon are
severely afflicted by malefics. The Lagna lord occupies a malefic
house, the 6th house. The 8th house from the Moon is slightly
better. This should have caused even Balarishta or Alpayu but
the strength of karaka Saturn pushes longevity into the
Madhyayu group.
Death took place in Venus Dasa, Ketu Bhukti. Venus
occupies the 2nd house and has exchanged signs with 2nd lord
Saturn. Ketu is in a mercurial sign. Mercury is a powerful maraka
both from Lagna and the Moon as the 7th lord and passes on
his killing powers to Ketu. Ketu becomes fatal in Bhukti.

Concerning the Eighth House 1483
Purnayu
Chart No. 57. -Born 12-2-1880 at 0-40 a.m. (L.M.T.) at 41
Saturn Mars | Ketu ||Mars | Ketu Moon Lagna
Jupiter
Jupiter E | ie
Moon
Sun
Mercur
atia RASI —| navamsa |-
Sat.
GO-97
Venus Sun
Rahu Lagna Venus Rahu
Mercury
Balance of Jupiter Dasa at birth : 9 years, 10 months and
17 days.
The Eighth House : Taurus is aspected by yogakaraka
Saturn and occupied by 2nd and 7th lord Mars.
The Eighth Lord: Venus is also the Lagna lord and occupies
the 3rd house with Rahu. He is aspected by the 4th and 5th lord
Saturn and adversely by 7th lord Mars.
Ayushkaraka : Saturn is in the 6th house but has exchanged
signs with 6th lord Jupiter gaining strength thereby. Also he
occupies his own sign in Navamsa.
Considered from the Moon : The eighth house is aspected
by Moon-sign lord Saturn while the 8th lord is in the Moon-sign
with 2nd lord Jupiter, 7th lord Sun and the 6th lord Moon.
Conclusion : Venus, the Lagna and 8th lord, would seem
afflicted by Rahu but both planets occupy a Venusian
constellation which is ruled by Lagna lord. As such the
disposition

144 How to Judge a Horoscope
of Lagna and 8th lords in own constellation aspected by an
equally beneficially disposed ayushkaraka Saturn has conferred
the full span of life.
The native died in June 1969 in Rahu Bhukti, Mars Dasa
in his ninetieth year. Generally the 8th lord in own sign or Saturn
in the 8th, free of afflictions, give Purnayu. Mars the Dasa lord, is
a maraka being the 2nd and 7th lord and placed in the 8th
house. He is the 3rd lord from the Moon in Rasi and the 7th lord
in Navamsa and a first-rate killer. Rahu is with Venus in the 3rd
house aspected by Saturn and Mars. Rahu gives the results of
Venus (the planet with whom he associates), Jupiter (his signdispositor) and Saturn (Sanivad Rahu). Venus is the 8th lord in
the 7th from the Moon in Navamsa, Jupiter is the 3rd lord from
Lagna, 2nd lord from the Moon in Rasi, the 7th lord from
Navamsa Lagna and in the 2nd from Navamsa Moon, while
Saturn is the natural death-dealer. Therefore, Rahu becomes
maraka.
Chart No. 58.-Born 24-5-1819 at 4-04 a.m. (L.M.T.) at 51
Rabu | Mercury} SU" Mars| Sun
Mars ý Lagna Rah tagna Moon Venus
Saturn enus Moon anu
RASI ~— | |[-— NAVAMSA EDA
Jupiter
NH-27
Ketu
Mercury
Katu Jupiter
t Saturn
Balance of Moon Dasa at birth: 7 years and 3 months.

Concerning the Eighth House 145
The Eighth House : Sagittarius rises in the 8th house
aspected by 9th and 10th lord Saturn.
The Eighth Lord: Jupiter is in the 9th debilitated but has
exchanged signs with 9th lord Saturn.
Ayushkaraka : Saturn is in the 11th in mutual exchange of
signs with 11th lord Jupiter in his own constellation gaining
strength thereby. He is with 7th lord Mars and Rahu, both
Vargottama.
Considered from the Moon : The Moon being in Lagna, we
find the same planetary situations recur.
Conclusion: Lagna lord Venus is in the 12th in an asterism
ruled by 5th occupant Ketu who is Vargottama and who, in turn,
is in a constellation ruled by 4th lord Sun. The Sun occupies a
kendra and is exalted in Navamsa which indirectly strengthens
Lagna lord Venus. The Lagna itself is very powerfully situated
occupied by the Sun and exalted Vargottama Moon, all in a lunar
constellation. (This constellation is particularly strong since its
lord, the Moon, is very strongly disposed.) The Lagna is
aspected by 8th and 11th lord Jupiter who primarily gives the
results of a strong Saturn. Saturn also aspects Lagna and he is
strong for two reasons : (1) occupation of own constellation and
(2) exchange of signs with 11th lord Jupiter. This extraordinary
strength of the Lagna places the chart in the Purnayu group.
The native died in 1903 in Mercury Dasa, Saturn Bhukti.
Mercury is the 2nd lord placed in the 12th. He is the 3rd lord
from Navamsa Lagna and the 2nd lord from Navamsa Moon. His
Dasa becomes fatal. The Bhukti lord Saturn is with maraka Mars
in Rasi and aspected by the same maraka in Navamsa
becoming a maraka himself.

146 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 59.- Born 7-5-1861 at 2-51 am. (L.M-T.) at 88 E
Moon Venus Ketu
Sun Jupit, Ketu Mercury
Lagna | Mercury Mars
Jupit Saturn
te RASI are) j E NAVAMSA PAS
Sat. || Moon Lagna
j NH-35
{ Rahu
Rahu Sun Mars
Venus j
Balance of Mercury Dasa at birth: 10 years, 2 months
and 20 days.
The Eighth House : Libra is the eighth house aspected by
8th lord Venus, 6th lord Sun and 7th lord Mercury. Saturn also
aspects it.
The Eighth Lord: The eighth lord Venus occupies the 2nd
house with 6th lord Sun and 7th lord Mercury.
Ayushkaraka : Saturn is in the 6th house in an inimical sign.
Considered from the Moon : The same situation obtains, the
Moon being in Lagna.
Conclusion : Superficially, the chart does not, by the
disposition of 8th lord, 8th house and Saturn indicate Purnayu.
But a closer look will reveal 8th lord Venus occupies his own
constellation, so does the 6th lord with whom he associates
closely. The Lagna is occupied by 5th lord Moon and Lagna lord
aspects both Lagna and the Moon in exaltation. According

Concerning the Eighth House 147
to a classical dictum, ‘if the 10th lord is exalted and the 8th house
has malefic planets, the native will be long-lived’. Here the Lagna
and 10th lord Jupiter is exalted and the 8th house, through vacant,
is aspected by malefics Sun and Saturn. According to another
dictum ‘if Jupiter is exalted, benefics occupy their moolatrikona
signs and the Lagna lord is powerful, the person concerned lives
for 80 years’. Jupiter is exalted. The natural benefic Venus
occupies own constellation. Functional benefic 2nd and 9th lord
Mars also occupies his own asterism while the 5th lord Moon is
very beneficially disposed aspected by exalted Jupiter from the
former's moolatrikona sign. The conditions of the yoga are
fulfilled for all practical purposes.
The native died in Jupiter Dasa, Jupiter Bhukti. Jupiter as
Lagna lord would not have ordinarily conferred maraka results
but here he occupies the constellation of Mercury, a
Chart No. 60.— Bom 26-7-1856 at about midnight at
Merc. || Rahy Lagna
Rahu
A Mercury
Jupiter Sat. Sat. Moon
Sun
Venus
D NAVAMSA —
Sun
Mars Ketu | fJupit. | Venus
Mars |
Ketu
Balance of Moon Dasa at birth : 6 years, 6 months and 18
days.

148 How to Judge a Horoscope
powerful maraka, both by ownership and occupation. Hence,
Jupiter gets the power to kill.
The Eighth House: In Chart No. 60 Sagittarius is the
eighth house aspected by 2nd lord Vargottama (occupies the
rane sign in Navamsa) Mercury and Saturn, the 9th and 10th
ord.
The Eighth Lord : Jupiter is in the 11th house in his own
sign with Vargottama Rahu aspected by Saturn.
Ayushkaraka: Saturn occupies the 2nd house with
Mercury but in the constellation of Rahu. Rahu, inturn, is
well placed in the 11th house in Vargottama with 8th lord
Jupiter.
Considered from the Moon: The same planetary positions
obtain since the Moon occupies Lagna.
Conclusion: Lagna is Vargottama and occupied by exalted
and Vargottama 3rd lord Moon. The Moon, moreover, has
exchanged signs with Lagna lord thereby strengthening both
Lagna and the 3rd house. The 8th house is aspected by a strong
well-placed karaka who also aspects the 8th lord Jupiter. Jupiter
is powerful having gained his moolatrikona Navamsa and being
with Rahu in Rasi. Rahu is Vargottama in the 11th. All these
dispositions favour Purnayu.
The death of the native took place in Venus Dasa, Venus
Bhukti. Venus is in the 3rd in a constellation of Mercury and is
aspected by 8th lord Jupiter. In Navamsa, Venus is in the 7th
house with the 7th lord both from Lagna and the Moon.
The Eighth House: In Chart No. 61 Sagittarius is the 8th
house occupied by Lagna lord Venus and aspected by 9th and
10th lord Saturn.
The Eighth Lord: Jupiter, the 8th lord, is in a quadrant
in the 10th house with 2nd and 5th lord Mercury and 4th lord
Sun.

Concerning the Eighth House 149
Chart No. 61.—Born 12-2-1856 at 12-21 p.m. (L.M.T.) at 18
M Lagna
pan Lagna | Sat R ahu
Rahu Jupiter
Sun
Mercury
Jupiter
RASI psd j NAVAMSA e
NH-29
| Sun
i Mars Saturn
Venus | ketu Merc, Ketu Venus Moon
Mars
Balance of Venus Dasa at birth: 12 years, 3 months and
9 days.
Ayushkaraka : Saturn is in the 2nd house aspected by
Lagna lord and 8th lord Jupiter.
Considered from the Moon: The eighth house is Scorpio
and is neither occupied nor aspected by any planet. The eighth
lord Mars is with a malefic Ketu in the 7th which is the 12th from
the 8th house aspected by 9th and 12th lord Jupiter.
Conclusion : The Lagna lord Venus in a dusthana, in the 8th
house, the 8th lord Jupiter in a quadrant, the 8th lord from the
Moon afflicted and weak in the 12th from the 7th house should
have given Alpayu but actually the chart is of a Purnayu native.
Venus, the Lagna lord, though in a dusthana occupies his own
constellation in Rasi and his moolatrikona sign in Navamsa. The
8th lord Jupiter also occupies his own constellation in the 10th
house. Mars is also in his own constellation and Vargottama
aspecting the Moon as Moon-sign lord. Ayush-

150 How to Judge a Horoscope
karaka Saturn is in the 2nd but in a strong martian constellation
and aspected by a favourably disposed 8th lord. All these factors
promote longevity.
The death of the native occurred in Moon Bhukti of Saturn
Dasa. Saturn is a maraka in his Dasa as he occupies the 2nd
house from Lagna and the 3rd house from the Moon. Saturn is in
the 7th house from Navamsa Lagna. The Moon is the 3rd lord
placed in the 12th house and, therefore, capable of killing in his
Bhukti.
Chart No. 62.—Born 15-8-1872 at 5-17 a.m. (L.M.T.) at 22
| Rahu
Rahu Lagna Sun Moon
Venus
Lagoa
Mars | |Jupit.
Jupit,
—— E RASI aan NAVAMSA eras ot
Sun
Venus
NH-43 Mere.
Moon Mercur
Ketu Ketu X Mars
Saturn Saturn
Balance of Ketu Dasa at birth: 3 years, 2 months and 22
days.
The Eighth House: Aquarius is the 8th house aspected by
2nd lord Sun, 4th and 11th lord Venus and 3rd and 12th lord
Mercury. Itis also aspected by debilitated Mars.
The Eighth Lord: Saturn, the eighth lord, is in the 6th house
with the Lagna lord Moon.

Concerning the Eighth House 151
Ayushkaraka: Saturn is also the karaka besides being the
8th lord and occupies the 6th house with Lagna lord Moon.
Considered from the Moon : The 8th house is occupied by
exalted Jupiter and debilitated Mars. The eighth lord is the Moon
himself being placed with 2nd and 3rd lord Saturn.
Conclusion: The disposition of the 8th house from Lagna
does not seem to indicate Purnayu but the association of Lagna
and 8th lords. Moon and Saturn, is welcome. Their signdispositor Jupiter is exalted indirectly strengthening them. Jupiter
is exalted in Lagna giving it strength. Mars is debilitated in Lagna
but this is offset by his occupation of the asterism of the 8th lord.
The presence of exalted Jupiter in Lagna and the strength
gained by Lagna ard 8th lords indirectly puts the chart in the
Purnayu span of life.
Death took place in Jupiter Dasa, Rahu Bhukti. Jupiter, the
Dasa lord, is in the constellation of Mercury who is in the 2nd
house with the 2nd lord Sun. Mercury is also the 7th lord from
the Moon. Rahu is in Taurus ruled by Venus who also is in the
2nd house with 2nd lord Sun. Rahu should also give the results
of Saturn who, in turn, is also the 7th lord from Lagna and the
2nd and 3rd lord from the Moon. Rahu, therefore, gets the power
to kill in his sub-period.
The Eighth House : In Chart No. 63 Taurus is the 8th house
aspected by Lagna and 8th lord Venus and 11 th lord Sun. It is
also aspected by a debilitated Jupiter.
The Eighth Lord : Venus occupies the 2nd house aspected
by the 2nd lord Mars.
Ayushkaraka : Saturn occupies the 4th house, a quadrant,
his own sign Capricorn in Vargottama. He is with debilitated 3rd
and 6th lord Jupiter.

152 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 63.- Born 23-11-1902at 5-16a.m. (L.M.T.) at 23
Ketu
Lagna | Mercury
Jupiter
—— NAVAMSA
Saturn
3 Sat.
Jupiter
Venus Mercury Moon
s Lagna Mars Rahu Sun
an Rahu Venus
Balance of Venus Dasa at birth: 13 years, 11 months and
12 days.
Considered from the Moon : The 8th lord Jupiter is in the
6th house with a powerful Ayushkaraka. Mars, the 4th and 9th
lord and Ayushkaraka Saturn aspect the 8th house.
Conclusion: The Lagna is occupied by 9th and 12th lord
Mercury and Vargottama Rahu. Ayushkaraka Saturn, who is
strongly placed, aspects Lagna. Lagna lord Venus is in a
saturnine asterism and aspected by his sign-lord. The strength
of the 8th house from both Lagna and the Moon, of Ayushkaraka
and the Lagna indicate Purnayu. The native died in Mercury
Bhukti of Saturn Dasa. Saturn is a powerful maraka from the
Moon. From the Lagna, he is with the 3rd lord Jupiter and
becomes a killer. The Bhukti lord Mercury is the 12th lord and is
placed in the 2nd house from Lagna. Mercury is also the 2nd
lord from the Moon.

Concerning the Eighth House 153
Unnatural Death
Rules handed down to us from the ancient writers are not
unworkable. Many of them are applicable with suitable
modifications. Unnatural deaths are those which occur due to
external agents. They may be sudden and unexpected as in the
case of accidents by fire, drowning, traffic accidents or even
murder. They may also be pre-meditated as in the case of
suicide. Nevertheless they are not caused by disease or old age
although it is quite possible a sick man may by run over by a car
or an old woman commits suicide by jumping down from a
height. The cause of death is what differentiates whether the
death is unnatural. In most cases unnatural deaths are invariably
violent.
It will be seen that in the majority of cases, apart from the
influence of the 8th house, 22nd drekkana, etc., Mars,
Chart No. 64. -Born 4-4-1948 at 6 a.m. (I.S.T.) at 73 E 04.
Jupiter
Venus Mereury
Rahu
a ee | ee | oe
Moon
NAVAMSA
Jupiter
Mandy
Balance of Moon Dasa at birth: 2 years, 11 months and
7 days.

154 How to Judge a Horoscope
Rahu and Saturn have a sinister role to play. The constellations
also play an important role in judging both span of life and nature
of death.
The Eighth House : In Chart No. 64 Libra, the 8th house,
is occupied by Ketu and aspected by 2nd and 9th lord neechabhanga Mars.
The Eighth Lord : Venus is in his own sign in Rasi in the 3rd
house and exalted in the Navamsa.
Ayushkaraka : Saturn is placed in a trine but with Mars
aspected by 5th lord Moon.
Considered from the Moon : The 8th house is aspected by
3rd and 12th lord Jupiter while the 8th lord Sun is in the 3rd
house.
Conclusion : The lord of Lagna is in the 10th house but in
the asterism of Ketu who is in the 8th house. The 8th lord Venus
is well placed apparently but occupies the asterism of the 6th lord
Sun. The Moon is afflicted by two malefics, Saturn and Mars,
both being very closely placed without any beneficial aspects.
The native died on 5-10-1964 in Rahu Dasa, Saturn Bhukti. Rahu
occupies the 2nd house and is in a martian sign. Mars is a
maraka as 2nd lord from Lagna and the 7th occupant from the
Moon with Saturn, the 2nd lord therefrom. Further Rahu is
aspected by afflicted Saturn. Rahu occupies Bharani, ruled by
8th lord. Saturn is in a constellation ruled by 7th lord Mercury and
is a maraka being conjoined with 2nd lord Mars, as 2nd lord from
the Moon in the 7th therefrom. In Navamsa
also, both Rahu and Saturn possess strong maraka powers by
occupation and rulership.
The girl died in a bus accident. The 8th house is aspected by
Mars and occupied by Ketu. The major lord is in Aries (Second
house indicates face) in a Venusian constellation indicating
vehicles. The face was crushed and death was instantaneous.

Concerning the Eighth House 155
Chart No. 65.— Born 15-7-1942 at 2-30 p.m. (I.S.T.) at
Lagna Jupi |
Saturn upit, Mars | Mandi Saturn
ere.
Venus
Sun Ketu
Kelu Moon Jupit Sun
Mars
RAS! NAVAMSA
Lagna
Mandi Rahu Merc Rahu
Moon Venus
Balance of Saturn Dasa at birth: 2 years, 2 months and 0
days.
The Eighth House: Sagittarius, a fiery sign, is the 8th house
and is aspected by 8th lord Jupiter and 2nd and 5th lord
Mercury.
The Eighth Lord : Jupiter occupies the 2nd house with 2nd
lord Mercury.
Ayushkaraka : Saturn is in Lagna Kendra with Lagna iord
Venus aspected by no other planet.
Considered from the Moon . The 8th house Aquarius is
occupied by Ketu and aspected by neechabhanga 5th and 10th
lord Mars and 6th and 9th lord Jupiter.
Conclusion: All the angles (kendras) are afflicted by
malefics. Saturn afflicts Lagna, Rahu, the 4th house. Mars,
Saturn and Ketu the 10th house and Saturn, the 7th house.
Though Lagna lord occupies the Ascendant, in Navamsa, he is
debilitated. He occupies an asterism ruled by Mars in Rasi.
The 8th house falls in Ayudha Drekkana.

156 How to Judge a Horoscope
The native's clothes caught fire on 16-12-1964 and death
occurred on 19-12-1964. This was in Rahu Bhukti of Ketu
Dasa. Rahu occupies a maraka piace from the Moon and a
constellation of Venus who as Lagna lord is in the 2nd Bhava.
The Dasa lord Ketu is in the 8th from the Moon aspected by
Mars and Saturn. Ketu according to the dictum Kujavad Ketu is
like Mars and hence, death by burns.
Chart No. 66.—Born 3-4-1949 at 8am. (I.S.T.) at
Mars tegna | A | |
Venus | Rahu | Moon | | Jupit. | Moon | Rahu Sat. (R)
Mercury | | | |
f | Í
| RASI I— |—! NAVAMSA | SE
Jupiter (R) | Sun | | |
= ar | ee a PON
} Ketu | venus Ketu re Lagne |
} Mars
Balance of Moon Dasa at birth: 9 years, 6 months and 23
days.
The Eighth House : Scorpio is aspected by 4th lord Moon.
The Eighth Lord: Mats as 8th lord is in the 12th house
combust in the Sun with 2nd and 7th lord Venus and 3rd and 6th
lord Mercury.
Ayushkaraka : Saturn is in an inimical sign in the 5th
house aspecting the Moon.
Considered from the Moon: The 8th lord Jupiter is in
the 9th with neechabhanga while the 8th house does not
receive any aspects.

Concerning the Eighth House 157
Conclusion : The Lagna and 8th lord being in the 12th
house, weak by combustion and association with marakas does
not indicate good longevity. The Moon though exalted is
aspected very closely by malefic Saturn. Jupiter is also aspecting the Moon. The 8th house fails in the 2nd Drekkana of
Scorpio which goes by the name of Nigada (fetters) Drekkana.
The native died on 2-12-1977 after a month as a result of
serious injuries in a motor bike accident. This was in Rahu Dasa,
Venus Bhukti. Rahu is in Aries ruled by Mars who is in the 12th
with marakas Venus and Mercury. Mars is a maraka from the
Moon. Venus, the Bhukti lord, is a first-rate maraka being the
2nd and 7th lord from Lagna. The 7th house is afflicted by the
8th house aspect of Mars and occupation by Ketu. Ketu gives
results similar to Mars and Mars is the 8th lord in the 12th in
exact degree association with Vahanakaraka Venus. The sign
being a common sign, the accident occurred on a road.
Chart No. 67.—Born 26-11-1959 at 4-30 p.m. (I.S.T.) at 79
| Ketu | Lagna | f Rahu | i | Moon |
i i] | i
SS | ee I J ee
| Mars
a RAS! i} |) NAVAMSA]
j į | j | f
| | | Saturn |
| |Lagna i T
Sun lee, at amma aii e=
Ic Mars | Moon a i. |Mere (R)}
| Saturn Mere. (R)| | Venus | | Jupit. | sun Ketu
Jupiter Rahu | Í |
Balance of Moon Dasa at btrth: 4 years, 5 months and 7
days.

158 How to Judge a Horoscope
The Eighth House: In Chart No. 67 Sagittarius is occupied
by 9th and 10th lord Saturn.
The Eighth Lord: Jupiter is in the 7th house in the 12th from
the 8th house with 7th lord Mars, 4th lord Sun and 2nd and 5th
lord Mercury all afflicted.
Ayushkaraka: Saturn is in the 8th house whose lord Jupiter
is in the 12th therefrom.
Considered from the Moon : The 8th house is Aries free of
aspects but the 8th lord is in the 3rd in own sign with 12th lord
Sun, 4th and 7th lord Jupiter and Moon-sign lord Mercury.
Conclusion: The Lagna is aspected by malefics. Jupiter is a
benefic but his presence as 8th lord in the 7th weakens him.
Lagna lord Venus is weakened by Rahu and Saturn's aspect.
The Moon is also eclipsed and afflicted by Saturn's aspect.
The girl was crushed to death under a speeding truck on 1912-1978, in Saturn Bhukti, Rahu Dasa. The 8th house is
occupied by a malefic while the 8th lord is with malefics Mars
and Sun in a Nigada (fetters) Drekkana. Lagna lord Venus is
with Rahu aspected by Saturn indicating a violent end.
Dasa lord Rahu is in the 5th in a mercurial sign. Mercury
whose results, he reflects, is the 2nd lord in the 7th house with
7th lord Mars. Rahu becomes a powerful killer. Saturn, the
Bhukti lord, is in the 8th and the natural significator of death.
Dasa lord Rahu occupies a common sign with Venus, ruler of
vehicles. Saturn too is in a dual sign indicating death while
commuting. Going a little further, Rahu is with the Moon
indicating public transport being involved in the death.
The Eighth House : In Chart No. 68 Taurus is occupied by
2nd and 7th lord Mars, 3rd and 6th lord Jupiter, 11th lord Sun
and 10th lord Moon.

Concerning the Eighth House 159
Chart No. 68.—Born 24-5-1906 at 4p.m. at O W 05, 51 N
Sun Saturn
Jupiter
Mercury Moon Sun
Mars
Saturn
RASI NAVAMSA
Moon
Katu Ketu
GD-3 Jupiter
Venus
Lagna Mercury Lagna Mars
Balance of Mars Dasa at birth : 5 years, 7 months and 3
days.
The Eighth Lord: Venus is in the 9th house hemmed
between Mars and Rahu.
Ayushkaraka : Saturn occupies his own sign Aquarius in the
5th house.
Considered from the Moon : The 8th house is aspected
adversely by Mars and Moon-sign lord Venus while the 8th lord
Jupiter is in the 1st with Mars and Sun, both malefics.
Conclusion : The 8th house is occupied by the New Moon,
6th lord Jupiter and malefics Sun and Mars. The 8th lord is
subject to a papakartari yoga. There are no benefics save
afflicted Mercury in the quadrants.
The native died by drowning in a boat accident in May 1926
in Venus Bhukti of Rahu Dasa. Rahu is in the 10th in Cancer
whose lord Moon is a maraka being placed with 2nd and 7th
lord Mars. Rahu is in the 3rd from the Moon. Bhukti

160 How to Judge a Horoscope
lord is subject to a heavy hemming in by malefics and occupies
the 2nd house from the Moon in Rasi and from Lagna in
Navamsa. The New Moon, Mars and Sun in the 8th house cause
death through water or other natural elements. Here Dasa ;ord is
in a watery sign and Bhukti lord Venus is between afflicted
watery Moon on one side and Rahu in a watery sign on the other
side indicating a watery grave.
Chart No. 69.—Born 10-11-1897 at 1-15 am.
i ! f
i j j Moon | | Moon | Jupiter | | sun |
— E n aai S 1
| f | | | Mars
| pran | | | Ketu
$ f H
— RASI [— |- — | NAVAMSA | |
Rahu | [Lagna Rahu Í |
Mars venus S | Lagna |
Saturn sun jJupit | Venus- | Saturn |
' Mercury | | ! |
Balance of Sun Dasa at birth : 1 year. 3 months and 17
days.
The Eighth House: The Lagna being Leo, the 8th house is
Pisces aspected by own lord Jupiter.
The Eighth Lord: Jupiter is in the 2nd house with no aspects
or associations,
Ayushkaraka: Saturn occupies a martian watery sign with
Mars in the 7th from the Moon. In Navamsa, though exalted and
aspected by Jupiter, he is aspected by an afflicted debilitated
Mars.

Concerning the Eighth House 161
Considered from the Moon: The 8th house is subject to a
papakartari yoga caused by Rahu on one side and Mars and
Saturn on the other side. The 8th lord is again Jupiter not
afflicted by aspect or association in Rasi but aspected by Saturn
in Navamsa.
Conclusion: The 7th house from the Moon is afflicted by
malefics Mars and Saturn while the 8th house from the Moon is
hemmed between malefics, one set of them being in a watery
sign and the other being Rahu who should give Saturn's results
being placed in Capricorn. Saturn, in turn, is s in Scorpio.
Waning Moon associated with Mars, Saturn or Rahu causes
death by possession, drowning or fire. Here Mars and Saturn
afflict the Moon from a watery sign. The native, a sailor, died on
25-9-1925 in the ramming of his ship.
Mercury Bhukti of Rahu Dasa was on during this period.
Mercury is the 2nd lord placed in the 3rd house in the
constellation of the 8th lord. From the Moon, he is the 2nd lord in
Rasi and the 7th lord in Navamsa- The Dasa lord is Rahu. He
should give the results of Saturn the ruier of the sign he
occupies and also because of the dictum 'Sanivad Rahu'. Saturn
is the 7th lord from Lagna and in the 7th from the Moon with
Mars, the 7th lord from Chandra Lagna. The end was violent.
The 22nd
Drekkana is the 3rd decanate of Pisces and is a Sarpa (Serpent)
Drekkana.
The Eighth House : in Chart No. 70 Aquarius is the 8th
house occupied by 6th and 9th lord Jupiter.
The Eighth Lord : Saturn is the 8th lord in the 3rd house
with 5th and 10th lord Mars and 3rd and 12th lord Mercury. He is
aspected by Lagna lord Moon.
Ayushkaraka : Saturn occupies the 3rd house from Lagna and
the 7th house from the Moon in association with Mars and
Mercury. In Navamsa, he occupies his own sign with Mars.

162 How to Judge a
Horoscope
Chart No. 70.—Born 15-10-1891 at 10-30 p.m. (G.M.T.) at
Moon Rahu Rahu | |
Jupit,
; ! Sat,
Jupiter Lagna Mars | Mercury
RAS! = | NAVAMSA
; Sun Mars i | |
atu Venüs Sat, | ‘Venus Sun gna
| Marc, i Ketu
Balance of Jupiter Dasa at birth: 12 years, 2 months and
16 days.
Considered from the Moon: The 8th house is occupied by
6th lord debilitated Sun and Venus. It is hemmed between
malefics, Ketu on one side and Mars, Saturn and Mercury on the
other side. Jupiter aspects the 8th house from the 12th house
from the Moon.
Conclusion: The 7th house from the Moon is affflicted by
Mars and Saturn while the 8th house is occupied by fiery Sun
who also afflicts the 8th iord Venus. ‘If the Sun is in the 8th
house. Moon is in the 10th house and Saturn is in the 8th house,
the native may be hit accidentally by a log of wood and die.’ In
this case, the Sun is in the 4th, the Moon though in the 9th is
aspected by 10th lord fiery Mars and Saturn is the 8th lord so that
the conditions are fulfilled indirectly. The native was accidentally
shot and died on 2-1-1930. The preponderance of martian
influences and the papakartari to the 8th house from

Concerning the Eighth House 163
Moon by Ketu (Kujavad Ketu) and Mars and Saturn caused
death by a fire-arm. Saturn alone could have caused death
through a blunt object such as a log of wood as indicated in the
particular yoga. Death occurred in Sun Bhukti of Mercury Dasa.
The Sun is the 2nd lord from Lagna in the 8th from the Moon. He
associates with the 8th lord Venus and occupies a martian
constellation. Mars, in turn, is in the 7th from the Moon, The
Dasa lord Mercury is in the 3rd and 12th lord conjoining 7th lord
Saturn in the 7th from the Moon.
Chart No. 71.—Born 25-10-1904 at 8-57p.m. (G.M.T.) at 15
Jupiter | Lagna
Jupiter
Moon p i Ketu
Ketu ` Saturn
RASI „i NAVAMSA
Saluen Sun
GD-43
Mercury Moon| Rahu
Venus Sun Merc. Mars Venus
Balance of Sun's Dasa at birth: 5years, 10 months and 3
days.
The Eighth House : Capricorn is occupied by its own lord
Saturn. It is not influenced by any other planet.
The Eighth Lord: Saturn occupies his own sign.
Ayushkaraka: Saturn occupies the 8th house in his own
sign.

164 How to Judge a Horoscope
Considered from the Moon : Scorpio is occupied by 2nd and
7th lord Venus and aspected by Mars from a fiery sign. Mars is
with Rahu and his aspect is therefore highly maleficent.
Conclusion : There are no heavy afflictions to the 8th house
from the Lagna or the Moon-sign. But the 5th house from the
Moon is afficted by Mars and Rahu. Saturn, a malefic occupies
the 8th house While the 8th house from the Moon has Venus
afflicted by Mars. The 7th house from Navamsa Lagna is also
afflicted by Mars and Rahu. Death occurred in a motor accident
and the native died on 29-6-1927 in Moon Bhukti of Mars Dasa.
The Moon is the 2nd lord, in Rasi, the 3rd lord in Navamsa
and placed in the 8th from Navamsa Lagna. Mars occupies the
3rd from Lagna and is with Rahu. Rahu gives results similar to
the Sun, his sign-dispositor, and Saturn. The Sun is the 3rd lord
in the 7th from the Moon and Saturn is the 8th lord from Lagna
and 2nd lord from the Moon in Navamsa.
The Eighth House: In Chart No. 72, the 8th is occupied by
8th lord Saturn and aspected adversely by Mars, the 6th and
11th lord, and an afflicted 7th lord Jupiter.
The Eighth Lord: Saturn, the 8th lord, occupies his own sign
and is aspectsd by Mars and Jupiter.
Ayushkaraka : Saturn is also the karaka and is aspected by
7th lord, afflicted Jupiter, and 6th and 11th lord Mars.
Considered from the Moon: The 8th house is Taurus
aspected by 3rd and 6th lord Jupiter. The 8th lord is in the Moonsign with debilitated Sun and aspected by Saturn from
Capricorn.
Conclusion : Death takes place in captivity when the 22nd
Drekkana happens to be either Nigala, Sarpa or Pasa. In this
case the 22nd Drekkana is the first of Capricorn and hencea

Conceming the Eighth House 165
Chart No. 72.—Born 2-11-1755 at about 8 p.m. at 46 N 30.
Mars i Sun Mars
Ketu Lagna i Venus Jupiter
Rahu
Sat.
Lagna
1A RAS! ae NAVAMSA
Saturn Keiu
NH-22
Sun Tin i
Mercury | Moon ue Merc Moon
Venus any
Balance of Mars Dasa at birth: 2 years, 5 months and 9
days.
Nigala one. Death occurred in captivity as the native, the heroine
of the French revolution of 1791, was guillotined. Mars aspects
the 8th house and Saturn as Ayushkaraka is also in a Nigala
Drekkana. 'When the 5th or the 9th sign from the Moon is
aspected or occupied by a malefic planet and when a Sarpa,
Nigala or Pasa Drekkana rises in the 8th Bhava, death is brought
about by hanging’ is literally fulfilled in this case. Mars is in the
9th from the Moon and 8th house rises in a Nigala Drekkana.
Death occurred in Saturn Dasa, Saturn Bhukti. Saturn is the
8th lord from Lagna in the 8th and in Navamsa, powerfully
aspects the 7th house in association with Rahu.
The Eighth House : In Chart No. 73 Virgo rises in the 8th
Bhava aspected by Jupiter and exalted Venus.

166 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 73.—Born 12-2-1809 at 7-32 a.m.
Jupiter
Venus
Sun
Legna
Mercury
Jupiter
NAVAMSA
maae
Moon
Sun
Mars Saturn Ketu
Balance of Sun Dasa at birth: 2 years, 1 month and 6
days.
The Eighth Lord: Mercury is well placed in the Ascendant
with the 7th lord Sun.
Ayushkaraka: Saturn occupies Scorpio in the 10th house
aspected by Jupiter in own sign.
Considerd from the Moon: The 8th house is aspected by
Saturn while the 8th lord Sun occupies the 2nd house with
Mercury.
Conclusion: The 22nd Drekkana is an Ayudha Drekkana,
being the 2nd of Virgo. The 8th lord Mercury, is in a constellation
of Rahu who, in turn, is in association with the planet of violence,
Mars.
The native was assassinated on 14-4-1865. A combination
in Goutama Samhita says that if the lord of the 8th is in the
Ascendant and the waning Moon is aspected by Mars, death will
be due to a weapon. The 8th lord Mercury is in the Ascendant
and the waning Moon in the 12th house is aspected by Mars.

Concerning the Eighth House 167
According to Jataka Tatwa and other classical works when
Saturn, Sun and Mars are in the 10th, 7th and 4th respectively
death is by assassination. Here we find Saturn is in the 10th,
Mars aspects the 4th and the Sun aspects the 7th.
The native was shot to death in Saturn Dasa, Mercury
Bhukti. The Dasa lord Saturn as an occupant of the 10th house
causes Mrityu Yoga and becomes a maraka. Also he is the 2nd
lord from the Moon and is aspected by 2nd lord Jupiter. Mercury,
the Bhukti lord, is in the 2nd from the Moon in Rasi, and is the
8th lord from both Rasi and Navamsa_ Lagna.
Chart No. 74.- Born 2-10-1869 at 7-45 a.m. (L.M.T.) at 21
| Jupiter
Rahu
ge
Mars
i Mercury
Saturn i Venus Sun
i Lagna
Balance of Ketu Dasa at birth: 6 years 10 months and 28
days.
The Eighth House : It is occupied by 3rd and 6th lord
Jupiter and aspected by Saturn and Mars.
The Eighth Lord : Venus, the 8th lord, occupies his c.wn
sign but is with Mars and hemmed between malefics, Saturn
and Sun.

168 How to Judge a Horoscope
Ayushkaraka : Saturn is in Scorpio aspected by 3rd and 6th
lord Jupiter.
Considered from the Moon : The eighth house is aspected
by tha Sun and the 8th lord Jupiter, by Mars and Saturn.
Conclusion: Jupiter though in the 8th house is in Krittika
ruled by the Sun. He is aspected by Mars and Saturn. According
to a classical yoga found in Gautama Samhita, Mars in the
Lagna unaspected by benefics and the waning Moon in the 11th
cause the native to die by being wounded above the naval
region by a weapon. The native, an apostle of non-violence, was
assassinated by a fanatic communailist.
The assassination occurred in Sun Bhukti, Jupiter Dasa.
Jupiter is in the 8th aspected powerfully by Mars, the 2nd and
7th lord. The Sun is in the 2nd from the Moon and in the 12th
from Lagna.
The Eighth House : In Chart No. 75 A fiery sign Aries rises
on the 8th Bhava and is occupied by Lagna and 10th lord
Mercury and 3rd and 8th lord Mars and aspected by Saturn, the
5th and 6th Lord.
The Eighth Lord: Mars occupies his own sign in the 8th
house with Mercury and is aspected by Saturn.
Ayushkaraka : Saturn occupies the 11th house and is
aspected by 8th lord Mars from the 8th house.
Considered from the Moon : The 8th house is Pisces free of
aspects or associations but the 8th lord Jupiter is with Venus
and the Sun and subject to a papakartari yoga caused by Mars
and Ketu.
Conclusion : The native was a President of the United
States of America and was shot dead on 22-11 -1963. The 8th
house, 8th lords both from Lagna and Moon are considerably
afflicted by malefics. Mars in the 8th house causes sudden

Concerning the Eighth House 169
Chart No. 75.—Born 29-5-1917 at 3-00 p.m. (E.S.T.) at
Jupiter
Mercury
Mare Sun Ketu Ketu Sun
Venus
a
| Sat
ł
RAS! | NAVAMSA
| Lagna
Moon eA Venus
Mars
ae See Si Marc. Moon 7 Rahu
Rahu
Balance of Venus Dasa at birth : aea eeen year.
death. Hediedin Saturn Bhukti, Jupiter Dasa. Jupiter is
the 7th lord while Saturn is the 7th lord both from Moon and
Navamsa Lagna.
The Eighth House: In Chart No. 76 Aries is the 8th house
here also aspected by the 8th lord Mars, exalted Saturn and 7th
lord Jupiter.
The Eighth Lord: Mars is with exalted Saturn in the 2nd
house aspecting his own sign.
Ayushkaraka : Saturn occupies the 2nd house in exaltation
with 3rd and 8th lord Mars.
Considered from the Moon : The 8th house is aspected by
Saturn and occupied by Rahu. The 8th lord, the Moon himself, is
well placed in Vargottama with Vargottama Moon-sign lord
Jupiter and 6th and 11th lord Venus. He is aspected by Saturn
afflicted by Mars. The Moon is subject to a papakartari caused
by the Sun and Ketu.

170 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 76.—Born 20-11-1925 at 1-00 p.m. (E.S.T.) at 71
Mars Lagna Saturn
RASI NAVAMSA
Katu
Jupiter |
Mars
Moon M Sun Lagna |
Venus ercury | Saturn
Balance of Sun Dasa at birth: 4years, 9 months and
7 days.
Conclusion: The native was also shot to death on
4-6-1968 for political reasons. The 8th house and 8th lord
from Lagna and Moon are heavily afflicted by malefics. Death
occurred in Saturn Bhukti, Jupiter Dasa both being first rate
marakas. Jupiter is the 7th lord and Saturn occupies the 2nd
house with 3rd and 8th lord Mars.
The Eighth House : In Chart No. 77 Jupiter, the 2nd and 5th
lord, occupies the 8th house.
The Eighth Lord: Mercury is in the 9th house with 7th
lord Venus and 10th lord Sun and aspected by malefic Mars.
Ayushkaraka : Saturn occupies the 7th house with Mars and
exalted Moon.
Considered from the Moon : The 8th house Sagittarius is
aspected by own lord Jupiter and 7th and 12th lord Mars.
Conclusion: The native suffered a violent end in Saturn
Dasa, Jupiter Bhukti- Two malefics in the 7th from Lagna and

Concerning the Eighth House 171
Chart No. 77.—Born 29-7-1883 at 2 P.m. (L.M.T.) at 41 N,
Moon Moon
Ketu Saturn jJupit. Saturn
Mars Jupiter
Sun Mars
Merc, |} Rahu Lagna
Venus Venus
Se RASI —— NAVAMSA mmm
Ketu
NH-50
Lagna | Rahu Mercury
Sun
Balance of Moon Dasa at birth : 3 years, 8 months and 26
days.
the 8th house from the Moon aspected by Jupiter resulted in a
tragic death. Saturn rules the 3rd house from Lagna and is in
the 7th from it, a maraka house. In Navamsa, he is the 7th
lord from Navamsa Lagna and joins the 2nd lord Moon. The
sub-lord Jupiter owns the 2nd from Lagna and occupies the
8th house. In Navamsa, he is with a maraka Saturn and is the
7th lord from the Moon.
The Eighth House: In Chart No. 78 Taurus is the 8th house
subject to a papakartari yoga caused by Rahu and Mars.
The Eighth Lord: Venus is in a fiery sign Aries with Mars,
Sun and Mercury aspected by Saturn.
i Ayushkaraka : Saturn is in the 10th aspected by a powerful
ars.
Considered from the Moon: The 8th house is occupied
by Saturn and aspected by Mars. The 8th lord Moon, though
with Jupiter, is with Ketu also.

172 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 78.—Born 20-4-1889 at 6-30 p.m. (L.M.T.) at
Moon
Jupiter | Jupiter
Ketu
Balance of Venus Dasa at birth: 16 years, 4 months and
6 days.
Conclusion: The 8th houses and 8th lords both from Lagna
and the Moon are heavily afflicted by Saturn-Mars influences. It
is believed the native committed suicide which is borne out by
the afflictions to the 8th house and the Moon's affliction by Ketu.
Death occurred in Rahu Dasa, Moon Bhukti. Rahu is in the 7th
from the Moon in a mercurial sign and in the 7th from Navamsa
Lagna. His sign dispositor Mercury whose results he must reflect
is in the 7th from Lagna and is the 7th lord from the Moon. The
Moon, the Bhukti lord, occupies the 3rd from Lagna and is in the
7th from the major lord.
The Eighth House : In Chart No. 79 Cancer is occupied
by Ketu, Venus and Saturn.
The Eighth Lord : The Moon is in the 9th house hemmed
between Saturn and Sun.

Concerning the Eighth House 173
Chart No. 79.—Born 25-9-1916 at 1-58 p.m. (L.M.T.) at 27
Jupiter
Jupiter
Ketu | {Venus Ketu
Sat.
Dii NAVAMSA
Moon
Moon || Rahu Saturn
ee ee
Lagna Mercury
Balance of Venus Dasa at birth: 17 years, 3 months and
2? days.
Ayushkaraka: Saturn is in the 8th house afflicted by Ketu
and associating with Venus.
Considered from the Moon : The 8th house Pisces is
aspected by Sun and Mercury while the 8th lord Jupiter is in a
fiery sign aspected by malefics Mars and an afflicted Saturn.
Conclusion : The native, the leader of a national political
party, was killed and the body thrown on the rails, according to
reports Mars, Saturn and Ketu influences on the 8th house and
8th lord indicate a violent end.
The death occurred on 10/11-2-1968 in Rahu Dasa, Ketu
Bhukti. Both are marakas by virtue of the houses they occupy.
Rahu is aspected by Mars and Ketu is with Saturn. In Navamsa
also, they occupy maraka nouses.
The Eighth House : In Chart No. 80 Cancer rising gives
Aquarius as the 8th house. Itis aspected by debilitated Mars.

174 How to Judge a
Horoscope
Chart No. 80.-Born 6-10-1885 at 1-36 a.m. (L.M.T.) at 20
Ketu | Mercury
Sun
Venus
— ane NAVAMSA a
Ketu
NH-54 H
Venus Moon
Balance of Venus Dasa at birth: 9 years, 9 months and
9 days.
The Eighth Lord: Saturn is the 8th lord and occupies the
12th house.
Ayushkaraka : Saturn occupies a friendly sign in the 12th
house.
Considered from the Moon : The 8th house is occupied by
Ketu and aspected by as many as 5 planets—Sun, Rahu,
Jupiter, IVlercury and Saturn. The 8th lord Jupiter is in the 2nd
with Rahu, Mercury and Sun. The closeness of the 8th lord
Jupiter to Rahu is to be especially noted.
Conclusion: This is also a case of unnatural death but
different from the previous ones in that it is one of self-infliction.
The native threw himself before a running train and ended his
life.
The nature of death is signified by Lagna lord Moon
occupying an Ayudha Drekkana, Ketu being in a Sarpa
Drekkana and

Concerning the Eighth House 175
the 7th and 8th lord Saturn also being in an Ayudha Drekkana.
Suicide is always preceded by frustration and disoppointment in
life which means the karakas for the mind, body and soul (Moon
and Sun) must be afflicted. Here the Moon occupies a malefic
Drekkana and is aspected by 8th lord Saturn. The Sun is
eclipsed.
The death occurred in Jupifer Dasa, Ketu Bhukti. The major
lord Jupiter is in the 3rd with a maraka planet, namely, the 2nd
lord Sun, Rahu and 3rd lord Mercury. He is in the 2nd from the
Moon. The sub-lord Ketu is in the 8th from the Moon in the
constellation of a powerful maraka Saturn.
The Eighth House : In Chart No. 81 Pisces is occupied by
the Moon and aspected by Mars and Venus.
Chart No. 81.-Born 21-10-1953 at 2 a.m. (I.S.T.) at 18 N 31,
Lagna |
Moon Jupit. || Rahų s i Mercury
Venus j
Ketu
ee RASI es | | a NAVAMSA a
Rahu Legna || Mars
GD-57
Sun Venus Moon
Mercury Sat. Sun Ketu
Saturn | Mars Jupiter
Balance of Saturn Dasa at birth: 1 year, 2 months and 16
days.
The Eighth Lord: Jupiter is in the 11 th house free of any
afflictions.

176 How to Judge a Horoscope
Ayushkaraka : Saturn is exalted in the 3rd house but is
combust and with 2nd lord Mercury. He is aspected by 8th lord
Jupiter.
Considered from the Moon: The 8th house is occupied by
malefics, Sun and Saturn, but aspected by Moon-sign lord
Jupiter. The 8th lord Venus is with Mars.
Conclusion : The native died on 4-4-1972 after consuming
poison. The 8th house is aspected by Mars who is also in the 7th
from the Moon. Malefics are present in the 8th from the Moon as
well. The Moon, ruler of the mind, is in a dusthana aspected by
malefic Mars and debilitated Venus. The Sun is not only
debilitated and associating with his bitter enemy Saturn but also
in a nodal constellation.
The native died in Ketu Dasa, Ketu Bhukti. Ketu occupies
the 12th house. He should give the results of the lord of the sign
he is in and also of Mars (KujavadKetu). The Moon, his signdispositor, is in the 8th house both in Rasi and Navamsa. Mars is
in the 2nd house from Lagna, and in the 7th from the Moon as
2nd lord thereby becoming a powerful maraka.
The Eighth House : In Chart No. 82 it is not occupied by any
planet but is aspected by an afflicted 6th lord Saturn and 7th lord
Jupiter.
The Eighth Lord : The 8th lord Mars is in the 6th with 6th
lord Saturn and Rahu.
Ayushkaraka: Saturn is afflicted by Rahu and Mars in the
6th house.
Considered from the Moon: The 8th house is occupied by a
heavily afflicted 7th and 8th lord Saturn, Mars and Rahu. The 8th
lord is also Saturn and is with malefics Mars and Rahu.
Conclusion : The presence of malefics in the 8th from the
Moon and the afflictions to the 8th lords both from Lagna and

Concerning the Eighth House 177
Chart Wo. 82.—Born 12-7-1877 at 10 a.m. (L.M.T.) at 46 N
Sun
Mercury
Merc. Jupiter
Sun Mars Saturn
RASI sae | fare NAVAMSA ——
Jupiter Lagna
Balance of Mercury Dasa at birth: 12 years, 5 months
and 28 days.
Moon resulted in the native consuming poison and killing
himself. The Moon is subject to a papakartari yoga caused by
the Sun and Ketu. Death occurred on 30-6-1922 in Venus Bhukti
of Sun Dasa. The Sun is the 12th lord from Lagna. He is the 2nd
lord from the Moon and the 8th lord from Navamsa Lagna.
Bhukti lord Venus is the 2nd lord from Lagna and in the 12th
from the Navamsa Lagna.
The Eighth House : In Chart No. 83 Leo is the 8th house
occupied by Rahu and aspected by an afflicted 3rd and 12th
lord Jupiter and Lagna and 2nd lord Saturn.
The Eighth Lord: The Sun, ruler of the eighth house, is in
the 10th in debility with Mars, Mercury and Venus. He is
aspected by an eclipsed Jupiter.
Ayushkaraka: Saturn occupies the 11th house aspected by
7th lord Moon.

178 How to Judge a Horoscope
Mercury
Mars
Ketu 2
Jupiter Lagna
Ketu Saturn
NAVAMSA
Lagna Moon
GD-75
Sua
Venus
Mercury
Mars
Saturn
Balance of Mars Dasa at birth : 5 years and 7 months.
Considered from the Moon : The 8th house is Sagittarius
free of aspect or association but the 8th lord Jupiter is in the 10th
with Ketu.
Conclusion: Saturn occupies the 7th from the Moon, the
Moon is afflicted by malefics Saturn and Mars, the 8th house is
occupied by Rahu while the Sth lord from the Moon is eclipsed
by Ketu. The native committed suicide on 7-7-1922 by
consuming poison. This was in Rahu Bhukti, Saturn Dasa. Rahu
is in the 8th from the Lagna and gives results similar to Saturn
(Sanivad Rahu). Saturn is a first rate maraka. He is the 2nd lord
from Lagna, occupies the 7th house from the Moon, and owns
the 7th houses both from Navamsa Lagna and Navamsa Moon.
The Eighth House : In Chart No. 84 Aries, a malefic sign,
rises on the 8th Bhava. It is aspected adversely by Mars and
malefic Saturn.

Concerning the Eighth House 179
Chart No. 84.—Bom 25-12-1917 at 11-55 p.m. (G.M.T.) at O
Jupi Lagna
upiter Ketu Moon
Moon Jupiter
Mercury
Sun
Rahu
Venus
Balance of Moon Dasa at birth: 7 years, 7 months and 6
days.
The Eighth Lord: Mars, the 8th lord, is in the Ascendant
aspected by malefic Saturn.
Ayushkaraka: Saturn is in the 11th house aspected by 2nd
and 9th lord Venus.
Considered from the Moon : The 8th house is Sagittarius
occupied by 2nd and 5th lord Mercury, 4th lord maiefic Sun and
Rahu and aspected by 7th and 12th lord malefic Mars. The 8th
lord Jupiter is placed in the Moon-sign Taurus.
Conclusion : Malefics either aspect or occupy the 8th house
from Lagna and the Moon. Rahu, in addition, eclipses the 8th
house from the Moon. The native died from an overdose of
sleeping pills on 20-1-1957 in Mercury Bhukti, Jupiter Dasa.
Jupiter is the 7th lord from Lagna and the 8th lord from the
Moon. Mercury is the 2nd lord from the Moon and is in the 8th
therefrom becoming a maraka.

Concerning the Ninth House
The ninth house signifies father, righteousness, preceptor,
grand-children, intuition, religion, sympathy, fame, charities,
leadership, long journeys and communication with spirits.
In judging the events ruled by the ninth house, the following
factors must be taken into account, viz., (a) The House, (b) Its
Lord, (c) Its Occupants and (d) The Karaka or signifi-cator. The
Sun is the karaka for father. Yogas formed in the 9th house or
involving the 9th lord produce their own results. These
considerations must be judged from the Navamsa chart also.
The ninth house, although it denotes several significations, is
primarily concerned with father and long distance travel.
Results of the Lord of the Ninth House being situated in
Different Houses
In the First House: When the ninth lord is placed in the first
house, the native becomes a self-made man. He earns much
money througn his own efforts. If the 9th lord combines with the
Lagna lord in the first house and associates with or is aspected
by a benefic planet, the native is fortunate with riches and
happiness.

Concerning the Ninth House 181
In the Second House : When the ninth lord is placed in the
2nd house beneficially, the native's father is a rich and influential
man. The native acquires wealth from the father. Malefics
influencing the ninth lord in the 2nd house ruin or destroy
paternal property.
In the Third House : If the lord of the ninth is placed in the
3rd, the native makes his fortune through writing, speeches and
oratorial abilities. The native's father will be a man of moderate
means while the native advances his fortune through his coborns. If malefics afflict the ninth lord in the 3rd house, the native
may land in trouble through his writings which may be irrational
and even obscene depending upon the nature of affliction. He
may be forced to sell his paternal property because of troubles
occurring through his writings.
In the Fourth House : The ninth lord in the 4th house gives
vast landed properties and beautiful bungalows. Or the native
may earn through estate and land dealings. His mother will be a
rich and fortunate woman. He will inherit his father's immovable
properties. If the ninth lord is afflicted in the 4th house, the native
may not have any domestic unhappiness. His early life will be
crossed by miseries due to a hard-hearted father or disharmony
between parents. If Rahu afflicts, mother may be a divorcee or
living separately from his father.
In the Filth House : The ninth lord in the fifth house gives a
prosperous and famous father. The native's sons may also be
very fortunate in life and enjoy success and distinction.
In the Sixth House : The ninth lord in the sixth house gives
a sickly father afflicted with chronic diseases. If benefics flank
such a sixth house, the native may gain wealth through
successful termination of father's legal problems, and by way

182 How to Judge a Horoscope
of compensation, costs, etc. If malefics afflict the ninth lord in the
sixth house, the native's attempts to make his fortune may be
frustrated through litigation involving his father or debts
contracted by him.
In the Seventh House : The native may go abroad and
prosper there. His father may also prosper in foreign lands. He
will get a noble and lucky wife. If ascetic yogas are present in
the chart, the native may seek spiritual guidance and fulfilment
abroad. If asubhayogas spoil the ninth lord, the father may meet
with his death abroad.
In the Eighth House : The native may lose his father early in
life. If malefics afflict the eighth house in such a case, he may
suffer severe poverty and heavy responsibility due to father's
death If benefics influence the ninth lord, the native may inherit
substantial paternal property. Afflictions may cause the native to
abandon traditions or damage religious institutions and trusts set
up by the family.
In the Ninth House : The ninth iord in the ninth house gives
a long-lived and prosperous father. The native will be religiously
inclined and be charitable. He will travel abroad and earn money
and distinction thereby. If afflicted by malefics or if the 9th lord
occupies the 6th, 8th or 12th from Navamsa Lagna, the native's
father will die early.
In the Tenth House : If the ninth lord is in the tenth house,
the native will become very famous and powerful. He will be
generous and occupy posts of authority. He will earn much
wealth and acquire every kind of comfort and luxury. His means
of livelihood will be righteous and he will be a law abiding citizen.
In the Eleventh House : The native will be exceedingly rich.
He will have powerful and influential friends. His father

Concerning the Ninth House 183
will be a well-known and well-placed man- If afflicted, unfaithful
friends will destroy the native's wealth through selfish scheming
and fraud.
In the Twelfth House : The position of the lord of the ninth
house in the twelfth house gives a poor background. The native
will suffer much and will have to work very hard in life. Even then
success may not come to him. He will be religious and noble but
always in want. Father may die early leaving the native
penniless.
These combinations are very general and cannot be applied
without taking into account the concerned karaka and the other
planetary dispositions in the chart. If the ninth lord is very
powerful, he becomes capable of conferring fortune even if
placed in a malefic house. If the ninth lord is afflicted but the
ninth house is beneficially disposed, the intensity of the malefic
results will be greatly reduced. Great skill is required in
interpreting the bhava and in no case is a literal application of
the results mentioned above desirable.
Other Important Combinations
The following are some of the yogas culled from ancient
sources:—
When the Sun occupies the 9th, 8th, 11th or 12th house
which should be a fixed sign and the Lagna is not aspected by
the Moon, the father will not be present at the time of the birth of
the child. He may be in his own town. When the Sun in such a
position occupies a movable sign, the father will be away in a
foreign country at the birth of the child. If the Sun, Mars and
Saturn combine in the 4th or the 10th house, the birth is of a
posthumous child.
When the 5th or the 9th house from the Lagna be a malefic
sign and is occupied bythe Sun, the father ofthe child

184 How to Judge a Horoscope
will die soon. The Sun and malefics in the 10th house from the
Moon also indicate early death of father. If Saturn and Mars
conjoin in Aries, Leo or Aquarius which should be the 5th, 7th or
the 9th house from the Sun, the father of the child will be in
some sort of captivity at the time of its birth. When the Sun is
afflicted by conjunction with malefics, the child's father's life will
be adversely influenced. If the Moon, Mars, Mercury and Saturn
be together, the native will have two fathers and two mothers.
That is, in other words, he may be taken in adoption. The Sun
aspecting the Ascendant indicates the native may inherit wealth
from his father. If the 9th house be a movable sign or the 9th lord
be in a movable sign either in conjunction with or aspected by
Saturn and the 12th lord is strong, the native will be adopted by
another.
If the 4th lord conjoins the 9th lord in the 6th house, the
native's father will be a profligate. When the 5th lord is a benefic
and the Sun is also beneficially disposed, the native will give
happiness to the father. If the 5th lord or the Sun is afflicted by
Saturn, Rahu or Mandi, the native will be a source of misery to
the father. If the Ascendant of the native happens to be the same
sign as that rising in the 10th house of the father, the native will
be a dutiful son. If Jupiter in the 9th house occupies his own
Navamsa, the native will be endowed with a high sense of filial
duty. If the Ascendants of the native and his father are mutually
in the 6th and 8th, the pair will always be at variance. If the Sun
is in an inimical sign, the native will studiously cause pain to his
father. If the Sun and Moon be in trine to Mars and Saturn, the
child will be abandoned by both parents. Saturn, Mars and Rahu
in the 11th or the 9th house from the Lagna cause father's death.
If the Sun or the Moon occupy a kendra in a movable sign, the
native will not perform the last rites of the father.

Concerning the Ninth House 185
If the 9th house is occupied by a benefic, the native is lucky.
If the 9th lord is aspected by a malefic, inimical or debilitated
planet and is in the 6th house, the person suffers in every
respect. If the 9th lord be in a malefic shashtyamsa or occupy a
debilitated sign or Navamsa or be weak or if malefics occupy the
9th house, the native is unfortunate in life.
If a malefic, eclipsed or debilitated planet occupy the 9th
house, the native will be luckless, poor or unprincipled. But if the
malefic in the 9th be exalted, in own or a friendly sign, the
opposite results are produced.
If the 11th lord is in the 9th influenced by the 10th lord, the
native is lucky wherever he may go. The same result is indicated
if the 9th lord is in the 2nd aspected by the 10th lord. If the 2nd
lord is in the 11th, the 11th lord is in the 9th and the 9th lord is in
the 2nd, one becomes extremely fortunate and earns well. If the
3rd and 9th lords join together or be aspected by benefics or are
placed in benefic signs or Navamsas, the native's fortune is
advanced through a brother. If the 5th and 9th lords combine or
are beneficially disposed by aspect or association, the native's
children bring him prosperity. Venus or Jupiter in the 9th or
aspecting the 9th lord indicate a fortunate life. Mutual exchange
of houses between the Lagna lord and the 9th lord gives every
kind of fortune.
If the 9th lord is aspected by a benefic and is in a watery
sign in a quadrant, the native goes on a pilgrimage and has dips
in a sacred river. Jupiter aspecting the 9th house or the
combination of the 9th and 10th lords gives travels to many holy
spots and religious centres. If the 9th house from the Moon be
beneficially aspected and occupied by a benefic also, the native
will go on a long pilgrimage. If Jupiter is inthe

186 How to Judge a Horoscope
9th and the Moon, Jupiter and Ascendant are aspected by
Saturn, the person becomes the founder of a system of
philosophical thought. If Jupiter, the Sun and Mercury occupy
the 9th, one will be highly learned and wealthy.
If the Lagna lord is in the 12th and the Moon and Mars
conjoin in the 10th which should be a malefic sign, the person
will go abroad but good fortune will evade him. If the Sun, the
Moon and Saturn are in the same sign, the person will be wicked
and deceitful and try to travel abroad. If the lord of the 12th from
the sign occupied by the Lagna lord is a watery sign, the native
becomes prosperous in foreign lands. Planets in the 9th if not
associated with Mercury and Jupiter make one diseased, forlorn
and face captivity and misery.
Planets in the Ninth House
The Sun : The native may change his faith if the Sun is
afflicted. He displays hostile feelings towards his father, lacking
respect for elders and spiritual preceptors. But if the Son is not
afflicted, the person will be a dutiful son having regard for
spiritual pursuits. The Moon combining with the Sun here causes
eye troubles Venus with the Sun gives sickness and ailments.
The health will be ordinary and the native gets little patrimony.
He will be ambitious and enterprising.
The Moon: The native will be fortunate and prosperous. He
will have many sons, friends and kinsmen. He will be principled
and generous-minded. If Saturn, Mars and Mercury aspect the
Moon, the native will become a ruler. If the Moon combines with
Mars, he may cause a fatal injury to his mother. If Venus
conjoins the Moon in the 9th, the person may lead an immoral
life. He will act in league with his step-mother. Saturn

Concerning the Ninth House 187
here causes one to suffer much. The native may build charitable
institutions. He will acquire good immovable property and also
visit foreign countries.
Mars : The native will wield authority and be affluent. He will
have children and be happy. He will not be a dutiful son but
otherwise generous and famous for his good qualities, if either
Jupiter or Mercury conjoin Mars, the native will be learned in
religion and spiritual lore. Venus here gives two wives and
foreign residence, it also gives the native proficiency in law.
Saturn with Mars in the Sth indicates addiction to other women
and a wicked nature. He will be seif-seeking, stubborn and
impetuous.
Mercury : The native will acquire much education and
wealth. He will be a great scholar. He will be interested in
theosophy and metaphysics. He will have a scientific mind, and
fond of music and pleasure if Venus joins Mercury. Jupiter with
Mercury in the 9th confers wit and wisdom. He may travel abroad
on invitations and be invited to lecture in educational institutions.
Relations with father will be friendly and happy.
Jupiter: The native may become an exponent of law,
philosophy, etc. if Jupiter is aspected by benefic planets he
acquires much immovable property. He will be fond of his
brothers, if the Moon and Mars influence Jupiter he will become
a great military leader or commander, if the Sun and Venus join
Jupiter, the native becomes characterless. Jupiter beneficially
aspected by Saturn makes the native live a life of austerity and
strive for divine communion. He may visit foreign lands as a
lecturer, preacher, etc. He will be conservative and principled.

188 How to Judge a Horoscope
Venus : The native is born fortunate and endowed with
fame, learning, children, wife and generally every kind of
happiness. The Sun with Venus makes one sauve and polished
in speech but one may suffer from many physical complaints.
Venus with Saturn makes the person a diplomat or otherwise
engaged in similar work under a king or government. He will be
well known for his balanced views on men and matters. Venus
with the Sun and Moon may involve the person in quarrels with
women resulting in loss of money. The Sun and Saturn with
Venus give criminal tendencies, and other combinations
warranting, the person may face conviction. He can also be
notorious as a libertine.
Saturn : The native will lead a lonely life and may not marry.
He will be well known for his valour on the battle field. The Sun
with Saturn causes serious conflicts with the father and also with
his own children. He may suffer from growths or lumps in the
stomach. Mercury with Saturn makes the native untruthful and
deceitful although he may be wealthy. Thrifty in domestic life,
somewhat irreligious, he may become a founder of charitable
institutions.
Rahu : The native will have a nagging and domineering wife.
He will be impolite and miserly, suffering from emaciation and
generally inclined to be of loose morals. He will hate his father
and revile God and religion. But he may become famous and
acquire much wealth.
Ketu : The native will be short-tempered and may get upset
over trifles. He will be eloquent but employ this ability to
scandalise others. Fond of pomp and show, haughty and
arrogant, he will, however, be valorous. Often treating his
parents badly and generally hostile towards them, he will be

Concerning the Ninth House 189
short-sighted but save much money through frugal living. He
will have a good wife and children.
Times of Fructification of the Results of
the Ninth House
The following factors must be considered in timing events
relating to the ninth house:—
(a) Lord of the 9th house, (b) Planet or planets aspecting
the 9th house, (c) Planet or planets occupying the 9th house, (d)
Planets aspecting the lord of the 9th house, (e) Planet or planets
in association with the lord of the 9th house, (f) The 9th lord from
the Moon, and (g) the Sun who is the karaka for father.
These planets may influence the ninth house as either the
lords of the main periods or as lords of the sub-periods. (1) The
sub-periods of planets capable of influencing the 9th house in
the major periods of those who are also capable of influencing
the 9th house produce results relating to the 9th house par
excellence. (2) The sub-periods of planets associated with the
9th house in the major periods of planets who are not associated
with the ninth house produce results pertaining to the ninth
house only to a limited extent. (3) The sub-periods of planets not
associated with the 9th house in the main periods of planets who
are associated with the 9th house produce results relating to the
9th house to a very small extent.
(a) Lord of the 9th house- Mars, (b) planets aspecting the
9th house—Saturn, (c) planets in the 9th house —none, (d)
planets aspecting the 9th lord-Jupiter, (e) planets in association
with 9th lord—Mercury, (f) lord of the 9th house from the Moon—
Venus, and (g) the Sun.

190 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 85.- Born 24-3-1883 at6 a.m. (L.M.T) at 13 N,
| Lagna | | i f Í |
i | Ketu | Saturn [Jupit. || Mars! Mercury} Moon |
| Sun | | j | Rahu }
| Mercury | Í
| Mars ! |
| | RAS! ij] NAVAMSA |——_|
Venus | | Sat. | |
N, L-i | | RESEN SEE, |
| } | Ketu i
f | i
| f Rahu {Maon || | — Venus
| | | fi | | Jupiter |
Balance of Moon Dasa at birth: 6 years.
Mars, Saturn, Jupiter, Mercury Venus and the Sun can
influence the Sth house in their Dasas or Bhuktis, Saturn and
Mars can, more than the other planets, influence 9th house
results during either their Bhuktis or Dasas. Ketu being in a
martian sign and aiso according to the dictum Kujavad Ketu can
also influence the 9th house equally strongly in his sub-period or
main period.
The sub-period of Ketu in the major period of Saturn was
important in the native's life in relation to the 9th house
significations. He lost his father, his guardian angel, during this
period.
The 9th house has mainly to do with father, prosperity or
fortune and long distance travel. The results relating to the 9th
house may manifest during the Dasa of the lord of the 9th
house. If this Dasa does not operate during the life-time of the
native, planets influencing the 9th house by aspect, occu-

Concerning the Ninth House 191
pation or in association with the lord of the 9th house give rise
to the 9th house significations.
Nature of Results
Subject to the general principles enumerated so far, the
following results relating to the ninth house are likely during the
Dasas and Bhuktis of the several planets:—
The Sun: Progress in religious education and spiritual
pursuits. Happiness from sons and acquisition of property
through self-exertion. Illness due to glandular irregularities,
income through agriculture. The Moon : Access to reading and
higher education. Participation in projects of humanitarian and
social significance. Travels both within and outside the country of
birth and residence. Fame and success. Mars : inclination to be
harsh and rude. Father suffers sickness. Agricultural ventures foil
but success comes in trade and business Life of despondency
due to circumstances, ill-will with brothers and death of one of
them Mercury : Gains knowledge in many subjects and succeeds
in learning music Gets children. Interest in literature grows. Fame
through scientific inventions and discoveries. Becomes popular.
Jupiter: Takes interest in religious and similar institutions.
Performs many ceremonies. Gives much happiness to father.
Gives away much money in charity. Venus : Becomes selfish but
religious and learns much under spiritual preceptors. Fame
through poetry and arts. Saturn : Becomes a successful lawyer
and founds charitable institutions. Builds up a big bank-account
through miserly habits. Shows ungratefulness to parents and
becomes irreligious. Rahu : Domestic unhappiness. Indulges in
adultery and other vices. Becomes stingy and rude. If Rahu is in
dignity, the native makes fast progress in spiritual evolu-

192 How to Judge a Horoscope
tion. If badly placed, causes much suffering to parents. Ketu
Suffers from eye trouble, gets many children and enjoys
domestic harmony. But becomes untruthful and irreligious.
The following results are likely during the Dasa of the lord of
the ninth house :—
If the lord of the ninth house occupies the Lagna in
conjunction with the Lagna lord, the native acquires every kind of
comfort. If benefics aspect the 9th lord, his Dasa brings in
conveyances. The native gets a position of authority and power.
He acquires wealth and riches and leads a happy life. He may
work in the top levels of government service and occupy a post
equivalent to a king or minister. He inherits paternal property and
builds it up through his own efforts as well. Many relatives will
depend upon his hospitability for their living and shelter. The
native becomes famous both for his generous instincts and his
achievements in career. If the 9th lord is weak, debilitated or
eclipsed or in malefic Navamsas, that is, the 6th, 8th or 12th from
Navamsa Lagna, the results will be quite contrary. The native
suffers penury and instead of maintaining others will be forced to
seek food from others. If Rahu and the 9th lord combine in
strength, the native may serve foreign powers. If it is Mars, he
will hold top rank in the armed or police forces. If Saturn or
Mercury be the 9th lords, the native may become a law-officer
such as a judge or a banker respectively.
If the 9th lord occupies the 2nd house with the 2nd lord, his
Dasa will bring in unlimited wealth through family business or
property. He will eat very good food and enjoy a luxurious life.
He will have many relatives who will hold him in regard and
affection. His face gets a radiant hue and his speech becomes
eloquent. If malefics combine with the 9th lord, the

Concerning the Ninth House 193
native's resources and inheritance dwindle on account ot family
squabbles and litigation. If the 9th lord combines with the 2nd
lord and the 8th lord, the native suffers disgrace and humiliation.
He may even be thrown to the streets and suffer unimaginable
poverty. If the period is a maraka one, the native may die
through the sources indicated by the 9th lord. If the 9th lord
occupies the 6th, 8th or 12th Navamsa, then also the degree of
beneficial results will be greatly modified.
If the 9th lord joins the lord of the 3rd in the third house,
brothers will prosper. The native will show an inclination for
writing on religion and spirituality. The native will earn through
music and musical instruments. He will make many trips abroad
as well as to holy spots and pilgrim-centres. If, however, the 9th
lord occupies the 6th, 8th or 12th Navamsas, the native's fortune
will be only mediocre. If the lord of the 9th house joins the 4th
house with the 4th lord, the native becomes very happy and
learned, if Venus and Jupiter also join, the native acquires many
conveyances and lands. If the 9th lord is exalted in this position,
the native may become a President or ruler of a country in the
Dasa of the 9th lord. Saturn combining with the 9th lord in the
3rd house takes the native to foreign lands where he will serve
the government or ruler. If fortified Mercury joins the 9th lord and
the 4th lord in the 4th house, the native becomes the head of a
center of learning or research. If the 9th lord occupies the 6th,
8th or 12th Navamsa from Lagna, the same results will be
experienced on a lesser scale.
If the lord of the 9th house joins the 5th lord in the 5th
house, the native experiences great clarity of thought and
consequent tranquility. His father will help him with money and

194 How to Judge a Horoscope
in other ways also to advance his career and interests. His
children will distinguish themselves in academics and bring
much happiness to the native. A son may become very famous
and earn governmental patronage, The native's son will also
prosper very well and enjoy all kinds of luxuries.
if the 9th lord and the 6th lord occupy the 6th house, the
Dasa will generally be good. If benefics aspect, the native will
earn well and advance in his career. His father's health will
improve during this period. If malefics aspect the 9th lord, the
native's father will die during this period. He may contract huge
debts and be drawn into endless litigation, if well-piaced by
aspect the Dasa of the 9th lord will give the native the post of a
judicial or similar officer. He will have many servants and men at
his beck and call. If Mars be there, the native inherits landed
property. If Mercury also influences the 9th lord, his Dasa will
bring profits through royalty on books through legal bequests, if
Jupiter be there, the native acquires immense wealth through his
own learning.
If the lord of the ninth house occupy the 7th house with the
7th lord, the native will earn wealth in foreign lands. He will be
sent abroad on diplomatic and similar assignments. His birth is in
a prosperous family and he will enjoy ail sorts of luxuries and
comforts. Women will flock round him and he gets every kind of
sensual enjoyment. Mars with the 9th lord gives the native
landed property abroad while he will earn through women if
Venus is involved. Fortune booms after marriage and the wife
will be a noble and rich woman hailing from a respectable family,
if the 9th lord be placed in the 6th, 8th or 12th from Navamsa
Lagna, the results will be greatly modified. The wife will be sickly
although gracious and gentle. The native, though earning well,
may during the period of the

Concerning the Ninth House 195
9th lord have to defray expenses on account of liabilities and
litigation. If the lord of the ninth house occupy the eighth house
with the eighth lord and is aspected by benefic planets, the
native's father will die leaving the native a large inheritance. The
native may also lose his married partner by death or divorce and
obtain much money in the form of a bequest or alimony. If badly
afflicted by malefics, the native will not only suffer bereavements
but also lose his wealth and lands. He may wander aimlessly
from place to place and suffer hunger and thirst. If the ninth lord
is in the ninth house, the period proves very lucky to the native.
He will marry a very eligible and good natured partner and travel
abroad. He will invest wisely in father's business and expand it
beyond expectations. He will earn great wealth. If the Sun
combines with the 9th lord and is aspected by benefic planets,
the native wins elections and becomes a great politician. He will
be well known for his statesmanship and political acumen. If
Rahu joins the 9th house the native's father becomes very
famous in foreign lands. If malefics like Saturn and Mars afflict
the ninth house and lord, the native becomes a leccher and
indulges in vile acts. If only Saturn aspects the 9th house, the
native, though prosperous, suffers stomach complaints. If the
afflicting planets be the Sun, the Moon and Mars, the native
loses both his parents and also a limb. If Jupiter aspects the
ninth house, he becomes pious and dutiful towards his parents
during the period of the ninth lord.
If the lord of the 9th house is in the 10th house with the 10th
lord beneficially disposed, the native becomes renowned for his
learning. He gets settled in his career and leads a very
successful life. He will have every kind of luxury and comfort at
hjs command. He will do charitable deeds such as building

196 How to Judge a Horoscope
rest houses and hospitals. He will earn much wealth through
service to the Government. He will be honoured many times. If
the 9th lord is afflicted by malefics, the results will be quite
contrary. The native will lose his job. If in a profession, he will
earn the wrath of people and be forced to close down his
practice. He will lead an unrighteous life and seek to earn
through illegal and shady means. He will lose his property and
may suffer punishment by the ruler. If the 9th lord in the 10th
house is well placed but the 9th lord occupies the 6th, 8th or 12th
Navamsas, results will be good but their degree will be only
middling.
If the lord of the ninth house occupies the eleventh house
with the eleventh lord, the native prospers in the family business.
If the Moon is also there in a watery sign, the, business relates to
products of the sea such as fish, sharks, pearls and the like. If
Jupiter or Mercury aspect the ninth lord in the eleventh house or
if the eleventh lord be one of these planets gains will be through
the newspaper, publication of books or educational institutions. If
Venus be the planet, the native earns through hotels, cinema,
restaurants but if Venus is afflicted by Rahu, Saturn, Mandi and
Ketu, it will be through prostitution. If malefics afflict the 9th lord,
the native's friends will turn against him and deprive him of all his
wealth. He will be forced to beg for mere survival. If the 9th lord
occupies the 6th, 8th or 12th houses in Navamsa, the native
earns moderate wealth and will be fairly well-off.
If the lord of the ninth house occupies the twelfth house with
the twelfth lord, the native will be spiritually inclined and will
spend all his wealth in charity. He will lead a pure and honest
life. He will lose his father during the Dasa of the 9th lord or may
live far away from him. If the 9th lord in the

Concerning the Ninth House 197
twelfth house is afflicted, the native will lose money through
foolishly investing it. He may be robbed of his valuables by
thieves or in a dacoity if Mars adversely aspects or influences
the ninth lord. If the 6th or 8th lord combines with the 9th lord in
the 12th house, the native will lose his ancestral lands and
money. If the 12th house is represented by a biped or quadruped
sign and the 9th lord is afflicted by malefics and is himself
debilitated or eclipsed, the native will lose his cattle, pets, horses
and also his servants and workers in the Dasa of the ninth lord.
In predicting results, the strengths of the karaka Sun, 9th
lord and other planets influencing him by aspect and association,
the running Dasas and Bhuktis must be judiciously assessed
first. Conclusions must be drawn only after the entire chart is
analysed. No planet, by itself, if afflicted or beneficially disposed,
can entirely influence the significance of the ninth Bhava without
being itsetf affected by the other relevant factors.
Father
The longevity of father is judged of the strength of the 9th
house and the position of the natural significator, the Sun. The
7th and 8th houses from the 9th house and other maraka houses
and planets from it help in estimating the span of life of the
father. Sometimes maraka planets with reference to the karaka
Sun can also be used to judge death of father. Afflictions to the
Sun or his occupation of malefic houses results in early death of
father. If the 9th lord is in a kendra or the 11 th house or aspects
the 9th house or is otherwise fortified, the native's father lives
long.

198 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 86.-Born 14-4-1857 at 1-45 p.m. (LM.T.) at 51 N
Jupiter p tagna
Venus Sat Jupiter sun
Rahu Sun Sat, : Mercury
Mars Moon Ketu
Mercury Venus Mars
= NAVAMSA ———
Moon Rahu
Balance of Ketu Dasa at birth: 6 years, 8 months and 7
days.
The Ninth House : Aries is the ninth house occupied by the
exalted Lagna lord Sun, Vargottama 5th and 8th lord Jupiter and
2nd and 11th lord Mercury. It is between malefics Rahu and
Mars.
The Ninth Lord : Mars is in the 10th house with 10th lord
Venus.
Pitrukaraka : The Sun is exalted in the 9th house with
Jupiter and Mercury. He is hemmed in between malefics Rahu
and Mars.
Considered from the Moon : The ninth house is Leo
aspected by Moon-sign lord Jupiter, 2nd lord Saturn and 5th and
12th lord Mars. The ninth lord is the Sun who is exalted but
between malefics Rahu and Mars. The ninth house and the ninth
lord are considerably afflicted.

Concerning the Ninth House 199
Conclusion : The ninth house and lord are both quite
afflicted. The presence of karaka Sun in the 9th house with
8th lord Jupiter is not conducive to longevity of father,
The following planets can give the results of the 9th house
with reference to father.
1. Sun—as pitrukaraka
2. Jupiter—being in association with the Sun
3. Mercury-being in association with the Sun
4. Mars—being the 9th lord
5. Venus -being placed with 9th lord Mars.
The Sun in exaltation with Vargottama Jupiter in the 9th
house and the 9th lord in a kendra gave an exalted father— the
native was born to royal parents. But the papakartari to the 9th
house (from Rahu and Mars), the 9th lord (from Saturn and Sun)
and the karaka (from Rahu and Mars) together with the
presence of the karaka in the relevant house deprived the native
of his father very early in life. Since the planets capable of
influencing the 9th house are all well placed, the native's father
could enjoy Rajayoga results but his longevity was curtailed. He
died in February 1861 in Jupiter Bhukti, Ketu Dasa. The Bhukti
lord, Jupiter, is the 12th lord from the 9th house The Dasa lord
Ketu is in a mercurial sign. Mercury is the 3rd lord from the 9th
associating with the 12th lord Jupiter. Ketu should give results
similar to Mars according to the dictum 'Kujavad Ketu'. Mars in
the 2nd from the 9th house with the 2nd and 7th lord therefrom,
namely, Venus and therefore, becomes a powerful maraka.
A noteworthy feature of the chart is the Moon's occupation
of the constellation Moola. This constellation occurring at the
junction of Jyeshta and Moola is called gandantha and is
capable of causing the death of father.

200 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 87.- Born 23-4-1877at 10-25 p.m. (L.M.T.) at 54
me - ms
Sarurn
Mars
Mercury Venus
Saturn
Jupiter
Balance of Venus Dasa at birth: 3 years, 5 months and
12 days.
The Ninth House: Cancer is the ninth house aspected by
exalted Lagna and 6th lord Mars.
The Ninth Lord: The Moon occupies the 10th house
aspected by a malefic Saturn, Mars as Lagna and 6th lord and
Jupiter as 2nd lord and is closely associated with Ketu. The 9th
lord is heavily afflicted.
Pitrukaraka : The Sun though exalted is in the 6th house, a
dusthana, with 7th and 12th lord Venus and is aspected by
exalted Mars and an afflicted Saturn.
Considered from the Moon : Karaka Sun occupies the 9th
house in exaltation but he is aspected by Mars, Saturn and
Jupiter.
Conclusion : The presence of karaka Sun in a dusthana and
his association with a maraka planet Venus and the affliction to
the 9th lord Moon, especially by the nodes, resulted in

Concerning the Ninth House 201
the early death of father in September 1877. This was in Mercury
Bhukti, Venus Dasa. Mercury occupies the 2nd house from the
Sun. The Dasa lord Venus is the 2nd and 7th lord from the
Pitrukaraka.
Chart No. 88. Born 6-10-1950 at 2-18 p.m. (I.S.T.) at 27
Jupiter
Ketu |
More,
| NAVAMSA
Jupiter
Moan
Mars
j Balance of Saturn Dasa at birth : 3 vears, 7 months and 27
ays.
The Ninth House: The ninth house is occupied by as many
as 5 planets. Lagna and Saturn, 9th lord Mercury, Ketu, 5th and
10th lord Venus and 8th lord Sun occupy it.
The Ninth Lord: Mercury is the 9th lord exaited in the 9th
house in close association with Saturn and Ketu, Venus and the
Sun.
Pitrukaraka : The Sun occupies the 9th house with the 9th
lord Mercury, Ketu, Venus and Saturn.
Considered from the Moon : The ninth house has Rahu in it
and is aspected by several planets—2nd lord Sun, 3rd and 12th
lord (Mercury, 7th and 6th lord Saturn and 4th and

202 How to Judge a Horoscope
11th lord Venus. The 9th lord Jupiter is in the 12th from the 9th
aspected by Mars.
Conclusion : The 9th lord Mercury is exalted but he is
eclipsed. Further he occupies the constellation of the 8th lord.
The presence of the karaka Sun in the 9th is not at all desirable.
The Rahu-Ketu axis is spread across the 9th house both from
the Moon and the Ascendant. The native was in her second year
when her father died in Saturn Dasa, Jupiter Bhukti. The Dasa
lord Saturn is with the 2nd and 12th lords from the 9th house,
Venus and the Sun respectively, in the 9th house. He is also in
the 7th, from the 9th house from the Moon. The Bhukti lord
Jupiter is a maraka from the 9th house.
Mars Mercury :
Venus Sun Raho Rahu | Mercury | Moon
A ESER l
Lagna
Sat Mars dupiter
—— RASI NAVAMSA
G IV-166
Lagna | Satura
Katu Moor | Venus Ketu Sun
Jugitur
Tam Rt ħi
23 days.
The Ninth House : Scorpio being the Ascendant, Cancer is
the 9th house. It is occupied by 3rd and 4th lord, malefic Saturn
and aspected by 2nd and 5th lord Jupiter.

Concerning the Ninth House 203
The Ninth Lord: The Moon as 9th lord is in the 11th
house aspected by malefic Saturn, Lagna lord Mars and 7th and
12th lord Venus.
Pitrukaraka : The Sun is exalted but with the 8th and 11th
lord Mercury in the 6th house, a dusthana. He is subject to a
papakartari yoga caused by Mars on one side and Rahu on the
other side. Further, he is aspected by malefic Saturn.
Considered from the Moon : The 9th house is occupied by
Rahu while the 9th lord Venus though exalted is in the 7th with
3rd and 8th lord Mars. Kataka Sun is in the 8th, a dusthana, from
the Moon, as well.
Conclusion : Severe afflictions to the Sun deprive one of
father early in life. The ninth house and the ninth lord as well as
pitrukaraka are quite heavily afflicted. The father died in Mercury
Bhukti, Mars Dasa. Planets capable of influencing the 9th house
are its lord Moon, its occupant Saturn, Mars and Venus as
planets aspecting 9th lord Moon, the same lords from the Moon,
karaka Sun end Mercury who is with the Sun. The father died in
Mars Dasa, Mercury Bhukti. Mars occupies the 12th house from
karaka Sun who is himself in a dusthana. From the Moon, Dasa
lord Mars is a maraka with reference to the 9th house Mercury,
the Bhukti lord becomes the 2nd lord from the 9th house and is
the 2nd lord and in the 12th house from the 9th lord causing
death of father. In Navamsa also, the 9th lord Moon is in the 12th
from powerfully by Lagna indicating early death of father.
The Ninth House : In chart No. 90 Virgo is occupied by the
7th lord Moon and Lagna lord Saturn. It is aspected powerfully
by the 3rd and 12th lord Jupiter.
The Ninth Lord: Mercury is the 9th lord placed in the
10th house with the 8th lord, debilitated Sun. The Sun does hot
get cancellation of debility.

204 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 90.—Born 29-10-1951 at 12-48 noon
Saturn
Juplter | Mercury ER
Rahu |
oe RAS! NAVAMSA
Lagne Ketu
Sun Venus | Jupiter Mars Moon
Mercury [Moon |
Balance of Mars Dasa at birth : 5 years and 3 months.
Pitrukaraka ; The Sun is in a quadrant but quite weak by
debilitation In addition, he afflicts the 9th lord Mercury.
Considered from the Moon : The 9th house is Taurus,
neither occupied nor aspected by any planet. The 9th lord Venus
occupies an inimical sign in the 12th house with Ketu and the 8th
lord Mars.
Conclusion : Although the 9th house from Lagna is relatively
free of affliction, the pitrukaraka is in debility in the constellation
of Rahu. From the Moon, the 9th lord is heavily afflicted. The
father of the native died in March 1962 In Saturn Bhukti of Rahu
Dasa. The Bhukti lord Saturn occupies the 2nd house from
Venus (the 9th lord from the Moon) and is also the 7th lord
therefrom. Rahu who is the lord of the Dasa is in the 7th from
Venus and in a saturnine constellation gaining thereby strong
maraka powers.

Concerning the Ninth House 205
Chart No. 91.—Born 1-8-1949 at 12-42 noon (I.S.T.) at 22
Moon
RASI = le NAVAMSA ner!
Sat Saturn
Jupiter Venu$ Marc. Venus
G.IV-266
aans Ketu Sun | Ketu
Balance of Saturn Dasa at birth: 8 years, 3 months and
3 days.
The Ninth House : Mars, the 2nd and 7th lord, occupies the
9th house.
The Ninth Lord: The lord of the 9th house. Mercury,
occupies the 10th house, a kendra with pitrukaraka Sun. He is
hemmed between malefics Mars and Saturn and aspected by
3rd and 6th lord Jupiter.
Pitrukaraka : The Sun occupies the 10th house in Cancer
with 9th lord Mercury, He is also subject to a papakartari yoga
caused by Mars on one sids and Saturn on the other and
aspected by Jupiter.
Considered from the Moon: The same picture obtains since
the Moon occupies Lagna.
Conclusion: The 9th lord is in a kendra, so also the karaka
Sun but both are quite afflicted. But 9th lord Mercury is
strengthened by his occupation of his own constellation.

206 How to Judge a Horoscope
The native's father died in January 1973 in Jupiter Dasa, Rahu
Bhukti. Since the 9th lord is afflicted together with the Sun, the
father cannot live very long. But the position of the 9th lord ina
kendra in a beneficial constellation cannot deprive the native of
her father very early in life either. Saturn is one of the afflictors to
the 9th lord as the constituent of the papakartari yoga which
means his Dasa must take away the father, who died just before
the commencement of the Dasa. Dasa lord Jupiter is a maraka
both by lordship and occupation from the 9th house and
pitrukaraka and the 9th lord respectively. The Bhukti lord Rahu
is in a jupiterian sign and thereby becomes a maraka in his
Bhukti.
Afflictions to the pitrukaraka by association, aspect,
placement or otherwise are very important in depriving a native
of his father. In Chart No. 86. the karaka Sun though exalted is
in the 9th afflicted by papakartari yoga and occupying a nodal
constellation, killing the fe'her, when the native was about 4,5
years old. In Chart No. 87, pitrukaraka is again exalted but in a
dusthana from Lagna, in the 9th from the Moon, afflicted by
malefic aspects and in a nodal constellation ruled by Ketu killing
the father within 6 months after the native's birth. In Chart No.
88, the Sun (pitrukaraka) is afflicted and is in the 9th afflicted by
the nodes. The father died in the 2nd year of the native. In Chart
No. 89, the Sun is again exalted but in a dusthana both from
Lagna and Chandra Lagna, subject to a papakartari yoga and
afflicted by Saturn's malefic aspects with the result the father
died when the native was about 7 years old. In Chart No. 90, the
pitrukaraka is in a nodal constellation in debility without
cancellation of debilitv, depriving the native of her father quite
early in life. In Chart No. 91, the karaka Sun is

Concerning the Ninth House 207
afflicted by papakartari yoga but is in a kendra with the 9th lord.
The native of Chart No 90 lost her father when about 11 years
while the father of the native of Chart No. 91 lived until the native
was 24 years. In both cases the karaka Sun and 9th lord
Mercury are in the 10th. In Chart No. 90, the Sun is debilitated
with no relief and in a nodal constellation with the node Rahu
being in a maraka house with 9th lord Mercury who is in
Visakha, ruled by the 3rd and 12th lord Jupiter. In Chart No. 91,
the Sun is in a friendly sign in the constellation of the 9th lord
Mercury who in his turn is in the 10th itself in his own
constellation. In Chart No. 90, the Sun occupies the 2nd house
from the Moon while in Chart No. 91, he occupies the 10th from
the Moon as well. We see karaka Sun, though afflicted by
papakartari yoga in Chart No. 91, is comparatively much
stronger than in Chart No. 90.
Chart No. 92. Born 31-1-1938 at 0-23 a.m. (I.S.T.) at 8 N
Sun
Mars cagna c
Saturn nee Mocni Be ioe
Jupiter
RAS! = | rere NAVAMSA ———
Sun
Jupiter
Vang
Moon G.IV-99
f ae i Sat
: aturn
oes Rabu Lagna | Mercury | Rah Mars
Balance of Sun's Dasa at birth: 0year, 1 month and

208 How to Judge a Horoscope
The Ninth House: In Chart No. 92 the 9th house is aspected
by own lord Mercury, and 2nd and 7th lord Mars.
The Ninth Lord: Mercury, the 9th lord, occupies the 3rd
house and is aspected by 4th and 5th lord Saturn.
Pitrukaraka : The Sun occupies the 4th house, a quadrant,
with 10th lord Moon, Lagna lord Venus and 3rd and 6th lord
Jupiter. He is not aspected by any planet.
Considered from the Moon : The 9th house is aspected by
two malefics, Mars and Saturn, as well as Jupiter (who gets
cancellation of debility) and the 9th lord Mercury is in the 12th
house, while the karaka Sun is in a kendra.
Conclusion: The 9th house from Lagna, the 9th lord Mercury
and karaka Sun are well placed with slight afflictions. The 9th
lord occupying the constellation of the Lagna lord and aspecting
the 9th house are important factors conducive to the long life of
the father. The native's father died in the former's 41st year in
Mercury Bhukti of Jupiter Dasa. Mercury occupies the 7th from
the 9th and the 12th from the Sun. Jupiter, the Dasa lord, is the
7th lord from the 9th house and is in the 8th therefrom gaining
maraka strength.
The Ninth House: In chart No. 93 the lord of the 9th house
Venus occupies the 7th house with 3rd and 10th lord Mars and
5th and 8th lord Mercury.
The Ninth Lord: Venus as the lord of the 9th house is in an
inimical sign Leo with Mars and Mercury and hemmed between
malefics Sun and Ketu.
Pitrukaraka : The Sun occupies a friendly sign in the 6th
house aspected by 2nd and 11th lord Jupiter who is Vargot-tama
(as he occupies Scorpio in Navamsa also) and Lagna lord
Saturn.

Concerning the Ninth House 209
Chart No. 93.—Born 8-8-1912 at 7-35p.m. (I.S.T.) at 33° N,
Saturn Venus
tagna
NAVAMSA
Jupiter Jupiter
Balance of Mars Dasa at birth: 6 years, 1 month and6
days.
Considered from the Moon: The 9th house is Capricorn
aspected by karaka Sun. The 9th lord Saturn is in Chandrakendra with the exalted 3rd lord Moon and is aspected by
Vargottama 8th and 11th lord Jupiter.
Conclusion: The 9th lord occupies a kendra. The 9th house
from the Moon is fortified while the 9th house from Lagna has no
afflictions. Only the 9th lord is afflicted by Mars and the karaka
Sun occupies a dusthana afflicted by Saturn. But Saturn does
not afflict in the strict sense of the term being the Lagna lord.
The native's father died when the former was about 32 years in
Jupiter Dasa, Ketu Bhukti. Jupiter, the Dasa lord, who is also the
lord of the 3rd from 9th, is in the 2nd (a marakasthana) from
the 9th. Ketu, the

210 How to Judge a Horoscope
sub-lord, occupies the 12th house from the 9th and the 2nd
house from the 9th lord Venus.
NAVAMSA
Jupiter
Saturn
Moon
Balance of Saturn Dasa at birth : 3 years, 3 months and
18 days.
The Ninth House: In this case also, Libra is the ninth house
and is occupied by debilitated pitrukaraka and 7th lord Sun. The
Sun gets neechabhanga (cancellation of debility due to his signdepositor Venus being in a quadrant from Lagna). The 9th house
is hemmed between benefics Moon and Venus on one side and
Mercury on the other side. It is also aspected by Lagna lord
Saturn.
The Ninth Lord: Venus as the 9th lord occupies a powerful
kendra, the i Oth house, in the company of debilitated Moon
(who also gets cancellation of debility due to his sign-dispositor
Mars being in a quadrant from Lagna). He is aspected by the
sign-lord Mars.

Concerning the Ninth House 211
Pitrukaraka: The Sun is in the 9th house itself with
cancellation of debility. He is aspected by Lagna lord Saturn and
is subject to a subhakartari yoga caused by Mercury and MoonVenus.
Considered from the Moon ; The 9th house is Cancer and is
aspected by Jupiter. It is not occupied by any planet. The 9th
lord Moon is in the 1st house with his debility cancelled aspected
by sign iord Mars.
Conclusion : The 9th lord is strongly fortified. The aspect of
Mars, even if malefic, is not really so harmful as being the lord of
the sign occupied by 9th lord it only strengthens the 9th lord. The
presence of karaka Sun in the 9th is not very welcome but there
is the protecting subhakartari yoga. The 9th house is quite
strong save the Sun's presence there.
The native's father must therefore live fairly long.
Compare this chart with Chart No. 93. The father of the
native of Chart No. 93 had no career as such nor any earnings.
He was dependent on his father (native's grandfather) until the
latter's death after which he was taken care of with great love
and affection by his son (native of Chart No. 93). In Chart No.
93, the 9th lord Venus occupies Makha whose lord Ketu is in the
8th house, the worst dusthana. Mercury ruler of the 8th is in the
12th therefrom. Venus is in Leo whose lord Sun is again in the
12th therefrom.
In Chart No. 94, the 9th lord Venus occupies Jyeshta ruled
by Mercury who is also in the 8th house but in exaltation in the
8th itself. Venus is in Scorpio whose lord Mars is not only in a
kendra but also aspects Venus powerfully. The father of Chart
No. 94 is a man of international renown and the leading authority
in his field well established in life. The asterism occupied by a
planet is very important in judging

212 How to Judge a Horoscope
its significations. The native of Chart No. 93 is the father of the
native of Chart No. 94.
Incidentally note the artrological hereditary factors in the two
charts. Both have Aquarius ascending aspected by Saturn from
a kendra, Rahu in the 2nd, Mars inthe 7th and Ketu in the 8th.
One has pitrukaraka Sun in the 6th house, a dusthana and the
other in the 9th house (the relevant Bhava). Both have a
Vargottama planet in the 10th, Jupiter in Chart No. 93 and the
Moon in Chart No. 94. Chart No. 94 has 6th lord Moon
neechabhanga in the 10th house while Chart No. 93 has the 6th
lord exalted and aspecting the 10th house. In both, the Lagna lord
Saturn aspects the Sun. In Chart No. 94, 9th lord Venus is in
the 10th, a kendra aspected by 10th lord Mars from the 7th.
In Chart No. 93, 9th lord Venus occupies the 7th, also a
kendra, in association with 10th lord Mars. In Chart No. 93,
Mercury is powerful being Vargottama while in Chart No. 94, he
isin his sign of exaltation. In Chart No. 93, 2nd and 11th lord
Jupiter is Vargottama while in Chart No. 94, Jupiter who has the
same lordship is also Vargottama but neecha with
neechabhanga caused by his sign-dispositor Saturn occupying a
quadrant from Lagna.
The Ninth House : In Chart No. 95 Capricorn is occupied by
Jupiter, the 8th and 11th lord. He is debilitated but obtains
cancellation of debility since Mars who gets exalted in Capricorn
is in a quardrant from the Moon. Ketu is also in the 9th house
and is aspected by 7th and 12th lord Mars.
The Ninth Lord : Saturn is in the 6th house but exalted and
aspected by the karaka exalted Sun and 2nd and 5th lord
Mercury.
Pitrukaraka ; The Sun is exalted but in the 12th house with
2nd and 5th lord Mercury. He is aspected by exalted 6th lord
Saturn.

Concerning the Ninth House 213
Chart No. 95.-Born 12-5-1925 at 7-30 a.m. (I.S.T.) at
Mercury | Venus
Sun Lagna
Mars | | Sat, Mercury] Ketu
-a-ra ——
Rahu | [Vanus
RASI NAVAMSA
Saturn
Balance of Venus Dasa at birth : 13 years, 9 months and 9
days.
Considered from the Moon : The 9th house is Leo. The 9th
lord Sun who is also the Pitrukaraka is exalted in the 5th house
with 7th and 10th lord Mercury aspected by exalted 2nd and 3rd
lord Saturn.
Conclusion : The ninth house is quite strong except for
some affliction from Mars. The 9th lord is quite powerful being
exalted and in a constellation ruled by Rahu, the nodal axis in
turn being spread across the 3rd and 9th houses. Rahu is in turn
aspected by exalted Saturn, the 9th lord. The Sun though in the
12th is fortified by his occupation of his own
constellation. The native's father is a big business magnate ana
still actively alive at 75 years. The karaka and the 9th lord,
both in exaltation, are in favourable constellations. They
mutually aspect each other gaining strength thereby. Rahu Dasa
Saturn Bhukti could see the death of the native's father. Saturn

214 How to Judge a Horoscope
is the 2nd lord from Pitrusthana (9th) and is in the 7th from
Pitrukaraka. The Dasa lord Rahu is in the 7th from the 9th
house. Rahu should give the results of Saturn as well who is a
maraka from the 9th.
The Ninth House : In Chart No. 96 the Langa lord Moon
occupies the 9th house and is not aspected by any planet.
The Ninth Lord : Jupiter is the 9th lord and occupies the 4th
house in Vargottama with Rahu. He is aspected by 5th and 10th
lord Mars.
Pitrukaraka : The Sun occupies Lagna and is aspected by
10th lord Mars.
Considered from the Moon : The 9th house Scorpio is
occupied by 11th and 12th lord Saturn and aspected by 2nd and
9th lord Mars but by his 8th house aspect.
Chart No. 96. Born 4-8-1958 at 6-40 a.m. (I.S.T.) at 9 N 55,
| Ketu
Ketu
Moon Mare Venus || Sat. | Venus
Sun L
Lagna egne
—— RASI ae NAVAMSA
M
Merc. ars
Mercury
ae |
j Jupiter .
Saturn Rehu Sun | Rahu | Jupiter Moon
Balance of Saturn Dasa at birth : 10 years, 7 months and
25 days.

Concerning the Ninth House 215
Conclusion : The 9th house and the karaka are free of
afflictions but the 9th lord is blemished by association with Rahu
and the aspect of Mars. Jupiter is no doubt Vargottama but
occupies a martian constellation. Mars is a powerful maraka
from the 9th house both by ownership and occupation. He is
afflicted by Ketu as well. Jupiter associates with Rahu but Rahu
is also in Chitta. The native's father died in April 1979 in Rahu
Bhukti of Mercury Dasa. Dasa lord Mercury is the 7th lord from
the 9th house and occupies the 2nd from Pitrukaraka. Rahu who
rules the Bhukti is in the 8th from the 9th house.
The Ninth-House : In Chart No. 97 Leo is aspected by 5th
and 12th lord Mars.
The Ninth Lord : The Sun is the 9th lord as well as
Pitrukaraka and occupies the 12th house with 7th and 10th lord
Mercury. He is aspected by Lagna lord exalted Jupiter. He is
afflicted by the papakartari yoga caused by Rahu and Saturn.
Considered from the Moon : The 9th house Aquarius is
occupied by 6th and 11th lord Mars while the 9th lord is exalted
in the 5th with the 5th lord.
Conclusion : The karaka and 9th lord Sun are in a dusthana
while the 9th house is aspected by Mars. The 9th lord Sun
occupies the constellation of Mercury who as the 2nd lord is a
maraka from the 9th house. Saturn, the 9th lord from the Moon,
is also in a constellation ruled by Jupiter, 2nd lord from the 9th
from the Moon. These weaken the 9th house to some extent.
The father of the native died in Rahu Bhukti of Saturn Dasa.
Saturn is the 7th lord from the 9th house and in the 12th from
the Sun. Rahu, the Bhukti lord, is in the 2nd from the Sun. The
Dasa and Bhukti lords are the constituents of the papakartari
yoga afflicting the 9th lord.

216 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 97.—Born 12-12-1954 at 7-30 a.m. (I.S.T.) at
| K Saturn
ett || Sun Moon
j Venus
M : Mars
S Jupit. Ketu
RASI af] ee NAVAMSA
Meic
Lagna | Mercury | Venus :
Rahu | Sun | Saturn Lagna | Jupiter
i cr
Balance of Jupiter Dasa at birth : 8 years, 5 months and 23
days.
In Charts No. 96 and 97, the 9th houses do not seem to be
strongly afflicted. In Chart No. 96, the Lagna lord occupies the
9th house and the 9th lord is Vargottama. In Chart No. 97, the
9th lord is aspected by exalted Lagna lord Jupiter. Nevertheless,
in both charts the 9th lords occupy constellations of maraka
planets from the 9th house which diminishes the vitaility of the
9th Bhava. If in Chart No. 96, Jupiter had occupied Visakha, the
fatherwould have lived longer. In Chart No. 97 also, the Sun in
Visakha (whose lord Jupiter would be exalted in the 8th) or
Anuradha (whose lord Saturn would be exalted in the 11th with
the 11th iord) would have prevented the father from dying in
Saturn Dasa.
Fortune and Long-Distance Travel
Long-distance travel in modern times can be interpreted as
travel abroad. The ninth house and its lord are important in

Concerning the Ninth House 217
finding out if a chart holds prospects for such travel. Common
and movable signs are more capable of giving foreign journeys
than fixed signs. Watery signs are also to be taken into account
since in ancient times going abroad invariably meant crossing
the seas and travel by ship. The Lagna lord and its position must
also be considered since foreign travel may be just a journey and
back to one's homeland or it could also end in settling there for
good. Alternately residence may be extended for many years
before returning to the homeland.
Ancient texts have not mentioned any planet as karaka or
natural significator of travel. Sahams employed in *Varsha-phal
charts can be tried but how far they can be effectively made use
of can be determined by an earnest student only after he has
studied a number of charts.
There are two sahams mentioned namely, paradesa (foreign
country) saham and jalapathana (voyage) saham, which could
be considered for predicting foreign travel.
Paradesa Saham: 9th house- 9th lord + Ascendant.
Jalapathana Saham: Cancer 15°—Saturn + Ascendant.
If the Ascendant does not lie between the two values (a and
b), 30° must be added to the value obtained above in order to
get the required Saham.
If the Saham or its lord is not related to the Ascendant or the
9th house or otherwise well placed, then the event of the Saham
may not materialise fully, The Saham aspected by the 7th, 9th or
12th lord who in turn is related to any of
* For calculation and interpretation of Sahams, read Varshaphal or The Hindu
Progressed Horoscope by Dr. B. V. Raman.

218 How to Judge a Horoscope
these houses indicates foreign travel in the periods of
appropriate planets.
When the planet occupying the 12th house from that of the
lord of the Lagna is well placed in an exalted or friendly house or
is aspected by a friendly or exalted planet, the native will prosper
in his homeland. If there is no planet in the 12th house, the lord
of the house can be considered instead.
If the 12th lord from the sign occupied by the Lagna lord is
in an inimical or debilitated state or is otherwise weak, the native
goes abroad. If the 12th lord from the sign occupied by the lord
of Lagna is in a quadrant or trine or in the Ascendant and in a
friendly, own or exaltation sign and is well placed, the native
goes abroad to countries that are prosperous. If the Lagna lord is
in a movable sign aspected by planets in movable signs, then
also there will be foreign travel and the native prospers abroad.
The Dasas of planets in the 9th house or aspecting the 9th
house, the 9th lord and 12th house are very important in
predicting foreign travel or residence.
Besides the all-important 9th house ruling long journeys, the
3rd house governs short journeys, the 7th house rules foreign
travel and the 12th house, long journeys and residence in distant
lands.
We have found in our experience the karakatwa or lordship
or Bhava occupation of planets that indicate foreign travel gives
a clue to the reasons for travel abroad. For instance, if the 4th
and 9th lords are related, one may go abroad for higher studies
or on a teaching mission. If the 9th and 10th lords are related it
may be for reasons of career and professional advancement. If
the 6th lord is also involved, the native may visit a foreign
country on an official assign ment sponsored by his employer.
If Mercury is the planet,

Conceming the Ninth House 219
education, research, learning, writing or similar reasons may
take one abroad. If it is Jupiter, then the native may travel in
foreign lands either as a visiting professor, for lecturing on some
subjects, or on religious, spiritual or cultural missions. If the 11th
lord is involved, travel abroad will be mostly connected with
gains; if on a political mission, to secure loans and financial and
other assistance; if on business, to expand or market products
and so on. If the 7th lord and/or the Sun is thrown in with planets
causing foreign travel, a native may go abroad as a diplomat or
delegate. If Venus and the 7th lord are associated with longdistance yoga causing planets, the native may go abroad
following marriage. If Venus and Saturn, the 11th and 10th lords
are related art-shows or some talent in fine arts may take the
native abroad. If these planets are powerfully placed, filmshooting and similar assignments could take the native abroad.
If Lagna lord is weak and the 6th house or lord is involved
travel abroad may take place for medical reasons, viz., treatment
or surgery. If the 9th and 12th lords are afflicted by malefics, the
native may go abroad in connection with nefarious activity such
as smuggling, trading in flesh, espionage and so on If the 6th or
8th lords and houses are related to planets causing
foreign travel, the native may flee abroad for political or criminal
reasons.
If Saturn, Jupiter and the 12th lords are favourably disposed
the native may go abroad to set up an ashram or on a religious
or spiritual mission.
In Chart No. 98 the Lagna lord occupies the 6th house in
exaltation. There being no planets in the 12th, its lord is Saturn
and he is placed in his own sign. The native, owner of a national
daily and many other businesses, has made his fortune in the
country of his birth.

220 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 98.-Born 18-4-1904 at 5-57p.m. (L.M.T.) at 25
Jupiter Sun
Venus Mars Moon Moon Sun
Ketu Mercury j
Rahu
RASI a NAVAMSA
Saturn Jupit. Ketu
Venus Mars
h
Lagna | Rahu Mercury PRA
Balance of Sun Dasas at birth : 1 year, O month and 13
days.
Chart No. 99.—Born 12-5-1925 at 7-30 a.m. (I.S.T.) at 13°
Mercury | Venus
Sun tadna Mars | | Sat. Mercury Ketu
Raho | Venus
a) NAVAMSA
Jupit.
Mars Lagna
R
anu Moon
Sun
Ketu
Jupiter
Saturn
Balance of Venus Dasa at birth: 13 years, 9 months and 9
days.

Concerning the Ninth House 221
In Chart No. 99 the Lagna lord occupies Lagna itself. The
Sun and Mercury occupy the 12th house from Venus. The Sun
is exalted. The native, an heir to a large estate, being the son of
a newspaper-magnate, and himself involved in it, his fortune too
bloomed in the country of his birth.
Note in both charts the Dasas of planets in the 8th house or
of the 8th lord have not operated so far. In Chart No. 98, the
native was born in the Sun's Dasa followed so far by the Moon,
Mars, Rahu, Jupiter and Saturn Dasas. Although there has been
foreign travel in relevant Bhuktis, the Dasa lords not having a
direct bearing on the 9th house, have not given residence
abroad so.far. In Chart No 99, the native was born in the Dasa of
Venus. He has so far gone through the Dasas of
the Sun, the Moon, Mars and Rahu. Here also the Dasa lords
are not directly involved with the 8th house and have only
given foreign journeys. Foreign residence is unlikely since
Lagna lord occupies Lagna in a fixed sign. Unless the
placement of the Ascendant and other planets warrants
residence abroad, the Dasas by themselves cannot give these
results.
The native of Chart No. 100 sailed for England in 1905 in
Rahu Bhukti, Ketu Dasa. The Dasa lord Ketu is with the 9th lord
Jupiter aspected by Yogakaraka Mars. The Bhukti lord Rahu is
in the 12th house in a mercurial sign which also rules foreign
journeys. The 9th house is Pisces a watery sign and the 9th lord
occupies a common sign. During Rahu Dasa also, the native
went abroad several times representing his country. Rahu is in
the 12th house and aspected by a powerful 9th lord Jupiter.
Jupiter is in a constellation ruled by Venus, the 4th lord, and is
aspected by 5th and 10th lord Mars. This Jupiter influences Ketu
and Rahu, the lords of the Dasas which gave him much foreign
travel. Jupiter's occupation of the constellation

222 How to Judge a Horoscope
Sun
Saturn
NAVAMSA eer ee
Ketu
Jupiter
Jupiter Mercury
y
Ketu Venus
Balance of Mercury Dasa at birth : 13 years, 7 months and
6 days.
j
Ketu Ketu } Lagna | Mercury
Jupiter
RASI <| i NAVAMSA Ea
Satum Moon
Jupiter Mars sat
Mercury Moon
Venus
Lagna Mars Rahu Sun
Sun Rahu Venus
Balance of Venus Dasa at birth: 13 years, 11 months and
12 days.

Concerning the Ninth House 223
of 4th lord took the native abroad in Ketu Dasa for reasons of
education. In Rahu Dasa, the influence of Mars as 10th lord on
the 9th lord made itself felt and travel abroad was mainly
because of the native's political career.
We see the 12th lord Mercury occupies Libra associating
with Venus in his moolatrikona sign. The narive was a very
popular political figure in the country of his bitth.
The first and most important happening in the life of the
native of Chart No. 101 was his trip to England for education.
This was in the Sun's Dasa, Jupiter's Bhukti. The Sun is in a
watery sign in Scorpio aspected by the 7th lord Mars. From the
Moon the Sun occupies the 4th house governing education.
Lagna lord Venus is in Scorpio, and the 9th and 12th lord
Mercury occupies Lagna with Rahu who is Vargottama. The
personality of the native must therefore necessarily be influenced
by a foreign background and this was possible because his
education was abroad. Jupiter, the Bhukti lord, is in the 3rd and
occupies a movable sign. In the Moon Dasa he came back to his
own country where he distinguished himself in scientific circles.
The 12th lord Mercury is in Lagna aspected by Saturn from his
own sign indicating prosperity and success in the country of his
birth. Rahu Dasa conferred on the native great name and fame
as a scientist of international reputation and gave wide travelling
all over the world. Rahu is in Lagna in a movable sign with
Mercury. Mercury is the 9th and 12th lord and Venus the signdispositor of Rahu is in Scorpio allowing extensive travel. Rahu
is with Mercury, the karaka for intellectual learning and it was
because of his scientific knowledge and eminence that he went
abroad.
The native of Chart No. 102 went abroad twice, both times
on a spiritual mission. This was in Jupiter Dasa and

224 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 102. Born 12-1-1863 at 6-33p.m. (L.M.T.) at 22
Ketu | Venus Mercury | Saturn
Mars
NAVAMSA ——
Ketu
E u
Balance of Moon Dasa at birth : 3 years, 3 months and
27 days.
Chart No. 103.— Born 16-10-1918 at 2 p.m. (LM.T.) at 13°
Lagna Rahu Jupiter Lagna | Jupiter
Ketu = | satun
| Jupiter
Moon | Rahu Venus
RASI ———} | — NAVAMSA a
Lagna | Sat | Moon
| Mars Sun |
\Venus
| Rahu Mercury |
~ Balance of Rahu Dasa at birth: 11 years, 8 months and
20 days.

Concerning the Ninth House 225
Jupiter Bhukti when he was invited to address the Parliament of
Religions in Chicago. Jupiter the Dasa lord is in the 11th house
in a movable sign aspected by the 12th lord Mars. Jupiter is also
in a martian constellation. The influence of Dasa lord Jupiter
gave a spiritual colouring to the native's journey abroad. It was to
fulfil a spiritual mission started by his mentor. The second time,
the native went abroad was in Venus Bhukti. Venus is a movable
sign with the 9th lord Sun and 10th lord Mercury.
The Ascendant lord Saturn occupies the 8th house. The 9th
lord Mercury occupies the 10th house in a movable sign and the
9th house has Venus, the 10th lord in it. Since the Lagna lord
occupies a dusthana in a fixed sign, subject to appropriate
Dasas and Bhuktis the native may go abroad. In
Chart No. 104.-BoRN 8-8-1912 at 7-35 p.m. (I.S.T.) at 13°
Saturn Venus
San
Rahu
NAVAMSA
Mereury
Moon
Ketu
Jupiter Ketu ||Lagna | Jupiter
Mars |
Balance of Mars Dasa at birth: 6years, 1 month and 6
days.

226 How to Judge a Horoscope
Mercury Dasa, Venus Bhukti, she went on a world tour. Both
Bhukti and Dasa lords are directly related to the 9th house, one
as occupant and the other as its lord.
The native of chart No. 104 first went abroad in Venus
Bhukti, Saturn Dasa. Saturn, although the Lagna lord, is also the
12th lord. Venus, the Bhukti lord, is the 9th lord placed in the 7th
house with the 3rd lord Mars. He went abroad a second and third
time in the same Dasa, Jupiter Bhukti. Jupiter occupies a watery
sign Scorpio and is aspected by the 12th lord Saturn. Mercury
Dasa, Mercury Bhukti also took him abroad. Mercury though the
5th and 8th lord is in the 7th house with the 9th lord Venus.
Because of the powerful disposition of Lagna lord Saturn in the
Ath house in a fixed sign, relevant Dasas and Bhuktis during his
lifetime can only give foreign travel but not residence.
Mars
Jupit
Moon j] Saturn SEUN Lagna Moan
Venus Saiuen
NAVAMSA —-—
Rahu
Balance of Ketu Dasa at birth : 2 years and 7 months.

Concerning the Ninth House 227
The native of Chart No. 105 first went abroad in the Sun's
Dasa, Jupiter's Bhukti. The Sun is the Lagna lord and is placed
in the 12th house in Cancer in a watery sign aspected by 7th
lord Saturn. The next Dasa was of the Moon, the 12th lord
placed in the 9th house and foreign residence continues. The
Lagna is occupied by 9th lord Mars with Vargottama Rahu. The
Lagna lord occupies the 12th house in a watery, movable sign
indicating residence abroad in the appropriate Dasas
Chart No. 106. Born 17-9-1941 at 10 a.m. (I.S.T.) at 22 N
Mars i Lagna
Ketu Jupiter
Saturn p | Mars
————— a in Sea Eee EEE
Moon | Ketu
ee! RASI ee | NAVAMSA —--
Sun
Venus Mercury
G1-36 Rahu
Lagna Sun i
j Merc Saturn Moon Jupiter
Venus Rahu
Balance of Saturn Dasa at birth: 3 years, 0O month and 27
S.
In spite of every effort to come back to India, the native has
been forced to stay back in a foregin country. The native went
abroad in Mercury Dasa. Mercury is the 9th and 12th lord
exalted in the 12th house and aspected by the 3rd lord Jupiter.
The Lagna is a movable sign occupied by its own lord and
aspected by a powerful 7th lord Mars. From the Moon also.
Mercury as 3rd and 12th lord is in the 3rd aspec-

228 How to Judge a Horoscope
ted by the 9th lord Jupiter. Ketu Dasa was also lived abroad.
Ketu is in Pisces, a watery sign aspected by 9th and 12th lord
Mercury. From the Moon, Ketu is in the 9th house. Venus Dasa
now running has given no possibilities of his return home.
Venus occupies Libra aspected by the 7th lord Mars.
In Chart No. 107 the Lagna lord Venus occupies Aquarius
but in the 9th Bhava. He is with the 3rd lord Moon. The 9th lord
Saturn is well placed in his own sign in a movable sign with
exalted 7th and 12th iord Mars. He is aspected by exalted 8th
and 11th lord Jupiter from the 3rd house The native went abroad
in Saturn Dasa. His efforts at coming back have been in vain
and he has been forced to reside there.
Rahu Lagna
i Mercury
Moon
¥onus
RASI NAVAMSA PESE ETAS
Mars
Saturn
GI-33
Sun
Venus Rahu
Mercury |
Balance of Jupiter Dasa at birth : 10 years, 5 months and 23
days.
The native of Chart No. 108 went abroad in the beginning of
the Sun's Dasa to start a new life there. The Sun, though the 4th
lord, is with the 3rd lord Moon and in a watery

Concerning the Ninth House 229
sign Pisces. The Lagna lord Venus is in the 12th aspected by
9th lord Saturn from a watery sign Cancer in the 3rd house. This
is aca?e of residence abroad.
Let us apply the test of Sahams defined earlier.
Foreign or Peradesiia Saham =Sth house. -9th lord + Lagna lord
oe = 9th house — Satura + Venus
Adding 30° because Lagna is not between the 9th house and
9th lord.
Paradesha Saham - 207° 55' or Libra 27° 5'.
Chart No. 108.-Born 13 3-1948 at 10-30 a.m. (I.S.T.) at 11 N
Ketu
Jupiter
HAVAMSA
Venus
Rahu
Jupiter Mercury
Balance of Mercury Dasa at birth : 3 years, 9 months and 27
days.
The Saham is aspected by its lord Venus who is in the 12th
house. Venus as the Saham lord is also aspected by the 9th lord
Saturn.

230 How to Judge a Horoscope
Voyage Jalapathana Saham = Cancer 15°— Saturn + Lagna
Adding 30° because Lagna is not between Cancer 15° and
Saturn, we get Jalapathana Saham = 58° 59' or Taurus 28° 59’.
In this case also, the Saham lord is Venus aspected by 9th lord
Saturn and in the 12th house.
In Chart No. 109, the Lagna lord is in the 9th house and the
9th lord is exalted in the 5th house in a movable sign.
Venus Rahu
Merc
Sat.
—— NAVAMSA
Mars
Moon
Sun
Lagna Ketu
Jupiter
Balance of Saturn Dasa at birth : 17 years, 6 months and
10 days.
The native went abroad in Mercury Dasa. Mercury is the 7th lord
placed in a watery sign with 12th lord Mars and aspected by 3rd
lord Saturn. The Lagna itself is aspected by Jupiter from the 9th
house and the 3rd lord Saturn from the 7th house-Saturn in turn
is aspected by 12th lord Mars justifying the native's status as an
immigrant-resident abroad.

Concerning the Ninth House 231
Foreign or Paradesha Saham — 9th house -. 9th lord + Lagna lord
=. 9th house —Sun + Jupiter
Adding 30° because the Ascendant is not between the 9th
house and the 9th lord, Paradesha Saham 305° 43' or Aquarius
5° 43' ruled by Saturn. Saturn is in the 7th house from Lagna in
a common sign aspected by 12th lord Mars and in 3/11 position
from 9th lord Sun.
Voyage or Jalapathana Saham -Cancer 15°-— Saturn -Lagna
Adding 30° because Lagna is not between Cancer and Saturn,
Jalapathana Saham = 326° 18' or Aquarius 26° 18' ruled by
Saturn. Saturn as already seen, is so placed as to indicate
foreign travel.
Chart No. 110.—Born 31-8-1944 at 4-30 a.m. (I.S.T.) at 10
Sun
Aahu
Jupiter
G.11l-180 Merc. |
Balance of Sun : 2 years, 2 months and
16 days.

232 How to Judge a Horoscope
In Chart No. 110 the Lagna lord Moon occupies the 7th
house, a movable sign. The 7th lord Saturn occupies the 12th a
common sign aspecting the 9th lord Jupiter and the 3rd and 12th
lord Mercury placed in the 2nd house. These factors indicate
residence abroad. The native left India in Rahu Dasa. Rahu is in
Lagna but in a watery sign Cancer. Its lord Moon, whose results
he should give, is in the 7th house. Rahu must give the results
of Saturn according to the dictum ‘Sanivad Rahu' and Saturn is
not only the 7th lord but also in the 12th house. The next Dasa is
of Jupiter, the 9th lord, and after that of Saturn,
the 7th lord indicating continuance of residence abroad.
Applying the Saham test :
Foreign or Paradesha Saham =: Sth house— 9th lord + Lagna lord
+. 352° 58° —Jubiter+ Moon
There is no need to add 30° because Lagna is between the 9th
house and 9th lord,
Paradesha Saham - 132° 3' or Leo 12° 3 ruled by the Sun.
The Sun is in the 2nd house but in close conjunction with 9th
lord Jupiter and 3rd and 12th lord Mercury, and aspected by
the 7th lord Saturn from the 12th house.
Voyage or Jalapathana Saham = Cancer 15°-- Saturn -+Lagna
The Lagna is not between Cancer 15° and Saturn. Adding,
therefore, 30°, Jalapathana Saham 171° 19" or Virgo 21° 19"
ruled by Mercury. Mercury is not only the 3rd and 12th lord but is
with 9th lord Jupiter aspected by the 7th lord Saturn from the
12th house, indicative of foreign journey.
In Chart No. 111, the 9th lord Mercury occupies a movable
watery sign Cancer in the 7th house. The Lagna lord Saturn

Concerning the Ninth House 233
powerlul and exalted in Libra (movable sign) in the 10th house
aspected by 3rd and 12th lord Jupiter from a common sign.
Saturn in turn aspects the 9th lord Mercury. The native left Indi3
in Mercury Bhukti of Jupiter Dasa. The Bhukti lord Mercury is the
9th lord and Jupiter is the 12th lord both indicating foreign travel.
Mercury's position in the 7th in his constellation and conjoining
Yogakaraka. Venus and 4th and 11th lord Mars is a powerful
combinatition for success and prosperity abroad.
Chart No. 111.-Born 24-8-1953 at 4-10 p.m. (I.S.T.) at 13
| Saturn
Jupit. || Rahu Sun
l “Ivenus|}
Kety ||Merc
Moon Mars j| Mars Venus
i Mate.
RASI a | | ue NAVAMSA ee
h
Ranu Sun | Lagna
Lagna
G.iV-82
i a Jupiter
! Satum | Moon Kety
Balance of Mars Dasa at birth: 1 year, 8 months and
11 days
Foreign or Paradasha Saham =9th house —9th lord + Lagna lord
= 152° 42'— Mercury + Saturn
since Lagna is not between the 9th house and the 9th lord.
:.Paradesha Saham = 248° 41' or Sagittarius 8° 4' ruled by
Jupiter who is the 12th lord and aspects the 12th house and
exalted Lagna lord Saturn in the 10th house.

234 How to Judge a Horoscope
Voyage or Jalapathana Saham=Cancer 15°—Saturn + Lagna
since Lagna does not lie between Cancer 15 and
Saturn
ruled by Mars who occupies the 7th house, a watery sign,
with 9th lord Mercury and is in mutual aspect with Lagna lord
Saturn.
$ Lagna Venus
panu | Sun Moon
Sat. Ketu
—— RASH —--| | —__ NAVAMSA
Mars oe
ee
Jupiter
Mars Sun
Venus Merc,
Maun
Lagna Kelu Jupit.] Saturn |
í Balance ot Jupiter Dasa at birth: 5 years, 5 months and 1
ay.
The 9th lord Sun joins the exalted 7th lord Mercury in
Virgo in a common sign aspected by 3rd lord Saturn. The Lagna
lord occupies a movable sign in the 11th house with 12th lord
Mars As soon as Mercury Dasa began, the native went
abroad for study and later continued his stay there for his
career. Mercury, the Dasa lord, is also the 9th lord from the
Moon placed in the 12th house indicating that the Dasa will be
spent abroad.

Concerning the Ninth House 235
Foreign or Paradesha Saham - Sth house — 9th lord + Lagna lord
, = 125° — Sun + Jupiter
because the Lagna is not between the 9th house and 9th _ lord. :.
Paradesha Saham = 180° 18'or Libra 0° 18' occupied by Lagna
lord Jupiter, Saham lord Venus, 8th lord Moon and the 12th
lord Mars.
Voyage or Jalapathana Saham -Cancer 15°~ Saturn + Lagna
since Lagna is not between Cancer 15° and Saturn.
:. Jalapathana Saham--275° 13'or Capricorn 5° 13' ruled by
Saturn who is in a movable sign as the 3rd lord in Cancer a
watery sign.
Pilgrimages
From times immemorial the Hindus have attached great
importance to bathing in sacred rivers and pilgrimages. This is
shown by separate chapters and yogas being devoted to the
question of yatra and gangasnana. A careful study reveals that
pilgrimages to which religious touch was given were undertaken
as part of education. Pilgrimages form the final phase of
education and have their own moral, intellectual and social
values. The waters of the Ganga and several other sacred rivers
are full of medicinal virtue and a dip in these rivers is held so
sacred that it washes away not only the physical dirt butthe
mental impurities as well. Even now the majority of the Hindus or
for that matter people of all faiths yearn to undertake pilgrimages
so that their existence on the earth may find fulfilment.

236 How to Judge a Horoscope
Some relevant combinations culled from ancient works are
given below.
Jupiter, if combined with or aspected by the 10th lord, leads
one to acts of piety. If the 7th, 5th, 9th, 10th lords and Jupiter
combine in a watery sign, the native has dips in the rivers as
sacred as the Ganges in Jupiter Dasa.
The Dasas of lords of the 5th and 7th houses do not give
pilgrimages but prompt the native to devote his time to study of
sacred lore, particularly the stories of Maha Vishnu. The Dasa of
the 4th lord gives pilgrimages to many holy spots. If malefics
occupy the 10th and 4th houses from Lagna, the native dies
during his pilgrimage to a sacred shrine. If the lords of the 9th
and 10th houses combine, the native goes on a long pilgrimage.
Jupiter's aspect on the 9th house gives the native the good
fortune of bathing in the Ganges. If benefics
Mercury
Moon
Ketu
Balance of Mars Dasa at birth: 6 years, 1 month and 6
days.

Concerning the Ninth House 237
aspect the 9th house and 9th lord occupies a trine or guadrant
or the 11th house the native goes on a big pilgrimage. If the 9th
lord from the Moon is in a kendra, then also the native goes to
many holy spots.
In Chart No. 113 Jupiter is in the 10th aspected by the 10th
lord Mars. In Jupiter Dasa, Jupiter Bhukti, the native not only
had dips in the Ganges but also in many other sacred rivers and
visited a number of holy places.

Concerning the Tenth House
The most difficult and at the same time the most importanpart in the analysis of a horoscope is the determination or occut
pation or profession. In fact, the number of avocations today is
so vast and varied that it is nearly impossible to ascertain with
any degree of accuracy the exact nature of profession. There
are several difficulties that present themselves before an
astrologer in his task of adapting ancient astrological principles
to suit current professions. In former times occupations were few
and the differentiation between one occupation and another was
clearly marked. But proper and judicious investigation into all the
relevant factors will reveal which vocation and the degree of
success one may achieve in it.
The tenth house refers to occupation, profession, temporal
honours, foreign travels, self-respect, knowledge and dignity and
means of livelihood.
Primary Considerations
Before analysing the tenth Bhava, one must study the
general strength of the (a) the house, (b) its lord, (c) its
occupants and (d) the Karaka or indicator or natural significator
of the 10th house. Different yogas in the horoscope bearing on
the 10th house, its lord and Karaka also influence the 10th
house. The Navamsa chart must also be taken into account.

Concerning the Tenth House 239
Results of the Lord of the Tenth House being situated in
Different Houses
In the First House: When the lord of the tenth house
occupies the Ascendant, the native rises in life by sheer dint of
perseverance. He will be self-employed or pursue a profession
of independence. When the Lagna and 10th lord combine in the
first house the native becomes very famous and a pioneer in his
field of work. He founds a public institution and engages himself
in social projects.
In the Second House : The 10th lord in the second house
makes the native fortunate. He rises well in life and makes a lot
of money. He may engage himself in the family trade and
develop it. If malefics afflict the 10th house he will suffer losses
and be responsible for winding up the family business. He will
prosper in catering and restaurant businesses.
In the Third House : The native may have to travel
constantly on short-journeys. He will be a speaker or writer of
celebrity if the 10th lord is well-placed. His brothers may be
instrumental to some extent in advancing his career. If 10th lord
is in the 6th, 8th or 12th from Navamsa Lagna or in an unfriendly
constellation in the 3rd house, the native's rise in life is slow and
beset with obstacles. If the 3rd lord is also afflicted, rivalry
between brothers may le3d to reversals, obstacles, etc, in the
native's career.
In the Fourth House : The native will be a lucky man and
highly learned in various subjects. He will be famous both for his
learning and generosity. If the 10th lord is strong, the native is
respected wherever he goes and he receives royal avour. He
may engage in agricultural pursuits or in dealings with
immovable properties- If the 4th lord, the 9th lord and the 10th
are beneficially disposed and related to one another,

240 How to Judge a Horoscope
the native wields great political authority as a president or head
of a government. If the 10th lord is depressed, eclipsed, in an
inimical sign or afflicted by malefic planets, the native will lose
his lands and be forced to take to a life of servitude. The same
result obtains if the 10th lord conjoins the 8th lord in the 4th
house in a malefic shashtyamsa.
In the Fifth House : The native shines well as a broker and
engages in speculation and similar business. If benefics join the
lord of the 10th in the 5th house, the native leads a simple and
pious life engaging himself in prayers and pious activities. He
may become the head of an orphanage or remand home if the
10th lord occupies the 6th, 8th or 12th Navamsa.
In the Sixth House : The person will have an occupation
bearing on judiciary, prisons or hospitals. If Saturn aspects the
10th lord, he may have to work all his life in a low-paying jbb with
not much prospects. If benefics aspect the 10th lord, he holds a
post of authority and will be held in high esteem for his
character. If Rahu or afflicted malefics are with the 10th lord, he
may suffer disgrace in his career. He may be exposed to criminal
action and face imprisonment.
In the Seventh House: The 10th lord placed in the 7th
house gives a mature wife who will assist the native in his work.
He will travel abroad on diplomatic missions. He will be well
known for his skill in talking and achieving objectives. He will
make profits through partnerships and co-operative ventures. If
malefics afflict the 10th lord, the native will be debased in his
sexual habits and indulge in every kind of vice.
In the Eighth House : The native has many breaks in career.
If the 10th lord is fortified, he will occupy a high office in his field
but only for a short time. If a malefic planet afflicts the 10th lord
the person has criminal propensities and commits

Concernirg the Tenth House 241
offences. If Jupiter influences the 10th lord by aspect or
association in the 8th house, he will become a mystic or spiritual
teacher. Saturn here makes the person an undertaker or
otherwise employed in burning ghats, graveyards, etc.
In the Ninth House: The 10th lord in the 9th house makes
the native a spiritual stalwart. He will be a beacon light to
spiritual seekers if Jupiter aspects the 10th lord. If both benefics
and maiefics aspect the 10th lord, the native is generally
fortunate and well-to-do. He follows a hereditary profession or
that of a preacher, teacher or healer. The father of the native has
a great influence on him. He will be a dutiful son and do many
charitable deeds.
In the Tenth House: If the 10th lord is strongly disposed in
the 10th, the native can be highly successful in his profession
and command respect and honour. If the lord is weak and
afflicted, he will have no self-respect, cringing for favours. He will
also be a dependent all his life. He will be fickle-minded. If the
10th lord occupies the 6th, 8th or 12th houses from Navamsa,
the native's career will be routine and ordinary. If three other
planets conjoin the 10th lord in the 10th house, the native
becomes an ascetic.
In the Eleventh House: The person earns immense riches.
Fortunate in every respect he will engage himself in meritorious
deeds. He will give employment to hundreds of persons and will
be endowed with a high sense of honour. He will have many
friends. If the eleventh house comes under affliction, "is friends
will turn enemies and cause him every sort of hardship and
worry.
In the Twelfth House : If the 10th lord occupies the twelfth
house, the native will have to work in a far-off place.

242 How to Judge a Horoscope
He will lack comforts and face many difficulties in life. If
beneficially disposed, the native becomes a spiritual seeker. He
will be separated from his family and wander about without
success if malefics afflict the 10th lord. He will indulge in
smuggling and other nefarious activities, Rahu afflicting the 10th
lord makes the native a cheat and a criminal. He causes sorrow
to his family and relatives.
Other Important Considerations
Astrology is a science of tendencies and predictions do not
imply fatalism or absolute predetermination. Consequently, it is
only one's natural aptitudes or leanings for specific occupations
that can be known from the horoscope. Therefore, no definite
astrological factors can be fixed for each vocation.
Before judging the profession it is necessary to ascertain
the mental, intellectual and physical abilities of the native by a
careful examination of the strength or weakness of the Sun, the
Moon and the Lagna respectively. The position of Mercury is
equally important. For, though classical astrology has assigned
the mental outlook of a person to the position of the Moon, yet
our observations go to show that as the planet Mercury rules
buddhi or intelligence, his auspicious disposition is equally
important in order to measure one's mental make-up. When
either the Moon or Mercury receives a series of evil aspects
particularly those of Rahu and Saturn, one lacks the strength of
mind needed to faca critical situations and would be unfit for
professions involving responsibility and the ability to meet critical
situations.
It would, in our experience, be reasonable to expect a
planet in the tenth or ruling the 10th house to have more
influence over the vocation than a planet of general prominence
in

Concerning the Tenth House 243
any other part of the chart. This however is different from
implying that the ruler of the 10th or a planet in the 10th house
can be considered a fixed factor for any of the professions. A
statistical study of over 50 charts has revealed that it is only in
15 charts that the 10th lord and the 10th Bhava were definite
factors in determining the native's profession. But the most
powerful planet in the chart will also have a bearing on
profession.
Going back to the ability to meet situations, a planet in the
10th house receiving a powerful aspect from a benefic denotes
that the individual is not lacking in the ability of the nature of the
aspecting planet that he could make a success of it. If the Sun
and Rahu are in the 10th house aspected by Jupiter, the native
may preside over political meetings and take interest in political
activities ; but politics will not be the native's profession. If the
Sun and Mars are in the 10th house with Mars fortified and in
dignity, the native may be a medical man but would be interested
in politics and even involved in it.
For purposes of study, we may classify the various
occupations into six broad groups or categories, viz., (1)
Intellectual avocations, (2) economic avocations, (3) aesthetic
activities, (4) routine works, (5) mechanical professions and (6)
trades.
This classification is too general because it is impossible to
draw a line of distinction between the different categories. An
author, whose main work is intellectual, may spend a part of his
time in composing and printing or insurance business. In his
occupation, therefore, both the intellectual and economic
aspects come in. There are instances when people suddenly
change their careers from teaching to business. This is
explained by the fact that there is a special stimulus to certain

244 How to Judge a Horoscope
qualities at certain ages, probably depending upon the nature of
the directional influences (Dasas and Bhuktis) operating then.
Taking the first group—lIntellectual avocations—historians,
mathematicians, scientists, philosophers, doctors, astronomers,
astrologers, psychologists, psycho-analysts, judges, lawyers,
etc., come under this group. To the economic group maybe
assigned politicians, bank workers, insurance workers, actuaries,
industrialists, mill-owners and manufacturers. Musicians, actors,
singers, dancers, dramatists, cinema stars, artistes belong to the
Aesthetic group. Routine workers include the large number of
clerks, shop assistants, waitors and the general staff in offices,
government and business organisations. Labourers,
agriculturists, carpenters, artisans, mechanics, compositors, millworkers, etc., belong to the fifth group. The sixth, viz.. traders
include the rank and file of merchants, booksellers, publishers,
stationers, grocers, printers, journalists, | manufacturing
representatives, etc.
Each one of these avocations can be divided into a number
of divisions. For instance, an artist may be a sculptor,
photographer or etcher ; a musician may be a violinist, vocalist,
composer or flutist. An engineer may be an inventor, designer or
a mechanic and so on. Hence it would be impossible to make an
entire catalogue of professions and group them to suit
astrological factorsGenerally speaking Jupiter and Mercury refer to intellectual
avocations, Venus to aesthetic professions, the Sun, the Moon
and Mars to economic occupations. Mercury to traders, Saturn to
hard working jobs and Rahu and Ketu to routine workers.

Concerning the Tenth House 245
In a chart there may be blends of different planetary influ
ences. A philosopher and a scientist are both intellectual
workers : but in the former case Jupiter will be prominent and in
the latter. Mercury. If these influences are further affected by
those of the Sun or Mars, then service under the State is
indicated.
Mercury is a very important planet for creative or fictional
writing. Jupiter end Venus influencing Mercury in the 10th house
may give rise to a poet. Mercury and Jupiter may make one
sh.ne as an author or spiritual, literary and religious subjects.
Mercury's situation in the 10th is the best gift for an author. In
the absence of such a combination, Mercury should occupy a
quadrant, preferably the 7th house.
Rahu
Lagna Saturn
—- NAVAMSA
Ketu
Jupiter
se Venus
"tu Moon
n S
Balance of Mercury Dasa at birth : 13 years. 7 months
and days.
Mercury is powerfully placed in the 4th house in Libra
(Chart No. 114). Mercury combines with 4th lord Venus
who

246 How to Judge a Horoscope
is also the generator of Malavya Yoga. Mercury as the
intellectual planet is between the Sun and Mars revealing the
native's political doctrines. His intellectual output in prison was
prodiguous.
Three instances draw our attention in the matter of deciding
profession. They are :—
(1) When the 10th house is not occupied by any planet
(2) When the 10th house is occupied by a planet
(3) When the 10th house is occupied by more than one
planet.
Taking the first : When there is no planet in the 10th house,
take the 10th lord as primary determinant and the lord of the
Navamsa occupied by the 10th house as the secondary
determinant. Between the two, the stronger planet generally
indicates the nature of profession.
When the 10th house is occupied by a planet, then of the
lord of the 10th house, its occupant and the lord of the Navamsa
occupied by the 10th lord, the strongest planet becomes the
primary determinant.
When the 10th house is occupied by more than one planet,
the most powerful planet becomes the prime determinant
provided there is no conjunction. If there is a conjunction, the
stronger of the Navamsa lords of these two planets will give the
clue. Or, when the different planets are more or less of equal
strength, then there will be a blending of influences and more
than one occupation may be indicated. These principles are very
general and must be adapted suitably. The 10th house should
be reckoned not only from Lagna but also from the Moon and
the Sun. It is also common experience that the reckoning made
from the strongest of these three centers gives good results in
judging occupation.

Concerning the Tenth House 247
Chart No. 115.—Born 29-4-1901 at 10-10p.m.
Sun
Mercury Ketu ee Mars
Venus i
Rahu
RASI —— | | m NAVAMSA |——
Mars Moon
Ketu
RP-155/PN
-oa ee a uy ee ————Á—————
Lagna Sun
Saturn Moon Saturn Jupiter Venus
Jupiter
Balance of Sun Dasa at birth: 3 years, 9 months and 24
days.
The Lagna in Chart No. 115 is Sagittarius and is very
powerful being occupied by own lord Jupiter. The 10th lord is
Mercury and he occupies the Navamsa of Mars in great strength
He is Vargottama (occupies the same sign in Rasi and
Navamsa). The chart belongs to a military emperor with
aggressive tendencies. Mars as lord of the sign occupied by the
10th lord Mercury has given a militant profession.
From the Moon also, the 10th house is a sign ruled by
Mercury who is in a martian Navamsa. From the Sun the 10th
house being Capricorn its lord Saturn is in Scorpio Navamsa
ruled by Mars again. Or consider the strongest of the Lagna, the
Moon and the Sun. The Lagna is occupied by own lord Jupiter
and 2nd and 3rd lord Saturn. The Sun sign is also strong, the
Sun being exalted and with Mercury and Venus.

248 How to Judge a Horoscope
The Moon sign is Virgo aspected by Saturn. The Lagna would
emerge the strongest of the three and the 10th lord from here
indicates a military profession.
In deciding the vocational determinant, another important
factor is also to be considered, viz., the planet whose shadvargas predominate in regard to the 10th lord and the 10th
house.
In Chart No. 115, the Ascendant (10 2 rupas) is more powerfully
than the Moon (8.8 rupas). The 10th is occupied by the Moon.
The 10th lord is Mercury and he is in the Navamsa of Mars.
Mercury occupies six vargas of Mars while Mars has 3 vargas of
the Sun. Though the Moon (occupant of the 10th house) is more
important than Mercury (the ruler of the 10th house) yet as the
Moon is in a bhava-sandhi (junction point), he is rendered
incapable of giving the results of the 10th house. Therefore
Mercury and his shadvarga strength, viz., that of Mars,
determine profession as being predominantly military.
Planets in the Tenth House
The Sun : The native is successful in all that he undertakes.
He will be strong and happy. He will have sons, vehicles, fame,
intelligence, money and power. He will be employed in
government service. He will acquire ancestral wealth. He will be
fond of music and have personal magnetism.
If Mars associates with the Sun, the native becomes
addicted to vices like drinking, etc. If Mercury joins the Sun he
acquires profound knowledge of the sciences. He will be fond of
women and ornaments. If Venus joins the Sun in the 10th
house, the native gets a rich wife. Saturn with the Sun generally
causes sorrow and dejection.
The Moon : The native will be religious, wealthy, intelligent
and bold. He will succeed in all his evdeavours. He will

Concerning the Tenth House 249
obtain corn, ornaments, women and will be skilled in the arts. He
will be of a helpful nature and virtuous. Jupiter with the Moon
makes the native learned in ancient subjects and skilled in
astrology. If Saturn aspects the Moon, the native will be a
dispassionate thinker but earning through printing and selling
books. He will have many friends and lead a comfortable and
long life. He will be the trustee of religious institutions.
Mars : Other combinations favouring the native may become
a cruel ruler. He will be fond of praise and may take bold steps in
governing. He will be rash. He will earn much money. If Mercury
joins Mars, the person will be a skilled scientist or technician
patronised by the rulers. If Jupiter is with Mars, the native
becomes the head of low-class people. If with Venus, he
becomes a trader in foreign lands. If Saturn and Mars combine in
the 10th house, he will be daring but will have no progeny.
Mercury: He will be a happy and straightforward person. He
will be a scholar in many subjects and engaged in acquiring
more knowledge and fame. He will be successful in all his
endeavours. He will have defective eyesight but profound
knowledge in astronomy and mathematics. If Venus joins him,
the native will have a charming wife and wealth. If Jupiter, he will
be unhappy, and childless but move in prominent circles of the
government. Saturn and Mercury make the native toil in jobs like
that of a copyist or proofreader and suffer penury.
Jupiter : The native will be a high official in the government.
Rich, virtuous, steadfast in his spiritual or religious life, wise and
happy, he will be guided by high principles. If Jupiter and Venus
combine in the 10th house, the person is held in esteem by the
government and entrusted with the protection Of the Brahmins
(learned people). If he is with Rahu, he

250 How to Judge a Horoscope
becomes a mischief-maker and will create trouble for others at
every step. If Jupiter is aspected by Mars, the native heads
research institutes, academics and educational institutions.
Venus : The native earns through houses and buildings. He
will be highly influential and has many women working for him.
He will be social, friendly and renowned. If Venus combines with
Saturn, the native will profit from cosmetics and articles used by
women. He will have healing powers and will be a skilled trader.
His education will be disrupted. He will have respect for divine
people.
Saturn : The native becomes a ruler or minister. He will be
an agriculturist, brave, rich and famous. He will be dispassionate
in nature and will work for the downtrodden masses. He will be
judicious and work in the capacity of a judge. The native visits
sacred rivers and shrines and in later life becomes an ascetic.
His career will be marked by sudden elevations and
depressions. If Saturn is associated with the 8th lord in a malefic
Navamsa, the native suffers under a tyrannical superior officer. If
the 10th lord joins Saturn together with the lord of the Navamsa
occupied by the 10th lord and is influenced by aspect or
conjunction with the 6th lord, the native will have more than one
wife.
Rahu : There is a tendency to lusts after widows. He will be
a skilled artist with a flair for poetry and literature. He travels
widely and is learned. He will be famous and will engage himself
in business. He will have limited issues. Bold and somewhat
adventurous he commits many sins.
Ketu : The native will be strong, bold and well-known. He
will commit vile deeds and be impure in his resolves. He will face
many obstacles in all his undertakings. He will be very clever. If
beneficially disposed, the native will be happy,

Concerning the Tenth House 251
religious, well read in the scriptures and visit many pilgrim
centers and sacred rivers.
Time of Fructification of the Results of
the Tenth House
The following factors are of significance in timing events
connected with the tenth house :—
(a) Lord of the 10th house, (b) planet or planets aspecting
the 10th house, (c) planet or planets posited in the 10th house,
(D) planets aspecting the lord of the 10th house, (e) planet or
planets in association with lord of the 10th house, and (f) the
10th lord from the Moon.
These factors may influence the 10th house either as lords
of the main periods or as lords of the sub-periods. (1) The subperiods of planets capable of influencing the 10th house in the
major periods of planets which are also capable of influencing
the 10th house produce results par excellence pertaining to the
10th house. (2) The sub-periods of planets associated with the
10th house in the major periods of planets which are not related
to the 10th house produce results pertaining to the 10th house
only to a limited extent. (3) Similarly the sub-periods of planets
that are not related to the 10th house in the major periods of
planets associated with the 10th house will produce effects
pertaining to the 10th house only to a small extent.
In Chart No. 116, we note :—
(a) Lord of the 10th house—Mercury
(b) Planet aspecting the 10th house—Mars
(c) Planets posited in the 10th house-nil
(d) Planets aspecting the lord of the 10th house—nil

252 How to Judge a Horoscope
Venus
Mars | Jupiter Venus Rahu
Mercury
Ketu 5
Sun Moon un
RASI NAVAMSA
Moon
Mars Mercury
s La Jupiter
aturn gna || Ketu Saturn Lagna
Balance of Mercury Dasa at birth : 7 years, 10 months and
26 days.
(e) Planets in association with the 10th lord—Venus and
Mars.
(f) The 10th lord from the Moon —Mars.
Therefore Mercury, Mars and Venus can produce results of
the 10th house in their Dasas and Bhuktis. The native graduated
in engineering during Mars Bhukti, Venus Dasa both connected
with the 10th house. He secured a lucrative job in a big
Government undertaking in the same Bhukti and Dasa.
Going back to Chart No. 114, the beginning of Venus Dasa
(Venus aspects the 10th house) saw the native settle down to
the practice of Law (Mercury, Sun, Venus and Mars aspecting
the 10th is a formidable combination). Ketu Bhukti in Venus
Dasa saw the native President of the Indian National Congress—
a great honour and also a great responsibility. Ketu

Concerning the Tenth House 253
is in the 6th with 9th lord Jupiter who aspects the 10th house
and becomes capable of bringing distinction and authority in the
native's career. The major and sub-lords, Venus and Ketu, are
disposed in the 3rd and 11th from each other—an ideal
combination for elevation in career. With the commencement of
the Sun's Dasa, the native's popularity began to wax further. The
Sun is a political planet and aspects the 10th. The Sun's Dasa
was not eventful but the Sun being in a Keeta Rasi, a series of
detentions took place. As soon as Mars Dasa began, the native
became Vice-President of the Indian Interim Government. Mars
is a yogakaraka. Rahu Bhukti made the native the first Prime
Minister of India. Rahu is in a mercurial sign and is aspected by
9th lord Jupiter who, in turn, aspects the 10th house trinally
forming a Rajayoga. The Dasa and Bhukti lords. Mars and
Rahu, are in mutual quadrants.
Nature of Results
The lordship, aspects, location and the general strength of a
planet capable of influencing the 10th house determine the
nature of results the planet produces in its Dasa. In general, the
following results, relating to the 10th house, are likely in the
Dasas and Bhuktis of different planets.
The Sun : Acquisition of wealth and learning. Health gains
vitality. Founds institutions and gets a high position. Domestic
happiness and prosperity of sons. Succeeds in military career
and political ambitions. The Moon : Becomes passionate and
adulterous, suffers mental unrest and a trustee of some religious
or social institution. Gives away money in charity. Gets many
friends. Acquires health, wealth and comforts. If in unfriendly
sign, death or illness to mother and danger from swindlers.
Mars: Acquires wealth and fame.

254 How to Judge a Horoscope
Prospers in agriculture and gets good profits in business. Gets
adoration of relations. Gains energy and clarity of thinking. If a
Yogakaraka, happiness and success during the entire period.
Gains through fine arts and increased income from lands.
Mercury : Gains academic distinction and recognition. Enjoys
fortune of a high order. Eye-sight deteriorates. Indulges in charity
and noble deeds. Succeeds in trade, religious activity and
spiritual evolution. Jupiter : Becomes virtuous. Acquires wealth
and conveyances. Birth of issues. Prospers in agriculture Venus :
Earns name, money and fame through law. Enjoys social life.
Education suffers. Acts in accordance with scriptures doing his
duty. Saturn : Goes on pilgrimages. Suffers from gastric
complaints. Meets with success in a sensational way. Goes to
foreign countries. If a malefic by lordship and occupation, a very
bad period in life. Rahu: Involvement with undesirable women.
Becomes a creative writer or artist. General prosperity. If Rahu is
ill-disposed, mental derangement and affection. Ketu: Does
highly intelligent work. Becomes spiritual and works for the
poorer classes. Travels widely. Destruction of dear ones,
properties and self-respect.
The following results can be generally expected to take
place during the Dasa of the lord of the 10th house :—
Benefics with the 10th lord in the Ascendant with the
Ascendant lord make the native renowned. He will occupy a top
position in the Government and exercise much power and
authority. He will be noble and engage himself in charitable
deeds such as gifting away clothes, building hostels,
orphanages, wells and hospitals. If the 10th lord is placed in the
6th, 8th or 12th in the Navamsa, the native will be a just and
peace-loving man. He will be of moderate means with neither
fame nor power.

Concerning the Tenth House 255
If the 10th lord combines with malefics in the Ascendant, his
Dasa brings in disgrace and humiliation. The native may live on
gifts obtained at death and similar inauspicious ceremonies.
If the lord of the 10th house is placed in the 2nd with the
2nd lord, the native earns riches in the Dasa of the 10th lord. His
fame for his riches spreads widely. His family will look to him for
everything and will hold his opinions in high esteem. He will work
for the government in an influential job with many servants at his
beck and call. He will have many dependents. He will feed
innumerable people. He will be magnanimous and always help
orhers. If Rajayogas obtain in the chart, the native's power and
authority will have no limit. If malefics combine in the 2nd house,
the native suffers from eye-troubles and family
misunderstandings. He will be beset with various kinds of
troubles and lose his money. Poverty will stare him in the face.
He will not get food and his speech assumes viciousness. He
suffers ill-fame.
If the lord of the 10th house occupies the 3rd house with the
3rd lord, the native's prosperity booms in the Dasa of the 10th
lord. He becomes famous as a bold writer during this period. He
rises swifty in his career with frequent promotions. His brothers
will prosper well. He acquires musical talent and becomes
famous in this field. If the 10th lord in the 3rd is in the 6th, 8th or
12th Navamsa, the native has a mediocre period. He may work
for newspapers or publishing houses. If the 3rd lord and karaka
are afflicted, then misunderstandings will arise between
brothers, and the native may suffer mental aberration. He will
wander aimlessly during the 10th lord's Dasa.
If the lord of the 10th house occupies the 4th house with the
Ath lord, the native enjoys mental happiness and gains fame
through his immovable properties. His income will be

256 How to Judge a Horoscope
through lands and buildings if the 4th lord is Mars or Mars
associates with the 10th lord. He will also undertake agricultural
pursuits. If Mercury or Jupiter is with the 10th lord, the native
heads an educational or research organisation. His family will
come to be known for its respectability. If male-fics afflict the
10th lord, the native suffers mental vacillation
and takes wrong decisions which affect his reputation adversely.
If the 10th lord joins the 5th lord in the 5th house and
benefics also aspect the combination, the native rises to the rank
of a minister during this period. If powerful Rajayogas are
present, the native may even become the ruler of a country. If a
beneficially disposed 8th lord joins the combination, the native
may become a ruler or prime-minister following the death of his
predecessor. If Rahu or Saturn in strength is involved in the
combination, the native is elected to office. His fame will spread
widely and he will innovate many reforms helpful to society. If the
10th lord is in inimical signs or in the 6th, 8th or 12th from the
Navamsa Lagna, the results will be greatly reduced and the
native may be a mere member of the Assembly.
When the lord of the 10th house occupies the 6th house,
the former's Dasa will make the native a court official. If
powerful planets are involved, he becomes a_ High Court or
Supreme Court Judge. If the 10th lord is of feeble strength,
the native may work as a summons-bearer or bench-clerk or
attendant in the courts. The native's maternal uncle will be an
influential and prosperous man. If Mars, the Sun, Leo,
Scorpio, Aries are the planets and signs involved, the native
becomes a skilled surgeon or physician. If malefics afflict the
10th lord, the Dasa makes the native work for others at death
and similar inauspicious ceremonies.

Concerning the Tenth House 257
If the lord of the 10th house occupies the 7th with the 7th
lord, the native works abroad where he gets distinction and
recognition. He marries a wife from a good family. She will also
work or otherwise boost his earnings by helping him in his work.
He goes to many shrines, holy places and sacred rivers. If the
Moon joins the 7th lord, his work will be connected with
conveyances. If the combination takes place in an airy sign he
may work as a pilot, in a fiery sign he may work for the railways
and in earthy signs, he may work in automobile companies. If
malefics afflict the 10th lord, he will follow a profession that may
not fetch much money and as a consequence suffer penury. His
wife will be a quarrelsome women coming from a low and
uncultured family. If Mars afflicts the 7th house, she will leave
him in the Dasa of the 10th lord.
If the lord of the 10th house is in the 8th with the 8th lord,
the native may lose his job in humiliating circumstances in the
Dasa of the 10th lord. If the 10th lord is fortified he will be only
suspended and then reinstated. The native will hold low jobs or
take to a career of crime if Rahu afflicts the Moon and the 10th
lord. He will lose lands, and pests and other troubles will spoil
his agricultural income. He will suffer breaks in education which
may not be completed. He suffers losses through his vehicles
and in every other manner.
If the lord of the 10th house is in the 9th with the 9th lord
subject to beneficial aspects, the native leads a life of
righteousness. He will earn through fair means and become
well known for his sense of fairplay and justice. If Ketu joins
the 10th lord, the person embarks on a life of spiritual sadhana.
If the Sun influences powerfully the 10th lord, the native

258 How to Judge a Horoscope
works for the Government or take up the medical profession. If
the Moon be strong, he will work as an auditor or banker in the
Government or in some big undertaking. If Mars aspects the
10th lord or associates with him, he will acquire immovable
property from his father. If Mercury is powerfully disposed, he
goes abroad for education and research in the Dasa of the 10th
lord. The native will prosper along with his father if Jupiter
associates with the 10th lord. Venus in the same position will
confer on the native gold, precious stones, conveyances and all
kinds of comforts in the 10th lord's Dasa. If Saturn is the
influencing planet, the native will head an industrial or other
concern employing labour. If Saturn and the 10th lord are both
weakly disposed or if the 10th lord is in an inimical sign, eclipsed
or debilitated or in the 6th, 8th or 12th in Navamsa, the native
himself will be forced to work as a servant.
If the lord of the 10th house is placed in the 10th house with
benefics, the native will become wealthy and fortunate. He
achieves distinction in his profession but after a hard struggle. If
Rajayogas are present, the native acquires power, status and
eminence in the Dasa of the 10th lord. There will be many
people working under him who will respect his word as law. The
native enjoys good health and does many charitable deeds. He
founds institutions relating to his field of activity. If afflicted by
malefics, the native suffers poverty. He will have a step-mother
who will ill-treat him and cause him hardships during the 10th
lord's Dasa. He will lose his job and drift about in misery.
If the lord of the 10th house occupies the 11 th house with
the 11th lord, the native will become a rich and prosperous man.
He will have many businesses and all his ventures will

Concerning the Tenth House 259
turn out successful. He will have powerful friends in the
government and upper classes. His personality will acquire
charm and he will be a popular figure in social circles. He will
have many men at his command and get possession of many
mansions. If the Moon is with the 10th lord, he earns through
vehicles, trade in sea-products, milk, restaurants. If the Sun is
with the 10th lord, his income comes from woollen-factories,
match-industries, gold market and chemicals. If Mercury is with
the 11th lord he earns distinction as a great intellectual and
thinker and gets some fabulous cash award. If Jupiter, he will
head many institutions of learning as a chairman or trustee. Or
he may be a newspaper magnate or prosperous publisher. If the
10th lord is in a malefic Navamsa and the 11th house is also
affiicteo, mese same sources will give the native losses. Or if the
10th lord is feeble in strength but not afflicted, his Dasa fetches
the native moderate success and wealth.
If the ruler of the 10th house is placed in the 12th house
with the 12th lord with benefics, the native may head a medical
institution or a prison or a remand home in the 10th lord's Dasa.
If the 10th lord is fortified, the native pursues his spiritual
inclinations with zeal. If malefics afflict, the native suffers
humiliation. He will lose his job and if in business, losses will
accrue to him. He will have unconventional professions and
people will revile at him. He wanders aimlessly with no domestic
peace.
An examination of professional prospects would include the
study of the 2nd house also as the source of income which must
necessarily be through one's occupation. The ninth house is also
of relevance since it rules luck or fortune and indirectly all
distinction, fame, Success and sudden gains as attributed to
Bhagya. The 11th house rules gains and espe-

260 How to Judge a Horoscope
cially in professions that are in the nature of trade gives a clue to
the calling in which the native would prosper.
The presence of powerful Rajayogas, Dhanayogas and
Mahapurusha Yogas is of importance in assessing the general
strength of the horoscope and the heights to which the native
may rise.
If the 10th house is vacant, then the lord of the Navamsa
occupied by the 10th lord gives a clue to the nature of the
profession the native may follow. In this case also, the reckoning
is to be made from the Lagna, the Moon or the Sun depending
on whichever of the three is most powerful.
If the lord of the Navamsa occupied by the 10th lord is the
Sun, the native earns through work connected with medi cine,
wool, grass, grain, gold, diplomacy and mediation and
arbitration. If this planet be the Moon, the native will deal in
ships, pearls, sea-products, agriculture, horticulture, humour
(cartoonist), women and clothes. If Mars be the ruler of the
Navamsa occupied by the 10th lord, the native makes his living
through metals, minerals, buildings, occupations involving fire,
thieving, feats of valour, military occupations, butchering, driving,
chemist-shops and doctoring. If Mercury be the ruler, the native
earns as a mathematician, poet, artist, sculptor, writer, journalist,
astrologer, priest whose services can be engaged and similar
callings. Jupiter gives the occupation of a judge, teacher,
counsellor, lawyer, bankers, ministers, preachers, and similar
callings. If Venus is the lord, the native earns as a dealer in gold,
precious stones, cattle, apparel and textiles, beautician,
perfumes, elephants, horses, cars and other conveyances,
hoteliering, and through the show-business such as cinema,
dancing, dramas and the like. Saturn makes one engage in
humble professions such as craft, tilling,

Concerning the Tenth House 261
factory and mill-workers, labour of every kind, jailors, wardens,
shoe-maker, miner, practitioner of wichcraft, and similar
occupations.
The native of Chart No. 117 is a teacher in a college. The
Moon lord of the 10th house is in the 10th aspected by Mars
from a jupiterian sign and by exalted Saturn 4th and 5th lord.
The Moon indicates callings that relate to people. The 10th lord
occupies a jupiterian constellation as well which should give a
teaching job.
The nature of the sign in which the 10th house falls is also
of significance. Fiery signs on the 10th house indicate
engineering, steel and iron industries, combustion engines,
locomotives as describing the general nature of profession.
Mars in the 10th in Aries aspected by the Moon may give a
Chart No. 117.-Born 10-4-1954 at 7-20 p.m. (I.S.T.)
i i | Ketu
Mercury | Venus | Jupiter | Ketu || Sun “sled
ey eee: | eae, Saree | Ea sane ee
| Moon | | Set Moon
ee RASI | be NAVAMSA
| Lagna Mercury
Venus
Mars Lagna
Rahu Jupiter
Rahu Saturn p
Balance of Jupiter Dasa at birth: 0 year, 4 months and
15 days.

262 How to Judge a Horoscope
job relating to automobiles. Mars and Mercury may make one a
mechanical engineer. Airy signs denote intellectual professions
philosophers, writers, thinkers, scientists and researchers. Libra
on the 10th Bhava with Mercury and Rahu can make the native a
scientist with an engineering back ground. Jupiter or Saturn
could indicate legal profession while the Moon also there with
Mercury may point to a writer on religion or fiction. Earthy signs
rule professions that require practicality such as administration,
economics and occupations such as construction of buildings,
mining, agriculture, estate agencies and the like. Watery signs
gives professions which are connected with liquids—chemistry,
biology, dairy-farming, breweries, bottled drinks, laundries,
shipping and water technology.
Movable signs endow the native with push, energy and
enterprise so that such natives are best fitted for jobs requiring
these qualities—salesmen, pioneering work, market executives,
medical representatives, etc. Fixed signs give one the capacity
to persevere against odds and a fixity of purpose. People with
such signs on the 10th house will succeed as research workers.
Common signs being mutable, if strong, give the capacity both
for go-ahead jobs and those that require steady work depending
upon the planets and signs involved.
Besides the 10th lord and house, the sign occupied by the
10th lord, other planets and sign or signs predominant in the
chart as well as a fortified Lagna are some more factors that go
to colour the occupation or vocation of the native. We give below
some general guidelines on the nature of career the different
signs and planets broadly indicate.
Aries : Natives born with Aries strong, farewell in careers
that require enterprise, dynamism and energy. They are suited

Concerning the Tenth House 263
for jobs requiring exploration and courage and do well as
soldiers, policemen, army workers, scientists, engineers,
dentists, surgeons, mechanics and metal and mineral
technologists. Since Aries rules the head, as surgeons they
exhibit skill in brain surgery. Aries is the natural fighter. If
Mercury and Jupiter be strongly disposed, the native emerges as
a powerful writer, journalist or lawyer—fighting for a cause.
Venus strong makes Aries-natives dashing executives or
salesmen. Mars strong gives industrial workers, hunters,
explorers and officers of law. If the Sun be strong, the native
would be an industrialist, politician or owner of a timber-yard or
lumber-yard. Saturn and Aries strong would give trade-unionists.
Chart No. 118.—Born 18-4-1904 at 5-57 p.m. (L.M.T.) at 25
Jupiter Sua
Venus Mars Moon Moon
Ketu Marcury
Rahu
—— AASI erin yd Pee NAVAMSA
Saturn Jupit.
k Venus 7 Saturn
na n
9 Mercury wane Mars
Balance of Sun's Dasa at birth: 1 year, O month and
13 days.
In Chart No. 118, Lagna is Vargottama, Lagna lord Venus
is exalted in the 6th house with 6th lord Jupiter, Mars is in

264 How to Judge a Horoscope
the 7th in his moolatrikona sign. Saturn, the Yogakaraka,
occupies another kendra and both luminaries are exalted, lifting
the chart well above average. The 10th lord Moon occupies
Pisces Navamsa ruled by Jupiter. The 10th lord from the Moon,
namely, Saturn occupies a Navamsa ruled by Mercury. The
karaka Sun also occupies a Navamsa of Mercury. Mercury and
Jupiter being dominant, the native's career is linked with
communication (Mercury) and publishing (Jupiter). The native is
a newspaper magnate. Aries is the most powerful sign in the
chart because, being a quadarnt is occupied by exalted Sun, 9th
lord Mercury and sign lord Mars. The native proved to be an
independent and intrepid newspaperman even during the Indira
Emergency when he was harrassed and bullied by the caucus in
every conceivable manner.
Taurus : Natives with this sign strong are practical people
with dogged determination and perseverance. Since it is the
second sign of the zodiac, bankers, cashiers, capitalists,
financiers and money-lenders are indicated. Cosmetics,
jewellery, articles of fashion come under this sign. Taurus strong
natives make good advertising and publicity agents. They can
be good throat specialists and singers. Venus strong would
make skilled instrumentalists and the Moon would give singers.
Mercury-Moon-Venus would give composers, acousticians and
audition experts. Mars and the Moon refer to agriculturists.
The native of Chart No. 119 is an accounts officer in a firm.
The 10th house is aspected by the Moon and Jupiter. The 10th
lord occupies a Navamsa of Mercury, the planet related to
account-keeping, auditing, book-keeping and similar vocations.
The Ascendant is Taurus, the second sign of the zodiac ruling
finance and is occupied by the 10th lord Saturn.

Concerning the Tenth House 265
Chart No. 119.— Born 13-1-1944 at 1-49 p.m. (L.M.T.) at 22 N
Lagna Mars Katu
Mars Lagna M J
Satum oon upiter
Rahu
RASI — NAVAMSA —
Sun Moon Sun
Ketu Jupit. | |\Venus
A A al
Mercury | Venus | | Rahu Mercury | Saturn
Balance of Ketu Dasa at birth. 5 years, 11 months.
It is aspected by sign lord Venus and is powerful indicating a job
connected with finances.
Gemini: Natives of Gemini make good workers irt all areas
of communication. They fare well as language experts,
interpreters, sales agents, translators, reporters, writers and
researchers. If the Sun be strong, they gain excellence in
engineering branches and in analytical studies of law and
education. Since Mercury is the planet of trade also, they do well
as auditors, accountants and similar jobs. It also gives
mathematicians and writers. If Mercury is predominant, fictionwriters and Jupiter strong would give drama-writers. Venus and
Gemini would give poetic abilities. If Mercury and Jupiter are
involved, there would be serious writing—history, biographies,
essays ; Mercury, Mars and Jupiter with G-mini give proficiency
in feature-writing, news-reporting and editing.

266 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 120.—Born 29-6-1864 at about 3-55 a.m.
Sun
Sun Mass Rahu | Jupitar
Mercury ]Venus
Saturn
ae | m NAVAMSA
Venus Moon
Jupi
piter “Sat Ketu Legna
Rahu Mercury
Balance of Venus Dasa at birth: 15 years, 6 months and
9 days.
Chart No. 120 is of a great educationist, mathematician and
jurist. The native had outstanding mental capacities with a
distinct bent for mathematics. The Lagna is occupied by
Mercury, the planet of intelligence. He is in parivartana with
Venus in Gemini. Gemini is occupied by Lagna and 4th lords,
Venus and Sun respectively, and aspected by Yogakaraka
Saturn and Jupiter. Gemini is the most powerful sign in the chart
endowing the native with wide learning.
Cancer: Cancer strong in a chart indicates biology, botany,
zoology, marine life, zoo-keeping, dairy-farming, bee-keeping
and trade in honey, fish, etc. Such natives make good housekeepers and can therefore work as matrons, housewives, hotelsuperintendents and similar jobs. They also make kind nurses
and gentle doctors. Since Cancer is a domestic sign, if the Moon,
Venus and Mars are involved,

Concerning the Tenth House 267
success is likely in hotel-running, snack-bars, bakery and
confectionery business, ice-cream parlours, etc. If Cancer is
afflicted, then the native's vocation will be connected with wines
and breweries. They make good laundrymen and sailors since
Cancer is a watery sign. If Saturn, Mercury or Jupiter is involved,
the native tends to be good at archaeology, history, museumwork, teaching. The Moon and Jupiter would give teachers,
social workers and institutional workers. The Sun and Cancer
with Moon and Jupiter give philanthropists.
In Chart No. 121 Cancer, Ascendant, is occupied by its own
lord the Moon, 10th lord Mars, 9th lord exalted Jupiter and Rahu.
This is by far the most predominant Rasi in the chart. Mars as
the 10th lord has given a technological background to the native
but his expertise is in alcohol technology.
Chart No. 121.—Born 28 5-1944 at 9-50 a.m. (I.S.T.) at 13
Venus
Mercury Sun
Sun
RASI NAVAMSA
Ketu
GIN-327
Mercury | Lagna
Mars Raho
Satum
Balance of Mercury Dasa at birth: 6 years, 1 month and
28 days.

268 How to Judge a Horoscope
Cancer rules wines and breweries and Rahu afflicting the sign
and planets in it has given the native the job of an alcohol
technologist.
Leo : Leo being an utopion royal sign, Leo-strong natives
fare well in jobs of authority and power. They make good
executives, administrators and generally do well as the boss.
They are fitted for jobs in administrative cadres and work well in
the stock-exchange, investment business, jewellery and gold,
circus-training, as forest officers, film and drama directors,
foremen. Leo has a special propensity for the doctoring line,
drugs and chemicals. The Sun and Mars predominant give
political leaders and workers while the Sun and Venus give
ambassadors, diplomats and foreign service jobs requiring polish
and sophistication.
Sun | Jupiter
Venus Mercury
Mercury Rahu
| Ketu
| jLagna Venus
Mars
Se RAS! — NAVAMSA |
Jupit. Lagna
Rahu | Sun
Moo Mars
| Poa 4
| é | Ketu
| Saturn Moon | atu
Balance of Sun Dasa at birth : 4 years, 6 months and
27 days.

Concerning the Tenth House 269
The karaka for mind, Moon, in Leo in association with
Jupiter, lord of the 9th and aspected by Saturn, lord of the 7th is
the most important combination in Chart No. 122 around which
the entire life of the native revolved. Besides causing Gajakesari
Yoga, this combination gave the native a certain sensitiveness
(lunar trait) that found expression in sublimal ways. Venus, the
planet of poetry, who happens to be the lord of the 4th house is
in the 10th in the house of practical Mars and aspected by
gnanakaraka Jupiter from Chandra Lagna. This confers poetical
talents of an extraordinary nature. The native was a great Tamil
poet with skill in English and French versification also. The sign
Leo in strength made the native essentially an ardent and a fiery
nationalist.
Virgo : Virgo natives have an eye for detail. They make
good teachers, manicurists, retail shop-keepers, clerks,
receptionists, secretaries, postal employees, bus drivers and
conductors, book-binders, stenographers, interpreters,
translators, librarians, radio and television announcers, paperdealers, handwriting and fingerprint experts, notaries public,
computer operators, writers, editors, reporters, psychologists
and psychiartrists, healers, doctors, explorers, detectives. They
do well in jobs requiring intelligence and efficiency. Mercury and
Virgo give book-keepers, statisticians, cashiers, bank-clerks.
Saturn related to' Virgo indicates typists, museum-curators and
book-keepers while the Sun has to do with auditors, tax-officers
and chartered accountants. Venus governs filing-clerks, sales
girls or salesmen and librarians.
In Chart No. 123 the 10th house is Cancer occupied by the
Moon indicating the job relates to the public. Mars and Jupiter
aspect the 10th house and 10th lord indicating a post of
authority. Chart No. 123 is of an income-tax official. The

270 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 123.—Born 2-10-1926 at 8-5 a.m. (I.ST) at16 N
Saturn
NAVAMSA
Mercury
Jupiter
Jupiter
GIV-228
Saturn Lagna
Balance of Mercury Dasa at birth : 7 years, 4 months
and 22 days.
Mercury Saturn | Mars
Ketu Sun Venus
Venus Marcury | Rahu
Lagna
RASI ——s | NAVAMSA
GIvV-58
Lagna Jupit, Moon
M Moon Sat. Sun K Jupiter
ara Rahu etu
Balance of Mars Dasa at birth: 0 year, 6 months and 6
days.

Concerning the Tenth House 271
sign Virgo is strong, though in the 12th house, being occupied
by exalted sign-lord Mercury, Venus and Sun and being
aspected by Jupiter.
In Chart No. 124, the 10th house is Virgo which is also the
most predominant sign in the chart. Saturn there indicates a job
as a stenographer. Rahu in the 10th afflicts Virgo coming in the
way of advancement.
Libra : Libra being the sign of the balance, natives with this
sign strong make good management consultants, lawyers,
judges, solicitors, logicians and officers of the law, diplomats and
public relations officers. Since it is ruled by Venus, it gives
singers, actors, beauticians, haber-dashers, fashion-models,
interior decorators and furniture-makers, perfumemanufacturers, social workers, photographers, tea-shop and
coffee-bar owners, snack and restaurant keepers and all similar
trades Venus powerful with Rahu and the Moon would give
artists, sculptors, cinema artistes and models. If Libra and Saturn
and Venus figure in strength cartoonists, cameramen, tailors,
dress-designers and make-up assistants would be the result.
Mars, Rahu, Venus make the native work in cabaret shows,
gambling casinos and similar haunts of sin and pleasure.
Note how Libra dominates in Chart No. 125. It is occupied
by Lagna lord Venus, 9th and 12th lord Mercury and 11th lord
the Sun neechabhanga. The native is a top executive in a
management firm and a nutritional consultant.
Scorpio : Being a mystic sign, Scorpio produces mystics,
philosophers, astrologers and occultists. Being secretive,
detectives and clever criminals also come under this sign.
Nurses, chemists, doctors, explorers, geographers, barbers,
dentists, mechanics, men of the armed and police-forces,
navigators, coffin-makers, undertakers, life-insurance agents

272 How to Judge a Horoscope
Balance of Mars Dasa at birth : 6 years, 10 months and
Chart No. 125.-Born 20-10-1931 at 7-20a.m. (I.S.T.) at 13
Lagna
Rahu p Ket
iupit.
POES OSS) eg E,
Jepit. | Venus Mars
RASI ——||-— NAVAMSA
Moon Moon
GIV-28
Lagna Sun
Saturn Mears Me cay Ketu Mercury; Rahu
| Venus Saturn
3 days.
and business and embalmers come under this sign. If Mars is
strong, then railway and tram workers, police and army
personnel, home guards, telephone operators and telegraphists
are indicated. The Moon and Scorpio would give pearl-divers,
dealers in sea-foods, corals, poisons, drugs and chemicals. The
Sun strong would indicate an executive job in these callings.
Chart No. 126 is of an international figure in astrology
whose predictions have been fulfilled to a remarkable degree.
The mystic sign Scorpio is powerfully placed in the 10th
house. Itis aspected by exalted Moon and Lagna lord Saturn.
It is occupied by Vargottama Jupiter and aspected by the 10th
lord Mars. Four planets influence Scorpio in great strength.
Sagittarius : Sagittarius natives are bold and practical. They
do well in sports, horse-training, as jockeys, stewards,
preachers, freedom fighters, advocates for any cause,
organisers, financiers, gamblers, leather-dealers and experts,
shoe

Concerning the Tenth House 273
Chart No. 126.-Born 8-8-1912 at 7-35 p.m. (I.S.T.) at 13°
Moon
Rahu Saturn vanus
Saturn i
L Sun sun |
na
i Rhu i
a, AASI — | — NAVAMSA |-
Meic, | Moca
Venus Mercury
Mars | Ketu
Jupiter Kew | jLagna | Jupiter i Mara
Balance of Mars Dasa at birth : 6 years, 1 month and 6
days.
and footwear makers or dealers. Jupiter and Mercury strong
would give rise to teachers, religious reformers, theologians.
Saturn, Mercury and Jupiter would indicate lawyers, judges,
magistrates and philosophers.
Chart No. 127 is that of a highly successful lawyer who later
took part in the freedom movement and was the first President of
the Indian Republic. The crux of the horoscope revolves round
Sagittarius which is not only the Lagna but also the pivot of a
powerful Rajayoga involving 5th lord Mars, Lagna lord Jupiter,
10th lord Mercury and Saturn. Mercury, Saturn and Jupiter
(Vargottama) influence Sagittarius powerfully indicating the
native's legal career.
Capricorn: This sign makes the native hard-working and
able. Agriculture, mining, forest products, farming, horti-

274 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 127.-Born 3-12-1884 at 8-45 am. (L.M T.) at 25 N
Rahu
Ketu Moon Sat Mercury
Mars
Venus
ee RASI a | am NAVAMSA
Moon
Jupita Jupiter
NH-54 P
Mars Lagna
Mercury Sun Yəpus | Rahu || Ketu s
Legna aturn
Balance of Mars Oasa at birth : 5 years, 10 months and 17
days.
Chart No. 128.—Born 19-12-1952 at 11-16 p m. (I.ST.) at
Jupiter
Rahu
——— RASI NAVAMSA
Mars
Raby
Venus
Moon Gill-146
| Mars
Sun Moreury Mercury | Lagna 7
Jupiter
Balance of the Moon Dasa at birth: 9 years, 2 months
and 3 days.

Concerning the Tenth House zt
culture, mineralogy and geology, suit such natives well. They
have great organising capacities and make good conveners and
secretaries. Executive and political posts requiring patience and
plodding on come ur.der Capricorn. Saturn strong makes for
bankers, merchants and agriculturists. Mars makes
mineralogists, geologists and forest officers.
Chart No. 128 is that of a businessman dea ing in timber in
the forests of South India. Capricorn is the 6th house and is
occupied by the 10th lord Venus, exalted Yogakaraka Mars,
Moon and Rahu shifting emphasis to callings coming under this
sign.
Aquarius: Natives with Aquarius strong in the chart are
usually advisers of some sort technical, legal, social or just
friendly. All innovative and unusual callings come under this sign.
Workers in electricity, atomic power, computer technology,
automobile and aeroplane mechanics and television technology
come under Aquarius. Such natives are ingenious and becomes
inventors if Mercury is strong. They make good astrologers,
telepathists and hypnotists. Neurologists, X-ray workers and
dealers in medical appliance come under this sign. They can
also succeed in nature-cure therapy. Saturn strong makes
engineers and scientists. Aquarius strong produces great
philosophers also.
Mark the concentration of 3 planets—the Sun, Mercury and
Jupiter in Aquarius-a philosophical sign all in the 10th or
Karmasthana from Lagna in Chart No. 129. The native was a
real philosopher and Karmayogi. This combination of plansts
also made the native an authority not only on astrology but also
in Indian sciences and history as well.
Pisces: Doctors, surgeons, nurses, monks, jailors and
prison-workers, sanatorium workers, convent-runners come

276 How to Judge a Horoscope
under this sign. Work requiring imagination suits such natives.
Film-making, script-writing, Composing, choreography, social
work, work in orphanages, museum, library, club and similar
bodies and group activity comes easily to natives with strong
Pisces. They make good musicians, inspired poets and occult
writers, travel agents, petrol and oil-dealers, sea-produce
dealers, owners of amusement centres, anaesthetists, coast
guards, private investigators and spirit mediums. Venus strong
produces painters and actors.
Chart No. 129. Born 12-2-1856 atabout 2-21 p.m
| Lagna
| | | tagna | Sat. \ , Rah
| Rahu į ' Jupiter |
PEDE ANIR.) : |||. i Sa kee
Sun
| Mercury |i |
Jupiter j i |
SS PASI j— laan NAVAMSA
j NH-29 j |
mae seams, Sail ana nee ecko Ws -
Sun
Mars | j j | Se
Verus | l Merc. | Ketu ; Moon
F | Ve snus
as
Ketu |
t | i
Mars |
Balance of Venus Dasa at birth : 12 years, rs, 3 months and 9
days.
The Lagna lord Moon in Chart No. 130 is in the 9th in
Pisces in exact conjunction with Jupiter. Rahu (Vargottama) is
also in Pisces aspected by Saturn. Pisces becomes the focal
point of powerful planetary influences. The native was a man of
various gifts - a great Sanskrit scholar, a powerful writer and
poet and a suong, subtle lucid thinker.

Concerning the Tenth
House
Chart No. 130.—Born 23-7-1856 at 6-24 a m. (LM.T.) at 18
Meon | j Merc \
Jupiter | = Mercury |
Se
Rabu f |
i t
| | Lagna |
| Sun |
Venus
RASI a NAVAMSA | ———
| | Sun
Ketu Mars Venus i
Mars 3
| | Jupit |
Balance of Mercury's Dasa at biith: 13 years, 8 months and
14 days.
In addition the planets also signify a variety of professions,
The Sun indicates those in authority, rulers, dignitaries,
government, goldsmiths, jewellers, finaciers, occupations
involving children, circus-trainers, theatre-owners and
managers. The Moon governs travelling and all travelling
requisites, sailors, nurses, liquor dealers, laundry-owners,
gardeners, confectioners and bakers, house-keepers, dairyowners, obstetricians, healing, plastics, catering, eating places
and waiters. Mars signifies firemen, metallurgists, armamentfactories, machine tools, soldiers, police, surgeons, dentists,
barbers, cooks, hardware goods, locksmiths, boxers, butchers,
chemists and druggists. Mercury rules documentation and
recording and all jobs connected with such work, teaching,
writing, clerks, accountants, book-keepers, postal men, bus
drivers and train employees, architects, correspondents,
stenographers, interpre-

278 How to Judge a Horoscope
ters, messengers, reporters, radio and other communication media,
stationeries, printing and telephone operators. Jupiter rules
counsellors, lawyers, lecturers, publishers, writers, astrologers,
travel-agents, priests and temple trustees and officials, cashiers,
philosophers, literateurs, grocers and tobacconists. Venus refers
to poets, artists, cinema artistes, dancers, singers, musicians,
instrumentalists, hat and dress dealers and makers, silks and
expensive textiles, perfumeries, cosmeticians, beauticians,
enterlainers of all kinds, dealers in furnishings, furniture-makers,
coffee planters, tea estate owners, fancy articles, ladies’ articles,
objects of art and fashion, social secretaries, photography,
engravers, cartoonists, flower sellers and embroiderers. Saturn
indicates miners, coal and fuel of every kind, petrol, real estate
business, craftsmen, plumbers, architects, cemetery, excavators,
building contractors and masons, leather goods, hides, icemaking, time-pieces, coffin and tomb makers, farm and factory
labour, watchmen, undertakers, priests, monks, nuns,
renunciates and philosophers.
According to Jaimini, the planet that gets the largest number
of degrees in a sign as his longitude becomes the Atmakaraka.
The sign in which the Atmakaraka is situated in the Navamsa
becomes what is called Karakamsa, a very important point in the
horoscope. If the Sun is associated with Atmakaraka either in the
Rasi or in the Navamsa, the native becomes a statesman or
diplomat.
If the Sun as Atmakaraka is aspected by Jupiter, the native will
be employed in a temple. If by Saturn, he will engage himself in
vile occupation. If the Sun is aspected by Rahu, he will work for
foreign concerns or foreign rulers. If with Venus, he will bo
engaged to serve outstanding women as companion, secretary
or attendant. Ifthe Sun is associated

Concerning the Tenth House 279
with Mars, he will head the local or district body. If with
Mercury, he will be employed in the judiciary.
The Full Moon or Venus with Atmakaraka in Rasi or
Navamsa makes one a journalist, writer, poet or a dramatist. If
the Sun and Rahu join Karakamsa aspected by benefics, the
native deals in ‘poisonous medicines’ implying a chemist,
druggist, anaesthesian, etc. Electric, mechanical and allied jobs
would come under Mars being in Karakamsa. Jupiter here would
indicate avocations related to religious learning, priesthood,
Spirituality, etc.
Other Important Combinations
The 10th house rules Karma. It is not possible to find an
English equivalent for this term but broadly interpreted Karma
means what the native does in his life. The most important
aspect of a person's existence is his activities and whether
mundane or spiritual come under a study of the 10th house.
Sanyasa Yogas are also signficant for in this case the native
occupies himself or makes it his life's goal to seek the Divinity in
and around him.
Below we give some combinations that comprehend the
significations of the 10th house.
Jupiter, Mercury, the Sun and Saturn afficted in the 10th
house prompt a person to indulge in vice. The afflicted Moon
here makes the native a gambler and violent in disposition. If the
10th lord exalted but occupying the 6th, 8th or 12th house will
never let the native finish any good work he undertakes. If the
9th or 10th houses are occupied by benefic planets and their
lords and Jupiter are well-placed, the native will be a noble man
of excellent deeds in conformity with customs and morality. If the
planets in the 5th and the 10th houses and the lords of the
Lagna, the 9th and 10th houses

280 How to Judge a Horoscope
are strong in shadbala, the native will be very learned in the
scriptures and Vedas. He will have intuitive knowledge as a
result of initiation.
Three strong planets in the 10th house in own sign,
exaltation or benefic vargas and the 10th lord also fortified make
the native an ascetic. But if the 10th lord be weak and in the 7th
house, the native will be of evil conduct. If the 2nd and 7th lords
be two of the planets in the 10th house, the native will be lustful.
Five planets including the 10th lord in a quadrant or trine give
birth to a saint of great spirituality who will be a jeevanmukta.
Four planets in the 10th house make one a renunciate. If the
Sun be one of the planets in these two cases and causes
combustion, the native though pious and spiritually inclined will
not renounce the world.
If the Moon occupies a decanate of Saturn and is also
aspec-ted by Saturn or if the Moon is in the Navamsa of Saturn
or Mars aspected by Saturn, the native leads a life of dispassion
and renounces the world. If the Lagna lord is weak and free of
planetary aspects but himself aspects Saturn, or if Saturn
aspects the weak Lagna lord, then also the native will be a
Sanyasi. If Saturn or the Lagna lord aspect the lord of the sign
occupied by the Moon, the native becomes a member of a
religious order. If the Moon is in a s'gn of Mars aspected by
Saturn and in a decanate of Saturn, the yoga leads to
asceticism.
If the Moon is in the 9th house free of aspects, the native
becomes an ascetic The presence of Rajayogas in the chart will
not hinder the yoga for asceticism. If Aries, Scorpio, Aquarius,
Capricorn, Pisces or Sagittarius be the Ascendant and Jupiter
occupies the 9th house, the native becomes a holy man.

Concerning the Tenth House 281
When all the four quadrants are occupied by benefics, the
native is endowed with a very powerful intellect. He will possess
many qualities of head and heart and earn oustanding fame,
immense wealth and earn recognition. If the kendras are all
occupied by malefics, the result is notoriety. Such natives resort
to crime and hypocrisy, suffer poverty, possess women
belonging to others, indulge in harmful occult rites and become
dangerous to society Benefics in the 10th from the Ascendant or
the Moon make the native noble-minded while malefics make
him addicted to evil deeds.
Then, there are special yogas. They do not indicate the
nature of career a native is likely to take up but their presence
enhances the degree of success in profession. More yogas in
one chart indicate outstanding success, fame and distinction in
life.
Sun |
Ketu Lagna Jupit. | Lagna |
[Merc & |
Mars Rahu | |
Se RASI E: — NAVAMSA canoe’
| | Venus |
| Moon | | Mars K
t
Baten es RP. 18/109 Sa
Eana a. = =
} nus | Rahu | |
| Mercury | Jupiter | Moon | Saturn
| Sun | Sat | |
Á
Balance of Venus Dasa at birth: 3 years, 7 months and 6
days.

282 How to Judge a Horoscope
For details about such yogas and their interpretation,
reference may be made to our book Three Hundred Important
Combinations.
Actor : Chart No. 131 is of an actor who has been acclaimed
as unparalleled in tragic roles. Lagna being Taurus, a Venusian
sign, and the combination of versatile Mercury, talented Venus
and the royal Sun aspecting Lagna have given the native acting
histrionics. The aspect of Saturn on Venus is also responsible for
his success as a cinema star. Lagna lord Venus aspecting the
Lagna, Yogakaraka Saturn Vargottama in the 5th, the SasiMangala Yoga in the 10th house, the Sankha Yoga caused by
5th lord Mercury, and 6th lord Venus in a kendra and the
combination of the Sun and Mercury (kendra and kona lords) in
a powerful kendra have resulted in an excellent Raja Yoga for
fame, money and success. Mercury is
Lagna Mars
Sun
Mercury Lagna Ketu mi
Venus Saturn oon
RASI —=— NAVAMSA a
Rah
Jupiter Merc. j g Venus
Jupiter
Balance of Jupiter's Dasa at birth : 6 years, 8 months and
5 days.

Concerning the Tenth House 283
the Atmakaraka and has given great skill in dramatics and voice
modulation. His occupation of Pisces, an emotional sign, has
given a flair for expressive acting.
Actress: The sign Pisces in Chart No. 132 is powerfully
placed. Lagna is Vargottama with exalted Venus and neechabhanga Mercury and is aspected by Saturn. The powerful
position of Venus has given success in Hollywood as a popular
actress. The influence of Saturn gives a considerable fanfollowing. The 10th lord Jupiter is in Libra, a venusian sign
indicative of a career in the show-world.
Chart No. 133. Born 11-1-1894 at 4-55 p.m. (L.M.T.) at 13
i Moon
Jupiter {Lagna
Lagna
Rahu
RAS! —_ NAVAMSA bora
Jupit,
Sun Ketu
AP-111/4 Venus
| { Mars
Mercury | Mars | Saturn | Ketu Mercury
| Satum |
Balance of Rahu Dasa at birth: 1year, 7 months and
21 days.
Archak (Temple Priest) : The 10th house is Pisces, a
spiritual sign, occupied by Rahu in Chart No. 133. The 10th lord
Jupiter is in Taurus aspected by Mars. In Navamsa, the 10th
lord Jupiter occupies Capricorn with the Sun and Venus
aspected by Saturn. The 10th lord inthe 12th signifies a

284 How to Judge a Horoscope
vocation connected with religion and rituals. The native is a
priest in a temple. Aquarius is the strongest sign being occupied
by the Moon and Venus and aspected by Mars. Aquarius is a
philosophical sign which trait is brought out by its occupation of
the 5th lord. Mars, the planet of action, aspects it which means,
philosophy in ritual would be the native's calling.
Chart No. 134.-Born 8-2-1857 at 8-30 a.m. (L.M.T.) at 42 N
Rahu Í |
Jupiter a ? |
Venus Sat. Sat. | Mercury
Lagna
Mars Moon | | Moon
RASI SS | NAVAMSA
Sun
Mercur
e i a |} ee EE
Rahu
Ket i Venus
Jupit |
Balance of Mercury's Dasa at birth : 7 years, 3 months and
20 days.
Astrologer: The 10th house in Chart No. 134 is aspected by
Saturn The 10th lord Jupiter occupies his own sign Pisces with
exalted Venus and Rahu. The Moon is in Cancer, in the 5th
house, a spiritual and inspirational sign. The native of Chart No.
134 was a noted astrologer. Pisces, the sign of intuition, is
powerfully placed and houses the 10th lord and Ascendant
signifying the astrological potential of the native. The 2nd lord
Mars is in the 12th house which is notvery good

Concerning the Tenth House 285
for predictions but Jupiter's occupation of his own Navamsa with
Rahu enabled the native to produce many valuable books on
the subject. Further Jupiter and Venus form 2 of the PanchaMahapurusha Yogas—Hamsa and Malavya.
Chart No. 135.-Born 31-1-1887at 11-1 p.m. (G.M.T.) at 50 N
Mercur
Moon Sal, Saturn Y
Rahu
Venus
Ketu Jupit. Sun
Mars
RASI | [aa NAVAMSA
Sun Lagna
Mercury Rahu sas n
Ketu
Jupiter [Lagna Venus
Mars
Balance of Venus Dasa at birth: 15 years, O month and 27
days.
Astrologer: Chart No. 135 also belongs to an astrologer who
wrote many books on Western astrology. The 10th and 5th
lords. Mercury and Saturn respectively, are in parivartana. The
10th house is aspected by Jupiter from the 2nd house. The 5th
lord in the 10th gives intuitive and psychic abilities while
Jupiter's presence in the 2nd house is important for giving
correct predictions. Jupiter's aspect on the 10th house and the
10th lord Mercury in his own Navamsa made him a prolific writer
in his subject.
Banker : In Chart No. 136, the 10th house is Aries with no
planets in it. The 10th lord Mars aspects the 10th from a

286 How to Judge a Horoscope
mercurial sign and is with exalted Mercury. The 10th house is
also aspected by Jupiter, the 5th lord and Dhanakaraka, who
associates very closely with the 2nd lord Sun. The native is a
rich and prosperous banker consistent with the influences of
Mercury (money transactions) and Jupiter (from the 2nd house)
on the 10th house.
Mercury
Mars
erat RAS! NAVAMSA F
Rahu Saturn
Satum Ketu
Balance of Mercury's Dasa at birth: 11 years and9
months.
Body-Builder: Chart No. 137 is that of a body-builder of
international renown. Note the predominant influence of Mars
both on Lagna and Lagna lord. Saturn, the Lagna lord, occupies
a martian sign Scorpio with Venus which gives unusual interest
in one's physique and its development. Mars, the karaka for all
physical fitness, aspects the Lagna. He is debilitated but gets
neechabhanga. Jupiter in the 10th made the native an
acknowledged authority on physical fitness and bodybuilding
techniques. He has his own gymnasium in which he

Concerning the Tenth House 287
Chart No. 137.—Born 11-1-1899 at 8 a.m. (Madras Time) at
[| tt
ores RASI i | je NAVAMSA —- —
Lagna
E E PES fe ee
un
Moon Venus X Venus Moon
Jupiter Mars
Mercury | Saturn zii Sun Rahy
Rahu |
Balance of Venus Dasa at birth : 13 years, 3 months and 0
days.
Chart No. 138.—Born 8-7-1929 at 6-30 a.m. (I.S.T.) at 11 N
Venus |Merc. Saturn
Rahu a s Venus Jupiter
Jupitar un Sdi
Lagna
Moon
— RASI ar a NAVAMSA
Mars
Moon
Saturn Ketu Rahu
Mercury
Balance of Saturn's Dasa at birth : 8 years, 6 months and 1
day.

288 How to Judge a Horoscope
trains students. Jupiter in the 10th in Libra, therefore, made him
a teacher as well as coach (adviser) to many.
Chemicals : The native of Chart No. 138 is an employee in
a firm of chemicals. Cancer, the Ascendant, is occupied by the
Moon. Rahu ruling potions, poisons and chemicals is in the 10th.
This further indicated by 10th lord Mars in Leo which sign also
refers to callings connected with chemicals. Rahu is also the
Atmakaraka and signifies work related to chemicals and drugs.
Chart No. 139.- Born 30-12-1907 at 9-55 p.m. (L.M.T.) at
Mars | | Mercury
Saturn | Rahu || Moon [ Rake Venus
ieee eel ene | ee |
. Mars
Jupit, Saturn
in RAS! a Pa NAVAMSA —_-—
Venus Lagna | |Jupit. Lagna
Sun
i Mercury Moon Ketu Sua
} Ketu
Balance of Rahu Dasa at birth: 0 year, 3 months and 7
days.
Chief Justice : Chart No. 139 is that of a very brilliant jurist
who began his career as a lawyer, and came to occupy the
highest judicial office in the State. The 10th house is Taurus
aspected by Saturn. The 10th lord Venus is in the 6th house
ruling the judiciary aspected by exalted Jupiter The 10th house
from the Moon is aspected by Moon-sign lord

Concerning the Tenth House 289
Venus and occupied by exalted Jupiter. The chart gains strength
from the Lagna which is Vargottama. The Vipareeta Rajayoga in
both Rasi and Navamsa adds further vitality. In Rasi, the 6th lord
Saturn is in the 8th house, the 8th lord Jupiter is in the 12th
house and the 12th lord the Moon is in the 3rd house. In
Navamsa, the 6th lord Saturn is in the 12th house, the 12th lord
Moon is in the 8th house and the 8th lord Jupiter is in the 6th
house.
Chart No. 140.— Born 24-2-1911 at 7-44 a.m. (L.M.T.) at
Legna | Saturn | H || | |
y Ketu Jupiter
enus Rahu |
-SUA en ea ie ees lee
Sun | | Saturn
= FONS RASI a | j NAVAMSA
| { |} Venus
Mercury ' | Sun Moon
RP-18/104 ! l| | Mercury
Moon | Jupiter | | | Me h |
Mare | | Ketu | f | von j chu Lagna
3aiance of Venus Dasa at birth: 17 years, 4 months and
16 days.
Craft and Woodworks’ Dealer : In Chart No. 140 the Lagna
is occupied by exalted Venus which gives skill in fine arts. The
10th house is occupied by the Moon and Mars who as 5th, 2nd
and 9th lord give financial success. The 10th lord Jupiter is in
Libra (ruled by Venus) aspected by Saturn indicating a business
in craft. Mars in the 10th indicates woodwork. The native of
Chart No. 140 is a dealer in woodwork craft.

290 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 141.—Born 4-8-1911 at4-19p.m. (L.M.T)
at13N, 77E
Rahu
Satum
Mars
= RASI — NAVAMSA
Rahu
Merc, Marcury
La Jupiter
gna Moon Venus Lagna
Ketu
Balance of Mercury's Dasa at birth: 16 years, 7 months
and 5 days.
Chart No. 142.—Born 31-5-1918 at 12-22 p.m. (I.S.T.) at
Sun
Mercury ; Ketu Rahu Venus Sun
Venus f Jupiter
Sat, Moon
RASI ———| | — NAVAMSA
Moon pra
ars
a Sat Mercury Ketu Jupiter
Mars Lagna
Balance of the Moon's Dasa at birth: O year, 1 month
and 28 days.

Concerning the Tenth House 291
Coffee Merchant: In Chart No. 141 the 10th house Virgo is
occupied by the 6th and 11th lord Venus. The 10th lord Mercury
is in the 9th house in a constellation ruled by Venus. Venus
governs all stimulants and occupies Virgo, an earthy sign. The
native is a coffee merchant.
Captain (Army) : Chart No. 142 has a powerfully placed
Aries being occupied by Mercury and Venus and aspected by
Saturn. The Lagna is a fiery and royal sign Leo with Mars in it.
Mars is the planet of war and the Lagna lord Sun who rules
authority and power is in the 10th house. The native is a Captain
in the Army.
Chart No. 143.-Born 18-9-1940 at 7-23p.m. (I.S.T.) at 8 N
A Jupiter
oan Satutn Mercury
Ketu
Rahu
En RASI NAVAMSA
GIV-286
Jupiter | Satum
Balance of Mercury's Dasa at birth : 6 years, O month
and 28 days.
Cardiologist: In Chart No. 143 Pisces, being the Ascendant,
gives a natural skill in healing and nursing. The Moon, 5th lord,
is in Lagna. The 10th house is aspected by the 10th lord Jupiter
who occupies Scorpio Navamsa ruled by Mars.

292 How to Judge a Horoscope
Mars refers to doctors, healers, surgeons, chemists and
druggists. The combination of the Sun and Rahu is especially
indicative of a medical career. The native is a cardiologist,
cardiology being ruled by the Sun. The Sun placed strongly with
an exalted Mercury gives an intelligent and research-oriented
approach to his work in heart-surgery.
Chart No. 144.-Born 16-3-1882 at 9-30 pm. (L.M.T.) at 32 N
Sun Saturn | SePites | Mars | ]Lagna | Ketu | | j
Venus Ketu l | |
Mercury | i Mars | |
RAS! i Eaa = NAVAMSA i——-—
Moon | Jupit. | nee
Q
——— mmm. ar r Ks ee. -e :
Vonus
Rahu Lagia | p pierce. Rahu Saturn
Balance of Mars Dasa at birth : 5 years, 10 months and 26
days.
Chief Medical Officer: In Chart No. 144 the 10th house
Cancer is aspected by its lord the Moon. The 10th lord Moon is
in Capricorn aspected by Mars and Saturn. The native retired as
the State Inspector-General of Civil Hospitals. The relationship
between the 10th house, Cancer, the Moon and Mars explains
the native's medical profession. The 10th lord Moon in a kendra
influenced by 3 planets gave him a post of authority.

Concerning the Tenth House 293
Venus
Moon | Jupit, | |Jupit. Mercury
Sun
Saturn |
Rahu || Ketu Saturn
RASI O | NAVAMSA
Venus
Lagna | Sun Lagna
Mars | Mars Moon
Balance of Saturn's Dasa at birth: 5 years, O month and 13
days.
Cloth Merchant: In Chart No. 145 the 10th house is
aspected by exalted Venus, the Moon and Saturn. Consistent
with the aspect of a powerful 11th lord Venus, the native is a
prosperous businessman in textiles and garments. The
association of the Moon, Venus and Saturn gives skill in dying,
textiles and allied trades.
Dancer : In Chart No. 146 the Lagna is Gemini aspected by
the Sun, Mars and Jupiter, the 10th house is occupied by Rahu
and aspected by the Moon and Mars. Saturn and Venus are in
parivartana. The native is a dancer. This is indicated by the
Saturn-Venus relationship. Rahu in the 10th does not give a
conventional calling. Pisces dominant rules the feet and
Sagittarius occupied by 10th lord rules the legs referring to a
career closely related to footwork such as dancing.

294 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 146.- Born 31-12-1912 at 4-44 p.m. (L.M.T ) at
Satum |Lagna f] Sat Mars Ketu | Jupiter
Mere.
RASI — | | NAVAMSA
Moon
Sun
Moon Lagna
Mars Mercury Ketu Reha Vanus Sua
Jupiter
Balance of Mars Dasa at birth : 5 years, 4 months and 26
days.
Chart No. 147.—Born 11-8-1921 at 8-18 p.m. (IST.) at 13
Sun
Ketu Venus | |M oon Lagna
Ketu
| Sun
Lagna Mars | [Venus
Merc
RAS! — NAVAMSA —
Jupit. Sat
i Sat.
Moon Jupit.| Mars Rahu
Rahu Mercury
Balance of Rahu's Dasa at birth: 1 year, 2 months and
17 days.

Concerning the Tenth House 295
Dancer: Chart No. 147 is also that of a dancer. Note the
connection between Venus and Saturn which gives skill in art
that is easily appealing to the masses. The 10th house is
aspected by Saturn and the 10th lord Mars is with the 7th lord
the Sun and Mercury. The native learnt dancing from her
husband (10th lord with 7th lord) and pursued it as a career
along with him.
Chart No. 148.-Born 7/8-8-1894 at 5-30 a.m. (L.M.T) at 13
Rahu Mars | Jupit Moon! Ketu oe
Venus Venus
Sun
Lagna!) Sun
Merc
re meni RASI —m| |- NAVAMSA
Mercury
Sat J upit.
Moon ; Rahu Saturn
Ketu |} |Lagna
boss ee ee en
Balance of Rahu's Dasa at birth : Oyear,5 months and 4
days.
Superintendent of Police : In Chart No. 148 the Lagna being
Cancer the 10th is the positive and fiery sign, Aries. It is
occupied by Mars, an aggressive planet who also happens to be
the 10th lord. The Lagna lord Moon aspects the 10th house and
the 10th lord and, in turn, is aspected by Mars giving a strong,
bold and spirited personality which is also firm and stable as
indicated by the presence of the Lagna lord

296 How to Judge a Horoscope
in the sign of the balance. The native was a high ranking police
officer.
Chart No. 149.—Born 5/6-10-1942 at 1-00 a.m. (W.T.) at
Venus
Mercury | Mars
Sun
Mercury |
j j t i
| Moon | j
| Saturn j|Lagne TASR | Lagna
5 | Sun
Jupit | Mars
mn Moon | gens
RASI ——| NAVAMSA in
j Í j
| | Rahu || Ketu | |
Balance of Mercury's Dasa at birth: 3 years, 8 months
and 3 days.
Superintendent of Police : In Chart No. 149 the 10th house
is Pisces fortified by the aspects of an exalted 10th lord Jupiter
from the 2nd house (with the 2nd lord Moon) and the 6th and 11
th iord Mars, 3rd lord Sun and 5th and 12th lord Venus. The
influence of 4 planets on the 10th house is of significance
especially that the 10th lord Jupiter is exalted and in vargottama
position. The native is a dynamic police officer. Although Jupiter
aspects the 10th, the aspects of Mars and the Sun are stronger,
being to the exact degree of the 10th cusp, and determines the
nature of work. The native occupies an enviable position in the
hierarchy of the police force much in advance of many seniors in
age. In Navamsa, the 10th lord Jupiter is exalted and is
associated with Mars. Jupiter's

Concerning the Tenth House 297
aspect has given a smooth-sailing career with lots of luck, while
Mars has been responsible for deciding the nature of career.
Jupiter, though in the 2nd, moves into Lagna Bhava and his
aspect on the 10th is therefore not total. Mars on the other hand
occupies 20° 21' of Virgo while Lagna being 21° 53' of Gemini,
the aspect is very strong taking the lead over the other
influences.
Compare Chart No. 148 with Chart No. 149. The native of
Chart No. 148 retired as a Superintendent starting his career as
a police constable while the native of Chart No. 149 who has
been but a few years in office has already reached the rank of
Superintendent having thorough sheer merit.
In Chart No. 149, the 10th lord Jupiter is exalted and
aspects the 10th house and is in turn aspected by the 9th lord
Saturn. In Chart No. 148, the 10th lord Mars occupies his
moolatrikona sign aspected by the Lagna lord Moon. In Chart
No. 149, the Lagna lord Mercury is Vargottama in a trine in Libra
while in Chart No. 148, the Lagna lord Moon occupies a kendra
in Libra. Both charts have 4 planets in kendras. Chart No. 149, in
addition, has 5th lord Venus in a kendra with neechabhanga.
Chart No. 149 has the 9th and 10th lords related generating a
powerful Raja Yoga while Chart No. 148 has no such yoga
between the 9th and 10th lords. Mars Dasa yet to operate should
see him occupy a very high position.
Director—Department of Geology: In Chart No. 150 the 10th
house Aquarius is aspected by its lord Saturn from Leo. Saturn
is also the 9th lord and his aspect gives a position of authority.
The native was the director of the State geological department.
Leo, the sign occupied by the 10th lord, rules hills and dales.
The sign Capricorn also acquires importance being occupied by
a powerful Vargottama Lagna lord Venus,

298 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 150.—Born 7-12-1888 at about 5-30 p.m. (L.M
Moon
Mars
Legna
Saturn
Rahu Rahu
ee] | NAVAMSA
Jupiter |
Mercury
Balance of Moon's Dasa at birth: 5 years, O month and 5
days.
Chart No. 151 .—Born 6-8-1906 at 12-38 p.m. (L.M.T.) at
Jien Mercury t
upi na
k Satuin g
Rahu
Moon
Sat Mars ee Ketu
um Sun enus
ts RASI —— NAVAMSA
Jupit
Ketu Mere. || Sun
RP-23/6 Rahu
Lagna [Venus Mare |
Balance of Rahu's Dasa at birth: 6 years, 11 months and 8
days.

Concerning the Tenth House 299
the Moon and exalted Mars together with Ketu. Mars is the ruler
of rocks, minerals and occupies an earthy sign which influences
the 10th house signification indirectly since Mars aspects the
10th lord Saturn.
Doctor: Cancer, the sign of healing and nursing rises on the
10th house in Chart No. 151. It is occupied by Mars, the Sun
and Rahu and flanked on both sides by Jupiter and Mercury,
both benefics. The native was an eminent medical doctor with
an international reputation. The Sun-Rahu conjunction in the
appropriate signs, invariably produces outstanding medical men.
The subhakartari yoga, to which the 10th house is subject, is
also of significance ensuring a distinguished and successful
career.
Chart No. 152.—Born 23-5-1932 at 5-24 p.m. (IST.) at 18 N
u
Rahu Mercury Sun {Venus ae Sun
Mars Venus| Saturn
Jupit Jupit Rahu
— RASI mil | NAVAMSA
Saturn Ketu
Mars
Moon Lagna | Ketu Moon
Mercury
Balance of Venus Dasa at birth: 1 year, 6 months and
18 days.
Doctor: The 10th house in Chart No. 152 is Cancer
occupied by an exalted 6th lord Jupiter aspected by a power-

300 How to Judge a Horoscope
ful Mars. The native of Chart No. 152 is a doctor. The 10th house
is aspected by Saturn from his own sign. Three planets in
quadrants in their own and exaltation signs have given the native
eminence and fame in his careerMerc, | Saturn Ketu
RAS?
— NAVAMSA
ed
Satura Rahu Lagna
Balance of Mars Dasa at birth: 6 years, 2 months and 20
days.
Doctor : The Lagna Cancer is occupied by exalted Jupiter,
Venus and the Sun. The 10th lord Mars occupies his own sign
Aries, a fiery sign, and from there aspects Cancer and the
planetary group in Lagna. The emphasis shifts to Cancer and
being the natural sign, ruling nursing, makes the native a skilled
doctor.
Editor: Chart No. 154 is that of an editor of a newspaper of
wide circulation. The Ascendant is Scorpio aspected by Mercury,
the karaka for intellect, and exalted 2nd and 5th lord Jupiter. As
2nd lord, Jupiter in exaltation gives inspired expressive powers
while as 5th lord gives lucidity and clarity

Concerning the Tenth House 301
of thought. The 10th lord the Sun occupies a mercurial sign in a
martian constellation which made the native a dynamic and
forceful newspaperman. The Atmakaraka is Mercury and
occupies Leo, a powerful and fiery sign which tended to
influence his editorials which were sharp and impactful. Contrast
this with Chart No. 131. Both have Mercury as atmakaraka but
in this case the influence of Mercury and Jupiter on Scorpio as
ascendant gave rise to a writer while in the other, venusian sign
and Venus influencing the ascendant resulted in a_ highly
talented cinema actor.
| Sun Moon Mars
Mars | Marcu
eee Venus Satun | Ketu
a oo a
Rahu Jupit.
Hol MASI oa NAVAMSA
eae Mercury
un
Moon | tagna | Sat A ean
g ature Venue ahu
eee tt
Balance of Ketu Dasa at birth: 5 years, 10 months and 14
days.
In Chart No. 154, Mercury is aspected by Jupiter in
Navamsa. Jupiter and Venus in the 5th from karaka gave prolific
writing abilities. The Rasi Chart has 2 planets in exaltation and
Mars, Lagna lord, in his moolatrikona sign rendering the chart
highly potent.

302 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 155.—Born 29-4-1948 at 9-48 a.m. (I.S.T.) at 12
Sun
Legna Mars ;
Mercury Venus Jupiter
Rahu Eny Ketu
7 Sat. H Sat
Ss RASI ai NAVAMSA — |-—-m—
Mars ||Lagna
G,IN-106
os | ne
Moon Venus Sun
Jupiter | Ketu T Moon Rahu | Mercury
Balance of Venus Dasa at birth : 2 years, 10 months and
6 days.
Engineer: In Chart No. 155 the 10th lord Jupiter aspects the
Ascendant Gemini powerfully with the Moon. Venus, a benefic,
occupies Lagna. The Ascendant Gemini is a basically thinking
sign and made powerful by the influence of 3 planets. Lagna lord
Mercury is involved strong Budha-Aditya Yoga in Aries, a sign
ruled by Saturn from Cancer. The native consistent with the
Lagna and strength of Mercury, is an engineer. The Sun-RahuMercury conjunction occurs in a fiery sign and gives mechanical
skills while Saturn's aspect could also give skill in building and
similar areas of work. Saturn although in Cancer is in a mercurial
constellation. Cancer is the sign of the home, house and
Mercury's asterism involved gives a flair for building-engineering
or civil engineering. In Chart No. 152, Saturn aspects Virgo from
a constellation of Jupiter who in turn is influenced by Mars giving
doctoring abilities. In Chart

Concerning the Tenth House 303
No. 155, karaka Sun occupies a mercurial sign with exalted
Mercury. The 10th lord Jupiter is also in a Navamsa ruled by
Mercury which planet would give a broad clue to the nature of
native's work, viz, engineering.
Chart No. 156.- Born 8/9-7-1953 at Oh. 03m. a.m. (l.S.
Moon
‘ Sun
Jupiler Venus| Rehu
Mars
Venus Mare
Merc
Ketu Jupiter
RASI |j] NAVAMSA
[tagna
Monn
sat. | Mercury Ketu Saturn
Balance of Mars Dasa at birth: 5 years, 2 months and 14
days.
Engineer : The 10th house in Chart No. 156 is Sagittarius
aspected by 6th lord Sun and 2nd and 9th lord Mars from a
mercurial sign. The 10th lord Jupiter is with the Moon and
Venus. Although there are no planets in the 10th house, there
are planets aspecting it which must be taken into account for
judging the nature of career. The native is an engineer. Mars and
the Sun are in a sign of Mercury and are, in turn, aspected by
Saturn. Saturn rules building contracts. Mars, earth, buildings
and with the Sun indicates a career in engineering with contracts
for civil construction from the Government. The 10th house
from the Moon is not

304 How to Judge a Horoscope
occupied or aspected by any planet but the 10th lord Saturn
occupies a mercurial sign Virgo again indicative of engineering.
Chart No. 157.—Born 10/11-2-1910 at 5-59 a.m. (I.S.T.) at
Saturn | Mars Rahu Sat. | Rahu | Lagna |
Venus
Sun Merc. Jupiter
Moon
RSA ——||-—] NAVAMSA
Lagna
Mercury Moon |
Sun |
Katu Jupit Venus Mars
l Ketu
Balance of Rahu's Dasa at birth : 9 years, 1 month and 2
days.
Film Studio Owner: Chart No. 1 57 belongs to a prosperous
businessman. Libra, the sign of the balance, rises on the 10th
cusp aspected by a powerful 11th and 4th lord Mars. The 10th
lord Venus is in the 2nd house with the 7th and 8th lords, the
Moon and the Sun respectively. The native owns a cinema
studio which he rents out for very large sums to film-shooting
units. Mars, the planet aspecting the 10th house, is the karaka
for immovable property placed in the 4th house, ruling buildings
and similar structures. Mars occupies Bharani ruled by Venus
the 10th lord. Venus and Libra are rulers of amusement centres,
drama, entertainment and the show-world in general which
describe the general nature of property rented

Concerning the Tenth House 305
out by the native. In Navamsa, the 10th lord Venus occupies
his own sign.
Chart No. 158.—Born 2-2-1942 at 6-54 p.m. (I.S.T.) at 18
Jupiter Moon r
M Lagna Jupiter
Saturn $ Ketu
Ketu Lagna Sun
Mercury Yenus
RASI em NAVAMSA
Venus Moon esi
at.
Sun Rahu
Mercury Mars
Rahu
Balance of Ketu Dasa at birth: 4 years, 1 month and
20 days.
Flight Lieutenant: The Lagna in Chart No. 158 being
Cancer, the 10th house is in the sign of Aries which stands
for aggressiveness and militancy. The 10th lord Mars occupies
his own sign in great strength. The native is a flight lieutenant
in the Air Force. Mars occupies a constellation ruled by Venus
who is with the Sun indicating service under the ‘king’ or the
country's forces in modern parlance.
Compare Chart No. 158 with Chart No. 160. Both natives
work in the armed forces but the difference is in rank. In Chart
No. 158, the 10th lord Mars forms a powerful Ruchaka Yoga in
the 10th house, the most powerful quadrant. In Chart No. 160
the 10th lord Mercury occupies 3rd house in a friendly sign, the
lord thereof being placed in the 12th, a dusthana explaining the
native's relatively low cadre.

306 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 159.-Born 13-1-1919 at 10-49p.m. (L.M.T) at 17
Satum | Mercury
Venus Ketu
—— NAVAMSA ae
Mars
Sun
Venus RP-42/187
Moon
Mars
Mercury | Rahu Rahu
Balance of Mars Dasa at birth : 4 years, 11 months and 10
days.
Governor (of State) : In Chart No. 159, the 10th house is
occupied by Jupiter who has exchanged signs with the 10th lord
Mercury. The Moon is exalted and the Sun is vargottama. The
3rd and 8th lord Mars is exalted in the 6th house while the 6th
lord Saturn is in the 12th house generating a partial Vipareeta
Raja Yoga. The 10th lord Mercury is in his own Navamsa while
the 10th occupant Jupiter occupies own Navamsa. Mercury in
the 8th from the Moon generates a partial Adhi Yoga. All the
factors strengthen the chart greatly to confer high political offices
on the native. He is now Chief Minister of a big state.
Group Subedar (Army) : The Lagna in Chart No. 160 is a
fiery warrior sign Sagittarius with Mars and Venus in it. The
Lagna lord Jupiter is in the 4th house aspected by Mars. Jupiter
aspects the 10th house. The martian influence on

Concerning the Tenth House 307
Jupiter Rahu Lagna
Sat.
Moon Ketu
RASI — _||—| NAVAMSA 2a
Sun
Sun Merc, Rahu
Venus Ketu Mars
Mars Saturn Jupiter Venus
Lagna Moon
Balance of Saturn's Dasa at birth : 7 years, 2 months and 19
days.
Lagna and Lagna lord who is directly aspecting the 10th house
must perforce give a fighting-spirit and a warrior's career. The
native is in the armed forces. The 10th house from the Moon is
again a militant sign Aries. The 10th house from the Sun is Libra
but its lord is with the aggressive planet Mars.
Hotelier : In Chart No. 161 the Lagna is Pisces. The 10th
house is Sagittarius which is not aspected or occupied by any
planet. The Lagna gains predominance with 4 planets in it.
Venus is exalted in Lagna in parivartana with Lagna and 10th
lord Jupiter in Taurus. The native of Chart No. 161 is the owner
of a restaurant. Taurus rules eating places, Venus rules places of
pleasure and Pisces rules snack-bars, canteens, tea-shops,
hotels and all similar businesses.
Industrialist: In Chart No. 162 the 10th house is occupied by
Rahu and aspected by Mars. The 10th lord Saturn is in

308 How to Judge a Horoscope
Lagna | Sat |
Moon s +
Mercury Mars | Jupiter Merc.| Jupiter
bsg P Rahu | |
Saturn Rahu | [Lagna Moon
RASI —— NAVAMSA |
Ketu [Venus Mars |
| } | Sun Ketu |
Balance of Jupiter Dasa's at birth : 2 years, 9 months and
11 days.
the 9th with the Moon aspected by 8th and 11th lord Jupiter. The
native of Chart No. 162 is the owner of textile industries. Note
the powerful combinations for financial prosperity caused by 2nd
and 5th lord Mercury exalted and vargottama in the 5th house
combining with 11th lord Jupiter. Jupiter in turn aspects the 9th
and 10th lord Saturn. In the chart of an industrialist, the position
of Saturn is always of significance since Saturn rules labour and
industries are dependent mainly, if not entirely, on workers.
Saturn is the 10th lord here and in the bhagyasthana.
Inspector of Police : Chart No. 163 is that of a police officer.
Mars who gets neechabhanga aspects the 10th house in great
strength. He is the Lagna lord as well, Lagna being Aries, a fiery
sign. Lagna is further occupied by an exalted Vargottama Sun
which makes the native regal in bearing and

Concerning the Tenth House 309
Chart No. 162.—Born 29-9-1933 at 10-15a.m. (I.S.T.) at
Venus
Jupiter Sun Saturn
EE, Paced
Lagna
Mars
—— NAVAMSA
Moon
Mars Venus | Rehu Mercury
Balance of Mars Dasa at birth: 6 years, 5 months and
18 days.
Chart No. 163.—Born 12-4-1899 at 7-30 a.m. (L.M.T.) at
tagna Saturn
un Sun
Mercury Kotu Mercury
Moon Venus
Venus Mars | |Jupit. Rahu
— RASI NAVAMSA
Ketu
Saturn |
Rehu Jupiter Lagna |} Moon Mars
| l aaa
Balance of Venus Dasa at birth : 3 years and 9 months.

310 How to Judge a Horoscope
conduct and an imposing personality. The 10th lord Saturn
occupies a martian Navamsa and the 10th from Navamsa Lagna
is also occupied by Mars.
Venus Raku
Jupitar Moon
Mara Saturn
NAVAMSA
RASI
Lagna
Jupiter
Saturn
Ketu
Balance of Moon's Dasa at birth: 7 years, 4 months and
11 days.
Journalist: The native of Chart No. 169 is a correspondent of
a national daily. The 10th house Leo is aspected by Mercury and
Jupiter, both planets indicating intelligence and writing. The 10th
lord Sun occupies a Jupiterian sign Pisces which gives an
element of inspiration and intuition in the writings of the native.
The Sun is subject to a subha-kartari yoga being hemmed
between benefics Mercury on one side and Jupiter and Venus
on the other. The native works for a prestigious newspaper.
Judge : In Chart No. 165 the 10th house Taurus is aspected
by Jupiter and the 10th lord Venus occupies a mercurial sign
with Mercury and Lagna lord the Sun. The 10th house

Concerning the Tenth House 311
| | Moon | Sun f enus! Moon | Rahu |
venu |
| EEE RR a | CUE Webco: Seen
Mars | i Sun Í |
RASI | ||— | navamsa —
ti
| lLagne || Mars |
| | Rahu | | Jupit
Senan. ! [| |—
? | f (Lagna | Saturn |
| Jupiter Saturn (Mero, | Ketu | j
i ‘ I i
Balance of Moon's Dasa at birth: 7 years, 8 months and
12 days.
is aspected by yogakaraka Mars from a quadrant. The planet of
justice is exalted in the 3rd house. Chart No, 165 is that of a
judicial officer.
Judge : In Chart No. 166 the 10th house is Gemini. The 10th
lord Mercury occupies Libra, the sign of the balance, with
exalted Saturn, the planet of justice. The native of Chart No. 166
is a High Court Judge.
Judge: The 10th house Leo is aspected by Jupiter and
Saturn indicating the native of Chart No. 167 to be a civil judge.
The 10th lord Sun is in the Ascendant with Venus who rules
counsellors.
Compare Chart No. 167 with Chart No. 166. Both natives
belong to the judiciary but there is a difference in the ranks of
the natives. Chart No. 166 has both Jupiter and Saturn ruling
law and justice exaited. Mercury in Libra and the Moon in a

312 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 166.—Born 4-10-1895 at 6-03 a.m. (L.M.T.) at 11
Saturn
Moon | | Rahu Sun |
aa Se,
Lagna |
Rahu Mars
| RASI | NAVAMSA |
Jupiter Ketu |
Balance of Mercury's Dasa at birth: 11 years, 11 months
and 9 days.
Sat, Mars | Mercury | Saturn meee a
Jupiter Mars | | Venus Rahu
Ketu
A; NAVAMSA |
Rehu Ketu | Sun |
Venus
Sun Mercury paai :
Leone oon |
Balance of the Sun's Dasa at birth : 4 years, 9 months and
29 days.

Concerning the Tenth House 313
quadrant. Chart No. 167 is not so powerful since Jupiter and
Saturn have no particular dignity. Mercury occupies the same
sign Libra but the Moon is in a dusthana which does not
contribute to the strength of the chart.
Chart No. 168.—Born 17-12-1893 at 8-02 a.m. (L.M.T.) at
Jupiter | | Sun Mars |
EE S S a ia
| | Rahu Venus
RASI — — NAVAMSA
|Jupit. |
am Mercury ial Ketu ear Mercury peal
Balance of Saturn's Dasa at birth: 5 years, 5 months and
16 days.
Judge : The 10th house in Chart No. 168 is Virgo occupied
by Ketu. It is aspected by Lagna lord Jupiter and the 8th lord
Moon. The 10th lord Mercury is in the 12th house vargottama
aspected by Jupiter from the 6th house. The planet of law and
justice Saturn is very strong being both exalted and vargottama
and aspects the Lagna giving the personality a balanced
judicious outlook. This outlook must influence the native's career
as well since Lagna lord occupies the house signifying courts
(the 6th house) from where he aspects both the 10th house and
10th lord. This is the chart of a High Court
Judge.

314 How to Judge a Horoscope
Elevation to the High Court is indicated by the presence of
Raja Yogas in the chart. The 9th lord Sun is in Lagna which is
itself vargottama. Lagna is aspected by vargottama 2nd and 3rd
lord Saturn who is exalted. The 10th lord Mercury is also
vargottama and the relationship between Lagna lord and the
10th lord is always fortifying.
Seturn Mars
Sun Venus | Lagna i Rahu|} Rahu
Mercury Jupit Moon
RASI oa! E A NAVAMSA
Lagna
Moon Sun
RP-64/4 Venus
Ketu | Mere.| Mars | Jupiter saturn
| | Ketu |
Balance of Ketu's Dasa at birth: O year, O month and 13
days.
Landlord and Banker: In Chart No. 169 the 10th house
Aquarius is occupied by the 2nd and 5th iord Mercury who is
also the natural significator of commerce. As the 2nd lord ruling
monies and the 5th ruling investments and aspected by the
Moon (ruling public) as lord of the 3rd (neighbours, environment,
surrounding regions), the native took up the business of banking
giving loans to farmers and others in surrounding regions. The
10th lord Saturn is in the 11th

Concerning the Tenth House 315
house with 4th lord Sun (immovable property) and aspected by
an exalted 11th lord Jupiter also gave him earnings from his
landed properties.
Chart No. 170-Born 30/31-8-1913 at 4-52 a.m. (L.M.T.) at
Lagna
Mercury Moon
NAVAMSA
Sun
Saturn
RP-190/6 Rahu
| Mars
Jupiter Venus
Jupiter
Balance of Ketu's Dasa at birth: 5 years, 1 month and 3
days.
Lawyer : The 10th house in Chart No. 170 is occupied by
Saturn and Mars. The 10th lord Venus is in Cancer aspected by
Saturn. Saturn rules law. Jupiter aspects Lagna and
Mercury trinally giving an analytical intellect and a lawyer's
calling.
Lawyer: In Chart No. 171 the Lagna is a martian sign with
the Lagna lord occupying a dignified place in the 10th house and
free of afflictions. The 10th lord the Sun occupies the 12th house
in Libra with the intellectual Mercury. Chart No. 171 belongs to a
legal luminary of his times. Jupiter occupies the 4th house as
lord of Chandra Lagna and aspects the 10th house from there
which conferred on the native legal

316 How to Judge a Horoscope
NAVAMSA
NH-42
Sun
Saturn Lagna | Mercury d
Ketu Venus Jupiter
Balance of Saturn Dasa at birth: 1 year, 3 months and 4
days.
Sun | Sun
Rah
Leone pi Venus Rah Jupiter
Jupiter Mars Mercury
Mere.
RASI NAVAMSA
Moon Mars
Moor
Ketu Venus| tegna | Setem
Mars
Ketu
Balance of Venus Dasa at birth : 9 years, 8 months and 3
days.

Concerning the Tenth Home 317
brilliance. The 10th house is occupied by the fighting planet
Mars who also aspects the Lagna. The 10th lord the Sun
occupies a martian Navamsa which made the native a fighter in
every sense. He was also an advocate of Swaraj during the
regime of the British.
Lawyer: Chart No. 172 is of a well-known bar-at-law. The
10th house is Capricorn aspected by Mars who gets cancellation
of debility and the 3rd and 6th lord Mercury. The 6th house rules
courts, litigation, while Mars is the natural ruler of strife and
quarrels. The 10th lord Saturn is with the Moon aspected by
Jupiter. Saturn is the natural law-dealer and Jupiter indicates the
judiciary. The Lagna being a fiery sign, the native was a forceful
and militant lawyer.
Major (Army): The native of Chart No. 173 is a medical
doctor in the armed forces. The 10th house is occupied by the
planet of war, Mars. The 10th house falls in the sign Scorpio
which rules healing and is aspected by the 12th lord Saturn. The
12th house rules hospitals and sickness. The Lagna and Lagna
lord being both aspected by Mars from the 10th house gives a
career connected with the armed forces.
Managing Director: The native of Chart No. 174 is the
director of a firm dealing in automobile parts. The 10th house is
Taurus aspected by the Moon. The 10th lord Venus is in
Aquarius aspected by Mars from the Lagna. Mars not only rules
mechanical articles but also conveyances being the ruler of the
Ath house. The Moon obtains neechabhanga due to Mars being
in Lagna and forms a Raja Yoga. The mutual aspects of Venus
and Mars as rulers of quadrants and trines forms a Raja Yoga
elevating the native to a position of authority. The aspect of 7th
lord Saturn on 5th lord Jupiter is another important yoga
fortifying the chart in general.

318 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 173.-Born 31-1-1907 at 8-29 a.m. (I.S.T.) at 16 N
Ketu
Venus
Saturn
Lagna
Saturn
Lagna
NAVAMSA
Mercury
Sun
Katu
Venus
Balance of Ketu Dasa at birth: 3 years, 5 months and 24
days.
Chart No. 174.—Born 29-1-1916 at 8-30 p.m. (L.S.T.) at 16
Jupiter
Venus
Mercury
NAVAMSA
Sun
Rahu Jupiter
Mars
Moon
Balance of Saturn Dasa at birth: 12 years, 4 months and
15 days.

Concerning the Tenth Houte 319
RASI ss NAVAMSA
Moon Mars
V Mercury Sun Rahu
Rahu at Sun Merc. | Venus | Jupiter | Lagna
sea Jupiter Sst Moon
Balance of Mars Dasa at birth : 4 years, 5 months and 20
days.
Managing Director: The 10th house in Chart No. 175 is
Aries aspected by Mercury, the Sun and Vargottama Jupiter.
Tne 10th lord Mars, though neecha, gets neechabhanga in
Lagna Kendra and is aspected by Lagna lord Moon. The native
is the Managing Director of a bank. Mercury and the Sun
together with the 9th lord Jupiter aspecting the 10th house nave
given the native a top post in a commercial concern.
Monk: The 10th house in Chart No. 176 is Aries aspected by
an exalted 10th lord Mars from a kendra and the 7th lord Saturn.
The mutual aspects between the 10th and 7th lords, bothe
malefics, involving the Lagna, the 7th and the 10th house
resulted in in disspassionate monk. The 10th lord aspecting
Lagna in exaltation made the native's aim in life the realization of
his own self. 'If Saturn or the lord of the Lagna aspects the the lord
of the sign occupied by the Moon, the person will betake

320 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 176.-Born 15-12-1888 at 8-17 pm. (L.M.T.) at 23 N
j F
Rahu
Lagna] | Merc Rahu
RASI Sat
— NAVAMSA
ay Kety
Mars
Venus | AP-134/4 Moon
Mercury
Sun La
i Jupiter gna
Balance of Sun's Dasa at birth: 3 years, 4 months and 26
days.
himself to a religious order or mendicancy.' The Moon, who is
also the Lagna lord, is exalted in Taurus. Venus, ruler of this
sign, is in Capricorn aspected by Saturn in great strength
generating a powerful yoga for asceticism. The Moon is well
placed aspected by the spiritual planet as well as 9th lord Jupiter
from the mystic sign, Scorpio. Mercury, the gnanakaraka, joins
Jupiter, the gnanasthanadhipati. Lagna itself is influenced by
Rahu and Saturn indicating burning dispassion. In this chart, the
Lagna and the influences it comes under explain the vocation (?)
of the native more clearly than the 10th house. In Chart No. 176
is noteworthy for Rajayogas as well which made the native monk
the general secretary of an international mission of spirituality
and Vedanta. The 4th and 5th lords, Venus and Mars, joining the
7th, a quadrant, and being aspected by the 7th lord Saturn
generates a powerful

Concerning tbe Tenth House 321
Raja Yoga. The Lagna lord is exalted in the 11th aspected by 2
benefics, Mercury and Jupiter. The 10th lord Mars is exalted ina
kendra aspecting the 10th house which gives the native a
position of great authority and equal responsibility.
Chart No.177.-Born 6-10-1894 at 11-17 p.m.(LMT) at 12 N,
Lagna | |Lagna
Rahu Mars : | |
Jupit. || Ketu
Merc, Sun
Jupit Mars
a RASI ae NAVAMSA
Venus
Mercury m7
Moon Y I Venus Saturn | Moon Rahu
Saturn Ketu
SAN E al | E ee ee SEE,
Balance of Venus Dasa at birth : 6 years, 9 months and 18
days.
Monk: The 10th house in Chart No. 177 Pisces is the last
sign of the zodiac also called the Moksha-rasi. Its lord Jupiter
occupies the Ascendant aspected by the 2nd lord Moon. The
10th house is aspected by the atmakaraka Sun, 5th and 12th ord
Venus and occupied by Rahu. The Moon is influenced by 2
spiritual planets, Jupiter and Saturn. These two are not only the
natural significators of spirituality but also being the 10th
ord and 9th lord respectively, give the native a spiritual goal in life.
Chart No. 177 is of a highly evolved monk. The 9th lord
Saturn is exalted in the 5th (purvapunyasthana) aspected trinally

322 How to Judge a Horoscope
by the 10th lord Jupiter from a kendra. The 10th lord has no
afflictions whatsoever indicating a blemish-free career in the
native's spiritual life. ‘If the Lagna lord or Saturn aspect the lord
of the sign occupied by the Moon, the native becomes an
ascetic’ Here the lord of the sign occupied by the Moon is Jupiter
and he aspects the Lagna lord Mercury. A trinal relationship is
established between the two planets signifying spiritual
moorings.
Musician : Lagna is the 3rd sign of the zodiac and is
occupied by 3 planets, Mercury, the planet of skill and versatility,
Venus the planet of music and art, the Sun in Chart No. 178.
Mercury as Lagna lord in Lagna is very good while his
combination with the 5th lord Venus and 3rd lord the Sun has
given the native a rich, deep and beautiful voice charged with
fervour (Moon's aspect) making her a singer of great popularity
and charm. The Adhiyoga has reference to these planets in
Lagna and has made the native an authority and outstanding
figure in the world of music. Venus is free of any afflictions which
has therefore confined the native's talents to classical, traditional
music.
Newspaper Owner: The 10th house in Chart No. 179 is
Cancer aspected by Yogakaraka Saturn and 3rd and 6th lord
Jupiter both placed in their own signs. In Navamsa, the 10th lord
occupies a Jupiterian sign. The native is the owner of a chain of
newspapers. The 10th lord being Moon and Jupiter aspecting the
10th house as 3rd lord has given a calling which is directly
related to the public (Moon) as a media of communication
(Jupiter as 3rd lord).
Shop-keeper: The 10th house in Chart No. 180 is Gemini
ruled by Mercury, the planet of trade. It is aspected by 2nd and
9th lord Venus and 5th and 6th lord neecha Saturn. The

Concerning the Tenth House 323
à Lagna |
Jupiter Rah venus Venus Rahu
Mars Merc Sun
Sun
= Lak | Sy ee Se See
Lagne
RASI | Merc |
—— —— NAVAMSA
ite
Sat. pe j
RP-49/34 | | Mars
Sat
M N Ketu Moon
Ketu | | |
Balance of Venus Dasa at birth: 12 years, 9 months and
27 days.
Chart No. 179.- Born 18-4-1904 at 5-46 p.m. (Madras
Jupiter Sun | i j | : | i
Venus | Mars Moon | | |Moon | | | Sun |
Ketu | Mercury | | |
SS aS SST
RASI = eS NAVAMSA |
| |Jupit | Ketu |
m = | OA
tepna | | Venus | Lanes Mars |
f Mercury | | Saturn
Balance of Suns Dasaatbith: 1 year, Omonthsand 13. days.

324 How to Judge a
Horoscope
Chart No. 180.—Born 6-2-1912 at 11 p.m. (I.S.T.) at 15 N
| Saturn | |! | | Moon | |
| | Mars | }iMerc.| Mars |
Rahu | ij Rahu | |
f i} i |
j RASI |—— = NAVAMSA
ur |
Aer e ieee See cee w A N
v ; | agna | Lagna |
enus | Jupiter | Ketu | Moon ‘oe Ketu Saturn Vitiis |
Í i
Balance of Moon's Dasa at birth : 5 years, 7 months and 6
days.
10th lord Mercury occupies the 5th house with 12th lord the Sun.
Chart No. 180 is of a proprietor of a store that deals in articles of
fancy and general use such as cosmetics, ladies' ware, trinkets
and the like. Venus and the Sun indicate the nature of business
while debilitated Saturn makes the native trade in common-place
articles signified by Venus.
Philosopher : The Lagna Libra, the sign of the balance, in
Chart No. 181 is vargoltama and gains considerable vitality
because of the aspect of Jupiter and association of the lord of
Lagna with Mercury. Mark the disposition of the Sun and the
Moon in benefic signs and association with spiritual planets. The
Moon is the atmakaraka and is very strongly placed in
vargoltama aspected by Jupiter, the divine planet. The 10th lord
Moon in an intellectual sign indicates the jnani the native was.
The powerful Dharma Karmadhipa Yoga

Concerning the Tenth House 325
Chart No. 181.—Born 29/30-12-1879 at 1 a.m. (L.M.T.) at 9
ead
Mars | | ame Loupe Keto: j Moog
Saturn | jron]
PREN | Venus
RASI | NAVAMSA
NH-46 | , ETON EEE
Rahu Mercury ý | Rehu | Lagna S
Sun Venus tagn Mars d ii
F Balance of Jupiter Dasa at birth: 4 years, 1 month and 20
ays.
Chart No. 182—Born 13-3-1925 at 10-12 a.m. (I.S.T.) at 8
| Saturn j
Venus
Rahu | =
Ketu
= {| NAVAMSA
Lagna
Mars
RP-36/101 Rehu
Jupiter Jupiter | Moon Mercury
ra ee | A Se Seer
Balance of Mars Dasa at birth: 2 years, 2 months and 21 days.

326 How to Judge a Horoscope
involving Saturn and Jupiter, the latter planet occupying the
mystic sign of Aquarius which happens to be the 5th from
Janma Lagna gives a clue to the spiritual heights to which the
native rose.
Photographer: The 10th house is Aquarius in Chart No.
182 occupied by the Lagna lord Venus. The 10th lord Saturn is
exalted in the 6th house with the Moon. There is a distinct
parivartana or exchange of signs between Venus end Saturn.
The native is a photographer with his own studio. This is
appropriate to the nature of the planet in the 10th house, viz.,
Venus. The 10th lord Saturn is also ina Venusian sign with the
Moon. The Moon generally indicates callings that have to do
with the public.
Physician : The 10th house in Chart No. 183 is occupied by
Lagna iord Jupiter and aspected by Mars (influenced by Rahu)
and Saturn from Cancer, the sign of healing. The 10th iord
Mercury is with the 9th lord in Rasi and is vargottama. Mars and
Rahu together produce skilled physicians and this combination
relates to the 10th house powerfully. The native is a physician
but consistent with the strength and the natural karakatwa of the
10th lord, the native is research-oriented.
Poet: Venus, the planet of poetry, is in the 2nd house in
Chart No, 184. The native revealed unusual powers of
intellect and a poetical genius of no mean order. The Sun and
Mercury, planets of intelligence, are in the 2nd forming a
powerful Budha-Aditya Yoga which found manifestation in
intuitively inspired poetry. The Lagna is conspicuously strong
as it is occupied by exalted Jupiter, gnanakaraka and the lord of
the 9th or dharmasthana and Lagnadhipeti Moon is in 8
benefic sign. Cancer rising gives intuition, benevolence/
sympathy, usefulness and fondness for subtle things in fife all
of which found place in his inspired poems.

Concerning the Tenth House 327
Chart No. 183 — Born 13-9-1945 at 1-00 p.m. (Standard
Rahu |
Jupiter |
Mars P |
Venus |} Rahu |
Saturn
Sat Venus |
Sa RASI | NAVAMSA
Sun Ketu
Mars Mercury
Merc.
G.IV-240 Lagna
Balance of Mercury Dasa at birth : 16 years, O month and
16 days.
EE TSA E E ee S
Rahu
Rahu Lagns Sun Moon
Venus
Lagna
Mars | |Jupit.
Jupit
RASI — NAVAMSA ——
Sun
Venus
NH-43 Merc,
Mercury
Saturn Ketu Ketu Satar Mars
Balance of Ketu Dasa at birth: 3 years, 2 months and
22 days.

328 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 185—Bom 3-4-1905 at 2-34p.m. (I.S.T.) at
Jupiter |
sit Veuus
un Mercury
Katu
Saturn Keto
RASI ||| NAVAMSA
Rahu | Sun
Lagna
Mars Sat Venus
Balance of Saturn Dasa at birth: 12 years, 3 months and
2 days.
Politician : Aries, the sign of fighting, is strong in Chart No.
185 due to the occupation of 3 planets and the aspect of Saturn.
Lagna is a martian sign occupied by Mars. The 10th house is
occupied by Rahu and aspected by Saturn, planet of the
masses. The native emerged as a political fighter and was voted
to power and was a minister for some years.
Postmaster (Sub) : The 10th house in Chart No. 186 is
Pisces ruled by Jupiter and aspected by Saturn. The 10th lord
Jupiter is in the 3rd, house of communication. Saturn occupies a
constellation of the Sun, ruler of the 3rd house. The native of
Chart No. 186 is a sub-postmaster. The 3rd house influencing
the 10th house has given a vocation that has to do with
communication. Saturn's influence makes it a public service job.

Concerning the Tenth House 329
Ketu tagna || Mars Mercury | Lagna
Moon
Rahu
RASI ——— |) ae: NAVAMSA
Jupit Sat Ketu
Moon
Mercury
Sun Rahu Sst. Sun Venus
Jupiter
i Balance of Mars Dasa at birth: O year, 7 months and 7
ays.
Ketu
Moon
Meon | Merc
Rahu Sün Sun Saturn
S RASI e NAVAMSA
Saturn Ketu Jupit.
| RP-18/51 ARR
POEs as ee a
$ Lagna
Lagna nes Rahu Mercury | Mars
| Venus
Balance of Jupiter Dasa at birth: 5 years, 7 months and
28 days.

330 How to Judge a Horoscope
Public Prosecutor: Chart No. 187 is of a public prosecutor.
Lagna is a fiery sign and the 10th house is occupied by Jupiter
indicating the judiciary and Mars, indicating advocacy and
militancy. The 10th and 9th lords combine in the 8th forming the
Raja Yoga for success and fame. Saturn aspects the 10th lord
and Jupiter aspects the former from the 10th house giving legal
brilliance As 5th lord. Mars, vargottama in the 10th gives a
forceful and hammering approach in the native's dealing with
cases. The 5th and Lagna lord combining in the 10th is a
beneficial yoga strengthening the chart as a whole. Jupiter in the
10th and 10th lord combining with the Sun have been
responsible for being in Government service.
Chart No. 188.—Born 17-10-1915 at 8-00 p m. (I.S.T) at 25
Satum | Jupiter
Jupiter Rahu
RASI NAVAMSA
Rahu
Moon
Venus
Sun Mare Sun Moon
Mercury
Balance of Mars Dasa at birth : 4 years, 9 months and 10
days.
Publisher: The 10th house in Chart No. 188 is occupied by
Jupiter and aspected by debilitated Mars who gets cancellation
of debilitation. The native is the proprietor of a big

Concerning the Tenth House 331
publishing house with offices all over the country. Jupiter in
relation to the 10th gives a career in publishing books while
Mars aspecting involves printing and allied sectors of work as
well. The relationship between the 11th lord Jupiter and 9th lord
Saturn has resulted in very prosperous and successful business
for the native. Saturn, the 10th lord, is in Gemini, an intellectual
sign and Jupiter aspects him from the 10th making the native
publish books which cater to a limited number unlike in Chart
No. 179, where public involvement is greater.
Chart No. 189.-BoRN 14-3-1879 at 11-30 a.m. (L.M.T.) at 48 N
Sun
Mercury
Venus
Saturn
Jupiter Sun
RAS! — | |.—__ NAVAMSA
Mars
Rahu X
NH-45
Moon Jupit. | Saturn Mercury
Ketu
Balance of Mercury's Dasa at birth: 7 years, 10 months
and 26 days.
Scientist: The intellectual sign Gemini rises in Chart No. 189
giving great sensitivity and intuitional ability. The Lagna is
aspected by Gnanakaraka Jupiter from the mystic sign Aquarius
suggesting the native's gift of gnana (knowledge) to the world by
his scientific brilliance. Four planets hiving reference to the 10th
house involving the lordships of the

332 How to Judge a Horoscope
Lagna, the 4th, the 5th and the 9th made the native a great
scientist (gnani). The parivartana between the 9th and 10th
lords, Malavya Yoga in the 10th house caused by Venus, and
Mercury's neechabhanga yoga in the 10th all acted to make the
native a Nobel Laureate in Physics, Note Pisces, the sign of
intuition, rises on the 10th house. The native's discoveries were
intuitive and deeply significant in the world of science.
Scientist: The native of Chart No. 190 was a genius,
physicist, inventor and also proved that there can be no sharp
dividing line between the nervous life of planets and animals. All
the three benefics Mercury, Jupiter and Venus, indicating
intelligence, knowledge and wisdom have brought about a link
between Lagna, the 2nd, 4th, 9th and 10th houses from the
Moon. Saturn's aspect on the 10th house and Aquarius with
Rahu on the 10th cusp made the native a scientific mystic. Both
Rahu and Aquarius are idealistic and have great affinity for
invention, research and invisible things. The 10th lord Saturn is
in Cancer aspected by exalted Mars from an earthy sign and
Lagna Taurus is also a fruitful sign indicating the native's sphere
of work was related to plant life.
Script-writer: Virgo, a sign of Mercury, rises in the Ascendant
in Chart No. 191. The 10th house is also an intellectual sign,
Gemini. The 10th lord occupies Cancer with exalted Jupiter. In
Navamsa, the 10th lord Mercury is in Sagittarius ruled by Jupiter.
Chart No. 191 is of a scriptwriter who writes for films. The
Mercury-Jupiter combination in the watery sign Cancer makes
the native a prolific writer catering to emotional audiences. Venus
in the 10th has made him write for the cinema.
Theatre-Owner and Money-Lender : In Chart No. 192 the
10th house Virgo is aspected by the 8th lord vargottama

Concerning the Tenth House
Chart No. 190..-Born 30-77-7858
Lagna
Jupiter
Moon
Mercury Venus
— re ey R Leena
Sat.
Lagna
Ketu Rahu
Sat.
Moon Sun
Mars
Ketu
NAVAMSA
Jupiter
Balance of Moon's Dasa at birth : 2 years, 3 months and 0
days.
Chart No. 191.—Born 6-7-7920 at 72-77 p.m. (I.S.T.) at
Venus | |Moon
Ketu Sun Jupit.
Moon Mere
Jupit,
——— RASI —
Sat
a IDEON! Casco
Mars Mars
Rah Lagna Merc.
ZE
Balance of Rahu Dasa at birth :
2 days.
Rahu
Sun Venus
Lagna
NAVAMSA
Saturn
Ketu
3 years, 2 months and

334 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 192.—Born 21/22-3-1901 at 0-39 a.m. (LMT) at
Sun Merc
Ketu Mars Lagna Venus
Moon Moon
Venus
Ketu
Mercury
RASI | —||——-| NAVAMSA
Mars Rahu
Lagna | | Sun
Saturn | Saturn į j
Jupiter | Jupiter
Balance of Mercury's Dasa at birth : 2 years, 8 months
and 4 days.
Moon and 2nd and 3rd lord Saturn. The 10th lord Mercury is with
the 6th and 11th lord Venus aspected by 5th and 12th lord Mars
and Saturn. The native of Chart No. 192 is a banker (moneylender) and also the owner of cinema theatres. The 10th lord is
influenced by Venus and Saturn, both planets ruling the cinema
and similar types of cheap entertainment. The Lagna and Lagna
lord are both influenced by 2nd lord Saturn (ruling monies) who,
in turn, aspects the 10th lord and the 10th house. The aspect of
the Moon shows public involvement in the native's calling. Both
business of money-lending and running cinema-theatres rely on
public participation.
University Lecturer: The 10th lord Mars in Chart No. 193
occupies his debility sign Cancer but gets cancellation of debility
because Jupiter who gets exalted in Cancer is in a

Concerning the Tenth House 335
Chart No. 193. -Bom 6/7-9-1936 at 4-30 a.m. (DST) at 35 N
Mercury
Moon | Ketu Venus Moon Rlahu
Saturn
Lagna [Leone
Saturn Mars
Mars lj i
RASI upit
NAVAMSA
Sun
Rah Jupi Mere tu Sun
ahu upiter venus
Balance of Moon's Dasa at birth : 6 years, 11 months
and 16 days.
Lagna
Lagna Mars
Moon
Ketu
Jupiter
Moon Venus
Sun Rahu
Sat. Sun
—— NAVAMSA
Venus
Rahu
Mercury
Balance of V ercurys Dasa at Dinh: 3 years, 9 months
and 27 days.
Jupiter
Ketu

336 How to Judge a Horoscope
quadrant from the Moon. The 10th lord is aspected by Jupiter.
The native is a professor in a college. The Moon and Jupiter
indicate teaching in a college or similar institution. In Navamsa
also, the 10th lord Mars is with Jupiter.
University Lecturer : The 10th house from Lagna has the
intellectual planet Mercury while the 10th house from the Sun
and the Moon is occupied by Jupiter. These planets in Chart No.
194 indicate broadly the native's profession as a college lecturer.
The Moon-sign is the strongest of the three and the 2nd lord
from it is Mars in a Jupiterian Navamsa with the Moon indicating
a teaching job and earnings therefrom.
Rajayogas or Combinations for Political Power
We reproduce below combinations for Rajayogas (lives of
celebrity) produced from classical works.
Three or more planets in exaltation or own sign and at the
same time in quadrants give rise to a widely known king. Five or
more such planets make even an ordinary man a ruler of the
earth. If a native with such combinations is born in a royal family
without any malefic yogas or planets being combust, he
becomes a ruler. People born in ordinary families with 3 planets
placed as above become counsellors or equal to kings in power
and authority but not kings themselves. Two or more planets with
digbala make a royal native a king while 4 or more such planets
make even an ordinary man a ruler. According to some writers
like Yavanacharya, when the planets concerned are malefics,
then the native becomes a cruel tyrant while benefics make one
a just and virtuous sovereign.
By a combination and permutation, Varahamihira
enumerates 32 kinds of Rajayogas arising under the following
conditions:—

Concerning the Tenth House 337
(1) When Mars, Saturn, Jupiter and the Sun are exalted
with one of them occupying the Ascendant (4 yogas).
(2) When any three of the planets, Mars, Saturn, Jupiter
and the Sun, are exalted with one of them being in the
Ascendant (16 yogas).
(3) When any two of these 4 planets are exalted, one of
them being in Lagna and the Moon being in Cancer (12 yogas).
(4) When any one of these 4 planets is exalted in the
Ascendant and the Moon is in Cancer (4 yogas).
The Ascendant or the Moon in vargottama (occupying the
same sign in Rasi and Navamsa) is aspected by 4, 5 or 6
planets (leaving out the Moon), 44 cases of Rajayoga are
caused.
If the Lagna lord occupies a quadrant or the 9th house in
Vargottama Navamsa and the 9th lord, in turn, is in saltation,
own sign or Vargottama Navamsa, a king is born. Jupiter exalted
in Lagna, the Moon, Venus and Mercury in the 11th house and
the Sun in Aries gives rise to a powerful king. If Mercury
occupies Virgo which is also the Ascendant, Jupiter and the
Moon be in Pisces and Saturn and the Moon occupy Capricorn,
the native becomes a king.
If the Sun and the Moon occupy the Ascendant in Aries,
Mars occupies Capricorn, Saturn is in Aquarius and Jupiter is
in Sagittarius, the person born in a royal family becomes a king.
According to Varahamihira in his great classic Brihat Jataka,
a kingdom is obtained during the Dasa or Bhukti of (1) the planet
in the Ascendant, or (2) the planet in the 10th house from the
Ascendant, or (3) the most powerful planet in the chart.

338 How to Judge a Horoscope
A kingdom is lost during the period (the major period or
minor period) of (1) a planet in an inimical sign or (2) a planet
that occupies the 7th from the sign it rules.
As we have several times pointed out, since Rajayogas
occur in large numbers, a clever student should assess the
worth of each combination taking into account the chart in its
entirety.
In the horoscope of a ruler-king, dictator, president or prime
minrster—we have found in our experience Saturn's position
when his rays are properly blended with those of Rahu can give
rise to realization of objects, consolidation of the country,
establishment of peace and economic prosperity and a happy
and contented populace.
Chart No. 195.—Born 4-6-1884 at 10-18 am. (L.M.T.) at
Sun
La
Marecury ang Mars
Saturn Ketu
Lagna Sun
Jupit. Venus
Venus Saturna
RASI NAVAMSA
Mars | | Mere
M N Moon
ver Se Jupiter
Balance of Mars Dasa at birth : 1 year, 11 months and 16
days.
The horoscope of Chart No. 195 is typically illustrative of
certain well-known principles of predictive astrology with regard

Concerning the Tenth House 339
to Rajayogas. Throughout his long and memorable reign of 40
years the native of Chart No. 195 showed a rare
conscientiousness and disinterested zeal for the promotion of the
welfare of his subjects. Note how balanced and constructive are
the planetary positions. Mark the vargottama positions of the
Moon, Rahu and Venus. Lagna occupied by exalted Jupiter
confers Hamsa Yoga, a most beneficial combination while the
Moon occupying Libra, the sign of the balance and causing
parivartana with Venus, lord of the 4th, is a yog3 par excellence.
This suggests a personality which though royal is not suggestive
of pomp. The conjunction of Saturn and the Sun in the 11th
made him a constitutional monarch and the native exercised an
influence more pervasive and lasting than any power that
dictator or despotic monarch could have, because that influence
proceeded from personal example and devotion to duty. The
Hamsa Yoga has reference to the 10th house from Chandra
Lagna which is also responsible for these noble traits. The Lagna
lord in a kendra and vargottama and the 9th lord in exaltation is
another powerful Rajayoga. The Full Moon's disposition in a
kendra other than Lagna is itself a Rajayoga denoting the birth of
a scion of a royal family. The Full Moon's vargottama position is
yet another asset.
The Sun-Saturn combination is no doubt good regarding
career but comes in the way of domestic harmony as 2nd and
7th lords and mutually bitter enemies.
Mars is a yogakaraka and he is in the 2nd house. Saturn
and Mars are in mutual kendras and are not involved in
mutual destructive aspects. Rahu is confined to an upachaya.
Thus his "political career" was assured till the end, and no
indications either for frustration or failure is seen in the horoscope. Chart No. 195 is of Krishnaraia Wadiyar IV, Maharaja
of Mysore.

340 How to Judge a Horoscope
The following Rajayogas rnay be noted :—
(1) The Moon being aspecting by exalted Jupiter
2) Jupiter's exaltation in the 10th from the Lagna and in
the 9th from the Moon
(3) Mercury occupying a Rasi other than Capricorn
identical with the Lagna (or Chandra Lagna) aspected by
Jupiter.
a i oe ae a OE 30.
Saturn
Rahu Jupit,
RASI pe NAVAMSA
Ket
Ketu M SR
NH-66 a
“Moon j ane
Sun i Junit; Mars
Marcu
ror } | Mars | Som M So t F Saturn Lagna
F ~~ Balance of Saturn Dasa at birth: 18 years, 1 month and 22 of Saturn Dasa at birth: 18 years, 1 month and 22
ays.
According to Phaladeepika "If out of the lords of the 11 th,
9th and the 2nd houses, there be but one planet that occupies
a kendra position in respect to the Moon, the person born
becomes the ruler of a full-blown empire."
In Chart No. 196, the lords of the 2nd, the 9th and the 11th
are Mars, Mercury and the Sun respectively. All the three planets
are in a kendra from the Moon.
Chart No. 196 is of King George IV. The outstanding feature
to be remembered and astrologically accounted for is

Concerning the Tenth House 341
that in all the nativities of the British Sovereigns during the past
century—Queen Victoria, Edward VII, George V, Edward VIII
and George VI, Jupiter is angular; in all but one he is either
rising or culminating. When Mars and Saturn join in Lagna, the
7th, the 8th or the 10th houses unrelieved by other favourable
aspects the person becomes aggressive, lacks tolerance for the
adversary, and is fanatical and ruthless. When Mars is not
involved in such destructive aspects but is confined to an
insignificant position and has nothing to do with the 10th house
(from Lagna or th8 Moon) the man no doubt will be clever, noble
and generous but he will also be impractical, contradictory,
Utopian, authoritative but lacking in practicality, sensitive and will
possess a tendency to assume the role of a hero. Where the
persistence of Saturn and the fire of Mars are lacking one's
political career becomes frustrated.
Chart No. 197.-Born 23-1-1897 at about 12 Noon (L.M.T.)
Moon Venus
Lagna Mars Sun
Mera | Lagna
Ketu || Ketu Mars
RASI PERTE] | SEEE NAVAMSA —
Sun
Rahu Jupit. Rahu
Mercury) NH-68
fans aisa
| Jupiter
Saturn Moon }
| Saturn
Í
Dia ee
d balance of Sun's Dasa at birth: 0 year, 4 months and 15
ays.

342 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 197 is of Subhas Chandra Bose. Lagna is strongly
disposed being powerfully aspected by Jupiter from Leo. There is
on Lagna a certain blending of martian and saturnine influences
denoting a frank outspoken and free-handed disposition and fiery
enthusiasm. The situation of Jupiter in the 5th or house of
emotions aspected by Mars and Saturn denotes that while the
native was moved by the highest impulses of patriotism, there
was a sense of frustration also. Fascist tendencies can be
present only when the vibrations of Mars and Saturn combine in
the 7th, 8th, 9th or 10th houses, but here since it has reference
to the 2nd and 8th houses, the native was not a dictator in the
sense of Hitler or the Duce.
The most noteworthy feature in Chart No. 197 is the
presence of the Sun, Rahu and Mercury in the 10th or house of
career and occupation. Rahu eclipsing the political planet Sun in
the 10th house in a sign owned by Saturn is significant in as
much as the native's entire life constituted one long battle against
British Imperialism. His chequered political career is attributable
only to Rahu's association with the Sun in the 10th house
aspected by Saturn.
Mars is the lord of Lagna and the native was, therefore, a
man of action. His daring, his energy, his uncompromising nature
and his dynamic personalities are all the qualities of Aries.
Chart No. 198 is of Jawaharlal Nehru. It is in direct constrast
with Chart No. 197. Here Lagna is Cancer a passive sign and the
lord of Lagna is in Lagna- neither Lagna nor lord of Lagna have
anything to do with Mars, Aries or Sagittarius. The native had all
the characteristics of the Moon—emotional, passive, inconstant,
changeful, compromising, indecisive,

Conceming the Tenth House 343
weak and vacillating. Owing to the insignificant position of Mars,
the native could not, as an administrator, make that impression
which he made as a thinker and politician.
Five planets—Jupiter, Sun, Mercury, Venus and Mars—
aspecting the 10th were mainly responsible for making him the
idol of India. Venus, Mercury and the Moon in kendras cause
Rajaiakshana Yoga making him an aristocrat.
Chart No. 198. Born 14-11-1889 at 11-03 p.m. (L.M.T.) at
Rahu | Mere. | Mars
Moon || Rahu | | Sun
Lagna | |Lagna j i Saturn
— RAS! —" | NAVAMSA |- i
| Sat. | | Jupiter |
=e — i—i
Jupiter Venus | Venus | | |
K Sun | Mar |
etu Mercury | Moon | |
Balance of Mercury's Dasa at birth : 13 years, 7 months and
6 days.
The 5th and 6th lords in mutual kendras cause Sankha
Yoga. Venus in a kendra identical with his own sign causes a
powerful Malavya Yoga, one of the Panchamahapurusha Yogas.
Three planets the Moon, Venus and Jupiter are in their own
houses These and the concentration of 5 planets on the 10th
house made the native a ruler (prime minister).
Chart No. 199 is of Harry S. Truman. The 3rd and 8th lord
Mars is in the 11th from Lagna and the Sun, ruling

344 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 199.—Born 8-5-1884 at 4-26 p.m. (L.M.T.) at 39
Sun |] Mercury Ketu š
atur
Ketu Saturn Mercury turn
——— Raai NAVAMSA E=
NH-51
Rahu Rahu Jupiter
Moon Lagna
Balance of Rahu's Dasa at birth: 7 years, 5 months and
27 days.
political power is in the 8th or house of death. This explains the
fact Truman became President following the death of his
predecessor Theodore Roosevelt. Jupiter exalted is actually in
the 10th Bhava though in the 11th Rasi. Mars has obtained
cancellation of debility in the 10th from the Moon which is
fortified by the occurrence of Chandramangala Yoga. The
Gajakesari Yoga has reference to the 2nd, the 10th, the 4th and
the 7th houses and its effects are further augmented by the
disposition of Venus, lord of the 2nd and the 9th (wealth and
fortune respectively) in the 10th. It was therefore a freak of
fortune for him the exalted office of a democratic Presidentship
fell on him unexpectedly. This is indicated by the exaltation of
the Sun in the 7th from the Moon and the association of the Sun
with Ketu. The distance between Ketu and the

Concerning the Tenth House 345
Sun is more than 27° so that there is no affliction. Saturn
as the 5th lord conjoining with 10th lord Mercury constitutes a
Rajayoga. Mark the disposition of the majority of planets in the
second half of the zodiac. Stress is, therefore, laid on the 9th,
10th and 11th houses indicating fortune, action and realization,
the last being restricted by the intermingling of jupitarean,
martian and saturnine influences. |The sun is very strong in
Aries and Mars in the 10th has obtained neecha-bhanga and
digbala.
The most important Rajayogas in our opinion are the
exchange of houses between the 9th and 10th lords, the
association of Mercury and Saturn in the 9th, exaltation of
Jupiter in the 10th, neechabhanga of Mars in the 10th and nodes,
vargottama.
The native became President during the sub-period of
Venus in the Dasa of Ketu. Venus is the lord of the 2nd and the
9th and is posited in the 10th in parivartana with Mercury, the
Lagna and the 10th lord. This is a unique combination. The Dasa
lord Ketu is in the 7th house vargottama. He occupies his own
constellation in the house of Mars. As such, he is capable of
producing martian results. Mars, though bad by ownership, is well
placed from Chandra Lagna. He owns the 2nd and 7th houses
from the Moon and occupies the 10th in conjunction with exalted
Jupiter. Mars is in the constellation of Mercury. All these favour
acquisition of exalted political office.
The native's political career came to an end in Venus Dasa,
Venus Bhukti. Venus is in the constellation of Rahu whose
results he must give. Rahu is in Lagna Bhava aspected
powerfully by 3rd and 8th lord Mars. Also in Navamsa Venus is
afflicted due to papakartari. In addition, Rahu is a maraka and
power is delegated to Venus.

346 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 200.- Born 29-2-1896 at 1-00 Noon (L.M.T.) at 20
Saturn |
t
i f
| | [Lagna | Sun | Venus | Saturn
| z biji | Mers pa
—~| RASI | ‘|__| NAVAMSA
Menen Ketu Itagna | |
Mars | GD-137 | Moon | Rahu |
DA eat ae ‘See Oa
| Moon Jupiter
4 Balance of Venus Dasa at birth : O year, 4 months and 6
ays.
Chart No. 200 is of Morarji Desai who became the prime
minister at 81 years. Three planets—all major planets— Saturn,
Jupiter and Mars are exalted in mutual kendras. The Moon is full.
The 6th lord Mars in the 8th with 12th lord Venus generates a
Vipareeta Rajayoga. This is further strengthened by a parivartana
between Venus and yogakaraka Saturn, the 5th and 8th lords
respectively. The Vipareeta Rajayoga occurring in the 8th house
involves the Lagna lord Mercury and is aspected by an exalted
10th lord Jupiter who aspects the 10th house. Jupiter is himself
aspected by the Rajayogekarakas Mars, Saturn and Venus, the
first two being exalted and the latter two being in mutual
parivartana.
The native became prime minister in Mercury Dasa, Venus
Bhukti. The Bhukti lord Venus is the yogakaraka for Gemini
Ascendant and is aspected by exalted 10th lord Jupiter. He

A
Concerning the Tenth House 347
is also a constituent of the Vipareeta Rajayoga. The Dasa lord
Mercury is the Lagna lord but with the Rajayoga-causing
planets, Mars and Venus, aspected by 10th lord exalted Jupiter.
Chart No. 201.—Born 21-4-1926 at 1-40 p.m. (G.M.T.) at 51
Rahu
Venus Süü Rahu | | | |
Mercury j | Sun
ae e
Jupiter | Saturn
| NAVAMSA
Lagna |
Mars
| | Jupiter |
Ketu | Saturn | Ketu Mars
ercury
Balance of Mercury's Dasa at birth: 11 years, 9 months
and 23 days.
Chart No. 201 is of Queen Elizabeth II. The royal planet Sun
exalted in a kendra explains her constitutional status as a
monarch. The Lagna is vargottama, Ketu is vargottama Legna
Bhava, the Moon occupies his own sign, Yogakaraka Venus is
exalted in the 4th Bhava and 4th and 11 th lord Mars is also
exalted but in the 2nd house. According to classical works, 3 or
more planets in exaltation and at the same time in a kendra
make one a widely renowned king (monarch). Here 3 planets
are in exaltation, two of them being in Lagna Kendra, agna and
the nodes are vargottama and the Moon occupies, own signconstituting a powerful Rajayoga. The 9th lord

348 How to Judge a Horoscope
Mercury is neecha but gets neechabhanga and joins the 10th
lord Venus. The Lagna lord and 11th lord, Saturn and Mars, are
in parivartana.
The native's accession to the British throne took place in
Venus Dasa, Rahu Bhukti. Venus, the Dasa lord, is a yogakaraka exalted in a kendra. In Rasi he combines with 9th lord
Mercury while in Bhava he joins the Rajyakaraka exalted the
Sun. Rahu the Bhukti lord is vargottama in the 6th, the best
place for him to occupy. He is in a mericurial sign and Mercury is
the 9th lord constituting a Rajayoga.
An unsullied 10th house aspected by karaka exalted the
Sun and a weak cuspal 3rd and 12th lord indicates a spotless
reign and the deep affection of the people the native has
secured for herself.
Loss of Power (Rajayoga Bhanga)
Chart No. 202.—Born 1-12-1751 (N.S.) at 8am.
Jupiter
Moon te Mars Ketu | Jupiter
Ketu
Venus
Mare
Sat
RAS! mre | | ae —— NAVAMSA a
NH-21
—S——— ean i -i ] jrr | me
Mercury Sun Moon
lagna | Satu | venus Mere.) Rahu tagna
Ranu
Balance of Venus Dasa at birth: 3 years, 4 months and
24 days.

Concerning the Tenth House 349
Chart No. 202 is of Tippu Sultan.
The Rajayogas are disposed in a peculiar manner. The Sun
as lord of the 9th and Mercury as lord of the 10th are in exact
conjunction. This Dharma-karmadhipa Yoga is highly significant.
Mercury is combust and one can contend that this could be
dangerous to the Rajayoga. But the sum total of the influences
to which Mercury is subject must be considered. The term
association’ implies results that are of mutual significance. In
other words, if Saturn and the Sun are together in association
with say Mercury, the effects of the yoga generated by the Sun
and Saturn are delegated or transferred to Mercury also. A
thorough study of standard astrological works gives ample
testimony in support of this statement. Here 4 planets—the Sun
and Mercury within 2°, Rahu nearer Mercury and Saturn, a little
away—have conjoined. Such grouping of planets causes
collective influences.
A planet has 3 main functions to perform apart from the
subsidiary ones. They are : (a) due to ownership, (b) due to
karakatwa and (c) due to generation of yogas. The subsidiary
functions are given rise to by virtue of association, aspect, etc.
Therefore the Sun's innate function of karakatwa, blended with
the main function of Saturn-Sun combination plus Saturn's
innate function of karakatwa—should render the combination
taken above as quite effective. Almost all standard astrological
works agree the Sun-Mercury combination is auspicious.
According to Saravali it indicates "fluctuating wealth, polite
speech, fame, respect, liked by the king, a great man, fairlooking, wealthy and strong". According to Jataka-parijata it
makes "the person fickle-minded, but endowed with learning,
beauty and strength". "The person will be clever, intelligent,
famous and happy” according to Varahamihira.

350 How to Judge a Horoscope
Mercury, in addition, is subject to the powerful aspect of
Jupiter, lord of Lagna. Mercury's combustion with the Sun is said
to destroy a person's abilities rendering him superficial and
devoid of judgement. But here since Jupiter aspects combust
Mercury, the significance of combustion is greatly minimised
resulting in a distinct Rajayoga. But as the Rajayoga occurs in
the 12th or house of loss, he could not enjoy it fully.
The native succeeded to the throne in Jupiter Bhukti, Rahu
Dasa- Dasa lord Rahu is in a constellation of Saturn who is the
10th ford from Chandra Lagna and has given rise to a Rajayoga
in association with the 5th lord the Sun. The sub-lord Jupiter
occupies an upachaya and is aspected by yoga-karaka planets
the Sun and Mercury.
He lost his political power by death by decapitation, the
Rajayoga having peculiar reference to the 12th house and
involving the 9th and 10th lords (Rajayoga) and the 2nd lord
(head).
Chart No. 203 is of Napoleon Bonaparte.
There are quite a number of Rajayogas which enabled the
native to achieve a position that literally laid the whole of Europe
under his feet. But the Rajayogas are loosely knit with the result
the foundation of his career collapsed at the prime of his life.
Saturn the 4th and 5th lord in the 10th with the 9th lord
causes a powerful Rajayoga. This is further reinforced by the
aspect of the 10th lord the Moon who is in parivartana
(interchange of houses) with the 4th lord Saturn. The lord of the
Navamsa occupied by the Moon is in Lagna. All the important
planets causing the various yogas are arrayed in the 9th, the
10th and the 11 th. The royal planet the Sun ruling the 11 th is in
the 11th while the martial planet Mars owning the 7th (war

Concerning tbe Tenth House 351
Chart No. 203.- Born 15-8-1769 at about 10-28 a.m.
Ketu || Moon Sun |
Jupiter
Venus | |Venus Rahu
Í Sat. Í
Merc, |
RASI ESENE 3) E NAVAMSA
Moon Sun Seturn
Mars
r Mars
Jupiter
Rahu Si Mercury | Ketu
Lagna Lagna
Balance of Sun's Dasa at birth : 1 year, 6 months and 6
days.
and foreign relations) is also in Leo but in the 12th Bhava. As a
result the native raised colossal and mighty empire with his
sword.
The afflictions to the Rajayogas subject to a series of evil
directions resulted in the collapse of the empire during his
lifetime. In the Rajayogas formed in the 10th, Mercury and
Saturn are nearly 10° apart. While Saturn is really a benefic,
12th lordship of Mercury has imparted to Saturn the quality of
loss or destruction. This is an instance of a powerful Rajayoga
delicately balanced and the Dasa of the planets causing the
yogas not operating,
In Mars Bhukti, Rahu Dasa, the native proclaimed himself
Emperor. Rahu, the major lord, is pre-eminently disposed. He is
strongly placed in the 3rd house aspected by Lagna lord Venus.
He occupies the constellation of Ketu who is in the

352 How to Judge a Horoscope
9th or house of fortune. In Navamsa, he is with exalted Sun and
aspected by Mars. Since Rahu is in a constellation of Ketu and
Ketu should give the results of Mars in accordance with the
dictum Kujavad Ketu and since Mars, in turn, is associated with
the royal and imperial planet the Sun, the native became an
emperor during the directional influences of Rahu and Mars. But
Rahu and Mars are not without their elements of destruction.
Rahu is in the sign of Jupiter and Mars in the 12th Bhava.
The native abdicated in Juipter Dasa, Venus Bhukti. Usually
under Jupiter's major period and Venus _ sub-period,
unfavourable results can take place. In addition, here the two
planets have certain inherent defects. When the lord of Lagna
occupying a trine is aspected by the 6th lord and is joined by
Saturn, Mars, Rahu or Ketu, Bandhana Yoga is produced. Here
the major lord Jupiter is afflicted as owning the 3rd and 6th
houses. The Bhukti lord Venus though in the 9th is aspected by
6th lord Jupiter and is in association with Ketu. The native was
finally vanquished at Waterloo during the Sun's sub-period. The
Sun is rendered evil by association with Mars.
The Rajayogas in this chart have in them the very seeds of
destruction. Saturn's situation exactly in the 10th Bhava plus the
afflictions of the royal planet the Sun in the Navamsa by Mars,
Rahu and Ketu foreshadowed the native's downfallIn Chart No. 204, in order to obtain a first impression we
must first of all consider the ruler of the nativity. The Lagna is
Scorpio. The lord of Lagna Mars is in the 7th a malefic Saturn
aspecting Lagna. In Navamsa, Lagna is Cancer and Mars is in
debility but obtains cancellation of debility.

Concerning the Tenth Home 353
Chart No. 204.—Born 29-7-1883 at 2 p.m. (L.M.T.) at 41 N,
ELS CU
M Moon
‘ oa Jupit Venus
etu ars Jupiter
Saturn Venus Saturn
Lagna
oe Rahu
Merc. Mars
RAS! NAVAMSA
Ketu
NH-50 7 er
Sun
Lagns Rahu Mercury
days.
According to Hindu astrology if the 8th house is occupied
by benefics—especially Jupiter and Venus—the combination
goes under the name of Asura Yoga. This makes the native a
tyrant taking pleasure in the sufferings of others. According
to Mantreswara "one born in Asura Yoga will become mean,
a tale-bearer, will spoil others' works and will always be
intent on securing his own interests. He will be headstrong.
He will do vile acts and become miserable as a result of his
own evil and mischievous doings". The situation of Jupiter
and Venus should be viewed from the Moon as it causes a
powerful Dhana Yoga. Moreover fromthe Moon, Saturn is
a yogakaraka and hence in his Dasa which commenced aboul
1928, the native reached the highest position as a dictator.
Saturn aspects the 10th from the Moon, Saturn also aspects
powerfully the 10th lord from Lagna, namely, the Sun. It is
this aspect that was responsible for the native's fall.

354 How to Judge 8 Horoscope
Saturn is not a benefic from Lagna while from the Moon he
is a benefic. The Dasa of Saturn ran upto 1947. He produced
good results in the first half of his Dasa while in the second half
he gave very unfavourable results.
The native entered the World War II in Saturn Dasa. Moon
Bhukti. Mark the situation of both these planets in the 7th along
with Mars. In Navamsa, Saturn owns the 7th and 8th houses and
is situated in the 12th house while the sub-lord owning Lagna is
also placed in the 12th house indicating loss. Lagna is also
placed in the 12th house indicating loss. Saturn tempted him to
sacrifice himself for greedy ambition and self-aggrandisement.
In Navamsa, there is a conglomeration of 4 planets—the
Moon (lord of Lagna), Saturn (lord of 8), Venus (lord of 11) and
Jupiter (lord of 6)—all occurring in the 12th or house of loss. This
satelletium is full of significance and made the native overforceful, restless and disruptive.
What we must note in Chart No. 204 is the presence of the
Sun in the 9th and his being aspected by Saturn, Saturn-Mars
association in the 7th with the Moon unrelieved by beneficial
aspects and Mars aspecting the 10th which explain the native's
rise from humble life, his becoming a dictator, and his final
violent end. Mark also the position of 4 planets in the 12th from
Navamsa Lagna.
Chart No. 205 is of Richard Nixon.
The Lagna being Leo, the 10th lord Venus and 7th lord
Saturn are in mutual parivartana. The Lagna lord Sun is
vargottama in the 5th in a friendly sign with 4th and 9th lord
yogakaraka Mars, 5th lord Jupiter and 2nd and 11th lord
Mercury. The grouping of 4 planets in a powerful sign with the
sign lord Jupiter in his own sign in Rasi and excellently

Concerning the Tenth House 355
disposed in the Navamsa by his exaltation constitutes a powerful
Rajayoga. The 12th lord Moon in the 6th generates a partial
Vipareeta Rajayoga.
Chart No. 205.- Born 9-9-1913 at 9-30 p.m. (P.S.T.) at 33 N
Mercu
Rahu | Saturn Y
Mars
| Ketu
Venus Jupiter
RASI —— | NAVAMSA ——
Moon Lagna
Sun
Jupiter
Mercury
Mers
Moon
Balance of Mars Dasa at birth : 4 years, 1 month and 4
days.
The native was elected President in Mercury Dasa, Mercury
Bhukti. Mercury is in exact degree combination with yogakaraka
Mars and in his own sign Navamsa. He continued for a second
term in the Sun Bhukti of Mercury Dasa. The Sun as Lagna lord
vargottama in the 5th with 9th lord Mars and 5th lord Jupiter
confers great fortune or kingdom.
The Rajayoga-causing elements are not without their bad
Points. The combination of 4 planets occurs in the 12th from the
Moon. Saturn in the 10th is not at ail desirable for although it
confers initial success, it also gives defeat and humiliation in
politically oriented charts. The fall came about following a
shocking scandal involving corruption chargesin Moon

356 How to Judge a Horoscope
Bhukti of Mercury Dasa. Mercury though well placed by
association is in a constellation ruled by Ketu who occupies a
marakasthana. The Bhukti lord Moon is the lord of the house of
loss placed in the 6th house, a dusthana. This chart is typical of
the destruction of Rajayogas capable of being caused by Saturn
in the 10th house.
Jupiter | Ketu Moon Jupiter
Lagna
Sat
Rah
Lagna eo
RASI NAVAMSA
M a Sat,
oon ars || Ketu Sun
Vanus Sua |
Rahu Mercury Marcury | Venus Mars
Balance of Sun's Dasa at birth : 1 year, 3 months
and 25 days.
Chart No. 206 is of Indira Gandhi.
The Ascendant is Cancer aspected by its lord the Moon who
is in mutual exchange of signs with the 7th lord Saturn. The 9th
lord Jupiter and 3rd and 12th lord Mercury are in vargottama.
The 11th and 6th lords, Venus and Jupiter respectively, are in
parivartana. So also are 2nd and 5th lords, the Sun and Mars
respectively. 3 sets of planets in parivartana yogas, two planets
in vargottama navamsas and Rahu in the 6th are all powerful
Rajayogas making the native a prime
j

Concerning the Tenth House 357
minister. Further Mercury and Saturn are in nakshatraparivartana, each occupying the other's asterism. Rahu and
Ketu have also mutually exchanged their constellations.
The native became prime minister in the Sun Bhukti of
Jupiter Dasa. The Sun has exchanged signs with 10th lord
yogakaraka Mars. He is aspected by Mars and occupies Leo,
the royal sign, in Navamsa. The Dasa lord is Preeminently
placed to give Rajayoga results being vakra vargottama in the
11th house. Moreover both the Dasa and Bhukti lords are in
mutual aspect. This chart carries with it latent seeds for
Rajabhanga. The only aspect the 10th house receives is of
Saturn, a maraka and malefic for Cancer Lagna. Further he is
placed in a constellation ruled by Mercury, the 3rd and 12th lord.
It was in Saturn Dasa, Venus Bhukti, that the native lost power
overnight. Not only are the Dasa and Bhukti lords in
shashtashtaka but by standard astrological rules the mutual
periods of Saturn and Venus are fatal to Rajayogas. Venus, the
Bhukti lord, is eclipsed in the 6th house. Saturn, the Dasa lord,
occupies an unfriendly constellation.
There are yet other factors, primarily the parivartana yogas,
which put the native back in power. This chart is illustrative of
the power of the inter-periods of Venus and Saturn to damage
Rajayogas. However, if the Rajayoga is powerful enough, the
bhanga (loss of power) will be set right in appropriate Periods.
Chart No. 207 is of Zulfikar Ali Bhutto.
The grouping of Venus, Saturn, Ketu and Mars in Scorpio
aspected by swakshetra Jupiter and exalted Moon ina
kendra from the Moon is a powerful Rajayoga. Considered
from Lagna, the Lagna lord Mercury and the Sun, significator of
kingship, in the 7th form a Budha-Aditya Yoga being very

358 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 207.—Born 5-1-1928 at 4-29 p.m. (LMT) at 27 N
E
Rahy
Lagna || Mars
Moon
Ketu
—— RASI ZES NAVAMSA
jteane Rahu
Sat. Jupiter
Venus | Venus
Sun Satuin Sun M
Mercury: Ketu oon
1] | Mars Mercury
7 Balance of Mars Dasa at birth : 3 years, 9 months and 27
ays.
closely placed to each other. Jupiter, the 10th lord, occupies a
kendra in his own sign. From Lagna, the 5th lord Venus, the 11th
lord Mars and yogakaraka Saturn in association from a
formidable combination for an autocratic birth and background.
The Adhi-yoga generated by Venus and Mercury being in the 7th
and 8th respectively from Lagna is of added significance
because the pivot of the Yoga is exalted. It gains extra vitality
being the centre of a Ruchaka Yoga caused by
Mars in Scorpio and a Sasi-Mangala Yoga formed by powerful
Moon and Mars.
The native became prime minister in Mercury Bhukti of
Saturn Dasa. Saturn is a yogakaraka both from Lagna and the
Moon and in the constellation of Lagna lord Mercury. Mercury
is in the 7th with Rajayogakaraka Sun in a quadrant and in the
8th from the Moon which confers dominion over a land.

Concerning the Tenth House 359
The Rajayoga occurs in the 6th house from Lagna and
therefore must suffer bhanga. Further, the nodes eclipsing the
Rajayoga are a great danger to the sustenance of the yoga
results. Consequently the native was ousted out of power in
Moon Bhukti of Saturn Dasa. The Dasa lord is not only the 9th
lord but also the 8th lord and in a malefic house. Bhukti lord the
Moon, the crux of the yogas, occupies dusthana with Rahu
bearing inherent defects for Rajayoga-bhanga.
Neechabhanga Rajayogas
In the study of career two important sets of planetary
combinations are to be noted. There are some men born in the
lap of luxury and wealth but who go down suddenly or gradually
and lead a most miserable life. There are others born in the
midst of abject misery and poverty but who reach very eminent
social or royal positions. The first set of conjunctions is called
Rajabhanga Yogas and the second, Neechabhanga Rajayoga.
The word bhanga means breaking away, loss or ruin. Those
who are usually styled usurpers of the thrones of others may
generally, if not always, be taken to be men from humble ranks.
The careers of some of the world's greatest men show clearly
the set of combinations that go under the name of
Neechabhanga Rajayogas.
Chart No. 208 (Hyder Ali) is a typical case of Neechabhanga
Rajayoga. The native rose from the lowest position of almost
nothing to very great power. The Lagna lord Venus occupies the
Ath house. The lord of the Moon-sign Mars occupies it with
benefics Jupiter and Mercury as well as Saturn and the Sun.
This strange combination of 6 planets in the houuse of wealth
and speech produced a man of extraordinary abilities. The
second house holds a very powerful combi-

360 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 208.- Born 8-2-1722 (N S.) at 2-15 a.m. (LMT) at
Jupit.
Rahu || Sun Venus Ketu
Sat.
RASI —l— navamsa |—
Venus |
NH-19
Sun
eta Mars
Ket | pint. Lagna Moon | Rahu Mercury
Tabie Lagna
Saturn
Balance of Mercury's Dasa at birth: 15 years, 8 months and
6 days.
nation. The Moon is debilitated but the debilitation is distinctly
cancelled. Starting with absolutely nothing in his pocket and no
claims to any education, the native founded an empire, trained
an army before which the disciplined and armed troops of
Europe could make no head, collected a fortune which ranked
second to none and exhibited a statesmanship which ran
without a parallel.
The following are some important combinations for
Neechabhanga Rajayoga :—
(1) If benefics are in the 10th, 11th and 3rd houses,
Rajayoga arises.
(2) If a planet is in debility and the lord of this sign or the
planet who gets exalted there is in kendra from the Moon or
Lagna, Rajayoga results.

Concerning the Tenth House 361
(3) If a planet is neecha (debilitated) in Rasi but gets
exalted in Amsa, Rajayoga is formed.
(4) Jupiter in the 12th and Saturn in the 11th (in debilitation)
cause Rajayoga.
(5) If Mercury is exalted in Lagna, Jupiter is in Pisces,
Saturn is in Cancer, Venus is in Sagittarius and the Sun and
Mars are in debilitation, Rajayoga is caused. In this combination,
it will be noted that the Sun and Mars are lords of dusthanas
(malefic lords) and, therefore, if weak, produce Rajayoga.

Concerning the Eleventh House
The eleventh house refers to gains, elder brother, friends,
acquisitions, freedom from misery, and happy tidings. An
affliction to the 11th house may result in the loss of brother,
friends, loss of wealth, misery or unhappy news. The exact
nature of the result can be gleaned only after an assessment of
the whole chart and the afflicting planets. To some extent the
eleventh also concerns marriage.
Primary Considerations
In analysing the significations of the eleventh Bhava or
house the general strength of the following factors must be
studied : (a) the Bhava, (b) its lord, (c) the karaka, and (d) the
occupants. Yogas in the chart bearing on the 11th house must
also be taken into account.
We shall first study the general combinations and the effects
of planets of severally.
Results of the Lord of the Eleventh House
Occupying Different Houses
First House :—The native will be born in a rich family. He will
earn much wealth. According as the 11th lord in Lagna is strong,
middling or weak, the native will be born in

Concerning the Eleventh House 363
a very rich, fairly rich or well-to-do family. He will lose an elder
brother early in life.
Second House:—The native will live with his elder brothers.
Benefics there give harmonious relations. Malefics cause
domestic bickerings but common residence. The native will earn
through commercial concerns and banking business. Business
with friends will bring good profits but if malefics join, the native
may suffer heavy losses on account of friends.
Third House :—The person will be a concert-singer or
musician and will earn thereby. Gain through brothers is also
indicated. He will have many friends and helpful neighboursAfflictions give contrary results.
Fourth House :—One acquires profits through landed
estates, rentals and products of the earth. His mother will be a
cultured and distinguished lady. He will be renowned for his
learning and scholarship of various subjects. He will live in
comfort and enjoy all joys in life. He will have a devoted and
charming wife.
Fifth House :—The native will have many children who will
come up well in life. He will indulge in speculation and gain
much money. If the 11th lord is afflicted, he will be a gambler
and indulge in foolish ventures. If 11th lord is beneficially
disposed, the native will be pious and observe many resolves
and vows which will enhance his prosperity.
Sixth House :—The person gains money through maternal
relatives, litigation and running nursing-homes. If the 11th lord is
afflicted in the 6th, the native thrives on setting person against
person, involve himself in other peoples’ quarrels and anti-social
activity. If malefics afflict the 11 th lord, the native may lose
through similar sources.

364 How to Judge a Horoscope
Seventh House :—The person marries more than once. He
prospers in foreign countries. If there are afflictions to the 11th
lord, the native carries on liaisons with women of ill-repute. He
will indulge in trading in flesh and similar immoral activities. If the
11th lord is fortified, the native marries only once but a rich and
influential woman.
Eighth House :—The native though rich at birth suffers
many calamities and loses much of his money. He will suffer
from the depracies of thieves, cheats and swindlers. If the 11th
lord occupies a malefic constellation, the native will be forced to
eke out of his living by begging.
Ninth House : —He inherits a large paternal fortune and will
be very lucky in life. He will possess many houses, conveyances
and every other kind of luxury. He will be
religious-minded and disseminate religious literature. He will
be charitable and set up charitable institutions.
Tenth House :—The native prospers very well in his
business and makes good profits. His elder brother will also help
him in his business. He will earn some prize-money for original
contributions to the subject of his study or profession.
Depending upon the benefic or malefic nature of the planet he
will earn through fair or foul means.
Eleventh House :—The native will have many friends and
elder brothers who may help him throughout life. He will have a
happy life with the blessings of wife, home, children and
comforts.
Twelfth House :— He will suffer losses in business. His
eider brother will be ailing and much expenditure will be incurred
on account of his illness. The native may also lose an elder
brother by death. He will have to pay fines and penalties
frequently and will be burdened with many domestic
responsibilities.

Concerning the Eleventh House 365
These results are very general and must not be applied
directly without weighing other factors. According to Satyacharya if the 11th lord is placed in an evil constellation such as
the 3rd, 5th or 7th from that occupied by the Ivloon, the native
suffers penury and misery. If the 11th house is flanked on both
sides by benefics or otherwise favourably disposed, one will
have a powerful elder brother. The native will earn fabulous
wealth through his mother. Benefics in the 11th house augment
the significations of the Bhava while maiefics diminish them both
qualitatively and quantitatively.
Important Combinations
If a benefic planet occupies the 11th Bhava, the native
acquires wealth through honest and noble means. If maiefics be
in the 11th Bhava, the native resorts to unfair and unscrupulous
methods of earning, if both benefics and maiefics are there,
sometimes unjust means and sometimes just methods will be
resorted to. Fortified planets in the 11th house confer fortunate
conveyances, bungalows, and all comforts. He will have a noble
and beautiful wife and will be fond of good clothes, food and
enjoyments.
If the 11th house be occupied by a weak planet-eclipsed,
depressed or defeated in planetary war, or occupying inimical
vargas—even if one is born in an affluent family will lose
everything and he will have to wander about without selfrespect.
The source of gains is indicated by the nature of planet in
the 11th house. If the Sun is inthe 11th house, the native
gets a fortune as an inheritance ; if the Moon—earns through
mother, sea-products, pearls, milk, farms, fruit orchards and
breweries ; if Mars—income is augmented through factories,

366 How to Judge a Horoscope
litigation, lands and rentals and through self-exertion ; if
Mercury—earns through teaching, writing, friends or uncles ; if
Jupiter-gains through knowledge—scientific, religious, literary—
and through well-placed sons ; if Venus-earnings increase
through dance, drama, cinema, fine arts, music and women ;
and if Saturn—wealth through industries, labour and agriculture.
If the Lagna, 2nd and 11th lords are friendly, the earnings
are used for honourable ends such as legitimate expenses and
charity. If the 2nd and 11th lords are afflicted and inimical to the
Lagna lord, money is squandered on wine and women. The 11th
lord well placed in a kendra or trikona from the
Ascendant or malefics strong in the 11th make the native
immensely wealthy.
When Mars occupies the 11th house and Lagna is a
movable sign aspected by the 6th lord, one suffers physical
ailments and fever due to spells and charms set into operation
by black-magic and similar means. If malefics aspect the 11th,
5th, 9th and the 3rd houses without any benefic aspect, the
native suffers from ear-troubles and deafness. If the afflictions
are heavy and the 3rd and 11th houses are hemmed in between
malefics, he may become stone-deaf. If benefic aspects feebly,
only slight deafness is indicated. Both benefic and malefic
aspects on the 11th and 3rd give irritating ear-ailments but not
deafness.
If the Lagna lord is in a quadrant, the 10th lord is in the
Ath and the 9th lord is in the 11th, one enjoys Rajayoga and
becomes long-lived and even a ruler. If the Moon and Saturn
join the 11th house, one can become a ruler even if born in
humble circumstances. Similar results happen if the 2nd, 9th
or 11th lord occupies a kendra from the Moon and Jupiter
owns 11th.

Concerning the Eleventh House 367
Lord of the Navamsa occupied by the Lagna lord in a
kendra or trikona from the Lagna or in exaltation, or the 11th
house in strength makes the native happy after his 30th year.
Lords of Lagna, the 2nd and the 11th in their own houses confer
much wealth. If the 2nd and 11th lords being friendly planets
occupy the Ascendant or if they occupy the 11th house in
strength (such as one of them being in own sign, or friendly sign
or exaltation) or if the lords of Lagna, the 2nd and the 11th
combine preferably in a trine or quadrant, the native gets
fabulous wealth.
If the 2nd and the 11th lords exchange houses or if the
Lagna lord occupies the 2nd house and the 2nd lord occupies
the 11 th house, or if the 11 th lord is in the Lagna, the native
acquires much property.
If the 1st, 2nd, 9th and 11th attain their exalted Navamsa or
Vaiseshikamsa (occupying own moolatrikona or exaltation or
same varga three or more times, one becomes a millionaire.
Planets in the Eleventh House
The Sun :—The person lives for a long time and becomes
wealthy. He will have wife, children and many servants. He gets
royal and governmental favours, and achieves success without
much effort. He will be sagacious and principled.
The Moon :—One will be noble, generous and blessed
with riches, wife and children. Introspective by nature and
quiet-going, he will become famous making good profits in
business. He will acquire vast lands and be helped in his
endeavours by the fair sex.
Mars :- The native will be an eloquent and forceful speaker,
clever and rich but lustful, will acquire landed Properties and
wield considerable influence in top circles.

368 How to Judge a Horoscope
Mercury:—One becomes learned in many sciences. He will
possess a keen and sharp intellect, will be wealthy, truthful and
happy, will have many faithful servants and will prosper in
engineering ventures.
Jupiter:—The native will be long-lived. He will have a limited
number of issues, will be bold and wealthy with a piercing
intellect and will become renowned. He will be fond of music, will
accumulate riches and will have many friends.
Venus :— He will be of a wandering nature, will make
immense profits possessing all kinds of comforts and luxuries.
He will have a weakness for women and long for their company.
He will be popular having many friends.
Saturn :—The native earns through employing many men
and women. He will have few friends, will be fond of enjoyment
and will earn through Government sources. He will have a long
and healthy life, and will be involved in politics commanding
great respect.
Rahu :-—The native distinguishes himself in the army or
navy, will become famous, wealthy and learned; will have
few children, will suffer from ear afflictions and will earn much
wealth in foreign countries.
Ketu :—The native will have the habit of hoarding. He
may get monetary wind-fall through speculation such as lottery,
horse-racing and the stock exchange. Noble and possessed
of many good qualities of head and heart, he will succeed in
all his ventures, and will participate in charitable and similar
works of beneficence.
Time of Fructification of the Results of the
Eleventh House
The following factors must be taken into account in timing
events pertaining to the eleventh house :- (a) Lord of

Concerning the Eleventh House 369
the 11th house, (b) Planet of planets aspecting the 11th house,
(c) planet or planets occuyping the 11th house, (d) planets
aspecting the 11th lord, (e) planet or planets in association with
the lord of the 11th house, and (f) the 11 th lord from the Moon.
These factors may influence the 11th house either as the
lords of the main periods or as the lords of sub-periods. (1) The
sub periods of planets capable of influencing the 11 th house in
the major periods of those who are also capable of influencing
the 11th house produce rasults pertaining to the 11th house par
excellence. (2) The sub-periods of planets associated with the
11th house in the major periods of planets, who are not
associated with the 11th house, will produce results pertaining to
the 11th house only to a limited extent. (3) Similarly the subperiods of planets who are not associated with the 11th house in
the major periods of planets who are associated with the 11th
lord will produce results pertaining to the 11th house only to a
feeble degree.
The factors capable of influencing the 11th house are :—
(a) Lord of the 11th house—Mars ;
(b) planet or planets aspecting the 11th house-Saturn and
Jupiter;
(c) planet or pianets posited in the 11th house—the Sun,
Mercury and Rahu ;
(d) planet or planets aspecting the lord of the 11th house -
Jupiter.
(e) planet or planets in association with the lord of the 11th
huose—nil ; and
(f) lord of the 11th house from the Moon—Venus.

370 How to Judge a Horoscope
Sun
Venus Mars ,
Mercury Lagna Ketu Jupiter
Rahu
Sat Sat
—— RASI — -| | ——$—— NAVAMSA
Mars | [Legna
G.IV-106
Moon Venus Sun
Jupiter f Ketu Moon Rahu Mercury
Í
Balance of Venus Dasa at birth : 2 years, 10 months and 6
days.
Therefore in this chart Mars, Saturn, Jupiter, Mercury, the
Sun, Rahu and Venus are capable of producing the results of the
11th house much more than the remaining planets. The subperiod of Jupiter in the major period of Rahu was important in the
life of the native. It was during this period that the native started
his own business having given up his job some months before.
Nature of the Results
The exact nature of results produced by a planet who is
capable of influencing the 11th houss in its Dasa (major period)
or Bhukti (sub-period) is qualified by its ownership/ aspect and
position. The general principles enunciated with regard to other
Bh3vas hold good here also.

Concerning the Eleventh House 371
The following results are likely in the Dasas of the different
planets with reference to the 11th Bhava. The Sun: The native
succeeds in his ventures without much effort. He will become
famous and as a result many enemies will spring up. He
acquires through fair means. The Moon : The person will get
children. He will cultivate interest in literary and artistic pursuits.
He will have a good reputation and will be charitable. He will
earn through lands. Mars : The native's education will fare well.
Ho acquries property and influence. But he will indulge in crafty
schemes. Mercury: The person acquires knowledge of
mathematics and astrology. He gets famous for his scientific
studies and discoveries. He succeeds in trade. Jupiter: The
person will be fond of music. He will be a good statesman. He
will be religious end Godfearing. But will be slightly dependent
on others and will get many good friends. Venus : The native will
acquire conveyances. His friends will increase. He will earn
through the theatre, dance, music and women. Saturn : The
native's education will be disrupted. He will take part in political
activity and succeed in politics. He acquires lands and other
immovable properties. Rahu : The native becomes a leader of
the lower classes. He acquires wealth and earns through farming
and agriculture. He will go abroad. Ketu : The native will be
happy and intelligent. He will be full of mirth and will travel to
many places in great comfort. But he will be licentious and
wanting in scruples.
Predictions regarding acquisition of money should be made
after assessing the strength of the 11th house and the 11th lord
and the source of acquisition can be judged from the planet in
the 11th house or the planet associating with the

372 How to Judge a Horoscope
11th lord. During the major and sub-periods of these planets,
gain of wealth can be anticipated.
The following results are likely during the Dasa of the lord of
the 11th house :
During the major period of the lord of the eleventh house
when he is placed in the Ascendant with the Ascendant lord, one
leads a happy and prosperous life. If the 11th lord is related to
the 10th lord, he has a successful career. His merit is recognised
and he gains many distinctions. If related to the 2nd house or
lord, his business fares well and fetches him huge profits. If
afflicted, he may lose an elder brother. Or, an elder brother may
suffer many troubles and bad health.
If the lord of the eleventh occupies the 2nd with the 2nd
lord, the native earns large sums of money. If Mars and the Sun
are involved, prosperity as a dentist or throat specialist is shown,
9th and 2nd lords with the 11th lord in exaltation or own vargas,
makes one a millionaire. If the 11th lord is in the 6th, the 8th or
the 12th from Navamsa Lagna, results will be moderate.
Lord of the eleventh in the 3rd with the 3rd lord gives one
both elder and younger co-borns. He will take on his brothers as
partners in business and secure much wealth. Ability of writing
will be acquired. If malefics afflict the 11th lord, the native's
brother incurs losses and suffers in other ways. The native will
have to face obstacles from competitors in his field of activity.
If the lords of the eleventh house occupies the 4th house
with the 4th lord, one will be fortunate in his mother. She will be
a cultured and refined lady who will influence the native greatly.
He will acquire an excellent education during this period, will
become famous and will get many awards

Concerning tbe Eleventh House 373
and distinctions. He will also earn through lands, vehicles,
houses and be very happy. Domestic harmony and bliss will
prevail.
If the lord of the eleventh house is posited in the fifth house
with the 5th lord, the native progresses fast in his spiritual
sadhana. He will have excellent children. He will earn through
investment (crops, edibles and drinks, depending upon the
nature of sign and planets involved). Malefics here cause, during
the period of the 11th lord, death of a child or intense mental
anguish on account of one's progeny. Great anxiety and
monetary loss due to a child may happen. Troubles will be
minimised if the 11th lord is well fortified in the Navamsa.
Lord of the eleventh in the 6th with the 6th lord enables the
native to succeed as a lawyer and through iitigation. He will be
generally healthy during the entire period. No amount of skill or
treachery on the part of his ill-wishers can do him any harm. His
earnings will be good. The bussiness of a maternal uncle or a
close relative may fall in his favour, if afflicted, the native suffers
from troubles in the legs, expenditure on medical bills and lawsuits.
Lord of the eleventh in the 7th with the lord of the 7th gives one
a rich wife. If the Sun is strong, he may go abroad as an
ambassador. He will have many powerful and influen-tial friends,
and will engage himself in partnership ventures which may prove
successful. If maiefics afflict the 11th lord, both the native and
his wife seek to earn money by question-able means. If Lagna
lord is strong but the 7th. house is weak, the native's wife may
desert him.
If the lord of the eleventh joins the 8th lord in the 8th house,
one suffers from pecuniary losses and incurs mounting

374 How to Judge a Horoscope
debts. His business will not thrive well. He will suffer mental
aberration and domestic disharmony. He will, however, succeed
In small ventures engaging manual labour. His sense cf right
and wrong will be warped and he will be forced to indulge in
unrighteous acts. He will also suffer from bodily weakness and
pain.
Lord of the eleventh in the 9th house with the 9th lord
indicates exalted and aristocratic father and background. He
haiis from a rich family and will continue the family business
extend it beyond expectations. He will have a colourful social life
and move on equal terms with rulers and other dignitaries. His
regard for religion will increase and he will be virtuous and of
good conduct. Foreign collaboration in business may bring the
native both distinction and money.
Lord of the eleventh in the 10th with the lord of the 10th
confers a highly successful and distinguished career. The native
wiii have more than one occupation, the nature of the planet
involved determining the nature of his means of earning. If
malefics afflict the 10th, the native no doubt becomes powerful
and rich, but he will be unscrupulous indulging in every kind of
despicable act to achieve his ends. If the affliction is heavy, the
native will be known for his monstrous nature and suffer grave
repercussions. He may lose all his wealth and power.
If the lord of the 11 th house occupies the eleventh, the
native succeeds without much effort. Fair in his dealings and
earning the goodwill of the people, he will be a dutiful son.
Money will be spent only on legitimate account and for charitable
purposes. The native's elder brother will be a very famous
person. If Jupiter is the 11th lord, the native's business will be
connected with books, publishing, religion and charity; if

Concerning the Eleventh House 375
Saturn it will be through industries, brick-kilns, printing press,
hardware business, oil refineries, quarries, etc.; if Venusearnings will be through women, hoteliering, cosmetics, showbusiness, films, coffee, beverages and art; if Mercury-writing,
teaching, educational and research foundations and similar
sources; if Mars—financial dividends through drugs, chemicals,
lands, timber, orchards, minerals, metals, match-sticks, sports
goods and sports; if the Sun -earnings through photography,
hereditary professions, wool industry, gold and jewellery,
banking, auditing and the stock-exchange ; if the Moon—farm
ing, milk-dairy, wines, coffee and snack bars, pearls and fish.
Lord of the 11th house in the twelfth with the ruler of the
12th house gives losses through varied expenditure. If malefics
afflict the 12th house, wealth will be squandered. The elder
brother of the native may pass through a troubled phase
suffering much monetary loss. The 11 th lord in the 6th, 8th or
12th from Navamsa Lagna makes the native run into debts.
Let us study a few examples relating to the eleventh house.
Brothers
Although there is no karaka as such for elder brothers Mars
who is the karaka for ‘brothers' according to Vaidyanatha
Dikshitar and other classical writers can also be considered for
the 11th house. Benefic aspects and associations on the 11th
house give elder brothers and ensure their happiness and long
life. Malefic aspects and associations on the 11th house and 11
th lord deny elder brothers or give them short lives or other-wise
mar their prosperity. When the 11th lord is in the 6th, 8th or 12th
house and if Mars is afflicted, the native may not have any elder
brother or may lose him by death.

376 How to Judge a Horoscope
According to one theory a native may have as many elder
co-borns as the number of planets taken together in the 11th
and 12th houses. This rule cannot be applied verbatim, it is
subject to qualifications and students should test its veracity for
themselves,
Chart No. 210.—Born 16-8-1937 at 8-31 a.m. at (I.S.T.) at
| Saturn | | Ketu \Venus | ge | Ketu |
| aa ee eevee = er: Learns iol
| lLagns | |
— | RASI .—-- — | NAVAMSA ee
| Sun [Moon j |
Mars | | Jupit. | | j
} | | Mars
Jupiter | Rahu | Lagna || Merc. | | Saturn |
| Moon | Rahu | j |
Balance of Mercury's Dasa at birth: 6 years, O month and 8
days.
The Eleventh House : In Chart No. 210 Cancer, a fruitful
sign, is the 11th house neither aspected nor occupied by any
planet.
The Eleventh Lord : The Moon is debilitated in the 3rd
house with 3rd and 8th lord Mars and Rahu. In Navamsa, the
Moon occupies the 12th from Navamsa Lagna aspected by 3rd
Mars. The Moon is badly afflicted.
Karaka: Mars is in his own house with 11th lord the Moon
and Rahu.

Concerning the Eleventh House 377
Considered from the Moon: The 11 th house is Virgo and
the 11th lord Mercury is in the 12th therefrom with the 12th lord
the Sun. Saturn, a malefic, aspects the 11 th house.
Conclusion: The native has no surviving elder brother. The
association of karaka Mars with the 11th lord Moon gave one
elder brother. The afflictions to the 11th house and 11th lord are
quite severe both from Lagna and the Moon without any benefic
aspects. The aspect of Jupiter on the 11th lord from the Moon
did not deprive the native totally of an elder brother but the
afflictions did not let him live long. But he died in the native's
Venus Dasa, Saturn Bhukti. Venus, the Dasa lord, is in the 12th
from the 11th house and is the 7th and 12th lord from the 11th
lord Moon. The Bhukti iord is the 7th lord from the 11th house
and a natural maraka.
The Eleventh House: Aries the 11 th house in Chart No. 211
is occupied by debilitated 8th and 9th lord Saturn and 7th and
10th lord Jupiter. It is hemmed in between malefics Ketu on one
side and the Sun and Mercury on the other.
The Eleventh Lord: Mars ruling the 11th occupies the Lagna
with Venus, 5th and 12th lord, and is aspected by debilitated
Saturn. He is exalted in the 3rd house in Navamsa aspected by
well-placed Moon.
Karaka: Mars is also the 11 th lord placed with a benefic
Venus and aspected by malefic Saturn.
Considered from the Moon : The 11th house is Virgo
occupied by Rahu and aspected by the 6th lord Mars. The 11th
lord Mercury is in the 7th from the Moon with the 12th ord the
Sun. He is between both malefics (Saturn and Mars) and
benefics (Jupiter and Venus).
Conclusion ; The native has an elder sister while an elder
brother died. Jupiter in the 11th is welcome but 8th lord

378 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 211.—Born 21-5-1940 at 7-50 a.m. (I.S.T.) at 13
Lagna || Sun
Jupiter Sun
Ketu Mars į | Venus Jupiter
Sarum Mercury Venus | |Merc
Kotu Moon
——— RASI SAE NAVAMSA
Mars Hite
Gi-12 aturn
Moon Lagne
Balance of Jupiter's Dasa at birth: 1 year, 6 months and
22 days.
Saturn debilitated there and the papakartari to the 11th house
does not augur well for elder co-borns. The 11th lord Mars
associating with benefic Venus who is a female planet has given
an elder sister. Malefic Saturn afflicting the male planet Jupiter in
the 11th house has killed the elder brother. The death occurred
in Mercury Dasa, Ketu Bhukti. Dasa lord Mercury is in the 2nd
from the 11th house in a constellation ruled by the Sun who is
also in a marakasthana. Mercury is also in the 12th from the 11th
lord Mars. The Bhukti lord Ketu is in the 12th from the 11th
house. He is in a sign ruled by Jupiter who is in the 11th house
but afflicted by malefic Saturn.
In Chart No, 210. the number of planets in the 11th and
12th from the Lagna is two (the Sun and Mercury in the 12th)

Concerning the Eleveath House 379
while from the Moon it is nil. The average would be one who,
due to the heavy afflictions, died.
In Chart No. 211, the total number of planets in the 11th
(Jupiter and Saturn) and the 12th (the Sun and Mercury) from
Lagna is four while from the Moon it is nil, Rahu being ignored,
as a shadowy planet. The average would be 2 which gave the
native two elder-borns. In Chart No. 210, the 11th lord Moon is in
the 12th from Navamsa aspected by a malefic Mars while in
Chart No. 211, the 11th lord Mars is exalted in the 3rd from
Navamsa Lagna aspected by a benefic Moon, allowing one eldar
co-born to survive.
The Eleventh House : In Chart No, 212 Libra, a fruitful sign,
rises on the 11th house. It is occupied by Lagna lord Jupiter,
Mars, Venus and the Moon. It is hemmed between Ketu on one
side and the Sun and Mercury on the other side. It is quite
strong.
The Eleventh Lord : Venus occupies the 11 th, his moolatrikona with bensfics, Jupiter, Mars and the Moon. He is in
Gemini in Navamsa with the Moon and aspected by Jupiter.
Venus becomes very powerful.
Karaka : Mars occupies the 11th house with benefics
Jupiter, 11th lord Venus and the Moon and is also between Ketu
and the Sun-Mercury.
Considered from the Moon : The 11th house is Leo hemmed
between Saturn and the Sun while the 11th lord Sun occupies
the 12th house with exalted 9th and 12th lord Mercury. He is
aspected by Yogakaraka Saturn.
Conclusion : The native has 3 elder co-borns surviving While
one elder brother died. The presence of benefics in the 11th
house and the 11th lord Venus beneficially disposed with the
fertile Moon are responsible for the elder co-borns. The

380 How to Judge a
Horoscope
Lagna Venus |
Rahu
e Sun Moon j
Sat. Katu
a RASI ee | | ets NAVAMSA ee
Mercury
Mars Rahu
GI-20 j
Jupiter
Mars Sun
Lagna Ketu Venus ! Mere. Jupit. | Saturn
Moon i i
j Balance of Jupiter's Dasa at birth : 5 years, 5 months and 1
ay.
11th house is occupied by karaka Mars while the 11th house
from the Moon is between malefics resulting in the death of a
brother. The death occurred in the Sun's Bhukti of Saturn's
Dasa. Both the Dasa and Bhukti lords cause a papakartari yoga
to the 11th house from the Moon. In addition, the Dasa lord
Saturn is the 7th lord from the 11th and placed in the 12th
therefrom. The Sun is with the 2nd lord in the 2nd house from
the 11th house.
There are four planets in the 11th house from Lagna and
two planets in the 12th from the Moon. The average would be 3
indicative of the surviving co-boms. Also, the strongest planet in
the 11th house is the 5th lord Mars who occupies his exaltation
sign in a trine in Navamsa. Mars is in the 4th Navamsa indicating
4 elder co-boms. Malefic Saturn aspect-ing Mars destroys one
elder co-born.

Concerning the Eieventh House 381
Chart No. 213-Born 6-1-1974 at 12-40 noon (I.S.T.) at 13
Ket |
ie Moon oa Lagna Rahu Venus
Mars
Moon
RASI
—— | |= NAVAMSA
Jupiter PE
Venua
G.H-204 Sun
Sun
Mercury Sat. Ketu | Marcury
Rahu
Balance of Moon's Dasa at birth: 0 year, 11 months and 16
days.
The Eleventh House : It is not occupied or aspected by any
planet in Chart No. 213.
The Eleventh Lord: Saturn is in the 3rd house aspected by
3rd lord Mercury and 5th lord the Sun. Saturn is with Ketu and
blemished.
Karaka: Mars occupies a quadrant from Lagna, his own sign
and is not aspected by any planet. He is debilitated in Cancer in
Navamsa and associated with the sign-lord Moon.
Considered from the Moon : The eleventh is Pisces
aspected by Saturn while the 11th lord Jupiter is debilitated in
the 9th Moon-sign lord Venus.
Conclusion: The 11th lord Saturn in the 3rd house
aspected by the Sun and Merecury and with Ketu, and Saturn
aspectmg the 11th house from the Moon give limited number
of elder co-borns. The Moon's influence on karaka Mars in

382 How to Judge a Horoscope
Navamsa cannot deny elder co-borns. The native has a lons
surviving elder sister.
Jupiter
Sat. Ketu
Mars
Rahu | Marc. Legna
panna, NAVAMSA
Lagna Venus
Jupit. Sun
Rahu
Satuin |
Moon | |
Balance of Mars Dasa at birth: Oyear, 10 months and
19 days.
The Eleventh House : In Chart No. 212 Gemini the 11 th is
occupied by 6th and 7th lord Saturn and aspected by the Lagna
lord the Sun. The 11th is hemmed between malefics Mars and
Rahu.
The Eleventh Lord: Mercury is in the 6th house with Ketu.
He occupies the 8th house in Navamsa aspected by the Sun
and Venus.
Karaka : Mars occupies the 10th house aspected by 10th
lord Venus.
Considered from the Moon : The 11th is occupied by the 7th
lord the Sun and aspected by 11th lord Jupiter, Moon-sign lord
Saturn and karaka Mars.

Concerning the Eleventh House 383
Conclusion: Saturn's influence as a malefic lord on the 11th
Rouse must give a limited number of elder brothers. The aspect
of the Sun on the 11th house prevents denial of elder co-borns.
The native has one elder brother.
Chart No. 215.- Born 26-2-1953 at 9-20 p.m. (IST) at 13 N,
Venus
Mercury | Jupiter
Mars |
Ketu
Sun
Moon
— RASI NAVAMSA —
Rahu
Rēhu M
ercu
f Saturn |
Saturn |Lagna Lagna
Jupiter
A S: S, VEEL. S COE CNSO.. em
Balance of Mercury's Dasa at birth : 7 years, 10 months and
26 days.
The Eleventh House: Cancer, a fruitful and feminine sign,
happens to be the 11th occupied by Ketu and sign-lord the
Moon in Chart No. 215. It is aspected by exalted 5th and 6th
lord Saturn.
The Eleventh Lord: The Moon is in his own sign in the 11th
with Ketu aspected by exalted Saturn. The Moon occupies
Capricorn Navamsa with karaka Mars exalted and aspected by
sign-lord Saturn.
Karaka ; Mars occupies the 7th house with Yogakaraka
Venus exalted and vargottama and Lagna lord Mercury.

384 How to Judge a Horoscope
Considered from the Moon : Taurus is the 11 th. It is neither
aspected nor occupied by any planet. The 11th lord Venus is
powerfully placed in a feminine sign with Mars and Mercury.
Conclusion : The predominance of feminine signs and the
powerful influence of Venus on the karaka has given more elder
sisters than brothers. The native has 3 elder sisters and one
elder brother. The Moon is aspected by exalted Saturn which
has prevented more elder co-boms warranted by the other
planetary factors. The 11th lord Moon has gained 7 Navamsas
but it aspected by 5th and 6th lord Saturn, a malefic in dignity.
This has, therefore, instead of killing any co-borns, reduced their
number to 5 in all (including the native himself). The Moon in
Navamsa is acted upon by 2 malefics. Mars and Saturn,
reducing the total number by 2.
Chart No. 216.-Born 12-5-1925 at 7-30 a.m. (I.S.T.) at 13 N
Mars |] Sat, Mercury | Ketu
Sun tagna
Rahu | |Venus
RASI es NAVAMSA
Ket Jupit
J S ae Legna
upiter ars
Moon Saturn ot Moon
Rahu
Balance of Venus Dasa at birth: 13 years, 9 months and 9
days.

Concerning the Eleventh House 385
The Eleventh House: In Chart No. 216 Pisces the 11 th is
neither occupied nor aspected by any planet.
The Eleventh Lord: Jupiter is debilitated in the 9th house
and afflicted by Ketu. He is aspected adversely by the 7th and
12th lord Mars.
Karaka : Mars is in the 2nd house aspected by 3rd lord the
Moon from the 8th house. In Navamsa he is exalted and joins
debilitated Jupiter.
Considered from the Moon : The 11th house is occupied by
exalted Saturn 3rd lord and aspected by 7th and 10th lord
Mercury and the exalted 9th lord Sun. It is superficially well
disposed. Venus, the 11th lord, occupies his own sign Taurus
aspected by Moon-sign lord Jupiter.
Conclusion: The 11th lord Jupiter is debilitated and obtains
neechabhanga but is eclipsed by Ketu. Mars, the karaka, no
doubt aspects him but adversely. Further the 11th house from
the Moon being influenced by powerful planets is nevertheless
not free from affliction. The Sun and Saturn, both powerful
malefics, influence it in mutual aspect destroying it. The 11th
lord Venus is subjected to a heavy papakartari yoga caused by
the Sun and Mars. The karaka Mars is aspected by the Moon
but from a dusthana. These factors have all contributed to deny
the native any co-borns, elder or younger. He is the only son of
his parents.
The 11th lord Jupiter has gained only one Navamsa denying the native any elder brothers. In addition, Jupiter occupies a
dusthana in the Navamsa chart. So does karaka Mars.
Gains
The 11th house rules gains. These may be financial gains
mostly but they also include gains by way of taking over

386 How to Judge a Horoscope
management of property, acquisition of a post of honour,
trusteeship, respect of distinction and inheritance of properties.
Jupiter, Dnanakaraka, can also be taken as the karaka for labha
or gains.
The Dasa of a weak or depressed planet causes loss of
‘labha' or gains. The 11th house necessarily comprises the 2nd
also so that timing of results due to benefic dispositions or
afflictions to the 11th house will have to be made taking into
account the 2nd house factors as well.
Thus a person acquires gains in the periods (major period or
sub-period) of the planet or planets in the 11th house, the 11th
lord or of the planet or planets-aspecting the 11th house or 11th
lord- The same result may also be expected in the major period
or sub period of the planet occupying the 2nd house, the planet
aspecting it or of the planet owning it.
Conversely, a person suffers loss of the 11th Bhava
significations during the periods of the planets cited above and
which are afflicted by malefic planets, or are combust or
depressed, eclipsed or with inimical planets.
Gains may also be predicted in the following Dasas (major
periods) and Bhuktis (minor periods) :— (a) Lords of the 2nd and
5th houses or the 2nd and 11th houses if they have mutually
exchanged places ; (b) lords of the 5th and 9th when they are in
the 5th and 9th respectively.
If the 11th lord is associated with the 12th lord, loss can be
expected during their mutual periods. If the Lagna lord, 4th and
9th lords are in the 8th house, financial stress is possible during
the major and minor periods of these planets. If the 5th lord is in
the 8th house or the 8th lord occupies the 5th house, then also
losses can occur.

Concerning the Eleventh House 387
Chart No. 217 -Born 28-10-1922 at 8-40 p.m. (I.S.T.) at 9 N
Ketu Lagna Mars | |
Rahu Saturn
RASI —-||—| navamsa |
Ketu
Moon Sii Marcury
aut Lagna
Mars | Gp-135 Moon |
Jupiter Rahu lupit |
Venus Sat ae |
Sun Mere Venu |
i i
n TE G oe a a: a
Balance of Mars Dasaat birth: 6 years,1 month and
17 days
The Eleventh House : In Chart No. 217 Pisces is the 11th
house aspected by 9th and 10th lord Saturn and 2nd and 5th
lord exalted Mercury and occupied by Ketu. It is strongly
disposed.
The Eleventh Lord : Jupiter lord of the 11 th is in the 6th
from Lagna in an inimical sign with debilitated Sun. The Sun's
debility is cancelled by Venus occupying a kendra from Lagna,
Apparently the 11th lord is not very strongly placed. But his
occupation of a constellation ruled by Rahu who, in turn, is
strongly placed in the 5th house strengthens him. In Navamsa,
Jupiter is well placed in his own sign.
Karaka : Jupiter occupies an inimical sign in the 6th house
with debilitated Sun and the same discussion as above applies
since the karaka is also the 11th lord in this case.

388 How to Judge a Horoscope
Considered from the Moon : The 11 th house is Scorpio
occupied by an excellent benefic and yogakaraka Venus. The
11th house is aspected by Saturn lord of the Moon-sign and the
2nd lord therefrom. Saturn is in conjunction with exalted 9th lord
Mercury. The 11th lord Mars is exalted in the Moon-sign with the
7th lord Moon generating a Sasi-Mangala Yoga.
Conclusion : Note the powerful Dhana Yoga in Chart No.
217 generated by exalted 2nd and 5th lord Mercury combined
with Yogakaraka Saturn in a trine in the 5th house and with
Rahu. The chart is strongly placed for financial gains. The 11th
house being aspected by Mercury and Rahu and Saturn has
given the native engineering (Mercury and Rahu) industries
(Saturn) worth several crores.
Chart No. 218. Born 18-4-7904 at 5-57 p.m. (L.M.T.) at 25
Jupiter Sun
Venus Mass Moon Moon Sun
Ketu | Mercury |
Rahu
RASI aÁ NAVAMSA
Saturn Jupit, Ketu
Ls A Vents i Mars
na
cii iiias Mercury a Saturn
Balance of Sun's Dasa at birth: 1year, O month and
13 days.
The Eleventh House: In Chart No. 218 Leo the 11th
house is neither aspected nor occupied by any planet.

Concerning the Eleventh House oy
The Eleventh Lord : The Sun occupies a kendra in
exaltation joining the 2nd lord Mars and 9th lord Mercury. The
Sun is well placed.
Karaka : Jupiter occupies his own sign in company with
exalted Lagna lord. His malefic iordshin is turned into a benefic
yoga by his association as 3rd and 6th lord with exalted 8th lord
Venus in the 6th house generating a partial Vipareeta Raja
Yoga enhanced further by the aspect of Yogakaraka Saturn.
Considered from the Moon : The 11 th house is Pisces
occupied by the 11th lord, exalted Moon-sign lord Venus and
Ketu and is aspected by Yogakaraka (9th and 10th iord) Saturn
from his own house.
Conclusion : The powerful combination of the 2nd, 7th, 9th
and 11th lords in the 7th house, a kendra, has generated
Chart No. 219.—Born 30-7-1863 at 2 p.m. (L.M.T.) at 42 N
Ketu | M
ars
Saturn |
Moon
Lagna
NAVAMSA |
Mercury ,
Sun Jupiter
Rahu
Balancr of the Moon's Dasa at birth: 2 years, 4 months and 6 days.

390 How to Judge a Horoscope
a very strong yoga for gains. The same situation obtains from
the Moon-sign also. The native is a newspaper magnet with
editions in different parts of the country.
The Elevanth House : In Chart No. 219 Virgo is the 11th
house occupied by 2nd and 5th lord Jupiter, 3rd and 4th lord
Saturn and 7th and 12th lord Venus in debility. Venus gets
neechabhanga since his sign dispositor Mercury is in the 7th
house from the Moon. The 11th house is fortified.
The Eleventh Lord : Mercury occupies the 9th house with
10th lord Sun aspected by a powerful 9th lord Moon.
Karaka : Jupiter is also the 2nd and 5th lord placed in the
11th with Saturn and Venus.
Considered from the Moon : The 11th house Scorpio is
occupied by Rahu and aspected by 11th lord Mars and Moonsign lord Saturn. The 11th lord Mars is in the 8th from the Moon.
The 11th house is strong and the 11th lord is not weak being in
Leo.
Conclusion: Saturn in the 11th is significant as giving gains
through mines, iron, labour and so on. Jupiter, lord of wealth, is
suggestive of influx of wealth. Vahanakaraka Venus advanced
the fortune of the native through the manufacture and sale of
automobiles The 2nd and 5th lord in the 11th aspecting the 9th
lord, Full Moon, in turn aspected by 11 th lord Mercury resulted
in fabulous gains to the native.
The advent of Jupiter Dasa advanced the fortunes of the
native. Jupiter is the 2nd and 5th lord placed in the 11 th house
and so the Dasa and Bhukti of the 2nd and 5th iord paved the
way for the native's future gains. It was in Mars Bhukti, Jupiter
Dasa that the native founded an automobile manufacturing
company. The sub lord Mars is the Lagna lord placed in the 10th
house. He also owns the 11th from the Moon. The

Concerning the Eleventh House 391
subsequent Dasas of Saturn (11th occupant) and Mercury (11th
lord) continued to add immensely to the native's position, wealth
and influence.
Chart No. 220. Born 7-4-1893 at 9-31 a.m. (L.M.T.) at 20
Sun Rahu Saturn
Venus : Mars j|Lagna Moon Mars Rah
| Mercury Jupiter ahu
Sun Jupiter
— RAS! —|| — NAVAMSA -
Venus
NH.62
j
Moon Ketu Sat Ketu | Mercury | Lagna
Balance of Ketu Dasa at birth : 6 years, 4 months and 4
days.
The Eleventh House : In Chart No 220 the 11th house is
Aries occupied by Rahu and the 7th and 10tn lord Jupiter. It is
not aspected by any planet and quite strong.
The Eleventh Lord : Mars occupies the 12th house but is
vargottama. He is also not aspected by any planet.
Karaka : Jupiter is with Rahu in the 11th house and exalted
in Navamsa gaining strength thereby.
Considered from the Moon : The 11th house is Libra
aspected by Jupiter lord of Chandra Lagna. It is occupied by
Ketu. Venus the 11th lord from the Moon is exalted and
occupies the 4th with the 9th lord Sun and the 7th and 10th ord
Mercury aspected by 2nd and 3rd lord Saturn. Mercury is

392 How to Judge a Horoscope
debilitated but gets cancellation of debility due to his occupation
of a kendra both from Lagna and the Moon.
Conclusion : The native of Chart No. 220, born in humble
circumstances, became a big industrialist and one of the
wealthiest men in the country. Financial gains depend not only
on the 11th house but also on a strong Lagna, the 9th (fortune),
the 10th (profession) and the 2nd (wealth) houses. There is a
blending of all these significations both from Lagna and Chandra
Lagna. Mercury is in the 10th in a kendra from the 2nd lord Moon
in association with exalted 5th lord Venus and aspected by
Saturn, lord of the 9th or house of fortune. The 10th lord Jupiter
is in the 11th with Rahu who rules over industries and aspects
the 2nd lord Moon. From Chandra Lagna also, the 2nd, 9th, 10th
and 11th houses are all fortified. The Moon is aspected by its
sign-lord Jupiter and 5th lord Mars. The 2nd lord Saturn is in the
10th aspected by 9th lord Sun, 10th lord Mercury and 11th lord
Venus—an ideal combination denoting immense wealth.
The native started Sugar Mills in the Moon's Dasa. The
Moon is lord of the 2nd and occupies the 7th aspected by Jupiter
lord of the 10th and Mars lord of the 11th. In Mars Dasa, the
native started cement industry. Mars is the 11th lord. In Jupiter's
Bhukti of Rahu Dasa, the native purchased a big managing
agency comprising of airways, coal mines, etc. Both the Dasa
and Bhukti lords are in the 11th house.
The Eleventh House: In Chart No. 221 Libra, being the 11th
house, is occupied by an exalted 2nd lord Saturn. It is not
aspected by any planet. The 11th house is very strong.
The Eleventh Lord: Venus occupies Lagna with 5th lord
Mars and is aspected by exalted 2nd lord Saturn from the 11th
house. Venus gets highly fortified.

Concerning the Eleventh House 393
| Sun
Venus
} Saturn
Moo
Mercury n Midian Mars
Rehu Jupit Ketu
n ąĒ RAS! eee!) ae NAVAMSA
Sun Ketu Rahu
NH-67
Lagna f
Mars | Saturn Mercury j Jupiter Lagna
Venus | |
Balance of Mercury's Dasa at birth : 5 year's, 1 month and 6
days.
Karaka : Jupiter is also the Lagna lord exalted in the 8th
house with the 8th lord and aspected by 9th lord the Sun and
2nd lord exalted Saturn. This indicates a sudden windfall in life.
Considered from the Moon : Taurus, a sign ruled by Venus,
is the 11th house. It is not occupied by or aspected by any
planet. The 11th lord Venus occupies the 6th with Yoga-karaka
Mars and aspected by exalted Saturn lord of the 7th. The 11 th
house is quite strongly disposed.
Conclusion: The 2nd lord Saturn is exalted in the 11th house
(gains). The 2nd house is occupied by 9th lord Sun aspected by
an exalted Ascendant lord Jupiter and the Moon forming a
Gajakesari Yoga. The Lagna and 9th lords are mutually
aspecting and the 11th lord Venus and 2nd lord Saturn are
interrelated forming a strong yoga for gains. The native of

394 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 221 was an industrialist having to do with labour, iron,
steel, aluminium factories, etc. Saturn has predominantly to do
with labour so that gain through employing labour on a large
scale was the important source of wealth.
The Eleventh House : In Chart No. 222 Taurus the 11th is
not occupied. But it is aspected by 2nd lord Sun, 5th lord Mars
and 9th lord Jupiter.
The Eleventh Lord: Venus is in the 5th house with 7th lord
Saturn, 3rd and 12th lord Mercury and Rahu.
Karaka : Jupiter is a benefic lord as well and occupies the
5th house, a trine, with 2nd lord the Sun and 5th lord Mars. In
Navamsa he is exalted and becomes very powerful.
Considered from the Moon : The Moon is in Virgo. The 11th
lord is the Moon himself. He is aspected by 5th lord Saturn.
The 11th house is aspected by 4th and 7th lord
Chart No. 222.—Born 26-11-1899 at 10-27p.m. (L.M.T.) at
Saturn
Venus
Rahu i
Mercury |
Saturn
NAVAMSA tial
a
Sun Ketu
Balance of the Sun's Dasa at birth : 4 years, 2 months
and 9 days.

Concerning the Eleventh House 395
Jupiter. The 2nd and 9th lord Venus, lord of Moon-sign and the
10th therefrom, viz., Mercury and the 5th lord Saturn have all
combined in a quadrantThe native grew very rich with many investments and
businesses but could not come anywhere near the financial level
of Chart Nos 221 and 222. Though the 11th house and other
factors bearing on it are quite well placed they are not
particularly strong. The 11th house being Taurus, the native
amassed a fortune through soaps. Mars and Rahu Dasa saw the
native build his soap-business into a national monopoly. Mars is
a Yogakaraka and joins the 9th and 2nd lord, Jupiter and the
Sun respectively, in the 5th house (investments). Rahu occupies
a Jupiterian sign and should therefore give his results.
Chart No. 223-Born 3-6-1939 at 10-30 p.m. (I.S.T.) at 24.N
| Saturn j
M Saturn
Jupiter | Venus — Mars On i Moon
Ketu Sun Mercury |
| Rahu | | Sun
RASI a i NAVAMSA p
Mars | | Ketu
Lagna |
i Moon Rahu Lagna Venus ; Jupiter
Balance of Ketu Dasa at birth : 2 years and 3 months.
The Eleventh House : In Chart No. 223 Libra the 11th is
occupied by Rahu and aspected by the 11th lord Venus and

396 How to Judge a Horoscope
the 2nd lord Saturn. Saturn is debilitated but gets cancellation of
debility due to his exaltation and debilitation lords, Mars and
Venus, being in mutual kendras.
The Eleventh Lord : Venus is the 11th lord. He is in the 5th
with the 2nd lord Saturn and also Ketu and is aspected by
exalted 5th lord Mars. The 2nd and the 5th lords having
exchanged signs and involving 11 th lord Venus fortify him.
Karaka : Jupiter is the Lagna lord and occupies his own sign
in a quadrant. He is favourably disposed due to his lordship of
both Rasi and Navamsa Lagnas.
Considered from the Moon : The same picture emerges, the
Moon being in Lagna.
Conclusion : The Lagna is vargottama. The Lagna lord
Jupiter occupies his own sign in the 4th house. In addition,
Jupiter becomes extremely powerful securing his own vargas 4
timse out of 5. The interrelationship between the 2nd lord Saturn,
the 5th lord Mars, and the 11th lord Venus involving all the three
houses as well as generated a powerful Dhana Yoga. Rahu in
the 11th made the native own a chain of industries.
The Eleventh House : In Chart No. 224 Libra the 11th house
is neither occupied nor aspected by any planet. It has no
afflictions.
The Eleventh Lord : Venus occupies the 3rd house
aspected by the lord of the 2nd and the 3rd, Saturn, and 5th lord
Mars. He is with the 7th and the 10th lord Mercury, and well
fortified.
Karaka : Jupiter is well placed in Lagna which happens to
be his moolatrikona sign. He is in association with the 2nd lord
Saturn. Further he occupies the constellation of the 11th lord
Venus.

Concerning the Eleventh House 397
Sun Ket
atu
ioan Merc. Mars Venus
Mercury
Venus ket
RASI — || — | NAVAMSA
Mara; Rahu
ee ee ees) eee)
Saturn Lagna
Jupiter Rahu Saturn Jupiter
Lagna Sun
Balance of Mercury's Dasa at birth : 2 years, 8 months and
26 days.
Considered from the Moon : The 11th house Capricorn is
hemmed between benefics Jupiter on one side and Mercury and
Venus on the other. It is neither occupied nor aspected by any
planet. The 11th lord Saturn is with the Moon and the 10th lord
Jupiter is in his own sign.
Conclusion : The association of the 11th lord Venus with
Mercury has given the native considerable earnings through the
business of money lending. The 11 th lord Venus, the 2nd lord
Saturn and the 5th lord Mars are all interrelated generating a
powerful Dhana Yoga. Further the association of karaka Jupiter
with the 2nd lord in the constellation of 11th lord Venus is
favourable for acquisition of wealth.
The Eleventh House : In Chart No. 225 Leo the eleventh
house is occupied by the 10th lord Moon and lord of the

398 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 225.-Born 16-10-1892 at 7-12 a.m. (D.M.T.) at
Jupit. i
Jupiter Rahu Bi Lagna | Saturn
Katu
Moon
RASI poo | = NAVAMSA
Moon
Mars Gii
Sun Mars
Mercury Sat, ||Merc. Sun Venus
Lagna Rahu
Balance of Ketu Dasa at birth : 1-year and 9 months.
Ascendant Venus. Itis aspected by an exalted Mars, lord of
the 2nd. Itis fortified.
The Eleventh Lord: The Sun is the 11th lord. He is
debilitated in the Ascendant but obtains cancellation of debility.
He is also vargottama and joins the 9th lord Mercury and Ketu in
Rasi.
Karaka ; Jupiter is in his own sign Pisces, is vargottama and
is aspected by Saturn lord of the 4th and 5th from the 12th
house.
Considered from the Moon : The eleventh house is
aspected by Saturn. The 11th lord Mercury joins the Sun lord of
the Moon-sign, and Ketu in the 3rd house.
Conclusion : The eleventh house as well as karaka Jupiter
are very favourably disposed. In addition, the Lagna lord Venus
occupies his own constellation and is in parivartans with the 11th
lord Sun, also strong due to neechabhanga and

Concerning the Eleventh House 399
his vargottama position. The presence of karaka Jupiter in
Pisces, a spiritual sign together with the aspect of Yoga karaka
Saturn from the 12th house (mokshasthana) is of significance in
as much as the native was the head of a religious Mutt. This is
suggested by the 9th lord Mercury combining with the
Atmakaraka Sun, which not only indicates great spirituality but
also ascension to a seat of spiritual power and responsibility.
It was in 1912 in Mercury's Bhukti of Venus Dasa that the
native was installed as a pontiff which, in addition to making him
the spiritual head of millions, brought vast properties all over the
country under his control. The Bhukti lord Mercury is the 9th lord
combining with 11th lord Sun in Lagna while the Dasa lord
Venus is the ruler of Lagna, placed in the 11th house in
parivartana with 11th lord Sun. Venus, the
Chart No. 226. -Born 26-5-1914 at 7-28 p.m. (I.S.T.) at 9 N
E a a aa a 78 E 37.
S: innit ir e
| ¡Monn kan |
Mercury | ý ói Sun
| r SOREN | enus || Rahu
Rahu | | |
Jupiter | Mars
RASI ir NAVAMSA os
Ketu Mars | Mercury
f | Moon Ketu
Lagna | i
j Balance of Mars Dasa at a 3 years, 4 months ee Palerice aihitie Dose attri aas 2 ontlisond te
ays.
| <a LT ee beani ee Jupiter Saturn

400 How to Judge a Horoscope
Lagna lord, the 10th lord Moon and the 2nd lord Mars are all
interrelated generating a formidable yoga for riches.
The Eleventh House : In Chart No. 226 the eleventh house
is free from aspects and is not aspected by any planet.
The Eleventh Lord : Mercury owning the 11th occupies the
7th house, with 3rd and 4th lord Saturn and the 10th lord the
Sun.
Karaka : Jupiter is in the 4th house aspected by Lagna lord
Mars who, though debilitated, gets cancellation of debility.
Jupiter is also aspected by 4th lord Saturn. The karaka is quite
strong, though his association with Rahu blemishes him slightly.
Considered from the Moon : The lord of the 11th house
Mars has neechabhanga. He occupies the 2nd house from the
Moon and is aspected by the 9th lord Saturn. The 11th house
and lord are considerably strong.
Conclusion : The Lagna lord in the 9th house and the 11th
lord combining with the 10th lord in the 7th house give the chart
much vitality. From the Moon, the 11th lord is powerfully placed
signifying the devolution of a trusteeship of a spiritual centre and
its administration on the native. This was in Saturn's Dasa,
Saturn's Bhukti. The Dasa and Bhukti lord combines with the
11th lord Mercury and the 10th lord the Sun and reflects their
results. The trusteeship has been the native's main occupation
as indicated by the involvement of the 10th lord Sun with the
planets in the 7th house.
The Eleventh House : In Chart No 227 Scorpio the 11 th is
occupied by Lagna lord Saturn. It is not aspected by any planet.
The Eleventh Lord: Mars, the 11th lord, is exalted in Lagna
and has exchanged signs with the Lagna lord Saturn.

Concerning the Eleventh House 401
Chart No. 227.—Born 21-4-1926 at 1-40 a.m. (G.M.T.) at 51
| Rahu
' Venus Sun | Rahu j
| Mercury | | Sun
Í Jupiter Moon | Saturn
| RASI — | NAVAMSA
| Mars ‘Legna |
mete Venus |
n
| | Jupiter
t Ketu Saturn Ketu Mars
| | Mercury
Balance of Mercury's Dasa at birth: 11 years, 9 months
and 23 days.
He is aspected by the 7th lord Moon. The house and lord are
both powerfully disposed.
Karaka: Jupiter occupies the 2nd house.
Considered from the Moon : The 11th house is Taurus. It is
aspected by the 7th lord Saturn while the 11th lord Venus is
exalted in the 9th house with Mercury, lord of the 3rd and 12th
houses.
Conclusion : The exchange of signs between Lagna and the
11 th lords and the 11 th lord in exaltation is of great
significance. Mars occupies his own constellation and forms a
sasi mangala yoga being in mutual aspect with the 7th lord
Moon.
The native of this chart acquired the titular monarchial
fulership of a country in Rahu Bhukti of Venus Dasa. Venus is a
yogakaraka for the chart and conjoins the 9th lord Mercury

402 How to Judge a Horoscope
forming a Raja Yoga in the 3rd house. The Bhukti lord Rahu is in
a kendra from the Dasa lord Venus and is in Gemini ruled by
Mercury. Mercury, in turn, forms a Neechabhanga Raja Yoga
with Dasa lord Venus.
The Eleventh House : In Chart No. 228 Virgo happening to
be the 11th house is aspected by an exalted 7th lord Venus and
Lagna lord Mars. It is quite strong.
The Eleventh Lord: Mercury, ruler of Virgo, occupies the 4th
house, in association with 10th lord the Sun. He is not aspected
by any planet.
wal d o voc oa
peed eee: tem bet aes
Mercury | i m | i
Sun phe Venus | Lagna
aes! RASI I || -—-| NAVAMSA n oe
Rahu | |
i es a a aa
Lagna Saturn f Voon Saturn | Jupiter
i | Mars j i
Balance of the Sun's Dasa at birth: 5 years, 9 months and 4
days.
Karaka : Jupiter occupies the 6th house with the 9th lord the
Moon and has exchanged signs with the Lagna lord Mars. He is
aspected by an exalted 3rd and 4th lord Saturn. The karaka is
fairly well placed though in the 6th house.

Concerning the Eleventh House 403
Considered from the Moon : The 11th house is Aquarius. It
is occupied by the 3rd and 6th lord Mercury and the 5th lord the
Sun. The 11th lord Saturn is exalted in the 7th aspected by Mars
and Jupiter lords respectively of Chandra-Lagna and the 9th
therefrom.
Conclusion : The 2nd and the 5th lord Jupiter and the 9th
lord Moon combining in the 6th house generate a powerful yoga
for gains. This is enhanced by the aspect of a well-placed Lagna
lord Mars on the 11th house. The presence of Lagna lord in the
5th house is a noteworthy factor for riches.
The native acquired immense properties as heir to an
erstwhile prince in Jupiter's Dasa, Jupiter's Bhukti. Jupiter, the
ruler of the major and the sub-periods, is the 2nd and 5th lord
associating with the 9th lord the Moon and aspecting the 2nd
house.
p is Lagna A
Jupiter | Ketu Moon | Jupiter
D CRE. ai SS t
Sat
Rahu
Lagna
——— RAS! NAVAMSA ——
Moon Mere a Sun
GD 145 “etu
Venus Sun |
Rahu Mercury | Mercury | Venus Mars
ra yi
balance of Sun's Dasa at birth : 1year, 3 months and
25 days.

404 How to Judge a Horoscope
The Eleventh House : In Chart No. 229 Cancer being the
Ascendant, the 11th house is Taurus. It is occupied by a very
powerful 9th lord Jupiter who is also vargottama. It is aspected
by the 2nd lord Sun and 3rd and 12th lord Mercury who is
vargottama. The eleventh house is very powerful.
The Eleventh Lord: Venus occupies the 6th house in
exchange of signs with 6th lord Jupiter. He is with Rahu
which blemishes him slightly.
Karaka; Jupiter is vargottama inthe 11th house and is
aspected by the 2nd lord the Sun and the 3rd and the 12th lord
Mercury, who is also vargottama.
Considered from the Moon : The eleventh house is equally
strong being Scorpio tenanted by the 8th lord Sun and the 9th
lord Mercury. It is aspected by the sign-dispositor Mars and
the 3rd and the 12th lord Jupiter. The 11th lord Mars is not so
strong being in the 8th from the Moon.
Conclusion : The outstanding features of Chart No. 229 is
the extremely powerful parivartana yogas involving powerful
planets. The Lagna is powerful being aspected by Lagna lord the
Moon who is in parivartana with 7th lord Saturn. The Sth lord
Jupiter is vargottama and aspects the 2nd lord Sun who, in turn,
has exchanged signs with Yogakaraka Mars. This is a powerful
yoga for fabulos financial gains. The 11th
lord has exchanged signs with the 6th lord Jupiter and
occupies his own constellation.
The native acquired an immense fortune in Jupiter's Dasa,
Sun's Bhukti in the form of immovable properties, book-royalties
and otner assets following the death of her father-The Dass lord
Jupiter owns the 9th, a constituent of the Dhana Yoga, involving
the 11th house. The ruler of the sub-period, viz , the Sun is the
2nd lord aspected by the 9th lord Jupiter and Yogakaraka Mars,
causing the native inherit large estates in his period.

Concerning the Eleventh House 405
Loss or Gain
The Eleventh House : In Chart No. 230 Scorpio being the
eleventh house is aspected by Yogakaraka Venus and the 3rd
and the 12th lord Jupiter from the 5th house. The Lagna lord
Saturn is vargottama. He aspects the 11th from the 9th house.
The 11th house is powerfully placed.
Chart No. 230.-Born 23-6-1894 at 10 p.m. (L.M.T.) at 51 N
Jupiter 5 K
Venue un Lagne otu |
Merc. |
RASI es. | | a NAVAMSA = |_______|
Sun
Moon Mercury
NH-64 Venus
Sat, Satur
Ketu Rehu Mars
Jupiter
Balance of Rahu Dasa at birth : 9 years, 5 months and 12
days.
The Eleventh Lord : Mars occupies the 3rd house in
association with Rahu. He is aspected by Lagna lord Saturn who
is also with a node, Ketu. The 11th lord is blemished.
Karaka : Jupiter as karaka occupies a benefic sign
association with Yogakaraka Venus aspecting the 11th house.
in
Considered from the Moon : The 11 th house is Sagittarius. Its
lord Jupiter joins the Yogakaraka Venus in a kendra from the
Moon. The 11th house is aspected by the political planet,

406 How to Judge a Horoscope
the Sun, who is the 7th lord. The 11th house is favourably
disposed.
Conclusion : The house of gains being extremely strongly
disposed, the native inherited a royal throne in Rahu Bhukti of
Saturn Dasa. Saturn occupies the 9th house in vargottama
aspected by the 11th lord Mars and his Dasa must result in
acquisition of a great fortune. But the 11th lord Mars occupies a
malefic constellation and is eclipsed by Rahu who occupies the
same asterism. As such, the gains acquried during Saturn's
Dasa could not last long and the native had to abdicate the
throne in the next Bhukti of Jupiter. Jupiter is the 3rd and the
12th lord. He is in the 5th house aspecting the 11th and the
Dasa lord Saturn. He associates with Venus, the Yogakaraka,
afflicting him as well. The 9th house is afflicted severely by
malefics. Although Saturn as Lagna lord is a benefic, his
association with Ketu and his being aspected by the 11th lord
Mars (who himself is afflicted by his association with Rahu)
renders him a malefic.
Note the powerful situation of Lagna lord in the 9th or house
of fortune aspected by 11th lord Mars. Yogakaraka Venus
occupies his own sign and aspects the 11th house. The 9th lord
Mercury occupies the 7th house. These factors indicate birth in
affluent and aristocratic circumstances forming as they do strong
yogas for financiel prosperity.
The Eleventh House : In Chart No. 231 Libra is the house of
gains. It is not occupied by any planet. The 2nd and 3rd lord
Saturn aspects it from the 9th house. The 11th house is fairly
strong.
The Eleventh Lord: Venus is in the 9th house joining the
2nd and the 3rd lord Saturn and 7th and 10th lord Mercury. His
occupation of Leo is not welcome.

Concerning the Eleventh House 407
Karaka : Jupiter occupies the 8th house in exaltation. As 4th
lord he is in parivartana with 8th lord Moon. He associates with
the 9th lord Sun. He is flanked on both sides by malefic Mars
and Saturn. Saturn's maleficence is checked through his
association with Venus.
Chart No. 231.-Born 18-7-1919 at 6-17 p.m. (I.S.T.) at 12 N,
Moon Ketu Mars || Ketu | Mercury | Saturn
| a SRSM SEREN SENEN
| Sun
| Jupit. ||
k RASI — a NAVAMSA ees
| jan: | Jupiter
Venus Sun
| GD-181 | Sat
| | Moon
! Legna | Rahu Lagna Venus
| f | Rahu
Balance of Saturn's Dasa at birth : 11 years, 6 months and
24 days.
Considered from the Moon : The 11th house is Capricorn. It
is aspected by exalted Jupiter lord of Chandra Lagna and the
6th lord the Sun from the 5th house. The 2nd and the 9th lord
Mars also aspects the 11th house adversely. The 11th lord
occupies the 6th house with the 3rd and the 8th lord Venus and
the 4th and the 7th lord Mercury. The 11th house is quite well
disposed but the 11th lord suffers heavy affliction.
Conclusion : The 5th lord Mars aspecting Lagna, Lagna itself
vargottama, Lagna lord Jupiter exalted and in association with
the 9th lord, the Sun, and the 11th lord Venus

408 How to Judge a Horoscope
joining the 2nd lord Saturn in the 9th house are indicative of
power, wealth and riches by birth.
However, note the simultaneous planetary dispositions
indicative of loss of power. The Lagna lord is in the 8th, a malefic
place. Karaka Jupiter has exchanged signs with 8th lord the
Moon. The 9th iord the Sun occupies the 8th house. The 11th
lord Venus though apparently well placed in his own
constellation suffers loss of strength due to his neecha position
and affliction by the 8th lord Moon and Rahu in Navamsa.
Chart No. 231 is of an erstwhile prince who lost many
privileges in Mercury Bhukti of Venus Dasa. The Dasa lord
Venus is a malefic for Sagittarius Ascendant, made worse by his
occupation of an inimical sign Leo which happens to be the 9th
house causing yoga-bhanga. Venus is equally malefic from
Chandra Lagna also. The Bhukti lord Mercury is in the
constellation of a Node. Both the Dasa and Bhukti lords are
blemished.
The Eleventh House : In Chart No. 232 Pisces, the 11th
house, is aspected by the 4th lord the Sun, the 2nd and 5th lord
exalted Mercury and the 11th lord Jupiter. The 11th house is
strongly disposed.
The Eleventh Lord: Jupiter occupies the 5th house joining
exalted Mercury, lord of the 5th and the 2nd, and the 4th lord
Sun. The 5th lord is well placed.
Karaka: Jupiter is also the karaka as well as the 11th lord.
Considered from the Moon : The 11 th house is Scorpio
occupied by the 11th lord Mars. It ts not aspected by any planet.
The 11th lord being Mars is in his own sign. The house of gains
is quite strong.

Concerning the Eleventh House 409
Se a r r a
| Sun
Lagna Jupiter | Venus | Səturn
i Ketu
Lagna
Rahu me Mas
j a [f] NAVAMSA
een Ketu Moon
Saturn | R.P. 18/90
Marc,
Mars Venus | Sun Rahu Mercury
Jupit |
Balance of Mars Dasa at birth: 6 years, 5 months and 18
days.
Conclusion : The combination in Chart No. 232 of the 11th
lord Jupiter and Mercury, exalted lord of the 2nd and 5th house
has generated a powerful Dhana Yoga. This is reinforced by the
vargottama position of Mercury. In addition the combination
occurs in the 5th house. The 11th lord Jupiter from the 5th
house aspects Yogakaraka Saturn in the 9th house. Saturn, in
turn, generates a Sasa Yoga. These yogas enabled the native
to emerge as a powerful industrialist during Mercury's Dasa, his
financial position consistently shooting up during this period.
A significant negative feature in an otherwise strong chart is
the position of Venus in a dusthana in the 6th house hemmed in
between malefics Mars and the Sun even th jugh he occupies
his own sign both in Rasi and Navamsa. The 11th

410 How to Judge a Horoscope
lord Jupiter is combust which indicates that his malefic lordship
can gain an upper hand during adverse planetary periods. As
soon as Ketu Dasa began, the native's financial empire came
crashing down. Ketu occupies his own constellation and afflicts
the 10th house through Rahu. He is in Leo ruled by the Sun who
afflicts the 11th lord Jupiter and the 5th house. During Ketu
Dasa, the native suffered every kind of loss including that of
prestige and reputation.

Concerning the Twelfth House
The twelfth house signifies losses, extravagance,
expenditure, confiscation, sayana sukha (pleasures of the
couch), left eye, feet, incarceration, divine knowledge and piety
and Final Emancipation (Moksha). As in the case of previous
Bhavas, the factors to be considered in analysing this Bhava are
: (a) the Bhava, (b) its lord, (c) its occupants and (d) the karaka.
A proper assessment of the indication of the twelfth house rests
on a balanced examination of these factors.
Results of the Lord of the Twelfth House being
Posited in Different Houses
First House :—The native will have a weak constitution and
will be feeble-minded. He will, however, be handsome and
sweet-tongued. If the sign is common, the native will generally
be travelling about. If the 6th lord joins the 12th lord in Lagna,
the native will live long. But if the 8th house is afflicted, he will be
short-lived. This also indicates imprisonment and living abroad. If
the Lagna and 12th lords exchange signs, the native will be a
miser, hated by all and devoid of intelligence.
In the Second House :—The person will suffer financial
losses. He may contact debts and get involved in
nefarious

412 How to Judge a Horoscope
activity. He will not eat timely meals. His eye-sight will be poor
and his family life, marked by lack of harmony. If the twelfth lord
is a benefic and in dignity, these evil indications will be greatly
reduced and the native will have financial stability. He will be a
tactful speaker. If the twelfth lord is ill-disposed, the native
indulges in gossip and quarrelling.
In the Third House :—He will be timid and quiet. Loss of a
brother is shown. He will be shabbily dressed. If malefics afflict,
he may develop ear-ailments. He may have to spend much
money on younger brothers. As a writer he may be
unsuccessful. He may work in some commonplace job and earn
very little. If the 12th lord joins the 2nd lord in the 3rd and is
aspected by Jupiter or the 9th lord, one may have more than
one wife.
In the Fourth House :- Early death to mother, mental
restlessness, unnecessary worry, enmity of relatives and living
abroad are some of the results. Suffering constant harrassment
from the landlord, his residence will be in an ordinary house. But
if the twelfth lord is well placed, these adverse indications get
mitigated to a large extent. If Venus is strong, the native may
own his own conveyance but it will always give trouble.
In the Fifth House .——Either difficulty to beget progeny or
unhappiness from children will be experienced. He will be
religious-minded and may undertake pilgrimages. Weak-minded
and suffering mental aberrations, he feels he is miserable. He
will not succeed in agriculture as his crops will suffer from pests
and disease.
In the Sixth House :—The native will be happy and
prosperous, live long, enjoy many comforts, possess a healthy
and handsome physique, and vanquish his enemies. But he
may become involved in litigation which may come to an end to
his

Concerning the Twelfth House 413
advantage. But if melefics afflict the 12th lord, the person will be
unscrupulous, sinful and ill-tempered, hating his mother suffering
from unhappiness on account of his own children. Womanising
will land him in distress.
In the Seventh House .-The wife may come from a poor
family. Married life will be unhappy and may end in separation.
Later on he will take to asceticism. Weak in health and suffering
from phlegmatic troubles, he will be without learning or property.
In the Eighth House :—The native will be rich and
celebrated, will enjoy a luxurious life with many servants waiting
on him. Gain through deaths and legacy is indicated. Interested
in occult subjects and devoted to Lord Vishnu, he will be
righteous, famous and a gentle speaker being endowed with
many good qualities of head and heart.
In the Ninth House .-—Residence abroad and prosperity are
shown. He may acquire much property in foreign lands. Honest,
generous and large-hearted he may not have any spiritual
leanings. Not liking his wife, friends and preceptor, and
interested in physical culture, he loses his father early in life.
In the Tenth House .—Hard-working and having to
undertake tedious journeys for his occupation he will be a jailor,
doctor or work in the cemetery and such places. He spends
money on agricultural pursuits in which he makes profits. The
native will derive no happiness or physical comforls from his
sons.
In the Eleventh House :—He will engage himself in
business, but does not make much profit. He has few friends but
many enemies. Troubled by extravagant brothers, some of
whom may be invalids, the native's funds may dwindle on

414 How to judge a Horoscope
this account. He will earn well by trading in pearls, rubies and
other precious stones.
In the Twelfth House :- The native spends much on
religious and righteous purposes. He will have good eye-sight
and enjoy pleasures of the couch. He will be engaged in
agriculture. If malefics afflict the twelfth lord, the native will be
restless and always roaming about.
These results are general and must be adopted to suit
individual cases. If the twelfth lord is a benefic, his occupation of
the twelfth house gives generally favourable results. If the 12th
house is a movable sign and contains the Moon or Mercury, the
native will do lot of travelling. Benefics aspecting this
combination give residence abroad, delightful journeys and
general good fortune. If malefics afflict by papakartari yoga or by
aspect, the native may leave the country for fear of the law or
life, and leave vagrant life as an incognito.
If the Lagna lord is in the 12th house and the trines or
quadrants are not occupied by benefics, the native will be a man
of mediocre or poor means leading a monotonous life.
General Combinations
We give below some important combinations bearing on the
twelfth house and its significations drawn from various standard
classical works.
When the lord of the twelfth house occupies benefic vargas,
the native spends his wealth in honourable and approved ways.
If the 12th lord is aspected by or is with a malefic or depressed
or eclipsed planet, the native spends his money in illegal and
questionable ways. Depending upon the planet afflicting the
12th lord, one may expend his wealth on

Concerning the Twelfth House 415
wine, women, illegal gratification, races, gambling or other vices.
If benefics aspect or occupy the 12th house, the native may
have a good father to take care of his wants to spend any
amount of money. If malefics afflict the 12th, one's earning get
dissipated in many ways. Lords of malefic houses such as the
6th or the 8th in the 12th result in loss of prestige and money
provided the 10th house, its lord, the 2nd house, the 11 th
house and their lords also get afflicted.
If the 12th lord is exalted or in a friendly sign, the person will
be generous ; if related to a well-placed Gth lord, fortunate. A
benefic in the 12th makes one thrifty and careful with his money.
Lord of the 12th aspected by Jupiter, the 9th lord in the 4th, and
the 10th lord in a kendra, indicate a charitable disposition. The
Ascendant and the 9th lords in parivartana make the native
engage himself in charitable and virtuous deeds. One will be
keen on undertaking pilgrimages and also charitably disposed if
the 9th lord is in the 12th. The 9th lord, occupying a benefic sign
in Navamsa with a benefic planet, makes one spend lavishly on
charity. Exalted Mercury posited in a quadrant or the 11th and
aspected by the 9th lord makes one a philanthropist.
The 9th lord in simhasanamsa (occupying the same varga 5
times) aspected by the lords of the Lagna and the 10th ; or the
9th lord aspecting the Ascendant and the Ascendant lord
disposed in a quadrant; or a benefic planet in the Ascendant
the 9th lord in a malefic Navamsa or shashtyamsa ; one
spends large sums on charity out of ostentation.
If the 12th house and Venus are both beneficially disposed, the
native, wherever he be, will have bed comforts. Similar results
will happen if the lord of the twelfth house is conjoined with or
aspected by a benefic and occupies a benefic

416 How to Judge a Horoscope
sub-division (varga). One will not enjoy such pleasures under the
following combinations :
If the Lagna lord occupies the 6th, 8th or the 12th : the
Lagna lord is debilitated or joins Saturn, Mandi or Rahu ; or if the
12th lord is afflicted by malefic aspects or associations.
Depending upon the other planets and the Lagna in a
horoscope, such denial or deprivation of bed-pleasures may be
due to force of circumstances, poverty, ill-health, physical
deformity or continence due to spiritual inclinations.
The nature of the planet in the twelfth house gives us a clue
as to how one's wealth is lost, dissipated or spent.
The native's wealth is spent on fines or will be confiscated
by the Government when the afflicted Sun occupies the 12th.
Mars in the 12th gives expensive litigation and dangerous
enemies. Money will be lost through ransom, cheating and
swindlers. Reckless investment in shares and trade and
business are likely when Mercury is placed in a similar situation.
Family litigation will also dwindle wealth. Venus causes loss of
money through women of ill-fame, scandals or black-mail-Saturn
and Mars create expenditure on account of co-borns. Saturn and
Rahu cause heavy expenses on deaths and similar calamities.
The Moon and the Ascendant lord in the 12th result in
dissipation of money through medical and hospital bills, sureties,
bail-amounts, etc. These results are possible in toto only if there
are appropriate indications in the chart as a whole and the
particular Bhava concerned to show such loss. One should be
very careful in weighing the afflictions correctly.
The native's mother is instrumental in his losing money
when the afflicted 12th lord joins the 4th lord. The 12th lord so
connected with the 6th lord, Mars, Venus, 5thlord. 3rd

Concerning the Twelfth House 417
lord, 7th lord and the 10th lord shows loss of money through
their respective significations, namely, enemies, litigation,
women, children, co-boms, married partner and father.
The 12th lord with a malefic suggests embezzlement
tendencies. An exchange of houses between the 2nd and 12th
lords and affliction by Lagna lord in the 6th house indicates
criminal proceedings against the native leading to loss of wealth.
Similar effects can happen when the 12th lord occupies the 2nd,
the 11th lord is in the 12th and the 2nd lord is debilitated or
occupies the 6th, the 8th or the 12th house; when the 2nd lord is
combust, debilitated or afflicted in the 12th and the Ascendant
lord is weak ; or the 10th lord is in the 11th combining with the
Lagna lord in a malefic shashtyamsa ; or when the 2nd lord is
debilitated, joins a malefic or is combust in the 6th ; or if Venus,
Rahu and the Sun are in the 12th, such expenditure will be due
to courts, litigation, fines, etc.
If the lord of the Navamsa occupied by the 2nd house is
aspected by the Lagna lord and is in the 6th, the 8th or the 12th
houses, the native incurs expenditure on account of fines. This
combination may also indicate losses through theft and fire
If Mars aspects the weak 2nd and 11th lords who also
occupy inimical Amsas ruled by malefics and are at the same
time afflicted by malefics, theft, outbreak of fire or fines could
lead to loss of wealth. If the afflicted 10th lord is in the 6th with
the 2nd and 11th lords in an evil shashtyamsa, the native suffers
public censure and thereby loses his wealth.
If the luminaries occupy the 12th, loss of wealth takes
place through tax raids, government enactments or
confisca-

418 How to Judge a Horoscope
tion. Jupiter in the 12th makes one honest and pay taxes and
tolls properly.
Lord of the Navamsa occupied by the 11th lord with a
benefic but in a malefic shashtyamsa in the 6th, the 8th or the
12th houses may plunge one in debts. If the 10th lord be either
aspected or conjoined with the 11th lord, a malefic occupies the
2nd house and the Lagna lord occupies the 12th house, then the
native will get involved in debts. Involvement in debts may be
anticipated under the following combinations :
Lagna lord joins the 2nd or the 7th lord is either eclipsed,
debilitated or in an inimical sign in any of the dusthanas (the 6th,
the 8th and 12th houses) while the 9th lord does not receive any
benefic aspects ; the 2nd lord is eclipsed and conjoins a malefic
in the 2nd or the 8th house ; the 2nd lord is both combust and
debilitated and occupies a malefic shashtyamsa ; the Ascendant
lord is afflicted both by a malefic planet and the lord of either the
6th, 8th or 12th.
If the lords of the Navamsa occupied by the rulers of the
drekkanas occupied by the 2nd and 11th houses are in
vaiseshikamsa and be in a trine or quadrant, the native will be
able to clear off his debts during his life time.
Poverty is indicated when Jupiter is in the 12th, 6th or 8th
from the Moon and the Moon is in a trine or a quadrant,
debilitated or occupying an inimical varga. The Sun in debility in
the 9th and Mars in the 8th cause appalling poverty. If the Sun in
Aries is aspected by a malefic and is in debility in Navamsa; or if
Venus occupies Virgo both in Rasi and Navamsa, a beggar is
born. When the Ascendant is Sagittarius, Pisces, Leo or Taurus
and Jupiter is stronger than the 9th lord and the 11th lord is
weak and combust and occupies any

Concerning the Twelfth House 419
Bhava other than a kendra, the native will generally be in
indigent circumstances.
If a malefic occupies the 2nd, 4th or the 5th house from
Jupiter, one will be poor. The same result is indicated if the
luminaries in the Lagna are aspected or associated with the 2nd
or the 7th lord. The 9th lord in the 12th, the 12th lord in the 2nd
and malefics in the 3rd cause penury and suffering.
If the Lagna lord is in the 8th house while the 8th lord joins
the 2nd or the 7th lord in Lagna, the native will never earn
enough for even bare subsistence. Benefics in the 10th and
malefics in the 2nd denote poverty. The Moon, Jupiter and
Saturn in quadrants and Mars and Mandi in the 5th, the 8th or
the 12th bestow poverty. Most of these combinations can be
found in the charts of slum-dwellers, servant-maids, flowersellers, show-shine boys and similar categories of vocation
where life is lived from day-to-day.
The Ascendant, its lord and planets in papakartari yoga
usually give rise to imprisonment. If the Lagna and the 6th lord
combine with Saturn in a kendra or kona, the native will suffer
imprisonment. Malefics in the 2nd, 5th, 9th and 12th houses
cause captivity, the exact nature of which is determined by the
nature of the sign rising on the Ascendant. If Aries, Taurus or
Sagittarius is rising, the native is said to be bound by ropes. If
Scorpio is the Lagna, the native will be thrown into an
underground cell. If Gemini, Libra or Virgo is ascending, one
may be put in fetters. Imprisonment will be in a large protected
building if the Lagna is Pisces, Cancer or Capricorn.
The 6th and Lagna lords in a trine or quadrant, joining Rahu
or Ketu, cause incarceration. Death in captivity may occur
when the Moon, Mars. Saturn and the Sun occupy the 10th,

420 How to Judge a Horoscope
9th, 1st and 5th houses respectively. If the rulers of (a) the 2nd
and the 12th houses, (b) the 5th and 9th houses, (c) the 6th and
12th houses, (d) the 3rd and 11th houses or (e) the 4th and 10th
houses are equal in strength, the native may face criminal action
provided there are no other mitigating factors.
If Lagna lord Venus is in the 6th, one suffers from diseases
in the left eye. The 2nd and 12th lords conjoining Venus and the
Lagna lord in any of the dusthanas (the 6th, the 8th or the 12th)
makes one born blind. Combination of the Lagna lord, the Sun
and Venus gives the same results. The Moon afflicted by a
malefic planet and Venus in the 2nd house can cause loss of
vision. The Sun, the Moon and Venus are the natural
significators of the eyes. Afflictions to these and the 12th house
cause defective vision.
The Moon and Venus in the 6th, the 8th or the 12th cause
night-blindness. One will have weak vision if the waning Moon is
aspected by Saturn, or if the Moon in Cancer is aspected by
malefics from the 7th or the 10th house. Eye troubles are
foreseen when Venus occupies the Lagna or the 8th house
afflicted by malefics. If the Sun aspected by Mars or Saturn or
afflicted by Rahu occupy the 12th house or any trine, the native
will have defective vision.
If the Lagna and 2nd lords occupy the 6th, 8th or the 12th
houses, one's eye-sight may be affected. Mars in the 12th
injures the right eye. If the Sun and the Moon occupy the 6th
and the 12th from Lagna, one may lose one of his eyes. If the
Moon and Venus occupy the 12th house, or if Venus along with
a malefic occupy the 12th house, the left eye will be affected.
Defective vision and eye-ailments are not so serious today
as they were when the classical works were written. In those

Concerning the Twelfth House 421
days, defective vision made one handicapped and depend on
the mercy of others. As such, natives whose charts indicated
such defects were rejected for marriages and generally looked
upon as a burden. Now-a-days things have changed totally and
defective vision is of little consequence except in certain
vocations. Most cases of defective vision can be set right
through prescribing proper lenses or through simple surgical
operations. Blindness is also no longer a handicap since blind
people are taught to be self-reliant.
If the 12th house be aspected or occupied by Saturn or
Mandi and the 12th lord be in a Vipat (3rd), Pratyak (5th) or
Naidhana (7th) constellation reckoned from Janma Nakshatra
(birth-constellation), the native may face untold calamities and
hardships. He will enter upon a vicious code of conduct, commit
sins and go to hell after death.
If a malefic planet in combustion, debilitation or a state of
eclipse afflicts the twelfth Bhava, one may go to lower planes
such as hell after death. When the 12th lord occupies a malefic
shashtyamsa and is aspected by a malefic planet or when Rahu
is in the 12th house with Mandi and the 8th lord is aspected by
the 6th lord, the person descends into the infernal regions after
mortal death.
If the 12th house is occupied by a benefic or is subject to
a shubhakartari yoga, the native goes to heaven. If Jupiter as
the 10th lord occupies the 12th house or is aspected by
Venus,
waning Moon or well placed Sun, one becomes a celestial
after death.
The same state occurs if a benefic planet in strength
occupies the 12th house in benefic vargas and is aspected
both by benefics and malefics. If powerful Jupiter occupies
Cancer and his moolatrikona sign in Navamsa and 3 or 4
planets are

422 How to Judge a Horoscope
in kendras, the native is said to attain Brahmaloka after his
mortal death. When Sagittarius is the Ascendant, Aries is the
Navamsa Lagna, Venus occupies the 7th house in Gemini and
the Moon is in Virgo, the native is said to attain Liberation
(Moksha) after death. Ketu in the 12th from karakamsa gives
Kaivalya or Final Emancipation. If the 10th lord joins 4 other
planets in a trine or quadrant, the native attains Final Liberation.
Mars and Mercury in Pisces and Gemini as Ascendant give
Moksha.
These combinations culled out from authoritative works on
astrology by ancient writers indicate the next stage of the soul's
journey after its release from the human body. This is a very
deep subject and involves a profound understanding of deep
studies in the doctrine of Karma. There is no way of veryfying
predictions bearing on the state of the soul after it shakes off the
physical body. But some clues can be had by studying the
twelfth Bhavas of great saints such as Sri Ramakrishna
Paramahamsa, Ramana Maharishi and Sri Aurobindo.
There is a little known but practically applicable dictum in
Bhavartha Ratnakara bearing on the twefth house. According to
it a person will be fortunate in respect of that house whose
karaka is situated in the 12th house from the Ascendant. The
following are the important karakas for the different Bhavas :
Thanubhava or 1st house — The Sun
Dhanabhava or 2nd house — Jupiter
Bhratrubhava or 3rd house — Mars
Matrubhava or 4th house — The
Putrabhava or 5th house — Jupiter
Satrubhava or 6th house — Saturn
Kalatrabhava or 7th house — Venus
Ayurbhava or 8th house — Saturn

Concerning the Twelfth House 423
Pitrubhava or 9th house — The Sun
Karmabhava or 10th house — Jupiter Labhabhava or
11th house — Jupiter Vyayabhava or 12th house —
Saturn Thus if the Sun is in the 12th house, the native
will be
fortunate in respect of the 9th house indications ; if the Moon
is in the 12th house, in respect of the 4th house indications;
if Venus isinthe 12th house, in respect of the 7th house
indications and so on.
Moon Lagna
Lagna Sat 3 Rahu
Rahu Jupiter
Sun
Mercury
Ketu
- RASI —— |, E NAVAMSA ——"
NH-29
M Sun
a
Venus ia Merc. Ketu Saturn Moon
Ketu Venus
| | Mars
Balance of the Venus Dasa at birth: 12 years, 5 months
and 21 days.
In Chart No. 233, the Moon, karaka for the 4th house,
occupies the 12th from the Ascendant. The native was
extremely fortunate in respect of his mother who wasa
genteel, refined and highly spiritual lady. But also note that
the Moon is with Rahu aspected by Mars. The mother died in
the native's 12th or 13th year.

424 How to Judge a Horoscope
Planets in the Twelfth House
The Sun: The native may take to an immoral life and
engage himself in vile occupations. He will not be quite
successful in his life and may feel neglected by all. He will suffer
the loss of some limb and have weak eye-sight. He will,
however, be energetic and have sons.
The Moon : The native may suffer from some deformity. He
will be narrow-minded, hard-hearted and mischievous. He
prefers to lead on obscure life in solitude. Eye-sight will be
weak. If the Moon is waning and combines with Saturn, sloth
and lethargy will be the result.
Mars : The person may lose his wife. He will be selfish,
hateful and suffer diseases due to excess of heat in the body.
He is liable to deception and may lose his money. If Mars and
Saturn occupy the 12th and the 2nd houses respectively, the
Moon be in Lagna and the Sun in the 7th house, he may suffer
from leucoderma. If Mars in the 12th house is aspected by the
Sun, danger from fire and wicked people is indicated. Malefics in
the 7th and the 8th and Mars in the 12th denote that one will
have another wife even when the first is alive.
Mercury: Capricious and wayward, the person will indulge in
extra-marital relations and suffer penury, and perverted thinking
will make him unhappy. He will also have a few children.
Jupiter: The native may deride religion and be evil-minded.
He will commit fearful deeds and lead a lascivious life. Later on
he repents and reforms himself. The native will always be
anxious about his vehicles, ornaments and clothes.
Venus : Desertion by relatives ; hankering after comforts
without success and penury will make the native's life miserable.

Concerning the Twelfth House 425
He will indulge in lying and associates with low women.
His eye-sight will be poor. If Venus is exalted, contrary results
will happen.
Saturn : The native will be dull-headed and lose all his
money. He will have squint eyes and a deformed limb, make
many enemies, suffer losses in trade, be a pessimist and
commits sins in secret.
Rahu : The native will be prosperous, immoral, but of a
helpful nature. He will have eye troubles. If the Sun is in the 7th,
Mars is in the 10th and Rahu is in the 12th Bhava, the native's
father will die early.
Ketu : The native will have a restless and wandering mind
and leave his country of birth. The lower classes will befriend
him. All his inherited property may be lost.
Time of Fructification of the Results of the
Twelfth House
As explained in the previous chapters, here also the
following factors must be considered in timing events : (a) Lord
of the 12th house, (b) planet or planets aspecting the 12th
house, (c) planet or planets posited in the 12th house, (d)
planets aspecting the lord of the 12th house, (e) planet or
Planets in association with the lord of the 12th house, and (f) the
lord of the 12th house from the Moon. The position of Saturn is
also of significance as he is the karaka of loss, sorrow, after-life
as well as renunciation and Emancipation or
The factors mentioned above may influence the 12th house
either as the lords of main periods or as lords of sub-periods. (1)
The sub-periods of planets capable of influencing the 12th house
in the major periods of those who are also capable of
influencing the 12th house produce results pertaining to the

426 How to Judge a Horoscope
12th house par excellence. (2) The sub-periods of planets
associated with the 12th house in the major periods of whose
lords are not associated with the 12th house, will produce results
relating to the 12th house only to a limited extent. (3) Similarly,
the sub-periods of planets who are not associated with the 12th
house in the major periods of planets associated with the 12th
house will produce results pertaining to the 12th house only to a
feeble extent.
Note the Bhava rul'ed by the planet occupying the 12th, and
also the Bhava occupied by the lord of the 12th house. During
the periods of these lords, loss or trouble in respect of these
Bhavas can be expected.
Nature of Results
If the 12th lord is well placed with beneficial aspects and
associations, his Dasa will make the native benevolent. He
becomes virtuous and acquires merit. The native will be
honoured by the rulers. If the lord of the 12th is weak due to
association with malefics, debilitation or combustion, one will
face much suffering. His health will break down and he may face
calumny from all sides, and even suffer captivity. His earnings
will dwindle.
The exact nature of results depends upon the ownership,
etc., of the planets connected with the 12th lord. The following
results may be expected during the periods of the different
planets when they are connected with the twelfth house :— Sun :
Becomes unsuccessful in all ventures. Takes to study and
practice of occult sciences. Children will cause much unhappiness. Moon: The native meets with obstacles in all his
undertakings. Becomes cruel and evil minded. Loses power and
is deceived by trusted colleagues. Leads an obscure life. Mars:
Contracts many diseases. May meet with accidents.

Concerning the Twelfth House 427
Loses popularity and career deteriorates. Becomes dishonestwill be duped. Liable to be defrauded. Mercury: Becomes
philosophical. Suffers initially, mental delusions and worries.
Acquires new skills. Will beget limited progeny. Mother will face
danger. Jupiter: Becomes poor and unlucky. Suffers loss of
children and becomes a sadist. Commits sins and gradually
takes to a life of piety. Venus: Associates with women of illrepute. Loses or separates from the married partner. Takes to
unscrupulous ways and means of gaining money. Becomes
miserly. Saturn: Business fails and debts mount. Litigation and
loss of prestige. Eye-sight fails. Becomes dispassionate if Dasa
occurs late in life. Rahu : Suffers loss of limbs through violent
accident. Begets limited progeny. Earns well through
unconventional means. Ketu : Mental disturbance and
wandering habits. Will reside abroad and work amidst servile
classes.
Dasas of planets in the 12th house generally produce
untoward results or else give interest in spirituality and religion.
If, however, there are benefic yogas, benefic results can also be
expected on a material level such as distinction in profession,
financial prosperity, acquisition of wife, children, comforts,
jewels, clothes and other objects of luxury.
The following results are likely, in a general sense, during
the periods (Dasa or Bhukti) of the 12th lord. But these results
must be modified by the nature of the sign and planets
influencing the 12th house and its lord. The results of the Dasa
must be predicted taking into account the karaka and lordship of
the house occupied by the 12th lord.
When the lord of the 12th is placed in the Ascendant with
the Ascendant lord, one will generally lose the affection of others
during the period of the 12th lord. His intelligence will grow dull
and he may become miserly. He loses his wealth

428 How to Judge a Horoscope
through short-sighted schemes, associates with evil persons and
becomes addicted to bad habits. If the 12th lord is a benefic, the
evil is reduced. Even if the native loses all his money, he will try
to work hard and regain it.
If the lord of the 12th house occupies the 2nd house with
the 2nd lord, domestic peace will be lacking. There will be
constant bickerings in the family. He will not be able to eat good
food or he may even develop some ailment of the tongue or
throat. He will be ill-tempered and commit many indiscretions.
His eye-sight will be affected. If the 12th lord is strongly afflicted,
the native may have to live at others' expense and doled out
food. If the 12th lord is favourably disposed, the malefic
indications will be greatly reduced.
If the 12th lord occupies the 3rd house with the 3rd lord, the
brothers of the native will face hardships. They will take recourse
to evil ways. The native's expenditure will keep mounting. If the
12th lord occupies the 6th, 8th or 12th house from Navamsa
Lagna or is aspected by benefics, the contrary results can be
expected. The person will have to undertake many journeys
within the country. If the 10th lord is also involved, his job may
require him to constantly move about. If the 12th lord combines
with the 6th and 8th lords, the native enjoys good food, riches,
conveyances, luxuries and prosperity of every kind.
If the lord of the 12th house occupies the 4th with the 4th
lord, the mother may die early. If benefics influence the 4th lord,
the native will be happy and own substantial immovable property
and many conveyances. He will evince growing interest in
Spiritual literature. If malefics afflict the 12th lord, the native's
mother suffers a crisis in life. She will have unhappy days. The
native gets trouble on account of his properties,

Concerning the Twelfth House 429
which may get lost or destroyed. If both benefics and malefics
aspect or associate with 12th lord in the 4th house, the native
will face troubles but will be able to overcome them.
If the lord of the 12th occupies the 5th along with the 5th
lord, the native gets progeny in the former's periods. He will
suffer mental aberration and his friends will desert him. He may
lose the association of an influential person. If malefics afflict the
12th lord, his children may face trouble or the native suffers
much unhappiness and pain on their account. His father will
pass through difficulties while he himself may rouse the wrath of
a powerful man. His life will be disrupted due to political
disturbances. The native will face many troubles in his work
(occupation).
If the lord of the 12th house occupies the 6th with the 6th
lord, the Dasa of the 12th lord will be filled with joyous festivities.
The person becomes fortunate in all walks of life, gets much
wealth, marries a noble and good woman and his children will
be a source of happiness. If the 12th lord combines with the 8th
lord, the native will get political power, fame and honour. If
malefics afflict the combination, he may be troubled by adverse
criticism and enemies.
The native's wife may have to face some danger or the
other if the lord of the twelfth occupies the seventh with the 7th
lord. If a maraka period is on, he faces danger to his life. Wife
may live abroad. Acquisition of money and the wife surviving a
crisis will be the result of benefics aspecting the 12th lord, if
malefics afflict the 7th house and the 12th lord, one may
wander aimlessly, get tired, lack physical comforts, be beet with
sorrows and ailments and his married life may be marred by
slanderous talk.

430 How to Judge a Horoscope
If the lord of the twelfth is placed in the eighth with the 8th
lord, one enjoys luck and at the same time some troubles. But
generally, during the period of the 12th lord, he will have
happiness, succeed in his ventures, though results may be slow
in coming. Marriage and other happy celebrations will take place
and much money and authority will be secured. The 6th lord
joining the 12th lord confers results par excellence, the native
enjoying honour, recognition, distinction and prosperity. The
12th lord being related to 5th lord makes one deeply devoted to
God. A steady career is vouchsafed if the lord of the 12th
occupies the 9th with the 9th lord. Affliction of the 9th lord leads
to the loss of job and luck. If benefics aspect the 9th house, one
develops interest in piety and leads a virtuous life. His material
prosperity will be on a low keel. These results can be expected
in the Dasa or Bhukti of the twelfth lord.
If the lord of the 12th occupies the 10th with the 10th lord,
one will spend money for charitable purposes. Paternal property
may slip out of the native's hands or get spoilt through fire or
other accident. Benefics aspecting the 12th lord makes one
detached and develop spirituality. If malefics afflict, one may
resort to propitiation of lower deities or Kshudra Devatas and
goblins for a living. If there is a papakartari yoga, he will be
dreaded for his evil powers.
Lord of the 12th in the 11th with the 11th lord causes
financial set-backs. Trade may bring in losses. Benefics
aspecting the 12th lord make the person expend much money
on religious and charitable deeds even at the cost of his own
well-being. Loss of money through theft, fire or accident occur if
malefics afflict. If one is a businessman, loss may occur due to
misunderstanding with elder brothers or partners

Concerning the Twelfth House 431
who are in the business. The nature of the afflicting planet gives
a clue to the source of loss. If Jupiter or the 5th lord afflicts the
12th lord in the 11th house, the native's wealth may be
dissipated by a bad son.
Lord of the 12th in the 12th makes his period bring in much
wealth. There will be no untoward expenditure. A benefic planet
combining with the 12th lord indicates the native incurs
honourable expenditure during the period of the former. The
Ascendant and its lord weil-placed results in income far
exceeding expenditure. The native will be religiously inclined,
will feed many holy men and seek their company, will always be
engaged in spiritual thoughts and talks and will lead a
comfortable life. Malefics afflicting the 12th house and the
Ascendant weak, make one, though born in an illustrious family,
become obscure, take to evil ways and lead a miserable
existence. He will eke out of his livelihood through serving as a
menial.
Summing up when the 12th lord is in any Bhava subject to
malefic aspects and associations, his period causes debts,
expenses, involvement in unhealthy and wicked company and
pursuits. When both benefics and malefics influence the 12th
lord, mixed results can be expected in the period of the 12th
lord. If the 12th lord combines with or is aspected by benefics,
religious piety and legitimate and charitable expenditure can be
expected in his period.
In Chart No. 234, the Ascendant lord Mercury occupies the
8th house. The 12th lord Venus is in the 8th with exalted Mars
lord of the 6th and the 11th. The native took to a life of celibacy
after the birth of his children when he was in his thirties. The
presence of Lagna lord in a dusthana, and of karaka Venus
who is also the 12th lord afflicted by Mars is

432 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 234.—Born 29-2-1896 at 1-00 p.m. (L.M.T.) at 20
| Sun Venus | Saturn
Sun Mercury
Mars
Raku Katu
= RASI NAVAMSA
Marcury
La
Venus st
Mars | 60-137 ma
Saturn Moon Jupiter
Balance of Venus Dasa at birth: O years, 4 months and 6
days.
responsible for it. Jupiter's aspect gave the native conjugal
life until he voluntarily renounced it.
We can also note the exaltation of the 10th lord Jupiter in a
spiritual sign aspected by the 12th lord Venus which has made
the native a Karmayogi-cum-Jnani. The Lagna lord Mercury is in
a dusthana in the 8th with the 6th lord Mars and 12th lord Venus.
The native suffered jail terms many a time during the preIndependence period.
Saturn, the 12th lord, is exalted in the 8th in Chart No-235.
As lord of mokshasthana in a dusthana, he has made the native
a great mystic of a high spiritual order. The 9th lord Mars
occupies the 12th house giving the native decidedly spiritual
leanings. Mars with Rahu in the 12th is significant as favouring
destruction of happiness of the couch (sayana-sukha). Even
from childhood she had been lost in spiritual trances and

Concerning the Twelfth House 433
Chart No. 235.—Born 30-4-1896 at 4-08 a.m. (L.M.T.) at 23
ee eee, T T A
Sun | Venus s K
Lagna Venus Mercury Müts aturn etu
aad Jupit |
Mars }
es RAS! | A NAVAMSA a
i Lagna
} Ketu || Merc |
| GD-137 Sir
Mercury Saturn Rahu
Jupiter Sun
iii |
Balance of Mercury's Dasa at birth : 10 years, 10 months
and 24 days.
the formal rite of marriage was never consummated. Her
spiritual celibacy continued untainted
The 12th house in Chart No. 236 is occupied by Mars and
Saturn. The native's wife died soon after marriage and he never
married again. He became deeply philosophical and spiritual.
The 12th lord Jupiter, though in the 2nd, is in Aquarius, a
spiritual sign and the centre of a powerful pravrajyaka yoga
(yoga for renunciation). The 12th lord is hemmed inbetween
malefics which denied the native both the pleasures and
comforts of a bed.
In Chart No. 237, the 12th lord aspects the 12th along
with the Lagna lord Mars. Jupiter and Saturn also aspect it.
The native was a staunch Christian who spent most of his life in
propagating its teachings. Saturn aspecting the 12th from the
10th is responsible for this voluntary missionary work.

434 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 236.—Born 20/21-2-1879 at 5 a.m. (L.M.T.) at 13
Lagna
Saturn Rahu | Venus
Ven, Sun
Moon
Mercury
Jupiter
RASI NAVAMSA OE,
Lagna
Rahu
Mars
Mercury
Mars dupher
Set , Ketu {
Balance of Rahu's Dasa at birth: 11 years, 8 months and
28 days.
Chart No. 237.—Born 8-4-1919 at 7-00 p.m. (G.M.T.) at
Ketu
Jupit. Saturn Mars
Rahu Moon
f
NAVAMSA —
Balance of Saturn's Dasa at birth : 6 years, 6 months and
20 days.

Concerning the Twelfth House 435
n agns |
Jupiter Kotu | Mercury
. °° °° “| Sat. ||Lagna ieee
i i} Ketu =
ee Mars | Jupiter
¡Moon || Moon
— RASI | NAVAMSA |-
| Sun
i Sat | Rahu
Merc | | Ë
erc.
Rahu Venus | | | Venus
Sun | |
Balance of Mercury's Dasa at birth : 4 years, 9 months and
19 days.
Chart No. 238 is of a dedicated mass leader who worked
zealously for the nation. He was a man of spartan habits and
Spiritually much evolved. The 12th house is occupied by the
spiritual planet Jupiter who is also the 10th lord. This indicates
the nature of his life's work which was reorienting the thought of
youth to ancient values of purity and renunciation. The 12th lord
Venus aspects the 12th house from the 6th house. The native
led a life of celibacy.
The 12th lord Venus in Chart No. 239 is exalted and is with
the Lagna lord and the Sun aspected by the 9th lord Saturn
Mercury who gets neechabhanga occupies the 10th house, a
kendra, aspected by 9th lord Saturn. The native spent fabulous
sums in charity. At the same time note that the 12th lord Venus
is exalted powerfully with the result the

436 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 239.—Born 7-4-1893 at9-31 a.m. (L.M.T.) at
n | Jupiter
| | Saturn
T Rahu Mars is gra Moon Mars Rshu
Mercury
7 Sun Jupiter
neS RASI ——| NAVAMSA hVenus
NH-62 f
Moon l
| Kew (Sen Ketu | Mercury | Lagna
Balance of Ketu's Dasa at birth: 6 years, 4 months and 4
days,
native enjoyed comforts of the bsd. It was rumoured he had
more than 3 wives.
There is also bandhana yoga present in this chart, which led
to the native's conviction in Jupiter's Dasa, Jupiter's Bhukti.
Mercury, the Lagna lord, is in a kendra with 12th lord Venus
aspected by 8th lord Mars The Dasa lord Jupiter is hemmed in
between malefics Mars (the 6th lord) and the 3rd lord Sun which
led to the native's arrest.
Chart No. 240 is that of a trustee of a temple whose
fabulous family properties have been set aside for feeding of pilgrims and other charities. The 12th lord Venus occupies his
moolatrikona sign in the 5th house (a trine) with the spiritual
planet Ketu and is aspected by the 9th lord Saturn. The 12th
house is aspected by the Atmakaraka Sun and the Lagna lord
Mercury.

Concerning the Twelfth House 437
Rehu | Lagna | Mars
| cee Eee ores Seamer
| Jupiter
Moon | Mercury
Rehu
RASI anes | MESON NAVAMSA
Sat. Ketu Saturn
Mars Sun | Venus Lagna
Jupiter | Mercury Ketu Moon | |Venus Sun
Balance of the Sun's Dasa at birth: 2 years, 9 months and
12 days.
Venus | Jupiter i Moon
Sat.
Rahu f
| ee
Lagna |
Mars | Sun
| Mercury |
Balance of Ketu's Dasa at birth: 1 year, 11 months and 15 days.

438 How to Judge a Horoscope
The 12th house in Chart No. 241 is occupied by mokshakaraka Rahu and aspected by Jupiter and Saturn. The native
was a dedicated social worker and built a national banking
concern starting from scratch. Saturn as Lagna lord and benefic
Jupiter aspecting the 12th house made him a selfless worker
whose projects of philanthropy proved a boon to countless
numbers. The 12th lord Saturn is aspected by a well-placed
blemish-free Venus who is also the 9th lord.
Chart No. 242.-Born 6-6-1901 about midnight at 7 S 15,
Ketu [Venus Lagna
Sun Merc. Moon
Lagna Mare. Rahu
RASI = | [oaa NAVAMSA en
Moon Mars || Ketu Sun
RP-P Nji4
Saturn Jupiter
Jupiter Rahu | Saturn Venus Mare
Balance of the Moon's Dasa at birth : 7 years, O month
and 27 days.
The 12th house in Chart No. 242 is occupied by the 6th lord
Moon while the 12th lord Saturn occupies the 11th house. The
12th lord is aspected by Venus and Mercury. The native was a
President of an Asian country. He married many wives and had
many mistresses as indicated by the Moon in the 12th house,
the influence of Venus on the 12th lord and the

Concerning the Twelfth House 439
preponderance of common signs. The native spent fabulous
sums on his private life.
Mars i
Moon | Mercury Vanus
Ketu
Lagna
a
Mercury
Sun
Mars
Moon
— NAVAMSA EERIE
Venus
Saturn
Rahu
Saturn
Jupiter Rahu |
Lagna Sun Jupiter
Balance of Rahu's Dasa at birth : O year, 5 months and 28
days.
Chart No. 243 has a badly afflicted 12th house. Mars,
Mercury, New Moon and the Sun occupy it. The 12th lord
Saturn is afflicted by Rahu and Venus also joins them. The
native spends extravagantly on drink and has an extra-marital
life as well. The affliction to Venus and the 7th lord Mercury
afflicted in the 12th house are also responsible for it.
Chart No. 244 has Rahu and the Moon in the 12th aspected
by the 12th lord Venus. Born in an aristocratic family the native
lived a reckless private life with many mistresses. There was no
dearth for pleasures of the bed as many beautiful women vied
for his favour. The 12th lord Venus and the 12th house are both
heavily afflicted indicating extravagant expenditure on sensual
gratification. There are Bandhana Yogas also present.

440 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 244.-Born 5-1-1928 at 5-26 p.m. (I.S.T.) at 27 N
Jupiter
NAVAMSA —
Jupiter
Rahu
Mercury
Venus Moon
Sun
Balance of Mars Dasa at birth: 3 years, 9 months and 27
days.
Mark the 12th lord Venus in the 6th house with 6th lord Mars and
8th lord Saturn. The yoga is stronger from the Moon occurring in
a quadrant in an insect sign. The native was in jail for over a year
before he was hanged.
The 12th house, in Chart No. 245, is occupied by Venus,
Saturn and its own lord Mercury. It is aspected by Mars and Lagna
lord the Moon. The native wasted money in pleasures and lost
heavily in racing. The affliction by malefics to the 12th house and
its lord led the native to squander money in the pursuit of pleasures.
But the 12th lord in the 12th with Venus also gave him the benefit
of his pursuits.
Venus, lord of the 12th house, in Chart No. 246, occupies the
11th house in debility aspected by Saturn, Mars and the Moon.
This weakens the 12th house and gives wasteful expenditure.
The native took delight in horse-racing in which

Concerning the Twelfth House 441
Chart No. 245.—Born 4-7-1738 at 7-46 a.m. (L.M.T.) at
Mars Jupiter Sun Jupiter Rehu
Ketu
hasn RASI NAVAMSA
Venus Sun
Mers
Ket
Moon Merc. oai | Moon
Sat.
d Balance of Venus Dasa at birth: 6 years, 8 months and 12
ays.
Chart No. 246.- Born 7-8-1887 at 1-21 p.m. (L.M.T.) at 11
Mars | | Rahu
Sun
Venus Moon
NAVAMSA
Jupiter Jupit. Lagna | Saturn
Mercury | Ketu
Balance of Jupiter's Dasa at birth: 0 year, 8 months and
5 days.

442 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 247.-Born 2-10-1869 at 7-45 a.m.
r Moon Sun
Jupiter Ketu Venus Macs
NAVAMSA LKatu |
Rahu |
Balance of Ketu's Dasa at birth : 6 years, 10 months and 28
days.
he lost sometimes. However the 12th house itself is occupied by
benefic Jupiter so that the native's reputation was untarnished.
It also gave him a philosophic outlook on life.
Chart No. 247 has the Sun in the 12th powerfully aspected
by Jupiter, a natural benefic, which made the native spiritual. The
chart is more significant for the prison-terms the native
underwent during the Indian Independence days. It was Rahu's
Dasa and part of Jupiter's Dasa that the native was arrested
several times. Rahu occupies the 12th house from the Moon
while Jupiter is the 3rd and 6th lord from Lagna placed in the 8th
house. The Lagna lord Venus is related to the 12th lord Mercury.
Venus is also the 8th lord and is subject to a papa-kartari yoga
between Saturn and the Sun. The presence of the 8th lord and
the 12th lord in a kendra has resulted in a Bandhana Yoga.

Concerning the Twelfth House 443
Chart No. 248.- Born 28-5-1883 at 9-25 p.m. (LMT) at 18 N
Mars Sun !Jupit |] Rahu
Ketu Saturn |Merc. Sat Sun Mars
Venus
Moon | Jupit
t
RASI |\——| | —- NAVAMSA
| Venus
_NH-49 O N: s
Lagna Rahu | ee ee U] jLagne | Moon | Mercury| Ketu
Balance of Mars Dasa at birth : 1 year, 1 month and 26
days.
Chart No. 248 has a number of Bandhana Yogas, the most
important ones being the association of the Lagna and 7th lord
in a quadrant from the Moon ; Ketu's disposition in Navamsa in
the 10th from Lagna aspected by three malefics — Mars, Saturn
and Rahu - and the 8th lord the Moon occupying the
constellation of Mars (12th lord) causing confinement in chains.
The affliction to the 12th house from the Sun and Saturn—two
bitter enemies in the same _ sign—made the native a
revolutionary who was interned for political reasons. The
conjunction of the 6th and the 12th lords Venus and Mars
respectively are also responsible for the native's incarcerations.
The native of Chart No. 249 was a celebrated jail-bird. The
Ascendant Cancer and the Ascendant lord Moon are hemmed
in between malefics Rahu and Saturn. Mercury and Venus are
also between malefics Mars and the Sun and are

444 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 249.—Born 14-11-1889 at 11-03 p.m. (LMT)
Rahu [[Merc, Mars
Moon || Rahu Sun
Lagna j|Lagna Saturn
RASI NAVAMSA
Ketu
Sat. Jupiter
NH-59
Ketu Marcury ven us
Jupiter Sun Venus Mars (Moon
H
Balance of Mercury's Dasa at birth: 13 years, 7 months
and 6 days.
Mercury
Lagna
Saturn Sun .
Rahu
Jupiter
Mercury Saturn
Moon
Mars
NAVAMSA
Balance of the Moon's Dasa at birth: 9 years, 5 months
and 16 days.

Concerning the Twelfth House 445
aspected by 6th lord Saturn. The Sun is in a Keeta Rasi or
insect sign in a quadrant from the 6th lord Saturn. These yogas
gave the native many terms in prison. Malefics in the 2nd, 5th,
9th and 12th houses cause captivity. Saturn is in the 2nd, the
Sun is in the 5th, Mars aspects the 9th house and Rahu
occupies the 12th almost fulfilling all the requirements of
Bandhana Yoga.
The 12th house in Chart No. 250 is occupied by Mercury
the Lagna lord, the Sun and Rahu. It is further afflicted by a
papakartari yoga caused by debilitated 8th lord Saturn and the
malefic 6th lord Mars. The native committed a grave murder.
Affliction to the 12th house is aggravated by the affliction to the
Lagna as well. The native was incarcerated and then hanged.
The 6th and 8th lords affect not only the Lagna but also the
Lagna lord Mercury forming a powerful Bandhana Yoga.
Chart No. 251.—Born 24-3-1883 at 6 p.m. (L.M.T.) at 13
Mercury
Rahu
Moon
Katu ; Saturn j;Jupit. || Mara
Jupiter
Balance of the Moon's Dasa at birth : 6 years.

446 How to Judge a Horoscope
In Chart No. 251 the 2nd and 12th houses are heavily
afflicted. The Sun, the natural significator of the eye, is subject to
papa kartari yoga between Ketu and Mars. The Moon is
powerfully but adversely aspected by Mars. The 2nd lord Mars is
in the 12th house. The 2nd and the 12th houses have the evil
influences of all the planets centered on them. Mars and
Mercury are in the 12th house aspected by Saturn while RahuKetu conjointly act on the 2nd house. Further the second house
is hemmed in between 2 malefics, the Sun and Saturn. The
native initially suffered from night-blindness and later lost his
vision completely.
In Chart No. 252, the 12th lord Venus, though vargottama,
is afflicted by the nodes both in Rasi and Navamsa. He is also
with Saturn, a malefic. The 2nd lord occupies the 6th house in
parivartana with 6th lord Mars. The 12th house is
Chart No. 252—Born 9-12-1608 (O.S.) at about 6-30 a m.
Mars | Jupiter | Moon Moan
Sain
Sun
Katy
AASI NAVAMSA
Katu
Saturn
Venus NH-16
cae aie re de r |
Mars
Jupit.
Sun
Mercury Lagna
Lagna
a O Si i PSS FS SS
Balance of the Moon's Dasa at birth: 8 years, 3 months
and 9 days.

Concerning the Twelfth House 447
Chart No. 253,— Born 1-8-1947 at 10-10p.m. (IST) at 14 N
Lagna > Mercury
Ketu Jupiter
Balance of the Moon's Dasa at birth : 7 years, 10 months
and 24 days.
aspected by Saturn and Jupiter. More than anything else the
heavy affliction to Venus both in Rasi and Navamsa was
responsible for making the native totally blind.
The native of Chart No. 253 has weak eyes which water
under even slight strain. The 12th lord Saturn is in Cancer in
close conjunction with his bitter enemy and 6th lord the Sun.
Venus, the karaka for eyes, is also with Saturn. The 2nd lord
Mars is also afflicted by Rahu. The 12th lord and the karakas,
the Sun and Venus, occupying Cancer, a watery sign and
aspected by the watery Moon have given eye affliction of a
similar nature.
The native of Chart No. 254 suffers from weak eye-sight, in
addition, he sees a blinking aura before his eyes. The 12th lord
Venus occupies an inimical sign with Ketu and is subject to a
papakartari yoga caused by the Sun and Saturn. The

448 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 254.— Born 2-8-1951 at 1-35 p.m. (I.S.T.) at 13
|] Reh
Jupiter | Mare : oe Mars
Moon
Rahu Sun
ee RASI H NAVAMSA =
Merc. |
Lagna
Venus Mercury
G 1-234 Ketu
Lagna | Sat. Sun Venus Moon Ketu
Balance of Saturn's Dasa at birth : 8 years, 5 months and 14
days.
2nd house is aspected by Mars while the 2nd lord Jupiter,
though occupying his own sign Pisces, is aspected by Saturn.
Venus, the karaka, is afflicted by a blemished Mercury so that
the root of the trouble is traceable to the nervous system.
The 12th house in Chart No. 255 is aspected by the 12th
lord Mars and the divine planet Jupiter. The 9th house is
occupied by 9th lord Saturn who aspects the Sun, the Moon and
Mercury—all three planets ruling soul, mind and intellect in the
spiritual sign Cancer. The Lagna lord Venus is in the 4th house
with kaivalyakaraka Ketu and the spiritual Jupiter, The native is
a Spiritual aspirant, who, in spite of high academic qualifications,
has taken to a line of austerity and sadhana.

Concerning the Twelfth House 449
Lagna Mars
Lagna
9 Venus Ketu
Rahu Saturn
— RASI NAVAMSA -o
Saturn
Balance of Mercury's Dasa at birth : 9 years, 11 months and
10 days.
Chart No. 256.—Born 19-9-1936 at 10-50 a.m. (I.S.T.) at
| Ketu Mars
Sun
Jupit,
RASI = NAVAMSA
Mars | |Moon
Ls Sun
Rehu Se . Moon f|Venus || Ketu Lagna Venus
piter es
Balance of Rahu's Dasa at birth: 9 years and 3 months.

450 How to Judge a Horoscope
The native of Chart No. 256 is spiritual-minded. The 9th lord
Moon occupies the 12th house or mokshasthana and hemmed in
between benefics, Jupiter on one side and Venus and Mercury
on the other. The 12th lord Venus also receives no malefic
aspects. He is in Virgo, vargottama and debilitated, with the Sun
and Mercury. The native is a full-time sadhaka.
In Chart No. 257 the 12th house is occupied by the 9th lord
the Moon and Atmakaraka the Sun who is also the 10th, lord.
The Lagna is under the influence of Mercury, the planet of
wisdom and Jupiter, a significator of philosophical and spiritual
inclinations while Lagna lord Mars' aspect only strengthens it.
The chart belongs, to the occupant of the highest seat of
Spirituality and religion in the illustrious line of Sri Adi
Sankaracharya. The 12th lord Venus is in Sagittarius with
mokshakaraka Rahu. The native is a jeevanmukta.
Chart No. 257.-Born 13-11-1917 at 8-30a.m. (I.S.T.) at 12
Jupiter | Ketu ||Lagna | Jupiter
Sun
Sat Rabu
RA$i Pacem | ee NAVAMSA
Sat Mercury
Mars Ketu Venus
RP-42/102 Mars
eee se = Se he 5
Venus | Mercury
Rahu Lagna
Moon
Sun Moon
Balance of Rahu's Dasa at birth : 13 years, 9 months and 7
days.

Concerning the Twelfth House 451
Chart No. 258.—Born 16-10-1892at 7-12 a.m. (L.M.T.) at 13
Jupiter | Rahu Junit. | Lagna | Saturn
Ketu
Moon
RASI —— NAVAMSA
Moon
Venus
RP-239/PN
Sun Mare
ee Sat. Merc, Sun Rahu
etu
Lagna Venus
Balance of Ketu's Dasa at birth: 1 year and 9 months.
In Chart No. 258 the 12th house is occupied by yogakaraka
Saturn and aspected by the planet of spirituality, Jupiter, who
not only occupies the mystic sign of Pisces but is also vargottama. The native was an exalted sage also coming in the
glorious line of Sri Adi Sankaracharya. The 12th lord Mercury is
also the 9th lord in Lagna associating with the Sun, ruler of the
soul, and kaivalyakaraka Ketu. The 12th house is hemmed in
between Lagna lord Venus and Atmakaraka the Sun who are in
mutual parivartana indicating the blazing spirituality of the native.

Some Practical Illustrations
We have seen so far how to assess the nature of results of
each of the twelve Bhavas or houses beginning from the seventh
(marriage) to the twelfth (emancipation) in this volume. The
principles of astrology provide us with a tool to estimate the
general worth of an individual and what life has in store for him in
its various sectors such as marriage (7th), suffering and death
(8th), parentage, prosperity, travel (9th), fame, success,
distinction and occupation (10th), friends, brothers, gains (11th)
and expenditure, incarceration and final release (12th) after
death. Although the planetary configurations can give a broad
outline of the future of an individual, it is only an intuitional
perception that can help us to assess the real worth of a
horoscope. It is no easy job to draw conclusions. The astrologer
has a duty in dressing up his predictions in such a way that the
truth is revealed without adversely affecting one psychologically.
If the Lagna lord, the Moon or Mercury is afflicted, a
negative prediction may drive the native to melancholia and
frustration. Hence one must be careful in revealing the truth. On
the contrary, a native with strong Ascendant, the Moon or
Mercury will be able to digest any prediction without reacting

Some Practical Illustrations 453
strongly. This mental maturity of a native must be assessed
before the astrologer gives his comments on any chart.
Coming to the question of interpretation, the Rasi, Nav-amsa
and Bhava charts must all be taken into account. Malefic
afflictions cause denial or lack of happiness or positive misery in
a particular sector of life. On the contrary, benefic dispositions
through aspects, associations and occupation give happiness
and success in the relevant aspects of life. A proper assessment
and balancing of all factors must be made before coming to any
conclusion. The Dasa-Bhuktis are of very great importance since
if appropriate periods do not operate in the life-time of an
individual, he may not experience the results in their entirety.
We shall analyse in a general way the several Bhavas in the
following two charts :
Chart A.—Birth details with-held for obvious reasons :
Mars
Saturn
Rahu
NAVAMSA
Moon
Venus Sun
Balance of Saturn's Dasa at birth: 17 years, 2 months 1 day.

454 How to Judge a Horoscope
Marriage
The seventh house falls in Taurus. It is not occupied or
aspected by any planet and therefore, quite unafflicted. The
seventh lord Venus occupies the 8th house and is free of
aspects, good or bad. Hence the seventh Bhava is fairly strong.
The 7th house from the Moon is Virgo occupied by Ketu and
aspected by the 7th lord Mercury. He is neecha (debilitated) but
gets cancellation of debility due to Venus, who gets exalted in
Pisces, being in a kendra (quadrant) from the Moon. Mercury is
afflicted by Rahu and aspected by exalted Moon-sign lord
Jupiter and 11th lord Saturn from his own sign (Capricorn).
The 9th house is occupied by an exalted Jupiter who is a
benefic for Scorpio Ascendants. He is aspected by powerful
Saturn, a malefic.
The presence of Venus in the 8th house, both as Kalatrakaraka and 7th lord, is not desirable since it gives a sickly
husband. Further Mercury, the 8th lord, occupies the 5th house
with a benefic the Moon but malefic Rahu.
The 7th house has no afflictions prima facie. Neither the 7th
lord nor the Bhava is aspected or associated with Saturn. The
9th house is fortified by a parivartana (exchange of signs
between 5th and 9th lords). An early marriage is therefore,
possible. The strength of the 9th house indicates a fortunate
match and great prosperity in life.
Timing Marriage: The following planets would be capable of
giving marriage in their periods (Dasas or Bhuktis):-
(1) The lords of the Rasi and Navamsa occupied by the
7th lord namely. Mercury and Mars.
(2) Venus.
(3) The Moon.

Some Practical Illustrations 455
(4) The lord of the sign occupied by the 2nd lord Jupiter—
the Moon.
(5) The 10th lord—the Sun.
(6) The 9th lord—the Moon.
(7) The 7th lord-Venus, there being no planets occupying
or aspecting the 7th house.
(8) The 7th lord from the Moon—Mercury.
That is. Mercury, Mars, Venus, the Moon, and the Sun become
capable of giving marriage in their periods.
The native finished her Saturn's Dasa when slightly over 17
years and Saturn having no marriage-giving power did not give
her matrimony. The next Dasa would be of Mercury. Early
marriage being indicated, the Dasas of Venus, the Sun, the
Moon and Mars could not be considered at all since Venus
Dasa would begin in her 42nd year, the Sun's Dasa by the 48th
year, the Moon's Dasa by the 58th year and Mars Dasa by her
65th year. So Mercury's Dasa would be most appropriate for
marriage. In addition. Mercury is with the 9th lord, the Moon and
aspected by exalted Jupiter (2nd lord and
Kutumbasthanadhipati) so that within 6 months from the
commencement of the Dasa, the native got married.
Applying the method of adding the longitudes of the Lagna
Bhava (223° 11') and the seventh house (43° 11'), the sum
would be 266° 22' or Sagittarius 26° 22'. Transit Jupiter was in
Capricorn when the marriage took place in January 1950.
Jupiter from here was aspecting natal 7th house and natal
Jupiter who is also the rule: of the sign signified by the sum.
The 9th house is extremely strong involving the 9th lord
Moon and the 2nd and the 5th lord Jupiter as well as the 11th
lord Mercury and gives rise to a powerful Dhana Yoga. The
marriage occurring in the commencement of the Dasa of the

456 How to Judge a Horoscope
11th lord Mercury gave a very rich husband. The 7th lord Venus
occupying Gemini, a sign ruled by Mercury, and Mercury being
strong with neechabhanga gave a highly intelligent husband.
Venus occupies a martian constellation in a mercurial sign so
that the partner turned out to be an expert in technology.
Mercury being very well placed with 9th lord the Moon
(sowbhagya) and aspected by the 2nd lord (kutumba) and the
5th lord (progeny) Jupiter from the 9th house (general fortune)
gave happiness in married life with the birth of children and
prosperity of husband in his Dasa.
Widowhood
The 8th house is occupied by the 7th lord Venus which is
not a good feature. Ketu afflicts the 7th house from the Moon
with no relieving influences. The presence of the 7th lord in the
8th house gives a sickly husband. Venus, further, occupies a
constellation ruled by Mars who is in the 6th house.
The native's husband developed prostrate trouble about the
end of Mercury's Dasa. It aggravated after several operations
during Saturn's sub-period, the last in Mercury's Dasa. By the
time Ketu's Dasa began, it had become so complicated that
normal conjugal life was no longer possible. The Rahu-Ketu axis
afflicts the 9th lord from Lagna and the 7th house from the Moon
causing vicissitudes in married life. Ketu Dasa continued in this
manner. After prolonged illness and several more surgical
operations, the native's husband died in the sub-period of Mars
in Venus Dasa. The Dasa lord Venus is in a dusthana so that his
karakatwa (natural significations) suffered until the end. Venus
occupies mangalyasthana from the Ascendant and is the 8th lord
from the Moon. Mars is the 7th lord from the 7th and becomes a
maraka. He is inthe

Some Practical Illustrations 457
12th from the 7th. The chart indicates widowhood and this
occurred in the sub-period of the 6th lord in the Dasa of the 7th
lord placed in the 8th causing Kalatra-bhanga. Foreign Travel
The ninth house is Cancer, a watery sign, occupied by
exalted 2nd and 5th lord Jupiter. The 9th lord Moon is in Pisces,
another watery sign, and with 8th and 11th lord Mercury. The
Moon is aspected by the 3rd lord Saturn and the 5th lord Jupiter.
Rahu associates with the Moon. The Lagna lord Mars being in a
moveable sign, the 9th house being a moveable and watery
sign, the 9th lord Moon occupying a common sign and being
aspected by the 3rd lord Saturn from his own sign Capricorn
which also happens to be a moveable sign are all indicative of
foreign travel and journeys to distant places in the appropriate
Dasas (periods) and Bhuktis (Sub-periods).
The following factors must be considered in timing foreign
journeys, namely,
(a) lord of the 9th house-the Moon ;
(b) planet or planets aspecting the 9th house—Saturn ;
(c) planet in the 9th house—Jupiter ;
(d) planets aspecting the 9th lord—Saturn and Jupiter;
(e) planets in association with the 9th lord—Mercury,
Rahu and Ketu ; and
(f) the 9th lord from the Moon —Mars. Therefore, the Moon,
Saturn, Jupiter, Rahu, Ketu, Mercury and Mars become qualified
to give foreign travel in their periods. The presence of Lagna
lord Mars in a moveable sign and the 9th lord Moon in a dual
sign aspected by a well-placed 3rd lord Saturn indicate several
journeys ab oad. ars, the lord of the Lagna, in the 6th house
cannot, however.

458 How to Judge a Horoscope
give foreign residence or prolonged stay abroad as would have
been the case if he were in the 9th or 12th house.
Venus is the 12th lord as well as the 7th lord and is also
capable of travel abroad more particularly because of his
occupation of a common sign.
The native first went abroad in Venus Bhukti of Mercury
Dasa. Venus, as we have just seen, is the 12th lord and so
qualified for giving travels. The Dasa lord Mercury is in
association with the 9th lord in Pisces. The second time Saturn
Bhukti in Mercury Dasa took her abroad. Saturn is the 3rd lord
aspecting the 9th lord Moon and Dasa lord Mercury from the 3rd
house. Ketu, the next Dasa lord, is in the 11th house in a
common sign, aspected by 9th lord Moon. The Bhuktis of Venus,
Mars, Jupiter and Mercury took her abroad in this Dasa. Venus
Dasa also gave her many journeys abroad.
We can also apply the Saham tests.
Paradesha Saham =9th house—9th lord + Ascendant iord
The lord of the Saham is the Sun who is exalted in the 6th
house in association with the 9th lord Mars from the Moon.
Jalapatana Saham = Cancer 15°— Saturn + Ascendant
The lord of the Jalapatana Saham is Venus who is the 7th
and 12th lord occupying a common sign. The lords of the two
Sahams being connected with the 12th and 9th houses, the
chart can be said to indicate foreign travel.
Father : The Sun is the karaka for father. He is exalted in
the 6th house with Lagna lord Mars who occupies his
moolatrikona sign. The Sun is fairly strong except for his

Some Practical Illustrations 459
occupation of a dusthana. The 9th lord, the Moon, occupies the
5th house, a trine, in exchange with 5th lord Jupiter. The Moon is
closely placed to Rahu and is with 8th lord Mercury. Malefic
Saturn aspects him but this is countered by the aspect of an
exalted sign dispositor and benefic, Jupiter.
Considered from the Moon, the 9th lord Mars occupies a
maraka house (2nd house) with exalted 6th lord the Sun who is
also pitrukaraka.
Chart B.— Birth details withheld for obvious reasons :
NAVAMSA
Balance of Mars Dasa at birth :
days.
The exaltation of the Sun gave the native a well-placed
father. His death occurred in Saturn Bhukti of Mercury Dasa.
Saturn is the 7th lord from the 9th house as well as the 12th lord
from the 9th lord Moon. The Dasa lord Mercury is 3rd and 12th
lord from the 9th house. He is also the 7th lord from the 9th lord
the Moon. The exaltation of the karaka and the parivartana
between the 5th and 9th lords gave a fairly long-lived father.
Mercury |
Moon |
Ketu
years, 0 month and 17

460 How to Judge a Horoscope
Marriage
The 7th house, viz., Scorpio is occupied by Venus lord of
Lagna and 6th. It is aspected by yogakaraka Saturn. This has
both good and bad significance. The 7th lord Mars is exalted
and occupies the 9th house with the 3rd lord the Moon. He is not
aspected by any planet. The 7th lord is well placed. Karaka
Venus, though well placed in a quadrant in the 7th house, is
partly benefic being the lord of the Lagna and partly not
welcome being the 6th lord. This has a mixed influence on his
karakatwa (natural signification). The 7th house from the Moon,
viz., Cancer, is aspected by the Moon himself ar.d exalted Mars,
a badhakadhipati and lord of the 4th and 11th.
Timing Marriage : The following planets become qualified to
give marriage : Venus, Jupiter, Moon, Mercury, Saturn and
Mars. The 7th house is occupied by Lagna lord Venus which is
good. Saturn is a yogakaraka and aspects the 7th house. This
has a delaying effect but since he happens to be a functional
benefic and his sign dispositor Mercury is exalted, he cannot
push the event too far ahead. The native got married in Saturn's
Bhukti of Jupiter's Dasa when about 27 years old. In the late
40's and early 50's, this could not be said to be an early
marriage nor even a very late one The Dasa lord Jupiter is the
ruler of the Navamsa occupied by the 7th lord while the Bhukti
lord Saturn is lord of both the 9th and 10th houses and aspects
the 7th house. Adding the longitudes of the Lagna and the 7th
Bhava we get 56° 47' + 236° 47' = 293° 34' or Capricorn. Jupiter
in transit was moving over this sign as well as 7th lord Mars at
the time of marriage.
The 7th house is occupied by Venus, the planet of beauty.
The 7th lord Mars is exalted in the 9th house (good fortune)

Some Practical Illustrations 461
with the Moon. The native married a beautiful and intelligent
woman. Venus in the 7th house made the couple deeply
devoted to each other. The association of the 7th lord Mars with
the Moon gave a wife, many years younger—almost ten —than
the native.
The 7th lord is in the 9th and karaka Venus with no
afflictions gave a long lease of married life. There are no
indications in the chart for loss of wife.
Longevity
The Ascendant is aspected by its lord Venus. The eighth
lord Jupiter is in the 6th house with debilitated 4th lord Sun. The
Sun gets neechabhanga (cancellation of debility) since his signlord Venus is in a kendra (quadrant) from Lagna. The eighth
house receives no other aspects. From the Moon, the eighth
house is Leo aspected by exalted Mars. The 8th lord Sun
occupies the 10th house with 3rd and 12th lord Jupiter.
Ayushkaraka Saturn is in the 5th house with exalted Mercury. At
the same time, he is afflicted by the Nodes. The 3rd lord the
Moon aspects the 3rd house. This is good. Considered from the
Moon, the 3rd lord Jupiter is in the 10th with the 8th lord Sun.
The 8th lord Jupiter in a dusthana and the 8th lord Sun (with
reference to the Moon) being strong in a kendra are not very
good for longevity. On the other hand, the presence of Venus in
a kendra gives some strength. Since both benefics and malefics
are in a kendra (quadrant) and kona (trine) and 8th lord is ina
malefic Bhava, the span of life can be said to be medium or
madhyayu. Another reason for medium life is the exaltation of
maraka planets, namely, 2nd lord Mercury and 7th lord Mars in
trines.
The Dasas that operate during madhyayu (32 to 75 years)
are of Jupiter (in part), Saturn and Mercury. Ofthese three

462 How to Judge a Horoscope
Dasa lords, Jupiter is the 8th lord from Lagna and the 3rd and12th lord from the Moon combining with 8th lord Sun. Saturn is
not a maraka from Lagna. He is the natural maraka and
combines with the 2nd lord Mercury. From the Moon, he is the
2nd lord. Mercury is the 2nd lord from Lagna placed with karaka
Saturn. He associates with the 2nd lord from the Moon, namely,
Saturn. Of these three planets, Jupiter does not have sufficient
maraka power, either due to lordship or association. Between
Saturn and Mercury, the latter is the 2nd lord and powerful due
to his exaltation. But Saturn who associates with Mercury takes
over the marakatwa from him and becomes a first-rate killer.
Since Lagna lord aspects Lagna, Saturn cannot be expected to
kill in the beginning of his Dasa. This would not be warranted by
the planetary dispositions. Hence he can kill only in the closing
part of his period. Rahu who is with Saturn (maraka) and 2nd
lord Mercury and who should also reflect the results of Saturn
becomes quite capable of proving fatal. The native died in
Saturn's Dasa at the fag end of Rahu Bhukti.
Nature of Death
The 8th house is Sagittarius and falls in the 3rd drekkana of
the sign, ruled by ths Sun.
The 8th house is free of aspects, malefic or benefic, while
the 8th lord joins the Sun (4th lord) in the 6th house (rogasthana). The Sun as lord of the 2nd drekkana occupying the 6th
house gives a clue to the cause of death. Death came after an
attack of pneumonia followed by a fatal heart-attack. Death was
sudden and natural since there are no malefic aspects on the 8th
house or 8th lord.

Some Practical Illustrations 463
Foreign Travel
The ninth house is Capricorn, a moveable sign, occupied by
the Moon lord of the 3rd and exalted 7th and 12th lord Mars. The
lord of the 9th house is in a trine in a common sign with Rahu
and exalted Mercury, lord of the 2nd and 5th houses. The Lagna
lord Venus occupies a watery sign Scorpio in the 7th house.
Considered from the Moon, the 9th house is Virgo occupied by
Rahu and Moon-sign lord Saturn. The 9th lord Mercury is
exalted in the 9th house itself. These factors are indicative of
foreign travel. Applying the Saham tests, we get Paradesha
Saham = 211° 20' or 1° Scorpio 20'. Jalapatana Saham comes
to 19° 3' or 19° Aries 33'. Both Sahams have Mars ruling them.
He is not only the 7th and 12th lord from Lagna but is exalted in
the 9th house.
The native went abroad first in Jupiter's Dasa, Jupiter's
Bhukti. Jupiter is with the 4th lord Sun so that it was for reasons
of education. Jupiter, the Dasa lord, is in a moveable sign in the
6th house. He occupies the constellation of Rahu who
associates with the 9th lord Saturn. The second time the native
went abroad was in Saturn's Dasa, Saturn's Bhukti. Saturn as
the 9th lord in the 5th house in a common sign is well placed to
give foreign journeys. After that there were innumerable journeys
abroad in the rest of Saturn Dasa until death.
Father
The Ascendant being Taurus, the ninth house is Capricorn
occupied by 3rd lord the Moon and the 7th and 12th lord exalted
Mars. The presence of a ruler of a dusthana (twelfth) house in
the 9th is not so good The 9th lord Saturn is in the 5th house
with 5th lord Mercury and Rahu. Although Saturn

464 How to Judge a Horoscope
as 9th lord in a trine is good for father, his association with
Mercury who is also the 2nd lord is not desirable.
Considered from the Moon, the 9th house is Virgo occupied
by an exalted 9th lord Mercury, Moon-sign lord Saturn and
Rahu. The karaka Sun is in the 6th debilitated and with 6th lord
Jupiter. The Sun gets cancellation of debility due to his signdispositor Venus being in a kendra from Lagna. This explains
the humble beginnings in life of the native's father. The karaka
being in an upachaya lifted him to the rank of a leading
industrialist as indicated by the exalted planets in the 9th both
from the Lagna and the Moon.
Death of the native's father occurred in Venus Bhukti of
Jupiter's Dasa. Jupiter is the 7th lord from the 9th house from
the Moon. He isin the 2nd from the 9th house. He is the 2nd
occupant from the 9th lord Saturn associating with the 12th
lord the Sun, therefrom, gaining maraka powers. Venus, ruler
of the sub-period, is the 2nd lord from 9th lord Saturn and the
9th house from the Moon and in the 2nd house from the karaka
Sun.
Occupation
The 10th house is Aquarius aspected by 8th and 11th lord
Jupiter. The 10th lord Saturn is also the 9th lord and occupies
the 5th house, a trine, with exalted 2nd and 5th lord Mercury and
Rahu. The link-up between the 2nd and 5th lords and the 9th
and 10th lords in the 5th house is powerful yoga for success and
financial prosperity.
The 9th and 10th lord happening to be Saturn and
associating with 2nd lord Mercury, the native joined the family
business. This was in Saturn's Bhukti of Jupiter's Dasa. Jupiter
is the 11th lord and aspects the 10th house. Saturn, the lord of
the Bhukti, is a yogakaraka and owns the 10th house. Venus

Some Practical Illustrations 465
incidentally is in the 7th house in a kendra ahead of the Sun so
the native's career began following marriage.
The 10th lord Saturn combines with Rahu (engineering) in
the 5th house (investment) with a powerful Mercury (industry).
The business was connected with a chain of engineering
industries. The 11th lord who signifies gains is in a venusian
sign (conveyance) with 4th lord Sun (vehicles) so that the major
business was dealing with automobiles.
Jupiter being the 11th lord and Saturn, the Yogakaraka and
both planets being related to the 11th houses, these Dasas saw
the native s business prosper and expand considerably.
Elder co-borns
The 11th house is Pisces, a fruitful sign and is aspected by
Yogakaraka Saturn and exalted benefic Mercury. It is occupied
by Ketu.
The 11th lord Jupiter is in a dusthana, the 6th house, which
is also an upachaya. with the 4th lord Sun. Jupiter occupies his
own sign in Navamsa with a benefic Venus. The 11th house and
lord are fairly well placed.
Considered from the Moon, the 11th house is Scorpio
occupied by Yogakaraka Venus, The 11th lord Mars, in turn, is
exalted in the Moon-sign itself. In Navamsa, Mars occupies a
benefic sign Pisces. Mars, who is also the karaka, is in the 9th
house with the fertile Moon.
The 11th both from Lagna and the Moon are fortified by the
influence of the respective Yogakarakas, Saturn and Venus. The
11th lord Jupiter occupying a dusthana is the only blemish on
the 11th house.
Saturn and Mercury, functional benefics from Lagna, who
act on the 11th house, have moved 6 and 7 complete Nav-

466 How to Judge a Horoscope
amsas respectively. From the Moon, Venus who is in the 11th
house has moved 5 whole Navamsas. Saturn who aspects the
11th house from the Moon has covered 6 whole Navamsas. The
average number of Navamsas covered by these planets is (6 + 7
+ 5 + 6) = 24 divided by 4. This would give 6 Navamsas. The
native had four elder brothers and two elder sisters. The RahuKetu axis afflicts the 11th house from Lagna. Rahu has covered
one Navamsa. Jupiter, the 11th lord, is afflicted by debilitated
Sun in the 6th house. These two afflictions on the 11th Bhava
resulted in the loss of two elder co-borns, leaving an equal
number of brothers and sisters alive.
While eunuch planets, Mercury and Saturn, aspect the 11th
house from Lagna, the eleventh house from the Moon is subject
to the equally strong influence of a female planet, Yogakaraka
Venus and a male planet exalted Mars with the result two elder
brothers and two eider sisters continued to live during the
native's life-time.
The death of an elder brother came about in Jupiter's Dasa,
Saturn's Bhukti. The Dasa lord Jupiter is the lord of the eleventh
house and placed in the 8th (a dusthana) from the 11th house.
Jupiter, in addition, occupies the constellation of Rahu who
occupies a maraka place from the 11th house. The Bhukti lord
Saturn is in dwirdwadasa (2/12 position) from Dasa lord as well
as 11th lord Jupiter. He is in the 7th house from the 11th house
combining with the 7th lord Mercury which makes him an
extremely powerful maraka.
Another elder brother died in Mars Bhukti of Saturn's Dasa.
Mars, the sub-lord, is the ruler of the 2nd from the 11th house.
He is a maraka from the 11th lord Jupiter, being the 2nd and 7th
lord therefrom. Saturn in the 7th witha

Some Practical Illustrations 467
maraka planet is a powerful killer with reference to the 11th
house as already analysed.
Sayana-sukha — Conjugal life
The twelfth house is a barren sign Aries aspected by the
10th lord Mars, 8th and 11th lord Jupiter, and another fiery
planet the Sun, the last two occupying a malefic place, viz , the
6th house. The 12th house is quite blemished except for the
aspect of the 12th lord Mars, who occupies the 9th house, with
the 3rd lord Moon and hsnce fairly well placed.
Considered from the Moon, the 12th house is Sagittarius,
neither occupied nor aspected by any planet. The 12th lord
Jupiter occupies the 10th house with the 8th lord Sun.
The karaka Venus is in a quadrant. As Lagna lord in the 7th
house he is good but as 6th lord, not so feasible so far as
Kalatrabhava is concerned. He is aspected by Saturn, a
hermaphrodite, whose characteristics are further enhanced by
association with another similar planet, an afflicted Mercury.
Moreover, Venus occupies a mercurial constellation and as we
have already seen, this is net a welcome situation.
The 12th house from Lagna being afflicted by planets in the
6th house (rogasthana) and the karaka being ruler of the 6th
house and afflicted resulted in health troubles that prevented the
native from having a normal married life.
But since the 12th lord Mars is well placed and Venus is a
so a benefic due to his ownership of Lagna and occupies a
kendra, this state of affairs began only after the native had ‘ved
a normal life for about 15 years. The next 15 years
approximately, until his death, were filled with complicated
health problems that did not allow sayana-sukha. This is a
unique instance of how both benefic and malefic influences

468 How to Judge a Horoscope
on a particular Bhava have been equalised and given good and
bad results in an equal measure.
Expenditure
The 12th house indicates acts of piety, charity and
expenditure.
The 12th house is aspected by a natural benefic Jupiter,
atmakaraka Sun and exalted 12th lord Mars. The 12th lord Mars
occupies the 9th house in great strength. Considered from the
Moon also, the 12th lord Jupiter occupies a kendra with the Sun.
He receives no aspects, good or bad. The native was extremely
generous and charitable. There are no malefic aspects on the
12th house. The native spent large sums of money on bettering
the living conditions of his workers and on many projects of
social welfare.

INDEX OF TECHNICAL TERMS
Adhipati
Adhipatya
Atpayu
Antara
Apoklima
Artha
Arudha
Asubhayoga
Asurayoga
Ayudha
Ayushkaraka
Bala
Balarishta
Bhachakra
Bhava
Bhava Sandhi
- Lord
— Lordship
— Short life between 8 and 32
years
— Inter-period
— The 3rd, 6th, 9th and 12th
houses
— The 2nd of the 4 aims of life
according to Sanatana
Dharma, namely, wealth
— The sign which is distant from
the lord as the lord is from
the house concerned
— A combination caused by evil
planets
— A combination for tyrannical
and demonical characteristics
— Weapon
— Saturn, the natural significator
of longevity
— Strength
— Infant mortality
— Zodiac
— House
— Junction of two houses

Bhratrukaraka
Bhukti
Budha
Budha-Aditya Yoga
Budha Dasa
Buddhi
Buddhisthana
Chandra
Chandra Dasa
Chandra-Mangala Yoga
Chara Rasis
Chatushpada Rasis
Dasa
Dhanakaraka
Dhanus
Dharma
Divya Drishti
Dosha
Drekkana
Dusthana
Dwikalatra Yoga
Dwirdwadasa
Dwiswabhava Rasis
Gangasnana
How to Judge a Horoscope
— Mars, the natural significator
of brother
— Sub-period
— Mercury
— A combination for intelligence
and learning
— Mercury's major period
— Intelligence
— The house of intelligence
— The Moon ,
— The Moon's period
— Angular disposition between
the Moon and Mars
— Moveable signs
— Quadrupedal signs
— Major period
— Jupiter, the natural significator
of wealth.
— Sagittarius
— Right living or the first of the
4 aims of life according to
Sanatana Dharma
— Supersensuous perception
— Affliction
— One-third division of a sign
— An evil place, namely, the 6th,
8th and 12th house
— A combination for two wives
— 2nd and 12th houses from each
other
— Common signs
— A dip in the River Ganga

Index
Ghati
Gnanakaraka
Graha
Gopuramsa
Guru
Guru Dasa
Guru Bhukti
Hora
Jaimini
Jalapatana Saham
Janma Rasi
Jathaka
Jeevanmukta
Kalatrakaraka
Kanya
Karaka
Karako bhavanasaya
Karma
Karmasthana
Kataka
Kendra
Kendradhipati
— Equivalent to 24 minutes or
1/60th of 3 day
of knowledge
— Planet
— Occupying the same varga four
times
— Jupiter
— Major period of Jupiter
— Sub-period of Jupiter
— One-half division of a sign
— A Maharishi of India. Author
of works on Astrology and
Philosophy
— Sensitive point relating to
voyage
— Sign occupied by the Moon at
birth
— Horoscopy
— One who has attained selfrealisation
— Venus, the natural significator
of wife or husband
— Virgo
— Natural significator
- The karaka in that particular
Enava destroys it
Activity
— The 10th house
— Cancer
— The 4th, 7th and 10th houses, a
quadrant
-~ Quadrangular lord
— Jupiter, the natural significator

Ketu
Krishna Paksha
Kuja
Kuja Bhukti
Kuja Oasa
Kuja Dosha
Lagna
Lagnadhipati
Madhyayu
Mangalya
Mangalyasthana
Makara
Mandagraha
Mandi
Maraka
Matrukaraka
Meena
Mesha
Mithuna
Mitra
Mitra varga
Moksha
Moolatrikona
Naisargika
Nararasis
Navamsa
Neecha
How to Judge a Horoscope
— Cauda or Dragon's Tail
— Dark half of a lunar month
— Mars
— Sub-period of Mars
— Major period of Mars
— Affliction caused by Mars occupying the 2nd, 4th, 7th, 8th
or 12th houses
— Ascendant or rising sign
— Ascendant lord
— Medium span of life
— Coverture
— The 8th house
— Capricorn
— Superior or slow-moving planet
— A sensitive point in the horoscope
— Death or death-inflicting planet
— The Moon, the natural significator of the mother
— Pisces
— Aries
— Gemini
— Friend
— The varga or the place of a
friendly planet
— Final Emancipation
—Asignof well-being fora
planet
— Natural
— Human signs
— 1/9th division of a sign
— Debilitated

Index
Neechabhanga
Nigada
Nirayana
Occhabala
Occhabhanga
Pakshi
Panaparas
— Cancellation of debility
— Fetters
— Fixed Zodiac, without precession
— Exaltation strength
— Exaltation degree of a planet
— Bird
— The 2nd, 5th, 8th and 11th
houses
Pancha Mahapurusha Yogas — 5 special combinations for
Papakartari Yoga
Paradesha Saham
Parivartana
Phaladeepika
Pitrukaraka
Pumayu
Putrakaraka
Rahu
Rajalakshana Yogas
Raja Yoga
Rasi
Ravi
Ravi Dasa
Ravi Bhukti
Saham
greatness
— Being hemmed in between 2
malefics
— Sensitive point relating to
foreign travel
—Mutual exchange of signs
— A classical work on Astrology
by Mantreswara
— The Sun, the natural significator of father
— Full span of life
— Jupiter, natural significator of
progeny
— Caput or Dragon's Head
— Combinations for^ royalty and
political power
—A combination for political
SUCCESS
— A sign of the Zodiac
— The Sun
— The Sun's major period
— The Sun's sub-period
— Sensitive point

474 How to Judge a Horoscope
Sani — Saturn
Sani Bhukti — Saturn's sub-period
Sani Dasa — Saturn's major period
Sanivad Rahu —Rahu gives results akin to
Saturn
Satru — Enemy
Satru Bhava — Sixth house
Sayana — Moveable Zodiac, with precession
Shadbalas — Six sources of planetary and
house strengths
Shashtashtaka — 6th and 8th from each other
Shashtiamsa — 1/60th division of a sign
Simha — Leo
Sowbhagya — Fortune, in particular relation
to women
Sthira Rasis — Fixed signs
Subhakartari Yoga — Being hemmed in between two
benefics
Sukla Paksha — Bright half of a lunar month
Sushka — Dry or earthy
Sukra — Venus
Sukra Dasa — Venus major period
Sukra Bhukti — Venus sub-period
Swavarga — Own sub division
Tanukaraka — The Sun, the indicator of body
Thula — Libra
Trimsamsa -- 1/30th division of a sign
Trikona — 1st, 5th and 9th signs
Upagraha — A satellite planet, e.g., Gulika
Udu Dasa — Vimshottari system of directions

Index 475
Upapada — The sign as apart from the 12th
lord as the latter is from the
12th
Upachaya - The 3rd, 6th, 10th and 11th
houses
Vahanakaraka — Venus.indicator of conveyances
Vahanasthana — Fourth house
Vaiseshikamsa — Occupying the same varga
three or more times
Varga — Manner of division, e.g., Rasis,
Hora, etc.
Vargottama — A special distinction
Varsha — Year
Varsha Dasa — Period relating to the year
Varshaphala — Annual results
Vedas — Scriptures
Vidyakaraka — Jupiter, indicator of education
Vidyasthana — Fourth house
Vighati Equivalent to 24 seconds of
English time
Vimshottari — A system of Dasa or directions
Vipareeta Raja Yoga — A combination for unparalVrischika leled good fortune
Vrishabha — Scorpio
— Taurus
Yatra — Pilgrimage
Yoga — Special combination
Yogakaraka — Planet causing yoga
PASE EYE -
