READABLE DATASET
================================================================================
Original file: raman_how_to_judge_horoscope_1.json
Dataset number: 323 of 455
Format: valid JSON
Structure: Object / structured dataset
Original size: 459,380 bytes
Top-level fields: 11
Title: raman-how-to-judge-horoscope-1
Creator: —
Date: —
Description: —

CONTENT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
METADATA AND OTHER FIELDS
  • title: raman-how-to-judge-horoscope-1
  • creator: —
  • date: —
  • description: —
  • subject: —
  • identifier: —
  • source_folder: How to judge horoscope - XML
  • total_pages: 311
  • total_words: 78188
  • text_quality:
    • ocr_word_validity_score: 0.971
    • quality_tier: good
    • note: —

FULL TEXT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
BV Raman Series
How to Judge
A HOROSCOPE
Volume One
B.V. Raman

How to Judge a Horoscope
Volume One
I to VI Houses
BANGALORE VENKATA RAMAN
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS
PRIVATE LIMITED * DELHI

Ninth Revised Edition: Bangalore, 1984
Eleventh Edition: Delhi, 1992
Twelfth Edition: Delhi, 1995
© MRS. RAJESHWARI RAMAN
All Rights Reserved.
ISBN: 81-208-0846-0 (Cloth) ISBN:
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS
41 U.A. Bungalow Road, Jawahar Nagar, Delhi 110 007
8 Mahalaxmi Chamber, 22 Bhulabhai Desai Road, Mumbai 400 026
236, 9th Main III Block, Jayanagar, Bangalore 560 011
203 Royapettah High Road, Mylapere, Chennai 600 004
Sanas Plaza, 1302 Baji Rao Road, Pune 411 002
8 Camac Street, Kolkata 700 017
Ashok Rajpath, Patna 800 004
Chowk, Varanasi 221 001
Printed in India
BYJAINENDRA PRAKASH JAIN AT SHRIJAINENDRA PRESS,
A-45 NARAINA, PHASE-I, NEW DELHI 110 028
AND PUBLISHED BYNARENDRA PRAKASH JAIN FOR
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PRIVATE LIMITED,
BUNGALOW ROAD. DELHI 110 007

CONTENTS
Preface to Eleventh Edition
Preface to Ninth Edition
Preface to First Edition
Chapter 1—General Introduction
2—Considerations in Judging a House
3—Determination of Longevity
4—Concerning the First House
5—Concerning the Second House
6—Concerning the Third House .,
7—Concerning the Fourth House
8—Concerning the Fifth House
9—Concerning the Sixth House ,,
10—Practical Examples
An Index of Technical Terms

PREFACE TO THE ELEVENTH EDITION
To sale of the 10th edition (wrongly printed as 9th edition)
of the First Volume of HOW TO JUDGE A HOROSCOPE
within twelve months of its publication testify not only to the
popularity of my humble writings on astrology but also to the
publishing enterprise of Motilal Banarsidass.
I am grateful to the public for the interest they have been
evincing in my writings and the patronage extended. I crave the
indulgence of the readers for any shortcomings in this edition.
I am thankful to my daughter Gayatri Devi Vasudev for
her assistance in revising the edition, to my sons B. Niranjan
Babu and B. Sachidananda Babu for careful proof corrections
and to Messrs Motilal Banarsidass for printing out this
eleventh edition attractively.
Bangalore B. V. RAMAN

PREFACE TO NINTH EDITION
How TO JUDGE A HOROSCOPE is a book on the
practical or applied side of astrology. The presentation has been
well received by the general public The ninth edition has been
thoroughly revised. Volume II dealing with Houses VII to XII has
been published.
I am grateful to the public for the interest they have been
evincing by my writings and the patronage extended. I crave the
indulgence of the readers for any shortcomings in this edition.
I am thankful to my daughter Gayatri Devi Raman for her
assistance in thoroughly revising the edition, to my sons B.
Niranjan Babu and B. Sachidananda Babu for careful proof
corrections and to Messrs. P. N. Kamat and G. K. Ananthram of
IBH Prakashana for bringing out this new edition attractively.
BANGALORE

PREFACE TO FIRST EDITION
All my astrological books—both predictive and
mathematical—have been received favourably—in fact beyond
my own expectation—both by the public and the press. This has
encouraged me to bring new books dealing with important aspects
of astrology. The present work, which I have the pleasure to
submit herewith, makes a departure from the. conventional
method of treatment of astrology. I have dealt with each Bhava or
house exhaustively with suitable illustrations. There can therefore
be no question as to the importance of this new work.
Nothing is more difficult in the present state of our
knowledge than to say in what events and circumstances any
given combination will express itself. For example, such a
combination as Saturn and the Sun, rising in the ascendant, may
result in a fall, disease, loss of status or money; it might indicate a
temperamental defect, an intellectual inhibition or it may operate
in several other ways. An attempt has been made in the following
pages to ascertain the indications of the various influences with
reference to each house.
In the judgment of a horoscope an astrologer will come
across many a pitfall. Each house deals with different
significations and the same set of combinations obtaining in a
particular house might influence the different significations
comprehended by the house, in different ways. To be more
clear, letus take the 4th house. It is

supposed to signify mother, education, landed and house
properties. An illiterate man may possess many houses and a
long-lived mother while one with full education may not possess
any properties. How can the same set of combinations affect the
same house—in different ways in regard to its different
significations? This apparent inconsistency has been reconciled
to some extent by the introduction of an important factor, viz., the
Karaka (indicator). A careful study of the illustrations provided
in this book will make these points clear. I have endeavoured in
this book to take the reader through the practical aspect of
astrology and have omitted the rudimentary principles and rules
In the study of any branch of knowledge, theory and practice
must go side by side. Theory always remains theory and it will be
of no practical use toman. Take physics, chemistry, biology or
geology. One may have read all the books available on the
subject but if it comes to a question of application, he blinks
like an idiot. An ordinary mechanic, druggist or a compounder is
any day more al home with his subject just because he has had
practical experience. A harmonious blending of the theoretical
knowledge with practical ability is always desirable
In the sphere of astrology too, a study of practical
horoscopes is absolutely necessary to grasp the true worth of the
subject and handle its technique properly. In writing How TO
JUDGE A HOROSCOPE, this aim has been kept in view. Typical
examples, illustrative of important principles, have been selected
from actual lives. A careful study of these examples will certainly
give a sound and working knowledge of astrology. In the analysis
of the Bhavas (houses) Ihave omitted to take

into account the various yogas as I have dealt with them in detail
in my Three Hundred Important Combinations.
Most of the rules given in ancient Hindu astrological books
can be readily tested if we can only secure sufficient data beyond
dispute. To reject them off-hand as unsuitable is to betray our
ignorance.
In my extensive travels throughout India, I have had
discussions with several well-known scientists and scholars.
Most of them are convinced that astrology has a rational basis but
they hesitate to proclaim their faith in public just because the
orthodox scientist has not yet put his stamp of approval on
astrologyIn this book, I am not going to make a case for astrology.
The introduction I have given to my Astrology for Beginners and
my Astrology and Modern Thought should be eye-openers to the
greatest sceptic, that astrology is science and no superstition. It is
an interplanetary or cosmic science that deals with the play of
cosmic energy. If modern science has not yet discovered by the
limited means at its disposal that man is subject to the influences
of planets on the three planes of existence, viz., physical, mental
and moral, then it is certainly no fault of astrology.
The ancient Maharishis who have propounded the rules of
astrology were sages of a high psychic development and
examined terrestrial and celestial phenomena by their divine sight
or Divya Drishti. We would hardly be justified in attributing
mean motives to those sages who have left great names in the
landmarks of time. They saw many phenomena which the socalled scientist could hardly hope to see with his instruments. Our
minds are mean and arc almost exclusively engaged in studying
and procuring worldly comforts. Though at the height of

yogic development, they scorned to utilise such knowledge
for any worldly concerns, and soley used it for the benefit
of mankind.
Can a science as astrology be ever untrue? The
scientist takes too crudely a materialistic view of the whole
nature of the universe. He contends that he may think of
considering astrology as a fit subject for investigation
provided the destiny factor is ruled out of it. This is simply
absurd. There is nothing like destiny in astrology. The
proper term to be used is Adrishta or that which is not seen.
Astrology simply indicates and gives the greatest scope for
the development of will-power, by means of which one can
either counteract the evil indications or augment the
favourable influences.
I feel sure that I have supplied a long-felt want by
ushering in this publication for the benefit of the educated
public.
BANGALORE

1. General Introduction
In the study of astrology nothing is more important,
more difficult and more taxing than the proper judgment of
a horoscope. The twelve Bhavas or houses represent the
entire history of the individual. In order to analyse a
horoscope properly and thoroughly each house or Bhava
should be carefully scrutinised. Sometimes it so happens
that many of the principles of astrology given in even
standard works do not hold good in actual charts. In such
circumstances, conclusion should not be drawn that the
principles of astrology are contradictory. On the other hand,
a further analysis of the relations and interrelations of
planets should be made.
Astrology is the most difficult of all sciences. It is
neither a physical science in the sense that physics or
chemistry is; nor is it metaphysical. The precision of
mathematics should be harmoniously combined with the
intuitive capacity of a philosopher. Consequently no hard
and fast rules can be laid down for guidance, except the
broad principles. In order to examine a horoscope a good
deal of judgment is required.
In this book, it is proposed to deal with the twelve
houses in an exhaustive manner and introduce to the reader,
principles of astrology with which he may not have come
across. One cannot say with any definiteness why particular
events of human life are attributed to particular houses ina
horoscope. For instance, the first house

2 How to Judge a Horoscope
represents the body while the fourth rules the mother. The
rationale of this allocation is still a mystery. The ancient
Maharishis must have had in view some scientific basis for
the allocation of all the events of human life to the twelve
Bhavas or houses.
It must be noted that the twelve houses have reference
to the material relation of Jeeva (soul) in its journey from
the cradle to the grave. According to one explanation, the
ancient Hindu day was divided into twelve sections of five
ghatis each and each section was devoted to certain definite
duties of the daily routine of living. The day started just
about, or a few ghatis (5 ghatis) before sunrise. From this
time until sunrise the activities were purely personal. Hence
the first house became the personal house. This ingenious
explanation does not certainly gratify the curiosity of
thinking brains. As the birth gives rise to all the incidents
and results to be experienced in our terrestrial life, the
ascendant or Lagna, which is their significator, points to the
conditions of life on earth. The second half of the day
(amongst ancient Hindus) commenced with the seventh
period of five ghatis (after the setting in of evening). This
period was always a period of amusement and and
relaxation—of meeting partners and enjoying the pleasure
of contact. Hence the 7th house came to be associated with
wife and partner.
The house opposite the ascendant must be one with
which to form a pair and therefore the seventh house is
attributed to wife. In the zodiac, Aries is the first house.
The third house is Gemini. It represents arms. As arms
protect our body so also our brothers are our helpers in the
earthly life and hence the third house in general indicates
brothers. The fourth house rules breasts. It is from the
breast that the baby suckles its nourishment while

General Introduction 3
happiness and pleasure proceed from the mind. It is not our
purpose to try to explain the rationale of the attributes of
the twelve houses. On the other hand we have suggested
above that common-sense thinking enables one to
appreciate what this rationale is. Take a haroscope in
which the fifth house is afflicted by unfavourable
conjunctions and aspects. The subject will have no children
or all or most of his children will die. Will this not suffice
to prove that the fifth house is connected with children ?
The ancient Maharishis discovered grand and glorious
truths with the aid of Divya Drishti or introspection.
In applying the rules contained in astrological books to
practical horoscopes one must definitely bear in mind that
they are merely for his guidance. In addition to knowledge
of astrology, one must also exercise discretion and
common-sense coupled of course with a certain amount of
intuition. Significations have been assigned to the various
dignities and debilities of planets, the pros and cons of
which must be carefully considered. No prediction should
be given in a haphazard manner. If the fifth house is well
disposed, and its lord occupies favourable situations the
subject will be happy with regard to children. Suppos-ing
Pisces is Lagna and Jupiter is in Cancer the fifth or
suppose Kanya is Lagna and Jupiter is in Makara. Would
the results in either case be the same ? In the first instance,
Jupiter lord of Lagna is in the 5th exalted : In the second
case, Jupiter lord of 4th is in debilitation. Can the results be
same in both instances ? Common-sense tells us that the
results must differ. An astrological student must bear
in mind all these differences and venture a prediction. The
First house is called Thanu Bhava. It deals with or
represents the beginning of life, childhood, health,
environment, personality, the physical body and character.

4 How to Judge a Horoscope
The Second house represents family, face, right eye, food,
wealth, literary gift, and manner and source of death, selfacquisition and optimism. The Third house rules brothers
and sisters, intelligence, cousins and other immediate
relations. The Fourth house indicates peace of mind, home
life, mother, conveyances, house property, landed and
ancestral properties, education and neck and shoulders. The
Fifth house indicates children, grandfather, intelligence,
emotions and fame. The Sixth house rules over debts,
diseases, enemies, miseries, sorrows, illness and
disappointments. The Seventh represents wife, husband,
marriage, urinary organs, marital happiness, sexual
diseases, business partner, diplomacy, talent, energies and
general happiness. The Eighth indicates longevity, legacies
and gifts and unearned wealth, cause of death, disgrace,
degradation and details pertaining to death. The Ninth rules
father, righteousness, preceptor, grandchildren, intuition,
religion, sympathy, fame, charities, leadership, journeys
and communications with spirits. The Tenth indicates,
occupation, profession, temporal honours, foreign travels,
self-respect, knowledge and dignity and means of
livelihood. The Eleventh represents means of gains; elder
brother and freedom from misery. The Twelfth rules losses ;
expenditure, waste, extravagance, sympathy, divine
knowledge, Moksha and the state after death.

2. Considerations in Judging a House
In examining a house due importance should be given
not only to the Rasi but also to the Navamsa and other
appropriate diagrams. In analysing a Bhava, the following
factors should be considered carefully :—
1. The strength, aspects, conjunctions and location of
the lord of the house.
2. The strength of the house itself.
3. The natural qualities of the house, of its lord and
the planets in it or having aspects.
4. Whether the influence has been altered by any
yogas occurring in any particular house or houses.
5. The exaltations and debilitations of the house lords
are equally important.
6. The situation—favourable or adverse—of the
house-lord or the lord in whose house the particular houselord is situated, in the Navamsa.
7. The age, position, status and sex of the subject.
8. Each sign has certain planets well disposed or illdisposed. For instance for those born in Aries the Sun is
good. The relation between the house lord (Mars) and the
Sun is very important and its proper consideration should
not be overlooked.
All these must be properly weighed before any result
can be deduced.
If the strength of the lord is full or complete there will
be in general a good influence on the house. Among the
many events comprehended by a house, those are to be

6 How to Judge a Horoscope
selected with which the planets are not concerned. The
good or bad nature of the aspects to which a lord or the
house itself is subjected plays no mean part in the judgment
of horoscope. The benefic and malefic qualities of the
planets should be taken under all conceivable relations. The
occupations and avasthas of planets go a long way in
directing the results and if well placed good planets are
there, they do good. The Adhipati or lord of the house is
responsible to an immense extent for the control of the
house. But if in a particular case, the lord is badly placed,
and the house itself has good conjunctions and aspects then
evil results should not be predicted. When the Dasa or
Bhukti of a house lord comes, the results of the Bhavas in
question will be realised. For instance, lord of Lagna is
weak and is in the 7th house as aspected by malefics. These
combinations indicate more than one wife. During the Dasa
or Bhukti of such a lord, wife's death may be predicted.
There are hundreds of combinations given for each
house and it is for the reader to try the merits of these
various configurations. These difficulties in the line of
astrological predictions cannot be easily overcome. When
once overcome the student will no doubt be satisfied in
drawing right conclusions.
Astrology is the most difficult and at the same time the
most useful science and one cannot hope to learn the
subject with easy-chair methods. Much effort,
concentration and intuition are necessary in order to be a
correct predictor.
Each ascendant has certain planets disposed towards it
favourably, unfavourably and neutrally which I have
enumerated below. My Hindu Predictive Astrology may
also be referred to with advantage. The details will be
useful when predicting the results of Dasas.

Considerations in Judging a House 7
Benefics and Malefics for each Lagna
If Ascendant or Lagna is : Aries (Mesha)—Jupiter, the
Sun and Mars are benefics. Jupiter is the best benefic. The
next benefic is Mars. Saturn, Mercury and Venus are
malefics. Mercury being the greatest malefic as lord of the
3rd and 6th.
Vrishabha (Taurus).—The best benefic is Saturn as he
owns the 9th and 10th. Mercury, Mars and the Sun are also
benefics. Jupiter, Venus and the Moon are evil planets but
Venus may be declared a neutral as he is lord of Lagna or
ascendant.
Mithuna (Gemini)—Venus alone is the most
beneficial planet for this Lagna. The most malefic is Mars
as he is lord of the 6th and the 11th. Jupiter and the Sun are
also evil. The Moon and Mercury may be classified as
neutrals.
Kataka (Cancer).—Jupiter and Mars are benefics, the
better being Mars as he is lord of the 5th and 10th. Venus
and Mercury are evil and Saturn, the Moon and the Sun are
neutrals.
Simha (Leo) — Mars and the Sun are benefics, the
former being the most auspicious. Mercury and Venus are
malefics. Jupiter, the Moon and Saturn are neutrals.
Kanya (Virgo).—Venus is alone the best benefic.
Moon, Mars and Jupiter are evil or malefics. Saturn, the
Sun and Mercury are neutrals.
Thula (Libra). — Saturn, Mercury and Venus are
benefics, Saturn being the best. The Sun, Jupiter and the
Moon are malefics. Mars may be taken as a feeble benefic.
Vrischika (Scorpio).—The Moon is the best benefic
and Jupiter and the Sun are also benefics. Mercury and
Venus are evil. Mars and Saturn are neutrals.

8 How to Judge a Horoscope
Dhanus (Sagittarius )—Mars and the Sun are benefics.
Venus, Saturn and Mercury are evil and Jupiter and the
Moon are neutrals.
Makara (Capricorn).—Venus is the most powerful
benefic. Mercury and Saturn are also benefics. Mars,
Jupiter and the Moon are evil, the worst being Mars.
Though the Sun is the 8th lord, he becomes a neutral.
Kumbha (Aquarius).—Venus is the benefic. The Sun
and Mars are also benefics. Jupiter and the Moon are
malefics and Mercury is a neutral.
Meena (Pisces)——The Moon and Mars are benefics.
Saturn, the Sun, Venus and Mercury are malefics. Jupiter is
of course a neutral.
To facilitate easy understanding I shall make these
principles more clear.
In each horoscope there are benefic lords, malefic lords
and neutral lords. These of course have nothing to do with
the natural classification of planets as benefics and
malefics.
In any horoscope the benefics or benefic lords are :—
(1) First house lord, other than the Moon; (2) the 5th and
9th lords (Thrikonadhipathis); (3) and (4) lords of the 4th,
7th and 10th when they do not happen to be natural
benefics.
The lord of the 9th is decidedly more benefic than the
lord of the 5th. Similarly lord of the 10th is more benefic
than that of the 7th while the lord of the 4th is the least
benefic.
The malefics or malefic lords in a horoscope are :—
(1) Lords of the 3rd, 6th and 11th houses; (2) lords of the
4th, 7th and 10th houses (Kendradhipathis) if they happen
to be natural benefics. Again among the malefics the 11th
lord is the worst malefic, the 6th less malefic while the 3rd
the least malefic.

Considerations in Judging a House 9
The neutrals in a horoscope are:—(1) The Moon—when
he is lord of Lagna, (2) the Sun or the Moon as the 8th lord,
(3) the Sun or the Moon as the lords of the 2nd and 12th.
Thus the student has to be very careful in correctly
affirming the strengths, weakness and other peculiarities of
the horoscope.
From the above it will be seen that a natural benefic,
such as for instance Jupiter, can also become a malefic
when he is lord of an angle. Natural malefics such as Mars,
Saturn, etc., become temproral benefics if they become
lords of angles (Kendras). Similarly, natural benefics
become malefics if they own quadrangular houses. It is also
to be noted that a natural benefic, who becomes a malefic
by virtue of quadrangle ownership, will cease to act as a
malefic, when he occupies the angular house (Kendra) of
which he is lord. Thus in case of Cancer, if Venus occupies
Libra, he will cease to be a malefic just because Libra
happens to be his own. Similarly, a natural malefic, viz.,
Mars who becomes a benefic by virtue of quadrangular
ownership will cease to be a benefic, when he occupies the
angular house of which he is the lord.
Yogakarakas
Yogakarakas are planets that confer fame, honour,
dignity, financial prosperity, political success, and
reputation. Any planet can become yogakaraka when he is
a common lord of certain houses. The extent to which he
produces a yoga depends upon the strength he has gained
by virtue of Shadbalas (see my Graha and Bhava Balas),
association, aspect and occupation.
1. A planet owning both a Kendra (quadrant) and a
Trikona (trine) becomes a yogakaraka. This is possible only
in case of Mars, Saturn and Venus. In case of

10 How to Judge a Horoscope
Kataka Lagna (Cancer rising) and Simha Lagna (Leo rising)
Mars can officiate as Yogakaraka as he becomes lord of 5th
and 10th with reference to Cancer and 4th and 9th from
Leo. When the ascendant is Thula (Libra) Saturn owns 4th
and 5th—an angle and a trine respectively and hence he
becomes yogakaraka. And when the ascendant is Taurus,
Saturn becomes 9th and 10th lord and hence a yogakaraka.
Venus becomes a yogakaraka, when the ascendant becomes
Makara (Capricorn) or Kumbha (Aquarius); in the former
case Venus owns the 5th and 10th houses and in the latter
case he becomes lord of 4th and 9th.
2. When a Kendradhipati (angular lord) becomes
associated with Trikonadhipati (trinal lord), then also, a
Rajayoga is caused. Between these two lords in association,
he who is not blemished either by the other ownership (such
as 3rd, 6th, etc.) or by associating with lords of 3, 6, 8,
becomes the acting yogakaraka. It should be remembered
carefully that the most powerful Rajayoga could be caused
by the association of lords of 9th and 10th. The combination
of the lords of the 4th and 5th, 7th and 5th, 10th and 5th, 4th
and 9th, 7th and 9th and 10th and 9th is so powerful that it
can overcome, to a large measure, the slight blemish caused
by other malefic lordships.
3. When the 9th and 10th lords have exchanged their
places, each is capable of becoming a Rajayogakaraka;
also, when the 9th lord is in the 10th or the 10th lord is in
the 9th, a Rajayoga is caused.
4. When the 9th and 10th lords fully aspect each
other, they will confer Rajayoga.
5. Apart from the Rajayogas referred to above,
certain yogas will be caused due to the position of certain
planets in certain situations. Thus Jupiter and the Moon

Considerations in Judging a House 11
mutually aspecting or in mutual quadrants will also confer
fame and dignity. There are several Yogas mentioned in
Sanskrit works, a detailed list of which will be found in
Satayogamanjari by B. Suryanarain Rao and in my Hindu
Predictive Astrology. I have given some typical Yogas in
my Three Hundred Important Combinations. In all cases,
wherever a Rajayoga is noticed, the extent to which it will
be realised depends upon the inherent strength it has gained
as a result of ownership, association, occupation and aspect
of the two planets that cause a Yoga. The Yoga can really
be of some substantial effect provided the planets causing
the yoga are within 12° of each other. In measuring the
yogas or even the general nature of the horoscope, the
starting point should be either the ascendant or the Moon,
whichever is stronger.
Chart No. I.—Born on 12-2-1856 at 12-21 p.m. (L.T.)
Lat. 18° N., Long. 84° E.
Moon Lagna
Raho Lagna | Sat. Jupiter
Sun
Merc.
Jupit.
RASI a
i gone
Y, Mars atur
enus Ketu Ketu Vénus Moon
Mars
Balance of Venus Dasa at birth: 12-3-9.
(a) The conjunction of the Sun and Mercury (lords of 4th
and 5th) in the 10th has resulted in a Rajayoga. This

12 How to Judge a Horoscope
is not as powerful as the next one because of the blemish
generated by association with Jupiter—lord of 8th and
11th. (b) Saturn is the Yogakaraka, as he is lord of 6th and
10th and occupies the second.
Chart No. 2.—Born on 31-7-1897 at 8-10 a.m.
Moon
Venus Mercury Rahu
Sun i
Ketu Sat.
—— RASI ——| NAVAMSA —
Lagna
Moon
Rahu i Merc.
1.61 DNase
Sun Mars Jupi
Saturn Ketu Venus |/upit.
Balance of Ketu Dasa at birth : years 5-0-24.
(a) The combination of Mars and Jupiter in the
ascendant has produced a Rajayoga. (b) Mars by himself is
a yogakaraka as he is lord of the 4th and 9th.
The astrologer should possess a keen intellect to enable
him to analyse the various sets of combinations and sift the
evidence properly. For a fuller appreciation of the modus
operandi concerning the interpretation of yogas, reference
may be made to my Three Hundred Important
Combinations.

3. Determination of Longevity
Before the period of death is actually determined one
should be able to find whether the longevity is long,
medium or short, and whether there are Balarishta
combinations threatening early death. These details have
been fully described in standard astrological books to which
the reader may conveniently refer. We are at present
concerned with the planets who are likely to cause death
(Maraka) as a result of certain combinations and
associations. For the sake of convenience we may classify
the planets who cause death as follows:—
(a) Primary Determinants of death,
(b) Secondary Determinants of death, and
(c) Tertiary Determinants of death.
(a) Primary Determinants of Death.—The 3rd and 8th
are houses of life and the 2nd and 7th are houses of death.
(i) Lord of the 2nd or 7th is a determinant of death; (ii)
the (malefic) occupants of these two houses, and (iii) the
(malefic) planets in association with the above lords are
also determinants of death.
Of these several determinants above mentioned, planets
in conjunction with lords of 2nd and 7th are the most
powerful in causing death, while the lords themselves are
least powerful.
(b) Secondary Determinants of Death—Above we
have referred to the malefic associates with lords of 2nd

14 How to Judge a Horoscope
and 7th and malefic occupants. The following may also
become Marakas or death-inflicting planets :—
(1) Benefic planets in association with lords of 2nd and
7th, (ii) lordsof 3rd and 8th and (iii) lord of 3rd or 8th
associated with 2nd or 7th lord.
(c) Tertiary Determinants of Death—(Q) Saturn in
conjunction, association or aspect with the Marakas
(determinants of death) mentioned above, (ii) lord of the
6th or 8th whether or not he is associated with a Maraka
planet, and (iii) the least powerful planet in the horoscope.
It is suggested in certain works that the following planets
will not cause death, (i) The Sun and the Moon and (ii) the
9th lord. In actual practice, however, this is not found to be
true. Herewith is given a list of Marakas in reference to
different Lagnas :—
Sign Maraka
Mesha — Mercury, Saturn
Vrishabha — Jupiter, Mars
Mithuna — Mars, Jupiter
Kataka — Venus, Mercury
Simha — Mercury, Venus
Kanya — Mars, Jupiter
Thula — Jupiter
Vrischika — Mercury, Venus, Saturn
Dhanus — Venus, Saturn
Makara — Mars, Jupiter
Kumbha — Mars
Meena — Mercury, Saturn, Venus
Instances are wanting to prove that the above
assignment of so-called Marakas always holds good.
Because the ascendant is Dhanus, Marakas are Venus
and Saturn. At birth Mars ruled for years 4-7-27. The native
died in Saturn's Dasa Saturn's Bhukti. Saturn is

Determination of Longevity i 15
Chart No. 3.—Born on 28-7-1897 at 6-47p.m. (L.T.)
Venus Moon Sun Mars Rabu
Merc.
Ketuif Sun Sat
RASI ean NAVAMSA
Mars l .
Rahu Jupit | Jupit.
L s v K Lagoa |
agnai Saturn enus elu Mercury oon
2nd and 3rd and is in the 12th from Lagna and 7th from the
radical Moon.
Chart No. 4—Born on 11-4-1880 at 10-38 a.m. L.T.
Lagna| Sun
i Ketu | Sat. | Lagna
| Mars | Ketu
= ——! NAVAMSA me
Mars

16 How to Judge a Horoscope
Because in Chart No. 4 Mithuna is Lagna, Marakas are
Jupiter and Mars, (a) Jupiter as lord of the 7th becomes a
primary determinant of death, (b) Rahu is a Maraka as he is
in the 7th house, (c) Mercury is with lord of the 7th and
owns the 3rd and 6th from the Moon. The native died on 17-1941 when the sub-period of Mercury was operating in
the major period of Jupiter.
Chart No. 5 is an elusive horoscope. The lord of Lagna
is exalted in the 5th without any unfavourable aspects,
conjunctions or associations. This has conferred Purnayu or
full term of life. Planets supposed to be Marakas did not kill
the subject; the foundation of the horoscope is strong. The
native died on 7-8-1940 at about 12 noon in Guru Dasa,
Guru Bhukti. In the Navamsa, Guru gets Maraka power and
the Lagna aspected by Mars.
Chart No. 5-Born on 7/6-5-1861 at 4-5 a.m. (L.T.) Lat.
Venus
Lagna Sun Mars | Ketu i Ketu
Moon Mercury |
Jupit, l
anaa RASI EEDS —-—: NAVAMSA TASE
Sat Moon} on
eee A l
! Sun
Raku | Rahu Mars
| Venus
Balance of Mercury Dasa at birth: Years 10-2-12.

Determination of Longevity 17
The student should collect a number of horoscopes of
persons dead and apply the principles given in this chapter.
Chart No. 5 is complicated and defies the intelligence of
the average astrologer.
Of course in the determination of death, the transiting
influences have a great bearing. Saturn was transiting the
2nd from the radical Moon when the native of this chart
died.
In Chart No. 6 the Ascendant is Gemini and the
Marakas are Mars and Jupiter. But Saturn (lord of 8) killed
the native at the close of his Dasa. Saturn is in the 6th from
Lagna and 7th from the Moon.
Chart No. 6—Born on 18-3-1869 at 1-15 p.m. (G.M.T.)
Lat.51°N., Long. 0° 5' W.
Sun Mars
Jupit. Moon |Lagna Jupit. Venus |
Venus | Mars|| Sat.
Merc. ! Rahu| |Moon Ketin
——' RASI — ||——' navamsa |——!
Ketu Rahu Í Sun |
Saturn Mere. Lagna |
Balance of Sun Dasa at birth : Years 2-1-25.
Ascendant is Vrischika or Scorpio. Marakas are
Mercury, Venus and Saturn. Death occurred in the subperiod of Rahu in Saturn's Dasa. Saturn is lord of 3rd and
occupies the 8th, aspected by Mercury, 8th and 11th lord.

18 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 7.—Born on 2-12-1885 at 6-13 a.m. (L.T.)
Ketu Sat, | Lagna! Jupiter Merc.
pene — p -]
enus
J: Sat. . Ketu
= RASI | = NAVAMSA .(-—
Venus Mars | Rahu Moon
Moon
Merc, gees Rahu || Sun | Mars
un :
Jupit.
Balance of Mars Dasa at birth: Years 6-0-24.
Careful observation reveals that many apparently
healthy children, with every circumstance in their favour,
succumb to early death, while many puny and sickly
children have been reared by careful nursing and judicious
treatment. I have with me horoscopes of several weak and
sickly children who according to the best medical diagnosis
should have died early but who, according to astrology,
were destined to live. For testing the rules of astrology we
should have sufficient data bayond dispute. A child was
born in Dublin on 20-11-1887 at 3-40 p.m. The child lived
for 20 hours. The Lagna is Taurus with the Moon in it
aspected by the Sun in Scorpio. Another male child born on
6-8-1912 at 42.5 ghatis after sunrise (5 h. 10m. 20s E.
Long, and 13° N. Lat.) died in the 14th month. The
ascendant (Aries) is hemmed inbetween Rahu and Saturn.
The Moon is afflicted by conjunction with Saturn. A female
infant was born at 3h. 20m. p.m. on 1-2-1874

Determination of Longevity 19
near Dublin. The ascendant was Cancer with the Moon
there. The Sun and Saturn were in Capricorn aspecting this
combination. The child died on 19-2-1874 of marasmus
(congenital). Generally if the Lagna, the Sun and the Moon
are afflicted, the child dies early.
The Maraka question, that is the determination of the
source, nature, time and place of death, has been
elaborately discussed in the second part of this book to be
published in due course.

4. Concerning the First House
In the delineation of any house, it is the Bhava that is
important and not the Rasi. The difference between the Rasi
and Bhava is explained in my books on Mathematical
Astrology*. The Navamsa is also equally important. The
effects of the Navamsa during which a person happens to be
born are supposed to influence all his activities throughout
life, subject to modifications according to the aspects of
planets situated at different piaces with reference to the
Navamsa. It is the pivot on which the horoscope revolves.
Consequently Hindu Astrology attaches the greatest
importance to the Navamsa chart. Every combination
mentioned should be applied to the Rasi, Bhava and
Navamsa charts and then a conclusion drawn. Essentials of
judgement have been described in my other works and it
would be sheer waste of space if they were repeated here.
Judgment is the summing up of the influence of planets
in a horoscope. Several elements are required for judging a
horoscope, viz., (a) the house, (b) its lord, (c) its occupants,
and (d) its Karaka or indicator. It must be noted that the
functions of a lord are those of the house or houses owned
by him. Apart from this, each lord has his own Karaka or
inherent functions. For example, if we take the 7th house in
a horoscope in which Aquarius is ascendant, the functions
of the lord of the house, viz., the Sun are two-fold : the
function house, due to ownership
* a) A Manual of Hindu Astrology (b) Graha and Bhava Balas.

Concerning the First House 21
and the Karaka function, viz., governance over father.
Judgment should therefore be based upon the (a) position of
the house lord, (b) aspects and association of the house lord,
(c) the yogas, etc., formed by the house lord and other
modifications. This holds good in the Navamsa also. The
celebrated Satyacharya opines that one's complexion, caste,
physical appearance, mental characteristics, nature of birth,
fame and defame, success, etc., should all be based on the
strength or otherwise of the Lagna and the Karaka.
Results of Lord of First House Occupying
Different Houses
In the First House: The subject lives by his own
exertion, will have an independent spirit and will have two
wives or one married and another illegal.
If the Lagnadhipati is well disposed in Lagna, the
person becomes famous in his own community and country.
The reader must note that the combination is of general
application. The exact nature of the results should be
interpreted by taking into account the strength, weakness
and other factors attendant upon the house lord. If
Lagnadhipati is in Lagna and aspected by evil planets, the
results produced will be quite different from those which he
would have produced by being aspected by benefics. The
same rules apply to all Bhavas which should be borne in
mind by every reader.
Second House : There will be more of gains, teased or
worried by enemies, good character respectable and
generous hearted.
Well disposed. He will gladly discharge his duties
towards his kith and kin, and will be ambitious. He will
possess prominent eyes and be blessed with forethought.

22 How to Judge a Horoscope
Third House: Makes one highly couragious, fortunate,
reepectable, two wives, intelligent and happy.
When Lagnadhipati is well disposed, the native's rise
in life will be brought about by his brothers. He may
become famous as a musician or a mathematician
depending upon the nature of the sign and the planets
involved.
Fourth House: There will be happiness from parents,
many brothers, materialistic, well built, fair looking and
well-behaved.
If the 4th lord is favourably disposed, the person will
acquire considerable landed properties, specially through
maternal sources. He will be rich, happy, famous and
commands a number of conveyances.
Fifth House: The first child does not survive, not much
happiness from children, short tempered, subservient and
serving others.
If fortified : In the good graces of rulers or powerful
political parties and likely to be absorbed into trade or
diplomatic services. He will propitiate deities consistent
with the indications of the fifth lord.
Sixth House : In addition to the results produced by the
lord of Lagna being in the third, the following may also be
noted. There will be bebts but they will be liquidated when
the Dasa of the Lagndhipati comes.
When the lord is fortified, the native joins the army,
becomes a Commander or even a Commander-in-chief
provided the lord's Dasa operates at the opportune period.
Or, he may become head of medical or health services or an
expert physician or surgeon. Here the other influences
should be suitably balanced.
Seventh House: The wife does not live or there will be
more than one marriage. Later in life becomes detached
from worldly affairs and tries to lead an ascetic life.

Concerning the First House 23
Depending upon other factors the subject will either be rich
or poor. There will be much travelling.
If well disposed, he will spend most of his time in
foriegn countries and lead a licentious life. Or he will be a
puppet in the hands of his parents-in-law.
Eighth House: Learned, gambling tendencies,
interested in occultism and mean character.
If the lord is strong the native takes pride in helping
others, has a number of friends, religiously inclined and will
have a peaceful and sudden end.
Ninth House: Generally fortunate, protector of others,
religious; if a Hindu—worshipper of Vishnu, good orator,
happiness on account of wife and children; and rich.
Provided the lord is well disposed, he will inherit good
ancestral and paternal property. The father will be famous,
philanthropic and god-fearing.
Tenth House: In addition to the results of the 4th
house, there will be professional success, honoured by
eminent men, a research scholar or specialisation in that
branch of knowledge or profession which is represented by
lord of Lagna and the 10th.
Eleventh House: In addition to the results of the 2nd
house, there will always be gains in business if a
businessman. The subject will not experience financial
straits.
He owes his prosperity to his elder brother. He will
earn enormous business profits, consistent with the
indications of the other planets joining the combination.
Twelfth House: The same results as in the 8th are
produced. In addition, there will be many losses, visiting
holy places and no success in business enterprises.
He will spend inherited riches on charities and other
deserving causes. Emotionally balanced he will dedicate
himself for public weal.

24 How to Judge a Horoscope
Other Important Combinations
If the lord of birth in birth with lord of 6th, 8th or 12th,
conjunction with or aspected by malefics, the health will
suffer. If there are any beneficial aspects this evil should not
be predicted. If the ascendant lord is posited in the Lagna
subject to evil combinations, the native will not be
physically happy. If all the planets aspect the ascendant he
will be strong, wealthy and long-lived. If the lord is strong
and good planets are in kendras and the ascendant is not
aspected by evil planets, there will be great happiness
regarding body. If the lord of birth is in conjunction with an
evil planet and Rahu occupies Lagna, the person has fears
from deception. If Rahu, Mars and Saturn occupy the
ascendant, the person will have some trouble in his sexual
organs.
If Jupiter or Venus remains in quadrants or trines from
Lagna, favourable results are produced. If the lord of the
Lagna is in a movable sign aspected by its own lord his
health will always be good and fortune prosperous. If the
ascendant lord is in the 8th, the subject will have a weak
constitution. Provided favourable aspects exist, this result
should not be predicted. The native will have a sickly
constitution if the lord of the house in which Lagnadhipati is
situated is also disposed unfavourably. If Saturn is in the
ascendant, his things will be stolen or he will be cheated. He
will be wounded in the head if lord of Lagna be Mars or
Saturn and the house is occupied or aspected by evil
planets. If a Sushka (dry) planet occupies the Lagna the
person will be lean. (Sushka planets are the Sun, Mars and
Saturn). If the ascendant falls in any of the Sushka Rasis
(signs owned by Mars, Saturn and the Sun) the body will be
emanciated. If the lord of the Lagna is in conjunction with
Sushka planets then also

Conceming the First House 25
similar results will follow. He will be corpulent if ascendant
be Cancer, Scorpio, or Pisces with good planets. If the
ascendant lord is a watery planet (Venus and the Moon),
strong and well conjoined, the native becomes stout.
Corpulence can also be predicted if the Lagna is owned by a
benefic and if the lord of the Navamsa occupied by the lord
of Lagna occupies a watery sign. If Jupiter occupies Lagna
or if Jupiter aspects Lagna from a watery sign or if the
Lagna happens to be a watery sign with benefics in it then
also the body will be stout.
The subject will suffer from asthma or lung troubles, if
the Sun is in the ascendant aspected by Mars. Suffers from
wounds and accidents if Mars is in Lagna aspected by the
Sun or Saturn. If the ascendant, its lord, ascendant in
Navamsa, or its lord is in a movable sign the subject travels
in distant lands with profit to himself. He will be happy all
his life if lord of Lagna is in Vargottama, in exaltation, in a
friendly drekkana, and joined or aspected by good planets.
If benefics stay in the Ist, 11th and 12th houses and the
strong lord is in Trikonas be will be happy in the beginning
and middle. If lord of Lagna is strong or Jupiter is in Lagna
he will be happy in the beginning.
Given above are combinations which enable one to
analyse in a general manner the first house and attempt
predictions regarding the physical appearance, general
fortune, health, stature, etc., of the native. Real
advancement can easily be made if the principles
enumerated in these articles are applied to actual charts. If
the Lagna or its lord is hemmed in between two malefics,
preferably Saturn and Rahu, the native will encounter
thieves and suffer on their account. Rahu in the 12th is not
as harmful as in the 2nd while Saturn in the 2nd is not as
harmful as in the 12th.

26 How to Judge a Horoscope
If there are many evil planets in Lagna the person will
always be miserable. If the ascendant lord, or the lord of
the Navamsa occupied by the lord of the Lagna, or the lord
of the 11th occupy the second house the person becomes
happy after his 20th year. The position of the above lords in
kendras makes the person happy after the 30th year.
Occupation of the 9th house by Lagna lord is conducive for
happiness after the 1 6th year.
Lord of Lagna in a decent position is itself a great asset
which sustains a person throughout his life. Added to this
the presence of any planet or planets in the 10th adds
greater vigour. Added to these two, that horoscope is a
fortunate one in which planets are not disposed in
Dwirdwadasa positions (12th and 2nd from each other).
A careful study of a large number of horoscopes has
revealed that when Lagnadhipati is not strong and well
disposed, but occupies the 3rd (vipat), 5th (pratyak) and 7th
(naidhana) constellations from Janma Nakshatra (the star
held by the radical Moon), the evil indications would be
intensified. Conversely when Lagnadhipati is strong but
occupies the above constellational positions, there will be a
lessening of the favourable indications. Even when
Lagnadhipati is strong but the lord of sign occupied by
Lagnadhipati is blemished, the benefic results decrease and
the malefic effects are augmented. In analysing Lagna
Bhava, due attention must be paid to the dispositions of
Chandra Lagna and Navamsa Lagna also.
We shall examine some actual horoscopes and then
continue further the discussion of the first house.
The lord of Lagna in Chart No. 8 is Venus who is a
benefic. The ascendant is aspected by a malefic Mars.
Though an enemy of Venus, Jupiter is a benefic.
Consequently the location of Lagnadhipati in the house of

Conceming the First House 27
Chart No. 8.—Born on 12-2-1856 at 12-21 p.m. (L.T.)
Moon Asedt,
Rahu Ascdt. | Sat. Jupiter Rahu
Sun
Merc
Jupit.
= RASI e | | —— NAVAMSA eee
Mars < Sun
aturn
Venns Ketu Merc.) Ketu Venus Moon
Mars
Balance of Venus Dasa at birth: Years 12-3-9.
Jupiter is auspicious. The presence of Lagnadhipati in the
8th made the native a very learned man. Coming to the
Navamsa, lord of Lagna aspects Lagna and hence, good.
Jupiter, lord of the 9th, occupies Lagna. Venus situated in
his own house aspects Lagna. Saturn exalted and the Sun
debilitated aspect Lagna. Hence the first house has acquired
considerable strength. Since lord of Navamsa Lagna is in a
movable sign, and the Lagna itself is a movable sign, the
subject had wide travels. The stature was ordinary. The
subject was fair looking. (Mark Venus and Mars, lords of
Lagna and the Navamsa Lagna are fair planets.) The height
was of medium size, complexion good. On account of the
aspect of Mars, he was martial in nature. There are other
combinations which need not be mentioned here which
made the native one of the world's greatest personalities.
The position of the three planets in the 10th and the
formation of Rajayogas

28 How to Judge a Horoscope
are factors whose bearing on the greatness of the native can
never be overlooked.
Chart No. 9.—Born on 22-2-1863 at 10-16p.m. (L.T.)
Moon | ea Asedt, Saturn /Venus
Venus Moon
Sun Ketu
Merc.
RASI = NAVAMSA
Sun
Merc. Mars
Rahu
Jupit. f
Rah t. 3
ahu | eedt Sa Jupit
Balance of Ketu Dasa at birth: Years 0-9-29.
It will be seen at once that, both in the Rasi and in the
Navamsa, planets are in the 2nd and 12th from each other
and hence unfavourable. Lagna is Libra and its lord Venus
is in the 5th with the Sun who is a malefic and who is also
the lord of the 11th from Lagna. Lagna is aspected by the
Moon. It is hemmed in between Rahu and Saturn in the 2nd
and 12th respectively. The subject, though belonging to a
respectable family, was an ordinary man. Though Lagna is
a movable sign, its lord is in a fixed sign. The subject had
absolutely no travels.
In Chart No. 8, the ascendant lord is Venus and he is in
the 8th from the ascendant. On either side of the ascendant
are Rahu (in the 12th with the Moon) and Saturn (in the
2nd). Here the opposite holds good. That is, Rahu is in the
2nd without any favourable aspects

Concerning the First House 29
whatsoever and Saturn is in the 12th. On account of this
combination the subject suffered from the hands of thieves
and robbers and sustained some injuries.
Chart No. 10.—Born on 8-8-1912 A.D. at 7-35p.m.
Rahu Moon Saturn | Venus
Saturn
Sun
Asdt. Sun Rahu
——4 RASI —— || .--_- NAVAMSA
Mars Ketu
A Mere. || Ascdt. Moon
1.72. Venus Mere.
“Jupiter Ketu Jupiter | Mars
Balance of Mars Dasa at birth: Years 6-1-6.
Lord of Lagna Saturn is in Taurus, a friendly sign and
an conjunction with the Moon lord of the 6th. Lord of
Lagna is also aspected by Jupiter and Lagna itself is
aspected by Mars, Mercury and Venus. Again in the
Navamsa, Saturn lord of Lagna is in debilitation and Lagna
is aspected by Mars. As Saturn has more to do with first
house than any other planet, the person's physical features
are predominantly saturnine. He is tall, lean, with much
hair, fair on account of the aspects of Mars over Lagna and
Jupiter over Lagnadhipati. Since the first house planet is a
malefic and since he is in conjunction With the Moon, the
native will not be quite healthy. The exact nature of his illhealth should be ascertained from the 6th house.

30 How to Judge a Horoscope
It will be seen that an examination of a number of
horoscopes will make it clear that the ascendant lord in
situations similar to the above illustration will confer a
weak constitution. A planet may give a weak constitution
but at the same time it may also produce financial and
professional prosperity.
Results of Different Signs Ascending
Each sign of the zodiac when ascending imprints its
own definite characteristics, mental, physical and personal.
These have of course to be blended with those of planets
rising or aspecting. The following delineations are for signs
alone without any planet in the first house. If any planet be
there, it will modify these testimonies. The Sun adds
nobleness to the figure and increases health of the
constitution. The Moon indicates better proportion and
greater delicacy of figure. Mars gives a fair ruddiness to the
person, healthy constitution, sturdy figure, a temperament
principally of heat and dryness. Mercury makes the stature
proportionately well shaped, bodily temperament chiefly
hot and yellowish complexion. Jupiter gives a fair
complexion, large eyes and dignified stature. Venus
produces qualities of a nature more applicable to feminity,
beauty, softness and greater delicacy of form. Saturn, black
and curled hair, tall figure, inactive and narrow chest.
The mental disposition should always be judged by
reference to the Moon and his disposition. The dispositions
given below are of a general nature. In actual practice,
however, they will be seen to vary from the normal in some
respects, owing to the strength of the ruling sign, its ruler,
planets aspecting the ascendant, etc.
The liability to diseases and accidents is judged from

Concerning the First House 31
the planets rising or setting, and those configurated with the
Moon. When the Sun, the Moon and the ascendant are
afflicted by more than one of the malefics, liability to
accidents and a violent or sudden death is indicated. Should
Rahu and Ketu be in angles with the Sun and the Moon, the
angles being Aries, Taurus, Scorpio and Capricorn, the
body will be afflicted with distortions, lameness, or even
paralysis.
Mesha (Aries) Rising
Mental Tendencies.—Independent thinking, courageous
and sensitive.
Physical Tendencies.—Middle stature, ruddy
complexion, sharp sight, long face and neck, head broad at
the temples and narrow at chin, brown or light and curly,
mark or scar on the head or temples, teeth well-set and
round eyes.
General Tendencies.—Those born in Mesha are lovers
of scientific thought. They are enterprising and ambitious.
They have the ability to plan. They dislike being guided by
others ; are intense when interested, vehement when
excited. They are rather stubborn, but often frank. Quick
tempered, they resent imposition and are liable to go to
extremes. Their constitution will be hot. They love beauty,
art and elegance. They have practical ideas. If Aries is
afflicted they suffer from diseases pertaining to the head.
Mental affliction and derangement are also likely if Saturn
and the Moon are in Aries.
Vrishabha (Taurus) Rising
Mental Tendencies.—Obstinate, proud and ambitious ,
easily accessible to adulation but affectionate and loving,
sometimes unreasonable, prejudiced and stubborn.

32 How to Judge a Horoscope
Physical Tendencies.—The stature of the person born
in this sign will be short and often tending towards
corpulence, lips thick and complexion swarthy, square build
of the body. Face beautiful, eyes and ears large, full
forehead, hands plump and broad.
General Tendencies.—If they are not listened to
attentively, people born in this sign will act like a bull. They
are self-reliant; They have their own principles and ways
and a piercing intellect. They have a great deal of
endurance, latent power and energy. They always put their
ideas into practice. Their physical powers and mental
endurance are indeed noteworthy. They are fond of
pleasure, they love beauty and music. They possess a
magnetic personality. They think they are born for
exercising authority. They generally suffer from nervous
complaints after the fiftieth year. With regard to children
much happiness is not indicated. The late Prof. B.
Suryanarain Rao was a typical example of Taurus
ascending.
Mithuna (Gemini) Rising
Mental Tendencies.- They will have a wavering mind.
Fond of writing and reading they are ingenious and
quickwitted, vivacious and inconsistent, nervous and
restless.
Physical Tendencies.—They are tall and straight in
stature and active in motion. Face well developed, there is a
depression near the chin, a thin face, sanguine complexion,
unusual height if malefics are there, the eyes are clear and
the nose snub. They are weak but active.
General Tendencies—They are very active and tend to
become experts in mechanical sciences. They may suffer
sudden nervous breakdowns. They must be cautious in
moving with the opposite sex. Their mind will be often
conscious of their own depravity. They are very clever

Concerning the First House 33
and possess inherent conversational and literary ability.
They are liable to fraud and deception. If evil planets are in
Gemini, trickery and deceit will characterise their nature.
They are best in occupations where there is much activity.
Kataka (Cancer) Rising
Mental Tendencies-——People born in this sign will be
extremely sensitive, inquisitive, nervous and restless,
interested in music and dexterous.
Physical Tendencies—They have a middle sized
body, face full, slightly snub nose, fair complexion, long
arms, long face and wide chest.
General Tendencies.—They are very intelligent, bright
and extremely frugal and equally industrious. Their
frugality often takes the form of miserliness. The mind is
intuitional, perceptive. They like pleasure. They are deeply
attached to their family and children. They often meet with
disappointment in love affairs. They are very talkative, selfreliant, honest and unbending. They will have a reputation
for love of justice and fairplay. Their emotions are strong.
They have psychic tendencies, are receptive to new ideas
and adapt themselves to environment. They are desirous of
possessions and cautious. They can best take up
occupations of a fluctuating nature.
Simha (Leo) Rising
Mental Tendencies.—People born in Leo are ambitious
as well as avaricious, warm-hearted, and have a liking for
art, literature and music. They are cheerful and unimpulsive.
Physical Tendencies.—Persons born in this sign will
be magnetic in appearance with broad shoulders, bilious

34 How to Judge a Horoscope
constitution, of average height, oval faced, thoughtful
countenance and the upper part of the body is generally
better formed.
General Tendencies.—They can adapt themselves to
any condition in life. They have faith. In affection they are
sincere. They stick to orthodox principles in religion but
are perfectly tolerant. Generally good tempered, they are
sensitive. They are lovers of music, literature and possess a
certain amount of philosophical knowledge. They are
voracious readers. In life they do not succeed as much as
they would like to and often throughout they struggle very
much. Their ambitions remain unfulfilled to a great extent.
They lack a natural policy and hence get into many
difficulties. They are forgiving and do not hold a grudge
long. They are likely to suffer from nervous troubles and
are generally misunderstood by their superiors and bosses.
Kanya or Virgo Rising
Mental Tendencies.—Those born in Virgo are
impulsive, emotional and fond of learning. They love
music and fine arts. They lack self-confidence. Methodical
and ingenious, they have active minds.
Physical Tendencies.—Persons born in this sign will
be middle-sized. Their chest will be prominent and when
afflicted, weak also. They have a straight nose, cheeks
massive and the forehead, good.
General Tendencies.—They exhibit their intelligence
when quite young. They are discriminating and emotional
and get easily carried away by impulse. They are cautious
regarding their own interests, prudent, economical,
diplomatic and shrewd. As authors they make progress in
physical and chemical sciences. They acquire much power
and influence over others. They are liable to suffer

Concerning the First House 35
from nervous breakdowns and paralysis when the sign is
afflicted. They are of a speculative nature.
Thula (Libra) Rising
Mental Tendencies.—Persons born in Libra are
idealistic, quick-witted, vindictive, forceful and positive.
Physical Tendencies.—They generally possess fair
complexion, a middle-sized stature, phlegmatic
constitution, handsome appearance, broad face, fine eyes,
broad chest and regular features. Their appearance will be
generally youthful.
General Tendencies——People V>rn in this sign are
generally of a sensual disposition. They are keen observers
of human nature. They have keen foresight and reason out
things from the standpoint of their own views. They love
justice, peace, order and are agreeable persons. They are
ambitious. They are more idealists than realists or practical
men and often contemplate on schemes that are like
building castles in the air. They are not sensitive to what
others say of them. As political leaders and religious
reformers they exert tremendous influence over the masses
and sometimes their zeal and enthusiasm can go to such a
pitch that they can force their views upon unwilling minds.
They are not easily amenable to reason. They are great
lovers of music. Truth and honesty have a special appeal for
them.
Vrischika (Scorpio) Rising
Mental Tendencies.—Sarcastic and impulsive, a
ferhale born in this sign will be masculine in nature.
Interested in occult forms of study they possess a subtle
mind, hard to influence.
Physical Tendencies.—Persons born in this sign are
handsome in appearance. The bones are well developed.

36 How to Judge a Horoscope
They have broad eyes, tall figure, curly hair and broad
forehead. The personality is forceful with prominent brows
and preceptive faculties.
General Tendencies.—They will have a generous
disposition. They are exceedingly fickle-minded and love
much excitement. Though inclined to sensual things in
reality, they will not hesitate to philosophise upon the
virtues of controlling sensual pleasures. They are good
correspondents. They are often brutal, brusque and keenly
fond of contest. They possess enterprise. They appreciate
luxury but are frugal. They may become expert musicians if
they learn that art. They can also become proficient in fine
arts, dancing and the like. They uphold their own views.
Their constitution will be hot and they are liable to suffer
from piles. They are good conversationalists as well as
writers and often rely too much on their own intelligence.
Dhanus (Sagittarius) Rising
Mental Tendencies.—Those born in Sagittarius have an
inclination for philosophy and occult studies. They can
acquire great mastery in these subjects. Humane and
somewhat impulsive, they are generally active and
enterprising.
Physical Tendencies——Persons born in this sign are
generally inclined towards corpulence. They possess
almond eyes and their hair is brown. They are usually good
looking. Evenly set teeth, a happy smile, and fullness of the
figure characterise the natives of Dhanus.
General Tendencies——They are of a phlegmatic
temperament. They are too conventional and also businesslike. They are prompt and uphold conservative views. They
are sympathetic and loving, and possess good foresight.
At times they are restless and over-

Concerning the First House 37
anxious. They are too callous and enthusiastic. They hate
all external show. They are God-fearing, honest, humble
and free from hypocrisy. They exercise strict control over
their food and drinks and in regard to their relations with
the opposite sex. They are prone to be misunderstood
unintentionally by others. In late years they must be careful
about their lungs as they are liable to suffer from rheumatic
pains and the like.
Makara (Capricorn) Rising
Mental Tendencies.—They are stoical to the miseries
of life. Possessed of sympathy, generosity and philanthropy,
self-willed, strong in purpose, secretive and vindictive,
Capricorn natives are cunning and determined.
Physical Tendencies.—Persons born in this sign are
tall, lean, reddish-brown in colour with prominent stiff hair
on the eye-brows and the chest. The head is big and the face
fairly broad. They have large teeth, a big mouth, prominent
nose, and are inclined to stoop. The body is thin and fleshy.
General Tendencies.—They have a knack to adapt
themselves to circumstances. They have great aspirations in
life and cannot economise funds. They like a lot of show.
Noted for their perseverance. They become vindictive when
Saturn is afflicted and may become somewhat bigoted.
They are capable of much endeavour. In the home life they
are perfectionists and often cannot get on well with
husbands or wives. They should check this harmful
tendency on their part. They are industrious. If Mars
occupies any sign other than his own they lack confidence,
become funky, nervous and weak-minded. They can be
described as "chatter-boxes" and have little or no control
over their tongues.

38 How to Judge a Horoscope
Kumbha (Aquarius) Rising
Mental Tendencies.—Aquarius being a philosophica
sign, people born in it become great teachers, writers, and
lecturers, provided the sign is free from afflictions. Natives
of Aquarius are reserved, they are peevish when provoked,
generous hearted, highly sympathetic and are always bent
upon helping others. They are intelligent, good memory
and capable of dealing with facts.
Physical Tendencies.—They are generally tall and lean
with countenance, handsome, appearance attractive and
disposition elegant. Their lips are flushy, cheeks are broad
and they have prominent temples and buttocks. If Saturn is
in the 4th, the chest will be weak with a tendency towards
stooping.
General Tendencies.—They make friends of others
very soon. They are peevish and when provoked, rise like a
bulldog but their anger is easily subsided. They shine very
well as authors and writers. Their conversation is always
interesting. They are sometimes timid and funky. They feel
shy to exhibit their talents before new audiences. They
specialise in subjects like astrology and become great
upholders of some such cause. Their literary greatness
comes before the world when they are quite young. Unless
the planetary positions are otherwise favourably situated,
people born in this sign will suffer certain critical setbacks
which will jeopardise their reputation. Owing to their
humanitarian doctrines they are prone to be misunderstood.
In family life, they will not have sufficient happiness. They
will be much devoted to their husbands or wives. They are
liable to suffer from colic troubles, chest pain and the like.
They should always be kept happy in life by their husbands
or wives. Otherwise their health will suffer.

Concerning the First House 39
Meena (Pisces) Rising
Mental Tendencies——Persons born in Pisces are
stubborn, psychically receptive, highly religious, stoical,
bigotted and God-fearing.
Physical Tendencies.—They are fair, stout of middlesized height, swarthy in complexion, eyes, 'piscean', and
inclined towards corpulence.
General Tendencies.—They are respectors of orthodoxical principles and can forego anything but orthodoxy.
They are extremely superstitious. They are very reserved
and are liable to draw premature conclusions on any matter.
They are God-fearing and very rigid in the observance of
religious customs and practices. They are stubborn, rather
timid, and ambitious to exercise
authority over others. They rarely realise their ambitions.
They are restless and fond of history, antiquarian talks and
mythological masterpieces. They are frugal in spending
money and though generally dependent upon others
throughout their life, still bear a mark of independence.
They are just in their dealings and fear to transgress the
laws of truth. With all this they lack self-confidence.
Planets in the First House
Planets rising in the ascendant produce their own
influences. Prima facie it seems absurd that the accidental
positions of planetary bodies at the moment of birth of a
child influence his health, finance, fortunes, affections and
disposition throughout his earthly career. But experiment
has shown that there is an intimate connection between the
positions of planets at the time of birth and a baby's
material and moral dispositions. The horoscope should be
considered as a person and not as a set of disconnected
planetary influences. There is something that links up

40 How to Judge a Horoscope
these scattered and contradictory fragments into a
connected and coherent whole. The twelve houses represent
not only the mould in which the young life takes shape at
birth, but they are unalterable as to their primary
significance when affected by the planets at birth. Diagnosis
of any chart may be obtained when we first show the effects
of the different planets being situated in the different signs.
The interpretations given below are for the planets by their
positions in the houses only, unaspected. If a planet situated
in the first house is aspected by or is in conjunction with
any other planet, then its effects by house position, as given
below are subjected to modification correspondingly. The
details given below must be adopted to suit the
requirements of the horoscope in question. First see
whether in the first house, any planet is exalted or
debilitated and whether the planet in the first house has
caused any special yogas, etc. (This principle applies to all
other houses also.) Then modify the reading accordingly.
For example, Aquarius is the ascendant and Saturn is rising
there. The disposition is calm, serious and grave. The native
is faithful. Since Aquarius is the ascendant the good
qualities of Saturn will further manifest as lord of the rising
sign is in his own house. If Leo is the rising sign then the
horoscope becomes generally unfortunate, indicates many
sorrows, disappointments, poverty and an uphill road
generally. By using considerable discretion-qualifying or
moderating your deductions to conform with the
astrological testimonies—you can unfold your powers of
prediction. Summing up, the above remarks:— (a) consider
the nature of the rising planet, (b) whether it is in debility or
exaltation, in a friendly or inimical sign, (c) note the aspects
it receives from the plariets—the houses from which
aspects are cast and the conjunctions the rising planet has,
(d) the nature of the sign—movable,

Concerning the First House 41
immovable, common, airy, watery etc. Finally, blend all the
influences carefully.
Sun in the First House.—Strong moral nature,
righteous-minded, ambition and love of power, tends to be
well supported by good health and vitality. Cheerfulness
and an optimistic temperament help to ensure popularity. It
adds respect to the personality and gives lofty motives. If
with Saturn or Mars, it indicates scars and a hot
constitution. The blood becomes impure and there will be
itches all over the body. Fevers, inflammations and eye
affections may also be anticipated.
Moon in the First House-——The native becomes
fanciful and romantic, a moderate eater. Considerable
restlessness is usually tempered by an easy-going
disposition. The fortune is generally changing. It makes one
an idealist, a great traveller and explorer. If with Saturn, the
mind will always be worried. IfMarsiswith the Moon, it
indicates menstrual disorders in the case of women.
Sociability tends to be a strong feature. He will be
successful in professions that bring him into contact with
the masses. The Moon in Lagna with Rahu indicates
hysterical tendencies and with Jupiter, the mind is elevated.
Mars in the First House—This gives a hot
constitution, courage, self-confidence and enterprise. The
native will possess practical ability and love of liberty and
independence. He becomes reckless of danger scorning
defeat. This gives somewhat of a rash nature. The body will
have scars and the appearance will be handsome. The
domestic life will be unhappy unless there are other
favourable combinations. Abuse of physical resources may
lead to ill-health. There is a proneness to accidents. The
aspects should be carefully examined. Danger of cuts,
burns, etc., are likely.

42 How to Judge a Horoscope
Mercury in the First House.-—This position makes the
subject humorous. Quickness of wit and mental ingenuity
tend to be strongly marked. The native becomes well-read,
particularly in occult studies. In good aspect to Venus, it
makes one musical and talented. Adaptability is a striking
feature. Mercury makes the man intellectual. If there is a
Rahu or Ketu in Lagna, the native suffers a lot of nervous
troubles.
Jupiter in the First House.—A magnetic personality is
bestowed on the native. An optimistic spirit, jovial
disposition and pleasant manners are indicated. The native
will have more sons if the 5th house is not affected. Selfindulgence especially in regard to gluttony will affect
health. If with Rahu, sms will be committed. Body will be
inclined towards corpulence. Lawyers, professors, writers,
theologians, etc., come under this planet. The man becomes
an influential leader. Diseases may result from impure
blood.
Venus in the First House—This is a fortunate
combination, more so if the ascendant happens to be
Capricorn or Aquarius. The native will possess amiability
and a cheerful temperament responsive to the emotional
side of nature. It gives an appreciation of art. There will be
craving for pleasure. Passions will be pronounced. The
native will take interest in music, drama and singing. There
will be a fondness for scents, flowers, etc. Those born in
this sign will be admired by the opposite sex. Generally a
good fortune is denoted. Fond of wife or husband, the
native will have a magnetic and attractive personality.
Marriage may take place early. If afflicted, it indicates
discord in married life.
Saturn in the First House.—Foreign customs will be
easily copied and imitated. But, if Saturn is not afflicted,
there will be much consideration for the welfare or others.

Concerning the First House 43
Self-confidence is normally justified. Moral stability will
also be marked. The disposition is calm, grave and serious.
The body will be weak and emaciated. Progress in any
venture will be slow but certain. There may be some
aversion for responsibility. This position of Saturn makes
habits inactive. Loss through negligence and lack of
opportunity are possible. The same results will be noticed if
the ascendant is aspected by Saturn. Misfortunes are likely
in the early part of life.
Rahu in the First House.—The health will be generally
unsatisfactory calling for treatment other than by medical
methods. It inclines one to the occult and the serious
wilfulness of nature is well marked. A hypocritical superconsciousness towards others is likely. It makes one appear
rather odd and eccentric. This combination is usually bad
for marriage. Rahu will generally partake of the
characteristics of Saturn.
Ketu in the First House-——Psychic powers are likely. It
denotes a weak constitution and an emaciated figure.
Instability and deceitfulness may influence the character.
Morbid imagination, strange appetites, tendency to
excitability and wandering disposition become
pronouncedly marked. Married life will be unhappy unless
there are other favourable configurations.
Every planet is the centre of some radiating force or
energy. These planetary radiations are absorbed by all the
beings in the universe in proportion to their capacity. The
planetary forces pass through them along the line of least
resistance.
When Do Indications of the First House Fructify ?
Hindu astrology has several systems of directions, the
most important of which is Udu Dasa or Vimshottari,
details pertaining to the calculations of which are embodied

44 How to Judge a Horoscope
in standard astrological works and in my Hindu Predictive
Astrology. In this chapter we shall explain the method of
timing events pertaining to the first house.
The first house indicates the body, general health,
childhood and personality. In the analysis of the results of
the first house, we have to consider the following
carefully:—
Whether the native of the horoscope is likely to enjoy
the Dasa of the ascendant lord or for that matter, the Dasa
of the lord of any house in consideration. For knowing this,
the longevity should be previously ascertained. If the Dasa
of the ascendant lord does not begin before the
commencement of Maraka period, then what are the other
planets which influence the 1st house by way of occupation
or location and whether the native will enjoy the Dasas of
such planets? The main periods and sub-periods generally
will give a delineation of the native's life. In timing events
pertaining to the first bhava, note the following factors
carefully : —
(a) Lord of the Ist house, (b) planet or planets
aspecting the Ist house, (c) planet or planets posited in the
Ist house, (d) planets aspecting the lord of the Ist house
and (e) planet or planets in association with the lord of the
lst house. The same consideration holds good with
reference to the other houses dealt with in the subsequent
pages.
These five factors are capable of influencing the first
(or any) house, either as lords of main periods or as lords of
sub-periods. Further (1) the sub-periods whose lords
influencing the first house in the major periods of whose
lords also influence the Ist house, produce results
predominantly of the Ist house. (2) The sub-periods whose
lords are associated with the 1st house, in the major periods
whose lords are not associated with the 1st house,

Concerning the First House 45
will produce results pertaining to the Ist house only to a
limited extent. The above principles can be clearly
understood by the following illustration.
Chart No. 11.—Born on 8-8-1912 AD. at 7-35 p.m.
Moon Sat i y
Rahu Satura aturn enus
Rahu
Lagna Sun Sui
ES RASI aieka NAYAMSA
Venus Moon;
Merc. Lagna Merc.
Mars k Ketu
Jupiter Ketu Jupiter | Mars
Balance of Mars Dasa at birth : Years 6-1-6. Longevity
about 75 years.
Planets who will give results of the first house in their
major and sub-periods:
(a) Lord of the first house—Saturn.
(b) Planets aspecting the first house—Saturn, Mars,
Venus and Mercury.
(c) Planets posited in the first house—Nil.
(d) Planets aspecting lord of the first house—Jupiter.
(e) Planets in association with lord of the first house —
the Moon.
In the horoscope illustrated above Saturn, Mars,
Mercury, Venus, Jupiter and the Moon can influence
(produce effects of the Ist house) either in their Dasas
(major periods) or in their Bhuktis (minor or sub-periods).

46 How to Judge a Horoscope
Since the longevity is about 75 years, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn
and Mercury can influence the Ist house both as major and
minor lords while Venus can give the effects of first house
only as minor lord.
Of the several planets having anything to do with the
first house, those in which two functions (out of the 5
mentioned supra) are combined will be in a position to
influence the house most. For example, in the above
horoscope, as Saturn not only rules the ascendant but also
aspects it, he will be able to influence the 1st house much
more than the other planets. A planet is said to influence a
house if it owns, occupies or aspects the said house or its
lord.
Nature of the Results
The nature of the results varies with reference to each
individual case.
During the main period of a planet influencing the first
house:—(i) the sub-period of another influencing the Ist
house, who is associated with the main lord, will produce
results pertaining to the 1st house—par excellence.
(ii) The sub-period of a planet influencing the Ist
house who is not associated with the main lord will produce
only ordinary results pertaining to the 1st house.
(iii) The good or bad nature of the results depends upon
whether a particular lord is benefic or malefic, whether he
is favourably or unfavourably disposed towards the
particular Lagna, and whether he is a Rajayogakaraka or a
Maraka planet.
(iv) The major lord or minor lord (influencing the 1st
house) will produce effects, pertaining to the 1st house in
its relation to the other houses with which the lord may
have anything to do by way of ownership, aspect, location,
etc. Thus, in case of Taurus ascending with Mars posited :

Concerning the First House 47
Mars in his own Dasa may produce effects of the Ist house
in its relation to the 7th house.
In the horoscope above illustrated let us take Mars and
see what effects (in relation to the Ist house) he will
produce in the course of his Dasa. At birth the balance of
Mars Dasa lasts for years 6-1-6 (from 8-8-1912 to 14-91918). Saturn's sub-period in Mars major period lasts till
about April 1915. Both the major and sub-lords are capable
of influencing the Ist house. The major lord is with Venus
(capable of influencing the Ist) lord of the 4th (house of
mother and happiness). The native lost his mother and the
happiness due to him on that account.
In general, the different planets capable of influencing
the Ist house will produce the following results in the
course of their periods and sub-periods.
The Sun.—The body will be heated and there will be
much ill-health. Aimless travelling and no bodily
happiness. Becomes immoral or/and unprincipled,
unscrupulous, will be deprived of family happiness due to
separation.
The Sun may be exalted, debilitated, may occupy a
friendly sign, may be in his own sign and may form
important yogas. These results should certainly be
modified. This holds good with regard to every planet.
The Moon.—The person will enjoy bodily happiness,
good health, jewels, he will command servants, all luxuries
will be obtained. His fame will increase.
Mars. — Suffers from thieves and poisons, there will
be eruptions all over the body, will be deprived of the
happiness of mother, father, etc., if Mars is in
conjunction with the 4th lord, 9th lord, etc. The mind will
be worried as a result of which health will be effected.
Rahu.—The person loses his senses and friends. The
body becomes emaciated. He will leave his house and
travel aimlessly. All relatives become enemies.

48 How to Judge a Horoscope
Jupiter. — Gets riches, clothes, equipment, etc. He
becomes happy. Health will become good. He will
command conveniences, he will practise exercises that
build up his constitution and health.
Saturn.—Reduced in health with cerebral complaints,
loses his position. If with the Moon, likelihood of insanity.
Becomes heterodox and irreligious. He will suffer from
windy complaints. He may incur the wrath of authorities.
He may incarcerated if the 8th and 6th lords join the Lagna.
Mercury.—Health comes to normal, fame will spread,
education will progress, respect from those in position. His
interest in occult studies will further intensify. If afflicted,
there will manifest a sort of headache.
Ketu—He will suffer from fevers and some
complaints which cannot be cured by medicine. The body
becomes weak and emaciated. There will be boils due to
excessive heat. Reputation may also suffer. Mind will be
uneasy.
Venus.—Commits sins without being able to control
passions. Health will improve. Happiness will manifest.
The body becomes energised.
In the sub-periods the lords will have the same
influence as in the periods stated above. In this case,
however, the influence of both the planets (major and
minor lords) are to be compounded and the relation
between them taken into account.
Generally, the following results may be anticipated in
the periods and sub-periods of planets capable of
influencing the first house :—
If the lord of Lagna is weak or debilitated or combust,
the native will become sickly and grotesque in appearance.
He becomes evil-minded, poor and infamous

Concerning the First House 49
and will serve others. When the lord of Lagna is in the 12th
in the Navamsa, the person will always be roaming about
and suffers of mind and body.
There will be acquisition of wealth if Lagnadhipathi is
in the 2nd with the 2nd lord. He will also acquire silver and
goldware and other precious metals and stones according to
the nature of the lord. He will succeed in all his attempts.
The family will expand and he will have a peaceful and
happy time. In spite of Lagnadhipathi being fortified as
above, if he occupies 6th, 8th or 12th in the Navamsa from
the sign held by the 2nd lord, there will be a lessening of
the above effects.
Lord of Lagna in the 3rd with the 3rd lord, fortified:
There will be birth of brothers or prosperity to them, mental
peace, and connection with pleasure-loving persons of both
sexes. Enmity with brothers or sorrow to them may be
anticipated when Lagnadhipathi occupies 6th, 8th or 12th
from the lord of the 3rd in the Navamsa.
Acquisition of vehicles, valuable clothes, cattle, houses
and lands, construction of new houses, and respect from
friends and relatives, acquaintance with learned men and
discussions with them and formation of new friendships—
all these will happen if Lagnadhipathi is well fortified and
occupies the 4th with the 4th lord. He incurs enmity with
his mother and near relatives and sustains accident and gets
involved in legal troubles if Lagnadhipathi is in the 6th. 8th
or 12th in the Navamsa from the 4th lord.
One will earn the grace of the ruler or the Government
of the day if Lagnadhipathi is in the 5th with the 5th lord,
well fortified. There will be mental peace. He will become
the leader of his community. Consistent with the strength
of the Lagna and 5th lords, he may become

50 How to Judge a Horoscope
either an Ambassador or a Minister, or a high Government
oflBcial. There will also be birth of a son. Political
prosperity may be anticipated. Quite opposite results may
be anticipated if the lord of Lagna occupies the 6th, 8th or
12th from lord of the 5th in the Navamsa. There will be
reverses in the political or oflBcial career of the individual.
When the lord of Lagna is in the 6th with 6th lord, one
suffers from all kinds of physical ailments, wounds, enmity
with rulers, failure, misunderstandings with cousins, legal
troubles, poverty, wounds from weapons and physical
distress. If, however, in the Navamsa, the 6th lord is
debilitated and lord of Lagna is exalted, favourable results
may be anticipated. Tbe person may enter the Army. He
will vanquish his enemies. He will succeed in litigation.
When, however, the lord of Lagna is in the 6th, 8th or 12th
in the Navamsa from the 6th lord, then favourable results
will be minimised and tbe unfavourable results will not
predominate.
When the lord of Lagna is in the 7th in conjunction
with the 7th lord, the native will have pilgrimage. If
unmarried, he will have marriage. When the 7th house is a
movable sign, he will undertake journeys to distant
countries ; if fixed, in his own country ; and if common, to
foreign countries. If Lagnadhipathi is weaker than the lord
of the 7th, journeys undertaken would prove profitless.
When the lord of Lagna is in the 6th, 8th or 12th from the
7th lord in the Navamsa, the person will be deprived of
means of livelihood, defamed and will have
misunderstandings with his wife. There will be failure, loss
of business and general deterioration in all his affairs.
If the lord of Lagna joins the 8th lord in the 8th, the
native suffers misery and poverty. He will lead a sinful life
and contract debts. He will always be thinking of evil

Concerning the First House 51
things. When the lord of the 8th is rendered weak, the evil
results are minimised. But he will resort to sinful life in a
clandestine manner.
When the Lagnadhipathi joins the 9th lord in the 9th,
father will be happy during the Dasa of the Lagnadhipathi.
He will do righteous acts and will be devoted to his parents
and elders. Contrary results may be anticipated if the
Navamsa positions are adverse. He will develop atheistic
tendencies. There will be litigation troubles with regard to
ancestral property. When either of the lords is exalted,
there will be influx of much wealth and expenditure on
desirable and deserving causes.
When the lord of Lagna joins the 10th lord in the 10th,
the native performs sacri6ces and other religious deeds
consistent with his beliefs. He will also get a good
administrative or political job. He will become more
theistic and wield considerable influence in high circles. If
the dispositions are adverse in Navamsa, he will lose
respect and will be a victim of slander and will commit
sinful acts.
When the lord of Lagna joins the 11th lord in the 11th,
there will be much gain from trade. The elder brother will
be happy and through him the native will benefit. The
nature and sources of gains will be consistent with the
Karaka indications of the planets concerned. When the
dispositions are adverse in Navamsa, the gains will be less.
There will be misunderstandings with elder brother. The
exact nature of the strength and weakness of the two lords
must be cleverly balanced before coming to a decision.
When lord of Lagna joins the 12th lord in the 12th, he
will lose all ancestral property. Poverty will stare him-He
will roam about in exile. He will be subject to all sorts of
financial difficulties. If, however, Lagnadhipathi is in

52 How to Judge a Horoscope
his own Navamsa, he will slightly benefit in foreign countries,
i.e., he will earn some money. When the lord of the Navamsa
sign held by Lagnadhipathi is exalted in a Chara Rasi, there will
be considerable amassing of fortune.
Thus results in the Dasa of Lagnadhipathi with this
disposition in other bhavas should be judged. When other planets
aspect Lagnadhipathi and Lagnadhipathi is involved in other
yogas—good or bad—all those peculiarities have to be
considered and then a consistent conclusion drawn.
We propose to examine a number of horoscopes with
special reference to the 1st house.
Chart No. 12.—Born on 16-10-1918 at 2-20 p.m. (I.S.T.)
= . Saturn
Ketu jjupic. Jupiter
Moon Rabu Venus
— RASI —— e NAVAMSA —
Lagna Sat. |{/Moon Ketu
am tm hg OS — | he |
Mars Sun z l Mercury
Rahu [Mercury Venusj | Mars Sun Lasna
Balance of Rahu Dasa at birth : Years 11-8-20.
The Ascendant.—Lagna is Makara or Capricorn. Lagna
receives the aspect of no planet—good or bad. Lagna is occupied
by no planet. This is good. In the Navamsa, Lagna is aspected by
Jupiter. This is good. Thus the ascendant is moderate in strength.

Concerning the First House 53
Ascendant Lord——Lord of the Lagna Saturn is in the
8th in the sign of a bitter enemy. Saturn is aspected by the
Moon, a malefic in this case. This is bad. In the Navamsa,
however, Saturn is with Jupiter in the sign of Venus, an
intimate friend. Hence the strength of the ascendant lord is
also fairly good.
Lagna Karaka.—The Sun is the Karaka or indicator of
body. He occupies a vargottama position but in a sign
owned by an enemy. The Karaka is therefore inclining
towards good.
Conclusion.—The planets mostly influencing the first
house are Saturn, the Moon and Jupiter, leaving aside the
Thanukaraka the Sun. The native will partake of the
characteristics of Saturn mingled with those of the Moon
and Jupiter. The head is big, face broad, mouth big, tall,
lean, fair complexion, vindictive. The body will be thin and
long. Health will be fairly good but occasionally she will
suffer from bodily complaints. She lacks self-confidence.
She is nervous. Jupiter here is a malefic capable of
influencing Lagna. Hence, during Jupiter's Dasa she
suffered considerably from ill-health.
The Ascendant.—Lagna is Thula and is aspected by no
planet. The Sun, lord of 11, is in Lagna in neecha or
debility. Because the Sun gets neechabhanga or
cancellation of debility, Rajayoga is caused. Lagna is
hemmed inbetween benefics causing Subhakarthari Yoga.
In the Navamsa also Lagna is not aspected by any planet,
but Lagna is hemmed inbetween Saturn and Rahu causing
Papakarthari Yoga. The Lagna therefore is fairly strong on
the whole.
Ascendant Lord.—Lord of Lagna Venus is in the 12th
in debilitation but there is cancellation of debility. Venus is
with exalted Mercury and hence good. Venus is not

54 How to Judge a Horoscope
aspected by good or bad planets. In the Navamsa, Venus is
in a friendly sign, with Saturn a malefic and aspected by
Jupiter. Therefore the ascendant lord is also fairly
powerful.
Chart No. 13.—Born on 2-11-1935 at 5-20a.m
Ketu | | Sun Ketu
Sat Mars
ae RASI —— NAYAMSA ——.
Venus
Sat.
Mocn
Lagna Merc. Merc.
M fi h
faa Jupiter | Son [Venus] E2899; Rabu | Moon eet
Balance of Venus Dasa at birth : Years 6-1-24.
Lagnakaraka.—The Sun is free from aspects—good or
bad. He is subject to Subhakarthari Yoga and there is
neechabhanga for him. In the Navamsa the Sun is aspected
by Saturn (a malefic), Mercury and Jupiter. The Sun is
therefore fairly powerful.
Conclusion.—The planets mostly influencing the first
house are Venus, the Sun, Mercury and to a moderate
extent Saturn and Jupiter (because Saturn is with Lagnadhipathi and Jupiter aspects Thanukaraka in Amsa). The native
will have a fair complexion, middle-sized stature and
handsome appearance. He becomes a keen observer of
human nature. He is not easily amenable to reason and
displays a certain amount of independent spirit. The

Concerning the First House 55
appearance will be generally youthful. Saturn's sub-period
in the major period of Venus lasts for two years from birth.
During Venus Dasa Saturn Bhukti the native suffered
seriously from typhoid and malarial fevers. Venus is lord of
8 also and this is bad. Moon, Mars, Rahu association
denotes emotional upsets.
Chart No. 14.—Born on 7-8-1878 at 1-30 p.m. (L.T.)
Lat. 11° N., Long. 5h. 8m. 8s. E.
Moon Mars ||¥enus Mars
Rahu
ue
ere.
Sat: Moon
— RASI a ||| NAVAMSA |——_
Ketu Sun Sat,
Mere.
Lagna | Jupiter |Venus| Jupit.! Lagna Ketu
Balance of Jupiter Dasa at birth: Year 0-2-22.
Ascendant.—No planet is found in the ascendant nor is
the ascendant aspected. In the Navamsa, Lagna is aspected
by lord of Lagna. Because Lagna is the same both in Rasi
and Navamsa, it goes under the name of Vargottamamsa.
Hence the Lagna is very powerful.
Ascendant Lord.—Mars is lord of Lagna and he is in
the 9th house (8th Rasi). Jupiter aspects Lagnadhipathi. In
the Navamsa, Mars is in Taurus and aspected by Saturn.
Excepting for this feeble evil, Lagnadhipathi is indeed very
strong.
Lagnakaraka.—The Sun is in the 9th with Mercury,
Saturn and Rahu. In Navamsa the Sun occupies an

56 How to Judge a Horoscope
inimical sign but is aspected by the Moon. The Sun
therefore is moderate in strength.
Conclusion.—The planets influencing the first house
are Mars, Jupiter, the Sun, and to some extent, Saturn.
There are several yogas in this horoscope. The Sun though
found in apparent conjunction with Saturn and Rahu is
away from Saturn by aboutl8 degrees. The harmonious
aspect in the trinity of life—Lagna, the Moon and the Sun
representing the body, mind and soul confer sound health,
sound mind and an evolved soul or ego. The position of lord
of Lagna in the 9th creates a zest for living and considerable
responsibility. Tenacity of purposes and willpower are well
marked. Being frank hates anything that savours of
subterfuge. The native is sympathetic, defends friends or
dependents in the face of a million foes. Deceit and
disloyalty alone can break his heart. Sometimes he becomes
over-critical. Detests being controlled or dictated to. This
horoscope belongs to a great man who is in intimate touch
with public opinion in this part of India and a great admirer
of talent, wherever found.
Above we have illustrated three typical horoscopes in
relation to the first house. By practice alone the real art of
judging a nativity comes. Some students are gifted in
forming accurate and concise judgments. The late Prof. B.
Suryanarain Rao had immense powers of intuition apart
from a profound knowledge of the subject. There is no right
royal road by which the whole life-history can be known
intimately at a glance. If such a method did exist then the
joy of using the discriminative faculties would be missed.
In all methods of studying a man's character, destiny,
financial prosperity, occupation, marriage, etc., there are
always contradictory indications to be taken into account.
It is often a difficult task to

Concerning the First House 57
co-ordinate these divergent indications. A good knowledge
of the subject and practical experience coupled with the
power of intuition are sure methods of overcoming the
difficulties in the way of correct prognostication. We shall
now give a number of examples to show how the same sign
ascending produces different results.
We shall now give examples in regard to each Lagna
separately.
Mesha or Aries
Lord of Lagna is Mars and he is in the 3rd in a friendly
sign aspected by Jupiter, lord of 9th and 12th and a natural
benefic. This is favourable, Venus occupies Lagna and he is
free from good or evil aspects. In the Navamsa, Lagna is
Scorpio and its lord Mars is in the 3rd. Lagna is aspected by
Jupiter. The native will partake of the characteristics of
Aries blended with those of Mars and
Chart No. 15.—Born on 9/10-6-1891 at 3-34 a.m.
Sun
Lagoa
HA Rabu | Mars Rahu Jupiter
nus
Mercury
Jupit. Moon] |Merc,
aera RASI ——|/——_| NAVAMSA
Sun
Sat. ||Mars Moon
Ketu
Ketu Venus| Lagna Saturn
Balance of Saturn Dasa at birth : Years 15-6-6.

58 How to Judge a Horoscope
Venus. The subject is of middle stature, fair complexion,
broad temples and narrow chin. A man of independent
thinking. Self-made, he has risen to a very high position in
life after much struggle. The situation of the Sun the
Thanukaraka with Rahu is not a desirable combination.
Loves beauty, art and elegance as Venus is in Lagna.
Humane principles and a sacred idea of friendship. The
Moon being hemmed in between Mars and Saturn makes
the mind worried almost always. As both Lagna and the
Moon sign are movable signs, the subject will have
wavering mentality. He is generally apprehensive and
somewhat pessimistic.
Mark the positions of planets. Almost all are in the
12th and 2nd from each other. Lagna is not occupied by any
planet but aspected by Jupiter, the Moon and Mars. Lagna
is Vargottama and hence strong. Lord of Lagna
Chart No. 16.—Born on 1-9-1897 at 8-15 p.m. (L.T.)
Lagna
Lagna Moon| Mars |Mercury
Rabu
Venus
Ketu
— RASI — | J = NAVAMSA —
Rahu a Sat.
111-34 upis
Satura | Moon oo Jupit. Ketu | Sue
Balance of Rahu Dasa at birth : Yak 3-8-8.

Concerning the First House 59
Mars aspects Lagna in Rasi and is in Lagna in the Navamsa.
In his physical characteristics, the subject is martian.
Because lord of Lagna is with Rahu in the Navamsa, there
is a blending of the influences of Rahu and Mars. As in the
previous case the subject has risen from a humble existence.
He is not as fair as the subject of Chart No. 15. The Sun is
in his own house with Jupiter. The stature is middle and
sight, sharp. The dispositions of Lagna, the Sun and the
Moon denote a stable mind with the power to concentrate, a
mind capable of resistance and quite frank. In Chart No. 15
lord of Lagna is aspected by Jupiter while here Mercury is
exalted with ascendant lord. The native is rather
unscrupulous.
Vrishabha or Taurus
Chart No. 11.-Born on 9-3-1864 at 11-15 a.m. (L.T.)
Lagna
Moon Ketu |
Sun
Merc.
RASI ———|/——-]| NAVAMSA ae
mar Ketu Sat
ents
IH-60
Jupiter Sat. || Merc, Moon (Jepit.
Rahu Lagna
Balance of Saturn Dasa at birth: Years 7-0-22.
Lagna is no doubt occupied by Ketu but Ketu is
actually in the 12th bhava. Thus Lagna is free from malefic
associations. Jupiter aspects Lagna and hence it gets

60 How to Judge a Horoscope
fortified. In Navamsa also Jupiter is in Lagna. Lord of
Lagna Venus is in a friendly sign with exalted Mars. Hence
fairly powerful. The Sun is situated in an inimical sign but
since this happens to be a kendra he becomes strong. In
appearance, character and mental disposition the subject
reflects the characteristics of Mars and Venus. The stature
is short tending towards corpulence (Jupiter aspecting),
body squarely built, fair complexion, forehead full and
appearance, handsome. He is self-reliant. He has a lot of
endurance, latent power and energy. He is not happy so far
as children are concerned. Mark Saturn in the 5th. The
Moon is aspected by Saturn. Therefore, the native is always
worried. Compare this with Chart No. 8. The native
attained high distinction in the legal line. There are certain
similar combinations in this horoscope and Chart No. 8.
The native is a worshipper of Vishnu (lord of Lagna in the
9th).
Mithuna or Gemini
Chart No. 18.—Born on 12-8-1896 at 1-52 a.m. (L.T.)
Sat. Moon
Mars |Lagna tay Lagna | Venus |Merc.
Mars Ketu
Sun
Rahu Jupit.
etai RASI — NAVAMSA eed
Merc.
Ketu
11.98 Venus
Saturn | Moon Rahu
Balance of the Moon Dasa at birth: Years 6-0-14.

Concerning the First House 61
Lagna is Mithuna or Gemini. It is aspected by neither
good nor bad planets. Lord of Lagna Mercury is in the third
with Ketu and Venus aspected by Mars. The Sun
(Thanukaraka) is with exalted Jupiter. This is the horoscope
of a middle-class man. He is tall and straight in stature.
Face is well developed. Lord of Lagna is also aspected in
the Navamsa by Mars. In his physical features the native
partakes of the characteristics of Mars, Mercury and, of
course, Ketu. The subject is unassuming, simple in habits,
forgiving in temperament and self-reliant. In this case the
fortunes are subject to much change. There should be no
contact between lord of the Ist and 6th either by way of
aspect or association. Hereford of Lagna is aspected by
Mars lord of the 6th and 11th. The native
was once implicated in a defamation case but subsequently
acquitted.
Lat. 18° N., Long. 5h. 34m. E.
Balance of Venus Dasa at birth: Years 13-3-20.
Compare this with the previous horoscope. While
almost all planets are disposed in Dwirdwadasa (2nd and

62 How to Judge a Horoscope
12th from each other) positions in Chart No. 18, here most
of the planets are concentrated in the Ist and 10th
indicating the powerful nature of the horoscope. Lagna is
occupied by Mars and Ketu and aspected by Rahu—not a
very good combination for sound health. Lord of Lagna
Mercury is in the 10th in debilitation but there is neechabhanga (cancellation of debility). Lord of the 5th is exalted
in the 10th. Jupiter is in his own house in the 10th with the
Sun. There are five planets in the 10th, a very powerful
combination. The native was a great journalist and
politician—moderate in views, firm in action and obliging
in nature. In physical features Mars was prominent: Thin
face, sanguine complexion, active, clever, inherent
conversational power. Note the Moon is free from any evil
associations and aspects. There are no fewer than six
planets in the ascendant and midheaven. This indicates an
active and rapidly moving mind fitted to
Chart No. 20.—Bornon 29-7-1909 at 6-42 a.m.
Mars
Sat. Rahu Sat. Venus
n d -r —
Sun
Merc. | |Moon Rahu
Lagna
an RASI -——] NAVAMSA Z
Jupit.
Yenus Keto
Sun
Moon Lagna Mars |Merc.
Ketu Jupiter
Balance of Mercury's Dasa at birth : Years 6-8-27.

Concerning the First House 63
play a mighty part. On account of the malefic aspect on the
Lagna the native suffered hostile comment, criticism and
opposition.
Kataka or Cancer
The Lagna is occupied by the Sun and Mercury lords of
the 2nd and 3rd. This is not very propitious. Lord of Lagna,
viz., the Moon is in the 5th with Ketu—hence bad. The Sun
is with lord of the 3rd. Lord of Lagna is aspected by Jupiter
(in the Navamsa) and is hemmed in between Saturn and
Ketu,— thus subject to what is called Papakartariyoga. All
the three factors pertaining to the first house are
unfavourably disposed. The subject is of a stout build,
nervous, extremely sensitive and dark in complexion. The
conjunction of Saturn and Mars, the Moon and Ketu have
spoiled the several good indications of the horoscope. The
native is unimaginative, miserly,
Chart No. 21.—Bom on 13-3-1891 at 2-30 p.m. (L.T.)
Balance of Ketu Dasa at birth : Years 2-7-10.

64 How to Judge a Horoscope
mean, undignified and over-cautious. The Sun and Mercury
are malefic and their situation in Lagna is not desirable.
Compare this horoscope with the Chart No. 21. The
Lagna in Navamsa is also the same. The Lagna, in this
case, is not occupied by any planet, but is aspected by Mars
and Venus. Lord of the ascendant is in the 10th with
Mars—causing what is called Chandramangalayoga. This
is a good combination. The Sun is in Pisces a friendly sign.
These dispositions are anyway better than those obtaining
in the preceding horoscope. The native is stout, middlesized, complexion fairly good, scars all over the body
(Mars aspecting Lagna), good behaviour, polite manners,
and agreeable disposition. Note the combinations occurring
in both the horoscopes and account for their different
dispositions—mental as well as physical —even though the
ascendant is the same both in
| Ketu || Ketu
f H
Mars |
|Lagna |
peel RASI ——]| NAVAMSA |
Moon
Moon| Mars
} v ; | Sun Sun h
Rahu | oe ‘Mercury | Merc.) Venus | Jupiter Ra a
| Saturn | Jupit. | Sat. Lagna
Balance of Mars Dasa at birth : Years 6- 1-1/ 2.

Concerning the First House 65
Rasi and Navamsa. It may also interest the readers to note
that the wife of the subject of horoscope No. 20 was
attacked by spinal T.B. from which she suffered
considerably while the wife of the native of this chart
suffered from partial paralysis for a considerable period.
Lagna is Cancer. Mars, a yogakaraka for this
horoscope (Chart No. 22), is debilitated in the ascendant
but there is neechabhanga for Mars, as Jupiter—the planet
which gets exalted in Cancer—is in a quadrangular house
from the Moon. Moreover Lagna is aspected by its own
lord. Thus the Lagna is powerful. Coming to the lord of
Lagna, he is aspected by Mars and Saturn. The first aspect
is good while the second is evil. In the Navamsa again, the
Moon is with Mars—a good combination. The lord of Lagna
may therefore be declared as middling in strength. The Sun
(Thanukaraka) is in Libra—in debilitation with Mercury
and Jupiter—Mercury being evil and Jupiter good. In the
Navamsa again the Sun is with two malefics —Saturn and
Mercury. There is no neechabhanga for the Sun in the Rasi.
Thus so far as the 1st house is concerned the Lagna is fairly
strong—the lord of Lagna middling and Thanukaraka,
somewhat blemished. Martian and lunar characteristics are
well marked. The presence of Mars in the Lagna has
produced smallpox marks on the body. Mars has given a
fair ruddiness to the person, healthy constitution, a sturdy
figure inclined towards corpulence and a temperament
principally of heat and dryness. The Moon aspecting
indicates better proportion and greater delicacy of figure.
Occult tendencies are well marked. Fleshy neck, fond of
wealth and responsibility, heavy gait. The mind is not at
ease as Saturn and Mars aspect the Moon.

66 How to Judge a Horoscope
In all the three horoscopes illustrated above pertaining
to Cancer rising, the peculiarity is about the physical
features. The body is middle-sized and strong.
Simha or Leo
We illustrate below three horoscopes out of which the
subject of Chart No. 25 has an attractive personality and
presents an obvious contrast to the subject of Chart No. 23.
in regard to his appearance and disposition.
In Chart No. 23, Lagna is occupied by Ketu and
aspected by Rahu. Lagna is therefore weak. Lord of Lagna,
viz., the Sun is in Taurus an inimical sign with Mercury lord
of the 2nd and 11th and the Moon. In the Navamsa the Sun
is in Capricorn, an inimical sign. Thus all the three factors
concerned with the 1st house are weak. The subject is lean
and has a sickly constitution. He psychologically feels that
there is something wrong with his health. The height is
average, face oval in shape and
Chart No. 23.— Born on 14-5-1896 at 12-16 p.m.
Sun
Mars) Venus | Moon Saturn Moon
Mercury Ketu
| A | Mars
R upit
ahu ’ pi | . Neely
(nee RASI — NAVAMSA
i Ketu Sun
Lagna
r Venus
| Saturn Rabu Jupiter Lagna
Balance of the Moon Dasa at birth: Years 3-3-8.

Concerning the First House 67
countenance, thoughtful. He possesses considerable
philosophical knowledge, is a voracious reader, lacks a
natural policy with ambitions remaining unfulfilled to a
great part. Note most of the planets have Dwirdwadasa
positions. Jupiter is exalted. The Moon's position and
aspects are more fortunate than those of the Sun.
In Chart No. 24, Lagna is Simha and it is occupied by
the Sun, its lord, and Mercury. The Lagna is aspected by
Saturn. This is slightly evil. The Lagna and lord of Lagna,
who of course is the Sun, are subject to the same aspect. In
the Navamsa however the Sun is in Cancer with exalted
Jupiter. The first house factors are fairly well disposed.
The native has an attractive appearance,
Chart No. 24 —Born on 28129-8-1898 at 5-30 a.m.
Ma |
| ee Moon| Ketu
Suo
= Jupit.
? Lagna
RASI | ——| NAVAMSA |.
Sun
Moon Lagna
Merc.
Rahu| § Jupit. Saturn Rah Merc.
a maturi Venus Mars ae Venus
Balance of the Sun Dasa at birth : Year 0-0-18. wellbuilt body and well-formed limbs. A dignified nature, a
strong will, openly frank, of noble spirit and an ambitious
and persevering nature, his passions are strong but under
control. A self-made man, ordinary education,

68 How to Judge a Horoscope
chequerred career but now well-to-do. The native is a
contractor.
In Chart No. 25, no planet occupies the Lagna, but
Lagna is aspected by Jupiter (lord of the 5th) and Mars a
yogakaraka. Thus the Lagna gets strengthened. The Sun's
situation in Virgo is good but his association with Venus
and Saturn's aspect have weakened the Sun's strength. In
his physical features, Mars and Jupiter are prominent. The
native has an attractive personality, reddish eyes, large
cheeks, broad face, is firm-minded, generous, candid and
honourable. Both in the physical and mental dispositions,
there is considerable divergence between the
Chart No. 25.—Born on 14/13-10-1879 at 4 a.m.
Mars | Ketu | Ketu]
Jupit. Merc.
phe RASI - — || NAVAMSA |
Laguna] [Venus
Sup Sat.
Mercury | Moon) Rahu | Mercury Sun
Venus! |Lagna i
Rahu
Balance of the Sun Dasa at birth : Years 2-1-18.
natives of this chart and Chart No. 23. Mars, aspect has
given a fair ruddiness to the person, healthy constitution,
sturdy figure while Jupiter's aspect is responsible for fair
complexion, large eyes and dignified stature. The native
had achequered career, was subject to varied fortunes.

Concerning the First House 69
once in the lap of wealth but now in ordinary
circumstances.
In all the cases stated above one important factor
should be borne in mind, viz., the strength or otherwise of
Lagna, the Sun, and of course the Moon also. A steady
flow of fortune is generally assured if at least two of the
three factors named above are well disposed.
Kanya or Virgo
Lagna is occupied by its own lord in exaltation with the
Moon and aspected by Jupiter in debilitation. Jupiter is of
course free from neecha effect. Saturn also aspects Lagna.
Lagna is subject to Papakarthari Yoga as also its
Chart No. 26.—Born on 4-9-1902 at 7-53 a.m. (L.T.)
Jupiter
Keiu Merc.; Moon Ketu Lagoa
Venus
Mags Venus |
—- RASI ——| NAYAMSA = :-——
Jupit. Sun
Lagna | i 5
Sat. Rahu |Merc. | Sat. | Rahu ue
Moon] | | Mars
Balance of Moon Dasa at birth : Years 7-5-25. lord. In
the Navamsa again Mercury is subject to malefic aspects.
The Sun is in his own sign but in the Navamsa his situation
is unfavourable as he is with Mars, aspected by debilitated
Mercury and also Saturn. The first house in

70 How to Judge a Horoscope
general is not well fortified. Virgo is a watery sign. The
native is stout, shoulders and arms rather drooping, dark
hair, forehead good. He is truthful and kind, fond of
learning, lacks self-confidence. He is shrewd, prudent,
somewhat indolent and has a speculative turn of mind.
Thanukaraka is with Mars and aspected by Saturn. Has
smallpox marks all over the body. Mutual aspects between
evil planets are not desirable.
Lagna is not aspected by any planet. Jupiter occupies
the ascendant. Lord of Lagna is in the 9th, a friendly sign,
aspected by Jupiter and Saturn. In the Navamsa the lord of
Lagna Mercury is debilitated. Both in the Rasi and
Navamsa the Sun is aspected by Saturn. Lagnadhi-pathi
and the Sun are therefore middling in strength. The
Chart No. 27.—Born on 7-6-1898 at 1-35 p.m. (L. T.)
Lat. 11°N., Long. 5h. 8m. 9s. E.
Sun [Venus Jupiter Mars
Mats Mercury | Ketu Mere Venus Kew
Lagna
ees RASI -—||-——| NAVAMSA ——
Moon Moon Sun
Jupit.
Lagna Rahu | Saturn
Rahu | Saturn
Balance of the Sun Dasa at birth : Years 4-2-16 Moon
is aspected by Saturn. The native is stout, dark in
complexion (Saturn aspecting both Lagnadhipathi and the
Sun). The chest is prominent. Discriminating and

Concerning the First House 71
emotional and very cautious regarding his own interests.
Prudent, economical, diplomatic and shrewd. Since the
foundation of the horoscope is strong, the general
disposition is sound. He is a businessman and moneylender and is financially very sound. The appearance is not
attractive, probably due to Saturn aspecting Lagnadhi-pathi.
Thula or Libra
Lagna is not occupied or aspected by any good or evil
planets. Lord of Lagna however is in the 12th in a friendly
sign with the Sun, an inimical planet. Lagnadhi-pathi gets
strength because he is aspected by Saturn,
Chart No. 28—Born on 24-9-1871 at 8-40 a.m. (L.T.)
zayl RASI
Moon
an Mars , Lagna ee ve Mars
| P F H
Balance of Moon Dasa at birth : Years 9-8-17.
a Yogakaraka. In the Navamsa, Venus is hemmed in
between the Sun and Ketu and Mars and Jupiter aspect
Venus.

72 How to Judge a Horoscope
The subject has a fair complexion, middle-sized
stature, phlegmatic constitution, handsome and youthful
appearance. Though not much educated, has keen
foresight. Straightforward, loves truth and honesty. The
nature is upright and frank, at times very hopeful and
melancholy. Appetites are keen and love of pleasure great.
Attained a good position in life and retired. Mark the
Dwirdwadasa positions of planets.
Vrischika or Scorpio
The ascendant is occupied by the Moon, lord of the
9th. This is a very good combination. Ascendant lord Mars
is in the 11th with Rahu aspected by the Sun (lord of the
10th) and Ketu. In the Navamsa Mars is in Cancer in
debility but the debilitation effect is cancelled. The Sun is
in Pisces a friendly sign, but is in association with Ketu in
Rasi and with Rahu in Navamsa. The ascendant
Chart No 29.—Born on 18-3-1903 at 12 a.m. (L.T.)
Sun | Venus Venus | Saturn
Ketu
ee Lagna
Jupit. iMerc.
Mere. ale Mars
RASI — || AS") NAVAMSA
Sun
Sat. Rabu
Lagna Mars Moon
Moon Rahu
Balance of Saturn Dasa at birth : Years 8-1 1-3.

Concerning the First House 73
lord and the Sun are both moderate in strength. The subject
has taken the characteristics of Mars. He has a handsome
appearance, broad eyes and thin figure. The faculties are
good and brows prominent. The disposition is generous. A
good conversationalist with a fertile imagination and
resourceful nature. The Moon is also free from afflictions.
There is much pride in the mental disposition. The native is
a businessman and is well off in life.
In physical appearance there is considerable difference
between the native of Chart No. 30 and that of the
preceding one. Here he is inclined towards corpulence,
because Jupiter is in Lagna. The ascendant is occupied by
Mercury, Jupiter and Rahu and aspected by the Moon and
Ketu. Mercury and Jupiter are nearly 20 degrees
Chart No 30 — Born on 15/14-12-1899 at 5-42 a.m.
Moon Rabu Sun Saturn | Mars
Ketu
Moon
Lagna
—— RASI E NAVAMSA AER
Sun |Mercur ,
Mars Jomes Mercury |Jupit.
Sat. | Lagna Venus | Ketu
j Rabu |
Balance of the Sun Dasa at hirth: Years 1-9-18.
behind Rahu so that they are free from the effect of Rahu's
conjunction. Lagna is fully associated with bene-fics and
thus gets considerable strength.

74 How to Judge a Horoscope
Lord of Lagna is in the 2nd with the Sun, Saturn
(malefics) and Venus a benefic. Lord of Lagna has also
caused a Parivarthanayoga with Jupiter. In the Navamsa
Lagnadhipathi is fairly well disposed. The Sun (Thanukaraka) is moderate in strength, because, though in a
friendly sign, is in conjunction with Mars and Saturn and of
course with Venus too. He is hemmed in between Rahu and
Saturn in the Navamsa. The health of the native is not very
good. The subject has an attractive personality, broad face,
fair complexion and is inclined towards corpulence. He is
somewhat assuming and ambitious. Generous position,
fickle-minded, possesses grit and enterprise. The
constitution is somewhat phlegmatic. In his physical
features, Jupiter is of course prominent.
In Chart No. 31, Lagna or the ascendant is hemmed in
between Saturn and Mars. This does not fortify the
ascendant.
Chart No. 31.—Born on 21-10-1903 at 10-43 a.m.
Mars Rahu
Ketu | Sat. Jüpiter ere.
Jupit Lagna
pee RASI i=j | —_— NAVAMSA 2
Sat. Venusj | Moon
; Sua |Merc. Ketu v
F eous
Lagna| Mars Moon {Rahu Sun 3
Balance of Rahu Dasa at birth: Years 11-6-11.

Concerning the First House 75
Lord of Lagna Jupiter is in the 3rd again hemmed in
between Ketu and Saturn thus losing strength. Venus no
doubt aspects Jupiter but even this aspect is not good
because Venus is lord of 6 and 11. Mars also aspects Jupiter
from his own sign. This is passable. In the Navamsa again
Jupiter is with Rahu aspected by three malefics Saturn, Ketu
and the Sun. Jupiter is certainly weak. The Sun is
debilitated in the 11th but the relieving features are,
cancellation of debility and Jupiter aspecting the Sun.
Added to these, all the planets are disposed in the 2nd and
12th from each other. These dispositions indicate strides in
career and lack of happiness. In the disposition of physical
features, the characteristics of Jupiter, Venus and Mars are
blended. The native is not inclined towards corpulence. The
face is long, thin figure but good-looking with wellproportioned features. Venus has added softness and greater
delicacy, while Mars has given fair ruddiness to the
personality. The body is full of hair (Saturn aspecting
Jupiter in the Navamsa). The native is sympathetic and
sometimes restless. Hates external show, is God-fearing,
honest and free from hypocrisy, and of temperate habits.
The mind is clear and quick. Manners are gentle. The native
is simple, in his mode of living. He is a lover of peace. He
is ardent in his affections and seldom bears malice. His
sense of justice is keen. Lacks happiness.
In the Rasi, except the Sun and the Moon, almost all
the planetary positions are practically the same as in the
previous horoscope. The native is inclined towards
corpulence and in the physical appearance, subjects of this
and the preceding horoscopes show much difference. The
previous horoscope belongs to a tutor while the subject of
this is a barrister. The Thanukaraka Sun is in an earthy

76 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 32.—Born on 2-10-1903 at 11-44 a.m.
Jupiter | Sun
Rahy Merc.
Saturn
Lagna
NAVAMSA
Mars
Ketu
Venus
Balance of Mars Dasa at birth: Years 4-10-8.
sign and the Lagna in Navamsa is free from any kind of
aspects.
Makara or Capricorn
Chart No. 33 is a peculiar horoscope. Though six planets
are concentrated in the 10th, the native is not an entity and
is at present in humble circumstances. Lagna is aspected by
two malefics Saturn and Mars. Lord of Lagna is neecha and
is with Rahu, of course in the same sign. Lord of Lagna is
aspected by debilitated Sun (lord of 8), Jupiters (lord of 3
and 12), Ketu, Mercury (lord of 6 and 9), Mars lord of 4 and
11) and Venus. In the Navamsa again Saturn is with Ketu
aspected by Rahu and Mars as also Jupiter and Venus. All
the three factors pertaining to the Ist house are rather
unfortunately disposed. The native is tall, lean and reddishbrown in colour. The body is thin and bony. Possesses
sympathy and generosity. Has good manners and puts on
superior airs. He has great

Concerning the First House 77
Chart No. 33.—Born on 31-10-1910 at 1-41 p.m.
i Saturno Sat.
i Rahu Ketu
—o RASI NAVAMSA —_—
ara
Venus
Balance of Mars Dasa at birth: Years 5-10-17.
aspirations, is capable of much endeavour, industrious but
lacks self-confidence, is nervous and weak-minded. The
concentration of six planets in one sign should be carefully
noted.
Kumbha or Aquarius
The subject has an uncouth and repelling appearance.
Lagna is powerfully aspected by Saturn and Mars. In the
Navamsa Pisces rises which is again aspected by Saturn
and Mercury. On account of Navamsa Lagna, he is stout
and of middle stature. Except for the physical features, the
horoscope is not interesting otherwise. It will be seen that
Lagna is middling in strength and lord of Lagna and the
Sun are rather weak.
Chart No. 35 is the horoscope of a fortunate but selfmade man. Though Lagna is hemmed in between Ketu and
Saturn indicating an unsteady career, it is free from any
other malefic influences. Jupiter is in Lagna. Saturn, lord of
Lagna, is in his own sign. In the Navamsa also

78 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 34.—Born on 28/29-3-1890 at 4-30 a.m. (L.T.)
| Sun Moon | Jupiter |
IMerc. Lagna| Moon Ketu Sat.
{Venus Rahu | |
[i r
(Lagna Venus
nn RASI S| —— NAVAMSA —s
Jupit. | Sat. j Mars
Ketu| Mars Sun Merc.
Rahu
Balance of Jupiter Dasa at birth: Years 12-11-6.
Chart No. 35—Born on 27/28-5-1903 at 1-19 a.m. (L.T.)
Lat 9° N., Long. 5h. 10m. 48s. E.
Sun v Jupit
Ketu j Moon |VYenus|| Mars| Lagna enus Si i
Mercury Sun
Jupit.
Lagna’ Rahu
i RASI =. |] a ef NAVAMSA
! Moon
Sai. Ketu Merc.
t
| Mars
j | Rahu |
Balance of Mars Dasa at birth: Years 5-10-7.

Concerning the First House 79
Saturn is in a friendly sign with the benefic Jupiter. The
Sun of course is middling in strength. Jupiter's presence in
the ascendant is a strong factor acting as an antidote for
other malefic influences. The native has a forceful,
imposing and attractive personality, countenance,
handsome, appearance, good and disposition elegant.
Jupiter has given him a fair complexion, large eyes and
dignified stature. The lips are flushy, cheeks are broad and
has prominent temples. He makes friends of others very
soon. He is somewhat short-tempered but becomes easily
subsided. The will is firm and inflexible. He has strong
affections and can love with exceeding constancy. The
spirits are usually buoyant, cheerful and full of geniality.
Meena or Pisces
The Lagna is no doubt well disposed as also the lord
but the Moon is subject to a number of evil influences
Chart No. 36 —Born on 26-6-1920 at 2-6 a.m. (I.S. T.)
Sun | Moon
Lagoa’ Ketu Venue Tadi Rahu |
| Merc. ;
| Jupit. Jupit
—— i RASI | NAVAMSA —
H
l Sun
Sat. Sat.
A ae
Moon er
M
Mars Ser Merc
| Rahu
rr r e i—i aM
Balance of Jupiter Dasa at birth: Years 12-11-15.

How to Judge a Horoscope
with the result the native is not mentally normal. Jupiter aspects
Lagna. The native is not stout but only middle-sized. He is of
course fair. Jupiter seems to be prominent so far as physical
characteristics are concerned. The body is not corpulent as Saturn
aspects lord of Lagna in the Navamsa.
In Chart No. 37, Lagna is occupied by Mars and Saturn
aspected by the Sun and Jupiter. Lord of Lagna is in the 7th with
the Sun aspected by Mars and Saturn. In the Navamsa also
Jupiter is in Lagna. The native is an athlete and has a welldeveloped body. The native follows a double occupation. The
situation of the Sun and Jupiter is important.
Chart No 37.— Born on 21-9-1909 at 7-9 p.m.
Mars
Lagna
Sat.
Rahu
Sat.
RASI oa
Moon {Mercury | Sun
Ketu
Venus jJupit.
Sun
Jupit.
Moon
Lagna
Venus
Ketu
NAVAMSA -——
Mercury [Mars
Balance of Mercury Dasa at birth : Years 7-8-12.

5. Concerning the Second House
The second house signifies, family, speech, vision and
financial prosperity. In judging the events regarding the
second house cognisance must be taken of all the important
factors referred to on page 21 while dealing with the first
house : viz., (a) The House, (b) Its Lord, (c) Its Occupants
and {d) The Karaka or Indicator. The several yogas—good
and bad—formed by the second lord or in the second house
will produce their own effects. These considerations hold
good in the Navamsa also. In short the second house
largely but not exclusively indicates wealth.
Results of Lord of Second being Situated in
Different Houses
In the First House —The native becomes no doubt
wealthy but he hates his own family, lacks polite manners,
becomes passionate, subservient and time-serving.
When the lord of the 2nd is in Lagna, one will earn
money by his own effort, intelligence and learning or he
will get inherited wealth if the 9th lord or the Sun has
anything to do with this combination.
In the Second House.—Becomes proud. The native
may marry twice or thrice depending upon the strength of
the seventh house. He may become childless.
The position of the 2nd lord in a constellation which
does not happen to be the 3rd, Sth and 7th from Janma

82 How to Judge a Horoscope
Nakshatra is highly desirable, especially if he is otherwise
fortified, i.e., joined with or aspected by benefics. The
exaltation of the 2nd lord of his disposition in Lagna, the
4th, 5th, 7th, 9th or 10th, will fortify him to the extent of
making him a yogakaraka. The native will be enabled to
eam considerable fortune through business or other
occupations consistent with the nature of the 2nd lord and
2nd house. Depending upon the nature of the aspects cast
on the 2nd lord by malefic planets, the native will sustain
losses. An affliction to the 2nd lord may also express itself
in the shape of the subject not getting nutritious and
delicious food, or his family and children suffering from
constant diseases, or want of cordial relations between the
native and his life-partner.
In the Third House.—Brave, intelligent, good-natured
but depraved character. Atheistic tendencies will be
rampant and he becomes addicted to luxuries. Later in life
he turns out to be a miser.
When the 2nd lord in the 3rd is well fortified, he will
be benefited by his sisters. He will benefit by learning fine
arts, viz., music and dancing. He will also indulge in
propitiating Kshudra Devatas or evil spirits.
In the Fourth House.—The above results will apply in
addition to the following. He will spend money for his own
happiness. He will be highly frugal in dealing with money.
When the 2nd lord in the 4th is well fortified, one will
eam well as an automobile dealer or agent or an
agriculturist or landlord or commission agent. He will also
be benefited by his maternal relations. There will be losses
on this account if the 4th lord is afflicted.
In the Fifth House.—Hating family, sensual, not
spending money even on children, he lacks manners and
etiquette.

Concerning the Second House 83
When the 2nd lord in the Sth is well fortified there will
be unexpected acquisition of wealth through lotteries,
crosswords, or the favour of rulers.
In the Sixth House.—Income and expenditure from
enemies. He will suffer from defects or diseases in the anus
and thighs.
Amassing of wealth by black-marketing, deceit,
dissimulation and by creating misunderstandings and
troubles between friends and relatives and through
questionable and suspicious dealings can be anticipated if
the second lord joins the 6th and is well fortified. If
afflicted, he will be involved in these troubles and
sentenced for such crimes as breach of trust, forgeries and
perjuries.
In the Seventh House.—Likely to become a healer.
Laxity of morals will mark both husband and wife. He will
waste much money on the gratification of the senses.
When the second lord who joins the 7th with the 7th
lord is strong there will be influx of wealth through foreign
sources. The native will undertake journeys to foreign
countries and do business. When the Rasi, Navamsa or the
constellation held by the 2nd lord happens to be a feminine
one, then he will benefit by contact with women.
In the Eighth House. — Will have very little or no
happiness from wife or husband. Misunderstandings with
elder brothers. Gets landed properties.
When the 2nd lord is strong, there will be influx as
well as loss of wealth. Actual observation reveals that
under such a combination, there will hardly be any
earnings, but inherited or accumulated wealth will
disappear.
In the Ninth House.—Skilful, ill-health in young age
but healthy afterwards, will possess lot of wealth and
become happy.

84 How to Judge a Horoscope
When the 2nd lord is well fortified and the 9th lord is
in Lagna, the native will have good inheritance. There will
also be benefits through different sources according to the
nature of the sign and nakshatra held by the 2nd lord.
In the Tenth House.—Respect from elders and
superiors, learned, wealthy and he earns by his own
exertions.
The native will take to a number of useful avocations.
He will do business or take to agriculture and also engage
himself in philosophical lectures and dissertations, and
thereby benefit financially. Here again, the constellation
and the sign held by the 2nd lord determine the exact nature
and sources of earnings. Powerful afflictions will cause loss
from the very same sources.
In the Eleventh House.—Health will be bad during
childhood, earns considerable wealth but becomes
unscrupulous.
When well fortified, one earns by lending money or as
a banker or by running a boarding house.
In the Twelfth House——The native becomes a
respectable man. In all probability he will be a government
servant, and will be deprived of the happiness of elder
brother.
The income will be through ecclesiastical sources. If
the second lord is afflicted, he will lose money on this
account.
These combinations are again of general application.
The exact nature of the results should be interpreted by
taking into account, the various dignities and debilities of
planets connected with the second house.
The celebrated Satyacharya insists upon YUKTA
VICHARYA meaning that the matter should be looked into
cleverly. This means that all sources of strength and

Concerning the Second House 85
weakness of the planets should be evenly balanced before
pronouncing an opinion.
Other Important Combinations
We give below some important combinations which
reveal the nature of the second house in its fullness.
If the second lord is in the 2nd with evil planets or
aspected by him, he will be poor. Ordinary wealth is
indicated if Saturn is in the 2nd aspected by Venus. If the
Moon and Mars reside in the 2nd bhava and Saturn aspects
it, he suffers from a peculiar skin disease. The situation of
Mercury in the 2nd with another evil planet aspected by the
Moon is bad for saving money. Eevn if there is any
ancestral wealth, it will be spent—rather wasted on
extravagant purposes. The Sun in the 2nd without being
aspected by Saturn is favourable for a steady fortune. If the
lord of the 2nd is Jupiter or Jupiter resides unaspected by
malefics, there will be much wealth. He loses wealth if
Mercury (aspected by the Moon) contacts this combination.
The Moon being placed in the 2nd and aspected by Mercury
is favourable for earning money by self-exertion. If lords of
the 2nd and 11th interchange their places or both are in
kendras or quadrants and one aspected or joined by
Mercury or Jupiter, the person will be pretty rich. He will
be poor if lords of the 2nd and 3rd are in the 6th with or
aspected by evil planets. One will always be indigent if
lords of the 2nd and 11th remain separate without evil
planets or aspected by them. Money will be spent on moral
purposes when Jupiter is in the 11th house, Venus in the
2nd and its lord with benefics. If the 2nd lord is with good
planets in a kendra or if the 2nd house has all the good
association and aspects he will be on good terms with
relatives.

86 How to Judge a Horoscope
One becomes a good mathematician if Mars is in the
2nd with the Moon or aspected by Mercury. The same
result can be foretold if Jupiter is in the ascendant and
Saturn in the 8th or if Jupiter is in a quadrant and the lord
of Lagna or Mercury is exalted. The person will be an able
debator if the Sun or the Moon is aspected by Jupiter or
Venus.
The eye suffers if the second lord is with Venus or the
subject becomes night-blind if the Sun and the Moon are in
the second. A person suffers penalty or false charges are
brought against him if lords of the 2nd and 11th are in the
6th, 8th or 12th, Mars in the 11th, and Rahu in the 2nd. He
suffers from eye disease if the 2nd lord is in the 6th, 8th or
12th. If the 2nd lord is strong his eye-sight will be good.
The eye becomes injured if lord of the 2nd joins Saturn,
Mars or Gulika. Saturn in the 2nd is unfavourable for good
eye-sight. Lord of the 2nd in a very weak position makes
the person helpless and lead a very wretched existence.
One will stammer or become dumb if the lord of the
2nd is debilitated, is in the 2nd or 8th with evil planets.
If the lord of the 12th be in the 2nd or vice versa, the
subject loses wealth under penalty. If lord of the 2nd
occupies the 8th with malefics in debility and the Sun
combines with him, losses will occur through Government
executions and fines. If the lords of the 2nd and 12th
remain in the 2nd or 12th and are aspected bv the lord of
Lagna, he loses money by offending the authorities. One
will be always in debt if evil planets are in the 2nd and lord
of ascendant is in the 12th, aspected or joined by lord of the
10th or 11th. If Jupiter, Venus or Mercury reside in the 2nd
being elevated the person supports many men. If the 2nd
lord is in elevation and occupies a kendra,

Concerning the Second House 87
if the ascendant lord is strong and if the lord of the house
where the 2nd lord is, remains in a kendra, the subject will
acquire a princely fortune. One acquires great wealth if lord
of Lagna is in the 2nd, the 2nd lord is in the 11th or 11th
lord is in Lagna.
One becomes rich in his young age if the 2nd lord is
with the 10th lord aspected by the planet who is lord of the
Navamsa occupied by the ascendant lord. Take a horoscope
in which Aquarius is Lagna and Saturn occupies Taurus in
Navamsa. Then if Jupiter (lord of 2) is with Mars (10th
lord) and aspected by Venus (who is the lord of the
Navamsa occupied by lord ascendant), the man earns when
quite young. One will also earn well in his young age when
lord of the 2nd is in the 10th aspected by either the lord of
Lagna or the planet who is lord of Lagna in Navamsa. If the
2nd and 11th lords associate with the ascendant lord and
occupy kendra having acquired Kalabala_ (temporal
strength) then the subject earns in his middle life.
If the third house is a common sign (Gemini, Virgo,
Sagittarius and Pisces) and its lord is situated there and
aspected by benefics, much wealth will be earned or
acquired during the Dasa of such a planet by thousands.
This combination naturally applies to cases where only
movable signs are on the ascendant. If the third happens to
be a fixed sign and the above combination in respect of the
lord occurs, the earnings will be by hundreds. A movable
sign in the third with quite similar combinations enables
one to earn within two hundred. Saturn or Mars, debilitated
in the 11th from Arudha Lagna, give good earnings. If
Arudha Lagna falls in the 11th, 4th, Sth or 7th from Lagna,
then also the person becomes rich.

88 How to Judge a Horoscope
Various combinations are given in ancient astrological
books to indicate the source and time of financial gains.
The position of the lord of the 2nd is important. If the
second lord is in the first—One earns money by his own
exertions and generally by manual labour. In the second—
Riches will be acquired without effort if the Ist and 2nd
lords have exchanged their houses. In the third— Loss from
relatives, brothers and gain from travels and journeys. In
the fourth-\Through mother, inheritance. In the fifth—
Ancestral properties, speculation and chance games. In the
sixth—Broker's business, loss from relatives. In the
seventh—Gain after marriage but loss from sickness, etc.,
of wife. In the eighth—Legacies and enemies. In the
ninth—From father, voyages and shipping. In the tenth—
Profession, eminent people, government favours. In the
eleventh—From different means. In the twelfth—Gain from
servants and unscrupulous means including illegal
gratifications.
Here I should like to make some observations for the
information of the reader. According to Maharishi Jaimini,
Atmakaraka (lord of soul) has an important part to play in
the smooth running of one's career. Arudha Lagna and
planetary dispositions in reference to it have a strong
bearing on the financial status of the person. In my own
humble experience, Arudha Lagna should be given as much
importance as the usual Janma Lagna. Arudha Lagna is the
sign arrived at by counting as many signs from lord of
Lagna as lord of Lagna is removed from Lagna. Thus if
Aquarius is ascendant and its lord Saturn is in the 4th
(Taurus) then the 4th from Taurus, viz., Leo becomes
Arudha Lagna. The just or unjust means of earning depends
upon the presence of benefic or malefic planets in the 11th
from Arudha Lagna.

Concerning the Second House 89
Poverty
Extreme poverty is caused if lord of Lagna is in the
12th with or aspected by a Maraka planet. The same result
could be expected if there is exchange of houses between
Ist and 6th lords—either of these remaining with or
aspected by a Maraka planet (see page 14). If malefics —
not owning the 9th and 10th—are in the ascendant in
company with or aspected by a Maraka, the man will be
extremely poor.
If Lagna is occupied by Saturn and hemmed in
between malefics, fortune will be destroyed. Jupiter's
aspect or association will however counteract the evil
indication. If Lagna is a movable sign occupied by Saturn
or Ketu and hemmed in between malefics, not only poverty
is caused but the body will be deformed. If either the 6th,
8th or 12th from Lagna becomes Arudha, the man will
suffer poverty.
Planets in the Second House
The Sun.—This is not quite a favourable situation.
Losses will occur by offending the authorities. He will have
a diseased face. He will obtain money by industrious effort.
The nature of the income depends on the nature of the sign.
He will be stubborn and peevish.
The Moon.—He will have a large family and will enjoy
much happiness. Money will also be obtained through
females. The financial position will be somewhat variable,
will have a fair complexion. Dhundiraja, a noted
astrological writer of yore, says that when the Moon is in
the 2nd house, the native will be reserved and not much
sociable, squint eyed and much admired.
Mars.—Becomes quarrelsome. Good earning powers
but usually miserly. Much money is accumulated. A

90 How to Judge a Horoscope
good conversationalist. He will befriend evil-minded
persons, be unsympathetic and pick up quarrels with all.
Mercury.—Learned in religious and philosophical lore.
Denotes gain by lecturing, business and commercial affairs.
Becomes rich. Highly intelligent. He spends money on
charities and moral purposes. Clever in earning money and
careful and thrifty.
Jupiter.—Becomes a poet, a great writer, astrologer or
even a scientist. Increases the chances for success. He
accumulates fortune, good wife and family surroundings.
He will not quarrel with others. Money will be acquired
through things indicated by the signs ruled by Jupiter.
Venus.—Large family. Money usually comes readily
by favours from others. Eats good food, possesses
conveyances. Handsome appearance, skilful and pleasant,
will marry a good wife or husband. Health and wealth are
indicated in a large measure.
Saturn.—Saturn, unless the second is Libra, Capricorn
or Aquarius, tends to make earning an uphill struggle. Much
work with little gain. Harsh speech, unsocial, sorrowful and
roaming about aimlessly the person comes across many
opportunities but seldom takes advantage of them. In family
life he will be unhappy. He will gain by dealing with
metals, storage, mines, labour, etc. He will be unpopular.
Rahu.—Peevish, diseased face, friction in family life,
danger to eye-sight. Financial affairs uncertain unless other
favourable combinations occur. If Jupiter aspects the
second house, then earnings will be good. Money is gained
through friends and business.
Ketu——Bad_ speaker. Loss through fraud and
deception. There will be liability in financial affairs.
Success in spiritualism, navigation, mystical arts, hospital,
etc., may be expected.

Conceming the Second House 91
Time of Fructification of the Results of
the. Second House
In timing events pertaining to the second house note
the following factors :—
(a) Lord of the 2nd house, (b) planet or planets
aspecting the 2nd house, (c) planet or planets posited in the
2nd house, (d) planets aspecting lord of the 2nd, (e) planet
or planets in association with lord of the 2nd, and (f) lord of
the 2nd from the Moon.
The factors mentioned above may influence the 2nd
house either as lords of main periods or as lords of subperiods. (1) The sub-periods of planets capable of
influencing the 2nd house in the major periods of those
who are also capable of influencing the 2nd house produce
results pertaining to the 2nd house par excellence. (2) The
sub-periods of planets associated with the 2nd house in the
major periods, whose lords are not associated with the 2nd
Chart No. 38.—Born on 20/21-10-1893, at 4-1 a.m.
Mercury f Mars
NAVAMSA = |——
Venus
Lagna Moon
Sun | Mars
Venus ‘Mercury | Sat. Sun Sat.
| Y | Ketu Ketu
Balance of Mars Dasa at birth : Years 4-2-14.

92 How (0 Judge a Horoscope
house, will produce results pertaining to the 2nd house only
to a limited extent. Likewise, the sub-periods whose lords
are not associated with the 2nd house, in the major periods
whose lords are associated with the 2nd, will produce
effects pertaining to the 2nd house only to a feeble extent.
(a) Lord of the 2nd house—Venus, (b) Planets
aspecting the 2nd house—nil. (c) Planets posited in the
2nd—Mercury and the Sun. (d) Planets aspecting lord of
the 2nd—Jupiter, (e) Planets in association with the 2nd
lord—nil. (f) Lord of the 2nd from the Moon—Saturn.
Venus, Saturn, Jupiter, Mercury and the Sun can influence
the 2nd house (produce effects of the 2nd house) either in
their Dasas or Bhuktis. Venus is capable of producing the
effects of the 2nd house much more than the other planets.
The sub-period of Venus in the major period of Saturn is an
important one in the life of this native from a financial
viewpoint. He was appointed the Speaker in a leading
Indian State.
Nature of the Results
The exact nature of the results that a planet, capable of
influencing the 2nd house, can produce in its Dasa its or
Bhukti depends upon its other ownership, aspect and
location. The general principles enunciated in regard to the
Ist house lord hold equally good for the 2nd house too. In
general the following results (pertaining to the second
house) are likely in the course of their Dasas and Bhuktis.
Sun — IIl-health and expenses on that account, destruction
of property and cattle, bad luck in general, quarrels and
litigation troubles. Moon—Access to wealth and good
earnings, family happiness, fame, increase of property and
gains in all undertakings. Mars—Comforts

Concerning the Second House 93
and happiness, favours from superiors and men in position
and increase of fame. Rahu—Destruction of the indications
of the 2nd house, quarrels, litigation troubles and expenses
on courts, offending the authorities and loss through them.
Jupiter—In general financial position will improve. Any
eye troubles, etc., will disappear. Saturn— Lot of expense,
eye disease, family misunderstandings, quarrels with wife
and worry. Financial prosperity should be predicted if
Saturn is a Yogakaraka by ownership or otherwise.
Mercury—Nervous troubles, paralytic attacks, etc., if
Mercury in the 2nd is aspected by the evil planets.
Otherwise pleasant results will manifest. Debits if any will
be liquidated. Earnings will be good and family prosperity
will be ensured. Ketu—Loss of wealth by theft, fire,
litigation and gambling, eye-sore and diseases affecting the
sight, disturbance from native's place, running into debts
and extreme worry. Venus—Power, influence, financial
prosperity and great success.
Generally the following results are likely to happen
during the Dasa of the lord of the 2nd house :—
When he is well fortified and occupies the 2nd house,
thd person becomes famous and wealthy. There will be no
acquisition of wealth if the lord of Lagna is weak. When
the 2nd lord is in the 6th, 8th or 12th in Navamsa, there will
be fame but no wealth. Depending upon the other lordship
of the second lord and his affliction, the native may die or
separate from his wife.
There will be prosperity and improvement in financial
matters if the 2nd lord joins the 3rd lord in the 3rd house.
Younger brothers will become helpful financially and
otherwise. If a musician, he will gain fame and money.
There will be neither losses nor gains if the 2nd lord is
Weak. Ifthe second lord is in the 6th, 8th or 12th from

94 How to Judge a Horoscope
the Sth lord in Navamsa, quite the opposite results will
happen.
There will be acquisition of lands, cars, houses and
financial advantages through literary and intellectual
activities if the 2nd lord is in the 4th with the 4th lord.
Unexpected wealth may come in mining, lotteries,
competitions and unexpected sources. He may also inherit
some property from mother or maternal grandfather. None
of the above benefits will accrue if the 2nd lord is in an
unfavourable Navamsa disposition from the 4th lord. Venus
as 2nd lord, joined by Rahu, or Mars as 2nd lord, joined by
Saturn, indicate during their Dasa or Bhukti, that the wife
(or husband) will go astray. When the lord of the 2nd is in
the 5th with the 5th lord, children will prosper and the
native gets their help and financial assistance. He will
engage himself in intellectual persuits which will prove
financially beneficial.
The native's maternal uncles will have great prosperity
in the Dasa of the lord of the 2nd in conjunction with the
6th lord in the 6th. The native will incur the enmity of
moneyed people. If 2nd lord is strong, he will acquire
wealth as a physician. If Mars joins the combination, he
will acquire stolen property, or he will earn through
litigation or questionable means.
When the lord of the 2nd is in the 7th in conjunction
with the 7th lord, he will get good dowry or property from
father-in-law. When the 7th lord has maraka power, then
death of the native or his wife may happen in this Dasa.
Acquisition of wealth should be predicted only when there
are other strong Dhana Yogas and not otherwise.
One gets involved in huge debts if the 2nd lord joins
the 8th with the 8th lord. He will be unable to pay off the
debts in spite of efforts. There is danger of wife's death

Concerning the Second House 95
or she may bring disrepute to the family. He will have
sorrow, affliction of mind and a miserable existence. These evil
results should be anticipated if the 2nd lord is in the 6th, 8th or
12th from the 8th lord in the Navamsa. When the 8th lord is
weak, the native will roam about aimlessly.
Immense wealth will flow in when the 2nd lord joins the
9th lord in the 9th. Father will have very good fortune The
native earns righteously. He will cultivate the friendship of
learned men and will have the opportunity of holding
intellectual discussions with them.
When the 2nd lord occupies the 10th with the 10th lord and
the lord of Lagna is involved in a Rajayoga, it will definitely
manifest in the Dasa of the 2nd lord. He will secure a high
political or administrative position and emoluments consistent
with the high office. If the planets involved are malefics, he will
abuse his position and cause pain to others. He will extort
money by way of bribes. A businessman, having the above
combination, will earn huge profits in the course of this Dasa.
When the 2nd lord is in the 6th, 8th or 12th from the 10th lord
in the Navamsa, contrary results will happen. He may become a
diplomat well versed in intrigue and hypocrisy. There will be
huge gains through sources indicated by the karaka nature of
the 11th lord. When he joins the 11th lord in the 11th, happy
relations will develop with elder brother. Malefic Navamsa
positions indicate reversals and losses.
When the 2nd lord is in the 12th with the 12th lord, there
will be huge losses through sources indicated by the karaka
nature of the 12th lord. When both the 2nd and 12th lords are
rendered weak, the losses will be small. No losses should be
predicted when the 2nd lord is unfavourably disposed from the
12th lord in the Navamsa.

96 How to Judge a Horoscope
Apart from financial losses, domestic affairs take an
unfortunate turn.
When the 2nd lord is in Lagna with the lord of Lagna,
the native will beget children during the Dasa of the 2nd
lord. He will become famous and rich and engage himself
in charitable work. If the 2nd lord is weak, he will have
meagre earnings.
In the matter of predicting Dasa results, one should
carefully consider the position of the 2nd lord and the
planet in question, not only in Rasi but in the Navamsa
also. There should be a balanced weighing of the
favourable influences.
Financial prosperity may be predicted in the following
periods and sub-periods :—
(a) Lords of the 2nd and Sth or 2nd and 11th if they
have mutually exchanged places, (b) Lords of the 5th and
9th if they are in the 5th and 9th respectively, (c) If the lord
of the 2nd is associated with the 12th lord, then in the
course of the Dasa of the 2nd lord, financial prosperity will
be ordinary.
If the lords of Lagna, 4th and 9th are in the 8th, then
the subject will suffer financial losses during their Dasas
and Bhuktis. If the 5th lord is in the 8th or vice versa, both
these lords will produce financial losses during their Dasas
and Bhuktis.
Let us study a few typical examples in relation to the
2nd house :—
The Second House.—The second is Aries. Ketu is
there aspected by Rahu. The second is hemmed in between
two malefics the Sun and Saturn causing Papakarthari
Yoga. This is bad. In the Navamsa, the second is aspected
by the Moon.

Conceming the Second House 97
The Second Lord.—Mars is the 2nd lord and he is in
the 12th with Mercury lord of 4th and 7th. Lord of the 2nd
is also aspected by Saturn.
Chart No. 39.—Born on 24-3-1883 at 6 a.m. (L.T.)
Sun | Ketu | Saturn Mars |Meteury | Moon
Lagna R
Merc.
Mars
an RASI Ea NAVAMSA nE
Venus Sat.
n ee ee ee | o piema m
un
Rahu Jupiter Venus|
Ketu
Balance of the Moon Dasa at birth: Years 6-0-0.
From the Moon, the 2nd is occupied by Rahu.
Lagnadhipati aspecting the 2nd lord is not conducive to
good eye-sight in later life. Netrakaraka (lord of eyes) is
hemmed in-between Mars and Mercury on one side and
Ketu on the other. Jupiter aspects Mars lord of the 2nd. In
the Navamsa, Jupiter is with Ketu and Saturn aspects
Lagna. On account of all these combinations, the native
lost his eye-sight in the sub-period of Rahu within the
major period of Jupiter.
The Second House.—The second house in Chart No.
40 contains four planets the Sun, the Moon, Mars and
Mercury. The position of Mars in the 2nd is bad. This
blemish is cancelled because Mars is in his own house.

98 How to Judge a Horoscope
The Moon is debilitated, but even this evil effect is cancelled as
Jupiter in exaltation aspects this combination. The second house
therefore is very strongly situated.
Chart No. 40— Born on 13/ 14-12-1895 at 3-5 a.m.
Saturn
Rahu
-—- RASI NAYAMSA
Moot | Lagna
Venus
Merce. | Saturn
Mars | Ketu
Balance of Saturn Dasa at birth: Years 18-2-18.
The Second Lord.—As the 2nd lord is in his own bouse
with Mercury lord of the 9th, he is strong. Exalted Jupiter
aspects Mars. In the Navamsa also Mars is free from evil
aspects or associations.
Lord of Wealth.—(Dhanakaraka).—Jupiter is exalted
and aspects the 2nd house and is in the 9th from the 2nd
and 10th from the Lagna. Jupiter in his turn is aspected by
exalted Saturn who is a Yogakaraka for this horoscope.
Because all the three factors connected with the second
house are strong and well fortified, there are indications of
immense wealth. The planets mostly influencing the second
house are Mars, Mereury, the Moon, the Sun and Jupiter
and Ketu (because Ketu must give the result of the Sun.

Conceming the Second House 99
Ketu must give the results of the Sun, lord of the 11th
(gain). Mercury is lord of the 9th (fortune) and is in the
2nd. In Ketu Dasa, Mercury's Bhukti, the subject inherited
an empire.
The Second House.—In Chart No. 41 there is an
excellent combination in the second as the Sun (lord of the
9), Mercury (lord of the 7 and the 10) and Mars (lord of the
5) are posited, A Rajayoga is caused. The second house is
strong.
Chart No. 41.—Born on 3/4-2-1900 at 4-00 a.m.
Rahu Merc.
Jupiter |
Balance of Jupiter Dasa at birth : Years 5-5-2.
The Second Lord.—The second lord Saturn is in the
Lagna and is subject to no aspects, good or bad. In the
Navamsa Saturn is in Gemini with Mars and the Moon.
The second lord is therefore moderately powerful.
Lord of Wealth—Jupiter lord of Lagna is in the 12th
with Rahu. But from the Moon, Jupiter is lord of the 2nd
and is in the 10th with Rahu. Jupiter is neither too powerful
nor too weak.

100 How to Judge a Horoscope
Conclusion.—There are some important yogas in this
horoscope which we are not considering in this example as
in order to examine their presence one should have a good
knowledge of astrology. Jupiter is in Vargottama. The
subject is quite well off in life and enjoys a monthly salary
of Rs. 1,500. The presence of three planets in the 2nd is the
most important combination in this horoscope. There is a
Rajayoga formed here as Mars is lord of the 5th and
Mercury, lord of the 10 and the 7. Saturn, Mercury, Mars,
the Sun and the Moon will considerably influence the
second house. Mercury's period was responsible for
improving the finances to a considerable extent.
Chart No. 42.—Born on 3-7-1909 at 9-14 p.m.
Mercury Sun
Sat. Sun Mars
Rahu Sat.
Mars Venus|} Ketu
— RASI ——||—_ -| NAVAMSA
i Rahu
Lagna Jupit. Venus
Lagna
Moon| Ketu Moon |[Merc.
Jupit.
Balance of Venus Dasa at birth : Years 9-4-20.
The Second House.—Mars is in the 2nd in Chart No.
42. Jupiter lord of the 3rd and the 12th aspects the second.
Both are bad.
The Second Lord.—Lord of the 2nd is in the 3rd, This
is bad for finance. In the Navamsa, Saturn is in the 7th with
a bitter enemy.

Conceming the Second House 101
Lord of Wealth.—Jupiter is in the 8th from Lagna and
aspected by Mars.
Conclusion.—Almost all the planets have what is called
Dwirdwadasa dispositions (being in the 12th and 2nd from
each other). This is an unfavourable combination which
always retards success in life. Saturn's sub-period in Mars
Dasa was a bit favourable from the financial point of view.
The horoscope is that of an ordinary man, drawing about
Rs. 50 to 60 a month.
Chart No. 43.-Born on 24-8-1890 at 8-44 p.m. (L.T.)
Rahu Ketu Jupiter | San
Moon
Mere.
Mars
——| NAVAMSA —
Sun Venus
Sat. Sat
Merc
Veous Lagna Rabu
Balance of Mercury Dasa at birth : Years 5-10-25.
The Second House.—In Chart No. 43, Aries is the 2nd
house. It is not aspected by any planet—good or bad.
Hence it is fairly strong.
The Second Lord.—Mars is the lord of the 2nd and he
is in the 9th from Lagna in his own sign. This is a fortunate
combination. In the Navamsa Mars is in the 4th with the
Moon and Mercury—the association with the first

102 How to Judge a Horoscope
planet being good and with second being bad. Lord of the
second is moderately good.
Lord of Wealth.—Jupiter is debilitated in the 11th but
there is a distinct cancellation of the neecha effect as Saturn
owner of that house is in a quadrant from the Moon. This is
a benefic yoga and results in much gain.
Conclusion.—Note lord of the 2nd and the 2nd house
have no connection with the 6th or 6th lord. The subject
will therefore contract no debts whatsover. The financial
position will generally be sound. Mars Dasa would be
particularly favourable for saving.
Chart No. 44.—Born on 29/30-9-1888 at 4-35 a.m.
| Moon!| Sat. | Moon Sun
i Sat,
| Rahu Ketu
CES RASI E NAVAMSA ESE
Ketu Lagna|! Mars ` Rahu
Mars [Mercury sun || Merc- venus | Jupiter
Jupiter | Yenus Lagna
Balance of Jupiter Dasa at birth : Years 13-1-20.
Second House.—The second house is Virgo or Kanya.
It is occupied by the Sun, lord of Lagna, and aspected by
Saturn, lord of the 6th and the 7th. The second house is
ordinarily disposed.
Second Lord.—Mercury, owning the 2nd house, is in
the third with Venus in a friendly sign. Venus being lord

Concerning the Second House 103
of the 3rd and the 10th has become a malefic. The second
lord has no other aspects. In the Navamsa Mercury is in the
ascendant. The second lord is also ordinarily disposed.
Dhanakaraka.—Jupiter lord of the 5th is in the 4th
with Mars—a Yogakaraka. This is an excellent
combination.
Conclusion. — From the Moon, Saturn and Rahu are in
the 2nd. Therefore while the subject earns considerable
money, the situation of Saturn and Rahu makes him spend
his earnings on evil purposes. Mark the Dwirdwadasa
positions of planets both in the Rasi and Navamsa. This
indicates a checkered career and sudden rise and sudden
fall.
In Ketu Dasa Venus Bhukti, the native lost all fortune
and made a debt of Rs. 50,000. Ketu is in the 6th (debts)
while the lord of that house Saturn is in the 12th from
Lagna and 2nd from the Moon. The financial crisis
occurred before the close of Ketu Dasa.
The Second House.—Libra, which happens to be the
second house, is free from affliction as it is neither aspected
nor joined by any malefics. In the Navamsa the 2nd is
aspected by Lagnadhipathi Mars. The second house is
therefore fairly well disposed.
The Second Lord.—Venus owning the 2nd is in the 5th,
a friendly sign, joined by the malefics S,un, lord of the 12th,
the Moon lord of the 11th and Rahu. He is further aspected
by the benefic Jupiter who happens to be a Kendradhipathi
here. In the Navamsa the 2nd lord Venus is in the 11th, ina
friendly sign aspected by Jupiter, lord of the 9th and Mars,
lord of Lagna (and the 8th) and conjoined by Rahu. Venus
is further aspected by Jupiter, lord of the 9th. Hence the 2nd
lord is feebly strong.

104 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 45.—Born on 22-1-1898 at 10-7 p.m.
Lagna Moon
Sun upit.
Venus
Ketu Rabu
RASI SS —— NAVAMSA —
ao
oon
Raha Ketu
Venus
Mars! saturn Lagna. | sat. | Mars Merc.
Merce. Jupit.
Balance of the Moon Dasa at birth : Years 4-8-21.
Dhanakaraka.—His disposition in Lagna and in the
9th from the Moon renders him fairly strong.
Conclusion.—From the Moon, Saturn, lord of the 2nd,
is in the 11th. This coupled with the fairly good disposition
of the 2nd lord who happens to be Yogakaraka from the
Moon renders the financial position of the native quite
favourable. It may be noted that during Saturn Dasa he
became an Under-Secretary to the Central Government
before retiring, enjoying a monthly salary of over Rs.
1000/- a month.
On page 9 reference is made to Yogakaraka or planets
producing or causing special yogas. Since I have devoted a
separate book* to the discussion of yogas, I shall make a
few remarks here with special reference to wealth and
property.
* Three Hundred Important Combinations by Dr. B. V. Raman.

Conceming the Second House 105
Careful study and examination of a number of
horoscopes have led me to the conclusion that
Chandramangala Yoga has a great bearing on the financial
status of a person. Even Varahamihira has not attached
much significance to this yoga. According to him, the
Moon-Mars combination results in making the man earn
money by unscrupulous means. In actual practice, however,
it is found that where the Moon and Mars are dignified by
being situated in Taurus and Scorpio or in Cancer and
Capricorn, the earnings have always been through over
board means. Under the first circumstance above referred
to, the Moon will be exalted and Mars in his own sign,
while under the second circumstance, the reverse holds
good, viz., the Moon will be in his own house while Mars
will occupy his place of exaltation. Here again the
combination can be productive of good, provided it occurs
either in the 2nd, 9th, 10th or in the 11th. The nature of
results depends also on the nature of ownership of the
planets causing the yoga. If Libra is Lagna and the
combination occurs in Cancer, the effects to be produced
Will be predominantly those of the 2nd and 11th houses.
Similarly for persons born in Cancer and Leo Chandramannala Yoga occurring in Scorpio or Taurus is also highly
beneficial. The Moon and Mars should be in conjunction or
in mutual aspect for the production of yoga. Except Where
the Moon and Mars are debilitated without Neecha-bhanga
(cancellation of debility) Chandramangala Yoga generally
produces bright results so far as finances are concerned, the
exact nature of the effects depending on the position of the
yoga as reckoned from the ascendant.
In Chart No. 46 the second house is occupied by Saturn
and aspected by Jupiter, lord of the 6th and 9th. The second
lord, the Sun, is in the 7th in an inimical sign. The second
house is, therefore, ordinarily situated.

106 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 46.—Born on 30-1-1891 at 7-0 p.m. (L-T.)
| Sun
Rahu Venus Moon
Rabu |
[Lagoa |
RASI ——-||———-} NAVAMSA —
Sat. |
Merc. | Saturn | Mars
Ket Mo
Merc S || ketu] Lagna | Jupiter |
Balance of the Moon Dasa at birth: about
Years 2-9-13.
Here Mars and the Moon are mutually aspecting.
Hence Chandramangala Yoga is caused. Mars is a Yogakaraka for this Lagna and the Moon, Lagnadhipathi
(ascendant lord). The situation of the Moon in the 3rd and
Mars in the 9th is also good. The yoga gains some strength
as a result of which the native is financially sound. The
Dhanakaraka is in the 8th and this disposition is rather
adverse.
Chart No. 47 is another typical illustration of
Chandramangala Yoga.
The Moon-Mars combination has taken place in
Scorpio the 9th from Lagna. Mars is in his own house and
the Moon in debilitation. Because the Moon is waxing and
Mars occupies his own sign, this yoga has received some
vitality. The Dasa of Mars has been much

Concerning the Second House 107
better than the Moon's on account of the favourable
disposition of Mars.
Chart No. 47.—Born on 24-8-1890 at 8-44 p.m. (L.T.)
Lagna Ketu Ketu Jupiter | Sun
Moon
Merc.)
Mars
— RASI NAVAMSA ee
Sun Venus
Jupit. Si Rae
| Moon
Merc.
Mars v sib Lagna Rahu
enus
Rahu I
Balance of Mercury Dasa at birth : Years 5-10-25.
The Second House.—In Chart No. 48, Virgo is the 2nd
house. It is aspected by Saturn, lord of the 6th and the 7th a
neutral. Hence it is moderately good.
The Second Lord——Mercury is lord of the 2nd and he is
in the 3rd with Jupiter lord of the 5th and the 8th. Mercury
is in a friendly sign without any malefic aspects. In the
Navamsa Mercury is in the 7th in his own house. The
disposition of the 2nd lord is therefore moderately good.
Lord of Wealth.—Jupiter is the lord of the 5th and he is
with the lord of the 2nd, but placed in an inimical sign. In
the Navamsa, Jupiter happens to be Lagna lord and he is in
the 5th in a friendly sign. Hence moderately good.
Conclusion.—Note the 6th lord aspects the house of
finance. The Sun lord of Lagna is also in the 2nd bhava.
The degree of wealth shown is not very considerable and

108 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 48.—Born on 20/21-10-1887 at about 3-10 a.m.
| : Mooni Jupiter Mere.
Sat. Mars
Rabu Rahu
—— RASI ——-| NAVAMSA
Mars
Ketu Venus! /Rahu
Lagna
Sun
Venus} Sua
Moon Mercury Lagna) Saturn
Jupiter
Balance of Mercury Dasa at birth : Years 4-2-24.
is frequently acquired by dint of hard labour. In the Navamsa,
Rahu is in the 2nd while 2nd lord is in the 12th. This indicates
loss due to the displeasure of the Government.
It has also been observed that Mars and the Moon in mutual
kendras give rise to something like Chandra-mangala Yoga.
The mutual disposition of the Moon and Jupiter in kendras is
known as Gajakesari Yoga. Here also the strength of the yoga to
produce its effects rests on the nature of the situation of the Moon
and Jupiter such as in exaltation, debilitation, inimical place, etc.
If Gajakesari Yoga occurs in the 12th, 6th, or 8th from Lagna, it
cannot advance the horoscopic indications for good. Gajakesari
Yoga or for that matter any other yoga can find manifestation in
different ways. It might enhance the reputation of a person
without financial promotions; it might

Concerning the Second House 109
improve the professional career but without corresponding
pecuniary gains; and it might give wealth without touching
the status. Here we are concerned only with the financial
aspect. Naturally, if Jupiter is connected in any way with
the second house, and forms Gajakesari, he is bound to
make a person earn well. All these technicalities should be
carefully considered by the students of astrology before
venturing any predictions.
Generally speaking, the financial prospects of persons
born in different Lagnas will be as stated below. The
following information is collected from a study of a number
of charts. These results cannot be applied blindly without
considering the other combinations obtaining in the
horoscope. .
Aries or Mesha
First Drekkana (0°-10°).—The fortunes are somewhat
variable. There is gain through property and rural industries
and sometimes through marriage The person will be frugal
and cautious. He takes advantage of circumstances to
improve his lot. The important years will be 18th, 28th.
36th, 42nd, 46th and 50th.
Second Drekkana (11°-20°).—The natural tendency is
no doubt to be cautious, but the person is all for money. He
gives the impression of being richer than he actually is.
Financially, the important years will be 20th, 24th, 29th,
36th, 47th, 56th and 6lst.
Third Drekkana (21°-30°).—The subject generally
takes risks in money matters and is pulled down by his
enemies. He is generally fortunate in financial matters. The
21st, 25th, 31st, 34th, 36th, 42nd, 45th, 5lst and 52nd years
will be important.

110 How to Judge a Horoscope
Taurus or Vrischika
First Drekkana (1°-10°).—The native earns a lot of
money, but it does not stay in his hands. Unless he takes
precautions in his earlier years of life, the advanced period
will be anxious. He is never frugal in financial matters. He
will hardly leave anything for his children and dependants.
He will get into debt and his properties will be encumbered.
He is likely to lose by legal affairs and strifes. The
important years will be 21st, 23rd, 31st, 42nd, 51st, 65th
and 68th.
Second Drekkana (11°-20°).—The subject will be
frugal and detest getting into debts. Sometimes this
frugality may extend to miserliness. On account of his
overcautious nature, he may miss many sound opportunities
for money-making. He will steadily strengthen his financial
position. He will become wealthy, provided there are no
other adverse yogas. The important years will be 17th, 21st,
24th, 33rd, 50th and 55th.
Third Drekkana (21°-30°)——The subject will be
unhappy so far as money is concerned. As age advances, he
will become comparatively poor. He may give his money
away to others or waste it in meaningless schemes. He
should deal with money very carefully. Speculation is not
advisable. Important years will be 18th, 22nd, 26th, 31st,
35th, 42nd, 51st and 57th years.
Gemini or Mithuna
First Drekkana (1°-10°).—The fortunes are subject to
change. Women play a large part. The native will
experience adversity as well as affluence. He will have
control over large sums of money only after he has reached
his thirties. He will have to exercise great prudence and
avoid litigation. Unexpected reversals may be expected

Concerning the Second House 111
in money matters unless there are other relieving yogas or
special combinations. Insurance companies, trusts,
electrical installations, aviation and such occupations will
be favourable. The most important years will be 16th, 23rd,
30th, 45th and 54th.
Second Drekkana (11°-20°)— Government service
will not be as favourable as business or other enterprises.
The subject will fail to make provision for his advanced
years. Whatever prudence he may have, he will sustain
heavy losses. If the Moon is in debility, there will be many
hitches. He should be on guard against swindlers and
imposters. Important years will be 19th, 23rd, 25th, 29th,
32nd, 36th, 43rd, 46th and 49th.
Third Drekkana (21°-30°)—The subject will earn
money by intellectual means. Speculative business is not
advisable. Some loss through litigation is indicated in the
45th or 46th year—the exact period depending upon the
nature of the current directions. Important years will be
24th, 29th, 33rd, 35th, 41st, 47th, 59th, 60th and 62nd.
Cancer or Kataka
First Drekkana (I°-10°).—Frugality often t2kes the
form of miserliness in the native. He will do many foolish
things in finance. Difficulty in acquiring wealth is shown
and frequently the inheritance is lost through relatives or by
speculation, affairs connected with children and love
attachments. At times he will meet heavy financial losses.
He is likely to gain by private enterprises. Important years
will be 17th, 24th, 29th, 31st, 39th, 49th and 52nd.
Second Drekkana (11°-20°).-The native is seldom
lucky in money matters. His generous nature will be a
handicap for him to save any money. Risky investments

112 How to Judge a Horoscope
are not advisable. Litigation and blackmail play a large part
in making him lose money. He will, however, be fortunate
in certain conditions. If the Sun is exalted, that gives rise to
much earning by high political appointments. Important
years will be 18th, 27th, 34th, 44th, 53rd and 60th.
Third Drekkana (21°-30°).—The native will be
generally careless in money matters. In advancing years, he
is likely to face poverty and loss of position. He will find it
difficult to manage his affairs carefully. His fortunes are
subject to much change. Important years will be 19th, 26th,
33rd, 36th, 45th and 48th.
Leo or Simha
First Drekkana_ (1°-10°). —Wealth comes from
personal merit, but financially the native will hardly be
successful. He will always be in want though earnings may
be good. Trading in commodities, food and clothes is also
advisable. In service, there will be sudden and unexpected
reverses. He may also earn money by means of astrology.
Reversal of fortune may occur. Important years will be
21st, 26th, 31st, 33rd, 38th, 43rd, 50th and 54th.
Second Drekkana (11°-20°).—Much depends upon the
position of Mercury in the horoscope. The native may
become a good writer or journalist or he may earn money
by literature and music. If in service, he is likely to earn the
displeasure of his superiors. Consequently he will sustain
reverses. His financial career will be moderate. After the
50th year or thereabouts, he may get access to some wealth
through insurance or investments. Important years will be
23rd, 26th, 31st, 36th, 45th, 53rd, 54th, and 56th. In spite
of talents, the native seldom dies rich.

Conceming the Second House 113
Third Drekkana (21°-30°).—The native will fare better
in money matters than those born in the second Drekkana.
Money is earned through unexpected ways. He will
succeed in contract works, shipping products and in
intellectual pursuits as well. The important years will be
20th, 25th, 30th, 33rd, 38th, 43rd and 48th.
Virgo or Kanya
First Drekkana (1°-10°).—The degree of wealth shown
is not considerable and is frequently acquired by dint of
exertion and labour. There remains a chance of loss
especially during the earlier part of life. Speculation risks
should be avoided as far as possible. The subject is likely to
be influenced by designing persons working for their own
benefit. Reckless schemes and impulsive actions may prove
ruinous. He can earn money by judicious investment,
industry, business connected with toilets, perfumery,
millinery, music, etc He is also inclined to get involved in
litigation. The important years will be 18th, 24th, 30th,
36th, 42nd, 49th and 55th. He can also attain success as an
organiser or company promoter.
Second Drekkana (11°-20°).—The financial conditions
will be much better off. He is likely to get considerable
wealth. But care is necessary in matters of speculation.
Generally he will be close-fisted with money. The period,
Jupiter transits Scorpio, Aquarius and Cancer, will be
particularly important in his financial career. He will spend
money on wayward habits unless other favourable
influences prevail. Important years will be as in the case of
the First Drekkana.
Third Drekkana (21°-30°).—In affairs connected with
money, the early life will be much more successful than the
middle one. There will be squandering of money

114 How to Judge a Horoscope
leading to much misery. The career will be marked by
many disappointments. Gambling and speculation should
be avoided. Important years will be 20th, 26th, 32nd, 35th,
40th, 44th and 50th.
Libra or Thula
First Drekkana (1°-10°).—This is a peculiar sign. The
subject may either become a worshipper of Mammon or he
may renounce riches. This depends upon the disposition of
planets in the horoscope. Financial success is likely to
follow in business enterprises, legal and political
occupations. He is also likely to indulge in luxury and an
extravagant style of living. Large schemes of a speculative
nature are. however, harmful. Important years will be 17th,
24th, 31st, 33rd, 40th, 43rd and 57th.
Second Drekkana (11°-20°).- The native will have
sudden financial reverses. Money will be made through
unusual methods, sometimes unscrupulous too. He will get
into trouble on account of misuse of others' moneys. He
will not be much attracted towards ordinary business
routines. Writing will also pay him well provided Mercury
is disposed favourably. He may spend money in unusual
ways. The important years will be 15th, 22nd, 24th, 29th,
31st, 36th, 42nd, 44th, and 51st.
Third Drekkana (21°-30°).—The financial disposition
of the person born in the third Drekkana of Libra will be
generally lucky. As hotel manager and caterer, financial
success may attend him. Music and fine arts will also
attract him. If in service, there will be sudden promotions.
In spite of this, he will labour under disadvantages in the
early years of life. The important years will be 16th, 18th,
23rd, 25th, 27th, 32nd, 39th, 46th and 53rd.

Concerning the Second House 115
Scorpio or Vrischika
First Drekkana (i°-10°).—The monetary affairs are
fraught with uncertainty but when favourable combinations
obtain, the native will amass considerable quantity of
money. Generally, there may be two distinct sources of
income. Business enterprises, journalism and industry will
make the native earn money. Extensive litigation and
powerful enemies will also rise in his path. Speculation will
attract him particularly though much success is not shown
in it. He must avoid over-reaching himself in his efforts.
Stocks, shares and industry will have a special attraction
for him. The important years will be 14th, 22nd, 23rd, 29th,
30th, 40th, 41st and 45th.
Second Drekkana (\I°-20°). — In matters of finance,
the subject will not be too prudent. He will be a dreamer
but sometimes the dreams may become reality. He will
also come under peculiar conditions. He may thrive well in
imaginative occupations. Much depends upon the position
of Jupiter in the horoscope. When he has money he will be
extravagant and when he does not have it, he will adjust
himself to circumstances. Important years will be 25th,
32nd, 41st, 49th, 57th and 63rd.
Third Drekkana (21°-30°).—The subject will get some
good properties. Prudence and caution will mark all his
dealings in matters of money. He rarely trusts people. He
will lose considerable money through robbery and
swindling. Important years will be 22nd, 25th, 33rd, 36th,
Alst, 44th, 49th and 52nd.
Sagittarius or Dhanus
First Drekkana (1°-10°). Saturn will of course be the
lord of the house of wealth. Much depends on how the
subject is disposed. The nature is to rush into schemes

116 How to Judge a Horoscope
without proper consideration. Partnership does not suit him.
He will have two or more sources of income. He is liable to
reversals at about the age of 32. The subject will lose
money through association with fraudulent organisations.
Much care is necessary in the signing of important
contracts, papers, agreements and documents. Important
years will be 19th, 20th, 28th, 29th, 37th, 38th, 46th and
55th.
Second Drekkana (11°-20°).—The native is more or
less a rolling stone, unable to stick to any particular
avocation. There will be a general feeling of uncertainty.
The income will fluctuate. Even if in service, there will be
many vicissitudes. Speculation and gambles should be
avoided. Mining, shipping, transport, metallurgy, factory
labour, etc., will suit him well. The important years will be
20th, 29th, 38th, 40th, 47th, 49th and 56th.
Third Drekkana (21°-30°).—Finances will be generally
sound except in the early part of life. The subject.will make
money in strange and sometimes in quite odd ways. He is
likely to gain by marriage. He will receive sudden legacies,
but this may lead into trouble. Provided the native does not
indulge in speculation, he will amass considerable wealth.
Important years will be 17th, 26th, 29th, 35th, 38th, 42nd
and 49th.
Capricorn or Makara
First Drekkana (1°-10°).—The wealth will be due to
personal merit and, sometimes, it may be due to speculation
also. The subject will have many big plans but they will
seldom succeed. He should be on guard always and not
overtrust others. It promises success in any legitimate
business he may care to go in for. He should try plans and
projects that bring him in contact with the

Conceming the Second House 117
public. Investments connected with mining, precious stones
and crystals and also factories will prove favourable.
Important years will be 20th, 21st, 30th, 31st, 40th, 45th
and 50th.
Second Drekkana (11°-20°).—The native will have a
lot of regard for money. He will spend money on purposes
not worthwhile, while shirking on those that he should
spend. In the latter half of life, he will become overgenerous and will naturally improverish himself. In other
words, he will be difficult to understand. Banking will be
good as also sound investments. The important years will
be 22nd, 24th, 32nd, 35th, 42nd, 45th and 50th.
Third Drekkana (21°-30°).—Undesirable friends will
drain financial resources. Music, literary work, dancing and
other fine arts will be suitable for those born in this
Drekkana. The subject will have to exercise great caution in
money matters. During his early life, he will meet with
many disappointments. But after about the 40th year, he
will be successful. Speculation is not advisable. Important
years will be 26th, 29th, 36th, 41st, 46th, 49th and 55th.
Aquarius or Kumbha
First Drekkana (1°-10°).—Provided Jupiter is well
placed, the native will never feel the want for money. His
earnings will be from different sources—particularly from
journalism, book publication, practice of occult arts,
politics, etc. If Jupiter's disposition is adverse, the monetary
success is likely to be of an uncertain nature, subject to
great mutations and to serious obstacles due chiefly to
relatives and hidden enemies. His generous instincts will
launch him into difficulties. He should be careful and
cautious if in speculation. Gain through co-

118 How to Judge a Horoscope
operation, partnership-association as well as through
marriage is also indicated. There will be a strong desire to
acquire and possess wealth, but money will only be a
means to an end and not an end in itself. The important
years are 16th, 24th. 25th, 29th, 35th, 46th and 57th.
Second Drekkana (11°-20°).—The results given above
will also apply heie. The subject can make money as hotel
manager, restaurant-keeper or mining engineer. He will be
inclined to indulge in luxury and an extravagant form of
life. He is prone to take risks in speculation but will be
successful to some extent. Great opportunities will present
themselves before the native. He should not go in for large
schemes. He will find it difficult to work with others.
Important years will be 15th, 26th, 27th, 37th, 38th, 51st,
58th, 59th and 67th.
Third Drekkana (21°-30°).—Financial conditions will
not be sound. Business will generally be good and the
subject will also do well in artistic lines. During the early
years, he will labour under several disadvantages. He will
have several reverses. He will be unsuccessful in gambles
of any kind. Landed properties will bring advantageous
returns. Important years will be 17th, 22nd, 26th, 33rd,
40th, 44th, 49th, 53rd, 55th and 60th.
Pisces or Meena
First Drekkana (1°-10°)—The subject will get many
opportunities for amassing wealth if he can exercise control
over himself. He will be generous and spend well in the
first half of his life. But after his 45th year, the native will
become miserly. If Mars is in the 8th house he will be
inclined to wreck his good fortune getting involved in
expensive litigation. He will succeed well as healer or
doctor. He will be strongly inclined to specu-

Concerning the Second House 119
lation and will be somewhat successful in such chance
games. He will find success in stocks, shares and industries.
The important years will be 22nd, 24th, 29th, 34th, 38th,
41st, 49th and 56th.
Second Drekkana (11°-20°).—Health will be largely
due to his own efforts. The native will follow a double
occupation. He should be able to make money easily. The
subject will always be craving and will never be satisfied.
Later in life, he may come under uncertain conditions.
Important years will be 20th, 29th, 32nd, 43rd, 47th, 55th
and 61st.
Third Drekkana (21°-30°).—The native will be prudent
in money matters and will hardly trust any people. He will
experience losses from robbery. He will be fortunate in
business connected with risk or chance. He will have many
unexpected changes. He should be careful in signing
documents and important papers. He can expect gain from
unexpected sources. He will be successful in investments as
also in public life. Important years will be 25th, 27th, 28th,
32nd, 37th, 41st, 47th, 53rd and 60th.
A New Method of Examining Financial Prospects
Grades of wealth differ. Wealth has many sections and
will have to be interpreted with reference to locality, time,
circumstances and other surroundings. Ordinarily, we can
recognise three grades, viz., aristocratic, commanding
immense sums ; middle-class people, who have enough to
eat, but not much to spare; and the poorer classes who have
only one meal a day and who are hard-pressed for money.
To this class, of course, belong the overwhelming majority.
They have no houses, no properties, no means to eke out
their existence. Then, there are People, who have no doubt
decent incomes, but whose

120 How to Judge a Horoscope
burden of debts contracted by themselves or their ancestors
become unbearable and who out of false notions of selfrespect, social position and family tradition cannot lead
simple and contented lives. Even the mediocres, who have
enough to eat, can hardly meet extra expenses like
marriages and other family functions. To have a clear
knowledge of the combinations of planets, which produce
all these various stages of financial affluence and
depression, one should possess not only a, good knowledge
of the subject, but also vast experience. The following
simple rule, culled out from an ancient astrological work,
may be tested with advantage by students of astrology :
The seven planets are given the following kalas (rays)
or root numbers :
Sun 30 Kalas Jupiter 10 Kalas
Moon 16 ,, Venus 12” 4;
Mars 6." “55 Saturn l,
Mercury So 35
Take the lords of the 9th from Lagna and the Moon;
add the root numbers of these planets. Divide the total by
12. The remainder counted from Chandra Lagna (the
position of the radical Moon) goes under the name of
Special Chandra Lagna, which for purposes of
convenience, we shall call Dhana Lagna. If a number of
benefics occupy the Dhana Lagna, the person will earn
immense wealth. If there is only one benefic unaspected by
other benefics or malefics, even then, the subject becomes
highly rich. If Dhana Lagna is occupied by pure malefics,
such as the Sun, Saturn or Mars, the person will have
moderate wealth. If the malefic planet is in exaltation, the
wealth will be moderate in the beginning but considerable
later on in life. If the special Dhana Lagna has a benefic
and a malefic, then also the person will be able to command
a

Concerning the Second House 121
lot of wealth. The same rule applies in the case of aspects.
Planets situated in this special Dhana Lagna or aspecting it
or situated in angles or trines from it will also give wealth
in the course of their Dasas and Bhuktis, while those
situated in 3, 6, 8 and 12 from this special Dhana Lagna
will destroy wealth and give unnecessary expenses and
losses.
In Chart No. 49 the lord of the 9th from the ascendant
is Venus and his root number is 12. The lord of the 9th from
the Moon is Saturn and his root number is 1. The total is 13.
Divide this by 12 and the balance is 1. One counted from
Taurus (where the radical Moon is situated) gives Taurus as
the special Dhana Lagna. There are two planets here—both
malefics and aspected by Jupiter. The Moon is exalted. The
native will earn well in Jupiter Dasa as he aspects the
special Dhana Lagna. Since Saturn is a pure malefic, he
will give better financial prospects in the course of his
Dasa. Either in the Dasa of Jupiter or
Chart No. 49.—Born on 8-8-1912, A.D. at 7-35 p.m.
Dhana |
Rahu Cogia ! Saturn Venus
i Saturo j
Rabu
iad Sun |) sun
PENER RASI NAVAMSA
; Mars Moon
Merc. ;/Lagna Merc.
Venus Ketu
oe hs fee (eee ee TN
Jupiter Ketu Jupiter | Mars
Balance of Mars Dasa at birth: Years 6-1-6.

122 How to Judge a Horoscope
Saturn, the Bhukti of the Moon will also prove decisively
favourable from a monetary point of view. Jupiter being
lord of the 8th and the 11th from special Dhana Lagna, his
power to do good is somewhat restricted.
In Chart No. 50 the lord of the 9th from Lagna is Mars.
His Kala or root number is 6 Lord of the 9th from the Moon
is Jupiter and his root number is 10. Total is 16. Dividing
by 12 we get as remainder 4 which counted from Cancer
(where the Moon is) gives Libra as special Dhana Lagna.
Unfortunately, Rahu is there aspected by the Sun, Mercury
and Ketu. Mercury is combust and has lost his vitality.
Ketu's situation has rendered these planets powerless. The
presence of an incendiary planet in special Dhana Lagna is
not desirable. This horoscope belongs to a gentleman, once
an aristocrat, but now reduced to poverty, debts and mental
torture.
Chart No. 50.— Born on 15-4-1883 at 1-30 p.m. (L.T.) Lat.
} Sun, | | a Lagna
Marsi Mercury ; Saturn [Jupit. aes Venus
Ketu | l! Rahu Sun
Venusi Moonl| Sat.
ae RASI aal —___| NAVAMSA |--—-
Lagna| Mars
EE ANELEE = e EE EE
Dhana , Moon
| Lagra Jupiter Ketu
f Rahu
Balance of Saturn Dasa at birth : Years 6-7-24.

Concerning the Second House 123
In Chart No. 51 the 9th lords from Lagna and the Moon
are the Moon and Mars respectively. The total of their root
number is 22. This divided by twelve leaves a remainder of
10 which counted from Pisces gives Sagittarius as Special
Dhana Lagna. A pure maleiic Mars aspects
Chart No. 51.—flora on 7-8-1887 at 1-30 p.m. (L.T.)
Lat. 11° N., Long. 5h. 8m. E.
NAVAMSA ——
Sat.
am [ey
Dhana : ; ly upit. | : Merc.
Lagno| Lagna | Jupiter (Venus Lagna! i Ketu
Balance of Jupiter Dasa at birth : Years 0-2-12.
Dhana Lagna. The native can command lakhs of rupees.
Venus (he is exalted in Navamsa) in the 10th from Dhana
Lagna gave immense wealth in the course of his Dasa.

6. Concerning the Third House
The third house rules brothers, sisters and relatives in
general. It has governance over courage. The third is also
concerned with throat, ears and father's death. In regard to
brothers and sisters, the reference is generally to younger
ones, i.e., those born after the native.
Main Considerations
As usual the factors to be considered in analysing this
house are : (a) The strength or otherwise of the bhava, (b)
the karaka, (c) the lord and occupants. A correct
appreciation of indications of the third house rests upon a
careful examination of these factors.
Results of the Lord of the Third House
Being Posited in Different Houses
In the First House-——Earns livelihood by self-exertion,
becomes vindictive, lean and tall body, brave and
courageous, always sickly and serving others.
When well fortified he will become an expert in
dancing, music and acting, and the means of livelihood will
be primarily fine arts. He will earn a good name as an actor.
Second House.—This is an unfavourable position as it
makes the subject rather unscrupulous unless there are other
favourable combinations. He will make advances on the
women and wealth of others. Likes mean deeds and is
generally devoid of happiness. He is likely to lose his
younger brothers.

Concerning the Third House 125
Third House.—Brave, surrounded by friends, relatives,
blessed with good children, wealthy, happy and contented.
The 3rd lord well disposed in the 3rd, 6th or 11th
indicates a number of younger brothers. When the 3rd lord
happens to be Mars and occupies the 3rd, then, generally,
the native will lose all his younger brothers. Saturn will also
give similar effects. The Sun in a similar position will kill
elder brothers.
Fourth House.—If the lord of the 3rd is in the 4th, life
will be happy on the whole. He becomes rich and learned.
But the wife will be cruel-hearted and mean.
When the lord of the 3rd is well fortified in the 4th and
the lords of Lagna and 9th are rendered weak, his brothers
will survive him. He will have step-brothers if the 9th lord
is strong. When Mars is weak he will lose his lands and he
will have to live in others’ houses. Evil results will be
minimised if the 3rd house is beneficially disposed.
Fifth House.—Much pleasure will not be derived from
children. Financially well off in life. Friction will prevail in
the domestic life.
If the 3rd lord is in the 5th, well disposed, the native
will be highly benefited by his brothers. He will carry on
agricultural operations on a large scale, or he will be
adopted by a rich family. He will also shine well in
Government service.
Sixth House.—Hates brothers and relatives and
difficulty through them. Becomes rich. Maternal relatives
will suffer. Accepts illegal gratifications.
When the 3rd lord is in the 6th, well disposed, younger
brother joins the Army. One of the brothers will become a
successful physician. If the 6th lord also joins

126 How to Judge a Horoscope
the 3rd, the native becomes either a sportsman, physical
culturist or an athlete. When the 6th and the 3rd are both
afflicted, he will suffer from diseases and be tormented by
enemies and he will himself be deceitful.
Seventh House.—May incur the displeasure of rulers
or authorities. Many vicissitudes in life. Much suffering in
childhood. The union will be unfortunate. Danger while
travelling.
When the 3rd lord is in the 7th, well fortified, there
will be cordial feelings between brothers. When the 7th
lord is in Lagna, one of the brothers will settle in a foreign
country and he will help the native.
Eighth House. —Involvement in a criminal case or
false accusations. Trouble on account of death or bequests,
marriage unfortunate, career will not be smooth, victim of
misfortune.
When the 3rd lord is in the 8th, he will suffer from a
serious and dangerous disease and lose his younger brother.
Ninth House. — Fortune will improve after marriage.
Father untrustworthy. Long journeys. Sudden and
unexpected changes in life.
When the 3rd lord is in the 9th, favourably disposed,
the native's brother will inherit ancestral property. The
native himself will be benefited by his brother. When
afflicted, the person will have misunderstandings with his
father.
Tenth House.—A quarrelsome and faithless wife. The
native will become rich. He will be happy and intelligent.
Gain from journeys connected with profession.
When the 3rd lord is in the 10th, all the brother, will
shine well and they will be helpful to him in all ways
Eleventh House——Not a very good combination..
Earnings with effort. He becomes vindictive. The bod)

Concerning the Third House 127
will be unattractive and emaciated. Subservient to or
dependent upon others, and liable to surfer from frequent
attacks of illness.
Twelfth House-—Sorrow through relatives, gets
fortune from marriage, seclusion. Great ups and downs.
Unscrupulous father.
When the 3rd lord is in the 12th, the youngest brother
will be a tyrant. The native becomes poor on account of
him.
These results have to be adapted to suit individual
cases. Though the third house exclusively denotes brothers,
the 3rd lord in different situations gives different results out
of which only a few may pertain to the third house. It is not
easy for beginners to understand the significance of these
principles properly with the result they err in predictions
and bring the science into contempt and disrepute.
When the lord of the 3rd occupies beneficial nakshatras
and Navamsas and is aspected by benefic planets and Mars
is equally well disposed, one will be a man of character and
conviction, brave and straightforward. A friendly 3rd lord
occupying a Trikona from Lagna or Lagnadhipathi
generally assures a family of brothers.
General Combinations
If the lord of the 3rd and the karaka for brothers (Kuja
or Mars) are not placed in the 6th, 8th and 11th houses, are
aspected by or conjoined with benefics and otherwise well
disposed, the native will have many long-lived and well-todo brothers. If good planets reside in 3 or aspect it, he will
get many brothers. The same result may be anticipated if
Mars and third house are also similarly well situated.
Increase in brothers may be

128 Concerning the Third House
expected if the third lord or Mars occupies exaltation, his
own house or Navamsa, or the Navamsas of benefics.
If the lord of the 3rd is an evil planet, if evil planets are
in the 3rd, the native will have very few brothers. If the
karaka for brothers (Mars) or lord of the 3rd is debilitated,
is in combustion or with inimical planets, destruction of the
indications of the 3rd house should be predicted.
If Mars and the lord of the third house are in odd signs,
aspected by masculine planets, the person will have
brothers. If Mars and the third house are in even signs,
aspected by feminine planets, he will have sisters. Even if
the third house is weak, the person will have brothers if it is
associated with Mars and Jupiter.
If Jupiter is in the 11th, the person suffers worry on
account of his elder brother. The elder brother, his
prosperity and his adversity should be judged by a
consideration of the 11th house.
The number of brothers has to be judged by measuring
the number of Navamsas gained by the lord of the 3rd
house, Mars, or the planets in the 3rd, whichever is
powerful. Kalidasa in his Uttara Kalamrita suggests that
the number of elder brothers should be ascertained by the
number of Navamsas passed by the 11th house. The
number of Navamsas (of the 3rd bhava) yet to pass
indicates the younger ones.
Whether one is a coward or a courageous person can
also be known from the 3rd house. If the lord of the 3rd
joins debilitation and has conjunction with malefics, the
person becomes unskilful and timid. If the lord of the 3rd is
with the Sun, the person becomes headstrong and furious; if
with the Moon, he becomes bold in mind ; if with Mars,
powerful and brave ; with Mercury, cautious

Concerning the Third House 129
and chivalrous; with Jupiter, shrewd of mind and bold in
temperament; if with Venus, the person becomes passionate
and enters upon quarrels arising out of his connections with
women ; with Saturn, dull and stupid; with Rahu and Ketu,
the person looks bold and martial outside but will have a
timid heart and weak mind.
If lord of the third is with Rahu or with the lord of the
house where Rahu is, then the person will have fear from
reptiles. Mercury with the lord of third gives throat disease.
Generally evil planets in the third give troubles connected
with throat. Ear defects and deafness should also be
predicted by the presence of evil planets in the 3rd house—
particularly in Dwadasamsa.
Planets in the Third House
The Sun——Makes the person courageous. The mind
becomes resourceful and restive, successful. Bad for
brothers if afflicted. Discredit through letters. Position of
the Sun in the 3rd is one of the strong points in a
horoscope.
The Moon.—Generally changes in occupation are
indicated, fond of travelling and active minded. Wife will
be fair. The subject possesses.good knowledge. Rather
indifferent to spiritual values of life. Subordinate to wife.
Attached to children. If however the Moon is waning,
cruel, miserable, impious and unscrupulous. An
unfavourable position for peace of mind, if afflicted.
Mars.—This position is bad for brothers and sisters.
Liability to danger and accidents by journeys. Brave,
Worried on account of family misunderstandings.
Reckless, pioneering and unprincipled. May be troubled
with ear defects or even deafness. If the house is further
afflicted, it shows thoughts of suicide or violent tendencies.

130 How to Judge a Horoscope
If the third is Capricorn, Aries or Scorpio, the evil effects
will be largely modified.
Mercury.—Will do good deeds for the benefit of others
but he will not himself be happy. The mind is sharp. Fond
of reading and study ; when once he undertakes a work he
does it to the finish and will never get discouraged. Tactful
and diplomatic. He will befriend businessmen and
merchants. He will generally be successful in trade and
speculation. A number of brothers and sisters. Independent
views. Liked by friends and relatives. When Mercury is
afflicted the native is inclined to nervous break-down.
Gain through third house affairs.
Jupiter.—This is also a good position. The mind is
optimistic and philosophical. Will have many good
brothers. Becomes a miser. Does not love family and
children. The body gets heated and he suffers from illhealth. He may be devoid of gratitude if Jupiter is afflicted.
He does not have many friends. Does not take advantage of
opportunities. Adapts himself to conventionalities.
Venus.—The mental quality is good but health will be
poor, lacking in vitality. He will take delight in singing,
music, dancing and fine arts. Financially he will not be very
successful. If Venus is afflicted, miserly, mean, poor and
highly sensual. He becomes funky and interested in
scandals. Brothers will be good. Not much happiness from
children.
Saturn.—Brave and courageous, wealthy, loss of
brothers, eccentric and cruel. Sorrow through brothers ;
honoured by rulers ; may become head or president of local
boards, municipalities, etc. He will protect many people.
One peculiarity of this combination is that success attends
him only after he has suffered disappointments and
reverses. The tendency of the mind is towards gloom,
anxiety and misgivings. The mental condition

Concerning the Third House 131
improves with age. If Saturn is afflicted, the despondency
is likely to run into mental affliction.
Rahu.—Brave for outward appearances. Sudden and
unexpected news. The combination is generally bad for
brothers. He may incur severe criticism on account of his
views and ideas.
Ketu.—Strong and adventurous but funky. Disturbs
the mind with hallucinations.
When the Indications will Fructify
The general principles for judging the results of Dasas
and Bhuktis in reference to the 1st and 2nd houses also hold
good with reference to the 3rd. First take the house, then
the lord and finally the karaka. Planets in association with
or aspecting the lord and karaka will imprint their
characteristics also. Planets occupying and aspecting the
third are also important. Thus (a) the 3rd lord, (b) planets in
association with or aspecting the third lord, (c) planets
situated in and aspecting the third, and (d) the karaka, and
the planets in association with or aspecting karaka, may
influence the third house either as lords of main periods or
as lords of sub-periods.
Consequently, the sub-periods of planets capable of
influencing the third in the major periods of those
connected with the third in any one of the capacities
mentioned above will produce results pertaining to the third
house par excellence. The sub-periods of planets associated
with the third bouse in the major periods, whose lords are
not associated with the third house, will produce results
pertaining to the third only to a limited extent.
Consequently the sub-periods of planets, not associated
with the third house in the major periods whose lords are
associated, will Produce effects pertaining to the third
house, to a limited extent.

132 How to Judge a Horoscope
Predict birth of brothers (or sisters) during the Dasa (or
Bhuktis) of the lords of the 3rd, 9th, 11th and 7th; birth of
brothers may also occur in the Dasa of the lord of the third
or the most powerful of the planets occupying the third.
As in reference to other bhavas, the exact nature of the
results depends upon the ownership, etc., of other planets
connected with the third house. The following results may
be expected in the periods of the different planets when they
have anything to do with the third house :—
The Sun.—Interviews with prominent men, promotions,
access to comforts and rejoicings at home.
The Moon.—The native becomes more courageous,
brothers will be born or they will become prosperous. Gain
of money and landed properties.
Mars —One becomes weak so far as health is
concerned, fame will increase. Finances will improve. If
Mars is afflicted, death of a brother may occur.
Rahu.—On the whole good results will be produced.
Health will improve but there may be some friction in the
domestic life. Reputation and respect will increase.
Jupiter.—Brothers and sisters will be born. The subject
becomes war-like. All his efforts will be crowned with
success.
Saturn.—Disputes will arise with brothers. Financially
the period would prove favourable. If in service, there will
be promotion. Birth of children, access to jewels and new
clothes and good in all respects.
Mercury—Auspicious celebrations, redemption from
debts and machinations of enemies, respect from others;
weddings of brothers and purchase of jewels.

Concerning the Third House 133
Ketuu—Enemies will be destroyed, becomes wellversed in music and dancing. Generally the period will be a
favourable one.
Venus.—All uncertainties will disappear. He takes
interest in music and leads a happy life.
It will be seen from the above that the Dasas of planets
situated in the 3rd will generally produce good results. It is
implied however that such a disposition in the 3rd house is
devoid of any other malefic influences.
In general, the following results may be anticipated
during the Dasa (or the Bhukti) of the third lord subject to
the modification due to the other lordship, association,
aspect, etc.
When the third lord is in the third, there will be birth of
younger brothers (and sisters) ; prosperity will attend the
existing brothers; the next eldest will have his marriage
celebrated.
When the third lord is in the fourth with the fourth lord,
brothers will shine well. The subject will become the head
of a political or scientific organisation and will acquire a
new vehicle. If a student, he will pass in examinations.
When the fourth lord is weak, there will be affliction to
mother, loss of property and destruction of crops (if the
native is an agriculturist). If the third lord is weak, brothers
will cause unpleasantness and losses. The family will break
up and brothers will separate. The man will sustain an
accident by falling from a vehicle. If the third lord is in the
6th, 8th or 12th from the 4th lord in the Navamsa, then
either in the sub-period of the 3rd lord or in that of the 4tb
lord (within the Dasa of the 3rd lord) brothers will die, the
person will be deprived of his conveyance, and he will be
extremely unhappy.
When the 3rd lord is in the 5th with the 5th lord, well
fortified, then the native gets political power as a Minister,

134 How to Judge a Horoscope
provided other Rajayogas function at the same time.
Otherwise, his brother will get a high administrative post.
Or the native will acquire fortune through divine grace.
One would eke out his existence as a dependent or a
servant if the third lord is weak. If the native is a musician,
then there will be considerable influx of fortune generally
through the grace of the rulers. He will be entirely
disappointed in his hopes if the 3rd lord holds an amsa
which happens to be the 6th, 8th or 12th from the Navamsa
of the Sth lord.
The native's brother will become a bitter enemy during
the Dasa (or Bhukti) of the 3rd lord if he joins the 6th with
the 6th lord. Or both will fall seriously ill. If a benefic joins
this combination, the native gets a job connected with the
army. He will benefit by his maternal uncles. When the 3rd
lord is afflicted, status quo would continue. When the lord
of the 3rd is in the 6th and is affected (i.e., associated with
or aspected by) both the lords of the 6th and 12th, then the
Dasa becomes capable of producing Rajayoga results.
There will be acquisition of property, wealth and fame. If
the 6th lord alone joins or aspects, then the person will
suffer from ear trouble.
The native's brother will go to far-off lands, if the 3rd
lord is in the 7th with the 7th lord. When both the lords are
well disposed, the brother will have a happy and profitable
foreign trip. If the 7th bhava falls in a Chara Rasi, the
journey undertaken will be to a distant country. If the
seventh house is weak, the brother will meet with sorrow
and misfortune ; or he will die there. At the time this
misfortune happens to the brother, the native's relations
with his parents will become cordial. By carefully
analysing the seventh house, one can predict second
marriage for the native during this Dasa (or Bhukti).

Concerning the Third House 135
Brother's journey, as indicated above, will not come off if
the 3rd lord is in the 6th, 8th or 12th from the 7th lord in the
Navamsa ; nor does any kind of misfortune befall the
brother. When the 7th lord is weak, the brother will roam
about in distant lands and lead a sinful life.
When the 3rd lord is in the 8th with the 8th lord, the
native will suffer from ear diseases, his enemies will win
and the native becomes miserable and unhappy. There will
be enmity with brothers and other near relatives or death to
one of the brothers. If, however, the 3rd lord is in the 8th
with the 8th lord, and also has the contact of the 6th lord
(either by aspect or association), the native will have
financial gains. The same results can also be anticipated if
the 3rd lord is in the 6th, 8th or 12th from the 8th lord in the
Navamsa.
The native's brother becomes fortunate and prosperous
(in the Dasa of the 3rd lord) if the 3rd lord joins the 9th
house with the 9th lord. Father's property will increase and
the native becomes religious. When the 9th lord is weak,
misunderstandings with father will arise. When the third
lord is weak, the evil results are lesssened.
When the 3rd lord is in the 10th in association with the
10th lord, the person meets with frustration and
disappointments. His daily mode of life will be upset. When
the 10th lord is afflicted, he will become immoral and
commit sins and his brothers take to questionable means of
earning money. When the 10th lord is fortified, one of the
brothers attains distinction in the political field.
When the 3rd lord is in the 11th with the 11th lord, both
the elder and younger brothers will have powerful
Rajayogas. In case the horoscopes of the brothers show a
bad period, then the evil would be mitigated. The brothers
may start a new business venture in articles represented by
their birth constellations. When the third

136 How to Judge a Horoscope
lord is weak, the elder brothers prosper and the younger
brothers suffer strokes of misfortune.
When the third is lord is weak and joins the 12th with
the 12th lord, the younger brother (next to the native) will
die He will meet with a series of misfortunes, will have fear
from enemies, ear diseases and will have to sell or mortgage
all his jewels. There will be mental affliction also. When the
12th house is a movable sign, brother's death will happen in
a far-off country. When the third lord is in Lagna with the
lord of Lagna, there will be increase of prosperity. He will
become proficient in music, becomes self-confident and his
enemies will be vanquished. When Lagna is a feminine
sign, the native may associate with women of questionable
character and earn money through their favours. When
Lagnadhipati is weak and otherwise afflicted, the person's
behaviour becomes scandalous in the public eye.
When the 3rd lord is in the 2nd with the 2nd lord, the
native's brother will die. Mother will be afflicted mentally
and physically. If the 2nd and 3rd lords are well-fortified,
then prosperity to brothers should be predicted.
In predicting results of Dasas or Bhuktis, due attention
must be paid to all shades of influences covering a
particular bhava or house. A lord is capable of conferring
the results of not only the house but those due to karaka
nature of planets joining or aspecting the bhava.
The Third House.—In Chart No. 52 the third house is
Cancer and it is not occupied or aspected by any planets,
benefic or malefic. Hence it is fairly strong.
The Third Lord.—The Moon is the third lord and he is
in the 12th with Rahu aspected by Mars and Ketu. This is
bad. The Moon occupies a benefic Navamsa.

Concerning the Third House 137
Chart No. 52.—Born on 12-2-1856 at 12-21 p.m. (L.T.) Lat.
Moon Lagna
Rahu Lagna | Sat. Jupiter Rake
RASI —— |/-——— NAVAMSA —-
Mats ue
aturn
Ketu Mere. Ketu Venus Moon
| Mars
Balance of Venus Dasa at birth : Years 12-3-9.
Lord of Brothers.—Mars is in the 6th with Ketu ;
Jupiter aspects Mars. In the Navamsa his disposition is not
very good.
Conclusion.—Thus the third house is good, Mars
ordinary and the third lord rather weak. The Moon, lord of
the 3rd, has gained six Navamsas. The native had 6 brothers
(and sisters born) out of whom three died early in life. The
person was extremely resourceful, courageous, skilful,
diplomatic, yet truthful.
The Third House is Taurus (Chart No. 53). Rahu
occupies it. The third is aspected by the Moon, Mars and
Ketu. Rahu's presence is not very auspicious.
The Third Lord.—Venus is in the 7th with exalted
Mercury. Venus gets neechabhanga or cancellation of
debility. Venus is aspected by Jupiter. Mars, Bhratrukaraka, is in the 9th in his own house.

138 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 53.—Born on 24-8-18*0 at 8-44 p.m. (L.T.)
Lat. 13° N., Long. 5h. Win. 20s. E.
Lagna | Rahu Ketu Jupiter | Sun
| Moon
Mere.
| Mars
ach a RASI —— NAVAMSA
. Sun iVenus
Jupit. Sat. Sat. |
PERA E EE ea I!
Moon | | i
‘ Merc. | |
Mars Venus | Lagna Rahu |
Ketu i 1 |
Balance of Mercury Dasa at birth : Years 5-10-25.
Therefore, whilst the third house is not good, the third
lord and Mars are well disposed with the result the native is
blessed with a number of brothers and sisters. The third lord
Venus is more powerful than the planets aspecting the third.
Venus is in the 8th Navamsa—indicating the native will
have 8 brothers and sisters ; out of whom (including the
native) five are surviving. As the third house has more to do
with the feminine planets the native will have sisters. Venus
is in the 8th Navamsa— the 8th from Capricorn. In between
the Ist and 8th Navamsa Mars, Jupiter and the Sun—three
masculine planets—are found. Therefore the number of
brothers is three and the rest, sisters.
The Third House.—Capricorn is the third and Ketu is
situated there (Chart No. 54). This is aspected by the Sun,
Mercury, Rahu, Saturn and Mars—all malefics.

Concerning the Third House 139
Chart No. 54.—Born on 7-8-1887 at 1-35 p.m. (L.T.)
Lat. 11° N., Long. 5h. 8m. E.
i Venus |
Moon Mars Rahu | Mars
SEES ese Es Sin
ere.
| kahu Moon
Sat.
aa RASI i = NAVAMSA
Ketu i Sun Sat.
ret As | Pe
g ' | Merc
Lagna | Jupiter Yenisi Jupit.| Lagna Ketu
Balance of Jupiter Dasa at birth : Year 0-2-12.
The Third Lord.—Saturn is aspecting the 3rd and he is
in conjunction with the Sun, Mercury and Rahu. Mars is in
the 8th (9th bhava) and aspected by Jupiter. Of the three
elements, the third lord is more powerful than the third
house or Mars. The native will have brothers. The third lord
Saturn is in the 2nd Navamsa. The native will therefore
have only two brothers (including himself).
In Chart No. 55, lord of the third Venus is in the 12th
with Mars who aspects the third. Saturn lord of the 6th
aspects the third. Both Mars and Venus are subject to
Papakarthari Yoga. The native is somewhat deaf.
In Chart No. 56, the third house is aspected by Saturn
and the third lord is debilitated in the 6th. The native is
partially deaf.
In Chart No. 57, the third is aspected by Mars and
Venus-lord of the 12th and 6th respectively. The third lord
Moon is aspected by Saturn. From the Moon, the third is
occupied by Ketu. The native is partially, deaf.

140 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 55.—Born on 10-9-1889 at about sunrise.
- Merc
Moon Rabu | Sat.
i Marts! tp ahu Moon
Venus Jupit.
mea RASI Pn NAVAMSA
Sun
Sat. Ketu
Lagna
Mars
K
Fane Merc.||Lagna| Sun
pit.
Venus
Balance of Jupiter Dasa at birth : Years 3-0-6.
Chart No. 56.—Born on 1-6-1895 at 11-42 p.m.
Sun [Merc [jupit Rabu | Sun
Jupit.
Lagna Mars M Mars
Rabu Venus| [908 Venos
eee RASI oe | eami NAVAMSA
Ketu || Sat
Merc.
Satum [Moon Lagna Ketu
Balance of the Sun Dasa at birth : Years 1-6-13.

Conceming the Third House 141
Chart No. 57.— Born on 9-3-1864 at 11-27 a.m.
Moen Ketu Mars | Sun
Lagna
Sun Venus
Merc. Rahu
Soe RASI s=] — NAVAMSA
ven Ketu Sat.
Jupiter { Jupit.
Raho Sat, | Merc. Moon Lagna
Balance of Saturn Dasa at birth; Years 7-0-22.
Thus it will be seen that in the analysis of the different
bhavas great care and caution have to be applied as
otherwise the results are bound to go erroneous. In the
examples illustrated I have purposely refrained from taking
into account the several yogas that may be present in them
as I do not want the readers to get confused. One should
have a good memory, ready powers of analysis and a
capable mind to grasp the varied and conflicting evidence
presented before his mind and draw proper and reasonable
conclusions.
The Third House.—The third is a malefic sign Aries
and is occupied by Ketu, an incendiary planet (Chart No.
58). It is aspected by another malefic Mars, who is the lord
of the house and Jupiter, a benefic, from his own sign. The
first is the bad but the second is good.
The Third Lord.—The ruler of the third is Mars, who is
himself the karaka of brothers. He is in the ninth, a

142 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No- 58—Born on 28-8-1901 at 4-30 p.m. (L.T.) Lat.
ee a ep nie
| Mandi
Ketu Venus Mercury | Sun
Rahu
ais a Se EES
Lagna | | purit
as RASI | i NAVAMSA |--=-
| Sun
ri M
| lies =
Jupit Mars |Veuus |, , | Mars
Sat. Moon Rah Ikeu Lagna Sat.
Balance of Mercury Dasa at birth : Years 12-0-25.
good house and a benefic sign, but ruled by an inimical
planet Venus and is posited with Rahu, an incendiary
planet. In Navamsa he is in the 12th in his own house with
Ketu. He is further afflicted by the powerful aspect of
Saturn placed in a kendra from Lagna. Therefore the third
lord is weak in the horoscope.
Karaka.—Mars is the karaka of brothers. He is
therefore subject to the same afflictions as the lord.
Except for the single benefic influence of Jupiter who
aspects the third house, the house as well as the lord of
brothers come under severe affliction. There by the
indications of the house suffer. The subject of the chart has
no brothers.
The Third House.—The third is Libra, a benefic sign,
and it is unoccupied by any planet. It is aspected by Jupiter
and Mars from the ninth. Of the two the aspect of Mars is
more powerful, as the planetis in his own

Concerning the Third House 143
Chart No.59.—Born on 9-7-1928 at 8-50 a.m. (LS.T.)
| Venus
Moon, Ae Rahu | Sun Lagna Ry ü Venus
Merce. |
J
— RASI i = NAVAMSA —
Merc.
ca Sat Jupit
ee I fn eA Hy Sere aa
Saturn Moon
Ketu Kertu Mars
Mandi Mandi
Balance of Saturn Dasa at birth: Years 12-10-14.
house. The bhava suffers on this account as Mars is a
natural malefic.
The Third Lord.—The lord of the third, Venus,
occupies Gemini, a friendly sign and is Vargottama in the
chart (Chart No. 59). This is good. But in the Rasi he is
with an inimical planet Sun and has become combust. This
makes him weak in the chart.
Lord of Brothers.—Mars the ruler of brothers occupies
the ninth from Lagna which is his own house and is with
Jupiter a natural benefic. In Navamsa he occupies a benefic
but inimical sign and is placed in an evil house with Moon
and Mandi. Altogether his position is fair in . the chart.
Conclusion—Though the karaka Mars is well
disposed, the fact of the ruler of the third becoming
combust and hence powerless, renders the third house
weak. This stands against his having any brothers.

144 Mow to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 60.—Born on 21-10-1896 at6 a.m. (L.T.)
Sat,
Moon Mars] | Ketu | Merc.
Moon
Ketu Jupit.
RASI — ||——/| NAVAMSA
7 Venus
J upit. Mandi
Lagna Lagna
Venus Sun |Merc.|| Suo Rahu
Saturn Mars
Balance of Ketu Dasar at birth: Years 0-9-14.
The Third House.—The third is Sagittarius, a benefic
sign, and is occupied by Mandi and aspected by two evil
planets, Mars and Saturn. This is bad. Jupiter aspects the
third house from the eleventh and this somewhat mitigates
the evil. But still the bhava is not sufficiently strong.
The Third Lord.—The lord of the third is Jupiter and
he occupies the 11th from Lagna in Rasi and is exalted in
Navamsa. This is good. But in ohava there is Jupiter-Ketu
association, and thus Jupiter is rendered weak. Even
otherwise he is afflicted by the powerful aspect of Mars in
Navamsa. As such the third lord is not sufficiently strong.
Lord of Brothers.—The lord of brothers Mars is
posited in the ninth a good house, but is in the sign of an
enemy. Though in a benefic Navamsa, he is with the Sun
aspected by Saturn which is bad. His disposition is not very
good in the chart.

Concerning the Third House 145
Conclusion.—Though Jupiter is well-disposed in the
horoscope, the karaka and the third house are subject to
affliction. The native has no brothers.
Chart No 61.—Born on 29-12-1880 at 10-10 a.m.
i “| Saturn Ketu | | Mars Mercury Rahu
Saturn
ae i a2
‘Lagna
RASI EEEN i pe NAVAMSA -—
Moon Jupit Moon Mandi | 54"
Mars ‘| Ketu | Venus
Balance of Saturn Dasa at birth : Years 4-7-19.
The Third House.—The third house is Aries a malefic
sign and it is occupied by an evil planet, Saturn. Though
the latter is the Lagna lord, he is debilitated. This makes the
house weak in Rasi. In Amsa the indications are no better
as the third is occupied by debilitated Saturn. The only
relieving feature is, the house is joined by Mercury and
aspected by Jupiter. Still the house is not sufficiently
strong.
The Third Lord.—The third lord happens to be Mars,
the karaka. He is posited in a kendra and own sign but his
situation in the 8th from the 3rd and with the ruler of the
6th Moon renders him weak. The planet is aspected by
Jupiter from his own sign but even here it is in

146 How to Judge a Horoscope
name only as Jupiter stands in an evil house from the
bhava—the 12th. Hence the situation of the third lord is not
very good in the chart.
Lord of Brothers.—Mars being the karaka is subject to
the same influences as the third lord.
Conclusion.—The third house is subject to 'Papakarthari' Yoga in Amsa in addition to other afflictions. The
strength of the 'Karaka' is not much. These are adverse
indications denying the birth of brothers.
The Third House.--In Chart No. 62 the third house is
Aries ruled by Mars, Bhratrukaraka. It is not occupied by
any planet but aspected by Jupiter from the eleventh.
Though Jupiter's aspect by itself is good, Jupiter is vitiated
due to contact with Ketu.
The Third Lord.—The lord of the third Mars occupies
the 6th an evil place, where he is not only debilitated but is
combined with the lord of the 6th, viz., waning Moon.
Chart No. 62.—Born on 24-8-1889 at 5-41 p.m.
Jupit.
Rahu Saturn Venus
Sun
_._| NAVAMSA l
Mars
Lagna
gaei Mandi Ketu
Balance of Mercury Dasa at birth : Years 16-8-29.

Conceming the Third House 147
Hence there is considerable affliction to the lord of the
third. The only relieving feature is Mars exalted in
Navamsa, here again aspected by the Sun. These are
decidedly adverse indications.
Lord of Brothers.—Mars, the karaka, is subject to the
same afflictions as the lord.
Conclusion.—Though the third house is somewhat
favourable, as the lord cum the karaka is severely afflicted,
the subject has no brothers.
A Practical Experience
The twelve houses or Dwadasabhavas in a horoscope
comprehend the entire human activities from birth to death.
The considerations involved are complex. It is a very
difficult task for an astrologer to study carefully all the
planetary influences systematically and find out the bencfic
and malefic elements contributed, by the different planets.
Moreover the astrologer has to deal with a human being
who is not a mere combination of physical substances.
Human nature is such an elusive thing that it is hardly
capable of being comprehended by the finite mind of man.
Anyway astrology gives us principles which enable us to
estimate the general worth of an individual and the
prosperity and the adversity that will attend him in his life's
journey. After having studied the various influences
carefully the astrologer must be able to perceive intuitionally the effects and reason cannot enter into the sphere of
intuition.
First House.—The first house indicates the body, the
health in general, personality and character. The Lagna or
ascendant is the actual foundation and on its strong or weak
disposition depends the foundation of the horoscope. If the
Lagna is powerful, even though other malefic

148 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 63——Birth details withheld for obvious
reasons.
Sun
Mandi | Venus
Sat.
Mere. Moon M Mars
Rahu Jupit. gon Ketu
RAST ——! NAVAMSA sw
Sun Ketu| | Rahu
Lagna ‘
Mars Saturn Mercury | Jupiter |Lagna
Venus
Balance of Mercury Dasa at birth: Years 5-1-16.
combinations may be present, the native will have a more
or less smooth sailing of his affairs.
In this case the Lagna is Sagittarius and its lord Jupiter
gets an innate strength of 9.59 rupas. He is by far the
strongest planet in the horoscope and since he is also the
Lagnadhipathi, the foundation is quite sound. Lagna is
occupied by Mars and Venus and is aspected by Saturn.
Thus the determinants of Lagna Bhava are Jupiter, Mars,
Venus and Saturn—the chief being Jupiter ; the secondary
determinants are Mars and Venus while the tertiary
determinant is, of course, Saturn. Therefore these four
planets affect the first house indications as also the Moon
either as sub-lords or lords. In the Navamsa, Lagna is Virgo
and the lord is in the sign of Mars free from affliction. In
the Navamsa also Lagna is not subjected to any malefic
association or aspect. Thus on the whole both the Lagna
and Lagnadhipathi are fairly powerful. In

Conceming the Third House 149
Rasi Lagnadhipathi is aspected by Mars lord of the 5th and
12th and Saturn lord of the 2nd and the 3rd. These aspects
act as a slight blemish.
wa aa age THEM mgema |
mgala vata at: wife fae freee: N
According to this the native will correspond in his look
to the lord of the rising Navamsa; or his appearance will
correspond to the nature of the strongest planet. His
complexion will partake of the colour of the lord of the sign
occupied by the Moon in the Navamsa. In this case —as
between the strongest planet in the horoscope, viz., Jupiter
and the lord of the Navamsa Lagna (Mercury) the former is
more powerful, the person's nature and appearance
correspond to the characteristics of Jupiter. Thus he will be
middle sized with fairly good complexion, and organs
proportionately formed. The disposition of Lagna lifts him
high by his own merits to a position of considerable honour
and celebrity. The Lagna gives him the inclination to taste
the good things of life. As Mars has to do something with
the Lagna he is enabled to exercise authority without
harshness and be firm with a pleasantness of manner.
As the Lagnadhipathi is powerful his health will be
generally good and sound. As Mars is in Lagna with Venus
the constitution will be hot and the tendency later on in life
would be to get piles and other bloody diseases. The same
position of Mars makes him mentally and morally brave.
Other characteristics of the presence of Mars here are he
will be a jolly sort of person, fond of company, rather
passionate, apt to be superficial in thought and profess
knowledge rather than possess it. Venus in the same place
gives him sympathy, agreeable and obliging manners.
Though the situation of Mars in Lagna is quite

150 How to Judge a Horoscope
favourable in its own way, in this case there is a tendency
to suffer from certain physical disabilities. According to the
astrological dicta if Mars is in Lagna, the native will be
injured by an iron staff and suffers from head and eye
diseases. Especially that Mars aspects the Moon, one of the
netrakarakas, this disposition of Mars should be carefully
noted. The native is susceptible to blood-pressure, dizziness
of the head, and the like.
General Observations
The dispositions of Lagna, the Sun and the Moon are
of paramount importance in assigning the true worth of a
horoscope. The Sun rules or represents the Ego, the Moon
tules over the mind and the Lagna rules over the body. In
fact these three form the tripod of life. In this case the Sun
is in Capricorn—a movable and inimical sign which
happens to be the 2nd from Lagna. In Navamsa he is in a
double-bodied or common sign associated with two
malefics. The Sun is fairly powerful having obtained 4.58
tupas as his total shadbala strength. Generally speaking the
situation of the Sun makes the emotions active. The Sun
gives him a magnetic personality. The vitality will be good.
The person carries about him a peculiar charm which
makes those that come into contact with him show their
respect and regard. He will be kind, loving and warmhearted. His impulses are of a generous nature as the Sun is
aspected by Jupiter. In Navamsa the Sun is with Saturn and
Venus but here also he is aspected by Jupiter. This makes
his spiritual life but somewhat clouded in material
attachments. He is independent and detests being dictated
to by others. The situation of the Sun in Navamsa suggests
that there will be a distinct conflict between ideals and
practices. He will no doubt plan his life's activities keeping
in view certain noble ideals. But his

Concerning the Third House 151
environment does not allow him to put into practice what is
dear to his heart in the spiritual life. As Jupiter aspects the
Sun the soul tries to assert its individuality, but it cannot
shake off the shell of attachment. However as age advances
he will live up to his ideals. He inherently possesses faith.
He is ardent and sincere in his affections. Jupiter's aspect
both in Rasi and Navamsa enables him to combine the ideal
with real and the practical with the philosophical. As Mars
is associated with Venus his personal life will be marked by
strong passions.
The Moon's situation in a movable sign makes the mind
wavering and somewhat unsteady. Jupiter's association with
the Moon partially blemished by Saturn's aspect is of very
great importance. This makes him impartial, just, accurate
and aiming to be precise ; persistent and careful and
diligent. The same combination enables him to forget and
forgive and vindictiveness does not find a congenial place
in his mind. Another characteristic of this combination is
that he is more or less self-conscious of what he is.
Exalted Saturn aspects the Moon.
Therefore in spite of his good position Saturn makes
him sometimes melancholic, doubtful and sceptical but
Jupiter restores the equilibrium. He will have a practical
conception of things and Jupiter's association with the
Moon makes him calm, cool and contemplative of things
divine. Inthe Navamsa again the Moon is in Aquarius
aspected by Mars and Jupiter, the former being debilitated.
This makes him homely in habits and attached to family.
Martian influence enables him to show much positiveness
and independence.
It will be seen that both the Sun and the Moon are in
variable signs. It is true that the Moon is very well placed
and that he is in association with Jupiter. But still in Rasi
he is subjected to the aspects of Mars, the Sun and Saturn

152 How to Judge a Horoscope
—all malefics. This makes him somewhat pessimistic. This
does not mean that he lacks self-confidence. He will of
course be bold but on account of the presence of Ketu in the
2nd from the Moon and the presence of the Sun in the 2nd
from the Lagna he will sometimes become petulant. Again,
the Moon's presence suggests that the mind is clear and
quick at apprehending things and assimilating new ideas.
Dhanus or Sagittarius rising gives an exaggerated faith in
human nature. He will be frank, generous, will have more
regard for actions than to their results. Dhanus is a common
sign and Mars being there nspected by Saturn may give him
a somewhat double nature. The sense of justice is keen and
harshness to others amounts almost to a personal injury.
Summing up the results of the dispositions of Lagna, the
Sun and the Moon, we have to observe that the person is
sincere, generous and magnanimous, somewhat ambitious,
and not fond of show or pomp. The native is sensitive,
easily influenced by prevailing circumstances. Emotion
plays a large part. Sense of justice, compassion, kindness
and deep affection are all features well marked in his
nature. Whatever may be general
worth of the horoscope, one drawback seems to be that the
mind is subject to worry. The power of reason and
investigation is strongly marked. Inspirational tendencies
are present. He will have much independence of thought
which is sometimes affected through deep feelings. The
mental and physical abilities are well balanced. He is a selfconscious personality, full of hope, combined with much
industry and perseverance. It will be seen that four planets
are in Chara Rasis. This bestows an active temperament.
Feelings pass quickly into action.
The Second House
The second house represents family, face, right eye,
literary gift, self-acquisition, optimism. Of course, wealth

Concerning the Third House 153
is the important indication of this house. Money matters are
judged largely, but not exclusively by the 2nd house.
Because while the 2nd indicates wealth the source of
earning comes from the 10th and whether one becomes
wealthy or not is judged from the 9th and 11th. Thus a
number of houses have a bearing on wealth. As usual the
2nd lord, the karaka and the 2nd house play a large part in
moulding the financial affairs.
In this horoscope the 2nd lord is Saturn and he is
exalted in the 11th. In the 2nd are placed the Sun as well as
Mercury, lords of the 9th and 10th respectively, and the
whole combination derives the aspect of Jupiter and the
Moon Jupiter the Dhanakaraka is being aspected by Saturn
lord of the 2nd. Thus it will be seen that on the 2nd house
are brought to bear the concentrated effects of the
influences of exalted Jupiter and Saturn and the lords of the
10th and 9th. Jupiter is also lord of Lagna. Thus it will be
seen that the forces of Lagna, the 2nd, 9th and 10th houses
are strongly focussed. The primary determinant of the 2nd
house is of course Saturn while the subordinate
determinants are Jupiter, the Sun, Mercury and to a certain
extent the Moon. Dhanakaraka in this case happens to be
lord of Lagna which is a force to reckon with. Viewed from
the Moon the 2nd lord Sun is in the 7th while the 9th lord,
viz., Jupiter is exalted in Chandra Lagna. The 2nd from the
Moon again receives the aspect of Mercury and Rahu while
Ketu is in the 2nd. In the Navamsa the 2nd lord from Lagna
is in the 10th (of course with the 12th lord Sun). Jupiter's
presence in the 2nd is itself a powerful disposition. From
the Moon the 2nd lord is again Jupiter while Saturn aspects
the 2nd.
All these various dispositions are powerful indeed to
give much wealth and financial prosperity. Saturn is the
most predominant planet to influence the person's financial

154 How to Judge a Horoscope
affairs. The natural tendency is to gain through the lord of
the 2nd. As lord of the 2nd is in the | Ith it promises gain
through co-operation ; a strong desire to get wealth and
possess it is one of the qualities to be found in the person.
This desire will be actuated not so much by selfish motives
but in order to be in a position to live well and spend well
for nobler purposes. Since Saturn is powerful, gain by
labour, responsibility, trading in dark or white metals,
storage, investments and minerals is also indicated. Saturn
has predominantly to do with labour and as he is in the 1 Ith,
gain through employing labour on a large scale will be the
important source of wealth and gains. Since Jupiter is
equally powerful acquisition of wealth through
managements, trusts and bankings can also be expected. The
Moon's favourable disposition in his own house aspecting
the 2nd house signifies earnings from factories and business
where a large number of hands are employed. Mercury is no
doubt powerful in a way as he is in the 2nd with the Sun, the
9th lord. But as he is also with Rahu in the Rasi much
success is not shown in speculation. Some wealth through
chance games may be expected by prudent investments. The
disposition of the 2nd lord (in the Navamsa) in the 10th is
good in its own way: the association with the Sun lord of the
12th is indicative of some sudden financial loss. Financial
losses in this case may also happen through the fraudulent
conduct of others. Gains from totally unexpected sources are
also likely. Investments in coal, shipping and the like would
also prove profitable. The 12th lord's association in Amsa
denotes waste, sometimes over-liberal tendencies and losses
through carelessness, particularly in the major period of
Mars. As Mercury is with Rahu without any relieving
features some loss is foreseen through bursting of
speculative bubbles.

Concerning the Third House 155
Let us examine some of the more important
combinations for wealth. We have already seen that lord of
the 2nd and lord of Lagna are both pre-eminently powerful.
We are specially using the word 'pre-eminently' to stress
its importance. This disposition of the lords of Lagna and
the 2nd assures financial prosperity throughout life and he
will never feel want. Mercury lord of the 7th is no doubt in
the bhava but this indicates no material benefits from the
wife. One of the powerful Dhanayogas is the presence of
lord of Lagna in the 2nd, the 2nd lord in the 11th and the
11th lord in Lagna. In this case this combination is
applicable with a slight modification. Lord of Lagna aspects
the 2nd, the 2nd lord is in the 11th (exalted) and the 11th
lord Venus is in Lagna. This is a powerful combination to
which alone should be ascribed the native's high financial
status.
Most of his wealth will be due entirely to his own
exertions is evident from the fact the planet owning the
Rasi occupied by the lord of the Navamsa in which Lagnadhipathi is placed, is exalted or in his own house. Lord of
Lagna Jupiter is in Libra Navamsa. Its lord Venus is in
Sagittarius and its lord Jupiter is of course exalted and is
himself Lagnadhipathi. This combination also gives power
to Venus—to be capable of producing results pertaining to
finance. From Arudha Lagna Venus is in the 11th house
and this must also give rise to much wealth according to the
dictum.
BY ATW TYAALTAAT: |
Venus is in association with Mars and thereby
transmits some of his power to Mars. Another important
combination for wealth is, Jupiter must reside in the second
or own the 2nd, or aspect the lord. In Navamsa the second
house is occupied by Jupiter and the 2nd lord

156 How to Judge a Horoscope
from the Moon is Jupiter. These have also added
considerably to the financial worth.
One of the most important dispositions is the exchange
or parivarthana in its subtle aspect between Jupiter and
Saturn, the two important planets in this horoscope. It will
be seen that Jupiter is in the constellation of Pushyami ruled
by Saturn while Saturn is posited in Visakha the
constellation ruled by Jupiter. This interchange of
constellations between Ist and 2nd lords is of unique
importance and this suggests the person having earnings
without much effort.
Summing up the above, we have to observe that the
house of wealth is very well disposed. Saturn's presence in
the 11th is highly conducive for a steady flow of fortune.
Mars Dasa would be highly prosperous so far as financial
prosperity is concerned.
Sarwarthachinthamani says that if lord of Lagna is
more powerful than any other planet and joins Jupiter he
will have much self-acquired wealth. According to
Jathakathathwa, acquisition of treasure is likely if the 11th
lord is in the Ist, the 1st lord is in the 2nd and the 2nd lord
is in the 11th. This combination is practically applicable
here and therefore the native is likely to land some treasuretrove also.
The native should be careful about his eyes. The Moon
is no doubt in his own place with exalted Jupiter and the
Sun is no doubt aspected by the same Jupiter. But still
according to the dictum "that if the Moon and Jupiter are
conjoined in the 6th, 8th or 12th, one becomes blind
through excess of seminal effusion", it is likely that the eyesight might suffer as age advances.
Tbe Third House
The third rules brothers and sisters, intelligence,
cousins and other immediate relations.

Concerning the Third House 157
The third house is Aquarius, a fixed sign, occupied by
Mercury (lord of the 7th and 10th) and Rahu and aspected
by no planets. According to bhava, Mercury comes to the
2nd bhava though the results have to be based on the Rasi
position also to an appreciable extent. Lord of the 3rd
Saturn is in the 11 th exalted and of course subject to no
aspects. Mars the karaka for brothers is in Lagna aspected
by lord of brothers and in association with the lord of the
house of elder brother.
If the lord of Lagna and lord of wealth are connected in
anyway with lord of house of brothers, then the relations
between brothers will be cordial and there will be mutual
benefits accruing. In other words, the financial disposition
of the native improves on account of the brothers. From the
Moon lord of the 3rd Mercury is in the 8th—while in the
Navamsa, the 3rd lord is Mars and he is in the 11th from
Lagna. Lagna, the karaka for brothers and lord of the 3rd
are all connected with each other in some way or the other.
All these dispositions indicate that the relations between the
native and the brothers will be generally cordial and there
will be mutual benefits accruing. His own financial
disposition improves on account of brothers. But on
account of the 3rd lord's disposition from the Moon, some
distrust or misunderstanding is possible especially in
Mercury's sub-period within the Dasa of Rahu. The
misunderstandings will be largely due to strings being
pulled by other members of the family. Lord of Lagna being
exalted the native will be noble and generous in his
disposition towards them but they will try to impute
motives to him and take advantage of his kindness. It will
be seen that Rahu is in the 3rd. This is good so far as it
goes. This gives the native courage and boldness to meet
awkward situations and

158 How to Judge a Horoscope
overcome opposition. This will also give him at times
melancholia and morbid tendencies in regard to dealings
with relatives. The position of Rahu shows also a religious
and philosophical mind, kind and sympathetic mentality.
On account of the favourable disposition of Mars, the
brothers will generally be well placed in life. The third
being a fixed sign gives a fixed and determined attitude :
Rahu in this particular position widens the mental vision
add broadens the intellectual view of life. It also raises the
mind to higher thought and prepares the way for altruistic
ideals and mental reforms. It tends to make one a distinct
and unique character especially in mental expression. Rahu
also gives sudden and unexpected journeys and gains
through such travels. In short, there will be cordiality with
brothers, generally speaking, and from a business point,
gain is indicated through association with brothers.

7. Concerning the Fourth House
In previous chapters I have dealt rather exhaustively
with the first three of the twelve houses or bhavas
constituting a horoscope. In astrology, we are used to
regarding each house or bhava as representing or signifying
certain definite functions or events. Often there is a certain
jumbling of the events assigned to a house that a student of
astrology gets somewhat bewildered at the apparent
inconsistency.
The fourth has reference to mother, immovable
property, education, vehicles and general happiness. It
follows as a matter of course that an affliction to the fourth
house may result in the shape of depriving the person of
peace of mind, causing misfortune to his mother, troubles
in regard to property affairs and so on. But in reality, a
person may be educated but may also lose his mother early.
He may command good immovable properties but may not
be happy. Most of us seek to use astrology from a practical
point of view. I have endeavoured to deal with each
signification of a bhava separately. The greatest difficulty
in astrology is to differentiate the different events
comprehended by a bhava. And the procedure adopted by
me is designed to obviate this difficulty to some extent.
Primary Considerations
Before analysing the fourth bhava, one has to carefully
study the general strength of (a) the bhava. (b) the

160 How to Judge a Horoscope
karaka, and (c) its lord and the occupants. Of the various
yogas present in the horoscope, those that have a bearing on
the fourth house should be carefully noted.
We shall first consider the general combinations and
then the effects of planets severally. The fourth, like the
tenth, is a very important house and is in fact the pivot
around which revolve some of the special events affecting
the individual's life.
Results of the Lord of the Fourth House Occupying
Different Houses
First House. - The person becomes highly learned, but
will be afraid to speak in public assemblies. He is likely to
lose inherited wealth. According as the fourth lord posited
in Lagna is strong, middling or weak, the native will have
been born in a rich, mediocre or poor family.
Second House.—He will be highly fortunate,
courageous and happy. He will have a sarcastic nature. He
will inherit property from maternal grandfather.
Third House.—The person will be sickly, generous, a
man of character, and will acquire wealth by self-effort. He
will suffer from the machinations of step-brothers and stepmother.
Fourth House.—Religiously inclined, will have respect
for traditions. He will be rich, respected, happy and sensual.
Fifth House. — Loved and respected by others, devotee
of Vishnu, becomes rich by self-effort. Mother comes from
a respectable family. The native will acquire vehicles.
Sixth House.—Short-tempered and mean, he will have
dissimulating habits, evil thoughts and intentions. He will
always be roaming about.

Concerning the Fourth House 161
Seventh House.—Generally happy ; will command
houses and lands ; will eke out livelihood in distant places
or near his birthplace according as the seventh happens to
be a movable or fixed sign.
Eighth House.—The person becomes miserable. Father
dies early. He will be either impotent or loose in sex-life.
He is also likely to lose landed properties or face litigation.
Ninth House.—Generally a fortunate combination
favouring happiness in regard to father and properties.
Tenth House.—Will have political success. He will be
an expert chemist. He will vanquish his enemies and make
his personality felt by the world. Loss of reputation is
posible if the 4th lord is afflicted.
Eleventh House.— Self-made, generous, sickly, mother
fortunate, but may have a step-mother also. Favours
success in selling and buying cattle and lands.
Twelfth House —Deprived of happiness and properties.
Early death to mother, bad finances and generally a
miserable existence.
It must be clearly noted that these combinations are
very general and they should not be applied verbatim. The
good and bad nature of results ascribed to the fourth lord
occupying a certain house becomes augmented or
minimised according to the strength or weakness of the
fourth lord. The great Satyacharya, for instance, says that
when the fourth lord, subjected to subha vargas or
favourable aspects, is in the third, one acquires very little of
immovable property and that such a fourth lord is also
capable of depriving the person of his meagre possessions,
besides involving him in trouble on account of his
stepmother and step-brothers. If the fourth lord is
moderately afflicted, the evil nature is somewhat
tempered. If the

162 How to Judge a Horoscope
fourth lord is strongly afflicted, there will be an
intensification of the evil results ascribed.
In judging any bhava, one's interpretation must be
intelligent and skilled and not literal.
Important Combinations
Ishall give below some important combinations
pertaining to the fourth house:
If the lord of the fourth house occupies the sixth, eighth
and twefth and has no beneficial aspect, there will be early
death of the mother. The lord of the fourth house in Lagna
and Venus in the fourth, strongly disposed, will confer
vehicles, jewels and wealth. If the lord of the fourth is in a
dusthana or if the fourth house is occupied by Mars or
Saturn, the person will lose his property and wealth. If
Jupiter is in the fourth and the fourth lord joins good
planets, the person will have good friends. One associates
with bad people if the fourth or the fourth lord is subjected
to Papakarthari Yoga. Lords of the second, fourth and
twelfth in kendras and thrikonas ensure smoothness in
affairs pertaining to property and houses. The fourth lord in
Lagna or in the seventh gives one a house without any
difficulty. Lord of the fourth in the eighth, afflicted or
debilitated, deprives the person of his lands and houses. If
there is Parivarthana (interchange) between the lords of the
fourth and tenth, one gets lands. If the lords causing
Parivarthana are extremely strong, and attain Gopuramsa,
the person may even become a ruler. Parivarthana Yoga
between the fourth and sixth lords favours getting lands
from enemies, by right. Jupiter weak and evil planets in the
fourth render one unhappy with wealth. The person loses
lands by royal or Government orders if the lord of the fourth
is neecha with Sun. One becomes a great sinner if many
evil planets are

Concerning the Fourtn House 163
in the fourth and the fourth lord is in an enemy's house. If
the fourth lord is weak, debilitated and joined by evil
planets and Lagna is in a watery sign, the person falls in
water. The person will be drowned if the weak lord of the
Lagna is in the fourth, which should be a watery sign. The
Sun and Mars in the fourth give wounds from stones. The
Moon in the fourth joined or aspected by evil planets kills
the mother early. The person will be reserved if the fourth
is occupied by evil planets, or if Mars, Saturn or Rahu is in
the fourth without good associations. The native's heart will
be clean if Jupiter is in or aspects the fourth. He will be a
hypocrite, sweet in words but dangerous at heart if Rahu,
joined or aspected by evil planets, is in the fourth. He wins
the affection of mother if lord of Lagna and the fourth are
friendly, and are otherwise beneficially disposed. There will
be enmity with mother if the fourth lord is in the eighth
from Lagna or from lord of Lagna. if the strong lords of the
fourth and ninth aspected by Jupiter are disposed in
kendras (angles) or konas (trines), there will be favours
from royalty. One gets commission in the army if the
fourth lord is with Mars in favourable disposition.
Planets in the Fourth House
The Sun.—This combination is said to make one
generally unhappy and mentally worried. He will be roaming about. The position promises some inheritance. He will
have interest in occult and philosophical studies. In the
political Geld success is difficult. Obstacles in life are
shown if Saturn or Mars aspects the Sun.
The Moon.—Possesses house; derives happiness from
relatives ; will be cheerful and contented ; becomes
important as a leader or ruler ; proud and somewhat
quarrel-

164 How to Judge a Horoscope
some. The position indicates early separation from the
mother if the Moon is afflicted ; will be fond of sensual
pleasures, unless aspected by Jupiter.
Mars.—This is generally a bad combination. The
person will be deprived of happiness from mother, relations
and friends, but will have success in the political line.
There will be quarrels with mother and domestic affairs go
awry. If Mars joins Rahu or Ketu, the man will have a
tendency for suicide. The person will own houses but will
not be happy on that account.
Mercury.—Shines well as an educationist or diplomat.
He will boldly criticise the Government. He will be held in
great esteem. Father will be a self-made man. He will
command a good conveyance. He will have taste for music
and other fine arts and will frequently travel to far off
countries. He will be witty in speech.
Jupiter.—Philosophically inclined, learned, happy,
possesses the favour of the ruling class; a terror to his
enemies; religiously inclined, respected and fortunate ;
peaceful domestic environments ; great spiritual
advancement.
Venus.—Well versed in music, polished manners, deep
attachment to mother, many friends, conveyances and
houses; religious by inclined : successful achievement of
desires. This is a favourable yoga for affairs of a domestic
nature, concord and happiness.
Saturn.—Sickly during early years; deprived of mother
and unhappy ; suffers from windy and phlegmatic
complaints; lethargic temperament; will not inherit any
property ; will have troubles from houses and vehicles;
disliked by relatives; desire to live a very secluded life;
unfavourable for domestic or family affairs, unless
beneficially aspected or associated.

Concerning the Fourth House 165
Rahu.—Foolish in behaviour; few friends; will be
subjected to fraud ; or guilty of fraudulent action.
Ketu.—Will be deprived of mother, properties and
happiness; lives in a foreign place. There will be
exceptional experiences at the end of life. There will be
reversals and sudden changes.
It will be seen that the nature of results supposed to be
given by the Sun and other planets remaining in the fourth
house gets modified by the aspects and conjunctions of
other planets. If the Sun is strengthened, there will be
financial benefits by inheritance; if afflicted, there will be
trouble through political sources. If the Moon is fortified,
that is well aspected or conjoined, the person will have
mental peace. If afflicted, adverse changes are denoted. If
the afflicted planet is Saturn, the mother dies early. If Mars
is the afflicted planet, there will be loss through theft,
deception and even litigation. Affliction of Mars always
denotes some tragic developments in the personal life,
quarrels, strife and misunderstandings. If Mars is involved
in benefic association or aspect, there will be a certain
amount of tempering of the evil. Mercury afflicted denotes
mental distress, frauds and misery. Well disposed, it is a
good position for intellectual and literary attainments.
Jupiter afflicted causes hardships and obstacles. Well
fortified it is a sure indication of prosperity in regard to all
the events of the fourth house. The person will have a
peaceful home-life. Venus in affliction denotes looseness in
morals and abuse of artistic talents. Venus well fortified is a
great asset for the horoscope. It indicates a bright career as
an artist. Saturn's position in the fourth, unless he is
Lagnadhipathi, is not favoured. It deprives the man of peace
of mind and the affection of the mother. The person likes
a secluded life. An affliction

166 How to Judge a Horoscope
by Mars indicates a sudden downfall. It is also a
combination for insanity. Rahu-Mars or Ketu-Mars
affliction shows tragedy or violence. Rahu-Saturn or KetuSaturn affliction may denote mental disorder, hysteria and
even insanity. In all these cases, a careful weighing of the
pros and cons of the affliction or fortification is absolutely
necessary. No slip-shod interpretation should be made and
a premature conclusion arrived at.
Time of Fructification of the Results of the Fourth House
Each bhava must be studied not in an isolated manner
but as having a bearing on every other part of the
horoscope. This collective approach is absolutely necessary
if we have to understand the true significance of a bhava.
The factors governing the fourth house are (a) the lord,
(6) planet or planets aspecting the fourth house, (c) planet
or planets posited in the fourth, (d) planets aspecting the
lord of the fourth, (e) planet or planets in association with
the lord of the fourth, (f) the lord of the fourth from the
Moon, and (g) the karaka of the fourth bhava.
The factors suggested above may influence the fourth
house, that is give rise to the results of the fourth house, (a)
as lords of Dasas (periods), as lords of Bhuktis (subperiods), or as lords of the still minor divisions of the Dasa
scheme. It must be noted that the sub-periods of the planets
capable of influencing the fourth, in the major periods of
those capable of influencing the fourth, produce results
pertaining to the fourth house par excellence. (2) The subperiods of planets, associated with the fourth house in the
major periods of planets, not associated with the fourth
house, will give rise to results pertaining to the fourth house
only to a limited extent. Similarly, the sub-periods whose
lords have nothing to do with the fourth

Concerning the Fourth House 167
house, in the major periods whose lords are associated with
the fourth, will produce effects pertaining to the fourth
house only to a limited or even nominal extent. It must be
noted that the term "association or associated" used in this
context connotes aspect as well as conjunction.
Where a lord is involved in a Raja yoga or Arishta
yoga, the lord is capable of producing in his Dasa or Bhukti
the Raja yoga or Arishta yoga results, so far as they relate
to the fourth house. Let us assume that a Rajabhanga
Neecha Yoga is caused by the lord of the fourth. During his
Dasa or Bhukti, he can bring about the destruction of the
Raja yoga so far as the fourth house indications go. If a man
owns houses and cars, he may lose them. If he has
properties, they may be auctioned.
The Nature of Results
The general principles enunciated in regard to the three
Bhavas dealt with in the previous chapters hold good for the
fourth house also. In general, the following results, subject
of course to the peculiarity of the individual horoscope
concerned, may be anticipated in the Dasas and Bhuktis of
the planets capable of influencing the fourth house in the
various capacities mentioned on page 14.
The fourth lord strongly placed in a kendra or thrikona:
Acquisition of knowledge, lands, houses and happiness.
The native will take to agriculture, dig wells and lay out
fine gardens. If the fourth lord joins the fifth lord in the fifth
or there is Parivarthana between the fourth and fifth lords,
the native gets political fame. He will enter the Parliament,
and get the post of a speaker ; earns plenty of money and
inherits properties. In the sub-

168 How to Judge a Horoscope
period of the fourth lord, there will be birth of a son. When both
the karaka and the lord are strong, he will definitely get the grace
of the rulers. When the fourth lord is in the sixth, eighth or
twelfth, the native will experience contrary results in the subperiod of the fourth lord. If the Lagnadhipati is afflicted, there
will be an endless source of trouble from the authorities. He will
lose his property and become a victim of the ruler's wrath. Where
both the fourth and fifth lords are weak, the results described
above will happen nominally.
When the fourth lord is in the sixth with the sixth lord and
the karaka is strongly disposed, the person will acquire lands
during the Dasa of the fourth lord. He will have happiness from
mother, acquisition of knowledge. When the fourth lord joins the
seventh lord in the seventh, the native will reside for some time in
a foreign place and acquire lands and wealth. If the fourth lord
occupies a Navamsa which is the sixth, eighth or twelfth from the
Navamsa held by the seventh lord, there is likelihood of death
also. The person will definitely lose his property, vehicles and
cattle or will involve himself in litigation in the Dasa of the fourth
lord, if the fourth lord is in the eighth with the eighth lord. The
mother will fail ill or die. There will be an end to education. The
evil gets mitigated if in Navamsa, the fourth lord occupies the
sixth, eighth or twelfth from the eighth lord.
When the fourth lord is in the ninth with the ninth lord and
the karaka is equally well disposed, the person gets sudden
fortune and wealth in the Dasa of the fourth lord. In the
Navamsa, if the fourth lord is in the sixih, eighth or twelfth from
the ninth lord, contrary results will happen. If the fourth lord is in
the tenth with the tenth lord and is otherwise strong, the person
becomes a

Concerning the Fourth House 169
Minister or a high placed Government servant. If Mercury
happens to be lord of the fourth or tenth, there will be
access to wealth through trade and business channels. One
will earn in trade and commerce if the fourth lord is in the
eleventh with the eleventh lord. If the fourth lord occupies
the sixth, eighth or twelfth (in Navamsa) from the position
of the eleventh lord, there will be losses. The earnings or
losses will be from sources appropriate to the natures of the
planets concerned. If the fourth lord is in the twelfth with
the twefth lord, the person will have mental worry, loss of
cattle, misfortunes to mother and involvement in troubles.
The evils will be somewhat tempered if the fourth lord is
more powerful than the twelfth lord.
Health, spiritual progress, happiness from father, new
friendships, agreeable food are the results conferred in the
Dasa of the fourth lord in association with Lagnadhipati or
Navamsa Lagnadhipati.
As we have seen above the fourth has reference to
mother, happiness, acquisition of learning and vehicles and
immovable properties. I propose to deal with each of these
items separately for purposes of studying example
horoscopes.
Vaidyanatha Deekshitar wants us to look to the fourth
house and Jupiter for judging happiness; the Moon and the
fourth for mother ; for vehicles and ornaments Venus and
the fourth bhava. By studying a number of illustrations, it
would be possible for any student of astrology to formulate
for himself astrological principles governing the analysis of
the fourth bhava in all its details.
Mother
Mother's long life should be estimated by the strength
of the fourth house and the fact of the Moon occupying a

170 How to Judge a Horoscope
benefic sign in a kendra and aspected by benefic planet. It
is also possible to anticipate the longevity of the mother by
considering the fourth house or Matrukaraka as the
ascendant of the mother and studying the strength or
otherwise of the eighth house therefrom. Generally when
the lord of the fourth is in the sixth or twelfth, weak, and
the Lagna is joined by a malefic, there will be early loss of
mother. The following combinations may also be noted:—
(i) Waning Moon in association with a malefic in
the sixth or eighth house. (ii) Saturn in
the fourth with the Moon.
The Fourth House.—The fourth has two planets, Saturn
and the Moon in Chart No. 64. Saturn's presence in the
fourth is good as lord of Lagna and bad as a natural malefic.
The affliction is heavy because of association with the
Moon lord of the sixth. The fourth is
Chart No. 64.—Born on 8-8-1912 A.D. at 7-35 p.m. (I.S.T.)
Rabu erin Satum | Venus
Sun
Lagna Sun Rahu
Jee RASI SAn NAVAMSA
Mars | | Merc.
Merc. | Lagna Moon
Venus | Ketu
Jupiter Ketu Jupiter | Mars
Balance of Mars Dasa at birth: Years 6-1-6.

Concerning the Fourth House 171
aspected by Jupiter. The aspect is good because Jupiter is a
natural benefic and bad as Jupiter is a malefic for Aquarius
Lagna. The fourth house is fairly strong.
Matrukaraka (Lord of Mother)—The Moon owns the
6th and hence afflicted. Matrukaraka's association with
Saturn here gives rise to considerable affliction though
there is a little relief due to Jupiter's aspect. Above all, the
karaka for the mother in the appropriate bhava is not a
happy combination.
The Fourth Lord.—The. lord of the fourth Venus is in
the 4th from the bhava in association with two malefics
Mars and Mercury and hemmed in between the Sun and
Ketu. In the Navamsa also the fourth lord Venus is
considerably afflicted on account of the aspect of Mars.
Considered from the Moon.—The fourth lord Sun is in
the twelfth from the fourth subjected to the aspects of
Saturn and Jupiter, the latter being evil by virtue of the
eighth and eleventh lordship from Chandra Lagna. The
fourth is hemmed in between malefics and joined by three
planets.
Summing up, the fourth house as such is not weak but
Matrukaraka is definitely afflicted indicating early death to
mother.
The following planets can give the results of the fourth
house with special reference to mother :—
Moon—as Matrukaraka.
Saturn—as an associate of Matrukaraka.
Jupiter—as aspecting Matrukaraka.
Venus—as lord of fourth house.
ae and Mercury—as associating with fourth
ord.
In Chart No. 64 all the above planets can influence the
fourth house either in their Dasas or in their Bhuktis. Since
the longevity of the person is about 75 years, Mars,
nA BWN eS

172 How to Judge a Horoscope
Jupiter, Saturn and Mercury can influence—both as mjaor
and sub-lords while the Moon and Venus can give the
effects of the fourth house only as sub-lords. Theoretically
speaking, the mother could enjoy Rajayoga results when the
native undergoes Saturn Dasa, as Saturn would be a
yogakaraka for the fourth bhava. Equally beneficial results
could be anticipated for the mother when the native enjoys
Mercury Dasa. But because there are no combinations for
the long life of the mother, Saturn and Mercury influencing
the fourth bhava as major lords are ruled out. Nor could
they confer the beneficial results on the mother as sub-lords.
Mars, it will be seen, is a maraka from Matrukaraka and
joins Mercury who happens to be a maraka for the sign held
by Matrukaraka. Consequently death of the mother can be
expected. Saturn joining Matrukaraka can bring about the
destruction of the mother. Moreover, the native at birth was
passing through sadeChart No. 65—Born on 16-11-1914 at 5 p.m. (Lat.
Lagna Sat. Mandi
Mandi
| Moon Ketu
Renu Merc. Sun
es RASI e NAVAMSA Sas
i Sat. Lagna
Jupit. Ketu lip ahu Jupit.
Sua Moon |
Mars Mercury Venus Mars
Venus |
Balance of Rahu Dasa at birth: Years 6-7-28.

Concerning the Fourth House 173
sathi. All these accelerated the death of the mother which
took place in Mars Dasa, Saturn Bhukti.
The Fourth House.—In Chart No. 65 the fourth is
Cancer a movable sign and is devoid of any benefic or
malefic associations. The fourth is aspected by debilitated
Jupiter.
Fourth Lord.—The fourth lord Moon is in the seventh
with MercuTy lord of the third and sixth and hence
blemished.
Matrukaraka.—The fourth lord is also Matrukaraka in
this horoscope. The blemish attached to the fourth lord
applies to Matrukaraka.
Rahu is in the fifth from Matrukaraka Moon. Rahu
being a shadowy planet should give the results of Mars
whose star he occupies, Mars in turn not only owns the
second and seventh maraka but is actually situated in the
second from Matrukaraka in association with the Sun lord
of the second from Matrusthana and Venus lord of the
eighth from Matrukaraka. Venus owns the eighth from
Matrukaraka and occupies the second. Hence mother's death
look place in Rab,u Dasa, Venus Bhukti, Venus Antara.
Conclusion.—The fourth house is moderately strong,
but the lord and the karaka are considerably afflicted.
Hence the native lost his mother very early.
Fourth Bhava—lIn Chart No. 66 the fourth is Virgo a
double-bodied sign. It is occupied by the Moon, lord of the
second and Saturn lord of the eighth and ninth. It is
hemmed in on either side by malefics. From Chandra
Lagna, the fourth lord Jupiter is in the eighth with Rahu.
The fourth house is moderately strong.
Fourth Lord.—Fourth lord Mercury is in the twelfth
from the fourth in association with the Sun. Mercury is
further aspected by exalted Mars lord of the sixth and

174 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 66 —Born on 25/26-8-1892 at 2-30 a.m.
Rahu | Lagna | Teens Mars
DIE) venus! | 5at | Ketu | Jupiter Venus
Sun
Mandi Moon
Merc.
RASI OS NAVAMSA Į—
Sun Mandi
Merc.
M
Ketu Sa | Rahu -
Balance of the Moon Dasa at birth: Years 1-5-27.
eleventh and Jupiter lord of the seventh and tenth. The
fourth lord is therefore rendered weak.
Matrukaraka.—The Moon is in Matrubhava (4th
house). This is dennitelv injurious to the mother. He has
joined Saturn, and is subjected to Papakarthari Yoga.
Conclusion.—Combinations for mother's longevity are
not good. Rahu occupies eighth from Matrukaraka and has
joined Jupiter as maraka from Matrukaraka. Consequently
the mother died in Rahu Dasa Jupiter Bhukti.
It will be seen that Chart Nos. 64 and 66 have both
Saturn and the Moon in the fourth. Jn Chart No. 64 mother
died in Mars Dasa Saturn Bhukti, in the second year of the
native whereas in Chart No 66 mother lived up to the 13th
year of the person. In view of the affliction of the Moon to
the sameif not to a greater extent as in Chart No. 64 it
is reasonable to expect the death of the

Concerning the Fourth House 175
mother in Moon Dasa itself. But because the Moon in this
case is in his own constellation, he could not cause the
death of the mother in his own Dasa (period). In Chart No.
64 on the other hand the Moon is in the constellation of
Mars, a maraka or death-producing planet (from
Matrukraka aod Matrubhava) and the mother died in the
Dasa of Mars. According to Satyacharya, the fact of a
planet being situated in a particular constellation is of
paramount importance especially in the matter of predicting
significant events.
Chart No. 67—Bornon 19-2-1900 at 10-24 a.m.
‘a Lagna Ketu | Mandi |Merc. | =
Sun |
Mars Rahu Sat. |
Merc. | j
E RASI LI —] navamsa |——
Ketu
— =l eee
Sat. | Jupiter | Moon | Sun Venus | £288 Imoon
Rabu | ie pit h
Balance of Mars Dasa at birth : Years 3-9- 8.
The Fourth House.—The fourth house is Cancer a
movable sign. It is aspected by Jupiter lord of the ninth and
twelfth. The fourth house is not occupied by any Planet.
From Chandra Lagna, the fourth is occupied by Saturn. In
Navamsa, the fourth is aspected by Saturn and Mars. The
fourth house is not strongly disposed.

176 How to Judge a Horoscope
The Fourth Lord.—The fourth lord Moon is in the
sixth. He is aspected by Venus (lord of the second and
seventh), Mars and Saturn, two first-rate malefics. The
fourth lord from Chandra Lagna is in the twelfth from the
fourth. In the Navamsa, the Moon is subjected to
Papakarthari Yoga and in the Rasi he is aspected by Saturn
and Mars. The fourth lord is on the whole weak.
Matrukaraka.—The fourth lord happens to be
Matrukaraka also. Hence Matrukaraka has all the weakness
of the lord.
Conclusion..— The karaka and the lord being very
weak, the mother's longevity is poor. Rahu is in the third
from Matrukaraka and has joined Jupiter a maraka from
Matrukaraka. Consequently, the mother's death took place
in Jupiter Bhukti Rahu Dasa.
Chart No. 68.— Born on 13-10-1896 at 7-56 a.m.
i Sat.
Mars | | Mandi] Ketu Venus Lagna
Merc.
Rahu Jupit.
ikiss RASI —— NAVAMSA
Maidi Jupit
Sas Ketu
| Lagna 5 M
Moon Saturn Pai Mars oon | Sun
Venus ere Rahu
Balance of Venus Dasa at birth : Years 5-2-12.
The Fourth House.—The fourth house is Capricorn a
malefic sign free from occupation. The fourth is however
aspected by Mars.

Concerning the Fourth House 177
Fourth Lord.- The fourth lord Saturn is exalted in
Lagna. He is in association with Venus lord of Lagna and is
otherwise free from affliction.
Matrukaraka.—The Moon is in the third, a benefic
sign, unassociated but aspected by Jupiter lord of the third.
This benefic disposition is more than counterbalanced by
the combined aspect of two first-rate malefics, viz., Saturn
and Mars. In the Navamsa again, the Moon is associated
with Rahu and subjected to Papakarthari Yoga. Moreover,
Matrukaraka is in a place which happens to be the 12th
from Matrusthana. Consequently Matrukaraka is
considerably afflicted.
Conclusion.—The aspect of Saturn, as lord of the
fourth, on Matrukaraka Moon could have been construed as
beneficial but for the fact Saturn happens to be a natural
malefic. The fourth is moderately strong. Matrukaraka is
feebly strong. The fourth house is considerably afflicted.
Chart No. 69.—Born on 10-2-1909 at 11-33 a.m.
| Venus
Lagna Rahu || Mars Ketu
DE pen)
Moon
RAS! mam || | NAVAMSA ee
Jupit. |) Mandi
TEER H PEIES | eee es Be
: Lagna
Mandi Mercury
Mars Moon Saturn Jupiter Sun
Rahu
Balance of Moon Dasa at birth - Years 0- 1-11.

178 How to Judge a Horoscope
Consequently the person lost his mother in his 16th year in
Moon Dasa Saturn Bhukti.
Fourth House.—In Chart No. 69 the fourth house is
Cancer a benefic sign. It is unoccupied, but aspected by
malefic Sun lord of the 5th and a benefic Venus. In the
Navamsa the fourth is aspected by Saturn, lord of the
fourth. The fourth house is therefore moderately strong.
Fourth Lord.—The fourth lord Moon is in the 6th in a
benefic sign but is aspected by Saturn. Hence blemished.
Matrukaraka.—Since the fourth lord is also Matrukaraka, the blemish attached to the fourth lord is equally
applicable to the Matrukaraka.
Conclusion.—The fourth house is moderately strong.
But the lord cum karaka is considerably afflicted The
mother died at the age of 9 in Rahu Dasa Rahu Bhukti.
Mark the disposition of Rahu in the twelfth or house of loss
from Matrusthana.
Chart No. 70.— Born on 25-9-1898 at 7-30 a.m.
: Ketu
Lagna | Mandi Mars] Sun Moon |Yenus
i Ketu
i Mars
——-— | RASI oe NAVAMSA —_
Lagna
Moon Merc. Jupit.
Mandi
i Sun Mercury |
Rahu | Saturn i Venus Jupit. Saturn | Rahu
Balance of Moon Dasa at birth : Years 6-7-2.

Concerning the Fourth House 179
Fourth House.—In Chart No. 70 the fourth house
Cancer is unoccupied by any planet, good or bad. It is
aspected by the fourth lord Moon. This is good so far as
general indications of the fourth house are concerned. In
the Navamsa, the fourth house is considerably afflicted by
the presence of Saturn and aspect of Mars.
Fourth Lord.—The fourth lord Moon is in Capricorn a
malefic sign, aspected powerfully by Saturn and Mars—
two first-rate malefics. Jupiter's aspect is a relieving feature.
Matrukaraka.—As the Moon Matrukaraka himself
happens to be the fourth lord, he is subject to all the
afflictions of the fourth lord.
Conclusion.—The fourth house is moderately strong.
The fourth lord and Matrukaraka are considerably afflicted.
The mother died in the 18th year in Moon Dasa Sun
Bhukti. Mark that Sun the sub-lord owns the 2nd from
Matrusthana and occupies the 3rd.
Chart No. 71.—Born on 5-7-1886 at 10-32 p.m. (L.M.T.)
‘ Sun} r
| Sun Ibn it. I
© Venus | cap Fea Mars | Venus gue
| Saturn |
Mere |
RASI —— NAVAMSA a
Moon
Rahu Moon
| Mars ;
| Jupit Mercury Rahu
Balance of Venus Dasa at birth : Years 17-8-3.

180 How to Judge a Horoscope
The Fourth House.—In Chart No. 71 the fourth is
Taurus, a benefic sign. It is occupied by its own lord Venus
and further aspected by benefic Jupiter. In the Navamsa the
fourth is occupied by Rahu but aspected by Jupiter. The
fourth house is therefore fairly strong.
The Fourth Lord.—As the fourth lord is in the 4th, he
is subject to all the benefic influences of the fourth.
Matrukaraka.—The Moon is in Leo in conjunction
with Rahu. The Moon is further aspected by Saturn and
hence considerably afflicted.
Conclusion.—The mother lived till the 36th year of the
native on account of the general strength of the fourth house
and fourth lord. The Matrukaraka Moon, who is the primary
indicator of the mother, is considerably afflicted. Mother's
death took place in Mars Dasa, Saturn Bhukti. Mark that
Mars happens to be a maraka from the 4th house and
occupies a maraka place from the Moon,
Chart No. 72.—Born on 10-4-1910 at 8-38 p.m.
ee Mars Sun Mercury |Moon
Sun ae | Rahu Rahu Saturn [Jupit.
jMereury
Salt _ 3
nee Mandi Lagna!
— i RASI ——-]}/-—_— | NAVAMSA =
| Venus, Mars
“Lagna |
Ketu Jupit. i Ketu
| Mandi i
Balance of Ketu Dasa at birth : Years 2-1-25.

Concerning the Fourth House 181
and Saturn occupies a maraka place from the fourth house.
The Fourth House.—In Chart No. 72 the fourth is
Aquarius, a malefic sign. It is occupied by natural benefic
Venus and aspected by no planet. The fourth is not
blemished.
The Fourth Lord.—Saturn is the fourth lord. He is
neecha in the 6th and is associated with two malefics Moon
and Mercury and subjected to a powerful Papakarthari
Yoga.
Matrukaraka.—Since Matrukaraka Moon is in the same
sign as Saturn, he (Moon) is subject to all the afflictions as
Saturn. In addition, the Moon is with a malefic Saturn.
Conclusion.—The fourth house is unblemished. The
fourth lord and Matrukaraka are both considerably afflicted
with the result the mother died when the native was aged 3
in Venus Dasa Venus Bhukti. Venus happens to be a
maraka for the sign containing the Matrukaraka and the 4th
lord.
Chart No. 73.—Born on 5-1-1891 at 12-30 p.m.
Lagna | Rahu | Mandi! | Merc. Mars |Lagna
Mars Moon Rahu
i RASI — h| NAVAMSA E
or | Sat. || Ketu Jupit.
upit.
aie i |
! andi
| Sun | Venus | Moon Sun |
| Venus i
Balance of Rahu Dasa at birth : Years 6-0-27.

182 How to Judge a Horoscope
The Fourth House.— In Chart No. 73, Cancer the
fourth house is not occupied by any planet, good or bad. On
the other hand, it is aspected by debilitated Jupiter and
Mercury. In the Navamsa also, the fourth is aspected by
Mercury who has obtained neechabhanga. Consequently the
fourth house is fairly powerful.
The Fourth Lord.—The Moon, lord of the fourth, is
Matrukaraka also. He is in Libra, a benefic sign but
aspected powerfully by Saturn.
Conclusion.—The fourth house is not much afflicted,
but the lord and karaka are moderately blemished. The
native lost his mother in Saturn Dasa Venus Bhukti. Saturn
is in a maraka from the fourth and Venus is in a maraka
from the Moon.
Chart No. 74.—Born on 21-7-1900 at 10-38 a.m.
Ketu
Lagna! Mandi | Mars |Venus a Mandi ties
Moon enus :
Sun
Merc.
Mere. 7 |
ae RASI —-—]!|——-| NAVAMSA on
Lagna Mars
Jupiter 3 |
Sat. Bake Rabu | Jupiter Sun |
Balance of the Sun Dasa at birth : Year 0-4-2.
The Fourth House. —The fourth house is Gemini a
benefic sign. It is occupied by Venus, who though lord of
the 3rd and 8th is a natural benefic. The fourth is

Concerning the Fourth House 183
further aspected by Saturn and is subjected to Papakarthari
Yoga.
The Fourth Lord.—Mercury who owns the fourth is in
the fifth in association with the Sun and aspected by
Jupiter. He is, if at all, feebly blemished.
Matrukaraka.—The Moon is exalted but in association
with Ketu and Mars. This is counterbalanced by Jupiter's
aspect. In the Navamsa, the Moon is in a benefic sign in
association with exalted Venus.
Conclusion. - All the three elements are feebly
blemished. The native's mother died in 1946 when he was
aged 46.
Chart No. 75.—Bornon 17-7-1895 at 12-30 p.m.
| Moon Mere: Mars Rahu |Jupit.
lupit.
Sun | Merce
RAŠI ——- | }—— NAVAMSA ee
Mars | | Sun
Ketu Lagna
vems
Mandi | | Moon ¥.
Saturn Lagba Sal. Ketu aa
Balance of Sun Dasa at birth: Years 5-1-6.
The Fourth House.—Sagittarius the fourth house is a
benefic sign. It is free from occupation but is aspected by
Jupiter lord of the fourth and Mercury lord of Lagna and is
thus considerably fortified. In the Navamsa, there is a slight
affliction of the fourth house which is negligible

184 How to Judge a Horoscope
as fourth lord Mars aspects the fourth from his own sign
Aries.
The Fourth Lord.—The fourth lord is in a kendra in
association with Lagnadhipati Mercury. The moderate
affliction to which Jupiter is subjected to in Navamsa is
more than counterbalanced by his strong disposition in
Rasi.
Matrukaraka.—The Moon is in Aries, a trikona from
the fourth house and is aspected by exalted Saturn.
Therefore the Moon's affliction is also feeble.
Conclusion.—Consequently the fourth house is quite
strong rendering the native enjoy the fortune of possessing
his mother till his age of 52.
Education and Learning
We shall now consider the combinations that make one
learned. Acquisition of learning should be ascertained by a
consideration of the fourth house and Jupiter. It must be
noted that with the aid of astrology, as known at present it
may not be possible to say from an examination of the
horoscope whether one's inclinations would be for Physics
or Chemistry, Engineering or Metallurgy.
The fault of course does not lie with astrology. It
shows our own imperfections and how we have not cared to
tap the original source of astrological knowledge, by a
proper study and adaptation of which it would doubtless be
posible to anticipate the exact type of education that one is
likely to take to either for his livelihood or for the sake of
knowledge. We are giving general combinations and a
number of illustrations leaving the reader to pursue his own
line of thought or argument to arrive at finer conclusions.
From the classical works are culled out the following
combinations indicative of inclinations towards different
branches of leaning.

Concerning the Fourth House 185
Venus in the fourth makes one proficient in music.
Mercury in the fourth makes one proficient in astrology.
The Sun and the Moon similarly placed favour political
science, psychology and metaphysics. Sun-Mercury
combination favours proficiency in mathematics. Venus in
the fourth, combined with Mercury or Sun, endows one
with poetical instincts.
The Sun and Mars having anything to do with Mercury
make one a logician. Jupiter similarly placed makes the
person an expert in Vedas and Vedangas. Here the planet
having to do most with the fourth house is to be considered
and not merely the house or the lord. Thus if Venus is lord
of the fourth and he is in the seventh with Mercury and
Mars and the fourth is occupied by Saturn and the Moon,
the person will be acquainted with different branches of
learning. Consistent with the inherent nature and
indications of the planet mainly connected with the fourth
house, either as lord, occupant or associate, one has to infer
the type of education one is likely to get. The Sun is the
king and the ruler. The Moon represents a wavering mind.
Mars is the warrior and the practical man. Mercury is the
thinker and the adept. Jupiter is the priest, spiritualist and
the judge. Venus is the poet and philosopher. Saturn is the
statesman and leader. Rahu is a diplomat and Ketu is the
prophet and the seer. With these clues, we have to interpret
the horoscope, consistent with commonsense factors, if.we
have to perceive the truth of astrology. Astrology is a
science. Studied and applied with the utmost integrity,
astrology can be a real boon to humanity. The qualities and
influencing abilities allotted to planets and signs must not
be taken too literally. For example when we say that Venus
is a Planet of poetry, it does not mean that one visualise
as

186 How to Judge a Horoscope
poet singing through the heavens. It means simply that
persons born at a time when Venus is situated in that
portion of the heavens, which symbolically rules education,
do tend to exhibit an aptitude for poetry, music and fine
arts. When dealing with the tenth bhava in the second
volume of this work, I propose to give adequate statistical
data regarding the professions and occupations denoted by
different planets. These data will also be helpful in finding
out the educational and literary attainments. The laws of
horoscopic interpretation are quite sound for, they are
based upon the vast experience of astrological thinkers of
all ages.
Chart No 76.—Born on 12-2-1856 at about 12-21 p.m.
: Rahu Lagna
| Moon Lagna | Sat. Jupiter Rahu
f
Sun !
Merc
Jupit.
RASI ~—~||——-| NAVAMSA pee
pare : a rT haion
ars ‘enus
Venus Kein Mere.) Ketu | szturm ‘Moon
i | Mars
eee
Balance of Venus Dasa at birth : Years 12-3-9.
The Fourth House.—The fourth house is Leo. It is
occupied by no planet. Saturn, Sun, Mercury and Jupiter
aspect the fourth house. The Sun as lord of the fourth and
Mercury as lord of the seeond and fifth aspecting the fourth
house have fortified the house considerably.

Concerning the Fourth House 187
Yogakaraka Saturn's aspect is equally important. Hence the
fourth house is rendered quite strong.
The Fourth Lord.—The Sun is the fourth lord. He is in
the tenth, in association with Mercury and Jupiter, owning
the 2nd and Sth and 8th and 11th respectively. The Sun
aspects the fourth house. Mercury's association with the
fourth lord is highly significant.
Vidyakaraka.—Jupiter, the Vidyakaraka, aspects
vidyasthana (fourth) and is well fortified but for his
ownership of the 8th and 11th, which may be ignored for
purposes of assessing Vidyabhava (house of education).
Conclusion.—The strong disposition of the house, the
lord and the karaka or indicator conferred on the native
high education—Jupiter and Mercury indicating
proficiency in astrology, Jupiter denoting scholarship in law
and Vedic learning and Saturn's aspect denoting great
proficiency in English language and literature. Here an
observation has to be made. Venus is the karaka for music.
He is in the 9th from the Moon and in the 11th from
Vidyakaraka. This explains the great interest the native
evinced in music. The intellectual attainments of this
subject were not confined to any particular field. He was a
historian, astrologer, linguist, literateur and lawyer of no
mean order. And his achievements in the field of learning
are well borne out by the disposition and stength of the
Vidyabhava and the karaka.
The Fourth House.—In Chart No. 77 the fourth house
is Leo, unoccupied by any planet but aspected by Saturn. In
the Navamsa the fourth house is aspected by Jupiter.
The Fourth Lord.—The fourth lord Sun is in Cancer in
association with Venus lord of Lagna and aspected by
Jupiter, the karaka for vidya. In the Navamsa also, the Sun
joins Venus and Mars in the 7th from Lagna.

188 How to Judge a Horoscope
Vidyakaraka.—Jupiter, the Vidyakaraka, is in an ideal
position. As lord of the 8th and 11th from Lagna and
Chandra Lagna respectively, he is in the 11th in his own
house aspected by Saturn the yogakaraka.
Chart No. 77.—Born on 26-7-1856 A.D. at Midnight
at Dublin.
Rahu Lagna |Merc.!|pahu Lagena Iper
Jupit.| Moon | Sat. |) sat. Moon S
Sun
Venus
a RAST i: NAVAMSA zae
Sun
Mars Ketul |Jupit.| Venus Ketu
Mars
r
Balance of Moon Dasa at birth : Years 6-6-18.
Conclusion.—The house, the lord and the karaka being
fairly well disposed, endowed the native with considerable
intellectual equipment. Vidyakaraka Jupiter in the eleventh
and Mercury the planet of intelligence in the second is
suggestive of financial gains and public favour through
writing. Venus in conjunction with the fourth lord made
him a successful music and art critic.
The Fourth House.—Leo is the fourth house. It is
occupied by the mystic planet Ketu and aspected by the
matter-of-fact planet Mars. Jn the Navamsa, the fourth is
aspected by Jupiter.
The Fourth Lord.—The fourth lord Sun is in the 7th, a
secret sign aspected by Jupiter and otherwise free from

Concerning the Fourth House 189
affliction. In the Navamsa again, the Sun is situated in
Sagittarius aspected by Jupiter.
The Karaka —Jupiter the Vidyakaraka occupies the
Lagna and is aspected by the lord of the fourth Sun.
Chart No. 78.—Born on 30-11-1858 at A.D. 4-25p.m.
Lagoa M {Moon
Jupiter ereury Venus
Rahu Sat. Mars
Ketu
RASI —— į -— NAVAMSA
Lagna
Mars Ketu j| Rahu ` Jupit. '
Sat.
Oa | =a
enous! Sun Moon | Sun
Merc. | I
Balance of Moon Dasa at birth : Years 2-3-0.
Conclusion.—All the three factors governing education
and learning have been considerably fortified. The fourth
being occupied by Ketu and aspected by Mars indicates
that the subject was a visionary, yet steeped in matter-offact science. The native attained acknowledged distinction
in Physics but his sphere of activities extended towards
biology also.
The Fourth House.—In Chart No. 79 the fourth house
is Capricorn and is free from affliction either by occupation
or aspect. In the Navamsa, the fourth house has Jupiter
Posited in it aspected by exalted Venus.
The Fourth Lord.—Saturn, who owns the fourth and
who is also Yogakaraka, is in Lagna, exalted. From
Chandra Lagna, the fourth lord Venus (who also happens to
be Yogakaraka in this case) is in the eighth from the

190 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 79.—Born on 28-8-1749 at 12-17 p.m.
| {Lagnaj
Jupit. Ketu | |Venus| Moon | Saturn : Ketu
i | < Merc. |
ED EN AEE O E] LAE) A, ES
Moon i
t
a NAVAMSA —-— | | — RASI es
Sun Sun
Mere. Mars
Soap ea | :
ars Lagna al
J x
Rahu Salin Vernus| Rahu | Jupit
Balance of Jupiter Dasa at birth : Years 12-4-24.
Moon, having obtained neechabhanga and causing Adhi
Yoga. In the Navamsa again, the fourth lord Mercury is in
Lagna, in his own house.
Karaka.—Jupiter is in his own house in an Upachaya
from Lagna and the second from Chandra Lagna aspected
by Venus. In the Navamsathe fourth lord and Vidyakarka
are in mutual kendras.
Conclusion. — Chart No 16 belongs to one of the
greatest poets of Europe of the eighteenth century. Mark
how the influences of Venus, Jupiter and Saturn have
blended together in relation to the house of learning and
how all these three planets have been strengthened either
by association or occupation of own house. The native of
the horoscope was also interested in astrology, philosophy,
art and metaphysical and mystical writings. The situation of
Jupiter in the fourth in the Navamsa and exalted Venus
aspecting the fourth are significant combinations
suggestive of the emotions that moulded the native's
poetical thoughts.

Concerning the Fourth House 191
Chart No. 80.—Born on 7-9-1856 at 4p.m. (L.M.T.) (Long.
| Sat. Mercury Lagna
| | Sat,
Venus °
Rahu Mars |
RASI | -.' NAVAMSA
Sun || Moon! Ketu
Jupiter | Sun
Balance of Mercury Dasa at birth : Years 10-1-17.
Moon
Mars |
The Fourth House.—The fourth house is Aries and is
unafflicted.
The Fourth Lord.—The fourth lord Mars is in the
eleventh (eighth from the fourth) in association with
debilitated Moon and aspected by Jupiter. In the Navamsa,
the fourth lord Mercury is in the twelfth aspected by Jupiter.
Vidyakaraka.—Though Vidyakaraka Jupiter is in his
own sign, yet he is considerably afflicted by Rahu and is
aspected by Saturn and debilitated Venus.
Conclusion.—Vidyakaraka's affliction resulted in the
native getting very ordinary school education. But the fairly
strong disposition of the fourth house and the lord rendered
him acquire knowledge of men and matters and the native
occupied a very high official position in life. There are, of
course, several Rajayogas in this horoscope and it is beyond
the scope of the present observations.

192 How to Judge a Horoscope
Education, in common parlance, means the acquisition
of certain distinctions having undergone the necessary
courses of study in recognised institutions and not the
acquisition of knowledge by self-study.
Chart No. 81.—Born on 23-11-1902 at 5-16 a.m. (L.M.T.)
Ketu
Ketu Mandi Lagna |Merc.
Jupit.
RASI — | NAVAMSA þ—-
Jupit Mandi
ae Moen}! Sat. | Moon
ý Mars
Mintz ay a en —- |
Ven | Rahu Sun
eae Lagna Mars Rahu Vena
Mercury }
Balance of Venus Dasa at birth: Years 13-11-12.
The Fourth House.—In Chart No. 81, Capricorn
becomes the fourth. It is occupied by Saturn and Jupiter,
the latter in neecha but having obtained neecha-bhanga. In
the Navamsa, the fourth is free from association or aspect.
The Fourth Lord.—The fourth lord Saturn, happening
also to be Yogakaraka, is in the fourth, in association with
Jupiter lord of the 3rd and the 6th.
Vidyakaraka.—Jupiter is subjected to all the
influences to which Satun is. Jupiter is exalted in the
Navamsa.
Conclusion.—Mark the strong disposition of all the
three factors and especially the dignified positions of both
the lord and the karaka. From Chandra Lagna, the

Concerning the Fourth House 193
fourth becomes strengthened by the situation of Venus and
the Sun (lord of Chandra Lagna) further aspected by Mars
lord of the fourth. Consistent with the dominant positions
of Mars and Saturn, the subject was a professor. Jupiter's
strong disposition has rendered the native an authority on
Power-Engineering.
The Fourth House.—In Chart No. 82, the fourth is Leo,
a fixed sign and it is occupied by the Moon, lord of the
third and hence blemished. It is aspected by Mercury, lord
of the fifth. In the Navamsa, the fourth house is Scorpio. It
is occupied by Mars, the lord, and aspected by Saturn, a
malefic.
Chart No. 82.—Born on 16-3-1908 at 10-56 a.m.
Sun | Mars
Sat. | Veous
Lagna [Rahu | ;Rahe | |
e i a
Jupit.
Mere. pre Moon
ea RASI —— | [--— AMSA
Lagna
Moon Sun
j Venus
Sa fe ee H i
Mandi 3 Sat.
Ketu Merc. Mars j] Jupiter | Ketu
Balance of Ketu Dasa at birth : Year 0-0-13.
The Fourth Lord.—The Sun owning the fourth is in a
benefic sign in association with Saturn and aspected by
exalted Jupiter.
The Vidyakaraka-— Jupiter is exalted in the third;
While in the Navamsa he is in the third.

194 How to Judge a Horoscope
Conclusion.—It is the Vidyakaraka that is really
strong. The natives's general education in the sense of
school knowledge is poor. His knowledge of English is
almost nil. This is indicated by the Sun's (lord of the fourth)
conjunction with Saturn. But, however, his grasp of the
current political, social and international problems is
unique. He is educated in the sense that he has learnt things
by self-study and not by going to college or school.
Above we have given six charts bearing on education
and learning. Each combination is capable of producing a
variety of effects consistent with the ownerships, inherent
and acquired natures and associations of the planets in
Combination. Consequently in the analysis of a
combination with a view to ascertaining a particular
signification or event, all the factors having a bearing on
the bhava have got to be considered.
Our humble experience suggests that for proficiency in
music, Venus should be in the fourth or ninth or fifth house
or aspect these .ouses. Interest in music may be predicted if
Venus is in the fourth from the Moon. For proficiency in
astrology, Mercury should be in the fourth, the Sun should
be in the fifth or the Sun and Mercury should be in the
second. The reference in all these caess is from Lagna or
Chandra Lagna. Great learning in Vedas and other
scriptures, consistent with the native's religion, can be
predicted if the Sun and Mercury are in the fifth or Jupiter
exalted or Jupiter occupies the second, ninth, fifth or tenth.
Rahu's position in the fourth or fifth generally favours
diplomacy. One who has this combination can probe into
the minds of others and understand their mental currents.
Students of Astrology should collect a large number of
horoscopes and study the combinations in the light of
actual results.

Concerning the Fourth House 195
Conveyances and Possessions
The fourth house represents vehicles or carnages. We
must also note the influences of the significator or karaka of
conveyances, viz., Venus. One of the important
combinations for the acquisition or possession of a vehicle
is the association of the lords of the fourth and ninth in
Lagna or the seventh from Lagna. Venus in the fourth with
the lord of the fourth or in the eleventh confers ordinary
vehicles. The fourth lord in conjunction with the Moon or
Venus as lord of the fourth (which is possible if Lagna is
Aquarius or Cancer) in the eleventh, tenth or ninth indicates
possession of vehicles. Vahana-karaka is Venus and
Vahanasthana is fourth. It is by a consideration of these
[actors plus the fourth lord that we have to predict Vahana
Yoga. Even in possession of Vahanas or conveyances, there
are gradations. A streamlined limousine cannot be equated
with a push bike or a bullock-cart though all of them fall
under the category of Vahanas. Jupiter's presence in or
aspect of the fourth plus the situation of Venus in the
seventh is a sure indication of the acquisition of a fitting
Vahana. In this connection, I would refer the readers to
Chapter IV of my English translation of BHAVARTHA
RATNAKARA, wherein several combinations have been
given, indicative of the acquisition of Vahanas or vehicles.
Regarding the possession of houses, the strangling hut
and the more exquisitely furnished mansion, fall in the
same category. Jt is only a difference of degree. It is the
inherent strengths, the afflictions, the fortified positions of
the karakas and the appropriate lord that reveal whether one
would acquire a hut or a palace. The follow-ing
combinations indicate possession of houses. Lord of Lagna
or the seventh joining Lagna or the fourth ; strong
disposition of the fourth lord in exaltation or kendra ; the

196 How to Judge a Horoscope
lord of the fourth occupying the shashtiamsas of Gopura,
Mridwa or Simhasana; Vahanakaraka posited in his own
Thrimsamsa ; lords of the fourth and tenth in association in
a kendra ; and Venus strongly posited in the fourth. In
applying the above combinations, the astrologer must use
his skill and "the skill of the astrologer" as Prof. B.
Suryanarain Rao says must be "consistent with
interpretation and comprehension of these minutes".
Chart No. 83.—Born on 12-3-1863 at 2-3 a.m. (Lat.
Venus | Mars Mars Sun
Ketu Saturno
Sun Ketu
jMerc
=N RASI —]|}--— AMSA —
Venus
Rahu
Moon . Jupit
L t
| agoa Rahu Jupiter | Sa Moon Mercury jLagna
Balance of Mercury Dasa at birth: Years 14-7-6.
The above chart is simple. The fourth lord Jupiter is in
the eleventh while the fourth house is occupied by exalted
Venus. Again, from Chandra Lagna the fourth Lord Saturn
is in the eleventhand the fourth is aspected by Jupiter, the
fifth lord, and occupied by the tenth lord. The subject
possessed not one, but many luxurious conveyances and
mansions throughout life.
Chart no. 84 is a typical horoscope illustrating the
possession of innumerable houses and vehicles. Mark the
fact that the fourth lord Saturn is in the eleventh with

Concerning the Fourth House 197
Chart No. 84.—Born on 30-7-1863 at 2 p.m. (Lat. 42°
Ketu i Saturn Mars
, Ketu
——— mna wrens tt SSS — ES NREN
Sun || | Lagna
Mere Moon
ne RASI atest ean CAS AMSA i
Moon Mars | Venus!
foe | -o i Eaa
Sat. ||
oe Jupit. |: | Sun Pa Jupit.
u
Venus i l
Balance of Moon Dasa at birth : Years 2-4-29.
Jupiter, lord of the second and fifth, and Venus, lord of the
seventh. Venus Vahanakaraka has Neechabhanga, while
Mars Grihakaraka not only happens to be Lagnadhi-pathi
but aspects the fourth from the tenth.
In Chart No. 85 lord of Lagna Saturn is in the fourth.
The fourth lord Venus is in the seventh with Mercury lord
of the fifth. Lords of the fourth and tenth are in association
in the seventh. Both the karakas of house and vehicles are
in the fourth from the Moon. Note the native acquired a fine
car in Jupiter Dasa Venus Bhukti and a decent house in
Jupiter Dasa Mars Bhukti.
In Chart No. 86 the fourth house is Virgo and it is
occupied by the 3rd lord Sun and aspected by Saturn lord of
the 8th. The fourth lord Mercury is equally afflicted. The
native enjoyed for some time the luxury of owning a car but
he had to dispense not only with his car but a fine job also
as his spendthrift nature and speculative tendencies landed
him in endless troubles and he was pursued day

198 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 85.—Born on 8-8-1912 A.D. at 7-35p.m.
Rahu Moon Saturn | Venus
Saturn
Sun
Lagna! un Rahu
—— RASI AMSA
Mars Moon
Merc. | [Lagna Mere, |
Venus Ketu
Jupiter Ketu Jupiter | Mars
Balance of Mars Dasa at birth: Years 6-1-6.
Chart No. 86.—Born on 26-9-1901 at 12-20 a.m.
| Sun Mars
Ket Lagpa| | Venus:
. s TS Lagna | Rahu
cot Jupit.
— RASI — a AMSA eet
Rabu 7
n Mercury Sup || Moon) Ketu (Mercury | Sat.
Venus
Balance of Rahu Dasa at birth : Years 16-1-18.

Concerning the Fourth House 199
in and day out by his creditors. To escape the clutches of
his creditors, the native has been roaming about here and
there, torn away from his family and children. Mercury's
association with Mars-Rahu is solely responsible for his
speculative tendencies and losses.
Chart No. 87.—Born on 28-8-1909 at 9-52 a.m.
| ll
Mars! Saturn Rahu Saturn | Yenus
Rahu
Z RASI i AMSA —
, Sun [Moon
Moon lJupit. eens
| Mandi iMerc.
‘Merc. i ; Mars
Ketu 3
| e Fagna Venus pees Mandi Sun
Balance of Sun Dasa at birth : Years 3-7-20.
The fourth is Capricorn a movable sign aspected by
Saturn the lord. The fourth is occupied by the Moon lord of
the tenth. The fourth lord is considerably afflicted by being
neecha and subjected to Papakarthari Yoga. He is, of
course, aspected by Jupiter, who being lord of the third and
sixth is himself afflicted. From Chandra Lagna again, the
fourth is occupied by debilitated Saturn and the lord
happens to be in the twelfth from fourth. Vahanakaraka is
neecha while Grihakaraka is weak. The subject is a Police
Jamedar drawing about Rs. 60 per mensum. None of the
indications ofthe forth house

200 How to Judge a Horoscope
have been conferred on him consistent with the intensely
malefic disposition of the house.
Hundreds of examples can be given to prove the
astrological dictum that the fourth house plus the
appropriate karaka should be well disposed to assure an
optimum share of the significations.

8. The Fifth House
The fifth house refers to children, emotions and
feelings, faith in God and Poorvapunya. To a certain extent
it is also concerned with speculative tendencies. The
remarks made in para 2 of page 159 pertaining to the fourth
house apply with equal force to the fifth house also.
Main Considerations
In analysing the fifth bhava, due consideration must be
given to the three important factors, viz., (a) the house, (b)
the lord, and (c) the karaka, which in this case would be
Jupiter. There are the secondary considerations, viz., the
occupants of the fifth house, the associates joining the fifth
lord and the karaka and the Yogakaraka, i.e , the planets
causing the various yogas bearing on the fifth house.
Before considering the general combinations, we shall
make a few observations on the emotional side of nature as
revealed by the fifth house. Some sign of the zodiac would
be on the bhavamadhya of the fifth house. Consistent with
the nature of this sign and blended by the nature of the
planet or planets situated therein or aspecting the sign, the
emotional nature of the native will be developed. When
Agnitatwa Rasis or fiery signs (Aries, Leo and Sagittarius)
have reference to the fifth house, the native cannot be
corrupt unless the horoscope has other unfavour-

202 How to Judge a Horoscope
able attributes. The native possesses vivid idiosyncracies.
He takes everything in the world seriously and possesses a
sense of importance. In excess, this independence of spirit,
characteristic of this tatwa, can be offensive in relation to
other people. This becomes the case when the bhava-madya
falls exactly in a fiery constellation or Mars occupies the
fifth. When not afflicted, the person faces life with courage
and the mind voyages through the strange seas of thought
alone. Unless the Moon is away from this combination,
emotion is life to the person. His marked trait would be that
he can forgive almost anything excepting a fool. The
quality of stupidity makes him indignant. However, there
exist softer and milder types of the same central character.
A literary writer, in whom this element is strong, excels in
developing an idea. The mind travels too far afield. There is
little sequence of ideas or sense of structure and the general
effect is illogical. One with Leo on the 5th house possesses
a quite divine foresight with regard to future. Generosity is
a marked characteristic. A lady born under such a set-up
has the knack of proving an ideal housewife. She is
impressive in action. Summing up, a fiery sign on the fifth
house gives that ardent, fiery quality which inspires and
invigorates one with the energy to act. It is dynamic and
forceful, aspiring and inspiring. It saves one from being
sunk in the inner seas of emotion or lost in the airy heights
of abstract thought.
If the Bhutatwa Rasis or earthly signs (Taurus,
Capricorn and Virgo) are in the Sth house, the person will
possess a retentive memory, imagination and deep feeling.
He has an attraction for hidden things. He is difficult to
deal with as he is e-lusive, trifle, impish, stubborn and
somewhat peevish. If the fifth bhava is in Taurus, the
person will be highly optimistic and he takes life easy.

The Fifth House 203
The opposite holds good for Capricorn. He will be highly
pessimistic and takes life rather too seriously. If the sign is
Virgo then there will be a blending of the characteristics of
Taurus and Capricorn. The earthy element makes the person
take a mystical view of physical life. This element is
intuitional and psychic. Another fundamental quality is
retrospection and exquisite sensibility often elevated to a
mystical belief in an inner life within the forms and objects
of nature. Criticism and censure closely allied to active
kindness and helpfulness, obstinacy, a certain irritability,
closeness over money and jealousy, in love, are some of the
important characteristics
of this group.
The Vayutatwa Rasis (airy signs), viz., Gemini, Libra
and Aquarius on the 5th house, give rise to an altogether
different emotional set-up. The Vayutatva element is
concerned with conduct rather than motive, with action
rather than thought or feeling. One characteristic of a
person born under this set-up is his liking for the ordinary
and familiar—the insignificant things in life, humble
everyday people and simple annals of the poor. Libra is the
most practical while Aquarius is the least matter-of-fact.
Gemini hits at the golden mean. We have of course to
consider the collective influences focussed on the fifth
house and then come to a conclusion. Usually shrewd and
far-seeing, one born with a Vayutatwa Rasi in the fifth
house is an innate philosopher. However much disturbed,
he has the capacity to remain calm and settle into poise. In
general outlook the philosophy is that of determinism and
the work is often shadowed by a dark sense of fate. The
past is looked upon and valued chiefly as a fact and not as a
cherished memory. He observes tradition and convention.
He upholds existing laws and conditions in religion and
philosophy. At its very highest

204 How to Judge a Horoscope
it becomes a grave acceptance of some power ordering
human lives, a submission to the inevitable and to a noble
resignation to the outworking of universal laws. The virtues
of this group are discipline and restraint, its ideals
obedience and sobriety. Often in the case of Aquarius, there
is associated a certain seriousness of outlook and a gravity
of tone—the former being at times a heavy melancholy.
Summing up, one born with a Vayrtatwa Rasi on the Sth
possesses the commonsense necessary to rule the world. He
is awake to realities. He has his own virtues and qualities
which no other elements can give. He makes us realise that
facts are facts which we must face and accept—not run
away from or try to distort.
If the fifth house falls in a Jalatatwa Rasi (Cancer,
Scorpio and Pisces), it indicates an attitude of mind where
balance is the dominant element. The person will possess
an impartiality of outlook, a kindly tolerance and a
philosophy of moderation, poise and a sense of proportion.
There is also a certain amount of satire and a mixture of jest
and earnest. The mental disposition is one of quieter but
more persistent effort. Scorpio has a sting in its tail and this
is the thing to watch out against.
The person will be uncompromising, exacting,
faultfinding. Yet he can display keen judgment and power of
imparital criticism. The wisdom of the serpent lies
concealed. Tenacity is one of his chief characteristics. He
will display sympathy, persistence, emotion and be
somewhat self-possessed and self-reliant.
When Pisces is in the fifth bhava, the person will have a
restless but a creative mind with an imaginative outlook.
He is liable to be obsessed with curious fancies. The
characteristics of a person born under this set-up are
difficult to interpret with any degree of clearness. He
always pretends to be different from what he really is and

The Fifth House 205
there will be an over-abundance of self-esteem and approbativencss combined. Summing up, the imagination is
fertile and the nature resourceful and there is much pride in
the mental disposition.
It must be noted that the above characteristics are said
to be conferred provided a Rasi belonging to a certain tatwa
is in the fifth house. The exact mental set-up depends upon
the combined influences of the exact Rasi plus the planetary
and constellation influences. Though Cancer, Scorpio and
Pisces belong to the same category, yet each has got its own
distinctive characteristics to impress. It is here that the
astrologer is called upon to use his power of judgment.
Results of the Lord of the Fifth House being placed in
Different Houses
In the First House.—If the 5th lord is favourably
combined and associated, the person commands a number
of servants, becomes a Judge, Magistrate or Minister
empowered to punish the evil-minded. He will earn the
grace of God ; few children ; will have foes and gives
happiness to others. If the 5th lord is afflicted, there will be
no issues; will invoke kshudra devatas (evil and destructive
forces), will be evil-minded and leader of a gang of
deceitful persons ; a tale-bearer with a sting. If the lord is
moderately good, mixed results will follow.
In the Second House. If the 5th lord is favourably
disposed, the person will be blessed with a beautiful wife
and well-behaving children. There will be gains from
Government or King. He will become learned and a good
astrologer. Lord weak and afflicted, Poor ; loss of money
through Government displeasure ; will be unable to maintain
his own family ; will have family troubles and
misunderstandings ; becomes a priest in a Siva temple.

206 How to Judge a Horoscope
In the Third House.—Favourably disposed, many good
children and brothers, If unfavourably disposed, loss of
children, misunderstandings with brothers and continuous
occupational troubles. He will become stingy and a tale
bearer.
In the Fourth House.—If favourably disposed, the
person will have a few sons, one of whom will live by
agriculture. The mother will live long. May become an
adviser to a ruler or his preceptor. The lord, afflicted,
causes death of children. The lord, moderately strong,
confers daughters and no sons.
In the Fifth House.—Lord favourably disposed
indicates a number of sons ; becomes great in his own line
of activity ; otherwise he becomes an expert in Mantrasastra
and befriends persons in power. He may also become an
expert in mathematics or head of a religious institution.
Lord afflicted, contrary results should be anticipated.
Children will die; he will not keep to his word; wavering
mentality and cruel.
In the Sixth House.—If the fifth lord is favourably
disposed, the maternal uncle will be a famous man. He will
have enmity with his own son. If the lord is afflicted, issues
will not be born and he may have to adopt one from
maternal uncle's line.
In the Seventh House.—When the lord is favourably
disposed, the native's son lives abroad and attains
distinction, wealth and fame. Or he will have a number of
issues. He will also become renowned, learned, prosperous,
greatly devoted to his master and possesses a charming
personality. When-the lord is afflicted, there will be loss of
children, one of whom will die abroad after attaining name
and fame.
In the Eighth House.—Paternal property will be lost
due to debts. There will be extinction of the family. He

The Fifth House 207
will suffer from lung troubles. He will be peevish, unhappy
but not poor.
In the Ninth House.—He will become a teacher or a
preceptor. Renovates ancient temples, wells, choultries and
gardens. One of the sons attains distinction as an orator or
author. If the lord is afflicted, he will earn divine wrath and
consequent destruction of fortune.
In the Tenth House.—If the lord is beneficially
disposed, a Raja Yoga is formed. Acquires landed property
; earns the goodwill of the rulers, constructs temples and
performs religious sacrifices ; one of the sons becomes a
gem of the family. If aspected by the Sun the native may
join the intelligence department. If the lord is afflicted,
faces the wrath of the rulers and contrary results will
happen.
In the Eleventh House.—Benefits through sons and
success in all undertakings; becomes rich and learned and
helps others; will have a number of sons; becomes an
author.
In the Twelfth-House.—Quest for knowing the Ultimate
Reality will be pronounced. He will lead a life of nonattachment, becomes spiritual, moves from one place to
another and ultimately attains Moksha.
It will be seen that the above combinations are quite
general and they have to be used with great care paying
particular attention to the benefic, malefic, or moderating
nature of the lord qualified or modified otherwise by the
association or aspect of the other planets and lords.
Important Combinations
The following combinations bearing on the fifth house
have been culled out from important sources, and they are
general in character requiring the skill and intelligence

208 How to Judge a Horoscope
of the astrologer for their correct interpretation and
explanation.
If the fifth house has beneficial associations or aspects,
there will be children. Lord of the Lagna in the fifth and the
fifth lord strong, or exchange of houses between first and
fifth lords, favours birth of children. If Jupiter, as lord of
the fifth, is strong and aspected by lord of Lagna, one gets
many issues. Lord of the 2nd, possessed of strength, in the
fifth, aspected by Jupiter, indicates birth of children. Birth
of children is also indicated when the lord of the Navamsa
occupied by the owner of the fifth be conjoined with or
aspected by a benefic or when the lord of the fifth is in
benefic amsas or when the lord of the Navamsa occupied
by the lord of the fifth is in Lagna bhava.
Children will die early if the lord of the fifth occupies
3, 6 or 12 and is aspected by no benefic; when the lord of
the fifth is hemmed in between malefics ; when the fifth is
aspected by a malefic, the lord of the fifth joins an evil
planet; when the lord of the 5th occupies cruel and
debilitated Navamsas; when the lord of the Drekkana, or
the Navamsa, joined by the lord of the twelfth aspects the
5tb lord ; when Rahu occupying the Stb is aspected by
Mars; when Saturn aspected by the Moon occupies the 5th
and the lord of the 5th joins Rahu; when Rahu and lord of
Lagna are associated with the 5th lord or occupy the 5th.
The family is extinguished when the lord of Lagna is
in the 5th, and Lagna and the Moon have evil associations;
when the fifth is occupied by Mercury and the Lagna by a
malefic; when malefics occupy the Ist, 5th, 8th and 12th
houses or the 5th house exclusively and when Mars, Saturn
and the Sun occupy respectively the Ist, 8th and 5th
houses. The first child will be male, if the 5th lord is in the
Ist, 2nd or 3rd or if Mars, Venus and Moon are in common
signs, Sagittarius excepted. One would have no

The Fifth House 209
child living if Venus is in the 7th, Moon is in the tenth and
evil planets are in the 5th from the lord of the 5th. Male
children will be got if lord of 5th is in the houses of Moon
or Venus, aspected or joined by them. The first child dies if
Mars is in the 5th aspected by Jupiter or Venus. One gets a
child in his 32nd year if Jupiter is in the 5th and lord of 5th
is with Venus.
An obedient child is born if the 5th lord aspects or
occupies the ascendant and lord of Lagna is similarly
disposed towards the 5th. A disobedient child is born if the
5th lord is afflicted and unaspected by Lagnadhipati but
seen by Mars or Rahu. Lagna being Aries or Scorpio and
the Sun and Saturn placed in the 5th and 8th respectively
influenced by a bencfic, the person will have children late
in life. If the 5th house falls in Gemini, Virgo. Capricorn or
Aquarius and has the association of Saturn or Mandi, one
will have an adopted son. When a malefic is in the eleventh
house and the Moon and Venus occupy the 5th, the firstborn will be a daughter. The person will have three children
if the Sun aspected by a benefic occupies the 5th, or Virgo
being Lagna and Saturn is in the 5th : five children if Libra
is Lagna and Saturn is in the 5th. If the lords of the Ist and
the 5th aspect each other, the son will be obedient to the
father. Saturn. Mercury and the Moon in the 5th make one
‘purchase’ a son for the continuance of the family.
Jupiter in the 5th gives good intellect and memory.
Rahu and Saturn in the 5th make one dull and stupid.
Planets in the Fifth House
The Sun.—This combination deprises the person of
children, riches and happiness. His life will be short. He
will suffer from heart disease, will roam about in forest

210 How to Judge a Horoscope
regions; a mountaineer. This position also denotes difficult
child-birth.
The Moon.—Clarity of mind, happiness from children,
acquisition of lands, gems and precious stones, opportunity
to serve the State are indicated when the Moon is in the 5th.
The person will be straightforward, truthful, learned,
gentlemanly, god-fearing, and devoid of enemies. Strong
tendency towards speculation is also denoted. One of the
children becomes famous.
Mars-—Miserable for his wife, friends and children ;
always disturbed in thoughts; impressive, rash, weakminded, back-biter and unhappy. He will suffer from colic
and suffers misfortunes through children. Too much
attached to sex pleasures and consequently loss of health.
Dangerous child-birth may be predicted in a woman's chart.
Mercury.—Learned and happy, will have a number of
children. The person may become an adviser or a minister ;
highly intelligent and learned in Mantrasastras ; inclined to
too much of sex pleasure and consequently lacking in
vitality.
Jupiter—Learned in logic and law, mantrasastra,
highly intelligent, preceptor or adviser to a king and great
discriminating power. He will have good friends and
vehicles and decorous manners. A number of children ;
god-fearing ; happy with children and friends.
Venus.—Poetic; possesses a number of friends and
beautiful children ; happiness through offspring ; wise and
discriminating; acquires wealth ; respected by the State.
This position also indicates more of female children and
success in speculation.
Saturn.—Evil-minded and stupid ; sickly and weak;
poor and hated by others. This combination denotes
sorrows through children. Fortune will be variable and

The Fifth House 211
not steady and he will have a hyprocritical nature. Quarrels
with friends and relatives and sorrow in domestic life.
Rahu.—Suffers from colic; mistaken by others and
unfriended; will lose a number of children; hard-hearted
and unconventional; heart trouble.
Ketu.—Loss of children; trouble in the stomach,
strange and peculiar experiences in connection with
emotions and feelings. Later on in life, inclination towards
spirituality.
The above results get modified by the aspects and
associations of other lords. If the Sun is afflicted, there will
be loss through speculation and trouble with cousins. If the
Moon joins malefics or is as-pected by them, there will be
loss through children and loose sex relations. If the
afflicting planet be Mars, children die after some time. If
the afflicting planet is Saturn, there is fear of brain
derangement. The 5th house is an index to the lower human
feelings. Moon afflicted by Mars in this position denotes
intrigues and loose sex relations. Affliction of Mars
denotes danger of ruin and disgrace through the opposite
sex. If Mars is strengthened, there will be gains through
lands, chemicals and factories. Trouble and danger through
children are shown. There will be inclination to rush into
rash speculations. Mercury afflicted gives anxiety and
worry through children. If afflicted by Mars there will be a
scandal in connection with love affairs. The emotional side
of nature dominates the reason. If well aspected by Jupiter,
it favours gain through speculation and authorship.
If Jupiter is strengthened, life will be smooth. If
afflicted, troubles arise consistent with the nature If the
afflicting planet. Venus well fortified denotes

212 How to Judge a Horoscopegains through females and extra marital attachments with
actresses or singers. If afflicted, there will be loss of health
through over-indulgence. If Mars is the afflicting planet,
there will be indiscriminate bestowal of affection on
children. Rahu afflicting gives strange courtships. Saturn
afflicting gives disappointments in love affairs. Saturn
afflicted by Mars denotes danger of unnatural attachments,
especially to those who are older. There will be loss of
children, danger of drowning and even heart trouble. If
Saturn's position is strengthened by Jupiter, gains in mines
is indicated.
Rahu's affliction is a very bad combination. It causes
scandal through children. If Venus associates with Rahu,
there may be homo-sexual tendencies. Ketu afflicted gives
criminal tendencies. The person lacks even a sense of
shame when provoked and usually possesses a vindictive
nature. The native lacks the human touch in his approach
towards one or two of the issues. If Venus joins Kethu, the
man chooses platonic love. If the afflicting planet is Mars,
many dangers are threatened and the family will be
extinguished. Much skill is required in judging the 5th
house and in interpreting the various combinations.
Time of Fructification of the Results of the Fifth House
Careful attention to the methods suggested in previous
chapters for interpretation of time-factors in regard to the
fructification of the results of the bhavas dealt with therein
will enable any intelligent person to anticipate the probable
period in which events pertaining to the 5th house take
place. To analyse a bhava and to indicate the likely
period of

The Fifth House 213
fructification of events, a true sense of proportion and
discrimination is needed on the part of the" astrological
student. The laws of interpretation, based on vast
experience, should be carefully studied and understood.
First attempts may prove disappointing and discouraging,
but subsequent attempts are bound to succeed. Failure may
be due to overlooking some point.
As we have said above, the 5th house has mainly to do
with issues and secondarily with intelligence, emotions and
fame. We have to consider whether the native is likely to
enjoy the Dasa of the 5th lord during his lifetime. If there is
no chance of the Dasa of the Sth lord being enjoyed, then
we have to find out the planets which will influence the 5th
house by way of occupation and aspect and whether the
native will enjoy the Dasa of such planets.
In timing events pertaining to the Sth house, the
following factors have to be noted :—
(a) The lord, (b) the planet or planets aspecting the Sth
house, (c) planet or planets posited in the 5th house, (d)
planets aspecting the lord of the 5th house, (e) planet or
planets in association with the lord of the 5th house, (f) the
lord of the 5th from the Moon and the karaka of the 5th
bhava.
The factors above mentioned are capable of
influencing the 5th house, either as lords of main periods
(Dasas) or as lords of sub-periods (Bhuktis) or as lords of
still minor periods.
The sub-periods of planets capable of influencing the
5th house, in the major periods of planets capable of
influencing the 5th produce results pertaining to the 5th
house par excellence. The sub-periods of planets
associated with the house, in the major

214 How to Judge a Horoscope
periods of planets not associated with the Sth house
produce results pertaining to the 5th house to a limited
extent only. Similarly the sub-periods of lords, who have
nothing to do with the 5th in major periods of lords
associated with 5th, will produce effects pertaining to fifth
only to a limited or nominal extent,
Nature of Results
In general, the following results may be anticipated in
the Dasas and Bhuktis of planets capable of influencing the
fifth house, subject of course to the peculiarities of the
individual horoscope concerned.
The 5th lord in his own house or otherwise strong:
there will be birth of sons and favour from superiors.
Misunderstandings with the sons will be the result if the 5th
lord in Lagna has an adverse Navamsa position. If the 5th
lord occupies the 6th in association with the 6th lord, the
native's maternal uncle will prosper or the native will derive
benefits from the maternal uncle. If a politician, he will get
political power. If the 5th lord has the above situation, but in
the Navamsa is in the 6th, 8th or 12th from the place
occupied by the 6th lord, there will be destruction of
prosperity and he will be the victim of his ruler's wrath.
When the influences are mixed, the results will also be
mixed.
When the 5th lord is in the seventh in association with
the seventh lord, the native will be benefited by his son's
trip to and residence in foreign countries. There will be
financial benefits and the native will enjoy the company of
learned and pious persons. If not already married, marriage
takes place and a new family will be set up. The 5th lord
afflicted, misfortunes befall children.

The Fifth House 215
When the 5th lord is in the 8th with the 8th lord, there
will be death of children or abortions to wife,
misunderstandings with kith and kin, displeasure of
superiors and rulers and loss in business. The person will
quarrel with his father and hate his family deity. When the
8th lord is afflicted or when the 5th lord is in the 6th, 8th or
12th (in Navamsa) from the 8th lord, the evil results will be
considerably minimised.
When the 5th lord is in the ninth in association with the
9th lord and the lord of Lagna weak and joining the ninth,
the person will have happiness from father during his
boyhood or during the Dasa of the 5th lord. There will be
inheritance of paternal or ancestral property, or he will get a
good administrative or honorary post. The father will be in
the good books of the ruling classes. When the Sth lord is
very strong, there will be unexpected dawn of prosperity and
fortune. This will be the case only if the 5th lord is Mars or
the 5th house happens to be a sign of Mars. If the 5th lord is
the Sun or Leo happens to be the 9th house, the person will
become an author of religious books. There will be
acquisition of wealth through a new administrative job,
one's own occupation, and through female sources if the Sth
lord is the Moon, Jupiter and Venus respectively or the 9th
happens to be a sign ruled by one of the above three planets.
When the 5th lord is in the tenth in conjunction with
the 10th lord or is in Lagna with the lord of Lagna, or in
Navamsa Lagna, or the 5th and 10th lords are in Lagna,
during the sub-period of the 10th lord, in the major period
of the 5th lord, or in the sub-periods of Lagnadhipati, in the
major period of the 5th lord, the person will acquire a
kingdom or become head of a State, or a Minister,
consistent with the strength of the lords concerned. When
the lords have attained Vargottamamsa, the position
acquired

216 How to Judge a Horoscope
will be that of a king or head of a State. When the 5th lord
is strongly disposed, as indicated above, but the Lagna lord
is weak, Raja Yoga, during the Dasa of the 5th lord, will be
enjoyed by the son.
In the assessment of the above yoga, the occupation of
the person concerned should be carefully considered. A
politician may become head of a State or Minister. One in
Government service will reach the highest position. A
businessman will have his palmy days while an agriculturist
will earn enormous profits in his own avocation. In
Interpreting horoscopes, commonsense must be applied to
the blending of various indications.
When the 5th lord is in the 11th with the 11th lord,
there will be acquisition of riches and gains from business.
If in addition to the above disposition of the 5th lord, the
2nd lord is in deep exaltation in Rasi or in Navamsa,
immense wealth and fortune will flow in. He will earn
through sea-products or ship-building when the 5th house is
a movable and watery sign. Consistent with the nature and
characteristics of planets and signs involved, there will be
influx of wealth.
When the 5th lord is in the 11th with the 11th lord,
there will be gain through his sons or Government sources
or elder brother, or one will acquire a new job. As the Dasa
of the 5th lord, when in the 11th with the 11th lord, is a
Yoga Dasa, it is capable of conferring highly beneficial
results. When the 5th lord is in adverse amsas cantrary
results may be expected. There will be losses in business,
reverses in official life, disappointments, misunderstandings
and financial troubles and upheavals.
When the lord of the 5th joins the lord of the 12th in
the 12th (along with the 6th lord) there will be mental
afflictions almost bordering on lunacy. Misunderstandings
will arise with father and sons. He will incur the dis-

The Fifth House 217
pleasure of the rulers. In the absence of the 6th lord in the
above combination, the person becomes wiser and spends
money on deserving causes.
When the lord of the 5th is in Lagna with the lord of
Lagna, one becomes a leader of his community or a
political party consistent with the nature of the planets
concerned. He will acquire riches and conveyances. When
the Dasa operates during childhood, he will be adopted into
a rich family. If in the middle of life, the native will have
good progeny. When the Sth lord occupies the 6th, 8th or
12th from the Lagnadhipati, in the Navamsa, contrary
results should be expected.. When strongly disposed, the
5th lord, in the above combination, is also capable of
conferring during his Dasa mantrasiddhi. The person may
also take to some religious or ascetic order.
When the 5th lord is in the 2nd with the 2nd lord,
there will be domestic happiness and the person will
develop power of eloquence.
When the 5th lord is in the 3rd in association with the
3rd lord, birth of children must be predicted in the subperiod of the 3rd lord within the major period of the 5th
lord. The younger brother becomes famous and gets a good
political or social position. The important results that may
manifest during this Dasa are acquisition of strength of
mind, courage and personality.
When the 5th lord is in the 4th with 4th lord, one will
acquire a new conveyance and happiness through the
ruling classes. When the 5th lord is weak, there will be loss
of issues. He may incur the wrath of the Government and
suffer its displeasure. When the lords of the 5th and 4th are
strong, the native will have visits from eminent persons
and acquisition of immovable property. If these
two

218 How to Judge a Horoscope
lords are very strong, he will acquire political power and
will control the destinies of his country.
In this way, the results likely to happen during the
Dasa of the 5th lord should be anticipated skilfully, taking
into consideration the blends of strength and weakness the
planet concerned is subject to.
As the 5th house has mainly to do with fecundity, birth
of children, their prosperity, and adversity and happiness or
misery from them, we shall study a number of charts
illustrative of the combinations bearing on children. In
studying the 5th house, it is essential that the horoscopes of
both the husband and wife are considered from the point of
view of fertility or sterility.
Science holds that masculine impotence, though of a
physical character as a phenomenon, is very frequently
determined by psychical factors. The sexual hypochondria
is supposed to frequently manifest itself in the belief on the
part of the man that his genitals have some defect.
Nonsensical as this delusion is in most cases, it may lead to
serious psychical derangements. Impotence is therefore one
of the causes for sterility, though sterility is often associated
with normal capacity for coitus. In cases of sterility, sexual
functions are apparently normal, but the semen contains
either no sperms or too few. Absence .of sperms is
scientifically known as azoospermia while insufficiency of
sperms is called oligospermia. In most cases the cause is
supposed to lie in an earlier inflammation of the epididimys
of gonorrhoeal origion. This is, to say the least,
unwarranted because, when the father, grandfather and
great grandfather of the person concerned had never been
guilty of moral lapses and they had never suffered from
gonorrhoeal infection, how can the 'absence of sperm’ in
the person concerned have

The Fifth House 219
gonorrhoeal origin? When science cannot explain things
with the aid of commonsense reasoning and ordinary logic
it resorts to unambiguous and unnatural causes. On the
other hand, we have specimens of normal persons perfectly
healthy but unable to beget children. This form of
masculine sterility is fairly frequent. Again the medical
man attributes feminine sterility to defects in her genitals.
We have been consulted by a number of persons about their
5th bhava and several couples have confessed before us
that their sexual lives have been perfectly normal.
Therefore sterility in woman cannot be due to sexual
maladjustment on her part and the cause is something
different. It has been estimated that at the present time in
the United States about one marriage in ten is infertile.
Lack of children in a family that wants them is so serious a
matter, yet it is unfortunate that so many couples,
disappointed year after year, make no effort to discover the
reason for their disappointment. Astrological knowledge
offers possibilities of investigation of the causes of sterility.
Horoscopic examination can reveal the conditions
preventing a conception which may be remedied. As we
have said above, the medical man has a ready but unproven
explanation, viz., a medical history of gonorrhoea which
explains a male's sterility.
The same gonorrhoea which is said to cause
inflammation of the fallopian tubes or of the ovaries is
supposed to be the most frequent cause of sterility in the
female also. Fibroid tumours are another explanation of
female sterility. The doctor may no doubt say that although
the man or woman may be absoultely sterile so long as the
deleterious condition presists, treatment at the hands of a
skilled specialist may in many causes restore fertility. In
other words, everything depends upon the cause of the
trouble and the fun of it is the cause for fertility has so

220 How to Judge a Horoscope
far eluded the mental grasp of the medical man that it has
developed upon the astrologer to explain the true cause and
suggest the remedy.
Viewing things practically it may be said without fear
of contradiction that sterility is often an impediment to
marriage. Such cases present a considerable difficulty in
that it is very frequently impossible to determine before
marriage, by means of medical examination, whether a
woman is capable of bearing children or not. Although
absolute regularity and normality of the menstrual cycle
may as a rule be taken as evidence in favour of fertility,
there are many cases of sterility associated with such a
menstrual cycle. Science does not and cannot know the
essential criterion of feminine fertility so long as it refuses
to absorb the knowledge offered by astrology. The
biochemistry of fertility as a whole is still largely a closed
book to science. The role of endocrine secretions in relation
to fertility is equally obscure as yet. Science does not even
know whether or not there is such a thing as normal
sterility.
We have emphasised these obscurities for a definite
reason. It happens frequently that in childless marriages,
especially in Hindu Society where the birth of a son is of
supreme importance, the fault is attributed by husband and
relations alike to the wife alone, and sometimes she is
accussed of having deliberately concealed her deficiency. It
may be that the husband alone is responsible for sterility. In
such cases, the astrological writers have suggested certain
remedial measures.
There are several rules given in astrological books
which enable us to find out the details pertaining to the 5th
house intimately. Before the Sth house is examined, it is
very essential to find out the sterility or otherwise of he
marrying couple or even the husband and wife. Though

The Fifth House 221
the fifth house may be strong and all the indications for the
birth or children be present, there will be no issues if there
is no strength or vitality for Beeja and Kshetra. Beeja is
the seed of the male and Kshetra is the bed of the woman. In
other words Beeja and Kshetra represent, not exactly the
sperm and the ovum, but the element that really makes the
male and female fluids fertile. The husband and wife may
be physiologically normal. Their sex relations may be
happy. But still if the Beeja and the Kshetra in their
horoscopes are not strong, when judged according to
astrological rules, they will not bring forth any issues.
When the Beeja (male) is weak and Kshetra (female) is
strong, then children may be born late in life after
undertaking the necessary remedial measures. The strength
to cause pregnancy is contributed by the Sun-lord of
vitality—in general. The seminal fluid is governed by
Venus. These too must have favourable positions in the
horoscope particularly in odd signs. Similarly, in the case of
a female, Mars governs the nature of blood and the Moon
controls the strength to bear children. These two planets
should preferably occupy even signs. The following simple
rule can be easily tested in the majority of cases, unless
other elusive combinations arc present in the horoscope.
In the case of a male, add together the longitude of the
Sun, Venus and Jupiter. Expunge multiples of 360°. The
sign arrived at indicates what is called 'Beejasputa' or the
longitude of the seed. Similarly in a female horoscope, add
together the longitudes of Mars, the Moon and Jupiter.
Expunge multiples of 360°. The sign arrived at represents
the longitude of the bed (Kshetra sphuta). If Beeja sphuta
occupies an odd sign and odd Navamsa and is aspected by
or associated with benefics, then there is strength in the
seed and the person is capable of procrea-

222 How to Judge a Horoscope
tion. Similarly the Kshetra sphuta should fall in an even
sign and even Navamsa and should be associated with or
aspected by benefics, in order to render the female fertile.
Evil and impotent planets should not aspect these sensitive
points, nor should evil planets occupy the 5th from Beeja
and Kshetra sphutas. Kshetra or Beeja should not fall in a
malefic sign even when it is friendly. Rahu should never
join these two sensitive points.
Chart No. 88.—Male born on 8-8-1912 at 7-35 p.m.
(LS.T.) (Lat. 13° N., Long. 5h. 10m. E.)
Rahu Saturn ` Saturn | Venus
Moon :
Sun |} Sun
Lagna (Besja) | Rahu
RAŠI AMSA
Mars Merc.
Venus Lagna Moon
Merc. (Becja)
Jupiter Ketu Jupiter | Mars
Balance of Mars Dasa at birth: Years 6-1-6.
Beeja Sphuta
Degrees Minutes
Sun's Longitudes __... 112 43
Venus' bs oe 121 48
Jupiter's ,, hee 221 11
Expunging 360° the remainder is 95° 42' which locates
Beeja in Cancer in Rasi and Leo in Navamsa. Beeja

The Fifth House 223
though an even sign in Rasi is occupied by lord of vitality,
viz., the Sun and the Beeja has not only fallen in a benefic
sign but is aspected by Jupiter and Saturn. The 5th from
Beeja is occupied by Jupiter. In the Navamsa. the Beeja
occupies an odd Rasi and the 5th is free from evil planets.
These indicate the strength of the Beeja.
Chart No. 89.—Female born on 16-10-1918 at 2-20
Ketu |Jupit. Jupiter
Saturn
Moon | Rahu Venus
—— WIFE | a AMSA —
RASI
Lagna Sat. A Ketu
Mars Sun “Sun
Kshetra Rahu [Mercury Venus| | Mars | Kshetra Mercüry agna
Balance of Rahu Dasa at birth : “Years 11-8-20.
Kshetra Sphnta
Degrees Minutes
Longitude of Jupiter 5 83 35
Expunging 360°, the remainder is 265° 07' which
locates the Kshetra in Sagittarius 25° 7'. In Rasi, Kshetra
occupies a benefic sign (though odd) aspected by Jupiter.
In the Navamsa, the Kshetra is in (Scorpio) an even sign

224 Hov\ to Judge a Horoscope
aspected by Jupiter and Saturn. Thus the Kshethra is fertile
indicating the birth of children. In both the cases above
referred to, owing to the fact that Beeja is an even sign (in
Rasi in the male horoscope) and Kshetra is in odd sign (in
Rasi in the female horoscope) the fertility cannot be in a
pronounced manner. Hence the number of children cannot
be very large. The natives of the above two horoscopes are
no doubt healthy but have weak constitutions appropriate
with saturnine influences on Lagna but the children have
been perfectly healthy.
The native of the following horoscope is quite hale and
healthy. With all searching medical examination, no
constitutional defects have been found. Doctors have said
that the powers of procreation are perfectly normal, yet he
has no children.
Chart No. 90.—Details of Birth withheld for obvious
reasons.
Moon | Sun
Namis ‘Mercury Ketu Mars [Mercury [Rahu
ES al E. SERS
Sat Sun
No. 3 | jLagna
ERR: anti AMSA =
RASI
watt Lagna, Jupit
(Beeja) | Mars | |(Beeia [Moon]
EPON tei j |
Rahu Saturn f Jupiter | Ketu | Venus
ae |
Leaving aside the Sth bhava, find out the Beeja dis position.

The Fifth House 225
Degrees
Sun's Longitude 53
Jupiter's ,, 192
Venus' 3 ms 26
271 = Capricorn 1°
The Beeja has fallen in an even and malefic sign both
in Rasi and Amsa. In Rasi, .the Beeja is aspected by Saturn
while in Amsa Jupiter is neecha in Beejasthana.
All these indicate sterlity. Several other rules are to be
found for determining sterility or otherwise of a person
concerned and certain rules have to be applied only under
certain planetary combinations. If the Beeja or Kshetra
longitude has a larger number of malefic saptavargas,
fertility is completely absent. The remedies for sterility will
be discussed on a subsequent occasion. Thus most of these
anomalies can be discovered or determined by astrological
examination of the horoscope of the couple before marriage
; and a fairly definite if not a truly correct prognosis as to
capacity to produce or bear children can be made in a good
number of cases.
The Fifth House——The 5th house in Chart No. 91 is
Libra a movable sign and is occupied by the malefics Sun
and Mercury and aspected by the malefic Saturn, lord of
the 8th.
The Fifth Lord.—The 5th lord Venus is debilitated
occupying the 12th or house of loss from the 5th and
associated with Rahu a first-rate malefic and is in a kendra
from Mars.
Putrakaraka.—Jupiter, the karaka for children, is no
doubt in the 9th with the Moon but as he is subject to
Papakarthari Yoga and occupies a malefic Rasi, he is also
blemished.

226 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 91.—Born on 30-10-1903 at 9-30 p.m.
Mandi Mars
Jupiter | Rahu |
Sat
RASI ——— AMSA ne
Lagoa
Sat Mandi | | Moon l
Venus |
: Sun Rahu j
j Ket
Mars Mercury |Venus SU aac |
Balance of Rahu Dasa at birth : Years 12-11-24.
Conclusion.—All the three factors viz., the house, the
lord and the karaka are considerably afflicted. From
Chandra Lagna again the 5th is aspected by Mars while the
5th lord is blemished in exactly the same way as the Sth
house from Lagna. Hence the native has had no issues born
to him, even though married to 4 wives. Readers may also
examine the strength of Beeja in this horoscope by applying
the principles given on pace 72.
The Fifth house.—The 5th house in Chart No. 92 is
Gemini, a common sign, and is unafflicted either by aspect
or association.
The Fifth Lord.—Mercury the lord is no doubt exalted
but he is considerably afflicted by association with three
malefics, viz., the Sun, Mars and Ketu.
Putrakaraka.—The karaka, Jupiter, is in Scorpio, a
malefic sign aspected by Saturn.
Conclusion.—While the karaka and the house are
moderately blemished, the lord is considerably afflicted.

The Fifth House 227
Chart No. 92.— Born on 30-9-1912 at 5-15 p.m.
Satura Saturn
Rahu Moon Mereury ape
Lagna a
RASI ——- AMSA ==
SA Lagna
Moon I
| Rahu |
Mandi
| Sua ||
| Jupiter Venus [Mars | |Jupit Mars
Balance of Sun Dasa at birth : Years 3-1-16. From
Chandra Lagna, the 5th house and the Sth lord are subject
to a number of afflictions. Consequently the native did not
have any issue. He died before the completion of Rahu
Dasa. If the native had good longevity, perhaps he would
got an issue in Jupiter Dasa.
The Fifth House—In Chart No- 93 Aries, the fifth
house, is aspected by Mars the 5th lord. Otherwise the
house has no aspect or association.
The Fifth Lord.—Mars the 5th lord is considerably
afflicted by his association with Rahu and 8th lord Moon.
No benefic aspects the lord. In tho Navamsa also Mars is
aspected by Saturn.
Putrakaraka.—Jupiter is subjected to Papakarthari
Yoga. Otherwise he is well placed.
Conclusion.—The horoscope is peculiarly disposed so
far as the fifth (children) and seventh (wife) bhavas are
concerned. Mark the fact that Mercury lord of the 7th is

228 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 93.—Born on 3-6-1903 at 4-45 p.m.
Sun Mandi
Ket
a Mercury Mars |
Jupit. Venus| | Moon
—— RAS! paces | AMSA
Sat. Ketu
Mandi
Mars
Lagna Rahu Venus | Lagna
Moon
Balance of Sun Dasa at birth : Years 2-5-29.
in the 12th (from 7th) with malefic Sun. From Chandra
Lagna the 5th house is occupied by Saturn the lord, while
in the Navamsa the fifth from Chandra is strongly afflicted
by the presence of Putrakaraka and Saturn further aspected
by Mars. The native's wife has separated and he has no
children born to him.
The Fifth House.—The Sth house, in Chart No- 94
Cancer in this case, is powerfully afflicted owing to the
presence of three first-rate malefics, viz., the Sun, Saturn
and Rahu. Jupiter's aspect and the presence of Venus, do
not counterbalance the evil due to the location of three
malefic planets.
The Fifth Lord.—The 5th lord Moon is equally
afflicted by his conjunction with Mars, in the 8th.
Putrakaraka.—Jupiter is fairly well disposed as he is
in a trikona from the 5th house.
Conclusion.—As both the 5th lord and the 5th house
are considerably afflicted, the native has had no issues.

The Fifth House 229
Chart No. 94.—Born on 16-7-1888 at 11-6 p.m.
Lagna Merc.) | Ketu [Mercury
Sun
Meadi ents) Lagna
Balance of Rahu Dasa at birth : Years 17-5-24.
Mark also the affliction of the 5th lord from Chandra Lagna
and of the 5th house from Navamsa Lagna. Any tyro in
astrology, who looks at this horoscope, can say that the Sth
house 1s unfortunately disposed for progeny.
The Fifth House. — Libra is the 5th house in Chart No.
95 and it is not occupied by any planet. Mars and Jupiter
aspect the 5th house, the former's aspect being bad and that
of the latter being good.
The Fifth Lord.—The lord Venus is in Lagna with
Mercury and is aspected by Jupiter. Against this benefic
disposition is the Papakarthari Yoga to which Venus is
subjected.
Putrakaraka.—Jupiter, the karaka, is no doubt in the
9th but his association with Rahu and the combined aspects
of Mars and Saturn he receives, have rendered him highly
malefic.
Conclusion.—The 5th house and the 5th lord are
rendered neutral by the almost equal distribution of benefic

230 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 95.—Born on 2-6-1914 at 7-5 a.m. (J.S.T.)
Lagna| |Venus | |
Sun Venus! Rahu Sun
Saturn Merc.| | Mandi
Jupit.
ars
Rabu M Mars
RASI PERREN y AMSA POPREL
Moon
Ketu
; Lagna ||. Sat.
Mandi | |Merc. Jupit
es Moon Spier Ketu
Balance of Venus Dasa at birth: Years 1-4-24.
and malefic influences. Putrakaraka Jupiter is capable of
producing the most baneful effects. Mark the fact that
Jupiter also happens to be the lord of the 5th house from
Chandra Lagna.
Though it is 30 years since he married, the native has
had no issues born to him.
The Fifth House.—The 5th house in Chart No. 96 is
Kumbha or Aquarius, a fixed sign, and is occupied by
Mars, a first-rate malefic. This is a bad disposition. The 5th
is further aspected by Saturn, another first-rate malefic thus
augmenting the evil considerably.
The Fifth Lord.—The 5th lord Saturn is no doubt in a
benefic sign, aspecting the Sth house. But Saturn is
aspected by Mars, so that the mutual aspects between
Saturn and Mars involving the 5th house are capable of
destroying the 5th house indications.

The Fifth House 231
Chart No. 96.—Born on 28-3-1913 at 8-35 p.m.
Sun
Rahu| Venus | Saturo Ketu Moon
Merc.
Mars
E RASI ——— AMSA
Moon | Sun
Mandi Lagna | Ketu j| Mars [Mercury
Jupit. Jupiter
Balance of Ketu Dasa at birth: Years 4-0-22.
Putrakaraka.—Jupiter, the karaka, is in his own house
with the Moon otherwise unafflicted.
Conclusion.—Since the house and the lord are
considerably afflicted, the karaka's moderately benefic
disposition should be ignored. The native, though married
in 1930, has had no issues. Mark also the affliction of the
5th lord from Chandra Lagna.
The Fifth House.—In Chart No. 97. the 5th is Kumbha.
Rahu's presence there, and Putrakaraka being hemmed in
between malefics are unfortunate combinations. The 5th is
not aspected by any benefics or malefics.
The Fifth Lord—Saturn the 5th lord is in Gemini
aspected by malefics the Sun, Mars and Mercury. The 5th
lord is therefore subjected to considerable affliction.
Putrakaraka.—Jupiter, Putrakaraka, has all the evil
influences, to which the 5th house is subject, focussed on
him.

232 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 97.—Born on 25/24-12-1914 at 2-30 a.m.
Mercury
Moo Sat. Ketu
aes Mandi
Sun
h
Rahu Mars
RASI — | -— AMSA
Jupit. Ketu Venus
Sun Lagoa. l
Lagna Moon
Mars | Venus Mandi Sat, Jupit.
Merc. Rahu
Balance of Mercury Dasa at birth : Years 16-9-29.
Conclusion.—As all the three factors, viz., the house,
the lord and the karaka are considerably afflicted, the 5th
house is spoilt. The native has not so far got any issue
though he married nearly 30 years ago.
The Fifth House.—In Chart No. 98, the 5th is
Capricorn a movable sign and is not afflicted either by
association or aspect. From Chandra Lagna however the
5th, being occupied by Saturn and Putrakaraka, is not a
desirable feature.
The Fifth Lord.—Saturn the 5th lord occupying the
12th from the 5th has rendered the 5th house weak from
Chandra Lagna. The 5th lord, in association with Saturn,
though in his own house, has weakened the lord.
Putrakaraka.— Jupiter, the karaka, occupies the 12th
from the 5th (from Lagna) and the 5th from Chandra
Lagna. He is in association with malefic Saturn. Jupiter is
therefore rendered feebly weak.

The Fifth House 233
Chart No. 98.-Born on 24-5-1901 at 1-36 p.m.
Moon enys
Rahu
Lagna Merc.
Mandi
— AMSA =
me Ketu Mars
Lagna; Saturn | Jupiter
Balance of Ketu Dasa at birth : Years 6-5-27.
Conclusion.—In view of afflictions to which the lord
and the karaka are subject to the 5th bhava is rendered
weak with the result no children have been born to him
either by the first or the second wife.
The Fifth House.—In Chart No. 99, the 5th house, a
fixed sign, is subjected to Papakarthari Yoga. It is aspected
by two benefics, viz., Jupiter and Venus, and a first-rate
malefic Saturn.
The Fifth Lord.—Mars the 5th lord is in the 6th from
Lagna in a benefic sign otherwise unafflicted. His being in.
a kendra from Saturn is not desirable.
Putrakaraka.—Jupiter, the karaka is in his own sign,
aspecting the 5th house and aspected by Mars and Saturn.
Conclusion.—In interpreting combinations, due
consideration should be given to the dual roles played by
the 'nyolved planets, as natural benefics or malefics and as
benefic or malefic lords. For instance, Jupiter is a natural

234 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 99—Born on 12-4-1892 at 12-45 p.m.
Sun |
Jupit. Mercury | Venus Sun Venus | Ketu
Rahu
Lagna
Maci Sat. Merc.
= RASI —— || AMSA amend
Mandi
Moon i Mars ; Lagna
Mars Ketu Sal; Rahu Jupiter Moon
Balance of Mars Dasa at birth : Years 2-3-2.
benefic. He may become a malefic lord by virtue of
ownership of certain houses (vide page 17 of 1 part of How
To JUDGE A HOROSCOPE). In interpreting a
combination involving Jupiter, the astrologer must be able
to balance the benefic effects due to Jupiter being a natural
benefic and the unfavourable result he gives as a malefic
lord.
The disposition of 5th house and the 5th lord indicates
the birth of children. But as Putrakaraka has the combined
influences of two first-rate malefics, Mars, ruling the 5th
house here and the karaka for blood, and Saturn, the karaka
for sorrow aspecting the 5th, the native has to experience
sorrow on account of the 5th house. The sign from which
Mars aspects the 5th house is a fiery one. The native's wife
had 4 or 5 abortions and no fully developed children were
born.

The Fifth House 235
Chart No. 100 — Born on3/2-6-1897 at 5-30 a.m.
Lagna
Venus Sun | Moon!|Moon, Mandi Rabu
Mercury
Mars M Launa
Ketu ere: Jupit
aen RASI -h AMSA pooh
Rahu Jupit. Sat.
i Mars i
Mandi! Saturn | Ketu
t d
Balance of Rahu Dasa at birth : Years 0-11-26.
The Fifth House.—Virgo happens to be the 5th house.
It is free from affliction. From Chandra Lagna the 5th
house happens to be Libra and it is aspected by Mars. In
the Navamsa the 5th house is aspected by Jupiter. Hence
the 5th house is nominally or feebly strong.
The Fifth Lord.—The 5th lord Mercury is in Lagna
with a malefic Sun and aspected by another malefic Saturn
and hence afflicted. From Chandra Lagna, the 5th lord
Venus aspects the 5th and Venus in his turn is aspected by
Jupiter. In the Navamsa the 5th lord is Mars and he is with
Ketu in Sagittarius. Hence the 5th lord is weak.
Putrakaraka.—Jupiter, Putrakaraka, occupying a
malefic sign, is aspected by Saturn from another malefic
sign Scorpio. In the Navamsa Jupiter is no doubt exalted
but his association with the Sun and his being aspected by
Mars are not good features.

236 How to Judge a Horoscope
Conclusion.—The Sth house is feebly strong, the lord
is weak and the karaka powerless. Birth of children is not
altogether ruled out. But the 5th house indications are a
source of misery for the native. One male issue was born in
1922 and died immediately. Subsequently there were two
abortions.
Chart No. 101.—Born on 6-5-1891 at 5-10 p.m.
Mars
Venns! E ñ Rahu PEE Rahu |
|Mercury
Jupit Mars
— RASI —}|-—- AMSA a
Sat. | Merc
Ketu Lagna Lagna; Sun Sat
E Venus| Ketu :
Balance of Ketu Dasa at birth : Year 6-3-12.
The Fifth House.—The 5th house is Aquarius and it is
occupied by Jupiter Putrakaraka and hence bad. The Sth is
aspected by Saturn the 5th lord. This is good. The Sth from
Chandra Lagna is occupied by the malefic Saturn and
aspected by another malefic Mars. Hence the Sth house is
strongly blemished.
The Fifth Lord.—The fifth lord Saturn is in the house
of an enemy but aspected by Jupiter and Mars. Hence he is
neither good nor bad.
Putrakaraka.—Jupiter is Putrakaraka in the fifth house
is nota good position. His being aspected by

The Fifth House 237
Saturn (ignoring the fact . that Saturn is lord of the Sth) is
not desirable.
Conclusion. - As lord of the 5th house aspecting the
5th and Putrakaraka, birth of issue is denoted. But as the
5th house is afflicted and the 5th lord almost weak, their
survival is not shown. The native's wife had five abortions
and one was still-born. One fully developed child was born
on 1-6-1937 but died on 13-4-1938. No surviving issues
now.
Chart No. 102.—Born on 29-12-1880 at 10-10 a.m.
Jupit. Saturn
Midi Saturn Ketu || Mars Mercury Rahu
Lagna ` Lagna
Venus
Sun
Mats Ketu . | Sun
Mere. Jupit Mandi
Moon
Rahu Moon | Venus
Balance of Saturn Dasa at birth : Years 4-7-9.
The Fifth House.—The Sth house, viz., Gemini, is
occupied by Ketu and aspected by malefics Sun, Mars and
Mercury. Hence the 5th is considerably afflicted. From
Chandra Lagna the 5th is occupied by Jupiter, who is not
only Putrakaraka but lord of the 5th from the Moon.
The Fifth Lord—The fifth lord Mercury is afflicted by
his association with malefics Sun and Rahu. In the

238 How to Judge a Horoscope
Navamsa also Mercury is strongly blemished by
association with Saturn and being subjected to Papakartari
Yoga.
Putrakaraka.—Whilst his position in his own house is
good, his being in the Sth from Chandra Lagna, as
Putrakaraka, is harmful.
Conclusion.—The 5th house is spoilt and is a source
of worry to the native. A male child was born on 15-101898 and died within one month. Subsequently no otheir
issues were born.
We shall now illustrate a few charts for the birth of
only one issue and for the birth of several issues. The
reader must study all the combinations bearing on the 5th
house carefully and apply the appropriate ones. There are
thousands of combinations given in standard astrological
works and it would be impossible to catalogue them in a
book of this type. Besides the ordinary combinations, there
are special yogas pertaining to children and some of these
yogas have been enumerated in my book THREE
HUNDRED IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS. Readers may
profitably refer to this book also. The art of judging a house
can be divided into two parts, analysis and synthesis. In the
former process, the combinations, bearing on a bhava or
event, are split up to ascertain the exact influence of each
conjuction and aspect, while in the latter, the isolated
pieces of information are built up into one co-ordinated
whole.
In Chart No. 103, Ketu is in the 5th house aspected by
Mars. This combination, in the absence of any relief from
beneficial sources, is formidable enough to adversely affect
the house of children. However as 5th lord Saturn is
aspected by Jupiter and Putrakaraka Jupiter is himself free
from affliction, birth of children is not denied. From

The Fifth House 239
Chart No. 103.— Born on 5/6-12-1906 at 1-10 a.m.
i . | (dupit. Mandi
Mandi Jupit. Sag Ketu
Moou
t i
Sa Rabu Lagna
a RASI E AMSA
Ketu Sun
Sun! ame E Sora Taree | ea
Moon
Mercury ; Mars |Lagna Rahi nr Merc.
Venus enue
Balance of Saturn Dasa at birth : Years 3-1-19.
Chandra Lagna, the 5th has less benefic and more malefic
forces concentrated on it by virtue of the situation of
Venus, Sun and Mercury therein and the aspect of Saturn.
Only one daughter was born just at the beginning of Ketu
Dasa and she is living. That apart the native has had no
issues.
The native has only one daughter. Mark, while the 5th
house is fairly well disposed, the 5th lord Saturn and
Putrakaraka are both considerably afflicted, the former
being associated with three malefics Sun, Mercury and
Moon and aspected by Mars and the latter being aspected
by Mars. From Chandra Lagna, the situation of Rahu in the
5th being aspected by Mars suggests some miscarriages
and premature births.
Innumerable rules have been given in ancient works to
ascertain the number of issues, and losses and survivals
among them. Ido not propose to expand these in the

240 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 104.—Born on 11-4-1907 at 6-50 p.m.
Sup
Moon
Merc.
Sat.
Sun
Venus
Ketu 5
Jupit.
Venus Merc.
Mandi Rabu
— RASI —— | J-— AMSA
Ketu Jupit. M
Mars | Lagna ie
Balance of Saturn Dasa at birth : Years 3-2-6.
pages of this book. I shall give a few typical illustrations
and the intelligent reader can study such charts in the light
of principles which may be gathered from any standard
astrological works. Usually the number of children to be
born is guessed by the number of Navamsas gained by the
5th house or Sth lord. If the 5th lord is aspected by Jupiter
or Venus, the number is doubled. Malefics occupying the
intervening Navamsas denote possible losses.
In Chart No. 105, the 5th house is unafflicted as no
benefic or malefic occupies or aspects it. From Chandra
Lagna, however, both Mars and Jupiter aspect the 5th
house. The 5th lord Venus is with the Sun and Mercury,
while Jupiter Putrakaraka, having caused Gajakesari, is
aspected by Mars. Rahu and Ketu have nothing to do with
the Sth house. Consequently the Sth house is fairly well
disposed. The 5th lord Venus has gained by 5
Lagna Rahu

The Fifth House 241
Chart No. 105.—Born on 6-1-1906 at 5-24 p.m.
Moon Rabu
Jupiter Lagna Mars Mercury Lagna
Mandi
Moon
Jupit.
RASI —— AMSA —
Rabu Venus
Sat Sun Ketu
Balance of Sun Dasa at birth : Years 1-7-21.
Navamsa indicating 5 issues. In the Navamsa he is aspected
by the Moon and Jupiter. Hence doubling the number, we
have 10. As Rahu intervenes between Aries the Ist
Navamsa) and Venus, the number of children) may be put
at about 9. The native had 8 issues out of which one died.
The 5th house in Chart No. 106 is highly significant.
From Lagna the 5th is aspected by Mars Lagnadhipathi and
by the Moon. The aspect of Mars a natural malefic is bad
but as Lagnadhipathi it is good. The Moon's aspect
produces beneficial influence favouring the birth of more
of female children. The fifth lord Sun is with Mars in a
benefic (though inimical) sign and is aspected by Jupiter
who has obtained neechabhanga. Putrakaraka Jupiter is
neechabhanga but has joined Saturn. The combinations
are indicative of birth as well as loss of

242 How to Judge a Horoscope
| Ketu $ |
Lagna un . Sun
Venus | Mars Mele Mandi Venus
Madni : .
Moon Sat Lagna
Ketu
RASI dan AMSA
Jupit. | Mars Juvit
Sat. Rahu k
Moon
Rah
a Merc. |
Balance of Rahu Dasa at birth : Years 14-1-1.
children. From Chandra Lagna, the 5th house is well fortified by
the presence of Mercury, the 5th lord. The 5th lord Sun has
gained 5 Navamsas. He is in Vargottama. Besides this, the
mid-point of the 5th bhava falls in the same Navamsa.
Consequently trebling the number of Navamsa gained by
the Sun, we have 15, the probable number of children to be
born. Actually so far 13 children have been born out of
which, due to affliction of the 5th lord and Putrakaraka by
Mars and Saturn respectively, the native has lost 3 issues.
Chart No. 107 is peculiar in the sense that the native
has no sons but only daughters. The 5th from Lagna is an
even sign occupied by a hermaphrodite planet Mercury and
subject to Papakarthari Yoga. The 5th lord is, of course,
Mars. The 5th from Chandra Lagna is an even and feminine
sign and the lord happens to be a hermaphrodite planet. The
5th is aspected by the feminine planet Saturn. The
exaltation of Putrakaraka and the

Toe Fifth House 243
Chart No. 107.—Born on 24/23-10-1907 at 2 a.m.
Moon | Rahu||Moon Mars |Rahu
| [Venus
Seg M
Lagna Merc
Jupit. Sat.
RASI — AMSA |
Jupit.
s Lagna
Ketu |Mercury y nn | Sun
enu: | Ketu |
Balance of the Sun Dasa at birth : Year 1-0-7.
lord of 5th house renders the 5th house sound while the
predominance of the feminine elements in the 5th from
Lagna and from Chandra Lagna indicates the birth of
female children. Mars has gained five Navamsas. Mars is
in a benefic Navamsa and aspected by the benefic Jupiter.
Here is another typical case (Chart No. 108) of the
birth of a number of children and the loss of all but one.
Putrakaraka in the 5th house aspected by Mars and the 5th
house from the Moon being occupied by Saturn— Ketu
association is a clear case of the spoiling of the 5th house.
As Mars is lord of the 5th and aspects the 5th, there is
affliction on account of the birth and death of children.
Mars, the 5th lord, has gained 5 Navamsas. Since Mars is
in the 11th from Putrakaraka in Navamsa and otherwise
unafflicted, the total number of children is shown to be
about 10. In fact 10 children were born, out of which only
one daughter survives.

244 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 108 —Born on 29/28-1-1905 at5 a.m.
oo
Venus) Jupiter Ketu | Jupiter Sun
j Moon
Venus
AMSA =——*
Lagoa
Mercu Saturn
ercury ur Rahu
Balance of Jupiter Dasa at birth : Years 4-4-24.
The examples given above are adequate to convince
the reader that much skill is required in judging children
from a horoscope. It is very necessary that the horoscopes
of both the husband and the wife are examined in order to
get a correct picture about the birth of off-spring It often
happens that the 5th house afflicted in the case of the
husband is made good by a favourable disposition in the
case of the wife and vice versa. The nature of the Lagna
and the sign falling in the 5th and the nature of the planets
occupying or aspecting the 5th indicate the size of the
family. The sex of the children should be judged by the
signs and planets and the special yogas involving the 5th
house. The horoscopes have to be examined carefully and
the indications balanced cleverly Intelligently and
scientifically applied, the results derived will be quite
satisfactory. This book gives the hints. The rest is in the
hands of the clever reader.

9. Concerning the Sixth House
The sixth house rules or signifies accidents, diseases,
enemies, mental affliction, mother's brother and
misfortunes. An affliction to the sixth house may result in
the shape of the person suffering diseases or incurring debts
or enemies. In reality however a person may be suffering
from diseases, but be free from debts or he may be
perfectly healthy but involved in huge debts. The difficulty
arises in differentiating the different events comprehended
by a single house. If one rushes headlong into making
predictions without a thorough study of the theory and
without gaining adequate practical experience, he will draw
quite wrong conclusions.
Main Considerations
In analysing the sixth bhava, one has to carefully study
the strength of (a) the Bhava, (b) the Karaka, (c) the Lord,
and (d) Occupants. Planets involved in aspect-ing the house
and the lord are also important. Several arishta yogas
having a bearing on the sixth house should be carefully
studied.
Results of Lord of Sixth House Occupying Different Houses
In the first House——Well aspected, the person may
Join the army as a soldier or Commander consistent with
the strength or otherwise of the disposition. Or he may
become a Minister of War or. an official or officer
concerned with prisons. He will live in the house of his

246 How to Judge a Horoscope
maternal uncle. If the sixth lord is weak and otherwise
afflicted, he will become a robber or a thief or leader of a
criminal gang.
In the Second House.—Conjoined with or aspected by
benefics the native will have untold suffering in family life
and deep sorrows, loss of money through enemies,
defective vision, uneven teeth and stammering. If the sixth
lord is weak and otherwise ill-disposed in the 2nd, there
will be loss of wife in the Dasa or Bhukti of the malefic
lord. If Venus is weak, the native will be a celibate and
poverty stricken, just able to get a morsel of food when
hungry.
In the Third House.—The sixth lord fortified confers
enmity with brothers. Or his maternal uncle befriending the
native's brother works against the native's interests or the
native's brother suffers from frequent ill-health. The 6th
lord weak and afflicted, the native will have no younger
brothers.
In the Fourth House.—Well fortified, lives in a
dilapidated building. He will have breaks in education and
will discard his mother. Maternal uncles will generally be
land cultivators. Weak and afflicted: he will quarrel with
his mother and ancestral property will be involved in debts.
He will work as a menial and lead a miserable life.
Troublesome home and domestic affairs and trouble
through servants.
In the Fifth House. — Sickly children. The native wil’
be adopted by his maternal uncle and become fortunateIn the Sixth House. —Increase of cousins. Native's
maternal uncle becomes famed. If in conjunction with
weak Lagnadhipathi, he will suffer from an incurable
disease and increase of enmity with kith and kin.
In the Seventh House.—Generally marries mother's,
brother's or father's sister's daughter. The maternal

Concerning the Sixth House 247
uncle lives in a far-off place (or a foreign country). The
wife's character will be doubtful. If the sixth lord is
afflicted, he will either divorce his wife early in life or she
will die. If the Rasi and Navamsa involved are
hermaphrodite ones, he will have a sickly or barren wife.
When Lagnadhipati joins the sixth lord in the 7th which
happens to be a hermaphrodite sign, the native will be a
eunuch and unable to perform the sexual act. There will
also be troubles with disrespectable women.
In the Eighth House.—When fortified, he will have
Madhyayu or middle life. When afflicted, he will have
plenty of debts and will suffer from loathsome diseases. He
will hunt after women other than his own wife and take
pleasure in inflicting pain on others.
In the Ninth House.—Father becomes a judge, if the
sixth lord is well fortified. The maternal uncle becomes
highly fortunate. There will be misunderstandings between
him and his father. There will be benefits from Gnatis or
cousins. If afflicted : poverty, sinful acts, misfortunes
through relatives, ungrateful towards preceptors and
engaged in unrighteous deeds. If moderate : becomes a
mason, timber merchant or stone cutter.
In the Tenth House.—If fortified : Sinful and
destructive nature, poses as an orthodox and pious man but
really unscrupulous in regard to religious matters. When
the lord is weak : dismissal formidable enemies, low life or
begging.
In the Eleventh House.—If benefic, eldest brother will
be a judge. If ordinary : an elder brother becomes a judge
for some time but loses his job. If malefic : poor and
wretched life : suffering on account of convictions.
In the Twelfth House.—Well disposed : difficulty and
sorrow through destructive nature; causes harm to others. If
afflicted : miserable, hard and wretched existence.

248 How to Judge a Horoscope
The above are the general results likely to happen
when the sixth lord is posited in the different bhavas. In
applying them to actual charts, much care is needed.
Unless the modifications due to benefic and malefic
associations, aspects, etc., are borne in mind, it will be
difficult to use these indications successfully.
Important Combinations
We shall now give some important combinations
pertaining to the 6th house, selected from authoritative
text-books.
If evil planets aspect or occupy the 6th, the native will
have few enemies. If good planets aspect or occupy it, the
number of enemies will increase. If the evil lord of the 6th
resides in Lagna, 8th or 10th, he will suffer from boils. If
the 6th lord is in the 6th or 8th with the Sun, he will suffer
from boils in the head; with the Moon, in the face ; with
Mars or Mercury, in the front; with Jupiter, in the nose ;
with Venus, in the eyes; with Saturn, Rahu or Ketu, in the
armpits. Lords of the 6th and 8th occupying the 7th and the
8th respectively will cause piles. The Sun, the Moon, Mars,
Mercury, Jupiter, Venus or Saturn joining the lord of the
6th in the ascendant indicate respectively danger from high
fevers, watery diseases or grandular swellings or ulcer,
bilious complaints, consumption, sexual troubles, nervous
diseases, carbuncle or spleen trouble. Evil planets in the 6th
or lord of the 6th with Saturn or Rahu will cause the native
to suffer always. One suffers greatly from fever in his 6th
and 12th years if Mars is in the 6th and the lord of the 6th is
in the 8th. He will contact leprosy in his 20th year if the
Moon and Jupiter are in the 6th; watery diseases in 26th
year if Rahu is in the 6th, and lord of Lagna is in the 8th;
colic in the 30th year if there is Parivarthana (mutual
exchange

Concerning the Sixth House 249
of houses) between lords of the 6th and the 12th ; rheumatic
affections if the lord of Lagna is in Lagna with lord of the
8th. There will be fear from wild animals if Saturn is in the
6th house with the lord of the 8th and lord of the 12th is in
Lagna. One will be endangered through water in the 5th or
9th year if the Sun is in the 6th or 8th and the Moon is in the
12th from the Sun. Parivarthana between lords of the 6th
and 12th denote loss of money in the 31st or 40th year. The
Sun becomes an enemy if the 6th lord is in the 6th with
Jupiter and the 12th lord is in Lagna. The Moon in the 6th
with Mars indicates jaundiced constitution. Saturn or Mars
in the 6th aspected by Rahu or the Sun, and the ascendant
lord weak denotes lingering disease. Heart or lung diseases
are indicated if Saturn with Mandi occupies the 6th and
receives the aspect of the Sun, Mars or Rahu.
If the lord of Lagna and the 6th join a kendra with
Saturn, the person will be confined : if with Rahu or Ketu,
he will be placed in irons. One will have a tragic end if the
Moon aspected by Lagnadhipathi joins Saturn, Rahu or
Ketu in the 6th, 8th or 12th. One will die in battle if the lord
of the 6th or 8th or Mars joins the 3rd lord with Saturn and
Rahu in cruel Navamsa. Parivarthana or mutual aspects
between Mars and the Sun, in Rasi or in Navamsa, indicates
death in a dual fight.
If the lord of the 6th is in a kendra aspected by evil
planets or many evil planets are in the 6th, the person will
be vexed by enemies. If the 6th lord is in the house of a
benefic planet and aspected by good planets, he will have
many friends. When lord of Lagna is in the 6th aspected by
lord of the 6th or if they both remain in Lagna or in the 4th,
the person will be constantly troubled and vexed by his
relatives. He will be put to difficulties by relatives if Jupiter
or Venus is in Lagna with lord of

250 How to Judge a Horoscope
the 6th aspected by Saturn, Rahu or Mars. He will suffer
from thieves and fire if the 9th lord occupies the 6th,
aspected by the 6th lord : if the 6th lord in the 6th is with
Mars aspected by Rahu or Ketu, he will lose his estates by
auction.
Planets in the Sixth House
The Sun.—The person becomes a good politician,
famous and successful. Not very good for health. Sun
afflicted : Long and troublesome illness. Sun fortified :
Good administrative ability, few enemies, wealthy and
generally successful in all endeavours. Affliction by Saturn
is not desirable as it indicates heart-trouble or frequent
chest pain unless the affliction is relieved by Jupiter's
aspect.
The Moon.—Indicates Balarishta or much ill-health
during early childhood. Affliction by Mars and Saturn :
curious and incurable diseases and revengeful enemies.
Moon strongly denotes ability and success in subordinate
positions. If the sixth is a fixed sign, the person will suffer
from stone in the bladder; he will be submissive to women ;
weak sexual connection and stomach troubles. Afflicted in
common signs, danger from lung troubles. He will have
success as a Caterer.
Mars.—Highly passionate, victorious and successful as
a ruler or politician. He will have worries from near
relatives. Mars afflicted : accidents, losses and troubles
through employees. If Saturn is the afflicting planet, death
may be due to operation or injury by animals. If Rahu
afflicts Mars, death may be due to suicide. If Ketu, he will
die by poisoning.
Mercury.—Quarrelsome and showy but yet respected ;
interrupted education. If afflicted, mental troubles and
danger of nervous breakdown. If afflicted by Mars and

Concerning the Sixth House 251
Rahu or Saturn and Rahu, there is danger of insanity
through excitement, troubles with servants and a tendency
to poor health. The person will be lazy, harsh in speech, but
nevertheless, a terror to his enemies.
Jupiter.—Inactive, suffers disrespect, indulges in black
magic, feared by enemies, unlucky, dyspeptic, health
generally good. If afflicted, health suffers through
overindulgence.
Venus.—No enemies, corrupted by young women,
favourable for getting favours from women. If afflicted :
health affected by too much sexual indulgence, fond of
other women and licentious.
Saturn.—Quarrelsome, obstinate, voracious eater,
foeless, courageous. If afflicted, sickness through privation
or neglect; troubles through subordinates. If Mars is the
afflicting planet, dangerous illness and operations. If Rahu
afflicts, the person suffers from hysteria. Saturn wellaspected denotes gains through contract work, mining
masonry, etc.
Rahu.—Long-lived and wealthy, troubled by enemies,
ghosts and diseases in private parts. He will also suffer
from sickness of a puzzling nature. There is also liability to
mental derangement if the Moon and Saturn join Rahu. The
person will have many cousins and his private life will be
scandalous.
Ketu.—The best position for Ketu to occupy in a
horoscope. The person will have fame and authority. He
will be foeless. Nevertheless his moral character will be
loose. The position also confers intuitive and occult
powers.
A word of caution is necessary. Over-enthusiastic
students of astrology should not apply the above
combinations verbatim and arrive at premature conclusions.
The results supposed to be given by the Sun and other

252 How to Judge a Horoscope
planets occupying the sixth house get modified by a number
of other factors such as aspects, associations, etc., of other
planets and the general strength or otherwise of the sixth
bhava. If the Sun in the 6th is afflicted in a fixed sign, heart
trouble, asthma, etc., may result. If in a movable sign, weak
chest and poor digestion may result. A good aspect of
Jupiter may neutralise all the results attributed to the
situation of the Sun in the 6th house and render him capable
of conferring quite the opposite results during his own
Bhukti. Success and promotion are sure to happen when the
Sun is aspected by Jupiter. If the Moon is fortified, that is
well disposed, success in the avocations ruled by the Moon
can be anticipated. Moon afflicted by Rahu denotes skin
troubles ; by Saturn, chronic complaints; by Sun, poor
digestion; by Rahu or Ketu, mental derangement, hysteria
or peculiar psychic conditions. Mars afflicted by Rahu or
Ketu, denotes tendency for suicide or death by poisoning.
Mars well disposed is an asset in the horoscope. Saturn
afflicting Mars favours litigation with brothers and cousins.
Mercury fortified sharpens the intellect; joined by Jupiter,
spiritual gains may be anticipated. Afflicted by Rahu, Ketu
or Saturn, despondency, excitability and abnormal mental
behaviour may be anticipated. Jupiter afflicted causes
hardships and intemperance in food habits. Venus, well
placed, favours success in nursing, films or drama.
Afflicted, the person suffers from urinary and sexual
troubles. Dangerous illness, incurable diseases,
undiagnosable psychic conditions are the results of Saturn's
affliction. Between Rahu and Ketu, the latter's position is to
be preferred in the 6th. Rahu's affliction is the most
unfortunate combination denoting huge debts, unexpected
enmities and incurable diseases. Affliction of Rahu by
Saturn and Moon together should be dreaded, unless there
is relief by benefic asso-

Concerning the Sixth House 253
ciations or aspects, as it will make the native a
psychological misfit. The native will be very sensitive to
environment, gets easily excited and irritated. In all these
cases, a careful evaluation of the influences involved is
absolutely necessary.
Summing up, the 6th has mainly to do with the three
important arishtas or misfortunes, viz., diseases, debts and
enemies. The combinations dealing with diseases are
innumerable and they will form the subject-matter of a
separate book entitled Medical Astrology, which I have
planned to write. In this book, I shall deal with some
important diseases, with suitable illustrations.
Karma finds manifestation on physical, mental and
spiritual planes. The resultant of evil Karma on the physical
plane is disease and medicine is the first shanti or remedial
measure for the aHeviation of human suffering.
The fundamental purpose of medical astrology is to
give the planetary influences which cause the various
diseases, afflictions and accidents. In ancient times all
doctors were expected to know astrology and its relation to
disease, what diseases would be produced under different
planetary conditions, the duration of such diseases and
whether or not they would prove fatal. Modern doctors
would do well to lay aside their prejudices and make use of
astrology for the diagnosis and treatment of diseases. When
properly applied astrology would quickly determine the seat
of disease in the patient. Diseases may be classed under two
heads—inherent and active. Inherent tendencies to diseases
are shown by the afflictions in the birth horoscope. These
tendencies may remain latent for long periods and then
appear when the directions of evil planets are in progress.
On the other hand, the 'active diseases' may make their
appearance with every evil transit, if the Lagna is weak and
afflicted.

254 How to Judge a Horoscope
Every student of astrology must recognise the
importance of mental influence upon bodily ailment. The
Moon rules over the mind, the Lagna represents the body
and the Sun governs the soul so that when the Moon and the
Sun are strong and free from affliction, one can enjoy sound
health even if the Lagna is subject to unfavourable aspects
and conjunctions. All these days, modern medicine had
been persistently preaching that all diseases were curable by
drugs. Ayurveda, on the other hand, had recognised that
physical disease was interdependent upon the mind and
insisted that mental harmony was the sine qua non of health
and well-being. That is why great stress was laid by
ancients on the strength of the Moon in the horoscope. Sir
Walter Langdon Brown, Regius Professor of Physics in the
University of Cambridge, is reported to have observed that
"drugs are not the whole of medicine. The dualism of mind
and body has broken down under the assaults of
psychologically-minded physicians. The doctors of the
future will have to come doubly armed with material aid for
physical troubles and psychotherapy for distresses of the
spirit". In other words, modern medicine is only returning
to the point of view held by the sages five thousand years
ago that health depends on harmony and disease upon
discord between the body and mind.
The first thing for an astrologer is to study the Moon
and thereby the mental qualities of a patient. Note the sign
in which the Moon is placed, the house, and the arishtas
and yogas to which he is subject. The secondary
determinant of mental qualities is of course Mercury, as he
is the ruler of the nerves and the nervous system. The basic
qualities of these two planets in the signs should be very
carefully studied. Harmonious relationship between these
two planets is a great asset. If the Moon is in conjunction
with Saturn and there is no beneficial aspect to

Concerning the Sixth House 255
relieve, the mind is stubborn, slow and subject to
melancholia. When however there is Adhi Yoga or
Gajakesari Yoga, a well-balanced mind with good
reasoning qualities will develop and a retentive memory is
shown. Mars in intimate contact (association or aspect)
with the Moon shows that the person is of a high, strong,
emotional, erratic type with little control over the mind.
Chandra-Chandala Yoga, resulting by Rahu-Moon
association, suggests that the mind is inclined towards
unhealthy and unnatural conditions, obsession, religious
mania, medium-ship, drugs, vices and so on. How these
tendencies express themselves depends upon the houses and
the signs. When, for instance, the Moon is in Scorpio and is
afflicted by Saturn or Rahu, the native is often tempted to
use black-magic and may himself become the victim of
those who unscrupulously make use of these dreadful
practices. Again, when the Moon is severely afflicted by
Rahu or Saturn, the person will have a sort of ‘hysteria’ as it
may give the mind suicidal tendencies owing to extreme
sensitiveness or short temper. The psychological set-up is
therefore of the utmost importance before the predisposition
to physical diseases is considered.
It must be made very clear that a ‘mental’ diagnosis
should never be made on the basis of one or two
combinations. The entire horoscope should be considered
carefully.
Before taking up the ‘diagnosis’ proper, a few
observations seem to be necessary. The strongest planet in
the horoscope determines the predominance of the physical,
mental and spiritual peculiarities of the person. Thus if the
Sun is the strongest planet, the native enjoys well-balanced
health, looks only at the bright side of things. The weak
point is the eyesight. He is likely to suffer from accidents
due to fire. However, if the Sun is predominantly

256 How to Judge a Horoscope
weak one may become blind, the heart will be in a poor
condition. He will be frequently troubled with palpitations
and aneurism. He may be a victim of sunstroke. When Mars
is very strong in the horoscope, the sanguine temperament
is represented. The blood is rich. Apoplexy, skin disease,
inflammation of the inner orgnas are the likely complaints.
He runs a great risk of wounds in quarrels. When Mars is
highly afflicted, the native may commit acts which may lead
him to the scaffold. The Mercury-man is endowed with a
bilious temperament. His weak points are the nervous
system, liver and digestive organs. He is sometimes
childishly superstitious and has a tendency to go in for
quick remedies. When Jupiter is the strongest planet, the
temperament is both phlegmatic and sanguine. One may
suffer from excessive indulgeace in eating and drinking. The
Venus person is strong, healthy and happy, sensual, fond of
the good things of life. The disposition is cheerful. He may
suffer from disappointments in love, derangements of the
generative organs. At worst, he will suffer from the
consequences of his excesses and has to pay for them
dearly. Syphilis, blood-poisoning, etc., are not outside
possibilities. When Saturn is the strongest planet, one may
often suffer from vericose veins. He worries a great deal
and suffers from chronic melancholia that may sometimes
grow into insanity. Unclean in habits, uncouth in
appearance with rough hair all over the body, lean and tall,
inactive, one is apt to make himself an undesirable visitor.
The spinal column requires special care.
Time of Fructification of the Results of the Sixth House
In timing events pertaining to the 6th house, factors
to be considered are :—

Conceming the Sixth House 257
(a) The lord, (b) the planet or planets aspecting the
house, (c) planet or planets posited in the 6th house, (d)
planets aspecting the lord of the 6th house (e) planet or
planets in association with the lord of the 6th, (f) the lord of
the 6th from the Moon and the karaka of the 6th.
The factors mentioned above are capable of influencing
the 6th house, as lords of main periods (Dasas), as lords of
sub-periods (Bhuktis) or as lords of still minor periods.
The sub-periods of planets capable of influencing the
6th house, in the major periods of planets also capable of
influencing the 6th, produce results pertaining to the 6th
house par excellence. The sub-periods of planets associated
with the 6th house in the major periods of planets not
associated with the 6th house can produce results pertaining
to the 6th house only to a limited extent. Similarly the subperiods of lords who have nothing to do with the 6th in the
major periods of lords, associated with the 6th. can produce
results pertaining to the 6th only to a limited or small
extent.
Nature of Results
In general, the following results are likely to happen in
the periods and sub-periods of planets capable of
influencing the 6th house, subject to other peculiarities of
the horoscope concerned.
When the 6th lord is in the 6th, fortified, generally
beneficial results will happen during the Dasa. The results
likely to happen during the sub-period of a planet, joining
the above combination, would be unfavourable, and the
results pertain to the nature of the house owned by the
conjoined planet. Thus if the 2nd lord joins, there will be
financial losses and debts during his sub-period. If the 10th
lord joins, there will be reverses in profession. In the

258 How to Judge a Horoscope
sub-periods of planets, not joining the 6th lord in the 6th
fairly auspicious results pertaining to the several bhavas
owned by the sub-lords will transpire. Financial prosperity
can be anticipated during the Dasa of the 6th lord in the 6th,
if he is joined by the lords of the 8th and 12th. Happy
results will be produced throughout the Dasa.
When the 6th lord joins the 7th and is fortified, mixed
results will happen during his Dasa ; there will be trouble
from enemies for some time and the person will also
become free from these troubles. When on tour he will meet
with disappointments and obstacles. When the 6th lord
joins the 7th lord in the 7th, the subject or his wife will
suffer from ill-health, Or in his own sub-period,
misunderstandings with wife may arise. If a malefic also
joins this combination and in addition to this Lagnadhipati
is weak, the person will fall seriously ill, there will be
misunderstandings, troubles from enemies, indebtedness
and in the case of women, female complaints. If the
Navamsa held by the 6th lord is in the 6th, 8th or 12th,
misunderstandings with wife; if the 6th lord is in the 5th,
7th, 9th or 10th Navamsa, wife's character will be suspect.
If in addition to the above affliction, the 6th house is a
common sign and the lord is in a common Navamsa, he will
divorce the wife and remarry. If Venus joins the above
combination then due to misunderstandings with wife, he
will have sex connections with .other women. When the 6th
lord is as above stated and joined by the 2nd lord, the
personis likely to die in the 6th lord's major period and the
2nd lord's sub-period.
When the 6th lord is in the 8th, well disposed,
favourable results happen during the sub-periods of benefic
planets. When lord of Lagna is in the 6th and lord of 6th is
in the 8th, then during the sub-period of Lagnadhipati
within the major period of the 6th lord, the

Concerning the Sixth House 259
person suffers from incurable diseases, poverty, loss of
money and distress of mind. However, if the Lagnadhi-pati
occupies the 6th, 8th or 12th Navamsa, in a benefic sign,
there will be redemption from ailments and suffering. No
relief can be expected from the unfortunate results
suggested above if the lord of Lagna joins the lord of 6th or
8th or if they are in conjunction in Navamsa. The
significations of the bhava, whose lord joins the 6th lord in
the 8tb, will be destroyed during the sub-period of the
former in the major period of the latter. Suppose lord of the
10th joins the 6th lord in the 8th. Then in the sub-period of
the 10th lord in the Dasa of the 6th lord, there will be
reverses in profession or loss of occupation, etc.
When the 6th lord is in the 9th, joined by malefics, and
Pitrukaraka (Sun) is strongly disposed, the father faces
misfortunes, danger from enemies, mental anguish and
heavy losses. The father may lose property, face pecuniary
troubles and litigation and get involved in debts. Father will
die in the major period of the 6th lord and the sub-period of
the Sun if he joins the 6th lord in the 9th. When the 6th lord
is in the 9th, and the Sun joined by the 9th lord is in the 8th
or, being weak, the lord (in the 9th) is associated with or
aspected by the 8th lord, father's death will be due to
swelling and inflammation of abdomen. When the 7th lord
also joins the above combination, father will not die but he
will become inimi-cally disposed towards his son.
When the 6th lord is in the 10th in association with the
10th lord, then his day-to-day professional activities will be
dislocated. He will take to occupations considered low and
degrading by current social values. He will incur the
displeasure of the Government or his superiors and may
become a victim of calumny. If, however, the 10th lord is
in the 6th, 8th or 10th in Navamsa, aspected or

260 How to Judge a Horoscope
joined by benefics, the above evil results will be lessened.
Afflicted, the maximum of evil will happen.
When the 6th lord occupies the 11th with the 11th lord,
his gains in business, agriculture or in his occupation in
general, will be below normal. These results will happen
specially during the sub-period of the 6th lord. When the
6th lord is fortified, there will be gains from the maternal
uncle, but he will incur the displeasure of his own elder
brothers. If the 11th lord is stronger than the 6th lord, he
will conquer his enemies and overcome all opposition.
When the 6th lord occupies the 12th with the 12th lord,
he will suffer from troubles, losses and destruction in his
enemies' hands. He will become immoral. The affliction
will come from the source denoted by the bhava lord
joining the above combination. When the 6th lord is
fortified, no untoward things will happen.
When the 6th lord is in Lagna in conjunction with the
lord of Lagna, the native will suffer from diseases or
deformity to an organ, troubles from his superiors and
machinations of enemies. When Rahu joins the above
combination, he will lose by theft, and will have to face
poverty and penury. If the 6th lord occupies the 6th, 8th or
12th from Lagnadhipati (in Navamsa) there will be a
tempering of the evil results suggested above. He will have
sharp attacks or misfortune, ill-health and financial losses
continuously one after the other during the Dasa of the 6th
lord if the 8th lord also joins the 6th lord in Lagna or the 6th
and 8th lords are on either side of the Navamsa Lagna or
Lagnadhipati in Navamsa. Under the above set-up, life
becomes hell and the native will meet with untimely death.
When the 6th lord is in the 2nd with the 2nd lord,
family life will be disrupted. Relatives and friends will turn
inio bitter enemies. He will not have timely meals.

Concerning the Sixth House 261
There will be loss of money through enemies. He will suffer
from dental and eye troubles or cancer. When any benefics
join the above combination, troubles and auspicious events
will alternately happen when Lagnadhipati joins the
combination and no benefic influences are involved, then
death can be predicted in the Dasa' of the 6th lord and
Bhukti of Lagnadhipati. Consistent with the nature of the
sum-total of influences involved in the above combination,
either death or most adverse events will take place.
When the 6th lord joins the 3rd lord in the 3rd, the
person will have misunderstandings with his brothers. He
will have ear or throat complaints or deafness or injuries to
the neck, lose self-confidence and incur the enmity of
friends. When benefics join, there will be a lessening of
these evil effects. When Mars is weak, brothers will suffer
from illness or death.
When the 6th lord is in the 4th, and Rahu and the Moon
are together, mother's honour will be at stake during the
Dasa of the 6th lord. If the Dasa comes late in life, the
person's health will be in great jeopardy. When Mars is
weak, the native's immovable properties will be auctioned
or lost to his enemies. If Mercury is weak, he will fail in
examinations or there will be breaks in education. If Venus
is weak, he will meet with accidents by falling from
vehicles. When the 4th lord is strong, mother may become a
widow. When lords of Lagna and the 4th are in the 6th and
8th from each other, the person will separate from his
mother. Other benefic or malefic influences will lessen or
increase the intensity of the evil results suggested above.
When the 6th lord is in the 5th in conjunction with the
5th lord he will incur the enmity of his boss or son or father
consistent with the karaka nature of these lords.

262 How to Judge a Horoscope
His children will frequently suffer ill-health. He will meet
with all sorts of obstructions. His thinking will be
perverted. Spiritual practices, if taken to, during this Dasa,
will prove abortive. If the 6th lord posited in the 5th
occupies the 4th, Sth, 7th, 9th or 11th degree and lord of
Lagna is weak and afflicted, then the person will incur the
displeasure of the rulers and suffer imprisonment in the
Dasa of the 6th lord and the Bhukti of Lagnadhipati or vice
versa.
In interpreting Dasa results pertaining to any bhava,
emphasis is laid by the sages on yukti or interpretative skill.
It is an admitted fact that in order to examine a horoscope a
good deal of judgment is required. The strength of the
planets, their various aspects and the innumerable
influences have to be properly weighed, appropriate
evidence sifted and then the inference drawn. For instance,
the rules given above for predicting the results likely to
happen during the Dasa of the lord of a particular bhava
can merely serve as a code of reference. With these at his
command, the clever reader will have to use his discretion
and lay down a ruling as he can best draw a conclusion
from them. The greatest mistake that one can commit is to
apply verbatim the principles to actual charts.
It has been given above that when the lord of the 6th
joins the 5th lord in the 5th, the person will incur the
enmity of his son or father. Supposing, Lagna is Pisces.
Then the 6th lord will be the Sun, who is Pitrukaraka and
the 5th lord is the Moon who is Matrukaraka. The
association having reference to 5th house, or Cancer, the
Moon is well placed. During the Dasa of the Sun, therefore,
the person, whose enmity will be incurred, will of course be
the father of the native.

Concerning the Sixth House 263
Suppose in the above case, the Sun is in the 4th, 7th or
5th, 9th or 10th degree. Then the person will suffer
imprisonment in Moon Bhukti in Sun Dasa, for offences
indicated by the karaka planets, aspecting or associated
with this combination.
As we have said above, the sixth house has mainly to
do with diseases, debts and enemies. We shall deal with a
few salient principles of medical astrology and give a
number of charts illustrative of certain important diseases,
debts and enemies severally. Methods of diagnosis of
diseases, time of their occurrence and disappearance will be
exhaustively dealt with in our work, MEDICAL
ASTROLOGY, under preparation now.
Three seats of disease are recognised, viz., if the Lagna
is movable and belongs to Urdhwamukha Rasi, then the
disease can be seen above the neck ; if fixed and
Thiryugmukha, the disease is below the neck and above the
waist, and if it is common and Adhomukh a the disease will
be below the waist. The following planets govern the organs
mentioned against them :
The Sun - stomach ; the Moon—heart ; Mars—head ;
Mercury—chest; Jupiter- thighs ; Saturn—legs, and the
bones tibia and fibula; and Rahu—the feet. Zodiacal
allocation of organs is similar to the method adopted by
Varahamihira, viz., Aries or Lagna ruling head and so on.
The Thridoshas are governed by different planets as
follows :
The Sun—Mostly pitta (bile) and a little of vatha
(wind).
The Moon—Mostly vatha (wind) and a little of kapha
(phlegm).
Mars—Pitta (bile).
Mercury—Mostly vatha (wind), a little of pitta (bile)
and still less of kapha (phlegm).

264 How to Judge a Horoscope
Jupiter—More of kapha (phlegm) and a little of vatha
(wind).
Venus—More of vatha (wind) and a little of kapha
(phlegm).
Saturn—More of vatha (wind) and a little pitta (bile).
Examine carefully the horoscope. If the Sun and Mars
occupy evil places, diseases by pitta (extreme heat, etc.),
can be seen. The Moon and Venus if evil by position bring
in diseases caused by water such as swelling, dropsy, water
in the head, etc. Saturn brings about diseases pertaining to
vatha or wind. Mercury causes brain-fever, typhoid and the
like. Jupiter causes deafness. The diseases will make their
appearance during the seasons indicated by the planets
which are follows :—
Planet Season English Equivalent
Venus Vasantha Spring
Sun and Mars Grishma Summer
Moon Varsha Rainy season
Mercury Sarat Autumn
Jupiter Hemantha Winter
Saturn Sisira Winter
Diseases can be read from (a) planets in the 6th, 8th
and 12th ; (b) planets in association with lord of Lagna ; (c)
planets aspecting the lord of Lagna ; and (d) planets
occupying or aspecting Lagna.
The diseases of the various planets are detailed thus :
The Sun governs excessive heat and internal fever. The
Moon rules 'vomiting' if he is in Urdhwamukha Rasi;
diseases in the kidneys and urethra if he is in Thriyugmukha; diarrhoea and thirstifhe occupies an Adhomukha
Rasi.
Mars or Kuja causes diseases brought about by
extreme heat in the body or by impure blood. Mercury or
Budha-shivering fever, typhoid, madness ; Jupiter or Guru

Conceming the Sixth House 265
—inability to think or remember ; Venus or SukraIndigestion, water in the body, extreme heat in the body,
fits and swoons; Sani or Saturn—Thirst, aversion to eat or
drink, pain in all parts of the body ; Rahu—Difficulties in
breathing; Gulika—Contraction of the nerves ; and Ketu —
Same as Rahu.
Diseases can be classified into several kinds such as
Sariraka (bodily), Chithothara (mental), those caused by the
three doshas individually and those caused by a permutation
and combination of the three doshas and so on.
According to the famous work PRASNA MARGA
bodily diseases can be ascertained by an examination of (a)
the 8th bouse, (6) the lord of the 8th, (c) the planet who
aspects the 8th, and (d) the planet who occupies the 8th.
The strongest of these will cause the disease pertaining to
the dosha under its domain and in the particular organ
governed by the zodiacal sign it afflicts.
PRASNA MARGA further says that if the Sun occupies
an Arishtasthana, troubles from pitta, fever with pains,
sudden fall, apasmara, heart disease, diseases in the
stomach, diseases in the eyes, fear from enemies, skin
diseases, Asthi diseases (dislocation of bones, etc.), leprosy,
fear from Gurus, troubles from weapons, danger from
poison, death of one's wife, danger to the son, danger from
quadrupeds, trouble from thieves, fear from kings, anger of
the family deity, anger of the serpent gods, evil influence of
Bhutas (certain evil spirits) will happen.
If the Moon occupies an evil position, then increase of
sleep, want of agility in any work (inertia), increase of
phlegm, and consequent troubles such as asthma,
inflammation of the lungs, etc., diarrhoea, sores and boils,
shivering fever; wounds caused by the horns of animals,
troubles from watery animals, dyspepsia, emaciation,
sorrow from wife, want of blood in the body, weakness in

266 How to Judge a Horoscope
thinking faculty, poisoning of the blood and consequent
diseases, fear from water, troubles from Balagrahas, anger
of the Goddess Durga, anger of family gods or deities,
anger of serpents, etc.
Evil Mars brings about thirst, blood pressure, pitta,
fever, diseases caused by heat, fire, poison and weapons ;
leprosy, sore-eye, gulma (a disease in the stomach),
apasmara—decline of Majja in the bones ; skin loses its
lustre, itches all over the body, body gets shrivelled,
troubles from kings, enemies and thieves ; enmity with
brothers, sons and relatives, and diseases above the neck.
An unfavourable Mercury causes madness, an
inclination to use abusive words often. Diseases in the eye,
diseases in the throat and the nose, high fever caused by the
fury of all the doshas—fear from serpents, fear from
poison, skin diseases, dull pallor, bad dreams, itches;
sudden falling down, a tendency to use cruel expressions—
fear of imprisonment, physical exertion—evil influences
such as Pakshi Peeda, etc.
Jupiter or Guru if afflicted brings about gulma (disease
in the stomach), fever, sorrow, fainting, ear diseases due to
the fury of kapha dosha : diabetes, diseases caused by the
curses of Brahmins and by the removal of treasure usually
found in temples, and diseases by the anger of serpents.
A bad Venus brings in pandu (a sort of leucoderma),
diseases caused by the fury of phlegm and wind, diseases in
the eye, laziness, great exertion for the body and consequent
weakness, diseases in the private organs, diseases in the
face, diseases in the urinary organs ; danger caused by
extreme averse for money or girls, free flow of seminal fluid
(spermatorrhoea), loss of clothes and dress, death of wife,
loss in cultivation, fading away of the lustre

Concerning the Sixth House 267
in the body, swelling of the body, fear from certain evil
spirits, death of near relations.
An afflicted Saturn gives diseases caused by vatha and
kapha, diseases in the legs, unforeseen dangers, laziness,
weakness, due to over-exertion, madness, pains or aches in
the stomach, loss of servants, loss of quadrupeds —death of
wife and children—some accidentto one of the limbs in the
body, blindness, deafness, mental worry, wounds caused by
the fall of trees or stones over the body, troubles from evil
spirits, pisachas, etc.
If Rahu occupies an unfavourable house, then extreme
heat in the body, leprosy, Vishama vyadhi (many diseases
coming together), poison given by another, diseases in the
feet, trouble from pisachas, fear from serpents, danger from
wife and children, quarrel with Kshatriyas and Brahmins,
trouble from enemies, and trouble from pretas (ghosts).
Gulika gives all the troubles caused by Rahu and Ketu
and besides it brings in anger of all. Death of near relations
and consequent pollution and fear from poison (mad dogs
also should be included) may also be anticipated.
If Saturn is in the 10th house predict trouble from
pisachas and pakshi peeda. If Gulika occupies Lagna or the
8th house and he is aspected by Rahu, then predict poison
in the body caused by swelling or evil eye. If evil planets
occupy the 6th house, predict diseases in the stomach. Mars
in the 8th house causes fever; in Lagna indigestion, and in
the 7th house, both.
Mental diseases are caused by anger, fear, sorrow, and
desires. These have to be determined by the mutual
dispositions of the lords of the Sth and 8th.
Then there is another class of diseases caused by
invisible agencies such as spirits, curses of great men and
mantric incantations of enemies.

268 How to Judge a Horoscope
The above diseases have to be ascertained by an
examination of the 6th house, or its lord, the planet that
aspects the lord of the 6th house, or the planet occupying
the 6th. If the 6th and 8th lords are in conjunction or aspect
each other, then say that the disease is strong and deeprooted. The following astrological combinations indicate
different forms of lunacy :
1. Vathonmada (lunacy caused by the excitation of
the dosha wind)—This can be detected by the following
symptoms, viz., laughing at all moments, clapping hands
often, speaking aloud, dancing round and round, crying
bitterly, shaking legs and wringing hands. The body
becomes copper coloured, soft and emaciated. He becomes
more turbulent as soon as the food taken in is digested.
2. Pittonmada (lunacy caused by excitation of the
dosha bile).-Symptoms : Hates all, impertinent, flying into a
rage at the face of all, showering abuses, always longing to
eat food and drink water, very angry. The body becomes
yellow and feels hot when it is felt.
3. Kaphonmada (excitation of phlegm) —Symptoms:
Seeking solitude and women, aversion to everything, little
sleep, saliva trickling down always, finger-nails turning
pale and white.
4. Sannipathonmada (excitation of all the three
doshas).—The symptoms mentioned above will be found in
a mixed form. Recovery of one suffering Sannipatha is
almost impossible.
All the above forms of madness can be ascertained by
the following 8 kinds of planetary combinations:— (1)
Jupiter in Lagna and Saturn in the 7th ; (2) Jupiter in Lagna
and Mars in the 7th ; (3) Saturn in Lagna and Mars in the
7th or 5th or 9th ; (4) the Moon and Mercury in
combination occupying Lagna ; (5) weak Moon and Saturn
in the 12th ; (6) weak Moon in conjunction with

Concerning the Sixth House 269
an evil planet occupying Lagna, 5th, 8th or 9th; (7) Gulika
in the 7th in conjunction with an evil planet ; and (8)
Mercury occupying 3rd, 6th, 8th or 12th in conjunction
with evil planets.
Vatha, Pitta and Kapha Unmadas are said to be curable
by administring medicines in judicious quantities but
Sannipathonmada is said to be incurable except by mantraic
treatment, japa, homa, wearing talismans, etc.
If the Moon, Venus and lord of 8th occupy evil places,
infer that lunacy is due to irregular use of food. If the above
planets are with Rahu, Ketu or Gulika, the madness is due
to unhygienic food. If Mars is in the 5th, the cause is due to
excess of anger; any other evil planet suggests excess of
fear. If evil planets are in the 9th, consider that madness is
the outcome of curses of Gurus and elderly people.
Chart No. 109—Born on 28-1-1919 at 3-58 p.m.
Lagna
Kelu ds Moon . eu Ketu
Mandi |rupit. Saturn | aed
i l
Mars 7
Venus Jupit.
—— RASI ——— AMSA ——
Sun Sat.
Moon | |Rahu |
Mer Rahu PR ; Venus
Balance of Ketu Dasa at birth : Years 5-5-0.

270 How to Judge a Horoscope
Remarks.—Suffered from a severe type of typhoid
fever in Venus Dasa, Venus Bhukti, Saturn Anlara. Note
Venus is in association with the lord of the 6th Mars and
aspected by Saturn lord of the 8th. Saturn was transiting
Scorpio. From the Moon, Venus happens to be the 6th lord
and occupies the 6th in the Navamsa. In Venus Dasa,
Saturn was transiting Aquarius he suffered from
pneumonia, and loss of weight and T.B. was suspected.
Subsequently in the Dasa of the Sun (note the Sun being
lord of the 3rd is in the 8th, in the 12th from Mars, karaka
of the 6th bhava) the native again suffered from malignant
malaria, pneumonia and awful blood vomiting.
Chart No. 110.—Born on 2/3-9-1921 at 3 am.
Mars
Ketu Ketu
R Lagna P
Mars Jupit. aga
Sat.
Venus
ee RASI E |) AMSA ee
Sun
Moon
Merc.
Mandi
Jupit. | | Moon j Sun
| Rahu | | Mandi | Venus Rahu
: Sat. | | Merc. |
Balance of Sun Dasa at birth : Years 4-11-9.
The above is the horoscope of an intelligent
hardworking lady, an M.A., B.T., who remained unmarried
and died in her 27th year. T.B. was suspected in 1947 in
Rahu Dasa, Jupiter Bhukti, Sun Antara. Rahu, the major
lord, is in association with Jupiter lord ofthe 6th from

Concerning the Sixth House 271
Lagna and Saturn lord of the 6th from Chandra Lagna.
Jupiter as sub-lord is fully capable of causing the disease
which he has done. The Sun is Chandra Lagnadhipathi and
occupies the 12th from the major and minor lords. Saturn
was transiting Cancer. As soon as the sub-period of Saturn
commenced, she died. Mark the fact Saturn is lord of the
7th from Moon and is Ayushkaraka. At the time of her
death, Saturn was transiting Leo and Rahu Aries, the 8th
from Janma Rasi.
Chart No. 111— Born on 26-7-1914 at 5-24 p.m.
Merc. |
Sai. Sun | Merc.
Rabu Sun |lrahu
== RASI ns AMSA eae
Aye Lagna
Jupit. 5 Ketu
Mars Mand
iVenus l Baas
Lagna n :
Mandi | Mars Saturn Venus |Jupit.
The native had an attack of IB. in Moon Dasa, Venus
Bhukti, Sun Antara. The major lord Moon, owning the 8th,
is in the 9th in conjunction with Venus the sub-lord who
owns the 6th and Mars (karaka for 6th bhava) and with
Ketu. The Sun is in the 8th from Lagna having
Dwirdwadasa position from major and sub-lords. This
combination is aspected by Saturn lord of the 6th from
Chandra Lagna.

272 How to Judge a Horoscope
From 1930 to 1934 he went to jail five times in
connection with political movements. The first conviction
took place in Moon Dasa Mercury Bhukti. Note Mercury is
also afflicted. By virtue of the association of the Moon and
Venus, as lord of the 6th and 11th, the native had to suffer
imprisonment. Mars and Rahu are also involved in this
combination. Consequently he continued to be jailed during
Mars Dasa, Mars and Rahu sub-periods also.
Chart No. 112.—Born on 15-6-1912 at 5-23 a.m.
venus | sun | iRahu
Mercury |Lagna |
Moon ;
| Saturn | Mandi
Sat.
Mars Mandi
— RASI Tenar AMSA —
Venus
te crated epee eee | ee
Lagna | Moon
Jupiter Ketu Jupit | Sun et
| ; Merc.
Balance of Mars Dasa at birth : Years 4-3-29.
The lord of the 6th Mars is in the 2nd (vision) and lord
of the 2nd Moon (ruler of eyes) is in the 12th with Saturn,
lord of the 8th. The native is suffering from myopia.
Mark the disposition of the 6th house in Chart No. 113.
The 6th lord Mars, who also happens to be the Rogakaraka,
is in the 11th with malefics Saturn, Ketu and the Sun. There
is slight relief as Jupiter aspects this combination. In Sun
Dasa Moon Bhukti, the native had

Concerning the Sixth House 223
Chart No. 113.—Born on 7-10-1893 at 8-30 a.m.
Rabu Jupiter Raby | Mars
Jupiter
i Sun
Lagna
— RASI ——|j—-—-| AMSA paar
Moon Sat.
Lagna un
Mandi [Mercury Sale Mercury| Moon | Ketu
Venus i Keiu
Balance of Venus Dasa at birth : Years 9-2-21.
Chart No. 114.—Born on 9-9-1911 ot 11-18 p.m.
Saturn Lagna P
Moon Rahu Mars tenes Jupit.| Mars
Venus Rahu
— RASI —)} | AMSA ae,
Sun
Ke
Merc.
Jupiter Sun Lagna
Ketu Venus} | Sat. Mercury | Mandi Moon
Balance of Saturn Dasa at birth : Years 12-5-27.

274 How to Judge a Horoscope
a serious attack of smallpox. Mark the association of the
Sun with the 6th lord and the other afflictions he has been
subject to.
The lord of the 6th Mars, who is also the Rogakaraka,
is in the 12th aspecting the 6th (Chart No. 114). From the
Moon the 6th and the 6th lord are aspected by Mars. Lord
of Lagna Mercury and lord of vitality the Sun are both
aspected by Mars. Throughout Saturn Dasa (for the first 12
years) the native suffered from liver and spleen troubles.
Mark the fact that Saturn is lord of the 8th and is with Rahu,
of course, aspected by Jupiter. Venus, lord of the 8th from
the Moon is neecha and subject to Papakarthari Yoga.
Mercury the planet of nerves is considerably afflicted.
Throughout Mercury Dasa he was the victim of serious
spermatorrhoea. In Mercury Dasa Venus Bhukti, he had
hydrocele and he was operated upon for this in Mercury
Dasa, Jupiter Bhukti. Mercury as Lagnadhipathi is afflicted
by association with Sun lord of the 3rd and aspected by
Mars lord of the 6th while Jupiter is afflicted by being
aspected by Saturn, lord of the 8th and by Rahu. At the time
of the operation, Saturn was transiting Janma Rasi.
In Venus Dasa, Rahu Bhukti the native had a serious
attack of typhoid. (Chajt No. 115) Venus, the major lord,
owns the Lagna as well as the 6th and occupies the 2nd
with Saturn. Venus and Saturn are almost in conjunction. In
the same Dasa, Saturn Bhukti he had an attack of
bronchitis. Mark the disposition of the 6th lord and Saturn
in Gemini, an airy sign.
In Chart No. 116 the 6th is occupied by Ketu while the
Moon is in Virgo subjected to powerful Papakarthari Yoga.
The 6th lord Sun is in the 2nd with Mercury lord of the 4th.
The 6th from the Moon is occupied by Rahu

Concerning the Sixth House 275
Chart No. 115.—Bornon 19-5-1916 at 6-10 a.m.
Venus J upiter
| Saturn
Sat. ||Venus Mandi
Mandi Rahu
Lagna
Sun
Mercury
Jupiter Mars
Sun
Ketu Moon
RASI
Balance of Mercury Dasa at birth : Years 4-6-9.
Chart No. 116.—Born on 4/5-5-1895 at 4-00 a.m.
| Sun Mars
Lagna Mexuury Venus Mars Rahu
Jupit.
Rahu
| — RASI at AMSA —
| Jupit.
Ketu | |Moon
Sat.
Lagna
Saturn |Moon||Ketu |Mercury Sun
Venus
eS) | | Sey see
Balance of Sun Dasa at birth : Years 4-5-19.

276 How to Judge a Horoscope
and the 6th lord Saturn is in the 2nd from the Moon
aspected by Sun and Mercury. Therefore the liability to
attack by appendicitis is plain and unmistakable.
As we have already said above, Ketu is in the 6th
ruling abdomen. Saturn is in the 8th house. The native
underwent an emergency operation for appendicitis about
August 1926 which terminated fatally. Rahu's position in
the 6th from the Moon is equally indicative of
predisposition for appendicitis. The operation took place
and death occurred in the Dasa of Rahu and sub-period of
Venus. Rahu is to give the results of Saturn and Saturn is in
a house of maraka or death from the Moon. Venus is in
conjunction with Mars. Added to all this, Mars was
transiting Cancer and Saturn Libra. The Elarata influence
coupled with poweful mutual aspects between transiting
Mars and Saturn all contributed to the acceleration of death.
A few general observations may be made on
appendicitis in the light of astrological factors.
According to modern medical explanations,
appendicitis is a very prevalent disease, being a condition of
inflammation of the vermiform appendix. The appendix
seems to be a vestigeal organ that has no function in the
anatomy of man in his present state of biological evolution
and consequently is an atrophying organ. Appendicitis
appears to be, to a decided extent, a disease caused by the
affliction of the sixth house and the Moon. * Abdominal
diseases, appendicitis, etc., are caused by the movements of
the Sun and the Moon in Virgo.
When the 6th house is occupied by a malefic
particularly Mars, Ketu or Rahu, disease will be in a latent
state. It may gradually develop under the directional
* Hindu Predictive Astrology.

Concerning the Sixth House 277
influences of the planet concerned or the tendencies may be
resisted by taking proper precautions from the very
beginning in the shape of regulating diet and habits. When
the disease becomes acute and dangerous, there will usually
be found an affliction in the 5th or 6th house by the transit
of Mars and mutual aspects between transiting Mars and
transiting Saturn. Obviously, the prevailing Dasa and
Bhukti influences provide their quota of evil. The
‘tendencies' in the chart take the form of acute disease by
the progressed influences. Mars, as we have said above, has
a baneful influence on this disease. This is due to his effect
upon the adrenal glands. The effect of martian influences on
the adrenal glands is to set up a chemical imbalance which
may localise in the appendix and set up irritation therein
due to the fact that it is shown to be weak and susceptible to
irritation and inflammation by the horoscopic indications.
These unfavourable martian influences tend to
overwork the adrenal glands and weaken and deplete their
harmones, so that the supply of adrenalin and intercortin,
the chemical agents which resist infection become
insufficient. Pus then begins to form in the appe'ndix and if
this condition increases, the poisons spread through the
blood stream and death ensues. This is the dangerous and
often fatal stage when septic peritonitis sets in. The septic
peritonitis results from the breaking down and decay of the
tissues of the appendix—a gangrenous condition.
The affliction of Jupiter in Pisces or Saturn in Virgo or
Pisces or Rahu in Scorpio or Mars in Gemini or Virgo, the
affliction happening to occur in the 5th or 6th house is
likely to bring about appendicitis. It will be seen that the 6th
house is not only the general seat of disease but has special
governance over the abdomen. Hence a malefic

278 How to Judge a Horoscope
of the type of Rahu or Mars is decidedly unfavourable
especially if the sign happens to be Virgo and the Moon is
also there. Summing up our observations, we can say that
the following combinations show a predisposition to
appendicitis:—
(a) Affliction of the 22nd drekkana particularly by
Rahu or Mars.
(b) The sixth house being subjected to powerful
Papakarthari Yoga.
(c) The Moon being posited in Virgo, Scorpio,
Aquarius and subject to malefic influences.
(d) The Sun in Leo or Aquarius receiving the aspect of
Saturn, Mars or Rahu or being associated with any of these
three planets.
In the light of the above principles, one can safely find
out, if any tendencies for appendicitis are to be found in a
horoscope.
Chart No. 117.—Data of birth withheld for obvious
reasons.
Ketu Lagna) Lagna
Sat, |.
Sat.
M
Sn Rahu
Se RASI —]. AMSA
Sun || Mars
Merc. | | Ketu
Jupie. | Merc.
Venus Moon) | sun Jupiter | Venus |Moot
Rabu
In the typical horoscope we are illustrating herewith,
certain fundamental factors are evident.

Concerning the Sixth House 279
The Lagna is Gemini, while in the Navamsa a watery
sign rises. The lord of Lagna is in the 3rd with the Sun and
Jupiter but afflicted on account of Papakarthari Yoga. Mars,
lord of the 6th (disease), is in the 2nd—a watery sign. If we
accept the zodiacal rulerships, then we find that the Moon
and Rahu in a sensitive place like Virgo, coupled with the
presence of Mars in Cancer, suggest the stomach and
kidneys as the seat of disease. Saturn being an 'anaemic'
planet has the tendency to dry up the body fluids as he is
in Lagna. Mark the fact that Venus ruling over sensual
appetites, whilst Vargottama, is powerfully aspected by
Mars (lord of the 6th) while the 7th from Lagna and
Chandra Lagna have unfavourable aspects. Any reasonable
astrologer would conclude that these sets of influences
indicate that a lack of moral balance was largely
responsible for the leprosy of the native. Mercury, who is
said to have governance over the thyroid, is aspected by
Saturn, and is in association with the Sun (and Jupiter) and
hemmed in between Mars and Rahu. Again, Venus the
planet of sensual pleasures is in Libra (ruling kidneys) and
aspected by Mars. The Moon, one of the planets of vitality,
is in a sensitive place and is afflicted by conjunction with
Rahu. We may conclude that this man through his
excessive desires, indulged in sexual pleasures to such an
extent that the functions of the pituitary body became
impaired. Saturn is styled lord of sorrow according to the
dictum 'duhkham dinesatmajaha'’, while Rahu is always
associated with vice, filth, dirt, etc. With Saturn in Lagna
and Rahu with Moon, the Sun being aspected by Saturn, and
with Mars, Ketu, Saturn and Rahu in mutual aspect in
Navamsa, we can deduce that the native was very untidy,
filthy, and unclean in habits and even unmindful of dirty
surroundings. The 6th lord Mars is in Leo Navamsa—as
usual afflicted. Probably having neglected

280 How to Judge a Horoscope
elimination of toxic poisons through the colon, skin and
kidneys, the body was filled with poisons which ultimately
caused eruptions. Mercury is lord of skin and he is evilly
disposed. Therefore the skin became dry (Mercury in Leo,
a dry sign), the mentality dulled (Moon-Rahu conjunction)
and the energies of mind and body slowed down.
The above is a case of leprosy in its most dreadful
form. Truly have the wise men said that the Lagna must be
strong and well aspected, as otherwise, the man would
become gluttonous, immoral and careless in personal habits
inviting such diseases to take a deeproot in his system.
Readers must be very careful in applying these
principles to their own horoscopes lest they should come to
premature conclusions based on insufficient knowledge or
want of experience. Any antidotes present must be
carefully scrutinised before pronouncing judgment.
In the astrological nomenclature, Mars is supposed to
originate leprosy. Rahu is of course assumed not only to
cause one to suffer from leprosy but to cause death by this
dirty disease. Even though the Sun and other planets are
not connected with leprosy, it is said to be caused during
the sub-period of Mercury in the course of the Sun's Dasa.
Obviously one should not rush to the conclusion that it is a
definite principle and that every person would suffer from
leprosy during Mercury in Sun. The combination suggests
that Mercury is also connected with leprosy. Mercury rules
the thyroid gland and leprosy is caused by disorders of the
thyroid gland. Again leprosy is said to make its appearance
during the sub-period of the Moon in the Dasa of Mercury.
The disease will definitely make its appearance if Gulika is
associated with Saturn. We enumerate below a number of
combinations which are said to cause, rather indicate, this
dreadful disease.

Concerning the Sixth House 281
(1) Mercury in Aries, the Moon in the 10th and Mars
and Saturn in conjunction. (2) Saturn, Mars, the Moon and
Venus in watery signs, afflicted by conjunction or aspect.
(3) The Moon in the 4th from Karakamsa, aspected by
Mars. (4) Conjunction of the Sun, Saturn and Mars. (5) The
Moon in Mithuna (Gemini), Kataka (Cancer) or Meena
(Pisces) Navamsa afflicted by Saturn or Mars. (6) Mercury,
the Moon and the lord of Lagna in conjunction with Rahu
or Ketu. (7) Mars, Saturn or the Sun and the 6th lord in the
ascendant. (8) Mars in Lagna, and Saturn in the 8th, Ist or
Ath. (9) Lord of the Lagna in the 8th afflicted by a malefic.
One should be very careful in the application of the
above principles to actual horoscopes. For, the operating
influence of a combination is subject to the general
disposition of the horoscope and the inherent strength or
weakness of the factors involved. It is evident from the
above information that almost all the planets—Jupiter
excluded—come into the picture. Of course, special stress
is laid on Mars, Saturn, Rahu, Mercury, the Sun and the
Moon. Ketu is less harmful than Rahu In other words, the
Lagna, the Sun, the Moon or Mercury afflicted in any way
by the lord of the 6th plus a malefic— Rahu, Mars, Saturn
or Ketu, should make one suspicious unless other antidotes
are present. The above combinations have been taken from
authoritative sources. It may not be out of place to mention
that our own study and observations extending over a pretty
long time bring to the fore the following general causes :
(a) the Moon in Lagna which should be Aries, afflicted by
Saturn, (b) Saturn or Mars in the Ist or 7th house in
Gemini, Cancer or Pisces, (c) Saturn conjunction Mars in
Lagna, when the Navamsa of Scorpio, Sagittarius or
Capricorn is rising, (d) Mercury afflicted

282 How to Judge a Horoscope
in Lagna by the 6th lord, and Rahu or Mars, and (e) the
Moon in Virgo, Capricorn and Aquarius afflicted by Mars
or Rahu.
There are indeed any number of instances to illustrate
the above principles. Our own observations need necessarily
have to be taken with due reserve, as in spite of the fact that
the deductions are based on the study of a large number of
horoscopes, they have to be subjected to far greater studies
and tests.
Chart No. 118 is the horoscope of a lady and her
trouble is paralysis of the limbs and arms. The 6th is Aries
and it is aspected by Mars, the lord of that house. The 6th
from the Moon has the Sun (lord of the 6th) with Venus
(lord of 3 and 8) and Mercury (ruler of nerves), aspected by
Saturn. These afflictions denote the disposition
Chart No. 118— Born on 23-8-18V9 at 12-10 p.m.
Mercury Sun
Ket Rah
Moon etu Venis abu Mars
pUPit.
Sat.
pes RASI | —- AMSA aoe
Wenus
IMere.
Sun
re ——
Saturn . Lagna
Rabu} tagna | Jupiter | Mars | Ketu | Moon
of the house of disease. Coming to details, the 9th house
rules the limbs. Here the 9th from the Moon is Scorpio and
the 9th lord Mars aspects the Moon. The 9th is

Concerning the Sixth House 283
occupied by Saturn, a first-rate malefic. Saturn is the planet of
obstruction. Thus the whole region of the lower limbs is afflicted.
Saturn aspects the 3rd from Lagna as well as the third from
Chandra Lagna, while Mars aspects the 2nd from Lagna as well
as from Chandra Lagna. The 3rd rules the arms. The native has
plenty of trouble with the arms and limbs. The Sun, ruler of
vitality though in his own sign, is associated with the lords of the
8th, 11th, 7th and 12th besides being aspected powerfully by
Saturn, lord of the 3rd. Her real troubles started in Saturn Dasa,
Rahu Bhukti. There was gradual loss of the limbs, which left her
prostrate. Lord of the 6th (and Lagna) Mars in Virgo aspected by
the Moon in Pisces gives a tendency to dropsical conditions.
According to Ayurvedic texts facial paralysis is said to be
caused by chewing hard substances or loud laughter, or yawning
or lying in uneven attitudes. The exciting cause, viz., vatha, pitta
or sleshma may be guessed by the
Chart No. 119.—Born on 12-4-1912 at 12-5 p.m.
Sun i
Rahu Lagna Sun
Venus Mercury Mars Rabu Mercury jLagna
Saturn
Moon! Jupit.
So RAŠI a = AMSA ——
Mars
Moo
Jupiter Ketu Sat. Ketu Venus

284 How to Judge a Horoscope
affliction to which a particular planet having to do with the
Lagna or the 6th house is subjected.
Mark the presence of Mars, lord of the 6th in Lagna,
almost in exact conjunction with the ascendant point,
aspected further by debilitated Saturn. Mars rules mostly
pitta while Saturn has reference to more of vatha. Mars in
Lagna always suggests some sort of gluttony resulting in
indigestion and constipation. When Gochara Saturn passed
through Lagna point, facial paralysis set in. As the exciting
cause is that of *Mars (pitta), there were, before the stroke
of paralysis, frequent attacks of fever, thirst and swoons.
Here the diseases may be said to be practically incurable;
but still by recourse to medical remedies (dealt with below)
and astrological propitiations, some slight relief can be
obtained. According to the famous Ptolemy, whose
knowledge of astrology is mostly borrowed from India, if
malefic planets are in angles and the luminaries are in
conjunction or opposition and the Moon is with Rahu or
Ketu, the body will be afflicted with lameness or paralysis.
A subject in whose chart Jupiter is in Lagna (Aquarius)
Saturn in the 7th and Mars in the 6th was paralysed in his
4th year. Based on a study of several horoscopes like the
above, we have observed that the following combinations
generally show a tendency to suffer from paralytic strokes :
(1) The Sun in Lagna afflicted by Saturn and Mars,
particularly in a sign ruling Pitta-humour.
* The Thridoshas, viz., Pitta (bile). Vatha (wind) and Sleshma
(phlegm) are represented by the twelve signs in an order. That is to say,
Aries rules Piita or bile, Taurus represents Vatha or wind and Gemini
signifies Sleshma or phlegm and so on. The Thridoshas are governed by
the different planets as follows :—
The Sun.—Mostly Pitta (bile) and a little of Vatha (wind).
The Moon.—Mostly Vatha (wind), and a little of Kapha (phlegm).
Mars.—Pitta (bile).

Concerning the Sixth House 285
(2) Saturn-Jupiter combination in the 6th house which
should be an airy sign.
(3) The Moon-Mercury conjunction afflicted by Rahu
and Saturn.
Diphtheria may be caused if the Lagna is subjected to a
severe Papakarthari Yoga, the planets causing the yoga
being subjected to powerful afflictions
Then we have the Poliomyelitis or infantile paralysis, a
pernicious affliction especially active in India during the
last two years. President Roosevelt's horoscope is a good
illustration. Mark the afflictions the Sun has received. Rahu
in Cancer afflicted by Saturn generally gives rise to infantile
paralysis.
ee Ee
i Mandi
i Lagna f
Ketu Venus } Sun Sun Ketu
Mars |
Noe -n Mere. ee T
Sat. Na
RASI a i araa AMSA pasa
Jupit. Moon ine
Sat.
Rabu; Moon | Lagna
Rahu Merc.| Mandi | Mars
Balance of Venus Dasa at birth : Years 2-9-27
Mercury.—Mostly Vatha (wind), a little of Pitta (bile) and still less
of Kapha (phlegm).
Jupiter—More of Kapha (phlegm) and a littleof Vatha (wind).
Venus.—More of Vatha (wind) and a little of Kapha (phlegm)
Saturn —More of Vatha (wind) and a little of Pitta (bile).

286 How to Judge a Horoscope
Enormous losses and enormous troubles for the native
of the above horoscope coincided with the commencement
of Rahu Dasa. Venus whose results Rahu should give is in
the 12th while Rahu himself is in the Sth aspected by
Saturn, lord of the 8th. In the Navamsa Rahu is aspected by
Jupiter, lord of the 6th. Mark the affliction of the 6th lord
Mars. He is in Lagna with Mercury, lord of Lagna and the
Sun, lord of the 3rd. The man is involved in huge debts.
In Chart No. 121 lord of Lagna and the 6th, viz., Venus
is in the 12th with Mars. From Chandra Lagna, the lords of
Chandra Lagna and the 6th are in conjunction
Chart No. 121.—horn on 16-3-1908 at 10-56 a.m.
| Sun Mars |
| Sat Venus | Lagna (Rahu | |Rahu
| Mandi
for Jupit Moon
— RASI OSON |) ———s AMSA
Lagna
Moon Sun
Venus
a aa ee eee: | Ae an ee
| | Merc. r Ketu
Ketu | | | Mandi Mars | Jupiter | sat.
Balance of Ketu Dasa at birth: Year 0-0-13.
in the 8th. In the Dasas of the Sun and the Moon the native
was convicted several times for political offences. He is a
leading and respected Congress man and landlord with
spiritual leanings.

Conceming the Sixth House 287
Chart No. 122.—Born on 23-7-1856 at 6-24 a.m.
| sat F a
| Moon |
it. M
Hae iMerc. eee,
Sun
Venus
Lagoa
eee RASI — AMSA —.
Lagna
Sun
Mars K Moon| Mars
Ketu
Jupit. Mandi Venus
Eo
a
Balance of Mercury Dasa at birth : Years 13-8-14.
The combinations for Bandhana Yoga are clear. Lord
of Lagna viz., the Moon is in association with Jupiter lord
of the 6th joined by Rahu and aspected by Saturn. The
native, a highly respected Indian political leader, underwent
long terms of imprisonment for sedition, especially in Sun
and Moon Dasas.
Chart No. 123 is the unique case of an ex-cashier of a
bank eternally involved in debts. The 6th house is subject to
Papakarthari Yoga and the 6th lord Mars is in the 5th with
Lagnadhipati, Mercury, Rahu and Venus. In the Navamsa,
the afflictions are greater. From Lagna, the 6th is occupied
by Saturn while the 6th lord is subjected to Papakarthari
Yoga. From Chandra Lagna, the 6th is occupied by Mars
and Rahu, the two worst malefics, while the 6th lord Venus
is aspected by Saturn and Jupiter. Though he was getting a
decent salary, he

290 How to Judge a Horoscope
Chart No. 124
i i
Rahu | Moon |Jupit. | Lagna |
| eee see.
Sun Mars | |
—— RASI — AMSA =
Merc. Ketu |
Net | R/S en Fee
pone Lagna | Ketu | es :
Balance of the Sun Dasa at birth: Years 3-8-27.
Atmakaraka and hence possesses good strength. Saturn lord
of the 4th is in the 3rd house aspected by Jupiter, Saturn is
in conjunction with benefic Venus, Moon the Matrukaraka
is exalted and in the 7th bhava, a kendra. From the Moon
the lord of the 4th house is in the 10th aspecting the 4th
which is highly beneficial. There are no malefic conjuctions
or aspects to the 4th from Moon. From the Lagna in the
Navamsa, Ketu is in the 4th. But here again the lord of the
4th aspects the 4th. The 4th from the Moon in the Navamsa
falls in Aries the lord of which Mars is in the 9th from the
Moon. He too aspects the 4th which being his own sign is
good. The lord of the 4th and the Moon have attained
Gopuramsa. All this is beneficial and will confer long life
on the native's mother. The lord of the 4th house Saturn is
in Vargottamamsa. If the Moon be strong or Venus be
conjoined with or aspected by a benefic, the mother will live
long. Here the Moon is powerful as

Practical Examples 291
he is exalted in a kendra and Venus is aspected by Jupiter.
So both elements are present though either will do. As for
the conjunction of Venus with Saturn a malefic (1) both are
in a benefic sign and benefic varga, (1) Saturn is the lord of
the 4th, (3) Saturn is yogakaraka. The same conclusion can
be arrived at by an examination of the Matrubhava as per
the system of Jaimini. According to Jaimini. the
Matrukaraka is the fourth in rank as per the number of
degrees advanced by planets in their respective signs.
Mercury comes first having attained 28° 27'. Next comes
Saturn who has got 28° 21'. Next Venus 28° 9'. The next is
Jupiter who has got 19° 12'. The 4th from Arudha Lagna
has also to be taken into account and that is Taurus. Jupiter
is a benefic and the fourth from Arudha Lagna is also a
benefic sign. Taurus is a fixed sign and all movable signs
and the planets located there aspect Taurus except the next
sign of Aries. Therefore, Mercury a benefic aspects Moon
(in Taurus) as also Mars a malefic (for Cancer, a movable
sign). Jupiter the Matrukaraka is aspected by benefics as
well as malefics. So the mother will have a fairly long life.
As we are in Matrubhava, it should form part of the
forecast as to when her demise should take place. It is
likely to take place about the end of Rahu Dasa. Rahu is in
the sign of Jupiter who is aspected by the lord of the 4th
house, Saturn. As he is by nature a malefic, he is likely to
appropriate to himself this function. The function generally
falls on the lord of the 4th house, or Matrukaraka, or
planets associated with them as also the planet that
occupies or aspects the Matrubhava. Jupiter is lord of the
Navamsa containing the lord of the 4th house. He is in the
2nd from the Moon, the Matrukaraka. Thus Jupiter's
qualifications are clear and it is only to be judged whether
Jupiter or

292 How to Judge a Horoscope
Rahu will handle the business. Rahu is more likely. In the
Amsa Rahu is associated with the lord of the 4th and is in
the 2nd from Matrukaraka, the Moon. Of all the planets
connected with the 4th house, Mars is the greatest malefic
who is also debilitated. As he is really in the 9th house, he
does not aspect the 4th house directly but aspects the 4th
house by distance (opposition) and also by his special and
powerful 8th house aspect. The sub-period of Mars in the
major period of Rahu takes us to 21-11-1969. There are
also rules for determining the time of demise by transits to
bring it within definable limits. Subtract the figures of the
Moon from those of the Sun. Find what sign the remainder
represents. When Saturn or Jupiter pass through that sign
and Navamsa or through the triangular positions
corresponding thereto, the demise of the mother may take
place. The Sun's figure is 10-13-38. Subtracting Moon's
figure which is 1-1-41 we get the remainder 9-11-57. This
represents the sign Capricorn. In March 1969 Jupiter would
transit the triangular sign of Virgo. Saturn would be in his
debilitation sign of Aries which being the twelfth sign from
the Moon heralds the beginning of sadesati.
Education.—This has to be judged from the entire
horoscope and the 4th house is only indicative of the
academical distinction that is likely to be attained by the
native. The 2nd house also indicates Vidya or learning and
the 3rd house denotes cleverness or mental characteristics.
The 5th house indicates the real learning or wisdom of the
native. Here Mercury is also the Atma-karaka. The lord of
the 4th house is with a benefic and in Vargottamamsa, as
well as aspected by Jupiter. Mars, the lord of the 4th from
the Moon in the Navamsa is with Mercury and therefore
also aspected by Jupiter. The

Practical Examples 293
aspect of Mars to the 4th house in the Rasi and the
combination with Mercury in the Navamsa will impart
energy to the native in the prosecution of studies. Thus
whether the native is clever or not, he will get high
academical qualifications to a certainty because of the
prominence and strength of the 4th house. Saturn, if he is
concerned with the 4th house or afflicts it, is liable to cause
obstruction in the persuit of studies but he is the lord of the
4th in Rasi and yogakaraka in Navamsa. The only way in
which he interferes is by aspecting Vidyakaraka in the
Navamsa, but as Jupiter also aspects and Jupiter is the
dispositor of Saturn both in Rasi and Navamsa, his aspect
will not cause much mischief. Still there may be
occasionally slight breaks or disappointments. The
association of the lord of Lagna Venus a benefic and Saturn
lord of 4th in Rasi and Navamsa is noteworthy and deserves
to be made special mention of.
Branch of Education—The Bhavamadhya of the 4th
house falls in Capricorn, an earthy sign. It is occupied by
Mercury the Vidyakaraka. The Moon an important planet
where mind is concerned is in Taurus—also an earthy sign.
Both the Moon and Mercury are in earthy Navamsas. The
predominence of earthy signs in "connection with
Vidyakaraka makes the native either scientifically or
commercially inclined in the pursit of studies and utility
will loom prominent in his view. Such persons though rarely
quick or brilliant are more often painstaking, persevering
and plodding. Three are three planets in common signs and
two planets in the fixed and two planets in movable signs.
This gives versatility to the native though he may not care
to be thorough in any pursuit. All these features should be
taken into consideration. The fact of Mars aspecting the 4th
house powerfully from a

294 How to Judge a Horoscope
watery sign should not be ignored. This combination
sugsests study of engineering, specially hydroelectric or
technology in oil, or such allied persuits. Mars lord of the
4th from the Moon in Navamsa aspects the 4th, is with
Mercury and is aspected by Saturn. This indicates also
ordinary engineering of heavy machinery where fire and
electricity too are employed, but this is secondary and
should not be the main object of the native.
Luxuries and Conveyances.—If the lord of the 4th
house is strong and is aspected by or conjoined with a
benefic, the person will have at his command vehicular
facilities. Saturn, the lord of the 4th, is not only aspected by
benefic Jupiter but is also conjoined with Venus, another
benefic. Mercury another benefic is in the 4th. Another
peculiar combination which confers vehicular facilities is
present. If the lord of the 11th house reckoned from the lord
of the 9th be in the Navamsa of the Atma-karaka planet,
then also the native will be able to command vehicles. Here
the lord of the 9th is Mercury and he is in Capricorn, the
eleventh from which falls in Scorpio. The lord Mars is in
Virgo which is also the Karakamsa. Hence this yoga is
present. It can even be said that as all the principal benefics
are connected with the 4th house, the native should
command a multitude of vehicles. The 4th contains
Mercury and the 4th bhava therefrom contains waxing
Moon. The lord of the 4th is with Venus and is aspected by
Jupiter. The eleventh house is concerned in the matter of
ownership of vehicles and it has been already seen that lord
of the 11th Sun is aspecting his own sign. It is noteworthy
that the 11th from Lagna is also the fourth from the
Moon—a unique feature in this respect. Venus is not only a
benefic but also a karaka for vehicles, etc., and his
conjunction with

Practical Examples 295
the lord of the 4th and aspect from Jupiter has a special
significance in this respect. The Amsa indications are also
favourable in this matter.
Paternal Property.—We have found that the 4th house
is particularly strong. There are no contrary indications for
this. So the native can expect to inherit substantial paternal
property as well.
Children.— In Chart No. 125 the 5th house falls in a
fruitful sign namely Pisces, but its lord is in the 6th a
dusthana. To compensate for this as it were, the lord of the
5th house who is also the Putrakaraka receives the aspect of
two natural benefics, Mercury and Venus. Mercury is,
however, lord of 8 and 11 and hence evil for the horoscope.
The 5th house though untenanted by any
Chart No. 125
Merc.
Jupiter | Rahu Mars | ae Rahu
Moon Sun
—_ RASI == AMSA —
Jupit.
Lagna M t
Saturn ae Sun Ketu
Ketu
Balance of Mercury Dasa at birth : Years 14-11-0.
planet, benefic or malefic, receives the aspect of a malefic
namely the Sun, who, by being the owner of a kendra has
become a complete benefic. Thus a sort of balance
between the good and evil influences has been effected.
From

296 How to Judge a Horoscope
the Moon the lord of the 5th Mars is in the 12th house. In
the Sth itself, a firstrate malefic Saturn is found who is the
lord of the 7th and the 8th from the Moon. While the
ownership of the 7th is very good the ownership of the 8th
is very bad. There is no aspect from any planet either to the
5th from Moon or to the lord of the 5th from Moon or even
the 5th from Jupiter, the karaka. Therefore as from Moon,
which cannot be ignored in this case as he is strong, the
testimony is not so good for children. In the Amsa, from
Lagna and the Moon, Rahu occupies the 5th and its lord
though exalted is in the 2nd with Saturn. One redeeming
feature, however, is that Jupiter aspects the 5th and the
Moon occupies the 5th from Jupiter. But Mars also aspects
the 5th. Here again the balanced position seen in Rasi is
maintained. From all this, one can conclude that while the
native will have a number of children, the family will not be
large.
The same conclusion follows even as per Jaimini. For
this the Upapada has to be found first as that will be more or
less the centre point from which this matter has to be
judged. Upapada is found by counting as many signs from
the lord of the 12th house as the 12th lord is from the 12th.
Here the 12th lord occupies the 12th and so the 12th or
Libra is the Upapada. We have to examine the 5th from the
Upapada and as this falls in an odd sign and the 5th from
lord of Upapada falls in a fruitful sign, there will be a
number of issues. The lord of the 5th from Upapada is
aspected by both Jupiter and the Moon as well as the Sth
from Upapada. But Rahu aspects Upapada also, and Mars
and Sun aspect the Sth from the lord of the Sth from
Upapada. These are contrary indications and so the same
balance between good and evil forces are seen.

Practical Examples 297
Number of issues.—The cusp of the 5th house falls in
350° 47'. Hence 6 complete Navamsas have been passed.
The lord of the 5th house is also Putrakaraka and he has
completed 5 Navamsas in that sign. The Sun aspects the 5th
and he has also completed 6 Navamsas. Saturn is in the 5th
from the Moon and he has aiso completed 6 Navamsas. The
Sun is also the lord of the 5th from Putrakaraka. Therefore
6 is the number almost uniformly indicated as being the
number of issues and the distribution will be four males and
two females. Loss of one or two issues is likely as lord of 5
is in 6 and lord of 5 from Moon is in 12. A malefic aspects
the 5th from Lagna and a malefic is in the 5th from the
Moon.
Speculation, etc.—The discussion of the strength of the
5th house for children holds good for this aspect of the
matter also. Speculation will result in gains as well as losses
and much of the losses can be eliminated by choosing the
right times only and confining to those occasions for
speculative activities. The aspect of Venus on Jupiter, while
in one sense good as from a benefic, is not so as he is also
lord of 12, the house indicating losses. The aspects also
indicate losses arising through divided interests, through
carrying on two occupations at the same time or through too
frequent change of occupations.
The Sth house being a watery sign aspected by the lord
of the 10th, the native will have journeys by water several
times not only for the sake of business or occupation but for
pleasure also.
The 6th house represents enemies, sickness, debts, etc.
It also governs inferiors, servants of all kinds and service.
In so far as we subordinate ourselves to anything, whether
it is an ideal or a person, we identify our activities with this
house. There are no planets in the 6th

298 How to Judge a Horoscope
house either from Lagna or from the Moon in the Rasi
(Chart No. 126). But in the Navamsa, Rahu is in the 6th
from Lagna and the Sun, Ketu and Jupiter are in the 6th
from Moon. The lord of the 6th in Rasi is in debility in the
8th house. The native is likely to have a wound or scar in
the face or head as the lord of the 6th is in the 8th bhava
conjoined with the Moon and Rahu. The bearing of this
bhava on health and sickness should be discussed under
Lagna bhava. Three classes of planets have influence in
connection with any bhava—the lord of the bhava, planets
in the bhava and
Chart No 126
| Merc. | |
li Sun
Moon Jupit
Ketu
A AMSA
Rahu Sat
Mer 5 Lagta
Lagūna all
Ketu Merc. liVenus Mars
Supit. i
Balance of Sun Dasa at birth : Year 1-9-18.
planets aspecting it. Here there are no planets in the 6th.
The lord of the 6th is weak with malefics. But of the planets
aspecting this bhava, the Sun and Mars, the Sun is stronger,
being in his own sign and in Simhasanamsa-Mars is also in
Gopuramsa. So, the promise of evil concerning this bhava
denoted by the weak lord of the bhava will not only be
belied but also be replaced by benefic

Practical Examples 299
effects. So life will be fairly healthy upto very old age and
measures taken for ills and for conserving health and
vitality will bear fruit to a great extent.
Enemies, debts, etc.—Troubles from these sources will
be reduced to a minimum and will not occur for any major
concern. Saturn's Dasa period of 19 years (1963-1982) will
not be entirely trouble-free in this respect. Even with regard
to Saturn, there are redeeming factors. The lord of the 6th
in the 8th constitutes a yoga. His debilitation is more than
relieved by his being retrograde.
OM TAT SAT

An Index of Technical Terms
Adhipati
Adhipatya
Apoklima
Arudha
Bala
Balarishta
Bhachakra
Bhava
Bhrathrukaraka
Budha
Budha Dasa
Bhukti
Chandra
Chandra Dasa
Chandra Mangala Yoga
Chara Rasis
Dasa
Dhanakaraka
Dhanus
Divya Drishti
Drekkana
Dusthana
—Lord.
—Lordship.
—3, 6, 9 and 12 Houses.
— The sign which is distant from
the lord as the lord is from
house concerned.
—Strength.
—Death in childhood.
—Zodiac.
—House or signification.
—Indicator of brothers—Mars
—Mercury.
—Mercury's period.
—Sub or Minor period.
—The Moon.
—The Moon's period.
—Angular disposition between
the Moon and Mars.
—Movable signs, e.g., Aries,
Cancer, etc.
—Period.
—Indicator of wealth—Jupiter.
—Sagittarius.
—TIntuitive perception.
—1/3 division of a sign.
—An evil place.

302 How to Judge a Horoscope
Dwiswabhava Rasis —Common signs, e.g., Gemini.
Dwirdwadasa —2nd and 12th from each other.
Ghati —Equivalent to 24 minutes of
English Time.
Graha —Planet.
Guru —Jupiter.
Guru Dasa —Jupiter's period.
Guru Bhukti —Jupiter's sub-period.
Hora —1/2 division of a sign.
Jaimini —A Maharishi of India.
Author of works on
Philosophy and Astrology.
Jathaka —Horoseopy.
Kanya —Virgo.
Karaka —Indicator.
Kataka —Cancer.
Kendra —Ath, 7th and 10th Houses.
Kendradhipati - Quadrangular lord.
Ketu —Cauda or Dragon's Tail.
Kuja —Macs.
Kuja Dasa —Period of Mars.
Kuja Bhukti —Sub-period of Mars.
Kumbha — Aquarius.
Lagna —Rising sign or Ascendant.
Lagnadhipati —Ascendant lord.
Makara —Capricorn.
Mandagraha —Superior or slow-moving
planet.
Maraka —Death or death-inflicting
planet.
Matrukaraka —TIndicator or Mother—Moon.
Meena —Pisces.
Mesha —Aries.
Mithuna —Gemini.

An Index of Technical Terms
Mitra
Mitravarga
Nararasis
Navamsa
Naisargika
Nirayana
Ochchabala
Ochchabhaga
Panapara
Papakarthari Yoga
Putrakaraka
Rahu
Rajayoga
Rasi
Ravi
Ravi Dasa
Ravi Bhukti
Saham
Sani
Sani Dasa
Sani Bhukti
Satru
Satru Bhava
Sayana
Shadbalas
Shashtashtaka
Shastiamsa
Simha
Sthirarasis
—Friend
—The Varga or the place of a
friendly planet.
—Human signs.
—1/9th division of a sign.
—Natural.
—Fixed zodiac.
—Exaltation strength.
—Exaltation degree of planets.
—2nd, 5th, 8th and 11th
Houses.
—Being hemmed in between
two malefics.
—Indicator of children—Jupiter
—Caput or Dragon's Head.
—A good combination for
political success.
—Sign of zodiac.
—The Sun.
—The Sun's period.
—The Suns sub-period.
—A sensitive point.
—Saturn.
—Saturn's period.
—Saturn's sub-period.
—Enemy.
—Sixth house.
—Movable zodiac
—Six sources of planetary and
house strengths.
— 6th and 8th from each other.
—1/60th division of a sign.
— Leo.
—Fixed signs, e.g., Taurus.

Sushka
Sukra
Sukra Dasa
Sukra Bhukti
Swavarga
Thula
Thrimsamsa
Thrikona
Udu Dasa
Upapada
Vahanakaraka
Vahanasthana
Varga
Vargottama
Varsha
Varsha Dasa
Varshaphala
Vidyakaraka
Vidyasthana
Vighati
Vimshottari
Vrischika
Vrishabha
Yoga
Yogakaraka
How to Judge a Horoscope
—Dry or Earthy.
—Venus.
—Venus period.
—Venus sub-period.
—Own sub-division.
—Libra.
—1/30th division of a sign.
—1st, 5th and 9th signs.
—A system of Directions.
—The sign as apart from the
12th lord as the latter is from
the 12th.
—Indicator of conveyances
—Venus,
—Fourth House.
—Manner of division, e.g.,
Rasis, Hora, etc.
—A special distinction.
—Year.
—Period relating to the year.
—Annual results.
—Indicator of education
—Jupiter.
—Fourth House.
—Equivalent to 24 seconds of
English Time.
—A System of Dasa or
Directions.
—Scorpio.
—Taurus.
—Special combination.
—Planet causing yoga.
