READABLE DATASET
================================================================================
Original file: sarvartha_chintamani_with_english_translation_b_suryanarayana_row_1899.json
Dataset number: 348 of 455
Format: valid JSON
Structure: Object / structured dataset
Original size: 509,015 bytes
Top-level fields: 11
Title: Sarvartha Chintamani with English Translation - B Suryanarayana Row 1899
Creator: —
Date: —
Description: —

CONTENT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
METADATA AND OTHER FIELDS
  • title: Sarvartha Chintamani with English Translation - B Suryanarayana Row 1899
  • creator: —
  • date: —
  • description: —
  • subject: —
  • identifier: —
  • source_folder: Sarvartha Chintamani XML
  • total_pages: 293
  • total_words: 89925
  • text_quality:
    • ocr_word_validity_score: 0.945
    • quality_tier: good
    • note: —

FULL TEXT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
■ AR W ARTHACEI1TT AMA2TI
rniTH oRioirmn text ifi devrhrgrh
AND
J3 N^GUSH jfKA^SLATIO^
wmrnmm ssms ass mmusmims
gjry
B. SURY ANAR AIN ROW, B. A., M. R. A. S.
Member Of Tlie Asiatic Society Of Bengal,
EDITOR GE THE ASTROLOGICAL MS.Gfi.ZIHE,
translator of ths (Author of the
(Astrological (Self (instructor,
Astrological Primer,
SHORT COMPENDIUM OF ASTROLOGY,
REVIVAL OF ASTROLOGY,
VIKARI AND ITS PROSPECTS,
Late editor of the Madras Argus. f
Etc. Etc. Etc.
First Edition, 1000 Copies,
Printed at the Aryan Press, Bellary,
By P. Ram an ah Naidu, Proprietor.
All rights reserved.

Sri
Sarvarthachintamaiai is a splendid work on horoseopy or
jthahtbhagci of joytish asastra and is very important on that account
as furnishing means for man to know his past, present and future.
The English translation of this work which extends over 2,000
stanzas in original Sanskrit, and the notes and illustrations I have
offered, will speak for themselves. The original text is given in
Devanagari character and in some copies in Telugu characters for
the convenience of those who do not understand Devanagari, so
that the readers will have the special advantage of comparing the
different readings of the various texts'^ and the English translation
given by me. Any furthur doubts and difficulties are intended to
be cleared by the elaborate notes and illustrations given by me
and the readers are earnestly requested to go through them carefully whenever they find any difficulty in understanding the texts.
In the translation of a large and technical Sanskrit work like
Sarvarthachintamani, it is possible to find passages which may
not have been very correctly rendered into English, or whose
spirit might not have been properly represented in the same inviting form as it has been done in the original text. Readers have
to understand the several difficulties which stand in the way of a
translator and realise them before they venture to offer their criticism. English language is not Sanskrit, and Sanskrit is not
English. Without crying down this or that language about its
relative merits, 1 may safely say that the idioms of the one language cannot be easily rendered into the idioms of the other and
in many cases they cannot be satisfactorily translated at all.
Various causes have contributed to these difficulties and they
are further increased in the fact that competency in English,
Sanskrit and technical sciences has not often been found in

n
INTRODUCTION.
one and the same individual as each branch of the knowledge requires a lifelong study for itself. And any rendering
of the one into the other in the absence of such a happy and
rare combination of several branches of learning in one person
will but lead to many misrepresentations and mistakes.
Helps to the study and understanding of these technical branches of knowledge are not forthcoming, while ideas relating to
astrology are very few and inadequate in the English language compared with Avhat we possess in the original Sanskrit,
’ihe flexibility of Sanskrit has been a great stumbling block in the
way of rightly understanding the technical words, and the extensiveness of its 1 ant ms and Mantras, Sastras and Puranas, Medicine
and Astrology, Rituals and Morals, Vedas and Vedangas adds considerable difficulties in the same line and makes any comprehensive
intellect to reel back from the difficult task which lies before him. A
few words may be quoted here to illustrate what I mean. Take the
word Soumya in Sanskrit. That which is born of Soma is Soumya.
Soma is Cliundra and Soumya therefore means Buda who is said
io be the son of Qhundra. But soumya also means Shubagrahas
or benefics as opposed to Papagrdhas or malejics. A third interI notation for soumya is good or mild as opposed to Krura or wild
or cruel. Sometimes in stanzas which contain the word Soumya
there is great difficulty in giving the proper interpretation, for
besides Grurd and Sukra, Buda is also classified as a Soumyagraha (good planet,) under certain circumstances. Vakra is anther word which has been well described in the astrological works. Valera is one of the many names given to Kuja
Mars. Vakra also means the state of any planet Kuja,
Jouda, Gfuiu, Sukra, and Sani when he is retrograde or in
his backward motion. The result sometimes so happens that
■ - itlier interpretation will suit the context and either may perhaps
■-upport the prediction. In the expression Vakram Hitva or Vena
it may mean without Kuja or without a planet who is in his retrograde movement. The word Papam is applied to the 8th as
v. oil as the 1 2th houses and also means a malefic planet. Instances
'd such doubtful expressions which are capable of various inter-
[ notations can be multiplied by scores but these few words given

INTRODUCTION 1 . Ill
here will show the nature of the difficulties which a translator of
a Sanskrit work has to meet in the progress of his work. In some
cases the names of the planets are indicative of the results which
they are supposed to give, and they are very aptly used in the
Sanskrit language which can never be imitated in the English
or any other foreign tongue. The word Satwika, refers to two
states, one physical and the other mental. A man who possesses
great physical energy is called a Satwika, one who has much
Satwa ( strength) ; or a person who possesses Satwaguna or
pious disposition. The Three principal characteristics of the
mind are Satwa, Raja and Thama, as they are classified in the
Aryan philosophical works. In the expression Satwam Kvjaha,
it may be possible to offer both the interpretations and both look
plausible enough in connection with certain passages. Kuja represents according to some authors Satwaguna and also commands
exuberance of physical energy. Buda means one who gives
Buddi or mind and he controls wisdom as he is represented to be
the planet who gives gnanandriya (consciousness of self) to the
otherwise unconscious faetus in the seventh month of its existence in the mother’s womb. Guru means, preceptor, big and
planet Jupiter. Sukra means, seminal fluid, whiteness and planet
Venus. Sani means, blackness, slowness and the planet Saturn.
Rooksha means a constellation as well as a sign of the zodiac.
Rahu is called Thama and it means shadow or the junction of the
two forces emanating from the Sun and the earth. I have only
attempted to give a few out of the many meanings which these
words have in Sanskrit, and these names are always used in their
proper places to indicate the results which are likely to flow from
the name of the planet in particular. There is a good deal of difficulty in a work of translation to reproduce faithfully what the
original author wants to convey in his own impressive and admirable style. Those who have got a good insight into the difficult
languages they are handling will readily realize the responsibility
which rests on them as translators. Translation means the interpretation put upon the author by the translator and not the original forcible expression of the author, which may be interpreted
in altogether a different way, by a clever student if he were allowed

IV I2TTR0DT7CTX01T.
If therefore the work of
T ^ aUtW
for all riahi thiS; ’ \ hehevQ > be a good cause for anxiety
derinor useful h botv g r en ^ ^° m ^ the res P°^ibiIity of renrealisethp,V oks from one Language into another. Very few
* their Position as translators, and know the mischievous con
ST S Sf T 1 ^ W ° rld fr0m th - bicapaeity^nd^areini<rht Kp i ’ lerebjle > are n °t imaginary difficulties which
Of The tS ° „T by tte intelligent interpreters
whkLZriTn f f ' V ° rkS ; “ Mre !S ? et another difficulty
locry i s necessarilv * ^ ^ W ? 1Ch ° annot be sli gbted. Astroini temporaland XT hT^tX^T °' T ^
SxrTs w rr f r
religious, moral social nnKf 1 °j &n ? blKia under different
labours riohtlvnn * ’ i 1Ca and physical conditions, India
b tf f tbat she ^
mere pi o-inies when rr mi i X ^ that her present children are
tod heihaXr O on foTT eo ‘nnl g iants who tenanthat she hasreaThecl theT “ ^' sIand : “ bonrs mdertheidea,
sons are so XXXtSX T T™ "> d that hw W
bar o us pigmies who tenanted I ° C ^ eom P arec ^ to the barThe Aryan dviCtion i t T n ^ * tbe ^rmer times,
mostly temporal. Here then Ha- tl kI>mtU f wbde the English is
and action between the two ? * ie grand difference in thought
I have to draw ^ to deaI ™th, and
but none the less important ^ S * n ° ular
uage and has great ambition to nX- 1S a P ro gressive langbe found in the foreign lan cm n * ^™ L at . e useful J deas which may
are of the highest kind and tl° T ® U ' “ sanskrit th e pretentions
of any kind from tt fore^n it ^ f ° rbids
progeny, taking sap from her ' Vblcb are considered her
anything worthy to S If ^ but ^ ^ding
tions of sanskri/worlcs into EnTrT * b ® secwred in translabest way would be to use the of^ ? ^ ° ther lan g ua g® the.'
use the original sauskrit word for which

INTB0DUOTI02T. V
there may not be correct English equivalent. But these difficulties should not be allowed to obstruct our intellectual progress.
Educated Hindus must make an attempt however unsuccessful it
may be at present — to overcome such difficulties, and I am one
of the many who are labouring in this field of research and translation, Many new words have been coined in the English language, and I do not see why any person should be kept back from
making such attempts, simply by the fear of being unjustly criticised if he is otherwise capable and competent. Another difficulty
is equally unsolvable. It is the technical nature of the science of
astrology I have undertaken to reproduce in English. English
Astrology seems to have been entirely borrowed from the Greek
and Arabian astronomers and these in their turn appear to have
borrowed it from the land of the Vedas where all knowledge floutrished before the dawn of western history. In this double transport
and travel English Astrology appears to have lost a good deal of its
previous force and usefulness which it possessed in the original
Sanskrit. Arabians, Persians, Chaldeans and Greeks who borrowed
astrology from the Maharishis of A-ryawartha did so under special
disadvantages of alien language and religion, and astrology apparently lost a good deal of its original value in this process of borrowing by nations differing from the Aryans in religion and
language. National and religious differences therefore had a great
deal to do with the degeneration which astrology as a science
underwent at the hands of the foreign scholars who came to the land
of the Vedas to drink in at the very fountain head of knowledge :
and when this deteriorated system of astrology travelled into the
uncongenial and barbarous regions of Western Europe, it was stripped of a good deal of its ornamentation and orginal value. This
noble and most complicated of all sciences had to be presented to
the rude nations of Europe in a form comprehensible to their stinted intellectual attainments. We know, as a matter of fact, that
the western nations of Europe were almost without education one
or two thousand years ago. Their priests, who monopolised all the
learning of their lands, were men of very ordinary intellects, and
they were not in a position to understand properly the complicated formulas of the astrological sciences. The high mathematical

YI
INTRODUCTION.
proficiency which is expected in an astrological adept was completely absent in them, and their ignorance of the various branches of
learning which are helps to the study of astrology was against their
understanding it properly. The Karma Theory so difficult to understand was the stepping stone to astrological information and the remedial portions so abundantly found in theHindu astrological works
were completely left out for want of proper representation. A tholough insight into these various branches of knowledge alone could
have made the astrological studies intelligible, and this was too
much to be taken in by those simple priests of the Western Europe,
who never rose high in the intellectual sphere, and to whom, all
these complications meant nothing but utter mental confusion.
Even unto this day the same difficulties stare the Western Nations
m their faces, in spite of the wonderful progress they have made ia
the arts °f civihsation. Whenever any references are made to
‘ and Oushadhies they at once reject the whole science
as false savouring too much of superstition and clashing with the
declared principles of the Modern Sciences. Nobody kno ws exactly
what science means now a days, but everyone talks of modern
s< ;’ cnces ** lf lt 1S the easiest thing for one to know in this world.
ie medical man talks of his noble science as much as the cobbler
°i , U ? science of shoemaking; the lawyer swears to the perfection
or ns legal science while the chemist proclaims from the top
or lus voice in regard to the infallible nature of his science
The astronomer is of course a declared a scientist, while tire
^stronomer ^ equally certain of the rules of his noble science,
o ogiap u is a science as much as orthography. But when
P . m J lese ' V0 |' tIlies *0 the errors and contradictions found
therein they attribute them to mistakes of calculations. The
the rTJH ° f ? Str0l °° y is 6ven more difficult than
the rest of astrology for any one to understand : and in the
comprehending of these rules the western nations showed a
comp e e ailure. Astrological interpretations in a foreign lanSarS, m “f* area ° -V any
defects of the Eno^hT* m0re 80 for a man who has dearly the
irno eon^ue of t T ^ ^ him > and is at the' same
t.no consent of the extensive nature of the sansfcrit idioms.

I2TTR0DT7CTI01T.
I have already grown lengthy about the difficulties attending the
translations of original Sanskrit works into English and only request the readers of these pages to be a little more indulgent in
judging of the merits of a work of this nature which I have undertaken to translate in spite of these obstacles. I have freely
used Sanskrit expressions wherever I found difficulty in selecting
an appropriate English word, and this I hope, prevented me from
falling into as many errors in my translation, as otherwise I
should have been guilty of. The pronunciation of the Sanskrit
words is another difficulty. However nicely the spelling may be
modified the pronunciation at once tells its own tale and affects
the construction which may be put upon the sentence or part of
the sentence, which we wish to produce in our work.
I shall now introduce the readers to the work of the author
Venkatesa Dcdv&gna who appears to have compiled the Sarvarthachintamcmi from the best works which were available during
O
his time. The selection he has made-without pretending any
originality-is a monument of his patience and diligence, and makes
him one of the best compilers in the field of astrological research.
Joytisha is said to comprise ThrisJcanda or three grand divisions
and they are Ganitlia ( mathematics) or Astronomy, Phcilabhagcc
(predictions) or Judicial Astrology, and Prasyici (questions) or
Horary Astrology. Marriages and other ceremonies may be separately termed a section of Astrology called Moohoortha or may be
conveniently joined under the 2nd division. These several divisions
are equally important to the astrological reader and cannot be
omitted by him if really he means to have a general proficiency. I
do not mean to offer any praise to one branch at the cost of the
ether two. Phalabhaga is the most important for a man to know
and as man has tried, since his creation, every means in his power
to read the future of his life, my attempts to place such means as
would easily enable him to know this much desired information
will not certainly be unacceptable or uninteresting. Feeling this
satisfaction in my innermost heart I now desire the ^reader to follow me carefully into the contents of the Introduction where he
would realize how far I have wasted my time or used it to the
be(5t advantage possible, In the Introuction to the tradnslation

Till
X3TTBODT70TX0N
of a great work like the SarivarthacMntamani I shall not attempt
to argue the pros and cons for a belief in the science of Astrology
or to defend its cause when so much has already been said or
written about it by me and by others competent to deal with it from
an intimate knowledge in it. The justification for the study of
Astrological books remains entirely on their own intrinsic value,
and the practical uses to which the astrological principles may be
advantageously applied. The stability of the modern scientific
theories has been very often questioned and many of these theories may be exploded at any time. I have shown at considerable
length the reasons which prompted me to believe in Astrology,
the work I have done, and the success which attended my attempts
m the region of practical predictions in the Introduction to my
Astrological Self Instructor and Primer and also in the several
leaders and sub-leaders which have appeared from time to time in
the Astrological Magazine conducted by me. I request my readers to kindly refer to the publications above alluded to and I am
sure they will find there ample food for contemplative and logical
minds. T enkatusa Daivagna opens the work with a Mangcda
™ 7 as ah Aryan authors do with a sincere invocation to his
family Diety, his Guru, Goddess of Learning Saraswathi, Gaum
leDiety Wh ° removes a11 obstacles, Mesha and other
Zodiacal signs Ran and the most important planets, and all
taosc (persons) who have in any way been benefactors to the
' , . , the last sentence he refe rs to all Maharishis and Astrological writers who have done so much to benefit the world bv
their splendid publications and it may also include great men of
ad departments of knowledge who have been helping by their
words or deeds human progress. He compares his work to a
strong boat which will enable the adventurous student to cross
the ocean of astrological knowledge. This is nothing but a reproduction of Varahamihira’s idea in Stanza 2 of Chapter I of his
Brihcitjatctka. -V arious authors previous to Varahamihira have
used this figure of speech and there is a singular force in this ex
pimsion used by these writers. A strong boat with a strong head
■o guide it will take the boat to a very great extent, but a stronoboat with a weak head or a weak boat with a strong head, >vifi

INTRODUCTION. IS
not be able to reach the other side of the sea of knowledge.
Knowledge is always compared to an extensive ocean whose depth
in several places (branches of learning) cannot be properly found
out by the ordinary student unless a man possesses extraordinary
powers of intelligence, patience and devotion to the subject he
wishes to understand. The deepest portions of the sea of knowledge
will always remain unexplored by him. Various means are suggested for the acquisition of such wonderful powers but as strong
will and determination are the property of very few individuals
many are not able to accomplish what they so ardently desire to
possess. Ocean and its extent and depth in many places (branches)
are not known to the ambitious student who fallows the ordinary
beaten tracks for their possession. Venkatasa Daivagna divides his
work into 16 chapters and each chapter contains stanzas varying
from 22 to 281. The total number of stanzas comes up to more
than 1900, and as the several manuscripts give some differences
we may have slight variations in the number of stanzas each chapter contains. The eleventh chapter contains the least number — 22
stanzas— while the 1 Gth chapter contains tlio greates t number — 2 8 1
stanzas. In the $irst <§hapter wo h ,ve the explanations of the various technical terms the author uses, and the Zodiacal divisions
with the planetary characteristics, He gives the names of the
signs, their lords, Navamsas and their lords, signs of the Zodiac
representing the various organs of the Kalapurusha (Time Personified), characteristics of the Zodiacal signs, llora l; Drahhana
Saptcimsa 1/7, Navamsa 1/9, Dasamsa 1/10, Divctdasamsa 1/12,
Thrimsamsa 1/30; and Shastiarnsa 1/6 0th divisions of the Zodiacal
houses -with names of the 60 divisions into which a sign is lastly
divided: then we have an enumeration of the varieties of divisions
called Oottamamsas or Vergas, and Kshcinikagrahas. I have duly
explained in their proper places all these technicalities as best as j
could and some of these will be found to be of very great use in
understanding the results of combinations on ■which depend life and
prosperityof an individual. He then introduces the readers to the
different ages of the planets, technical names ^f the planets, Zodiacal
houses, Prustodaya, Oobhciyodaya, Devabala, (strong during day
time) Patribala (strong during night), planets which are invisible

Aprahtm, significations of Kendras (quadrants), Moola Tkrikonas,
Zodiacal signs which are powerful during day and night, colors of
these signs, Vasee and Vaysee houses, classification of the planets
into Kings, Ministers, Commanders-in-chief and menials, planets
who represent soul, mind , physical, energy, speech, spiritual wis -
dom, venereal pleasures and sorrows, the various names of the
planets used in astrology, their principal characteristics, their
classification into castes, their colors, the places they govern, the
metals they rule, the seasons they command, the tastes they
produce, the times which are governed by them, the various
aspects of tiie planets, the relationships among the planets, the
six. principal sources of strength they possess, the positional
st rcngth they have, the signification of birth sign, the description
ol Pitch aka , Bodaka, T edaka and Kctraka grahas and their
>oiults,and the explanation of means to find out Gulika, Ycmictkct~
i^ithit, Mandi, and A rdcipruhara. I have necessarily to use
tno original Sanskrit words, where the meaning cannot be
adequately represented by the use of single- English words..
H these words have to be properly represented in English the space
y\‘ A would 1>e quite out of proportion to the utility armed at.
1 m.i chapter contains all the information regarding the sources of
v.- a.iue.>s and strength both to Zodiacal houses and the principal
planets which occupy them. To a student who wants to learn
n 'i r< -logy this chapter is simply invaluable and the facts herein
.m-ntioned must be carefully remembered for future progress.
I .i -'ii \ enkatasa IJaivagna begins his Sscozid iQh&ptsr with a genera' treatment of the planetary combinations, when they are geneluily good, Orwhen they are evil, what peculiarities are to be observed in drawing inferences, and how predictions could be safely
ventured; this is called in Sanskrit Samudayaphala. The combin it ions for wealth are then chiefly stated and the significations of
the third house as well as those of the 4th, 5th, 6th, 7th, 8th, 9-th,
l"th, 1 1th, and 12th houses are briefly stated. The Adhana Lagna
’ >. conception time is then touched upon with the possible results
v.’.ien flow from thA*ombinations obtained at that time and some
peculiarities of birth such as children born with hoods, or covers,
umbilical cords twisted round the neck etc, are stated. The signifi-

INTRODUCTION. XI
cations of birth sign or Lagna are very carefully stated, and this
closes the second chapter. The &hird Qbapter begins with Dhctnit
Bhava or second house which signifies, eyes, wealth, family, debt,
toothache, various forms of diseases to which flesh is heir to, combination for ones loss of sight, eyes being pulled out, diseases of tho
ears; possession of gold and silver vessels; luxurious meals; troubles
from small pox, fires, and animals; and the powers of speech which a
man possesses. Then the author begins the fourth Chapter with a
description of the significations of the third house, the prosperity,
and adversity among a man’s brothers and sisters, their number,
losses and gains from those sources, dangers from animals, description and determination of the various forms of diseases which
attack the native and the possession of precious ear-ornaments;
then he goes on with the significations of the 4th sign about houses,
relations, possession of landed property, happiness and misery,
virtuous and vicious behaviour, dangers from falling into wells,
tanks, rivers and oceans, falls from rocks, high places, conveyances,
and mountains, dangers arising therefrom, incestuous and adulterous intercourses, chastity of his own mother, and her immoral
conduct, longevity of the mother, deception and dissimulation,
honesty and straightforword conduct, agreement and hatred between himself andhis mother, vehicles and conveyances, and the possession of throne or imperial power. The ffifth Chapter enlightens us
on the possession of children, their number, their sex and the
happiness or misery flowing from that source, loss of children, or
their possession late in life, extinction of femily ; high intelligence
and stupidity, combinations for males, famales and eunuchs, heartdisease, powers of counsel, and his respect as an adviser with
description of enemies. Then iSistb Chapter begins with the significations of the 6th sign namely wounds, cuts, sores and diseases which
corrode into the body of a man. And the various dieases which attack
him are stated at considerable length, and combinations for deaths
arising from accidents of all descriptions are also elaborately stated. Enemies and the causes for anxiety from them are then
explained and debts from which man suffers are further indicated by the several unfavourable combinations which trouble
a man in this life. Thus the significations of the sixth house are

INTRODUCTION.
debt, enemies and disease, any one. of which, if unfavourable, is
enough to make a man miserable, and all of which, if combined
unfavourably can make a man mad or even can drive him to commit suicide. The seventh house is explained, with reference to its
significations of the marriage of a person, the character and eomplexiom of the wife or wives, the number and times of marriages,
beautiful and ugly wives, their unchastity as well as the adultery
of the native the tyrranny of the wives and himself, early and late
lamages and the sources of pain, pleasure, gains, losses, happiness
.pdnnsery from marriage are clearly indicated as also the sexual
p s,ionb ul his wife or wives andhis-own potency or impotency. The
.description of the sexual organs, their health and disease, dimensions and malformations with the times of marriages complete the
of tL'sThousI d frt ^y eTwehave the significations
f ^ the . Vari0US fortunes attend
. ’ , _ 3 existence are given. These are called Balaristan® • combmatl °ns for very early death. The significations of
dotadTof ^° US . e . ar ®. & lvea and tfie chapter concludes with the
S5 m ; aatl0 f r Piet ^’ pbilonthropy, respect for elders
" d p ta ’, supllllle ld <?as and universal charity. The (Eight Chapter
conT- I hG ^ mfications of the tenth house, and we have
combinations here for man’s political power, his employment the
influence lie commands, the kind of profession hepLuel the
Sf ThenV* It*’ n 6 Y ° ga he shrines
broiW T ‘ f"' 6 * eomm ands, elder sisters
a d bi others wealth and its uses, strength of hearing and
ea ness, . and then the chapter closes with the description^ the
varies significations of the twelfth house. This indicates loss of
L P Z y u lm ?° r ! deeds ’ dis » raee ailcl ™ in - From the ginth <§haptra T ersa *° the combinations ofplanete
a ne^o^t S T r!ja “.' lpernWn ™ t influe "cc. and which bring up
a person to great prom, nence and influence even when he is bori
nol 1 1 r ie *T- OT combinations for'
a ' e o'^orately sketched out, and by this term
f "clave to understandthe occupation of a person under

INTRODUCTION.
XIH
government. Then the planetary combinations for Anapha, Sunapha
Dhurudhura and Kemadruma are given, and after describing
various Raja Yogas the author elaborately deals in combinations
which produce loss of employment^ mendicancy, public disgrace,
criminal prosecutions, dismissals, suspensions, various misfortunes
whieh men in high and low position usually meet with. This is a
very interesting and useful chapter and a good deal of instructive
information is given by the writer in it. Chapter Tenth divides the
life into short, middle and long and the various combinations for
these different terms of life are very accurately given. There are
combinations for immediate or earlv death after birth and these arc
called Balaristayogas . These are also minutely detailed and every
student is earnestly recommended to remember these combinations
before he ventures his predictions about the prospects of a child’s
life. In (Chapter (Eleven combinations are stated which would counteract against the influences of planets which indicate early death.
In the Twelfth Chapter we come again to sketches of planetary positions for middle and long lives and Amitayuryog as or combinations for lives which go beyond the usually recognized term ot
man’s life. Almost all nations agree in fixing one hundred years
as the term of human existence and cases of persons living beyond
one hundred years are very few and rare. In this chapter the author
gives out planetary positions for terms of life beyond one hundred
and twenty years and some of those combinations give thousands
of years of life for those happy persons who are born under their
benefic influences. Then we have combinations for a series ol
Yogas which go under the name of Pravarajja or Moomyoga,
This is peculiar to Aryan sciences and lias not been mentioned m
any of the astrological books written by the Continental gentlemen, It is alleged, that by a special kind of internal development
a man can attain to wonderful powers and can, not only control
natural forces, but can also prolong his life to any extent he pleases,
and for purposes he best knows. In India adepts are not wanting
in Hata and Rajayoga practices and those who had the good
fortune to be eye witnesses to some of the elementary practices ot
Hatayoga will readily agree with me in saying that an extensive
and most wonderful department of knowledge about God is utterly

xrr
INTRODUCTION,
unknown to the Western scientists; and so long as those are not
known to them, their theories will be but simply empirical.^ In
my humble personal experience gentlemen like Rupanagudi crundappa, YogiLakshminarasimacliar, T. Soobbarayasastry, and others
have shown unmistakably the existanee of a grand science of
Yoga and Guana for which no paralled could be found in any of
the known departments of knowledge among the European Nations. I can only speak of facts which have transpired ‘in my . personal knowledge. These gentlemen I have named above are living
now and can be seen by those who care to see them. The grandest
achievement of the European scientists will be nothing when compared to the splendid concentration of the Yogee and the power he
commands over the elements of nature. It is highly absurd to send
all the knowledge which the modern scientists do not understand
into the regions of mythology and superstition and it does not
require much effort on the part of the Yogees, to transport the
scientists into the realms of their mental hallucinations. The chapter as it stands, is really unintelligible because foreigners do not
know what is a Mooniyoga, what is Pravarajja, what is Tliapas
and what are the numerous Mantras. But one who studies this
department of knowledge, holds a different opinion and sees events
with different eyes. Chapter .Thirteen takes the readers to the various
states of the planets and the results of the planetary periods of
Ravi and Chundra. The different Phalam which these two planets produce to the native are given at considerable extent and a
person will be able to predict with tolerable certainty when he
read.'' this portion carefully.
Chapter fourteen is devoted to the Dasa results of Kuja and
.!>:id;« and Chapter fifteen explains the Phalam of the Dasas of
Guru, Sukra, and Sani. We now come to the last <§ hapter /Sixteen, wherein are sketched the results of the Dasas of Rahu
and Kethu. Then the author gives the general results of. the
planetary sub-periods or Anthar dasas. The Anthardasas (subperiods) of Ravi, Chundra, Kuja, Rahu. Guru, Sani, Buda,
Kethu and Sukra are well explained. Venkatasa ldaivagna
introduces some miscellaneous combinations which give various
remits,, and the work is wound up with the Karalcx results of

INTRODUCTIONrr
planets. I shall explain what is meant by Kardka in its proper
place, but it may suffice to know here that Karaka means, one
who causes, or governs a particular event or thing. Father, soul
reputation etc. are indicated by Ravi and he is said to be the Kara -
ka for these. This completes the work and the learned author Venkatasa Daivagna closes the book without any ostentation or pi’ide
about himself or of his intellectual achievement. Some ill-founded
statements have been made or rather ventured by the so called
annotators of this work, but we can only give that supreme
contempt to such useless information which it deserves. He
does not say much about himself. His style is elegant and impressive, and he seems to have had a wonderful insight into the
astrological principles. Although he never pretends originality,
his arrangement, and the happy selection he has made ot his facts
speak volumes in his favour as a compiler and author. I have
very briefly attempted to convey to the reader the important
subjects which he wishes to consult in astrology and I am sure
that students who carefully go through this book will be able to
make astrological predictions with great ease and tolerable certainty. In the editing of a large w r ork like this, there may be some
repetitions which could have been avoided. But the work is
solely intended for those who have great anxiety to learn but
whose leisure is limited and such gentlemen always find occasional
repetitions rather a help to their studies than otherwise. I do not
claim much credit for any special arrangement, erudition, or
originality on my part. The book must speak for itself and its
success depends entirely upon its own merits. The mathematical
portion of astrology is presumed in the student and without a fair
knowledge in it the reader may find many portions of the work
unintelligible. As the calculations in mathematics extend over a
large area I have thought it fit to publish this work without
them, as their introduction in this volume will necessarily enlarge
its bulk and make it costly. If the Maharishis of Aryavartha
were really great intellects their works will stand in spite of ail
attempts to suppress them by ill-founded criticism but if they wrote
on astrology without a definite knowledge of its principles and without truth to back them up they will soon see that grave from

IImtO^T7CTION , .
which there isno tops of their returning back. Venkatasa Daiva-
. gna seems to have been an exhaustive and critical reader, and
.us labours in the astrological sciences have been rightlv crowned
with that success which is a sure forerunner of all that is sound
und true m the domain of knowledge. Hundreds of years have
i U U11 b ^ s ai nl each century has been adding greater credit and popularity to this splendid work than its predecessor.
I he book is extensively read all over India, and if it has not tra-
!r ut - ies °f the lt is bfcCHUse of the difficulty of
oian leongmal Sanscrit language in which it is written
prevented its rapid spread among the enlightened nations of the
" U , El, « llsh translation with original Sanscrit text and the
'•xhaustiye notes and illustrations, will it is hoped, remove all
>uc j ojs Eices to its rapid progress among the nations of the
yv 01 Id, and I shall be very glad to allow Western writers to render
Tli v do "f otber Em ';'h-i‘* languages on reasonable terms.
I he \alue ot any book will only be known on its careful study.
w-jeaion of books without study and through prejudice is
yU.culal to all intellectual progress. The Appendix will be an
- n usetuI adtlitiuu to thi * work. A i.
ul'nstr .1 I"-" 01 V ] 1S c ‘ xba ^ ti y e as regards the horoseopie portions
]uC \ Ji’ 111 p l U!sefu ! llf<jnuat ion which is needed in our daily
tw t n 1 T M f 11 lmS t0 be — d eWhere. With a
relhhh h T UC of ' thia book 1 ha ™ collected the most
.•‘i ij ’ ". ' eI ' ! subsequent ritualistic ceremonies after birth
; houses, temples, chuttra, ns, tanks, and planting of
• b • . . uspu-ious times for cultivating fields and diggiuo- Jells
„ y !-ti stcU ting Useful institutions, and a lot of otW
Z at Z rf ? “ ,e m ° f “vktaU be he a big od
id* ^ Tl ZJZ M »»y«fthe S e details wilfbe
v.dA elrf. *° f 6 We “‘ em 8»“«« "1- wish
iaffiienoe on -ilf if ^ }m P u *tance of time and its never failing
.1 jm, yi U ZficT uT tl01 f ° f hUman Hfe * 111 seag °n everj
•^illpioduce good fruit, but sow the seed out of season and

INTRODUCTION.
there will he no fruit or if there is it will be partly or wholly
rotten. Common sense teaches this and long human experience
extending over thousands of years has confirmed it. European
officials, merchants, travellers, lawyers, speculators, cultivators,
scientists, commanders, parents, educationists, rulers, diplomatists,
ambassadors, detectives, engineers, doctors, manufacturers, promoters, inventors, discoverers and in fact all those who have any
ambition to rise in this world will find my notes in the Appendix very highly useful and certainly profitable. The book there -
fore is intended to reach all communities of the people in the different quarters of the globe, and I have with this special view
fixed the price very low, and explained the astrological principles
in the easiest language consistent with the treatment of technical sciences. A glossary of all the technical terms used generally
in the Astrological works and particularly in this work has also
been added, and I hope that it will serve the different purposes
for which I have laboured in the astrological field for nearly 20
years, and in which my labours have already been appreciated
by the generous and intelligent public. As much time and thought
have been bestowed upon the completion of this book I make no
apology to place it before the public with a special request to
them that its contents may not be judged with haste or racial
prejudice. An unbiassed perusal is my best remuneration and 1
hope I will be granted that privilege by every gentleman whether
he belongs to India or to any other part of the world and whether he believes in astrology or not.
Bellart.
India,
B. SURYANARAIN ROW, B. A.

&T
SAEWABTHACHUTTAMANI
CUITH Of^IGIflfLLi TEXT Ifi tDEVfi^HGH^I
A MP.
A. K A* K^>
JSl^GLISH 'J'RANtSLATIOlS^
wm mam mm dm mmmdmm
MY
B. SURYANARAIN ROW B. A.
EDITOR OF THE ASTROLOGICAL MAGAZINE.
Member Of The Asiatic Society Of Bengal.
Etc. Etc. Etc.
Stanza. I
§ make obeistuxce to iSri fflenkataswara, the §reat$ari ( §od ) who is on
(Seshaparwata. § next pay my respects to my family t§nru $enkata<Naika.
g (genkatasa @aivagnya ) who am learned in the sciences ( astrological ) and
who is the son of (Appayaria, write Saruarthachintamani (a ship) to
guide those who are anxious to gain the shore of the sea of the astrological
knowledge and thereby give pleasure to those who ere pursuing those studies.

Sarwarthachintamani.
NOTES.
The name of the work is very significant of its contents.
Sirirarthachintamara means that it is a Chintamani for all desires.
Sancartha and Chintamani are two distinct words, the first
means in Sanscrit desires or thoughts, and the second means a
symbolical gem which is found in Heaven and which is credited
with the possession of powers which enable it to grant all desires
or wants as soon as they are conceived. SarwaHhachintamani
therefore, signifies that it is an astrological work which is able to
satisfy the student in all that he desires to know in the science
of astrology. It is a well recognised custom among the Sanscrit writers to invoke first the blessings of their family God,
then sing to the praise of their family Guru (Instructor) and
afterwards to give their own lineage. This is not of course very
strictly followed in every case in the same order. Usually they
mention also the names of the most renowned authors in the
branch of knowledge in which they want to excel themselves.
TSie names of the Goddess S.traswathi (Light or Wisdom) and
Gunpathi (Power which removes all obstacles in the completion
<>? the work undertaken) are recognised by some while others
simply address their invocations to the Supreme Power. After
t.ioso pnlimmaries are overtuev commence with the work proper.
0 .ir author \ ekataswara has followed the general custom prevalent among the Aryan authors. He appears to be a Brahmin by
ln< name and a devout follower ot God Venkatas wara* (destroyer
01 all sins) who reigns supreme on the Sesha par oath a. The last
is the name generally given to those series of Hills on which the
iamous Temple of Tirupathy in Southern India stauds -visited by
enormous crowds of pilgrims every year- presided over by Venkatael allopathy of the world wide renown. As a devout worshipper of
that God the author makes his worship first to that Deity. His
fnnily Guru appears to be Venkata Nayaka. The word Naika is
s uuctimes misunderstood as being applied to men of lower castes.
But this is a grand mistake. Naik is purely a Sanscrit term meaning
a leader and the various corrupt forms of it are found in Naika,
X>th?»,Naiy, Nair., Naiker, Nat it and Nath. Even to this day there

Sarwarthachintamani.
are Braliniins who are called Nctikcts or Naikevs. It is clear therefore that his family Guru is a Brahmin. The author then gives his
lineage. It is unfortunately very very short and gives us only few
particulars to judge of it. He does not say to what place, to
what nationality, and to what age he belongs. He simply mentions that he is the son of Appayaria or the learned Appavya.
The name partly determines his- country. He must have been a
citizen of the Deccan. This however is not a conclusive proof of
his nationality. A Southern name might be found in the
middle of the Northern country and a Northern name might be
found in the middle of the Southern country. The author does
not pretend to write anything original on the subject of astrology,
for excepting the Maliarishis none of the subsequent writers on
astrology or any of the Hindu sciences ever pretended any originality in the subjects they treated. The intelligent homrga
paid by these learned writers seems to be complete and unconditional. They make a clear admission that they went carefully
through the older works on astrology, and that their labours
were merely an attempt to simplify those older works for the benefit
of tlie succeeding generations. Even great wrters like Arvabhatta, Bhaskaraeharya, and Varahamihira, precise and excellent writers in tlieir departments of knowledge, claim no originality. This proves one fact undoubtedly — viz . — that the various
systems of sciences — including astrology — whatever they might
have been, were complete and exhaustive long even before the
Christian Era, and that none of the succeeding authors, however great they were, in their departments of knowledge had
ever the ability to differ from the original works and establish
anything like their own doetrises in preference to the older works.
We need hardly say anything about the men of genius who produced such complete systems of calculations and predictions and who
appear to have flourished long before the so called dawn of European History. We must remember that the dawn of European
History dates only from the Grecian and the Roman Empires.
The age of the author is not given. He does not seem to have
lived before Varahamihira the author of Brihatjataka and Brihat
Samhita, because he largely quotes from Yarahamiliira’s works.

Sarwarthachintamani.
I sliall refer to the question of the ages of these writers in a
separate place. The manuscripts and printed books on Sarwarthachintamani with me contain several readings which have to be noticed and which give sometimes quite distinct ideas. The first
stanza is one of them. But I have considered it unnecessary
to go so minutely into the work as the time and labour spent
upon such task may not be well recompenced by the profit we
may derive. I shall give the text of the most approved reading, leaving the Sanscrit student and the philologist to fight out
these niceties at their convenience. Besides, in a translation of this
kind, the various readings cannot be adequately represented and
even when put forward serve little or no purpose. The name
Venkatasa Daivagna is assumed by several astrological writers
but the names of the authors of Kalamritq, and Jatakaehundvikct
ought not to be confounded with the name of the author of this
present work as they distinctly say they belong to separate
families and the names of their fathers are different. Daivagnya
is a Sanscrit term meaning one who can read the planetary influences or those of Time, and it is a sort of title assumed
by those who are well versed in the astrological sciences. The
object of the author in compiling this work is to guide the
students of astrology easily in their attempts to secure astrological knowledge and he feels confidence in his innermost heart
that what he writes will delight and enlighten those who are
in search of astrological lore. He calls himself a learned man
in astrology. This might sound a little out of the way as
pointing to pride or selfpraise, but this way of asserting is
common to many authors who are conscious of their superior
knowledge, and who feel perfect confidence in their abilities
to carry out the work they have undertaken. If a man feels
doubtful about hjs capacity to begin a work it is certain he does
not understand it properly and will surely fail in the treatment of the sublet he undertakes. His assertion therefore
of possession of superior astrological knowledge shows more his
capacity to deal satisfactorily with the subject he has chosen, than
any indications of self conceit, which characterises the boast of
vulgar men, whose works die long before their authors breath
their last.

Sarwarthachintamani.
SrnufrPreW ^WWR^'MiJjr-'.l!
Stanza II.
/I next offer my prayer to that §od (Sower) who is red after the color
of a bright lotus, and whose blessings are always invoked in all their undertakings even by the Devatas.
NOTES.
It must, b.e remembered by the readers of my translation,
Indian and Foreign that this work is written bv an eminent Indian
Brahmin Astrologer who completely believed in the Yedic lore
and all the ritualistic recommended therein, and whose feelings
must naturally have been moulded according to their holy precepts.
Ganesha or G antipathy is a well known Deity (Power) in the
Aryan religious system. Without going into the deeper meaning
of Yotja or Sankhya it might suffice here to know that Ganesha
is the reputed son of Parvathi and Eswara and no undertaking will
be considered as successful, whether spiritual or temporal, without
first invoking the help of this important Power, and suitable offerings made to him. Venkatasa follows this general custom of the
Aryan writers in invoking the help of Ganesha for the completion
of his work without any interruption. Red color is symbolical of
danger and Ganapathy governs all dangers and effectually
removes them. His another name is Yighnaswara or the remover
of all Yitjhnas or obstacles.
Stanza III.
Shat Sarcunrathy who stands on th: white lotus, whose complexion is
as pun as the whitest camphor and who is the giver of all eloquence r Yaavibhute ) — may she herself dance in my speech (writing ).

Sarwarthachintamanl
NOTES.
The invocation of the author is offered next to Saraswathy
(Goddess of Learning or Wisdom). The arrangement here seems
to be a little out of order. It is generally the custom to offer
prayers to the family God, then to Saraswathy and Ganapathy
and then to family Guru, and other learned pundits who excelled
in the branch of knowledge in which the author wrote, hut here
we have the order a little reversed. Sarasivathy is the Goddess
of all knowledge and is the spouse of Brahma. All eloquence
and intellectuality are ascribed to Her grace and favour. The
%ure of speech used by Venkataswara simply shows that when
Saraswathy is herself dancing in his mouth or speech, the work
which he undertakes must be all perfection and beyond comparison, for the Goddess represents the highest wisdom. It is a
kind of prayer offered to Saraswathy (Light or Guana) and is
commonly found in the writings of the Eastern authors. It is
also meant to show great humiliation on the part of the writer.
le author does not pretend to write from his own inborn ability
or learning acquired from instruction or experience but ascribes
the excellence of his composition to the fact of the crace which
has been extended to him by the Goddess of Wisdom ^Saraswathy,
m as much as, she is pleased to dance in his versification and to
produce the desired excellence in the work.
Sti.vza IV.
the iodiacat digits, the planets and those < Grand 'Benefactors who
are helping the cam of humanity, protect me. ®
cl JIT W 'P e ™ lia f The author is writing an astrologiC 1 11 J l the f bjects treated of are Zodiacal Sions Planets
° ° Utluns and irrespective influences on our worldly pheno-

Sarwarthachintamani.
menu. It is therefore fair that he should offer his obeisance to
the Zodiacal Signs and the great Planets which incessently revolve
in them. But he says more than that. Venkataswara alludes
also to the Benefactors of the world. Who are they and what are
they ? I presume, we have to suppose all those who have in any
way benefittedthe world are here meant and their blessings are
also solicited. It may also mean that those ether Deities whose
names have not been mentioned here, and who all the same, are
continually doing good to the world. The expression grand Benefactors of the world does not refer to human beings however
great they may be temporally but refers to those men who have
risen 'to the highest spiritual wisdom, who are Mahatmas by
severe Thapas, and those great Maharishis and Moonis, without
whom the creation, protection and destruction of the world and all
its phenomena, cannot go on. In the narrow sense of the term,
one who builds a chuttram or plants a tope, or digs a well, or
governs a country wisely is a benefactor, but the author does not
refer to them at all as the good or evil they do by such acts, is
very little and of small local importance. That unsullied good which
can proceed only from Spiritual elevation is here meant and that
is possessed by the Higher in the Unseen World. The authors
prayer proceeds from all sincerity and this gives a clue to his
development on the Spiritual side. Many are liable to make
mistakes by supposing that great and intelligent authors should
deify such objects as Zodiacal signs, planets, constellations and so
forth. The language in which these works are written, is unrivalled in its capacity for multifarious interpretations and the
pliancy which it offers to men of genius. Always there is a double
meaning in the slokas in Sanscrit — an inner and an outer meaning.
Sur. is worshipped as a deity or source of Power W e know as a
matter of fact that some mysterious Power controls it and pervades
the physical body of that great luminary and when the Aryan
offers his prayers to the Sun, he offers it to the Narayana who is
Savitru Mandala Mudhya Varti viz. the Supreme Power which lies
behind the great solar body, and which animates it with its wonder-

Sarwauthachintamani.
t‘ul ami incomprehensible power. I shall not however digress from
my subject proper. Zodiacal signs, Planets, and Constellations arc
animated by various but Superior Powers. These must not be confounded with the physical signs, planets and stars themselves. This
department of knowledge is very extensive and I shall not go beyond rnv legitimate work, by leading the readers to that wonderful
sea of wisdom whose depth in many branches is not known to the
highest informed mortals. I simply draw tlie attention of the readers to the fact that intelligent authors in every branch of science,
have always offered their prayers to the Principal Causes which
they were abL* t > sm by .superior spiritual sight an 1 id t to grow,
matter.
Stanza Y.
those results which may be predicted by consulting the birth time
( Horoscope i may also be predicted by consulting the question time.'' Inhere
is no difference in consultations based on birth or question times and they
give the same certain results.
NOTES.
lliis requires a little explanation as it appears to mislead a
reader on a superficial perusal. The author is not here strictly
correct, although on a closer examination he does not contradict
himself. I can point out several circumstances in which calculations based on horoscopic rules and predictions drawn therefrom
do not apply to horary or Prasna calculations. But as I understand the stanza means altogether a different thing. He says that
calculations for horoscopes are based upon the birth time” while
those for Prasna are based upon question time. In both cases

J
Composition op the Z<
Time is the most important element. The »tom’shr^r&Mre isJsjjSnit
■upon it. In the one the birth of the child is m^S5==»sfeif6 in the
other the birth time of the question — hence the subject — is taken.
It therefore stands to reason that both are equally important and
that the science of astrology deals with both alike, and makes
predictions past, present and future with the same definiteness of
knowledge. *
Stanza. 6.
The Zodiac is composed of twenty-seven constellations., one hundred
and eight PadamS {quarters) twelve Zodiacal signs of nine Pa d am g
each, and the Zodiac turns round once a day from East to West in the
Akasa or space.
NOTES.
The Zodiac is called in Sanskrit Bha (lustrous or resplendent)
and- dialer a ^ Globe) and is composed of 27 constellations or
Nahshu trams. These are (1) Aswini, (2) Bha.ra.ni, (3) Krittika,
(4) Rohini, (5) Mrugasira, (6) Auridra, (7) Poonana.su, (8) Pooshyami, (9) Auslasha, (10) Maltha, (11) Poohbu, (12) Oottara, ,
(13) Hasta, (14) Chitta, (15) Sioati, (16) Visakha, (17) Auoom-
■ dha, (18) Jaista, (19) Moola, (20) Poorvaskada, (21) Oottaraskoda,
(22) Sravana, (23 j Dhanista , (24) Satablmlia, (25) Poorvabhaclra
(26) Oottarahhadm , (27) Raivcdy. These are the clusters of stars
which move once in a day and which clearly mark the revolutions
of the planets and identify them at any given time. Each of these
.Stars is divided into four equal divisions called Padams or quarters
and we have therefore 27 x 4 = 108 Padams. But the whole of the
moving Zodiacal space is divided into 12 divisions called signs
(Razees) and therefore we get \°£ — 9 Padams of stars for each
‘ of the Zodiacal houses. These twelve Zodiacal signs and the 27
constellations go one round in about 24 hours or a day and they
have a movement from East to West while the planets have

Sakavakthachihtamant.
movements from West to East. . This will be a little confusing m
the beginning but after a little study and practice the idea becomesf miliar.
Staxza 7.
The planets Saui, Gum, Kuja, Ravi, Sukra, Buda and
Chnndra occupy positions within that Bhachakra and move from
West to East and thus go round the Earth. ( Saturn , Jupiter , Mars*
Sun , Venus , Murcury and Moon respectively .)
NOTES.
Questions of astronomy and mathematics ought not to be
discussed in a work of English translation. If introduced tbey
will occupy more space than I can afford to spare here, i tieposition of the Zodiac, its major and minor divisions, the position
of the planets and their respective revolutions in their orbits, theposition of the Earth in the planetary spheres and its revolution
round the Sun, the movements of the constellations which havedirect influence on the sublunary affairs, are facts about which,
short explanatory notes will be thoroughly misleading and highly
objectionable. These are very important questions and requireproper diagrams for clearly illustrating them. The points involved,
are too complicated and too difficult to be properly handled inshort notes and the object of the English translation of this work,
is not to introduce the beginner in the science of astrology to the
higlier knotty provinces of difficult astronomical problems but
to create an interest in this science by giving easy explanations of
facts which may be comprehended by the readers without much
difficulty and labour. In all works of importance there are many
points which have to be assumed as true or established by thestudents. The authors presume a fair knowledge in the readers
and whenever they propound any objectionable theories the authorsthemselves discuss the matters in a fair light aud at considerable^

Plane'is and Pancha Bhootas. tl
The why and the wherefore of any scientific problem must be
liept away for sometime until the students have made a reasonable
progress and can approach their solution with a tolerable knowledge of its various grades of development. The order in which
-the° planetary bodies are situated is here given. . Saturn is the
highest and consequently most distant from the Earth, nest is
Jupiter, then comes Mars, next we have the Sub, then comes
Venus, next is Mercury and lowest of all (nearest) is the ever
busy Moon, whom we see so often and in such striking phases
•of variations in the lunar light reflected from the Sun.
•Stanza 8.
The mutual connection between the Earth, Constellations and the
Globes of the Planets and those of the creatures which are poduced
Z the combination ./Panclia Bhootas *» Space the
aidless variety and characteristics which are observed in creation .
IffOTES.
This is a difficult Stanza for translation. The beauty and
brevity of the Sanskrit language, especially in rhyme, are incomparable and we can hardly reproduce its meaning in any other
lan-ua^e. In Spare or Kha there are planetary globes with their
mutual* attractions, repulsions, and revolutions, the Earth which
revolves, the constellations with their influences and the other
Lights which shine, have all their respective peculiarities and
uses. All these therefore give rise to the creation ot endless
varieties in the physical and the mental phenomena- Added to
this we have the five Bhootas, the— so called erroneous elements
— water, earth, light, air, and Akasa (Space). The combinations,
-and permutations of those various bodies produce endless species
influenced by the above bodies and influencing them in their
turn. What the author, means to say is that the endless varieties

ty
Saiuvarthachintama.ni.
of creation are doe to tie mutual iaduences ° { ll ' e P>“ e ‘W
vlobes including the earth and the 4ve B hootm which have bee
enumerated above- ,
iprcTntj^i f^T
Stanza 9.
Therefore zoc have to carefully find out the peculiarities of the
planetary spheres which are indicative of the products, of previous
HRYiarma Palam) acts and from a knowledge of wmch we have to
draw our inferences regarding the future by the light of the astrological science.
* TTfl'F'fiS.
The world is a great confusion for a scientific man- r lhe relisious systems are so many puzzles and do not help him in as much
as be wants to see everything for himself which is utterly impossible, taking man as he is and not man as he ought to be. Scientific
development is onesided as other developments are and we need
not be surprised if there is always variance between tbe man of
science and the man of religion. The two brains are differently
developed and the energies which enable them to see into the
mysteries of nature are differently directed. This is but natural.
The religions man sees objects and their causes differently from
the vision of the man of science- Muscular development addsstrength to the muscles while development of the intellect adds
strength to the brainpower. In this stanza the author clearly
hints at the Karma Theory. Karma (results of past, actions in
the previous states of existence) as commonly understood by thegeneral public denotes a series of acts which a person is supposed
to have done in his previous births and the results of those actsare enjoyed by him in the present birth in addition to what be"
may be able to do in this life. The previous acts and their results
are also modified or augmented by thet-acts of those who are
dear and near to him. Thus parents, brothers, children and
wives have great mutual influences in moulding the Karmaic-

K-arua Phalam.
IS
effects of a person. It is nob easy, for the man of science to
know, much less to understand, how a man now enjoys the result
of what he may have done in his previous births. The theory of
past and rebirths must be accepted here as proved and all the
astrological assumptions are based upon this theory. This is
neither the place nor the occasion to enter into a full discussion on
a most complicated and puzzling subject like that of Karma and
Gmma. Many promises are made by men in the course of their
lives but they are . not fulfilled. The impressions of sound are
always stored in our favour or against us as we fulfill or break
our promises. Phonograph gives a distinct explanation that
what we speak or promise is recorded in the ethereal space.
When the dissolution of the body is set in the finer and the mdre
spiritual portion goes away with these ethereal records and has
to account for it in the future births for the various porimses it
has to its credit. When the .molecules join together and Integratin* processes begin to produce human body they do so with the
previous liabilities attached to them. A knowledge of wliat those
impressions were in the previous births and how they work now
is clearly indicated to us by the rays of the- various planets
expressed in the technical language, of the astrological symbo s.
Planets therefore appear to be simply indicators and it is perfectly
within the sphere of map to know the evil results of such previous acts and take suitable remedies to avert them or to allow,
natural laws to operate upon him without the slightest attempt
on his part to stem such evil currents. Wherever we turn our
eves in •Nature there is arrangement and order. The transmigiation of souls is accepted by many and denied by some. T e
■ existence of souls in the human body is itself doubted by some
scientists. These are problems which are of a very difficult and
serious nature. Philosophers are not .agreed and cannot do so as
lonv as there is difference in the development of their inte -
lects. There. is chaos— but yet we see there is some or er.
Our own exertions are sometimes most . eminently successful.
But at other times they are found to be perfectly futile. Who
does Karma ? How does he extricate himself from its effects

14 Sarwarthachintamani.
■when he has done it ? Where does he come from ? What are
his missions here r And whither does he go ? These are surely
not simple questions for which I can furnish easy answers
in these short notes. There is no predestination or fatalism
recommended in the astrological sciences. I simply draw the
attention of the educated classes to these important truths for
mauv are carried away with the idea that a belief in astrology
involves a belief in fatalistic theory and ties down man to inaction
and laziness. This stanza clearly shows that the astrological
principles are not fatalistic tables. Proper remedial measures are
recommended and no preordination or predestiny is encouraged.
All the important planets which are mutually influencing the
earth and its phenomena, are simply indicators — by their pei’iods
and subperiods — of what a man is to enjoy or suffer as the result
of his own actions in the previous birth or births with a freedom
for the Jeeva ( Atma or Soul) to enjoy and suffer the results of the
previous karma by inaction and indifference or to overcome the
evil and augment those results of the karma for good by certain
acts of the present birth and by certain sources of knowledge
which might be acquired by proper initiation or by the determined
efforts of a highly developed will. This certainly involves further
difficulties and their solution cannot be attempted in such short
notes as these. The making of the attempt to overcome the evils
indicated by the planetary combinations obtained at the time of
birth or of question as the result of previous karma may itself also
be indicated bv those very same planetary combinations, and
therefore may be stated to be a sort of pre-arrangement which
might go under the name of Pate or human Destiny. But it is
assured by the advanced Sanskrit Vedantha writers on Karma and
Guana theories that the product of the past karma as .indicated
by the planetary combinations is quite different from that special
energy called ego or self (Atma) which has an action independent
of the karmaic effects and a right development of which can be
made to overcome the evil results of the previous karma. It is
really difficult to explain this strange but mysterious combination
of two important agencies in the human system and their relation-

No Fatalism in. Astro loci'.
ship between the effects of the past karma and the independenceof .the soul and much more difficult to understand it even when
explained in the ordinary methods. Long and learned discussions
alone can throw proper light on these difficult problems of our
life. They are -no doubt very vital and for the very same reason
they are most difficult to comprehend. This Energy — whatever
name we may be pleased to fasten on it — is the Power which
actuates the otherwise inactive combination of Punchabhnotna toperform the various functions which go under the name of Ufeacts,
and when this energy is not found or has left the combination of
Bhootas, they are themselves incapable of exhibiting any of the
life functions. The body then dies- The connection is very
mysterious, but it is neverthless very distinct. We do make
a distinction between body and mind, the functions of the one
are clearly defined as against the functions of the other and
when we bear this in mind we can see that behind the mind
and the body of man there seem to be vital energies which
may be direct exhibitions of the one Universal Force or which
may be secondary manifestations of the Primordial Forces
emanating from that Final Power. One thing seems to be
certain, namely that we need not be without a hope, when we
make an attempt to overcome the evils which maj r be indicated by
the planetary combinations, and therefore it is worth our while
to know what is in stove for u,s and make such arrangements aswould be suitable to overcome the evil or augment the good.
This has to be specially remembered by the students as it is very
important in the life of a man to know, that it is in his power to
mould his character and his future prospects temporal or spiritual.
If this were not the case astrology has no use, and man will be
hopeless. The karmaic acts will produce their own results so
long as they are not obstructed or modified by external agencies,
and these are sufficiently indicated by the astrological writers to
escape the attention of even the most careless readers of their
works. Water finds its own level b.ut Where it is wanted for
cultivating' purposes at a higher level we muse put a dam or anicut
to raise its level and turn the chaunel to our advantage.

Sarwarthachintamaki.
KUBfJ
Stanza 10
Therefore those peculiarities and characteristics of the planets
which arc not detailed by me here , -have to be learnt and understood
from the works of other authors on astrology. I shall only give such
as arc needed here for my purpose ;
NOTES.
The author simply says that it is not possible for him to give
all the astrological details in his book. Those details which are
not given here will have to be learnt from other well known books
on the subject. Here, as elsewhere, much information on the subject is presumed in the student by the authors. It is but rightAstrology is a huge science extending over four hundred thousand
sul rax and it is next to impossible to find all these in any one book
however intelligently its author might have composed it.
art i ii i m 1 1
Stanza 11.
^ Mars, Venus , Mercury , Moon, Sun, Mercury, Venus , Mars,
Jupiter, Saturn , Saturn and Jupiter are respectively the lords who
own Aries , Taurus , Gemini, Cancer, Leo , Virgo, Libra, Scorpio ,
Sagittarius , Capncornus, Aquarius and Pisces. These planets are
also the lords of their KavamsasNOTES.
Kuja, Sukra, Bud a, Chundra, Eavi, Buda, Sukra, .Kuja, Guru,
Sani, Sani and Guru, are respectively the lords of Mesha, Vrishablia, Mithuna, Ivataka, Simha, Kanya, Thula, Vrischika, Dhauas,
Makara, Kuraba, and Meena. When a sign is divided into 9 equal
divisions each of these is called a Navamsa or one-ninth of the
house. In these minor sub-divisions the lords of the Navamsas
are the same as those named above. The counting in the Zodiac

2odiac represents human organs.
usually begins with the first or Mesha. Tt is a celestial circle and
wo may begin from any place, bat we must have some convention
among ourselves to understand the science and we begin with
Aries as the first.' The solar year also commenced with the
entrance of' the Sun into Aries and the world seems to have
commenced with the appearance of the Sun in Mesha.
Stanza 12 .
Mesha, is the head of Kalapurusha, VrishabhcChis face., Mitlmna
his neck and chest, Kataka his heart , Simha his belly , Kauya his
waist , Thu la his lower stomach and navel, Vrischika las sexual
organs, Dhanas his thighs, Makara his knees, Kumbha his buttocks
and Meena represents his feet. Signs occupied by good planets give
health and strength to the organs indicated by them, and those occupied
by evil planets denote weakness or deformity in those organs.
NOTES.
This is a necessary stanza to indicate the development of the
various human organs and their malformation. Kalapurusha
apparently means Time Personified and deified. Where a sign is
occupied by an evil planet the organ governed by that sign will
either be-absent or ill developed. Good planets show great strength
and energy in the particular organs. The various degrees of development of the bodily organs are to be judged according to the
strength or weakness of the planets and the aspects and conjunctions they may have at the time of birth. When there are good and
evil planets in a sign, the strength of the planets has to be found out
and then the development or deformation should be ascribed as the
predominating influence is that of a good or evil planet. I have found
the application of this principle verified in almost every horoscope which has fallen under my observation and my predictions
of pain or disease in the particular' organs represented by the

SaKWAR i HACHINTAMAXIi
signs occupied by evil or debased planets have been wonderfully
correct. Much discretion and diligence no doubt must be used in
judging of the strength or weakness of the planets in the various
Louses. This power of balancing good and evil influences and forming a sound judgment thereon is a tact or ability which can only be
inherited or learnt intuitively ; and no amount of external education or training can really be of much use in this matter. This is
a patent fact and we see it realized in a remarkable degree in
evJrv walk of human life. Science is useful with intelligence
and dangerous without it. This is well illustrated in every branch
of scum**'.
afr* I
Stanza 13 .
Mcslta resembles ram, Vrishaba a bull , Cataka a Cancer or crab ,
Vrischika scorpion, Mcena is likened io two fishes one with its tail
turned towards the head of the other and vice versa. D lianas
resembles a warrior ( Centaur ) with bow and arrows in front and the
back and hips of a horse behind. Makara resembles the body of .a
crocodile with a face of an antelope in front. Mithuna resembles a
female with a lute (Yeena) and a male with a club (Gada)
embracing each other. NOTESIt has been a serious question, very often asked of the astrologer, as to wliy the different signs of the zodiac are named after
some animals and insects, and whether they lookod in these shapes
when observed carefully through the naked eye or. through the
optical instruments ? The answer does not seem to be so easy.
According to the Bhoulica sutras, which cannot be quoted at length
in a work of translation, the representations of the zodiacal signs
after the various animals, which have been mentioned here, are
really the representations of various forces whose power of motion

Zodiacal Significations.
and counter motion resembles the outlines of the above named
animals. What are those forces ? how are they worked ? why do
they resemble some of the well known species of animals ? are
matters which have to be explained at considerable length. The
letters composing these names in Sanskrit also stand as representations of the particular forces which have combined to produce
definite results under a Higher A gency. Others attribute these
names on account of the zodiacal signs presenting feeble resemblances to the animals depicted. Ham, Bull, Crab, Lion, Scorpion, Fishes and man and woman are well known species which
need no separate description for their indentification.
Dhanas is centaur representing half warrior and half horse
combined in one. Makara has the body of a crocodile with the
face of a dear. The uses for these details will be shown in this
work later on.
Stanza 14.
Konya represents a well built woman , seated in a boat floating in
water with vegetation and light in her hand. Thula resembles a man
with scales seated in a street,— -Kumbha represents a man with a
waterpot on his head and Simha represents a lion.
NOTES.
Kanya in Sanskrit means a Virgin unmarried, and Thula
means a balance. Kumbha denotes a waterpot and Simha represents a lion. These twelve Zodiacal signs also govern the
different countries of the globe and peculiar characteristics of
each of them may be predicted by reference to the sign which
governs a country. On humanity the special results of these rasees
are perceptible to the keen observer of nature.

2o SabwarthachintamakI.
I have often surprised my friends by giving ' tlie nal f ®
tto birth sign of . porton utterly «* now" .to mg «£ ^
ing at liisiace and the expression o 7
iuLto the headed the whole character, end l wb»
fully attend to these, we can gradually improve 1 P
diction by simply watching the facial expressions.
Stanza 15.
I now come to Vergas ( Divisions of the Zodiacal sign).-
In^thc C birth or question time the sign of the Zodiac which ascends
or rises at the time of birth or question is said to be Lagna. Jtus
is the first Yerga and the other rgaS are lts divisions.
NOTES
The reader should be very careful as all calculations and
planetary combinations are constantly referred to Lagna or time of
birth or question. Without understanding this important stanza
there is no use of any further attempts. A child is born at a
ceitain hour on a certain day in a certain month and year.
The place of birth and that of question are very .essential.
Zodiac is the celestial space which is marked by 27 constellations
and divided into 12 almost equal divisions. Each day sees these
twelve signs and 27 constellations going round once the celestial
space. This circle is divided into 360 degrees and the Sun goes
round this circle once in 360 days. He rises, for instance, ,in the
siern Aries, on the 1st day of the , solar month of Alesha and on the
2nd day be is found to rise in the 2nd degree o£ Mesha, and on :th.e
30th day of Mesha, the Sun rises in the 30th degree. . This has. al- ,
ready been explained in the previous notes and I shall show what >
is meant by Lagna. Lagna literally means -Sandhiox Junction*
What forces are joined here ? and how da they join ? are matters .
which are outside the limits of the present book. This gaining of

Tub Different Vergas.
the Sun every day is called the Bhoohta Ghatikas. Every to w n
and country has its different latitude and .longitude, and this
. 68 a great deal of difference in the .extent of the Zodiacal
signs. rlshaU give a rough idea of the extent of these houses,
and as I have already stated, they are liable to variations in the
.^afferent parts. of the world... Meena and Mesha measure about
; ghatikas each.- Yrisbabba and Kumbha about 4£ ghatikas,
Mjthuna and Makara about 5|- ghatikas, Dhanus and Kataka
about 5} ghatikas. Simha and Yrisohika about 5£ ghatikas and
Kanya and Thula about 5£ ghatikas. A day is composed of 24
English hours and 60 Indian ghatikas. Therefore each English
ho.ur has 2f Indian ghatikas. Each ghatika is divided into 60
Vighatikas, each Yighatika is. divided into 60 Liptas and each
Lipta again is subdivided into 60 Viliptas. 24 Euglish minutes
compose one Indian ghatika. 2^ Vighatikas make one Euglish
minute. 150 Liptas make one English minute or 2^ Liptas for
each English second. The Hindu astronomers have gone further
in the divisions of , time and each of these liptas is again subdivided into 60 viliptas or each English second has 150 viliptas.
They are necessarily one hundred and fifty times more minute in’
point of division of time over their modern western brothern and
certainly cannot be accused of want of mathematical depth
and the influence of time on terrestrial phenomena. The sunrise determines the day and the sign of the Zodiac or Oodaya
Lagtia. Wherever the Sun may be that will be the lagna in the
morning when the sun rises. These facts may be illustrated by a
few examples. A child is born, say, at 12'ghatikas on the 25th
day of the solar month Cancer, The rising sign at sunrise in that
month will be Cancer itself. But the Sun rises in it on the 1st
day in the 1st degree and on the 30th day in the 30th degree.
The child was born on the 25th morning and therefore the Sun
has passed 24 degrees of Cancer and rose on that morning in the
25th degree. Cancer extends over ghatikas, and this divided
by 30 days gives us II Vighatikas = 11 Vighatikas for
each day. Hat the Sun has passed 24 days in it and therefore

Sarwakthachintamasi.
he has saine.1 Gl.ato= 4 Ghatikas. This is to
be deducted from the ghatikas the extent of Kataka and we
have one ghatika and 0 vighatikas remaining therein. Therefore
at the time of sunrise on the 25th day of the solar month Kataka
the Lagnu remains for ghatikas. The child was born after 12
ghatikas. Therefore as the Lagnns regularly revolve we must find
out which of the Lagnas governed the time at which the child was
born. Siinha(Leo) conies next and remains for 5 5 ghatikas. Then
we have Kanya (Virgo) for 5^ .Ghatikas. Thus the extent of the
time to the end of Virgo will be Kataka=lro + Simha 5|-+ Kanya
51 = 11,1* ghatikas. But the child’s birth is stated at 12 ghatikas
after the sunrise and therefore the rising sign (Lagna) of‘the birth
of that child was in Thula (Libra) and in the very commencement
of it or its first Navamsa.
Take another example.
A child was born on the 15th of Mesba (Aries) at 20
ghatikas after sunrise. The sun rises in Aries during all the
days of this month and therefore at sunrise this is the Lagria. 14
days have already passed and the birth took place on the 15th.
The Sun has gained 14 and odd degrees on the 15th of Aries' at
sunrise. Mesha extends over about 4 ghatikas and the Sun has
gained - ^ghatik as =|g — 1 (s ghatikas. = 1 gh. and 52 vighatikas.
At the time of Sunrise we have therefore Mesha=4 — l||=2ghas.
and 3 vghts- But the time of birth is fixed at 20 ghts. and we
have to see which sign is rising at that time. We have now to
bring up all the signs in due order until we get that sign which
exactly falls in the 20th ghatika. Add to the remaining portion
of Mesha 2 { /b, Vrishabha 4^ ghts, Mitliuna 5^'ghts, Kataka 5J
ghts, total of all these signs = 1 7 ghts. and 23 Vighatikas, The
birth time is 20 ghatikas and therefore it falls in Simha which
extends over ok ghatikas after 17* j, ghatikas =or 22f§ ghatikas after
sunrise. The birth Lagna tbereforeds clearly in Simha. To this
the name Lama is technically given. The san}e : processes are . to

tlonA 'and Dbakkana.
be obseived in treating of tb 6^‘Prasua or horary — question time.
There are certain subdivisions which are made in each of these
zodiacal signs and these minor sub-divisions lead one to find out
exactly in what minute part of the zodiacal sign a person is born.
It is one thing to say that a man is in America, in the United
States, in New York and so on and it is quite another thing to say
that he is in a particular pleasurable or painful state, that he is
in good or bad circumstances, that he is in a particular house, in
a particular room and in a particular physical or mental condition.
The more we' are intimate with the exact environments of a man
the’ greater will be the precision with which we can predict about
any act which he is likely to do or not. A knowledge of these
details enables us to know the sources of strength or weakness of
planets. These have symbolised language expressed in the case
of planets, constellations and zodiacal signs by minute divisions
called vergas, states, friendship, retrogrades, accelerations, exaltations,
debilitations, M oolathrilconas and so on. The readers are requested
earnestly to pay attention to these facts and understand them
before they venture into the predictive regions of Astrology.
ufi' i 1 1 > s u
Stanza 16When a Zodiacal sign is divided into two equal parts , each part is
called a Hora* In odd signs the Sun governs the first Hora and the
MOOBL governs the second. In even signs , the Moon rules the first
Mora while the Sun rules the second Hora*
When a sign is divided into three equal divisions , each of these
parts is called a Drakkana- The lord of the sign governs the first
division , lord of the fifth rules the second division and the lord of the
fih governs the third division respectively.

SARWAKTHACHIN'fAMArtt.
NOTES.
The word flora in Sanskrit is derived from a compounding of
the two words Aho {day) and Eatri (night) and dropping the first
letter A and the last letter In. In thus compounding we get Sara
and henco astrology is called Hora Sastra . The English words
Horoscope, Horologue, Hour, Horary seem to have been directly
derived from the Sanskrit I lor a which means Time. In counting
the zodiacal signs we generally commence with Mesha unless from
the context, it is otherwise intended. 1-3-5 -7-9 andll or Mesha,
Mithuna, Simha. Thula, Dhanas and Kumbha are odd signs and
the rest 2-4-6 8-10 and 12 or Vrishabha, Kataka, Kanya, Vrischika
Makara and Meena are even signs. When a sign is divided into
two equal divisions each of these is called a hora and the lord of
the 1st hora in odd signs is Ravi, while the Moon governs the 2nd,
and in even signs the first hora is governed by the Moon while the
second is ruled by the Sun. The zodiacal sign is the first Verga
and the hora represents the 2nd Verga.
Take Mesha and divide it into two equal parts, each is called
a hora. The first bora is ruled by the Sun while the second is
governed by the Moon. In Taurus the first hora is governed by
the Moon while the second is ruled by the Sun. So on for the
rest.
When a sign is divided in to three equal parts each of the parts
is called a Drakbma. Thus we have 36 Dmkkanas for the 12 signs.
The lords of the Dnikkanas are respectively the lords of the 1st, 5th
and 9th houses. This is the most approved system. Thus when
Menlta is divided into 3 equal divisions, the 1st part is governed
by the lord of the house viz. ICuja. The second Drakkava is ruled
by the lord of the 5th viz. Simha — the Sun— aud the third is
governed by the lord of the 9tli Dhanas viz. Jupiter. In Vrishabha
the lord of the 1st is Sukra, that of the 2nd is Buda and that of
the 3rd is Sani. Soon for the other, signs.- Yavanacharya and
some inferior writers on astrology give the lords of Hrakkanas as
follows : — The lord of 1st house is the ruler of the 1st. The lord
of the 12th house is the ruler of the 2nd Drakkhna and the'

INFERENCES IN DRAKKANAS.
lord of the 3rd Drakkana is the owner of the 11th house
If we take the sigu Aries and its Drakkana :s we have their lords
thus The 1st Drakkana is governed by Kuja, the 2nd Dr alkane
has Guru to rule it because he owns the I2th house from Mesha ;
and the lord of the 3rd Drakkana is the owner of the litb house
viz. Sani. There is yet another system which treats of these lords
in a different way. The 12 zodiacal signs are regularly divided
into Char a ( active nr movable ), Sthira. (fixed or stationary) and
Dwisivabhava (Double Bodied or Common) signs. Mesha is Chara ,
Vrishabhais Sthira and Mithunais Dwisivabhava. Kataka is Chara,
Simha is Sthira and Kanyais Diciswabhava and soon with the rest.
In treating of Drakkanas some writers give the lordships
thus In chara signs, the lord of the 1st Drakkana is the lord of
the house itself, the lord of the 2nd is the lord of the 5th and the
lord of the 3rd Drakkana is the lord of the 9th house as stated
already. In the Sthira Signs, the lord of the 1st Drakkana
is the owner of the 9th house, the lord of the 2nd Drakkana is the
ruler of the sign itself and the lord of the 3rd Drakkana is the
lord of the 5th house. In the Dwisivabhava signs, the lord of the
1st Drakkatia is the lord of the 5th house, the lord of the 2nd is
the ruler of the 9th house and the lord of the 3rd Drakkana
will be lord of the house itself. This makes a great deal of
difference in fixing the strength of planets in their different Vergas. Varahatnihira, Pa rasa ra, Satyacharya, Badarayana and some
other well known writers on astrology have followed the 1st mentioned system — namely — the lords of the three Drakkanas are the
lords of the house itself, lord of the 5th and lord of the 9th
respectively, whichever signs may be taken into consideration. I
’have simply pointed out the different systems and leave the
readers to follow whichever they please and whichever tallies
with their experiences best. This is the 3rd Very a or Division and
is a source of strength or weakness to planets.

SAHWAIiTHiCHlXTAMANl.
ii^ii
Stanza 17 . >
Some say for PraSH£l {horary or question time) that the lords of
the koras arc the owner of the I? aS66 aju ^ ^ ie ^ or< ^ °f ^- u house
from it. The lords of the Drakkanas are the rulers of the 1st , 12th
and nth respectively.
NOTES.
The different systems have been carefully pointed out in the
notes Httjirti, and the readers ought to remember them in venturing
their predictions.
Stanza IS.
Some authors say that in movable signs, the lards of the Drakkanas
are the rulers of the 1st, $th and the 9th signs. In the fixed -’'signs,
the lords of the Drakkanas arc the riders of the 9th, 1st and 5th
sicnis. In the common or Double-Bodied signs they are Hie rulers '■ of
the jth, 9th and 1st houses respectively. .1 •
NOTES.
Stanzas 10 , 17 and 18 , treat of the same subject and the
notes of stanza 1 G are ample enough on these matters.

Sapta AND D ASA. MS AS. 27
Stanza 19.
* e! ” aU ' Msims ««* of the farts
. P^p vellllScl. Ill odd Sir IIS /A/? [ni'rlc nf <•„ J‘ •
szons are the r J7 » 6 °J these seven dim-
**»**. lords are a, tjL 'of Z yt a^^’Ilf”'
mencefrtm the miner of the ^’1 '!“//° Tv ^ ^ asamsas «"»■
®r <fe dy* ofthZl^ V ff’ ? ’* «* «*«
/ h and the following houses respectively.
notes.
e I aeh * - IM •
nexfc 6 si s ns respective] y. Take AW,* i<w
S^ptamsa is governed hv Maps lord of Mesha 9 a ■ ’’ * irsfc
Venus (lord of TaurnO q Z *' 2nd 18 governed by
of the “th (Vrieehtt) “ S °'' emed by tbe lord
by Saturn, 4th by &t™ J . ?' Jup ' ter (,ord ° f Dk*nus), 3rd
Mars (lord of Mosha) and 7tr 1 , ^ plter lLord of Meena), 6th by
*» d 4th ,OTd - Vrisbabha ; »Z
Kumbha are the 3rd and4°th CdcT
for the rest. This is the 4th Varga
p Tr h is -«•
“h
8th, 9th and lOti by filda Cl p W ' 4th ' l5tb ' 6 *’
Guru 1,1(1 Saui Lords of Mit’huna Kzie.iT ’s'mb^r S " kra ’ K " Ja
Vrischika, Dhanas and Mai- k j Simha > Kanya, Thula,
- ~ ^ “ir iT p ;::r^e it ,; rishabha
governed by the lord of the 9th f\i - a , firbt Wa6 ‘ am - S ‘« is
,0t4 of the 10* .Kumbha', 3rd bylXd otCalh % f

SarWAR I’HACHINTAMANJ .
lord of Mesha, 5th by the lord of Vrishabha, 6th by the \or-d of
Mithuna, 7th by the lord of Kataka, Sth by the lord of Sira.ha,
Oth by the lord of Kanya and 10th by the lord of Tlnala. Mw*
larly calculate for all the other odd and even signs. This is the
fifth Verga.
Stanzas 20 and 21.
When a sign is divided into p equal divisions each part is called
a Navamsa- /« Mesha, Simha and Dhccnas count from Mesha.
In Vrishabha , Kanya and Makctrci count from Makara. In Thula ,
Mithuna, Kumbha, count from Thula, and in, Kataka , Vrishika and
Mcena count from Kataka. When a sign is divided into 12 equal
divisions each is called a Bwadasamsa- These Amsas should be
counted regularly from the Lagua. ■■■'..■
When a sign is divided into 30 equal divisions each is called a
ThrimsamsaIn odd houses, Kuj a governs the first five parts, the next five partsarc under Sani, the next eight parts are governed by Guru, the-next
seven parts by Buda , and the last five parts are under Sukra. In the
even signs the reverse order holds good. When a sign is divided into
16 equal parts, each is called a Shoda.s a.mgp. . In odd signs the.
lords of the first 12 houses govern them and 13th,
1 6 th parts are ruled by Sani, Buda, Kuja and Bam, In ,$ven f%%s,

, ShasTIAM343. $$
the planets govern them m the reverse order. When a sign is divided
■into 60 equal parts each ts called a Shastiamsa* The names of
these Shastiamsas *«-( 1) Ghora, ( 2 ) Bakskasa, (3)
vabhaga, (4) Kubera, 5) Eakskogana, (6) KinaaraNOTES.
It is. very important for readers to bear these, several subdivisions correctly in mind. The author constantly refers to
these sources of strength and weakness in the combinations, of
planets, he gives hereafter, and insists upon their correct understanding in making predictions. If a planet is strong in Rasee
(sign), in Horn, in Drahkana, in Chatartamsa, •in PancUam.sn, iu
Sgptamsa, in Navamsa, in Dasamsa, in , Wkadasamm, in Dicculasamsa, in Shodasamsa, in Thrimsamsq, and in Shastiamsa, he will
be able to give the native all. the highest possible good influences
which he is capable of, but if the planet occupies an unfavourable
position in all these Vergas he will bo able to produce all the evil
effects which are ascribed to him. Much material is therefore
furnished here for the student to judge., of the sources of strength
or weakness to, the planets and. the reader cannot bestow too
much attention upon this important subject.
: A planet may look very bright in the Rasee, he may he
exalted, and he may occupy a position indicating great gains or
success, but should such a planet occupy unfavourable- V'ergas
or sub-divisions enumerated above, the student lias to subtract
much of the good and may perhaps be even required-: to predict
evil instead) of good. A superficial reader might get confused
over a horoscope in judging of the combinations and their- results
when- they inchoate wealth and success in the Rases and the: native
fading actually a beggar’s life. This may. look quite inconsistent
with what the astrological formulas may say-- .about the results. of
such; ©.oiubiuations.. The reasons are not. far to seek. Amafi
may put-on a decent, dress, have all the adrs of a gentleman, or
<?ne of; noble birth and breeding, but when a careful-' examination
,Q$t.his .©ir©u ( eostances is made, the inquirer- may s have various
revelations that, .the noble- looking person, may be. hopelessly

Sarwarthachintawani.
involved, or most miserably situated. Appearances may often be
deceptive, and it is just with a view to correctly give the reader
how fdr he could safely rely upon the strength of the planet^ that
the author has detailed in great fulness all these sources of
strength and weakness which should be taken into careful consideration before predictions could be boldly and precisely made.
The divisions 1 tire plain enough and I need not waste much time
and space irt giving illustration of what the reader can easily
understand for himself by a little perseverance and diligence-
' However I roust say something about the Navamsas as they
give some trouble to the ordinary readers. Take Mesha and
divide it into 9 equal divisions, each of these is called a Navamsa.
The lord of the 1 st Navamsa is the lord of Mesha itself ’(V.e.)
Kuja. The Navamsas must be counted consecutively from
Mesha. The 2nd Navamsa in Mesha will be the next from Mesha
(Vrishablia). Its lord is Sukra. The 3rd Navamsa is Mithuna
and its lord is Budha The 4th, 5th, 6th, 7th, 8th and 9th
Navamsas are, Kataka, Simha, Kanya, Thula, Vrischika and
Dlianas with their lords Chundra, Ravi, Budha, Sukra, Kuja and
Guru respectively. • • ■ ■
Take Vrishablia — The next sign in order — Its Navamsas must
commence from where we left the last Navamsa of Mesha ( i.e .) from
Makara. Thus the 1st Navamsa of Vrishablia is Makara and its
lord is Sani. The 2nd Navamsa of Vrishabha is Kumbha
governed also by Sani. The 3rd, 4th, 5th, 6th, 7th, 8th, and 9th,
Navamsas are Meena, Mesha, Vrishabha, Mithuna, Kataka, Simha
and Kanya with their lords Guru, Kuja, Sukra, Budha, Chundra,
Ravi, and Budha respectively. For Mithuna we have therefore
to commence the 1st Navamsa with Thula, the next after Kanya,
with which ended the 9th Navamsa of Vrishabha. For Mithuna
therefore we must commence with Thula. The 1st Navamsa of
Mithuna. is therefore Thula governed by Sukra. The 2nd to 9th
Navamsas are Vrischika, Dhanas, Makara, Kumbha, Meena,
Mesha* Vrishabha, and Mithuna governed by Kuja, Guru, Sani,
Sani, Guru, Kuja* -Sutra and Budha respectively. For Kataka

OwADASA Aftt) SSODASAMSAS.
^ie Navamsas therefore begin with Zataka itself— Kafcaka, Simha,
Zanja, Thula, Vriscfiika, Dhanas, Makara, Kumbha, Meena, are
the 9 .Nayamsas of Zataka and are ruled by Chundra, Ravi, Budha,
feukra, Zuja, Guru, Sani, Sani and Guru respectively. For Simha
we, have to begin the Navamsas with Mesh a the Sign next to Meena,
which was the 9th Navamsa of Zataka. We see an order here,
ior Mesha, Simha, and Dhanas we have to commence the Navamsa
lagua from Mesba ; for Vrishabha, Zanya and Makara we begin
fiom Makara for Mithuna, Thula and Kumbha from Thula.
For Zataka, V rischika and Meena we commence from Zataka.
That is, the angular houses of an equilateral triangle 1, 5, 9 or
120 degrees apart in the Zodiacal Circle repeat themselves and
commence their Navamsas with the same sign for those three
angular houses. If the student draws up a Zodiacal figure and
applies the test I have suggested he will see the beautiful arrangement the Maharishis had in view in the division of these Navamsas.
Dwadasamsa— Divide a sign into 12 equal parts each partis
called a Dwadasamsa from Sanskrit Dwadasa— 32. In Mesha, the
divisions regularly commence from itself. In Vrishabha from
itself and so on. If Mesha is divided into 32 parts the lords of
tlio 32 Zodiacal, signs regularly govern the 12 divisions and there
is no difficulty about this.
When a sign is divided into. 16 equal parts each is called a
shodasanisa. Here the lords cf the first 32 divisions in odd signs
are the lords as in the Dwadasamsa, and the 13th, 14t.h, 15th and
18th divisions are governed by Saturn, Mercury, Mars and the
Sun. In the even signs the order must be reversed. This will
not be intelligible without one or two illustrations. Divide Aries
into 16 parts. The lords of the first 12 divisions are thelords of
Aries, Taurus, Gemini Cancer, L.eo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Caprieornus, Aquarious and Pisces, the 3 3th is ruled by
Saturn, 14th by Mercury, loth by Mars and I6tli by the Sun.
Take Taurus— -Here the order must be reversed, the lstdivi*
sion has the Sun, 2nd has M ar$, 3rd has Mercury, 4tli Saturn, and

8 a rw arth aciu nt a mani.
then the 5th; 6th, 7 th, Sfchj 9tb, 10th, 11th, 12th, 13th, 14th, 15th
and 16th are governed by tl{^ lords of the 12 signs taken in the
reverse order or Aries, FideHs, -Aquarius, Capricorn us, Sagittarius,
Scorpio, Libra, Yirgo, Leo, Cancer, Gemini and Taurus respectively,
by their lords Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus,
Mercufrv, Sun, Moon, Mercury and Venus.
Thrirnsamsa— when a sign is divided into 30 parts each is
called a Thrirnsamsa meaning a '„th. Here the order is thus obser -
ved.
In odd signs the following Thrimsamsas are governed by
Mars, Saturn, Jupiter, Mercury and Venus = 30
In ev r en signs the reverse order holds good. Venus, Mercury,
Jupiter, Saturn, Mars =30. In Aries and other odd signs the first
five parts are ruled by Mars, the ne xt 5 parts by Saturn, the next
8 parts by Jupiter, the next 7 parts by Mercury and the last 5
parts by Venus. In Taurus and other even signs, the first 5 parts
are ruled by Venus, the next 7 parts by Mercury, the next 8 parts
by Jupiter, the next 5 parts by Saturn and the last 5 parts by
Mars. The Sun and Moou have no lordship over these Thrimsarnsas.

SHASTrAMSA3.
?33TTTqfa:
nwt ?^^*nnr ?vsfraaRT » <§^11^11
?VJ5*T$: ^oitTn7sl?TO*rpft
Rj'ra^iifrr: i
s -'3^T%^r»T»TnT:
^cf^fts^TT^T: i^n -.ltunST-Ml^ail
sPIT^o *F3R*I5r^1pgVOT5^
^rrarja^m 3HMn*<d+isr. i
o^s^nm yjstfhRHH
•i ^sTsr’Tt a 3 Frt^py «
«^#^2s^T2vs?pTra^reft i
H'l^pTTi^prrSTrH'S^^HI'l
^Tlf^»TW^9T|VRT^: IR'SII

Sarwa RTII ACH L\TA If an t.
Stanzas 22 to 27.
(7) Hrusta , (6) Kalaqhna, (9) Garala, (10) Agnighatha, (11)
Afajamsa, (12) Preta Purisa, (13) Apampathy , (14) Devaganasa,
(15) Kala, (16 ) Sarpa , (17) Amnia, (18) Chundra, (19) Mridwamsa,
(-0) Komalamsa , (2J) Pqdmci , (22) Lukshmisa , (23) Vagisa , (24)
Dzgambara, (25) D evanish (26) ludrn, (27) Kalviasa , . (28) KshitisZJara ' (29) Kamalahara , (30) Mnndatmaja, (31) Mrityu, (32)
(33) Devagnya, (34 ) Chora, (35) Yamakantaka, (38) Satya, (37)
(38) Paripurna , , (39) Vzshapmdagdha, (40) Kulanasa, (41)
Mookhya , (42) lamsa/cshya, (43) Ootpatha , (44) Kalarupa, (45) .Sbw-
(46) Mrndzmmsa, (47) Susithala , (48) Damstra, (49)
^<7^? , (oO) IndooMoohha, (51) Poorisha, (52) Kalagnya , (53) Dandayoodha , (54) Nirmala , , (55) Shoobha, (56) Ashoobha , (57) ^/z-
( 5S ) SudkapayodJu , (59) Dyumani, (60) ludurakha.
This is the order in which the 6 o equal divisions of a Rasee are to
be taken zn all odd signs . /« the even signs, the order has to be
reversed, that zs, the both zs the jst , the jpth is the 2 nd, 58 th is the
3 rd. 5 ~tn zs the pk, and so on until wc get to the first which becomes
the both division zn the even signs.
notes.
are good divisions and when a person is born in these be will
prosper well. The order is given in the odd signs and in the even
signs they have to be taken in the reverse order when they become
different numbers. On the enumeration of these Shastiamsa*
several manuscripts give different readings. Some of the names
are slightly altered. This kind of difference in the various manuscripts, which fall into our hands, seems to be a necessary evil
with which we have to combat, in the best way we can..
Iu the processes of copying and committing to memory, there
must necessarily be many'readings and unless there are material
differences m the several readings we may pass on, occasionally
noticing them as we proceed in our translation. In the first place
it becomes extremely difficult for ordinary men to find out such

Sapta Vergas.
minor divisions of time. This work entails a good 'and sound
knowledge in mathematics, which is the basis for all astronomical
and astrological calculations. After a good study in science, the
inductive faculties are developed and the different states of the planets given above may be almost guessed by a glance at the horos-
: cope. This power, however, cannot be possessed by every one and
is a rare qualification to be found among the present generation
of astrologers. This may be called genius in Astrology. Very few
have it. If the reader can confine himself to the Lagna, Hora,
Drakkana, and Navamsa, he will have a tolerably good idea of the
sources of the strength of the planets, and may be able to venture
safe predictions. But to have a thorough mastery in ihe science
one must carefully go over all these divisions and know their
relative values before predictions are ventured. The names of
these 60 Amsas are purely Sanskrit and they indicate the nature
of influence which they carry with them. The expressive nature
of Sanskrit terms are entirely foreign to other languages and I can
do no more than quote them for the information of my English and
Foreign readers.
ITfraTTH^f^r: IRCIl
Stanza 28.
The Sapta (7) Vergas previously stated are (1) Lagna {birtfi),
(2) Hora, (3) Drakkana, (4) Saptamsa, (5) Navamsa, (6) Dwadsatnsa and (7) Thrimsamsa.
HOTES.
Several systems in astrology give different kinds of Vergas
or divisions.' Some authors speak of Shadmrgas. Some give 7
Vergas, others say there are ten Vergas, some say there are IB
Vergas and others again say that there are 16 Vergas-. The author
gives here some of these different schools of astrology.

Sarwahthachintamani.
^W^r^w5T j n’: U^ll
Stakza 29.
Planets occupying cruel Shastiamsas produce evil \ planets in
good Shastiamsas, who are also occupying good divisions become
powerful to do pood.
NOTES.
This has been clearly explained in the Notes to other Stanzas.
Wsrm=*r ?rfr^wrr^r:ii^oii
Stanza 30.
Tkc Oottamansas are (1) Moolathrikona, (2) Swocha, (3)
Swakshatra and (4) Kendra.
These produce very beneficial results.
NOTES.
These Oottamansas or auspicious divisions give planets much
strength and produce very favourable results. Planets in particular houses and degrees are said to be in Modathrikonas. Ravi
has Moolathrikona in Simlia, Chandra has it in Vrishabha, Kuja has
it in Mesha. Buda has bis in Kanya, Guru has Moolathrikona in
Dhanus, Sukra has it in Tbula, Sani has it in Kumbha. But some
of these signs are also their places of exaltations and others are
their own houses. Readers have to be careful in giving the planets their proper share of strength and not too much or too little.
Bavi owns Simha and out of the 30 degrees composing that sign,
the first 2^ degrees are Moolathrikona for him and the last 10
degrees are his Swakshetra (own house or place). Chandra is in
exaltation in Tauras (Vrishabha) in the first 3 degrees and the last
27 degrees are Moolathrikona for him. Kuja has his Moolathrikona
in the first 18 degrees of Mesha and the last 12 degrees for him are
Swakshatra. In Kanya Buda has 3 functions. The first 15 de-

O0TTAMAMSAS.
gv$es m Kanya are exaltation for Buda, the next 5 degrees are his
MoolathriJcona and the last 10 degrees are his SwaJcshatra. In.
predicting results, these three different states must be prominently
kept before the eyes of the student. The results of exaltation are
and will be different from the results of MoolatJmJcoua and the
influences of the last materially differ from those of the SwaJcshatra •
Simply because Buda is located in Kanya he ought not to be called
Oocha or SwaJcshatra. His position must be carefully found out
by correct mathematical processes, explained in the Suryasiddhanfa,
GraJidlagJiava, Khacharad arj, ana or Sreepathi . The first 23
degrees in Dhanus are MoolathriJcona for Guru and the remaining
degrees are his SwaJcshetra . The first 10 degrees in Thula areMoolathriJcona for Sukra and the rest are SwaJcshatra . The first
twenty degrees in Kumbha are MoolathriJcona for Sani and the last,
ten degrees are his SwaJcshatra • Swochas are places of deep exaltations. Ravi is in exaltation in Mesha, Chandra is exalted in
Yrishabha, Kuja is exalted in Makara, Buda is exalted in Kanya,
Guru is exalted in Kataka, Sukra is exalted in Meena and Sani is
exalted in Thula. In all these zodiacal signs, however, there are
different degrees of strength and weakness and the exaltation of
the planets ought not to be taken as efficacious all throughout
the Rasee.
In Aries the tenth degree is the place of greatest exaltation for
Ravi. In Tauras Chandra is in deep exaltation in the 3rd degree.
In Makara. Kuja is in deep exaltation in the 28th degree. In
Kanya Buda is in deep exaltation in the 15th degree. In Kataka.
the 5th degree is the highest exaltation for Guru. In Meena Sukra
is most exalted in the 27th degree and in Thula Sani is deeply
exalted in the 20th degree. When these planets occupy other
degrees in their signs of exaltations, they are in simple exaltations
which are not so productive of favourable results as their deep
exaltations or Swocha. Swakshatras mean their own houses or
grounds. Ravi owns Simha, Chandra has Kataka, Kuja has Mesha
and Yrischika. Buda has Mithuna and Kanya. Guru owns.
Dhanus and Meena, Sukra rules Yrishabha and Thula and Sani

8 A U W A I1T IIACD I >' T A U AXI.
owns Makara and Kumbha. They aro their own houses and when
planets are there they produce goed. Kendras are 1st, 4th, 7th
and 10th. houses and planets occupying them are said to be very
powerful. These are called the Oottama excellent and Amsa.s
divisions or situations, l'lanets in the above houses or states are
productive of good results.
wnf:jffrBT:snfi^ro 3*11
Stanza 31.
Tfie seven Vergas above alluded io with the A dhim itr fl. Tnpa. and
the four Oottamansas referred io already with the Shastiamsa
form what arc called Tkriodasa Vergas fhirtcen dijferent kinds
of divisions.)
NOTES.
The A d k i mifrantsa Yerga or division has not been stated- All
the planets bear to each other certain relationship — such as friends,
enemies, acquaintances, indifferent, inveterate and intimate. These
relationships aro simply meant to show the counteracting or
augmenting influences of the planets in their results upon the
prospects of human life. These relationships will be explained in
tlieir suitable places, and they are fully discussed in my work
called the “ Astrological Self Instructor,” the third edition of
which contains very valuable and instructive matter. When one
planet is a friend to another planet and that other planet bears
enemity to the first the relationship is classified as Sama or neutral. But if both are friends to each other the relationship is
classified as Adhimitm or intimate. The occupation of one planet
of the Am set, of his Adhirnitra friend is called Adkimitramsa and
this will certainly result in producing much good. The Amsa is
not stated here. Ip probably refers to the Navamm and it may be
interpreted to .mean any other division of the Zodiacal sign. .

Vbega Combinations
3qf
flrifalKAIH+H, ll^ll
f^Rt^Tfrftfer: \\\\U
When three Vergas are combined it is called OottamaiLSa J
Gopuramsa when '.four Vergas combine ; Simhasanamsa when
five Vergas combine ; and Parijatamsa when two Vergas are
joined.
When six Vergas are combined it is f«//<?^Paravatani Sa. When
seven Vergas combine it goes under the name of Dewalokamsa.
When eight Vergas combine it has the name of Kumkumamsa •
When nine Vergas combine it is called Trayat aryi sn.. When ten
Vergas join in one planet it is called Vyshuavamsa. When
eleven Vergas are combined it is called Saivamsa- ’ When twelve
Vergas join it goes under the name of Bhaswadam sa- When all
the thirteeyi divisions — Vergas — are favourably combined it is called
Yaiseshikamsa.
NOTES.
I have already clearly shown how to find out the various
Vergas or divisions of a house. The combination of Vergas
means that a planet must occupy a favourable Basee, an auspicious
Bora, a friendly Drakkana, a powerful Naxamsa, a good Divads •*'

SAfiWARTHACHlNTAMANr.
emso, an agreeable Tkrimsamsa and a strong Skastiamsa with the
other divisions which have been detailed already. If a planet
occupies two favourable divisions he is said to have two Yergas
to his credit and he has the special distinction of being called one
who occupies a Parqatam&a- This produces its own beneficial
results. In the same way the reader must infer for other Amsas
also.
These divisions of the Zodiacal signs and the positions of the
planets therein clearly show that the rays of the planets falling
upon each other at particular angular points are conducive to
health, and prosperity and that the contrary results will be produced when these angular points are disturbed and changed. We
can easily guess what these mean. A planet, if it were shining
alone, would have no other ray or shade to disturb its own spreadglory and the results — whatever they may be — will be plainly
ascertainable and easily calculable. But it is not possible to
imagine such a case of a single planet shining on this world or in
the planetary spheres- There is no sky within the human
knowledge which has only one planet and which is lighted up by
its single glory.
On the other hand the fact appears to be that the influences are
too many and too complicated to be easily identified or traced. The
sky overhead appears to be lit up with millions and billions of shining bodies and the influences exerted by them both on themselves
and the other luminous bodies which are within the reach of their
rays must really be very wonderful and passing our poor comprehension. The intellect of man is itself the centre of the greatest
wonders and it is no strange fact to say that some of its flights in
the aerial regions are the noblest conceivable. Circumscribed as
it is by calculable measurements of Time, Space and Dimensions it
emerges into the regions of the immeasurable and incomprehensible and achieves wonders which can never be described by men
of lesser genius. If Ravi sheds a ray and it is opposed by another
solar ray which has passed through the body of Chundra, there
must be some modification as a matter of fact.

Bhaswat and VaisashikamsasThis is plain enough to even ordinary minds. But if Kuja
adds his influence also, the modifications in the Solar, Lunar and
Martian rays will still be greater. "Which portions of these rays
are exactly modified, eclipsed, counteracted or augmented, can
only be found out by the nicest of mathematical calculations and
these modifications and augmentations are technically called
Yergas, or divisions of the Zodiac. Their divisions mean the
influences which are exerted there by the rays of the various
planets. A tree, for instance, covers a portion of a field with its
umbrage. We roughly say that we sit under its shade, but there
may be differences in the thickness of the shade in the several
portions underneath its multifarious branches, and one who sits
under a thick cover of its leaves has certainly less of solar light
and heat than one who sits under its thinner covers. There may
be several spaces under the general shadow where these modifications are more or less distinctly perceived according to the strength
of the covering above. By a careful measurement of the umbrage
we can easily say which portion of the ground under the shadow
is most exposed and which part is least affected by the light and
heat of the Sun above. But supposing, instead of one planet Bavi
to shed his influence on the tree we have seven planets — as a matter of fact we have seven planets — similarly shedding their lights
on the tree in question, the matter becomes complicated and the
measurements will be difficult. It becomes necessary for us then;
to find out exactly the resultant of the forces which are working
there, whether as light and heat, which are perceptible to our
senses, or some invisible forces which have to be found out by a
series of calculations of a higher intellectual development. When
a planet occupies or owns a bouse, his influence is greater there for
good or bad and he is said to be the lord of that Yerga. The
enumeration of these Yergas simply means the intensity or light,
ness of the influence which a planet possesses at the time of birth,

Sa it W A KTIIACH 1 N T A M AMI.
Stanza 3 ( 5 .
Where all the plands arc Asta, Neecha a ?id Arlbhamsasta
the combination is called Pratainsayoga an< t produces danger,
misery and death.
NOTES.
Planets are A slo (combustion) when they are in conjunction
with the Sun. Planets are said to be in Naecho when they are in
debilitation. The following are the houses of debilitation for the
planets : —
Ravi is debilitated in ... Thula.
Chundra VrischikaKuja ... ... ... Kataka.
Bada ... ... ... Meena.
Guru ... ... ... Makara.
Sukr3 ... Ivanya.
Sani ... Mesh a.
Wherever the planet3 are strong, the 7th bouses from such
will be their houses of debilitations. The seventh houses from
these — viz. — Mesba, Yrishabha, Makara, Kanya, Kataka, Meena
and Thula are respectively the houses of exaltations for Ravi,
Chundra, Kuja, Buda, Guru, Sukra and Sani.
Exaltation means the greatest power to do good while debilitation shovrs’the greatest power to do evil.
A ribhmsasta — where a planet occupies the Amsa of its enemy
or Ari it is said to be weak and inauspicious. Ari in Sanskrit
means Shatru or enemy. Bha means a house or sign and Amsa
means a division. St a means the occupation of the same by a planet,
lat. — Sto to stand is akin to Sanskrit Stha to be or to stand.
When planets are in bad moods they do not produce good.

G AND.vxrn.AS on Dangerous Tomes.
4a
u ^vsn
Stanza 37.
When there are three Grauda&tlias, ai, d Chundra occupies any
one of these , and is in Lagna during Pathas, the combination is
called Sadyo M ruty amsaka , a ^d results in sending the child born
then, at once out of the world.
NOTES.
TLe author of Sarwarthachinfcamani was an adept in the
science of Astrology and has very clearly introduced into his work
many combinations in a highly concise form. This work of theauthor is much facilitated by the rich language he was handling
in composing his work. I lack unfortunately both the facilities
he possessed. His scholarship can never be claimed by mej and
the English language, in which I am compelled to appear as the
translator, is so poor and unconstructive that I find the greatest
difficulty to do justice to the spirit of the original author. The
indulgence oE the reader is claimed on this score.
The three Gandanthas are (1) Lagna, Hakshatra and Thithi.
These may also be called their Sand hies. The last Navamsas of
Kataka, Vrischika andMeena are called Lagna Gandanthas. I refer
the readers to my Astrological Self Instructor (3rd Edition)-,
wherein the Navamsas are clearly explained and the reasons why
the last Amsa of Kataka, Vrischika and Meena houses are considered as Lagna Sandliie3.
. Nahslnitrae are the clusters or Constellations marking the planetary paths, and their Sandhies are the last padam of Awslewhcc,
.Taisia and Eaivathi - After the end of Auslasha we begin with
Maltha and a new zodiacal sign Simha and these clusters of stars
continue till they end with Jaisia in Yrischiha> Moola, begins
with a new sign altogether and continues with constellations
running into each other till the end of Eaivathi is reached with.

S A Ii\V A RTH AC H 1 XTA MAXI.
■which Meerut closes. We then have Me ah a with A swim the
first constellation and with the first of the zodiacal sign. The last
two ghatikas (24 English minutes make an Indian gbatika) of .
each lunar day (Thithi ) will constitute Ihithi Gandantha or the
Saiuhki. Pathos are to be explained at considerable length and I
would specially refer nay readers to the famous work called Suryasidhantha and to the Astrological Magazine, page 118, Vol. II
published by me. Patha is one of the three Forces or Agencies
which is obstructing, as it were, the free movements of the Sun and
Moon in the Northern and Southern directions and there are times
when these Pathos rule, when the sap of the vegetables and the
blood of the animals will have a momentary check or StoppageChildren born under such influences die very soon after birth.
It seems to be a principle with the astrological writers, to
consider the last portion of a sign, day or Nakshatra as producing
evil to those who are born during such influences and this evil
assumes a very serious form where the time chances to be the end
of any one of the above three named Gandanthas or junctions,
(of time) when the Moon is in the birth sign and Vyajpra and
similar Pathos are ruling.
231‘icrei *-41 I
Stanza 38.
The unfortunate combination called O gmlamga. will be found
when berth {Latina) has Ravi and Chundra in it during the time of
a Solar Eclipse. When the Newmoon day has the name of KnllU
and also when the birth falls in the Sandhi of Newmoon day when
the Vishaghatiha prevails. This combination produces imprison ~
plenty sorrow y known and unknown complicated diseases and dangers
to life •

Garalamsa.
NOTES.
This is really a difficult stanza for translation into English.
The ideas contained in this sloka are many and require very long
explanations, but still I will and must make an attempt. Garala
in Sanskrit means Visit a or poison and a combination named
after poison has an unfortunate tendeucy to make the Native
born under its influence miserable in every way. Aviaxasya, is
the name for the newmoon dav. There are two varieties in thisThose who are familiar with the lunar days ( Thithies ) will be able
to follow me better than those who do not know how to read the
Native Panchangas ( Almanacks ). I cannot, of course pretend
here to simplify matters beyond the stage of the Astrological
Alphabet and I expect the student who reads my work to possess
the elementary knowledge in Jyotisshastra, without which no progress could ever be expected. In the treatment of the Binomial
Theorem and the problems relating to it, the writer certainly
expects a fair knowledge of the previous mathematical portions
which alone could make the reader understand the higher parts.
Some persons are apt to think that the authors are not simple
because they themselves have a confused .idea of the subject.
I readily admit the force of these arguments, but at the
same time the authors of works on technical subjects, also expect
some amount of proficiency in the student, who is anxious
to rise higher and higher in the intellectual scale- Amavasya
is the last day of the lunar month, and as such has the Moon
perfectly invisible or if visible at all, only to a very slight extent in the horizon. When the Amavasya, is full, the Moon is not
at all visible in the night as he is entirely concealed. There are
usually 30 lunar days and they . are counted 15 days each in the
bright and dark halves of the lunar month. On the 15th day of
the bright half of the lunar month we have the Moon quite full,
and on the 15th day of the dark half of the lunar month we have
the Newmoon. It is plain from these facts that the Moon gains
some brilliancy every day more and more in the bright half of the
lunar month called the Shvddam (pure) and attains to his fullest

t,lory on tlie 15th day. The Moon' is said to have 16 Kolas or
important rays. (Mrrntu rrramtx of Ivjhtmid brilliancy). He begins
to gain these for 15 days and lose them again in the same period
gradually. The complete gaming of lunar brilliancy and its loss
forms one lunar motith. The lunar days are not always composed
of -4 English hours or 60 Indian glmtikas. Sometimes they are
longer and sometimes they are shorter in duration. I shall not
attempt here to explain the reasons for these changes and varieties, for they will occupy much space and time which I can
ill afford now. These lunar days, as a matter of fact, come one
upon the other in various apparently conflicting wavs. When the
Awn ras y a is full and 1ms no tinge of Chotunhm (14th lunar day
of the dark half of the month'' it is technically called Kalahv.hu
and Isaxht Imfo. We cannot at all see the Moon on that night
although he retains one Kala enough to keep lnm alive, as it were,
but wnen the Amantxya overtakes the Chatunlad on one and the
same day and extends itself to the next day also, then it is called
f‘" mh ‘ in<1 We see then a tiny glimpse of the Moon
during the early day break if we carefully watch the heavens.
Ine.se two kinds of Amuouya* have an important bearing
on the results which are expected to be produced both on the
national and individual horoscopes and therefore these must be
ca.efullr noted and remembered. Each day consists of 60 Ghatikas roughly and some of these are called Vishar/h/itihas or poison12 T eS ' Ure ° therS Wllich are cafled rltaghatiha , ,
and they are said to produce very beneficial results. Amrita,
means IS ectar- I he times of the eclipses of the Sun and Moon
specially of the former, are considered very bad and those who’
are born during such times become very unfortunate for want of
proper quantities of light, heat, magnetism and electricity or in
one word VidyutsaUL J
For fuller details of these peculiarities of time and its tremendons influences on man the reader is referred to Smdamimlmla ;
Siddhantamtnakara, and other comprehensive treatises on the
subject in Sanskrit.-

Kshanikagkahas.
r rtf | $ d -ft ^^^^PfaPTRT I
LE^t^RT^r I
eT^HI^II
q^m^^rwrrr^ i
TTR^^^f^TTR^riTr^ II ^ II
Stanza 39.
\iv\ II
l shall now describe Ksh.anika GrahasLagnas ajre 1° be measured by 24 Ghatikas each. For each
Lagna the lords of the 5 th and 9 th from the sign which is occupied
by the Sun, form PranapadaS and this goes tender the name of
Ghatichathurthamsa-

S A It W A RTH AC H 1 XT A M A X I .
TkeSnn moves at Vie rate of 2£ Gkatikas from Dhanas backwants. Cluindra moves at the same rate from the same sign for-
™ a .., nWV6S backward * fromVrishabha at the rate of two
(jhatekas for each sign.
Stakzas 40-41.
Breda mows from Dhanas backwards at the rate of one GharJZtflt Stg ’ U ( Z U ’'. U moves f rom blcena backwards at the rate
f * *r 6aCk Sig *' Sukra moves at the rate °f 5 Gkatikas
f ZZw, £^£r ,ar f in T Ck **" andSani ^ from tire same
stgn mthnna forwards at the rate of one Ghatika in each sign.
Rahu moves at tire rate of 2* Gkatikas in each sign forwards
from Mcsha, and Ketku moves at the same rate in each sign backwards from Meena. -
Stanzas 42-43.
These results are foretold in the Astrological works and in
orary arrdtess of property questions, but they are not of use in the
£Si*?2c ciJC) J
I shall, mo say about Baladi Ayastas of tfc plants _
Ik odd signs the stages of life foe the planets are, Bala
Knmara, Tlianma, Vridha, Alasa and MHta
*"* signs, they ought to be taken in thereverse^rdfr. ^ ^
NOTES.
Kshanihagrahas indicate the relative influences exercised bv
the va n °„ s planets in short intervals of time and these
iseful in questions asked of an astrologer, about the directional
wUhonf drt “ “” d t0 “ 0rease the bulk of ti>« work
wthcrat adding much to its usefulness. The Amela, or stages of
influent 0 PlS "f S md ‘ cate their otongth and make them „ r od IJM
plLt “ tage a ‘ " >b!ci " M the
aud the diffe™ V^T which is found in Mesha. It is an odd sign
ff. D d ; ferent of®®® 3 are to be taken in the regular order The
ormfanttle state, where the influence is almost nothin
o

Influence of Mandi.
as the baby is not able to take care of itself. Then the second state
is Kumar a, or boyhood wherein the age generally fixed is 12 years.
Here the influence is a little better. Then we have the third
stage Tharuna or manhood, when the influence is greatest, the
fourth is Vridha or old age, where wisdom and maturity are to
be predicted, the fifth state is Alasa or incapacity, when the influence is very weak, and the sixth is Mrita or death, and there
the influence of a dead person may safely be imagined.
Stanza 44.
si ii 22 a
There are 6 stages— Bala, Kumara, Tharnna, Vriddha,
Alasa an d Mrita. The Planets prodtice results in their Dasas as
per their stages of developments.
NOTES
See notes to stanza 43 .
fttTfiRMMM i srr>r \o ^ifarroi
II 8^ II
Stanza 45.
/ shall now state about MandiMultiply Ahapramana Ghatikas with 26, 22, 18, If, 20, 6 attd 2
respectively and divide the result by 30 , the remainder denotes the
time when Mandi hifluences the horoscopes on Sunday, Monday, Tues -
day , Wednesday, Thursday , Friday and Saturday respectively . The
process for finding out this will be similar to that of Lagnaspilta*

S A li W A KTH A 1 1 1 N T A M A N I .
NOTES.
We have ia astrology the influences of Grahas (planets) and
opagra tas or Subordinate planets. These are supposed to be the
cnuctrea of the Major planets, but the influences exercised by
em should not be confounded with those exercised by their so
e parents. The influence of Mandi has been constantly
referred to m this work, and therefore the student is recommended
o remem r this. The measurements of day and night are indica ed in the Panchangas (Almanacks) as. the Sun keeps chaoginoIns position with reference to the Earth. On any day we take the
i 7 tbe raeasure ®ent of the day, and multiply the same
30 Ind tr gl I° n f0rthut daj> ^P^duct must be divided by
infl! o 1 T 3 d8n ° teS ’ iD ghadkaS ’ the time of Mandi*;
influence on Sunday. On Monday the time must be multiplied by
Z 7o ; ld6d ^ 30> ° n Tues <% thedaytime must bemultiplied
y * and so on for the rest of the week davs.
in i] T ^ e Ti ematlCal P ° rti0n ° f astrol °gy h * s not been detailed
n .his work, because the author considered that one, who had no
tWff 386 ° iS . iddhmtha ’ Whereb y he find out the positions of
^ Efferent planets at any given time, was quite ill-qualified to
egm the predictive portion, and much less to begin a work of the
ment which the author Las undertaken. j
orer th, s defect and wanted to write copious not i „ n til
1 Z r' e 'VT7 the n>ut!,ematical portions, but as a translator I would, I thought, be transgressing,,,, legitimate bounds
by introducing a portion of astrology which the author had not
even touched m the most elementary manner. As I made up my
tnmd to write a separate book, on pure Siddhantha ia English, I
gave up a!l idea of introducing mathematics into this translation,
and I therefore refer my readers to Graha Lagkaca, Khacham
Darpana, Sreepathi and Suryaxiddhanthu .
In order to Bnd out the position of any planet at a given time

Names of Rasees.
The calculations for M adhya grahas give us their positions
roughly while the processes for Sputagrahas give us their exact
positions. Even here it is not strictly correct. There are certain
forces called Mamlocha, Seegrocha and Patha and their uses in the
economy of planetary influences must also be carefully considered.
I n the same way we have the Sputas for the Lagna or birth time
and this process must be followed to find out exactly what portion
of the sign of the Zodiac corresponds to the birth time of the
native.
f$i jfeqijRwr:
Stanza 46.
I now treat of Rasee Soumgnya- s
Mesha, Aja, Rasee, Kriya, Chaga, Basta, are names of
Mesha or the first sign , (Aries). Vrislia, Ooksha,Go, Tavuru,
Soukrabha, are names for Vrishaba, or second sign (Taurus)-
Boudha, Nriyoogmam, Jitam and Thrityam, are names
for Mithunam, or the third sign (Gemini).
Chandra, Kulira a?ul Chathurtha are names for Rataka
(Cancer)-
- NOTESIn almost all works in Sanskrit, especially when they happen to
he technical, there will generally be a chapter in the commencement which is devoted to the explanation of these special names.
These are generally more useful in the original yvorks than in
their translations into a foreign language. In English, unfortunately; we have in many instances, only one word .which could be
used for denoting a particular objept and therefore the student
does not labour under any disadvantage. Whether I write 1,000
pages or 100 pages 1 can use only Aries or Ram for the first sign
in the Zodiac, hut no other word for Mesha, but in Sanskrit, oi*

Sarwartuachintamaxi.
account of the richness of its construction and its most profound
development of ideas concealed in the formation of the words, some
20 or more quite distinct words can he used for each of these
Zodiacal signs or the planets which govern them, and this will add
•much difficulty and labour to the student in the commencement,
but certainly has the best advantages as he progresses in his
studies later on. I shall simply repeat them in their original forms
so that, those who care to know more may read them and find
them useful when they happen to read astrological works in
Sanskrit.
r#a n f ir :
nvm
stow wd i i
rftftf it
Stanzas 47 and 48.
Leo is called Simha, Kantirva and Laya.
Virgo is called Pathona, Shasta Easi, Abala and XanyaLibra is called Jooka, Vanik, Saptama and Thouli.
Scorpio is called Kourpi, Astama, Vrischika, Keeta and
KonjaSagittarius is called Jaiva, Dbanas, Thonksbika and
ChapaCapricornus is called Nakra, Akokira and MrigasyttAquarius is called Hridroga and Kumbhapjusces is called Xeena, Jhasha, Antya and SapharadwajaNOTES.
Hany of these words are easily explainable while others require a little more deep study, but this will be enlarging the bulk

.Significations of Signs.
of the present "work without adding much to its interest or value,
as the deeper and finer meanings of these must always be learnt
in the original language in which the work is written.
^ ^ m f i % hVu * i
:ll
IICELLL^
ipr^r^TTtTRr^: I
ajrcqgqfcwOT^ra rer f rr
h >i
( 1 ). Birth time or Lagna is called Hora, ThanU, Mllrthi,
0 odaya and Sira.

54 SAliWARTH Al’H ! VIAM ASl .
(2'. Second house is called Vitth a , Katumba, Mookha and
Akshi'
(3) . Third house is called Sahotha, DuseMtka, Gala, Threthiya, Shourya and Earns-
(4) . Fourth house is called Sakha, Amba, Bandhu, Rasathala, Hibuka, Yashmy, Pathala, Hridaya, Vahana and
Mathru-
• 0>) Fifth house is calkd Baddi Pratapa, Atmaja, Thosha,
Viveka, Sakti, Oodara and Pravasa.
(6) Sixth house is called Roga, Kshatha, ArilVyasana,
Chorasthana ami Vighna.
(7) , Seventh house is called Ghithorthft, Kamai Madana,
Bhartrtu Xalatra* Dadhi, Soopa and Kshira.
(8) Eighth house isuailed Guda, Moothra, Krisa, Galiya,
Randra, Maraua and Auyoo-
(9) Ninth house is called Dharma, Pyfchrika, Bhagya, Deva,
Guru, Tapas and Shaba.
(10) Tenth house is called Augnya, liana, Dasama, Karma,
Rajya, Kha and Aspada-
(11) Eleventh house is called Babha, Oopachaya, Aaya.
(12) Twclftn house is called Rippha, Vyaya, Rasa, Auutya*
NOTES.
As the significations of these twelve houses from the birth
sign are to be dwelt at considerable length later on in this work,
in connection with the explanation of the different Ilhams from
the Lagna, I shall not repeat twice the same ideas. They will be
shown in their proper places- • .

ApiUlCASA GRAHAS.
H^'r^^rp^rr^ i
Stanza 54.
The 6 thy 8th, and 12 th houses are called Doosthas* The owners
and occupiers of these are bad planets . >
Vrishaba, Mesha , D lianas, Kataka , and Makar a, when they are
JLagnas, are called PrilStOdayaS ; these and Mithuna are powerful
during the night ; Mithuna , Simba , Kanya, Thula , Vfischika, and
Kumbha, when they become Lagnas, they are called Sirsbodayas •
Excepting Mithuna, all these Rasees atid_Meena are pcrwerfzil during
the day. Meeua is called both PrilSta & Sirsha emd hence it derives
the name of OobhayodayaNOTES.
Trudodayas begin with, their backs and the Sirshodayas begin
with their heads while Oobhayodaya may begin with head and
back. The uses for these technicalities will be shown later on.
H W Ji
-iiHSii
Stanzas 55 and 56.
The author now names the five Aprakasa ( Invisible ) Grahas •
Dhooma , Patha, Paridhi, Dhanu or Sikhi and Indrachapa ,

SABWAUTHACniNTAMAXT.
Suryasputa with 4 Rasces and / j Bhagas gives DilOOma, when
this is subtracted from 12 signs, the remainder indicates Patha, when
6 Razees are added to this we get P arid he ; this subtracted from
the 12 signs gives In&raChapa ; this with 17 Bhagas added will
give Dhanu or SUMVOTES.
Unless the reader knows Sputa s he will not be able to understand this stanza*
He must refer to any one of the Siddanthas which give the
processes for Grahasputa and then, after he finds the Surya
Sputa* ha has simply to add and subtract in the manner indicated
above and find out were these invisible but at the same time mischievous planets are located. When any of the Bhavas are occupied by these Dkoomadigr alias they predict unhappiness and loss
to the significations related to these Zodiacal signs.
I! rr^^sTT^ft I M
ft i 1 : M II
FTTc* r\
I* v I
RM I K«M U M
Stakzas 57 & 58 .
/ wili now explain Kantakas &c. The isf, 4th, 7th and 10th
houses are called Xantaka, Kendra, Chatnstaya- The same
Nammsa is called Vargottma ; Meena and the following Rasees
are called Br&bum, Kshatriya, Vaiysa «^Sndra respectively.

Vargoitamamsa.
NOTES.
As already explained these are all technical portions of the
astrological science and they must be carefully borne in mind.
Planets occupying Kendras, planets owning Kendras and the houses
forming the Kendras themselves are exercising great influence
over the destinies of mankind and without a fair knowledge of all
these preliminaries, no student can hope to make any safe predictions in the field of astrology. The explanation for Kendras is
easy enough. If we want to find out Kendras for any house
observe the following rule. Viz. the first house we commence,
its fourth, its seventh, aud its tenth houses are called Kendras
or quadrants or the angles of a square. Vargottamamsa is one of
the Navamsas. We have already explained in its proper place
what is a Navamsa. Where the Navamsa happens to fall in the
same sign, as it does in the Rasee, it is technically called a Vargotta -
ma and is productive of much good. Take an example. If a
person is born in the sign Aries ( Mesha •) and the Navamsa of his
birth also falls in Aries, then that Navamsa is called Vargottama.
The same for all other signs. In Brihatjafcaka this is well explained. We have three sets of signs, Movable , Fixed and Common
and the rule is, the 1st Navamsa in the Movable, the 5th.
Navamsa in the Fixed and the last Navamsa in the Common signs
are Vargottamas aiid this comes up to the same explanation as that
given above. The distinction of Brahma, Kshetriya, Yaisya and
Sudra has to be noted. The author asks us to commence from
Meena. Meena and its Tbrikonas or triangular houses, are Brahma
Rasees. This includes Meena, Kataka and Yrischika. Mesha,
Simba, and Dhanus form Kshetrya Rasees. Vrishaba, Kanya,
and Makara are Yaisya Rasees. Mithuna, Thula and Kumbha
form Sudra Rasees. • These technical divisions have much to
explain about the characteristics of the persons born in those
Rasees.
n

S A I i W A liT H A< : H I NTA M A X I.
3Tf^TlM :^or
f^rjvr i
qi<5 ^ejiiBwc):
II II
Stanza 59.
The signs arc odd and even regularly f rom Alesha , ihey arc also
movable, fixed and common in the same way f rom Mesha ; the signs
from Mccna regularly form Poornjalaka, Arthajalaka, Padajalaka and Nirjalaka.
NOTES.
For Odd, Even, Moveable (Char a) Fixed (8th ira) and Common
(D wiclaha or Dwiswabhava) commence from Aries or Mesha and
proceed, Mesha, Mithuna, Simha etc., or the 1st, 3rd, 5th, 7th,
9th and 11th signs from Mesha are Oja or odd signs. 2nd, 4th,
6th, 8th, 10th, 1 2th signs are Yoogma or even signs. Their uses
are to be found later on as we progress in our knowledge of astrology. Mesha, Kataka, Thula and Alakara, are Movable or Chant
Rasees. Yrisliabha, Simha, Yrischika and Kumbha are Fixed or
Sfchira Rasees. Mithuna, Kanva, Dhauus, and Aleena, are Common or Dicirwalhaca Rasees. Aleena, Kataka, Vrischika are
Puonutjalaht Rasees. Alesha, Simha, and Dhanus are Arthajalak-xs. Vrishaba, Kanya and Alakara are Padajalalcas and
Alithuna, Thula and Kumbha are (Sirjalukas.
TOill<ran^r:gq a : II II
Stanza 60.
From the birth wc have Kendras, Panaparas and Aupoklibas
regularly among the twelve Zodiacal signs.

Naha, Kita, Past and Jala Rasees.
NOTES
Take the birth, or question time or any other Rasee, anti
tlien 1st i.e. itself, its fourth, 7th and 10th, as already explained,
are Kendras, the 2nd, 5th, Sth and X 1th houses are called Pana~
pavas ; the 3rd, 6tli, 9th and 12th houses are called Aupoklihas.
Planets are very powerful generally in Kendras, moderately
powerful in Panaparas and least powerful in Aupoldibas ■ Theso
are considered at great length in the Sanskrit works.
Stanza 61.
When Nara Rasees fall In forth w h cn Jalachara Rasees
fall in fourth , when JCita Ra-SGSS f a H l’ 1 seventh, and PaSU or
OhatllshpadaSRasees fall *’« tenth , they become powerful "whether
in horoscopy or in Prasna (horary.)
NOTES.
If the Lagna falls in Nam, the fourth -in Jalachara, the
seventh in Kita, and the tenth house in Pam llase.e*, they become
powerful in producing good. ( Vide Stanza 17, Ch. I, in Brihatjataka) Nara Rasees are Mithima, Konya, Tlmla, the first half- of
Dhamts and Kumbha. If these are birth signs, or Lagnas they
are good. Nara means in Sanskrit inale. Jalachara Rasees are
Katak i, the latter or second half of Male. am, and Meenm and these
are powerful when- they become tbe fourth! houses from* Lagna.
Vrischika is called Kita Rasee and ifc is powerful when it is the
seventh house from Lagna. Pasu Rasees are Meslia, Vrishabha,
Sirnha, the second half of Dhanus, and the first half of Makarat
and these become powerful when they are 1-Otli houses from
Lagna. Kita means an insect and Vrischika is Scorpion. Jala~
chara means those animals which live or move in water* and Pasu

CO Sa jIwartiiach ixtam axi.
or Chatmhpaihi means beasts oi’ those which have four legs or of
the quadruped kind.
u u
4 N n ^^ldfy&i | U | t<t ll^lt
5*^ jjijriii.' ? O nui 3 ^ S -C
*U^V ?H *TC H sTCPAosiTOI
5^UPTFrr :tefrairfq‘ II ^ II
Stanzas G 2 & G 3 .
These Rasees become powerless in the seventh houses from where
they are scad to become powerful. Ravi , Chuudra y Kuja , Bua’ha,
Guru, Suhra and Sani are respectively exalted ( Oocha ) in Mesha ,
Vnshaba , Makara , Kanya , Kataka , Meena and Thula. The 10th ,
yrd, 28 fit, 15th, jth, 27th and 20th Bhag&S i n these respective RaseeS
are called the most exalted (Parama Oocha) divisions for the above
planets. The sezvnth house from these are their houses of debilita j
tion (ITeecha) an d file same numbers among these divisions are those
where they are most debilitated (Pa.r a.ma. n ftoo h a, .}
ISTOTES.
Exaltations and debilitations have already been explained.
When a sign is divided into 30 equal parts each is technically
called a Bluxga and we may also call it a Thvhnsamm. The tenth
Maga in Mesha* 3 rd in Vrishabha, 28 th, in Makara, 15 th. in Kan-

Muot.ATH tilKOXAS.
ya, 5th in Kataka, 27th in Meena and 20th in Thula are Ptvramaoochcbs or the most exalted regions for Ravij'jChundra, Kuja, Budha,
Guru, Sukra and Sani respectively. The seventh from these where
they are most exalted form places fqr their greatest humiliation.
The Circle is divided into 860 degrees, and 180 degrees form a
semi or half Circle. If a planet is exalted in the first degree of
the Zodiac, it is debilitated in the 181st degree.
Stanza 64.
I shall now speak about MoolathrikoHaSSimhafor Ravi , Vrishabha for Chundra, Mesha for Kuja , Kany
for Buda, Dhanas for Guru , Thula for Sukra , and Kumbha for
Sani are said to become SloolathrikonaS. These are considered
almost equal in strength to their places of exaltation.
NOTES.
There are Several readings for this stanza. Some of the Commentators in^the 'Vernaculars have falsely explained the meaning.
Men, who are incompetent to handle scientific subjects, ought not
to come forward as expounders of them;. “ Moclathnkona is a technical word like Oocha and means that by angular position of the
planet it acquires a great source of strength and it is almost equal
to its state of exaltation. Exaltation is the highest point where
the planet acquires the best strength for doiDg good, whether it
is called auspicious or inauspicious. The results of the exaltation
of the various planets of course vary as their individual characteristic-es. See notes to Stanza 30.

SaMVA UTHACFI I XTA MAX I.
TOrfr.^WNP ^W$T£T-I
Hi 4 rsi^TM IrJH flWRT
Stanza 63.
IsTara Rasees arc powerful during the day. Quadruped or
Pasu Easees are strong during the night and Kita anci Jalachara Rasees are strong during the two Sandhyas- The 3rd ,
6th , joth and nth houses are called Oopachayas.
NCTSS.
In the notes to stanza 58, we have shown which are Nara, Peso,
Kill and Jalacham Riis'ees. 1 Xarrt, Rastes exercise a powerful
influence during the day time, the Pasu Rasees do so in the night,
while the Kita and Jahtclnua exert much influence during the
two Sanillu/iis. Sandhi in Sanskrit means junction or union. There
are two samlliies vis Prat, am and 8a yam, the morning and the evening twilights as we familiarly recognise them. Two Ghatikas
after half sunset & two ghatikas before half sunrise are technically
called sand hies. Oopachaijax means improvement or expansion
and planets occupying these houses are capable of doing much
good to the native. In tlm absence of anything to the contrary
all these houses must be counted from the birth sign.
Stanza 66.
/ now describe, the colors of the signs'*

ExTjivr of Bashes
Red, white , green, red, r smoke, varigalcd, black , golden, golden,
whitish dull yellow, blackish white, and pure white arc the colors of
the respective signs from Media.
NOTES,
There are some slight differences between the different readings
as also among the astrolagical writers. In Briliatjataka of Yarahamihira the colors are given in slightly different forms.
Kataka — Whitish red
Simha— Smoky white
Dhanns — Pingala or dull yellow
These colors of the different signs have much influence in
modifying the complexion of the person or objects under their
rule.
Stanza 67 .
The second prom the Rasee occupied by the Sun is called VaS6.
In the first half of the Zodiac , 5, 6, y, 8, 9, 10, multiplied by 4. and
increased by 10 , will give their respective extents, in Vighatikas,
and in the other half of the Zodiac, the same done in the reverse
order holds good.
NOTES.
This Stanza is very concise and may not be intelligible without detailed explanation. In every month the Sun, as a matter
of fact, occupies some house. The second house from the house
where we find the Sun is called Vasee and is of much importance
in the Raja Yogadhya. The author wants us to follow him in
determining the extent of the different signs. The signs in the
first half of the Zodiac are Mesha, Yrishaba, Mithuna, Kataka,
Simha and Kanya, and the signs in the latter half of the Zodiac

SAfiVVARTH.U’HINTAlTASI.
are, Thula, Vrischika, Dhanus, Makara, Kumbha and Meena. In
the first half the figures 5, 6, 7, 8. 9 and 10 are to be multiplied by
4, and we get 20, 24, 28 32, 3d and 40 : these multiplied by 10 will
give the signs the extent they have in Vigbatikas. We have then
200, 240, 280, 320, 3G0 and 400 Vighatikas for Mesha, Vrishabha,
Mithuna, Kataka, Simha. and Kariva respectively. The same holds
good in the reverse order in the other 6 signs of the 2nd half of
the Zodiac viz, Thula, Vrisclnka, Dhanus, Makara, Kumbha and
Meena. Thus w e have 400, 300, 320, 280, 240 and 250 for Thula,
Vrischika, Dhanus, Makara, Kumbha and Meena. Summarised,
the results run as follow : —
Mesha and Meena extend over ... 200 Yighatikas.
Vrisbaba and Kumbha ... ... 240 do.
Mithuna and Makara 230 do.
Kataka and Dhanus ... ... 320 do.
Simha and Vrischika 300 do.
Kanya and Thula ... 400 do.
The following table may be remembered in connection with
the Indian and English distribution of times.
English calculation.
A day is divided into 24 hours, an hour contains 60 minutes
and a minute contains 60 seconds, thus 24 H. X 60' x 60" = 86
4o0 seconds are contained in a day.
Hindu calculation —
A day is divided into GO Ghatikas. A Ghatika is divided'
into 60 Vujhatihas. A 11 ora contains 2} Ghatikas and 24 Horas
make a day. 8 Yamas form a day, and 3 Bora s make a Yama.
We shall not go to further minute sub-divisions as they do not
much concern the student in the beginning. An Indian Bora
corresponds to an English hour. An Indian Ghatika means 24
English minutes and an Indian Vighatika is equal to 24 English
seconds or an English minute is equal 2| Indian Yighatikas. As
these are very, familiar I need not explain any further. Though
the uses for these are not given here by the author, I may explain

Powers of Peanuts.
to the reader that the different organs of Kalapurusha .signify
much in judging the different bodily organs of a man. The
twelve Zodiacal signs signify those organs. Signs which
are of larger extent , signify larger proportions of the organs and
those which are of smaller extent signify shorter development and
those which are of moderate extent signify normal growth- In
the body of man different organs may have different proportions
and different growths. One may have Jong legs and short hands,
another may have long hands and short legs. One may have
large c.hest and small head and so on. These are signified by the
extent of the Rasees, and the aspects and conjunctions which
they 'have. In Prawn or questions, about loss of property, approach of enemies in invasions «fcc,, these signs signify distances
of persons about whom we may ask our information. I refer the
reader to notes on Stanza • 2 of this Chapter.
Stanza 68.
Ram and Clmndra arc Rajas , Kuja is Senap&tliy, Bud ha is Von.
va-Raja, Guru- and Snhrd arc ministers and Sant is servant.
NOTES
Among the planets certain conditions and powers are laid down,
not because they are themselves such, but because they indicate
certain results to the native born under those influences. Ravi and
Chundra represent kingly power, Kuja shows military strength,
Budha represents the heir apparent, Guru and Sukra, represent the
councillors or advisers and Sani represents the labourer or workman.
These are useful to judge of the future of a man and the kind of

s VKU A K I'HAvll INTA.M ANi.
work which lie is likely to do to earn liis livelihood. Of course
rhe.se are the main divisions and these may be subdivided into
innumerable varieties.
Stanza 69 .
Raw represents the soul, Chuna’ra shows mind \ Kuja exhibits
strength , Budha represents speech , Guru shows guana or knowledge,
Sukra represents cupidity and Said shows sorrow.
NOTES
There are several things to be noted in man. These are the
strength and depth of his soul and mind, the physical capacity to
work or bear fatigue, the rhetorical powers so productive of good
or bad results, the charitable and religions disposition, the fondness
for sexual and temporal pleasures, and the state of the mind,
optimistic, or pessimistic. AW have to take circumstances as they
happen with a light heart, and control them or readily yield
on Twelves to their influences and lie controlled by them.
5?ftaiyHi^44'ii*:^5t iw>„u

DUTT'JKk.N'1 N Wills Ul' L’UNBTB
(tf
3Tr?t^R^r^T-‘f^T^T
The author now gives the various special names used for the planets .
1. Surya, Hayli Bhanu, Itarthanda- Basxni, Chundamsa, Bhaskara, Ahaskara, Deeptha Basmi, are other special
names for B»avi {Sun).
2. Abja, Soma, Ohundra, Seetharasmi, Seethamsa- Glou,
Mruganka , Kalanki are names for Ckuadra ( Moon'.
3. Ara. Vakra, Avanaya, Kuja, Bhouma Xrura> Lokitanga- Dharaja* are names for Knja {Mars).
4. Vit, Guo, Soumya, Bodhana, Induputra Ckandri,
Khyata, Syamagatra, Atidirgha, Skanta, arc names for
Bnda {Mercury).

S.\RWAIi I HAl'IUN t'AMANl5- Jiva, Angiras, Devaguru, Prasanta- V ackaspathi,
Tkridasandra Vandya, Eejya ar * names for Gtiru {Jupiter),
'»• Bknigu, Spujit, Bkargavaja, OosaJia, Sookbi, Kavi
Daityaguru, Sita> arc names for Sukra ( Mentis).
~ Chayatmaja, Pang'd, Yama> Arkaputra, Kona, Asifca,
Sonii, Sani, Keela arc names for Sani [Saturn).
d Kraru, Krisanga, Kapilaksha. Sarpa, Tkama, Asura,
Saimkikeya, Chayagraka, Vidkuntuda, Swarkkanu,
Rakta> Agn, AM, Rahn, are names for Rakn, {Dragons Hml).
U. Ketn, Sikki, Bwaja, are names for Kettt [Dragons Tati).
Planets are also called (Jra kaS a ' 1 ^ KhagaS.
NOTES
These are uuly some of the many names which aye frequently used
iu the astrological works, and which have their own proper uses
when we enter into their inner men nings- These Will be of imminse
use to the student who reads the astrological works in Sanskrit.
Those who read translations of those works are not at present
concerned with these various names. Some of these names have
superficial religious allusion, while others are iudicative of
planetary characteristics or their dimensions and forms, in the
Astrological Magazine published by me in Volume 1, I have given
many more names for Unci, and if these are to be explained with
reference to the BhoiiMkaSnl ras, the work will extend over several
volumes. Each of the letters of these various names, is indicative
of the force which combines iu the planet and the results of the
combination by such union- Such of my readers as are anxious
to know more about them, may be referred to the explanations
which have been given in my Astrological Magazine. Grahas
means those which have gravitation and mutual power of attraction, from Qrahe to attract. Khaga* mean those which move in
space- KIm space and Gn means to move- It would be absurd
to ascribe that the knowledge about gravitation and its laws was
due to Sir Isae Newton's discovery. Orientalists and' Astronomers
cannot commit grander mistakes. The term Graha, wMbk has
been used from the Vedic (and therefore immemorial) time

Good and Evil Planets.
shows the knowledge the ancient Maharishis had about them* bw$g
before Europeans had an existence even as ' the most b&rbarose
nations.
IIVSHH
Stanza 75 .
Grulika cmd Sa nis uta arc names for an Oopagraha called
Gulika who is the son of Sani i. Saturn ) Mandi- Yamatmaja,
Prahahara an d Atipapi are names for Jffan&i. Ardapra*
hara and Yatnakantaka are names for Y axuakantaka* Ootk -
ranti is the name for KalaNOTES.
There are some other planets whose uses and influences are
explained in astrological works. The author asks the readers to
refer to them and find them out. These Oopagrahas or Minor planets
have also an evil influence in the houses they are found to occupy
and they act against the interest of the native in the Bhavas they
denote. Suppose any one of these evil planets is found in the
7th house, which signifies wife, marital happiness, sexual energy
&G., then there will be great misery from those sources or there
will he danger to those signified by that house.
Stanza 76 .
Buda in bad association, weak Chundra, Ravi, Kuja, Sam,
Rahil, Kethu, and Maudi are called KruraS or cruel planets and

SaKIVAKTHAI HIN I'AMAM.
Papas or ezil ones ; well associated Bud a. full Chundra , Guru and
Sufcra are classed as Soumyas or Shllbhas, well disposed or beneficial plan els.
NOTES.
Tins is a very difficult stanza and is very contusing to the
beginner. If a planet is called evil, then exaltation means for him
greater power to commit mischief. A rogue armed with deadly
powers will naturally cause greater mischief than one similarly
disposed but without power. A good man. without power may
have a sympathetic heart but he will not be able to do any good
unless it be in a very remote way. But if he is armed with large
powers he will try to do much good. World as it is, is a mixture
of good and evil and it is not possible to have either an entirely
bad man or a thoroughly good man. Planets are not independent
of each other, whatever may be r.lieir final source of strength.
Bach is influencing the other, and is in its turn, influenced by it.
These mutual influences arc to be found out and reduced to some
formulas which will guide mankind in their avocations of life.
Good planets will do good if they are not otherwise influenced and
evil planets produce evil if they are not disturbed by external
causes. Apart from the surrounding influences to which all
natural phenomena must submit themselves, we can yet classify
objects, as good, bad and indifferent. They have their intrinsic
worth as opposed to what they may possess under external modilying influences. This explains the division into evil arid good
planets. JLxaltution is a common factor where everv planet good
or evil, produces good, but according to its natural characteristics
which have been separately assigned to it If Guru is debilitated
we call him evil, but this word evil must not be confounded with
the word evil, when we use it about Sani and call him an evil planet.
In the one case a good man, by external influences tends to do evil
modifying it by his own natural goodness, while in the other a bad
man, does good modifying it by his own evil tendencies- A strong
man falls sick and is weak; and a weak man takes exercise and
gains strength. There is weakness in both, and there is strength
in both with this difference that natural strength and weakness

Planetary Characteristics. 7i
are modified by external circumstances The analogy may not.
have been happily expressed bat the readers attention is called to
these special differences, which have distinct results attached to
them in the art of making astrological predictions. When Biuht
is with good planets, he is good, when he is with bad planets he is.
bad. • Moon is called weak when he is close to the Sun, and he is
called Puma or full when he is opposite to the Sun. The determination of these several sources of strength constitutes the chief
factor for success in the field of predictions and this nice balancing
of evidence can only be perfected by natural ability or genius and
to some extent by learned labour. ( Vide . ,4s. S. fnsf/ructor
3rd Ed.),
Stanza 77.
Planetary Characteristics.
The Sun — irritable , well proportioned body, dark-red color , honey
colored eyes , bilious and hot. healthy , short hairs, moderate size , represents Satwaguna.
NOTES.
All the planets are given certain characteristics. The object
in attributing these to the planets seems to be that when the
planets have a strong influence in a horoscope they produce these
results on the person born under their influences. The previous
karmaic results are indicated by the symbolical language used to
represent planetary influences. Different works on astrology
differ to some extent in the delineation of these characteristics
of the planets but so far as I have seen there are not very material
differences. Long explanatory notes are not. required for plain

Sakwa kthacminta mani.
language. When the Sun is powerful in a horoscope the person
becomes influential, hold, commands respect and political success.
^FTfTO lau fc
Stanza 78 .
Moon— fair complexion, average height , sweet agreeable speech ,
lean but rounded body, watery and windy temperament, Safwaguna,
and Sanguine turn of mind.
NOTES.
When the Moon is full he will produce generally an agreeable
and handsome person. When he is weak or New Moon he produces contrary results. The Sun, Moon and J upiter are governing Satwagniw. Bhagwadgitv and other eminent Hindu religious
works divide human disposition under three principal heads, they
are Satwa, "Rajas, and Thamas. The words are highly suggestive.
Satwa, represents all goodness and God himself is the fountain for
this Guna. Rajas represents worldly courage, refined taste, military propensity, and ideas of position and respect. Thamas
represents all evil aud mischievous tendencies, laziness, rogues
and all sorts of vagabonds.
f

Kcja and Bud a.
Stanza 79.
. 'Mars —represents bbodred eyes zui-h anger, zvkitish red complexion,
bilious, fickle-minded, well proportioned body , indicates Thamasaguna, ,
intelligent and bold , warlike, and licentious.
NOTES.
Kuja represents physical strengh, he is bold adventurous, independent, fond of most daring deeds, fond of women and very
capricious. In body be is fair and red complexioned and every
part of bis person is admirably apportioned. He is a fiery and
hot planet and governs all military operations. There is very
little of gnana in bim— superior wisdom pertaining to God. Slight
differences in astrological authors about his complexion and person are found. He is represented as blood red, generous and
having great strength with slight waist by Varahamihira.
Stanza 80.
Mercury [Buda)— greenish complexion, 7nuch learning, represents
Rajasaguna, excellent advice , fond of wit and humour, mixture
of all temperaments , enthusiastic but easily cowed down, keepings company with women of evil repute.
Buda produces a very harid^o.me and attractive person although not of a fair e3§pf?iion^ ; fie is the lond of all. intelligence
and memory and gives great ta^fStc-the pursuit of sublime subjects like astronomy, astrology, and physical sciences. He also commands extraordinary skill it* arts and manufactures. He is obliging,
very courteous and very enthusiastic in the commencement. When.

Sa RWABTH ACHINTAir ANI.
he is favourable and joins Guru be commands great personal influence and unrivalled intellectual position. When he is unfavourable
he mates a man [forgetful, crackish, perversely ■witty and a disagreeable companion.
Stawea 81.
yupiter— Stout and fair body, virtuous, phlegmatic, represents
S&tvsg nit ft | blessed zvith all good character, golden-colored eyes
and hairs, learned in all the shastras , clever speech.
NOTES.
Gnru represents education while Buda indicates intelligence.
If these join together, or occupy kendras . they make the person
well educated and highly intelligent. Guru, represents all that is
good. His color is excellent being bright and deep golden-yellow,
a handsome, but stout body, excellent sight and speech, splendid*
moral &nd spiritual character, a generous and forgiving disposition
and love for all which tends to help humanity both in this and in
the after life His aspect averts many evils, his conjunction
produces much good and in every way Guru stands foremost in
the planetary ranks as the most principled and the most beneficial
■ u ii

Sukra and Sant.
7a
Stanza 82. ' -
Venus-^poor cafe?, fond of various things, strong and very
handsome body, charming appearance , dark curly hairs fine eyes
cxaellcnt qualities, governs Itajasaguna, happy,
»OTES.
Venus, when strongly situated, gives a very agreeable personality and mind. Sukra governs all wordly Concerns. He represents
wife, passions, cupidity, refinement, agreeable manners and exceptional worldly enjoyment. He governs paintings, sweet scents, horses
and carriages, wife’s and his own morals and sexual passions, a love
for sublime themes and in fact all that is desirable to make a man
happy in this world. He governs Rajasaguna and therefore is not
so pious as his rival Deva Gum. Although thoroughly worldly he
is not entirely sensual, as later on in his life he makes the native
to see to his future and inclines him to meditate upon god. Sukra
is a planet of extremely good taste and when he occupies the 4th
house unaspeeted by evil planets and aspected by good ones he
will make the native the leader of fashions, a model to imitate
for taste and refinement in the selections of furniture, houses, gar*
dens, carriages and other worldly objects. When Venus is unfavorable or debilitated, he pTungel the native into uftter sensuality,
gratifying his senses without reference to morals or reputation.
Vile women, low drinks, bestial pleasures, undignified company,
reckless gambling, and disgraceful aots’are some of the events
which blacken the native’s career. In the horoscopes of women
he will produce when bad, much immorality, but refined and
courteous manners.
tTOTJTii I

Sarwarthachintamani.
Stanza 83.
Saturn — Lazy, uninclincd io enter on active sendee, lean and
tall body, yellowish eyes , rough hairs , cruel and tyrranical, long and
ugly teeth , windy temperament, hard* la^gitoge, governs
guna, humble-minded. , ,
VOTES.
Saturnine influence can bo easily distinguisbed from the influences of other planets; those who are tall, slender built, lazy,
darkish, with rough hairs all over their body with ugly or illsefc
teeth may at once be placed under Saturnine influence and very
rarely the prediction fails. When Saturn occupies or aspects the
Lagna or Chundra, these qualities will be most prominent, if he
is not aspected by any fair planet like tli3 Mood, Venus or Jupiter. When any of these planets aspects Saturn, some of these qualities will be present although the person may appear fair or handsome. Saturn also makes a person prematurely old and greyheaded.
Persons born in Makara and Kumbha, will also be tall, darkish and
irritable. They will have many ups and downs in life. They will
be imperious, and generally inclined to be tyrranical.
lt*TTrT
Stanza S4.
trrt
II <2 II
Jllandi — Fearful and ugly , eccentric ami fitful , generally fond
of evil deeds and low company. When the planets are strong either
in Jataka Or Prasna all these characteristics must be predicted \
but when they arc weak traces of thpnt rnay be foretold.
VOTES.
^.TT
Mandi is one of the Oopaqralias and several eminent authors
have not sptk$tr aboi^b. ,?ther subordinate

Planetary Castes.
planets* The author of Sar wa.rthaeh i ntam a n i lays much stress up-'
on these Oopagrahas, It is left to the readers to take these influences or not a-s he, pleases. "Vasieta, Gargi, Parasara, Vyasa*
V arahamilrira, Satyachaffya* and many other eminent astrologers
and astronomers dq not include the influences of these subordinate,'
planets and 1 think, predictions may be safely based upon*# consideration of the sewn principal planetseven without reference to
Ealiu and Kethu. Put I appear here as a translator and I must
give out -what, VenkaLam speaks himself in. his learned work*
"When the influences of Oopagrahas have to be predicted it must
be carefully noted, that the principal planets are not strong and
4o not appose or counteract the influences, of the minor planets.
II II
II II
Stanza 85 .
I shall now explain the castes of the planets.
Jupiter and Venus represent Brahma, Mars and the Sun.
indicate the Kshatryas, the -MfeM ’tited Mercury Hpr^tisent the Vaisyas,
Saturn represents the Sudra
. There is some Sftil among the
writers on astrology., and Sudra,
classifications are representative ' of the various functions discharged by the members of a united sopifty and when this stanza is
applied to other than Hindu Nations, who have none of these
castes in name, although all of them, have them in true spirit, it may
be interpreted to indicate the avocations followed by the different
if-.
NOTES.

Sauwarthachixtamaxi.
members of tliat society- All those persons in any society, whether caste system prevails there in name or not, who are engaged in
meditation on God, wl>o are working in the cause of God and who
transact charitable or philanthropic work, may b& classed as the
highest, because, they work in a moral and spiritual plane, which is
considered to be the highest among all nations, whatever may be
the pretensions to civilisation, and modern enlightenment. The next
class is the martial* The fighting races l>ave always been honored
from time* immemorial, althongh they come next after moral and
intellectual classes- On the Earth they represent the highest physical
energy and temporal power and also develope many solid virtues
when properly controlled. These are under the special influences of
the Sun and Mars. The Sun represents all kingly power and Mars
governs all military clas|^ v , Tjj^ and Mercury Chandra and
Buda come in the 6bXt { 6rderi, which 'represents all mercantile and
banking activities. These ^epo;V«W 0 |f: pa the earlier stages of
the Hindu Society and even now the Indian Chettif and the Banija
are illustrations of Lunat a«d Mercurial "influences.' Saturn represents all the working, cultivating and labouring classes and these
are generally Sudras M' India arid wcft-fcmen elsewhere. "When
these planets shed their respective influences, they produce strong
inclinations in the llativee to take to the kind of work which
is represented by the planet in particular.
> e Jssrv IS .
v TOIWST 1
Staxza 86.
Rahu represents all Pariah classes , Kethu and Mandi represent all other lower castes and Doomadi planets indicate all topsy
tnrvy or hytytd and loathsome sects. The planets indicate their influences aud imt measles cmt&ng tkmsekes.

Pi. ax start Castes.
NOTES.
This is really an iritefess^ng stanza. Planetary rays are very
remarkable in the ®roductiou<>f terrestrial phenomena. The, rays
are not pure ana feithple. They are modified, reflected, refracted,
and counteracted-. In thase states we. have reasons for the proreligions, various sects, various castes and various creeds, hate
been called into , existence and have been destroyed by the influence of the all powerful .2 me. Who gives us Time, who enables
us to know Tine, who records the Time and who is the Pinal
Cause for, all Time ? God is invisible and cannot be understood
by the undeveloped senses of ordinary men. But even the
igpppanfc fool, who does not knaiy^hi* alphabet, knows that the
glorious Sun and Moon and other planets are the causes of all
earthly phenomena. He knows these ivjUienees because he sees
them, feels them, works under them, guides his movements within
their control and argues, it may be in the rudest manner possible,
that without the influences of the planets above, he and all his
creatures who keep company with him in this world, could not
live even for a single moment. This is science grand and pure enough ,
and ought to be simple enough. These countless rays of the
planets are doing their work— distributing and redistributing
matter — in nature and these ravs produce an endless variety of
castes and creeds whether we call them so by names or not. Inclination to work, tastes and dislikes, birth, breeding and education, coupled with the seed and bed where persons have taken
their rise, determine to a great extent the lot of those people.
Where society, has existed long, these, takea eterfptyped form and
whsrejt is ip newrformation the castes are split up into numberless new ones. I’hese remarks hold good for all ages and for all
nations. If a Lord does not admit the plebian to his dinner-table
he does so under his caste scruples, pnly he doe^s not call it caste,
but calls by
that term,

S A ft \Y A RTHACIH X T A M A X I .
u
<nMi < » i «ii
Stans* 87.
I shall now givt
is hiihife, Mars is 6
golden-yellow, Vein
The’ Stitt represents Firegod , ' Moon indicates water., Mars shows
Kttffla^aswami , Mercury ^presents Vishnu, Jupiter refers to'
3 adria, Venus indicates ISacM Devi, ait d Satilrn represents BrahmaId the matter of colors represented bv planets, slight differences may be found in the astrological works. The Sun indicates
copper color, Moon is White' like silver, Mars is bloodred or
scarlet, and indicates daggers, and* sanguine temperament. Mercury
represents greenness indicating much wit and humour, Jupiter
represents the finest golden yellow and safety to all beings who
are under his sway. Yenus shows great variety of colors and
therefore very fine taste, and Saturn shows blackness or misery and
death. Then the author mentions what are called the Adhi Bevatas
forthese planets. The Stni 'represents the Tire God (Power), Moon
shows the Water Power, Mars shows Kumarswami or the Fighting
Power, Mercury represents Vishnu or protecting Power, Jupiter
represents Indra or Governing Power, Venus indicates Sachi or
spouse of Indra-and Saturn represents- the creative Power Brahma.
flN^pjSITS : II «H
; colors ‘etc^qf planets. , The Sun is red , the Moon
lood-red or deep-red, Mercury is green, Jupiter is
is is variegated and Saturn is black.

Directions Governed i;y Planets.
SI
Stanza 88.
The S vn governs East, Yams rules South East , Slfars indicates
South, Rahil represents South l Vest, Saturn shows T Vest, the Moon
governs North TT est. Mercury rules North and Jupiter indicates
North East Aries , Taurus , Gemini and Cancer , with their Thrikonas
represent East , South, West and North respectively.
NOTES.
The first portion of the stanza is simple enough. In the
Dasas and Bhukties as well as in queries about thieves, lost property, enemies, and runaway persons, this stanza will be extremely useful as indicating the direction which they take or its boundaries. They also shew where a person will be transferred to or
where he will be successful if he entered into some speculations.
When planets indicate cardinal directions, the Zodiacal signs also
must signify for their own values in this connection. Aries and its
two Thrikonas, i.c., oth and 9th houses or Leo and Sagittarius
shew the East. Taurus and its Trines Virgo and Capricornus
indicate the South. Gemini and its Trines Libra and Aquarius
represent the West and Cancel’, Scorpio and Pisces govern the
North. These signs also serve the same purpose as the directions
indicated by the planets.
TPrif^vurtcT^rn - : i

Sagwarthachintaaiaxi.
rf^ 1 4^1 MF ^ R qf II \% II
Weak Moon, Mars, Sun, Saturn an i bally associated Mercury are
classed as evil planets ( Papagr alias ). Mercury and Saturn are eunuchs .
Venus and Moon are females The Sun, Mars and Jupiter are males.
These planets indicate corresponding dispositions in horoscophy as
well as in horary. Mars governs marrow, Jupiter rules the brain ;
Sukra indicates the semin or vital fluid ; Mercury governs the skin;
Moon rules over the blood. The Sun has jurisdiction over the bones.
Saturn governs the nervous system. The diseases of the person or his
health depends upon the strength of the planets and the organic matters they govern. The person dies from the inflaniation or disorder
ascribed to that planet which occupies the 8th house from his birth.
In enjoying health similar considerations apply to planetery characteristics.
NOTES.
Moon is called Kshina waning when he is 5 days forwards and
backwards from New Moon. He then will produce evil as does any
other evil planet. From the 10th of the waxing half of the lunar
month to the ylh of the waning half of the lunar month the Moon
is said to be full. On the rest of the days he is moderate in
strength. Bari, Sani> and Kuja are evil planets. Where planets are strong and influence the native, the person partakes
of their masculine, feminine or neuter gender. The passions
of the person will be according to the -strength of the planets.
In Prasva the gender of the planet determines the sex of the
thief or those who are concerned with the work. Eahu and
Kethu have been omitted by this author. Eahu represents feminine sex, Kethu denotes a eunuch. In the formation of the featus in the womb and its developement during the nine months, it
is there the influences of the planets have a great deal to do. At
the time of the sexual functions; the Lord who causes the ejection

Nature, Skx and Diseases oe Planets.
of tli© fliid into the female recepticle is Sukra. Sukra in Sanskrit
means setnin and the sexual correspondence is brought about by
Kuja and Chandra, one representing fire or heat and the ether
representing water or cold. Where the Sun is very strong the
person will have stout bones ; if otherwise he will have rotten or
ill-developed bones, where the Moon is powerful the man will have
good and sufficient quantity of blood . If Knja is strong lie will have
pleanty of marrow which gives strength to the bones, where Budha
is strong he will have good skin, if Guru is exalted he developes a
spleudid brain, if Sukra is favourable he will have plenty of sexual
passion and seminal fluid, if Sani is auspicious the nervous system of
the person will be strong. These characteristics of the planets will
be useful not only in consultations of horoscopes, but also in a variety
of other questions relating to various matters connected with human
life. At the time of death or disease the pain and the difficulty
arises in that organ or sense of the body which is attributed to the
influence of the planet which, is unfavorable or which causes Mura •
hi- In dasas and bukthies, if planets are evil, they give complaints
in those parts and senses which they govern. It has been stated
elsewhere that the 8th house represents maraua or death. If at
the time of birth the planets occupy the 8tli house from it they determine the mode and the time of his death ; if there are no planets in
the 8th house the death has to be determined by that complaint
which is attributed to the Lord of the Navamsa occupied by the
Lord of the 8th house. If there, are more than one planets in ilie
8th house then the death will be from that disease which is attributed to the strongest of the planets. If all the planets are equal
in strength in the 8th house death will result from a complication
of diseases which are ruled by those planets. If Bahu or Kethu
occupies the Stli house they give death from that disease which is
governed by the Lord of the 8th or that of the planet which aspects
the 8th. Deaths from violence or poisons may also be predicted
by the occupation of the 8feh bowse by-Rahu or iKethu.

SiBWA RTHACHINT AltAXI.
H
a a
Stanzas 02 & 93.
The Sun governs places of worship* or temples . Moon rules over
bath rooms , tanks, wells and other watery surfaces. Kuja rules all
fire places , engines, armories. Bndct governs places of sexual intercourse. Guru rules over treasuries and places where money is deposited. Sukra governs bed rooms. Said metes over hospitals and medical stores. Ralm indicates places where serpents and other reptiles
hide themselves. Mandi indicates localities of death or execution.
NOTES.
The author by suggesting so on in his work indicates the kind
of places governed by these planets and which are too numerous,
to be detailed here.

Metals and Clothes Governed ijv Planets.
So
Stanzas 94 & 95 .
Saturn governs all rags, torn and old clothes . The Sun commands
rough clothes . Jupiter shows neither old nor -ncio clothes. Venus
indicates strong clothes . The Moon governs white and new elothes.
Mars rules partly burnt and red clothes. Mercury represents wet
and torn clothes. Rahu governs several clothes Hitched up together.
Kethu indicates variegated dr many colored clothes , and Mandi rules
dirty clothes. If planets are powerful, the clothes of the class indicated by the planets will be valuable . If the planets arc weak or
unfavorable they will be valueless, (c. g.) If Moon is unfavorable
he gives an ordinary white cloth of very little value , ij he is favorable
or exalted he gives white clothes but laced or silk, of a costly nature.
If Rahu is favorable he gives nice velvet, damask or silk pieces stitched
together. If he is unfavorable he gives all dirty clothes stitched together. Similarly for other planets.
II 3WTf TOTT^tfr: II

8G
S A U W A mi A C FI INT A If A NI.
Stanzas 06 & 97 .
Sun governs copper , Moon t gcms. Mars gold ‘ Mercury/ brass and
bell metal and so forth, Jupiter stiver , Venus pearls, Saturn iron .
Rahil lead , Kethu dark metals , Mandi iron lead and other metalic
Ores.
3TOTES>
There is difference in the metals ascribed to the planets by
this author and Varahamibira and others. In Laghu Jataka of
Yarahamira* Chapter IV, Yerse II, he asoribes gold to Jupiter
•when he is in his own house and in B-rahat-. Jataka in Chapter II
Yerse 12, he ascribes lead to Sani and omits Rahu and Kethu altogether. Y}'asa is of the same opinion. Strong planets give gains
from these sources and weak planets inflict loss.
II If
Stanza &S.
Sukra represents Vasanta Rttihu. Surya and Kuja represent'
Grishmaruthu , Chundra represents Parasha Rathu, Budha represents Sarathruthu, Guru represents Hemaniharuthu , Sani represent?
Sisararuthu.
NOTES.
The Hindu astronomers divide the year into Six Ruthus of two
months each. Vasantha represents Summer. G-rishma represents
windy season, Yarsbk hn^aits rain, Sarathruthu represents fruiting season. Hemantha indicates cold and Sesira represents spring.

Seaso'xss Tastes and Times of jc eanets.
u Tarrfr?TT^fiof^‘ u
II VUI
T^nfrft^rriri^T: n \ q ° ii
3T^fTTR : n^f%TT^T^'r:
R^rf?l%fT^%WTr3: II So* H
These Ruthus are to be found hi birth or lost horoscopes or
questions on losses in property by the Drakkana which , rises at the
time of birth or question. Ravi governs punjent or hot tastes, Chandra shows saltish tastes , Kuja rules bitter , Buda governs shadrasas.
Guru represents sweet, Sukra indicates sour taste, and Sani rules
acidity . Ravi indicates 6 mo7iths , Chandra a few minutes, Kuja
denotes one day, Buda shows two months , Guru represents one month,
Sukra hidicates a fortnight , and Sani represents one year, Rahu
indicates eivht months, Kethu denotes three months and Maitdi hidicates
eighteen months. These are to be used in the Prasna.

SaEWA RTII ACH IXTAMASI.
NOTES.
There is a separate chapter devoted at the end of Brihatjataka
wherein the processes for calculating the Nasta- Jataka or loss of
property questions, are elaborately given. As the whole question
involves a series of calculations I would refer my readers to my
Astrological Self Instructor or to the Brihatjataka. In some editions of Sarwartliacliintamani, Mantantara or separate doctrines on
these points are given. I do not think that they are necessary
here. In this chapter most of these preliminaries are given with a
view to guide the student in the art of predicting all events
connected with the life of a Native. When the planets are strong
these peculiarities in taste are noticeable, but when they are weak
they show perhaps some traces of their existence. When a question is put to an astrologer about loss of property or person or when
any event is to happen and the time at which it is likely to happen,
the periods mentioned against these planets will be the extent within
which, if favourable, they will announce success.
II II
n u
Staxza 102.
Rahu , Sani, Chandra and Kuja denote DhattlS- Sukra and
Jiavi represent BCoolSiS, cmd Guru and Buda indicate JeeVaS. From
Mesha and Aswini, these arc regularly to be calculated.
NOTES.
Tlie whole terrestrial phenomena is divided into 3 grand
divisions mineral, vegetable and animal. This was thoroughly
known to the ancients. Dliatoos represent minerals, Moolas show
vegetables and Jeeves represent animals including men. In all

Mink i; .\r., Veuktable and Animal Kingdoms.
queries, the astrologer lias to find out what is the object of the
question and whether it will be successful. The query may be
about marriage, education, loss of property or person, death,
children, money or other speculation and gardening or cultivation.
These are uot exclusive of each other. When a man asks the
astrologer about loss of money the object fails under mineral.
When a question is put about the health of a person the object
falls under animal. And when he questions about the growth
of a garden the object is vegetable. In the latter portion of the
sloka the author gives a hint as to which of the Zodiacal signs,
are Dhatoos, which are Moolas and which are Jeevas- Mesha
Cat-aka, Thula and Makara or all the movable signs represent Dhatoos
(minerals'. Yrishabha, Si mb a, Yrischika and Kumbha or the fixed
signs represent Moolas ( vegetables). Mithuna, Kanya, Ulianas
and Meena or the common signs indicate Jeevas (animals). In a similar
way take the constellations. Aswini, 1’ohini, Poonarvasu, Makha,
Pasta, Yisakha, Moola, Sravana, Poorvabhadra or the 1st, 4th,
7th, 10th, 13th, 10th, 10th, 22nd and 25th represent Dhatoos.
Bliarani, Mrugasira, Pooshyami, Poobba, Chitta, Auooi’adha,
Poorvasbadla, Dhanista and Oottarabhadra or 2nd, 5th, 8th, llth,
34th, 17th, 20th, 23rd and 26th constellations represent Moolas.
And Krifctika, Auridra, AuslasLia, Oottara, Swati, Jaista, Oottarasliadha, Satabhisha and Eavati or the 3rd, 6th, 9th, 12tli, 15th,
1 y tii, 21st, 24th, and 27tli constellations represent Jeevas.
ii u

SAB WA tiTHACHIXTAMAX J.
UU
Stanza 103,
Kuja and Ravi have upper sight ( Oordwd ), Sukra and Buda have
sidesight \Katakska'), Guru and Chandra have ordinarysight ( Sama ),
and Rahu and Sam have half opened sight ( Ardhokshi .)
NOTES.
Sights are most peculiarly arranged and we witness a variety
of sights among men. Some generally look up while speaking,
some look down, some always look with half shut eyes, some
have squint'eyes, and others look askance through the end of their
eyes. The sights ascribed to the planets must be predicted if they
are strong in a horoscope and their traces if they are weak.
fa fgsnu ?ogll
Stanza 104.
Saturn aspects 3rd and 10th powerfully. Mars aspects 4th and
Sih powerfully and Jupiter aspects the 3th and gth powerfully,
while the rest of the planets aspect the yth powerfully. All planets
aspect 3rd and 10th with quarter sight. 3th and gth with half sight
and 4th and 8 th with three quarter sight and the Jill with full sight.
NOTES.
All planets aspect the 7th house fully, 4th and 8th houses with
f- sight, 5th and 9th houses with. 1 sight, and 3rd and 10th with
ith sight. But in these aspects there is much difference. Saturnine rays powerfully aspect the 3rd and 10th and his aspect in the
7th is very ordinary, not so strong as the sight of others there.
Jupiter aspects the 5th and 9th more powerfully than he aspects
the 7th and Mars aspects the 4th and 8th more powerfully than
he does the 7th house. The rest of the planets, Moon, Mercury,
Sun and Venus aspect strongly the 7th house. In plain language.

Planetary Aspects and Friendship.
the aspecting influences of the planets are thus indicated. Sun,
Moon, Mercury and Venus hare to be noted in their aspects of
the 7tb, while Mars shows his influence in the 4th and 8th, Saturn
in the 3rd and 10th and Jupiter in the 5thand 9th houses. Mars,
Jupiter and Saturn also aspect the 7th but not to any powerful
extent.
u ?<>h ii
Stanza 105.
I shall now explain planetary friendship atid enmity .
Kuja , Chandra and Guru are friends to Ravi, Buda is ordinary. Sukra and Sant are enemies . Ravi and Buda are friends
to Chandra , and the rest, Guru, Kuja, Sani and Sukra are S&ID&S
or ordinary.
NOTES.
Tbe author has elsewhere clearly stated that the results
indicated by the planets are not to be supposed to apply to the
plaDet3 themselves but to those objects which are subjected to
their influences. The Sun is the friend of Moon, Jupiter and
Mars. It does not mean that they often meet, have food and
exchange courtesies as we do. All that is to be understood by
that expression will be that the Sun’s rays are- not counteracted
by those planets which are declared to be his friends, but on the
other hand his rays will fcfe intensified ‘by the tfays of Mars,
Moon and J upiter. Samos are those planets wftich neither retard,.
nor extinguish the rays of the other planets.

pAKVTABTHACH I N'T AM AN! .
By enmity we have to understand that the rays of the one
planet will be counteracted by those of the other which is declared
to be his enemy. The anticipated results are therefore negatived
by. the conjunction or aspecting of the unfriendly planets. It is
specially to be noted that while all other planets than the Moon
have the three states of friendship, neutrality and enmity, the Moon
has no enemies. Others have the Moon as their enemy but the
Moon has other planets as friends or as neutrals.
wntf^Ti^EsiG^rt i
Stanza 106.
The Sun, Moon and Jupiter arc friends of Mars. Saturn and,
Venus arc neutrals and Mercury is an enemy. The Sun and Venus
are friends of Mercury, Mars, jupitcr, and Saturn are neutrals,
'd'hilc the Moon is an enemy.
NOTES
There are planets who own two signs in the Zodiac while
some own only one house. The Sim aud Moon own only one
house each. While Jupiter, Veuus^ Saturn, Mercury and Mars
own each two houses. Friendship is generated by the triangular
theory of planetary influences explained by me in the Astrological
Magazine. Take any sign in the Zodiac. The Lord of that house
will be a friend of the Lords of the houses which fall on the
angles of an equilateral triangle formed from that house. Those planets who owiii other houses qr-e-his' enemies- Take the sign Aries.
Its -Lord* |s. Wars jj .If tva dmwpliqtf&^f aj^. equilateral triangle from
,A**l#3,1we4iWW5h,. Le^|5t^- (> 'iwpse4roipf| 4frips, qnd Sagittarius, 9th
theffeeiand A»je*i agMuAtb Ifem tk&t 9th house. Therefore the an gies
of an equilateral tri angle .fujp placed .in Aries, Leo and Sagittarius

FiuKsnsm!' Among the Pf.ant.ts..
or 120° apart. The Zodiacal circle represents 3(50°. The Lords of
ArLs, Leo and Sagittarius. — Mars, the Sun and Jupiter are friends.
Tuke Taurus. Drawing the lines of an equilateral triangle, we
touch Virgo, Capricorn and Taurus, and the lords of these houses
Mercury, Saturn and Venus are friends as owning the angular
houses of an equilateral triangle formed from Taurus and touching
Virgo and Capricorn, Similarly examine for other houses and
planets.
II t ««tl
Stanza 107.
Guru has Ravi \ Chandra and K. ujcl as friends . Sukra and
Buda arc enemies and Sam is fia.raa .« Sukra has Sam and huda
as friends, Kujci and Guru are neutrals and Ravi and C haudi a
arc enemies .
NOTES.
On this point of. friendship, neutrality and enmity 1 might
refer my readers to mv book entitled the Astrological Self Instructor 3rd Edition. I hare there elaborately explained these
relationships.
^rTM W14 <4 4 W h ^ rr * it It
Stanza 108. ■ • •
Buda and Sukra are friends of Sand. , '&*** Chandra, andKnja
are enemies of Sant . ' Guru is neutral. Rahu has Sukra , Gu j u and
Sam as friends. Keihu has Sukra, Smi and ’» Guru as friends.

SaEWAETH ACH1NTA M AXI.
HOTES.
The author 'does not say who are enemies and who are neutrals to Rahu and Kethu. A fair inferenoe may b9 drawn, however, based upon a general knowledge of astrology. Rahu and
Kethu are classed as low caste planets and evil in nature. Buda
and Kuja are evil planets and when they are not treated as their
friends they may safely be classed as neutrals at least. Ravi and
Chandra are the declared enemies of Rahu and Kethu. Because
these latter planets eclipse the former ones and thus put them into a shade. There are many complications in these friendships
of planets, into the details of all of Which it is undesirable for me to
go deeply. The facts above given show permanent or Nisargika
friendship and enmity. What will be given below, will show the
temporary or Thatkulika friendship. Persons may be inveterate enemies, but circumstances may compell them to aot in union against a
third or common enemy when he is close at hand, and thus for a
time forget or forgive their individual misunderstandings and
hatredrepair v^atfE^TT
II \*\ it
H \\* it

Temporary Friendship of Planets.
Stanzas 109, 110 and 111.
Planets which are in the 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 10th, nth and 12th houses
from where a planet is at the time of birth are its temporary friends.
Otherwise they are its temporary enemies. Jf the temporary friend
also happens to be a permanent friend, they both become intimate
friends. If a temporary enemy also happens to be a permanent one
they both become inveterate enemies. Jf one happens to be a friend
and the other happens to be an enemy they become Samas or neutral.
NOTESThere is variance between this classification and that given by
Varahamihira in his Brihatjataka about temporary friends.
Varahamihira includes the lord of the house where a planet
happens to be exalted in the list of temporary friends. Various
other books also give slight differences on these points.
One thing seems to be certain and if the readers hear that in
mind they will easily get on with their predictive work. There
are apparently three parties among the planets; two of which are
active and the third indifferent or passive. The Sun, Moon, Mars
and Jupiter form one party and are usually friends. Their aspects
and conjunctions with each other are good and will help in the production of favourable results. Venus, Saturn and Mercury form
one set of friends who are generally on bad terms with the planets of the other party. Rahu and Kethu form one party
They have no special interest in either party and give the good
or bad effects of the planets in a more intensified form. It will
be noticed in the above formula that the planets from any given
planet at the time of birth in the 2nd, and I2tb, in the 3rd and
the 1 1th, in the 4th and the 1 0th are friends. Here there is observed some order. The planets in the 2nd, 3rd and 4th from any
planet, as also those which are in the 12th, 11th and 10th or planets regularly in the first 3 houses from the position of the given
planet forwards and backwards, are his friends. Those which occupy 5th, 6th, 7th, 8th and 9th, are enemies. If a temporary
friend becomes a permanent enemy the result is neutral. If there

S A ft W A RTH AC H I NT II A U A N I .
9ti
is friendship both permanently and temporarily there is great’
friendship. If there is enmity temporarily and permanently there
■will be inveterate enmity. There are many slight shades in
friendship and enmity which have to be borne in mind in Ghe foretelling of the future events and then the skill of the astrologer
depends upon the nice discrimination of facts and balancing of
the evidence before him. Good natural intelligence and large familiarity with theSdientific rules will make a man always a great adept
in the science of astrology. Dull people have never shone as adepts
in any branch of knowledge and much less could they shine well in
a department of science, whose pretensions, real or imaginary, are
of the grandest flight. Kahn and Kethu will share the same fate
in these matters as do the other planets. These relationships
among the different planetary bodies are very important in determining their actual power with reference to their effects on the
prospects of the native's life.
II ||
Ml mu
Stanza 112.
/ shall now give the Shadb&laS of planets. Planets in exalt a.
tion, m friendly houses, in their own jVavamsas, in their own houses ,
m their Drahhanas, m their Dwadasamsas , in their Shodasamsas
and in their Thrimsamsas , are said to possess Stanabala.
NOTES.
Stanabala means the strength which planets derive from their
being in particular places which are favourable to them. I have
elaborately explained what is meant by Drakkana, Navamsa, Dwu-

DlRECTiOSAL STRENGTH OF PLANETS.
dasamsa, Thrimsamsa and Shodasamsa. When planets occupy
their own divisions and subdivisions they acquire great strength
and their rays are capable of exercising the most favourable influences on the horoscope of any person.
fnd^aiHtf§<irdr#?T ; » m li
Stanzas 113 & 114.
Lag mi represents East and Guru ani Buda are strong there.
Ravi and A uja become strong in the loth house which indicates the
South. Sam is powerful tn the jth house which shows the West avid
Sukra and Moon are strong in the 4 th which represents the North.
In the seventh from the house where they are strong, they became
weak tn Digbala. The intermediate strength must be found out by
the simple rule of three. Their own mouth, their ozem hora, their
own weekday ami their own year for tke planets give their Kalabala.
NOTES.
First the author details the Digbala or directional strength.
All planets are not strong in one and the same direction. Jupiter and Mercury, when they occupy the Eastern direction, represented by the Lagoa, become powerful. In the 7th house from
the Lagna where they have this Digbala they lose that power
altogether. Suppose they occupy the 4th house. This is midway
between the 1st and 7th and therefore they only will have half
of the Digbala they had iu Lagna. They continue to lose this

S A It W AHTIUCHl XT A M AX'I .
strength until they reach , th$ >7 tU. -house where they have no
strength at all. . Jfwnp the 7th. house up to the Lagna they gain
p*ppo$j^»£tply the strength- they have l0sfc. Suppose they, arein
the 9th. It is the 3rd house from, tho 7 th, and therefore by a
simple rule of three, they roughly get about 3/7ths of the dig bed a
or little less than half. To be more
accurate, the exact degree p| the. birth must be calculated and
then for each sign or portioned ont.
Suppose a person is bo^^be $tesha. Tf Guru
is also in the same degree he lias Digbala completely. But when
he is found in the" ^Oth^A^rel froln the birth* degree, what is
the strength he has ? From tW degrfe -ol Mesha we have to
take 180° to see Guru completely without Digbala. In the 25th
degree of Tbula Guru loses is found in the
20th degree of Vrishabha. He has lcet 25/180 degrees of strength
or 5/36th of his directional strength 1 $e dfsU ^ftrwefore a balance
of Si/36th of his strength and the effects to be foretold have to be
modified as per degrees of his strength.
Similarly consult for other planets.
The author now gives Kal-ibuhi or strength arising from
the influence of Time. Planets in their own bora, in their
months, in their weekdays and in their years* have Kahibahi. What
are these is a question which lias to be properly explained. The
horn that he refers to here seems to be different from the kora as
a division of the Zodiac. The world began with the appearance
cf the Sun. He therefore commanded the first 2J ghatikas after
the first sunrise and therefore the first Sun’s day become tlie first
Sunday. The second kora (an English hour is exactly equivalent
to an Indian Hora and the whole astrological science is called the
Hora Shastra from the compounding of two words A ho day and
Ecttri night and by the dropping of A the first letter, and tri the
last letter we get the word hora, denoting time) on the first Sunday
was goverp^d by.Sukra, the third was ruled by Buda, then Chandra, (hen Wanda, then Jeeva, and then Dharasuta. Seven
hours thus' passed away aud the 8tli hour again was governed

Ivvtl le Sun, the Oth by Venus, the 10th i»y Mercury, 1 1th by Moon,
12th by Saturn, 13th by Jupiter anti the 14th by Mars- ' Again
the loth hour was governed by Ravi, 16th by Sukra, 17th by Buda,
18th by Chandra, 19th by Sail!, 20th by Gum and the 21sb by
Kuja. The 22nd was again governed % Ravi, the 23rd by Sukra
and the 24th hora by Buda- Thus tlie first day of 24 hours passed off
beginning with the Sun’s Hora and ending with the Hora of Mercury.
On the morning of the 2nd day at sunrise, or the 25th hour after
creation and appearance of the light the first kora was governed
by the Moon, the 2nd was by. Sani, the 3rd by Guru, the 4th by
Kuja and so on- The second was therefore called the Moon’s day
or Monday or Soma War a from the fact of the Moon governing the
first hora after sunrise. On the 3rd day at. sunrise the first hora
fell under the influence of Kuja and hence it was called Kuja .or
Mangala Warn. On the 4th day the first hora after sunrise was
governed by Buda and it is called Buda Wara. On the 5th day the
first hora was governed by jupiter, and hence the day was called
Guru Wara. On the Gth the first hora was governed by Sukra and
hence it was named Sukra Wara. On the 7tli day the first hora
was governed by Sani and it was called Sani Wara. On the 8th
day the first hora after sunrise was governed by the Sun and again
it was called Sunday and so it is now going on. Planets therefore
occupying their own lioras have this Ktilcibctla . > lu calculations
based on Lunar movements-ealled the Chandra Mana—- the .year
begins after the Amavasya of Phalgttna. The Ruler or King for
that year will be the lord. of the weekday on which the Prathama
or the first lunar day of the new year begins- Thus, this year Sharwari (1900 & 1901) began on a Saturday and Sani is the Kingfbr
the whole of this reamr f^gfet-Xalabala. Again
the months are under the influence of planetsaad whoever rules
the month he gets Kalab&W 'Tflfe weekdaysare too well known
to need any explanation- < bpre on a Tuesday is under the influence of Mars and he gets Kalabala. There is another version
of these KalabaW - The norths aid alrealy-too long and I leave

S A R \\ A UTH AC III NT A MAN f .
my readers to refer to other books for cansuitations on these matton?. The author continues about Kakbala further on.
Stanza 135 .
Sant, Chandra and Kuja are ptm&rful during the night, Ravi
Guru and Sukra arc strong during the day. Buda is pmverfut
during the day and night. Auspicious planets are powerful during
the waxing half and cm l planets are strong during the loaning half
of the Lunar month.
NOTES.
Tlie author gives another example where the planets get
Kalabala. In the first half of the lunar mouth, the Moon waxes
stronger and stronger every day, every hour and every minute
and the benefice are said to be powerful during this half. In the
second half of the lunar month, the Moon begins to lose gradually
the brilliancy of her disk and the Mabfcs are said to be powerful.
31oon, Mars and Saturn are powerful during the night time and they
have Kalabala only for those who are bom during the night. Ravi,
Guru and Sukra are strong during the day time and only those
who are born during the day can count upon the Kalabala of these
planets. Buda has Kalabala both, during the day and during the
night.
II II

Dlilfi AN1) A Y ASA Bai.as.
Stanza 11G.
Planets which arc aspeeted by BdH6fi.CS have Poorna Drigbala,
planets which are aspeeted by evil planets have Papa Drig bala *
Tnc relative strength of these DrigbfiiaB must be found out by
the simple rule of three.
HOTEg.
Dnh means aspect or sight and Drigbala means tlie strength
or weakness which a planet derives from the aspects of other
planets. Planets have already been classified as Bewfies and Mahjics
and the aspects of auspicious planets like Guru, Sukra, Shubha
Bud a and Poorna Chandra are productive of much strength and
favourable results. The rest are evil planets and when they are
aspecting they produce weakness or debility.
II W 11
Stanza 117 .
The S uu is strong m the fit Aara yatta:^ the Moon is strong in the
Dakshinayana. Mars and other planets are strong when they have
Vakra. If any of tike five planets, Kuja, Bn da. Gut u, Sukra and
Sam is successul in the planetary fight, and occupies the Northern
half of the celestial globe, he will be strong.
mwmThree important facts have teen detailed in this stanza.
There are two Ay anas or halves of the year. Oottarayan commences from the month of Mak^i^fBidlcontmues through Koombha,
Meena, Meeha, Vrishabba and Mitlmna. During these months the
Sun is powerful and occupies a. northerly direction. The Dakshinajana extends over Kataka, Simhn, Kanya, Thula* Yrischika and

Sarwahthachixtamaxi.
Dhanus. Here the Sun has a Southerly direction and the Moon
is di#pjfeg:£|$ AymM* Planets have various
af ,^o|ar^tS4 They go first forwards and have a normal
nioyejnent* Then fey Sfij^yi^ible forces called Seegrocha,
Mandocha and Patlia, they are dra gge d backwards and' forwards.
These complicate the movements ofpfanets and make their calcuPlvjeta.tyru btoki-or* get intd* what is called Vdktti gati or
rctrqgrade. Atterigqis# $or igQioskitne i» tills- defection they again
ti^ru towards! their pqnualdireetipfi and are then said to be id their
Rtiju gati Then they get infoaq. accelerated monrewetit to make
up the time lost, by their retrogrades and get into what is called
A thick am gati or acceleration. Elettegwde planets ate strong.'
Acceleration makes them weak- Planets begin to fight when they
are in conjunction with Mars. This is well explained in Brihatjafeaka Chap. «nd occupies the
Northern half of the globe, it gets peculiar strength. These
sources of strengtk'fte coifed Cfiritstti Data or ^rMgth from doing
Sani, Kuja, Bud a. Guru, Sukrci , Chandra and Ravi, arc respectively stronger than each other. TMs^is *fheir Nisargikabala. Shadbalas
arc (/) Stana Bala , (2) Digbala , (j) Kalabala, (4) Drigbala,
(5) Chesta Bala and (<£) Nisargikabala.
NOTES.
; It the above 8 or ' 4 ! stanzns the niitlior has attempted! to show
clearly wliicfe hre the .6 principal sdhtces of strength to' each of tlie
planets* He has Ahohrh the vatroos 'Vergns wliicli fvirhish

. s §judbaus.
strength or £^»%g a large
number of pjMfifnifiary* fadts ' \Vhiclr every student in astrologyought to remember, 1 1 of strength
called the shadbald*. Nifarrilkaljah denotes the perm
of the respective W-™
■manent strength
Sani is the w eakest of the lot. Next comes Kuja, next in order
of strength is the pj&nct J^u^^ w l^rfw thetr €h*«i»,tlien comes
Sukrn, then Chandra and the strongest is the planet Ravi. Varahamihira and Jxhuini Muharishu speak to the same facts and we
have qoted their sutras in the astrological Magazine Vol. IV. to
which our readers can advantageously refer for elaborate explanation. "When an astrologer does not know how far the planets possess strength, his venturing into the fields of prediction would surely
he attended by danger to the science and disgrace to himself.
Where certain ingredients form necessary factors in the pronouncing of a judgment they ought to be carefully considered and weighed
before attempts are made, to -pro no mice the judgment- 'A rider
who does not know the nature of the animal be rides, runs the
danger of having a kick or a fall from the horse, and in a similar
way one who does not know what lie is talking about or doing is
sure to get into an unpardonable confusion. This is the first and the
most important chapter and the details herein given ought. to be
thoroughly mastered apd be familiar to the student before he ventures to consult horoscopes and- - make predictions- A Judge
ought to know tho -principles of law before he proceeds to try a
case. The way in which a man brings to bear the electrical currents of his hea^— brain power— upon apybranch of study has much
to do with the success ©rJ*itor$oS that particular subject. Astrology requires the best knowledge in its technicalities, as well as the
greatest intelligence and- the best personal- experience. Where
these are notpresent or are wanting, in depth, attempts in the astrological predictions must be attended with certain failures-

Sarwarthachixtamaxi.
S^Wr-ri i
«mwm Ji it t \%t\
Stanza 119.
Tlu Shadbala of the Lagnadhipatii will be the strength of the
Lagna Where the Lagna happens to be a Nara Rasee Jt gets the
strength of one Rupa. Where it happens to be Chatushpada Rasee
rt gets the strength of half a Rupa and where it chances to be a Kita
Rasee , it does not share any strength at alt.
Lagna is the technical name given to the sign of the Zodiac
in which a person is born . This is the groundwork for all astrological consultations and predictions. Hitherto the author -ave
the sources of the strength of the planets, but he said nothinabout the birth sign (Lagna) itself. Now he says that Lagnt
derives strength of one Rupa when it is in Nara Rasee Humansigns). If Lagna falls in a Chatushpada (quadruped sign) it
derives only the strength of half a Rupa. This means” that
Chatushpada Lagnas are capable of absorbing half the strength
of their lords. If the Lagna chances to be a Kita Rasee (Reptile
sign) it absorbs all the strength of its lord and leaves none in
return. ( Vide notes to Stanza 61 page 59) See also Brihtjataka
Chap. I. Stanza 17. Nara Rasees (Humansigns) are Mithuna, Kartya,
Thnl a, Kumbha and the first half of Dhanas. Chatushpada rasees
(Quadruped signs) are Mesha, Vrishabba, Simha, the 2nd half of
Dhanas, and the first half of Makara. Kita Rasee (Reptile sign)
means Vrisehika.

Extext he Shahhalas.
11 IR\ It

Sa tUVA rthachixt a maxi.
II W II
The Sun becomes pewerful in Shadbala by getting 6 Rupas an d
30 VimpaS. The Moon by 6 Rupas, Mars by g, Mercury by 7 ,
Jupiter by 6 Rupas Sf go Virupas. Venus by g Rupas ami go Virupas and Saturn by g Rupas. Any power wider the above mentioned
figure will not give the planets puma {full) Shadbalas. In Sthauabala these must be 2\ or g Rupas for the planets. In Digbala
there must be g',4 of a Rupa. In Chasta.^' planets must have go
Virupas.
In Kalabala one Rupa, 53 Virupas and 30 Paras will
give Purnabala to Ravi, Buda and Guru provided, the above three
planets have got 30 V irupaS from their Ayanabala- Chandra and
Sukra must have 50 Virupas for Digbala. 2 Rupas and ig Virupas for Sthanabala, / Dupa and 40 Virupas for Kalabala and
go Virupas for Chastabala, 4° Virupas for Ayanabala- When
they possess the above said Rupas and Virupas they become fully strong.
Kuja and Sani must have 40 VimpaS for Ohastabala, one Rupa,
7 Virupas and 30 Paras for Kalabala, 30 Virupas for Digbala, 20 Virupas for Ayanabala, 2 Rupas and 30 Virupas for
Sthanabala- When they possess the above figures they become,
possessed of PurnabalaNOTES.
The author has introduced Rupas, Virupas, Paras and Suras.
The readers might advantageously refer to the works of Sripathi, Khacharadarpana, Grabalaghava, Siddanta Siromoni, Aryabat
tiam and lastly but not with least advantage to the most wonder,
ful work the Suryasiddhanta for the Shadbala Sadliana of planets
or finding out the 6 sources of strength which have been detailed
above.

Bupas, Virlpas, Paras and Scras.
. . C»0 Suras make one Para
60 Paras „ „ Virupa
60 Virupas „ ,, Bupa
Thus one Bupa equals 60 X 60 X 60 = 2, 16,000 Suras- It
clearly shows that the huge intellects of the Aryan literary giants
grasped the minute divisions of time with a wonderful facility for
which we find no parallel in the divisions of modern time. As I
intend treating the mathematical portion or Siddanta Bliaga of
astrology in the appendix to this work I shall not repeat the calculations here. In all calculations to find out the. exact positions
of the planets, a great mathematical familiarity becomes an indispensable necessity. One who does not learn how to fix the
planets in their rasees and the 16 Vergas or minute divisions of
those rasees, could hardly be called an astrologer and his calculations bv rough or rude methods will uot enable him to find out
the exact source of strength which the planets derive from the
occupation of these divisions. Therefore no predictive anxiety
should be entertained by any student or reader of astrology
before he is thoroughly acquainted with the mathematical portion.
This applies to all with a few exceptions. There are two methods
of calculation and prediction. One is the well known system of
deduction. The other is the much coveted but very rare method
of induction . The latter is possessed by a few blessed mortals
who can, without resorting to these elaborate mathematical calculations, fix correctly the planetary positions by looking at the
person of the native, but such power is the possession of only a
few men of genius and originality who occasionally grace this world
with their presence. In deduction the mind has to pass through
all the gradations of recorded knowledge bequeathed to us by
the ancient astronomers but in induction, the person strikes out a
path for himself through the intensity of his intellectual reach
which others have only to follow in wonder.

Sarwarthacjiixtamaxi.
: II
StaxzaS 126_& 127
The author now proceeds to give the extent of Phalam result)
which planets arc capable of producing. The planets have Aroha
and. Avaroha dasas. Their exaltation and occupation of friendly
houses are matters of great consequence. P lands in Sandhi Sthanas
arc practically powerless and influence very little for good. Jf there
is any doubt regarding the birth I.agna of a person it has to be
determined with reference to the Prana Rasi or Mandi and their
Thrikonas.
NOTESThese are important stanzas. Two facts are prominently
brought to the notice of the readers. (1) The extent of the Philo m or results good or bad which may be expected from the planets
in their periods and subpei'iods (2) the determination of the Lagna
‘ or birth sign of the Zodiac when it is called into question, or when
there are difficulties about its being correctly fixed. All planets
‘ have two states which are (1) ascending ancl (2) descending. The
first is technically called Aroha Dasa, and the second is called
Avaroba. In music Arohma and A varohana or rising to higher pitches and falling to lower ones are well known. All other inter-

Aroha and Avaroha Dasas. 109
mediate states are only fractions of these in strength. I shall
explain more clearly what the author here means. After the
planets are correctly placed in their respective places at the time of
birth by grahasputa calculations, take any one of the planets* In
the notes to previous slokas I have shown which are the degrees of
•deep exaltations for the planets and their corresponding debilitations. It has also been shown, which degrees constitute Moolathrikonas, Swakshatras and Swoclms. Take a planet in the deepest
exaltation. Ravi is in his Paramocha (highest exaltation) in the
10 th degree of Mesha. It is shown that in the 180th degree from
there or in the 10th degree of Thula, he becomes Paramo, fleecha
(greatest'humiliation). Again from Paraina Neech a to Paramocha he
is separated by 180 degrees. When Ravi gets the highest- power
in the 10th degree of M eslia he reaches, as it were, the summit
of his power and glory and cannot go any higher ; and thencef onwards he begins to lose his power gradually until he becomes the
most powerless in the 10th degree of Thula. This movement of
Ravi from Mesha to Thula is called Avaroha or descending order of
motion. Every day he loses a degree of his power and when he
Teaches 180 degrees or the 10th degree in Thula he becomes perfectly powerless. But when he begins to move from the 10th degree of Thula towards his house of exaltation in Mesha his movement is characterised as Aroha or ascending motion. He begins
to gain power every day until he reaches the zenith of his strengtii
in the 10th degree of Mesha. Take the Moon for example. On the
New Moon day he is practically lustreless and for 15 days afterwards he gains every day one Kala or one degree strength until on
the Full Moon day, he cammands all the glory which is credited
to Poorna Chandra. Here he is said to possess Shouasa Kalas or 16
parts of light. Then again a reverse phenomenon happens- The
Moon begins to lose one, Kala every day, grows less and less bright
until at last he does not appear at all in the horizon on account
of the want of light from the solar disk. All other planets have
similar phases of gaining and losing their splendour and we can

no
Sa RWARTHACII1KTA MAXI.
even see them with our naked eves provided we have a strong
vision and stronger patience to watch the heavens from day to day.
Jupiter has exaltation in Cancer and appears there as a planet of
the brightest -yellow color and thence he begins to lose brightness
gradually until he becomes weakest in Capricorn where he seems a
dull, yellowish planet. Then again he moves on gathering glory
until he reaches his Zenith in Cancer. Mars is quite the reverse
of Jupiter.
In Cancer he is most powerless and his globe appears pale
dull red. He gains glory from Cancer to Capricorn and in the latter sign he appears to the naked eye as a bright red planet and in
his full splendour. Mercury is not visible to ordinary vision on account of bis nearness to the solar body, and when seen through a
telescope be appears brightest green in Virgo and with dull pale
greenish color in Pisces. 'Venus appears quite the reverse of
Mercury. He is weakest in Virgo and strongest in Pisces and appears as a pale silvery planet where be resembles almost a little
Moon. Saturn although darkblue, appears brightest in Thula and
most powerless in Mesha. All these facts are demonstrable to our
naked eyes and we need not have recourse to costly or complicated
instruments. When a planet begins to move from his place of
deepest exaltation, he takes a downward movement and loses
brilliancy day after day. This is called his Avaroha Dasa, and the
greater the distance from his place of exaltation, the greater is his
weakness in point of brilliancy and production of favourable results.
When planets are in Sand hies or junctions of time where they may
be said to be neither here nor there, their powers seem to be perfectly neutralised and they give no favourable results. Taking the Sun
in 30 degrees after the 1.0th from Mesha, we shall see what power he
gets. He is in his Avaroha or descending Dasa. If his power is represented by 180 degrees in the 10th division of Mesha it is represented as Zero in the 10th degree of Thula. Therefore by the application of simple rule of three, we can find out what degree of strength
the Sun has after he moves 30 degrees from Mesha. He has
moved 30 degrees towards his declining course and therefore in

Solution op Doubts in Lagna. vrJ .lll
the 30th degree after Mesha, his power has to be estimated at only .
150 degrees or ISO — 30 degrees. He loses 180 degreesin IS^y
days, therefore how much does he lose in 30 degrees or = d«rj>%'?
The figures are so simple that I need not waste the time of my
readers by working out this question. Id the case of other planets
the figures are not so simple and the calculations have to be carefully made. Arolia Dasa always produces greater good than Avarolia.
Now we come to another most important point, that of fixing
the Lagna of the person when there are doubts about it.
The author throws some valuable hints which many he of
great practical value. After getting the time of birth as correctly
as possible, tbe astrologers are recommended to make Lagna
sphatom. By this means they will be able to correctly find out in
what sign of the Zodiac the time of birth falls in. Where persons are
generally born in the middle of Lagnas and the time of birth is
fairly recorded there are no difficulties in fixing the Lagna although
there may be doubts and difficulties in fixing tbe minute amsas
recommended by the author. But where the time happens to be
between the last amsa of any sign and the first of tbe next rasee
doubts arise asregards the foretelling of the person’s characteristics
and here there is absolutely no help unless the astrologer is a great
adept and has long personal experience by which he can fix the
amsas and Lagnas with reference to the complexion, stature and
characteristics of the person. This would be begging the question.
Lagna and G-raha sphutas should enable the students to fix the
Lagnas and where these create doubts his progresb'is materially obstructed. If he is a man of la^er attainments and. experience he
does not much care for these details as he goes altogether on
induction.
Lagna has to be definitely fixed both with reference to birth
and also with reference to queries. Find out Chandra and Mandi
at the time of query about the doubtful Lagna, and fix it as that of
the fifth or ninth from the position of Mandi or that of Prana

S.V HWAltTHACniSTAM AN’I .
Kasee or Moon. The query reveals say Mandi in K'ataka arid
Chandra in Mosha. As per explanation given by the author the
birth Lagna of the person must
be either tho 5th or Oth from
Mandi t.e., Scorpio or Pisces or
the 5th from Chandra namely
Leo or Sagittarius. If the doubt
■was between Thula and Vrischika or between Kumbha and Meena
by the above rule we may fix it in Vrischika or Meena. But suppose the doubt is between Vrischika and Dhanas and Meena and
Mesha. In these cases no amount of advice could help a man —
who has not high intelligence and vast personal experience — in
fixing these doubtful Lagnas and the student must shift for himself as best as he could. In the next Sloka the author tries to
give further hints as regards the fixing of these Lagnas which are
very valuable.
j Moon.
Question
~ Lagna
Kundali.
Mandi.
ii 11
r^TTFqf^rm ri^l ot I
HI t cfc |
II II

IJOW TO FIX A L\GSA IX DOUBT.
Stanzas 12S and 129.
In doubtful cases of Lagna, fix the 5th, or gth house from the
Navamsa which is occupied by Mandi , or the yth or the gth house
from the yth to the amsa occupied by Mandi , or the yth or gth from
the house occzipiedby Chandra or the gth or 5th houses from the yth
house to the amsa occupied by Chandra . This may be done either
for the tim.8 of birth or for the time of Prasna ( query ).
NOTES.
These slokas are difficult to translate from their brevity and
multifarious interpretations which may be offered to them. Take
a kundali, suppose there is any
doubt about Vrishabha or Mesha
being the Lagna. The Lagna
must he the 5 th or 9 th from Chandra or Mandi; now the 5th and 9th
from Mandi are Yirgo and Capricorn and 5th and 9th from Chandra are Simha and Dhanas. All
of these therefore cannot be Lag-
'll as. Going to the Navamsa, the
5th and 9th from Mandi again
happen to be the same as in
Eases and they are not Lagnas*
Take the 7th from Mandi, it is
Vrischika. The 5th from this
Meeua, or 9th from this Kataka
cannot be Lagnas. From Mandi
therefore we have failed to get
any satisfactory solution either in
the Rasee or Navamsa diagrams.
Taking Chandra in the Navamsa,
we see him occupying Kanya, 5th
from him is Capricornus and it
is not Lagna but the 9th from him is Vrishabha which is
the Lagna of the person. These therefore have to be carefully
Moon
Rahu
Mandi
Lagna
Sani
Ravi
Buda
Guru
Easee
Janma
ICundali
Born in 18o6
Sukra
Kuja
Ketku
Lagna Rahu
Guru Mandi
Amsa
Kundali
Buda
| Ravi
Kethu
j ollliTcl
| Ivvija
Chandra

Satiwabthachistamaxi.
tested only in cases where there is any doubt as regards the
correct Lagna. But where there is not the slightest doubt about
the Lagna there is no sense in applying these tests : Medicines are
recommended only when a person is suffering from some complaints. When there is no disorder, the application of medicine
means the creation of complications. In the same manner if these
rules are applied to Lagnas which are not doubted they may create
so many doubts aud difficulties instead of being helps to the finding of the correct Lagnas- Another and the better test is the
analyses of a person’s characteristics and surroundings in the light
of formulas laid down by astrologers which are warranted by the
combination of planets which obtain at the alleged time of birth.
If the results agree with the experiences of the native we may proceed at once to fix that as the Lagna, which gives us the largest
number of correct predictions. These tests may be applied both for
time of birth as well as to the time of query (Prasna). These are
very important points which have to be carefully borne in mind and
their utility cannot be too much valued in the determination of doubtful Lagnas. Sphutas give correct Lagnas or their divisions when the
time is granted very correctly, but they do not help us in finding
out which is the correct Lagna of birth. In the majority of cases
the correct time is not forthcoming. The medical man fails to
correctly diagnose the disease although the patient is before
time and he can be questioned on liis health. Much more difficult
will it be for an astrologer to judge of an event which took
place iu a private compartment years ago and about which there is
no further evidence to clear any doubts. Mandi occupies Vrishahharnsa and the 5th and 9tli from it therefore are again Kanya
and Makara, or take the 7th from Mandi in Navamsa- That will
be Scorpio, and the 5th and 9th from that seventh will be Pisces
and Cancer. None of these therefore are the Lagnas. If we
take Chandra in the Amsa he is placed in Kanya. The fifth
and ninth houses from him are Capricorn and Taurus, and the Lagna therefore has to be placed in Taurus and not in Aries. We
may also take the 7th from Chandra in the Amsa, and it is

Strength or Lagna on Chandra.
Meena. Tbe 5th and 9th from Meena are Kataka and Vrischika. They are not Lagnas. We have to take into consideration
only such Lagnas as are] likely to come tip at the time about
which there is doubt and in which a person is alleged to have
been born. Here the Lagna may be searched either from Mandi
or from Chandra, 5th and 9th houses from them or the 5th and 9th
houses from the 7th house where they are placed in the JSammsa.
There are many astrologers who start at once to make predictions
from simply looking at the Easee Kundali. How futile suclx
attempts at success will be can be seen from the importance
attached iu astrological works to the divisions of the houses and
the occupataions of plantes in them. The astrologer cannot be too
careful in determining the correct; Lagna in whose light the whole
history of the native might be safely predicted. Here therefore, these
liipts are of the greatest value. Two and two will make four and this
is correct mathematics. But we have to determine first whether it
is two and two or whether it is two and three. If it is two and two
there is no doubt of their making four by whomsoever it is worked
but if it is found to be two and three where is tbe justification for
totalling them up into four and predicting on the wrong i*esults thus
obtained ? These aim at the very foundation of the horoscope and
therefore ought to be carefully analysed and remembered.
Tf^RTI
Stanza 130.
If the prasna Lagna is strong, then the birth Lagna has to be
determined with reference to the positic7i of Mandi. Jf the Moon

no
SaKVA r.TIIAC HIXTAMASI.
is strong of the question time then the birth Lognci nets to be del a -
mined with reference to the position of the Moon. Jf the Prasna,
Havamsa foils in ojo (odd'} signs ttien the birth of a male must be
predicted; if the -Pransa Navainsa falls in yoogina [even] signs
the birth of a female must be predicted.
NOTES,
The learned Yenkatasa Daivagnya has taken special care to
bring to the notice of bis readers the importance which has to be
attached to the Prasna Lagoa. The birth of a person takes place
under a combination of previous forces some of which are known
to us (Drmta- seen) and many of -which are not seen by us, (dd-
'j-«.stfl-unseen). He seems to plead, that if a birth is really the resultant of previous forces, working in their own way, may we not consistently say that a Prasna or that which comes out of a person’s
mind freely and produced by previous forces also — (query) nvist
equally be the resultant of those same forces working in the Admda plane? Man is born without knowing liow he is born, and
he appears on the plane of this world as the resultant of various
forces working in a mysterious way, and thoughts arise in his
mind at different stages of his existence for which he has to search
for causes in the same Adrusta plane. The promptings of his
mind therefore are rightly attributed to the higher powers, coming through the planetary spheres from his previous karma and
•working in their own systematic and unknown ways. Many Nasta-
■j a takas prepared by me on these principles have been wonderfully verified and I myself was often struck with the correctness
of my predictions based entirely on calculations made in the light
of these astrological principles enunciated so particularly and
elaborately by the eminent astrologers of ancient India. Any
bodv who wishes to learn these principles of astrology ean come
over to me and spend a few days with me to learn them or communicate with me on the subject. I shall always be willing to help
persons in this direction. Where the time of question is calculated
and the planets are correctly fixed find out whether Mandi is stronger or Chandra* If Mandi is the stronger of the two, then the Lagna

Pachaka, Bowtaka, Sahara axd Vkdhaka.
has to be found with reference to him. If Chandra is the stronger
of the two then the above test recommended by the author has to
be applied from the position of Chandra himself. If the ISavainsa
of the question time falls in«n odd sign then the birth of a male must
be predicted. If the Navamsa of question time falls in an even
sign the birth of a female must be conjectured. These are collateral tests which would also help the student in fixing the correct
time of birth. For an explanation of odd and even signs see notes
to stanza 16 on P. 24.
y h [ j i rra^rr
ft^rsr#^t=ti3rfirTTra n t*«u

ns
Sarwartiuchixtamani.
ii WH
/ shall now speak of Pachaka , Bodhaka, Karaka and Vedhaka
Soungnyas ( technicalities ) .
7 /« following planets arc Pack aka, Bodhaka, Karaka, and Vedhaka respectively to the planets named below.
To the Sun— Saturn, Mars, Jupiter and Venus —
To the Moon — Venus, Mars, Saturn and the Sun—
To Mars— the Sun, Moon , Saturn and Mercury —
To Mercury — Moon , Jupiter, Venus and Mars
To Jupiter— Saturn, Mars, Moon and the Sun—
To Venus— Mercury, the Sun, Jupiter and Saturn—
To Saturn - Venus, the Moon, Jupiter and Mars —
I shall now give the positions of planets from the particular planet, to whom they become Pachaka , Bodhaka, Karaka and Vedhaka.
If Saul occupies 6th from Ravi he becomes Pachaka. Kuja in the
yth from Ravi becomes Bodhaka. Guru in the glh becomes Karaka.
Sukra in the nth becomes Vedhaka.
Venus in the jth, Mars m the tyth, Saturn in the nth, and the
Sun in the 3rd from the Moon —
The Sun in the 2nd, Moon in the 6th, Saturn in the nth and
Mercury in the 12th from Mars —
Chandra in the 2nd, Guru in the 4th, Sukra m the 5th ana Kuja
in the 3th from Buda —
Sard in the 6th , Kuja in the 8th, Chandra in the Jth awl Ravi in
(he J2th from Guru —
Buda in the 2nd, Ravi in the 6th, Guru in the 12th and Sam m
the 4th from Sukra —
Sukra in the 3rd, Chandra in the nth , , Guru in the 6th, and
Kuja in the 7th front Sani — respectively become , Pachaka , Bodhaka >
Karaka and Vedhaka planets. . _

Results op Pachaka Planets.
NOTES.
The above according to tlie author are some of the technicalities by which he is trying to show other sources of strength and
weakness which planets will have by virtue of their relative positions at the time of birth or question. In the following stanzas,
the results of such positions are clearly explained. In some cases
enmity works good ; in some cases friendship results in good.
All these are clearly pointed out. Yeuus in the 5th from the
Moon, the Sun in the 2nd from Mars, the Moon in the 2nd from
Mercury, Saturn in the 6th from Jupiter, Mercury in the 2udfrom
Yen us, and Venus in the 3rd from Saturn, become their Pachakagrahas. Mars in the 9th from the Moon, Moon in the Oth
from Mars, Jupiter in the 4th from Mercurv> Mars in the 8th
from Jupiter the Sun in the 6th from Yen us, and the Moon in
the 1 1th from Saturn become respectively their Bodhaka planets.
Similarly consult for the rest of the planets.
Stanzas 136 & 137.
The Pachaka planet becomes enemy to Ravi and Chandra. The
rest become friends. The Vedhaka planet becomes enemy to Kuja
and the rest are friends. The Bodhaka planet becomes enemy to
Bndha, the rest are friends. The pachaka and the Vedhaka planets
become enemies to Gum, the other tzvo are friends. The Kara ha
and Vedhaka planets become enemies to Sukra and the rest arc
friends. The Karaka becomes enemy to Said and the other three
are his friends.

Sa ii\V ARTHAOHINTAM ANI.
NOTES.
When Sani occupies the Otli from Eavi he becomes Pachaka>
and as such he will be considered as an enemy of Ravi in addition
to his being a Nisargika Shatru (permanent foe). Sukra in the
oth from Chandra becomes Pivchaka and he will be classed as a
foe. Buda in the 12th from Kuja is his "Vedhaka and he becomes
au enemy. Guru in the 4th from Buda becomes his Bodbaka and
he becomes a foe. Kuja in the 6th and Eavi in the 12th ironl
Guru become his Pachaka and Vedhaka planets respectively and
they become his foes. Guru in the 12th and Sani in the 4th from
Sukra become his Karaka and Vedhaka planets and are declared
his enemies. Guru in the 6tli from Sani becomes his Karaka and
thus will be classed as an enemy. These denote tlie various
sources of strength on considerations of which predictions of
good and bad have to be based.
^r^Tfr:qT^^Tir^nT \\%\<\\
ii n

Effects of Pachaka and Bqdsaka Planets.
Stanzas 138 & 139.
The planet which becomes Pachaka, cotifcrs upon the native - excellent food, good cows milk, valuable clothes and ornaments, power,
wealth ami lands, much happiness, courage, hopefulness, great energy ,
and success. If the Pachaka planet becomes a friend the above
results are to be expected. -- -$f ke-becomes an meaty, losses and troubles from these sources will mark the track, of the Pachaka planet.
If the planet Bccohiis Bodhak'a he ‘zuillgiye great 'gain and pozver,
much respect among the ruling classes, high education, wit and
humour, reputation , religiousness and general happiness.
NOTES.
The author has already explained in the previous stanzas,
which planets become Pachakas, which are Bodhakas, which are
Kanakas and which are Vedhakas. JHe has also shown that Paehakas become friends and foes as well as other planets, some
give good as friends and some give good as enemies. All these
have been carefully 'detailed. After marking the planets at the
time of birth, find out their relative positions with reference t o
each other and see who become Pachakas', who are Bodhakas, who
are .Karakas. and who are Vedhakas. Having found out. these
technicalities, as the author calls them, then predict the results,
such as have been explained here by him. The full signification
of a Pachaka can never be expected unless the planet who becomes
Pachaka, is otherwise fully free from the several influences to
which he is subjected in the ordinary course of planetary movements. This point of giving each planet its due influence, and
not more, lias often been touched upon in these notes, and' has
to be specially remembered by the readers of this work in tlieir
ventures to make predictions.
q q ft

Sabwarthachintamani.
II 3W vHTf II
?UT*I^IW4 i)<r<mT7u/; t
tt^K^IWW4w«J2iE \\ W II
Stanzas 140 & 141 .
If the Bodhaka planet is a friend he produces the above good results.
If otherwise the results will be the reverse of what has been foretold
of him . The Karaka planet produces wealth and poverty alternately.
It gives disease and trouble to wife, children, and relations and unhappiness in nmietary affairs. If the Karaka planet becomes a friend,
he produces trouble through thieves, fire, and low classes of people. If
he becomes an enemy he gives the reverse results or happiness and
success.
NOTES.
I pointed out already that when planets possess these technical positions, they give good and bad. friendship in some cases
produces good, while enmity in others produces good. Negatives
produce positive and positives produce negative. If Sani wants
to do evil and he is strongly opposed by the rays of the Sun, who
also wants to do evil what would be the result ? The rays of the
two planets oppose each other, and are neutralised. The result
happily for the native, will he the averting of evil from both
planets, for both evil influences are opposed to each other and
are negatived, and as a matter of fact, when evil does not happen,
good must come out.
^ ctERiii'.LV ti Rb ^ I d, I

Generalised Effects.
H 'N'bti *m HI v htr5*TTf It
it m it
Stanza 142.
/ now speak about the Vedhaka planet. Vedhaka planet produces,
danger from thieves, fire, enemies and rulers , travelling in foreign
countries, and loss of wealth 'and happiness when it is friendly.
When it is unfviendly the reverse results are to be predicted i.e. the
man will have success, much respect and happiness..
NOTES.
This illustrates the principle explained in the above stanza.
The first lialf of this stanza refers to the reverse results of Baraka
planets whose significations have been explained in. the notes to
the above stanzas.
5EacaiE'RKEH35,^PT?:5t^lSIiSl«U*+(y?8Vt

SABWARTJUCfllNTAMAXf.
Stanza 143.
1 shall now explain ffa general results. The planets who are in the
12th , 6th and 8th houses from the Dasanatha are his enemies.
Planets in the nth, in fits lpn.se qf et jalifUiou of the Dasanatha, in
the 5 th, 4th, gth and ioth prom the Ddsauatha are favourable.
Favourable planets give good and unfavourable planets give bad during suchDasas mid'&mkiies. ' '
This is a general stanza to enable the reader to find out
what results the lords ,,ol Bhuktiea will proibie'e. on the native’s
life during such periods. ' Dasanatha means lord of the general period. Bhuktinatha means the lord of the sub-period. Iu the calculations of astrology, lords of Gth, 8th apd 12th and planets occupying those unfavourable houses are always bad and evil results will
be, produced- These houses are technically called Dusta Stands or
Dposthanps, But when planets are found in 3rd, 4th,. 5th,- 9th,. 10th
and 11 th houses from each other or from the Lagna they produce
good. The author here refers
only to the positions of plapefce -
with reference to each other at the
time of • birth and -Dasa and not
with reference to the Lagna- Take
an illustration. The planets are
peculiarly situated. In the Dasa
of Sani, Ravi and Chandra produce evil, because the Dasanatha
Sani stands in .-the I2fch house
from them.
They stand, tp him in the 2nd which also is bad. Take the Dasa
of Ravi or Chandra and the Bbukti of Guru. Guru stands to them
in the 6th J5e is bad and they stand ,to Guru in, the 8th
which also is bad- This is called Shasta and Astama or 6th and
T 1 Sani
U « na ! Buda
Bavi
Chandra
Sukra
Rahu
Zodiac .
48 years bid'
Ruja ;
Kethu
Guru
8th houses * fpjpw, $*ch hither. • If. on the other hand we take Sukra
and Rahu’s Bhukties ip. Sani or Buda Dasas, they stand to each
o$h$r.'ia nod 11th Jhoxjses respectively and they become

Munis Propound astroiooical Theories.
friends and produce good. These areson>e of (he sources of strength
and weakness which have also to be taken into consideration in
determining favourable and unfavourable results produced by the
planetary combinations and. positions. at the time of birth.
OT W IHrllTd
ITTr^rRt^^C Sii EUR II \V2\l
Stanza 144.
When the above, described Pachaka planets become enemies and
occupy favourable .places just described in stanza 143, they become
extremely powerful and produce much good . These minute details
tftust be well known and tjie Great Munis propounded all these astrological \ principles jor the edification of the world.
NOTES-
; :V'Ifc, has .been all along described that when a planet gains
power from various sources,, it becomes stronger to produce good
or., 'evil, than . the planet which is powei’ful in some cases and
powerless in others. This is perfectly natural. When a planet
g»in§ strength in 10 sources in ten units and loses it in one source
in One .unit, it has to its credit 9 units of strength after deduction
without any evil, and therefore it becomes extremely strong. But
if it had 5 units of strength and five units of weakness it is really
not capable of producing any perceptible results because the
strength and the weakness cancel eaph other and the planet has
none to its credit for good.or evil. Its tendency, therefore, will be
tp produce faintly that, which is indicated by its own good or evil
nature. But if it has all the ten units of weakness without any points
of strength to redeem it, it will certainly produce all the bad results
in full which, are indicated by an evil planet of the first water.

Saewarthachlvtamani.
T || $2HII
Stanza 145.
<?(?/ sphutas for. all grahas according to the two methods of
Drikshidda and Siddhantka, get all the calculations needed for the
Bhavasandhies , carefttMp apply the details given in this chapter
entitled So umgyadhayu t and then say what each planet is worth ,
after knowing all the Balas of the planets.
NOTES.
The adyiee of the author is not too important and timely. It
may safely he challenged that this sound advice of one of the
greatest astrologers of the middle ages, has been most shamefully
violated by the majority of the astrologers and hence the large
percentage of failures witnessed in the predictions they make. Grammar, is needed to construct the language, but language also is absolutely needed to construct and express the grammar. One cannot exist without the help of the other. But there is some difference between the two. Language existed > without grammar for
a long time but in an imperfect state of development and wanted
the grammar to improve it and to give it a further stimulus to its
future progress. But grammar cannot exist without language, for
it has to be expressed in the language over which it tries to command at a later stage. Siddhantha and joytisba are something
like these. Astrology can exist without astronomy and did exist
without it. The Solar, Lunar, Stellar and Zodiacal influences were
^elt, end their results were realised long before they were reduced to demonstrable calculations or astronomical methods. 1 The
intelleot of man, the most wonderful phenomenon in the worldgrasped various influences of the planets before the mathematical
portion of astrology— called astronomy, came to perfect the judicial -
or the predictive portion. - There ean he no-astronomy without the

Education or Genius.
planetary influences. The influences of planets form astrology
while their calculations, and divisions and sub-divisions have given
rise to the grand science of astronomy. This may be a little
startling to the world but if they carefully think over the problem
whether astrology or astronomy was the older of the two, they
will see the soundness of my views in declaring that astrology had
flourished long before astronomy came into vogue and obtained
the credit which it is now keeping. There are now many joisis
astrologers and there are also many siddhanthees astronomers. —
A happy combination of the two. in one and the same individual
is a rarity and we may count their names almost on our fi ngers’ ends*
While mathematics are absolutely necessary for all astrological
calculations they deprive the possessor of that mathematical ability
and acumen, the excellent judgment— power in prediction, which
will be developed in a man, who has entirely devoted himself to the
predictive portion of it and to the observation of men who are so
many results of planetary influences. The best astronomers, as a.
class, are sorry predictors, while the best astrologers guess the
combinations of planets, almost instinctively, at the time of birth
of a person without even a pretence of making the elementary
calculations.
To whom are we then to give the credit — whether to the
good astrologers who are able to make great national and individual predictions which are verified at every turn or to the good
mathematicians who have reduced the planetary influences into
exact calculations, who know the correct- movements of the planets,
their eclipses, their combusts and their retrogrades and who have
benefitted the nations by the splendid works they have composed ?
This is a physiologico-psychological question of great importance which involves a series of nice problems f : or solution.
Mathematics, and all such calculations based upon mathematics, make a man exact in reasoning, ready in perceiving objects
and their correct positions and argue in a perfectly deductive and
methodical way. .. . .. s ; : ; . .

Sabwabthachistamani.
writers. The real genius deals with these problems in altogether
* different way. To such men of genius these works give but
very little help. In the appendix to this work I shall explain the
mathematical portion of astrology. Siddhanta and Driggamrtha
vary in giving the positions of planets at any given time to some
extent. ,
Madhyagrahas and Sputagrahas also differ. The bayana and Un-ay an a systems have to be noted. After obtaining
the Sputagrahas, the
Bhavasandhis have to be
attended to. Each Shaw
os house of signification
extends roughly over 30
•degrees. Take an illustration.
Here it will he seen
that the relative distances of the various planets
have to be found out
by Sputas. Take birth
which is 14° degrees in
Taurus. The distance
between the Moon and birth is 24 degrees. In making Bhavasnadhies we have to take 15 degrees on either side of a planet. This
is its first Bhava and those planets which are within 15 degrees of
it are really in the same house as the birth itself, although they may
.apparently occupy the second sign from it. Moon here is in -the
12th Bhava and the person lost his mother at an early age. I am
eimplv giving rough examples. There are differences even m
Bbavasandhies among the astrological writers into which I
need not enter here. Take Rahu. He is in the 7th degree in
7J ag 'W. There is therefore 37 degrees between Rahu and birth
:and although he appears in the 12th house he realv is occupying
fihe llth which is good. I shall enter into these details later on
Moon
20° Rahu
td
I?
o
Saturn
Jupiter
24° Sun
3° Mercury 6°
Zodiac
Venus
Mars 3°
Kethu 7 C
in the appendix.

Author makes a Compilation.
cFTcM I hH F^rf^ II w II
gf?reft mv ^uwm
^srr^nripw.
Stanza 146.
T have made this compilation after reading the whole of the astrological sciences and I have composed this for the benefit of the worldi
! The details thus given by me — the learned Venkatasa ought to be
carefully remembered and applied to the planets in their respective.
Das as and Bhukties.
NOTES.
The author does not pretend to be an original writer. He says,
plainly that he consulted, before the preparation of his great work,.
Sarwasasbramram- or essence of the whole astrological science and,
picked up the most important to give a sound knowledge of the
joitisshastra to the student- He does the work from no mercenary,
motive as he clearly says that he writes his book for Locopakara ar
for the benefit of the world. His Language is happy and he is conscious of his abilities as a great astrologer, and makes no concealment of his honest pride. He calls himself the Learned Venlcataswara in almost every concluding stanza of each chapter of his
beautiful work, and from the style, the manner of arrangement,
the* brevity of expression, the gradations he introduces in order to
the perfect understanding of his excellent work, he cannot be any
other than a-profound Sanskrit scholar, an extensive reader, a learned. mathema tician and one who was thoroughly acquainted with the
vast astrological literature of his time— mathematical, horoscopic
and. horary. During the course of 146 stanzas he has condensed a.

SaKWAKTH Al'HI NTAM AN! .
world of information which is very necessary in the field of astro*
logical studies and predictions iu this work. Without a mastery
in this first chapter no satisfactory progress can ever he attained
by the readers in the series of planetary combinations which he
introduces to explain tire 12 Zodiacal signs and their significations.
The beat way I would recommend this study would be, that
the readers ought to read this chapter as often as they can. Constant reading makes them familiar with the essentials explained in
the 1st chapter. Tlre^e details are useful in predicting the phalam
(results'! of the planets all through the future of the man. When
Guru Dasa comes, what are we to expect ? Guru governs various
articles of necessity aud luxury. When Jupiter is good he gives
them well. When evil he breaks them or causes loss to them, or
through them. The results of a good planet will be satisfactory
and agreeable and the results of a bad planet may be, not only
losses through articles which lie would have given as a good one,
but also misery which may arise through various other sources. ,
The sources of happiness and misery are carefully delineated
and these-— the author insists — must be well read, carefully digested,
and clearly remembered by liis students. Art helps nature to a very
large extent but there must be nature to be helped by art. Man’s
psychology is a puzzling subject- Hardly two branches of knowledge develope equally well in a person. The constitution of the
nervous matter in man is very peculiar and admits of only one sided
development. Good astronomers are bad astrologers and good astrologers are bad astronomers. Mind cannot be measured by mathematics and it is Mind that produced mathematics and measures them.
Although therefore mathematics are generally needed to give a fair
knowledge in predictions, they are not indispensible for real greatness as a successful predictor. Each man should specially cultivate
that which is most suited to his capacity and taste. I have seen
a few astrologers who are most successful predictors of future
events — national and individual. As soon as a question isbroached before them, they find out the planeatry combinations by
ordinary methods in a few minutes, and then make .predictions'
which are verified by the happening of subsequent events ih a

Mind Works Method.
uaost remarkable manner. In the commencement of their studies
they do not deduce results from calculations) but begin to predict
by simple, inductive methods.
( Those possessed of this extraordinary power begin to argue
the points in, quite a different way. They say that the horoscope
of any person presents a certain combination of planets. This
combination produces a certain result. The result therefore must
have had a particular combination. When the results are known
can we not guess the combinations ? A question is put to them.
They say that the putting of the question by a person is the result
of certain combination, of planets in that man’s horoscope) and
when those combinations are known it is easy for them to know
their subsequent movements by the results they produce. When
planets stand in a particular position at the time of birth or at the
time of query, they must necessarily go on combining in definite
conjunctions. These combinations at the different epochs of a
man’s life readily suggest themselves to the inductive mind and it
simply gives out the results as if it had them all in its mental
grasp. Ordinary minds cannot understand the logic of this kind
of reasoning. A man comes and asks an astrologer to tell him the
phalam of his horoscope. At once the comprehensive mind of the
astrologer grasps the exact combinations of planets which produced such personage. Having taken in this situation of the planets
at the time of birth, the mind at once guesses the various phases
of these planetary movements, and their periods, and sub-periods
and begins to make predictions past, present and future with the
same definiteness and ease. Mind’s work is curious and the minds
of these wonderful men take in these various combinations of planets
and their results almost in the course of an incredibly short time.
This really puzzles the ordinary systematic working man, because
he has measured the extent of work that he has to do, to produce
a certain result and finds it difficult to follow the rapid workings
of an intellect possessed with sparks of real originality. The
reasoning of the two are radically different. It is a remarkable
f%6t in the history of the astrological literature that all the authors

144 Sarwarthachintama&i.
W'ho bail since the beginning of Kaliyuga (5000 years) are simply
compilers and not original authors. They may be original— fit?
far as the arrangement and treatment of the subject goes, but they
never even pretended to introduce one fact in astronomy or astrology which was not touched by the earlier Rishis. Varahamihira, Bhattotphala, Bhaskaracbarya, Aryabhatta, Vararuohi, Tavanacharya, Yavanaswara, Chanikya and other eminent mathematicians and astrologers, have paid the greatest honors in their works
to the older Maharishis and followed them completely.
Siddhanfcha means Truth and 18 susiddhanthas have been
named in the earlier works. Of the whole lot of these Siddhanthas,
Surya Siddhantha stands most prominently and as a great authoritative work. Vysa flourished in the end of Dwapara and beginning of Rialiyuga, the era when the war of Mahabharata seems to
have been waged. Among the Siddhantees or original writers he
seems to have been the last and those who followed him were
Tantraics or writers of inferior works which did not come up to
the standard of the Siddhanta stamp.
lherefore all these second rate writers, whom we are admiring as men of great intellectual reach, have paid the highest
respect to the original Rishis, and they did nothing more than
simply collect such information as would suit the times they lived
in and the tastes of the people to whom they had to address their
works. Tenkatasa is certairily one of this class, and falls even- a
little lower than those second rate men whom I have named above.
He boldly says' that he is a learned man, that he had read air the
works on astrology available in his time, and that he composed
the work with a view to benefit the world: He has unmistakably
referred to the great Rishis and Munis from whom he gathers his
information and he says that those Munis wrote the astrological
works for the edification of mankind. A recapitulation of the
subjects he has treated in the first chapter will refresh the memory
ef the readers. Tenkatasa began with a prayer to Hods, his Guru,
and other benefactors of the world.' Then he explained • how
Planets, Constellations, Signs and' the Bhootas exeroised their
Mutual influences and gave rise to the endless creation we see

Recapitulation. 185
in this world. Kalapurusha, and the connection of the various
organs of the body are connected and explained. The names of the
signs, planets, and their divisions are touched upon, and the significations of the twelve Bhavas or houses are explained. Then follows a
long list of particulars in the case of planets, which the students
ought to keep in mind. The sexes, characteristics, colors clothes,
metals, ages, places, times, scenes, states, and other particulars of
the planets are regularly given. To the European readers who go in
for this work — and I have many of them — I would suggest that they
should carefully read all the Slolcas except those which simply give
the equivalent names in Sanscrit to the Planets and Zodiacal signs.
The rest of the information contained herein is really useful and
must he familiar to the readers, when they begin to read the 2nd
and the following chapters. Yenkatasa does not introduce any
portion of mathematics in this work but he asks the readers to know
tbe graha and Lagna Spbutas and how to find the Bhava Sandhies.
Some of the readers might get the mathematical portion of the work
done by competent siddhantees, and then they may keep their horoscopes and apply the information herein given by the author of Sarwarthachintamani in reading their own horoscopes. I shall be happy
to undertake this work on payment of reasonable fees. Constant
reading, as I have said, is necessary. Then Yenkatasa gives some
technicalities, and conventionalities which have great significance in
modifying the results of planetary combinations in their general and
special periods. All these details, he says, must be carefully considered with reference to the planets when their Dasas, Bhukties and
Antaras come in. It is then that the planets show what they are
and how they influence the horoscope. What follows next is not
difficult but it will not be intelligible without a fair knowledge in
this first chanter. That which he has not given here, must he
learnt from other works on the subject.
Tbe End of First Chapter.

Sri
^aiWfchacMnftam&ni.
i o &oOQ £50 —
CHAPTER II.
* N the first Chapter the author elaborately dealt with, the zodiacal
signs, constellations, divisions of signs and their peculiarities,
planets and the numerous details with which they were intimately
connected in moulding the destinies of terrestrial objects- It is
absolutely necessary to know the nature and the peculiarities of
the planets who govern men in the different stages of their development, their adversity, their prosperity and their numerous relationships. In the following Chapters the learned Venkatasa Daivagnya deals exhaustively with the significations of the houses,
and the results flowing from them with reference to the combinations of planets, the houses they occupy, the aspects they have and
the strength or debility which characterises them. Hindu astrology is immensely old and although he appears to he a very learned
man, he Gften has the candour to impress upon the minds of his
readers the fact that he is not an original writer, and that he has
completely drawn his information from the learned Rishis for
whose genius and erudition, he pays the highest respect and allegiance. As the Telugu and Devanagari type was very large in the
first chapter, without adding much to the usefulness of the work,
and as many of my subscribers suggested that I could use smaller
type for the same in this and the following chapters I have arranged
to use the ordinary type which will quite suffice for all practical
purposes.

Sarwarthaciuntamani.
^I^rcT05f^lFIRrcT|§;q# I
^CrcsiRYSYr^risfcr
|«rr^i^rfw|mrs5^rPr n II
Stanza 147.
I shall now state such results of the combinations of planets in
the different Bhavas as have book clearly explained in the learned
■works of the revered- Bishis, which I have been able to collect from
them by my intelligent study and which I shall now offer to the
educated so that they may be pleased with my ivorh
NOTES.
Conscious of liis own abilities in tlie astronomical and astrological field, Yenkatasa wishes to put forth before his readers that
his object is to intelligently explain to the educated persons what
he has been able to notice as worthy in the astrological works of
the celebrated Maharishis. There may be two interpretations here.
If the writings of the Maharishis themselves were clear and easy
for the public there may be very little necessity for a work of this
kind. With a view to simplify matters he may be said to have
undertaken this compilation ; or it may be that, as the Kishi writings were old and scarce, and that as they were found, by bits here
and fragments there and not in any regular or systematic form or
order of treatment, Yenkatasa undertook this compilation to save
the learned from the unnecessary trouble of searching through
various works — many of them incomplete in themselves — and give
them a completed whole from which they may regularly work out
any horoscope and make safe predictions which would he largely
verified. The arrangement he has made in the present work is
certainly commendable and he has collected information which it
is impossible to find in any single work whatever may be its
reputation or merit. His warning that the sources of strength and
weakness of the planets must be first ascertained, and that the
predictions should only he ventured after a thorough knowledge of
these details cannot be too strongly brought to the notice of the

Different Bhavas.
readers and students and I would humbl y add mr little voice in impressing upon my readers the necessity of remembering these
minute details in the work of past, present or fixture predictions.
Stanza 148.
If the different Bhavas ore associated with auspicious planets
or owners of good houses, or have their aspects, and if these Bhavas
are not combined with evil planets or owners of evil houses, and have
none of their aspects, they become very good and produce all the desirable results to the native. If the evil planets men good houses they also
become good- Planets which are debilitated, which occupy enemies
houses and which are combust become pi oductivc of unfavourable
results .
NOTES.
In an elaborate work like the one under translation, the
learned Venkatasa lias made an omission which is unpardonable to some extent. He told us who are the owners of the twelve
Basees in the first Chapter hut he did not tell us, which ownership
produces evil and which produces good. In calculations about
these Bhavadhi Pathies— Significators— he presumes this elementary knowledge in his readers. There are two or three ways of
interpretation which it is necessary for the readers to bear in mind
in reading astrological works. (1) The Bhavas — significations may
he taken from the Birth or Lagna, (2) they may be taken from the
Moon. or Chundra, or (3) they may also be taken from any one of
the planets with reference to any other of the planets at the time
of birth or question. The positions of planets and their combinaitions have the same interpretation. I shall clearly explain, by
illustrations what I mean here.

Sarwarthachintamani.
Take the following horoscope : —
This is a powerful horoscope and is well worthy ol ! examination. Birth is n Taurus and therefore it becomes the first Bhava
from which the significations indicated by the ascendant have to
be examined. The second is
Gemini and it is occupied by
Saturn. The third, fourth and
fifth are blank, the sixth is occupied by Mars and Kethu, the
seventh is blank, and the 8th is
occupied by Venus, 9th is free,
and the 10th is occupied by the
Sun, Mercury and Jupiter, the
11th is blank and the 12th is
occupied by the Moon and Bahu.
These Bhavas form one set with reference to Lagna signification.
The ownerships for this are — Venus is the lord of birth and 6th,
Mercury owns 2nd and 5th, Moon owns the 3rd, the Sun is the lord
of the 4th, Mars owns the 7th and 12th, Jupiter owns Sth and
11th and Saturn rules the 9th and 10th houses. Lords of the 3rd,
6th, 8th and 12th with the lord of the 11th are evil. The lords
of the 5th and 9th are good. The lords of 1st, 4th, 7th and 10th,
when benefics become evil, when mnhfics become good. The lord
of the 2nd becomes good or evil according to associations, positions
and aspects. Here therefore, Moon and Jupiter are thoroughly
evil, Mars is ordinary as he owns a quadrant 7th, and an evil house
1 2th, and the Sun is good because he rules the 4th, Saturn is thoroughly good as he owns 9th and 10th houses, Mercury is partly
good as he owns the 2nd and 5th and Venus is bad as he rules the
1st and 6th houses. These are the Bhavas which we see when
examined in the light of Lagna. How the 2nd set of Bhavas is
to be calculated with reference to the position of the Moon at
the time of birth and they will be thus noticed. Moon is in Mesha
and it becomes the birth or Chundralagna, the 2nd and 7th Bhavas
Taurus and Libra are ruled by "V enus, the 3rd and 6th are governed
by Mercury, the 4th by Moon himself, the 5th by the Sun, the 1st
and 8th Aries and Scorpio by Mars, the 9th and 12th by Jupiter
and the 10th and the 11th by Saturn. Thus those who become
Moon,
Balm.
Birth.
SaturnSun,
Jupiter
Mercury
Rasee Diaj gram.
Venus
1 Mars, j
| Kethu j

Bhava Significations.
good and evil planets in this case are — the Sun ruling the 5th becomes good, J upiter and Saturn are ordinary as the former owns the
9th and 12th houses and the latter owns the 10th and 1 1th houses.
Mercury, lord of 3rd and 6th, and Venus, lord of 2nd and 7th are
thoroughly bad. Then again these Bhavas may be taken with
reference to each other of the planets who occupy houses in the
zodiac at the time of birth or query. Take Guru. He is the lord
of the 2nd and 11th houses from the Sun (who is in Aqmrim)
and he is with the Sun. The Bhavams he owns viz. 2nd and 1'tli
from the Sun are bad while his position with the Sun is good.
Sani is in the 5th house from the Sun, but he owns Kumbha and
Makara or the 1st and 12th houses from the Sun. This ownership
is bad. The Sun is in the 9th from Sani and Sani is in the 5th
from the Sun. Take Sukra- He is in Dhnnas. Guru owns the
1st and 4th signs from him and therefore becomes bad. But Guru
is in the 3rd from Sukra and Sukra is ia the 1 1th from Guru.
These positions are favourable. Where the planets occupy the 2nd,
12th, 6th or 8th houses from each other at the time of birth or
query they become bad and produce evil to some extent. All these
different Bhavasmustbe taken into consideration in determining the
extent of good and evil which planets may be disposed to give. The
combination of Buda and Ravi in the 10th would have been more
powerful if Guru had not joined them. He is the lord of the Sth
and 11th from Lagna, of 9th and 12th from Chundra, and of 2nd
and 11th from Ravi and Buda and therefore he has taken away a,
great deal of the power which the combination of tbe lords of the
4th (Sun) and 5th (Mercury) would otherwise have given.
I have explained these ownerships and the results they produce clearly in my notes on Jatakachundrika, (2nd Edition, p- P- 6
to 21 and stanzas 5 to 21) to which I beg to refer my renders.
This knowledge of ownership is absolutely necessary for understanding the force of these Bhavas and Bhavadhipathies.
If any house (signification) is occupied by a good plnne^ ha*
its lord powerful and benefics aspect it, the results raen ^° n ^ sC op 0
that Bhavam will be what may be desired. In the
above given let me take the Vidyabhavam or the signifi 0 ^^ f 0l .
education- This is signified by the 4th house. The

Sarwakthachintamani*
Vidya or lord of education is Guru, and the Kar&ka or lord for
intelligence or Pragnya is Buda. 2nd is the house of speech and
education in a general way and the 5th house indicates the state
of intelligence. We have here a splendid combination for education, intelligence and general ability. The lord of the 2nd and 5th
is Buda who is also the lord of intelligence, the lord of 4th is the
Sun, and the lord or education Guru — who owns two evil houses
are ail occupying the 10th house from Lagna and 11th from
(Jhundra and are aspecting the house of education 4th. The
gentleman in question is an highly educated, extremely intelligent
and well known person and has a great fame as an author : The 2nd
house is occupied, by Sani- but aspected by Guru and Sukra both
excellent planets.
Evil planets when they own good houses like quadrants or
trines produce also good- Debilitated planets, planets in conjunction with evil planets or with Ravi and planets who occupy unfriendly houses are productive of unfavourable results. The author here gives a general summary? as it were, to enable a student
at once to see what kind of results may be expected from the
ownership, occupation, association and aspects of the planets. This
applies to all the Bliavas and therefore is of special importance
which has to be kept in the mental view of the student as he
progresses in his astrological studies and ventures on into the regions of predictions.
ii W II
Staxza 149.
Ftvil planets occupying or owning 6th, 8th, and 12th houses from
lagna produce unfavourable results. Good planets occupying or owning 6th, 8th and 12th houses from Lagna, do not produce much good-

Different Bhavas.
NOTES.
The stanza is curiously worded in Sanskrit and requires a little
explanation. The author makes a distinction between evil and
good planets, in their occupations and ownership of 6 th, 8th, and
12th houses from the birth or Lagna. Evil planets refer to Bavi,
Kuja, Sani, Kaliu, Kethu, Kshinachundra, or new moon and papayuhta Buda or badly associated Mercury. Buda himself is troumya or good. In good company like that of Guru, Sukra. or Poorna
Chundra, (full moon) or when he is exalted or in his own house or
Mooiathrikona he is good. Guru and Sukra are alwaysbenefics and
even when they are debilitated or associated they are benefics but
with a limited power to do good. The lordship of the 6th, 8th and
12 th is bad, and planets in the 8th and 12tli houses are also bad.
But what about the results of planets — evil — who occupy the 6th
house. In the Astrological Magazine in Vol. II, I pointed out the
two schools of astrology who hold contrary views. Evil planets in
the 6th house are said to produce good. Some assert that good
planets in the 6th produce evil- Taking the general principles of
astrology it may be asserted that when evil planets occupy any
houses the results indicated by those Bhavas are destroyed or
are largely diminished. On the other hand if good planets occupy
any houses they produce good in matters which are ascribed to
those Bhavas. Take the 6th house. It denotes debt, disease, and
enemies principally. If evil planets occupy this house, by the
above principle these significations are destroyed and indirectly the
man becomes happy. A man whose enemies are ruined, whose
debts are destroyed, and whose disease is put down, certainly feels
quite co mf ortable. On the other hand if the good planets are
placed in the 6th, they increase the three items which are mentioned above. But some astrological authors assert that good planets
produce the reverse results in the 6th house. They are good by
nature, and good means the destroying of evil and creation of circumstances which are favourable to the native. Thus if Jupiter is
in the '6th, he destroys the debts, enemies and complaints of the
man and gives him happiness. 6th house also is included in the
Oopachayas or improving houses. In Adhi and Vasumathi Yogas,
good planets are recommended in the 6th house- Thus there are
c onflicting views on this most important question and I would re-

SaEWAETHAOHINTAMANI.
fer my readers to the articles on this vital point in the Astrological Magazine. My own views will he expressed later on. The
author says that evil planets owning or occupying the 3 Dusthanas
or the 6th> Sth and 12th houses are productive of evil. If auspicious planets are found there or own those houses, they cannot produce much good- It means, I suppose, that they produce good but
not in an intensified form. There is really much difference between the occupation of the 8th and 12 th by the malefic and benefie planets- If Mars or Saturn occupies the 8th, death is nearer
than when the same house is occupied by Guru. Such controversial or doubtful points must be carefully remembered.
ffirrefirawr'facissrf
Stanza, 150.
It] the lord of any Bhaca occupies the 6th, Sth and 12th house, or
■if the lords of those homes occupy any other Bhava , the results will be
unfavourable . If any Bha ca has the aspect of the yood planets it will
thrice well
NOTES.
There may be two interpretations for this Stanza. The Bhavas may be taken either with reference to the planetary houses at
the time of birth or with reference to the Lagna. Here instead of
straining the meaning, it would look most natural if we took the
ordinary meaning vh. counting from the Lagna- Even then there
may be a double interpretation.
A horoscope will well illustrate the meaning. The author says
that the significations of those houses which are occupied by the
lords of Dusthanas are sure to suffer. The lord of the sixth is
Ravi and he occupies the third house which shows sisters, brothers and courage and length of life. If Ravi had alone occupied

Difpebent Bhavas.
the 3rd house, all those events
signified by the Sahaja Bkava
would have suffered heavily. But
Moon is with him and is exalted
there- But those events signified by that house have suffered a
great deal. Take the lord of
the 8th Venus. He occupies the
4th house. 4th house indicates
mother, happiness, education, conveyances, lands, relations, &c., and
as a Dusthanadhipathi has occupied it all these have suffered.
The person lost mother early and he had broken education.
Take the lord of the 12th Saturn He occupies the 2nd house
indicative of speech, eloquence, wealth, eyes, family and so forth.
All these have suffered to some extent by the evil influences of
Sani owning the 12th house and occupying the 2nd. This is the
most approved meaning. The second house is aspeeted by Guru,
and is joined by Buda. Both are good and the Bhava has not
altogether been unsuccessful. The 4th Louse has also the aspect
of Guru and it is partly successful. All that the author means to
say is that, for any Bhava to be successful, it must not be combined
with the lords of the 6th, Stli or 12th houses ; nor should the lord
of that Bhava occupy the 6tli, 8tli or 12th houses. Any Bhava
which has beneficial aspect will thrive well. In the above mentioned horoscope the lord of the birth is Guru and he is in the 8th
which is bad.
TfTfiTr ll ll
Stanza 151.
If the lords of the Bhavas , occupy trines , their oxen house , 4th
7th or 10th houses , have the conjunction of benefics without the
aspects of evil planets, and are joined by the lord of the 9th house,
without the conjunction of malefics , such Bhavas will prosper well and
Lagna.
Sani
Chund.| Sukra
Buda.
Ravi. | Rahu
Kuja.
KethuGuru.

Sarttarthachihtamaxi.
indicate happiness. If the Imls of the Bhavas have good and evil
aspects or associations they will indicate mixed results,
NOTES.
Tlie line of argument is pretty plain. If the lord of any
Bhava occupies 1,4, 7, 10,9,5, or joins the lord of the 9th
house and has the aspect and conjunction of good planets, those
results indicated by that Bliacam will he eminently successful. In
this case as well as in all other cases, the Bhavas as well as their
I Buda
j Sun
VenusKuja.
Bhava- In Sanskrit a Bhava Buda
means any zodiacal sign- Bha- Moon. Kahu- g un
vas may be taken from the Lagna or from the planets themselves- . VenusBoth must be consulted- If we Died in 1891
take the Lagna Bhava, it is placed B J n llls
in Libra [Thai a). Its lord is in g atu "thyear. ^uja.
the 10th house from Lagna, and
he is auspicious. He has the as- j I Birth,
pect of Saturn and the person jKethu. Q uru>
had some complaint or other, 1
although the presence of Jupiter in Lagna gave generally sound
health. If we take the 8th Bhava it is Vrishabha, tlie house of
Ayush or longevity. Sukra owns two houses and it has been
shown that he is in the I Oth from Lagna. But from the 8th
which is also his he occutn'es a good position, i. e-, the 3rd from
the 8fch and this is good- * Take the 5th house the Bhava denoting
children The lord of the 5th is in the 12th from it, although in
this case Sani owns Kumbha and Makara and is in his own house.
jKethu,
j Birth.
Guru,
As he occupied a bad sign from the 5th, and the fifth house is
aspected by Kuja and Guru, and its lord Sani by Sukra, the person
lost half the number of children, one of whom was a grown up
womau- Take the Karma Bhava. Its lord is Moou, and he occupies the 10th from his own house, is placed in the 7th from Lagna }
and has the aspect of Guru, without any evil planetary conjunctions or aspects, the man had a steady and a successful government
service and retired honorably irom it. If the same Moon had evil
aspects and occupied 6th, 8th and 12th houses from the 10th, the

Different Bhavas.
person would have had a checkered life, losing service and getting
it again or what we call the hps and downs in life more frequently than is desirable. The lord of the 5th is Sani. His occupation
of the 12th from Kumbha is bad- In the first case he is to be
taken from the Lagna, and that denotes the first Bhavam- Then
his position must be taken with reference to his house. Sani oceupies the 4th house from Lagna and thqt denotes happiness. The
person therefore had honor through his sons, one of whom became
famous. The author says that the junction of the lord of any
Bhava with the lord of the 9th is favourable. An illustration of
it is found in the horoscope. Buda is the lord of the 9th, and
with him is found the Bun the lord of the Lablia-Bhava (11th
house) and he was good in his periods and sub-periods. It looks
as if there is a little repetition in the author’s stanzas, but where
the ideas are twice repeated, they are done so purposely to draw
the attention of the T'eader and show their importance- Where these
Bhavas or their lords have good and bad together, it is asserted
that the results wilkbe of a mixed nature. Taking the lord of the
5tli Bhava he is found in the 12th from him. That is bad. He
happens to he Fani which is bad also. Ho lias the aspect of Venus,
it is good. He is in his own house which is good. An evil planet in
a Kendra is bud, but Sani owns the 4th and 5th houses and it is
good. The Bliava is aspected by Guru and it is good, but it is also
aspected by Kuja and this is bad. In this manner, collecting the
good and evil results, it is found that the Putra Bhava or house of
children is mixed and the results as a matter of fact W'ere mixed.
ii \ <\\ ii
Stanza 152. .
If the lord of any Bhava occupies the 8th house , or is in combust
with the sun , or occupies a debilitated sign , or occupies an enemy’s
house, without the association or aspect of beneficial planets , those
results which are indicated by that Bhavam will be utterly unfavourable, or they will produce much misery.

Sarwarthaohintamani.
profession would suit him P what influence does he command ? and
how best he could struggle for existence in this world? are some
of the most vital points on which astrology ought to throw the
greatest light possible. If really astrology can benefit mankind, it
is here that it will have the most extensive opportunities to do its
useful work. Persons educate their children without knowing in
what station of life they will be placed and what kind of education
would help them in their future career. This gross ignorance of
the parents is unpardonable when astrology can be utilised with
great advantage and profit to themselves and their children. Boys
have so many tastes and dislikes. The sphere of life where they
can best succeed is utterly unknown to them as well as to their
parents. A may have taste for music. This will depend upon
the strength or weakness of the 4th house and its lord. But with
a taste in music? he may be successful as a doctor, a lawyer, a
merchant, an officer, a military man, or even as a cobbler. That
calling will pay him best which is commanded by the lord of the 10th
house. The author, with a view to cover all possible combinations
on this most vital question in life, gives various alternatives. He
first asks the student to find out who occupies the 10th house from
Lagna- If there are no planets in the 10th from Lagna, he advises
the reader to search for planets in the 10th house from Chandra.
But suppose there are no planets in the 10th house from either of
these two? then? he takes the student through a long line into the
Navamsa and adds the house occupied by the Bun also to the above
two. When the loth house from Lagna, Ravi andChundrais
without a planet then we are asked to find out in what Navamsa
the lords of the 10th houses from the above? are situated, and
then describe such means of livelihood as are prescribed to the
lord of the Navamsa, which is occupied by the lord of the 10th
from Lagna, Chundra and Ravi. I shall first take the ordinary
Bhava. If there is the Sun in the 10th from Lagna the person,
gets wealth through his father or paternal relations. If there is
Mcon, through his mother, if there is Mars, the person gets
wealth by conquering his enemies* If there is Buda? wealth comes
through friendly circles, if there is Guru, wealth can be expected
from brothers and cousins, if there is Sukra, through female
agency and if Saturn through his servants or dependants. The

Sources op wealth.
quantity and frequency of getting wealth largely depends upon
the strength and position of the planets- If the Sun is exalted
and well aspected and occupies 10th owning a good sign, the
paternal wealth will be enormous and the person will be extremely
lucky. If on the other hand the Sun is debilitated and aspected
by evil planets, there will hardly be any paternal estate and even
if it comes there will be much anxiety and litigation about it and
it eventually disappears, leaving the man in his original stateIf there are two or more planets in the 10th then wealth
flows in from those sources which are ascribed to the planets there.
First the student should examine which is the stronger of the
two — Lagna or Chundra. Then he must find out which of the
planets in the 10th from birth or Moon is strong and ascribe the
acquisition of wealth accordingly. This will be the predominating
source of his income. So far the matter is easy and the readers
can comprehend it If there are no planets in the 1.0th house
either from birth cr from Chundra then the 10th from the Sun
may be considered. But if even there, planets are not found ;
then the author refers to the Navamsas. Take the three places,
Bagna, Chundra and Ravi at the time of birth and find out
which of them is the strongest. Then take the lord of the 10th
from the strongest of the three above named and find out which
Navamsa he occupies. Then find out the lord of the Navamsa
occupied by the above planet and ascribe the acquisition of wealth
by the person from those means which are indicated by the lord
of that Navamsa. One or two illustrations will make this point
clear. Take the horoscope given under stanza 150.
The horoscope runs thus in Rasee and Navamsa diagrams.
Ravi
Kuja.
Rahu.
Chundra.
Guru.
Navamsa.
Sani
Buda.
Kethu.
Birth.
Birth.
Sani
Buda.
Ravi
Chundra.
Rahu
Sukra.
Rasee.
Kuja.
Kethu.
Guru.

Sab.wabthachinta.mani.
In. this illustrative horoscope the reader has to carefully note
the line of argument in explanation of the author’s meaning in the
above stanza. The means of acquiring wealth will be those which
are ascribed to the planets occupying the 1 Oth house from Birth,
Chundra or Ravi. If there are no planets there, then find out
which of the above three, is the strongest by conjunction, aspecting and other sources of strength mentioned in the first Chapter.
Then take the lord of the 10th from that, and find out where he
is situated in the Navamsa. And after finding out his occupation
in the Navamsa, take the lord of the house he is situated and ascribe to the person those means of acquiring wealth which are
governed by that planet. This is rather a round about process
and may not be intelligible without proper illustrations. In the
present horoscope, take birth first and examine its strength. The
lord of birth or Meena is G uru and he occupies T hula — an unfriendly
house, and is in the i?th from Lagna. He is therefore weak- Besides he is aspected by three evil planets Sani and Buda in the /tli
and Kuja in the 4th. There are no beneficial aspects. Therefore
the lord of the 1 Oth from 1 .agna cannot be taken as Lagna is weak
and its lord is powerless. There are no planets in the 10th from
Lagna, but there is Ivethu, a planet who is supposed to give the
phalam of the loi'd of the house lie occupies and of those planets
who aspect or combine with him. Here the lord of Dhanas is
Guru and we have found that Guru is not strong and accordingly
rejected him. Now take Ravi. The 10th house from him is
vacant. Ravi is the lord of the 6tli from Lagna and he occupies
an unfriendly house. That is bad. He is besides with Kshina
Chundra (weak moon) and occupies Meena Navamsa with Kuja
an evil planet. His position in the 3rd house is good, and
balancing all sources of strength and weakness he cannot he taken.
Chundra is the lord of the 5th house, is in exaltation, although
with the Sun and therefore weak, occupies a friendly Navamsa
with the benefie Guru with him ; His exaltation, his owning the fifth
house, and his conjunction with Guru, in the Amsa gives him
better strength than that which is possessed either by Lagna or
by Bavi. Therefore taking from Chundra the 10th house is
Kumbha and its lord is Sani. Going to the Navamsa Sani is
found in Siraha (Leo) with Buda. According to the stanza above

Sola's Influences.
explained, the lord of that house which is occupied by Saturn will
determine the means of acquiring wealth. He is found to be the
Sun. The person therefore pursues those means to get money
which are ascribed to the Sun I believe I have made the meaning of the stanza clear and another illustration is unnecessary*
Refer to Bhattotpala’s commentaries on Brihafcjataka (Vide Chap.
X, Brihatjataka of Varaha Mihim-j
t*T
Stanzas 154 & 155*
If the Lord of the Naramsa , occupied by the lord of the 10th
from birth, Sun,, or Moon happens to be the Sun the person follows
medicine, or seller of medical stores, fold or foldmining, merchandise
on water , war, gems and pearls , helping gamblers , and lovers, lawful
merchandise, counselling or instructing, chemical experiments , coaxing
or playing the part of a humorist, learned in all the Shastras ancl
respected by kings or high personages.
NOTES.
In the translation I have necessarily to be brief at the cost of
lucidity. The author first gives the profession of a man when the
Sun rules the Navamsa.
If the lord of the Navamsa, occupied by the lord of the 10th
from Birth, Sun or Moon happens to be the Sun, the person becomes a doctor or seller of medicines and medical stores, he will
either be a chetorist, or one who helps chemical experimentalists,
he will be a dealer in gold, or will be connected with some goldmining industries, he will deal with ships or be a merchant, he
will be a counseller, or one who instructs higher personages in

iU
Sarwarthachintamani.
the discharge of their individual affairs or in their discharge of
government or political affairs, he will be engaged in war, or will
be connected with war department, he will be a dealer in gems,
pearls and other precious articles, he will be a helper to gamblers
and lovers, and thus, make money through them, he will get money
through humouring big men or kings, will be learned and will
command wealth through his proficiency, or finally will be
attached to some court or royal personage and get his livelihood
through employment there. In Sanskrit the word Adyaihi
is used which means — and so forth or, etc. Therefore some more
professions may also be included in those already named aboveApparently there appears to be some variations between these results and those predicted by the author of Jatakachundrika, who
follows closely Parasara’s doctrine. He says that the combination
of the lords of the 9tli and 10th will produce Kajayoga, wherever
those two planets may be combined. Suppose the two methods
give different Phalam one pointing to Rajayoga, and the other
pure merchandise ? Here there will be an obvious difficulty. But
really there will be none at all. A man may be an important
government servant aud still get money through merchandise directly or indirectly. He may be an officer and still take great fancy for music, gambling, love making, tanning leathers, astronomy,
astrology, travelling, trading in gems and pearls, merchandise in
ships and various other concerns. An officer frequently sells his
horses, harness, jewels, wife, daughters, sisters and furniture and
makes larger profits than his pay or those which would have been
made by an ordinary merchant. Another succeeds in getting
at a rich widow and plays the role ox a gallant and makes money.
One rises to eminence by pimping to his superiors or his kings.
A nother makes wealth by taking advantage of his official position
and collecting gems, jewels or gold through fair or foul means.
There are therefore so many ways of making money separately, although a person may have a definite position in life.
All these depend upon the strength of the combination of the lords
of trines and quadrants and that of the lord of the 10th or the
planet there, or the lord of the Navamsa, where the lord of the
10th is found at the time of birth. These are important matters
which are well worth careful perusal and I draw the attention of

Gains from various callings.
my readers to these stanzas. It is a well known fact in the affairs
of the world that an influential person becomes influential by his
underhand dealings, by having to do something secretly while he
holds a respectable government or other mercantile office, that
often he combines in himself multifarious functions, that besides
his pay his employers sometimes pay him commission, allowances
batta and other sums, and that a man may be connected with 10
or 32 different and radically opposed callings, making money
through all of them, while, holding a general and recognised special calling- In fact if we enter into the history of professions by
which men manage to live, we hardly find any one individual living
entirely hy one specialised means. The king has his own private
estates, his inclination to take shares in companies and encouraging industries and taking part in them not as a sovereign power
but as a private citizen. A high functionary holds several buildings, gets rent from them and from his extensive lands and makes
profits from shares he may have purchased in companies and speculations. An official may get his regular salary and hare lands
and money dealings. A merchant may have lands, and some government honorarium in the shape of small allowance for his trouble from the government. So that if we carefully examined the
soui’ces of income of many persons in the world, we find that those
sources of income will generally be not confined to one single avocation or calling, but will have included various means and ways.
These differences are due to the fact that it is hardly possible to
find one planet occupying the 10th exclusively without conjunctions or aspects of other planets. In the Navamsa the complications are still greater, and the skill of the astrologer consists in
properly reading the particular influences of the planets in their
general, sub and other minor periods. No amount of care and
devotion bestowed upon this important subject could be considered illspent. I would strongly request the readers to perused
these and the previous stanzas, carefully before they venture on to
predictions.

SarwarthaohintamaniStanza 156.
If the lord 0/ the Navamsa occupied by the lord of the LOth is
Moon , the person trades in shells , pearls, corals and other articles
born or taken out of water, by cultivation , by exhibiting various shows ,
by insinuating himself into the favour of royal females or females in
high rank and by trading in clothes, fo.
NOTES.
Even fishes, sea herbs? anil other articles found in deep water,
may be classed under ( jalodbhavas ) or those born in water. Bywit, humour, or by appealing to various senses of the body, a man
may acquire wealth- Shows of all kinds come up under this classification. Merchandise in all varieties of clothes, and acting as the
agent? confidant or gallant with women in exalted position, he will
be able to earn money. With women in high rank, the person
might get into various relationships. He may act as their paramour
their pimp, their agent? or their humourist and acquire money
through that source. The strength of the planet decides the extent
of respect and the amount of money he may he able to secure.
Trmr^f?Tc^?firqri:f 1
Stanza 157 .
If Mars happens to be the lord of the Navamsa occupied by the
lord of the ]Qth house , he trades in minerals of various hinds, or war
implements ; lie finds employment in Military department, and all
other undertakings which involve courage, fighting and danger , all
services where fire plays an important part, in picking quarrels and
setting up quarrels, athletic sports and exercises and by. robbery or
thieving .
NOTES. ,
Mars plays an important part. He commands, he kills, he
beats? he is beaten? he plunders, he robs, he bums, and in fact his
hand is in every work where there is, blood, hones? fire? property.

Mercurial and Jovian Influences.
or empires. On a small scale robbery is thieving, on a large soale
it is empire-building and conquest worthy of even the best and the
grestest heroes. Wherever blood is spilt, bones are broken? weapons are made or used, property is gained or lost, fires consume,
or are used in manufactures, engines, kitchens and other work?
there will be Mars found- He has also the command of all minerals, some of which are deadly poisons. Thus all men in the
military, police, engineering? robbing, extorting, fighting or engaged in burning and poisoning practices? are under the Martian
influence. They earn money and live by those means or related
to such measures and make money through themStanza 158.
If Mercury happens to he the lord of the Naramsa occupied by the
lord of the 10th, he inclines the man to do painting, writing boohs, composing poetry, astronomy and astrology, learning Vedas and Shastras
follow priestly work, missionary labours, and offering prayers for the
sake of money.
NOTES.
There is not a tinge of military aspect in the case of Mercury.
Missionaries, priests, chaplains? bishops, purohits, religious men who
put on that mask for earning money, astrologers and astronomers,
authors and painters of all grades, learned in the religious lore,
who make a living by that means, are all under Mercurial control.
If Mercury is exalted the followers will be respected and will be
sincere men- If he is debilitated they will be contemptible fellows
who put on the religious mask to serve their ends-

Sarwarthachiotamani.
Stanza 159.
If the lord of the Nammsa is Jupiter he induces the person to give
religious instruction for wealth , read Pnran as for income, teach morality for consideration, become secretaires and members of charitable
institutions for personal interests, succeed to high priest hood for Ms
benefit and thus make his livelihood.
NOTES.
There is a grand difference between jupiter and other planets.
A 11- of them have worldly considerations. But although jupiter
takes money for the trouble, he labours in a moi'al and elevated
sphere ; and it will produce much good upon those who are instructed by him- Suppose a man wants good moral lessons and
pays to his instructor. For the money he spends he gets a splendid return which has a permanent value in his life? and which
alters the tone of his whole future career- The money therefore
is well earned and the labour produces much moralising effect. If
the instructor or moralist or priest be sincere he will be all the
more meritorious. If he is not he gets less merit. But those
who are instructed will be largely profited.
li U° li
Stanza 1G0If the lord of the Xaramsa occupied by the lord, of the 10 th from
Birth, Moon or Son is Venus the person lives by trading in
gold, in precious stones , in elephants , horses, flowers, cows and cattle ,
in fresh water , or clean wafer, milk , curds and in depending upon
women or through their influence,
NOTES.
Bach of these planets controls a lot of other professions, which
are not explained here by the author but which can be easily classified under the characteristics of the particular planet. Venus
is a fine planet- Merchandise in diamonds, rubies? sapphires,

Saturnine Influences.
emeralds and other precious gems, trading in gold, elephants,
horses, flowers of all kinds, cattle, specially cows and buffaloes,
fresh water and all purified or filtered waters, milk and curds,
all these and many more are under the influence of Yenus.
Besides these another profession is mentioned which is depending
upon the favours of women. In the last case the strength of the
planet Venus determines the honourableness of the connection. If
Venus is weak or with evil planets the person lives by the gains of
her prostitution. He may be a dependent upon actresses, or dancing women, or a master pimp.
Stanza 161.
If the lord of the Naoamsa occupied by the owner of the 10 th
from Birth , Moon or Sun be Saturn he acquires money by disgraceful professions , by ivorking in wood or other mean materials , by
killing birds and beasts, by inflicting wounds upon himself, by carrying
loads for cooly or as a Labourer or by walking on foot, or by setting
up quarrels among persons.
NOTES.
Saturn gives a sorry profession and the means employed will
be those which are generally considered low by the class to which
the person belongs. There are some honourable professions
although they may not be very remunerative. Thus the schoolmaster might get 10 rupees a month and a scavenger might make
double or treble of what the teacher might expect. But the
teacher’s post is honourable while that of the scavenger is considered very low, if not disgraceful, by every civilised nation. W orid
presents a variety of avocations some of which are considered
conventionally honourable while others are mean. Saturn is io1 '
giving mean kind of work. There are some busy bodies who cleverly trade upon the brains of others and their weaknesses* £

160 SABWA&THACHW*A»ANi.
no good work they set up quarrels, rouse had passions in the combatants and make capital out of such quarrels. Killing no
warriors on the battlefield-in cold blood, executioner s work, or
butchering for the sake of selfish gain, going in the streets as
mendicants, inflicting bruises upon their own bodies and rousing
the sympathy of passers by and making money by this hateiul
practice, the ordinary coolies who toil day and night to mam aan
themselves, these and similar others are under the influence or
Saturn. In the examination of a horoscope, the 10th house signifies employment and consequently means of livelihood. Every one
in this world must, admit that this is a very important item in
man’s existence. Success and failure here have a great bearing upon
man’s happiness and misery and these stanzas therefore become
verv important- In my humble opinion, as one who have had
experience in astrological calculations and predictions over a, quarter of a century, it may be pointed out that those persons who have
their 10th houses from Lagna or Moon occupied by planets have
alwavs been more influential than those who have no planets m
them. If all the planets occupy 9th, 10th and 11th houses the
person specially distinguishes himself as a greatman whatever may
he his surroundings at the time of birth, the degree of success
varvin® with the strength or debility of the planets occupying the
10th house. If the Sun, Mars, or bright or full Moon occupies the
10th without evil aspects and in friendly houses they give the
native continuous success and desirable influence among bis classmates and friends. If evil planets occupy the 10th debilitated,
aspectedby other evil planets similarly weakened, whatever may
be the position in life at the time of birth, the person loses all and
gets into public disgrace or will have too many ups and downs m
fife to make it endurable or smooth.
ll W II

Various kinds of Inf&ufncesm
Stanza 162.
Planets who are in their houses, in their Naramsas, in friendly
signs, in their swochas (deep exaltations), in their Drahhmas, in quadrants, in their Movlafh rikonas and also the lords of the Navavnsas
they occupy , give good results according to the six sources of strength
they possess ( skadlalas ) in their Dasns and Antardasas (periods and
sub-periods).
NOTES.
This and the following few stanzas treat of a most important
subject which can engage the attention of the astrological readers.
There are three kinds of influences which have to be carefully
considered. First the influences of the planets as fixed at the time
of birth in the horoscope ; second the influences in their periods
and sub-periods and third the influences of the planets as they are
moving from year to year, from month to month and from day to
day. There are other influences which have also to be taken into
consideration, but I need not confuse the subject at present with too
many sources of knowledge. Take any horoscope. At the time of
birth two or three planets may be in exaltation, one or two in their
own houses, one or two in debilitation and the rest in friendly or
unfriendly houses. These positions of the planets are permanent and
fixed, and they all exercise influences on the native who enjoys the
resultant of all their work. This will be the influence — general —
at the time of birth and after birth the native is ruled by the periods
of the lords who govern the constellation at the time of birth and
the next eight constellations if he lives up to 120 years and odd
days. This is what is commonly known as omsoitan (120 years)
calculated by the Oodu Dasa (stellar period) system generally
prevalent in the -whole of S. India and Dekkan. In N. India
these periods and sub-periods are similarly referi*ed to birth and
the following constellations but the total number of years is 108
under the name Agtotaii. There is a third method recommended,
in th<? Srihat-jatpha and other works (vide B. Jatalca Ch. VIII.
St, 1 .) This has no reference to birth and the following constellations, ere birth (Lagna), Mpon and Sun are taken and their
relative strengths are determined- The first Dasa is given to the
strongest, of the three named above and the extent of the period

Sarwabthachestamani.
will be the number -.of years, months, clays, &e., which have been
given by the most powerful of these three in Grahadatta Pindayurdaya or the extent of life given by it to the foetus in the womb.
The next Dasa will be that of the planet who is strongest in the
quadrants. After giving Dasas to all the planets in the quadrants
take the planets in the houses next to quadrants and after
them those which are in Aujiold ibas or next to them. ( Seep 59).
In Jaimini Sutras the Dasas are differently given, and in KalacJiaJcm Vakyas periods are ascribed in a different method. Any
one of these, if properly understood, will be sufficient and will be
found quite correct. Thus the influence of the periods and subperiods are very important in moulding man’s prospects. The
period of a planet in deep exaltation, occupying the 12th house from
Lagna, differs from the period of the same should it be in the 1 1th
or 10th. The period of a Noechagraha ■(debilitated planet) in evil
conjunction differs from the Dasa of the same in good combinations.
While the general condition of the man may remain stationary, as
a king, a general, a judge or a merchant, he may be subjected to
various temporary misfortunes without losing his general position
and status in life- The author, in order to meet all these contingencies, draws the attention of his readers and asks them to bear these
sources of strength and weakness of the planets in mind in venturing future predictions. A planet in exaltation gives a general
value to the horoscope but if his favourable period comes he gives
it a sudden elevation or perceptible change for better. If a friendly planet's sub- period comes, and the general lord is good, he gives
much prosperity. If a- debilitated planet rules and another powerless planet intervenes as his sub-lord, the man will be plunged into
difficulties and disgrace. A planet in an unfriendly house gives
greater irritation to the person if lie is evil and less if he is good.
Planets in Moolathrikonas (sec p. 30) are favourable. Planets
in friendly houses give many friends and influence thereby. Men
are ever changing in their color, behaviour, passions, tastes, circumstances, prosperity and religiousness. Their successes and failures
are also often very remarkable. Palling utterly, in one calling,
some take to others and succeed beyond their most sanguine expectations. Failing in some places men succeed in other localities.
Failing With one class or nation they succeed with others. They
change their tastes, their food, their countries, their wives, their

Changes due to Planetary Periods.
religion, theiv morals, their language and their character as do the
rays of the ever inconstant Moon. This stanza, if properly
understood, with reference to the details given in Chapter, I.
enables an astrologer to predict the future of men and the changes
they are likely to meet with great accuracy and precision. The
author first deals with the influences of planets fixed at the time
of birth and then with the influences of planets in their periods
and sub-periods. The combinations of planets as they move on
from year to year, month to month, clay to day, and minute to
minute, are not detailed here, and it is understood that the reader
will get them from books which are devoted to that subject
specially. The author brings another point to prominence which
ought not to be omitted in predicting results. Not only the
strength of the planets in the Rasee lias to be taken, but also
the sources of the strength of the lords of the Navamsas which
are occupied by those planets. Take an example. If Moon is m
Taurus, lie is exalted and if he chances to be the lord of the
fifth house he becomes extremely good when he is placed in the
quadrants or ia 3rd, 10th and lith houses. But he may be found
to occupy an evil Navamsa like jtliat of Capricorn or Aquarius.
Then his influence will be considerably modified by the lord of
the Navamsa he occupies, viz Saturn. Not only should the planets be strong and auspicious but also the lords of the Navamsas
they occupy. The six sources of strength to the planets are
well explained in the first Chapter. (See notes on pp. bG to 103.)
Stanza 163.
hi horoscopy or horary (prasna- question) the planets (five such
results in their periods and sub-periods (is are to he ascribed to them
by their occupation , their ownership , their aspects , their conjunction ,
the influences of the zodiacal signs they occupy when they have no
Undue there , the influences of the aspects of the planets modified by the

Sarwarthachintamani.
will be the number -.of years, months, days, &c., which have been
given by the most powerful of these three in Gmhadatta Pindayurdaya or the extent of life given by it to the foetus in the womb.
The next Dasa will be that of the planet who is strongest in the
quadrants. After giving Dasas to all the planets in the quadrants
take the planets in the houses next to quadrants and after
them those which are in AupoJd ilns or next to them. {Seep 59).
In Jaimini Sutras the Dasas are differently given, and in Kalachahra Vakyas periods are ascribed in a different method. Any
one of these, if properly understood, will be sufficient and will be
found quite correct. Thus the influence of the periods and subperiods are very important in moulding man’s prospects. The
period of a planet in deep exaltation, occupying the 12th house from
Lagna, differs from the period of the same should it be in the 11th
or 10th. The period of a Neechagraha -(debilitated pfanet) in evil
conjunction differs from the Dasa of the same in good combinations.
While the general condition of the man may remain stationary, as
a king, a general- a judge or a merchant, he may be subjected to
various temporary misfortunes without losing his general position
and status in life- The author, in order to meet all these contingencies, draws the attention of his readers and asks them to bear these
sources of strength and weakness of the planets in mind in venturing future predictions. A planet in exaltation gives a general
value to the horoscope but if his favourable period comes he gives
it a sudden elevation or perceptible change for better. If a friendly planet’s sub- period comes, and the general lord is good, he gives
much prosperity. If a debilitated planet rules and another powerless planet intervenes as his sub- lord, the man will be plunged into
difficulties and disgrace. A planet in an unfriendly house gives
greater irritation to the person if he is evil and less if he is good.
Planets in Moolathrikonas Gee p. 36) are favourable. Planets
in friendly houses give many friends and influence thereby. Men
arc ever changing in their color, behaviour, passions, tastes, circumstances, prosperity and religiousness. Their successes and failures
are also often very remarkable. Tailing utterly, in one calling,
some take to others and succeed beyond their most sanguine expectations. Tailing in some places men succeed in other localities.
Tailing With one class or nation they succeed with others. They
change their tastes, their food, their countries, their wives, their

Chakc.es due to Planetary Periods.
religion, their morals, their language and their character as do the
rays of the ever inconstant Moon. This stanza, if properly
understood, with reference to the details given in Chapter, Ienables an astrologer to predict the future of men and the changes
they are likely to meet with great accuracy and precision. The
author first deals with the influences of planets fixed at the time
of hirtli and then with the influences of planets in their periods
and sub-periods. The combinations of planets as they move on
from year to year, month to month, day to day, and minute to
minute, are not detailed here, and it is understood that the reader
will get them from books which are devoted to that subject
specially. The author brings another point to prominence which
ought not to be omitted in predicting results. Not only the
strength of the planets in the Ttasee has to be taken, but also
the sources of the strength of the lords of the Navamsas which
are occupied by those planets. Take an example. If Moon is m
Taurus, he is exalted and if he chances to be the lord of the
fifth house he becomes extremely good when lie is placed in the
quadrants or in 3rd, 10th and lith houses. But he may he found
to occupy an evil Navamsa like [that of Capricorn or Aquarius.
Then his influence will be considerably modified by the lord of
the Navamsa he occupies, viz., Saturn. Not only should the planets he strong and auspicious but also the lords of the Navamsas
they occupy. The six sources of strength to the planets are
well explained in the first Chapter. (See notes on pp. 06 to 103.)
Stanza 163.
In horoscopy or horary ( pra sun - questi on) the planets (lire such
results in their periods and sub-periods as are to be ascribed to them
hi/ their occupation , their ownership , their aspects , their conjunction ,
the influences of the zodiacal signs they occupy when they have no
bindns there, the influences of the aspects of the planets modified by the

SA&mitTHACHINTAMANI.
zodiacal si pis they are in their own peculiarities and the peculiarities
of the Base es.
NOTES.
The stanza is an important one. As the above stanza so also
this stanza, leads to important facts a careful knowledge of which
is indispensable in ascribing pali lam (results) to the periods and
sub-periods of planets. At the time of birth or question planets
calculated, will be found to occupy certain Bhavas or significations.
There are 12 houses and their significations have already been
detailed in Chapter I. [rule p. 53). They will be shown later on in
greater detail. All planets own certain houses at the time of birth
or question. This is indispensable. The lord of birth may be in
the 12th aspected by the lord of the 5th in the 6th. The planets
are inilueuced by their own characteristics, by those with whom
they join, by the signs they occupy, by the planets they are aspected, and by the houses they own. Thus lords of the 3rd, 6th
and Uth houses, pvhna facie produce evil, but they may be beneficially joined, aspected, exalted or occupied, when they change their
evil nature and become producers of favourable results. The
Navamsa influences are not to be forgotten. The influences of
signs are also important factors. Mercury in Scorpio is bad. The
Sun in Capncornus and .Aquarius is bad and so forth. The
author of Sarwarthachintamani seems to make no distinction between the time of birth and that of question, although other
writer's on astrology have kept them as far as possible separately
and treated them differently.
In Chappana and Lampnka, two eminent works on horary
astrology (treating on questions asked) the matter is treated quite
distinctly and elaborately. The astaka verga process is not mentioned here where certain houses have only a few Bindus ( ciphers )
or none at all, their influences have also to be considered in judging
of planetary power.

Unfavourable Influences.
Stanza 164.
At the time of birth or question , the results of those planets who
are most powerfully aspected or combined hi their respect ire Bitovas
(significations) coupled with the influences of the Zodiacal signs,
ivhich are occupied by them trill hare to be predicted in their periods
and sub periods* The influences of the flu nets, the Jlasces they
occupy , the significations of those planets and It users, the influences
of aspectmg and combining planets, with those of houses they occupy,
have all to be taken into consideration in predicting results.
NOTES.
Venkatasa has already told his readers to get all other information which is not found in his hook, from competent works on
astrolop-y. Astahavarga has not been treated by him in this book. I
refer the readers to Brihatjatka Ch. IX. where the valuable processes and examples about Astakavarga are given. There is also a
separate book devoted to this and it may be consulted with great advantage. The book is called Ash ilea Varga B i nil u sodium a . Certain
positions of planets are indicated at the time of birth as favourable,
and these are denoted by putting in a biudu or zero, and others
which are unfavourable as regards positions at the time of birth are
shown by lielchas or simple marks or dots. If any sign has no
Bindus and a planet occupies it? the significations denoted by that
sign will be destroyed- A man is bom in Taurus. There is
Saturn in the 3rd house, which gets no zeroes in the Astakavarga
.processes- During the time of Saturn either as principal or as
sub-dasanatha the Bhava, viz - brothers, courage &c*, indicated by
the 3rd house will be destroyed or will be afflicted. A debilitated
planet occupies the 10th house which signifies means of livelihood?
ireputation? political credit &c. The native will suffer dismissal,
disgrace or prosecution or loss of reputation during the period of
that planet or its •sub-period. If the period of a planet in an unfriendly house comes up and he represents the 7tli signification
then death or danger to wife or disturbance to domestic happiness
emust be predicted. These stanzas ought to he very carefully
studied. Bvery planet or sign must and will represent some
Bhava or other and if that planet happens to be debilitated or is

Sabwabthachintamani.
found in an unfriendly house or has evil aspects or otherwise becomes powerless, the Bliava so indicated suffers when the period
or sub- period of that planet comes. The intensity of the danger
and its duration will depend upon the evil nature of the planet
and other sources of weakness it has. It will be seen how difficult astrology is and what an amount of intelligence and study
are required to make successful predictions. The cheap fewpenny astrologers, with a few stanzas in their heads, cannot
certainly be expected to do even an apology for justice to this science
and those intelligent people who consult them with a view to cheap
payments, ought certainly to realize their own duties to the sublime
science from which they wish to procure the best information possible. The hateful idea of making grand sciences very easy is to
be doubly deplored. There is no royal road to learning and when
such easy methods are promulgated they produce simply disastrous
results from the superficiality of its treatment. How can any difficult science he mastered and made practical without a lifelong devotion ? Even then the expert knows that he has much to learn.
I ’cnfoittisa does not encourage such easy going rogues who would
like to pose as astrologers by a superficial knowledge. He insists
upon a fair knowledge of the elementary portion before the student could make any attempt at predictions. The whole lot of
details must be gone through and that thoroughly well, if not he
does not guarantee the results described by him and the ancient
Malm risk is (sagesj- 1 beg to draw the readers’ attention to these
pertinent remarks of the author, supplemented by my own.
When so many preliminaries are required to be studied and
remembered it can easily be seen that the one anna and the two
anna astrologers will only 7 give in return an equivalent intellectual
value for the amounts paid to them by the consultors. JFor each
planet there are about do or 40 sources of strength to be considered
in the commencement. The Zodiacal signs are equally affected.
The strength of constellations have to be marked. The periods
and sub-periods have to be brought down to the minutest division
possible and the different combinations must be consulted. All
objects in nature are governed by these planets and they have to
be ascribed or identified under their respective jurisdictions. Then
there are the mathematical calculations to get at* the correct

Causes for failure of 3?redictions. 16?
positions of planets, and to fix the different Bliavas at the time of
birth or question. The Astakaverga and other processes recommended in the standard works on astrology have to be learnt and
worked out. The astrologer becomes only then duly qualified to
enter into the regions of prediction and make his way there as
best as he can, according to the strength of his general education
qualified by the special study, and backed up by a splendid memory
and the more splendid genius.
These are not the kind of astrologers whom we daily
meet in the market. Those who consult have no reason whatever to complain against the quacks, for they pay them badly, and
like quacks, expect them to work well and honestly for the trifling payment. They scatter dirt and hope to gather gems into the
bargain and if they are disappointed the fault is more with themselves than with the quacks who are consulted. If society only condemns quacks and rogues and neglects them as they deserve to be, they
will gradually drop down and disappear in course of time, but this
will never be done. The best way to put down prostitution is to neglect women of evil repute. But society as a whole has never done
it and can never do it, and pi ostitution prevails to an awful
extent simply by the encouragement given to it by society. If
quacks and imposters arc treated with contempt, they will never
flourish. But tins can only be done when society is not what it is
now. This will be paying a high moral complement to society.
As long as a large percentage of the individuals forming a society,
arc themselves imposters and cheats in other fields of work than
astrology, they cannot but tolerate their brethren in this, by the
sheer force of mutual professional sympathy. One rogue goes to
another to overreach him. The latter knows the object of the
former’s visit, and each conscious of his own skill in imposture tries
to do business with the other as an honest man. The other equally
clever only returns his complement if he can- There are many
patrons who encourage quacks in the field of astrology, and make
much of them for not what they know or can prophesy, but for purposes for which they may be used to tlie consultor’s advantage.
The astrological rogues, well posted in the work of imposture of
the latest pattern, return calmly their complement when their turn
comes and pay them in their own coin. Thus both parties — those

Sabwaethaghintamahi.
who consult and those who are consulted — are largely to blame,
and these are indispensable to the existence of society as it is and
as it will he for ages to come. Morality and honesty will remoye
a lob of these difficulties* but they cannot be purchased unfortunately in the world’s market. Veukatasa in the commencement of
the 2nd chapter shows the importance of these general principles
in the astrological sciences which have to guide the astrologer in
the art of his predictions. Good planets in good Bhavas* with
good combinations and good aspects, in good houses produce
favourable results while evil planets in evil Bhavas with evil conjunctions and evil aspects produce much misery and unhappiness.
Planets in combust are called Asfa and they are said to yield very
unfavourable results. Those planets which are with the Sun in
any sign in close proximity with his disk get powerless, and are
called V ileal a or without light or rays. The moon affords a splendid example of this on the new Moon day. We hardly see the
Moon and he is perfectly powerless and without rays when he is in
close proximity with the solar disk. Rahu and ELetliu have no
ram hast and on the other hand the presence of those planets with
the Sun will considerably impair the Sun’s capacity to influence
as lie is said to be eclipsed by them. All the other planets have
this state of combustion when they are close to the Sun.
Stanza
Thr I on Is of I hr Nonimsas occupied by Sunt , Mandi, Rahu,
< iulika , and the bird of thr 8th, are generally the Marahi planets to
the native and kill turn when Sani is moving in the 8th home and
alien the worst period, of any one of the above planets is passing at
the time,
NOTES.
Venkatasa now gives hints as to who is likely to kill a native.
In the Rasi diagram Saturn, Mandi, Rahu. Gulika, and the lord of
the 8th from Lagna are to be fixed, and then their positions in
the Navamsa have to be ascertained by pure mathematical calcuda-T

G-ochara on Life.
tions. (Vide pp 50 — 69.) The lords o£ the Navamsas where the
above named planets are situated, are found to be powerful in inflicting death when Saturn is moving in the 8th. The author is
not clear about the last expression, but he presumes a general
knowledge in the student. Gochara or the movements of the
planets every day with reference to the position of the Moon at the
time of birth has much good and evil influence on the person as
the planets are favourably or unfavourably combined at any given
time. The eighth house from the Moon represents the length of
life. If Saturn is moving there, any one of the unfavourable
periods of the lords of the Navamsas occupied by Sard, Rahu,
Mandi, Gulika or the lord of the eighth from Lagna intervenes,
then death may be reasonably expected. One or two illustrations
will clear this most important point.
Take a horoscope for illustration.
Moon Birth
Raliu ‘Gulika
Saturn
Mandi
Sun
Mercury
Jupiter
j
Venus
Mars
Kethu
Birth j
Jupiter Ralui
(Julika. j
Navamsa.
j
Mercury.
i 1 Sun
Kethlli Venus
M“di !
Moon
The person was born on a Tuesday and Mandi begins to influence him after 17 ghatikas and is placed in Gemini. As per Stanza
Saturn, Mandi, Gulika, Rahu and the lord of the 8th must first be
noticed. The lord of the 8th is Jupiter. All these are found in
the Navamsas thus— Jupiter aud Gulika in Aries, Rahu in Taurus,
Saturn in Libra and Mandi in Scorpio. The lords of Navamsas
occupied by thpm are Mars; Venus, Venus and Mars respectively* ,

Sabwabthaohintamahi.
who consult and those who are consulted — are largely to blame,
and these are indispensable to the existence of society as it is and
as it will be for ages to come. .Morality and honesty will remove
a lob of these difficulties, but they cannot be purchased unfortunately in the world’s market. Veukatasa in the commencement of
the 2nd chapter shows the importance of these general principles
in the astrological sciences which have to guide the astrologer in
the art of his predictions. Good planets in good Bhavas, with
good combinations and good aspects, in good houses produce
favourable results while evil planets in evil Bhavas with evil conjunctions and evil aspects produce much misery and unhappiness.
Planets in rombud are called Ada and they are said to yield very
unfavourable results. Those planets which are with the Sun in
any sign in close proximity with his disk get powerless, and are
called Vital a or without light or rays. The moon affords a splendid example of this on the now Moon day. We hardly see the
Moon and he is perfectly powerless and without rays when he is in
close proximity with the solar disk. Rahu and Ketliu have no
com bud and on the other hand the presence of those planets with
the Sun will considerably impair the Sun’s capacity to influence
as he is said to be eclipsed by them. All the other planets have
this state ol“ combustion when they are close to the Sun.
Stanza «<>5.
Thr lords of the Nacamsas occupied by Sani> Mandi, Rahil*
ihilika, and the lord of the 8th . are generally the Marahr planets to
the native and kill him when Semi is macing in the 8th house and
when the worst period of any one of the above planets is passing at
the time,
NOTES.
Yenkatasa now gives hints as to who is likely to kill a native f
In the Rasi diagram Saturn, Mandi, Rahu. Gulika, and the lord of
the 8th from Lagna are to be fixed, and then their positions in
the Navamsa have to be ascertained by pure mathematical calendar

CrOCHARA ON LIFE.
tions. ( Vide pp 50 — G9.) The lords o£ the Navamsas where the
above named planets are situated, are found to be powerful in inflicting death when Saturn is moving in the 8th. The author is
not clear about the last expression, but he presumes a general
knowledge in the student, (xochara or the movements of the
planets every day with reference to the position of the Moon at the
time of birth lias much good and evil influence on the person as
the planets are favourably or unfavourably combined at any given
time. The eighth house from the Moon represents the length of
life. If Saturn is moving there, any one of the unfavourable
periods of the lords of the Navamsas occupied by Pani, Rahu,
Mandi, Gulika or the lord of the eighth from Lagna intervenes,
then death may be reasonably expected. One or two illustrations
will clear this most important point.
Take a horoscope for illustration.
Moon I Birth Saturn
Rahu Gulika Mandi
i Sun j
i Mercury!
; Jupiter ,
! Venus
Mars
Kethu
j Birth
J upiter
j U ulika.
Rahu
Navamsa.
Mer- ] Kethu!
cury. j Mandi i
Sun
Ten us
Mars
Saturn
Moon
The person was born on a Tuesday and Mandi begins to influence him after 17 gliatikas and is placed in Gemini. As per Stanza
Saturn, Mandi, Gulika, Rahu and the lord of the 8th must first be
noticed. The lord of the 8th is Jupiter. All these are found in
the Navamsas thus— Jupiter and Gulika in Aries, Rahu in Taurus,
Saturn in Libra and Maudi in Scorpio. The lords of Navamsas
occupied by thpin are Mars; Veuys, Venus and Mars respectively* • .

S AR W ARTli A0H1N TA M AN I .
m
When Saturn ia moving in Scorpio as per Gcchara, the death of the
party may he predicted in the subpericd of the most powerless of the
above planets. Of the two planets. Mars and Venus it has to be
determined who is the weakest, and then death must be ascribed to
him. Venus is the lord of the birth ,a friend of Saturn and stays
in the eighth house, in opposition to him. In the Amsa, Venus has
gained strength by being in his own house, and in company with
Saturn who is exalted there. Mars on the other hand is the lord
of the 7th and 12th houses, occupies Libra an unfriendly house,
and is in the Amsa, with Venus, Saturn and the Sun in Libra.
The Sun is in debilitation and Mars is in an unfriendly house.
Mars therefore is weaker in comparison with Venus. When Saturn is moving in Scorpio and Mars becomes the lord or sub-lord
of the period, death may be predicted. All these points involve a
series of mathematical calculations without which the work of the
astrologer becomes more or less a guess work, and quite a broken
reed, to trust to, for making certain predictions about future events.
sHrfaqf: ^^rronnk |
sTcfcsrrcr t3Frcrcr*rr|: iroNd u
Stanza 160 .
Jr' the lord of the 2nd house is an evil planet, if an evil planet
occupies the 2nd house , and if the lord of the 2nd is in conjunction
inth aii nil planet, loss of wealth must he predicted in the subperiods of bani, Kuja, liahu and Had ,
NOTES.
Venkatasa having given hints as to the results about the
health, life and general prospects by the strength or weakness of
planets, now begins to enumerate the combinations which cause
loss to property and the times when such losses of wealth may be
expected- Bril planets are Saturn, Mars, Sun and Eahu- Weak
Mood and badly associated Mercury are not named by him hero a*

Times for Loss of Monet.
m
evil, although he was stated so in Stanza 70 { Vide p. 70). The
first condition is that lord of the 2nd house, signifying wealth,
must be an evil planet, there must be a malefic in the second and
the lord of the 2nd must be in evil conjunction. Then the subperiods of Saturn, Mars, Rahu and the Sun, will cause loss to the
wealth of the person. In what periods these sub-periods will cause
ruin or loss is not clearly mentioned. But we can easily see that
these sub-periods during the Dasas of the lord (f the 2nd house
who is evil, the evil planet which occupies the second house and
the malefic with whom the lord of the 2nd combines, are the
Anthar dasas, when the person will be subjected to losses iu
property. The Dosas and Bhuktis of evil planets are unfavourable and it is very natural to expect loss of money when any one
of them has jurisdiction over the house of wealth. Losses are
mentioned but what are the causes by which these losses are to be
expected are not detailed. I will try to explain tbem’later on.
wfstct: qrTOmcrfrsr: i
fRfurr tMRfM-RT: II
Stanza 107.
If the lord of the 2nd Is on on! planet awl occupies that house
there will be loss of wealth, public disgrace, Jines and penalties through
the displeasure of government, confiscation of property , imprisonment , separation from his country or banishment and hatred of the
relations , during his period
NOTESIf the lord of the 2nd is in that house, and happens to be evil,
he produces all the above miseries during his period. Suppose he
is an evil planet and owns the 2nd house, and occupies it without
favourable aspects and if he is in exaltation can all the above mise*
ries be safely predicted about the man ? The author has already
told his readers that when evil planets are well aspected or
in good houses, or in exaltations, they greatly modify their

SAKWABTEA C IttNTAMA.NI •
evil results and produce even beneficial results. If the same lord
is debilitated; and aspeeted by evil planets, the person ' suffers
greatly and will be thoroughly ruined* The degree of intensity
of weakness or strength ot the planet must he ascertained by
mathematical calculations, and where evil is in . abundance}
the suffering and ruination will be large, but where good is found
among the evil planets in the shape of strength by aspect, exaltation, occupation of good Vargas and so forth, evil must be predicted, but in a considerably mitigated form, or the person gets into
troubles and gets out of them again with honor.
flpnrsrflr qwnuoti fofsnpnfa I
JTrwwrfcr n
Stanza 168 .
During the above named evil planetary periods, their sub-periods
and their still minor divisions, the person loses lands, riches, reputation , | children and brothers. Hood planets do not produce such
unfavourable results.
NOTES.
This is a continuation of the previous stanza. It is meant
here to show that the periods and sub- periods of evil planets produce loss of wealth, lands, death of children and brothers, and
bring the man to disgrace and ruin. Good planets, he says, do not
produce such results. Even in their sub-periods, and other divisions, benefics ai*e more considerate than malefic* in producing
evil results. — —
f^r§PT |
Stanza 169.
If there is a good planet in the 2nd house,, an l the lord, of the
2nd is a benefit, then prosperity may be predicted, in the Dasa of the
latter as also the pleasure of hearing the talk of his children.

Prosperous Times- 1?3
MOTESThe more fact of the lord of the 2ud being a benefic adds
much to wealth, and if he occupies a good position, and auspicious
planets occupy the 2nd,- large wealth and alt its appendages will
flow easily and with little exertion on the part of the man. If an
exalted . good planet occupies the 2nd and his Dasa or Bhukti
comes in an equally favourable period or sub-period, the man will
have sudden and unexpected fortunes. To him, everything promises success, and all institutions would prosper greatly with which
his name is connected and which he starts- This affords a good
spheie for starters of all institutions, societies and speculations,
and they must appoint such men as secretaries and presidents,
as have their lord of the second favourably situated, and who have
good planets in the second houses and who are under the influences
of such periods and sub-periods. The speculations thus started
will attract money, influence, and thrive well. When persons,
whose lords of the 2nd and 10th houses 'are evil, and when those
signs are occupied by evil planets, are selected^ as secretaries,
managers and presidents, the institutions are sure to suffer and
bring discredit upon their promoters. Men arejihoroughly blinded
by prejudice, they spend hundreds or thousands in all preliminary
tomfoolleries, but will not secure the permanency and success
of any institution by consulting row-’peterd astrologers and taking
their advice beforehandDuring the sub-period of the lord of the 2nd, when he is good
or during the sub-period of the planet who is good and who occupies the 2nd house the person will have the pleasure of hearing
his children talk. This means that he will have children and
they will prosper well.
qprtfc PtrPT qpripqff I

SaRWABTH ACHINTAMANi.
Stanza 173.
During the period of the lord of the 4 fh house in the sub-periods
of evil, combust or debilitated planets , the person will be compelled, to
leave Iris country and there anil be great loss among his relations.
From the third, Venkalesa takes the 'reader to the 4th sign.
All these Bhavas are to be counted from the Lagna or birth.
Fourth means, the fourth from the Lagna. As many are making
mistakes about these preliminary facts 1 have to call their attention
to these facts. If Aries is Lagna, it counts as one. The second is
Taurus, the third is Gemini, the fourth is Cancer, and the fifth is
Leo and so on. The fourth house signifies carriages, education,
mother, happiness, relations, morality, lands, horses and houses ;
all these have to be consulted for their prosperity or adversity
with reference to this house, its lord, the planets who occupy it
and those which aspect as well as those who are Karakas (lords)
for the various events. Fourth represents mother audits lord may
he any one of the planets. The Karaka or lord of mother is Chaudra.
Fourth represents education, and its lord may be ICuja. But the
Karaka v lord) for it is Guru and his strength lias to be consulted
in addition to the lord of the fourth. Thus if the lord of the 4th is
a benefic and is well situated, it cannot be said that all those events
which are signified by it will be eqaully prosperous. If the lord
of the 4th and Moon are good, mother will be happy and longlived. If the lord of 4th and Jupiter, are good, the person will
have good education. If he and Mercury are favourable, there will
have good education and high intelligence. If the lord of the 4th
is a benefic, those events indicated by that house will he successful.
A powerful Sukra with a beneficient aspect and the exaltation of
the lord of the 4th will be most desirable and will add much to ■
the worldly comforts of the man. Later on this house will be
dealt with at greater length.

Mental and Bodily Diseases
ifgHR cfifcflcwrsr^ ’rnsrsw I . . .
3RT55ircf Jfl£*TCl«IT <Wni*3 ||
Stanza 17-L.
//* the snh-penods of rnl planets come d avi ili'l the period of flip
lui'tl of the dfh house, trim is eril, the. person Lecontes dernnyed or
insane and will hare dirt ) / and unseasonable ■meals, if the lord or
the dth is a baiefie, these unfavourable results ought not to be predicted.
NOTES
The fifth house represents intelligence and children. And
the author is summarising the results shortly with a view to give
a general idea of what may he expected during the period of the
lord of the 5th when evil and the sub periods of t he evil planets
come in.
tnnfr essrrft'TT^f fw-m i #
strict II
Stanza 175.
If the ecil planets briny their snb-jwriods dnriny the period, of the
lord of the 6th, when he is evil, they pice losses from I itiyafion, pars,
thieves, fire anil enemies and. they also produce jaundice, asthma ,
rate real ram plaints, ronsu mpl inn, enla ryement of spleen or liver ;
and those sab-periods trill be productive of much misery.
NOTESSixth house represents debt, diseases and enemies Men
cannot be more miserable than when they have these three sources
of misfortunes. Any one of them will be enough to kill ordinary
men. Three of them will be too much for even men with wonderful patience. To the list of misfortunes, the author has enumerat-.
ed, he should have added the dim of the creditors. Litigation includes all such sort of things. In all astrology, the most useful
chapters are those which deal with misfortunes, miseries and

Sa R WA ut II achint a m an i .
deaths. Men in all ages have tried to overcome these by knowing them beforehand, and their successes have varied with the
physical conditions they were surrounded, and the amount of
intelligence, patience and devotion they possessed in the pursuit of
knowledge which analysed these sources of misery, and which
enabled them to find out counter influences to modify or remove
them altogether. Hindus pretended great knowledge in these
matters and it is for the students to find out how far their pretensions are justifiable. If a man is surrounded by enemies his life
becomes miserable and uncertain, If he has disease, he suffers
much and gets disgusted, if he has debts, the peace of mind goes
away and often he becomes unprincipled to deceive his creditors,
feixth house, therefore, becomes a very important one and the
moie men study about it, the better it will be for them, with a view
to find means to overcome the evils which may be indicated by the
p anfltary periods and sub-periods. There are differences in the
octiines of asti olog>, on this point. Some authors call good
planets m the sixth house as producers of evil results, while others
say that evil planets in the sixth house produce evil. Regarding
these important differences in astrology I would draw the attention
of my readers to the valuable articles I have contributed in the
pages of my Astrological Magazine in Vols. II, III, IT, V and VI.
cfrjq-qcr ||
Stanza 176.
Ift1t * l' eriod °f fhe M of the 7th who is evil, comes, the person
will have quarrels with females, and his wife may die. He will incur
the displeasure of government, and will be separated from his dear
country. He will he subjected to complaints of the semal organs and
amis

Majutal MiseriesNOTES.
Seventh is the house of marriage, passions, sexual happiness,
and wife. When the lord of that house is evil and his I) am
comes, the person will be banished from his country, will quarrel
with his wife aud she will die The displeasure of the ruling
authorities is a source of unhappiness to him. Venereal complaints
in the sexual organs and in anus will also trouble him much. The
author here simply refers to the period of the evil lord of the 7th
without referring to sub-periods of evil planets. But that is to be
implied. If a Dvsa extends for 20 years, there will be good and
evil planets as Autardasauathas or lords of sub-periods. It is only
the evil lords of the sub-periods who produce the above-named
miseries- Good planets do not give evil results.
Marriage can make a “ heaven of hell and a hell of heaven.”
A good wife, obedient, loving and chaste, will make a man enjoy
heavenly bliss although he may be surrounded by great miseries
and poverty. But a quarrelsome, unfaithful and impertinent wife
can make a man extremely miserable, although, he may be rolling
in wealth, and may have a good social position* The seventh
house represents wife as well as sexual organs, and the complaints
therefrom. Evil plauets make him adulterous and give him as the
result'of immorality, continuous future sexual diseases.
Stanza 177.
During the period of the lord of the 8th when evil the subperiods of Baku, Mars and Saturn give loss of wealth, reputation ,
life , wife , relations , friends and brothers ■
NOTES.
Venkatasa names only Rahu, Kuja and Sani as evil planets
here, and says that during their sub-periods they produce undesir-

ISO
SaUW AKi'tl A‘JH 1ATA.M AX J .
able results. The lord of the 8th is generally had uud if lie
happens to he an evil planet he will be much more so. By evil,
I believe it is to he understood as the planet being iu evil houses,
with, evil aspects and conjunctions or owning evil signs.
p-TK^rfer tffafNTcrrsr tj?lrw>T: |
cT5in%qr% frqrrsRRf n
lj llu j lord uf the 9 tli is evil, during his period and
period* 0 / Rah a, Sani, Ku/a and Had, there a- ill be mac,
/rum wanderings in a /<>rei,j,t country, hatred of relations ,
tnth brother* and separation from home.
the sub
4 misery
quarrels
NOTES
in the above stanza Ravi has been omitted as an evil planet
while here and elsewhere he is included in the list of evil planets.
Jth 1 epresents father., religiousness. 1 lui pas and wealth in a
general way. Generally the lord of the 9th is good by ownership
as it is a Thrikona, and confers strength on its lord. But when he
is evil, debilitated, in unfriendly houses with evil aspects and
conjunctions, he cannot certainly be expected to produce good.
Dining the Dasa of the lord ot the 9th when evil and the* subperiods of tsani, Ivuja, Rahu, and Ravi the person suffers from hatred
of relations, separation from home, and quarrels with brothers.
U these lords of sub-periods an good by exaltation and aspects
then they will not do much evil.
RPTRCFR WlfriTOr ||
Stanza 179.
2 he sul-penods of. evil planets daring the period of the lord of
the LO th when evil, will produce imprisonment , many hinds of mise -

PliiSJ.IC DjStiltAei! AN1» DaNUKIO
nea, horrible and disturbing dreams, emanation in the hod;/ />;/ carious hinds of misjurtun.es and nil regntutiowNOTESVenkatasa lias not here said who are evil planets- In Stanza
16G, he stated who are evil planets and when the subsequent
stanzas omit to mention them, it is understood that the student
refers to them. [Vide notes to Stanza 1GG). They are Raliu, Kuja,
Sani and Ravi, weak Moon and bad Mercury.
Tenth is the house of reputation, means of livelihood, general
vise and influence or rajayoga titles, political success and position.
Some have great influence with the (iovernnient, some command
respect among their relations, some are obeyed be their class people, some secure universal respect. All these states of influences
and their thousand different, grades are due to the strength of the
lord of the 10th and those who occupy and aspect it. Man always
suffers public disgrace if evil planets aspect or occupy the 10th
when its lord is powerless, when debilitated planets occupy it, and
when there is evil conjunction there- This is a very important
house, and deserves every care at the hands of the student. If
there are exalted planets in the tenth house and they are not
debilitated in the Navainsas the person gets sudden elevations. If
exalted planet occupies a debilitated Antra the pe-son gets promotion and gets also degradation. All these Bhavas or houses are
carefully explained in the subsequent chapters.
n
Stanza 180 .
If the sub-periods of Ravi, Kuja, Raliu and Sani intervene in
the period of the evil lorcl of the 11th house, the person suffers losses
through the displeasure of the ruling authorities, disturbance to his
legitimate /cork, mental distractions and general misery-

FvWiWAUTIIACIHN 'I' A M A XI
8th, and lSlh houses fi om each other the;/ produce banishment, death,
d'siuissal, sorrow i input at ions against honor and general mtserip
These hare been eu ref nil if a nd elaborate! if described daring the periods
and sub- periods of eril planets hii the learned Hindndras «
NOTES.
I have explained in full who are permanent and who nve
temporary friends and all the shades of differences arising from
these sources in my notes to Stanzas 109-110 (ride P. P. 94 & 95).
About the evil influences of planets occupying 6th, 8th, and 12th
houses see notes on Stanza 1 -4-1. p. 124. If evil planets happen to
ho tempornrv f-ieuds rho unfavourable results will he greatly
modified and the person will have misfortunes in a mild form.
Those planets who are in the 6th, Stli and 12th houses from each
other at the time of birth give worry, separation from home and
native country ; dismissals, and degradations, false imputations
constant quarrels with mean and low men and general misery.
All these results, says W.ikatasu, a-e very carefully and elaborately
described in the Dasa and Blmkti Phalams by the famous Mv.nindras or the great Mahanshis. lie plainly therefore admits his
position as a compiler ami takes no credit for any originality in
his work. Sanvavtha Chintamani is an exhaustive compilation
from the most famous works on astrology found during the time
< f the lea rni’d author.
Many people are sensitive and if false or illgrounded imputations arc levelled agamst them they feel extremely offended and
have great misery. Banishment from a country is unpleasant,
however it might be brought about. All these unfavourable results
have to be predicted during the periods of planets who are ill
situated and who have temporary enmity with the lords of the suhperiods.

■BntTirmiEs or Oiiii.likex.
fNcrr^r^ 5TRr?r?r^f qf^rq^nr i
usftqirrefcqsnf^ it .
swfaqftffrcqNs'rsT-q qs^mi l
stanzas 184 and 185.
The great Mums have framed eery short and difficult sutras
indicating extensive meaning in the form of Vasa and Bhuhti explanations. When the Sun moves in the third house from the Lagoa of
Garbliadhana or in the 6th and 9th from it the birth of the child
must be predicted. The ffth house from the concept, ion Lagan has
been described by the learned in astrology as (hat which ivutdd be the
birth of the f uture child:
NOTES.
Very important issues have been indicated iu these stanzas
and the readers’ attention is drawn to them. Children are indicated by the 5th house in a horoscope, Ihis is not a future contingency, bat one which already lies prefigured in the horoscope
of any person. A child’s horoscope is taken and its children who
are then nowhere, will be described in plain terms, their number,
sex, prosperity^ death and other important particulars appearing
therein. Where are these children of children ? and how can an
astrologer know anything of the children of a baby which is perhaps only a minute old ? T he Hindu astrology shows its superiority over the Western systems in that it includes the Karma, the
Gnana and the Moksha theories, and rises far above the level of a
material science which can command insight and knowledge only
on a phyiscal basis. All astrological writers are agreed in giving
influences from the very commencement of sexual union and
every one of them traces connection even earlier than that. The
sexual function itself is based upon the influence of planets and

Sa 1! \VA BTH A'.’ HINT AM AX I .
inhuman, murder. But Hindu sciences go a step further and trace
the prehirth influences even to earlier stages. Conception is the
act at which the prepared seed of the male enters the prepared bed
of the female. If it is admitted that the faetus in the womb of
the female is subjected to good or evil influences during the
carrying months will it not be reasonable to concede that the seed
in the male before its entry into the bed of the female, must
have been subjected to similar influences ? The Hindu astrological and religious writers have gone even a step further. When
an infant is born, and its horoscope is carefully prepared, it may
be found out by referring to the fifth house what number of
children, of what sex and of what fortune, the baby will have in
future. This may be predicted with reference to the 5th house.
Therefore it is obvious that the future issues of the infant are already lying prefigured as it were in the infant and being moulded
by invisible forces and that its horoscope indicates both their
number and their sexes. It will be in the hands of the person to
change the law of sex and get ma'es or females as he pleases, provided he knows beforehand what sort of children he would get,
through competent astrologers and would take proper measures to
change their sex and fortunes before their development is completed
to give the sex formation. European astrologers are entirely
silent on these matters because their astrology gives only the
results of influences at the birth time without teaching the higher
causes which produce these results. If planetary influences are
fixed and there is no power in the world to change their effects,
then there is no hope for humanity and despair would be their
goal. It does not appear to he so arranged by the al 1 merciful
power of the Almighty. Planets indicate previous causes and their
results and there is a ray of the Mighty Power in man called the
Brahma Kala which when, properly devoloped by Yogao Manthra,
or Q-nana methods, can be made to overcome and regulate the
planetary influences to the greatest advantage of man. A good

Prenatal Influences.
astrologer must not only be well versed in astrology but also
in other sciences which have been recommended in the Hindu
method as having a direct bearing upon it. This is a very difficult
and important question and I have frequently referred to it in the
columns of the Astrological Magazine. As the planetary influences of birth are concentrated, as it were, to a large extent,
comprising the prenatal, paternal, maternal and karmaic results,
it may be generally taken as a safe guide to go on from that period
and base all future predictions upon it. Here a large field for
speculation is opened for those who care to know more about the
immediate causes which govern the terrestrial phenomena. All
natural forces are not of the same intensity or potentiality. Some
are apparently weak while others are tremendously strong. The
smaller are naturally governed by the greater. In man the mind
is greater than the physical forces. Mind is governed by some
unknown agent called Self or Ego, This may be called Soul or
jeeva according to the development in an individual. The last
again is governed by still higher forces, until we go to the final
Power called the Brahma . Predictions therefore are relative and
pertain to certain Physical levels. There is no fatalism and the
so-called inevitable is an ignorant fiction. The higher is the human
knowledge the greater are the chances of material and moral
advantages to be secured. But for cafeful delicate and definite
predictions, not only a thorough knowledge in astrologer is
needed, but also acknowledge in other sciences which have a direct
bearing on the Astrological principles. Medicine as known to the
Western nations has made ordinary progress in the direction of
reproduction and continuation of species. Every sexual act of the
male with the female does not give rise to conception. The
medical man cannot say when a woman eoncieves. There are
only certain periods when conception can take place. The marriage adaptations, the numerous rituals and the fixing of auspicious
times for sexual union are based upon the theory that when the

S.Alt WA F.TH AO flINTA MAXJ .
inhuman murder. But Hindu sciences go a step further and trace
the prebirth influences even to earlier stages. Conception is the
act at which the prepared seed of the male enters the prepared bed
of the female. If it is admitted that the fsetus in the womb of
the female is subjected to good or evil influences during the
carrying months will it not be reasonable to concede that the seed
in the male before its entry into the bed of the female, must
have been subjected to similar influences ? The Hindu astrological and religious writers have gone even a step further. When
an infant is born, and its horoscope is carefully prepared, it may
be found out by referring to the fifth house what number of
children, of what sex and of what fortune, the baby will have in
future- This may be predicted with reference to the 5th bouse.
Therefore it is obvious that th e future Issues of the infant are already lying prefigured as it were in the infant and being moulded
by invisible forces and that its horoscope indicates both their
number and their sexes. It will be in the hands of the person to
change the law of sex and get males or females as he pleases, provided he knows beforehand what sort of children he would get,
through competent astrologers and would take proper measures to
change their sex and fortunes before their development is completed
to give the sex formation. European astrologers are entirely
silent on these matters because their astrology gives only the
results of influences afc the birth time without teaching the higher
causes which produce these results. If planetary influences are
fixed and there is no power in the world to change their effects,
then there is no hope for humanity and despair would be their
goal. It does not appear to be so arranged by the all merciful
power of the Almighty. Planets indicate previous causes and their
results and there is a ray of the Mighty Power in man called the
Brahma Kala which when, properly devoloped by Yogao Manthra,
or Q-nana methods, can be made to overcome and regulate the
planetary influences to the greatest advantage of man. A good

Prenatal Influences.
astrologer must not only be well versed in astrology but also
in other sciences which have been recommended in the Hindu
method as having a direct bearing upon it. This is a very difficult
and important question and I have frequently referred to it in the
columns of the Astrological Magazine. As the planetary inflmnces of birth are concentrated, as it were, to a large extent,
comprising the prenatal, paternal, maternal and karmaic results,
it may be generally taken as a safe guide to go on from that period
and base all future predictions upon it. Here a large field for
speculation is opened for those who care to know more about the
immediate causes which govern the terrestrial phenomena. All
natural forces are not of the same intensity or potentiality. Some
are apparently weak while others are tremendously strong. The
smaller are naturally governed by the greater. In man the mind
is greater than the physical forces. Mind is governed by some
unknown agent called Self or Ego. This may he called Soul or
jeeva according to the development in an individual. The last
again is governed by still higher forces, until we go to the final
Power called the Brahma . Predictions therefore are relative and
pertain to certain Physical levels. There is no fatalism and the
so-called inevitable is an ignorant fiction. The higher is the human
knowledge the greater are the chances of material and moral
advantages to be secured. But for careful delicate and definite
predictions, not only a thorough knowledge in astrologer is
needed, but also acknowledge in other sciences which have a direct
bearing on the Astrological principles. Medicine as known to the
Western nations has made ordinary progress in the direction of
reproduction and continuation of species. Every sexual act of the
male with the female does not give rise to conception. The
medical man cannot say when a woman concieves. There are
only certain periods when conception can take place. The marriage adaptations, the numerous rituals and the fixing of auspicious
times for sexual union are based upon the theory that when the

SaKVVVUTII At'II 1 NTAM AXI.
planetary Dasas and Bhukties are favourable these facilitate
conception, when they are unfavourable they produce abortions
or disturbances. The intensity of evil mnst l>e met by an equal
intensity of counteracting influences by remedial measures.
Excellent times ( Lmjiut*) might l>e fixed by competent astrologers
for the proportion of desired children and success might be
ensured by cureful calculation of the previous forces against the
birth of issues and the good influences which might be directed in
favour of them. Tf sexual union fails in producing conception the
reason must be sought in astrological causes- Medicine is thoroughly
helpless in this matter. A person-male or female, who has Mars
.Saturn or weak Sun with evil combination in the fifth house will
have no children, or will have children who die early, because on
every act of his sexual union with his partner, the influences of
these malefics will be exercised, and they will dry up the
progeny by the unfavourable magnetic currents. But when
benefics are there the seed will be prolific and the house-hold will
be blessed with children.
jap rt i
^JT?rvif^fJrT[Cil^ 1

SiiXiSS AND PkCUIiIAUITIBS OF ( UiLORKN'. iO l
If the Navamsa of conception sign falls in nude signs or those
occupied by male planets , -male children must be predicted . If otherwise female children will be born.
If the lords of conception sign and the 3rd from it, are occupying
the conception Lagna ( N ishaka) then the birth of twins must be predicted. 187.
If the lords of conception sign and the 3rd from it are found in
the 3rd house, there will be twins born. If the conception, Lagna
is occupied by Mercury or Saturn having the aspects of evil
planets , then the child born will be ill-developed ( Pindakriti ) but
if benefics. aspect them such results ought not to be predicted. If the
lord of conception occupies the IQth house from it and llahu occupies
the conception time the child will be born until feet first. 188-189.
If the lord of the 8th from conception joins with llahu and occupies conception Lagna then the child will be born with the umbilical
cord wound round its neck or head like a serpent • If llahu and
Gulika occupy any Iceudra or if the lord of conception joins with lb c
lord of 8th and occupies a kendra similar results have to be
predicted. 190.
If the Brakkana of conception Lagna is occupied by malefics , the
child loill have similar cords . If the Brakkana of conception
happens to be Andaja or Surpaja the child born will have a similar
appearance. 191.
NOTES.
I have already told my readers that V enkatesa is an exhaustive compiler and has tried to give as many ’useful combinations as
could be conveniently staffed into a decent volume.
Children are bom in various ways and forms and it can be
seen at once that the influences of the first as well as subsequent

Sa R\V AKTHACHI NT A M AN 1 .
It ‘2
sexual unions between the couple have a great deal of effect upon '
the formation, capacity and prosperity of the future child.
There are normal as well as abnormal births and the formations and malformations of the f ictus are also often curious and
interesting.
First Venfcatasa gives combinations for the birth of twins and
then for malformations among children. If the lord of the conception Lutjna joins with the lord of the 3rd from it and both
occupy the conception sign, or if both of them are found in the
3rd from the conception time, then the birth of twins must be
predicted. He gives only two combinations for the birth of twins.
Those who want to have more knowledge about these facts can refer to stanza 4 of Chapter V of Briliat jataka.
If the conception Lagna is combined with Mercury or
Saturn, having the powerful aspects of evil planets, like Mars,
Sun and weak Moon, then the foetal development will be stinted
and the child will become a mass of flesh without well developed
organs and if these planets Buda and Sani have the beneficial aspect
these malformations ought not to be predicted. It will be seen
here how important the conception time is and what special care
should be taken when a man wishes to join a woman for the
purposes of sexual union and reproduction. All children are exr
pected to be naturally born with their head first. But there are
some instances in which children are born with feet first. This
is not considered to be auspicious. If^the lord of conception sign
is in the 10th from it and Rahu occupies the conception Lagna
then the child wili be bom with feet first and head afterwards.
There are soine children who are born with some covers and
other appendages. The author gives a few combinations to find
out these curious phenomena.

Drakkana Influences. 103
If the lord of the 8th from conception and Rahu occupy the
conception Lagnatlie child will be born with an umbilical cord
round its head, neck or body in a curious shape- fashion.
Similar results are to be predicted when Rahu and Gulika are together in Kendra or the lord oE conception and the 8th in Kendra.
If the Dralckana of conception time happens to be owned by
cruel planets then also the child will have similar appendages. For
Drakkanas see p. 25 of this hook, also Ohap. XXVII, Brihatjjataka
with lihattot Palais commentaries.
Then he refers to two expressions called Andajas and Surpajas.
Those who are bom when the conception takes place in the And a j a,
or S nr jin Drakkana rising will have similar cords or cowls or hoods
covering them. Andajas are those which are born from And a an egg
or bird Drakkanas and they are: —
2nd Drakkana of Mithuna Gemini.
1st Drakkana of Simha — Leo.
3rd Drakkana of Thula— Libra. Surpa (, Serpent) Drakkanas are
3rd Drakkana of Cancer (Kataka) 1st and 2nd Drakkanas of
Vrischika (Scorpio) and 3rd Drakkana of Meena (Pisces). A few
remarks on sexual union will not be out of place.
Every sexual act is not followed by conception. When the
seed thrown by the male is retained in the womb oi the female
conception takes place. The time at which the male fluid is
injected into the organ of the female and retained there for purposes of reproduction, is technically called conception and this
time must fall into some Lagna or Zodiacal sign. In the month
of Aries at sunrise a person cohabits with a female and conception
takes place. Aries will be the conception time. Suppose the
person joined with a women just about the sunset in the solar
month of Aries on the 10th day, then the connection took place
in Libra which is the setting sign. If the male seed is retained

194 Sarwartiu Cbintamani.
bv tin' woman then Libra is the conception time or sign- The
divisions of these signs, as usual, into 9 erpiil parts Tiirnish us
wit It N iivaiusas. By mathematical calculations it is easy to find
in what Xnvamsa conception took place with the necessary combinations of planets at the time. Those who wish to be careful in
begottin jS their progeny Would do well to think of the proper
times for sexual union. Females with ordinary intelligence find out
whether die seed is retained or not, and the time may be marked at
once for Titure guidance and predictions. They also know when
they are likely to conceive if sexually joined- The married
couple should be careful in their acts of reproduction, for they
have grot significance and lead them to permanent misery or
happiness according as they join in gcod or evil times. "VVe mostly
determine our own future and every care should be exercised for
our advantage.
esiiPrCflr I
^i5.d5T^f«rfr?^*rr^l sna5*i^i%5nn«r^ i
^.^qrq n
^ratofr ^rWwfiT; |
jf n u . re are beneficial aspects to the conception time , there will
he no .vch remits.
Jf J >-/•’.<?. Taurus or Leo becomes conception time with Mars or
Saturn in it, the Sarparasfana will be in that part of the body which
is indicated by the Naramsa of the conception sign.
If tkr birth is occupied by a malefic and aspected by many evil
planets or if it falls in an evil planet's house with Rahu or Kethu in

Maeitai Miseeees.
it, tin ' rhihl trill liner Ike umbilical rofil trotted run mi it nr mil hare
noma road or mmrimj.
Jf the birth lx otrueil by a untie fie uud flte lords t]t tin birth ami
fourth iiii'tnnlhi e.rehaarje their house* the tufa at trill Imre similar
eoceriiiq.
NOTESIf there are beneficial aspects to the conception Lagoa then the
above results ought not to be predicted. All the Zodiacal signs
represent different organs of Kola- Parasha and hence the
human bodv. To find out which part of tlie body or organ will
have these appendages or circles or coverings the author >ays take
the Ntieamxu of the birth, and see where it falls. a hen the
organ governed by that sign would be affected by this Sar/m Vestitha or Xala cestit/m. If concepti .11 is in Aries w ith evil planets, ilars
or Saturn in it and the Xavamsu of conception falls in 1 ancer, then
heart or about the chest of the ciiild, the ring or the umbilical
cord or covering will be found.
(Refer to P 27.). Cancer represents the heart of Kalapurusba.
If the conception sign is aspected by many evil planets aud
has an evil planet in it, or if it falls in a sign owned by an evii
planet and occupied by Rahu or Kethu or if tlie conception sign
is owned by a malefic and he occupies the 4th house while the
lord of the 4th is in the conception the child will have round its
body many coils of the umbilical cord or similar ap lenda^es.
{See Stanza 4. ch . V Brihat Jatabi). A careful study of those
combinations enables one to find out the circumstances and
peculiarities of the birth of children and to verify or fa lsify the
correctness of the times of birth given by those who are interested
in its welfare.

19G Sarwahtha Chintamani.
Stanza 195 .
// malefirs are strong and le.nejics are weak, with the lords of
conception ami the 4th house* e.eehamjiutj mutually their houses and
joined with Hahn or Kr.thu , and eunuch planets are in quadrants, there
must he predicted birth oj beastsNOTESChapter III in Brihat Jataka is entirely devoted to the explanation of such births and their classification. This opens up a
wide field for inquiry and research and requires very special study
and high intelligence. Venkatesa says that for the above births
the evil planets must be strong and benefies weak and the quadrants must be occupied by Mercury and Saturn who are styled
impotent planets. The different soui’ces of strength and classification of evil and good planets have been clearly explained in the
First (. liapier.
Astrology is no ordinary science and it requires much knowledge 3 general intelligence and great skill in using the information stored in by the reader. The births above referred to are
called in this as in other A strological works Vioyoni Jainna or
those which are born outside the Yoni or sexual organ of a human
female.
Yum lias been techuicallv narrowed to mean the sexual organ
O P
of a human female5n^rt5rcwTr«n;l
fsstfact StorVrcfc il
it

BIRTHS OF CATTLK.
^sreMtnt*Tr§- 55^r^^FR^r%^sf[ ii
If in a Lagua malefic $ ace strata/ ami he tafia* freak and if is
aspected by Mercury and Saturn predict quadruped birth#*
If evil planets strongly occupy their awn house* ichile hrttep.es do
not do so birth of quadruped# is predicted, by the learned hi Astrolugt/.
If Lagua is in a common sign and has the conception Uralckamt
(. Pakshi ) rising^ strongly aspect ed by a malefic with a nmcafdcNaramst/
or the Navamsa of Mercury , the birth of other than human species
must be predicted .
If such Lagna is a spurted by }'enus the birth of nars^ if joined
with or aspected by Saturn buffaloes; if combined nr asjtnded In/
by Rahu or Kethu rams m ust be predicted .
If birth falls in a Mercurial sign with lord of Qtlt in it and joined
or aspected by Mercury both the husband and irife become impotent •
If such a sign is occupied by Mars and Saturn the husband alum:
becomes impotmU
If the Sun and Moon or Saturn and Mercury occupy odd and
even signs respectively with mutual aspects they ivill produce
impotency .
notes.
In the last portions of the Stanzas 199 and 200 separate subject
has been introduced namely y the potency or impotency of the husband and the wife or it may be of the male and female living together. As the Stanzas are interwoven they are put as they are
found in the original

Sarwabtha Chintamasi.
The Id tjna means the sign of birth. T he aspect of Mercury
and Saturn with the strength of m alettes and the weakness of
benefits, produces quadruped species. But there are many kinds
of quadrupeds iu the world with all of which men are not directly
concerned. The most important domestic animals are named and
a knowledge of their prosperity is equally essential for the comfort of man.
If powerful malefics occupy their own houses while benefios
are not found to reside in their own signs the birth of quadrupeds
ought to he predicted. If powerful benefics occupy their own
houses, they will prevent a beastly origin and produce birth
among the human species.
In the previous Stanzas I stated about the Draklninas > but a
more detailed informat ion is needed here.
The 12 Zodiacal signs are divided into three equal parts, each
of which is called Dniklmna . Thus in the whole Zodiac there are
12 s 8=36 Drakkauus. Their knowledge is essential. Male, female,
quadruped, bird and serpent are symbolical names given to these
and I shall give a short description of each of then here. The
author has omitted their details although he refers to them
frequently.
Aries. — Maslia.
tO - Drakkana-male armed with weapons governed by
Mars.
(2) . Quadruped female Drakkana, horse-faced ruled by the
Sun.
(3) . Male armed with weapons, and cruel Drakkana owned
by Jupiter.
Taurus — Wishaba.
(1) . Female, fury Drakkana ruled by Venus.
(2) . Male quadruped Drakkana owned by Mercury.
(3) . Male quadruped Drakkana governed, by Saturn.

Description of Drake anasGemini- — Mi thima.
{]). Female Drakkana ruled by Mercury.
(2) . Male bird armed Drakkana governed by
(3) . Male armed Drakkana ruled by Saturn.
Cancer. — Kataka.
(1 ) . Male quadruped Drakkana owned by the Moon.
(2) . Female Drakkana ruled by Mars
(3) . Male human serpent Drakkana governed by Jupiter
Leo. — Simha.
(1) . Male, quadruped, bird Drakkana ruled by the Sun.
(2) . Male, armed Drakkana ruled by Jupiter.
(3> Male quadruped, armed Drakkana governed by Mars
Virgo. — Kanya.
(I V Female Drakkana ruled by Mercury.
(2) . Male armed Drakkana governed by Saturn.
(3) . Female Drakkana owned by Venus.
Libra. — Thu la-
(1) Male human Drakkana ruled by Venus.
(2) Male bird Drakkana owned by Saturn.
(3) Male, monkey shaped quadruped Drakkana ruled by
MercuryScorpio. — V rise-hike.
(1) Female Serpent Drakkana ruled by Mars.
(2) Female Serpent Drakkana governed by Jupiter.
(3) Male quadruped tortoise faced lion shaped Drakkana
ru'ed by the Moon.
Sagittarius — Dhanas
(1 ) Male quadruped horse bodied armed Drakkana governed by Jupiter.
(2) Female Drakkana ruled bv Mars-
(3) Male armed Drakkana controlled by the Sun.

Sabwartha Chiktamani.
aoo
r*
lapricoraus- Makara. _ Tlralckana ruled by Saturn.
(1) Male quadruped chained Drakka a <
(2) Female Drakkana ruled by "Venus.
(3) Male armed Drakkana governed by Mercury
Aquarius.— Kumba.
m Male eagle faced Drakkana ruled by baturn.
(-2) Female fury Drakkana governed by Mercury.
(3 ) Male Drakkana ruled by Venus.
Pisces. — Meena.
(1) Male sailing Drakkana ruled by Jupitei.
f2) Female well decked Drakkana controlled 0 ° 0 ”'
pkala’sCommentarresenOl.ap.XXVIIo
When malefics occupy then- own bone® and ,
or do ,o the learned In astrology predret of qnadmped
not do so, tlie planets have a
v,- t >.a Here it seems to mean that tne l
births, ueie , p anets raise
tendency to make births beastly while goon y
them far chore the brute creation. The finest men-mocally
^Tkioe-mnst he those who have Jupiter, Venus and Mercury • m
Xtlces. When malefics occupy their ovyn houses and the
benehr occupy their own houses quadruped brr.hs «nnot be
piloted. By the expression the learmd m astrology Venkatas*
Lviv refers to the old authors who we«-all of them wVhput
anv execution — Maharishis with splendid intellectual powers.
" W hen the conception falls in a movable (diara) sign, and
bird Drakkana rises in it with a Navamsa owned by Merely or is
itself a movable one, and is powerfully aspected by malefics, the
bhth of quadrupeds must be predicted. The four movable sigps
(cMra Basis) are Aries, Cancer, Libra and Capncomus ruled by
Mars, Moon, Venus and Saturn respectivelyIf the Navamsas rising are those of Mercury aud the rising
Drakkana W^he fi^n is also movable ififljfc ? yil ,as^s mf with-

Conjunctions Producing Quadrupeds. 201
out beneficial looks, quadrupeds will be born. If such a Lagna
is aspected by Venus, the birth of cows or bulls, if aspected by
Saturn or combined with him buffaloes and if aspected or joined
by Rahu or Kethu goats and sheep must be predicted Aluch.
discretion has to be used iu judging of these combinations and
their intensity, by the astrologer and he must take special care to
see that he thoroughly understands these combinations before he
ventures on his predictions. There are many other subtle influences which have also to be taken into consideration in tbo
determination of the reproduction of human and other species- of
animals- It may be argued that while human beings themselves,
do not keep any records of the times of their sexual unions or
conception times who is likely to keep any record of the union or
conception of beasts and so forth. What the astrologers mean is
that the prosperity or adversity of human as well as any other
animals can be ascertained and predicted by observing the working of planetary influences. In the crossing of animals, times may
be correctly kept and they may be referred to astrologers for
future predictions regarding their careers.
All animals have their fortunes and misfortunes and they
can be judged by the combinations obtained at the time of conception or of birth as the case may be.
From the predictions of quadrupeds and other peculiar births
Venkatasa takes the readers through some of the combinations
by which potency and impotency of the joining couple may bepredicted. By the word potency perhaps the authors mean the
capability of sexual union by which reproduction is ensured and
obtained. Men and women may think that as long as they have the
necessary sexual capacity they are potent. This does not certainly
seem to be the case. Real sexual potency is that which produces
children at stated times. This potency maybe present or absent iu
both male and female or in any one of them. Here the stanzas are not

fcsAUW AK'J'IIA t HINTa.UAXI.
very explanatory. He refers to bi ills. But what are the readers to
understand- Is it the birth of the male or the female or does it refer
to both of them • In sexual union the marriage tie is not essential.
Children may be — and very often are — the results of immoral connection and it is to be understood as referring to man and woman
who join together- A man or woman may keep a host of lovers
and think that he or she is satisfying them sexually. This may
be true so far as the animal gratification is concerned. Bui this
does not really serve the purpose for which sexual union is designed
by the all wise Nature There is no harm in consulting the
horoscopes^ox both the male and the female and if union takes
place between a couple who have such unfortunate combinations
then the question of getting children becomes a hopeless task.
If birth falls in Gemini or Virgo the signs of Mercury with the
lord of the Gth house occupying the same and if Mercury joins or
aspects such birth the husband and wife both become impotent.
They will have no real power to reproduce their species, however often they may join in their sexual correspondence — and
they will not be blessed with any children. But when Gemiui
or Virgo is combined with the lord of the 6th with Mars and
Saturn the husband alone will become impotent. In such a case
the wife being capable of reproducing may bear children if she
marries or joins another potent man- It is a well known fact that
a. person who has no children bv the first wife, begins to o-et
children as soon as he marries another woman It is also known
that a woman who bears no children with one man, begins to bear
when she has connection legally or illegally with another person.
If the Sun occupies odd and Moon occupies even sign with
mutual aspects the child borD will be an eunuch. If Saturn
occupies odd and Mercury even signs with mutual aspects then
the birth of a eunuch must also be predicted. Venkatasa is
giving here 6 combinations for the birth of eunuchs or impotent

Production of I m potency.
persons and he is simplv reproducing the ideas of Varaha Mihira
in his own language. (Vide BrL datuhx Gh, IV. Sf. 13)
In the last combination there seems to be a little difference in
the wording of the slnlra. Venkatnsa makes Mercury in the even
and Saturn in the odd sign to produce an impotent personas birth.
But Varaha Mihira makes that combination as Saturn in even and
Mercury in odd sign aspecting each other. Bhattotpala the
learned commentator of Brihat Jataka quotes a long passage from
Badarayana and supports his view. The mistake therefore
seems to be due to faulty preservation of the 1 W.t or an oversight
of Venkatasa. If the sloka read Blianuju Viudu Pnfroa everything
would be alright : Preference must always be given to original
writers specially when they happen to be writers of Yyasa\s and
Parasara’s stamp.
There seems to be also a doubt in this stanza which is not
capable of easy solution. So far as Venkatasa has given aspects
he has followed Varah a mihira and his admirers but not. the aspects of Jaimini (ride P.90. Sfun::.i 104 uotrr). If the 'Moon
is in an even sign aud the sun is in an odd sign how can they
aspect each other. Aries is odd and suppose the sun is there.
Then the only sign from which the Moon can aspect him would be
Libra, which also must be an odd sign. In any other place, there
cannot be mutual aspects on a strong scale. Take an example.
even.
odd
Sun.
even.
odd.
odd.
Zodiac with
even.
even
twelve signs.
odd.
odd.
even.
odd
Moon.
| even.

Sarwartha Chintamani.
If we take tlie fractional aspects then it is possible to verify
this statement. But in fractional sights neither the Sun nor the
Moon is strong and in the absence of better authority it must be
taken to mean the fractional aspects of the planets Sun and Moon.
If Moon is in Cancer, it is even, 4th from the Sun, and therefore
has a fractional aspect. From Cancer Aries is 10th, the Sun is
there and Moon aspects him in the 10th house- In the enumeration of these sis combinations for important births, VarahaMihira is supported by Badarayana and other ancient writers, all
of whom give mutual aspects to the Sun and Moon in odd and
even signs as also to Mercury and Saturn. The best commentator
on astrology appears to be Bhattotpala and even this learned
scholar makes no reference in his commentaries to this improbable combinations of mutual aspects to the Sun and Moon in odd
and even signs. It is very strange and I do not know what to
say about this. I suppose those adepts did not make much
difference among these fractional aspects and full aspects and
tacitly thought that the student who begins such high works
requires no special comments upon these points. At least
Bhatthoipala could have hinted at the fractional aspects- The
readers are to notice such facts and draw their own inferences.
I simply point out facts where they ought to be noticed.
T^'RdTJTf.R^qf^ffir: j%r|: : n
Stanzas 20 1 . and 202.
(1) If Mars m an odd sign aspects the Sun in an even sign, or
has the Sun's aspect — -

Varieties in Impotence
(2) If the birth sign is odd with Moon in it having the aspect of
Mars in an even sign —
(3) If Moon is in an even sign and Mercury is in on odd sign
and have the aspect of Mars in any sign —
(4) If birth is in an even sign and Moon in on odd sign and
occupy Male Navamsas with the aspect of Mars — in all these combinations the person born ivill become impotent.
NOTES.
Impotency may be here classified under various heads.
There are persons born as neutrals or eunuclis and they will have
their sexual organs ill developed to do their normal functions.
There are others who lose their potency at an early age by some
nervous disorder and who become useless in their after lives for
sexual purposes. Some have weak sexual appetites and may be
classed as impotent, because they rarely seek cohabitation, and are
easily satisfied with a nominal connection.
There are others who by early abuse lose potency in a short
time and may be classed as useless for sexual connection. Some
have potency but have peculiar magnetic currents running in them
which keep them aloof and which never permit them to have any
thing with the opposite sex. On the other hand some persons
have been known to be sexually strong, but when they are coupled
with a woman, they lose their potency on the very first contact,
and become incapable of further sexual intercourse. All these
cases apply to males as well as females with various grades of
differences, and the author here gives limits to find out the competency of a person in his sexual correspondence and ability to
' reproduce his species for which function Nature seems to have
specially created him. Mars in an odd sign and the Sun in an even
sign with mutual aspects— fractional of course— take aivay the
potency of a man. If Moon and birth are combined and fall in an

Sarv.vrtha Chixtajtasi.
odd sign, and have tlie aspect of Mars in an even sign tie potency
is similarly taken away. If Moon is found in an even sign and
Mercury occupies an odd sign and have Martian aspect the
potency is taken away. Here it seems that the aspect of Mars
must be on both the Moon and Mercury, and not on one planet alone.
If birth falls in an even sign, Mo m occupies an odd sign, these
two are rising in male Navamsas having the aspect of Mars, then
the person becomes impotent. Furusha Navamsas may be explained in two ways, the Navamsas of male planets, or the odd
Navamsas which become masculine.
But I think the latter is meant here. In the last combination Venkatasa differs from Varaha Mihira and Badarayana,
in not mentioning Yenus along with Moon and birth and this may
be due to his following some other doctrine which he had before
him. Astrological writers seem to have had a great deal of
differences in treating of facts, and these may he due to various
experiences of adepts in astrology and the standards of judgments tliev had. Varaha Mihira says that if c ‘ Birth, Moon and
Venus occupy the male NTavam«as of any sign ” the person will
be impotent. This differs from Venkatasa’s statement that birth
in a even sign with Moon in an odd sign having the aspect of
Mars, produces a eunuch- He further says that all the planets
must be occupying the Male Navamsas to produce these results.
There is no hint in Brihatjataka to this effect and I do not think
it is necessary to insist upon this latter statement of Venkatasa as
being correct. In the Sanskrit language the word for eunuch is
Najmmsa or one who has not the vitality of a purusha or male.
This must be specially borne in mind. There are many females
who have ill developed sexual organs unfit for sexual work, and
who consequently cannot conceive and bear children. I do not
know if the word Napumsa can be strictly applied to women.
The writers have used another and a more comprehensive word.

PSIOKITV OF ElKTII.
Kliba or impotent and in this latter sense females as well as males
may be included.
In some places in astrology we apparently come across cei’tain
combinations or aspects which do not happen now and which
therefore would sound as absurd. The older writers did not feel
these difficulties because whenever they found anything irreconcilable they at once admitted their impossibility during their
•times, but plainly hinting that such combinations might have been
occurring during the earlier periods of world's history. Even
<y araha Mihira a profound astronomer and mathematician of unequalled ability and reach gives such combinations and says that
they might have been possible in the earlier ages.
^rnrriifcr^Ri n
Stanzas 20o and 201.
If the Lord of birth is noth Merc tiro t aid rud tic peeled fjij be u epics
the person becomes impotent.
If the lords of the 9th on I loth honors fn>m (drib vccupti
Du slit anas while the lord of the birth . is powerful the person trill be
born as the eldest v-ifhoni any religious Ceremonies performed
when he was in the womb*
If there is an evil planet in the 11th house or if the lord of the
11th joins mi ecil planet the person will be born as the eldest in a
NOTES.
Here lie gives one more combination for impotency and
changes the subject. Mercury is a thoroughly impotent planet
and if the lord of birth joins him without beneficial aspects* there
will be impotency.

Sarwartha Chintamani.
Dus thanas are 6th, 8th and 12th and of these 6th forms one
of the houses of Oopachaga or improvement and therefore may not
be so very bad as the other two are- For the proper performance
of religious ceremonies one has to look to the strength of 9th and
10th houses and their lords. If they are unfavourable the person’s
mother will be neglected during pregnancy or will have irreligious
parents and husband who do not care to follow their religious precepts. Whenever the words religions ceremonies are used, the reader
must understand the rites or ceremonies prevalent among those
classes and sects to which the person belongs. Various Karmas
are prescribed for the superior caste Hindus, to be performed before
the birth of a child, aud after its birth also to modify or neutralise
the previous karmaic evils.
The great object of all these ceremonies seems to be the spirit
ox the maxim that ^prevention is better than cure.” All births
take place as the results of previous karmaic acts and therefore
must be ascertainable to a tolerable extent by the astrological
adepts. J£vil and good influences are known, and the object of
these Shodasa Karmas or 16 rites to be performed for the benefit of
the child is to purify it as far as possible from terrestrial and
and therefore partly sinful deeds, and give it spiritual and religious energy to battle against evil temptations, to live happily in
this world, and to secure that bliss which all Hindu Sastras and
sciences hold out to the sincere devotees. It serves therefore a two
fold purpose namely — an earthly good and a heavenly bliss and both
these can be secured by studying carefully the previous causes for
these results and following the principles of.astrology. If the exertions
of man can prevent or counteract against the Karmic influences
flowing through the planetary agencies, then the writers say that
man must do all that lies in his power to overcome the evil influen*
ces indicated by the symbolical language of astrology. The 11th
must be occupied by an evil planet or the lord of the 1 1th must he
in conjunction with an evil planet to make the person the first

Description of But’cu Places.
bom in a family- He is called Sevmanthu Putm and certain advantages are posseesed by him- Children born without the proper
rituals during the time of pregnancy of their mothers are naturally
less powerful in even way than those who reap the benefits accruing from such performances.
Stanz\ 20o.
If ihe a#ii?iuhi;itf(tlte in Leo. Ihe linns, ■ ni birth ml! linn- fw<>
ih ions, if it f nil ft hi firijo, tin ■ phu-e will he mi >te cable. It berth Jnlls
in the Ik/, 2 ml nr nrd Dr a khan, a of h'qno, the tiir/n* which are
oimjiiei! bn the hmh of the .9/A, 12/// and ofh represent re-ftp retie el ,j
the ronilitioii a rut J're.rliun of ihe Joorx >;/ Ihe birth place.
NOTES
Although short in Sanskrit the stanza is not very clear and
cannot be so expressed in the English language. If the birth
happens to fall in Leo the house will have two doors. If it- is in
Virgo it will be a poor building. If 1st Drakana rises at the time
of birth then the direction of the door will be represented by the
sign occupied by the ruler ol the 9th house from birth. If the
2nd Drakkana rises at the time, the house occupied by the lord of
the 12tli represents the direction of the door- If the third Drakana
rises the sign occupied by the lord of the oth represents the direction
of the doors. An example will better illustrate the author’s
moaning.

SARWALTHAOHINTAilANJ.
Birth
Sun.
Kefchu.
Saturn.
J upiter.
* Mars
Mercury
Zodiac Rasi
! Venus.
Diagram.
I j
Moon. !
Birth is in Pisces in the first Drakkana- As per above stanza
the direction of the door will be represented by the sign occupied
by the lord of the 9th vix Mars. Mars is in A quarius and this
sign represents the Western direction. If the second Drakkana rose at
the time, find the house occupied by the lord the 1 £th who is Saturn.
This planet occupied Taurus and this represents the direction of
the doors aud of the birth place. If the 3rd Drakkana rises, then
the house occupied by the lord of the oth must be found out.
Lord of 5th from birth is Moon and he is in Virgo. This sign
therefore represents the direction of the rloo'-s. Consult similarly
for others. In Brihatjataka and Parasara H- ra these are explained at considerable length and 1 refer the readers to those works
for further information. Venkatasa has been very brief in these
matters, so much so that a few facts read by themselves, are likely
to mislead the student. But he has already told his readers that
those items which are not related by him must be learnt from other
standard works on the subject.
STANZA 206.
The direction of the door in the house , where birth took place
must be predicted by the planets who are in quadrants to the lord of
the birth sign or by the most powerful of the planets.

Directions' of tub Doors.
The number and eharaeter of the woman gathered at the jila^e of
birth mutt be determined bo the forth * of the 2 ml, 12///, 10//* and 4 th
housed Trout the aiyii of birth.
NOTES.
In the previous stanza I Tnl.nlasa briefly gave hints to find out
the number of doors and the condition of the house. But now T he
says about the directions of the doors, and the number of women
gathered at the place of birth and their characteristics. In the
illustrative horoscope given above the lord of birth -Jupiter is
found occupying Gemini, planets tvho are in quadrants
from this are the Moon iu the 4th and the Sun in the 10th.
Moon Is in Virgo which represents the southern direction. The
Sun is in Pisces which represents the North. These then are the
directions which the door or doors must be facing. Many of the
writers in Sanskrit are not clear on this subject. Evei’y door has
two directions, as can be seen by persons from inside or outside.
3i one stands out of the door and looks into it the direction may
point to south. But if one stands in and looks out and he may be
facing the north. Here the aspect must be taken from inside and
not from outside. If this does not tally with the actual experience of the birth place then he says the student must find out the
most powerful of the planets and ascribe the direction indicated
by the sign which is occupied by him.
The sources of strength and weakness have been clearly
explained by V enkatasa in the first chapter and I refer the reader
to my notes there.
Having related a few combinations fertile condition of i lie
house, doors and their direction Venkatasa now comes to determine
the number of women present when the birth of a child takes
place. Many of these combinations are given here with a view to
test the correctness of the horoscope with the actual faots of. the

Sa RWAUTHACHINTAMANI.
child's birth. They themselves may not be of much value when
considered separately.
The number of women who were in the place of birth are indicated by the planets who are occupying the 2nd, the 10th, 4th, 12th
houses from the birth sign. The beauty of perfectly developed
sciences is that they lay down principles which can be interpreted
according to the conditions where they are to be interpreted.
Suppose there are no planets in those houses it must not be supposed that there will be no woman at the place. Combinations in
detail are given for these in Brihatjatnka. Jt is there stated that
the number of womeu will be determined by the number of planets
who are found between the birth sign and the sign occupied by
Moon.
en^VhS5T5*i% I
^ro2T^fS5ni%^tiTl(?rr |
IT^TTf qs^HTRi ||
If the planet in 2, 4, \0 and 12 is Saturn the women will he
Sudras , if the Sun is there they belong to Kshefrias- If there dr®
Rahu and Kethu there will be low caste or casteless women, and' if
there are other planets, the women will belong to that caste which is

Description of Women 1’kesent.
indicated by them. Some writers say that the gathered women may be
found out by the planets iclw are with the lords of 12-1U-4 and 2.
If jupiter, Mercury and Venus occupy the aboee houses the females
will be Brahmin . If evil planets are with them , they will be
Brahmin widows , if Rahu and hath a are with, them , the women will
be sudras. If saturn is there- the woman will be short, dark and
a widoio.
By the planets who are in Drisya chair a those females who are
out of the room where birth, takes -place may be predicted
and by the planets ivho are in Adrisya chakra , those woolen who are
in the room of birth may be predicted.
Those other planets in Drisya and Adrisya chakras, which ace
■not included in the above list, the member of women gathered there
must be predicted.
If the birth falls in a mo vable sign the light in the b irth place
would be dickering and moving, -if it Jails in a f.ced sign the light
would be steadyNOTES.
If saturn occupies 2 — 4 — 10 or 12 and without beneficial
aspects the women gathered will belong to lower orders of society.
Sudras are a class in India. But when the application is to be
made to other women in. other countries where there are no such
caste distinction then the astrologer must say that women of ordinary classes were assembled there. If those houses are occupied by
the Sun, the women will be kshatriyas or warrior classes.These women
may be those who are the wives, daughters or other close relations
of military officers. If in the above houses there are other planets,
the women will belong to that class which is indicated by the planets.
If Jupiter is there they will be brahmins or t hose who belong to
the priestly class. If Rahu or Kethu is there, the women will be
from low classes, or from sankara or mixed classes. Here Venkatasa
gives the opinions of some writers who are not much esteemed but

SAR W ARTU ACH i .\TA .MAXI.
still who have written works on Astrology. Whenever the word
l-erhit is used by the Sanskrit writers it refers to those persons
who are of less repute and authority in astrological matters and
whose names could not still be passed over when they differ from
the older writers.
A enkatasa does not approve of their views and hence he uses
the word bvhil in a half contemptuous way. Some writers say that
by the planets who are in conjunction with the lords of 2-4-10 and
12 the castes of women gathered at the place of birth may be explained. -t hen there is a sort of repetition which is made here to
1 lieady explained in the previous stanzas.
Guru, Sukra and Buda there predict Brahmin women. If they
have evil conjunctions they will be Brahmin widows. If they
have the conjunction of Rahu and Kethu, they will be Sudras- If
Saturn is there, the woman will be short, dark and a widow, lhat
which is seen is called Drisya Chakra and that which cannot be
seen is called Adrisia Chakra. During the day and night men are
only able to see half the sky. Prom the Bast and the West the
distance is nearly ISO c . During the day we can only see half the
globe and in the night the other half- These are technically divided as follows— Drisyachakra comprises all those 6 signs which
arc counted backwards from Lagna. Adrisj achakra comprises
those six signs which are counted from Lagna forwards. Take an
example. If 10 ° in Aries is the birth time then the six signs,
vi * the first ten degrees in Aries, Pisces, Aquarius, capricornus’
Sagittarius, Scorpio and the last 20 degrees in Libra form the Drisya
Chakra, The last 20 degrees in Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer
Leo, Yirgo and the first 10 degrees in Libra form what is called
the Adrisya Chakra. The number of planets in the Drisya Chakra
determines the number of women outside the birth room, and the
number of planets in the Adrisya Chakra determines the number
of women ktfche birth room. Here the number of women: may fee

Xatcre and Position of Light.
very large. Here we liave to consider only those who are directly
concerned with the delivery business.
Then again we have also to consider the exaltations, and other
sources of strength and weakness of the planets and increase or
decrease the number accordingly.
Movable signs, with birth sign in them give the light unsteadiness. Steady or fixed signs make light in the birth place steady
All these have to be examined with a view to definitely settle the
Lagna with greater certainty
The skill, ability and intellectual reach of flu- astrologer must
be very great and his personal experiences in dealing with horoscopes must- indeed be remarkable.
c, va "s
Stanza 2 1 2If lord of birth is in conjunction with cril planet, the health will
suffer: the same result will happen if the haul -.a' I, muni occupies the
8th house from it. If Lord of birth is beuejicialtii aspeeied the evil
should not be predicted.
NOTES.
Venkatasa now takes the readers to the good or bad health
of the natives. Lagna or birth indicates the body and when its
lord is joined by an evil planet, the health suffers. 8th from it is
called Nasa or house of destruction or loss and if the lord of birth
occupies it then also bad health must he predicted- lint if there
is the aspect of a benefic the evil will be absent or considerably
modified. The word Nasa refers to the ! 2tli house as well and that,
also signifies destruction and death. But generally Nasa refers to
Mrityu St ana or the 8 th house, and Varaha mihira and other eminent writers support my view and because I consider 8th as the

SABWARTU ACH 1 .VfAMAXJ .
still who have written works on Astrology. Whenever the word
kedtit is used by the Sanskrit writers it refers to those persons
wlioaieoi less repute and authority in astrological matters and
whose names could not still be passed over when they differ from
the older writers.
A'enkatasa does not approve of their views and hence he uses
the woid hi ‘chit in a half contemptuous way. Some writers say that
by the planets who are in conjunction with the lords of 2-4-10 and
12 the castes of women gathered at the place of birth may be explained. ihen there is a sort of repetition which is made here to
emphasize w hat has been already explained in the previous stanzas,
(xuru, Sukra and Luda there predict Brahmin women. If they
have evil conjunctions they will be Brahmin widows. If they
have the conjunction of Balm and Kethu, they will be Sudras. If
Saturn is there, the woman will be short, dark and a widow. That
which is seen is called Drisya Chakra and that which cannot be
seen is called A dris\ a Chakra. During the day and night men are
only able to see half the sky. from the East and the West the
distance is nearly ISO -. During the day we can only see half the
globe and in the night the other half- These are technically divided as follows— Drisyachakra comprises all those 6 signs which
are counted backwards from Lagna. Adris^achakra Comprises
those six signs which are counted from Lagna forwards. Take an
example. If 10 c in Aries is the birth time then the six signs,
viz. the first ten degrees in Aries, Pisces, Aquarius, capricornus'
Sagittarius, Scorpio and the last 20 degrees in Libra form the Drisya
Chakra. The last 20 degrees in Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer
Leo, Virgo and the first 10 degrees in Libra form what is called
the Adrisya Chakra. The number of planets in the Drisya Chakra
determines the number of vromen outside the birth room, and the
number of planets in the Adrisya Chakra determines the number
of women in the birth room. Here the number of women may be

Nature and Position of Light.
very large. Here we have to consider only those who are directly
concerned with the delivery business.
Then again we have also to consider the exaltations, and other
sources of strength and weakness of the planets and increase or
decrease the number accordingly.
Movable signs, with birth sign in them give the light unsteadiness. Steady or fixed signs make light in the birth place steady'
AH these have to be examined with a view to definitely settle the
Lagna with greater certaintyThe skill, ability and intellectual reach of the astrologer must
be very great and his personal experiences in dealing with horoscopes must indeed be remarkable.
StAxNza 212.
If lord of birth is in conjunction - with evil planet, the health mil
suffer : the same- result will happen if the lord <>/ Laipni nmipies the
8 th house from it. If Lord of birth is beneficially nsperlccl the evil
should not be predicted ~
NOTES.
Venkatasa now takes the readers to the good or bad health
of the natives. Lagna or birth indicates the body and when its
lord is joined by an evil planet the health suffers. 8th from it is
called Nasa, or house of destruction or loss and if the lord of birth
occupies it then also bad health must he predicted- But if then*
is the aspebfc of a beiiefic the evil will be absent or considerably
modified. The Word Nasa refers to the 12th house as well and that,
also signifies destruction and death- But generally Nasa refers to
Mrityu Stana 6r the 8th house, and Varaha mihira and other emineiit' writers 1 support my view and because I consider 8th as the

SAR WA RTIIACH IXTAMANf.
House meant by Venkatasa. If the lord of Lagna is well aspected
and situated the person commands good health and much personal
influence.
>a \o
at^CItprfSrttfirwra; n
Stanza 213 .
ft tin ‘ lorn of birth if,- In birth flth tin 1 lords of Gth, 8th, 12 th the
hodij v:dl be svhj fit ted to rouxt-nd complaints ■ 1/ the lord of birth is
'poirerless, and erd planets occupy birth then the body infers from
diseaseNOTES
The lords of Oth, 8th, and 12th are called Deesthanadhi Pathies
or planets ownin'? evil houses, <Sth and 12th are declared to be
evil, but 6th represents debt, disease and enemies and therefore
its lord is also evil. If the lord of the birth sign is in the Lagna
with any one < f the lords of iitli, 8th, or 12th houses? the body
will he subjected to much disease, ff sill of them join there then
the man will he an invalid
If the lord of binh is powerless, i- e. occupying: unfavourable situation and so forth? the person will have constant diseases
if here is an evil planet in the birth.
From these a general principle may be drawn — namely — that
if the lord of birth is strong, and has powerful good aspects and
associations the man keeps good health, but when the condition is
reversed the person becomes sickly and subjected to diseases.
^^vrfqcScT^rfcpTt^fr ii
Stanza 215 .
If the lot d of birth is toealc and occupies Kendras or Trilconas,
the person has had health. If the lord of the- sign is occupied by the

House Significations.
idl7
birth-lord is found to be posited in the Qthj ftth , or 12th house the
native has sickly constitution .
NOTES
If the lord, i-f birth is weak and occupies kendras or 1st, 4th,
7.th and 10th; or Thrikonas or 5th and 9th houses, the health
will be bad and the man will be sickly. If the lord of the sign
occupied by the lord of birth, is found to occupy 6th, 8th or 12th
houses from the Lagna the man become sickly. Thu , not only
the lord of birth must be strong but also the Lord of the house
occupied by the Lord of birth.
ep^^rfarfaTfSTirrf: ,
Stanza 215.
If the lords of the signs occupied h, the respective Bhncadhi
Bath ics ( Signified tors) happen to join Dustlmnas or ceil houses
the eril must be predicted for all those events which are indicated bn
those houses. If an evil planet is in Lagoa, and Gulika occupies
Thrikonas mth a ng of the KeudraJinafhas, then there ‘cill be evil
to the person bom.
NOTES.
This stanza is not so very clear. If there is to b=- an examination of any horoscope, there are 12 signs or houses counting,
from the Lagna (birth sign) and each sign indicating different
events in a person’s life. First or Lagna indicates body, color,
dimensions etc- Second represents speech, eyes, wealth, and
family. Third house indicates brothers, courage, maid servants
etc. Fourth represents education, mother, morality and lands.
Fifth shows children, intelligence and counselling power. Sixth
explains debts, enemies and diseases. Seventh rules wife, passions and marriage. Eigth indicates longevity, travels, death,
etc. Ninth indicates father, piety, religiousness etc. Tenth is the

2is
Sarivarthachintamanj.
nmv! *' eP i tatl0nj SUCCes35 influeDCP an< l politics. Eleventh
ZITooT 1 ! SjP °»' elder b ^hers and twelth miles losses,
^ Ven ‘ VeDkateSa ^e- ,-neral principle
* stiology, that if a person wants to know any one of these
Mams or significations, he has to see to the lord of that and also
=^r sth of iord ° f tue sign whict * occu ^ *
Take an illustration and consult anv Bhava The fifth
Bhavaor house indicates children etc T Q ‘ /
The lord of the 5tli is Merccnw a n • S 1S th ° Lagna ‘
and the snn. The I ortoTZ! " " h0U8e " ith ***
Saturn and he is found in the o^T 6 °° CUp “ d bjr Mercul T is
of Venus and Jupiter Th e r ^ ^ b “ efl « W “P 8 *
1 1Ler * 1 b 0 native has children W i x
on account of the position of Mercury with reference to Ihe^Th
house as he occupies the 6th house from the house of children
andi^z:^ 1 f^ir ifio “* ion shouH be “■*-
Gulika is referred to here. (Pi* m . 49 and BO notes.)
horos^ope^thiis^ren— ^jount^ tlnTwrek p ° Slt *° n ChUH, in a
multiply this number by 4 and subtract 2 frLTe toW .T*
-st he PW in that sign which rises at the nunTrtf ^

Position* or Gumka.
so obtained. The person above given was bora on a Tuesday.
From Saturday to Tuesday the number is 4. This multiplied by
4 will give ltj. Two must be subtracted from this and thus we
have a balance of 14 which represents the number of ghatikas
after sunrise on that day at which Gulika has to be fixed The
sun rise was in Aquarius and by calculation of the extent of
each ox the succeeding signs till we get to that at which 14 gulikas
fall. It will be seen that Gulika falls in Taurus or the Lagna
itself.
In this way Gulika’s position may be found out. If birth lias
an evil planet, and Gulika joins lords of 5th and 9 th, Ad 1st, 4th,
7th and 10th houses, and occupies 5th or 9tli then any Dhuva or
house will suffer similarly. Wherever O'ulika is found to occupy
he will do evil to those events which are signified by that house.
wqi JTfcgft rerw ? m ii
Stanza 216.
If the lord of birth is in conj unction with an. evil planet, and
Baku occupies Lay an . , the person has fears from- deception and
thieves. And if to the above combination there is the conjunction or
aspect of Saturn , there trill be fear from cheats , thieves and riders .
NOTES.
It is very essential for the well being of a person that his birth
lord should be strong and that evil conjunctions should not be
found in tbe birth sign. Ii Haliu occupies Lagna and its lord is
in conjunction with an evil planet then the person will be easilycheated, his property stolen and he will become a great loser. If
saturn is aspecting or combining such a combination with as that
given above then there will be losses through the ire of the rulers
who happen to be bad men.

Sakwartuachlntamani.
tftfqrtp&sma II
Stanza 21 7
It Bohn, Kuja and Sani orrupy L.njna, the. person will hare
swollen levies. If the forth lord, Rah a and another eril planet
occnp'j the Stk house, there will he similar disease.
NOTES.
Hydrocele is a nasty form of disease in the testicles by which
i ate often attacked in dirty cities and climates. This is certainly a misfortune and must be a constant source of misery to the
person who has it. If the evil planets Rahu, Kuja and Sani are
found in the Lagna then the person will have this unfortunate
complaint. The swelling and pain depend upon the intensity of
the evil planets who are located there. If they are very bad then
the nature of the disease will be bad; if they are weak, the swelling
will be ordinary. This is one combination. Then again Venkatesa
gives another. If the lord of birth, Rahu and another evil planet
occupy the 8th house, the person will have swollen testicles. In
the division of bodily organs and their identification with those
oi Kalapu.'usha, 8th house represents sexual organs and testes
and hence if evil planets are found there, the person will have
enlarged testicles.
wfrfuwfcra flfjn
Htanza 2 18.
La9na ‘ ***/*» rhAna > and *“/<■ and
an JmndmaKndm, then; ciU be testieh enlargement. If
ZZtlti TTT* *> thc M * hirth «
1 ‘ 4 Uar «’ ‘'ten also testicles will be swollen.

Tjb&tjcal Complaints.
notes
I have already explained what is meant by Mandi \ V ule p.
49). In stanza 217 1 have shown h-w Culika has to be fixed.
There are nine principal planets and there are nine subordinate
planets called in Sanskrit Ufa yr alias as opposed to Mukhija
grahas. If birtti sign is occupied by Rahu and 5th and 9th
houses by Lruliha and K-uja with Idnudi is found in a kendra, the
person will have enlarged testicles. This is a permanent disease,
and will be troublesome during bad periods and subperiods,
giving a little relief in good periods or even perfect cure, if the
period is completely good, r lhe permanent as well as temporary
effects of planets will have to be compared and a resultant must
be struck to give the real prediction. The latter portion of the
stanza is difficult to explain briefly. Many more stanzas appear
in future in this direction and it would be better to explain there.
The lord of the birth must be occupying some Navamsa as a matter
of fact. After fixing him and the Navamsa, find out the lord of
the Navamsa thus occupied by the birth Lord. There if the lord of
the Navamsa, occupied by the birth lord joins Rahu, Mandi and
Kuja, the person will have Hydrocele . Suppose he is only with
one of those planets, can the evil results be predicted ? I think
there is evil to some extent, but the full evil has to be predicted
only when the combination is full and strong.
Stanzas 219—220.
If the lord of the Navamsa occupied by the lord of ike S/A, is
in conjunction with Baku there will he enlarged testicles . If the lord

Sabwarthachlntamani.
Stanza 21 7
If Batm, Kuja and Sunt vmqn/ Lujua , the person, mil have
stio at t* \ fours. lj th e Un-lk lord, Rah a and another ecil planet
ou upy the Sth house, there will be similar disease.
NOTES.
Ihjdroc- le is a nasty form of disease in the testicles by which
i ate often attacked in dirty cities and climates. This is certainly a misfortune and must be a constant source of misery to the
person who has it. If the evil planets Rahu, Kuja and Sani are
found m the Lagna then the person will have this unfortunate
complaint. The swelling and pain depend upon the intensity of
the evil planets who are located there. If they are very bad then
the nature of the disease will be bad; if they are weak, the swelling
will be ordinary. This is one combination. Then again Venkatesa
gives another. If the lord of birth, Rahu and another evil planet
occupy the Sth house, the person will have swollen testicles. In
the division of bodily organs and their identification with those
oi Kalapui-usha, Sth house represents sexual organs and testes
and hence if evil planets are found there, the person will have
enlarged testicles.
•Stanza 2 IS.
jMm occurs Lag™, ChUka joins Thrilcona, and Kuja and
., ;uha,therewillbe Mich enlargement. If
£ZZL A'" a l r ?. l,J thc hMh “
an i ant. Mars, tlten also testicles will be swollen.

Xestica l Cum p i, a in n .
Motes.
I have already explained what is meant by Mandi yfide p.
49). In stanza 217 1 have shown li . w Culika has to be fixed.
1 here are nine principal planets and there are nine subordinate
planets called in Sanskrit Upagrakas as opposed to Mukhya
g) ahas . If birtn sign is occupied by Rahu and 5th and 9th
houses by GulUca and Kuja with Mandi is found in a kendra, the
person will have enlarged testicles. This is a permanent disease,
and will be troublesome during bad periods and subperiods,
giving a little relief in good periods or even perfect cure, if the
period is completely good. The permanent as well as temporary
effects of planets will have to be compared and a resultant must
be struck to give the real prediction. The latter portion of the
stanza is difficult to explain briefly- Many more stanzas appear
tY. U ]T( d 7 0ti0n and “ betoto explain there.
The lor, l o, the b.rth must bo occupying some Navamsa as a matter
of tact After bring him and the Navamsa, bad out the lord of
the Navamsa thus eoeuped by the birth Lord. There i; the lord of
the Navamsa, occupied by the birth lord joins Kalm, Mandi and
Kuja, the person will have Bfinc'l,.. Suppose he i, only with
one of those planets, can the evil results be predicted ? 1 think
there ts evil to seme extent but the full evil has to be predicted
only when the combination is full and strong.
Stanzas 219 — 220.
If the lord of the Navamsa occupied by the lord of the S/A, is
in conjunction with Baku there will be enlarged testicles . If the lord

SaRWARTHAC HIXTA-M am .
of birth and Mars occupy birth sign and are joined b s evil planets or
have their aspects, there will be wound or soar in the head by stone
cut 0 } by a kind, of sword ■ If Saturn joins the lord of birth instead
of Mm s, and there is a similar combination there will be icounds
in the head, by falls , rocks, jives or other instruments.
NOTES.
The lord of the 8th house from Lagna must occupy some
Navamsa. Take the lord of this Navamsa, and if he is in combination with Rahu, then there will be testicle disease. There are
many kinds of testicle diseases, The disease here referred to is
Brihat-Bija or enlargement in the testicles. Various degrees of
enlargement of testes may be observed. In some nasty centres of
civilisation and enlightenment, there may be seen testicle as
large as big pumpkins, and they must certainly be a source of the
keenest misery to the possessor. Sharp and shooting pains, want
of energy m them or some internal rottenness in the testes are not
to be classed under these combinations- If Mars joins the Lord of
birth and both are in Lagna having evil conjunctions or aspects,
the person will have some wounds in the head, there will be cuts
from stones or marks left by some kinds of swords. Mars is an
evil planet. Ihe other evil planets are the Sun, Saturn, weak moon,
badly associated mercury and Rahu and Kethu. If any or all of
these join in the birth, then there will be larger cuts or deforming
marks m the head. The extent and pain inflicted by these scars
or wounds or weapons vary with the iutensity of the evil planets,
their conjunctions and their aspects. If Saturn joins the lord of
birth and occupies Lagna, having evil conjunctions or aspects,
then there will be cuts from stones, instruments, fires, wounds or
sores. The occupation of Lagna by i ts Lord in Conjunction with
Mars or Saturn, and having the combination of other evil plafiets
or their aspects leads to such sores or cuts. If the evil planets are
really bad and the lord of lagna is weak then these sores or cuts

Leanness and Stoutnesswill be severe and may lead to permanent injury or deformation.
If the lord of lagna is well situated, exalted and joined with or
aspected by beneficial planets then slight injuries have to be
predicted from these sources and there will be nominal marks
leit upon the head of the person. The intensity of evil or good
indicated by the planets,has always to be judged by the sources of
planetary weakness or strength and in these matters each astrologer
must be guided by his own intelligence, knowledge and experience.
"He can get valuable hints from competent experienced astrologers
and he ought to avail himself of these sources of instruction whenever he can do so.
'S vo so *'
If sushka planets occupy the Lagna, the body will be lean or
emaciated : If lagna falls in any of the sushka rasis , the result will
be similar. If the lord of Lagna joins with the sushka planets, or
occupies their houses the body will be emaciated. (221.)
If the lord of the birth occupies the Nasa, or if birth falls in
sushka rasi, the body will be lean or withered- If the lord of the
Navamsa occupied by the lord of Lagna , is in conjunction with
sushka grahas, the body will be emaciated. (222.)
If birth falls in sushka rasis and evil planets combine there the
body will be emaciated.
If Lagna falls ip j ala rasis and good planets occupy it , the body
becomes stout, ( 223 .)

SaRWAETHCH tNTAMANf.
NOTES.
Yenkatasa has not explained what is meant by sushka grahas
or planets, and after careful search for them, 3 find an authority
in Badaravana or Veda V\ sa
Bavi- Kuja and Sani are called sushl-a grahas or loan planets.
Sukra and Chandra are classified as jada grahas or dull planets
the rest of the planets must be taken to be well developed or
stout. Here it is understood that if Ravi, Kuja or Sani occupies
Lagna, or if the lord of Lagna occupies sushka Basis then the
body will be very lean or emaciated. All the 12 signs of the
Zodiac are divided into Poorna jala, Ardltajala, Padajala and
Nirjala Basis or houses.
Po irnajala ‘full watery) signs are. — Meena (Pisces),
Karkataka ( Cancer 1 and Makara (Capricornus).
Ardliajala (half watery) signs are : — Kumbha (Aquainus),
Vrishabha (Taurus) and Dhanas (Sagittarius).
Padajala (quarter watery t signs are : — Mesha (Aries), Thula
(Libra,) and Vrischika (Scorpio),
Nirjala (waterless) signs are ; — Mithunam (Gemini)
Simham (Leo) and Kanya (Virgo). By sushka Rasis, which
have not been properly explained in any of the works.
I am acquainted with — Venkatasa may mean the Padajala
and Nirjala Rasis or the houses of the sushka Planets — viz., Sun,
Mars and Saturn. If we are to accept either of these explanations,
the difference would not be much except in the case of Mithuna
and Kanya both of which are owned by Mercury. The Ardha Jala
and Padajala signs are mostly owned by the evil planets called
sushka grahas.
If Ravi, Kuja and Sani occupy birth, or if birth Lagna falls
in any one of their signs, or if the lord of birth joins with Ravi

C auses eor emaciation.
Kuja, Sani, or if the lord of birth falls in the 12th, or the 8th
house, the body will he emaciated, or lean or withered up. The
person never grows stout, although he may take all possible care
of it. It must be borne in mind that, while habits have an influence on body and mind, they do not form the entire causes.
Planetary influences must be considered with reference to the
determination of the mind and the mysterious power of the soul or
Jeeva in the body. After the life leaves the body, stoutness or
leanness will be subjected to the all powerful vayoo (air) called
Dhananjaya which spreads entirely over the body and begius its
work of putrefaction and separation of the Pancha Mahabootas.
This question is very interesting and deserves to be carefully
studied in its proper place. If the lord of the Navamsa
occupied by the birth lord joins with Ravi, Kuja or iSani
or occupies any of the lean signs, then the body will be lean or
emaciated. The emaciation depends upon the intensity and
strength of the evil planets and that of the Lagna. The three
planets named above are, purely evil planets and therefore
it may be safely asserted that if evil planets occupy Lagn a, or
join with its lord, stoutness ought not to be predicted. This
statement again has to be modified with reference to the sions
which are occupied by the evil planets or in which the Lagna falls.
Suppose birth is in Cancer or Pisces, and Ravi, Kuja or Sani
occupies it, or joins the lord of Lagna, then much leanness
ought not to be predicted. Suppose Scorpio, Aries or
Leo or Acquarius is occupied by Guru or Sukra, then much
leanness ought not to be predicted. The reader is expected to use
his knowledge and judgment carefully and summarise the various
sources of strength and weakness before he makes his predictions.
Then again if the birth falls in a lean sign and its lord joins with
Guru or Sukra, emaciation ought not to be predicted- If the
birth falls in a lean rasi, and all the lean planets occupy that without favourable conjunctions or aspects then the person will have a

SARWA KTH ACff 1NTA MAN1 .
withered body and will be subjected to constant illhealth and
chronic complaints like piles, asthma, dispepsia, diabetes or general debility. In the first half of the 222nd stanza Venkatesa has
used the word Nam. Searching for its meaning, two interpretations are found and they are (1) Nasa means — the 8th house from
Lagna and (2) the twelfth house from Lagna. INasa generally
means destruction or loss and we may well select the twelth house
instead of the 8th. The general principle of bodily comfort is
based upon the good position of the lord of birth and when he
occupies the 12th or house of loss from it this must necessarily
refer to loss of health or loss of the normal development of the
body. The 6th, 8th and 12th houses are called Dusthanas or evil
houses, and if the lord of Lagna occupies any one of them, then
the signification (Bhava) indicated by him viz body— must suffer.
But the word N as a referring to the 8th house means loss of life
more than loss of normal development in the physical body and I
humbly suggest that the word Nasa here may be taken to be the
12th house instead of the 8th. However my personal experience
has shown me that the body suffers much when its lord occupies the
8th house also. Guru has been specially described as a stout planet
and if he occupies the Lagna, and if it falls in a watery sign the
person becomes stout, and puts forward flesh rapidly. Venkatesa
describes combinations for leanness and after that he commences
with planetary conjunctions for corpulance or stoutness. Leanness
is less than normal bulk, and stoutness is more than usual bulk.
If birth fails in jala rasi and good planets join or aspect it then the
body will be stout.

Combinations for Stoutness.
#?rr%WR^=€tt: s^i%^*^rarri?ff<r II
Stanzas 224-225-226.
If the h>nl of Lagna is a jalagcaha , is strong audios the conjunction of good planets the body heroines stout ; If the lord of Lagan
is in a jalarasi, has conjunction with good planets , and has the
aspect of jalap alias, and if Lagan falls in any houses of the auspicious planets , the person becomes stout. If the lord of the Nocamsa.
occupied by the lord of Lagna, joins a jalarasi , uaaspected by evil
planets, ami the Lagna falls in an auspicious sign, then also the
person will become corpulent nr stout. If Guru occupies Lagna or
aspects Tiugva when he occupies a jalarasi, if the Lagna falls m a
jalarasi, or has the aspect of good, planets, or their conjunction, the
person becomes unusually stunt .
NOTES.
Jala grali as are two viz., Chundra and Sukra. (Moon and Venus)
(see Brihat Jataka Ch. II. ver. 6). That these two planets are
watery globes are farther illustrated by their becoming powerful
when they occupy the fourth house or Jalasthanam. Bavi and
Kuja are fierv planets, Buda is an earthy planet, Brihaspathi is an
ethereal planet and Sani is an airy planet. Therefore when Moon
or Sukra happens to be the lord of Lagna and has the aspect of
Guru or Buda, the body becomes stout. I have explained what is
meant by jalarasis. They are Meena, Kataka and Makara, and
when the Lord of Lagna is in any one of these signs aspected or in
conjunction with good planets the body becomes stout. If the
Lagna falls in any of the houses owned by good planets, and its
lord has the aspect of Moon or Venus the person becomes stout.
The aspecting of these combinations or Lagnas by evil planets,
stakes away from the stoutness, and the person becomes medium
sized- If Jupiter occupies Lagna, be has a tendency to produce

SABWAKTHACfliOTAMAM.
withered body and will be subjected to constant illhealth and
chronic complaints like piles, asthma, dispepsia, diabetes or general debility. In the first half of the 222nd stanza Venkatesa has
used the word Nasa. Searching for its meaning, two interpretations are found and they are (1) Nasa means — the 8th house from
Lagna and (2) the twelfth house from Lagna. Nasa generally
means destruction or loss and we may well select the twelth house
instead of the 8th. The general principle of bodily comfort is
based upon the good position of the lord of birth and when he
occupies the 12th or house of loss from it this must necessarily
refer to loss of health or loss of the normal development of the
body. The 6th, 8th and 1 2th houses are called Dusthanas or evil
houses, and if the lord of Lagna occupies any one of them, then
the signification (Bhava) indicated by him viz body — must suffer.
But the word Nasa referring to the 8th house means loss of life
more than loss of normal development in the physical body and I
humbly suggest that the word Nasa here may he taken to be the
1 2th house instead of the 8th. However my personal experience
has shown me that the body suffers much when its lord occupies the
8th house also. Guru has been specially described as a stout planet
and if he occupies the Lagna, and if it falls in a watery sign the
person becomes stout, and puts forward flesh rapidly. Venkatesa
describes combinations for leanness and after that he commences
with planetary conjunctions for corpulance or stoutness. Leanness
is less than normal bulk, and stoutness is more than usual bulk.
If birth fails iu jala rasi and good planets join or aspect it then the
body will be stout.

Combinations fob Stoutness.
s^i%^5Jro3T?$f<r II
Stanzas 224-225-220.
If the lord nf Lagna is a jalayraha, is strong and Lis the conjunction of good planets the body becomes stout ; If the lord of Lug no
is in a jalarasi, has conjunction with good ; planets , and has the
aspect of jalayi alias, and if Lay no falls in any houses of the auspicious planets , the person becomes stout. If the lord of the Ho cam so.
occupied by the lord of lay na, joins a jalarasi , uaaspected by evil
planets, and. the Lagna falls in an auspicious sign , then also the
person will become corpulent or stout. If Guru occupies Lagna or
aspects lagna when he occupies a jalarasi, if the Lagna falls in a
jalarasi, or has the aspect of good planets, or their conjunct ion, the
person becomes unusually stun/.
NOTES.
Jalagrahas are two viz., Chundra and Sukra. (Moon and Venus)
(see Brihat Jataka Cli. II. ver. 6). That these two planets are
watery globes are further illustrated by their becoming powerful
when they occupy the fourth house or ,f alasthanam. Ravi and
Kuja are fiery planet=, Buda is an earthy planet, Brihaspathi is an
ethereal planet and Sani is an airy planet. Therefore when Moon
or Sukra happens to be the lord of Lagna and has the aspect of
Guru or Buda, the body becomes stout. I have explained what is
meant by jalarasi s. They are Meena, Kataka and Makara, and
when the Lord of Lagna is in any one of these signs aspected or in
conjunction with good planets the body becomes stout. If the
Lagna falls in any of the houses owned by good planets, and its
lord has the aspect of Moon or Venus the person becomes stout.
The aspeeting of these combinations or Lagnas by evil planets,
stakes away from the stoutness, and the person, becomes medium
sized. If Jupiter occupies Lagna, he has a tendency to pi-oduce

Sarwarttjachintamant.
COrpulance, and this stoutness will be unpleasantly increased when
he occupies a Jalarasi, when the Lagna falls in a watery sign and
when jupiter aspects that sign without evil conjunctions or aspects.
These combinations have been based upon some principles of
astrology. If Lagna is occupied by evil planets or aspected by
them, and it falls into an unwaterv or dry sign then the body
becomes lean or emaciated. But when the Lagnas falls in a watery
sign or the signs owned by benefics, and has good conjunction or
aspect and its lord occupies a watery sign then also the body becomes stout, and the extent of leanness or stoutness has to be
judged by the strength or weakness of the planets, who aspect
or combine such Lagnas. Brihaspathi means a big planet and
when he occupies the Lagna the person will become stout.
Stauza 227 .
If Sani or Baku occupies Lnc/n-a, the person suffers franf Devil s
or evil spirits. If Lcnjna is occupied Inj Bad and has the aspect of
Kuja, the native suffers from asthma, consumption, enlargement of
spleen or some disease in the, anus.
NOTES.
Planets Sani and Rahu are the most powerful of the evil
ones, and exercise a great deal of influence in the bad direction.
If Sani or Rahu occpies Lagna the person suffers from evil spirits
or devils. Satan, devils, evil spirits, ghosts, hobgoblins etc , are
not new names in the vocabulary of the world’s literature. The
word Pisacha is used in the text and is thus derived in Sanskrit.
“ Pisitham Asnathi Iti Pisacha ” or those who have for their food
mamsa, or flesh, hence evil spirits or devils are meant, As a trans-

IExistbxck op Devus
lator I have simply to confine myself to what the author says in his
hook, but as a scientific man, I will not be trespassing beyond my
bounds, if I made a short discussion on the question of the existence
or nonexistence of evil spirits. Man is considered to be a
compound of three states of existence, one within the other as it
were, and these are Sthula , Sookshma and Havana or physical,
mental and ethereal. The last word is used for Karanavi
because when finally analysed it will be found to be of the
essence of the Supreme Spirit or God- When death takes place
in a man separation ensues between the bodv and that which
was mysteriously enclosed in the body and which actuated
it in all its external or phenomenal work- It would he
unreasonable to sav that death annihilates all matter and leaves
no further traces of its future existence. Tf this proposition is
granted then birth simply means a sudden evolution of the
body and all its mysteiies from unknown and unknowable causes,
and death moans a sudden decomposition or dissolution of all
that composed the inner and the outer man leaving no more for
the individual to aim at or work for. In fact the human existence in this ‘worl d, becomes purposeless and men may simply
engage themselves in tbe gratification of sensual pleasures, and
those gross propensities, which have made the world a stage,
which is fully convulsed with the ungodly passions of human
brutes. Those who have some intellectual strength and can
comprehend higher intellectual reasoning and those who
read carefully the Vedic literature of India, and the
religious works of other ancient nations, have always thought
that the mysteries in man are not easily solved, and that future
states of existence are not myths of deluded brains. Soul or
jeeva ha3 been located in the body and at the time of death, a
separation takes place between the gross physical and the
finer spiritual. When therefore death occurs, the soul or mental power with its actuating cause or Karrna leaves the

Sarwaethachintamani.
body and goes away — by the laws of continuity — to places
where it is attracted by its previous r good or bad Karma .
In the ordinary transactions of man’s daily life, his mind takes
him to societies where it finds pleasure. So also it is easy to
imagine chat the same mental power when separated from the
body by death, will be attracted to regions or spaces where it has
its predisposition for attraction. The development of hodv is
mostly influenced by the development of the mind and
we see that the severe trials of a real patriot or philanthropist
do not differ in their external devotion from those of hardened
dacoits or declared murderers. Both endure severe pains and
privations, and both work with a splendid determination. But
the mind of one is exercised in relieving the human
miseries while the mind of the other is exercised in causing
them.
Attractions of the one cannot therefore be compared to the
attractions o£ the other. Here lies the grand secret of mental development, dependent upon a thousand and one causes, too numerous
to detail or even understand. After liberation from the body, the
i venial state, whatever it may be, has its own peculiar flights into
the higher regions determined and directed by the previous training it had while it was encased in the bodily surroundings.
The ancient Rishis prescribed methods for the development of
the body as well as the mind in such directions as would enable
the latter, when liberated by death, to take the approved path, so
that it may finally be thoroughly purified to make it fit to take its
place in the halo of the Supreme Intelligence and become on9 with
It. Thi.s is no doubt a very difficult question but its interest is so
absorbing that those who spend their time in studying it will be
amply repaid by a higher knowledge of man’s future existence.
An example or two will make this point clearer to the minds
of my readers. Suppose A- is a thoroughly good man, contented.

Karma Influences Jeeva.
charitable, dutiful, godfearing, and honest, in his dealings.
Suppose B is as thoroughly a bad man, vicious, deceitful;
murderous, dishonest, discontented and greedy, To carry out
these two sets of principles both of them require certain
mental development, determination, intelligence and endurance.
The mind takes two different turns in these persons. While
the mind of a causes pleasure and profit to humanity that
of B causes pain and loss to mankind. When death approaches
these two individuals the feelings will be necessarily different. One
is contented and does not fear it, while the other takes altogether
different impressions. Death separates their bodies from their souls
and the flight of the two must be in opposite directions, because
their pi’evious karma gives them attractions to regions which
afford congenial mental stages- Love, passion, hatred, vengeance,
avarice, self sacrifice, charity, duty, kindness, honesty, roguery
etc., raise different vibrations in the nervous centres, and the
activity of the brain cells, must therefore be in various directions
when one or the other of these are attracted by the surroundings
in a man's life. Blackest thoughts coi’rupt the mind while the
purest thoughts purify it. I cannnot put the theory in a simpler
form. Mental power is the grandest force yet identified in nature
and, the intensity and the direction of it are determined by the
kind of feelings which are constantly harboured in it during its
tenancy in the body. The impure cannot join the pure and the
pure has no special attraction to the impure. Places of attraction
beyond the limits of the earth, must be so arranged as to afford
suitable planes for the existence of spirits according to the Karma
they have done when they tenanted the terrestrial forms.
When the mind force i 3 thus immersed or steeped in, avarice,
immorality, and vice of all kinds, the spirit which was encased
Under such influences, will be called an evil spirit or devil and
When death takes place suddenly or by any of the accidents to

232 SA E\V A RTH ACH 1KTA -M A NI .
which, human bodies are subjected, the flight of the spirit
liberated from the body of such an unholy person, will be impeded
in its higher directions? and as it has to be purified before it can
be elevated to join the saintly or holy spheres of existence, it will
have to move in the lower and unholy regions, and trouble people
who are peculiarly predisposed to its evil influences, and who
possess mentality similar to what the evil spirit commands. But
in the case of a god fearing and charitable man, the spirit takes a
higher flight unimpeded because the weight of grosser considerations, does not shackle its movements, and the attractions of
purer regions will afford facilities for its onward march. These
are called good spirits and they rise higher and higher, according
to the intensity of the mental feeling, they put forward in their
good Karma on the terrestrial plane. It is not easy to understand the principles underlying these various attractions and
repulsions and states of devilish existence are ascribed even to
good persons when they commit suicide, or willfully take out
their lives by drowning or falling from high places. Here we can
understand the reason why they will pass to good regions through
temporary states of devilish existence. When, a man takes away
his life under a real or fancied grievance, he is discontented and
his mind is not in that mould which would fit the higher planes
of spirit existence. Suicide or Atina Katya is considered even
worse than a murder, and must not be resorted to under any
circumstances. The rays of evil planets have evil influences
while the rays of benefies have good influences.
And when evil planets like Bahu or Sani occupy the
Bagna, they have a powerful influence over the mind
of such a person, to attract or to he attracted by vice and
immorality and as the mind of such a person will be impure,
he will attract impure spirit already liberated from their
bodily conditions, but which will be found hovering aboi^t.

Varii.ti ks oi Evil. Sni.iis. 23‘!
unholy places. Haunted house-; contain evil spirit.-?. Titov love
mischief and (hat was due to their previous training. Some persons see devils while others never see them. There are three
(Janas. Dacii — godly — .l/omo-Vm human, and L‘>t '*•> ungodly
or devilish. These are classified aecor ling n th? W <//■•#. >•
persons are born in. The zodiacal, starry and planetary lights
determine these characteristics and it would be a very
interesting study to pursue by the readers of this book.
It would therefore be absurd to deny the existence of evil spir/s
or the sufferings of those who are peculiarly subjected to their
influences. A man often catches cold by the slightest variations
in the thermometer, white another does not suffer iu the least bv t he
largest variations in the atmosphere. When both of them meet, thev
will be at loggerheads because ; ne affirms the existence of an influence in the climate while the other denies it. We have to read a
great deal and think deeply on all these difficult problems in life.
It is silly to deny many things which we could not understand nr
explain. These evil spirits are attracted by dani and Rahu more
than by auy other planets. Sani is a black planet- His color absorbs all other colours uud reflects only darkness. Hahn is called
Thamo graha or dark planet. He, as well as his opposite friend
Kethu, gives rise to the phenomena of eclipses. They obstruct
the solar and lunar rays and take away much of the terrestrial
energy. Darkness favours de\ ils whi'c light dispels them. The
influence of darkness on the minds of bad men is simply indescribable and many of the desperate deeds are committed under the
auspices of darkness. When God is devoutly worshipped, when
there is plenty of light, where men are honest, when they are upright and when they are guided by just principles of conduct, devils
have very little access and angelic spirits are evolved out of such
places. It is no wonder therefore that Sani, Rahu and Kethu, when
they occupy Lagoa or aspect it with power? should subject the person to the attractions of evil spirits. Their own rays arc congenial

S A 1! W A K'i 1 1 .U II I X TA MAXI.
my Astrological Magazine. Vols. II, II], and IV. They maybe
read with great advantage by the student.
Stanza 228 .
// Lihj/i'i i* lii Mars and the Sun ami Saturn aspect it,
the person h'i/I lie si ruck irillt ireaj>ons elc. If Kethu Is in Lagna and
Imre nl aspects the man sillers Jenin tierces and evil spirits.
NOTES.
Mars occupying birth, when aspecied by Saturn and the Sun,
will produce injuries from weapons or sharp instruments. This
may result from the person falling upon them, cr his being cut
with them. It was already shov.n that if Rahil and Sani occupied
Lagna, the man suffers from Devils. If Kethu is in birth and
evh planets Saturn, Mars and the Sun-aspect him, the person
suffers from Devils. Large reading and careful discussion with
eminent men led me to examine the phenomena of the existence of
devim -1 ne. so are called pisnrbns and the word has already been
derived irom the Sanskrit root. As in every other case there are a
lot of imposters as against some genuine cases of devil-tormentinoConfronting some of the real cases, myself and friends watched the
phenomena with great interest and found some manifestations of
the power of the devil, which defied all scientific explanations or
reasonings based on our experience. An honest young woman
was possessed of a devil, and when pressed hard by* mantras and
certain other performances, the devil said that it would «o. * We
demanded some confirmatory evidence of the Devil’s statement
and the evil spirit said that a huge branch of a ficusreligiosa
[Peepid tree) winch was in front of the house, would be broken and
it would disappear for ever. 1 he girl was almost in a dying condi-

Devil Demonstration's
tion, and she was caught in the hands of her father who was
really a strong man. She rose suddenly, made towards the door
and heavily fell on the floor making her father also fall
with a heavy thump. The peepul tree which was only about
10 or 20 yards from the door where she fell with her
father, cracked, and a huge branch of it came down with a
tremendous crash on the other side. The breaking down or the
branch and the falling of the girl with her father near tho door
were almost simultaneous and we were really puzzled at what had
happened before our very nose. The branch which was broken
by the invisible devil was about 2 or 3 feet in diamete •, and could
not have been brought down even if ten elephants had dragged it
with all their might. What surprised us most was that the devil
in the girl told those who were present there, that it would break a
tremendous branch of the peepul tree as a token of its immense
power and that it would leave the gi -1 ever afterwards. This was a
fact, as the girl got round, and become quite hale and healthy in
the course of a few days. I have seen two or 3 instances of such
remarkable exhibition of the presence of devils and their great
power and I speak simply from my actual experience
In all these cases the time during which such suffm ings come will
be generally the periods and subperiods of evil planets or benefics who
are weak and who are strongly affected by malefic conjunctions.
In the following stanzas the author steps into other
considerations of how a person gets his money, whether he will be
prosperous in his own country or in foreign countries or partly
there and partly hereStanza 229.
If birth is movable , or if its lord occupies a movable sign the per-

SAR\YAHTHA<.'HI*N'TAMA.NI.
son will be a traveller. If the Kara mm of the Larina be also in chara
there will be a similar disposition.
NOTES.
The temper of the man depends upon the position of Lagna,
its lord and the position of the Moon. The twelve Zodiacal signs
are divided into Chara (Movable), Sthira (fixed) and Dwiswabhava
ycommon) (see notes P. 2b) Meslm, Kataka, Thula and Makara
are Charas. Vrishabha and its quadrants are Sthiras and Mithuna
and its Ivendras are Dwidahas. If birth falls in a movable sign
the person will be inclined to travel, if the birth lord occupies a
movable sign, the inclination will be similar. If both of them
are in movable signs, then ho becomes a great travellor. If the
Navamsa of the Lagna is chara, he will be fond of travelling.
Staxza 230 .
Jf the birth falls in chara , if its lord occupies a similar house ,
and if it has the aspect of planets in chara the person {jets wealth
from foreii/u countries. Jf the Lor/rui is Sthira and. has the aspect
of planets in Sthira houses the person becomes wealthy in his own
country.
NOTES
The words used area little dubious. We have nothing like
chara and sthira grahas, but as the velocities of the planets are
different a classification may safely be made. Between the Moon
who moves one sign in 2 J days and Saturn who takes 900 days to
move in a sign there is a wide gulf, and Saturn may very conveniently be called a Sthiragraha or stationary planet when compared to the rapidly moving planet the Moon. In such a planetary classification, Sani, Guru, Ralm and Kethu, may fall under
sthiragrahas while the rest may be reckoned as charagrahas. But
Venkatasa apparently means t hat it the planets occupy a chara
Rasi, they get that influence and if they occupy a Sthirarasi they

Combinations fob Thavf.l.
will be similarly influenced. Men generally get wealth from their
occupations and when they involve large travelling, the Lagoa?
its Navamsa and its lord must be in cliara ; movable) and when ail
these are in Sthira the person gets much wealth in his own native
place and travels very little outside. If these are in ] heistvabhava
the man will be partly travelling and partly stationary.
There is also another test which holds good in many of the
horoscopes. If a man has many planets in chara he becomes a
traveller. If many are in Sthira he becomes mostly' stationary
and if they are in common signs then the. produce half travelling
and half stationary habits.
Stanza 231 -
Jf the birth falls in common sign, its lard in a similar house
and- planets in a common sign are a speeding it, the person will get
wealth from mang countries, but not always by honorable means.
If lord of lagna is strong and join his house of r.nilUttion, the
person will be very dignified in his behaviour.
NOTES
Common signs are Gemini, Virgo, Sagittarius and Pisces and
if birth Jails in any oneof them, its lord occupying one of these,
and planets in these houses aspect it, the person will visit some
countries, make money and acquire it in any way. That is, he will
not be very scrupulous about the means he employs in the acquisition of his wealth.

S AIWA I TH AC UINTA II A XI.
Stanza 242.
If the lord of lagna is powerless, then the person becomes jada •
{Dull). Ij bene^/ics aspect or join with the birth lord, the person dees
not become dull. If Lagan is auspicious and is combined with benefics i > i has their aspect the person will have happiness from his
infancy. I f evil planets combine or aspect there will be no happinessITOTES.
If Jie lord of Lagna lias not tie sources or strength, detailed
iu the eailiei portions of this work, then the person becomes
dull 01 inactne. If b-uru, Sukra, full moon or powerful Buda aspect him or join with him, such dullness ought not to be predicted. If Lagna is auspicious— by this we have to understand
that it must fail in Dhanus, Meena, Vrishabha or Thula or in
Mithuna and Konya, when Buda is powerful or in Karka when
Moon is fuil, and benefics aspect or combine Lagna, the man will
be happy from his infancy. This means that he will enjoy happiness till he dies. Of course even in such cases when powerful evil
planetary periods intervene, they may cause occasional misery but
he will be generally known as a happy man. If evil planets Ravi"
Kuja.. Sam, R ihu, or Kethu occupy or aspect Lagna, the reverse
lesu t must be predicted, that is, the man will be miserable. If
beneficial planetary periods intervene he may have occasional internals of happiness, but will be generally characterised as an un.
happy man. The general principle that benefics are good and
malefics are bad is well illustrated and the strength of Lagna and
its lord have great deal to do iu the determination of happiness or
misery. Lr
Stanza 232 A.
If there are many evil planets in the
miserable all through Ms life.
hrih th e person becomes

Combinations fob Misery.
NOTESWtien evil planets occupy the Lagua, and have u« beneficial
aspects the person becomes sorrowful in all his life, A distinction
must be draws between “a man oi position and a man of joyful
temper. 1 ’ Pecuniary or official position does not always give the
man happiness, Shakespear's pithy remark that “ uneasy lies
the head that wears a crown” and Johnsons observation that u inerease hie riohes and his peace destroy” are well worth contemplation There are many men in very good means but they are always
miserable. There are others in humble position and they are always
happy. lt Maimew Mu un^hijuvum Eihviinm Bamlht itnislunioha".
Mind can make a heaven of a hell or a hell of a heaven.
Therefore happiness ami mi$,*rv are m *stl> otivotvn mnkiu?
and will affect ns when our minds are cut rolled by them, jnu
whci the mental strength is great, pains mid pleasures appear no
inoi'M hivil planets in (he ia<rna which ••en resents body- lemperanient, health and appearance — make a man sorrowful ;md therefore miserable. A ltd misstate will continue ■<! through the person’s
b’fe. I have examined thousand? of horoscopes: and found that
when Ingiia or Chindra is in conjunction with evil planets-SaniR.ivi-lvuju, evil Buda, Rahu or Iverhu. tlie person will always
taken, s imv-yfui view of his present and future life. If there
are a large number of evil planers in the lagna then the mind
of the person will he very mol nchoiy. Take an example. Suppose a man is born with Sani in lagna in exaltation in Thula.
He will be successful, commanding and imperious, but be will be
miserable for one thing or other upsets the equilibrium of hia
i emper.
Suppose a man is born in Aries with Saturn there, he will be
miserable as well as poor. Take a birth in p ancer with Jupiter
in it and take a birth in Capricorn with Jupiter there.

Sarwarth ACHINTAWANI.
Ia Cancer he will be dignified, noble and jolly- tempered,
while in. Capricorn the person will be ordinary and meanminded.
Suppose a birth falls in Taurus with Moon there in exaltation and other combinations indicating poverty, then the individual will be jolly although he may be really poor. Suppose a person is born with Ohundraand Sani in Vrischika, and other combinations indicating great wealth, the person will be miserable
though he may be rich and influential. The distinction between a rich man and a happy man must be carefully remembered.
Planets are forming most pleasant and unpleasant conjunctions,
and the temperaments of the people depend upon how their laguas are conjoined or aspected and upon the strength of the lord of
lagna. Dasas and Bhukti-' bring in temporary pains and pleasures.
Stanza 233If the lord of Lngu.it urrupies his V arr/ottamnmsn. or his exalt a -
tiuit N’avamsa , or his men or friend's Dr a licana, or if he joins a
bene fir or has his aspect the person will he a I wan/s happy.
NOTES.
Venkatasa Daivagnya now gives some combinations which
make a man always happy. If birth lord occupies Vargottaraa
Navarasa (see St, 14 ch. 1. Brihatjataka) or if birth lord occupies
that Navamsa in which he holds his exaltation, or if he is found
in his own Drakkana or in the Draltkauaof a friendly planet or if
he is in conjunction with a benefic or has a beneficial aspect ;
then a person born under such combinations will become a happy
man. This does not necessarily mean that he >will be a rich or
influential man. dhose conditions depend upon other conjunctions, and positions of planets. For happiness or e miserv an

Combinations fob IFa-I’jpiness.
astrologer has to look carefully to the strength of the bulk lord
or his weakness and make predictions accordingly.
If a planet occupies Mesha, and he is also found in Mesh a in
the Navamsa, he is said to be in Vargottamamsa. In all movable
signs, the first N avamsa, in all fixed signs the fifth Navamsa, in all
double-bodied or Dwiswabhava signs the ninth 2s avamsa becomes
Vargottamamsa. This gives a special energy to the planei and
hence he becomes beneficial.
When a sign is divided into 3 equal divisions each is called
a Drakkana. If Guru is found in Meena or Damir Drakkana or
in Mesha, Kataka, Simha, or Vrischika JDrakkanas which are owned by his friends he becomes strong in giving happiness- If Ravi
is in Kumbha and Simha is Lagna, then the birth lord is unlavourable and makes a man miserable. But if this Ravi is in the
Navamsa of Mesha where he is exalted he becomes powerful and in
spite of his weakness n the Rasi he gives happiness to the native,
because he occupies an exalted Navamsa If this Ravi joins Guru
or Sukra or has their powerful aspect then also he gives happiness
all through the person’s life.
In fact the guiding principle for determining happiness in all
life is the strength of the birthlord. Dasas and Bhukties may
come and go, and the person, if the, are bad. may suffer very sharply
but here the general disposition and condition of a man are given,
and they must not be confounded with temporary sorrows and
privations. Astrologers require a good deal of intelligence and when
they omit any such important factors in their calculations they
are liable to make mistakes and go wrong.

Sa&wakthachintamanj.
those miserable states- If the 1st, 2nd and 3rd houses have beneficial aspect or conjunction, if the lord of birf-h is a benefic andSukra
occupies paravatamsa, the person will have happiness in the first
and middle periods of his existence. This means that he will not
be happy to wards the end of his life. If birth Lord is a benefic,
and iSukra occupiesParavatamsa where have we got 3 more benefics
to occupy or aspect the 1st, 2nd anddrd houses. Guru, Chundraand
Buda are benefics besides Sukra. There may be aspects but there
cannot be occupations. The students should work out these interesting propositions and satisfy themselves that my doubts raised
here are reasonable. When six vergas are combined in a planet it
is called a Paravatamsa. (See notes on P- 39.)
V eir/as mean divisions.
Stanza — 236.
If Guru becomes powerful and occupies Lagna kendra, and the
lord of lagna occupies Iravatamsa the person becomes happy from
the commencement.
NOTES.
Of the benefics Guru is the most favourable and if he becomes
powerful and occupies lagna, and the lord of lagna occupies Iravatamsa, the man will be happy from the commencement. The word
used is Balya which means in the young age. Having regard to
the excellent positions of the best benefic and the lord of lagna, I am
not prepared to infer that the word Balya means that the person
will be happy in the beginning and will npt have it in the end.
It must be interpreted as meaning from the very beginning he will
be happy. This combination will make a man- cheerful and happy
all through his life. . _ jV>

Pains anp Pleaboees.
Iravcitarim means the combination of nine vergas in. a planet.
Very few planets combine in such a splendid way, ( Vide Page 89.)
Such a combination will also give him wife, children, wealth and
friends. In the interpretation of these stanzas. I have largely fallen on my personal experience as a render. The compounding or
dividing a word mav be very conveniently resorted to under the
rules of grammar and rhetoric in Sanskrit, but the question is will
such interpretations tally with the predictions and experiences of
the consultors. The readers are requested to carefully note these
important differences.
Stanza 287.
If Sill' rn oecn pies Dcriiluhimsn, Lord of the Lntjiio
Gopuranmt. mid i.cninn •« impeded hi / he.nefics thr person
Jiappii in the middle on (l end <;/ his life.
NOTES.
nee n jH.es
mill he
For all these AmsasJL request the reader to refer to my notes
on stanzas— 82-83-84 and 85 When four Vergas are combined it
is called Gopiiramsn Devalokamsa is a combination of seven
Vergas.
Snkra must occupy seven good Vergas, birtn lord must, occupy
four Vergas. and >-th>ust be aspected by benefics to enable a
man -to live a happ;, life in thejmiddle and end of his existence.
The stanza is simple enough.
Stanza 288.
If [jtiijnii is occupied by n benefit, the second by n madeth..

Sarwarthaohintamani.
m&hjU occupies Kenclra , and the, lord of birth occupies Oottamiamsa,
the person', will have -misery in the beginning and happiness afterwards.
'• N0TES.
- The stanza is very suggestive and ought to be carefully readThere must be a benefic in Lagna, the second house from it
must Tie combined by a malefic, an evil planet must be in a Kendra
and the birth lord must have Oottamamsa, to enable a man to
have sorrow first and happiness afterwards. As Lagoa is the first
Kendra and that must be ocoupied by a benefic, there are only
three more Kendras for evil planets to occupy. But here he means
only anyone of those 8 Kendras to be occupied by Sani, Kuja, or
Ravi. Evil planets include also bad Buda, Ksliina Chundra and
Rahu and Ketku. It would be enough therefore to satisfy the
conditions laid down here for auy one of these evil planets to
occupy a Kendra. Oottamamsa mean the combination of three
Vergas (See p. 39).
TO? : I
I!
Stanza 239.
If malefic occupies Lagan , a benefic in the. 2nd, another in the
9th, and birth/oul in Devalobintsa , the person enjoys happiness first
and sorrow afterwards ,
NOTES
An evil planet in birth, a good planet in the 2nd, and 9th,
and the lord of birth in the Devalokamsa will make a man enjoy
happiness in the earlier life and misery in the later days. This is
due to the occupation of the Lagna by a malefic. He must show
his evil influence, and he does so in a striking mauner by subjecting the person to misery in his last days. I have- already pointed
out that we cannot imagine greater misery than the misery ofsuffering sorrow in the last days of a man’s career-

Good I*k putatiox.
Stanza 240.
If lord of Laijna occupies 10th , and lord of loth occupies
Lagna , having beneficial aspects or accept/ tug exaltations , the person
will have very good reputation.
NOTES
Reputation, is often called a babble by the philosophers, and
they say that it is liable to burst at any moment- With due deference to their views, a worldly man cannot afford to have a bad reputation in the interests ol ! his own success and business.
A good reputation can never be acquired by a bad man and
even if by deceitful ways and means he acquires such a bubble
he will have the mortification of seeing it burst before his eyes
and perhaps it might even expose him to great degradation.
Glean character alone enables a mau to get good and unsullied
reputation and this is certainly worth having at any cost. When
the lord oi birth and tenth exchange their bouses, having good aspects and occupying exaltations the results are highly satisfactory.
It is very curious that the author has used the word exaltations.
How can the two planets be exalted and still occupy each other’s
houses namely, 1st and 10th. Take Aries. Its lord is Kuja and the
lord of 10th Mabara is Sani. Sani now must be in Mesha and Kuja
must be in Makara for his exaltation, t-'ani is in bis debilitation.
Take Taurus. The lord is Sukra and the lord of 10th Kumbha is
Sani. If they exchange their places, there is no exaltation. Take
Gemini, Its lord is Bud a, and the lord of 10th is Guru. They
exchange their places and Buda becomes Neecha in Meena while
Guru is only in Mithuna. Take Kataka. Chandra and Kuja exchange and Kuja becomes Neecha in Kataka.

fcjAKWA UTHACH INTAMANl.
In Simha Eavi and Sukra exchange places and no exaltation
is obtained for either. In Kama and Meena there cannot be any
exchange between two planets as the lords of both houses of Lagna
and 10th are one and the same. Therefore the stanza has to be interpreted in a limited sense. If any one of the two, specially the lord
of Lagna occupies an exaltation, the person gets good reputation.
/Stanza. 241.
If a malefic occupies Lagna, lonlof Navamsa lagna occupies Kendra with Balm, a malefic joins tenth , and Neecha planet occupies Lagna, with the aspect of Ravi the person gets had nameNOTES.
The author gave in the previous verse combinations for good
reputation and in this he tells the readers when a man becomes
notorious or gets bad reputation.
There must be a malefic and a ^.debilitated planet in Lagna,
an evil planet must occupy the Karma or 10th house, the lord of
the Navamsa Lagna must join Rahu and occupy any of the other
two kendras — 4th and 7th for he has given planetary positions for
Lagna and 10th, if these combinations are found in total with the
aspect of Ravi for the Lagna then the man achieves a name in the
wrong direction. He will be notorious and well known.
It is enough if there are evil planets in the 10th and Lagna to
make a man notorious. 10th house is the most important in a
horoscope and if this house of reputation is badly joined the person gets an evil reputation, and if it is good he will be rightly,
famous.

Influence of Lagna and its Wokd.
»T|«TFf^^f5iqf42^ I
Stanza. 242.
When lord of Lagna and % fit ore n -pH flic first hid res of 1st and
9th houses respect ioehj ivifh bene firs the person gets gnat reputationNOTES.
The word Aroha and Amalia are used to indicate ascending
and descending influences. The Aroha Lagna therefore will be the
end of the first half of the Lagna. Each ox the Lagnas is divided
into 30 degrees and it may be conveniently denoted that the Lagna
or the planet in it will be Aroha till it reaches the 15th degree and
then gets into the Amroha state.
Therefore if the lord of Lagna is at the end of the first half
of the Lagna, and the lord of the 0th is similarly situated there,
and these have the combination of benefics the person will have a
splendid reputation and it will extend over a large extent of the
country. In all these cases it is clearly seen that for happiness or
health or reputation the lord of Lagna plays an important part
Aroha and \varoha also mean states of planets moving toward®
Oo$ka and N’eeeha respectively,
MwtcP-rr ||
Stanza. 243.
If Suhra occupies the first half of the Lay on, the person has
happiness in the beginning. If Suhra occupies the second half of Lag.
na, with evil planets in the itli and 5 tk houses the person gets misery
in the end,

Sarwaethachintaman.c.
NOTES
The position of Sukra has a great deal to do with the happiness or misery of a man, and the time is determined by Sukra
occupying the first or the second half of the Lagna. If evil planets
occupy the 4th and 5th houses, they make the man miserable in the
end with Sukra in the second half of the Lagna. Sukra represents
all worldly pleasures and it is natural that when he occupies a
favoui*able position, he will give the person happiness in the beginning. 4th house represents happiness and 5th house intelligence
and children. Both these houses must also be well occupied.
If the lord of Lagna is cornhined with benefics, occupies his own
exaltation , joins Kendras'or Thrihmns, has beneficial aspects combined
with the lord qt 10th or occupies his own house , the person will have
desirable wealth , good, reputation, excellent surroundings') large
quantities of grain and long and happy life.
NOTES.
This seems to be a sort of summary of what the author Had
been trying to explain in the previous verses. What he insists
upon the astrological reader is that for long life, wealth, happiness
and good reputation, he has to principally consult the strength of
the Lagna and its lord.
Where this is neglected the predictions made with reference to
a horoscope may not turn out correct. If vve examine into the
conditions of the lord of Lagna, all those which have been enumerated above will never be found combined in him. He may
be exalted but may not join with the lord of 10th. He may occu-

Importance op Lagnadhipathi. 253
pj Kendras, but may not have exaltation. He may occupy his own
Thrikonas but he may not have beneficial aspects. To have long*
happy and peaceful life coupled with proper position and desirable children, the position of the Lagna, its lord, the occupation
and conjunction of Guru and Sukra, have a great deal to do.
In the previous stanzas the author gradually opened his subject
and in this he sums up as it were the different positions, conjunctions and aspects, the Lord of Lagna must have as well as the real
beneficial planets. The extent of the good which may be expected from the planet depends upon the number of advantages he
possesses mentioned in this and the above stanzas.
Stanza 245 .
If the lord of Lagna is all powerful, has no eril aspects , occupies
kendras and has beneficial looks, he gets longevity, shakes off dangers,
possesses good character, will have personal gains, and secure a high
reputation.
NOTES
This is a sort of continuation of the previous thread of instruction the astrological adepts have been giving.
The conditions laid down are that the lord of Lagna must be
all powerful, he must be occupying any one of the Kendras, he
must have no aspects from malefics, and he must have the aspects
of beneficial planets. Thus the essence of the instructions is to
see primarily the sources of strength possessed by the Lagnathipathi, and this is a very valuable stanza to remember in the consultation of Balaristajatakas or the horoscopes of children who

SasWABTH ACHIXTAMANr.
^Ye cijitjcjal timesip their younger days. Bala- Arista means,
yo^pg- juisfortunes, o v evils which happen to children when they
are young. I am surprised to see this stanza quoted by BattotPaB io his commentaries on Brihntjataka in the Balaristadhayaya
Chap. VI. A very difia Cu i t question arises as to the authorship
of this sloka. Bhattotpala completed his invaluable commentaries
on Brihatjataka on the paneharni olh day of the bright half of the
lunar month Cliaitra i a the year 888 of Saka on a Thursday." The
saka certainly refers to the era of Salivahana and therefore this
learned commentator \\- as in the prime of life about 93? y ears ago.
This will bring us to the year 9G5 and 66 A. D. If this verse
was composed by any other astrological writer, it is possible to
imagine that the commentator took it and quoted it as an authority
on the point under illustration. In the commentaries to jBr.
Jatalca he clearly says that he is going to quote some valuable
passages fmm A arym or other learned writers on Arista
Bhanga or combinations which go a great deal to avert the evils
indicated by Balaiista and prolong the life of the children thus
afflicted by evil influences. To be quoted, by this learned Astrologei, tho stanza must have been taken from some renowned
writer foi whom Bhattotpala must have had certainly a great
regard. If V enkatasa i s the author of it then he must have lived
befoie Bhattotpala or at least must have been his learned contempoiary. Ihis takes ^enkatasa to the 10th century A. D. or even
eailier thau that. It is p oss jbe that this stanza, which must have
been composed bv a leaned astrological writer, might have been
copied by the authoi ox Sarwarthachintamani, and incorporated ip
toto into his voi k, as be could not change it for better and as
it contained too valu a p, e an i n f orm ation, to be omitted b.y
him. instead of coiifu.sj r) „ m yself and my readers with unnecessary
chronological difficulties I simply point out to , my readem
Ihe possibility of Its esiatenoe long before Bhattotpala and

Times of Em.iov.men r.
quoted by him in his commentaries Venkatasa Daivagm a is
certainly not so old as one thousand years, and if Bhattotphala
knew him by name, he would certainly have mentioned his name
in his immortal commentaries on Brihatjafaka- If we refer td
Valmiki and Vy B sa, two of the most renowned epic writers in
India a remarkable coincidence happens. Valmiki is certainly the
older of the two and the Ttamayana is call- d the Adilcavya and
never disputed by any sensible and reputed writer. In his Aditi/a
Hridaya in Bharata Vyasa almost repeats, some of the verses
composed by V almiki in his Aditya Hridaya in Ramayana in toto.
This is as it should be. Some versds are so fine that when a subsequent, author cannot improve them, and cannot at the same time
omit them, he falls into the 2nd alternative of quoting them in
full as if composed by himself for the occasion.
To inherit money is not considered so noble as to earn it by
honest means. The combination above given is a good one and
gives man energy and facilities to earn wealth by his own exertions.
Stanza 246.
If evil planets are not in Kendras , Thrilconas and in the 8th house,
and the lord of Lagna and. Jupiter occupy Kendras , the person will
have all enjoyments, will be charitable , and virtuous, will be free
from disease and will live up to one hundred yearsNOTES.
It will he observed from this* stanza what amount of strength
a man gets if only the birth lord and Brihaspati occupy Kendras —
1st, 4th, 7th, and 10th houses. The verse says that evil planets

Sabwarthachintamani.
are not required to be in the kendras, and 5th, 9th and 8th houses
when kendras and Thrikonas are free from evil influences as well
as the Sth house, which signifies length of lif e-Auyurbhava and if
the lord of birth as well as Jupiter occupy Kendras then the man
will have every enjoyment and long life and prosperity. Lord of
Lagna and Guru may be in one and the same Kendra or each of
them may occupy different kendras. Any how the authorities in
astrology seem to insist upon the lord of birth using ia an 7 one
of the quadrants as well as the most beneficial planet Guru.
Stanza 247.
If Ihe lord of Lagna, or if the lord of the Amsa , occupied by the
lord of Lagna , or the lord of the 11th, occupies the 2nd house the
person gets happy after his 20 th year.
NOTES.
Here three different combinations are given. The lord of
Lagna must occupy the 2nd. The Lord of the Amsa occupied by
the Lord of Lagna must occupy the 2nd. The Lord of the 1 1th
or Labha (gains) must occupy the 2nd. In all these cases the
person becomes happy after he is 20 years. This implies that he
will not be happy before that age- Here Amsa means Navamsa. Suppose Mesha is Lagna. Its lord is Kuja, and he may be found
occupying the Navamsa of Thula • The second combination is that
this lord of Thula. Sulcra must be found occupying the 2nd house
or Vrishabha.

Stanza 248.
Combinations tor Happiness.
If the lord of the Navmma occupied by the lord of birth or the
lord of the Uth, occupies kendras, his own house, or ‘ his exaltation,
the person becomes happy after his 30th year.
notes.
Here times of happiness arc roughly indicated wirhout reference to periods and sub-periods of planets or the Gvchara. The
lord of the Lagna must occupy some Havamsa as a matter of
course. Then the lord of that JS'avamsa occupied by the birth
lord must be found out, and if he occupies his own house, any one of
the Kendras, or his house of exaltation, then the pe son becomes
happy after he is 30 years. The latter portion is easy. If the lord
of the lith occupies his own house, any one of the * Kendras, or
his house of exaltation, the person becomes happy after 30 years.
In all these cases Venkatesa hints that the man will not be happy
before the periods mentioned here.
But suppose in such a case, the person gets a verv bright
l)asa of a planet in his 20th year, and the temporary movements
of the planets are also very favourable to him. The result will
bo a tug of war between the general influences fixed at the time
of birth and those influences which come to him later on. Here
it is meant that when such counteracting influences work in a
horoscope, the results will not be as bright as when no disturbing
elements are observed. Suppose in such- a horoscope good Dasas
come after the 30th year, then the period will be brighter than
what the planet indicates. Herein lies the skill of the astrologer
and he must take all facts into consideration and balance the evidence beforehim.

Sarwarmiachi x i'A M A ic i .
Stanza. 249.
If the lord of Lagna occupies the Oth house, or the lord of the 9th
decuples the oth home or is found in his Gopuramsa the person will
command happiness after his 16th pear.
NOTES.
The occupation, of 9tli by the lord of the birth is good, as
also when the lord of the 9th occupies the 5th. If both or one
of them occupy the Gopuramsa, then it will also be good for the
person. In all these cases the man gets happiness after his 16th
year- This will be a very desirable conjunction. There is another
reading which means that the lord of Lagna must be in the 9th
with beneficial aspects or occupying his fropuramsa. hhis is also
good and may be retained.
Stanza. 2-50.
The results of planetary conjunctions, aspects, their various
sources of power as hearing upon the Lagna (birth) have been detailed by Venkatesicara Sharma.
NOTES.
Vcnkatasa mentions his own name at the conclusion of this
chapter and says that he has carefully explained the results of
planetary conjunctions, their aspects and the various sources of
strength of the planets so far as they directly concern the birth
and its various significations. In all these cases significations or
Bhavas run into each other, and cannot be treated exclusively by
themselves. Happiness includes health and children, money and
power-

Combinations for Wealth. 259
Life includes good and bad and can never be found unalloyed
in its nature- Education includes influence and rponey. Life includes happiness and misery. Earning money may involve various Bhavas. But still each Bhava is treated separately as far as
practicable, and this is what he means. The mentioning of his
name in this as well as in other chapters makes the authorship of
Tenkatasa quite certain, and he is both a learned as well as a
lucid writer. He has grasped the principles of astrology well, has
a good command over the language and has the genius to express
his thoughts and ideas in brief but lucid style.
End of chapter TI.
CHAPTER III.
sww'wftlw-r fisrnfenpW'T n
Stanza 251 .
From the second house hus to be found fundi //, pace, speech,
right eye, precious properties, varieties of fot‘<l, edunitimi . and different Mantras.
NOTES.
Venkatasa after detailing all combinations affecting the
Lagna or body etc., now intends tc take his reader through the
various significations or Tilt a ms and naturally he comes to give a
description of what are signified by the 2nd house and what con.
junctions and aspects will give prosperity or adversity to them
Lagna is alwats counted as the first and therefore the second
house means the next from it. As many are liable to make mistakes in these matters, I shall give one or two examples. If

Sakwa rth achintamani.
;\£feha is birth sign then it is Lagna and is technically called the
first house in a horoscope. The second from that will be Vrishabha, and the third will be Mithuna and so on. \rishaba from
Media is second and Mithuna from Mesh is third-
■ Mantras are a series of sound vibrations so arranged as to
produce definite results. Therefore second house enables one to
see what Mantras the person will get initiation in and with what
effect. Face, right eye, speech, general iamily and the different
kinds of food the nan will like, have to be judged by. the 2nd
house, its lord and the planets who occupy and aspect it- The
details will be given further on.
Stanza 252
If the lord of the 2nd joins the birth lord and occupies Dusthanas ■
there will he loss of sight . If the lord of the second joins Sulera and
Chundra and occupies Lagna with them, the person ivill have defective
sight during the night. If the lord of the second is exalted or is combined with another benefit there will be no defect as predicted above.
NOTES.
The conjunction of the lord of the second with the birth lord
and their occupation of Dusthanas — 6th, 8th and 12th is bad for
vision. If the lord of the second house joins Chundra and Sukra
without exaltation (for lord of 2nd house) and without beneficial
conjunctions the person will- have defective vision during the
night. Bub if a benefic joins them this defect should not be
,, predicted. In the above combination the person will have good
sight during Iho day.

Blindness from BirthStanza 253
If the Sun joins the lord of birth > and the lord of the second happens to occupy 6th-, 8th or 12th houses, the person becomes born
blind. If Mars occupies l'ith the left eye will suffer-, and it Saturn
occupies the 1 2th, the right eye will suffer.
NOTES
The conjunction of the lord cf birth with the S'un and the occupation of Dusthanas by the lord of the 2nd will denote total loss
of sight from the birth. The Sun seems to play an important part
in giving strength to the sight or in depriving it. Dusthanas — G8-12 are bad forany planet or Bhavadhipathi to occupyIf Mars occupies 12th the left eye and if Saturn occupies 12th
house the right eye will be affected. If in the above combination
there are beneficial conjunctions or aspects the ptrson will not
suffer much. In the Vedas the Sun and Moon are represented as
the two eye; of the Supreme Intelligence and their strength in a
horoscope determines to a large extent the strength of the eyes
of a person.
Stanza 254If the S mi and Moon combine and occupy Cancer or Leo— {their
own signs ) having the aspect of Mars and Saturn the loss of sight oc.
curs. If there is an admixture of malefic and benefic aspects, the
person will have defective sight. If benefics join or aspect, there is
no evil to sight.

263 SAKWA RTtiACHINTAMANf.
NOTES.
Kataka and Siraha are the houses of Chundra and Eavi respectively. Surya and Chundra represent the two eyes. If they
join together and occupy any one of the above signs, having Martian or Saturnine aspects then the person suffers from loss of sight.
If these combinations have beneficial aspects then, the sight will be
defective. Budbiidnkshn means, one whose sight is watery, and
defective and one who cannot see properly but at the same
time he is not perfectly blind. If benefics aspect the conjunction
of the Sun and Moon and their occupation of Kataka or Simha,
the evil to sight should not be predicted. This means that the
person will not be born blind, but will lose it later on.
Stanza 255.
Tf there is an evil planet in the 2nd and its lord is aspected
by benefics the person will have Nimilithalcsha . If in this conjunction, the lord of T.aona is combined with wavy evil planets and aspected by Saturn, the person will have eye disease.
NOTES.
From blindness the author takes his readers to half blind and
eye diseases. Shnihthaksha means half opened eves or eyes possessing only half sight. This differs from combinations for eye
diseases. The second house must be occupied by an evil planet,
and when the lord of the second has beneficial aspects .this result
occurs. There are some who cannot fully open their eyes and
therefore cannot see properly. Jf that combination is aspected by
Sani then he will have eye complaints. If in this combination, the
lord of Lagoa is in conjunction with evil planets, aspected by Sani,
then there will be eye complaints.

Influence <>f Bihth Loki> 263
in ali cases of planetary conjunctions, the strength of the lord
of Lagna and the aspect he possesses have a great deal to do in the
direction of influencing the native. The birth lord has a general
influence which modifies, augments, or neutralises the influences
exercised by the lords of The various other houses, and this must
he carefully borne in mind in venturing predictions bv an astrologer. In the latter case above enumerated, there must be an evil
planet in the 2nd having beneficial aspects, and the lord of Lagna
must be combined with many evil planets and in addition have
the aspect of Sani to cause eye complaintsIn all these cases, the presence and aspects of betiefics ought
not to be overlooked as they have the power < f modifying or mitigating evil influences to a very large extent.
C* X V
g-soil^fjsrrqvr^i'l n
If the Karaka of eyes is powerful, if the J 2nd is occupied by a
benefic , if the lord of the 2nd is combined with a good planet
or if the lord of the birth is joined or aspeded by the Netra Karaka
the person will have broad and beautiful eyes. 256.
If the 2nd or its lord combine with Kuja , Sa-ni and Qulika, there
will be eye disease.

' S A R W AETB AC H I N TAM AN I .
ao4
„ tke lori of tte Jfaw* «“!>« »» W ** e “
* Ac person will safer from eye disease*. 257.
other severe bodily complaint s. 2o8.
notes
, , » 11 il senses, the most important is the
"!n 7Z Ze Z double interpretation. By developed n S M
slgl1 ’ .11 desires which may be generated in his
the yoois. This is the internal meaning. Externally, it 15 «*“ J.
,een that the most important sense is the sight and it mus be preZ Z t any cost. How useful this will be for doctors to know
heir professional work, if they only studied astrology, and -
tended to its invaluable suggestions. They do
why the eyes suffer at all, and they can never say at what pen
rh/nerson will suffer from bodily complaints. Astrology iv
, flood of lioht on these circumstances and it will be woi i
r:"t devote a little attention to this all absorbing study.
There is no need to say that sight is an important factor in the
life and career of man. A blind man is thrown into the greatest
disadvantage by want of sight combinations Therefore predictions
thioh deal with the organs of vision are to be carefnily noted.
The Karate or lord of eyes is the San as given out by Venkatas* at the end pf this work. There are some other astrologers
Who consider that Mhm iterates aretwo planets, theSun and the
*)oa i«d' flrft the right eye is under the control of the Sun wh
the left i. under that of the Moon. Bat as Ventotasa gives

Combinations ton Eyk Complaints « A ^
control of both the eyes to the sun. the Karaka here must lie
interpreted as the planet Uavi. w ^
The principles underlying in these combinations seem to he the
position of thu lord of the 2nd, the occupation of that house by benefi.es, the conjunction its lord will have with auspicious planets and
the aspects both the lord and the house may command- In these cases
the eyes will be full and strong. When evil planets aspect or occupy
2nd house or combine with its lord and aspect him and when the
sun is not powerful, and has malefic conjunctions or aspects, the
person will have eye diseases varying in intensity with the strength
of evil planets, and producing good when benches are powerful.
The lord cf the 2nd must not occupy evil positions viz , G*b,
8tn and 12th houses f-om Lagnm If "ukra occupies the 2nd hr use
he will give charming eyes When evil influences predominate to
a large extent, the person might even lose his sight altogether. All
these combinations, presume that the man has sight at the time of
birth, and will lose it afterwards. The times during which such
sight will be lost or endangered, will be times oi evil planets, who
get jurisdiction over the vision during their periods and sub-periods.
The determination of the causes for compiaiut >>r loss of sight, will
depend upon the characteristics of the planets, who control the vision at the particular time- Thus if Kuja. is in the 2nd with evil associations the sight may suffer from fire, bile, heat, or sudden
dangers or instruments. If Sani is similarly situated, the causes may
be traced to windy complaints what are familiarly known as VafaBajas and so forth. Planetary peculiarities are clearly sketched
out in the, first chapter of this work, and no reader can hope to be
successful as a predictor, without mastering the details given in the
preliminary chapters.
In the' Aristadhyaya of Brihatjataka several combinations are
gtobn 1 for loss of sight, and they may be compared with the present
hotels' w'ith- great advantagesi

SakWAKTHAC’EISTAMANIThe lord of the 2nd house must occupy some hacamsa us a
matter of curse and tt the lord of that Amm joins an evil plana -,
»ud the 4th house is occupied by a malefic powerful diso.de, » m
the sight must be predicted.
Jaundice, When unchecked will produce loss of sight or dimness in vision bv the increase of bile. Bxcessive sexual indulgence
will take aw ay* the visual vitality and subject the person to various
eye and. other bodily diseases-
^cTt^T^f^drs'dfTfi: I
Stanzas 25‘>— 200.
If the lord of the 2 ml beiiuj ecil occupies 6th, 8th, and \.th house , ,
they, al ll fa e ,<»«fl»W< f m ' hr
, al ; M s„ uu tbe - brothers, ehlldren, relays, —
anti wives*
/r, fa M of the 2nd is romMncd or osjierted by^aeiand
Jxcmb, for ‘eyes .« »»* Hep have tenefieial aspects the
eyes of the matt mil he strong and fair. 260 .
NOTES.
The word Dustham used in the work means 6th, 8th, and 12th
houses The occupation of these houses by any planets will give
them evil influences. Many of the complaints can he traced to some
immediate or remote causes. But there are yet others, winch have
to be traced to causes arising in the previous births. I his is a stion
argument in favour of the Xarma Theory, without which it is nut

Combination for bvb Complaints.
possible to explain satisfactorily all the inequalities in position,
education, health, mental capacity, moral tone and pecuniary success
which are witnessed among men. When the lord of the 2nd is in conjunction with Ravi or Kujathe eyes will be colored red at their ends.
Both of these are hot and fiery planets aud they show a sort
of reddishness at the ends of the eyes of a person When the lord
of the 2nd and the NetraKani/.a have beneficial aspects or conjunctions, the vision will be strong and distinct.
Yenkatasa gives a very valuable suggestion a- 10 certain peculiarities in a horoscope aud how to judge of a man’s enemies, relations,
children, brothers and friends. When a horoscope is examined there
are 12 B ha can or significations, which have already been explained
in the previous chapter. r l he first shows the body < f the person, the
second his family and vision in general, the third indicates brothers,
the fourth mother, the fifth children, the sixth enemies, the seventh
wife, the eighth longevity, t he 9 rh father, the tenth refutation,
the eleventh elderho n brothers ai.d sisieis- and the 12th sin and
heaven. What Venkatasa me: ns to sav here is, that if the welfare
uf the brothers of a person, has to be consulted, then tire drdhou.se
must be taken as the birth of his brothers and making it as their
Lagna,the astrologer has to pn diet their successes and failures.
One or two illustrations will make his meaning clear.
Take the f llowing horoscope —
The eyes of this person, have
to be judge. I by the strength of
the lord of the 2nd .as well ns its
occupants and those which send
powerful and beneficial influences.
If the nature of his brothers has
to bo found out,tlien according to
Venkatesn take the erd house
Cancer which represents brothers
and make this the Lagna or birth
Mo< » n
Riv h n ;
ISaturll.
. J u pi Eel* j
Mercury
San
, |Rjijai <] iacjrt'iim < *F —
j 0 5i p r j. ; a leading mini
corn, i
j Venus :
i Ker.hu j
Mars. ;

ggg Sarwarthachintamaniti w e „I hi, brothers- Then the 2nd tom Cancer, and the
tions there and with ite lord will decide “ f fi* ^ honse
r le K t rVh"rcm Crofca^comn, indicate,
SL pi^and that must he tahen - Me
father The sixth house represents las ename^.
f t ' ‘ ... . il. Wna for determining his enemies
Thula will represent the -La„
future prospects.
The 4th or Leo represents mother and this will he toe
of his Mother. In this way every other Bhava has to be carefully
' h ^ There are 1 2 £/««* or significations from the Lagna.
rrlt » now the results of any one of these BW* wto
asKivcia t~H£
X nf morality which the person possesses. But suppose
Tf ther’s moretity is wnnted. Then the 9,h from Lagna
represents the father' of the man. The 4th tarn the 9, h or the
1 2tli from the Lagna really represents h.sfather’s moiahty. Fut
sub divisions of these trill represent the different brothers, sons,
sisters, friends and wives.
to S3
ft*^OTrB^r : I
Stanzas 261 — 262Ifthe lord of the 2nd and JSetraTcaraha have evil conjunctions o r
aspects the vision will he defective. These significations have) to
be extended to father fyc-? 26 1 ,

Command of Bespect.
If the lord of tty 2nd joins a henejic, awl occupies kendras,
exaltations friendly houses, or the signs 0 / benejics, the person will help
his family members, and will have sweet speech for all. It the lord
of the 2nd joins auspicious planets similar results wilt foil vie therefrom. 262
NOTES.
The first part of the stanza has already been exp ainedVenkatsa takes the reader to those pla letary combinations,
■which influence persons to command respect among their relations
and casteinen and family members in general. Charity should begin
at home. There are some persons who entertain bitter reelings to
wards their family members, and who are kindly to strangers. There
are others who do a great deal to help their family members. National as well as religious codes, have ordained that men should help
their families first and their societies and nations afterwards If
they neglect this simple but mo u. essential duty then they will never
become worthy before their God The lord of t he 2nd represents
family &. and when he is good and occupies kendrav 1-4-7-10, his
own house, his friendly signs, his signs of exaltation, or the signs
Of benefics, he will make the man love his family and support its
members as far as he can. The houses of r< a! benefics are Taurus
and Libra ruled by Venus and Sagittarius and I isces governed
by the most auspicious planet. Jupiter. The houses of Mercury,
namely Gemino and Virgo may or may not be considered good
as he happens to be good or evil by occupation and association.
Mercury as is well known is an unsteady planet and becomes good
or evil as he is conjoined. The house of Moon is good when he is
full and inauspicious when lie is weak.

Sauwarthachintamani.
q?rtw(l3PTOiTO , n# I
qrqr^taf^isfi qiqr%!r€rc5i#cKrfr n
tfifti# q[t>-T|f^qa€T I
qcn^tswcrcffa^reft ftqerc^qsTcsfcret- II
NaNa 6 . Ni
If the lord of Lngna is in exaltation and also the lord, of . the 2nd.
and. hare beneficial aspect*, the person will be charitable and± helpful
to man//. If Guru is the lord of the second, and occupies it, or the 2nd is
owned hi/ B nda or Sukra and they occupy their exaltations or friendly
houses or occupy the 4 fh house, the person will protect many and be
helpful to the public . 203.
If the lord of the 2nd is erif and has eril conjunctions or aspects
and is exalted t and the lord- of birth is weal: and conjoins a malefic, the
person makes his money or lirclihond by help my others 264.
If erd planets occupy the 2nd , and its weak lord is aspected by
malefic s, and if the lord, of Lru/nais in conjunction with eril planets in
the Dnsthanos the person makes a hard, tiring. 265
If the lord ! if the second is aspected by Jupiter occupying the 3 rd
houses and if the exalted sun occupies the 4 th house, the person will
be a protector of 'many persons . 266.
NOTES.
The lords of th^ 1st and 2nd houses must be exalted with
beneficial aspects, to make the person charitable,. When jupiter
occupies the 2nd and owns it also, the person becomes helpful to
others. IE the 2nd is owned by Venus or Mercury, and they hav§

Livelihood and Livino 27 )
exaltations or if they juiu friendly houses the man Incomes a supporter of many souls- These were all beneficial combinations- Now
the reader is taken to the evil conjunctions which the author
details. If the lord of the 2nd is exalted- is evil and has evil aspects
or conjunctions, the person will help others and in the bargain gain
some money. This may refer to all such persons who are called
commission agents, brokers and JDalals. 01 course their success
depends upon the strength of the lord of the 2nd and those who join
or aspect him. When evil planets occupy the 2nd, when its lord is
weak and is aspectcd by malefic*, and when the lord of the Lagna
occupies Dusthanas or btli, fatli and lt_th, the struggle for existence
will ho severe and he knows little of happiness. "When the lord
of the 2nd is aspectcd by Jupiter, who occupies the 3rd house fiom
Lagna and when the sun in exaltation occupies the fourth house,
the charities of the pex*son will be immense, and he protects many,
A careful study of these combinations enables one to judge whether
a given horoscope will be successful or unsuccessful and whether the
person will he helpful and public spirited or whether he .will earn
money to leave wealth to those who come behitid him. Earning is
quite different from spending and spending is quite different from
carefully using money for his own as well as for the benefit of liis
fellow subjects. The difficult nature of the astrological predictions
must have been brought before the readers of this work and I have
to insist upon the students, to carefully read these combinations
analyse them, digest them, and then venture on future predictions.

Sa r w a rth ach ijjta m an t
iCcmiTOiW q^lflcP-TirV-T^ 1
qrqiT&<wss<jsr ^fresffaqq n
s* "S
SiANZAS 267—2(58—269
If the lord of the 2nd is exalted or found in 5th, 9th or 11 th,
toitk the lord of birth powerful , and the lord of the sign occupied by ■
the lord of the 2nd in Kendras , the person will be master and . protector of many persons. 267.
If the lord of the 2nd occupies gopuramsa, or Simhasanamsa or
if the lord of the Nacawsa occupied by the lord of the 2nd happens
to be a benefic, the person will protect 50 persons. 268.
Jl ' If tlie2nd house is owned by a malefic and if its lord occupies an
h'vil sign and has evil aspects , the person will have very hard life. 269.
Iff
NOTES.
The exaltation of the lord of the 2nd house, or his occupation,
of the 5th, 11th, and 9lli houses, with the lord of birth powerful, will
give man position, and wealth to protejct many. The; power of the
birth lord means, that he must be well posited, well, combined 1 , weld)
aspected, and well occupying the shubha shadvergas This is ver-v
important. If the lord of the sign occupied by the lord of the 2c«*
is found in the Kendras, the person will protect many persons nj^ 7
In the horoscope above given, the lord of tie' 2nd is Mercury
and he occupies Kumbha. The lord of Kumbha is Saturn and
he is found in the 2nd house.- But if Saturn 1 had occupied Kendras then the person would have been a protector of many persons.
Stanza 268 is* not clear,- and- the mherptic^ian on its face
would be found ^inconsistent. Perhaps what- th# author meant
was that if the lord of the 2nd occupies Gopura or ; Simhasanamsa
or if the lord of the 2nd occupies a beneficiaT l^avamsa, the man

MisEBA.nr.E Living.
becomes a protector of 50 persons- This means that through bis
earnings, about 50 persons will be supported and this cannot he
done unless the man has a decent position or wealth. It would
be unintelligible to consider that the 2nd house can occupy any
Navamsa. It may be construed as meaning the 2nd Navamsa
from the Lagna. From these good combinations Venkatasa will
now take the readers through those combinations, which make
man’s life difficult, and his career full of obstacles.
If the 2nd house happens to belong to a malefic, if the lord of
the 2nd occupies an evil sign and if he has evil aspects, thea the
person will have very severe struggle for existence- He earns
little, and that little comes to him after great trouble and anxiety.
The ways of the world are mysterious. Why one man should be
easily successful, while the other is unsuccessful, nobody car
clearly explain. The Karma theory offers very convincing arguments in this direction. But even Karma Theory is found to be
difficult to understand. Whv there should have been differences
in temperament at the very commencement of creation to attract
good and evil influences, is a question the solution to which is not
so easy to give. Any how there are very great differences in the
•mental capacities of created beings and their moral perceptions
:Jre simply marvellous. All these differences could not have
nit*en. the products of blind chance. Neither ean any man definitely
to j .JWhat is chance.' 1 We see certain laws holding good- It ia
the tnind that is a good or bad conductor for virtues and vices.
When this mind leaves the body and goes away to higher or
lower regions according to its previous Karma it must necessarily
cuv/ with it its previous encumbrances, and these in course of
biin; must be expects I to produce their own good or evil result?.
Th ; question is a very complicated one, but at the same time, the
most interesting one in this world to study and understandActions must inevitably produce some results, and all causes must
have th'dr corresponding effects. Some are quick in producing

Sauwabthacbintamaki.
results, while others take ;i very long time. knit iheif. cun bt
cause without its direct or indirect oil cot .
Thus it will be seen that some men succeed very easily while ;
others take a long time to achieve success. There are yet otheu
who never are successful. These effects are indicated by the
combinations of planets at the time oi birth, as well as by the new
angles and positions which those planets assume in their incessant
movements round their axes as well as round other pUnetaiy
spheres. Granting that, men possess similar capacities, we fine
that the results of their actions when performed under equal
conditions will greatly vary and these therefore clearly show that
the present actions and their results have some close relationship
with the previous states of existence of the person. Otherwise outattempts must be uniformly successful when directed under similar conditions. Man is a grand mystery and his relations with
objective and subjective phenomena are peculiar and require
deep knowledge to understand. As man brings some invisible
but all the same, certain energies with him from his previous
states of existence, these add a great deal to make or mar his fortunes in this life- i
.5RRTT5rrfnlr3ncr^« 11
\OH> 'O

Protecting fellow Subjects and their Number*
3 -q 5 far%a'ff!a?r?r 1
^'JWSW'IST q^aRfBRf: t
^rq^t^cT^ qifi^h-u ii
Stanz\s ti 7*»-7 1-Vti-7:J-7 L* ~o
Pnraratnms<i ami if tin' lord of 1 hr -"'I mnjnins "' Ihhenniis
son will )i roteet 20 persons
ui'i'H fPt‘ m
tin 1 yiffS
If tln> lord of iln‘ -2ml w-nt pies e.,altnli<ai . fei-miiy , or lux own
house, or si ndtnxnoa visa, while ihe ioeil of Ho' house war re the 2nd
haute owner stops. a, rallies Para cut am sa with the aspret of id urn, Ike.
person will protect 300 people. 2. i.
Jf the I, ml of the '■J.ml Geraint's it is xwoeiia a ml has aspret laj or
eaajanetom with tinea, while t/i re is a planet hi Swoe/m >„ tin ■ 2 ml
with jar in a. aspret nr ennjnnet. mi Hie person will enmmami and protee I one tlmiixn ml souls. 2< 2.
If.tnpirer oeenpiex Siiuhnsantliiixo , leans I Inpn ra.necr, ami tj
the lord of I he 2nd is poaref a, I i ml i era, lies I , a ra tain so. the prison,
will pro; net an nib-elexs men. . t >■
If the inr.i nj the '2nd <>si a pint t Japan i m >-ri amt Onrn. <v‘ni pirx
1 hi retrain nixti , nntiiii iieesonx tire e.inijortnh/y thromjk his tniinenct
a ad dependency. 2/4.
If the lord of the 2ml rout'd aCS talk I'am ml (f m so, alflunjh //<«
person ims no Ilnjnipiipi . ion i. y pars <li x W<ll nude their Uretihomt and
i/ej iia mU Ini depend i iuj a non inn and resjii cl t mj him. 2 to.
NOTES.
The skl'izus iiiv Very inlorestiug* Monti L ilto oreat aim of
mauy or the people. Before its iafitionce, other iaflaeaoes are al-

SAKWAETHACHIxVTAMANI.
most insignificant and powerless. A mind that is greedy after
money will entertain no scruples in the means used to acquire
it. When the Lcogha and Bhava Sputas are made, the 1 2 houses,
will be found to be occupying some good or bad vergas or divisions. Venkatasa means to say that as Lagna has born, Drakkana,
Navamsa, Dwadasamsa, Tbrimsamsa and Shastiarnsa so also have
other Bhavas their Shubha or Ashuba Vergas or good and evil
divisions. These can be found out by correct mathematical calculations. There must be moon in the 2nd house, the second
Bhava must fall in Paravatamsa and the lord of the 2nd house
must be found to be in conjunction with benefi.es, to make a person
protector of 20 persons. This means that directly or indirectly he
governs 20 souls and they will depend upon him for their maintenance. This number so correctly stated need not be taken literally
but must be interpreted in a general sense. Then Venkatasa
gives a combination which enables a man to protect 300 souls'
The lord of the second mus^occupy his own house, a frieudly sign
or the sign of his exaltation, or occupy Simbasanamsa, while the
lord of the house where we find the lord of the 2nd posited
should be in Paravatamsa to create the yoga above referred to.
The lord of the 2nd may be exalted in his own house, then that
becomes bis bouse of occupation and he is his own lord. Even
in this ease I think he must occupy paravatamsa to generate this
yoga where he will be in a position to protect 300 persons. Then
we come to Swocha, (See Stanza 30. P. 37).
There must be a deeply exalted planet in the 2nd, while its
lord must also have deep exaltation and both of these must have
the aspect of or conjunction with Jupiter to enable a person to
protect a thousand souls. A person will certainly be a great man
on whom one thousand people are directly dependent for their
livelihood.
Then a higher combination is given; wherein the individual
have wealth and influence to protect numberless men. " The last

t^OraCTIHG- FELLOW. SUBJECTS JkJiJD TBElR NUMBER. 277
word should not be taken in its literal sense- While the population
of the earth is given in definite numbers, numberless does really
mean greater than that number- What the- author apparently
means is that a very very large number of souls depend directly
upon this great man. Guru and Sukra have to occupy Bimhasana
and Gopuramsas respectively while the powerful lord of the second
must occupy Iravatamsa to make a man elected as the head of
some large numbers of people, to enable them to make a comfortable living on his dependency. There are heads of various societies and institutions. A religious community may elect a man as
their head and then through the earnings which that position
commands all these may make their living, as some sort of
dependents upon him and his position. Here the people give him
a position and then take advantage of that position for eking out
their existence.
Then comes an equally good combination. Lord of the 2nd
in Paravatamsa, will enable a person to get into a position whereby
he will be the means to procure livelihood for many persons although he may have no Rajayoga-'Rajayoga may refer to political
position under the direct control of the ruling -Government. But
there are some employments which are at the gift as it were of
the people themselves, which they can give and u,«der the shadow
of which they can spend luxurious and -comfortable lives.
it

SabwabtSachintamani.
, r If the. lord of the, 2nd occupies keiidras aspc.cicd by belief cs, or if
a be tie fir, occupies the 2nd t the person wilt hare <i handsome or attractiae face. 276.
If the lord of the 2nd occupies kendras, exaltations, friendly
house#) or his own, V ertfots, or if the lord of the house occupied, by the
lord, of the 2nd occupies Gopurainsa , the person will liana a full face
and much wealth. 277.
Jfmalefirs occupy the 2nd or its lord is debilitated or joins e-nil
planets or has enil aspects the person will knee an ugly or repulsine
face. 278.
NOTESThe second house represents face. Combinations are explained by V"enkatasa Daivagriya, to illustrate the various kinds of
faces. There are some who possess very inviting faces, while
there are others who have absolutely repulsive looks. If the lord
of th« 2nd. occupies Kendras, his friendly houses, his house of
exaltation, has beneficial conjunctions or aspects, then the astrologer is advised to predict good face, fully developed and possessing an attractive appearance. If the lord of the 2nd is well situated,
then the person will also have riches. . There arc, some who
are very handsome, but who have no money, while there are
others who are positively ugly but who command immense
wealth. In these cases a distinction has to, he made. The lord
of wealth is different from the lord of the house signifying wealth.
2nd is the house of wealth and its lord may be any one of the
seven planets who govern all terrestrial affairs. Hut the lord ' of
wealth is Jupiter and according to some Mars, for 1 personal
appearances we have to take the lord of the 1st as well as the lorduf
the 2nd. When the 2nd house is occupied or aspected by good
planets, the person should have great wealth, bub ii these planets
