READABLE DATASET
================================================================================
Original file: shree_varaha_purana_01.json
Dataset number: 359 of 455
Format: valid JSON
Structure: Object / structured dataset
Original size: 676,250 bytes
Top-level fields: 11
Title: Shree Varaha Purana 01
Creator: Purana_01
Date: —
Description: Misc Indic Books, 'Puranas', 'Shree Varaha-Purana_01'

CONTENT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
METADATA AND OTHER FIELDS
  • title: Shree Varaha Purana 01
  • creator: Purana_01
  • date: —
  • description: Misc Indic Books, 'Puranas', 'Shree Varaha-Purana_01'
  • subject: Misc Indic Books
  • identifier: yaar_shree-varaha-purana-01
  • source_folder: yaar_shree-varaha-purana-01
  • total_pages: 380
  • total_words: 119739
  • text_quality:
    • ocr_word_validity_score: 0.877
    • quality_tier: good
    • note: —

FULL TEXT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SY ETOR,
ANCIENT INDIAN
fRADITION & MYTHOLOGY
Translated by
A BOARD OF SCHOLARS
Edited by
Prof. J.L. SHASTRI
VoruMr. 31

ANCIENT INDIAN TRADITION AND
MYTHOLOGY SERIES
[PURANAS IN TRANSLATION]
Volumes Released
SIVA 1-4
LINGA 5-6
BHAGAVATA 7-11
GARUDA 12-14
NARADA 15-19
KURMA 20-21
BRAHMANDA 22-26
AGNI 27-30
VARAHA 31-32
BRAHMA 33-36
VAYU 37-38
PADMA 39-48
SKANDA, PARTS I-XX, 49-68
Volumes Under Preparation
SKANDA, PARTS XXI-XXIV
BHAVISYA
BRAHMAVAIVARTA
DEVIBHAGAVATA
KALIKA
MARKANDEYA
MATSYA
VAMANA
VISNU
VISNUDHARMOTTARA

_ THE |
VARAHA-PURANA
Translated and Annotated by
S. VENKITASUBRAMONIA IYER
PART I
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS
PRIVATE LIMITED e DELHI

First Edition: Delhi, 1985
Reprint: Delhi, 2003
© MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PRIVATE LIMITED
All Rights Reserved.
Also available at:
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS
41 U.A. Bungalow Road, Jawahar Nagar, Delhi 110 007
8 Mahalaxmi Chamber, 22 Bhulabhai Desai Road, Mumbai 400 026
236, 9th Main III Block, Jayanagar, Bangalore 560 011
120 Royapettah High Road, Mylapore, Chennai 600 004
Sanas Plaza, 1302 Baji Rao Road, Pune 411 002
8 Camac Street, Kolkata 700 017
Ashok Rajpath, Patna 800 004
Chowk, Varanasi 221 001
UNESCO COLLECTION OF REPRESENTATIVE WORKS—Indian Series
This book has been accepted in the Indian Translation Series of the
UNESCO Collection of Representative Works, jointly sponsored
by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization (UNESCO) and the Government of India.
Printed in [ndia
BY JAINENDRA PRAKASH JAIN AT SHRI JAINENDRA PRESS,
A-45 NARAINA, PHASE-I, NEW DELHI 110 028
AND PUBLISHED BY NARENDRA PRAKASH JAIN FOR
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PRIVATE LIMITED,
BUNGALOW ROAD, DELHI 110 007

PUBLISHER’S NOTE
The Purest gems lie hidden in the bottom of the ocean or in the
depth of rocks. One has to dive into the ocean or delve into the
rocks to find them out. Similarly, truth lies concealed in the
language which with the passage of time has become obsolete.
Man has to learn that language before he discovers that truth,
But he has neither the means nor the leisure to embark on
that course. We have, therefore, plannedto help him acquire
knowledge by an easier course. We have started the series of
Ancient Indian Tradition and Mythology in English Translation.
Our goal is to universalize knowledge through the most popular
international. medium of expression. The publication of the
Puranas in English Translation is a step towards that goal.

PREFACE
The present Volume contains the Vardha Purdna Part I (Chapters
1-136) in English Translation. This is the thirtyfirst volume in
the Series on Ancient Indian Tradition and Mythology.
The project of the series was planned in 1970 by Lala Sundar
Lal Jain of Messrs Motilal Banarsidass, with the purpose to
universalize knowledge through the most popular international
medium, viz. English. Hitherto, the English translations of eight
Puranas, namely Siva, Linga, Bhagavata, Garuda, Narada,
Kürma, Brahmanda and Agni have been published and released
for sale.
In this scheme, the Old Sanskrit Texts of the Puranas as
printed by the Venkatesvara Press and published by Khemardja Srikrsnadass have been rendered into English. Translation is
neither too literal nor too free. Care has been taken to maintain
balance between the two extremes. The spirit of the Original
Sanskrit text has been preserved in translation without violating
the idiom of English language.
The Puranas are classified as Vaisnava, Brahma, or Saiva
according to the degree of quality, sattva, rajas or tamas which
they possess in prominence. Judged by this standard the present
Purana belongs to the Visnuite class. Majority of the verses
relate to Visnuite rituals, stotras or anecdotes. The Purana
eulogizes the ten incarnations of Visnu and proclaims that a
devotee attains identity with the lord by reciting and listening
to his praise. A number of chapters describe the initiation of
devotees to Visnuite order. The Purana prescribes initiation
not only for the Brahmanas but also for the Ksatriyas, Vaigyas
and Südras.
The Purana records a number of religious vows which a
devotee should observe at certain holy places for attaining his
desire. Mention may be made in this context of Dvadasi Vrata
observed on the twelfth day of the bright fortnight of each month
of the year, the ritual being related to the ten incarnations of
Visnu, Padmanabha being the eleventh and Dharani (Earth)
the twelfth. The Purana contains a number of hymns in praise

vill Preface
of Visnu, addressed to his specific forms, under particular names
such as Matsya, Varaha and Kürma. There is a hymn in prosc
called Brahmaparamaya stotra which was uttered bv the Agvins
in praise of Visnu.
Though predominantly Visnuite in character, the Purana
talks highly of lord Siva, discribing his origin, exploits, the destruction of Daksa’s sacrifice in particular. The Purana is emphatic
about the identity of Trinity, a single entity assuming manifold
forms such as Visnu, Brahma, Siva and others.
Beside the worship of Trinity we find the cult of Mother
Goddesses as the distinct feature of this work. These Mothers are
allied to Siva and their origin is traced to the fury of Siva, the
purpose being the destruction of asuras.
In the miscellany of topics we can include the glory and
greatness of holy centres, gifts of cows, enumration of sins and
their expiation, causes of sufferings in hell and of enjoyment in
heaven. Finally this Part describes Sraddhakalpa (the institution
of obsequial rites and rituals).
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT OF OBLIGATIONS
It is our pleasant duty to put on record our sincere thanks to
Dr. R. N. Dandekar and the UNESCO authorities for their
kind encouragement and valuable help which render this work
more useful than it would otherwise have been. We are extremely grateful to Dr. S. Venkitasubramonia Iyer, Professor of
Sanskrit (Retired), University of Kerala, for his critical Introduction, lucid translation and useful notes. We also thank those
persons who have offered suggestions for improving the same.
— Editor

CONTENTS
PART I
PREFACE vii
ABBREVIATIONS xiii
INTRODUCTION XV
CHAPTERS
1. Earth's Enquiry about Creation, Benedictory Prayer 1
2. Primary Creation 3
3. Birth of Narada 10
4, Greatness of Narayana 12
5. Attainment of Liberation through Duty 16
6. Attainment of liberation uttering the Pundarikasapara
hymn 20
7. Attainment of liberation uttering Gadadhara Hymn 23
8. The Life of Dharmavyadha 27
9. Description of Fish-Incarnation 32
10. The Creation and the Life of Durjaya 35
11. Fight between Durjaya and Gauramukha 40
12. Narayana offers a boon to Supratika 47
13. Rules for Sraddha 49
14. Rules for Sraddha 54
15. Sage Gauramukha’s liberation after uttering the hymn
of Ten Incarnations of Visnu 58
16. The Story of Sarama 60
17. The Story of Mahatapas 62
18. Origin of Fire 68
19. Greatness of Fire 69
20. Origin of A$vins 70
21. Origin of Gauri 74
22. Marriage of Gauri 80
23. Origin of Vinayaka 83
24. Origin of Serpents 86
25. Origin of Skanda 88
26. Origin of Sun 92
27. Origin of Mátrgana 94

Origin of Goddess Durga
Origin of Diks
Origin of Kubera
Origin of Visnu
Origin of Dharma
Origin of Rudra
Origin of Pitrs
Origin of Soma
Former Story .
Story of Dirghabahu
Story of Satyatapas
Matsyadvadasi Vrata
Kirmadvadasi Vrata
Varahadvadasi Vrata
Narasimhadvadasi Vrata
Vamanadvadasi Vrata
Jamadagnyadvadasi Vrata
Ramadvadasi Vrata
Krsnadvadasi Vrata
Buddhadvadasi Vrata
Kalkidvadasi Vrata
Padmanabhadvadasi Vrata
Dharani Vrata
Agastyagita I
Agastyagita II
Story of Pasupala
Vrata for attaining the best husband
Subha Vrata
Dhanya Vrata
Kanti Vrata
Saubhaghya Vrata
Avighna Vrata
Santi Vrata
Kama Vrata
Arogya Vrata
Putraprapti Vrata
Saurya Vrata
Sarvhabhauma Vrata
Naradiya Paficaratra
Wonder of Visnu
Contents

Conten*s
Yugadharma
Wonder of Narayana
Rudragita I
Rudragita IT
Determination of Prakrti and Purusa
Vairajavrtta
Cosmology
Jambüdvipa and Meru
Cities of Eight Dikpāla-s
'The Meru Mountain
Mandara and other mountains
Valleys of Meru 1
Valleys of Meru II
Domains of Devas in the Mountains
Decent of the rivers
Regions and rivers in the mountain Naisadha
Regions on the South and North of Meru
The nine divisions of Bharata
Sakadvipa
KusSadvipa
Krauficadvipa
Salmalidvipa and others
Goddess of Creation
Sarasvati and others
Greatness of Vaisnavi
Discussion of Mahisásura with his ministers
Fight between gods and demons
Death of Mahisasura
Exploits of Raudri
Greatness of Rudra
Moksa of Satyatapas
Greatness of Tiladhenu
Greatness of Jaladhenu
Greatness of Rasadhenu
Greatness of Gudadhenu
Greatness of Sarkaràdhenu
Greatness of Madhudhenu
Greatness of Ksiradhenu
Greatness of Dadhidhenu
Greatness of Navanitadhenu

xii Contenis
108. Greatness of Lavanadhenu 245
109. Greatness of Karpasadhenu 247
110. Greatness of Dhanyadhenu 248
111. Greatness of Kapilàdhenu 249
112. Greatness of Cow at Childbirth, list of Puranas 250
113. Hymn on the Lord 255
114. Varáha incarnation— Questions of Earth 260
115. Originofdifferent dharmas (Karmas of different castes) 264
116. Happiness and Unhappiness 267
117. Thirtytwo offences 270
118. Rituals in idol worship 273
119. Food forbidden in worship 276
120. Worship of Sandhya 278
121. Absence of birth 279
122. Greatness of Kokamukha—story of the Fish and Cricket 281
123. Greatness of flowers, sandalpaste etc. 288
124. Worship in the Seasons 291
125. Mayacakra 295
126. Greatness of Kubjàmraka—story of the Serpent and
Ichneumon 306
127. Initiation of the Brahmin 319
128. Initiation of other Castes—Ganantika, Comb,
Collyrium and Mirror 323
129. Further Rituals in worship 329
130. Expiation for eating the king's food 333
131. Expiation for not cleaning the teeth 335
132. Expiation for touching Dead body 336
133. Expiation for passing flatus and answering calls of
Nature in the midst of worship 339
134. Other offences during worship 340
135. Expiation for eating goose etc. 344
136. Rules of expiation 347

ABBREVIATIONS
Common and self-evident abbreviations such as Ch(s)-
Chapter(s),
p—page, pp—pages, V—Verse, VV—Verses,
Ftn—footnote, Hist. Ind. Philo—History of Indian Philosophy
are not included in this list.
ABORI
AGP
AIHT
AITM
AP
Arch.S.Rep.
AV
Bd. P.
BG
Bh. P.
Br.
BS. P.
BV. P.
CVS
DB
De or
GDAMI.
Dh. S.
ERE
GP
Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute,
Poona
S. M. Als The Geography of Puranas, PPH, New
Delhi, 1973
Ancient Indian Historical Tradition, F. E. Pargiter,
Motilal Banarsidass (MLBD), Delhi
Ancient Indian Tradition and Mythology Series MLBD,
Delhi
Agni Purdna, Guru Mandal Edition (GM), Calcutta, 1957
Archaeological Survey Report
Atharva Veda, Svadhyaya Mandal, Aundh
Brahmanda Purdna, (MLBD), Delhi 1973
Bhagavadgità
Bhàgavata Purána, Bhagavat Vidyapeeth, Ahmedabad
Brühmana (preceded by name such as Satapatha
Bhavisya Purdna, Vishnu Shastri Bapat, Wai
Brahma Vaivarta Purina, GM, 1955-57
Caturvarga Cintàmani by Hemadri
Carana Vyüha Sütra by Saunaka; Com. by Mahidasa
Devi Bhagavata, GM, 1960-61
The Geographical Dictionary of Ancient and Mediaeval India, N. L. De, Orienta Reprint, Delhi, 1971
Dharma Sūtra (preceded by the author's name
such as Gautama)
Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics—Hastings.
Garuda Purana Ed. R. S. Bhattacharya Chowkhamba, Varanasi, 1964

Pd. P.
PE
PR or
PRHRC
RV
Sat. Br.
SC or SMC
SEP
Abbreviations
Grhya Siitra (preceded by the name of the author
such as Apastamba)
History of Dharma Sastra, P. V. Kane, G. O. S.
The Indian Antiquary
The Indian Historical Quarterly
Purana (Journal of the Kashiraj Trust) Varanasi
Kautilya Arthasastra
Kürma Purdna, Venkategvara Press Edt. Bombay, also Kashiraj Trust Edt., Varanasi 1971
Linga Purana, GM, 1960; also MLBD, Delhi, 1981
Manusmrti
Mahabharata, Gita Press, Gorakhpur, VS 2014
Markandeya Purdna
Mahābhārata Na@mdnukramani, Gita Press Gorakhpur, VS 2016
Matsya Purina, GM, 1954
Monier Williams Sk. English Dictionary MLBD,
Delhi, 1976
Naradiya or Narada Purdna, Veùkateśvar Press,
Bombay
Bhàratavarsiya Pracina | Caritrakoía, Siddheshwar
Shastri, Poona, 1968
Padma Purana, GM, 1957-59
Puranic Encyclopaedia, V. Mani, English, MLBD,
Delhi, 1975
Puranic Records on Hindu Rites and Customs
R. C. Hazra, Calcutta, 1948
Rg-Veda, Svadhyaya Mandal, Aundh
Satapatha Brühmaga
Smrti Candriká-.—Devanna Bhatta
Studies in Epics and Purápas, A.D. Pusalkar Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan (BVB), Bombay

INTRODUCTION
The Varàhapurána is an old Purana considered as a major
Purana (mahdpurdna) in the accounts given in the Puranas themselves. But although it states in an early chapter the five general
characteristics of a Purana (paficalaksana), it itself does not contain all these, a feature which it shares with several other Puranas.
It, of course, contains an account of the first two, namely primary creation and secondary creation (sarga and pratisarga), but
contains very little of the others (vamía, manvantara and vamsanucarita). It is full of religious and theological matters and glorification of the gods, mainly Visnu, and of the holy tirthas and
rules for the observance of various vows. Nevertheless, it is an
old Purana in its essential parts, though, as in most other works
of a like nature, there are many portions added to it from time
to time as is evident from the repetitions, inconsistencies and what
would normally appear to be irrelevant matter in some contexts.
Its date must be early and Wilson's assigning it to the 12th centuary A.D., is arbitrary and unjustified. The earlier parts may
not be later than loth century as pointed out by P. V. Kane
and accepted by scholars like R. C. Hazra, who, however, considers some interpolations to be possibly as late as the 15th century.
The work is presented here in an English translation, which is
neither too literal nor too free, of the text published by the Venkateswar Press, Bombay, with the most essential corrections. It
may be noted that although the work is traditionally believed to
contain 24,000 glokas, the text available now contains only a
little over 10,000 ślokas.
The Purana is in the form of a conversation between Varaha,
the Boar-incarnation of Lord Visnu, and Dharani, the Earth
held up by him in his tusk, as given by Sita, the mythological
narrator. The whole discourse is in reply to Earth’s questions to
the Lord seeking enlightenment as to the creation, sustenance and
destruction of the world and what would constitute righteous
conduct and virtuous actions for happiness in life and ultimate
liberation from worldly existence.
We may make a rapid survey of the Purana dividing it into
convenient sections and noting the most essential things in each.

xvi Introduction
1. Chs. 1-8. This is of a preliminary nature. Earth puts
her questions to the Lord who reveals to her his universal form.
We find the account of primary creation from Vyoma through
the Pradhana and the three gunas, Sattva, Rajas and Tamas, to
Brahma, the origin of Rudra, Prajapati and Svayambhuvamanu,
Rudra’s form constituted of man in one half and woman in the
other, the division of the male part into eleven and further development of creation from Svàyambhuvamanu. Narada’s narration to Priyavrata, son of Svayambhuvamanu, of his previous
life and his meeting goddess Savitri is interposed. The story of
king Aévagiras whom the sages Kapila and Jaigisavya convince
of the omniscience and omnipresence of Visnu and the need to
do one’s duty for spiritual knowledge and liberation and the king
finally getting dissolved in the Lord, follows. We may note that
although the chief emphasis of this Purana is on devotion, here
we find the stress on jfidna as the ultimate means for mukti.
King Vasu practising penance and obtaining liberation by
reciting the Pundarikàksapàra hymn, sage Raibhya performing
penance at Gaya and getting liberation by uttering the Gadadhara stotra, the ghost of a Brahmin unwittingly killed by king
Vasu becoming a hunter by name Dharmavyadha merging in
the lord by his praise of him, are narrated to illustrate the efficacy of penance and prayer. The Dharmavyadha, it is stated
begot daughter and gave her in marriage to the son of the Brahmin, sage Matanga, but afterwards she was illtreated by her
mother-in-law particularly referring to her father being a meateating hunter, and, indignant at this, the Vyàdha made Matanga
admit that while he, as a hunter, was killing only one animal a
day for food, the sage who prides at his being a vegetarian, is
actually destroying numerous potential forms of life contained
in the grains he cooks and eats. We may note two things in this
story, one, the free and formal intermarriage between a Brahmin
and a lower caste and the other a defence of non-vegetarianism.
2. Chs. 9-17. This continues the account of creation. Lord
Narayana creates Uma and the syllable ‘Om’ identified with
Siva, out of which latter arise the seven worlds Bhi etc, the sun,
the moon, fire, people of the four castes, Yaksas, Raksasas and
Devas and day and night. The Vedas hide themselves in water,
but the Lord, assuming the form of a huge fish, recovers them
from the water when extolled.

Introduction xvil
Durjaya, son of Supratika, conquers all the worlds including
Indra’s, but on the way chances to enter the hermitage of sage
Gauramukha who offers him and his army great hospitality with
the help of a miraculous gem given by Visnu. Wishing to get
possession of the gem for himself but unable to do it, Durjaya
enters into a fight but his army is defeated by the army that arises
from the gem, and Visnu appears there and kills the king and
his men by his disc. Distressed at the death of the son, Supratika
extols Visnu as Ràma (the delighter) and attains merger in him.
In answer to a further question about Gauramukha by Earth,
Varaha narrates a conversation between that sage and Markandeya in the course of which details relating to graddha (propitiation of manes by libation) are given, such as the kinds of
manes, the different ways of performing the ceremony according
to means, the nature of those who are fit to be invited for it and
of those who are unfit, the occasions for its performance, the
number of persons to be invited and the form of the different
rituals. Gauramukha utters a hymn of Visnu extolling the ten
incarnations as a result of which the Lord appears before him and
he becomes merged in him.
Sage Mahatapas tells king Prajapala how worship of Visnu
leads to liberation and narrates the story of the different Devatas
residing in the body of the cosmic egg, Hiranyagarbha, like
Agni, Agvins, Gauri and others each feeling that without itself
the body will not function and leaving it one after another, but
finding Hiranyagarbha unaffected being protected by the Supreme Person in his form as the moon (Soma), praise him seeking
his favour and the Lord allots them their positions and names
and gives them each a form in the world of gods and a formless
state in the beings on earth.
3. Chs. 18-38. Here the circumstances under which the
subtle Ksetradevatas (the deities in the body) assumed concrete
forms are given in the order Agni, A$vins, Gauri, Vinayaka,
Nagas, Skanda, Aditya, Durga, Diks, Kubera, Visnu, Dharma,
Rudra, Pitrs and Soma, as also the significance of the different
names and the day in each fortnight important for their worship,
Starting with Prathama for Agni and ending with Amavasya
for Pitrs and Paurnami for Soma. Much that is seen in chapter
12 is repeated in chapter 33 which is introduced as ‘another
account of the first appearance of Rudra’. There are variations

xviii Introduction
in some of the popular stories here. For example, Siva appears
before Parvati not as a Brahmacarin but as an old man who
creates an illusory shark to catch hold of him and requests Parvati to save him by lifting him up by holding his hand. In the
praise of Skanda by the gods, many terms are with reference to
what he was yet to accomplish, but this is explained as due to
their knowing already what he would do later. Vinayaka was
created by Rudra out of his laughter and in his own form, but
changed into a being with elephant-face and protruding
belly at the passionate look of Uma on him. Visnu is a form of
Lord Narayana created by himself for the protection of the
world.
Mahatapas gives the names of the fifteen kings born out of
the gem of Gauramukha when they would be born in Tretayuga,
pointing out to Prajapala that he himself is one of them, Suprabha, reborn. Then, Prajapala praises Visnu as Krsna and merges
in him. King Dirghabahu, cursed to become a tiger for his
disrespect to Brahmins, gets redemption by accidentally hearing
the name of the Lord. This illustrates the efficacy of the Lord’s
name even when unintentionally uttered and reminds us of the
more familiar story of Ajamila narrated in the Srimadbhagavata. A hunter pleases sage Durvasas by the wonderful hospitality he extends to him as a result of his devotion to his preceptor, and gets renamed as Satyatapas and the Vedas and Sastras
dawn upon him, thereby showing that it is devotion not birth,
that makes one eligible for spiritual elevation.
4. Chs. 39-50. This is devoted to the details of the Dvadasivrata with the variations and the benefits accruing therefrom,
one in each month starting from Margasirsa and ending in
Agvayuja, respectively for the ten avataras of Visnu beginning
with Matsya, the ninth being Buddha and the last one being
Padmanabha. For the month of Karttika the Dvadasgivrata is
called dharanivrata, since Visnu was worshipped on that day
by Earth for raising her from the water. .
5. Chs. 51-67. An account is given of various Vratas for
attaining various thingslike health, wealth, progeny, peace,
regaining lost possessions etc, and the Paficaratra system of the
Vaisnavas is claimed as equal to the Vaidika. The first two chapters in the section, given as Agastyagità is an allegory on liberation and evolution on the basis of Sankhya philosophy and the

Introduction xix
last chapter is another allegory on day and night, months, seasons and year. i
6. Chs. 68-73. Illicit sexual association and the atonement
therefor are discussed in the first chapter in this section and
a wonderful experience of sage Narada in the next. The following
three chapters speak of the identity of Visnu, Siva and Brahma
as given by Rudra, and a hymn on Visnu uttered by him occurs
in the last.
7. Chs. 74-89. This deals with cosmology with the earth as
the central point and the seven islands, Jamba, Saka, Kuśa,
Kraufica, Salmali, Gomeda and Puskara with their mountains,
rivers, valleys, lakes, trees, gods and denizens. Mount Meru
and the continent Bharata are given special importance.
8. Chs. 90-98. The subject of this section is the Triple
Power, the goddess unifying in herself the energies of Visnu,
Brahmá and Siva, born at their looks at one another, and this
goddess triplicating herself as the white Brahmi, the red Vaisnavi
and the black Raudri and performing their respective functions
in the universe. We get here the concept of the triple energy of
the later Tantric system though not in its details. We also find
that, against the popular story, it is Vaisnavi who kills Mahisasura after assuming a fierce form with twenty hands, and not
Raudnr. Raudri gets the name Camunda for killing Ruru, and
not for killing Canda and Munda.
Then is given an account of a Vrata for Rudra as Kapalin,
and the moksa of Satyatapas by his unflinching truth and
dharma.
9. Chs. 99-113. We get here the glorification of the gift of
images of cows with gold and gems, together with special objects
like sesamum water, sugarcane juice, sugarcandy, honey, milk,
curd, butter, salt, cloth, grain etc, each separately and on separate occasions to worthy Brahmins. The deity propitiated by
these is not Visnu in all; it is Rudra in some and Parvati in one.
The special value of the gift of parturient cow is stated, as also the
importance of the Kapilà variety.
The last chapter is a hymn on Visnu by Earth praying for
lifting her up from sinking in the ocean.
10. Chs. 114-121. This constitutes a series of questions by
Earth to Varàha on the nature of ritualistic worship and the
merits accruing therefrom and the reply stating the rules of obser-

XX introduction
vance, lists of meritorious and unmeritorious actions, the well
known thirtytwo major offences in worship, the rituals of idol
worship and of the quarters during morning, noon and evening.
It comprises numerous moral precepts for a virtuous and pious
life. Purity, sincerity, piety and generosity are stressed. Many
of the Smrtis are mentioned here and every one is advised to
follow whichever suits his faith.
11. Chs. 122-126. The first and last chapters here are in
glorification of two tirthas Kokamukha and Kubjamra where
death of even minor creatures on Dvadaéi day is declared to be
giving them birth as human beings and illustrated by stories.
In the intervening chapters the materials for worship and the
variations in this matter in the different seasons are given.
There is also an account of the mdyá of Visnu and how everything
in the world is carried on by its power.
12. Chs. 127-136. Initiation of the devotee and the expiations for offences form the subject of this section. The initiation
into Bhagavatadharma of the devotees with the variations in the
details of the rituals for the four different castes and the objects
to be offered are described. The importance of the Guru is
stressed, who alone can do the initiation. The role of the rosary
in meditation is given, as also the desirability of copper vessels
in worship. The mode of ritualistic worship is further elaborated
in the last chapter.
13. Chs. 137-151. The glorification of Tirthas is continued
here. We get an account of great tirthas, the various holy spots
in them, the merit associated with each, the wonders perceptible
in many of them and several stories in illustration of their efficacy. The greatness of Saukara, particularly its Somatirtha,
where a jackal became a princess, a vulture a prince and a wagtail an opulent trader, all by mere death there is pointed out.
The holy spots in Kokamukha are recounted, followed by those
in Badari. Tirthas like Mandara, Somesvara, Muktiksetra,
Triveni in the river Gandaki, and holy places like Salagramaksetra, Ruruksetra, Hariksetra, Goniskramana, Stutasvami,
Dvaraka, Sànandüra and Lohargala are then described with
emphasis on the Dvàdasivrata in many of them and connected
incidents.
Two intervening chapters are on the value of Lord's service.
The importance of service through music keeping awake on

Introduction xxi
Dvadadi day is highlighted by the story of an outcaste being able
to liberate the ghost of a Brahmin by transferring to him a bit
of his merit so acquired. The rules relating to women devotees
during the menstrual period are also incidentally given.
We are told of Visnu seeking boon from Siva at Muktiksetra,
Siva incurring a curse from Prajapati Aurva for destroying his
hermitage and sage Salankayana getting as his son Nandike$vara,
a form of Siva. We find two brothers quarrelling over a share
turned into an elephant and a crocodile and getting redemption
by Visnu’s disc, which reminds us of the more popular story of
king Indradyumna and his curse. Lohargala, about which information elsewhere is practically absent, is stated to be situated
in a place difficult of access amidst settlements of Mlecchas.
14. Chs. 152-180. This is the longest section in the Purana
and is on the glory of the city of Mathura and the numerous
tirthas in and around it, the various gardens, deities and so on
with the wonders in each, the benefits they confer, the days particularly sacred in each etc. Mathura is declared as superior to
all other holy spots including Prayaga and Varanasi and the
people there to be Visnu himself unstained by the faults they
may be having and the sins they may be comitting and as deserving of the respect of all and gifts from them, a statement which
seems to be indicative of the possible origin of this Purana or,
at least, this bulky part of it, in this region. Its association with
the deeds of Krsna is naturally highlighted. The efficacy of
pleasing the Lord by fast and dance on Ekadasi day is brought
out by the story of a dancing devotee redeeming a Brahmaráksasa
narrated in terms identical with the one stated earlier of an
outcaste doing a similar deed by the transfer of the merit of his
service by song. The significance of social service by planting
trees, digging wells, laying gardens and renovating ruins is brought out in the long story of the merchant Gokarna. The list of
offences in worship is repeated with the means of atonement,
only to say that for ali this, fasting and bathing in Mathura is
à good substitute. We also get the story of a servant maid made
to release her manes by sraddha, and also what actions lead to
ghosthood and what protection from it.
15. Chs. 181-186. This deals with the consecration, and
rules of worship of idols made of wood, stone, clay, copper,
bronze, silver and gold and also about tne worship of Salagrama

xxii Introduction
stones. Worship of ido!s is sanctioned for all castes but not of
Salagrama.
16. Chs. 187-192. The details of sraddha constitute the
subject of this section. The origin of sraddha, its significance, the
place and time of performance, persons eligible as well as those
ineligible to be fed in śrāddha, the various rituals etc, are all
elaborately given. There is emphatic prohibition against a bestard being fed in this ceremony even unknowingly. The nature
of madhuparka preparation and its administration are also given
in two chapters.
17. Chs. 193-212. This is a separate section quite unconnected with the rest narrated by Vaigampayana about the world
of Yama as seen by Naciketas who goes there at an angry uttarance of his father Uddalaka, but returns to give a description of it.
The Naciketas here is not one whom we are familiar with in the
Upanisad discoursing with Yama on the nature of the soul and
ultimately gaining from him dtmavidyd. According to his account,
Yama's is a splendid world full of enjoyment for the good souls
that go there, but also having numerous fearful hells full of torment for the bad. It contains a hall of justice with the well known
lawgivers like Manu, Brhaspati, Apastamba and Angiras as the
jury. The supremely virtuous souls bypass Yama but the sinners
are never spared and his lieutenant Citragupta is asked to deal
with them as they deserve. In the course of a discussion of Yama
with Narada, righteous and unrighteous deeds are enumerated,
generosity is praised and the power of chastity illustrated. It is
interesting to note that this section contains an incident of Citragupta’s men getting fed up with their duty of executing punishments, their fight with the demons called Mandehas who are sent
to subdue them by Citragupta and finally a settlement being
reached by the intervention of Siva in the form of a Jvara. This
has some similarity with the demands of modern workmen, their
strike and settlement and reconciliation.
18. Chs. 213-218. This, the last section, deals with the greatness of Siva as Gokarnesvara, Srügesvara and Sailesvara where
his single horn in the form of a deer was taken out into three
pieces and installed respectively by Indra, Visnu and Brahma.
It is noteworthy here that this Purana which is predominantly
Vaisnavite in nature concludes with an account of the greatness
of Siva.

Introduction xxiii
The penultimate chapter states the benefits of the recitation
of this Purana and the last one gives its contents from beginning
to end as it is available now, and is, in all probability, a later
addition.
In addition to what we have incidentally seen as worthy
of special notice in the brief survey made above, there are certain
other matters in this Purana which deserve attention and we may
now look into some of them.
We come across the tirtha Lohargala which it is hazardous
to reach although powerful to remove sins. There is another one
mentioned, Stutasvàmi, which also we do not come across in
other Puranas. The identity of these two is not known now.
Both these relate to Visnu and occur in the portions of the work
which are considered as its early and original parts.
Numerous Vratas are mentioned mainly meant to propitiate
Visnu but not infrequently to propitiate Siva, Parvati and others
with fasting, prayer, worship and gifts, and each is taken as capable of dissolving sins, sometimes of many generations in his family
and many of them also confer special benefits like health, wealth,
wife and progeny. But performance of Vratas without any desire
is also recommended:
niskama ¿vañ vratam asya krtvā
nafyanti papani ca tasya pumsah (45.10)
what we get more emphatically propounded in the Bhagavadgita.
Many mantras are prescribed for ritualistic worship in several
Vratas, but all are Puránic and not drawn from the Vedas and,
in some cases, they are not fully intelligible.
Although this Purana is primarily meant to extol Visnu,
glorifying his achievements and inculcating steadfast devotion
for him, it is not biased that way. Devotion for Visnu is only
preferential and not exclusive to that of others like Siva and
Sakti. It aims at harmony and cordiality among worshippers of
different gods. True that a fighting between Visnu and Siva
stopped by Brahma is mentioned in one place (21.53) and people
devoted to gods other than Visnu are spoken of as doing so under
delusion in another (117.45), but passages proclaiming the identity between Visnu and Siva are numerous, as for instance:
-yeyam mirtirbhagavatah
fankarah sa svayam harih | (9.7),

XXIV Introduction
yo harih sa trilocanah |. (58.4), and
na bhedafcávayordeva ekabhàvàvubhávapi] (73.40)
and anyone who draws a distinction between the two, it is stated,
goes to ruin.
mam visnorvyatiriktam ye brahmanasca dvijottama |
bhajante püpakarmánaste yānti narakam naráh || (70.40)
Rudra declares Narayana to be supreme god,
nàràyanah paro devah sarvarüpo jandrdanah (70.14)
and Visnu observes that he and Siva remain together and worship of the one is the worship of the other too.
aham yatra Sivastatra Sivo yatra vasundhare |
latráham api tisthami àvayornüntaram kvacit |j
Sivam yo vandate bhüme sa hi mam eva vandate |
labhate puskalam siddhim evar yo vetti tattvatah |] (145. 108-9)
However, a Saiva becoming a Vaisnava is instanced by Ravana
who does so when Varaha tells him that, being a Raksasa he
cannot have the sort of devotion required for achieving his aim.
Sakti is spoken of as the triple power, representing the energies
of Visnu, Siva and Brahma and is extolled in a series of chapters
(90-96). In Sauryavrata the devata to be worshipped is Durga.
We also get worship of Yantras or mystic diagrams, as in Dharanivrata in which Visnu is to be invoked in a sixteen-petalled lotus
and as Yogiévara.
kuryàcca vaisnavam yajfiam yajed yogifvaram harim |
sodafáre tathà cakre yogibhir bahubhih krte || (50.14)
The Paficaratra system of Vaisnava theology is eulogised and
its follower is spoken of as superior to all others, a statement
which bears testimony to its wide popularity. In the Dharanivrata the gift of the image to a Paficaratra Ácárya is pronounced
to be a thousand times more meritorious than to others.
ücürye pāñcarātrāłīām sahasragunitam bhavet. (50.18)
Although the food oífered in worship is generally grains,
vegetables and fruit, the flesh of some animals like the deer,
goat and hare and some birds like làvaka, varttika and kapifijala
is permitted, probably indicating a primitive practice.

Introduction XXV
márgamamsam varam chágam cügam samanuyujyate |
eta hi prapane dadyanmama cattat priydvaham ||
paksindm ca pravaksyami ye prayojya vasundhare |
ye caiva mama ksetresu upayuljanti nityasah |j
lavakam várttikam caia prasastam ca kapinjalam! (119.12,16-17)
In the preparation of offering Madhuparka also, flesh is
Social service is laid down as an important function of the
devotee. The value of planting trees, digging wells etc, is stressed.
Istaparta is important for dharma. Heaven is acquired by ista
or sacrifices and liberation by pärta or service to humanity. The
provision of trees, gardens etc, and renovation of wells, ponds,
parks and temples gain the benefit of pürta.
istápürtam dvijatiném prathamam dharmasddhanam |
istena labhate svargam pürte moksam ca vindati ||
vapikiipatatakani devatdyatandnt ca
patitanyuddhared yastu sa pürtaphalam aínute !!
bhiimidanena ye loka godànena ca kirtitah |
te loka prapyate pumbhih pddapandm prarohane jj
aívaltham ekam picumandamekam
nyagrodham ekam dasapuspajatih
dve dve tatha dadimamatulunge
pañcāmraropi narakam na yàt! || (172. 36-38)
The Puràna abounds in stotra in praise of various deities.
Naturally there is a larger number for Visnu than for others.
Among the hymns of Visnu are those uttered by Dharani (1.2028) the last four verses being a kavaca, another by her (113.
18-68), praising him in his universal form, by Narada, (3.11-20),
known as the Brahmaparastotra, by Asvasiras (5.49-57) known
as Yajfiamürtistava, extolling Visnu as the lord of sacrifice and
as combining in himself the Trinity, by Vasu (6. 10-16) known
as Pundarikaksaparastotra, identifying Visnu with the universe,
by Raibhya (7. 21-40), known as Gadadharastotra, bv Dharmavyàdha (8.43-49), by (Waters) (9.28-33), by Gauramukha
(11. 11-21) and another by the same sage (15.9-21) known
as Dasavatarastotra, by Supratika (12. 5-16) praising Visnu
as Rama (the delighter), by Ksetradevatas (17. 59-63), by
Prajapala (36. 12-122) praising Visnu as Krsna, the lord sup-

XXvi Introduction
reme, by Drdhavrata (55. 33-43), by Rudra (73. 18-38) and
by Ràvana (163. 34-37). Among the hymns to Siva are those by
Devas (21. 68-75; 25. 17-28; 33. 16-24, the last being practicallv a repetition of the first), by Soma (114. 20-28) and by
Nandin (213. 43-49). There is a stotra each for several others,
like the one for Brahma by the Asvins (20. 27-30), for Vinàyaka
by Devas (23. 33-34), for Skanda by Devas (25. 40-42),
for Aditya by Devas (26. 10-14), for Durga by Siva (28.
29-35), for Sarasvati by Brahma (91. 9-16), for Vaisnavi in the
form as Mahisasuramardini by Devas (95. 58-66), for Yama
by Naciketas (198. 9-20; and for the Dharmadevata by
Buddha is given as an avatàra of Visnu even in an early chapter (3.2) and more explicitly later:
arsimha vàmana namo jamadagni nama
daíásyagotrántaka vdsudeva |
namo'siu te buddha kalkin varesa
Sambho namaste vibudhürinüíana j| (54.37)
As stated earlier, one Dvadasi day in the year is in his propitiation and the acquisition of personal charm is its special benefit.
rüpakàmo bhajed buddham (48.22).
The importance of the preceptor in formal initiation into
devotion and ritualistic worship is stressed, but strangely it
is carried to the indulgent extent of permitting him to be not
learned or good-natured.
avidyo vă savidyo và gurureva janárdanah |
margastho vdpyamargastho gurureva pará gatih jj (50.20)
A devotee secking initiation should be tested for one year as
to his way of life and true eligibility.
bráhmanaksatriyaviéám bhaktandm tu pariksanam |
Samvatsaram guruh kuryat jatisaucakriyadibhih |! (99.15)
The performance of Sraddha is given great importance and
the right mental disposition, necessary money, the purity of the
persons invited, the proper time, the prescribed rituals and,
above all, deep devotion are laid down as the conditions for
its fulfilment (13.48), but for one who has not got the means

Introduction xxvii
for this, though he has the mind, a mere prayer to the manes in
the open with outstretched hands is a substitute and this declaration is put in the mouth of the manes themselves in what is
given the title ‘Pitrgita.’
sarvabhdve vanam gatvā kaksamiilapradarsakah
süryüdilokapalánám idam uccaih pathisyati [|
na me’sti vittam na dhanam ca nànyat
fráddhasya yogyam svapitrn nato'smi !
irpyantu bhaktyà pitarau mamaitau
bhujau tatau vartmani márutasya ||. (13. 56-57)
Various occasions for the Sraddha are mentioned, including the
anniversary in the tithi of the month of the death of the pitr,
which is the most important in present day practice. Another
thing not common in current practice in general, is the feeding
during Sraddha of uninvited Brahmins and particularly saints.
Not only is this permitted:
prathamehni dvijah kurydd viprdgryanadm nimantranam j
animantrya dvijan pascad agatün bhojayed yatin || (14.8)
but the warning is given that if a guest arriving when sraddha
is being performed is not honoured, the very ceremony may go
in vain.
tasmad abhyarcayet praptam Sraddhakdle’tithim budhah |
Sraddhakrityaéphalam hanti doijendrapijito tithih || (14.20)
The same liberal spirit is perceptible in social relations to
some extent. We have seen a hunter approaching a saintlv
Brahmin requesting that his daughter’s hand may be accepted
by his learned son and the offer being readily accepted. We have
also seen how an outcaste liberates the ghost of a Brahmin and
himself attains absolute merger in the supreme. The Lord says
that a pious Sidra devoted to him and performing his duties in
right earnest is more dear to him than even the sages.
fraddadhàno tip utátmà lobhamohavivarjitah |
namaskárapriyo nityam mama cintàvyasthitah. sada ||
$üdrah karmani me devi ya evam samamácaret |
Ltyaktvà rsisahasrani £üdram eva bhajámyaham || (115. 38-39)
We have noticed in the story of Asvasiras the emphasis on
knowledge as the means for liberation. Maya is referred to in

xxviii Introduction
many places but it is more in the sense of power, at times magical
power, not generally in the sense of illusion. It denotes, in the
main, the potency of Visnu, the miraculous power that activates
the world and carries it on. Of the four kinds of mukti, namely
sdlokya, sámifya, sürüpya and sdyujya, however, thelaststanding for
absolute merger (laya) in the Lord is frequently referred to (5.58;
place, ‘n the case of Dharmavyádha, the Lord gives him a boon
by which he gets merger in Brahman, the absolute.
varo visrstasca kulasya te maya
layastatha brahmani śāśvate tava | (8.52).
Salokya or residence in the. world of the deity worshipped is guaranteed for the performers of various vratas and visitors of various
tirthas, and sárüpya or attainment of the form of Visnu is the
benefit accruing from some (see 126.233, 137.17, 147.33, 169.18
etc.), a privilege extended even to animals, birds and worms
dying in Mathura (169.34), but sdmipya or nearness to the Lord
is net separately mentioned, probably since it can be taken as
implied in sdlokya.
In a pertinent passage the Puràna observes that the mythological stories should be viewed as pertaining to two different
planes, the concrete and the abstract, the concrete exemplified
by the characters figuring in the stories and the abstract by the
qualities in them. In the story of the Goddess vanquishing the demon Mahisa, she represents true knowledge and he ignorance,
and it is the triumph of the right over the wrong and that is its
aim.
athavà jüànaíakth sā mahiso’jidnamirtiman |
ajüünam. jüünasüdhyam tu bhavatiti na samáíayah ||
miirtipakse cetihásam amiirte caikavaddhrdi |
khyāpyate vedavakyaisca iha sā vedavadibhih || (99.6-7)
in a work like this, the aim of which is the propagation of
religious ethics and illustrative stories to establish it. one need
not normally expect any poetry. Still we do get a few instances
of passages of poetic value, as in the description of night and the
lustre of planets, couched in VarhSastha metre, in the hermitage
of Gauramukha (11.51-61), in the description of Siva's chariot
and equipment with abstract forces and personifications (2i

Introduction XXIX
33-36) and in the description of the rainy and autumn seasons
Lastly, we may see what the Varüha purána speaks of itself.
It is one of the eighteen Mahapuranas and the twelfth among
them as known to Vyàsa.
astdadaSapurandni veda dvaipdyano guruk |
varaham dvádaíam proktam. (112. 74, 76)
It is the cream of all Sàstras.
Yathà ca mathyamánàd vai dadhnascoddhriyate ghrtam |
evam sarvesu $üstresu varaham ghrtasammitam |] (148.21)
The recitation of this Purana in all seriousness is equivalent to
the recitation of the entire lot of scripture comprising the Vedas,
Puranas and other works.
fi
diksitatma punarbhūtvā vàrüham śrņuyād yadi |
tena vedapurāņāni sarve mantrāh sasaħgrahāh |!
japtah syuh | (99.50)
A king who worships this with his subjects for one year gets merger
in Visnu.
yathāśaktyā nrpo grāmoih püjayed vatsaram dhare }
sarvapāpavinirmukto visnusdyujyamapnuyat |i

CHAPTER ONE
Earth's Enquiry about Creation
Benedictory Prayer
1. Bowing to Narayana, Nara the greatest Man, and goddess Sarasvati, may Jaya be narrated.
2. Adoration to the Varaha (incarnation of God Visnu)
who lifts up the Earth with ease and under whose hoofs the mount
Meru (the golden mountain) tinkles.
3. May the foremost God, Varàha, dispel my foes; who is
Krsna, Visnu and the lord of gods; who is the enemy of the
demon Kamsa; who killed (the demons) Mura, Naraka and
Ravana (in his different incarnations}; who, in his huge and
extensive form, raised, like a clod of clay, by the tip of his tusk,
the Earth encircled by oceans and full of mountains and rivers.
Süta (the Purdna-narrator) said:
4. The Earth asked the Supreme god (Visnu) as to when,
in yore, was she lifted up with force by the mighty god in the form
of the boar.
Earth said:
5. In each Kalpa (cosmic age) O Lord, it is you that raise
me up. And I do not know, O KeSava (Visnu), your form in
the first creation.
6. Again, when the Vedas were stolen (by the demon Hayagrīva), you, in the form of a fish, entering Rasátala (the nether
region) took them out and gave them to Brahma.
7. Again, O destroyer of the demon Madhu, on the occasion
of churning the milky ocean jointly by gods and demons (for
obtaining the divine nectar), you, taking the form of a tortoise,
raised up the mountain Mandara (which formed the central
churning rod).
8. O illustrious lord of the worlds, you, again, with one of
your tusks lifted up me, the Earth, from the deep ocean when I
Was sinking down to the nether regions.

2 Varáha Purana
9. Still again, by you (in your incarnation as Nrsimha
(‘man-lion’) was destroyed (the demon) Hiranyakasipu who was
haughty on account of the boon (bestowed on him by God
Brahma) and who was tormenting the world.
10. Then, O God, you, (in another of your incarnations)
assuming the form of (Parasurama, the son of (the Brahmana
sage) Jamadagni, made the Earth once devoid of Ksatriya
rulers.
Il. And, then, (in another of your incarnations as Rama,
son of king Dasaratha), through your kingly strength, the demon Ravana was killed by you. O illustrious God, in still
another incarnation of yours in the form of Vamana (dwarf),
the demon Bali was bound by you.
12. 1 do not know, O God, even a small portion of your
multifarious actions. (Now), after lifting (me up how do you
create and why ?
13. By whom is the creation destroyed, and by whom is it
protected ? By whom, O all-pervading one, are you attainable ?
14. How does creation originate and how does it end ?
How are the aeons (Yugas—Krta, Treta, Dvàpara and Kali)
reckoned and why are there four Yugas ?
15. Of them, what is the speciality of the present aeon ?
And, O great god, what is the desire ? Who are the sacrificers ?
Who are the kings? Who have attained final emancipation ?
16. Be pleased to tell me all this briefly. Being asked thus,
the great God in the form of the boar laughed.
17-18. In the belly of that laughing lord, the Mother World
saw the (eleven forms of God) Rudra, the several gods (Devas),
the (deities called) Vasus, the groups of (semi-divine beings)
Siddhas, the great sages, the seven worlds, the sun, the moon and
planets and the inhabitants ‘herein performing their duties.
Al this, the Earth beheld with her entire body shivering.
19. Soon after the great God was seen with his mouth opened wide, He was seen by the Earth in His four-armed form sleeping in the great (milky) ocean.
20. While seeing the God Janardana (Visnu) sleeping on
the serpent-bed in the ocean, she also saw God Brahma (seated)
in the lotus-flower (that sprouted) from His navel. The goddess
Earth, with folded hands, extolled Him as follows:

Earth said:
21. Obeisance to you whose eyes resemble lotus-petals,
vou wearing the vcllow garment; obeisance to you, the supreme
soul who destroys the enemies of Gods.
29, QObeisance to you sleeping on the bed of (the thousandhooded serpent) Sesa and bearing (your consort, goddess) Laksmi on your chest; obeisance to you, O God of gods, the giver of
the final liberation.
23. Obeisance to you bearing the bow, sword and disc;
you without birth and death; obeisance to you, from whose navellotus Brahma has taken birth.
24. Obeisance to you with tender hands and rosy lips. I
surrender mysclf to you: protect me, this innocent woman.
25. Seeing you as a boar dark like collyrium all over, O
Janardana (Visnu), I was fear-stricken; and seeing the whole
world in your body, I am afraid again. O preserver, now, bestow
your benevolence upon me and, O great lord, protect me.
26-27. (May the twelve forms of Visnu protectme. (Thus)
may Keśava protect my feet, Narayana my shanks; may Madhava
protect my hip, Govinda the genitals; may Visnu protect my
navel, Madhusüdana the belly; may Trivikrama protect the
breast, Vàmana the heart; may Sridhara protect my neck, Hrsikeáa my face, Padmanabha the eyes, and Dàmodara the head.
28. Thus having covered herself (as above) with the
(twelve) names (of Visnu), the Earth uttered, “O illustrious
Visnu, I bow to you”, and stopped.
CHAPTER TWO
Primary Creation
Süta (the narrator) said:
1. Then pleased by the devotion of the Earth resting in his
body, Visnu manifested Maya (the power of illusion) and stood
therein the same form of Varáha.
2. And he said: O lovely damsel, why this strange question ?

4 Varüha Purana
I shall tell you the subject of the Purana from all the Sàstras
(disciplines of knowledge).
3. This verse app'ies to all the Puranas. Therefore, O Earth,
listen to it intently.
Varaha said:
4. Primary creation, secondary creation, genealogy, reigns
of the Manus (the lords of the aeons) and history (of the solar
and lunar) races—these are the five characteristic topics in a
Purana.
5. Now, I shall speak of the primary creation from which
begins the history of gods and kings.
6. The eternal supreme soul is said to be consisting of four
parts.
7. First, I was endless Vyoma (indiscrete in space). Then
the principal atomic intellect came out of me. The Intellect was’
threefold, consisting of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas, each of which
being added separately with the form of Sattva.!
8. As Tamas predominated in this trinity, there appeared
what is called the Pradhana (the originator or source Prakrti
of the material world). And out of that Pradhdna, the powerful
Ksetrajfia (the Supreme Soul) arose. From that came out the
intellect.
'9. From these, next manifested the sense-organs of the world,
the causes of hearing etc., with latent elements, O auspicious
lady, the cosmic matter was created by me.
10. In the beginning there was only void. Then sound and
ether, then air and after that fire and water, and next, O goddess, you, the mother of all beings were created by me.
11. Asa result of the union of these,in the earth, appeared
an egg with frothing generative fluid in the water. When the egg
expanded, I assumed the form of water myself.
12. Having created water and resting therein, I (Visnu)
came to be called ‘Narayana’. In each Kalpa (grand aeon), I,
again and again, lie on the water. And while sleeping there, a
lotus flower came out of the navel, as now.
13. 'Then, from the navel-lotus, the four-faced ( God
Brahma) came out. I ordained him to create men.
1. The verses 7 and 8 seem to be corrupt. The idea is not clear.

14. Then, I disappeared. And as he (Brahma) stood brooding over (what I had said), he did not know what to do.
15. Then this mysteriously-born Brahma became very
angry and from that anger arose a boy.
16. The boy was crying but he was stopped by Brahma.
Then the boy demanded: ‘Giveme a name’, and Brahma gave
him the name ‘Rudra’ (‘the crying one’).
17. O auspicious lady, he was then ordered by Brahma:
“create this world". Being unable to do that, then, he plunged
into water and decided to perform penance.
13. As he sank into the water, Brahma created another
Prajapati (Creator) out of his own right thumb.
19. And from his left thumb, he created also a wife (for
the Prajapati).
20. In her, the Prajapati procreated Svayambhuva Manu.
Thus was given the idea of progeny by Brahma.
Earth said:
21. Tell me in detail, O God of gods, the primary creation,
and how this Brahma (in the form of) Narayana, came into
existence at the beginning of Kalpa.
The Lord said:
22. Goddess Earth, listen to my detailed description how, as
Narayana, I created all the beings.
23. At the end of the previous Kalpa, while he was sleeping
at night, O auspicious lady, as the quality of Sattva predominated
in him, Brahma saw the world empty.
24. Narayana is the supreme, incomprehensible, elder even
to the old, in the form of Brahman (the supreme soul), the great
god, beginningless and present in all beings.
25. The following verse is said about Narayana, the supreme
Brahma, the source of the world and imperishable.
26. “Water is said to be Nara, since it is verily the progeny
of nara (man). As water is the repose of the Lord, He is called
Narayana.”
27. While, he, in yore, in the beginning of the Kalpas, pondered over creation, there arose a creation beginning with ignoTance and consisting of darkness. .

po
6 Varáha Purdna
28. From that great being, came out the five-fold ignorance
consisting of Tamas (obscurity), Moha (illusion), Mahamoha
(extreme illusion), Tdmisra (gloom) and Andhatamisra (utter
darkness).
29. On meditating, he knew the five-fold creation. This
should be understood as the Mukhya-sarga (principal creation)
by the learned.
30. On meditating again, creation of a high character occurred, as a result of which the animal world came into being and
it is known as Tiryakasrotas (in which the stream of life of the
created beings is horizontal).
31. Cattle and other animals of that kind were straying on
wrong paths. Brahmà thought that this creation, Tiryaksrotas,
was imperfect.
32. There took place, therefore the three-fold Urdhvasrotas
(in which the stream of life of the created beings tends upwards)
which was of a Sattvika type and based on virtue. From that,
all the gods living in the upper world were created.
33. After making this creation, the creator found that the
productions of the principal creation etc., were not competent
and he continued his meditation.
34. Then the Lord meditated on the creation Arvaksrotas
(in which the stream of life of the created beings moves downwards). In the Arvaksrotas the human beings were created who
were quite competent.
35. They have Prakasa (abundant light of clear knowledge,
internal and external) but (the qualities of) darkness (Tamas)
and passion (Rajas) predominate in them. Hence they have a
lot of sorrow and are continuously engaged in action.
36-37. O beautiful lady, I have thus told you six creations.
Of these, the first creation was of Mahat (intellect); the second
was of Tanmātrās (subtle elements), the third was of Vikdras
(being products evolved from the basic Prakrti) which is also
called Aindriyaka. These three creations were known as Pràkrta
creations preceded by Buddhi (intellect).
38-39. The fourth one was called the Mukhya-sarga (principal creation). Immovable beings are principal. The fifth was
called Tiryaksrotas wherein the animal world was created. Then
the sixth one, Urdhvasrotas, creation of gods, and it was the best.
The seventh was the creation of mankind (Arvdksrotas) and the

-— te
eighth creation was Anugraha. That was characterised by Sattva
(good) and Tamas (darkness).
40. These last five creations were called Vaikrta, the first
three being Prakrtas. There was also a ninth creation called
Kaumára which was Prakrta as well as Vatkrta.
41. These are the nine creations of Prajapati. Prakrtas and
Vaikrtas are the root causes of the world. Thus the creations have
been told. What else, then, do you want to know ?
Earth said:
42, Out of the mysteriously-born Brahma, nine types of
creation came out. How did they multiply ? Tell me this, O
imperishable god !
Varaha said:
43. First Rudra and other sages were created by Brahma.
Then Sanaka and the rest and afterwards (sage) Marici and the
rest:
44. (Namely, the sages) Marici, Atri, Angiras, Pulaha,
Kratu, Pulastya, great-prowessed Pracetas, Bhrgu, Narada and
as the tenth Vasistha, performer of great penance.
45. By him (Brahma), (sage)Sanaka and others were appointed for the functions of renunciation, and Marici and
others excepting sage Nàrada, for those of action.
46. In the race of the first Prajapati who was born from the
right thumb of Brahma, this world withall the animate and
inanimate beings appeared first.
47. Gods, demons, Gandharvas, snakes and birds—all these
most virtuous beings were born from Daksa's (Prajápati's) daughters.
48-49. Rudra who came out of the forehead of Brahmà
with his eyebrows knit in anger, was in one half of his body a man
and in the other half a woman. Asking the fierce Rudra to divide
himself, Brahma disappeared.
50. When said thus, he divided himself into a man and a
woman. Then the masculine part divided itself into eleven parts.
3l. Then onwards the eleven Rudras became famous as originated from Brahma.
32. I have thus told you, O sinless lady, the creation of Rud-

8 Varaha Purana
ras in brief. I shall now tell you briefly the greatness of the Yugas
(aeons).
53. There are four Yugas, namely, Aria, Tretà, Dvápara and
tali.
54. Hear from me of the noble and generous kings, gods,
demons and others who performed righteous deeds in these yugas.
55-56. Long ago, in the first Kalpa, there lived Svayambhuva Manu. He got two virtuous sons of super-human capacity
by name Priyavrata and Uttanapada. Among these two, king
Priyavrata was a great performer of sacrifices and spiritually
eminent.
37. After performing many sacrifices munificently, and
placing his sons Bharata and the rest in the seven islands (namely,
Jambi, Plaksa, Sálmali, Kusa, Krauüca, Saka and Puskara), he
went to the grand Visala and performed great penance.
58. While the virtuous emperor was thus doing penance,
(sage) Narada came there to see him.
59. Seeing Narada descending from the sky like the lustrous
sun, the king was delighted and stood up in respect.
60. After giving him seat and the water for washing his feet,
both of them began to speak with introductory words of welcome.
61. At the end of these formalities, the king asked the seer
Narada:
Priyavrata said:
62. O illustrious Narada, tell me a little of the wonders you
have seen or heard in this Krtayuga.
Narada said:
63. Listen to a wonder, O Priyavrata, seen by me. Yesterday, O King, I went to (the island of) Svetadvipa.
64. There was a lake with an array of full-blown lotuses
and on its bank was a girl having large eyes.
65. At the sight of that lovely sweet-tongued girl, O king,
I was wonder-struck and I asked her:
66. “O auspicious lady, who are you ? How are you here ?
What do you want? Tell me, O charming lady, what is to be
done ??
67-68. When asked by me thus, she looked at me intently

and stood thinking and silent. Just then I forgot all my great
- knowledge, all the Vedas (Rk, Yajus and Sama), all the Sastras
(Siksa, Kalpa, Nirukta, Chandas, Vyakarana and Fyotisa), Yogas
(psychic disciplines) Siksa (physical discipline) Smrtis (codes of
conduct) and all the rest.
69-70. By merely looking at me, O king, all this was taken
away by the girl within a moment. Struck with wonder and full
of anxiety and sorrow, then, I went near her and begged for her
kindness. As I was beholding her, O king, a divine person appeared on her body. `
71. And, in the heart of that person another one appeared,
and on the breast of the latter appeared another with reddish
eyes and lustrous like the twelve suns.
72. Thus three men were seen on the body of that lady. At
the next moment, O righteous king, only the girl was seen, and
not the men.
73. Then I asked that illustrious girl: “How are my Vedas
lost? Tell me, O auspicious lady, the reason for this."
The girl said:
74. “I am Savitri, the mother of all the Vedas. Since you
‘did not know me, you lost the Vedas.”
75. When thus told, I asked her in wonder: “O beautiful
lady, tell me who are these men”.
The girl said:
76. “This beautiful one, residing in my body, with all his
(six) angas, is known as Rgveda. This Veda is Narayana himself.
Soon after its utterance, it becomes verily a fire to burn all sins.
77. He, whom you saw in his heart, is the mighty Brahmå
in the form of Yajurveda.
78-79. He who was seen in his heart, resplendent and pure,
1s called Sámaveda, manifested in the form of Rudra. This Veda,
when recited, destroys sins like the sun.
80. These three great Vedas are, O sage, the three great
gods. These are the letters beginning with ‘a’. It is here, O
Dvija (twice-born), all the sacrifices dwell.
98i. O best of the Brahmins, I have told you all this in brizf.

1c Varaha Purana
Now take back, O Narada, your Vedas, Sastras and your omniscience.
82. In this lake of the Vedas, O great Brahmin, take your
bath. After this bath, O good sage, you will recollect all the things
of the other births.”
83. Saying this, O king, the girl disappeared. Having taken
bath in that lake, I have come here to see you.
CHAPTER THREE
Birth of Narada
Priyavrata said:
l. Tell me, O divine sage, all your doings in the other birth.
I am deeply interested to know them.
Narada said:
2. When I bathed in the lake of Vedas atthe behest of
Savitri (the mother of Vedas), O great king, I got memory of
my doings in numerous previous lives. Listen to the happenings
in my past life.
3-4. In the Aytayuga, in the country named Avanti, I was
born as a Brahmin by name Sarasvata, very intelligent, wellversed in the Vedas and Vedangas, served by many attendants
and possessing a lot of wealth.
5. Then, in solitude, I thought: “What shall I do with
(material) things that are (mainly) pairs of opposites (like good
and evil, cold and heat, etc.) ? So, giving all this to my sons, I
shal] go to the lake Sarasvata with determination to perform
penance.”
6. Having thought thus, I propitiated Visnu with rituals,
the manes with Srdddhas, and the gods and men with sacrifices.
7. Then, I went to the lake Sarasvata with full resolve to
perform penance.
8. Reaching there, I worshipped Visnu, auspicious and
primordial spirit, uttering (the sacred name) ‘Narayana’ with
great devotion.

9. When I recited the great hymn (by name) Brahmapära,
O king, the Lord was pleased and he appeared before me.
Priyavrata asked:
10. I wish to hear, O excellent sage, the nature of the
(hymn) Brahmapara. Be pleased to tell me this clearly, O divine
sage.
Narada replied:
11. I bow to Visnu, who is higher than the highest, farther
than the farthest, the most powerful, the eternal and the refuge
of all.
12. I bow to the illustrious Lord Visnu, the eternal, the
incomparable, the ancient, the farthest, the most cffulgent,
the foremost among the most intelligent.
13. With pure mind I extol Narayana, the highest, the
Supreme, the important, the great refuge, pure and extensive,
and the Almighty.
14. May the stainless and ancient Narayana protect me.
He who, in yore, created this Pura (body) namely Prakrti and
residing therein, has become known as Purusa (spirit).
15. I always extol Visnu, the great and auspicious, of endless form, the most ancient, the foremost among the just, possessing fortitude and peace and the lord of earth.
16. I extol the great immortal god Narayana, possessing
thousand heads and numerous feet and hands, having the sun
and the moon as his eyes, and sleeping in the milky ocean.
17. I bow to the immeasurable Narayana, Triyuga (the
creator, protector and destroyer), who can be attained by three
Vedas (Rk, Yajus and Sama), who has twentyeight forms, who
stands firmly in Trifukla (the sacred combination of three days,
namely Uttardyana, the day of gods; the bright-half of the moon,
the day of the manes; and the day-time), who is divided into
three sacred fires (Daksina, Garhapatya and Ahavaniya), who can
be seen by the three qualities (Sativa, Rajas and Tamas and
who has three eyes.
18. I bow to Visnu, the ancient one, who is white in AytaJuga, red in Tretdyuga, yellow in Dvàparayuga and black in KaliJuga.

12 Varüha Purana
19. I bow to Him who has the world as his body and who
created Brahmins (the caste of priests) from his mouth, Ksatriyas (the caste of kings) from his breast, Vaiéyas (the caste of
merchants etc.) from his thighs and Südras (the caste of servants)
from his feet.
20. I bow to the immeasurable Narayana, the supreme
entity, the highest of the highest, the lord of fighters, who took
the form of Krsna with a purpose, and who holds in the hands
mace, sword and nectar”.
21. Thus extolled by me the god was pleased and several
times asked me ina voice majestic like the rumbling. of clouds,
to seek a boon. I sought the uniou with Him.
22. Having heard this the eternal god told me: “ʻO Brahmin, attain the original nature. That will lead to the aim.
23. Water is Nāra. You give it to the manes. Therefore
your name will be ‘Narada’.’
24. Saying thus, the god immediately disappeared. Then
after doing penance for a long time I gave up my body and got
dissolved into the Brahmaloka (the world of thecreator) and rose
there, O king.
25-26. Then the day was created along with ten sons. It
is the beginning of the day of the mysteriously-born god Brahma,
no doubt, with the creation of all the gods and others. This is
the creation of all the worlds by the prowess of the lord.
27. This is my previous birth, O King, about which you
asked me.
28. Since by meditating on Narayana, I attained greatness,
you also, O best of kings, be a devotee of Visnu.
CHAPTER FOUR
Greatness of Narayana
Earth said:
1. Tell me whether this illustrious Narayana, the supreme
soul and the eterna!, is God in all respects or not.

Varaha replied:
9.3, Matsya (fish), Kürma (tortoise), Varaha (boar),
Narasimha (man-lion), Vàmana (dwarf), Parasurama, Ram.
(son of Daéaratha), Krsna (dark-one), Buddha (enlightened)
and Kalki—these ten are told as His forms, O beautiful
one bearing all the beings. These are the steps for those who
wish to attain the vision (of Visnu).
4. Even the gods do not see His real form. Hence they
satisfy themselves with the forms like mine.
5. Brahma, the Rajasa and Tamasa forms establish and
sustain the universe.
6. O Earth, you are the first form of that God. The second
is water and the third fire.
7. The fourth form is air and the fifth ether. These are His
forms. With the controller of these in three aspects, the total
forms are eight.
8. All this world is pervaded by Narayana. Thus, I have
told you this. What else, O goddess, do you wish to hear ?
Earth asked:
9. Be pleased to tell me, O great lord, what king Priyavrata did after having been told thus by Narada.
Varaha replied:
10. After hearing the wonder from Narada, Priyavrata,
giving his sons you (the earth, i.e., his kingdom), divided into
Seven, performed penance.
11. Uttering the great .Váráyana-mantra and his mind absorbed in it, he attained liberation.
12. Hear, O beautiful lady, again, the deeds of the great
Lord for the worship by kings in olden days.
13-14. There was a righteous king named A$vasiras. When
the saintly king performed munificently the A$vamedha sacrifice
and accompanied by Brahmanas finished it with the Avabhrtha
bath, there came the great sages Kapila and Jaigisavya.
15. Then the king quickly stood up in great delight and
welcomed them.
16. Offering them seats and showing hospitality the great
king asked them who had keen intelligence and knowledge of
Yoga and who had come there of their own accord.

Sy Io e mmus mmi RN SE SS E
14 Varühà Purana
17. “O great Brahmins, be pleased to tell me how we should
Narayana ?”
worship the cternal god Visnu
The Brahmins replied:
18. O king, who is this Narayana about whom you ask ?
We two, standing before you, are Narayanas.
Afvasiras said:
19. *Both of you are Brahmins who are cleansed of sins due
to penance and attained great spiritual power. But how do you
say that you are Nàràyanas ?
20. The great God Janardana (Narayana) has in his
hands the conch, disc and, mace, and is clad in yellow garment.
He sits on Garuda (the king of birds). Who can be like Him in
this world ?"
21. Hearing thc words of the King, the two ascetic Brahmins
laughed aloud and said: ‘O king, see Visnu (in us)’.
22. Then Kapila transformed himself into Visnu and at the
same time Jaigisavya became Garuda.
23. Suddenly, there arose an uproar of wonder in the assembly of the king.
24-25. Then the great king, having seen the eternal God
Narayana sitting on Garuda, told them with folded hands:
*Forbear, O Brahmins, Visnu is not like this. He is the great
god, from the lotus in whose navel Brahma arose, and from that
Brahma arose Rudra P’
26. Then those great sages made a miracie by their Yogic
power.
27. (Thus) Kapila became Padmanabha (one having a
lotus-flower in his navel) and Jaigisavya Brahma. Brahma shone
on that lotus-flower and the resplendant Rudra thereon.
28-31. The King saw Him who had reddish eyes and who
was emanating the lustre like the enveloping fire at the end of
the world. And he said: “The lord of the world cannot be seen.
This is the illusion created by you, sages. The illustrious Visnu
is all-pervading."
As soon as he uttered this, O Earth, there appeared in the
assembly of the king, bugs, mosquitoes, lice, beetles, birds,
snakes, horses, cows, e'ephants, lions, tigers, jackals, deer and
other beasts, domestic and wild, in crores.

32-33. Dismayed at the sight of this multitude of beings,
the king thought: "What may be this !” Realising the greatness of Jaigisavya and the intelligent Kapila, king ASvasiras
asked those (two) sages with hands folded in respect: “O excellent Brahmins what is this ?’’.
The Brahmins said:
34 O king you asked us how Visnu should be worshipped
and how he could be attained. Therefore, O great king, we have
shown this to you.
35. The powers of omniscience are, O king, shown before
you. The god Narayana is omniscient and has the power to take
any form.
36. This benign being can be attained by men everywheie.
Worship (in any particular form alone) will not be the ultimate.
37-38. But the lord of world, the Supreme Soul, is omnipresent. As he is present everywhere, he can be seen in one's
own body through devotion. That was whv the form of the illustrious Supreme Soul was shown to you in our body so that you
may be convinced.
39. Likewise, O king, the omnipresent Visnu is there in
your own body. So too in your ministers and servants.
40. O king, the divine beings as well as the multitude of
animals and germs are all Visnu himself. Meditate upon Visnu
as present in all beings.
41. Worship Him with the conviction that there is no being
like Him. It is the attainment of knowledge, O king, that is
revealed to you.
42. Remember the great Narayana with full dedication,
with oblations, offerings, incense and. by propitiating Brahmins,
The supreme lord can easily be attained by firm meditation.

i6 Varüha Purana
CHAPTER FIVE
Attainment of Liberation Through Duty
Agvasiras said:
1. Kindly clear my doubt as a result of which I may be
able to get release from the bondage of worldly life.
2. Asked thus, the great sage told the king who was the best
among the performers of sacrifice.
Kapila said:
3. O righteous king, tell me your doubt so that I may cicar
it.
The king asked:
4. O sage, be pleased to clear my doubt whether liberation
is attained by one who does righteous duties or by one who acquires spiritual knowledge.
Kapila replied :
5. O great king, this very question was formerly put to
Brhaspati by Raibhya, son of Brahma, as well as by king Vasu.
6. Long ago, in Càksusa Manvantara, there lived a great
king Vasu, who was a scholar and liberal donor and descendant
of Brahma.
7. One day, Vasu went to the abode of Brahma to see Him.
On the way he saw Caitraratha, the Vidyadharachief, and asked
him about the convenience of Brahma.
8. He said that a mecting of the gods was going on in Brahma’s house. Hearing this, Vasu stood at the gate.
9, Just then, the great sage Raibhya came there and king
Vasu was very much pleased at this.
10. He saluted him and asked him where he was going.
Raibhya replied:
11. “I am returning from Brhaspati to whom I had gone on
some business".
12. At that time the assembly of Brahma was dissolved and
the hosts of gods returned to their homes.
13 Then Brhaspati went to his home with Raibhya, followed by Vasu who worshipped them both.

14-15. Raibhya, Brhaspati and king Vasu sat down and
then Brhaspati told Raibhya: *O great sage proficient in the
Vedas and Vedangas, what shall I do for vou ?”.
Raibhya said:
16. O Brhaspati, please clear my doubt whether liberation
is attained by one who performs righteous duties or by one who
acquires spiritual knowledge.
Brhaspati said:
17. Ifa man does any work, be it good or bad, dedicating
it to Lord Narayana, he becomes not attached to it.
18-19. O best of Brahmins, there is the well known conversation between a Brahmin and a hunter.
There lived a descendant of sage Atri learning the Vedas
intently, performing penance, bathingearlyin the morning, and
worshipping Sandhya all the three times. His name was Saryamana. One day he went to Dharmaranya to bathe in the
auspicious river Ganges.
20. A big herd of deer was taking rest there. A clever hunter
by name Nisthuraka came running there with bow and arrow,
like Yama, to kill the deer.
21. Noting the aim of the hunter, sage Sarhyamana forbade
him saying: ‘O friend, don’t kill them’.
22. Hearing this, the hunter said with a smile: “O excellent
Brahmin, I am not killing the individual souls.
23. 'The Supreme God plays himself by the beings. Like
illusion created by mantras He works thus,
24. O Brahmin, those who wish liberation should never have
ego. Everything in the world is for the sustenance and progress
of life. The word ‘I’ is not good there."
25. On hearing this, the great Brahmin Sarhyamana was
Struck with wonder and he asked the hunter Nisthuraka thus:
26. “What you say, O friend, is apparently reasonable."
27-28. Then the hunter, who knew Dharma, made an ironnet and placed fire underneath. He then asked the Brahmin to
blow into the fuel to blaze the fire. He did so.
29. When the fire was thus blazing, the iron-net, with flames
Spreading through its holes, shone like a globe of arrows,

18 Varaha Purana
30. Though the fire was only on a single spot, thousands of
its tongues spread through the holes of the iron-net.
31, Then the hunter told the Brahmin: “O great sage !
please take a single flame within these so that I may destroy
all the remaining ones”.
32. Saying this, he poured a pot of water on it and the entire
fire subsided.
33. Then the hunter told the saintly Brahmin: “O lord;
please give me the flame which you have just taken from the fire,
so that I may roast the flesh for my food."
34. Being told thus, the Brahmin went there and looked at
the iron-net. But there was no flame since its base was fully extinguished.
35. Then, as the Brahmin stood perplexed and silent, the
hunter told him.
36. “The fire when flamed up, had numerous tongues, but
all of them disappeared when the fire was extinguished . Similar
is the case here.
37. The soul (Atman) in its primordial form is the repository ofall beings. When it transforms itself, the world evolves.
38. No one falls who performs the duties enjoined in accordance with the embodied nature of his soul".
39. When the hunter told the Brahmin thus, O king, flowers
were showered on him from the sky.
40. ` The excellent Brahmin saw many an aerial car that
were divine, great and jewelled, and capable of going everywhere.
4l. The Brahmin saw in all of them the hunter Nisthuraka.
42. With the yogic power to multiply himself, he had obtained the fruit of the instinct of non-duality. Pleased at this sight,
the Brahmin returned to his hermitage.
43. O Raibhya, best of Brahmins, O king Vasu, he who
does his duties according to his caste, will acquire spiritual knowledge and attain liberation.
44. Thus Raibhya and Vasu who had got their doubt cleared left Brhaspati’s home and went to their hermitage.
45. Therefore, O great king, you also worship the great
God Narayana and see Him, identical with yourself in your own
body.

q
46-47. Hearing these words of Kapila, King Asvaéiras called
his son, Sthilasiras, and placed him on the throne. Then he
went to the Naimisa forest, O beautiful lady, and there he pleased
Visnu, the sacrificial Man, with penance and the hymn in his
praisc (Yajnamiirtistava).
Earth asked:
48. How did the king present the hymn of Narayana, the
sacrificial Man ? Be pleased to tell me.
Varaha replied:
49. ‘IT bow to Visnu, the embodiment of sacrifice, who takes
many forms like Indra, Siva, sun, moon, fire, king and Maruts.
50. I bow to the everlasting and extremely strong sacrificial
Man possessing terrific canines, having the sun and the moon as
his eyes, having ycar and the two ayanas as his belly and having
the kuga-grass as his hairs.
51. I always prostrate before that Janardana (Visnu) who
pervades the sky and earth and all the directions, who is worthy
to be extolled, who rules over the world, and from whom the
world arose.
52. I always prostrate before that Parame$vara (Supreme
God), the embodiment of sacrifice, who, though birthless and
beginningless, takes birth himself first in each yuga for victory,
though invincible by the gods and demons.
53. I always prostrate before the great prowessed Visnu,
the embodiment of sacrifice, who bears pure and white disc
(Sudarsana), the Sarnga-bow and conch in his hands to achieve
victory, and the abode of Maya.
94. I bow to the sacrificial Man, sometimes having thousand
heads, sometimes having the body like a huge mountain and at
other times like an atom.
55. I always prostrate before that sacrificial God, who takes
birth as Brahma, the four-faced, to create all the worlds, as Visnu,
the disc-bearer, to preserve it, and as Siva resembling the fire in
deluge to destroy the same.
56. I always prostrate before that immeasurable sacrificial
God, who is meditated upon by sages, who is primordial and all-

20 Varaha Purana
pervading, and who performs sacrifices for the systematic operation of the wheel of worldly life.
57. When in my mind I place well your ‘principle’ which
is well manifest in my own body, I am of the firm view that nothing other than this is existent, then my mind attains purity."
58. There appeared before the king who finished his prayer
thus, a lustre resembling the flaming fire. With firm determination the king entered into that sacrificial God and dissolved himself in Him.
CHAPTER SIX
Attainment of Liberation Uttering The Pundariküksapára hymn
Earth asked:
1. Having cleared their doubt by the words of Brhaspati,
what did Vasu and Raibhya do?
Varaha replied:
2. The virtuous king Vasu ruled over his country and performed munificently many sacrifices.
3. Meditating solely on Visnu and doing righteous actions,
the great king pleased the Lord.
4. As time went on, the king who crossed the ocean of
Dvandvas (opposite things like pain and pleasure, cold and heat
etc.) developed inhis mind complete detachment from royal
pleasures.
5. Then he entrusted his kingdom to Vivasvat, the eldest
of his hundred sons, and went to the forest.
6. There was the sacred lake named Puskara where Visnu
is worshipped by His devotees in the name. of Pundarikaksa.
7. The saintly sage Vasu, ruler of Kashmir, went there
and doing extremely severe penance emaciated his body.
8. Reciting the Pundarikaksapara hymn in devotion, the
wise king worshipped the sinless God Narayana, and at the
end of it, the excellent king became dissolved in Him.

Earth asked:
9. O Great God ! tell me clearly what the Pundarikaksapara hymn is.
Varüha replied:
10. “Bow to you, O Pundarikaksa (one having eyes resembling white lotuses) ! Bow to you, O Madhusüdana (one who
killed the demon Madhu) ! Bow to you, O lord of all worlds !
Bow to you having a scorching disc (in the hand) !
11. Obeisance to Pundarikaksa, the embodiment of all
worlds, the long-handed, the giver of boons, the great-prowessed,
the omnipresent, and the one having the form of both Vidya
(knowledge) and Avidyà (ignorance).
12. Salutation to the primordial great God, who crossed
the ocean of the Vedas and Vedangas, profound of all gods
and having eyes like lotus-petals.
13. Salutation to the supreme God who has thousand heads,
thousand eyes, long hands, and who stands pervading the whole
world. l
14. Salutation to God Visnu, the victorious, the primordial,
the repose to all devotees, one resembling the dark cloud, and
having a disc in hand.
15. Salutation to the pure, eternal and all-pervading Visnu
who has the form of sky and is freed from both Bhava (existence)
and Abhava (non-existence).
16. O Acyuta (imperishable) ! I can see nothing other
than you. I see all these movable and immovable beings identical
with you !” l
17-18. As he finished this prayer, out of his body arose a
person with a small body in blue complexion, extremely terrible,
having reddish eyes, and resembling a burning pillar. With
folded hands, he asked the king: ‘O great king ! What is to be
done by me?
The king said:
19. Who are you ? What do you want? Where do you come
from? Tell me, O hunter.
The Hunter said:
20. “O king ! in Kaliyuga, formerly, you were the king of

22 Varāha Purāna
Daksinapatha (South India), quite righteous and skilful, reigning
at Janasthana.
21. One day, O brave king ! You with your horses went
to a forest for hunting.
22. There a sage in the form of a deer was thrown down on
the earth with two sticks by you, although unwittingly.
23. Immediately the sage breathed his last. You were, O
king, very happy thinking that the deer was dead.
But when you went forward, on the Prasravana mountain,
you found dead the Brahmin in the form of deer.
24. Seeing him, O great king, you went to your palace with
a mind extremely distressed and toldsome one about this incident.
25. As some more days passed, at one night, O king, you
got struck with the fear for the sin of killing a Brahmin and you
thought: “I will do something by which I will be freed from the
sin".
26. Then, meditating on Lord Narayana, you performed the
sacred Dvadasi fast.
27. Saying ‘Narayana is pleased with me’, on a sacred day,
a cow was offered by you according to religious rules. Then and
there, you fell down dead due to stomach-ache.
28-29. I shall tell you why your Dvādaśī fast did not result
in good. Your wife, Narayani, was an auspicious lady. You
called her by her name when your life breath was leaving your
neck (and not the name of the Lord).
30. For a Kalpa, O great king, you were in Visnu region.
I was living in your body and I know all that occurred.
31-32. I felt, being the terrible ghost of the dead Brahmin,
Icould harass you. But then I was driven out by Visnu’s servants
by their clubs and I came out of the pores of your skin. And I
remain my own even in heaven.
33-34. After this, when the day-kalpa was followed by the
night-kalpa, O best of kings, in the first creation, you were born
in the palace of king Sumanas who ruled over Kashmir. I was
then in your hairs. Duriug that occasion, you performed many
sacrifices munificently.
35-36. I was not released from your hairs by those sacrifices
which were lacking in the remembrance of Visnu. But, now,
when you uttered the Pundarikaksapara hymn, by its power, I

w—
was released from your hairs and I have attained the form of a
hunter.
37. Just sometime before, I heard the hymn to the God with
my sinful body. Hence my liberation. Now, O lord, I am changed into a completely righteous-minded man."
38. Having heard this, the great king was struck. with
wonder and pleased the hunter giving a boon to him.
The king said:
39. As you have reminded me of my prcvious birth, O hunter, you will be famous by the name ‘Dharmavyadha’ (a righteous hunter).
40. One who hears this Pundarikaksapara hymn will get
the same result as that of bathing in the sacred lake Puskara.
Varáha said:
41. After saying this, the king entered into the aerial car.
O Earth, then he attained union with the Supreme light.
CHAPTER SEVEN
Attainment of Liberation Uttering Gadddhara Hymn
Earth asked:
1. Having heard that Vasu had attained liberation, what
did the great sage Raibhya himself do ? O God, I wish to know
this.
Varáha replied:
2. Having heard that Vasu had attained liberation, the
great sage Raibhya went to Gaya, the sacred lake of the manes.
3. There he propitiated the manes offering Pinda (the
lump of rice offered in obsequial ceremonies) in devotion and
Performed extremely severe penance.
4. Before sage Raibhya performing great penance, there
appeared in an- aerial car an exceedingly effulgent Yogin.

24 Varáha Purdna
5. In the aerial car which was small like a particle of dust,
resembling the sun, shone forth a man like an atom.
6. He asked Raibhya: “O sage, with what end in view are
you doing penance ?’ Asking this, that man swelled himself into
a huge figure touching the sky and earth.
7. He found the aerial car which was resembling the sun,
also becoming very big and pervading the abode of Visnu (sky).
8. Then, possessed with great wonder, Raibhya prostrated
before him and asked ‘O great yogin, please tell me who you are’.
The Man said:
9. “Iam Rudra’s younger brother and I am Brahmà's
mind-born child. My name is Sanatkumara and Iam living in
Janaloka.
10. I have come before you, O sage, out of love for you. O
child, you are blessed all times since you increase the race of
Brahma.
Raibhya said:
11. Bow to you, O great yogin, Be pleased with me. Please
shower on me your benevolence, O Yogin, with the body consisting ofall the worlds. O great yogin, please tell me what I should
do now. Why do you call me the blessed.
Sanatkumàra said:
12. O great Brahmin, you are blessed because you, interested in discussions on the Vedas, pleased the manes by hymns,
vows, sacrifices and all kinds of Pindas at this Gaya.
13-14. And hear me, O sage ! There lived in the city Visala
another king by name Visala, gratified and courageous, ruling
over the whole country Visala. He, who had destroyed all his
enemies, asked the great Brahmins what was to be done to get a
son for him. Those benign Brahmins told him: ‘O king, please
go to Gaya and propitiate the manes there by giving munificent
offerings of rice for getting a son.
15. No doubt, then, you will get a son, O great king, who
will be the lord of the earth and a munificent donor.
16-17. When the Brahmins said this, theking of Visala
was very glad and he went to the sacred lake and in great devo-

tion offered Pindas to the manes in Maghas(tenth lunar asterism). At that time, he saw before him three persons in white,
red and black complexions. He asked them: Why do you look at
me intently? I am anxious to know everything. Please tell me".
The White man said:
18. O Child, I am your father Sita (the white) by name,
conduct, race and actions. This is my father, the Red, cruel and
prone to do sinful deeds like killing of Brahmins.
19. The other is his father, the Black, and the lord of all who
are black of conduct and character. It is by this Black one that
a good number of ancient sages were killed.
20. Both these my father, the lord Red, and his father, the
Black, died and, O child, went to the hells named Raudra and
Avici and lived there for a long time.
21. Asaresult of my chaste actions I was led to the seat of
Indra (the heaven), one that is rare to be attained. It is by you,
well-versed in Mantras, I am united with these, who were in hell,
by the power of offering Pindas in this sacred lake.
22. O destroyer of enemies, you have offered water saying:
“I shall propitiate my father, grandfathers and great-grandfathers.
23. By that word, we are united now, O good child, I can
undoubtedly go to the world of manes by the power of this
sacred water.
24. By offering Pindas here, both these your grandfathers got
liberation in spite of their misfortunes and sinful deeds.
25. The power of this sacred water is so great that even a
killer of Brahmins can be liberated by his son through the offering of Pindas in this lake.
26. 'That is why, I, accompanied by both these, have come
here to see you. Now I am going.
27-28. For the same reason; O Raibhya, I am saying that
you are blessed. It is very rare to go to Gayà even once and. offer
Pindas there. You have been always here. What else is to be
said, O lord; this is your good luck.
29. Since Narayana himself was seen here as Gadàdhara
(holding the mace in his hand), He isinstalled in this temple in
the same form. O best of Brahmins ! this sacred lake, therefore,
is the most famous.

26 Varaha Purana
Varaha said:
30. After saying this, the great yogin (Sanatkumara) disappeared. Raibhya extolled Narayana in the form of Gadadhara
as follows:
Raibhya said:
31. Bow to Gadadhara, who is extolled by gods, who is
forebearing and auspicious, who destroys demons in Visala
and who destroys, on mere remembrance, the sorrow of the poor
and all inauspicious things.
32. Bow to Gadadhara, the primordial Man who is extolled
again and again, the ancient, the purified, the great prowessed,
the shelter to all, Trivikrama (one having three footsteps in the
Vamana incarnation ) and who killed demon Kesin and
protected the world.
33. One who prostrates before Gadadhara lives happily—
Gadadhara who is wedded to Laksmi (goddess of wealth) and
thus amply rich, who is extolled by sinless kings, who is devoid
of sin and has purified feelings and is skilful.
34. One who prostrates before Gadadhara lives happily—
Gadadhara who has the feet like lotuses and is worshipped by
gods and demons, who wears a bracelet, necklace of pearls,
armlet and crown, and has a disc in his hand, and who sleeps in
the sea.
35. One who prostrates before Gadadhara lives happily—
Gadadhara, the all-pervading, the imperishable, and the great
lord who is white in Krta age, red in Tretà, blue in Dvapara
and black like a bee in Kali age.
36. May Gadadhara be victorious—Gadadhara having
three forms at a time, who as one born from a seed creates the
four-faced Brahma, who in the form of Narayana creates and
protects the world, and who in the form of Rudra destroys it.
37. It is well known that all beings are formed of three
qualities, Sattva, Rajas and Tamas. May Gadadhara possessing
all these three in himself provide me with courage in discharging
my righteous and spiritual duties.
38. It is the raft of Gadadhara that has protected me who
was drowning deep in the ocean of worldly life, terrible with
snares of sorrows, and crocodiles of separation (from my relatives).

39. I prostrate before God (Gadadhara) preserving
the earth, who being himself the trio of Gods created this world
out of his power as in the case of sky, i.e., in Atman by Átman,
who created fire and water in it and seated himself in the water.
40. May Gadadhara Visnu provide me with liberation —he
who attained the form of fish and the like to protect gods and
others and who is present in all beings in the form of sacrifice.
Varáha said:
41. When the intelligent Raibhya thus extolled Visnu in
great devotion, He clad in yellow-garment, appeared before him
in the sky.
42. Then He having a conch, disc and a mace in his hands,
sitting on Garuda, said in words lofty like the sound of a cloud.
43. “O great Brahmin-sage Raibhya ! I am pleased with
your devotion, hymn and by your oblution in this sacred. lake.
Tell me what you want".
Raibhya said:
44. Be pleased, O great lord Janardana, to give me the
beatitude by which I shall live where Sanaka and others dwell.
God said:
45-46. ‘Let it be so, O Brahmin !' Saying this, the Lord
disappeared. By the grace of God Visnu, Raibhya became
possessed of divine knowledge within a moment. And he attained
the world where the great sage Sanaka and others live.
47. One who goes to Gayà and recites this hymn, uttered
by Raibhya to Gadadhara Visnu, achieves better fruits than
those by offering Pinda.
CHAPTER EIGHT
The Life of Dharmavyadha
Varüha said:
l. He who was in the body of king Vasu became a hunter
and he lived some four thousand years doing his traditional work
(hunting).

28 Varaha Purana
2. For his family he killed one beast each day and with it
propitiated his servants, guests and the fire (installed in his hut).
3. In Mithilà, O beautiful lady, he used to perform obsequial ceremonies for the manes on every new moon day in accordance with practice.
4. Doing daily worship of fire and uttering truth and sweet
and appropriate words he lived a modest life.
5. As he was living thus, a son was born to him by name
Arjunaka. He was righteous in mind; performed penance and
controlled his passions like a sage.
6. In course of time this intelligent and chaste hunter got a
charming daughter also by name Arjunakà.
7. As she came of age, the righteous hunter thought about
her marriage: To whom is she tobe given in marriage? Whoisa
suitable man for her ?
8. While he was thinking about this, Matanga's son, Prasanna, came to the hunter's mind.
9. Having tentatively fixed him (as a bridegroom to his
daughter), he asked Matanga: ‘ʻO great sage ! please receive
Arjuni, my daughter, whom 1 am giving on my own accord to
the great-souled Prasanna, your son”.
Matanga said:
10. My son Prasanna is well versed in all Sastras. O great
hunter, I shall receive your daughter Arjunaka for him.
11. Then the righteous hunter, performer of great penance,
gave his daughter in marriage to the intelligent Prasanna, son of
Matanga.
12. After this, the righteous hunter went to his hut. His
daughter began to attend on her husband and parents-in-law.
13. As time went on, the auspicious girl's mother-in-law told
her. “You area hunter's daughter. That is why you are like this.
You don't know how to perform penance and how to attend on a
husband."
14. The timid lady, scolded by her mother-in-law for such
a silly offence, went to her father’s house weeping again and
again.
15. The father asked her. “O my daughter, why are you
crying like this ?" The beautiful girl told him in detail all that
happened.

p
16. “O my father, my mother-in-law scolded me loosing
her temper that I was a hunter’s daughter and my father had
killed so many living beings”.
17. Hearing this, the righteous-souled hunter got angry and
went to Matanga’s house which was surrounded by a village.
18-19. Thevictorious Matanga, his relative, welcomed him
giving water for washing his feet and provided him with a seat.
Then he asked the guest: “Please tell me for what purpose you
have come here. What shall I do for you ?”’.
The hunter said:
20. I want some food bereft of life. I came to your house
eagerly for this very purpose.
Matanga said:
21. There is a lot of cooked wheat and rice in my house. O
best of righteous men and great sage, you can eat these as much as
you wish.
The hunter said:
22. May I see the wheat, rice and barley. I have to check
whether these are the same as I know them.
Varaha said:
23. Whenhe said this, Matanga showed the righteous hunter
a winnowing basket full of wheat, and another full of rice.
24. Seeing the wheat and rice, the righteous hunter stood
up from his seat and started to go but Matanga prevented him,
saying as follows.
25. “Please teli me, O great soul, why are you going so hastily even without taking food. There is still excellent food here
in my house. You may cook it yourself if you like, and eat it.
Why not you eat this?”
The hunter said:
26. “Each day you kill thousands and crores of lives. Which
virtuous man can eat food given by such a sinner like you ?
27. If there is well-cooked food free from living organisms
in your house, then I shall eat it since you are my relative.

30 Varáha Purána
28. I kill for my family only one animal each day. And
even that, after cooking I offer first to the manes and then only I
eat it with my family members.
29. You, on the other hand, kill many living organisms
everyday and eat them with your family. I think, therefore, this
food is not eatable to me.
30. Brahma, in yore, created all plants and creepers for the
purpose of sacrifice. It is sanctioned by the Vedas, that these are
eatable to all beings.
31. Long ago, Brahma created five great sacrifices: Divya
(divine), Bhauma (of earth), Paitra (of the manes), Manusa
(of man) and Brahma (of Brahma).
32. These sacrifices are intended for the good of Brahmins
and other castes. Forother castes they are fruitful if got performed by Brahmins.
33. A man should eat food only after doing this. Only
through this, the food becomes purified. Otherwise the rice and
thelike are considered to be birds and animals for both the
guests and hosts. These are called ‘great meat’.
34. I have given you my beautiful daughter as your daughter-in-law. Your wife scolded her that she is the daughter of a
hunter who kills animals. So I have come here to test you
also.
35. Traditional rites, worshipping gods, receiving guests—
nothing of these can be seen here.
36. Therefore I wish to go to my own house to perform
obsequial rites for the manes. Unless these are done, I do not
take my food even in my house.
37. When my daughter was married by your son, she attained some of his eminence as a result, and that is sufficient expiation for her birth in my family.
38. When your son married my daughter, this decency
had not come te you. Now, O sage, it is time for doing expiatory
rites."
39-40. With these few words, he rose up and pronounced
a curse on women. “‘Never shall the mothers-in-law have confidence in their daughters-in-law ! And never shall a daughterin-law wish her mother-in-law live "' Cursing thus, O lady,
the hunter went to his hut.

EE
41-42. Then having worshipped gods and manes
with devotion, and having entrusted his son Arjunaka with
looking after the family, the righteous hunter, performer of great
penance, went to the world-famous sacred lake named Purusottama. There, O Earth, he performed penance in accordance
with rules with a concentrated mind reciting the following
hymn :
43. “Bow to Visnu, who destroyed the enemies of gods,
who has Laksmi on his broad chest, who rules over the world
well, who is a shelter to the virtuous, who placed three steps (in
his dwarf incarnation), and who uplifted the mount Mandara
(in his tortoise incarnation).
44. Bow to Visnu, Dàmodara (one who had been bound
by rope by his foster mother Yasodà), who has seized the earth
with his intellect, who is white with his fame, who is black like a
bee, who is the enemy of demons, who is extolled by everyone
time and again and who protects his devotees.
45. Bow to Visnu, Purusottama (best of men) who is seen
in three forms, who has a lustrous disc in his hand, who stands
on the part of justice, who has excellent qualities, who has the
name Beatitude, who is imperishable and who 1s the preceptor
of all.
46. May Visnu protect me praying for shelter, who is the
great boar, who receives the sacrificial offerings, who destroys
the mischievous, who fulfils my wishes, who has four faces, and
who is a mountain for me in crossing the ocean of worldly life.
47. May Visnu, the Lord of the world, protect me who created the three worlds covered by illusion, and who, like the fire,
pervades himself all over the animate and inanimate beings.
48. In each yuga, Visnu creates Brahma from whom arose
this world consisting of animates and inanimates and in whom
in the form of Rudra all this is dissolved; so He is called Hari
and Hara.
49. May the eternal Lord Visnu, provide me with good
whose different forms are the sun, moon, earth, air and water and
whose form is unthinkable and indescribable.”
50. When the hunter uttered this, the eternal God appeared
himself before him in a wondrous form. The eternal Lord having

34 Varaha Purana
20. Similarly, he filled Satyaloka with the gods freed from
re-birth.
After having this creation, the benevolent God gave it the
meaningful name Kalpa, the whole thing being his creation.
2]. In that cosmos, the three worlds Bhür Bhuvah and
Suvah arise, no doubt.
22. The time when the God sleeps at the end of a Kalpa is
called night. Then all these three worlds are subject to turmoils.
23. Night being over, the lotus-eyed God got up and thought about the four Vedas and in them the Goddess of the Vedas.
24. Despite this thinking, he did not get the Vedas because
He was illusioned by the sense ofsleep. He was in utter confusion.
25. Then seeing them hidden in his own form called water,
he thought of entering into it taking the form of a fish.
26. So after meditating for sometime He took the form of a
great fish and entered into the water agitating it all around.
27. When the excellent God in the form of the huge fish
resembling a big mountain, suddenly entered the ocean, He who
had uplifted the earth before was extolled.
28. “Obeisance to you, O God, who is difficult to be attained even by Vedànta ! Obeisance to Nàràyana in the form of
fish. Obeisance to you, the embodiment of all the worlds and
the lord of gods; Obeisance to you taking the form of the two
kinds of knowledge (spiritual and worldly).
29. Obeisance to you having manifold forms like the sun
and the moon and having beautiful eyes, and now in the ocean;
Obeisance to you, O Visnu. We seek shelter in you ! Giving up
this form of fish, please protect us.
30. O God having endless body, this world is pervaded by
you. O God, there is nothing here except you. There is nothing
other than yourself in this world. We seek protection in you.
31. O God having eyes resembling lotus petals, ether, soul,
moon, fire, mind and form—all these are your primordial body
itself. Itis by you that this cosmos is illumined. Please forgive
me if I am devoid of proper devotion to you.
32. O God, this form of yours is contradictory in itself. It
is pleasant-speaking and pleasant-voiced and at the same time
it is like a mountain. O the ancient and imperishable great God
who is the repose of all the worlds, please turn this scorching form
into one that is benign.

g
33. We all seek shelter in you. We prostrate before you
terrified by this huge form. "There is nothing in this world outside
yourself.”
34, Extolled thus, the God caught the Vedas with Upanisads and Sastras out of the water and then took his own form.
35. As long as the God bears his own form, this world exists.
When the God assumes his primordial form this world is dissolved. When He takes his manifested forms, this world also
evolves.
CHAPTER TEN
The Creation and The Life of Durjaya
Varáha said:
l. After creating all the worlds thus, the benevolent Lord,
stopped the endeavour. Then the creation, O Earth, is increased
itself.
2-3. When the creation was developed, the gods pleased the
venerable Visnu by performing devoutly many sacrifices in all
the Dvipas (islands or continents) and countries.
4. As thousands of years passed, the God became pleased
and appeared before them.
5. The God having many hands, bellies, faces and eyes and
resembling the peak of a big mountain, asked them. ‘‘What shall
I do for you ? Please seek a boon from me, O gods !”
The gods said:
6-7. Be victorious, O great Visnu ! We seek this boon
from you. Even in the world of men, you alone are worshipped
by all and none of us is worshipped by any. The moon, the sun,
Vasus, Sadhyas, Visvedevas, Asvins, Maruts, fire—all these have
sought shelter in you. O embodiment of all beings, please make
us venerable for men.
8. Hearing this, the great lord Visnu told them: “I shall
make all of you venerable". Saying this, He disappeared.

36 Varaha Purana
9. The eternal gods also went home uttering hymns in his
praise. The great Lord assumed three aspects.
10. Becoming threefold thus the great Lord worshipped the
gods, with Sattvika, Rajasa and Tamasa forms.
11. Visnu recited the Vedas in Sattvika mood and performed
sacrifices to the gods.
12. He worshipped with great devotion Rudra in the form
of Kala (time) having a trident in his hand, in the Rajasa form.
13. And he attained his Támasa form in Asuras.
14. Thus the great Lord of the world taking three kinds
of forms worshipped the gods. Then the world also became
varied.
15. In this manner Visnu established the names of great
gods. In Krtayuga He is Nàràyana.
16. In Tretayuga He is Rudra and in Dvaparayuga Yajfiamürti, the form of sacrifice. In Kaliyuga the God Narayana
attains many forms.
17. Hear from me, O fair damsel, the story of the great God,
the first creation.
18. In Krtayuga there lived a powerful king by name Supratika. He had two beautiful queens.
19. Their names were Vidyutprabha and Kantimati. Though he was very healthy, he did not get a son by either of these
wives.
20. So, he offered worship in the prescribed manner to the
great sinless sage Atreya in the famous mountain Citraküta.
21. Pleased at his long and steady worship, the sage Atreya
spoke to him with the intention of giving him a boon.
22. At that time the mighty Indra seated on his elephant
accompanied by an army of gods, passed by him without
showing him respect.
23. Seeing this the sage got offended and he cursed Indra.
24. “Since you have shown disrespect to me, O stupid lord
of heaven, you will lose your kingdom and you will have to live
in another world."
25-27. Having uttered this, the sage told king Supratika:
“O king, you will get a son valiant like Indra. He will be endowed with wealth, prowess, and spiritual knowledge and he will
be a performer of brave deeds. He will have great strength and
will have the name Durjaya". Saying this, the sage went away.

98, The righteous king Supratika got his queen Vidyutprabhà pregnant. In due course, she gave birth to a child who
was very strong and was given the name Durjaya.
29, The sage himself performed the ceremonies in connection
with his birth.
30. As a result of the sage’s rites, the child became gentle,
righteous and proficient in the Vedas and Sastras.
3]. Kantimati, the second queen of the great king Supratika
also gave birth to a child by name Sudyumna who also became
well versed in the Vedas and Vedàngas.
32-33. As time went on, Supratika, the mighty king of
Varanasi, seeing his son Durjaya becoming mature and himself
old, O Earth, thought that Durjaya was to be crowned king.
34. "Thinking thus, the righteous king bestowed on his son
the kingdom and he himself went to the mountain Citraküta.
35. Adding to his great kingdom more elephants, horses
and chariots, king Durjaya thought about the widening of its
boundaries.
36. Thinking thus the intelligent king assembled an army
consisting of elephants, horses, chariots and soldiers and went to
the northern quarters.
37-38. All the countries in the northern quarters were captured by the great king. 'Then he won over this country, Bhàrata.
Subsequently the countries Kimpurusa, and Harivarsa were
seized by him.
39. "Then he captured all the countries around mount Meru
like Romavata, Kuru, Bhadrasva and Ilàvrta.
40. After having seized this Jambüdvipa, the king went to
conquer Indra with all the gods. —
41. Sage Narada, son of Brahma, climbing on the mount
Meru told Indra the gods, demons, Gandharvas, Guhyakas,
Kinnaras about the victorious advance of Durjaya (over the
whole Jambüdvipa).
42-43, As soon as he heard this, Indra along with the lords
of the quarters set out to kill Durjaya. Climbing the mountain
Meru, he came to the earth, the abode of mortals.
44. Lord Indra accompanied by the lords of quarters stood
n the east. It was then that the wonderful exploits of Durjaya
occurred,

38 Varaha Purána
45. After conquering the gods, Durjaya made his camp in
the table-lands of the mount Gandhamadana.
At that time two ascetics came there to see Durjaya.
46. They told him: “O king Durjaya, ail the lords of quarters have been driven away by you. Without them the world
cannot get on. So please give us their exalted position."
47-48. Requested thus, the righteous king Durjaya askcc
them: “Who are you ?” They replied: “We are Asuras by name
Vidyut and Suvidyut. We wish the righteousness well set by you
among the good.
49. O Durjaya, we shall do all the duties of the protectors
of the quarters."
50. On hearing their words, Durjaya appointed them in
heaven as the protectors of directions. Then both of them
disappeared. O Earth, they did their work well.
51. On the mount Mandara the great king Durjaya found
the celestial garden (Citraratha) of Kubera which was like the
Nandana garden (of Indra).
52. While he was on a stroll in that beautiful garden he saw
there under a golden tree two girls.
53-54. 'They were wonderfully charming and he stood
there for a moment wondering who they could be. Just then
hesaw two sages.
55. Seeing them the king with great joy got down from
his elephant quickly and prostrated at their feet.
56. He sat down and gave them two seats of KuSa grass.
They asked him: “Who are you ? Wherefrom have you come here
and what for.".
57. With a smiling face the king replied: “A famous king
by name Supratika was ruling. I am his son named Durjaya.
58. With a desire to defeat all the kings in the world, I came
here.
59. O excellent sages, who are you ? Be pleased to tell me
your names."
The sages said:
60. We are Hetr and Prahetr, sons of Svayambhuva Manu.
To destroy gods we went to the mountain Meru.
61. There we won many times the huge army of gods
consisting of elephants, horses and chariots.

62-63. Seeing their army destroyed by the demons, the gods,
seeking shelter, went to the bank of the Milky ocean where the
great lord Visnu was sleeping. Saluting the Lord, the gods
requested Him:
64. *O God Visnu, please protect our frightened army
defeated by the demons.
65. It is you, O Kesava (destroyer of the demon Kesin)
who, long ago, in the war between the gods and demons, protected us from the attack of the eternal thousand-armed Kalanemi.
66. Here also, O great Lord, there are two demons by name
Hetr and Prahetr being accompanied by a huge army and they
are oppressing us all. Killing both these, O great God, the protector of the worlds, please save us.”
67. Hearing this, Visnu, the great Lord of the worlds told
them: “I shall go to kill them".
68. Being told by Him thus, the gods waited there by the
mountain Meru meditating on Him Who was the destroyer of
the mischievous people.
69-70. Soon the mighty God having a mace in His hand
entered into our army multiplying himself into one, ten, hundred, thousand, lakh and crore by his miraculous power.
71. As the mighty God stood in the middle of our army in
this manner, evcry soldier in our army began to fall down dead.
72-73. Thus within a few minutes, our fourfold army
having flesh and blood and full of soldiers and flagstaffs was
destroyed by the magical power of the God, the embodiment of
all beings. Then seeing us only remaining, the God with a
disc in his arm, disappeared.
74. We saw this wonderful act of the God having the
Sarnga-bow in his hand. Then we sought shelter in him and
worshipped him.
75-76. You are the son of our friend king Supratika. These
two are our daughters. Please accept both these, O great king.
Hetr's daughter is Sukesi and Prahetr’s Miérakesi.
77. When Hetr said thus, king Durjaya received those two
girls as his queens for the sake of righteousness.
78. Marrying them the joyful king returned to his own
kingdom accompanied by his army.

40 Varéha Purànc
79. In course of time, he got two sons by his two wive
Prabhava by Sukesi, and Sudarsana by Misrakesi.
80. Having got the two auspicious sons, the wealthy king
Durjaya, as he became old, went to the forest.
81-82. As he was living in the forest driving away wild beasts
he found a sinless and auspicious sage by name Gauramukne
performing penance who was the protector of hermits as well a:
the sinful men.
83. The sage’s penance-grove with ponds full of pure water
and with big trees imparting fragrance to the brecze shone
like a cloud descended from the sky to the earth.
84. There was in his hermitage fire blazing with flames
upwards brightening the sky, a grinder covered by pure white
cloths; Sama-hymns sung by his disciples, lovely hermitage
girls, and all the trees with full-blown flowers.
CHAPTER ELEVEN
Fight Between Durjaya and Gauramukha
Varaha said:
1-2. Seeing the hermitage of Gauramukha, Durjaya thought: A shall enter this beautiful hermitage and sce the virtuous
sages”. He then entered the hermitage.
3. Delighted to see the king, Gauramukha wnd him.
4. Then the great Brahmin sage told him, “O great king.
I wish to give you and your retinue food according to my capacity. So release your horses.”
5. Saying this, the virtuous sage remained quiet. Secing
his devotion the king also stood there with his followers.
6. “Five batallions of the army are with me here, What
food can this sage give us all ?" he thought.
7. After inviting king Durjaya for food, sage Gauramukha
also thought: “what shall I give the king now ?"'.
8. Thesage who was thinking thus had the great Lord Visnu
in his heart then.

9. Then the great sage went to the Ganges and meditated
on Visnu and propitiated him.
Earth asked:
10. Iam anxious to know, O Lord, how Gauramukha propitiated Visnu. Tell me this clearly.
Varaha replied:
11. “I bow to you (Visnu) always. Bow to you, clad in
yellow garment. Bow to you, the primordial Man. Bow to you
in the form of water.
12. I bow to you the Omni-present. Bow to you lying on
the water. Bow to you in the form of the earth. Bow to you in the
form of light.
13. Bow to you in the form of air. Bow to you in the form of
sky. You are the God of all beings. You are the Lord reposing
in the heart of all.
14. You are the syllable ‘Om’, the word ‘vasat’. You are
present everywhere. You are the beginning of all gods; but
you have no beginning.
15. Youare (the world) Bhüh. You are (the world) Bhuvah.
You are (the worlds) Janas and Mahar. You are (the world)
Tapas. You are (the world) Satya. O God, all the animate and
inanimate dwell in you.
16. All this world came out of you. The Rk etc. came out
of you. The Sastras were born from you. It is in you that the
Sacrifices are installed.
17. All the trees, creepers, plantsinthe woods, animals,
birds and serpents—O Janardana, all these are born from you.
18. O God of gods, king Durjaya has come to my hermitage. I wish to treat him as my guest.
19. O Lord of all the worlds, I am very poor and all the
‘same, an obedient devotee of yours. Give me rice and the like
(to feed the king).
20. Whatever I touch with my hands, whatever I look at
with my eyes—may it be a log of wood or a blade of grass, let
all that turn into the fourfold food.
21. Also whatever my mind calls for, let all that appear
before me. Bow to you, O great God.”

42 Varáha Purdna
Vardha said:
22. By this hymn, the great God of all the worlds was pleased very much. He appeared before the sage and showed him his
real Form.
23. Then the God told him with great pleasure. “O Brahmin, please ask for a boon". Hearing this the sage opened his
eyes.
24-26. Then he saw Visnu clad in ycllow-garment and
bearing a conch and mace in his hands. Sitting on Garuda,
he shone forth with the lustre similar to that of the twelve suns,
why, the lustre of a thousand suns rising together in the sky. The
sage, O beautiful lady, saw him with his eyes wide open with
wonder.
27-28. He prostrated before the God with folded hands
and told Him. “O God, if you are pleased with me, your devotee,
and intend to give me a boon, then, please make arrangements
in order that this king with his company can stay in my hermitage and take food and then return to his palace.”
29. Hearing this, the great God gave him a boon according
to which his desire would be fulfilled. Hc also gave him a shining
jewel.
30. The God then disappeared. Sage Gauramukha also
went to his holy hermitage with many sages.
31. Then the great sage contemplated on a hundred-storied
mansion looking like the peak of mount Himalaya and high up
like the huge cloud, and pleasing like the beams of the moon.
32. Then, by the power of the boon attained from Visnu,
the Brahmin created lakhs of mansions like this.
33-34. Then he got huge walls around them. Also there came
into existence beautiful gardens, pleasant with the charming songs
of cuckoos, and full of many other kinds of birds; and trees like
Campaka, Asoka, Punnaga, Naga and Kesara appeared in the
gardens in these homes everywhere.
35. Stalls for elephants and stables for horses appeared there.
Many varieties of food were provided everywhere.
36. All kinds of food—to be chewed, bitten, licked and
sucked—made of rice and the like and golden utensils for them
were seen everywhere.
37. Then the sage told the great king: “Let the entire army
enter into these houses".

38. When told thus, the king went to a mountain-like mansion. His servants also went into it.
39. Seeing all of them in the mansion, sage Gauramukha,
with the divine jewel in his hand, said to the king.
40. When you want to bathe and have your food, O king,
I shall send charming damsels and obedient servants to attend on
you.
41. After saying this, the great Brahmin put the Visnuite
jewel in a solitary place. The king was watching all this.
42. As soon as the sage put the shining jewel there, thousands of celestial damsels appeared on the spot.
43. Smeared with cosmetics, the lovely ladies attracted
everyone with their beautiful cheeks, hairs, eyes etc.
44-45. Some of them taking golden pots in their hands
started to go. Thus, men and women followed the king and his
servants to attend on them.
46. "Those ladies found all the servants taking bath following the king. The elephants were seen walking gently and
beautifully.
47-48. When the king was bathing, many kinds of tabors
were played everywhere and some ladies danced beautifully and
some others sang songs as at the time when Indra was taking his
bath.
49. "Thus the great king finished his bath with divine accompaniments. Struck with wonder, he thought: ‘‘How is all this
done ? Is it by the power of the sage or by his penance or by this
Jewel?"
30. Then, after bathing and wearing fine clothes, the great
king took his food consisting of numerous items.
31. The great sage showed his hospitality to the king's servants also as he did to the king.
32. As the king and his servants took their meals, the rosy
Sun went to the setting mountain.
33. Then came the night, decorated by the grand mark of
the autumnal moon. Even though having only soft qualities
Rohini’s Spouse (moon) showed his passion (also reddish colour)
Proper to the context.
34. The planet Venus (Sukra) rose with strong rays.
Jupiter (Brhaspati) also rose at the time, but with lustre

44 Varüha Purana
suppressed (by that of Venus). The position of all beings is in
accordance with their association.
55. The planet Mars gave up its reddish colour and Rahu
its sharpness. The moon’s beams were white. The nature of all
beings is influenced by its association according to whether it is
with the good or with the bad. Nature is the chief factor that
imparts strength and valour.
56. Although within the influence of Saturn, Ketu did not
spread his dense darkness in that brightness, pure like the sun.
If the master is great, then even the bad behave well.
37. The planet Budha, the intelligent son of the moon,
shone forth with his actions and smiling at the good.
58. Ketu standing in the path of the moon (also king)
and the gods made the sky tawny. In an assembly of good men
the bad do not exhibit their tricks in full.
59. The moonlight increased the passion of even highborn
wives. The contact of the great rouses the great.
60. The results of the Vedic rites performed were evident."
61. By virtue of the remembrance of Visnu, Dhruva, who
in yore, worshipped him, brightened the king’s seat by wealth
and intellect.
62. 'Thus, the auspicious night came to the auspicious hermitage of Gauramukha in keeping with the grand reception accorded with sumptuous meals, clothes and ornaments to king
Durjaya and his servants and to his elephants and horses.
63. There were beautiful couches in the mansions lustrous
with precious jewels and covered by the best silks, and lovely
damsels were standing nearby.
64. The king sent his chieftains and servants to other buildings and slept in his mansion in the company of charming ladies,
like Indra in the heaven.
65. Thus, by the sage’s power, the king with his retinue
slept well during the whole night.
66-67. As the night was over, the king found that the ladies
had disappeared; so too those huge mansions and their grand
seats. Seeing this, the king was struck with wonder and he felt
unhappy.
68-69. King Durjaya thought: “How can I get a jewel
1. The idea in this stanza is not clear.

plike this ? I will steal this jewel which fulfils all the wishes of him
who possesses it.” Thinking thus, the king did not feel inclined
to leave the hermitage.
70-71. Going somewhere not far away from the hermitage,
the king with his horses sent his minister Virocana to sage Gauramukha to request him for the gift of the jewel. He went there
and requested the sage for it.
72. He told the sage: “It is the king who deserves to keep
jewels. So this jewel may be given to him."
When the minister said thus, Gauramukha got angry and
replied to him.
73. “The Brahmin is the recipient; the king, on the other
hand, is the donor. Being a king how do you request for this, like
a poor man?
74. What you arc telling me amounts to saying that king
Durjaya himself is an ill-conducted man. Soon go to that illconducted king. May not the pcople disobey him."
75. Hearing this, the messenger went to the king and conveyed to him all that was told by the Brahmin.
76. Hearing the Brahmin's words Durjaya got angry and
called one of his chieftains, Nila, and told him:
77. “Do not wait for a minute. Snatching the Brahmin's
jewel come here quickly."
78. Receiving this order, Nila, with a huge army, went to
the Brahmin's hermitage in the forest.
79. There, seeing the jewel placed in the Agnihotragala
(the house where the sacred fire is worshipped everyday), Nila
got down from the chariot and stood on the ground.
80-81. While the most cruel Nila got down from the chariot,
numerous valiant soldiers holding weapons, came out of the jewel
with chariots, flag-staffs, horses, swords, bows and quivers.
82. From among the powerful soldiers that came out ofthe
Jewel, fifteen were particularly valorous and were capable of
accomplishing anything in battle.
83-84. O auspicious lady, I shall tell you their names.
Suprabha, Dipratejas, Surasmi, Subhadargana, Sukanti, Sundara, Sunda, Sudyumna, Sumanas, Subha, Suéíila, Sukhada,
Sambhu, Sudànta, Soma —these were the fifteen chiefs that arose
from the jewel.

46 Varüha Purüna
85. Seeing the vast army and its brilliant leader they closely
fought with various weapons in their arms.
86. Their bows glittered like gold and arrows were bound
with gold in their feathered parts. Their sharp swords, powerful
missiles and lances fell (on the enemies).
87. Chariot encountered chariot; so also elephant, horse
and foot-soldier of high valour attacked their counterparts.
88. Likewise, abusing each other, the mighty soldiers in the
two armies entered the array. Thus the war became horrible
producing a flood of blood and deviated from the path of the
righteous.
89. In the tumultuous war, the king's minister fell in a swoon
and soon embraced death with his army.
90. When the minister died, king Durjaya himself rushed
to the spot along with horses, chariots and soldiers and continued the battle with those who arose from the jewel.
91. In the fight the king also faced very many reverses.
92, Then, hearing that their son-in-law was in the warfield, Hetr and Prahetr brought an army there.
93-95. In that army, O Earth, the leading demons were
Praghasa, Vighasa, Sanghasa, Asanisaprabha, Vidyutprabha,
Sughosa, Unmattàksa, Agnidatta (Agnidamstra), Agnitejas,
Bahu, Sakra, Pratardana, Viradha, Bhimakarman and Vipracitti; these fifteen having strong weapons with them were the
chicfs of the demons.
96. Each of them had a large army. These chiefs with
miraculous power fought with the jewel-born soldiers.
97. Satejas (Dipratejas) pierced Vighasa with three arrows.
Likewise, Suraámi struck Sanghasa with ten arrows.
98. Subhadargana shot five arrows at Aganiprabha. So did
Sukanti and Sundara on Vidyutprabha and Sughosa respectweiy,
$9. Sunda pierced Unmattaksa with five arrows and cut
his bow with a pointed shaft.
100. Sumanas fought with Agnidamstra and Suveda
‘Sukhada) with Agnitejas. Similarly, Sunala (Subha) with
Bahu (Vayu) and Sakra and Sudanta with Pratardana.
101. After a terrible fight in which weapons were hurled
on each other incessantly, the demons were killed by the jewelborn soldiers.

102-103. As the fight became extremely terrible, sage Gauramukha came there collecting the Samit and Kuśa grass (for
his daily rituals). Seeing the wonderful and horrible war in which
huge aimies were fighting and seeing Durjaya standing by,
the sage stood near the gate in deep thought.
104. Finding that his jewel was the cause of that huge battle,
sage Gauramukha meditated on God Visnu.
105. Suddenly, there appeared before him the God, clad
in yellow garment and seated on Garuda and asking him what
he might do.
106. With folded hands the sage replied to Him: “Please
kil this sinful Durjaya and his army."
107-108. Then he threw his fire-like disc (Sudaráana)
towards them. Within a moment the king and his army and
the demons were reduced to ashes completely.
109-110. After this, the God told sage Gauramukha. **This
race of demons is killed within a minute (nimisa) and so this
forest will be called significantly Naimisaranya. This will be an
abode of Brahmins.
111. In this forest, I will be known as Yajfiapurusa (Sacrificia] Man) and sacrifice is to be offered here always.
112. In Krtayuga these fifteen jewel-born leaders will be
born as kings."
113. After saying this, the God disappeared. The sage also
went to his hermitage in great joy.
CHAPTER TWELVE
Narayana Offers a Boon to Supratika
Varüha said:
l. Hearing that so many men were reduced to ashes in the
fire of (Visnu’s Sudarsana) disc, king (Supratika) became most
unhappy and he thought of what he might do.
2. Then an idea came into his mind: ‘‘Visnu in the form of
Sri Rama is here on mount Citrakita.
3-4. I will extol Visnu, the Lord of all the world, uttering

48 Vardha Purana
His names." Thinking thus, the king went up the sacred mountain Citraküta and recited a hymn.
Supratika said:
3. ‘“Obeisance to the great God Rama the lord of the people,
the imperishable, the ancient, having the form of Siva (auspicious), the origin of all beings, the destroyer of the enemies of
gods, the dispeller of all sorrows of his devotees and the
bearer of Laksmi (goddess of wealth, on his chest).
6-7. O God, it is you bearing the forms of all beings that
always bestow lustre to alllustrous things. In earth you (appear)
with five qualities (colour, taste, touch, sound and odour);
in water with four (omitting odour); in light with three (omitting taste also) ; in air with two (omitting colour also) ; and in
ether you are present as the person of sound. You are the moon,
sun and fire. lt is said that in you this world lies in a latent
form.
8-9. As the world rejoices being installed in you, you are
well known as Ràma (the delighter). The man who has the raft
in the form of meditation on you is not drowned in the ocean of
the worldly life which is full of waves of pains and terrible
with the fish and crocodiles in the form of senses. Therefore,
you are contemplated on as Rama in hermitages. O Visnu,
when the Vedas are lost, you take the form ofa fish (and recover
them).
10. In the end of Yugas, O all-pervading God, you in the
form of Fire, take many shapes and cover all directions.
Similarly, on the eve of churning the ocean, O Madhava, you
take the form of a tortoise.
11. There is nothing like you anywhere. All the best things
are born from you, Janardana. O great God, you pervade the
whole universe, and all worlds, and all directions are your
creations.
12. You are the primordia! and ultimate lustre, where else
can I seek shelter? First, only you were there (in the vast cosmos).
Then, out of you, Mahar (Intellect), Ahankara, (Ego), water,
fire, air, ether, mind, intellect and three qualities were born.
Everything originates from you.
13. All this world is pervaded by you. I take you as the
primordial Man. Be victorious, O great God having thousand

y
hands, having the forms of all the worlds and the Lord of all.
I bow to you, O great Rama.”
14. Pleased by this hymn, the great God appeared before
king Supratika and asked him to choose a boon.
15. Then the king hurriedly prostrated before the great God
and requested him: “O God of gods, please give me union with
yourself."
16. As soon as he said this, the great king attained union
with the God. Meditating on the supreme soul, the king got
liberation from his bondage of enormous actions and attained
identity with the supreme soul.
Varüha said:
17. Thus I have told you a part of what cccurred in the age
of Svayambhuva (Manu). No one can tell easily all that occurr-
. ed then, even if he has thousands of tongues.
18. O auspicious lady, I have told you this ancient story
from mere memory. Drops of water from the ocean which fall
in many places form valuable later on.
19. What was narraced by Brahma and Narayana cannot
be easily narrated by us. It is difficult to picture in the mind his
primordial form.
20. In sea there are numerous grains of sand, and in earth
numerous particles of dust. Even if they can be counted, it is
impossible to count the doings of God.
21. O lovely damsel, I have told you a part of the story of
Narayana in Krtayuga. What else do you want to know ?
CHAPTER THIRTEEN
Rules for Sraddha
Earth said:
l. It is wonderful to learn that those soldiers arose from the
jewel to help sage Gauramukha. What is the further fruit of the
boon ?
2. Who is this great righteous sage Gauramukha ? Seeing
the actions of God what did the great sage do ?

50 Vardha Pur ana
Varüha said:
3. Secing what was done by the God, the sage with a view
to worshipping him went to the same forest.
4. There is an important Tirtha Prabhasa by name, sacred
to Soma, wherein the God (Visnu) who destroyed demon
is meditated on by pious men.
5. There the sage worshipped Visnu in the name of Daitvasüdana (destroyer of demons). The great sage Markandeya
came to him who worshipped Lord Visnu Narayana.
6. Seeing Markandeya coming towards him, sage Gauramukha welcomed him in great joy with vencrable offerings ana
the water for washing his feet.
7. When sage Markandcya sat on the seat of Kusa grass
sage Gauramukha asked him: “Tell me, O great sage, what
shall I do ?"
8. Hearing this, the great saintly Brahmin Markandeya
told sage Gauramukha in gentle and soft words.
Markandeya said:
9, The first preceptor of all gods is Narayana. Brahma
was born from him and he (Brahma) created seven sages.
10. Brahma asked them (the seven sages) to sacrifice for
him, and it is known that each of them sacrificed himself before
him (Brahma).
1l. Then Brahma cursed them, although born from himself,
for their rushing to rash actions just out of emotion. Since vou
committed this serious mistake, all of you will, no doubt, be devoid of knowledge.
12. Thus cursed by Brahma, those seven sages created sons
and then went to heaven.
13. And those sages, the knowers of Brahman, went to
heaven; their sons offered them oblations without any delay.
14. All the seven sages, the mind-born sons of Brahma,
appeared in the sky in aerial cars seeing the oblations offered to
them with mantras.
Gauramukha asked:
15. O Brahmin, who are those Pitrs (the manes) ? Which
is the time (for those offerings) ? How many groups of manes
are there in that world ?

m
Markandeya replied:
16. There are some good personages who inereasc the Somajuice for the gods. Those seven gods, Marici and others, are
called the manes in heaven.
17. Of these, four have form; the remaining three are formless. I shall tell you their worlds and creations.
18. There are worlds by name Santanaka whercin live the
luminous manes of the gods. The gods perform sacrifice there for
those manes.
19. These who get out of this world, attaining cternal worlds,
aftcr a thousand years, again, take birth as knowers of spiritual
wisdom.
20. With the memory of the past, they practice yoga, and
as a result, attain liberation with little chance of rebirth.
21. These were the manes in obsequial ceremonies who
increased the yogic powers of vogins. All of them were full of
yogic powers.
22. Therefore, O excellent yogin, obsequial rites have to
be offered to yogins. This is the first and great creation of the
gods (who drink Soma-juice).
23. These great Brahmins (manes) live in heaven with
a single body. They have to be offered sacrifices bv the inhabitants of the earth.
24. Marici and others are sons of Brahma. They should
perform sacrifice for Maruts. The Maruts who are respected by
people are to be pleased with sacrifices by those who are calied
Kalpavasikas.
25. Then there are Sanaka and others. They were born out
of Virat, and they performed penance. There are seven groups
of them. This is the line of the manes.
26. These are also to be pleased with sacrifice separately
by castes other than Sidra. With the sanction of the remaining
three castes, Südra should also sacrifice for the manes.
27. For Südras there are separate manes belonging to the
same caste. We do not gct among the manes, the liberated yet
living.
28-29. By the knowledge of special Sàstras and the Pur? as,
cf the Rsis, and knowing those that arose from him as worthy to
accept sacrificial offerings, Brahma at creation, recalled his sons,

52 Vardha Purána
and they attained liberation due to their spiritual knowledg:
itself.
30. Kasyapa and others among Vasu and the like, Vasava
and others among caste-holders and the whole class of Gandharvas and the like (are also the manes).
31. O great sage, I have told you the creation of the manes
in a general manner. By even a crore of years this cannot be told
in. full.
39. Now I shall tell you the time of the Sraddha rites. O
great Brahmin, please listen to this.
33-34. After procuring the required money for the Sraddha
ceremonies and choosing a Brahmin of particular qualities for
the purpose, the rites are to be done on the occasions of Vyatipata (the day of full-moon when it falls on a Monday), Ayana
(the solstices) Visuva (the equinoxes)eclipses of the sun and the
moon, and of all signs of zodiac (Rà$i) at the time each is entered
into by the sun.
35. And at those times also when calamities occur due to
stars and planets, when one has an inauspicious dream, and when
new vegetation appears, Sraddhas may be performed, if desired.
36. When Amavasya (the new-moon day) occurs in conjunction with the asterisms Ardra, Svàti and Visakha the manes
get pleased with offerings for eight years,
37. When Amavasya occurs in conjunction with the asterisms Pusya, Raudra (Ardra) and Punarvasu, the manes, if
worshipped, get pleased for twelve years.
38. Those who wish the manes to be gratified should perform obsequial rites when Amavasya occurs in the asterisms
Dhanisthà, Pürvà bhàdrapadà and Satabhisak. This is a rare
occasion even for the gods.
39. ‘Those who wish to have an unending result should perform obsequial rites when Amavasya occurs in the above nine
asterisms, Then their merit docs not come to an end even after
crores of years.
40-41. There are yet other sacred times proper to the Sraddha ceremonies. They are—ihe third day of the month Vai-
$akha, the ninth day of the bright fortnight in the month Kàrttika, the thirteenth day of the dark fortnight in the month Bhadra
pada, the fifteenth day of the month Magha, the eclipses of the
sun and the moon and all the four Astakas (the eighth day of

q
each quarter of the year) and at the commencement of the two
Ayanas or solstices (Uttarayana and Daksinayana).
42. A man, purified by austerities, should offer the manes
the water mixed with sesamum. Then, itis deemed that he has
done the Sraddha rites for a thousand vears.
43, On rare occasions the Amavasya in the month Magha
joins with the asterism Satabhisak. This is the most happy dav of
the manes. But, O Brahmin, this is not for a man of inferior
worth.
44. O great Brahmin, if this occurs in the asterism Dhanisthà, then the relatives should give offerings to their manes on
that day. That will give them great satisfaction for thousands of
years.
45. If oblations arc offered to the manes when this occurs
in Parva Bhadrapada, they will be highly gratified and for a full
yuga they will get deep sleep.
46. By offering cows and the like on the banks of the Ganges,
Satadru, Vipasa, Sarasvati, or Gomati the dissatisfaction ofthe
manes, if any, can be removed.
47. The manes would wish: When at the end of the dark
fortnight of the rainy season the thirteenth day coincides with the
asterism Magha, we may be gratified with sacred waters in the
pilgrim centres by our sons and other relatives.
48. Purified heart and wealth, auspicious time enjoined by
the rules, the nature of the performance and ardent devotion—
these in the performance of Sraddhas fulfil men’s wishes.
49. Listen to the verses sung by the manes on this and then
act in accordance with them.
30. “May that kind of man take birth in our family who is
intelligent and contented and who without any consideration of
monetary benefit offers us oblations with Pinda rice.
51. Who, if he is rich, munificently offers jewels, garments,
vehicles, all the wealth, well and pond to Brahmins for our
Sake;
92. Who if not well-to-do gives meals to Brahmins at the
appropriate time in great devotion according to his means ;
f 33. Who, being unable to give meals, gives venerable Brahmins wild Saka-leaves and a little money;
34. Who, being unable to give even this, offers to a great
Brahmin. in devotion a handful of dark sesamum ;

54 Varaha Purana
55. Who offers us a handful of water with seven or eight
seeds of sesamum in great devotion;
56. Who gives with devotion to cows a daily measure of
food obtained from somewhere, and in the absence of it, pleases
them caressing and so on;
57. Who, if he is not in a position of doing any of these,
goes to the forest and with palms joined in reverence utters aloud
this hymn to the protectors of the quarters like the sun, namely;
58. “I have no money, wealth and the like to offer in the
Sraddha rites; I prostrate before the manes. May they be contented with the respect I offer in devotion.”
59. This is sung by the manes, and shows the results of
performing Sraddha and not doing so, The Brahmin who does
according to this, does rightly the rites for manes.
CHAPTER FOURTEEN
Rules for Sraddha
Markandeya said:
l. O Brahmin sage, this was said to me by the intelligent
Brahmin, younger brother of Sanaka, son of Brahma. Listen to
me now:
2-4. One who knows all the six Vedangas, who worships
the three sacred fires at three sandhyas (morning, noon, and
evening) and who offers libations with the three madhus (sugar,
honey and ghee), the priest (of the family), nephew, daughter's
son, father-in-law, son-in-law, maternal uncle, saintly Brahmin,
particularly one who worships the five sacred fires, disciple,
matrimonial relative and one who respects his parents—these
are fit to be invited in Sraddha.
5-7. One who troubles his friend, one having bad nails,
a brown-toothed Brahmin, an outrager of virgins, one who donates his sacred fire, one who sells Soma-juice, one who is cursed,
a thief, a slanderer, a priest who conducts the religious ceremonies for all castes, a hired teacher, a charioteer's teacher, onc who
has married another’s wife, one who does not look after his
parents, one who is born of or looked after by a Sidra woman,
the husband of a Sidra girl, and one who performs worship to

an idol for the sake of others—none of these deserves to be
invited for Sraddha rites.
8. The invitation should be made on the day previous to
the Sráddha. They should be fed first (on the day of the Sraddha) and afterwards the sannyasin and others who come
uninvited.
9. The feet of the Brahmins who come to the house should
be washed, and then with pavitra (the ring of Kusagrass in hand)
they should be seated.
10. The performer of Sraddha should offer oblations to the
manes in odd numbers and to the gods in even numbers or to
both these each in single.
11. Likewise, he should perform Sraddha rites for his
maternal grandfather with great devotion, along with Vaisvadeva (an offering to all deities made by presenting oblations to
fire before meals) or may perform Vaisvadevika rites alone.
12. The Brahmin representing (Visvedevas should be scated to face the east and the Brahmin representing the father and
paternal grandfather should be seated to face north.
13. Some sages say that a Brahmin should perform both.
these (for the gods and the manes) separately whereas others
hold that both should be done together.
14. Giving KuSa-grass as the seat and receiving with arghya
(oblation consisting of rice, Dürvà-grass etc.) the performer
should invoke the gods with their permission,
15. He should offer oblations to the gods with barley water.
16. After worshipping the manes with incense and sacred
lamps according to rules, he should do so to the Pitrs with
apasavya (the sacred thread in the left position).
17. Then getting Anujüà (the permission of the priests)
offering Kuśa grass divided into two with Mantras he.should
invoke the manes, Then he should give arghya and the like with
Sesamum and water with apasavya.
18. With the permission of Brahmins, one should honour
also the Brahmin traveller who comes there for food at that time.
19. Yogins with a view to helping others, roam about everywhere in this earth in various forms without disclosing their
identity, i
20. Therefore, a discerning man should worship the guest

56 Varáha Purana
coming on the occasion of obsequial ceremonies. O great Brahmin, a guest who is not honoured destroys the fruits of the $ràddha,
21. With the permission of those Brahmins, one should put
rice devoid of salt and the like thrice into the fire.
22. The first invocation is—-‘this is to the fire who bears the
oblation of food’. Next—‘this is to be conveyed to Soma having
the manes.’
23. The third invocation is to Vaivasvata. The remnants
of offerings should be put a little in the plates of Brahmins.
24. Then he should give sumptuous food to them and request
them in pleasant words to cat well and to their heart’s content.
25. He should feed them in all sincerity, and they should
eat silently, pleasantly and steadfastly.
26. The Raksoghna mantra (mcant to drive away the
demons) should be recited. Then spreading sesamum as seat on
the earth he should say—‘‘these Brahmins are verily the manes
to whom we have offered ghee (in fire).
27. May my father, grandfather and great grandfather
invoked in this home, feel fully satisfied.
28. May my father, grandfather and great grandfather
invoked by these Brahmins fecl fully satisfied.
29. May my father, grandfather and great grandfather fee!
fully satisfied with the Pindas (balls of rice) offered by me on
this floor.
30. May my father, grandfather and great grandfather feel
fully satisficd with the devotion shown by me.
31. May my maternal grandfather feel satisfied. May all
other manes feel satisfied. May Visvedevas (all gods) attain
great satisfaction. May the demons perish.
32. Here is God Visnu, the god of sacrifice, the leader of all
sacrifices, the enjoyer, the eternal soul. By his presence, may all
demons get away quickly.”
33. When these Brahmins are thus made satisfied, some rice
should be scattered on the floor, and then each of them should
be given in’ the hand water scparately for dcamana (sipping).
34-35. With the permission of these who are thus fully fed
to satisfaction, he should take all balls of rice from the floor
with water and offer them with the sacred water of the manes in
a sacred tirtha (pond or river) for the maternal grandfathers.
36. Then he should offer the pindas sanctified by flowers

tn
s]
and incensc, on darbha grass placed with tip facing South near
the remnants. The first pinda is to be for the departed father.
37. The next one is for the grandfather and the third to the
great grandfather. At the root of the darbha, the pinda should
be smeared with añjana paste.
38. Likewise, for the maternal mancs also, one should offer
balls of rice along with incense, flower and the like, and give
water for dcamana to the Brahmins who are fed.
39. He should with devotion utter Svastimantras (words of
propitiation) and then give daksind (money).
40. After giving them this, he should make them recite
Vaiévadevika (mantras of blessings). He should say: "May
Visvedevas (all gods) be pleased”.
41. When those Brahmins say “‘let it be so", he should
request them for their benedictions. Then he should send off Visvedevas first and then the manes.
42. Similarly, in the case of maternal manes also along with
Visvedevas in the matter of feeding, giving money and sending
offi from Pádya onwards.
43. Inthe rites for maternal manes the Brahmin having
spiritual knowledge should be sent off first and then the others.
44. The performer should accompany them upto the outer
door and then, with their permission, return. After the Sraddha
ceremonies he should offer oblations to all deities.
45. "Then he should take his food with revered men, servants and relatives.
Thus should the wise perform Sraddha for the paternal and
maternal manes. Propitiated at the Sraddha, the manes will
grant all desires.
46. These three are sacred in Sraddha, namely grandson,
Kutapa (the afternoon time suitable for the performance of sacrifices to the manes) and sesamum; so also the daksind of silver
and proper reception and the like.
47. The performer of Sraddha should avoid three things
towards the Brahmin who is to be fed on the occasion—anger,
Boing to the street, and hurry.
18. O Brahmin, all the deities, fathers, maternal grandfather, and the family are purified by the performer of Sraddha.
49. The manes depend upon the moon and the moon on

58 Varaha Purána
yoga. Therefore, O Brahmin, Sraddha joined with yoga (concentration of mind) is considered superior.
50. A (single) yogin amidst even a thousand Brahmins,
liberates all these that are fed in the Sraddhas as well as the
performer.
51. These are the rules of Sraddha generally described in
all Puranas. One should free oneself from bondage of worldly
life with the knowledge of duties like this.
52. Knowing this from Gauramukha, the sages performing
penance got liberation. You also attain the same.
53. I have told you this, O great Brahmin, since you asked
me this. What else should be attained by him who meditates on
Visnu after performing Sraddha for the manes." Nothing else is
there, no doubt, more than the Sraddha for the manes.
CHAPTER FIFTEEN
Sage Gauramukha’s Liberation after Uttering the Hymn of
Ten Incarnations of Visnu
Earth asked:
l. After hearing the rules for Sraddha ceremonies from
Markandeya, what did sage Gauramukha do?
Varäha replied:
2. After hearing this science pertaining to the manes,
Gauramukha was reminded of a hundred births by the intelligent Markandeya.
Earth asked:
3. Who is this Gauramukha ? Who was he in the previous
births? How did he remember all this ? What did he do recollecting this?
Varāha replied:
4. He was Bhrgu himself in the other birth of Brahma.
This great sage Markandeya was also born in his race.

pn—
5. Brahma told him before: “Taught by your sons you will
attain supreme bliss." Therefore, he was taught by Markandeya.
6. Herecollected his previous births. I shall tell you briefiy,
O lovely girl, what he did after remembering all that.
7. He saw his manes after performing Sraddha for twelve
years and then, O Earth, he began to utter a hymn.
8. Near Prabhàsa, the sacred lake famous in the three
worlds, Gauramukha stood to extol the God, who destroyed
demons.
Gauramukha said:
9. “J extol lord Hari who is Mahendra, Siva, the dispeller
of haughtiness of enemies, Narayana, the best among the knowers of the spiritual wisdom, the ancient being who permeates
the sun, moon, Asvins and destroys demons.
10. I extol him, destroyer of the enemies of gods who took
the form of the primordial fish when the Vedas were lost— the
fish that bore the Earth on its body and whose fin was like fire.
11. May the Lord of gods and the destroyer of demons
protect me, who being the primordial Man took the form of tortoise on his own accord and uplifted the mount Mandara in
churning ocean.
12. May the destroyer of demons, who is called yajfianga
(with sacrifice as limbs) ) by the multitude of gods and Siddhas
and who entered the Talatala (one of the nether worlds) taking
the form of a boar, protect me.
13. May the great destroyer of demons the great yogin who
took the form of the fierce Man-lion (Nrsimha) with a frightful
face and golden hue, protect us.
14. May the short Brahmacàrin with staff and deer-skin who
changed into a measureless huge body with yogic power, transcended the earth and made the sacrifice of Bali ineffective, purify
us.
15. May Hiranyagarbha, the destroyer of demons, who as
the son of Jamadagni and the protector of Brahmins, conquered
the whole world twentyone times and gave it to Kasyapa, protect me.
16. May the destroyer of demons protect us, whose primordial Hiranyagarbha-form attained a fourfold division into Rama
and others (Laksmana, Bharata and Satrughna).

ii,
56 Varàha Purápa
i7. (May the God protect me) who in each yuga took ihe
wonderful form of Vasudeva (Sri Krsna—son of Vasudeva}
to look after gods who were frightened by the haughty demons
like Cànüra and Kamsa.
18-19. May the great God, the supreme soul, who takes
the form of Kalki in every yuga to uphold the caste system whose
form cannot be known by the gods, demons and Siddhas without
the spiritual knowledge and who is worshipped in his assumed
form like the fish, protect us.
20. Obeisance to the exalted Man; obeisance to you again
and again. Kindly lead me to the state of liberation. I bow to
you.”
21. Extolled thus by the sage with great devotion, the God
appcared before him holding the disc and mace.
22. Seeing Him, the soul in the form of stcady knowledge
(Vijhàna) issued out of his body and got merged in the eternal
and attained the state called apunarbhava (without rebirth).
CHAPTER SIXTEEN
The Story of Sarama
Earth. said :
1-4. When Indra, the king of Gods, was cursed by sage
Durvasas to live among mortals, being defeated by the son of
Supratika, what did he and other gods do in the mortal world ?
What did Vidyut and Suvidyut with high yogic power do in
heaven after the fall of Durjava ? Be pleased to tell me.
Varaha said:
5. Defeated by Durjaya, O Earth, Indra with all the gods
and Yaksas and Nagas, first lived in Varanasi in the Bharata
country.
6-7. At that time Vidyut and Suvidvut, O lovely lady, by
the power of yoga generated intensive fever in the lords of quarters.

p
8. Hearing that Durjaya was dead, they brought the submarine fire and rushed to the gods.
9. "Thesc two demons went to mount Himavat with thc army
and stood there.
10. The gods also collected a huge army and discussed about
regaining thc position of Indra.
11-12. Then the preceptor sage Angirasa told the gods;
«First you perform the Gomedha sacrifice and then all other sacrifices. That is the practice. This is my advice. Do follow it.”
13. When he said this, the gods left the cattle to graze and
entrusted Sarama (the bitch of gods) to look after them.
14. Those cows being looked after by Sarama, the dog of
gods, O Earth, went to the place of demons.
15. Seeing those cows, the demons told their priest Sukra:
“See, those cows, O Brahmin, grazing, being looked after by
Sarama, the bitch of the gods. Tell us what we should do now”
16. When they asked him thus, Sukra said: “Steal these
cows quickly; don't delay”.
17. Accordingly the demons took away the cows.
18. When the cows were stolen, Sarama searched for them;
and found out that they were carried away by demons. The
demons realised that Sarama had traced the path of cows.
19. Seeing her they told her in a soft manner: “O auspicious Sarama, please drink the milk of these cows." Then they
gave the milk to her.
20-21. Then the leaders of demons told her: ^O auspicious,
bitch, don't say about these cows of Indra.” Then the demons
left her in the forest. She, then, went quickly to the gods shivering.
22. Sarama prostrated before Indra, the lord of gods.
23. Indra told the gods Maruts: “O mighty gods. vou
please go secretly along with this bitch to find out the cattle.”
Thus they went quickly taking subtle forms.
24. They came back and, O Earth, prostrated before Indra.
25. ‘The king of gods asked: “Sarama, where are the cows?"
Sarama replied: "I don't know”.
26. Full of anger, then, Indra asked Maruts: “O Marut,
where are the cows intended for sacrifice? Why does Sarama
Say so?"

62 Varüha Puréna
27. Then unperturbed, the Maruts reported to him what
Sarama had done.
98. Then the great Indra kicked the bitch in great anger,
29. Saying, “O you fool you have drunk the milk ! The
cows are stolen by the demons.’’, he kicked her again,
30. Asa result of that kick by Indra, Saramá vomited the
milk she had drunk and ran to the place wherc the cows were
held. Indra followed her accompanied by his army.
31. He saw the cows stolen by demons. But the demons
who looked after the cows were very strong.
32. Still they were crushed by Indra's army and so they
gave up their bodies along with the cows. Regaining the lost
cows the king of gods along with his chieftains became delighted.
33. ‘Thus recovering the cows, Lord Indra with great joy
performed a thousand different sacrifices.
34. As he performed these sacrifices, his power also got increased. Then Indra told the army of gods.
35. “O Gods, prepare quickly, to kill demons." Hearing
this, gods got themselves ready in a moment.
36. Then they marched with Indra and inthe battle they
defeated the army of Asuras.
37. O Earth, the few demons that survived the battle,
plunged into the sea struck with fear and completely perplexed.
38. And the great lord Indra followed by gods and protectors of the quarters reigned in heaven as before.
39. The man who hears daily this excellent story of Sarama
attains the fruit of Gomedha sacrifice.
40. Ifa king who lost his kingdom listens to this story intently, he will be able to recover his kingdom like Indra the heaven.
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN
The Story of Mahátapas
Earth said :
l. Those great men who were born of the gem were given
a boon indeed by the God in Tretayuga.

2. How was the birth of those kings to be ? What were their
deeds ? Teil me this for each.
Varáha said:
3. O Earth, listen to the origin of the great king Suprabha
who rose from the gem.
4. In Krtayuga there lived a powerful and noble king
named Srutakirti.
5. Suprabha was born as his son, and was named Prajapala.
G. One day he went to thc forest infested with wild beasts,
and saw there the great hermitage of a sage.
7. In it an exceedingly virtuous sage by name Mahatapas
was performing penance giving up food and meditating on the
Supreme Soul.
8. King Prajapala felt desirous of entering the hermitage,
and he quickly went into it.
9. In the grand hermitage, there were pleasant bowers
beautiful like the moon with attractive creepers surrounded by
hovering bees. The very pathway was fine with big trees on the
sides.
10.* ‘The ponds with full-blown red lotuses looked like
celestial women with rosy feet, who had left Indraloka and come
there.
11. In the protruding branches of trees which looked very
symmetrical, were blossoms of flowers with honeyfed blackbees
and a variety of birds reposing as if fully satiated.
12. There were many kinds of trees like Kadamba, Nipa
Arjuna and Sala, nourished by the householders and served by
sweet-voiced birds.
13. The hermitage was surrounded by Brahmins with families and by sacred smokes coming up from the sacrificial fire.
The elephant of vice there was killed by the lions of virtue.
14. Seeing there different objects like these, the king entered the hermitage. In it he saw the great sage Mahatapas, the
champion of duty and seeker of Brahman, sitting on a seat of
kuga-grass, and resplendent like the sun.
15. Seeing the sage, the king forgot his hunt. The sight of
the sage diverted his good mind to righteous action.
1, ‘The stanzais very corrupt.

64 Varáha Purana
16. The sage received Prajapala with words of welcome and
oftered him a seat.
17. Then the king prostrated before the great sage and
sat on his seat. O Earth, then he asked him:
18. “Tell me, O Great sage, what should be done by those
plunged into woes of worldly life, but wish to overcome it."
Mahdtapas said:
19. Those men who are plunged into the ocean of worldly
life have to obtain a firm raft to cross it. They have to make the
lord of all the three worlds this raft with proper worship, homas,
gifts and prescribed sacrifices and meditations and fixed to the
liberated souls by the strong strings of their vital airs.
20. One who bows to Narayana, the destroyer of hell and
the Lord of gods in devotion, attains the imperishable abode of
Visnu, free from all sorrows.
Prajapala asked:
21. O sage, the knower of all that is righteous, tell me precisely how the eternal Visnu is worshipped by those men who
wish to get final emancipation.
Mahdtapas replied :
22. Hear from me, O intelligent king, how Visnu, the lord
of all the yogins, is pleased at men and women.
23. The Vedas say that Brahma and all other gods and. the
manes all of whom were in the cosmic egg were born from Visnu.
24-25. Agni, A$vins, Gauri, Ganapati, Nagas, Karttikeya,
Adityas, Mátrs, Durga, Diks, Kubera, Visnu, Yama, Rudra,
Candra, Pitrs—all these were bora of the lord of the worlds,
according to their importance.
26. All these beings were in Hiranyagarbha’s body. Buc
each became highly egoistic.
27. ‘Their loud claims, ‘I ain competent’, ‘I have to be propitiated by sacrifices’, were heard in the assembly of the gods like
the roar of agitated occan.
28-29. Among them, O king, Agni (fire)stood up and said:
“Sacrifice for me; meditate on me. This body created by Brahma
will perish without me. Hence I am great".

30. So saying Fire left the bodv; but even when he disappeared, the body did not perish.
31. Then Agvins. the personified forms of Prana and Apana
airs said: “We are important and so we have to be pleased with
sacrifices".
32. Saying this they stood apart leaving the body. The
body was a bit emaciated, but it did not perish.
33. Then Gauri.the speech, said : "Importance is in me",
So saying she also left the body.
34. Even without her, the body remained, though without
speech. Then Ganapati, the space, said:
35-36. “Without me no body stands for long in course of
time." So saying he also left the body. Without him too, the body
did not perish.
37. Finding the body devoid of holes, all. the dhátus of the
body said thus:
38. “In our absence the body cannot bear itself?” —saying
this, all of them left the bodv.
39. Even without them the body was looked after by Purusa
(the Supreme Soul). Seeing that, Skanda who is the embodiment
of Ahamkara (ego) said:
40. “Without me the body cannot exist". So saying he left
the body and stood away.
41. Without him too, the bodv stood intact and as if emancipated. Seeing this, Sun, the Aditya, got angry.
42. “How can this body stand without me even for a moment ?" Uttering thus, he left the body. Even then the body was
not destroyed.
43. Then the group of passion and the like called as Mothers
said: “The body cannot bear itself if we leave this." They left
the body. Then also the body was unaffected.
44. Then Durga well known as Maya (illusion) said angrily:
"without me there is no life (Bhüti)". Saying this Durga disappeared from the body. Even then the body was not destroyed.
45. Then the quarters stood up and said, "No doubt, withOut us, nothing could be done".
46-47. Within a moment they went away. Then Kubera,
the air occurring in the middle of the body, also left the body and
Went upwards.

ra
66 Varaha Purana
48. Then Visnu, the mind, said: “Without me this body
cannot stand even for a moment. Saying this, he also disappeared.
49. After this Yama said: “I protect all this. When I leave
this body nothing should be there.”
Saying this, Yama went away. Even then the body was not
affected,
50. Then said Mahadeva, the subtle cause of beings: "I
am great and without me the body will not be there.”
51. Saying this Siva (Mahat) left the body. Then alsa
it was not destroyed.
52. Seeing this the Pitrs (sense organs) said: “As long as we
along with other life-airs live in this, this body stands; otherwise
it will be destroyed." So saying they [eft the body and disappeared.
53-54. Saying this, Agni, Prana, Apana, Akasa Dhātus,
Aharhkara, sun, desire, Maya quarters, Vayu. Visnu, Dharma,
Sambhu and the sense-organs left the body.
55. Still the body stood as if liberated, being protected by
Purusa in the form of Soma, the moon.
56. When the imperishable Soma consisting of sixteen digits
stood thus, the body with its qualities stood up and began its
work as before.
57. Seeing the body protected bv Sarvajna (Purusa) as
before, ‘all those deities of the body got ashamed and extolled
that great god.
58. O king, all those entered into the body and took thei:
own positions and extolled Him: “You are the Fire, you are
Prana, Apana and Sarasvati (word).
59. You are Akaga, Kubera and Dbàtus of the body. You
are Aharhkàra; you are the Sun, and the Matrgana.
60. You are the Maya and the earth, you are Durga, quarters and Indra; you are Visnu and Dharma. You are the victor
and the vanquished.
61. You are called Paramegvara (Supreme lord) in its
liberal sense. Otherwise how could this happen (the body
remaining unaffected) when we left it.
62. When we gave up the body, O God, there was none else
but you. So please protect us,

_—X—~——sS—sh
63. O Creator, having created yourself in our forms, don't
change positions."
Thus extolled by them, the God was pleased very much.
64. He told them: “T have created vou for mv sport. I have
onlv one purpose to be gained by vou.
65. If you don't like your form, then vou divide it into two
and stand formless in the beings on earth and with form in the
world of gods. In duc course attain dissolution (in the Supreme
soul) yourselves.
66. Do not be egoistic any more with regard to voursclves
in the body. I shall assign you vour names now.
67. Agni will be Vaisvanara; Prana and Apana. Aśvins;
Gauri-Himavat’s daughter.
68. The qualities like those of the earth will be Ganapati.
These various other beings are the dhatus (the essential elements)
of the body.
69. Skanda Karttikeya will be the ego. At the end Durga
will be the last of the causes for the body and will be Mava (the
power of illusion).
70. These ten virgins will be ten quarters. Kubera will
be the air.
71. This mind will be called Visnu, no doubt; so aiso
Dharma (righteousness) will be Yama.
72. The ‘great principle’ (Mahattattva) will be Mahadeva.
The sense organs will be the manes, no doubt.
73. This moon will be always in the Jamitra, no doubt.
Thus I have described the Vedanta-purusa (Vedantic Man)
in the form of Narayana.” Al! the gods sat on their respective
seats. And the God thus finished the account.
74. I have told you, O king, about God Visnu who is of
such prowess and who can be known only through the Vedas.
What else do you want to know? :
SEU E ee
l. Jamitra is the seventh house in horoscopy. This is taken as the house
Concerned with matrimony. The passage indicates that moon will govern
marital relations.

68 Varaha Purdna
CHAPTER EIGHTEEN
(The Origin of Fire)
Prajapala said:
1-3. O great sage, how did Agni, A$vins, Gauri, Ganapati,
Nagas, Skanda, Aditya, Candra, Matrs, Durga, Diks, Kubera,
Visnu, Dharma, Siva, Pitrs and Candra take birth ? How did
all these deities of the body attain concrete forms ?
4. Also tell me, O sage, for each of these the food, name, and
the sacred day of the month, on which each gives to the people
the result of their worship. I wish to know all this secret.
Mahdatapas said:
5. When the omniscient soul in the form of Narayana played
himself with the form attained by the yogic power, he willed in
himself the desire to enjoy.
6. Then the great cosmos (Mahabhita) was stirred, the
wonderful basis of all existence (water) arose.
7. Pleased at this, he willed its transformation, and during
this transformation, there arose the great fire.
8. This fire was burning with countless flames and with
noise. The effulgent fire underwent transformation and then
arose from it the terrific wind.
9. By the transformation of air, Ether (spacc) came into
existence with sound as its distinctive quality.
10. The space, air, heat and water interacted among themselves.
11. The water was dried by the heat and wafted by the wind,
and the sky was made distinct.
12. 'The whole mass thus solidified and hardened. Thus
came into being this earth and later the trees and the rest in it.
13. By the harmonious combination of these four (water,
fire, air and space) as well as by the preponderance of each,
the earth attained five qualities established in it. Getting hard
thus, it became the Brahmanda (the universe).
14. In it, God Narayana having four hands and a fourfold
form wished to create different beings taking the form of the
creator.

15. Thinking about it as he did, he could not properly conceive it. Then he became extremely angry.
16. From that anger arose fire with a thousand flames and
it came to burn the Creator himself. It was then told by him as
follows.
17-18. “You bear (vaha) the offerings kavya (for the gods)
and kavya (for the manes)”. Thus Fire became Havyavāhana.
But fire was itself hungry and asked Brahma (the creator): what
it might do. Brahma replied. "You will be gratified in three
ways.!
19. Propitiated by daksinàs (offerings of money) first, you
carry the daksinas to the gods. So you be Daksinágni.
20. You take what is offered to the gods in sacrifices all over
the three worlds. So, O fire, you are Havyavahana.
21. ‘Lhe body is said to be Grha (a home). Since you are
its Lord, you be Garhapatya everywhere.
22. When propitiated by offerings you lead all men to final
liberation. Therefore you be Vaisudnara.
23. Dravina (money) is power and it is wealth. Since. you
give this, you are Dravinodáh (giver of money).
24. Sins disappear always. ‘The word nis stands for certainty.
Therefore and also since you are everywhere, O Agni, you will
get (the name) Tejas (splendour).?
25. Since you blaze when Jdhma (the bundle of sacred
sticks) is placed in you and air blows, you are yourself /dhma.
26. O my son, surely people who sacrifice will propitiate
you with offerings in these names in great sacrifices.”
CHAPTER NINETEEN
The Greatness of Fire
Mahdtapas said:
l. I have told you incidentally the greatness of Visnu's
A l. This refers to the three sacred fires—Garhapatya, Daksinatya and
havaniya,
2. This verse is highly corrupt and does not yield any cogent sense.
o i 5
me matter seems to be missing between the two lines,

79 Varaha Purana
manifestations. Now I shall tell you about the importance o:
tithis (dates). Listen to me.
2. The great fire born from Brahma’s anger asked Branma
“O lord, please give me a day in which I shall get the praise o:
the whole world”.
Brahma said:
3. O fire, the foremost among the gods, Yaksas and Gandharvas, you were born on Pratipad, the first day (in the fortnight).
4. On account of this that day will be honoured by all gods.
Thus the day Pratipad is yours.
5. On that day the gods and manes will be gratified by the
offerings given in Pràájàpatya form.
6. Four kinds of beings, men, beasts, demons and gods,
together with Gandharvas, will be pleased if you are gratified.
7. Your devotee who on the Pratipad day, fully fasts or
takes milk alone, gets the great result of beng worshipped in
heaven for twentysix aeons.
8. And he will be the powerful, beautiful and wealthy in this
life and after his death he will be respected in heaven as a king.
9. The fire went to the hermitage given by Brahma and kept
quiet.
10. The man who hears this story of the birth of fire getting
up early morning, no doubt, will be free from all sins.
CHAPTER TWENTY
The Origin of Asvins
Prajàpála said:
1. The fire was thus born from the great Brahma. How
did Prana and Apana in the form of twin gods Ásvins take birth ?
Mahátapas said:
2. Marici was Brahma’s son, the foremost among the fourteen forms assumed by him.

Be
3. His son was the great sage by name Kasyapa. Being
himself a creator, he became the father of gods.
4. He got as his sons twelve suns, (ådityas) all endowed with
the spirit of Lord Narayana.
5. These suns (Aadityas) are the twelve months while Visnu
himself is the year. Martanda is the most lustrous among those
twelve suns (adityas).
6. Tvasta gave him his gracious daughter named Samjfia
in marriage. He got two children by her, Yama and Yamuna.
7. But unable to bear his virility she became a steed fast
as the mind and leaving her shadow (Chaya) there, went to the
Northern Kurus.
8. The Sun had union with Chaya who was in form and
complexion similar to her and got two chidren—Sani (Saturn)
and Tapati.
9. Chaya did not treat all these children equally and so
Martanda became angry and told her: “O dear, don’t show partiality among your children."
10. Yet, she did not change her attitude. Then Yama said
to his father with great sorrow:
Il. “O my father, she is not my mother. She always behaves towards us as an enemy. In a stepmotherly manner, she
behaves cruelly towards us, but kindly towards her own children.
12. Hearing Yama's words, Chaya lost her temper and
cursed him: “You will shortly be the king of the dead”.
13. Hearing this, Martanda consoled him saying: “You
will be the judge in deciding merit and demerit. And you will
have the position in heaven as a guardian deity"!
14. Then, agitated by Chàyá's anger, he cursed Sani
(Saturn). “O my son, you will be of cruel eye on account of your
mother's fault".
15. Then, the Sun rose up and went to Northern Kurus to
see Samjiià and saw her there in the form of a mare.
16. Then he too took the form of a steed and united himself
with her.
SL EP _
l. Yama is the dikpala guarding the southern direction.

72 Varaha Purana
17. In that daughter of Tvasta in the form a marc, he,
in the form of the horse, laid the glowing seed, but that came
out split into two.
18. These in the uterus were Prana and Apàna but attained
embodied forms due to boon.
19. Since they were born from Tvastà's daughter who was
in the form of a mare (Asva), these sons of the Sun by her are
praised as the Aśvins.
20. The Sun himself was the Creator, the daughter of
‘Tvasta the power (Sakti) by name pardpara. These two were in
her body first formless and then they attained their form.
21. Then the gods Asvins approached the Sun and asked
him: "What shall we do ?”
The Sun said:
22. “O my sons, worship the Creator Narayana with devotion and get from Him a boon”.
23. Advised by the great Sun thus they, performed severe
penance reciting the Brahmapara hymn.
24. After so many years, Brahma, the manifestation of
Narayana, was pleased by their penance and he gave them a
boon with extreme joy.
Prajapala said:
25. O great sage, I wish to know the hymn recited by the
A$vins on Brahma.
Mahátapas said:
26. Hear from me, O sinless king, the hymn to Brahma
recited by the A$vins and the fruit that they obtained by the
recitation of that hymn.
27. “I bow to you, the being free from action, free from the
world, one without any base or dependence, devoid of qualities
and beyond vision, and one free from the feeling ‘I’ and ‘mine’.
28. O Brahman, great Brahman, dear to Brahmins, O man,
Supreme Man, excellent Man; O god, great god, excellent god;
O immovable, one who preserves harmony.
29. O being, great being, lord of beings; O Yaksa, great
Yaksa, lord of Yaksas; O Guhya, great Guhya and Lord of

Guhyas: O soft, very soft, and lord of all that is soft.
30. O bird, lord of great birds, O demon, lord of great
demons ; O Rudra, lord of great Rudras; O Visnu, lord of great
Visnu; O Supreme lord Narayana; I bow to you, O Prajapati
(creator ).”
3]. Extolled by those twin gods, the Asvins, the Creator
was pleased very much and said thus:
32. “Please woo a boon which is rare even to the gods and
by which you can go everywhere in heaven."
Asuins said:
33. “O great Creator, please give us our share among gods.
Please give us the position of gods who drink Soma-juice and an
eternal place in the generality of gods."
Brahma said:
34. You will attain all these—beauty, lustre, uniqueness, the
position of physicians for all beings, and a place among gods
entitled to drink Soma-juice in the worlds.
Mahdatapas said:
35. All this was given by Brahma to Aávins on the second
day. Therefore, the second (Dvitiyd) is the best day among all
days.
36. The man who wishes to attain beauty should eat flowers
only on this day. And if he does this for a year in all purity, he
will attain great beauty of form.
37. One who hears this account of the origin of Aávins
daily, attains all those qualities of Agvins and will be freed from
all sins and blessed with sons.

74 Varáha Purána
CHAPTER TWENTYONE
The Origin of Gauri
Prajapala said:
1. O wise sage, how was Gauri extolled on account of the
boon, and how did she become part of the body of the great god
(Rudra) ?
Mahátapas said:
2. Formerly, the virtuous god Brahma, in order to create
different beings, entered into deep thought, but could not gain
the end.
3. He then became angry, and from the anger arose the
valiant Rudra (lit. ‘roarer’), so-called because he was crying
loudly at birth.
4. To him Brahma gave as wife the auspicious virgin his
daughter, the goddess of speech, named Gauri.
5-7. He was extremely happy at getting this beautiful damsel, but when Brahma persuaded him repeatedly to create, he
found himself incapable of it and entered into water (to perform
penance) feeling that what could be done through penance alone
could not be accomplished without it.
8-9. When he thus remained within water, Brahma lodged
the beautiful Gauri within his own body, and then, desirous of
creation, produced seven beings! from his mind and also Daksa,
and progeny was thus increased.
10. The children of Daksayani (lit. Daksa's daughter?)
are the gods and (their king) Indra, eight Vasus, Rudras,? Ādityas and Maruts.
11-12. The beautiful Gauri, formerly married by the great
Rudra was then given by Brahma as daughter to Daksa. She
thus became Daksayani.
13. Daksa was pleased with his daughter’s children and in
1, These are the seven sages Marici, Atri and others.
2. Presumably identical with Aditi.
3. This group of gods should be taken as different from the Rudra
created by Brahma earlier.

y
order to make them prosperous, he started a sacrifice to propitiate
Brahma.
14. Inthat the functions of the priests were taken upon
themselves by the sons of Brahma, namely Marici and others,
in a specific manner.
15-17. Marici became Brahman (priest), Atri the supervisor, Angiras the Agnidhra (priest to kindle fire), Pulastya
the Hota (to recite Rgvedic hymns), Pulaha the Udgata (to
recite Saman hymns), Kratu the Prastota (to assist the Udgata),
Pracetas the Pratiharta (also to assist the Udgata) and Vàsistha
the Subrahmanya (priest). The Sabha (assembly) was constituted of Sanaka and others.
18. The person to be propitiated by the sacrifice was Brahma
himself and the sacrifice was for the world. The persons to be
honoured were the sons of Daksa’s daughter, Rudras, Adityas,
Angiras and others because they are the visible Pitrs, and once
they are pleased, the whole world is pleased.
19-20. ‘The sacrificial offerings were meant for the Devas,
Adityas, Vasus, Visvedevas, Pius, Gandharvas and Maruts,
and they received fully all that was offered in the sacrificial fire.
21. At that time, suddenly arose Rudra, the anger-born
son of Brahma, trom the water into which he had formerly
entered.
22. Hecame out of the water completely pure, full of
knowledge and resplendant like a thousand suns.
23. He shone with his penance which enabled him to visualise the whole universe. Then took place the creation of five
things, the celestrials and the four kinds of mortals.
24. The creation by Rudra occurred quickly. O great king,
now listen to the account of that creation.
25-26. When Rudra came out after performing penance in
the water for ten thousand years, he saw the earth full of fine
vegetation and big forests and peopled by human beings and
beasts.
27. He then heard the recitations of the priests in Daksa's
house and the words of praise in the hermitage.
28. At that the omniscient and resplendent god (Rudra)
became extremely angry and said:
29. “Formerly I was created by Brahma to be fully potent

76 Varadha Purana
to create beings and I was asked to start the process. Who has
done that action now”.
30-31. So saying he roared aloud in high rage and from his
ears issucd forth huge flames and from them came out with weapons ghosts and goblins in crores.
32. After creating such an army equipped with numerous
weapons he produced a chariot of Veda and Vidya (knowledge).
33-34. In it two deer were the drawing horses, the triple
principle? was the central pole, the three sandhyas (morning,
noon and evening) the three shafts (wheels), dharma the axle,
air the sound, day and night the two flags, merit and demerit
the flagstaffs all the Vidyas together with Kalas the seat and
Brahma the charioteer.
35. Gayatri was the bow, the syllable Om the bowstring,
the seven notes of music the arrows for that great god.
36. With all this array and equipment the valiant god flew
to Daksa's sacrifice.
37. As Rudra was descending from the sky, there was a
loud noise at which the mantras of the priests were lost.
38. Seeing this portent the priests said in fear; “A great
danger has befallen us; let the gods get ready for battle".
39. A big demon created by Brahma is coming here to partake of the special offering in this sacrifice".
40. Then the gods addressed their maternal grand-father
Daksa: “O Sire, please tell us what you think we should do”.
Daksa said:
41. “Take up your weapons immediately and wage a war".
42. Told thus, A big battle was then fought by the gods
with the army of Rudra, carrying various weapons.
43. The vampires, goblins and imps holding different
weapons fought with the guardian deities.
44. 'The Bhütaganas came out of hcaven and entering
Yama's abode showered arrows, fierce swords and axes.
45. They attacked Devas with firebrands and bows and
arrows in fury before Rudra.
46. Then in that fierce battle Rudra pierced with an arrow
1. Signifies God, Soul and matter.

both the eyes of Bhaga.
47. Seeing Bhaga thus made eyeless, Püsà got angry and
engaged Rudra in fight.
48. Seeing Püsà aiming an arrav of arrows, Rudra caught
him and pulled out his tecth.
49. At the sight of these fallen teeth the army of gods took
to their heels.
50. Seeing the army scattering away Visnu, the younger
brother of Aditya, addressed it.
51. “Where do you run away giving up your valour, pride
and position. Why don't you remember your calling, family
and responsibility ?
52. Since you get your life from Brahma, you prostrate
before that great god."
53. Saying thus, Visnu wearing yellow garment and bearing conch, disc and mace, seated himse!f on Garuda.
54. Then occurred the thrilling battle between Visnu and
Rudra.
55. Rudra hit Hari with the Pagupata weapon. Infuriated
at this Hari hit Rudra with the Narayana weapon.
56. These two weapons fought cach other in the sky intensively, cach to gain victory over the other. The fight continued
for a thousand divine years.
37. One was having a crown on his head, and the other
tresses of matted hair. One blew the conch, the other sounded the
drum.
58. One was holding a sword and the other a staff. One was
glowing with the Kaustubha gem, the other was shining with
ashes all over thc body.
39. One was whirling the mace, the other the pole. One
shone with gems round the neck and the other with a string of
skulls.
60. One was wearing the yellow garment, the other a girdle
of serpents. Thus were the two opposing weapons, one Visnu’s
and the other Siva’s in essence.
61. Seeing them combating each other, Brahma appealed
to them to calm down.
62. They did so and Brahma told Visnu and Rudra.

78 Varáha Purdna
63. “Both Visnu and Rudra will attain prominence in the
world. This sacrifice which was smashed, also will be completed.
64. Daksa will attain fame in the world because of the progeny”.
65. Telling thus to Visnu and Rudra, Brahma, the grandfather of the world, asked the people to give Rudra a share in the
sacrifice.
66. (He said): “The portion to Rudra is declared to be the
foremost in the Vedas. So you Devas, praise this great god Rudra
the destroyer of the eye of Bhaga and the teeth of Pisa.
67. Quickly sing his praise with all his names, and he will
be pleased to grant you boons.
68. Thus asked, Devas bowed to Sambhu and sang his
praise in great reverence.
The gods said:
69-70. “Bow to the uneven-eyed, bow to the three-eyed,
bow to the hundred-eyed, bow to the bearer of trident, bow to
the bearer of Khatvànga,! bow to the holder of staff.
71. You are resplendent like the shooting flame as well as
like a crore of suns. We were foolish before seeing you, we are
enlightened now at your sight.
72. Bow to the three-eyed Sambhu, the remover of all distress, holder of the trident, with mouth fierce, lord of all gods,
the essence of purity, immanent, omnipresent, O Rudra, be
pleased.
73. O lord of the worlds pervading the universe, O fierce
destroyer of the teeth of Pisa, with neck full of hanging serpents
with expansive body and bluish neck, be pleased.
74. O great lord endowed with all virtues, the crusher of
Bhaga's eye, be pleased to receive the main share of the sacrificial
offering and save us all.
75. O lord that arose from Brahma, O lord of Uma, O destroyer of Tripura, O holder of the bowl, with ash smeared in
body, save us from all fear.
76. We find in your person, O Lord of gods, the entire
l. A mace with a skull at the head.

creation, the Vedas with their Pada, Krama etc.,! and the
Vedangas and all branches of knowledge.
77. “O Bhava, O Sarva, O Mahadeva, O Pinàkin, O Rudra,
O Hara, we all bow to you, protect us all".
78. Praised by the gods in this way, Mahesvara was much
pleased, and he spoke thus to them all:
Rudra said:
79. "Let Bhaga get back his eye and Pisa his teeth. Let the
sacrifice of Daksa also attain completion.
80. At my sight, O Devas, vou have all become animals to
me and J take you all to me. I thus become your master.
81-82. I am also the prime master of all knowledge. Being
thus the master of all you animals, I will attain the name Pasgupati (lord of all beasts) in the world.
83. Those who sacrifice for me will have the observance
called *Pasupati ”.
84. When Rudra spoke thus, Brahma told him affectionately with a smile:
“Certainly you will be hailed as ‘Pasupati’ in the world, and
the world will gain renown by your name.
85. The entire world will surely worship vou.
86. The clever Brahma then spoke to Daksa: “As already
decided, give Gauri in marriage to Rudra”.
87. Saying so he gave the highly auspicious Gauri to Rudra
in the presence of Daksa, thus showing him a great favour.
88. When Daksa's daughter was thus married, Brahma
gave to Rudra an abode on mount Kailasa before all gods.
89. Rudra with his attendant Bhütas then went to Kailasa.
90. Devas in great joy returned to their places and Brahma
with Daksa went to his abode.
l. Pada, Krama, Jatà, Ratha and Ghana are methods of rendering the
Veda, each word being differently combined with the preceding and following words.

80 Varaha Purana
CHAPTER TWENTYTWO
The Marriage of Gauri
Mahátapas said:
1. While they were thus living there, Gauri got angry towards Rudra, thinking of the enmity between him and her father.
2. She thought of the place! taken away by him and his
smashing the sacrifice and decided to give up her body.
3. She thought: “Being born in his house,? I shall attain the
lord by penance. How can I go to my father Daksa who has
nothing with him now?
4. 'Thinking thus, the beautiful wife of Rudra, went for
penance in the great mountain Himalaya.
5. Then she allowed her body to gradually emaciate and
finally burnt it by the fire from within, and then she became the
daughter of Himavàn by name Umi, also called Krsna.
6. Thus born with a beautiful and auspicious body in the
house of Himavan, she again performed penance meditating on
the three-eyed Rudra.
7. She remained in penance for a long time with the resolve:
“This (Rudra) is my husband".
8. When she was thus performing severe penance in the
great mountain Himavan, god Mahesvara felt propitiated and
appeared in her hermitage in the form of a Brahmin.
9. The Brahmin was very old with crippled limbs and was
faltering at every step. He came near her with difficulty and
told her: **O gracious lady, I am extremely hungry, please give
me some food”.
10. Asked thus, Uma, the daughter of the mountain told
him: “O Brahmin, I shall give you fruits to eat. Please take
your bath and then eat well”.
1l. At this, the Brahmin got down for bath in the river
Ganga which was flowing close by.
12. While bathing there, he created in it an illusory shark,
big and fierce, and that caught him.
13. He then told Uma showing her the shark that had
caught him.
]. Kailàsa,
2. In the house of Himavan,

14. “O girl, a great mishap has happened. Save me from
this shark before I am mutilated by it”.
15. Hearing this Parvati thought: “I touch Himavàn as
my father and Siva as my husband. In this state of mind, purified by penance, how can I touch this Brahmin ?
16. If I don’t hold him by the hand and drag him out of
the water, no doubt the sin of being responsible for the death of a
Brahmin will betall me.
17. Any other transgression of righteousness can be atoned
for, but never being the cause of a Brahmin’s death”. So saying
she hastened towards him.
18. Going there quickly she held the Brahmin by the hand
and dragged him out of the water. rie then assumed his real
form.
19. The same lord Rudra to please whom Parvati was performing penance was now holding her hand.
2U. Seeing him she was bashful, and remembering her act
of giving up her body, did not speak.
21. Seeing Gauri silent, Rudra said with « smile: “Having
held me by the hand, how can you give me up ?
22. If you are going to make this vain for wedlock, then I
ask you, the daugüter of Brahma, to give me food (for which I
came).
23. O lady, I am not joking; I have told you what I should”.
She then said with a smile:
24. “O great lord of the three worlds, all my endeavour has
been to attain you. I worshipped you as my husband in my previous life.
25. Now too you are my husband, and none else can be so.
But my master is now my lather, the lord of mountains. I shall
go to him.
26. Duly getting his consent. you will marry me".
27. So saying, she went to her father Himavàn and with
palms joined in reverence she told him thus.
28. “Rudra, the smasher of Daksa’s sacrifice, who was my
husband in my former life, has now become, as a result of my
penance, full of love for me.
29. He came to me in my hermitage in the guise of an old
Brahmin and asked me food.

82 Vardha Purána
30. I asked him to have his bath (before the meal), and
accordingly he descended into the Ganges fur the purpose. He
was then caught by a shark and he cried for help.
31. Being afraid of incurring the sin of killing a Brahmin
(i£ I did not help him), I pulled him out by the hand, and then
he showed me his real form.
32. He then told me that our hands have been mutually
held together (and thus the marriage has been effected), and that
I should not have any hesitation.
33. Being thus told by the great Sankara, 1 have now come
to tell you.
34. Whatever is proper now, you may kindly do quickly”.
35. Hearing these words, the king of mountains was much
pleased, and he told his daughter:
J6. “O daughter, 1 am indecd blessed in this world in that
Rudra has by himself chosen to become my son-in-law. I have
become the father of a worthy daughter.
37. I have now been placed at the head of Devas by you,
my daughter. Please wait for a while ull I return".
38. So saying, the king of the niountains went to Brahma,
the grandfather of all Devas.
39. Bowing to him in reverence, he said that he proposed
to give his daughter Uma in marriage to Rudra.
40. Brahma, the grandfather of Devas and progenitor of the
world, gave his consent.
41. ‘Then the king of mountains rushed back to his home.
He then invited Tumburu, Narada, Haha, Hühü, Kinnaras,
Asuras and Raksasas.
42. The mountains, rivers, hills, trees and plants all came in
their personal forms tosee Himavan’s daughter and her marriage
with Sankara.
43. The earth became the altar for the marriage, the seven
seas the ritual pots, the sun and the moon the lamps, and the
rivers the carriers of water.
44. Making thus the materials for the marriage, the king
of mountains sent mount Mandara to Rudra.
45. Called by Mandara, Sankara came quickly and he took
the hand of Uma in marriage according to the rites.
46. In that ceremony Parvata and Nàrada sang, the Sid-

dhas danced, the trees showercd flowers and celestial damsels
danced in joy.
47, In that marriage wherein holy water was flowing,
Brahma, in consideration of the world, told Uma, “O daughter,
you will be a model for other women in the world”, and told
Rudra *you will be a model for other men".
48. So saying to Uma and Rudra, Brahma went to his abode.
49. Thus said sage Mahatapas to Prajapala who askcd
him. (He continued).
50. “The origin of Gauri as well as the account of her marriage has been thus said to you."
51. All this happened on ‘Trtiya tithi. ‘Therefore on Trtivà
tithi day give up salt in your food.
52. Amanora woman who fasts on that day gets prosperity.
53-54. A man or woman in utter misery, if hc or she gives
up salt and listens to this, attains all desires, acquires great wcalth
and gains health, brilliance and opulence.
CHAPTER TWENTYTHREE
The Origin of Vinàyaka
Prajapala said:
l. O good sage, I am cager to know how Ganapati was
born. Be pleased to tell me. l
Mahātapas said:
2. Formerly, the hosts of Devas and all the sages and saints
began to do things to gain the result.
3. It was seen that the actions of the righteous faced numerous impediments to success while the actions of the unrighteous
were unimpeded.
4. Then the gods and manes seriously deliberated on the
matter and thought of ways for creating obstacles in the actions
of the bad.
5. It occurred to Devas then that they may very well consult

84 Varaha Purana
the highly intelligent Rudra.
6. They, therefore, went to him in Kailasa and, bowing to
him, said in great respect.
The gods said:
. 7. “O great god with three eyes and trident in hand, it
behoves you to create (a being) for obstructing the actions of the
bad".
8. Thus requested by Devas, Rudra with great pleasure
looked at Uma for a moment.
9. When he was looking at Uma in the presence of gods,
he was worried why no form of his was seen in the sky.
10. “There is the body in earth, there is one in water; so
also in fire and air.
11-15. How is it not there in sky ?" So thinking he laughed.
By the power of knowledge, by what was scen by Rudra in the
sky, by what was said by Brahma formerly as the body of all
beings, by the laughter of Rudra, by all these four in the four
elements Earth and the rest, there arose a boy effulgent with
glowing face, looking like Rudra himself and stupefying Devas
with the charm of his dazzling brilliance.
16. Seeing the person of this gre^t boy, Umà remained with
eyes stuck on him.
17. Looking at the beautiful form of the boy and thinking
of the fickleness of women's minds Rudra got angry and cursed
him.
18. “O boy, you will attain an elephant’s face, protruding
belly and yajfiopavita of serpents”.
19. He cursed him thus in great anger, and then rose up
shaking his body.
20. With each shake of the body, water fell on the earth and
from it arose numerous Vinayakas, elephant-faced and darkcoloured, holding various weapons.
21-22. The Lord (Rudra) then got annoyed and wondered
when even one of them could do extraordinary things, how much
more will the multitude do ?
23. When Devas were thus thinking, the earth became agitated by Vinayakas. Brahma then rose up in the sky in his vehicle
and said:

24. “O gods, you are lucky. You have been blessed by the
wonderful Paramesvara (Rudra). The actions of demons will
be surely hampered”.
95. After telling them thus, he turned to the holder of fire
in the palm (Rudra): “O Lord, let him who was born out of
your mouth (i.c., laughter), Ganapati, be the chief of these
Vinayakas, and let the rest be his followers.
26. Occupying the sky as well, let him be in the other four
elements with you. And let the sky with all its parts be for him.
27. You be the master to give him great weapons."
When Brahma departed after saying thus, the three-cyed
(Rudra) told his son:
28-29. “May you have the names Vinayaka, Vighnakara,
Ganeáa and Bhavaputra, and may all these (other) Vinayakas
with fierce eyes and prowess be your servants, and let them with
their flowing ichor and massive body, bring about success in all
undertakings.
30. In sacrifices and ceremonies to propitiate the gods, and
in other deeds, you will bestow success if you are worshipped in
the beginning, and hamper the whole thing if not done so".
31. Then Rudra as well as Devas poured holy water on him
in golden pitchers and declared him king of the Vinayakas.
32. The Devas then praiscd him in the presence of Rudra.
Devas said:
33. “Bow to the elephant-faced, bow to the leader of ganas
(group of Vinayakas), bow to Vinàyaka (the chief), bow to the
valiant. i
34. Bow to the creator of obstacles, bow to the serpent-girdled, bow to him who rose from the mouth of Rudra, bow to the
pot-bellied. O lord of all, we prostrate before you to remove all
obstacles”.
35. The great Gaņeśa thus praised by the gods, and anointed by Rudra, became the son of Uma.
36. All this occurred in the tithi Caturthi. Hence Caturthi
is the most important of all tithis.
37. O king, on this day if one cats only sesamum and worShips Ganesa, the lord will certainly be pleased.
38. He whe recites this stotra and he who listens to it never
encounter any obstacles.

86 Varaha Purana
CHAPTER TWENTYFOUR
The Origin of Serpents
Earth said:
1. O Varaha, be pleased to tell me how the mighty serpents
arose by contact with your body.
Varaha said:
2. After hearing about the origin of Ganapati, king Prajàpala asked the sage (Mahatapas) in a soft voice.
Prajāpāla said:
3. O sage, be pleased to tell me how the crooked serpents
were born and how they got the enmity of Garuda.
Mahátapas said:
4. When Brahma was creating, he first conceived in his mind
his son Kasyapa to beget Marici.
5. Daksa's beautiful daughter Kadrü became his wife. In
her be begot many valiant sons.
6-7. Ananta, Vasuki, Kambala, Karkotaka, Padma, Mahapadma, Sankha and Kulika were the chief among them.
8. The earth was filled by the progeny of these.
9. They were all crooked, heinous and violent, and with
their fangs stung people and reduced them to ashes.
10. Their contact was reducing human population day by
day severally.
ll. Finding their kind thus becoming steadily reduced, men
went to the great god Brahma, the refuge of all.
12. They flocked to him who was seated on the lotus, and
told him.
13. “Protect us, O god, from these venomous serpents.
Please realise that (otherwise) all men and beasts will be soon
reduced to ashes.
14. What was created by you is being annihilated by the
serpents. Please do what is fit to avert this danger".

Brahma said:
15. Doubtless I shall give you protection. You may all go
to your homes in confidence.
16. When they were all gone, Brahma called the serpents
Vasuki and others, and cursed them in great anger,
Brahma said:
17. Since you are annihilating my progeny, the men, in
another age, in the Svavambhuva manvantara, by a curse of the
mother, you will face a serious decline.
18. Said thus by Brahina shivering with anger, they fell
at his feet and implored:
The serpents said:
19. O god, we were made crooked by nature by you. Our
venom, cruelty, and the use of eye as weapon were all given by
you. The intensity of all that was given may be reduced.
Brahma said:
20. Granting that I have created you crooked, what right
have you to eat away men every day ?
The serpents said:
21. O god, prescribe us a limit and allot us separate regions.
22. Hearing the words of the serpents, Brahma said: “I
shall make for you an agreement with men.
23. Listen with attention my verdict.
24. Patala, Vitala and Sutala are the regions allotted to
you. You may all have your abode there.
25. I ordain that you shall enjoy all pleasures there and
remain there till the seventh manvantara.
26. Atthe beginning of Vaivasvata manvantara you will
become the relations of Devas as well as of Garuda the wise.
27. Then all your progeny will be consumed by fire but for
your own selves there will be no danger.
28. The end of such serpents as are fierce and insolent will
certainly occur, but not of others. You may eat and bite a person
if he is so destined, and also to retaliate when somebody injures
you,

88 Varáha Purana
29. You should move away in fear from persons who recite
the mantras, or take in the medicine or wear the garudamandala
(yantra) (all these being precautions against snake bite). O Earth,
otherwise you will bring about your own disaster",
30. Thus said by Brahma, the serpents went to the netherworld allotted to them.
31. And gaining in the end, Brahma’s relenting mood, they
remained in Patala with satisfaction.
32. All this happened on the Paficami tithi. So this tithi is
auspicious and capable of removing all sins.
33. If one remains austere on that day, gives up all that is
sour in food and bathes the (images of) Nagas in milk, they become friendly towards him.
CHAPTER TWENTYFIVE
Origin of Skanda
Prajapala said:
1. O great sage, how was Skanda born out of Ahamkara
(Ego) ? Please clear my doubt in this matter.
Mahdtapas said:
2. From Purusa, considered as the highest of all Tattvas.
arose Avyakta which is of three kinds.
3. Between Purusa and Avyakta, there arose Mahat which is
also known as Ahankara.
4. Purusa is called Visnu, and is also known by the name
Siva. Avyakta is Uma or Sri (Laksi).
5. By the union of these two (Purusa and Avyakta) arose
Ahankara, also known as Senapati and Guha. Listen O king,
I shall narrate to you his origin.
6. The first is Narayana. Out of him arose Brahma, and
then Svayambhuva, and others like Marici from the sun.
7. Thereafter came creation consisting of gods, demons,
Gandharvas, men, birds, beasts and all other beings.

8. When the creation was thus progressing, the powers of
gods and demons began to fight cach other in order to gain victory.
9. Among the demons there were strong leaders of warlike
Hiranyakasipu, Hiranyaksa, Vipracitti, Vicitra, Bhimaksa and
Kraufica.
10. These mighty warriors were gaining victory over the
gods in the battle every day.
1l. Seeing the defeat of gods, Brhaspati said: ‘O gods, your
army is without a proper leader.
12. It is not possible for a single Indra to manage the whole
army. So quickly scarch for a commander."
13. Thus told, the gods went to Brahma and prayed to him
to give them a commander.
14. Brahma then entered into serious thought to find out
what he could do in this predicament of Devas, and his mind
then fell upon Rudra.
15. Then led by Brahma, Devas, Gandharvas. Rsis, Siddhas and Caranas went to mount Kailasa.
16. Seeing there the great god Siva, the lord of all beings,
Indra and the other gods praised him.
The gods said:
17. O Mahe$vara, the three-evcd god, lord of all beings, we
supplicants bow to you. O lord of Uma, lord of the worlds,
lord of Maruts, protect us all.
18. O god everlasting and holding the trident in hand, and
illumining the whole world with the rays of the moon on the locks
of matted hair, protect us who have come to you out of the fear
of demons.
19. You are the first of gods, the best of men, Hari, Bhava,
Mahe£a, the destroyer of Tripuras, all-pervading, the enemy of
demons, the most ancient, the bull-bannered. O great god, protect us.
20. You are the husband of Parvati, and the great lord
worshipped by all gods. You are Ganega and the lord of all
beings. For averting danger to us, protect us from the fierce
demons,
21. You are established in Tattvas like the Earth; parti-

90 Varaha Purana
cularly you are of the nature of sound in the sky. You are hidden
two-fold in fire, threefold in water, fourfold in earth and fivefold in qualities.
22. In the tree you are of the nature of fire, in stone you are
of the nature of truth, in sesamum you are of the nature of oil.
O Mahesvara, protect us who are oppressed by demons.
23. O three-eved god, when there was no stem of the universe, and there was no sun, moon or Indra, then you alone remained beyond the purview of any reasoning.
24. O Jord of gods, wearer of the garland of skulls, bearer
of the crescent moon on the head, resorter to the cremation
ground. smearer of ashes all over the body and encircled by
serpents, you arc capable of protecting us.
25. You are the Male and the beautiful daughter of the
mountain is your Encrgv. You are fierce to the whole world with
your trident, but the three sacrificial fires (Garhapatya, Ahavaniya and Daksina) remain in your three eyes.
26. In the form of your matted hair remain all oceans, all
great mountains and all rivers. The whole universe is your body,
though men without proper inner vision see only the physical
aspect.
27. You are Narayana, the source of the universe. Similarly,
you are the great Brahma. By the difference in the Gunas and
difference in the fires and by the difference in the yugas you remain thrcefold.
28. O lord, all these chieftains of the gods now seek your
favour. O you Rudra, who shine with ashes, we bow to you again,
be pleased to save us all.
Mahátapas said:
29. Thus praised by Devas, Rudra asked them as to what
he was to do.
The gods said:
30. O great god, give us a commander. That is the desire
of Brahmà and others.
. Rudra said:
31. O Gods, be free from anxiety. I shall give you a com-

mander. Good time will befall the people.
32. Saving thus, he sent away Devas and then excited the
Sakti (Energy) in him for producing a son.
33, By this excitement there arose Kumara glowing like
fire, holding Sakti (lance), the embodiment of knowledge.
34. O king, the origin of Kumara is different in different
manvantaras.
35. What remains in the body as Ahankara, the same appeared as Senàpati for a purpose.
36. When he was born, Brahma together with Devas worshipped him and Siva.
37. The Senapati was thus propitiated by all the gods,
sages and Siddhas. He then asked gods to give him a plaything
and a pair of companions.
38. Hearing this, the great Siva said: “I shall give a cock
as your plaything and Sakha and Visakha as your followers.
You are the leader of all beings and you become the commander
of the army (of Devas)".
39. Then Rudra and other gods all praised profusely Skanda
the commander.
The gods said:
40. “O lord, Mahcsvara's son, six-faced, cock-bannered,
the issue of fire, Skanda, may you be the commander of the army
of gods.
4]. O Kumara, a terror to the enemies, the smasher of the
Kraufica mountain, son of Krttikà, son of Siva.
42. © the foremost of all beings, giver of joy to fire, son of
the lord of all beings, three-eyed god, we bow to you.”
43. Thus extolled by Devas, the son of Siva grew up and
became resplendent like the dozen suns and of matchless valour.
44. O king, he illumined the whole world by his effulgence.
Prajápála said:
45. How is it that you referred to him as the son of Krttikà,
son of fire, and the son of six mothers ?
Mahátapas said:
46. What I narrated rclates to the first birth of Skanda.

92 Varaha Purana
But the gods, by their omniscience knew about the future also
and extolled him accordingly.
47. In the second birth of Skanda, Krttika, Fire, Mothers
and Parvati were the causes of his origin.
48. O great king, I have told you the secret of the birth of
Ahankara (as Skanda) and this is a secret which pertains to sclfknowledge.
49. Skanda is a great god and he dispels all sins. During
his anointment, Brahma allotted to him the Sasthi tithi.
50. On that (Sasthi) day, if one worships him with concentration of mind, and eating only fruit, he becomes blessed with
child if he is childless, and attains wealth if he is poor.
51. Whatever man desires, he attains (by worshipping him
on that day).
52. He who recites the stotra of Kàrttikcya (Skanda), in his
house the children get health and prosperity.
CHAPTER TWENTYSIX
The Origin of Sun
Prajápála said:
l. O Brahmin, how did light attain embodiment ? Please
clear my doubt in this matter.
Mahdtapas said:
2. When this eternal soul, the power of knowledge, desired
to form a second, there arose light.
3. This was known as Sürya (Sun) and Bhasvan and all
the radiance contained in it, illumined the threc worlds.
4. Init were seen all gods, Siddhas and sages. Since it was
self-born, the appellation Sirya came into vogue.
9. From it the latent lustre assumed a body. This is called
Ravi by the Vedic secrs.
6. Since it illumines all the worlds from the high sky, it is
called Bhdskara (from bhas to illumine).

7. Since it produces the day (divasa), it is known as Divàkara. Since it is the beginning (ddi) of the universe, it is called
Aditya.
8. From its lustre arose twelve suns, and the principal one
among these now revolves round the world.
9. Seeing it pervade the entire universe, the gods came out
and praised it.
The gods said:
10. “You are the first-born in the world. You protect the
world and also destroy it at the time of deluge. When you rise,
you enliven the whole universe. We always bow to you.
11. You spread light everywhere. You are the heat in sacrifices. You ride in a chariot pulled by seven steeds, fast and never
tardy.
12. You are Prabhákara, Ravi and Adideva, and the soul
of all that is moving and stationary. You are Brahma, Varuna
and Yama. You are also the past and the future, so say the Siddhas.
13. You are the Veda, you are effulgence, you destroy all
enemies. Protect us all who have sought refuge in you. You are
to be known through Vedanta. In sacrifices you are known as
Visnu.
14. Be pleased at our prayer, and protect us all, O God."
159. When thus cxtolled by Devas, the Sun assumed a gentle
form and shed lustre on them.
16. The fierceness thus became reduced for Devas. It was
in the tithi Saptami that the sun became embodied.
17. He who worships Sürya on that day, gets all desires
fulfilled.
18. This ancient story of the sun has been thus narrated to
you, O king. Now, hear the story of Mothers in the first manvaltara,

94 Varáha Purana
CHAPTER TWENTYSEVEN
The Origin of Mairgana
Mahátapas said:
1. There was a powerful demon named Andhaka who had
made all gods subservient to him by a boon got from Brahma.
2. Being made his servants and driven out of mount Meru,
they were very much afraid of Andhaka and sought refuge in
Brahma.
3. Seeing the gods, Brahma asked them the cause of their
arrival there. i
The gods said:
4. O grandfather, four-faced, we bow to you and seck your
protection from Andhaka who is harassing us.
Brahma said:
5. “O gods, I am helpless to protect you from Andhaka.
So we will seek the help of Siva the great god.
6. But I have already given him a boon the effect of which
cannot be nullified and his body will not touch the earth.
7. 'The one person who can kill him is Rudra. So we will
all go to Kailàsa and sce him”.
8. So saying, Brahmà along with the other gods, went to
Siva. Siva rose up and received them and then asked Brahma.
Sambhu said:
9. With what purpose have all of you gods come to me.
Command me soon.
The gods said:
10. “Save us from the wicked and powerful Andhaka”.
11. When the gods were thus reporting to Siva, Andhaka
came there with a big army.
12. His aim was to kill Siva in battle with all the four divisions of the army, as also to kill his consort Parvati.

13. When the demon thus suddenly appeared ready with
all weapons, the gods ranged themselves with Rudra.
14. Rudra then called mentally Vàsuki, Taksaka and
Dhanafijaya, and made for himself a waist girdle of thein.
15. The big demon called Nala then assumed the guise of
an elephant and quickly began to atiack Siva.
16. Nandin (the vehicle of Rudra) indicated the demon by
a sign to Virabhadra (the army chief), who thereupon assumed
the form of a lion and quickly killed him.
17. He then pceled off the skin of that clephant dark like
collyrium and presented it to Siva who wore it.
18. From then on Siva became the wearer of clephant’s
skin.
19. Wearing this skin, and ornamented with the serpents,
Siva with his trident in hand and accompanied by his Ganas,
rushed towards Andhaka.
20. Then started a fierce battle between gods and demons.
the guardians of quarters like Indra, Skanda the commander
and the gods fought in the battle.
21. Seeing this Narada auickly went to Visnu and informed
him of the severe fighting between gods and demons in Kailàsa.
22. Hearing this, Visnu took his disc and rode on Garuda
to that place and fought against demons.
23. Although much relieved at the inte vention of Visnu,
the gods were full of despair and were taking to their heels.
24. When the gods thus became dispirited, Rudra himself
darted towards Andhaka and engaged hiin in a terrible fight.
25. He pierced Andhaka with his trident, but trom the
blood that fell from his body, arose numerous other Andhakas.
26. Atthiswonder, Rudra caught up the original Andhaka
in the trident and began to dance.
27. The other (secondary) Andhakas that came were all
annihilated by Visnu with his disc.
28. With blood and ice in the trident, Rudra rose up in
anger,
29. By this anger, there arose trom his mouth a fierce flame.
The goddess in this form is known as Yogesvari.

96 Varaha Purana
30-32. Then Visnu produced another goddess having his
own form: so did Brahma, Karttikeya, Indra and Yama. Visnu
then created another having his form at the time of raising up
the earth. These together with Máhesvari and Mahendri are
the eight Mothers.
33. Ihave thus told you about the cause as well as the form
of these goddesses.
34. The eight goddesses have as their aspects love, anger,
greed, pride, stupefaction, rivalry, malignity and tolerance respectively.
35-37. Know love to be Yogesvari, anger as Máhc$vari,
greed Vaisnavi, pride Brahunàni, stupefaction Kaumári, rivalry
Indraja, malignity Yamadandadharà and tolerance Varahi.
38. The group love etc., constitute their bodies. They
assumed the forms as I have told you now.
39. When the blood of Andhaka was completely drawn by
these goddesses, his Maya (magical power) became extinct and
he became a Siddha.
40. I have now told you all this which is the nectar of self
knowledge.
41. O king, he who listens to this account of the origin of
Mothers, can get protection everywhere.
42, He who recites this, becomes blessed in the world and
finally attains the world of Siva.
43. "To these Mothers the titht Astami was ordained by
Brahma. By worshipping theim (on that day) with devotion
eating only Bilva, one atcains their favour, wealth and health.
CHAPTER TWENTYEIGHT
Origin of the Goddess Durga
Prajapala said:
1. How was the auspicious Durga, who is Katyayani and
Maya, born with a separate body out of the primordial subtle
State.

p
á
Mahatapas said:
2, Once there was a valiant king named Sindhudvipa, a
manifestation of Varuna. He was performing severe penance in
the forest with a view to begetting a son who would kill Indra.
3. With this determination he stood fast in constant penance
emaciating his body.
Prajápála said:
4. How was he offended by Indra that he wished to get a son
to kill him ?
Mahatapas said :
5. In his former birth, he was the son of Tvasta, and being
immune against the attack of any weapon, he was killed with
foam.
6-7. Killed by foam, he was dissolved in it. Then he was
born in Brahma’s line as the valiant Sindhudvipa, and he performed penance always thinking of his enmity to Indra.
8. After a long time, the auspicious river Vetravati assumed
a beautiful human form and went to the place where the king
was engaged in his austcrities.
9. Seeing her in that beautiful form the king's mind was
disturbed and he asked her who she was.
The river said:
10. “I am the wife of Varuna, the lord of waters and my
name is Vetravati. I came here loving you.
1l. He who rejects a woman who approaches him with
intense desire, although she belongs to another, brings upoa himselfa sin like the one on killing a Brahmin. Knowing this, accept
me”,
12. Said thus, the king enjoyed her heartily.
13. In Vetravati was bora immediately a son named VetraSura who was resplendent like the dozen suns, mighty and brilliant, and he became the king of Pragjyotisa.
14-15. In due course he became a powerful and courageous
youth, much lucky, and he conquered the whole world consisting of seven islands and then, going up the Mera mountain, conquered Indra, then Agni and then Yama.

98 Vardha Purána
16. Indra, when vanquished, went to Agni, Agni when
vanquished went to Yama, Yama when vanquished went to
Nirrti, and Nirrti when vanquished went to Varnna.
17. Varuna with Indra and others went to Vayu, and Vayu
went to Kubera with them. m
18. Kubera went to his friend Siva. The Asura was chasing
them all with his club, and so he too caine to Sivaloka.
19. Siva, knowing that he could not be easily killed, took
the gods to Brahmà worshipped by Siddhas and others.
20-21. There Brahma, having created the world, was engaged in meditating on Gayatri, the Maya of the Supreme Being,
within the water which was flowing from Visnu's fect.
At this Devas cried aloud:
22. “O Brahma, protect all of us Devas and sages, who have
now come to you being harassed by the demon (Vrtra)".
23. Prayed thus, Brahma looked at Devas and contemplated on Maya by whose prowess there will be no Asuras or Raksasas (left to harass them).
24-26. Then appeared there out of the water the great Goddess, a maiden wearing garlands and crown, clad in white cloth,
with eight hands each holding a divine weapon, disc, conch,
mace, rope, sword, bell, bow (and arrow) and with a quiver,
riding on a lion.
27. She fought with the Asuras with great agility for a thousand divine years and with various divine weapons.
28. Finally the demon Vetrasura was killed by her in battle
and there was then a great shout of joy in the ranks of Devas.
99, When the Vetrasura was thus killed, the gods bowed in
reverence. Siva uttered praise.
Mahesvara said;
30. “Hail goddess Gayatri, Mahamaya, the great Devi, the
highly auspicious.
31. I bow to vou O Mahc$vari, mother of Vedas, with celestial sandal smeared over the body adorned with celestial garlands
and necklace, and remaining in letters.
32. (I bow toj you who remain in all the three worlds, in
the three Tattvas, in the three fires, hold the trident, have three
eyes and are fierce in face and eyes.

p33-34. I bow to you Sarasvati, the daughter of Brahma,
Mahamaya, lotus-eved, shedding ambrosia, omnipresent, the
lord of all beings, Svaha, Svadhà,! O Mother.
35. (I bow to you) who arose from Bhava, the Perfect,
resembling the moon in lustre, with resplendent body, the great
knowledge, capable of being known only by the great, the destroyer of mighty demons.
36. O you goddess who rose from the great Intellect, free
from sorrow, the goddess of the hunters, vou are justice, you are
fortune, you are speech, you are the cow, you are the everlasting,
37. I bow to you, O great goddess; you are intelligence, you
are opulence, you are the Pranava, you arc the Tattvas. You do
good to all beings.”
38-39. "When she was thus extolled by the great Rudra and
hailed by the gods, Brahma came out of the water and saw her
fully gratified.
40. Seeing her and knowing that the purpose of Devas had
been accomplished, he spoke to them thinking of the future.
Brahmá said:
41. “Let this beautiful goddess go to the mountain Himavàn
and all of you go there and offer her worship.
42. She should be worshipped with all concentration of
mind on Navami tithi. She will then certainly give boons to the
whole world.
43. On the Navami day if a man or woman fasts taking only
some flour, he or she gets all desires accomplished.
44. He who recites the above stotra by you every morning,
will get all boons from you and the goddess, and will also
surmount all calamities.
45, Having said thus to Siva, Brahma spoke to the goddess:
46. “O goddess, you have to render us another great service
in future by killing the demon Mahisasura”’.
47. Then, O king, Devas left the place and installed her in
the Himalayas and paid her homage. Since she was thus honoured (nandita) she came to be known as Nanda.
48. He who listens to this account of the origin of the goddess
and recites it himself, gets freed of all sins and attains salvation.
. Ll
in fire
‘Svaha’ and ‘Svadh@’ are expressions uttered when offering oblations
respectively to Devas and Pitrs.

100 Varaha Purana
CHAPTER TWENTYNINE
Origin of Diks
Mahdtapas said:
l. “O king Prajapala, listen intently to the story of the
origin of diks (quarters) from the ears (of Brahma).
2. When the first creation was in progress, Brahma became
anxious as to who would hold all that he created.
3. As he was thinking thus, there arose from his ears ten
radiant girls.
4. Among them six were more important, namely Pürvà
(East), Daksinà (South), Pratici (West), Uttara (North),
Ürdhvà (the upward direction) and Adhara (the downward
direction).
5. Then amidst them arose four, particularly attractive,
auspicious and endowed with great dignity.
6-7. They asked the sinless Brahma earnestly to give them
their quarters as well as husbands to live with there.
Brahma said:
8. “O lovely girls, this universe is ten crore broad and in
this vast expanse you can choose to your liking and tell me soon.
9. I shall also create sinless and beautiful husbands for you.
Go you each to the place you like.
10. Thus told, they went to the regions they liked. And
Brahma soon created the powerful guardian deities of the quarters.
11. Then Brahma arranged their marriage.
12-13. One he gave to Indra, another to Agni, the third to
Yama, the fourth to Nirrti, the fifth to Varuna, and one each to
Vayu, Kubera and Igana. Urdhva he himself took and gave
Adhara to Sesa.
14. Then Brahma allotted the tithi Dasami to them. Daéami
became their favourite.
15. He who observes vow on that day taking in only curd,
becomes cleansed of his sins by their favour.
16. He who listens to the account of the origin of Diks,
undoubtedly gets a secure place in the world of Brahma.

CHAPTER THIRTY
Origin of Kubera
Mahátapas said:
1. Listen to the holy story of the origin of the lord of wealth
from the body of Vayu.
2. Vayu was originally within the primordial body, but was
later on given a concrete body with a purpose.
3. That was how Vayu came to possess a concrete shape.
Listen to me for details.
4. When Brahma was creating, there arose from his mouth
this air (Vayu). It was coming out showcring stones. Brahma,
therefore, stopped it and gave it a concrete shape saying “Assume
a finite shape and become calm".
5. When that form was obtained, Brahma ordained that the
new being may be the keeper of the wealth of Devas. Thus came
into being Dhanapati (Kubera).
6. Then being pleased, Brahma allotted to him the tithi
Ekadasi. On that day, if one remains pure and takes in only
uncooked food, Dhanada becomes pleased and gives him everything.
7-8. Such is the body of Dhanapati capable of clearing one
of all one's sins. He who listens to (the story of) his origin or
recites it, accomplishes all desires and attains heaven.
CHAPTER THIRTYONE
The Origin of Visnu
Mahatapas said:
: l. Manu about whom we learn now, is only a manifestation
In specific form of the great Visnu.
2. O king, to the Supreme Being, Narayana, an anxiety
arose, as he was bringing about creation.
3. "T have now brought into being this creation and I have

102 Varaha Purana
to protect it myself. It is not possible to establish the performance
of duties without a body. Therefore, I shall create a body for
the protection of the world’’.
4. O king, while the great Being was thinking thus, the
whole creation appeared embodied before him.
5. Lord Narayana then saw himself entering into it and all
the three worlds constituted his person.
6. Then the Lord remembered the assurance he had to fulfil
and gave boons.
7. “You are omniscient and omnipotent and you are worshipped by the entire world. You be the eternal Visnu governing
the three worlds.
8. You should always look after Devas and do whatever
Brahmà wants. Doubtless you will be knowing everything."
9. The Lord then withdrew to his original form. And Visnu
evoked his own intellect.
10. The great Lord then mentally summoned Yoganidra
(cosmic slumber) and lodging therein all the creatures that
arose out of the senses, entered into slumber.
11. While thus sleeping, there arose from his belly a big
lotus.
12-13. It was spreading over all the seven islands of the earth
and all the waters and forests and extended upto the nether world.
In its interior was Meru and at its top Brahma.
14. Seeing the new being come out of his body, Vayu (air
within) was delighted and produced the atmosphere (and said):
15. “Hold victory over illusion in the form of a conch and
a sword to cut off ignorance.
16. Bear this disc which represents Kalacakra (the course of
the world) and a mace to crush unrighteousness.
17. Let there be round your neck this garland which represents the string of beings, and the sun and the moon in the form
of Srivatsa and Kaustubha.
18. For quick travel you have Garuda. Let the great goddess Laksmi be always with you. l
19. Dvàda& shall be your tithi. Any person who takes in
only clarified butter on that day and meditates on you, attains
heaven, be the person man or woman."

20. He is Visnu and his body is constituted of Devas and
Asuras. From his own self he creates, protects and destroys.
21, In every yuga he pervades everything. He is verily the
Vedantapurusa. No one should take him as an ordinary man.
22, He who listens to this holy account of Visnu, acquires
great fame and attains heaven.
CHAPTER THIRTYTWO
The Origin of Dharma
Mahátapas said:
l. Now listen, O king, I shall tell you about the origin of
Dharma, its greatness and the tithi associated with it.
2. Formerly, the eternal and pure Brahma, who is inferior
only to the Supreme, thought of creation as well as the protection of the created.
3. Then from the right side of his body came out a person
with body smeared with white unguent and wearing white garland and white earrings.
4. Seeing him who was four-footed and bull-shaped, he
said: “You be the foremost of my creation and protect all these
beings”.
5. Thus ordained, he protects the world with all the four feet
in Krtayuga, three feet in Tretayuga, two fect in Dvaparayuga
and a single foot in Kaliyuga.
6. Dharma was established with six divisions in Brahmins,
three in Ksatriyas, two in Vaisyas and one in Südras. This lord
(Dharma) is prevalent everywhere in all the islands in the earth.
7. His four fect are acclaimed as Guna (quality) Dravya
(substance), Kriyà (action) and Jàti (genus).
8. In the Veda he is considered as having three horns, Samhità, Pada and Krama.! He is Orhkàra and has two heads and
Seven hands.
l. Samhita isthe Veda with the words conjoined, Pada with the words
s : as mies :
*Parated, and Krama with each word joined with its succeeding word.

104 Varüha Purana
9, He was bound by the three svaras, Udatta, Anudatta
and Svarita.! Such was Dharma.
10-11. Dharma was persecuted by Soma (moon? desirous
of (getting for himself) Tara, the wife of his own brother Angirasa, and somehow escaping from him, he resorted to the expansive forest.
12-13. When Dharma was gone, the groups of gods began to
wander about desiorus of killing Asuras, being bereft of dharma,
The Asuras too similarly wandered about in the abodes of gods.
14. As a result of Soma’s sin based on the woman, Devas
and Asuras fought cach other with numerous weapons.
15. Seeing them at war with cach other Narada came to
his father Brahma and spoke about it.
16. Brahma then mounted his swan and forbade them from
fighting, and asked them about the cause of fight.
17. They all said Soma to be the cause, and then he was able
to see that his son Dharma had resorted to the forest because of
persecution,
18. Then Brahma went there quickly with Devas and Asuras
and saw him there four-footed, bull-like and white like the moon.
Brahma said:
19. This is my first son, the sage by name Dharma, harassed
by the moon desirous of the wife of his own brother.
20. O Devas and Asuras, propitiate him so that vour
former position may be established.
21. Thus knowing his identity through Brahma, Devas and
Asuras extolled him.
Devas said:
22. “Bow to you, O lord of worlds, moon-like in complexion, bow to you with divine form, the guide to heaven’s path.
23. Bow to you of the form of Karmamarga (the path of
action) and omnipresent. The earth is governed by you, in fact
all the three worlds.
24. The other worlds like Jana, Tapas and Satya are also
I. Udátta is the high tone, Ánudátta the low tone and Svarifa a combination of the two.

governed by you. Without you there is nothing, moving or stationary.
95-26. Without you the world perishes in a moment. You
are (the qualities) Sattva, Rajas and Tamas respectively manifesting in the good, the common and the bad people.
27. Bow to you the bull-shaped one with four feet, four
horns, three cyes, scven hands and threc joints.
28. O lord, without you, we all go astray. So give us the
right path as we are ignorant. You are our great refuge."
29. Thus praised bv gods, the lord of beings in bull’s form,
became pleased and spoke with benignity.
30. By the very look of Dharma Devas became freed
from ignorance and attached to righteousness, So too Asuras.
31-32. Then Brahma said: “O Dharma, from today onwards let your tithi be Trayodasi. He who fasts on that day and
worships you will attain you and become freed of sins.
33. This forest where you have been wandering long will
be known by the name ‘Dharmaranya’.
34. The world will see you four-footed, three-footed, twofooted and single-footed respectively in the yugas Krta, Treta,
Dvapara and Kali, and extending over earth and heaven, protecting the whole universe".
35. Saying this Brahma disappeared while Devas and Asuras
were looking on. They too went to their homes fearlessly.
36. He who recites to others this story of Dharma and he
who propitiates his Pitrs with milky food on Trayodasi, goes to
heaven and remains with gods.
CHAPTER THIRTYTHREE
The Origin of Rudra
Mahétapas said:
1. “Nowyou listen to anotheraccountof the first appearance
of Rudra,” so said the great sage Mahátapas who had cut down
the tree of Adharma (evil) and whose weapon was forbearance.

cu
106 Varáha Purána:
2. The creator with great prowess came into being and realising knowledge to be the greatest principle, was desirous of
performing creation. But seeing that creation did not proceed
forth, he got highly agitated in mind.
3. He was then performing penance, but there came out of
himself a person reddish blue in colour with tawny eyes, valiant
and free from Rajas and Tamas.
4. The person was crying (rudan) and Brahma asked him
not to cry (má ruda). He thus became Rudra (one who cries).
He then said to him that he was competent to carry on extensive
creation.
5. Told thus, he plunged himself in water. And Brahma
then produced mentally his son Daksa who carried on the process of creation.
6. As it was proceeding, Indra performed a sacrifice to
Brahma and then Rudra came out of the water to create the
world and gods.
7. Hestopped the sacrifice and was very angry to see Devas,
Siddhas and Yaksas, and discarding even the beautiful damsel
(Daksa’s daughter), asked who created the world without him.
8. ‘Ha, ha’ he said and there issued forth from his red face
flames of fire and there appeared multitudes of ghosts, goblins
and vampires.
9. When the sky, earth and quarters were densely covered by them, out of his omniscience he made a bow twentyfour
cubits long.
10. He then made the bowstring three-fold and took up
quiver and divine arrows. He then pulled down the teeth of
Pasa, the eyes of Bhaga and the testicles of Kratu.
11. Stripped thus of his testicles, Kratu ran away through
the north-western part of the sacrificial altar. Devas became like
beasts and prostrated before him.
12. Brahma then came there and embraced gods who were
thus prostrating before him, although they were offended by him.
13. Seeing Rudra he said, “O Rudra, enough of your anger,
the sacrifice is obstructed’. Hearing the words of Brahma,
Rudra spoke in anger.
Rudra said:
14. I was formerly created by you. These are also yours.

EE
Then why do they not give me a share in the sacrificial offering.”
This form of mine which arose out of the sacrifice, made these
bereft of knowledge.
Brahma said:
13. O Devas, for regaining your (lost) knowledge may you
all propitiate Rudra by prayers. Let Asuras also do the same.
Rudra will thus become pleased and will give you back your
knowledge.
Thus instructed, Devas praised the great Rudra.
Devas said:
16. * Bow tothe great god, thrce-eyed and red-eyed, wearing
matted hair and crown.
17. Bow to him who is served by ghosts and goblins, who has
the snake as his sacred thread (yajhiopavita), who is sthànu (the
permanent one) and whose mouth is with terrific laughter.
18. Bow to him who uprooted the teeth of Pisa and the
eyes of Bhaga and who will have the bull as his emblem.
19. Bow to Bhairava whose matted hair is tied upwards,
who wears the elephant’s skin and who resides in Kailàsa and
who will kill Tripuras and Andhaka.
20. Bow to him who is fierce with tongues of fire and who
bears the moon on the head.
21. Bow to him the great Lord bearing the sharp trident
who will undertake Kapalivrata and destroy Daruvana.
22. Who is blue-necked, holds trident, has serpents as
bracelets, gives blows with his mighty hands and has a fiery face.
23. Who is the creator of the three worlds, who is the embodiment of sacrifice but destroyed Daksa's sacrifice and who is
known through Vedanta.
24. Bow to Mahadeva, Siva, Sambhu, Bhava, Kapardin,
Karala, Vigvegvara.”’
25. Praised thus by Devas, Rudra the eternal, holding a
fearful bow, told them that he was the god of gods and asked
them to say what he could do for them.
Devas said:
26. Give us, O god, the knowledge of the Vedas and” Sastras

108 Varaha Purana
and also of the sacrifice and its secret, if you are pleased with us.
Mahádeca said:
27. ‘May vou all be pasus (beasts) and I shall be the lord
of beasts. Thereby you will attain moksa’’.
28. The gods agreed and Rudra became Pasupai: (lord of
beasts).
Brahma then spoke o Pasupati with great pleasure.
29-30. “O Rudra, let Caturdasi be the tithi for you. On that
day those who worship you fasting, and later take in only wheat
food, will get vour pleasure and this will lead to their liberation".
31. When thus said by Brahma, Rudra restored to Bhaga,
Pasa and Kratu the teeth, eyes and testicles respectively.
32. He gave to Devas all knowledge.
33. Thus occurred the emergence of Rudra from Brahma.
On account of what was detailed above, he came to be called the
lord of gods.
34. The person who listens to this account early in the
morning, becomes free from all sins and attains the world of
Rudra.
CHAPTER THIRTYFOUR
The Origin of Pitrs
Mahatapas said:
1. O king, listen to the origin of Pitrs I am going to tell
you now.
2. Formerly Brahma, the lord of all beings, desirous of
performing creation in all its variety, thought of kceping all
Tanmatras out of his mind and engaged himself in deep meditation.
3. When he was thus in meditation, there came out of his
body the Tanmátràs tawny in colour.
4. They were all horizontal in form, moving upwards and
telling gods that they would drink the soma juice.
5. Seeing them who were remaining in a horizontal position

p
and moving upwards, Brahmà told them, *May you be the
Pitrs (manes) for all householders.
6. Those among you whose faces are upwards are named
*Nàndimukhas'." So saying Brahma defined their path.
7. He created for them the Daksinayana (the southward
movement of the sun), and continued the other creations silently.
They then asked Brahma to give them their means of sustenance
so that they could remain happy.
Brahma said:
8. Amavasi (New moon day) be your day. You will
derive great satisfaction by the water given to you with the Kuga
(darbha) grass end sesamum seeds by the people.
9. On that day if people give gifts of sesamum, fasting and
with devotion to the Pitrs, they will get boons from them early.
CHAPTER THIRTYTIVE
The Origin of Soma
Mahatapas said:
l. There was the famous mind-born son of Brahma by name
Atri. His son was Soma (Moon) who became Daksa's sonin-law.
2. 'Twentyseven renowned and honourable daughters of
Daksa became his wives and Rohini was the chicf among them.
3. He was giving his love only to Rohini and not to others.
So they went to their father and told him about this difference in
the treatment accorded to them.
4. Daksa asked him several times to give equal treatment
to all wives, but he cared little. Thereupon Daksa cursed him to
disappear, and as a result, he waned and vanished.
3. When Soma was thus lost, gods, men, beasts and plants
began to wither, particularly the plants.
6. When the plants were thus shrivelling up, gods were
Worried and said that the moon is the source of all plants.

110 Varadha Purana
7. They sericusly thought about the matter and resorted to
Visnu, and lord Visnu asked them what he might do for them.
8. They told him that Soma was lost because of a curse of
Daksa and then Visnu suggcsted that they may churn ocean
putting the plants into it.
9. After telling Devas thus, Visnu mentally called Rudra
and Brahma and also the serpent Vasuki for the churning rope.
10. They all churned the ocean and Soma reappeared.
11. He who is soul within the body and is called Ksetrajiia,
is this Soma who is the Jiva (life).
12-13. He attained an invisible form which sustains gods
and men and these sixteen deities, as also the trees and plants.
His visible form Rudra. borc on his head.
14. Water also is his form and hence he is considered universal. Brahma then gave him Pau namáàsi (Full moon day)
as the tithi.
15. Oking, if onc fasts and gives him offerings on that day,
he bestows on him food, knowledge,effulgence, health and wealth.
CHAPTER THIRTYSIX
The Former Story
Mahátapas said:
1. O king, I shall tell you about kings known as Manijas
(born of the gem! Jin the first Tretayuga, in whose line you are
born.
2. You were known as Suprabha in Krtayuga and you are
now born as the famous Prajapala.
3. Others will be born as mighty kings in Tretayuga. Diptatejas will be born as Santa.
4. King Suraími will become Sagakarna, Subhadargana
wil become Paficala.
5. Susanti® will be bern in the line of Angas; so too Sundara,
l. See chapter XI verses 83, 84.
2. Earlier the name is given as Sukànti,

a
Sunda as Mucukunda and Sudyumnat as Turu.
6. Sumanas will be born as Somadatta, Subha as Sarvarana, Sugila as Vasudàna and Sukhada as Asupati.
7. Sambhu will be born as Senapati, Kànta? as Daéaratha
and Soma as Janaka. All these about kings in Tretayuga.
8. These kings will rule the world well, perform various
sacrifices and will finally attain heaven.
Varáha said:
9. The King, after listening to this account which pertains
to the nectarine Brahmavidyà, was extremely pleased and went
to the forest to perform penance.
10. And attaining high spiritual potency, he gavc up his
body, became one with Brahman and was merged in Hari.
11. (Earlier) the king had gone to Vrndàvana and praised
there Hari called Govinda.?
The king said:
12. I bow to the great god with the whole universe as body,
the chief of the cowherds, brother of Indra, of immeasurable
greatness, clever in regulating the movements in worldly existence, and bearer of the earth.
13. I bow to you, O Krsna the great lord of cows, the sole
source of happiness in the ocean of worldly existence, terrible
with the numerous waves of sorrow and whirlpools of advancing
age.
14. I bow to you Janardana, the friend of all. (who give
solace to me) who are always battling with diseases, ill-disposed persons and hostile planets.
15. O holder of glowing disc, you are the highest of the omniscient gods. The whole world is pervaded by you. O leader of
the Gopas, save me from the fears of mundane life.
16. You are the most exalted of gods. You are the most
ancient. You shine like the moon. O imperishable God with
l. In the earlier enumeration name is Pradyumna.
2. The name given earlier is Sudanta
3. This should be presumed to be a praise of the future Krsnavatara
of Visnu. It is also possible that this part of the chapter is a later addition.

112 Varaha Purana
fire in the mouth, save me from falling a prey to worldly allurement.
17. In the wheel of worldly life revolve men deluded by
your Maya. O great lord, who is able to cross this enveloping
Maya ?
18. O lord of Gopas, those courageous souls that meditate
on vou who are free from a descent, free from touch, colour and
smell and without a name, but the greatest of all, gct liberated
from worldly bondages and attain salvation.
19. I always bow to him who is spoken of in Puranas as
bearing the disc and lotus, but is really beyond sound, in the form
of the sky, without a finite body, without action, but full of auspiciousness.
20. I bow to Visnu the eternal, Trivikrama who occupied
the three worlds, who has four forms,! the lord of the whole universe, who is Siva as well as Indra.
21. O lord, you create cverything moving and stationary
and you dissolve the cntire creation. Lead me as I am desirous
of salvation, to that place soon from where the yogins do not
rcturn.
22. Hail great Govinda, hail Visnu Padmanabha, hail
the omniscient, hail the unbounded, hail the lord of the worlds.
Varaha said:
3. "Thus praising the lord, the king gave up his body and
became permanently merged in the Supreme soul, Govinda.
CHAPTER THIRTYSEVEN
The Story of Dirghabahu
Earth said:
1. Ogreat lord, be pleased to tell me how you are to be worshipped by men and women with devotion.
l. The four zyühas namely Vasudeva, Sankarsana, Pradyumna and
Aniruddha.

Varaha said:
9. Iam to be attained bv meditation, not by money or incantation. Still, I shall tell vou about the physical restraints to
be observed by devotees.
3. Listen to the observances to be adopted by a person who
is dedicated to me in mind, action and word.
4. 'The mental observances are non-violence, truthfulness,
faith and celibacy.
5. The bodily observances are taking food only once a day
and fasting at night.
6. The oral observances are learning the Veda, reciting the
glories of Visnu, speaking truth and not speaking ill of others.
7. Here a story is known: There was a highly spiritual sage
named Aruni, son of Brahma.
8-9. He went to the forest on the bank of river Devikà to
perform severe penance. Once he went to the river for a bath.
10. While performing japa after bath, he saw a fierce hunter
with (bow and) arrow in hand rushing towards him.
11. He came there to kill the sage and snatch away the bark
garment he was wearing.
12. The sage became extremely perturbed understanding his
criminal intention, but remained there meditating on Narayana.
13. Seeing the sage whose mind was thus immersed in meditation on Visnu, the hunter became afraid. and dropping down
his bow and arrow, said:
The hunter. said:
14. “O Brahmin, I came here with the intention of killing
you. But now on seeing you, that intention has left me.
15. I have been killing thousands of Brahmins and even
more good women.
16. Will any good befall me after killing so many Brahmins?
I now wish to perform penance near you. Be pleased to give me
the necessary advice".
17. But the sage did not say anything in reply, thinking
that the man who is guilty of killing Brahmins is a high sinner.
18. Still, desirous of acquiring religious merit, the hunter
remained there. The sage took his bath and resorted to the foot
of the tree.

114 Varáha Purana
19. After some time, a famished tiger came to the river, and
attempted to kill the serene sage.
20. The sage plunged himself into the water, but the tiger
was trying to drag him out. The hunter then quickly killed it.
2]. A person came out of the tiger’s body then. Hearing
the noise (of the hunter killing the tiger) from within the water,
the sage exclaimed ‘Bow to Narayana’.
22. That mantra was heard by the tiger which was about to
die, and it then became transformed into a man.
23. He said, “O Brahmin, being freed from my sins and ills,
I now go to that perpetual abode of Visnu’’.
24. Told thus, the sage asked him who he was. He then told
him about his former life.
25-26. “I was (a king) known as Dirghabahu. I was well
versed in Dharma and had mastered the Vedas and known about
everything good and bad. I had nothing to do with the Brahmins and was asking *^what is this thing called the Brahmin”.
27. At this attitude of mine, the Brahmins became angry
and they cursed me to become a tiger.
28. 'They also said that because of my insult to the Brahmins I would lose my memory but would hear the name of the
lord at the time of my death.
29. The curse pronounced by the great Vaidik Brahmins
took effect on me.
30. Ithen prostrated before them and sought their pardon.
They then said:
31. ‘You should take food only once in six days, and then
whatever comes near you will be your food.
32. When you will be about to die, being hit by an arrow,
you will hear a Brahmin uttering ‘Bow to Narayana’. Then you
will attain liberation.”
33. Although through another’s mouth, Ihave now heard
the name of Visnu and the god is now before me although an
offender of Brahmins (and thus a sinner).
34. He who adores Brahmins and himself utters the name of
Visnu at the time of death, becomes freed frem all sins.
35. With outstretched arms I proclaim again and again the
truth that the Brahmins are the gods moving in this earth and
the lord is the Supreme Man.”

36. So saying the king went to heaven, being freed of sins.
The sage, who was thus saved, spoke to the hunter.
The sage said:
37. Since I have been saved by you from the tiger, I am
pleased with you. I shall give you the boon you choose.
The hunter said:
38. The fact that you speak to me is itself a boon for me.
What else have I to seek ? Please advise me.
The sage said:
39. Formerly, vou requested me to instruct you to perform
penance. Then you were full of sins and fierce in appearance.
40-4. Now all your sins have disappeared by your holy
bath in this river Devikà, by my sight and by hearing the name
of Visnu, and you have become pure in body.
42. So now you can ask me a boon. You may perform penance as long as you like.
The hunter said:
43. The one boon that I wish to seek is to know how Visnu,
about whom you said, could be attained by mortals.
The sage said:
44. The man who with intense devotion, performs vows in
respect of lord Visnu, doubtless attains him.
45. Knowing this, perform austerities. Do not take common
food (be contented with whatever food that is available in the
forest). Never utter falsehood.
46. This is the instruction and the boon to you. You may
remain here practising penance as long as you like.
Vardha said:
47. The sage thus gave the boon to him who was desirous
of securing salvation, and went away.

116 Vardha Purana
CHAPTER THIRTYEIGHT
The Story of Satyatapas
Varüha said:
1. The eminent hunter followed the auspicious path and
began to do penance giving up regular food and meditating
on the preceptor (sage Aruni).
2. Formerly, when he was hungry, he used to eat the fallen
leaves.
3-4. But once when he was hungry and went to the foot of
a tree to eat the leaves shed there, he heard a loud aerial voice
prohibiting him from eating them.
5. Leaving that tree he went to another. There also he heard
the same thing. The same thing happened when he went to other
trees also.
6. So he stopped eating anything and began todo penance
fully fasting.
7. When he was doing penance in this way, once sage Durvasas came there and was surprised to find the hunter not only
alive (in spite of his fasting) but effulgent like the blazing fire
because of the penance.
8-9. The hunter bowed to the great sage and told him:
**O sage, I am extremely gratified to see you. By my good fortune
you have come here at a time when I have to perform $ràddha.
I shall propitiate you with the fallen leaves (which alone I take)’.
10. Durvasas, with a view to knowing the spiritual powers
of this hermit who had fully subdued his sense organs and become fully purified, told him:
11. “Give me, who have come here with the intention of
seeing you, well prepared food of barley, wheat and rice".
12. Told thus, the hunter began to seriously think as to how
he could meet this demand.
13. When he was thus engrossed, a golden vessel with miraculous powers fell into his hand from the sky.
14. Taking it, he told Durvàsas in great reverence, “O great
Brahmin, please remain here till I return after begging food and
bless me".
15. The noble hunter then went out to beg alms in the nottoo-distant city through forests and hamlets.

pm
16-17. As he was going along, from tree after tree came out
nymphs with golden vessels full of food of various varieties and
they filled with them his begging bowl.
18. When his aim was thus achieved, he delightfully
returned to the sage.
19. He placed the bowl in a tidy place, bowed to him, and
said:
20. “ʻO sage, if you are pleased to bless me, kindly take this
seat and wash your feet".
21. But the sage, with a view to testing how far his penance
was powerful, told him: “I am unable to go to the river, nor have
I any vessel with me; how can I wash my feet ?”
22. Hearing this, the hunter again began thinking as to
what he could do to enable the sage to take food.
23. Meditating on his preceptor, he sought recourse to the
river Devika.
The hunter said:
24. “O excellent river, goddess, I am a hunter and thereby
asinner. Still when I pray to you, be pleased to give me help.
25. I know not a deity, I know not a mantra, I know not
worship. All that I know is to meditate on the feet of preceptor
and derive benefit therefrom.
26. I being such a one, have mercy on me. Please flow to
the place where the sage is seated so that he may wash his feet’.
27. Requested thus by the hunter, the holy Devikà moved
to the place where Durvasas was resting.
28-29. Seeing that wonder, Durvasas was much surprised,
and after washing his hands and feet, ate the food reverentially
given.
30. He then blessed the emaciated hunter: “Let the Vedas
and Vedàngas and Upanisads, Pada and Krama recitations of
all these (Vedas), Puranas and Brahmavidyà dawn on you".
31. After giving this boon, Durvasas told him that he would
become a famous sage by name Satyatapas.
32. When he was thus given the boon, the hunter asked the
sage: “O sage, being a hunter how can I learn the Vedas ?”
The sage said:
33. As a result of your fasting, your old body has disappeared

118 Varaha Purana
and the present body you are having is born of penance.
34-35. Your former knowledge has perished, and a pure
one has come upon the imperishable body you have now acquired. This is the truth. Therefore, O sage, the Vedas and Sàstras
will always appear in your mind.
CHAPTER THIRTYNINE
Matsyadvadasivrata
Satyatapas said:
1. O sage, the foremost among the learned, be pleased to
enlighten me on the two kinds of bodies about which you spoke.!
Durvasas said :
2. Actually there are three bodies, not two, inciuding the
one for the operation of the effects of one's good and bad deeds.
3. The first body is called Adharmic (of demerit) which is
without (true) knowledge. The second resulüng from proper
observances is called Dharmic (of merit).
4. The third, which is beyond senses, is for the action of the
results of one's merits and demerits. It is declared so by those
who have attained knowledge of Brahman.
5. And thus, including the body for the manifestation of the
result of one's own good and bad deeds, there are three.
6. Your former body (body in the former aspect) was named
Sin, because you were doing the sinful deed of killing living
beings.
7. Now by doing good deeds and performing penance, you
have acquired a Dharmic body. Thereby you have become eligible to know the Vedas and Puranas.
8. Upto eight years of age man is, of course, guided by
others, but after that he becomes different and does things on
his own.
1. The reference is to verse 33 in the previous chapter.

p et
9. It is declared by people with Supreme knowledge that it
is one and the same body that is considered as three because of
different aspects. The difference between them is as between the
clay and the pot.
10. The path of action laid down for the Brahmins and
others (Ksatriyas, Vaisyas and Südras) is of four kinds.!
11. There the first three always perform the rites prescribed
by the Vedas. The fourth attends on these three.
12. He who performs penance knowing well the Vedic
injunctions, certainly gains salvation.
Satyatapas said:
13. O great sage, the form of what you said as the Supreme
Soul, cannot be known by even great yogins.
14. Itis beyond the scope of name and form, and, as such,
how can it be known ? So kindly tell me the sign by which I may
know it.
Durvdsas said:
15. That which is spoken of as the Supreme Brahman in
Vedas and Sastras is the (essence of) Veda itself, the lotus-eyed
Narayana-Hari.
16. This Supreme god, Narayana, is attained through the
different sacrifices and gifts.
Satyatapas said:
17. O sage, lord Narayana is attained by spending a lot
of money and by the meritorious persons who have mastered the
Vedas. Please tell me how he can be attained by those who have
no money (for sacrifices.)
18. Without money it is not possible to give gifts. Those
who are tied to the family will not have the mind to spend even
if they have the means.
19. To such people, it appears to me, Narayana will always
be far away.
20. Tell me in particular as to by what efforts he can be
reached by people of all castes.
l. This refers to the four stages of life namely Brahmacarya, Garhasthya, Vanaprastha and Sannyasa.

120 Vardha Puráno
Durvàsas said:
21. Ishall tell you the great secret, what was done by Mother
Earth when she was merging into water and moving down te
the nether world.
22. The solid part of Earth was engulfed by water, and as «
result, she was sinking into the lower world, Rasatala.
23. This mother of ali beings, when she reached Rasatala,
worshipped the great god Narayana.
24. By the fastings and vows and other observances of Earth,
Narayana became pleased. He raised her up and restored her
to her original place.
Satyatapas said:
25. Osage, please tel] me what was the sort of fasting undertaken by her and what were the vratas performed.
Durvdsas said:
26-28. In the month of Margasirsa (Dhanus), on Dasami
day the devotee should, with great control of mind, perform the
prescribed rituals in fire and worship of gods, and with clean
dress and pure mind eat the remains of the food offered to gods.
He should then walk five steps, wash the feet and clean the tee«h
by chewing eight inches of the twig of a sappy tree and sip watet
29-31. He should then touch the nine outlets in the body
(eyes, ears, nose etc.) and meditate on the great lord Janardana
(Visnu), the wearer of yellow garment and bearer of conch,
disc and mace and endowed with all auspiciousness. He should
then take water in his hand and reverentially offer it to Him
uttering His name.
32. He should then say, “O lord, remaining without food on
Ekàdaái day, I shall take food onthe next day; O lord, be my
refuge”.
33. Then in the night he should sleep near (the idol of)
the Lord reciting ‘Namo Narayanaya’. o
34-37. Then early in the morning, he should go to a river
which preferably flows into the sea, or a tank or pond in the house
(in the order of preference), and taking the mud from it utter
the words, “O goddess, the existence and sustenance of all beings
lie in you. Be pleased to cleanse me of all my sins. Ali the holv

n— tM
Tirthas (places for holy bath) are made by you, so I take this
mud from you and stand here, O Earth. O Varuna, all rasas
(essences) remain in you. By bestowing them all in this mud
make it fully purified". Then the mud with water should be
smeared all over the body three times.
38. He may then take bath uttering Varuna mantra. After
bath, he should observe the essentials prescribed and then go to
the temple.
39-43. There he should offer worship to Narayana saying, ‘|
worship the feet as Kegava, the waist as Damodara, thighs as
Nrsimha, chest as the bearer of Srivatsa, the stomach as the wearer of Kaustubha, the breast as Laksmi’s Lord, the hands as the
victor of three worlds, the head as the all-pervading, the disc
as the bearer of disc, the lotus as the doer of all good, the mace as
the valiant, and the lotus as the serene.
44, After saluting Lord Narayana thus, he should arrange
four pots of water before Him and put into them sesamum and
gold and decorate them with garlands.
:45. The four pots should be considered as containing water
from the four oceans. In the middle a seat covered with cloth
should be placed.
46. A vessel made of gold, silver or copper, or, if they are
not available, one made of the leaves of Palàsa tree, should be
placed on it.
47-49. This vessel should be filled with water and in it should
be placed a golden image of Visnu in his form as the fish with all
the limbs and ornaments and worshipped withsandal, Dhüpa
and different kinds of food and fruit as prescribed.
50. Then saying “O god, just as you raised up the Vedas
from the nether world, raise me up (from worldly life)". He
should keep awake (throughout the night).
51-54. In the morning, he should give away the four pots to
Brahmins, the one on the east to a Rgvedin, the one on the South
to a Samavedin, the one on the West to a Yajurvedin and the
one on the north to an Atharvavedin, uttering respectively ‘let
Rgveda be pleased by this’, ‘let Yajurveda be pleased by this’,
‘let Sàmaveda be pleased by this’, and ‘let Atharvaveda be pleased by this’.
35. The golden image of the fish should be given to the priest

122 Varáha Purana
after giving him, according to the prescribed rituals, sandal,
Dhüpa and cloth.
56. If the priest is one well versed in the Vedas and Upanisads then the result of the gift will be many times more than when
given to an ordinary person.
57-58. If one shows any disregard to such a priest, he falls
into hell for several lives, because one who guides the worship
should be considered as a preceptor.
59. After the worship of Visnu and gifts to Brahmins, they
should be fed and given daksinà according to one's means on
the Dvadasi day.
60. The copper vessel with sesamum on which the image
was placed should be given to a Brahmin having a family.
61. After feeding the Brahmins, the worshipper may eat
along with children, silently and fully controlling the senses.
62. Now listen to the benefits that befall the performer of
this Dharanivrata.
63-64. If only I have a thousand mouths and life as long as
Brahma’s will I be able to state in full the results of this Vrata.
Still I shall say this in brief.
65-66. Seventeen million, ten million, eight million and four
million years respectively constituting the four yugas together
constitute a caturyuga. Seventyone such Caturyugas constitute
a Manvantara.
67. Fourteen days and nights (form a paksa, fortnight).
Thirty days make a month, and twelve months make a year.
68. Hundred years is the life of a Brahma.
69. Even if one performs Dvàdaáivrata but once as detailed
above one would reach the world of Brahma and be there as long
as Brahma himself remains.
70. When Brahma merges in the Supreme, he too will merge
likewise, and at the time of creation again, will be born as a
saintly and divine king.
71. Even sins like killing a Brahmin, committed knowingly
or unknowingly, disappear from him in a moment.
72. Even a person in utter poverty or a dethroned king, will
be born as a king by fasting in the prescribed manner.
73. Abarren woman, following this course of worship, begets

a good son.
74, The sin of sharing a prohibited bed disappears by the
observance of this vow.
75. By this fasting one who has long neglected the Brahmanic duties, gets restored to the Vaidik position.
76. Why say much, this brings about even what is unattainable in the ordinary course. Hence this should be observed by
all people.
77. This was done by Earth herself when she was submerged
in water. There is no need, therefore, to deliberate on this.
78. This should not be told to any one who is not righteous
or has no faith; nor to any one who denounces gods and Brahmins. If it is imparted to one who is devoted to his teacher, it
results in the dissolution of all sins.
79. He who undertakes this fast, gets all splendour, wealth,
foodgrain and beautiful women.
80. He who recites to others the important rituals pertaining to Dvadasi worship, or listens to such narration, gets freed
from all sins.
CHAPTER FORTY
K ürmadvadasivrata
Durvásas said:
l. Similarly in the month of Pausa (Makara) amrta was
churned from the ocean, and then lord Visnu, on his owa accord,
became a Kürma (tortoise).
2. The tithi Dasami on the bright half of this month is assigned to Visnu in the Kürma form.
3. On that day, as before, one should do sankalpa
(stating the aim), and on the following (Ekadasi) day take ritualistic bath and worship Visnu with all devotion.
4-5. Adoring His feet as Kürma, waist as Narayana, belly
as Sankarsana, neck as Purobhava (the first born), the hands
as Subahu (fine-armed) and head as Viśāla (broad-bodied),

124 Varüha Purana
and uttering mantras containing the names of the lord, offer
sandal, flowers, dhüpa and naivedya of a variety of fruits.
6-7. After worshipping, a pot of water with a gem within it
should be placed in front and decorated with flowers and white
cloth. On it should be placed a copper vessel containing s ghee
and in it should be placed an image of the lord with Mandara
(resting on him) made of gold, and it should then be gifted to a
Brahmin in reverence.
8. The next day (on Dvàda$i), the lord Kürma-Nàràyana
should be propitiated by giving gifts to Brahmins with daksina,
and food should be taken afterwards.
9. If done in this way, all sins will disappear. You need not
have any doubt about this. And it leads one out of the perils o£
the world, to the abode of Visnu.
10. All sins disappear instantaneously and he is then born
as a righteous man. ‘lhe sins accumulated over several lives arc
eradicated by devotion.
11. The benefits stated before accrue to him and Lord Nàràyana becomes very much pleased.
CHAPTER FORTYONE
Varáhadvádasivrata
Durvasas said:
1. Similarly, listen, O sage, to the worship of Visnu as Varaha
on Dvadaisi day in the bright half of the month of Màgha (Kumbha).
2-9. Performing Sankalpa and puja, as stated earlier, on
the Ekadasi day with sandal paste, incense and dry fruits, the
pot filled with water should be placed in front.
4-5. Then (the devotee should utter): “I worship the feet
of the lord as Varaha, waist as Madhava, belly as Ksetrajfia,
chest as Vi$varüpa, neck as Sarvajna, head as Prajapati, hands
as Pradyumna, Sudarsana (disc) as Divyastra (divine weapon),
and Sankha (conch) as Amrtodbhava"'.

gm
6-9. Then he should place on the pot a vessel made of gold,
silver or copper, fill it with valuable materials according to his
capacity, and place on it a golden image of Visnu as Varaha in
the form holding the earth with all its mountains and forests.
Thus should be placed the golden image in the vessel filled with
grain.
10. The image should be covered by a pair of white clothes
and worshipped by offering sandal, flowers and dry fruits of
various kinds.
11. Heaping flowers all round, he should keep awake and
read the story of the appearance of the lord as Varaha.
12-13. After doing this, the next morning at sunrise, taking
bath and performing worship he should give the image together
with the pot to a pious Brahmin with family, who is learned in
Vedas and devoted to Visnu.
14. Now hear the results that accrue to a person who thus
gifts the image of Visnu in his form as Varaha.
15. In this life he gets happiness, prosperity, effulgence and
gratification. If he is poor, he becomes rich and if without a son,
gets one.
16. Everything inauspicious disappears. and auspiciousness
sets in immediately as if by force. In the life bevond he gets eternal happiness. Listen to a story in this connection.
17. In the place called Pratisthàna there was a famous king
named Viradhanva.
18. He once went to the forest for hunting, and there near
the hermitage of a sage he killed numerous deer.
19-20. There, quite unknowingly, he happened to kill five!
sons of sage Samvarta, who were all devoted to learning the Vedas
and who had the appearance of deer.
Satyatapas said:
21. O Sage, be pleased to tell me how they looked like deer.
Durvasas said:
22. Once they saw in the forest several young deer, just born
Sar ee
l. According to the reading it is fifty, but this seems to Lea mistake.

196 Varáha Purana
but without their mother near by.
23. They took one of them each and put them in a cave,
but they soon died. Sad at this they went to their father and told
him about it.
The sage’s sons said:
24. © father, we have been the cause of the death of five
young deer, though not deliberately. So be pleased to tell as
what atonement we should do.
Samvorta said:
25. “My father used to injure and I too. And you my sons,
also have developed a tendency to commit injury.
26. You put on deer skin and perform penance for five years.
You will then become purified."
27. 'They then put on deer skin and began meditating on
the Supreme in the forest.
28. At the close of one year, King Viradhanva came to the
place where these in deer-skin were sitting.
29-30. Seeing them at the-foot of a tree, the king mistook
them to be real deer and killed them.
31. But when herealised that he had killed not the deer
but some Brahmins doing penance, he was struck with fear and
went to the hermitage of sage Devarata.
32. He told the sage how he happened to kill Brahmins
and stood there shedding penitent tears.
33-35. Devarata consoled him saying that he would be freed
from the sin thus committed. He said that the (story of the}
earth sinking into Patala and Visnu assuming the form ofa boar
lifting it up, would bring about the king’s purification by the
lord himself.
36-37. Then the king became glad and asked him as to how
the lord would become pleased that he would rid him of all his
sins.
Durvásas said:
38-39. "Thus asked, sage Devarata told him about this Vrata
(detailed above).The king performed it, and as a result, enjoyed all pleasures in the world and, at the end of his life, was taken

to the world of Indra in a golden aerial vehicle.
40. Indra honoured him by rising from his seat and offering
arghya.
Seeing Indra thus going towards him, thc servants of Visnu
said:
41. “O Indra, you are not entitled to see him, because you
are inferior to him in penance”. All other Dikpalas also were
similarly turned away by the servants of Visnu, all of them being
eclipsed by his superior lustre.
42-43. He then proceeded to Satyaloka which is unaffected by deluge and the heat which follows it and remains there
now applauded, by others. When Yajfiapurusa(Visnu) is pleased, what wonder is there that this happened so.
44. Worshipped in proper form, even once one attains effulgence, long life, sound health and abundant wealth and finally
gets immortality.
45. When the worship is in all detail, lord Narayana, who
has the fourfold form, gives his own abode.
46-48. Just as he restored the Vedas by taking the form of
the fish, and held the Mandara mountain in position by assuming the form of a tortoise at the churning of the milky ocean, so
he raised up the earth from the nether world bv taking the form
of a boar.
CHAPTER FORTYTWO
Narasimhadvadasivrata
Durvasas said:
1. Similarly one may worship Visnu in the prescribed manner on Dvàdaá&i on the bright half of the month of Phalguna.
2-3. He should worship the feet as Narasimha, thighs as
Govinda, waist as Visvabhuk, chest as Aniruddha, neck as Sitikantha, head as Pingakeéa, disc (Sudarsana) as AsuradhVarbsin (destroyer of Asuras) and conch as Toyatma, with sandal,
flowers and fruits.

128 Varaha Purana
4.5, A pot together with two white clothes and a gem inside
should then be placed in front and over that in a vessei made of
copper or wood or reed a golden image of Narasimha with the
usual materials.
6. After performing worship on it, on Dvadasi day it should
be given to a Vaidik Brahmin.
7. I shall now tell you the result gained through this Vrata
by the king named Vatsa.
8. In the land of Kimpurusas there was a righteous king
named Bharata and he had a son named Vatsa.
9. Vatsa was conquered by his enemies and was completely
robbed of his treasurv, and he went with his wife to the hermitage
of sage Vasistha.
10. Vasistha then asked him the purpose of his visit.
The king said:
11-12. O sage, I have been deprived of my kingdom and
robbed of my treasury by the enemies, and without any one to
help me, I have now come to you. Be pleased to advise me.
Durvàásas said:
13. Thus said, Vasistha told him about this (Narasimha )
dvadaSivrata, and he observed it accordingly.
14. At the end of the vrata, lord Narasimha was pleased,
and he gave him a cakra (disc) to smash his enemies in battle.
15. With that weapon, the king won back his kingdom, and
after performing numerous A$vamedha sacrifices, attained Visnuloka.
16. This holy Dvadasivrata is thus narrated to you. Now
you may do whatever you'desire to do so.
CHAPTER FORTYTHREE
Vamanadvadasivrata
Durvásas said:
l. In the same manner, in the month of Caitra (Mesa),

Visnu should be worshipped on the Dvadasi day after duc fasting.
9.3. The feet should be worshipped as Vàmana, the waist
as Visnu, belly as Vasudeva. chest as Sankarsana. neck as Visvabhrt, head as Vyomarüpin. the arms as Viévajit and the conch
and disc by their own names (Páficajanva and Sudarsana ;.
4. After worship to the great lord in this manner, place in
front, as before, the pot of water with gem within dulv purified.
5. As before, place on it in a vessel (of the material mentioned earlier) a golden image of Vàmana with a white yajnopavita.
6. Near it should be placed the Kamandalu (spouted vessel),
a small umbrella, wooden sandals, rosary and seat of kusa grass.
7. All these together should be given to a Brahmin in the
morning uttering *May Visnu in the form of the dwarf be
pleased".
8. The story of the appearance of Vàmana in this month
(Caitra) should then be recited. This is the rule. (Here isa
story in this connection).
9. There was once a king named Haryasva. He was childless and so he perform ed penance for an issue.
10. When he was performing a sacrifice for the purpose,
Visnu came to him in the form of a Brahmin.
ll. Heasked the king the aim of his deed. The king replied
that it was for getting a son. The Brahmin asked him to continue
what he was doing.
12. Saying thus to the king, he suddenlv disappeared.
13-14. The king completed the rites and then gave (the
image with all the associated things) to a poor Vaidik Brahmin
saying “O Lord, just as to the issueless Aditi you were born as
son, by the same truth may I also get a child".
15. By this vrata a son was born to him by name Ugrásva
and he became an emperor.
16-17. One without a son gets a son, one who wants wealth
gets it, one who is deprived of his kingdom rcgains it. And after
death he goes to Visnu's abode and after remaining there for
long, takes birth as a man and becomes an emperor like Yayati,
son of Nahusa.

130 Varüha Purana
CHAPTER FORTYFOUR
Jamadagnyadvadasivrata
Durvásas said:
1. In the same manner in the month of Vaisakha (Vrsabha),
one should perform sankalpa (on Dvadasi day? and after bathing using mud, go to the place of worship.
2-3.There he should worship Visnu in the following manner.
The feet should be worshipped as Jamadagnya, belly as
Sarvadharin (bearing everything), waist as Madhusüdana,
thighs as Srivatsadharin, hands as Ksarantaka, the beard as
Sitikantha, the conch and disc by their own names (Paficajanya
and Sudargana) and head as Brahmandadharin.
4. After worshipping thus, he should place a pot in front
as before and put on it a pair of clothes.
5. A golden image of Jamadagnya (Parasurama) having
an axe in the right hand, should be put in a rotten vessel and
then placed on it.
6. Worship should then be made with sandal and flowers
of various kinds.
7. Keeping awake the whole night with devotion, it should
be given to a Brahmin early in the morning the next day.
8. I shall now illustrate the result accruing from this vrata.
9. There was a mighty king by name Virasena. He had no
sons and so he began to perform intensive penance.
10. When he was thus doing severe penance, the great sage
Yàjüavalkva came to him.
Il. Seeing the effulgent sage thus come to him, the king
rose up with folded hands.
12. The sage who was honoured thus, asked the king about
the aim of his penance.
The king said:
13. O sage, I am now without a son, and so I perform these
austcrities so that this body of mine may steadily decline (leading
to death).
Yájüavalkya said:
14. O king, enough of this severe penance. Surely you will

p»
get a son without difficulty.
The king said:
15. O sage, be pleased to tell me how I will beget a son without difficulty.
Durvàsas said:
16. Asked by the king thus, the sage told him about this
(Jamadagnya )dvadasivrata to be performed in the bright fortnight in Vaisakha.
17. By observing it with due fasting, the king got a son, the
well known Nala, who even now is remembcred in the world as
one to be considered as with a sacred name.
18. Such is the result of this Dvàdaásivrata.
19. One who observes it will get good sons, learning, prosperity and resplendence in this life.
20. In the world beyond, he remains in the world of Brahma
for one kalpa attended by numerous Apsarases.
21. Then he will be reborn as an emperor and live for thirty
thousand kalpas.
CHAPTER FORTYFIVE
Ramadvadasivrata
Durvásas said:
l. In the month of Jyestha (Mithuna) similarly, after
sankalpa in the prescribed manner, one should worship the lord
with flowers of different kinds.
2-4. He should worship the fect as Rama, waist as Trivikrama, belly as Dhrtaviéva (the holder of the universe), chest
as Sarhvatsara, neck as Sarnvartaka, hands as Sarvastradharin
(the bearer of all weapons), the conch and disc by their names
(Paficajanya and Sudargana) and head as Sahasraéiras (thouBe eee): After this, as before, the pot should be placed in
ront.
3. As before, the golden images of Rama and Laksmana

132 Varáha Purána
covered in clothes, should be worshipped in the prescribed manner, and should be gifted to a Brahmin the next morning by him
who desires to accomplish his wishes.
6-7. When the advice of Vasistha was sought by Dagaratha
when he was without a son, it was this that was suggested to him
by the sage.
8. Grasping the secret, the king observed this and the result
was Visnu in a fourfold form became his sons, being pleased with
him.
9. Such is the result in this world. I shall tell you the effect
in the world beyond.
10. 'The performer enjoys the pleasures of heaven as long as
Indra remains its lord. Then he takes birth as a king who would
perform a hundred sacrifices (and thus becomes one like Indra
himself).
11. One who performs thisvrata without any desire gets
all his sins removed and in the end attains eternal bliss.
CHAPTER FORTYSIX
Krsnadvadasivrata
Durvasas said:
1-2. In the month of Asadha (Karkataka) also, one may
take due sankalpa, and after worshipping Visnu in the hands as
Cakrapani, neck as Bhüpati, conch and disc as Paficajanya and
Sudargana and head as Purusa, and place the pot in front as
before.
3. Then on a cloth over it should be placed the golden
image of Visnu as Vàsudeva and the other vyühas (Sankarsana,
Pradyumna and Aniruddha).
4. After worship with sandal, flowers etc., it should be gifted
to a Vaidik Brahmin, as before.
5. Now listen to the benefits arising from this vrata performed in the prescribed manner.
6, Inthe Yadu clan there was a great man named Vasudeva

He had a highly devoted wife named Devaki, but she was without
a child.
7. Once Narada came to their house, and being received
with due respect, he said:
8. *O Vasudeva, please listen to this matter relating to the
worship of god, after knowing which I have rushed here to tell
you.
9. Earth went to the assembly of gods and said that she
was unable to bear the weight (of the demons) straining her and
requested them to kill (these evil-doers).
10. Thus requested, Devas thought of going to lord Nàràyana, but the moment they thought of him, he appeared before
them.
11-12. The great lord himself then told Devas that he would
; accomplish their desire by taking birth as a human being, but he
would be born only to her who, with her husband, observes the
fast (on Dvadaii) in the bright half of the month of Asadha.
13. Assured thus, Devas went away, and I came here to tell
you about this so that you can get a worthy son.
14. By performing this Dvadasi vrata, Vasudeva got the son
named Krsna and gained great prosperity.
15. After enjoying great affluence, he attained in the end
final beatitude. Thus I have told you about the observance of
Dvàdaái vrata in’ Asadha.
CHAPTER FORTYSEVEN
BuddhadvadaSivrata*
Durvasas said:
l. In the month of Sravana (Simha) on the Ekadasi day
of the bright half, observe the vrata as before, and worship Visnu
with sandal and flowers.
2-3, Worship the feet as Damodara, waist as Hrsikeáa, belly
f l. The colophon at the end of the chapter gives this name but its signicance is not clear.

134 Varaha Purána
as Sanatana, chest as Srivatsadharin, hands as Cakrapani, neck
as Hari, head as Muñjakeśa and tuft as Bhadra.
4, After worship in this manner, place the pot in front as
before, and place over it covered in a pair of clothes, the golden
image of the lord as Damodara.
5. After worship with sandal and flowers in proper form,
give it to a Vaidik Brahmin as before.
6-7. Now listen to the account of the power of this vrata
which is capable of removing all sins.
8. In the Krtayuga there was a mighty king by name Nrga.
He was wandering in the forest for hunting.
9. Riding on his horse, he happened to enter into the interior of the dense forest full of tigers, lions, elephants, snakes and
aborigines. — —
10. Being alone in a lonely place, he was sad and dismounting the horse, spread Kuéa grass and slept on it.
1l. Inthe night there came near him a multitude of fourteen
thousand hunters for hunting.
12. They saw there the king adorned with golden jewels
and full of high effulgence.
13. They quickly ran to their master and reported to him,
and he immediately started to kill the king and take away the
gold and gems he was adorning on his body.
14. The other hunters also rushed there to snatch away the
horse from the sleeping king.
15. At that time there arose from the king’s person a divine
lady decked with sandal and garlands and ornaments white in
colour.
16. With a Cakra held in her hand, she killed all the hunters,
and then entered his body.
17. Asshe was entering into the body, the king rose up.
18. Seeing her disappear in his own bedy and seeing aU
those base men killed there, the king mounted the horse and went
to the hermitage of sage Vàmadeva.
19. Bowing to the sage with reverence, he asked him to bc
pleased to tell him as to who that lady w2s and who the killed
hunters were.

pn
Vamadeva said:
90. O king, in the previous life you were a Sidra, but you
formed this Dvadaéi vrata on hearing about it from Brahmins.
91, You observed the vrata on Dvàdaéi in the bright half
of Sravana month.
22. By this vrata you became a king and the goddess (of
this vrata) protects you always from all dangers.
23. She who killed all these base and cruel men and protected you is this goddess.
24. Even this one goddess is capable of protecting from all
dangers and bestowing (on the devotee) a kingdom. Twelve
of them! will well bring about the position of Indra.
per
CHAPTER FORTYEIGHT
Kalkidváda£ivrata
Durvàsas said:
1. In the same manner, on the Ekadasi of the bright half
of the month of Bhadrapada (Kanya), one may worship the
lord of lords in the prescribed manner.
2-3. He should worship the feet as Kalkin, the waist as
Hrsikesa, the belly as Mlecchavidhvamsaka, neck as Sitikantha,
arms as Khadgapani, hands as Caturbhuja and head as Viśvamūrti.
4-5. After worship in this manner, he should place, as before, a pot in front and over it a golden image of Kalkin in a
white cloth and with sandal and flowers, and in the morning it
should be gifted to a Vaidik Brahmin.
6-7. O sage, now listen to the result accruing from this
vrata:
Once there was a powerful king named Visala in Kasi. Deprived of his kingdom by his kinsmen, he went to Gandhamadana
and from there reached Badari in a canoe, bereft of all his royalty.
8. There came the great and ancient sages Nara and NaraERI Em es
l. The goddesses of the Dvadasis of all the twelve months.

136 Varaha Purana
yana, who are worshipped by all gods.
9. Seeing the king there immersed in contemplation of
the Supreme Being Visnu, they were very much pleased and
asked him to seek a boon from them who had gone there pleased
by his meditation.
The king said :
10. ‘I do not know who you are and from whom I should
seek the boon. I wish toget boon from him whom Iam worshipping".
11. Said thus, they asked : “O king, whom are you worshipping and what boon do you wish to get ? We wish to know
this. So please tell us”.
12. 'The king replied that he was worshipping Visnu and
then remained silent. They then said :
13-14. “It is by the grace of that same god (Visnu) that we
are offering you a boon now. So tell us what you desire".
The king said:
15. Grant me the boon by which I will be able to propitiate
. the lord of sacrifices (Visnu) by various sacrifices.
Nara said:
16. Lord Narayana who looks after the entire world, is
performing penance with me at Badari.
17. He formerly took the form of a fish (Matsya), then
that of a tortoise (Kürma), afterwards that of a pig (Varaha)
and then assumed the form of man-lion (Narasimha).
18-19. Then he was born as a dwarf (Vàmana), and later
on as the mighty son of Jamadagni (Parasurama). Then he took
birth as the son of Dagaratha (Rama) and killing all the base
and vile people, established order in the world.!
20-22. One may worship Narasimha for ridding oneself of
sins, Vamana for removing all stupefaction, Paras$uràma for
wealth, Rama for annihilation of enemies, Balarama and Krsna
for begetting sons, Buddha for physical charm and Kalki for
victory.
1. One verse relating to Krsna and Kalkin seems to be missing here.

p
23. He then told him about this Dvadasi. And observing
this, the king became an emperor, and by his name Badari came
to be known as Visala.
94, After ruling the country for long, the king retired to the
forest. By performing several sacrifices he attained final beatitude.
CHAPTER FORTYNINE
Padmanabhadvadasi
Durvasas said:
|. In the same manner, on the Dvadasi day in the bright
half of the month of Agvayuja (Tula) lord Padmanàbha should
be worshipped.
2-3. The feet should be worshipped as Padmanabha, the
waist as Padmayoni, the belly as Sarvadeva, the chest as Puskaraksa, the hands as Avyaya, the weapons as before, and head as
Prabhava, and then, as already described earlier, the pot should
be placed and over it the golden image of Padmanabha.
4. After performing worship with sandal, flowers etc., early
in the morning the next day it should be gifted to a Brahmin.
5. Listen to the result accruing from the observance of this.
6. In the Krtayuga there was a valiant king named Bhadrasva. His kingdom also came to be known by his name Bhadrasva,
7. Once sage Agastya came to him and said that he would
stay with him for a week. The king, with bowing head, agreed
with pleasure.
8. The king’s wife by name Kàntimati was so beautiful
that she had the splendour ofa dozen suns.
9. She had five hundred co-wives but they were all devoted
to her and they attended on her like servants.
10-11. Agastya saw her in her radiant beauty, the co-wives
earnestly serving her and the king being delighted at her happiDess,

138 Varáha Purana
12. He was very glad to see all this and exclaimed, ‘‘O Lord
of the worlds, how good in this !
13. On the second day seeing the beaming queen, Agastya
exclaimed, *^The whole world has been acquired".
14-15. On the third day, seeing her he said, ‘“‘Fools do not
know lord Visnu, who by a single day's propitiation has given this
king this gift".
16-18. On the fourth day, he threw up his arms and exclaimed, ‘‘well done, lord of the world !, well done, women and
$üdras !, well done, Brahmins !, well done Ksatriyas !, well
done Vaisyas !, well done Bhadrasva! , well done Agastya !,
well done Prahlada !, well done Dhruva !" Saying thus Agastya
danced in joy before the king.
19. The king with his queen, seeing him thus immersed in
joy, asked him the cause of his delight.
Agastya said:
20-21. “You are a foolish king, all your followers are fools,
your priests are also so, since they do not understand me”.
22. Told thus, the king with folded hands, requested him
to be sympathetic and tell him clearly so that he could understand.
Agastya said:
23. “In the former life, this queen was a servant in the house
of the Vaisya Haridatta, and you were her husband, a Sidra
serving in the same household.
24-25. The Vaisya, observing Dvadasi in the month of
ASvayuja, went to the temple of Visnu and after worshipping
there with flowers, incense etc., left you both there to keep guard
and to keep the lamps burning.
26. When the Vaisya was gone, you were both engaging
yourselves in keeping the lamps burning throughout night.
27-28. In course of time both of you died, and due to the
merit you had acquired (by attending to the duty assigned to
you by the Vaigya in the temple), you were born in the family of
Priyavrata and this queen, who was originally servant of the
Vaiáya, became your wife.
29-30. If this is the result of simply keeping the lamp burn-

ing in the temple for another's sake, it is beyond words to state
the effect of doing such a thing for one's own sake. Hence, I said
ʻO lord of the worlds, how good is this !’’.
31-32. ‘The merit acquired by the worship for one year in
Krtayuga, is acquired by the same for half a year in Tretayuga,
by quarter of a year in Dvaparayuga and by the mere utterance
of the name ‘Narayana’ in Kaliyuga.
33. Hence, I exclaimed ‘the whole world has been acquired’.
34. The result of burning the lamp before Visnu for author's
sake is what has been gained by you. Hence, I exclaimed ‘Fools
do not know the effect of serving Hari’.
35. Since the Brahmins and Ksatriyas perform with devotion sacrifices of various kinds they were hailed by me.
36. Ido not find in this world anything more worthy than
the worship of Visnu. Hence, I congratulated myself saying ‘O
Agastya, well done’.
37. That woman is blessed who attends on her husband,
because that kind of service is an indirect service of god. A Südra
who does so, is even more blessed.
38. That woman and that Sidra are blessed, if they attend
on the twice-born. Hence, I said “Well done, women and Sidras’’
39. Although born in the Asura clan, Prahlàda proclaimed
that he knew none other than Purusottama (Visnu). Hence I
said “Well done Prahlàda."
40-41. Dhruva who belonged to the line of Brahmà, went
to the forest when he was but a boy, and there worshipping Visnu
attained an extremely glorious position. Hence I said ‘Well
done Dhruva !".
42. Hearing these words of the great Agastya, the king
sought his advice, but the sage was leaving for the tirtha Puskara.
43. Bhadrasva followed him to get his advice, and he was
then told about this Dvàda£ivrata by the sage.
Durvasas said:
44. “O sage, I have told you this much". Agastya then told
the king:
45. "I am leaving for Puskara, but you will be blessed with
good sons". So saying, the sage suddenly disappeared.

140 Varaha Purana
46. By observing this Padmanabhadvadasi as prescribed
and with fasting, the king attained the height of glory in this
world.
47. Enjoying all pleasures surrounded by children and
grandchildren, he finally reached the world of Visnu with the
blessings of Padmanabha.
CHAPTER FIFTY
Dharanivrata
Durvasas said:
l. After going to Puskaratirtha, sage Agastya returned to
the palace of Bhadràsva in the month of Karttika.
2. The righteous king duly received him with arghya, pádya
etc., and offered a seat. He then asked him with curiosity.
The king said:
3-4. O sage, formerly you told me about the observance of
Dvàda$i in the month of Agvina. Now be pleased to tell me what
is sacred in the month of Karttika.
Agastya said:
5. O king, Dvadasi in the month of Karttika is spoken of
as most sacred. I shall tell you about its observance and results.
Listen to me with rapt attention.
6. In the manner detailed earlier, take the sankalpa and
perform bath.
7-10. Then perform worship to Lord Narayana. The head
should be worshipped as Sahasraéiras (thousand-headed), the
hands as Purusa (Supreme Man), neck as Vi$varüpin (universal
form), weapons as jüànástra (weapon of knowledge), chest as
Srivatsa, belly as Jagadvasisnu (the abode of all the worlds),
waist as Divyamürti (divine-bodied), feet as Sahasrapada (thousand-footed), and the whole body together as Damodara. Thus
perform worship in the reverse order (from head to foot).

y"
11-12. After worship in this manner, place in front four pots.
smeared with white sandal and with gems within, decorated in
the neck with flower garlands and placed in copper receptacles
filled with sesamum and (a little) gold.
13. Consider these four pots (of water) as representing the
four oceans. In their midst, as before, place the golden image
of Visnu wearing yellow cloth and in the form of a yogin.
14. After worship in the prescribed manner, keep awake
(the whole night).
15. Then perform Vaisnava sacrifice for the lord as Yogiévara (the great yogin)in the sixteen-petalled cakra! devised by
yogins.
16. In the morning give four pots to Brahmins, and the fifth
containing Yogisvara with particular devotion (to an exalted
person like the preceptor).
17-18. Giving (to an ordinary Brahmin) is equivalent to
the acquisition of Vedas, giving it to one steeped in Vedic knowledge brings double the result, giving it to an Acarya of the Paficarátras? brings about the result a thousand-fold, and giving it to
one who is learned in the secrets of all this makes the result a
crore time more.
19. When the guru is available, if ignoring him the gift is
given to another, it becomes useless and leads to the donor’s
downfall.
20-21. Persuade the guru to accept it, and then think of
others, because, learned or otherwise, the guru islord Janàrdana.
Whether he follows the proper path or not he is highly important.
22. If any one, after resorting to the guru, falls out with
him, he is put to torment in the hell for numerous yugas.
23. After worshipping Visnu and giving gifts thus, Brahmins
should be fed according to one's means and given daksina.
24. The Creator formerly performed this Dharanivrata
and attained his position and the eternal Brahman.
25. Similarly, the Haihaya king named Krtavirya got the
son named Kartavirya and attained the eternal Brahman.
26. Performing. this vrata, Sakuntalà got through Dusyanta
the son Bharata who became an emperor.
Sic Specified mystic figure with sixteen points engraved on a metal
e.
2. The Vaisnavas who follow the Paficarátrágama.

142 Varaha Purana
27. The emperors referred to in the Vedas, ali got their
positions by performing this vrata.
28. When Dharani (Earth) sank into Patala, she performed
this vrata and hence it is known as Dharanivrata.
29. When the vrata was completed, the earth was raised by
Visnu in his form as Varaha and placed over the water like a
canoe.
30-31. O sage, I have thus told you about this Dharanivrata.
He who listens to this and he who performs this, becomes freed
from all sins and gets merged in Visnu.
CHAPTER FIFTYONE
Agastyagita I
Varáha said:
. 1-2. After hearing the account of Dharanivrata from sage
Durvasas, Satyatapas went to a slope of Himalaya mountain
where the river there was Puspabhadra (beautiful with flowers]
the stone Citragila (beautifully shaped) and the banyan tree
Bhadravata (particularly attractive), and building a hermitage
there, spent the rest of his life in contemplation.
Earth said:
3. Thousands of aeons have elapsed since I performed this
Vrata, and now I have forgotten all about it.
4-5. By your blessing I now begin to get a recollection of all
that. I am, therefore, anxious to know more.
6. Therefore, kindly teil me what Agastya did after returning to the residence of Bhadragva.
Varáha said:
7. When the sage returned, Bhadràéva asked him about
Moksadharma.
Bhadrāśva said:
8. O sage, by what means is the bondage of worldly exis-

tence snapped, and by what means the sorrows in life can be got
over ?
Agastya said:
9. O king, listen well to this story relating to what is distant
and what is near and based on the division into the seen and the
unseen.
10. Atthe time when there was no dav, no night, no direction, no heaven, no gods and no sun, a king named Pasupala was
looking after numerous beasts.
11. He once went to see the eastern ocean, and there, on the
shore of that limitless expanse of water, saw a forest full of snakes.
12. There were eight trees and a freely flowing river. Five
important persons were there moving horizontally and upwards.
One of them was holding an effulgent woman.
13. 'The woman was holding on her chest a person having
the splendour of a thousand suns and with thrce colours and three
divisons.
14. Seeing the king, all of them became silent and still, and
as soon as the king entered the forest, became combined into a
single being.
15. The king was then encircled by the serpents, and he
began to think about how he could kill them and effect his escape.
16. When he was thus thinking, another person having the
three colours, white, red and yellow, came out of his body.
17. He asked by gesticulation where he should go. Just then
there arose Mahat.
18. The king was covered by that and asked to be alert in
mind. He was then confronted by the woman (who was really
Maya).
19. He was thus engulfed by Maya. Then the lord of all
beings caught him in his possession.
20. Then five other persons came there and surrounded him,
21. All these hid themselves within the king’s person when
the serpents came united to attack.
22. The king then appeared highly resplendent and his ali
Sins disappeared.
23. In him were unified earth, water, fire, air and ether
and all their qualities,

144 Varáha: Purana
24. Thus Pasupála unified all these that stood around him.
25. Sceimg the king then, the tri-coloured person said to
him:
26-97. “O king, I am your son, please command me to
do what you wish. We decided to bind you, but we were defeated and bound by you, and we now remain hidden in your body.
When I have become your son, everything else will arise of its
own".
28. Told thus, the king spoke to the man.
29, “You (say you) are my son, and as a result other things
arisc. But I don't desire to have attachment to any of the pleasures men may have”.
30. So saying he released the son, and with him others also.
And freed from them, he stood alone.
CHAPTER FIFTYTWO
Agastyagita II
Agastya said:
l. The king made himself into a tri-coloured being and
produced a tri-coloured son named Aham (Ego).
2. 'The son got a daughter Avabodha (consciousness) and
she got a Son Vijňāna (knowledge).
3. He got five sons comprehending all comprehensible objects and named Aksa and the rest (Eye etc).
4. These (sense-organs) were the Dasyus (hostile aborigines) who were subjugated by the king.
5. In their abstract form they made an abode for themselves
(in the king’s person), a city consisting of nine outlets, a single
pillar, four pathways, and numerous rivulets and ponds.
6. All the nine entered the city together and soon Pagupàla became the concrete Purusa.
7. Established in that city, the king brought the Vedas there
by contemplating on them.
8. 'The king also arranged there for all the Vratas, rules and
sacrifices laid down in them.

9. The king once felt distressed and evoked the karmakanda (the scripture of ritualistic action), and then the Supreme
Jord remaining in vogic slumber, got forth a son with four faces,
four hands and four feet and embodying the four Vedas.
10. Frem then onwards every object of sense came to be
under the kings perfect control.
11. He found alike the sca and the forest, the grass and the
elephant as a result of his invocation of the Karmakànda.!
CHAPTER FIFTYTHREE
The Story of Pasupala®
Bhadráfva said:
1. Osage, you have narrated this story in reply to my question. But how did it arise and by whom was it made ?
Agastya said:
2. This curious story is there and it relates to every object
in the world. Its implication is the same in your body, my body,
and every other being’s.
3-4. Desiring to originate it and thinking of the means for
it, he who arose from Pasupàla with four feet and four faces is its
originator as well as propagator.
9. His son named Svara is considered as an embodiment
of truth. He expounded the significance of the four Vedas to
four persons and thus became venerable.
6. The first of these four was Catuhsrnga (four-horned)
and the second Vrsa (bull), the third followed their path and the
fourth followed them with devotion.
7. They all heard the story of Satyamürti (Svara). The
Second (Vrsa) then resorted to Brahmacarya.
8. Asa result of Vrsa's dominance there arose in men the
l. The whole of this Agastyagità is an allegory based on the principles
of Sankhya philosophy.
2. Many verses in this chapter are obscure.

146 Varaha Purana
capacity to govern servants, riding.on bulls and living in the
forest.
9. When he was speaking, there arose his sons suddenly
fourfold, singlefold and twofold.
10. The fourfaced seeing the permanent and transient
objects, thought of the means of seeing his father.
11. “The great virtues which were there in my father, I am
not able to see in any of the sons of Svara.
12. 'The Veda proclaims that the grandson with the grandfather's name (will be like him), and this cannot be different in
the case of Svara's sons.
13. I should see those virtues in some one here. But what
shall I do?" He was thinking in this way.
14. While he was thinking thus, a weapon from his father
appeared there and with that Svara was churned.
15. When the churning was in progress, the fourfaced saw
the head appearing like a cocoanut fruit covered in a tenfold
16. The four-footed then cut it off like a sesamum plant.
17. Then he cut off what had become rootless.
18. At that part arose ten! and afterwards the five?
19. He cut them again and they were all flaming.
20. When that was cut off, a small object, onetenth of the
original size, appeared.
21. That too was cut off, but then arose another small like
that and white and calm.
22-23. And he saw in that his own father small like a molecule and indistinct. He then became happy and so too the father
Svara.
24. Such was the man Svara, his trunk was Pravrtti (action >
and head Vivrtti (inaction).
25. Thus arose the story and it has been narrated to you.
26. This is the earliest of allstories. He who understands its
significance, performs true action.
I. The ten indicates the indriyas, five jianendriyas for perception and
five karmendriyas for action.
2. The five represents the five elements, Earth,Water, Fire, Air and
Ether,

CHAPTER FIFTYFOUR
Vrata for attaining the best husband
Bhadrāśva said:
1. O sage, be pleased to tell me who should be worshipped
by a person desirous of getting knowledge and how he should be
worshipped.
Agastya said:
2. Lord Visnu alone is to be worshipped by all always, even
by Devas. I shall tell you the means by which one can get boons
from him.
3. He is the ultimate truth conveyed by the Vedas and sought by sages and the common people, and He is the Supreme
God. Worshipping him will never be in vain.
4. The vrata to propitiate Visnu told by the great Narada
to the Apsarases is well known.
Apsarases said:
5. O divine sage, son of Brahma, we wish to have husbands.
Please tell us how we can get Lord Narayana as our husband.
Narada said:
6. Itis the rule that a question like this should be asked after
respectful prostration, but you did not observe it because of your
pride of youth.
7. Still, since you have uttered the name of the great Visnu
and what you seek is to attain him as husband, I feel you have
made some amends for your fault.
8. I shall now tell you about the vrata by which Visnu will
give boons on his own and become the husband of the seekers.
Narada | said:
9. On the auspicious Dvadasi day in the $uklapaksa in
Vasanta (spring season), one should fast and worship Visnu at
night in the prescribed manner.
10. A circle of red flowers should be made (round the idol)
and the whole night should be spent without sleep and with dance

148 Varàha Purana
and song, vocal and instrumental.
11. The (lord’s) head should be worshipped as Bhava, the
waist as Ananga, the hands as Kama, the belly as Susastra, the
feet as Manmatha, and the whole body as Hari.
12. The devotee should then bow in all directions.
13. In the morning gifts should be given to a Vaidik Brahmin who is free from bodily defect.
14. After propitiating the Brahmins, the vrata should be
concluded. If you observe all this, Visnu will certainly become
your husband.
15. The lord should also be worshipped with fine sugarcane
juice and flowers like jasmine.
16. Since in your pride you did not bow to me before asking
me about this, you have shown me an insult and you cannot
escape (fully) from its effect.
17. Therefore in this very lake here you stand now, you
will happen to laugh at sage Astavakra and incur his curse.
18-19. You will get the great Hari as your husband, but
you will face the insult of being carried away by the cowherds.
But the lord will still be your husband.
Agastya said:
20. After saying this, the divine sage Narada disappeared.
They performed all that they were told to do, and Visnu became
pleased with them.
CHAPTER FIFTYFIVE
Subhavrata
Agastya said:
1. O great king, listen to the best of vratas namely Subha,
by which Lord Visnu may be attained.
2. This should be started on the first day in the bright fortnight of the month of Margasirsa and on Dagami take food only
once.

p—
3. Then at noon on that Dasami day worship Visnu. And
on the Dvadasi day, perform Sankalpa as before.
4. Fasting on that day, give away yava grain to Brahmins
and utter the name of Hari while performing Dana, Homa and
Arcana.
5. Spend four months like this, and in the next four from
Caitra month observe similarly but give barley meal as gifts to
Brahmins.
6. In the next three months from Sravana give paddy grain
as gift.
7. In the month of Kàrttika also observe in the same manner and on Dvadasi worship Visnu with great purity and devotion in the name of the month.
8. With full control of the senses and with sankalpa as before, perform rituals on Dvadasi.
9-10. (For this) on Ekadasi day instal a golden image of
Earth, with the great mountains in front of Visnu, on a pair of
white clothes over layers of different grains.
11. Offer to the deity five gems (gold, silver, ruby, emerald
and pearl) and keep awake the whole night.
12. In the morning invite twentyfour Brahmins and give
each a cow with daksina.
13. Also a pair of clothes, a ring (for the finger), bangles
and earrings in gold.
14. The king may give a village each to the poor (Brahmins).
15. Along with the land gift, a pair of golden cows as well
as a pair of clothes also may be given, according to capacity.
16. A cow decorated with all ornaments may also be specially given. In this way the Lord becomes pleased.
17. The image of Earth may also be made of silver and this
may be given to the Brahmin along with the other associate
materials thinking of Visnu.
18-19. He should also be fed and given slippers and umbrella
uttering *May lord Visnu of universal form be always pleased
with me’,
20-21. The merit acquired by such feeding and gifts cannot
be described even in the course of many years. Still, I shall tell
You a little of it. Listen to my account of what was achieved by
this vrata,

150 Varáha Purana
22. Inthe Krtayuga there was a saintly king named Drdhavrata. He asked Lord Brahma as to what he might do to get a
son. Brahma told him about this vrata and he performed it.
23. At the close of the vrata, the universal god (Visnu)
appeared before him and asked him to seek a boon.
The king said:
24. “Bless me with a son, O Lord, who will be longlived, very
famous, highly virtuous, proficient in the Vedas and inclined
to perform sacrifices".
25-26. The king continued: "Grant me also, O great god,
the position of a sage by attaining which one will have no cause
to regret".
27. Lord Visnu granted the boons sought and disappeared.
And a son by name Vatsaéri was born to him.
28. He became very learned, well versed in Vedas and
Vedangas and performed many sacrifices, and his fame spread
over the whole world.
29., The king, having attained this son by the blessing of
Visnu, retired to perform intensive penance.
30. With full control of the senses and absolute fasting, he
began to meditate on Visnu in the Himalayas and always utter
the praise of Visnu.
Bhadràíva said:
31. O sage, what was the praise uttered by him and what
happened to him who was praising the lord in that manner ?
Durvasas said:
32. Resorting to the Himalayas and with mind fully
immersed in Visnu, the king praised him.
The king said:
33. “I bow to Janardana of the form of water, the permanent as well as the transient, reposing in the milky ocean, the
holder of the earth, the final resort of all beings, beyond all senses
and the foremost among the enjoyers of the whole universe.
34. O lord, you are the first principle, the ultimate truth,
all-pervading, most ancient, the best among men, beyond senses,

pe
the foremost among those who have mastered the Vedas. Save
me, O holder of the conch, mace and weapons.
35. "O Visnu, the Eternal, all that you have done at the entreaties of Devas and Asuras is for the sake of bringing about
creation, though you are the ultimate.
36. Still, you assumed the form of the tortoise and other
animals and you are spoken of as having taken birth several times,
though actually all this is not there.
37. I bow to you, O Narasimha, Vamana, Parasurama,
Rama, Vasudeva, Buddha, Kalkin, Sambhu, the destroyer of
the enemies of the gods.
38. Ibow to you, O Narayana, Padmanabha, Purusottama,
worshipped by all gods and the foremost of all-knowing.
39. O eternal god, I bow to you who assumed the fierce manlion form, the tortoise-form expansive like the mountain, the
fish-form extensive like the ocean and the boar form.
40. All this (assumption of different forms) is for the sake
of creation (of the world). Really you have no form whatsoever.
To facilitate meditation, a form is conceived for you, the ancient
Man.
41. You are the first sacrifice by yourself. You are the accessories of the sacrifice. You are the offering in the sacrilice. You
are the sacrificial animal. You are the priest and the clarified
butter. Groups of gods and sages sacrifice for you.
42. The entire world, animate and inanimate, is in you. In
you are the gods, time and fire. O Janardana, you are undivided.
Please grant me my desire.
43. I bow to you Hari, lotus-eyed. I bow to you the finite
and infinite. I seek refuge in you. Lift me up from the worries
of the world".
44. Thus praised by the great king standing under a big
mango tree, tne lord became very much pleased.
45. And he came there in the form of a dwarfish Brahmin.
As soon as he came, the big mango tree also became a small one.
46. Seeing that great wonder, the saintly king began to
think about how the big tree became small.
47. 'Then he was able to understand that the arrival of the
Brahmin was the cause and that this very fact showed, that the
Visitor was the lord himself.

152 Varaha Puréna
48. He prostrated before that Brahmin and prayed.
49. “O Lord, you are certainly the great Visnu come here
to bless me. Be pleased to show me your genuine form".
50. 'Fhus requested the lord appeared before him in his
original form bearing the conch, disc and mace, and told him:
51. “O great king, ask me the boon you wish to get. When
I am pleased, the whole world to me is but a scsamum seed”,
52. Told thus, the king became extremely delighted and
asked for moksa and nothing else.
53. Thus requested, the lord said again:
54. “Since at my arrival this expansive mango tree (amraj
became small (kubja), this tirtha will hereafter be known a;
Kubjakamra.
55. Not only Brahmins, but even the animals, when they
give up the body here, will get salvation that is the yogin’s.”’
56. After saying thus, the lord touched the king with the tip
of his conch and immediately he attained salvation.
57. Therefore, O king, you too resort to this lord so that
you may not revert to worldly existence.
58. He who listens to this story and he who recites it daily
in the morning, attains liberation.
59. And, O king, he who performs this holy Subhavrata,
will get great prosperity and, in the end, will be merged in Him.
CHAPTER FIFTYSIX
Dhanyavrata
Agastya said:
l. Ishall now tell you about the Dhanyavrata by performing which even a poor man becomes quickly rich.
2. In the tithi Prathama in the bright half of the month of
Margasirsa, worship in the night Visnu in the form of fire.
3. Worship the feet as Vaisvanara, the belly as Agni, chest
as Havirbhuja, hands as Dravinoda, head as Sarnvarta and the
entire body as Jvalana.

4-5. After duly worshipping Janardana in this manner,
prepare an altar of fire in front and perform homa in it with the
above mantras. Then eat cooked barley with ghee.
6. In the dark half of the month also the worship should be
done in the same manner. This may be continued for four months.
7. During the next four months from Caitra eat milky food
with ghee and during the four months from Sravana eat barley
meal. The vrata is thus brought to a close.
8. At the end of the vrata make a golden image of fire,
cover it with a pair of red clothes, decorate it with red flowers
and anoint it with saffron.
9-10. Then give the image to a Brahmin of faultless body
along with the pair of red clothes uttering the following mantra.
11. “I am gratified (dhanya), I perform righteous deeds
(dhanyakarmá), all my actions are for good (dhanyacesfa), lam
blessed (dhanyavdn). Let me be happy by this Dhanyavrata’’.
12. Thus saying make the gift of the image with money to
the Brahmin. The result is that one becomes highly satisfied
without actual enjoyment or suffering in the world.
13. It is quite certain that by this vrata alone, one attains
in this life abundant happiness, wealth and grain (food).
14. The fire (in the vrata) burns away all sins in the former
lives and, as a result, brings about liberation.
15. He who listens to this and he who recites it with devotion, both become highly blessed.
16. It is said that long long ago, this was performed by
` Dhanada who was born to a Sidra woman.
CHAPTER FIFTYSEVEN
Kantivrata
Agastya said:
l. I shall now tell you about the important Kantivrata by
performing which the Moon regained his !ost resplendence.
2. Itis well known that the Moon was attacked by consump-

154 Varáha Purána
tion due to the curse of Daksa and that he regained his lustre by
performing this vrata.
3. O king, on the Dvitiyà tithi in the bright half of the
month of Karttika, spend the whole night by worshipping Visnu
as Bala-KeSava.
4. The feet should be worshipped as Baladeva and the head
as Ke$ava.
5. After worshipping Visnu in this form, an image of the
moon of two digits (in gold) should be worshipped with arghya
etc., and with the (prescribed) mantras.
6. “I bow to the great soul Soma, the overlord of the world
of sacrifice, the holder of amrta and the great ordainer". (This
should be uttered).
7. In the night should be eaten cooked barley with ghee.
8. For the four months from Phalguna milky food should be
taken and in Kàrttika homa with barley should be conducted.
9. During the four months from Asadha homa with sesamum
should be performed, and only sesamum food should be taken.
10. At the end of one ycar, the golden image of the moon
covered in a pair of white clothes and decorated with white
flowers should be gifted to a Brahmin.
11-12. At the end of the year, a silver image! of the moon
covered in a pair of white clothes and decorated with white flowers may also he given to a Brahmin after similarly honouring him.
13. “O Narayana in the form of Soma, by your grace, one
becomes lustrous, learned and lovely; 1 bow to you". (This
should then be uttered).
14. By making the gift to the Brahmin with this mantra, a
man becomes resplendent.
15. In days of yore, this vrata was performed by Soma himself and Visnu was very much pleased by it.
16. And he rid him of his consumption and gave him the
digit called ‘Amrta’. This digit was acquired by Soma at night.
17. He regained his full form and became the king of the
stars. On the Dvitiyà day the A$vinidevas should be acclaimed
as Soma-eaters. They are known as Sesa and Visnu.
1, The silver image seems to be an alternative for the golden image
for those who cannot atford to give it.

18. O king, there is no god other than Visnu. All the other
gods are himself in different names.
CHAPTER FIFTYEIGHT
Saubhag yavrata
Agastya said:
]. I shall now tell you about Saubhagyavrata by performing which prosperity accrues to man and woman alike.
2. On Trtiya tithi in the bright half of the month of phalguna one should perform this vrata with purity of body and
mind in the night.
3-4. He should worship Hari with Laksmi or Rudra with
Uma. Laksmi is identical with Uma and Hari is identical with
Rudra. It is so declared in all Sastras and Puranas.
Any Sastra or Kavya which states otherwise is not worthy
of its name.
5-6. Visnu should be considered as Rudra and Laksmi as
Gauri. He who speaks of difference between them is lowly
(Adhama) and should be considered an atheist outside the field
of dharma.
7. Knowing this well, Hari together with his consort should
be duly worshipped with the prescribed mantras.
8. The feet should be worshipped as Gambhira, the waist
as Subhaga, the belly as Devadeva, and face as Trinetra (threeeyed), the head as Vacaspati and the entire body as Rudra.
9-10. Worshipping thus with sandal, flowers etc., either
Visnu with Laksmi or Siva with Gauri, homa should be performed in front with honey, ghee and sesamum in the name of
Saubhagyapati (lord of prosperity).
11. Cooked wheat should be taken on the floor and without oil and caustic elements.
In the dark half of the month also, the observance is the same.
12. In the months of Asadha etc., the fast should be broken
with barley food, and in Karttika etc., with food made by Syamaka grain.

156 Vardha Purana
13-14. Then on Trtiyà tithi in the bright half of the month
of Magha a golden image of Rudra and Gauri or of Visnu and
Laksmi should be made according to means.
15-16. The image should be given to a deserving Brahmin
who is a good Vedic scholar but without means for food or onc
who closely observes the precepts. It will be better if the recipient is a devotee of Visnu.
17-18. It will be particularly meritorious if six vessels are
given to the Brahmin containing honey, ghee, sesamum oil,
molasses, salt and cow's milk one in each.
19. By observing this, prosperity and beauty in seven lives
are gained, be the performer man or woman.
CHAPTER FIFTYNINE
Avighnavrata
Agastya said:
1. I shall now tell you about the Vighnahara (Avighna)
Vrata by which, O king, obstacles are warded off.
2. This vrata should be performed on Caturthi tithi in the
month of Phalguna. Food should be taken only at night and it
should be of rice mixed with sesamum.
3. The homa also should be of the same material (sesamum),
so too the gift to the Brahmin.
4. This should be done for four months and in the fifth a
golden image of Ganesa should be worshipped and gifted to a
Brahmin together with milky food in five vessels and sesamum.
5. All obstacles can be got over by performing this vrata.
6. When Sagara faced impediments while performing
A$vamedha sacrifice, he got them removed by this vrata.
7. When Rudra was destroying Tripura, he did the same to
accomplish his aim. And I too did the same while drinking the
ocean.
8. This was done by many kings and by those that seek
penance or knowledge, to remove obstructions.

pe
9. Püjà (worship) should be performed to Ganega (invoking him as) Sara, Dhira, Gajanana, Lambodara and Ekadamstra, and homa also should be done to keep off obstacles.
10. By doing this all obstacles vanish, and by gifting the
image of Vinàyaka, one attains great gratification.
CHAPTER SIXTY
Santivrata
Agastya said:
1. O king, I shall now tell you about Santivrata by performing which all householders get peace of mind—Bliss. Listen.
2. It should be performed on Paficami tithi of the bright
half (starting from) the month of Karttika. During the year hot
things should be avoided in food.
3-4. In the night Visnu should be worshipped in his form
reposing Sesa. The feet should be worshipped as Ananta, the
waist as Vasuki, the belly as Taksaka, the chest as Karkotaka,
the neck as Padma, the hands as Mahapadma, the face as
Sankhapala and the head as Kutila.
5. Worshipping (the great serpents) as contained in
Visnu, püjà may be offered to them separately also.
6. Withthem in mind, Visnu should be bathed with milk,
and then homa should be performed with milk and sesamum.
7. At the end of the year, Brahmins should be fed anda
golden image of à serpent should be gifted to one of them.
8. O king, he who observes this vrata with a devoted
mind, will certainly get full peace of mind and freedom from
the fear of snakes.

158 Varaha Purana
CHAPTER SIXTYONE
Kamavrata
Agastya said:
1-2. O king, listen tome. I shall tell you now about Kamavrata by which whatever pleasure is desired is obtained by
anyone who performs it on the Sasthi day eating only fruit.
3-4. On Paficami day in the bright half of the month of
Pausa one should take meal, but on Sasthi only fruit and afterwards silently pure rice in the company of other Brahmins. Or
(even on that day) he may take fruit alone and on the Saptami
day have (the usual) meal.
5. Homa also should be performed after worshipping Visnu
as Guha (Skanda) in the prescribed manner. This should be
done for one year.
6. The worship of Visnu should be in his names as Sadvaktra (six-faced), Karttikeya (son of Krttika), Senàni (commander), Kumara and Skanda.
7. At the close of the vrata, Brahmins should be fed and a
golden image of Skanda should be gifted to one of them, saying.
8. “O lord Kumara, may all my wishes be accomplished by
your mercy due to my devotion. O Brahmin, receive it soon”.
9. When this (image) is given to the Brahmin along with the
clothes the desires of the worshipper begin to get fulfilled in
this life itself.
10. A sonless man gets a son, a needy man gets money, the
deposed king regains kingdom. There need be no doubt in
this matter.
ll. In days of yore, this vrata was performed by Nala when
he was living (in servitude) in Rtuparna's capital.
12. Similarly by several other depcsed kings was this vrata
observed to succeed (in regaining kingdom).

CHAPTER SIXTYTWO
Arogyavrata
Agastya satd:
1. Now I shall tell you about another vrata called ‘Arogyavrata which removes sins of every kind.
2. This vrata is to be observed by performing worship (to
the Sun-god) in the names of Aditya, Bhaskara, Ravi,
Bhanu, Sürya, Divakara and Prabhakara.
3. The rule is that on the Sasthi day food may be taken; on
Saptami day the sun should be worshipped (without food) and
on the Astami day food may again be taken.
4, One who performs this worship of the Sun duly for one
full year, gets health, wealth and grain in this life, and gets in
the other world a place from where he need not return.
5-6. In days of yore, the glorious and valiant king by name
Anaranya propitiated the god by this Vrata, as a result of which
the god was pleased and he bestowed upon him sound health.
. Bhadrasva said:
7. Was that king sickly that he is spoken of as getting
healthy ? O sage, how did he happen to get the disease ?
Agastya said:
8. The king was, no doubt, glorious, famous, handsome,
mighty and healthy.
9. But once he happened to go to the Manasa lake frequented by hosts of gods. He saw there in the middle of the Jake a
big white lotus.
10. And within that an effulgent man of the size of the
thumb, two-armed and clad in red silk.
11-12. Seeing him, he called his charioteer and spoke to
him: “Bring that lotus to me. Wearing this on my head before
the whole world, I shall become highly praiseworthy. So bring it
quickly". Told thus, the charioteer entered the lake.
13. He went near it in order to catch it. But the moment he.
touched the lotus, a boom emanated from it and, terrified by that
sound, he fell down dead.

160 Varüha Purana
14. By the impact of that sound, the king lost his complexion, might and prowess and became a leper.
15. Seeing the transformation of that kind, the king was
grief-stricken and began to think about how it happened.
16-17. When he was pondering thus, sage Vasistha, the son
of Brahma, came there and asked him: “O king, how has your
body become afflicted in this wav ? Tell me what I may do for
you".
18. Asked thus by Vasistha, the king told him about the
lotus and al! that happened.
19. After hearing that, the sage said: “O king, you arc
lucky. But you are also unlucky and hence you have become a
leper”.
20-21. Told thus, the king shivering with fear and with
folded hands, asked him: “O sage, I am righteous, how could I
be otherwise"? Be pleased to tell me the cause of my leprosy."
Vasistha said:
22. “This lotus is called ‘Brahmapadma’ and it is well
known over the three worlds. Its very sight is equivalent to the
sight of all gods.
23. Somewhere in this lake, it will be seen for six months.
On seeing it, he who enters water gets cleansed of all sins and
attains supreme beatitude.
24. This is the form of Brahman in the originating stage.
Seeing this and then plunging in water, brings about liberation.
25. O king, your charioteer saw this and was immersed in
water. But you came here to catch hold of it and so you have
committed a sin and, as a result, become a leper.
26-27. Since you were able to see this (lotus) I said you
are lucky. But since you became stupefied (so as to attempt at
plucking it) I said you are unlucky”.
28. Saying thus to the king, Vasistha disappeared.
29. The king, grasping what Vasistha had said, came there
every day and saw the lord (in the lotus) (and got cured of the
disease).

gm
30. The godstoo call it the golden lotus. Seeing the Brahmapadma with Hari within it in the Mānasa lake, one attains the
supreme Brahman from where he does not return.
31. O king, there is another reason also for your becoming
leprous. The sun remains within this lotus.
32-33. He is really the eternal Supreme self. You thought
of wearing that on the head thinking you would become famous
thereby and so sent the charioteer to fetch it. That very moment
you became afflicted by leprosy.
34. Therefore, O king, you also perform this vrata and
by its power you will be cured of leprosy.
CHAPTER SIXTYTHREE
Putrapraptivrata
Agastya said:
l. O king, now listen to the brief account of the Putrapraptivrata. I am going to give you.
2. This Putrapraptivrata (the vow for getting a son) is to
be performed fasting on the Astami tithi in the dark half of the
month of Bhàdrapada.
3. The Sankalpa should be made on the Saptami day and
the worship to Visnu as Krsna lying in Devaki's lap surrounded
bv the mothers, should be conducted on Astami.
4. On the Astami day, early in the morning, Visnu should
be worshipped with full concentration of mind.
3. Then homa should be performed with barley, black
sesamum, ghee and curd. Brahmans should be fed and given
daksinà.
6. 'Then the performer of vrata may take food, first Bilva
leaves, and then with oils and other items.
7. Doing in this way on the Krsnapaksa Astami every
month, an issueless person begets children.
8-10. It is known that in ancient times the valiant king
Sürasena who was issueless, performed penance in the Himalayas, and the Lord himself told him about this vrata, and accord-

162 Varaha Purdna
ingly he performed it and got a son Vasudeva by name who
later on performed many sacrifices. And the saintly king (Sürasena) gained salvation.
1]. Thus, O king, I have told you about Krsnastami.
(In this Vrata), at the end of the year, a pair of cows should be
gifted to a Brahmin.
12. Such is the Putravrata narrated to you. By performing
it one gets freed from all sins.
CHAPTER SIXTYFOUR
Sauryavrata
Agastya said:
1. I shall now tell you about another vrata called Sauryavrata (the vow for valour) by which even a timid man becomes
valiant all of a sudden.
2. On the Navami day in the month of Agvayuja one should
undertake absolute fasting. Taking the sankalpa on the Saptami
day and remaining without food on Astami, on the Navami day
flour should be taken first in all reverence.
3. Feeding the Brahmins, goddess Durga who is Mahamaya, Mahabhaga and Mahaprabha should be worshipped.
4-5. Observing in this way for one whole year, at the end
of the vrata, young girls should be fed, and, according to means,
given golden garments. The goddess should then be implored
saying, "May the goddess be pleased with me".
6. By performing thus, a deposed king gets back his kingdom, the ignorant man gets knowledge and the fear-stricken
man gets valour.

CHAPTER SIXTYFIVE
Sárvabhaumavrata
Agastya said:
I. I shall now tell you briefly about the Sárvabhaumavrata (vow for emperorship) by performing which properly, a
king can become an emperor.
2.4. On the Dasami tithi in the bright half of the month of
Karttika, one should take food only in the night and offer pure
bali to the different quarters with flowers of various kinds, after
offering worship to Brahmins, and pray with devotion to the
quarters saying, May you all be favourable to me in life after
life". So saying bali should be offered to them with pure mind.
5. Food should not be taken in the night, but well-cooked
food with curd may be taken before and after.
6. He who performs so, for one year, gains victory in different quarters.
7. Ifhe performs this in the prescribed manner without food
starting from Ekadaéi in the bright half of the month of MargaSirsa and continues for one year, Kubera gets pleased and grants
abundant wealth.
8. It is a great vrata relating to Visnu if on Ekadasi, whether in the bright half or dark half of the month, one fasts and
takes food on Dvadasi day.
9. Such observance destroys even great sins.
10. Then there is Dharmavrata, which should be started in
the night of Trayodasi in the bright half of the month Phalguna.
It is Raudravrata starting in Caturdasi in the dark half, from the
month of Magha and continuing for one year.
Il. It is Pitrvrata when it is performed on the Amavasya
day. All these have been now told to you.
12. If one continues these vratas for fifteen years, one gets
reward according to their intensity.
13. O king, performing them according to the prescribed
rules, is equivalent to performing thousands of A$vamedha and
hundreds of Rajasiiya sacrifices. -
14-15. Even a single vrata is capable of destroying all sins.
A king who performs all of them gets the whole universe under
his control and finally attains the celestial region called Viraja.

164 Varaha Puránc
CHAPTER SIXTYSIX
Naradiya Paficarátra
Bhadráíva said:
1. Iam eager to know whatever wonder you have seen or
heard. Please tell me.
Agastya said:
2. Lord Janardana is himself of the nature of wonder. The
wonders I have seen about him are many and varied.
8. O king, when sage Narada once went to Svetadvipa
he saw there many effulgent men bearing the conch, disc and
lotus.
4. Seeing them he began to ponder over as to who was Lord
Visnu among them.
5. Hewasunable to know who was the Lord Krsna (Visnu)
with conch, disc and mace, to whom he could offer worship.
6. Baffled thus, he began to meditate on lord Krsna, the
great Narayana.
7. By this meditation for a thousand divine years, the lord
became pleased with him.
8. He appeared before him and asked him what boon He
could give him.
Narada said:
9. Ihave meditated on you for a thousand years. If you are
pleased with me, tell me how I may attain you.
The great lord said:
10. O sage, those who perform sacrifice with Purusasükta
and those who learn the Vedic Texts attain me.
11. In the absence of Vedas and Sastras, those who do sacrifice in the manner ordained in the Pāñcarātra attain me.
12. The Pajficaratra is for Brahmins, Ksatriyas and Vaisyas
For Südras and others what is laid down is going to the temple
and utterance of my names but not my worship.
13-14. O sage, I declared this in the most ancient times for
the multitude. Any one who follows it and becomes my devotee,

2mm
will retain this in his mind when the fruits of his actions disappear.
15. Others who are engulfed by the feelings caused by Rajas
and Tamas, become indifferent towards me.
16. In Krta, Tretà and Dvapara yugas, those with the sativa
element (predominating) reach me, but in Kali people have a
preponderance of Rajas and Tamas.
17-18. Listen to me Narada, now, I give you another boon.
This rare Paficaratra doctrine of mine will fully dawn upon you
by my blessing. You need have no doubt in this matter.
19. Ican be attained through the Vedas, Paficaratra, Bhakti
and Yajiia, but not by anything else even if resorted to for crores
of years.
20. Telling this to Narada, the great lord disappeared, and
Narada too went to heaven.
CHAPTER SIXTYSEVEN
The Wonder of Visnu
Bhadrüfva said:
1. Who are the two women in this world, one black and the
other white, and who is both black and white ?
2. Who is this pure person, who became sevenfold ? Who
is the lord who is twelve-fold and who has two bodies and six
heads?
3. How was conjugal unity brought about through the rising sun? How was this world expanded?
Agastya said:
4. The white woman and the black woman are sisters. The
woman who is of the dual colour, black and white, is the night.
3. The person who being one became sevenfold, is the ocean
Which is seven in number.
. 6. He who is twelve-fold and has. two bodies and six heads
1s the year and the two bodies are the two movements (northWard and southward), the six faces are the six seasons and thus
the person is verily the year.

166 Varaha Purana
7. The conjugal unity is the day and night brought about
by the sun and the moon, and from this dual god arose the propagation of the world.
8-9. O king, Visnu should be considered the Supreme God.
One who does not do the rites ordained by the Vedas, can never
see him.
CHAPTER SIXIYEIGHT
Yugadharma
Bhadragva said:
1. How should this great lord, the omnipresent Supreme
Soul, be known in four vugas?
2. What are the practices to be observed in each yuga by
the castes? How can a Brahmin who contacts a woman not his
own, can get himself purified?
Agastya said:
3. Inthe Krtayuga the earth becomes connected with Devas
by Vedic rituals. In thc Tretayuga the same is accomplished
through sacrifices.
4. Inthe Dvaparayuga by the mingling of Sattva and Rajas,
the king reigns according to the extent of his righteousness. In
Kaliyuga Tamas predominates.
5-6. In the Kali age Brahmins stray from the path of righteousness and the Ksatriyas, Vai$yas and Südras become mostly
lowcastes without truth and purity. Then the world gets spoiled
and the dharma of the castes begins to disappear.
Bhadráíva said:
7. How can a Brahmin, Ksatriya, (Vaisya) and Südra
purify himself if he happened to have sexual connection with a
prohibited women. Is such a connection tolerated at all?
Agastya said:
8. A Brahmin can cohabit with (women of all) the four

(castes), a Ksatriya with three (avoiding Brahmin), a Vaisya
with two (avoiding Brahmin and Ksatriya) and Sidra with his
own (only).
9. To the Ksatriya the Brahmin woman is prohibited, to
the Vaisya the Brahmin and Ksatriya women are prohibited and
to the Südra all these three.
10. Manu has declared that to a man in the lower caste a
woman of the higher caste is prohibited; so too the mother,
mother's sister, mother-in-law and brother's wife.
11. To one in the lower caste, a woman in the higher caste
is fully excluded; so too the daughter-in-law, daughter; the frend's
wife and grand-daughters.
12-13. The women of the washerman class and similar
others are also of the prohibited category. Cohabiting with a
woman of the prohibited category produces great sin.
14. ‘The atonement for a Brahmin for such prohibited cohabitation is fràndyàma (control of breath in the prescribed form)
for a hundred times.
‘15-16. The sin acquired by a Brahmin by prohibited association with the woman of a different caste, even during a long
time, disappears by reciting the Gayatri mantra with pranava ten
times and by pradndyama three hundred times. Even the sin of
killing a Brahmin (disappears by such a practice), then should
we say about the other (less grave) sins?
17. It may also be noted that the Brahmin who is able to
realise the Supreme god by meditation and worship is no
touched by sin.
18. The learner of the Vedas is not affected even if he happens to commit numerous sins.
19. By meditating on Visnu, learning the Vedas, giving
gifts and performing sacrifices for Hari, a Brahmin always remains pure and gets over all obstacles.
20. I have thus told you all that you asked me about. I have
briefly stated what has been said by Manu and others in detail.

168 Varaha Purana
CHAPTER SIXTYNINE
The Wonder of Narayana
‘Bhadrasva said:
1. O Sage, be pleased to tell me what happened to you in
your body that you are long-lived.
Agastya said:
2. O king, this body of mine is associated with many interesting things. It is purified by Vedic knowledge and it wil
remain for numerous kalpas.
3. Wandering over the whole world, O king, I once went
to the great land Ilavrta near mount Meru.
4. There I saw a beautiful lake, near it a great hermitage
and within it a frail sage performing penance.
5. Seeing him who was reduced to a skeleton and was
wearing torn bark garment, I was wondering who he was.
6. In order to gain his confidence, I exclaimed: ‘O sage, I
have come to you, please give me something".
7. The sage said: “Welcome to you, O great Brahmin,
please remain here. I shall show hospitality to you”.
8. At these words of his, I entered the hermitage and saw
the sage glowing with lustre.
9. Seeing me standing on the floor, the sage hummed and
immediately there arose splitting the earth five virgins.
10. One of them took a golden seat and offered it to me.
Another held water in her hand and a third began to wash my
feet with it.
11. Two others holding fans stood on my sides. The sage
again hummed.
12. Asa result, a large golden canoe appeared in that lake
beautifully floating.
13. In that canoc were hundreds of virgins holding golden
pots. Seeing them the sage told me:
14. “O Brahmin, all this is for your bath. Please enter the
canoe and have your bath”.
15. Then I entered that canoe, but soon the canoe sank
into the lake.

16. When I was thus immersed in water, I saw that place,
that sage and myself at the top of mount Meru.
17. O king, I then saw the seven oceans, the seven principal mountains, and the seven islands constituting the earth.
18. Even now I remain thinking of that glorious world and
how and when I could get there (again).
19. I have now satisfied your curiosity regarding the great
lord and what happened to my person. What else do you wish
to ask ?
CHAPTER SEVENTY
Rudragità I
Bhadráfva said:
1. O sage, what Vrata, Tapas or Dharma was done by you
to get at that world again?
Agastya said:
2. No one can think of getting at those worlds without
worshipping Visnu with devotion. When once he is worshipped,
all of them are easily attainable.
3. ‘Thinking, thus, O king, the eternal Visnu was worshipped by me with sacrifices in which daksina was liberally given.
4. As I was worshipping him in his form as sacrifice for a
long time, Devas who were invoked in the sacrifice came there
together with Indra.
3-6. When Indra and the other gods were remaining in
their positions in the sky, the great god Rudra arrived there.
He too stood in his position.
7-9. Seeing all the gods, sages and great serpents arrive
there, the sage Sanatkumara, son of Brahma, came there in a
very minute aerial car resembling the sun and he, a great yogi
who could know the past, present and future, prostrated before
Rudra.
10-11. At the sight of these Devas, sages like Nàrada, and
Sanatkumara and Rudra, I asked who among them was the

170 Varáha Purana
greatest to whom sacrifices could be offered. Then in the presence of gods, Rudra told me:
Rudra said:
12. Listen to me all of you Devas, Devarsis, Brahmarsis,
and you intelligent Agastya in particular.
13-14. He for whom: sacrifices are to be performed is the
great and omnipresent lord Narayana from whom the entire
universe has arisen and in whom it is dissolved along with Devas,
15-16. That great lord put himself to a three-fold transformation. With Sattva predominating in him, he associated
himself with Rajas and ‘lamas, and created out of his navel
Brahma scated in the lotus. Brahma associated himself with
Rajas and ‘Tamas and created me.
17-18. Lord Hari is Sattva and he is the ultimate. Brahma,
the four-faced god, who arose from the lotus is Sattva and Rajas,
That which is with Rajas and Tamas is no doubt, myself.
19. There is the trio constituted of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas.
Sattva is of the nature of Nàràyana and all living beings are liberated by it.
20. By Rajas associated with Sattva arises this creation
which has got Rajas predominating. This is well known as the
creation of Brahma.
21. The actions not laid down in the Vedas but are, however, based on Sastras, are called Raudra (pertaining to Rudra)
and that is not commended for people.
22. Actions not out of Rajas, but purely out of Tamas,
lead people to ruin both in the present world and in the world
beyond.
23. Sattva pertains to Narayana and living beings have
Sattva as the means of liberation, and Narayana is considered
as of the nature of sacrifice.
24, In the Krtayuga, Narayana is worshipped in his pure
and minute form. In the Tretayuga he is worshipped in the form
of sacrifice and in the Dvàpara yuga according to Paficaratra.
25. In the Kaliyuga he is worshipped in the manner laid
‘down by me in various Tamasic forms and with the motive of
animosity.
26. There is no god above him in the past, present or future.

He who is Visnu is Brahma and he who is Brahma is MaheSvara
too.
27. Men who are learned in the three Vedas and adepts in
sacrifices have declared that he who draws a distinction among
us three, is sinful and wicked and faces downfall.
98. O Agastya, listen. I shall tell you about the early times
when people were not having devotion to Hari.
99-30. In olden times, the people of the Bhüloka (Earth)
performed sacrifice to Janardana, and went to the Bhuvarloka,
and from there worshipped Him and attained heaven being
liberated in the gradual manner.
31. (Even) after being thus liberated, everyone began to
meditate on Hari, and He being present everywhere, appeared
before them.
32. He asked them all as to what he might do for them.
'They then bowed to him and said:
33. “O great god, all people have been now liberated. How
then will crcation proceed and who will go to hell?"
34. ‘Thus asked by Devas, lord Janardana told them: “During the (first) three yugas, most people reach mc.
35. But in the last yuga (Kali) those who attain me will
be few. I then create the force of stupefaction which deludes
people.
36. O you Rudra, you produce the Mohasastra (the science
of stupefaction). With a little effort you produce delusion"',
37. So saying, the great lord concealed himself and 1 was
made very manifest.
38. From then onwards people became more interested in
the $àstras which I promulgated.
39. Following the Vedic path, (worshipping) lord Narayana and finding unity (in all the three gods), people get liberation.
40. Those who consider me as different from Visnu or
Brahma, are driven to do sinful deeds and reach hell.
41. It is for the delusion of those who are outside the Vedic
fold that 1 introduced the sàstra called Naya, Siddhànta etc.
42. ‘This is the rope (Pasa) that binds men (Pagu) and that
should be snapped. Therefore, it is the Pasupata $àstra which is
Vaidik.

172 Varaha Purana
43. O sage, my body is of the Vedas. This truth is not known
by those who propound other śāstras.
44. I am to be known through the Vedas and particularly
by the Brahmins. I am the three yugas and also Brahma and
Visru.
45. I am the three gunas Sattva, (Rajas and Tamas), the
three Vedas and the three fires, and three worlds, the three Sandhyàs! and the three Varnas.?
46. Iam the three savanas*, the three bonds in the world.
47. He who knows this and also knows me as Narayana,
the lotus-born Brahmà and myself as one made different by the
qualities (has right knowledge). I am essentially one, itis ignorance that produces the sense of difference.
CHAPTER SEVENTYONE
Rudragita I1
Agastya said:
1. Said thus by Rudra, all the gods and sages bowed to him;
I too did the same.
2. After bowing thus, when I looked at him, I saw in his
body Brahma.
3. I also saw in his heart lord Narayana in an extremely
minute form glowing like the Sun.
4. Seeing this ailthe sacrificing sages were wonder-struck
and hailed him uttering the Sama, Rk and Yajurvedas.
5. Then they asked Paramesvara (Rudra) how in one and
the same god all the three gods are seen.
Rudra said:
6. O learned men, whatever is offered in the sacrifice for
me, is shared by all the three of us.
1. Morn, noon and evening.
2. Brahmana, Ksatriya, and Vaisya
3. Vedic rites to be performed in the morning, noon and evening.

7. O great sages, there is no diversity among us, and discerning people do not find any such thing".
8. Thus said by Rudra, O king, all the sages asked him
about the purpose of Mohasastra (which deludes people).
The sages said:
9. You have produced a separate sastra to stupefy the world.
Be pleased to tell us why you have done this.
Rudra said:
10. There is in Bharatavarsa a forest called Dandaka.
There a Brahmin named Gautama was performing severe penance.
11. Brahma was very much pleased at this, and he asked
the ascetic to seek a boon from him.
12. Thus asked by Brahma, the creator of the worlds, he
requested, ‘‘Give me abundance of crops and grain". And
Brahma granted it.
13-14. Getting this boon, the ascetic built a large hermitage
at Satasrnga and there he used to reap every morning the ripe
grain and cook it at noon and offer sumptuous food to Brahmins.
15. He was doing this for a long time, but once a severe
drought occurred which lasted for twelve ycars.
16. Distressed at this drought and very much famished, all
the sages in the forest went to Gautama.
17. Seeing them all in his hermitage, Gautama bowed to
them and asked them to stay there.
18. They remained there eating a variety of food till the
drought was over.
10. Then those sages felt a desire to undertake a pilgrimage.
20. Knowing this the great sage Marica spoke to the sage
Sandilya.
Marica said:
21. “O Sandilya, I say for your good that sage Gautama is
like your father. Without telling him we should not leave here
for penance”.
22. When told thus, the sages laughed and said, "Have
we sold ourselves to him by taking his food"?

174 Varaha Purána
. 29. Again they spoke of leaving the place. They also created a magical cow and left it at the hermitage.
24. Seeing that cow wandering in the hermitage, Gautama
took some water in his hand and splashed it on its body (to drive
it out).
25. Then that magical cow fell down like a drop of water.
26. Seeing it thus hurt, he turned to the sages starting to
leave and asked them with reverence:
27. “QO Brahmins, please tell me why vou are going leaving
me, your devotec”’.
The sages said:
98. “O sage, so long as the sin of killing the cow remains in
you, we shall not cat your food".
29, 'Told thus, Gautama who knew what was righteous,
asked them to tell him what was the atonement for the sin of
having killed the cow.
The sages said:
30. “This cow is not dead but has only become unconscious.
Bathed in the water of Ganga, it will doubtless rise up.
31. The atonement is only with regard to one that is killed.
So penance may be performed. Please don't be angry". So saying they all left.
32. When they were gone, Gautama went to the great
mount Himalaya to perform severe penance.
33. For one hundred and one years I was worshipped, and,
being pleased by that, I asked him to seek a boon.
34. He sought me the river Ganga in my matted hair to be
made to follow him.
35. I then let off the river from one part of my head and
Gautama led it to the place where the cow was lying.
36. Washed by that water the cow rose up, and the river
became great with holy water and sacred spots.
37. Seeing that great wonder, the seven sages came there in
aerial cars saying “Well done, well done.
38. Blessed you arc O Gautama, who is there equal to you
in that you have brougnt this Ganga to this Dandaka (forest).
39. Then Gautama was wondering as to how he became the
cause for burting the animal,

40. He realised then that it was all the result of the magic
adopted by the sages (who were living in his hermitage) and
cursed them who were sages only in appearance.
4l]. “You will all be outside the three Vedas and ineligible
to perform Vedic acts".
42. Hearing the curse of Gautama thus pronounced on those
sages, the Seven Sages told him: “Although vour words will
have due effect, you should not mean it for all time.
43. In the Kali age let these Brahmins become such as to
be ungrateful to those who do them good.
44. But, burnt by the fire of the woods of your curse, let
them in the Kali age become devotees.
45. But let them he outside the fold of Vedic rites. Let this
river also have the secondary name Godavari.
46. In Kaliyuga those who come to this river and give gifts
of cows and other materials according to their capacity, will
delight themselves with the gods.
47-48. If at the time when Jupiter is in Leo one takes bath
there and propitiates the manes according to the rules, they will
go to heaven even if they have fallen in hell, and those who are
already in heaven will get final release.
49. You will attain great fame and gain eternal liberation",
50. Then the seven sages went to Kailāśa where I was with
Párvati and told me:
51. “In the Kali age many will have your form with crown
of matted hair assuming by themselves ghostly forms and wearing
lingas.
52. For their sake, give a Sastra to all these people under
the influence of Kali".
53. Requested by them thus, I produced a Samhita which
contained rules for Vedic rites as well.
54. This Sarnhita was named Nissvasa, and Babhravya and
Sandila were absorbed in it.
55. Deluded by me, people out of selfish motives, will promulgate their own śåstras in Kaliyuga.
96. The Nisfvasasarhhità with a lakh of verses alone is authoritative and that gives the discipline regarding Pasupata.
37. This follows the path of the Vedas, and whatever is
outside its scope should be considered as impure.

176 Varáha Purana
58. The Vedantins in Kaliyuga resort to Rudra. Fickleminded people frame their own $àstras, but I don’t remain with
them.
59-60. In yore, I assumed the fierce Bhairava form for the
sake of the gods and for the annihilation of the wicked demons
and laughted terribly.
61. Out of my tears which fell then on the earth, arose innumerable terrific beings.
62. They were fond of flesh and wine and women and were
out to create terror in the world.
63. The Brahmins cursed by Gautama will be born in their
clan. Among them those who follow the rules I have laid down
and are of good conduct, will attain heaven and get liberation.
64. Those who doubt the doctrine I have laid down, ridicule
my followers and go to hell.
65. Formerly burnt by the fire of Gautama and now by my
words they go to hell and we need not doubt this.
Rudra continued:
66. Told thus by me, the sons of Brahma (the seven sages)
went away. Gautama too returned to his abode.
67. I have thus told you what Dharma is. He who is averse
to this naturally is prone to do only wicked things.
CHAPTER SEVENTYTWO
Determination of Prakrti and Purusa!
Varāha said:
1. Agastya asked the omniscient Rudra; Who is the most
ancient one and the creator of everything?"
Agastya said:
2. Yourself, Brahmà and Visnu constitute a trio and the
three Vedas. Like the flame of the lamp (you illumine everything) and permeate all śåstras.
1. Actually the chapter deals with theidentity of Brahma, Visnu and
Siva,

g
3, O god, tell me at which time are you Rudra, at which
time Brahma and at which time Visnu.
Rudra said:
4. Visnu is the Supreme Brahman and in Vedas and Sastras
he is spoken of as having three forms. But this is not known to
the ignorant.
5. From the root viś meaning ‘to enter’ with the Nominative singular suffix we get the word ‘Visnu’. He is the eternal
and the supreme among ali gods.
6. This Visnu who is spoken of as having a tenfold form as
well as of a single form is the Aditya with all yogic powers.
7. The great god for the sake of Devas assumes human form
in every yuga and praises me.
8. For the sake of the world as well as gods, I worship these
two forms of the lord (divine as well as human) in the Svetadvipa (white island) in Krtayuga.
9. At the time of creation, I extol the fourfaced (Brahmà)
and become time. And in that Krtayuga, Brahmà, Devas and
Asuras extol me always.
10. People who seek pleasures sacrifice to me in my form as
linga (phallus), and those who seek liberation sacrifice to me
mentally in my form as the thousand-headed. It is to this form
that the universal god Nàrayana himself offers sacrifice.
li. Those who perform Brahmayajfia daily propitiate
Brahma, because the Veda is Brahma.
12. The Supreme Brahman is enshrined in the names Narayana, Siva, Visnu, Sankara and Purusottama.
13. For those who perform Vedic rituals, we Brahma, Visnu
and Mahe$vara are the spirits of the mantras. There need be
no doubt in this matter.
14. I am Visnu as well Brahmà with the eternal Vedas.
The three (gods) are really one and the wise men should not
consider them as different.
15. He who considers otherwise is a sinner and he goes to
the terrible hell.
16. Iam Brahma and Visnu and the Vedas Rk, Yajus and
Saman. The difference is only in this manner.

178 Varáha Purana
CHAPTER SEVENTYTHREE
Vairàjavrtta
Rudra said:
l. O great Brahmin, listen to another interesting wonder.
2. I was created by Brahma and ordered to create þeings, but being unable to do it, I immersed myself in water.
3-4. There, while for a moment I was fully absorbed in
contemplating on the great lord in the size of the thumb, there
arose from the water eleven persons blazing like fire at the time
of deluge and heating the water with their radiance.
5. I asked them who they were thus come out of the water
and imparting to it much heat and where they were going.
6. 'Though asked thus, those great beings didnot speak
anything, but simply went away.
7. Then came an effulgent person cloud-like in complexion
and with eyes like the lotus.
8. I asked him who he was and who the other persons were
and also the purpose with which they came.
The man said:
9. The effulgent persons who came out here and went away
are Adityas who appeared at the meditation of Brahina.
10. Brahma performs creation and they are for the protection of the created.
Sambhu (Rudra) said:
11. “Please tell me, O lord, how I can know this great
Person".
12-13. Asked thus by Rudra, the Man replicd: “I am the
eternal lord Narayana reposing in water. You are given a divine
eye, and see me with that carefully”.
14. Told thus, when I looked at him, I found him to be
the same as the lord of the size of the thumb (whom) I was
meditating on) with a lotus in his navel.
15. I saw Brahma (in that lotus) and myself near him.
Secing that great Being I was full of pleasure.
16-17. O great Brahmin, I had then an urge to extol him,
and I accordingly praised that Universal Soul with the following
hymn.

Rudra said:
18. I bow to that eternal being, the pure soul, with numerous forms and thousand hands, the foremost among the effulgent, extensive in body and pure in action.
19. I bow to that great Sambhu, resplendent like a thousand suns and blazing like the fire, the remover of all ills of
the world, the holder of all knowledge, the bearer of the disc,
and praised bv ai! Devas.
20. I bow to you always, the originless and eternal, reposing
on the serpent Sesa, great lord, lord of all beings, the chief of
Maruts, the master of all, the lord of the world, the master of
the entire universe.
21-22. O Narayana, lord of water, the bestower of good
to the whole world, lord of the universe, the universal eye, the
moon, the sun, the eternal, with form to be inferred, the embodiment of ambrosia, the eternal, with effulgence excelling fire, the
omnipresent, protect me always who have sought refuge in you,
O remover of the perils of Devas.
23. Isee your innumerable faces and in their midst Brahma,
the creator of the worlds. I bow to you, O my grandfather.
24. O the first and great god, you are resorted to by those
with mind purified by following the path of knowledge after
numerous births in the cycle of sarhsara. I bow to you.
25. He who understands you to be the one beyond Prakrti
(Matter), is not subject to the activity of the Gunas (the three
qualities Sattva, Rajas and Tamas) and realises you in the extensive as well as the minute aspects.
26. You are the root of speech, but you are without organs.
You are without action, but you have not given up action. You
are not one in Samsara, but you have a body of pure abstracts.
27. You in your four-armed form are known by those who
perform sacrifices, but itis a matter for wonder that your supreme
form is not known even by Devas.
28. Therefore, gods like Brahmà contemplate on your avataras. Even Brahma does not know your ultimate form.
29. But I, having been purified by penance, am able to know
you, the most ancient. And my father Brahma has become known
to many Puranas.
30. Even those like me cannot know you except through

180 Varáha Purana
penance. But you, who cannot be known even by those like
Brahma, can be known by continuous meditation on you.
31. "Those who know the Vedas gain superior mental power
through your grace and they alone know you.
32. To him who has realised you, manhood or godhood is
not delectable. You are of universal form. You are minute as
well as big.
33. You are expensive as well as minute. O God, still you
are quite attainable. Those who keep out from you fall in hell.
When you, the lord, are there, why speak of Vasus, Adityas,
Maruts and Bhümi ?
34. My praises are all for you who are extensive and
supreme soul, and so, O eternal one, be pleased to accept them
from me, a staunch devotee.
35. O Visnu, give me omniscience when you command me
to perform creation.
36. Four-faced (Brahma) or crore-faced, only he who is
pure of mind will be able to narrate your countless qualities.
37. He who with pure mind contemplates on you unswervingly, in his mind you remain. I bow to you.
38. O lord, this hymn thus came out of my mind. Be pleased to purify me, fear-stricken by the course of sarhsara.
Varaha said:
39. Thus praised by the great Rudra, Lord Visnu was pleased
and spoke in a voice majestic like thunder.
Visnu said:
.40. O God, husband of Uma, everything is well for you.
Please seek a boon. There is no difference between us. We are
one and the same.
Rudra said:
41. I am engaged by Brahma, O lord, to perform creation.
Give me for that the threefold knowledge required.
Visnu said:
42. “You are the abode of all knowledge. You are doubtless
omniscient and worshipped by Devas always".

43-44. ‘Told thus, Rudra said again, “O lord, give me
another boon by which you will take a form with which you will
worship me and bear me and get a boon from me, and as a result
of that you will become the most worshipful among gods.
Visnu said:
45. “For the sake of gods, I will take incarnations and then
Į will worship you and you will give me boons.
46. As for bearing you, O lord of Uma, I shall bear you for
a hundred years assuming the form of a cloud".
47. So saying, Visnu became a cloud, drew up Rudra from
the water, and said:
48. “The eleven persons who came out earlier, are Vairájas
and they have gone to the earth with the name ‘Adityas’.
49. The twelfth part of mine has descended on earth with
the name ‘Visnu’ and will worship you”.
50. So saying, Nàràyana, out of his own part produced a
divine cloud full of sound, and it isnot known where he disappeared.
Rudra ‘said:
51. Thus this great Hari who is omnipresent and omnipotent, became a giver of boon to me in yore, as a result of which
I am supreme among gods.
52. There is no god above Narayana in the past or future,
This is the secret propounded by the Vedas and Puranas.
33. Ihave thus told you how Visnu is to be propitiated.
CHAPTER SEVENTYFOUR
Cosmology
Varaha said:
l. The sages then asked the ancient, eternal and omnipresent Rudra, three-eyed and holder of the trident.
The sages said:
2-3. You are beyond us and the Devas. So we ask you a

question. O iord of Uma, be pleased to tei! us about the mags
tude of the earth and the position of mountains in deiei
Redra said:
4-5. in the Puranas this earth is considered to be the wor.
So I shall briefly describe this earth, Please iisto
6. The great Narayana who pervades ail over the worni?
ih
who is atomic, unknowable, pure and whose ultimate foru
be known by Supreme knowledge alone, who is indicaied os
broadchested, wearing yellow garment and holding the earth.
and who is spoken of as beyond the three qualities Sativa, Ra!
and Tamas, and as neither long nor short, neither big nor srai
etc., and who is of the nature of pure knowledge, created water
Having created that, the primordial man Narayana, who pervaiies the entire world, and is of the nature of all gods, sacrifices
and water, produced from his navei a lotus during his yogic
slumber. In it arose the creator Brahma, the great god, the re
pository of the Vedas. He produced the repositorics of knowledge
like Sanaka, Sananda, Sanatana aud Sanatkumara, and then
Svàyambhuva Manu and those from Maris to Daksa. Fron,
Svayambhuva Manu created by the lord, further creation began
to proceed. He had two sons, Priyavrata and Uttanapada.
7. Priyavrata had ten sons, Agnidhra, Agnibahu, Medhas,
Medhatithi, Dhruva, Jyotisman, Dyutiman, Havya, Vapusman
and Savana, Priyavrata established seven of his sons in seven
islands. Agnidhra was made the lord of Jambüdvipa, Medhatithi the lord of Sakadvipa, Jyotisman the lord of Kraufica,
Dyutiman the lord of Salmali, Havya the lord of Gomeda, Vapusman the lord of Plaksa and Savana the lord of Puskara. Savana,
the lord of Puskara had two sons Mahaviti and Dhataka. Their
reg^ons were known after their names. Thus Dhataka had Dhatakikxhanda and Kumuda had Kaumuda.! Jyotismàn, the lord
of Sàlmali?, had three sons, Kuga, Vaidyuta and Jimütaváhana.
Their regions came to be known after them. Dyutimàn haa
seven sons, Kusala, Manugavya, Pivara, Andhra, Andhakaraka,
Muni and Dundubhi and seven regions in. Kraufica came to be
known after them.
l. Kumuda seems to be another name for Mahàviti.
2. This contradicts with the earlier statement that Dyutimàn is the
lord of Sálmali,

p
8. jyotisman, the lord of Kusadvipa, had seven sons,
Udbhida, Venuman, Rathapala, Manas, Dhrti, Prabhakara
and Kapila and they had regions with their names. Medhatithi,
the lord of Saka, had seven sons, Nabhi, Sàntabhaya, Sisiramukha, Udama, Nanda, Sivaksemaka and Dhruva. They had
regions with their names. Nabhi had Hemakita, Kimpurusa,
Naisadha, Harivarsa, Merumadhya, Ilavrta, Nila, Ramyaka,
Sveta, Uttarakuru, Malyavan, Bhadrasva, Gandhamadana and
Ketumála. This is the division of the earth in Svayambhuva
Manvantara. In every acon seven kings each thus rule the earth,
This happens in every aeon.
9. I shall now narrate the creation by Nàbhi. Nabhi begot
in Merudevi the son named Rsabha, his son was Bharata. To
Bharata his father gave the region to the South of Hemadri called
the great Bharata. Bharata’s son was Sumati. Bharata gave his
kingdom to Sumati and retired to the forest. Sumati’s son was
Tejas, his son Indradyumna, his son Paramesthi, his son Pratihartā, his son Nikhata, his son Unneta, his son Abhava, his son
Udgata, his son Prastota, his son Vibhu, his son Prthu, his son
Ananta, his son Gaya, his son Naya, his son Virata, his son
Sudhiman.
10. Sudhimàn had hundred sons and by them was the
population increased. The Bharatavarsa with its seven islands
is occupied by them.
11. This earth is enjoyed by their descendants. There are
seventyone aeons like Krta, Treta etc.?
12. Incidentally I have given an account of Svayambhuva
Manvantara, Know this well.
CHAPTER SEVENTYFIVE
Jjamb üdvipa and Meru
Rudra said:
l. Ishall now tell you in detail about the Jambüdvipa and
the number of oceans and islands in it.
l. Earlier Jyotisman is spoken of as lord of Krauiica.
ad nds Yugas are generally given as only four, Krta, Tretà, Dvàpara

184 Varaha Purana
2. Also the number of regions in it, the different rivers etc,
and again their extent and the movements of the sun and the
moon.
3. It is not easy to describe thousands of islands within the
seven major ones by which the whole universe is filled.
4. I shall say about the seven islands and also about the
sun and moon, about which people propound logical authority.
5. But it is not possible for logic to accomplish what is unthinkable. And what is beyond nature ts really unthinkable.
6. I shall, therefore, describe Jambüdvipa as it is and the
dimensions of its different regions.
7. It is one hundred and one thousand yojanas! in extent
and is strewn all over with human settlements.
8. It is full of Siddhas and Caranas* and is beautiful with
mountains full of rocks and minerals,
9. It has numerous rivers arising from the mountains and
is globular.
10. In this remains the great lord surrounded by nine
(creators? ). It is encircled by the saline ocean.
11. In the expansive Jambüdvipa there are six broad and
long mountains.
12. There are oceans on the east and west. There is Himavan full of snow and Hemakita full of gold.
13. There is the big mountain Nisadha which gives pleasure in all its parts and the mount Meru which is of four (main)
colours and contains gold.
14. It (Meru) is round and uniform in shape and has varicgated colours. It has in it groups of Prajapatis.
15. Itarose from the navel of the great Brahma. It is white
in colour on the eastern side and this represents the Brahmin.
16. On the southern side it is yellow and this represents the
Vaisya.
17. On the western side it is black like the bee and this
represents the Südra symbolising service.
18. On the northern side it is red in colour and this represents the Ksatriya. This is the division according to colour.
1. One Yojana is equal to cight miles.
2. Siddhas and Caranas are semi-divine beings.

19. The blue parts contain Vaidürya stones, the pale white
parts contain gold. The parts with the colour of peacock feathers
contain highly pure gold.
20. These mountains have Siddhas and Caranas in them.
Their internal extent is nine thousand (yojanas).
2]. In the middle is the region llàvrta on which stands
Meru. It spreads thousands of yojanas on all sides.
29. Mahaimeru stands in the middle like smokeless fire. It is
half a Vedi in extent on the northern and southern sides.
23. There are six regions there each with a mountain. The
periphery of each region is one yojana.
24. Two each of these are for the thousands of Ksatriyas.
Their extent is that of Jambüdvipa.
25. Occupying one hundred thousand yojanas are two
mountains, Nila and Nisadha.
26. Smaller than these arc the white Hemaküta and the
peaky Himavan, Nisadha has the same dimension as Jambüdvipa.
27. A twelfth part of it is the dimension of Hemaküta and
Himavàn has the dimension of a twentieth part of Hemakaüta.
28. An eighth part of Himavan lies between the east and
west. Because of the expansive nature of the island, there appears
increase and decrease.
29. In the regions, just as there are mountains, there are
settlements of people.
30. Itis not easy to go from one settlement to another since
each is surrounded by steep mountains and rivers.
31. Different kinds of beings live there. In the region of
Himavan, the people are the Bharatas.
32. In Hemaküta the people are Kimpurusas. After Hemaküta is Nisadha. The settlement there is Harivarsa.
33. After Harivarsa is llàvrta. After llàvrta is the well
known Ramyaka which is blue.
34. After Ramyaka is the well known Hiranmaya which is
white. After Hiranmaya is S$rhgavàn where we get Kuru,
35. Like a bow are two regions in the south and north. Of
the four islands, Ilàvrta is square-shaped.
36. Half a Vedi of Nisadha on the southern side is low and
half a Vedi on the northern side is peaky.

186 Varüha Purána
37. On this southern side are three regions and there are
three on the northern side too. Between these, where the Meru
stands, is Ilàvrta.
38. Its extent is thirtyfour thousand yojanas. On its
eastern side is the mountain Gandhamadana.
39. In its length, breadth and height it is similar to mount
Malyavan. In the middle is the golden mount Meru.
40. It is full of gold and has four colours. All the vital elements and living beings arose from it.
41, Taking the original indefinite form of earth as a lotus,
Meru may be considered as its pericarp, and from it to have
evolved the four major (outer) petals and the definite form with
five qualities.
42. Then arose all activities and men of virtue living for
| several kalpas.
43. The best of Men (the Lord), who is the great yogin,
the great God to be contemplated upon by the whole world,
is attained by the great men who have realised the self.
44. Hisform is imperishable, endless and pervades the whole
universe and he does not possess body constituted of bones,
flesh and marrow.
45. He is all-pervading and bears all forms because of his
being a yogi and the great Master. Because of him there arose
in the world the great lotus.
46. In that great lotus arose the great lord, the four-faced
(Brahma).
47. He is the chief of the creators and the overlord of the
whole world. The seeds of creation have arisen from him.
48. The creation is now explained in detail. That water
full of gems is the body of Visnu.
49. The earth arose in the form of the lotus with forests and
lakes. It is this world lotus that expanded itself.
50. I shall recount this expansion in its order, please listen
O Brahmins.
There are four regions in it.
51. There is the mighty mountain Meru. It has different
colours. On the eastern side it is white.
52. Itis yellow on the south, black on the west and red on
the north.

53. The white part of Meru is for the clan of kings. it shines
like the rising sun and like fire without smoke.
54. it is eightyfour thousand yojanas in height, sixteen
thousand yojanas deep and sixteen thousand yojanas in length.
55. It has a table-land thirtytwo thousand yojanas in extent. The area of its expanse is thrice this.
56. One division of it has ninety thousand yojanas.
57. Beyond that is one of six thousand yojanas more.
58. This mountain is divine and is full of celestial herbs.
‘The houses (built) in it are all of gold.
59. In this big mountain, groups of Devas, Gandharvas,
Nagas, Raksasas and Apsarases delight themselves.
60. All round the Meru are auspicious abodes. There are
four regions on its four sides.
61. They are Bhadragva on the east, Bharata on the
south, Ketumala on the west and Kuru on the north.
62. The pericarp of this lotus covers several thousand
yojanas.
63. It has fifteen stamens each a yojana long and their
interspaces (at the bottom) occupy cightyfour yojanas each.
64. ‘The stamens pervade a space of thirty thousand yojanas.
65. The length is one hundred thousand and the breadth
eighty thousand (yojanas). There are four parts of fourteen
thousand yojanas.
66. Listen now to the account about what I told you as the
pericarp.
67. It is attractive with hundreds of jewelled petals of various
colours, golden and shining like the rising sun.
68. It has a thousand protrusions and thousand depressions
and is fully circular.
69. In it there is the assembly of Brahma with splendidly
jewelled arches and full of Brahmarsis.
70. It is known by the name Manovati in all the worlds.
The glory of the great lord, resplendent like a thousand suns,
is well marked there.
7l. The groups of Devas propitiate the four-faced Brahma
with sacrifices and prayers.
72-74. Also by those great men who have given up all desires by those who are of good mind and taken to righteous living,

188 Varüha Purana
devoted to please the manes and gods, and by those householders
who are full of humility, inclined to honour guests and of detached mind.
75. Those who with a resolve get their sins removed by their
yogic practices like yama, niyama etc, attain the commendable
white Brahmaloka.
76. The final position is beyond a height of fourteen thousand yojanas.
77. Above that is the bcautiful black place luminous like
the rising sun in the mountain full of gems and minerals.
78-80. The mountain with the circular base is thirty thousand yojanas and from a place in it which is ten yojanas long
starts the river which begins flowing upwards and then falls on
the earth. This flows through Amaravati, the city of gods.
81. Thrown out by this river, the sun, the moon and the
stars rise and set and render service.
82. The Brahmins propitiate all the eight great mountains.
CHAPTER SEVENTYSIX
The cities of the eight Dikpalas
Rudra said:
1-2. Onthe resplendent eastern part of Meru full of different minerals and in the form of a circular extension, there is the
city of the immortals full of mighty gods and demons, full of gold
and with well-devised pathways and arches.
3- To its north-east with hundreds of spires and extensive
lakes, decerated with flowers and flags, is the prosperous city of
Indra named Amaravati abounding in Devas, Yaksas, Apsarases
and sages.
6. In the interior of Amaravati there is a hall full of diamonds and other gems, which is well known as the assembly
Sudharma.
7. Init remains the thousand-eyed Indra, husband of Saci,
surrounded by Siddhas and other divine beings.

8. Indra, revered by all othergods, is the president of
this assembly. The great sun is there.
9. On its side, as broad and splendid like it, is the city of
Agni, called Tejovati.
10. Next is the beautiful city of Vaivasvata (Yama), well
known as Samyamuni.
11. On the fourth direction is the city of Nirrti, called Krsnavati.
12. The fifth, on the northern side, is the city of the lord of
waters (Varuna), called Suddhavati.
13. Beyond that in the north is the city of Vayu, called
Gandhavati.
14. Onits right is the beautiful city of Kubera, called Mahodaya with a hall of Vaidürya gems.
15. On the eighth quarter is the city of Isàna, called Manohara.
16. This world of gods, prayed for by people in their
different à$ramas (stages of life) is svarga (heaven).
CHAPTER SEVENTYSEVEN
The Meru Mountain
Rudra said:
1. The middle of Meru, which is considered as the pericarp
of the world-lotus, has (a circumference) of one thousand
yojanas.
2. Its bottom is (in circumference) fortyeight thousand
(yojanas).
3. In it there are thousands of mounts and thosc at the extremity of the eight quarters are the mounts that indicate the
limit.
4. Among these, two named Jathara and Devakita are on
the eastern side.
5. O great Brahmins, listen to my account of this Meru,
the golden mountain, in respect of its parts in different directions

5. ‘There are four prominent parts in the four directions anu
fourteen parts at the top, because of which the earth, with its
seven islands, moves.
7. Its extent is ten thousand yojanas and its vertical and
horizontal parts are covered with yellow orpiment.
8. It has caves full of red arsenic and is strewn with golden
gems. It has numerous fine mansions and playgrounds.
9. On its eastern part is the mountain Mandara, on its south
Gandhamadana, on the west Vipula and on the north Supàréva.
10. On their peaks are four great trees which are resorted
to by gods, demons and Apsarases.
11. At the peak of the Mandara mountain is the big tree
called Kadamba with hanging branches.
12. Its flowers have the size of big pots and they blossom
throughout the year and have high fragrance.
13. The entire area where its smell spreads is very sacred.
14. This is the tree of trees and is famous, beautiful and
auspicious.
15. Lord Visnu, meditated upon through efficacious mantras, remains in it.
16. Thisis also called ‘Bhadragva’, because this great god
remains in it surveying the whole world.
17. On the peak of the southern mountain is the Jamba
tree in a cluster with big branches full of flowers and fruits.
18. From that fall down at the top of the mountain fruits
by name Atisa, sweet and fragrant and like ambrosia.
19. From this great mountain arise many rivers which make
the places fertile.
20. There we get gold named Jàmbünada glowing like fire
and used by the gods for their decoration.
21-22. Devas, Gandharvas, Yaksas and Raksasas drink
the juice of the jambu fruit which is like ambrosia and delight
themselves in the southern region which is known as Jambüloka.
People call it Jambüdvipa.
23. In the mountain Vipula on the south, there is the verv
big tree called Agvattha with a big trunk spreading all around.
It is the abode of all noble qualities.
24. It bears beautiful fruits big like pots throughout the
year.

25. Because oí the tags fluttering in this region, resorted
by Devas and Gandharvas, it is known as Ketumāla (lie
one having a row of flags). O Brahmins, Listen to this name,
96. At the time of churning the m x à
a banner appeared here and hence it is kno
27. At the top of the peak of Supa
Vata.
28. It has got a big truak; it spreads over three yojanas, grows
also downwards and is highly clustered by hanging branches.
29. It bears golden fruits big like pots.
30. Adding lustre to the tree are the mind-born sons of
Brahma, the younger brothers of Sanatkumara
31. They are seven in number and are known as Kurus.
They are calm in mind and iree from passion.
32-33. They are eternal and they remain in this region which
goes by their name. These Kurus are the lords of the region.
CHAPTER SEVENTYEIGHT
Mandara and other mountains
Rudra said:
1-8. I shall now tell you about the four great mountains
and about the lakes in. them, which are beautiful, from which
blow the gentle and sweet-smelling breeze, which haverivers
flowing out of them, each of which have nine regions frequented
by the celestial couples, which are fullof gems and sacred spots,
which always sound with waterfalls, which are full of lotuses,
lilies, and other beautiful plants.
9. The lake in the eastern mountain is Arunoda, the one in
the southern is Mànasa, the one in thewestern is Asitoda and. the
one in the northern is Mahabhadra. All these are full of lilies
of various colours.
10. Ishall tell you now about the mounts around Arunoda,
listen to me.
11-12. They are Vikanka, Manispüga, Supatra, Upala,

192 Varáha Purana
Mahanila, Kumbha, Suvindu, Madana, Venunaddha, Sumedas
and Nisadha, all of them holy.
13. The mounts around Manasa, I shall now enumerate.
14-16. They are Trisikhara, Si£ira, Kapi, Satamaksa, Tuvaga, Tamrabha, Visa, Svetodana, Samiila, Sarala, Ratnakctu.
Ekamüla, Mahasrnga, Gajamüla, Sàvaka Paficasaila, Kailàsa
and Himavan.
17. The mounts on the next, namely on the west (around
Asitod a) I shall now give you.
18-20. They are Kapila, Pingala, Bhadra, Sarasa,
Kumuda, Madhuman, Garjana, Markata, Krsna, Pandava.
Sahasra£iras, Pariyatra and Srngavan. I shall tell you now about
the mounts around Mahabhadra in the north.
21-23. They are Hamsaküta, Vrsahamsa, Kapifijala, Indragaila, Nila, Kanakasrnga, Satasrnga, Puskara, Meghaéaila.
Viraja and Jaruji.
24. In this manner know the places, towns and lakes in
order from the north.
CHAPTER SEVENTYNINE
The Valleys of Meru I
Rudra said:
1-2. Between the mountains Asita (Krsna) and Kumuda is
the valley which is three hundred yojanas long and hundred
yojanas broad and full of all kinds of birds and beasts.
3. In it there is a beautiful big lake with sweet water and
huge lotuses, white and red, in which are seated gods, demons,
Gandharvas and the great snakes.
4. Its placid water is resorted to by all. It is called Srisaras
and it always sparkles.
5-7. Amidst that array of lotuses there is a particularly big
lotus shining like the sun, astounding in its size, spreading witha
crore of petals and attractive filaments, and with the bees humming all around. In it is seated the great goddess Laksmi, the
embodiment of prosperity.

pe
8-9. On the bank of that lake is the forest of Bilva trees always full of flowers and fruits wherein live Siddhas. It is two
hundred yojanas in length and hundred yojanas in breadth.
10. It has numerous big trees as high as half a kro$a with
thousands of branches.
1]. They bear thousands of fruits green and grey, smelling
sweet and tasty like nectar.
12. The place is filled with the fruits falling from these trees
and it is known all over the world as Srivana.
13. It has eight peaks. Many Devas and bilva-eating sages,
live in it. Laksmi, adored by groups of siddhas, ever remains
there.
14-15. Between the mountains Ekàcala and Maniérnga
there is a lotus-grove, two hundred yojanas long and a hundred
yojanas broad, resorted to by Siddhas and Caranas.
16. The flower there appears as if held by Laksmi. There
are big peaks as high as half a kroéa.
17. With branches full of flowers, the whole place is made
reddish yellow.
18-19. In this the flowers are each three cubits long and two
cubits broad and with filaments of the colour of red arsenic and
sweet-smelling. It always hums with inebriate bees and there
are in it gods, Gandharvas, Raksasas and Yaksas, and also Kinnaras, Apsarases and Nagas.
20. There is the hermitage of the divine Kasyapa in it and
also other hermitages.
21. Between Mahanila and Kakubha (Kumbha?) there is
the river Sukhà, and on its bank is a big forest fifty yojanas long
and thirty yojanas broad.
22. This forest is Talavana (forest of Palmyras) with the
trees rising to a height of half a krośa.
23. "These trees are full of big, strong and juicy fruits of the
colour of collyrium.
24. The whole place smells sweet and it is resorted to by
Siddhas. This bears close resemblance to Airavata, the great
elephant.
25-26. Between Airavata, Rudra (Kailasa)? and Deva$ila
(Paficasaila?) there is a tableland formed of a single rock, thousand yojanas long and hundred yojanas broad, without any
kind of trees or plants, and with but a small stream of water,

i94 Varühe Purdrs
27.98. Thus has been narrated, O Branmins, the vaiievs i
order around Meru.
CHAPTER EIGHTY
Valleys of Meru If
Rudra said:
1. Let us now see the valleys on the southern side occupies
by Siddhas. Between Sisira and Patanga is the white land which
is without women and trees. But its sugar-cane-like peak has
trees, and around it there is the grove of Udumbara trees full of
birds.
2. In this grove, the trees bear fruits as big as large tortoises,
It is resorted to by all the eight kinds of demigods.'
3. In this region flow many rivers which are fuli of clear and
sweet water. In it there is the hermitage of Kardama Prajapat:
frequented by many sages and men. Around it there is a forest
extending to a hundred yojanas.
Between the mountains Támrábha and Patanga there is a
big lake hundred yojanas broad and twice as long, full of different kinds of lotuses glowing like the rising sun and resorted to
by Siddhas and Gandharvas.
4. In the middle is a tall peak, hundred yojanas long and
thirty yojanas broad, full of a variety of minerals. At its top is a
broad pathway leading to a vast enclosure with a jewelled porch.
Within it is the city of Vidyadharas. Therein lives the Vidyàdhara king by name Puloma with numerous attendants.
5. Between the mountains Sumüla and Vasudhara, there is
the place calied Bilvasthali, fifty yojanas long and thirty yojanas
broad.
6. The Bilva trees there bear fruits big like pitchers, the
ground there is strewn with these fruits, and it is resorted to by
Guhyakas and the like who eat these fruits.
Between Vasudhàra and Ratnadhara there is the Kirhsuka
I. The demigods are Vidyadharas, Apsarases, Yaksas, Ráksasas,
Gandharvas, Kinnaras, Pisácas and Guhyakas.

forest, a hundred. yojanas long and thirty yojanas broad, spreading smell of the blossoms over a hundred yojanas. It has abundant water and is used by the Siddhas.
7. Init is the abode of Aditya. This god, the sun, appears
month after month. Devas and others bow to Prajapati, the
creator of the world.
Between Paficaküta and Kailasa, there is the expansive land
which is one thousand yojanas long and hundred yojanas broad,
white like the swan, unapproached by trivial beings, and which
is like the ladder to heaven.
8. Let us see now the valleys on the western side. Between
Supáréva and Sikhiéaila there isa stony plateau which is untouchably hot for ever. In its middle is a part, a hundred yojanas
in extent, which is the place of fire. Here fire which is the destroyer of the world, blazes for ever without fuel.
Between the mountainas Kumuda and Afjana is the Matulungakasthala (the place of Pomegranate), inaccessible to beasts
and covered by yellow fruits.
In it is the holy pond used by Siddhas. This grove is Brhaspati’s.
Then between the mountains Pifijara and Gaura there are
lakes extending to hundreds of yojanas. They are full of big lilies,
9. In it is the abode of the great lord Visnu.
Between the mountains Sukla and Pandura there is a single
rock ninety yojanas long and thirty yojanas broad without trees.
In it there is a pond of still water with different kinds of lotuses.
In its middle is a big banyan tree spreading over five yojanas.
Beneath it sits lord Siva wearing blue cloth, praised by Yaksas
and others.
Between the mountains Sahasrasikhara and Kumuda is a
Sugar-cane-like peak, fifty yojanas long and twenty yojanas
broad, full of birds and numerous trees bearing tasty fruits. In it
is the divine hermitage of Indra.
Between Sankhakita and Rsabha there is the beautiful grove
of Punnága trees extending over several yojanas and bearing
sweet-smelling fruits as big as bilvas. In it live the Nagas and
Others inebriated with the juice of the Punnaga fruits.
10. Between the mountains Kapifijala and Naga, there is
the place, two hundred yojanas long and one hundred yojanas

196 Varaha Purana
broad, occupied by various kinds of people and with grapes and
dates in abundance.
Between Puskara and Mahamegha is the place, one hundred
yojanas long and sixty yojanas broad, called Pànitala, without
trees and plants. On its sides are four big forests and lakes extending over several yojanas. In it there are fierce valleys, ten,
five, seven, eighty, thirty and twenty yojanas long.
CHAPTER EIGHTYONE
The domains of Devas in the Mountains
Rudra said:
1. I shall now state about the domains of Devas in these
mountains At the top of the mountain called Sita is the pleasure
spot of Indra. Therein is the big grove of Parijata trees. On its
eastern side is the Kufijara hill. At its top there are eight cities
of Danavas.
2. In the mountain Vajraka there are many cities of Raksasas. They are called Nilakas and they are capable of changing
their shapes. In the mountain Mahanila, there are fifteen thousand cities of Kinnaras. They are the regions of fifteen Kinnara
kings like Deva datta, Candra and others. In the mountain
Candrodaya we get golden underground cities wherein live
Nagas. The Danavas are established there under an arrangement with Garuda. In (the mountain) Venuman there are three
cities of Vidyadharas, each thousand yojanas in length and hundred yojanas in breadth. These are the regions of Vidyàdhara
Kings like Ulüka, Romaga and Mahavetra.
3. In each of these Garuda is established. In the mountain
Kufjara Pagupati (Siva) is permanently established. In Vasudhàra the great god Sankara (Siva) on the bull remains with
his retinue of crores of Ganas. In this live Vasus.
4. Atthe tops of Vasudhàra and Ratnadhara there are eight
and seven cities (respectively) for Vasus and seven sages. In
the great mountain Ekaspnga is the seat of four-faced Brahma.

Á—
In the mountain Gaja the goddess herself takes abode with her
retinue.
5, In the mountain Vasudhara is the city, the abode of
sages, Siddhas and Vidyadharas with forts and gateways. In it
live the militant Gandharvas called Anekaparvatas with their
chief Rajaraja. In Paücaküta there are Devas and Raksasas,
in Satasrnga Danavas, and there are hundred cities of Danavas
and Yaksas.
6. Onthe western portion of Prabhedaka there are the cities
of Devas, Dànavas, Siddhas and others. At the top of this mountain there is a big slab. The moon descends on it every new moon
day. On its northern portion is Triküta. Brahma remains in it
sometimes. There we get the abode of Fire. Fire in concrete form
is worshipped by gods.
7. On the north, in the mountain Srnga, we get the abodes
of gods. On its eastern part is the abode of Narayana, in the
middle that of Brahma and in the west that of Siva. There we
see a few cities of Yaksas. On the north, in the mountain
Jatuccha, there is a lake covering an area of thirty yojanas. In
it lives the hundred-headed serpent-king Nanda.
8. Thus are the eight Devaparvatas (mountains of gods).
They have the colours of gold, silver, ruby, cat’s eye, vermillion
etc., in order. This part of Earth is full of millions of houses of
Siddhas and Vidyadharas. On the side of Meru is the world of
Siddhas full of Kesara trees. The earth is in the form of a lotus.
This is the general description given in the Puranas.
CHAPTER EIGHTYTWO
The descent of the rivers
Rudra said:
l. Now listen to the descent of the rivers. From what is
known as the ocean of the sky, starts the river of the sky. This
river is always agitated by the elephant of Indra. (As a result)
it falls at the top of Meru in eightyfour thousand streams. And
flowing upto the foot of the Meru, it forms into four and follows

198 Varáha Puránc
a clockwise direction for six thousand yojanas with the name:
Sita, Alakananda, Caksus and Bhadra. Among them the on:
that reaches earth slashing eightyone thousand mountains 1»
known as Ganga.
2. Now we describe Amaragandika on the side of Gandhamadana. It is thirtyone thousand yojanas long and four huncred yojanas broad. This region is Ketumaia with mighty me:
black in complexion and beautiful women lotus-like in complexion. There we get big jack trees. The son of Brahma is the lore
there. The people here drink water, arc tree from decay an.
disease and live for ten thousand years. On the eastern side c:
Malyavan is the Purvagandika and from Lkasrnga extenc:
Manasa for one thousand yojanas. This region is known as
Bhadrasva.
3. There we get the forest of wholesome Rasala trees. The
mangoes are black, men white, women lotus-coloured and the:r
life is one thousand years. There are five great mountains, Sailavarna, Malakhya, Korajaska, Triparna and Nila. The regions
watered (by the streams from these mountains) have the same
names. l
4. Those regions consume the water from the rivers Sita,
Suvahini, Harnsavati, Kasa, Mahavaktra, Candravati, Kaveri,
Surasa, Akhyavati, Indravati, Angaravahini, Harittoya, Somavarta, Satahradà, Vanamala, Vasumati, Hamsa, Suparna,
Paficaganga, Dhanusmati, Manivapra, Subrahmabhaga, Vilasini, Krsnatoyà, Punyodà, Nagavati, Siva, Saivàiini, Manitata,
Ksiroda, Varunatali and Visnupadi. Those who drink the waters
of these rivers live for ten thousand years and become devotees
of Rudra and Uma.
CHAPTER EIGHTYTHREE
The regions and rivers in the mountain Naisadha
Rudra said:
l. Bhadrasgva and Ketumala have been described in detail.
Now are described the major mountains, regions and rivers on

p
the western side of the great mountain Naisadha. The seven
major mountains, Visakha, Kambala, Jayanta, Krsna, Harita,
Agoka and Vardhamana, have given rise to crores of others. The
regions occupied by people there are also known by the same
name (as of the mountains).
2. The settlements upto Sauragrama like Satapa, Krtasura,
Sravanakambala, Maheyacala, Kütavàsa, Mülatapa, Krautica,
Krsnanga, Manipankaja, Cüdamala and Somiya and those upto
the end of the sea, like Kurakufja, Suvarnatata, Kuha, Svetanga,
Krsnapada, Vida, Kapila, Karnika, Mahisa, Kubja, Karanàta, Mahotkata, Suka, Naka, Sagaja, Bhima, Kakuranjana,
Mahanaha, Kiki, Saparna, Bhaumaka, Coraka, Dhtmajanma, Angaraja, Madhureya, Sukeya, Cakeya, Sravana, Mattakasika, Godavama, Kulapafijaba, Varjaha and ModasalJaka
consume the water flowing from these mountains.
3. Among these rivers, Plaksa, Mahakadamba, Manasi,
Syama, Sumedha, Bahula, Vivarna, Punkha, Mala, Darbhavati,
Bhadranadi, Sukanadi, Pallava, Bhima, Prabhanjanà, Kamba,
Kuíàvati, Daksa, Kasavati, Tunga, Punyoda, Candravati,
Sumülàvaü, Kakupadmini, Visala, Karantaka, Pivari, Mahamaya, Mahisi, Manusi, Candà are the more important. The
others are small rivers and they are in thousands.
CHAPTER EIGHTYFOUR
The regions on the South and North of Meru
Rudra said:
l. Now are duly described the people who live on the northern regions as well as those who live on the southern side.
2. O Brahmins, listen to what I say. In the region to the
south of Meru and north of Sveta, there is Ramyaka belonging
to Vayu.
3. The people there are born pure, highly intelligent and
free from old age and disaster.
4. The extremely big banyan tree grows there. Drinking the
Juice of its fruits, all the people there attain divine form and live
for ten thousand years.

200 Varáha Purana
5. To the north of Sveta and south of Trisrnga, we get the
region named Hiranmaya where flows the river Hairanvati.
6. The mighty Yaksas, who can assume any form at will,
live there. The duration of their life is eleven thousand years.
7. Many live there for fifteen thousand years.
8. The breadfruit and jack trees flourish there. By the juice
of their fruits alone, one can live for many days.
9. In Trigrnga with its peaks of gems and gold, from its
northern peak, upto the southern ocean}, is the northern Kuru.
There we get sappy trees and many juice. In thosc trees are
clothes and ornaments. The land is full of gems and the sands
are golden.. People dropped from heaven live there, with duration of life of thirteen thousand years.
10. On the western side of this island, after four thousand
yojanas, we get the celestial region Candradvipa covering an
area of one thousand yojanas. In its middle are two waterfalls
called Candrakànta and Süryakànta. Between them is the great
river Candravarta with numerous tributaries and many trees
(on the banks).
11. On the northern side of Kuru is the celestial region
Süryadvipa covering an area of one thousand yojanas washed by
the waves of the ocean. In its middle is a great mountain, a
hundred yojanas in extent. From it arises the river called Süryàvarta. The abode of the Sun is there. Therein live the people
with the Sun as their god and having the same complexion as his,
with duration of life of ten thousand years.
12. On the western side of this island, after four thousand
yojanas, we find in the ocean the island called Bhadrakara covering an area of one thousand yojanas. Therein is the abode oi
Vayu adorned by numerous gems. There Vayu remains in corporal form. There the people are golden in colour and live for
five thousand years.
l. Perhaps the northern ocean is meant.

CHAPTER EIGHTYFIVE
The nine divisions of Bharata
Rudra said:
1. Thus has been described the arrangement in the worldlotus. Now listen to the ninefold division of Bharata. These
(divisions) are Indra, Kaseru, Tamravarna, Gabhasti, Nàgadvipa, Saumya, Gandharva, Varuna and Bharata (proper).
Each is surrounded by an ocean and is one thousand yojanas in
extent. There are seven major mountains.
2. These major mountains are Mahendra, Malaya, Sahya,
Suktiman, Rksa, Vindhya and Pariyatra.
3, There are minor mountains like Mandara, Sara, Dardura, Kailasa, Mainaka, Vaidyuta, Varandhama, Pandura,
Tungaprastha, Krsnagiri, Jayanta, Airavata, Rsyamüka, Gomanta, Citraküta, Sriparvata, Cakorakuta, Srisaila and Krtasthala. There are smaller mountains also. In the settlements in
these dwell Aryas and Mlecchas. They drink water in the
rivers flowing there.
/4, The rivers are Ganga, Sindhu, Sarasvati, Satadru,
Vitasta, Vipasa, Candrabhaga, Sarayü, Yamuna, Iravati, Devika,
Kuhü, Gomati, Dhitapapa, Bahuda, Drsadvati, Kausiki,
Nisvira, Gandaki, Caksusmati and Lohita, all rising from the
foot of the Himalayas. Vedasmrti, Vedavati, Sindhuparna,
Candanabha, Nasadacara, Rohipara, Carmanvati, Vidiéa,
Vedatrayi and Vapanti arise from Pariyatra.
5. Sona, Jyotiratha, Narmada, Surasa, Mandakini, Dasarna,
Citrakütà, Tamasa, Pippala, Karatoya, Pisacika, Citrotpala,
Visala, Vafijuka, Bahuvahini, Suktimati, Viraja, Pankini and
Ratri arise from Rksa. Manijala, Subha, Tapi, Payosni, Sighroda, Vesna, Pasa, Vaitarani, Vaidipala, Kumudvati, Toya,
Durga, Antya and Gira arise from the base of the Vindhya.
Godavari, Bhimarathi, Krsna, Veni, Vafjula, Tungabhadra,
Suprayoga and Bahyakaveri arise from the foot of Sahya.
6. Satamala, Tamraparni, Puspavati and Utpalavati arise
from Malaya. Triyama, Rsikulya, Iksula, Trivindala, Mūlinī
and Varhgavara have their origin in Mahendra. Rsika, Lusati,
Mandagamini and Palasini have their source in Suktiman.
These are the main rivers arising from the major mountains.

202 Varáha Purana
The others are minor rivers. This Jambüdvipa is one lakh yojanas in extent.
CHAPTER EIGHTYSIX
Sakadvipa
Rudra said:
1. Now know about Sakadvipa. It is double the extent of
Jambüdvipa and the saline ocean surrounding it also is double
the size. There live in it blessed people, long-lived and free from
famine, decay and disease. There are seven major mountains
here which have the saline ocean on one side and milky ocean
on the other.
2. On the east is the extensive mountain called Udaya. To
the west of it is the mountain named Jaladhara, also called
Candra. Indra drinks its water and then pours it down (as rain).
In it there is another mountain called Svetaka. It has six parts.
Here the people play a good deal. There is another mountain
called Rajata. It is also known as Saka. Beyond it is Ambikeya.
It is also called Vibhrajasa.
3. The same is called Kesari. The wind arises from there.
The regions are also known after the mountains, as Udaya,
Sukumara, Jaladhara, Ksemaka and Mahadruma as principal
names. The other names of the mountains are also applied. In
the middle is the Saka tree. There are seven main rivers with two
names each. These are Sukumari, Kumari, Nanda, Venika,
Dhenuh, Iksumati and Gabhasti.
CHAPTER EIGHTYSEVEN
Kusadvipa
Rudra said:
1. Now listen to KuSadvipa, the third. Kusadvipa is surrounded by the milky ocean, and is double in extent of the Saka-

dvipa. There are seven major mountains nere also, each with
two names such as Kumuda, also called Vidruma. The high
Hemaparvata is also Drona, Puspavan is also Kanka, Kusesaya
is also Agnimàn, and the sixth Mahisa is also Hari. Agni remains
there.
2. The seventh is Kakudhra; it is the same as Mandara.
These are the mountains in Kusadvipa. The divisions in it have
also two names cach. Kumuda is Sveta, it is named first. The
high Lolita is also Venumandala. Valahaka is Jimuta and is the
same as Rathakara. Drona is Hari and is the same as Baladhana.
3. ‘The rivers there have also two names. Pratoya is also
called Pravesà. The second is Siva, also called Yagoda. The
third is Citra, also known as Krsna. The fourth is Hradini,
also called Candrà. The fifth is Vidyullatà, also called Sukla.
The sixth is Varna, it is the same as Vibhàvari. The seventh is
Mahati, the same as Dhrti. These are the main rivers. The
others are minor ones. This is the arrangement in Kusadvipa.
4. Sakadvipa and its position have already been narrated.
In its middle is a big mass of Kusa grass. T'he KuSadvipa is
surrounded by an ocean of curd, equal to amrta, and double
the size of the milky ocean.
CHAPTER EIGHTYEIGHT
Krauncadvipa
Rudra said:
l. The fourth is Kraufica, double the dimensions of Kusadvipa, surrounded by an ocean also double in size. In it also
there are seven mountains. The first in Kraufica is Vidyullata
or Raivata, then is Manasa or Pavaka. Then is Andhakara or
Acchodaka. Then is Devàvrta which is called also Surapa.
After this is Devistha, also called Kaficanaérnga.
2. After Devananda we get Govinda or Dvivinda. Then is
Pundarika, which is the same as Toyasaha. These seven mountains in Krauficadvipa are all high and full of gems.
3. The regions in Kraufica are: KuSsala or Madhava,
Vamaka or Sarivartaka, Usnavan or Saprakàía, Pavaka or

204 Varáha Purana
Sudargana, Andhakara or Sammoha, Munidega or Prakasa
and Dundubhi or Anartha.
4, There are seven rivers: Gauri, Kumudvati, Sandhya,
Ratri, Manojava, Khyati and Pundarika.
5. Gauri is Puspavaha, Kumudvati is Ardravati, Sandhya
is Raudra, (Ràtri) is Sukhavaha, (Manojava) is Bhogajava,
Khyati is Ksiproda, Pundarika is Bahulà. The minor rivers
have different colours and flow in different regions. Krauficadvipa is surrounded by (an ocean of) ghee and beyond it is
Salmali.
CHAPTER EIGHTYNINE
Salmalidvipa and others
Rudra said:
1. Ishall now speak about the people in the remaining three
islands. Listen to the account of the fifth, Salmali.
2. Sàlmali is double the size of Kraufica island.
3. This is surrounded by the sca of ghee. It is also double
in size. There also we get seven principal mountains, and the
same number of rivers. The mountains are big, yellow and full
of gold and have the names Sarvaguna, Sauvarna, Rohita,
Sumanasa, Kusala, Jambünada and Vaidyuta. The regions are
also of the same names.
4. Then is the sixth, Gomeda. This is twice the size of
Salmali. There are only two mountains in it, Avasara and
Kumuda. The ocean is of Sugarcane juice.
Puskara is double its size. In it there is the mountain called
Manasa. This is divided into two and is surrounded by sweet
water spreading to the same area as itself.
5. Then is this broad earth forming part of the expansive
universe.
These are the regions enumerated. In every aeon Lord Narayana assumes the form of a boar and raises it up by a tusk and
restores it to its original position.

6. I have thus told you about the dimensions of the earth.
May good befall you, O Brahmins. I shall now retire to my abode
in Kailasa.
Varüha said:
7. Saying thus, Rudra immediately left for Kailasa. All
the gods and sages also departed.
CHAPTER NINETY
The Goddess of Creation
Earth said:
1. Some consider the holy Siva, some Visnu and others
Brahma as the supreme being.
2. I have great curiosity to know who among these is
superior and who inferior. Pleasc enlighten mc.
Varaha said:
3. O goddess, Nàràyana is the supreme god. Then is Brahmà
who arose from him. From Brahma arose Rudra the omniscient.
4. The wonders Rudra accomplished arc numerous. I shall
tell you all of them.
5. In the beautiful peak Kailasa, full of many kinds of
minerals, resides the three-eyed lord Siva.
6. Once this god, who is bowed to by all beings, was in the
company of Parvati, surrounded by his Ganas.
7. Some among the Ganas were lion-faced and were roaring
like lions. Some were elephant-faced and others horse-faced.
8. Some were crocodile-faced, others boar-faced, yet others
mule-faced and donkey-faced.
9. A few were goat-faced and a few others fish-faced. In
all, they were all innumerable and holding weapons. Some were
singing, some dancing, some running and some jumping.
10. 'The mighty ones were laughing, clapping and roaring.
Some of the leaders were fighting throwing stones at one another.
ll. Many were engaged in single combat. Thus were the
Ganas surrounding Mahesvara.

206 Varáüha Purana
12. While the Ganas were thus mirthful and the lord was
playing with his spouse, there came Brahma in great hurry together with Devas.
13. The great god Rudra, seeing Brahma arrive there,
honoured him and said:
14. “O Brahmi, tell me quickly the object of your hurried
visit to me".
Brahma said:
15. “There is a great Raksasa named Andhaka. Being much
harassed by him, Devas came to me for help.
16. I then told them that they may go to Siva and that is
why they are here now”.
17. Saying this, Brahma looked at Siva and at the same time
called to his mind the great god Narayana.
18. Lord Narayana thus came to be between the other two.
And Brahma, Visnu and Maheévara came to be unified.
19. They looked at each other minutely, and as a result of
the unified looks of the three, a goddess arose.
20. This deity was young and resplendent, had the compIexion of the blue lotus and had dark and curly hair.
21. She had shapely nose and forehead and wellformed
mouth. All that the god Tvasta (the celestial architect) had
described as five-tongue was well descernible in her.
22. Seeing her, Brahma, Visnu and Maheégvara asked her
who she was and what she wanted to do.
23. That goddess who had the three colours black, white
and yellow said:
24. “O great gods, I was born out of the combination of the
looks of all the three of you. How do you fail to know me to be
the goddess representing your energies ?”.
25. Then Brahma and others were pleased and gave her
a boon saying: “O goddess, we name you Trikala, protect this
universe always.
26. You will have other names also based on your attributes, and all these will produce different achievements.
27. There is another thing also. You have three colours.
Assume three different forms one with each colour’’.
28. Thus told by the gods, she became triplicated, one white,
another red and the third black,

p"
29. The white body is Brahma (because of Brahma element)
and creation proceeds from it calmly as ordained by Brahma.
30. The beautiful body red in colour, is Vaisnavi (because
of Visnu’s element) and bears conch and disc.
31. She protects the whole universe and is known as Visnumaya.
32. The body black in colour bears the trident and holds
a fierce face. She destroys the universe.
33. The broad-eyed white goddess with the aspect of Brahma, took leave of him and disappeared.
34. She hid herself in the Sveta mountain and began to
perform severe penance desirous of attaining omniscience.
35. The red goddess with the aspect of Visnu took leave of
him and went to the Mandara mountain for performing severe
penance.
36. 'The fierce-looking black goddess with the aspect of
Rudra, similarly went to perform penance at the Nila mountain.
37. Then for a long time Brahma started to create beings,
but he could not progress.
38. When the creations made out of the mind of Brahma
thus failed to multiply he began to seriously think about the cause
of it.
39. When Brahma, thus, meditated with his yogic powers,
he knew about the goddess performing severe penance at the
Sveta mountain.
40. Then he went to the place of her penance and told her
who was absorbed in contemplation.
Brahma said:
41. O beautiful goddess, why do you do this penance? I
am pleased with you. You may seek of me a boon,
Srsti said:
42. “O god, I don’t wish to remain confined to a single
place. I seek of you the boon to make me present everywhere".
43. God Brahma, being thus requested by Srsti(the goddess
of creation), told her that she would be present everywhere.
44. Told thus, the beautiful Srsti dissolved herself in Brahma.
45. From then onwards, the creation by Brahma began to
- grow,

208 Varaha Purana
46. Seven arose from Brahma’s mind, from them other
sages, from them yet others, and from them still others. Thus
there are four series of beings.
47. Thus was established beings moving and stationary and
all that is expressible by words.
48. Thus was established all that is past and future.
CHAPTER NINETYONE
Sarasvati and others
Varaha said:
1. O fair lady, hear what that goddess did who was made
triple by the great god Siva.
2. The form of the goddess of creation which is beautiful
and white, is known as Ekaksara (of one syllable) and also Sarvaksara (of all syllables).
3. She is also known as Vagiéa (highest speech) and sometimes as Sarasvati. She is Vidyesvari and Amitaksara.
4. She is Jñānanidhi (the abode of all knowledge) and also
Vibhavari. All the names that are soft and all the names related
to knowledge pertain to her.
5. The broad-eyed, beautiful and red-coloured Vaisnavi
is another. Raudri is the third.
6. All the three arose really out of Rudra. It is really a
single goddess who is in three froms.
7. Thus have I told you about ancient creation. The entire
world of movable and immovable objects is pervaded by her.
8. Brahma praised the goddess by whom his creation was
made to grow.
Brahma said:
9. Hail O goddess, that arose from truth, firm and eternal,
the mother of all, all-pervading.
10. You bestow all achievements, all intelligence and good
progeny.

g" D
11. You are Svaha, you are Svadhà, you are the origin of
everything, you are Pranava and the source of all Vedas.
12. You are the source of all gods and demons, all Yaksas,
Gandharvas and Raksasas, all animals and all plants.
13. You are Vidya, Vidyesvari, Siddha, Prasiddha and
Sureégvari. ,
14. You know everything, you give all success, you are
present everywhere, you are free from all doubts, and you destroy all enemies.
15. You hold all knowledge and bestow all good. I bow
to you.
16. He who unites with his wife after her menstrual bath,
gets good progeny by your blessing. You destroy all enemies
and always remain victorious.
CHAPTER NINETYTWO
The greatness of Vaisnavi
Varaha said:
1. The goddess Vaisnavi who went to Mandara for performing penance, was the great power representing Rajas.
2. She was doing penance all by herself (at the place)
Visala. After a long time, her mind became agitated.
3-4. As a result of this agitation there arose hundreds of
beautiful damsels with black curly hair and red lips, wearing
bracelets and anklets.
9-7. Seeing them all, the goddess created a city with numerous mansions with golden balconies, crystal stairs and water
fountains, with jewelled windows and gardens, all on broad
roads.
8. 'The ladies thus created were innumerable, but I shall
tell you the names of the more important among them.
9-12. Vidyutprabhà, Candrakànti, Süryakànti, Gambhira,
Carukesi, Sujata, Mafijukesini, Ghrtaci, Urvasi, Sasini, Silamandità, Carukanya, Visalaksi, Dhanya, Candraprabha, Girisuta, Süryaprabhà, Amrtà, Svayamprabha, Carumukhi, Siva-

210 Varáha Purana
dati, Vibhavari, Jaya, Vijaya, Jayanti, Aparajita and several
others in hundreds occupied that fine city.
13. All these in the retinue of the goddess were bearing the
rope and the noose, and she herself was seated on the throne.
14. Attended on by these, she began to perform the vrata
called Kaumara.
15. While she was thus engaged in penance, duly attended
on by them, there appeared before her Narada, the son of Brahina.
16-17. Seeing that great sage, she directed Vidvutprabhà
to give him a seat and water for washing the feet.
18. Thereupon Vidyutprabha offered to Narada dsana
(seat), padya (water for feet) and arghya (holy water».
19. When Narada bowed to her and took his seat, she asked
him in great joy.
20. “O great sage, welcome to vou. From which world
are you coming now ? Be pleased to say with what purpose you
have come ?".
21-22. Asked by the goddess thus, Narada who knew all the
worlds, said: “From Brahmaloka I went to Indraloka and from
there to Rudra's mountain (Kailasa): From there I have come
here to see you”. Saying so, he looked intently at the goddess.
23. Seeing her for a while, Narada became wonder-struck.
24. “How wonderful is her form, how wonderful is her
lustre, how wonderful her courage, how wonderful her selflessness
in that she is undergoing all this strain.
25. In no other woman can this beauty bc seen, be she belong to Devas, Gandharvas, Siddhas, Yaksas, Kinnaras or Raksasas". Thinking thus, his wonder was redoubled.
26. He bowed to her and then jumped into the sky and
quickly went to the city of the Raksasa chief.
27. That city was known as Mahisa and was within the
ocean. He went there to the Asura whose form was like a buffalo.
28. When he saw the sage, he duly honoured him with devotion.
29. 'Thus pleased, Nàrada told him about the matchless
beauty of the goddess doing penance.
Narada said:
30. “O lord of Asuras, by means of a boon, the entire universe has become yours. Now hear about a jewel among damsels,

p
31. From Brahinaloka I happened to go to the Mandara
mountain. There I saw a city, Devipura, full of hundreds of
young women.
32. The chicf among them is performing penance. Like
her we cannot find one among gods, demons or Yaksas.
33. I have not seen one like her in all my wanderings all
over the world.
34, She is honoured by Devas, Gandharvas, Rsis, Siddhas,
Càranas and Daityas.
35. Seeing that benevolent goddess, I rushed here to you.
She cannot be won without winning Devas and Gandharvas’’.
36. Thus informing him, Narada immediately disappeared.
CHAPTER NINETYTHREE
The discussion of Mahisásura with his ministers
Varüha said:
1. When Narada was gone, Mahisasura began to think of
the beautiful damsel spoken about by him.
2. Thinking of her, he never got peace of mind. He summoned his chief minister by name Alamáéarman.
3-4. He had eight ministers who were learned, valiant and
just. They were Praghasa, Vighasa, Sankukarna, Vibhavasu,
Vidyunmali, Sumati, Parjanya and’ Krüra. These were the
principal ones. They asked their king to tell them what they
should do.
5. Determined to get the damsel mentioned by Narada,
the king told them:
Mahisa said:
6. Sage Narada spoke to me about a young woman. She
cannot be obtained without defeating the king of gods.
7-8. You, therefore, consider the matter well and tell me
how gods can be defeated and how this woman can be obtained.
Please tell me quickly.

212 Varáha Purana
9. Thus asked, they began to say. First Praghasa said to
him:
10. “O lord, she who was spoken of by Narada to you, is
the supreme power that has assumed the form of the goddess
Vaisnavi.
11. A king who desires the wife of his preceptor, the wife of
another king or the women in attendance on him, or cohabits
with a woman prohibited for him, brings about his own doom.
12. After Praghasa, Vighasa said, “O king, what Praghasa
said about that goddess is true.
13. If we all agree, then what should be done by one desirous of success, is to get that virgin goddess in marriage.
14-15. In a matterrelating to a virgin, one should notact
by oneself. If you all agree to what I say, then Ict the ministers
go to her nearest relative and seek her hand for you.
16. We will first try negotiation failing which we will try
to get the approval by gifts. Yf we still fail we try the method of
threat, and finally, if necessary, we will fight.
17. If by all these processes, we fail to achieve our aims, we
will march forward and carry her away by force".
18. Vighasa's proposal was gladly approved by all the other
ministers. They said:
19. ‘‘Vighasa has said now what best we can do in this
matter. Let that be done and let us send a messenger now.
20. 'The messenger should be pure in mind, valiant and
learned in polity.
21. We should know from him about her appearance, complexion, valour, might, relations and residence.
22. After knowing all this, we may think of the further action
to be taken”.
23. The king accepted the suggestion and applauded the
minister Vighasa.
24. All of them then considered as to who should be sent
as messenger and finally chose Vidyutprabha, who had magical
powers, for the purpose.
25. Vighasa then told him: “Be victorious over the army
of gods. Mobilise the Raksasa army with all its four constituents.
26. O lord of Asuras, when the gods are defeated by you,
that damsel will naturally come to you.

27-28. When the guardians of the quarters, Maruts, Nàgas,
Vidyadharas, Siddhas, Gandharvas, Rudras, Vasus, Adityas,
are all overcome, you will become Indra.
29. When Indra's harem with numerous women, and the
women among Devas and Gandharvas fall to you, she too will
certainly do so”.
30-31. Thus said, the king ordered the commander-in-chief
Virüpáksa, black like the cloud and collyrium, to get ready the
army with the elephants, horses, chariots, and soldiers, in order
to defeat gods and Gandharvas.
32. Commanded thus, Virüpàáksa immediately got ready
the invincible army.
33. Each Raksasa in the army was adequate to defeat one
god in battle.
34. Even the chieftains were nine crores in number. Thousands of Raksasas constituted the infantry.
35. The entire force was assembled and made to march with
a view to defeating the force of gods.
36. With a variety of weapons in hands and with ferocious
looks, the soldiers in the army danced in delight and uttered
loud cries at the prospect of victory over the gods.
CHAPTER NINETYFOUR
The fight between gods and demons
Varaha said:
l. Then the mighty demon Mahisa, who could assume any
form at will, started for mountain Meru on an elephant.
2. Reaching Indra's city, he challenged Indra and gods
for battle.
3. Taking their weapons and riding on their battle vehicles,
the gods accepted the challenge.
4. Then started the exciting battle between great warriors
full of war cries from both sides.
9. The (eight) Vasus were attacked by eight Raksasas,
namely Afjana, Nilakuksi,-Meghavarna, Valahaka, Udaraksa,
Lalataksa, Subhima and Svarbhanu.

214 Varüha Puréna
6-9. The twelve Ádityas were engaged by twelve Raksasas,
namely, Bhima, Dhvanksa, Dhvastaksrna, Sankukarna, Vajraka,
Jyotivirya, Vidyunmali, Raktaksa, Vidyujjihva, Atikaya, Mahakaya and Dirghabaht.
10-12. Similarly, the eleven Rudras were to face eleven
Raksasas by name Kala, Krtanta, Raktaksa, Harana, Mitraha,
Nala, Yajfiaha, Brahmaha, Goghna, Strighna and Samvartaka.
13. The other Raksasas engaged the other devas and Mahisa
himself engaged Indra.
14. Mahisa was very valiant and was highly haughty that
he could not be killed by any male, because of a boon from Brahma, be he Siva himself.
15. Numerous Asuras were killed by Adityas, Vasus and
Rudras. Many in the army of Devas were also killed by the
Raksasas.
16. In the end Indra was defeated, and the gods, unable to
face the piercing weapons, took to their heels.
17. The Asuras reached Brahmaloka and began to harass
Devas further.
CHAPTER NINETYFIVE
Death of Mahigásura
Varáha said:
1l. Then Vidyutprabha, who was sent as the messenger,
reached the place of the goddess where there were hundreds of
young women, and said:
Vidyutprabha said:
2. “O goddess, there was a sage named Suparsva who was
one among the first of creations.
3. To him was born the valiant and resplendent Sindhudvipa.
4. He was performing severe penance without food in the
city Mahismati.
5. One day princess Mahismati of incomparable beauty was
moving about playing with her friends.
ER.

6. She chanced to reach the valley of the Mandara mountain.
7-8. There she saw the penance-grove of sage Asvara which
was full of bowers and trees like Bakula, Lakuca, Candana,
Spandana, Sala and Sarala.
9. Secing this beautiful hermitage, princess Mahismati
thought.
10. “I shall frighten out this sage from this penance grove
and shall myself enjoy here with my friends".
11. Thinking thus, she transformed herself into a buffalo
with sharp horns, along with her friends.
]2. She then went to the sage to frighten him.
13. When frightened by them, the sage was able to see by
his internal eye that she was the Asura princess, and in anger he
cursed her.
14. “Since you are frightening me by assuming the form of
a buffalo, you be a buffalo itself for a hundred years for your
misconduct".
15. Cursed thus, she was shivering with fear, and she fell
at his feet with her friends and sought his pardon.
16. He was very much moved and said in mitigation of the
curse: “When once you give birth to a son with this form, there
will be the end of the curse. My words will never be in vain",
17. Told thus, she went to the bank of river Narmada where
Sindhudvipa was performing penance.
18. There a young and beautiful Raksasa girl by name Indumati, bathing naked, was seen by this sage.
19. Then he had an emission which he dropped in a stony
crevice at the river (and it got mixed with the water).
20. Finding the water fragrant (with it), Mahismati told
her friends that she would drink it. She then drank the water
containing the emission of the sage.
21. Asa result she conceived and in due time brought forth,
a son named Mahisa, intelligent and valiant.
22. O goddess, this Mahisa who has vanquished the army
of gods, now desires to marry you.
23. "This great Asura, having subjugated all the three worlds,
will give you everything you desire.
24. O goddess, you will be doing a great thing if you offer
yourself to him”.

216 Vardha Purana
25. Told thus by the messenger, the goddess simply laughed
and did not utter a word.
26. When she was laughing, he saw in her belly all the three
worlds and he became stupefied.
27. Then the doorkeeper of the goddess, by name Jaya,
spoke what was in the mind of her mistress.
Jaya said:
28. "You have now spoken seeking the hand of this goddess
(for your master). But the vrata she has undertaken is a ceascless one.
29. There are so many damsels here attending on her. Even
one among them is not available to you. Then why speak of the
goddess. Therefore, O messenger, please go before something
untoward befalls you”.
30. The messenger departed. Immediately there appeared
sage Narada from the sky.
31. He quickly prostrated before the virgin goddess, took
the seat offered to him and said after bowing to all the others
there.
32. “O goddess, ÍI am sent to you by the gods.
33. The gods have been defeated in battle by the asura
Mahisa, and now he is attempting to capture you.
34. And I have been asked by the gods to tell you that you
should be firm in killing him".
35. Soon Narada disappeared and the goddess ordered her
retinue to get ready for battle.
36, Thus ordered, they all took ferocious forms holding
sword, shield and arrows, and stood ready for battle to destroy
Asuras.
37, Then the entire army of Asuras quickly came away
from the army of gods to the place where thisarmy of women
was ranged.
38. The women fought with them and soon destroyed their
force with all its four divisions.
39. The heads of many were smashed or cut down. The
chests of many were broken and goblins were drinking the blood
therein.
40. "The trunkless heads of many of the Asuras wererolling
on the ground.

p
4l. "Thus very soon the Asura army was vanquished and the
attack now turned towards Mahisàsura.
42. Then the whole army raised a cry of fear, and Mahisa
asked the commander why it was so.
43. The Asura named Yajüahanus, who had assumed the
form of an elephant, told him that this was because of the army of
women striking ferociously at the Asura force.
44. Mahisa then darted forth towards these women to strike
them with his mace.
45. He straightaway went to the spot where the goddess
worshipped by Devas and Gandharvas was standing.
46-47. Seeing him advance towards her, she assumed a form
with twenty hands, holding bow, sword, spear, arrows, trident,
club, mace, disc, sling, rod, rope, flag and lotus.!
48. The twenty-armed goddess appeared riding on a lion.
She then meditated on the fierce Rudra who is the cause of destruction.
49-50. Rudra immediately arrived there. She bowed to him
and said that she would gain victory over the Asuras by his mere
presence there.
51. Then she defeated all the Asuras except Mahisa. Afterwards she darted towards him.
52. When he saw her, Mahisa rushed towards her. He
alternately fought and fled.
53. He sometimes fought and sometimes withdrew. The
fight went on in this manner for ten thousand divine years.
54. The entire universe was realing with fear in the tumult
of the battle.
55. Finally in the mountain Sataírüga, he was trodden
upon and killed with the trident.
956. His head was cut off with the sword, As he was killed
by the goddess, his soul went to heaven.
37. Then Devas led by Brahma, delighted at the annihilation of Mahisa, praised the goddess.
Devas said:
38. Bow to you, O goddess, the great, majestic and fierce,
l. Only thirteen items are mentioned here and not twenty.

218 Varáha Purána
victorious, the cause of the existence of the world, three-eyed
and omnipresent.
59. Knowledge aud nescience, meditation, the object of
meditation, the slayer of Mahisasura, present in everything, the
lord of all, of universal form, Vaisnavi.
60. Free from fear, permanent, with eyes like the lotus petal,
engaged in holy vows, of frightening form.
61. The bestower of prosperity and success, learning and
ignorance, immortal, auspicious, the energy of Siva, Visnu and
Brahma, prostrated by all gods.
62. Holding the bell in hand, bearing the weapon trident,
the destroyer of terrible Mahisa, fierce in form, uneven-eyed the
great illusion, the exuder of ambrosia.
63. "Well disposed towards all beings, the very essence of
all beings, the supporter of all beings, the source of all Vidyas,
Puranas and Silpas.
64. Bow to you, O mother, you are the repository of all
powers and ali the secrets of the Vedas.
65. Bow to you, O great goddess, pure, the embodiment of
forbearance.
66. We all seek refuge in you, O supreme goddess, as a
result of which we never meet with any reverse in battle.
67-68. He who recites this Stotra with devotion escapes from
ferocious animals like the tiger, from robbers and from thc displeasure of kings, gets release from fetters and lives happily.
Varáha said:
69. Thus extolled by gods, she asked them to seek of her a
boon.
The gods said:
70. “The boon we seek is that you may be pleased to fulfil
all the desires of those who recite this stotra of yours".
71. Saying ‘Let it be so’, the goddess sent the gods off and
herself remained there.
72. O Earth, he who knows this the second birth of the goddess, becomes free from grief and attains the eternal abode free
from all misery.

CHAPTER NINETYSIX
The exploits of Raudri
Varaha said:
1. O Earth, listen to the Vrata of Raudri, representing the
power of Tamas, who went to the Nila mountain for performing
penance.
2. With the aim of protecting the world by means of penance
for a long time, she resorted to five fires.
3-4. While she was thus performing great penance, there
lived in a city rich with gems and full of forests in the midst of
the sea, a powerful Asura king named Ruru who had got a boon
from Brahma. He was a source of terror to gods.
5. He was like a second Namuci,? and had as his followers
crores of Asuras.
6. For a long time he fought against gods with a view to
capturing the cities of the deities guarding different quarters.
7. As the great Asura was rising with his army, the water
in the sea began to swell and enter the valleys of mountains
filling them with crocodiles and big fish.
8. From within that water issued forth the Asura army with
variegated weapons and armour.
9. Came out from it big elephants with .\suras seated on
them and loudly tinkling with bells tied on thom.
10. Crores of horses having white streamers came out with
riders seated on golden pedestals,
]l. Similarly, came out a ceaseless stream of chariots with
good wheels, shaft and poles, fitted with mechanical contrivances, and equalling in speed the chariot of the sun.
12. In the same manner rushed forth the infantry with quivers, bows and arrows, quickly striking at all those that came in
the way.
13. After coming out of the waters, they vanquished the
gods and darted towards the city of Indra with all the four divisions of the army.
14. The Asura king Ruru fought Devas with fierce club,
hammer, rod and arrows.
l. The five fires are those on the four sides, the fifth being the sun,
2. Namuci was a demon killed by Indra.

im.
220 Varaha Purana
15. In the battle,the Asuras inflicted serious injury on Devas
and so too Devas on the Asuras. In the end, Devas with
their leader Indra were defeated and they ran away.
16. When Devas were thus taking to their heels, Asuras
chased them.
17-18. Running in great fear, gods came to Nila mountain
where the goddess Raudri was doing penance. They understood her to be Kálarátri, the cause of all destruction.
19. Seeing Dcvas thus fear-stricken, she told them aloud not
to be afraid.
The goddess said:
20. O gods, why are you so worried. Tell me the cause of
your fear.
The gods said:
21. “O great goddess, protect us from the powerful Ruru,
the king of Asuras, who is pursuing us”.
22. Told thus by the gods, she of matchless valour, simply
laughed a while.
23. As she was laughing, from her mouth arose numerous
goddesses of strange forms, and the whole world became covered
by them.
24, ‘They were ferocious, with expansive breasts, holding
noose, goad, trident, bow and arrows.
25. They remained around the goddess in crores.
26. They soon fought against Asuras and annihilated their
entire force.
27. The army of Devas together with the army of Kàlarátri
fought Asuras and sent them all to Yama's abode.
28. The great demon Ruru alone was left there.
29. He then discharged towards the gods a magical power
which made them all fall into a swoon.
30. When Devas were thus in a state of forced sleep, the
goddess struck at Ruru with her trident.
31. When he was struck, his trunk (carma) and head (munda)
got separated from each other.

pme
32, Since the carma and munda of the demon Ruru were
separated thus, she came to be known as Cāmuņdā.!
33. Because of her terrific form engaged in destruction, she
was known as Kälarātri (the night of time).
34. Her attendant goddesses are legion and they always
stand around her.
35. They all felt extemely hungry and so requested the goddess to give them food.
36. Thus requested, she began to think about food for them,
but could not find an immediate solution.
37. She then meditated on Lord Rudra, and as a result the
three-eyed god appeared before her.
38. He then asked her to tel! him what her desirc was.
The goddess said:
39. These mighty attendants of mine are in need of food.
Please give them something suitable to cat. Otherwise, O lord,
they may be eating me.
Rudra said:
40. “O resplendent Kalaratri, I shall tell you about the
food for them. Please listen.
41-42. She who, while in pregnancy, wears the cloth of
another woman, or touches a man (other than her husband),
let her be (the food) for some of them on earth.
43. Where there are foibles among the ignorant, the occasion may be taken advantage of as an offering for some of them.
44. Others may take advantage of crevices in rooms for
child-birth and snatch away the newborn ones.
45. Still others may satisfy their hunger by possessing the
bodies of women standing with tears in houses, fields, lakes,
tanks and gardens thinking of men (other than their own husbands)".
46-47. Telling the goddess thus and seeing Ruru and his
army lying dead, the three-eyed god began to praise her.
Rudra said:
48. ''Hail goddess Camunda, hail the snatcher of all beings,
hail omniscient K4laratri, bow to you.
l. Usually the name is taken as due to her killing the two demons,
Canda and Munda.

222 Varāha Purana
49. O you of universal form, the auspicious, pure, threecved, fierce, benevolent, the great illusion, the great beginning.
50, Speedy like the mind, victory, the cause of growth,
fierce-eyed, settler of all agitation, the great devastation, attractive in body, the lover of dance.
51. Fierce, black-coloured, remover of sins, with noose and
and rod in hand, of frightening appearance.
52. Camunda, with flaming mouth, sharp teeth, mighty,
sitting in a hundred vehicles, sitting on the dead.
53. Possessed of threatening big eyes, striking terror in all
beings, furious.
54. Kali, Karali, Kalaratri, bow to you”.
55. Thus praised by god Rudra, the great goddess became
very much pleased and asked him to seek any boon he wished.
Rudra said:
56. “May you be pleased to grant desires of those who
recite this stotra of yours.
57. He who recites this with devotion thrice a day, may
attain sons, grandsons, cattle and affluence.
58. He who listens to this account of the Triple power,
may he be freed of all sins and made to attain beatitude’’.
59. Having praised the goddess Camunda thus, lord Rudra
disappeared and the gods retired to their abodes.
60. He who knows about the origin of the goddess in this
three-fold form, becomes freed from allbondages and attains
supreme bliss.
61. A king who has lost his kingdom, regains it free from all
troubles, if for one year he worships her fasting on Astami,
Navami and Caturdaáíi.
62. This Triple power brings success in diplomacy.
63. This great goddess of creation, when white, is of Sattvic
nature and pertains to Brahmà. The same, when red, is of
Rajasic nature and is called Vaisnavi (pertaining to Visnu).
64. The same, when black, is of Tamusic nature and is
known as Raudri (pertaining to Rudra).
65. Just as the same supreme soul manifests itself in three
forms (Brahma, Visnu and Rudra), so the same power manifests itself in three different forms based on function.
66. He who listens to the origin of this Triple power, becomes
free from all sins and attains the highest bliss.

67. He who listens to the same on the Navami tithi with
great attention, becomes free from fears and attains a kingdom.
68. He who keeps it written in his house, gets it immune
from fire, thiefs and snakes.
69. He who worships the book in which it is written, gets
the whole world in his favour. He gets children, money, grain,
kine and noble women.
70. He who has it in his house, gets jewels, horses, cows,
servants, servant maids and all other kinds of wealth.
Varaha said:
71. O Earth, I have now told you about the secret and the
greatness of Rudra.
72. Camunda has different forms numbering nine crores.
Camunda is the Tamasic power which pertains to Rudra.
73. Vaisnavi has different forms numbering eightcen crores.
Vaisnavi is the Rajasic Power of protection which pertains to
Visnu.
74. Brahmi has different forms countless in number.
75. O Earth, to each one of these Siva creates a form of
himself to be their husbands.
76. So Rudra becomes pleased with those who worship
them and grants all that they desirc.
CHAPTER NINETYSEVEN
The greatness of Rudra
Varaha said:
1. O Earth, now listen to the origin of Rudra Vrata, by
knowing which one gets freed from all sins.
2. The red-eyed and tawny-coloured Rudra who was created by Brahma in his third birth, was borne by him in pleasure
on his shoulder.
3-4. When he was thus on the shoulder, the fifth head of
Brahma told Rudra the Atharvana mantra by which release is
obtained,

224 Varàha Purana
5. “O Kapalin, Rudra, Babhru, Bhava, Kairata, Suvrata,
my valiant and broad-cyed son, do protect this world”.
6. When Rudra was thus addressed by the names which he
would be getting in future he was angry at the word ‘Kapala’
used and clipped off that (fifth) head.
7. The head was clipped off by the nail in the left thumb,
but it got attached to the hand.
8. Having plucked out the head, Rudra, however, spoke
to Brahma in humility.
Rudra said:
9. O lord, please tell me how this cut-off head can be made
to fall from my hand and how I can make atonement for this sin,
Brahma said:
10. “O Rudra, perform the vrata called Kapalika by your
own prowess and following the right Samayacara.”
1l. Thus said by Brahma, Rudra went to the holy mountain
Mahendra to make atonement for his sin.
12. Remaining there, Rudra broke that head into threc.
He separated the hair on the head and with it made his yajñopavita.
13. He made a bead of the bones. One part of the skull,
full of blood, remained in his hand.
14-15. Another he made into smaller parts and placed them
on his matted hair. Then the great god wandered over the whole
earth with its seven islands, bathing in the holy Tirthas every
day; first he bathed in the sea and then in the Ganges.
16. He went to river Sarasvati and then the confluence of
the Ganges and Yamuna. He then went to river Satadru and
from there to the great river Devika.
17. He then bathed in Vitastà, Candrabhàgà, Gomati,
Sindhu, Tungabnadra, Godavari and Gandaki.
18. He went to the great Siva temple in Nepal and then to
Daruvana in Kedara.
19. He visited Bhadresvara and then the very holy Gaya
and there propitiated the Pitrs.
20. Thus, O Earth, he quickly traversed the whole earth.
21-22. In the sixth year of his wandering, his only dress,

a lion cloth tied to the waist-string, fell down and he became the
naked Kapalika.
23. Wandering again for the next two years from one holy
place to another, he attempted to cast off the piece of skull in his
hand but could not.
24. For another two years he continued the same but in
vain.
25. He then spent one year in the holy Himalaya mountain.
26. For another year also he did the same in great excitement.
27. The next two years Rudra wandered about visiting very
ancient holy places.
28. O Earth, in the twelfth year, he went to Varanasi and
had his bath there.
29. When he was dipping himself in river Ganga there,
Brahma’s skull in his hand released itself.
30. This tirtha in Ganga, thereafter came to be known as
‘Kapalamocana’.
31. Going to the place Harihara and bathing in Devangada
and worshipping Some$vara, he went to Cakratirtha.
32. Bathing there and worshipping the deity Trijalesvara,
he went to Ayodhya and from there to Varanasi.
33. At the end of twelve years, the skull in his hand was
made to fall by the force of the Ganas moving in the borders.
34. This place became the holy tirtha named Kapalamocana,
35. He bathed in the Ganga there, worshipped Visvesvara
and became free from the sin of Brahmahatya.
36. The tirtha Kapalamocana is well known in the world,
by bathing in which one gets absolved of the sin of killing a
Brahmin.!
37. Seeing the skull fall, Brahma arrived there together with
Devas, and said:
Brahma said:
38. “O Rudra, be you the propounder of the righteous
path in the world. Since you wandered in the world with Kapdla
1. Verses 31 to 36 seem to be an interpolation stating the same matter
as in the verses before with the change that the skull was made to fall by
the Ganas instead of its dropping on its own accord.

296 Varáha Purana
(skull) in hand, the Vrata relating to you will be known as
Nagnakapala.
39. Since you attained reddish-brown colour while wandering in the Himalaya, the Vrata will be known as Babhravya.
40. Since you became Suddha (purified) in this place, the
Vrata will be Suddhafaiva, highly purificatorv.
41. Iwill impart the sastras only to those who duly worship
you at first.
42. He who performs these Vratas which you did first, will
be absolved of even the sin of killing a Brahmin.
43. The Vratas performed by vou as a Nagnakapala fnaked
holding the skull), Babhravya (as pure Siva), will be known
by the respective names.
44. Following this, those who duly worship you, to them you
may impart briefly with the rituals all Sastras, the Pasupata
Sàstra in particular".
45. Told thus by Brahma, Rudra became extremely pleased,
and hailed by Devas, he went to Kailàsa.
46. Brahma departed with Devas to the celestial world,
and then Devas went to their abodes.
Varáha said:
47. Ihave thus told you about the greatness of Rudra and
what he did in this world.
CHAPTER NINETYEIGHT
Moksa of Satyatapas!
Earth said:
1-2. O lord, you said formerly that there is much that is
interesting to be said about Satyatapas, the Brahmin who became a hunter and who saved Aruni from a tiger and propitiated
Durvasas and then went to Himalayas.
]. In the text the chapter is named Parvédhyaya,

3. Iam now very much eager to know this. Be pleased to
tell me.
Varaha said:
4. Satyatapas was a Brahmin in the lineof Bhrgu, but
because of his association with Dasyus (a cruel uncivilised tribe),
himself became onc like them.
5. After a long time, by the contact with sages, he became
a Brahmin again and got instruction from Durvasas in particular.
6. On the northern side of mount Himavan there is a holy
river called Pusyabhadrà, on its bank a beautiful slab called
Citragila and a big banyan tree called Bhadra.
7. There Satvatapas was performing severe penance.
8. Once when he was cutting with his axe sticks (for homa),
he happened to cut his left fore finger.
9. At the broken part there were only ashes, neither blood
nor flesh nor marrow. He put the broken finger in its place and
it got united as before.
10. 'This wonder was seen by a Kinnara couple that had
resorted to the banyan tree Bhadra the previous night.
11. When the couple returned to Indraloka in the morning,
they were asked by Indra and Yaksas, Gandharvas and Kinnaras there to tell them if there was anything wonderful to be
narrated.
12-15. The Kinnara couple then narrated about their being
near Rudrasaras, the wonder relating to Satyatapas they saw on
the bank of river Pusyabhadra, the exudation of ashes from his
broken finger and all that.
16-17. Surprised at this, Indra suggested to Visnu that they
may go to the place of wonder mentioned by the Kinnara pair
on the slopes of the Himalayas.
18. Visnu then transformed himself into a boar and Indra
into a hunter, and both went near the sage (Satyatapas).
19. Visnu in the form of the boar appeared within the sight
of the sage, alternately revealing and hiding himself.

228 Vardha Purana
20. Soon appeared there Indra also (in the guise of the
hunter) with bow and arrow in hand and asked sage Satyatapas:
21. “O sage, did you sec here a big boar? I want to kill it
for the food of my family".
22. Asked thus, the sage began to think: "If I show him the
boar now, it will surely be killed by him.
23. If I don’t, his family will famish. This hunter with his
wife and children, is in great hunger.
24. The boar hit by the arrow has sought refuge in my hermitage. What shall I do?”.
25. When thus in a dilemma, a thought occurred to him,
and he exclaimed:
26. “The eye is directed to see the moving objects and the
tongue is directed to speak to the hunter. There is no eye now to
see or the tongue to speak. Does the tongue really have the eye?"
27. Hearing this, both Indra and Visnu were pleased, and
showing their genuine forms, offered to grant him a boon.
Hearing this Satyatapas said:
28. "Really there is nothing to be asked, after seeing you
both before me here in this earth. I am fully gratified.
29. Still I shall ask: One, when Brahmins honour other
Brahmins at the sight of the new moon and full moon with devotion, let their acquired sin disappear in the course of a month.
30. Another, let me attain full liberation”.
31. They granted him both the boons asked for and disappeared. Satyatapas too felt in his heart to have become one
with Brahman.
32. While the sage was thus remaining there fully gratified,
his guru Áruni came there after going round the world visiting
the holy spots.
33. In great devotion he honoured the Guru with a seat,
Padya, Acamana and Godàna.
34. Aruni then spoke to him, seeing him full of humility
and freed from all sins.
Aruni said:
35. “You have achieved in full the aim of penance and you
have now become Brahman, Now it is the time for your liberation along with me,

36. Arise, my son, we shall go to the supreme Abode, after
reaching which there will be no rebirth”.
37. Then both of them, Satyatapas and Aruni, meditated
on Lord Narayana and became merged in him.
38. He who listens to this Parvadhyaya in full or reads it to
others, attains all that he desires.
CHAPTER NINETYNINE
Greatness of Tiladhenu!
Earth said:
1. She who is Maya and arose out of the body of Brahma
who was born of Avyakta, became the eight-armed Gayatri
and fought Caitrasura.
2. The same goddess became Nanda to achieve the purpose
of Devas. Then she became Vaisnavi at the instance of Brahma
for killing Mahisasura. Be pleased to tell me how all this was
done.
Varaha said:
3. She is the goddess Ganga very much loved by Lord Siva.
Being given his own abode, she is omniscient.
4. In Svayambhuva (time), she killed as Vaisnavi in the
Mandara mountain the demon Mahisa.
5. Then in the Vindhya as Nanda, the demon Caitra was
killed.
6. Or (it may also be understood) she is the power of
knowledge and Mahisa the embodiment of ignorance. Doubtless, ignorance is to be overcome by knowledge.
7. For the embodied form we get the story. For the abstract
form the place is the heart itself. This is proclaimed by Vedic
statements and established by the exponents of the Vedas.
8. Now listen, O Earth, to the propitiation of Visnu, the
greatest of gods, as a result of which the five great sins are
destroyed and sons and wealth are acquired.
1. Hollow metal cow filled with sesamum.

230 Varáha Purana
9. And he who is oppressed by poverty and diseases like
leprosy and is issueless, attains quickly prosperity, long and
healthy life and children.
10. He who sees Lord Narayana with goddess Laksmi in
the mandala with due rites.
ll. The lord who is self-born and is the embodiment of
mantra, as directed by the priest.
12. During all Dvàdasi days, particularly on the Dvadasi
day in the bright half of the month Karttika.
13. Or during the change of month or solar and lunar
eclipses.
14. To him occurs great happiness, dissolution of all sins,
and other deities also get propitiated.
15. The priest should test for one year whoever approaches
him, be he Brahmin, Ksatriya or Vai$ya, as to his conduct and
eligibility as true devotee.
16. The devotee should also treat the priest with the same
constant devotion as for Visnu.
17. At the end of the year he should propitiate the priest
saying.
18. “O worthy lord, I desire by your grace all prosperity
in this world and then to cross this ocean of worldly existence".
19. ‘Thus should he worship the Guru taking him to be Lord
Visnu before him.
20. Thus worshipped, the Guru should on the Dasami day
in the month of Karttika, get him clean the teeth with mantras
using the twig of a sappy tree and sleep near the deity.
21. He will see dreams and he should tell them to the Guru,
.who will then know whether it augurs well or ill.
22. On the Ekadasi day the devotee should fast and go to
the temple after bath.
23. Then Guru should prepare the mandala on the floor
according to prescription and draw there the cakra Sodaéara,
Sarvatobhadra or Astapatra! and ask the devotee to see it.
24. Then he should cover the eyes of the devotees with white
cloth and ask them to enter the place of worship in the order of
their Varna (Brahmana, Ksatriya and Vaisya).
1. These are diagrams of different kinds to be drawn on the floor
according to specifications.

95. The mandala Navanabha should then be arranged with
different colours.
26. Then worship should be done for the Dikpàlas in their
respective positions in the mandala, Indra in the east, Agni in
the south-east .
27. Yama in the south, Nirrti in the south-west, Varuna in
the west, Vayu in the south-west.
98. Kubera in the north and [gana in the north-east.
29. At the centre of the Padma (lotus in the middle of
the diagram), worship should be done to the great lord Visnu.
30. In the petal on the east of the Padma, worship should
be offered to Balabhadra, in the one on the south to Pradyumna,
in the one on the west to Aniruddha and in the one on the north
to Vasudeva, the destroyer of all sins.
31. (Of the four objects in the hands of Visnu) the conch
should be placed on the north-east, the disc on the south. east,
the club on the north-west and the lotus on the south-west.
32. In the north-east, again, may be placed the mace
(musala). Garuda should be on the right and Laksmi on the left
of the lord.
33. The bow and the sword are to be placed in front, special
position is to be given for Srivatsa (the mark on Visnu’s body)
and Kaustubha (the jewel he wears).
34. After performing worship to lord Janardana in this way,
in the petals in the diagram on the eight directions, a pot each
filled with water should be placed. A ninth pot pertaining to
Visnu also should be placed (in the middle).
35. 'The water in the pot pertaining to Visnu should be
poured on the devotee desirous of moksa.
36. The water in the pot pertaining to Indra (the one placed on the east) should be poured on him who is desirous of
prosperity and the same in the one pertaining to Agni (the one
placed on north-east) on him who is desirous of great fame.
37. The water in the pot pertaining to Yama (the one placed
on the South) should be poured on the devotee desirous of long
life, and the same on the one relating to Nirrti (placed on the
south-west) on him who desires the annihilation of the wicked. `
38. The water in the pot pertaining to Varuna (the one
placed on the west) should be poured on him who is desirous of
tranquility and the same on the one relating to Vayu (the one

232 Vardha Purdna
placed on the north-west) on him who desires the destruction
of his sins. The water in the pot pertaining to Kubera (the one
placed on the north)should be poured on him who desires wealth.
39. The water in the pot pertaining to [gana (the one placed
on the north-west) should be poured on him who desires knowledge or kingship.
40. Even when bathed in the water of one of these, one
becomes free from sins, acquires profound knowledge and attains
great skill. What then, when he is bathed in all the nine? All
his sins disappear, he becomes equal to Visnu and becomes a
king.
41. The Guru may also perform worship to the guardian
deities of different directions (Indra and others) one after
another in the respective spots.
42. And then lead there the blind-folded devotees and make
them circumambulate the mandala.
43. The rituals relating to Varuna, Vayu and Soma should
then be performed and the order of propitiation should be told.
44. Namely, high Brahmins, Vedas, Visnu, Brahma, Rudra,
Aditya, Agni, the lokapalas (deities guarding the eight directions), the planets, preceptor, Vaisnavas and the devotee who
has taken the vow.
45, ‘Then the homa should be performed with the mantra
Om namo Bhagavate sarvarüpine hum phat svaha.
46. Homa should be made in the blazing fire with the
(above) Sodasaksara mantra, and rituals like Garbhadhana
should be done.
47. The offering should be made thrice in fire in front of the
deity. At the end of the homa, the devotee who has undertaken
the vow should give daksina to the Guru.
48. A kingmay give as daksina elephants, horses, jewels,
gold and land; others according to capacity.
49. O Earth, the merit attained by this cannot be described
even for a hundred years.
90. Ifthe person with the vow listens to Varàha, it is equivalent to reciting the Vedas, Puranas and mantras.
51-52. He gets double the merit of reciting them at Puskara
tirtha, Prayaga, Kuruksetra or Varanasi or during eclipses or
V isu.

53. Even Devas perform penance and meditation, and
wonder when they will be born in Bharatavarsa.
54. Become devotees with vow, listen to Varaha, and leaving the body with its sixteen elements.
55. Reach the position from which there is no return. They
think so and say the same.
56. An old story is illustrated in this connection in the form
of conversation between Vasistha and Sveta.
57. In the region Ilàvrta there lived a highly saintly king
named Sveta.
58. He wished to gift away all his verduous land and consulted sage Vasistha on the matter.
59. “O great sage, I wish to give away the entire continent
of mine to Brahmins. Please permit me". Vasistha told the
king.
60. “O king, give them food conducive to all times. If food
is given, what does become not given?
61. The gift of food is superior to all other gifts. All beings
arisc from food, and they all grow by food.
' 62. ‘Therefore, O king, resort to giving food". The king,
however, did not follow the advice of Vasistha.
63. He called Brahmins and gave them gems, cloth, ornaments and fine urban land with money.
64. He even gave them majestic elephants. After this, once
having conquered the whole earth, he called his family priest
Vasistha again and told him:
65. “O great sage, I wish to perform a hundred Aávamedha
sacrifices”.
66. He then performed the sacrifice and gave the Brahmins
gold, silver and copper but not food or drink thinking it to be an
insignificant thing.
67. O Earth, this affluent king, in due course, became dead.
68. In the world beyond, he became oppressed by hunger,
and thirst in particular.
69-70. He went to the mountain Sveta and from there collected from the place where his mortal body was cremated, all
the bones and began to lick them.
7l. He then got into his aerial car and returned to heaven.
(He used to do this quite often).

234 Varaha Purana
72. After a long time, the king was seen thus licking the
bones by sage Vasistha. The sage asked him why he was feeding
on his own bones.
73. Thus asked by Vasistha, king Sveta replied.
74. “O sage, I am hungry and as I have not gifted food or
drink, so hunger and thirst overpower me”.
75. Told thus by the king, Vasistha addressed him again.
76. “What can I do for you, particularly now that you are
hungry. What is not given never serves any one at any time.
77. By giving gold and gems, one enjoys pleasures. But
by giving food and drink, one attains everything.
78. ‘That was not given by you, being under the impression
that it was a trifle.
Sveta said:
79. Please tell me how I can attain its fruit, although I have
not given food. I request you most earnestly.
Vasistha said:
80. There is one way to attain it. I shall tell you that.
Please listen.
81. In days of yore, there was a famous king named Vinitasva. He began a great sacrifice called Sarvamedha.
82. During the sacrifice, he gave to the Brahmins cows,
elephants and money, but not food, just as you did.
83. After a long time he died in river Ganga and because of
the great merit he had acquired, he went to heaven as you too
did.
84-85. He too became very much hungry in the same manner and went to the Nila mountain on the bank of the river
Ganga, in a resplendant aerial car and saw there his own body.
86. He also saw there on the bank of Ganga his priest and
asked him the cause of his hunger (and the means to overcome
it).
87-88. The priest asked him to quickly make gifts of Tiladhenu, Jaladhenu, Ghrtadhenu and Rasadhenu so that he may
be rid of his extreme hunger.!
l. These are models of cows with sesamum, water, clarified butter and
sugarcane juice inside.

P
89. The effect will last as long as the sun and moon are in
the sky".
The king then asked him again:
Vinitasva said:
90. O Brahmin, tell me how Tiladhenu (cow of sesamum )
is to be given so that I may peacefully enjoy heaven.
The priest said:
91. Listen to mc. I shall tell you how Tiladhenu is to be
given.
92. Four Kudavas make one Prastha. The cow should be
of sixteen prasthas and the calf of four prasthas. Thenose should
be of sandal and the tongue of gur.
93. The tail should be adorned with bells and the horns
should be made of gold.
94. The body should be of bronze and hoofs of silver. As is
the cow (so should be the calf). This should be then given to the
Brahmin.
95. On its back should be placed antelope's skin and the rope
should be adorned with gems.
96. The gift should be made with mantra and with herbs
uttering.
97. “May I get food, may I get water good, O cow of sesamum given to the Brahmin, I hold you with devotion for the
sake of my family. I bow to you, may you be pleased to grant
my desire”.
98. Give away Tiladhenu in this way. I fulfil all your desires,
99. He who listens to this intently or makes the gift or makes
one give such a gift, gets freed of all sins and reaches the abode
of Visnu.

236 Varáha Purána
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED
Greainess of Faladhenu
The priest said:
1. I shall now tell you about Jaladhenu. On a holy day
clean the floor of the size of a cow’s skin with cowdung.
2. In its middle, place a pot full of water with perfumes,
camphor and sandal paste.
3. Consider that as the cow and another full of water as the
calf.
4, Place on all sides the tender sprouts of Dürvà grass and
duly decorate with garlands.
5. Put on the pot fine gems and different kinds of fine fragrance.
6. Place also different kinds of grain on all sides.
7. Place four vessels on the four sides respectively filled with
ghee, curd, honey and gur.
8. The face should be of gold, horns of lead and eyes of
pearl.
9. The back should be of copper and (the rest of) the body
of bronze and hairs to be of darbha. The tail should be of strings
with black bells.
10. There should be garlands on the neck, gur on the face
and teeth should be of seashells. The tongue should be of strings
with black bells.
1l. The feet should be of Sugarcane with sandalpaste and
flower. Cover it then with cloth and place it on an antelope's
skin. Then give it to a Brahmin after giving him sandalpaste and
flowers.
12-13. The person to whom it is given should be good,
learned in Veda, one with a family and devoted to duty.
14. He who gives the gift, sees it or hears about it and he
who receives it, all get freed of their sins.
15. Even those who have the sin of killing a Brahmin, father
or cow, or of drinking liquor or of adultery with his teacher's
wife, get absolved of it and go to Visnu’s abode.
16. The performer of an Asvamedha with all gifts and daksinas and the giver of a Jaledhenu are equals.

17. The giver of Jaladhenu may live on water alone for a
day and the receiver in the same manner for three days.
18. The giver of Jaladhenu goes to the place where rivers
are full of milk and ponds are full of honey and where always
swells the music of the Apsarases.
19. He who gives Jaladhenu, he who causes it to be given
and he who receives it, all get merged in Visnu.
20. He who speaks about the greatness of the gift of Jaladhenu and he who listens to it go to heaven, getting rid of all sins.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND ONE
Greatness of Rasadhenu
The priest said:
i. I shall now tell you about the rules of the gift of Rasa
dhenu in brief.
2. Onthe floor smeared (with cowdung) place an antelope's
skin covered with kusa grass and over it a pot filled with sugarcane juice (and also the metal cow) and a calf of one-fourth its
size on its side.
3. Its feet should be of sugarcane sticks and hoofs should be
of silver.
4-5. The horns should be of gold, the tail of cloth, the udder
of butter, the face and tongue of gur.
6. The teeth should be of fruits and back made of copper,
the hairs of flower and eyes of pearl. It should be well decorated and scented with sandal paste.
7. Seven (different kinds of) cereals should be placed near
it and lamps lit on the four sides.
8. Four vessels filled with sesamum should be placed one on
each side.
9. The person desirous of heaven should make the gift of
Rasadhenu.
10. The giver and the recipient attain the result of drinking
the sacrificial soma juice if they fast for a day before the gift.

238 Varaha Purana
11. Those who see the gift being made also attain salvation.
12. With the mantras stated before, the donor should pray
and then give it to the recipient.
13. Besides himself he leads to a permanent position in
heaven ten generations of his ancestors and ten generations of
his successors.
14. Thus I have told you, O king, about Rasadhenu. Follow
it and attain supreme bliss.
15. He who reads this account every day or listens to it in
reverence, goes to the world of Visnu, being freed of all sins.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND TWO
The greatness of Gudadhenu
The priest. said:
1. I shall now tell you about Gudadhenu, the gift of which
accomplishes all desires and endows wealth.
2. On the floor smeared (with cowdung) place an antelope's
skin covered with kuśa grass. Spread a cloth on it and place
in it the cow made of gur along with the calf and a bronze milking vessel.
3. The face should be of gold and teeth of pearls. The neck
should be full of gems and nose of sandal paste.
4. The horns are to be of Agaru sticks and the back of
copper. The tail is to be of silk and well decorated.
5. The feet are to be of sugarcane and hoofs of silver. A
velvet cloth is to be put on it and fitted with bells.
6. The ears are to be of brass and the udder to be of butter.
Different kinds of fruits are to be placed all around.
7. The best Gudadhenu is one which is four adbaras (in
weight), its calf may be half or one-fourth its weight.
8. The medium is the one with half its weight and the inferior is the one with a quarter of the weight. The poor may have
it of the size according to capacity.
9. Then according to means, worship should be performed
to this, as also for the Brahmin to whom it is to be given.

P—
10. This is to be done with sandal paste, flowers, ghee and
other offerings and lamp.
]1. It should be given to a Vedic Brahmin, preferably one
who has performed sacrifices, with a hundred pieces of gold, or
half or even a quarter of it.
12. And in the absence of capacity even for that, with a
hundred or fifty, together with ear-rings, umbrella and footwear.
13. And then should be uttered the mantra: “O virile
Gudadhenu, the bestower of all prosperity, be pleased to provide
me with food and drink as a result of this dana’’.
14, 'The mantras cited before may also be recited.
15. The giver should face east while giving it to the Brahmin.
16. The gift of such a cow is proclaimed to be efficacious in
removing the sins committed through thought, word or deed
and of all that is false.
17. Those who witness the gift of such a cow attain salvation. The rivers in that place flow with milk and marshes produce
ghee. The sages and Siddhas flock there.
18. The giver takes himself and those in the past ten and
future ten generations in his family to the world of Visnu.
19. For this dàna the equinoxes, solstices and the new moon
and full moon days are particularly meritorious.
20. The gift should be made only to a. deserving person and
with full sincerity.
21. Itthen fulfils all wishes, removes all sins, provides enjoyment and finally liberation.
22. By the blessing of Gudadhenu one enjoys all prosperity,
good health and long life.
23. All adversity is overcome and the abode of Visnu is
attained.
24. Never does he, at any time, meet with any distress or
discomfort.
25. He who recites this or listens to this or advises others on
its basis, lives in this world with all happiness and in the world
beyond for long honoured by the gods.

240 Varaha Purána
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND THREE
Greatness of Sarkarüdhenu
The priest said:
l. Listen, O king, similarly to the account about Sarkaradhenu (cow of sugarcandy).
2. On the floor smeared (with cowdung) place antelope’s
skin and over it kusa grass and then cow made of sugarcandy.
3. The best is one made of four weights of sugarcandy and’
its calf of one-fourth the quantity; the medium is one of half this
quantity and the inferior one of a single unit of weight. In all
cases the calf is to be of one-fourth the weight of the cow.
4. (The money to go with it) may be above one hundred
and eight, but it may also be according to one's capacity and
without straining oneself.
5. Cereals of different kinds should be placed on all the four
sides.
6. The face and horns should be of gold, eyes of pearls and
tongue of flour. The face should be smeared with sugar.
7. Round the neck should be a silken band. The feet should
be of sugarcane, the hoofs of silver and. udder of butter.
8. The ears should be of grass. The cow should be adorned
with five gems and white chowries and cloth should be thrown
over it.
9. Itshould then be decorated with sandalpaste and flowers
and given to a poor, good and intelligent Brahmin with a family.
10. Itshould not be given to one who is bad or jealous.
11. Solstices, equinoxes and other holy days are particularly good for this dàna.
12. Itis particularly good if it is given to a deserving Vedic
Brahmin who happens to come to the house.
13. The gift should be made facing east or north and keeping the cow faced east and holding its tail, and the calf on its
northern side.
14. The mantras prescribed for the gift should be recited
and the Brahmin to whom it is to be given should be honoured
with ear-rings.
15. In his hand should be placed sandalpaste and flowers
and daksinà according to one's means.

pe
16. Without looking at his face, the gift of the cow should
be made. The giver may live on sugarcandy for one day and the
recipient for thrce days.
17. The cow is the remover of all sins and bestower of all
that is wished for. So one who gifts it attains all desires.
18. Those who see the gift being made, also attain salvation.
19. He who listens to this or reads this becomes purified of
all sins and attains the abode of Visnu.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FOUR
The greatness of Madhudhenu
The priest. said:
1. I shall now tell you about Madhudhenu (cow of honey)
which removes all sins.
2. On the floor smeared (with cowdung) and on which is
placed antelope's skin with kusa grass spread over it, the cow of
honey made with sixteen pots of it and the calf of a fourth of its
size should be placed.
3. The face should be of gold and the horns of Agaru. The
back should be of copper and dewlap of bands of silk.
4. The feet should be of sugarcane covered with white velvet.
Gur should be smeared on the face and sugar on the tongue.
5. The hips should be of flowers and the teeth of fruits.
The hairs should be of darbha grass and the hoofs of silver.
6. The ears should be of brass. Seven cereals should be
spread all round in the prescribed manner and measure.
7. Four vessels of sesamum should be placed, one on each
side. The cow should then be adorned with a pair of cloths and
jewels on the neck.
8. A bronze milking vesselis also to be placed. Worship
should then be done with sandalpaste and flowers.
9. It may be gifted to a deserving Brahmin at any time, but
the solstices, equinoxes, change of month and eclipses are particularly sacred.

242 Varáka Purana
10. The Madhudhenu is to be given to a poor Vedic Brahmin who has performed sacrifices and is born in the region Aryavarta.
11. The gift is to be made with water and daksina, uttering
the mantras and holding the cow by its tail.
12. This cow pleases all gods and is for the well-being of all.
13. It is to be given to the Brahmin saving, “O Madhudhenu, I bow to you; may all my ancestors be pleased.
14. I bow to you again; I hold you, O yiclder of wishes, for
the sake of my family."
15. After the cow, umbrella and footwear also should be
given.
16. After giving the cow, the giver may live on milk and
honey for a day and the recipient similarly for three days.
17. Now listen to the good that arises out of it.
18. In the place where this gift is made, rivers flow with
honey and marshes turn into payasa. Sages and Siddhas flock
there.
19. The giver enjoys all pleasures in this world and goes to
the world of Brahma. After living there long, he returns to the
earth.
20. Then he enjoys pleasures in abundance and goes to the
world of Visnu.
21. In addition for himself, he acquires union with Visnu
for ten past generations and ten future generations in his family.
22. He who listens to this or recites to others gets free from
all sins and goes to the world of Visnu.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FIVE
The greatness of Ksiradhenu
The priest said:
1. Listen, O king, I shall tell you about Ksiradhenu (cow of
milk) now.
2. On the floor smeared with cowdung over an area of a
cow's hide, spread Ku$a grass over a black antelope’s skin.

D
3. Place on it a small heap of cowdung and over it a pot fall
of milk, and another, a fourth of its size, to represent the calf.
4, The face is to be of gold, the horns of sandalwood or
Agaru, ears to be of brass.
5. The mouth is to be of gur, tongue of sugar, teeth of
white seeds and eyes of pearl.
6. The feet are to be of sugarcane, the hairs to be of darbha
grass. A white velvet is to be thrown over it. The back is to be of
copper and the rest of the bady of bronze and tail of silken threads.
7. The udder is to be of butter, the hoofs to be of silver and
the five germs.
8. Vessels of sesamum are to be placed on the four sides and
those containing seven grains all around.
9. The Ksiradhenu is to be arranged like this, and. it should
be covered with a pair of cloths and worshipped with sandalpaste, flower, dhüpa, dipa etc.
10. Then it should be given away to a Brahmin together
with clothes, ear-rings, footwear and Umbrella.
11. Reciting the mantras dpydyasva ctc. and áfrayah sarva~
bhàütanàm etc.
12. The mantra djyáyasva etc., is also for propitiating the
Ksiradhenu. The other mantra is to be recited by the recipient
also.
13. This is the rule about this gift. Those who see the gift
being made also rcach heaven.
14. O king, listen to the benefit of making the gift with a
thousand gold coins or a hundred ones or even according to
capacity.
15. He who does this remains in the world of Indra for
sixty thousand years.
16. He then gocs to the world of Brahma with his departed
ancestors and enjoys there for a long time.
17. Anointed with fine perfume and wearing divine garlands, he ascends an aeria! car and goes to the world of Visnu.
18. Which is resplendent like the twelve suns and where
swells the vocal and instrumental music and where dance the
Apsarases. Living there fong he finally becomes one with Visnu.
19. O long, he wha listens to this or recites this with devetion, gets rid ol ail sins and goes to the world of Visnu

244 Varüha Purana
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SIX
The greatness of Dadhidhenu
The priest said:
1. O king, now listen to the rules of gifts of Dadhidhenu
(cow of curd).
2. On the floor smeared with cowdung over the area of a
cow's hide and strewn with flowers, spread kuśa grass over an
antelope's skin.
3. Then spread the seven cereals and install a pot of curd,
and another, a fourth of its size, to represent the calf.
4. Place on it a pair of clothes and then perform worship
with flowers and sandal paste.
5. Give it away to a good-natured Brahmin from a good
family and endowed with qualities like patience and the like,
holding it by the tail.
6. And giving along with it coins, ear-rings, footwear and
umbrella and uttering the mantra dadhikràvno etc.
7. The giver of Dadhidhenu may live on curd alone for a
day and the recipient in the same manner for three days.
8. Those who see the giving away of Dadhidhenu also attain
salvation.
9. He who listens to this or recites it for others, gets the result equivalent to ASvamedha sacrifice and goes to the world of
Visnu.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SEVEN
The greatness of Navanitadhenu
The priest said:
1. O king, now listen to the rules relating to Navanitadhenu
(cow of butter) by which one gets freed from all sins.
2. On the floor smeared with cowdung for an area of a cow’s
hide, spread a black antelope’s skin.

3. Place on it a pot containing butter of the measure of one
prastha, and another, a fourth of its size, to represent the calf
on its northern side.
4. The cow should have horns of gold, eyes of pearl, tongue
of gur.
5. Lips of flower, teeth of seeds, dewlap of white threads.
6. Udder of butter, feet of sugarcane, back of copper, hoofs
of silver and hair cf darbha grass.
7. Four pots of sesamum are to be placed, one on each side.
8. Place a pair of clothes on it, decorate it with sandalpaste
and flowers, kindle lamps on all sides and then give it away to
a Brahmin. l
9. The mantras stated for the other Dhenus, shouid be
recited here also, (and in addition).
10. “When the ocean was churned by devas and asuras, the
divine ambrosia that arose is this butter. I bow to you, O butter,
the elixir of all beings.”
11. Uttering this, the cow should be given to a Brahmin with
a family to support, and he should take it to his house.
12. The giver may live on butter for one day and the recipient similarly for three days.
13. He who witnesses the gift of Dadhidhenu gets free from
all sins and becomes merged in Siva.
14. He remains in the world of Visnu with his ancestors as
well as descendants till the end of the world.
15. He who intently listens to this or recites it to others,
becomes purified and remains in the world of Visnu.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHT
The greatness of Lavanadhenu
The priest said:
1. O king, now listen to the rules relating to Lavanadhenu
(cow of salt).

246 Vardha Purana
2. On the floor smeared (with cowdung), spread kuśa grass
over an antelope’s skin and place on it a cow made of salt of the
measure of sixteen prasthas, and a calf a fourth of its size.
3. The feet are to be of sugarcane, face and horns of gola,
hoofs of silver.
4. The mouth to be of gur, teeth of fruits, tongue of sugar,
nose of sandalpaste, eyes of jewels and ears of leaves, abdomen o:
sugarcandy and udder of butter.
5. The tail of silken threads, back of copper, hair of darbha
and the milking vessel of bronze. It should be decorated witn
bells and jewels.
6. Worship should be performed with sandalpaste, flowers
and incense. A pair of cloths should be placed on it and the
whole thing gifted to a Brahmin.
7. This gift may be made at any time if it is to ward off
evil effects of planets or stars. But eclipses, change of month
and solstices are special occasions for it.
8-9. 'The recipient should be a Brahmin who is weliversed in Vedas, is of good conduct and of a good family.
10-11. This should be done along with a pair of cloths,
gift and a woolen shawl and gold according to one’s ability.
12. Holding the tail and according to the prescription laid
down before.
13-15. The (special) mantra should be uttered “O Brahmin, I bow to you; receive this cow adored by all gods, who knows
the tastes of all beings and who is veritably Rudra. O goddess,
I bow to you; fulfil all mv desires".
16. Such a gift with a thousand or hundred gold pieces,
ieads one to the heaven of Siva.
PS
He who iistens to this intente
ui
e)
vd from all sins and gocs i

CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND NINE
The greatness of Karpasadhenu
The priest said:
1. O king, I shall now tell you about the Karpasadhenu
(cow of cotton) the giving of which leads one to the world of
Indra.
2. (This is particularly effective when performed, during
equinoxes and solstices and the beginning of the year, and also
when the planets are unfavourable or when calamity is foreboden
by dreams.
3. Its proper place, O king, is a temple, other sacred spots
or where there is a herd of cows.
4. On the floor smeared with cowdung, spread darbha grass
and sesamum and place on it the cow (made of cotton) adorned
with cloths and sandalpaste and perform worship with incense,
lamp and sweets.
5. The best (cow) is the one weighing four bharas, the
medium is the one weighing just half of it and the inferior the one
weighing a quarter, but the weight need not be insisted on.
6. The calf should be of one-fourth the weight of the cow.
7. The horns should be of gold, the hoofs of silver, the teeth
of different fruits and gems.
8. Then the cow should be invoked with full concentration
of mind and gifted to a brahmin with full sincerity.
9. This should be done according to the prescriptions formerly given and with the mantra:
10. “The multitude of Devas will not be there without you.
O goddess, raise me up out of this ocean of sarhsara and protect
me."
1. One bhàára is equivalent to 2000 Palas.

248 Varáha Purána
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND TEN
The greatness of Dhanyadhenu
The priest said:
1. O king, listen. 1 shall tell you about Dhànyadhenu (cow
of grain) by the very mention of which goddess Pàrvati gets
pleased.
2. One gets absolved of all sins, like the moon becoming
free from the clutches of Rahu, by performing it during equinoxes, solstices and in the month of Karttika.
3. The gift of Dhanyadhenu brings about the merit equal
to that of ten cows.
4. Asin the earlier cases, worship is to be done on the floor
smeared with cowdung and covered with antelope's skin.
5. The best (Dhànyadhenu) is the one made of four. dronas
of grain, the medium the one made of just half of it. But the
quantity need not be insisted upon.
6. The calf should be one-fourth of the cow.
7. The horns should be of gold and the hoofs of silver. The
nose should be of ‘gomeda’ gem or of Agaru or sandalwood.
8. The teeth should be of pear! and mouth of curd and
honey. The ears are to be of leaves and the milking vessel of
bronze.
9. The feet are to be of sugarcane and tail of silk. There
should also be a variety of fruits and gems.
10. The rules are as before, and after performing worship
it should be given to a Brahmin together with footwear and
umbrella.
ll. At the auspicious time, the giver should bathe, dress
himself in white cloth, circumambulate the Brahmin thrice and
prostrate before him.
12. Heshould then utter: “ʻO brahmin learned in the Vedas,
be pleased to receive this gift so that the great lord Visnu may
be pleased.
13-15. Laksmi is associated with Visnu, Svaha with Agni,
Saci with Indra, Gauri with Siva, Gayatri with Brahma, Jyotsnà
(moonlight) with Candra, Prabha (lustre) with Sürya, Buddhi

(intellect) with Brhaspati and Medha (intelligence) with Munis
(sages). But O goddess (cow), all these remain in you".
16. Saying this, the offering should be made to the Brahmin. He should then be circumabulated and his pardon sought
for any lapses unknowingly made.
17. The benefit acquired by the gift of Dhànyadhenu is
equivalent to the acquisition of the entire earth with all its gems.
18. Therefore, O king, the gift of Dhànyadhenu should be
made as it gives enjoyment and release.
19. Itgives prosperity, longevity and health in this life, and
a place in the world of Siva, taken there in a brilliant aerial car
attended on by Apsarases.
20. He stays there till he thinks of birth when he comes to
earth as the lord of Jambüdvipa.
21. O king, he who listens to this, becomes freed from all
sins, goes to the world of Rudra and is honoured there.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND ELEVEN
The greatness of Kapiládhenu
The priest said:
1. I shall now tell you about the most important Kapila
dhenu (the brown cow), the giver of which attains the world of
Visnu.
2. Following the prescriptions given before, give the (brown
coloured) cow along with the calf, well decorated and provided
with gems.
3. Allthe holy places in the world are contained in the head
and neck of the brown cow, as ordained by Brahma.
4-5. He who sprinkles on his head early morning the water
poured on the head and neck of the brown cow, burns away all
his sins accrued during thirty years, like fire burning away faggots.
6. Circumambulating such a cow is equivalent to circumambulating the whole earth.

250 Varüha Purana
7. He who circumambulates it even once, burns away sins
acquired in ten births.
8. He who bathes in the urine of the brown cow gets merit
equal to that of bathing in Ganges.
9. Bathing in it once, removes sins acquired during the
whole life.
10. Lord Brahma has declared that giving away one brown
cow is equivalent to giving away hundred other cows.
ll. Even the smell of burning bones of a dead cow is a purifier.
12. Caressing the cow and actually rearing it give the benefit of making the gift of a hundred cows for the cure of ailments,
13. He who gives to a hungry cow grass and water every
day gets the merit of performing a Gomedha sacrifice.
14. He gets many aerial cars and is attended on by celestial
damsels like so many brilliantly glowing lamps.
15. The different colours of the ‘brown cow’ species are,
first golden brown, second yellowish brown, third rosy red,
fourth gurlike brown.
16. Fifth variegated colour, sixth whitish yellow, seventh
whitish brown, eighth blackish brown.
17. Ninth reddish brown, tenth tawny in tail, eleventh
white in hoof.
18. Such cows with good features and well decorated should
be given to a Brahmin. ‘That brings about enjoyment here and
liberation hereafter.
19, Giving enjoyment and liberation, it leads one to the
path of Visnu.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND TWELVE
The greatness of cow at childbirth, list of Puranas
The priest said:
I. O king, listen to the account of the double-faced cow (the
cow just giving birth to the young one) narrated to the Earth in
days of yore. This produces great merit.

Earth said:
2. What are the characteristics of the sacred cow referred
to as Kapilà created by you in connection with sacrifice?
3. How many varieties of it are distinguished by Brahma ?
4. O Madhava, what merit accrues by the gift of a cow in
the process of childbirth? I wish to know all this in detail.
Varaha said:
5. O goddess, know the truth about it, sacred and removing
all sins, by hearing which one certainly becomes free from all
acquired sins.
6. The Kapila (brown cow) is for Agnihotra and other
sacrifices. It was made by Brahma out of all effulgence.
7. The Kapila is the holiest of the holy and the most auspicious. It gives important merit.
8. It is the best of all penances, the foremost of all vows,
the most important among gifts and the most imperishable of all
wealth.
9. It is equivalent to all holy spots in the world and all
temples accessible as well as inaccessible.
10. The Brahmins should perform Agnihotra morning and
evening with the ghee, curd and milk of Kapila.
ll. They are used with great devotion in Agnihotra, in the
offerings with mantras and in hospitality for guests.
12. Those who do so move in aerial cars dazzling like the
sun.
13. The Kapilà with its several varieties was made by
Brahma from out of the middle part of the solar globe. Its eves
are brownish yellow. It provides happiness, success and intelligence.
14. All the varieties of Kapila mentioned before, if they have
the right characteristics, are great indeed, and they lead to liberation,
15. In confluences theyare particularly efficacious. They
have Agni in their tail and face and have complexion like the
fire and hence called Agnayi.
16. One who receives Kapila as a gift from a Sidra should
be considered as most lowly like a Candala.

252 Varaha Purana
17. Therefore let not a Brahmin receive the offering from
Südras. They are to be kept far away like dogs during sacrifices,
18. They are discarded by the manes during new moon and
full moon. They should not be spoken to and nothing should be
received from them because they do only sinful deeds.
19. Those (Südras) who drink (the milk of) Kapila make
their forefathers eat the filth in the earth for long.
20. Note what happens to the Südras who feed on the milk,
ghee and butter of the Kapilà cows.
21. They go to the terrible hell called Raurava.
22. After living there for a hundred crores of years, they are
born as dogs.
23. After the life as dogs, they become faecus-eating worms
stinking deep. They are born again and again there and never
get release.
24. Once a Brahmin receives a gift from a Südra, his ancestral manes fall into filth.
25. No other Brahmin shall speak with him or share a seat
with him. He is to be kept afar.
26. The Brahmin who, however, chances to speak with him
or share a seat, shall perform Prajapatyakrcchra ceremony for
purification.
27-28. The aim is achieved by the thousandth part (of the
merit) of the dana of a single cow. Why then speak of the numerous other gifts?
29. The parturient cow should be gifted to a poor, goodnatured Vedic Brahmin.
30. The cow in the condition of the young one just coming
out of its womb is to be considered as earth itself.
31. Those who make the gift of Kapila remain in the Brahmaloka honoured there for as many crores of years as there are
hairs in the cow and its calf.
32. Make horns of gold and hoofs of silver, or place gold
and silver in the hand of the Brahmin.
33. And place the tail of the Kapila on his hand pouring
water and uttering clearly (the mantras).
34. This gift becomes certainly equivalent to the gift of the
whole earth full of gems and mountains and forests and oceans.
35. By this gift, which is thus equal to the gift of the earth,

one becomes honoured and goes with his ancestral manes to the
supreme abode of Visnu.
36-37. By the gift of the cow, one gets fully purified even if
he has incurred the sins of stealing the property of the Brahmin,
killing a cow, destroying the foetus, deccit, defiling the Brahmin,
ridiculing prescribed rites and similar others.
38. On the day of the gift of the double-faced cow, the giver
may feed on milk or milky preparations.
39-40. (The gift should be accompanied by) a thousand
gold pieces, half of it or a quarter of it, or a hundred or even fifty
or according to means. There need not be any stipulation in
this respect.
4l. (The giver should utter): “Receive this double-faced
cow. I give this to you so that I may have good progeny and
peace of mind. Let this bring about prosperity".
42. (The recipient should utter): “O cow, I receive you
particularly for my family. O mother of gods, I bow to you. Let
good befall me".
43. (The giver should then say): “I bow to you again and
again. May good befall me always". (He should utter the mantra)." May the heaven give you and the earth receive you. Who
gave this to whom ?"
44. The Brahmin should then be allowed to go and the cow
should be taken to his house.
45. O Earth, he who also gives this gift of the parturient cow
gets the merit of the gift of the whole of the earth with its seven
islands.
46. The congregation of Devas always worship (the Kapila)
who is beautiful like the moon and golden in complexion.
47-48. He who reads these rules (about Kapila) early morning, pure of mind and with full control of the senses, gets rid
of sins acquired during one whole year. The sins are blown
away like dust by the wind.
49. If this is read at the time of Sraddha, the food becomes
particularly purified and the manes eat it with pleasure.
50. If this is read before Brahmins on Amavasya day, the
manes become pleased for a hundred years.
51. He who listens to his gets purified of all sins accumulated during the year.

254 Varaha Purana
The priest said:
52. Ihave thus told you this secret, the greatness of the cow,
formerly narrated to Earth by Varaha.
53. He who gifts Tiladhenu on the dvàda& day of the bright
half of the month of Magha, gets all wishes fulfilled and goes
to the abode of Visnu.
54. On the dvadasi day of the bright half of the month of
Sravana, the gift of the real cow should be made along with gold.
55. O king, the gift of any kind of cow at any time is capable
of removing all sins.
56. Ihave thus briefly told you this extensive matter relating
to the gift of cows which fulfils all desires of men.
57. (You may do this). Otherwise you will continue to be
tormented much by hunger (and thirst).
58. O king, now is the month of Karttika when the whole
earth is full of fresh plants.
59. Devas, Raksasas and Yaksas all mingle in this.
60. A golden cow with fruits and gems may be given to the
priest particularly on the dvadasi day or paficadasi day (new
moon. or full moon) in the month of Karttika.
61. This will be equivalent to the gift of the whole world.
62. He who performs a yajfia with daksina of ten thousand
(gold pieces), really covers only a part of the universe.
| 63. But he who performs this (gift of the cow) covers the
whole universe, whatever is offered in fire, gifted, read or recited.
64. Hearing this, the king gave the sage a golden pot representing the universe.
65. He then got his desires fulfilled and went to heaven.
66. "Therefore, O king, you too do the same.
Told thus by Vasistha, the king too did the same and attained
supreme abode by reaching which one becomes free from all
sorrow.
Varaha said:
67. O Earth, I have thus told you about this great and
sanctifying treatise Varaha Purana.
68. This arose from the omniscient (Visnu), and from him
Brahma learnt it.

69. Brahma imparted it to his son Pulastya and the latter to
Parasurama.
70. Parasurama imparted it to his disciple Ugra, who, in
turn, gave it to Manu. In that line I have told you now.
71. Another dissemination of the same also you may know.
I learnt it from the omniscient (Visnu) and you have now got
it from me.
72. From you, sages like Kapila will know by the power of
their penance. In due course this will be learnt by Vyàsa.
73. He will have a disciple by name Romaharsani. He will
impart it to Saunaka and none else.
74. The teacher Dvaipayana (Vyasa) knows eighteen
Puranas namely, Brahma, Padma, Vaisnava, Saiva, Bhagavata.
75. Naradiya, Markandeya, Agneya, Bhavisya.
76. Brahmavaivarta, Lainga, Varaha, Skanda.
77. Vamana, Kaurma, Matsya, Garuda and Brahmanda.
78. O Earth, he Who gets them or reads with reverence on
the dvadasi day in the month of Kàrttika, begets children.
79. Lord Narayana is always present in the house in which
these are kept written.
80. He who listens to this continuously, and after listening
worships (this Purana) Varaha.
81. And performs worship of Visnu with sandalpaste,
flowers and clothes, and propitiates Brahmins.
82. And the king who worships along with his subjects and
according to his ability, gets freed fromsins and attains merger
in lord Visnu.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTEEN
The hymn on the Lord
Om, bow to Varaha, bow to the son of Brahma, bow to
Sanatkumara.
l. Bow to thet “’araha who raises up the earth with ease,
and within whose hoofs mountain Meru tinkles.
2. May this Visnu, the lord of all, the destroyer of demons

256 Varáha Purana
Mura, Naraka and Ravana, who, in the form of the boar, raised
by the tip of the tusks the earth full of mountains and rivers and
encircled by the ocean, for removing the fear of his devotees,
whom the sinless saints easily attain, remove all adversities.
3-4. Earth who was thus raised up in the former kalpa asked
the great lord in all reverence.
Earth said:
5. O lord, in every aeon you and you alone raise me up.
Otherwise, O Kesava, my body cannot move, not even my hands.
6. When the lord was consoling her, came there Sanatkumara and, blessing her, he said.
Sanatkumara said:
7. O Earth, you who are Visnu’s and prosper by him, tell
me what wonder you have seen when you were held by him.
8. Please tell me also what you have heard from him.
9. Hearing these words of the son of Brahma (Sanatkumara), Earth said:
Earth said:
10. “O great Brahmin, listen to the essence of the great
secret he told me in response to my request.
11. He told me about what should be done by a devotee of
Visnu in order to release himself from the miseries of worldly
existence.
12. He told me the great secret of the eternal and ever valid
dharma’’.
13. Hearing these words of Earth, the great sage Sanatkumara brought there the ascetics from his place Kokamukha.
14. He then,spoke to Earth.
Sanalkumára said:
15. “O lovely goddess, tell me now what I sought of you,
namely the essence of dharma and the path to salvation".
16. Earth then bowed to that great sage and spoke to him
in sweet words.

Earth said:
17. “O sages, may you all be ready to hear what I have
learnt from Visnu." They said, “yes, O goddess, tell us”.
(She then said praising Visnu):
18. “When the world was without sun, moon, stars and fire,
when the quarters were all still and nothing was known.
19. When the wind did not blow, the fire did not blaze and
the lightning did not flash, when the star did not shine and the
zodiac did not appear, and nothing was there.
20. And when the Vedas were lost, you assumed the form of
a fish, entered the underworld, recovered the Vedas and restored
them to Brahma.
21. O lord, during the churning of the ocean, you became a
tortoise and held the Mandara mountain.
22. Then, when I was sinking into the nether world, you took
the form of the boar and lifted me up from the ocean with a single
tusk.
23. When hiranyakasipu became haughty because of a boon,
he was destroyed by you in the form of man-lion.
24. O lord, once I was seen by you exhilirated by the extermination of the Ksatriyas, in your form as Para$uràma.
25. Then by your prowess the demon Ravana was vanquished, and in the form of the dwarf, O lord, Bali was bound.
26. Iam not in the least able to know your actions. How
do you raise me up and why do you create beings in me ?
27. And even after creation, nothing could be known. The
wind does not blow, fire does not blaze.
28. The sun and moon are not there, no stars, no planets;
no Mars, no Venus, no Jupiter.
29. No Saturn, no Mercury, no Indra, Kubera, Yama or
Varuna or Devas.
30. No trinity, Brahmà, Visnu and Siva.
Being distressed,! Earth sought resort in Brahma.
31. Having gone there, she said in a plaintive tone: “O
grand-father, I am sinking with the mountains and forests in me,
because of my unbearable burden. Be pleased to save me”.
l. The portion from here upto the end of verse 40 is out of place here
and seems to be an interpolation.

258 Varüha Purdna
32. Hearing the words of Earth, the grandfather of the world,
meditated for a while and told her.
33. “O earth, Iam helpless to save you in this sad predicament of yours.
34. Rush to Visnu, the originator of all, who stands with
bow and arrow and who has magical powers.
35. All activity is due to him alone. Hc is capable of saving
all, then why say about you".
36. Earth with folded hands approached him, who was
lying in yogic repose on the serpent Ananta.
‘Earth said:
37. On account of my burden, I sought the help of Brahma,
but he sent me away saying:
38. 'O fair goddess, I am unable to save you, please go to
Visnu.
39. He will hold you if you happen to sink in the ocean’.
40. O lord of the worlds, I have now come to you with
supplication. Be pleased tc protect me.
41. You are Aditya, Candra, Yama, Kubera, Indra, Varuna
Agni and Vàyu. You are the quarters main and subsidiarv, and
all that is permanent and transient.
42. You are (the avatàras) Matsya, Kürma, Varaha,
Narasimha, Vàmana, (Parasu)ráma, Krsna, Buddha and Kalki.
43. Your greatness in this manncr is known by vogic powers,
and you remain the same acon after acon.
44. The earth, air, ether, water and light, and sound, touch,
colour, taste and smell, are all yourself.
45-46. ‘The planets and stars, (units of timc like) kala,
kastha and muhürta, the entire milky way and the pole stars are
all your effulgence.
47. The month, fortnight and day, the seasons, the halfyear and the year are all yours.
48. ‘The rivers, oceans, mountains and snakes are all yourseli.
49. You are (the mountains) Meru, Mandara Vindhya,
Malaya, Dardura, Himavan and Nisadha.
30. You bear the disc and the bow. You are Sànkhya-voga.

You are the tradition of the world, you are the adorable Nàràyana.
51. You are dimunitive as well as extensive, vou are the
sacrifice permanent. You are the greatest of all yajfias and of
the sacrificial pillars.
52. You are Sama among the Vedas, and Mahavrata in all
its detail. You are thunder as well as rain and you are truth as
well as untruth.
53. You generate ambrosia and sustain with it the whole
world. You are satisfaction, supreme satisfaction and the most
ancient Man.
54. You arc all that is movable and stationary in the world
and all action. You are the lord of all the seven worlds.
55. You are time, you are dcath. You are the origin and
cause of all beings. You are the beginning, iniddle and end.
You are intelligence, intellect and memory.
56. You are the sun, aeon, ascetic penance. You are measureless, you are all that is to be known and the greatest of all
sages.
57. You are Ananta among the snakes and Taksaka among
scrpents. You are the (winds) Udvaha and Pravaha, and
Varuna and the sea.
58. You project the world in sport, vou are the gods in the
homes. You pervade cverything, nourish everything. You are
the mind.
59. You are energy of every kind and the brightest of all
flashes. At all times you are the biggest of all trees.
60. O lord, you are attention, you are the dispeller of all
evils. You are the source of all the four types of beings, egg-born,
earth-born, sweat-born and womb-born.
61. You are the great Garuda and you bear everything.
You are the sounds of all drums, and the pure sky.
62. You are Jaya and Vijaya!; all the domestic deities are
your manifestations. You are all-pervasive.
63. You arc Bhaga, Linga, and the supreme soul. You are
to be worshipped by all. I bow to you, O lord, again and again.
64. O lord Krsna, it behoves you who have in you all the
1. These two are the doorkeepers of Visnu.

260 Varáha Purdna
worlds and the entire time, to protect me when I am sinking
down."
65. He who recites this hymn of Visnu is cured of all diseases
and freed from all bondages.
66. "The issueless man gets issue, the poor man gets wealth,
the man without a life gets one and the girl without a husband
gets one.
67. He who recites this in the morning and evening goes to
the world of Visnu. There need be no doubt in this matter.
68. Even if this is mechanically recited (without knowing
the meaning), one gets a place in heaven for a thousand years.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FOURTEEN
The Varüha incarnation—Questions of Earth
Varäha said:
1. Lord Narayana was extremely pleased when he was extolled.
2. He then meditated for a while and spoke to Earth in a
sweet voice.
3. “With great reverence have you told me what you badly
need. I shall do what you wish.
4. Ishall hold you along with your mountains, forests, rivers
and oceans and the seven islands".
5. Comforting Earth thus, the lord assumed the form of a
big boar full of effulgence.
6. It was six thousand yojanas long and three thousand
yojanas broad, and thus covered nine thousand yojanas.
7. 'The whole earth with its mountains, forests, islands and
cities was raised up by the left tusk.
8. Some mountains were clinging, some falling. It all looked
like clouds of various farmations and colours at evening time.
9. The earth clinging to the white tusk of the boar looked
like the clod of clay with a lotus stalk.
10. It was thus held in the tusk for a thousand years.

11. Time then passed and then set in the seventyfirst Kalpa,
the lord of which was Kardama Prajapati.
12. That was the Varaha kalpa wherein the mutual regard
for Visnu and Earth was the highest.
13. Earth extolled that eternal Person and sought complete
resort in him.
Earth asked:
14. O lord, what is the foundation and what is the practice
of different actions (for man) to be done from time to time ?
15. What is the nature of evening sandhya? Do all those
who perform rites get the same result?
16. How do we know the measure regarding the consecration invocation and release (of deities for worship and of agaru,
candana, dhüpa etc.?
17. How is padya (water for washing feet) to be offered,
how is unguent to be applied, how is the lamp to be waved and
how are the roots and fruits to be offered ?
18. What are the rules for the seat and the bed for the deity,
how is worship to be performed and how many are the vital airs
to be instilled ?
19. What is the merit to be acquired in the morning and
evening sandhyàs. What are the rituals in the $arat (autumn)
season, what are they in $i$ira (winter) ?
20. What are the rituals to be performed in vasanta (spring)
and what are they in grisma (summer) ? What are they in pravrt
(rainy season) ? What is laid down for the end of the year ?
21. What are the flowers and the fruits that can be used ?
Who are entitled to offer worship and who are prohibited ?
22. By what actions does one attain Visnu ? How do these
actions take one to the level beyond that of food ?
23. What is the size of the idol to be used and how is it to
be installed ? what is the nature of fasting and what is its duration ?
24. What are the rules regarding cloths (to be used in worShip), yellow, white and red?
25. What are the constituents of Madhuparka ? What are
the benefits that accrue from it?
26. To what worlds do we go by taking in Madhuparka ?

262 Varáha Purina
27. What is the measure of Madhuparka to be offered ?
What kinds of flesh, fruit and Icaves are to be mixed with it ?
28. What are the rites of invocation to be observed ?
29. What are the mantras to be used in offering food after
due invocation ?
30. After food, what are the things to be done by the devotce
so that there may not be any fault ?
31. What is the food for those who pray to you eating only
once a day ?
32. What is the place of those in the life beyond, who worship
you following the rules ?
33. What position do those get who worship you with the
rituals Krcchra and Sàntapana ?
34. What position do those get who worship Krsna, living
on air alone ?
35. What position do those get, O Krsna, who worship you
living on food without salt and chillies ?
36. What position. do those get who worship you living on
milk alone?
37. What position do those get who worship Visnu with
vows and tending cows ?
38. What position do those get who worship with great
devotion and live on begging alms ?
39. What position do those get who worship living as householders but feeding on what is offered to them ?
40. What position do those get who always serve you in
your. temples and die there ?
41. To what worlds do those go who end their lives in your
temples performing penance with the five fires ?
42. What position do those get who end their lives by performing penance with the five fires but lying on a bed of thorns ?
43. What position do those devotces get who do the same in
bed of thorns but lying without touching the earth ?
44. What position do those get who worship you lying in
the cowshed ?
45. What position do those devotees get who worship you
living on. vegetables alone ?

46. What position do those get who worship you living on
grains and Paficagavya ?!
47. What position do those get who worship you living on
gruel and cowdung?
48. What is the position, O Narayana, for those who worship
you feeding on flour ?
49. What is the position for those who serve you lighting
a lamp on their heads ?
50. What is thc position for those who carry lamps on their
heads and worship you always thinking of you and drinking milk
alone ?
51. What is the position for those devotees of yours who eat
stones alone ?
52. What is the position for those devotees who feed on the
dürvà grass?
53. What is the position for those who follow their own
traditional avocations and pray to you kneeling ?
94. What is the position for those who worship you lying
flat and holding a lamp?
.55. What position do they get who worship you holding a
lamp between their legs ?
56. What position do they .get who worship you turning
their faces away ?
57. What position do they get. lying with face downwards,
giving up their family and possessions ?
58.' Bc pleased togivc me answers for all these that I have
asked you in the interest of the world.
59. O Madhava, every movement depends on you. You
are knower, you are the father; in you is the decision regarding
all dharma.
60. Therefore, you alone can answer all these which have a
bearing on Sànkhya-yoga.
61. How should your devotée who has offered you Madhuparka, be consigned to fire when he is dead ?
62. What place do your devotees attain who remain in water
or in your temples ?
l. Paficagavya is a preparation consisting of cow’s milk, curd and ghee
from it and its urine and cowdung.

264 Varaha Purana
63. What place do they attain who utter your name Narayana, though calling one’s own son?
64. What place do those warriors attain who die in battle
uttering your name ?
65. O lord, I am your disciple and servant. So be pleased
to tell me this secret dharma.
66. For my sake please impart me this secret.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTEEN
Origin of different dharmas (Karmas of different castes)
1. Hearing these words of Earth, lord Narayana said: “O
goddess, I shall tell you about the actions that lead to the pleasures of heaven.
2. O Earth, I shall answer your questions relating to the
existence and attitude of devotees that are laid down.
3. Iam never pleased with petty-minded people even if they
make a thousand danas, perform hundreds of sacrifices and offer
a lot of money.
4. I am pleased with him who (tried to) know me with
steadfast mind even though he may have many faults.
5. Now that you ask me about the actions that lead to the
pleasures of heaven, I shall tell you. Please listen.
6. Those people who bow to me always, at midnight, in
darkness, at noon or afternoon, although of diverse minds.
7. Who with unfailing devotion to me observe fast on Dvadagi day.
8. Realise me in the fruition of their devotion.
9. The good man with clean mind devoted to me gets a
place in heaven by the very desire.
10. I shall tell you about those actions in the path of devotion that lead to my realisation.
li. Those devotees who fast on Dvadasi day certainly attain
me.
12. He who after fasting, offers me libations of water saying
‘Bow to Narayana’ and looks at the sun.

13. Remains honoured in heaven for as many thousands of
years as there are drops in the water of libation.
14-15. Now listen to what happens to those pious people
who worship me on dvadasi day with due rites and with white
flowers and incense.
16. Putting flowers on the head and dressing in white cloth
he may utter the mantra: “May the worshipful lord Hari be
pleased to accept these flowers.”
17. Sandal paste is to be offered with the mantra: “Bow to
lord Visnu, be pleased to accept the sandalpaste which gives out
its scent fully and slightly alternately or fragrant sandalpaste’’.
18. The incense is to be offered with the manta: ‘‘May lord
Acyuta receive the incense at the main ritual”.
19. He who makes my image according to Sastras reaches
my abode and becomes four-armed.
20. Thus have I told you, O goddess, this mantrapüjà which
brings about happiness and which is dear to me.
21. He, who being devoted to my service, eats (only) the
grains $yàmàka,svastika, godhüma, mudgaka, sali, yava, nivara
and kànguka, attains (the divine) conch, disc, plough and club.
22. O Earth, I shall now tell you what actions the Brahmins
devoted to me should do.
23. Free from ego and attending seriously to the six duties
ordained,! with full control of senses, living on alms and unconcerned about loss or gain.
24. Engaged in my service, free from malignity, following
: the prescribed rules, fully unbiased, and neither senile nor childish.
25. Performing deeds beneficial to the people at large, and
full of concentration of mind, such a Brahmin attains me.
26. Ishallnow tell you about what the Ksatriyas devoted to
me should do.
27. Free from bias, munificent in gifts, pure, keen on sacrifices, devoted to my service, free from ego.
28. Reserved in speech, capable of knowing merit, always
considerate towards other devotees, free from malice, avoiding
all prohibited deeds, learning from the master.
1. The six duties of the Brahmin are adhyápana (teaching) adhyayana
(learning), yajana (performing sacrifice), »ájana (making others perform
Sacrifice), dana (giving gifts) and pratigraha (receiving gifts).

266 Varaha Purana
29. Eager to show respect to others, without a trace of avarice, such a Ksatriya attains me.
30. I shall now tell you about what the Vaisya devoted to
me should do.
31. Doing the duties ordained to him, without the motive of
gain or loss, doing the duties by his wife at the proper time, free
from greed, calm in mind.
32. Remaining pure, skilful, fasting when worshipping me.
33. Always honouring his guru, considerate towards other
devotees, such a Vaisya always remains mine and. I always remain his.
34. I shall now tell you about what the Südra should do in
order that he may be mine.
35. Husband and wife always pious, devoted to me and ever
engaged in doing service to me.
36. Knowing the appropriate. place and time for their actions, unstained by Rajas and ‘Tamas.
37. Free from ego, pure in mind, humble, hospitable, free
from greed and malice, and full of sincerity.
38. Fond of prostrating (before me), ever thinking of me,
such be the actions of the Südras.
39. Leaving thousands of sages, I always look after Südras.
Such are the duties of devotees in the four castes which you wished
to know.
40. So much about the four castes. Now listen to another
matter rclating to voga (of attaining me).
4l. Giving up (thoughts of) gain and loss, delusion and
desire.
42. Without thinking of heat and cold, what is obtained. and
what is not, without preference among what is hot, bitter, swect,
sour and salinc.
43. Giving up attachment towards wife, children, father
and mother and concentrating on service to me.
44. Steadfast, proficient, serious and determined.
45. Always earnest, averse to all other actions, doing things
appropriate to his age, eating the minimum, maintaining family
prestigc.
46. Full of compassion, honouring all, highly patient, keeping silence when necessary, particularly when observing vows.

47. Performing rites prescribed for morning, noon and
evening, not taking food without giving 1t to others.
48. Doing all actions with me in the mind, answering calls
of nature and bathing at the right time.
49. Always cager to offer me sandalpaste, flowers and
incense.
50. Eating sometimes’ roots, sometimes fruits, sometimes
milk, sometimes what is got by begging, and sometimes living
simply on air.
51. Sometimes eating once in four days, at other times once
in six days, often once in ten days or once in a fortnight or once
in a month.
52. Those that do all this in seven lives, become yogins and
attain me.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTEEN
Happiness and unhappiness
Varáha said:
1. O blessed one, now listen to the benefits that accrue to
those that perform actions in the manner stated above.
2. With full concentration of mind, free from ego, always
devoted to me, full of forbearance, tranquil and with senses controlled.
3. Taking in roots and fruits and leaves at times on the
Dvadasi day, feeding mainly on milk and abstaining from meat.
4. Observing continence on Sasthi, Astami, Amavasya and
Caturdasi, particularly on dvadaéi.
5. He who performs rites according to the rules of voga,
gets purified, acquires merit and goes to the world of Visnu.
6. For him there is no fatiguc, no decay, no stupor, no illness. He gets cighteen hands endowed with bow, arrow, sword,
mace and the like.
7. The benefit that accrues as a result of actions in this
manner and worship of mine, is the residence in my world for
sixty thousand and sixty hundred years.

268 Varáha Purana
8. O Earth, I shall now tell you what is unhappiness. Please
listen.
9. Is there anything more unhappy than a man being unable
to attain me because of his ego and delusion enveloping him ?
10. Is there anything more unhappy than aman being
unable to attain me because of his eating anything and trading
on anything and not prostrating before me?
11. Is there anything more sorrowful than being the man
who at the time of Vaisvadeva sees a guest coming but, without
giving him food, himself eats.
12. Is there anything more unhappy than the man whose
food Devas do not partake of because of differentiation in preparation ?
13. Is there anything more despicable than a person who is
unhappy in adversity, establishes illicit contact with another's
wife, torments others and is slow-witted ?
14. Is there anything more pitiable than a person who spends
all his life till death grasps him, in his house without doing righteous deeds in profusion ?
15. Is there anything more contemptible than the person
who runs after elephants, horses, chariots and other vehicles ?
16. Is there anything more sorrowful than this that some
eat meat, some eat it with grain and others eat dry food ?
17. Is there anything more disquieting than the fact that.
some sleep in ornamental beds of costly cloth and others sleep
on the grass in the floor ?
18. Is there anything more disturbing than the fact that
some people are handsome and some ugly although this may be
the result of their own deeds ?
19. Is there anything more distressing than the fact that
some are virtuous and learned in all gastras while others are scen
dumb ?
20. Is there anything more annoying than the fact that
wealthy personal are niggardly while poor people are generous ?
21. Is there anything more condemnable than the man who,
having married two wives, favours one and discards the other ?
22. Ifthe three castes, Brahmana, Ksatriya and Vaisya, are
engaged in sinful actions, can there be anything more detestable ?
23. Having got human birth, if one does not strive to attain
me, can there be anything more deplorable ?

24. I have thus told you about the actions leading to unhappiness which vou asked me.
25. Now I shall tell you about the actions leading to happiness which you asked me.
26. Letall actions be dedicated tome. Those that are otherwise lead to unhappiness.
27. Is there anything more happy than cating the food remaining after offering it to me?
28. Is there anything more happy than observing rites in
the morning, noon and evening, particularly the last ?
29. Is there anything more happy than offering food to the
gods, guests and men in general and then oneself taking it ?
30. Is there anything more happy than giving a supplicant
something instead of sending him away disappointed ?
31, Is there anything more happy than propitiating the
manes on Amavasya day every month ?
32. Is there anything more happy than giving focd of barley
to those that have come secking food, without a trace of unwillingness on the face ?
33. If a person with two wives looks upon both alike, is
there anything more happy for him ?
34. He, who with pure mind, always observes non-violence,
attains happiness.
35. If, on seeing the beautiful wife of another, the mind does
not flutter, can there be greater happiness ?
36. Can there be greater happiness for a person if he is able
to sce as mere stones gold and gems like pearl ?
37. Can there be anything more happy than giving up life
in the midst of the battle which delights the horses and elephants ?
38. He who lives contented condemning wrong actions for
attaining the ends, is prone to be happy.
39. Can there be greater happiness for a woman who pleases
her husband considering him to be everything for her in life ?
40. Can there be anything more gratifying if a man, in spite
of his being rich, is learned and has full control of the senses ?
4l. If one is forbearing of an offence, is not dispirited in
adversity, and knows everything well, can there be a greater cause
for pleasure ?
49. He who leaves off his mortal coil in my temples, be that

270 Vardha Purana
with any desire or without any desire, can there be anything more
happy for him ?
43. Is there anything more happy than honouring the parents like gods?
+t. Can there be anything morc happy than cohabiting with
the wife with full attention every month after the course ?
45. He who worships me like this, never ceases to be mine
and I never cease to be his.
46. Thus have I told you the directions for the good for the
sake of the world in reply to your qucstion,
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTEEN
The thirtytico. offences
Varáha said:
1. O blessed goddess, now Iisten to the rules of food, about
eating food as well as avoiding it.
2. The food has a bearing on attaining mc, because the man
who follows dharma reaches me even if he chances to do an inauspicious act.
3. Let the prescribed food be taken always. Vrihi and Sali
grains (cereals) are to be used
4. I shall tell vou about the grains (food) prohibited, because to use them is an offence.
5. The first offence, which I always dislike is to worship
moe after taking another's food.
6. The second offence, which obstructs dharma, is to touch
me after a sexual contact.
7. The third offence, O carth, is to attend to me after seeing
a woman in her courses.
8. The fourth offence, one which I never tolerate, is to serve
me after touching a dead body and without undergoing the
necessary purification.

9. The fifth offence, which I do not brook, is to touch me
after seeing a dead body and without taking acamana.
10. "The sixth offence, which I do not forgive, is to go for
answering calls of nature in the midst of my worship.
11. The seventh offence, O Earth, is to serve me wearing
blue cloth.
12. The eighth offence, O Earth, is to talk much while engaged in my service.
13. ‘The ninth offence, O Earth, is to worship me without
purifying onesclf according to the rules.
14. The tenth offence which displeases me, is to do me service with an angry mind.
15. The cleventh offence is to consider in my worship prohibited objects as conducive to merit.
16. The twelfth offence is to worship me wearing cloth made
red with saffron.
17. The thirteenth offence is to touch me in darkness.
18. The fourteenth offence is to serve mc wearing black
cloth.
19. The fifteenth offence is to serve me wearing unwashed
cloth.
20. The sixteenth offence is to eat food even unknowingly
(while engaged in my worship).
21. ‘The seventeenth offence is to approach me after eating
fish and meat.
22. The eighteenth offence is to approach me after cating
goose (and other waterbirds).
23. The nineteenth offence, O Earth, is to come to me after
touching my lamp-bcarer.!
24. The twentieth offence, O fair goddess, is to approach me
after going to the cremation ground.
25. 'Phe twentyfirst. offence, O Earth, is to approach me
after eating oil-cake.
26. The twentysecond offence is to take pork as food conducive to attaining me.
27. The twentythird offence, O Earth, is to approach me
after drinking liquor.
1. ‘The word is dipake, What it means here is not quite clear.

272 Varaha Purána
28. The twentyfourth offence, O Earth, is to approach me
after eating vegetables with saffron.
29. The twentyfifth offence, O Earth, is to approach me putting on the garment of another.
30. The twentysixth offence, O Earth, is to eat fresh food
without offering it first to the gods or manes.
3]. The twentyseventh offence, is to go to the tank (for bathing) with footwear on.
32. The twentyeighth offence, O virtuous one, is to come to
me after tormenting the body.
33. The twentyninth offence, which never takes one to heaven, is to approach me with undigested food (in the abdomen).
34. The thirtieth offence is to offer me incense without offering sandalpaste and flowers.
35. The thirtyfirst offence, O noble one, is to open the door
(of my temple) without sounding the drums.
36. 'The thirtysecond offence should be taken as the most
serious.!
37. I shall now tell you about Drdhavrata (strong vow)
by observing which one attains me.
38. Learning the Sàstras, always remaining devoted to me
and rendering service to me, following non-violence, being compassionate to all beings, affable to all, pure, clever.
39. Controlling senses completely, without committing any
offence, being generous, righteous, well attached to the wife.
40. Observing the rules prescribed for the four castes, (he
who worships me attains me).
41. She who is devoted to the preceptor, devoted to the husband and looks after the family (also attains me by worshipping
me).
42. The man who is my devotee reaches me even if he gives
up his wife, but awaits here the devoted wife.
43. Ishall now tell you about the best of all actions.
44. Even sages who follow the path of devotion are not able
to easily realise me, what then about ordinary men?
45. Those sinful people who are attached to other gods,
are deluded by my magical power and do not attain me.
1, Itis simply stated as mahaparadha. What it is, is not given.

46. © Earth, those who resort to me desirous of liberation,
get purified and get places allotted (in my world).
47. I told you all this because of the fact that I hold you
with great energy.
43. This should rot be instructed to a slanderer, a fool, an
uninitiated or the cunning.
49. Nor to the vowless, base or the impious.
50. To none other than the devotees of mine.
5]. I have thus told you ali this about dharma for the sake
of the world. What else have yo 1 io ask me now ?
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTEEN
Rituals in Idol worship
Varaha said:
1. O blessed one, I ton to the expiation that my devotee is
to offer.
2. Take the tooth stick. Do not light the lamp till the ground
is touched.
3. Assoonas the lamp is lighted, wash the hands and then
approach the idol.
4. Bow to the fect and offer the toothstick with the mantra.
5. “O the abode of the worlds, excelling the sun in lustre,
endless, middle, receive this universal toothstick’’.
6. Inaccordance with the rules explained to you, O Earth,
the teeth should be cleaned.
7. The flower placed on the head of the idol the previous
day should be taken and placed on one's own.
8. 'The hand should then be washed with water and the
face of the idol should be sprinkled with a little water.
9. The mantra for it is this and by reciting it one gets release
from the world:
10. “O lord, receive these waters by their quality and soul."
The faces of all deities should be washed in this way. By the same
mantra should be offered sandal paste, incense, lamp and food.
11. Then handfuls of flowers should be offered saying “O

274 Varaha Purana
lord Narayana, who look after the devotees, I bow to vou,"
and then utter the mantra.
12. “I bow to the sacrificer of those who know the mantras,
and the creator of all beings". Further flowers should be offered.
13. The devotee, with due knowledge and purity of mind,
should worship the lord in this manner and then throw himself
down with all his actions.
14. Making the body fall in this way, he should seck the
grace of the lord and with hands folded over the head, utter this
mantra:
15. “Getting clear consciousness by the mantras I pray ©
lord, when you are pleased and by vour wish only even the yogins
attain liberation.
16. Since I am your servant as you have stated, be pleased
with me".
17. After doing all this seriously he should quickly go behind.
18. The idol should then be bathed in oil first and then in
ghee.
19. Then with full concentration of mind, the devotee should
offer oil with the mantra:
20. “O lord of the worlds, I am offering this oil with affection and with my hand to you who pervade the whole world. 1
have said ‘Pardon me.’ I bow to you again and again."
21. With this mantra it should be first applied to the head.
22. Then the right hand, then the left and afterwards the
back and then the waist.
23. "Then cowdung should be smeared on the floor.
24. I shall tell you what benefits accrue by this anointing.
25. The man who bathes the idol in ghee or oil remains in
heaven for as many thousands of years as there are drops in them.
26. He who does this is honoured in my world.
27. Now I shall tell you about the application of unguents
by which the body is purified and I am pleased.
28. The unguent should be made of lodhra, the juice of fig
and the leaves at Madhüka, A$vaparna, Rohina and Karkata.
29-30. The ingredients may be either crushed by the hand
or otherwise made into powder and then applied. It makes my
body pleasant.

31. For complete fulfilment, after the application of the
unguent, the bathing (proper) should be done.
32. Then the whole body of the idol should he rubbed with
(the fruits of} Amalaka and Vasugandha.
33. Taking then the pot of water this mantra should be
uttered:
34. “O sinless lord, you are the god of gods, you have no
beginning, you are supreme, be pleased to accept this bath for
your visible form". Thus should the bath be conducted bv those
who follow my path.
35. The water for bath may be taken in golden or silver pot,
and if they are not available, in copper pot.
36. After this ritual of bath, sandalpaste should be applied
with the mantra.
37-38. “O Madhava, all scents from flowers and all colours
are liked by you. These which arise in different worlds are combined by you in Satyaloka. I am now applying the same on your
body in pure form. Being pieased by my devotion, do me the
favour of accepting it".
39. After applying sandal (with the perfumes) perform
other edifying actions.
40. Adorn me with garlands of the prescribed kind and continue the ritual.
4l. Then offer handfuls of flowers and utter the mantra:
42. “O Acyuta, accept these clean flowers, waterborn as
well asland-born in thisseason, for my release from this worldly
existence”.
43. After this may be offered incense from fragr: nt substances with the mantra.
44-46. ‘Be pleased to receive this incense the essence of the
great trees mixed with many ingredients, for the sake of deliverance from worldly existence. This for peace for all Devas, peace
for me and peace for all devotees. I bow to you. O lord of the
worlds, there is no saviour for me other than you".
47. After this, adorn theidol with sandalpaste, unguents
and garlands. Then decorate with white and yellow silk garments,
48. Then with hands folded over the head and remaining in
meditation, he should utter.

276 Vardha Puràán:
49. “May this please lord Purusottama, of the nature .
bliss, the abode of Laksmi, the creator, protector, overlord, lord of
all beings, the primordial being. I dress you in beautiful yellow
silk".
50. After this, I should be provided seat in a pedestal of
flowers.
51. Then naivedya should be offered uttering ‘Om’.
52. “O lord, receive this (naivedya) which isthe giver of
life and mutually pleasing."
53. After this he should quickly give water for washing thc
mouth.
54. The naivedya given should be pure and the water for
washing is essential for making it acceptable.
55. After thus offering food and water, betel leaf and arccanut should be given with the mantra.
56. “O lord of the worlds, receiving this tàmbüla which is
an ornament to all gods and which is mixed with all fragrant substances, be pleased to remain in this idol of yours in this house.
57. Please receive this fine decoration for your mouth reverentially given by me".
58. The devotee who worships me in this way gets liberated
and remains in my great world for ever.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND NINETEEN
Food forbidden in worship
1. Hearing the rules of rituals in worship which lead to liberation, Earth asked again the pleasant lord.
Earth said:
2. “I have heard from you now about the efficacious actions
that lead to attaining you. Be pleased to tell me what are the
materials to be used for it".
3. Hearing the words of Earth, Varaha was much pleased
and spoke these words of virtue.

Varüha said:
4. The mantras to be utilised (have been said. Now I shall
tell you about the materials).
5. The seven kinds of grain together with milk and vegetables and the (fruits of) Madhüka and Udumbara (are commendable).
6. ‘There are others in hundreds and thousands which I may
tell you.
7. Ishall say about the grains that can be used. Listen to
me with attention.
8-9. The vegetable Gillika, the fragrant raktasali, the long
sali, the big sali, good saffron, fine honey, the sweet-smelling
givasundari, sirika and kulasalika and different kinds of cooked
barley are commended in worship.
10-11. Green gram, black gram, horse gram, sesamum,panicseed, gavedhu, makusta, vahija, and Syamaka are all permitted.
12. All this I accept if devoutly offered; also the flesh of
deer, goat and hare.
13. All these are dear to me in the worship meant to attain
me.
14. When the goat is offered in sacrifice by the Vaidic
Brahmin, a part of it comes to me as my vhare.
15. The milk, curd and ghee of the buffalo should be
avoided. The devotee of Visnu should avoid its meat, even the
food cooked in its milk.
16. "The birds that are to be used also in my worship, I shall
tell you now.
17-18. The flesh of the birds lavaka, vartika and kapifijala
are used in my temples.
19. He who does the worship following these instructions
(and restrictions) docs not commit any fault and good befalls
him. f
20. Those who worship me in this manner with all the rituals
attain their goal.

278 Varaha Purána
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY
The worship of Sandhya
Varáha said:
1. O Earth, I shall tell you the great secret of crossing the
worldly existence which you asked me about.
2. My devotees, duly taking bath, approach me with full
control of mind and eating but a trifle of food.
3. O blessed one, my form is eternal. I am the one that
permeates all beings.
4. It is I that is above, below and the sides, as also at the
quarters and subquarters.
5. Obeisance should, therefore, be made to all these by the
devotees desirous of salvation.
6. Ishallalso tell you this secret that by worshipping these
my followers acquire great fame.
7. With concentration of mind, the devotee should turn to
east and take water in both hands held together.
8. He should then say Om namo nàrayanàya (Bow to Nàràyana) and then utter:
9. “I bow to that great and merciful primordial man, the
most important in all the worlds, Narayana the origin cf dharma.
I offer sacrifice to him".
10. Then turning to west and similarly holding water he
should utter Dvadasaksara (Om namo bhagavate vasudevdya) and
then the mantra:
11. “I extol that eternal being, the most ancient, whose
desire is never in vain, the first creator who manifests himself in
all objects”.
12. Then holding water in the same manner he should turn
to the north and uttering Om namo narayandya recite the mantra:
13. “I offer sacrifice to that most divine being, the most
ancient without beginning or end, of eternal form, the originator
of life and the world,the most tranquil, unique, the liberator from
the woes of worldly life".
14. Then inmediately turning to the south (similarly holding water in the hands) he should utter Om namah purusotiamaye
and recite the mantra:
15. “I offer sacrifice to the great being of endless forms, the

first, the truth, the righteous, of the form of time, for liberation
from worldly life”.
16. Then remaining steady like wood and fully controlling
the senses and concentrating the mind on Visnu, he should utter
the mantra.
17. “I offer sacrifice to the lord of the worlds, with the sun
and moon as his eyes, the foremost of all in the worlds, the drinker
of soma juice, the liberator from death and worldly existence”.
18. The devotee of mine who desires beatitude may do this
wisely and sincerely during morning, moon and evening.
19. This is the secret of all secrets, the highest of yoga and
the best of Sankhya.
20. This should not be inparted to the dunce, the cheat or
the crooked; it can be imparted only to the good, initiated disciple.
21. These secret instructions given by Visnu should be well
borne in mind and never be forgotten even at the time of death.
22. He who learns this well and follows the instructions,
always finds a place in my mind.
23. He who worships the sandhya in this manner, whatever
be his form here, reaches my abode.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTYONE
The absence of birth
Varüha said:
1. O Earth, listen to me. I shall tell you the essence of all
dharma by which one can remain without entering into birth.
2. One is not able to realise the self even after performing
the prescribed rites with purity of mind.
3. But he who performs the duties by me, becomes blessed
and able to distinguish between right and wrong.
4. He who bears heat and cold alike, overcomes thirst and
hunger, speaks the truth, is not jealous, persevering even if poor.
5. Is devoted to his own wife and discards the women of
Others, is honest and dedicated to the Lord.

280 Varüha Purana
6. Sets on the good from the bad, is well disposed towards
Brahmins, speaks endcaringly to them, and is attached to my
service.
7. Such a person never goes to a cursed womb, but reaches
my abode.
8. O Earth, I shall tell you another thing regarding my devotee’s never going to a bad womb.
9. He who refrains from all sorts of injury, is kindly disposed
towards all beings, is pure-hearted, considers alike a stone and
gold.
10. Never keeps in mind any insult received, is always aware
of his duties and speaks only the truth.
ll. Turns away from all falschood, is firm in truth, never
speaks ill of any one even privatcly,
12. Cohabits with his wife for the sake of progeny soon
after her pcriod, and is steadfast in my devotion.
13. Never goes to a bad womb, but reaches me.
O Earth, I shall tel] you another thing. Please listen.
14. The eternal dharma of man is scen in one way by Manu,
in another way by Angirasa.
15. In yet another way by Sukra and still another way by
Gautama, in a different way by Soma, still differently by Rudra.
16. Yet differently by Sankha and more differently by
Likhita, similarly by Kasyapa and so too by Dharma.
17. Agni and Vayu found dharma differently; so also Yama,
Indra and Varuna.
18. Kubera found it in one way and Sàndilya in another:
Pulastya and Aditya still differently.
19. Pitrs found it yet differently and Svayambhü too. Each
propounder found it according to himself.
20. Each man should follow dharma according to his faith
and should not dispute about it with others.
21. He should stand in the path of righteousness and should
not despise virtuous deeds.
22. Such a person never falls into a heinous womb, but
reaches my world.
Listen, O Earth, I shall now tell you about another thing.
23. By which people are able to cross this ocean of births.
24. He who has control of his senses, has overcome anger
and is free from desire and delusion, helps himself by always

p
worshipping god, guests and preceptors, abstains from injury and
does not partake of meat or liquor.
25, Who never even thinks of cohabiting with a Brahmin
woman, makes gift of Kapila cow to the Brahmin and attends on
old men.
96. Docs not discriminate among his own sons, consoles a
Brahmin when he is angry.
27. Who touches the Kapilà cow in devotion, never outrages the modesty of a virgin, does not cross fire, and does not
dispute with the son.
28. Docs not pass urine in water, is respectful towards the
teacher, is not talkative.
29. And endowed with such qualities (like these) resorts to
me; he never goes to a womb, but reaches my world.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTYTWO
The greatness of Kokamukha—the story of the fish and cricket
Varadha said:
1. “QO Earth, listen to the secret of secrets bv which even
those that have become animals are cleared of all their sins.
2. He who maintains continence on the eighth and fourteenth days of each lunar fortnight, he who, having taken the
food offered by another, does not speak ill of it.
3. Who even from childhood is devoted to me, who is happv
with whatever he gets, who honours his parents.
4. He who does not live in strain, who is virtuous and discreet, liberal in gifts, enjoys life, restrained but independent in all
actions.
5. Who, even in his youth, does not do anything prohibited,
who is kind towards all beings, and is full of energy.
6. Who is of desireless mind and never covets another's
wealth, such a person reaches my world.
7. O lovely damsel, this is a secret which is not easily comprehended even by gods. Listen to what I sav further.

282 Varàha Purana
8. He who is sympathetic and does not harm any being and
he who gives up life at Kokamukha, becomes dear to me and he
does not swerve even in mind”.
9. Hearing these words of Visnu, the saintly Earth asked the
Lord who was in the form of a boar.
Earth said:
10. “O Madhava, I am your disciple, servant and devotee.
I deserve to be told the great secret.
11-12. Leaving out Cakra, Varanasi, Attahása, Naimisa
and Bhadrakarna, why do you praise Koka.
13. Again, leaving out Dviranda, MandaleSvara and
Kedara, why do you praise Koka ?
14. So too while there are Devadaruvana, Jalesvara and
Durga, why do you praise Koka ?
15. Similarly, when there are Gokarna, Jalmegvara and
Ekalinga, why do you praise Koka ?”
16. Thus asked in great reverence, the Lord in the form of
the boar replied:
Varaha said:
17. What you say is true. I shall, therefore, tell you about
the special nature of Kokamukha.
18. All the places mentioned by you pertain to Rudra and
they are resorted to by the Pàéupatas. But Koka pertains to the
Bhagavatas.
19. I shall tell you what happened in this Kokamukha of
mine.
20. A hungry hunter was once wandering about in this Koka
country.
21. Hesaw ina shallow pond a fish and caught it in his net.
But the mighty fish escaped from his hand.
22. Immediately a vulture saw it. It swooped down, caught
it and swiftly flew away.
23. But the vulture was unable to carry it far, and the fish
fell down at Kokàmukha. By the special power of that place, it
became a handsome prince (in Saka kingdom).
24. After a long time, the wife of this hunter happened to
pass by there with meat in her hand.

wa
95. A female cricket, desirous of the meat, hopped on it
again and again and annoyed her.
96. She struck it with an arrow and hurled it down on the
ground.
97. The cricket fell before me in Koka, and she was born as
a beautiful princess in Candrapura.
28. She duly grew up and mastered all the sixtyfour arts,
but developed an aversion for men.
29-30. She disliked even a man who was highly virtuous,
quite handsome and brave in war.
31. After a long time, however, she married a young Saka.
32. Having thus got each other in wedlock, they lived a
happy and virtuous life.
33. He never parted company with her and she never parted
company with him. They never wasted even a minute.
34. A long time they spent in mutual love. She served him
with humility and regard.
35. He too (enjoyed himself) in the same way.
36. Once, in the afternoon, the Saka prince became afflicted by severe headache.
37. All the expert physicians tried their best with all their
recipes, but the headache did not subside.
38. For a long time he was unable to know himself being
deluded by the maya of Visnu.
39. The period (of their transformation into human form)
was drawing to a close.
40. Still they were strongly attached to each other, and
neither left the other even for a moment.
4]. Then the beautiful princess asked her husband: “Are
you doing well? How is it that you are having this headache ?
42. Please tell me the truth, if you have any consideration
for me.
43. Numerous expert physicians are treating you, but the
headache st*ll remains”.
Thus asked by his wife, he said:
44. “Have you forgotten that the human life we are having
now is a mixture of pleasure and pain.
45. You should not ask this question now that we are in the
ocean of samsára". So was that young lady spoken to by her
husband.

284 Vardha Purana
46. After a long time, when both were slecping, she again
asked him:
47. “O my lord, please give me an answer to what I asked
you long ago.
48. Is there anything to be hidden (from me) ? Otherwise
why do you hide facts. You should certainly tell me if I am your
beloved".
49. Pressed thus, the Saka princc told her out of love and
regard:
50. “Give up this human form and remember what you were
formerly. If you are interested in knowing about your previous
life.
51. Please go to my parents and propitiate them. They are
honourable and my mother kept me in her womb.
52. After honouring them and getting their consent, we will
go to Kokamukha and there I shall tell you the whole thing.
53. Although it is difficult even for gods to know about the
previous life, I shall tell you about it there”.
54. "Then that beautiful damsel went to her parents-in-law
and prostrated at their feet. She-then told them:
55. “Please listen, I have a submission to make before you.
With your permission, both of us wish to go to the holy Kokamukha.
56. Since the purpose is serious, you should not object to
this.
57. So far we have not asked of you anything. Therefore,
it behoves you to grant the present request.
58. Your son is suffering from an incurable headache and
at noon he becomes practically lifeless.
39. Because of this he has to forego all pleasures. There is
no remedy for this other than going to Kokamukha.
60. This secret has never been told to you. I wish to go
quickly to that supreme abode of Visnu. Contemplation by the
husband and wife is always efficacious”.
61. Then the great king of the Sakas, held his daughterin-law by the hand and told his son:
62. “Why do you think of going to Kokamukha ?
63. You have got here elephants, horses, chariots and other

vehicles and women beautiful like Apsarases. This country with
all its seven constituents like treasury and fort is all for you.
64. So too our friends and this throne. O son, take all this.
My life rests in you, so too progeny".
65. Hearing these words of the father, the prince held his
feet and spoke in humility.
66. “Enough of the kingdom, treasury, vehicles and army.
I wish to go to Kokamukha quickly.
67. Only if I survive after this terrible headache that has
caught hold of me, can this kingdom, army and treasury be of
any avail to me.
68. By going there my headache will surely disappear".
69. At these words of the son, theking of Sakas gave permission for him to go to Kokàmukha and blessed him.
70. The citizens, traders, beautiful ladies and courtesans
followed him to Kokamukha.
71. When they reached Kokamukha, the princess asked her
husband:
72. “Be pleased to tell me now what you promised to tll
me at Kokamukha, now that we have reached that place”.
73. O Earth, when asked thus by the beloved, the prince
laughed and embracing her said:
74. “Now night has fallen and let us sleep well. I shall tell
you tomorrow all that is in my mind".
75. At daybreak both of them had their bath. They put on
silk garments and bowed to Lord Visnu. He then held her by
the hand.
76. And pointed out at the north-east part the remains of
some bones and said:
77. ‘These are the bones of my former body. I was then a
fish moving about in the pond in this Koka country.
78. I was caught in a net by a hunter, but I slipped out of
his hand and fell down on the ground.
79. I was then caught by a vulture and torn by its nails.
But when I was being carried away by it, I slipped again and
fell down here.
1, The seven constituents (sapiánga) are the king, minister, kingdom,
forts, treasury, army and friends.

286 Vardha Purana
80. My head hit the ground and thus developed this headache of mine. I alone know this and none else.
81. Ihave now told you what you asked. You may now go
wherever you please".
82. Then that lady of faultless limbs and of a hue like the
red lotus spoke to the husband again in a piteous tone:
83. “In order to know this. I did not disclose what I was in
my former birth. Now I shall tell you that, please listen.
84. I was a cricket flying in the sky. Once overcome with
hunger and thirst I was sitting on the branch ofa tree thinking of
my food.
85. Just then there came a hunter with a big mass of flesh
of the many animals he had killed that day.
86. Placing the mass of flesh near his wife, he went to fetch
firewood for cooking the flesh, as he was hungry.
87. When he kindled fire (and began cooking a part of the
flesh), I swiftly flew there and began to cut the flesh (left with
his wife).
88. But it was too heavy for me to carry away and so I
remained there itself.
89. After eating the (cooked) flesh, the hunter was much
pleased, but, not seeing the mass of flesh, looked for it everywhere.
90. Then he saw me eating the mass of flesh. At once he
took his bow and discharged an arrow towards me.
91. The arrow hit me and hurled me down from the mass of
flesh I was eating.
92. Then I moved about here and there practically dead.
93. But by the power of this holy place, I was born a princess
and became your beloved with the memory of my former life.
94, See here the remains of the bones of my former body".
She told her husband again:
95. “O blessed soul, you have been brought to this Kokāmukha.
96. By the power of this place even animals get birth as
human beings and in high families.
97. O famous prince, whatever dharma is there spoken by
Visnu, I follow, because that gives us supreme joy in the world of
Visnu’’.

98. At this narration, the prince was wonderstruck remembering the previous birth.
99. The princess, fully knowing what was to be done in
that place, herself did certain rites fully devoted to her husband.
100. Hearing this, others also performed whatever prescribed
rite that was to their liking.
101. Then the co :1ple gave gifts of food and gems in great
delight to deserving Brahmins.
102. Others who were given presents, also gave them to
Brahmins because of their devotion to Visnu.
103. Remaining there steadfast in devotion they went to
Svetadvipa (the white island).
104. The prince also, following the tenets of my worship,
cast off his human form and reached Svetadvipa. All the people
there realise their own selves.
105. They are all clad in white, adorned with divine jewels,
effulgent, tall and fine-looking.
106. The women also have divine jewels, are resplendent
and pure, and absorbed in contemplating on me.
107. Thus have I told you about the matchless Kokamukha
where the fish and the cricket attained each other.
108. Some may perform the Càndràyana ceremony, some
may live on water alone. But every Brahmin shall follow the
dharma laid down by Visnu.
109. Even those couples who have a lot of grain and gems,
perform the rites laid down by me for my devotees.
110-111. All those who move about serving me, go to the
Svetadvipa after death by the power of the place, the power of
their deeds and my own power.
112. So it was that the prince also went there after giving
up his human form.
113. Even his servants who were devoted to me cast off their
mortal frame and reached my world.
114. There all are resplendent and every one realises the
self.
115. Allthe women there have the smell of the lotus, are free
from máyà and in the company of their beloved persons. They
reach. Svetadvipa due to my blessing.
116. "This is virtue, this is fame, this is power, this is renown,

288 Varadha Purdna
117. This is the greatest of actions, the highest of penances,
the best of narratives and the worthiest of deeds.
118. I have now told vou about the highest cf dharmas. This
should not be told to a choleric, a fool or a jealous person.
119. Nor should it be told to a non-devotee, the uilistening
or the arrogant. It should be imparted only to the calm aud the
initiated.
120. It should not be imparted to the disputing man even if
he is learned.
12]. He who remembers this at the time of death, gets removed of all sins and never takes birth again.
122. 1 have thus told you, O Earth, this great and inv gor ating story. Those who go to Kokàmukha attain supreme bliss as
did the fish and the cricket.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTYTHREE
The greatness of flowers, sandalpaste eic.
Sita said:
1. On hearing about the greatness of Koka with its emphasis
on dharma, the Earth became wonderstruck.
Earth said:
2. “How wonderful the greatness of Koka narrated by lord
Varaha, that even animals attain supreme bliss.
3-4. Now, O lord, by your grace I wish to know what I have
already asked you, namely, by what dharma, penance or action
can people see your benign face ?”
5. Requested thus by the goddess Earth, the lord laughed
and began to tell her:
Vardha said:
6. ‘What you ask is quite proper. I shall tell you that secret
which leads to release from sarmsára.
7. When the rainy season is over and the autumn sets in
with the sky clear and the moon fully bright.

8. With the weather neither hot nor cold, when the swans
sing in delight and the smell of the lotus, lily and kalhara
spreads.
9. There on the Dvadasi day in the month of Kumuda,
(Karttika) if one worships me, what merit he attains I shall tell
you.
10. O Earth, such a person becomes my devotee and not of
any other so long as these worlds last.
11. Performing actions relating to me on Dvàdaái day he
shall utter the following mantra for my worship:
12. "You are praised by Brahma and Rudra. You are adorable and adored by the sages. Dvadasi has come. Awake, arise.
The clouds are gone. The moon is full. O lord of the worlds, I
offer you the flowers of autumn for the sake of dharma. For worshipping you who have arisen, sacrifices are performed,the Vedas
are recited by the awakened, O lord of the worlds".
13. Doing in this way on Dvadasi day, my devotees attain
supreme bliss.
14. Thus have I told you about the autumnal action aimed
at getting release from samsára for my devotees.
Thus is the action of awakening.
15. I shall now tell you about the actions to be performed
in winter by doing which the devotees attain supreme bliss.
16. Although tormented by cold winds, remaining firm in
devotion and with unchanging mind.
17-18. Worshipping me with the flowers available in winter,
kneeling down on the floor and with folded hands, the following
mantra is to be uttered:
19. *'O lord of the worlds, you are winter, the snow is impenetrable and uncrossable. Lead me out of this samsára, O lord
of the three worlds".
20. He who performs worship with this mantra in full devotion, attains supreme bliss.
2]. O Earth, I shall tell you another thing, please listen.
22. The month Margasiras is very dear to me; so too the
month Vaisakha. I shall tell you the result of offering flowers to
me then.
23. He who makes offerings to me then with a steady mind,
goes to Visnuloka and remains there for nine thousand nine
hundred years.

290 Varáha Purana
24. The offering of even a single turmeric produces great
effect. So one should wisely offer turmeric and flowers.
I shall tell you more about the efficacy of turmeric.
25-26. During the three months Kaumuda, Margasirsa
and Vaiéakha, he who offers me with constant mind the vanamala
of beautiful flowers and sweet sandal on the Dvadasi days.
27. Attains the merit of worshipping me for twelve years.
28. In Kaumuda the flower of Sala with sandal, in MargaSiras the flower of lotus with sandal (are important in my worship). Thus have I told you about the result of worship with
turmeric”.
29. After hearing all this, Earth laughed and then spoke
to him in all humility.
30. “O lord, there are twelve months (consisting of) three
hundred and sixty days. Of these why two (months) alone are
particularly praised by you, and even there why Dvadasi alone?”
31. Asked thus by the Earth, he laughed and told her words
of dharma.
32. “O goddess, I shall tell you why these two are particularly dear to me.
33. (Worship of Dvadasi day) is more important than all
sacrifices. By this one attains the same result as by giving gifts
of land to a thousand Brahmins.
34. I wake up in the month of Kaumuda and remain alert
in Vaisakha.
35. O Earth, these remove all ailments and, therefore, with
steady mind in Kaumuda and Vaiéakha, one should take turmeric in the hand and utter the mantra:
36-37. “O lord, command me. Vaisakha and Karttika are
eternally great. Accept this turmeric and increase all dharma.
Bow to Narayana’, and then make the offering.
38. I shall now tell you about the qualities and results of
offering flowers. After turmeric, one should take flowers in the
hand and say ‘Om, bow to Vasudeva’ and then utter the following mantra:
39. “O lord, command me. Make my mind favourable to
worship you with these flowers. Accept them with sandalpaste.
I bow to you”.
40. He who worships me offering me these, never again
takes birth, is never fatigued and never feels hungry.

4l. He remains in my world for a thousand divine years.
42. Such is the effect of each flower offered. Such is the
greatness that arises from flowers and sandal about which you
asked.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTYFOUR
Worship in the Seasons
Varaha said:
I. On the Dvadasi day in the bright half of the month of
Phalguna, the devotee should collect the fragrant flowers blooming in spring.
2. Flowers that are white or pale vellow and auspicious and
offer them in the prescribed manner with a pleasant mind.
3. "This ritual relating to the great God is to be done by one
who knows the rules and rituals and is ciean.
4. This is to be done according to rules and uttering the
prescribed mantra and with pure mind.
5. First should be uttered ‘Om, I bow to Narayana’ and
then the mantra: ‘‘I bow to you, the lord of Devas, holding the
conch, disc and mace; I bow to you, the lord of the worlds; I
bow to you, the great hero.
6. Splendid is the spring season with the trees full of fragrant
and honeyed flowers".
7. He, who worships in this manner in the month of Phalguna, goes to my world and is never born again.
8. I shall now tell you the result of worship on the Dvadasi
day of the bright half of the month of Vaisakha which you asked
about.
9. When the Salas and other trees are in full bloom, the
devotee should collect the flowers of the Sala for my worship.
10. Performing the rituals and honouring other devotees,
he should lay them before me.
ll. O Earth, the sages praise with Vedic mantras. Gandharvas and Apsarases sing and play instruments and dance.

292 Vardha Puräna
12. The entire celestial world praises this most ancient ana
best Man. The Siddhas, Vidyadharas, Yaksas, Pisacas, Uragas
(snakes) and Raksasas praise the god of all beings and the lord
of all worlds.
13. The Adityas, Vasus, Rudras, Agvins and Maruts praisthe god of gods who alone remains when everything else di~-
appears.
I4. Then Vayu, Visvedevas and Asvins praise lord Kesava
who remains frorn the most early times.
15. Then Brahma, Soma, Indra and Agni come together
and praise the lord of all worlds.
16-17. Narada, Parvata, Asita, Devala, Pulastya, Pulaha,
Bhrgu, Angiras and many other sages like Mitravasu and Paràvasu, praise the lord of all beings and the greatest of yogins.
18. Hearing the reverberating sound of the praise by
Devas, lord Narayana told Earth:
19. “Do you hear this sound mixed with the recitation of
the Vedas ? Do you hear the sound of Devas ?”
20. The lotus-eyed Earth endowed with all forms and qualities replied to the lord in the form of the boar:
21. “O lord, Devas desire that this boar form of yours be
there for ever and they are all engaged towards that end".
22. Then lord Narayana told Earth: “I know that they have
come here seeking this.
23. I have held you, with ease at the. tip of one of mv
tusks, O Earth, for a thousand divine years.
24. And you are quite safe. To see this have come here the
celestials, Adityas, Vasus, Rudras, Skanda, Indra and Brahmà".
25. Hearing these words of Visnu, Earth fell down at his
feet with hands folded over the head.
26. She then requested the great lord in the form of the
boar: *I who sank deep in the netherworld was raised by you.
27. I seek refuge in you as your devotee. You are my lord
and saviour. What is Karma ? By what karma can life's aim bc
achieved ? ?
28. How can you be propitiated ? By what action can you
be worshipped ? I wish to do that which will be conducive to
my happiness.

bo
E
29, Being engaged in your service, Í never feei fatigue or
strain, nor do cld age and birth and death affect me.
30. Where do the gods, demons and peopie, as also Rudra,
Indra and Brahma remain in pleasure ?
31. What actions do those perform that realise you, O
what practices do they
Madhava ? What food de they take
follow ?
32. Whatshould be the actions of the Brahmins, what sh
be the actions of the Ksatrivas? What actions should the Vaisyas
do and what the Südras ?
33. By whomis yoga attained, by whom penance ? What
result does he attain who is devoted to you ?
34. What should be the nature of living of
tees ? What food shall they take and what drink ? What is the
nature of their actions ?
35. Which directions do they take? How can they attain
cessation from birth, particularly in a despicable family °
36. Dy what action can they avoid being born as animals ?
Tell me all this by which they attain happiness ?
37. By what action can they avoid old age aud rebirth, O
Acyuta ? By the power of which action can they get relief from
Samsara >?”
38. Thus requested by Earth, the lord replied,
39. “Know how my devotees are led to the path of liberation and what mantras please me.
your devo40. ‘The mantra: ^O Madhava, you are indeed the month
Madhava which is the chief of all months. May you be seen in
the spring season when approached with sandal-paste. Lord
Narayana who is the greatest heroin all the seven worlds and
ever present in sacrifices is invoked”.
41. In summer also worship should be done as I have directed, and the following mantra, which is for the good of all devotees, should be uttered:
42. “In summer occurs the most important of months. May
you be seen, O lord, in summer so that all my sufferings may
cease’?
43. O lovely damsel, my worship is to be performed in this
way in summer so that there may not be any more births or deaths
(for the devotce).

294 Varáha Purane
44. As long as there are flowering trees and sweet smelir :
objects like sandal, so long 1 may be worshippec ir this manne:
45. In the rainy season also my worship may be performe: ’
By this the intellect becomes pure and the sou: never vbecom:.
subject to samsára.
46. Ishall tel! vou another thing conducive to release fro -
Samsara,
47. After consecrating me, I should be ritualistically wow
shipped using the buds of Kadamba tree and the flowers «:
Sarala and Arjuna. The mantra Namo Ndardyandya (Bow
Narayana) should be uttered and then:
48. “The blessed people who contemplate on you and worship you find you of the hue of the cloud. May you enter into
sleep, O lord of the worlds, during this rainy season seeing the
colour of the cloud".
49. He who performed my worship on Dvàda$ day in the
month of Asadha, never falls into samsára at any time.
50. I have thus told you about the worship in the different
seasons, by which the devotees cross samsdra.
51. This secret is not known even to the gods, other than
lord Narayana in this form of the boar.
52. This should not be communicated to the uninitiated,
the uneducated or the envious, nor to an undeserving discipie
or one who finds fault with scripture.
53. "This should not be read to those who slaughter cows or
those who are wicked, as it will result in rapid loss of wealth anc
virtue.
54. It should be read only to devotees and those who are
wedded to dharma.
55. J have thus told you what you desued to know in fuil.
what else do you ask me?

CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTYFIVE
Mayacakra
Sata said:
]. After listening to the actions to be performed in the six
seasons, Earth again asked Lord Narayana.
2. “You have explained the auspicious and sacred actions
to be performed, that indecd gladden your mind.
3. Knowing these from you, O Madhava, I have become
frec from staia like the moon in autumn.
4. Lam now eager to know another secrct which you may
be pleased to enlighten me about, namely.
5. What is it that you speak of as my mdy@ (illusory power) ;
what is its nature, O Visnu.
6. I wish to know this great secret, namely the meaning of
Maya.”
7. Visnu, who is the very repository of máyà, laughed a
little at this, and then told Earth:
8. “You ask this quite earnestly, but why do you ask this
since you see it yourself ?
9. But know this that even Rudra, Indra and Brahma have
not known me fully even now; then how can you, O Earth, know
my Maya ?
10. Where the clouds shower rain, there water accumulates, but there are also places without any water. This is due
to my maya.
li. The moon wanes in one fortnight and waxes in the next,
and does not appear at all on new moon day. This is really due
to my máyà.
12. In winter, the water in the well is warm, but in summer
it is cool. This really is due to my màyà.
13. The sun sets in the west and rises in the east the next
morning. This is due to my mapa.
14. The generative fluid is in the female and the semen is
in the male. In the womb they combine to form a being. This
is due to my màjá.
15. The soul entering the embryo knows pleasure and pain,
but when once born, it forgets the whole thing. This is due to
my maya.

206 Vardha Purana
16. The soul depends upon its own actions, but is quite
unaware of it and is free from desire. But by its actions it 1s ied
[s
elsewhere. This is due to my må
17. Living beings are born (in the human and animo:
world) by the combination of semen of the male and the generative fluid of the female.
18. The fingers, feet, hands, head, waist, hip, belly, teeth,
lips, nose, ears, eyes, checks, forehead and tongue, all these arc
produced in association with my maya.
19. By the same maj? do they deteriorate like fire transforming the food eaten and the liquids drunk.
20. Sound, touch, colour. taste and smell all act in a living
being due to food. AH this is by mv mày.
21. The cause of the effects on stationary and mobile objects in each season is not known because of my máyà, O fair
damsel.
22. The celestial waters as well as terrestrial waters by which
the rivers arc flooded are all due to my máyá.
23. During the rainy season, all ponds and lakes are full of
water, but in summer season, they all dry up. This is due to the
power of my mad.
24. The river arising from the peak of Himavàn with the
name Mandakini and flowing incarth withthe name Ganga
is because of my maya.
25. The clouds drawing water from the saline ocean and
showering it on the land as swect water is due to my mapa.
26. Beings afflicted by disease take in medicine. The efficacy of such medicines is duc to my mdpd.
27. That in spite of medicine, a being sometimes dies is
because of the fact I take it away making the medicine ineffective.
28. First the embryo is formed, then the child is born, afterwards he becomes a youth and finally becomes old. In due course
the senses are lost. All this is due to my mdyd.
29. The seed sown in the field sprouts and then gets foliage.
by my maya.
30. From a single (aggregate) seed grow numerous plants
and they all become perennial because of my maya.
31. People say that Garuda is the vehicle of Lord Visnu.
Really I become Garuda and bear myself.

pr
32. Different gods are raade to be pleased by the offerings
in sacrifices. Really it is I that please them by my mdayd.
33. All people believe that the gods always eat the sacrificial offerings. Really the sacrifices propitiaung the gods are due
to my maya.
34. All people consider Brhaspati as the sacrificer. Actually
it is I that do the sacrifice by my maya Angirasi.
35. All pcople believe that Varuna protects the sea. It is
I that protect the sea by mv maya Varuni.
36. All people take it that Kubera is the lord of wealth.
It is I that protect that wealth by my Auberamaya.
37. All people think that Vrtra was killed by Indra. Vrtra
was really killed by me by Aindri maya.
38. All pecple believe that the sun remains constant by itself. But the fact is that by producing Meru by my máyà, I hold
the sun.
39-40. All people take it that water (in the ocean) is consumed (by the submarine frc). Really it is] that sit at the mouth
of Badava (the submarine fire) and consume the water. And
by producing wind by my mdyd, the water is lodged in the clouds.
4]. All people ask "Where is water deposited ?" Even the
gods do not know where amrta reriains. By my máyá the medicine remains (in the herbs) in the forest.
42. All people think that it is the king who protects his subjects. It is I that really rule the earth by producing Rdjamaya.
43. Twelve suns appear at the time of deluge. I enter them,
O Earth, and create maya in the world.
44. O Earth, it is by (the heat of) rays of the sun that all
cooking is made possible. But it is really my Amśumayī mdyd
in the form of these rays.
45. The Samvarta clouds (at the time of deluge) pour down
water in torrents. It is really I that fill the world with water by
my maya samvartiki.
46. O Earth, that I repose over the serpent Sesa is because
' of my Anantamaya.
47. What I do by Varahamaya you already know.
48. Do you not know that the Devas are all enveloped by
my Vaisnavi maya ?
49. O beautiful damsel, I have raised you up from the big
ocean and held you (in my tusk) seventeen times by my maya.

298 Varāha Purdna
50. That I remain in this water is also due to my maya.
51. I create Brahma and Rudra and hold them. But due
to the power of my maya they do not know it.
52. The group of Pitrs resplendent like the sun, I-hold by
my Pitrmayi māyā ultimately, but apparently by you.
55. Ishall now tell you how by the power of maya a sage was
made to enter the womb of a woman”.
54. Extremely eager to hear this, Earth said with folded
hands,
55. “What was the difficult task done by that sage that gave
him womanhood and was made to enter a woman’s womb ?
56. I am very much curious to know this. What was the
sinful action of the great Brahmin that brought him womanhood ?”
57. Hearing the words of Earth, Lord Visnu was very much
pleascd and spoke to her in sweet words.
58. “O lovely goddess, listen to this. By my exciting mapa
Rohini, Somasarma was tormented.
59. He had numerous lives exalted, ordinary and despicable, but became a Brahmana again because of my màyà.
60. That he was led to the womb of a woman was not because of any prohibited action or offending deed of his.
61. He was always worshipping me and performing decds
that would please me. He was always meditating on my attractive form.
62. After a long time, I was very much pleased with his
penance, devotion and unchanging mind.
63. I then appeared before him and asked him *osceck a
boon.
64. I said: “O Brahmin, ask of me anything you have in
mind, gems, gold, cows or even a kingdom free from trouble.
65. Ifyou desire heaven where you get all pleasures, beautiful women and gems and gold in abundance,
66. And where there are celestial Apsarases, I shall give
you”.
67. Hearing my words, the Brahmin prostrated before me
and said:
68. “Ifyou will not feel angry, I shall tell you what boon I
desire now that you have offered me many things to choose
from.

69. I don't desire gold, cows, women or kingdom; nor do
I desire Apsarases or abundant wealth.
70. I do not wish even one among the thousand heavens.
I wish to know only about your Maya by which you play”.
71. Hearing his words, I spoke to him: ‘O virtuous Brahmin,
what have vou to do with Màyà? Why do vou ask about this
irrelevant. thing ?
72. Deluded by Visnumáyá, even the gods do not know about
ito.
73. Hearing my words, the great Brahmin spoke being
induced by màyàá:
74. *'If vou are pleased with me, O great god, by my actions
or penance, give me the boon I have asked".
75. "Then I asked that ascetic Brahmin to go to the place
called Kubjamraka on the bank of the river Ganga and take bath
there in order to know Maya. He then circumambulated me and
went there.
76. O goddess, at Kubjamraka he carefully placed on the
bank his staff, vessel and bundle of cloth.
77. 'Then performing the prescribed rites for the bath, he
got down on the river.
78. As soon as his whole body was immersed in water, he
found himself in the womb of a woman in a hunter's hut.
79. Troubled by being deposited there, he thought: "what
a pity ! what bad deed did I do that I am now in the hell of the
womb of the wife of a hunter ?
80. Fie on my penance, fie on my rightcous deeds, fie on
the effects of these, fie on my life, that now I am placed in the
womb of this wife of the hunter full of filth.
81. With three hundred bones, nine openings, full of urine
and faecal matter and flesh and blood.
$2. Foul smelling, unbearable, full of air, phlegm and bile,
with numerous diseases.
83. Or why say all this ? I am undergoing a lot of suffering.
84. Where is Visnu? Where am I? Where is Ganga ?
Having been placed in this womb, I have to face all the consequences”.
85. While he was thinking like this, he was cast out of the
womb, and falling on the earth, he lost all his reminiscence.

300 Varáha Purdna
86. The Brahmin was born as a girl in the hunter’s house
which, however, was affluent.
87. Being deluded by the máyà of Visnu, the girl did not
remember anything (about her previous life).
88. In due time she was well married and she begot sons
and daughters.
89. She ate permitted as well as prohibited food and drank
permitted as well as prohibited drink. She also killed severa!
creatures.
90. Deluded by máyá she could not discriminate between
good and bad actions or good and bad utterances; so too between
permitted and forbidden contacts.
9]. After fifty years, I decided to call back that Brahmin
(now living as the hunter's wife).
92. In order to wash dirty cloth, she went to the Ganges
with a pot and, placing the cloth and the pot on the bank, plunged into the water.
93. When she dipped herself into the river being oppressed
by heat and sweat, she was retransformed into the ascetic Brahmin holding the staff and vessel.
94. He found himself holding the staff and the vessel. He
could sec the bundle of cloth he had placed formerly on the bank.
. 95. When knowledge dawned upon him as before, he was
able to know the power of the maya of Visnu.
96. He took his original clothes from there and began, as
before, his yogic practice sitting on the sands of Ganges.
97. Then he understood himself and also what happened.
He cursed himself for having done heinous things.
98. He felt sorry for the loss of his ácára in the despicable
life he was subjected to.
99. (He repented:) “I was born in the family of a hunter.
I ate forbidden food. Ikilled many creatures. terrestrial, celestial
and aquatic.
100. I drank forbidden drinks and traded on prohibited
things. The prohibitions relating to contacts and utterances
were not observed by me.
101. Doubtless I ate in the home discarded food. I gave
birth to sons and daughters begot in me by the hunter.
102. What a crime have I done? But who thinks of this

that I have been brought to this state of being the wife of a
hunter ?”
103. In the meantime the hunter became angry and came
to that Mayatirtha in the Ganges together with his children.
104. He searched there for his devoted and beautiful wif:
and asked every ascetic he saw there about her.
105. (He wailed:) “O my dear, where have you gone
leaving me and the children at home ? The little girl cries for
breast-milk’’.
106. (He asked the sages:) “Did you find my wife who came
to the bank of the Ganges with a pot in hand to fetch water" ?
107. People flocked there and they saw the ascetic with the
pot near him.
108. Seeing the cloth and the pot and not the wife, the
hunter was grief-stricken and he lamented a lot.
109. “The cloth and pot are left on the bank of the river,
but my wife who took them here is not to be seen.
110. Can it be that some crocodile snatched her away for
delicious food.
11]. I never spoke to her anything harsh even in dream.
112. Perhaps she is devoured by some spirit, goblin or
demon. Or some (sudden) disease caught hold of her when she
entered the river (and she became senseless and was carried away
by the stream).
113. What bad thing did I de in my former life that my wife
inet with her end this way ?
114. O my dear wife who used to follow my mind always,
look at these pitiable children moving about in fear here and
there.
115. Look at me, my dear, and the three little sons and the
four daughters.
116. The boys cry to see you. The daughters seek your help.
How cursed am I !
117. You certainly know that Lam hungry and thirsty.
Please be kind to assuage my grief”.
118. To the hunter who was wailing like this and was restlessly moving about, the Brahmin said without going near him.
119. “After being with you and giving you pleasure, she
has departed never to return.

302 Varaha Purana
120. Go away without uselessly lamenting any more. Bring
up these children with the necessary food. They should never
be given up".
121. Hearing these words of the ascetic, the grief-stricken
hunter said in soft tone :
122. “O great sage, the upholder of dharma, I am really
consoled by your sweet words".
123-124. When the hunter spoke thus, the ascetic spoke
again feeling great pity for him.
125. “Please don't cry. I shall tell you the truth. It was I
that was your wife. When I came to the bank of this Ganges, I
was transformed like this,”
126. Hearing the words of the ascetic, the hunter felt much
consoled and spoke to him again.
127. “O Brahmin, what do you say? This is mystifying.
How can a woman be transformed into a man ?"
128. The Brahmin felt very sad at this and told that fishhunter softly.
129. *'Go to your house with these children and give them
the attention they deserve".
130. In spite of the persuation of the Brahmin, the hunter
was at a loss to know, and so asked him again.
131. “What wrong had vou done in the past that you became a woman, as you say, and how did it happen ?
132. And having become a woman, by whatever fault,
how did you become a man again? Please tell me’’.
133. At this the ascetic replied to that fish-hunter in the
Mayatirtha in Ganges.
134. “O hunter, hear my story. Really I did not do anywhere anything which I should not have done.
135. I was taking food only once a day and that too was
never of any prohibited article. Janardana (Visnu) the lord of
the worlds, was worshipped by me by various rites with a view to
secing Him.
136. After a long time, Janardana appeared before me and
asked me to seek a boon.
137. Idid not, however, desire any boon and requested that
I may be shown his Maya.
138. The lord told me: ‘‘Enough of máya, O Brahmin (Ask

something else’’’. But I insisted on the mdyd being shown to m:.
136. Then he said that I will know what màya is and asked
me to take bath. in the Ganges at the place called Kubjamrak»
140. Anxious to know about maya, I immediately went there,
and placing. my staff, vessel and cloth on the bank, dipped mwse'f in the river after performing the due rites
141. fam unable to know what happened then. But is
born as a hunter’s daughter and became your wife.
142. For some reason I entered the Ganges again and I
become the old ascetic again.
143. See here my old vessel, staff and cloth. Though this
is after fifty years, the river Ganges has kept them all intact”.
144. As he said this, the hunter disappeared and none of
his children could be scen there.
145. O Earth, the Brahmin then performed penance with
upward breath and arms held upwards and living on air alone.
146. In the afternoon he offered water ritualistically.
147. Sitting in the Viràsana pose, he worshipped me with
the prescribed flowers.
148. The Brahmins going for bath in the Ganges asked iiim.
149, “In the forenoon you placed your bundle, cloth and
vessel here, and went to the fishermen (hunters). Did you forget
this that you did not return soon ?”
150. Hearing these words of the Brahmins, the ascetic simply remained quiet, contemplating on the self.
151. Then, O goddess, the Brahmin thought: “Now fifty
years are over and it is Amavasya today.
152. ‘Then why do these Brahmins say that I left these things
here just this forenoon 2"
153. just then 1 appeared before him and asked him.
154. "Why are you stupefied ? What have you seen ? Finding you perpicxed, I came here".
155. Asked inus by me, he prostrated before me and toid
me with grea: Gisiress, irequently heaving.
156. “O preceptor of the whole world, these Brahmins tel
me that I left this staff, this vessel and this cloth here in the forenoon and I returned in the afternoon and whether I forget them.
156 (a) Actualiv I was born as daughter to a hunter, was
married to another hunter and remained in that state for fifty
years.

PNIS: T
UU i
157. I bore three sons and three daugiiters By him proba.
as à result of my misdeed ia earlier lives.
158-59. Once I happened to go to the Ganges for batir ana
when I dipped myselfin it, leaving my cloth bundic on the bank
I became converted into the Brahmin again.
160. What fault d d T commit when I was worshipping vos
or performing penance ? :
161. Did I eat any prohibited food or commit any errer i.
worship to you?
162. Please tell me the truth as to why I had this hcl
Please know that I am extremely tormented by these thoughts
163. I was eager to know about máyd and so I asked von
about it. I do not remember to have committed any sin to i
put to hell like this".
164. Noting his pitiable lament, I told the distressed Bratmin: f
165. “O Brahmin, don’t be sorry. There is no fault in yor.
nor have you committed any error in worship by which you wer
afflicted and made to have a niuferior birth.
166. Lasked you formerly to seek a boon, but you chose tc
have knowledge of maya.
167. I offered you heavenly pleasures or worldly pleasures
if such was your desire. But you wanted to get the knowledge
of maya.
168. You have, therefore, seen Vaisnavi máyá according to
your desire. There is no day, ne afternoon nor the life of yours
in the hunter’s house for fifty years.
169. JI shall tell you another thing about the Vaisnavi mapa
which you desired to know.
170. You did neither good nor bad. Everything is due to
maya which stupefies all.
171. You have not done any bad action or swerved from the
proper path. Nor have you committed anything wrong in worship or in penance.
172. The suffering you were subjected to was the result of
your actions in previous birth. I shall tell you about it.
173. This predicament of yours was the result of the sin. incurred by your failing to revere the Brahmins who were devoted
to me.

172. My devotees are really my own manifestations. hose
who honour such Brahmins really honour me. IT am known bv
them.
175. Peopie should know that my devotees deserve to be
ipped by those desiring to attain moe.
176. Particularly in Kali age, I am manifest in Brahmins.
Therefore, those who honour Brahmins do really honour me.
177. He who is irreproachable and desires to attain me, let
him turn his attention towards my devotees.
178. O Brahmin, you have now accomplished your desire.
When you dic, you will surely reach iny place, Svetadvipa".
179. So saying, the lord disappeared. The Brahmin too
cast off his mortal coil at Màyàátirtha and reached Svetadvipa.
180. By the power of mdvd he attained bow, arrow, quiver
and sword and supreme valour and remains always secing me.
181. O Earth, why de yeu ask about mdy@? You cannot
know maya. My máyà is incomprehensible even to gods and
Raksasas,
182. I have now told you about this mighty mdyd. This is
called *Máyácakra! and it brings about good.
183. This is the greatest of all narratives, the highest of
penance, the best of merits and the most important of all paths.
184. This should be narrated to devotees and not to nondevotees. This should not be recited in the midst of the bad or
those who find fault with scripture.
185. The Brahmin should recite it before devotees, and not
before those who dishonour scripture.
186. O Earth, he who recites it with due adoration, attains
result equivalent to reciting it a dozen times in my presence.
187. And at the end of his full life, becomes my perpetual
devotee and never takes birth in any inferior family.
188. He, who listens to this great story also, is never born
dull and never takes birth in any inferior family.
189. I have thus told you what you desired to know. What
else do you wish to ask?

306 Varüha Purane
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTYSIX
The greatness of Kubjamraka—the story of the serpent and ichneumor:
1. Hearing about the power of Maya from the lord, Lart:
asked Varaha again:
Earth said:
2. What you have to say about Kubjamraka is endics.,
know. But I am not able to grasp well even what you have sai !
3. You may, therefore, tell me about the sacredness ar
glory of Kubjamraka.
Varaha said:
4. I shall tell you all this which is conducive to the welfare
of the world at large, the glory of Kubjamraka and holy spois
there.
5. Hear tnis in full, O goddess, how this Kubjamraka came
into being and about the holy places there, and also what accrues
to a person who bathes or dies there.
6. O Earth, in the seventeenth aeon when the whole earth
was one mass.
7. And after killing the demons Machu and Kaitabha according to the desire of Brahma and collecting all the waters together for my repose.
8. I was not able to see sage Raibhya who was deep in my
devotion, scrupulously performing all the prescribed actions.
9. Very intelligent, virtuous, pure, clever, who had controlled all his senses, who performed penance with upraised hands
for one thousand vears.
10. Another thousand vears by living on water alone and
then for five hundred years on moss.
11. I was very much pleased by the supreme devotion ot
Raibhya and I was well worshipped hy him.
12. Then I saw that great sage performing penance ai ww
foot of a mango tree on the bank of the Ganges.
13. This was pointcd out to me by some one, but when I
came near that mango tree, he became a dwarf.
14. This place thus came to be called ‘Kubjamraka’ ‘the
place of the mango with the dwarf). People who die there go tc
my world. i

15. I shall tell you another thing, O Earth, namely what
that sage said.
16. When I saw him as a dwarf, he crawled towards me with
his knees and began to speak.
17. Seeing him bow to me, I was much pleased and I
offered him a boon.
18. Hearing my words, that virtuous sage spoke sweet words.
19. “Ifyou, O lord Janardana, are so pleased, may you remain in this place for cver.
20. I pray you to be here as long as the world lasts.
21. This is the onc boon which I have in mind. May vou
grant this if you are pleased.
22. May I have devotion for you always. I do not wish to
have devotion for any one celse”.
23. Hearing these words of sage Raibhya, I said “Let it be
as you desire”.
24. Then, O Earth, the Brahmin said after contemplating
for a while:
25. “O protector of the worlds, I wish to know from you
about the greatness of this great tirtha.
26. As well as of the other tirthas in this place."
27. (I said then:) “O Brahmin, I shall tell you what you
wish to know.
28. In this holy and pleasant Kubjàmraka there is a tirtha
with the shape of a lily, by the mere bath in which people attain
heaven.
29. Inthe months Kaumuda, Margasirsa and Vaisakha,
after austerities.
30. One who ends one’s life here attains heaven, be the person a man, woman or eunuch.
31. I shail tell you about another, O Earth. Please listen.
That is the tirtha known as Manasa.
32. By bathing in this, one goes to the divine garden Nandana
and enjoys there with Apsarases for a thousand divine years.
33. At the end of this period of thousand years, he is born in
a big family with abundant wealth and virtues.
34. If he dies there on the Dvadasi day in Kaumuda, he
attains great merit and reaches my world.
35. I shall tell you about another. Please listen, O Earth.
It is known as Màyátirtha by which people understand máyàá.

308 Varaha Purana
36. By bathing there, one attains great fame and remains
my devotec for ten thousand years.
37. Gets abundant wealth and reaches the abode of Kubera.
He gets the capacity to go wherever he likes for a thousand years.
38. If one dies in the Mavatirtha, he becomes a mdydyogin
and reaches my world.
39. J shall now tell you, O Earth, about Sarvatirtha which
has the efficacy of all firthas.
40. By bathing there on the Dvadasi day of Vaisakha month,
one enjoys heaven for fifteen thousand years.
41. Ifone gives up life there giving up all attachment, one
attains my world.
42. O fair goddess, I shall tell you now about the little known
tirtha called Pürnasukha.
43. While the whole of the river Ganges is cool, in Pürnamukha it is warm.
44. By bathing in this, one goes to the world of Soma and
remains there for fifteen thousand years.
45. Then he is dropped from heaven and takes birth as
a Brahmin, pure, clever and a devotee of mine endowed with
all good qualities.
46. Ifhe dies there on Dvada‘i day in the bright half of the
month Margasirsa, he goes to my world.
47. And finds me there in my effulgent form with four hands.
He will have no more births or deaths.
48. O Earth, listen to my account of another tirtha with full
concentration.
49. Ifa person with unflinching devotion for me bathes in
this tirtha at any timc, he goes to heaven and remains there for
ten thousand years.
50. At the termination of his period in heaven, he is born
again as a virtuous and wealthy devotec.
51. After severe austerities, if one gives up life here on Dvàdasi day in the bright half of the month Vaisakha.
52. One will have no more birth or death, nor langour or
fear, and becoming free from all attachments, goes to my world.
53. I shall now tell you, O Earth, about the tirtha called
Karavira which brings about happiness to all.
1. The name of the tirtha is not given. Presumably it is Amaratirtha.

54. I shall tell vou about its characteristics by which it may
be known.
55. If the man with knowledge and devoted to me, on the
Dvadasi day in the month of Magha, when the Karavira plant
(oleander; is full of flowers.
56. Takes bath in it in midday after the prescribed rituals,
gets the power to move and live anywhere travelling in a divine
car with a thousand women dancing in attendance.
57. If one dies there on the Dyadasi day in the month of
Magha, he sees me, Brahma and Siva.
58. O Earth, I shall tell you about another tirtha which I
formerly told to that Brahmin.
59. That is called Pundarika, and this is particularly dear
to me in Kubjàmraka.
60. I shall tell vou about its characteristics bv which it may
be identified.
61. At noon on Dvadasi day there moves in it a tortoise as
big as a chariot’s wheel. Listen to what I have to sav about it.
62. Bathing there confers the same merit as performing the
Pundarika sacrifice. There need be no doubt in this.
63. If one happens to die there, he regains consciousness,
becomes famous.
64. And after enjoying the merit of performing ten Pundarika sacrifices, becomes highly purified and ascetic.
65. Gains great attainments and gets a permanent place in
my world.
66. Ishall tell you about another. Please listen. That is the
Agnitirtha in Kubjamraka, proclaimed as efficacious for the sinless on Dvadasi day.
67-68. The Dvadasi in the bright half of the months of
Kaumuda, Margasirsa, Asadha and Madhava are particularly
important for this.
69. I shall tell you the characteristics by which this tirtha
of mine can be identified.
70. So you listen with attention. None other than the pure
Bhagavatas who master my Samhitàs know the Sastra relating to
me.
7l. lask you again to listen, for I am going to tell you about
the result aceruing by bathing or dying there.

310 Varaha Purána
72. The man who bathes in Agnitirtha in Kubjamrka which
is a Vaisnava tirtha of great efficacy.
73. Attains the merit equivalent to that of seven Agnimedhs
sacrifices.
74-75. If one dies there on Dvadasi day after remaining
there for twenty days, he reaches my world.
76. I shall tell you about the characteristics of this tirthi
which it can be known (as I already promised).
77. During the hot season it is cool, and during the cold
season it is warm. Such is this Agneyatirtha, O Earth, and through this people are able to cross the ocean of the woes of worldly
life.
78. I shall now tell you about another tirtha in Kubjàinraka, called Vayavyatirtha which arose from dharma.
79. He who bathes there after performing the daily ablutions,
attains the merit of Vàjapeya sacrifice.
80. Ifanyone dies in this Vàyutirtha after performing worship for fifteen days, he will not have birth or death again in this
world.
81. He becomes four-armed and remains in my world.
82. I shall tell you about its further characteristics to facilitate its identification.
83. The leaves of the Aśvattha (Pipal) tree always flutter
there during all the twentyfour Dvadasi days in the year.
84. Ishall now tell you about anotber tirtha in Kubjamraka,
known as Sakratirtha which helps us to cross the ocean of sarisdra.
85. In that Sakratirtha, O Earth, Sakra (i.e., Indra) always
resides with Vajrayudha in his hand.
86. He who dies in this highly holy Sakratirtha after fasting
for ten days, reaches my world.
87. I shall tell you its characteristics for the sake of identification. Please listen attentively.
88. Five trees stand on its southern side and that is its identification mark.
89. I shall now tell you about another tirtha in Kubjamraka
where Varuna performed penance for twelve thousand years.’
90. What merit accrues to a person bathing there, I shall
tell you.
1. This tirtha was probably named Varunatirtha.

91. Also for the person who dies there. The former goes to
the world of Varuna and remaining there for eight thousand
years acquires the power to go anywhere he likes.
92. Hewhodies there after giving up all attachment and
fasting for twenty years, reaches my world.
93. Listen to what I say about its characteristics.
94. There is a uniform waterfall in it which neither increases
in the rainy season nor decreases in the summer season.
95. (I shall now tell you about) the tirtha called Saptasamudraka in Kubjamra. He who offers ablutions there gains
the merit of three A$vamedha sacrifices.
96. He soon reaches heaven and after living there for fifteen
years, is born again as a noble Brahmin.
97. He becomes an expert in Vedas and Vedangas and
performs Soma sacrifice.
98. He who gives up life there, after acquiring full detachment and control of senses and fasting for seven days, reaches my
world.
99. O fair damsel, listen to my account of its characteristics
namely what strange thing occurs in it on the Dvadasi day in
the month of Vaisakha.
100. Mixed with the placid water of Ganges, in this tirtha
the water turns milky in colour.
101. Soon the colour changes into yellow and then red.
Then it becomes emerald-coloured and finally gets the colour of
pearl. This tirtha is to be identified by this.
102. Now I shall tell you about another tirtha in Kubjàmraka named Manasaras which is dear to all devotees.
103. He who bathes there goes to Manasasaras and sees
there Devas and Rudra, Indra and Maruts.
104. If one dies there after fasting for thirty days and with
full detachment, he reaches my world.
105. I shall tell you about its identification mark.
106. It extends over fifty krosas and can be known only by
those Bhagavatas who do their duties scrupulously and not by
ordinary people.
107. I told about this to Raibhya particularly because he
was an aspirant of moksa.
108. Ishall tell you another thing, O Earth, about a wonder
that once occurred in Kubjàmraka.

312 Varüha Purana
Please listen.
109. Near the place where the offerings made to me (in. my
temple there) were thrown out, a female serpent was moving
about without anv fear.
110.) She was eating the sandalpaste, garlands and the cakes
and fruits offered.
LIL. After some time an ichneumon came there and he
chanced to see this serpent. Then occurred a furious battle Detween the two.
112. At noon on the Dvadasi day in the month of Magha.,
the ichneumon was fatally bitten by the serpent in my temple.
113. The ichneumon too bit the serpent injecting his venom
and thus both died.
114. The serpent was born as a noble princess in Pragjvotisa
(Assam) and the ichneumon was born as a primce in Kosala
(Bihar), handsome, virtuous and learned.
115. They grew up in all happiness and steadily like the
moon in the bright half of the month.
116. But whenever the princess saw an ichneumon, she
wished to kill it and whenever the prince saw a serpent he too
wished to kill it.
117. When they came of age, due to my blessing, the king
of Kosala celebrated the marriage of his son with the daughter
of the Pragjvotisa king.
118. This alliance gave great jubilation to the kings of
Kosala and Pragjyotisa.
119. They were attached to each other firmly like the lac
and the stick or smoke and fire.
120. Like Sact and Indra playing in the Nandana garden.
they were deep in love.
121. But although they were so deep in love, they never
transgressed limits, like the ocean not transgressing the shore.
122. Seventyseven years they spent like this, without, however, knowing that fact, as they were under my mdyà.
123. One day, while they were sporting in the garden, the
prince saw a female serpent and he wanted to kill it immediately.
124. Although he was prevented from doing so by his beloved, he did not desist from it. Indeed Garuda kills a snake at
its very sight !

125. So he too, although prevented, did kill that serpent
mercilessly.
126. The princess was very much offended by this and became very cross with him and did not speak a word.
127. Just then the princess saw an ichneumon coming out
of a burrow before her in search of food.
128. Seeing the ichneumon who came out to eat the snake
(which was killed), the princess became angry and started to kill
it.
129. Although prevented from doing so by the prince, she
killed it.
130. Seeing the beautiful ichneumon killed, the prince
was very sorry and he asked her.
131. “The husband is always to be respected by a woman.
Then why did you kill this ichneumon which is auspicious and
liked by kings, in spite of my warding you off from that action ?”
132. Hearing these words of her husband, the daughter of
the king of Kosala replied to him angrily:
133. “Although I repeatedly prevented you from killing that
serpent, you killed it. Therefore, although you attempted to
prevent me from killing this ichncumon, I killed it”.
134. The prince then told her in hard and threatening words.
135. “The serpent has fierce fangs and dreadful poison.
It bites men who dic as a consequence. So I killed this venomous
creature.
136. Weare kings who protect the people. It is our duty to
suitably punish whoever swerves from the right path.
137-38. Those who harass innocent people and those who
molest women out of lust are to be punished even with death
according to the rules of kingship.
139-40. I only discharged my duty as a king. But what crime
has the ichneumon committed ? It is an innocent creaturé considered as beautiful, auspicious and sacred for royalty.
141. Since you killed the ichneumon in spite of my attempt
to ward you off, you are no more my wife and I am no more your
husband.
142. I do not kill you because the royal rules do not permit
the killing of a woman". So saying he returned to his city.
143. Thus anger took away their mutual love.

314 Varüha Purana
144, In course of time, the king of Kosala came to know of
the incident of killing the snake and the ichneumon and the
consequent unpleasantness between the couple.
145. He ordered his chamberlains and ministers to bring
there his son and daughter-in-law.
146. In accordance with the king’s command they duly
brought there the prince and his wife before the king.
147. Seeing the son and daughter-in-law, the king said:
148. “O my son, where has gone that intense love between
vou? How have you become cross to cach other ?
149. The love between you was fast like the lac on the stick.
You used to consider each as the image of the other.
150. You were always closely united. It is not proper on
your part to reject this good-natured and dutiful wife.
151. She never said anything unpleasant even to the servants. On the contrary, she was always cager to feed them sumptuously. It is not proper for you to discard such a person.
152. Dharma is our asset. That indeed is caused by women.
It is true that dharma rests on women, the son and the family"
153. Hearing these words of the father, the prince fell at his
fcet and said:
154. “O father, your daughter-in-law has no blemish in her.
But she killed an ichneumon even when I prohibited her.
155. Then I got angry secing that creature killed before me
and in that anger I told her.
156. ‘Hereafter you are not my wife and I am not your
husband’. This is the reason and nothing elsc"
157. Hearing this, the princess of Pia So otisa bowed her
head and said:
158. “An innocent and frightened serpent was quickly
killed by him in spite of my repeated attempts to ward him off
from that action.
159. Secing the serpent killed, I got angry and did not speak
any more. Please know this"
160. Hearing his son as well as daughter-in-law, the king of
Kosala said to them before the people assembled there.
161. “The serpent was killed by him and the ichneumon was
killed by you. What was the cause of anger at this, I wish to
know.
162. “O son, when the ichneumon was killed, why did you

get angry ? O princess, when the serpent was killed why did
you get angry ?"
163. At this the Kosala prince softly spoke to his father.
164. “Why should this question be put to me? Ask her,
O king. Then you will know”.
165. Hearing the words of the son, the king of Kosala uttered words in order to maintain dharma.
166. "Tell me, son, what is in your mind that brought about
the break in your mutual love.
167. Sons are the closest relations (of the father) in everything. Those who hide the truth when asked by the father, are
the lowest and despicable.
168. Right or wrong, the sons who do not answer the father
when questioned fall into the hcll called Raurava full of hot sands.
169. Pleasing or displeasing, those who answer the father
when questioned, go to the world that is for the speakers of truth.
170. You should certainly tell me here the reason for the
loss of love between you”.
171. Thus said by che king, the Kosala prince said before
that assembly of men:
172. “Let all these people go to their homes. Tomorrow
morning I shall tell you what is most essentially to be told".
173. When the day dawned, the Kosala king was woken
up by the sound of drums and the music of the minstrels.
174. The prince then had his auspicious bath and came to
the doorway of the royal chamber.
175. The chamberlain announced the arrival of the prince
to the king and conveyed his desire to meet him.
176. The king asked the chamberlain to usher in the prince
immediately.
177. Thus ordered by the king, the prince was led into the
chamber.
178. ‘The prince prostrated before his father. The king asked
him to sit down and expressed his blessings.
179. The people saw the king and the prince seated together
and looking auspicious both within and without.
180. The king then asked the son to give him reply to
what he had formerly asked namely the cause of estrangement
between him and his beloved wife.
181. "Then the prince told his father.

316 Varáha Purana
182. “I should certainly tell you what you asked me about,
although it is not going to be of any help in this.
183. It is really a secret and if you wish to know it, come
along with me to the place called Kubjamra.
184. There I shall tell you, O Kosala king, this secret which
vou have asked one about".
185. Hearing these words of his son, the king agreed out of
hiis affection for him.
186. When the prince was gone, the king said to his ministers who had assembled there.
187. “O ministers, listen to what I say now after due deliberation. We are now to proceed to Kubjàmra.
188. Make the necessary arrangements. Get ready the
elephants and horses". They replied, "We shall do so at once”.
189. In the course of a weck they made everything ready,
elephants, horses, bulls, vehicles, money and cows.
190. Also gold, gems, cloths, food and everything else that
was necessarv. Then they informed the king that everything was
ready.
191. Then, O Earth, the great king called his son and asked
him: “How can we start, O son, leaving the country void".
192. Hearing the words of thc father, the prince bowed to
him, and told him softly.
193. “My younger brother, who is born of the same mother,
may be endowed with the kingdom".
194. The Kosala king then observed: “When the elder son
is there, how can the younger son be considered for this ?”’.
195. At these words of the father, the prince of Kosala spoke
to him impelled by dharma.
196. “I give my full consent for you to give the kingdom (to
my younger brother). The acceptance of this will not involve
him in any transgression of dharma.
197. Having gone to Kubjamra, I will not return from there.
O father, I swear this in the name of truth and dharma”.
198. Consented thus by the elder son, the younger son was
duly installed on the throne.
199. After a long time, the king reached the placc called
Kubjàmraka with his family and attendants and with all the
necessary equipment.

200. Then he performed the prescribed rites in that tirtha
and gave there abundant gifts of food, cloth, gold, cows, ele
phants, horses and land.
201. After many days, the king once asked his son who came
near him, about the secret of estrangement between him and
his wife.
202. “O son, this is the holy spot sanctified by the feet of
Visnu.
203-1. Wo have given as gifts here a lot of money and gems
according to rules. Now tell me the truth why this beautiful
daughter-in-law, who is noble and virtuous and who never commits any wrong, has been given up by you without any real
cause".
205. The prince then told the father: “Let this night pass.
May you sleep. Tomorrow morning I shall tell you everything".
206. Then, when the night was gone and the sun was rising,
he took his bath in the Ganges and put on silken dress.
207. He then worshipped me and circumambulated his
father and said as follows:
208. “Come, father; let us go. You ask me the secret. Please
know it from mc".
209. Then the prince, the princess and the king went to the
place where the remains of the offerings made to me were heaped.
210. Going close there, the prince held his father's feet in
respect and said:
211. ‘O king, I was an ichneumon living at the foot of the
plantain. Once I chanced to go to this place where the remnants
of offerings to the Lord are thrown.
212. Isaw there then a female scrpent crawling about eating
the sandalpaste, flowers and other things therc.
213. Secing that fierce serpent, my eyes turned red with
anger and soon I jumped upon her.
214. A terrible fight ensued but none noticed it. It was on
the Dvadasi day of the month of Magha.
215. In the course of the fight, when I was guarding myself,
the serpent bit me on my nose. í
216. The poison from me got into the serpent too. Thus both
of us were dead.
217. After a lapse of time, when our anger and stupor were
gone, I was born as the son of the Kosala king.

318 Varüha Purana
218. The serpent was killed in these circumstances, mainly
because of my anger. This is the secret I have to communicate
to vou."
219. After this narration by the prince, the daughter-inlaw said: “I was that serpent moving about in the remanants
thrown out from the lord's offerings.
220. During the fight I was crushed down by the ichneumon. I was then born as the daughter of the king of pragjyotisa,
and then I became your daughter-in-law.
221. Because of that anger inherent in me, I killed that
ichneumon. This is the secret I have to tell you”.
222. After listening to what his son and daughter-in-law
had to say, the king went to Mayátirtha and died there.
223-24. O lovely Earth, the prince and the princess then
went to Pundarikatirtha and died there and went to the supreme
heaven lorded over by Janàrdana.
225-26. The king, the prince and the princess then reached
the Svetadvipa due to my blessings.
227. All their attendants became highly meritorious and
they also got entry into the Svetadvipa.
228. Thus have I told you about the splendour of Kubjamraka, as I narrated to the great Brahmin Raibhya.
229. This is a sacred narrative which deserves to be recited
by people of all the four castes and in all ceremonies.
230. "This is the best of all lustre and the highest of all penance. This should not be recited in the midst of fools.
231. Nor should it be recited amidst cow-slaughterers or
those who condemn the Vedas and Vedàngas; so too before those
who harbour ill-will to their teachers or speak ill of $àstras.
232. This should be recited in the assembly of Bhagavatas
or of those who are initiated.
233. He who recites it at dawn liberates ten gencrations of
his ancestors and ten generations of his successors. He who dies
reciting this, attains a four-armed form and resides in my world.
234. Thus, O Earth, have I told you about the place Kubjàmraka. What else do you propose to ask for the good of my devotees ?

CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTYSEVEN
The initiation of the Brahmin
Sita said:
1. After listening to the account of the many acts of dharma
meant to bring about liberation, Earth told Janardana the
lord of the worlds.
2. “O the power of this place, by hearing the prowess of
which I, who was feeling great weight, now feel much lighter
and also much purified and free from stupor, O great lord !
3. I am known in the world as having come out of your
mouth (and that is quite proper).
4. I now ask you again, O lord, a doubt regarding dharma,
namely by what dharmic rites initiation is effected.
5. lam very eager to know this great secret in order to know
dharma in full. So be pleased to tell me”.
6. Hearing these words of Earth, the lord in the form of
the boar replied in a dense tone resembling thunder.
Varüha | said:
7. “O goddess, listen to the truth of my eternal dharma,
which even the gods concentrating on yoga are unable to know.
8. This auspicious dharma which is now being spoken by me,
I alone know and in this world my devotees.
9. O auspicious one, listen to the details of initiation (diksa)
leading to release from samsára which you ask me about.
10. Listen to the process of this diksé which brings about all
good and which 1s different for the different castes.
11. By this the people are able to escape from further births
if they repose their minds in me.
12. Let the person (who wishes to be initiated) go to the
preceptor and tell him “O preceptor, I am your disciple. Please
instruct me". And after getting his consent collect the materials
for diksa, like,
13. Honey, ghee, KuSa grass, sandal paste, flowers, incense,
lamp,
14. Antelope’s skin, Palaéga stick, spouted vessel, pot, clothes,
footwear, white yajilopavita.

320 Varéha Purána
15. Support poles, vessel for arghya; cooking vessel with ladle,
sesamum, paddy and barley, different kinds of fruits, water.
16. Other kinds of food and drink that are acceptable and
agrecable to him.
17. He shall also collect the necessary grains, gems and crvstals.
18. Al these should be then presented to the preceptor at
his feet.
19. The Brahmin who wishes for prosperity and desires to
be initiated should hold the feet of the preceptor and ask him
what he might do for him.
20. Then with the approval of the preceptor, he shall prepare a spacious altar, asquare in shape and sixteen cubits in
dimension, and place pot in it.
21. Over a mass of grain according to rules. The pot should
then he filled with water with mantras and tender sprouts and
flowers should be placed in it.
22-23. The rituals, as directed by the preceptor, should be
performed there and the materials formerly enumerated should
be brougat to the centre of the altar.
24. Four pots filled with water and decorated with mango
twigs should be placed, one on each side.
25. They should be wound all round with white threads.
Vessels containing presents like cloth and the like should be
placed near each pot.
26. They should then be gifted away uttering the mantra
according to the direction of the preceptor.
27. The person desirous of initiation should then follow
the preceptor to a temple of Visnu.
28. After washing the hands and fcet, the preceptor shall
then sit facing the east and tell the disciples the following:
29. "Ifa Bhàgavata (devotee of the Lord) does not stand
up (in respect) on seeing other Bhagavatas, it is equivalent to
harassing me.
30. After performing kanydddna (giving a daughter in marriage), if one docs not observe the subsequent rites, he harasses
eight generations of his manes.
31. He who mercilessly torments a dutiful wife, goes to thc
company of the lowborn oppressers.

32. Disciples who have committed the sin of killing a Brahmin or similar other sins, or kill cows or remain ungrateful,
should be avoided.
33. Trees like Bilva, Udumbara and other sacred trees
(which are of use in ceremonies) should not be cut down.
34. If the disciple desires ultimate moksa, he should be told
about what is good to eat and what is bad.
35. Karira is good. The fruit of Udumbara can be used
before it gets petrid.
36. Pork and fish should not be eaten by Brahmins, particularly by those who are to bc initiated.
37. Let him not be fault-finding and let him not harm any.
Let him not be a tale-bearer or a thief.
38. Seeing a guest coming, he should go out to receive him
and converse with him.
39. Lord Visnu has ordained that one should not even think
of having illicit contact with the wife of the preceptor, the wife
of thc king and any Brahmin woman.
40. Lord Visnu has ordained again that one should not set
one's mind on gold, jewels or a young girl.
4l. Sceing another's affluence and one’s own penury, one
should not be angry or jealous. This should be an all-time
maxim".
42. Thus should the disciple be told. He should then symbolically offer an umbrella and footwear in the form of two pairs
of Udumbara leaves in the middle of the altar.
43. So too a razor and a cup full of water. Then I should be
invoked with the following mantra:
44. “Om, bow to seven oceans, seven islands, seven mountains and to the thousands of creations and to all. All these live
in my heart. What showers down goes up again.
45. Om, lord Vasudeva, make your presence here as vou
deem fit. I utter your mantra. Considering your commands to
us, kindly come here in this spot of the earth upraised by vou.
This aspirant of initiation prays for your favour".
46. After uttering this mantra, he should prostrate on the
ground by his knees and head.
47. “Om, welcome, I am the welcomer’’.
48. By the above mantra, O Earth, having invoked the lord,
arghya and padya should be offered according to direction.

322 Varaha Purana
49. The mantra is: “O lord of the worlds, all that is given
by the grateful Rudra to the grateful Devas and Asuras and the
Brahmanas, may that all be given to you, accept it all, O lord”.
50. After offering the arghya and pádya in this manner, he
should take the razor and utter this mantra:
51. “O disciple, may Varuna protect you whose head i
shave, By this water of Visnu this diksd serves to terminate
samsdara °
52. One pot of water should be given to the workman /barber), who should shave the head without any bleeding {duc to
scratching or cutting by negligence).
53. The disciple should then take his bath quickly (and then
perform other rites) conducive to moksa.
54. He should then kneel down on the floor and utter the
following mantra:
55. “Om, I know all Bhagavatas, all Diksitas and Gurus
(preceptors). Let all of them who have become Diksitas by the
favour of Visnu be pleased with me".
56-57. ‘Then saluting all the devotees there and kindling the
fire, he should offer in the fire seven times the mixture of ghec,
honey, fried paddy and black sesamum, and then rice mixed
with sesamum twenty times. Then sitting on the knees, he should
utter the following mantra:
58. “The A$vins, the quarters, sun, moon, and my own self,
may they all please listen to my declaration of truth.
59. The earth is held by truth, the earth remains by truth,
the sun moves by truth and the wind blows by truth”.
60. After declaring this truth, the Brahmin should propitiate
the preceptor in due form.
61. Circumambulating the lord preceptor thrice, he should
hold his feet in respect and utter the following mantra:
62. “I accidentally got initiation by the blessing of my preceptor. May he forgive me for whatever lapse there may be on
my part.
63. After this supplication, he should be seated at the middle
of the altar facing east.
64. The spouted vessel should then be held as also the white
yajnopavita and then he should utter the following mantra:
65. “By the blessing of Visnu I attained my aim, and got

initiation. together with the spouted vessel (kamandalu). By
taking it in my hand, I am initiated into duty and action”.
66. Then the preceptor and the disciple together shall circumambulate uttering this mantra:
67. “By moving about placing myself lower aud lower, I
secured the preceptor and attained initiation, by your blessing
O preceptor”.
68. By this mantra, the head shall be touched by the feet.
Then he can wash (if necessary) and put on the prescribed
clothes (given by the preceptor saving).
69. “Wear these clothes, O disciple, and then take the
spouted vessel for purification in all rituals”.
70. The mantra is: “Receive these vessels containing pleasant sandal paste, pure and favourite to Visnu, and helping to
obtain moksa’’.
71. After madhuparka, the following mantra is io be recited:
“Be pleased to accept ` this madhuparka which cleanses the devotees".
72. Then propitiate the preceptor by holding his feet in
respect and by bowing to him with hands folded over the head.
Then bearing in mind the instruction of the preceptor, this mantra is to be uttered, namely.
73. “May all Bhagavatas listen. This great preceptor dissolved all worldly desires in me. I am his disciple and servant, I
got a Guru, who is like a God”.
74. O Earth, I have thus told you about the initiatory rites
of the Brahmin. Know about the same relating to the other three
castes.
75. 'The same rites are applicable to them also (with the
necessary modifications) The`preceptor and the disciple both
attain their aim.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTYEIGHT
Initiation of other castes. Ganantika, Comb, Collyrium and Mirror
Varaha said:
i. I shall now tell you about (the initiation of) the Ksatriya.

324 Varaha Purána
2. Giving up all weapons which he has practised to wield,
let him attain initiation with the mantra mentioned before.
3. Heshould gather all materials which I had mentioned
earlier except one, namely the skin of the black antelope. The
staff of Palasa also is not to be used.
4. Instead, the skin of the black goat is to be given, and the
staff of the Asvattha is to be used.
5. An altar of twelve cubits is to be made and all that I have
said earlier should be done.
6-7. Thus arranging all the materials for the initiation of
the Ksatriya, he should touch my feet and utter the following
mantra:
8. “Giving up all weapons, giving up all deeds of the Ksatriya and giving up, in fact, everything, I have resorted to Lord
Visnu for crossing the stream of successive lives”.
9. 'Thenstanding on my side and holding my feet, he should
utter the following mantra:
10. “O lord of lords, I shall not touch any weapon, I shall
not speak ill of others. I shall follow only such things as are laid
down for liberation proclaimed by you in your boar form".
11. Then he should do all those things as directed, with
sandal, leaves, incense etc.
12. "Then food should be given to the pious devotees according to practice.
13. O goddess, I have thus told you about the initiation of
the Ksatriya who desires to attain my grace.
14. Ishall now tell you about (the initiation of) the Vaisya.
15. Giving up all actions of the Vaisya and turning evei;-
thing towards me, the third caste attains the aim.
16. Collecting all the materials I have enumerated before,
an altar of ten cubits should be prepared.
17. As before it should be smeared with cowdung. He
should then cover himself with goat skin.
18-19. "Then holding a staff of Udumbara in the hand, he
should circumambulate the pure devotees thrice, and kneeling
down utter the mantra:
20. “I, this Vai$ya, have come to you, giving up all my
actions as a Vai$ya. By your blessing, I got initiation. May you
be pleased to give me liberation".

21. After saying this and doing things to gain my favour,
he may hold the feet of his preceptor and utter the mantra:
22, “Giving up my cultivation, cattle rearing, business and
trade, I have been able to get initiation into your worship by
your grace.
23. After bowing to the Lord, the devotees should be fed
without fault. l
24. Such is the initiation of the Vaiśya to worship following
my path for release from samsara.
25. I shall also tell you about the initiation of the Sidra by
which he gets freed from all sins.
26. All the materials which I had formerly detailed for
initiation should be procured.
27. The altar should be of eight cubits and the skin should
be that of the blue goat for the Sidra.
28. The staff should be of bamboo and the cloth should be
blue. Then prostrating before me, he should utter the mantra:
29. “I, this Sidra, have given up all actions of Sidra and
all forbidden food".
30. The Sidra desirous of initiation should say like this,
giving up all desires, free from all sins and with pure consciousness.
31-32. Then he should hold the feet of the preceptor in his
hand and utter the following mantra for propitiating him.
33. “For the sake of relief from Samsāra I am doing such
actions as are ordained for getting the grace or Visnu.
34. After uttering the mantra he should perform circumambulation and prostrate before him again.
35. Heshould then perform worship with sandal and flowers
and, without fail, feed (devotees).
36. Such is the initiation of Südra. I have thus told you
about this pertaining to all the four castes.
37. I shall also tell you about the colour of umbrellas for
different castes.
38. The white umbrella is for the Brahmin, red for Ksatriya,
yellow for Vaisya and blue for Sidra.
Süta said:
39. After hearing about (the initiation regarding) the four
castes, Earth bowed to Varaha and asked again.

326 Varáha Purdna
Earth said:
40. *I have now heard about initiation for different castes.
(I wish to know) what should be done by the initiated”.
41. Hearing these words of Earth, the resplendent Lord in
the form of boar answered.
Varaha said:
42. “Listen to what I tell you in reply to your question.
The observance is called Ganantika and it should be always
considered as secret".
43. Hearing these words of Lord Narayana, Earth was
pleased and satisfied.
44-45. "Then the lotus-eyed goddess who was a devotee herself and was attached to other devotees, spoke to lord Nàràyana
with folded hands.
Earth. said:
46. “O Madhava, what are the rules to be observed by those
that are fully devoted to you and are initiated?
47. How should you, who are unknowable, be contemplated
upon by these people according to their capacity?"
48. Hearing these words of Earth, the Primordial Being
replied in sweet words:
Varaha said:
49. Ishalltell you in truth what you ask, namely, how I am
to be contemplated upon by one dedicated to me.
50. The (use of) Ganantika (rosary) is an ancient practice
pertaining to my contemplation and it is of a secret nature.
51. This should be received by those who are pure and initiated and with the prescribed mantras.
52. He who isa Bhagavata and receives this Ganàntika with
sight and touch, for him the initiation is successful and he has no
duty left.
53. He who receives Ganantika sanctified by mantra, the
initiation is called Asuri.
54. He who receives the Ganàntika should meditate on me
with pure heart.
55. He who meditates by the Ganàntika performs the equivalent of contemplation for a thousand lives.

56. Ishall tell you how the mantra is to be imparted to the
disciple for the good of the world.
57. The day suitable is Dvadasi in the months of Kaumuda,
Margasirsa and Vaisakha.
58. The follower of my path may receive Ganantika on that
day after avoiding non-vegetarian food for three days.
59-60. Kindling fire before me and installing the Ganantika
on a bed of Kuśa grass, the preceptor as well as the initiated disciple shall utter Namo .Nàràyanáya and recite this mantra:
61. “O disciple, receive her who was born out of the right
side of Lord Narayana, and who was held by the first grandfather
Brahmáà".
62. 'Then taking the Ganàntika with this mantra, the preceptor shall give it to his dear disciple with the following mantra:
63. “O my disciple, receive this goddess who was born out
of the right side of the lord Narayana, and on contemplating on
whom you will get liberated and never take birth again”.
Earth. said:
64-65. After conducting the bath what should be done?
By what mantra should decoration be done so that the action may
lead to the state of non-action ?"
66. Hearing these words of Earth, the lord of the worlds,
Janárdana, replied in words of dharma:
Varüha said:
67. “O goddess, I shall tell you in truth what you seek to
know, namely the bathing and decoration (of the rosary) which
the worshippers perform.
68. In these relating to water (for conducting the bath)
and the offerings, the comb, collyrium and mirror are important.
Now know what the mantras for this are.
69. After bathing me (as represented in the Ganàntika)
white silk should be offered as garment. Then collyrium and
comb should be offered.
70-71. Then kneeling down with a sense of dedication to
me, he should hold the comb (and the collyrium) in his hand and
utter the following mantra:
72. “O great lord, be pleased to accept this comb in my hand
and arrange your hair with it.

328 Vardha Purana
73. O the most supreme being, this collyrium is for your
eyes by which you arc able to see all the three worlds".
74. 'Then bathing should be done for the deity with the
following mantra:
75. “O lord of lords, with folded hands I pray that you may
be pleased to accept for your bath the water contained in this
golden pitcher”.
76. Then Namo Narayanaya should be uttered and the following mantra should be recited:
77. “This worship by mantra I have attained by your grace
O Madhava. I have been given the Ganantika too. May there
not be anything unrighteous for me any more".
78. He who follows this after getting it from the preceptor,
goes to my world.
79. This Ganàntika should not be given to a bad disciple or
to an envious or wicked person. It can be entrusted only in the
hands of the good disciple.
80. The best should have one hundred and eight (beads),
the medium fiftyfour and the inferior half of that (twentyseven).
81. The best should be of rudraksa, the medium of putrajivaka
and the inferior of padmáksa (seeds).
82. The truth and efficacy of this rosary is not easy to know
even by hundreds of lives.
83. It should not be touched by an impure person and it
should not be in hands of women.
84. Itshould be hung up high and should not be touched by
the left hand. It should not be shown to others, but worshipped
with contemplation.
85. I have, thus, told you this secret leading to liberation.
This should be scrupulously guarded. Being purified, my devotee
reaches my world".
86. Hearing these words of Visnu, the ascetic Earth, again
asked the great lord:
87. “How should the mirror be offered to you by which you
could see your own. form in it ?"'.
88. Hearing these words of Earth, Varaha said, ‘O goddess,
listen to the rule relating to the offering of the mirror.
89. After saying Namo Nardyandya, the following mantra
should be recited.
90. "'Your ears are the Vedas and Agni, mouth the Brahmin,

nostrils Agvins, eyes the Sun and the Moon, the face is like the
moon, body the entire universe. See this form in this mirror".
91. He who performs my worship in this manner, liberates
scven generations in his family.
92. These are the mantras, these are the modes of service.
All this should be done with pleasure and satisfaction by those
desirous of beatitude.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTYNINE
Further Rituals in Worship!
1. After bowing to the lord, Earth said again.
Earth said:
2. “I wish to know this, namely the mode of worship of the
sandhyà in your system".
3. Hearing these words of Earth, the great lord in the form
of boar said:
Varaha said:
4-5. O Earth, I shall tell you this secret which you have
asked,by which all devotees are able to get liberation from
Samsara.
6. The worship of sandhyé is laid down in this way.
7. Holding water in the joined palms with great reverence,
and meditating for a while, the following mantra is to be uttered:
8. ‘The source of the worlds, the primordial indistinct form,
all the gods, Brahma, Rudra, all in dhydnayoga bow to Vasudeva
in Sandhya; we too every day in the sevenday week for release
from Samsara; O Vasudeva, I bow to you”.
9. He who recites this mantra of mantras and pene of
penances, reaches my world.
10. He who recites this secret of secrets, never gets stained
by sins.
1. In the text the title is given as Caturvarnadiks4.

330 Varüha Purine
11. This should not be imparted to any one other than an
initiated person.
12. O goddess, I shall tell you another matter, namely the
offering of lamp by devotees.
13. After performing the due rites, the lighted lamp should
be taken and holding it between the shanks, the following mantra
should be recited:
14. “Om, bow to the blessing light Visnu, all the gods remain in this flame which shines because of your effulgence. By
vour lustre and by the lustre of mantra this lamp shines. May
you receive it offered with mantra for the sake of removing my
samsára, as otherwise this action of mine will be fruitless”.
15. He who does this liberates all his manes.
[ Varáha said:
1-2. The person ritualistically worshipping me should, after
the decoration, adorn me with yaj/iopavita of nine threads. Then
the tilaka of sandalpaste should be put on my forehead.
3. Ishall tell you of another act to be done for the good of
the world, namely the uttering of the mantra for this, namely.
4. “This decoration of your face, O Vasudeva, is done by
me. This makes it more attractive. O god, snap my samsdra’’.
5. O Earth, by this mantra should the tilaka be applied in
beautiful design on my face. Then taking flowers, this mantra
should be uttered, namely.
6. “These flowers are for your magnanimity, O lord; make
everything happy; these are created by you for that purpose,
Svahà".
7. After flowers, offer incense. Holding the fragrant and
beautiful smoke-emitting receptacle,
8. Utter Om .Náràyanáya and then recite the mantra:
9-10. “O Kesgava, your body is sweet-smelling by nature.
By this smoke it is made further sweet. By the fragrance of your
body make everything smell sweet. Accept this incense for my
release from samsara’’.
11. I shall now tell you about the offering of lamp which I
accept for the welfare of my devotees.
1. This portion within brackets is given in parenthesis in the text,
probably indicating that this is perhaps an interpolated part.

12. In doing the duties by me, the devotee should take a
lamp with flame, hold it between the legs and utter the
mantra:
13. “O lord, I bow to you Visnu. All gods reside in fire.
Fire shines because of your effulgence and fire is the self itself.
14. O lord, receive this bright lamp for my release from samsára. Let not this action of mine be in vain”.
15. He who offers me the lamp like this, liberates all his
manes".
16. Hearing these words of lord Narayana, Earth was
wonderstruck and she asked again:
17. “I have now known about the devotees who are dedicated to your service. My mind is eager to know another matter,
namely,
18. Of what material should be the vessels used in your
service as to be pleasing to you”.
19. At these words of Earth, the lord of the worlds said:
20. “O Earth, I shall tell you what you have sought tc know,
namely what vessels please me.
21. Leaving out vessels of gold, silver and bronze, what
pleases me most is vessels made of copper.
22. Thus told by Narayana, Earth devoted to dharma asked
him again: “It appears strange to me that copper pleases you
most. Why is it so to you ?”
23. Then that primordial and invincible Being, the greatest
in the world, replied to Earth:
24. “O sinless Earth, listen intently to what I say about
my partiality for copper,
25. Which arose seven thousand aeons ago and which is
pleasing to look at.
26. O lotus-eyed one, there was a great asura named Gudakeśa. He had a cupreous form and was absorbed in my worship.
27. I was worshipped by him for fourteen thousand years,
being desirous of acquiring dharma.
28. I was pleased by his determination and penance, and
seeing his hermitage where (later on) arose copper (Í appeared
there).
29. Then kneeling down, he meditated on me and seeing me
in my four-armed form, he prostrated with folded hands.

332 Varaha Purana
30. I was immensely pleased and I spoke to him.
31. “O glorious Gudákesa, tell me what I may do for vou.
I am very much pleased with your devotion, although it is difficult to please me.
32. Ask me the boon which you desire through your
thoughts, words or deeds.
33. Then with supplicant hand and pure mind, GudakeSa
said:
34. “If you are indeed pleased with me, O lord, may I
have constant devotion for you for a thousand lives.
35. (Finally) may I have death by the hurling of your disc
on me.
36. Killed by the disc, may my marrow and flesh become the
holy material called copper.
37. Making vessels out of it and using them in your ritualistic worship, may that be for your pleasure.
38. If you are pleased, O lord, may I have this boon”.
39. I then said, “In view of your severe penance I grant you
the boon you seek. May it be so as long as the world lasts. You
become mine in cupreous form".
40. From then onwards Gudàke£a was transformed into the
nature of copper.
41. Therefore, O virtuous one, know that whatever is
offered to me in copper vessel, gives me immense pleasure.
42. "The auspicious and holy copper is dear to me. You will
see it when the sun is at the zenith.!
43. On the Dvàdaá£i day of the bright half in the month of
Vaisakha, my disc will fall on you.
44. You will then reach my world.” Telling thus to Gudakesa, I disappeared. .
45. Awaiting death by the fall of the disc, he was continuing his admirable penance, thinking all the while as to when he
would go to the world of Visnu.
46. In due course, Dvådaśi of the bright half of the Vaisakha
month arrived, and
47. Performing the worship of Visnu in due form, he implored:
1. The proper place of verses 41-42, which are obviously spoken to
Earth is after verse 49.

48. “Let loose on me your disc glowing like fire and take
away my soul quickly cutting to pieces my body”.
49. Then cut by my disc, the great devotee reached me.
But his flesh became copper, blood became gold and the bones
became silver and other metals Be zinc, tin and iron.
50. Now listen to the result of offerings made in copper
vessels.
51. My real devotees should know that it is in this way that
copper arose and that it pleases me.
52. The Diksitas among the devotees should offer pddya,
arghya etc., in this. Such is the origin of copper, such its prescription.
53. Ihave thus told you this. What else do you wish to ask?
Earth said:
Tell me how the Diksita performs worship of Sandhya and
by what mantra.
Varaha said:
54. O Earth, listen to the mantra of Sandhya of morning
and evening.
55-57. Holding water in the palms held together and meditating on me with full devotion, the following mantra should be
recited, by which one delights in my world for as many thousands of years as he uses copper vessels.
58. “AIL gods, Brahma, Rudra and Indra, all in dhydna yoga
contemplate on Lord Vasudeva, the source of the world, the
primordial effulgence.
59. O Vasudeva, the primordial being, bearing you in our
souls, we bow to you again and again, during Sandhya, for emancipation’’.
60. May the Diksita worship Sandhya with this mantra.]
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY
Expiation for eating the king’s Food
Siita said:
1. Hearing the account about Diksá from the mouth of Lord
Narayana, the goddess Earth became clear in mind and asked
Him again.

334 Vardha Purana
Earth said:
2. “How great is the diksa@ for your worship, by hearing
which my mind has become very clear.
3. O the greatness of the Lord, who has established this
diksd for the four castes for their welfare !
4. But one thing lingers in my mind, O lord, and that you
should be pleased to clear for the sake of devotees.
5. Formerly, you enumerated thirtytwo offences in
worship. Committing such offences, how do people make
expiation for them ?
6. Be pleased to tell me, O Madhava, how this is”.
7. Hearing these words of Earth, the great lord meditated
for a while and then replied.
Varaha said:
8.9. “Ifthe pure devotees dedicated to my service eat the
food offered by the king, out of desire, fear or contingency, they
will be tormented in hell for ten thousand years”.
10. At this Earth shuddered and became struck with fear
for seventeen days.
11. Then with an afflicted mind she spoke again for the good
of the world:
Earth said:
12. “O lord, please hear what I have in mind. I wish to:
know why there is this prohibition for the king's food”.
13. Hearing these words of Earth, lord Narayana, the foremost among the knowers of dharma, spoke to her:
Varüha said:
14. “Listen, O fair one, to know the truth about the prohibition of the king’s food for the pure devotees.
15. Although the king conducts himself with equanimity,
he performs cruel actions also by the influence of Rajasa and
Tamasa qualities.
16. So the food he gives is despicable and I don't like it in
the interest of upholding righteousness.
17. Listen, O Earth, to what I say further regarding the
acceptability of the king's food.
18-19. After installing me with due rites and giving money

and grain to the devotees, if the food is got cooked by my own
devotees, and taken after offering to me, it will not be sinful.”
20. Hearing these words of Visnu, the saintly Earth asked
Varaha again:
Earth said:
21. O Janàrdana, how can one purify oneself after taking
in king's food.
Varáha said:
22. Listen, O goddess, to what you want to know, namely
how people can purify themselves after eating king's food.
23. That sin can be removed by performing Candrayana,
'lTaptakrcchra and Santapana.
24. Then the sin will not remain, so I say. Therefore, the
king's food shouid not be eaten by my devotees who are
desirous of salvation.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTYONE
Expiation for not cleaning the Teeth
Vardha said:
1. “He who approaches me without chewing the tooth-stick?,
forfeits all merit in store by this single deed".
2. Thus told, Earth asked Him for the sake of the good of
devotees.
Earth said:
3. How is it that, by a single offence, all the merit in store is
annihilated ?
Varüha said:
4, Listen to the truth that I say that by a single offence, all
the acquired merit becomes lost.
5. Man is impure because of the kapha (phlegm) and fitta
1. The twig like the Margosa’s for cleaning the teeth.

336 Varáha Purana
(bile) in him and also of marrow and blood. His face is foulsmelling.
6. This impurity disappears by chewing the tooth-stick.
Such purity is not got by other acaras.
Earth said:
7. What is the atonement for one who performs the rites
without chewing the tooth-stick (i.e., without cleaning the teeth).
Vardha said:
8. I shall tell you how purity can be obtained by such people.
9. Akasasayana (sleeping in the open) for even days, purifies the people who do the rites without chewing the toothstick.
10. I have thus told you about the chewing of the tooth-stick
and the means of purificat.on for not using it.
11. Ifone does the expiation, how will he continue to have
the sin?
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTYTWO
Expiation for touching Dead Body
Vardha said:
1. “O blessed one, he who touches a dead body without
bathing after a sexual intercourse, remains drinking semen for
fourteen thousand years".
2. Hearing this from Lord Narayana, Earth was very sorry
and she asked him:
Earth said:
3. What do you say, O lord ! This is a sad and disgustful
thing. How can a man be drinking semen ?
4. This saddens me a lot.
Vardha said:
“O goddess, know this secret.

5. This is indicative of transgression, such as of man having
sexual perversion in women.
6. The man who does so reaps the result of his offence.
7. There is no atoncment for a deliberate offence. But I
shall tell you about the atonement for the offences committed
through faults of the mind.
8. Householders who are my devotees, should live on barley
meal for three days, oil cake for three days and air alone for one
day.
9. They then become free from sins. Those whodo this in
the prescribed manner are not stained by sin.
10. "Thus have I told you about the atonement for one who
comes to me after a sexual intercourse.
11-12. If one goes to the cremation ground disregarding
the rules I have laid down, he aswell as his father and grandfather
become jackals and eat the dead bodies".
13. Hearing these words of Lord Hari, Earth asked again
for the good of the world.
Earth said:
14. How can there be sin for those who have surrendered
themselves to you ? How can it be removed even if there is any ?
Varáha said:
15. O fair one, know from me what you seek to know. I
shall tell you this which removes sins.
16. Remaining on food once a day for seven days, then
completely fasting for three days, and then taking pafcagavya
removes sins.
17. I have now told you about the rules for touching the
dead body. It is better that the Bhagavatas avoid this altogether.
18. He who performs expiation in the manner suggested
above, gets himself frced from all sins.
19-20. He who touchcs me after touching a woman in her
monthly course out of lust, remains (in hell)drinking menstrual
blood for one thousand years.
2]. He is then born as a blind, penniless and stupid person
and never realises that he is in hell.

336 Vardha Purana
Earth said:
22-23. Please tell me how people devoted to you can attain
moksa even if they happen to commit some offence, and how they
can get purification for the purpose.
Varáha said:
24. The persen devoted to me, if he happens to touch a
woman in her monthly course, shall perform penance for three
days by sleeping in the open.
25. My devotee gets purified, in this manner and all sins of
offence disappear from him.
26. I have thus told you about the purification after touching
a woman in her courses.
27. He who enters my temple after touching a dead body,
enters the womb (again and again) for thousands of years.
28. Then for ten thousand years he remains a Candala, then
as a blind man for seven thousand years and as a frog for hundred years.
29. Asa bee for three years, as a beetle for eleven years,
as a snake for seven years and as a chameleon for another seven.
30. Asan elephant for hundred years, as a camel for thirtytwo years, a cat for nine years and a monkey for fifteen years.
31. Thus by causing offence by oneself, much sorrow is
brought upon.
32. Hearing these words of Lord Hari, Earth asked with
sorrow:
Earth said:
33. Why do you say, O Lord, such words which are horrifying to all men ?
34. Tell me the expiation for the devotee who fails in his
conduct so as to enable him to cross the barriers.
35. Hearing these words of Earth, Janàrdana, the lord of
the worlds, replied to her for the sake of righteous order iu the
world.
Varaha said:
36. My devotee who touches a dead body, shall remain
taking food only once a day for fifteen days.

37. After doing like this, pañcagavya should be taken in.
38. Thus have I told you about the expiation to be done
after touching a dead body.
39. He who perforns expiation in this manner, gets
cleansed of all sins and reaches my world.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTYTHREE
Expiaiion for passing flatus and answering calls of Nature in the
Midst of worship
Varüha said:
1. He who passes flatus during my worship, gets afflicted
by wind in the mind.
2. He takes birth as a bee for five years, a mouse for three
years, a dog for three years and a tortoise for nine years.
3. Such is the punishment for one who does not know the
fástra properly.
4. Hearing these words of the lord, Earth said:
Earth said:
5. By lapses of this kind in your worship, one attains enormous sin. Please tell me the expiation in such cases.
Varüha said:
6. Listen to what I say regarding the action to be done for
purification. The guilty shall spend three days and nights by
fire.
7. Ifdone like this, then no offence remains and my world
is attained.
8. Thus has been told to you to remedy for offences, the
faults as well as the expiations which you have sought to know.
9. O Earth, now know what happens to a man who passes
motion in the midst of my worship.
10. He remains in the hell Raurava for a thousand divine
years eating faeces.

340 Varàha Purana
11-12. I shall tell you also expiation for this. He shall lay
himself in water and then in air for one day each. Then he becomes absolved of the sin.
13. Thus have I told you about the offence of passing
motion during worship.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTYFOUR
Other offences during Worship
Varàha said:
1. He who neglects his duties by mc, but goes about speaking of expiations,
2. Becomes a fool, O fair one, and becomes free from sin
only by doing expiation himself.
3. 'The expiation for him is sleeping in the open for fifteen
days.
4. He who approaches me wearing blue cloth, becomes a
worm for hundred years.
5. Ishall tell you about the nature of atonement in this
case.
6. He has to perform Càndràyana according to rules in
order to get free from the sin.
7. He who touches me except in the prescribed manner
becomes a fool.
8. The sandal, garland, food and prostration offered by
him, I shall never receive.
9. Hearing these words of lord Narayana, Earth asked him
again out of interest in righteousness.
Earth said:
10-11. O lord, now that you speak to me about lapses in
conduct, please tell me about the way upasparsana (washing with
water) is to be done.
12. Iam very anxious to know this. Please enlighten me
for the welfare of devotees.

Varaha said:
13. O goddess, listen to what I say in reply to what you
ask. This is extremely secret.
LH. Listen to the action of washing for the person who comes
to me after giving up all actions in general.
15. Facing the cast, the fect should be washed with water.
Then three pods of mud should be applied.
16. Then the hands should be washed with seven pails of
water and the feet with five pails each.
17. Then washing (all parts) with two parts should be done.
18. Afterwards water should be sipped three times and the
face should be washed with the hands.
19. Then pranayama should be performed according to
prescription for the sake of release from samsara.
20. He who is desirous of moksa should then touch the head,
ear and nose thrice.
21. After touching in this manner, water should be thrown
round thrice.
22. In this manner should upasparíana be done and that will
please me.
23. For one who docs like this, no sin of offence remains.
24. Hearing these words of Lord Nàràyana, Earth asked in
sweet words what is good for all the Bhagavatas.
Earth said:
25. Please tell me about the torments as well as the purification of those who perform the rites without upasparsana.
Varaha said:
26. O Earth, know in truth the secret about the way those
who are guilty in my worship go.
27. He who approaches me after committing adultery,
remains à worm for ten thousand and ten hundred years.
28. Ishalltell you about the atonement to be done by which
he gets purified.
29-30. By performing the Mahdsantapana and Taptakrcchra
ceremonies, the Bráhmanas, Ksatriyas and Vaisyas get released
from all their guilt and attain bliss.

342 Varüha Purana
31. Idon’t like the devotee who gets possessed of anger and
is fickle in mind touching me.
32. I don't like the angry and possionate man. I like only
those who are calm, good and pure.
33. With the senses completely under control, those who
donot think of loss or gain, are free from ego and are
engaged in my worship.
34. © fair one, I shall tell you another thing. Listen.
35. Even a devotee who though pure and good, approaches
me with an angry mind is born a cricket and remains like that for
hundred years and an eagle for hundred years.
36. <A frog for three hundred years, a demon for ten years
and a eunuch for six years drinking semen.
37. He is then born as a blind man for seven years, a kite
for thirtytwo years, a cakravaka bird for ten years.
38. Then a moss-eater and a bird in the sky. This happens
even if the offender is a Brahmin whirling in the ocean of samsara.
Earth said:
39. O, what a rare thing have you told me! My mind is
much perturbed and I don't feel it steady.
40. Iam very much afraid after hearing what you have said
about what befalls the devotees (due to their lapses).
4l. Iam not commanding you, O lord of the worlds.
42. But I ask you for the welfare of the world, how the pure
and wise devotees can be liberated.
43. Tell me the expiations for those of limited intellect and
for those who are not free from desire and stupefaction.
44. (The lotus-eyed Varaha then stood in front, and my
devotee Sanatkumara said.)!
45. Hearing the words of Earth, the great yogi Sanat kumara
replied to her.
46. What you have asked is good and sound. The Lord in
the form of the boar is the abode of all illusion.
47. O goddess, the person to whom you spoke is Lord Narayana, the best among the knowers of yoga and dharma.
l. This is an unnecessary verse in view of the next one, and is perhaps
an interpolation.

48. Hearing the words of Kumara, Earth said: “Tell me
O great Brahmin, what I ask,
49. The actions, yoga and the matters relating to soul”.
50. The great Visnu, the abode of all illusion, told me then
as to how the angry Bhagavata can be purified.
51. Performing the vows, he shall eat the food collected by
begging in the houses, at the sixth part of the day.
52. It should be collected only from the good Bhagavatas
and from eight houses alone.
53. He who does like this gets purified of sins. So said
Lord Janàrdana.
51. Even the highest Brahmin, if he desires the world of
Visnu shall soon resort to the worship of Visnu.
55. Hearing the words of Earth, the son of Brahma told her
who was keen on dharma.
236. O goddess, what you have said is of a secret nature.
Please tell me the dharmas which he expounded.
Earth said:
57. Then that lotus-eyed Lord in the form of the boar holding the conch, disc and mace, spoke in words resembling thunder,
for the sake of devotees.
58. By doing these actions and observing proper conduct,
O goddess, one can attain my world.
39. My worship should not be done with an angry mind
or with greed or in haste, if salvation is the aim.
60. Those who worship me with full control of senses and
without any trace of anger, become free from all offences and are
never born again.
Varáha said:
61. © Earth, I shall tell you what happens to the man who
offers forbidden flowers for me.
62. T don't accept those flowers and I don't like the persons
who offer them to me.
63. Fools alone dare to offer me like this and they
into the hell called Raurava,
64. And then, because of their ignorance, undergo a lot of
suffering. They remain as monkeys for ten years, cats for thirteen
years.

344 Varàha Purana
65. ‘Muka’! for five years, bulls for twelve vears, goats for
eight years, fowls for a month,
66. And buffaloes for three years. There need be no doubt
about this.
67. Thus have I told vou about what befalls people who
offer me forbidden flowers.
Earth said:
68. O Lord, if you are pleased, tell me how your devotees
doing service to you are purified by their pure mind.
Varáha said:
69. O goddess, I shall teil you what you want to know
namely expiation for attaining purification.
70. For one month he should take food only once a day.
For fourteen days he should adopt Virasana posture. For
one month after that, hc should take food cooked in milk mixed
with ghee during the fourth part of the day.
71. He should take barley for three days and remain on air
alone for another three days.
72. He who performs like this gets freed from all sins and
reaches my world.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTYFIVE
Expiation for eating goose etc.
Varáha said:
l. O fair one, listen to the expiation that is to be done for
approaching me wearing red garment.
2. The red garment is equivalent to menstrual flow.
3. The man who wears red garment becomes this for fifteen
years.
4. I shall tell you about the expiation by which he gets
purified.
5. He should take food daily once alone for scventeen days,
live on air alone for three days and on water alone for onc day.
l. Perhaps the word is Müsaka meaning ‘mouse’.

6. By doing this he gets freed of the sin of this offence and
then becomes dear to me.
7. Ihave thus told you, O Earth adorned with red garment,
the expiaticn in this matter.
8. He who touches me in darkness without a lamp, being
hasty and stupefied, courts his own downfall.
9. Such a base man brings upon himself great misery.
10. “One whole life he spends as a blind man eating everything he comes across.
11. Ishall tell you the expiation for this by which he becomes
enabled to reach my world.
12. He should blindfold his eyes for fifteen days, eat once,
alone a day for twenty days.
13. On the Dvadasi day in any one month, he should eat
only once and then take water alone.
14. Then he should cat barley cooked in cow’s urine. By
this expiation, he gets free from the sin.
15. Now listen to what downfall one brings for oneself by
doing me service wearing black garment.
16. For five years he remains a worm in parched grain,
17. For five years an ichneumon and for ten years a tortoise.
18. Then for fourteen years he will be a pigeon and remain
near where I am installed.
19. I shall tell you about the expiation for a person for the
offence of wearing black garment.
20. He should take gruel for seven days and flour balls for
three days, and three such balls alone for three days.
21. He who performs like this gets purified.
22. He never gets into samsdra again but reaches my world.
23. O Earth, I shall tell you the offence a devotee does if he
wears unwashed cloth, although he may be otherwise pure.
24. The person clad in such a cloth returns to samsdra.
25. Such a person is born as an elephant in one life, then as
a camel and afterwards as a wolf.
26. Then he is born as a jackal and then as horse. He becomes an antelope and then an ordinary deer.
27. After seven such successive lives he is born as a man
again as my devotee, clever and offenceless and free from cgo.

346 Varaha Purána
Earth said:
28. O lord, I have now known what befalls a person who
wears unwashed cloth.
29. Be pleased to tell me the expiation to get rid of this
offence.
Varáha said:
30. O goddess, I shall tell you about the expiation you ask
for.
31. He should live on barley for three days, oil cake for three
days, lcaves for three days and milk for three days,
32. Rice cooked in milk for three days and air for three days.
33. In this way hc can get freed from the sin of offence.
34. Ishall tell you about the serious sin resulting from offering the food that is touched by dog.
35. He becomes a dog for seven lives, a jackal for scven lives,
an owl for seven lives and is then born a man.
36. He then takes birth in a family of devotecs, learned in
the Vedas and pure-hearted.
37. Now listen to the expiation by which one crosses the
ocean of sarisára.
38-39. He should live on roots for three days, fruits for three
days, leaves for threc days, milk for three days, curd for thrce
days, rice cooked in milk for three days and air for three days and
then take the holy bath.
40. By spending twenty one days like this, he gets freed from
the offence and reaches my world.
41. O fair one, I shall tell you about what befalls a person
who approaches me after eating pork.
42. He wanders in the forest as a pig for ten years and becomes a hunter for fourteen vears.
43. He then becomes a rat for fourteen vears and a demon
for nineteen years,
44. A porcupine for eight years and a carnivorous tiger for
thirty years.
45. Then he enters into samsára and is born in a family of
devotees.
46. Hearing these words of the Lord in detail, Earth said
with folded hands:

47. I have now known this secret by which an eater of pork
gets purified. Whatshall one do in order not to become an animal
by offence ?
Vardha said:
48. He should live on cowdung for five davs, small grains
for seven days and liquids for seven days,
49. Food which is not caustic or saline for seven davs and
flour for three days.
50. Sesamum for seven days and milk for seven days.
51. With great forbearance and fortitude and free from ego,
he should spend fortynine days in this manner.
52. He then becomes cleansed of all sins and doing service
to me, goes to my world.
53. He who comes to me after eating goose-flesh, becomes a
goose for fifteen years.
34. He becomes a shark for ten years and a pig for five years.
Thus does one roll in sazisára after giving offence.
55. By performing this expiation, he becomes a pure devotee
free from all sins and, crossing all actions, reaches my world.
56. I shall tell you the expiation for eating goose-flesh in
order to get free from the sin.
57. He should live on barley for three days, air for three
years, fruit for three days,
58. Sesamum for three davs, and food neither caustic nor
saline for three days.
59. For fifteen days in this way expiation is to be done. The
offence of eating gooseflesh gets removed and he gets the liberation he desires.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTYSIN
Rules of expiation
Varüha said:
1. A man gets the sin of offence by doing service to me after
touching a lamp.

348 Vardha Purana
2. Listen to what I say in this matter. He becomes attacked
by leprosy all over the body for sixty years.
3. And this will be in the house of an outcaste.
4. After undergoing this punishment, if he happens to die in
my temple, he takes birth as my devotee in a sanctified family.
5. I shall tell you the expiation for touching the lamp by
which the man gets release from being an outcaste.
6. On the DvadaSi in the bright fortnight of any month,
he shall take food only in the fourth part of the day and sleep in
the open.
7. Then by gifting a lamp he gets out of thissin, becomes
purified and eligible to do me service.
8. Thus have I told you about the offence of touching the
lamp and the way to get release from it.
9. He who touches me without bathing after going to the
cremation ground commits an offence and I shall tell you what
befalls him.
10. He becomes a jackal for fourteen years, an eagle for seven
years wandering in the sky, in both forms eating human flesh.
1l. He becomes a goblin for fourteen years. And then for
thirty years, he remains eating the remains of the dead”.
12. Hearing all this from Lord Narayana, Earth said:
I have great curiosity to know why this is so.
13. The cremation ground, O lord, is praised by Rudra.
How can it be otherwise when there is this holy utterance of Siva?
14. That great god delights there holding a bright skullbone
in his hand.
15. The cremation ground is dear to Rudra particularly in
the night. How is it that ycu decry what is praised by Rudra’’?
Varáha said:
16. O goddess, listen to this story which has not been fully
understood even by the ascetics.
17. After accomplishing a difficult task in Tripura,! and
killing young and old alike and beautiful women,
18. He got into the grip of sin as a consequence and was
unable to move.
1. The three cities of gold, silver and iron in the sky, air and earth
built for the demons by Maya and destroyed by Siva.

19. He lost his mind, effulgence and yogic power and became discoloured.
20. He stood there in that condition surrounded by his
ganas.
21. When Siva was thought of by me, I saw him with my
divine vision as completely bereft of his magical power.
22-93, Then I went there and saw the three-cyed god bereft
of consciousness, knowledge and magical power. Then I asked
him in a pleasing tone.
24. O Rudra, how is it that you stand here engulfed by sin.
You are the creator as well as the destroyer, the source as well as
manifestation.
25. You are union as well as separation, you are the repository of all and you are the sole refuge. You are the fierce god,
foremost of all gods, you are Saman and you are the various
quarters.
26. Do you not know yourself surrounded by your attendant
ganas. How is it that you are discoloured and swollen-eyed.
27. Tell me truly what I ask you. Contemplate on the yoga
and maya of the great Visnu. I have come here for your good.
28. At these words of mine, Siva, regained consciousness
and spoke in swect words with his eyes burning with sin.
29. Listen to the truth, O god. Who else will come to me
like this other than you Narayana, the lord of the worlds.
30. O Visnu, godhood is attained by your favour.
31. I got yoga and Sankhya and I have become free from affliction. By your grace I have become like the ocean full of water.
32. O Madhava, I know vou and you know me. None finds
any difference between us. Brahma too is not known as different from us.
33. All this is well, O great Visnu, the repository of mdyd,
34, Telling me like this, Siva meditated for a while and spoke
to me again:
35. “By your grace, O Visnu, I destroyed Tripura (The
three cities) and all the demons there.
36. But aleng with them I also crushed down many pregnant women, children and old men in all the ten quarters. By
the sin of this action, I am not able to move.
37. I have lost all my mystic and magical powers and all
my effulgence. What shall I do in this state of sin ?

350 Varadha Purana
38. Tell me, O Visnu, what atonement I may do to purify
myself and get rid of the sin”.
39. I then told the regretful Rudra to take a string of skullbones and go to Samala.
40. He then asked me to tell him what this Samala was
where he was asked to go.
4]. Then I told Siva what I meant when I told him so.
42. Samala is the cremation ground which smells rotten
like the sorc.
43. People who have given up all desires voluntarily remain
there. Taking skull-bones you too remain there.
44. Live there with great austerity for a thousand divine
vears and then be eating flesh to remove your sin.
45. Eat the flesh that is dear to you of thosc that are killed.
Live there in this way along with your ganas.
46. When the thousand years are spent in Samala, go to the
hermitage of sage Gautama.
47. While in Gautama's hermitage you will realise yourself
and be rid of your sin by the blessing of Gautama.
48. The skull-bowl on your head full of sin will be brought
down by that sage out of compassion.
49. Giving the boon to Rudra in this manner, I disappeared.
Rudra wandered in the sinful cremation ground.
50. "Therefore it is that the cremation ground is not liked by
me, being defiled by the sin of Rudra.
51. Thus have I told vou about the despicable cremation
ground and the person who comes to me without purification
after going there.
52. Ishall now tell you about the expiation to get purified
of this offence.
53. For fifteen days he shall eat only once and that in the
fourth part of the day, ‘sleep in the open’ wearing a single cloth
and seated in Kuśa grass, and in the morning should drink.
Paficagavya.
54. He then becomes freed of all sins and reaches my world.
55. Now listen to the expiation for the offence of going to
the lord after eating oil-cake.
56. He becomes an owl for two years and a tortoise for three
years and then he is born a man again devoted to me.

57. I shall tell you the expiation for this by which the sin is
removed and liberation from Samsara is attained.
58. For one day he shall take barley cooked in cow’s urine
and in the night he shall ‘sleep in the open’ in Virasana pose.
59.- Such a person does not revert to samsdra but reaches my
world.
60. He who approaches me with pork becomes a sinful dunce
and brings upon himself much misery.
61. He is tormented in hell for as many thousands of years
as there are hairs on my body as the boar.
62. Another effect also I shall tell you of approaching me
with pork.
63. As soon as he begins to worship me, he becomes a boar.
64. I shall tell you also about another thing which befalls
such a person.
65. He becomes blind and continues to reel in samsára.
66. In the end he is born in a family of devotees, humble,
cultured and effluent.
67. Ishall tell you the expiation for this so as to remove the
sin.
68. He shall eat fruit alone for seven days and roots alone
for seven days.
69. Seven days on rice cooked in milk, seven days on butter
milk and seven days on fire.! By this expiation he reaches my
world.
70. O beautiful goddess, listen to the evil that accrues if one
approaches me after drinking alcohol.
7]. He remains poor for ten thousand years and then becomes purified to be my devotee again.
72. Fora devotee of mine who is initiated, there is no expiation at all if he.takes alcohol out of desire.
73. Listen to another thing which I tell you. One gets freed
from the sin by taking in drink coloured like fire.?
74. He whv performs expiation in this way does not incur sin
and does not fall in samsára.
75. My worshipper who eats vegetables cooked with safflower becomes a boar and is tormented in hell for fifteen years.
1. The expression is pavakabhojanah. What it signifies is not clear.
Perhaps the word is yavodakabhojanah which means feeding in barlay water.
2. How the evil of one drink is removed by another ts not clear,

352 Varáha Purána
76. "Then he is born as a dog for three vears and a jackal for
one year.
77. Then he becomes a purified devotee and reaches my
world".
78. Hearing these words, Earth asked Lord Hari:
79. O great—god;tell me about the expiation for the sin of
eating vegetables with safflower".
Varàha said:
80. He who comes to me with vegetables mixed with safflower, gets tormented in hell for ten thousand years. I shall tell
you about the expiation for this.
81. For eating vegetables with safflower, the expiation is
doubtless the rite called ‘Candrayana’. For approaching me with
the same, the expiation is to live on milk for twelve days.
82. He who performs such expiation gets free from that sin
and reaches my world.
83. He who approaches me wearing the cloth of another
without washing becomes a dunce and has to perform expiation.
84. He who touches me and serves me in that condition becomes a deer for ten years.
85. One whole life he remains foolish and irate and then
becomes my devotee again.
86. Ishalltell you about the expiation for this by which the
devotee traverses samsdra.
87. On the Dvadasi day in the bright half of the month of
Magha,
88. Heshall stand in a pond calm and composed and
thinking of me alone.
89. When the night comes to a close and the sun rises he
shall take paficagavya and then do service to me.
90. He who performs expiation in this way, gets free from
sin and reaches my world.
9]. If the devotee does not offer nine kinds of food,! his
manes do not eat for fifteen vears.
92. Hewho eats nine kinds of food without offering (to me),
does not acquire any merit.
1. The expression is navānnāni. It may also mean ‘fresh food’ though
the plural seems to relate to number.

93. I shall tell you about the expiation to be performed in
order to get free from this sin.
94. He shall fast for three days or at least for one day and
‘sleep in the open’. He gets purified on the fourth day.
95.. After doing this, when the sun rises, he may drink pancagavya which will purify him.
96. He who performs expiation in this manner, renounces everything and reaches my world.
97. He who offers me smoke of incense without offering
sandal and flowers, doubtless takes birth as a goblin or demon.
98. Certainly he has to live in iron for twentyone years.
99. I shall tell you about the expiation by which he gets
free from this sin.
100. On the Dvadasi day in the bright half of any month,
alternatively on the Dasami or Ekadasi day, he shall fast.
101. When the night ends and the sun rises, he shall drink
paficagavya which purifies him.
102. The manes of one who performs expiation like this get
liberated.
103. He who approaches me wearing sandal, becomes a
cobbler for thirteen yeas.
104. After that he takes birth as a boar.
105. From being the boar, he takes birth as a despicable dog
and after that he becomes a man again, my devotee free from
faults.
106. He gets release from samsdra and reaches my world.
107. He who performs the atonement like this, does not at
all become touched by sin.
108. He who wakes me-up without beating the drum,
becomes deaf in one whole life.
109. I shall tell you the expiation by which the sin of not
beating the drum is got rid of.
110. On the Dvadasi day in the bright half of any month he
shall ‘sleep in the open’ and then he becomes free from sin.
111. O Earth, he who performs expiation like this does not
commit any offence and reaches my world.
112. He who eating a lot suffers indigestion and approaches
me with eructations and without taking bath,
113. Becomes a dog for one life, a monkey for one life, a goat
for one life, a jackal for one life,

354 Varáha Purana
114. A blind man for one life and then is born as a rat and
is finally born in a big family as a pure and respected devotee
free from faults.
115. Ishall tell you about the expiation by which the devotee
becomes free from sin.
116. For three days he shall live on fire, for three days on
roots, for three days on rice cooked in milk, for three days on
flour,
117. Three days on air, and shall ‘sleep in the open’ for three
days.
118. At daybreak he shall clean his teeth and drink pañcagavya for his purification.
119. He who performs expiation like this, does not become
touched. by sin and reaches my world.
120. What I have told you, O goddess, is for the (true)
Brahmins. This is the greatest of all narrations.
121. Itis righteousness, fame and sacred practice. It is the
best of qualities and the moral of all morals.
122. He who reads this every day after rising up in the
morning, liberates his manes ten generations before and ten
generations after.
123. This is the healthiest of the healthy and the most
auspicious of all that is auspicious. This is the gem of all gems
that removes all sins.
124. The devotee who recites this with concentration of
mind does not become defiled by sin even if he chances to commit
an offence.
125. He who recites this after worshipping Sandhya early
in the morning, reaches my world.
126. This should not be read in the midst of the wicked or
amidst incompetent disciples. This shall be imparted only to my
devotees.
127. Ihave thus told you about the rules of expiation about
which you asked me. What else do you wish to know ?
