READABLE DATASET
================================================================================
Original file: shree_varaha_purana_02.json
Dataset number: 360 of 455
Format: valid JSON
Structure: Object / structured dataset
Original size: 718,711 bytes
Top-level fields: 11
Title: Shree Varaha Purana 02
Creator: Purana_02
Date: —
Description: Misc Indic Books, 'Puranas', 'Shree Varaha-Purana_02'

CONTENT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
METADATA AND OTHER FIELDS
  • title: Shree Varaha Purana 02
  • creator: Purana_02
  • date: —
  • description: Misc Indic Books, 'Puranas', 'Shree Varaha-Purana_02'
  • subject: Misc Indic Books
  • identifier: udzx_shree-varaha-purana-02
  • source_folder: udzx_shree-varaha-purana-02
  • total_pages: 397
  • total_words: 129858
  • text_quality:
    • ocr_word_validity_score: 0.903
    • quality_tier: good
    • note: —

FULL TEXT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ANCIENT INDIAN
TRADITION & MYTHOLOGY
TRANSLATED BY
A BOARD OF SCHOLARS
EDITED BY
Professor J. L. SHASTRI
VoLUME 32

BRRIMIEHT EI eck ad LS HAM HA EE A Eid aids o abo die £22:21 LS
ANCIENT INDIAN TRADITION AND
MYTHOLOGY SERIES
VOLUMES
SIVA PURANA 14
LINGA PURANA 5-6
BHAGAVATA PURANA 7-11
GARUDA PURANA 12-14
NARADA PURANA 15-19
KORMA PURANA 20-21
BRAHMANDA PURANA 22-26
AGNI PURANA 27-30
VARAHA PURANA 31-32
VOLUMES UNDER PREPARATION
BHAVISYA
BRAHMA
BRAHMAVAIVARTA
DEVIBHAGAVATA
KALIKA
MARKANDEYA
MATSYA
PADMA
SKANDA
VAMANA
VARAHA
VAYU
VISNU
VISNUDHARMOTTARA

VARAHA PURANA
PARTI
TRANSLATED AND ANNOTATED BY
S. VENKITASUBRAMONIA IYER
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS ə DELHI
UNESCO ® PARIS

© MOTILAL BANARSIDASS
Head Office: Bungalow Road, Delhi 110 007
Branches : Chowk, Varanasi 221 001
Ashok Rajpath, Patna 800 004
6 Appar Swamy Koil Street, Mylapore,
Madras 600 004
UNESCO COLLECTION OF REPRESENTATIVE WORKS— Indian Series
This book has been accepted in the Indian Translation
Series of the Unesco Collection of Representative
books jointly sponsored by the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO) and the Government of India.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced
in any form or by any means, without the written permission
of the publisher.
First Edition: Delhi, 1985
Printed in India by Shantilal Jain, at Shri Jainendra Press,
A-45 Naraina, Phase I, New Delhi 110 028 and published by
Narendra Prakash Jain for Motilal Banarsidass, Delhi 110 007.

PUBLISHER’S NOTE
The Purest gems lie hidden in the bottom of the ocean or in the
depth of rocks. One has to dive into the ocean or delve into the
rocks to find them out. Similarly, truth lies concealed in the
language which with the passage of time has become obsolete.
Man has to learn that language before he discovers that truth.
But he has neither the means nor the leisure to embark on
that course. We have, therefore, planned to help him acquire
knowledge by an easier course. We have started the series of
Ancient Indian Tradition and Mythology in English Translation.
Our goal is to universalize knowledge through the most popular
international medium of expression. The publication of the
Puranas in English Translation is a step towards that goal.

PREFACE
The present Volume contains the Varaha Purana Part II
(Chapters 137-218) in English Translation. This is the thirty
second volume in the Series on Ancient Indian Tradition and Mythology.
The project of the series was planned in 1970 by Lala
Sunder Lal Jain of Messrs Motilal Banarsidass, with the aim to
universalize knowledge through the most popular international
medium, viz. English. Hitherto, the English translations of eight
Puranas, namely Siva, Linga, Bhagavata, Garuda, Narada,
Kürma, Brahmanda and Agni have been published by us.
This Purana, like most of the other Puranas, is of encyclopaedic character. Like the first part, this part of the Varaha
Puràna contains topics of diverse nature. Nevertheless there is
a sort of unity under diversity. The early chapters which open
this part contain stories on the efficacy of holy places in India.
They tell us how by resorting to these even a creature of low
species can attain godhood. To illustrate, a vixen and a vulture are hit by the arrow of a hunter. They dieat holy Saukara
and are born as the prince of Kalinga and the princess of Kàüci.
A wagtail falls in the Ganges and is born as the son of a rich
merchant who renounces the world, goes to Saukara and attains
liberation. Holy places include streams, pools, wells, peaks of
mountains etc. and are associated with the episodes throwing
light on their efficacy.
Most prominent among the holy places are Mathurà, Gokarna, Badari and Dvaraka. Their efficacy is supported by the
anecdotes which ancient tradition has handed down to us. We
learn that devotees are liberated, ghosts are relieved, gods are
absolved of curses. A Sraddha at these centres can transport
manes from hell to heaven.
Since the Purana is Visnuite in character, a number of chapters arc essentially devoted to the worship of lord Visnu in the
form of idols. Various kinds of idols are enumerated. They are
of wood, stone, clay, copper, bronze, silver or gold. The procedure of worship is the same as prcvails among Vaisnava devotees even to-day.

vili Preface
Much emphasis is placed on the performance of Sraddha.
The subject is very mysterious. It begins with a narrative on the
origin of Sraddha, proceeds with the description of the ritual,
the qualities of the Brahmin to be fed and the articles to be used
atthe rite. The account presents sufficient materialfor research
in this field.
Quite interesting and informative is the story of Naciketas
who visits the abode of Yama and returns home. His description
of Yama, Yamaloka and Yama's attendants is very thrilling.
Extremely horrid is the sight of sinners undergoing torments
resulting from their evil deeds. Most dreadful is the scene where
demons and Yama's men fight with each other. It is strange to
learn from Yama's instructions to his messengers that they have
to assume different shapes, as of a snake, fever etc. to perpetrate
death. The topic is very important inasmuch as the Puràna
devotes twenty chapters to this.
In the miscellany of topics we can include Reflections on
Sexual Relations, Efficacy of Chastity, the Awakening and others.
Acknowledgement of Obligations
It is our pleasant duty to put on record our sincere thanks to
Dr R.N. Dandekar and the UNESCO authorities for their kind
encouragement and valuable help which render this work very
useful. We are grateful to Dr S. Venkitasubramonialyer, professor of Sanskrit (Retired), University of Kerala, for his critical
Introduction, lucid translation, useful glossary and notes. We
also thank those persons who have offered suggestions for improving the same.
—Editor

PART II
PREFACE
ABBREVIATIONS
CHAPTERS
137. The Vulture and the Jackal
138. The Story of the Wag-tail
139. Greatness of Saukara
140. Greatness of holy spots in Kokamukha
141. Greatness of Badarikasrama
142. Action in Privacy
143. Greatness of Mandara
144. Greatness of Somegvara, Muktiksetra, Triveni
and others
145. Greatness of Salagramaksetra
146. Greatness of Ruruksetra and Hrsikega
147. Greatness of Goniskramana
148. Greatness of Stutasvami
149. Greatness of Dvaraka
150. Greatness of Sanandira
151. Greatness of Lohargala
152. Glory of Mathura Tirtha
153. Greatness of Mathura Tirtha
154. Power of the Tirthas in Yamuna
155. Power of Akriratirtha
156. The Appearance of Mathura
157. Malayarjuna and other Tirthas
158. The Power of Mathura-Tirtha
159. Circumambulation in Mathura
160. The Order of Visits in the Tirthas of Mathura
161. The greatness of Devavana
162. The greatness of Cakratirtha
163. The Greatness of Kapilavaraha
164. The Greatness of Annaküta
CONTENTS

The Power of Catuhsamudrika well
The power of Asikunda
The power of Visranti tirtha
The Tirthas in Mathura
The Semicircular spot in Mathura
The story of Gokarna
The story of Gokarna (continued)
The story of Gokarna (continued)
The story of Gokarna (continued)
The greatness of the confluence of Yamuna
The prowess of Krsnaganga and Kalifijara
The prowess of Krsnaganga and Kalifjara
Consecration of Sürya by Samba
Satrughna-Lavana
Expiations for Offences
Greatness of Dhruva tirtha in Mathura
Consecration of wooden Images
Consecration of stone Images
Consecration of clay images
Consecration of copper Images
Consecration of bronze Images
Consecration of silver and golden Images
The Origin of Sraddha
Rituals of Sraddha
Qualities of the Brahmin to be fed in Sraddha
Other details about Sraddha
Madhuparka
Peace for all
Departure of Naciketas
Return of Naciketas
Sinners in Yamaloka
City of Yama
Yama and his associates
Torments in Hell
Torments in Hell (Contd)
Torments in Hell (Contd)
Fight between Raksasas and Yama’s men
Punishment according to deeds
Sins and Punishment
Instructions to Messengers
Contents

Contents
205. Good and bad results
206. Results of good actions
207. Good results
208. Story of the chaste women
209. Greatness of the chaste women
210. Means to destroy sin
211. Means to destroy sin (Contd)
212. The Awakening
213. Greatness of Gokarnesvara
214. Boons to Nandikesvara
215. Greatness of Sailesvara
216. Greatness of $rügesvara
217. Benefits of Recitation
218. Contents of the Purana
GLOSSARY
INDEX

ABBREVIATIONS
Common and self-evident abbreviations such as Ch(s)-
Chapter(s), p—page, pp—pages, V—Verse, VV—Verses,
Ftn—footnote, Hist. Ind. Philo—History of Indian Philosophy
are not included in this list.
ABORI Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute,
Poona
AGP S. M. Ali’s The Geography of Puranas, PPH, New
Delhi, 1973
AIHT Ancient Indian Historical Tradition, F. E. Pargiter,
Motilal Banarsidass (MLBD), Delhi
AITM Ancient Indian Tradition and Mythology Series MLBD,
Delhi
AP Agni Puréna, Guru Mandal Edition (GM), Calcutta, 1957
Arch.S.Rep. Archaeological Survey Report
AV Atharva Veda, Svadhyaya Mandal, Aundh
Bd. P. Brahmanda Purdna, (MLBD), Delhi 1973
BG Bhagavadgita
Bh. P. Bhàgavata Purana, Bhagavat Vidyapeeth, Ahmedabad
Br. Brahmana (preceded by name such as Satapatha
BS. P. Bhavisya Purüga, Vishnu Shastri Bapat, Wai
BV. P. Brahma Vatvarta Purana, GM, 1955-57
cc. Caturvarga Cintamani by Hemadri
CVS Carana Vyüha Sūtra by Saunaka; Com. by Mahidasa
DB Devi Bhagavata, GM, 1960-61
De or The Geographical Dictionary of Ancient and MediaGDAMI. eval India, N. L. De, Orienta Reprint, Delhi, 1971
Dh. S. Dharma Sütra (preceded by the author's name
such as Gautama)
ERE Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics—Hastings.
GP Garuda Purana Ed. R. S. Bhattacharya Chowkhamba, Varanasi, 1964

Manu.
MkP
MtP.
Pd. P.
PE
PR or
PRHRC
RV
Sat. Br.
SC or SMC
SEP
Abbreviations
Grhya Sütra (preceded by the name of the author
such as Ápastamba)
History of Dharma Sastra, P. V. Kane, G. O. S.
The Indian Antiquary
The Indian Historical Quarterly
Purdna (Journal of the Kashiraj Trust) Varanasi
Kaufilya | Arthaíástra
Kürma Purdna, Venkateévara Press Edt. Bombay, also Kashiraj Trust Edt., Varanasi 1971
Linga Purana, GM, 1960; also MEE Delhi, 1981
Manusmrti
Mahābhārata, Gita Press, eter VS 2014
Markandeya Purána
Mahabharata .Námünukramani, Gita Press Gorakhpur, VS 2016
Matsya Purdna, GM, 1954
Monier Williams Sk. English Dictionary MLBD,
Delhi, 1976
Naradiya or Narada Purdna, Venkatesvar Press,
Bombay
Bharatavarsiya Pracina Caritrakofa, Siddheshwar
Shastri, Poona, 1968
Padma Purina, GM, 1957-59
Puranic Encyclopaedia, V. Mani, English, MLBD,
Delhi, 1975
Puranic Records on Hindu Rites and Customs
R. C. Hazra, Calcutta, 1948
Rg-Veda, Svadhyaya Mandal, Aundh
Satapatha Brahmana
Smrti Candrikà--Devanna Bhatta
Studies in Epics and Puranas, A.D. Pusalkar, Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan (BVB), Bombay

CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTYSEVEN
The Vulture and the Jackal
S üta said:
1. Hearing this elaborate account of expiations pertaining
to the devotees (Earth said):
2. What you have said about the great expiations for the
welfare of your devotees, is pleasing to me.
3. It behoves you now to tell me, O lord, the means of acquiring dharma.
4. What is the holy vow to be performed in Kubjamraka and
which is the holy spot that brings pleasure to the devotees ?
Varaha said:
5. Listen to what you have asked of me, which is of a highly
secret nature, namely ihe most sanctified spot for the devotees.
6. Kokàmukha is a great spot, so too Kubjàmraka, so again
Saukara which gives release from samsdra.
7. Holding which spot I raised you from the underworld
and where the river Ganga flows.
Earth. said:
8. To which worlds do those who diein Saukara go? What
merit is acquired by bathing there or drinking its water ?
9. What are the sacred Tirthas (places for bath) in Saukara.
It behoves you to tell me all this for the sake of establishing
dharma.
Varáha said:
10. Listen to what I say in reply to what you ask, namely
where the people dving in Saukara go.
11. What merit accrues to those who go there or die there
and the tirthas therein.
12. Listen to the merit that those wno go to Saukara get.
13. Those who die there send to heaven seven generations of
their ancestors and fourtcen generations of their successors.
14. By merely going there and seeing me, one takes birth for
seven lives in a big family,

356 Varüha Purana
15. Affluent in wealth and grain, handsome and virtuous
and ever devoted to my service.
1G. He who goes there without committing any offence an
lives there till death,
17. Assumes a form with conch, disc, mace, lotus and bow
in four hands and goes to Svetadvipa.
18. Ishall tell you, O Earth, what happens to the man who
bathes in these Tirthas.
19. One acquires enormous religious merit by bathing in
the Cakratirtha where the Cakra (disc) is installed.
20. Going to Cakratirtha taking only limited food and in all
austerity,
21. And taking there ritualistic bath on Dvadasi day in the
month of Vaisakha, one takes birth in a large and affluent
family and remains in it for ten thousand ten hundred years.
22. He becomes a great devotee dedicated to my service,
gets initiated and avoids all offences.
23. By this he crosses the ocean of samsára and attains a
four-armed form holding disc, mace, conch and lotus.
24. He who dies there gets a form similar to mine, and excels
in my world.
25. Hearing these words of the Lord, Earth said with hands
folded over her head.
26. In the tirtha Saukara, the moon propitiated you. Tell
me about this, as I am eager to know.
27. At these words of Earth, Visnu, the respository of all
maya, spoke to her in a voice like thunder.
28. O Earth, listen. I shall tell you the reason why I was
worshipped by him.
29. I was pleased with him and I revealed to him my original
form which is difficult even for the gods to see.
30. Soma could not stand the effulgence of this form and
he fell down senseless.
31. Then closing his eyes and folding the hands over his
head, he desired to speak but could not.
32. Seeing this condition of this lord of the Bràhmanas,
I prompted him in sweet words.
33. O Soma, with what aim do you perform this severe
penance ? Tell me what you have in mind. I shall grant that
for your pleasure.

34, On hearing my words, the lord of luminaries, who
had come to Soma-Tirtha, spoke thus.
35. O great god, the master of yoga and the lord of yogins,
now that you are pleased and have come here,
36. May I have firm and eternal devotion for you as long
as these worlds exist.
37. May the form you have given me be visible in all the
seven islands of the earth.
38. Let it be soma that Brahmins drink in sacrifices and may
they attain the divine supreme path.
39. On new moon day waen I am weak, let there be oblations for the manes, and may I become pleasant to look at after
that.
40. Let my mind never turn to what is unrighteous. Let
me be the lord of all herbs.
41. If you are pleased, O great god without beginning,
middle or end, may this be granted to me.
42. Hearing these words of Soma (I gave him the boon)
and disappeared there.
43. Thus did Soma perform penance and get supreme
attainment at Somatirtha rare to get.
44-46, I shall tell you the result that accrues to a devotee
of mine of righteous conduct, who takes bath in Somatirtha where
the great Soma performed penance standing on one foot.
47. Remaining like that with upturned face for five thousand
years and doing severe penance, Soma attained great brilliance.
48. He became free from the effect of all his offences.
49. He who performs oblations in the Somatirtha is born a
Brahmin well-versed in Veda and Vedanga for three thousand
three hundred years.
50. He becomes wealthy, virtuous and well known and a
devotce not committing any offence. He finally gets liberated
from samsára.
5l. Ofair one, I shall tell you the sign by which Somatirtha
can be identified by a devotee.
52. On the Dvadasi day in the bright half of the month
Vaisakha, when darkness sets in and nothing is visible,
53. Moonlight is seen on the earth without, however, the
moon being therc.
54. Such is the wonder of the place which I have to tell you.

358 Varüha Purana
55. This is the indication by which the Somatirtha in Saukara can be known, where all beings get release.
56. J shall tell you another thing which shows tbe wonderful
greatness of this placc.
57-58. By the prowess of this place of mine, a female jackal
who happened to die there without any desire, was born as a
highly beautiful princess, supremely virtuous and proficient in
all the sixty four arts.
59. On its eastern side is the tirtha called Grdhravata, where
a vulture which died without any desire, became a human being.
60. Hearing these words of Lord Narayana, the holy Earth
spoke for the welfare of the devotees of Visnu:
61. What a power does this firtha possess, by which two
beings in the animal kingdom, namely a vulture and a jackal,
attained human form !
62. O Janardana, tell me what befalls a person who bathes
or dies there.
63. What identification do they get who die there without
any desire?
64. Hearing these words of Earth, Visnu, the foremost knower of everything righteous, spoke to Earth in sweet words.
65. Listen, O Earth, I shall tell you what you scek to know,
namely how these two beings attained human form.
66. When due to what I had ordained, Krtayuga was over
and Tretayuga had set in,
67. A virtuous king by name Brahmadatta was ruling in the
city of Kampilla.
68. He had a handsome and righteous son named Somadatta.
69. Once the prince went for hunting in the forest full of
tigers and lions for the sake of his father.
70. While he was wandering, being not able to get any game,
he came across on his right a female jackal.
71. The prince hit her with an arrow and she fell down
in great pain.
72. Being wounded by the arrow and tormented by the heat
of the sun, she went to a Sàkhotaka tree.
73. Then she gave up ber life without any desire in the
Somatürtha.

74. Meanwhile, the prince felt thirsty and reached Grdhravata for taking rest.
75. He saw a vulture on the branch of a banyan tree and
then hit it with an arrow.
76. It fell down dead being pierced in its heart.
77. The prince was delighted. He plucked out its wings to
feather his arrows and went home.
78. The vulture died there without any desire, and after a
long time, it was born as the son of the king of Kalinga.
79. He was handsome, virtuous and learned and always delighted the people.
80-81. The jackal was born as the daughter of the king of
Kafici. She too was beautiful, virtuous, cuckoo-voiced and proficient in all the sixtyfour arts.
82. O Earth, due to my favour, Kafici and Kalinga became
very friendly and closely attached to each other.
83. In due course, the marriage of the prince of Kalinga
with the princess of Kafici was conducted in the proper manner.
84. The King of Kafici bestowed on them numerous gems
and jewels and elephants, horses and women.
85. Honoured well by him, the king of Kalinga also went to
his capital with his son and daughter-in-law.
86. The couple lived in extreme happiness like Candra and
Rohini.
87. They delighted themselves in temples, gardens and other
places of enjoyment.
88. Ifthe princess did not find her husband by her side even
for a moment, she felt extremely anxious.
89. Similarly, the prince too felt the same if he could not find
the princess near him even for a moment.
90. Day by day, their love waxed like this and there was no
difference between them in any matter whatsoever.
91. The prince, by his intelligence and nobility pleased all
his subjects and all the ladies in the harem.
92. By the couple everybody was made happy.
93. Their mutual love steadily grew up and their intimacy
was like that between Indra and Saci.
" 94. The loving princess once made a request to her husand:

360 Varüha Purana
95. O famous prince, I wish to ask you something which
you may tell me because of your love.
96. Hearing these words of his wife, the prince of Kalinga
said in sweet words:
97. © fair princess, I shall tell you in truth whatever you
wish to know.
98. Truth is the source of all Brahmins, Visnu is established in truth. The source of that ispenance, the kingdom is
established by truth.
99. I will never speak falsehood, I have not said anything
false so far in my life.
100. I shall give you elephants, horses, chariots, vehicle,
gems and wealth. I shall even raise you to the very position of the
ruler.
101. Hearing these words of her husband, the princess of
Karici held his feet and said.
102. I don't wish to have gems or elephants, horses and
chariots. I don't wish to rule the kingdom so long as you are
there.
103. I wish to sleep for a short while at noon without being
seen by anybody.
104. During the time of this vow, even the father-in-law and
mother-in-law and any one like them shall not see me.
105. Those in my own household may, however, at times see
me sleeping.
106. Hearing these words of his wife, the prince of Kalinga
agreed to what she said and spoke to her:
107. Be assured, O my love, that none will see you in your
bed during your vow.
108. Astime was passing, the king of Kalings having become
old, installed his son on the throne.
109. He gave the kingdom, as is wont in his line, after making it free from all troubles.
110. After receiving this gift from the king, he used to sleep
alone without being seen by anyone.
111. In due course, he begot five children resplendent like
the sun.
112. Such is the human world under the spell of my maya
that everyone revolves like a wheel in accordance with one's own
actions.

113. A human being is first born, then he becomes a boy,
then a youth in the prime of life, and after that attains old age.
114. Whatever deed a boy does without knowing it, does not
bring upon him any sin.
115. While he was ruling thc kingdom happily and free from
trouble, seventyseven years passed.
116-117. In the scventyeighth year, on the Dvadasi day in
the bright half of the month of Madhava, when the sun was at
the zenith, the desire came upon him to sce his wife.
118. He thought: Who is worshipped by her and what is
her vow to sleep in loneliness. A vow during sleep is not heard
of anywhere.
119. This is not ordained by Visnu or Siva, nor do we find
it in the dnarmasastra of Manu.
120. A detestable action can never be dharma even for yogins.
There will be none who will do like this.
121. We do not find in dharmasastra of Brhaspati or Yama
anything ordaining a vow for a woman in sleep.
122. Enjoying as much as she liked and eating meat, taking
tàmbüla and wearing red garments,
123. Having fragrant unguents and numerous gems, what
is the sort of vow she performs ?
124. Certainly my wife will be angry if I see her. All the
same, I should know what vow she practises.
125. Perhaps she wants to acquire the power of attraction
of the Kinnaras or to become a yogisvari to go wherever she
likes.
126. Or she is having sexual urge for another person.
127. While he was thinking like this, the sun sct and night
began giving pleasure to all.
128. When night was over and day set in, the bards began
singing rhapsodies.
129. As the sun rose for the welfare of the world, the king
was roused by the sound of conchs and drums.
130. The desire to see his beloved was still there in his mind.
131. He then took bath and wore silken clothes and gave
orders to keep away people from him.
132. Any one who touches me during my vow will be puniShed according to the rules of law.

362 Varüha Purana
133. Issuing the order in this manner, the king went to the
place of vow of his beloved in order to sec her.
134-135. He found her there crying with severe headache
and asking herself.
136. What wrong did I do that I am now in this despicable
state ?
137. My husband does not know that I am helplessly suffering like this. What will he or my relations think of me ?
138. What shall I tell those who are my constant companions ?
139. How has all this come about ? What will my husband
say ? What will others say ?
140. The vow which is not properly done will be defective.
But I shall once go to Saukara and there I shal! utter what I have
in my mind.
141. Hearing these words of his beloved, the king embraced
her and said:
142. What do you say? Why do you condemn yourself.
Why should you be sorry when you can be happy ?
143. Are there not doctors adept in the cight kinds of treatment, who can control your headache ?
144. Under the pretext of observing a vow, you have been
hiding your severe headache.
145. The head is aching because of the disturbance of wind,
phlegm, bile or blood or all these together.
146. It can also be due to exciting bile in place and out of
place by eating meat.
147. The head can be bored, biood expelled and anointed.
How then can the ache remain ?
148. Why is it that without telling me about this, you undergo all this suffering under the guise of vow ?
149. You now speak of going to Saukara. What is the secret
for you there ?
150. Then that beautiful and bashful lady held her husband's feet and told him:
151. Be pleased, O king, not to ask me this question. My
former life was full of bad deeds.
152. Hearing these words of his beloved, the king of Kalinga
spoke to her with composure.

153. O beautiful lady, why should you hide anything from
me. Tell me the truth.
154. She then told the king softly with eyes wide with
wonder.
155. The husband is virtue, the husband is glory and the
husband is the most dear. So what the husband asks should
certainly be told.
156. Still I don't wish to say what I have in mind because
it may cause sorrow to you.
157. My distress remains in mind. You are a handsome king
ever remaining happy.
158. You have numerous wives like me in the harem. You
can have any food you like, so too clothes and jewels.
159. You can drive in any vehicle, or on the back of elephant
or horse. So even without me you can have a life cf pleasure.
160. Your command is unviolable and you have everything
for your pleasure. So it is not necessary for you to ask me about
my illness.
161. O noble king, you are my god, preceptor, husband,
sacrifice, dharma, wealth, desire, fame and heaven.
162. So when you ask me anything, I should tel! you the
truth. That is the duty of all obedient wives.
163. But the happiness of the husband should not be disturbed by a wife. Therefore, please don't ask me about my pain.
164. Hearing these words of his wife, the king of Kalinga
spoke being distressed at her ailment:
165. Happy or unhappy, the husband should be told what
he asks.
166. No virtuous wife will hide from the husband any matter
private or public, good or bad.
167. Even if it is a sin committed out cf passion, if the wife
hides it, she is never considered virtuous.
168. Considering all this, O great lady, tell me the truth.
You will not be committing any sin by telling me the truth.
169. Hearing these words of her husband, who was standing
on dharma, she replied:
170. It is said that the king is god, the king is preceptor
and the king is Soma. Therefore, in the name of dharma I should
tell you what you ask.

364 Varáha Purana
171. IfI should not keep it secret, install your eldest son on
the throne, as is the usual practice.
172. Then come along with me to the place called Saukara.
173. Hearing these words of his wife, the king of Kalinga
agreed to her proposal and said:
174. As you say, I shall give my kingdom to my son as I
got it from my father.
175. The king and the queen in full agreement with each
other, left that place.
176. Then seeing the chamberlain, he asked him in a loud
voice to dispel the crowd that had gathered there. All those who
had coliccted there out of curiosity were asked to leave the place.
177. 'Then a tumult was heard inside the palace.
178. Why are we being sent out from here? We have come
here for our own purposc. Why should there be a command like
this ? Perhaps we are not to know the reason.
179. Then he ate sumptuous food and took rest with his wife
for a while.
180. Then he sent for his ministers and asked them to make
arrangements for the coronation of the son.
181. He also asked them to decorate the capital in an auspicious manner.
182. Then he went near the oldest minister, who was wellversed in polity, and told him.
183. O revered minister, I wish to coronate my son tomorrow. Please make arrangements for all the necessary rituals.
184. The arrangements have already been made, they
said. What you proposed to do is agreeable to us also.
185. Your son, O king, is interested in the welfare of your
subjects and he is always just and considerate.
186. Your proposal really gladdens us. So saying the
ministers left and the sun sct.
187. Hespent the night well and was roused in the morning
by music and the rhapsodies of the minstrels.
188. When the night was over and the sun rose up, the son
was crowned at an auspicious time.
189. Giving him thus the kingdom and smelling him on his
head, he told him.
190. Although you have now become the king, listen to
what you should do.

191. If you wish to acquire great merit and liberate your
manes, you should be a liberal giver and abstain from injury.
192. Butone who molests another's wife should be punished,
so also one who kills children.
193. Do not entertain desire for another's wife particularly
when she is a Brahmin. Close your eyes if you sce a beautiful
lady who is another’s wife.
194. Don’t desire the wealth of another or any ill-earned
wealth. You should protect the land with cleverness and justice.
195. Be always enterprising and follow the advice of the
ministers. The report of a minister should be carefully considered.
196. Take care to protect your person. See that the subjects
as a whole, and Brahmins in particular, are happy.
197. Indulgence in the seven kinds of pleasure may bring
about great harm.
198. Wealth should never be squandered. Unpleasantness
with ministers should be avoided particularly by those that are
interested in the welfare of the subjects.
199. Do not prevent me from going away renouncing everything, but observe all that I have said.
200. Hearing these words of his father, the prince held his
feet and said pitcously:
201. What are kingdom, treasury and army to me. Without you here, I may not be able to have any activity.
202. You have crowned me king, but I don't consider it
great without you.
203. I know only to play as other boys do. I do not know the
administration of the kingdom, which only experienced kings
know.
204. Hearing these words of his son, the king of Kalinga
Spoke to him words of consolation.
205. I do not know why you say like this. The citizens
will instruct you as to what you should do.
206. After advising the son in this way, the king started for
Saukara.
207. Seeing him leave like that, the citizens with their families followed him.
208. The elephants, horses, chariots and women in the
harem gladly followed him.

366 Varüha Purana
209. After a long time, he reached Saukara and there he
made large gifts of money and grain.
210. O Earth, as time passed, they became more and more
purified.
211. Then the handsome prince spoke pleasantly to the princess of KaAfici.
212. Now a thousand years of my life is over, please tell the
secret about which I asked you before.
213. Hearing these words of her husband, she laughed and
told the king:
214. It is all as you say. You fast for three days and then
you will know the truth.
215. The king agreed: O my beloved, I shall do what you
say. That is to my liking also.
216. Then he took the prescribed twig, twelve fingers in
length, and after bathing took the vow of fast for three days.
217. For three days they observed fast according to rules
and after bathing, put on new silk.
218. Then they bedecked themselves and offered worship to
Visnu.
219. Then she removed all ornaments, offered naivedya to me
and then told the king.
220. O my lord, come along so as to know the secret.
Then holding his hand as in wedlock, she spoke sweetly to the
king.
221. I was formerly a vixen and I was hit by the arrow of
Somadatta when he was hunting.
222. See here the stump of the arrow well lodged in my head,
as a result of which I have developed headache.
223. I was then born in the Kajici royal family and I was
given to you in marriage. By the prowess of this place I attained
all this.
224. Hearing this, the king of Kalinga said to her remembering his previous life.
225. I was a vulture who was hit by the same Somadatta
by a single arrow.
226. Then I was born as the king of Kalinga and attained
great prosperity and this kingdom.
227. All this was because I died without any desire in this
holy place.

228-229. The devotees of Lord Narayana and all the other
people there, hearing about this, began to perform rites there
without any sense of loss or gain,
230. Those who died there without any desire went to Svetadvipa with a four-armed body, all of them holding conch and
various weapons.
231. The women also went to Svetadvipa and enjoyed all
pleasures there.
232. I have thus told you about the greatness of Saukara.
233. Those who perform rites here and die without desire
go to Svetadvipa.
34. Now listen, O Earth, what results from a bath in Sakhotaka tirtha.
235. For twelve thousand and twelve hundred years they
enjoy pleasure in the Nandana garden.
236. They then come down to the earth and are born in a
big family of my devotees.
237. I shall now tell you the result of merely bathing in
Grdhravata.
238. For nine thousand nine hundred years he delights
himself in the world of Indra with the gods.
239. Then coming down from Indraloka, he is born as a
devotee with full detachment.
240. I have thus told you the result of bath in this tirtha
which you desired to know.
241. Hearing these words from Lord Nàràvana, Earth asked
him again in sweet words:
242. Duc to the result of which action is this tirtha attained
for bath or for death? Be pleased to tell me this.
Varaha said:
243. O goddess, listen. Due to the defect of some action,
one is born as an animal.
244. But due to merit acquired in former lives by deeds like
bath in sacred spots, and by liberal gifts etc, onc happens to die
there.
245. The action performed in a former life, whether it is
big or small, gives its effect without fail.
246. Even by the very sight of a sacred spot at some time or
other and even alone, what is weak becomes strong and what
is strong becomes weak.

368 Varáha Purana
247. The result of action is mysterious because what is little
becomes enormous.
248. That is the reason of being born as a human being and
attaining kingship.
249. The jackal and the vulture, by their death in the firtha,
got their sin removed and attained memory of their former lives
and went to Svetadvipa.
250. I shall now tell you about the tirtha called Vaivasvata
where Sun-god performed penance.
251. In order to get a son, Sun performed severe penance
and Candrayana for ten thousand years.
252. Then for seven thousand years, he lived on air alone.
253. I was very much pleased by this action of Sun and I
asked him to seck a boon, as he was devoted to me.
254. Choose a boon which you have in mind.
255. Hearing these words, the mighty son of Kasyapa, spoke
to me in sweet words:
256. If you are pleased with me, then give me the boon of
my getting a child by your favour.
257. I was glad to hear this uttered by him in all purity
and seriousness.
258. You will beget a twin, Yama and Yamuna.
259. After giving this boon to Sun I disappeared due to my
yogic power. Sun too returned. to his abode.
260. One who attains merit by austerities at Saukara, eating but little and bathing there, remains in the world of Sun for
ten thousand years.
261. The virtuous man who dies there never goes to the
world of Yama, because of the power of this tirtha.
262. Thus have I told you about the benefits of bath and
death at Saukara.
263. This is the narrative of all narratives, the action of all
actions. ‘This is to be recited as authority during the worship of
sandhya.
264. This is the glorious mantra dear to all devotees.
265. This should not be imparted to a wicked person, a fool
or one who is not a devotee, nor toa Vaisya or Südra who does
not know me as the Supreme being.
266. This should be recited in an assembly of learned men or

in a hall full of Brahmins proficient in Vedas. It may be imparted to those who are initiated and who know the fàstras,
267. O blessed goddess, thus have I told you about the merit
that accrues from Saukara.
268. He who recites this rising up early in the morning, gets
the result equivalent to contemplating on me for twelve years.
269. He does not take birth again, but attains eternal liberation. He who reads even one chapter of this, liberates ten
generations of his ancestors.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTYEIGHT
The Story of the Wag-tail
Sita said:
l. After hearing about the greatness of Saukara and the
benefits drawn from it and its capacity to change one being into
another.
2. The goddess who knew everything about dharma was
wonderstruck and felt much gratified.
3. She then asked Lord Visnu: How great is this tirtha
Saukara of yours ! Whichever being dies here without desire
becomes a human being.
4. What other story do you propose to tell me about
Saukara. I am very much curious to know.
5. What merit accrues to a person who sings there or renders
instrumental music ?
6. What merit is acquired by one who dances there or what
by one who keeps awake all the time. What is the effect of making gifts of cow, food and water there ?
7. What benefit is got by cleaning, anointing, offering flowers, incense, lamp and naivedya ?
8. What is the effect of other actions like japa and sacrifice
performed there? Please tell me all this for the sake of your
devotees.
9. Hearing these words of Earth, Lord Hari spoke in sweet
words.

370 Varadha Purána
Varaha said:
10. O fair goddess, I shall tell you what you wish to know,
the sacred deeds that bring about happiness.
ll. In Saukara a wag-tail bird ate too many worms as a
result of which it was suffering from indigestion.
12. By this action, it fcll down dead.
13. Then came there many boys to take it for playing and
they were running for it.
14. They began to quarrel among themselves each attempting to get it for himself.
15. Then one of them took it and threw it into the river
Ganges saying that it was of no use to them.
16. The wag-tail happened to fall in Aditya tirtha in the
Ganges.
17. Asa result of this, it was born as the beautiful son of a
Vaiśya who had performed numerous sacrifices and was very
wealthy.
18. Intelligent, pure and devoted to me he was, and twelve
years passed in this manner.
19. Once when his father and mother were together, he
bowed to them and made a request.
20. If I am dear to you, please grant me a boon I ask for.
21. Ishould not be said ‘No’ cither by you father, or you
mother. I swear by my preceptor.
22. Hearing these words of the son, the parents were very
glad and they told the dear son.
23. Whatever you say and whatever you have in mind, be
confident that we will fulfil.
24. Thirty thousand milch cows are here and you can make
a gift of any of them.
25. Ifyou do not wish to have trade which is our occupation,
you may gift away all wealth to your friends.
26. You can gift away quite unhampered all the grain. and
money.
27. We shall bring here aristocratic girls of our clan to
choose one as your bride.
28. If you wish to perform sacrifices, you can do the same
according to ihe rules laid down for Vaisyas in this regard.
29. If you wish to be a farmer you have here cight mighty
bulls and eight thousand ploughs.

30. If you wish to feed Brahmins sumptuously you can do
it as you like,
31. Hearing these words of his parents, the virtuous boy
held their feet and said:
32. Idon’t wish to make gifts of cows. I have not thought
of my friends. I don’t wish to have a bride and I don't wish to
have the merit of sacrifices.
33. Idon'twish to enter trade or farming and cattle-rearing.
Nor do I wish to host anyone.
34. There is only one thing that I desire and that is to go to
Saukara, the place of Lord Narayana.
35. Hearing these words of their son, the two devotees of
mine began to weep. (The mother said):
36. How is it that you think of Lord Narayana now?
That is, of course, good to you at the proper age.
37. Evennow I have to run after you to make you eat. How
is it that you think of going to Saukara now ?
38. My breasts are still full of milk for you and I still wish to
fondle you. How is it that you think like this ?
39. During sleep when you turn on the bed you call ‘mother’
even now. How is it that you have this desire ?
40. 'The women hold you when you play. No offence has
been committed in temples or homes.
41. Norelation or servant has spoken to you any thing harsh.
You have with you the cane when you are threatened or made
angry.
42. I do not find any reason for your renunciation.
43. Hearing these words of the mother, that delighter of the
Vaisya clan, spoke to her in sweet words:
44. Ihave always been attached to your person. During
pregnancy I was in your womb. As child I was playing over your
shoulders.
45. I have suckled your extensive breasts and, sitting on
your lap, I have soiled your whole body.
46. O mother, be kind to me. Give up the grief of parting
with the son.
47. People come and go. When once gone, they are never
Seen again.
48. From where is one born ? What relation has he ? Whose

372 Varáha Purana
is a mother or father ? I happened to fall in your womb and
thereby into the ocean of samsdra.
49. Thousands there are of fathers and mothers and hundreds of sons and wives in numerous lives. Who are they and who
are we?
50. Therefore, O mother, don’t feel sorry. The parents
were surprised at this and they said :
51. What a great secret is it that you speak about.
Then the Vaisya boy told his parents in sweet words:
52. If you think that there is a secret in what I said, then
ask me about it at Saukara.
53. There I shall tell you the secret about me if you ask there
in Süryatirtha.
54. They agreed and resolved to go to Saukara.
55. Arrangements were made for everything regarding the
journey to Saukara, the place of the lord of Abhiras.
56. "Twenty thousand cows were sent there in advance.
57. People went in front with all materials, whatever in
the house that could be offered to Lord Narayana.
58. Then on the Trayodasi day in the month of Magha,
he called together all his people.
59. They all started together at an auspicious time, cleansed
themselves and took bath with lord Narayana in mind.
60. Meditating on Narayana for a long time, they reached
my temple on the Dvadasi day in the month of Vaisakha.
61. After bathing there and propitiating the manes and
putting on the dress prescribed for my devotees, they moved
forward with twenty thousand cows.
62. They were received duly by my devotee named Bhangurasa.
63. He was given twenty milch cows all of them sacred and
auspicious.
64. The king was giving gifts of money and gems every day
and feeling happy with his wife and son.
65. While he was spending the days like this, the rainy season set in which makes all plants grow.
66. The Kadamba, Kutaja and Arjuna trees flowered profusely. Women separated from their husbands were feeling extremely sad.

67. The waterfalls produced roaring sound in some places
and gentle sound in others.
68. There were the subdued sound of flowing rivers and the
cooing of peacocks. The fragrance of Kutaja, Kadamba and
Arjuna flowers was spreading everywhere.
69. The blowing wind gave delight to the peacocks but
agony to women in separation.
70. As the rainy season with its drums of thunder passed,
the autumn season set in and the Agasti star (Canopus) rose.
71. The ponds became clear and smelt of lotuses and lilies
which blossomed producing fine fragrance.
72. The wind was pleasant with fragrance and coolness
and the smell of the Saptaparna flowers excited lovers.
73. When the autumn was over and the month of Karttika
started, on the Ekadasi day in the bright half of the month.
74. The couple took bath and dressed themselves in silk and
then spoke to the son;
75. “We have now stayed here for six months and the auspicious Dvàdasi day has come. Why don’t you tell us the secret
which you have been hiding from us."
76. Hearing the words of his parents, that dutiful son spoke
in sweet words:
77. What you say is true. Tomorrow morning I shall tell
you this secret.
78. This Dvàdast, O my parents, is particularly dear to
Visnu and it is very auspicious and it brings about the well-being
of the devotees of Visnu.
79. The initiated yogins among the devotees of Visnu are
delighted on the Dvadasi day of Karttika and they make gifts.
80. By these gifts meant to propitiate Visnu, they are able
to cross the dreadful ocean of sarisára.
81. As he was telling them this, the night came to a close.
After worshipping sandhya at dawn,
82. He had the ritualistic bath, and putting on silken garments, bowed to Lord Visnu.
83. And holding the fect of his parents, told them:
84. Ishall tell you, my parents, the purpose of our coming
here. It is to give you the secret of this Saukara.
85. I belong to the species of birds and I was bornas a wag-

374 Varaha Purana
tail. I ate numerous flies and worms and I began to suffer from
indigestion.
86. Because of that I was unable to move and, seeing this,
boys took me in their hands to play with.
87. They made fun of one another and I was moved from
hand to hand, but soon a quarrel arose each saying, 'I saw the
bird first’.
88. Oneofthem snatched me away and threw me in Ganges.
That happened to be the Somatirtha and I breathed my last
there.
89. Since I died there without any desire, by the power of
that place, I was born, O mother, as your son on this holy day.
90. "Thirteen years have passed since then and I have been
hiding this truth from you all the time.
91. Ihave now told you the purpose of our coming here.
92. I shall now engage myself in what I have to do. I bow
to you, O father, be pleased to rcturn.
The parents said to the son again:
93. Whatever deeds you do to propitiate Lord Visnu, the
same we shall also do.
94. 'They became my devotees for a long time and performed
actions laid down for liberation from samséra.
95. In the end they died there and due to their determination and by the power of this place, they were liberated and
they reached Svetadvipa.
96. All the attendants who had come there with them were
endowed with health and wealth.
97. They acquired the smell of lotus, became vogins and felt
happy by the prowess of this sacred spot.
98. Thus have I told you about this great story.
99. Such is the prosperity which this place bestows on those
who go there. Even what is originally an animal goes to Svetadvipa attaining libcration.
100. He who reads this in the morning every day, liberates
ten generations of his ancestors and ten generations of his successors.
IOf. This should not be read before fools or those who decry
the $àstras or within the hearing of wicked people. It is best
to recite it in solitude at home.

102. This should be recited before Brahmins who are wellversed in Veda, before devotees of Visnu and those who are
learned in Sastras.
103. It liberates from samsdra the pure and the humble.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTYNINE
Greatness of Saukara—the benefits of Service in worship
Varüha said:
1. O goddess, listen. I shall tell you what merit accrues to
a person who smears (the floor of the temple with cowdung).
2. He remains in heaven for as many thousands of years as
the number of steps he smears with cowdung.
3. Ifhedoes this for twelve ycars, he is born in a family rich
in money and grain.
4-5. He then goes to Kusadvipa and lives there asa great
devotee of mine for twelve thousand years, honoured by the gods.
6. At the end of his life in Kusadvipa he is born as a king
who upholds dharma.
7. He then becomes a great devotee fully dedicated to my
service and adept in all $àstras.
8. He constructs many temples and ultimately reaches my
world.
9. Ishall tell you what world is attained by collecting cowdung.
10. He who does this remains in heaven for as many thousands of years as the number of steps he goes to collect it.
11. Then he delights in the salmaladvipa for eleven thousand eleven hundred years.
12. Then leaving Salmala he is born as a virtuous king and a
great devotee.
13. He who carries cowdung for use in the temple remains in
my world for twelve thousand years.
14. Now know the benefits that accrue to a person who
bathes me, applies unguent and offers water.

376 Varáha Purdna
15. He lords in heaven for as many thousands of years as
there are drops in the water offered.
16. From heaven he descends to Krauficadvipa and from
there he descends to be born as a king.
17. And then by his own merit he goes to Svetadvipa.
18. I shall tell you now, O Earth, about what befalls a man
or woman who does the cleaning of my temples.
19. The pure devotee, free from all faults, remains in heaven
for as many hundred: of years as there are particles of dust expelled by his sweeping.
20. From heaven he descends to Sakadvipa and, remaining
there for long, is born as virtuous king.
21. Then enjoying all pleasures in the world, he goes to
Svetadvipa and remains in my eternal worship.
22-23. Listen now to what I tell you about the result of singing in my service.
24. He who sings for me remains exalted in the world of
Indra for as many thousand years as there are syllables in the
song.
25. He becomes handsome, virtuous, accomplished and
proficient in Veda. He always sees Indra, the lord of gods.
26. Heremains my devotee even while living in the world of
Indra, always worshipping me.
27. Then from the world of Indra, he passes on to the garden
Nandana and makes himself happy there in the company of
Devas.
28. Then he is born in this world amidst Vaisnavas always
singing my glory in great devotion.
29. And then by my favour, he reaches my world.
Sita said:
30. Hearing these words of Lord Madhava, Earth exclaimed
with folded hands:
Earth said:
31. How wonderful is the efficacy of singing ! Who are those
who attained salvation by this means ?
Varüha said:
32. Ina hermitage there, an outcaste was living as a devotce
of mine keeping awake for a long time.

33. O fair goddess, though an outcaste, he had good qualities
and was deeply inmersed in devotion, singing my praise for many
years.
34. On the Dvàdasi day in the bright half of the month of
Karttika, when all were asleep, he wandered about playing on
Vinà.
35. While he was thus awake, he was caught by a Brahmaraksasa. The outcaste was week and the Brahmaráksasa strong.
36. Grief-stricken, he was unable to move. He then spoke
to the Brahmaraksasa.
37. I am a mere wanderer. Why did you do this to me ? The
Brahmaráksasa then told him, being desirous of eating a man.
38. Ihave been going without food for ten days and now I
have been given the food.
39. Ishall eat you now with your flesh and blood and satisfy
myself with this that Providence has given me.
40. Hearing the words of the Brahmaraksasa, the outcaste
who was still engaged in singing in devotion asked him to do what
he liked.
41. I have now become your food given by Providence.
You do what you think proper.
42. But I am now engaged in keeping awake and singing in
praise of the Lord.
43. Letme finish my worship according to the rules and then
you can eat me.
44. This vow of mine is for the propitiation of lord Visnu
and, when this is over, you may eat me.
45. Hearing these words of that outcaste, the Brahmaraksasa
who was extremely hungry, spoke to him in harsh words:
46. “Why do you try to cheat me by saying that you will
come to me later. Can any man live after falling into the mouth
of Death ? You wish to get out of it and then come back".
47. Hearing these words, the outcaste said again:
48. “Although now I am an outcaste because of my bad
actions in my previous life, I am a pure man in my mind.
49. Listen to my promise of returning to you after my
vow which is for the good of the world. I swear truly that I will
return to you. So please release me.
50. The whole universe is based on truth, all the worlds rest

378 Varüha Purána
in truth. The sages who speak of Brahman get their attainments
through truth.
51. By truth is a girl given in marriage, the Brahmins speak
truth, kings win by truth.
52. Heaven is attained by truth, salvation is got by truth.
The sun shines by truth and the moon sheds light by truth.
53. IfI do not return to you, I will incur the same sin as
accrues to a person who does not take bath on Sasthi, Astami
and Amavasya days.
54. IfI do not return to you, I will incur the same sin as
accrues to a person who shares bed with the preceptor's wife
and the king's wife.
55. If I do not return to you, I will incur the same sin as
accrues to a person who is a beggar or a liar.
56. IfI do not return to you, I will incur the same sin as
accrues to a person who kills a Brahmin or drinks liquor or who
does not complete a vow undertaken".
57. The Brahmaraksasa was pleased at these words of the
outcaste, he bowed to him and allowed him to go.
58. Released thus by the Brahmaraksasa, the outcaste with
determination again moved about singing my glory out of devotion.
59. When the day dawned, the singing and dancing were
concluded, and uttering the name ‘Narayana’ the outcaste began
to return.
60. Then a man suddenly appeared there and spoke to him
in appealing tone:
61. O good man, where are you going in such haste. That
is the place of goblins and don't lose your life by going there.
62. Hearing these words of that man, the outcaste said:
63. I have to honour an agreement with the Brahmaraksasa who wanted to eat me. I am speeding to him now.
64. Then the man told him in all earnestness.
65. O you poor outcaste, don’t go to that place where
lives that Brahmaraksasa. It is not sinful to violate truth if it is
to save your own life.
66. Then that austere outcaste said, determined to court
death.
67. I shall not do as you say. I shall never sacrifice truth,
come what may. That is my resolve.

68. The whole universe rests on truth, the family is established in truth, truth is the highest dharma and the soul has its
basis in truth.
69. I shall never give up truth and take to falsehood. I bow
to you. Be pleased to go.
70. The outcaste, who was thus firmly wedded to truth,
went to that Ráksasa, bowed to him and said:
71. I have now come to you. Eat me quickly. By that
favour I shall be able to go to the abode of Visnu.
72. Eat my body as you like and drink my warm blood.
You are so full of hunger. Satisfy yourself and do me thus good.
73. Hearing these words of the outcaste, the Brahmaraksasa
told him:
74. I am pleased with you. You have upheld truth and
righteousness. You have got this commendable mind, although
being an outcaste, you do not know the rules.
75. Hearing these words of Brahmaráksasa, the outcaste
who was standing on truth, spoke to him endearingly.
76. Although I am an outcaste not entitled to perform
rituals, I should always stand by truth.
77. Hearing these words of the outcaste, the terrible
Brahmaráksasa spoke to him again:
78-79. If you wish to save your life, give me the benefit
of your having sung the glory of Visnu throughout night. I
shall then release you instead of eating you.
980. The outcaste then replied to the Brahmaraksasa:
81. Iam not able to know what you mean. You said that
you will eat me. And now you want the fruit of my singing the
praise of God.
82. The Brahmaraksasa then said: Give me the merit of
your singing for one watch of the night. Then I shall release you
so that you can go to your wife and children.
83. At these words of the Raksasa, the outcaste who treasured the merit of his singing, told him with an air of determination,
984. O Brahmaráksasa, I shall not give you the merit of my
singing which you ask for. You may cat me and drink my blood.
95. The Ráksasa then replied: Give me the merit of your
singing once before Lord Visnu. By that I shall be liberated.

380 Varaha Purana
86. The outcaste was wonderstruck at these words of the
Raksasa and asked him:
87. What wrong did you commit that you became a Ràksasa ?
88. The Brahmaraksasa then spoke in great sorrow:
89. I was a Brahmin by name Somagarma belonging to
the Caraka clan.
90. Without knowing the rules and mantras I used to perform
sacrificial rituals for the credulous, because of my greed.
91. When once I was performing a sacrifice in. this way, I
was stricken by pain in the abdomen and I died as a result.
92. When, thus, the five-day long sacrifice was interrupted,
a great sin befell me.
93. I became a Raksasa because of this objectionable deed.
94. Whatever I did without mantra, without proper accent,
without following the code, the resultant form of all that I could
see then.
95. By my own faults I became this Raksasa. It behoves
you to liberate me from this by giving me the merit of your
singing. Liberate me, this despicable self, by the song in praise
of Visnu.
96. The saintly outcaste was moved by these words of the
Brahmaraksasa and so he agreed and spoke to him:
97. O Raksasa, ifit will make you pure and get you release,
I shall give you the merit of my faultless singing.
98. He who faultlessly sings songs before Visnu crosses all
berriers. So saying he transferred to him his merit.
99. The Raksasa, thus getting the merit from the outcaste,
became pure like the moon in autumn.
100. The outcaste continued to be a singer of my glory and,
in the end, attained Brahman.
101. Such is the result, O Earth, that a person who sings for
me gets.
102. He who sings on the Dvadasi day of Karttika, renounces everything and reaches my world.
103. He who sings songs in my praise during the period
when I am awake, becomes detached from everything and attains
my world.
104. I have thus told you about the efficacy of singing by
which one is able to transcend this world.

105. I shall now tell you about the instrumental music
which confers a position equal to the Gods.
106-107. By means of Sampa tala or Sannipata! one goes to
the abode of Kubera and remains there for nine thousand nine
hundred years.
108. Then from the abode of Kubera he moves about as he
likes and finally reaches my world by the efficacy of the talas
like Sampa.
109. O Earth, I shall tell you now about the efficacy of
dancing by which one is enabled to transcend the world.
110. He goes to Puskaradvipa and moves about there as he
likes for thirty three thousand years.
111. He becomes handsome, virtuous, valiant and always
treading the right path. He gets release from samsdra.
112. He who dances for me with vocal and instrumental
music, goes to Jambüdvipa and is born there as an emperor.
113. He becomes an ardent protector of his subjects and
remains a staunch devotee.
114. He who offers me flowers in ritualistic worship and
places them on my head as much as it can hold,
115. (He) reaches my world by the efficacy of this action
of his.
116. Thus have I told you what is conducive to the liberation from samsdra for my devotees.
117. He who recites this early in the morning liberates ten
generations of his ancestors and ten generations of his successors.
118. This should not be read in the midst of fools or before
wicked people. It should be read only before devotees who seek
release.
119. This should not be rcad to the indifferent, the cruel
and those who go to temple simply seeking food, if you wish for
good.
120. This is the greatest of all dharmas and the greatest of
all actions.
121. Don’t read even a chapter of this to one who despises
the $àstras if you wish to go to my world.
Hael
l. These are different kinds of keeping time-measure.

382 Varüha Purdna
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FORTY
The greatness of holy spois in Kokamukha
Earth said:
l. I have now known about the temoles of which you spoke
to me. But I wish to know in which place you reside for ever.
2. Which is that most exalted place where you remain as an
idol ? Which is the exalted place where the performance of actions
leads to the attainment of the highest end ?
Varüha said :
3. O you goddess, fond of devotees, I shall tell you about
the places where I reside.
4. I have formerly told you about Kokamukha. There in
the Himalayas is a broad rocky surface called Badari.
5. There is a spot called Lohargala resorted to by the king
of the Mlecchas. These are places from which I do not move out
even for a moment.
6. This is the place where I am installed, although I am the
entire universe and there is nothing in which I am not present.
7. Let those who wish to know the secret about me go to
Kokamukha soon.
8. Earth was glad to hear these words of the Lord. Holding
her hands over her head, she spoke to him:
Earth said:
9. O lord of the worlds, I have great curiosity to know how
Kokamukha is great. Be pleased to tell me.
Varáha said:
10. "There is no sacred spot greater than Kokamukha, none
more pure than Kokamukha, no position higher than Kokamukha's, nothing more dear than Kokamukha.
11. He who goes to Kokamukha never returns to samsdra.
Whatever action is performed there, becomes conducive to the
soul.
12. Among all the places about which you have asked, O
Earth, a place which equals Kokamukha never has been and
never will be.

13. There in Kokamukha is my hidden form.
Earth said:
14. O great lord, the refuge of devotees, be pleased to tell
me about all the secrets of Kokamukha.
Varüha said:
15. O goddess, listen. I shall tell you what you desire to
know about this charming Kokamukha.
16. There is a waterfall called Jalabindu in the mountain
which is important. By performing rites there one reaches my
world.
17. There is another waterfall in Koka called Visnudhara
which is like a club.
18. Ifone fasts there for a day and night and then takes bath,
he acquires the result of a thousand Agnistoma sacrifices.
19. He never fails in his duty and he attains full benefits.
He is then born in a big family of my devotees.
20. One who gives up life at Visnudhara, doubtless sees this
form of mine.
21. There is a place in Kokamukha called Visnupada dedicated to Varaha which is not known to many.
22. He who offers libations there after fasting during the
night, will be born in Krauficadvipa as my devotec.
23. One who gives up life there, renounces everything and
reaches my world.
24. Then there is the lake called Visnusaras where I have
played with you raising you up with my tusk.
25. One who bathes there early in the morning, becomes
free from all sins and goes to my world.
26. In Koka there is Somatirtha where there is a spot of
five slabs with the name of Visnu marked therein.
27. One who bathes there after fasting for five days, is born
as my devotee in Gomedadvipa.
28. One who gives up life there, becomes free from all sins
and sees me.
29. In my region in Koka, there is Tungaküta where water
falls from the mountain in four streams.
30. One who takes bath there after fasting for five days
goes to Kusadvipa and then to my world.

384 Variha Purina
31. There is the place called Anityasrama sacred for rituals
which is not well known even to gods, why then speak of mortals?
32. One who bathes there after fasting for a day, is born as
my devotee in Puskaradvipa.
33. One who dies in this holy spot becomes free from all sins
and goes to my world.
34. Then there is the highly holy Agnisaras where water
falls from the mountain in five streams.
35. One who bathes there after fasting for five days, is born
as my devotee in Kuésadvipa.
36. One who dies there after performing the important rites,
goes from KuSadvipa to the world of Brahma.
37. There is the great spot called Brahmasaras where water
falls in a single torrent on a slab.
38. One who bathes there after fasting for five days, becomes
my devotee in Süryaloka.
39. One who dies there goes from Süryaloka to my world.
40. There is then the place called Dhenuvata where a single
torrent falls from a rock.
41. My devotee may take bath there after fasting for seven
days.
42. He then gets the merit of having bathed in seven
oceans and he may remain my devotee in all the seven islands.
43. My devotee who gives up life there, transcends the seven
islands and reaches my world.
44. There is the place called Dharmodbhava in that holy region
where a single torrent falls from the hill-top.
45. One should take bath there after fasting for a day. If he
is a Südra he will be born a Vaisya.
46. One who gives up life there, enjoys the fruit of all sacrifices and then reaches me.
47. There is the holy spot called Kotivata where a single
torrent falls at the foot of a banyan tree.
48-49. One who bathes there after fasting for a night remains my devotee with all prosperity foras many thousands of
years as there are leaves in that tree.
50. One who gives up life there after severe austerities,
attains the colour of fire and reaches my world.
51. There is the place called Papapramocana where a single
torrent falls shaped like a pot.

52, One who bathes there after fasting for a full day is born
as a Brahmin proficient in all the four Vedas.
53. One who gives up life there resorting to the stream called
Kauégiki and one who takes bath there after fasting for five days,
54. Revels in the world of Indra following the rules of my
devotees.
55. One who gives up life there transcends the world of
Indra and reaches my world.
56. There is another important spot called Yamavyasanaka
where there is a torrent in the river Kauéiki.
57. One who takes bath there after fasting for a day, does
not meet with adversity.
58. The devotee who gives up life there, becomes free from
all sins and reaches my world.
59. In the same place there is a spot called Matanga where
there is another torrent in the same river KauSiki.
60. One who takes bath there after fasting for day will be
born in Kimpurusa and become fully purified.
61. One who gives up life there, transcends Kimpurusa
and goes to my world.
62. There is another spot there called Vajrabhava where
again, there is another torrent in the river Kausiki.
63. One who takes bath there after fasting for one day, will
be born in the world of Indra.
64. By the merit of the bath there, he gets a body like Indra's
holding the weapon Vajra.
65. One who gives up life there meditating on me, transcends the world of Indra and reaches my world.
66. Ata distance of three krosas from there, is the spot called
Sakrarudra in the expansive rock in Kokamukha.
67. One who takes bath there after fasting for three days,
will be born in Jambüdvipa where Jambi is rooted.
68. (One who gives up life there), transcends Jambüdvipa
and reaches my world.
69. O Earth, there is another important spot there by going
where people cross the ocean of samsára.
70. That is known as Darhstrankura and is at onc extremity
of Kokàmukha. This is not so well known to people.
7l. One who bathes there after fasting for a day, will be
born as my devotee in Salmalidvipa.

386 Varáha Purdna
72. One who gives up life there, transcends Salmalidvipa
and reaches my world.
73. There is the spot called Visnutirtaha which brings about
good to my devotees.
74. In it from the middle of the mountain in Koka, there
are three torrents.
75. He who bathes there snaps all ties with the world and
goes to the world of Vayu remaining in airy form.
76. The devotee who gives up life there, transcends the world
of Vayu and reaches my world.
77. There is a great spot called Sarvakamika where there is
a famous rock at the place where the river Kau£iki enters Koka.
78. One who performs bath there after fasting for a day will
be born in a big family of devotees with the memory of the past.
79. By merely bathing there one attains whatever is desired
in heaven or earth.
80. One who gives up life there, gives up all attachment and
goes to my world.
81. There is the spot called Matsyasila in Kokàmukha where
there are three torrents in the river Kausiki.
82. Ifwhile bathing there, one sees a fish, it should be understood that I have gone there then on my own accord.
83. Seeing the fish there, the devotee shall offer water with.
honey and fried grain.
84. One who bathes there reaches Padmapatra to the north
of Meru.
85. One who gives up life in Matsyasila, transcends the
peak of Meru and reaches my world.
86. The Kokamukha region extends over five yojanas. He
who knows this is never stained by sin.
87. Ishall tell you now another thing, O Earth! I stand in
the beautiful Kokamukha facing south.
988. Iremain there in human form with the face of the boar
and complexion like sandalwood.
89. With the face raised on the left and the left tusk held
up, I see the whole universe and my devotees there.
90. ‘The sinless persons meditate on me there and perform
actions meant to secure liberation.
91. Ifa person happens to die in Kokamukha, he never returns to this world but attains a form similar to mine.

929. This Kokàmukha is a great place, the greatest secret
and the greatest attainment.
93, Itell you the truth that what is acquired by the processes
of Sankhya or Yoga will never be equal to what is acquired by
going to Kokàmukha.
94. I have thus told you what you desired to know. What
else do you wish to ask ?
95. He who reads this liberates ten generations of his ancestors and ten generations of his successors.
96. After death, he will be bora in a family of pure devotees
and will be solely devoted to me.
97. He who listens to this early in the morning, snaps all
potentialities of his future lives and becomes my staunch devotee.
98. He who recites this account of the greatness of Kokamukha early in the morning reaches my Supreme abode. There
need be no doubt in this matter.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FORTYONE
The greatness of Badarikasrama
Varüha said:
1. Now listen to another secret on the surface of the Himavat
mountain, namely the holy place Badari which is not easily
accessible even to Devas.
2. People do not reach there by their actions, however difficult to perform they may be. They reach only by devotion this
place which liberates all.
3. tis not easy to reach this place of mine in the rocky peak
full of snow. But he who is able to go there will be really gratified.
4. Jn that heap of rocks there is Brahmakunda. O Earth,
I remain there in that snow.
5. The man who bathes there after fasting for three nights
attains merit equal to performing Agnistoma sacrifice.
6. And, if after performing the vows and with full control
of the senses, he gives up life there, he crosses Satyaloka and
reaches my world.

388 Varaha Purana
7. In that place, there is the spot called Agnisatyapada,
where water falls in torrents from three peaks.
8. He who bathes there after fasting for three nights becomes truthful, clever and devoted to my service.
9. He who dies there too, crosses Satyaloka and reaches
my world and enjoys there.
10. In Badari, there is my hermitage known as Indraloka
where I was most sincerely propitiated by Indra.
1l. Here too from the peaks water falls in big torrents in
a broad slab which is dear to me.
12. He who bathes there after fasting for a night becomes
truthful and pure and remains high in Satyaloka.
13. And he who gives up life there after performing the vow
called Anagaka, crosses Satyaloka and reaches my world.
14. There is the tirtha called Paficasikha in Badari where
water falls from five peaks.
15. He who bathes there attains the merit of ASvamedha
sacrifice and delights himself in the company of Devas.
16. He who dies tbere after performing all austerities, crosses Svargaloka and remains high in my world.
17. Inthatgreat place of mine there is the spot called
Catuhsrotas where water falls in streaks, one each in the four
directions.
18. He who bathes there after fasting for a night delights in
heaven and becomes my devotee.
19. And if he dies there after performing all austerities,
crosses heaven and reaches my world.
20. There is another spot called Vedadhara there wherein
from the mouths of Brahmà emanated the four Vedas.
21. Four big peaks are there in that place in the Himalaya
and from these four torrents fall.
22. He who bathes there after fasting for four nights gets
the capacity to easily master the four Vedas.
23. And if he dies there standing in my service, he crosses
the world of Devas and reaches my world.
24. Then there is another spot called Dvàdasàdityakunda,
where the twelve Adityas were settled by me.
25. There on a big slab fall twelve streaks of water facilitating service to me.

26. He who bathes in any one of these twelve streaks, goes
there where the twelve Adityas lord.
27, And ifhe dies there, he crosses the place of these Adityas
and remains high in my world.
28. There is the spot called Lokapala where the guardians
of quarters were settled by me.
29. There in the middle of the mountain is a pond from
where by splitting the rocks arose Soma.
30. He who bathes there on the Dvàdaéi day in the month
of Jyestha, delights with guardian deities of the quarters and
becomes my devotee.
31. And if he dies there, remaining in my service, he crosses
the world of these guardian deities and reaches my world.
32. There is a very holy spot called Merorvara from where
the Mount Meru settled itself.
33. Three torrents bright like gold fall from there but þecome invisible at the place where they fall.
34. He who bathes there after fasting for three nights, delights himself in the peaks of Meru and becomes my devotee.
35. And if he dies there, he crosses the Meru and reaches
my world.
36. There is another important tirtha called Manasodbheda
where water gushes forth piercing the earth.
37. Even Devas do not know about this place, but men
know since the water comes forth from under the earth.
38. He who bathes there after fasting for a full day and night
delights in the heavenly Manasa and becomes my devotee.
39. Then there is the holy spot called Paficasira where
Brahma clipped off one of his heads.
40. Five ponds are there amidst big rocks in the place of
five heads.
41. The one in the centre has water red in colour and this
represents the head cut off by Brahma.
42. He who bathes there after fasting for five nights, delights
in Brahmaloka and becomes my devotec.
43. And if he dies in this Paficasira after performing Jalacàndràyana and remaining steadfast in my service,
44. He becomes clever and prudent and free from desire
and stupor, and crossing the Brahmaloka reaches my world.

390 Varáha Purdne
45. There is another tirtha named Somabhiseka, where
Soma (Moon) was crowned by me as the king of Brahmins.
46. O Earth, I was propitiated there by the Moon by austerities numbering fourteen crores.
47. He attained great powers because of this. The whole
world is now dependent on him, as also the cereals and all herbs.
48. Skanda, Indra and Maruts are born from him and also
disappear in him, and everything will be of Soma.
49. There is a spot called Somagiri where there is a torrent
of water falling in cavity.
50. He who bathes there after fasting for three nights, delights himself in the world of Soma.
51. And if he dies there after performing austerities, he
crosses Somaloka and reaches my world.
52. In that sacred Badari there isthe holy Urvastkunda
where Urvasi was born out of the right thigh.
53. "There I was performing penance for the sake of Devas.
None knew me.
54. Along time passed as I was performing penance there.
Even the gods like Indra, Brahma and Siva did not know me then.
55. Result is certain in Badari and I performed penance
for many thousands of years.
56. Infact, I continued like that for millions of years.
57. As Iwas in this secret place, Devas could not see me and
they became very sad.
58. O Earth, while I was engaged in that penance, I could
see every one, but none could see me because of my power of
illusion.
59. Then the gods went to Brahma and told him that without Visnu they could have no peace of mind.
60. Hearing the words of Devas, Brahma said that I was
concealed from them by the enveloping Maya.
61. Then Devas, Gandharvas, Siddhas and Saints became
very much. pleased.
62. Headed by Indra they came where I was and said:
63. “O Lord, we are all unhappy being forsaken by you.
Save us by your blessing”.
64. I then cast a glance at them and they became happy.
65. He who bathes in the Urvasikunda after fasting for a

night, gets absolved of all sins and delights in the Urvaéiloka
for all time.
66. And he who gives up life there remaining in my service,
becomes freed of all merits and sins and merges in me.
67. He who thinks of this holy Badari reaches the abode of
Visnu never to return.
68. He who listens to this or recites this remaining truthful,
celibate and free from anger,
69. Orremaining in contemplation and he who understands
the secret of such contemplation,
70. And understands the self, attains supreme beatitude.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FORTYTWO
Action in Privacy!
Sita said:
1. Hearing these words of the Lord, Earth, desirous of
dharma, propitiated him with folded hands.
Earth said:
2. O Madhava, be pleased to listen to what this servant
of yours with tender nature has to say.
3. Women do not have the stamina to do all that you said
now without taking food.
4. So tell me how these can attain happiness even if they
take food with your blessing.
5. Hearing these words of Earth, the Lord laughed and
said:
Varüha said:
6. O fair goddess, it is good that you asked me about this
Secret conducive to my devotees.
7. She who is my devotee, if she feels anything impure, may
touch my image wherever it is.
l. This relates to women in their monthly period.

392 Varaha Purana
8. If, while performing austerities, the need for food is
felt, it can certainly be taken with mind set in me.
9. Ifa woman gets menses (in the course of her austerities),
she does not incur sin if she takes food after uttering this mantra
with hands folded over the head: “I in my monthly course, bow
to the great Lord who is unborn and has no beginning or end.
10. There is no harm in her doing things after taking food
with this mantra.
11-12. "Taking bath on the fifth day (from the occurrence
of menses), if she duly performs worship with mind solely set in
me and without thinking of worldly life she may attain manhood.
Earth said:
13. Men or women are really neither men nor women (of
the type they ought to be). How can they be liberated from the
bondage of worldly life ?
Varáha said:
14-15. Controlling all their sense organs and steadying their
mind, if I am meditated upon steadfastly, it is Sannyásayoga.
One that does it, whether it bea man, woman or hermaphrodite,
attains supreme bliss.
16. I shall tell you another thing, please listen. The mind,
intellect and thought are not usually within the control of man.
17. But he, who with the power of knowledge, is able to
fix it unflinchingly on one object and keep it in poise, is not
l stained by anything.
i 18. He who has the poised mind set in me, does not incur
the result ofany action even if he takes all kinds of food and drink,
prescribed or prohibited.
19-20. Ifthe mind, intellect and thought are poised and set
| in me, then one is not affected by whatever one does, like the
water on the lotus leaf.
21. O Goddess, let the mind be well poised whether it is
for the whole day and night, for an hour or even for a moment.
22. One attains the supreme aim if the mind is well poised
even if he does all kinds of things day and night.
23. What fear has he who always thinks of me, awake or
asleep, hearing or seeing?

24, I praise him who has nothing else in mind, be he a
Candala doing heinous deeds or a Brahmin who has strayed into
the wrong path.
25-26. Those who perform sacrifices knowing dharma well,
endowed with proper knowledge and mind set in me, those who
always think of me and perform actions dear to me and those who,
in dedication to me, sleep well free from care, and those who are
tranquil in mind, all of them are dear to me.
27. Those who do actions, good or bad, thinking of themselves alone, are very base men and they bring upon themselves
suffering.
28. It is the mind that leads to ruin in this world, and it is
the same mind that is the cause of liberation also. O Earth,
therefore, let me be attained with the mind set on me.
29. Dedicating Jñäna (knowledge) and Yoga (action) to
me, let me be worshipped with steadfast devotion.
30. He who with due austerities has the mind always set
on me, comes near me and becomes eligible to be in me.
31. The rule that a woman should be cohabited with after
her monthly course, was laid down by me for the sake of progeny.
32. If one does not cohabit (with his wife) soon after her
period, with full concentration of mind and wishing my blessing,
ten generations of the ancestors and ten generations of the descendants are harmed.
33. Let one approach the wife with a sense of duty to his
ancestors and not with the motive of carnal pleasure or impelled
by lust.
34. Let not a second woman be touched even if urged by
uncontrollable passion, so too a third and never a fourth.
35. After cohabitation, let one not have the curiosity to see
the women laying in the bed, in order to maintain purity.
36. When once the thing is over, my devotee shall bathe in
water and change his cloth.
37. He who cohabits before the stopping of the monthly
course, doubtless makes his manes drink semen.
38. A man cohabits with one woman (for the sake of
dharma) with a second due to passion. He who does it with a
third or fourth is indeed a depraved person.
39. This is a rule which I have made for the entire world.

394 Varüha Purana
40. Soon after the period, cohabitation is laid down for the
sake of the manes. He who cohabits at this time (alone) is considered celibate enough.
41. The man who wanders away at this time without cohabiting with the wife, due to anger or delusion, incurs the sin of
kiling the embryo.
42. I shall tell you another thing, O Earth, please listen.
It is knowledge relating to Cittayoga and action relating to Karmayoga.
43. Pcople reach my place by action, also by singing of me;
so too by contemplation. There is no other course (for this).
44. Jfiana, Yoga and Sànkhya are all based on the mind
and those that follow the path I have shown, will achieve their
aim.
45. O Earth, during the monthly period, one may remain
for three days on air alone.
46. On the fourth day such actions as conducive to the
attainment of the aim, may be done, but none else.
47. ‘The head should be cleansed by bath, white cloth should
be worn, and the mind should be made steady.
48. The prescribed deeds may then be done. Those who do
so are dear to me indeed.
49. Then after worshipping me they may take food and bow
to me with hands folded over the head.
50. The mantra for this is: “You are the first of all beings
and you have no end. O Lord, we who were in our monthly
course, bow to you. We have fasted for three days and we bow
to you now when the menstrual flow has stopped."
51. O Earth, the women after their course become purified
by this mantra and they may do the actions that are to be done
after bath as well as those to be done before bath.
52. In this way man or woman does not get any harm and
those who do actions laid down by me are dear to me.
53. And they become more and more inclined to do what is
dear to me, even if they be defiled by association with the monthly period.
54. And those desirous of attaining the supreme, may give
up everything and with full control of the senses and deep concentration of mind, meditate on me.

55. "They get the result, be they men, women or hermaphrodites, irrespective of their knowledge and actions.
56. People who are caught in Samsara do not know me yet.
Those who are engaged in devotion to me alone know me.
57. Fathers and mothers in thousands, and sons and daugthers in hundreds, revolve like a wheel and as a result of this
stupefaction, they are unable to know me.
58. The world is enveloped by ignorance and subjected by
delusion. It is also bound by manv attachments. It is difficult
to wean the mind clear from all this.
59. The mother goes away, the father goes away, so too the
‘sons and servants.
60. They are born according to their own deeds.
61. Even those with knowledge, if they are deluded by
samsara remain (in my world) for a short while only, a few months
or years, and are born again and do not remain with me.
62. But he to whom the .Vyasayoga (dedicating everything
to me) 1s known, releases himself, no doubt.
63. He who listens to this (account) early in the morning
soon after waking up, acquires great attainments and goes to
my world.
64. Thus I have told you the secret about which you asked
me for the favour of devotees.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FORTYTHREE
Greatness of Mandara
Varaha said:
l. O fair goddess, I shall tell you now about another place
which is important to my devotees. Please listen.
2. This is known as Mandara and is situated on the right side
of river Ganga, on a plateau in Vindhya.
3. In Tretayuga will be born the brilliant Rama and he will
‘consecrate me there.
4. Hearing these words from the mouth of Lord Narayana,
Earth desirous of dharma, spoke to him in sweet tone.

396 Varáha Purana
Earth said:
5. O great Lord, you were pleased to tell me about the holy
place called Mandára.
6. What rites do people perform there and to what worlds
do they go?
7. What are the secrets about Mandara? I am eager to
know all this. Please tell me.
Varaha said:
8. Ishalltell you all that you ask, the rites in Mandara and
the secrets.
9. Iwas playing there when the Mandara tree was in flower
and I placed one of its beautiful flowers on my chest.
10. Then in the place where the Mandara was standing in
the mountain, eleven ponds appeared.
ll. I remained in that place beneath the Mandara for the
sake of devotees.
12. It is an attractive spot with a beautiful slab where I
stood beside that tree.
13. You may know the wonder of this Mandara. It flowers
only on the Dvadasi and Caturdasi days.
14. And this occurs during the noon. No flower can be seen
in it on any other day.
15. The man who bathes in the Mandarakunda attains
supreme bliss.
16. He who dies there after performing austerities, goes
to my world.
17. On its northern side is the hill called Prapana where
three torrents fall on the southern side.
18. 'Thisis known as the Snànakunda in that place and
here the water that falls on the south flows northwards.
19. He who bathes there after fasting for a night delights
himself on the southern peak of Mount Meru.
20. And he who dies there giving up all attachments, reaches
my world.
21. On its north-eastern side is the spot Vaikunthakarana
where a torrent falls green in colour.
22. He who bathes there after fasting for a night, reaches
heaven and enjoys with the gods.

23. And he who gives up his life there after full gratification,
liberates his whole family and reaches my world.
24. On its south-eastern side on the peaks of the Vindhya is
an even fall of water entering into a deep pond beneath.
25. He who bathes there after fasting for a night, delights
himself on the eastern side of Mount Meru.
26. And he who gives up his life there with mind set in me,
cuts off all connections with worldly life and reaches my world.
27. On the eastern side of Mandara is a Kotara where a
torrent falls in the shape of a mace.
28. He who bathes there after foregoing five meals, delights
himself on the eastern side of Mount Meru.
29. And he who gives up life there after performing
austerities, crosses the peak of Meru and reaches my world.
30. On its southern side is Vindhyavinissrta where five
torrents fall in the shape of maces.
31. He who bathes there after fasting for one day and night,
delights himself on the southern peak of Mount Meru.
32. And he who gives up life there after performing austerities, crosses the peak of Meru and reaches my world.
33. In the south-western side of Mandara falls a torrent
shining like the sun.
34. He who bathes there after fasting for a day and night
delights himself on the Western side where (the star) Dhruva
shines.
35. And he who gives up life there remaining in my devotion, gets freed from all sins and delights himself in my world.
36. On its western side is the deep lake called Cakravarta.
37. He who bathes there giving up five meals, delights
himself freely in the peaks of Meru.
38. And he who gives up life there, crosses all peaks of
Meru and delights himself in my presence.
39. On the north-western side of this rocky place in the
Vindhya, there are three torrents, also shaped like maces.
40. He who bathes there with mind set on me, delights
himself in all peaks (of Meru).
4l. And he who gives up life there giving up all attachments,
reaches my world.
42. Ata short distance from it on the southern side is the
deep lake called Gabhiraka.

398 Varáha Purdna
43. He who bathes there after fasting for eight nights,
enjoys himself freely in all islands.
44. And he who gives up life there remaining in devotion
to me, leaves all these islands and reaches my world.
45. On its western side is the great Parama where seven
torrents fall into a deep lakc.
46. He who bathes there after fasting for a day and night,
delights himself freely in the world of Indra.
47. And he who gives up life there remaining constant in
my service, gcts free from all attachments and reaches my world.
48. Now listen to this namely that Syamantapaficaka is in
this mount Mandara.
49. Iremain in the heap of rocks in Mandára at the top of
the mountain Vindhya.
50. The cakra (disc) is on the right, gadā (club) is on
the left, $amkha (conch), làngala (plough) and musala
(mace) stand in front.
51. I have told all this to you and for the sake of devotees.
52. Being deluded by my Maya, people do not know this,
except the pure devotees and those who resort to this Varaha.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FORTYFOUR
Greatness of Somesvara, Muktiksetra, Triveni and others
Sita said:
1. Hearing about the greatness of Mandara, Earth, who was
desirous of dharma, was full of wonder and asked the Lord.
Earth said:
2. By your favour I got an idea of Mandàra. Be pleased to
tell me now about what is even more important than that.
Varüha said:
3. Listen to me, O goddess, for what you wish to know. I
shall tell you about Salagrama.

4. In Dvaparayuga in the clan of Yadus in which is the
leader Sura,
5. To whom is born Vasudeva of righteous actions,
6. Whose wife is the highly beautiful Devaki,
7. To her Iwill be born known as Vasudeva to the Devas
destroying all enemies.
8. Inthat place of Yadavas was a Brahmarsi by name Salankayana.
9. He was wandering in all ten quarters to worship me
and then performed penance at the peak of Meru for getting a
son.
10. He then went to Pindaraka and from there to Lohàrgala
and so on for a thousand years.
1l. AsI was in my form together with Siva, he could not
see me in any of those places.
12. O Earth, I was together with Siva, and Salankayana
was performing penance.
13. In that mount Salagrama, Siva united with me remains
as a stone.
14. I, of course, remain there in the form of the mount and
all the stones there represent me.
15. All these stones are fit for worship, particularly those
which have the cakra-marks in them. And Siva remains in the
form of a Linga in a temple in that hill.
16. There are stones there marked by the linga and also
those marked by cakra. The hill itself is in the form of a linga
and is lorded by Somesgvara.
17. This is because it was established there by Soma (Moon)
and named after himself. He performed penance there for a
thousand years for release from a curse.
18. When he was freed from the curse, he regained his effulgence and strength and then extolled Siva,
19. Who emerged as a giver of boons from Somesgvara.
Soma said:
20. I bow to Siva, the lord of Uma, fivc-faced, blue-necked
and three-eyed, calm and eager to bless the devotees;
21. The divine, adorned by all Devas, having moon on the
crest, holding the bow Pinaka in the hand, the lord of gods, the
refuge of devotees;

400 Varáha Purána
22. Holding the trident, bearing the Damaru and riding the
bull, praised by the ganas with different kinds of fierce faces;
23. Mahakala, the destoryer of Tripuras, the vanquisher of
demons like Andhaka, wearing the elephant's skin and adorned
with the tiger-skin;
24. Having as the Upavita, the serpent's body, holding the
string of rudraksa, lord of all, though without a form assuming
forms according to the devotees’ desire;
25. Having the sun, moon and fire as the eyes, beyond the
reach of words and mind, with prominent matted tresses and
shoulders washed by Ganga;
26. Having Kailàsa as abode and with hermitage in the
Himalaya.
Praised thus, Lord Siva spoke to Soma:
27. Seek a boon of me of what is in your mind, now that
you have the rare opportunity of getting me before you.
Soma said:
28. O Lord, if you are pleased to give me a boon let it be
that your presence is always there in this linga known after my
name to grant the desires of devotees.
The great lord said:
29. I shall remain in this place for ever where the presence
of Visnu is also there, particularly in this Linga installed by you.
30. O moon, know that you are only a form of mine. I shall
grant boons to all those that worship this Linga, even more than
for the gods.
31. By the power of the penance of sage Salankayana, I am
here together with Visnu.
32. The hill Salagrama is Visnu and this Somegvara is
myself. The stones here represent both Visnu and Siva.
33. Reva (the river Narmada) once performed penance to
propitiate Siva that a son like him may be born to her.
34. Iam not the son of any and shall not be ofany. But the
desire of Reva had to be fulfilled.
35. Thinking thus, I spoke to her with pleasant mind:
36. I shall be within you as son, but in the form of the
linga and along with Ganeéa.

37. You are really myself in my form as water. We remain
together as Siva and Sakti.
38, Receiving the boon, Reva came to my presence here
which came to be known as Revakhanda thereafter.
39. Gandaki (the river) also formerly performed penance
for a thousand divine years, first living on fallen leaves and then
on air alone, with a view to propitiate Visnu.
40. Then Visnu who always favours his devotees, appeared
there and spoke:
41. O Gandaki, I am surprised and pleased at your penance and unflinching devotion.
42. Please ask what boon you desire. I am ready to grant
it,
43. Seeing before her the Lord bearing the conch, disc and
mace, she prostrated and began to praise.
44. O great god, I have seen you, difficult to be seen even
by the Yogins. The entire world was created by you.
45. You then entered into it and hence you are known as
Purusa. In this world which emanated as a result of your lila
(play) who is free?
46. O Visnu, you are Brah man which is spoken of as without beginning or end and without limit. He who knows you is
really the knower of the Vedas.
47. Your supreme power is the Universal Mother. She is
called Yogamaya, Prakrti and Pradhana.
48. Purusa is without qualities, is indistinct (avyakta), of the
nature of knowledge, pure consciousness, actionless and unchanging.
49. By entering Yogamaya you (Purusa) became the doer.
It is Prakrti that (really) creates and you who (simply) see it are
called Saksi.
50-51. When Prakrti by the three qualities is performing
creation, you become its cause by your presence alone like the
red colour in a clear colourless crystal by the presence of a shoeflower nearby. Its light is because of your lustre. I bow to it.
52. How can I know that form of yours which cannot be
known even by such seers like Brahma ?
53. L remain in this stupefied world without knowing anything. I do not know which has merit and which has not. I am
simply held by you.

402 Varaha Puréna
54. Lattained a position in this world by your favour alone.
now I ask you something out of my ignorance. All the same, it
behoves you to give me that.
55. You are indeed very kind and so do not say ‘No’.
56. Then the Lord said: Ask me whatever you like even if
it is something which is not normally granted and is difficult for
men to get.
57. Who has got his desire not fulfilled after seeing me ?
58. O Soma, then that holy Gandaki spoke in sweet words
with folded hands: If you are pleased to grant me the boon J ask,
then may you enter my womb and be born as my son.
59. The Lord was pleased and he thought:
60. What is it that is asked by this river desirous of constant contact with me? Still, I shall grant boon for the emancipation of the world.
61. So thinking, he told Gandaki:
62. O goddess, listen to me. For the sake of devotees, I
have already become your son, as I am lying within you in the
form of Salagrama stones.
63. You will become the foremost among rivers because of
my presence in you.
64. By seeing you, touching you, bathing in you or drinking
your water, you remove all sins acquired through thought, word
or deed.
65. He who bathes (in you) according to the prescribed
rules and performs oblations to the manes, leads them all to heaven and himself goes to Brahmaloka.
66. And he who gives up life in you while remaining devoted to me, reaches my abode from where he never returns.
67. After giving these boons, he disappeared. From then
onwards, O Soma, in this place I and Visnu reside together in
the form desired by the devotees.
68. So saying the lord (Siva) blessed Soma and stroked his
limbs making them free from all ills.
69. And while he was looking on, Siva disappeared there.
70. To the south’of SomeSsvara is the holy waterfall that
arose as a result of Ravana splitting the mountain there by an
arrow.
7l. It is known as Banaganga and it is capable of removing
all sins.

72. To the east of Some$vara is the penance-grove of
Ràvana. By spending three days there, one attains the result
of penance.
73. This place is known as Nartanacala, because Ravana
danced here, and pleased at it Siva gave him boons.
74. He who bathes in the Bànagangà and worships Bàneévara attains the result of bathing in Ganga and delights in
heaven like the gods.
75. O Earth, I shall now tell you another secret.
76. Salankayana was performing severe penance at Sàlagráma desirous of getting a son like Siva.
77. Knowing this, Lord Siva assumed the form of a beautiful boy (Nandi) through Yogamaya and stood beside him as his
son.
78. Although he was standing close on his right, the sage
did not notice him.
79. Siva (as Nandi) with the power of Maya was there,
beautiful, virtuous and shining like the sun, with the trident in
hand. But the sage did not notice the son, being immersed in
contemplating on me.
80. Then, at the command of Lord Siva, Nandi told the
sage laughing:
81. O great sage, rise up. Your desire has borne fruit. I
am your son born of your right side. Tell me what I should do?
82. You started penance with the aim of getting a son like
Siva. None else is there like me. So I am myself now born to
you.
83. Worshipping Lord Visnu through penance, you have
attained your desire, since I am here your son.
84. The sage was extremely glad tohear these words of
Nandi.
85. But he was surprised and asked him: If my penance
has borne fruit as you say, how is it that Lord Visnu has not appeared before me?
86. Aslong as I am not able to see him, I don't think my
penance can come to a close. So I shall continue to be here till
I am able to see Visnu.
97-88. My son, by the power of your yoga, quickly go to
Mathura and bring from there my disciple Amusyayana from
my hermitage and the wealth and cows there.

404 Varaha Purana
89. At this command, Nandi quickly went to Mathura and
reached the hermitage of the sage.
90. He saw Amusyayana there and asked him about the
well being of himself and about the wealth and cows.
91. Amusvayana said: “Everything is all right because of
the blessing of my guru. Tell me how he is and where.
92. Where are you coming from and what is the purpose of
your coming?
93. ‘Tell me all this and receive this arghya.
94. So requested, he received the arghya and, after taking
rest for a while, told him about his guru and the purpose with
which he had been sent.
95. Then he started with him and the wealth and cows and,
after a few days, reached the bank of Gandaki. And from there
he reached Triveni and felt very happy there.
96. There is the river Devikà which arose as a result of
the penance of Devas. This joins Gandaki.
97. Another flows by the hermitage of Pulastya and Pulaha
and this too joins Gandaki. Thus Gandaki becomes Triveni
(three-streamed ).
98. This confluence is the great tirtha called Kamika, dear
to the Pitrs. There we get the great Linga called Trijalesvara.
99. It gives both enjoyment and salvation at its very sight.
Earth said:
100. In Prayàga there is Triveni where Siva remains with
the name Siilatanka and also as Somegvara;
101. Where Visnu remains with the name Venimadhava,
and the rivers Ganga, Yamuna and Sarasvati meet;
102. Where, I have heard, is the presence of all Devas and
Sages and all Tirthas;
103. By bathing where one goes to heaven and, dying, gets
salvation; which is the king of all tirthas and is one liked by
Visnu most.
104. This is the well known Triveni. But now you speak of
another and speak of it as a secret.
105. Therefore tell me this out of compassion for me and
for the good of the world.

Varüha said:
106. Listen, O goddess, I shall tell you what you seek to
know, also a story connected therewith.
107. In days of yore, Visnu performed penance for the sake
of the world in a beautiful mountain, the Himalayas, resorted
to by the gods.
108. After a long lapse of time, a great effulgence emanated
from him.
109. By its heat profuse sweat emanated in the cheeks, and
this formed into a river capable of removing sins.
110. This caused wonder in all the worlds, but none could
know its origin.
111. All the gods then went to Brahma full of eagerness, and
asked about the source of this.
112. Being affected by the Maya of Visnu, Brahma too could
not know. So he led the gods to Siva.
113. Seeing him there with the gods, he asked them the
cause of their visit.
114. Brahma bowed to the great lord and said: O Mahevara, there is a wonderful effulgence by which the whole world
is affected.
115. But how it came and from where we are unable to
know.
116. Siva then meditated for a while and told Brahma and
others that he would show them its source.
117. He then, with Uma and Ganas, led Devas to the place
where Visnu was performing penance.
118. He then asked him: You are the creator of the worlds
and their sustainer. With what purpose, then, do you perform
this penance ?
119. You are the source of everything and the master of
everything. What is there difficult for you to obtain ?
Lord Visnu then bowed to him and said:
120. I undertook this presence for the sake of the world,
to see you and to get boons from you.
121. Having seen you now, I am fully gratified, O lord of
the worlds.

406 Vardha Purdna
Siva said:
122. This is Muktiksetra where by the mere sight one gets
salvation. Here flows the great river Gandaki which arose from
the sweat of cheeks (ganda).
123. In future you will lodge yourself within it. And then
because of your presence there,
124. Myself, Brahma, gods, sages, sacrifices and Tirthas
will remain in the Gandaki for ever.
125. He who bathes init during the whole month of Kàrttika, becomes free from all sins and attains salvation.
126. This is the tirtha of all tirthas and the most auspicious.
127. By bathing here one gets the merit of bathing in Ganga,
and by its thought, sight or touch one gets free of all sins.
128. There is nothing comparable to it other than Ganga.
Gandaki is extremely holy and gives enjoyment and salvation.
129. Another by name Devika mingles with Gandaki.
130. Pulastya and Pulaha formerly performed intense
penance in separate hermitages for ordering creation and attained
the skill therefore.
131. From there arose the holy river Brahmatanaya and it
mingles with Gandaki.
132. There is thus, the Triveni which is very holy even for
the gods.
133. There were Jaya and Vijaya, sons of sage Trnabindu,
a repository of the Vedas, who were engaged for a sacrifice by a
king, but became sinful.
134. They were highly learned in the Vedas and clever in
sacrifices.
135. They were worshipping Visnu with full concentration
of mind, and the Lord’s presence was there every day before them
being drawn by their intense devotion.
136. These two Brahmins were invited for a sacrifice by king
Marutta.
137. At the end of the sacrifice, they were given handsome
daksinas.
138. Reaching home, they thought of dividing daksina
between them and then arose a quarrel,
139. Jaya the elder, was for equal division, while Vijaya,
the younger, was for each taking what he had got.

140. Jaya (who had got less) thereby became angry. He
said: Since, having received you don't give me, may you become a crocodile.
141. Vijaya too said: Since you have become blind with
the money, may you become an elephant which will be madandha
(blind with pride). Thus they became a crocodile and an elephant by mutual curse.
142. Vijaya became crocodile in Gandaki with memory of
his past and in the place Triveni Jaya became elephant playing
with female and young elephants.
143. "Thousands of years passed for them and the curses
were still working on.
144. Once the elephant got down into the stream Triveni
along with his herd.
145. Heenjoyed himself there playing with the rest, pouring
water on the female elephants and drinking water offered by
them.
146-147. While he was playing thus, the crocodile, remembering the former enmity, caught hold of his leg firmly by the
teeth.
148. The elephant too dragged the crocodile and a fight
ensued between them.
149. By the dragging of the elephant and biting of the crocodile in the course of the fight, many other creatures became
wounded or dead.
150. Then the king Jale$vara of the place made a request
to the lord (to stop this fight).
151. Thereupon the lord, the protector of the devotees,
smashed the mouth of the crocodile with the cakra Sudargana.
152. While moving around again and again in the water,
the cakra hit the stones, and, as a result, they became marked by
it.
153. In that place the Vajra worms became abundant and
they too made the marks.
154. Thus I have told you about the greatness of Triveniksetra. You need not have any doubt in this matter.
155. King Bharata worshipped Visnu and Trijalesvara near
the hermitage of sage Pulastya.

408 Varaha Purana
156. And then he could give up his animal body and become
himself againt.
157. The worship of JaleSvara generates the power of Yoga.
158. O Earth, aware of my presence in this place Salagrama,
Jalcsa praised me.
159. Then due to my affection for the devotees, I threw my
Sudaréana. The place which it hit first, became the holy Tirtha.
160. By bathing there, one goes to the world of the sun and
remains resplendent there, and by dying there, he goes to my
world.
161. For protection of my devotec, I directed the Sudargana.
Wherever it rotated, the stones became marked by it.
162. Then spending there five nights according to the rules,
he (Nandi) went with the cows and wealth to Hariksetra (i.e.
Salagràma).
163. Since lord Hari remains there, it became a place of
worship. j
164. From the time Nandi with the cows and the trident in
hand stood there, the place came to be known as Hariharaprabha.
165. Since Devas frequent there, it also came to be known
as Devata. Who can adequately describe the greatness of this
god ?
166. This god with trident in hand and protecting his devotees, is resorted to by sages, gods and Gandharvas.
167. It was in this place that the great god Siva became son
to Salankayana in the form of Nandi.
168. He is a great yogin himself who bestows on others the
power of yoga. And he remains in a high pedestal in this tirtha
Triveni.
169. Three streams fell down from the three streaks of Siva’s
matted hair and these are Ganga, Yamuna and Sarasvati.
170-171. These three fell from his matted hair when he was
sitting in yogic contemplation in the place Salagrama meditating on Visnu and imparting knowledge to his devotees for release from samsdra.
172. He who bathes in this triple stream and performs oblations to the manes and worships the great yogin Siva, never takes
another life.
l. The reference is to the story of Jadabharata narrated in the
Bhagavatapurana Skandha 5.

173. On the east of this place is the Harhsatirtha. I shall
tell you something interesting about it.
174. Once, on a Sivaratri day, devotees were performing
worship to Siva with many kinds of naivedyas.
175. Many crows came there with a view to eating these
naivedyas. One crow snatched a bit of it and flew into the sky.
176. To snatch it away from this crow, another crow began
to fight with it. Then both fell dowa into a pool below.
177. There they were transformed into Hamsas (swans)
lustrous like the moon. Seeing this wonder, the people present
there called that pool Harnsatirtha.
178. From then onwards that came to be known as Hamsatirtha.
179. It was originally made by a Yaksa and hence it was
known then as Yaksatirtha.
180. He who bathes there gets purified and goes to the world
of Yaksas. And he who dies there with devotion to Siva, crosses
Yaksaloka and reaches my world.
181. Of such effect is this tirtha because of the prowess of
Mahayogi Siva. Both I and Siva are there blessing the world.
182. I have now told you all this secret, O Earth. This
ksetra extends over twelve yojanas commencing from Muktiksetra and proceeding to Salagrama.
183. It gives supreme bliss to devotces.
184. This is the secret of all secrets. What else do you wish
to know ?
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FORTYFIVE
The Greatness of Salagrdmaksetra
Earth said:
l. O great Lord, what did sage Salankayana do when he
was performing penance at Muktiksetra ?
Varáha said:
2. When he was performing penance for a long time, he
Saw a fine Sala tree before him.

410 Varaha Purana
3. It was of a nature that even the Devas could not get,
being broad and big, unbroken anywhere, giving dense shade
and bearing beautiful and fragrant flowers.
4. Seeing this wonder, the learned sage Salankayana looked
at this auspicious tree again and again.
5. Seeing the big tree, the wearied sage took rest under it,
all the time desirous of seeing me.
6. He stood on the eastern side of the tree facing west, but
under the influence of my maya he was unable to see me.
7. Then on the Dvadasi day of the month Vaisakha he saw
me on its eastern side.
8. Seeing me then, the sage in his penance repeatedly prostrated before me and extolled me with the hymns of the Rgveda.
9. Struck by my effulgence, he closed his eyes and when he
opened them praising me still, I had gone to the southern side of
the trce.
10. Giving up his original position, he moved opposite to
me and began his praise again.
11. While he was praising me still with Rgvedic hymns, I
moved to the western side.
12. He too then moved to the west and extolled me with the
mantras of the Yajurveda.
13. While he was doing so, I moved to the northern side.
He also moved and praised me with the mantras of Sdmaveda.
14. Pleased by his praise in this manner I told him:
15. O blessed Brahmin, sage Salankayana, I am very much
pleased by your penance and praise.
16. Seek of me a boon as.your penance has fructified.
17. Thus told by me, Salankayana stood close to the tree
and spoke to me with a tranquil mind:
18. O Lord Hari, I performed this penance only by way
of worshipping you, and I was wandering over the whole earth
for this.
19. Now I have seen you, O great Lord. Ifyou are pleased
with me, then that very fact is fully gratifying to me.
20. And if you wish to give me a boon because of my worship, give me a son like Lord Siva.
21. This is the boon you may be pleased to give me.

29. Such was the boon asked by that great Brahmin who
was performing long penance for the sake of getting a son.
23. So hearing his words, I spoke to him in reply.
24. 'Theaim of your long penance, you have achieved now.
25. Siva in his form as Nandikegvara is now born as your son
from the right side of your body.
26. O sage, conclude your penance now and be happy in
mind.
27. Itis a long time since this has occurred, but you have
not known the Nandike$vara born.
28. By the power of Maya, he was with me amidst the cows.
He is now here with your disciple Amusyayana brought from
Mathura.
29. O great repository of penance, be happy in the hermitage there with your son in my ksetra and become my equal.
30. O Salankayana, listen to another secret which I now
tell you. Because of my being pleased with you, know this place
comes to be known as Sàlagràma.
31. ‘The tree seen by you is none other than myself. This is
not known to any one other than Mahe$vara.
32. Because of Maya I am not easily known. But I showed
myself, being pleased with you.
33. Thus giving the boon to Salankayana, I disappeared
there as he was looking on.
34. After circumambulating the tree, the sage went to his
hermitage.
35. The place Salagrama which liberates devotees from
the bonds of Samsára, is very dear to me.
36. O Earth, listen to secrets about this I am now telling
you. They help people to cross the ocean of sarisára.
37. ‘There are fourteen tirthas there, which are not known
to all. i
38. There is the place called Bilvaprabha where there are
four ponds within the distance of a krosa. It is very pleasing and
beneficial to devotees.
39. The man who bathes there after fasting for one day and
night, gets the merit of performing four A$vamedha sacrifices.
40. Andhe who gives up life there, standing in my devotion,
enjoys the fruit of A$vamedha and goes to my world.

412 Varaha Purana
41. Another is known as Cakrasvami, where you get scattered many stones marked by cakras.
42. It extends over a length of three yojanas.
43, The man who bathes there after fasting for three nights,
certainly gets the merit of three sacrifices.
44. And he who gives up life there with devotion to me,
enjoys the fruit of Vajapeya sacrifice and goes to my world.
45. Then there is Visnupada where three torrents of water
fall from the peak of Himalayas.
46. The man who bathes there after fasting for three nights,
gets the fruit of three Ratri Sacrifices.
47. And he who gives up life there free from all attachments,
enjoys the fruit of Atiratra sacrifice and remains high in my world.
48. There is the place called Kalihrada, where there is a
pond and a stream arising from the Badari tree.
49. He who bathes there foregoing six meals, attains the
fruit of Naramedha sacrifice.
50. And he who gives up life there free from all attachments,
enjoys the fruit of Naramedha and delights in my world.
51-52. There is another important and wonderful place
called Sankhaprabha, where on Dvadaéi day the sound of conch
is heard at midnight.
53. Then there is Gadakunda where the water on the southern side always vibrates.
54. He who bathes there after fasting for three nights,
attains the same merit as is attained by the Brahmins who master
Vedanta.
55. And he who gives up life there with full gratification,
goes to my world with a big body and holding the mace in the
hand.
56. There is the place called Agniprabha where a single
torrent falls on the north-east.
57. He who bathes there after fasting for four nights, attains
merit five times that of Agnistoma sacrifice.
58. And he who gives up life there remaining in my devotion, enjoys the fruit of Agnistoma and reaches my world.
59. A wonder here is that the water here feels hot in winter
and cold in summer.
60. There is Sarvayudha where seven torrents fall from
Himavan.

61. He who bathes there after fasting for seven nights becomes a king with all weapons and arts.
62. And he who gives up life there remaining steady in my
service, enjoys all royal pleasures and reaches my world.
63. There is Devaprabha where the water from the hill
falls in five directions.
64. He who bathes there after foregoing eight meals, gets
mastery of the four Vedas.
65. And he who gives up life there giving up all desires,
gives up the result of Vedic actions too and remains high in my
world.
66. Then there is Vidyadhara where also five torrents fall
from the Himalayas.
67. He who bathes there after fasting for anight, goes to
the world of Vidyadharas and becomes happy there.
68. And he who gives up life there free from all attachments,
enjoys all pleasures in the world of Vidyadharas and goes to my
world.
69. ‘There is Punyanadi full of stones and bowers and resorted to by Gandharvas and Apsarases.
70. He who bathes there after fasting for eight days, moves
at will in all the seven islands.
71. And he who gives up life there remaining in my devotion, gives up seven islands and reaches my world.
72. There is Gandharva where a single torrent falls on the
western side.
73. He who bathes there after fasting for four days, delights
himself with the devotees guarding quarters going freely wherever he likes.
74, And he who gives up life there remaining in my devotion,
gives up the (company of) guardian deities and goes to my world.
75. O Earth, there is the place called Devahrada where the
Sacrifice of Bali was destroyed.
76. The pond here is cool and charming and deep and pleasant even for the gods.
77. In that pond, the fish have marks of the cakra and they
move about here and there.
78. I shall tell you about another wonder that occurs there.
79-80. Thirtysix golden lotuses appear there at sunrise and
these can be seen till noon.

414 Varaha Purána
81. He who bathes there after fasting for ten nights, attains
the fruit of ten A$vamedha sacrifices.
82. And he who gives up life there thinking of me, enjoys
the fruit of ASvamedha and then becomes my equal.
83. Ishall now tell you about another place called Samastasukhavallabha at the confluence of two divine rivers.
84. Coming down from the celestial regions, the gods with
their consorts remain in it, asalso Gandharvas, Apsarases, Nagas
and Uragas.
85. So too the sages, seers, Siddhas and Kinnaras.
86-87. This abode of Siva called Samastasukhavallabha in
Nepal is more important than all other places of Siva.
88. Here, along with Svetaganga that arose from the matted
tresses of Siva, mingle numerous other rivers visible and invisible.
89. And also Gandaki and Krsna that arose from the body
of Krsna which mingle with the river Trisülagangà.
90. Such are the confluences of rivers in this place.
91. O Earth, know you that in that Ksetra of mine there
is a very holy place which is not easily accessible even to Devas.
92. That is Siddhasrama, the most superior penance-grove
of Siva.
93. It is full of flowering and fruit-bearing trees like plantain,
Nicula, Punnaga, Kesara,
94. Kharjüra, A$oka, Bakula, Priyala, Coconut, arecanut,
Campaka and Jambu,
95. Lime, Pomegranate, Badari, Ketaki, many varieties of
Jasmine, Kurabaka and others.
96. Numerous couples of celestials play at the confluence
there.
97. The man who bathes there gets the fruit of a hundred
Asvamedhas.
98. Bathing there in the month of Vaisakha confers the
result of (the gift of) a thousand cows, and the same in the month
of Magha confers the same result as of bathing in Prayaga.
99. He who bathes there according to rules in the month
of Karttika when the sun is in Tula, doubtless attains salvation.
100. He who bathes there after fasting for three nights,
attains the fruit of Rajasiiya sacrifice and delights in heaven like
the gods.

101. Sacrifices, penance, gift, sraddha, worship of the favourite deity, whichever is done here, produces endless benefits.
102. I forgive also whatever offence committed in the course
of these.
103. Just as it is rare for man to get at the confluence of
Ganga and Yamuna, so too the confluence of divine rivers
here. This is the secret of this Ksetra of mine.
104. In this great place Salagrama, I stand facing east, dear
to the devotees.
105. I shall tell you another thing, O Earth, an inner secret
which people under the influence of Maya do not know.
106. That is that the great Siva remains calm on my right
side.
107. Those who know this Siva really know me and those
who know me really know Siva too.
108. Where I am, Siva too is there, and where Siva is, I
too am there. There is no difference between us.
109. He who worships Siva, indeed worships me and h e who
knows this, attains immense good.
110. Such is this great place where both Visnu and Siva
make their presence. People who die here attain salvation.
111. First Muktiksetra, then Rurukhanda, then the confluence of divine rivers and afterwards Triveni.
112. The place where Gandaki flows is very holy, because
Gandaki is the best of all rivers.
113. Then is the Hariksetra where Ganga mingles with
Bhagirathi.
114. The sacredness of the place where Gandaki joins Ganga
cannot be fully known even by the gods.
115. I have thus told you, O fair goddess, about the greatness of Salagrama and of Gandaki which removes all sins, what
you asked of me earlier and what is dear to all devotees.
116. This is the most important of all narratives, most
brilliant among the brilliant, the foremost of merits and the best
of penances.
117. This is the secret of all secrets and the best of all paths
and the greatest of gains.
118. This should not be imparted to the wicked, the obstinate, the disobedient, the sinful, the ungrateful and the offenders of Brahmins.

416 Varāha Purana
119. This should not be imparted to a bad disciple, to one
who condemns the scriptures, to the base or to one who does not
know divine service.
120. It should be imparted to the disciple who is good and
intellectually bright, freefromgreed and desirous of acquiring
merit.
121. He who recites this, rising up early in the morning,
liberates twentyone generations in his family.
122. And after death, he reaches my world.
123. I have thus told you about the greatness of Salagramaksetra. What else do you wish to hear?
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FORTYSIX
Greatness of Ruruksetra and Hrsikeía
Sita said:
l. On hearing about the greatness of Salagrama, Earth
became wonderstruck and asked again.
Earth said:
2. How wonderful is the place about which you spoke to
me ! I feel very much gratified to hear this.
3. You have said about a very sacred place called Rurusanda. Who was this Ruru and how could be that, O Hrsikesa
you have chosen to remain there?
4. Please tell me this if you consider me deserving of this
favour.
Varüha said:
5. Once there lived a Brahmin by name Devadatta, a descendent of Bhrgu, well versed in the Vedas and Vedangas.
6. He was an expert in matters relating to sacrifice, highly
ascetic, and fond of guests.
7. His penance-grove was full of sacred trees and creepers,
was abundant in roots and fruits, and had herds of gentle beasts.

8. He performed penance there for a thousand years.
9. This made Indra restless in mind. He called the Gandharvas together with their associates and also the season spring
and spoke to them in sweet words.
10. I badly need your help to overcome a serious trouble.
Let me get peace of mind through you.
11. Then Kàmadeva and the Malaya wind replied to the
lord of gods.
12. Command us as to what we may do for your pleasure.
Which ascetic's mind, despite his control of senses, should we
disturb ? Which man should we pull down from his severe penance? Tell us quick.
13. Thus asked, Indra was pleased and he replied.
14. I was much worried till I saw you. I shall tell you
everything in detail.
15. A sage named Devadatta is performing severe penance
in the beautiful Hrsike$a in the Himalayas.
16. His aim is to attain my position. See that his penance
is disturbed.
17. Receiving this command of Indra, Kàmadeva started
with the spring season and the Malaya wind.
18. Then Indra called the celestial damsel named Pramloca
and spoke to her in endearing words.
19. Iwish you success in what you do. Go to the hermitage
of sage Devadatta and captivate him by your charm.
20. Accomplish this so well as to gain my special favour.
21. Taking this command of Indra, she went to the hermitage of Devadatta.
22. She stood there in the nearby grove which was beautiful
with a variety of trees and creepers, sweet with the warblings of
joyful cuckoos;
23. Delightful with the humming of swarms of bees that
enjoy honey in the blossoms of the Rasala trees;
24. With the music of Gandharvas spreading around
and the Malaya wind blowing cool; with lotuses in bloom in the
clear ponds;
25. With calm prevailing everywhere due to the prowess
of the sage; captivating with the sweet odour spreading in every
place;

418 Varáha Purana
26. And she began to sing there so well that the sage became
attracted and he slowly stopped his penance.
27-98. The Gandharvas also began their music, and, seizing
the occasion, Kamadeva strung his flowery bow and aimed his
arrows at the tranquil sage.
29. Hearing that music beautiful with the Paücama svara
the mind of the sage became perturbed.
30. Kamadeva tirelessly shot his arrows again on him.
31. The sage, with perturbed mind, moved about all around
and saw at a distance beautiful damsel playing with a ball.
32. Hit by the arrows of Kamadeva, the great sage approched her with a smile.
33. She too looked at him amorously but with shyness.
34. Attracting the mind of the sage with her irresistible
charms, she continued to play the ball unmindful of flowers.
falling from her dishevelling hair.
35. At that time the Malaya wind blew off her garment
freeing it from its knot and the girdle holding it.
36. Kamadeva lost no time in hitting him again. And the
excited sage went close to her and said:
37. Who are you and whose, O lovely lady. What do you
seck in this forest?
38. Do you wish to make people like me beasts to be drawn
by your hands; and, catching us in this way, what do you propose
to do?
39. Anyway, we are entirely under your control and we will
do whatever you make us do.
40. Then he held that smiling damsel by the right hand.
He embraced her and gave her delight.
41. Dayandnight he enjoyed with her every pleasure helped
by the power he had acquired by his penance.
42. A long time elapsed like this. One day suddenly, as if
waking from sleep, discrimination dawned upon him.
43. He felt aversion for everything and exclaimed with remorse.
44. How powerful is Maya that deluded me in this way,
that my dislodgement from penance was effected in spite of my
awareness of it.
45. The saying that woman is like a pit of fire and man is

like a pot of ghee, is not of the wise because there is much difference when we think about it.
46. The ghee in the pot melts only in contact with the fire,
but man melts at the very sight of woman, deluded by her.
47. So saying, he gave up the celestial lady, Pramloca, and
began to think.
48. There has been a great impediment to my penance
here. So I shall leave this hermitage and go somewhere else
where I can perform severe penance and emaciate my body.
49. So deciding in his mind, he went towards the hermitage
of Bhrgu.
50. He bathed at the confluence of the river Gandaki, performed ablutions there for the manes and gods, worshipped
Visnu and Siva and then thought of the proper locality for penance.
51. Seeing the hermitage of Bhrgu towards the north, he
moved there on the eastern bank of Gandaki.
52. Resting for a while, he looked for a fit place there for
penance.
53. He chose the spot known as Bhrgutunga and engaged
himself in meditating on Siva.
54. After along period Siva became pleased and appeared
before him in the form of a linga with water flowing from it at
the bottom, top and the sides to give him peace.
55. He told the sage, *O sage, see me Siva. Know me to
be Visnu too. Don't feel that there is any difference between us.
56. Formerly you took us to be different from each other.
Therefore it was that impediment occurred to your penance and
you were dislodged from it.
57. You will attain your aim if you look at us both with the
same attitude.
58. This place where lingas have arisen due to the power of
penance, will be known as Subhanga.
59. He who bathes in the Gandaki tirtha and worships these
lingas, will attain the fruit of yoga. So saying Siva disappeared.
60. The sage Devadatta obtaining supreme knowledge by
the means suggested by Siva, gained supreme beatitude.
61. Pramlocà, who became pregnant through the sage, gave
birth to a daughter near the hermitage, but leaving the child

420 Varáüha Purana
there, returned to heaven, considering herself as having taken a
new birth.
62. The girl was brought up by the animals called Rurus.
She, therefore, came to be known as Ruru and remained in her
father’s hermitage.
63. Although her hand was sought by many young men
(when she came of age), she did not encourage any one.
64. She then resolved to perform penance meditating on
lord Visnu.
65. In the first month she took fruit on alternate days, in
the second month once in three days.
66. In the third month once in five days and in the fourth
once in seven. In the fifth month she took food once in nine days
and in the sixth once in fifteen days.
67. In the seventh month she lived on fallen leaves and in
the eighth on air alone.
68. <A period of one hundred years was thus spent in meditating on Visnu, and she became motionless like a stone.
69. She did not distinguish between opposites and attained
the supreme stage of penance which gave a halo to her.
70. Seeing everything illumined by her halo, I was wonder-
$truck, O Earth, and I appeared before her.
71. Butas she had withdrawn all her sense-organs, she did
not sce me.
72. Then I entered her sense-organs and stood before her
heart. She saw me then.
73. Since I made myself visible thus by subduing the senses
(Hrsikds), 1 came to be known as HrsikeSa, and I continued to
be there.
74. Soon after that, she could not see me. Then she opened
her eyes and saw me standing before her. She then prostrated
at my fect, with her whole body in horripilation, and was sobbing.
75. Seeing her in that condition, I spoke.
76. “O beautiful girl, I am pleased with your penance.
Seck of me what you have in your mind. I shall grant you that
even if it is one not normally granted to others."
77. Hearing these words of the lord, she bowed to him and
said with folded hands.
78. “O great lord, if you are pleased to give me a boon,
then let it be that you remain in this place in this very form.”

79. (I then said): “Let it be so. I shall remain here. But
seek another boon also, as I am pleased with you.”
80. So asked, she prostrated at my feet again and said:
81. "If you are so pleased, O Lord, then make me holy
and give this place my name".
82. Then, O Earth, I spoke to her again:
* Your body will become thc holiest of all tirthas.
83. This place also will be known by your name. He who
takes bath in that tirtha after fasting for three nights, will see me
and become purified.
84. Even sins like killing the Brahmin, committed knowingly
or unknowingly, will be removed immediately.”
85. After giving her these boons, I again became invisible.
86. In due course, she became the tirtha.
87. Thus have I told you about the greatness and secret of
Ruruksetra. l
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FORTYSEVEN
Greatness of Goniskramana
Earth said:
1. I have now known about the wonder of the Ruruksetra
and the greatness of Hrsikesa.
2. I now wish to know if there is any other place equally
important.
Varüha said:
3. Now know about another place which is equallv important at the top of the HimAlayas.
4. It is called Goniskramana, since a number of cows were
released from there.
— 5. The Prajapati Aurva performed penance there for seventy
kalpas aided by my power of Maya.
6. A long time elapsed for him in this way.
7. Thena doubt arose in the minds ofthe people as to why

MEM |
422 Varaha Purana.
he was doing penance since no boon was sought by him and ne
indication of his aim was available.
8. But he was performing penance unabated for quite a
long time.
9. Then in that famous tirtha known as Goniskramana,
lord Siva came near him.
10. Aurva was then going to the river Ganga to gather lotus
flowers.
11. Knowing him thus out of the hermitage, Siva entered
it.
12. It was auspicious, beautiful and full of fruits and flowers.
13. Butit was soon reduced to ashes by the heat of the halo
of Siva.
14. After burning that hermitage, Siva quickly returned
to (his abode in) the Himalayas.
15. Soon Aurva returned to his hermitage with the flower
basket. He was calm, collected, patient and wedded to truth.
16. Still, when he saw his hermitage with its abundance
of fruits and flowers burnt, anger set foot on his mind, and also
sorrow.
17. He then said, his eyes red with anger. “He who burnt
this hermitage full of fruits and flowers and waiter, shall also be
afflicted with sorrow and wander about in all the worlds.”
18. When this curse was pronounced by Aurva, the whole
world began to fear.
19. From that moment Siva, although he is the lord of the
world, began to be tormented by great heat, and he told Parvati:
20. “Seeing the penance of Aurva, the gods were afraid and
they told me: “The heat of the penance of this Aurva affects the
whole world.
21. But he does not desire anything. How can we remedy
this?”
22. When told thus, I cast my eye on his hermitage. In a
moment it was burnt down, and we returned.
23. Being sorry and angry at this, Aurva cursed me, and
that has resulted in this torment of mine.”
24. Siva wandered and wandered but could not free himself
from the affliction. I too began to feel the torment of heat because of my identity with Siva but I was unable to do anything.

25. Parvati then suggested: “We shall go to lord Narayana
and seek a solution for this.”
96. They then went to Narayana, and along with him to
Aurva, and told him:
27. “Please withdraw the curse pronounced on Siva. We
are all tormented by it.”
28. Aurva said: What I uttered shall never be false. Let
Siva bring herds of cows and bathe them here. He will then be
free from the curse, not otherwise."
29. At that time, I got down there seventyseven auspicious
COWS.
30. They were all bathed there and they became delighted
as a result.
31. Such is the extremely holy tirtha called Goniskramana.
32. He who bathes there after fasting for a night, delights
himself in Goloka (in heaven).
33. And he who dies there after performing all austerities,
reaches my world and becomes endowed with conch and disc.
34. At the foot of the banyan tree called Paücavata there,
fall five streams of water. He who bathes there after fasting for
five nights, attains the fruit of five sacrifices (Paficayajfias).
35. And he who gives up his life there after performing all
austerities, enjoys the fruit of five sacrifices and then rcaches my
world.
36. There is the spot called Paücapada there, where on my
eastern side there are five big slabs.
37. Two of these form Brahmapada. Between them is a
broad slab. Above it is the Visnupada, which is mine.
38. He who bathes there after fasting for five nights, reaches
those pure worlds dear to the devotees.
39. And he who gives up his life there, becomes free from all
bondages, and reaches my world.
40. Then there is the place called Brahmapada where a
single torrent falls on the western side.
4l. He who bathes there after fasting for a night, reaches
Brahmaloka and delights himself in the company of Brahma,
42. If he does this on the Dvadasi day in the bright half of
the month Kaumuda, he attains the fruit of Vajapeya sacrifice.

424 Varáha Purdna
43. And he who gives up life there remaining steadfast in
my service, reaches my world after enjoying the fruit of Vajapeya
sacrifice.
44. At a distance of five krosas from there on the northwestern side is the place called Kotivata.
45. He who bathes there after foregoing six meals, gets the
fruits of crores of sacrifices.
46. And he who gives up life in this Kotivata, reaches my
place after enjoying the fruit of crores of sacrifices.
47. Ata distance of five krogas on the north-east side there
is Visnusaras.
48. This lake is mine and it spreads for five krogas along a
mountain.
49-50. He who walks there or circumambulates after fasting
for three nights and performing all austerities, remains high in
Brahmaloka for as many thousands of years as the number of
steps he has trodden.
51. And he who gives up life there, after performing his
duties well, leaves Brahmaloka and reaches my world.
52. Know you, O beautiful goddess, the wonder in this
(Goniskramana)ksetra. A devotee of mine hears there the bellowing sound of the cows.
53. This will be heard very loud on the Dvadasi day in the
bright half of the month of Jyestha.
54. The devotee who performs pious deeds in Goniskramana
gets freed from all his sins.
55. In this manner was the effect of the curse got over by
Siva along with the gods.
56. Ihave thus told you in full about Gosthala which removes all ills.
57. This chapter bestows all auspiciousness on my devotees
and it adds to my pleasure.
58. This is highly important, highly auspicious, highly beneficial and highly righteous.
59. Those of my devotees who read it, acquire effulgence,
wealth and prosperity and attain their desires.
60. They remain esteemed in my world for as many thousands of years as there are syllables in this chapter.
61. Those who read it every day never face a fall. They

liberate seven gencrations of their ancestors and twentyone generations in his family.
62. This should not be imparted to the wicked, the foolish
or the obstinate. It may be imparted to the son, the disciple and
he who knows my service.
63. This should not be forgotten at the time of death by any
one desirous of supreme bliss. A verse or even a foot of a verse
may serve the purpose.
64. In that place which extends over five yojanas, I remain
with pleasure on the eastern side.
65. Ganga flows on the west for the sake of those who have
no desire.
66. Suchis the place where all actions generate well-being.
67. Ihave thus told you the great secret of this place about
which you asked me.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FORTYEIGHT
Greatness of Stutasvdmi
Süta said:
1. Earth was very much wonder-struck on hearing the narration about Goniskramana.
Earth said:
2. lam very much gratified to hear about the greatness of
cows and the greatness of yourself, O Lord.
3. O Lord Narayana, now tell me if there is any place even
holier than this.
Varüha said :
4. I am lord Narayana, the resort of all dharma. There is
none to rival me and so I am the supreme lord.
5. I tell this $àstra to you in pleasure, assuming the form of
the boar which is dear to all devotees.

426 Varaha Purana
Earth said :
6. “As you tell me more and more about dharma and its
cause, I get more and more unbounded joy in my mind."
7. Hearing these words of Earth, the lord, who is the highest
in dharma, and who had taken the form of the boar, told her.
Varüha said :
8. Itis befitting of you to say this as you are devoted to me.
I shall tell you what you ask for the happiness of the world.
9. There is my holy place called Stutasvàmi. My presence
is there from the Dvàparayuga.
10. I will be born as the son of Vasudeva and Devaki to
kill all demons.
11. I will have five disciples then who will be experts in
dharma due to my favour. They will be establishing me as the
embodiment of dharma.
12. These followers of mine will be Sandilya, Jajali, Kapila,
Upasayaka and Bhrgu.
13. There will also be those of pure mind setting examples
to others by themselves,
14. Andupholding me by their power of knowledge, namely
Sankarsana, Vasudeva, Pradyumna and Aniruddha.
15. They will be devoted to me and propagate righteousness.
16. I will give them whatever boons they wish and they will
speak to me in their knowledge of self.
17. Where dharma is firm, may there the science of selfknowledge become established. Let this be well known and let
this never be false. May the world go on with your favour.
18. I will then be telling them : O dear disciples, let it be
as you please, as you are dear to me.
19. What a good disciple desires will certainly be granted.
20. Then they will tell me dear to all desciples:
21. Just like butter churned out of curds, is the Varaha
churned out of all sastras. It is the cream of all knowledge.
22. They will thus proclaim as authoritative what I say
and will attain supreme beatitude.
23. This is considered by the devotees as the greatest of all
Sastras leading to salvation of all.
24. Listen, O Earth, I shall tell you another thing, namely
about the actions to be done.

25. Some people cross this world by knowledge while others
engage themselves in actions for the same. Others do this by
gifts.
26. Others resort to both knowledge and action, certain
others realise me by the power of yoga and yet others by rituals.
27. But all follow dharma and do everything with concentration of mind.
28. This is the great s4stra for liberation from samsdra pro~
pounded for the sake of my devotees.
29. They will propagate this, each according to what appeals
to him most and as the sages have demonstrated.
30. ‘Those learned in sastras along with their disciples will
popularise what is suited for the particular yuga. And by my
grace, they will all attain bliss.
31. Those among my disciples who have the fault of rivalry
and those who find fault with my $ástra, will have rebirth.
32. For those who are caught in rivalry is not the world that
is great beyond.
33. Listen, O Earth, I shall tell you another thing in regard to those that follow my path.
34. Even those who are learned, humble and free from
many faults, come down if they have this fault of rivalry.
35. Rivalry destroys dharma, it destroys everything. He who
has rivalry can never see me.
36-37. There may be those who do numerous good deeds,
give gifts, learn Vedas, practice penance, attain knowledge and
perform daily rituals. But if they have rivalry they do not see
me, but are defiled by Maya.
38. So none should have rivalry which destroys dharma,
if salvation is wished for through what I have laid down.
39. Even wise people do not know about this, and many
have brought ruin upon themselves by rivalry.
40. I have proclaimed this sastra dear to all devotees in this
boar form of mine.
4]. Listen now to the wonder that happened at Bhütagiri
where there is an iron idol of mine.
42. Some consider it as of iron, others as of bronze, still
others as of stone, yet others as of diamond,
43. Although they perform worship to me at the top or bottom and touch me in the middle of the head.

428 Varaha Puràna
44-45. Those who have preceptors and worship me in Manipüragiri, derive virtues of the preceptors, get freed of all sins and
attain beatitude.
46. In that place, on its north, is the tirtha called Pañcadruma.
47. He who bathes there after foregoing food five times,
delights in the Nandana garden with the Apsara women.
48. And he who gives up life there fully gratified, gives up
Nandana and reaches my world.
40. At a distance of half a yojana on the southern side is
the tirtha known as Bhrgukunda.
50. My devotee who takes bath there subdues his senses and
is never born again on earth.
51. He delights himself with the Apsarases in the peak of
Meru where Dhruva remains.
52. And he who gives up life there, remaining in my service,
gives up the world of Dhruva and reaches my world.
53. There is another spot called Manikunda where gems are
seen in several places.
54. This is a deep pond and not easily accessible even to
Devas.
55. He who bathes there after fasting five times, comes to
possess gems and gets the marks of a king.
56. And he who gives up life there, remaining in my service,
cuts asunder the bonds of samsára.
57. There is Suguhya on the castern side at a distance of
three krogas. He who bathes there reaches my world.
58. Then there is Dhütapápa at a distance of five krosas on
the Western side.
59. That is particularly dear to me and I have made it full
of emeralds and glowing like gold.
60. He who bathes there after foregoing five meals,
61. Giving up all actions pertaining to the five elements,
gets freed of all sins,
62. Reaches the world of Indra, O fair goddess, and delights
himself there with Devas.
63. And he who gives up life there, remaining in my service,
gives up the world of Indra and reaches my world.
64-65. Know you now about the wonder there. In that
Manipüra hill the streak of water will not fall on the person who.

approaches it unless he is cleansed of all sins. When once the
gins are removed, the streak begins to fall.
66. Similarly, there is an A$vattha (Peepal)tree near which
only a purc person is able to go and not one who is sinful.
67. On the western side, at a distance of half a yojana is an
Amalaka (Gooseberry) tree.
68. By my prowess it yields all desires, but this cannot be
known by a sinful man.
69. The devotee who, with full control of the senses and concentration of mind, and fasting for three nights,
70. Goes there at sunrise and at noon or at sunset,
71. With undivided attention and full determination, and
procures the Amalaka fruit, gets (his desires fulfilled) in the
course of five days in that Bhütagiri.
72. Hearing these words of lord Narayana, Earth asked
again in all humility.
73-74. “Be pleased to tell me about Stutasvami, the holy
spots there and how it got this name".
Varádha said:
75. O Earth, after killing the enemies of gods and cutting
all bonds of samsára, when I was remaining at Manipüra in
Dváàparayuga,
76. Brahma and other gods began to praise me with mantras.
77-78. Then, O goddess, Narada, Asita, Devala and Parvata
who were all deep in my devotion, gave me the name in the
Manipüra hill as ‘Stutasvami’ (and then the place also got the
name).
79. I have thus told you how and why the place got this
name, what you asked for the good of the devotees.
80. I have told you about the greatness of Stutagiri where I
will be from the beginning of the Dvaparayuga.
981. All these secrets about Bhütagiri should be listened to
by people with attention.
82. Thus have I told you about the greatness of Stuatasvàmi,
What else do you wish to ask?

430 Varaha Purana
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FORTYNINE
Greatness of Dvàrakà
Sita said :
l. Earth was very much pleased to hear the greatness of
Stutasvàmi. She then said:
Earth said :
2. l have gained great tranquility of mind on listening to
the account of importance (of Stutasvami).
3. This great $àstra has been imparted by the lord himself
who bears the earth, kills the enemies of gods and holds bow and
arrows, sword, conch, disc, mace and lotus.
4. Thus have I been told about the greatness of Sutasvami.
If there is anything still greater, be pleased to tell me that.
Varaha said :
5. O you goddess wearing garland of lotus flowers, I shall
tell you another secret aimed at removing sins.
6. In Dvapara yuga my father will be born with the name
Sauri in the Yadava clan.
7. There is a well-known city named Dvaraka there, built
by Visvakarma and beautiful like the city of gods.
8. It is ten yojanas long and five yojanas broad. I will live
there for five hundred years.
9. After removing the causes of trouble to Devas, I will
return to the world of gods.
10. A sage by name Durvasas with high spiritual powers,
will curse my race.
11. As a result, the residents of Dvaraka, namely the Vrsnis,
Andhakas and Bhojas will all die.
12. Balabhadra, white like the moon and wearing the
Vanamala garland, will drag the city with his plough into the
sea.
13. Hearing these words of Lord Narayana, Earth desirous
of dharma, held his feet and said:

Earth said :
14. You are the lord of the worlds and the custodian of
Maya. Tell me how Durvåsas can give such a curse.
Varáha said:
15. I will then get a wife called Jambavati, beautiful and
youthful.
16. A son by name Samba will be born to her who will
be liked by me but who will be haughty because of his beauty and
youth.
17. He will dress himself like a pregnant woman and ask
the sage whether the child to be born will be a son, as such is
the desire.
18. Knowing that he is really Samba, the sage will become
very angry and say:
19. “From your pregnancy what will be born is a club which
will eventually kill all Vrsnis and Andhakas."
20. Hearing the words of curse uttered by Durvasas, all the
boys would be sorry. They would rush to me in fear.
21. I will then ask them why they have come and thev will
tell me what had happened.
22. I will tell them then that what Durvasas said would
certainly take place.
23. Ihave thus told you about the cause of the curse on the
Vrsnis and others. I shall tell you now about the holy places there.
24. In Dvàrakà which gives delight to the Vaisnavas, there
is the great place called Paücasara which is a little within the
shore.
25. He who bathes there foregoing six meals, delights himself with the Apsarases in heaven.
26. And he who gives up life there, leaves the world of gods
and remains high in my world.
27. In that place there is a big Plaksa tree with numerous
branches with a lot of good fruits shaped like pots.
28. Many people go there to get these fruits but none gets
them other than my devotecs.
29. Those who get the fruits become free from all sins and
they attain beatitude remaining in my service.
30. There is the tirtha called Prabhàsa which people with
desire or greed arc unable to see.

B.
432 Varüha Purdna
31. He who bathes there after foregoing five meals, delights
himself in the seven islands and gets access to secret places there.
32. And he who gives up life there free from sins, gives up
all attachment and reaches my world.
33. Know you now about the wonder therc.
34. In the sea in Prabhàsa many big fish are seen moving
about here and there.
35. They do not harm any one bathing there.
36. If Pindas (balls of rice for the manes) are put there,
they draw them towards them without themselves going near.
37. Butthey receive the pindas of only those who are righteous and not of those who are sinful.
38. There is the tirtha called Paficapinda which is deep and
spreads over one kroáa.
39. He who bathes there after foregoing five meals, delights
himself in the world of Indra.
40. And he who gives up life in this Paücakunda!, gives up
the world of Indra and goes to my world.
41. Know you about the wonder there which can be seen
only by the virtuous and not by the sinful.
42. At noon on the twentyfourth Dvadasi day in the year,
a golden lotus appears there.
43. There is the place called Sangamana where, in the
Manipüra hill, four streaks of water fall.
44, He who bathes there after foregoing four meals, goes
to the world of Vaikhanasas.
45. And he who gives up life there in full devotion gives up
the world of Vaikhànasas and goes to my world.
46. Listen to the wonder that is there in the Manipüra hill.
'The streaks fall only before persons free from sin and not before
others.
47. There is then Harsakunda where a single torrent falls
from the Manipüra hill.
48. He who bathes there after foregoing six meals, becomes
free from all attachments and delights himself in the world of
Varuna.
1. Pafcapinda and Paücakunda seem to be two different names for the
same tirtha,

p
49. And he who gives up life there, leaves thc world of
Varuna and becomes exalted in my world.
50. I shall tell you about the wonder in Harhsakunda which
is seen only by the pure persons and not by others.
51. On the twentyfourth Dvadasi day in the year, at noon
swans are scen there white like the moon.
52. Those who see these swans moving here and there, attain
supreme bliss.
53. Then there is Kadamba where the Vrsnis became purified and reached my world.
54. He who bathes there after foregoing four meals, delights
himself in the world of sages.
55. And he who gives up life there, after performing all
austerities, gives up the world of sages and reaches my world.
56. I shall tell you about the wonder there. There is a
waterfall on its eastern side.
57. On the Dvadasi day in the month of Magha, flowers
can be seen in it when the sun rises.
58. Those of my devotees who get these flowers attain supreme bliss.
59. There is Cakratirtha where five streaks of water fall
from Manipüra.
60. He who bathes there after foregoing five meals, delights
in Svargaloka for ten thousand years.
61. And he who gives up life there, free from desire and
delusion, gives up everything in Svarga and reaches my world.
62. I shall tell you about the wonder there which is known
by none other than my devotees.
63. At midnight on the twentyfourth Dvàdasi in the ycar,
à sound which is pleasant to the mind and ear is heard.
64. The wind wafts fragrance but this is perceptible only
to the virtuous and not to others.
65. On its northern side there is a big Asoka tree. It blossoms when the sun rises.
66. Those of my devotees who get this flower, attain supreme
bliss.
67. There is the Raivataka (mount) in that place, which
is known all over the world aud where I had played.
68. It is full of thickets and bowers and abundant with
flowers.

434 Varéha Purana
69. It has rows of slabs of variegated colours and caves
everywhere and many lakes liked by even gods.
70. He who bathes there after foregoing six meals, goes to
the world of Soma fully gratified.
71. And he who gives up life there remaining steadfast in
my service, gives up the world of Soma and reaches my world.
72. Listen to the wonder there which people seeking dharma
notice.
73. In the water numerous leaves from the trces standing
around fall, but none can be seen within it and the water remains
absolutely clear.
74. On the eastern side there is a gigantic tree and another
by my side, spreading over an arca of five kroáas.
75. The water is full of lotuses, lilies and other fragrant
flowers.
76. It has fish of various kinds. There are rocks in it with
caves.
77. He who bathes there after foregoing eight meals, delights himself in the divine Nandana garden with the Apsarases.
78. Listen to the wonder there which, of course, is seen only
by the seekers of dharma.
79. As in the sea, the water here rises at noon and falls at
midnight.
80. On its western side is a big Bilva tree which flowers on
the twentyfourth Dvadaéi day of the year.
81. This is seen by the virtuous when the sun sets, but not
by others.
82. My devotees who get this flower attain, doubtless,
supreme bliss.
83. In that place there is the spot known as Visnusankramana where I was hit by the hunter and then attained my original form.
84. There is a small deep pond here by the side of Manipüra.
A streak of water also falls here.
85. (He who bathes there) without any feeling of loss or
gain, (goes to the world of the sun, and he who gives up life therc)
leaves the world of the sun and reaches my world.
86. I shall tell you about the wonder there, namely that
Visnu is easily visible there to the meritorious but not to others.

87. On its southern side is a big and beautiful A$vattha
tree which bears fruits at noon on the twentvfourth Dvadasi
day of the year.
88. Those of my devotces who get these fruits, get supreme
bliss.
89. I remain in that shore facing north for the well-being
of my devotees.
90. Iam there together with Balarama and the auspicious
Ekàdasi.
91. Ail the three of us remain there in Dvaraka and the
three delight there.
92. The place extends in all over thirty yojanas. Those who
go there and see me in all devotion, soon get beatitude.
93. This is the best of all narratives, the best means for peace
(of mind).
94. The greatest of all dharmas, the most lustrous, the best
of all gains, the foremost of all actions,
95. The most sacred of scriptures, the best in penance.
96. This should never be forgotten at the time of death by
one desirous of bliss. He then reaches my world.
97. He who recites this early in the morning, liberates seven
generations of his ancestors and seven generations of his succesSors.
98. I have thus told you in detail about the greatness of
Dvaraka. What else do you wish to ask ?
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY
Greatness of Sdnandiiva
Sita said :
]. Earth was very happy to listen to the greatness of Dvaraka
and spoke to the Lord again, being desirous of knowing dharma.
Earth said :
2. “I am extremely delighted that you have been pleased to
tell me all this.

436 Varüha Purana
3. Ifyou are pleased to favour me further, tell me if there
is any place even more important than this."
4. Hearing these words of Earth, Visnu in the form of the
boar, spoke to her.
Varāha said:
5. There is the holy place called Sànandüra to the north of
sea and the south of Malaya mountain.
6. There I stand facing north in an idol which is neither very
tall nor very short.
7. Some consider this idol to be of iron, others to be of
copper, some others to be of bronze yet others to be of tin and
still others to be of stone. Such is its wonder.
8. Now listen to the holy spots there which help people to
cross the ocean of samsdra.
9. One wonder in Sanandira is that a golden lotus appears
there at noon.
10-11. In the spot called Ramagrha there, a big tree with a
single creeper spread over it, stands in the sea, but it is not visible
to any one (other than my devotees).
12. Another wonder I may tell you, O Earth, which also
my devotees alone are able to see.
13-14. There are multitudes of fish there, but if a pinda
is thrown amidst them, none touches it until it is received by a
big fish with the mark of disc on it.
15. There is the lake called Ràmasaras which is deep and
broad and adorned with red lotuses.
16. He who bathes there after fasting for a night, goes to
the abode of Budha and makes himself happy there.
17. And he who gives up life there, leaves the abode of Budha
and goes to my world.
18. Now listen to the wonder in the Ramasaras which people
other than my devotees do not see.
19. This lake extends over one kroga and has around it
numerous bushes and creepers.
20. It is attractive with numerous lotuses in every part of
it and also with other water plants. There is amidst them one
white lotus which is of silver.
21. On the northern side is the Brahmasaras where falls a
single torrent shaped like a mace.

92, He who bathes there after foregoing six meals reaches
the world of Brahma and delights himself there.
23. And he who gives up life in this Brahmasaras, reaches
my world being permitted by Brahma.
24. Know you now the wonder in Brahmasaras which my
devotees see.
25. 'Thesingle torrent (about which I told you) falls on the
earth at noon on the twentyfourth Dvadasi day of the year.
26. Soon after noon, this ceases to fall on earth. Such is
the wonder in this holy Brahmasaras.
27. There is the place called Sangamana where the sea and
Rama remain together.
28. There we get of a pond placid water with bushes and
creepers all around and charming with birds.
29. ]tis just at a distance of one yojana from the sea and is
full of fragrant lotuses and lilies.
30. He who bathes there atier foregoing six meals, goes to
the abode of (the lord of) sea and from there to my world.
31. I shall tell you about the wonder in that Sangama
seeing which people move about happily free from all ailments.
32. The leaves falling in the water there are never seen in it,
33. The leaves (in the trees) in Ramasangama have no
holes in them. No hole is seen in them even by my devotees.
34. At a distance of half a yojana in the east is the holy
Sakrasaras.
35. Four streaks of clear water fall in the pond there.
36. He who bathes there after foregoing four meals, reaches
the worlds of four (principal) guardian deities of the quarters.!
37. And he who gives up life there, gives up the worlds of
guardian deities and reaches my world.
38. Ishalltell you the wonder seen there by the pure
devotees.
39. The four streaks fall on the four sides. They never increase or decrease in their flow.
40. And on the Dvadasi day in the bright half of the month
of Bhadrapada, highly pleasant music is heard there.
4l. Then there is the place called Sarparaka where we get
the hermitage of Paragurama.
l. These are Indra, Yama, Varuna and Soma.

438 Varàha Purána
42. There I take abode facing north with a Salmali (silkcotton) tree in front on the shore of the sea.
43. He who takes bath there after foregoing food five times,
goes to the world of sages and sees Arundhati there.
44. And he who gives up life there, after performing all
austerities, gives up the world of sages and reaches my world.
45. Those who prostrate there in reverence, get the benefit
of prostrating for twelve years.
46. The Salmali tree is visible only to my devotees and not
to those who arc sinful;
47. And that too only on the twentyfourth Dvadasi day in
the year.
48. On the north-western side we get the lake called Jatakunda.
49. It spreads over ten yojanas and lies to the north of the
sea and south of Malaya.
50. He who bathes there after fasting five times, goes to the
abode of Agasti and delights himself there.
51. And he who gives up life there thinking of me, leaves the
abode of agasti and reaches my world.
52. Nine streams fall into this lake and it is deep like the
sea.
53. Know you the wonder there which is seen only by my
devotees and not by others.
54. On the twentyfourth Dvadasi day of the year when the
sun rises, the water does not swell but remains steady.
55. I have thus told you about Sanandira, its expanse and
wonders which increase devotion.
56. This is the greatest secret and the holiest of all.
57. He who goes there remaining in the eight-fold path,
attains the highest. I assure so.
58. He who reads this every day and he who listens to it,
liberate six generations of ancestors and six generations of successors.
59. This should not be forgotten at the time of death, if easy
passage to thc world of Visnu is desired.
60. I have thus told you what you asked me about for the
sake of devotees. What else do you wish to ask ?

CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTYONE
Greatness of Lohargala
Sita said:
1. After listening to the greatness of Sanandiira, Earth
asked Varaha again with folded hands.
Earth said:
2. “By knowing this secret, O lord, I have gained great
peace of mind.
3. Are there places even greater than Sànandüra and more
important,
4. O Lord of the worlds, best of Men, great hero, lotuseyed and of the nature of Time.”
5. Hearing these sobbing words of Earth, Lord Visnu, the
remover of all ills of the world, spoke in sweet tone.
Varüha said:
6. Listen, O goddess, I shall tell you what you ask.
7. My devotee may go to Lohargala in the Himalaya, at
a distance of thirty yojanas from Siddhavata, (although it is)
situated amidst (settlements of) Mlecchas.
8. It is fifteen yojanas long and five yojanas broad.
9. (Normally) it is inaccessible and intolerable being surrounded by the heinous (Mlecchas), but it can be reached by
the virtuous who follow my path.
10. I stand there in a golden idol facing north.
11. The demons crept in there, but I stopped them with my
‘Vaisnavi maya.
12. I shielded there Brahma, Rudra, Skanda, Indra, Maruts, Adityas, Vasus, Vayu, A$vins, Soma, Brhaspati and other
celestials.
13. And with my effulgent cakra, quickly annihilated
thousands of demons.
14. The gods thus became happy.
. 13. Thus was this place Lohargala established by me after
killing the valiant demons.
16. He who sees me there with all the effort necessary for
tt, establishes himself as a great devotee.

440 Varaha Purana
17-18. He who bathes there after fasting for three nights
and performing all austerities, delights himself in thousands
of heavens.
19. And he who gives up life there, gives up all these heavens
and reaches my world.
20. I shall tell you about a great wonder there.
21. On the twentyfourth Dvadaéi day of the year, an offering is made to me there, which removes all desires.
22. I have installed there a horse, white in colour like the
lily, jasmine and conch, and decorated with all kinds of gems.
23. Offerings of bow, arrow, rosary, spouted vessel and seat
are made to me over this horse.
24. Climbing the white mountain and falling in the Kuru
country, no injury is found sustained.
25. Making numerous forms fall from the sky, the horse remains in the sky calm and composed.
Sita said:
26. Hearing these words of Earth, the great sage (Sanatkumara), son of Brahma became wonderstruck, being influenced
by Visnumaya.
27. And in that state of wonder, he asked again.
Sanatkumàra said:
28. O goddess, you are extremely blessed that you got the
sight of the lord of the worlds.
29. Tell me all that he told you in the course of your conversation with him, as that is conducive to the wellbeing of all.
30. My mind is full of eagerness to know the rare things
told by the Lord for the sake of dharma and supported by reason.
31. What did that lotus-eyed god, fond of all devotees, say
regarding the deeds prescribed ?
Sita said:
32. Hearing these words of the great Sanatkumara, (Earth)
spoke to him in sweet words.
33. O dear son, I shall tell you what the Lord of worlds
told me at my request.

Varüha said:
34. 'The performance there of the prescribed actions properly, removes all sins.
35. 'Fhe horses of mine lead (such devotees and) those of
theirs, but none else.
36. There is another important pond called Paficasaras,
where four white torrents fall in high speed.
37. He who bathes there after foregoing four meals, goes to
the (Gandharva) world Caitrangada and delights there in the
company of Gandharvas.
38. Andhe who gives up life in that place, givesup the world
of Gandharvas, and reaches my world.
39. 'Then there is Nàradakunda where five torrents fall,
each like a palm tree.
40. He who bathes there after foregoing one meal, sees the
divine sage Narada and lives with him.
4l. And he who gives up life there knowing the secret about
me, leaves Nàrada and reaches my world.
42. Then there is in that place Vasisthakunda where three
torrents fall which are neither too big nor too small.
43. He who bathes there after fasting five times, goes to the
world of Vasistha and enjoys there.
44. And he who gives up life there, remaining steadfast in
my service, gives up the world of Vasistha and reaches my world.
45. Then there is the spot called Paficakunda where five
torrents fall from the Himalayan peak.
46. He who bathes there after fasting five times, goes to the
world of Sage Paficasikha.
47. And he who gives up life there, after completely conquering the senses, gives it up and attains the highest bliss.
48. Then there is the famous Saptarsikunda where seven
torrents fall from Himavan.
49. He who bathes there after giving up seven meals, delights in the world of sages surrounded by their daughters.
50. And he who gives up life there, free from all attachment
and desire, gives up the (company of) seven sages and reaches
my world.
51. There is Sarabhangakunda where a single torrent falls
and flows as the river Sarabhanga.

442 Varáha Purana
52. He who bathes there after giving up six meals delights
in the world (of Sarabhanga) in the company of daughters of
sages.
33. And he who gives up life there, free from all attachment,
leaves Sarabhanga and reaches my world.
54. ‘Then there is the pond called Agnisaras where the water
falling on the ground remains still.
55. He who bathes there after fasting eight times, reaches
the world of Agnisaras! and derives great pleasure.
56. And he who gives up life there, remaining in my service,
gives up the world of Agni and reaches my world.
57. Then there is the pond of Brhaspati full of waters of the
Vedas, where a single torrent falls from the Himalayan peak.
58. He who bathes there after fasting six times, goes to the
world of Brhaspati surrounded by the daughters of sages.
59. And he who gives up life there, gives up the world of
Brhaspati and reaches my world.
60. There is the pond of Vaisvanara where a single torrent
falls from the Himalayan peak.
61. He who bathes there after foregoing six meals, delights
himself in the world of Vaisvanara,
62. And he who gives up life there, remaining in my service,
gives up the world of Vaigvanara and reaches my world.
63. There is the pond of Karttikeya where fifteen torrents
fall from the Himalayas.
64. He who bathes there after fasting six times, sees the
auspicious six-faced Kumara.
65. And he who gives up life there, after performing Candrayana, gives up Karttikeya and delights in my regions.
66. Then there is the pond called Umakunda where arose
Gauri, the consort of Mahadeva.
67. He who bathes there after fasting during ten nights sees
the goddess Gauri and delights in her world.
68. And he who gives up life there, after fasting for ten
nights, leaves the world of Uma and reaches my world.
69. There is Mahesvara Kunda which is full of Cakravakas,
swans and cranes and where Uma was married (by Mahe$vara).
1. The world of Agni is what seems to be meant here.

70. Three torrents fall there from the Himalaya mountain,
which are big, beautiful and clear.
71. He who bathes there after fasting for twelve days, goes
to the world of Rudra and is surrounded by women.
72. And he who gives up life there after performing all
austerities, leaves the world of Rudra and reaches mv world.
73. Then there is Brahmakunda from where the Vedas
arose and where four torrents representing the four Vedas, fall
from the Himalayas.
74. On the eastern side a uniform torrent falls which is high
and beautiful and has whitish colour representing Sama.
75. On the northern side is a torrent of clear water golden
in colour and representing Rk.
76. On the western side is the torrent representing Yajus
and on the southern side the one representing Atharva coloured
like Indragopa.
77. He who bathes there after fasting for seven nights,
reaches the world of Brahmà and remains in his company.
78. And he who gives up life there after subduing his ego,
‘gives up the world of Brahma and reaches my world.
79. The man who desires to attain bliss must, therefore,
go to this Lohargala of mine.
80. O goddess, this extends over twentyfive yojanas and
he who goes there will nothave any trace of his actions left in him,
81. This is the greatest of narratives, the highest of all
dharmas and the purest of the pure.
82. ‘Those of my devotees who read this or listen to this,
liberate ten generations of ancestors and ten generations of successors,
83. Those who desire liberation from samsäāra should never
forget this at the time of death.
84. Thus have I told you about the greatness and secret of
Lohargala.
85. It is auspicious and holy and brings about happiness to
the devotees.

444 Varüha Purdne
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTYTWO
Glory of Mathura Tirtha
Sita said:
1, Listening to the greatness of the Lord of three worlds
residing at Lohargala, Earth became wonderstruck.
Earth said:
2. Olord of worlds, with eyes blooming like lotus petals,
by your favour I have now heard the great Sastra.
3. Being your disciple and servant, I have resorted to you.
And you are the light of the worlds and their lord.
4. By your favour I have become resplendent like gold and
endowed with all Sastras.
5. For you everything is effortless. The entire world depends
on you and nothing acts without your will.
6. Therefore, great pleasure resides in my heart (and curiosity too).
7. So be pleased to tell me whether there is any tirtha which
is even greater than Lohargala.
Varāha said:
8. O dear Earth, there is no place equal to Mathura in this
world, the nether world or the upper world.
Sita said:
9. Onhearing this, Earth bowed to Varaha and asked again.
Earth said:
10. There are Puskara, Naimisa and Varanasi. Leaving
them out, why do you speak about Mathura ?
Varáha said:
1I. Listen to me. I shall tell you in detail. There is nothing
more dear to me than the wellknown Mathura.
12. Itis beautiful, famous and the place of my birth. Listen
to its sanctity and glory.
13. People living there certainly get salvation. They get
there the same result as accrues during Mahamakha in Prayaga.

14. The same result is attained there as of (living in) Varanasi for a thousand years.
15. The same result is attained in Mathura in a moment as
of the Karttika festival in Puskara.
16. The same merit is acquired in Mathura by one who has
conquered his senses as is acquired in any other place he thinks
of.
17. The foolish person it is that wanders in samsára being
deluded by my Maya.
18. Even he who hears the name Mathura uttered by another gets release from sins.
19. When Janardana is asleep, all the tirthas and sacred
lakes in the world make their presence in Mathura.
20. Through Sraddha in the Mathura region, the manes become propitiated as long as the great lord remains there.
21. Even those others (who are not my devotees) living in
Mathura attain beatitude by my favour.
22. In Kabjamraka, Saukara and Mathura, particularly
in the last, salvation is obtained by my favour without Samkhya
or Yoga.
23. Those who live pure and devoted in the great city of
Mathura, making offerings and giving alms, are verily gods in
human form.
24. In Dvapara yuga, I will be born as a Ksatriya in the
family of king Yayati in Mathura.
25. In my four-fold form, I shall be there for a hundred
years, praised by the sages and ready for battle.
26. These four forms! will have the colours of sandal paste,
gold, Asoka (flower) and blue lotus respectively.
27. I will then have numerous appellations, sacred and
sanctifying and powerful enough to snap the bonds of samsara.
28. I will then annihilate, O Earth, thirtytwo wicked demons
like Karhsa who outrage dharma.
29. In that place, the river Yamuna, the daughter of the
sun-god flows eternally.
30. Yamuna joins Ganga at Prayaga known as Veni, but
l. The four vyühas, namely Krsna (Vasudeva), Sankarsana, Pradyumna
and Aniruddha.

446 Varáha Purana
Yamuna is hundred times more sacred at Mathura. There need
be no doubt in this regard.
31. There will be many tirthas in that place, by bathing in
which, people can reach my world.
32. And by giving up life there remaining in my service,
one is never again born as a mortal, but attains four hands (and
reaches my world).
33. By bathing in Avimukta, one gets salvation and by giving up life there, reaches my world.
34. He who bathes in the tirtha named Visranti, reaches
my world.
35. He gets the merit of bathing in all the tirthas by seeing
the Lord there.
36. The merit obtained by bathing in Visranti is not obtained by sacrifices, penance, meditation or subjugation of mind.
37. Hesees with ease the past, present and future and by just
two circumabulations, reaches the world of Visnu.
38. There is another tirtha by bathing in which one gets
release from worldly existence and reaches my world.
39. That is the great Prayaga which is not easy to get at
even for Devas.
40. He who bathes in this gets the merit of Agnistoma
sacrifice and goes to the world of Indra and delights there.
41. And he who gives up life therc, reaches my world.
42. There is the tirtha called Kanakhala, by the mere bath
in which one gets enjoyment in heaven.
43. There is then the spot named Tinduka by bathing where,
O goddess, one remains esteemed in my world.
Now listen to an old story connected with this tirtha.
44. There is the city Kampilya in the Paficala country with
abundance of money and grain and ruled by Brahmadatta.
45. In that city lived a barber named Tinduka. Gradually
his whole family became extinct.
46. Extremely grieved at this, he gave up everv contact and
went to Mathura.
47. He lived there in a colony of Brahmins.
48. Steadfast in his austerities, he used to bathe in Yamuna
every day and performed all religious rites for a long time.
49. In course of time he died, but by the prowess of this
tirtha he was born as a high Brahmin.

50. He became a great yogi with knowledge of his past life
and a staunch devotee, and by the power of the tirtha, attained
liberation.
51-52. Then there is the Sürvatirtha which removes all sins,
where the sun was worshipped bv Bali, son of Virocana, for
acquiring weaith when he was banished from his kingdom.
53. He performed penance there for one full year with upraised arms and without food, and in the end attained his aim.
54. The Sun-god was pleased with him and asked him why
he was performing such severe penance.
Bali said:
55. “O great god, banished from my kingdom, I am now
livingin the netherworld. And being penniless, how can I look
after my family ?"
56. The Sun-god then took out from his crown the Cintamani gem (which has the power of yielding all desires), and
receiving it, Bali returned to the nether world.
57. He who bathes in that tirtha gets free from all sins,
and he who gives up life there, reaches my world.
58. The man who bathes there on Sundays, on the days of
the Sun's transit and on the days of the solar and lunar eclipse,
gets the benefit of Rajastiya sacrifice.
59. (There is the Dhruvatirtha) where Dhruva performed
penance on his own. He who bathes there becomes esteemed in
the world of Dhruva and he who gives up life there reaches my
world.
60. He who performs oblations to the manes in the Dhruvatirtha, particularly in the fortnight when the anniversary of
the manes falls, liberates them all.
61. To the south of Dhruvatirtha is the Tirtharaja by
bathing in which, one attains my world.
62. Further south of it is the Rsitirtha, by bathing in which
one reaches the world of Rsis.
63. And he who gives up life there, becomes esteemed in my
world.
64. To the south of the Rsitirtha is the Moksatirtha by
bathing in which one aitains mok;a (salvation).
65. There is then the Kotiürtha which is not easily reached
€ven by Devas. He who bathes there or makes gifts, becomes
€xalted in my world.

448 Varaha Purana
66. The man who bathes in the Kotitirtha and propitiates
the manes, liberates them all.
67. And he himself becomes esteemed in the world of
Brahma.
68. In the same place, there is the Vayutirtha which is not
easily reached even by the manes. He who offers pinda there
reaches the world of the Pitrs.
69. By offering pinda there in the month of Jyestha one
attains the same merit as of doing the same in Gaya.
70. Taking bath, giving gifts, practising Fapa and performing homa in these twelve! tirthas gives the benefit thousand-fold.
All sins vanish by simply thinking of them and all wishes are
attained by simply listening to the account of their greatness.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTYTHREE
Greainess of Mathura Tirtha
Varaha said:
l. To the north of Sivakunda are nine tirthas. Never was
there any greater tirtha than these and never will be.
2. By merely bathing there, high prosperity is attained and
residence in heaven in beautiful form is assured. And he who
bathes there (after performing all austerities) goes to my world.
3. There is the tirtha called Samyamana known in all the
worlds and by bathing or dying there, one reaches my world.
4. Ishall tell you what happened in days ofyore in the Samyamana tirtha.
5. Ahighly sinning and wicked hunter was living in the
wellknown Naimisa forest.
6. Once he happened to go to Mathura on the Caturda&
day of the dark fortnight.
l. Actually only ten are given here. The other two are perhaps Sivakunda
and Sarhyamana described in the next chapter.

7. He wanted to cross Yamuna and for that purpose he went
to Samyamana.
8. As he was crossing the river there, he was drowned.
9-10. As soon as he lost his life thus, he was born as a king
in the Saurastra country with the name Yaksmadhanus.
11. He ruled the country very well observing his kingly
duties. He married Pivari, the handsome daughter of the king of
Kasi.
12. Among his hundreds of wives, she was made the chief
and he gave her pleasure in the gardens and woods, as also in
fine palaces and attractive sands in the rivers.
13. He was protecting his subjects and giving gifts, but was
also deeply immersed in enjoying pleasures.
14. Seventyseven years passed in this manner, and he had
by then got seven sons and five daughters.
15. All the five daughters were beautiful and they were
married to kings and the sons were settled in different places.
16. Once, when the king was sleeping with his queen Pivari,
he rose up saying repeatedly ‘Alas, alas P
17. That was at the thought of Mathura and Sarhyamana
(tirtha) there.
18. 'Then Pivari asked him why he was saying so and he
replied:
19. “The intoxicated man, the sleeping man and the mad
man sometimes blabber. So please don't ask about what I blabbered while asleep."
Pivari said:
20. “IfI am your wife, please tell me the truth, and if you
are going to hide it, I will give up my life."
21. At these words of his queen, the king replied: “If it is
essential that I should tell you, let us go to the city of Mathura.
After going there, I shall tell you the truth.
22-23. (In the meantime) give liberal gifts to the Brahmins
and instal our sons and grandsons in proper places taking into
account the villages in our possession, the treasury and the
jewels.”
24. Then the citizens were summoned and told: This
ancestral kingdom has to be ruled well.

450 Varaha Purànc:
25. I propose to entrust this duty to my sons with your
approval.
26. Realising that people always wish for the kingdom, sons.
wives and relations and never the world of Yama, and knowing
what is really good for me,
27. I and my queen wish to undertake the trouble of going
to Mathura.
28. What a pity that so far I have been attached to my
kingdom. I now understand that there is nothing more pleasurable than renunciation.
99, There is nothing more sorrowful than attachment and
nothing more pleasurable than detachment.
30. It is indeed commendable to practically give up all
desires.
31. Then crowning the eldest son as king and taking leave
of citizens, he started for Mathura followed by the four units.
of the army, and reached it after a long time.
32. There he saw the city beautiful like the city of Indra,
with its twelve tirthas, pure and sanctifying.
33. He also saw there the abode of Visnu named Madhuvana by seeing which every one becomes gratified.
34, The man who bathes there on Ekadagi day in the bright
half of the Bhadrapada month, becomes fully gratified.
35. Then there is the third natural garden! called Kundavana by going where, O goddess, every one becomes equally
gratified.
36. The man who bathes there on Ekàdasi day in the dark
half of the Bhadrapada month becomes esteemed in the world of
Rudra.
37. The fourth such garden is the Kamyakavana by going
where one becomes exalted in my world.
38. (Bathing) in the pond in Vimala? removes all sins, and
giving up life there leads to my world.
39. The fifth is Bakulavana by going where one goes to the
abode of Agni.
1. The account of the second appears to be lost.
2. This is perhaps the second garden and is presumably named
Vimalavana.

40. Atthe other bank of Yamunà is Bhadravana, the sixth
garden which is dear for gods also.
4l. My devotee who goes there, gocs to the world of Nàgas
by the power of that garden.
42. The seventh is the Kbadiravana well known in the world,
by going where, O goddess, one goes to my world.
43. The eighth is a great garden named Mahavana. This
is very dear to me and one who goes there goes to the world of
Indra.
44. The ninth is called Lohajanghavana being looked after
by Lohajangha. It is capable of removing all sins.
45. The tenth garden is named Bilvavana held sacred even
by the gods. By going there, one attains the world of Brahma.
46. The eleventh is Bhàndira which is particularly liked
by Yogins. By its very sight one does not enter a womb any more.
47. By reaching this great garden Bhàndira and seeing lord
Vasudeva there, one gives an end to further births.
48. The twelfth is Brndàvana which is looked after by
Brndà. It removes all sins and is particularly dear to me.
49. Those who see Brndavana and Lord Govinda there,
never go to the place of Yama, but go where the meritorious go.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTYFOUR
Power of the Tirthas in Yamuna
Varüha said: \
1. Both of them were very glad to see Mathura of this description.
2. While living there, O Earth, the queen asked the king to
tell her the truth as promised by him.
3. The king then asked her to tell him the truth about herself which she too had promised to reveal.
4. "Then the virtuous Pivari laughed and told the king what
he wished to know.
5. “I was living on the bank of river Ganga. I came here
to see this city on the Dvadasi day in the month of Kumuda.

452 Varüha Purdna
6. As I was crossing the river in a canoe, I fell down in the
water and was drowned.
7. But by the power of that tirtha, I was born asthe daughter of the king of Kasi and I was married by you. But the memory
of my past life never left me.
8. All this was due to my losing life in the tirtha called Dharápatanaka (in Yamuna)’’.
9. Hearing this the king narrated his own former life and of
Sarhyamana where he lost his life.
10. Then they bathed in Yamuna and after worshipping me according to rules, dicd there.
11. And as they had given up all attachments, they reached
my world.
12. Thus have I told you about the wonder that occurred
there.
13. He who dies in the tirtha called Dharapatanaka, gets
all his sins removed and reaches heaven.
14. He who dies after worshipping Yamune$vara, goes to
the world of Visnu and remains there in divine form with four
hands, and he who gives up life there, reaches my world.
15. Then there is the very holy spot named Nagatirtha by
bathing in which one goes to heaven and is never born again.
16. Then there is the tirtha Ghantabharanaka which purifies everyone. By bathing in it one goes to the world of Sürya.
17. By giving up life there one certainly goes to my world.
18. I shall tell.you, O Earth, about another tirtha which is
known even in the world of Brahma.
19. By bathing in this (Brahmatirtha) and drinking the
water there, one gets honoured by Brahma and then reaches my
world.
20. There is Somatirtha in the holy Yamuna where Soma
will see me in Dvàpara yuga.
21. He who bathes there remaining steadfast in his duties,
delights himself in the world of Soma.
22. And he who gives up life there, reaches my world.
23. ‘There is the Sarasvati (tirtha) which removes all sins.
By bathing in this even an outcaste becomes a saint.
24. I shall tell you about another tirtha in Mathurà.! He
1. The name of the tirtha is not given.

who bathes there after fasting for three nights, gets even the sin
of killing a Brahmin removed. And he who gives up life there,
goes to my world.
25. Then there is Dagagvamedha (tirtha) which is resorted
to by sages. A bath there makes entry into heaven easy.
26-27. On the western side of Mathura is the tirtha called
Manasa which was created by Brahma from his mind and which
is worshipped by sages.
28. Those who bathe there go to heaven and are never born
again.
29. There is the Vighnaraja tirtha by bathing in which one
becomes immune from the troubles of Vighnaraja.
30. Those who bathe there particularly on Astami, Caturdaéi and Caturthi days, are never troubled by Vighnaraja.
31. This son of Parvati wards off all impediments to them in
education and in sacrifices and other ceremonies. He who gives
up life there, reaches my world.
32. Then there is the holy Kotitirtha, by bathing in which
one attains the merit of a crore of cows.
33. He who gives up life there without desire or delusion,
transcends the world of Soma and reaches my world.
34. Ata distance of half a Kroáa from there is the temple of
Siva from where he protects Mathura.
35. By bathing there and drinking the water, the same result as of doing them in Mathura is obtained. And he who gives
up life there, reaches my world.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTYFIVE
Power of Akrüratirtha
Varaha said:
1. O goddess, I shall tell you about another important tirtha
named Ananta.
2. I remain there permanently for the good of the world,
and people who see me there, attain salvation.

454 Varüha Purana
3. Thosewhogo there during equinoxes, solstices and Visnupadi, get freed from all sins.
4. We get then the tirtha called Akrüra, by bathing in
which during solar eclipse, one attains the fruit of Rajasiya and
Afvamedha sacrifices.
5. Akrüra is the king of all tirthas, and a bath there confers
the same result as of a bath in Prayaga.
6. O Earth, listen to an old story in connection with this
tirtha.
7. There was a devotee of mine named Sudhana, a merchant affluent in money and grain.
8. He was happy with his wife, children and relatives and
was highly devoted to me.
9. He was spending a lot of money for his family and in this
way a long time passed.
10. Never did he commit any fraud either with the weighing balance or with the weights.
11. Every day at the proper time he performed the worship
of Hari with flowers, lamps and fragrant sandalpaste, and also
with incense and offering of food.
12. On the Ekadasi days in both the (bright and dark) fort-.
nights of the month he used to fast and keep awake in the night.
13. He once went to this Akrüra tirtha and was dancing
before me.
14. And when he was doing this keeping himself awake in
the night, he was caught by a Brahmaraksasa.
15. Who was huge in form, black in colour, fierce to look
at and with hair vertical on the head.
16. He caught (Sudhana) by the feet and said:
17. “O merchant, I am a Raksasa living in this forest. I
shall get high satisfaction by eating you up today.”
Sudhana said:
18. “Please wait for a while. I shall offer you this fat body
of mine nurtured by sumptuous food.
19. Let me complete this vow of keeping awake before Lord
Hari. ,
20. After this is done, I shall come to you quickly when the
Sun starts rising.

21. You can devour my body when I return to you after
this vow of keeping awake meant to propitiate Lord Visnu.
22. Please don't obstruct the performance of this vow. You
may cat me as you like soon after my return."
23. Hearing these words of Sudhana, the Brahmaraksasa
who was oppressed by severe hunger, spoke softly to him.
24. “O simple man, what you say is false. How will you
come back ? Which man will come back when once he is let off
from the clutches of the Raksasa ?"
25. At these words of the Raksasa, the merchant said:
26. “The whole world originates from truth and it is established in truth. The great sages well-versed in the Vedas attain
their aim through truth.
27. As one who has never been defiled by any bad action in
the past life and hence born as man, I swear before you that I will
return.
28. After keeping awake and joyfully dancing (before the
lord), I shall certainly come back to you. There is nothing false
in what I say.
29. By truth is a girl given in marriage. The Brahmins
speak truth. The kings remain in truth and the earth is held by
truth.
30. Heaven is desired through truth, salvation is got by
truth. The sun blazes by truth and the moon shines by truth.
31. Yama takes away (life)by truth, Indra sways by truth.
That truth will be lost if I do not return to you.
32-33. IfI do not return, I will he stained by the same sin
as befalls a person who rapes the wife of another out of lust.
34. If I do not return, the same sin will fall on me as of
taking away the gift of land once made.
35. IfI donot return, the same sin will fall on me as of disowning a woman after enjoying her well and full.
36. If I do not return, the same sin will fall on me as of
breaking a row of persons entitled to remain in the same row
When eating.
37. IfI do not return, the same sin will fall on me as of cohaae with a woman after performing $ràddha on the new moon
day.
38. IfI do not return, I will go the way of those who do not
bathe on the Sasthi, Astami and Amávásyà days,

456 Varaha Purana
39. As also the sin similar to the one that accrues as a result
of raping in lust the wife of the teacher, brother, son, uncle or
friend, will fall upon me.
40. If donot return, I will get the same sin as of cohabiting
with the wife of a king, wife of a Brahmin or a widow.
41. IfI do not return, the same sin will fall on me as of one,
who having given a daughter once in marriage, gives her to
another.
42. If I do not return, I will be stained by the same sin as
is incurred by one doing sacrifice for the king or the villagers (for
the sake of money).
43. IfI do not return, my way will be the same as of those
who kill Brahmins, drink liquor, steal (money) or obstruct à
vow”.
Varāha said:
44. Hearing the words of Sudhana, the Brahmaraksasa was
pleased and he allowed him to go.
45. Released by the Brahmaraksasa thus, the merchant with
a determination danced before me in devotion.
46. When day was dawning he danced more intensely and
repeatedly uttered namo nàárüyanàya (bow to Narayana).
47. When the period of keeping awake was over, he bathed
in Yamuna and after seeing my divine form, went to the city of
Mathura.
48. I then appeared before him as a celestial man and asked
him where he was going in such haste.
49, Sudhana then said that he was going quickly to the
Brahmaraksasa.
50. I then forbade him pointing out that is for the living
and, when once dead, there can be neither dharma nor fame.
51. The merchant then replied to the man “I shall tell
you the truth. I have to go to the Brahmaráksasa."'
52. (He went to the Brahmaraksasa accordingly and said)
“I have now returned after happily dancing before Lord Visnu
and after keeping awake.
53. O Raksasa, you may eat up this body (of mine) as you
like.
54. Ihave never uttered falsehood, O Brahmaraksasa; you
may, therefore, devour me now.”

55. Hearing these words ofthe merchant, the Brahmaráksasa
said in soft tone:
56. “O merchant, I am glad that you have upheld both
truth and righteousness. You have great knowledge and merit
and that is why you are so.
57. Please transfer to me the whole merit of your having
kept awake, and danced, so that I can liberate myself by it."
Sudhana said:
58. “Ishall not give you the merit acquired by my dancing,
O man-eater, full, half, quarter or even less.”
59. Hearing these words of Sudhana, the Brahmaráksasa
said again: ‘‘Give me, O magnanimous merchant, the merit of a
single dance."
Sudhana said:
60. “I shall not give you my merit. You may do what we
have agreed upon.
61. By what fault did you attain this state of being a Bramaràksasa? Tell me all that secret.”
62. Hearing the words of Sudhana, the Raksasa laughed and
said: “You may know that I was your neighbour, a Vedic Brahmin named Agnidatta.
63. I was stealing the bricks ot others with a view to building a house for myself. And on my death, I became Raksasa.
64. You have now met me. Please do me this help. Give
me the merit of a single respite in your service (to god).”.
65. The merchant was full of pity, and he said: “O Raksasa,
I give you the merit of a single dance."
66. By the power of the merit of that single dance, the
Ráksasa gained liberation.
Varüha said:
67. O Goddess, Sudhana then saw lord Janardana of universal form standing in front of him.
68. The great lord Janardana in his divine body holding
the conch, disc and mace, spoke to him sweetly:
69. “Get into this splendid aerial car and arrive in my
world." So saying, the lord disappeared there.

458 Varaha Purana
70. Sudhana, although he was in human form, got into the
aerial car with his family, and reached the world of Visnu.
71. O Earth, I have thus told you about the power of Akrüratirtha, a greater one than which there never has been and
never will be.
72. By the power of this ürtha Sudhana got salvation.
73. He who bathes in it on the Dvàda&i day in the bright half
of the month Kumuda, attains the fruit of Ràjasüya sacrifice.
74. He who performs in this tirtha in the month Karttiki
the Vrsotsarga ceremony (letting loose a bull), liberates all his
manes.
75. He who performs Sraddha there during Karttiki, immediately liberates all forefathers.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTYSIX
The Appearance of Mathural
Varaha said:
1. I shall tell you about the tirtha called Vatsakridanaka.,
It is full of red stones and is beautified by red sandal.
2. By simply bathing there, one goes to the world of Vayu,
and he who gives up life there, goes to my world.
3. I shall tell you about another tirtha, O Earth, namely
Bhandiraka.
4. This is full of trees like Sala, Tala, Tamala, Arjuna
Inguda, Piluka and Karira.
5. He who bathes there observing the rules and fasting,
goes to the world of Candra. And he who gives up life there, goes
to my world.
6. Ishall tell you about my place Brndavana where I play
with cows and cowherds.
7. It is a beautiful place and is not easily gained by gods
and demons alike.
1. Although this is the title of the chapter what we get here is the
account of some tirthas,

8. Ifone takes bath there in the particular spot covered by
shrubs and creepers, after fasting for a night, one gets delight in
the company of Gandharvas and Apsarases.
9. And he who gives up life there, goes to my world.
10. I shall tell you about another tirtha in Brndàvana,
namely the place where the (demon) Kesi was killed.
11]. This tirtha is a hundred times more holy than other
tirthas and a hundred times more holy than this is the spot here
where lord Hari rests.
12. There is another speciality, O Earth, in the Kesitirtha.
13. By offering pinda to the manes there, the result of doing
the same at Gayà is obtained. Bath, gifts and homa there, confer
the fruit of Agnistoma.
14. Then there are Stryatirthas pertaining to the twelve
suns.
15. This is the place where the serpent Kaliya was moving
about. Kaliya was vanquished by me and the twelve Adityas
installed. I asked the Adityas to seek a boon.
Adityas said:
16. “O Lord, if you consider us worthy of receiving a boon,
be pleased to grant us bath in this tirtha".
17. This request of the Adityas, O Earth, was granted.
18. Mere bath there absolves one of all sins. He who gives
life there, reaches my world.
19. Those who die in the strip between the Kaliya in the
south and the place where I am installed in the north, are never
born again.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTYSEVEN
Malayàrjuna and other Tirthas
Varaha said:
l. Beyond Yamuni, there is the tirtha called Malayàrjuna
à pond near which (the demon in the form of the cart) Sakata
Was smashed .

460 Varüha Puréna
2. By fasting and bathing there, immense merit is derived.
3. By bathing and giving gifts there on Dvadasi day in the
bright half of the month Jyestha, one can get absolved of all sins.
4. He who takes bath there on this particular day and sees
lord Hari in Mathura, attains beatitude.
5. Bathing in Yamuna with full control of the mind and
high purity and worshipping Lord Visnu properly, brings about
final liberation.
6. The manes in the other world always say: “How much
we wish that some one born in our family bathes in Yamuna
and worships Lord Visnu in Mathura after due fasting."
7. He indeed is a blessed man who worships Janardana on
the Dvàda$i day in the Jyestha month and offers pinda to the
manes in Yamuna.
8. He who bathes in the tirtha called Bahula in the same
Brndavana, gets an exalted place in the world of Rudra.
9. He who bathes there on the Dvadasi day in the bright
half of the month Caitra, certainly goes to my world.
10. There is the pond called Bhandahrada where the auspicious Adityas are seen every day.
11. He who bathes in the spot there called Arkasthala, gets
freed from all sins and goes to the world of Sürya.
12. And he who gives up life there, reaches my world.
13. Near Arkasthala there is a well of pure water called
Saptasamudrika which is dear even to the gods.
14. By bathing there, one gets the power to go wherever
one likes to go. And he who gives up life there, goes to my world.
15. 'Phere is the place called Virasthala which is full of
lotuses and lilies and where water is very near.
16. He who bathes there after fasting for one night, goes
to the world of heroes (Viraloka) by my grace, and he who
gives up life there, goes to my world.
17. Then there is the holy KuSasthala by bathing where
one goes to the world of Brahma.
18. And he who gives up life there, goes to my world.
I9. Then there is Puspasthala where there is an important
temple of Siva. By bathing there one goes to the world of Siva.
20. There is (a chain of five spots called) Paficades$a capable
of removing all sins. By bathing there, O Earth, one enjoys the
company of Brahma.

21. There is Gopiévara with capacity to dispel all sins.
Sixteen thousand Gopis were born there for Krsna to play with.
22. There by the boy Krsna was the pair of Arjuna trees
crushed and the (demon in the form of) cart was smashed.
23. While playing with Krsna, the Gopis embraced him but
the dharma in this was kept hidden.
24. Matali came there at the behest of Devas and performed
ceremonial bath to the lord in the form of the cowherd.
25. Water was brought in seven pots containing sacred
herbs and gems, and was poured on him in the midst of Gopis.
26. The Gopis were then singing and dancing uttering repeatedly the name of Krsna.
27. After consecrating Lord Gopisvara, Matali made a
well also there with the (water in the) auspicious pots.
28. This is the well Saptasámudrika with clean water. In
front of the lord there are the cowherds.
29. The manes of one who performs Sraddha in the well
Saptasamudrika with ablutions and pinda, get propitiated.
30. He who offers pinda there when the new moon falls on
Monday, liberates seventyseven generations of his ancestors,
and they become propitiated for a hundred crores of years.
31. He who diesin the place between the templesof Govinda
and Gopiávara, attains the world of Indra.
32. So too when death occurs in the place between the
temples of Bahula, Siva, and Govinda there, or between those of
Gopiga and Brahma.
33. By bath, gift and pinda in these places, ten generations
of ancestors and ten of successors are liberated.
34. Bath in these leads one to the pleasure of the company
of gods, and death there leads one to my world.
35. There is the great tirtha Vasupatra, and on the southern
side of Mathura, the holy place Phalgunaka.
36. Bathing in them and drinking the water there, lead one
to a place of esteem in the world beyond.
37. In Phalguna we get my temple named Vrsabhafijanaka.
38. He who bathes there, delights with Devas and he who
gives up life there reaches my world.
39. At a distance of half a yojana from Mathurà on the
western side, we see the place Talavana held by the asura
Dhenuka.

462 Varáha Purdéna
40. We get there a pond of clear water with lotuses and
lilies. By bath and gifts there, one gets whatever is desired.
41. In that place there is the pond called Sampithaka where
we get a deep pit full of clear water.
42. He who bathes there after fasting for a night, gets the
fruit of Agnistoma, and he who gives up life there reaches my
world.
43. When I took birth as the son of Devaki in the house of
Vasudeva, I worshipped the sun.
44. Asa result, I got a handsome, virtuous and intelligent
son.
45. There I saw the sun-god holding lotus in the hand and
effulgent with his rays in the month Bhadrapada.
46. On the Saptami day in the dark half of the month the
sun-god appears there.
47. He who takes bath in this pit on that day, finds nothing
beyond his reach in this world by the favour of the sun-god.
48. If this is done when this day happens to be Sunday, the
effect is absolutely sure for man as well as woman.
49. King Santanu performed penance here installing the
sun-god in front, and he got as his son the mighty Bhisma.
50. Getting that son, Santanu went to Hastinapura. Bath
and gift there, fulfils one's desires.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTYEIGHT
The Power of Mathurà-Tirtha
Varaha said:
1. The Mathura region extends over twenty Yojanas,
Bathing in the tirthas there removes all sins.
2. In the Mathura region, which is extremely holy, stay in
the rainy season is particularly pleasant.
3. During the time of my sleep, the tirthas and temples in
the seven islands, make their appearance here.
4. O Earth, seeing me in Mathura after I am awake, is to
see me for all time.

5. To see my face after I am awake, is to bring about instantaneous cessation of all sins acquired in the course of seven lives.
6. Those who reside in Mathura and see lord KeSava_ there,
become fit for salvation.
7. He who bathes in Yamuna gcts the fruit of Ràájasüva and
Asvamedha and becomes esteemed in my world.
8. Circumambulating lord Kesava in Mathura is equal to
circumambulating the whole earth with its seven islands.
9-10. O Earth, by making the gift of a lamp before lord
Kesava together with a vessel full of ghee and a cloth, one gets
an aerial car five yojanas long and five broad and full of rows of
lamps.
11. It is beautiful, full of pleasures, attended on by Apsarases
and it fulfils all desires.
12. Devas, Gandharvas, Siddhas and Caranas praise him
for the merit acquired while on earth.
13. At the expiry of ail the acquired merit, he is born in a
meritorious family.
Earth said:
14-15. Who protects this place from beasts, goblins, demons
and others that cause impediments, so that it may yield its proclaimed effects ?
Varáha said:
16. Due to my prowess they never even see this place of
mine and they never do any harm to my devotees.
17. Moreover, I have entrusted the four guardian deities
with the protection of this place.
18. Indra guards the east, Yama the south, Varuna the west
holding the noose.
19. The valiant Kubera guards the north and Siva, the
husband of Uma, the middle.
20. He who constructs a temple in Mathura, becomes forearmed and gets liberated even while living.
21. He continues to remain in his four-armed form always
in the ponds of clear water in Mathura.
22. He who gives up life there after taking bath, reaches the
World of Visnu and enjoys there.

464 Varáha Purdna
23. Ishall tell you about the wonder in the ponds of clear
water there.
24. By my power, the water there will be warm in winter and
cool like ice in summer.
25. The water does not increase during the rains or decrease
during hot season.
26. In Mathura at every step there is the merit of tirthas,
and bathing there removes all sins.
27. During the rainy season bath may be taken in the large
tirthas with effort, or in the wells, ponds and pits,
28. Or in the confluence of rivers, but one desirous of liberation should necessarily take bath.
29. There is the place called Mucukunda where sleeps
Mucukunda, the Vanquisher of demons.
30. He who bathes there accomplishes all desires, and he
who gives up life there reaches my world.
31. By extolling lord Ke$ava one gets rid of all sins
acquired in this life as well as in the earlier ones.
32. What is the need for all the mantras if there is devotion
for lord Janardana, for He is the redeemer of all those who are
tormented in hell.
33. He who circumambulates Lord Narayana and rests
near him acquires great merit.
34. O Earth, by seeing Hari in Mathura after His waking,
one becomes fourhanded and is never born again.
35. All sins disappear by circumambulating there on the
Navami day in the north of Kumuda.
36. He who has the sin of killing a Brahmin, drinking liquor,
killing a cow or violating a vow, gets purified by wandering in
Mathura.
37-38. He who goes to Mathura on the Astami day and
spending the night as a celibate, cleaning the teeth in the morning, washing the clothes and taking the bath, circumambulates
there in silence, gets all his sins removed.
39. Even the touch of a person who so circumambulates,
accomplishes all that is desired.
40. The same merit as of such circumambulation in attained
also by seeing the lord in Mathura.
41. The offering of pinda and ablutions in the well of pure
water in front of the lord there, propitiates the manes very much,

42. ‘There is also the tirtha called Catussamudrika which is
well known. He who bathes there enjoys himself in the company
of gods.
43. He who gives up life there, reaches my world.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTYNINE
Circumambulation in Mathura
Earth said:
1. By your favour, O Janardana, I have now learnt a good
deal about the numerous tirthas and their efficacy.
2. The sort of merit we acquire by resorting to the tirthas
cannot be acquired by gifts, penance, sacrifices or circumambulation of the earth.
3. But it is difficult for people to go to all these tirthas that
lie scattered about in different parts of the earth.
4. So be pleased to tell me whether there is any easy means
of doing this.
Varaha said:
5. Listen, O blessed one, I shall tell you the number of
tirthas calculated to be in this earth.
6. By going over the whole earth we can find sixty thousand
and sixty hundred crores of tirthas.
7. These tirthas as well as devas and stars in the sky are
counted by Vayu who lives as long as the world exists.
8. All these have been visited by Brahma, Lomaéa, Narada,
Dhruva, the son of Jambavati, Ravana and Hanuman,
9. As also by Bali by wandering over the surface of the earth
with its occans and forests.
10. Sugriva has gone to the interior places also. Formerly
Indra did the same, so too the Pàndavas.
11. Some sages like Markandeya also have done so by their
yogic powers, but none else has done so or can do.
12. Ordinary people with their limited capacity, cannot
€ven think of all these, then why say about their going there.

466 Vardha Purana
13. The merit of going to all tirthas in the seven islands
of the earth, is attained, and even more, by going to (the tirthas)
in Mathura.
14. Circumambulation in Mathura produces the same effect
as circumabulation in the seven islands.
15. Therefore, circumambulation may be properly done in
Mathura by those desirous of accomplishing their desires.
Earth said:
16. Be pleased to tell me the rules of circumambulation at
Mathura.
Varüha said:
17. This was asked of Brahma by the seven sages in yore
and they were told about it.
18. Knowing the account about it in all the Puranas, he
told them about this matter.
19-20. Itellyou that hundred times the merit that accrues
from all temples, all tirthas, all gifts and all rituals for well-being
in this world as well as in the world beyond, accrues by the circumambulation in Mathurà. This is the truth.
21. Hearing this the sages bowed to Brahma and then went
to Mathura and put up their hermitages there.
22. Together with Dhruva they were waiting for the Navami
day in the bright half of the month Kumuda.
23. Circumambulating in Mathura on that day removes all
sins.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTY
The order of visits in the Tirthas of Mathura
Varüha said:
l. On the Astami day in the bright half of the month Karttika, one should bathe in the Visranti tirtha with a view to worshipping the manes and gods.

2. By seeing Viésranti and Visnu reposing there, the effect
of circumambulation is attained.
3. Fasting for the whole day or taking but a little food,
the twig for cleaning teeth may be collected in the evening.
4. Spending the night in continence with the resolved mind,
(the devotee) should bathe well, put on clean clothes and take
the vow of silence.
5. Taking sesamum, rice and Kuása grass and with a lamp
in hand he shall go to the forest there for the worship of manes
and gods.
6. He shall then start his visits in the order in which they
were done by the sages like Dhruva.
7. By doing this full of devotion, he will attain all desires
and the fruit of Asvamedha.
8. He shall keep awake for the night and on the Navami
day, just before sunrise, start journey.
9. The first bath in the morning should be taken in the tirtha
Daksinakoti (at the southern end).
10. Then washing the feet and performing Acamana, he
shall worship Hanuman, the young Brahmacarin, who confers
all auspiciousness.
11. He should be informed of the journey, as difficulties
vanish by simply thinking of him and as he brings about success
in the attempt.
12. (The prayer is) “You got great success in your journey
on behalf of Ràma. May you grant me success in this undertaking of mine (to visit the tirthas)."'
13. After prayer to Hanuman, perform worship to Ganeáa
with lamp, flowers and offerings of food.
14. Then Lord Visnu, reposing there as Padmanabha,
should be informed as he is the dispeller of all fear and the dispensor of all success. The mother goddesses also shouldbe informed.
15. First there is the goddess Vasumati, then Aparajita installed in the armoury who removes all fears.
16. Then there are Karmsavasanika, Augrasena, Carcikà
and Vadhüti who annihilate demons.
17. There is also Jayada. These are goddesses worshipped
by the gods. These as well as the goddesses installed in the houses

468 Varáha Purana
and structures may be worshipped and their permission for the
journey sought.
18. He shall go to Daksinakoti without speaking. After
taking bath there, libations are to be given to the manes and Lord
(Visnu) should be saluted.
19. Then he is to go to Iksuvásà worshipped by Lord Krsna
and where, as a boy, he played with the cowherds and where
the tirthas were established by the great sages.
20. Vasatputra is to be visited next where we get Arkasthala,
Virasthala, KuSasthala, Punyasthala and Mahasthala.
21. These five spots take away all sins, and their mere sight
gives one the company of Brahma.
22. The result is got in full by seeing Siva (installed as)
Siddhamukha there.
23. Then Hayamukti should be visited where the sages
speak about an old incident.
24. That a prince once went there riding on a horse, and
then the horse got salvation and the prince alone remained there,
25. Which shows that one should not go there in any vehicle
(but walking) if the result is to be achieved.
26. Seeing and touching him (the horse erected) in that
tirtha removes all sins. There is the Sivakunda by bathing in
which one attains great results.
27. Seeing the Jasmine of Krsna also produces success, so
also by going to the Kadamba grove.
28. On the southern side is the Yogini Carcikà surrounded
by other Yoginis, guarding Krsna.
29. There are two mother goddesses named Aspr$yà and
Aspr$à, whose sight gives great protection to children.
30. Then he should go to the holy Varsaghata, bathe there
and offer libations to the manes. That removes all sins.
31. He should then go to the temple where Siva is enshrined
as the protector of the place. That makes the visit to Mathura
fruitful.
32. There is the Krsnakridàsetubandha where the Lord
made a dam for children to play.
33. He used to play with the cowherd boys there every day.
He continues to visit it always.
34. "There is Balihrada where the Lord used to play in water.
Its very sight takes away all sins,

35. There is the place where Krsna used to play with cocks.
By the sight of this (Kukkutakridana) even a heinous man gets
salvation.
36. There is a group of pillars with good crests which were
anointed with scents and worshipped by Krsna.
37. To circumambulate it and offer it worship is to get
absolved of all sins and go to the world of Visnu.
38. (The visit to the place) where Vasudeva lay alone for
protecting the pregnancy of Devaki, removes all sins.
39. Then he should go to Narayanasthana and go round
Narayana and other deities there for liberation.
40. He may then announce his visit to Vinayaka and also
to Kubjika and Vamana, the two Brahmanis protected by Krsna.
41. Getting their approval, be may proceed to Gartesvara
to see Siva there so that the aim of his visit may be accomplished.
42. In that place there is also the goddess Mahavidyesvari
who protects it, protects the devotee and gives him success.
43. By seeing Prabhamalli there, all desires are fulfilled.
She remains there for guarding Krsna.
44. There is another goddess who remains there always
giving success.
45. She was installed there by Krsna Balabhadra and Gopas
when they thought of killing Kamsa and assembled there to consider the strategy.
46. She confers success as well as enjoyment. She is called
Siddheévari (as she gives siddhi success) and Sanketake$vari
(as she was installed at the Sanketa or the place of their meeting.)
47. There is a deep pit of holy placid water, where we can
see Lord Siva with the name Gokarneévara, by whose mere
sight one gets rid of all sins.
48. Seeing river Sarasvati there, one derives everything
auspicious.
49. Then Ganeía, the remover of all impediments, may
be worshipped. Much benefit is got by seeing him.
30. The highly purifying Ganga is there, whose sight, touch
or even thought bestows great benefits.
Sl. There is the place called Rudramahalaya having the
appearance of Siva’s face. Sceing this confers the same benefit
as by staying there. l

470 Varaéha Purána
52. At Uttarakoti (the northern end), there is again Ganeá$a.
Here Lord Krsna was playing dice with the Gopis.
53. Merrily playing with them, the Lord won all of them
and their wealth in the game. He gave them all to the Gopas
who commemorated the event there.
54. The visit to this place where Krsna played in his boyhood, dispels all sins.
55. The sages contemplate on him in the exact form and in
the exact deeds of his in his boyhood.
56. The devotee should go to this Rudramahalaya of pure
water in Yamuna, bathe there and give libations to the manes.
57. Then he should go to Gargyatirtha, Bhadresvaratirtha
and Somatirtha.
58. After bathing in the Somatirtha, he should worship
Someávara for the fulfilment of the aim of his visit.
59. At the confluence of Sarasvati, he may do, according
to rules, rites in propitiation of gods, manes, sages and men. That
will give him merger in Lord Visnu.
60. He should then go to tirthas Ghantabharanaka, Garuda,
Keśava, Vaikuntha, Ghandavelaka, Sarhyamana, Asikunda,
61. Gopa, Muktikeévara and Vailaksagaruda, all of which
are extremely holy.
62. They are as holy as Visrantitirtha and the devotee may
move about here with full control of the senses.
63. After propitiating gods and manes he may pray: “O
Lord Avimuktesa, worshipped by seven sages, be pleased to make
my perambulations in Mathurà fruitful."
64. After praying thus to Siva, the protector of the place,
he should go to Visranti (again) and perform libations to the
manes.
65. Then, resting for a while, he should go to the temple of
Sumangala and bow to her and pray for his success.
66. “O most auspicious goddess, the fulfiller of all desires,
may this visit of mine be fruitful by your favour”.
67. Then he is to go to Lord Pippaladegvara, the Siva consecrated by the sage Pippalàda, and anoint this deity's head.
68. The sage was saved by Siva and so he consecrated him
there with his own name.
69. Then, after seeing the serpent Karkotaka, he may
proceed to see the goddess installed by Krsna.

70-71. On hearing about the wicked intentions of Karhsa
at first, the cloth over the face of Krsna was placed there for
(good) omen.
72. On entering that place, an agreeable sound is heard,
and there Krsna has installed his auspicious sister.
73. Out of fear, Krsna invoked the goddess Candikà also
and installed her there with the name Artiharà.
74. By seeing this goddess, one becomes very happy.
75. She appeared in the north when Krsna invoked her for
good omen when he started for killing Kamsa. By seeing her
all desires are accomplished.
76. In order to kill the wrestlers, Krsna invoked Vajranana,
and after killing them, he installed him there.
77. And then Krsna gave to every deity whatever was sought
of him. Everything auspicious was bestowed on them.
78. The (memory of the) deeds of Krsna in his boyhood,
(it may be noted), takes away all sins.
79. Finally, after seeing Sürya, the principal deity of the
people of Mathura, and giving gifts there, the visit may be concluded.
80. Visiting the different places in this manner on the
Navami day in the bright half of the month Kumuda, one goes
to the world of Visnu with the whole family.
81. As many people in his clan gain permanent abode in
Surya as there are steps in his perambulation in Mathura.
82. Even those who have committed the murder of Brahmin,
taken liquor, stolen wealth, impeded vows, cohabited with prohibited women or carried away the wives of others, get absolved
of their sins, if they visit Mathurà in this way.
83-84. "Those who live in distant places get cleansed of their
sins at the sight of the person who has returned after his ritualistic visit to Mathura.
85. Even listening to the narration about this by one who
has returned from Mathurà removes all evil and leads to heaven.

472 Varüha Purana
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTYONE
The greatness of Devavana
Earth said:
1. O Krsna, what is the way (for liberation) for those ignorant people who have no knowledge of righteous actions and
(hence) are condemned to hell ?
2. Tell me by what means they can avoid the sorrows of
hell?
Varáha said:
3. For all those cursed people who never do righteous deeds
it is goddess Mathura (the Mathura region with all its tirthas)
that removes all sins and sorrows of hell.
4-5. Those who live in Mathura, those who resort to the
tirthas there, those who do perambulation there, those who see
the woods there and those who do with might amidst them hundred and one!, never go to hell but go to heaven.
6. (Among the woods), ihe first is Madhuvana, the second
Tàlavana, the third Kundavana,
7. The fourth Kàmyakavana, the fifth Bahuvana, the sixth
Bhadravana,
8. The seventh Khadiravana well-known in the world, the
eighth Mahavana always dear to me,
9. ‘The ninth is the holy Lohargalavana, the tenth Bilvavana
worshipped by gods,
10. The eleventh Bhandiravana and the twelfth Vrndakavana. Those who see these will not have to go to hell.
11. Those who visit these worlds with full control of mind,
go to the world of Indra.
1. What this refers to is not clear,

CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTYTWO
The greatness of Cakratirtha
Varaha said:
1. Listen, O Earth, I shall tell you about another thing
namely what occurred in days of yore in Cakratirtha to the
north of Mathura.
2. There once lived a pious Brahmin in the city of Mahagrhodaya which is a jewel to the whole earth,
3. He went from there with his son to the holy Saligrama.
4. He lived there with full control of senses, bathing in the
tirthas and worshipping the deities.
5. There he got the acquaintance of a Siddha (with yogic
powers )who belonged to Kalpagrama and was living in Kanyakubja.
6. As days passed, he heard the Siddha describe the glory
of Kalpagrama.
7-8. The Brahmin then desired to go there and requested
the Siddha to help him in this on account of their mutual friendship.
9. Hearing the words of the Brahmin, the Siddha said that
only Siddhas could go there and not one like him.
10. But he offered to take him there with his son by his yogic
power.
11-12. Then holding the Vaidic Brahmin in the right hand
and his intelligent son in the left, he flew up and released them
both at Kalpagrama.
13. They lived there for a long time and then the Brahmin
became afflicted by an ailment.
14-15. He then reached the last stage of his life and wishing
to die in peace, he asked his son to take him without delay to the
bank of Ganga.
16. The son took the father to the bank of Ganga, but he
was crying, out of his affection for the father.
17. There a long time passed, and he was controlling himself out of devotion for the father.
18. In Kalpagràma, the beautiful daughter of the Siddha
was on the look-out for a suitable husband for her, but could
get none,

474 Varaha Purana
19. There one day the Brahmin’s son chanced to enter the
house of the Siddha for food.
20. The Siddha asked about his whereabouts and he told
him everything.
21. Then knowing his identity by his yogic power, he
honoured him and gave him his daughter in marriage.
22. From then onwards he was taking food in the fatherin-law's house and remaining near the father, attending on him.
23. As time passed, the father became extremely weak and
the son asked the father-in-law about it.
24. ‘‘When will my father die?', he asked. The fatheri in-law laughed and told him.
25. “O Brahmin, your father has been eating Südra's food
for a long time. Because of this, death stands away from him.
26. (The essence of) this food remains in his feet and not
above the knees. When the effect of the Südra's food is over, he
will die."
: 27. He reported to the father what the father-in-law said.
| 28. Hearing this the old man condemned himself very much.
j 29. At sunrise the next day the son went to the father-
| in-law's house, as usual.
30. When the son was gone, the father, being very much
afflicted by his illness and wishing to die, stood up and looked
around.
31. Seeing a stone near him he dragged it towards him by
his foot and with it smashed both his feet. He then died.
32. When the son returned after his bath and food, he saw
the father dead (and knew how).
33. He wept for long, but then he coolly thought of the
Sàstra and came to the conclusion that the father did not deserve
obsequies,
34. Because Apastamba (the law-giver) has declared so
regarding those that die by snake-bite, by wounds caused by
animals with their horns, by the bite of carnivorous animals or
by suicide,
35. And one who commits suicide is long tormented in
hell; for him expiations may be done but not libation through
usual obsequies.
36. Fate is powerful and valour is helpless there.
a

37. He then went to his father-in-law’s house, only to be
told by him in great sorrow.
38. “The sin of killing a Brahmin has come upon you. So
you may go wherever you like".
39. He then said to the father-in-law: “I never committed
the murder of a Brahmin at any time. Then how has this sin
come upon me?"
40. Hearing these words of the son-in-law, the father-inlaw said: “O dear man, the means of death was suggested to your
father by you. And by that fault the effect of killing the Brahmin
has come upon you.
41. By sleeping near such a condemned person, by eating
with him and by talking to him, one gets condemned oneself
in the course of one year.
42. "Therefore, O great Brahmin, you can no more live in
my house."
43. Hearing these words of the father-in-law, he requested
him to direct him what he might do when thus rejected.
44. The ascetic Brahmin then asked him to leave Kalpagràma and go to Mathurà, as nowhere else would it be possible
for him to get himself purified.
45. He immediately left Kalpagrama and in due course
reached Mathura.
46. There he began tolive outside the settlement of the
Brahmins.
47-48. He started feeding himself on the remnants of the
food from the rest-house constructed in Mathura by king Kuśika
of Kanyapura with provision to feed two thousand Brahmins
every day.
49. He used to take bath in Cakratirtha, but never begged
alms for his food.
50. As days passed in this manner, the father-in-law began
to think about him and knew by his yogic power what he was
doing.
51. He persuaded his daughter to go to Mathura and give
her husband food.
52. By the spiritual power (of the father), she could go to
Mathura every day (from Kalpagrama) with food for her husband.

476 Varaha Purana
53. At the close of the day, she used to go there with food
and he used to eat what was given by his wife.
54. He used to keep his eating vessel in a hollow and live
in the rest-house. In this way a full half-year passed.
55. Then the people there began to ask him as to where he
was staying and from where he was taking food.
56. He then told them the whole matter. Then, O Earth,
all those Brahmins declared in one voice that he had become purified.
57. “You have already become purified by the power of
Cakratirtha. You have now become futher purified by this declaration of ours".
58. Hearing their words, the Brahmin became very happy
and went from there to Cakratirtha for bath.
59. Then the wife arrived with food and, delighted at heart,
spoke to him.
60. “Take this food I have brought for you. I now see you
free from sin that was in you".
61. Hearing this, he asked her to say again what she said.
62. She did so and added, “I have not been speaking to
you before since you were possessed of the sin of killing a Brahmin.
63. Now you have become freed from it by the power of
Cakratirtha. O my lord, get up, let us go to the pleasant Kalpagràma".
64. He then went with her to Kalpagràma.
65. For Bhadre$vara the offering of money is commendable
and before this deity there is a vessel for putting it. The full
benefit of Cakratirtha is got only by seeing Bhadre$svara.
66. O Earth, Cakratirtha is hundred times more holy than
Kalpagrama. The sin of killing a Brahmin is removed there by
fasting for a full day and night.
67. Of what need is Kalpagrama or Varanasi for one who
goes to Mathura and dies there ?
68. Evena bird, why a worm too, that dies there becomes
four-armed (like Visnu).

CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTYTHREE
The Greatness of Kapilavaráha
Varüha said:
1. I shall now tell you about another thing, namely what
occurred in days of yore in Vaikunthatirtha.
2. The city of Mithila was ruled by king Janaka. The people
of Mithila, Bráhmanas, Ksatriyas, Vaisyas and Südras, started
on à pilgrimage.
3. They bathed in the tirtha Saukara and then reached
Mathura.
4. Great devotion to Mathura arose in them and they all
stood assembled in Vaikunthatirtha.
5. A Brahmin among them had clear signs of the sin of
killing a Brahmin, because blood was always oozing from his
hand.
6. This was clearly perceptible and it never stopped although he had gone to many tirthas.
7. But he had not gone to Vaikunthatirtha before. And
now that he went there, this oozing of blood ceased and all were
surprised at this.
8. The Lord then appeared in the form of a Brahmin and
asked them what had happened.
9. They told him about the sinful Brahmin and what had
happened then.
10. The Lord said : “As the result of his bath in the Vaikunthatirtha, the sin of killing a Brahmin has left him. So you
need not be surprised at this. It is all due to the power of this
tirtha.”
ll. The Lord then disappeared there. O Earth, such is
the greatness of this tīrtha.
12. He who bathes in Vaikunthatirtha gets removed of his
sins and he goes to the world of Visnu.
13. I shall tell you about another, namely Gandharvakunda in the holy Asikunda.
14. He who bathes there, delights inthe company of Gandharvas and he who gives up life there, reaches my world.
15. The Mathura region extends over twenty yojanas and
is like a lotus with Lord Kegava in its central part.

478 Varáha Purana
16. Those who die in this central part get liberation and become gods.
17. Those who see Lord KeSava on the western side will not
get any sorrow.
18. Those who see the Lord on the northern side never fall
into the cycle of births and deaths again.
19. Those who see the Lord in Visranti on the eastern side
certainly gain liberation.
20. On the Southern side there is a divine image of mine.
21. It is long and beautiful and he who sees it delights
himself in the company of Brahma.
22. In the Krtayuga there was a king named Mandhata.
I was propitiated by him with a devout mind.
23. Pleased at this, I gave him this image and it was worshipped by him for his own salvation.
24. It was at the time of (Satrughna's) killing Lavana at
Mathurà, it was installed there. It is holy, divine and resplendent.
25. 'There was a great sage by name Kapila who was
devoted to me.
26. He made by his mind an image of (Visnu in the form
of) Varaha and was worshipping it every day.
27. The sage Kapila was propitiated by Indra, and pleased
at this, he gave him this divine idol.
28. From then onwards, Indra was worshipping it with
devotion and delight. As a result, he attained matchless divine
knowledge.
29. Once the demon Ravana went to the world of Indra to
conquer heaven by his might.
30. Severe fighting then followed between Ravana and
Indra.
31. The gods together with Indra were defeated by Ravana
and he then entered Indra’s abode.
32. In that splendid house decorated with numerous jewels,
he saw the idol of Kapilavaraha and prostrated before it.
33. But being deluded by it, he began to pray.
34. “O Lord Madhava, Damodara, Hrsikesa, the holder of
earth, the destroyer of Hiranyaksa, be pleased to save me.
35. I bow to you, the essence of Vedas. I bow to you Vasu-

deva. I bow to you in your form as the tortoise. I bow to you
Narayana.
36. Iam not able to see you or ask anything, O abode of all
virtues, the destroyer of Madhu and Kaitabha.
37. I bow to you, the Lord of Lords, the refuge of all devotees. I bow to you in all devotion. Be pleased with me."
38. Atthis prayer of Ravana, the Lord of the worlds
adopted a gentle form.
39. Ravana then went near and attempted to raise the idol
in order to put it in his Puspakavimana, but he could not.
40. Surprised at this, he exclaimed: ‘‘O Lord, I was able
to raise mount Kailàsa together with Siva. You are here in such
a small form, stil] I am unable to raise it.
4l. I bow to you, god of gods, be pleased to enable me to
take you to the great city of Lanka".
Varáha said:
42. Kapila(varàha) then told him that being a Raksasa he
was not a Vaisnava and he could not have the sort of devotion
(necessary to achieve his aim).
43. Ravana said: “O great being, unflinching devotion has
dawned on me by your sight. I bow to you. I wish to take you
(to my city)".
44. The Lord then assumed a little form and so he was able
to lift him and place him in his Puspakavimana.
45. He installed me at Lankà and I stood there for a long
time in his house worshipped by him.
46. Rama, the Lord of Ayodhya, then came there and killed
Ravana in battle, and installed his brother Vibhisana on the
throne of Lankà.
47. Vibhisana then offered everything to Rama.
Rama said:
48. “O Raksasa Vibhisana, I shall not have anything to do
with all this. You may give me that idol alone which was taken
here from the city of Indra.
49. Ifyou give me that, I shall take it to Ayodhyà and worship it every day".
50. He then gave Rama the Kapila(Varaha) and Rama
carried it in the Puspaka.

480 Varáha Purana
51. He installed it at Ayodhya and worshipped it there for
hundred and ten years.
52. He then sent Satrughna for killing Lavana. Satrughna
bowed to him and started with an army with all its four divisions.
53. He then killed the terrific demon Lavana and entered
the city of Mathura.
54. He settled there twenty-six thousand Vedic Brahmins
who were all equal to me.
55. (Even) a non-Rgvedic Brahmin of Mathura is equal
to one who has mastered the four Vedas. To feed one of them is
equivalent to feeding a crore of other Brahmins.
56. Thus have I told you about Lavana’s killing (by Satrughna).
57. When Rama came to know of the success of Satrughna
he asked him to seek of him any boon he wished.
58. Hearing this, Satrughna said, “O Lord, if you are pleased with me and consider me worthy of receiving a boon, give
me this (idol of Kapilavaraha)”’.
59. Hearing these words of Satrughna, Rama, said, “Take
this (idol of) god in the form of Varaha.
60. That whole region is very much blessed, the city of
Mathura in particular. The people of Mathura who worship
this Kapila (Varaha) are highly blessed.
61. Allsins disappear when he is seen, touched, contemplated upon, bathed or anointed.
62. When he is bathed or worshipped every day, he not
only removes our sins but grants moksa.”
63. O Earth, so saying Ràma gave him the idol.
64. Receiving it, Satrughna went to Mathura.
65. He installed it in the middle of the city and worshipped
it. In this way the Lord permanently came to be there.
66. By seeing this, the same result is obtained as by offering
pinda in Gaya during Puskara in the month of Jyestha.
67. The same result is also obtained in Visranti, Govinda,
Hari, Kesava and Dirghavisnu.
68. My lustre is at Visranti in the morning, Dirghvisnu at
noon and KeSsava in the evening.
69. This knowledge was kept a secret for a long time. Since
you are my devotee and disciple, I imparted this to you.

CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTYFOUR
The greatness of Annaküfa
Varüha said:
1. There is the highly holy place called Govardhana at a
distance of two yojanas to the west of Mathura.
2. 'There isa pond in it full of trees and creepers and there
are four tirthas in it.
3. In the east is the Indratirtha, in the south Yamatirtha,
in the west Varunatirtha and in the north Kaberatirtha, and I
remain playing in the middle.
4. He who bathes in the Indratirtha with due austerities,
gets over all opposites and delights in Indraloka.
5. He who bathes in the Yamatirtha in the south after observing all the necessary rites, goes to the Yamaloka and delights
there.
6. And he who gives up life there, without desire or delusion, leaves Yamaloka and goes to my world.
7. He who bathes in Varunatirtha, goes to the abode of
Varuna and becomes purified of all sins.
8. And he who gives up life there without desire or anger,
leaves Varunaloka and goes to my world.!
9. He who bathes in the middle, delights with me, and
he who gives up life there, goes to my world.
10. The devotee should then go to Annaküta and circumambulate it. He will then become free from further birth. This,
I tell you, is true.
ll. After bathing in Manasaganga, seeing Lord Hari in
Govardhana and circumambulating Annaküta, one will have
nothing to worry about.
12. By giving pinda to the manes on new moon day falling
on Monday, one gets the merit of Rájasüya sacrifice,
13. The same result as is obtained by giving pinda in Gaya,
is obtained here also, and no one need have any doubt regarding this.
CIIUD MONS
.l. After this there must be a verse relating to the Kuberatirtha, but it is
missing.

482 Varáha Purana
14-15. Going around Govardhana and seeing Hari there,
confers the same result as of Rajastiya and ASvamedha.
Earth said:
16. Please tell me about the power of Annaküta and the
rules of its circumambulation.
Varüha said:
17. This should be done in Govardhana on the Ekadasi
day in the bright half of the month Bhadrapada, after fasting.
18. At sunrise, bath should be taken in Manasaganga and
the mount Govardhana and Lord Hari at its top should be propitiated.
19. Then bath should be taken with the rites at Pundarika
and worship should be made to Pundarika as well as to the gods
and manes.
20. This removes all sins and leads one to the abode of
Visnu.
21. Then bath should be taken at the Apsarastirtha, where
bath and libations remove all sins and bring about the result of
Ràjasüya and Aévamedha.
22. There is the tirtha called Sankarsana guarded by Balabhadra. It removes the sin of killing a cow by merely bathing in
it.
23. Near Annaküta is a tirtha made by Indra. There a
sacrifice meant for propitiating Indra was stopped by Krsna.
24. The large quantity of food collected there for the worship of Indra was distributed among his own men.
25. The (enraged) Indra was pouring rain heavily and, to
protect the cows from this, the big mount was raised and held
over them (by the Lord).
26. This came to be known as Annaküta (literally, heap
of food) and had to be worshipped by Indra himself.
27. Lord Visnu satisfied here the gods, goddesses, cows and
sages. By offering libations there, one attains the fruit of a thousand sacrifices.
28. Then there is the pool called Kadambakhanda with
clean water. By bathing in it and offering libations, one attains
the world of Brahma.

29. The devotee should then go to Devagiri which extends
over a distance of hundred cubits. Bybathing and worshipping
there, the merit of Vajapeya sacrifice is attained.
30. Seeing the great lord there also brings about great
merit. By bathing there and offering libations, one goes to heaven with gratification.
31. A little to the north of (Manasa) Ganga, there took
place the battle between lord Krsna and the demon Arista.
32. A tirtha was formed at the place where Arista, who had
assumed the form of a bull, was angrily hit by the lord’s fist.
33. Krsna bathed at this wonderful tirtha which appeared
at the place of his killing the bull.
34. But he was sorry for having brought upon himself the
sin of killing the bull although it was a demon.
35. Then Radha embraced Krsna and told him about the
pond which was known after her name and which was not far
from there.
36. This Radhakunda is capable of removing all sins (and
‘Krsna got rid of the sin there). |
.37. By bathing in Aristakunda and Radhakunda, one gets
the fruit of Rájasüya and Aévamedha (respectively). There
need be no doubt in this matter. The sin of killing a cow, man or
Brahmin disappears there instantaneously.
38. There is the tirtha called Moksaràja whose very sight
dispels all sins and confers salvation.
39. On the eastern side is the tirtha called Indradhvaja because of Indra’s banner being raised there.
40. Those who bathe there go to heaven and those who die
there are never born again.
41. Then by bathing in the spot called Cakratirtha in the
Paficatirtha, the devotce should dedicate the fruit of his pilgrimage to Hari.
42. Finishing thus the pilgrimage, he should keep awake at
Govardhana for purification from sins.
43. Keeping thus awake on the night of the Ekadasi day, he
Should bathe early morning on the Dvadasi day and offer, according to his means, pinda for the manes.
44. He who offers libation in this manner for the liberation
of manes, gets freed from all sins and attains supreme Brahman.

484 Varüha Purana
45. I have thus told you about the circumambulation of
Annakita. This is laid down for the month of Asadha as well.
46. He who listens with attention to this account of the
greatness of Govardhana gets the result of bathing in Ganga.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTYFIVE
The Power of Catuhsámudrika well
Varaha said:
1. O Earth, now listen to what I say about what happened
at Pratisthana in the Deccan region.
2. In that city there lived a wealthy Vaisya by name Susila
with his wife and several children.
3. Always absorbed in the affairs of his family, he never
turned his attention to religious matters like holy bath, gift,
recitation of mantras, performance of homa or worship of god.
4. He was always engaged in trade and a long time passed
like this. He never met any pious people.
5. He never listened to any discourse on dharma and he had
no attachment towards Brahmins or gods.
6. He was incurring a lot of sin by his selfish deeds but he
did not realise this.
7. It never occurred to him that gifts are necessary.
8. Though he was quite wealthy and was living in the great
city of Pratisthàna, he never gave away anything to anyone.
And not only that, he could not bear to see others giving.
9. Though deeply attached to his wife and children, in due
course he died.
10. On death, he became a ghost and began to wander in
places without water.
11. Full of thirst, he spent a long time like this in the desert.
12. Acaravan of traders happened to pass by among whom
were some from Mathura.
13. When that moved away, he resorted to the foot of a
tree and began to remain there.

14, He was fierce and terrific with long canines, short in
arms, long in chin, big in eye, and cat-like in face.
15. After a long time, by his good luck, a merchant named
Vibhu happened to pass by that place.
16. Seeing him even at a long distance, the ghost became
glad. He danced towards him and said:
17. “You have now become the object of my food. Where
do you wish to go ?" At these words of the ghost, the merchant
was fear-stricken and he began to run.
18. The ghost caught hold ofhim and said: “You are the
food for me come of its own accord. I shall eat your flesh and
drink your blood".
19. Hearing this, the merchant said:
20. “I have reached this forest on my way to a place to seek
something to maintain my family. I have an aged father in my
house, and also my mother ang virtuous wife.
21. Ifyou are going to eat me, my family also will die",
22. Hearing his words, the ghost asked him to tell him from
where he was coming.
Vibhu said:
23. Between mount Govardhana and river Yamuna, there
is the beautiful city of Mathura known all over the world. I live
there in my ancestral house.
24. All the wealth I had accumulated there was stolen by
thieves and I became penniless.
25. With the little that was left, I reached this desert.
26. Ihave thus come before you (by chance). You may do
(with me) whatever you like.
The ghost said:
27. “I sympathise with you and I am not going to eat you.
I shall release you on condition that you will do what I say.
28. You return to Mathura for my sake I shall tell you what
you should do there.
29. 'Take a ritualistic bath in the well called Catuhsámudrika, and offer pinda there in my name. Then give me the
Íruit of this bath and go away as you please".
30. Hearing the words of the ghost, Vibhu said:

486 Varāha Purana
31. “I shall not go back to Mathura without money. You
may eat my body and satisfy yourself”.
The ghost said:
32. There is a lot of money in your house. So go there and
oblige me. Please don’t delay.
Vibhu said:
33. “There is no money in my house as you say. All the
wealth that is left is the house.
34. There is the fame of my ancestors, but that, of course,
cannot be sold".
35. The ghost laughed and said: “There is certainly wealth
in your house as I told you. A mass of gold is kept in a cavity in
the house.
36. So return with pleasure. Retrace your path to Mathura’”’.
Sita said:
37. The merchant was very much pleased and asked him
how it was that he possessed the knowledge of such secrets when
he was in that state.
38. Then he told him about his former life. “There is a
great temple of Visnu in the city of Pratisthana.
39. From early morning Brahmanas, Ksatriyas, Vaisyas
and Südras gather there.
40. A reciter would read Purànic stories and a friend of
mine always used to listen to this.
41. He once persuaded me very much to go there with him
to this Visnu temple.
42. I did so and seated myself near him. Then I heard (the
reciter say) about the sacred well where all the four oceans meet.
43. I heard about the efficacy of this well and the merit it
brings about.
44. Ali the people present there gave presents to the reciter,
but I remained quiet although persuaded by the friend.
45. The friend asked me again to give whatever I liked, and,
thus insisted, I gave a small gold coin.
46. In course of time, I died and by the decision of Vaivas-

vata (Death god), I became a ghost from which state it is difficult
for me to redeem myself.
47. No gift was made by me, no offering made in fire,
no bath was taken in a tirtha and no libation was made to the
manes. The result is this ghosthood.
48. I have told you now what you asked. Please do go to
Mathurà".
. 49. Hearing these words of the ghost, Vibhu said:
50. “How do you maintain yourself at the foot of this tree ?”
The ghost said:
51. “I have told you about all that happened.
52. By the power of the gift of the gold coin I gave to the
reciter I remain always satisfied.
53. As I had given it without any motive, my knowledge
remains in me even though I have become a ghost."
54. 'The merchant then returned to Mathurà and did all
that was requested of him by the ghost. And the ghost got liberation and went to heaven. i ;
55. O Earth, I have thus told you about the greatness of
Mathura and how the offering of pinda in the Catuhsamudrika
well leads to liberation.
56. Those who die here in a tirtha, house, temple or square,
gain liberation but not elsewhere.
57. Asin incurred elsewhere is eradicated in a tirtha, but a
sin incurred in a tirtha sticks on.
58. Buta sin committed at Mathura disappears there
itself, but this city is so holy that there is no sin there.
59. The ungrateful, the drunkard, the thief andthe vowbreaker all get cleansed of their sins in Mathura.
© 60. A resident of Mathura acquires more merit than one
{performing penance) standing on one foot for a thousand years.
61. All residents of Mathura are gods in human form even
if they have no control of senses or are fond of others’ wives.
62. Those who make offerings to gods, give alms, die without anger, inclined to take bath in tirthas, are all gods in human
form.
63. Honouring a single Brahmin of Mathura is equivalent
to honouring a thousand other Brahmins.

488 Varaha Purine
64. A Brahmin of Mathura without knowledge of the Veda
is equivalent to one with the knowledge of all Vedas elsewhere.
65. The very presence of a man from Mathura in a tirtha
or temple makes it more auspicious.
66. Giving up four Vedas, honour a man of Mathura.
All beings and gods get pleased.
67. The celestials find the residents of Mathura four-armed
because they are Visnu in human form.
68. But this is perceptible only to those with knowledge,
not to others.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTYSIX
The power of Asikunda
Earth said:
1. I have been told, O great god, about various tirthas.
Be pleased to tell me now about the tirtha named Asikunda.
Varaha said:
2. There was once a virtuous and renowned king named
Sumati who went to heaven as a result of pilgrimage.
3. Then his son named Vimati began to rule the ancestral
kingdom.
4. Narada once went to him and the king duly honoured.
the sage with seat, padya and arghya.
5. Receiving all this, Narada said that the acquisition of
dharma by a son depends on doing what he owes to the departed
parents.
6. Narada then went away and when he was gone, the king
asked the ministers:
7. “What did Narada say about the departed father. I
have not understood what he meant by the words ‘doing what he
owes to the departed parents’ ".
8. The ministers knew and they told him that what was
meant was a pilgrimage and it is a debt that we owe to the manes.

9. The king immediately decided to undertake a pilgrimage.
10. He decided to go to Mathura and spend there the four
months of the rainy season.
11. When the king went there, all the different tirthas began to consult one another.
12. ‘It is not possible for us to fight with this Vimati. Let
us all go to Kalpagràma where lord Varaha remains".
13. All the tirthas, O Earth, went to Kalpagrama where,
by accident, I was in the form of the boar. All of them stood before me.
The tirthas said:
14. Victory to you, O Lord Visnu, victory to you, O Acyuta,
victory to you, O Lord of the worlds, we all bow to you.
Varaha said:
15. Praised by the tirthas, O Earth, I spoke to them; “Seek
of me whatever boon you have in mind".
The tirthas said:
16-17. O Lord Varaha, you should give us protection from
this sinful Vimati who is a source of fear for us. Check him if
you wish us happiness.
Varüha said:
18. “For the sake of all of you, tirthas, I shallkillthisgreat
enemy". Then I went to the city of Mathura for the purpose.
19. When the haughty king came there, I engaged him in
battle and hit him down with the divine sword, and in that process the tip of the sword pierced the earth.
20. When the sword was drawn out from there, a clod of
earth was removed, and there gods and sages made a tirtha which
came to be known as Asikunda (being the kunda ‘pit’, formed
by asi ‘sword’).
21. Ishall tell you about the wonder there pleasing to the
mind and ear.
22. People who go there with full control of the senses on
Dvadagi or Caturda&i never fail to get whatever they desire.
23. Having gone to Mathura then, I remain there facing
west.

490 Varüha. Purdna
24. Four golden images have also been installed in the
Varahatirtha in Mathura. They are all beautiful and he who
sees them gets liberation. .
25. One is Varaha, the other is Narayana. The third is
Vamana ard the fourth Raghava.
26. He who bathes in the Asikunda and sees these four images gets the merit cquivalent to going round the carth upto the
four oceans.
27. He also gets the fruit of all tirthas in Mathura.
28. Asikunda is the most important of all tirthas there. As
regards the order of the tirthas for the pilgrim told to you earlier,
it is good to start it from Asikunda.
: 29. Even the man who bathes in Mi dus on Dvadasi day
after waking from sleep and secs the images there, becomes eligible for final liberation.
30. Evenaftera longlapsc of time, he will not be born
again.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTYSEVEN
The power of Visranti tirtha
Varaha said:
1. O goddess, listen tome. I shall tel] you what the Raksasa
said about Visranti tirtha to the Brahmin.
Earth said:
2. Tell me why the Raksasa spoke about Viérànti tirtha
and why the Brahmin asked about it.
Varáha said:
3. In Ujjayini there was a Brahmin who never cared for the
rules of virtuous life. He never worshipped gods and never bowed
to the saints.
4. He never bathed in any holy tirtha, He knew neither the
Vedas nor the Vedangas. He was lustful and longed for the wives
of others.

5. He used to sleep during dawn and dusk. He never gave
the honour due to superior men and never did anything to propitiate the manes.
6. His mind was wicked, deeds sinful and his company bad.
He was always immersed in the pleasures of conjugal life.
7. To discharge the duties of a houscholder is, of course,
proclaimed to be a virtuous action and that all beings are
sustained by that.
8. Just as all beings depend on the mother, so too they depend on wedded life.
9. So (when he felt the need for more money to maintain
his family) he began to steal, and when once he was running in
the night, he was caught by the king's sentinels.
10. He ran away from them, but while doing so, fell into a
well and died. He then became a Ráàksasa of terrific form.
Il. Acaravan of traders happened to pass by that place.
12. Amidst them was a Brahmin who was protecting the
entire group by uttering the Raksoghna mantra (meant to drive
away Raksasas).
13. Then the Raksasa came to the Brahmin and told him:
. 14. “O Brahmin, I shall give you whatever you need.
Don't deprive me of my food which I have got after a long time.
15. Get up from here and go and sleep somewhere else. Let
me eat my food (these men) to my heart's content".
16. Hearing these words of the Raksasa, the Brahmin said:
“I have come along with this group and I shall not forsake it.
17. This caravan is to be looked after by me like my wife.
You may, therefore, go away from here. You will not be able to
see it because of the power of my mantra.”
The Raksasa said:
18. “By depriving me of my food vou will be doing a great
wrong. Please take pity on me and don’t stand in the way of my
food”,
19. Then the Brahmin asked him about the particular misdeed as a result of which he had become the Raksasa.
20. Then he told him about his previous life and how by the
violation of the rules of virtuous life he was turned into a Raksasa
on death.

492 Varüha Purána
21. Then sympathising with him, the Brahmin said, “O
Raksasa, you have become my friend now. So tell me what I may
give you and what I may do to be helpful to you”.
The Raksasa said:
22-23. Ifyou are pleased to grant me my wish, then give me
the fruit of your bath at Visranti tirtha in Mathura so that I
may gain release from my present state.
The Brahmin said:
24. How do you know, O Raksasa, about the Visranti tirtha.
Tell me how it got the name.
The Raksasa said:
25. “I was living in the city named Ujjayini and once I
happened to go to the temple of Visnu there.
26. There a Vaidika Brahmin was discoursing on the greatness.
of Viérànti tirtha.
27. By listening to it, devotion set in in my mind. I also.
came to know how it got the name.
28. Janardana, the great lord of the worlds, reposes there.
Hence it got the name Viérànti".
29. Hearing these words of the Raksasa, the Brahmin said:
“I give you the merit of one bath there".
30. As he was saying this, the Raksasa attained release.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTYEIGHT
The Tirthas in Mathura
Earth said:
1. Tell me who is this Ksetrapala who guards Mathura and
what merit is obtained by seeing him.
Varaha said:
2. By the very sight of this lord of beings in Mathura, all
sins disappear.

3. Siva performed penance of a severe nature for thousand
years, at the end of which I appeared before him and asked him
to seek a boon.
4. “O Lord of gods, I know for certain that you are everywhere. Give me a place in Mathura’.
5. Hearing these words of the great god, Hari said:
6. “O god, you will be the Ksetrapála in Mathura. To see
you will beget the benefit of the whole ksetra. Otherwise there
will not be fulfilment.
7. Whatever good deed is done in this tirtha, its full benefit
will be derived through you.
8. The very entry into this place is capable of removing
samsdra.””
9. This city is beautiful like Indra’s Amaravati in heaven.
10. In this earth, Mathura is most dear tome. The Mathura
region extends over twenty yojanas and at every step there, the
fruit of A$vamedha is obtained.
11. O Earth, I have not told this great truth to Brahma or
Siva. I have been keeping it as a great secret.
12. In this region the city of Mathura is splendid with gems
and jewels, I shall tell you about the tirthas there.
13. They are sixty crores and sixty hundreds in number.
I shall give the names (of a few).
14. Govardhana, Akrüra, Daksinakoti, Uttarakoti,
15. Praskandana and Bhandira. These six are equal to
Kuruksetra.
16. This most holy Visranti, Asikunda and Vaikuntha are
equal to Kotitirtha, Avimukta, Somatirtha, Yamuna, Tinduka.
17. Cakratirtha, Akrüra, Dvadasaditya, All these are very
holy and remove all sins. Mathurà is hundred times more holy
than Kuruksetra.
18. Those who read this account of the greatness of Mathura
or listen to it with attention, attain supreme bliss.
19. They liberate two hundred and forty generations.
20. He who calls this to mind at the time of death, snaps
all samsdra and gets Supreme bliss.
21. Ihave thus told you about the greatness of these tirthas.
What else do you wish to know ?

494 Varüha Purana
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTYNINE
The Semicircular spot in Mathura
Faráha said:
1. There is no place greater than Mathura in all the three
worlds. So I remain in Mathurà for ever.
2. Mathura is the greatest of all tirthas because Krsna was
playing in every spot there.
3. The whole place is circular and half of this circle is particularly important.
4. People who live between the northern and southern ends
of this attain liberation.
5. This is Somacakra because of its appearance and it is
efficacious for bath and gifts. Death there also is desirable.
6. He who bathes in this Ardhacandra (semicircular spot)
reaches the world from which there is no return.
7. Bysimply following the law of the sacred thread, one may
start from the south and go to its north.
Earth said:
8. O Lord, what is the law of the sacred thread. Tell me how
it should be followed.
Varáha said:
9. O goddess, the law of the sacred thread is that the commencement should be in the south and conclusion in the north.
10. This is the law by which people are able to gain salvation.
11. One should start from home and silently go to the north
and have bath there.
12. Then one may break silence and perform worship to
Krsna.
13. Amilch cow may then be gifted and also gold and other
things. Then Brahmins should be fed. This is that law.
14. One can also get these things done there for the sake of
getting the results.
15. Such a person is never born again but remains esteemed
in my world. He who dies there also goes to my world.

16. Those who die elsewhere also go to my world if they
have done these things in Ardhacandra.
17. They remain in heaven as long as their bones remain in
Ardhacandra.
18. In this Ardhacandra in Visrantitirtha even a donkey
becomes a four-armed person after it is cremated.
19. I remain as GarteSvara between the two ends of this
place.
20. O Earth, I remain in the form of the people of Mathurà.
I am satisfied when they are satisfied.
21. Listen, O goddess, to what happened to Garuda when
he came to Mathura to see Lord Krsna.
22. He found all people there to be like Krsna, and in order
to know the real Lord Krsna among them, he uttered this stotra:
Garuda said:
23. “Victory to the Lord of the universe, victory to Aditya,
victory to Visnu, victory to Acyuta, Victory to Krsna, Victory
to him who is beyond thought. I bow to you, O Lord."
24. When praised thus by the great Garuda, the lord appeared before him.
25. He consoled him and said to him pleasantly.
26. “Why have you uttered this praise? What do you desire? Why have you come to Mathura ? Tell me all this."
Garuda said:
27. “I came to Mathura wishing to sec you. But I was
unable to see you.
28. I find here all of the same appearance and so I am stupefied. Hence I uttered this praise for your favour".
29. Hearing these words of Garuda, the lord laughed and
told him in sweet words;
Krsna said:
30. “The form of the people of Mathura is my form. The
sinful people never see them in that form".
31. So saying Krsna disappeared there. Garuda also returned.
32. I have thus told you about the form of the people of Mathurà. Their propitiation is my propitiation.

496 Varaha Purana
33. Those who die in Mathura attain salvation, and this will
never be otherwise.
34. An animal, a bird or even a worm, all attain there the
four-armed form.
35-36. He who fasts on the Ekadasi day in the month of
Aévina, and on the Dvadasi day bathes in the river Yamuna
and sees Padmanabha and the deities Siva and Visnu united in
a single form, ceases from rebirth.
37. He who bathes there on the Dvàdaá& of the bright half,
after fasting and keeping awake the previous day, and worships
Visnu, surely gets salvation.
38-39. He gets freed of the sin of killing a Brahmin by praising YaSoda, Devaki and Vidyeévari.
40. Bath there removes all the evil effects of the planets,
so too the prayer there to whatever deity.
41. Seeing the Lord as Dirghavisnu there is itself efficacious,
and worshipping him yields all results.
42. This place itself is called Brahma and doing all that
Brahma did there like japa, homa and dhyana well, takes one
to Visnu.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTY
The story of Gokarna
Varaha said:
1. O Earth, I shall now tell you an old story about Gokarna
in Mathura.
2, There was a wealthy Vaisya named Vasukarna in Mathura. He had a very virtuous life named Susila.
3. She was very much devoted to her husband, but did not
have a child even after many years.
4. Once seeing many women with children, she was wailing
over her unfortunate lot at the confluence of the river Sarasvati.
5. Seeing this, a sage who was sitting at the foot of a tree
there, took pity on her and asked her who she was aud why she
was sad.

6. She told him that when she saw there numerous women
playing with their children, she was feeling sorry that she alone
had not that good fortune.
7. The sage then told her who was yearning for the blessing
to get a child:
8. “By the blessing of God, you will get a son. Go to the
Siva temple known as Gokarna.
9. Worship there with your husband offering abhiseka,
lamp and naivedya, reciting stotras and performing Japa”.
10. Hearing this, she prostrated before him and went to
her husband to tell him about the agreeable advice of the sage.
11. He told her that he very much liked the idea and felt
that his long-felt desire was bearing fruit.
12-13. He went with her to the confluence of Sarasvati and
bathing there, worshipped Gokarna every day with flowers,
lamp and naivedya.
14, Ten years passed like this. Then Lord Siva became
pleased with them and said:
15. “You will get a handsome and virtuous son and he will
be getting many children by the blessing of God".
16. So said by the Lord, they bathed in the Sarasvati early
in the morning and made many offerings to the Lord.
17. They gave to the Brahmins a lot of food, clothes and
liberal daksinà.
18. Signs of pregnancy could then be discerned in Suéilà.
The foetus was growing like the moon in the bright fortnight.
In the tenth month was born a boy delightful like the moon.
19. To celebrate the birth of the son, the father gave numerous cows with gold and clothes to people of all castes.
20. He performed the Jatakarma ceremony of the new-born
and also the Namakarana naming the boy Gokarna after well
thinking about it.
21. In due course, he performed for his son the other ceremonies like Annaprasana, Cüdàkarma, Upanayana, Godana
and Vivàha at the appropriate times.
22. He gave numerous gifts, worshipped many deities and
and performed several auspicious ceremonies.
23. But seeing him not getting children even in the prime
of youth, he got more girls married to him making them four in
all.

498 Varaha Purana
24. All of them were lovely, good-natured and in the bloom
of youth, but none bore a child.
25. Gokarna started doing many things conducive to get a
child like digging wells, making tanks, constructing temples,
26. Stalls for giving water and garlands, daily food, special
feasts and such other things.
27. Considering the evanescent nature of human life, he
always engaged himself in such activities.
28. Near Gokarna, on its western side, he constructed a
temple of Visnu in the Paücáyatana.
29. He arranged for an extensive garden around it with all
kinds of flowering plants and trees like mango, orange and pomegranate.
30. Around this he constructed a big wall with a moat and
made provision for watering the plants and collecting flowers by
women.
31. Every service in the temple including cleaning, was done
by his wives.
32. All of them were devoted to him and faithfully carried
out whatever he said.
33. A garland maker was appointed to water the trees and
he was guarding the garden also.
34. In due time, the trees produced flowers and fruits and
presented the appearance ofan eternal festival of fruits. They
were eaten by all and given to others also as in the garden of
Indra.
35. While he was thus living in Mathura making lavish
gifts, his resources gradually began to dwindle.
36-37. He began to get worried as to what he could do with
the little that was left with him to look after his parents, maintain
his family and feed his servants.
38. So he started his trading business again and started
with his employees to the eastern regions.
39. Purchasing things from there, he sold them in the northern regions with good profit.
40-4]. He then bought from there fine gems, horses and
clothes and brought them home in Mathura. This business was
continued.
42. Once during a trip like this, he and his people halted

for rest in a mountain valley with fine water and profuse growth
of barley.
43. In a convenient place near a brook, they put up their
tent, deposited their luggage there and let loose the horses for
grazing.
44, He gave the necessary instructions to the followers, and
with a few of them climbed up the mountain which was full of
caves.
45. While he was strolling there for pleasure, he noticed a
spot which was full of placid water amidst groves of oranges.
46. There were many trees laden with fruits and many plants
full of flowers grown by the flowermakers therein between rocks.
47. As he went near and scanned it with his eyes, he heard
words of welcome.
48. Surprised at this, he looked more carefully and saw there
a parrot in a cage.
49. The parrot said: “Come here, let me accord you
welcome and be hospitable to you, O wayfarer. Receive this
water for padya and take this honoured seat.
50. You and your people may partake of these sweet fruits,
honey, meat and water as much as you like.
5l. My parents will come and offer you further hospitality.
52. The ancestors of a householder, who is indifferent to
duly receive guests, go to hell and those of one who respects them,
go to heaven.
53. A guest who goes away disappointed, takes with him the
merit acquired by the householder transferring to him all of his
own sins.
54. So a guest should be attended upon in all seriousness
irrespective of the fact whether the time of the visit is suitable or
otherwise, for a guest is like Visnu.”’
55. The merchant Gokarna was very happy to hear these
words of dharma from the parrot, and he asked him.
56. ‘‘Which sage are you ? or are you a god or semi-divine
that you appear superhuman and utter these words of wisdom ?
57. Please tell me who you are. You are enthusiastic and
eloquent about guests. Surely blessed is the man near whom
you are".
58. So requested, the parrot began to tcll him about an
improper action foolishly done by it.

500 Varüha Purdna
59. “I happened to offend sage Suka when he was performing penance on the northern side of mount Sumeru.
60. Suka, the son of Vyasa, was performing great penance
and to hear the Puranas and Itihàsas from him, many sages came
there.
61. There were among them the sages Asita, Devala Markandeya, Bharadvaja, Yavakrita, Bhrgu,
62. Angiras, Taittiriya, Kanva, Medhatithi, Krta, Tantu,
Sutantu, Aditya, Vasuman, Ekata, Dvita,
63. Vamadeva, Aśvaśiras, Trisiras, Gautama and many
Devas, Siddhas, Pannagas and Guhyakas.
64. They all sat before Suka and asked him many questions
relating to dharma. I was a disciple of sage Vamadeva, by name
Sukodara.
65. Curious to know things but not observing the necessary
decorum, because of my being young, I went in front and repeatedly put questions of a hypothetical nature.
66-67. My master was stopping me every time saying that
the objections are raised and the answers given by those who want
to win a point over each other and it was not proper to interrupt
them by my questions.
68. Thus chastised by my master, the other sages refused to
speak to me.
69. And Suka pronounced a curse on me: “‘As this boy
blabbers like a parrot, let him become the parrot itself”.
70. No sooner did he utter this, than this Sukodara was
transformed into a Suka (parrot).
71. The sages then sought the pardon of Suka on my behalf, but he only said:
72. “What I said cannot but happen. But I shall give this
parrot a boon to redeem himself after a lapse of time.
73. Because of your pleadings, I give him the power to be
highly virtuous and get mastery of all Sastras and get knowledge
of the essence of Puranas even while remaining in the form of
the parrot.
74. He will die in Mathura and then go to the Brahmaloka”.
75. Having incurred such a curse and getting the boon for
redemption from it, I was living in despondency in a cave in
the Himālayas.

76. Iwas then caught by a hunter and put in a cage, and he
and his wife keep me as a plaything.
77. But by the grace of the sage, my knowledge does not
leave me. I eat the fruit of my own bad action’’,
78. At these words of the parrot, Gokarna said: “O great
soul, don't give yourself up to sorrow.
79. I belong to that holy Mathurà from where you are to
gain redemption. I happened to come here on my way for trade.
80. I will be going back to Mathura with all my merchandise soon. (I shall take you with me as my son)".
81. The parrot was happy to know that Gokarna was a
resident of Mathurà and he agreed to the suggestion of the merchant that he would take him as his son.
82. When they were conversing thus, the huntress woke
up'and came out. She saw the handsome man sitting in the seat
surrounded by his followers.
83. As she was looking at him again and again,the parrot
said:
84. “Mother, here is a distinguished guest for us. He is
named Gokarna and deserves to be well honoured".
85. As she was hesitating in spite of what the parrot said,
the hunter returned home.
86. The parrot repeated the importance of honouring guests
and the hunter agreed.
87. He offered him fruits, meat and sweet-smelling honey
and then asked him what he might do for him.
88. But Gokarna said that what he desired was something
else, and that may be given to him if he was willing.
89. He said: “Please give me the parrot in the cage as my
son. I will take him to my parents at Mathura’.
90-91. Immediately the hunter said: “I shall give you the
parrot if you are prepared to give us the fruit of the bath in
Yamuna and in the confluence of Sarasvati’’.
92. Gokarna replied: “Tell me, if you know, the result of
the bath in the confluence of Sarasvati”.
The hunter. said:
93. This parrot has told me about the merit that accrues in
Mathura, in the confluence and in performing DvadaSivrata.

502 Varáha Purána
94. He who performs this vrata, let him be a Raksasa or
even an animal, attains final beatitude.
95. He who bathes in the confluence and sees Lord Gokarna
there, never goes to the abode of Yama, but goes to the world of
Visnu.
96. Thus have I heard about the great merit that accrues
in the confluence (Sangama).
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTYONE
The Story of Gokarna (con tinued)
Varáha said:
l. He took the parrot and went to Mathurà and presented
him to his parents, telling them the whole story about him.
2. Many years passed happily in worship and discussions
(of morals).
3. His resources again began to dwindle and he thought of
starting trading again.
4. His idea was to collect gems from the sea through experts.
5. He then entered into an agreement with a troupe of
sailors and started.
6. Onan auspicious day together with the parrot and taking
with him all the necessary food and drink.
7. Before entering the ship, he got the blessings of his parents
and instructed his wives to do their duties in the temple and to
look after the garden.
8. He asked them to attend well on the parents all the time
without fail and to do for them what would be normally his duty.
9-10. Instructing them thus and getting their approval and
propitiating God, he entered the ship together with the parrot
and started voyage in the vast ocean.
11. The sailors moved the craft rapidly into the deep outer
ocean.
12. Then an adverse wind began to blow which drifted it
away and made the crew helpless and senseless.

13. “What a pity ! what can we do now", they exclaimed.
Hearing their words, those on board began to accuse one another.
14. “Some sinful man who ought not to have entered the
ship has got into it", they said. “Because of his sin we arc all
facing death now".
15. Four months passed and they observed the fruit of their
adventure.
16. Listening to their mutual accusations, Gokarna asked
‘Suka who was in a self-disparaging mood.
17. *O my son, I am burning within myself because I am
the sinner among us, as I have no (real) son and it is wellknown
that the man without a son has no salvation.
18. Tell me out of your wisdom and proficiency in scripture
"what we may do in this predicament.”
Suka said:
19. “O father, be quiet. Don’t have any fear and don't give
yourself up to sorrow. Leave me to do what is appropriate in
this situation."
20. Consoling his father thus, Suka quickly flew in the northern direction to the region called Dhruva.
21. He crossed the expanse of water by flying low and reached the valley of a mountain spreading over one yojana.
22. He was thrilled to see the big mountain, and flying to
its top, saw a fine temple.
23. It was a splendid temple of Visnu, and after going
around it, he hid himself within.
24. He thought, “Iam the son, the father is now a wanderer.
When will we be able to get over the present difficulty ?”
25. As he was thinking for a moment in this manner, the
(chief) goddess entered there with a golden vessel in her hand
and performed worship of the god.
26. She uttered ‘Bow to Narayana’ and sat on a seat. In a
moment there came numerous (other) goddesses similar to
the chief goddess in age and beauty.
27. After delightfully presenting there vocal music, instrumental music and dance, they returned to their places.
28. On the southern side in the temple could be seen many
flocks of Jatàyu birds.

504 Vardha Purána
29. Suka, the parrot, entered into an understanding with
them, as if in written form, and spoke in his language seeking
their protection.
30. They consoled him and asked him how he came there
crossing the expansive ocean full of all kinds of fish.
31. Suka said; “My father remains in the craft drifted away
to a difficult place by an unfavourable wind.
32. Desiring to seek protection for him I have come to this.
great mountain. Please see that he is safe and happy".
The birds said:
33. We shall see that this good desire of yours is accomplished. You will get your father as if by a canoe.
34. Iwil split the water with my feet (and make a shallow
passage across the ocean) and your father will follow on my back.
35. The aquatic beings that come in the way will die by my
beak pushing them down".
36. The plan was conveyed to the father, and he was made
to cross the ocean on the back of Jatàyu.
37. While crossing, the water was in some places waist-deep,
in others chest-deep and in yet others neck-deep.
38. He then reached that wonderful temple and saw there
the tank full of gems and lotuses. He bathed there and offered.
libations to the gods and manes.
39. He collected flowers and worshipped Lord Keéava.
After seeing the Paficayatana studded with gems, he sat in solitude with the approval of Suka.
40. In a short time, the goddesses made their appearance
as before, and after the dance, the seniormost among them spoke
to the rest.
41-42. ‘To this Gokarna, the visitor who is great and spiritual, give the celestial fruit for eating and fine water for drinking
so as to get him satisfaction for three months and his sorrow, sin
and delusion disappear".
43. They did so and said, “Live in this heavenly place as
long as you like, you will be free from fear and sorrow".
44. This continued and Gokarna was as happy as in Mathura.
45. Meanwhile (as Gokarna was just leaving the craft),

a favourable wind blew and took it to a place of calm water full
of gems.
46. His men collected a good deal of gems, and as they were
taking them to him for his examination, they found him missing.
47. They were extremely sad and said, “Where has he gone?
Is he dead or lost in water ?
48. Or has he drowned himself out of shame ? Any way we
shall go to his father and move with him as if we are his sons.
49. We shall also give him the share in the gems due to him.
This is the rule when we venture jointly as a group."
50. But Gokarna, who was in that island, was full of sorrow
and he piteously spoke to Suka about his parents.
51. Suka, however, spoke to him, “I am but a bird with a
frail little body, and, as such, I am unable to carry you.
52. I shall go to Mathura across this sea and convey to them
your words and convey back to you theirs. Give me your permission”.
53-54. Gokarna then said to Suka, “Let it be so. May you
go to my parents and tell them about me. But return soon as I
can't do without you."
55. The parrot said ‘yes’, and reaching Mathura told everything to the parents (of Gokarna).
56. They heard all that but, however, presumed Gokarna
as dead and wailed for a long time. Then they put affection on
the parrot and said:
57. “O bird, you should narrate for our peace of mind stories
up-holding dharma.”
58. Distressed at the loss of the son, they were consoled by
stories uttered by the parrot remaining in the cage.
59. Then the sailors (who had gone with Gokarna in
voyage) returned with their collection of gems and gave to Vasukarna what was due to his son.
60. The mountain was worshipped by them by offering
twenty gems each. They were all then duly honoured and sent
to their homes.
61-62. They lived there attending to the needs of the old
Vaiéya (Vasukarna) as if he was their own father.

506 Varáha Purana
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTYTWO
The Story of Gokarna (continued)
Varaha said:
1. Gokarna did in the temple for (the other) thirteen days
(in the fortnight) what he did on the first day.
2. The goddesses, beautiful and well ornamented, used to
visit there and happily perform their dance.
3. Gokarna soon forgot everything about his home. Then
once he saw the goddesses coming there to be devoid of their
usual lustre.
4. They were weak and pale, without their attractive garments and jewels, and with the hair on the head and eyelids
reduced.
5. They were deformed and disfigured and had several
bleeding wounds. He was very much pained to see them in that
condition.
6. He felt that, being an issueless man, not only he himself
will have no salvation, but by his association even these goddesses
were reduced to that state.
7. Thinking so, he asked them to tell him how such a change
occurred in their form.
The Goddesses said:
8. “O noble man, don’t ask about this. Fate is the cause
for everything. In the form of Time, it gives us the effects of our
merits (as well as demerits).
9. Fate should be sought after for an answer. People who
are very much distressed do not talk with one who is himself
distressed."
10. Gokarna, however, out of a desire to know the truth,
bowed to them and asked again.
11. “Ifyou consider the cause of this disfigurement a secret
and are not inclined to tell me about it, I shall put an end to my
life."
12. When he told them thus, one among them said, “Let us
tell him about our sorrow if that will give him relief.
13. Ishall tell you how this disfigurement happened to us.
Listen with attention.

14. There is the beautiful city of Mathura which brings
about salvation to people.
15. Once the king of Ayodhya went there with all the four
components of his army to worship in the tirthas there for four
months.
16. He chose there the temple of Visnu with its five parts
and having gardens and arbours around with wells and sweetsmelling flowers and trees bearing fruits in all seasons.
17. The king arranged his residence near this.
18. His followers destroyed the garden with its fruit-bearing
trees and the surrounding walls were razed to the ground.
19. Although prevented from doing this, these sinful people
-did not listen. The king felt himself like a lion in a cage".
20. She then covered with the hands her face shedding tears
on the breast and cried aloud, “Alas ! who will protect us”.
21. Then all of them began to cry, and hearing their wailing
sound resembling the cry of the Kurari birds, Gokarna became
‘very sad.
22. He fell down at the feet of every one of them and slowly
‘consoled them with soothing words.
23-24. He then told them that if he had been there, he would
have prevented the king himself from being there, but unfortunately he was incapacitated.
25. When he said this, all of them became curious and asked
him who he was and from where he came there.
Gokarna said:
26. “Iam Gokarna. I told you I was happy to see you all
formerly very beautiful.
27. But now you are all otherwise and that gives me grief.
Tell me the cause of this transformation".
28. ‘The eldest among them said, “We were well decorated
‘with various flowers because we were in that garden protected
by its owner.
29. Therefore you could see us beautiful with all those flowers. I shall tell you how the change occurred.
30. The king's men tormented us by their cutting and up-

508 Varaha Purana
rooting (the garden). We became miserable and hence the present appearance.!
31. We are without flowers, left but with the root and trunk.
'Thus are we reduced with loss of our identity.
32. The god who is shaped there in stone and clay, but who
is really of the nature of Sattva, is the witness of all good deeds.
33. It is meritorious to water well the garden and to dig
ponds and make them full of lotuses and swans.
34. The trees laden with fruits are (to be considered) golden
To protect the garden is to provide pleasure to people. To destroy it is to do harm as the disfigurement of ours.”
Gokarna said:
35. Tell me what kind of merit accrues to a person who.
makes a garden, digs wells and instals images of gods.
The eldest said:
36. For the twice-born, istaparta is the foremost means of
dharma. Heaven is acquired by tsja and liberation by pärta.
37. He who renovates tanks, wells, ponds and temples gains
the result of pirta.
38. 'The same world as is ordained for those who make gifts
of land or cows, is attained by one who grows trees.
39. He who plants a peepal, a margosa, a banyan, ten flowering plants, two pomegranates, two oranges and five mangoes
never goes to hell.
40. Just as a dutiful son raises his family by hard effort
and austere resolve, so do the trees with their flowers and fruits,
raise up from hell their planter.?
41-42. The service of the trees in providing firewood, sticks
for sacrifices like Agnihotra, shade for the travellers to rest, nests
for birds and medicine for men through the leaves, root and bark
is said to be its five sacrifices (paficayajfia).
43-44. The learned people declare a tree to be like a son
because it provides materials for domestic life, provides shelter
l. This indicates that the goddesses were nymphs of the garden
(Udyánadevatàs).
2. The text has after this ‘Gokarna said’, but this seems to be wrong.

for small animals, twice in a year birds breed in it and it provides
fruits to the originator throughout the year.
Varüha said:
45. When told thus by the goddess Malati, he swooned saying ‘Alas, Alas P
46. They brought him back to consciousness by sprinkling
water on him and sought to know why he swooned.
Gokarna said:
47. “In Mathura I have my aged parents and four wives.
The garden and the temple you speak of are mine.
48. Iflam able to go to my parents and see the king I shall
tell them what has befallen you".
49. The eldest goddess said, “I shall take you wherever you
like. We shall see Mathura today itself.
50. You may get into this aerial vehicle. You may also take
with you these celestial gems, jewels and fruits and present them
to the king without arghya".
51. He agreed and, bowing to Lord Visnu there, got into
the vehicle and soon descended at the place where the king was
camping.
52. He then presented to the king the numerous gems he
had brought with him.
53. The king was very much pleased even at their sight.
He welcomed Gokarna, showed him hospitality and honoured
him by giving half his seat due to a donor of gems and money.
54. Gokarna then offered to show him a wonder and also
explain about it.
55-56. He agreed and asked his commander-in-chief to get
ready the army soon.
57. 'The commander-in-chief carried out the orders of the
king!. The deformed goddesses attained their original celestial
form.
l. After this the portion relating to what was done seems to be lost,
Presumably it is about the king being taken to the deformed goddesses to
convince him of the misdeeds of his men and then making him restore the
garden and renovate the temple.

510 Varaha Purana
58. They praised Gokarna again and again. They gave him
boons and bestowing benedictions went to heaven.
59. Gokarna then told the king all about himself and of the
result of Pärta dharma.
60. The king then bestowed on him some villages, cities,
clothes, elephants, horses and abundant money.
61. Having known how great a dharma the making of a
garden is and how wonderful its results are, the king did everything in that realm.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTYTHREE
The story of Gokarna (continued)
Varáha said:
1. Remaining in that auspicious place, Gokarna honoured
the parrot Suka, his own parents and the four wives.
2. He then made the residents of Mathurà make gardens
according to their capacity.
3. He himself then conducted a great sacrificial festival in
which Brahmins were fed and gifts given every day.
4. He also provided for vocal song and instrumental music
and did everything conducive to progeny.
5. Hethen prostrated separately at the feet of his father and
mother.
6-7. Then looking at Suka he shed tears and exclaimed:
“It was because of your favour that I got my life, dharma and
introduction to the path of salvation and the king gained profound merit".
8. Living happily with his family and friends, Gokarna constructed this temple of Siva and named it Suka.
9. He installed Sukesvara (Siva) there and then constructed the resthouse named ‘Sukasatra’ where two hundred Brahmins are sumptuously fed.
10. Suka died there, and entering an aerial car went to
heaven.

11. Gokarna had given to the hunter, in exchange for the
parrot, the merit of his bath at the confluence and the Sraddha
and gift of gold and cows there.
12. (Asa result) the hunter and his wife also entered the
same aerial car as Suka's and went to heaven.
13. "Thus have I told you about the great merit that accrues
at Mathura, at the confluence of river Sarasvati and Yamuna
and at the temple of Siva Gokarna.
14. The meditation on Gokarna confers great merits, enormous enjoyment and salvation in the end.
CHAPTER. ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTYFOUR
The greatness of the confluence of Yamuna
Varüha said:
1. I shall tell you another thing about the prowess of Sangama (confluence) which gains liberation even for the sinners.
2. An ascetic Brahmin by name Mahanama was living in a
forest there.
3. He had mastered yoga and was spending his time in. reciting Veda, practising Japa and performing Homa.
4. In performing these with the idea of attaining Brahmaloka, many years passed.
5. He then thought of undertaking a pilgrimage and cleansing his body by the holy tirthas.
6-7. His idea was to purify himself by starting early morning
after the prescribed rites and first go to Asikunda, from there to
Kotitirtha in the south and then proceed to the northern end
bathing in all tirthas including Mathura and Puskara.
8. So he started from Mathura and took the proposed route
after performing worship and saluting the Lord.
9. Soon he came across five ghosts in the lonely forest full
of thorns.
10. They were all terrific in appearance and so he became
afraid for a moment and closed his eyes.

512 Varüha Purana
11. Soon he gave up his fear, and mustering courage, asked
them:
12. “Who are you, O fierce beings? By what bad action
have you become like this ? Where have you come from and
where do you go?”
The ghosts said:
13. We are full of misery and hunger and thirst overcome
us. Our minds are bad and knowledge we have none.
14. We do not know the quarters or the subquarters, neither
the sky nor the earth nor even the day.
15. We hope that this suffering of ours will ultimately lead
to good and it is like darkness awaiting the rising of the sun.
16. Iam by name Paryusita, this one is Sücimukha, these
are Sighraga and Rodhaka and the fifth is Lekhaka.
The Brahmana said:
17. How can the ghosts, who become so because of their
own actions have names ? Please tell me how you have got these
names.
The ghost said:
18. O Brahmin, I used to eat well during the whole day
and give what is left over (faryusita) to the Brahmins (the next
day). Hence my name is Paryusita.
19. Many Brahmins who were seeking food were directed
(sücita) wrongly by this man. Hence he is Suücimukha.
20. This one used to go away quickly (fighram gacchati) whenever a Brahmin made any request to him. Hence he is Sighraga.
21. For fear of other Brahmins asking food, this one used to
take food in the interior of the house. Hence he is Rodhaka (since
he stopped others rudhyati).
22. This (last) one used to remain silent scratching the earth
(likhan) in indifference. Hence he is Lekhaka.
23. Lekhaka moves about like an inebriate; Rodhaka has
his head bent down.
24.25. Sighraga islame and Sücimukha (has a deformed
face)! Paryusitahas become one with thin limbs, long neck
hanging big belly and stout testicles. I have thus told you all
about us. You may ask if you want to know anything else.
1. ‘The appearance of Sücimukha is not given.

The Brühmana said:
26. All beings in the earth need food. I wish to know what
food you take.
The ghosts said:
27. O kind man, listen to what I say about our food, by
knowing which you will despise us.
28. The ghosts eat phlegm, urine and faeces before women
and in houses which are unclean.
29-30. The ghosts eat in such houses where there are no
offerings to gods, no recitation of mantras and no gifts, where
the elders are not respected, where women are dominant, where
things are kept haphazard and where there is always quarrel.
31-32. We eat in homes where gifts are given to the undeserving orgiven without due rites, where contemptible Brahmins
live, where bad and prohibited actions are done.
33. Such is the food for us who have done bad deeds. We
are extremely dejected with this ghosthood. Please tell us how
we can cease to be this.
The Brühmana said:
34. A man who undertakes vows like Krcchra and Candrayana for a single day or three days, gets purified and never becomes a ghost.
35. He who gives ample food and drink with due regard
and honours ascetics, never becomes a ghost.
36. He who nurtures every day five, three or even one (being) with universal compassion, never becomes a ghost.
37. He who is inclined to worship gods and honour guests,
elders and parents, never becomes a ghost.
38. He who has conquered anger, does not enter into rivalry,
is free from avarice and attachment, is full of forbearance and is
prone to give liberal gifts, never becomes a ghost.
39. He who fasts on the Ekadasi, Saptami and Caturda&
days during the bright as well as dark halves of the month,
never becomes a ghost.
40. He who bows to the gods, Brahmins, cows, tirthas,
mountains and rivers, never becomes a ghost.

514 Varaha Purana
The ghosts said:
4l. We have now heard from you about the factors that are
conducive to make one not to become a ghost. Please tell us what
factors make one (necessarily) become a ghost.
The Brühmana said:
49. He who dies with the food given by a Sidra within him,
becomes a ghost.
43. By mere contact of, not to say sitting together or eating
with, Nagas (a naked sect), Kapalikas or Pasandas, one becomes
a ghost.
44. Such a person loses all his acquired merit and becomes
condemned to be a ghost for ever.
45. He who remains in the abode of a Pasanda or is a drunkard, or cohabits with the wife of another, or is fond of flesh,
becomes a ghost.
46. He who steals the wealth of gods, Brahmins or teachers
or gives away his daughter for money, becomes a ghost.
47. He who gives up his mother, father, brother, sister, wife
or son, when thcy are innocent, becomes certainly a ghost.
48. He who performs sacrifices for the sake of those who are
not eligible for it and refuses to do the same for those who are
eligible, and who is interested in serving Südras, becomes a ghost,
49. He who kills a Brahmin or cow or incurs the five great
sins or is ungrateful, becomes a ghost.
50. He who does not heed the advice of an elder or preceptor
meant for his well being, becomes a ghost.
51. He who receives gifts from bad people, particularly
atheists, becomes a ghost without food or drink.
The ghost said:
52. Please tell us how those who do such prohibited deeds
out of ignorance can redecm themselves.
The Bráhmana said:
53-54. The only means of redemption for those who are
ignorant and indifferent to dharma and do not have compassion
or give gifts, is to perform worship and sacrifice to Lord Vàmana
at the confluence at Mathurà when the star Sravana is in combination with Dvadasi in the month of Bhadrapada.

p—
55. 'They should make gifts of gold, food, clothes, umbrella
and sandals after bathing and giving libations to manes.
56. They not only do not become ghosts, but go to the world
of Visnu in an aerial car.
57. He who bathes in that tirtha or thinks or speaks about
it, gets the merit equivalent to bathing in river Ganga.
58. I have heard it proclaimed that even he who, having
become a ghost, listens to the narration of the prowess of this
tirtha, goes to the immortal world of Visnu.
The ghosts said:
59. O auspicious man, tell us details of the rites of this
vow so that wecan do it and get redemption from this ghosthood.
The Brahmana said:
60. The details of this vow were formerly narrated to Mandhata by Vasistha being asked about them.
61. I shall now tell the same to you since they are capable
of securing your release.
62. Whatever bath, gift or sacrifice done in Bhadrapada
when Sravana falls on the Dvàda&i day, is a lakh of times more
efficacious than at other times.
63. You may know the merit that accrues when the gift of
a pot is made after bathing in the confluence and worshipping
Vamana.
64. It is the same as what is obtained by making gifts of a
hundred cows with gold and all decorations.
65. By this Sravanadvadafivrata one not only never becomes
a Raksasa, but takes abode in heaven for the duration of the
period of fourteen Indras.
66. Then he is born as a Brahmin learned in the Vedas,
proficient in Yoga, always following the path to moksa and conscious ofhis previous life. And by contemplation he becomes
permanently liberated.
67. Gifts of gold, food, drink and jewels should be made
there.
68. According to one’s means a golden Vamana may also
be gifted along with umbrella and sandals according to rules.

516 Varáha Purana
69. After performing worship in the prescribed manner with
mantras and also homa, the Brahmins may be propitiated.
(These are the items in worship:)
70. (Invocation): O lord of Laksmi, Eternal being, giver of
gifts, although you are everywhere, be pleased to adorn this seat
by your part for my favour.
71. (Reference to the star): I adore for the attainment of
my desires that star in which form you shine in thesky on Dvadasi
day.
72. (Bath): I bow to you (and bathe you), O Kesava, you
having lotus in the navel and forming the abode of Laksmi.
73. (Salutation): I salute you, O eternal and omniscient
Lord Narayana, the source of the whole world. (Worship):
O Keáava, accept this worship of mine on this day when the
asterism Sravana is in conjunction with Dvadasi day.
74. (Incense): O Lord of Lords, bearing the conch, disc
and mace, here is the incense. I bow to you Vasudeva, Acyuta,
Ananta, Govinda.
75. (Lamp with flame): By this incandecense may all the
eternal worlds be opened. O Janàrdana, you are the lustre in
everything and I bow to you.
76. (Food): You were born to Aditi as Vàmana for subduing the son of Virocana (Bali) and you then occupied the
entire universe with three steps. I bow to you.
77. (Arghya): You are esteemed by the gods and you are
the final resort of yogins. You repose in water and you are the
source of the universe. Be pleased to accept this arghya (ceremonial water).
78. (Homa): You eat the sacrificial offering, you produce
the sacrificial offering, you are the sacrificer and the sacrificial
offering. O Kesava, I bow to you who are everywhere and permeate every being.
79. (Daksinà): O Lord, you are gold, food, water and cloth.
(Umbrella and Sandals): O Janàrdana, be pleased with this
offering of sandals and umbrella.
80. (Praise): May the eternal Lord who is wind, water and
fire, Varuna, Sürya, Kesava, Siva, Kubera, remove my sins.
81. (Gift of water pot): He who is Brahma, Visnu, Rudra,
Candra, Sürya, Indra, Tvasta, Yama and Agni, remove my sins.

82. (Reference to the worshipper): Vàmana is the giver of
intelligence, Vamana is the liberator. I bow to Vamana.
33. (Receiver of gift): I give to Vamana, Vamana gives me.
Vamana is the liberator by both these means. I bow to Vamana.
84. (Gift of cow): In the body of the cow remain the fourteen worlds. By giving a gift of the cow which yields all desires,
people get gratification.
85. (Release): I offered worship to you, the dispeller of all
my sins. I now release you after this worship to adora any other
place you like.
86. He who performs in this manner the worship on the
Dvadasi day in the Bhadrapada month, attains his aim.
87. He who performs like this in the Sarasvati tirtha at the
confluence of Yamuna in particular, gets the merit a hundredfold.
88. Giving up everything, I have also been resorting to this
tirtha all this time with intense devotion. That was why you were
not able to affect me.
89. The Vrata should be commenced when the tithi Dvadasi
actually starts combination with the star Sravana and continues
till one of the two is out of combination.
90. The prowess of the tirtha is becoming manifest now itself.
I find that your listening to this account has itself started gaining
your liberation.
Varāha said:
91. As the Brahmin was saying this, the sound of Dundubhi
could be heard in the sky and a shower of flowers from the sky
on earth in hundreds.
92. Aerial cars descended there for the ghosts. A messenger
of the gods then told them:
93. “By the narration of (the prowess of this tirtha by) the
Brahmin and his extollation of its efficacy and by your listening
to all this, you are released from your ghosthood.”
94. So conversation with a good man even with effort is a
highly desirable thing, and in the mind there should always be
the thought of the tirtha and attitude of the Vrata.
95. This is evidenced by these ghosts getting their release
and going to eternal heaven by their contact with the man who
was always in the tirtha at the confluence of Sarasvati.

518 Varàha Purana
96. The result of their simply listening to the account of the
greatness of the tirtha was their release. So this which brought
about the liberation of the five ghosts, is a great dharma.
97. He who devoutly recites this or listens with serious
attention or performs what is ordained by this, never becomes a
ghost.
98. The tirtha named Pisaca is known in all the three worlds
and simply to know about it is to safeguard against becoming a
ghost.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTYFIVE
The prowess of Krsnagangà and Kalinjara
Varüha said:
1. O fair one, now listen to the prowess of Krsnaganga in
river Yamuna.
2. Sage Krsnadvaipáyana (Vyása)used to bathe here thinking of Ganga and do his daily routine.
3. Krsnaganga is between the tirthas Soma and Vaikuntha.
In this place in Mathura, Vyasa performed penance.
4-5. In this hermitage where there were many other great
sages also, many sages used to go to perform Caturmasya and
also many scholars deep in the knowledge of Vedas to clear their
doubts.
6. Vyasa used to clear their doubts by citing the relevant
passages (from scripture).
7. In that place Siva is installed with the name KaAlifjara,
the very sight of whom confers the merit of Krsnaganga.
8. Vyasa lived there for twelve years free from all attachment, eating but once a fortnight and that too fruit in the new
moon and full moon days.
9. He then went to Badari in Himalaya and entered into
dhyanayoga and became endowed with the knowledge of the
past, present and future.

10. The greatness of this tirtha was known through intuition by a Brahmin of the Pancala country.
11-12. His name was Vasu, but being stricken by poverty,
he proceeded with his wife to the south and settled in a town on
the right bank of Sivanadi.
13. While living there pursuing his Brahmanic way of life,
five sons and a daughter were born to him.
14. In due course, the daughter was given in marriage to a
Brahmin with the necessary grain and wealth, but he passed away.
15. She then collected his bones and went to Mathura,
having known, by hearing the Puranas, that one whose bones
areputinthe Ardhacandra tirtha gets a permanent place in
heaven.
16. She went to Mathurà undertaking a pilgrimage and
following a group of traders.
17. The youngest of the Brahmin's children thus became a
young widow.
18. She was fair-complexioned, had wellformed limbs and
curly black hair. Her thighs were stout and like the stem of the
plantain.
19. Her fingers were close together and so too the toes and
her nails rosy, her navel right-whirled and the belly had the
three folds.
20. Her belly was small and even and breasts well rounded
and raised. Her neck was conch-like, mouth tight, teeth sparkling
and the lips and chin attractive.
21. Her eyes and brows were beautiful, speech extremely
sweet. Her entire body was well proportioned. She bore the
significant name Tilottama.
22. Whoever was looked at by her, became dumbfounded
by her beauty as if drawn in a picture.
23. As she was spending her days bathing in the tirtha once
she came to be seen by a group of courtesans.
24. The king of Kànyakubja, an upholder of Ksatriya
dharma, had constructed a permanent inn near the Siva temple
Devagartegvara.
25. He had endowed it with a lot of wealth and entertainments with music and instruments as in Indra’s abode.
26. Repeatedly induced by these courtesans attached to this

520 Varüha Puràna
temple (for music and dancing), she took to music and dancing
and gradually fell into their way of life.
27. Inashort time, the virtuous woman became surrounded
by the vicious.
28. As the consort of god, she began to enjoy with all those
that came to her.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTYSIX
The Prowess of Krsnaganga and Kàlinjara
Varaha said:
1-2. The youngest of the five sons of the Pāñcāla Brahmin.
was rich and handsome and he started with his men and merchandise for trade in different countries.
3. After trading in various places, crossing different kingdoms, mountains and rivers, he came to the city of Mathura
and put up his tent in a place where food and fuel were plentiful.
4. He took bath early in the morning in that tirtha together with his men and dressing and decking himself well, proudly drove in his cart.
5. He saluted the deities and gave many gifts.
6. Then out of curiosity he visited the temple of Garte$vara
and, seeing there the supremely charming Tilottama, fell a
prey to passion.
7. To her matron he respectfully gave many clothes and
hundreds of beautifully designed bangles.
8. He gave her also many jewelled chains and the essence
of Agaru with camphor and sandal.
9. In that house (where Tilottamà was living) he was spending his time every day and used to go to his camp only after the
sun had risen high in the horizon.
10. But everyday he would bathe in the tirtha in Krsnaganga. Out of the pride of wealth he was continuing in this way
and six months passed.

11-12. Once when he went there to bathe, he was seen by
sage Sumantu, who was in his hermitage nearby, to be full of
worms all over his body.
13. These worms used to fall in plenty till he took bath, but
the moment the bath was taken, they disappeared and he became
handsome again.
14. This wonder was noticed by Sumantu for many days
and he wanted to know who this youth was.
15. He then boldly asked him who he was, who his father
was and what he was engaged in day and night.
Pàfàla said:
16. I belong to Paficala. I am the son of a Brahmin. I have
taken to trading business.
17. Ihave come from Dekkan to this Mathurà and spending
the night in my camp, I come to this tirtha in the morning.
18. After bath, I worship this Lord Siva named Trigarte-
$vara and also Kalifijara and your feet and then return to my
camp.
Sumantu said:
19. “I see a wonder in your body everyday. I find it full
of worms before bath but clean after bath.
20. You have unknowingly incurred some great sin which
is kept afar bv the power of this tirtha.
2]. And by the contact of Kalifijara, the body becomes pure
also.
22. Think well and tell me what can possibly be the cause
of this sin now unknown to you. Seeing the power of this tirtha,
I am asking this for your good".
23. Hearing these words of the sage who knew the past,
present and future, he could not say anything and simply went
away.
24. When he was alone with Tilottama, he asked her:
25. “O dear, please tell me who you are, whose daughter,
to which place vou belong and why vou arc living here like this,
though happily".
26. Although he pressed for an answer, she did not speak a
word. He repeated the request several times but she was mum.

522 Varāha Purāņa
27. A few days passed and then he threatened to give up his
life if she still refused to say the truth.
28. Compelled thus, she told him about her parents, brothers, native place, relations and the family (of her husband)
to which she belonged.
29. “There is the beautiful city of Paficala on the northern
bank of river Ganga. My parents were living there.
30. During a famine which caught hold of the entire country, they moved to Dekkan and settled on the southern. bank of
Narmada in a town full of Brahmins.
31. Five sons were born to them there and a daughter as
the sixth. That daughter is myself and I became a widow.
32. The youngest of the five brothers, but elder to me, left
home even while he was a baby with a view to earn and make
himself rich.
33. When he was gone, the parents died. I came here with
a group of traders to put the bones in this tirtha.
34. Iused to spend my time here bathing in this tirtha and
worshipping the gods and Brahmins. Then I was lured by these
(courtesans) and transformed to my present state.
35. By resorting to prostitution I have traduced my family.
By this sin of mine I have brought to hell twentyone persons in
both the families".
36. "Telling him all this, Tilottamà cried for long thinking
of her once high family.
37. She cried in the night thinking of her own doings.
38. Hearing her cry, the other women there came to her
and asked her why she was crying and spoke words of consolation.
39. By then, hearing her story, the Paficala too fell down
unconscious and the women stood around and consoled him too
and brought him back to consciousness by their efforts.
40. Seeing him revive, they asked him why he fell down
unconscious.
4]. He then said all about himself and his great family in
detail before those associates of Tilottama.
42. He became much dejected at his having committed inadvertent incest and thought seriously about the expiation for it.
43. Ifa Brahmin incurs the sin of killing a Brahmin or drink-

ing liquor, the expiation ordained by the sages is the destruction
of the body.
44. The only purification for the guilt of incest with mother,
teacher's wife, daughter, sister or daughter-in-law is immolation of the offender in fire.
45. He who cohabits with a prohibited person falls into the
same category as the killer of the Brahmin, drinker of liquor,
the murderer of women and the offender of the chastity of the
teacher's wife.
46. Knowing her paramour to be her own elder brother,
that woman from Paficala (feeling herself guilty) gave away all
her ornaments to Brahmins.
47. She gave them also all her jewels, clothes and grain.
She gave these also for adorning Kalifijara and for (the maintenance of) the garden.
48. Then at the tirtha in Krsnaganga she arranged a pyre
in the prescribed manner and blazed the fire for her own purification.
49. The Pàücàla too decided to do similarly for himself.
50. He took his bath, bowed to the gods and saluted sage
Sumantu. He then sat before him and performed rites relating
to his death.
51. He called the people of Mathura and gave them gifts
liberally.
52. He purchased villages then and there and made them
over to Brahmins. He asked them to recite the divine Isavasya
(upanisad).
53. He entrusted with them money for the maintenance of
the rest-house and for conducting his obsequies.
54. Then bathing in that tirtha of Krsna and bowing to
the Lord, he endowed funds for the worship of Kàliüjara, for the
rest-house and for the temple and gave the necessary instructions
in the matter to his own people.
55. Then he held the feet of the great Sumantu and said:
“O sage, your knowledge is wonderfully divine and exhilarating.
56. My sin has been now proved to be the consequence of
incest,
57. From the time I came to Mathura, I was having sexual
contact with my sister and I have thus done great harm to my
family.

524 Varaha Purana
58. By your pure sight, O sage, you were able to see worms
falling from my body but the body becoming clean again by the
power of Krsnaganga.
59. All this was seen by you and I was asked about it again
and again.
60. The sin of incest suspected has now been confirmed and
for purification from that sin 1 am now giving up this body. I
bow to your feet. Please give me approval."
61. When he was about to enter the pyre blazing with the
ghee poured on it, an aerial voice was heard to say:
62. “Don’t do this rash deed since you both have become
free from the sin, for redemption from which you have decided
to immolate yourselves.
63. This place where Lord Krsna had played and walked
about with his feet marked by the disc is pure and equal to Brahman.
64. A sin committed elsewhere disappears in a tirtha, but a
sin committed in a tirtha sticks close like vajralepa (cement
concrete).
65. Since both of you were bathing in Ganga sangama (you
are freed from your sins). By bathing here even once, a man
becomes free even from the sin of killing a Brahmin.
66. The same merit as is acquired by bathing in all other
tirthas on earth, is acquired surely by bathing in five tirthas.
67-68. Bathing in Visranti on Ekadasi day, Saukara on
Dvadasi, Naimisa on Trayodasi, Prayaga on Caturdasi and
Puskara on the new moon and full moon days in the month of
Karttika removes all sins.
69. Among these five tirthas in Mathura, Visranti is the
most important.
70. But the same result as is obtained by bathing in these
tirthas or in Asikunda in the river Sarasvati or in Kalifijara, is
obtained tenfold by bathing in Krsnaganga.
71. Whatever sin is incurred knowingly or unknowingly
disappears in Mathura, so too all merits and demerits.”
72. This narration of the greatness of tirthas made by Varaha
to Earth is capable of removing all sins.
73. WVaraha combines in himself all gods and Vedas. He has
no end and he cannot be fully known.

74. How can we speak fully of this god in whom the entire
space is covered by but a part of his ear ?
75. The entire heat (as well as light) in the world is covered
by the corners of his eyes.
76. The whole of Air is covered by his breath and the seven
oceans by the tips of his hoofs and look like particles of swcat
there.
77. The whole Earth that was lost is seen clinging with the
mountains and forests in the roots of his hair. Who is greater than
this god ?
78. In order to protect tirthas he has taken his form himself.
79. And this is the Purana narrated by him for clearing the
doubts of Earth.
80. There need be no doubt that the moment he is seen,
every sin disappears.
81-82. By bathing in (Krsnagangà) on Navami day in the
bright half of the month Jyestha and in Sükara for three days
and then giving a lamp according to capacity, one gets rid of all
sins.
83. By bathing in Kalifijara on Dvadasi day and worshipping god, one ascends an aerial car bright like twelve suns, and
accepted by Visnu, remains esteemed in Visnu-loka.
Varaha said:
84. Thus comforted by the divine voice, the Pàricàla asked
Sumantu:
85. “O sage, you arc my preceptor and father. Tell me
what I may do, to enter this fire or resort to this tirtha.
86. May I perform for threc days expiatory rites like Krcchra
and Candrayana in this place rendered more holy by your feet
and get salvation ?
Sumantu said:
87. The aerial voice we heard is true. It can never be false.
88. I was able to perceive the sin in your body before bath
every day and its recession after bath.
89. You remain in this hermitage free from sin for the rest
of your life. This sister of yours, who nas also becn freed from her
sin, will surely attain salvation.

526 Varáha Purana
Varáha said:
90. O Earth, such is the prowess of this tirtha in Mathura.
91. The greatness of the tirtha in Krsnaganga, Kalinjara
and Sükara is as I narrated to you.
92. He who listens to this with attention or recites it in the
morning, will never be touched by sin.
93. The sin committed in seven lives disappears and the
merit of giving a hundred cows is acquired.
94. Heaven is reached and immortality attained.
C HAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTYSEVEN
Consecration of Sürya by Samba
Varaha said:
1. O fair goddess, now listen to another deed of Lord Krsna,
when while living in Dvaraka, (his son) Samba got a curse.
2. When Krsna was living there with his wives and sons,
once Narada stepped in.
3. Krsna offered him padya, arghya, asana, madhuparka
and cow according to the usual etiquette (in receiving a distinguished guest) and began to converse with him.
4. But Narada took Krsna aside and spoke to him in private.
5. “I have to tell you something in secret. Please listen.
Your son Samba is young, eloquent and handsome and is longed
by all the women here.
6. The Supreme God gave you these sixteen hundred divine
women for your pleasure.
7. Their minds get agitated (with love) when they see
Samba, and this (scandal) has spread even in Brahmaloka.
8. O great god, I have come here to apprise you of this.
Dvaipayana (Vyasa) has a significant verse relevant here, namely,
9-10. “By (proper) deeds one gets residence in heaven, and
by its reverse residence in hell; the result of meritorious actions
spreads allover the earth and the doer becomes the Purusa indes-

tructible, unchanging and eternal and the opposite of this puts
him in hell, so say the wise.”
11-12. By calling Samba and all this multitude of women
and seating them here, I shall show you whether what I say is
true or false.
13. "Then seats were spread for all of them and they were
called and seated in groups.
14. Then Samba entered with folded hands and waited to
know the command (of Krsna).
15. Seeing the exceptionally handsome Samba, all those
noble women felt agitated in mind even when Krsna was watching them.
16. Then Krsna asked these beloved women of his to get
up and go to their homes and they did so.
17. Samba stood there shivering with folded hands. Looking at Nàrada, Krsna bent down his face in shame.
18. Hethen told Nàrada in detail about the nature of women
and their conduct leading to sin.
19. “They have no consideration of time, of secrecy of what
they do. Still they pass to be virtuous.
20-21. Women irrespective of their age, whether they be
girls, teenagers, middle-aged or advanced in age, get their passion excited at the sight of a handsome man. O great sage, this
is natural to them.
22. As for Samba, he is dignified, bright, virtuous and good.
His excitement is only because of his beauty."
23. Narada fully agreed with Krsna in what he said, but
knowing more about the working of the mind, made a remark
that led to the curse of Sàmba.
24. “A chariot does not move," (he said), “‘with a single
wheel alone. It is only with the response of men do women get
excited with passion. They get gratified by the looks of men.
25. Seeing (your other son) Pradyumna, they become highly
shy.
26. But by seeing Samba, they become stricken with passion
and the sandal paste and such other things (on his body) act
as additional excitants.
27. So Sàmba must be held responsible for ruining your
women and you cannot obliterate the scandal that has reached
even Satyaloka.

528 Varüha Purana
28. I hear again and again from the people and the sages
(the opinion) that you should give up Samba to save you from
the ignominy affecting your family.
29. O great Lord, I have told you what is good for you".
After saying so, Narada remained quiet.
30. Krsna then cursed Samba to become ugly and immediately he became a leper.
31. Foul-smelling blood began to ooze from his body which
became full of wounds.
32. Then Narada spoke of the means of redemption from the
curse also namely the worship of the Sun.
33-34. “O Samba, son of Jambavati, listen to me. Prostrate
before the Sun uttering Vedas, Upanisads and the like when he
rises in the eastern mountain. The Sun will be pleased in this
way (and get you out of this curse), not otherwise."
Samba said:
35. “O sage, how can the Sun-god become pleased with a
person who has committed a prohibited sexual contact ?”
Narada said:
36. By your discussion of this, there will arise a Purana by
name Bhavisya. I will read this in Brahmaloka before Brahma
himself, and Sumantu will impart it to Manu in the world of
mortals.
Samba said:
37. You have suggested a remedy for my present distress,
but how can I go to the eastern mountain when I am reduced
to the state of a mere mass of flesh ?
Narada said:
38. The result that is obtained by worshipping the Sun-god
at the eastern mountain is obtained by worshipping him at
Satsürya in Mathura.
39-40. Worshipping him there in the noon and evening
confers even a kingdom.
4]. Reciting the mantras of the Sun in the morning, noon
and evening at Mathura, one gets all sins removed.

42. By worshipping the Sun after bathing in Krsnaganga,
all sins disappear and so also all diseases like leprosy.
Varaha said:
43. Then at the bidding of Krsna, Samba went to the city
of Mathura which brings about salvation, for worshipping the
Sun.
44. He worshipped the rising sun at Satsürya according to
the rules given by Narada.
45. Then, by yogic power, the Sun appeared before Samba
and asked him to seek a boon for his good and for the establishment of the Süryavrata.
46. “Recite before me the fifty $lokas strung with expressions from the Vedas with which I was propitiated by Nàrada. I
am pleased by your worshipping me".
47. He was then touched by the Sun-god and soon he regained his wellshaped form and appeared like another Sun-god.
48. The Sun then taught Samba the sacrifice of Yajfiavalkya
called ‘Madhyandiniyaka’ to be performed at noon whence he is
Madhyandina.
49. There is the tirtha Madhyandiniyaka on the western
side of Vaikuntha (tirtha). To bathe there and see Madhyandina is to get free from all sins.
50. The all-pervading Sun remained with Samba in the
morning and evening, and in the evening he stood on the southern
side of Krsnaganga.
51. To see the Sun there in the morning and evening is to
get removed of all sins and to attain Brahman.
52. Thus appearing before Samba by splitting himself by
the power of yoga from the sky, the Sun removed leprosy which
was afflicting him.
53-54. Samba disappeared in the tirtha, but was riding with
the Sun in his chariot day and night and asking him about the
Purana spoken by him.
55. He then propagated this Purana known as Bhavisya.
56. He then consecrated Surya in the rising form at Udayacala to the south of Yamuna, in the fully brilliant form at noon
at Kalapriya and in the setting form at Astamanacala in Milasthana.

530 Varaha Purane
57. Thus he consecrated Sürya in his three forms pertaining to morning, noon and evening.
58. O Earth, in Mathura too he established a place known
after his name as Sàmbapura, according to Puranic rites.
59. He arranged there (the festival of) Rathayatra as
suggested by the Sun.
60. On the Saptami day in the month of Magha people
conduct Rathayatra there, giving up all opposites in their nature.
61. They go to the abode of peace in the regions of the Sun.
62. Ihave thus told you the sacred story relating to Sàmba's
curse and release, which removes all sins.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTYEIGHT
Satrughnalavana
Varaha said:
l. The fierce Lavana was killed by Satrughna (in Mathura)
for the protection of Brahmins.
2. O fair one, he who recites the account of Satrughna,
fasting on the Dvadasi day in the month of Margadgirsa, and
propitiates Brahmins with sumptuous food (gets his desires fulfilled).
3. By Satrughna’s killing of Lavana, the great Rama was
extremely pleased.
4. Tocelebrate this victory Rama came there from Ayodhya
with his retinue.
5-6. And Satrughna at Mathura fasting on the Ekàda&
day in the bright half of the month Agrahayani, bathed in the
Viérànti ürtha and performed the festival together with the whole
family and propitiated the Brahmins with food.
7-8. He who performs this festival on the same day in the
year, gets rid of all his sins and delights for long with his forefathers in heaven.

CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTYNINE
Expiations for O ffences
Earth said:
1. O great Lord, by committing offence to you, one becomes
guilty even if otherwise not so, and is despised by Vaisnavas.
2. Tell me by what acts of expiation he can get the fruits of
his worship.
Varaha said:
3. “People who are sinful in thought, word and deed (commit offences). Eating the tooth-stick, eating the king’s food,
4. Sexual intercourse, touching a dead body, passing motion,
passing urine, sight of a woman recently delivered or during her
monthly course and touch of such a woman.
5. Obscenity in speech, eating oilcake, wearing red garment, another’s cloth, soiled cloth, or coloured blue with indigo,
6. False compulsions on elders, eating the food of an outcaste, eating prohibited items of food, boiled rice or myrobalan,
7. Keeping good ‘food for oneself, eating the goose or crane,
entering the temple wearing sandals,
8. Using prohibited flowers during worship, performing
worship without removing the previous day’s flowers or in dim
light or darkness,
9. Drinking liquor, rousing the Lord in darkness, non-prostration before the Lord at the close of worship.
10. These are the thirtythree offences (connected with
worship), O Earth. He who is guilty of these will never see Lord
Visnu.
11. The prostration should not be performed from a long
distance, because then it will be like the worship by the Raksasa.
Taking in paficagavya for one day, two days or three days,
bathing along with the dress worn are the expiations in order for
the offences commencing with wearing soiled cloth.
12. For the offence of using indigo, rubbing with cowdung
is to be done. The offence of wcaring cloth dyed with indigo is
removed by the rite Prajapatya.
13. The offence to an elder (or preceptor) can be removed

532 Varüha Purana
by performing Candrayana twice. If the food of the outcaste is
eaten, both Candrayana and Paraka should be performed.
14. If prohibited food is eaten, Candrayana, Paraka and
Prajapatya should be performed and the gift of cow and food
should be made in addition.
15. He who enters the place of worship wearing sandals,
gets purified after fasting for five days and taking in paftcagavya.
16. One-fourth of a Krcchra and fasting for two days will
be the atonement for bathing the deity and doing other items of
worship without the prescribed flowers. For the offence of performing worship without removing the previous day's flowers is
bath in paficamrta.
17. For the offence of drinking liquor by the twice-born,
the expiation is four Candrayanas and three Prajapatyas for
twelve years.
18. Purification is also obtained by Brahmakürca, gifting of
three cows on a single day and by taking in paficámrta.
19. By reciting the hymns of Visnu also, one gets free from
the effect of offences. I have thus told you about this important
matter. What else do you wish to know ?"
20. Lord Janardana said this again and again, but Earth
seemed to be falling into a swoon.
21-22. She soon recovered and said: Knowing about the
offences starting from the sight of the recently delivered woman
and the numerous expiations to be done by people, I was really
lost in sorrow and stupor.
23. Is there any means by which you get propitiated in the
same manner as by these rites of expiation ?"
Vardha said:
. 24. Bathing after due fasting in the Sankara tirtha in Ganga
in the middle of the year, removes the effect of offences, similarly
in Mathura.
25. He who resorts to these two tirthas gets rid of the effect
of offences he has done in a thousand lives.
26. The sins disappear by bathing there, by drinking the
water there, by carrying it, by speaking about it or thinking about
it, also by hearing about it and seeing it.

Earth said:
27. Both Mathura and Sankara are dear to you. Of these
two, tell me which is the greater.
Varáha said:
28. Among the tirthas of the world extending upto the ocean,
Kubjamraka is considered the most important by my devotees.
29. The Saukaratirtha is a crore times more efficacious than
that.
30. There is Sitatirtha which is sacred to the Vaisnavas on
Dvadasi day in the month of Margasirsa. In Puranas this is
known as Gangasagara.
31. Even more important is the Mathura region which is
half a parardha more efficacious than Sitatirtha.
32. Whatever sin remains even after visiting tirthas like
Kubjamraka, disappears quickly on reaching Mathura.
33. The name Visranti (rest) is significant because the pilgrimage comes to a close there.
34. The best place for those who seck release is Mathura.
35. Release is obtained without Sankhya or Yoga in Kubjamraka, Saukara and in Mathura in particular. The same effect
as the one obtained by a Brahmin practising yoga is obtained by
dying in Mathura.
36. I have thus told you the truth in essence. There is no
tirtha greater than Mathura and no god greater than KeSava,
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTY
Greatness of Dhruvatirtha in Mathura
Varüha said:
1, I shall now tell you a story about Dhruvatirtha which
propitiates the manes.
2. In this city there was a valiant, virtuous and magnanimous king named Candrasena.

534 Vardha Purána
3. He had two hundred young and noble wives among
whom was one, Candraprabha of an ascetic turn of mind, although the mother of valiant sons.
4. Among her hundred attendants, there was one named
Prabhavati. The manes for whom obsequial rites were due from
her (servant) had not got the Ekoddista ceremony done.
5. Their number exceeded a hundred and they all fell into
hell because of this.
6. And it is well known that this sort of mixture leads to
hell as it violates the rules of the family.
7. Then thrown out from there, all of them came to Dhruvatirtha as a cluster of minute beings, black in colour and resembling mosquitoes.
8. They were seen there by the sage Trikalajia who was
mainly living on water and taking food only once in three days.
9. He was observing the vow of silence and was following
the course of the sun, but at that moment he was stupefied and
did not perform japa.
10. While he was looking at them with compassion and
curiosity, three quarters of the day passed.
11. Some manes came to the earth from the sky, others from
the north, east, south and west.
12. Some were happy by themselves, some were made happy
by their sons and they all went upwards with nourished bodies,
pleased and satisfied.
13. They had all small bodies and they were interested in
bath and penance. They had good dress and decorations and
were moving about in groups in delight.
14. 'There were others who were naked but nourished.
15. Still others returned as they came and came back again.
Some came in various kinds of vehicles and others came on birds.
16. Some returned after pronouncing benedictions and
others pronouncing curses in anger.
17. Some who came famished returned well-fed in Sraddha.
18. The sage rose up after seeing all this as if it was a festival
and when the manes were gone, their sons returned home with
their wives.
19. Soon Dhruvatirtha became desolate. But in one remote
corner there was a puny being, very much famished and unable
to move.

20. It was shivering, its eyes had gone low and belly much
depressed. Its feet were mere skeleton. Its voice was feeble like
that of a tiny bird.
The sage asked:
21. Who are you that look so mutilated and surrounded by
these mosquitoes ?
22. Having come here you don’t attempt to return. Tell
me about what you have done.
23. My daily routine in this tirtha is badly affected as I
‘was stupefied at the sight of these numerous beings of various
sorts here.
24. Seeing you in this form, my attention was turned towards you. Tell me with confidence all about you. I shall do
you good.
The. being said:
25. “The greatest means of propitiation for the manes is
the performance of Sraddha in Dhruvatirtha and offering of
water with sesamum.
26. Manes who have sons go to heaven being propitiated
with sesamum. I am famished for want of such a thing.
27. Due to the guilt of mixture of caste, I. fell into hell and
-have been there for a hundred years hoping against hope.
28. I have no means to go from here. Those who were propitiated with $ràddha and libations by their sons went to heaven.
‘What way is there out for one like me?
29. Those who have a line of progeny, get propitiation from
their sons and attain liberation.
30. The manes of King Candrasena were propitiated today,
and, O Trikalajfia, you saw them going to heaven with your
divine eye.
31-32. You saw here what happened to the manes of Bràhmanas, Ksatriyas, Vai$yas, and Südras and the performance of
Sraddha by Südras, the progeny of hypergamous and hyper gampous
marriages."
33. Thus he said to the Brahmin the cause of his remaining
there. The sage then spoke to him in curiosity.
34. “Due to fate you have no proper progeny. If I can do

536 Varáha Purana
anything to help you to get out of your present state, please tell
me”.
35. Remaining in that despicable condition surrounded by
the manes, he said:
36. “The emaciated mosquitoes that cover my body remain so due to the lack of progeny. I am the slender thread for
them to hold on.
37. In the palace of Candrasena at the centre of the city,
there is the servant of the queen by name Prabhavati.
38. She too has a servant by name Virüpanidhi.
39. She is the continuing thread in our progeny and we are
eagerly awaiting for the $ràddha to be performed by her for us.
40. All this long time we have been spending in this water
and now we have to return to hell because of our own deeds".
4l. Hearing this Trikalajfia was baffled and said: “How
can the libation offered by a lowborn woman be of any use to
you ? By what cule can she be your proper issue?"
42. Hearing this, he told the learned and merciful Trikalajfia:
43. “People desire to have sons because even when they fall
down (in hell), they are raised up and sent upwards by (the
proper actions of) the son.
44. The manes have the service of the son done, if they perform sraddha, libation of pinda and gifts on normal as well as
special occasions. They have no other way.
45. Howmuch do we wish that at least one among our progeny gives us libation !
46. Standing in waist-deep water in rivers full of cool water,
and particularly at the middle of the tirtha spot, he should offer
handfuls of water together with sesamum.
47. He should do this with darbha in his hand and three
times each for the manes uttering the gotra and name of each of
them and saying ‘svadha’ and ‘may my manes be pleased’.
48. It should be known that in propitiating the gods, sages
and manes (Devas, Rsis and Pitrs) the number of handfuls of
water is to be respectively one, two and three.
49. In the end should be uttered the mantra trpyadhvam
(may you all be pleased").

50. First should be given the three libations to the father
reciting the mantras Udiratàm etc, Angiraso etc, and Ayantu
nah etc, in order, and then to the mother uttering the gotra and
name and also svadhà and trpyatu.
51. Then for the mother’s father with gotra and name, and
similarly for father’s father.
52. For these the mantras ürdhvam pitrbhyah etc, Ye ceha
te pitarah etc, and Madhu vátà etc, should be used.
53. Then it should be done for father’s mother and grandmother as in the case of the mother and then for mother’s father
and grandfather each three times separately uttering the mantra
Namo vah pitarah etc.
54. In each case utter the gotra and Asiirydn nàáfayámahe.
Offer àsana (seat) uttering the gotra and the particular Pitr
by his name.
55. In the case of the female Pitrs also utter the gotra and
the particular pitr (mātā, mátàmahi) by name (devi) for àsana.
Similarly for pitāmaha (grand-father).
56. In the sankalpa for arghya, in pinda and in avanejana
(pouring water over the pinda) the form should be (genitive)
as gotrasya, piturmahasya and Sarmanah, for females (dative) as
gotrdyai, máturmahyai, devyat.
57. In dváhana (invocation) the form should be accusative,
in worship dative and in benediction nominative.
58. In sraddha it should be genitive for ddana and aksaya
(praying for their eternal abode in heaven). At the times prescribed for aksaya, the datta rite should be performed for the manes.
59. ‘The twice-born son who does this devotedly or offers
even water with full devotion, leads them to eternality.
60. When the Brahmin performs Sraddha with due attention and in the prescribed manner, the manes become happy.
61. O Trikalajia, remain quiet. We now go to Naraka
(hell)to live there long because of theresult of our former deeds".
Trikdlajiia said:
62. Among the manes I saw there in this tirtha many were
happy and many unhappy too.
63. Some received Sraddha offered by the sons in great
anxiety and some returned mum. Please tell me why this was so.

538 Varaha Purana
. Agastya said :
64. The graddha performed by the son sometimes goes in
vain and sometimes even leads to hell. I shall tell you, please
listen.
65. What is given at the wrong place and time, given without proper rites or daksinà, or given to the unsuitable person
and is impure, produces great sin.
66. The sraddha done without the necessary attention, not
in the proper form, seen by the bad, or without sesamum, mantra
or kuga grass, becomes àsura (demoniac).
67. It is well known that Lord Vàmana gave the fruit of
the éráddha of Südras to Vairocana (Mahabali).
68-69. Similarly, Rama, son of Daéaratha, after killing Rāvana, the chief of the Raksasas, with all army, became pleased
to hear about the devotion of Raksasi Trijatà, and gave her a
boon.
70-71. “O Trijata, I give to you all the Sraddha offerings
done in unclean houses, those done without padya, without oil,
without food or without daksina and the gifts given withanger
although to the proper persons."
72. Similarly, Sraddha was given to Vasuki, the king of
serpents, by Siva who was pleased with him. I shall tell you
about this, please listen.
73. “The annual sraddha done by the twice-born without
proper daksina even if all the rituals are observed,
74. Done by one who takes false resolve in the presence of
gods and Brahmins, done without the proper rites and mantras,
75. Done by one who bathes at night with the dress worn,
who does not respect the teacher who imparts knowledge,
76. Done by one who propagates primitive ideals—I give
to you". (So said Siva).
77. We hear about such things from the Puranas and Itihásas.
78. Sràddha, dàna and vrata done without sincerity, never
produce their results. Hence the nakedness etc., of these manes.
79. Due to such defects in the conduct of Sraddha, the
manes who are invoked, do not get result and they return as they
came.
80. Having come to receive, they return silently. This I say
in reply to what you ask.

Trikdlajfia said:
81. “I have been taking food only once in three days. But
even that I don’t wish to take till you are satisfied. Be cheerful
and await my return.
82-83. Out of compassion for you, I am giving up my routine austerities here to hasten to bring that woman here.
84. I shall see that she performs sraddha here according to
the prescribed rules.”
85. So saying, the sage quickly left the place (and went to
the king).
86. Seeing the sage suddenly there, the king fell down at
his feet and said: “I feel honoured and favoured indeed by your
coming to my home. I shall arrange for all sacrificial rites due
therefore. My life is made fruitful by your presence here.
87. Here is the padya, here is the arghya, here is madhuparka
and here the cow. Receive them, O sage, so that my mind may
rest satisfied."
88. Receiving the hearty welcome, the sage said:
89. “O king, great is the purpose with which I have come
here. Do now what I ask you to do so that I may be happy”.
90. Thus asked, the saintly king replied: “Please tell me that
purpose so that I can see it accomplished."
Trikälajña said:
91. “Call your queen and also her beautiful attendant
Prabhavati before me here."
92. Then came there from the harem the queen with the
attendant and prostrated at the feet of the sage.
93. When they were seated, the sage said to them: *'I shall
tell you about something strange that happened in Dhruvatirtha.
94. The manes from all the worlds came there and, propitiated by their sons by performing graddha, went to heaven.
95. There was, however, a very old one among them extremely emaciated and fatigued by thirst and hunger and surrounded by numerous minute beings.
96. He was very much disappointed and was preparing to
return to hell. Then out of pity 1 asked him who he was and what
his wish.

540 Varaha Purdna
97. Then he told me what had come upon him as a result
of his own deeds. I sympathised with him and came here.
98. Your servant’s servant by name Virüpanidhi is his
progeny. Please call her here."
99. The queen then sent many persons to find her out and
bring her there.
100. She was found fully intoxicated and still taking meat
and drink and seated on the bed with a man.
101. The queen’s man caught hold of her and brought her
before the sage.
102. Although she was in that drunken state, the sage told
her about what she was to do.
103. “You have not made for your manes any gift libation
or other ablutions. Nor have you done for them the propitiatory
offering of water".
104. She said that she had not done any of these and that
she did not know who her manes were and what rites she was to
do.
105. When she said so, Trikàlajfia said, May the king of
Mathurà, with his queen and all good people in this city witness
the wonder of what progeny can do to the manes".
106-107. Then all those curious people and the virtuous
Brahmins were called together and the king proceeded with them
accompanied by the sage to Dhruvatirtha.
108. There, that being was seen extremely fatigued and
surrounded by the mosquitoes.
109. The sage then told him, “Your descendant has been
brought here for your propitiation. Do what you please".
Agastya said:
110. Let her bathe in the Dhruvatirtha and offer libation
according to the rules enunciated.
111. Let her then perform Sraddha with daksina, cloth and
sandal-paste and give pinda in veneration.
112. By making her do this graddha you can see me here
made happy".
113. Hearing this, the queen made that servant perform
$raddha with abundant daksinà,
114. And fine cloth and good incense and camphor and
sandal followed by sesamum, many kinds of food and pinda.

115-116. When Sraddha was thus donc and pinda offered,
he attaincd a divine form, so too those surrounding him. He
looked like a sacrificer after the concluding bath. Those in the
mosquito form were transformcd into handsome persons.
117. The sky was covered with aerial cars from heaven, and
as he was preparing to get into it, he spoke to the sage and the
king:
118. “Be pleased to listen to what I say regarding the propitiation of the manes.
119. There are many sacred tirthas, rivers, mountains and
ponds and places like Kuruksetra and Gayà and many temples.
120. But a place like this for the propitiation of the manes,
there never was and never will be.
121. From the first day in the month of Asadha till the first
day in the bright half of the month Asvina, the manes remain
here enjoying the $ráddha and the pinda.
122. In fact, during this period, the city of the god of death,
heaven and the netherworld become practically empty since the
manes flock here desiring the offerings of their son or any
other descendant or brother.
123. He who performs éráddha and tarpana in Dhruvatirtha when the sun enters the Kanya rasi (Virgo), propitiates
sixteen generations of his manes very much.
124. "We are now fully propitiated and we are all liberated.
Such is the greatness of Dhruvatirtha.
125. You have now scen the wonder of what has happened
to us. By your kindness, O sage, we have become absolved of all
sins".
126. Telling thus to the king, the sage, the people assembled,
the queen, the servant and his own daughter, he bade them all
well.
127. Hethen got into the aerial car and ascended to heaven
Surrounded by gods.
Varaha said:
128. Astonished at the greatness of that tirtha, the king
bowed to the sage and returned to his palace with his people and
attendants, always thinking of Lord Visnu.
129. Ihave thus told you, O auspicious one, about the great-

542 Varaha Purana
ness of Mathura, the very thought of which removes even the
sins acquired in former lives.
130. He who recites this with attention before Brahmins,
propitiates all his forefathers.
131. This should not be narrated to any one who does not
undertake vows, who does not listen with attention or one who
does not worship Hari.
132. This is the greatest of all tirthas, the highest of all
dharmas, the most exalted of all knowledge and the best of all
gains.
1338. O blessed one, this should always be narrated to the
meritorious devotees of the Lord.
Süta said:
134. Earth was full of wonder hearing these words of the
Lord and asked him in joy about the erection of idols.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTYONE
Consecration of Wooden Images
Sita said:
1. Having heard about this place of supreme importance,
Earth asked again out of curiosity.
Earth said:
2. “How great is the prowess of this place about which you
have so kindly told me ! Hearing this, I have really become free
from all uneasiness.
3. But I have long been wishing to know about one secret.
Be pleased to tell me that for my enlightenment.
4. That is this: How do you remain (in idols of) wood,
stone or clay,
5. (In idols of) copper, bronze, silver or gold?
6. How do you remain in (idols of) ivory.
7. O Janardana, how do you remain in a wall (in picture)
and how on earth (in pictures drawn with powers) ?”

8. Hearing these words of Earth, the Primeval Boar replied.
Varáha said:
9. First of all, the material in which the idol is to be made
should be brought and the idol moulded or carved according
to the rules.
10. The purification of the idol should then be made and
then it should be consecrated. Worship for release from sarhsara
may be started thereafter.
11. The Madhüka tree may be used for cutting wooden
idols. After consecration, it may be worshipped with the kind of
sandal paste mentioned before,
12. As also with camphor, saffron, Agaru, benzoin and
powder of fragrant roots.
13. The idol may be smeared with thesc. Svastika and
Vardhamana hymns are to be recited and Srivatsa and Kaustubha are to be offered.
14. The auspicious payasa should be offered (in naivedya).
Scented wicks are to be lighted and sesamum and fruits to be
offered.
15. With cleanliness, purity and devotion the worship is to
be made with all that is prescribed.
16. Pranayama (control of breath) should then be made
and the following mantras uttered:
17. *'Be pleased to remain in this (idol made of) wood, you
with the power of yoga pervading the whole world".
18. Thus consecrating the Lord in the wooden idol, it should
be circumambulated together with other devotees.
19-20. A lamp should be then lit facing the idol and, without looking upwards or sideways and free from desire and anger,
Namo nardyandya (Bow to Narayana) should be uttered, and then
reciting the following mantra, the ritual is to be performed.
21. The Mantra: You, the most heroic of all, remain as the
unfailing lord and refuge of all. O Lord of the worlds, Vasudeva,
may you by this mantra remain consecrated in this.”
22. After completing the rite of my consecration, all the
devotees assembled there should be honoured.
23. They should be honoured according to the prescribed
rules with sandal, garlands, unguents and food.

544 Varaha Purana
24. O fair one, this is the way to consecrate the wooden idol.
I have told this to you for the sake of dharma.
25. He who consecrates the wooden idol in this way never
returns to samsdra but goes to my world.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTYTWO
Consecration of Stone Images
Varaha said:
1. Ishall tell you now how I am to be consecrated in stone
images.
2. A beautiful, flawless stone should be selected after careful
examination and a quick and clever artisan should be engaged to
carve out the image. The outline may be made with a white
brush.
3. After circumambulation, worship should be made with
rice grains and the like.
4. Lamp should then be offered and then rice with curd.
Then Namo nàráyanàya (Bow to Narayana) should be uttered
and the following mantra recited.
5. The mantra: “You are the most heroic of all, the foremost among the intelligent and effulgent like the sun, the moon
and the fire. May you be consecrated here by this mantra and
may fame increase. Hail, hail, great Varaha”’.
6. Whatever is necessary should be done with this mantra.
Consecrating Lord Narayana in this form, he should be installed
facing east.
7-8. Fasting for a whole day and night, wearing white dress
and white Yajfiopavita, and after cleaning the teeth, the following mantra should be uttered taking sandal water.
9. The mantra: “O Lord of the worlds, you who are the
entire world with all forms, remain worshipped in this. You
are always held in the mind, you are the supreme example of
indestructibility, you are never defeated, you have no old age or
death. Being worshipped, fix yourself here by this mantra Om
namo Vaüsudevàya.

10. After this consecration, the stone idol should be given
adhivasana (rest on a substratum) in the asterism Prostapada.
11. He who instals me in this manner, goes to the world of
Visnu. There need be no doubt about this.
12. The whole day and night should be spent thus eating
only wheat cooked in milk. (The next day) during the evening
sandhyà four lamps should be offered.
13. Atthe foot of the deity four small pots containing water
mixed with paficagavya and sandal should be placed.
14. A festival should be conducted with vocal and instrumental music and recitation of Samaveda by Brahmins should be
arranged.
15. I make my presence there when thousands of Vedic
syllables are uttered in proper tone and tune, because, O goddess,
the recitation of Vedic mantras is dear to me.
16. The idol should then be installed in the company of
devotees and invocation should be made with the following
mantra:
17. “Come here, O lord, with the mantras, the five sense
organs and the mind. You, the dispenser, remain in all these
beings".
18. With the same mantra, hundred and eight Ghutis (offerings in fire) should be made using twigs, sesamum clarified
butter and honey.
19. When all this is done, I voluntarily make my presence in
the idol.
20. When the night is over and the day dawns, paficagavya
should be offered with mantra as prescribed.
21. Sandal, fried rice and water with paficagavya should then
be given and the idol installed in the temple with vocal and
instrumental music and recitation of auspicious hymns.
22-23. Taking different kinds of sandal paste, the mantra
should be recited: “O Primeval being, may you who have been
here according to the prescribed rules, be pleased to enter this
temple with all effulgence together with Laksmi. Bow to you
again and again.”
24. With this mantra the idol should be taken into the
temple and placed there in the exact centre, not on the side.
25. The idol should then be erected. Sandal, saffron etc.,
should be applied and the following mantra should be recited:

546 Varüha Puràna
26. “O Lord of the world, you are the foremost in the world,
worshipped by Brahmà and Brhaspati. Remain here welcomed
and saluted with mantras”.
27. After installation in this manner, worship should be
made with sandal and garlands. White cloth should then be
offered with the following mantra:
28. The mantra: “O Lord, accept these garments given by
me with devotion and put them on. Be pleased with me. Bow
to you again and again".
29. Clothes should be offered to me in this way following
the rules. Incense should then be offered with Agaru and saffron.
While giving this dhüpa the following is the mantra:
30. “You are the most ancient Man, the foremost in the
world and without a beginning. Accept this sandal, garlands,
incense and lamp, O Lord. Bow to you again and again."
31. After this food should be offered as before.
32. For this the same mantras as before may be used. Then.
should be given water for cleaning.
33. Santijapa should then be conducted, which accomplishes all desires, with the mantra: ‘O Lord of the worlds, bestow
peace on the king and the kingdom and on the Brahmins.
Bestow peace on the infants and the aged, on herds of cows,
virgins and chaste women.
34. May ailments vanish everywhere, may the farmers
always get good yield. May the world be prosperous and peaceful
with the rains falling in time."
35-36. After performing worship to the Lord in this manner
with all the rites, Brahmins should be feasted and the poor fed
according to capacity.
37. He who instals me in this way remains in my world for
as many thousands of years as there are waterdrops in my body.
38. O Earth, he who does all this without any ego liberates
seven, seven and seventy in his clan.
39. Thus have I told you about the installation of stone idols.
for the sake of dharma and for the good of devotees.

CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTYTHREE
Consecration of Clay images
Varáha said:
1. I shall now tell you another thing, namely my presence
in idols made of clay. Please listen.
2. The idol in clay should not have any defect or crack. It
should be neither too big nor too short nor having any bend.
3. With such an idol my devotee can perform worship as he
likes.
4. The clay idol may be used when one in wood or stone is
not available.
5. Idols are also made in copper, bronze, silver and gold by
experts for auspicious purposes.
6. My worship in the pedestal is done by some out of devotion, by others to avoid censure and by still others for publicity.
7. Lam also worshipped for domestic prosperity. Even the
disc which has arisen out of my effulgence may be worshipped.
8. O Earth, know that when I am installed like this and
worshipped, I give all wealth.
9. With whatever aim a man worships me in proper form
with mantras, I give that with pleasure.
10. He attains beatitude by my grace.
ll. My devotee who is full of things to do, may please me
by mental worship.
12. I will be pleased by his mere giving me a handful of
water. Why should he bother about flowers, Japa and rules ?
13. Igrantall desires and give divine enjovment to him who
meditates well on me.
14. I have told you all this secret incidentally.
15. My devotee who takes the clay image may perform its
adhivàsa in the asterism Sravana and then consecrate it according
to the rites mentioned before.
16. Bath may be then done to the idol with water mixed
with pafcagavya and sandal with the following mantra:
17. “O Great Lord, master of all worlds, the worlds arise
out of your grace. O Acyuta, extend to me your grace and remain in the idols of clay. Bow to you again and again, the cause
of all causes, the great Man beaming with great lustre.”

548 Varáha Purana
18. By this mantra, it may be taken into the house and
installed and then, as before, four pots may be placed and the
following mantra uttered:
19. The mantra: “Om, the ocean having got Varuna
was honoured with self-satisfaction. By this mantra I perform the
bath and always bow with raised hands Him from whom arise
fire, earth and all tastes."
20. After this bathing ritual, the devotee should worship
with sandal and garlands as before.
21. He may offer incense with Agaru, camphor and saffron
uttering Namo ndrdyandya (Bow to Narayana).
22. After incense, yellow garment is to be offered uttering
Namo náráyanáya and the following mantra should be recited:
23. “The lord becomes pleased by the yellow garment, and
when he becomes pleased, the whole world becomes happy. May
the lord accept this garment and protect me from the bondage
of worldly existence.”
24. Having offered the garment with this mantra, incense
and lamp should be given and then food.
25. The offering of food should be as stated before and then
water should be given with the mantra.
26. (Peace should be prayed for with) the mantra: “Let
there be peace for the gods, Brahmins, Ksatriyas and Vaiáyas.
May the rain god shower rain and make the earth full of vegetation."
27. After Sànti with this mantra, the other devotees should
be honoured and the Brahmins fed.
28. The devotee should prostrate before them and give them
daksinàs.
29. Words of mangala should then be recited and the deity
should be released.
30. After the release, those assembled there should be honoured with clothes and decorations. The preceptor should then
be honoured if union with me is desired.
31. Itell you the truth, O goddess, that if the Guru is properly worshipped, I become worshipped.
32. The king, when pleased, may grant but a village; but
when the Guru is pleased, he leads one easily upto the state of
becoming Brahman.

33. Therefore, in all Sàstras, the worship of the Guru is
ordained in my own words.
34. He who performs my consecration in this way liberates
three, thirty and seventy in his clan.
35. He remains in my world for as many thousands of years
as there are drops of water falling in worship.
36. Thus have I told you, O Earth, about the consecration
of clay idols. I shall tell you now another thing dear to my
devotees.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTYFOUR
Consecration of Copper Images
Varaha said:
1. Getting a beautiful image made of copper, it should be
brought to the middle of the abode with due rites.
2. Itshould be placed facing north and the adhivasana should
be done in the asterism Citra.
3. Bath should then be conducted with water mixed with
paficagavya and sandal and with the following mantras:
4. The Mantra: “You, the essence of everything, remain in
copper as the eye. O, the abode of all worlds, come to this idol
with the five elements.”
5. After consecrating with this mantra, adhivdsana and worship should be done as before.
6. When the night is over and the sun rises, purification
should be done with mantras of the Rgveda and bath should be
performed with mantras.
7. The Brahmins assembled may recite the Vedas. Auspicious materials may be placed in the Mandapa.
8. The devotee should then bring scented water and bathe
me with the following mantra:
9. The mantra: “O Lord of worlds, you are the greatest of
all with power of maya and yoga. Be pleased to come quick for
my sake and remain in this copper image. O Lord, the best of
Men, fire, Sun and air, be here yourself, Om".

550 Varüha Purana
10. Then I should be led into the sanctum and installed on
à pedestal and worship done.
11. The installation should be done with the following
mantra and with sandal, flowers and lamps.
12. The mantra for installation: “Om, the light of all light,
the light of the world, the embodiment of knowledge, embodiment of bliss, the lord of the universe, be pleased to come and
remain here, O the best of Men, and protect me".
13. After installation in this way, white cloth should be offered with the mantra: “Om, O lord of the celestials, the pure
soul, the most ancient Man, the truth of the worlds, accept these
clothes. Bow to Purusottama."
14. After dressing me with the clothes, the devotee should
perform arcana (with flowers).
15. After arcana and offering of sandal, incense etc, the
offering of food should be made.
16. When the naivedya with delicious food is over, Santipàtha
(invocation of peace) should be made.
17. The mantra: “Let there be peace for the gods, peace for
the Brahmins, peace for the kings and their kingdoms, peace for
Vaisyas, peace for boys and pregnant women. Let there be peace
everywhere by your grace, O Lord".
18. After uttering this Santi, the Brahmins should be honoured.
19. Then the Guru should be honoured and the Brahmins
should be fed according to capacity.
20. Particularly when the Guru is honoured with clothes,
decorations and food, I am worshipped and this is the truth, I
tell you.
21. Iam far away from him whose Guru is not pleased.
22. He who performs my installation in this way, liberates
thirtysix generations in his family.
23. Thus have I told you about the installation of idols.
He who does this remains in my world for as many thousands of
years as there are drops in the water during the bath given to me.

CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTYFIVE
Consecration of bronze images
Varaha said:
1-2. Getting a well-made, complete and beautiful idol in
bronze, the devotce may take it into the temple to the accompaniment of song and drums and all that is auspicious.
3. Then taking arghya in the proper manner, the following
mantrz should be uttered:
4. “O Lord of the worlds, worshipped in all sacrifices, contemplated upon, the desire of the whole universe, the great soul,
the master benign, may you be pleased with me and remain for
worship here".
5. After this arghya, the idol should be placed facing north
and adhivasana done in the prescribed manner.
6. Then four pots should be got ready for my bath containing faficagavya, sandal paste, fried rice and honey.
7-8. When the sun has set, the worshipper may perform
consecration holding pots and in the company of other devotees.
9. He should utter Namo Nàráyanáya and recite the following mantra:
10. “O lord of the worlds, you are the primeval being remaining through all aeons and the dispenser for all time.
You are one, you have no second. Please come and take your
abode here. You are all the transformations, but you yourself
have no transformation. You are the letters A, S, $, $. You take
forms at will. The decaying, the undecaying, the sustaining, the
formless are all you. Bow to you, O Purusottama’’.
11. When the night is over and the sun is rising and when
the latter part of asterism Mila is reached,
12. According to the rites mentioned before, the idol may be
placed at the door-way of the Sanctum.
13. Then taking the sacred water, sandal and fruits, the
devotee should utter Namo ndrdyandya and recite the following
mantra:
14, “Om, You are Indra, yourself (Visnu), Yama, Kubera,
Varuna, Soma, Brhaspati, Sukra, Sani, Budha, Rahu, Ketu,
Strya and Kuja.

552 Varüha Purána
15. Your are herbs, waters, air, earth, fire, Nagas, Yaksas
and quarters. Bow to you, O Purusottama."
16. Doing well all the rituals with this mantra, the idol may
be taken into the sanctum.
17. It may then be bathed with the water with sandal kept
in the pots.
18. During the bath, the following mantra may be recited:
19. “For you, Purusottama, may the lakes, oceans, rivers,
tirthas and wells, make their presence here by your grace for this
bath".
20. I may be installed in this manner and then worshipped
with sandal, incense etc, according to the materials available.
21. Then clothes should be offered as also decorations for
pleasure.
22. Placing the clothes before me and prostrating at my feet,
the following mantra may be recited.
23. “O lord of the worlds, I have brought here for you nice
and beautiful clothes pleasant to put on. Be pleased to receive
them. O Veda, Upaveda, ‘Rgveda, Yajurveda, Samaveda,
Atharvaveda, I extol you. Bow to you, O most supreme".
24, After decoration in the manner stated before, food is to
be offered as prescribed.
25. After food, water shouid be given, and then Santipatha
should be recited in the form of the following mantra:
26. “May all knowledge, Brahman, Brahmins, planets,
rivers and oceans, Indra and other guardian deities of the quarters bring about peace. Aydma, Yama, Kümadama, Vàma Om namak
purusottamaya.”
27. When all these upacdras (services) are over, circumambulation should be made and then abhivádana and stuti (praise).
28. Then the pure devotees should be honoured and the
Brahmins fed with $àyasa and other materials.
29. Sacred water should be received from the Brahmins
and sprinkled on me. Then after sending them off, worship of
the Guru should be performed.
30. There is no doubt that I become worshipped when the
preceptor is honoured with ring, garments and other gifts.
31. It is also true that I see to the extinction of those that
condemn the Brahmins, my devotees and the preceptors.

32. He who instals me in this manner remains in my world
for as many thousands of years as there are drops of water in
my body.
33. He liberates every one in his paternal and maternal
lines.
34. I have thus told you about the consecration of bronze
images.
35. I shall tell you now about the consecration of silver
images.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTYSIX
Consecration of silver and golden Images
Varüha said:
1. Getting a pure, well-shaped and well-proportioned silver
image, free from all defects,
2. White like the moon and radiating lustre in all directions,
3. The devotee may take it to the temple to the accompaniment of music and the sound of the conch and drums and praises
and benedictions.
4. Then taking water for arghya and pàdya, the following
mantra is to be recited:
5. The mantra: “O lord of worlds, you who are the
arghya in all worlds, worshipped by all and honoured by the
celestials, the master of my Agnihotra done at Sunrise, be pleased
to come here and receivethis arghya. The glow residing in the
middle of the sun”.
6. After giving arghya with this mantra, the idol should be
placed facing north.
7. On the day when the asterism Aslesa is in the Zodiacal
house Karkataka, when the sun has set, the adhivdsana should be
done with mantras and in the prescribed manner.
8. Four pots filled with sandal water should be placed there
with all herbs and decorated with mango twigs.
9. Then the devotees should do the rituals as instructed by
the preceptor.

554. Varáha Purána
10. Namo .Nàràyanàya should be uttered and the following
mantra recited:
11. The mantra: “O lord the creator of all worlds, the ruler
of all, the form of all forms, worshipped by Dhruva and the
deities guarding the quarters, be pleased to make your presence
in this idol . Bow to Ananta.”
12. When the night is over and the sun rises and the quarters
are clear, it should be taken to the doorway of the sanctum.
13. Then my devotees should perform the bathing
ceremony there.
14. He may perform this bath in the prescribed manner
uttering Namo nàráyanáya and reciting the following mantra:
15. “This water I have brought, O lord, from rivers like
Ganga and the Oceans and scented with camphor for your bath".
16. The idol should be taken to the interior and installed
there with the following mantra:
17. “O lord of the worlds, known through the Vedas, worshipped by those who know the Vedas, having the form of sacrifice, the giver of the fruit of sacrifice, I invoke you here for sacrifice. Be pleased to remain in this idol. Wealth, people, silver,
gold, bow to Ananta.”
18. After installation in this manner with a pleasant mind,
arcanà should be done in the manner stated before.
19. Then blue garments may be offered, as they are dear to
me.
20. Taking clothes and kneeling down, Namo .Náràyandya should be uttered and the following mantra recited.
21. The mantra: “O lord, resplendent like moonbeams,
resembling the conch, jasmine and milk, may you be pleased to
accept these garments for my sake : Dress, good dress, O lord,
endless, imperishable, causing death, Cause, easy to obtain,
difficult to attain, the supreme".
22. After giving me clothes with this mantra, food is to be
given with all reverence, uttering Namo ndrdyandya and reciting
the following mantra:
23. “O lord Purusottama, may you be pleased to receive
this food containing cooked rice and payasa with sugar and ghee”.
24. After this natvedya, water should be given.
25. For the welfare of the world, Santipatha should be recited.

26. “Om, peace is brought about by Brahma, Rudra, Visnu,
Sürya, Ratri, Sandhya, Naksatras and Diks. Motionless, vibrating, moving, moving in the sky, rapidly moving, having the hue
of lotus, Bow to Vàsudeva."
27. After the Santipatha which removes sins, the devotees
should be honoured.
28. The Brahmins should then be fed according to capacity
and water taken from them should be sprinkled on me.
29. Then Brahmins and relatives should be sent off with
folded hands.
30. The preceptor should be worshipped with gifts. When
he is worshipped, I am worshipped.
31. He who does this remains in my world for as many thousands of years as there are drops of water falling at the end of
the meal.
32. He who worships in this manner liberates his paternal
and maternal lines.
33. This is the way to instal silver images. I shall now tell
you about the installation of golden images.
34. The golden image may be made in the same manner as
the silver image and invocation.etc., may be made similarly.
35. The benefit of erecting idols in wood, stone, bronze etc.,
becomes a crore times more with golden images.
36. Twentyone generations are liberated (by one installing
golden idols) and he is finally merged in me without being born
again.
37. O Earth, I have thus told you what you desired to know.
What else am I to tell you ?
Earth said:
38. You have now told me about the idols made of gold and
other metals. You remain in all these, no doubt, but you remain
in Salagramas too.
39. O Madhava, be pleased to tell me the number (of these
Salagramas) to be worshipped in homes and the general and
special benefits arising therefrom, as also the number in
worshipping Siva and other deities.

556 Vardha Purana
Varaha said:
40. In the house two (Siva) lingas should not be worshipped,
so also three Salagramas.
4]. Two Cakras from Dvaraka should not be worshipped,
so also two Süryas. Three Ganesas should not be worshipped,
so also three Saktis (Ambikàs)."
42. A Pair of Salagramas should be worshipped, but not two
pairs. Odd number should not be worshipped because this
amounts to a single one.
43. Burnt or broken (Sàlagràmas) should not be worshipped at home, as this may bring about calamities.
44. But even if broken, if the Cakra is clear, then it is good
enough.
45. Ishalltell you, O Earth, the merit of worshipping twelve
Salagramas.
46. The same result is attained in a single day as of worshipping twelve crores of lingas worshipped with golden lotuses for
twelve aeons.
47. The merit that accrues to a man worshipping a hundred
Salagramas, I am unable to recount even for hundred years.
48. All deities can be worshipped in idols by people of all
castes. Crystal lihgas can also be done similarly.
49. But a Sàlagràma should not be touched by men of inferior caste or by women and Südras.
50. Ifa woman or Sidra touches it even out of curiosity, the
result will be torment in hell till deluge.
51. But ifa woman or Sidra has devotion (for me through
the Salagrama), then worship may be got performed by others
without oneself touching it. The drinking of that water (used for
worship) removes all sins.
52. The offerings made to Siva like leaf, flower, fruit and
water, are prohibited from use. But they get purified by association with Salagrama.
53. I shall tell you the merit that accrues to a person who
makes gift of a Salagrama together with some gold to a devotee.
54. It is equivalent to making gift to a worthy person
of the whole earth with its gold, mountains, forests and oceans.
55. Sale of a Salagrama leads to hell both the seller and the
buyer.

56. I will be unable to say in full about the good results o
this worship even if I take a hundred years.
57. Ihave thus told you about the installation of idols and
the specialities relating to the Salagramas and the Lingas.
58. I have also told you about the rules in worship. What
else do you wish to know ?
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTYSEVEN
The origin of Sraddha
Sita said:
1. Hearing all this from Lord Narayana, the ascetic Earth
asked Him again with folded hands.
Earth said:
2. Ihave now heard this great narration and the great merit
that results from the place. But I wish to know another secret
and it behoves you to tell me that.
3. You told me about Pitryajfia (rites to propitiate the
manes) in connection with the hunting adventure of King Somadatta.
4. What is the merit of Pitryajíia and how is it to be done ?
Who conceived of this Sraddha, for what purpose and of what
nature is it?
5. I wish to know all this. Please tell me in detail.
Varaha said:
dt is quite proper that you ask me this.
6. Because of the weight you have to bear, you have become
stupefied. But I shall give you divine intelligence to enable you,
O fair one, to grasp the significance.
7. I shall tell you about the origin of Sraddha, but before
that I shall tell you about the origin of heaven and Devas.
9. When there was no light and darkness was spreading
everywhere, the idea dawned upon me to create the three worlds
with all their moving and non-moving beings.

558 . Varáha Purana
9. I was then all alone, sleeping on the bed formed by the
serpent Sesa and not inclined to activity.
10. Ikeep awake and fall asleep due to my power of Maya,
and this Visnumaya, O Earth, you are unable to know.
11. Thousands of aeons have passed and thousands will be
coming. Still maya is unintelligible to you.
12. I have held you with this boar form of mine for five
hundred divine years. Still you have not known this.
13. That is why you ask me this question. (I shall tell you).
My single form became transformed into three, namely
Brahma, Visnu and Hara.
14. Because of anger I created Iśvara (Hara), the destroyer
of Asuras. From my navel appeared a lotus and Brahma was
within it.
15. Thus by Vaisnavi maya this world came into being and
we three gods remain in it in great pleasure.
16. Butthere was only water everywhere and nothing could
be discerned except a banyan tree, the tree of Visnu's fame.
17. In this banyan tree I remained as a little boy with my
maya, seeing in entirety the three worlds that I created. I am
holding you, O fair Earth, and you know this.
18. After some time, O goddess, I produced Badavamukha
(the marine fire) by my maya, to dry up the water.
19. When the deluge was thus over, Brahma, the grandfather
of the worlds, was told by me after meditating for a while.
20. “O Brahma, create quickly the gods, demons and men.”
21-22. Thus told, Brahma took his vessel of water, cleansed
himself with the water, and then created Devas—Adityas, Vasus,
Rudras, Aśvins, and the group of Martus and also, for the liberation of all Brahmanas who are the gods on earth.
23. From the hands arose the Ksatriyas, from the thighs
Vaisyas, and from the feet Südras for the service of all.
24. Devas and Asuras who were thus born of Brahma
had the power of penance, heroism and strength.
25. To Aditi were born Adityas, Vasus, Rudras, Aévins
and the groups of Maruts, all together constituting thirtythree
divinities.
26. To Diti were born Asuras, the enemies of gods.
27. Brahma then created Rsis full of penance and resplendent like the sun, and all of them Brahmins well-versed in the

gastras. The sons of Brahma then created their sons and grandsons.
28. To Nimi was born Sriman renowned as Atreya, (being
a descendant of Atri) who became great and full of penance even
at the time of his birth.
29. He performed penance with full concentration of mind
and steadiness of body, in the midst of five fires, standing on one
foot, with hands thrown upwards,
30. Feeding himself on fallen leaves and water, remaining
in the water in winter, and performing Krcchra and Candrayana.
31. He performed penance like this for a thousand years O
Earth, and then died.
32. Seeing the son dead, Nimi became griefstricken and was
brooding over what had happened day and night.
33. Immersed in this sorrow and thinking deeply what he
might do, an idea occurred to him at the end of three days.
34. It was the Dvadasi day in the month of Magha and he
had become particularly pure. His mind had given up all worldly
objects and his intellect had become expansive.
35. ‘Then with concentration of mind, he began to think of
Sraddhakalpa (the rules relating to the conduct of Sraddha).
36. What can be the sort of food, roots and fruits, what
items will be fresh and tasty, what will be particularly suitable
and so on. l
37. The sage then made himself pure (by bath etc), and
inviting (seven) Brahmins, propitiated them with everything
(that occurred to him to be duly done).
38. Each was separately honoured and then all were seated
together and fed with meat, vegetables, roots and fruits.
39. With great attention he then placed Kuśa grass with
their tips facing south, and gave pinda to Sriman uttering his
name and gotra.
40. Having done this, the sage felt (relieved) that he had
discharged the dictates of dharma (with regard to his departed
son).
41. When the day came to a close and the sun had set, he
performed the ritual that is to be done with meditation and which
is conducive to the attainment of Brahman (namely, the worship
of Sandhya).

560 Varáha Purana
42. He did it alone, in seclusion, with full control of mind,
free from desire and declining even what is offered, sitting steadfast in a clean place,
43. In a seat that is neither very high nor very low and
arranged with Kuéga grass, (deer)skin and cloth in successive
layers, with control of senses, mind drawn inward and fixed on
a single object,
44. And practised this Yoga for the purification of self, sitting steady and erect with the chest, neck and head in line,
45. Directing the eyes to the tip of the nose and not looking
anywhere else, free from fear and radiant in self. Thus did he
do in contemplation of Brahman.
46. My devotees, without anything elsein mind, should
remain in this manner with full control and direct the mind always towards me.
47. He thus performed the worship of Sandhyà. Then the
nightsetin. He began to think again and his mind became
afflicted with sorrow.
48. He began to repent for having done the rite of pinda
(for his son), because what he did was never done (or sanctioned )
by the sages.
49. ‘Libation done for a son is improper. Alas, I have
foolishly done it out of my love (for him).
50. How will the sages spare me from burning me with their
curse? What will Devas, Asuras, Gandharvas, Pisacas, Uragas
and Raksasas, as also my own manes, say about this ?”’
51. He was thinking in this manner, O Earth, till the whole
night passed.
52. When the day dawned and the sun rose, he worshipped
Sandhya and performed rites to be done in fire.
53. He then became again immersed in his earlier thought
and was extremely sad. With his mind thus full of grief, he said
to himself:
54. “Fie upon my age, fie upon my action, fie upon my
strength, fie upon my very life. I do not find in my life the son
with all pleasures.
55. The wise say that the sorrow in the mind (because of
this) leads to hell called Pütikà. It is the son that saves one
from this (sorrow) in this y-orld and (from the hell) in the other
world.

56-57. (Even) by worshipping gods, giving munificent gifts
and making offerings in fire, scrupulously observing the prescribed rules, a man attains heaven (only) through the son, a
grandfather through the grandson and a great-grandfather
through the great-grandson. Now that I am without my son
Sriman, I don’t wish to live.”
58-59. At that time the great sage Narada came to that
penance-grove, which was full of hermitages of sages, beautiful
with plenty of flowers, fruits and water.
60. Seeing him enter his hermitage beaming with effulgence,
(Nimi) honoured him with welcome.
61. He gave him pddya and arghya and seated him properly.
Taking the seat, Nàrada spoke to him.
Narada said:
62. “O you highly intelligent Nimi, cast off your sorrow and
listen to me.
63. You are now grieving over one who is not really an
object for grief, and though you are intelligent, you also not
realise this fact. Those of true learning never grieve over the dead
or the living.
64. Grieving over one that is dead, lost or gone, simply
makes glad those that are not friends; the departed person never
returns.
65. Idonotfindimmortality for any moving or non-moving
being in any of the three worlds. Gods, demons, Gandharvas,
men, beasts and birds, all have death; only they wait for their
time.
66. Every being that is born is bound to die at the destined
time, and it has to respond to the call of death.
67-68. Your son, the great Sriman, the repository of all
opulence, performed extremely difficult penance for a full thousand years, and when it was time for him to die, attained supreme
divine beatitude. Knowing all this, you should not give yourself
up to sorrow."
69-70. Thus told by Narada, the great Brahmin Nimi, who
was perturbed in mind, prostrated at his feet, and spoke to him
with fear ‘and shyness, in a pitiable voice, sobbing and heaving
frequently.

562 Varáha Purana
71. “O great sage, the foremost among those who know
dharma, I am greatly consoled by your sweet and kind words.
72. Be pleased to listen, whether it be due to affection or
friendship, what I say with reverence. What I did out of love for
my (departed) son, instils sorrow incessantly in my mind.
73. Ipropitiated seven Brahmins with food, fruits, and the
rest and then released pinda over darbha grass spread on
the floor.
74. I performed libation also in apasavya (with Yajüopavita
on, the left).
75. All this I did because of my sorrow. But it is not something approved by the good, not conducive to the attainment of
heaven and not favourable to renown.
76. Being deluded by ignorance, I had lost then my common
sense, memory and stamina. I had never heard of it and the gods
or sages had never done it.
77. All that I have now is the great fear of the fierce curse
that the sages may pronounce on me."
Narada said:
78. “O great Brahmin, don’t be afraid. Go to your father
and seek refuge in him. I don’t find here anything wrong. What
you have done is dharma, no doubt."
79. Thus said by Narada, Nimi entered into meditation and
resorted to his father through thought, word and dead. He alone
was in his mind who was the originator of his line.
80. When thus meditated upon, the father came to the ascetic son who was tormented by the grief at the loss of his son,
81. He then comforted him in agreeable words “O ascetic
Nimi, you performed Pitryajiia (sacrifice for the manes).
82. The Pitryajiia (is a ceremony) declared by Brahma himself as dharma.
83. A dharma greater than this is Sraddha, which was first
done by Brahma himself."
84. Ishalltell you, O fair one, what he heard from Narada,
the foremost among those who know the rules, about the Sraddha
ceremony and what is to be done to the dead.
85. I give to the person concerned the necessary mental
power for this.

86. To every being that is born, the time for death will
certainly occur. Everyone will have to leave (this world) by
the order of the lord of death. There is no immortality even for
small beings like the ant.
87. Liberation is, of course, there, but that is through the
(necessary) actions and by the expiations.
88. There are three (qualities) in the body,
and Tamas. People become short-lived at the close of the acon.
89. He in whom Tamas predominates does not understand
the Sattvika because of the defects in his actions. It is hell, animalhood and demoniac nature that pertains to Tamas.
90. Those who know the Veda resort to the Sattvika to enter
the path of liberation. Knowledge of dharma, godliness and
renunciation from Sattvika,
91. Cruelty, cowardice, despondency, aggressiveness, shamelessness, ignorance and ghostliness are the 'T'àmasa qualities.
92. The Tamasic person never understands what is told to
him. He is always haughty and heedless.
93. Strength, good speech, fickleness of mind, perseverance,
valour and ego are the qualities of the Rajasa person.
94. Forbearance, composure, purity of mind, undivided
attention, penance and study of scripture are the Sattvika qualities.
95. Considering all this, sorrow should be given up, because
it leads to the ruin of everything.
96. Sorrow consumes the body, intelligence is lost through
sorrow, so too humility, courage, righteousness, prosperity, fame,
memory and tactfulness.
97. All the dharmas leave the man who is hit by sorrow.
Thus the father asked the son to give up his sorrow.
98. O Earth, he who commits injury or speaks falsehood
Sattva, Rajas
due to the power of love, is tormented in hell because of his own
wrong actions.
99. Controlling affection. (and attachment) in everything,
one should direct the intellect in matters of dharma for the weliare
of the world. This is the truth I tell you.
100. I say this for all the four castes, what Svàyambhuva!
said to Nimi and others with regard to sraddha.
1. Svayambhuvamanu of whom Nimi was the descendant.

564 Varáha Purána
101. When (to a dying person) the life-breath has reached
the throat and he is full of fear and anxiety, he should be quickly
taken out of the house.
102. He should be laid over a layer of Kusa grass. He may
not be able to see anything even when he gets momentary consciousness.
103. Then Brahmins should be asked to recite the scriptures
and gifts of gold and money should be made.
104. For welfare in the other world, gift of a cow is particularly efficacious.
105. Cows are brought into being by the creator in this world
as the embodiment of all gods. They move about yielding
nectar (milk). By making gifts of them, all sins are removed.
106. Then should be uttered into the ear, as the life-breath
is leaving, the divine scripture.
107. To my devotee who is in this struggling condition, the
mantra should be recited in the prescribed manner, and by this
means liberation from samsára should be procured.
108. Madhuparka should be quickly brought and administered with the following mantra.
109. The mantra: *Receive this pure madhuparka, which is
equivalent to ambrosia, which is the foremost among the means
for getting rid of samsdra, which is prescribed by Lord Narayana,
which is honoured by all the gods and which gives relief to the
devotees when their bodies are cremated.”
110. With this mantra, madhuparka should be given at the
time of death, as it brings about pleasure in the other world. If
life departs in this manner, the man does not return to this world.
111-112. When a man is unconscious as he is nearing death,
he should be taken to the foot of a big tree and his body should
be smeared with ghee, oil and sandalpaste, considering them all
as giving him effulgence and eternality.
113. He should then be placed in water, with the head on
the southern side and bathed invoking all the tirthas in the water.
114-115. ‘Tirthas like Gaya, the holy rocks, Kuruksetra, the
holy rivers Ganga and Yamuna, Kausiki, the purifying Payosni,
116. The auspicious Gandaki, the strength-giving Sarayü,
the nine gardens in the Varaha tirtha in Pindaraka,
117. All other tirthas on earth, the four oceans, all these
should be mentally invoked in the water before he is bathed in it.

118. When he is actually dead, the pyre should be duly
arranged and the body should be placed on it with the head on
the southern side.
119. Meditating on gods like Agni and taking the fire (pot)
in the hand, fire should be blazed up and the following mantra
uttered:
120. “After doing all difficult actions, knowingly or unknowingly, the man died (lit. reduced to the five elements) when the
time for death came.
121. (O fire), consume this body of his which was the seat
for all that was righteous and otherwise, and for all desire and
stupefaction, so that he may go to the celestial world.”
122. Then a circumambulation should be quickly done and
the fire placed on the head.
123. "This is the sort of cremation for all the four castes.
124. Bath should then be taken and the clothes well washed,
and returning, pinda should be offered on the ground for the
departed. There is Sauca (pollution) from that time onwards
and so one should (during that period) keep aloof from service
to god (like worship, etc).
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTYEIGHT
The rituals of Sraddha*
Earth. said:
1. O Madhava, lord of the gods, lord of the worlds, I wish
to know from you the rites to be done during the period of asauca.
Varaha said:
2. Listen, O auspicious one. I shall tell you about asauca
and how people are purified after it.
3. On the third day after the death (of the relative), bath
should be taken in the river and pinda should be given together
with three handfuls of water.
l. Thisis on the basis of contents. The title actually given is Pinga-
*alpatráddhotpattiprakaranam based on the statement at the close of the chapter.

566 Varaha Purana
4. On the fourth, fifth and sixth days, there should be pinda
and one handful of water. On the seventh day this should be ina
different place. This should be continued upto the tenth day.
5. On the tenth day, all those belonging to the gotra of the
departed should bathe taking oil of sesamum and myrobalan
and wash the clothes with cleaning materials.
6. After giving pinda, they should get themselves shaven,
bathe again according to rites, and return home along with the
relatives.
7. On the eleventh day, the Ekoddista ceremony should be
done and after bath the (soul of) the dead person should be united in Brahmins.
8. This Ekoddista is to be done by all the four castes and
Brahmin should be fed with all the materials prescribed.
9. After bath, the departed soul should be united with the
departed.
10. Brahma has laid down that for the first three castes and
also for Südras who were really doing service, cooked food should
be used and for others uncooked food.
11. On the thirteenth day Brahmins should be fed with wellcooked food.
12-13. Having in mind the name of the dead and with conviction that its aim is to make him go to heaven, the Brahmin
should be sought in his house, and invited in all humility, uttering mentally the following mantra:
14. ‘You have gone to the celestial world and ordained by
the god of death. Your mind has become the wind. So enter
this Brahmin.”
15. The Brahmin should be approached soon after sunset,
and after giving pddya, should be prostrated before and his feet
caressed, all for the sake of the departed.
16-17. So long as the Brahmin is having in his body the
soul of the departed thus invoked, he shall not, O Earth, touch
my images.
18. In the morning, soon after sunrise, proper shaving should
be got done for the invited Brahmin.
19. An oil bath should then be given for him which gives
pleasure to the departed.
2. Perhaps there is some confusion here. In verse 7 we get pretam vipresu
yojayet and here pretam pretesu yojayet.

20. A small earthen pedestal by a heap of clods on a low
clean place near a river or a pond, should be made as the place
for the departed.
21-22. This may be marked into sixtyfour parts. Then on
the south-east in the shade or under a tree on the river bank, the
rites for the departed are to be done in a place free from Candalas
and other outcastes and creatures like the fowl, dogs and pigs.
23-24. If Sraddha is done in a place, where the dog blocks
(the people) by its moan, the pig by its grunt, the fowl by the
wind wafted by its wings and the Candala (by his very presence),
it brings about bondage to the departed (and not release). The
wise should avoid such places for these rites.
25-26. O goddess, Devas, Asuras, Gandharvas, Pisacas,
Uragas, Raksasas, Sacrifices and all beings moving and nonmoving are set on your surface.
27. And I hold this universe full of Visnu-maya and with
the Candàla upwards and all the good and evil of the people.
28. "Therefore, let the libation be made in the clods on the
pedestal.
29. Those who do libation without these earthen clods, make
what remains impure.
30. Neither gods nor manes accept such offerings and that
leads only to the ghastly hell.
31. The offering for the departed should be made in the
earthen pedestal in the forenoon uttering the name and gotra
and saying that the pinda is offered.
32. After this, all in the family and those in the same gotra
are to partake of the remains (after the offering). This food
should not be given to those belonging to other gotras for
whom it is not permissible to take it.
33. This is what is ordained for all the four castes and those
that are departed get propitiated by this.
34. He who eats it before offering to the departed, shall go
to a great river and bathe there along with the clothes he wears
(as expiation).
35. (Then for feeding the Brahmins), first calling to mind
all the tirthas, water should be thrice sprinkled on the floor,
and thus getting the place purified, the Brahmins should be
quickly brought there and, when they have come, the ritual of
welcome should be made for them.

568 Varáha Purana
36. Arghya and padya should then be given and then Asana
(seat) with the following mantra:
37. The mantra: “O great Brahmin, please take this seat
offered and rest in it; also be pleased to favour me.”
38. After seating the Brahmin thus in the seat, umbrella
should be given for keeping out beings moving in the sky like
Devas, Gandharvas, Siddhas and Asuras.
39. The umbrella is meant for the effulgent to hold in the
sky.
40. For the sake of the departed, the umbrella may be given
when the Brahmin is pleased with earlier offerings.
41. The Brahmin may be made to hold it over his head.
42. In the sky, Devas, Siddhas, Gandharvas, Asuras and
Raksasas will see the departed, and this will produce shyness in
him.
43. When he (the departed) is thus shy, the Asuras and
Raksasas may laugh at him. To avoid this, the umbrella was
devised by Aditya long ago for all those who go to such regions
and for the sages.
44. There may be shower of fire, shower of stones, shower of
hot water and shower of ashes day and night.
45. The umbrella is to be given to the Brahmin for warding
off all this.
46. Then foot-wear should be given to enable comfortable
walking. I shall tell you the purpose of this.
47. The feet should not be injured in the region of Yama
which is dark and difficult to traverse.
48. The departed is led alone through that difficult part day
and night by the god of death and his associates.
49. Therefore the Brahmin should be given footwear for the
protection of the feet.
50. (The departed has to move along) places of hot sand
and those full of thorns. The foot-wear helps to cross them (unhurt).
51. Then Dhipa (incense) and Dipa (lamp) should be given
with mantra in order that they may go to the departed.
52. 'The departed should then be invoked in a stretch of
darbha on the ground uttering the name and gotra.
53. (Sandal paste should be offered saying:)

“You have left this world and got liberated. Receive this
sandal paste given with reverence, O you departed".
54. “O Brahmin, accept this sandal paste, flowers, incense
and lamp and give liberation to the departed".
55. Similarly, clothes and ornaments should be given to the
Brahmin and then cooked food again and again.
56. Such materials as can be used by the departed should be
given. Then (the performer of these rites) should wash his feet
thrice. This is common for all castes.
57. But in the case of Südras all this should be without
mantra. What the Südra gives without mantra, the Brahmin
receives with mantra.
58. After doing all this, the Brahmin should be fed with
cooked food.
59. When the Brahmin, purified by knowledge, is eating,
the offering with all its accessories to the departed should be
given.
60. It may be known by the wise that godhood and Brahminhood are given through the pinda for the departed and manhood
through libation.
61. For the manes the offering should be accompanied by
mantra:
62. After washing hands, the cooked food along with its
accessories is accepted by the Brahmin with mantra.
63. After the Brahmin eats for the departed, (what is left)
should be shared by all the relatives of him for whom it is done.
64. None should prevent anything being given to the Brahmin. He who prevents, incurs the sin of killing the preceptor.
65. In such a case what is offered is not accepted by gods,
fires or manes, thus resulting in the loss of dharma. Then the
departed does not get propitiation.
66. With all this consideration in mind for guarding
dharma, should the food for the departed be given in the midst
of relations.
67-68. When the Brahmin is pleased, particularly with the
offering for the departed, the departed soul gets free from sins.
69. When he is fully satisfied with the cooked food, water
should be poured into his palm.
70. The remnants of the food (left by the Brahmin in the

‘570 Varüha Purdna
eating vessel) should not be thrown away. With his permission
it shouid be disposed of in a blemishless manner.
71. After purification with sacred waters sanctified by
santimantras, the performer should go to the place of libation and
bow to the earth.
72. He should utter mantras and praises full of devotion for
the earth.
73. “I bow to you again and again, O Earth, mother of the
world, holding big mountains. I bow again and again to you in
whom the whole universe rests.”
74. Then uttering the name and gotra of the departed,
water with sesamum should be poured.
73. Kneeling down and prostrating before the Brahmins,
they should be raised up holding their hands with mantra.
76. A bed should then be given and also ornaments and
collyrium. 'The Brahmin should receive them and occupy the
bed.
77. After a while, going to the place of libation, a cow should
be given to the Brahmin by holding its tail.
78. The vessel made of Udumbara wood containing water
and black sesamum should be taken and mantras relating to the
cow should be recited.
79. The cow should be gifted holding its tail and sprinkling
it with this water sanctified by the mantras and capable of removing sins.
80. Then the departed (who was invoked earlier) should be
released and gifts given to Brahmins. The balls of rice offered
to the manes should be given to the crows, because of their impurity after the offering.
81. Then the performer should go to his house with other
Brahmins and feed them all with cooked food.
82. Food should be scattered also for tiny beings like the
ants for propitiating the departed.
83. When all these are thus made happy, happiness accrues
to him who has departed to the world of the dead.
84. All the food thus distributed becomes an inexhaustible
store for him. These are the rites to be done for the departed to
enable change from that state (to become manes).
85. This will be adopted by all the four castes since it is
something revealed to Svayambha.

86. Now you need not have any fear, O son, for having done
the obsequial rites to your son.
87. I have now told you everything in detail and in the
presence of Narada.
88. You have now set the precedent for the sacrifice for the
departed son. Hereafter, this Pitryajfia will be established in the
world.
89. The rules of the rites for the manes were thus told by
Atreya (the father)!
90. The oblations should be done in the third, seventh,
ninth and eleventh months after death, and at the end of one
full year the annual rites should be performed.
91. Getting pure in body and mind and with concentration
of mind, the departed should be invoked and cooked food offered
according to the rules.
92. This should be done with mantra for all the castes, except the Südras for whom it should be without mantra.
93. When the rites for the departed are over at tbe end of
the year, some get full release and some return (to be rc-born in
the world).
94. Although there may be the grandfather, daughter-inlaw, wife, and relatives close and distant, we should realise that
this world is like a dream.
95. Allofthem mourn for a while, but soon turn themselves
away. The bond of affection and attachment is there for a moment, but that is broken soon.
96. Whose is the mother, whose is the father, whose the wife
and whose the sons? In life after life they are there and have
attachment by bond of delusion.
97. But the rites for the dead should be done with a feeling
of attachment, though it is true that we are having thousands of
parents and hundreds of wives and sons in the numerous cycles
of birth and death.
98. (What I told you)is the rules of obsequies laid down by
Svayambha.
99. When the rites relating to the departed (pretakarya) are
over, the status of manes (pitrtva) is attained, and so libation for
manes (pirtarpana) should be performed on the new moon day
every month.
V die" NT Eds cb 9
l. This is possibly an interpolated passage.

572 Varaha Purana
100. The father, grand-father and great-grand-father (should
be given libation), and if the Brahmin is fed on that day, they
get permanently propitiated.
101. After describing the rites of Pitryajfia in this manner,
Atreya (the father) meditated for a while and soon disappeared.
Néarada said:
102. “Having heard about the obsequies narrated by Atreya
for all the four castes, (you should now be convinced that) you
have (really) established dharma.
103. The sages also perform Pitryajfia as part of frdddha on
a particular day every month. The Brahmins do it in this way
and the $üdras without mantra.
104. The Sraddha performed by Nimi is followed by the
twiceborn and it has come to be known as ‘Nimisraddha’.
105. O great sage, let good befall you. I take leave of You."
106. So saying, the great sage Nàrada returned to heaven
spreading his lustre everywhere.
107. O Earth, this is the conception of pinda and the origin
of Sraddha and they are established among the Brahmanas by
the sage Atreya himself.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTYNINE
The qualities of the Brahmin to be fed in Sraddha*
Earth said:
1. “I have now heard in full about the Sraddha, the purities
and impurities connected with it and also about the feeding for
the departed relating to the four castes.
2. Ihave a doubt and it behoves you to clear it. (You said
that) for all the four castes, the gifts should be given to the Brahmins.
l. The title actually given is Pindakalpotpatti (origin of the instructions
for pinda) .

3. Those who receive them, particularly the food for the
departed, really do a contemptible thing namely eating with the
departed (ghost).
4. By what means does such a Brahmin free himself from
such a position and how does he help the donor? I ask this, O
Janardana, because of your affection for me and my nature as a
woman (who always has doubts)."
5. Asked thus by Earth, the Lord in the form of the boar
replied to her in a tone resembling the sound of the conch and
Dundubhi.
Varáha said:
6. It is quite proper that you ask me this. I shall tell you
how the Brahmin helps himself and the donor.
7. After eating what is offered through him to the departed
(pretabhojya), the Brahmin wanes in his knowledge.
8. To purify his body, he should undertake fasting. By fasting for one full day and night, he regains his power of knowledge.
9. Then after performing the worship of the morning Sandhya and making the routine offerings in the fire, he shall perform Homa with sesamum reciting the Santimantras.
10. Then he shall go to a river flowing in the eastern direction and bathe there with due rites and drink paficagavya together
with madhuparka.
11. Taking water sanctified with Santimantras in a vessel
made of the wood of Udumbara, he shall sprinkle it all over in
his residence.
12. After performing propitiatory rites for gods like Agni,
he shall perform Bhütabali and feed Brahmins.
13. The gift of a cow also should be made for the removal
of sins. If all this is done, he enters the supreme path (of liberation).
14. If one dies with the food offered through him to the
departed in his stomach, he has to remain in the fierce hell till
the end of the aeon.
15. Then he becomes a Raksasa before he is freed of the sin.
So the proper expiation should be done for the welfare of the
donor and the recipient.
16. The Brahmin who, after receiving gifts of cow, elephant,

574 Varaha Purána
horse, money and the like with mantra and in the prescribed
manner, performs the prescribed expiations, surely enables the
donor to cross (samsara).
17. The Brahmin who is rich in knowledge and is ever devoted to learning the Vedas, surely enables himself as well as the
donor to cross (sarnsàra).
18. O Earth, the Brahmin should not be offended by any
person belonging to the three castes.
19. The Brahmin invited for food during a ceremony for
gods, birthday, Sraddha, new moon day or rites connected with
the departed, should be carefully chosen.
20. The Brahmin who has mastered the Vedas, who is highly
righteous, goodnatured, contented, virtuous, truthful,
21. Forbearing, learned in Sàstras, and wedded to nonviolence—should be called.
22. And the gifts should be given to him, because such a
person alone is capable of enabling the donor to gain his aim (of
crossing samsára).
23. But a gift of this sort should never be given to a Kunda
or Gola!, for then it will be in vain. They pull the donor down.
24. Seeing a Kunda or Gola in a ceremony for them, the
manes get disappointed and fall into hell. In the ceremony for
gods also what is given to them goes in vain.
25. Therefore, a gift should never be given to any one not
eligible to receive it. In this connection, I shall tell you what
once happened in yore. Please listen.
26. Inthe Avanti country there was a highly righteous king
named Medhatithi, a descendant of Manu.
27. He had as his priest one Candrasgarma, a virtuous
Brahmin belonging to the Atreya gotra and very much devoted
to the Vedas.
28. 'The king used to give hundred cows to the Brahmins
every day before taking food.
29. Once on the anniversary day of his father in the month
of Vaisakha, Medhatithi invited many Brahmins for Sraddha.
30. When all of them had come, Medhatithi with pure mind
bowed to them all and also to his preceptor and started performing the S raddha.
1. Kunda and Gola are both bastards, the one born to woman by her
paramour when her husband is alive, and the other after he is dead.

31. Doing the rites of Sraddha in the prescribed manner,
offering pinda and libation, he gave food to Brahmins sumptuously.
32. Among them was a Gola and to him too the food was
given with due rites.
33. Because of this sin, the manes of the king fell from heaven into a forest full of thorns, and they repeatedly began to
cry being oppressed by hunger and thirst.
34. Medhatithi chanced to go there for hunting with two
or three attendants.
35-36. Seeing them wandering there, he asked them who
they were and due to what wrong action they were in that sorrowful state.
The Pitrs said:
37. “We are the ancestors of king Medhatithi and we are
on our way to hell."
38. Hearing these words of theirs, the king felt very sorry
and told them in a consoling voice.
Medhátithi said:
39. Iam Medhatithi and you are my ancestors. What is the
sin committed, as a result of which you are now forced to hell ?
The Pitrs said:
40. “The food in the Sraddha for us was given to a Gola
and, as a result of that misdeed, we got to hell.
41. After suffering there much, we will return to heaven. O
son, you arc a liberal giver and see to the welfare of the world.
42. You have gifted numerous cows with munificent daksinà. By the merit of that we will return to the pleasant heaven.
43. But there will not be food there to satisfy us. So vou
have to perform the Sraddha again for our satisfaction."
44. Hearing these words, Medhatiihi returned home and,
calling his preceptor Candrasarma, told him.
Medhátithi said:
45. “O Candragarma, I am going to perform the Sraddha
again. Call the Brahmins but sec that there is no Kunda or
Gola among them."

576 Varaha Purana
46-47. Immediately, the priest Candrasarma called Brahmins who were always learning the Vedas, who were goodnatured, forbearing, of good family, free from anger and of fine
conduct, and the king conducted Sraddha.
48. After Sraddha, pindas were offered and libation given
and the Brahmins were fed and honoured with daksina.
49, They were then released and the king took his food.
Soon he went to the forest and saw the manes.
50. Seeing them now well-nourished, strong and happy,
he was very much delighted.
51. The manes spoke to him with modesty and pleasure:
“May good befall you. We are now proceeding to heaven.
52. For our sake you should be careful about one thing that
anything meant for the gods or manes should never be given to
a Gola (or Kunda). The wise declare it to be in vain what is
offered through them.
53. Ifin a ceremony meant for the propitiation of gods or
manes, a suitable Brahmin is not found available, the offering
may be given to a cow, keeping in mind the aim always.
54. If even a cow is not available, it may be thrown in a
river.
55. But it should never be given to an ineligible person,
an unbeliever or one who is against his own teacher, and surely
not to a Gola and never to a Kunda.”
56. So saying the manes went to heaven and Medhatithi
returned to his city together with the Brahmins. Thereafter, he
carefully observed what the manes had said.
57. Therefore it is said, O goddess, that a single virtuous
Brahmin enables us to tide over even the worst difficulties.
58. A single one is capable of taking us across. Therefore,
O Earth, gifts should be given to the true Brahmin.
59. Sraddha is approved by all gods, demons, men, Gandharvas and others.
60. Sages like Nimi began to do it every month in the fortnight of the manes.

CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND NINETY
Other details about Srüddhal
Earth said:
1. “O Lord, when men or animals die, some go to hell while
others go to heaven.
2. This world is like a dream. Here the good and bad are
the result of one’s own actions. It is sustained by the power of
your maya.
3. O Lord, who are the manes that eat the essence of Sraddha? They have existence in the fire according to the actions
done.
4. How are the rules of pinda to be observed month after
month? Who are those that cat in Sraddha and what are the
rituals for the manes? I very much desire to know this for
certain.”
5. Asked thus by Earth, Lord Narayana in the form of the
boar replied.
Varáha said:
6. Well have you asked, O Earth, in your eagerness to see
the establishment of dharma. Y shall tell you what you seck to
know.
7. The enjoyers in Pitryajfia are the father, grand-father
and great-grand-father.
8-9. The sankalpa for the Pinda should be made on the
particular day in the month in the particular fortnight and on
the day in which the naksatra is in combination with the particular tithi. The Sraddha done then yields great result.
10. O fair one, listen. I shall tell you all about Sraddha
which the learned do with great attention.
11. Some of the twice-born perform the rite called Brahmayajfia, some perform Devayajfia in fire.
12. Others perform Bhütayajfia and yet others Manusyayajiia when they live the life of a householder.
13. Ishalltell you about the Pitryajfia. Those who perform
- The title given is Sraddhapitryajfianiscayaprakaranam (determination of
Sraddha and pitryajfia) .

578 Varüha Purana
a single one or a hundred of this, remain in me. This, I tell you,
is the truth.
14. O Madhavi, in havya as well as kavyat, Agni (fire) is the
mouth of Devas,
15. In all sacrifices I am the Uttaragni, I am the Daksinagni and I am the Ahavaniyagni.?
16. Iam the fire and the purifier in all matters relating to
sacrifices for gods.
17. For Vaigvadeva may be engaged a pure Brahmacarin,
a mendicant in holy tirthas and an anchorite in the Vanaprastha
stage.
18. These are to be worshipped for the sake of gods, but
should not be chosen for ritualistic feeding in Sraddha. I shall
tellyou who are the twice-born that are to be engaged in
Sraddha.
19-20. O Madhavi, the sort of people that are to be fed in
Pitryajfias are those that are superior, contented, forbearing,
calm, having full control of the senses, taking pleasure and sorrow
alike, truthful, propounding dharma, well versed in Vedic knowledge and eating well.
21. The offering should first be made in fire in tirthas sacred
for Devas and then to the Brahmin.
22. In the Pitryajfias the rules for different castes relating
to Sraddha should be observed.
23-24. During Sraddha in Pitryajüa, the food should not be
seen by dogs, fowls or pigs. The performer should not see those
Brahmins who are forbidden eating in his company, who have
not undergone sacred rituals, who apply themseives to all kinds
of work and wuo eat anything without discrimination.
25. The Sraddha that is seen by the prohibited persons is
considered ‘Raksasa’. I have ordained already the offering in
such $ràddha to Bali when he overpowered the three worlds.
26. Such a Sraddha is taken to be one without mantras and
rituals. Therefore, the wise should avoid such people in Sraddha.
27. One should keep oneself pure during Sraddha and,
making the Brahmin pleased, he should be fed free from the sight
of others.
1. Havya is the offering for gods and Kavya the offering for manes.
2. These are the three forms of fire laid down for various ceremonies.

28. The manes should then be invoked with mantra according to the prescribed rules. Three pindas should then be offered,
together with condiments, for the father, grand-father and greatgrand-father.
29-30. Water with sesamum should be given every month
after bowing to the goddesses who are the carriers of such water,
namely Vaisnavi, Kasyapi and Ajaya. When done in this way,
the manes doubtless become propitiated.
31-32. Ihave made the supreme soul reside in the bodies of
gods. From the body of gods, O beautiful goddess, three beings
came out. They are the Pitrdevas (manes-gods) who enjoy
pindas given for the manes.
33. The Devas, Asuras, Gandharvas, Yaksas, Raksasas and
Pannagas, all in airy form, watch the pitfalls during performance
of Sráddha.
34. Upon those who perform Pitryajfia with due attention,
the manes bestow long life, fame, strength, effulgence, wealth,
sons, kine, women and health.
35. Such men, by their actions, go to the auspicious world
beyond. After death, they will never have to be born as animals.
36. ‘The householder who worships the manes, gods becomes
the saviour of those (of his ancestors) who are tormented in hell.
37. He who fully propitiates the Brahmin according to rules
in Sraddha makes the manes propitiated and enables them to go
to the world of eternity.
38. Those who worship the manes attain supreme beatitude
and, being thus blessed, reach the Sattvic white path.
39. Ishalltell you another thing in brief, O fair one, please
listen.
40. Those who are engulfed in the darkness of ignorance and
are obstinate, are tormented in hell, bound by their own hundreds
of strings of attachment.
41-42. For such people who thus suffer endless torment, if
their sons or grandsons offer libation in any pool of water on newmoon day, propitiation is obtained (and they are able to leave
the hell).
43-44. Those who perform Sraddha duly propitiating the
Brahmins and offer in solemnity to the manes pindas and water
with sesamum, also are freed (from the fear) of hell and get permanent satisfaction.

580 Varáha Purana
45. Water with sesamum should be in a vessel of Udumbara
wood. Calling the Brahmins in reverence, daksina should be
given tothem according to the means for the salvation of manes.
46. The gift of a blue bull avoids the torments of hell. When
water is poured on the tail of such a bull (while making the gift),
the manes become propitiated for sixty thousand years.
47-48. If the blue bull, when released by its horn, digs up
a clod of mud by the horn, then the manes of the donor that
have fallen in hell, get released, and together with them, the
donor goes to the world of Soma.
49-50. By the merit of releasing a blue bull in this manner,
they delight themselves in the Somaloka for sixty thousand and
sixty hundred years free from hunger and thirst.
51. This is the duty of the householder with his sons and
grandsons. They, thus, save their fallen manes and themselves
remain in happiness.
52. O fair one, the householder is the source moving animals
and flying birds.
53. Thus the state of being the householder is the base wherein dharma gets firmly established.
54. The householder who performs Sraddha every month
in the proper tithi in the particular fortnight, liberates all his ancestors,
55. The sacrifices, gifts, learning of scripture, fasts, baths
in holy waters, agnihotra, however carefully done following the
rules, do not generate the merit in magnitude that the performance of Sraddha generates for a housebolder.
56. The manes emanated from the bodies of Brahma and
Visnul. They are the father, grand-father and great-grandfather. These are, O Earth, the manes-gods.
57. Since these devatas invoked in Sraddhas are the creations of Kaáyapa, gods like Indra and others do not know them.
58. Isvara (Rudra) does not know this although they came
out of his body. Similarly, Brahma too does not know. This is
because of my maya.
59. Thus are Brahma and Rudra kept out by my maya.
60. I shall now tell you another thing relating to Pitryajfia.
Do not give food in Sraddha to the Brahmin before offering it
to Fire.
a
l. From later stanzas, it appears that Rudra also should be added here.

61. (I shall narrate to you a story). O Earth, after taking
sankalpa, darbha grass was strewn on the floor and pinda was
placed on it.
62. But the manes-gods became afflicted by indigestion and
could not eat any more. They went to Soma to report their
sorrow.
63. Soma saw them suffering from indigestion. Still he
extended to them welcome.
Soma said:
64. '*Who are you, O gods ? Wherefrom did you arise ?
Why are you in grief now ?”
They replied to Soma:
65. “O Soma, please listen to us. The three of us are manesgods. We arose from Brahma, Visnu and Hara respectively.
66. We are the gods for Sraddha. The pindas for the manes
were offered to us. But we developed indigestion and hence our
sorrow.”
Soma said:
67. “I shall be your friend and be the fourth with you three.
We shall seek the means for our well being."
68. So said by Soma, they went with him in pursuit of the
means for their relief.
69. They went to Brahma who was resting in the peak of
Meru surrounded by great sages.
70. Soma, the son of Atri, prostrated before Brahma and
told him.
71. “These manes-gods are afflicted by indigestion. They
have come here with me seeking your favour. Be pleased to rid
them of their ailment.”
, 72. Brahma meditated for a while and soon saw before him
lévara.
73. Brahma then spoke to the great lord of Yoga.
74. “O lord, these manes who are suffering from indigestion, have come to me with Soma seeking my help. It will be
good of you to tell me how these have come into being."

582 Varaha Purana
75. Thus asked by Brahma, Ivara meditated for a while
entering into his divine Yoga, and saw there Lord (Visnu) in his
Yogic form.
76. He was wonder-struck at this and then spoke to Brahma.
77. “These are the creations of Visnu by his maya. They are
the exalted manes-gods.
78. The father is the god from Brahma as he arose out of
you. The grandfather is the god from Visnu as he arose out of
Visnu. The great-grand-father is the god from Rudra as he arose
out of myself.
79. They are assigned as manes-gods in Sraddha performed
by men. They are created by the maya of Visnu for the sake of
Brahmins.
80-81. Ifitis that they have come to you with Soma, having
developed indigestion when they were propitiated in Pitryajfia,
I shall tell you how their indigestion can be cured and they can
be made happy. Please listen, O Brahma, grandfather of the
whole world.
82-83. "There is the resplendent Fire with his tawny banner,
the son of Sandilya. When men perform Sraddha, they should
first make offering to him. 'The pinda should be eaten along with
him."
84. When Iśvara said like this, Brahma called in his mind
Fire, and he immediately appeared before him.
85. The all-consuming Fire with all his effulgence was associated with the five Yajfias by Brahma by the power of my maya.
86. Brahma then spoke to Fire. “O you consumer of all
offerings, the first pinda offered should be eaten by you.
87. What is left after that will be partaken by the gods and
the Maruts. Then should be eaten the wholesome food of the
Sraddha (by the Brahmins).
88. The pinda after that is eaten along with Soma."
89. Thus told by Brabma, O Earth the manes-gods departed
with Soma. In the Pitryajfia (therefore), food is eaten together.
90. So, O Earth, in Sraddha the first offering is for Agni,
after honouring Brahmins for the sake of manes.
91. "Then is the pinda on the floor overstrewn darbha grass.
There, the first pinda is for father who arose from Brahma.

92. The middle one is for grand-father who arosefrom Rudra
and the third is for great-grand-father who arose from Visnu.?
93. Those who perform Sraddha with mantras according
to the rules laid down, get blessings of the manes. The twiceborn perform Sraddha by the strength of my maya.
94. Ishall now tell you who are the Brahmins that are ineligible to be fed in Sraddha.
95. Eunuchs, artists, those who condemn the king, those
with bad nails or irregular teeth, or are blind or pot-bellied,
96. Dancers, singers, those dependent on the dramatic stage,
those who teach Veda for money, those who perform sacrifice for
anybody,
97. Those in the service of the king, traders, those of a mixed
origin though born to a Brahmin woman, those who have fallen
into depravity,
98. Those who have not undergone the sarskàras, those who
do the deeds of Südras for their living, those who serve Südras,
astrologers, those who perform sacrifice for the public,
99. Those under initiation (for some ceremony), usurers,
those who sell mercury, those living upon Vaisyas,
100. "Thieves, inscribers, beggars, platform-builders, those
that live in hills and mountains, dissemblers,
101. Those that do any kind of action, those that offer for
sale everything—these should not be called for eating in Sraddha.
102. Those who have gone far away and earn their living
there, those engaged in the sale of mercury or of sesamum, and
actors are considered Rajasa in Sraddha by the wise (and may be
called in the absence of others).
103. But the rest in the list should be considered Ráksasa in
the form of the Brahmin. They should not be seen in Sraddha.
104. Ifsuch prohibited persons are found eating in Sraddha,
the manes become subjected to serious sorrow for a period of six
months.
105. For this expiation should be done quickly.
106. Clarified butter should be poured in fire and the sun
should be looked at.
107. The grand-father, father and great-grand-father should
be invoked again and sanda! paste, flowers, incense and water
l. This is at variance with the earlier statement that the grand-father
arose from Visnu and the great-grand-father from Rudra.

584 Varáha Purana
with sesamum should be offered and then the Brahmin fed
according to rules.
108. I shall tell you another thing briefly, please listen.
The Brahmin who is purified by knowledge is purified by mantra.
109. One who never partakes of the food for the dead,
should not be insisted upon taking food in Sraddha but may be
given food in Vai$vadeva.
110. Ifsuch persons are given the food for the dead, then
one has to do expiation.
111. He goes to hell, but I shall tell you what expiation he
has to do.
112. On Dvadasi day in the month of Magha he should take
rice cooked in milk together with ghee, after propitiating Brahmins with meat and honey.
113. In order to make himself pure, he should make the
gift of a cow with calf and then perform Sraddha again calling
Brahmins and giving them unguents.
114. The Brahmacarin should purify himself by giving up
the twig for cleaning teeth.
115. It should not be used at all on newmoon days.
116. If one uses the twig for cleaning teeth on newmoon
day, he causes torment for Soma and the manes.
117-118. When the day dawns and the sun is rising, one
should perform morning duties and invite Brahmin and see to
his shaving and pairing of nails. He should then be given oil for
bathing and unguents.
119. Rice should then be cooked well with all purity and the
Sraddha should be commenced at noon.
120. The Brahmin should be welcomed and water given for
padya. He should be led into the house.
121. Seat should then be given and the manes should be
invoked in him. Arghya should be given then and the sandalpaste
and the garland.
122. Incense and lamp should follow, as also cloth and water
with sesamum. The plate for eating should be placed before him.
123. The place should then be marked off by a streak of
ashes. The rites in fire should then be done and a circle of water
made round the rice.
124. No separate sankalpa need be made then regarding
the manes. The Brahmin should be requested to eat at ease.

125. The Raksoghna mantra should be recited. When the
Brahmin is fully satisfied with the food served, Vikira! should be
done.
126. The ritual of offering pinda should then be done
laying darbha grass on the floor and facing south.
127. Pinda should be offered for the three manes, father and
others. The pindas should be worshipped for the sake of progeny.
128. The Brahmin should be given aksata in the hand, and
after making him pleased with daksinà, his words of blessing
should be obtained, and then released.
129. As long as the pindas remain on the floor, so long do
the manes remain in the house.
130. Becoming clean after washing hands, fantyudaka (water
for peace) should be offered to the three deities that carry the
libation to the manes, namely Vaisnavi, Kà$yapi and Aksaya,?
after prostrating in the floor.
131. One should eat the first pinda oneself, the second
should be given to the wife and the third thrown into water. This
is the rule in Sraddha.
132. The manes-gods should then be released and obeisance made to them.
133. Done in this way, the manes-gods become pleased and
they bless with long life, wealth and progeny.
134. The Sraddha should be performed with Brahmins of
high knowledge; otherwise it will be in vain.
135. He who performs Sraddha without mantra or ritual,
gives part of the merit to my Asura devotee.
136. The moment the Brahmin without knowledge takes the
plate for eating in Sraddha, it is snatched away by the Raksasas.
137. O fair one, I have now told you about the rites relating
to the manes, its origin, the gifts to be made and merit that
accrues from it.
138. O Earth, what else do you now wish to know ?
l. Vikira is scattering of cooked ricein a streak outside the plate in
which the Brahmin invoked as manes eats.
2. The name given earlier is Ajaya.

586 Varaha Purana
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND NINETYONE
Madhuparka
Sita said:
1. After knowing so much about dharma, Earth asked again
the Lord in the form of the boar.
Earth said:
2. Ihave now known so much Sàstra from your own mouth.
Still I don’t feel that I have known all that I should know.
3. It, therefore, behoves you to tell me as to what is the
nature of madhuparka, who is its devata and what merit arises
from it.
4. And also what are its ingredients and to whom it should
be given.
5. Hearing these words of Earth, the great Lord in the form
of the boar replied.
Varaha said:
6. Listen, O Earth, I shall tell you how madhuparka is made,
what is its origin and how it should be gifted.
7. When I, Brahma and Rudra caused dissolution of the
world, all beings remained in an indistinct form.
8. Then from my right side came out Man, beautiful, lustrous, auspicious, humble and famous.
9. Then Brahma asked me: “O Visnu, who is this person
that has came out of your body to be a fourth among us three.
He is small and has come out in secret. This is not proper on
your part.”
10. Hearing these words of Brahma, I said:
11. “The being that has come out of me is known as Madhuparka, necessary in all ceremonies and capable of bringing about
the release of devotees from samsdra. This, in brief, is what I
have to tell you and Rudra."
12. (Brahma said:) *Good it is that he has come out as
your part." The origin of Madhuparka is thus decided.
13. Then Brahma asked me as to what should be done with
madhuparka.
14. “Please tell me what is the way to utilise madhuparka
so that it may not go in vain."

15. Hearing the words of Brahma, I said: Madhuparka is
to be made and gifted. If madhuparka is given after performing
my worship one goes to the exalted place where there will be no
sorrow.
16. Ishall now say how its gift should be made by which
-one attains divine path.
17-18. When in my worship, the upacaras are over, madhuparka should be taken and this mantra uttered:
19. “This, O Lord, is what arose from your body. It is by
name madhuparka and it is capable of granting release from
-samsara, I offer it to you with great devotion. Be pleased to receive
it. I bow to you."
20. O Earth, now listen to what I say about the nature of
madhuparka and how it is to be offered.
21. Itshould be made with equal parts of honey, curds and
ghee reciting the prescribed mantras if the full benefit should
be attained.
22. It may then be offered to me in the proper manner. I
have thus told you what you wanted to know.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND NINETYTWO
Peace for all
Süla said:
1-2. Having heard about the origin, gift, merit, result, making and holding of madhuparka, the saintly Earth was wonderStruck, and holding the feet of Lord Janàrdana, said:
3. “O Lord, it is dear to you to offer madhuparka after the
upacaras in your worship and it should be done then. But tell
me how to do it in the best form."
Varáha said:
4. You have asked me well. I shall tell you all that since it
is capable of gaining release from the sorrowful sarhsara.
5. After doing all the rituals which you referred to, Santi

588 Varüha Purdna
should be performed for me for the well-being of the whole country.
6. At the close of the rituals, one should kneel down on the
floor.
7. Then Namo nàráyanáya should be uttered and the following mantra recited:
8. I resort to you, O Lord, saviour from the ocean of sarhsara. O handsome one, you have come to me again.
9. Look at the directions, look below, protect me from all
ills.
10. Be pleased to bestow always peace and happiness to this
country with the king and his army, to pregnant women, to old
men, to Brahmins and cows and to the cereals.
11. Give abundance of food, bring plentiful rain, prosperity
and freedom from fear. Let the nation progress, O Lord, let
there be peace for ever.
12. For gods, Brahmins, devotees, maidens, animals and
other beings, let there be peace for ever.
13. After reciting this Santi, my devotee shall offer a handful of water and recite the following mantra:
14. “O Vasudeva, may you who are the originator of all the
worlds, the witness in all sacrifices and the spirit in all the gods,.
give us peace and release from sarhsara.”’
15. This is the best attainment, the best fame, the best
energy, the best gain and the best path.
16. He who recites this auspicious Santi in all seriousness,
gets merged in me without rebirth.
17. After reciting this Santi, is the occasion for madhuparka.
Namo nārāyanāya should be uttered and the following mantra
recited:
18. “O Lord, the greatest of all gods, the venerable one with
the name Madhuparka, be pleased to come here and remain in
this vessel for my deliverance."
19. (The madhuparka should be)in a vessel made of Udumbara wood and should consist of equal parts of honey, curds and
ghee. If honey is not available, gur may be used.
20. If ghee is liberally available, it may be mixed with fried
rice. If curd is not available, milk may be substituted.
21. 'Thus curds, honey and ghee may be mixed in equal

qualities uttering ‘O Lord, I am offering you curd, honey and
22. For the benefit ofall, my devotee may takeitin his hand
and recite the following mantra:
23. “You who created from the navel, you who are to be
invoked by mantras in all sacrifices, receive this offering named
madhuparka meant for you.”
24. He who offers it to me in this manner, attains the merit
of all sacrifices and goes to my world.
25. I shall now tell you another thing about this, O Earth,
Please listen.
26. This should be administered in proper form with mantra
to a dying devotee of mine.
27. This reliever from sarhsara may be given to my devotee
who is dying after doing good deeds all his life.
28. Seeing such a person in the throes of death, a devotee
should take madhuparka in his hand and recite the following
mantra:
29. “May you, O Narayana, the most important in all the
worlds, who remain in everybody, be pleased to accept this
madhuparka brought by the devotee”.
30. Madhuparka should be given to him with this mantra.
Given at the time of death, it gives release from sarhsara.
31. O fortunate one, I have told you thus about madhuparka which no one else knows.
32. Madhuparka should be given by those desirous of accomplishments. Given after worshipping the great Lord, it brings
about release from sarhsara.
33. Onewho gives madhuparka attains beatituds, because
it is pure and removes all desires.
34. It should be given to a holy preceptor by the devoted
pupil. Never should it be given to the ignorant or immodest.
35. He who listens to this purifying account of madhuparka,
also attains beatitude.
36. Ihave told you thus everything about madhuparka for
the sake of release from sarhsara for those that wish for it.
37. Those who recite this Santi in the king’s gateway, the
cremation ground, or when in fear or sorrow, get relief.
38. The man without son gets one, the man without a wife

590 Varüha Purana
gets one, the woman without a husband gets one, and the person
who is bound gets release.
39. O Earth, I have told you about this great Santi, which
is of a highly secret nature and gets release, from sarhsara.
40. He who performs Santi in this manner, gives up all
attachments and goes to my world.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND NINETYTHREE
Departure of .Naciketas
Lomaharsana said:
1-5. King Janamejaya, the last of the Kuru line, after completing the twelve-year-long expiation for his killing a Brahmin
after the performance of Asvamedha sacrifice, impelled by his
own action and very much worried, approached Vaisampàyana,
the great sage, disciple of Vyasa, living on the bank of Ganga,
soon after he had finished his morning rites, and spoke to him in
great repentance.
Janamejaya said:
6. O sage, when I think more and more about the deeds of
man, I feel convinced how we have to face their results unavoidably.
7. I therefore, wish to know, of what kind is the abode of
Yama, how extensive it is and how one sees it on going there.
8. Also how I can avoid going to that place of the king of
the dead, the king of dharma who directs the whole world.
Sita said:
9. Asked thus by the king, the sage replied in sweet voice.
Vaifampàyana said:
10-11. O king, listen to this old story, which is auspicious,
conducive to dharma and fame, purifying, bringing about good,
the favourite of the learned and narrated in Itihàsas and Purànas.

12. In days of yore, there was a great sage by name Uddalaka who had mastered the Veda with all its accessories.
13. He had a son by name Naciketas who was a yogi, very
intelligent and virtuous and a master of Vedic lore.
14. But he was cursed by the angry father to quickly go to
Yama and see him.
15. The brilliant son said ‘yes’, meditated for a while and
entered into yoga.
16. Soon he became invisible and told his father in great
humility:
17-18. “O virtuous father, your words can never go false.
I am, therefore, leaving for the glorious abode of Yama, the lord
of dharma. But, doubtless, I shall return here’’.
The father said:
19. You are my only son and I have no other relative. So
let it be false, against dharma or affecting your fame. (Please
do not go).
20. You will be able to save me although I have said something wrong in my anger, and it is true that he who utters something unbecoming mercilessly in anger defiles his entire family.
21. I who cursed you, the virtuous boy thus, have become so
defiled as not to be deserving of being spoken to.
22. I have become one who does not say the proper thing,
but I don’t wish any outrage on dharma.
23. O you good son, you have always been obedient, composed, forbearing and devoted to dharma. You have been sincerely attending on me and you alone are capable of enabling
me to gain liberation.
24, I, therefore, earnestly request you not to go there.
25. Iflord Yama happens to see you there even accidentally,
he will never release you in his anger.
26. Know, then, that I will perish as one who has cut off
the family line, condemned by all as a base sinner.
27. Hell is horrible and it is known as ‘put’. The son is
‘putra’ because he saves the father from this.
28. Whatever penance the son performs, whatcver he gifts
and whatever he offers in fire, all that nourish his ancestors. To
one without a son this is not there.

592 Varüha Purana
29. One may be a Sidra engaged in service (prescribed for
him), a Vaisáya engaged in cultivation, a Ksatriya engaged in
protection of the produce, or a Brahmana doing his deeds.
30. He may perform intense penance and make munificent
gifts. But if he is without a son, he never attains heaven. So have
I heard.
31. Afather gets gratification through his son, a grandfather
through his grandson and a great-grand-father through the son
of the grandson.
32. Ishall not let you go, the potential continuer of our
family line. So I implore you in all earnestness not to go there.
Vaisampayana said:
33. "The virtuous son spoke with composure and pleasure to
the wailing father.
The son said:
34. “Don’t be sorrowful, O father, you will see me return
here. After seeing that god (Yama) who is revered by all, I
shall certainly return to you, for I have no fear of the god of
death.
35. That king (ofthe dead) will honour me because ofyour
compassion.
36. You remain in truth and uphold truth. Truth is the
ladder to heaven as the boat is the means of crossing the ocean.
37. The sun shines by truth, the fire blazes by truth and the
earth remains firm by truth.
38. The sea does not advance over the shore because of
truth; the mantra produces its wholesome effect over the world
because of truth.
39. The sacrifices with their purifying mantras and honoured worship rest in truth. The Vedas sound by truth. The whole
world is set in truth.
40. 'The Sàman sings by truth. Everything is established in
truth. Heaven is truth, so too dharma. There is nothing outside
truth.
41. O father, I have learnt that everything is got by truth.
There is nothing that transcends truth.
42. Itis well known that Brahma, the very repository of the

Vedas, was banished by Rudra remaining in truth and Brahma
remains in austerity controlled by him.
43. Similarly, Agni was thrown into the mouth of the submarine horse by Aurva remaining in truth.
44. O father, all the worlds and gods were held by the
valiant Sarhvarta out of compassion for gods.
45. Bali remains in the netherworld, protecting truth.
46. The great mountain Vindhya with hundreds of its rising
peaks, does not grow because of truth. The whole world, with
All its moving and statonary beings, goes on in truth.
47. All the duties of the householder, those of the Vànaprastha and the rules of all austerities are based on truth.
48. If a thousand Asvamedhas and truth are weighed against
each other, it is truth that weighs more.
49. Dharma is ruled by truth, and dharma protects when
itself is protected. Therefore, follow truth and save yourself by
your own self.”
50-51. Having said this cheerfully, the effulgent and truthful son of the sage, resorted to his power of yoga attained by
penance and reached the place of king Yama.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND NINETYFOUR
The return of Naciketas
Vaisampàyana said:
l. Onreaching the place of that inaccessible king (Yama),
Naciketas was duly honoured and let off.
2. O king, when the sage saw his son returned, he was extremely delighted. He embraced him, smelt his head and filled
the earth and sky with his shouts of joy.
3. Then he called the other sages and told them.
4. “O great sages with divine lustre, see the greatness of my
son. He has gone to the abode of Yama and quickly returned
: here.
5. Iamseeing him alive because of good luck, filial affection
and service to elders.

594 Varüha Purana
6. There is none in this world as blessed as I am, because my
son has returned here after falling into the jaws of death.
7. (Then he asked the son). You were not beaten or bound
in the abode of Yama? Your path was unhampered when you
were going there?
8. The horrible diseases did not pursue you there ? What
strange things did you see there ? Were you happy ?
9. Did you see the king of the dead ? Did he see you with
his eyes?
10. Was he glad that you went there on your own accord ?
And did he let you return so soon ?
11. You didn't have to face the harassment by the fierce
doorkeepers there ? And even though released by the king, the
others there didn't do you any harm ?
12. You found it possible to get a way to enter there and
also to get out of it? (He then turned to sages again and said:)
My son has now come back to me. 'The gods are pleased.
13. So also the venerable sages and the pious Brahmins, in
that my son has returned from the world of Yama”.
14. Hearing him say like this, the sages there flocked to him
giving up their vows and observances.
15-17. Those performing Japa or worshipping deities, others
standing with thrown-up arms, yet others remaining on one foot
and gazing the sun, still others worshipping fire, all of them hastily gathered to see Naciketas.
18-19. Naked sages, those remaining within heaps of stones,
those in vow of silence, those eating the fallen leaves and water,
those that torment themselves in fire, all these stood around him.
20. Some sat down, some remained standing, but all wanted
to ask him many things.
21-22, Seeing Naciketas who had returned from Yama’s
world, some were afraid, some were glad, some were inquisitive,
some were indifferent and others were full of doubts. But they
all together asked him:
The sages said:
23. O Naciketas, the intelligent son observing dharma, the
truthful boy devoted to serving the elders,
24. Tell us in truth what you have seen or heard (in Yama-

loka). All of us are eager to know it, particularly your father.
25. Even if it is a secret, you should tell us when asked,
because you can see how full of fear all of us are.
26. By the maya of Kāla the dead are never seen again.
Man gets the result of whatever action he does.
27. Whatever action, good or bad, one does here, the result
of it accrues in the other world.
28. We see the working of maya of Kala in that beings become dead and also become born.
29. Those who think about it do not find a solution since
the whole world is engulfed in the darkness of desirc and stupefaction. What is necessary is not thought upon, what is pleasurable is gone after.
30. What does Citragupta do there and what docs he blabber ?
31. What is the appearance of Dharmarája and what is
Kàla like? What form do the diseases have there and how do
they act ?
32. By what action is one released from there and what are
the deeds to be done ? That is the final resort of the whole world
and nothing can be transgressed there.
33. People who know about (good and bad) actions speak
of angry bindings, torments, draggings and cuttings there.
34. What befalls pure souls there and what befalls sinners ?
35. We ask all this out of affection and friendliness. T'ell
us in detail what actually you have seen, heard or understood.
Vaifampàyana said:
36. O Janamejaya, listen now to what Naciketas said in
reply to what the sages asked him.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND NINETYFIVE
The sinners in Yamaloka
Naciketas said:
1. O ascetic Brahmins, I shall tell you what you seek to
know. Listen. Bow to Lord Dharmaraja.

596 Varüha Purána
2. I tell you briefly and according to my ability. Liars,
molesters of animals, women and children,
3. Killers of Brahmins, deceivers, the obstinate, the ungrateful, those fond of the wives of others,
4. Those who outrage the modesty of maidens, defilers of
Veda, those who harass the people following Vaidik path,
5. Sacrificers on behalf of Südras, condemned Brahmins,
performers of sacrifices for those who are ineligible, those
afflicted by leprosy,
6. Those who drink liquor, the Brahmins who kill other
Brahmins or warriors, those that live on usury, those crooked in
sight,
7. Those who give up their mother, father or wife, those
that have ill-will towards their preceptors, those of bad conduct,
messengers who speak indistinct,
8. Encroachers upon houses and fields, destroyers of bridges,
people without children, without wife, those without the necessary attention in their deeds,
9. The unclean, the merciless, harassers, vow-breakers,
sellers of soma, the henpecked, those that sell everything,
10. Speakers of falsehood, teachers of Veda for money,
teachers of out-castes, the astrologers, the fortune-tellers,
11. Cohabiters of all including those prohibited, magicians,
balance-holders,
12. Doers of actions without the idea of sin, those that harbour strong enmity, those that do not stake their life for the
master, those averse to battle,
13. 'Those that steal others wealth, assassinators, those
justifying sinful actions, those earning their living by fire,
14. Those that do not serve others as prescribed, anchorites
committing sin, makers of vessels,
15. Those selling things in temples, inns and tirthas, those
who speak against vows, those that speak untruth,
16. Those who grow hair and nails simply to appear as
sannyasins, crooked persons, those who make false documents,
17. "Those who do not observe austerities though out of ignorance, those banished from hermitages, those who receive every
offering, those who defile sacred places,
18. The quarrelsome, the cruel and thousands of others were
there.

19. Now hear what women and men do on going to Yama’s
place.
Vaifampayana said:
20. Hearing these words of Naciketas, the sages were wonderstruck and they asked him again.
The sages said:
21. O yov, the best among the learned, tell us about everything there as seen by you.
22. Of what nature is Kala because of whom the whole world
continues.
23. The selfish person who performs actions in this world
is not allowed entry in the world of Brahma.
24. Although tormented and burnt till the end of the aeon,
there is no loss to the body in that place,
25. Torture is applied again and again according to the
nature of the action, and one has to suffer it. No Brahmin will
dare to go there because of fear.
26. One avoids going there by giving gifts and performing
austerities.
27. What is the nature of Vaitarani ? What is the sort of
water that flows in it ? How is the hell Raurava and how is the
deceptive Salmali tree ? How are the messengers there and what
do they do?
28. What should a person do to shield himself from all this
by his merit acquired previously ?
29. Being under the influence of sin, courage is lost, and
even those that are sinless get stupefied.
30. What should be known is not known nor what is virtue
and what is not. The thinking faculty is lost because of sin.
31. Due to illusion what is the supreme is not known and
many toil there having committed sin.
32. Please tell us about all this as you have seen with your
Own eyes.

598 Varaha Purana
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND NINETYSIX
The city of Yana
Vaifampáyana said:
1. Hearing these words of the great sages, he began to tell
them everything in detail.
Nactketas said:
2. O great sages, listen tome. The city of the god of death
is one thousand yojanas in breadth, double that in length and
double that in perimeter.
3. It is full of mansions, golden spires and beautiful rows of
buildings.
4. It has got a golden fort also of great height.
5. The houses there shine like the Kailasa mountain. Rivers
flow there full of spotless water.
6. There are beautiful lakes, lotus-ponds and pools; also
tanks and wells.
7. It is full of men and women and elephants and horses of
different kinds and from different places.
8. We find there every kind of living being. Here and there
battles and single combats are also seen.
9-10. Hundreds of thousands of people are there, some singing, some laughing, some sorrowing, some playing, some eating,
some sleeping, some dancing, some standing and some remaining
bound.
11. In accordance with their actions, some are found big
and some small.
12. My limbs become languid and the mind becomes disturbed when I think further. Still, a divine feeling comes upon
me. So I shall tell you what I have seen and heard.
13. There is an important river named Puspodaka (flowery
water) full of all sorts of trees on the bank, but it is (alternately)
seen and not seen.
14. There are golden flights of stepsin it and it is full of
golden sand.
15. Its water is placid, cool and sweet-smelling. On its
banks are groves of flowering and fruit-bearing irees with numerous birds on them.

16. That great river flows there removing all sins. I saw
thousands of trees on its sides.
17. . The gods play in its water. The Gandharvas seem to be
singing Sàman there with their wives.
18. The Naga and Kinnara women sing and play there.
19. ‘Thousands of divine damsels play in this manner in the
water and in the mansions.
20. There are many trees whose branches bear fruits and
flowers at all times, and birds flock there to get what they need.
21. Beautiful women with lovely girdles provide delight to
men there to their heart's content.
22. They splash the water with their lovers and sweetly sing
with inebriation.
23. With the splashing of water and jingling of jewels, the
river appears to be decked with divine gems.
24. The great and auspicious river named Vaivasvati beautifully flows in the middle of the city, protecting it like a mother
her son.
25. Swans, white like the jasmine and the moon, gracefully
move about in its sands in the midst of the charming water.
26. With fine Cakravakas and lotuses with golden carpets
and with attractive golden flights of steps, it is very resplendent.
27. Its water is clear, pure, sweet-smelling and very tasty
like ambrosia. The trees in the forests on the banks are full of
flowers and fruits.
28. Inebriated beautiful women play in it as much as they
like but they never get weary.
29. It is worshipped by gods and sages. With its plentiful
water,it is like the weighty words of poets pregnant with
meaning.
30. There is an image of the river erected there, on. which
numerous people pour water (in reverence). The lofty rows of
buildings on the bank inspire wonder.
31. In the fine groves there women gather in large numbers
and sing playing instruments aad beating tàla.
32. "They provide great pleasure to the gods in heaven with
their fine voice mixed with the sound of the drum, the lute and
the flute.
33. "They never get satisfied with playing in the balconies
from where the wind wafts the scent of Agaru and sandal.

600 Varaha Purdna
34. Insome places the scent spreads in such an intense
manner as to block entry there, in some other places people
engage themselves with playthings, and in yet other places the
music of women fills the air.
35. Some play with their beloveds in golden pedestals.
Some play in the water with great delight.
36. The different items of beauty there cannot be recounted
even if we take a number of days for it.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND NINTYSEVEN
Yama and his associates
The sage’s son (Naciketas) said:
1-2. There isa hundred-tiered gateway in the north, ten.
yojanas in breadth and double that in length, with a fort on
the sides, shining prominently and so tall as to appear as a
scraping the sky.
3. It is highly lustrous and provided with several contrivances. This is the entrance for gods, sages and others (of their
category) who do good and virtuous deeds.
4. There is another gateway (on the east), white like a heap
of autumn clouds. It is the entrance for (ordinary) human beings
who have acquired merit.
5-6. Built of iron and highly hot is the gateway in the south,
terrific in appearance.
7. The son of the Sun (Yama) has assigned this entrance
for all sinners and killers.
8. Made of Udumbara and very much uneven is the
gateway in the west.
9. It always glows with fire and is difficult to look at. It
is meant for those that do bad and prohibited deeds.
10-11. In that beautiful city, there is a jewelled assembly hall
constructed by Yama.
12. Therein is the seat of justice occupied by saints who are
truthful and virtuous and free from anger, desire and attachment.

13. That is the assembly where justice is dispensed for the
righteous as well as sinful, for good as well as bad, according to
the store of result of the actions performed.
14. These judges decide the merit of actions according to
Sastra, taking their stand on dharma and without doubt, fear or
favour.
15. They consider matters from a universal point of view
according to Sastra and their observation.
16. All of them think well on the matter with full restraint
and in all seriousness.
17. (The judges are) Manu, Prajapati, Parasarya (Vyasa),
Atri, Auddalaki, Apastamba, Brhaspati, Sukra, Gautama,
18. Sankha, Likhita, Angiras, Bhrgu, Pulastya, Pulaha and
other law-givers.
19. Along with Yama they think of the justice to be dispensed. The divine as well as human among them are dispassionate.
20. Oneamong them stands out with kundala (on the ears),
angada (on the wrists) and mukuta (on the head) and heis the
effulgent Brahmadatta.
21. He is so brilliant in his appearance and speech that
he appears like the single embodiment of all the rest.
22. By his side stand the great divine sages steeped in Veda
and Vedanga.
23. They discuss the meaning of Veda, truth and dharma,
and also about Siksa, Chandas and other Sàstras.
24. They also discuss Nirukta, the Saman music, alchemy
and everything else pertaining to Veda.
25. I saw there in the palace of Dharmaraja sages and
manes reciting auspicious stories.
26. Near there, I saw one black in colour, with projecting
cheek, erect hair and uncouth form,
27. With face ugly, canines protruding, full of anger and
generating fear, holding a big cane in the left hand.
28. He is the eternal Kala who listens to Dharmaraja whenever ordered to execute punishment. There are others also there
to carry out such orders.
29. I saw there a resplendent female form worshipped by
Yama with celestial sandal and other unguents.
30. She is the destroyer of the worlds and there is nothing
beyond her.

602 Varáha Purāna
31. None has ever suggested any means to go beyond her.
The Asuras and even the sages are afraid of her.
32. She is worshipped by gods and demons and aiso by
yogins,
33. It is from her body that the oppressing ailments arise,
as also the dreadful diseases brought about by time.
34. I then saw the god of death who is fuil of valour, but
cruel and angry.
35. He is full of strength and lustre. Age and death do not
affect him,
36. Along with the god of death are many that sing and
laugh and excite life.
37. Some there glow with divine ornaments, chowries and
umbrellas.
38. Some I saw there installed in seats and worshipped.
39. In many places there I saw serious fevers and severe
pains in the form of men and women.
40. There were fierce women, the embodiments of desire
and anger, consuming life.
41. The sound of their conversation near Dharmaraja
seemed to break the carth.
42. (I saw there) Raksasas big and small who cat flesh,
some having both feet, but some single-footed, some with three
feet, some with many feet;
43. Some with both hands, but some with a single hand,
some with three hands and some with many hands; so too some
with small ears, and some with ears as big as elephants.
44. Some people were wearing many kinds of ornaments
like keyfira and mukuta.
45. Some had garlands and some anklets. Some were holding axe, some mace, some disc, some trident.
46. Some had spear, some javelin, some bow, some sword
and some club.
47. Some were bolding curd in hand, some sandal, some
varicties of food and some clothes.
48. Some were holding iacense and some different kinds of
garments.
49. 'There were palanquins and various vehicles to which
were yoked horses, elephants and swans.

50. There were $arabhas, bulls, elephants, peacocks, cranes,
cakravakas and horses. I saw all this. But there were fearful
things also.
51. While some were well dressed, some were shabbily
dressed. Some wore fresh silk and while some wore torn cloth,
Some spoke well while others were dumb. Some were out to kill
others.
52. Some were tawny and some black. Some were for
dharma and some for fame. These were in attendance on Yama.
53. So if the Brahmin performs the sacrifices, he will not
have any disappointment.
54. Those who deserve honour should be duly honoured.
When they get pleased, all good results.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND NINETYEIGHT
Torments in Hell
Naciketas said§
1. Yama, the god of the dead, gave me audience in his
assembly.
2. He duly honoured me with seat, padya and arghya according to Vedic rites.
3. He then asked me to sit in a golden seat on which wer
strewn darbha grass and flowers.
4. His face which is always terrific, became calm as I was
looking at it.
3. Due to his kindness for me, his reddish eycs soon became
gentle like lotus petals.
6. His attitude created confidence in me and I became glad.
7. Then issued from my mouth a hymn in his praise which
removes all sins, brings about all desires, confers fame and is
commended even by gods.
9. Yama, the great upholder of dharma, was pleased at this.
The sage's son (Naciketas) said:
9. O four-footed lord, the god of the manes, you are the
ordainer and sustainer of Sraddha. I bow to you.
10. O Dharmaraja, the great god of the dead, you are the

604 Varaha Purdna
knower of time, the knower of whatever that is done, and one
wedded to truth. I bow to you.
11. You are action and the actuator of action. You are the
lord of past, present and future. You are the purifier as well as
the stupefier. You are the essence as well as elaboration. O
uneven-eyed holder of rod and noose, 1 bow to you.
12. O you resplendent like the sun, the observer of the life
of all, black in complexion, indomitable, having the form of
sesamum oil, I bow to you.
13. You are lustrous like the sun, you are the carrier of offerings to gods as well as to the manes. You are a mighty lord. I
bow to you.
14. You are destroyer of sins, you stand in austerity, you
are ever the guardian of Sraddha, you are a great ascetic. With
one eye transformed into many you are Kàla and Death. I bow
to you.
15. Sometimes you appear with a rod, sometimes with a fully
shaven head, sometimes as the fearful Kala, sometimes as a boy,
sometimes as an old man, sometimes in a form that strikes terror,
I bow to you.
16. 'The world is controlled by you through dharma. You
see to this directly and, without you, dharma cannot be accomplished.
17. You are the god of gods, the penance among penances
and the japa among japas. In this I don't find anyone other than
you.
18-19. You never attempt to push down from here sages
without any relations or friends and chaste women in distress
engaged in penance.
20. So, among all gods, you are the greatest upholder of
dharma.
Vaifampàyana said:
21. Listening to this hymn uttered by the son of sage Uddalaka, Yama was extremely pleased.
Tama said:
22. I am delighted at your sweet hymn. May good befall
you. Tell me frankly what I may do for you.

23. O Brahmin, ask of me any boon you like, whether it be
prosperity or health or longevity.
The sage’s son (Nactketas) said:
24. “O great lord, I desire neither death nor life. If you,
who look after the welfare of all, are pleased with me and wish
to grant me a boon, then let me see this entire region of yours as
it is.
25. Ifyou are inclined to give me a boon, then show me the
whole thing so as to know what befalls the good people and what
befalls the sinners.
26-27. Show me also, O lord, Citragupta who considers on
your behalf what is to be meted out to whom according to the
particular action done by each."
28. When I said thus, he called the man at the door and
said “Take this Brahmin safely to Citragupta.
29. Tell him that he should treat him in a fitting manner
and do what he desires.”
30. Iwas then quickly led by that attendant to the presence
of Citragupta.
31. He rose up and, thinking for a while, welcomed me
saying ‘O great sage, make yourself quite at ease here’.
32. Telling me thus, he gave instructions to his fierce-looking servants who were remaining there with folded hands.
Citragupta said:
33. “Listen to me, O my devoted and dutiful servants,
34, With my permission, this Brahmin is going to the place
where the dead reside. He should be wel] concealed and carefully guarded.
35. He should not have anything to feel unhappy. He
should not have fatigue either from heat or from cold; nor should
he suffer for food or drink. I command you so.
36. This Brahmin who is full of compassion for all beings
and is following the wish of his father, has been granted such
a boon by me.
37. Let him see this city of Dharmaraja as much as he likes."
So saying he asked me to go and see it.
38. The attendants were asked to lead me there. (Going

606 Varáha Purana
there I saw) mighty beings running and chasing people and
beating, binding and burning them.
39. They break their bones by beating them again and again
with bamboo sticks and often with more heavy objects.
40. With broken bones and bruised heads, the people piteously cry aloud, but find none to help them.
41. In deep and dark abysses, many are scorched in fire and
also used as fuel for the fire.
42. Some fall in boiling oil, some in molten lime as the result
of their own evil deeds.
43. They are severely tortured again and again.
44, Some are put into machines and crushed like sesamum
and blood flows out profusely from them.
45. There is the horrible river Vaitarani with eddy and
foam, difficult to cross for sinful persons.
46. Hundreds of people are held by the feet, thrown over the
trident and then thrown into Vaitarani.
47. Hundreds ofpeople in their curdled blood are bitten by
numerous snakes.
48. When they sink in the river unable to cross it, whirlpools and ripples arise there in abundance.
49. The sinful people get parched there, sinking and
vomitting, but find none to save them.
50. Many are thrown over the deceptive Salmali tree, full
of metallic nails and severely beaten again and again with swords
and spears.
51. Isaw in its branches, a large number of goblins aud
demons furiously hanging down.
52. Those thrown over the tree move to the branches, being
unable to bear the pain of piercing nails.
53-54. The demons in the branches then pounce upon them
swiftly like monkeys in big trees and eat them up.
55. I could hear the crushing sound like that of a mleccha
eating fowl.
56-57. They cat them in their fierce mouths as if these were
ripe mango fruits and after sipping the marrow also, throw down
on the ground their skeletal form.
58. Those in the forests also are similarly handled.
59-60. The sinners standing below in large numbers implore

the servants of Yama to lcave them in mercy, but they are only
further tortured.
61. Hit by showers of stones and choked by clouds of dust,
many rush to the shade of the tree, only to find there scorching
fire.
62. They are then beaten up and thrown in blazing fire.
63. Many request these attendants to be pleased to give
them a pot of cold water.
64. But what is given to them is boiling water by drinking which they get scalded and cry aloud.
65. In their agony they fall down clasping one another.
So do many others becoming unconscious due to hunger.
66. But there is also sumptuous sweet-smelling food in heaps.
67. There is curd and milk, sesamum cakes and milky
soup, also honey and liquor.
68. There is fruit juice of various kinds and cool and fragrant
drinks.
69. There are also drinks mixed with milk, ghee or curd.
All these await the good souls going there.
70. We find there for them incense and fine sandal paste.
Everything is inviting and abundant.
71. For serving food for these souls there are handsome
women well ornamented.
72. They hold basketful of fruits in their hands and keep
flowers and water for pádya. They are graceful with jingling
anklets.
73. They serve food for thousands of them.
74. While these women honour the virtuous in this way,
the servants of Yama beat the sinners under their control, laugh
at them and say:
75. “O you ungrateful, avaricious, adulterous wretches,
76. Evil in mind, bad in action, reluctant to gifts, active
to speak ill of others, conversing only with sinners,
77. Shamelessly ready to ask from others. When you were
affluent on earth, you never gave anything, food, drink or fuel.
78. Therefore it is that all these torments are imposed on you.
79. When the effects of your misdeeds are over, you will be
released from here to be born again on earth in misery.
80. The sinners arc born in poor families in human world
with the sins adhering in them.

608 Varüha Purdna
81. But those that have lived an irreproachable life, particularly those belonging to the four castes, being truthful, peaceful
compassionate and virtuous,
82. Rest here for sometime with their followers, and then
go to the supreme abode or are born on earth again in a high
family,
83. Affluent, well ordered, full of beautiful women and then
attain supreme bliss."
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND NINETYNINE
Torments in Hell (Conid.)
The Sage’s son Naciketas said:
1. The entire ground there is strewn with iron nails and is
rugged and dark.
2. The sinners with their hands, feet and head bruised,
are not able to leave that place for long.
3. But only the sinners are thrown there. Those who are
devoted to dharma and have control of self, remain there as in
their homes.
4. Beautiful women wait upon them with sumptuous food
and cool drinks.
5. The sinners are thrown on hard and burning rocks.
6. They are shown places with trees and.as they run to go
there with feet and waist scorched,
7. The servants of Yama rush there and harass them. There
is none to save them from the torment.
8. Then there are others who are bitten by ferocious dogs
from head to foot and they cry aloud again and again.
9-10. In another place fierce beings with projecting canines,
pierce the sinful souls with needles and leave them without food
and water, when they are hungry and thirsty, for the sin incurred
by them in refusing these essentials to those in need.
Il. A cruel woman of a body of brandished steel embraces a
man and chases him when he runs away.

12. She tells him: “I am (the combined form of) your sister,
daughter-in-law,
13. Maternal aunt, paternal aunt, uncle's wife, preceptor's
wife, friend's wife, brother's wife, king's wife,
14. The wives of Vaidikas and Brahmins, all of whom you
have molested. You cannot escape from me even if you go to the
nether world.
15. For the wrong you have done, I am going to thrash you.
O shameless man, why do you try to run away?"
16. She chases him again and tells him repeatedly:
17. “Even if born among thousands of learned men, a sinner
is tormented in this manner,
18. I, therefore, a low woman, embrace you. Why do you
cry ?
19. When I lead you like this, don't you feel ashamed to
entreat me with folded hands?
20. Why do you try to get away ? wherever you go in this
abode of Yama, I will pursue you, as you have outraged the
modesty of another's wife."
21. (Inanother place) people are beaten with iron rods like
cowherds beating the kine with sticks.
22. Some are bitten by tigers, lions, jackals, donkeys and
dogs and some pecked by crows.
23. ‘There is a grove of palms of swords enveloped by flames
and fumes, resembling a conflagration and glowing all around.
24. The sinners are thrown there by Yama's men and scorched.
25. When they run from there to the trees in the grove of
palms of swords, they are cut again and again.
26. Thus dragged and burnt and mutilated, they cry aloud.
27. The noble souls that stand at the entrance to the grove
of palms of swords, chastise the sinners.
28. “O you sinners who have destroyed the bridge of dharma
for that very reason you have to undergo torments in thousands.
29. After all this, if at all you are born as human beings,
it will be in extremely poor families and you will always be in
misery."
30. (Inanother place) there are birds resembling tongues of
fire and raising loud cries. Their bcaks are of iron.

610 Varaha Purdra
31. These as well as carnivorous animals like tigers and wild
dogs angrily bite the sinners.
32-33. I saw the mighty servants of Yama throwing many
persons in this grove of palms of swords which is full of tigers
and bears and innumerable worms and ants.
34. Some were bruised by swords and others pierced by
tridents.
35. There were thousands of wells, pools, ponds, lakes and
rivers, all of blood.
36. O great sages, I saw also places full of marrow, flesh and
faeces.
37. In them were put numerous sinners who have not only
to put up with their foul smell, but also to dip themselves in them
again and again.
38. Cranes from above make showers of blood, bones and
stones upon them.
39. I could hear the pitiable cries of those who were floating
in them or running out of them and they were bound and beaten
again.
40. Their wailings filled the entire place.
41. Bound in some places, blocked in others, struck in yet
others and thrown up in still others, their pitiable cries could be
heard everywhere.
42. I saw certain other things in certain other places, the
very thought of which will make one shudder.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED
Torments in Hell (Conid.)
The Sage’s son (Naciketas) said:
1-2. There are eight hells where the sinners are tormented,
namely, Tapta, Mahatapta, Raurava, Maharaurava, Saptatala,
Kalasitra, Andhakara and Andhakaravara.
3-4. They are first taken to the first, then to the second where
the duration is twice, from there to the third where the duration
is thrice, from there to the fourth where the duration is four

times, then to the fifth where the duration is five times, then to
the sixth where the duration is six times, then to the seventh
where the duration is seven times and then to the eighth where
the duration is eight times.
5. The dead go there in the course ofa single day and night
and for those of them afflicted by sin, there is only misery and
more misery.
6. There is only misery there and no pleasure. The misery
goes on increasing. There is no means at all there to get even a
little happiness.
7. Man, after death, is left there. There are no killers there,
but he never gets pleasure through any of the senses— sound,
touch, colour, taste or smell.
8. He never gets pleasure, physical or mental. All that is
there is sorrow lone.
9. The earth there is full of hot and sharp iron nails and the
Sky is covered with flocks of birds with fiery tongues.
10. Hunger is there much, so too thirst. But what is hot is
too hot and what is cold is too cold (to eat or drink).
li. When one wishes to drink water, one is taken by the
Raksasas to a pond having lotus and lilies and swans and cranes.
12. But on reaching there in all eagerness, one finds the
water boiling hct.
13. The Raksasas then bring cooked meat, but throw it ina
pond of brackish water.
14. (When one enters the pond for taking it) one is bitten
by the numerous fish there.
15. Atthe end of the assigned period, when one tries to run
away, one gets the body fleshy for being tormented again.
16. Whether sitting at the top or leaving or running, serious
torment is absolutely certain.
17. There is the abominable Kumbhipaka which is a
deep pit of dung shaped like a lotus leaf.
18. The Raksasas thrash the sinners there biting their lips
in anger and exclaiming aloud.
19. There is a forest of swords and another of red lead. The
latter is strewn with red hot sand.
20. "There the sinners are burnt, cut, struck, hit, thrashed,
dragged and dismembered.

612 Varáha Purana
21. Black and spotted dogs bite them, so too do serpents and
scorpions.
22. There is the deceptive Salmali tree with its numerous
projecting thorns. They are dragged there till the body is left
with bones alone.
23. All the torment and adversity for the sinner arise soon.
24, When he wants coolness, he gets heat and when he wants
warmth he gets coldness. When he desires pleasure, what he gets
is sorrow. Pleasure he never can have.
25. He always receives injuries in thousands all over his
body and at all times.
26. A furious river full of ferocious animals, has to be crossed.
27. This is named Karambhavaluka. It is a hundred yojanas
in length and is like blazing fire.
28. Then there is the big river Vaitarani of bitter water,
fifty yojanas long and five yojanas deep.
29. It is deep in mud and is full of skin, flesh and bones.
"There are in it big scorpions with sharp teeth.
30. ‘There are owls as big as bows and ferocious and poisonous with tongues sharp enough to break bones.
31. Somehow crossing this river of deep mud, some manage
to reach the empty and supportless abodes there,
32. Where, however, they are devoured by numerous rats
leaving but the skeleton.
33. But in the morning the body gets flesh again as soon as
the wind wafts over it.
34. Then there is a mango-grove where ferocious birds feed
on the man eating up all his skin and flesh and veins, eyes and
years.
35. On the south, at a distance of three yojanas, is a banyan
tree which glows always like an evening cloud.
36. There is a big fire-place ca'led Yamaculli, ten yojanas
deep.
37. It always burns and is ever blinding with its smoke.
38. Thousands of dead are thrown into it incessantly by
the Ráksasas, servants of Yama. In this fire-place they are to
remain for a month.
39. Then there is the river called Sakunika which is full of
fat and morrow.

40. This proceeds from the interior of the Yamaculli. On
crossing this, there are seven kinds of torments to be undergone.
4l. Every one of these is extremely painful, but the sinner
has to go through them in their order.
42. There are ten Silas and thirteen Kumbhipakas where
one whole day and night should be spent.
43. The merciless and fearful Raksasas hold the sinners in
tridents and bake them over glowing cinders.
44. They are then held head down-wards over clouds of
choking smoke and then fried in hot oil in big vessels.
45. They are then held over the fire of burning marrow in
a pit of dried cowdung. This is done for ten days in each.
46. When these seven kinds of torments are over, they are
taken to the river ‘Yama’ at a distance of three yojanas wherein flows molten lead.
47. Crossing it with burnt body and completely unconscious,
they get rest there for a while.
48. They see a beautiful pond with cool water and shady
trees around. They get there whatever they want, because this
is the sister of Yama.
49. All the sinners get food and drink there, but all this is
forgotten after spending three days there.
50. Then there is the mountain called Sülagraha which
extends over a hundred yojanas. It is constituted of a single rock
and no being lives in it.
51. The clouds shower hot water on it and people traverse
it with difficulty in the course of a day.
52. There is the Spngataka forest which is full of biting black
flies.
53. "The bite of these flies transforms one into a worm. One
has to face there showers of flesh and blood.
54-55. ‘Traversing this, the sinner goes to another place of
torment where he sees his sons, mother, father, wife and other
‘dear ones. But he is bound and can only helplessly cry.
56. “O son, save me, save me," he cries, but what he gets
then is beatings with clubs, rods and bamboo sticks, knocks with
the fist, blows with whips and bitings by snakes.
57. Unable to bear all this pain, he swoons.
58. The sinners get here this sort of treatment again and
again.

614 Varaha Purana
59. Those who commit the five heinous sins, necessarily
reach this place.
60. When the punishments for these sins are undergone,
one becomes a stationary being.
61. After a period in that form, the dead man is born as an
animal.
62. But this is after his life in hell for sixty thousand and
sixty hundred years.
63. When the effects of his actions are over, he becomes a
being born of sweat and undergoes all its life-process.
64. He then takes birth as a bird, then as a cow and afterwards as a man.
65. Among men he is first born asa Sidra and after a proper
life as a Sidra, takes birth as a Vai$ya endowed with the result
of all actions.
66. After his life as a Vaisya, he is born as a Ksatriya and.
after that as a Brahmana.
67. If, after taking birth as a Brahmana, he commits sins.
again and debases himself with evil mind and self-ruinous actions,
he gets afflictions physical and mental.
68. As a result of his actions, he develops a tendency to
Brahminicide, becomes a leper, squint-eyed and crow-voiced.
69. Hegets protruding teeth, develops foul odour in his body
and gets a bent of mind to drink liquor, kill the parents and
murder the king.
70. He also becomes a stealer of gold, and, in short, one
similar to a killer of Brahmin.
71. In another place in hell, I could see sinners badly mutilated as a result of their own actions, and blood flowing everywhere.
72. The whole place is full of such people who groan again
and again.
73. There frequently arise cries of those who are bound in
various ways and beaten.
74. 'They are tormented by beatings with iron rods and pricking weapons.
75. This is done till those engaged in this get tired.
76. When they are thus tired, they make a report to Citragupta.

CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND ONE
Fight between Raksasas and Yama’s men
The Sage’s son (Naciketas) said:
1. Then Yama’s men of different forms gathered together
and went to Citragupta with folded hands.
The men said:
2. ''We have become weak and tired (by this work in which
we are now engaged). So please entrust this work to others.
We shall do some other work, however difficult it may be.
3. Save us, O Lord. Please see how much wearied we are.
Others will do this work to your satisfaction.”
4. Enraged at these words, Citragupta heaved a sigh like
à serpent and looked all around with eyes red with anger.
5. His eyes fell on an uncouth figure standing not far from
him and immediately that person came near him.
6. The angry Citragupta sent him on an errand. He was
the Raksasa named Mandeha! and he departed immediately.
7. He went to the giant Raksasas who were in various
forms, wearing many ornaments and standing ready to bring
about any kind of destruction.
8. They were the persons meant to be brought there by Citragupta who looks at all beings alike.
9. Then those cannibalic Raksasas having numerous forms
mounted elephants and horses,
10. Donned armour and gloves, took their weapons and led
by their servants, bowed at his feet.
Il. Awaiting his order in great joy, they said, “O Lord,
tell us what we should do. We are here to carry out your orders.
Whose life should we cut ?”
12. Hearing their words, Citragupta said choked with anger,
heaving again and again.
13. *O you warriors, Mandehas, who always do what I
wish, bind these (my men) and bring them here.
14. You are all highly valiant and you are the annihilators
of all beings. Bring these that disobey me, wounded or bound."
1. The chief of the group of demons called Mandehas.

616 Varáha Purána
15. Hearing these words, they said:
The Raksasas said:
16. ‘‘Wearied, hungry or sorrowful sages, should be considered as ministers, so too the thousands of servants.
17. 'They are ordered to be killed by your great self. It
is not proper that they should become the source of our destruction.
18. Just as they have arisen thinking of dharma, so too are
we. You are also for the same purpose.
19. Let there be no false resolve for one remaining in dharma.
If you are pleased, give up this idea of our fight.
20. Protect us from those mighty servants who will be struck
by us Raksasas in the battle-field.”
21. "Then fierce diseases with forms at their will soon came
ready tbere.
22. Some came on elephants, some on horses, some in chariots, some on swans and some on lions.
23. Others came on deer, jackals, buffaloes, tigers, asses
and goats, also on vultures, eagles, peacocks, cocks and serpents.
24. In vehicles in this manner, armed with numerous weapons and mutually challenging, they all appeared there.
25. The warriors on either side, in their eagerness to gain
victory, brandished their weapons and raised shouts which seemed to make the earth shudder.
26-27. "Then started the battle, and in its darkness shone
the crowns, bangles and ear-rings all over the place.
28-29. The battle became exciting and frightful with clashing tridents, spears, swords, clubs and other weapons.
30. Hand to hand fight was followed by each dragging the
other by the hair and thus swelled the battle.
31. The Raksasas were vanquished by the valiant men of
Yama and Loud utterances like ‘give, give’, ‘strike’, ‘hold’,
‘stand’ etc. could be heard.
32. Those who were fleeing were caught hold of and challenged by their opposites with eyes red with rage.
33. “Wait, Wait, where do you go?” “I am not going, be
assured." “I have released this weapon to destroy your
body".

34. “O fool, you have not released any weapon to injure
me." “I have aimed these arrows. Receive them. Why do you
run ??
35. “What do you say, O wicked man ? I am an adept in
battle. Tell me whether you can live facing this weapon which
I release."
36. The Mandeha Raksasas soon came to be caught in
their thousands.
37. Then they resorted to magical means as they could
assume any form at will.
38. Their army became covered with darkness and they
could be visible as well as invisible. Then Yama's men resorted
to Jvara, the fierce fever, for help.
39. He was uneven-eyed, held the trident in his hand and
was the destroyer of all beings.
40. “Ordered by Citragupta, the Raksasas called Mandehas are killing and eating us. They are in the form of a thousand
ailments and we are as ourselves. O Lord of the worlds, protect
us."
41. Hearing these words of Yama's men, the black, squinteyed Jvara holding the iron rod in his hand, became angry.
42. He then called a large number of his mighty soldiers
who were shining like fire. They stood before him with folded
hands. He commanded them:
43. “Burn these Raksasas by your physical strength as well
as yogic power”.
44. At this command of Jvara, they rushed to the place of
these Ràksasas shouting like thunder.
45. They struck with their numerous weapons the haughty
Raksasas in large number.
46. ‘They became seriously wounded and drenched in blood.
47. Yama himself then interceded, stopped the battle and
saved the Raksasas who were being thus killed.
48. He then went to Jvara in all humility, honoured him
holding his hand and pacified him.
49. He led him into his house and wiped off the sweat on
his face.
50. After he had calmed down, Yama said, “O lord, you
are full of penance and you pervade everywhere. But what have
you done?

618 Vardha Purana
51. You are worshipped by the whole world. O lord, you
and I control this whole world as we should, as we have seen
and heard.
52-53. I am to be received by you when my end comes,
although I am the annihilator of all beings. So be pleased to go
to your abode and to put an end to this battle.
54. The six crores of Raksasas will be revived and they will
become decayless but will not go to you."
55. Thus bringing the war to a close, Yama restored friendship between Citragupta and his men.
56. They then requested Citragupta to allot them their
duties as before regarding the good and the bad the mortals
acquire.
57. Then they went to Rudra by the side of Citragupta and
bowing to him, said:
58-59. “As the worlds, as the king and as Death, O lord,
rise-up. Forgive us, forgive us."
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND TWO
Punishment according io deeds
The sage (.Naciketas) said:
1. I was wonderstruck at the instructions given by the wise
Yama to Citragupta.
2. Those who have swerved from the righteous path have
to take the consequences. Some are scorched in fire and some
severcly bound. T'hey are tortured as theresult of their own deeds.
3-4. (Yama says): “Take him away soon, this sinner who
has done bad deeds, who is ungrateful and who is of wicked
mind. Let him be devoured by pouncing dogs.
5. Take him who has the sin of killing the father, mother
or cow, to the deceptive Salmali tree and let the sharp thorns
in it pierce him.
1. This shows that the Jvara was the manifestation of Rudra.

6. Fry him in oil or in decomposed ghee and then from the
hot vessel throw him in a hot copper plate.
7. Then throw him in burning fire. He will be then born
as a man and will face the torments of debts.
8. Throw the man, who has stolen a bed or seat or set fire,
quickly into Vaitarani.
9. For the man who defiled holy places for bath is this pike
fresh. from fire.
10. Pierce the ears of him who has given false evidence or
:uttered falsehood otherwise.
11. Bind the Brahmin who has performed sacrifice for the
‘village, who has been unsteady in mind or boastful or obstinate,
and give him nothing.
12. Cut off the tongue of the man who has offended any one
by his words.
13. Cut off the generative organ of the man who has committed adultery whether without knowing it or deliberately out of
lust, and then apply lime and also heat.
14. Yoke him to the mortar who has ruined his coparceners
out of selfishness.
15. Thrash this usurer all over his body for the great sin
-he has committed.
16. The stealer of gold and the ungrateful man should be
-equated with the person who has killed a Brahmin.
17. Cut his bones and apply lime and fire. Let five ferocious
‘tigers tear him with their sharp teeth.
18. Put him in boiling slime who has failed to maintain fire
or given it up altogether.
19. Give him to the fierce scorpions for he has incurred the
sin of killing a hero.
20. Throw him who performed sacrifices for all into the
-deep pond. Let him carry water to all kinds of beasts.
21. Let there be none to help him or give him anything.
22. Letthose who performed vows without gifts, those who
sold Veda and those that did all kinds of ritual not be given anything.
23. Let him who took away the water-vessel and prohibited
-any one from food, be beaten with strong rods.
24. He should be beaten with bamboo sticks, whips and iron
‘rods. He should not be given food or water.

620 Varāha Purana
25. Burn him in fire who failed to keep the confidence reposed in him.
26. Put him in fire for thousands of years who has committed
theft of a Brahmin’s wealth.
27. Afterwards send him to be born as an animal. Let his
minute body then enter different kinds of worms and birds.
28. After thousands cf such lives, let him be born as a man
again and again in various families, but always as a wicked person.
29. The man who has killed a Brahmin should be oppressed
to the maximum; so too the murderer of the king, the stealer of
gold and the drinker of alcohol.
30. Then he should be afflicted with consumption.
31. Let this man who has killed a cow be made to climb up
the deceptive Salmali tree. Let him be dragged by the Raksasas.
32. Let him be then put in the hell Pütipàka and bitten by
beasts. Toa period one-fourth of that for Brahminicide, heshould
remain born as a beast.
33. He should be condemned wherever he goes and he is to
be born again and again doing sinful things.
34. This man is wicked. He has incurred the sin of killing
his father. Let him be bitten by the beasts for a hundred years.
35. Let him then be put in different hells. Let him become
a human being again, but die even while in womb.
36. Let him be thus in ten wombs and then released to be
born as a man but full of misery. Let him suffer due to hunger
and diseases.
37-38. Let him who has betrayed his friend be quickly
crushed in machine and put in fire for two hundred years.
39. Let him be born as a dog and afterwards as a man full
of misery, discarded by all and suffering ailments.
40. This man has stolen salt and also what belonged to the
Brahmin.
41. Let him be put here for five hundred years. Then he
will be born as a worm in faeces. He will then take birth as a
bird and afterwards as a pig.
42. Let this man who used to set fire (to useful things) be
put in this fire of burning wood.
43. When the effect of his actions is over, he will be born
as an animal and then as a man full of misery.

44-45. Those who jointly persuade one for bad deeds and
those that steal the wealth of others, are to be put in the hell
Raurava.
46. And he who does bad instigated thus is to be tortured
in Kumbhipaka. He is to be born as an ass and later as a pig
eating filth.
47. He who commits theft of wealth should undergo severe
suffering. He will be born as an ass ten times.
48. Then taking birth as a human being, he will be a thief
and incur all sorts of sins harassing others. Then he will be born
as a being hanging head downwards from a tree.
49. Let the greedy miser be burnt in fire.
50. He is to be released only after a hundred years.
51. He will be born as a pig and then as an ichneumon and
finally as a human being again.
52. The man who gives false evidence and is wedded to
falsehood, never gets peace anywhere, being condemned by his
own actions.
53. Let this liar who has appropriated for himself the field
of another, suffer here as long as the result of his actions
persists in him.
54. Let him suffer for his actions one after another. That
will be, no doubt, for a lakh of years.
55. Let him then be born as various animals and later as a
man without anything to appease his hunger.
56. He will be full of sins and his desires will never be fulfilled. He will be born blind or deaf.
57. He will be born sometimes dumb, sometimes blind and
sometimes full of diseases. He will, thus, have only suffering and
never happiness.
58. He who misappropriates the field, even after a. thousand
lives as various beings, never attains pcace.
59. Let him who takes for himself another's land, although
distressed by his own mental anguish, be bound well and burnt
in fire.
60. After a long period in that manner in my world, let him
be born as a cat.
61. Let his hunger be never appeased and let him continue
to be kept bound. Let him be born as fifty kinds of animals.

622 Varáha Purana
62. Let this man who is guilty of killing birds, be bitten by
dogs and vultures.
63. Let him then become a cock eating filth and afterwards
as a fly and mosquito. After a thousand of such lives, let him
become a man again.
64. Let this sinner who has killed pigs be hit by buffaloes.
65. Let him be thus hit and smashed by the hoofs and horns
for a thousand years.
66. Released from there, let him become a pig, then a buffalo and later a cock, a hare and a jackal.
67. In all these lives he will be a prey. There is no other
way to mitigate his actions.
68. Then he will become a man, but as a hunter. There is
no other way even after a hundred lives.
69. Put in glowing cinders for three hundred years this man
‘who has given to others food left after his eating.
70. Let this bad adulterous woman, who was unfaithful to
her husband, embrace these seven men of iron.
71. She will then become a dog, afterwards a pig and, when
the result of her actions is over, a distressed woman. She will
never attain happiness.
72. This man made his servants toil very much and then
sent them away without giving them any food or drink.
73. He was only fond of his own glorification.
74. Let him, therefore, be put in the terrific hell Raurava.
75. Beat the man who performs all sorts of actions for thousands of years.
76. Let him then be born as a robber and afterwards as a
serpent.
77. Lethim then bea pig, and then a goat, then an elephant,
a horse, a jackal and crane.
78. After a very long time, let him become a man.
79. He is to be born dead in five lives and die as a boy in
five others.
80. Only afterwards does he become a man.
81. Whatever good or bad a being has done, the result of
that necessarily accrues to it.
82. So it is that the great Lord has laid down the results of
all actions."

CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND THREE
Sins and punishment for them
The Sage’s son (Naciketas) said:
I. Citragupta (himself) spoke about other miscellaneous
sins (and their punishments). Listen to them.
2. Those who do not have good conduct and self-control
and have great sins in them, and who die (as a consequence) in
the dark half of the month, face punishment.
3. Those who incur the displeasure of the king or the teacher
are all condemned. They care only for their sustenance and they
are not dependable or affable.
4. Those who delight in injuring others, who are cruel,
deceitful, obstruct others in their work, kill the gayal, buffalo
and goat,
5. Those that set fire to the forest and those that trade on
pigs are tormented in hell for a long time.
6. When this period is over, they are born again, but will
be short-lived and disease-stricken.
7. Sometimes they are dead even when in womb, sometimes.
in boyhood or a little later.
8. They may die by accident like the fall of a log of wood
or by weapon or may be blown away by a stormy wind or burnt
by fire. They may meet with death also by drowning or being
caught in a net or by a fall or by poison.
9. Those who have the sin of killing mother, father, friend or
relation, repeatedly face punishment as long as life-breath remains in them.
10. Dishonest traders in metals and jewels, those who bring
about abortions, magicians, dealers in poison, those who indulge
in arson,
11. Makers of cages, hitters with the trident, tale-bearers,
those who pick up quarrels, or make baseless allegations against
others,
12. Dealers in the flesh and hides of cattle, elephants, asses
and camels and those that unnecessarily provoke others are all
harassed in hells.
13. After these terrible torments, they take birth as human
beings again,

624 Varaha Purana
14. But with mutilated limbs and immersed in misery.
15. Because of their actions, they meet with injuries in the
ear, nose, hands and feet.
16. They get physical ailments as well as mental. They
suffer pain in the neck, severe headache and serious stomach
disorders.
17. They become stupid, blind, deaf, dumb and lame, often
creeping with their legs.
18. They may become paralytic, dwarfish, limping, potbellied and disfigured.
19. Their bad actions bring upon them leprosy of various
kinds, hernia, hydrocele and diabetes,
20. Ophthalmic disorders, venereal diseases, asthma, hearttrouble and diseases of stomach and spleen.
21. They become, thus, afflicted by numerous diseases.
These people who have committed cruelty are asked to be
severely beaten.
22. Messengers who deliver the false message are ordered to
be duly dealt with.
23. Those who are harsh towards women, whose talk is of
four kinds, namely, false, offensive, ironical and treacherous,
24. Or provocative, stinging, contemptible, unfriendly,
harsh, inconsistent,
25. Or trifling like the pith of the plantain, or wounding,
26. Grating, meaningless, ceaselessly chattering, incoherent,
27. Who speak false and defamatory words obstinately,
shameless even when condemned and still utter words stinging to
the quick,
28. Who do not tolerate the virtues of others being extolled,
all such base persons are ordered to be well bound and punished.
29. They are then born several times as beasts, worms and
birds.
30. People who have done harm to others or caused harm
by others are also punished for their sins for a long time.
31. When the effects of their deeds are over, they again become born as men but without proper knowledge or ability and
are insulted by their own kith and kin.
32. They will be given up even by their friends and relations as they have done harm to the world and are disliked by
the world.

33. Even the sins of others fall on their heads in the form
of lightning, weapon, poison or physical clash with another.
Such is the punishment for blabberers.
34. Those who are corrupt with regard to matters of theft,
violence and justice,
35. Who steal or rob, who live upon taxes and pretending
to be rulers,
36. Who harass the poor in the villages, who cheat people
of gold, gems or pearls,
37. Who do not honour agreements, who oppress people,
who are clever in accomplishing selfish aims,
38. Who engage themselves in unnecessary litigation, who
destroy minerals to make silver,
39. Who appropriate for themselves what is deposited with
them, or perform sorcery, all these are tortured in various hells.
40. ‘These sinners are ordered to be put in these hells for a
long time.
41. At the expiry of the result of their actions, they are
born as human beings again,
42. But in places which always instil great fear, fear from
thieves, kings, dangers, diseases and hunger,
43. Where there will be natural calamities and the people
ever greedy.
44. They will be full of sorrow even while in womb and,
when born, they may be deformed, single-handed or potbellied,
45. With veins protruding all over the body and rheumatic.
"Their wives will always shed tears and never associate with
them.
46. "Their children will never be well-formed. They will be
dwarfish and deformed and with unsteady eyes.
47. In their miserable life they may raise horrible cries, but
in vain. They will get only food that is left by others.
48. Being inferior in appearance, strength and conduct,
they may become royal servants of the lowest category.
49. But they will be homeless, full of misery.
50. They are cared not even for a straw even by friends and
relations in the same caste. They incur royal punishment every
day.
51. They are simply disappointed even when big ceremonies
are performed.

626 Varüha Purànc.
52. Ifthey turn to farming, cattle rearing or trade, whatever
they do results in failure, and they fail to know why it is so.
53. Whatever bad befalls that place, these sufferers will bc
the most affected.
54. Their fields will not get rainfall, even when there is
heavy rain everywhere else; on the contrary they mav be
damaged by lightning fall.
55. These people never get happiness, but always great
misery. Only a series of sorrows comes upon these who have the
sin of stealing.
56. Now listen to the torments for people who set their
minds on the wives of others.
57. They will be born as animals and will be of unsteady
mind.
58. Those who do adultery will be caught firm and suitably
dealt with.
59-60. Know now what happens to those who outrage the
modesty of noble women, either by force or otherwise, by sorcery
or in a political turmoil, as also to those who defile rules of Classes
and bring about contamination of castes, or molest virtuous perSons.
61. They are put in the terrible hell for thousands of years.
62. Then they are born as human beings but low in families
of contaminated castes.
63. Those who resort to prostitutes, sorcerers or dealers in
liquor and have sexual alliance with bad and outcaste women,
although shamelessly wearing the caste-mark and pretending
gentlemanliness,
64. Those who kidnap women and ruin them, those who
sport with them, put on their dress,
65. Those who live upon women, depend on their earnings,
worshipping their deities, following their rules, wearing their
garments and speaking like them,
66. Adopting their ways and always speaking about them.
67. Becoming addicted to pleasures and having a repulsive
look,
68. Get physical and mental distress in abundance.
69. ‘They are bathed in boiling oil and are fed upon by
worms. They are burnt in fire, soaked in lime and thrown in the
river.

70. This is what happens to those who have their minds on
the wives of others. I have thus told you all this.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND FOUR
Instructions to Messengers
The Sages son (JVaciketas) said:
1. O great Brahmins, I also heard these instructions given
by Citragupta to his men.
2. “Do you say that this one is far away, and his actions
have not come to a close ? Why do you take pity on him ? Bring
him here. Don't be sorry.
3. Why ao you remain indifferent with a shy face? Why
don't you hasten ? What have you been doing all this time ?
4. Go, go, bring him here soon. That you are weak should
not make you insolent.
5. Do you say that his marriage is going on, or that he is an
ascetic ?
6. Do you say that we should wait for some time, or that he
is remaining with his wife ?
7. Do you say that she is a chaste and good woman ? Do you
say that he is a boy and has returned home only last night ?
8. Do you say that the man is sitting for his food, or is lying
in water, or is giving a gift ?
9. O you are all virtuous and I alone am cruel ! Go, go, do
your duty without any loss of time.
10. You soon become a snake, you become a tiger, you a
python, you a crocodile and you a poisonous worm.
11. You become a disease and hold him who is to go to hell,
You become diarrhoea and you vomitting.
12. You become ear-ache, you cholera, you high fever.
13. You become rheumatism, you dropsy, you epilepsy,
you insanity,
14. You become vertigo and you paralysis and do your work.
15. You remain like this as long as necessary. At the end

628 Varáha Purdna
of the period or when good befalls otherwise, you will be relieved
from this.
16. So go away quickly. Don't tarry.
17. What I have told you is the order of Yama. May be
that you have to spend only one day like this, may be it is two.
18. May be it is three, four, six, ten or a fortnight, a month,
even many months.
19. After due time, you will get relief. It is true that this is
difficult.
20. Butas ong as I have to discharge my duty, you too have
to discharge yours.
21. I have instructed you according to my direction. You
have to obey my orders irrespective of whether the person concerned is alert or deluded.
22. I shall give you protection from Brahmins. So don't
hesitate to do your duty, let it be a sage, a woman or a mighty
man.
23. Don't be afraid of any trouble. It is my command.
24. Do as I have asked you without any delay."
25. The great Citragupta ordered them thus.
26. His command was like that of Rudra, Indra and
Brahma.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND FIVE
Good and bad results
The sage’s son (.Naciketas) said:
1. O great Brahmins, I shall now tell you what Yama and
Citragupta spoke. Listen.
2. “Let this man return to worldly life, let this one go to the
heaven of kings. Let this one become a tree, this one an animal
and let this one ‘get final release.
3. Let this one become a serpent and let this one attain
supreme beatitude.
4. Let this man see his ancestors who are suffering, crying

and asking for help again and again, but condemned to eternal
hell because of their own sins.
5. Let this man who was unrighteous, gave up his wife and
is without sons and grandsons, be put in the Raurava hell and
‘smashed by mighty hands.
6. Release these who have been brought here and those who
are being brought, because they are all sinless.
7. In prosperity as well as in adversity these people have
upheld dharma.
8. Let them remain happy in heaven for many kalpas and,
after enjoying there very beautiful women, be born again as men
in Kali age.
9. Let this man have permanent residence in heaven as he
died fighting an enemy in battle.
10. Anyone who has staked his life for the sake of a Brahmin,
à cow or for the nation, should be immediately taken to Amaravati, the city of Indra. He will remain there for one kalpa riding
jn the aerial car.
11. This man was a highly righteous person always steeped
in dharma, giving numerous gifts and compassionate to all.
12. Honour him quickly with sandalpaste and garlands.
13. Let him be thus honoured and fanned with chowries
and then given a chariot,
14. So that he can leave this place of the dead and go to
heaven where he will have a place even above Indra.
15. He will be received there with the sound of conchs and
words of welcome.
16. Let this one also go to Indra’s world, since the whole
world is full of his fame.
17. Indra awaits him there for his hundreds of virtues.
He will remain in heaven like Indra himself.
18. He enjoys the pleasures of heaven till the expiry of his
dharma and then he takes birth as a man and enjoys all pleasures.
19. Take this virtuous man, who is full of dharma and who
has made gifts of even gems, to the world of Asvinidevas full of
pleasure.
20. Let this great man go to the great lord Rudra, as he has
given numerous milch cows to Brahmins,
21. And given to them good food in abundance.

630 Varáha Purane
22. He remains there for one kalpa injoying the beautiful
Rudra women.
23. By this person were given to Brahmins honey with sugarcandy and tasty food with good flavour,
24. And good milch cows together with calves, gold and
golden garments.
25. Ihave seen three crore entries for him in heaven. And
after his life in heaven, he will be born in a family of sages.
26. Let him who has made gifts of gold be reported to Devas,
and after their approval, betaken to Lord Rudra.
27. Let him in all effulgence enjoy there as he likes.
28. Let him who propitiates his ancestors be with them and
let those who are liberal givers go to heaven.
29. 'This man was compassionate to all and fulfilling the
desires of all and he should be honoured here by granting him
whatever he desires.
30. Let this man who has made gifts of land to Brahmins go
to heaven. Let him remain with his followers in the world of
Brahma.
31. Let him with all his desires fulfilled, get the unaging
and eternal place, honoured by sages.”
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND SIX
The Result of good actions
The Rsi (Nactketas) said:
1. O great ascetic Brahmins, I shall tell you about the instructions given by Citragupta, as I heard them. Please listen.
2. “This is a highly compassionate and forbearing man who:
takes all as his guests and gives all of them alike good food and
eats only what is left after that.
3. Leave him, leave him. That is the dictate of Dharma.
4. I stand here with Kala and Mrtyu and I am flanked by
the disfigured sinners.
5. But this man is sung in the sky by Gandharvas and Apsa-

rases. So give him a divine seat and a vehicle and whatever else
he may wish.
6. And all this should be given without any delay. Such
is the command of Yama because he has given numerous gifts
without any ostentation.
7. See to it that this person is fed well with his followers
because he is a hero.
8. Let him remain here till the aerial cars arrive from
heaven. He may then board them with his retinue and go to
the abode of gods and receive their honour.
9. Let him remain happy there as long as the worlds last.
10. One who goes there like this is really gratified and remains there in all purity.
11. Honour him with carrying out all that he wishes, who
has given several girls in marriage or performed several sacrifices and let him attaiu the abode of Visnu.
12. Lethim remain there for a hundred thousand years and
then be born in a high family in the human world.
13. Honour this man who is full of compassion for all.
Let him remain like a god for a million years. He will then be
born as a highly honoured man in the world.
14. Honour him well who has made gifts of sandals, umbrellas and vessels for water several times.
15. Let him extend his soft and cool hand in assemblies
where thousands gather,
16. And be an ever happy Vidyadhara attended on by four
Mahapadmas.t
17. At the end of this period, let him be born in the world
in a family full of beautiful women.
18. Let him who has given milk, curd and ghee to Brahmins
be honoured when he comes here.
19-20. Get for him without fail vessels in thousands of milk
and its products so that he may enjoy them together with his
relatives.
21-22. Let him then go to the enviable Goloka and enjoy
there for hundreds of years as a god attended on by several beautiful women."
1. These are embodiments of treasures.

632 Agni Purdna
23-24. Citragupta said this also, “(The cows) move about
in the world bearing ambrosia (in the form of milk). They combine in them all gods and goddesses and also the Vedas. They
are the best of all tirthas.
25. They are the holiest of holy and the most nourishing
among nourishments. Therefore the gift of cows should be
made for getting purity.
26. By offering once curds, all the gods are pleased; by milk,
Siva is pleased; by ghee, Agni is pleased; by milk-pudding Brahmà is pleased.
27. By offering this for thirteen years and by taking them
oneself, satisfaction and purity are obtained.
28. By drinking Paficagavya, the result of performing the
Vajimedha sacrifice is obtained. The products got from cow are
the most pure. There is none else like them.
29. In the teeth of the cow remain gods Maruts, in its tongue
Sarasvati. In the middle of the hoofs are Gandharvas and in
their ends serpents.
30. In its joints Sadhyas, in the eyes the sun and the moon,
in the back all Ksatriyas and in the tail dharma.
31. In its excretory organ are the tirthas and in the urine
the river Ganga. In the feet the four oceans.
32. Inthe roots of hair the sages and in the dung Laksmi.
In the hair remains all knowledge and in the skin the two Ayanas
(northern and southern).
33-34. Because of the cow, one is endowed with courage,
determination, tranquility, prosperity, progress, memory, intelligence, humility, health, fame, knowledge and progeny.
35. Where there are cows, thereis the universe with the god
of gods foremost. Where there are cows, there is Laksmi and
eternal dharma.”
36. I saw the cows honoured everywhere, in the houses and
in the broad streets.
37. Men and women with great restraint were found in
thousands sitting, eating and sleeping.
38. They were also engaged in sports and other entertainments in thousands. Many were found decorated with flowers
and garlands in drinking houses.
1. These are milk, curd and ghee and cow's urine and cowdung.

39. 'There was abundant food of great variety and beds,
seats and drinks, and also horses and elephants.
40. I saw there beautiful women of various kinds, some of
them engaged in sports in water, some playing in the gardens and
others in their happy homes.
41. There is none like this and none other than this.
42. What a fine structure and what a fine decoration in
house after house there.
43. Seeing all this wonderful place well, I came to Yama
again.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND SEVEN
Good results
The Sage’s son (Naciketas) said:
1. O great sages, there is another thing which I heard from
Narada in the assembly of Yama.
2. As he was asking him about the doings of the great, he
narrated a story as told by Citrabhanu.
3. That was about King Janaka attaining all his great desires. I shall tell you that. Please listen.
4. The resplendent sage Narada arrived at the assembly of
Yama.
5. Seeing him arrive there at his own accord, king Yama
quickly received him with due honour, circumambulated him
and said:
6. “O great Brahmin Narada, welcome to you. By my good
luck have you come here.
7. You know everything, see everything and you are the
foremost among those knowing dharma. O sage, You know well
the legends about the Gandharvas.
8. We have become extremely purified at your sight. The
whole of this place has also become sanctified.
9. Please tell me without any hesitation whatever you have
1. This story, however, is not found narrated.

634 Varüha Purdna
in mind, whether anything is to be done by me or got done by any
one else.
10. There is nothing in this world which cannot be got by
great ascetics and Brahmins like you.”
11. Hearing these words of Yama, Narada, the knower
of dharma, began to speak.
Narada said:
12. I shall tell you since you have asked. You are always
the protector, keeper and the leader of dharma, doubtless by your
truth, penance, forbearance and courage.
13. There is none like you who can read the minds of others
and know what is done. I have a great doubt and that has to be
cleared by you.
14. How is immortality obtained by practising vows, following rules, making gifts or performing penance ?
15. How is high prosperity attained in the world and how
great fame, and how the eternal abode free from all troubles ?
16. What leads one to the despicable hell ?
Tell me all this",
Yama said:
17. O sage, people who do unrighteous deeds undergo numerous torments in hell.
18. I shall tell you all that in detail. Please listen and then
think about it.
19. Those who maintain (the sacrificial) fire, who have sons,
who make gifts of land, who are valiant, who live for a hundred
years, who are well-versed in Vedas never go to hell.
20. Chaste women, truthful men, those who never face defeat, are not obstinate, ever faithful to the master never go to hell.
21. Those who abstain from injury, follow the rules of celibacy, observe chastity, make gifts andare devoted to Brahmins,
also do not go to hell.
22-23. Those people of composure who look after their own
wives and avoid the wives of others, are fully compassionate to
all, never go to this infernum full of darkness and wailings, the
place for torture.
24. Men of great knowledge, who are indifferent (to you
and sorrow alike), those that stake their lives for the sake of the

master, those that are liberal givers and kind to all beings, also
do not go there.
25. Those who look after the comforts of their parents also
do not go there.
26. These who make gifts of sesamum, cows, gold and land
to Brahmins do not go there.
27. Those who perform sacrifices, observe Caturmasya and
maintain the sacrificial fire,
28. Who carry out the wishes of preceptors, who are calm
and collected, who recite the Vedas every day and who are always cultured, never see me, having realised the self themselves.
29. Those who have full control of the senses and who avoid
sexual acts in prohibited times, also never go to hell.
30. Those Brahmins who have given up all desires and have
control of senses become gods.
31. "They do not go to this terrific hell which is for sinners.
Narada said:
32. Is it the gift that is conducive to well-being or the worthiness of the person to whom it is given ? By what kind of action is
the honour of the heaven attained ?
33. By what kind of gift do we get good physique, wealth,
grain, longevity and good family. Please tell me.
34. It is impossible to detail even in the course of a hundred
years what befalls the good and what the bad.
35. I shall tell you, therefore, briefly about it. The wellbeing is mainly the result of virtues.
36. Listen to this secret, O sage, as to who obtains what
after death.
37. It is by penance that heaven is attained, by penance
fame, and by penance again longevity and prosperity.
38. Learning, knowledge, health, beauty, wealth and happiness are all acquired by penance and not by the mere desire for
them.
39. O sage, in this way, by silent order everything is got due
to merit, enjoyments by gifts and the very life by celibacy.
10. By non-violence is got handsome form and by vows birth
in good family. By austerities like eating only roots and fruitsa
kingdom is obtained and by feeding on leaves heaven.

636 Varàha Purana:
41. By feeding on milk one attains heaven and by attending
on the preceptor acquires abundant wealth. Progeny is got by
performing Sraddha.
42. By gifts of cow in proper time and with the necessary
ritual, by austerities like sleeping on grass and by drinking water
in Trisvana ceremony, one attains the world one desires.
43. The performer of sacrifice goes to heaven, particularly
if he lives on water alone for ten years.
44. One attains splendour by giving up tasty food and gets
long-lived children by giving up meat.
45. By giving up sandal and garlands, the body becomes
well-formed. By gifts of food, one attains intelligence and power:
of memory.
46. By the gift of umbrella is obtained a good house, by the
gift of a pair offootwear a vehicle, by the gift of cloths handsome:
body, wealth and children.
47. By giving drinks, eternal satisfaction is gained, by food.
and drinks, all desires are accomplished.
48. He who offers toa Brahmin a tree full of fragrant flowers
and fruits, gets a house full of women and gems.
49. By gifts of food, drink and dress, one attains the same.
By gifts of garlands, incense, sandal, flowers and fine house-hold.
items to a Brahmin, one gets a handsome body and becomes free
from diseases.
50. By gift of a house beautiful with beds and full of grains
to a Brahmin, is acquired a lofty residence full of women, horses
and elephants.
5l. By gifts of incense and cows, one attains the world of
Vasus.
52. Eternal bliss in heaven is attained by gifts of elephants,
cows and bulls. Lustre is obtained by the gift of ghee and
gracefulness by the gift of oil.
53. By the gift of honey, satisfaction in all tastes is obtained,
and by the gift of lamp, effulgence is acquired.
54. By milk-pudding is acquired the nourishment of the
body, by the mixture of sesamum and sugar suppleness, by fruits
children and by flowers all happiness.
55. By vehicles one gets palanquin and aerial car and also
prosperity.
56. By giving shelter, one attains all that is desired.

CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND EIGHT
The story of chaste woman
The Sage’s son (Naciketas) said:
1-2. In a short while there could be seen many Brahmins
with high spiritual attainments proceeding to heaven in aerial
cars resplendent like the sun, accompanied by their wives and
relations.
3. At this sight, Yama became pale in face and reduced in
lustre. He soon became angry and sorrowful.
4. Seeing him lose his lustre and knowing his mind, Nàrada
asked him.
5. “You were beaming all along as if you were another lord
of beasts (Siva). How is it that your happy face has become sovery pale all of a sudden ?
6. O king, what is your anguish that you heave like a serpent? I wish to know what causes you fear.”
Yama said:
7. “True that my face gets discoloured and mouth parched.
I shall tell you why. Please listen.
8. Eminent Brahmins who depend on alms received, who
are steadfast in learning Vedas and performing penance, who are
humble and free from jealousy,
9. Who have control of senses, honour guests and contemplate on the supreme and know self, by-pass me.
10. They never come near me and I have no control over
them. They pass over my head together with their wives and
followers.
ll. They have fine sandal smeared all over the body and
are dressed well and adorned with garlands and they offer garlands to me. I am, therefore, distressed.
12. (They make fun of me saying) ‘O Death, whom are you
awaiting here,’ ‘How can death occur ?’ ‘Why don't you speak.
O Death’, ‘Have you become unwanted in the world ?’
13. I strike at sinners who give up dharma and are greedy.
But with regard to these who have earned the merit of penance,
I am nobody.
14. For these great souls, I have no powers of benediction or

638 Varaha Purana
destruction nor of injunction or prohibition. I am, therefore,
distressed, O Sage."
15. Just then there arrived a chaste woman with her husband and followers in an aerial car ushered in with the sound of
musical instruments.
16-17. Seated in that car, she spoke to Yama in pleasant
words.
The chaste woman said:
18. “O great lord of dharma honoured by all, don’t have any
ill-will towards these Brahmins who are full of penance.
19. The greatness and power of their penance, none can estimate. The Brahmins are steeped in Vedic lore.
20. They are always to be honoured by all. They have all
gods in themselves. Jealousy or anger should not be shown to
them.
21. Without considering what they do is good or bad, you
should respect them. Impelled by desire or delusion, the virtuous
should never be made the object of rage."
22-23. Seeing that chaste woman pass in the sky like a
lightning, after being honoured by Yama, Narada asked him.
Narada said:
24. Who is this beautiful and virtuous woman who spoke
to you for your good and departed receiving your honour.
25. Iam very much eager to know this. So tell me in brief.
Yama said:
26. I shall tell you in full the auspicious story about this lady
whom I honoured here.
27. In Krtayuga there was a very famous, effulgent and
truthful king named Nimi.
28. He had a son named Mithi who had a wife named Rupavati very much devoted to him.
29. She always followed her husband’s words, was pleased
with him and performed auspicious deeds.
30. He was very virtuous, compassionate to all, highly truthful and full of penance.
31. When he was ruling the earth with all dharma, there was
no disease, decay or death.

32. There was always rain in the country. His kingdom
became endowed with all that is good.
33. Notasingle man was there who was suffering from
disease or distress.
34. After a long time, the queen spoke in all humility to
this king of Mithila.
The queen said:
35. Whatever money that was with you in this house, with
our servants and followers and with the Brahmins in this earth,
has been now fully spent.
36. O king, you are not aware that there is not necessary
food.
37. We have no kine, dress or even flowers and roots.
38. I do not find now even the necessary vessels.
39. Please tell me what I should do. I am ever prepared to
obey you.
The King said:
40. I am unable to tell you anything unpleasant. At the
same time, I do not find anything to please you or the people.
41. Therefore, if you are pleased, I shall tell you what we
may do in our present condition.
42. A hundred years have passed in our sacrificial austerities. We will now build a temple with the wood of Kuddala and
perform rituals there. You will then get the food and drink we
need.
43. Told thus, the queen replied to the king.
The queen said:
44. O king, here we have thousands of servants, horses, elephants, camels, bulls, buffaloes and asses.
45. How will they fail to carry out your wish ?
The king said:
46. “Our servants do whatever duty we allot to them. I
have engaged them in annual as well as other functions.
47. The bulls, asses, horses, elephants and camels are
assigned to the discharge of various other duties.

‘640 Varüha Purana
48. All the iron, tin, copper, silver and gold have been given
for various purposes.
49. O queen, I do not find now any iron or gold for the
temple to be made with Kuddala.’
50. Told thus by the king, the queen spoke to him joyfully.
51. “O king, proceed as you like, I shall certainly follow
you.’ Thus agreed, the king started with queen.
52. Then the king and queen set out searching for a suitable
place and traversed a long distance. Then the king said:
53. “This I find to be a good place. Let us remain here.
I shall cut off bushes and thorns and you may clear them from
here.
54. This will be your service and we will accomplish our
aim".
55. Said thus by the king, the queen spoke to him sweetly
with a smile.
56. ‘‘The tree we want stands close by and a golden bush
too. But nowhere near do I find water.
57. How will we be able to build a temple here? It will
result only in disease of the heart.
58. Here is the tree in this fertile land. But how can our
action be useful here ?'
59. Hearing this, the king spoke in endearing words:
60. ‘‘Let us begin with the preliminaries. We may be able
to get water near or a little away. There is no obstacle of any
kind here."
61. Then he began to clear the place together with his
wife.
62. It was the summer season and the sun was blazing high
up in the sky.
63. The heat was severe and the gentle queen became hun- .
gry and thirsty.
64. Her tender rosy feet turned red with heat.
65. The rays of the sun were like fire at noon. Then the
tormented queen told her husband:
66. ‘Oppressed by this sweltering heat, I am extremely
thirsty. Be pleased to give me some water quickly”.
67. So saying she fell down being very much fatigued but
.as she was falling down, she looked at the sun.

68. As her look was in anger, the sun in the sky became
fear-stricken and fell down on the earth.
69. Seeing this strange thing, the king asked:
70. “O great luminary, why have you come here leaving
your orb ? Tell me what I can do for you. You are worshipped
by the entire world".
71. To the king who was asking thus, the Sun said apologetically: '"This chaste lady got very much angry with me. As
a result I fell down. I am now here to do you whatever service
you require.
72. ‘There is none equal to her in all the three worlds. Certainly there is none like her in this world.
73. What a prowess is hers, what a penance and what a
courage ?
74. She is a nice match for you, very obedient and pure
with penance.
75. She is chaste and good and always looks after your comforts.
76. She is as suitable to you as Saci is to Indra. The good
has joined the good due to merit as can be seen from the perfect
harmony.
77. Your desire will never go in vain. Put up here the temple as you wish.
78. There is none else who deserves the fruit of all this.
79-80. So saying the Sun gave the king a Vessel of water,
a pair of sandals and a well-decorated umbrella, being very
much pleased with him.
81. He gave all this for his pleasure and use for meritorious
purposes.
82. The (Sun) gave this for the sake of the king's beloved.
83. The queen was sprinkled with the water. She regained
consciousness and asked the king wondering what had happened.
84. “O king, who gave you this pleasant water and these
fine sandals and umbrella ?"
The king said:
85. “O queen, this god Sun came down here from the sky
out of compassion for you.”

642 Varaha Purana
86. Thus told by the king, she said to him: “What can I
do for him ? Please ascertain his desire.”
87. Then the king fell at his feet with folded hands and said,
“O god, please tell us what we may do for you ?”
88. Thus requested by the king, the Sun said, “O king, let
me have protection from women.”
89. Hearing these words of the Sun, the king communicated them to his wife.
90. Knowing thus from the king, the queen said with great
pleasure:
91-92. ‘Since you have given this umbrella for warding off
your rays, a water-pot (for keeping water) and the sandals for
soothing feet, I give you protection you seek.”
93. Therefore, O sage, I bow to the chaste woman and
honour her.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND NINE
The greatness of the chaste women
Narada said:
1. “O great king clad in black, please tell me by what virtuous deeds or penance do the saintly women attain the supreme
path.”
2. Asked thus by Narada, the lord of dharma said:
Yama said :
3. It is not the observance of rules nor penance, fasting or
gifts nor worship of god, but the conduct about which I shall
tell you in brief.
4. She who sleeps after the husband sleeps, wakes up before he wakes up and eats after he has eaten, certainly overcomes
death.
5. She who remains silent when he is silent and stands when
he stands, overcomes death.
6. I am afraid of her who has the same outlook and mind

as the husband’s and carries out what he says. She becomes
honoured even by gods.
7-8. She who never retorts to whatever the husband says,
remains calm even when chastised by him and never considers
anyone other than him as god, never goes to the mouth of death.
9-10. She who always attends to the comforts of her husband and follows him closely, never enters the mouth of death.
11. She who attends on the husband considering him the
mother, the father, the relation and god, overcomes me. In fact,
I bow to her.
12. She who always thinks of her husband, follows the husband and shares the woes of the husband, never sees the door of
death.
13. She who never turns her attention to music or dance or
similar other attractions, never sees the door of death.
14. She who does not think of any one other than the husband when bathing, standing or decorating, never secs the door
of death.
15. She who has her husband in mind when worshipping
god or fecding the Brahmin, never sees the door of death.
16. She who wakes up before sunrise and cleans the house,
never sees the door of death.
17. She who keeps well covered the eyes, body and the feelings and always observes the rules of cleanliness, never sees the
door of death.
18. She who looks at the face of the husband with a view
to carry out his desire and is always ready to do anything for
his good, never sees the door of death.
19. Such virtuous wives of men in this world will be seen
as goddesses in heaven.
20. Al this was said by god Sun regarding the chaste
woman.
2]. Fnowing all this, I honour the chaste woman.

644 Varáha Purana
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND TEN
Means to destroy sin
Narada said:
1. “You have now told me about the duties and greatness
of chaste women as propounded by god Sun.
2. I now wish to know about something which relates to
all beings.
3-4. There are people who stricken with sorrow perform
penance, undertake vows with steadfast mind and without consideration of pain and pleasure. Why do they meet with impediments ?
5. It is always said that all our virtuous actions lead to welfare. Then how is it that the mind sometimes turns to sinful
actions ?
6. Whose doing is this ? Who is the doer and who is that
makes him do so ? Who is it that restrains this world of the four
kinds of beings ?
7. Why does the mind act with anger ? How is there the
horrible mixture of joy and sorrow in the world ?
8. IfIcan be told this secret which cannot be known even
by gods, please do so."
9. Requested thus by the sage, the great lord of dharma
spoke to him in all humility.
Yama said:
10. O Sage, I shall tell you what you wish to know. Please
listen.
11. Everything is established in supreme dharma. I don’t
find really any doer or actuator of action other than that.
12. It is this that is applauded, it is this that orders, it is
this that speaks, it is this that does.
13. I shall tell you what I have seen and heard about this
in this celestial assembly full of great sages.
14. One gets the cumulative result of one's own actions.
It is the self that brings down itself by the wrong action it
does.
15. The air gives it consciousness and it is made firm in

worldly life and here the being gets the fruit of actions according as they are good or bad.
16. Overpowered by obstructions, one should redeem one’s
own self. One’s own self is one’s friend as well as foe. The self
has nothing other than itself.
17. The nature and extent of the bondage is determined by
the previous actions and the soul undergoes it in hundreds of
lives.
18. It is wrong to say that everything is wrought by the
world. Whatever action one does, it is all one's own.
19. The more and more the bad effect gets reduced, the
more and more the thought for good works in man.
20. The soul that takes birth in the world because of its
evil, can redeem itself when the effect of the evil is over.
21. One gets the mind to do good or bad according to one's
action, good or bad, in the previous lives. When good actions
are done, the sin and suffering are removed.
22. Good or bad, is thus acquired according as the action
is proper or improper. When once the good actions alone are
there, one becomes exalted among gods.
23. Heaven is the result of good actions and hell that of
bad ones. There is no giver or remover of this.
Narada said:
24. It is one’s own actions that bring about good or bad
results; good action paves the way for progress and bad one for
downfall,
25. It behoves you to tell me how by thought, action, penance and conduct one can attain the birthless state.
Yama said:
26. I shall tell you about this sacred matter, how the sins
can be diss ;lved and how even the bad can be made to yield good.
27-28. I first of all make obeisance to the creator of the
world, who dispenses the good and the evil, who is without a
beginning or end, and who is difficult to be known by gods as
well as demons.
29. The man of knowledge, who knows the whole Vedas,
Who is calm in mind and has control of the senses and looks at
all beings alike, gets absolved of all sins.

646 Varüha Purana
30. He who knows the truth about Purusa and Prakrti and,
having known it, is never dcluded, attains the eternal abode.
31. He who has the capacity to discriminate between virtue and vice and betwecn the eternal and ephemeral, and is
able to get over delusion by contemplation, gets absolved of all
sins.
32. He who always inquires about the pleasure and pain in
oneself as well as in others, gets absolved of all sins.
33. He who never injures anything, is free from desire and
anger, and is always just, gets absolved of all sins.
34. He who holds his breath by proper prandydma and keeps
the mind steady as a result, gets absolved of all sins.
35. He who remains free from desire for everything, including such things as are naturally liked, and gives up life in
tranquility, gets absolved of all sins.
36. He who is ever attentive, free from anger, free from
desire for another's wealth, and free from jealousy, gets absolved
of all sins.
37. He who always attends on elders, is sworn to non-violence and is never mean in his conduct, gets absolved of all sins.
38. He who performs only praiseworthy deeds and never
what is not so, and always considers only the auspicious, gets
absolved of all sins.
39. He who resorts to the tirthas with purity in mind and
does not commit anything bad, gets absolved of all sins.
40. He who greets a Brahmin with reverence by going towards him, gets absolved of all sins.
Nérada said:
4l. What you have said is suitable, convincing, and conducive to the good of all.
42. Seeing discerning people resorting to various means, I
had a doubt and that has been now cleared by you.
43. O great knower of Yoga, be pleased to tell me if there
is any means still more simple for the destruction of sin,
44. The difficult practice of yoga you have already explained. What I wish to know is whether there is anything easier to
practice,
45. What will be simple and pleasant and capable of removing every kind of sin,

46. What can be practised by oneself, is not very elaborate,
and fully favourable for this world as well as the world beyond.
47. What is capable of exploding the effect of all bad actions
that leads to birth of various kinds.
Yama said:
48. Bowing to the creator, I shall tell you about the dharma
he has expounded in this connection.
49. Listen to this course of action which is meant for the
benefit of the world and for the removal of sin.
50. He who is desirous of attaining Absoluteness, should do
‘with a steady mind what is ordained by dharma.
51. He who does so with pure mind gets free from all sins
and attains all desires.
52. He who makes the form of the creator in the form of the
constellation Si$umàra and bows to it with concentration of mind,
gets absolved of all sins.
53. He who sees with intensity the moon in its body, gets
absolved even of great sins.
54. Ifhe sees it in the forehead, then also he is absolved of all
‘sins, so also when he sees it in the neck or chest.
, 95. Seeing it in the abdomen removes all sins committed
through thought, word or deed.
56. Seeing the sun in its Langala form also brings about removal of all sins committed through thought, word or deed.
57. He who performs circumambulation on seeing Jupiter
in it, gets free from every kind of sin.
58. He who contemplates on him as the one without dissolution, becomes free from al sins.
59. He who performs circumambulation considering him
as Mercury, Venus, Saturn, Mars and the benign Moon and
contemplates on him with pure mind, becomes pure like the moon
in autumr.
60. One gets absolved of all sins by a hundred pranayamas
also.
61. O sage, seeing the moon in the best of form and
bowing to him in reverence, removes all sins.
62-63. He who contemplates on him (by the mantra of)
hundred and eight syllables and alternately sees the sun and
moon in their full effulgence and purity, gets free from all sins.

648 Varáha Purana
64. Seeing there the Brahmin Vamana, Varaha that arose
from water holding Earth, and the Lion and bowing to them in
austerity, consuming only milk, he gets absolved of all sins.
65. He who performs Pranayama also gets free from all sins,
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND ELEVEN
Means to destroy sin (contd.)
The sage’s son (Naciketas) said:
1. Hearing these words of the lord of dharma, Narada spoke
again in reverence.
Narada said:
2. O great Dharmaraja, you look alike on all beings, stationary or moving.
3. I have now heard from you about the circumambulation
which is particularly favourable to the welfare of Brahmins.
4. Three castes participate in sacrifices and share their
benefits in general. The Südras are kept out by Brahmins from
those that are purified by Vedas.
5. Since you look upon all beings as equals, you should tell
me what leads to their welfare also, what action the Südra may
do.
Yama said:
6. I shall tell you what is favourable to all the four castes
as sanctioned by dharma.
7. Ishall tell you that by listening to which with attention
and following it in action, one gets free from sin. Please listen.
8. The cow is sacred, auspicious and fit to be worshipped
even by gods. He who tends it with devotion, gets absolved of all
sins.
9. He who drinks Pañcagavya at the auspicious time, immediately gets absolved of all sins acquired from birth.
10. He who receives on his head the water scattered by the

cow by its tail, acquires the merit of bathing in all. tirthas and
gets free from all sins.
11. He who bathes in cow’s urine on Rohini day, gets all
his sins burnt away.
12. He who receives on his head the milk from the cow's
udder, gets cleansed of all sins.
13-14. The Brahmin, who soon after his bath bows to the
rising sun with devotion, gets free from all sins.
15-16. He who worships the sun with purity and holding
curd and raw rice in hand thrice a day, gets all his acquired sins
dispelled.
17. Asimilar offering to the moon on full moon day, removes
all sins.
18-19. He who makes such offering with concentration of
mind and according to Vedic rules to Arundhati, Budha and all
sages, gets his sins instantaneously removed.
20. He who propitiates Brahmin, attending on him with
great devotion, becomes free from all sins.
21. He who makes gifts of milk during solstices gets immediate destruction of his sins.
22. Worshipping along with Brahmins a bull over a streak
of Kuśa grass strewn with tips facing east, brings about removal
of all sins.
23. Bathing according to rules in an east-flowing river where
it bends in a right hand direction, removes all sins.
24-25. Taking water in a right-spiralled conch and pouring
it over the head with purity and pleasure, destroys all sins.
26-27. Bathing in an east-flowing river at a spot where the
water is waist-deep and offering seven times handfuls of water
mixed with black sesamum and performing Pránáyáma thrice with
control of senses, brings about immediate destruction of all sins.
28. He who bathes thrice in water taken in untorn lotus
leaves in which different gems are placed, gets free from all sins.
29. Ishalltell you about another great secret. The Ekadasi
day in the dark fortnight of the Kàrttika month is known as
Prabodhini. It gives both enjoyment and liberation.
30. The body of Visnu with its numerous indistinct forms,
O sage, became Dvadaéi in the mortal world.
31. Those who fast in the proper form with full devotion to

650 Varaha Purana
Lord Narayana, get absolved of all sins acquired in numerous
lives.
32. The great lord in the form of Varaha was once asked by
Earth about Ekàdaá$i for the good of the world.
Earth said:
33. O Lord, in this fierce Kaliyuga we find people inclined
to do sinful deeds like stealing the property of the Brahmin and
also killing him.
34. They are inclined to do harm to the preceptor, the friend
and the master and outrage the modesty of the wives of others.
35. They are drawn to steal the wealth. of others, eat prohibited food and to denounce the Vedas and the Brahmins.
36. They are found to be dissemblers, not respecting decorum, proclaiming atheism, eager to receive anything even from
the bad and interested in sexual relations with the prohibited.
37. Be pleased to tell me, O lord, how people who incur
these and other sins can redeem themselves.
Varaha said:
38. It is good that you asked me about this. I shall tell you
this secret for the sake of the world.
39. What I have ordained for those who have acquired no
merit but a lot of demerit due to their great sins, I shall now tell
you. Please listen.
40. The supreme power of Visnu with its numerous indistinct forms, has assumed the form of Dvàdasi in the mortal world.
41. By fasting on that day, O fair one, even those who have
committed serious sins go to the eternal abode, free from the
effect of merits and demerits.
42. There is no means other than observing Ekadasi for the
dissolution of all sins.
43. The Ekàdast in the bright fortnight as well as in the dark
fortnight of the month should be observed. The first gives devotion and the second liberation.
44. Therefore, O Earth, every effort should be made to
observe Ekadasi always if the world of Visnu is desired to attain.
45. The observance of Ekadasi burns away all sins committed through thought, word or deed in the course of a month.

46-47. Even sins acquired earlier are dispelled. Therefore,
.one should not take food at all during Ekàda&, if one wishes to
go to the supreme abode of Visnu.
48. With raised up hands I cry aloud that Visnu, the lord
of the universe, should be worshipped on Ekadasi day without
any slackness.
49. During Ekadasi on both fortnights, water from the
-conch should not be drunk and fish and pig should not be killed.
50. He who takes food on either Ekàdaái in the month,
incurs the same sin as of killing a Brahmin, drinking wine, stealing gold and committing adultery on the teacher's wife.
51. What sin is not incurred by the man who follows the
suicidal practice of knowingly eating on Ekadasi day ?
52. He who finds it unable to fast on the Ekādaśī of the
bright fortnight may eat at night whatever he gets unasked.
53. The Dvadasi should be observed by eating once and
giving gifts. He who does not observe this or does not give gifts
incurs great sin and does not get liberation anywhere.
54. O fair one, those who are unable to fast at other times
‘may do so, at least, on that Dvadasi which is known as Prabo-
:dhini.
55. He who worships the lord of the universe on that day,
gets the merit of twelve Dvadasis.
56. The Dvadasi which occurs in conjunction with the
-asterism Pürvabhàadrapada is great and its observance produces
endless merit.
57-58. The Ekàdaéi which occurs in conjunction with the
-asterism Uttarabhadrapada brings in a crore times the merit of
others if the lord is worshipped once on that day.
59. Just like Prabodhini (in which the lord wakes up) is the
Sayani in which the lord goes to sleep. Fasting on that day too
produces abundant merit.
60. Savana, Bodhana and Parivartana (Dvadasis on which
the lord goes to sleep, wakes up and turns his side) bring about
‘purity to man when he fasts.
61. Therefore, whoever desires permanent liberation should
by all means observe fast on Dvadasi.
62. Ekadaéi falling on Monday in conjunction with Uttarabhadrapada in the month of Karttika gives endless merit.
63. If that is observed, it yields great results.

652 Varaha Purana
64. The same falling on Tuesday confers supreme merit to
one who bathes and worships the lord on that day. He gets the
benefit of twelve Dvadadsis.
65. The devotee shall place at a pure spot a pot filled with
water, over it a vessel of ghee containing the five gems, and
66. Over that lord Janardana in the form of the fish made
with gold weighing one niska.
67. He shall then bathe him with Paficàmrta, decorate with
saffron, dress with a pair of yellow cloths and provide with umbrella and a pair of sandals.
68. He shall then worship him with lotuses keeping the senses in full control.
69. He shall worship him as the ten incarnations namely
the fish, tortoise, boar, man-lion, dwarf, (Parasu)Rama, Rama,
Krsna, Buddha and Kalki.
70. He shall do worship with every kind of decoration and
offering flowers, incense, lamp and food of various kinds.
71. The lord should be released at night. When the day
dawns, the devotee shall take his bath and worship him in all
earnestness with flowers, incense, lamp and different kinds of
fruits.
72. He shall then worship the preceptor, according to his
means, with food, clothes and decorations.
73. Then the image should be gifted to him with due rites
and with the mantra:
74. ‘May lord Janardana who is the source of the universe,
who is in the form of the universe and who is the first in the universe, be pleased with me’.
75. The Ekadasi is to be observed in this way. I shall tell
you now, O Earth, about the merit that accrues from it.
76. The merit of Prabodhini cannot be fully uttered even
with a thousand tongues. Still, I shall tell you about it briefly.
77. The man who observes this, enters with all his dependents the celestial aerial car splendid like the sun, the moon and
the stars and goes to my world.
78. Atthe end ofa thousand kalpas he becomes the lord of all
the seven islands constituting the earth and enjoys full health
and happiness. He then becomes free from birth.
79-80. The sin of killing the Brahmin, drinking wine, steal-

ing (gold) and committing adultery on the teacher’s wife, disappears by hearing the very name of this.
81. Even he who is unable to do the rites for want of money,
may get himself purified and attain heaven, if he touches with
devotion the man who performs them and renders him service.
82. Even by reading this account about the efficacy of this,
all bad dreams disappear and all fear from worldly existence
vanishes, Should we then say about the effect when the Prabodhini is actually observed ?
83. They who worship me in the proper time are indeed
blessed. They are happy. A really virtuous deed has been done
by them and the essence of life has indeed been earned by
them.
84. He who always takes the name of Narayana, Acyuta,
Ananta or Vàsudeva, O Earth, would merge into myself.
85. What to say of those who worship with undivided.
attention devotedly in accordance with the manner advised by
the preceptor. They would undoubtedly be merged into myself.
86. Those who bow down to that boar-shaped Visnu,
possessed of unlimited energy, are always adorable even by the
gods.
87. Hence, the station of Visnu is to be carefully aspired
by the seekers. The state of being the devotee of Visnu, O pretty
madam, is rarely attainable in the three worlds.
88. By virtue of propitiating lord Siva during thousands of
births, a man may attain the state of a devotee of Visnu on the
decay of his sins.
89. The decay of the sin is effected by the worship of lord
Siva. Rudra, the supreme lord, has to be worshipped by a
person who seeks after knowledge.
90. While worshipping me, one would attain the highest
station. of Visnu. The Vaisnavites, O propitious madam, do
purify the entire universe.
91. If a devotee of Visnu, even though he be a Candala, is
recollected, named, seen or touched accidentally by any body,
O dear madam, the former purifies them.
92. Knowing it therefore, the learned and the wise should
worship lord Visnu in accordance with the Vedic rites or scriptural injunctions,

654 Varáha Purana
Yama said :
93-94. Having heard all this, the fortunate Earth who
had her vows fulfilled, worshipped the lord of the Universe
according to regulations and got merged into him. Hence,
the wise man should seek for the state of a devotee of Visnu
with all effort.
95. Those who observe even once this Dvadaéi called Prabodhani with due fasting, go to the supreme abode.
96. Such souls never see Yama or his messengers or the travails in hell. What I say is simply the truth.
97. Ihave thus told you what I have seen and heard in reply
to what you asked me.
98-99. O great sage desirous of knowing dharma, I have now
told you in brief what was said to me about this by the creator.!
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND TWELVE
The Awakening
Narada said:
1. “Well, well, O great king, the great knower of all dharma,
you have now told me about this important matter of dharma.
2. Remaining in the path of dharma spoken of by you, Iam
‘very much satisfied on hearing what you have said.
Q
3. I feel particularly honoured by you. I shall now go to
whichever world I wish to go.
4. May good befall you, O great king, be free from fear.”
5. So saying, the great sage Narada left, illumining the sky
with his lustre like the sun and freely moved about in the celestial
region.
1. There is some confusion in this chapter because of the use of ‘Ekadasi’ and ‘Dvadasi’ as apparently relating to the same.

6-7. When he was gone, that king(Yama),turned towards
me, honoured me with his sweet words and let me off very much
pleased.
8. Thus have I told vou, O Brahmins, about what I saw and
heard in that city of Yama and how I have returned here.
Vaifampáyana said:
9. Hearing his words, the sages became very much delighted. Some jumped up from their seats.
10. The eyes of some were filled with wonder and they gave
out exclamations in appreciation.
11. Even old ascetics and those living in forest and those
among them living on scattered grain, proclaimed the greatness
of compassion for all beings.
12. "Those lying on rocks, those lying on wood, those eating
uncooked food or partly cooked food,
13. Those following prescribed rules, those who had overcome themselves, those observing full silence, those lying in water,.
14. "Those who were lying high up, those moving like animals, those sitting in the midst of five fires, those fecding on fallen
leaves and fruits,
15. Those living on water, those living on air, those living:
on vegetables, all these began to do severe penance, being convinced that there is nothing greater than pcnance.
16. Some bold sages, being not afraid of birth or death,
gave up dharma and adharma (merit and demerit) and resorted to
continuous concentration of mind.
17. Hearing the narration (of Naciketas), the divine sages
resorted to follow such of the rules as are commended.
18. (The father of) Naciketas, seeing his ascetic son, was
immensely pleased and began to think of dharma alone.
19. Remaining in penance, he always contemplated on the
great lord Visnu extolled by the Vedas.
20-21. He who listens to this great narrative which generates
devotion to the Lord, or makes others listen to it, attains his
desires.

656 Varáha Purana
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND THIRTEEN
The greatness of Gokarnefvara
Süta said:
l. In days of yore, when the manace in the form of demon
Taraka had been completely crushed in battle, and the army of
the demons routed,
2. Indra had been restored to his position, the enemy being
annihilated, and the world of animate and inanimate beings had
become fully productive,
3. Andin the golden peak of the Meru full of gems,
4. Brahma was sitting in comfort with full concentration
effulgent like the sun and fire,
5. Sanatkumára approached him with great humility,
prostrated at his feet in reverence, and asked him.
Sanatkumára said:
6. “O lord, I wish to know from you about an old thing
which the sages cherish, namely,
7. How is the northern Gokarna, how the southern, how is
it placed at the top of the peak,
8. Ofwhat dimension is that place, what is the merit of the
tirtha there, how is there Lord Siva in the form of an animal,
9. How did gods led by you reach there, where is the animal
form of his consecrated, and
10. What are the special rules to be observed there. Be
pleased to tell me all this."
11. Thus asked by the son, lord Brahma told him about his
old and secret matter.
Brahma said:
12. O sage, my son, I shall tell you this secret truth, as I
have heard it.
13. On the northern side of the great mountain Mandara,
there is a peak called Mufijavan, beautiful like the Nandana
garden.

14. It has pebbles shining, stones resembling coral and
slabs like sapphire and many caves and waterfalls.
15. With its rising rocks covered with creepers bearing a
variety of blossoms, it seems to scrape the sky.
16. The caves in it are beautiful with numerous flowing
minerals and flowers of mushrooms.
17. The streaks of forests in it shine with the flowers of
Jasmine and Ketaki.
18. In that mount washed by streams of pure water blue
like sapphire, having stretches of slabs covered with many kinds
of flowers.
19. Displaying a variety of colours as in the rainbow and so
appearing like the abode of Kubera,
20. With celestial couples playing, groups of Apsarases dancing and inebriated peacocks cooing,
21. With ponds full of clear water and having full-blown
flowers of lotus and Kalhàra and resorted to by swans and
cranes,
22. With numerous brooks flocked by herds of elephants,
dear, birds and many sages,
23. With groves enjoyed by Devas, Gandharvas and Vidyadharas, where the cuckoos warble and the hollows resound with
the music of Kinnaras,
24. With numerous waterfalls and green meadows illumined
by natural glow,
25. Natural gardens full of flowers blossoming in all seasons
and resorted to by Kimpurusas and Guhyakas,
26. With very attractive and auspicious penance-groves of
sages and Siddhas,
27. There remains always lord Maheévara as Sthànu, the
preceptor o` all gods, granting boons.
28. He remains there accompanied by Parvati, Guha and
attendants, full of grace for the devotees.
29. The gods used to go there in their aerial cars to pay
homage to that great lord. The demigods also used to go there for
his worship.
30. Once in Tretàyuga, a great sage named Nandi began to
perform severe penance in order to propitiate Siva.

658 Varáha Purana
31-32. Sitting in the midst of five fires in summer, standing
in cold water in winter, with hands raised and remaining without
support, feeding on water and air alone, and observing numerous
vows and restraints,
33. And with Japa and offerings of flowers from tune to
time, he worshipped Siva with great devotion.
34. He fully engaged himself in severe penance, as a result
of which he became much emaciated and almost looked like a
piece of wood.
35. He became very lean and dark in complexion. Thus
worshipped, Siva was pleased.
36-37. Siva then appeared before the sage and told him,
“I am pleased with you and I give you divine eyes with which
to see my form which is visible only to those with the highest
knowledge.”
38. Seeing the great lord Mahadeva shedding lustre like a
thousand suns, with a blazing halo around him,
39. With prominent matted hair adorned by the moon, surveying the whole universe with his three shining eyes,
40. Very attractive with hundred heads, hundred bellies,
thousand hands and feet, thousand eyes and mouths,
41. Smaller than the smallest, bigger than the biggest.
wearing the rosary and holding the water-vessel in hand,
42. Wearing the skin of lion and serpent for Yajiiopavita,
the sage became thrilled.
43. He prostrated before him with folded hands and uttered a hymn in praise.
“Bow to the creator, dispenser, granter of boons, Sambhu,
44. The enjoyer of the world, three-eyed, Sankara, Siva,
Bhava, the protector from worldly existence, sage, wearer of
elephant’s skin,
45. Blue-necked, Bhima, the combiner of the past, present
and future, with hanging brows, ferocious, auspicious,
46. With broad, matted and tawny hair, the wise, holding
the trident, lord of beasts, omnipresent, Sthanu,
47. Lord of Ganas, the creator, condenser and frightener,
who is calm and benign,

48. The resident of the cemetery, Rudra, the benevolent,
wearing a garland of skulls and tawny moustache,
49. Lover of devotees, I bow to you the supreme soul."
50. 'Thus praising Siva, he bowed to him again and again.
51. Siva was very much pleascd with him and spoke to him.
52. “O great sage, seek from me whatever boons you wish.
I shall grant you all of them, even if they are such as are not
normally granted.
53. Tell me soon what you desire, whether it is lordship,
the status of Devas, Indra or Brahma, the position of the guardian
deities, liberation, eight-fold power or leadership of Ganas.
54. Asked thus, the sage replied with great delight.
55-56. “I don't desire lordship, the status of Devas, Indra
or Brahma, the position of the Guardian deities, liberation, the
eight-fold power or leadership of Ganas.
57. O great god Sankara, if you are pleased with me and
wish to favour me,
58. Please give me that kind of devotion which will make
me worship you alone and none else.
59. Iwtsh to have devotion for you who dwell in the minds
of all. Let there be no impediment in this. I wish to worship
you with the Rudra mantra à crore times."
60. Hearing these words of Nandin, lord Mahe$vara laughed and then spoke in sweet words.
61. “O sage, I am pleased with you. Rise from your penance. I am fully propitiated by your pure mind and constant
devotion.
62. Enough of this penance. You have been deeply devoted
to my feet.
63. You have already recited three crores of Rudra mantra
before me.
64. You have completed, O sage, thousand years of severe
penance, the like of which neither Devas nor Asuras nor sages
have ever done.
65. You have done something difficult and wonderful as a
result of which the three worlds are awed.

660 Varadha Purana
66. All Devas led by Indra will come to see you. You have
become eternal and fully knowable by Devas or Asuras.
67. With your divine body and divine ornaments you have
become equal to me.
68. You will get a form and splendour like mine, three-eyed
and endowed with all virtues and worshipped by Devas and
Asuras.
69. With this body which will be free from age and death,
you will also be the lord of Ganas.
70. O Brahmin, you will be the foremost among my attendants and will be known as Nandisvara.
71. O sage, you have attained the eightfold power and
Devas will bow to you as my second form.
72. Hereafter, O sage, by my blessing you will be the chief
in all matters relating to Devas.
73. As the chief of my attendants, you will be worshipped
by all beings that desire my favour.
74. You will be the dispenser of boons in this world and the
refuge for the fear-stricken.
75. He who hates you hates me, he who worships you worships me. There is no difference between us just as there is none
between the sky and air.
76. O lord of Ganas, you should stand on the right of my
door-way and Mahakala on the left.
77. You will be the principal doorkeeper. You are to guard
me and Mahakala is to guard the Ganas.
78. None will be able to injure you in the three worlds whether by the Vajra, Cakra, fire or Cane.
79. Devas, Asuras, Gandharvas, Yaksas, Raksasas, and Pannagas will resort to you, so too men who are my devotees.
80. When you are pleased, I will be pleased and when you
are angry, I too. There is none more dear to me than you."
81. Being thus pleased with him and after giving him these
boons, Siva spoke to him again in clear tone which filled the air.

82. ‘See gods together with the Maruts come here to see
you. You have now become fully gratified.
83. Ifthe words I spoke giving you the boons have not vet
entered into your ear, see these gods in the sky here.
84. The gods and Maruts led by lord Visnu come here out
of love and regard for you. Sages will come here to get boons.
85-86. Yaksas, Vidyadharas, Siddhas, Gandharvas, Pannagas and sages who are already immersed in penance, knowing
about what you have accomplished by penance, engage themselves in various kinds of severe penance with a desire to gain
similar boons.
87-88. Before they come here knowing me to be present in
this peak Mufijavan, I shall go away from here.
89. I have to see Brahma and other gods who are waiting
for my blessing. I know what they have in mind."
90. Thus blessing him and giving him boons, he disappeared
from there.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND FOURTEEN
Boons to Nandikesvara
Brahma said :
1. When Siva, the lord of beings, disappeared, Nandi became the leader of Ganas and divine in form,
2. With four arms, three eyes, divine demeanour, divine
complexion and divine Agaru-like odour,
3. Having trident, spear, club, the bow pinàka and girdle
of Mufija grass and full of lustre like another Siva.
4. With his raised foot he seemed to be aiming at pervading
the whole universe like Trivikrama.

662 Varüha Purāņa
5. Seeing him, the gods became afraid and they rushed in
great hurry to inform Indra.
6. Hearing this, Indra and others in his city became
perturbed and began to think about what they might do.
7. “Here is some one who has got a boon from Maheégvara,
and with his great might he is sure to get control over all the
worlds.
8. His enthusiasm, effulgence and strength will enable him
to snatch away the place of celestials.
9. Before he sets foot on thiscclestial world for the purpose
through his power, let us go and propitiate the benign Siva himself who has given him the boon.”
10. So saying, they went with me to mount Mufijavan
made by the gods.
11. Myself, Visnu, Indra and others rushed there in anxiety.
12. The gods and sages began looking for him. Then Visnu,
along with them, went to the spot where Nandi was remaining
like a god.
JVandi said:
13. My life has become fruitful as also all my efforts since
I see before me Indra, the lord of gods, and Visnu, the lord of
the worlds.
14. This is enough for me and I am fully gratified.
15. The great lord Hara became pleased with me, gave me
a place among his attendants and blessed me with boons.
16. ‘This is a greater blessing for me and I have become extremely purified.
17. What Brahma told gods about me is absolutely true.
Now the gods and sages have come here and speak sweet words
to me. This shows Brahma’s affection for me.
Devas said:
18. “We wish to see the benevolent god Siva who appeared
before you pleased by your penance”.
19. They asked him again, “Where can we find lord Siva ?”
Nandi said:
20. “After blessing me, the lord disappeared there itself.
I do not know where he is. A search may be made”.

Sanatkumára said:
21. Please tell me what the Lord had told Nandi since he did
not disclose where he was. Was there any secret for Siva in this
matter ?
Brahma said:
22. Ishall tell you what Mahe$vara said to Nandi regarding
why the gods should not be told as to where he could be seen.
Please listen.
Siva said:
23. “Beyond Himalaya there is a nice and holy place with
numerous hermitages. There a great serpent by name Slesmataka lives.
24. He has now freed himself of all sins by penance and so I
have now to go there urgently to bless him.
25. The place around him there is very beautiful and (strangely) there are no monkeys there.
26. Due to the long penance he performed there, it has now
come to be known as Slesmataka forest and even the rocks there
have become sacred.
27. I will be moving there in the form of a deer and I will
see then the gods who finally come there wearied after a long
search.
28. You should not tell this to Devas or Apsarases". Saying
so and blessing him he disappeared from there.
29-30. Indra reached that table-land in his chariot which
moves at will, beautiful like the crescent moon and sprinkled
with divine drops, accompanied by the Maruts and followed by
the gods, shedding lustre all around.
31. The benevolent Varuna, the lord of aquatic animals
came in an aerial car splendid with crystals and diamonds,
together with his followers.
32. Kubera came there in another beautiful golden car.
33. In numerous such cars shining like the sun came in crores
of Yaksas and Ràksasas.
l. This seems to be an interpolated verse. In the next chaper we find
the mention of monkey here.

664 Varáha Purána
34. Yama came there along with the good souls. The sun,
moon, planets and the entire group of stars arrived there in
aerial cars shining like fire.
35. The eleven Rudras, twelve Adityas and Aévins came
to that great mountain Mufijavàn.
36. The Viávedevas, Sadhyas and the ascetic Brhaspati came
there covering the milky way.
37. Skanda and Vinayaka came to the great peak full of
cooings of numerous peacocks.
38-39. At the command of Indra came there also in aerial
cars Gandharva leaders like Visvavasu, Paravasu, Haha and
Hühü and also sages like Narada and Tumburu.
40. Vayu, Agni, Dharma, Dhruva, the divine sages, Siddhas,
Yaksas, Vidyadharas, Guhyakas all arrived there.
41-42. Celestial women like Gandhakali, Ghrtaci, Buddha,
Gauri, Tilottama, Urvasi, Menaka and Rambha flocked there.
43-45, At my bidding and also at the bidding of Visnu and
Indra, came the sages Pulastya, Atri, Marici, Vasistha, Bhrgu,
Kaśyapa, Pulaha, Visvamitra, Gautama, Bharadvaja, Agnivesya,
Parasara, Markandeya, Angiras, Garga, Samvarta, Kratu,
Jamadagni, Bhargava and Cyavana.
46-49. Also came there great rivers like Sindhu, Purusa,
Sarayu, Tamra, Aruna, Carubhaga, Vitastha, Kausiki, Sarasvati,
Koka, Narmada, Bahuda, Satadrü, Vipasa, Gandaki, Godavari,
Veni, Tapi, Karatoya, Sita, Ciravati, Nanda, Parananda, Carmanvati, Parnasa, and Daivika.
50-52. At Indra's instance came there in large numbers
tirthas like Ganga, Prabhasa; Purusa. Soma and Lohita and
even the ocean, all in their own forms.
53-55. All the mountains also presented themselves, Meru,
Kailasa, Gandhamadana, Himavàn, Hemaküta, Nisadha, Vindhya, Mahendra, Sahya, Malaya, Dardura, Malyavan, Citrakita, Drona, Sriparvata, Pariyatra and others.
56. So too all sacrifices, all kinds of knowledge, all the Vedas,
Righteousness, Truth, Forbearance, Heaven and the great sage
Kapila.
57-63. There came the great Vāsukī, the serpent (Rāhu)
who drank nectar, Ananta, the holder of earth with his thousand
hoods, Dhrtardstra, Kirmiranga, Ambodhara, the mighty
Arbuda, Vidyujjihva, Sankhavarcas, Nahusa known in the three

worlds, Satya, the son of Virocana with numerous brilliant spots,
Rüpi like a mountain having numerous peaks, Arimejaya, Vinata,
Kambala, Agvatara, Elapatra, Karkotaka, Dhanafijaya and
several other lords of serpents.
64. Arrived there Day and Night, Fortnight, Month, Year,
Heaven, Earth, Quarters and Subquarters.
65. Thus swelled the mountain peak with Devas, Yaksas,
Siddhas and others everywhere like the ocean in high tide.
66. Wafted by the wind, the trees showered flowers over the
gods assembled in the peak.
67. The Gandharvas sang, Apsarases danced and the birds
warbled in delight.
68. The wind was blowing gently and fragrant and pleasant.
69. When all the gods flocked there led by Visnu, they saw
the resplendent Nandi in front of them.
70. Seeing the Gandharvas, Apsarases and other celestials
there with Indra, he prostrated before them.
71. After saluting all of them, he spoke to them words of
welcome, offered arghya and pádya and requested them to be
seated.
72. Watching all this carefully, the gods began to return him
the honour.
73. The Adityas, Vasus, Rudras, Maruts, Agvins, Sadhyas,
Vi$vedevas, Gandharvas and Guhyakas honoured him.
74. All Gandharvas like Vi$vàvasu, Haha, Hühü, Citrasena
and others and Narada and Tumburu honoured him.
75. All the chiefs of serpents like Vasuki honoured Nandi.
76. Siddhas, Caranas, Vidya(dharas) and Apsarases
honoured him who was already honoured by the great lord.
77. The Siddhas, sages and rivers like Ganga blessed him
in great joy.
The gods said:
78. “O sage, let the great god Siva be always pleased with
you. Let there be unhindered supremacy for you.
79. You are now greater than gods.
80. You will be moving about in all the seven worlds together
with Siva without discase or death.”
81. Thus said by the gods, Nandi spoke again.

666 Varüha Purdna
Nandikesvara said:
82. “Now that I am blessed by you all with your benedictions, I have become one worthy of commands from you. Please
tell me what I may do for you.
83. O great gods, let me know your command". Hearing
this, Indra said:
Indra. said:
84. “Where is the great lord Siva gone ? Where can we see
him ?
85. If you know where he is, please tell us soon, O sage”.
86. Hearing these words of Indra, Nandi replied contemplating on Siva for a while.
NandikeSvara said:
87. O lord of gods, you deserve to know this.
88. In this mountain Mufijavan, I worshipped lord Sthanu.
He was pleased with me and gave me several boons.
89. Then he left this place and I am afraid to find out where
he has gone.
90. But if you so desire, O Indra, we shall make a search
for him.”
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTEEN
Greatness of Sailesvara!
Brahma said:
I. Then Indra and all other gods decided to start on a search
of Siva.
2. They all rose from the mountain and moved in the sky
along with Nandi.
3. Wishing to find out Rudra, they moved about in heavens,
in the world of Brahma and in the world of serpents.
1. In the text this is given as Jalesvara.

4. Seaching him in all the seven islands of the earth with
their mountains and forests, they became extremely tired, but
could not trace him.
5-6. Nota blade of grass was left out in their intensive search
in the caves of mountains and in their high peaks, in the bowers
and woods.
7. But nowhere could they know anything about his whereabouts.
8. They searched again in spite of disappointment, but
became afraid when thev could not find him still.
9. Then they discussed among themselves about their predi-
-cament and decided again to seek my help.
10. I then entered into single-minded concentration on
Siva in order to get a means for finding out where he was.
11. Then I told them that a serious search has becn made
‘everywhere except the Slesmataka forest and we may now go
there.
12. When said thus, they all agreed and we proceeded to
that place.
13. Soon we reached there in quickly moving aerial cars
and saw the Slesmataka forest resorted to by Siddhas and Caranas.
14. There were in it many beautiful and pure places for
meditation.
15. Near the penance groves and the caves there were
beautiful streaks of forests and brooks with clear water.
16. The place was full of sounds of lions, tigers, bisons,
bears, bulls, monkeys, elephants and deer.
17-18. Leaving the chariots and other vehicles, they all
walked to the place led by Indra with a view to finding out Rudra
anywhere in the caves, peaks or thickets.
19-21. As the gods entered one part of the forest full of
plantain groves and flowering trees, they saw a stream and in its
sands white like the swan, jasmine and moon, smelling sweet
with the fragrance of flowers and honey, a beautiful damsel playing in the sand resembling powdered pearl.
22. Seeing this, they asked me, being the first among them,
how this could be.

668 Varüha Puràna
23. Meditating for a while, I could know that she was none
other than Uma, the universal goddess, the daughter of Himavan.
24. Then they all climbed up the peak, and on looking down,
saw the great lord (Siva) there.
25. He was in the midst of a herd of deer as if their protector, having but one horn and one foot, lustrous like molten gold,
26. With beautiful face, eyes and teeth, having white dotes
on the back, silverwhite on the belly,
27. With stout and raised up waist and neck and bent shoulders, rosy lips, brown tongue and slightly projecting canines.
28. Seeing that deer, all the gods quickly descended there
to catch hold of it.
29. The tip of its horn was caught by Indra, the middle by
me and the lower part by Visnu.
30. Then the horn broke into three pieces.
31. "The tip was in the hand of Indra, thc middle in mine
and lower part in Visnu's hand.
32. When the horn was thus in our hands in threc pieces,
the lord naturally became hornless.
33. He instantly became invisible and spoke to us from the
sky. “O gods, know that you are deceived by me.
34. Iam here with my body. You got my horn alone. So I
say you are deceived.
35. If you had caught hold of me with the entire body and
placed me then the whole dharma with its four feet would have
been established.
36. Now, O you gods, you may install the pieces of the horn
here in this Slesmataka forest for the sake of the world.
37. There will be great sanctity in this place because of my
prowess.
38. For my sake the tirthas in the world and rivers and the
sea will make their presence here.
39. Iwill emerge by myself from earth in holy Nepal at the
foot of the Himalaya,
40. With four faces and resplendent head and body, known
as Sarircéa in all the three worlds.
4l. There I will remain within the water in the deep pond
known as Nagahrada for thirty thousand years.

49. When Krsna who will be born in the clan of the Vrsnis,
smashes the mountain with his disc at the request of Indra, and
kills demons, then that place will become peopled by the Mlecchas.
43. Then the Ksatriyas born in the solar race will kill them
and settle Brahmins there.
44. They will then establish in that country dharma permanently.
45. The Ksatriya kings of the solar race will establish in the
void the worship of linga.
46. The place will then become great with Brahmins and
all other castes observing different àéramas in life.
47. The kings will do their duty well by dharma.
48. In that place thus well settled, every being will always
worship me. Those who see me in that form or duly worship me
there, will go to my abode and see me there, being frced from all
sins.
49. Fourteen yojanas of land to the north of Ganga and
south of Agvinimukha is my region.
50. River Vàgmati rising from the peaks of Himalaya is a
hundred times more sacred than Ganga.
51. Those who bathe there reach my world through the
world of Visnu after death.
52. Even sinners who live in this place, certainly go to the
world of Indra.
53-54. The gods, demons, Gandharvas, Siddhas, Vidyàdharas, Apsarases, sages, Yaksas and others are deluded by my
maya, aud so they are unable to know where I am.
55. "This is known. as Siddhaksetra and is frequented by ascetics for penance. It is superior to Prabhàsa, Prayaga, Naimisa,
Puskara and Kuruksetra.
56. The great Himavan, my father-in-law is here.
57. From here arise great rivers like Ganga. In this holy
place all rivers are sacred, all springs are sacred, all rocks are
sacred.
58. A hermitage resorted to by Siddhas and Caranas will
arise here and the spot where I remain will be known as Saile-
$vara.

670 Varáha Purána
59. The river Vagmati flowing from here is very sacred, and
(like) river Ganga, cleanses one of all sins.
60. The utterance of its name brings about purification, its sight confers prosperity, and drinking its water and bathing in it liberates ten generations in the family.
61. ‘Those who bathe in this famous tirtha are never reborn
after their death.
62. I raise from the ocean of worldly life those that bathe
here every day and worship me.
63-64. He who takes from here at least one pot of water with
devotion and purity of mind, gets the result of performing Agnihotra, particularly if he is learned in Veda and Vedanga.
65. A spring will arise there because of me. It will be known
as Mrgasrngodaka and it will be a favourite of ascetics.
66. Those who bathe there with concentration of mind will
get free from all sins they commit.
67. "Those who bathe in the tirtha Paficanada here gain the
merit of performing Agnistoma sacrifice.
68. Those who guard Vagmati (against defilment) get
(the merit of gifting) six thousand cows.
69. The sinful or the ungrateful shall not go to Vagmati,
but only the pure, the honest and the devoted.
70. The afflicted, the fear-stricken, the tormented and the
diseased get beatitude by bathing in Vagmati.
71. Those who bathe in Vagmati and see me in devotion,
get great peace of mind.
72. By my power the sins of those who bathe here disappear
and natural calamities do not affect them.
73. Those who bathe in the Vagmati (in the particular
tirthas) get the result of Rajastiya and Asévamcdha sacrifices.
74. The place (actually occupied) by me (Rudra) should
be taken as one yojana.
75. At the north-eastern side remains the great serpent
Vasuki surrounded by thousands of other serpents.
76. He will obstruct persons coming to this place.
77. He should be first saluted. Then there will be no
difficulty for those coming here.
78. He who worships me here in full devotion, becomes a
king in this world honoured by all.

79. He who worships my idol here with sandal and garlands,
becomes a god.
80. He who offers me a lamp in this mountain with due
devotion, will be born as a solar deity.
81. He who renders me service with vocal or instrumental
music or dance, uttering praise and keeping awake at night, becomes mv own.
82. He who bathes me with milk, curd, ghee, honev or water,
overcomes old age and death.
83. He who feeds Brahmins in Sraddha with due attention
(here) becomes a god honoured by Indra.
84-85. Those who propitiate me through vows, pilgrimages,
offerings of food and offerings in fire with attention, remain in
heaven for sixty thousand years and are then born in this world
in all prosperity.
86. Brahmanas, Ksatriyas, Vaisyas, Südras, and women
who resort with devotion to Saile$vara here, get the position of
my attendants.
87. Sailegvara is the supreme secret, Saileívara is the supreme resort. There is no place superior to Sailesvara on earth.
88. Even the man who has incurred the sins of killing a
Brahmin, killing a teacher or killing a cow, gets purified by coming to this place.
89. There are various tirthas here with various deities, and
the touch of water in them removes all sins.
90. There is the tirtha called Krosodaka built by the gods
by condensing the form extending over a krofa.
91. By bathing there with purity, self-control and truthfulness, all sins disappear and abundant merit is achieved.
92. There is Anàíaka to the south of Sailesvara and the
person who goes there gets beatitude.
93. He who throws himself down from there without desire
or anger, goes in an aerial car to heaven surrounded by Apsarases.
94. At the bottom of the precipice there is a tirtha known
as Brahmodbheda built by Brahma. Know what merit it gives.
95. He who bathes there for one year with control of senses,
doubtless goes to the world of Brahma.

672 Varaha Purana
96. There is the Goraksaka dug by the feet of cows and bulls.
Seeing it procures the benefit of a thousand cows.
97-98. By going to the peak there called Gaurisikhara resorted to by Siddhas and seeing, touching or bowing to the universal mother Parvati who remains there for protecting the world,
one attains her own world.
99. He who throws himself down from there to the bank of
Vagmati, quickly goes to her world in an aerial car.
100. He who bathes in the pond called Umáàstanakunda
becomes lustrous like fire and goes to the world of Skanda.
101. By bathing in Paficanada resorted to by great sages,
the merit of Agnihotra is obtained.
102. He who makes others bathe there, will be reborn with
memory of his previous lives.
103. To the north of this is another tirtha resorted to by the
pious called Prantakapaniya guarded by Guhyakas.
104. He who bathes there for one year, becomes a Guhyaka
and an attendant of Rudra.
105. To the north-east of this temple of Pàrvati and to the
south of Vàgmati, there is a holy tirtha called Brahmodaya into
which water flows from a cave.
106. By touching its water, sprinkling it over the body or
bathing in it, one avoids seeing the world of death and is never
put to any misery.
107. By bathing with due rites in the Sundarikatirtha, one
attains beauty and brilliance.
108. By worshipping Sandhya there during the three times
of the day, a Brahmin gets free from all sins.
109-110. The pure Brahmin who remains for a whole
day and reciting Rudradhyaya at the confluence of Vagmati
and Manivati, becomes a learned man well-versed in Vedas and
liberates his entire family.
lil. Even if a person belonging to an inferior caste bathes
there and offers water with sesamum, no doubt, propitiates his
manes.
112. By bathing anywhere in the Vagmati, one avoids taking
birth as an animal, and becomes born in an affluent family.
113. The wise man may go to this confluence of Vagmati
and Manivati with his mind free from desire and anger.

114. And bathing there, he will acquire ten times the merit
of bathing in the place of the emergence of Ganga.
115. Thisis frequented by Vidyadharas, Siddhas, Gandharvas, sages, gods, Yaksas and serpents for bath.
116. Even a little money given to Brahmins here, produces
eternal merit.
117. The deities should be worshipped here with all effort,
because there is no holy place superior to this.
118-119. In this holy Slesmataka forest resorted to by the
gods, wherever I have, in my form as deer, moved about,
stood, slept or played, all that has become particularly sacred.
120. This horn broken into three wil] become famous in the
world as Gokarne$vara.
121-122. Thus telling gods, the great Lord, still remaining
invisible to them, bounded to the north.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND SIXTEEN
Greatness of Srügefvara
Brahma said:
1-2. When the great lord Tryambaka in the form of deer
left, the gods were consulting one another and me as to where
the three parts of the horn could be duly consecrated.
3. Indra installed the tip in one place. I installed the middle
part also in the same place.
4. Devas, Devarsis, Brahmarsis and Siddhas proclaimed it
as Gokarna.
5. Then Visnu installed the base of the horn in Devatirtha.
It then carae to be known as $rügesvara.
6. When the three parts were thus installed in two places,
the Lord bestowed two (of his hundred parts), one on cach.
7. Inthe deer he had divided his energy into hundred parts.
Two of these were bestowed on the three parts of the horn.
8. With the rest of the deer form, the Lord went to the foot
of the Himalaya.

674 Varàha Purana
9. To worship the Lord in these three pieces of the horn is
to get hundred times the benefit of worshipping him elsewhere.
10. Devas and Asuras worshipped him with severe penance
and got many boons.
11. Devas, Asuras, Gandharvas, Siddhas, Yaksas and Uragas went round the whole Slesmataka region in pilgrimage.
12. Proclaiming the benefits of that region and of the tirthas
therein, they returned from there to their own places.
13-14. When the gods had left, Ravana with his brothers
and other Raksasas came there and began to worship the great
Lord Gokarnesvara with severe penance.
15. Siva became pleased with him and offered him boons.
16. He sought the boon of victory for him in the three worlds.
17. Getting it from the great Lord, he immediately set out
for the conquest of the three worlds.
18. He conquered the three worlds and defeating Indra,
pulled out the tip of the horn installed by him and carried it away
along with his son Indrajit.
19. On the way, Ravana placed it on the shore of the ocean
for a while and went for performing Sandhyopasana.
20. When he returned he found that it had fixed itsclf on
the ground.
21. Hisattempt to pull it out with all his might simply failed
because it had so strongly cemented itself, and so leaving it there,
he returned to Lanka.
22. That place came to be known as Daksinagokarna (Southern Gokarna) where Siva, the lord of all beings, consecrated
himself.
23-24. Thus have I told you in detail about Uttaragokarna.
Daksinagokarna, $rügesvara and Sailesvara and how the Lord
came to be in each of these places.
25. I have told you, O son, about the greatness of these
places and tirthas there. What else do you wish to know ?

CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND SEVENTEEN
Benefits of Recitation
Sanatkumára said:
1-2. You have cleared all my doubts after well thinking
about them a lot and told me about Lord Siva of universal form
and unmatched glory who took the form of the deer and also
about the installation of its horn and the body in holy places for
the good of the world.
3. Now you may be pleased to tell me about the significance
of this.
Brahma said:
4. Whatever there is still to be told, will be narrated by
Pulastya.
5. He will say that before the sages in the Kuru country.
He will say about the importance of all tirthas.
6. O my son, you are equal to me and have known the true
essence of Vedas and Vedangas. (By listening to what I have
said) one gets cleansed of all sins, attains fame and becomes honoured in this world as well as in the world beyond.
7. '[his should always be listened to by people of all castes.
8. It is sacred and auspicious and brings about Dharma,
Karma and Artha and all prosperity, long life and success everywhere.
9. It removes all sins and bestows wealth, fame, happiness
and peace. So by listening to it one gets free from all that is bad
and evil.
10. By getting it recited, one gets over the effects of Kali
age and goes to heaven.
Sita said:
11. Having thus told Sanatkumara, the great lord Brahma
retired.
12. O virtuous ones, I have thus told you in essence the
conversation between Varaha and Bhümi.
13. He who recites this or listens to it with devotion, becomes free from all sins and gets beatitude.

676 Varaha Purana
14, This confers a crore times the merit acquired in Prabhasa, Naimisaranya, Gangadvara, Puskara, Prayaga, Brahmatirtha and Amarakantaka.
15. The merit of gifting a cow is acquired by listening even
to one chapter of it.
16. Listening to ten chapters with attention confers the
merit of Agnistoma and Atiratra sacrifices.
17-18. He who listens always to the narration of utterances
of Varaha acquires the merit of all sacrifices, all gifts and all
tirthas.
19. Varaha himself has declared: “He who listens with
devotion to the narration of this greatness of mine gets sons if
he has none, and also good grandsons".
20. He who kecps in his house a written copy of this, always
gets the favour of Lord Narayana.
21. He who always listens to it with deep devotion,
22. And performs püjà to the work as for the great Visnu
with sandal, flowers and clothes and feeds Brahmins,
23. And the king who does so with gifts of villages according
to his capacity, and honours well the discourser of the Purana,
24. Become free from all sins and attain merger in Lord
Visnu.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND EIGHTEEN
Contents of the Purana
I. This Purana spoken by Varàha was written at Kasi by
Madhavabhatta with the assistance of Viregvara in the Vikrama
year one thousand six hundred and seventythree.
2. The contents of the Varahapurana are now given. First
the occasion is mentioned and then the primordial origin.
3. Primary creation is then detailed followed by the story
of Durjaya and place of narration and rules of Sraddha.
4. Inthe narration of old legends we get the story of Sarama
and the story of Mahatapas.

5. Then the origin of Agni, Asvins, Gauri, Vinayaka and
Nagas,
6. The origin of Skanda and Sürya are given, followed by
the origin of Devi.
7. Then we get the origin of Kubera, the determination of
relative priority, and the origin of Dharma and Rudra,
8. 'Then the secret of the origin of Soma and briefly the
origin of earth, then the ancient legend and the story of the
hunter.
9. Then is the story of Satyatapas and later the rules for
observance of Matsyadvadasi, Kürmadvàdaái, Varahadvadasi,
10. Nrsirnhadvadasi, Vamanadvadasi, Bhargavadvadasi,
Sriramadvadaa,
1l. Krsnadvadasi, Buddhadvadasi, Kalkidvadasi and Padmanabhadvadaisi.
12. Dharanivrata, Agastyagita, the story of Pasupala and
the Vrata for obtaining a good husband follow.
18. Then are given Subhavrata, Dhanyavrata, Kantivrata,
Saubhagyavrata, Avighnavrata,
14. Santivrata, Kamavrata, Arogyavrata, Putrapraptivrata,
Sauryavrata and Sarvabhaumavrata,
15. The glorification of Purana, the praise of Lord Narayana by Lord Siva, Rudragita, and the determination of Prakrti
and Purusa.
16. Then follow the descriptions of the universe, the limits
of Jambüdvipa.
17. The extent of Bharata and the various things there.
Then we get the conversation between Narada and Mahisa,
18. The account of the greatness of Sakti and the killing of
Mahisasura, followed by the description of Rudra’s glory and
the Parvadhyaya.
19. Then occurs Svetopakhyana. This is followed by the
rites of Tiladhenu, Jaladhenu, Rasadhenu, Gudadhenu,
20. Sarkaràdhenu, Madhudhenu, Dadhidhenu, Lavanadhenu, Karpasadhenu and Dhanyadhenu.
21. Then we get the nature of devotion to the Lord, the
praise of Lord Visnu and the numerous questions put to him.

678 Varáha Purana
22. The nature of the devotees is then described, as also the
nature of joy and sorrow and the thirtytwo offences in worship.
23. The rules and the mantras for worship are then given
and also for permitted and prohibited food and the rules for
Sandhyopasana.
24. Observances for freedom from rebirth, the greatness of
Kokamukha, the importance of sandal and flower in worshipping
the lord,
25. Mayacakra, the greatness of Kubjamraka, the rules
relating to different castes,
26. And the mantras for offering collyrium and mirror
follow.
27. The expiations for eating the king's food, for not
cleaning teeth, for touching dead body, for non-utterance of
mantras,
28. For wearing blue cloth, worshipping with anger, for
wearing red cloth, for worshipping in darkness,
29. For wearing black cloth or unclean cloth, for eating
meat like pork,
30. For worshipping with the stain of the burnt oil in the
lamp in hand, for going to the cremation ground,
31. For cating oil cake, for worshipping with foot-wear on,
for not observing what is laid down by Sastra are then stated.
32. Then follow the account of the greatness of Sükaraksetra, the story of jackal and the eagle, and that of Khaüjarita,
33. The greatness of Kokamukha again and of Badari, the
importance of secret worship, the greatness of Mandara and
Guhya tirthas and of Salagrama,
34. Of Somegvara, Muktiksetra, Triveni and Gandaki,
35. Of Cakratirtha, Hariksetra, Devahrada and Ruruksetra,
36. The importance of Goniskramana, Dvàrakà and its
tirthas, Lohargala,
37. Mathuratirtha and its origin, Yamunatirtha, Akrüratirtha are given.
38. Then occur the accounts of Devaranya, Cakratirtha,
Kapila, Govardhana,
39. Visrantitirtha, the story of Gokarna,

40. The greatness of Sarasvati, Yamunodbheda, Gangodbheda and the curse of Samba.
41. This is followed by rules for installation of idols for
worship made of wood, stone or clay,
42. And the same made of copper, bronze, silver or gold,
43. The origin of Sraddha, pinda and sankalpa and details
of Pitryajfia are then given.
44. Then we get the importance of Madhuparka, the description of Sarnsaracakra, the miseries of evil and pleasures of
good,
45. The torments inflicted by Yama's men, the various hells,
46. The transformations consequent on the nature of actions,
and sinful deeds.
47. The account of good and bad, the allurements in life
and the wonderful story of Nimi are then given.
48. The sacred story of Gokarnesvara, the boons to Nandi,
the greatness of Jalesvara, Sailesvara and Srngesvara are then
narrated.
49, By listening to this Anukramanikà, one attains che merit
of listening to the Varahapurana.

GLOSSARY
The figure in black refers to a Chapter
The figure in white refers to a Verse
Abhava, non-being 6.15, 9.3;—son of Unnetà 74.9.
Acchodaka, a mountain in Krauficadvipa (same as Andhakara) 88.1.
Acyuta, a name of Visnu 6.16, 174.74, 211.84.
Adhara, deity representing downward direction 29.4.
Aditya, Sun-god 80.7, 113.41; origin of the name 26.7;—a law-giver 121.18;
Adityatirtha, a tirtha in the Ganga at Saukara, 138.16.
Agnayi, another name for Kapila cow 112.15.
71;—fire in the body 17.24-25, 28-29, 18.1-3;—guardian deity of southAgnibahu, son of Priyavrata 74.7.
Agnidatta, a warrior in the army of Hetr-Prahetr (also Agnidarhstra) 11.93-95,
100;—2a Brahmin turned Brahmaráksasa 155.62.
Agnidhra, a special priest 21.15-17;—son of Priyavrata and lord of Jambüdvipa 74.7.
Agnihotra, a sacrifice, 112.6, 215.63-64, 101.
Agnimàn, a mountain in Kusadvipa 87.1.
Agnimedha, a sacrifice 126.73.
Agniprabha, a tirtha in Saélagrama 145.56-59.
Agnisaras, a holy lake in Kokamuhka 140.34;—a tirtha in Lohargala 151.54-56.
Agnisatyapada, a tirtha in Badari 141.7-9.
Agnitejas, a warrior in the army of Hetr-Prahetr 11.93-95, 100.
Agnitirtha, a tirtha in Kubjamraka 126.66, 72.
Agnive$Sya, a sage 214.43-45.
Agrahayani, a month 178.5-6.
Ahavaniyàgni, one of the three sacrificial fires 190.15.
Aindri maya, a form of Maya 125.37.
Airavata, a minor mountain in Bharata 85.3.
Ajayà, a carrier goddess of libation 190.29-30.
Ākāśa 17.59.
Akhyavati, a river 82.4.
Akrüratirtha, a tirtha in Mathurà 155.4-5, 13, 71, 168.14.
Aksayà, a carrier-goddess of libation 190. 130.
Alakanandà, a stream in Meru 82.1.
Alamsarmà, chief minister of Mahisásura 93.2.

Glossary 681
Amalaka, a holy tree in Bhütagiri 148.67-71.
Amaragandikà, a river on the side of Gandhamadana 82.2.
Amiavasi, tithi 34.7.
Ambikeya, a mountain in Sakadvipa 86.2.
Ambhodhara, a serpent-chief 214.57-63.
Amitaksara, a name of Brahmi 91.3.
Amrtà, a goddess created by Vaisnavi 92.9-12.
Amsumayi, a form of Maya 125.44.
Amusyayana, disciple of Salankayvana 144.88, 90, 91, 145.28.
Ananta, a name of Visnu 174.74, 186.11, 211.84;—a serpent-chief 24.6-7, 214.
57-63;—son of Prthu 74.9.
Anantamáyà, a form of Maya 125.46.
Anantatirtha, a tirtha in Mathura 155.1-3.
Anaranya, king 62.5-6.
Anarta, a region in Krauficadvipa (same as Dundubhi) 88.3.
Aná$aka, a vrata 141.13;—a tirtha near SaileSvara 215.92.93.
Andhakàra, a mountain in Krauficadvipa 88.3;—a region of Krauficadvipa
88.3; —one of the eight main hells 200.1-2.
Andhakaraka, son of Dyutimàn 74.7.
Andhakas, a class of people 149.11, 19.
Andhatàmisra, utter darkness 2.28.
Anekaparvatas, a group of Gandharvas 81.5.
Anga, Manija king Sundara reborn 36.5.
Angaraja, a settlement in Naisadha 83.2.
Angaravahini, a river 82.4.
Angirasa, a law-giver 121.14;—a sage, husband of Tara 32.10;—preceptor of
Angirasi, a form of Maya 125.34.
Aniruddha 99.30;—one of the four Vyühas 148.14.
Anityá$rama, a holy place in Kokàmukha 140.31.
Añjana, a Raksasa 94.5.
Annaküta, a holy spot in Govardhana, 164.10, 11, 16, 23, 26, 45.
Antyà, a river arising from Vindhya 85.5.
Aparajiti, a goddess created by Vaisnavi 92.9-12;—2. goddess installed in
Mathura 160.15.
Apsarastirtha, a tirtha near Govardhana 164.21.
Apastamba, a law-giver 162.34, 197.17.
Arbuda, a serpent-chief 214.57-63.
Ardhacandra, a tirtha in Mathura 169.6, 16, 17, 18, 175.15.

682 Varaha Purdna
Ardravati, a river in Krauficadvipa (same as Kumudvati) 88.5.
Arimejaya, a serpent-chief 214.57-63.
Arista, a demon killed by Krsna 164.31.
Aristakunda, a tirtha near Govardhana 164.37.
Arjunaka, son of Dharmavyadha 8.5, 41-42.
Arjunakà, daughter of Dharmavyadha 8.6, 9.
Arkasthala, a holy spot in Bhandahrada 157.11-12, 13, 160.20.
Arogyavrata, rules 62.2-3, results 62.4.
Artiharà, goddess Candikà installed in Mathurà 160.72.
Aruna, a river 214.46-49,
Aruni, a sage saved by Satyatapas 98.1-2, 32, 34, 37.
Arundhati, 211.18-19.
Arunoda, a lake in Mandara 78.9.
Arvaksrotas, beings with vertical growth, 2.34, 38-39.
Asadha, the month Karkataka 46.1, 15, 126.67-68, 164.45, 180.121.
ASanisaprabha, a warrior in ihe army of Hetr-Prahetr 11.93-95, 98.
A$auca, pollution 188.2.
origin of 166.2-20.
Asita, a mount in Meru 79.1;—a sage 124.16-17, 179.61.
Asitoda, lake in Vipula 78.9.
Asoka, a mount in Naisadha $3.1;—a sacred tree in Dvàrakà 149.65-66.
Asprsa, a goddess installed in Mathura, 160.29.
Asp:$yà, a goddess installed in Mathura, 160.29.
Astami, tithi 27.43, 160.1.
Astapatra, a mandala for püjà 99.23.
Astavakra, a sage 54.17.
Asuras 32.11, 12, 16, 18, 19, 27, 31, 72.9, 92.30, 93.26, 94.17, 95.37, 41, 96.5,
Asvara, a sage 95.7-8.
ASvasiras, a king 4.13-14, 5.46-47;—a sage 170.62.
A$vatara, a serpent-chief 214.57-63.
A$vattha, principal tree at the peak of Vipula, 77.23;—a sacred tree in DvàAégvayuja, the month Tulà 49.1, 23-24, 169.35-36, 180.121.
25, 214.35, 73;—the vital airs Prana and Apàna 17.24-25, 31, 18.1-3,
Atharvanamantra 97.3-4.
Atikaya, a Ráksasa 94.6-9.
Atiratva, a sacrifice 145.47, 217.16.
Atman 9.10.

Glossary 683
Attahasa, a holy place 122.12.
Auddalaki, a law-giver 197.17.
Audhra, son of Dyutimàn 74.7.
Augrasena, a goddess installed in Mathura 160.16.
Aurva Prajapati 147.5, 10, 15, 20, 28.
Avanti, a country 3.3-4.
Avasara, a mountain in Gomedadvipa 89.4.
Avataras of Visnu, list 48.17-19, results of worshipping each 48.20-22.
Avici, a hell 7.20.
Avidya, ignorance 6.11.
Avighnavrata, rituals 59.1-4, results 59.5.
Avimukta, a tirtha in Mathurà 152.33, 168.16.
Avyakta, 25.2, 99.1.
Babhravya, sarhhita relating to Pasupata, 71.54;—a vrata relating to Rudra
97.39, 43, origin of the name 97.39.
Babhru, a name of Rudra 97.5.
Badari, a holy place in the Himalayas 48.6-7, 23, 140.4, 141.1, 52, 55, 57
Badavà, sabmarine fire 125.39-40.
Bahu, a warrior in the army of Hetr-Prahetr 11.93-95.
Bahuda, a river rising from Himalaya 85.4, 214.46-49.
Bahulà, a river in Krauficadvipa (same as Pundarika) 88.5;—a river in Naisadha, 83.3;—a tirtha in Brndavana in Mathura 157.8-9.
Bahuvahini, a river rising from Rksa 85.5.
Bahuvana, a garden in Mathura 161.7.
Bahyakaveri, a river rising from Sahya 85.5.
Bakulavana, a garden in Mathurà 153.39.
Baladhana, a division of Kusadvipa 87.2.
Bali, son of Virocana 152.51-52, 159.9, 193.45.
Balihrada, a tirtha in Mathurà 160.34.
Bànagangà, a holy waterfall near Somesvara 144.70-74.
Bhadra, a banyan tree on the bank of Pusyabhadrà 98.6, 10;—a mount near
Asitoda 78.18-19.
Bhadrà, a stream in Meru 82.1.
Bhadrakarza, a holy place 122.12.
Bhadrakara, a region on the western side cf Kuru 84.12.
Bhadranadi, a river in Naisadha 83.3.
Bhadrásva, a country 10.39;—the kingdom of Bhadrasva 49.6;—name of a
king 49.6, 50.1, 51.5;—the region on the eastern side of Malyavan 82.2,
83.1;— a region on the east of Meru 74.8, 75.61.
Bhadravana, a garden in Mathura 153.40, 161.7.

684 Varaha Purana
Bhadresvara, a holy place 97.19;—deity installed in Cakratirtha in Mathura
Bhadresvaratirtha, a tirtha in Mathura 60.57.
Bhágavata dharma, propagators of 148.12-22.
Bhairava, a name of Rudra 33.19, 71.59-60.
Bhándahrada, a tirtha in Mathura 157.10-12.
Bhandiraka, a tirtha in Mathura 156.3-5, 166.15.
Bhandiravana, a garden in Mathura 153.46-47, 161.10.
Bhangurasa, a devotee in Saukara 138.62.
Bharadvàja, a sage 170.61.
Bharadvaja, a sage 214.43-45.
Bharata, son of Priyavrata 2.57;—son of Rsabha 74.9.
Bharata, a division of Bharatavarsa 85.1;—the land of Bharata 10.37-38,
16.5. 74.9, 85.1;—a king of Kimpurusa 42.9;—the region south of
Meru 75.61.
Bháratas, people in the region of Himavàn 75.31.
Bhargava, a sage 214.43-45.
Bháratavarsa 99.53.
Bhásvàn, a name of Sun 26.3.
Bhàskara, a name of Sun 26.6;—origin of the name 26.6.
Bhava, name of Rudra 97.5.
Bhava, existence 6.15.
Bhavaputra, a name of Vinàyaka 23.28-29.
Bhavisya, a Purana 177.36, 55.
Bhauma, a sacrifice 8.31.
Bhaumaka, a settlement in Naisadha 83.2.
Bhima, a Raksasa 94.6-9;—a river in Naisadha 83.3.
Bhimakarma, a warrior in the army of Hetr-Prahetr 11.93-95.
Bhimàksa, a Raksasa 25.7.
Bhimarathi, a river rising from Sahya 85.5.
Bhisma, son of Santanu 157.49.
Bhogajavà, a river in Krauficadvipa (same as Manojava) 88.5.
Bhojas, a class of people 149.11.
43-45 ;—father of Devadatta 146.5, 49, 51;—propegator of Bhágavaiadharma 148.12.
Bhrgukunda, a tirtha in Bhütagiri 148.49-53.
Bhrgutunga, a holy spot on the bank of Gandaki 146.53.
Bhüma, a settlement in Naisadha 83.2.
Bhütagiri, a sacred place 148.41, 71, 81.
Bhütayajfia 190.11.
Bilva, a sacred tree in Dvárakà 149.80-82.

Glossary 685
Bilvaprabha, a tirtha in Salagrama 145.38-40.
Bilvasthali, a place in the valley between Sumüla and Vasudhara 80.5.
Bilvavana, a garden in Mathura 153.45, 161.9.
Brahma, a sacrifice 8.31.
Brahmanas, see Brahmins;— rules of worship for 115.23-26.
Bráhmani, a mother goddess representing pride 27.35-36.
Brahmins 3.19, 9.15, 37.15, 17, 25, 26, 28, 32, 33, 34, 39.10, 50-53, 57,59, 68,
Brahmadatta, king of Kampilya, 137.67, 152.44;—the chief judge in Yama’s
hall of justice 197.20.
Brahmahà, a Raksasa 94.10-12.
Brahmakunda, a tirtha in Badari 141.4-6;—a tirtha in Lohàrgala 151.73-78.
Brahmanda, the universe 9.8, 18.13.
Brahmapara, a hymn in praise of Brahma by A$vins 20.27-30;—a hymn in
praise of Visnu by Nàrada 3.9-20.
Brahmapada, a tirtha in Goniskramana, 147.40-43.
Brahmaràáksasa 139.35, 37, 40, 57, 58, 63, 65, 73, 77, 80, 82, 84, 88,155.14, 44,
45, 47, 51, 54, 59; —liberation by an outcaste 139.32-100.

686 Varaha Purana
Brahmasaras, 2 holy lake in Kokamukha 140.37;—a tirtha in Sanandira 150.
Brahmatanaya, a river 144.131.
Brahmatirtha, a holy tirtha 217.14;—a tirtha in Mathura 154.19.
Brahmavidya 36.9, 38.28.
Brahmayajfia 190.11.
Brahmi, the aspect of Trikala representing the energy of Brahma 90.29, 96.74.
Brahmodaya, a tirtha near Saile$vara 215.105-106.
Brahmodbheda, a tirtha near Sailesvara 215.94.
Brhaspatikunda, a tirtha in Lohargala, 151.57-59.
Brndávana, a garden in Mathura 153.48-49; 156.6-7, 157.8.
Buddha 55.37;—an incarnation of Visnu 113.42.
Buddha, a celestial damsel 214.41-42.
Buddhadvadasi, rituals 47.1-5, results 47.6-24.
Caitra, a demon 99.1;—the month Mina 43.1, 157.9.
Caitrangada, the world of Gandharvas 151.37.
Caitraratha, a Vidyadhara 5.7.
Cakeya, a settlement in Naisadha 83.2.
Cakoraküta, a minor mountain in Bharata 85.3.
Cakra, a holy place 122.2.
Cakrasvàmi, a tirtha in Salagrama 145.41-44.
Cakratirtha, a holy place 97.31;—a tirtha in the Manipüra hill in Dvaraka
149,59-64;——a tirtha in Mathura 162.1, 57, 58, 63, 168.17;—a tirtha in
Saukara 137.19, 20;—a tirtha near Govardhana 164.41.
Cakravarta, a tirtha in Mandara 143.36-38.
Caksus, a stream in Meru 82.1.
Caksusa manvantara 5.6.
Caksusmati, a river rising from Himalaya 85.4.
Camunda, a name of Raudri 96.32, 48, 52, 59, 72, 76, origin of the name 9$.
Candà, a river in Naisadha 83.3.
Candanabha, a river rising from Parivatra 85.4.
tain (same as Jaladhàra) 86.2;—a river in KuSadvipa (same as Hradini) 87.3.
Candrabhaga, a river from Himalaya 85.4, 97.17.
Candradvipa, a region on the western side of Tri$rhga 84.10.
Candrakànta, a waterfall in Candradvip2 84.10.
Candrakanti, a goddess created by Vaisnavi 92.9-12.
Candraprabha, a goddess created by Vaisnavi, 92.9- 12; —wife of king Candrasena 180.3.
Candrapura, a city 122.27.
Candrasarma, the priest of Medhatithi 189.27, 45, 46-47.

Glossary 687
Candrasena, a king of Mathura 180.2. 37.
Candravarta, a river in Candradvipa 84.10.
Candravati, a river in Naisadha 82.4, 81.3.
Candrodaya, a mountain 81.2.
Cánüra 15.17.
Caranas, a group of celestials 25.15, 75.8, 26, 79.14-15, 92.34, 158.12, 215.13,
Carcikà, a goddess installed in Mathura, 160.16, 28.
Carmanvati, a river rising from Pariyatra 85.4, 214.46-49.
Carubhaga, a river 214.46-49.
Carukanya, a goddess created by Vaisnavi 92.9-12.
Cárukesi, a goddess created by Vaisnavi 92.9-12.
Càrumukhi, a goddess created by Vaisnavi 92.9-12.
Catubsámudrika, a tirtha in Mathura, 158.42-43.
Catuhsámudrikà, a holy well in Mathura 165.29, 55.
Catuhsrotas, a tirtha in Badari 141.17-19.
Caturyuga 39.62-63.
Chaya, shadow of Sarmjfia, wife of Màrtanda 20.7, 8, 12, 14.
Citra, a river in KuSadvipa 87.3.
Citravati, a river 214.46-49.
Citraküta, a minor mountain in Bharata, 10.20, 34, 12.2, 3-4, 85.3, 214.53.55.
i Citrakütà, a river rising from Rksa 85.5.
Citrasena, a Gandharva 214.74.
Citrasila, a slab on the bank of Pusyabhadra, 98.6.
Citrotpalà, a river rising from Rksa 85.5.
Cittayoga 142.42.
Cohabitation, rules relating to 142.31-41.
Collyrium, offering of 128.73.
Comb, offering of 128.70-72.
Copper, origin of 129.26-49.
Copper vessels, importance in rituals 129.21, 41, 42.
Consecration of images 181.9— 186.36.
Coraka, a settlement in Naisadha 83.2.
Cosmology 74.1— 89.7.
Creation, of gods 187.7-27, primary 2.4-53.
Cüdamala, a settlement in Naisadha 83.2.
Cyavana, a sage 214.43-45.
i Dadhidhenu 106.1, 7, 8.
Daivika, a river 214.46-49.
Brahma 74.6.

688 Varāha Purana
Daksa, a river in Naisadha 83.3.
Daksayani 21.10-12.
Daksinà, deity representing south 29.4.
Daksinagni, one of the three sacrificial fires 3.17. 18.18, 190.15.
Daksinagokarna 216.22, 23-24.
Daksinakoti, a tirtha at the southern end of Mathura 160.9, 18, 168.14.
Daksinàpatha 6.20.
Daksinayana path of Pitrs 34.7.
Dàmodara, a name of Visnu 8.44, 39.39-41, 47.4, 163.34.
Darhstrankura, a holy spot in Kokamukha 140.70.
Dànavas 81.1, 2, 6.
Dance, merit of 155.7-70.
Dandaka, a forest in Bhàrata 71.10, 38.
Darbhavati, a river in Naisadha 83.3.
Dardura, a minor mountain in Bhàrata 85.3, 113.49, 214.53-55.
Dàruvana, a holy place in Kedàra 97.18.
Dasaratha, a king 45.6;—Manija Sudanta reborn 36.7.
Dasami, tithi 29.14.
Dasarna, a river rising from Rksa 85.5.
Dasasvamedha, a tirtha in Mathura 154.25.
Devas 25.14, 32, 26.16, 32.11, 12, 16, 18, 19, 31, 33.15, 25, 35.9, 70.10-11, 13Devadaruvana, a holy place 122.14.
Devadatta, a Kinnara king 81.2.
Devagarte$vara, a Siva temple in Mathurà 175.24, 176.6.
Devagiri, a holy spot near Govardhana 164.29.
Devahrada, a tirtha in Sàlagràma 145.75-82.
Devaküta, a mountain at the eastern extremity of Meru 77.4.
Devangada, a holy place 97.31.
Devaprabha, a tirtha in Sàlagráma 145.63-65.
Devaráta, a sage 41.31, 33-34, 36-37.
Devata, another name for Hariharaprabha 144.165.
Devavrta, a mountain in Krauficadvipa 88.1.
Devayajiia 190.11.
Devika, a river rising from Himalaya 37.8-9, 38.22, 85.4, 97.16, 144.129.
Devistha, a mountain in Krauücadvipa 88.1.
Devotee, moral code for 122.2-7.
Dhanafijaya, a serpent-chief 27,14, 214.57-63.
Dhanapati, Kubera 30.5, 7.
Dhanusmati, a river 82.4.

Glossary 689
Dhanyà, a goddess created by Vaisnavi 92.9-12.
Dhànyadhenu 110.1, 3, 17, 18.
Dhanyavrata, rituals 56.1-2, results 56.13-16.
Dharanivrata, another name for Matsyadvadasivrata 39.60;—origin of the
name of 50.27; ritüals 50.4-22; results 50.23-28.
Dhàrápatanaka, a tirtha in Mathura 154.8-14.
Dharma, division among the four castes 32.6; origin 32.3; feet of 32.7; three
horns of 32.8;—a law-giver 121.16;—name of Yama 17.71.
Dharmàranya, a forest on the bank of Ganga 5.18-19.
Dharmodbhava, a holy place in Kokàmukha 140.44.
Dharmavyadha 6.39.
Dhàtaka, son of Savana, 74.7.
Dhàtakikhanda, the region of Dhataka 74.7.
Dhatus, vital elements in the body 17.37, 59.
Dhenu, a river in Sakadvipa 86.3.
Dhenuka, a demon 157.39.
Dbenuvata, a holy place in Kokamukha 140.40.
Dhrtarastra, a serpent-chief 214.57-63.
Dhrti, a river in KuSadvipa (same as Mahati) 87.3;—son of Jyotisman 74.8.
the northern end of earth 171.20;—son of Priyavrata 74.7;— son of
Medhatithi 74.8.
Dhruvatirtha, a tirtha in Mathura 152.59-61, 180.1, 7, 19, 25, 93, 106-107,
Dhümajanma, a settlement in Naisadha 83.2.
Dhiitapapa, a river rising from Himalaya 85.4;—a tirtha in Bhitagiri 148.58Dhvanksa, a Raksasa 94.6-9.
Dhvastakarna, a Raksasa 94.6-9.
Dhyànayoga 129.8, 58.
Diptatejas, a warrior who came out of Gauramukha's gem 11.83-84, 97;
Manija king reborn as Sànta 36.3.
Dirghabahu, a king 37.25;—a Raksasa 94.6-9.
Dirghavisnu, a deity installed in Mathurà 169.41.
Diti, mother of Asuras 187.26.
Divakara, a name of Sun; origin of the name 26.7.
Divya, a sacrifice 8.31.
Dravinoda, a name of fire 18.22.
Drdhavraia, a king 55.22;—a vow, requisites of 117.37-42.
Drona, a division of Ku$advipa 87.2;—a mountain (same as Hemaparvata)
Drsadvati, a river rising from Himalaya 85.4.
Dundubhi, a region in Krauücadvipa 88.3;—son of Dyutiman 74.7.
Durga, a holy place 122.14.
Durga, opulence in the body 17.24-25, 44, 18.1-3;—a river rising from Vindhya 85.5.

690 Varaha Puréna
Durvásas, a sage 16.1-4, 38.7, 10, 14, 27, 29, 51.1-2, 98.1-2, 5, 149.10, 14, 20,
Dusyanta, father of Bharata 50.25.
Dvadasaditya, a tirtha in Mathura 168.17.
Dvàdasaditya Kunda, a tirtha in Badari 141.24-27.
Dvadasaksaramantra 120.10.
Dvadasi, tithi 31.18, 123.9, 11, 12, 13, 28, 30, 124.1, 8, 126.34, 40, 46, 51, 57,
211.54, 55, 64;—general rules of worship on 115.11-21.
Dvadasivratas, pertaining to the avatàras of Visnu 39.1— 48.24.
Dvaipayana, Vyasa 112.74, 177.8.
Dviranda, a holy place 122.13.
Dvita, a sage 170.62.
Dvitiya, the second day of the fortnight 20.35.
Dvivinda, a mountain in Krauficadvipa (same as Govinda ) 88.2.
Dyutimàn, son of Priyavrata and lord of Salmali 74.7.
Eight hells 200.1-2.
Eighteen Purànas 112.74-77.
Ekaksara, a name of Brahmi 91.2.
Ekalinga, a holy place 122.15.
Ekamüla, a mount near lake Mànasa 78.14-16.
Ekaśrůga, a mountain 81.4, 82.2.
Ekata, a sage 170.62.
Ekoddista, an obsequial ceremony 188.7, 8.
Elàpatra, a serpent-chicf 214.57-63.
Eleven Rudras 214.35.
Expiation, for approaching idol after drinking alcohol 136.73; for approaching idol with pork 136.68-69; for eating food without offering to the
deity 136.94-96; for eating goose-flesh 135.57-59; for eating king's
food 130.23; for entering temple after touching a dead body 132.36-38;
for going to the cremation ground 132.16-18; for not cleaning the teeth
131.9; for not offering sandal and flowers 136.100-102; for otfering food
touched by dog 135.38-40; for passing flatus during worship 133.6-7;
for passing mction during worship 133.11-12; for performing worship
in anger 134.51-53; for preaching about expiations but not practising
134.6; for service after touching lamp 136.6-7; for touching after sexual

Glossary 691
intercourse 132.8-11; for touching a woman during her monthly course
132.24-26: for touching idol after adultery 134.29-30; for using saffower
in food 136.81; for waking up the deity without beating the drum 136.
110; for wearing black garment 135.20-21; for wearing cloth of another
136.86-90; for wearing red garment 135.5-6; for wearing unwashed
cloth 135.31-33; for worship after eating oil-cake 136.58; for worship
after eating pork 135.48-52; for worship after going to cremation ground
136.53; for worship in darkness 135.12-14; for worship with forbidden
flowers 134,69-71; for worship with undigested food in stomach 136.
Five propagators of Bhagavatadharma 148.12.
Five sacrifices 8.31.
Four castes, origin from Lord’s form 9.15-16.
Four vyühas 148.14, 152.25.
Gabhasti, a division of Bhàratavarsa 85.1;—a river in Sákadvipa.
Gabhiraka, a tirtha in Mandara 143.42-44.
Gadadhara, a form of Visnu 7.29-40,47.
Gadakunda, a tirtha in Sálagràma 145.53-55.
Gaja, a mountain 81.4.
{ Gajamüla, a mount near lake Mànasa 78.14-16.
Gambhira, a goddess created by Vaisnavi 92.9-12.
Ganàntika, rosary 128.42, 69, 77; eligibility for 128.79; materials of 128.81;
number of beads in 128.80; place in worship 128.50-63.
Ganapati, ākāśa 17.24-25, 35-36, 18.1-3;—a name of Vinàyaka 23.1, 25, 24.2.
Gandaki, a river rising from Himalaya 97.17, 85.4, 144.39, 41, 58, 61, 95, 96,
of its origin 144.107-128.
Gandhakali, a celestial damsel 214.41-42.
Gandhamadana, a mountain on the southren part of Meru 10.45, 48.6-7,
a tirtha in Salagrama 145.72-74.
Gandharvakunda, a holy spot in Asikunda in Mathura 163.13-14.
Gandhavati, city of Vayu 76.12.
Ganga, a river rising from Himalaya 13.46, 22.11, 30, 71.30, 38, 82.1, 85.4,

692 Varàha Purána
Gangadvara, a holy place 217.14.
Gangasagarika, another name for Sitatirtha 179.30, 31.
Garga, a sage 214.43-45.
Gargyatirtha, a tirtha in Mathura 60.57.
Gáàrhapatya, one of the three sacrificial fires 3.17, 18.20.
Garjana, a mount near lake Asitoda 78.18-19.
Gartesvara, a holy spot in Mathura with the installation of Siva 160.41;—the
chief deity in Ardhacandra in Mathura 169.19.
Garuda, the king of birds, Visnu's vehicle 4.19, 23, 24-25, 7.42, 11.24-26, 105,
Garudake$ava, a tirtha in Mathura 168.60.
Gaura, a mount in Meru 80.8.
in Krauficadvipa 88.4;—speech 17.24-25, 33, 18.1-3.
Gaurigikhara, a sacred peak near Saile$vara 215.97-98.
Gaya, son of Ananta 74.9.
Ghantabharanaka, a tirtha in Mathura, 154.16-17, 160.60.
Ghantavelaka, a tirtha in Mathura, 160.60.
Ghosthood, actions that lead to 174.42-51; actions for redemption from 174.
53-58; actions that save from 174.34-40.
Ghrtaci, a celestial damsel 214.41-42;—a goddess created by Vaisnavi 92.9Gift, of Dadhidhenu 106.1-9; of Dhànyadhenu, 110.1-21, of Gudadhenu 102.
1-25; of Jaladhenu 100.1-20; of Kapiladhenu 111.1-19; of Karpasadhenu 109.1-10. of Ksiradhenu 105.1-19; of Lavanadhenu 108.1-17; of
Madhudhenu 104.1-22; of Navanitadhenu 107.1-15; of parturient cow
112.29-45; of Rasadhenu 101.1-15; of Sarkaràdhenu 103.1-19; of Tiladhenu 99.91-99; varieties and benefits 207.42-56.
Girà a river rising from Vindhya 85.5.
Girisutà a goddess ereated by Vaisnavi 92.9-12.
Godàvàma a settlement in Naisadha 83.2.
Godavari a river rising from Sahya 71.45 85.5 97.17 214.46-49.
Goghna a Raksasa 94.10-12.
Gokarna. holy place 122.15, 213.7;—name of the place where the tip and middle of the horn of Siva’s deer form was installed 216.14;—a merchant
Gokarnesvara, name of Siva in one of the temples in Mathura 160.47:—Siva’s
deer form represented by the three places of his horn 215.120.
Gomanta, a minor mountain in Bharata 85.3.

Glossary 693
Gomati, a river rising from Himalaya 13.46, 85.4, 97.17.
Gomeda, one of the seven islands of the world 74.7, 89.4, 140.27.
Gomedha, a sacrifice 16.10-11, 38, 111.13.
Goniskramana, a place at the top of Himalaya, 147.4, 148.1;—a tirtha in
Goniskramana, 147.9, 31-33, 54.
Gopa, a tirtha, in Mathura 160.61.
Gopisvara, a holy spot near Saptasámudrika in Mathura 157.21.
Goraksaka, a tirtha near Saile$vara 215.96.
Gori, a celestial damsel 214.41-42.
Govardhana, a holy hill near Mathura 164.1, 11, 14-15, 17, 42, 46, 165.23,
Govinda, name of Visnu 36.11, 22, 23,153.49, 174.74; —a mountain in Krauficadvipa 88.2.
Grdhravata, a tirtha in Saukara 137.59, 74, 237,
Gudakesa, an Asura devotee transformed into copper and other materials
Guha, a name of Skanda, 25.5.
Guhyakas, a group of celestials 10.41, 80.5, 213.25, 214.40, 215.103.
Haha, a Gandharva, 22.41. 214.38-39, 74.
Hairanvati, a river in Hiranmaya 84.5.
Hamsa, a river 82.4.
Hamsakunda, a tirtha in Manipüra hill in Dvaraka 149.47-52,
Harhsaküta, a mount near lake Mahabhadra 78.21-23.
Harhsatirtha, a tirtha near Kamika 144.173-178.
Harhsavati, a river 82.4.
Happiness, actions leading to 116. 26-44.
Harana, a Raksasa 94.10-12.
Hari, a name of Visnu 15.9, 58.3, 7, 68.19, 70.17, 73.51;—a division of
KuSadvipa (same as Drona) 87.2.
Haridatta, a Vaisya 49.22.
Harihara, a holy place 97.31.
Hariharaprabha, a holy spot on the bank of Gandaki 144.164.
Hariksetra, the place where Ganga meets Bhagirathi, 145.113.
Harita, a mount in Naisadha 83.1.
Haritoyà, a river 82.4.
Harivars:, a region in Nisadha 10.37-38, 74.8, 75.32.
Harya$va, a king 43.9.
Hastinapura 157.50.
Havya, son of Priyavrata and lord of Gomeda 74.7.
Havyavahana, a name of fire 18.17, 19.
Hayamukti, a holy place in Mathura 160.23-25,
Hell, actions to avoid going to 207.19-31.
Hemaküta, a mountain in Janvoüdvipa 74.8, 75.12, 27, 32, 214.53-55.

694 Varaha Purdna
Hemaparvata, a mountain in Kusadvipa 87.1.
Hetr, son of Svayambhuvamanu 10.59, 65.
Himalaya 16.8, 28.29, 55.30, 32, 63.8-10, 71.32, 97.25, 39, 98.6, 16-17, 113.49,
Himavan, see Himalaya;—father of Uma 22.4, 42;—a mount near lake MànHiranmaya, a region in Jambiidvipa 75.34, 84.5.
Hiranyagarbha, cosmic egg 15.15, 17.26.
Hiranyakasipu, an Asura 25.9, 113.23.
Hiranyaksa, an Asura 25.7, 163.34.
Hota, a special priest 210.15-17.
Hrádini, a river in KuSadvipa 87.3.
Hrsikes$a, a holy place in Himalaya 146.15, 147.1;—name of Visnu 146.3,
163.34; origin of the name 146.73.
Hühü, a Gandharva 22.41, 214.38-39, 74.
Idhma, a name of fire 18.24.
Iksula, a river rising from Mahendra 85.6.
Iksumati, a river in Sakadvipa 86.3.
Iksuvàsà, a goddess installed in Mathura and worshipped by Krsna 160.19.
Iláàvrta, a region in the middle of Jambüdvipa 10.39, 69.3, 74.8, 75.21, 35,
Incarnations of Visnu, 113.42, list of ten 211.69; Buddha 4.2-3, fish 1.5, 2.3,
Indumati, a Raksasa girl 95.18.
158.18;—a law-giver 121.17, 125.9;—a division of Bhàáratavarsa 85.1:
Indradhvaja, a tirtha near Govardhana 164.39.
Indradyumna, son of Tejas 74.9.
Indrajà, a mother goddess representing rivalry 27.35-36.
Indrajit 216.18.
Indraloka, a tirtha in Badari 141.10-13.
Indrasaila, a mount near lake Mahábhadra 78.21-23.
Indratirtha, a tirtha to the east of Govardhana 164.3-4.
Indravati, a river 82.4.

"Glossary 695
Initiation, of the Brahmins 127.9-74; of the Ksatriyas 128.1-13; of the Südras
Intellect 2.7, 36.
Travati, a river rising from Himalaya 85.4.
Īśāna, guardian deity of north-east 29.12-13, 99.28, 39.
Jaigisavya, a sage 4.13-14, 22, 27, 32-33.
Jàjali, a sage propagator of Bhagavatadharma 148.12.
Jalabindu, a holy waterfall in Kokamukha 140.16.
Jaladhara, a mountain in Sakadvipa 86.2;—a region in Sakadvipa 86.3.
Jalesvara, a holy place 122.14;—a king 144.150.
Jalmesvara, a holy place 122.15.
Jamadagni, a sage 15.15, 214.43-45. )
Jamadagnya, an incarnation of Visnu 44.2-3.
Jamadagnyadvadasi, rituals 44.1-7, results 44.9-21.
Jambavati, wife of Krsna 149.15.
Jambi, the principal tree at the peak of Gandhamadana 77.17.
Jambüdvipa, one of the seven islands of the world, 2.57, 10.40, 74.7, 75.1, 6,
Jambinada, a mountain and region in Salmalidvipa 89.3.
Janaka, king of Mithila 163.2, 207.3;—Manija Soma reborn 36.7.
Janamejaya, last king of the Kuru line 193.1-5, 194.36.
Jàruji, a mount near lake Mahàbhadra 78.21-23.
Jatakunda, a holy lake in Sànandüra 150.48-54.
Jatàyu, a bird in the northern Dhruva 171.28.
Jathara, a mountain at the eastern extremity of Meru 77.4.
Jatuccha, a mountain 81.7.
Jaya, doorkeeper of Visnu 113.62;—son of Trnabindu 144.133, 139, 140.
Jaya, doorkeeper of Vaisnavi 95.27;—a goddess created by Vaisnavi 92.9-12.
Jayadà, a goddess installed in Mathura 160.17.
Jayanta, a minor mountain in Bharata 85.3;—a mount in Naisadha 83.1.
Jayanti, a goddess created by Vaisnavi 92.9-12.
Jimüta, a division of Kusadvipa (same as Valahaka) 87.2.
Jimiitavahana, son of Jyotismàn 74.7.
Jüànanidhi, a name of Brahmi 91.4.
Jvara, a manifestation of Rudra 201.38, 41, 44, 48.
Jyotirathà, a river rising from Rksa 85.5.

696 Varaha Purána
Jyotisman, son of Priyavrata and lord of Kraufica (Kusadvipa) 74.7, 8.
Jyotivirya, a Raksasa 94.6-9.
Kadamba, principal tree at the peak of Mandara 77.11;—a tirtha in Dvaraka
149.53-58. Kadambakhanda, a tirtha near Govardhana 164.28.
Kadrü 24.5.
Kailàsa, a minor mountain near lake Manasa in Bharata, abode of Rudra
Kairáta, a name of Rudra 97.5.
Kakubha, a mount in Meru 79.21.
Kakudhra, a mountain in Kusadvipa 87.1.
Kakupadmini, a river in Naisadha, 83.3.
Kakurafijana, a settlement in Naisadha 83.2.
Kala, an associate of Yama 194.26, 31, 195.22, 197.26-28, 206.4;—a Raksasa
Kalanemi, an Asura 10.64.
Kalaratri, a name of Raudri 96.17-18, 40, 48, 54;—origin of the name 96.33.
Kalasütra, one of the eight main hells 200.1-2.
Kali, a name of Raudri 96.54.
Kàlihrada, a tirtha in Sálagráma 145.48-50.
Kalifijara, name of Siva installed at Krsna-ganga 175.7, 176.18, 21, 47, 54, 70,
Kalki, incarnation of Visnu 48.4-5, 20-22, 55.37.
Kalkidvadasi, rituals 48.1-5, results 48.6-24.
Kàmavrata, rituals 61.1-9, results 61.10-11.
Kamba, a river in Naisadha 83.3.
Kambala, a serpent-chief 24.6-7, 214.57-63;—a mountain in Naisadha 83.1.
Kamika, another name for Triveni in Gandaki 144.98.
Kàmpilya, a city in Paficala 152.44.
Karhsavasarhka, a goddess installed in Mathura 160.16.
Kamyakavana, one of the gardens in Mathura 161.7.
Kanakasrnga, a mount near lake Mahabhadra 78.21-23.
Kanakhala, a tirtha in Mathura 152.42.
Kàáficanaérhga, a mountain in Krauficadvipa (same as Devistha) 88.1.
Kanka, a mountain (same as Puspavàn) 87.1.
Kàntimati, queen of Supratika 10.19;—queen of Bhadrasva 49.8.
Kaàntivrata, aim 57.1, rituals 57.3-14.
Kaànva, a sage 170.62.

Glossary 697
Kanyakubja, a city 162.5.
Kapala 97.38.
Kapalamocana, a tirtha in Ganga in Varanasi 97.30, 34, 36.
Kapalika, the naked form of Rudra 97.21-22.
Kapalikavrata 97.10.
Kapalin, a name of Rudra 97.5.
Kapardin, a name of Rudra 33.24.
Kapi, a mount near lake Manasa 78.14-16.
of Bhagavatadharma 148.12;—a mount near lake Asitoda 78.18-19;—
a settlement in Naisadha 83.2;—son of Jyotisman 74.8.
Kapilavaradha, an idol installed in Mathura 163.32
Kapifijala, a mount near lake Mahabhadra 78.21-23;—a mount in Meru 80.
Kardali, a name of Raudri 96.54.
Karambhavaluka, a furious river in Yamaloka 200.27.
Karant2ka, a river in Naisadha 83.3.
Karatoyà, a river rising from Rksa 85.5, 214.46-49.
Karavira, a tirtha in Kubjamraka 126.53.
Kardama Prajapati 80.3, 114.11.
Karkotaka, a serpent-chief 24.6-7, 214.57-63, installed in Mathura 160.69.
Karmakanda, scripture of ritualistic action 52.9, 11.
Karmayoga 142.42.
Karnata, a settlement in Naisadha 83.2.
Karnika, a settlement in Naisadha 83.2.
Karpasadhenu 109.1.
Kartavirya, king son of Krtavirya 50.24.
Kárttikeya, a name of Skanda 17.24-25, 27.31-32.
Karttikeyakunda, a tirtha, in Lohargala 151.63-65.
Kasa, a river 82.4.
Kasavati, a river in Naisadha, 83.3.
Kaseru, a division of Bhàratavarsa 85.1.
Kàémira, kingdom of Vasu 6.7;—of Sumanas 6.33-34.
Kasyapa, sage, son of Marici 13.30, 20.3, 24.4, 79.20, 214.43-45;—a law-giver
Kàsyani, a carrier goddess of liberation 190.29-30, 130.
Katyayani, a name of Durga 28.1.
Kaumara, 2 vrata performed by Vaisnavi 92.14;—a mother goddess representing stupefaction 27.35-36.
of Kumuda 74.7.
Kausiki, a river rising from Himàlaya 88.4;—a river in Kokàmukha 140.53,
Kaveri, a river 82.4.

698 Varüha Purana
Kedara, a holy place 122.13.
Kesari, a mountain in Sdkadvipa 86.3.
Kesitirtha, a tirtha in Brndavana in Mathura 156. 10 13.
Ketumàla, a region in Gandhamàdana 82.2, 83.1, on the west of Meru 75.61,
in the mountaín Vipula 77.25; origin of the name 77.26.
Khadiravana, a garden in Mathurà 153.42; 161.8.
Khyati, a river in Krauficadvipa 88.4.
Kiki, a settlement in Naisadha 83.2.
Kimpurusas, people in Hemaküta 75.32.
Kirmiranga, a serpent-chief 214.57-63.
Koka, same as Kokamukha.
Koka, a river 214.46-49.
81, 86, 87, 91, 92,98; dying creatures becoming human beings 122. 19Kojaraska, a mountain 82.3.
Kotara, a tirtha in Mandara 143.27-29.
Kotitirtha, a tirtha in Mathura 152.65-67, 154.32-33, 168.16, 174.6-7.
Kotivata, a holy spot in Kokamukha 140.47;—a tirtha in Goniskramana 147.
Kraufica, an Asura 25.7;—a mountain 25.41;—a settlement in Naisadha
Krauficadvipa, one of the seven islands of the world 2.57, 74.7, 88.1, 2, 4,
Krechra, a purificatory rite 114.33, 187.30.
Krosodaka, a tirtha near Sailesvara 215.90.
a mount near lake Asitoda 78.18-19;—a mount in Naisadha 83.1.
Krsnà, a river rising from Sahya 85.5;—a river at the confluence in Samastasukhavallabhà 145.89;—a river in Kusadvipa (same as Citra) 87.3;—a
name of Uma 22.5.
Krsnadvadasi, rituals 46.1-4, results 46.5-15.
Krsnadvaipayana, sage Vyasa 175.2.
Krsnaganga, a holy spot in Yamuna in Mathura 175.1, 3, 7, 176.10, 47, 55,
Krsnagiri, a minor mountain in Bharata 85.3.
Kyrsnakridasetubandha, a holy spot in Mathura 160.32.

Glossary 699
Krsnanga, a settlement in Naisadha 83.2.
Krsnapada, a settlement in Naisadha 83.3.
Krsnatoyà, a river 82.4.
Krsnavati, City of Nirrti 76.11.
Krta, a sage 170.62.
Krtanta, a Raksasa 94.10-12.
Krtasthalà, a minor mountain in Bharata 85.3.
Krtasura, a settlement in Naisadha 83.2.
.Krtavirya, a king of Haihaya 50.24.
Krtayuga 2.53, 62, 3.3-4, 18, 7.35, 9.1, 10.15, 12.21, 17.4, 32.5, 30, 36.2, 47.8,
.Krüra, a minister of Mahisdsura 93.3-4.
Ksatriyas 3.19, 9.16, 49.16-18, 34, 66.12, 68.5-6, 7, 8, 9, 75.18, 24, 116.22, 128.
193.29, 200.65, 206.30, 215.43, 45, 86; initiation into Bhagavata dharma
128.1-13; rules of worship for 115.27-30.
Ksemaka, a region in Sákadvipa 86.3.
Ksetrap4la, the guardian god of Mathura 168.6.
Ksiprodà, a river in Krauficadvipa (same as Khyati) 88.5.
Ksiradhenu, 105.1, 9, 12.
Ksirodà, a river 82.4.
28, 38, 158.18;—a law-giver 121.18;—the vital air in the body 17.24-25
‘Kuberamaya, a form of Maya 125.36.
Kubja, a settlement in Naisadha 83.3.
"Kubjàmraka, a holy place on the bank of Ganga 125.75, 76, 139, 124.3, 28,
22, 179.28, 32, 35; origin of the name 126.6-14; dying creatures
becoming human beings in 126.109-227.
Kubjikà, a goddess installed in Mathurà 160.40.
Kuha, a settlement in Naisadha 83.2.
Kuhi, a river rising from Himalaya 85.4.
.Kulapafjáka, a settlement in Naisadha 83.2.
Kulika, a serpent-chief 24.6-7.
Kumara, a name of Skanda 25.41, 151.64.
Kumara, a river in Sakadvipa 86.3.
Kumbia, a mount near lake Arunoda 78.11-12.
Kumbhipàka, a hell 200.17, 202.46.
Kumuda, a month 154.5, 155.73, 159.22, 160.80;—2 division of Kusadvipa
87.2;—a mount near lake Asitoda 78.18-19, 79.1, 80.9;—a mountain in
Gomedadvipa 89.4;—a mountain in Kusadvipa 87.1.
Kumudvati, a river in Krauficadvipa 88.4;—a river rising from Vindhya 85.5.
Kumudavana, a garden in Mathurà 153.35-36.
Kundavana, a garden in Mathura 161.6.

700 Varáha Purana
Kufijara, a mountain 81.1.
Kurakufija, a settlement in Naisadha 83.2.
Kürma, incarnation of Visnu 40.1.
Kürmadvaàda$i, rituals 40.2-8, results 40.9-11.
Kuru— northern, a region near Trisrhga 84.9;—a region in Jambüdvipa 75,
34;-—the region on the north of Meru 75.61.
Kuása, one of the seven islands of the world 2.57;—the principal grass in Kusadvipa 87.4;—son of Jyotismàn 74.7.
KuéSala, a mountain and region in Salmalidvipa 89.3;—a region in Krauficadvipa 88.3;—son of Dyutimàn 74.7.
Ku$sasthala, a holy spot near Saptasàmudrika in Mathura 157.17-18, 160.20.
KuSavati, a river in Naisadha 83.3.
KuseSaya, a mountain in KuSadvipa 87.1.
Kusika, a king of Kanyàpura 162.47-48.
Kutapa, afternoon time fit for Sráddha 14.46.
Kitavasa, a settlement in Naisadha 83.2.
Laksmana 45.5.
Laksmi 1.21, 7.33, 8.43, 31.17, 58.3, 9-10, 13-14, 79.5-7, 13, 16, 99.10, 32, 110.
Lalataksa, a Raksasa 94.5.
Lavana, a demon killed by Satrughna 163.24, 52, 53, 56, 178.1, 3.
Lavanadhenu 108.1.
Lekhaka, a ghost 174.16, 23, origin of tne name 174.22.
Libation, rules of 180.46-60.
Liberation, different means for 148.24-30.
Likhita, a law-giver 121.16, 197.18.
Linga, phallus 72.10.
Lohajanghavana, a garden in Mathura 153.44.
Lohàrgala, a holy place in Himalaya 140.5, 144.10, 151.7-35, 79, 84, 152.1, 7.
Lohàrgalavana, a garden in Mathura 161.9.
Lohita, a tirthe 214.50-52.
Lohita, a division of KuSadvipa 87.2;—a river rising from Himalaya 85.4.
Lokap§ala, a tirtha in Badari 141.28-31.
Lomaáa, a sage 159.8.
Lüsati, a river rising from Suktimàn 85.6.
Madana, a mount near lake Arunoda 78.11-12.
117;— region of Krauficadvipa (same as Ku$ala) 88.3.
Madhudhenu 104.10, 13.
Madhuka, the tree for wooden idols 181.11.

Glossary 701
Madhumàn, mount near lake Asitoda 78.18-19.
192.22-34; origin of the Devatà 191.7-12.
Madhureya, a settlement in Naisadha 83.2.
Madhuvana, a garden in Mathura, 153.33-34, 161.6.
Madhyandiniyaka, a sacrifice for Sürya 177.48; —a tirtha in Mathura 177.
Mahabhadra, a lake in the mountain Suparsva 78.9.
Mahabhaga, a name of Durga 64.3.
Mahabhita, great cosmos 18.6.
Mahadeva, a name of Rudra 17.51, 213.38, 44;—mahattattva 17.72.
Mahadruma, a region in Sakadvipa 86.3.
Mahàgrhodaya, a city 162.2.
Mahàkadambà, a river in Naisadha 83.3.
Mahàkála, a name of Siva 144.23;—a doorkeeper of Siva 213.77.
Mahàkàya, a Raksasa 94.6-9.
Mahāmāyā, a name of Durga 28.29, 32, 64.3;—a river in Naisadha 83.3.
Mahamegha, a mount in Meru 80.10.
Mahamoha, extreme illusion 2.28.
Mahānāha, a settlement in Naisadha 83.2.
Mahanama, a Brahmin living near Saügama in Mathura 174.2.
Mahànila, a mount near lake Arunoda 78.11-12, 79.21, 81.2.
Mahapadma, a serpent-chief 24.6-7.
Mahaprabha, a name of Durga 64.3.
Mahàáraurava, one of the eight main hells 200.1-2.
Mahasrnga, a mount near lake Manasa 78.14-16.
Mahàsthala, a holy spot in Vasatputra in Mathura 160.20.
Mahat, intellect 2. 36;—ahankara, 25.3.
Mahatapas, a sage 17.7, 22.49, 33.1,
Mahatapta, one of the eight main hells 200. 1-2.
Mahati, a river in Kusadvipa 87.3.
Mahavaktra, a river 82.4.
Mahavana, a garden in Mathura 153.43, 161.8.
Mahavetra, a Vidyadhara-king 81.1.
Mahàvidyesvari, a goddess installed in Mathura 160.42.
Maháviii, son of Savana 74.7.
Mahàvrata, 113.52.
Mahendra, a major mountain in Bharata 15.9, 85.2, 6, 214.53-55.
Maheévarakunda, a tirtha in Lohargala 151.69-72.
Mahesvari, a mother goddess representing anger 27.35-36;—a name of Durga
Maheyacala, a settlement in Naisadha 83.2.

Varaha Purdna
Mahisa, city of Mahisasura 92.27 ;—a mountain in Ku$advipa 87.1;—a settlement in Naisadha 83.2.
Mahisi, a river in Naisadha 83.3.
Mahismati, a city 95.4;—a princess, mother of Mahisasura 95.5, 9, 20.
Mahodaya, city of Kubera 76.14.
Mahotkata, a settlement in Naisadha 83.2.
Maináka, a minor mountain in Bharata 85.3.
Maia, a river in Naisadha 83.3.
Malakhya, a mountain 82.3.
Malaya, a major mountain in Bharata 85.2, 6, 150.49, 113.49, 214.53-55.
Malayárjunaka, a tirtha in Mathura 157.1-4.
Manas, son of Jyotisman 74.8.
Manasa, a lake in the mountain Gandhamádana 62.9, 30, 78.9, 82.2;—a
mountain in Krauficadvipa 88.1;—a mountain in Puskaradvipa 89.4;—
à tirtha in Kubjamraka 126.31, 141.38;—a tirtha in Mathura 154.26-28.
Mànasagangà, a tirtha near Govardhana 164.11, 18.
Manasaras, a tirtha in Kubjamraka 126.102, 103.
Maànasa, a river in Naisadha 83.3.
Màánasodbheda, a tirtha in Badari 141.36-38.
Mandagamini, a river rising from Suktimàn 85.6.
Mandakini, a river rising from Rksa 85.5;—river Ganga 125.24.
Mandalesvara, a holy place 122.13.
Mandára, a minor mountain in Bharata on the eastern part of Meru, 1.7, 8.
49, 213.13; —a mountain (same as Kakudhra) 87.1;—Vaisnavi’s place
Mandára, a holy place in Vindhya 143.2, 5, 7, 8, 11, 27, 33, 49, 144.1, 2.
Mandárakunda, the main tirtha in Mandara 143.13-16.
Mandehas, a group of Raksasas in Yamaloka 201.6, 36, 40.
Mandhata, an ancient king 163.22, 174.60.
Manijas, warriors who came out of the wonder-gem of Gauramukha 11.83-84.
Manijala, a river rising from Vindhya 85.5.
Manikunda, a tirtha in Bhütagiri 148.53-56.
Manipankaja, a settlement in Naisadha 83.2.
Manipüra, a hill in Dvaraka 149.43, 46, 47, 84.
Manipüragiri, another name for Bhütagiri 148.44-45, 64-65, 75, 77-78.
Manisrnga, a mount near lake Arunoda 78.11-12.
Manitatà, a river 82.4.
Manivapra, a river 82.4.
Manivati, a river near Saile$vara 215.107-108, 113.
Mafjukesini, a goddess created by Vaisnavi 92.9-12.
Manohar§a, city of [sana 76.15.
Manojava, a river in Krauficadvipa 88.4.
Manovati, the assembly of Brahmà 75.70.

Glossary 703
manifestation of Visnu 31.1.
Manugavya, son of Dyutimàn 74.7.
Manusa, a sacrifice 8.31.
Mànusi, a river in Naisadha 83.3.
Manusyayajfia 190.11.
Margasirsa, the month of Dhanus 39.26-28, 123.12, 25-26, 28, 126.29, 46,
Marica, a sage 71.20.
Marketa, a mount near lake Asitoda 78.18-19.
Mártanda, the most important among the twelve suns, sons of Kagyapa 20.
Maruts, a group of gods 10.6-7, 13.24, 16.22, 25, 26, 21.10, 19-20, 25.7, 73.33,
Marutta, a king 144.136.
Matanga, a sage 8.8, 9, 17, 23.
Mátaüga, a holy spot in Kokàmukha 140.59,
guarding 158.16-19; extent of 158.1; merits of actions in 158.4-13,2041; number of tirthas in 168.13; power of removing sins 179.23-35.
Mátrs, passions in the body 17.24-25, 43, 59, 18.1-3.
Matsya, incarnation of Visnu 39.1.
Matsyadvadasi, rituals 39.26-59, results 39.60-77.
Matsyasilà, a holy spot in Kokàmukha 140.81, 85.
Mattakasika, a settlement in Naisadha 83.2.
Mayatirtha, a tirtha in Kubjamraka 125.133, 126.35, 38, 222.
Mayayogin 126.38.
Medhatithi, a king of Avanti 189.26, 29, 34, 37, 39, 44, 56;—a sage 170.62;—
son of Priyavrata and lord of Sakadvipa 74.7, 8.
Meghaéaila, a mount near lake Mahabhadra 78.21-23.
Meghavarna, a Raksasa 94.5.

704 Varaha Purana
Menaká, a celestial damsel 214.41-42.
Merorvara, a tirtha in Badari 141.32-35.
Meru, the central mountain in Jambüdvipa 10.38, 42-43, 44, 59, 67, 27.2, 28.
Merudevi, wife of Nàbhi 74.9.
Merumadhya 74.8.
Mirror, offering of 128.89-90.
Misrakesi, daughter of Prahetr married by Durjaya 10.74.
Mithi, king of Mithilà, son of Nimi 208.28.
Mitrahà, a Raksasa 94.10-12.
Mitrávasu, a sage 114.16-17.
ModaSalaka, a settlement in Naisadha 83.2.
Moha, illusion 2.28.
Mohasastra, the doctrines propeunded by Rudra for non-Vedic people 71.8.
Moksaraja, a tirtha near Govaradhana 164.38.
Moksatirtha, a tirtha in Mathura 152.64.
Mrgaérügodaka, a spring near Sailesvara 215.65.
Mucukunda, Manija Sunda reborn 36.5;—the sleeping place of Mucukunda
ín Mathurà 158.29-30.
Mukhyasarga, principal creation 2.29, 38-39.
MuktikeSvara, a tirtha in Mathura 160.61.
Muktiksetra, a holy place on the bank of Gandaki 144.122, 182, 145.1, 111.
Mülatapa, a settlement in Naisadha 83.2.
Mülini, a river rising from Mahendra 85.6.
Muni, son of Dyutimàn 74.7.
Munide$a, a region of Krauficadvipa 88.3.
Mufijavan, a peak in Mandara 213.13, 87-88, 214.10, 35, 88.
Mura, a demon 113.2.
Nabhi, son of Medhatithi 74.8.
Naga, a mount in Meru 80.10.
vital airs in the body 17.24-25, 18.1-3.
Náàgadvipa, a division of Bhàratavarsa 85.1.
Nagahrada, a holy pond in Nepal 215.41.
Nagatirtha, a tirtha in Mathura 154.15.
Nagavati, a river 82.4.
Nagnakapala, a vrata relating to Rudra 97.38, 43; origin of the name 97.38.
Nahusa, a serpent-chief 214.57-63.
Naimisa, a holy forest 5.46-47, 122.12, 152.10, 153.5; origin of the name 11.
Naimisraddha 188.104.

Glossary 705
Naisadha, a mountain (same as Nisadha) 74.8, 83.1.
Naisthuraka, a hunter 5.20, 25.
Naika, a settlement in Naisadha 83.2.
Nala, a king, son of Virasena 44.17, 61.11;—a Raksasa 94.10-12.
Namuci, a demon killed by Indra 96.5.
Nanda, a serpent-king 81.7;—son of Medhatithi 74.8.
Nanda, a name of Durgà 28.44, 99.1, 4;—a river in Sakadvipa 86.3, 214.46Nandike$vara, same as Nandin, 145.25, 27.
Nàndimukhas, Pitrs with faces upwards 34.6.
Nandin, Siva born as son to Sàlankàyana 144.77, 80, 84, 89, 164, 213.30,
Nara 48.8.
Nàra, water, 3.23.
Naraka, a demon 113.2.
Narada, a sage 2.44, 58, 81, 3.23, 4.9, 10.41, 22.41, 46, 27.22, 32.13, 54.4, 19,
Nàradakunda, a tirtha in Lohargala 151.39-41.
Naramedha, a sacrifice 145.49.
Narayana 1.25, 2.12, 21, 22, 24, 25, 3.8, 11, 14, 16, 4.1, 8, 17, 18, 19, 35, 5.17,
Náàràyanamantra 4.11.
Narayanasthina, a sacred spot in Mathura 160.39.
Narayani 6.28-29.
Nartanacala, a holy spot near Somesvara 144.73.
Nasadacara, a river rising from Pariyatra 85.4,
Navanabha, a mandala for püjà 99.23.
Navanitadhenu 107.1.
Naya, son of Gaya 74.9.
Nepàla, a country 97.18, 145.86-87.
Nikhata, son of Pratihartà 74.9.
Nila, the chief of Durjaya’s army 11.76, 78, 80-81 ;—a demon 27.14;—a moun-

706 Varaha Purana
tain 74.8, 82.3, 96.1, 17-18; —Raudri's place of penance 90.36;—mount
near Jake Mahabhadra 78.21-23 ;—a mountain in Jambüdvipa 75.25.
Nilakas, a group of Raksasas 81.2.
Nilakuksi, a Raksasa 94.5.
Nimi, a king of Mithila 208.27;—son of Svàyambhuvamanu 187.28, 32, 62,
Nisadha, a mount near lake Arunoda 78.11-12;—a mountain in Jambüdvipa
Nissvàsasathhità, doctrine propounded by Rudra on Pasupata 71.54, 56.
Nisvirà, a river rising from Himalaya 85.4.
Nrga, a king 47.8.
Nirrti, guardian deity of South west 28.16, 29.12-13, 99.27, 37.
Nrsirhha, incarnation of Visnu 39.39-41, 42.2-3, 14, 48.20-22, 55.37.
Nrsimhadvadasi, rituals 42.2-6, results 42.7-15.
Nyàsayoga 142.62.
Padma, a serpent chief 24.6-7.
Padmandbhadvadasi, rituals 49.1-4, results 49.5-46.
Paisácikà, a river rising from Rksa 85.5.
Paitra, a sacrifice 8.31.
Palasini, a river rising from Suktimàn 85.6.
Pallavà, a river in Naisadha 83.3.
Paficadesa, a holy spot near Saptasàmudrika in Mathur 157.20.
Paficaganga, a river 82.4.
Paficakunda, a tirtha in Lohargala 151.45-47.
Paficaküta, a mount in Meru 80.7.
Pajicila, Manija Subhadarsana reborn 36.4;—a country 176.1-2, 16, 29, 39.
Paficami, tithi 24.33.
Paficanada, a tirtha near Sailesvara 215.67, 101.
Paficapada, a tirtha in Goniskramana 147.36.
Paficapinda (-Kunda), tirtha in Dvaraka 149.38-42.
Paficaruna, a tirtha in Bhütagiri 148.46-48.
Paficasaila, a mount near lake Mànasa 78.14-16.
Paficasaras, a holy place in Dvaraka, 149.24-26;—a tirtha in Lohàrgala 151.
Paficasikha, a sage 151.46;—a tirtha in Badari 141.14-16.
Paficasira, a tirtha in Badari, 141.39-44.
Paficavata, a tirtha in Goniskramana, 147.34-35.
Pàndava, a mount near lake Asitoda 78.18-19.
Pàndavas 159.10.
Pandura, a mount in Meru 80.9;—a minor mountain in Bharata 85.3.
Panitala, a place in the valley between Puskara and Mahàmegha 80.10.

Glossary 707
Pankini, a river rising from Rksa 85.5.
Papapramocana, a holy spot in Kokamukha 140.51.
Paráka, an expiatory rite 179.13, 14.
Parama, a tirtha in Mandara 143.45-47.
Paramesthi, son of Indradyumna 74.9.
Parananda, a river 214.46-49.
Paráparà, a name of Sañjñā 8.20.
Parásara, a sage 214.43-45.
Para$uráma, an incarnation of Visnu (same as Jàmadagnya) 48.20-22, 55.37,
Paravasu, a Gandharva 214.38-39;—2 sage 124.16-17.
Pariyatra, a major mountain in Bharata near lake Asitoda 78.18-19, 85.2,
Parjanya, a minister of Mahisdsura 93.3-4,
Parnasa, a river 214.46-49.
Parvata, a sage 22.46, 124.16-17.
Patyusita, a ghost 174.16, 24, origin of the name 174.18.
Pasa, a river rising from Vindhya 85.5.
PaSupatas 122.18.
Pá$upatasástra 70.42, 71.56, 97.44.
Pasupati, a name of Rudra 21.82, 33.28, origin of the name 21.82.
Patanga, a mount in Meru 80.1-3.
Patila, a netherworld 24.24, 31, 36.13.
Paurnamasi, tithi 35.14.
Pausa, the month Makara 40.1.
Pavaka, a mountain in Krauficadvipa (same as Manasa ) 88.1; a region in
Krauficadvipa 88.3.
Payosni, a river rising from Vindhya 85.5, 5, 187.115.
Penance, benefits of 207.37-39.
Phalguna, the month Mina 42.1, 124.1, 7.
Phálguaaka, a holy place in Mathura 157.35-36
Pinàkin, a name of Rudra 71.1.
Pindaraka, a holy place 144.10.
Piagala, a mount near lake Asitoda 78.18-19.
Pifijara, o mount in Meru 80.8.
Pippalà, a river rising from Rksa 85.5.
Pippalàda, a sage 160.67.
Pippalàde$vara, Siva installed in Mathura 160.67.
Pisaca, a tirtha in Yamuna in Mathura 174.98.
Pitr-devas, manes—gods 190.31-32, 65.
Pitr, à law-giver 121.19.
Pitrmaya, a form of Maya 125.52.

708 Varáha Purana
Pitryajfia, sacrifice for manes, a form of śrāddha 187.3, 4, 82, 188.88, 101,
Pivara, son of Dyutimàn 74.7.
Pivari, a river in Nisadha 83.3;—wife of Yaksmadhanus 153.11, 16, 18, 154.
Plaksa, a sacred tree at Paficasara in Dvaraka 149.27-29;—one of the seven
islands of the world 2.51, 74.7.
Plaksa, a river in Naisadha 83.3.
Prabhàkara, a name of Sun 26.12;—son of Jyotismàn 74.8.
Prabhàmalli, a goddess installed in Mathura, 160.43.
Prabhafijana, a river in Naisadha 83.3.
Prabhava, son of Durjaya and Sukesi 10.77.
Prabhavati, servant of queen Candraprabha, 180.4, 37, 91.
Prabhedaka, a mountain 81.6.
Prabodhini, Ekadasi in Kárttika 211.29, 76;—Dvadaéi in Kàrttika 211.54, 95Pracetas, a sage 2.44, 21.15-17.
Pradhàna 2.8, 144.47.
Pradyumna, son of Krsna 99.30, 177.25 ;—one of the four Vyühas 148.14.
Praghasa, a warrior in the army of Hetr-Prahetr 11.93-95;—a minister of
Mahisasura 93.3-4, 9.
Prágjyotisa, a country ruled by Vetrásura 28.13, 126.114, 117, 118, 157, 220.
Prahetr, son of Svayambhuvamanu 10.59, 65.
Prahlàda 49.16-18, 38.
Praises, see Stotras.
Prajapala, a king 17.5, 8, 16, 22.47, 24.2, 29.1, 36.2;—Manija Suprabha reborn 36.2.
Prajapati 2.18, 20;—a law-giver 197.17.
Prajapatya, an expiatory rite 19.4, 179.12, 14, 17.
Prajapatyakrcchra, a purificatory rite 112.26.
Prakááa, a region of Krauficadvipa (same as Munideéa) 88.3.
Prakrta, creation 2.41.
Pramloca, a celestial nymph 146.18, 47, 61.
Pranava 9.5,7.
Pràántakapàniya, a tirtha near Saile$vara 215.103.
Prapana, a hill in Mandara 143.17.
Prasanna, son of sage Matanga 8.8, 10, 12.
Prasiddhà, a name cf Brahmi 91.13.
Praskandana, a tirtha in Mathura 168.15.
Prasravana, a mountain 6.23.
Prastota, ə sage 21.15-17, 74.9.
Pratardana, a warrior in the army of Hetr-Prahetr 11.93-95, 100.
Pratici, deity representing west 29.4.
Pratihartà, a special priest 21.15-17;—son of Paramesthi 74.9.
Pratipad, first day of the fortnight 19.3, 7.

Glossary 709
Pratisthána, a city in Dekkan 41.17, 165.1, 8, 38.
Pratoyà, a river in KuSadvipa 87.3.
Prayága, a tirtha 99.51-52, 144.100, 145.98, 152.13;—a tirtha in Mathura,
152.38-41, 176.67-68, 215.55, 217.14;—the confluence of Ganga and
Priyavrata, son of Svàyambhuvamanu 2.56, 62, 4.9, 74.6, 7.
Prthu, son of Vibhu 74.9.
4;—A4 law-giver 197.18;—son of Brahma 112.69.
Puloma, a king of Vidyadharas 80.4.
Pundarika, a mountain in Krauücadvipa, 88.2;—2 river in Krauficadvipa 88.
4;—a tirtha near Govaradhana 164.19;—a tirtha in Kubjdmraka 126.
Pundarikaksa 6.10, 11.
Pundarikaksapara, hymn in praise of Visnu uttered by Vasu 6.10-16, 35-36,
Punkha, a river in Naisadha 83.3.
Punyanadi, a tirtha in Salagrama 145.69-71,
Punyasthala, a holy spot at Vasatputra in Mathura 169.20,
Punyoda, a river in Naisadha 82.4, 83.3.
Pura, body 3.14.
Puranas 36.19, 38.28, 58.3, 73.29, 74.4-5, 81.8, 95.63, 159.18, 170.60, 73, 175.
Pürnasukha, a tirtha in Kabjamraka 126.42, 43.
Purusa 144.45, 48, 210.30; the highest Tattva 25.2, 4;—the supreme soul 17.
Purusasükta 66.10.
a tirtha 8.41-42.
Pürvà, deity representing East 29.4.
Pürvagandikà, a river on the eastern side of Malyavan 82.2.
Puskara, a lake 6.6, 40;—a tirtha in Mathura 49.41, 99.51-52, 152.10, 15,
174.6-7, 176.67-68, 215.55, 217.14;—one of the seven islands of the
world 2.57, 74.7;—a mount in Meru 80.10;—a mount near lake Mahabhadra 78.21-23.
Puspasthala, a holy spot near Saptasamudrika in Mathura 157.19.
Puspavaha, a river in Krauficadvipa (same as Gauri) 88.5.
Puspavàn, a mountain in KuSadvipa 87.1.
Puspávati, a river rising from Malaya 85.6.
Puspodaka, a river in the city of Yama 196.13.
Pusyabhadra, a river on the northern side of Himalaya 98.6, 12-15.
Put, hell 193.27.

710 Varaha Purána
Pütika, a hell 187.55.
Pütipàka, a hell 202.32.
Radha, consort of Krsna 164.35.
Radhakhanda, a tirtha near Govardhana 164.37.
Raghava, image of 166.25.
Raivataka, a holy mount in Dvàrakà 149.67-73;—a mountain in Krauficadvipa (same as Vidyullatà) 88.1.
Rajaraja, a king of Anekaparvata Gandharvas 81.5.
Rajamaya, a form of Maya 125.42.
Rajas, one of the three gunas 2.7, 3.17, 7.37, 32.23, 66.15, 68.4, 70.15-16, 18,
Ràjasüya, a sacrifice 145.100, 152.58, 155.73, 158.7, 164.14-15, 21, 37, 215.73.
Rajata, a mountain in Sakadvipa 86.2.
Ràksoghna mantra 14.25.
Raktaksa, a Raksasa 94.6-9, 10-12.
Ramadvadasi, rituals 45.1-5, results 45.6-10.
Ramagrha, a holy spot in Sanandiira 150.10-14.
Rámasaras, a tirtha in Sànandüra 150.15-20.
Rambha, a celestial damsel 214.41-42.
Ramyaka, a region to the south of Meru 74.8, 84.2.
Rasadhenu 104.1, 9, 14.
Rasátala, a netherworld 39.23.
Rathākāra, a division of Kusadvipa 87.2.
Rathapàla, son of Jyotisman 74.8.
Rathayaira, a festival in Mathura 177.59, 60.
Ratnadhara, a mount in Meru 80.6, 81.3.
Rainaketu, a mount near lake Mànasa 78.14-16.
Ratri, a river in Krauficadvipa 88.4;—a river rising from Rksa 85.5.
Raudra, a hell 7.20.
Raudra, a river in Krauficadvipa (same as Sandhya) 88.5.
Raudri, the aspect of Trikalà representing the energy of Rudra 90.32, 91.5,
Raurava, one of ihe eight main hells 112.21, 126.168, 133.10, 134.53, 200.1-2,
Ravi, a name cf Sun 26.5, 12.

Glossary 711
Rebirth, conduet for avoidance of 121.4-29.
Reva, river Narmada, 144.33, 34, 38.
Revakhanda, a tirtha 144.38.
Rksa, a major mountain in Bharata 85.2, 5.
Rodhaka, a ghost 174.16, 23, origin of the name 174.21.
Rohini, a form of Maya 125.58.
Rohipáàra, a river rising from Parivatra 85.4.
Rohita, a mountain and region in Salmalidvipa 89.3.
Romaharsani, disciple of Vyàsa 112.73.
Romaáa, a Vidyádhara king 81.2.
Romavata, a country 10.39.
Rosary, see Ganàntika.
Rsabha, a mount in Meru 80.9;—son of Nabhi 74.9.
Rsikulyà, a river rising from Mahendra 85.6.
Rsikà, a river rising from Suktimàn 85.6.
Rsitirtha, a tirtha in Mathura 152.62-63.
Rsyamüka, a minor mountain in Bharata 85.3,
89, 213.48, 215.3, 17-18, 74, 104; origin of the name 83.4; identity with
Vedas 72.16;—the subtle cause of beings 17.24-25;—a law-giver 121.15.
Rudramahilaya, a holy place in Mathura 160.51, 56.
Rudrasaras, a tirtha in Pusyabhadra 98.12-15.
Rudravrata 97.1.
Rüpavati, wife of Mithi 208.28.
Rüpi, a serpent-chief 214.57-63.
Ruru, an Asura king 96.3-4, 14, 21, 30, 32;—daughter of Devadatta 146.3,
62, origin of the name 146.62.
Rurukhandz, same as Ruruksetra 145.111.
Ruruksetra, a holy spot on the bank of Gandaki 146.87, 147.1.
Sabhanga, a holy spot on the bank of Gandaki 11.6, 58.
Sagaja, a settlement in Naisadha 83.2.
Sagara, a king 59.6.

712 Vardha Purdna
Sahasraíiras, a mount near lake Asitoda 78.18-19, 80.9.
Sahya, a major mountain in Bharata 85.2, 5, 214.53-55.
Sailavarna, a mountain 82.3.
Sailesvara, residence of Siva in Siddhaksetra 215.58, 87, 216.23-24.
Saivàhini, a river 82.4.
Saka, a mountain (same as Rajata) 86.2;—the principal tree in Sákadvipa.
Sakadvipa, one of the seven islands in the world 2.57, 74.7, 86.1, 139.20.
Saka prince 122.31, 49, king 122.61.
Sakra, a warrior in the army of Hetr-Prahetr 11.93-95.
Sakrarudra, a holy spot in Kokamukha 140.66.
Sakrasaras, a tirtha in Sànandüra 150.34-40.
Sakratirtha, a tirtha in Kubjamraka 126.84, 85, 86.
Sakunika, a river in Yamaloka 200.39.
Sakuntalà, mother of Bharata 50.25.
Salagrama, a holy mount representing Visnu 144.3, 13, 32, 76, 158, 170, 182,
145.35, 104, 146.1; origin of the name 145.30; stones 144.62, rules for
worship of 186.40-55.
Saligràma, a village 162.3.
Sàlmali, one of the seven islands in the world 2.57, 74.7, 88.5, 89.1, 2, 139.11,
12, 140.71, 72;—a deceptive tree in Yamaloka 195.27, 198.50, 200.22,
202.5;—a sacred tree at Sürpàraka in Sànandüra 150.46-47.
Samala, cremation ground 136.39, 40, 46.
Samastasukhavallabha, a tirtha in Sàlagráma 145.83-70.
Samba, son of Krsna by Jambavati 149.16, 18, 177.1, 5, 11-12, 14, 22, 23,
Sambapura, a holy place in Mathura 177.58.
Sambhu, a name of Rudra 21.61, 70, 33.24, 55.37;—a warrior who came out
of Gauramukha's gem 11.83-84;—Manija king born as Senápati 36.7.
Samjíia, wife of Martanda, daughter of Tvastà 20.6.
Sammoha, a region of Krauficadvipa (same as Andhakara) 88.3.
Sampithaka, a tirtha in Talavana in Mathura 157.41-50.
Samüla, a mount near lake Manasa 78.14-16, 80.5.
Sarhvarana, Manija Subha reborn 36.6.
Sarhvarta, a sage 41.17, 214.43-45 ;——cloud at deluge 125.45.
Samvartaka, a Raksasa 94.10-12;—a region of Krauficadvipa (same as.
Vamaka) 88.3.
Sàmvartiki, a form of Maya 125.45.
Sarhyamana, a sage descendant of Atri 5.18-19, 21, 25;—a tirtha in Mathura
Sarhyamani, city of Yama 76.10.
Sanaka, son of Brahma 13.25, 14.1, 74.6.
Sananda, son of Brahma 74.6.
Sanandira, a holy place south of the Malaya mountain 150.5, 9, 55, 151.1, 3.

Glossary 713
Sanatana, son of Brahma 74.6.
129.6-15, 54-60;—a river in Krauficadvipa 88.4.
Sandilya, a sage 71.20; propagator of Bhagavata dharma 148.12;—a lawgiver 121.18;—a Samhita relating to Pasupata 71.54.
Sangamana, a holy spot in the Manipüra hill in Dvaraka 149.43-46;—a tirtha
in Sànandüra 150.27-33.
Sanghasa, a warrior in the army of Hetr-Prahetr 11.93-95.
Sani, son of Màrtanda and Chaya 20.8, 14, 185.14.
Sankara, a name of Siva 9.7. 81.3.
Sankarsana, a name of Visnu 40.4-5;—one of the four Vyühas 148.14;—a
tirtha near Govardhana 164.22.
Sanketesvari, another name for Siddhe$vari 160.46.
Sankha, a law-giver 121.16, 197.18;—a serpent-chief 24.6-7.
Sankhakita, a mount in Meru 80.9.
Sankhaprabha, a holy spot in Salagrama 145.51-52.
Sankhavarcas, a serpent-chief 214.57-63.
Sankukarna, a minister of Mahisasura 93.3-4;—a Raksasa 94.6-9.
Santa, Manija Diptatejas reborn 36.3.
Santabhaya, son of Medhatithi 74.8.
Santanaka, loka of manes—gods 13.18.
Santenu, a king 157.49, 50.
Santapana, a purificatory rite 114.33, 130.23, 134.29,30.
Santi, a ritual 192.5-61.
Saparna, a settlement in Naisadha 83.2.
SaprakaSa, a region of Krauficadvipa (same as Usnavan) 88.3.
Saptarsikunda, a tirtha in Lohàrgala 151.48-50.
Saptasamudraka, a tirtha in Kubjamraka 126.95.
Saptasáàmudrika, a tirtha in Mathura 157.13-14;—origin of 157.24-30.
Saptatàla, one of the eight main hells 200.1-2.
Sara, a minor mountain in Bharata 85.3.
Sarabhaügà, a river in Lohargala 151.51.
Sarabhangakunda, a tirtha in Lohàrgala 151.51-53.
Sarala, a mount near lake Mànasa 78.14-16.
Saramz, the dog of Devas 14.11-39.
Sarasa, a mount near lake Asitoda 78.18-19.
Sàárasvata, a tirtha in Yamuna in Mathura 3.5, 7, 174.87;—name of Narada
in his former life 3.3-4.
Sarasvati, a goddess 17.58, 206.29; ——a name of Brahmi;—a river rising from
Sarasvatitirtha, a tirtha in Mathurà 154.23.

714 Varaha Purana
Sarayü, a river rising from Himalaya 85.4; 214.46-49.
Sarkaradhenu 103.1.
Sariresa, name of Siva in Nepāla 215.40.
Sarvabhaumavrata 65.2-6.
Sarvaguna, a mountain and region in Salmalidvipa 89.3.
Sarvakamika, a holy spot in Kokamukha 140.77.
Sarvaksara, a name of Brahmi 91.2.
Sarvamedha, a sacrifice 99.81.
Sarvatobhadra, a mandala for pūjā 99.23.
Sarvayudha, a tirtha in Sdlagrama 145.60-62.
Sasakarna, Manija Surasmi reborn 36.4.
Sasini, a goddess created by Vaisnavi 92.9-12.
Sasthi, tithi 25.50.
Sastras 2.67-68, 81, 9.10-11, 34, 10.30, 11.16, 13.28-29, 33.26, 39.15, 58.3, 4,
Satadra, a river rising from Himalaya 13.46, 85.4, 214.46-49.
Satahrada, a river 82.4.
Satamoksa, a mount near lake Manasa 78.14-16.
Satamala, a river rising from Malaya 85.6.
Sátapa, a settlement in Naisadha 83.2.
Satagi nga, amount near lake Mahabhadra 71. 13-14, 78.21-23, 81.5, 95.55.
Satsürya, a sacred spot in Mathura 177.38.
Sattva, one of the three gunas 2.7, 3.17, 7.37, 21.38-39, 32.23, 68.4, 70.15-16,
Sattvika 10.10, 11.
Satya, a loka 9.20, 11.15, 32.22;—a serpent-chief 214.57-63.
Satyatapas, a sage 38.29, 51.1-2;—a Brahmin become a hunter 98.1-2, 4, 7,
Saukara, tirtha in Mathurà 174.67-68.
creatures becoming human beings in 137.66-231, 138.11-97.
Saumya, a division of Bhàrata 85.1.
Sauragràma, a place in Naigadha 83.2.
Saurástra, a country 153.9-10.
Sauryavrata, aim 64.1, rules 64.2-6, results 64.7.
Sauvarna, a mountain and region in Sàlmalidvipa 89.3.
Savaka, a mount near lake Manasa 78.14-16.
Savana, son of Priyavrata and lord of Puskara 74.7.
Sàvitri, a goddess 2.74, 3.2.
Senàpati, Manija Sambhu reborn 36.7;—name of Skanda 25.5, 37.
Sesa, serpent-bed of Visnu 1.21, 125.46, 187.9.
Siddhas, a group of celestials 15.12, 18-19, 25.15, 26.12, 28.19, 33.7, 75.8, 20,

‘Glossary 715
Siddha, a name of Brahmi 91.13.
Siddhaksetra, a holy place to the north of Ganga and south of A$vinimukha
Siddhamukha, name of Siva installed in Mathurà 160.22.
Siddhàsrama, a holy spot in Salagrama 145.91-100.
Siddhavata 151.7.
Siddhesvari, a goddess installed in Mathura 160.44-46.
Sighraga, a ghost 174.16, 24, origin of the name 174.20.
Sighrodà, a river rising from Vindhya 85.5.
Siddhisaila, a mount in Meru, 80.8.
Silamandira, a goddess created by Vaisnavi 92.9-12.
Silpas 95.63.
Sindhu, a river rising from Himalaya 85.4, 97.17, 214.46-49.
Sindhudvipa, a king manifestation of Varuna 28.2, 5;—son of Suparsva and
father of Mahisàásura 95.3, 7.
Sindhuparná, a river rising from Pariyatra 85.4.
Singing in praise of the Lord, release of a Brahma-raksasa by its power
Sisira, a mount near lake Mànasa 78.14-16, 80.1.
Sisiramukha, son of Medhatithi 74.8.
Sisumàra, a constellation 210.52.
Sita, a mountain 81.1.
Sità, a stream in Meru 82.1, 4, 214.46-49.
Sitàtirtha, a tirtha 179.30.
‘Siva 5.49, 55, 15.9, 18.1-3, 25.2, 16, 27.5, 8, 11, 12, 15, 18, 28.17, 33.24, 36.
ation-ground, reason for 136.16-50; identity with Visngu and Brahma
Siva, a river in KuSadvipa 82.4, 87.3.
Sivadüti, a goddess created by Vaisnavi 92.9-12.
Sivaksemaka, son of Mahatithi 74.8.
Sivaku.zda, a tirtha in Mathura 153.1, 160.26.
Sivanadi, a river in Dekkan 175.11-12.
Slesmàtaka, a serpent 214.23 ;—the forest of its penance 214.26, 215.11, 13,
Smrtis, codes of conduct 2.67-68.
Snànakunda, a tirtha in Mandara 143.17-20.

716 Vardha Purana:
Sodasaksaramantra 99.46.
Sodasara, a mandala for püjà 99.23.
70;—a law-giver 121.15;—Manija king born as Janaka 36.7;—a sacrifice 126.97 ;—a warrior who came cut of Gauramukha’s gem 11.83-84.
Somiabhiseka, a tirtha in Badari 141.45-48.
Somadatta, Manija Sumanas reborn 36.6;—-a king 187.3.
Somagiri, a tirtha in Badari 141.49-51.
Somasarma, a Brahmin who experienced Maya 125.59;—a Brahmin turned
into a Brahmaraksasa 139.89.
Somatirtha, a tirtha in Kokamukha 140.26;—a tirtha in Mathura 60.57, 58,
Somavarta, a river 82.4.
Somesvara, a holy place 97.31;—a holy mount[representing Siva 144.16, 19,
Somaya, a settlement in Naisadha 83.2.
Son, a river rising from Rksa 85.5.
Sraddha 3.6, 190.3, 4, 10, 18, 22, 26, 27, 33, 43-44, 57, 93, 113, 119, 131, 134,
135, 198.9; becoming raksasa in effect 190.25; expiation for eating for
the manes 189.7-16; occasions for 13.33-45; persons eligible in 190.95103; prohibition of bastards in 189.23-56; qualities of Brahmins tobe fed in 189.19-25,
Sraddhakalpa 187.35.
Sravana, the month Simha 47.1;—a settlement in Naisadha 83.2.
Sravana Kambala, a settlement in Naisadha 83.2.
Sriman, son of Nimi 187.28, 39, 57, 67-68.
Sriparvata, a minor mountain in Bharata 85.3, 214.53-55.
S1iíaila, a minor mountain in Bharata 85.3.
Srisaras, a lake in the valley between Asita and Kumuda 79.4.
Sriga, a mountain 81.7.
Srügàtaka, a forest in Yamaloka 200.52.
Srhgavan, a mountain in Jambüdvipa 75.34;—a mount near lake Asitoda 78.
Sragesvara, the place where the base of the horn of Siva's deer form was
installed 216.5, 23-24.
Srsti, the goddess of creation 90.43, 44.
Srutakirti, a king 17.4.
Stotra, of Aditya by Devas 26.10-13; of Brahma by A$vins 20.27-30; of Durga
by Rudra 28.29-35; of Dharma by Devas 32.20-25; of Srsti by Brahma
33.16-24; of Siva by Nandin 213.43-49, by Soma 144.20-26; of Vaisnavi by Devas 95.58-68; of Visnu by Aévasiras 5.48-57, by Dharmavyadha 8.43-49, by Drdhavrata 55.33-43, by Earth 1.20-28, 113.17-30,
41-64, by Gandaki 144.44-52, by Gauramukha 11.11-21, 15.9-20, by
Ksetradevatas 17.58-63, by Narada 3.9-20, by Prajápàla 36.12-22, by

Glossary 717
Raibhya 7.31-40, by Rudra 73.18-38, by Supratika 12.5-13; of Yama,
by Naciketas 198.9-20.
Sthànu, a name of Rudra 33.17.
Sthilasiras, son of Asvasiras 5.46-47.
Strighna, a Ráksasa 94.10-12.
Stutasvàmi, a holy place 148.9, 73-74, 77-78, 82, 149.1, 4,;—origin of the name
Subha, a warrior who came out of Gauromukha's gem 11.83-84, 100;—Manija
king born as Sarhvarana 36.6.
Subhà, a river rising from Vindhya 85.5.
Subhadaráana, a warrior who came out of Gauramukha's gem 11.83-84, 97 ;—
Manija king born as Pàficàla 14.4.
Subhavrata, rules 55.2-7, rituals 55.8-9, results 55.20-21.
Subrahmabhaga, a river 82.4.
Subrahmanya, a special priest 21.15-17.
Subtle elements 2.36-37.
Sticimukha, a ghost 174.16, origin of the name 174.19.
Sudànta, a warrior who came out of Gauramukha's gem 11.83-84, 100;—
Manija king born as Dasaratha 36.7.
Sudargana, a region of Krauficadvipa (same as Pavaka) 88.3;— Visnus|disc
11.107-108, 12.1;—son of Durjaya and Misrakesi 10.77.
Sudhana, a pious merchant, his liberation of a Brahmaraksas 155.7-70.
Sudharmà, the assembly hall in Amaravati 76.6.
Sudhimàn, son of Viráta 74.9.
Sudyumna, Manija king born as Turu 36.5;—son of Supratika 10.31;—a warrior who came out of Gauramukha’s gem 11.83-84.
Suddhasaiva, a vrata relating to Rudra 97.40, 43, origin of the name 97.40.
Suddhavati, city of Varuna 76.12.
Südras 3.19, 9.16, 13, 26, 27, 49.16-18, 37, 66.12, 68.5-6, 7, 8, 9, 75.17, 112.
86; initiation into Bhagavatadharma 128.25-36; rules of worship for
Sughosa, a warrior in the army of Hetr-Prahetr 11.93-95, 98.
Sugriva 159.10.
Suguhya, a tirtha in Bhütagiri 148.57.
Sujata, a goddess created by Vaisnavi 92.9-12. .
Suka, a settlement in Naisadha 83.2;—son of Vvàsa 170.60, 69;—Sukodara
a temple of Siva in Mathura 173.8.
Sukanadi, a river in Naisadha 83.3.
Sukanti, warrior who came out of Gauramukha’s gem 11.83-84, 98.
Sukesi, daughter of Hetr married by Durjaya 10.74.
Sukesvara, name of Siva in the temple of Suka in Mathura 173.9.
Sukeya, a settlement in Naisadha 83.2.
Sukhà, a river in the valley between Mahànila and Kakubha 79.21.
Sukhada, a warrior who came out of Gauramukha's gem 11.83-84, 100.

718 Varüha Purana
Sukhàvahà, a river in Krauficadvipa (same as Ràtri) 88.5.
Sukla, a mount in Meru 80.9.
Suklà, a river in Kusadvipa (same as Vidyullata 87.3.
Sukodara, disciple of Vàmadeva 170.64, 70.
Sukra, preceptor of Asuras 16.14, 15, 185.14;—a law-giver 121.15, 197.17.
Suktiman, a major mountain in Bharata 85.2, 6.
Suktimati, a river rising from Rksa 85.5.
Sukumiara, a region in Sakadvipa 86.3.
Sukumiari, a river in Sakadvipa 86.3.
Silatanka, name of Siva at Triveni in Prayaga 144.100.
Sumali, a minister of Mahisásura 93.3-4.
Sumanas, a warrior who came out of Gauramukha's gem 11.83-84, 100;—
Manija king born as Somadatta 36.6.
Sumanasa, a mountain and region in Salmalidvipa 89.3.
Sumangalà, a goddess installed in Mathurà 160.65.
Sumati, a king 166.2;—son of Bharata 74.9.
Sumedas, a mount near lake Arunoda 78.11-12.
Sumedhà, a river in Naisadha 83.3.
Sumülàvati, a river in Naisadha 83.3.
Sunda, Manija king born as Mucukunda 36.5.
Sundara, a warrior who came out of Gauramukha's gem 11.83-84, 98.
Sundarikatirtha, a tirtha near Saile$vara 215.107-108.
Suparna, a river 82.4.
Supár$va, a mountain on the northern part of Meru 77.9, 88.8;—a sage, grandfather of Mahisàsura 95.2.
Supátra, a mount near lake Arunoda 78.11-12.
Suprabha, a warrior who came out of Gauramukha’s gem 11.83-84, 17.3,
reborn as Prajapala 17.5, 36.2.
Suprayoga, a river rising from Sahya 85.5.
Sura, a leader of Yadus, 144.4.
Suràpa, a mountain in Krauficadvipa (same as Devavrta) 88.1.
Surasa, a river rising from Rksa 82.4, 85.5.
Sürasena, father of Vasudeva 63.8-10.
Surasmi, a warrior who came out of Gauramukha's gem 11.83-84;—Manija
king born as Sasakarna 36.4.
Sure$vari, a name of Brahmi 91.13.
Sürpáraka, a holy spot in Sáànandüra 150.41-47.
origin of the name 26.4,
Süryadvipa, a region on the northern side of Kuru 84.11.
Stryakanti, a goddess created by Vaisnavi 92.7-12.
Süryaprabhà, a goddess created by Vaisnavi 92.9.12.
Süryatirtha, a tirtha in Mathura 152.51-58, 156. 14-18.
Stryavarta, a river in Süryadvipa 84.11.
Süryavrata 177.45.
E

ARRA TN
Glossary 719
SuSila, a warrior who came out of Gauramukha’s gem 11.83-84;—Manija
king born as Vasudàna 36.6;—a wealthy Vai$ya in Pratisthàna turned
into a ghost 165.2-54.
Sutala, a nether-world 24.24.
Sutantu, a sage 170.62.
Sutejas, another name for Diptatejas 11.97.
Suvahini, a river 82.4.
Suvarnatata, a settlement in Naisadha 83.2.
Suvidyut, an Asura 10.47-48, 16.1-4, 6.
Suvindu, à mount near lake Arunoda 78.11-12.
Suvrata, a name of Rudra 97.5.
Subhima, a Raksasa 94.5.
Svara, son of Pasupála 51.5.
Svarbhànu, a Raksasa 94.5.
Svayambhü, a law-giver 121.19.
Svayambhuva manvantara 74.12, 99.4.
Svayamprabha, a goddess created by Vaisnavi, 92.9-12.
Sveta, a division in Kusadvipa (same as Kumuda) 87.2;—a mountain in
Svetaganga, a settlement in Naisadha 83.2.
Svetaganga, a river 145.88.
Svetaka, a mountain in Sakadvipa 86.2.
Sveiodana, a mount near lake Mànasa 78.14-16.
Syama, a river in Naisadha 83.3.
Syamantapafcaka, a tirtha in Mandara 143.48.
Svarioka, a world 9.17-18, 20.
Taittirlya, a sage 170.62.
Taksaka, a serpent 27.14.
Talatala, à netherworld 15.12.
Tàlavana, a garden in Mathura 161.6;—a palmyra grove on the bank of river
Sukhà 79.22.
Tamasa, a river rising from Rksa 85.5.
Tamra, a river 214.46-49.
Tamrabha, a mount near lake Mànasa 78.i4-16, 80.3.
Tamraparni, a river rising from Malaya 85.6.
Tamravarna, a division of Bharata 85.1.
Tanmátras, subtle elements 2.37.
Tantu, a sage 170.62.

720 Varüha Purána
Tapati, daughter of Martanda and Chaya 20.8.
Tapi, a river rising from Vindhya 85.5, 214.46-49,
Tapta, one of the eight main hells 200.1-2.
Taptakrechra, a purificatory rite 130.23, 134.29-30.
Tara, wife of Angirasa 32.10.
Taraka, a demon 213.1.
Tejas, son of Sumati 74.9.
Tejovati, city of Agni 76.9.
Ten incarnations 113.42.
Three kinds of bodies 39.3-4.
Three qualities, nature of 187.88-94.
Tilottama, daughter of the Brahmin Vasu 175.21, 176.6,24, 36, 41; a celestial
Tinduka, a barber devotee in Kampilya 152.45-50;—a tirtha in Mathura
Tirthas, total number on earth 159.6, those who have visited them all 159.
Tiryaksrotas, beings with horizontal growth 2.31, 38-39.
Toya, a river rising from Vindhya 85.5.
Toyasaha, a mountain in Krauficadvipa (same as Pundarika) 88.2.
Trayodasi, tithi 176.67-68.
'Iretáyuga 2.53, 3.18, 7.35, 10. 16, (8, 17.1, 32.5, 30, 36.1, 7, 49.30-31, 66.16,
Trigartesvara, Siva, same as Devagartesvara.
Trijale$vara, a holy place 97.32;—the linga in Kamika 144.98;—$iva in
Jale$vara 144.155.
Trikala, the goddess representing the energies of Brahma, Visnu and Siva
90.25; origin 90.12-27, constitution 90.24, division 90.28-36, as Brahmi
90.33-91.16, as Vaisnavi 91.1-95.70, as Raudri 96.1-59, effects of worTrikālajňa, a sage 180.8, 30, 41, 61, 104.
Triküta, a mountain 81.6.
Triparna, a mountain 82.3.
Triple Power, See Trikala. i
Trisikhara, a mount near lake Mànasa 78.14-16.
Trisiras, a sage 170.62.
Trisrnga, a mount in Meru 84.5.
Trisülagangà, a river 145.89.
Trisulba 3.17.
Triveni, confluence of Ganga, Yamuna and Sarasvati at Prayaga 144.100,
104;—coufluence of Gandaki, Devikà and Brahmatanaya (also called
Trivikrama, a form of Visnu 7.32, 36.20, 214.4.
Trivindala, a river rising from Mahendra 85.6.

Glossary 721
Triyāmā, a river rising from Mahendra 85.6.
"Trnabindu, a sage 144.133.
Trtiya, tithi 22.51.
Truth, praise of 193.36-49.
Tryambaka, a name of Siva 216.1-2.
Tunga, a river in Naisadha 83.3.
Tungabhadra, a river rising from Sahya 85.5, 97.17.
Tuhgaküta, a holy waterfall in Kokamukha 140.29.
Tungaprastha, a minor mountain in Bharata 85.3.
Turaga, a mount near lake Manasa 78.14-16.
"Turu, Manija Sudyumna reborn 16.5.
Twelve Adityas 214.35.
Udama, son of Medhatithi 74.8.
Udaraksa, a Raksasa 94.5.
Udaya, a mountain in Sákadvipa 86.2; a region in Sàkadvipa 86.3.
Udbhida, son of Jyotismàn 74.8.
Uddalaka, a sage 191.12, 198.21.
Udgata, a special priest 21.15-17;—son of Abhàva 74.9.
Ugra, a disciple of Para$uràma 112.70.
Ugrà$va, a king son of Haryasva 43.15.
Ujjayini, a city 167.3, 25, 26.
Ulüka, a Vidyádhara king 81.2.
Umakunda, a tirtha in Lohargala 151.66-68.
Umàstanakunda, a pond near Saile$vara 215.100.
Unhappiness, actions leading to 116.9-24.
Unmattaksa, a warrior in the army of Hetr-Prahetr 11, 93-95, 99,
Unnetà, son of Nikhàta 74.9.
Upala, a mount near lake Arunoda 78.11-12.
Upasayaka, a sage, propagator of Bhagavata dharma 148.12.
Upasparsana, ritualistic washing with water 134.10-23.
Ürdhvà, deity representing upward direction 29.4.
Ürdhvasrotas, beings with upward growth 2.32, 38-39.
Urvasi. a celestial damsel 214.41-42;—a goddess created by Vaisnavi 92.9-12,
Urvasikunda, a tirtha in Badari 141.51-66.
Usnavan, a region in Krauficadvipa 88.3.
Utpalavati, a river rising from Malaya 85.6.
Uttanapada, son of Svàyambhuvamanu 74.6.
Uttara, deity representing north 29.4.
Uttaràgni, one of the sacrificial fires, 190.15.
Uttaragokarna, same as Gokarna 216.23-24.

722 Vardha Purana’
Uttarakoti, a tirtha at the northern end of Mathura 160.52, 168.14.
Uttarakuru 74.8.
Vadhüti, a goddess installed in Mathura 160.60.
Vagisa, a name of Brahmi 91.3.
Vagmati, a river rising from Himalaya 215.50, 59, 68, 69, 70, 71, 73, 99, 105,
Vaidipala, a river rising from Vindhya 85.5.
Vaidyuta, a minor mountain in Bharata 85.3;—a mountain and region in
Sàlmalidvipa 89.3.
Vaikunthakdrana, a tirtha in Mandara 143.21-23.
Vaikunthatirtha, a tirtha in Methurà 160.60, 163.1, 4, 7, 10, 12, 168.16, 175.3.
Vailaksagaruda, a tirtha in Mathura 160.61.
Vairajas, denizens of Janaloka 9.19.
Vaisampayana, a sage 193.1-5.
Vaisnavi, the aspect of Trikalà representing the energy of Visnu 90.29, 91.5,
93.10, 58, 96.63, 73, 99.2;—a carrier-goddess of libation 190.29-30,
130;—a mother goddess representing greed 27.35-36.
Vaisnavimaya, a form of Maya 125.48, 169, 151.11.
Vai$vadeva, a daily ritual 14.10, 190.17.
Vaisvadevika mantra 14.39.
VaiSvànara, a name of fire 17.67, 18.21.
Vaisvanarakunda, a tirtha in Lohargala 151.60-62.
Vaisyas 3.19, 9.16, 49.16-18, 66.12, 68.5-6, 8, 9, 75.16, 116.22, 128.14, 20, 24,
vata dharma 128.14-24; rules of worship for 115.31-34.
Vaitarani, a river rising from Vindhya 85.5;—a river in Yamaloka 195.27,
Vaivasvata, a tirtha in Saukara 137.250.
Vaivasvata manvantara 24.26.
Vaivasvati, a river in the city of Yama 196.24.
Vajrabhava, a holy spot in Kokamukha 140.62.
Vajraka, a mountain 81.2;—a Raksasa 94.6-9.
Vajránanà, a goddess installed in Mathura 160.76.
Valáhaka, a division of Kusadvipa 87.2;—a Raksasa 94.5.
Vamadeva, a sage 47.18, 170.62, 64.
Vamana, a region of Krauficadvipa 88.3.
Vamana, a goddess installed in Mathura 160.40.
Vamanadvadasi, rituals 43.1-8, results 43.9-17.
VarbSasvara, a river rising from Mahendra 85.6
Vanamálà, a river 82.4.

Glossary 723
Vafijuka, a river rising from Rksa 85.5.
Vañjulā, a river rising from Sahya 85.5.
Vapanti, a river rising from Pariyatra 85.4.
Vapusman, son of Priyavrata and lord of Plaksa 74.7.
Varaha, the boar-incarnation of Visnu 24.1, 41.1, 4-5, 11, 112.52, 113.1, 2,
Varahadvadasi, rituals 41.2-13, results 41.14-16.
Varahakalpa 114.12.
Varahamaya, a form of Maya 125.47.
Varahapurana 112.67, 80, 141.52; as the cream of all $àstras 148.21; merits
of listening to 99.50-55; transmission of 112.67-73.
Varahatirtha (a tirtha in Mathura 166.24; four images in 166.25;—a tirtha in
Pindàraka 187.115.
Varahi, a mother goddess representing tolerance 27.35-36.
Varandhama, a minor mountain in Bharata 85.3.
Vardhamànà, a mount in Naisadha 83.1.
Varna, a river in KuSadvipa 87.3.
Varsyaghata, a tirtha in Mathura 160.30.
158.18;—a law-giver 121.17;—lord of the sea 125.35;—a division of
Bhàratavarsa 85.1.
Varunamantra 39.38.
Varunatali, a river 82.4.
Varunatirtha, a tirtha to the west of Govardhana 164.3, 7-8.
Varunimaya, a form of Maya 125.35.
Vasatputra, a holy spot in Mathura 160.20.
Vasistha, a sage 21.15-17, 42.10, 13, 44.6, 62.16-17, 29, 99.56, 58, 59, 62, 64,
Vasisthakunda, a tirtha in Lohargala 151.42-44.
Vasu, a Brahmin of the Paficaéla country 175.10;—a king of Kashmir, son of
Vasus 1.16, 18.6-7, 21.10, 10-20, 73.33, 81.3-4, 93.27-28, 94.5, 15, 124.13, 24,
Vasudana, Manija Susila reborn 36.6.
Vasudeva, father of Krsna 46.6, 8, 14, 144.5, 6, 148.10.
one of the four Vyühas 148.14.
Vasudhara, a mountain in Meru 80.5, 6, 81.3, 5.
Vasukarna, father of Gokarna, 170.1, 59.
Vasuman, a sage 170.62.
Vasumati, a goddess installed in Mathura 160.15;—a river 82.4.

724 Varüha Purana
Vasupatra, a tirtha in Mathura 157.35.
Vata, the principal tree at the peak of Suparsva 77.27.
Vatsa, a king 42.7, 9.
Vatsakrinanaka, a tirtha in Mathura 156.1-2.
Vatsasri, son of Drdhavrata, 55.27.
Vayavyatirtha, a tirtha in Kubjamraka 126.78.
deity of north-west 29.12-13, 99.27, 38, 43 ;—a lawgiver 121.17 ;—transformed into Kubera 30.5.
Vayutirtha, a tirtha in Mathura 152.68-69.
Vedas 2.67-68, 81, 3.3-4, 17, 5.14-15, 6.12, 7.11, 8.30, 9.23, 34, 10.11, 30, 31,
Vedadhàra, a tirtha in Badari 141.20-23.
Vedàntapurusa, Visnu 17.73, 31.20.
Vedasmrti, a river rising from Pariyatra 85.4.
Vedatrayi, a river rising from Pariyatra 85 4.
Vedavati, a river rising from Pariyatra 85.4.
Veni, a river rising from Sahya 85.5, 214.46-49.
Venikà, a river in Sákadvipa 86.3.
Venimadhava, Visnu at Triveni in Prayága 144.101.
Venuman. a mountain 81.2;—son of Jyotismàn 74.8.
Venumandala, a division of Kusadvipa (same as Lohita) 87.2.
Venunaddha, a mount near lake Arunodaya 78.11-12.
Vesna, a river rising from Vindhya 85.5.
Vetrasura, king of Prágjyotisa, son of Sindhudvipa and Vetravati 28.13, 27, 28.
Vetravati, a river, mother of Vetrasura 28.8, 10.
Vibhavari, a goddess created by Vaisnavi 92.9-12;—2 name of Brahmi 91.4;—
a river in KuSadvipa (same as Varna) 87.3.
Vibhavasu, a minister of Mahisasura 93.3-4.
Vibhisana 163.46, 47, 48.
Vibhrajasa, a mountain (same as Ambikeya) 86.2.
Vibhu, son of Prastota 74.9.
Vicitra, an Asura 25.7.
Vida, a settlement in Naisadha 83.2.
Vidisa, a river rising from Pàriyàtra 85.4.
Vidruma, a mountain (same as Kumuda) 87.1.
Vidya, a name of Brahmi 91.13, 95.63.
Vidyddhara, a tirtha in Sàlagràma 145.66-68.

Glossary 725
Vidyadharas 80.3, 81.2, 5, 8, 93.27-28, 124.12, 145.67, 68, 206.16, 213.23, 214.
Vidye$vari, a goddess 169.38-39;—a name of Brahmi 91.3, 13.
Vidyujjihva, a Raksasa 94.6 9;—a serpent-chief 214.57-63.
Vidyullà, a river in Kusadvipa 87.3.
Vidyullatà, a mountain in Krauficadvipa 88.1.
Vidyunmáli, a minister of Mahisásura 93.3-4;—a Raksasa 94.6-9.
Vidyut, an Asura 10.47-48, 16.1-4, 6.
Vidyut-prabha, an emissary of Mahisásura 93.24, 95.1;—a warrior in the
army of Hetr-Prahetr 11.93-95, 98.
Vidyutprabhà, a goddess created by Vaisnavi 92.9-12, 16-17, 18;—queen of
Supratika 10.19.
Vighasa, a minister of Mahisásura 93.3-4, 12, 18, 25;—a warrior in the army
of Hetr-Prahetr 11.93-95, 97.
Vighnakara, a name of Vinàyaka 23.28-29.
Vighnaraja, a name of Vinàyaka 154.29, 30;—a tirtha in Mathura 154.29-31.
Vijaya, door-keeper of Visnu 113.62;—son of Trnabindu 144.133, 139, 140,
Vijayà, a goddess created by Vaisnavi 92.9-12.
Vikanka, a mount near lake Arunoda 78.11-12.
Vilasini, a river 82.4.
Vimalavana, a garden in Mathura 153.38.
Vimati, a king, son of Sumati 166.3, 12.
Vinata, a serpent-chief 214.57-63.
Vindhya, a major mountain in Bharata 85.2, 5, 113.49, 143.2, 24,39,49, 214.
Vindhyavinissrta, a tirtha in Mandàra 143.30-32.
Vipasa, a river rising from Himalaya 13.46, 85.4, 214.46-49.
Vipracitti, an Asura 25.7.
Vipula, a mountain on the western part of Meru 77.9.
Virabhadra, chief of Siva’s army 27.16.
Viradha, a warrior in the army of Hetr-Prahetr 11.93-95.
Viradhanva, a king 41.17, 28.
Virája, a celestial region 65.14-15;—a mount near lake Mahabhadra 78.21-23,
Virajà, a river rising from Rksa 85.5.
Virasena, a king 44.9.
Virasthala, a holy spot near Saptasamudrika in Mathura 157.16, 160.20.
Virat 13.25.
Viràia, son of Naya 74.9.
Virocana, minister of Durjaya 11.70-71.
Virüpàksa, commander-in-chief of Mahisasura 93.27-28, 32.
Virüpanidhi, servant of Prabhavati 180.38, 98.
Visa, a mount near lake Manasa 78.14-16.
Visàkha, a mountain in Meru 80.4;—a mount in Naisadha 83.1.
Visàla, a city 7.13-14;—a country 7.13-14, 16-17, 31;—a king 7.13-14;—a
king of Kasi 48.6-7;—-a name of Badari 48.23.

726 Varaha Purana
Visala, a river in Naisadha 83.3;—a river rising from Rksa 85.5.
Visalaksi, a goddess created by Vaisnavi 92.9-12,
Visnu 1.1, 4, 19, 29, 3.6, 8, 15, 29, 4.2-3, 22, 24-25, 28-31, 35, 39-40, 5.53, 6.3,
5, 217.22, 24; derivation of the name 72.50; identity with Aditya 72.6;
identity with Siva and Brahma 70.26-27, 39-40, 71.6-7, 72.14, 16, 73.
Visnudhara, a holy water-fall in Kokamukha 140.17, 20.
Visnumàyà, a form of Maya 125.72, 151.26, 187.10, 15, 188.27;—a name of
Vaisnavi 90.31.
Visnupada, a tirtha in Goniskramana 147.38-39;—a tirtha in $alagráma 145.
Visnupada, a holy spot in Kokamukha 140.21,
Visnupadi, a river 82.4.
Visnusaükramana. a holy spot in Dvārakā 149.83-85.
Visnusaras, a holy lake in Kokamukha 140.24;—a tirtha in Goniskramana.
Visnutirtha, a holy spot in Kokamukha 140.73.
Visrantitirtha, a tirtha in Mathura 152.34-37, 160.1, 2, 62, 64, 163.19, 67, 68,
Visvakarma, the architect of Dvaraka 149.7.
Visvamitra, a sage 214.43-45.
Vi$vàvasu, a Gandharva 214.38-39, 74.
Visvesvara, the deity in Varanasi 97.35.

Glossary 727
Vitala, a netherworld 24.24.
Vitasta, a river rising from Himalaya 85.4, 97.17, 214.46-49.
Nivarnà, a river in Naisadha 83.3.
Vivasvàn, son of king Vasu 6.5.
Vrndakavana, a garden in Mathura 36.11, 161.10.
Vrsabhafijanaka, a temple in Phalgunaka in Mathura 157.37-38.
Vrsaharhsa, ə mount near lake Mahabhadra 78.21-23.
Vrsnis, a class of people 149.11, 19, 23, 53.
Vrsotsarga, ceremony of letting loose a bull 155.74.
Vrtra, a demon killed by Indra 125.37.
Vyasa, a sage 112.72, 175.3, 8;—a lawgiver 197.17.
Vyoma 2.7.
Women in monthly period, rules relating to 142.6-10, 45-51.
Worship, in autumn season 123.7-14, in rainy season 124.45-59, in spring
season 124.1-40, in summer season 124.41-44, in winter season 123.1520; expiations for offences in 179.11-19; food permitted in 119.4-18,
grains and vegetables 119.8-11, flesh of animals 119.12, flesh of birds
"Yàdavas, a clan 144.8, 149.6.
Yadus, a clan 144.4.
Yajfia 66.19.
Yajüahà, a Raksasa 94.10-12.
Yajüahanus,a Raksasa 95.43.
Yajfiamirti, a form of Visnu 10.16.
Yajfiapurusa, name of Visnu in Naimisaranya 11.111, 41.41-42.
Yaksadhanus, a king of Saurastra 153.9-10.
Yaksatirtha, another name for Harhsatirtha 144.180.
Yayàti, a king son of Nahusa 43.16-17;—a king of Mathura 152.24.
ple of dharma 17.24-25, 48, 49, 18.1-3;—son of Martanda and Samjiia
Yamaculli, a fire-place in Yamaloka 200.36.
Yamadandadhara, a mother goddess representing malignity 27.35-36.
Yamaloka, city in 196.2-35; sinners in 195.3-18.
Yamana, a tirtha in Mathurà 168.16.
Yamanadi, a river in Yamaloka 200.46.
E
A
H
Er

728 Varáha Purdne
Yamavyasanaka, a holy spot in Kokamukha 140.56.
Yamatirtha, a tirtha to the south of Govardhana 164.3, 5-6.
Yamuna, a river rising from Himalaya 85.4, 97.16, 137.258, 144.10, 169,
Sarhjfia 8.6.
Yaśodā 169.38-39 ;—a river in Kusadvipa (same as Siva) 87.3.
Yavakrita, a sage 170.61.
184.9, 193.50-51, 210.43, 44; for attaining the Lord 115.42-53; benefits.
of 116.5-7 ;—psychic discipline 2.67-68.
Yoge$vari, a mother goddess representing love 27.35-36.
Yogisvara, a form of Visnu 50.14.

INDEX
(Figures refer to the number of page)
Aditya-tirtha, a holy place dedicated
.. to Sun-god 370
Adityas= twelve months 71
Agasti star (Canopus) 373
Agastya, sage of mythological origin
Agastyagità 142ff
Agni=Vaisvanara 67
Agnidatta, a Vedic Brahmin turned
into a Brahmaraksasa 457
Agnisatyapada, a holy spot in Badari
Aharükára—Senápati and Guha 88
Air=Kubera 67
Akriratirtha, its greatness 453
Amarakantaka, a holy place of pilgrimage in Madhya Pradesa 676
Amávási, the day of pitrs 109
musyayana, a disciple 403
Anasaka, a vow 385
Andhaka, a demon 94; his aim to slay
iva and Parvati in battle 94
Andhaka, lord Siva as his slayer 94,
Angirasa, sage 61
Anityasrama, a sacred place for rituals
Annaküta, its greatness 481ff
Annaprasana, a ceremony 497
Apastamba, the law-giver 474
Arista, an asura killed by Krsna 483
Arjunaka, daughter of a hunter 28
Arjunaka, son of a hunter 28
Arogyavrata, for removing sins 159
runi, a sage, the preceptor of Satyatapas 228
runi, son of Brahma 113
Asuras, their leaders—Hiranyakasipu,
Hiranyaksa, Vipracitti, Vicitra,
Bhimaksa and Kraufica 89, 98
Asuras in Durjaya’s army 46
Asura-s Kama, Mura, Naraka, Rävana, Hayagriva, Madhu 1
Hiranyakasipu 2
A$vamedha, a sacrifice 13, 233
Aévattha, a sacred tree 435
ASvasiras, a king 13
ASvin’s hymn of prayer to Brahma 74
Atreya (sage) residing on the mountain 1
Citraküta 36
Avabhrtha bath 13
Avanti (city) 10
Avataras (incarnations)
Matsya, Karma, Varáha, Narasimha, Vamana, Rama, Parasuráàma,
Krsna, Buddha, Kalki 258
Avatara-s—incarnations of Visnu 1-2,
Avighnavrata, for warding off evil 156
Avyakta=Uma or Sri 88
Badari, a place of pilgrimage in HimaBanaganga 402
Bhadra, a banyan tree 227
Bhadrasva (k) 142
Bhadravata (an attractive banyan
tree) 142
Bhangurasa, a devotee of Visnu 372
Bharata (k) 407
Bharata, a king in the land of Kimpurusas 128
Bharata, nine divisions 201 ff
detailed descriptions 201ff
Bharatavarsa 173
Bhisma, son of Santanu 462
Bhütaganas, fight between Devas and
Bhütaganas 76ff
Bhütagiri 429
Bilva, a sacred tree 434
Bilvaprabha, a holy place 411
Birth, absence of 279
Boar incarnation 257
Bodies, two kinds: Adharmic, Dharmic (of demerit and merit) 31
Body, nomenclature of its inmates 67
Body considered as threefold because
of different aspects 119
Brahma, four-faced 94
Brahma, His origin from the navellotus 4
Brahma, in the form of Yajurveda 9
Brahma, meditating on Gayatri, the
Maya of the Supreme Being 98
Brahma, Visnu and Siva, their identity 177
Brahma asks Goddess to slay Mahisa~
sura 99
Brahma created ten guardian deities
of quarters 100
Brahma provides Rudra with the share
in the sacrifice 78
Brahmà's favour of boon to A$vins 73

Brahmadatta, a king 358, 446
Brahmakunda 387
Brahmakürca, an expiatory rite 352
Brahmapadma, a lotus for removing
sins and curing diseases, leprosy etc.
Brahmapara, a hymn 11
Brahmaraksasa 377
Brahmaraksasa and merchant Sudhana, an anecdote 454
Brahmatanayà (r) 406
Brahmatirtha 676
Brahmavidyà 117
Brahmins, his six duties 265fn 1
Brahmavidyà 111
Brhaspati, his Dharmasastra 361
Brhaspati Raibhya dialogue 16ff
Brndavana, a holy city 459
Buddhadvadasiviata 133
Caitraratha, Vidyadhara chief 16
Cakras: Sodasàra, Sarvatobhadra, Astapatra 230
Cakratirtha, a holy spot 356; its great-
' ness 473
Caksusa Manvantara 16
Mc EM, significance of the name
Canda and Munda, two asuras 221
Candraprabha, a queen 534
Candrasena, king of Mathura 533
Candrayana, an expiatory rite 525,
Caste, evolution 33
Caste-mixture leading to hell 535
Catuhsimudrika well, its greatness
Caturyuga, the four yugas 122
Chariot of Veda and Vidya 76
Chaste woman, a story 637
Chaya got two children by Aditya,
Sani and Tapati 71
Chiefs, (fifteen) rising from jewel 45
Citrabhanu narrates a story 633
Citragupta, the principal officer under
Yama, a story 615: his instructions
to his Messengers 627ff
Citraküta (mountain) 37
Citraratha, a celestial garden of Kubera 38
Citrasilà, a beautifully shaped stone
at the Himalaya mountain 142
Citrasilà, a holy slab 227
Cittayoga 394
Cosmology 181ff
Cow at childbirth, its greatness 250
Cow Kapilà 281
Creation, Goddess of —205-211
Creation, ninefold 7
Creation, origin, development 182
Creation, origin of Devas, Ádityas,
Varaha Purana
Vasus, Rudras, Agvins, Maruts etc.
Creation, Primary 3ff
Creation, progeny of Daksa Prajapati’s
daughter 7
Creation, process 4
Creation of Worlds 33
Creation of Yaksas and Ráksasas 33
Crocodile and Elephant, a fight between the two 407
Cüdàkarma, a ceremony 497
Curse, a hunter's curse on women 30
Daksa's sacrifice, destruction by Rudra
76ff
Daksa's sacrifice to propitiate Brahmà
75; Functions of sages 75
Daksayani= Aditi 74
Dandaka, a forest 173
Daéami tithi allotted to Diks 100
Day and Night in relation to Kalpa 47
Deities of the body attaining concrete
form 68
Deva’s praise of Rudra 78
Devagarte$vara, a Siva temple in
Varanasi where the king of Kanyakubja had constructed an inn 519
Devagiri, a mount 583
Devaráta, a sage 126
Devas, turning into beasts (Pasus) and
the lord as pasupati 166
Devas, their prayer to Brahma 98
Devas thcir praise of Vinàyaka 85
Devas as Pasu-s 108
Deva's praise of Rudra 107
Devavaua, its greatness 472
Devikà 113, 117
Devikà (r) 404
Dhanya Vrata, for getting rich 152ff
Dhányadhenu, its greatness 248
Dharanivrata 140
Dharanivrata, benefits 122
Dharma=Yama 67
Dharma, origin 103
Dharma seen differently by Manu,
Angirasa, Sukra, Gautama, Soma,
Rudra, Sankha, Likhita and others
Dharmapurusa described in detail 103
Dharmaranya 17
Dharmas (or Karmas) of different
Castes 264ff
Dharmavyadha, a hunter 27 (king
Vasu in former birth)
Dhruva, born in the line of Brahma
worshipped Visnu 139
Dhruvatirtha, greatness for Sraddha
Dhruvatirtha in Mathura 533
Dikpalas 127

index
Dikpàálas, eight, and their cities 188
Diks, origin 100 |
Diptatejas born as Sànta 110
Dirghabahu, his narrative 112
Dirghabahu (k) 114; turned into
a tiger ibid
Dravinodah= Fire 69
Durjaya, his conquest of the world 37
Durjaya, his son Prabhava by Sukesi
Durjaya, son of king Supratika and
queen Vidyutprabhà 37
Durjaya married Sukesi and Misrakeśi 39
Durjaya and Gauramukha, fight between—40
Durvasas 116
Durvasas, a sage 142, 430
Dvadasadityakunda, a holy spot 388
Dvárakà, its greatness 430
Dvipas (Continents)—Jambü 183;
Saka 202; Kusa 202, 203; Kraufica
203; Salmali 204; Gomeda 204;
Puskara 204
‘Earth: Enquiry about Creation 1ff
Earth: prayer to Visnu 3
Ego—Skanda Karttikeya 67
Expiation, rules of 347ff
Expiation for eating the King's food
333ff; for not cleaning the Teeth
335; for touching Dead Body 336,
forpassing flatus etc in the midst
of worship 339; for other offences
in worship 340; for eating goose
etc. 344
Expiations for Offences 531
Fastings and Vratas 120ff
Fire, its greatness 69
Fire, threefold—Gaàrhapatya, Daksinatya, Ahavaniya 69 E
Fires, Daksina, Garhapatya and Ahavaniya 11
Fish-Incarnation 32, 257
Fish and Cricket story 281
Food forbidden in worship 276ff
Forest of snakes 143
Gad? hara hymn 26
Raibhya's prayer 26
Gandaki(r) 401, 402, 419; as Triveni
when two other rivers join it 404
Gandhamádana (mountain) 38, 135
Gandharvas 227
Ganesa, his worship for warding off
evil 157 .
'Ganesa, son of lord Siva 400
‘Gangadvara 676
Gangasagara 533
Garhapatya—Fire 69
Garuda, the Vehicle of Visnu 102
Garudamandala (a yantra) 88
Gauri—Himavat's daughter 67; also
known as Krsna, married to Siva 80
Gauri, origin 74
Gaurisikhara 672
Gauramukha, a sage 40; his hospitality
to Durjaya 40ff; his meditauon on
Visnu 41; his prayers 41; his liberation after utterring the Hymn of
Ten Incarnations of Visnu 58; his
previous life 58ff
Gauramukha, his prayer 59
Gauramukha receives jewel from lord
Visnu 43
Gautama, a brahmin, his narrative
Gaya 24
God, his forms in different yugas 36
God Visnu in the form of fish 34
Godana, a ceremony 497
Godavari(r) 175
Goddess slays Vetrasura 98
Goddess rising from the ears of Brahma
Goddesses, six important
(1) Pūrvā (2) Daksina (3) Pratici
(4) Uttara (5) Urdhva (6) Adhara
Gods—Agni, Aévins, Gauri, Ganapati, Nagas, Karttikeyas, Adityas,
Matrs, Durga, Diks, Kubera, Visnu,
Yama, Rudra, Candra, Pitrs—their
egoistic proclamations 64
Gods’ homage to Visnu 35
Gods and Demons, their fight with
each other 213
Gods’ prayer to Siva 89
Gokarna, A story 494{F
Gokarna, a Siva temple 497
Gokarnas, Northern and Southern
Gokarne$vara, its greatness 656
Goloka 423
Gomedadvipa 383
Gomedha sacrifice 61
Goniskramana, a sacred place 421
Ghrtadhenu 234
Gudadhenu, its greatness 238
Harhsatirtha, a pool 409
Happiness and unhappiness 267
Haridatta, a Vaisya 138
Haryasva ( k ) 129
Hastinapur, a famous city 462
Havya, Kavya 68
Havyavahana= Fire 69

Hell, Torments 603-614
Hetr (a sage) son of Svayambhuva
Manu 38
Himalaya, (m) 174
Himavàn, his invitation to the people
at the marriage of his daugher 82
Hiranyakaéipu, an asura 257
Holy places 282
Hymn to Visnu, by a hunter 31
Ignorance, fivefold 6
llàvrta, country 233
Images, wooden, their consecration
Images of bronze, their consecration
Images of clay, their consecration
547ff
Images of copper, their consecration
Images of silver and gold, their consecreation 553
Images of stone, their consecration
544ff
Indra, king of gods, cursed by Durvasas 60
Indra, lord of celestials 37, 127, 227
Indraloka 227
Indraloka in Badari 388
Initiation of the Brahmin 319ff
Initiation of the castes 323
Intellect: Threefold 4
Islands, seven 8
Jaigisavya, a sage 13
Jalabindu, in Kokamukha 383
Jalacandrayana, a vow 389
Jaladhenu 234; its greatness 236
Jamadagnyadvadasivrata 130
Jambavati, wife of Srikrsna 431
Jambudvipa and Meru 183ff; Geographical survey 186fF
Jamitra, the seventh house connected
with matrimony 67 fn 1;
Janamejaya, a king 590
Janaka, a king 633
Janaloka 24
Janasthana 22
Játakarma, a ceremony 497
Jaya and Vijaya--doorkeepers of Visnu
259; sons of sage Trnabindu 406
Jvara (fever) as the manifestation of
Rudra 618fn
Kailaga (m) 107, 175
Kalacakra (course of the world) 102
Kalapriya, a holy place 529
Kalifijara, its greatness 518
Kaliya, a serpent 469
Kalki, his golden image as a gift 135
Kalkidvadasivrata 135
Kalpagrama, its greatness 473, 475
Varáha Purana
Kalpavasikas 51
Kamavrata, for obtaining pleasure
Kamika, a sacred place 404
Kampilla, a city 358
Kàmpilya, a city in the Paficala country 446
Kanakhala, a holy place near Haradvara 446
Kànta as Dasaratha 111
Kantimati, wife of king Bhadraéva
Kàntivrata, for regaining lost splen--
dour 153ff
Kapila 19
Kapila, a sage 13
Kapiladhenu, its greatness 249
Kapilavaraha idol given to Satrughna.
as a boon by Rama; idol taken to
Mathura by Satrughna 480
Kapilavaraha, its greatness; idol of
Kapilavaraha taken to Lanka by
Ravana 478ff. Later on the idol:
taken to Ayodhya by Rama 479
Karma-yoga 394
Káàrpásadhenu, its greatness 247
Kasi, a holy city, a place of pilgrimage 135
Ka$yapa, son of Marici 71
Kausili(r) 386ff
Kesitirtha where the Asura Kesi was.
killed 459
Kimpurusas 128
King of Kalinga 359
King of Kàfici 359
Kinnaras, semi-divine beings 227
Kokàmukha, a holy spot 355, 382; its.
greatness 281
Kosala (k) 312ff
Kratu (sacrifice), running away through the north-western part of the
sacrificial altar 106
Krauficadvipa 376, 383
Krechra, an expiatory rite 525
Krsnaganga, its greatness 518
Krtavirya, a Haihaya 141
Ksetrapála in Mathurà 493
Ksiradhenu, its greatness 242
Kubera 381; Origin 101
Kubjàmraka, a holy spot 355; story:
of serpent and ichneumon 306;
Tirthas at—and their efficacy 310
Kumara, Skanda, his origin different
in different Manvantaras 91; His
first birth 91; son of Krttika 91; son
of fire 91, 92; son of six mothers 91;
his second birth 92; son of Krttika
92; son of Mothers 92; son of Parvati 92

Index
Kumara Skanda, Sasthi tithi allotted
to him 92
Kunda and Gola, bastard sons 574
fn 1
Kiarmadvadasivrata 123, 124
Kusadvipa 373
Lavana, an asura killed by Satrughna
Lavanadhenu, its greatness 245
Liberation by performing caste-duties
Liberation by utterring the Pundarikaksapara hymn 20
Liberation through Gadadhara hymn
Liberation attainment through Duty
Lohargala 399; a holy spot 382; its
greatness 439; sacred places in the
region 439
Lokapàla, a holy spot 389
Lord of beings in bull’s form 105;
Deva’s homage 105
Lotus from the navel of Visnu 102
Madhudhenu, its greatness 241
Madhika tree for making idols 543
Madhuparka—a preparation consisting of curd, ghee and honey 263
MSAN the destroyer of Tripuras
Mahapadma’s, embodiments of treasures 631fn 1
Mahat tattva—Mahadeva 67
Mahatapa-Prajapala dialogue 68
Mahatapas, a sage 63
-Mahatapas and Prajapala 1; a dialogue 64
Mahisa an asura and his ministers
211, his death 214ff
Ma&hismati 215
Malayarjuna, a holy place, where the
Asura Sakata was killed 459
Manasa, a lake 161, 389
Manasodbhava, a holy spot 389
Mandara and other mountains 191
Mandara, its greatness 395
Mandeha, chief of Raksasas 615
Mandehas defeated by Yama’s men 616
Mandhata a king 515
Manijas, kings in the Tretayuga 110
Manipüra (a hill) 428, 429
Mantra, dvadasaksara, of Visnu 278
Manu, his Dharmasastra 361
Manu, Svayambhuva, his age 49
Mīrica, a great sage 173
Marici, one of the seven sages 51; son
of Brahma 70
Markandeya (a sage) 50
Marriages hypergamous and hypergampous 585
Martanda, most lustrous among the
adityas 71
Maruts 51
Masa (a month)—aggregate of thirtydays 122
Matanga a sage 28
Matanga-hunter dialogue 28ff
Mathura 403; a holy city, its greatness 444, 448; its appearance 458;
sacred places in the region 444ff,
492; Semicircular spot 494
Mathura holier than Kuruksetra 498.
Matrgana, their origin 94
Matsyadvadasi vrata 118
Matsyasila in Kokamukha 386
Maya 112; her origin 229;—eightarmed Gáyatri 229; fought with
Caitrasura 229; Visnu's power of
illusion 3
Mayacakra 295ff
Maya Rohini 298; her influence 298
Merorvara, a holy spot 389 ;
Meru (m) 37, 97, 389; in detail
189ff; Valleys 192-198; regions on
the South and North 199ff; the
golden mountain 1
Milky Ocean 2, 39
Mind=Visnu 67
Misrakesi, daughter of asura Prahetr
Mithi, son of king Nimi 638
Mithilà (a city) 28
Mlecchas, to be annihilated by the
Ksatriyas 669
Moksa-dharma (means of liberation)
142ff; Agastya's discourse — an
allegory 144, 145 .
Moksadharma, Bhadràéva's enquiry
142; Agastya's reply 143
Months, twelve—make a year 122
Mother Earth 120
Mother goddess 467
Mothers, eight in number: (1) Yogesvari, (2) Máhesvari, (3) Vaisnavi,
(4) Brahmani, (5) Kuméari, (6)
Indrajà, (7) Yamadandadhara, (8)
Varahi
Mothers, their qualities 96 i
Mrgaśrůgodaka, a spring on the Himālayas 670
Muktiksetra 398, 406
Mialasthana, an important place 529
Mundjavan, a peak of Mandara meuntain
Naciketas, cursed by his father 591;
Departure 590; his discourse on

truth 592ff; his visit to Yama 593;
. son of Uddalaka, a sage 592
Nagas, their abodes—Patila, Vitala
and Sutala 87
Naimisáranya 676
Naisadha (m) regions and rivers 198
Naudà Goddess 99
Nandana, a divine garden 434
Nandana garden 38, 376, 656
Nandi 404
Nandi, a sage 637; became the leader
of Ganas 661
Nandimukhas 109
Nara and Narayana 135
Narada, Birth 10; etymology of the
word 12; son of Brahma 37
Nárada's prayer to Visnu It
Narasirhhadvadasivrata 127
Narayana, His greatness 12; in the
form of Rgveda 9
Narayana or Visnu, his Wonder 168
Narayana-mantra 13
Narmadà (r) 215, 522
Narrative of a Hunter and a Brahmin
Nartanácala, a holy place where Rāvana danced 403
Navanitadhenu, its greatness 244
Nepal, a holy place at the foot of the
Himalayas 668
Nila, a chieftain of Durjaya 45
Nimi, a king of Krtayuga 638; his
grief at the loss of his son Srimàn
NisSvasa Samhita, with a lakh of verses contains Pásupata discipline 175
Nisthuraka, a hunter 17
Nrsimha (man-lion) incarnation 257
Nyasayoga 395
Observances, bodily: taking food only
once a day 113; fasting at night 113
Observances, oral: learning the Veda,
reciting the glories of Visnu speaking truth not speaking ill 113
Offences, thirtytwo 270
Om created the earth 33
Origin of Creation 38
Origin of water, fire, air, ether 68
Outcaste, his story 376ff
Pada and Krama recitations of Vedas
Padmanábha, his worship 137; his
golden image to be worshipped 137
Padmanabhadvadasi 137
Paficagavya 263 fn 1, 531; five products of cow—milk, curd, Ghee,
urinc and dung 632
Pàücála, a country 519
Varáha Purana
Paficamrta 532
Paficanada, a holy place an Himalayas 670
Paticaratra, Nasadiya; for Brahmins,
Koatriyas, Vaisyas 164; Sadras excluded from worship 164
Paficasikha, a holy place in Badari
Paficasira, a holy place 389
Paraka, an expiatory rite 332
Parama, a lake 398
Parasurama (—Jamadagnya), his
gold-image as a gift 130; exterminated Ksatriyas 257; his hermitage
at Sürpàraka 437; son of Brahmana
sage Jamadagni 2, 136
Pasupala (k) 143; his narrative an
allegory 143; 146
Paksa—Fourteen days and nights 122
Pindaraka, a holy place 399
Pisácatirtha 518
Pitrs, origia 108; (manes) their origin
51; time for offering sacrifice to
Pitrs 52ff
Plaksa, a sacred tree 431
Prabhasa 50, 676
Prabhávati, the attendant of queen
Candraprabhà 534
Pragjyotisa (Assam) 97, 312
Prahet; (a sage) son of Svayambhuva
Manu 38
Prahlada, an asura who worshipped
Visnu 139
Prajapala 110; Prajapati-Mahatapas
dialogue 74
Prajapati, His wife, His creation 5,
birth of Svayambhuva Manu 5
Prajapati Aurva 421
Prajapatya, an expiatory rite 531
Prakrti and Purusa 176
Pramloca, a celestial lady 419
Prana and Apaaa=Asvins 61
Prasanna, son of Matanga 28
Prasravana mountain 22
Pratipat, the first day in the fortnight
of each month 70; allotted to Agni
Pratisthana, a city 125, 484
Prayoga 676
Principle, triple 76
Priyavrata 8
Pulastya and Pulaha, 2 sages 406
Pundarikaksa hymn 21
Punishment according to deeds 618ff
Purana, five characteristics 4
Puranas 117, the list of 2544
Purification for the guilt of incest 523
Purusa=Visnu 88; as all in all without whom body cannot exist 65ff
Purusottama, a lake 31
ES

Index
Puskara lake 20
Puskara 676; a place of pilgrimage
Puskaradvipa 381
Puspabhadra(r) 142
Pusyabhadra, a holy river 227
Putika, a hell 560, 620
Putrapraptivrata, for getting a son
161ff
Onalities of earth etc 67
Quarters (ten) married to Indra,
Agni, Yama, Nirrti, Varuna, Vàyu,
Kubera, láána, Ürdhva and Adhara 100
Raibhya, a sage 311
Raivataka (mount) 433
Ràjasüya sacrifice 447
Ráksasa and Brahmin, an anecdote
Raksasa and Yama’s men, a fight
Rama of Ayodhya takes the idol of
Yajnavaraha from Lanka to Ayodhya 479
RamadvadaSivrata 131
Rasadhenu 234; procedure of gifting
Rasatala (lower world) 120
Rathayatra festival 530
Raudhi, a goddess, her exploits 219
Raurava hell 629
Ravana 402; his worship of lord Gokarnes$vara, by Rama 257
Results corresponding to good and
bad activities 628
Results of good actions 630, 633
Reva= Narmada (r) 400
Rgveda 410
Rites for the dead 564
Rituals in Idol worship 273ff
Rituals in worship 329
Rivers, names of famous rivers of India
Rudra, deprived of share in the sacrificial offering 107; half man and
half woman 7; his greatness 223ff;
in the form of Samaveda 9; origin
75; his roaring 76; Origin (First
aprearance) 105; Etymology 106;
Origin from the anger of Brahma
5; piercing the eyes of Bhaga 77;
pulling out the teeth of Püsà 77; the
bearer of Khatvanga 78; as the destroyer of Tripura 78; the smasher
of Daksa’s sacrifice 81
Rudra and Visnu fight with each other
77; Brahma’s intervention to stop
the battle 77
Rudra as Pagupati 108
Rudra in the guise of a Brahmin 81
Rudra in the guise of an old Brahmin
caught by an illusory shark in. the
Ganges 82
Rudra restores teeth, eyes and testicles
to Bhaga, Pisa and Kratu 108
Rudragita 169-172; Identity of three
Rudra's curse to Vinayaka 84
Rudra-s, eleven 2
Rüpavati, wife of prince Mithi 638
Ruru, an asura king 219-221
Ruruksetra and Hrsikesa 416fT
Sacrifice, fivefold: Divya, Bhauma,
Paitra, Manusa, Brahma 30
Sacrifices, performed by gods to please
Visnu 35
Sages seven : Marici, Atri and others
74fn
Sages ten 7 ; Delegation of responsibilities of the sages 7
Sailesvara (or Jalesvara ?) his great-
, ness 666
Sákadvipa 376
Sakhotaka 358
akrarudra a holy spot in Kokamukha
Sakuntala, daughter of Menaka-Visvàmitra and foster-child of Kanva,
married king Dusyanta and got son
Bharata 141
alagrama, a holy region 408; method.
of worship 556; Tirthas of the region
409ff
Sàlagrámaksetra, greatness 409
Salankayana, a sage 400
Salmaladvipa 375
Sàmaveda 410 .
Samba, son of Jambavati by Srikrsna
431, 526, cursed by Srikrsna to become a leper; cured by Sun-god;
taught Madhyandaniyaka by Sungod
Sàmbapura, a place in Mathurà 530
Sambhu as Senapati 111
Samjüàa, daughter of Tvasta 71;
married to Aditya 71; goes to the
Northern Kurus leaving her Chayashadow behind 71; in the form
of a mare 72; leaves Aditya, her
husband 71
Samvarta, a sage whose five sons
were killed by king Viradhanva
125; his five sons killed five young
decr 126
Sarhyamana, descendant of sage Atri
Sanandira, its greatness 435ff; sacred
places in the region 436ff
TET Lanas
E
ATIS
Erne eee
Ed
epi
H
E

Sanatkumara, Brahmàá's mind-born
child and the younger brother of
Rudra 24; son of Brahma 440
Sandhyà, procedure of worship 329;
worship 278
Sandilya, a sage 173
Sannyasa-yoga 392
Santanaka worlds 51
Santivrata for getting peace of mind
Saptanga (seven constituents) 285
Sarabhanga (r) 441
‘Sarama, her betrayal 62; the dog of
gods 61
Sàrasvata, a Brahmin 10; a lake 10
Sarasvati (r) 496
Sarasvati, daughter of Brahma 99
Sarkaradhenu, procedure of gifting it
Sarvabhaumavrata for a king to become an emperor 163
Sarvakamika, a holy spot in Koka 386
Sarvamedha, a sacrifice 234
astras (ancient disciples) 9
Satrughna-Lavana 530ff
Satyaloka 127, 387
‘Satyatapas, a story 116; his Moksa
226; saved Aruni from a tiger 226;
propitiated Durvasas 220
Saubhagya Vrata, for attaining prosperity 155
Saukara, a holy place 356, 362; its
greatness 374
Sauryavrata, a vow for valour 162
Savitri, mother of the Vedas 9
Sense-organs—manes 67
Serpents, Daksa’s daughter Kadrü begets sons Ananta, Vasuki, Kambala,
Karkotaka, Padma, Mahapadma,
Saükha, Kulika and others 86
Serpents, how to make them friendly 88
Siddhaksetra on the Himalaya superior to Prabhasa, Prayága, Naimisa,
Puskara and Kuruksetra 669
Siddhas 2
Sin, means to destroy—644, 648
Sindhudvipa, a valiant king 97; asa
manifestation of Varuna 97; son of
Tvasta in his previous birth 97
Sins of Castes, their removal 166, 167
Sitatirtha 533 .
Siva, Devas’ search for Siva 666; his
prayer to Gayatri 98ff
iva as Nandikesgvara 411
Sivaloka 98
Sivanadi (r) 519
Sivaratri 409
Skanda, origin of 88; born of Aharhkara 88
Slesmátaka, a great serpent 663
Varáha Purána
Slesmataka forest where Lord Siva
moves in the form of a deer 673
Soma, origin 109
Soma as Janaka 111
Somasarma, a Brahmin 298; his episode 298ff; a Brahmin of Caraka
clan 380
Somatirtha, a holy place 357, 374;
Wonder of the place 357
Somesvara, a holy place 399
Sraddha, A story 581; details 5778;
in the absence of money to propitiate Pitrs 54; origin 557; Pitryajfia
described 577-580; rules 449; the
method of performance 586ff
Sraddha ritual 565ff; qualities of the
Brahmin to be fed 54; 572
Sraddha, rules 54;
Sraddhakalpa, rules relating to the
conduct of Sraddha 559
riman, son of Nimi 559
Srivatsa and Kaustubha in the form
of the sun and the moon. 102
rügesvara, its greatness 673
Srutakirti, a king 63
Stages of Life—Brahmacarya, Garhastya, Vanaprastha and Sannyasa 119
Sthilasiras son of Agvasiras.
Stutasvami, greatness 425ff
Subha as Sarhvarana 111
ubhadarsana as Pāňcāla 110
Subha Vrata 149ff
Sudargana, son of Durjaya by Miérakesi 40
Südra, his right to sacrifice for manes
Sudyumna, son of king Suprattka and
queen Kàntimati 37
Sudyumna as Turu 111
Sukesi, daughter of asura Hetr 39
Sukhada as Asupati 111
Sukra, his advice to gods to steal
cows 61
Sülatanka, a holy place 404
Sumanas as Somadatta 111
Sumantu, a sage 321
Sun, his names and their etymology
92, 93; his origin 92
Sun in the form of steed 71
Sunda as Mucukunda 111
Suprabha, son of king Srutakirti 63;
known also as Prajapala 63
Suprabha (king) in Krtayuga 110
Supratika, a king of Varanasi 37; his
concern about his son’s defeat 47;
his liberation by meditation on
Visnu 49
Supratika’s prayer to Visnu 48ff
Surasmi as Saéakarna 110

loniae
Index
SSürya (Sun-god), his consecration by
Sun-god 526
Süryatirtha, a holy place 372
Süryavrata for cure of leprosy 529
Susanti or Sukànti as the king of
Angas 110
Susila as Vasudana 111
Susila, wife of Vai$ya Vasukarna 496
Suvidyut (an asura) 38
Svaéha and Svadhà oblations in Fire
to Devas and Pitrs respectively 99
Svayambhuva Manu, his descendant
- Nimi 563fn 1
Sveta, (m) 233
Sveta, (k) 233
Syamantapancaka 398
Taraka, a demon 656
Three holy places: Puskara, Naimisa,
Varanasi 444
"Tiladhenu, a hollow metal cow filled
with sesamum 229; procedure of
gifting 235
‘Tilottama, a charming woman attached to the temple in Varanasi 520
Tirthas visited by dignitaries 465
‘Tortoise incarnation 257
‘Trees—Campaka, Asoka, Punnaga,
Naga, Kesara 42; Kadamba, Nipa,
Arjuna and Sala 63
‘Trijata, a ráksasi 538
Trikalajfia, a sage 534
"Fripuras 107
"Iriveni 398; confluence of Ganga,
Yamuna and Sarasvati 404
"Irnabindu, a sage 406
Tungakita in Koka 383
Tvasta, the architect of Devas 71
Udatta, high tone
Anudatta, low tone, Svarita, Gombination of high and low tones fn 104
Uddalaka, a sage 591; his son Naciketas 591
Uma and Ganas 405
Umiastanakunda, a pond on the Himalaya 672 B
Universe, as the transformation of Atsaan 18
Upanayana, a ceremony 497
Urvasikunda 390
Vagmati (r) rising from the peaks of
Himalaya more sacred than Ganga
Vairajavrtta 178
Vaisvánara- Fire 69
Vaivasvata, a holy place 368
Vamana, his golden image as gift 129;
incarnation of Visnu 538
Vamanadvadasivrata 128
Varaha, a hymn 255ff
Varaha (boar incarnation of Visnu) 1
Varaha Incarnation—Question of
Earth 260ff
Varahadvadasivrata 124
Varaha Purāņa, benefit of recitation
Varaha Purāņa on its contents 676Varuņa mantras, used in both 121
Vasistha, a sage 128, 233, 515
Vasu, a brahmin, of the Paficala country 519
Vasu, a king 16; a ruler of Kashmir 20
Vasu-s, semi-divine beings 2 _
Vasudeva got the son Krsna by Asadhadvadasi Vrata 133
Vasukarna, a Vaisya 496
Vasuki, a naga 87; king of serpents
Vasuki, Taksaka and Dhanafijaya
mentally called by Rudra 95
Vatsa, son of King Bharata 128
Vedadhara, a holy place 388
Vedanta pmimusa; an epithet of Visnu
Vedanta-Purusa in the form of Narayana 67
Vedas, methods of rendering the text—
Pada, Krama, Jata, Ghana etc. 79
Vedas, Rk, Yajus, Saman 9
Vedas, Vedangas, Upanisads 117
Vedas and Upanisads brought out of
water by God 35
Vedic texts: Samhita, Pada and Krama
Vetrasura, son of Sindhudvipa from
Vetravati 97
Vetravati (r) wife of sea-god Varuna
Vidyut (an asura) 38
Vidyut and Suvidyut, their offensive
against gods 60
Vidyutprabha and Kantimati queens
of King Supratika 36
Vinayaka, his origin 83
Vinitasva (k) 234
Violence or non violence, a sage in
a dilemma 228
Viradhanvà (a king) 125ff
Virocana, Durjaya's minister 45
Virüpanidhi, a servant's servant of the
queen Candraprabhà 536
Visala (k) 135, 137
Visala (city) 24
Visnu, attainable by meditation 113
Visnu, Gods’ prayer 34
Visnu, his designation as Narayana

explained 4, 5, his four forms—(1)
Vasudeva, (2) Sankarsana, (3)
Pradyumna, (4) Aniruddha 112fn;
his serpent-bed in the ocean 2; his
threefold function: creation, protection, destruction 11; his wonder
165; his worship for attaining the
best husband 147; A husband 147;
A Vrata for attaining—1l48ff; in
the form of Sri Rama on mount
Citraküta 47; Origin 101; sleeping
in the milky ocean 39; sitting on
Garuda 42; twelve names 3
Visnu in the form of Varaha 124
Visnu in the Kürma form 123
Visnudhara, a waterfall in Koka 383
Visnu Narayana 14
Visnupada, dedicated to Varaha, in
Kokàmukha 383
Visnusaras, a lake in Kokamukha 383
Visrantivada, its greatness 490
Visvakarma, divine architect 430
Vivaha, a ceremony 497
Vivasvat, son of Vasu 20
Vrata (vow) for attaining the best
husband 147
Vrndàvana 111
Vrsnis and Andhakas 431
Vulture and Jackal, an anecdote
355ff
Vyasa, a sage 518
Vyühas, four 445fn I
Varáha Puràna:
Vyahas—Vasudeva, Sankarsana, Pra--
dyumna, Aniruddha 132
Wag-tail, a story 389ff
Wheel of worldly life 112
Worship, articles, days, months, seaWorship of various forms of Visnu for
different purposes 136
Yajnamirti-stava, a hymn to Narayana 19ff
Yajnapurusa 127
Yajnavalkya, a famous sage 130
Yajurveda 410
Yaksas 227
Yaksatirtha 409
Yama, dikpála guarding the Southern
direction 71
Yama, his city 598ff; and his associates
600; his Dharmasastra 361
Yama and Yamuna, Children of Sarhjna by Aditya 71
Yamaloka, description by Naciketas
593ff
Yamuna, its greatness 451ff
Yayati, son of Nahusa 129
OUR 102; (Cosmic slumber)
Yogesvari 95
Yugadharma 166
Yuga-s—Krta, Tretà, Dvapara, Kali.

explained 4, 5, his four forms—(1)
Vasudeva, (2) Sankarsana, (3)
Pradyumna, (4) Aniruddha 112fn;
his serpent-bed in the ocean 2; his
threefold function: creation, protection, destruction 11; his wonder
165; his worship for attaining the
best husband 147; A husband 147;
A Vrata for attaining—148ff; in
the form of Sri Rama on mount
Citraküta 47; Origin 101; sleeping
in the milky ocean 39; sitting on
Garuda 42; twelve names 3
Visnu in the form of Varaha 124
Visnu in the Kürma form 123
Visnudhara, a waterfall in Koka 383
Visnu Narayana 14
Visnupada, dedicated to Varaha, in
Kokamukha 383
Visnusaras, a lake in Kokamukha 383
Visrantivada, its greatness 490
Visvakarmà, divine architect 430
Vivaha, a ceremony 497
Vivasvat, son of Vasu 20
Vrata (vow) for attaining the best
husband 147
Vrndàvana 111
Vrsnis and Andhakas 431
Vulture and Jackal, an anecdote
355ff
Vyasa, a sage 518
Vyühas, four 445fn 1
Varáha Purana
Vyühas— V asudeva, Sankarsana, Pradyumna, Aniruddha 132
Wag-tail, a story 389ff
Wheel of worldly life 112
Worship, articles, days, months, scaWorship of various forms of Visnu for
different purposes 136
Yajüamürti-stava, a hymn to Narayana 19ff
Yajüapurusa 127
Yáàjüavalkya, a famous sage 130
Yajurveda 410
Yaksas 227
Yaksatirtha 409
Yama, dikpàla guarding the Southern
direction 71
Yama, his city 598ff; and his associates
600; his Dharmasastra 361
Yama and Yamunà, Children of Samjaa by Aditya 71
Yamaloka, description by Naciketas.
593fF
Yamuna, its greatness 451ff
Yayati, son of Nahusa 129
Yoganidra 102; (Cosmic slumber)
Yoge$vari 95
Yugadharma 166
Yuga-s—Krta, Tretà, Dvapara, Kali.
