READABLE DATASET
================================================================================
Original file: sri_tripurarahasyam_mahatmya_khandam_sanskrit_text_with_english_translation.json
Dataset number: 370 of 455
Format: valid JSON
Structure: Object / structured dataset
Original size: 1,319,868 bytes
Top-level fields: 11
Title: Śrī Tripurārahasyam (Māhātmya Khaṇḍam) - Sanskrit Text With English Translation
Creator: T.B. Lakshmana Rao
Date: 2017
Description: <span style="color:rgb(204,200,193);font-family:'Helvetica Neue', Helvetica, Arial, sans-serif;font-size:30px;white-space:pre-wrap;">Śrī Tripurārahasyam (Māhātmya Khaṇḍam) - Sanskrit Text With English Translation</span>

CONTENT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
METADATA AND OTHER FIELDS
  • title: Śrī Tripurārahasyam (Māhātmya Khaṇḍam) - Sanskrit Text With English Translation
  • creator: T.B. Lakshmana Rao
  • date: 2017
  • description: <span style="color:rgb(204,200,193);font-family:'Helvetica Neue', Helvetica, Arial, sans-serif;font-size:30px;white-space:pre-wrap;">Śrī Tripurārahasyam (Māhātmya Khaṇḍam) - Sanskrit Text With English Translation</span>
  • subject:
    1.
      hindu
    2.
      sanskrit
    3.
      tripura
    4.
      tantra
  • identifier: tripura-rahasya-mahatmya-khanda_202412
  • source_folder: tripura-rahasya-mahatmya-khanda_202412
  • total_pages: 807
  • total_words: 225336
  • text_quality:
    • ocr_word_validity_score: 0.761
    • quality_tier: good
    • note: —

FULL TEXT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ms
Mahatmyakhandam
Sanskrit Text with English Translation

it PUISea, AeIeaaT Sy
Sri Tripurdrahasyam
Mahatmyakhandam
Sanskrit Text with English Translation
English Rendering by
T. B. Lakshmana Rao
Editorial Support by
Prof. E. K. Das
Publisher
Sri Kailasamanidweepa Trust
Sri Kailash Ashrama Mahasamsthana
Rajarajeshwarinagar
Bengaluru - 560 098

ott Froureeay, Wrerera Sy
Sri Tripurarahasyam Mahatmyakhandam—
Sanskrit Text with English Translation
Pages : xxx + 762 + 16 Colour Photos
English Rendering by: T. B. Lakshmana Rao
Editorial Support by : Prof. E. K. Das
Published by: Sri Kailasamanidweepa Trust
Sri Kailash Ashrama Mahasamsthana
Rajarajeshwarinagar, Bengaluru - 560 098
Email : srikailashashrama@gmail.com
srikailasamanidweepa@gmail.com
Perpetual Patron
Jaganmata Sri Jnanakshi Rajarajeshwari and
His Holiness Paramacharya Jagadguru
Sri Sri Sri Tiruchi Mahaswamigal
(Founder of Sri Kailash Ashrama Mahasamsthana)
Chief Patron
His Holiness Parama Pujya Jagadguru
Sri Sri Sri Jayendra Puri Mahaswamiji
(Padasevaka Peethadhipathi of Sri Kailash Ashrama Mahasamsthana)
© Publisher
First Edition : January 2011
Second Edition : 2017; 1000 Copies
Cover Design: Lakshman Bala
Creative Concepts, Bengaluru - 560 098; Mobile : 98440 70713
Price: Rs. 1200/-
Printed by
B. N. Nataraj
Sri Nithyananda Printers
# 46, 4th Cross, Ashoknagar
BSK 1st Stage, Bengaluru - 560 050

STAT HS aT Shad 9 AHO
Senha wtegaura_|
aerate ays et
ardtaureerageet tl
She Tripurcnahosigamr. xs oppved 42th
dettion of tre ebpilgent bolus geet ap
Ket THarast Rayanazpesuart yt
prsltaling Lepere Snr Sr Shite puri Rabe
wand te Exallid Sissnc Jenuchhi Swami
vomd Ue mot Excellent Sri Sri Zyorcra
Punt Soumigi -
siasta rarer

Invocation and Blessings
His Holiness Prama Pujya Srimatparamahamsa Parivrajakacharya
Sachidananda Pranavaswarupa Acharya Mahamandaleshwar Jagadguru
Sri Sri Sri Jayendra Puri Mahaswamiji
Padasevaka Peethadhipathi of Sri Kailash Ashrama Mahasamsthana
Rajarajeshwarinagar, Bengaluru - 560 098
oy ae Uke Vedswtic cry
Fhe cewmenden pel oligo
a a r and ‘Bey apart
Mya ‘Siva pactdhaks hams par eee R eI ane
ks! home panaste

at FRR, vi Sri Tripurarahasyam
ne ES a aE een Oe PA Me ee Se
BS prvcedive dnakag Me Dive Mottur,
Fob ts froedinne, and comiction Seat davtion bs
dS Rants Methir remevis alk pom ond Arrrer,
Alive Ahan Jeon Wu pagek of oll peak wadkino of
Ape bE, ond Aovibimws KK ke Ao tien be Ma,
+ hin be ath the mere Bene a the cone of
sfc aad infty of Uo ony 9 Bo
Artslion the Mparirhads Azo Aurrentur
Aulferdy ana ducers ,” yato Vaco nivartante aprapya
monaga Saha” “ dere Wwereds dewewersang Jaw
fallin silenee with Jee mind” goo
Ore dench eomreph char to surniverendleg ad ap
ek aa hy Se OM a
prided, ond apmibally fperlpl bend wilt be
nner being’ ss al J, We Come sate as
or Uk, Divine Maker df, tha Wrivemne — Tagammite,
Mon, Matha or Ded:

at Tested ayaa: sii
Invocation and Blessings
Aeutlin wands dedratid be Me 4
p damping frm tea Video (inclarding te
o Wie Paranns , nal Afecol nurntion 4 ew
Srcmaddevt bhagavatamahapuranam and the
Markondeyapuranam tb ta sntho Sates |
dng yariere alive Che Jbdase , te Dripor
RoDargann. on Jtarbayarasothilt planks eth ar ow
“sap J lle ; pee shes
te bow ‘yahasyam pigfies & :
dance» Re Ss poadey recall

at fey Bs :
ye Sri Tripurarahasyam
Dio trek keen SR advomeed Abinihaal
fkies hoe alwenge heen hilt Wwaehiebicelss excmune.
Mikak te prtipienk io tink eligible (Yosys) for
Mey Uren’ De etn ls MinseerCemuhcs ik
Aap Iny Agartzp Risks ti Lad
wn Bo plde t Wa Lobsbacahathanamashetram
Indon he tnrflerig bard bet Ma
nak Ht dertan berkiobied Si Ms q, te
duper been Re war net aegis b reve
tn (4-3 & 9-1) Bak Le i i a be
Oe ad OUdinane of Lhe Birra
Ua wenden werk inte tnglick Ws Lane
Ba TB: Labeda Ras, he har revel
takers ternpesitionsd Mypmns in eLemteal banrkait
HE Die pret and Whey io a msifionk dp Sie bivreny, ;
Sf perrak sank ound Mn qrase 4 Divw Mehr
Dar mat “feat Cimmtated Se work aanks Cagle dd
abel n emetic eMCay es hy
from

tt csrtat aq: ix Invocation and Blessings
Aas EK: Bar, tadbener eS ee
Xe edit We enSine Ganrbl: Hob dut of e
We prec rey An BeLababomam , Crrabive
Comes ph | Bempahork y Uke weal free} Anaddiny by
AM AN: Drinela. and: Lie ala genk pot, by
Ax BN: Netannd 1 Aas Neb mando Prrntia Dare all
added Drdette Leite bo Uhr Ari work, ond
Sf Ditrine Mithrr . a
With owrudsberdny qroSitnde bet olor fin
Aro Trobe > the ‘Varakerabla!, haf
poten f Ae preteen hanbiny
quhyakiguhyageptrt tvam gyhay asmalky tam tepom
Scddhirbhevaln “yo devi Evalprasadabsurefwari
You are the protector of Ake most ocend Seoeds,
O Divine Mater | Aceon Unis afcuy of ows May pe

at ARS, x Sri Tripurarahasyam
adiner Ue ulbinoli i .
We prog fe Bion ie tlpten
4 pring be Riven Motte Ant Gromahobs
Rajarag etre MobSipermrendand Ee. peveal
ca eae knakedne of Ler Quam
SUN ee aie

eee, hen wl
CE RWT Tripuratundart . Thie wore is attrchuted
Le Sage Sumedha (Hanitagera) , whe composed
LE cab inifiated amd inttiuctid by Snr
Parasurama . Oncy irate. lrvd Mahadeva
ei ae ai rand Siz Uisnu tt
Guu Datta brege LS Paratundoa Sage
Sumecdha , che ties Marka tn tis frurons
bint | bbessed. by Bee Rpalamrbinz , oo
heskowed £8 compete Bhis omn by Uintae op
ee having acldracted his meter ars “Ai he"
(UO), tre Acad Letter <p hearning ilthonk te
ASE (Lend [amusemra) .
Src Trpuranabargam has toes portions
lez, Mahwbmyarhandany TREmarhardar rand

ii Sri Tripurarahasyam
at FRET, ae
Chanyznharidam. The Taananharrdan explains
ee re ee et
the Azdhanar necessary ab varcous Levels
aw order Le attain te higher knowledge.
Dhe Chanyaihardams) 2s net” Giacenltle +s
Aaid be <mlain, te rules of reteok emduct,
The Mihatmyarbardann | thick is the mage
poronr op Sh Tat purzraharyany , rot onlig
awdudes Ke gery ep Be swt mahatmgor
wand the grancleun of She Calitoparhyanam
dale alte provides rang Legends cand Aacrele
cconcepls [fa Srtacdga ,
ond -cmiuones tks wuatior . Vo pacchibtate
Te egrotant & pose kee ThowseencentAshich Ls Peete Cams eraieiesg iL. Riss | he
Seens have frercecvetl by ae fprenance

WRT xiii Introduction
Aural perms of the Monighty. the tanta
prilerephy hreliwes «<~ the Motherly
mramipestntion of a Supreme Penn be
Panamar cand. texts Lite Gri Tripunrciaharyour |
Hrrowgh fevercl omecdelis rand -atlusons Lrirg
ata tad Urcqueress a tre Thawscerdental
Comic Corscrcorsness <ohich 16 ned Lafperent
14, ehabonatad an the Aaorad linls..Cres
Aniamph oy Be deine over the demon is
tre fundamental <siue Latkhed ov all Te
Roipiioes « Amgthy descriptions of prolonged.
proce battle) prebobl, <owey Re mrersage
Hat 1b is va challenging Caan Le Avtcne
Ge demen an Be wirdssrduck ,
At Rams condentaL Bur tas Aperliiely
arpedta Auch as Satin , Rayos ond Tamas ;
Sthala, Siksma ant Rarana Schhe Taare
wand Kriys and Soon ard She is the

Rt fa sie
Sri Tripurarahasyam
under the omar Schha (Dearne), THAre
(Hnowledge) cand Kriya (Aclion) - The deonre Lo
caccemplish, -o ask, arvanrcalety Aeqpines Do
Sr Be Tripurrnrohasyar, Ke Aercne of Kaine,
the ow 4 Mut Mahzlangms , te Momyurt
FSI PM ee ere ee Sr or ae egy
rocqucned_, by tra bLlesairrgs yp Set Thepens ,
Re Krovledee a Soubhagynridys « Tao eve
athe «onbiele ter bitak dermacns to called
Thipuratundart: The exporrilion oy bre Sabhzgy
Asbettara is an excellent hoor be Her clevotirs.
Swim handy wrmoiy renectsda Rave a Atte
wressage be Be reader.
(Snichakra), tohvcly is He Mrode cy Awe +6
Seige eee ree aurea bly (ie Haylee SE-BE):.
Snichakra is He Supreme dynamic mysbie
ccagrany frat rapretents Let Ha microceim
womd Bt macrecesm - $e is Agnomyrit
ath Be Dewrmre couple Siva ant Sark .

Introduction
Aarlis tohe cane 2 embeciioerls oy te Uerious
fryical, mental and transmental lrdencies
an He Univer ond 4. tah Lecong «
The cenlietk part (Beri) corer 16 Ke
Atrehnira y the Loleh Lincvercal emengy, 18
merges cath the Ber. Sac Adi Sannormacharyn
aw HS TarpureAundart -Vedapaidastia has
tRe Curictousnes, Kis:
“ATH? atari gaisah sthagnteen : |
Terr Soareniet Saar SARNIA. Stange 90 |
Ine clevolix has te cdenlip, his body ith Re
Guichanra and his Sorl ont be Set.”
Bhaydasund , whe represents the gly —
wrdividual eae, oflin enpoyrng te <ravings
AvtR Dewt rar is pints diherolid . The
eavkente emplicalion ev the comupl as
Devt is domight- ont Legend wlrult <. Se
feng Alaryas 4 Sho Tre purcraharyars,
chapln 6 - tlargas 21-23,

efor
AGA, HIMTATESM Tp eTSTHETRAT + 12
aandanryay eferareneieraat |
BATA ET + Tern cpeteteagay 122"
aera AOt ae SANTA |
aeuat & zed eragraraey 123"
peut Teepunaaundans is Ike chancel oy OE
The ame onesaage AS aw Bhagavadgote , Chapter 18,
Alamzea Gls:
“ See. aSuaret eels rete
yeaa asreere aren tl.
Sha Ine 5 ae
dint is hound & eleole te pol t a bert
op worbhy, theo
So ae Get :
» has be Le Learnt
fer arr adepl an Ge proth.

Weare xvii Introduction
Peethadhipal: op Foilasasramca Mahaianrstinoear,
tho Aas blessed. metivated ancl get. me
an ong base - $ he mel- Kee ang Apperernce
drelijeer His bee and te grace of Ser
TRANAKSE Rapanapesvart -
Our gro lida 45 Prepesson EK, Dos, the .
dat cmperted glitter te the Lianslolinr ty
Aupromigms 5 be Shi DN. Anand. a prociienk
1 guberentagc eer ie Alii ie <r saan rete
pend. twwce em. Ole thanks ans. alan lice
ke Usduar S.N, Praneda gor meliarlerst
Paading the proud o the Santerit eres wand
te nz B, elanthman for developing a Anblime
ewer design for De berks We Bana Sz
AN. Natahay 2 Shi Noo Bly ancl Prevtne ond
tia Alef $e tan tacellent execution y Fe
prirling « Dre heats oy te boon tas Leon
enhanced by many fpckicus of te Heil.
rand. Ave Hank thm alt tho puriced am
fer pubtecelion .
We 1 ee a ie G&G Awe
dnt Mohaltipuretindarc te pardow the
mistakes Psy beers Dd Pp ete ee onsanh all,

at fae ae
Sri Tripurarahasyam
sata Gequiatrrs serra
afteel Arq azar adi (
arene Aouzesrrte Sagat at
aerate set wer af ae aera 1
R
Tn Her Serrrhi.de
9A. Larbhorane kx

Publisher’s Note
(Second Edition)
By the unbound Grace of Universal Mother Sri Jnanaksi
RajarajeSvari, the benign Sri Shivapuri Baba, the unlimited compassion
of His Holiness Parama Pujya Sri Sri Sri Tiruchi Mahaswamigal and
the consistent encouragement extended by His Holiness Sri Sri Sri
Jayendra Puri Mahaswamiji, the second edition of the Mahathmyakhanda
of Sri Tripura Rahasyam has reached you, dear devotee.
This second edition is just the tip of the iceberg of the unlimited
sankalpa of His Holiness Sri Sri Sri Jayendra Puri Mahaswamiji to
propagate the scriptural worship of the Divine Mother worldwide and
thereby bring about universal wellbeing. This is in addition to the
personal guidance which Mahaswamiji is giving to sadhakas and common
man at large for universal unity and peace.
In this second edition, which is not different from the first one in
basic content, it has been endeavoured meticulously to make the book
free from typographical and other errors. The clarity of purport has been
enhanced at certain places. This divine task has been executed with
utmost devotion by Bhakta Kavi Sri T. B. Lakshmana Rao who had
already rendered the original Sanskrit text into English. In addition to
the excellent rendering of this work into English in the first edition, it
is again Bhakta Kavi Sri T. B. Lakshmana Rao who has undertaken
this divine task with the able assistance by Smt. Chandra Venkataramani,
a proficient proofreader. May Jaganmata Sri Rajarajesvari shower Her
choicest Grace upon both. Sri Nataraj of Sri Nithyananda Printers has
earned Divine Mother’s Grace in abundance and the choicest blessings
of His Holiness Sri Sri Sri Jayendra Puri Mahaswamiji for the flawless
printing of this second edition.
We re-present Sri Tripura Rahasyam Mahatmyakhandam to all
devotees of Mother Divine.
sh arrat testat fast
—The Publisher

sit FINES Were SA,
Sri Tripurarahasyam Mahatmyakhandam
farerqeit
Chapter
CONTENTS
Page No.
Bo
ce
a
on
Invocation; The panorama of the Malaya mountain and
the hermitage of Parasurama; Sumedha (Haritayana)
inquires Paragurama; Parasurama initiates Bala Mantra
to Sumedha; Sri Bala blesses Sumedha in his dream;
Prayer to Goddess by Sumedha; Sumedha’s penance in
Halasyaksetra; Arrival of Sage Narada.
Concept of seer and the seen. Markandeya inquires
Brahma about the essence of Veda; Brahma’s prayer to
Goddess Tripura; Tripura-rahasya communicated by Siva
to Visnu and by Visnu to Narada and on the earth by
Guru Dattatreya to Parasurama and by Parasurama to
Sumedha; Sumedha blessed to write Tripurarahasya;
Sumedha’s earlier birth as Alarka; Sumedha writes
Tripurarahasya.
Greatness of Tripurarahasya; Haritayana narrates to Sage
Narada; Birth of Parasurama; Triumph over Ksatriyas;
Sri Rama defeats Paragurama.
Parasurama meets an effulgent lunatic; The lunatic
blesses ParaSurama and reveals himself a Samvarta and
tells him about Guru Dattatreya and guides him.
Parasurama proceeds to Dattatreya; On the way he is
pained and dejected seeing the sensory cravings of human
beings and decides to seek enlightenment from Guru
Dattatreya and reaches his hermitage.

faraget xxi
Dialogue between Dattatreya and Parasurama. Strange
external behaviour of Dattatreya causes repulsion in
many; But Paragurama is not deluded and seeks his
tutelage and wants to know about the glory of Goddess
Tripurasundari.
Incomprehensibility of Goddess Tripura even by Brahma,
Visnu and Rudra; Self-experience a way; Competition
among Indra, Agni, Soma, Vayu and others claiming
superiority; All gods meet Visnu and Siva for a solution;
Goddess Tripura prayed by them appears. All gods except
the Trinity become unconscious.
Prayer to Goddess Tripura by Brahma, Visnu and Siva;
To dispel the ignorance of the gods, the Goddess assumes
a beautiful form; Agni, Moon and Wind cannot hurt a
straw shown by the Goddess; Indra starts worrying.
Indra’s delusion; Indra’s defeat; Brhaspati praised by
Indra appears; Brhaspati prays to Goddess; Indra begs
pardon from Devi and praises Her; Goddess grants
devotion to him; Visnu explains the greatness of Goddess
to the gods.
Parasurama anxious to listen to the glory of Goddess
Tripurasundari; Dattatreya narrates; Different forms of
Goddess like Rama, Gauri and so on; Description of
Creation; Story of mat-weaver; Vedanta not to be taught
out-of-turn; Brahma’s creation gets destroyed; Visnu
directed to protect; The world is over-populated and
congested; Rudra destroys completely; Lord of death sheds
tears for his portfolio; His tears manifest as diseases on
earth; The Trinity gods lose interest in creation and pray
to Goddess; Goddess creates Vani, Rama and Rudrani to
wed them.
Gods not worshipped by human beings; Indra approaches
Brahma; Brahma suggests to propitiate Laksmi.
Contents

Laksmi praised by twenty-eight names blesses the gods;
Teaches Her method of worship; Gods pray to Laksmi;
Laksmi creates Manmatha; Indra doubts Manmatha’s
ability.
Manmatha proceeds to subdue human beings as they
refuse to worship gods. They are loyal only to king
Viravrata of Brahmavarta. Viravrata does penance to get
the blessings from Siva.
Siva appears; Prayer to Siva; Viravrata asks for
detachment and liberation but Siva advises him about
his duties; Meanwhile the ministers and sons of Viravrata
who set out to fight with Manmatha are blessed by their
guru Vidydpati through Rudrakavaca.
Indra supports Manmatha; Description of war between
gods and the army of Viravrata led by Sudhruti.
War between Indra and Ranadhira and others. War
between Indra and Sudhruti; Kubera and Satrufijaya,
Varuna and Satruhana and so on.
Description of war between the lords of the directions
and the sons of Viravrata.
All gods captured by the sons of Viravrata.
Fight between Ranadhira and Manmatha; Message sent
to Viravrata; Kama rendered unconscious.
Viravrata informed by Virasena fights with Manmatha;
Viravrata gets a trident from Lord Siva; Kama hit by
the trident falls unconscious and is taken away by the
gods to Laksmi; On the advice of Vidyapati, Viravrata
releases the gods and returns to his capital.
at ARES xxii Sri Tripurdrahasyam

Contents
Laksmi appraised; Laksmi prays to Goddess Tripura and
revives Manmatha from unconsciousness; Manmatha
refuses to worship Siva who favoured Viravrata; Gauri
deputed to console Manmatha; Manmatha does not heed;
Gauri curses him to be burnt by Siva; Laksmi curses
Gauri to be burnt in Daksayajfia; Gauri and Laksmi
fight; Sarasvati suggests release from their mutual curses.
Laksmi separates from Visnu because of his secret love
towards Bhidevi and Brnda and becomes river Padma
which dries up cursed by Narada; Bhagiratha brings
Ganga to earth and river Padma is relieved of the curse;
Story of river Ganga.
Story of Gauri; Killing of Bhasmasura; Gauri born as
Daksayani weds Siva and gets burnt in Daksayajiia.
Ganga none other than Tripura.
Promulgation of Yajfia on earth; Indra made incharge of
rain; Laksmi teaches Saubhagya Astottara to Manmatha;
Goddess Tripura teaches Saubhagya-Paficadasdksari in
dream to Manmatha; Goddess Tripura appears before
Manmatha.
Description of the form of Goddess Tripura; Manmatha
prays and wants nothing; But Goddess gives him bow
and arrows to achieve his goal.
Dattadtreya discloses the Saubhagya Astottara to
Paragurama; Himavan worships Gauri who is in the form
of ether; Narada assures a daughter to Himavan.
Tarakeya conquers the universes and captures Indra and
other gods; Saci desired by Tarakeya diverts him to
Laksmi; Laksmi and Visnu defeated in war disappear;
Gauri requested by Saci kills Tarakeya assuming the
form of Mahakali.
Dattatreya teaches Gauri Astottara to Parasurdma;
Himavan’s penance to obtain Gauri as his daughter; Birth
of Gauri; Himavan loses memory about the divinity of Gauri.

Gauri (Parvati) behaves like an ordinary child; Wedding
fixed with Siva; Narada suggests Visnu as_ the
bride-groom; Himavan agrees.
Parvati does not accept the proposal; She goes to forest;
Jiianakalika Stotra by Parvati; Goddess Tripura appears
and grants the desires of Parvati.
Himavan finds Parvati in the forest and concedes to her
condition; Himavan captured by the servants of Visnu;
Parvati and her mother seek shelter under their Guru
Kasyapa.
KaSgyapa narrates about the birth of Gauri as Parvati;
Parvati assumes the form of Jvalamukhi and burns
Sudargana cakra and defeats Visnu and releases her
father; Jvalamukhi settles in Himalaya for future
destruction; wedding of Siva and Parvati;
Murasura confronts Visnu; Visnu unable to win prays to
Jvalamukhi and gets back his Sudarsana cakra and wins;
Siva goes into penance; Tarakasura conquers the
universes; Gods pray to Gauri.
Curse on Gauri from a sage that she will not have
children; Similarly Siva also cursed by Brahmins; Siva’s
penis drops off and gets worshipped as Linga in heaven.
Worship of Linga on earth; Indra requests Manmatha to
disturb the penance of Siva; Rati wails and resists;
Manmatha wants to keep up his promise to gods; Laksmi
blesses Manmatha and takes care of Rati.
Manmatha prays to Goddess Tripura; Laksmi also
requests for the redemption of curse by Gauri on
Manmatha. Tripura absorbs Manmatha into Her eyes
and becomes Kamaksi and blesses him with a separate
body; Manmatha burnt by Siva.
a ARN xxiv Sri Tripurarahasyam

fare xxv
a ———Csonttornts
Birth of Kumara from the semen of Siva; Story of his
birth; Kumara made the chief of the army of gods; Skanda
kills Tarakasura.
Story of Bharatidevi; Mutual curse between Brahma and
Sarasvati; Sarasvati born as a cow-herdess and helps
Brahma in Yajfia.
A Brahmin Kausika cursed by Narada becomes a cowherd
for mingling with a cow-herdess; Savitri born to Kausika
as Gayatri; Tripura merges into Gayatri; Story of the
birth of Goddess as daughter of Nandagopa.
Matrka hymn; Story of Krsna who kills Karhnsa and
Dantavaktra; Katyayani Vrata by Gopikas.
Story of Katyayani; After Sri Krsna goes to Dvaraka,
demons Sumbha and Nigumbha torment the Gopikas;
Yasoda prays to Katyayani who by assuming three forms
kills the demons who hide in three places; Katyayani
dwells in Vindhya mountain to protect people in Kaliyuga.
Story of Sumbha and Nigumbha; Gauri assumes the form
of Kali; Defeat of Canda and Munda; Dhimralocana sent
to capture Kali.
Visnu becomes Lion, the carrier of Candika;
Dhamralocana killed, Death of Canda and Munda; End
of Raktabijasura; Killing of Nisumbha by Goddess;
Sumbha killed by Her trident; Prayer to Goddess by
Gods.
Story of Goddess Kalika; Destruction of Kalakhafijas;
Siva assumes the form of Mahakala.
Story of Durga; Birth of Mahisasura; Humiliation of Vayu
by Sanumati; Durga born out of the power of all gods;
Durga’s lion kills the five army chiefs of Mahisasura;
Goddess kills Mahisasura; Prayer by the Gods.
Contents

Story of Bhandasura; Goddess Lalita destroys
Bhandasura; Manmatha reborn; Siva vanquished by
Manmatha; Siva enchanted by Visnu in the form of
Mohini.
The churning of the milky ocean; Demons deceived of
nectar by Mohini; Visnu propitiates Tripura and imbibes
Her aspect; Siva deluded; Manmatha becomes the
promulgator of Sri Vidya; Agastya and other worshippers
of Sri Vidya.
Detailed story of Bhandasura; Hayagriva narrates to
Agastya; Bhandasura conquers the three worlds; Gods
destroy Sonitapura; Bhanda destroys the heaven and lives
in Sanyakapura and rules the universe.
Birth of Bhanddsura from the ashes of Manmatha;
Bhandasura obtains boons from Siva; Bhanda wants to
have Saci; Bhanda weds the daughters of Tarakasura;
Bhanda defeated in Kailasa by Gauri returns to Sinyaka
city.
Gods serve Bhandasura; Gods secretly propitiate Goddess
Tripurasundari who appears; Prayer to Goddess by
Brhaspati.
Gods worship Goddess to kill Bhandasura; Sukracarya
alerts the demons; Jvalamélini engulfs gods by fire;
Demons return assuming victory; Goddess appears from
the fire altar and grants boons to the gods;
Goddess as Kamesvari and Kameévara dwell in the city
constructed by Visvakarma; Lopamudra’s worship of
Goddess; The method of Sristikta worship; Description of
Sripura.
Visvakarma ordered to construct the Sripura as described.
Goddess takes visible form in Manidvipa; Wedding of
Kamesvara and Kamesvari; Creation of sixteen and nine
Saktis.
at ETL xxvi Sri Tripurarahasyam

4 xxvii Contents
es Gantente
56. The Saktis located in the Sricakra; Description of Mudra 543
Saktis and their place in Sricakra.
57. Penance by Saktis to get suitable place in Sricakra; 552
Creation of Gurus Mitrega and others who also reside
in Sricakra.
58. Reason why Brahma meditated on a female form of the 560
Transcendental power; Names of the Gurus; Visvakarma
decides to construct the Sripura.
59. Bhandasura gets to know from Narada that the gods 567
were not destroyed by the flame; Narada warns
Bhandasura who is proud of his valour; The wives of
Bhandasura request Narada to advise Bhandasura;
Bhandasura discloses his past life as Manigekhara the
messenger of Laksmi and the curse on him by Laksmi
for loving a married Kinnara woman; His death from
Goddess Lalita as redemption after ruling the universe;
Hence Bhandasura is awaiting salvation; Narada
appreciates his devotion to Goddess Lalita.
60. Birth of Kamesvara from Lalita and their wedding; 579
Mantrini explains to Narada how Bhandasura will be
killed by Goddess Lalita; Goddess creates saktis; Goddess
Lalita sets out for war and so also Bhandasura.
61. Bhandasura advised by his minister sends spies to know 590
the strength of Saktis; They return defeated.
62. Amitraghna reports to Bhandasura; Bhandasura 599
concealing his devotion to Goddess Lalita prepares to
fight; Dandanatha also prepares to fight.
63. Bala Tripurasundari defeats Kutilaksa and confronts 607
Visukra.
64. Bala defeats Viéukra and Visanga and proceeds to fight 615
with Bhandasura who showers respect on her; Both fight
severely.

RT ARES xxviii Sri Tripurarahasyam
Tae
Bala Tripurasundari taken away from the war to Goddess
Lalita by Asvarudha; Fight between Sampatkari and
Visukra and also between Asvaraudha and Visanga;
Dandini fights with Bhandasura; The demons run away.
Bhandasura consoles his wives regarding his inevitable
death by Goddess Lalita; The army chiefs of Bhanda
resolve to fight Goddess Lalita; Durmada killed by
Sampatkari.
Kuranda killed by Asvaridha; Kutilaksa sends Sarpini
magic through Karanka on the Saktis; The Saktis are
defeated; Goddess Lalita sends Nakulesi who destroys
the serpents and kills Karanka and others.
Kutilaksa depressed by defeat; Visukra the brother of
Bhanda plans to capture Goddess Lalita when She is
alone; The army of Saktis tortured by the demon Balahaka
by his scorching vision; Tiraskarini kills Balahaka and
others; Amrtesi revives the dead Saktis.
War during night; Jvalamukhi dispels darkness;
Balambikaé renders unconscious the thirty sons of
Bhandasura; Ulaika and others killed by Asvaradha;
Dandanatha kills Kutilaksa; Visukra laid unconscious by
Mantrini; Visanga stopped from his deceptive attack on
Goddess Lalita;
KameSvari destroys the demon Damana and vanquishes
the magical demon created by Visanga; Visanga captured
and released by Goddess Lalita; Jvalamalini creates a
fort of fire for the Saktis to relax.
Visanga consoled by his elder brother Visukra who gives
a Vighna missle to him; The sgaktis rendered inactive;
Dandini reports to Goddess Lalita.

fart xxix
Goddess Lalita creates Vighneévara from the smile of
Kamegvara, Ganega destroys the Vighna missile and
defeats Visukra and others; Bhandasura sends Gajasura
to fight with Ganesa; Balambika confronts the sons of
Bhandasura.
Gajasura killed by Ganega; GaneSa called back from war
since Bhandasura desired to be killed by Goddess Lalita;
Balambika kills the sons of Bhandasura.
Bala appreciated by Goddess Lalita; Bhanda grieves the
death of his children concealing his devotion to Goddess;
Visanga and Visukra attack the Sricakra; Dandini fights
Visanga and Mantrini fights Visukra; Sukhasyamala and
other saktis kill the sons of Visukra; Visukra killed by
Mantrini.
Jambini and other Saktis kill the sons of Visanga; Dandini
kills Visanga.
Bhandasura grieves the death of his brothers but gets
consoled and proceeds to battle with Goddess Lalita;
Bhandasura explains to the charioteer regarding his past
birth and so on.
Bhandasura encountering Mantrini and others wishes to
fight with Goddess Lalita; Bhanda worships Goddess
Lalita with flower arrows; Goddess Lalita destroys
Bhanda’s ten powers and finally kills him using
Kameégvarastra. Brahma and other gods adore Goddess
Lalita.
Prayer to Goddess by Brahma and other gods; Goddess
dwells in the Sripura on the Meru mountain; Goddess
is coronated by Vasistha and others; Sage Agastya was
unable to see the Sripura for want of proper initiation
from a Guru; Greatness of Listening to the glories of
Goddess.
Contents

ao:
Need for proper initiation through a Guru; Goddess
Tripurasundari is Universal Consciousness; Agastya gets
initiated from his wife Lopamudra; Greatness of
Tantrasastra.
Procedures for practicing Srividya and the benefits gained;
Listening to Tripurarahasya is the way to be blessed by
Goddess Tripurasundari; Even Siva and others have
attained bliss through Tripurarahasya; Goddess Tripura
is the Sakti-pranava ‘Hrim’.
RERREERERE EEE
List of Illustrations
Illustration Page No.
1. Dattatreya and Parasurama 67
2. Mahalaksmi 135
3. Mahasarasvati 375
4. Gayatri 387
5. Mahakali 435
6. Durga 451
7. Saundaryalahari Stanza 1 519
8. Sricakram 531
9. Sricakramahameru 547
10. Balatripurasundari 611
11. Rajasyamala 707
12. Mahavarahi 711
13. Jfianaksi Rajarajesvari 727
14. Saundaryalahari Stanza 8 739
15. Saundaryalahari Stanza 27 751
at ARES XXX Sri Tripurarahasyam

U sthratgrerenyerat Ta:
Sri Ganega Sarada Gurubhyo Namah
sit FUINESNL AreteaeT Sy.
Sri Tripurarahasyam Mahatmyakhandam
Tate faerrena ait anetgga ye qerharred worn wer yer
I incessantly prostrate with joy to Sri Ganega to ward off obstacles;
to Sarasvati for obtaining a clear understanding of the word and its
meaning; to the Guru to understand the secrets.
Wats ears:
Chapter 1
a Ta: GRU ecaterenryrnfant | aecttereryreaar Meares Ta: U1 Vl
Prostrations unto that Lord situated in the seat of the heart
(Daharakasa), who is the cause of creation; who is Bliss; who is Orhkara,
and by a speck of whose sport shine the particles of the Universe. 1
teat ut Fel wera ad wales Uda doers, neu
Prostrations unto that Transcendent Lord who is the pendant-gem
in the universal necklace; who is eternal and all, who is the soul and
essence of all and who is the support of the universe. 2
aeastadancaatst frame freed vifatad werner, nau
fart wate wemeaerfaci creases Garant Tse I
Prostrations unto Tripura the Transcendental Queen who is seed
unto the petals of the entire auspicious world, who is Siva the auspicious,
who is Sakti the power, who is Brahma, who is the witness of the
immense universal dissolution; who is nectar unto the resuscitation of
burnt-up Kama (the Lord of Love). 3, 4

St PARES, 2 Sri Tripurarahasyam
afer cfamferart uerenfsterega: | TeagrraceeaaTaTaerreT: wall
In the South is the Malaya Mountain whose high peaks obstruct
the transit of the Sun. 5
sreygeitemenqeraya: | TarPemfaaacrreteneaay: ue
By its many peaks, demonstrating as it were the grandeur of the
Great person (Mahapurusa), the Malaya Mountain by its vastness looks
despisingly at the great Meru Mountain. 6
ATA UA aA ATTAT ST: | qararctfacracstataanreums: Hon
On the Malaya Mountain, dense clouds rest at the roots of the
trees, whose tender sprouts defame the redness of the Sun by their
effulgence. 7
amiqatarnygraanate: | strenredveatarre ga: wen
The Malaya Mountain is filled with the melodious music of divine
damsels in tune with humming bees and the atmosphere atop rich
with the fragrance of sandalwood conquers the perfume of the divine
damsels. 8
Uereanahretacagreated: | stenaferttpecmerdteade ae: nen
The gentle breeze atop the Malaya mountain carries with it the
sweet smell of the cardamom creepers. Swans play around the fully
blossomed lotuses in the ponds. 9
mqeucdatirratrgmuse: | frafrgretageaattarn: gol
The interiors of the Malaya Mountain are filled with the odour of
ichor oozing out of the inebriated herd of elephants that rival with rain
bearing clouds. 10
faeormatdlayitereractarre: | faaivlaravsranrsrtegucara: neeeul
Atop Malaya Mountain there are herds of lions, tigers, wild boars
and below there are vast forests with many hermitages. 11

Sear: 3 Chapter 1
araraeaaacaray ATA: | EMtergameutta eared: Ue
The hermitages reverberate with the vedic chants of the disciples
of the seers. The breeze there, carries the aroma of the oblations of
ghee. 12
agahurrmanageanana: | eatery SAY PaRATAsTAT: Tea)
The sacred robes of the seers tied to the branches of the trees
flutter like flags in the breeze. Some seers are seated under trees, 13
waRadt saunter sai aafaaaet wet wast weranfer: weevil
These meditating seers appear still, as in painted pictures. Elsewhere
vedantic seers repeat chants attributed to the Transcendental Being. 14
wafaerigauet fesfitracn: | cafaceararargder faurtarrgqan: 1 84 1
In some places seers invoke Agni according to their routine and
special rituals. Elsewhere learned seers are engaged in teaching Vedas
to the brahmin children. 15
qatar wiry tiniest wee! safaorarat ag: Goat Harfag: 1 96 I
In some places seers mutually discuss the Vedas and other sacred
texts. Elsewhere seers knowing the tales from the Puranas, discourse on
them. 16
ud faasirat wdyporafaa werant fataaarat qfa ararctara neoll
On the eastern side of such a superb mountain displaying
simultaneously all the six seasons on the banks of a lotus pond, 17
qrutaaticapemeandtaet | fast qed: arta Weel
aioineatg: meaaiudian: | waitgferraatg: arevifafyuge: 1 eit
patreatea: Pat Wet: Yat: | a: Meaacaes fawityrATea: Il Zo Il
Ta: Wasa: Marae: fra: 1 faotdaraaye: Aarereaarara: BRI
in the central portion of the hut made of leaves and grass is seated
comfortably on a deer skin the son of Jamadagni, Sri Paragurama. He
is fair like camphor, wearing immaculate clothes and sacred thread,

at RENeSA, 4 Sri Tripurdrahasyam
besmeared with Vibhiti (sacred ash) and always with triple lines of
Vibhiti on his forehead, peaceful due to performance of religious rites,
attractive, an incarnation of Visnu, a joy for everyone; a devotee of Siva.
He has attained Self-knowledge by worshipping Dattatreya, an incarnation
of Visnu. 18 to 21
a mafaahat watery firaferer: qterg: Wat Varta: WM
ures wafer wfetsreratad: | wa dear wangqrefare = 231
Once, when he was pleasantly disposed, his dear disciple by name
Sumedha who was soaked in devotion and intent always on serving him
asked the seer with folded hands:
“Oh! Parasurama! Ocean of compassion for the helpless! Protector
of the devotees! 22, 23
ytear war yet wary aftfanras: | far dhargardtat darcactererhirany i By Il
ut sitag qua waka aq cencvatach ta fafseda: Garry on BI
ut afe fare strat af A aaq aft wet aexite axat dace: 11 211
Once, I had asked you, interested in the well-being of devotees who
are afflicted and suffering in life, about what is the best remedy which
is supreme that brings good merits and well-being. It is said that the
compassionate Gurus reveal even the most secret knowledge.
Oh! Excellent Brahmin! Teach that to me if I deserve to receive it,
we warstt dust waritedferas: | aerht reread: Wea arta u 01
Asked by me thus, O Bhargava! You said with a smile, ‘I will let
you know in course of time’. 27
were wey aigefeceat! @ varat wa wart uftadwefier, 2c
ag 8 agra waa |
“Sixteen years have passed like a fraction of a second after you
said that to me. The same thoughts revolve in my heart day and night.
Kindly tell that to me who has no other refuge.” 28

Sear: 5 Chapter 1
ft aged spat arta: offre WeN
Wee AU wad garden fawn! faqrar weet aerenfeoaT TET 30
Hearing his words Bhargava in the process of thinking recollected
the secret of Tripura which was told to him by Dattatreya who had
heard the same directly from Siva. 29, 30
fayjaete datet dearest ferarrani uf dare wees aferaritodfery 1 321
“Commanded by Siva in the course of time, Dattatreya transferred
to me that entire knowledge containing Bhakti and Jfidna
(Tripurarahasyam) which was embedded in his pure heart. 31
Tremaaragqafaetaratan| 7 satan Wz
aifetenra yrorenfa areat anterctyta: | wetarate aretat qated A ATA I
This glorious text which is replete with divine lore, glory, devotion,
ardour and which is supreme Tantra should not be given even partially
to a stranger, an atheist or a cheat. Nor even should this be uttered in
the presence of persons devoted to other deities. 32, 33
HUI UTaTeD areas Tan! Were Wea: YA fearTy: i By
frenaet qrena ag are arta a dacaqurennd wadtsqfrareaft 1 341
feat west eat qarareraany! aersct faerare fererearafereaft 1 3611
Since it deals with the secrets of Paramegvara, revealed by Him
directly, you shall eventually give this knowledge to Sumedha-Haritayana,
your devoted disciple who after listening to that will compile a text
which will be a purifying blessed compendium of Tantra and preach it
to other disciples.” 34 to 36
sta apart qeae: fret Gear qarsfery!
fraen wreesattyereeateata farcry, Non
farfarar gfafarea a wre yea: fear
aaa caret udtara ae aarert Brat EYAL
Recollecting thus the words of his Guru, he saw the disciple who
stood with folded palms. Having thought for long about the inviolable

at ARES, 6 Sri Tripurarahasyam
injunction of the Divine Power, he spoke to the disciple who was standing
before him. “My boy, wait for the opportune time. Every thing happens
in the course of time. 37, 38
a: WS ywateranpnent wad! wd feat wavarearygadt a: UIs
Tomorrow at the auspicious time of Pusya star you will get answers
to your questions.” As he was saying this, the mild-rayed Sun was
setting. 39
ararea Ufsrat aeat at wel Gag: WH!
era ee wareet Tat YANG: Fay U ¥oul
Both of them performed the evening Sandhya and recited the
transcendent mantra (Gayatri). In the night meditating on their inherent
power, they slept comfortably. 40
Fa Wt: Ware Hafentats yeq! cusacatirans agrafeyet Ad: i wei
Rising in the early morning Sumedha performed the ablutory rites
and stood humbly with folded palms after prostrating to his guru. 41
soeet aafat caret UAT ster et we age arafa Waray, Use
quratfer wateaafaaearat yeti ar arent fager wteat cferat sttararitenr i
wen aqatend wafers veda! ag Wid wart amfanadah: xx
As the auspicious moment drew near, Sri Paragurama with a sweet
loving voice called Sumedha. Then he offered flowers to the Devi seated
on an auspicious golden seat who is variously called as Bala, Tripura,
Lalita and Kumari and gave to his disciple the Vagripa Mantra which
personifies Her. Then he worshipped the seat and Her paraphernalia
with various worshipping articles. 42 to 44
Weaferneeratt: Wea ata: | ueaate fica arfrarer frett wa: xytl
MEATS ATTA! Bae Gee aS eT uvatl
Penfedt a agi wat cated yan sree werafiact aA vio Il
qdeqreny werfahatsem eremargit aaa wavisadt xc
Then Paragurama bathed his disciple with the sanctified water from

TEATS Sar: 7 Chapter 1
a pot. He cut off three types of bonds and made him sleep near the
Devi. Then he made him comprehend the secrets of Devi worship based
on three fundamentals with its ramifications of 12, 4 and 16 methods
in the beginning, middle and end respectively. He taught the sacred
methods of worship, the discipline, the symbols (mudra) of the triple
Devi. He also taught him systematically the procedure of imbibing the
grace of Devi at his head, heart and anus and offering the three truths
to the Self-fire. 45 to 48
fa cea omnfesa aeareafaet aa: | antdagel Ue aatfaeiadr xe HI
aa: Quin get canafarerenm: | sft wacadeateent afta: NW 4o It
fa: after eat of sitytet faye gayi aa stunt eat frerafatear fea
Having thus spoken and initiated, ParaSurama addressed him
“My child, practice that Supreme Truth. Soon I will grant you a fulfilled
status”. Thus receiving the entire secret, Haritayana circumambulating
Paragurama three times and saluting him soon went to Srigailam where
Devi Bhramari stays permanently. 49 to 51
TET: WapEd: Test araaaaet Het fata aa arrest reat YTTEHAT | 42
In front of Her, he made a clean cottage protected from sun and
wind and there started the Srividya practice. 52
Ud Wee HER Bh: | wferagiices fradizraca: Waal
Waatadet Wal ardatads: | feseneatera TarShaaraaT: wasn
aq: aurfrarcre dfs Tet AAA WARS: YT: YA: aI
MTA Ge: YTETAAa: YA: |
During his practice, he ate only fruits and he was determined and
devoted with physical and mental control. Always happy and meditative
with faith in the teachings of his Guru, he spent one year and five
months as if in a moment and attained mastery over the practice.
During the penance he had a pure body and mind, sweet-voice and
radiant eyes; light weight due to frugal eating but with healthy eight
limbs that looked auspicious. 53 to 55

at fae, 8 Sri Tripurarahasyam
ag at wer Tat wert sitar at Weg
watawayinargan qeuTeoTTesfa: | sernTeTyRtenTetarei rary aT 14 ll
fda) atferrarcravar pant erate Well
Then in his dream during night, Sri Bala Paramesvari appeared
before him assuming a sportive form as a ten year old girl, beautiful
like a crore of cupids, with shining limbs red like the rising Sun; bearing
signs of Japamala, book, protection and boon in her four hands, with
three eyes and a crown shining with crescent moon. 56 to 58
at Gear aca Waa eTeaTaA: W4sn
qveaafirarara ReRegT: | HaTfeySt Ya HeitgyTAHA Noll
Seeing her in the dream, the happy Haritayana prostrated with
folded hands and in a sweet choked voice started praising Her. 60
wea sitfaqt waste arenfiads uti wa waatra fret wa aarevatame = GRU
“Victory to Sri Tripura, the Mother; Victory to the Transcendent
Balambika; Victory for ever to the lover of Devotees; Victory to the
Embodiment of Compassion. 61
tie fafrenitconfearqudtateda: | fat aa: wet wendtat wersrat 1 G21
You are called Tripura because you showed three times the Triple
aspects of primary substance. You are the sole refuge for Brahma and
others. 62
mere et eterna aft wt a cag wd at waa se tarfeqra: |
aH Yat eat He se Yary wars wigents aa wurdarfacted: uel
Oh! Devi! Even Hari, Hara, Gods and teachers and others are unable
to either comprehend or explain a little of your greatness. That being
so, who in this world bereft of worshipping your feet can desire to tread
the path of praying to you. 63
Tersitrafareta wate ferarafirit 4 afeet tf waafa ater |
TRICeTOMTeTIR aaa wet T Wed fer ae ua Bae ut gv

> ‘ 9 Chapter 1
Oh! Devi! Devotion to your lotus feet is like a bunch of Cintamanis
(wish yielding gems) that would grant fruits greater than one’s desire.
Hence, Oh! Sundari! The highest transcendental auspiciousness! Please
tell me what cannot be achieved by those who have totally submitted
their body and mind at Your lotus feet? 64
wtaret ae: weagantquacta: frat farsa ayfe ferret frsrerat
4G ages: oferta qfinieuet a a wrarart aeafawat ar fer eu I
Prior to creation You were always resting Your pure undisturbed
form which was a natural ocean of ambrosial delight. At that time or
state, there was no Sky, Air, Fire, Water, Earth, Pot and Cloth,
Enlightenment, Ignorance, Speech, Senses. 65
wader 8a Prafimersferattar feat dfagar wacrorrarneaTe |
WTAE UUTG A AAT TST Uae feartercK et WagU
Before the creation You were alone in the form of Supreme
Consciousness filled with immense, infinite power. Transcendentally
Blissful, You were bearing the seed of the garland of group of worlds
and were giving auspicious individual identity to beings. 66
aa: faga wa wactatgetad frat agd afearaqantt wear!
aural apt: weaerpusr sa yfe war agent FAUT: Go I
Oh! Pure Consciousness! Later Your shining existence was revealed
and suddenly other beings, moving and non-moving, appeared. They are
related to you like the waves related to the sea, like pots to the earth,
and jewels to gold. 67
aaeagurat yatre watenfsett ar ar wateranfgerate werenrerager |
aa qarara uftfiretreeate ager facrat wady wHafe sar TATA I RC
Therefore there is nothing in this universe that is separate from
You. Being the soul of all beings You shine with Your great spatial
form. Though of such form Your sport of assuming a form with hands
and legs is due to Your compassion towards Your devotees. 68

st AEN, 10 Sri Tripurarahasyam
raraagd freyeueriinfacrad, quremisitctgnetaah fata
elfarhtifaaate urit array: wt aagd wafie wears TTA a
Such a form of Yours becomes visible rarely to a merited few who
have pure sight from their devotion to the lotus feet of sacred guru.
Otherwise how can a vision of Your form becomes easy? 69
wae arene foretaraherdt wet Taderanfrenciaeage |
wet dakufaccraaape Wet Weistafsnacarretreat Nott
Salutations to You whose feet are like Agastya unto the ocean of
delusion; Salutations to you whose compassion is like Vajrayudha
(Thunder-bolt) unto a mountain of misery; Salutations to You, skillful in
granting more than the desires of the devotees; Salutations to You, Oh!
Balambika, the repository of the riches of Siva the foe of Tripuras.” 70
gta art weed tufagferaa: | cusaafadt qat qererorahret Neen
arRganeea: Uaage: | dedi aprerifeater i 02 1
Thus praising the Great Devi with his heart full of love, he prostrated
at Her feet. With tears of joy filled in his eyes, horripilated and heart
filled with devotion he was unable to aspire anything from Her. 71, 72
aera aad ae ot fafsengatac: | deenftfatriserar a faqufiaeat 1 031
We weihrgdtrattvar efararar! ara ators Het seq =a Ml ox
When he was thus immersed in the ocean of love (devotion) and
unable to see, speak and do any thing, Devi Tripura with a beautiful
smile on Her face and a dignified voice showering ambrosia addressed
him as “My child” and placed her lotus hand on his head. 73, 74
a ad eee ae Sear! WATE: HEIMGMENTSTaS AAT OKI
Sumedha who was, due to the vision of Devi, already immersed in
the ocean of joy got transformed into Absolute Bliss by the touch of Her
hand. 15
Sars AT TAT Baths aT fae wes vith at: ure fasisdtftadcraa: 1
Then the Universal Mother told Sumedha, “Get up quickly and soon
go to your Guru, as you have attained perfection.” 76

its : 11 Chapter 1
seeaisaten Wat wieanyead! Bish wegen fatatete farraq vio ti
Saying so, She disappeared instantly like the thoughts of a person.
Sumedha woke up at that time and thought about his dream as to what
it was. 77
Tiree: eae yat yet fafaaqi at ght qed are drgeraatedhy ui we
aet went rat Srarasmeaftet | ata fasta: a faaaigaatena: 1
Baga aaah aay! wet at ate arsaet T Aaa HOTT I
With a perturbed mind thinking repeatedly about the beautiful Devi
and Her ambrosial words in his dream, he went to the river to bathe
and thought he had spent millions of years to reach there. Thinking
about the dream he forgot his morning rites and wondered about what
he had seen within himself. He could not understand whether it was
true or false, nor could he know the reason for it. 78 to 80
faoer Teast treat fr wadtereq aor ofrecrefaarat weiter 1
“Due to the illusory nature of the dream, the wise will not believe
it. Hence taking it to be true what shall I tell the guru after going to
him. 81
arate aa ten aaareggarae: | vet faerarenfa arerer ahrecaT Ul 22
“How can I not go without faith in the words of the Devi? Alas!
The power of Time looks indomitable. 82
aarsfa ta treanfr vert arquéfe! sf ffaea free wae g qtafs can
amesyrianat uy aft aeqan aaat anfaad waar ae A ATT Mt cv Il
“Even then I shall not go. Let Devi pardon me.” Deciding thus, as
Sumedha was engaged in his daily duties an incorporeal voice sweetly
addressed him thus.
“Qh! Child! Shed your doubt in the words of Devi. It is not false
but truth alone”. 83, 84
gfe grasa aeorenst fastarert: werafert: arerg FATA qf Tat: CuI
Listening to the voice from the vacant sky, the happy Sumedha
lovingly prostrated on the ground. 85

at ARR, 12 Sri Tripurarahasyam
are pitt waged teat aeTEUgA Yer Heya dead saa ASAT Mt ce
Then he quickly went to Sri Paragurama and touched his lotus feet
with his head and faithfully narrated the incident. 86
reget antat we: ure fered yfafer: | aad art a wat ger aT fag wT
ARR GT: WAAT SET AT AT Hanh adaad Ge AAA ce
Hearing that Sri Bhargava Rama told his disciple with wonder,
“My child! Blessed you are to see the Transcendental Tripuradevi in
your dream. There is no one who is more blessed than you who have
been blessed by the Transcendental Devi. Your dream was seen by
UTgeass t we Wea AMTMAS FAT |
SARA FY caret UP ATE Bae TRAST
sitfaet smarter derarara atfirre| uradieest Tee eUAATTA YT Ul Fol
she dara qed ama manfeatert faqureerqaiesart, een
“Now you will attain everything by your yogic vision”. Saying So,
Parasurama the king among the yogis initiated at length the Srividya
in accordance with the prescribed procedures, along with its main and
accompanying details. Then to him who had received Srividyé, Parasurama
taught the most sacred, auspicious legend ‘Tripurarahasyam’ which is
the essence of Tantra which he had heard from Sri Dattatreya and which
was told by Lord Siva Himself. 89 to 91
ardent viet tauftet wae: | ret afr sihpeur aararaprreat wer
“My child this great knowledge/Vidya has to be protected cautiously.
This was taught to me by my Guru and by his orders it has been
imparted to you. 92
Tonfrravedty afereny + aaah area faytert aarerenares TN 8B
faa erste afeoety fratta) ware wa at: aed SNA UIATAT 11 ev tl
saan wordt Prema
“You should not tell Tripurarahasyam to atheists and non-devotees.
After duly worshipping Tripuradevi and obtaining her grace, you compose

Wats aa: 13 Chapter 1
the Tripurarahasyam text and teach it to deserving disciples. This is
the command by my guru and it is no different from Truth.” Saying so,
Parasurama blessed his disciple who was saluting him. 93, 94
FY Tea Te Ws Ufterer wefan, Weel
WH Breage aa sea | UAT Usa Alas aTaeeTaT neal
Then circumambulating and prostrating before Parasurama, his guru,
Sumedha went to Halasyapura (Madhurai) where shines the Transcendental Mother, Minaksi the consort of Sri Sundaregvara. 95, 96
qauluteriat aracataera: | aa: wonfasetega siterftacrr neon
Close to the river Vegavati on the banks of the pond with golden
lotuses, he performed intense austerities contemplating on the Supreme
Mother. 97
eqmbrst wera fadttadt at: | caret caret Gora ai Prada: 1 ee tl
at are afer fret aferorerayigar ysrarare aA aer ATA: 11 kell
Very fortunate Sumedha with control of his senses and great devotion
to Sri Lalita Devi worshipped Her, who is Supreme, daily at appropriate
timings with physical and mental control. 98, 99
afin: aa: ws cfeat aradtsaey
aie arist geass: ged foray, I Goo ll
ait wet waitgferafarey! ator areaciot yea: arate, — it RoR I
fartatefa asrdysites aat qari ot: feat ae arteateara fafera: 1 302
fast uftorena ufos qrareter: | sara wat are fadtat ear: tl oR Il
Meditating on Sri Lalita Devi, Sumedha spent five years. Once while
meditating he saw within himself an auspicious person in camphor hue,
matted hair, besmeared with ash and playing vind. Wondering, he opened
his eyes and saw Narada before him. He stood up and offered a seat, duly
prostrated and with humility and happiness spoke sweetly. 100 to 103
dat ward Ase ater weurepha: | war earafertte Gres ATacitfena: it Yow I

at ERE 14 Sri Tripurarahasyam
“Oh! Divine Sage! Welcome to you. Pardon my mistake. As I was
meditating I did not observe your presence. 104
at TaN cites were Haraisé wafadequetacitfard: tt You
“In this world the visit of Noble persons causes great prosperity.
My desires are fulfilled by your grace. 105
Sfad a qaad wagytrad: | waste & yfsrs peraterert I 20K Il
“All my wants are fulfilled just by seeing you. Even so, Oh! Great
Sage! There is something to be asked. 106
qeart fentscat wer Wer wee see: |
wai afe: dfeadtsite wat Asa: aaifaa: Ul Qo I
UrReat aot ate ale sitterafer 31 area: Gaaraa diferent cacsem: i god ti
“Oh! Maharsi! (Brahmarsi) I will ask a small question which has
caused a great doubt in me. Even though you were standing outside,
how were you seen within my heart (being). Please tell me the reason
for this, if I deserve the answer. Noble souls are impartial and are
compassionate on the afflicted.” 107, 108
Biot Weeder aa CileHyTeAAT: | ANE: Wea arearMshacteyta: tl RoR
Thus questioned by Sumedha, the all-knowing Narada intent on
blessing the world, spoke with a smile. 109
sia stages wrereravs yantseaa:
End of the first chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurarahasyam.

fadtats cara:
Chapter 2
eiftarert attra wart HEISyAL! seat: Teiifeae fe fagtarsfrareaq ug
“Dear Haritayana, you have told me about your wonderful vision
like an erudite person and not like a young boy. 1
Wa wer wdear ger qaaagada: | fagiet wenaa: faa: ye oT: =H
age ae yet tanerafe safe) aat ater fagied ware az A aRSNT BH
During my roaming around the series of worlds I was variously
questioned by the wise, dullards, women, low-born, helpless ones, but
none questioned me like you. Explain to me clearly your question. You
are learned as indicated by your name Sumedha. 2,3
art: Ualfane sft arate aa: WALI
faxes fe ae werd Het fee neu
Explain to me your good words that you saw me within you. What
is within and what is without. With reference to what? What is its
nature? 4
ot: YRC sft Y Aa aad at wag Geiss Serta wera Aqe: U4
Here it is not apt to say as within your body. Standing on the earth
you have seen me surrounded by great space. 5
seer aq Aare faa et wa carht ser at pa die: GI
By innumerable testimony your body is found to be seven feet long.
Within that where were you, the seer, standing? 6
ASNGARAM GSTATSAAeaAT AT AAPA TaMtat Tatas =
Did you see inside from your external sensory organs or by your
internal existence? You cannot see what is within the stomach by external
senses.

at fey 16 Sri Tripurdérahasyam
aerator dqeeaasé aa F yup! sen wigaer: WI A aT AS Ci
If you say your internal being has seen, then, Oh! friend! listen,
you should have close connection with your Atma (Self). 8
wi afeds getaeatt qu age: | Het ae Sa ee ae fe aA OTT 8
If you have seen externally, then listen to my words: Who saw
whose exterior and how and why? 9
shat teqrarannd whats daa afett wet a ge eafafa cae ut toll
Because the senses are a part of the body they are inert. Then, tell
me how they can see external things? 10
ad afett aa died Afad qa: 1 qeatefaaong fer wrt wa cae Neen
Then, there or at that time, why were entire external things not
seen? Assuming that the senses saw me, tell me of what avail was that
to you? What happened to you? 11
aMseTAa: east Mia waa a atat at sarhie AA OTN gz
I came from Brahmaloka to see you. I will tell you what conversations
were there about you. 12
werat WENT: Tat UTehUsat verge: | fears wart Sars: wafer g3 1
Ter ones det quact ferenbad: | wey at wae: adenine: 1 ex il
Ward wa fafsearrdaat wart aa: | ag wap ta farsitararrays i eh
In the assembly of Brahma, the great sage Markandeya bowing
humbly questioned him while others seated there were listening.
“Oh! Respectable Lord of the Universe, you are omniscient. Being
the creator there is nothing not known to you. By your grace alone
I attained long life. 13 to 15
manfsarrerat fart que war wderenfir ger Aferarrnht wo eg
quorate watfit faenanfacritan: | fs ax at sitet afe 2 earghfarry

-GICINEZICE 17 Chapter 2
“By worshipping Lord Siva I conquered death. I read all scriptural
injunctions along with legends and vedas; all ancient sacred books and the
entire literature. If I am eligible to listen, tell me their essence. 16, 17
War eg isa Meat A EAA! aa Yor war gat wea: fagatfirs: ecu
aaha waeatind afeasreag 31 aatafagret aensitg: weather ae: 199
wa tial ade: water days: 1 ae at carferat aergst war wet i 2011
“T have a great doubt regarding this. You tell me about that essence.
Regarding this I asked the Gods, sages and acclaimed yogis. But they
told me according to their devotion and faith (in the matter). Since they
are not omniscient, they told me what pleases them. Oh Lord! You are
the creator, omniscient, the self of all, the knower of all and ocean of
mercy. Tell me about what I have asked you.” 18 to 20
Wehusaaa: Bat We citenftame: | Hot earat Yara AAMT fer qvTaT tl 2
Hearing the words of Markandeya, Brahma the creator meditated
for a while with a pure mind and prostrated on the ground. 21
dentta: wget: ward at ede: | Gerenrqeet AS quiTerahrde: WM
wpateater: wrenret faqt deo! set AyTEHTA Mater APF ut VBA
Happy having remembered the greatness of Paragakti, Brahma was
horripilated and filled with tears of joy. He offered obeisance with folded
hands to Tripurambika the Universal cause and addressing the great
sage started his narration. 22, 23
sq Uget wer Ae T HaTAEy! TarahR: Trae sATAISA Wate VW Ut
“Oh! Brahmarsi! I will tell you the Truth. Listen to my words with
faith along with the members assembled here. 24
aacarn & dfaaat at aq festa: 1 ar adored Vgtar wafs AT Ht AWM
aearmeater aa ar fager aactsfirent) wer fected ae arerersret wert tt 26 1
“Those without faith have no place here. Tripurambika who is the
cause of the Universe, who has pervaded this creation and who transcends
the same is greater than everything. Bereft of Her, everything would be
like the son of a barren woman. 25, 26

at ARE 18 Sri Tripurarahasyam
wen: wares wd wart diet weeoranty ar got fager fe AT uz 1
“All things exist in Her by a fraction of Her grace. She is indeed
Tripurambika who has filled every atom, every second. 27
an fafaargquorenconfa uftaor qaatht waa aa RCI
“She the Unborn hides within Herself the entire Universe that
changes every moment, being made up of wonderful body, soul and
senses. 28
wen: wiameafeant we ster: | ate aad: Neu
“Me, Hari, Hara who are the minute dust of Her lotus feet, do not
know the beginning, magnitude and the end of Her existence. 29
ae: fafa: defies fttarqaze: | feat aderserg ferret arat aat tt 3011
a adedt ade adearureanun fag gett weat cada fatgenfat uae
“The great power who by manifesting in us creates, sustains, destroys,
conceals and evolves is the Soul of all, Ruler of all, the Primordial cause,
the Self willed, the Intelligence termed or called by the name
Tripurasundari. 30, 31
FASS A Visas THUTAL! Asses Aare Fay ATTATSAT | 32
“Due to kindness towards Her devotees, the most Excellent, the
Universal Mother, the Lover of praises (hymns), the Sakti has taken
many forms. 32
waft: addteper afeaia: wit wa: 1 da ated ada yy yteT aH
“Her form is the most excellent. Her doctrine is considered as
ultimate. Oh! Best among sages, listen. She alone is the Universal
Princess adored by all. 33
weet wegVe fraatantey! anfereresterperaayragaaan, i 3x ll
watfamitar cred art arate sar wel cite wefawittgit says: BAT: Bh
“That extremely holy secret is known to Parasiva alone. From the
first Lord who is along with his Sakti, Rudra the fourth form of Sadagiva

fadtats ara: 19 Chapter 2
learnt it and from Him, Visnu and through Visnu I obtained the knowledge.
No other person knows this secret. On the earth, Dattaguru an incarnation
of Mahavisnu knows. 34, 35
a stevsqes: at wight wafaad arta: dist qatqragia wWeatar aq: i
gree giereara a data eta! faenty: weretor greet ayufaa: «= BNI
: “Sri Dattatreya taught this knowledge learnt from Srikantha (Siva)
to Sri Parasurama who was his own incarnation.
Sri Paragurama as ordered by his guru in turn taught this to his
obedient disciple Sumedha who had reached Halasya Ksetra (Madhurai)
to compose Tripurarahasyam. 36, 37
frat: sia Fe: |
The wise Sumedha is meditating on Tripurambika as ordered by his
Guru.
saat Vacaa wer areot wet TA
It was thus told by the great God Brahma to the Brahmana (Sri
Markandeya)” 38
arat sgfre unet: aetdewatie a1 sft aed war wret aerqd BATA =n BR
Therefore I have come to see you. I am telling the truth to you.
Thus I have completely narrated to you the reason for my coming. 39
wrt ag wat aa art afta sft aneareet a seat dfaxs ade: Koll
ant warded afsadt yaad vetisa a weft fafseqat wan wR
Oh! Haritayana (Sumedha)! Tell me what you know as an answer to
my question. Listening to the words of Narada and thinking thoroughly
Haritayana could not get any answer. With shyness he told the sage
Narada thus. “Oh! Maharsi! I do not know any answer to tell you.”
war ad dag 8 aeare frag wanted ger aad Jeuns wetfem: ou ven
wae: He atta fqean weae ad Teqered eamfsa wr | xB

at ARES, 20 Sri Tripurarahasyam
fat weagfsereat qe ahs wat sqacat Tea RUT wfoaaaraT xx tl
You please tell me all that is auspicious. Just as you told me, my
Guru Sri Paragurama urged “Oh child, compose the Tripurarahasyam
text”. Then with concentration I heard every thing from him. Due to
dullness of my mind I forgot the teaching. Oh! All powerful! Show mercy
on me”. Saying so, he fell prostrate at his feet and begged. 42 to 44
aneise fat qa arat WaMaEA SI AAA Ta ARNT Wee KI
ARITA AUT GAT af TAL!
Then Narada completely meditated there for a long time and became
motionless. Then Brahma invited by Sage Narada through meditation
came there immediately in view of the task ahead. 45
Ure aa faarant vacrfaa araeay Neva
qafagrdanst agdet uqyaa aavse Uemrennsdt atta U voll
ear ada weoagdiaeny! Anis weitere ane: wedifadt: we
Taare cesar wy dysaTEataaeat Garterateat: Useu
Then Narada along with Sumedha stood up at once having seen
Brahma who came there like a mass of brilliance glowing like fire; who
was like a fresh coral with four faces and four arms holding a water-pot,
a rosary, and signs of protection and boon, dressed in white and wearing
a pure sacred thread and worshipped him by offering a seat, oblation
and all else and stood with folded palms. 46 to 49
quale ANE Wen ace fee t aiseaEq!
fe adet war asa aq aanfadt mar UW 4oll
Seeing Narada, Brahma addressed him thus: “My child why did you
remember me? What should be done by me? What is your request?” 50
gfe grasa aed ANE: WyaTS AL wT aaTETes Ufequiaee: wall
Listening to the words of Brahma, Narada replied “Oh! Lord! By
your grace all my desires are fulfilled. 51
waritedt WU atest wrhesare ated) ferret wear wereaafafarry 1 42H

fads er: 21 Chapter 2
“Earlier you had told the greatness of the wonderful secret of
Tripurambika to the intelligent Markandeya. 52
aa wt Gqaeret weernfa qe Uvartiarnisaé qBisd eta: 4g
“Then I came here to see this poet and sage by name Sumedha
who authors Tripurarahasyam and I saw Haritayana (Sumedha).” 53
waged werd afedared aft: 1 ot sant qearht fenfsat wate feo i uy
“May your words come true. Let sage Haritayana become a poet.”
But I will ask you about something that is in my mind. 54
fag water ararercfgrenferent | east rane wrTtat Say, WRK
“By what merits of good deeds did Haritayana acquire the worship
of Tripura the Supreme Queen, the embodiment of Parasiva. 55
aaeerard we: watarrenqery! cae uedtsa Aenfer ArercoAeMaSA tt 4G I
“How did this teacher, (i.e., Haritayana) who knows Tripurarahasyam
attain honour among worshippers which is not possible by means of
ordinary efforts. 56
Ut ded ta Syreeated: | Meaaafeentt stg apr aq W 4
“Oh! God! This is my doubt, which you can clarify. I would like to
hear that even though it is a secret. Kindly tell me that.” 57
regen anata earear fenfargara Ei YU] ANS AEA US GT PAT NGS Wt
Having listened to what Narada said, Brahma meditated for a while
and told him “Oh Narada! Listen about his past good deeds. 58
qus wen: afgench sf faga:) qeqara: werent a aradt ue
wereit gefat far feaq few: | areeot weet arat adt agar tt gol
ad wea Oat art: waa: firs: fogs) Qagqead uiqsiararaar: Wan
Weve Genta: Wer quiawan: | seid waural argacarqaracay Wa
“Previously he was a brahmin well known as Alarka. He was the
son of Sumantu who lived in a beautiful place on the bank of westward

his beautiful wife devoted to him. Alarka
his father. Sumantu was daily worshipping
th a strong mind always dedicated to
flowing river Sarasvati with
was a five-year-old lad, dear to
Durga. He was a great devotee wi n
Durga. Every day he would call his wife as cals
aren Ue aa a TET TI MTAT! aTeTTaTeTEAAA OE sft TedE: neat
“Hearing and practising that Alarka was repeatedly addressing his
Mother as “ai, ai”.
are Titonfirgat aret wrghra: Fer! Re sft aca oT TBAT GY Il
This boy who was dear to his mother fell sick and died while he
was uttering “ai ai” thinking about his mother. 64
Sgt werd vari dteafrgena wet arvafietad arreraafe FAT gy
“This “ai” which is the first seed-letter of the Tripura-mantra without
the bindu is called as ‘vagbhava’ since it quickly generates (grants)
erudition. 65
Prat Felgen Wa: Heise YAR! St Ala Waa SeMAATAANT, «RR HI
aquees wares sitaren fag wel werafifarter mredt aeeat RII
“For a long time he repeated that ‘ai ai’ and at the end died
repeating the same. Because of the power of that merit, the Transcendental
Mother Devi Sri Bala Tripurasundari, who is prayed even by great yogis
desiring a vision, was pleased with him (Alarka) and appeared before
WT weaisfatures wegrraehaen ar Grad wos eqaT GCI
eT Ha SIAA TET! T Meer ar eatery AaT geil
amt aah al aqufantany wiretap voll
“Prayed by him with meaningful wonderful metrical words the Devi
blessed him. At that time he had no ability to think about poetry.
Because of his chanting of the Tripura-mantra and seeing Her, the prayer
was composed and later forgotten. 68 to 70
SRT aat wet wetanager ara: we fret ercnfacereay a

& 2 : 23 Chapter 2
“Because of his ignorant chanting of the great seed-mantra
without bindu (the nasal termination) he forgot everything being unable
to retain it. 71
warsti sifeerrier tiara | we ufrepreange UIs ad ra Wot
at feat afaerer yayenrifary! eter add: aren
“Even then due to the importance of the work ahead and my words,
everything unseen and unheard, the past, present and the future untold
by Guru, prosody and grammar, apt meaning and the qualities of great
poetry with figures of speech, will flash in his mind. 72, 73
ad wag cat Hee aft cea Seer aitfzar: 11 ox
uitarerg fertsea 4 gett waafaq at eee fageeeter WETAfA: 11 oy
“Let everything that is clear, that is vague, that happened even
ages before, that is super sensory that pertains to other worlds flash in
his mind truly. Let not false things come to his mind. Let this highly
intelligent person become the author of Tripurarahasyam. 74, 75
qu featd aborarrasgan etaeatag reed afacatt Hog
“Earlier this Tripurarahasyam was not in the form of text. Now
authored (composed) by Haritayana it will become a text. 76
sfrerafad srs fafeoreteargaa quadt wedi waa get caraquhaarr ti v9
“This excellent narration contains wonderful meaningful stories.
A reading or hearing of this with devotion will please Devi Tripurambika.
Terastaprentir quiratacranar: | 7 aaerafed at at gfe arat wc
mata opt ta ufed at afeeafa fer ages tat wdenfre wag Ol
“Let anyone born read the entire scriptural injunctions or hear all
the moral stories. But till he studies or hears this text ie.,
Tripurarahasyam, his reading or hearing will be incomplete. Oh! Devarsi!
What is the use of talking too much. This is the essence of all at

Rt FRET 24 Sri Tripurarahasyam
ee ee
waanafiafecr % arafvreta farsa araten arf ararmeareg yaa U coll
“After understanding this text nothing remains to be known. Till
this is not known there will be no complete Knowledge. 80
qte: qu wget wa we apie aed THES ck
“Qh! Sumedha! Listen to my words. Starting from the words of
Paragurama upto the vision of Tripura in the dream, everything will
flash in your mind. 81
waded mag: wd aid aa afacatr wcfaeadtaeedel wa TAT eR
“Everything that you have to do will-become known to you gradually.
You will complete this task in 36 days. 82
seat ageh as Hates eat geyreh wus frrata a cl
“You will write four chapters every day. It will have 12,000 stanzas
(poems) divided into three portions. 83
Wet WITS: AI AAASHIM: | watavsaqdia: wMeanaaaets 11
“The first portion will be Mahatmyakhanda; the next portion will
be Jfianakhanda; the third portion will be Caryakhanda. This is how it
will be composed. 84
pear cat ated mega aer ae weregined & erat wa Neu
; “Having done this extremely wonderful work, to begin with, Oh!
Child! Narada the Divine Sage! You will listen to it with devotion. 85
AaTSaMTa: stat a ase afseafir say wreaat aa aa wyfaa:
adarafedt wen arcdtsfit entra: | Waa sat att wrasittadt fee cis
“This Samedha will be the first to narrate and you Narada will be
the first to listen.” Saying so Brahma disappeared duly worshipped by
Narada and Sumedha. Even Narada worshipped by Sumedha, travelled
in the direction of his liking playing his vina. 86, 87

fedtats ea: 25 Chapter 2
aa aot Recequit fanart afta: | apfarerctecnautenarara: ween
Mentally perturbed for a while by the departure of Narada and
Brahma, Haritayana stood for a while silently without thoughts. 88
aa aad tent erent pafatedh: 1 qatst aired word yey ce
Then, he going to the Vegavati river bathed and after performing
daily rites worshipped Sundaregvara, Minaksi, Ganega and Guru. 89
PIT TART HUTA Tt fa: | so AN: HRUTASAIA HAT: FAT I Go
wftarattet a watayta ey fragieamurateal wore wart: nek
Remembering the task of writing the text, that Brahmana Haritayana
started it with “Orn Karanananda” and in an orderly manner ended it
with “Sa Bhavet Tripuraiva Hrim”. The work betwixt the Siva and Sakti
Pranava is of the Sivasakti Pranava form. 90, 91
wa faeeda Sat wernitet Aart WTI
Haritayana thus composed Tripurarahasyam text as told by Brahma
before.
ofa sttfaqereeet wrerereud fadtatseara:
End of the second chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripuraérahasyam.

qdtats ara:
Chapter 3
anfearat way: UdeUrERUM! Waal fast Waterencar Fert: = R
The primordial Lord Mahega who is the cause of all causes, who
is the creator of everything, who stays as the soul of everything is
victorious. 1
Haaiteibiet casa weg: 1 yeaat aed wacacet wad wen
Dattatreya the great sage, who is an incarnation of Sri Visnu, who is
fond of His devotees, who travels secretly in this world is prosperous. 2
WAST a: AAAS: | TS Rha AeA ATER TATST SR : wan
Born from the fire generating wood named Jamadagni, Parasurama
the great fire unto the wood named Ksatriya and who is the dispeller
of the dark inner ignorance of his devotees is prosperous. 3
Ud aren Ter wulariviate fa: 1 frametectatar wefistead: ay x
shrert armed qararcratrenq arranfenmrercateragnraataary Wau
Thus praying the Gurus, Sumedha seated on the banks of the pond
with golden lotuses wrote in 36 days the Tripurarahasyam containing
the essence of the Tantra of Bhagavati which is everlasting with aspects
of detachment and devotion in three portions viz., mahatmya, kriya and
jiiana. 4,5
Treated Ay waa! Ved wa sad say ON Il
feranitt wrmreriat Hera! oft faquafedant ge ypateay nen
This Tripurarahasyam, containing many wonderful stories, alleviates
the sins of its reader, destroys the distress of its listener, creates Selfknowledge in its inquirer, grants liberation, imbibes devotion to Tripura
in its worshipper, brings forth auspiciousness on the onlooker. 6, 7
faeme ofead tfad afseaiaq aa sitfayueen: wenferaettaq cil

Tatas ea: 27 Chapter 3
wrairawaraed anert: at a ae ax far geteat ferarafinfter ferry ut ¢ 11
It grants erudition when well-written, grants desires when
worshipped. Where the story and glory of Sri Devi Tripura which is
abundant with Knowledge, Detachment and Devotion, which is listened
to by Narada and others, is sung, what is not achievable? It is like a
wish-yielding gem Cintamani. 8,9
Uaferarat aa unat Zafterra: | accent area, Taree: i oll
At that juncture the greatest among Divine seers Narada reached
there playing on his attractive Vallaki (vind) with his mind soaked in
bliss. 10
gre aft ¢ gear agatha yore: | dqvaracored: qargfercarr i eel
Even Sumedha seeing Narada, quickly stood up with a smile
and spoke with folded hands after worshipping him with water, seat and
so on. ll
tat warares wird weraarda: | mporeratts warengfterferery ween
Oh! Divine Seer! By your grace everything was known meaningfully
just as an intuitive eye smeared by a special collyrium. 12
feraragtat dod that wager! srgrcart fered at were: far atten i e3l
As told by Brahma, the Tripurarahasyam has been written. Tell me,
your disciple, what service should I render to you next? 13
ae waif yrreafin wife faferenfs a
we cient feet: carer: afrare Patch: evn
ye: aatfterreresdenreraforeusay! Trea WENA AATT ETAT HN RI
aeparitra: wares art we cee gegen weathers eueafwaas Fi teil
Now the entire scriptures, varieties of prosody, all worlds, all
directions, all times, those with senses and without senses are known
to me like a piece of pure Vaikranta Gem (a gem slightly inferior to
diamond) in my palm. Salutations to you Oh! great Narada! the son of
Brahma. By your grace I understood very well the knowledge of the

st ARES, 28 Sri Tripurarahasyam
immanent and the transcendent. Saying so Sumedha fell at the feet of
Narada. 14 to 16
analsa ayaa aaasites ¢ Bq srat aravarsat wqt aerate
Then Narada lifted that sage and embraced him. After seating him,
spoke sweet words. 17
afters gaista mer ta feet wet forresacn dafteRet | el
“Qh! Haritayana! You are blessed. There is no one equal to you, who
has acquired such wealth due to devotion to the feet of Tripura. 18
aan faqreen tweet trad AL! TeaR Wea Tea: = ASH
“As advised by Brahma, I have come with a desire to listen to
the auspicious Tripurarahasyam from you, which has been composed by
you. 19
Seat WAY As aq Alaa sft Tan WSEAS: = Roll
arragaianwaates: | fears rrsteongs: WWM
HAAN are VET T STH!
“Tell all that in great detail to me in person who has faith.” Listening
to his words, Haritayana with his fully blown lotus-like eyes filled with
tears of joy, with a happy mind, with swollen body from the horripilation
induced by the remembrance of Tripura, folded his palms and with
beautiful words dripping honey, addressed Narada. 20, 21
saad wads weNQA HETTT WIM
Tepe yqratact freq tahteararatsd wat queat wa 231
Oh! Great sage! Oh! Son of Brahma! By your grace alone this text
has been composed. Knowing everything you wish to listen to it from me,
your disciple. It is the natural tendency of great good beings. 22, 23
SRT SeaisMIet watt WaT: | tafeast werent Uw
It is no wonder that good men who know everything listen to without
envy, the ambrosial story of the Transcendental Devi, even though a
short one. 24

wi aS a: 29 Chapter 3
FY React Het cet afro at eemangt a uefa TH: KT
Grape fruit will be the same whether placed in an earthen pot or
a gem-studded jar. The natural sweet taste of it will never change with
the container. 25
Tat frat gen faaramayer! aeratafatat weet wT WU
mat: dareed wafer: OT
Placing your order on my head and remembering the instructions
of Brahma, I will tell you the most wonderful extremely ambrosial
Tripurarahasyam, in the form of a dialogue between you and me. Listen
to it with concentration. 26
ardtexerga: sitar. ppp faifea: Holl
There was the son of Brahma the glorious sage Bhrgu praised by
a host of sages. 27
Waa: Wat: ManeweoT Age yfai Taz wet aitaaar sat weet
aa aaa ot fararsfasat greg srdtereret Trat Aer ASAT: 11 2k
His son was Cyavana who was verily like Brahma on earth. Sukanya
was given in wedding by her father to this great person owing to his
conduct. Cyavana conquered Indra and gave the scarificial soma offerings
to the Asvini gods. He begot a son named Rcika who was great and
equal to Cyavana. 28, 29
wet cer caer fer yattreoar! Saar atfea: Aisht at wet WEA I 30 ll
Gadhi, with a desire of having a son gave his daughter to Rcika.
Pleased by her service Rcika gave a boon to his wife. 30
Ol aa wet Wa ad WelHetaTH!
She desired a warrior brother as well as a Brahmin son. 31
ag ad aad wart a dita Wag
afar frit ax crea! aaarge a Gass: Wey AT We 3zM
Then the valorous Rcika prepared two puddings by his heroic and

sit ARREST, 30 Si Tripurarahasyam
brahminical strength and offered them along with oblations to fire-god
at the time of purnsavana—the time of bearing a male baby. 31, 32
Uae Ut ut Te WS eet AETATAT |
That great person gave one to his wife and another to her mother.
aa mfmentat afeet facta: U33n
SI afte wat yet cea tan aa agar at aaa Ghat
Then the wife of the king Gadhi, by a wrong understanding that
the pudding of her daughter was superior, ate it secretly by deceiving
her. Knowing this the sage spoke thus: 33, 34
fe ae t ate et ered carga afsasta wean a aeeIaega: = B41
“Oh! Auspicious lady! What did you do? You have spoiled the
plan. You have been cheated by your mother because of exchanging the
pudding. 35
Waa Tra AL HTT FU: | MAT ATMS SANA UTS BG HI
Oh! Auspicious lady! You will beget a kingly son equal to the
destroyer of death. Your brother will be really of the nature of Brahma.
God only should save the situation.” 36
Weg aag Tet Mss! waa walt Aca Bret YA: YA: 11 30H
Hearing those terrible words, that noble lady with sorrow repeatedly
prayed to her husband duly bowing before him. 37
Weg ASE ate WeuepAA: | ATER YT Taft PRATT 1 3c I
Oh! Brahman! Excuse my mistake and be kind to me. I am the
wife of a peace loving brahmin. 38
7 Yardige: Ya: ward qe dar WRASE WAT: Faat Ea: fea 1 38 Ul
Let not such a son be born. Be graceful to me. Hearing her the
great one told her “Oh good lady! Listen to me. 39

d See: 31 Chapter 3
wed Tare Tenet wa A deere ude fe Gage TM von
VARS Oat YAIR Ta Adar MAMEMGT we: Ml Ye
Brent faa ashe aactefor aga: | sft Arar PYARSWAAT AISAAAT Il YR
“That infallible pudding prepared with the power of Mantra cannot go
waste. Now listen to my words. Your son will be a peaceful person. His
valiant son will be born of the aspect of Visnu and will destroy the entire
warrior clan. Even though born as a brahmin, he will possess heroic
might.” Listening to the words of Bhrgu, she was perturbed. 40 to 42
a caret BTS Vea Ys Tet A: AMO: YMA HeryA: fsa: v3
After some time the devoted lady delivered a son named Jamadagni.
This brahmin boy was peaceful, possessed vedic knowledge and was of
pure conduct. 43
Wet Hlet Vala Topearai YMat: | aattenfafet weraeras: usen
Later from him through Renuka was born the mighty auspiciouseyed Paragurama who was like a Sun unto the mist of Ksatriyas. 44
a chelfad firqaamlerener VET Ua Tees aM Tl YG I
Once being angry about the killing of his father, he propitiated Lord
Sankara and obtained from him the invincible axe and bow. 45
fa: aaa: ofedt Fast arawaeq sf aa ufaare fagaerqasat ot ¥ GI
Going round the earth 21 times with the anger of the killing of his
father he vowed to eradicate the warrior clan. 46
area urgt feet aarott qperargr: |
f:aat ofadt rat eyarrasfaet yay ne voll
ae Wereayary aftr fara water) waned sefratiare: ear Ml xe
Taking the divine axe, the destroyer of the warrior clan made the
earth empty of the warriors and handed over the entire earth to KaSsyapa.
Then he conquered the land near the western sea with his power and
retired from the killing of warriors at the request of the sages. 47, 48

a PE, 32 Sri Tripurarahasyam
am anfragt W: Were Busetes: | ate PIAS FT TUMaTTTAT Mt ¥e Hl
feat: wrenguart cient: da AeA!
Fiercely angry by nature, he took to severe penance and offered his
anger as oblation to the fire of serenity. Thus, all valuable worlds were
conquered by this great person. 49
BT HAA WEA WA: AHA: I &oll
Taner anata wistsadat 81 aa Sfrerureryetaseren gtr, U&en
aq: wanter war dhigeennqaraed! srteraot wart oq: vt were GR
After quite a long time, the truthful, valiant Parasurama incarnated
with his greatness as Sri Rama, to kill Ravana. Sri Rama twanged the
bow of Sankara that was placed in the court of the king of Mithila and
wedded Sita. During tying, the fierce bow of Sankara broke. 50 to 52
arent wdetenrat scrernrete were! UreRT VITA Ser ATART I 43
Teel ara Teaprett anteater MeMqaahaaaaTa FAT yy il
That wonderful act of Sri Rama was universally appreciated.
Parasurdma heard that from divine beings travelling in the sky. Hearing
that unbearable repute of the warriors (Ksatriyas) Parasurama the
embodiment of anger, 58, 54
larefireareRenasTa WI! Teles cHlyla: Weranftatta Sa Gk II
Terre f way ater ayy ast arrears Awa GI
art aafate aa: wereret frorerare
like boiling water from excessive heat, with anger in his reddened eyes
burning like the fire of dissolution, looked as if burning the universe.
“Let it be so, I will today subdue the pride of the warrior community’—
saying so, he moved out of his abode with the axe on the right shoulder
and the Vaisnava bow on his left. 55, 56
gatiisa a gear arta wat gay N&ell
PA YA: aot aati aafteafer
i Seeing Paragurama wrapped in anger, the gods and sages said
‘Once again he will empty the earth of Ksatriyas.” 57

ada SeaqTa: 33 Chapter 3
wet TEI HEAT Meret aya ATL wen
wat fearreat qeitqattd aa: 1 denfaeifest rat: ay: We Tat Ua
By his immense anger, the earth trembled severely, the Sun got
dim, the sky was filled with dust, the seas broke the shores as if it
was the time for final destruction. 58, 59
wa a fata: wart Sarenrgay! Ted UTES Hadas tl Goll
Setting out thus from his abode, he met on the way Raghukula Rama
who was returning along with his army after getting married. 60
tum gael et dtafteetsteredt: | sar qpamenderagiean YCATET 1 GR HI
we Waa Wa: fans gaperda: | Waseift wereramaga qd ET: 1 gH
arenft agitate qitoa aaeanfer: | areca sat at wet wer afareafe G3 11
“Oh! Rama of Ksatra clan! Imbued with valour you are stupid. You
have done a prohibited act thinking that you are powerful. Did you not
know till today that I am Yama unto the race of warriors? Without
knowing the existence of Parasurama, you have committed an error from
arrogance. Even now the edge of my axe that kills warriors is not blunt.
You will suffer punishment for your act today.” 61 to 63
ae & aetater unt wiser agent t Huseselorefator J RI
“After a long time my axe will indeed be satiated today with the
warm blood of your severed head. 64
ant way at Halgiaarsswanndt) area weala waae: afar G4
“The wicked should not be pardoned. Similarly, a disease ignored
on its onset will eventually bring death like a snake fed with milk. 65
wet wea wists Wale Har VAS ATgerEra WaHA FAT: GR
“How can even a calm person bear the insult to the guru—the
teacher—which is like a burn in the foot by fire. More so a mighty
person like me. 66

at fee, 34 Sri Tripurarahasyam
afe stafe amen qt: arereenfes: | afrarracarqgrert Vitara, tt G9 I
“yen when I am alive, the bow of my guru, the dweller on the
Kailas mountain has been humiliated by a young inferior Ksatriya. 67
an: wren Sera at aaeforagr) Wea aaa Ta Trsftacitera ke
meat: ufirrena warsrnera! aay aneafe yar wa: Haretet: ee
Alas! The time has changed. Now patience will be of no avail.” As
Parasurama was speaking thus, the lotus eyed Sri Rama prostrated
before him and worshipped him. Sri Rama with folded palms calmly
requested to be pardoned. 68, 69
Wea AWarat HATTA! Fat A AAA Bisfe qarsfaaarar: — Woll
wey mlaamat araatagara ei wa et areoisdife Gert anfara Ti ogi
He humbly requested to be excused. But when the brahmin did not
excuse him and began abusing him even more, Sri Rama with eyes red
with anger said thus “Oh! Parasurama! Since you are a brahmin, I should
be calm. 70, 71
Tea wrenty yea Yplvsan st Avs: Hortur fora F aaa we
“The weapons of Raghus are blunt in respect of brahmins. May you
sever my head with your axe if it pleases you. 72
weer wren are: Yser At TARA!
“Brahmins and cows are venerable to us who are born in Raghu
dynasty.”
af qafe arepeet arrest varie Woezt
areenpengaatsa ware |
wasaaaad wt Type evil
aarensfrqetsta ara: far areoreaari
mary ata + aris qa: wet Hall
As Sri Rama was saying so, Paragurama blazed like the sacrificial
fire sprinkled with water during oblations with ghee. Then he
addressed Sri Rama, the scion of Raghukula thus, “Oh wicked one!

aetats ea: 35 Chapter 3
You are a shameless inferior Ksatriya. You are taking me to be an
ordinary Brahmin. How come you are not aware that I am the death
unto the clan of warriors?” 73 to 75
waraeagat afer eat topeargqay! ae yrerar yet a war wera ORI
7 are topearqes: feactsfer qerera) ared at grand ARTISAN EA Hl
Then the excellent among Raghus said “I know you are the son of
Renuka. I am not like the kings killed by you, a brahmin. And I am
not standing before you like your mother. Discard either your brahminhood
or your warriorship at once.” 76, 77
warpee wa aafa our faftafifr qa) eaent dftert ert det weet
As Sri Rama was speaking thus, Parasurama, uttering words of
despise with anger, quickly gave to Sri Rama the Vaignava bow which
he was holding in his hand. 78
wet ciara dope: creat fle qar wai weet vutegdet tas ae wear ut weil
3¢ Auranniter wera feerttaa wat war wags ferreeet afeafiy tt coll
Again with great anger he addressed Rama thus “Your boasting is
futile. You broke the worn-out bow of Siva by good fortune. Tie the
string to this Vaisnava bow and stand boldly in front of me. Then you
will shed your arrogance in a combat with me.” 79, 80
wager Tyee: sear arent agers serera etterar whelfarcter faftrardde: ce
fragrearad: atest wearers senviqhtary wey rfararet war wrerer weer: 1 cz
Hearing the words thus spoken, Sri Rama took the great Vaisnava
bow and sportively tied its string in half a minute. Then placing a sharp
arrow from his quiver and drawing the string up to his ears, Raghava
demonstrated his valour to Paragurima and spoke angrily. 81, 82
ama sit aerde: an: ae fafroreeary) steofteret werent arte:
“Oh Paragurima! Tell me quickly where this unfailing arrow
should fall. You have to be left out since you are a brahmin born to
Bhargava. 83

at FRRESA, 36 Sri Tripurarahasyam
fant werareraareata & ye: 1 werd cet Gores sitaalssy AMTSSTA:
smaisd verano sitfaardtanteda |
Because of your relation with Visvamitra, you are my Guru, even
if you are a heinous criminal. Show the target for this great arrow which
is unfailing in ending your life and quickly return alive.” 84
Sa Waa FLATS ATTA, TACST
TASTE MAA Wore eUSaaMt Vea wars arta: ce
Hearing the words of Raghava and seeing his wonderful valour,
Bhargava realising him to be actually the Superhuman Eternal Absolute
Self, praising him fell prostrate and spoke. 85, 86
art wat Wet Yes wea: UT! Wefan wat Tea: ucon
arafeat war quaint agaahtat: | acre eRe erat Vitae Was i cc i
I know you, as the Transcendent Self beyond the causal concept,
who is born as a human being to enact the protection of the Universe.
Oh Raghava! I shall offer the entire array of my merits acquired through
several performances of austerities as a target to your arrow and save
myself. 87, 88
warsteata aay wat Foret yaar wea anid wre zHET TA arta ce
grred Ft eat aq Areit F Wer We: 1
Then Rama discharged the fierce arrow saying “Be it so”. Then he
addressed Bhargava the brahmin thus. “Oh Bhargava Rama! My
salutations to you. Pardon me for my angry words. A Brahmin is always
my Guru”. 89, 90
ofa wet aa: spat antat crrastad: Ugoll
Tel Veta WIT a SaTTALI
Listening to his words, Bhargava filled with shame went back after
offering circumambulatory obeisance to Sri Rama. 90
ofa st forest wrererers ddtatseara: 11
End of the third chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurarahasyam.

aqats ara:
Chapter 4
ag ant wmeisemtdenran! ufone wd a fat weet
Enroute Parasurama was filled with extreme repentance. Humiliated
he proceeded with following thoughts. 1
WA wer wyanra sear attult whey aise: ut efteet: Grenht FAT ui VI
“Giving the earth to Kasgyapa I indeed promised that henceforth
I will not in anger wield the weapon on kings. 2
wet 8 farante: fa aeniggitswaq mlearscastitqon urfaat wreerray 13 1
Lamentable is my mental delusion. What can I say about my change?
By the mighty foe called anger I have fallen into an abyss of delusion.
wile Wa Way: waleravale S aa: 1 Paes seat als free: werghas: uw
Anger, really kills askesis. Askesis verily gets destroyed by Anger.
Thoughts generated by the pious mind stay away from the angry man.
wee wapitsta a aatet Gear ait gam
we pe fran: arafar dbedatenat wan
Just as a loyal wife stays away from a paramour, good thoughts do
not even touch me. How can an angry person possess reflection, even
so beauty with vitiligo? 5
al + Galfer ant wef a fegraaqs sat Serisafes frereapaardia
What will a terrible, reproachable act an angry person not do like
a goblin? There is not the slightest difference between the angry person
and the devil on this earth. 6
sratifad yatreafeutissy! Gat 7 ees at at Hal eet TRAE ot
In both—the angry one and the devil—is seen the torturing of

at Aer 38 Sri Tripurarahasyam
children and loved ones. An angry person kills anyone. He kills even
his preceptor, Guru. {4
PIE UWS HE PRAGA HAAS! SHLAA YT AAAI «aT: eI
atentea wrieerat yaaat sar wet & fda wart fee ad aaah: 1
Anger alone is the great enemy by which I have reached this state.
In the past, like a low-born brute, I killed many infants of Ksatriyas
by snatching them from their mother’s hands. Pitiable was my cruelty.
What offence to me was done by the Ksatriya infants? 8,9
fafa: aafegit aren: agen sey aft at mle aa ta fares wet aT:
WaSrafad Wssahet aa TMT) Sar A Prenat: GS Fa FUATA: Ween
Children, crores in number, visible or distant had been tortured by
me. The askesis of a person who has not conquered anger is similar to
the joy of a king whose enemy is growing in strength. My father was
killed by only one. But I killed the entire lot of kings. 10, 11
Yeueta tar ad ad qnfeaq afi: meget wereqaymesy = RR
Fritet: ateation weenserert |
My action like a man-eating devil is highly reproachable. My
arrogance is the root cause of my anger. Because of that, I am swallowed
by the mighty python, the serpent of anger.” 12
we fastaet a4 art aaa yes: Neal
qa vacafatitdan ysqecaals: wecagacite: Weevil
wforargt yarn: Tarraftatsthe a: | weqEraagel were BhrTe Ara: 1 gil
As he was thinking so Paragurama saw a great person, who was
like a mass of effulgence, a burning mountain, who had a beautiful
well-built body, fully blossomed lotus-like eyes. Though that persons’
body was dirty, his hair dishevelled, his behaviour mad, he looked like
a great soul, a king among sages, a learned person. 13 to 15
qeaa antat fat waafergramnicay feat aged wrafergrafernt i 26 I
Parasurama saw that noble person who had taken to abstinence

gals : 39 Chapter 4
and abandoned religious life and its codes, who was standing naked,
dirty, exuding ichor like an inebriated elephant. 16
a Geet wragratisa ut deanna: | weiss faeraure: weaferwagA: 11 go UI
Seeing him, Parasurama became very doubtful. “Who is this person
with conflicting behavior exhibiting good and bad signs? 17
fer wergEat arsetsnadt aistt aaa aa ghgatatfa qa dart at un ec
Is he a great person? Or is he a learned one? Or is he some one
else? Regarding this the mind cannot conclude as regarding an actor
differently dressed. 18
mses dae wa! qa: Wart anf cea at WAT RL
If he were to be insane, how could he possess effulgence? However,
he looks very much like a person who does not disregard the path of
righteousness. 19
Tweed catstt werent afeapia: | wtavita: fate aeratafadaz tt 20 tI
Hence he should be some great person in disguise. He should be
examined somehow.” Thus thought Parasurama. 20
AqaTeS SH WH: Saee Yor weqeraaie featrat wigeit aq RI
With a smile, Parasurama asked him: “Oh exalted one! Who are
you? You appear like a great person. What is this state of yours? Tell
me all this.” 21
oft agreamrenrd wears tad! farareorausia eaqeadede: WI
Hearing the words of Parasurama, that person started running away
hurling pieces of stones and repeatedly laughing loudly. 22
fanemt dar Haq agetarratec: | Ua fat arta at we AT: RBI
Talking madly, that person displayed great insanity. While he was
behaving like this, Paragurama quickly caught hold of him. 23

at fees, 40 Sri Tripurarahasyam
ater fasarara area 8 fafedts aac qe we attensa saranda i ex
Holding him, Paragurama thought thus—“This person has not
understood me. I will test him once more and then go my own way”. 24
afa fafa querafadtey want) afefencitste ager aftyatste 4 feat: 0 equ
Deciding thus, Parasurama started abusing him very much. Even
very much abused he was unaffected. 25
weg qadtardaitestvetary! Heyes wate war fafa arta: WRI
There was not even a slightest change in his countenance. Then
Bhargava concluded that he must be a great person. 26
aeredttaatra: wetararea dt yh se ashe Weare BAe THAT I Vo I
Falling at the feet of that sage, ParaSurama adored him. That sage
was then happy and filled with compassion towards Bhargava. 27
aot afer at ageaiqina aeatieaegEea aegQu arta
Then the sage, with a smile, spoke words full of many truths.
“Oh Bhargava! You asked me who I am? Listen to this. 28
rafrrranrt wa: fiterracgant eat waTasratate arerenfartaeat ol RHI
If you have understood the word “Tvam” (you), your question is
useless like grinding the flour. If you have not understood the meaning
of the word “Tvam”, then again that phrase is useless. 29
arfaager ae sft auacea 41 a wae faeren aetaaraanfea: I B01
If you have understood that through somebody, then tell me that. You
have not cognised the Conscious-Self because it is not cognisable. 30
oa Se aT ee wanda Fayre: | wenendgahrs davai qorateac: nan
You have seen the physical body. There is no doubt in that. Because
your inquiry is well based on appellation. 31

agats em: 41 Chapter 4
wet Ors Te Ata A AAT! Bet VT A waa: frat sfera agents aT
Thus you know what is sensory through its designation. You have
not known that which is not self revealing and severally imagined. 32
W Shera Aetna AAAS HAA: | TEMS TART TT WaT aan F331
It—the consciousness—is not confined to a single space because of
its association with the body. Therefore, Oh Rama! I will answer you if
you ask your doubt clearly.” 33
wd deed great ererargfgutes: | cfsara: wre abitet aar oreagdas: un ax tl
Hearing the words of the sage, ParaSurama’s speech, intellect and
valour were stupefied. Then with shyness, he addressed the yogi with
prayer and prostration. 34
TWRGSs A WAT TA AAA! ease aetat & fren, Wagnl
“Oh! Great person! I do not know the answer to that. Indeed teach
me by taking me as your disciple free from sin.” 35
sete Tat asqHhadass: | aa AQuaes fire wqray wat BRI
Thus told by Paragurama, the sage with compassion started to
narrate sweetly his story. 36
antarssfged wi at uritgrarst Wat: 1 dat gfe fared faeiteat wfat qt:
“Oh Bhargava! I belong to Angirasa lineage. I am the disciple of
my brother. With great qualities, I am well-known in the three worlds
as Samvarta. 37
feafa aeanfis 3 or qoy dara: | YT A eo wat faeTaTTTAT = BCI
“I will tell you about me. Listen with attention. Sometime ago,
I developed enimity to my brother who was my preceptor. 38
Sarsé une fade: weet unt feats fener cera Your Yaerrqatfet: Vit
“Thereby I became disgusted and attained this condition indeed.
Later, I was suitably instructed by the Guru Dattatreya. 39

at ARES Z Sri Tripurarahasyam
areranhact wear afgeratnt wart ava anhafsrer ygteuratt: = ol
WSUTAA: FAUTHMereat TAT
“Understanding that everything is Self (consciousnesss) and all this
is its sport, I am treading the path of fearlessness, free from flashes of
doubts and bound firmly as a puppet to the string.” 40
sequenced agra wre wreferafee: Nexen
TH: wre aft atest doreafine dar verges at eh daresay, Wwe
aye ys artafites freq
Listening to his words, Parasurama with folded palms and prayerful
voice addressed the sage thus: “Oh great soul! Bless me who is distressed
by this worldly life by putting me on the fearless auspicious path.”
Sy: TWA: We casecat Wha: Wan
TUT aa wa Wert at watedzeqs aferart ward: @ ahi agada: sx tt
Being addressed thus, the merciful sage spoke again. “My child!
Listen to my words, the essence of all knowledge. The path pursued by
you presently is dreadful and highly harmful. 43, 44
am afreatageoand canted: | art ceqenrentvtefsrdt arta fra: xu
sates Tart feervataerae ut) sang aa aa dafrasif uv vei
“It is like some one deluded by fate fearlessly and ignorantly
wandering aimlessly in an unknown path which is filled with enemies
and suffers frequently, expecting comfort. Similar is the journey in the
worldly life. 45, 46
aa Sarstt aniaggas welfare: | qartnfandt ofa gaberseat | vt
“Then, awakened by some great person he proceeds in the right
path ridiculing those in the wrong path. 47
Wise Wa watergartenste fra: | gaaartenfant reaft waa: ve
“Similarly, initiated by my Guru, I am happily going all over on
the right path ridiculing those on the wrong path. 48

aqats er: 43 Chapter 4
aa dafrarig fandct fagferen: | aarsfracyrarsitstr + aaa faratfea: 1 xe
“The path of worldly life is contradictory and painful. Though
suffering in life, the deluded do not realise this. 49
fasten: aegrarety qaqeearstr Une: |
& dat getet anf atsefgahrafaa: NW 4o lt
“Foolish persons are confined to the web of misery with a
notional happiness. To them, the path that we sages travel is difficult
to access. 50
Teneaartdeat areat aa farenet: | qpecfesaritor careryrfeet AeA 1 Get
Faget wert aeparetreranfaa: | Set Taree Usareasraa 4H
serrata) aren we Taree PfeRTaeATAT: TANT 43 I
wageanrate oer fastadgra: | wera adres wa arate fase: WG
“Therefore, by understanding the nature of Self-knowledge, with
detachment, worship Maheévari, the inner strength, as taught by the
Guru. Then with a little of Her grace, attain oneness with the Self which
is equanimous with everything. Knowing other than that Self to be a
reflection/semblance of that Sakti, which is none other than yourself,
through a universal Guru, you move around freely like me, without
doubt, fear and disturbance. 51 to 54
waren aaa wares ware! frwseraqayes aqarareafears: tt 4h I
ae wed daar weet: | aster at ard fart dee: Uf 4q I
at famadaret qa: dafracifr: aa wary dered arene OHI
“For a person who has the feeling as a knower, who has eradicated
the feeling that he is the physical body, who experiences everything within
him, who experiences himself in every thing, who always concentrates
as a knower on what is to be known by keeping awake, there is no
action to be done in the path of worldly life. Further more, to begin
with, one should know the defects in the path of worldly life. By that
he will quickly develop indifference to the world followed by righteous
characteristics. 55 to 57

st eee 44 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Wartadt ddurat wel: were afatete danft est art TAT ke
“A human being, by constantly practising this quintessence that has
been told by me will very soon attain the auspicious supreme path.” 58
Vaqad wee cet gamers! Wasa arta: We Ya: eT: 1 4s i
Thinking that the words told by Samvarta are unimaginable and
beyond sensory comprehension, Bhargava with turbid mind said again
to Samvarta. 59
Weed dated wat Mat aa: | Tesherrerae T Tahafedt WaT Goll
“Qh great one! I have not clearly understood your words containing
the best essence of knowledge because of their great depth. 60
andauaead Tt Ges at: | fae GRIT AMT Wt TAT AAT
aM 2 ag Wag Ta At MUTA!
“My doubt is because of its brevity. Oh! Omniscient! Kindly tell me
in detail, so that I can understand. Protect me who is seeking your
succour.” 61
gfe deat set dadt eaten: Harn
Wren denhact aret Wars wat ae: oy wa wated et art arfsferirer: 11
Listening to the words of Bhargava, Samvarta meditated and came
to know the future of Bhargava, and spoke sweet words. “Oh Rama! The
path told by me is not shrouded. 62, 63
aerate at +t yah wa Sedarifed: qarararcnafianerny i eX il
Hirgaatas cag a get dar) afteitfrnafaean get dageat RK
“Because of its subtle transcendental nature, this knowledge cannot
he grasped by persons with polluted minds. Since this knowledge can
be known only by practice, it is difficult to be told easily. Because of
its non-worldly nature it is said to be difficult to acquire. 64, 65
Pareannedareant ta cae | Ish skye Augie ara Weg
“That knowledge cannot be got without serving the feet of

agars =: 45 Chapter 4
Sri Tripurambika and that service is not possible by any other means
other than the grace of the Gurunatha. 66
Teen J Way: Wa eh ae: Tee: wit aw ana go
“Association with noble persons is instrumental for the grace of the
Guru, through which everything is achieved. Therefore, Oh! Bhargava!
Go to Sri Guru Dattatreya.’ 67
a wanes aries ated weata gai fat anise: yd feta a we
“By pleasing him through service, you will soon get your wants.
How indeed can one obtain auspiciousness without the protection of the
Guru? 68
wnhagrer wet wat aa feat aan fart agedara a ae fret safer get
“Just as none other than the Sun can lead a person who has lost
his way in the darkness of the night, no one without service to Guru
can get happiness. 69
wereaiserada faasaa arte: | ararcaarierat ta: fereaciteargefad:
WyaTEcas wer waefa wy: 1 fear sthyeuretordat we: aitfery, u
aia fag cicey ayatste arnfefa: | cemfered teats sy cer Wer hte ART:
“Just as the maker of collyrium to the blind, there is no recourse
other than the Guru. Lord Sadasiva himself, due to compassion towards
his devotees, is roaming in the form of a human being as Dattatreya.
In the three worlds who although rich, can get satisfaction without taking
shelter at the lotus feet of the Guru? Therefore quickly go from here to
the feet of the Guru. 70 to 72
area quan wacatra aa: | waasa It fae eget qarAt =— tt 3H
“Then worship him with pure devotion free from deceit. What is not
achievable in the three worlds if the Guru is pleased? 73
aw amet amnfa fird weerendfea! art quayfas fagatirqefat = owl
“Presently he is living in his meritorious hermitage situated on the
mountain named Gandhamadana occupied by accomplished yogis. 74

at Peery, 46 Sri Tripurarahasyam
warns ys Ase wars hererftrat | STRAT PATA SATA SAAT STAT:
“T will get back. Be lucky. May your desires be fulfilled.” Saying so,
Samvarta went in the aerial path, as Parasurama was seeing him. 75
araqaramcetta ot friar: | arprtfest sat getter: TACT
In a minute, Samvarta went beyond view into the North East quarter
just like a mass of cloud driven away by the wind. 76
we: dada gfrnaengd: | We Wat ee aa aa eae: fert: «tt wot
Then Paragurama, who was surrounded by the hastening words of
Samvarta, decided to go to Guru Dattatreya. " 77
oft sire mreraraud ugatseara: 11
End of the fourth chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurarahasyam.

Usniseara:
Chapter 5
FARTTSHTTSY SI PTS: | SATAATST Aap Bet aa: wen
Then Parasurama in excitement quickly travelled towards North to
reach the hermitage of Dattatreya. 1
farrey areaft aver art craet: fear
rensata war qet fart a fata Te
On his way, Parasurama thought within himself about the nature
of worldly affairs. “All these days I never thought about important
matters. 2
vereafadt Wet sa AERA Wa: | ARS ST: Carafe: wan
arrest ret Ysa Ta Udat wet: | afafedta wdet pata sree: wit
“Just as a person fallen in a flood is dragged by it, just as a blind
person who does not know the route reaps the same fruit by following
another blind person, people by and large ignorantly follow the action
of others. 3, 4
faeha wea a Heaseifert! Gear safaenceraand Sara 4H
qerssenist cea wife: werttan weretgraragen smd ureqata feu Gil
“Also they think that the wrong result is due to some thing else.
Seeing some good result due to divine plan, people deluded by thirst for
results, take that to be due to some other action. 5, 6
aan uifiactas wet afeyratea: | er far age wit wadarasife = ot
“Just like a fish greedy about meat gets caught in a fish-hook,
persons greedy about small imaginary pleasures end up in difficulties.
What happiness has anyone got in this cruel worldly journey? 7
arpirararedt quar waite: | aye faeitrertgarey ager cil
ada argyt crear Faq we fe abfrenteres Secured either nen

a Aree, 48 Sri Tripurarahasyam
‘Starting from an insect to an out-caste person every being is
continuously striving for happiness.
“The pleasure of a king of the three worlds is similar to the pleasure
experienced by a worm in the urine and excreta, in respect of taste and
copulation.
“Everything is desired indeed for the sake of the body born out of
the five elements. 8,9
BB werparauineeaferage: | YET: Met wept: =— lt Roll
“That body is filled with urine, excreta, blood, flesh, sinew and bones.
It is reprehensible, highly despicable and the cause of misery. 10
Wrata: wad yates: | st aamerdatrrnfag aa, een
“Sons, friends, wives are all related to this despicable body. It is
reproachable that they take this body which is perishable, extremely
terrible and intolerable, to be the self. 11
sera gear aiteate fatarerq cat arr yoretyiisa add Tee LVM
aa: Qfatat vite wa: urrafist: |
“It is very well known to every unlettered and the learned, in this
universe, that there is not even an iota of good characteristic in this
deplorable body. 12
ART MACE G MAAS PET, Ween
farprenherd clergy! wean fran teneqerat 7: New
Pirorapyt: weqafget: | waa arsed 2¢ wntequarfs wz Weeki
“People take this body which ceaselessly throws out liquid, which
smells of dirt and filth, which is filled with excreta, urine and phlegm,
which is full of hair, skin and blood, to be supremely good and dear,
and decorate it with scent and aromatic flowers, and ignorantly feel
happy about the decorated body. 13 to 15
faa Pemarapfaccergent ys cafrecayrafiet frenftor, 1 26 tl
“They forget that the body which is well built because of excessive

qants are: 49 Chapter 5
sap, is a flock of urine, excreta and phlegm which flow out daily and
the body itself is deteriorating every moment. 16
U Ua eat weer erga terete: | conte wags gamete: eel
arta et wafeeisenge: | fafroirrasnenifad faopratsyfa:
Waayyat WAM EHH! Weal SSN TS: Ue
“This body is being consumed by old age and is defiled by diseases.
It spreads foul smell by the oozing marrow of the wound. Sweating and
lacking lustre, it is inauspicious being eaten up by a host of worms. It
is dirty with filth. Seeing such a body of another in this condition, the
ignorant thinks of his body as always young and permanent. 17 to 19
ud faasfrdtaet ates zee | wes abe Gearengquifea: Roll
“In such a dreadful body, men and women, mutually deluded, see
beauty. 20
franuite dhed far wafer qaqa wergafaagraya cael RR
“Excepting for a mass of filth, blood and bone, it needs to be
reflected upon and demonstrated where ingeniously in the body, the
beauty stays. 21
waistapaceint quritscatfed | at Geae usted afirersyet VM
ahed onfa ata wife: uretaa a aeedhrd arent aria ifr 23 1
Geurgieve: aera wreauifia: | nafeust eat at a waleguteeteat ue
“It is a wonder that extremely infatuated persons, because of delusion,
see and desire for beauty in this body which stinks like a corpse which is
highly reproachable, which is perishable, which causes pain, which is short
lived and which causes fear. What special difference could be in a
woman’s body other than atoms, than in the body of a man, which by its
beauteous look, increases desire in lustful persons? And those two breasts
are just balls of flesh that have erupted from filthy flesh. 22 to 24
qdurentedart wat: ahechiifiget! Sesciosyfans a vtfrafrareret 1 Bq
fiorg apiiorarteacaurart| afaanea werd fer aeraedtgery il 2g 11

at ARS 50 Sri Tripurérahasyam
“Alas! Fie upon those men, who like filth eating worms, revel in
the extremely dirty body by finding beauty and desire, contact with the
bad wound-like eruptions. What can I say about such power of
indiscrimination? 25, 26
upaate werett Woah | us Seehant: artes = ROI
“Even after knowing about the great weaknesses of the body, people
consider these to be good qualities. Qualities like desire, anger and so
on are enough for such a liking towards the bad body. 27
qatar a fae ger sa A Hatateata aha TATA TAT |! Ve It
“By such a misunderstanding people suffer pain that is fiery. Just as
cotton caught in whirl wind, nowhere do they find stability, peace. 28
wreat war wefaat fagreeamraun: | at facratrarreattad Wf TTSTT tt VV
“Perhaps, ignorant persons given to eating and procreation, do not
cognise the proximity of the dreadful death. 29
deat urladtuidtafgncrcasitfann: | cardfacet arrefat ATHeHTaSATS SETA: Il 30
“Even though short lived, they desire for long-lasting benefits,
pleasures. Overpowered by desire and anger they kill others for gaining
selfish ends. 30
armleem wat: qatacest weld: | 7 aafagaenrnhs aut fafsehr gaz
“People slain by desire and anger, continuously strive for happiness.
Certainly they do not find the slightest happiness anywhere even for a
moment. 31
GeMncatgrrerapret FM! Hat araarchagaast FST Bz
“Wherefrom, men surrounded by the intense consuming fire of desire
can have the happiness of being anointed by the sandal paste of
detachment. 32
eared fe frets: dere: gan gehrafraarateacnreregatera: tl 33
“Animals are more fortunate than human beings because they are

Wants a: 51 Chapter 5
mentally peaceful by engaging themselves in acquiring that much food
which would be enough to satisfy their hunger, that too when they are
hungry. 33
aeeent et Sat: FRAT: |
“Those animals, without hoarding, sleep peacefully. 34
wet fracnmagat der aan avn
geri ada: fararensdarat: | cite aaget art ura: fers va a Bull
awe maarearste aut Pfada sai set werg:faana Aat arred WA: 3e
“Alas! Pitiable is slavery to desires which always brings pain, which
are insatiable by any means practised life long. Even after acquiring the
entire wealth in the world consisting of money, material, cattle, women,
a person cannot be free from worries even for a moment. 34 to 36
wang ares ata fe grant yet erwaraey ot BNI
“Though possessing all wealth, prosperity and sovereignty, people
caught by desires are sorrowful. Money, indeed is the root cause for
sorrow and causes continuous fear. 37
2am wretch: arractnfefafary aeamrfterraor fara a yraa: tl 3c
arenes gata tadt fran arg: faq: frefraresgt axet qa 1 38
“People acquire wealth through continuous physical and mental
difficulties. Once they become rich, even friends turn enemies. One’s own
son, loved wife, mother, father, dear friend and all look upon these
people with hate and suspicion, like a crow. 38, 39
qe wrdaha yaaa: fire: | erent fry a ST ll vol
“Dear children, wife and others pray for the death of this rich
person. Hence what indeed is the joy in money that is equal to one’s
own death? 40
aorafagraatttet Wrest Ua A! CayTaTte SorAa J TAIT Wve
frat agaata weraaa aden Gost yaarafe aaqarsfatrayr: Ween

att PTET 52 Sri Tripurarahasyam
ALTARS
“Ryen then the ignorant person foolishly desires such wealth, by
which he always strives to protect his family consisting of wife, son and
so on but faces many calamities by unprofitably clinging to it. 41, 42
waa qaenife saaafaarat! afwarya fafsereraistt a reat RHI
“A person acts with the belief that wife, son and so on belong to
him. Without that belief there will not be the smallest of relationship.
Wearra agin sar alread: frat!
fat daft ust ereara faarrat Use
“Acts done for gaining money will end up in great grief. Even those
with long partnership will meet with bereavement. 44
ersayd gaye: viretenfeatra: | ua feat danwitfrdger: on wy
virerafermet dabrwetiqeny! wera washer dara g ada wa
“Thus, in this world having been together with love till separation,
persons will come to grief immensely from bereavement of one of them.
Such is the result of companionship which always ends up in contrary
result. 45, 46
afore west arerd: agar a: | faflacer feerdeiht yer: aetefiat aT: 1 x9 1
Wel Herteata: viraatsfag-aa: |
“Human beings thoughtlessly associate themselves with family till
the end. The householders foolishly think that the association is
permanent. Always interested in their family they come to great grief
in the end. 47
We Ua Herdtet etfiae wag a uvenl
ordd wegyorrent franco wtarergarerd yor fasifrar ara: Use
“The great drawback with money and men is their fickleness, loss
of good qualities which are difficult to be warded off. By this attachment
all good qualities will vanish completely. 48, 49

Wants aa: 53 Chapter 5
ag ta fade: earng wadtafiresar we waa dearet yepsfereretterar tt Go it
“One who desires to be happy should never have attachment.
Everything is pervaded by the fear of powerful death. 50
et ye wer ere: wantente arto wearteda farafte yepret we vite Get
“Wealth, residence, wife and heaven are all the results of one’s
action. Therefore one should not aspire for any of these that give grief
and are caught by death. 51
amd addese 3 viata oat wa: soni t mere care qh ae
“One should always long for protection by which he will not grieve.
I shall go to the great sage Dattatreya who gives happiness.” 52
wrt @afaesarrerdats ea! we art fasta: weaanatart Wag
Moving along with such thoughts, desiring happiness and total
self-protection, Parasurama then saw a great mountain. 53
Weary Trearrsyprenraferereray | yar retter saree eae, Wail
HATO TAS TMA AT | TTA HOH TTT TT, W4anl
teeicreanttagrironpen| Ataaitercecitdentsgercnryy, nag
RAMP YMSS ATS SaaS A Ayes TTA Hh 4 Hl
ufeticerrgaacnrgara! qpthrencergrateg fers ray Wael
wa viteraera unearth fit: | wereretegrer ttatonserterer W4git
The mountain before him had shining sky-scraping peaks; clusters
of clouds were resting on the peaks. The central portion of it was
reverberating with the music of divine damsels.
It was filled with the tinkling resonance of the anklets of dancing
Apsaras. It appeared beautiful by the group of Siddha women playing
on the swing. Its caves were filled with the sports of intoxicated Yaksa
women. Its interior was suffused with fragrance from Kadamba flowers.
It bore a gentle breeze spreading the aroma of scented flowers.
The lotuses in the ponds were glittering with swans, ruddy geese,
cranes surrounding them. Its creepers were filled with the music of
female bees.

a ARREST, 54 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Witnessing such a grandeur, Parasurama approached the mountain
named Gandhamadana the dwelling of gods. 54 to 59
sass B Teranh aeaiada afta: | daranaedtitangieaaary tl gol
In order to uplift the distressed struggling in the mire of the
mundane ocean, the great yogi who was described by Samvarta, lives here.
sft fara sfitattars vad woleren der Wdegtafierfad: Wau
As Paragurama was thinking thus, he saw the hermitage of
Dattatreya Muni that he was longing for. 61
WY Wen wer aaaeres: | a Waser tana wpe GR
“This might be the hermitage of Guru Dattatreya, the Guru of
Angirasa. Verily, today has blossomed good fortune for me who was
unfortunate till now. 62
ae wart ares areagfed wa Hess Taavahs aearearateey G3 HI
Pancraaeryarstfereriony ust faa UA: Peay: ney
“Tt is a wonder that fortune will dawn on people in the course of
time. Today I will see his lotus feet that destroy the heat of the worldly
conflagration and shower nectar.” Thinking so, Paragurama approached
the doors of the hermitage. 63, 64
Ear Bees Ae AAA! AeMAAEesaA Aaa SEAT: AUTH A I
Near the door, he saw a brahmin who was engrossed in meditation.
Then fearing to disturb his meditation, Parasurama stood for a while at
a distance. 65
Saiiferana aqueatadtga: | ahaa wer at we AATEC Wa
After a while the brahmin opened his eyes and saw Paragurama
who moved towards him and started asking questions after prostrating
at his feet. 66
wt west: Her wacranfafra: | aytata wdarafatasnfacran: TAC

Wants a: 55 Chapter 5
aa cana: qa feet qo ale ats gd daar eeu
“Oh! Brahmin! Whose is this most lovely hermitage, a glance of
which confers comfort on one and all? Where is the hermitage of Guru
Dattatreya? Oh Yogi! Oh compassionate towards distressed! Tell me soon
with mercy.” 67, 68
she aaa Aa ATI: PITA: | aed wETATaTCTE w erage WegH
Listening to Parasurama, that peaceful brahmin with a smile spoke
words like the sweet essence of honey. 69
starrer afer Ug: | farted wa ag aed cremfeert: it wot
“This is the hermitage of that virtuous Guru, the king among
Yogis. Tell me who you are? From where you have come? What do you
want?” 70
we agrees TH: We Hale: | Py UAaSS BETA AEG 11 we
Tt amt wt: Gad: Seafaegaisa JI una: dadyfrar aifeatsfaparaari 2 I
Hearing the words of that Brahmin, Paragurama spoke with folded
palms.“Oh great sage! I am born in the Bhrgu lineage as son of Jamadagni.
Well-known as Parasurama, I have come here with some motive ordered
by the compassionate sage Samvarta. Tle he
Una ate WteoMtfeay! Bat F card we AeNeTahMahagy TACT
“T desire to see the feet of the Guru immediately. Oh Brahmin! My
mind is in a hurry to prostrate at his feet. 73
aa: we Gfated wad aad Aql GHA WeaeMVa eraapraated: Now
Writaerarsaan at Tay AL! aT wa a: ways Tat tl Ou
“Later you will come to know everything about me. Just like a
thirsty person wandering in the desert-like forest scorched with heat
will not be happy with any thing other than getting cool water, nothing
would interest me other than the sight of my Guru's feet. 74, 75
oreng ¢ varrenntreantdtaaeay! sta celernrd weet Wg aa: WEI

at Agree 56 Sri Tripurarahasyam
TH aft & aes HAUT! WeeraaenagTt: BET tl WU
“Hence, you make me known to him who destroys the misery of his
disciples.” Listening to Parasurama, the brahmin with a smile replied
sweetly. “Oh! Paragurama! Due to the power obtained by serving the
great Guru, I know clearly the purpose of your visit here. 76, 77
TRBISARIS Se QPrae, aac EN: | Sey Afra yess: waster Fi
“Go inside. The great sage who is the friend of the Universe is there.”
Thus addressed by the Muni, Parasurama entered the hermitage. 78
Tals SHTeasapetaTay! Safad AtirpwlraareyoyTs: West
Qeanaeront wet paste: | shed asfaet a uvay afeatrstoa
There Paragurama saw the leader of the ascetic clan being served
by eminent yogis of great merit. Prostrating at his lotus feet,
Paragurama stood nearby with folded palms looking at the posture of
Guru Dattatreya. 79, 80
sit stages wrereeraus Eatsea: 11
End of the fifth chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurarahasyam.

Wests eae:
Chapter 6
a cayt werd asta wareenteeertterrerneatay wen
PEAT TAT Tea SMA | eae MTT Te TCR eT TT, Wen
Parasurama saw that great person Guru Dattatreya who was brilliant,
a paragon, whose hue was like that of blue stem of the tender sprout of
Tamala tree, whose eyes were like fully blossomed lotus, whose face was
like the full moon and whose lips were shining like fresh coral. 1, 2
aefoaieteinanior weqereferiemntnatesratery = a
The beauty of whose tender smile had illumined the quarters, whose
row of teeth had defeated the glow of big pearls. 3
WURTS NAS! Hea charger usu
Whose face was shining with broad cheeks and nose, whose neck
was like a conch, who was shining with beautiful long arms. 4
Farareenferagaatorrentaat | famengens Tyfraterntery wan
Whose palm was soft like new sprouts, who was robust and full
chested, whose stomach had three folds. 5
afarateqat quintersifranq wgeetrget wergeeaay Wau
Whose thigh was beautiful like the trunk of an elephant, whose
shank was similar to a quiver, whose feet were charming like lotus. 6
dhedercuact arevashfrafan ceirea arto ater won
The mere sight of him who was the root of beauty, pure and youthful,
kindled infinite love in women. 7
way areas fer rattan aanfaafrareraerara aa Fa wen
afeerreetcerreut areata | arent ggager errata ae TA nen
afrauet fratatgt vifgatswaq fetacet at PTs were: Wgolt

st FNS, 58 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Seeing such an ascetic who was embraced by some young beautiful
woman equalling Laksmi, with reddish eyes rolling due to intoxication
and with a wine pitcher in front, exhibiting contradictory signs,
Paragurama became suspicious. “What is this wonderful behaviour of
this great sage? 8 to 10
faraerretatia avant afer set Hereat cites Tiataaratara geil
I see his conduct like wine mixed with poison. Alas! In this world
the manner of great persons is extremely surprising. 11
wafagesikitt safari! afaageat eich afi: Ge wey
Sometimes they exhibit external goodness. Sometimes they display
inner beauty. In this world, for persons like me, the behaviour of yogis
is indeed incomprehensible. 12
Tear a Wadi wemnfesta safe gisate went: dated BMT 1
sone afta: ae freon: afaanta: | werddameyaraearher fest i evil
That sage Samvarta would not tell me something that is useless.
Also, how will such a tranquil person (the brahmin) seek shelter at the
doors of the hermitage? Again, many pious persons are sitting around
him. Therefore what I am seeing is not the reality which is something
TO TM at Aag Yetsa Gale: | Weafeaatas weaaeseay ugg
Whatever it may be, this ancient person is my Guru. Differences
like good and bad are mental formations.” 15
ofa fafa tenet gfe afear
Deciding thus, the intelligent Parasurama stood there with a calm
mind.
a ameter a Weta ante aa: Wall
Ware wat aed fatearehrataat ward santa wa fert Here aay
Seeing the polite Bhargava, the Guru spoke sweet words carrying
wonderful meaning. “Oh! Paragurama! Welcome to you. Are you fine?

WSs ae: 59 Chapter 6
wat wa ifenqueieadteer! afeageand aftr wre ypqehE SAT Re
In your hermitage, are the brahmins, cows, grass, creepers and trees
doing well? Are you serving your visitors properly? Are oblations to fire
suitably given? 18
Ciel let hfe Fa WITT
aarrsykaareananst Wah AT een
Oh! Brahmarsi! Are the Vedas being studied from time to time? Are
you without delay keeping under control the untimely upsurge of the
enemies in the body viz., the senses. 19
aur ot faa cient aga: Queda: | erat antadyit & ahitseqeas UTA 11 Ro
aaat faeran yaa aerator Asta
By the merits of your penance, you have conquered many worthy
worlds. The Bhargava lineage has indeed risen to the acme by your
penance, erudition, power, continence and lustre. 20
aes stmacnred & Wee A Wars: WWM
Tell me why you have come. Persons like me are not to be sought
by sacred men. 21
dis ania: qeartacnrom yeasts waft: wt ae se BT: BRM
In this world, conquering the senses is responsible for attaining the
four goals. Attainment of the four goals is considered to be the highest
gain in this world. 22
aereaqearat & asada deat: | Geared 7 taba Stacpuradgat: = 23M
Those persons, without reaching the four goals, who are engaged in
mercenary activities are like breathing dead bodies. 23
oft agaft:arer: carter: SarSyEet: | PaUeeras SASS AT: ¥ Ul
Thus those men who are interested in wealth, who are selfish, are
like wooden puppets engaged in futile activities. 24

mR ARES, 60 Sri Tripurarahasyam
aé qusfrdtranrenradtnats ray ga aarfrarcrate rear sy 1eeeH
veered agaist wire: | at aa fad aerate ae fad Ta WRN
Earlier due to utter dispassion, I discarded all action. Among the
enemies of the self, the tongue and the procreative organ are powerful.
Many have been degraded by them. He who has conquered these two
has truly conquered everything. 25, 26
aefreiqa areat ord aa fatten: | a darafe at oat Pfrereatar i 20 1
I am really despicable for I have both such weaknesses. Pious persons
do not follow me who has taken to the forbidden path. 27
afaverend at qo asrniga agai arcatersfr waaged faery RI
This wine which causes mental disorder is reproached by the pious,
similarly a courtesan. I have taken to both these. 28
at aeaghd WRT Vat Sat WaT: | Meee farts TA eS HAANTA: 1 28
Therefore pious persons have perhaps gone away from my company.
Hence, how have you come to such a place like this? 29
ae ante aed aaa eae ar: | sft get wert um: ure afafera: 1 3011
Oh! Bhargava! Tell me the truth by which my mind gets clarified.”
Thus addressed by Dattatreya, Parasurama the son of Jamadagni spoke
with astonishment. 30
datafd tea yagenqend Ti werd at yPRget a: We3en
Recollecting the past deeds of Samvarta, Parasurama thought that
Dattatreya has said this to conceal his real form (identity). 31
Bert wget agreantat eratcant A Wed ata Wadisfreaar: 1 32
It may be due to affliction caused by association with bad lustful
persons like me, the compassionate Samvarta would not tell me the
truth. 32
Sf creer Feet aMeserays aa: | serearéfs af pfgy yOu 38H

Wests a: 61 Chapter 6
Deciding thus and prostrating before him, Parasurama spoke very
auspicious words. “Oh Lord! Do not suspect me, who is seeking your
shelter. 33
arene wat caiquanttiry: da: cafe teaurenra: nasi
G Gararhaafeersareamnrens SAHens Sea: | aTseTEaEAiinfet: after:
daretataart wrens sarferarren!
Destined to roam in the impenetrable forest of worldly life, which
is engulfed with the conflagration of sorrow, I am scorched by the mid-day
rays of the Sun of desire. Directed by Samvarta due to my good-fortune,
I have, today, with no other protection, come to you who are an ocean
of compassion. 34, 35
aS Aa AAA TCA SCATTER, naan
meaguat teat Baensfepens saa wat aera Bist eT: i Bo tt
cata a fara dadiferaeea: | ae fayrgdta: eareraeromn: nen
By the power in the words of Samvarta having come to you who
are like the wish-yielding tree with its basin filled with dripping cool
ambrosia, who are worthy of worship, who are attended by a swarm of
servants, who are great, who are pure, I will very soon gain your grace.
I who have come to you as the sole refuge, should not be suspected.
wararar qfateat fafiseansfe % aye: 1 WeISwET A Vareg wearet ager 98
I have clearly understood you. You are truly my Guru. Good or bad,
may I follow your path who are my Guru. 39
Tye: ararerefera: waarareat Wa: | sraTeraTaeR: fae wat TARTRATE, It Yo It
Guru is really Paragiva who imparts Self-knowledge. What benefit
can be had by associating with bad persons who cannot give Selfknowledge. 40
at: whit: eifieatiefeerqet: 1 utcrenqtetorans senor fry vet
What is the use of possessions like wealth, progeny, mantles, wife,
territories and land which cannot give Self-knowledge? 41

Rt PEST, 62 Sri Tripurérahasyam
aan: We wenaaefarded: | wreraaa dari weefta at we eH
How can an unwise person derive happiness from immense wealth?
It is similar to the benefit that a person born blind can have from
thousands of lamps. 42
aerate quiet aay dart! Hur Hg wala Yatse aces start:
Therefore, Oh! Ocean of mercy! Adorable! Protector of the pitiable!
It behoves you to be compassionate towards me, who is pure due to my
surrender at your feet.” 43
gad wet aet gear Cea: | AAAS: We TuTAal Wega: vst
Listening to the words of Parasurama, the great sage Dattatreya,
the protector of the deprived, spoke with a pleased face. 44
Wg ae Wert wecaafad aT kaiser: Veet shar gota oferta
“Oh! Son of Jamadagni! My child! You have rightly decided. Attainment
of Self-knowledge is pre-eminent which is difficult to get by searching.
aaeenact Fa FereTeaTtoy! snsrdisa at cites earereentsaPaATH: | YE II
It is a wonder that in this world man thinks about Self-realisation.
The search for Self-knowledge is not to be thought as a small benefit.
Ualaes Tat AN MEAL! VIgAMTTE Tet AaTeTeAP TOT, ven
Attainment of Self-knowledge is the essence and the great benefit
that is truly ever-lasting in this human life. 47
Ti a ahety tamer: wer! samefters wiles we wt ven
Verily, people continuously long for pleasures obtained through
sense-organs, that are truly magical in nature. 48
Sere aa fants creme wise: | teen abt aswetaafiot: 1
Not finding solace in sense pleasures, people bound by the noose of
death go from one body to another in myriad cycles. 49

WSIS : 63 Chapter 6
TRIS SAITAMA SF TMT WaT Heise wert aha TARSAL ko A
People always experience high, low and middle states that are futile
accordingly, as if trapped in the cog-wheel. 50
Waalsé Wert geal frst watsaenq ae assitftad fe carat afar:
Oh! Parasurama! I am pleased with your unwavering faith. Tell me
about your desire that has brought you here.” 51
grad aget Wa: waabsrara: | ufos weraa: aware waar: U4
paratertgra fit qqaar wer!
Hearing the words of Dattatreya, the happy Parasurama humbly
prostrated and after taking a seat spoke sweetly to him with folded
palms. 52
WERT WU Lahey Taha YS Heat Wan
fauaferaafeecites wat a1 eee Goreneores Ween: WY
“Oh! Eminent Guru! Oh Lord! When you are pleased what is there
that is not attainable here and hereafter? Just like a person desiring a
diamond got to a mountain of gems, I have come to a great one like
aa wan agit dgadel dia aa oe a fasnha cera cy: safe
SeRAcraersareMAeaA He: | SAMA SAfet shienretstratfed: 4k
at: Vitter ce FT WaT Haferaatat
Oh Guru! For a long time roaming in the worldly life I never gained
even a little solace. Caught and burnt in the blazing fire of desire and
anger, I have spent a long time. I never felt any inner cool anywhere.
wiles wa Aa Aral WT aret faegTT: WON
edt Tr adtaret wesc we: | erat YeeaT aan: frgfereratssea: |
aut arm agar Sxaareatsh Bl) SASAMAT Wat Tar ATHEIST Ue
In this world all men, women, animals, creatures of the sea, birds,

MR ARNE, 64 Sri Tripurarahasyam
the wealthy, the poor, kings, emperors, monarchs, Gandharvas, Yaksas
(demi-gods), siddhas, Vidyadharas, serpents, snakes, demons, Indra,
Moon and the like are always being burnt by the great fire of desire.
WeMaseuhst wad advice: | ces at WETTED sa fea: Gon
Therefore make me remain always cool like the elephant in the
middle of the Gafiga while the forest is on fire. 60
qasé wad: Wearalfaa: cafafs war
Oh Lord! Similarly let me be suitably instructed by you.”
ofa agreaarenud cue verge: Neen
saeyat auf edaante gf we ey wget aged WaaTszT RI
Tere Teoent aed YU Ta ahs ao wararaen wafeaT G31
Hearing his words, the great sage Dattatreya uttered auspicious
words that pleased Parasurama. “Oh! Rama! Listen carefully to my words.
The good desire that has been expressed by you who are pure, is the
root of auspiciousness. Truly you have gathered the grace of the Devi.
Temata Yar wed wat a Merafratg yates wars Wasi
Your good deeds of many past births have borne fruits. This type
of grace is never acquired by small deeds. 64
Tetaet safer fe wets: | YO Head UH Aaa VAT WRU
The fruits of your good deeds in the past are really supreme.
Oh Rama! Listen to me with oneness of the mind. 65
areata FU at wassiead wag afer aratts 7 faqeat Hera gg
Your desire is most comforting. It cannot be realised anytime without
wisdom. 66
aaa wiftrararear arent ur: fara: | Sareea aaRaAaST WET I Ge I
agra weyrertiat vad ugfamer: | dorafie at carafe frecnft safer, "

WSs aM: 65 Chapter 6
Truly Parasiva is the Self of all creatures. The individual soul under
the influence of Maya does not understand the Supreme. It remains
shrunk due to the shrinking of all powers. This is the Truth here.
Nothing else shines. 67, 68
wat dat areary faa feafara faera
Other than the shining Self nothing else is there.
wet aaaae 7 Aare eee ugg
arpteratet fe sare ace: fire: |W WaISTRESaT Pa Waa: WAT: I
ar fafaerent fafaaaa ada: a vatssen y aaei cea freee:
Self-luminance is what is seen as Self. There is no difference between
them. The power of the Self is really the illumination. The shining Self
is Paramasgiva. He alone who is eternal by His pure power shines
everywhere in multiple wonderful forms. He who shines always is the
Self of the entire universe. 69 to 71
aad sa aTdsfe Ber Wet Wad) TeMaaea AEA Alt FAT UW wR
aradte: waar WEIS Bar vitaet safer Asser aerentfefA: 11193 0
Though He is Self-luminous, he appears to be dull because of delusion.
Once He is known, the delusion disappears and He shines in and out
like an island in the Ganga that is very cool. By no other crores of
means other than Self-knowledge can one attain cool serenity. 72, 73
amart geet vias gefet fawens serfs: 1 feat weefeacpat ta ered aATET
Self-knowledge is difficult to obtain in this world and is invisible
to persons engaged in sensual pursuits. Without the Grace of Parasakti,
Self-knowledge cannot be had any time. 74
aa art wat: Ger at faguftaars dat gy feat vaca geter sareatfefH: 1
So, everyone should, to begin with, worship Tripurambika. And that
service to Her is impossible through crores of births but for devotion to
Her. 15

a fee, 66 Sri Tripurarahasyam
asta wea: qafents seats fast qa!
And devotion to Her is achieved only through listening to Her glory.
AANSaAA WA: Bal YHSA Fa: Weg
sien aAifacen a faguar: wT wat qwadisqet Ga get ated weft
Therefore people should with perseverance and faith listen to and
sing the transcendental glories of Tripurambika. By this process Devi
Herself will grant unswerving devotion towards Her. 76, 77
aasae Wet Vat waa TaN! AT: Wa Te AAT UU sara
By such devoted supreme service one attains the state of fearlessness.
There is no other path at all to reach that state. 78
aa wet wise aie weagd | da Headeiut ateaqdwaat wel
Hence, to begin with, one should listen to Her glories with utmost
faith. This alone confers all wants like a Kalpataru.” 79
sia ste weeavS wets EAT: 11
End of the sixth chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurarahasyam.

Lord Dattatreya imparting
Sri Tripurarahasyam to Lord Parasurama

Bera Ears:
Chapter 7
gfe grat tratest ante: dtaarra: | qe ys art ngage el
Pleased by hearing the words of the Guru, Bhargava spoke sweet
auspicious words. 1
sinRt ar waar wireat fagtfr werftarear |
magi ar ae yer fee cantar farorfsrar ue
“Oh! Auspicious Guru! What is the form of the transcendental
Tripurambika who has been mentioned by you? What is Her origin?
What is Her nature? 2
ae t qeunferadt wfaeraas gar
Oh! Ocean of Mercy! Tell me now about Her in great detail.”
fa wdzqeng ware afer aa: nau
faqrafemfaeaisst:acont YPa: | area Worer UTAT eaTAATS SHAM: I ¥ Al
Thus questioned, Dattatreya who was immersed in the ocean of the
Glory of Tripurambiké, meditated and prostrated before the Supreme
and spoke enchanting words by virtue of his drowning in the bliss of
meditation. 3,4
STOP wargTafear at aus | eeratfaeras se: wast: weer: 4
arensfir ar a fagrat at apa feaarafies + ar avlfag ren seit aerea:
“Oh! Rama! Listen. Who can describe the glory of Parasakti? Even
today the all-knowing, all-powerful Lords starting from Brahma, do not
know who She is or where She resides. It is not possible to describe
Her exactly. 5, 6
ar: vrenfir wantin wag a reat &1 mecanfemmronts wrest weer io
fasnanft taae assarafa y aaeH! teres vara aeTteate Hafat ic

at Fe, 68 $ri Tripurarahasyam
The Vedas, Spiritual injunctions, Tantras are really unable to describe
Her. External evidences that are direct and inferential remain away from
the Truth that is to be known, just like the flame which gets nowhere
inside.
a pifeaaiqarareaaggucat fara a atehor gees at ag ANAT SET At <I
That power—Sakti—is Motherly, who is situated in an unrivalled
position. She can never be known through logic or inventive skill. 9
aeiwearmeatrerata gata a ctenssadg: mreadats freer i go 1
Other than through experience of the existence of the Self, She
cannot be found. The scriptures, the Veda and other literature acknowledge
Her as having a form by way of Her sport. 10
warorat wart ar faeateattt yrert
ciens smayetsaem aritsfer afeatstae: Ween
She is the ultimate in evidence. She is called the Power of
Consciousness. Though She has assumed a form for Her sport, the ocean
of Her glory is boundless. 11
ven wf waenisar: aaa: | Amish weaned: sata
It is possible to count the number of atoms in the earth. There is
no end whatsoever to the wonderful multitude of Her glory. 12
waste arate fagrafteet 81 afrarenfs aa BAT: OT Bs
Even so, I will tell you a part of the essence of the story of Tripura.
Listen to it with attention. 13
We aftergianrt yar: weftraeach | anfearra: ara: BITE: 1 Be Il
faen enfermmrerengrenstatantaa: | fracteratiredrenacnrenszgee: Ul 4 I
In former times, Sri Hari the primordial Narayana, whose form is
the absolutely pure satva aspect of Tripura, reclined on the serpent bed.
His shining lotus feet are served by Sri Laksmi—the Devi of wealth.
His body is effulgent like the glow from a bunch of broken Sapphire.

; 5 ; 69 Chapter 7
WqavaraereaMesay! Utara ae cafes dead BAST, neg
His waist shines conspicuously with the yellow silk-cloth like a
lightning amidst rain-bearing clouds. 16
Staeynygeitaraentad: | AarengeaaArras SeTAgat: ngenl
ugienifaeecde Fria ceased afe: 1 diedthagaigaremacentan: Ween
He has a well-built chest that is charming with the Srivatsa mark.
The bees attracted by the fragrance of the garlands and the garland of
Tulasi, appear as though the dark blue lustre of His body has come out.
His long and stout arms end in lotus like palms. 17, 18
mrdeeyrgiferematarntsd: | Tergureamisset faatesrettar: eel
He is magnificent holding the Conch, the Discus, the Mace, and the
Lotus in His hands. His face is like the full Moon. His lips are red like
the cherry fruit. He has a beautiful nose. 19
HUleraanntauSaaia: | Prnaerarpreraeanragy sar: Roll
He is charming with a pair of earrings that resembles crocodiles.
His auspicious eyes humble a pair of fully blossomed lotus. 20
Weis sateaheractiaynteatvsd: | RATATAT: BRI
His glossy bunch of hair is like a swarm of bees. His head carries
a beautiful crown bedecked with an array of strange gems. 21
imaciafrerd fats Wg:1 wat: WeTequte Veramtisag aft: 1 BM
By His endearing glances, He is always bathing Sri Laksmi. He is
Hari who is incessantly served by devotees like Prahlada and others22
aret TaesdcaoTefat: AAT |
He is always interested in the protection of the Universe.
malted aa citi Bert Teas frase: Te
qusaafirrensat qrarsfager fafa: 1 erat agfadt: eta: fea: darafaee:
Once Brahma the creator arrived there, the abode of Hari.

st Ae 70 Sri Tripurarahasyam
He prostrated with folded hands and praised the Lord through many
prayers and took his seat. 23, 24
HY IA: VATS: BAA Bt: 1 saafaaaat S Gat: PTCA BG A
Afterwards Indra and other gods with their eyes red with anger
after debate, approached Sri Hari. 25
uforaer fart ef a aaerafy) safaer: HATTA MTA SAT AEs: WI
Prostrating Hari the Lord of Laksmi and Brahma, they took their
respective seats after obtaining the orders from the Foe of Madhu—
Madhusiidana. 26
Wa Uae Bred welled: | venqernmaay Gd frst act: TCH
Then Indra prodded by his chief assistant Sunanda started to talk
about the quarrel among themselves. 27
We HUTT WEaseaa | fraat ad wa aad fay Taal
Oh! Lord! The consort of Kamala, Oh! Visnu! The Immutable, listen
to why we are all debating. 28
we Vigeddatifaqatat: | ated tanefe wagietenct TTT TX
warsfattsatarsset warmer ute: | ustantsfereren arg: wa wa agiaar: 1 30
Weneé dete ssl A a
Once in the assembly of gods, I, Indra the lord of gods and the
three worlds, occasioned to mention that the entire world comes under
my control and that I am the lord of religious sacrifices and all including
Varuna, Agni, Air are under my rule and hence I am the supreme and
none else. 29, 30
oft weet sat wie aaa: Wael
uistrert quar arate et yeurad: | farw uate wt adetenses GATTI 32
Hearing my words, Agni spoke thus. “Oh Indra! Do not be proud
in vain due to ignorance. Are you not able to cognize me, the best among
gods and best in the entire Universe? 31, 32

Waals ara: 71 Chapter 7
we FS aqiicarmafet aaa qt yee ved gaerdaa yA: aan
“Oh! Indra! I am the foremost among gods led by you. All of
you partake the oblations of all sacrifices that are brought to you by
a wae ate afer aaa: |: Heraa! He SaeT Aare Pereafact WTI Bx
“If I were not there, there will be no yajiia—sacrifices—on earth. I am
the third eye of Rudra who can destroy the world. 34
Sarthe ¢ a4 ceafsritea: |
My son Sanmukha is the chief of the army and through him you
have defeated the demons.
weregar weft aera tant: ga: 1 at wares fant at Seat a afaeafe 1 34
“Hence discarding your useless ignorance, worship me soon or else
you will perish.” 35
TATA Hersa Ar ats ular saat S cient: Wa waqyE: = BR
After hearing this, the Moon said, “Do not be ignorant. The creation
lives on food which comes from my blessing. 36
wee fat qat af wet fer aq! wadtes atta wegahtargt: 1 30
areata tar staged aq qarsfaara ga ur faarergtert 3c il
“If I were to withdraw, the world will be destroyed for want of
vegetation. Indra, Agni and other gods are really sustained by the
ambrosia that I generate. By needless pride, all of you should not meet
peril.” 37, 38
Weert WarHUs VTA Sl Be fee Heat Gar Aves WIT | 38
annsfaaragd wargenrgay| aifastt caftent tae wearer: voll
Listening to these words the wind god became really furious. “Oh
Moon! You are boasting in vain. Am I not the annihilator who can in
a moment reduce the entire world, consisting of Indra, Moon, Fire, Gods,
Men and demons to a state of memory of the past? 39, 40

xt FES, 72 Sri Tripurarahasyam
SeAISUTEA A AAT A A ATA: | A WefaMEat at AaISSafaat Ga: i we
“Due to your offensiveness, if I were to destroy the world, there
could then be no Moon, nor Indra, nor Brahma, Visnu, Rudra. How can
the others remain? 41
aaisd wanat gfadenusafadt wari diet cefe fant adtsé Sraraet uve
“Then my friend Agni, supported by me, will in no time burn the
entire universe. Therefore I am the fastest and strongest. 42
Vassar etter afadtaetar wet! ate Asqaet 7 ea era fee aE
“Oh Agni! Having you as my junior I will reduce everything to a
naught. Tell me if anything can move without my grace. 43
wet: watered: eft F WTA
“I alone am the supreme and the world is active because of me.”
gaa Hee wet aaa eeactanfas: Neveu
afanans stan: fataasym: Ut a2 Wedanesrst WAE_aa: Ul 4 Il
Thus a quarrel started in the assembly in heaven. Some gods
supported Agni, some others supported Moon. A few followed the wind
god and the remaining joined my side. 44, 45
wa went arduld atenaat) He sant waeayreatssaraat wer Weal
arrate: reared: We Aeaayseny AT ASTID Fear AgIast UTATS SST |
During such an argument, the angry gods involved in that, raised
their weapons. Then their preceptor Brhaspati pacified them with his
words. “Oh Gods! Do not get destroyed. Listen to me with love. 46, 47
SISTA See SATs: | aa Tat ahaa F Gea YC II
Fe TYE Wear wat wT AAT! Wed BAe West At: we
“Janardana who sleeps on the ocean knows the reality about your
debate. Therefore you go quickly to the milky ocean and fall at the feet
of the Purusottama the great Cosmic Being and calmly become aware of
the truth from Him.” Hence we have come to your lotus feet. 48, 49

STATS ATA: 73 Chapter 7
aye fete stay at afacaats safe
Oh Lord! Destroy our doubt. You are the refuge to gods during
distress.
sft df faa: ymqyeda: Koll
frat tancerrgard fat dati Aa agreataeren: TaAUAESTS SPAT: Ht GLH
aa wife yrean faargfta fara cated were ceat efe WATEA: 1 GR II
Thus requested by the gods led by Indra, Visnu thought for a long
time about a plan to pacify them. He thought that these gods who had
firm belief in their own coteries would not repose faith in Him and He
would not be able to bring about peace among them. So, He meditated
on the great God Kapardi (Siva), in His heart. 50 to 52
SIMS Seater Paar aT aT Wall
Thus invited through meditation, Siva appeared in their assembly.
qusswcistaama: yeentenatan: | arp titercnneypessaet: Gy Ul
Siva with a crystal-clear hue was seated on the Bull with Ambika
by his side. He was shining with matted hair, crown and crescent moon
on his head. 54
Trerdtarfetents Sareea eieretch: | Tea wratetcalerearereantert eae: I
His head was bright with the Celestial River Ganga, looking like a
garland of Malati—a kind of jasmine flowers. He illuminated the quarters
by the flame burning in His eye on His forehead. 55
wenfaqugefararerernshaget: | Husciepaataya ea eaas GOT Ta
OTA ARATS SATA MUSA TAT | WOTASAA ATTA: AAT tt 49
His forehead was extremely beautiful with the bright mark of the
three lines of ash. His mirror-like cheeks were shining from the reflection
of the ruby on the hood of the ornamental serpents in His ears. With
the ambrosia of His loving glances, He was showering Sati Gauri.

st ARES, 14 Sri Tripurarahasyam
aeqaaMearmrater qaeieha efiot ure fares reseqe: Neen
On His well-built chest appeared rows of Rudraksa garlands. In His
lotus-like palms He bore the deer, the axe, the signs of boon and
protection. 58
aredtianchedeey: | Sraantarearrerg feraaye: Ween
His beautiful body was glittering with the Tiger’s skin tied around
His waist. His upper garment was the skin of an Elephant. His body
was smeared with ash. 59
aatisurrasrrgatantarrsd | Tacs Fear: Ugoll
Shining on His luminous bull that was like a mountain of camphor,
He was seated in a great Sirnhasana which was made of nine types of
gems. 60
Was SHAQUATS s MUTEMsfayiers: | wre: unica aoreiaavrat: = GR
aetapingfatrtet: dated war: carafe: warpreatfeagerean wea: Warn
carfaeat art Panis SUA: |
He was beautiful in His padmasana posture of his lotus-like feet.
He was attended by the Pramathas, eminent devotees like Bana, Nandi,
Bhrngi.
The illusory aspect of Parasakti Tripura, He, the Mahesvara, the
foremost Lord engaged in the act of destruction, appeared before the
Prter & faapper: otf faqeta: Wea
Werg wioresat arat wAAcTAT | A afd eqaetat fae carafe gx I
FeeT FATA HAMA! TssaAsA alas wareaysss: uu gl
Seeing Him, the gods led by Visnu prostrated and worshipped Him.
Thus worshipped by them, Bhava—Siva alighted from his admirable bull
and embraced with happiness, Visnu the Lord of Laksmi. Then along
with the gods and Janardana, He took His seat. 63 to 65
quettige wear gear farce: | afer wyaT wea Bat VARTA TAI GE Il

S : 75 Chapter 7
fat serait ereit urefarara yrgt: |
Knowing the mind of Murari Visnu and looking at the gods
overpowered by quarrel and hatred, Siva, for the welfare of the world,
prayed to Tripurambika the creatrix of the world. 66
Vg aatad wear faferet aa: TCH
Feat Safaat AT Vet YSIsseraT Yat Aut: YSdts aya AT WTENT i Ke
Wrattaarares wget acar |
Understanding the act of Sankara, Visnu and Brahma bowed and
meditated on Her, with a pure mind. Remembered thus by the three
causal persons, the Trans-transcendental Great Mother manifested Herself
in order to protect the Universe. 67, 68
TeIgrer: Waagubrerahrge: agen
Aa PAA AEA AMVSTACATTAT | AvitqparaeraanUraearMenas: Noll
At that time arose a great sound like the severe striking of a
thunderbolt. That mighty sound which enveloped the Universe rendered
trivial, the sound from the striking thunderbolt. 69, 70
Wasarensfaacar aa urpar fe fag atearentfeatsat Gry sar aT ti weil
Then soon the north-eastern quarter blazed as if the brilliance of
crores of lightnings occurred at the same time. 71
TAH BT wes Ga: Safraraa: | seityatsr aferttepar: Waraafia4r: tz M
By that sound and luminance the gods including Indra, Agni and
Vayu became blind and deaf and trembled with fear. 72
aféoar: uftar qat foagen ga gar: | fear: Sera ERT TOT: 11 93 Wl
Fainting, they fell on the ground like uprooted trees. They were
unconscious of dislodged clothes, fallen crowns and ornaments. 73
fafacrangecon: aaraeatacy! dat: ufaa: afachfatareat Fat: oxi
With their limbs stretched on each other, some gods fell in groups,
some here and there. 74

st fee, 16 Sri Tripurarahasyam
ud qa tant fafafreqeeat: | Gear remeae caaeTAT —t OG
wae a yeahh a wet asae a1 fad deter waits carer afar I og
When the gods were in such a state, Brahma, Visnu, Mahesvara
saw the magnificent brilliance pervading the directions. They could not
perceive the beginning, middle or end of that unique effulgence which
embraced the Universe. 75, 76
aaa: weaved wed! Galdipaanisnticmtenea i voi
Wat wiefaachenfand aitar: | usaeafaar qat wea at PUT AAT: tl ee
Cognising that great unparalleled brilliance, which had spread from
the nether world to the boundaries of heaven, as the grandeur of the
sport of Paragakti, the causal lords fell prostrate on the ground and
surrendered to Her with devotion. 77, 78
Fa YA: Wye Fear AaMArE! Harsfeder: Bild wea wrefiaery ii oe
Witnessing that wonderful manifestation, they again and again
bowed. Then with folded palms set out in prayer to the Universal Mother.
ofa sitfaqaeet werenaus warts eae: 1
End of the seventh chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurarahasyam.

SEATS ATT:
Chapter 8
a wa adage wen cienfiame: | afeeraancarmhaeattn: neu
The creator Brahma blissfully started to pray with words reaching
the heights of devotion. 1
Wa Wa Wasa wa wa walfres weyThT
Wa Wa cerns sftet wa wa watserreafage WRU
“Victory to Mother of the Universe. Victory to the Supreme, the
consort of Mahe§ga. Victory to the dispeller of the distress of the devotees.
Victory to the Intelligent Form—Consciousness situated in all beings. 2
wet aerate aeyetentacrad: se: |
fafaeftesonsser ad vest wf at tat nan
“We, Brahma, Visnu, Rudra, Isana and others, carry out, by the
sportive movements of whose eyebrows, the act of creation, protection
and destruction of the world, to that great Devi, I salute. 3
warseade Wet: Ueifaar Se ATeTeRt Ba: |
Sohetfaget we create: fre eal
“I create, Murari protects, Rudra destroys, Iga conceals this world.
All this happens by a trifle of Your strength. 4
aatsqaenet Varfgratsae aaeHIaTOTT|
dfrdta waaft vem at adtadtarshe wal
“And Sadagiva who is the cause of grace does so only by
seeking shelter under Your lotus feet. Hence You are adorable by one
and all. 5
armistsnighatonsert fearasta Hear
afé ad aff car yet qa Tarshacnragar ugu

at IECCtOLR 78 Sri Tripurarahasyam
“By Your forms (manifestation) as Vama, Jyestha and Raudri, You
have placed us in our present positions and in the form of Ambika You
occupy the fourth transcendental state. 6
deat Wacrenst wea dents afe war
afé aa ufsanen: wanenedgar seth Non
“Tf You were to involute the space and stay at Your own abode,
then the five of us would remain in this creation as well-known five
great corpses. 1.
afaenssuemeamencs wt fafaadsfarar
TAM Gat we Safa ah TATA: wen
“Oh! Universal Mother! Assuming many wonderful forms, You are
our utmost protector, just like a mother protects her child. 8
ear WHat QUIS aa AAT: |
aereantt fea: ye feared wenthrar fager uen
“We three, born out of Your characteristics, precede the entire
creation. Because of your existence prior to three of us, You are known
as Tripura.” 9
ofa dae cami eer wartafasiz: |
qusaq ufaat yat eae ef wersfiarary gol
Thus praising the Supreme Mother, the creator filled with devotion
fell prostrate on the ground meditating on Her. 10
we arent wan TR ft: 1 arebiiehranpintieamEt: 1 geil
Then Hari wearing the yellow garment, with a voice choked with
devotion, praised Her skillfully with many dignified words. 11
sirradatite 3 qumnyarerenntia aaandte ATE: |
gienanht wengquerafed arconit wag ata wdar a: 11 ei
“Oh! Auspicious Mother! We, who are born out of Your characteristics,
always cautiously carry out Your instructions. Let us be always devoted
to Your lotus feet alone as cherished by us. 12

SEATS : 79 Chapter 8
eae cafe ofa aederaant: cagupmtafrrrae: |
aMiptettanaagrat frat areata farafe ta onfaa: er eat
“Oh! Great Devi! Because of You, all beings shine according to their
different forms from their tendencies and various powers. If not, there
would be nothing existing. 13
seaisscracanta sgh serfs fearfasents arsfit arati
feacret wenette wattage FeRAM newn
“Oh! Mother! Earth, Water, Air, Fire, Space, Moving and Non-moving
forms, Directions, Time, Manifest and Non-manifest and all are Your
Manifestations. Other than You, there is not even an iota of existence.
weg ufsaremragqen ween aafig tear: |
wadtonaatranaat fe wrat: Varsaeta TeUeraret Heat
“We, starting from Brahma, the lords of the world, have become
famous by our grandeur having secured a place at the base of Your seat
because of our service to Your lotus feet. Salutation to You. 15
wet a comdifad seat qabitseafreatena aafat ta
warenfarantrepasang 2 Ft wat Haficg aqeit fara Weal
“The Upanisads severely tremble and fail to describe Your form
which is trans-sensory. How can they, overpowered by Your mighty Maya,
understand You of such greatness? 16
PARAM TATA eH AAT AIM: rT]
sirraisqraarn ayaradt afe wat acaferararettott a: nee
“The Lord of Laksmi having discarded the heap of impurities by
constant single-minded service to Your lotus feet and gaining a pure
mind by ambrosial prayers to You, has understood You as the embodied
Self of Paramagiva. 17
adgisamfrrarra fe ae: wagd safe qoaea
weed urn frat daastarercnagtacereay, Ween

st ARES 80 Sri Tripurarahasyam
“The omniscient Veda proclaims that the three tendencies (Gunas),
cause Your seeming form. Hence out of extreme compassion You have
assumed this brilliant form for our sake. 18
wet date wemenyrat wadafavad wa wife 7:1
taaafarqadad wet Taq Mier, Ween
“We are seeing this, Your most effulgent form, only due to our great
service to You. Oh Mother! Let Your desirable form pacify the multitude
of defects of gods lead by Indra.” 19
wa qh: teger fag ata afenitquenftirt ted fart U Roll
Murari, praying thus to the great Devi Tripura, was immersed in
the ambrosial ocean of devotion and did not see anything else. 20
aa wig agua: ware qarafe: | afeatrererganeadt: «RR
Next, Isvara with joined palms started praying the Devi with soft
words glowing with devotion. 21
wht umtatt wafie aed: farargeftergt: waged: ofan
anractin: aa waft waist taste: aaa daikon vate IEA I
“Oh! Paramegvari! Salutation to You. You are worshipped by the
supreme beings Brahma, Hari and Sankara—who are foremost among
gods. Therefore, who can be greater than You? Oh! Rajarajesvari! You
are the only one excelling all else. 22
forg ayeisframruy faqer fe an faera uta orferat WTA!
ae fe fagqersfaary uftarta & anfirt fears qeenfied qaatigarss rar
“Fie upon those passionate ignorant animal like human beings, who
neglecting the most excellent Paramesvari, the Parasakti, serve other
lords of gods just like neglecting the Divine Tree Kalpavrksa and seeking
a dry thorny tree. 23
Wisnt Tad wget & war fertaag wad farrareerta
wdtaattat wramng wired set wag add qoonsqared: fn Av

SBATS A: 81 Chapter 8
“Oh! Auspicious Universal Mother! Let my mind, purged of sense
pursuit, be constantly fixed on Your lotus feet. Let my hands be always
engaged in Your service. Let my speech sing the ocean of Your many
glories. 24
frageftergtiarn: ait: yrertfigastraredta set: BET TAT
We ee fonda agit aad: ver wafgahreanomeraenty wea: WIM
By always keeping Your partial incarnations known as Sarada, Rama,
Girija, who are respectively the consorts of Brahma, Hari and Sankara
in our mouth, heart and left half of the body, we are engaged in the
task of creation, protection and destruction of the universe. 25
vata fergfafaat fatirdtemeige ate werd fora qorfreraat aye |
aepta: fora axat uraerftr ferret axferats seaaT WewPaaTeHTYTTS SPATEAT U1 2G
“Oh! Auspicious Devi! You are the creatrix in Brahma, the protector
in Visnu who reclines on the serpent, the destroyer in me (Siva), the
concealer of attributes in Isana, the aspect of grace in Sadasiva. You
are ParaSakti in the transcendental Para-Brahma. You are by nature
the glowing Intelligence. 26
qa: afer aa ta saseg wt yedar a vedt afadaft yar @ aa
aor wafer ater ferpaatanr wa fora ferarfeagqeratas uefgre a ares sferent
“Oh Parasive! Just like the hardness in earth, the taste in water,
the form in fire, the movement in air, the vaccum in space, the heat in
Sun, You are the essence of all the creative principles starting from
Sadasiva to the earth. 27
Glauarsmeda wermeval: woaaafiifed: uftrata asta: |
Wax dander wat aeanty fire fara Hurganeprcneracyt: AeA Ml Re
“Qh! Auspicious Devi! All the gods, starting from Indra, illusioned
by your intense influence disrespect each other. Oh Mother! Rescue these
gods who are You children by casting just once a little of Your glance
that is soaked in the ambrosia of mercy. 28

at fT 82 Sri Tripurarahasyam
sara wad faracreraanfrary SA HOVE ATA AT |
farraa urat wHadehtult aaa wera Aaae_ Tet AA: WRU
“Qh! Universal Mother! Dispeller of all distress! Oh! Supreme One!
Look with Your compassionate glances that pour out a flood of nectar,
at these persons always parched by the conflagration of desires. You are
the sole refuge for this world. We salute You always.” 29
Ua Vegan Ta wee fea: | ausaetan qat eareafeaqustiaary
Thus praying with devotion and meditating on Devi Tripurambika,
Brahma and others filled with devotion prostrated on the ground. 30
aa ar fagtyet wear deta: Hat! Geet aan We Maga at = ae
Then, pleased by the good prayers, Tripurambika took a physical
form in order to drive away the ignorance of the gods. 31
aaaerantssat fensseurafia sees HITafsaht Yarars saat tl 3z
(The Devi appeared as described in stanzas 32 to 45.)
With a molten gold hue, wearing shining ornaments, with eighteen
arms, a virgin, with a charming smile. 32
wai ATs stragoregtorateetet | Tee M ATTA ag AUT Ne 3Bu
With the melody from her anklets tinkling in the quarters, with the
lustre of Her foot putting to shame the sprouts of fresh coral. 33
Sraterertfrantdteare tea | aatqrarstareracectre fara avi
With the delicate gait of a swan, with a waist shining in a golden
garment. 34
Teds sadagerafageteatara | Tarrentyraherteretg fer gars tet Wall
Charming with a navel resembling a deep vortex, with her chest
shining in a red-silk upper garment. 35
aq: ee ees RE Ged WTS Ug Yet qa neal
feapt gaat a Gat ys ue Tet efit erry eetfagror uestatsect: 11

EATS PAT: 83 Chapter 8
Holding in Her red sprout-like hands, the bow, the noose, the bell,
the drum, the gem-decked cup, the shield, the rosary, the lotus, the
book, the sign of knowledge, the conch, the disc, the sword, the trident,
the axe, the mace, the goad and the arrows. 36, 37
waa Hus Trace fara | Tes geitaatse Fete Sse Ta
With a garland of golden lotus in Her neck, with gem-set shoulderornaments, with budlike fingers shining with diamond rings. 38
Fea | Afar seat stearate = ak
Her neck decorated with a necklace set with nine gems, with the
glow of Her gem-set sacred Mangalya chain, well smeared with sandal
paste. 39
TRAM SUAS Pe | Wachee = il ¥oll
With a pair of ear-ornaments shining like the Moon and the Sun,
with lips shining like the red-cherry fruit. 40
AMIS swUftreaiqreurgasar | weaahraaarcitens see TOT Uwe
With eyes whose redness has been doubled by the ruby in Her
nose-stud, attracting the female deers by the sport of Her three eyes
resembling the lotus petals. 41
Rifas SeINAaN sass Targuinferetraamfapratet: ul xz
With Her full-moon-like face bearing the deer-musk mark on the
forehead, with bee-like row of curly hair on Her lotus-like face. 42
ygdhhaayarncayns stagger | sredafiratchoranguigsent Wau
Filled with the fragrance of her soft, long, dense, dark hair; with
a crown, set with invaluable gems that filled the sky with its effulgence.
mreiaryrasatraatisa | Bal Hate eat waeRaatet = vil
With a forehead shining with crescent moon, who is ever a virgin,
the Transcendental Devi. 44

mt ARES, 84 Sri Tripurarahasyam
geet a copfeaiagn cigar ster wyradt Be ATT xu
The Paraéakti Tripurambika assumed such a most sacred enchanting
form to sportively protect Her devotees. 45
at fafrgtterarare aeeitcar fiers acer: oped weet Heat Aare | wR
Then Devi Tripurambika addressed with a dignified voice the gods
Brahma, Hari, [sana and others thus: “My children! Listen to my words.
I will bless you with good things. 46
Farat whearera wgyarsfer wae seqeRaTsyAafewa Gear Fay, TyfeoaL
YAMA AAT AAT TT eTSTS HAL!
“I have now made myself visible to dispel the ignorance of the gods”.
Saying so, She brought back to consciousness and consoled, through the
downpour of nectarian glances, the gods who had fainted as if dead.
aergnant gar frargant gatfeaa: TA
fenfng fenfae aft wrqratenage: | 1 farnfe aitsaat ucorgrefioiey un xe
Then Indra and other gods got up as if from sleep and mutually
wondered about what happened. They said “None of us knows who is
this wonderful Lady”. 48, 49
sarsta tearrgftarn: yaw: | want Tat es Ute HEAT Goll
qt aera fer tet fr cece
Then Indra and other prominent gods told Agni—‘Oh Agni! Go
quickly and find out what this huge form is? Why has it taken birth?
What is its strength? What is its nature?” 50
varard gfetat areafirpetcry GQ
Wreaqryease we at uted aarets sfigertoren: aefsyaferd Wa: 1 ull
Hearing the words of Indra, the haughty Agni proceeded and with
great difficulty with his splendor reduced by Her effulgence got near
Her and spoke to Parameévari. 51, 52

BATS ATA: 85 Chapter 8
wr wt quit ag & far atat et apa: fer frerqeenrarreet ateat weer ti
“Oh Young girl! Tell me who you are? What is your power? Where
do you live? I have come to understand you who are extremely
distinguished.” 53
ea Aare aT TE et ae: | ae et ae: Brea we fe weNT Ge
arrat warsyreqeret:; eat Wars
Hearing his words, She replied excellently. “Tell me who you are?
From where you came? What is your strength? I will later narrate my
entire account”. 54
seaeitstasardat yoy weafir wee: W&M
ae gare: ararape fergerasa’: | frgnficar eaftrard: wfeettse wef un 4a 1
Thus spoken, Agni spoke to Her. “Oh! Auspicious Lady! Listen to
me, I am Agni the embodiment of the mouth of the gods. I have been
sent to you by Indra and others who are wondering about you. 55, 56
dtd & neqepeantenfrarsor ated qvat feafgsrreerercgr Huon
wattat gutta tanaitsfia aert!
“My valour is very great, being unfailing and ruthless. In a second
I can reduce to ashes this visible universe of moving and non-moving
things. There is no one else like me.” 57
searenud ypdatet weer wre AT wT Ween
ary waqet art ate matey aswe: 1 wevitafafet qut ae warsm: Wag
Hearing the words of Agni, Paraéakti laughed and told him thus
“Oh Agni! If you have such a strength, then show it in my presence
soon. Burn this straw that is placed before you.” 58, 59
qasatet aret pet terete we wrsfrereafira area way SH tt
Hearing these disrespectful words of Devi, the angry Agni with
deluded mind spoke thinking himself to be the best. 60

St FRESH, 86 Sri Tripurarahasyam
aa emaen are Taraneh) adorei aise qorane Pratt: een
“You are just a weak young girl. Therefore you are talking stupidly.
You are asking me, who can burn everything, to burn a straw. 61
aifa wer Bayt AGU wai esq!
“Right now I will equate you with the straw and burn you along
with it.”
Sea TTA At AeToaTeTEN AA: ug
safe at qorafr ward aver Ufa: | HeractaTya: Baw Tear, nesu
waists quit are a yee ere: | feursferafadtecha wreasfa: viteat wa:
Saying so, Agni with red angry eyes and burning with a huge flame
quickly fell on the straw and the Devi, to devour them both. Even as
he tried with his great might, Agni was unable to burn the straw.
With subdued flames he became cold like a meteor fallen in the arctic
ocean. 62 to 64
aunt: Yeittst GElTagyMy: | Atha TENS Fae wee Tar TT
Weal AAEM WATS Aa! cist: Hvedtsfaenraast We: = REI
Trembling with terrible cold, looking like a firefly, his whole body
turning into a skeleton, the dull Agni who suffered shame disappeared
from that place running away with all his strength. 65, 66
Fa Usacagy 4 Mga etl cat df qt wera gol
Then, he narrated to Indra. “Oh Indra! It was not possible for me
to understand that huge mighty force that I faced”. 67
arts ore Quiet ag oe ada at res aie Quanarteht WEAR ween
Then Indra told the Moon to find out about the huge form. “Oh Moon!
Go with speed and get to know about this mighty one. 68
Wt aorqag fer def fa mena
“How was that mighty one born? What is its strength? What is its
nature?”

SBATS AT: 87 Chapter 8
sas savatsa yuigatermravscitter nat
Mayes we at utah. darareata: cefacatad ma: woul
ar at Gpatt ag & ferdtat at oat wie faarqrearnagamt ferry
Hearing the words spoken by Indra, the arrogant Moon proceeded
and losing his lustre somehow went near Her and spoke to the Great
Devi. “Oh Young girl! Tell me, who you are? What is your strength?
Where do you live? I have come to understand an extremely wonderful
lady like you.” 69 to 71
Tear Yoyaret A we wt aa: | ag a a: aa: ut sa eet a fe aati
arant war daa daaati 71
Hearing the words of the Moon, the Devi spoke excellently. “Tell
me who you are? From where have you come here? What is your might?
Later I will let you know about my story.” 72
ara ua qa wat areetaTqarea any Wogn
dns sft wae: wdeiteees were: | sitedtaredg cant sieareryqaigyfa: ox
qeategerqara safe a wT!
Told so by Her, the Moon addressed Her thus. “I am the reputed
Moon, the protector of the Universe. I am the Lord of herbs. With my
ambrosial rays I protect the grass, the creepers, the bushes and the
trees. Indeed, the whole Universe is alive because of me.” 73, 74
UARaa: Fal WET US AT UT Woy
afe dttayt dthgy ata Asa: 1 quot war cert fated ae: WRN
agra tafercotyared: yyitaet: |
Hearing the words of the Moon, the transcendental Devi said with
laughter. “Oh Moon! If you have such a strength, show it before me
quickly. By your cool ambrosial rays, quench the straw placed before
you, which is being burnt by me.” 75, 76
geacneyaat wea AeA TT Noon
We: wre welfare: yrergt aerifaa: | tae wa ATMA ATT ATTA

Tt NSS, 88 Sri Tripurarahasyam
senate agreed qersufafaita 21 feenfs wat vittntsigtyat atraeq i oe
Listening to Her and taking Her light talk as insulting, the angry
Moon filled with arrogance and proud of his valour spoke thus. “Oh weak
lady! I shall destroy you for what you have childishly spoken without
knowing my strength. I will freeze you with my cool rays.” 77 to 79
syria: viettercadtt: 1 cet aft aero Fa con
Saying so, with his innumerable rays he caused, with great force,
a rain of snow that looked like a flock of cranes. 80
wer ference: wrearsfataga: | atfagtenqurearetels se: «ek
aritsft cera searonsagtted: | att: wenfaa: vite wrest Asya STN CVU
We TT Aeryd AeTaraaTH AT!
His downpour of snow was destroyed by the fire of Her third eye.
His body was engulfed by the fire. Being burnt up, the Moon almost
dead, quickly ran with fear and reported to Indra. “Oh Indra! I was
unable to know about that huge form with stupendous might”. 81, 82
Ba View: We are aeranhtaat Wezn
amt & aeat es arte wer yt Goad fe ctf fe aan
Then Indra told Vayu to understand that power. “Oh Vayu! Go soon
and know about the great form. How did it come into existence? What
is its strength? What is its nature?” 83, 84
sit grat aat arg: yoarqenfeaq asa aaa aa sitet on cul
_ Hearing the words of Indra, the proud Vayu went to the place of
Sri Parameévari. 85
Saratitact Wet Test Bae |
wl a acisaet Henemamasa far ser cal
r Assuming himself to be very strong, Vayu spoke with disrespect.
“Oh weak lady! Who are you? From which country have you come? What
is your strength? 86

BATS aT: 89 Chapter 8
qecutentereat foragers srr: |
“Sent by Indra and others I have come here to assess you.”
arqareatata scat at ware yt ae: ucon
aq a &: Ga: una: fen ae: fee WAU: | ACTA TA SA: WANT
Hearing Vayu, the Devi replied sweetly. “Tell me who you are? Why
have you come? What is your strength? What is your profession? Later
I will reply to your questions.” 87, 88
sft grat aet 2am: wraratssasa at WHI
wat TOY A ad cena YT eeu
Hearing the words of the Great Devi, Vayu replied. “Oh weak one!
Listen to my account which is most famous and auspicious. 89
aeraftaet argehranot wert: 1 sarcatae: urat werararsta: WT: Goll
WaT Malta: Bret Aeritshs A yYA: | VAeMUpeHT Fa Hat Warhat a Aaa: 1 ee
waaranste yeaa aft get weet aft wa wad aaa ta eT ez
“I am the most powerful Vayu. I am the breath of the Universe.
I am of great speed. I have come from Indra’s place. I am the supporter
of the Universe. I am supreme. During deluge all the great mountains
shaken by me were moving all over like sparks of fire. Even the seas
dried up due to my anger. Till now there is no one who could retard
my speed.” 90 to 92
sft gear wegrest wre at Utah Aq ara aeretect ate avery aren 83 It
got Bat =i wae Aaefe
Hearing the speech of Vayu, the Great Devi spoke. “Oh Vayu! If you
are powerful let me witness it. Show your valour by carrying away the
straw that is placed before you.” 93
wadaaadregen wyrtee: Wes
mrersfiauut arert aredt aemfaa: | faa wererdaeatrgedt: gull
erect wera ae: IG Mae Yet aaferansfa wrath ws Ta KI

ft fee, 90 Sri Tripurarahasyam
anet qonfuat wat 4 araget axtaen ferttva weearssy wa at YgeET
Hearing such deriding words, the angry Vayu being proud of his
valour uttered abusive words. “Oh weak lady! Foolishly why are you
opting destruction? Which strong man can withstand my great strength
and force? You are stupid and arrogant. I shall destroy your pride. To
start with I will reduce you to naught as if a straw. So, stand firm and
withstand my unbearable force.” 94 to 97
seaen at ut tat wredt WaAIssqa: | Wetec VT Aa WAT Ts ee
wrenrghras smart Gear ants AT aeons aged: erat Ute aA: 1 eeu
wer fear waarsfr cera Ha) YTS We aT: AAMAS AT Qooll
att aareryd Terra |
Thus addressing the Great Devi, as Vayu, filled with anger thought
of moving with great speed and force, he became lame and miserable.
With all his breath he was unable to take a step forward. Then being
put to shame he started running away with fear. He told Indra that he
was unable to understand that Great form which is of unfailing mighty
valour. 98 to 100
cantar Fear TTT RoR NI
quart: vigats qq fertatete fasta
ferafrarsta ager asentesd frst Wo
fart ga yet + fats
Seeing such a defeat of Agni, Moon and Vayu from that great power,
Indra worrying himself started thinking what it could be. He was unable
to conclude anything even after thinking in several ways. Dejected with
ignorance, he was unable to do anything. 101, 102
gfe stares weeUe apatsena: i
End of the eighth chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurarahasyam.

Wants cara:
Chapter 9
forfaen fet yreneissa satis: | aeredaqaat aaqers war: wen
Thinking for a long time, Indra, elated by his strength and ego,
decided to conquer the Devi, quickly took his thunderbolt. 1
WIAs seer Vitae aa aT dfeeatsfae
at Feat HANG wafer aerate TTT
watcifrstaitcarcdatrm et Raaeat ures Aare afta: «8
He proceeded riding on the clouds to where the Devi was staying.
Standing at a distance with his eyes concealed by the lustre of the Devi,
asked Her, who had a tender body, who was glowing like a lotus filament,
who had conquered the grandeur of crores of cupids by Her beauty.
Cal ta Weegee SAAS FUT VTL!
feoasfa aan Het at Hee VATA ue
wu a ofat agegfasredtsay! at wasmegt aha cage: fea: kl
Aget tacit ar gfe atsfr carat! war gar Tardy Yorerayrentssre 1 GU
ae vit war ust aera aor feafar
“Qh! Lotus-eyed Lady! Who are you who have enveloped the universe
with the luminance of your body? Whose daughter are you? Why have
you come here? Your beauty is radiant. Your stature is attractive. You
are evoking reverence. In my city of the heaven there are women like
Rambha and others. But I have not seen a beauty like yours, effulgent
with eighteen arms, either in heaven or earth or even in nether world.
Oh Lustrous Lady! quickly tell true answers to my questions.” 4 to 6
Tagen veweet wea wre af wht ne
ceed farnef come: fer dite ferqers: 1
great od da vat carte wa ahah wen

st freer, 92 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Hearing the words of Indra, the Parambika addressed him thus:
“Who are you? Why have you come here? What is your strength? What
is your profession? After hearing your account I will tell you about me.”
ee}
gfe sear et 2em: wre we: HERR TY Aaa was TAT: ki
Hearing the words of the Devi, the thousand eyed Indra spoke.
“Listen to my words carefully. I am the lord of the heaven. 9
yreced: fryaafsrat steal Wetact: |
vat faarahte weit artiste qat afer Noll
wert ayrar eat Feat astefor daar
“I am Indra who has performed hundred sacrifices, who enjoys the
wealth of the three worlds, who is mighty. I have come here to know
about you. There is no one anywhere in the world who is equal to me,
by way of valour, fame, wealth, strength and prosperity. 10
Wal YaAMAISS Sat AA Aviad: Wet
aa marge deen wages! UT Wetter orate aafaq | eR
“I am always the ruler of the world. The gods are my subordinates.
This unfailing unbearable thunderbolt is my weapon. Hit by it no one
will be alive. 11,12
Geet SAAT SAT VAN: | AHA pat TWAT: eau
“Many powerful demons and raksasas have died just by the touch
of the thunderbolt. 13
ae: Weantse aafadaeepiste aa: | MEAT WAT TATA AAT Il
“Vala, Paka, Namuci, Vrtra, Tvastra and Taraka who had conquered
the entire worlds were defeated by this thunderbolt. 14
agasa feaqeds 3 2 qeaae: safer write at ware weraeTTTEHAT I kh
‘There is no point in talking more. There is no one who is equal

Fans are: 93 Chapter 9
to me in strength. Know me as the famous Mahendra with immense
valour.” 15
sdtaaet seat wre aT Utah yafirs waded Hau: eq
s¢ got gffed sass oy aca! aftenfswa dt at asrensft yraemdt ui go
vevfasfert at Aare sai wera upenit carts fear aay ee ti
Hearing the words of Indra, the Great Devi spoke. “Oh Indra! I know
you well as the son of Kasyapa. Oh Satakratu! Show your or your
thunderbolt’s valour on this light and dry straw, which is in front of
you. If you cannot, then I would watch you running away with shame
just like Agni and others.” 16 to 18
fayrdtaget ter: yen: wepftret: | sera ast apa wed wt et on eet
Hearing the words of Devi, Indra angrily biting his teeth lifted his
Vajrayudha deciding to hit Her. 19
Tad Tage Yes Beat vatern fest: 1 afafes feat drrgaeetsfreatet 11 Ro 1
fernitacaanista gacntcteubseny! frrmaresagegded: AT: SAT: i Wil
tafe uret areaarethsarfir ai saa Aftg yradt genfeanate aa Ve
As Indra lifted his weapon the surroundings were lit up. When
Indra was thus angrily standing with the lifted thunder-bolt in his hand,
the Devi gave a little smile which was mocking at the moon light from
crores of moons. Just by that smile, the hand of Indra which was
holding the thunderbolt was frozen along with his feet and sensory
organs like tongue, eyes and the like. He was on his own not able to
move his limbs even a little. 20 to 22
wa tereraatgt weer faftams safe: | aad ag wafer Ae guadtar: 2a
Thus, Indra the lord of heaven, whose body became immobile looked
like a painted picture and was unable to speak, move and act even a
bit. 23
Ud ad weed Gear arsarephry! saaera fager wa aftafia: ye

a Aer, 94 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Seeing Indra transformed into a wooden figure, the sad gods trembled
with fear. 24
der aban ta a taqedfagay: | saerrearareanas faeq But
Aeneas Suga BEMIS Stars THAI
Feeling miserable, having lost their lord, the gods wailed loudly.
Then Indra realised that it was due to his own mistake and prayed to
Angirasa (Brhaspati) his guru for protection from the danger. 25
dar daar eftors sferat yh: UU
ten qd Fat areas eM! As: Great wagaar: «tl
Then just being remembered by Indra, the foremost intelligent sage
Brhaspati who can know the past and future rushed there having known
the subjugation of Indra’s pride by the Devi. 26, 27
qurd aa Wat aaa Weta: | Gear Ganon: wa vlafrsraraay R11
aiitsfasemramt aftata werat tert: eyareanaenhaayredteat tl Re
Brhaspati reached in a moment to the place where Indra was
immobilised. Seeing Brhaspati who was capable of rescuing Indra, all
the gods were consoled even by looking at him as if persons desiring to
cross a river in spate, get a boat. 28, 29
Uafarat aa faut chieyia: | fadadt aneter wtrrstitar: 301
arrais qactearat yfet Harsafer: | ass wforoeasat WReATATA: 1 BVA
aerate: wanted aya! Yeteat wet: araqet: ysafwa BRI
In the meantime, Brhaspati who had foresight, saw the Universal
Devi and swelled with happy horripilation. With his eyes filled with
joyous tears, with folded palms on his head, he prostrated and with his
voice choked started praising the Supremely Secretive Transcendental
Mother as if he was worshiping Her with blissful words. 30 to 32
wa wa yight wieuagt fafinpafergt aeqa
qeragtt frequgyht wacagrgt wfe qa Waal
“Oh! Sankari! You assure security to the Universe. You are served

anise: 95 Chapter 9
by Brahma and others. You are praised by the Veda. You are ferocious
to the wicked. You protect the pious. You control everything. Victory to
You! Protect the gods. 33
wat wratrecntey fatirettergcfageen: |
aa UaUgwaaTs SMfadeHeUTT: WHateT awn
“Brahma, Visnu and Sankara who are the lords of the gods carry
out their task of creation, protection and destruction through Your bit
of mercy secured by serving Your lotus feet. 34
afe wa meuneyfatedt faqeritgitscatry: |
wé fast wfaqatstt fe + aafadter: as: Waal
Even if a little of Your compassion is absent, the lord of gods Indra,
becomes highly foolish. This is no wonder. Even Paramesvara cannot
really do anything by opposing You. 35
fafaefiqen aft ca cite 4 waa: eqdutfagqy
aa Het Wa yifad: Hat a Ufenetde Ure: naan
“Even Brahma, Visnu and others are not capable of describing Your
deeds. Then, Oh! Mother! Tell me how can I be competent to praise
Your ocean of greatness? 36
ara: waeta fr:afad fafrefoqen Fors: |
chert wae att faqratreanrany, Ngo
“The primordial Vedic words are Your breath. Brahma, Visnu and
others are born out of Gunas (temperaments). Everything is an evolution
of Your play. The ignoble do not realise You as the Mother. 37
AHTRISAATE wa ATS Shorea sca |
wsakafsra wut wa fad forat aq ate Ta
“You are Primordial, the embodiment of the entire moving and
non-moving creation. The manifest and unmanifest take shelter under
You. You need no shelter or protection because You are resplendent by
Your own glory and power. 38

at ARES 96 Sri Tripurarahasyam
wise: wet age sa Fe Hea!
afta utd wid da mora fagt aera, TST
“Just like a cloth which is spun with threads length-wise and
breadth-wise, just like gold pervades the bangle, the entire universe,
Oh! Tripurasundari, is sewn by Your different manifestations. 39
ante aft ufgaeartt: carerent aft waregr: |
water aft usenet aq festa, U vont
“Four castes, Six paths of worship, Nine groups of time-frame, Five
aspects like firmness and all, are really forms of Your Conscious Power
and nothing else. 40
adeset utafraqer faerafa een fyrereur
3S Ala Aa Aa Bil GH Se YEA: wen
“Primordially You shine alone as the auspicious embodiment of
Absolute Consciousness. Other than You there is no viewer, hearer or
speaker. Who has here the capacity to praise You of such greatness? 41
feratiifenteurnn sa area: THAAAL
wea Aeaterst Erased wrehaeny, seu
“The entire universe has emanated from You just like the rays from
the Sun’s orb. Hence there is nothing, visible and non- visible, in the
Universe apart from You. 42
Safer agers searfentareagar |
wrige watts fager: ue walt Gear U van
“Oh Great Lordess! With their eyes covered by Your impenetrable
power, how can the gods comprehend Your form? Protect all the groups
of gods. 43
Wi weaea Ugatad cergeat a faa
SIGE HSUIAAT Ue MARGATE ues

AIS ATT: 97 Chapter 9
“This Mahendra, without understanding You, has become immobile
near your feet. Oh Mother! Protect Indra the lord of the gods with your
compassionate side glances”. 44
oft dager wtatorge: weeath arat ya: wresar ward at wu
Brhaspati, the preceptor of gods having thus praised Parameégvari,
prostrated and praised Her again and got Her favour for Indra. 45
ag Ten: Hugwermiqudeya: | Sk: Uta weft wdisé eraafat: = ¥G HI
wre fadat wanateaentata) sat wat gait eat aati
moped waonifaert Yates ya: wore wes Hastert ee: u xen
Ta Jetta: fatsetren: | aeititvctast wqetrerarnnt: 1 xe i
Then submerged in the compassionate glances of the Devi, Indra
got back his original form freed from immobility and ego.
Then he properly understood the Devi of the Universe through
Brhaspati.
With his heart filled with utmost devotion, with folded palms, with
his head bent a little due to shyness, prostrating several times, Indra
with sweet and soft words praised the Devi the most Supreme, the all
Powerful, the Cause of the Universe, the Pure Consciousness, the Mother
of the Universe. 46 to 49
quqat Wear Bast aayias: | WAT: HPurghecienfesat ATA Ya: | hol
With his illusive bondage cut off by Her compassionate glances, the
subduer of Vala (i.e., Indra) praised the Devi when all the gods nearby
were listening. 50
weet fagt arate: UAT | AA: ATUTARTS STHTAATS SHAT SHA GR
“Qh! Mother Tripurasundari! Salutations to you! You are one with
Paragiva. Salutations to You the true cause of creation. You are the
ambrosia of transcendental bliss. 51
wa fe arorecsfa waaay Aad: | ad: Peace wala wa ofafisty Gz
wafa wettaart a ot aed Wao

st fe 98 Sri Tripurarahasyam
“You are the cause for all things that are manifest and unmanifest.
Every thing is born out of You, everything stays in You and gets absorbed
in You. You are the reality in all things. 52
face were FeCl A HTT, Wes
Arent @erdistr artaaaeatad wet yt vhafra verissRa cafaq
Gant: yradat aafencon: aera | aA: waa fasta wtate i Gyn
“Oh! Parameégvari! Just like earth in pots, Gold in ornaments, not
even a bit in this universe exists without you. Just like coolness in
water, light in fire, strong rays in the Sun, everything shines because
of You. 53 to 55
faet at fra cacrafery Qacrsfaet arene teed wa gratfagfirrt 4 11
“The essence in Brahma, Visnu, Siva and other gods is a display
of your power. 56
ams sofia dameeatt | aque vie wd am farsi F
“Oh! Devi! You are devoid of Name, Form and Action. You are just
Consciousness alone. Your Name, Form and Action are for the benefit
of the Universe. 57
THEA: Tad Foregraey! aa waa Aaa faraferaafir fers GS
“Oh! Auspicious Devi! Therefore those who desire fulfilment of the
objects of life like Dharma, Artha, Kama, and Moksa should solely serve
You who are the Cintamani—the wish yielding heavenly gem—unto Your
worshippers. 58
wafa weet fattest creamed faftea wer
fagra Gat wrdigierad qua uiscaa tat faqar: Wt
“If You are pleased, what is there that cannot be obtained? If
You are not pleased what is there to be obtained? Neglecting service
to the Universal Power the ignorant are uselessly engaged in other
activities. 59

Aaats ar: 99 Chapter 9
facatonste fe aorrgt faa cerredt 3 yaa: |
HEVTA GSAMASI: AEHATEHIMMT Yla: I Goll
“Even though, people bound to worldly life worship other gods with
limited power, they cannot attain liberation without worshipping You.
How can people rigidly bound by the illusory power (i.e., Devi) of Mahega
attain liberation without its grace. 60
seer Ta WaT A ae WafsccnrenEyee: |
ferassvipifad weadt wai carfrar frareuraatar Ween
“From a long time, bound by the illusion of Your eternal power,
ignorant people neglecting You the Transcendental Devi, the Power of
the self, salute other gods in different forms. 61
waa vatsacar TTT at WaT SaaTeaT: Het AT: |
WESAISAM A ANNU: CArereasvaTetactenfasar: Tata
“You are the only Trans-transcendental primordial One. How can
those gods born out of You, have a different identity? Just as the host
of ornaments are not different from gold, the host of gods like Isa and
others are not different from You. 62
Srdearactard wiyarsqeata CT: |
Weeamiel wrediatacneat feat pearavent eraeren: TE
“Finally, the lordship of Isvara and others is due to a tiny grace from
You, the Universal Devi. It is really stupid that the people scorched by
conflagration go in search of a pond discarding the Ganga near by. 63
ard Wd Yah ecnissee Wderens safiarst Jaa
mafaranaed ete watsam ar chad at arat nav
“Qh Mother! Who else other than You the Real is capable of protecting
me who is ignorantly filled with the vanity of overall lordship in this
body which is subject to repeated sin, bad desires and death? 64
a wt faavafadt umar ud asd aqrarsddifa
a weal @ diac arate anfarcdancest qufrat WRK

at faqeeeeay, 100 Sri Tripurarahasyam
“You are the great Devi, the Mother of the Universe. You shall
excuse all my sins. I do not have to request You because kindness of
the Mother towards her child is well-known and natural. 65
ais¢ Ask weraratsad A Aasdereafe asqae: FAL!
Oa aed weasht altar MaKe astarsft ge TT
“The fact that I became immobile before You due to Your anger is
nothing other than Your grace. All sins get burnt up due to Your anger.
A mother’s anger is such on a bad child”. 66
wa aghrdated: arr digedad: | aamaent edt west afer: = go
Thus praising the Great Devi through many nectar-dripping words,
Mahendra filled with devotion, made Devi to pardon him. 67
vende fat gear wae featera: | aia at certo tae Ge
ata: weet Aydusaenunshth | Aen fafarqeteat arrarretfiaary
Seeing Indra submitting to the Devi, Agni and other gods understood
Her as the Mother of the Universe and realising their mistake prostrated
at Her feet with fear and secured Her forgivance by praying to Her
through many hymns. 68, 69
Wer at Uae fate frat waar we Heat Heat wet aa:
Then the pleased, auspicious Supreme Devi addressed Brahma and
other gods with extremely sacred words. 70
wt at gar feet: sped cet ar annnfefrrent: eaernrty Bae 1 0k
afaret vatet ynfearermaat: | faengeftesmnt agt yen wer wa Tack a
at cartes @ frexafiaginnn: | afr eaaeererar wae UrfeaHT: 11 93 I
frag yt a qearfeauite: |
eer Ut dat tars sordfadarae faut Nes
“Oh! Brahma and other Gods! Listen to my words. You shall engage
yourself in your duties carefully according to My instructions. Oh Indra!

ants are: 101 Chapter 9
You shall always obey Brahma, Visnu and Rudra. Agni and other gods
will come under your control. Develop pious qualities by constantly
submitting to Me.
Brahma and others will carry on with the work of creation and so
on by constantly meditating on Me who am their self and the embodiment
of Pure Consciousness (Absolute Knowledge).” 71 to 74
Us TT Aa: FAT MIST: Fla: | Aa aatHfeger: wearer
Listening to Her instructions, Brahma and other gods with folded
palms and supplication prayed to the Mother. 75
ARTA te Werte! fa usaaafers yeast = RII
“Oh MaheSvari! Let us always have the vision of Your lotus feet.
Let us have absolute devotion towards You. 76
urafa aye 7 ae wate a: 1 ued Heat assent ferert safari vw i
“If we are granted this much, we have obtained everything. After
getting the Kalpataru nothing else remains to be gained. ds
afermeaitagent fart: weqerat: | afxeararafe one: fer fararafirentfefia: 1
farrafirnidta drat wat wer aareafercgitsh wrest Wery | well
Wenewanfacy: sererareaga! er at feet wales frrsrenfaet 7: it co tt
“What is the use of petty thoughts for people flourishing with the
wealth of devotion?
And for those without devotion, what is the use from crores of
Cintamani-gems?
Oh Devi! The benefit from a heap of Cintamani-gems will involve
fear; where as a little devotion to Your lotus feet will grant fearless
benefits. Therefore persons desiring fearless protection should take shelter
at Your lotus feet. Hence confer on us good devotion. What is there to
be gained by requesting for any other thing?” 78 to 80
sfa wenfearest ar sar etenssafemer! sare warfeafa aeertersaetaT
Hearing the request from Brahma and others, the Devi who had

a ARES 102 Sri Tripurarahasyam
assumed a form for play said “Let it be so” and then disappeared from
there. 81
araferrarat o wenfrarea: Ye: | fate |ft fort aeat aersaferrat sa:
Wighettaas WaaISaAAT TI
After the disappearance of the Devi, Indra and other gods saluted
Brahma, Visnu and Siva and spoke with folded palms and bent body
depicting humble submission. 82
fat get yest a: qHoasde tag, ue3n
WISHES: HAAZeUT GA! Wfaassa aeons aAeHaY AL oxi
tat HIIseet aagq seater Sq ade fe pat fesse
“Oh Brahma, Visnu and Sambhu you should protect us. We have
been somehow saved by Brhaspati, from our great mistake. Now, we
desire to know the real form of the Devi. Be kind and tell us who are
dependent on you, if we deserve to hear. Also instruct us regarding our
further duties.” 83 to 85
sdtatfeaa: seat quit: wre afera: | erat Oy ae wa Maa: ca
Hearing the words of Indra and others, Visnu spoke with a smile
“Oh Indra! Listen to me patiently. 86
saq vor wifacat wrafaeraani ar yifed: uctyrer farts swear WET | ce
“She is the Supreme Power to be contemplated upon. She is the
Great Power of Parameégvara. She is termed as “Vimaréa” the analytical
consciousness of Siva. 87
fanghattutt
(Ref: Lalitasahasranama name 548. VimarSaripini)
Telssoarenirent Beat wea TTe | a APTS Yar wTgeaey carafe
“She is the great space wherein shines the universe. She has pervaded
the universe in the form of a witness. 88

Tans AM: 103 Chapter 9
qrad animfgatata agapert i ava g fafa sted crete: ween
“The world which is seen is Her form. Whatever is seen has two
aspects because of Time and Space. 89
caret: ferarrat tat Oyit yfra: eye: 1 aut: as aer wer sf aarerfeaer fear: 11
wet was qaatate sensfe S fram weeraren dag wat We RTA: 11 Vl
“Kala (time) is of the form of action and sound. Space (Desa) has
form. Kala has three components called Varna, Pada and Mantra. Even
Space has three components called, Kala, Tattva and Bhuvana. The six
components in combination are known as sadadhva”.
Useardtra taut
(Lalitasahasranima name 991.) 90, 91
aun care atdtarerat wart at auea: caret: Hemfeder Seat 1 ez
“Just like the tree is the form of a seed, all actions become the
cause. Therefore Varna and others are Kala and Kala and others are
termed as Dega. 92
ReMeahrabegrrnqaia! Tarehartas ARTS TT, West
“Because of its illuminating the cause and effect, it is termed the
witness. Hence everything is a witness in reality. 93
a ert warered fafagrfarettoi gracerfedt fit wear at arqyéfa nex
“By separating that witness from the visible physical body, you
should understand Her as your own Self in the form of intelligence
(Pure Consciousness). 94
Be WSIET: WarMeTaaa aay! A APRA TAT UAT AGI
spa aera erafaoy |
This is in brief the principle of Self-knowledge. Treading the path
of ignorance during several births, the knowledge concerning the Power
of Paramegvara cannot be acquired by a single hearing. 95

at FIRES, 104 Sri Tripurarahasyam
ASA Wert FaISHT: AGA AAT een
aed TerTafeatonferresee |
“Therefore by constantly bearing my words with faith within your
being and practicing devotion to Her feet you will soon attain Her. 96
Vin Wanted Yotarqarers ugen
warren fragadary faq waar: | War we Nera TATA: 11 ge
afrrestsaad antag wa yin!
“Oh Indra! Along with Agni and others, you rule the heaven. Engage
them to carry out their respective duties with constant alertness. By
contemplating always on the Mahasakti, Oh Indra! tread the path of
fearlessness.” 97, 98
we quitaat gear afefiarea: Ween
wefautiqnt agers at Te: |
WOT Sat AATaTa WY: tat VS Pa, I Roo ll
Hearing the words of Visnu, Indra and other gods circumambulating
and saluting Brahma and other lords of the Universe went back to their
dwellings after receiving orders from them. 99, 100
Sort eftarqeat sara weaeR warhart: | Uva AS WASAMEL ASAT: 11 20k
Igana (Mahegvara) well worshipped with reverence by Hari and
Brahma, disappeared immediately in their presence. 101
Fe ARTA WEN erat Acat Tenfafer) sat award wer waeitenfraAs: 1 Yo?!
“Oh Parasurama! Then duly praising and saluting Visnu, the creator
Brahma went back to his residence. 102
Ua a wenger: Tesgaatea waearan wdetant fran 11 gol
I at anicarparatermgay aa ar weer: GANtageT GAT 11 Vo¥ Il
Sa Aiea aT |
“The Supreme Power, the Greatest among gods, the Universal witness,

Faas area: 105 Chapter 9
the Enchantress of the universe has shown such wonderful deed.
Oh Parasurama! You have indeed heard the marvellous narration about
the Transcendental Virgin Devi wherein She dispelled the ignorance of
Indra and other gods.” 103, 104
SCSI Wadi War Youll
shormenateradt ured wedi sittertaccad frger stfafiresat U RoK II
This legend destroys the inauspiciousness of those who hear it
regularly. It is lofty. It is purifying. It promotes sincere devotion to the
feet of the Transcendental/Supreme.
One who wishes the love and grace of Sri Tripurasundari should
incessantly listen to this. 105, 106
sta stg reread vants era: 1
End of the ninth chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurdrahasyam.

Sorat cara:
Chapter 10
wean’ dye Garage! fafera: we wat ated ct oTTeTaT Ng
Having heard the wonderful legend of Devi Kumari, the amazed
Paragurama spoke sweetly after greeting him (Sri Dattatreya). 1
wre Wea wadterq + atheregea ys fageafedtay wen
“Qh Venerable Guru! The legend told by you is wonderful. I have
not heard anytime in the past the great glory of Tripurasundari. 2
wefaayetta yfaer deqar cari aa: walfaent ar St fafa aa: | a
“Splendidly worshipped and sung by Brahma, Visnu and Hara, She,
their Mother is indeed Supreme. 3
et WAST Wat: HUSA Tar! Frit gfeteor dit carressaey, ul vl
“Oh! What a fortune! Drinking through my ears today the
ambrosial legend that flowed from your mouth, my mental ailment has
been cured. 4
prasppesé sir yeaa ass Hapeatsé A qe eda ou 4
“By the compassion of the celebrated Guru I am blessed. Pleased
as you are with me, I am lucky and contented. 5
Age stermrercryd frat wr agente far aad ag WaT nal
“While drinking such an ambrosial auspicious story I never feel
hungry, thirsty, tired or sleepy. 6
We Seas yaaa |
a Gastar wareatstr mega qadts ere Nell
“Oh Adorable Guru! After drinking the nectarine legend from your
moon-like face, I am not completely satisfied. Instead, I am more thirsty
to listen to you. 7

qRTHtS A: 107 Chapter 10
qa: staqrern citer faraautaq sights are qa frre wet cui
; “I would like to listen again the description of the glorious deeds
of Sri Tripurambika. Oh Lord! Please let me listen to it.” 8
wed dane qat saat wera: | aye wTIeTT area starsfaftarany 1
sara faqcea aaaewa: BAT: | TOT Tarsfrarenhs Fagen: ae: BAT:
Pleased by the repeated request from Parasurama, the great
Dattatreya, understanding his ample sincerity, spoke thus—“Oh Rama!
I will narrate to you the sacred stories of the incarnation of Devi
Tripurambika. Listen. 9, 10
a a sitfage wlan acarenrgrattot | aeat aafine farat wferret wenreret 1 gel
“Tripurasundari is said to be the embodiment of vast space. In Her,
shines the Universe with its divisions. 11
a faerretsgats soraftot amtat: afifeacatsdter afaoit wearers i 22
“She, the Supreme, is the embodiment of Consciousness and Bliss.
She is unique. She is beyond comprehension by words and the mind.
She is the witness of all and its supporter. 12
Mt wetpuar eat arifaergiear TARTU VT: TEATS STAMSHT T MY: BU
“To favour the devotees, the Devi works through several forms. Even
Adigesa with thousand faces (hoods) is not capable of counting the
varieties of Her manifestations. 13
Teraearreater arpacraats 1 sat PANt Tata HAAATSAAT AAT i Vv
ahd car aredtfa aa: are a afesers gut wnat asraite erat wT
wferar sitreresit aa qufaer wari Uaret aaeet efter: yoy aeenft arte ut RGU
“Hence I will tell you about some prominent forms. The primordial
one is Kumari. Gauri, Rama and Bharati are the next three. Also Kali,
Candika, Durga, Bhagavati, Katyayani are her forms. The Great Empress,
Sri Lalita is known to be the complete incarnation. Oh Bhargava! Listen
to their legends which I will narrate in an orderly way. 14 to 16

at FERS, 108 Sri Tripurarahasyam
aa waar gant ar ar war fara: | qa: at fag eat fret area
waster wae WATE!
“She, the Kumari, the Devi Tripura, who was praised by Brahma
and others took three forms again. I will tell you that sacred and most
marvellous legend.” 17
qa anissteana fage fafratiut een
wanssdivaces wer: feafsete fer ar aaretiot vied: aera J
PRAT Aer wre AST HASTA! SHAT AAA fea A AAA It Roll
‘Long ago, at the time of creation, Tripura the Universal
Consciousness was all alone. There was nothing other than Her.
She, the embodiment of Power, who is Self independent wanted to
create; the desire developed. From desire, knowledge was born and then
action. 18 to 20
wifeadat wadaadtaad! seora: UUfaaiisen efita a WH
Wen feacrenery A waar yigit & frectaerctat: aerdencagnfers: i 22
‘From Her three glances the three gods were born. Pasupati
represented desire, Hari knowledge and Brahma action. They were looked
at by Sankari and became naturally powerful and Truth abiding. 21, 22
wa: Gaet wpdataatsatea: | aera Ua a fear a yal Aa aT: Bll
7 aft wet dat argat a fem: cafe a fraet quanstt feed ae wate
‘The three gods did intense askesis controlling their mind and sensory
organs. At that time there did not exist night, day, Sun, the stars, earth,
water, fire, wind, the directions, the minute, or the yuga. Everything
was just space. 23, 24
rd Wang f eat tet Preradisra: | weaT aa Yaa: WaTTa |PASTAT: BWM
‘Self luminous as they were, the three gods in that space were
engaged in great firm concentrated askesis. 25
srragrraterenretsay wisfiace | weet aa freraTyaTs F neal

SRTatS aT: 109 Chapter 10
anthers fat fer t arent adie ga citer Gaara What wari ze
‘After a lapse of several Yugas, the Supreme Mother in the form of
transcendental space addressed Brahma. Oh Brahma! My child, rise up.
What is it that you want to do by penance? Create many beautiful
worlds. I have given birth to you only for that purpose.’ 26, 27
Sees: WIT WIAs Hat ca ae Ha Garitfa fartaq waayaT ut Wil
aat SBt Wel: Aaya sae: | aaaifaenisaeatsst TACT AVI
Thus ordered by Parasakti, Brahma decided to create. Thinking
where he should create, he looked around. He saw the great vast space
without a beginning or an end. 28, 29
wacntistet & pitt wat frame: | sracfentsega wet aatTeTeTATLI 30 Il
Thinking that there is room for his creation, Brahma shook his body
a little whereby he felt the touch. 30
wager weed etegqehad aetdrguong wgutatswacer aR
Thus by the touch generated by the vibration of his body, wind was
formed. By the speed of the wind, heat was generated. 31
Set wagadatia tfrrenbate: | aat ageq afta viteterehigey un az
Tossed afact tare Badge Ul a TY WEIS Tae TM RH
gfact aq wea cafoor aurea) GeaaTaseTRAST Usher Ache it gx Ul
From that heat, Brahma saw Agni taking shape. Then all around
Agni, cool and viscous water was formed. Then smell was generated.
From the dust of the smell was formed the earth which was hard and
capable of bearing the creation. Seeing all this, Brahma thought that
(the earth) to be the place of his creation. 32 to 34
areat gant gad arragfatataery gfe wear aa Ue fart wrdtat: a4
Thinking that “On this earth I will create a world with many diverse
forms” Brahma, the Lord of the world, started his creation. 35

at B aH 110 Si Tripurarahasyam
gad oat wea caer ania: | wre defeat HgTercar fire TTT
Listening to what Dattatreya said, Parasurama filled with doubts
spoke sweetly. 36
amaaa 2 fared tasfirreoft agegrad aed ayer va fafafaaq i 300
“Oh Venerable Guru! By listening to your words that give room for
many doubts, my mind is not satisfied. 37
meanrayat fearon |
seadeanttir & athat cat asst aa: fear: Ren
“Since Brahma saw space and other elements, it seems that they
are self existent and, that there is no other creator for them. 38
wee dat wera feat dames wer wre: vafarererea qage: SM 1 3c
“Then without sound, how these elements named by Brahma were
before their birth? 39
Uastfrncee wares sft via 1 ae dyradtenetssartedat von
alata Hea! sqeate rena wear cara: Wwe
TWRa: Wiggs haa Wargyr: |
“Tell me what the relation between sound and the body made up
of five elements is?
“Oh Compassionate Guru! Nothing other than your words that are
like hot rays of the Sun have the power to melt my snow-like doubt.
Gurus of your order with extremely pure mind will disclose the secrets
to their disciples even without being asked.” 40, 41
fet yet antaur en: via: qrorfita: USzil
We FIAT Arar Mater aeat ae: 1 TH afgnat ses wash fame: 1 v3 il
Thus asked by Parasurama, the pleased and compassionate
Dattatreya who is an adept in speech, spoke lovingly. “Oh Rama! You are
the best among the intelligent. Your question is very clever. 42, 43
frenftarrrash wrertsaut apem a a Waat wrerer enfentas "

SRTATS SA: 111 Chapter 10
“Your question has three aspects. I shall answer you later. It cannot
be understood in a hurry. Therefore have patience now. 44
sarad ¢ rere acy eaape va a: 1 fart ofesta asainahrenomt
TAT TAUTGAVA HCH |
“By teaching to a disciple at a wrong time, he gets confounded. Also
such a teaching will beget contrary effect. “Inopportune learning leads
to destruction like the weaver of mats.” 45
sft grat mitatet uae WYEE: Wwe
wate faqad vac meen: neffa: 1 fa qi we ent fare face
Listening to the words of the Guru, Parasurama the best among
Bhrgu Clan, questioned again. “Oh Guru! What is it that you said? Who
is this mat weaver? What is his story? Why was he ruined? Please tell
wd wiygqad: dsaafgafeataiin: | uy we qa ad HearaAa il Xe
Thus questioned again, Dattatreya who is the most exalted among
learned spoke. “Oh Rama! Listen to the story of the mat-weaver, which
happened some time ago.” 48
anitenfrenfagy Hacnret sat: yt aeanistafagu: Heetaierfane: uve
oem fataafaartin aes pacifier: | Ua Fagaes Tat Ge: AAA yo tt
‘In the city of Yadu in Kalinga land, there was a skilled mat weaver
by name Kuvala who was well trained in that work. That Kuvala made
mats having many designs and offered them to the king who was pleased
by his merit. 49, 50
wet cet at aft Aassea: MAMTA! GAT AA HSH ATRIUM STATA: I GR Ul
great eatery arent war! Helfapact: Yraeweraeata: Feat 42M
‘The king gave him much wealth by which he became rich. Having
heard about the greatness of the Brahmins by listening to sacred texts,
he was spending the money for their worship. Once he was listening to
the sacred texts with great interest. 51, 52

st FRE, 112 Sri Tripurarahasyam
aaserefrane Wares HAA: | A MaaIshrqerarys: GAT ATT Ge
‘There he heard about the knowledge regarding the Self. He was not
able to grasp that subtle knowledge even after repeated hearing. 53
Fasswaat farted age: Fafa! Ta Sea wremeaatars Te: 1 yy
dadta wire war yaisfr Gaya TA AN ATH AA antag aT aut
Ae He HOUTA GRA UA UHY AM!
‘Then Kuvala secretly met one truthful Brahmin and told him thus.
“Oh Adorable Brahmin! I have heard many times your talk on the
knowledge of the Self which is very profound. With mercy on me at least
once tell me its essence, which I will be able to understand.” 54, 55
ufaa: Gace we deer aN: Ween
qu at wafsentt Hacnisarcrayey|
‘Thus requested by Kuvala, the Brahmin told him the essence
briefly. “Oh Kuvala, listen. I will tell you in short the knowledge about
the Self. 56
waaay: ait ea Wat See W&H
Weal es GH UME FAA Vall SAMs S dager faa: Wer ue
farternted sft & gfrafir
“The essence of Vedanta is as follows. By keeping away from the
cravings of the senses, remaining calm, taking all seen objects to be
same as the seer, treating all equally, not discarding what comes to
your lot, not aspiring for what you do not get, being contented, being
fearless, you shall indeed conduct yourself with detachment.” 57, 58
We waeemrand act afedtstaey eS
warn fay afsaytfrcantaa: | area: Wal US Waraaaeay ll
Saardat ens wera umd aur) dfeadt aaferca: Weare Weyl
‘Listening to his words, the confounded Kuvala (without proper
understanding) started treating the Brahmins as his equals and lost
respect for them. Becoming rich he was always enjoying material comforts.

axes ae: 113 Chapter 10
He stopped listening to sacred talks as well as worship of God. Without
the fear of sin he turned an atheist and was ruined.’ 59 to 61
Ura ante wert Gd Heal WaT! Tees AMlad stare uftaHeayT 1 gzHI
“Oh Bhargava! That was the story of the mat-weaver told by me.
Therefore knowledge imparted at a wrong time will be injurious.” 62
Ua qa acter warat WftaE: | WATS ya Hah WAIST GI
‘Thus, the grandsire of the world looking at the earth created from his
mind, all moving and non-moving things along with human beings. 63
TETterrdat frefaratea tafe era tear yates i &x
tar fagt Queer, WaT | TA Weds Gorestegaerar gy
qearata fearfir fafata wast a1
‘Brahma created human beings, Yaksas, Gandharvas, Siddhas,
Vidyadharas, Kinnaras, Raksasas, Danavas, Daityas, Demons, Spirits,
Goblins, Gods, Manes, Lords of Gods, Animals, Horses, Goats, Birds,
Animals living on land, Creatures of the Sea, Grass, Creepers, Trees
and varieties of dwelling places. 64, 65
we we atta ad wradtatt Wa
qeasaeat Ue wi yata wat sel
WM aaisdtat agente WIsfacat ugon
mresytivadar fae fer aaa fea:
War UBt fyad: a is wera fanfare: TA
‘All his creation was getting terminated in a moment. Seeing his
creation sinking, he made up his mind to do askesis. After a long time the
Supreme Mother addressed him incorporeally. “Oh Brahma! Leaving aside
the duty of creation that I had ordered, why are you doing penance”?
wegen set wre faarats searerataiy tadar get aonearadtafe gs tl
mares frageatd fam citerat fered
‘Hearing the words of the Devi in the spatial form, Brahma said

at PETES 114 Sri Tripurarahasyam
BARS oy ee eS
“Qh Mother! My creation is sinking in a moment after taking shape.
Oh Sive! Nominate Visnu for its protection.” 69
faqya weet UT ues senreretaatt wont
arengrarcar & fae wre at tat share feet auet farassaea wea:
urea war yp: weaaigrag 21 fafrge wera earereeraaat: 1 RN
‘Pondering over the words of Brahma, Paramesvari the
Transcendental embodiment of Space, addressed to Visnu incorporeally.
“Oh Visnu! Wake up. Stop your penance and listen to me. You have
been created by me for the purpose of protection. Taking my order
protect the creation of Brahma by your self-power.” 70 to 72
sft arest aarenvd uenarar eftetel | AMPA TAA WIAA: 1 93 I
warren anf ehattat wa aa aa feat adaareraastat: = ol
‘Hearing the words of the Supreme Devi, Visnu agreeing with Her
and saluting Her rose up to protect the world. By his self-power, Hari
the lord of yoga, protected completely all the created world. 73, 74
ww qe crear a faa anada asisetifegedaad i e4tl
In this manner, the world, being created by Brahma and
being protected by Visnu, overgrew like a pond filled by the down-pour
of rain. 75
anf argent werd ada qateftar afr: Gutsftd a7: TACT
‘The world was filled with the creation growing every day. The land
was filled with creation that live on land. The sky was filled with animals
moving in the sky. 76
areifastemtearst sfratetaet var areqeofefererrcerensiefte rer: N well
ameprenmd: tema anft a1 uganifwarts cad watat wat tl 62 tl
‘The waters were filled with water-creatures. The holes (burrows)
were filled with worms and insects. Similarly the mountains were filled
with trees and bushes. The forests were over-filled with quadrupeds,
deers and tigers. The interspersed space was infested by mosquitoes,
and flies. 77, 78

SRTATS A: 115 Chapter 10
wa ante dere eaten feat) sree wiftrat difsatssarTT 11 oe
faction sarcsartianiinfra dtaqeat afsari aa wade TaN i co
‘When the world was thus densely filled, there arose the hue and cry
of creatures that were tormented. The universe which was spread with
lives was cracking just like a ripe pomegranate rich with seeds. 79, 80
Ua wre freesare cite dyfeassaet
geet fafefsrcamt et aefate fara eau
Watton aot fatacifenfeccrar
‘Seeing such a suffocating and distressing situation of the world,
Brahma with a sigh went again into penance for the sake of the world.
WUT AeA VeqeT YAS Tertacar Wer
areAyTawa arat etait weat faa a: fer wate fearenge Asfa 230
aie aad ad faerentt + aera: |
‘Pleased by his penance, the Supreme Mother, the Supreme Devi,
gladdened Brahma by Her incorporeal voice. “Oh Brahma! Tell me quickly
why you are performing penance again. Undoubtedly I will fulfil your
wants.” 82, 83
Sa: We cteari wat erat wefan, ues
Trader yore oer Targa cand wifinfarerd Uist wench TT cut
arent fads arararre yigit
‘Told thus, Brahma the creator spoke to the Supreme Mother.
“Oh Mother! the world that is created by me and protected by Visnu
the wielder of mace, is densely pervaded with lives and suffering.
“Oh Sankari! Give orders regarding what is to be done next.” 84, 85
WaT WIS We SF TEAC wegu
ease are viaghrs we wr! fafrge wiforrot def water coll
‘Being reported thus, the Mother of the Universe told Rudra the
great Lord. “Oh Rudra! Enough of your askesis. Get up soon and according
to my order, destroy the lives created by Brahma.” 86, 87

st ARREST, 116 Sri Tripurarahasyam
sft gran werengdert waft wenn wre Uehreat TMETAHIT ee
aifrenetsa werent qatisra: | reac PTET aTRT Net
‘Hearing the spatial voice of the Mother of the Universe, Pasgupati
saluted the Supreme Devi. Accepting Her orders he determined to destroy
the world and by opening his third eye reduced to ashes all the world
in one stroke. 88, 89
aqear premised faera Wd: AI! HAGE: We BS AHH HaTSfer: 1 go
ai Way wad: denfsfatrad ageret VE A aa aaitpd aoTT on ee
‘Seeing the surprising manner in which the world was destroyed
the displeased Brahma addressed Rudra by saluting him with folded
palms.
“Oh Maheéga! Stop your strange destruction, which has reduced to
ashes in a moment, my long-term creation. 90, 91
aap safes cient erertsgari sft warts erat retate afer: 1 32H
“Therefore again do penance for the benefit of the worlds.” ‘Thus
requested by Brahma, Siva started his penance again. 92
ade: get weed fafa at: wae wen WisyIsTaa WA: tl
‘Then Brahma the Lord worried about how to proceed with
his creation, created his representative creators from a portion of his
being. 93
Sa HVAT YS YE: wiforsedar fafaaret: wat Sf wea waTsat:
‘The creators Daksa, Kasyapa and others created animals and the
entire world was filled with their varieties of moving and non-moving
creations. 94
Wel HAT wat Pera! Era SF UyyaA waver wfrarse: Ta
Taisrsaryg det ¢ saad et wassqar Maier HAVitsfacr II
Wal waded a up: defaeaa
‘Then Brahma thought about gradual destruction of the world. He
pleased Rudra by praying to him. Born from Rudra, Yama the god of

TAS A: 117 Chapter 10
death was allotted the job of destruction. Brahma said. “Oh Yama! As
ordered by me gradually destroy the creation. You are indeed created
by me for this purpose of annihilation.” 95, 96
WeHea TMU ATER YY: We WoTET A nse
a dedicat sorererquéfa sifteata sar at a a oat kt fret ec
‘Hearing the words of Brahma, Yama saluted him and spoke. “Oh
Adorable Lord! Please pardon me. I do not like to do the work of
destruction. People will curse me for that. Do not allot me such a cruel
agad wifddtsta + aemensquaa ufafigers erat aa: were: = eel
‘Even after repeated requests Brahma did not concede. Being thus
rejected, Yama took to penance. 99
astrmagd aa wreipsansa: | vitvlguigrt eee citegetar: Il Qoo ll
Ques sarda YRitse wa dal qe: Wdtes sant at atfseaafet ATL ul 20g tl
‘Yama did penance for ten thousand years with discipline standing
on his toes and sustaining on fallen leaves. Then the pleased Brahma
spoke thus. “Oh Yama! I am pleased by your penance. Ask from me
any desired boon”. 100, 101
TTA WE MA Ta Sarsler: | aay afe & qeercissara ai fast
era qaedtacas fraser!
‘Listening to Brahma, Yama spoke saluting with folded palms. “Oh
venerable Lord! If you are pleased with me, I do not want the task of
destruction. This is my request.” 102
aarenud wre fafa: get tcafacata I oR ll
aMamisge aut dati wifeay saat wise at anisfraery
‘Hearing that Brahma said, “Oh Yama! This is not possible. My
earlier order, that you shall destroy, cannot become false. Quickly ask
for another boon from me.” 103, 104

a fea 118 Sri Tripurarahasyam
TaRTshrrayy: WesaEA TAT SAAATAAT MS FATS HASTA I OKI
aayasHet at eTAgT Ala aat ten agian: wrat faferergtar: 11 g0G 1
‘Hearing that Yama wept terribly with fear. From his weeping eyes
flowed a shower. Brahma collected that in his palm and spilled it on
the earth. From that were generated varieties of diseases. 105, 106
Aart fafewarad qeat WT aeyTaTaS | SA WT: AYA AAAI lt ow
we wafa & oom: yeh Fat: | af Tard fees ae weiter
‘Then Brahma said, “Oh Yama! Do not get worried. These diseases
have been created to assist you. These diseases will attack first, so that
people will not consider you as the killer. Thus your task will be
accomplished.” 107, 108
wafa wine gst yafadda: | aed wea: Blehatrdendieat I o@tl
‘Pleased with the words of Brahma, Yama consented. In this way
the creation, protection and destruction activities of the world were
organised. 109
wen eft: agua: @ a ain die: | aeR Sere faaoon fara: 1
sarequgedt wrearureanuny |
‘Brahma, Hari and Pasupati who were engaged in their respective
activities and due to that were tired, depressed and dull. They approached
the Great Devi who is the primordial cause of the Universe. 110
Wel Waa UAT rg eat Heat WeRRRM
framt greyrgen eyreacat wena wefaerfetareat wanes sare wifeerat 11 Bez
suey amet at at yest viet wet ugar yt yeh UTA eel
wutet aaa a faprteaatitt
‘The Transcendental Maheévari pleased with the trinity of gods
a can before them as a composite form of them. She was tri-coloured,
ad twelve arms, ten faces, was exceedingly luminous, had twenty-five
persis wielding the water-pot, the rosary, the signs of boon and
eerie namidiney the conch, the mace, the lotus, the deer, the

SyTAIS ar: 119 Chapter 10
trident, the axe, the skull in Her twelve hands. She stood pervading the
universe. 111 to 113
Note: The composite form—12 arms (4 x 3), 10 faces (Brahma 4, Visnu 1,
Siva 5), 25 eyes (Brahma 8, Visnu 2, Siva 15)
at Gear fafqearet cusaaorar afer Weevil
merenferaarreats qattaan: | aEytats APSA aoe AAT NRG II
‘Seeing Her, Brahma and the others prostrated on the ground.
Horripilated and filled with tears from devotion to Her feet and their inner
being blissful from Her vision, they abundantly praised Her. 114, 115
wameat tat faasrettestranement cteayitatirmerwagany
vachomrardnenteaternustaata amet wnfratarcrrriy =n eek tl
“We salute you, Oh Devi! You grant to your devotees more than their
desire. You are the Ruler of the universe. Your great splendour is infinite.
You have displayed the array of universes just for Your sport. You are
the Transcendent Brahma. You are the life vein of Paramegvara. 116
faera wat ect fafqatrarnccannt wid arenftanpaterandarar |
wargu defearefarestt werct waar flat art vate yrqenractafe: it ye 1
“In the process of measuring the group of principles starting with
the earth and ending with Siva and also the group starting with Kalagni
and ending with Siva and similarly the moving and static creation and
the entire lot, if you, the Devi, is abandoned or is absent, it would be
like searching for water in a mirage. 117
uefeast af watts wrachrae ferat demenft wecacyeat Ay wer!
a aft stardtate aerate tar wads arg cafe a fe watscarcam: 11 eRe
“Oh Devi! Even though You have pervaded all the different objects
in the world and always displayed Your presence, it is a great wonder,
that our sensory organs like ears and our speech or even our mind which
has a deeper place in our body, fail to ponder on You. 118
ara weararafrereurarsyreaT wataretarot Yoneda |
aar earn aa: veafeadaracat: aan wt at was wIGSRIT HH NRT

et 120 Sri Tripurarahasyam
“Qh Pure Devi! For the sake of easy comprehension through mind
and senses by Your saluting devotees, You, out of utmost compassion,
favour them. Oh! Mother, who are anxious to protect the world, You
manifest in the same form as meditated upon by the worshippers of
Your lotus feet. 119
fraterearmnfiratearsvetacrtaat Maat Bear: UeaTreTeTeRTAge: |
nemranat: facaretennctaat feratert artfertgafret aeTa tt R201
“Qh Consort of Siva! By the closing and opening of Your eyes
innumerable Universes are destroyed and created. For You with a
supremely powerful form with great power of illusion, it is a small matter
that You take several forms to grant the desires of Your devotees. 120
Tae ween sate wgeracakadt deat wea waft aad aerate: |
faquun: wt: aed facaedtatfefaua: wad wseravata fe daa wea
“Oh Mother! We Brahma and others having been allotted by you,
the work of creating, protecting and destroying the world are continuously
engaged in them. In that task we feel depressed having lost our strength,
valour and splendour. You alone who are the Supreme will be able to
rescue us.” 121
ofa degra aan Saget waft Haus Tara qe Wael 122?
‘Thus praying Parambika, the Protector of the Universe, Brahma
and others narrated their account after saluting Her with love and
devotion. 122
TST MTS aekt AT Ua wre Wear aren fit Aart faaadt 1 ezsil
‘Hearing the words of Brahma and others, the Supreme Devi being
pleased spoke to them sweetly with affection. 123
WET weet at art Pt ASAE: | pee: ASNT wey faa FeAl VY
oat 4 Fran at seats ay arty same gaan frdfat sa dferat: 11 eee
“Oh Brahma, Murari and Sambhu, I know your condition. Your
physical form is without my component. Hence you are tired in your
tasks and you have lost lustre, strength and potency. 124, 125

aRTats aa: 121 Chapter 10
weet at fearents fact wer wr fa wage ava fg a weet
wargitcoer fer atftr wari crgaer! walfampesionguaaryreT tl got
“I will soon grant you auspiciousnes. Do not worry.”
‘Saying thus, the Great Devi Tripurambika brought out from Her
body three forms. These three in association with the powers of Brahma,
Visnu and Mahe§a, took three forms. 126, 127
aroft tar a eae sarensfaame: | gape: Ahedafirteot: 1 geet
TAME Feworeade: | Tarai aera TOT: WWM
wproaaeen: YETenfeaataa: | ead qurestg Alyce: Ron
sretenireneqysuitesca: | BHAA: «= ARTI
Wgatratercnrerqtnteryntaa: | Afters aEA ATT: WRIT
yedttugaigaraaninteen: | aerate: waaferanenset: 1 883
‘They are Vani, Rama and Raudrani. They are respectively white,
red and dark in colour and seated on the swan, the lotus and the lion.
They are the gem mountains of beauty, with the gait of an intoxicated
elephant, with soft and red feet, with a row of nails whose rays have
humbled the lustre of moons, with fore-feet like the tortoise, with stout
beautiful ankles, with shanks like the quiver of cupid, with waist (unseen)
like space, tired with heavy hips that are covered by luxurious silk robe,
with a deep navel resembling the vase for the creeper of beauty, with
three folds on their soft belly beautiful with fine hair, bent forward
because of the weight of their breasts looking like ruby pots, with long
and soft arms like the stalk of the lotus palms, with conch-like necks,
with lips like ripe cherries. 128 to 133
Pe AUST AVA: | ATH here ATATA TATA: Ml BS
gramtentarenftarengaredt: | Aforedurarerstadvsgatsae: TE
thimergeenbraragaten: | sedigicigqeanettecrarrarg7: = 8G I
wifaficadedaurengican: | fertartagretcarencantereat: (@xtet:)
ufimdanecrmapeae: | aredteytearpuscmtusa: Ben
ararafimraratisgiferarcraten: | Tefeartoretarcnfayiea: R88

at ARE, 122 Sri Tripurarahasyam
FATE AAH ASEM: | HATA MUTA eT: NU R¥onl
TgasarHaerASyasa: | wkeaHaavradureaturarskT: ul ewe
‘Beautiful with rows of teeth like the buds of jasmine, with beautiful
nose resembling the bud of Campaka flower, with the wind in the
directions (quarters) filled with the flood of aroma from their breath,
with cheeks like a mirror made out of ruby, with three eyes looking like
blue lilies, with broad temple destroying the elegance of half-moon, with
locks of hair looking like the compressed heap of darkness of the universe,
with curly hair naturally having the fragrance of campaka flower, with
crown closely studded with excellent gems, with golden ear-rings decorated
with precious gems, with nose-studs the effulgence of which is being
stolen by Sukra (star), with gem-set necklaces beautifying the necks,
with lotus-like faces at the tip of stem of pearl necklaces (garland),
decorated with gem-set bracelets, shoulder ornaments, bangles and rings,
with silk garments bound by snake-shaped waist-band and rope, with
the vehemence of the jingling swan-shaped anklets. 134 to 141
ud faa ameter yaentenataan frat aster SongErarszary tl Ys?
oat arivittaenattrysstet |
‘The Devi of speech Sarasvati, of such beauty, with a hue like pure
crystal, with three eyes, with moon on her head, holding the Vina, Book,
signs of boon and protection in Her lotus-like hands, was shining like
a mass of knowledge. 142
fagurer fagreneit wen werageay, Newen
qart uftrsrcrst safrae at |
‘The Devi of wealth Padma (Laksmi) of such beauty, was shining
with coral hue, with broad eyes, holding four lotuses in her lotus-like
palms. 143
eefedtararar aght: ufireea: W Rell
HATA: TSCTR TARR LT: | STR eee Ha STTT Ul VS
‘She (Rudrani) of such beauty, was shining with a dark blue hue
like blossomed blue lily, wielding a sword, a shield, a trident, a mace

RIS, iE
in her four sprout-like palms, with a crescent moon at the tip of her
ud faertagra fafa: gorarad: | wrgyat wereeat ferapfergr safe: 1 ¢xg
‘From the body of Tripurasundari, three forms of powerful godesses
as described, manifested in a moment like sparks from a fire. 146
a: Wore Ut cat aaa dferareter
‘They saluted the Supreme Devi and then stood near Her.
fasta: wre fag wetat Nevo
at waenyae: Aacel WaT Sar: | TATYMGST Weleer: Uetewet HAUT aT: exe
The Great Devi Tripurasundari spoke to Brahma and others.
“Oh Brahma, KeSava, and Hara! These three powerful Goddesses have
been created from My power for your sake. Accept them in this order.
34 fagraniter arastar watsyra: | aar Wet Hecate ase RaT BT Nw
fagregt ured x AsyneagRA! Tae yiRaT MAT Aletta wAaEAG — tt Bo ll
“Qh Brahma! The coral coloured one is from your aspect. Oh Hari!
The dark blue coloured Rudrani is from your aspect. Oh Rudra! Bharati
with crystal clear body is from your aspect. They would become famous
as sisters of the aspects from which they have manifested. 149, 150
fag: det faunfaent waea cer q1 faete fares fates sqaAeT a: Ml 84
Usht waren wag fraret aqea 4:1
“The sister of Brahma to Visnu, the sister of Visnu to Rudra, the
sister of Rudra to Brahma. In this manner, you accept them as your
wives and let the marriages bring good fortune for you. 151
wa qafaarert yifeafertratr: TSA
wen fdas waa frearty) qa wae MATT rat ARMAS TAT Mt 4S I
“Oh Brahma and others! By such a marriage, with my powers you
will be happy without strain and soon become fit in all your work that
will be for the good of the world.” 152, 153

st ARREST, 124 Sri Tripurarahasyam
sqaen A eet ataracetad | aafearrrat g teat F wrretaet: | aa
ai wat wiea Sere wae wfafet) aa cae YR wa wae WaT:
aatfeefaaa aygqetaa: |
‘Stating thus, the Great Goddess disappeared from that place. After
Her disappearance the Lords of the world reached their abodes along
with their respective consorts. Then on an auspicious day, the three
Lords got wedded according to rituals. 154, 155
Regs gage asrargaaat TRC Ca
faaresren tfeat ffir feat agate farersdga on gue Il
‘At the foot of the Mountain Meru which was ten thousand yojanas
broad, a beautiful marriage hall was structured by Visvakarma. It had
thousands of stout pillars raised upto four yojanas. 156, 157
faarrenrstfst ancnreanhaaay Ua SATAY TESS ETNA 1 Rue I
Unrentfredstteatiragattid: | fageierrqad: aarguenirery, Wee
‘Its sky-like canopy had astral designs and a border with gem bunch
hangings. It was beautiful with thirty-yojana tall flags decorated with
sapphire. 158, 159
fagreiufasersrcitormtise da cuted aft: dreamt a ego
‘Tts coral pillars had engraved dolls. The golden flooring was spread
with gem-set mats. 160
nfnmrearantaicat: Maen areata: ada afesat gag
‘The platforms were shining with precious gems. All over the
lamp-posts were set with nine kinds of gems. 161
eieatirpasareadnuientiga | wera gaia ssae Weg
‘The doorway arches were of pure emerald. Every pillar was tied
with plantain-stem decorated with gems. 162
MOT SAH EAHA | Gace Tae TSTAT 1 g3 ll
‘There were gem-set dolls holding diamond-set fans. The hall was
rich with the fumes of incense, camphor, musk, saffron. 163

SRTAts A: 125 Chapter 10
AEA eSATA afore sa fercenre hrateaaet WRex
‘The excellent gems in the nooks and corners of the hall were
glowing as if set ablaze from the augmented brilliance of the row of
lamps. iss
yrera: uae caeamtenatican: | ferkatengeenictateht: eeu
Feu steraetSgNG aM: | AeegAtIaaAARPST: 1 ReK II
Tegenleayeraacaaa: | wat aa ferareret cpeTarara ferferTet Va\9 tt
‘In that hall, there were many beautiful orchards with naturally
oozing sweet honey that attracted a row of buzzing bees, with the melody
of intoxicated parrots and cuckoos, with branches of trees touching the
ground by the weight of the bunch of fruits. The eminent sculptor created
all these for the marriage. 165 to 167
TASMAN: gaara: | Ta feraraaareanya AAT: NR I
A group of gods arrived there in their decorated heavenly cars which
filled the gardens and the ground. 168
meat yaa: fag: faareaferat: | AAMT: YASaT AGA: ASST: 1 Ra
aargurt fagrenstt yet xAaarTe |
‘At that auspicious event even the spacious hall was overcrowded
with thousands of Seers, Sages, Siddhas, Vidyadharas and Kinnaras,
Human beings, Snake-gods, ancient gods, and demons. 169
U gvoll
TraRaarrTeM TS:
TYAMTagRage: YAATT| FeaMfafaqaavartUrerarat: 1 Yo il
afta sauradataeeataraera |
‘The marriage hall was filled, with the intensely sweet musical
notes of the Gandharvas, with pleasing murmurs, with the dance of
heavenly damsels like Rambha and others dancing to symphonic
synchrony, with instrumental music of various sounds that was pleasant
to hear. 170, 171

at Rea 126 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Sargurgenteatted: Wega: Ween
qervieivitufatrnsaccnteta: | wretefaeraret: ufttgren: =n 2031
wa faarat yrerat faare: wnada |
The charming ladies of the gods, demons and men were well decorated
with varieties of ornaments set with fresh gems and valuable clothes
shining with precious diamonds. In such a grand hall the marriage was
performed. 172, 173
yt aed facracrarnvsonen: WRO¥ It
Farerneradine vache Weer | ARTS vratvar: urforreetay tt 9% tI
ware yigt aefafrn waqeary|
‘In the centre of that brilliant hall, while the fire was blazing on
the gem-decorated altar, Sankara held the sprout-like palm of Sarvani,
the sister of Visnu and wedded her by uttering Vedic chants. 174, 175
ue faarrararcararforeataray, Ta
Waleadal aA AATANTAT: UT: 1
‘Then on the same platform the Supreme Narayana held the lotus
like palm of Rama, the sister of Brahma and married Her. 176
Oa TAM: Uy: cater: TE Roel
frame: WEST: Wad: | Aaa: MAMA: VAT: tt RII
ad agian Heaiteanst |
‘Then Brahma held the palm of Vagdevi the sister of Pasupati and
married Her. By that auspicious marriage every one assembled in that
hall was very happy. 177, 178
a faarefatir werfamre at: W gogtl
fare: wer: wer aroit cet fereanfirer: | aerat waristansrrararaerfiott:
wagered: aaa araet: | fafaraearacorargenfeqyiiaad: i R22 il
wet Faefever fasta aepfertqar ea et cites wea ABATE: VCR Il
wiyeaie pay waar fate: | fat ween: arenes Tat: 1 923 ll

ZaTAtS a: 127 Chapter 10
ene
‘Thus Brahma, Visnu and MaheSvara married the three aspects of
Tripurasundari who are known as Vani, Laksmi and Siva, who are the
mothers of the world, who destroy the sins of their devotees, who bestow
auspiciousness and gift speech, wealth and knowledge, who wear many
jewels and clothes and who shine with their weapons along with their
consorts. The three great gods who were extremely happy and who were
relieved of strain went to their respective abodes and were engaged
in their tasks of creation, protection and so on of the world. They
were always immersed in the worship of the lotus feet of the Great
Devi. 179 to 183
ure arta Greaney ax a fagtert frear ararat ol ex tt
aot tar frraraar wdeitenrentest) mefaeyfgrary aa areas areata: 11 ec
‘This is the sacred legend of Tripurasundari wherein She the
well-wisher of the whole universe, manifested in three forms as
Vani, Rama, and Siva and wedded Brahma, Visnu and Siva by such
aspects. 184, 185
Uerararemipacaany| steed frgreat: wader deareafe: = RcR II
‘This legend which confers longevity and grants what one desires
should be always heard by the devotees of Tripura with control over
their senses. 186
aig wen at waar AeA FTL! wearer arfsoaratttrenrayperarerary ll 8c
ara afeanivte gran piwadeaq wearer wt wart yarafeaforry i tee
‘For the devotees who hear this legend, the Supreme Devi very
quickly grants all material comforts and at the end imparts the knowledge
of Parameévara (Sambhavi Diksa) according to their devotion and finally
accords the highest place from where there will be no return to the cycle
of birth and death.’ 187, 188
arta were afearcerraran wrargrarered fageran were — RCS
“Oh! Paragurama! You have heard with concentration this marvellous
legend of Tripurasundari, which yields great benefits. 189

at FEST 128 Sri Tripurarahasyam
aaa afeent vert qatar! Tt ared HAS wg Wan sorta
“This should never be told to non-devotees, to atheists, to fraudulent
ones and the wicked. If told to such, the Devi will be angry on the
teller. 190
wn ear avid faaritet a aden fee ga: sitgfireat Fae wer WEA eee
“You have to imbibe and meditate on this always. Oh Intelligent
Parasgurama! Tell me what more do you want to listen?” 191
sft stages wrereraus eymitsera: 11
End of the tenth chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurarahasyam.

Wenleyits arg:
Chapter 11
wa fat caret freara weM! Gra wire wa: stempega ue
PoraereaT eae! AMaNTARIMAA Vy F neu
Listening to such a splendid legend of the triple manifestation of
Tripurasundari which was like the fresh honey of joy from the lotus-face
of Sri Dattatreya, the wonder-struck Parasurama’s mind was submerged
in the blissful ocean of nectar. 1.2
ate afeaatgret ae! ASME We Il
Tdfad wert seagate) qaapareatrieacnanpretay vil
feat: sagen wiet feet) cor anfirentegpedt ariel Gil
Wudtsqaot gon add F cas aad
Then Paraguréma uttered words filled with love and devotion.
“Oh Guru Dattatreya! I had never heard such a wonderful legend which
you narrated. Drinking that ambrosial river-like story through my ears my
thirst is not quenched; instead it is increasing every moment just as the
desire of a lustful person when he sees a beautiful woman.” 3 to 5
Te sitar 3 aerey aaa, nau
freon: yd qed alafdarafe weit aarsseart art qt ue seo Ut ©
Oh Guru! Oh Lord of Auspiciousness! Oh compassionate one!
You have told me very well the great, auspicious and purifying legend
of the triple forms of the Devi. Now tell me the story of Gauri and
other forms. 6, 7
sft welqgadtsa carter adtac: | wre WES CaT ATA ATA nen
Being thus repeatedly requested, the great sage Dattatreya, pte
in pleasant, dignified and sweet words.
arta su talfeattt aterarer we ait cat eof mea eaTeaeTeT
fifa: <q pet faaer: acta A

at fe 130 Sri Tripurarahasyam
“Qh Bhargava! Listen to the purifying story of Gauri and others.
After wedding, Gauri, Rama and Vani, Rudra and others were engaged
in their duties, happily and comfortably. 9
wa wey city alate: Ugo
aM: Warana ayquiaat gfe
Aardtentsf Aareat + fact + Gare: een
Tayi a a Urea at urerat arsft aaa!
a Wa: Aaent arsft 3 Wet 4 Were Weel
wa at amelie aritacat wari
In such created worlds because of non-difference in action, all
human beings on the earth were of equal temperament. Disparities like
rich, poor or happier were absent. There was no Lord, no servant, no
king and no subjects. Everything looked equanimous like the mind of a
yogi. 10 to 12
wafaa wt wid A ast a a efaor Ween
Tart ast gente yreaaretfacreery|
When people were in such a state, there was no Yajfia, no reward,
no giving, nor worship. Everything was peaceful and unperturbed. 13
way qfa cer tare: Saree: uesil
7 OG cet aeterafadiaa: | der ye wars wore faqs neal
Wess: Teaat ferita: aa: fear: |
In such a condition on the earth, the gods led by Indra did not find
enjoyment for want of service from human beings. Then the thousandeyed Indra along with other gods, humbly saluted and asked Brhaspati
who was seated in the assembly. 14, 15
SUga Wt WE Wa A: Hecawry Wall
qart peparaierant ators: | deen wepes wats Terai Aart Voll
“Oh learned Brhaspati! Oh Guru! You are our preceptor. You are
taken to be the boat by the gods to cross the ocean of difficulties. Hence
look at the kind of trouble we are facing now. 16, 17

UaTeeS AA: 131 Chapter 11
a a
neat qerat wera Sta a: fate: I! we frameset yer enfete fererary ry
We have heard in the Veda that human beings are subordinate to
gods. Think, how can the words of Brahma become false? 18
Gea F Wada Wafer T1 Aakerer aurea: Uy ty wat ee
If the human beings fall to our strategy, then they will not be
independent and they will come under our rule as our followers. 19
aa: Waa Ba Tay Ufa! sarat feat are RASA I 20 tt
Quickly think, how we can achieve that? You are our saviour during
difficulties like the maker of collyrium to the blind person.” 20
sea Qeerareat fayrens sfexat Te: 1 aut faqya ware aateraqirra 1 22 11
Hearing Indra, Brhaspati the Guru thought for a while and addressed
Indra and other gods. 21
3 acer ware staat waatsseue! tarnfetacesd aque fed aa: 1 22H
Tes ada: vith yrevd wftrarmeqs wut a saesat frarerenqaret: i 23H
Whraasa wae: waenlEy: | Vata vaca Maat THT Ht BSI
asstisa fart afsgurat sada
“Oh Indra! Listen, with interest, to my advice for the fulfilment of
the desire of gods. Go soon along with your gods and surrender to the
lotus-seated Brahma who will bless you. He is the all knowing independent
Lord of creation. This alone will be for your good and redressal of fear.
There is no other means to achieve your wants.” 22 to 24
. fauut dat Hew
aifatt gatas: atafiqyern: | wT wWeraet aeicites yretafer: mene
Listening to the words of Brhaspati, the Gt te no al
his advice and saluting him, Indra the Lord of ret apr he
gods, manes and guhyakas (demi-gods) went to Satyaloka the le
Brahma. ae
l Wu
1H TT IeTaTG: wet seo te soe

att P 132 Sri Tripurarahasyam
a eee
apfesrereratererenrite yfiraare | Saihra my MReRT AGA ATT aA AATA WU
Rar TTA STA! SHAATSVSAR TAMA M30 tt
Sarterarcferenaeeny ear iyTATy |
There Indra reached the outer court of Brahma, which was hundred
yojanas wide and twenty yojanas long, and thirty yojanas high. It was
bright with diamond pillars, and by its reflection the brilliance of the
gold flooring was enhanced. The marble roofing was mixed with the glow
from the flooring. The row of pearls looked variegated by its contact
with the three types of light. The eyes of the diamond dolls enclosed in
the pillars were shining with marble bits, sapphire-like pupils and
attractive eye-lids. 27 to 30
ANTS TANIA : Bgl
aftrearsafatad: | dt: meet: gq: Wasa: 1 BRI
afta meats Wenredeiae! weal fianred Yaaresatarfaag 33 I
fagreat wereag: oftatsft waren amifaararats dierent weet: tl B¥ ll
Brahma’s court was filled with fragrance of sandal, musk and the
many aromatic powders of Kasmir. The door arches were decorated with
gems and golden designs. The pillars beautified by plantain and betel
stems and nets of flower garlands. It was cooled by a mild breeze. In
the centre was the throne of Brahma which was densely decorated with
gems and an umbrella of pearls. All around there were thousands of
many types of seats. 31 to 34
ag fear were: eaftenen veda: | qraren: arenes ait: qeraferat:
In those were seated the great sages like Kapila, Bhrgu, Sanaka
and other yogis. 35
alferreeravaatquigatrn: | arerarnfsar Tar TATTSTACTET: zal
ata: qeisanraret arfirife: Wat: | Wat aera g re feria: nzou
TATA: STAM ATATS: | TEER CBC Il
wavitrestteerraqenet sa
These sages were being fanned by lovely proud young women with

ERS a Se
a beauty equalling crores of cupids. As the rays of smile emanating from
their faces resembling full moon were falling on the rows of eyes of the
carved images on the pillars, the eyes were dripping pure water
continuously as if they were the tears of joy produced by seeing the
beauty of the court. 36 to 38
wa faerat srat wafaguaeeta: nagn
Waadeaeat Aaa: | Wafast faarat arsayaencsfan: U¥oll
There on the throne was the fresh coral-coloured Brahma with
graceful four faces intent on interpreting the Supreme Spirit. The Lord
of the heaven saw that grand Brahma. 39, 40
aeciearat usta feoa welfare fafa: 1 wafgrarardta: centarerat = wR
Even in Satyaloka, Brahma has assumed two forms for protecting
the world. 41
TATA PSMA! Wag afer caitert fraafggerry ll wz
Devendra and other gods who are given to pleasures having tasted
nectar, have no entry into the inner court of Brahma. Only those who
have conquered the cravings of the senses are allowed there. 42
Wa Unat + Weta arset at Hare! aarmmianfeta: ta uftyat waht atl
Those who enter the inner court will not be infatuated nor reach
lower levels. They will not be slaves to desire, anger and so on. 43
aaractenfeqaarat are wafer dfeate: | urea fret aa afta: wftraree: tH
Those with desire, anger and the like can enter only the outer court.
Hence Brahma appears in two forms in Satyaloka. 44
aarsmrerfant Sa: Bras FRAT WAST! FTSATSATA GUSASTOTATA AA Mt
warqfagqer: we eareterqeretat |
In that outer court, Indra along with other gods saw Brahma the
Lord of the world and prostrated from a distance. Later all the gods
prostrated with folded palms. 45

at fae, 134 Sri Tripurarahasyam
aM Seat Wat Mat Wars was qeT Wvan
st urengrad ga: or ttefins & fer aeafe afe fer asa oat arora a1
Seeing them Brahma spoke immediately. “Oh Subduer of demon
Paka (i.e., Indra)! Get up along with gods. Have no fear. Your wants
will be fulfilled. Tell me quickly why you have come here”. 46, 47
ft geen aqderaes faqiar: | sara yfet faarerntnayeeter u ven
waqd aaqaea faqd: we aay! feet: aqay waa TTT xR
waarat qfet grat faeitet vires feaa: | saeparergratsta fa farqerferar i yo
Ghee wat arr eayreaaft gar
Hearing the words of Brahma, Indra the wielder of thunderbolt
stood up along with other gods and started to narrate his account with
his lotus palms folded on his head. “Oh Brahma! You are our refuge in
all our actions. By obeying your orders we are ruling the three worlds.
My lordship of the worlds is certainly because of a fraction of your grace.
Weg cteafacararaa af agyit Wael
arqeit fasta feared faergqari acaststt qut agatesrarfeyreay GI
“Further my lordship of this type over the three worlds is indeed
derived by contemplating on you the Lord. It is also like the echo of
the thunder from an insignificant grass. 51, 52
are aeatfrtse a at meat cafe ai Set az yferct te wordt arf deqa: Ul 4a
“T am not respected, served, liked, worshipped nor saluted nor i"
by human beings.
weaheg wera: viet arf eryareranys acenfe az wert waited fe seq UY
“Oh Brahma! Your earlier words that human beings will be
subordinate to gods have not come into force even today. 54
mt amata faqer wagered! senate witaatafa ferry | GG
} “The gods respect me because of their respect to your words. I am
in this rank as Indra on the pretext of belief and not on authority. 55

a
EY
ig
e

ch ay Ss .
=: 135 Chapter 11
We tet wsyeqat aatfany! anaag at teat cede GG
“I have narrated my entire predicament properly before you. Oh Lord!
Please order our further action.” 56
ofa grat weertaaet faage wari faqea fefaidiaa wearat = Goll
Hearing the words of the thousand-eyed Indra, the creator reflected
a little and replied in a dignified voice. 57
Taaaa Fareed uy at wate aat weal a wat sega Aa HOTT I ue
fratea aadt aa: cafeartacrsrar: | wardfterrer are at eftat vrgatsf ar 11 4g
fear wea weed Sat Gora cay saat ut wel care fenfSrerafer: 11 go
Talat wact fafea wats a1 cama gat wet aera 1 &R
“Oh Indra! Listen to what I will tell you of the reason regarding
your problem why human beings are not adoring you. Everyone is
dependent on another for selfish gain. For him who has no selfishness,
what is to be gained from me or Hari or Sankara. For him this entire
world including Isvara is more trivial than a straw. Every one depends
on another for some selfish gain. But there is no use from you gods to
the human beings. Hence, how do you gods who are non-beneficial to
them deserve respect? 58 to 61
aqaat weact ett wareat warts wearer fereoperott est wearer ar fear &2 I
“Therefore go to my sister the auspicious Laksmi who is seated
on a lotus. By pleasing Her, the consort of Visnu, attain prosperity
quickly”. 62
sft ae warcraft aeaeata: | worer fanaa wat cresiterars sera 1 G3 II
Hearing the words of Brahma, Indra the Lord of heaven saluted him
and reached the Himalayan area to obtain the grace of Laksmi. 63
sta sftfgereeet rereravs Wenleyits ara:
End of the eleventh chapter of the
Mshatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurarahasyam.

Bleyits ara:
Chapter 12
aa & yeqaergientzad faa: 1 eepttafad wat qegqéftaccrary, wen
Thereupon, Indra and others standing at the foot of the Himalaya
praised Padma the consort of Hari, near the celestial river Ganga. 1
at ered Hereed werd wad AH: 1 AAT faupfenfet eras vat TA: Il
“Salutations to Laksmi, to the great Devi, to Padma, repeated
Salutations to Her who pleases Visnu, to Her who is seated on the lotus.
ea Marea Yrs area! Teal wares wees ot BI
“Your residence is the chest of Hari, You are the elder among
goddesses, Your manifestation is auspicious, You are lotus eyed, You
reside in a lotus, You hold lotuses. You are the Supreme. 3
WRATeasUPEMa Agta: | eUTbedt eesitereratht eager usu
“Oh Laksmi! You bestow supreme bliss; by Your sideway glances
You destroy the distress of Your devotees; You make Aruna happy; You
are Mahdlaksmi, You are triple powered. 4
arose welgarar Patera faferers freftergsar ferreqar fremetafer: wall
“You are the empire, You grant all types of happiness, You are the
Devi of riches, You grant riches, You are worshipped by Kubera, You
are lauded in Vedas, You are the peak of eternal prosperity.
wafrearn wage deqtant) car tare cen Tufteseaar wall
“You are the approbator of wealth, You are the Mother of all, You
are the praised Devi, You are Rama, You are the protectress, You are
charming, You are the best among women.” 6

— 137 Chapter 12
vata tar AarsEifagie ws! Seat: carat werfea afar: wl
Reciting thus the twenty-eight names of Laksmi the consort of Hari
and the power of Brahma, Indra and other gods stood there calmly. 7
wa aeafararet Ber at PUT Mat: | Ter et: WIgeateart wheat yA ct
When the gods thus meditating on Her surrendered, Laksmi appeared
soon to please them. 8
arratfcateat yelper cemecterereangh mererTeaTTs haa nen
UAT SATTTASA | SAMMI Raa aT gol
3 MAZE TTLT AM | PATH AATEA THR TTT Ween
starqeharaaerarnuiciesn aeirercnreragarargeaeet = Rl
arredromegeraniteters fran
She was effulgent like the combined lustre of infinite lightnings.
She was red-lotus hued. She wore a golden garment. She held in Her
four lotus-like hands, four shining hundred-petal lotuses. Her soft lips
outdid the ripe cherry fruit. She was surrounded by bees which were
attracted by the fragrance in Her mouth. Her eyes which granted elegance
to blue lilies extended upto the ears. Her full-moon-like face had the
musk mark on the forehead. She was fully embellished with precious
gem-set jewels. 9 to 12
wafaat Tat Feat TSAMOTAT: FT: Hea
arrargenciien: wart mea: |
Seeing such form of Devi Rama, the gods filled with tears of joy
prostrated and praised with choked voices. 13
ary faretters war Preteare feraqann, Weevil
nagfigicfercarceecenfiott ot sit wren aeemar ot tar sree: Ru
wernt at at enfant weerenrera: | wetted ear Tse ahaa: RE
Looking at them Laksmi with a smile and a sweet voice like a flood
of honey spoke. “Oh Thousand-eyed Indra! Oh gods, the enemies of the

MR ARRES 138 Sri Tripurarahasyam
demons! Praised by secret names I am pleased. You can ask from me
your desired boon.” 14 to 16
a watranrend aad fctraar otgfastanper awereferqer: 3 Non
Hearing those words Indra and other gods spoke with folded palms.
Taeata Weare gare fenfigreat | unacneratt: fer ar arfsed uftigrert ii 9c
“Oh Mother! When you are pleased, what is not achieveable. What
want remains after getting the Kalpataru? 18
arene aa wat: Sant: aaah Si tar He Yard: earear frorreafa:
“Oh Mother! Make the human beings subordinate to us so that
Indra will be the Lord of the three worlds. 19
Wer Ayla: Wa aa: wy a: fea aarersafeva faata at fea 11 Roll
“Oh Sive! Grant us a boon by which all human beings will be
obedient to us and perform sacrifices for our sake.” 20
eta afedateat a we weer fier ar: quest wares aMeetat 1 Be
senate & wat: GarMSr, YI! Aaa fatter ame: wale arise: 2
Thus addressed by the gods, the Devi spoke sweetly. “Oh gods!
Listen to me. I am the goddess of wealth. From today those human
beings who systematically worship Indra and other gods will obtain
desired prosperity. 21, 22
sendin & yty dat weahrerera: | ae Teay aa wet weaedtaaq it 3
“The wealth of those who neglect the gods wi i i
t like the
water in a pond during cage ‘ —_— 23
segertaiatnet wt eater wet ar: Sut watse wequr freenfir weit: neil
i ho se persons who alw: Sf
5 ays i i es 0
adoratii on b Age yS praise me with the nam
stay happily always. 24

: s 139 Chapter 12
a udaiafacar qyjart Pryitad | qatar weit werastat yar HI
qafedt qaata ataees wera: | Wahewarat aed woreredaery 2K II
seagrass aaTTATTEH |
“Those persons who worship me with these 28 names on a Friday
in the evening and recite My hundred and eight names and worship a
married woman with one of My twenty-eight names and offer food
containing chick-peas will attain permanent wealth in twenty-eight weeks.
Waal wdeatsé tar ya Ware: Well
Treg wlaate wierd aisfrareaq sya ar wer edt Serene AAT I
“Similarly I am always graceful to you. You go to your heavenly
abode happily. Your desire has been achieved.” Saying so the Supreme
Devi disappeared. 27, 28
Wa: Vcenggarent feet aferarat: | worst ae Hea Aga TY: Ml Vil
Thereupon Indra and other gods saluted with devotion to the direction
where the Devi disappeared and returned to their abode with a feeling
of accomplishment. 29
wa wet agat wa tarfeafast wordt: qaatarnfgrTTaT eT: 201
ha quate 3 writs feereafernys at Secret at arash sat STATA | BRM
Wt ae: waar at at caadt @ aq! WAIST aquined 4 Het Grad Fafa tl
After a lapse of a long time the gods seated in the heavenly court
called “Sudharma”, supported by Brhaspati who was listening, addressed
Indra who was on his throne. “Oh Lord of Gods! Hear our logical words.
The boon which Laksmi had granted in the past is not effective anywhere
on the earth. 30 to 32
aafacnaet wee at grat ageit A: | at war Gates errarreref era:
aerereredte qa fas qeraen ferecans® aad Ye 7: area # av tl
“We find one in a lakh or a thousand who is devoted to us. Others
are without any desire for action. Our desire has not been fulfilled even
today. Hence, Oh Indra! Reflect on what would be suitable and good for
us in the future.” 33, 34

a AR 140 Sri Tripurarahasyam
wayed: vera: fred aed deri ufos qe arena parsfe: on ayn
Giving a thought to the words of the gods, Indra bowed to Brhaspati
the Guru and spoke with folded palms. 35
We faqyaat dacepat 4: faface ati eftaccrare wile a ger afag ary 1 3K
aepalseary Aa At oats fafaqdeq
wad: waefated 4 fe cea ferry TCH
wa fe watered Safa watatyraqi oat afe fora a ore wfeefiary i 3c
“Oh Guru! Please analyse why we are not successful. The words of
the Consort of Hari cannot become false. Then why are human beings
not duly worshipping us? There is nothing in the three worlds which is
unknown to you. Like Visnu, you really know the mind of everyone.
Therefore tell us by what we will achieve good quickly.” 36 to 38
ua vracnqaet fayreans sfycat yf: | Pritfera: qfat earatara qtarq 3¢ tl
Hearing the words of Indra, Brhaspati closed his eyes and meditated
for a long time and spoke to the Lord of the gods. 39
Uy Uget Weayreanshayteay! ate caat sreneteaaa A Uy: Ul ¥oll
Tres tat: aeb WA: Sree waiters detate a afseafa yaa
sort aft Uisatsat ae feats gay art wes ereat yet year
“Oh Indra! Listen to my words that will promote prosperity. After
sometime, undoubtedly, your desires will be satisfied. Go again along
with the group of gods to Laksmi. By pleasing Her you will have
your wants. There is no other means by which your needs will be
met quickly. Hence seek shelter under the Great Devi who grants
protection.” 40 to 42
oft arr qeaet 24: we feaaaia: 1 wre argdhit feayteraetatt val
Wa Teal Glare wate sega: | abet: ae aaa wat ctl YI
Hearing the words of Brhaspati, the Lord of the heaven went to
the banks of the Ganga at the foot of the Himalayan Mountain. There,
after bathing in the limpid Ganges water he decided to perform penance
along with other gods.

SRS HT: 141 Chapter 12
ann eforiagineryt yg: 1 aretaarrormenfaprirreerary n ven
TAS Ys MESSI: | HeaeT PTA ATAEART: «tt BRI
Taam qaraaagiaad: | freicnutquanctaganittaardta i xo il
Meditating on the pair of lotus feet of the beautiful wife of Hari
and repeating several times Her twenty-eight names, Indra and other
gods did penance, standing on their toes pressing the ground, with arms
lifted up, with no support, with air as their food, with concentration,
with their body, eyes and mind still, appearing like idols carved in stone.
ud fraagres asad GYRE SA ATEN YET Meat MaaHeaT neve
Thus after a lapse of twenty-one months, Oh Paragurama! Devi
appeared there pleased by their fierce penance. 48
TANT HOPPE, a, yest Yl HTSHSTAA AMAT ATE AT TAT I
Appearing there the Devi Laksmi saw Indra and other gods
resembling wood and wall, immersed in meditation and spoke. 49
at at tar: qterat wawfer aeer! faorg saatiseneezaret Fa: Go tl
aad at aed aaceratariget|
“Oh Indra and Gods! Refrain from this terrible penance. ‘Pleased
with you I am here to grant boans. Tell me what you want. I will grant
that undoubtedly.” 50
aft gear ait Som MITT wag
Baifeageit tar gear 2a sfefirart qdqet ferarargt coserferar fa Wael
gieganensaadtare witg Way: |
Listening to the melodious words of the Devi the gods opened ea
eyes and saw the consort of Hari as before who was smiling and —
Her glances. They prostrated before Her and started praising yey
voice indistinct and choked with joy. ;
Wag
Tes TATA, Waray Pafier ARTAAOT AHS a

at Ae 142 Sri Tripurarahasyam
USAUIAGTATaTE AT: Weraent safer Was
wef fated: at anrafir anise ti Georqest fawqat fear atsfr ae
AVE: OT eS a ara aiseg Fi Tpereatioet areaarareatiatt 1
adoreeht to anrafin aatseq 71 giant wenfeattcht faapacitert yen
Perko sapfadakratir aatseq 71
“Oh Laksmi! You are ever united with Narayana. Salutations to
You. You are the thunderbolt unto the mountain of misery of helpless
devotees. Protect us who have submitted to You. By a small fraction of
Your grace men who are lame and blind compete with Brahma and
others. You are so Supreme that without You Visnu even though He is
the Primordial Purusa, will not be able to protect the world. You are
the Supreme Powerful Devi. You are the word and its meaning. You are
the essence of everything. You are the power of the creator Brahma, the
protective power of Visnu the sustainer, the destructive power of Rudra
the dissoluter. Salutations to You of such glory”. 53 to 57
oft eet waqured waaqyracny: Well
Wie: WT at wes wat arat ae fee aeenfe a wert aT aT AT aT SH Ul
TEMS AAS CAAT: | TAT Spe Aerefa wae: uyTat fF 7:1! o
Thus praising Her, the gods started narrating their story.
“Oh Mother! Erstwhile we obtained a boon from you and went back to
the heaven. That boon has not become effective even this day. Human
beings are not worshipping us. So, Oh Great Devi! make them really
worship us and devoted to us and subordinate to us.” 58 to 60
git taaa: grat tameraenona fears Zarq wars guped fergertar: Gell
War aged yf at mada 4 aster fren aa: areerarares far waa
wad qsas frat qadtiiaay
Hearing the words of gods, The Devi thought to help them and
spoke “Oh Powerful Gods! Listen to me. The boon given by me previously
is valid now also. Human beings because of certain circumstances are
desireless. So what? Let it be so. Even now I will accomplish your
request.” 61, 62

Breas Ara: 143 inde’
Bye Mt Va Sat fear Wean
STE AAT VA SAAT Fa AAT! Hel GPA: SATA Tere: ih Gx it
areacat waat caret afaeate a dra: | Uaereaa atta wat: wy: at aytaar.n gy
wt Weta teeq wart aifearssart
Stating thus, the Devi quickly created a brilliant boy from Her mind
and gave him to the gods and spoke to them. “This boy named Kama
(Cupid) is very powerful and he will surely achieve you purpose. With
his association, truly the human beings will obey you. Take him with
you for achieving your wants”. 63 to 65
act cart aurea wa fara weatagre: wail
tee gtafegquot aprghag: sqerarsmatea we: Ueaat a featerary 1 Ge
To the boy She said “Oh Kama My child! For the benefit of the
gods, you conquer all the human beings and bring them under the control
of Indra and other gods.” Thus addressing them She disappeared even
as the gods were watching. 66, 67
Wa: YU wep Area Wag: | aren eareffi war sant aepeT wae: I Rell
24: ug cetera ant darren ga: Seger weiter waeferagtar RI
wae wa Tra Yet WAaTSeahgAeTAT | vet Were ater: BaTeTATAT HAT I! Vo It
arafrafa aeafe aerated aA!
Then the gods saluted the Devi and proceeded along with Kama.
After reaching the heaven they extended all hospitality to Kama. Then
along with the gods, Indra smilingly addressed him humbly with all
praise. “Oh Kama! You have been created by Devi Rama from Her rem
for our good. But you are a five-year old lad. Tell me how you be oo
us achieve our desired goal”
wafer: Fa WM TSA ATT Woe
ear aarfaeraet sara Upltars a: | aquy ven aeaTe aaa Neh oF
ares fag: aaftort mogeitquesan: | 3 apeeaferentirent ZeaTearee AL,
ah aerett Spit ar eats fr aes Teme fas we wa wed AE TT .
capereint arot prem sradifeerrareran( tert wear arene arefeereemaTTATeHT I ON

at fesay 144 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Hearing the words of Indra and taking it as an insult Kama with
red angry eyes and quivering lips spoke. “Oh Indra! It does not befit
you to disrespect me. A lion though young can punish a group of elephants,
Do you not know that a spark of fire can destroy the entire army? For
a strong person, time or place has no significance. Instead it is a natural
phenomenon. Hence tell me what your desire is. Oh Sakra! You will see
me accomplishing that in a moment. The impediment to my success is
just the time taken by you to tell me that”. 71 to 75
Bit Maa: Brat We AMET! HTT AT HE aati aa atfaqga wei
Hearing Kama, Indra said “Oh Kama! Do not be angry. What was
told by us was to enhance your potential. 76
Tater aged aye ta ada aq St Maas: ll
Maret: gard frat war wa aT aasergyeT aaagedt fe A ws
waded weet aad Mase fromreafa: | warft upratsene wren: wegen qf
“What was uttered by Devi Rama will never be false. That will be
really true. You are born from the mind of the Supreme Devi. Born out
of the consort of Hari, there is nothing impossible for you. Your task is
to make human beings obey us and regularly worship us through sacrifice,
by which I will be the Lord of the three worlds. Human beings should
be ruled by us as our subordinates.” 77 to 79
Tafraaa: seat arm: ware afer: | wearer witeary es ator efit:
Listening to those words of Indra, Kama arrogant by his a
spoke smilingly and tactfully to the gods and pleased them.
sta stqret wrereaus greyitseara: 11
End of the twelfth chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurarahasyam.

waleyits ara:
Chapter 13
Geet Teatsg & eerdfaed + Aaya! Uencitse faferears sy arity waggt ATH Hit
“Oh Indra! I have set out to achieve your goal. This is not false.
Single handed I will soon conquer human beings and make them obey
you.” 1
yee aquest Hage AeA vat wddart qanrrTary ST I
Saying so, Kama held his mighty bow and quiver and engulfed with
rage the earth as the gods were watching. 2
Wee ReHART: UTA AUT: | POUMATATT: TaaeATe ewe: nan
quscniteranvel trentteyitfe: | aatrengt charg: wtaveceraenfe: i ¥ il
AMEMAMEA SASEATS SMAI: | aAMAYHledt: HA: THETA: ll 4 Il
ware ofan uyaat Tatra: |
With a hue of the filaments of a lotus, with eyes like the petals of
a lotus, with a face like a lotus, with lips like a cherry fruit, with cheeks
illumined by ear rings, with a diamond crown, with a tender body, with
long arms, with a waist beautiful with golden robe, with the bow in his
left hand and an arrow in his right hand, with curved angry eyebrow
Kama a boy of five years and a joy to onlookers, reached the middle of
the earth. 3 to 5
saistr eareteg et AIT FTL Wall
tat wares auger: aaraati sist gat awa: fergfeerafewt: = ell
at dftaarera aa aera afer fea: |
Even Indra, to look at the difficult deed of Kama, proceeded on his
elephant Airdvata holding the thunderbolt. Other gods, Seers, Sages,
Vidyadharas and Kinnaras were looking on from the sky above Kama.

at PRES 146 Sri Tripurarahasyam
AT BM A We AAA Var aa: wen
WAT: FoAIssat A wat: wd va fei
aarq tar vende Veoren fe F ac: wen
Then Kama angrily told the group of human beings thus, “Oh Human
beings! Listen to my orders. All of you should worship Indra and other
gods. If not you will be punished by me.” 8, 9
WrareRt WareHvd WAT Meqeedah: | Tt MATT: Heat VATS Ta: I Qo
Hearing his words the people laughed loudly and spoke to each
other thus: “He is some young boy engaged in childish play”. 10
aed Wares Ware aaa: | eet TATAT UIST A TEU eel
Safad qerdy warrendut fra tdfera: forepdet qf arent Arafat, 1 eel
mle Waaetat Aq: WepAt Aa
People who were looking at his beauty exclaimed. “The mother of
this lovely, charming and attractive lad is extremely lucky. We have
never seen anywhere of anybody on earth a child like him. He may be
a son of a king. Such a boy cannot be of human birth.” 11, 12
gee aeat dat sari @ Targa: eau
fromraqarated: squat aqeterany it ar wt wepad a ter Garey ll
ae TMA Age! frag at fskront watz watz, aviaarq ul
arise ast quae aif agrafea: | 2arat art weet ad at aaassy A ll
To those people who were thus talking, Kama surprising the
inhabitants of the earth addressed in a loud voice. “Oh Human beings!
Do not take me to be an ordinary human boy. I am the son of Devi Laksmi.
Ordered by Her, I have come to make you all obey the gods. There is no
doubt to gods that I will bring you under their control either by conciliation
or force. Let me know quickly your views on this.” 13 to 16
wa ae: warned wget faferar ser: 1 Gre yur at areet feenef taarayt
Treat qaitsereh + fase agt qu: | aersenfit aret Saat sehr Tera!
areas st Tat at aa: Wy: 1 datas werad gq Taft Ml ell

aptagreres aa OA: Uretfeat wy: 1 carat sate wenaTayafia: 1 201
Hearing those words the wonder-struck people spoke to him. “Oh Boy!
Listen to us. Why should we obey the gods? Why should they not obey
us? As we do not need anything from them, they also do not need
anything from us. You may go elsewhere. Our lord is the famous Viravrata
who is a human being and he stays in Brahmavarta. We are his obedient
citizens and he is our ruler. Being under his lordship we cannot obey
your orders.” 17 to 20
get Gary aely clerefiracited: | serares aaah aes gatas: 1 eel
As the people were saying so the most valiant Kama with red furious
eyes bound those human beings by an array of missiles. 21
Uaferaat aa HUricenel Pyrat AL AAMTAT TBAT: SHtfewr: Wrens SAAT: YR
Meanwhile hearing that news from one another, crores of kings
arrived there holding raised weapons. 22
aM Gear yatae: sHeanftrsateras splat: |
FRM safe wars Udeaht Asa, Weal
Seeing them, Kama again with burning fury stood firm by setting
an arrow in his bow. ed
a qear get are frame wget Tgueret eearret sa: Fe I
t Haney Ur aera ae, TA! ag 3a cranfarrensteor AAA: Mt AM
areragira dtgent ore wt argyiret!
Seeing that beautiful boy with marvellous valour, the kings spoke
to him with arrogance, “Oh Boy! Do not get destroyed like a moth on
your own by getting into contact with the conflagration of our anger.
With no gain you are causing grief to your mother by self ge fg“
wag areaha & aren: Fale STATI: |

Atateretsoaterss are: tert ferret: Wen
agt dtd wet yret wesfaa or fer srrat wdtarenctafeftrentticay, TCT
facrents gt quar saat are faqs
Hearing those wounding words, Kama blind with anger could not
see anything. Then soon getting over the angry condition addressed the
kings. “It is futile to call boys as young. A boy is not young by virtue
of his age. The learned call the weak and the dull as boys. Therefore
without delay show your potency and the strength of your missiles. After
that I will soon by the power of my missiles put your fame on the
ground. Stop your useless talk.” 26 to 29
Baga AVS FaTet WEI AT: I Roll
aafrerarenft arats sarafrangar: | WreassanTetstacet wat: wrecrafat &
Tardisdferdicamt weet aaarta
Incited by his words, the kings poured an array of missiles like
rain from thick clouds. Those missiles that were falling around
Kama looked like thousands of burning meteors ejected from the
full-moon. 30, 31
arardt yraqie a Gear ey: Wael
TATA Hittet Asa Aaa: | WlesarIw aat reaaray FAH TAR
vertenqedtsea art feaafirdst |
Seeing the approaching shower of missiles, Kama of quick valour
standing alone destroyed all the missiles in no time by showering
counter-acting missiles. While the weapons of the kings were individually
cut into eight pieces, Kama looked like the Sun freed from the fog of
weapons. 32, 33
Teqeal Venera yigig: arg watt nese
sata yratatcaisa goa!
Witnessing that, Indra and others praised him saying “Well done,
well done” and beating kettle-drums showered flowers. -

FARTS AMA: 149 Chapter 13
Wea AMAL Wale yitfeati: Waku
faora ant det Arata: | Hteargientefearseping ait: ae 1
a afrsa: waa Gus: slot agen! vifinetrarer aqewitcet Fa 1 3G
aymsastaent witepargfereeerenr: | weresagernm: firgreataraayiat: 1
wareityaenrenter: aegtyeeften: | tafretter wera Frenssetyrarpet: 1 3¢ tl
sheut ea aut faeenfa ve wt)
Again quickly, Kama tortured each one of them with three arrows
by which only their name was remnant. The earth was spread over with
their severed limbs, head, waist and stomachs. A river of hot blood
wherein the hair and nerves were like moss, the thousands of fingers were
like fishes, the innumerable floating skulls looked like devils, the group
of crows resembled the swans, the weapons were like the tides that
flowed with high speed, creating massive froth and hundreds of vorticies,
trembling again and again the hearts of the cowards. 35 to 39
Waaered FLAT MATS HAA Wl ¥oll
paredism: Be faghreta way: |
Seeing such an unfailing wonderful valour of Kama, Indra and other
gods declared that their wish was fulfilled. 40
AaIseat arTOT: area Ts Faery oes
ateaara aang werat warren: | wears Tere & artery ATgTeTAT Mt wR
faarrerg A: ua FERTs Bethea aareoreatarees wafer yt a ferret ¥9
Meanwhile the messengers having known the destruction <>
kingdom, reached Brahmavarta to report the matter to Vere mer
entering the capital they told the gate keepers thus — ae
us to the great king. There is a very important work. Let there be a
delay.” 41 to
Bit seat rarest after: eget: | caarara weet artert a Faery "
wrcareit mererorafed Sorerercays areavefifiectefarar aparetferearet TH NN
Listening to the words of the messengers the eS wei
quickly and informed their head. Hearing this the head ouae at yn
to the king and spoke with folded palms after hailing the . 44,

St ARES, 150 Sri Tripurarahasyam
fagraant abaqet: ditemfray) qosenfemderdd adorn: xen
a2: werfat: yt: wfaumarient: | Prfpratcardaecten tartrate: ¥en
wid wap sa Aiea
The king amidst his ministers, citizens, tributary princes, messengers
from distant countries, bodyguards and their leaders who were strong
enough to destroy the enemies by the sharp shining swords held by
them, was seated on the throne like a lion atop a golden mountain peak.
Tents Ser: qaenqaa seul
Uratant: arafegt: wreatteh Fo 4:1 at aerate taefecaraey, ul etl
“Oh Great King, who have dispelled the darkness called enemies by
the Sun named your fame! The messengers from the north have some
urgent matter to be reported to you. I will follow what the Lord orders
further.” 48, 49
sit great grat Tatgcere: | ada abate We Ways a At EAT Ml boll
Then hearing the words of the head gatekeeper, Vardhana the
foremost among the ministers who knows the mind of the king, said
“Bring them in quickly”. 50
AMA US MIT AAS SAMRAT! UAT STATS AAT Aaa: FRAT: MR
Ordered thus the head gatekeeper brought them to the king. The
messengers saluted the king from a distance and stood with folded hands.
We We adenine te: fret feo: 1 ant fart cafeaesty wferarfary tl 4
Upaley Garg wepfrafer arma) ancahads wet wa: wreatfahraerary U4
Vardhana the favourite of the king and dear to him spoke to them.
“Oh Messengers! Is everything peaceful in our kingdom, territory,
treasury? Report the urgent message at the feet of the king”. 52, 53
afaeres Fat qasT aaa: | aia a ada alates: wre | uel
TI: UGTA: Wat cienreitennetaa: | feracarda: wafrepaniseamas: Waal

qaregns ATA: 151 ad i§
ater TEU STE AERTT WaT: Wea: Tat Veit faenfatser Fu ue
7 Uanat USAR: HACSteMeRTFH: | EAT Yea sleet MEAT: 11 Go
ualgaiad Sa sarat TAU
Hearing that the messengers saluted again and with folded lotuslike hands reported. “Oh Lord! Your fame which is increasing every
moment like the moon in the bright half period, has crossed the farthest
Lokdloka Mountains. Near Himalaya one boy brilliant like the sun has
killed all the kings in a great battle. He has captured all your subordinate
rulers. The country is inundated. All alone, that five-year-old lad with
eyes and limbs like a lotus, has killed in no time crores of kings. What
is to be done further?” 54 to 57
ofa cereanrened ten atradetat Weel
TE Urea art yrerrgy a1 sears faetat airnrsrshaqetay tt 48 tt
Hearing that report, king Viravrata got up and picking up the bow
and arrow placed by his side proceeded towards the northern direction.
war vit gat wear ada: vfs aH Sars yaerararet area fee: Go Ut
Then Vardhana the eminent speaker quickly went before the king
and bowing to him spoke words dripping with ambrosia. 60
aera rer era wat teeter fererennftot were TeeTAT Mt GR
ufafe: aed wat arat fafiser arr werent cectet fewer eretieat
“Oh Adorable Lord! Excuse me. Prosperity follows him who thi his
well and acts. Suffering stays away. A king should — _ 62
ministers and analyse for himself the final course of action. 61,
we agit caus semod qufr: | ara Bhat wraaTTaTe fafertat!
Wat wareg: UsETaTAAy FAA: Wall
Tarereatfeitar: aiaitsa qua war: | waareary aeaeg Sorat FL RY tl
WH: wut mare aa eat Tar) area: aT TAT AE TTS aK
Thus repeatedly requested by the minister, the king thoughtfully

Rt ARE 152 Sri Tripurarahasyam
respecting his wise minister reached the court. Then Vardhana made
the members of the court, the leaders of fifteen Aksauhini army, who
had gone ahead of the king, to return. After returning to the assembly
shining with many diamonds, they took their respective seats along with
the king. 63 to 65
gaat Went ada: We SIR Srenula WERT GATT FAT aT: REI
quetifrgafaer tar: Gaeta: | faqyaeant caret serfs THAT 1 Ge
um fayya waded ad were qatata: |
Then Vardhana pacified the king and said “Oh Great King! Hear
me calmly. Kings who follow the line of justice will be happy. The person
who acts after proper analysis is appreciated. Therefore I suggest that
the king should discuss thoroughly with the ministers and then act.
aa ert Seequet wear Atarquraar: neen
ydqatsacra x aa SGM! sais: Haare wafeqya uPafs: = az
wafatashtet adet afadtaa smacate waste warate aadtert Boll
wae abafasaget feaat aa: |
“The rules of administration speak of strategies like conciliation,
bribery, sowing dissension and punishment. If the first one fails then
the other methods have to be followed successively. Now by discussing
with the ministers the strategy has to be decided. At times of emergency
such a consultation is not necessary. But if impediments are seen,
discussion is advisable. Hence now you should discuss with the ministers
and then proceed.” 68 to 70
rege set wat ahaot peter Weg
areata wPaoreg wg: ered dar) afd arte wre ee WE UT: HORI
RUSMeIsMEA Fear aglad way Tar quit fies: fafectat asa aeAA Ml
= ing those words the king looked at the ministers. Understanding
the intention of the king the ministers individually voiced their views.
One person recommended conciliation, another was for bribery, yet another
the strategy of dissension. The fourth wanted the course of punishment.

ELICMINECIER 153 Chigtie 18
The king hearing such various views was silent and then cast his eyes
on Vardhana. 71 to 73
aehart worst aes: WreRaEe: | Tens=abate: wet SEIsaATATT I ox
ad ada aarste wepe dfgartary at are wana S usert aisut wat oy
weed fett carat weasel | WT aa A I aaa: TT a wa
aaah TAUSAASUT: TESA: | ANTENA Ta A BEAM: 11 Wo
ugders @ tied: adarsaisqufeedt! aarssea Geared wart & wats wc
amalda aad a meiteanraed! wiser fastior freraraseat: Mel We
HAAS AIS SRTARL UCT A) TATE Saree arf Piet seat
Wa UsTel Haaadiete! Aer: were sta aa Te ft: 2k
qaartrrarereeragae! aaa a Meaet at art fe aA N22
Bat Vqataat Aq Aa AeETA Uae: PARKA FAT TBAT: FUT | 63
wlfeyistraeras da weed aaq warenhe: werd: wet ter eee cx
Ta Henyequhas fienfay weed ade ad Meats TAT oh
Fis=aes gigs + qaragqures: | wi erate warn eT ek
Then Vardhana stood up and saluted the king and said “Oh King!
The opinion of other ministers based on their individual consideration
could be right. But we have to consider the actual situation. When both
sides are of equal strength, conciliation suits. When the enemy is stronger,
then also conciliation works. Instead if the enemy, being weak takes the
help of a stronger group then the strategy of bribery to split them helps.
If there is no scope for this, we have to adopt the method of dissension
with the help of tactful persons. If such persons are not there then the
first two strategies i.e., conciliation and bribery, should be used. The
fourth method should be adopted if the other three soothods oust
utilised. A king who adopts punishment where conciliation 1s possible
meets with trouble and spoils his own success. In reality, since Kama
is not fighting for his gain the first two strategies will be of no ase.
Again because Kama is fighting all alone, the third strategy of ee ae
has no place. Hence we have to resort to the fourth path of eenprre
If so, we have to think about the consequences. Otherwise we will ators
Thinking that Kama is only a five-year old boy, all the kings

tt Ree 154 Sri Tripurarahasyam
defeated by him. Moreover he is battling for the good of the gods. That
carries serious consequences. We could have bribed him if he wanted to
conquer the kingdom. Since this is not possible, using our force is the
remaining alternative. We should remember that, single handed he has
destroyed crores of mighty kings which means he has divine strength
and he does not expect any gain from mortals. Therefore, Oh King! Serve
and worship your family deity the great God Mahadeva who wields the
Pindka bow and achieve your desires through His grace. I cannot think
of any other plan. Kings would like to fight with enemies of lower
strength. 74 to 86
ee Fens wer fagieatier aa: | weed fraratsa wat ayes ui ce
“Oh King! Therefore you can discuss with other members of the
court, my humble words and decide on a successful course of action”87
Gregan adres at date ergata t wear afaitsepgrent i cell
Hearing the views of Vardhana which were the best among the
views, the court members and ministers lovingly said “Well said, well
said”. 88
Ta aerenved aal Aeeaes act went fasret afe adaitaca fare: 28
farartgéarsergarat aentater gol
Hearing that, the intelligent king determined to systematically
propitiate Lord Mahadeva according to the words of Vardhana and the
consent of Brahmins and Gurus. 89
sia signet werenavs aaleyitseaa: 11
End of the thirteenth chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripuraérahasyam.

ageyits era:
Chapter 14
aa tet yas dedtefe fo wet aay dare aoe wa za HH
Then the king handing over the administration to the ministers
decided to perform penance on the solitary banks of a river in an
auspicious forest. 1
aa feat: siengisdsrat wrdtary arated fararifaat at 2
There meditating on Candragekhara the Lord of the Universe, he
got delinked from external sensation. 2
Ud Passa WaT WeISSERt ea! Safeaat feat Y THA ASAT | 31
froent fret frattacarre: | sare firrfencreremnpeterg tar: en
wet atswat arsfi + fefete aac: 1 wa feaaasdta aree aurea Gl
aifadqa wade: aifad vacate!
Thus the king living on only water, served Mahesvara for five days
with total involvement. Then the next three days without food, without
support, with arms lifted, with control on senses and mind, he meditated
on the lotus feet of Siva and became unaware of external and internal
happenings. In the evening of the eighth day the Universal Lord appeared
to fulfil the desire of His devotee. 3 to5
pUTars gudtenrerqaearatacttart nau
ret apresbafasanfatatatea 1 yaararerearentet ergarfarrentaet Holl
anda: wafeerearet aerresenfirea: | arereragparea: farrat arrose: it cl
: : 5 fearon fOr Ta RERATETY: neu
OURAN: WaAaaagy: | HUSA: fk
sameniadtarit aaeifattre: | arcterafosdtirs afisargistrger: neem
; nee
neat

The quartz crystal-coloured Lord Siva was seated on a saddle spread
with soft deer-skin and decorated with varieties of colourful fresh gems
and bunches of pearls, fitted on the shoulder of the bull which was like
the autumnal clouds. He was shining with locks of matted hair and the
crescent moon on it. Three-eyed, with snakes as earrings, with five faces
like fully blossomed lotuses, with a pleasing moon-like face, with His
cheeks brightened by the gems on the hoods of the serpents worn on
his ears, wielding in His four hands the trident, the skull, the deer and
the axe, with a serpent as His sacred thread, with garlands of Rudraksa
beads, wrapped in tiger skin, with elephant’s skin as upper covering,
beautifully decorated with serpents as ornaments, with Rudrani seated
on His charming left thigh, looking like an ocean of mercy, besmeared
with ash all over His body, surrounded by attendants reciting the
Sata-rudra hymns, He the Great God, the Supreme, appeared before the
king. 6 to 13
Ware qeat wart aamarent aay weMadged water rat fea: 11 Vy
Lord Siva seeing the king immersed in meditation addressed him
sweetly with compassion. 14
Tel WAGES SCENT: | AMANIGUAA: Walter AaASTa: Weal
apa wfaamantar! wordt cusaaat yeatssternsis: = RG
Tephiecteeatatr fquige: | arraisg utters wafadte: waeTat: Ul Well
at qa: worded weitgqyrant geil
Then by the uproar of the attendants of Siva, the king became
extrovert and opened his eyes. In front of him, he saw Mahadeva with
Devi Ambika and His retinue. With folded hands on his head he fell
prostrate on the ground. He was elated by the festive joy arising out of
the sight of Siva. His chest got wet with the flood of tears of joy. He
again and again saluted Siva and began praising Him. 15 to 18
VIG Wadfergt Wrai tan eatery F
Wrensitst frees at eet arson |
We want Priagqear uve wernt
Taran ett aeit wqucitas werétet negil

Gees SATA: 157 Chapter 14
“Oh Sankara! Oh Ocean of Compassion! Protector of devotees!
Protector of the Universe! Punisher of the wicked! Your lotus feet is out
of reach even for the great gods. Today I am seeing Your highly rewarding
lotus feet with my pure eyes. Oh Lord of the Universe! Hence there is
no one other than me on this earth who is more blessed. 19
ursifsrquaayed See et
wa a we aeaad wd wart fanaa
va watt Heute Meese Tat ATT
a aera fatteg eardeg hep U Roll
“Rare is human birth because of the virtuous deeds in the past births
and then a strong body, healthy eyes and a pure mind is rarer. Such
being the fact, ignoring You the ocean of Compassion, people are engaged
in other material pursuits. Such persons who invite self destruction are
despicable. 20
wat aanaeataatssaant aroit yore
33 sttiraqiahtitaredtin fat at a1
cpuit cfterenutatrat aut 2a afte
ariel wea wad at ASA: F War nee
“He who spends his time by engaging his hands to serve Your feet,
his speech to sing Your glory, his eyes to see Your auspicious form, his
mind to meditate on Your reality, his ears to listen to Your historical
deeds, his legs to circumambulate Your shrine, is the most fortunate in
this world. o
yrsit qraeuedarat aura aa fears
wer qarred quiget wrquard feragart|
ua arate wa ar areer qaray fafaet at
wits fagafteaarat qardtar farcry WIM
“Oh Sambhu! Oh Lord! For the person who has served Your feet
even for a second, when the Lordship of the heaven is like a straw what
can be said about earthly wealth? Even then, what I am aspiring for is
so trifling that the learned would laugh at it forever. 22

at FRESH, 158 Sri Tripuraérahasyam
weretel fag 2agt ieifeote faaty feat
wrat arate qf cient fawat gsahrartate
apera dar aa wanifedtan fora ats &
maungiefacag sree words fer TT
“Therefore, Oh Lord of Gods! Extirpate my love towards worldly
affairs. On this earth people even after knowing that sensual craving is
the essential cause of distress, desire always that alone probably being
deluded by Your power of illusion. Oh Siva! Cast Your compassionate
glances on me who is helpless, who has no other refuge and who is
saluting you.” 23
we dager 2ayt vigt cag tafagfrrart cosas qfe ul al
Thus praising lavishly Lord Sankara, the Protector of the world,
the king whose inner being was agitated with divine love fell prostrate
on the ground. 24
FT Salsas SY GANA! Sage att st wart yfet ase!
vara Mngt Yat sat fire: TDL
Then Siva the Lord alighted along with Gauri from the bull and
went near the king and touched his head and spoke beautiful loving
words. 25
anittas gt afe firt far asfrnfeaq ax weata deci wearer a feet tl
; “My Child! Get up. Quickly tell me what is your fond desire. There
is nothing in the world which my devotee cannot get.” 26
Weg set Te wrearaseedgn: | rasefreyvteweraarAT: ll Veil
wares firt tse ate wt arghresfa aff & fawarafer aqet fafrada 2c
Teath fafrenetareaeera sar yt ate aha za at aera: i 28
Listening to those words of Lord Siva, the king who was stupefied
by asceticism having seen the feet of Siva got up with folded palms and
said. “Oh Mahadeva! If You wish to grant me now my favorite boon
then uproot my worldly involvement. I do not desire in the least any
thing else but serving Your feet. If You are filled with mercy towards
me, take me towards You.” 27 to 29

Gees SM: 159 Chapter 14
ua wd ae: yryfiera oe gfe antaaey area weanitet afer 1 30
UY Ceres Wes cart a ETaay wer Var afer fete wrat Aarsfer arqt ae
were card fafafier war: urea eta: |
Hearing the words of the king, Sambhu spoke smilingly, “My Child!
You will reach My abode in the end. But now you go and conquer the
unassailable Kama. Perhaps there is no one other than Me on earth or
in heaven who has vanquished him. Therefore righteously protect your
subjects by defeating Kama.” 30, 31
wa wget sear ware afer aosar, We3zn
we @a weet a arent aaftaq ward pe t Wedel cea EAT BRI
faciteaeranta & arseq fer artutnan! ag 2a wre whet cenitafrantsery
aarafag arenraré yaad quti wrenfered afe at welt tereifeet: tt 4H
queda wat 2a at HEY FT AAT!
Hearing the words of Sankara, the king fell prostrate on the ground
and said to the Great Lord Mahega, “Oh Lord! I do not want what You
have told me. Bless me with the great opportunity to serve Your feet.
Let me not be the lord of the three worlds. Emperorship need not be
mentioned. Oh God! You told me that You will grant my wants. How
can you change those words? I do not want victory over my enemy. If
I do not get a place near You, I will continue my penance instead of
obtaining worthless boons.” 32 to 35
gfe sear qaeet Ya: WIE ART: naqu
sqoy Tar ren yes Bare aaa! Teatro wfereafe non
afe yf werttomera ufterfaam ae aenerte wae we RTAT TAT nacu
weanfed wet fea wget eretanftrarey) tree aaret cot fare retettererefeer ch
art wegrrarare wend woeafn warrant Wa: Wat rafet way voll
Sean ayaa: veges WaeTT
Hearing the words of the king, Mahesvara spoke again. “Oh King!
Listen. To begin with you did penance to conquer Kama. Hence it will
not go waste. If earlier you had done Tapas to get to My abode you

at REL 160 Sri Tripurarahasyam
eh Les!
would have got that result first. Your contemplation would not be
purposeless. Therefore what I have said will not fail to yield result. So
go and win Kama in the battle and become the emperor. At the termination
of your life you will understand Me and reach Me. By My grace your
mind will be free from ignorance.” After saying so Sambhu disappeared
while the king was looking on. 36 to 40
wat Wat ered Wore trea: neu
frat wraaainta: wage ¢1 Unferwtt ae: wats fareat wary gfe nn xe
ager warmegenad aa ate: feat: | FAT VAT: an ¢ dheataaiteey
fregraanas feaqarenyeea: | wees age acatecatsetam: Wen
areqet ga wat fisteraa afer: |
Then the king saluting Mahadeva with devotion became verily purified
internally by respecting the orders of Siva. Meanwhile Kama after
capturing all the residents of the earth came to Brahmavarta. There the
people who were standing outside, seeing the lad Kama who was
submerged in a mass of beauty, fixed their sight on him forgetting their
houses and themselves. Carried away by the beauty of his different limbs
on which they had focused, the people stood like lifeless wooden dolls.
Tal Sarat aMitenrare TWarectanr: Uva ll
Br at went aeg unaaface vit weenie at ge at witenttg az ve
Then Kama with red angry eyes spoke to the citizens. “Oh People!
Tell your king that I have reached the place near your city. Let him
choose to obey me or fight with me.” 45, 46
fe teeth gen age BAT: | OT ad were ort frees 7 nvell
wa GATT: we wer way geht yx Gat areata: we sf uel
frteoet weraet greene: waredt) aertacat gran oat: whreg waa: Uv
Faq: atererqar srget: weer Ut gorges BTL HW 4oll
Age Werererceteees AC Stare wer; Sarat: AEST: MUM
Seth Gee PRAAGaaTea: |

Spee a a ee
Hearing the most astonishing words of Kama and seeing him as
the same boy with extremely fearful valour about whom they had heard
before, all the citizens started running away wailing and calling their
sons, mothers, brothers, and friends. Their cry “Run away; Go away”
was heard every where. Hearing that spreading cry, all the citizens
including women, children and aged persons ran helter-skelter warning
one another. Thus in a moment, that city looked like an ocean breaching
its shores. By the uproar of the people the city was shaken. In thousands
the guards of the fort, the warriors, the army chiefs raising their arms
with weapons got on to their carriages. 47 to 51
Wifaat wea Sart: aafeday, W4Qeu
verdant: dat wears aefe: | at raya grofaadty oemfea: ara tt 43
aalireat Weeder, Hear Yous: | aT YS MNT, Fe AEA SATA: 1 Gy Ul
Meanwhile the highly valiant army-chief Sudhrti deployed the army
outside the city and placed gatekeepers at all the gates sequentially
starting from the East. He deployed troops of very strong soldiers at
the corners and quickly went in a vehicle to the residence of Vardhana.
SETATALATS SHY PRAMS GT FAL TH THOTTERTS TAT Pita 4s
ust frafeg ter wat abafrrge: | fate cagay arrears Ae: W&R
fasta wane gaa Haare |
In the meantime Vardhana deployed bodyguards to protect the
inner-chambers and sent speedy messengers to inform the king.
Surrounded by the ministers he set out from his house after sending
message to the sons of the king about the arrival of Kama. As he was
proceeding he saw Sudhrti. 55, 56
amet aedt seat trara & aye: Nyon
say ada wgrest Sareanfent: wel fra saretera fated wT I
Yen fete: stot arnt: afwafiar: | werent: Wa TresreEfaa: TAL 4S Il
TAGATAUTTG VIPAT TA: | AL ICR ATT TUT TEAR Ht Goll
The chief of the army Sudhrti going near Vardhana saluted him

ot ARREST 162 Sri Tripurarahasyam
and said. “Oh Vardhana! Hear me. I have sent the army and its leaders
to obstruct Kama. The doors are guarded. In all corners troops are
deployed. All citizens who were running away have been brought back.
From here I am going to bring Satrufijaya and other sons of the king
and led by them I will quickly go to the battle field.” 57 to 60
ua waft aeeret aqat Taya: | ae: efron gen
As Sudhrti was saying thus, the sons of the king who were extremely
brilliant set out along with their respective armies. 61
VARA: Wa a A: AAA: | MT TAT: Frege: RH
BASMA YReHusentesga: | aaeA: Weregyraraca faa: aan
way qdadeq wedy foie: | aratdteraaret wat abate: Ta
The four sons of the king by name Satrufijaya, Satruha, Bhima and
Samaratapana were equal to Indra in valour, were wearing war dresses
and decorated with crown, ear studs and other ornaments, were holding
in their raised arms weapons resembling thunderbolts, were proficient
in handling many missiles, were seated in chariots glowing like suns
and beautiful with healthy horses, were fanned and praised often by
panegyrists. 62 to 64
Qala Faqs Aas see Tene! ST Taga Waly AATATT, | GY
Sudhrti reached them and after saluting them moved in front of
the sons of the king riding an elephant and cleared the way. 65
vara Teyise at ead sort: qe wt: taut ara qt: wR
Wt: Gt eat add face
To Vardhana the benefactor of the kingdom the king’s son said
“Safeguard along with alert soldiers and by sending news through
messengers to the city which has many inner chambers.” 66
sft gran Wergdareet wit wea: gol
Ware aqat seat aerate Taya wea Tes at AE ATA 1 GCI
watered afentgant aft staf a greats marae wa: get y ATIATL I &

a RIS SATA: 163 Chapter 14
pataraartte vacrshe wit) waa aged aa darfint: ae Boll
Listening to and receiving well the words of the king’s son, Vardhana
the best among speakers spoke aptly at that time. “Oh fortunate son of
the King! Proceed to the battle along with the army. By your grace there
will not be any lapse in duty in the city as long as I am alive. Also be
informed that preparation for war has been done. You should also, by
the help of the soldiers, fight carefully.” 67 to 70
Watradt aa wrt: Hoifed: | faeraft: wemitaqaetsia: yfa: 1 wen
At that time the radiant and pure Vidyapati, the priest of the
lineage, surrounded by host of brahmins arrived there. 71
a Teal Taare target ce afware ye fam weratsaam: fear: i 92
Seeing him the sons of the king got down from the chariots and
saluted the Guru and the brahmins and stood with reverence. 72
wat faenofafanpifirqaics ari trey fierce qrar deaths way: 03 1
Tat aratiaradcrrarage: |
Then along with the brahmins, Vidyapati blessed them and marked
their forehead with auspicious unguents and caressed their limbs and
invoked protection by chants containing the names of the deity. 73
am forat tag wat yernfinfercites: ox
forest yea: arf urges weet: | art aizertsearget alfa: 11 oy
trentaraat aa: wale aitferane: | Say: sple Het TeqIAT | OG
quad qe Peay ada: stferage: | wera faarargcat sears store: BAT: i Vo
arfarat wererarafe ararfeentr ai wort: Taya fanfeerefertat Nee
May the Trident wielder, the three eyed Siva protect you from the
front. Pinaki from the back, Mahesvara with his noose your sides, He
with matted locks your head, your hands, the One who is decorated with
snakes, your waist, the One wrapped in elephant skin. Your stomach,
the wearer of Rudraksa; the One with the eye of destructive fire, your
chest; your legs, the Bearer of the skull; the One with sun and moon
as eyes, your back bone; the One who brings about auspiciousness, your

Rt fines, 164 Sri Tripurarahasyam
entire body. Thus invoking protection by smearing ashes and wishing
all well and making them give varieties of great gifts, Vidyapati returned
with the brahmins while the king’s sons were saluting him. 74 to 78
aa ad warped fafa faead weramergare a afar: 1 oe
aoe weary ad area: Gare Phy: Sher aya dar ada:
aart Sfad deggrr waeitepar: | tazater warfare srenter: eter afr ce
fate tedinet facrurent gai sferadtafeactar wrgrrerat We
facia werditer dteerentceviar fadtearnita qed dftate ae TA)
Then the people made loud victorious proclamations that reached
the sky. The roaring warriors, the conch-blowing soldiers, the players on
kettle-drums, big drums, and trumpets proceeded by surrounding the
sons of the king. The neighing of the horses, the loud sound from valiants,
the cry of the elephants, the sounds from chariots, the vibrations from
bow strings, the sounds from the clapping on shoulders and uproars
were jointly splitting the sky. Then the mighty army which was like a
swelling ocean proceeded from the city gate, breaking the hearts of the
pusillanimous, created another ocean in the middle of the earth.
sia stages wrereravs agqdvitseara: 11
End of the fourteenth chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripuraérahasyam.

Wseyits cara:
Chapter 15
aa at wed Sat Yafretrad Ha Vass Tas ceatfectiga, =
wea fava ota: wat Hardee: | fagraaitiguitqa: fea: dafintda: on 2
art vigett fagraatievitgd tari eat sit dhava fayraatiecttgey =n 3
fasraatienitad var way
Then Sudhrti divided that huge army strategically. He positioned
the king’s son Satrufijaya at the centre along with ten Aksauhini army.
In the front he himself sitting on an elephant took position along with
twenty Aksauhini army surrounded by army leaders. To his left he
positioned Satruhana along with twenty Aksauhini army. Similarly to
his right he positioned Bhima along with twenty Aksauhini army. At
the back Samaratapana was placed along with twenty Aksauhini army.
wale: Geourt | yperaewmantea: uw
Ten: fasam: wtahtate: | aaatereant catfeategtti: = at
Trerahtaeeneg wast cara: feaat: 1 viene art fara: yprerersfrar: it &
ua wager fraser gafreren csgare fags wears wafeac: Won
arreastaraniss fant wedt PTI
Behind, an army with innumerable strength consisting of great
valiant soldiers equal to lions and who had never receded in any battle
and who held spear and shield were ready to fight. There were as many
soldiers with spears and discuses on the left as with maces on the right.
Sudhrti thus dividing the army and informing the king’s son, was in
the front on an elephant. Taking along with him the huge army he
moved towards Kama. 4to7
eat ARG WATS SAVSHS AT: wen
Tsar Taaksee qemfarattart weeny neu
uraagaiyatre @ far agqanteassat GAISAYTST ll tol

m ARES, 166 Sri Tripurarahasyam
mrrggracitenra warrstaftfeat | fagagit warreneaee YET Ween
acuit fercar ara wars fafrgea: | gt: ferreter ore ater faqeary een
At that time Narada came in front of Indra, who was seated on
Iravata. Indra saw him, who was bright like a silver mountain wearing
deer skin, besmeared with ashes, who was in the sky like an autumnal
cloud with negligible water, who came there with the speed of the wind
to shower the rain of news and to see the battle of Kama. Then Indra
alighted from the elephant and duly worshipped him by touching his
feet and stood in front of him. Then Narada addressed Indra. 8 to 12
gam fer avafa at usgq ved ay: | GaasIsn VHA UvASAaT VARA I
vaed at de: cam: darafaeafa cate steeds areata ol ex
yfanert at dt far g dterqurg adi suet acer weer gu
wigitta acyreat anafarerany) Taste We: VAT A ATRST HM Ue:
farttafiars senfe wertearitge: | ars afer cart ett a det 1 gol
SAM A Wana Fst HaATawqa!
“Oh Indra! Are you seeing the huge well-prepared army of the king,
which is like an endless ocean. How can Kama all alone achieve your
desired goal? Even though it is extremely difficult, it will be possible
for him by the power of Devi Laksmi. We should not count valour based
on appearance, because valour is a property of the seed. A stone at the
base of a banyan tree, even if it is big cannot sprout branches and
leaves. Even then the army of the king is countless and Kama is alone.
It looks incongruous. Therefore go with your group and support Kama
and please Kama as well as goddess Laksmi. Otherwise Sri Laksmi the
Universal Mother, would be angry with you for your negligence.
sft aneagreanraed yn ae: Weel
qratteter ae wren waite wat zai aat zen Zayfs atedt Qadzar 1 Bel
srry aaron wefergatda: |
a Then listening to the good words of Narada, Indra thinking that to
right decided to proceed. Then saluting the divine sage he reached
ma along with the heavenly army, Maruts and others. 18, 19

qaaes ATT: 167 Chapter 15
SCS tor 15
uret vies Searmut: sear care: weet: I Roll
great ofa wear 24: yrenqara 1 ear uve wet Sameer 1 een
deere arrestee! argqqgas sagt: erafafadt tH: 1 een
intfenixaqretrenrgret: | tarermrerreats?: faragfafat: eat
aa: caeciteragt: ada: uftenftary
Seeing the arrival of Indra along with the gods, Kama was happy
and felt revered and spoke to Indra. “Oh Indra! See the huge ocean-like
army which causes fear in the hearts of the weak; which is decorated
with varieties of flags that are fluttering in front of speeding chariots;
which has elephants like blue mountains with streams of ichor covered
with red blankets and mountain born metals, with horses looking like
shining waves and which is entirely surrounding. 20 to 23
wa yim: caraerat fagres ore WeaT UW
au cara at de: waa: daa SEL AEA Sera reTeUTT Rh
Listening to Kama, Indra said “Oh Kama! How can you fight single
handed that terrific army which has spread all over and has many strong
soldiers?” 24, 25
gfe agrerrnrenud cart: palaTeUteRUT: | TOT Pew aT Yeh Har alert Mev 2G
gat dat frtersatq wwarera dae Tae wT aE HE Tet aah Ti Vw
mada 4 wana weamafied ay: | arate front wt wrtife ager = Re
Hearing his words Kama with furious red eyes said. “Oh Indra!
I have never uttered a lie before. In front of your eyes I will destroy
this army in half-a-minute. Have no doubt. I am speaking the truth. Oh
Lord of gods! The delay will be as much as the time taken by the army
to come near me.” 26 to 28
Ua aarerarened Sar: Sager: | sept arqeretfaferen: waa: feat 28M
Hearing his words, the gods led by Indra were surprised i
worshipped Kama with words of appreciation.
Uafenaat aa Sar wnat weftaa: | aaTARTAT at Edt Sat WaT AT FT: Ml Rol

at fae, 168 Sri Tripuraérahasyam
a
Bart Yerereas sfaremnftaagent: | arate: armenateat qada: 1 an
uftart aqart art arg wergfat
Meanwhile the army had reached near Kama. Seeing that huge
army Kama holding his twanged bow moved forward. As soon as Kama
proceeded, Indra with other gods covered Kama all-round and went in
front to fight in that great land. 30, 31
manage gat Wace 3H
werere: WANA Faateahrta: | yaR ACE TAH ECE: TEE
faguedtnatafta: ufrrage: | wae: VATA: Wate: Sarasa: avn
When the two armies came face to face there arose a great sound
caused by the instruments like drums, horns, trumpets, conches that
were employed in war. The roaring of soldiers mixed with the sound
from the axle of the chariots was mutually frightening. The two armies
started firing missiles at each other. 32 to 34
faqart wart wre yRT: | TT YT HetenTaT WraafacHaT: TL
AMTASAG MT: VAIAAAT: | TAA HAVA VATA: = BG
A war between gods and men commenced. There, well-built dreadful
valiants of lion-power skilled in the use of missiles fought with matching
weapons and carriages. 35, 36
vate tit warebifreer afafrensfer: west: areata: 1 301
arqendga gant weeetiaen: | Get: wengyrtdanetas afeert: i 3c Il
quvstnfeanyuhanrageat: | qyvdtefaauryafreanray fara: ne 3gul
Be Ayes tot WMA: | Us wa UM Salsa: wafer: voll
The fight was systematic between men and gods where the
charioteers, those on elephants, the horse riders, soldiers on foot, those
with bows, mace, sword, spears, missiles, axe, rods, tridents fought with
opposing warriors who had similar carriages and weapons. 37 to 40
Tetra arenhesrererTe: | agar: wat acasafann: sel
forsaenn: rangydisatsat ae ualgeciteed afinferd zat Yl

2 : 169 Chapter 15
Fe TaMact yyet Teter
A righteous war went on for a while steadily with no anxiety,
mutually desiring victory. Looking for a weak moment in the enemy
some were dropping their weapons in between. Then the war turned
noisy, fearful and horripilating. 41, 42
wert teat: qercteafeansa: usan
Feros aera Ure WO SUT 1 Ta AAT A UrAisfer deen ame
faeg ard agen yer seed aur: | sitfaartencetse ara sept A aera Hi
wa: Wea wer eS SF wees Toate gefearet ager aes UAT I YE I
The soldiers on either side with tense eyebrows inviting each other
uttered angry words thus: “If you stay in front of me I will kill you.
No one is there to save you. I will send you to the abode of Yama. Fie
upon you, uncultured, who are talking too much uselessly. Brahma has
decided that I am to terminate your life. I am going to kill you. You
cannot run away.” 43 to 46
we Fs Waar werealt sagt wleareiqnat: aad aisfag: eat war vol
With such a terrific war in progress, everyone blind with anger
failed to recognise each other. 47
qagant wat wetfe aatsaaq Sargent weessat TA: il vel
Then gods fought gods. Humans fought humans. The dust risen out
of the agitation of the army enveloped the sky. 48
threaten ardityd a ada: ws feaasfettior qatereiiqnat qf ut ¥en
aiaey wt ut ast weq: etary aa eat!
a fagetstttor qa @ ar ferret Koll
Seized by the rain of weapons there was darkness everywhere. Even
then being blind with anger and unable to recognise they killed their
own soldiers. In their anger they could see neither the earth nor the
sky nor the directions. 49, 50

xe FARES, 170 Sri Tripurarahasyam
NN ——
fet ut aenssort Fae vrerenitaet Mae SY: UTA ue
Unaware of day, night, self, war and weapons they killed each other
intent only on attacking. 51
vaferrat wrengat aarilda: | werctcreryarererssts ere: WAH
Wet: BRAT Nee Sara! Tat: TAMAS YEtAfarSoTy, Wasi
At that time Jayanta the son of Indra came there with anger riding
on the elephant, the son of Airdvata. He faced Sudhrti with a huge
heavenly army. They fought fiercely for a while. 52, 53
wer qafraarifreraneren: | foxuefetecrats eesti: WQsn
ACA MAMET: afta: get Aa: | MAMTA AhfaeeaMTTETATSaT GK HI
Yfeoasat asst eitear aa Yat FAT: |
Prfter 33 moni aft seer fat awe, W&atl
at qfet tratrracite! ata: araaft a teafa wrt: wrt: yon
Then the army of gods, which faced the forefront of Sudhrti’s army,
was destroyed. Their legs, heads, hands, sides, eyes, ears and noses were
chopped off. The group of gods losing their lives fell on the ground. Some
were totally dead and some almost dead. A few others fell unconscious.
Some others out of fear pretended to be dead with their eyes closed,
controlling their breath with difficulty. They were not casting even a
side glance at the strong enemy standing far away and they breathed
slowly. 54 to 57
we froma ered siiensfinggg: | wart Sent gear aqTorerat ul Well
wifemgarat yqrent were! Skerarnfia west Wea Wasnt
Seeing such a war a few others ran away out of fear. Observing
the god’s army defeated like that, the group of Vasus led by Savitra
started quickly destroying the army of Sudhrti that was huge like a
billowing ocean. 58, 59
wafedarara ar gatiedt wy: sare dierent aatwafreagrt Goll
_ Being killed by the Vasus the mighty army of Sudhrti was quickly
ruined like the group of clouds by a speedy wind. 60

THES OM: 171 Chapter 15
tfaafgarpa wet afafeswetseua: |
tafacatgfanga: aferee freer: aa: watt
Some were split into two. The legs and hands of some were cut off.
Some lost half their body. Some were pulverised like gingely seeds. 61
wa wy facies qyquaenen: | sryreqest: afte: vitforarat safer 1 62
siete oat agfrentsar yerq srrey yreut fenfiga after certferary 1 G3 11
Seeing such a condition others fled with fear. Unable to cross the
river of blood they ran helter-skelter and severely beaten by the Vasus
fell into the ocean of blood without finding any shelter. 62, 63
srerertateet Prana aret ageat warearet warts ot ue ay
YA TAM, AAA Tey: WTO: | srarttafirars sare erste HATTA: H&G
at cargarane tedfenrtrarcta) sear tar wer aferdtint: yitforrenfiett
Some were drowned in that vast river of blood. Some who were again
and again floundering and floating were trying to swim across. Some
desirous of living caught hold of dead elephants as if an island and
sailed afar. Some crossed by holding on to a chariot’s wheel. Some others
crossed the river of blood with the help of horses and chariots.
Sarre Gear yyteqeear Tr weer: awe yar non
TeMTEe UaSt aforewaftepey! aqfarenrcay ue yea Sar ween
Seeing the defeat of the army, the young valiant adamantine
Ranadhira the son of Sudhrti faced the Vasus on his chariot and angrily
twanged his bow which was set with gold and gems. 67, 68
wréted: Shree etter were war! frevtet frentet aifet a: were i
aferast ef a wef sthigreran) affroser frepfirgs terrier — it volt
Then he loudly addressed his soldiers who were running away, thus:
“Return, return. It is not right on your part to flee. Righteousness,
wealth and fame discard the person who recedes from war. The atonement
for the debt of the master is offering your life in the battle.” 69, 70

at fee, 172 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Ua aay QU aaa aatsadt! fraser satis AaqEs Aaa: 11 wen
ya: wecatset wat upaa ye: fey yptfaafea: wen: tarsi wegea: 1 921
avait saat att waytad & gayi dead actin arearafator ae: 31)
Having said that, he approached the group of Vasus and spoke.
“Shame on you who are chasing and attacking with weapons the weak
and the discouraged. Enough of that. Look at me who is in front of you.
Chasing the coward is reprobated by the strong. Show me quickly your
strength which I will see. Then I will soon make you happy by my
valour every day.” 71 to 78
aaaeed: Aen wrehifed dan puaakagqe Ti wget sa Nox
worse wide aqua tafaa: | a wart qanife: aatefaftiqe: nn oun
Hearing the words uttered by Ranadhira, the Vasus simultaneously
surrounded him like a flower by the bees. Even then Ranadhira who
was amidst the Vasus seated in his chariot was firm like the Meru
mountain surrounded by smaller mountains. 74, 75
aa @ erat aay: aaatsfaa: | aan qaewreraieparecensfaqiefa: oat
Then the Vasus showered arrows on him from all directions. Similarly
they showered clubs, spears, double edged swords, barbed darts, arrows
and swords on him. 76
agerastratir degd Grats sera! Gear yd AAT at Sfrear qreifera:t1 wo
met wae: fattaratia aaa a areal dtrafag fawwrracitay, tl cll
Seeing Sudhrti’s son drowned in the missiles of the Vasus, the
soldiers standing at a distance thought him to be dead. They were sad
as no one was able to release him who was like an young elephant
surrounded by lions. 77, 78
aa at vege a oye: aurea: | wherawer fora a wars fafa: wt:
Irieh fitters qeasqarrenm! weigiéaan wal: waits: wie: ul coll
: Then, instantly the skilled son of Sudhrti broke all those missiles
into eight pieces each and hit them each with three sharp arrows. Seeing
his wonderful valour gods and men praised him with shouts of
appreciation. 79, 80

Wears A: 173 Chapter 15
art fate: sepioseriften: | atstt vit aretht weareter aA ce
Then the Vasus forming a circle poured varieties of missiles. Sudhrti’s
son quickly destroyed them by suitable combat missiles. 81
vaisfinteqarat ofrag ori ut ygdreaes aquiterer ween
Alone he severely fought with the eight Vasus by revolving like a
wheel and the fight lasted for a while. 82
guaradagg adet aApasad! aa: Weenyhe faces fafert: wt: c3
Revolving like a vortex he fought in front of all warriors. He pierced
their chest individually by sharp arrows. 83
SaMHaAyoa Uta CM! aatat fet aectsenatshagd AUT cx i
He cut off the flags one by one and the four horses by four arrows.
Then with great speed he severed the heads of charioteers with his
special arrows. 84
fafraa qui gfe frees am aga! eeaTSa aaa: Yqesfeat: cy
yfsar: ufaat quit qrayer Sa FAT: | Seat wera ay Gear Frarferary
aang wel Wayreat wey!
Then with a sharp sword he wounded the Vasus in their chest. The
Vasus were in great trouble with their flags, horses and charioteers
destroyed and they fell on the ground unconscious like uprooted trees.
Seeing the defeated Vasus, loud lamentation arose in the army of gods.
In the army of men shouts of victory were heard. 85, 86
Udtaraat wa aq: Blas: nol
qeatqantstatatert crete yitfeata: | freer faeard @ seat WE ATSeN << I
Meanwhile one of the Vasus by name Savitra woke up and struck
.Ranadhira with three extremely sharp arrows and roared before the
other Vasus. 87, 88
wifaaprdfaat wretistrafia: | atesur frede aq: waren el
afsaecn wedi wennee ana: | tar fadarentiqaeeneary Fat ll oll

sft fe, 174 Sri Tripurarahasyam
retina wer wae, Halaat wary!
Hit by the arrows of Savitra, the angry Ranadhira cut off the bow
held by Savitra with a half-moon-like arrow. With his bow destroyed
Savitra with his massive mace rendered the cloud-like horses of Ranadhira
unconscious and threw the iron mace on Ranadhira’s chest. 89, 90
as Saag aera, Ween
wyee: wfrede frat vafe wer: |
The skilled Ranadhira broke into three pieces in space the mace
that was approaching him like a highly fierce thunderbolt. 91
ameestarint wat at a Gey, Wee
arfaat wrediver asa dad: | frede aa aeett ea: THrSsfrarra: 1 ea
Prt wer Ba Tq: APRS ST!
Then holding a very sharp sword and a beautiful shield, Savitra
jumped on to Ranadhira’s chariot and broke his bow and pierced the
charioteer with a spear and angrily cut off his head with its crown.
treat: forrqicantaeeah: nest
Wa: Genhieigt wpe vga: | ytd aca at fase wert un eu
Tet vitet o yet a ett disfearagaT
Ranadhira the scorcher of the enemies, infuriated having lost his
bow and charioteer picked up his sword and shield. Savitra with great
speed broke them immediately. Also, he destroyed quickly the mace,
spear and trident held by Ranadhira. 94, 95
we aferaeres cred citer tare, neal
apg writgeny e1 faq ye qqet aahtetrge gel
wart safe ay wt a weg) sms wEeet daniesaet qa: ecll
Seeing the dexterity of Savitra’s sword, Indra praised him. Then
Ranadhira angrily boxed the chest of Savitra with his strong thunderbolt-

z See: 175 Chapter 15
like fist and roared in the great battle. With that Savitra who became
slightly unconscious moved five feet away. 96 to 98
WET Wataru Tort wera eat wenger we 1 etl
aus Wy wet aegahrars wag ara at yfefretat fagrat a aT 200 11
aed aa amegqer afast qerdteraqs aear cafe deer afer qetarsaq, 11 tok tl
Again the strong Savitra gave a blow to Ranadhira. Meanwhile
Ranadhira snatched the sword of Savitra and broke his shank. This was
really a wonder. Then both of them fought with their fists. After a while
Ranadhira jumping into the air pushed Savitra on the ground and sitting
on his chest hit him on the head. 99 to 101
afearstaedt tert afer: feet ari areat yyf arfast feerenrerrst wer i RoR
Pearmre Sagi wast afgateacts adt wait wet yrfeera St: = oR
er Pore qaftaa atari wordt ea: eT =Aafeset gfe Rox Il
Hit by the fist, Savitra fell vomitting blood. Realising that Savitra
was unconscious like an elephant attacked by a lion, Indra sent Jayanta
for his rescue. Jayanta with deceit hit forcibly Ranadhira on his back
with a spear by which he fell unconscious. 102 to 104
aeat 9 wera: | afgrerorivtetiraard WaT I oll
Then Jayanta the son of Indra, with great difficulty carried Savitra
who was still having some life, to Indra.
gfe stig wrererers waeyitseaa: 1
End of the fifteenth chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurarahasyam.

WrSoits Ala:
Chapter 16
wanferdtrat meqeigie q) wetistesrat yedteqatea: wen
Ranadhira struck by Jayanta’s weapon, swooned and could not
recognise anything. He got up after a short time and was ready to fight
again. 1
Femtt waxitsht wasswers sme: | Tree: ETS ft aS VU
Then Jayanta came in front of Ranadhira in his chariot holding his
bow and said “Stop, stop” to Ranadhira. 2
a gear wrest tinted & wer greta wai waft aa St Pee: HI
daar ware Godt wi adisadt: | ata at aecitee Hd agedetg nn ¥
yeaa ua wt dtontstafeena: | aaa diya @ + areivaferert wall
a vitae wet cat fierratsadtga! svat a wdepg ae ale feattwa 1 G1
meat Pret waretnatat! saan Fitededisedes fret Ta Il
_ Seeing him Ranadhira angrily chided him. “I know you as the son
of Saci and not as the son of Indra, because like a woman you attacked
me from the back. Such a mean act is done by cowards. You think that
you are manly, but you are driven out of the warrior group. Shame on
you the uncultured son of a disloyal mother. Do not needlessly cause grief
to Saci, or if you are interested in battle, then stand firmly before me.
I will despatch you in half-a-minute to the abode of Yama.” Saying so
Ranadhira crushed the chariot of Jayanta with sharp arrows. 3 to 7
Went Weaxitst wat faa aa: | watsha weit aca Bsmt Cl
Then Jayanta angrily flung his mace saying “Oh Ranadhira, you
are dead”. Ranadhira jumped and caught that mace. 8
“relearn at ret wre ang ets he yen witsfe asm Waet awat Preheat ¢
pe = eae Ranadhira said “Oh son of Indra! Well done. You
xl ee There is no doubt that I am dead. But the dead one will
nu. 3

SS : 177 Chapter 16
gfa qafa tear caaritaacites: | faese Gerda aqerefe yey: gol
Talking in this manner with furious red eyes he broke the bow of
Jayanta by striking it with his sword. 10
fos fad oristt war Gest eT! Senger Beals ator Fafrerda: 1 eet
forest preperafedé wrye foram feraend ferat grat ated: adufs ser i ee
When Jayanta’s second bow also was destroyed, Ranadhira, violently
holding the sword in his right hand quickly sprang and instantly dislodged
the crown of Jayanta and held his tuft and dragged him like Garuda
dragging the king of serpents. 13,12
Oy Wea acd Htalet TAI! Maal: Wage Aa A aN RII
aeAyTeagaaey sete uae ay wars eferornt adeno wae: ev II
When Ranadhira raised his sword to behead Jayanta, Agni knowing
that Jayanta was in danger, struck with all his might and fury the right
hand of Ranadhira with a bolt when the gods were wailing. 13, 14
ufteredeenry Hrtarcitsargia cadted x dead Gear care RK
gata wretitse wast aw uetsead! ed: Weer wore af afer: eat
Wades AMSAT Wet WANS Aa: | CaUle aacneat uaa yeihs Hl goll
afeatseredt afedutart qa sat
The sword of Ranadhira dropped on the ground from his right hand
which was hit by the bolt. He grew angry by this failure and kicked
Jayanta who fell unconscious. Then holding the neck of Agni with his
left hand, hit him on his head with his hard right hand fist by which
Agni dropped on the ground. 15 to 17
Aaatt MAS: Het: Yaa Weel
traceret Gear wre gage: | Teasers Bas farts aTagaT RVI
fetougisandtsdiaaq prays TI aarssedise wet Frama wear Ml Rol
faregt yea md wrettts wawer
At that time Indra came there to protect his son. Seeing Indra
seated on Airavata, Ranadhira jumped up and angrily dislodged his

it AE, 178 Sri Tripurarahasyam
See
crown by slapping him. Then Indra feeling disgraced by the loss of his
crown hit Ranadhira on his thigh with his Vajrayudha by which Ranadhira
fell deeply unconscious on the ground. 18 to'20
aaafagd aghad att Fryar J Ween
afr dtcarara toredtersfards Ta Serra Prt tae aT RH
wade tart tatott fara aH sare eas STAT TeTATETa ETAT BB
watadt wercemegat wqarrihy! seta yrenfarta artarare ar: TS
neasfaea: eat ara wart Fl Yfeod: wHfeeTer WS PAPA AMT 1 WU
Seeing the condition of the son of the army-chief Bhima ordered his
charioteer to go near Ranadhira. On his instructions the charioteer went
near Ranadhira immediately and Bhima got down from the chariot and
placed Ranadhira on the chariot. Then Bhima himself, to oppose Indra,
picked up his shining gem-studded iron mace which could destroy the
enemies and jumped and struck Indra on his head with great force.
Struck by the mace Indra with injured head fell unconscious on the back
of the elephant like a cut-off tree. 21 to 25
manta Sauft MaTaCaTA: | MATT PeTeoeMTOT TATA Te TAL
Knowing that condition of Indra, the divine elephant Airadvata ran
away from the battle to protect Indra. 26
Feat Weye shit gad aye Tara orget faanaisa aqamatid act 1 Vol
Seeing the Airavata which was running away Bhima quickly held
it by its tail and dragged it back about six hundred feet. (The length
of one bow is taken as six feet). 27
areata abafag wae: cafttre qari ator t wararg WeeRTa YA: A: Ul Vl
Being unable to escape, the elephant then with its trunk tried again
and again to catch Bhima. 28
werrmerartar gafacen ygdg: | wear asset dwar aeagAT Tea
Then the angry Bhima turned the elephant to the left and right
repeatedly and hit its back with great force by his mace. 29

Semis : 179 Chapter 16
asada Tear dep fa: Ui aT ecierargea vt a onl
Hit by his mace, the crying elephant made three rounds and fell
on its knees vomitting blood. 30
at ate: waneqer uted wrenarda: | at aes Te SAT BRT
Then Bhima jumped and picked up from behind the thunderbolt
that was near Indra. 81
vies freha aeta sreanifa cafetad Text vmstat WaT ATT BRI
While Bhima was thinking of killing Indra with his own weapon,
the thunderbolt vanished immediately. 32
Uiferaat arpequreanngd: | dda Gane Weatard yretafry, Rt
Then Vayu along with the group of Maruts fought with Bhima to
save the life of Indra. 33
vremarera sitatsta agha: aftarita: | Wear ASAT Wee AAT: BY
Even Bhima took his mace and followed by many soldiers hit the
Maruts all over with his mace. 34
weat arcing wort aafeor Aga: abate Aart Ga: WeIPTTRT ul HI
Then the charioteer took the unconscious Ranadhira to Sudhrti’s
residence and returned immediately. 35
agyit tanrgeefesistr gana: | aafaar afer Tay Wag
Though obstructed by many gods the charioteer cheating them quickly
brought the chariot which had carried off Ranadhira. 36
gear ta wdprenigd wreedert arf qararare arehigeiyre: TO
Seeing the chariot returned full with all types of Eee Bhima
climbed on it and with sweet words appreciated the charioteer. 37
sera oemeattatgar wager | CAAT rarergaepa Wel
wart quant: urengeryargs: | ate fafrranitadantsfract at tl RII

A ARS 180 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Then Bhima battled with Vayu using his raised bow and missiles,
The grey-coloured Vayu seated in his well-equipped chariot drawn by
deers and wielding weapons like a rope and a goad, showered with anger,
sharp arrows on Bhima. 38, 39
muita aaresat faarary gfetita ufrarrnqear t arerarara ara: tt ¥o tt
aa tat aecaiserard RISA! Tefal ages aoraitsrstga: ut we
Bhima who was covered by the heap of arrows just as the Sun by
the mist retaliated and destroyed them with combat arrows. Then he
pierced Vayu on his chest with a special arrow. The deeply wounded
Vayu became immobile for a while. 40, 41
Aertt | Wed BI Arata! arg fataqutt frequiratira: Ueszu
Then the Maruts simultaneously fought and threw fast moving goads
at Bhima to kill him. 42
matardaster dtafracas fran: |
Wah ele frearenssantsseqe: yitfate: evant
Bhima with an equal number of half-moon-shaped weapons cut off
their goads quickly. Then he wounded them one by one in their heart
by using three arrows pulled up to his ears. 43
wea: tee: wa tqveat yufeom: | qareat arquit wreqaurgey il vv Il
All the Maruts who were thus wounded fell unconscious on
the ground. Then the wind-god gaining consciousness hurled a goad at
Bhima. “4
wafafrat exe ayn aornfayr! ya: daMaense werarers art: Yk Il
eee at: SeaTaTeEL| oTafaar vat yet areca WUT Fil 6 Il
Very much injured in his chest by that goad Bhima swooned for a
while and again gaining consciousness quickly took his mace and sprang
from his chariot on to the chariot of Vayu and hit him on his head by
revolving his mace. 45, 46

CURT SR 2S be ee
ufarg Taree werqet itr: 1 qfeedt ferme: afer xo tt
When Vayu fell unconscious with his head broken by the mace, he
was taken away by his charioteer. 47
wuaa aed Gear aaafreran seu: faqufsat weadafata a xen
faqea qed ott enitqrege teraaeat tax: faqronfeafee: uxen
wremt want utaredt arate: | werdufacaeat fafedefatirfar: I Koll
aramydfnnratg ater: qpardfae: |
Seeing the defeat of Vayu and understanding that Bhima is invincible,
Kubera, Varuna, Yama, Indra, the king of Gandharvas arrived
simultaneously at the battle field. Indra seated on Airfvata, Yama on
his Bison, Varuna on Fish, Kubera on a man, the Gandharva king on
a horse, each wielding varieties of weapons came with a common agreement
to fight Bhima. 48 to 50
AQAA Yaa: Wie wea yrAHatetes Wag
Taya wearer tesa saree: | wef ht wereng werere a rT Ge
wane aghads fat oferta A
Seeing that Sudhrti went near Satrufijaya and said, “Oh Sons of
the king! Indra and others have joined hands to kill the strong Bhima.
Let us go there. I think that one single person fighting with many, is
really odd or dishonest.” 51, 52
ofa agreanrennd qeafieafana Waal
Aa: VERE wR Saar Targa Yafaaet arf Ml 4 I
Every one agreed with Sudhrti. Then Satrufijaya and others
surrounded the group of gods. Sudhrti faced Indra who was on his
elephant. 53, 54
waa aaufe aeut yrqer wari weaderat ohetshe at waa: WGK HT
vasagit deferens wesaq ergata ate areas getfte: W 4g tl
Fares tagst dteergeaga: | aren: aacaTeaya ay TAT Waont
wet waren war qe wa: WETS! regenera urea: we I

at Pre 182 Sri Tripurdrahasyam
Satrufijaya faced Kubera, Satruha faced Varuna, Bhima faced
Gandharvaraja, Samaratépana faced Yama, Viravikrama the son of
Satrufijaya faced Vayu, Virasena the son of Satrughna faced Agni,
Virabhanu the son of Bhima faced Jayanta, Viragraga the son of
Samaratdpana faced Vasus. Thus they expecting to win, fought a wonderful
war, which made the hearts of the cowards to tremble. 55 to 58
ste staged wrereravs weyits era: 1
End of the sixteenth chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurarahasyam.

TSS CATT:
Chapter 17
qgdanead qq terete smeaarescfoxea: wit: fafa: nen
fare waqiea fade a aequm aw fear oft weds ay 8
arard ufte wet farses faferagur ardut: ug-detaqt divarfra: = ai
wen TaSAT Wat ante denahaor fore fttetas feerenasety i x
The horripilating war went on for a muhirta (48 minutes). Citrasena
riding on a horse struck Bhima with three arrows and broke his bow
in the middle by a mighty arrow. Then Bhima hurled a pad-bolt at the
Gandharva Lord. The skilled Citrasena cut off with a sharp arrow that
weapon which was approaching him and with four feathered arrows
killed the four horses of Bhima and with another arrow destroyed the
crown of the charioteer and killed him and roared like a lion. 1 to 4
wiganfaste: Wasa GAA! Weasasafearaaraatra re: Wail
TEUMUTBT Yaa aA MUTT YoTeT farses WATT wan
Losing his horse and chariot, Bhima burning with anger gave a
hard blow with a mace to Citrasena’s horse. Hit by the mace the horse
bleeding with its head split, died after touching Citrasena who had fallen
down from the horse. 5, 6
went q afert fasdatssratrarn: | srafeat werarat werent farted, i ol
aenaaty yrevautq aahy deronate mgs qesterrytreedsy — eil
aat oat freacfe arat Tet AAT: |
Understanding that Bhima was strong, Citrasena disappeared and
created a perplexing magic that showered stones, weapons, serpents, evil
spirits, heaps of skulls, blood, embers and whirl-wind on Bhima wherever
he has moving. 7,8
ua sitrequreiter wat toad fafa, wen
ar wrt Frater pret sitet fererans fexstarernrar feraers eter TAPE to I

at fqReSay 184 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Seeing that witchcraft cast by the Gandharva, Bhima ejected into
the sky an anti-magical missile, which destroyed in no time the great
magic of Citrasena. 9, 10
aayt wadufanraet wet aaa! anfayerners qusftfra as 1 eel
wea Wfet wat dtm: wiguitefrara: | wearsfaedt qt wore fatarqaq ul ez
aasaed weal fry: wroteon
Bhima saw Citrasena rushing towards him. Just as Siva hit
Andhakasura with his trident, Bhima with the mace hit Citrasena on
his head. Thus Citrasena fell on the ground as if dead and was carried
away by a gandharva to save his life. 11, 12
ahisat aqy qe yreaset: ararsfenct, neat
awa: rato aad: aanagur) sate yrad at aqtcranyredcr uesn
fafa: qygfaerre wee ara!
Viragraga directed weapons and missiles towards Vasus. The Vasus
also showered arrows in the battle field. But Viragraga pushing away
those arrows, shot three feathered arrows at each of the Vasus hitting
their legs, chest and head respectively. 13, 14
@ Bat Waar: wate yragt Wail
yreaeearadsty: wdurtdettaa: | aa dherreitarmectefe Wart AM RG I
murars sapere + wreferer weghy: | fritgifesa: ad afaeg yitfeata-n go
forn chromed anfa afarerar: ese: yratior want fritersda: 1 ec tl
The wounded and enraged Vasus simultaneously with all their might
shot arrows that filled the war field. Then Virdgraga wounded their
chest with sharp speedy arrows stretched up to the ears. Injured by the
mighty arrows all the Vasus fell unconscious. But Savitra using three
arrows broke to pieces in a short-time the chariot, charioteer and horses
of Viragraga. 15 to 18
ae Ges aifet wariigts ufge aat waaMRS Gare frets Taq 28
Then Viragraga flew like a bird and hit with his sword the crown
of Savitra which broke into two pieces. 19

Baas AM: 185 Chapter 17
wifes: vracsend Bente: Uftaor ay! MseTafet arse fewqat wart ¥ 11 20
‘Angry at the breaking of his crown Savitra struck Viragraga on his
head with a bolt by which he fell unconscious. 20
wed yfeoa: Hise wera weatseaq! aifat aeracitsea ay Tat WaTA F 11 Re
Lying unconscious for a while Viragraga rose and with the mace
struck Savitra violently who fell bleeding. 21
afta aheriste fat qaeat wersfears sernsta qa wae a yifT 1 22
aqranraasargl afgstvarst Waar uifguitfragrteer a teat faarfergy 1 23 0
Virasena battled with Agni for a long time and hit him hard on
his head with the strong sword by which Agni who was drenched in
blood flared up with fury and threw his spear Sakti at Virasena to kill
at gear ahariste vaerttererra
drarsed wnfguirestt great yiferetaraa: nevi
Seeing that thunderbolt-like burning weapon, Virasena quickly
despatched a water missile whereupon the burning-weapon subsided. 24
wants: cat fafreat gear yifet Bat GA: |
safatitercerer feredars qe Wet
Then Agni, seeing his Sakti destroyed by Virasena, with anger again
cut to pieces all the weapons of Virasena by sharp arrows. 25
eraatqe: eitsfir afore aera: 1 ware yfet aarsfrafaaara water REI
arag ateaitstt ware vant ware) argeat aera setem Ae AF MATA RO Ul
vifrenmPaaqersgirareaat|
Having lost all his weapons Virasena hit Agni with his raised fist
by which Agni dropped on the ground. Then Virasena pressing with his
arms the chest of Agni brought him to the city and tied him with pend
ropes invoked with freezing chants. 26,

e ATL 186 Si Tripurarahasyam
aenirgqe qa argar atten: Ren
reat: aaresra farrrrerensentiy! yea arotter farger wfererda: Ween
warttrergys Heat ates! argerissedt aa: epled sferaay tt Bot
TEMS SUTATRTTOTAATS HTT OTH! faguinrrast frog: gormfea: i ag
are wat waver whe wes gt Aer! Meg VAT ASTANA ATH neaen
Viravikrama fought fiercely with Vayu by showering arrows and
roaring like a lion. Destroying, immediately that rain of arrows by counter
arrows, Vayu hit Viravikrama in his chest with a huge goad. Beaten by
the goad, his chest was split and bled and he trembled for a moment
and with roving eyes fell unconscious. Again gaining consciousness he
pulled out with great effort the goad that had gone into his chest and
hit Vayu with it. 28 to 32
Frorsgesseat arquerqatsurgta: qaeryfesdt argerarset atten: 11 33
Ft: Ware at guy eeweraT! aE Yara vfet ECUTAgMS SEAT tl BN Hl
arate Werenreag wrafegyfesat |
Vayu hit by his own goad fell as if dead on the ground with his
head broken. Viravikrama unable to bear the pain caused by the impact
of the goad dropped down bleeding too much. Even Vayu was bleeding
from his head and both of them became unconscious. 33, 34
VARs: Hato war FAS TT, Waal
VIgea Tansswe: Bet arares: | Tet yrensepyret ecgferenfererait 1 36 1
weet cela erenpreareretyrent fort qaear gator ygwa sare ALI 30
Satrufijaya intensely battled with Kubera. Satrufijaya was seated in
a chariot. Kubera was on a human being. Both skilled in handling
missiles and experts in archery displayed mutually their skills and fought
for a long time. Then Satrufijaya spoke to Kubera. 35 to 37
ore fis fererats zeta et wensafiry at aft wrt fat wer roret TOT II aen
“Oh Kubera! Why this delay? Show your ultimate strength. If not
become aware that this great arrow will knock down your life”. 38

Baas AM: 187 Chapter 17
wqsaaa: gear aura faferaqurs yrtonssaftt art feeders gafiewm: uae
ares ary arte ag aati fafefeate: 1 fare wert eact eererrgfireen 1 xo
Hearing Satrufijaya, the mighty Kubera destroyed his arrow-set bow
with a sharp arrow and with four, three and three arrows cut off the
horses, the charioteer and the flag respectively and roared like a lion
after killing an elephant. 39, 40
arg yt sere fated & act aa gat aie a dee an: earsitferasaee:
“Oh valiant Satrufijaya! I have come to know about your commendable
strength. Come here. If you do not, this will be your last moment in
life”. 41
wy etviedt searsator yfta: | wenqere ata arsaged AO NW ¥et
Trearsfirgat wed: wore fe yfeoa: | aett atyrer wear yedarery wR Hl
wafrgrar yfet afsat rear eri aoret yfedtsat war wwert aq: i wx ll
yypaefager wergsyetacr: |
Enraged by the words of Kubera, Satrufijaya hit with his raised
mace the human being, the carriage of Kubera. Struck by the mace he
fell down unconscious. Then he severely pounded the diamond hard mace
on Kubera’s head by which Kubera lost his consciousness for a moment.
Meanwhile the strong Satrufijaya snatched Kubera’s bow and broke it.
Fraaest aaa: Gear arret TET nean
alee: ere Wedt WENT! AAT VARA: We AS TY Ta Tt Ka
qfaeat x marge waa a fe feet yrenserd: wre wt weaedife faye
forfigatsferrct aa mrerat wera! Tega 3 A yet avant gfe wT well
afe aersfr ead wrerat wo wean: | aee arate weezer aaTeaT tt RI
satera apatsé werga stacy wevtarsserat ated warqasfrreyry i yo tt
After gaining consciousness and seeing his broken bow Kubera with
angry red eyes picked up his mace. Then Satrufijaya said “Oh friend!
Listen to me. There is no one on earth who is equal to me in mace
fight. I will tell you what my teacher of weapons had told me. After
giving me exceptional training in mace fight he said that there is no

R AT 188 Sri Tripurarahasyam
match for me in this world and if I defeat Kubera it would be great. Today
I have got a chance to see your mace and fight with you the lord of
riches. Show me your extraordinary strength in mace fight. 45 to 50
wa wagaaet fares exaeter! sitfreqerar a4 Fe TeTS AAA GR
Hearing Satrufijaya, Kubera consented and started to fight with
him. 61
wae eters werqafaymet | yfefaat wet qarsreafacaat Ween
at aopiosenfs qermetrafor ai fant ansatfs farsa a 4g
wots anfrents aafensdentir a) secqereasatta faarqaentt a i 4x i
Remiegrapararaaas wi wargame: wat af wre Qu
avtert afeat at qfirat qaatfact: wcenmerce abataoretfact = ua
seein dort we) sera oad aaa yell
Both Satrufijaya and Kubera were well trained and skilled in mace
fight. Both were strong and haughty like lions. They both revolved in a
circle sometimes moving to the left and then to the right, sometimes
unevenly, half evenly, half unevenly, straight, equally bent, half bent,
jumping, half jumping, unevenly jumping, flying, half flying, leaping,
swan walking. Thus both of them, experts in the movements, exhibited
all types of strategies adopted in mace-war. Waiting for a chance to hit
each other they appreciated mutually because of their knowledge about
starting movements. Like brisk balls their movement was not noticeable.
wet wabierga tert: feeeron: | vetqdaatereanet qafidtgt: | cll
wet fat aa ae geen erafeacr eactsfirh marge B32 yg wa: Hl
The Siddhas and Caranas who were watching their mace-fight,
exclaimed “Oh, what a great fight”! and appreciated their skill through
gestures. After fighting for a long time with Satrufijaya, Kubera opined
that Satrufijaya was superior to him in mace fighting. 58, 59
areyer O evel: wef atrana) meensagaeTy ga sara Nn gol
Then Kubera flew in the air and raised his mace to hit. Seeing that
Satrufijaya tricked away from that unfailing Kubera. 60

aaeyits ara: 189 Chapter 17
wren 4 ag: YS Waraisetaaar! wgHa: Peay mfsat yfeea: gon ee
aad: Wat Bara wAlareeureies: | foerarrriayys anisit earsfiry Harn
mamentggs aferarl Wea wari TAT Tea argneiss enters: 0 ea
yay deoreant wage wad aghadifret: frat drreaatay nae
wracprafata aga aratfes dat) seqarar qfe fade wet wateet wan 40
Knowing that Kubera unrighteously hit Satrufijaya on his back by
which Satrufijaya became unconscious for a moment. Then gaining
awareness, he with furious red eyes addressed Kubera. “Shame on you,
Oh Kubera! You are uncultured, inauspicious and unrighteous by hitting
me like a raksasa. Being on the right path I cannot fight you with the
mace. Mace-fight which like the Yogic path, has many rules and
regulations, is commended as the best among fights. Watch me, I will
immediately compensate for your action.” Saying thus, he placed his iron
mace on the ground. 61 to 65
yfeqera ata war gfe & aa: 1 yfearsfeedt aera: viforryfeey = RR
ward qfa art qfesat qaawari ufad ft urpreddere fafiursde: = Rt
Then he pounded the chest of Kubera with his fist by which Kubera
dropped as if dead on the ground bleeding. Satrufijaya then tied him in
half-a-minute with a bunch of ropes. 66, 67
aa arafad aan tart atfcentfegr: | yreiteent: wpe wey WATT It Ge
Then crores and crores of Yaksas attacked Satrufijaya, with weapons
in their hands to release their king. 68
aa ay Near wary yrvarara aera: 1 fete sa yatary are Fated ware 1 &e
were aot ¢ qerea: gfe 4) aren aetna eat avert i vo
Wasa aryise frat FS rar wera Sie wetted ult Watt wet Oe I
atradt anfad a faint a wereofa a aeqa: aot wet 7 careafirarferry ni 0?
Then Satrufijaya quickly destroyed all of them with his mace just
as the Sun, the group of devils. Then he carried Kubera and moved
away. Hearing this, Pulastya came there and addressed him sweetly by
calling him “Oh child! You have won Kubera by your strength in the

a fee 190 Sri Tripurarahasyam
war. Give me my grandson who is lovable and dear to me. Viravrata
will give the brahmins whatever they ask from him. Then how you his
son will not give him when I have asked for? 69 to 72
Wregedt seat wore qf cusaqi aaet qet aad darada ame: Wezu
Listening to the words of sage Pulastya, Satrufijaya prostrated on
the ground and offered Kubera to him and returned soon. 73
Wa wads aa dheagatead at qeen qfat aa agerearaatfact = ov
tier fran: watreredfa: | wera wares wait ACATTATH ot 11
afert afsat yfet aaacercaiatt ante: ufedt gear wast wAUTSAET 11 G1
In the same manner Virabhanu fought with Jayanta. Both of them
well versed in war-weapons fought for a long time and surprised every
one by exhibiting their skills. In the sword-fight Jayanta was hit on his
head. by the strong Virabhanu and fell in the chariot. Seeing that his
charioteer took away Jayanta. 74 to 76
Vas aourrsat qatrnsteactaarl weacedgiad: yrattraness: TRC
Then Satruha whose valour was laudable battled with the most
powerful Varuna by adopting many types of weapons. 77
ASU WHUSSRS: YAR Taft: | fates Ge went eteafreret AEA 2 I
Varuna riding his crocodile and Satruha his chariot were engaged
in a wonderful great war that surprised every one. 78
Viger aeutte qagensfat aa: 1 fafa: wit: qffertee facare dram 1 weit
fafa: yiuiefagt aon: mtenreat aghatifrtdietaqreer aft: 1 coll
Pree eqettat wart cenafan gear aoiaquts efe facara area: =n cel
Satruha after fighting very well for a long time with Varuna, injured
him in his chest by three well-sharpened arrows. The angry Varuna
who was thus hurt killed with four sharp arrows the horses of
Satruha. Then he destroyed the flag of Satruha with one arrow and his
charioteer with another and hit Satruha in his chest with a deep drawn
arrow. 79 to 81

TARTS HAT: 191 Chapter 17
yqe ererTanfeisryT | areut wet dterenfirn qedarsaq c2
aan ut fede ferttenatqum arenntssqppanis faeare fafzet aera
Satruha who lost his flag, horses and the charioteer, hit with great
fury Varuna’s crocodile on its head with a sharp arrow. He broke Varuna’s
bow with another arrow and his crown with a different one. Then he
injured Varuna in his temple with a long stretched arrow. 82, 83
Aterannfatitimrcrerrenetery: | srqraristrats fromedtste qfeea: cx i
From the forehead of Varuna which was split by the sharp arrow,
blood flowed with great force and Varuna became unconscious. 84
WpAsPara a wreatrtrar qari vet sa VRS ASISSAA: i cht
With that stream of blood from his forehead Varuna was shining
like the Himalayan mountain oozing from its peak a red river. 85
aa Wat PaaS wales aout wari aes fasts afert wer cal
Then regaining consciousness Varuna angrily tied the strong Satruha
with is infallible rope with great force. 86
aI GSAT VAeUt we ara: | Arras wens wie als ara: Ween
Then seeing Satruhana being tied and taken away by Varuna,
Samaratapana obstructed him on the way with arrows. 87
aout aera aa gate gfat war) we wgeut ares yet yrewaifaa: Mt ce
Then the mighty Varuna an expert in war fought with Samaratapana
for a long time holding his bow and also the tied Satruhana. 88
west fatertatet: arefir caenfara: | reer fora weart aan: weet wary I
Wer wert aarara Ten waa: | aeut Fraissy yfet dteonsfat AT
* Geman fraqat weet: 1 qfesa: waa at prereset, gail
Then Varuna, after destroying with sharp arrows the charioteer, the
horses and the bow of Samaratapana, went away with great speed.
Samaratapana holding a sword pursued him and hit Varuna on his
head with that sharp sword. With that blow, Varuna with his head

at fqerery, 192 Sri Tripurarahasyam
split, fell unconscious on the ground like a mountain with its wings
chopped off. 89 to 91
aeat y aout agen aacaes: | 3q weitet Ger war aS aact aH: Neu
neraferdest ag waa) street fereritentamtest qeqats saa: ean
irtdte ated frparsseargenge: | sat aS Gear ht temtgay
aesitta wer: dershst TATE!
While Samaratapana was binding Varuna and taking him away,
Yama looking like a chopped black mountain riding on his great Bison
and surrounded by lieutenants of death, diseases and servants with ugly
faces and limbs came there. People seeing that dreadful Yama along
with his frightening group would die out of fear. 92 to 94
a qearstt var itt asa adhere Tt}
qaesararss: vrarsefafaddtet | qeen fat attandaan aaf 1 eal
arpa auladet wera yrraer a)
Even after seeing Yama, the brave Samaratapana was firm like a
mountain. He fought with Yama by riding on another chariot using
varieties of weapons. After a long battle he injured Yama in his chest
by a long stretched half-moon like arrow. 95, 96
Was seat Bose aa Tet Taher uel
ware wfeargat gar wref yepey: | aeot yaar aga wat zt Neen
Hit by that arrow Yama fell down on the ground vomiting foamy
blood. His servants cried in agony. Then Samaratapana went near Varuna
and decided to go away. 97, 98
Wage sare Gear YT AT: | afer: weeiged we wT Weg
Witnessing such an astonishing defeat of Yama, all gods and human
beings praised Samaratapana with wonder. 99
Fett GOT aorta arf arrest TS Gaga: Aaat feyr{ tl Roo ll
Then the soldiers of Yama and Varuna simultaneously obstructed
Samaratépana from all sides, 100

Tae Aa: 193 Chapter 17
a Feat Uta: WATT TAT WeTaTaTa Wet Wares eeHTTA
Seeing the innumerable groups surrounding him, he started driving
them away with his huge mace. 101
a eT agar Fada S eT! areAseT aerTUt qubAUsATTN to?
When they did not disperse even after being driven many times,
Samarataépana using the wind-missile quickly drove away the Varuna’s
group. 102
Tt ATA ATSTATAUT BAT AST YA: | Wet WAT SA AraMTaRMT: AEA: 11 203 11
uftard facie & ser ara! Seqenacard wrarssaisea: Yerba 20% i
AMAaAUTaTE Trrahs AAA! ASAT UTTSATS HAAS SAAT: 1h ROK Ht
Weraret Berar ga Pryyraat aq: |
After driving away the group of Yama with the fire-missile, as he
was trying to return, thousands of the guardians of diseases enveloped
to kill Samaratapana. Then Samaratapana thought that no other missile
than the Namatraya-missile would be of use and discharged that against
the diseases, by which all the diseases were totally destroyed in a moment
just as the clouds by a strong wind. 103 to 105
aeatt WerenTeaea AAaTET: Hl RoR
Pat fat: aay ee eTa) taeray Peat erepPATAATMT I tow it
argerywancaet wifacs Far
Then the vehicle of Yama, the bison by name Mahakala sighing
with anger, splitting the ground with its hoofs, discharging dung and
urine, lifting its tail, rushed towards Samaratépana making sounds
characteristic to its breed to attack and kill him. 106, 107
arart ater afgant aacaer: Roel
Uyit yrenor fenfafa erecar yreacagted: | Yfear miserayfet weary wea
Seeing the bison nearing him, the mighty Samaratapana abandoned
his weapons thinking them as unnecessary to fight an animal and gave
a hard blow with his fist on its head. 108, 109

st PRES, 194 Sri Tripurarahasyam
a afewentor fraqat ease saenyaerradt Afeats eamagqa: U0
With that blow, the bison with its head injured swooned a bit and
again rushed towards Samaratapana. 110
afager fasroneat gar ATA Weta TRANS UTA TAT NAAT
wage ater Yr wey: MUTA fewer Aya Hea Bs ATA BRR
Then the bison carrying Samaratapana between its horns started
running away. Watching that astonishing scene the gods were glad at
the defeat of Samaratapana and the humans were sad thinking that it
was his end. 111, 112
Aa: Wat AAA YSaeal Aa! AeTAserTS TA AeagaT it RRB
Then Samarataépana regaining his consciousness quickly climbing on
the bison severely pounded its back angrily with his palms. 113
demenisteed yes ae fadtda fadtuins: ofadt qaafarttann: gee tl
Fratfacafetirg wedcrradga: |
Hit by the palms, its back got split and the bison fell as if dead
with its eyes and tongue protruding and making a purring sound. 114
Teotfaqed: tayrdagearsfreastac: Weal
sat reeus t ey GALATI! Bat wear dar gear wala: aafaraT tl Vg Il
HAG: THreeeUS Isa UNA: BATA |
weitqata wee: fer grat a: yt wa W ggetl
w faqya wate wat vit amsfra
; When Yama who got back his consciousness and saw the fate of his
bison and picked up his Kaladanda—the weapon of death—and proceeded
to kill Samaratapana, then Sudhrti who was sure that the infallible
Kaladanda would reduce Samaratapana to ashes thought about what
would be good for his side and quickly went near Yama. 115 to 117
fre aa wresdteqeran at wracfeer: UW RRe I
Wana sautpea wecta aaaTsaT|

waewits ay: 195 Chapter 17
Seated on the elephant and questioning Yama about where he was
going, Sudhrti hit Yama with a sharp long drawn arrow. 118
Ustad Tay Ta aaTeAT, eee
arreeqa: sarereus: fraara wetaet! Gaevs waren wat araeMATA: 1 201
qafeeracat aeea aad wert at seer araqat waa = Ren
Because of the injury to his right arm with which Yama was holding
the Kaladanda, the Kaladanda slipped and fell on the ground. As Yama
was picking it up, Sudhrti struck him on his head with another arrow
by which Yama dropped down with his head hurt. 119 to 121
aeantergd Gear vryptghrster AT: | Arges AeA Aat aS Taare: = Ne
qRastengqy wet Yqlad war Traqaaness: Wart yiey: 1 RIB
Gods and men appreciated that marvellous valour of Sudhrti by
loudly acclaiming “Well done”. Then Indra seeing the supernatural powers
of Sudhrti came on his Airavata to fight with him. 122, 123
ofa stare wrereaaus waayitseare: 11
End of the Seventeenth chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurarahasyam.

ARTSY S ATA:
Chapter 18
gata wer wat waded yet: | fat Ge wrenttgyet Tredory wen
Approaching Sudhrti who was riding an elephant, Indra fought a
long-drawn, raging and horripilating war. 1
qatdaans yale frye qi prrngfatents aq qeerart wsfat on eH
Seeing the bravery and skill of Sudhrti in war, Indra was surprised.
yideng: feragraerafa: qafa dati aad dae sa tes qaleia: nau
Then Indra showered Sudhrti with hundred sharp arrows just as
the clouds rain on the peak of Meru. 3
FMHAINIS SARASSA: YAitetad |
a fest asf assangt qa at uyafa aafaq uel
Covered by the cloud of arrows Sudhrti could not see the directions,
nor the sky, nor the ground. 4
Vafraynis stress qafaqaury greta apPYgear weber: WAT: wan
Witnessing thus the Sun named Sudhrti concealed by the cloud of
Indra’s arrows, the entire soldiers cried in consternation. 5
Ufone yenerafe verse: | fara frdat qd sa sitqaaveerqe tt Gl
At that time destroying the shower of Indra’s arrows by a mighty
missile, Sudhrti emerged like Sun out of the group of clouds. 6
We AR TeMs sy say Waasfear! dears faeara a eretafrtii
Then he enveloped Indra by a rain of arrows and injured him with
a bunch of sharp arrows. 7

HEIRS AM: 197 Chapter 18
Fash Tatars sy WeaTet Wea: | fesersetr wea artes ease 6
Indra too immediately ruined the entire web of arrows by a powerful
missile just as clouds by the wind. 8
wa Gantt Pitter wer deere a qefetast ord we
Thus Sudhrti and Indra anticipating mutual retaliation were
eulogising their strengths and weakness. 9
ware gate: vitmeereitent: vitfata: | egies qere feeds areagay 11 gol!
Meanwhile Sudhrti who was quick in action cut off simultaneously
with three sharp arrows the bow, quiver and the crown of Indra. 10
wae: Vrardy Ha: Wephtasat: | canisatenttera faaanifatatinri ee
manele ait wend qafa: vit:| Gaafeseniad qeats frac WR
wanate fade qatssarafa arta: 1 fatter wt der qafaetgfaera: 1 931
faesed cer tarsal ASAISAAS SAA: |
mietstaa wsafea tase Bras TA nevi
Then Indra, whose lips were throbbing with anger, put on another
crown made by Vigvakarma. Then Sudhrti quickly cut off that too with
arrows. Again Indra wore on his head yet another crown given by
Visvakarma. Even that crown and again many, totaling to a hundred
and one crowns were shattered by the extremely powerful Sudhrti who
hailed from the clan of Bhrgu Maharsi. Thereupon with lowered face
out of shame, Indra burning with the flame of anger discharged the
Indrastra. 11 to 14
Aarne wea arqcaretur aryra! Tar efor Te METS AATETT RG
Then quickly Sudhrti destroyed that by Vayavyastra and pierced
Indra’s elephant with a long spear. 15
Bit weds tara: Great Fen HS: Tefreeret ares WITT Mt NI
Sus Uda Tal aagahrarras arg wheather card: senfaat waAgyA: tl elt
Ware yale aentons sarqenryas: | Tet Y qafarget Tearaey Re

Rt fea, 198 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Tamra faa nermaernerd! Saisie aaqpefsan aftt wer nen
Taras qaqa: uftionssedt wa: 1 Haistraratet A Yao: FT i 201
mragaunstaedt Wat Beats: |
Massively hit on its temple by the spear, Indra’s elephant furiously
snatched the bow from Sudhrti’s hands and broke it with its foot. Then
the elephant was praised thus “Well-done, well-done” by the gods for its
wonderful deed. While the elephant was trying to catch Sudhrti by its
trunk, Sudhrti threw a huge iron goad at it which was smashed by that
huge elephant. Indra too wearing a crown discharged a pad-bolt at
Sudhrti’s elephant. Hit by that, Sudhrti’s elephant angrily ran towards
Indra carrying a pounding weapon in its trunk and was killed, hit by
Indra’s thunderbolt. 16 to 20
aa: Srerraa qafactafacn: Toa
that: yitfafadaufa qeifrarsaqi mefag: yitettettecayaea F: 2211
Wiad usft fafa: wafer wt:
Then riding on a chariot the mighty Sudhrti struck Indra on his
head with three sharp arrows from which he swooned for a while. Sudhrti
injured again Airavata with three arrows. 21, 22
vaste qeettrfen: vifea aracrnfara Tea
qwauvet qefert cearasrafrar
Rising out of unconsciousness Indra released a Sakti which carried
nine beautiful bells and was like a thunderbolt. 23
Fealsarit wererrmtat yefaeter UH
Target Wereet areqa: ufrafsa) araercrarare vifsatst warfare Il
Waa wrea w watt aa FI
_ Looking at that unfailing Sakti speeding towards him, Sudhrti holding
his mace quickly jumped up from his chariot like Garuda. At the same
time Indra’s Sakti-weapon reached Sudhrti’s chariot and reduced to ashes
the charioteer, the horses, the flag and the weapons. 24, 25

bi 199 Chapter 18
' waft: mteameaadradt set erty
net watadt qat erafaear wert @1 wearsfrea: qret wera TACHA: 11 0 11
qat cafaafadt ary tat whim saeacaaer augedsfrear ec
qafreracany wear afar yeti aeamra aeautedt Zagat: RM
Tatra fart ufad aaferst ae
Then the strong Sudhrti with red angry eyes swirling his iron-mace
severely hit Airdvata on its head by which it fell on the ground vomitting
foamy blood. Then Indra with his thunderbolt came running
towards Sudhrti and Sudhrti with his mace punched the right shoulder
of Indra by which Indra swooned and his thunderbolt slipped away from
his hand. 26 to 29
gah wares yftod qf 3011
Aa qaanMaaea: Waa: | Aaeeco: Yale aqua Wagut
qafrarg qafahs are aftr yea efancta wea afm | BR
Immediately when Sudhrti was trying to carry away Indra, all the
gods wielding many kinds of weapons quickly surrounded Sudhrti. Then
Sudhrti being brave held with his left hand Indra and with the mace
in his right hand drove away the gods. 30 to 32
wemt daa: waHayara F1 faqer fae wyate et gate wha sam: BRN
Fe acer Wtarset wat qeafa agin asa faerat aaret sys area
Then Virasena said to Satrufijaya, “Oh Uncle! Did you see the gods
trying to kill Sudhrti who is carrying the bound Indra and is fighting
all alone in the war. This is not the time to delay.” Speaking thus he
directed his chariot towards Sudhrti. 33, 34
wqasAE: sear dare afer yraqis wpa fafay: yremarfedry ti 34
Listening to the utterances of Virasena, Satrufijaya and others
attacked Indra’s army by pouring weapons on them. 35
SUNS Maer Tr: TATE: | eaeatat a Aealat wreMSeaggs: = Fel
BTaTeMTAyerrareenaTee: | qeyrsterferrattreraettarat ge: n zen

at Rea 200 Sri Tripurérahasyam
setad: Weaanehaafaeaa | Wesdeneta agar erat wT: acu
Watt PRAM SAMMNach AAT TAS MTATETaTeaTAAd TH: uaen
area witfast Uist means aa cifras Ward ut at tatata ari xo
vrearganartor qeata Fagor wt save: ufea: afagereitst tar wt ue
Tet: Gapladaa Aegis ai: Vala: | MawaaMansdegaaa: i II
ufta: treater aanfea fatrit: | ca: dereacubrinaaons = wR
Then a ruthless fierce war ensued between gods and humans thronged
with weapons. In the process of attacking each other with mighty weapons
like the sword, the trident, the spear, the mace, the disc, the axe, the
missile, the pad-lock, the iron-club and the arrow, the heads and limbs
of the host of soldiers dropped like ripe palm fruits by the wind. A
dense darkness set in because the constellation was covered by the dust
generated by the chariots, by the feet of the horses, the elephants and
the soldiers. Then none could recognise each other and the skilled
continued to fight following the sounds. Some fell down from horses,
some from elephants and many horses and soldiers were trampled upon
by elephants. The blood emerging from such a pounding by the weapons
flowed all over as if from a machine and thereafter the dust subsided
like after rain. 36 to 43
West Bit TAT: wear: war aretfafad: wtdrakhe qt: ye
fest ware afsass ware: | seater Taree wes saree wa x4 II
When the darkness vanished it was seen that those whose vehicles
were lost had climbed different vehicles. The earlier charioteer was on
an elephant, the one who was on an elephant was on a horse, the one
on the horse on a chariot and thus there was utter confusion. 44, 45
werd wares ware faviga: | Gara qarel 4 fagatet aq i ve I
Those who had lost their vehicles and got on to whichever vehicle
they came cross were fighting forgetting their own vehicles. 46
Wanerring: wrgrategaen zt tarssedtgar werd raga soul
srrngraftat atta wert qeyiforrarcfagar wsqeer wat ven

ETERS AA: 201 Chapter 18
qemaqaant Pritenfrentett agarratarerdtiarravtaear Went
shearer Sepetraqa! TARO FAAS FATS SAA: i wo
Terateadt dteecatehoenttont |
By that intense combat was generated a terrific river of blood full
of froth and vortices that flowed with great speed. Like a great river
joined by its tributaries the huge river of blood along with its smaller
streams, had dead elephants as islands obstructing its flow, was
infested with eagles, crows and swans, had long hair and veins as its
mosses, had the trunk of elephants as crocodiles, had the shields as
tortoises, had the limbs of soldiers as sharks, had the fingers of the
dead as small fishes and was gushing creating tremor in the hearts of
the cowards. 47 to 50
qeanrt sere wcentararaa: Wag
were Yfeaerraeats saat wat! frente qactpfeen ceqHwAT: i 42 I
In such a battle field, fighting to kill each other, the soldiers
having lost their weapons used their fist, palm, nails and teeth as
weapons. Their eyes were wide open with injured lashes and crooked
brows. 51, 52
Wrangens qaafyowaged: uti safarerHeris FAT: PRATT: i Gal
Some soldiers were running away with raised weapons. The arms
and stomach of some were severed. Some were without head. Some fought
holding weapons. 53
Ua aga ant matsachamrget yrawaren Tafagarerqrasts Wael
fafaytadarat agree: | fat t Zacher Haier UIST UG
arag: qafa aaafa aaquieays ae ytet arta yeteraree: 4g
Tem aged gear & faferat vat!
Arg VR Tees Stet Ya TUS SoM: 1 &e ll
dagdadat t acraqaafia: |
When such a war was going on between gods and humans, Satrufijaya
and the children of the king and their children too who were brave

at frre 202 Sri Tripurdrahasyam
entered the army of gods and tormented them and reached their army
chief Sudhrti who had bound Indra. They were surprised to see Sudhrti
who was holding in his left arm the bound Indra and fighting with his
mace in his right hand. Praising him saying “Well done. You are worthy
of praise in war”, the sons of the king arrogantly punished the army of
gods. 54 to 57
aéaart faqer: dtqurafaara: W4ell
wreear vreatfir erefr qepeyansfafager: 1 aver qart eeu wat wTashr 11 ue
faforen qagqers arqetnyeter: | aeqerrary afat & qear WTS: i Goll
merge Had aempad fafa vragsat eaafa wget cect war RH
faxes ver ditt at worm: | wat dhaag dienq: wir Wan
ahert aera veg ahaa: | acest Sar dear wyTEHA: 11 6311
Unable to withstand the blows, the gods discarding their weapons
ran away crying in dismay. Then Kubera, Varuna, Yama and Citrasena
supported by Vayu, Moon and others jointly fought for a long time but
were defeated and bound by the sons of the king. Satrufijaya captured
Kubera, Satruha caught Varuna, Bhima bound Citrasena and
Samaratépana arrested Yama. Virasena took Jayanta into custody and
Virabhanu captured Vayu. The Vasus were held by Viragraga and
Viravikrama caught the Moon. Taking all the gods including Indra into
custody they started taking them away. 58 to 63
fa sifeqeeeet arerearaud apreyitsera:
End of the eighteenth chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurérahasyam.

weaatafagits cara:
Chapter 19
Wafrayerl Agee Aer AG weeny: | Aer cATat agieet ary Bete feretazu ¢1
When Indra and others were being taken away under custody, Kama
prevented the kings by pulling his sacred bow. 1
fager fagen: ahfarhferrs frofien: 1 festa: myer tarqer wert war: i 211
earadennngpyaditee: | rer carat feat wt aqeatrscrs nen
frpsy yreaaatfin yrearert aqui!
Some gods ran away and some others had fallen down. The wives of
the gods and Gandharvas yelled with fear since Indra and other prominent
gods were captured. Then Kama pulling his bow stopped the human
beings and enveloped them by raining arrows and weapons, 2,3
wer qafeywarst =rer war featere: nen
Wag: wa waa areasfreettra weereat are wR: watrgert weit
THIN: PIA REP VTC aheeas AA |
Then Sudhrti and others putting aside the bound gods, jointly fought
with the powerful Kama. The five-year young Kama, skilled in weapons
opposed alone all of them which caused wonder. 4,5
frrart wot wy: wat tarerdat nan
waarrerenfa yrerwafe qererqeag | foen wars weteh ard: feravrert io
wer: qafrpearet erat afer: yeep) weheoteqerst wars wera: tl cil
wer & fatertatet: arnt ferergtengr: |
aarrerrafe ferade welt uray vit: wee nen
The humans, gods and others were extremely astonished. Kama
using arrows with sharp bright tips destroyed one by one all the weapons
and missiles of the opponents. Thus beaten Sudhrti and others riding
separate chariots again fought with Kama with all their might.

st fae, 204 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Simultaneously they discharged sharp arrows at Kama and Kama
destroyed each one of them midway by means of arrows. 6 to 9
marred Gearstract agfa: Waedar! at wage: supa ada qifery 1 gon
UH: HARAASA FT TET: aoe! aAtfevitstraemeaa ta aes wa ge
ft aerertarse uyara: caraMteey Ua: HAN: Waly at eile afafrsar
aensfa aistreata at wen dtaat faq: 1 art a Sqrenta: yea diaarat 1
Rist wor werea date ATE afer yATaAayt At MeaMisey wafraong 1
Witnessing the great valour of Kama, Sudhrti said “Oh, Sons of the
king! Listen. Vardhana had earlier said that this boy had killed crores
of kings and that he must be having divine power. We are today seeing
the truth in that statement through Kama’s strength that single-handed
he has hindered all of us of immense power. If our Lord and King
Viravrata does not return from his penance even now, we will be unable
to conquer Kama without him. If our king after getting the grace of
Mahadeva does not join us, Kama will surely defeat us soon. 10 to 14
aerating am: vitratea: | qgatrad dteorertunfesacsrar Heel
ae we free mé ants ufo qafaete dae: Gaye Sa AA: 1 RR
ware yfa fret fafrxeqaean! sige yrqeut ditt aaa Hegel
fastaqagret fae migerach: | dtachrviframet: qfesarrenteaery i 8 I
As Sudhrti the chief of the army was speaking thus, the quick Kama
immediately cut off his weapons by a sharp arrow and injured him in
his chest by another feathered arrow. Pierced in his heart Sudhrti fell
unconscious on the ground like a tree whose root is cut. Then Kama of
unconquerable war skills rendered unconscious Satrufijaya, Satruhana,
Bhima and Samaratapana, by hurting their vital organs with sharp
poisonous arrows. 15 to 18
em: arrenoihtshtttyafese: 1 fear warrge a tedifirr are: = RR
fer aft watgifagaterra
Hurt and shattered by the arrows of Kama, they, without weapon
and consciousness totally embraced the ground like a lover his fiancee
and were unaware of in and out. 19

waafagits aa: 205 Chapter 19
—ReQrCr ee
difanmnyperet Yat gear aanfaary WW oll
faqt viererart: witefaqareet! et aareratterses aq witsaeat Ta
wa at u fa at aistt weafe sifeaq far wafatataenfe at afaar qa:
Viravikrama and others and the sons of Satrufijaya and others,
seeing the condition of their fathers, overwhelmed by sorrow started
wailing thus “Oh father! Where have you gone leaving us helpless. What
shall we say to your father who will also die being unable to withstand
your separation even for a minute? 20 to 22
wa faery a FRAT Years: | Tore: We AAT Tat F qOpATET | 23
Tene cretsd aa a ufefaqy varia waly at aaeatent fe die
teat afte wears aon terest utes Geass wera
ua facade daa: warftad: | waat efad gear dhrenr: waat ferry un eau
vata star eet texreranteda: | Fradaet vitenred fart eehrarsrart 11 20 11
Seeing their misery Ranadhira the son of Sudhrti said “Listen to
me with confidence. This is the time to show our strength and not
sorrow. Depression destroys our valour and the enemy will win over all
of us. A soldier should fight till his death. Hence renouncing sorrow let
us fight our best. Let Virasena go from here to report to the king. Seeing
your sad state the soldiers will disperse screaming with fear, discarding
their weapons. Turn your mind away from grief by embracing courage.”
Pemeta yqefaaaret af anf: | gare fq: we ahfaeraqoret: 1 el
Hearing the words of the son of Sudhrti, Viravikrama and others
gained courage and proceeded to battle. 28
Wa faery daa: geria: 1 sqeaqarens srrenfeye fern: — BRN
Wfraat tar gear sree Saeed we qadat: AaTHTT Ml 30
After Virasena left for reporting to the king, the children of Satrufijaya
and other faced Kama. Then all the gods seeing the defeat of human beings
by Kama, boldly approached to set free Indra and others. 29, 30

St RES, 206 Sri Tripurarahasyam
tordhisa a waty fart wreafete: | fagarrgaraty Shrearretoeri ae i
@ @ yu fad a: cereravifaaq wera woe adftwsfaheiag ot ap
ae Temseaviatat af afftvses Pratt qs teamtory i 331
Tera aroeisiresta 41 set moose | ax
fradet Frade teres wea sft deed qe fae: wa wa KH
Then Ranadhira prevented all the gods by raining arrows on them
and invited all the human soldiers who were running away. He said
“Oh brave soldiers, your unworthy receding is not proper and you will
face heinous hell being ungrateful to your king. Sacrificing your life is
the way to clear your debt to the king. Even your wives will not accept
you who have fled from war. Do not take to life-saving which ruins you
here and hereafter. So be brave and return soon, return soon.” Hearing
Ranadhira, the soldiers returned. 31 to 35
WA: WaMage Canara: | WedaraAaaUT: UeAETETT: 13a
Again the fight between men and gods resumed and went on cruelly
for a muhirta (48 minutes). 36
Text J AVA wm: waengqehe: | feared ga tage wae eu
In between Kama by a rain of arrows blew off the human army
like the clouds in the sky by a wind. 37
3 Barat: wat aes ergfehe: | eH: WETS wag ara war ga 3 I
Hit by the rain of arrows of Kama the human soldiers were unable
to stand before him like clouds before the wind. 38
Feat yates: wasagd atts we wenreragyi Toreht wergf: Wael
Then Ranadhira the valiant and highly intelligent son of Sudhrti
spoke suitably to the son of Satrufijaya. 39
TT TY sat orale: Sranshe 31 amet Sataret vtarifagay —u ¥ol
ae cart arafaet uyatse wea! sya TaarES: aafeeRaATET | Ve ll
AUS AAS UNI ahha |

34 eS SATA: 207 Chapter 19
hv
“Oh Son of the king! Along with your brothers and the army,
safeguard the gods and the manes from the army of gods. See my
strength, fighting with Kama.” Speaking thus and twanging his bow he
went in a chariot to Kama pouring arrows on him. 40, 41
aa araists ¢ af yer yragieie: Neveu
fafrart qfferary wrgarearteary aet! amare wet frets arrafeafa:i x3
forn gt qfeest wares aegUT Sara woreittsfe cer ATS: «tl SI
marge dager yeigq: argqarfeata) caratsfe fact gear weds dat
arg at sereaan eq Fated wre areata ware woretret ya: Nw GH
fase ut yt wyeet: Waar!
Then Kama warding off that down-pour of arrows by opposing arrows,
shot highly sharp arrows at Ranadhira. Before those arrows could reach
him, Ranadhira destroyed them midway employing three arrows and by
another mighty arrow injured Manmatha’s fist by which the bow of Kama
dropped from his hand. Seeing that everyone appreciated Ranadhira.
Even Kama recognising the valour of Ranadhira in the war praised him
thus “Oh Strong one, you are worthy of praise” and placing a sharp
arrow in his bow, the quick and strong Kama broke off the bow and
arrows of Ranadhira. 42 to 46
ar whe: Baht: aITTTES Wvoll
aa ares Toray yt yA farses Grae: vith qTTEHA: Mt ¥e Il
The furious Ranadhira picked up another bow. Then the powerful
Kama simultaneously destroyed his chariot, the horses, the charioteer
and the bow by arrows in no time. 47, 48
saree vet adeternfratran mated of eae sae, SRI
wet qaradt Geat HTT: FATA: | aear at fafragrent watfsa tt Moll
Then Ranadhira blazing with anger ran towards Kama to kill him
with his mace made of all metals which was looking like a thunderbolt.
Seeing Ranadhira thus approaching him, Kama created a down-pour of
sharp arrows like a dense cloud. 49, 50

a Ara, 208
Treiste at gfe walfra Wile: | Ta Wa Nea AAT ae ue
Tea afedt yet aaa cord eI Meqesiraratsa woredshe ae ue
mrraranader areata: | wart yfesatseast aared sarfarre, Wasnt
Ranadhira also consuming that rain of arrows like snakes by the
Garuda, hit with all his might Manmatha on his head with the mace
and Kama giddily fell unconscious. At the same time Ranadhira too
unable to move being hit by Kama’s arrows dropped unconscious like a
mountain hit by a thunderbolt. 51 to 53
ofa sitfaqeeet areas vatafayitseara: 1
End of the nineteenth chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurarahasyam.
Sri Tripurarahasyam

fagits era:
Chapter 20
aeatt ahaa anf weartert: wore act qeat fanart sa tfter: Wen
Then Virasena saw on the way the king and after touching his feet
with his head stood dejected. 1
wanted firret ubt wen fatter q1 anyitfieqatense qecformra araet i 2H
am fer dhradisfa afert ayret aati ant orgy var fgg eihrtg eo a
arg qeerty aisty yeahagi aq vit ater at ch yeah atm: xi
Seeing the depressed beloved grandson, the king with blessings smelt
his head and said “My child! Why are you miserable? Are you doing
fine? Is everyone in the city including your brothers, fathers, ladies,
soldiers, servants, treasury, priests and ministers safe? Tell me soon
because my mind is sad seeing you pitiable. 2 to 4
ofa seat ver aaa: wreaferadia usieafrinfeareageste ga at: 4
writ atorerfattardete qa: | ware: Faye Fe Bear at: Wau
sarenta: qafran aaa we aa) gear fafafsra ar war FASTEST: Ul
HA AM: HUA AACA: | MARA Fale Waa AT ew
salfeuttat werergarets feared: 1 arent coredttor qetsseem: yg:fea: 0 ei
Bint cteaetent core: ear Saar! wat Fafa: dish artt we AAT —t Roll
qatar aa aoe Praveen: | ane aterdeent Tore were HN RR
gta wet adad wart wera!
Hearing that Virasena narrated the events with folded hands.
“Oh King! On the fourth day after you went, Kama about whom you
had spoken earlier, along with Indra and the army of gods came and
fought a fierce war with men. Then the gods fighting with Sudhrti were
defeated and Indra, Maruts and others were captured by us. Again the
powerful Kama quickly defeated Satrufijaya, Sudhrti and others. In half
a day he destroyed our fifty aksauhini army. The depressed brothers
were then consoled by Ranadhira who is presently fighting alone. May

at fey, 210 Sri Tripurarahasyam
be, by now, he is also won by Kama who had quickly subdued Sudhrti
and the other eminent persons. How can Ranadhira battle all alone with
the mighty Kama? Thus I have told you the incidents. Further action
is yours.” wid
Waaedt ar atte adica, Ween
ann qeufa aqfeearayg: | aura aracartste qfesa: werqert 1 eat
Hearing his grandson and asking him to be bold Viravrata entered
the battle field repeatedly twanging his bow. Then Kama also quickly
gained consciousness. 12, 13
Tart Yat Gear aM: weqqiete: | senfeertefnt asta ga fea: uu ex
Seeing the king in front, Kama showered arrows like the downpour
from the clouds on Meru mountain. 14
Tans ufrator yrgfe aqeet am atencceryqet: wesigita wast i gui
The king also destroyed that rain of arrows by a retaliating shower
of arrows and looked like the Sun freed from a veil of mist. 15
aa trnste faeries: qatar: | faeara wet qa: dist arrer onfesaq, ti
Then the king shot Kama with bright sharp arrows that were cut
off midway by Kama. 16
aifwarnutqurs wart arsaayery. tansfe & ort wet foredermrerreptit go tl
After destroying those arrows, Kama hit the king with a high-speed
arrow and the king broke it half-way through. 17
Ua Garyargierdareuy | Wart ter wret Uren: agate: 1 eel
qaienanste yestyen: wera: | Aa: wroTTaera wat was firergar: | 88
Thus a fierce battle ensued between the king and Kama. Seeing the
king in the war field all the soldiers, Sudhrti and others relieved of
their swoon rose up quickly rejuvenated and joined the king. 18, 19
wiry: we Usd ARATE TIT! Gert yz: we Bq Ty ARE: «—i Fol
ar qeensfafet feat: srs waft

fagitseart: 211 Chapter 20
Sala Tat Yet Yt: eat fey Ween
agisead We vert: Rerear wr seqarat qqaserd wen warts dam 2211
Satrufijaya and others saluted the king. The king who was fighting
said, “Oh Sudhrti! Listen. All of you are tired and worried after battling
with Kama for a very long time. Now you guard very well from all sides
Indra and others, from the gods. You will keep on watching me fight
with Kama.” Saying this the king fought furiously with Manmatha.
watts waved faaphewattta seared: yeah yaa: Wan
sana yrarfor yran fatrart ai aaqderet wreradfiot = xi
wtenaat wawsagcantat! aeeaquanet aqfaentamnet Wen
areas a ata aqaqefaterat wd catfacnnantrenrt fearay TCA
The war between them was like the one between Visnu and Kaitabha.
Both used many mighty weapons and missiles. Both of them wanting to
win, fought fiercely by nullifying weapons with weapons and missiles
with missiles. Both these masters of archery had impervious shields,
unbreakable bows, inexhaustible quivers. They were mutually displaying
skill and valour for three days. 23 to 26
qeniqifead qauritareary! satstrata: wdeiten caren: WTA TAT Vo
Wan war Pat weg sarmtsferaeta | Area Tar SATA HTL PATH Re
wane wre yitt aver tafeacives: 1 fayyet dearer ware’ HTT BRI
afafas aracraaarar unforassedi at wt req @ At Yor aa: W oll
au arreiserdt arcqatsyrfare: | aa ust frag a ase aeveat 1 ae
aaarsé set gfx eareaate ar fora: | Serr: aarafaaa afwart wat WaT I 32
The war on the fourth day was violent with the fire from the missiles
pervading the worlds. Then the king was dwindling in strength and
Kama was growing with strength. Understanding his weakness the king
remembered and prayed to Lord Sankara and the three-eyed God quickly
sent his trident. The king picked it up from his quiver like an arrow
and thought it to be a heavy powerful one. He also wondered as to how
that heavy thunderbolt-like arrow which was never there before came

a Aree, 212 Sri Tripurarahasyam
into his quiver. He also guessed that it may be Siva the Lord of his
clan who has come in that form thinking that he was tired. 27 to 32
faraq fafad aot anja arated aaisfae: aqetg: erreytfrafaer i 33
WeIsuaed carr Up: Wea wT: | fee: wavagefrsedt cr say i ax
Thinking thus the king fixed in his bow that thunderbolt-like arrow
from which portentous fire sparks emerged. Then Kama’s left side shook
and birds and animals made sounds of ill-omen. The directions were
ablaze, the earth trembled and the atmosphere was covered with the
aagear fautit @ HM: Wet WAT at aT Pea Gay Tae watya:
Looking at that unfavourable condition Kama remembered and prayed
to his mother Sri Laksmi who sent guards for his protection. 35
mafesaa tant ¢ yates wsaat weiter yr: carenftaafre: 1 36
wefaa faettet @ ora wedtaft: eeft apytar gear enor tl BI
TONS FIN: BM CMa! ARIAT yea He TaltsraraoM tl cl
camists faranront ereaisgreargen: | froara fiafaaet aftorqual aerstereii 38
At that time the king despatched that blazing arrow. Even as the
entire world was looking on that arrow resembling the fire of dissolution
dropped on Kama as if burning the three worlds. Seeing that all the
gods cried in agony. That arrow consumed Kama like a straw by the
fire. The bow, the pair of quivers and all his weapons were reduced to
ashes in a moment. Kama charred to death, dropped on the ground like
a person from heaven with exhausted merits. 36 to 39
aett wt Gor cea a Biker: Yeh sa eqY: art Ut faafad a_HI ¥o
a year feast faq: werenitaa: 1
Then the servants who were sent earlier by Sri Laksmi arrived
there and saw the lifeless Kama fallen on the ground. They carried his
unconscious body to Sri Laksmi. 40
wa Tat et HT Gear Galera: u well
aed wey: wa megan! dhe watatdtafeny: waa: tl BR

See eee
Seeing Kama killed by the king, Sudhrti and all others were extremely
happy at the subjugation of the great enemy. All the soldiers beat
kettle-drums to mark the victory. 41, 42
qtarpiem: a wife aferasset: | carmafnager adarmgecads: it x3 1
pirat aa Ufeaha at) avast auras erat Aree Ween
Every one overwhelmed with joy swelled like an ocean on high tide
and went near the king shouting slogans of triumph. Some prostrated
before the king, some embraced him; some looked at him with love and
some conversed with him. 43, 44
wa wqa aarat wen eta qafa ore gate: aretfadcreeter Nutt
Aye wet Sat wae ageigeis wart wreraret areat user Afra: xg
2 am: weve amy fasts ahera ara eA FarIaAA | sl WII
qeantwrany we wartefa: qe sear fafaate: sated STL ¥e tl
When the army was thus jubilant the king talked to Sudhrti suitably.
“Oh Sudhrti! Collecting the four types of army proceed first to the city.
Then arrange medical treatment to those who are injured by weapons.
Perform suitable death rites to those who have sacrificed their lives.
Bury the other cowards who were hit in their back while fleeing and
died, along with the animals”. Ordering thus the king climbed the chariot.
wear: Srentay arent arrentferar: 1 arearha farferarfor deer Vfeareva: 1 ¥e U
Faefeqierar were waa: | uftart état TrTafraHy: W4oll
At the same time the guards, soldiers, chiefs and generals moved
towards the city riding varieties of vehicles and holding weapons and
dragging along the captured Indra and other gods and surrounding the
afaae: equa: yremarreran a: 1 warat arerarsey Weta: fara SACL 4k
The king glowing with victory quickly reached the city praised by
panegyrists and soldiers. 51

st eH, 214 Sri Tripurarahasyam
quafaad sear uPaut ant gayi srereepes fat wrearrgeerh: Qa
Hearing about the victory of their king the ministers speedily
decorated the city and loudly declared the triumph. 52
adat afarre aa gar vier aga! area fart Tat eeafirasrag 7 1 4g
wearer cramrty ares arora: | Heer coarsnferenrret: Wasnt
wofagreciend war tareray wl Ysa Herptsranteitaresr J W4AQ
fasion agaenqranrrncrad|
Vardhana the prime-minister sent many fast messengers to many
relatives and friends to inform the victory of the king. As ordered by
him, the royal roads were decorated with arches, plantain stems, betel
stems and idols holding lamps. ‘Similarly many offerings were made ready
for worship at the temple of Sri Candramaulisvara, their family deity.
aT: FEU: Yee: Aacntsrazarfect: W4gll
qaacetisr: yoigerneme: | sar fafreay fafa sft dear ui uo tl
areert: Agere: warfagra S FAT
He ordered beautiful ladies dressed in white silk garments and
wearing jewels, to go in groups, some holding curd and sacred rice, some
with sacred jars, some holding many special types of lamps to receive
the king. 56, 57
faeruft: qerqe: faifaenfaynce: W&e
watateramst aeratgfagea: |
The family Guru Vidyapati along with learned brahmins arranged
according to custom, the materials required for sprinkling on the victorious
king 58
wardd ufanitdedampada: Wag
famrafe: erat et aaree yeefe: | wm weft gaureet Goll
After such an arrangement Vidyapati along with Vardhana and
brahmins proceeded in a chariot to the outskirts of the city. Vardhana
rode his horse. 59, 60

fase: 215 Chaptie
at tH Wares Aba ay: | wo Pott: wa aaa ate: ae
Other ministers riding on elephants and chariots proceeded. Gradually
every one reached the city gate-way. 61
qext qfrafe: perenfed wa ages aaavltrepetaay Wa
weep Haee TST Tat) WYMASEMAaTAAST YT Gy
gfeastar ASS WHAATAA: | Trea Taneat Te arate: = GH
frdet qadaat Arar We Ysa: | Waet Carndtergrera WaT: W&M
gafertsaresat trerafir: ware: |
Meanwhile the king, riding the decorated white-hued elephant by
name Kularatnaé which had four tusks and was born in the Airavata
clan, moved towards the city. Satrufijaya and other sons of the king and
grandsons followed the king on their separate excellent elephants.
Ranadhira in his chariot was in front of the king. Complying with the
orders of the king, the courageous Sudhrti riding an elephant and holding
his mace went behind the king with the army along with the bound
Devendra and other gods. 62 to 65
afagt qanant yersart Wagul
aisaeer caftun faerafaqurs seats wordt wagarensae we frye | GN
THANaSS TARSAQSSIAM| Aade: ATTA THAIAyAay: Wael
The king as he approached the city gate saw the guru nearby and
alighted from his elephant and reached Vidyapati. Beholding the king
getting down from his vehicle on seeing the guru, Ranadhira, the sons
of the king and everyone alighted from their respective vehicles and
followed the king. 66 to 68
Tat ye waver weryt fercar aM wgwaeTetay MoT eTRTT RI
Going near, the king touched the feet of the Guru with his head.
Then Satrufijaya and others saluted the great Guru. 69
frente qomrphfeeqater ¥ Tarrraaemrera frente: wot!
Tafent aad wast grat fag: | farsrearsfireitee meet Te fay ot

tt FRNA, 216 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Vidyapati, the expert in all branches of Knowledge, after blessing
the king spoke to him. “Oh King! The present time is said to be not
suitable to enter the city. Hence relax now and enter the city during
the next auspicious time.” 70, 71
wage wre Taher: aaepe aensteata asad a Ye: Seeaefagea: tt 92 1
wewsrat wafer frraressat ya! qatar fafeatattawot afaqrat: 1 311
vasa: waste frefdzqar |
Listening to this, the king prostrated before him and said “Be it
so”. Then the Guru alighting from the chariot sat on a good seat under
the shade of a nearby tree. As ordered by the Guru the king sat not
far from the guru. Commanded by the guru, Satrufijaya and all others
also sat. 72, 73
faanofrendtsuyaxadentedtane: Host
Fear wes yafa a st aed war: 1 sft art Wt: Arar ureter: ore qf:
Wt vee tar: yrqueantsa: | yates fafa at war: WoRn
Then Vidyapati saw the gods in the chariot and asked the king thus,
“Who are these in custody”. Listening to the Guru the king said with folded
hands. “They are Indra and other gods who were with our opponents.
Being defeated by Sudhrti they have been captured.” 74 to 76
wegen set Tet famafrearet: | srerafrr ware aed we yf i Il
Hearing the words of the king, the generous Vidyapati thinking that
deed as improper spoke to the king. 77
& Te Ty waited Aachafees wer wt fe Zar: quer Ft uRlfebasaa: 1 oc
manure fe dagreanter ad: wari reader ude vith gr gt: 1 I
“Oh King! Listen. Your act of taking the gods under custody does
not befit you. These gods are venerable to us because they are responsible
for our fate. Bound for some reason, indeed, they are always unconquerable
by men. Release them soon and solicit by worshipping them suitably.

fagits era: 217 Chapter 20
gfe gear Wtratet can qafeten quate aren qafe: wet TT coll
faqs Tefen! Sartre gear wiht zara ce
ator ear wrens: Marea | SHAT Bap AIL Tet let a aE
qaentech ad eerste fate a1 aarepartat arreafafe aise 23
Hearing the guru, the king looked at Sudhrti who caught the intention
of the king and quickly released the gods and brought them with respect
near the king. Seeing them come to him the king soon got up and saluted
them in order and honoured them with seats and worshipped them. Then
the king submitted himself along with his kingdom, treasury, vehicles,
sons and all and asked pardon for his ignorant act. 80 to 83
AAGVAAYST Sar Tat atawayea wry: WMA are Aenreragyt aay i cx
aaiste qofasrs oer a afeattgyits sitet get citer anet greater @ freq
anda fe van a ad feetq witferq! cated cree reat ad fea
SYA Sat: PHYS: WL! Wa Warat ant your awetfed:
Seeing the politeness of the king, the gods spoke good words suitable
for the occasion. “Oh best among kings! You are blessed. With such a
devotion to the Guru, how can prosperity forsake you? By that devotion
alone you will obtain all your wants. May you achieve your desires. We
will proceed to the heaven.” Speaking thus, Indra and other gods
disappeared. Directed by the Guru, the king entered the city. 84 to 87
oft sttfagereeet reread faryitseaa: tt
End of the twentieth chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurérahasyam.

Wafagits eared:
Chapter 21
mre & at: Haeratad Wa: | Aca Faq tari waaay oi
Those messengers carried Kama near Laksmi and narrated the story
of the war and the defeat of the gods. 1
gen watts gear art warssqay Seesteraareern sharers S 7:11
fag wterit een fserarrar frites Aaquet wart afer aor 31
water taqrenyaigpentor| sagas ceiteranonea ware: neu
sweet fake ga qateghencaa: | water oft: ea Prrgqemaer a: Gil
afeaa: ter wet aare aera
afeenstfaaouns seat creat ure aat aa: Wat
Hearing that and seeing the dead Kama, Laksmi the mother of the
world was sad for a moment but gaining courage again closed Her eyes
and was engrossed in unperturbed meditation on Sri Tripurasundari the
Supreme Devi. Then opening Her eyes that showered ambrosia, She cast
her glances on Manmatha who got up immediately as if from sleep.
Wanting to fight, he looked around and could not find his weapons. With
disgrace he looked at his mother and fell prostrate at Her lotus feet
and addressed Laksmi thus: 2 to 6
Wie: oat Bat weet wera: | ae A wget fawqaen: AARA: 1 WI
Rarer fersrarel t eeneorewed feet ite: aot F aged tart asf war Nc
ae wregt ererestet at aedtafts wepyat yet qa fared wife gil
aredtrd: weryat wraet yaisoren wn alates eta sitet adhe 1 go Il
Fess sarot araetentt we via
“Oh Auspicious Mother! Born from your mind who are the consort
of Visnu, how did I lose the battle with men? I was born with your
intention of bringing victory to gods. How is it that your resolve has
failed and the, gods are captured? Answer me quickly since this worry
is burning me. For what purpose I who failed and died in war have

at faery 219 et Taipei
been brought back to life? Although I am your mind-born son, I am
defeated by small people. My life which is defamed has become worthless
in this world. Oh Mother! after knowing the cause for this I will discard
my life.” 1 to 10
gad armaeat viteatarantar Ween
Ware Wen Wensseat arenremtat ea: | Aer cAI itn wile sArHaTs shir
qea 7 fe viata er: aarsft wearer: | smerstfatricar aft deieererery
wore ware deat wera? gar sreeg verre Sar: We:
ay wt carat aed aa ee fafa woh a aeddtate a qs aaet faforr: we
wen ahaa: warreeaqutsa: | qeraet Fe wt fafartsfa watwa on tk
areas stag fora werandtarm! Sarsfa wat watz waren yfert: 1 gol
Hearing such grief-stricken words of Kama, the lotus-faced Laksmi
spoke aptly. “Oh Kama! My child! Abandon that grief which is resorted
to by low people. Brave and great people are never sad. Even drowning
in the ocean of difficulties they would reach the shore of prosperity with
the help of the great ship of bravery. Only the weak people lament
during distress. Listen to the reason for your defeat in war. Oh Mind-born!
You were not won in the war really by the human valour. King Viravrata
had worshipped Lord Mahadeva and by His blessings you were
defeated. Hence go and propitiate Siva who is the Great God and the
Great Lord, and you will conquer everyone by the grace of the
Trident-wielder.” 11 to 17
wager sire: arreat wee wateafewa: | ar ate merafer IqTATAATAAA i ke I
2a ar agst arsfir arget onda weet Z ervitepatita: wy ardtefe eel
witsat ag 2ayt wermrared BAH Bar weet weet Zararafr A wt ol
ueree fertenfit wert aeaaeq Say wea array Bahra awe | Bl
Hearing the words of Laksmi, Kama overpowered by anger spoke
thus—“Oh Great Devi! Do not tell me to take the help of the supporter
of the enemy. Oh Universal Devi! In this world how can I helplessly
seek shelter under such a god or a human being. Therefore suggest
another god by whose grace I can soon conquer the host of gods in the

wenfayits ara: 220 Chapter 21
war. To start with I will vanquish Mahadeva and then the gods, the
humans and the demons one by one.” 18 to 21
wraeadt We UeNea aet| aeat 2a A A aed fret 2201
waearsfaeagt feat casa usted: | Gear Wert wefa: watfrat | aerafir: 1)
udart qtes tar aq yg: | oferta: sreraty neater: ev
wat wen aqaas: wer areas alee: | aat faq: orefaar aafiranentefe: "
WHA: Wes Hwa eaten: | Adis saree: ss: wdearsfeeare 1
weet derot Herter wea: | wat: Haha wader we: qtwo: 11 you
ta: wdtae: warfera sf aya: 1 afeerqer Ge feet atsuyaeega: 11 2 1
adv faint weeen fos fort aed asfet teretercrendt wut aT
Hearing the words of Kama, Laksmi said—“My child! You do not
know about the three-eyed Great God. Who else other than Him the
Lord of all gods is superior? Just as the ocean among the waters, the
Sun among the stars, the Sumeru among the mountains, Sankara is
great among gods. Among animals the moving ones are superior and
among them the human beings and among these the gods and among
gods Brahma, the creator of the worlds is superior. More than
Brahma, Visnu the protector, from whose naval lotus was Brahma born,
is the Supreme-Purusa. Even greater is the Three-eyed God who is the
Lord of all gods. Born out of His power the fierce Rudras representing
anger destroy the creation. That God, the Lord of all gods is known by
the name Sadasiva. Earlier Visnu was unable to trace the base of His
Linga form. By His power Brahma’s pride was destroyed by chopping
off his big head. Thus there is no one to excel Siva and so surrender
to Him.” 22 to 29
Proven werftearest qa: wre eo ware: | ara: waft fire firqatary i 30!
Tssterarag weresgqe sam fe a1 ae are: feat aerafearars sar tl
4 warren Sersfer wercernitaft: Safed ar ufem wer tart az i 32
Listening to his mother, Manmatha spoke again. “Oh Mother! Though
Siva is the Lord of the three worlds and is superior to all, I cannot
pray to Him because He is favourable to my enemy. Oh Mother! tell me

a fea 221 Sri Tripurfrahasyam
from whom Siva acquired such supremacy so that I can please that god
and conquer even Mahadeva, or let me know that god who has natural
greatness.” 30 to 32
areavd araet war weit: weet) arate areafeiter zeae on 88
aot earn weredt faqet octets oredarera earrer aheraura’ war i 8x
faara oredt 2et meer: carrer fara ah fraterarera ar aarsferiyer wn ay
Listening to Kama, the Great Devi Laksmi closing Her eyes meditated
for a while on Tripura the Supreme Great Devi and prayed for the
prosperity of Kama. Knowing the intention of Lakgmi which was for the
fulfilment of Kama’s desire, Tripuradevi deputed Gauri who made her
appearance. 33 to 35
qear wet were: agateara waar! year HT arate ator farfretyrey 1 ae
TaISSH aa: Yat faara aeitzars wea gcar aren ure HT weet 1 ge
Seeing Gaurl, Mahalaksmi quickly got up and holding Her hand
with reverence had Gauri seated on a gem-set chair and after worshipping
Her and praising Her in a sweet voice addressed Her, the Great Devi.
fa aansfer wast quar waeitfera: at wrentetaer verter Pert ui 8c Hi
waaytt a qerdt wendtaredtaft: srr 2 finger tar aeat xeanfy wager Beit
srgat arate weft axe frag
“Oh Devi! I am blessed having come under your compassionate
glances, You are the dear wife of Mah&deva. Seeing you is not easy even
to Brahma and others, Today Devi Tripurasundari is pleased with me
by which I am seeing You who are the sister of Vasudeva and the
consort of Pasupati.” 38, 39
gfe amet sen ht arava afer H volt
fa: wat Sxqret finftea excranfeerar: fas fercrater af gt wrwerenftafe ne
Hearing those words Gauri said with a smile. “Oh Padma! Why
were you meditating with closed eyes. Oh Kamalavasini! Tell me quickly
about what you are thinking.” 40, 41

wapfagits ea: 222 Chapter 21
Frere tikterert ore asym Tie et afer qart yO] AferTaraET 11 x2
ard GU: earrea: Yat F ara: forts Zarnftehredtyaran stat un xg 1
a fafa wit dada acoltaet) Wa age Ta Uy: Wares: ¥en
arranfa 3 ost farary gt fea fawoutt fafa waty Safes xy n
frannradeqadt + quite gat 771
Hearing the words of Gauri, Laksmi uttered nectarian words,
“Oh Gauri! I will narrate my thoughts to you. This boy named Kama
is my son born out of my mind for accomplishing the needs of the gods,
In the war he was defeated by Viravrata on the earth. Oh Sive! Viravrata
by the blessings of your husband has conquered in the battle my son
who is really invincible. Depressed by the defeat he wants to vanquish
every one. He is deaf to my advice of worshipping Siva.” 42 to 45
sft sear carat ext caratatee all
forage aca aare ueift ore sigtt) seat tities: are sagen feat qari von
qrsaaturmensa aereateye: fera: 1 wre wht ae fee & anf ated azn xc
Hearing Rama, Gauri saw Kama who was close by and with a smile
said “My child, Kama! Come to me”. Upon the words of Gauri, Kama
going near Her fell prostrate before Her and stood by Her side with
folded hands. Gauri said thus. “My Child! Tell me what is it that you
want to do?” 46 to 48
BAH: We Tat At: qUy Tapers
Fé waly fasents aver Year Wl ¥tl
Wa ea 3 aft ager arfseane: |
Then Kama spoke thus “Oh Mother! Hear my desire. After severe
penance I would defeat every one. For that, I do not know the god who
will grant my wishes if pleased.” 49
ott sen fit wea ware feraaccrat Goll
caaarat were 3 ferarsscert fear) wafereater aa: care ferent FAT I Ue
4 cferforareeitas frrereat fe fret. gcterdnarara weet RET W&
seqre wed wt ore cet wat ae: |

at fea 223 Sri Tripurdrahasyam
Dfearsfer werent wafege Fagus erat naan
fart ufters wa ya: weit afeat sft cen fnfeg weymeara i uxt
wareag caer feat aaritsdererat
Listening to his words, the consort of Siva spoke thus. “Oh Kama!
Such a great task of yours will not be possible without the worship of
Siva. Therefore immediately adore Him. In this world there is none other
than my husband Siva who can grant rare wants. Hence seek Maheévara.”
Having said that to Madana, Gauri spoke to Laksmi thus—“I have been
sent by the Great Devi Tripurasundari to convey Her message—“Stop
worrying. Your son will achieve his desires”—Let Kama propitiate Siva
the Lord of the gods, to reach his goal.” 50 to 54
wa aga titat a am: we Sarsfaa: Hutt
sqoy yratfor wgrert yrquarrarsea! fered cratserd ta preot anf yrgft nn 4a
frrarqerfarcs Sat ware wer Seay feat aarfraterste fasterrengaterar it 49 1
waranty ar cefint 3 fered dart aafeq
Then Kama angrily said to Gauri who was talking in this manner.
“Oh Sarvani! Sankari! Listen. I will never anytime surrender to Siva
who protects my enemy. I will propitiate a god superior to Siva and
have my wants. With my strength I will conquer Siva and His followers.
I would rather die than seeking Siva’s help anytime.” 55 to 57
grata erraat par We Heat waen
wenrargest wernt at a quivers: 1 fort qa wares wervreenpesfs ii util
yrerte war crest: sear yt YT AH
Brat vrera TE ar ders seferaetreat Goll
area Gat Bo pret caerererarsea apPrragferree rere wfereafes "
Hearing Kama, the angry Maheévari cursed him thus—“Because you
do not heed my good advice, you will be reduced to ashes while fighting
with Siva”. Then Laksmi hearing the curse on her son became angry
and with reddish eyes cursed Gauri thus. “For having cursed my son
you shall soon be reduced to ashes by hearing ignominy about your
husband.” 58 to 61

wenfagits ar: 224 Chapter 21
adtsfarcntedtqenn Wht wre et: fram qart terarad faarcieat wa: azn
aad adfager vite mreafe & faery aaetfirett faeer afaeate efttirs nga
Then Gauri getting extremely angry said to Laksmi thus “Oh Laksmi!
Because of your thoughtless behaviour out of love towards your son, you
will suffer a long separation from your husband and also harassment
from his co-wives.” 62, 63
gta erat acta: gar arg aghean wawate yrs wt ated wyUheaaT 11 gx
aqicet aera yrauifir ang: | fafaent a yreanfir wersenfir a arte gy
“Oh Bhargava! Thus cursed again the angry Laksmi rose to fight.
Even Rudrani got ready on Her Lion. Using shining bows both showered
arrows, weapons and missiles on each other. 64, 65
Ua wat: AMA Farerou! tat warrarersa WaT qqTHT on RI
Mate Was Beat: | KATTaT ARISHATT WaT yyTdtfsar: 1 KOMI
uenfam: fore vires ters wear seat feat quissee: waat aa AAT: II Ge
Thus a most fierce battle was on between them. The Pramathas
(attendants of Siva) who had accompanied Gauri fought intensely.
Laksmi injured them by mighty missiles. Severely hurt by the missiles,
the Pramathas ran to Siva and reported to Him the war between Gauri
and Padma. Hearing that, Siva riding his bull, came to the place of the
war. 66 to 68
Went Gage gen fae: aarra: 1 wensfe Geese wer a: waTqT: 1 GI
aR Wea wat Gantfaqy| freradfaan: aerate: il woll
anrydguaaea aa witerar: |
Meanwhile, hearing about the war, Visnu made his appearance there.
Getting the news about the war even Brahma, along with Sarasvati and
other gods came there to witness the war. Siddhas, Gandharvas,
Vidyadharas, Kinnaras, and great serpents came there to watch the fight.
wragye qe ceiintat: wer Rll
Tom fafeersenfin weactesa | Ranfagqararct frrafawy aitvs: = eel

at AEE 225 Sri Tripurarahasyam
ee — Oe
ararstrrn fatreret afesdt wenqag: |
A terrific war emerged between Laksmi and Gauri with different
missiles created by them to achieve victory. Siva and Visnu who went
near them to prevent the war became unconscious being burnt by the
fire of the missiles. 71, 72
aa maltdazicet wtatfsrede ara: ean
fe face fafgragrtons saucer eareardfrargiat ag frat exn
trefagr qfesars qRNt aferrerct vitor ecarren frit agonsfat oq
wenfafarscat Wasa Waa: | AKaTenfa: wareatof wraTeaPS aati os
Then Laksmi broke with arrows the bright bow of Gauri and injured
her chest with a sharp arrow having a bent tip. From that wound, a
lot of blood gushed out and the severely injured Gauri became unconscious.
The flow of that blood in the battle field engulfed and blazed like the
fire of annihilation by which the world started perishing. 73 to 76
Wal HEN Tat VAQ yaaa, Haste: | Mat sfercent aaratag fares: 11 19 1
At that time Brahma the creator, afraid of the dissolution of the
world, with folded hands started praying Rama (Laksmi) for pardon. 77
wa afer agrefa wa amedtatt: wa wend waste aarti Neen
“Oh Laksmi, the Great Devi, be victorious! Oh Devi of wealth, be
victorious! Oh Mother seated on the lotus, be victorious! Oh Consort of
Narayana, be victorious! 78
a aft: wesrrat starat waerftuit: worenftet afer arrafir aatsey Tn WRI
You are the protector of the entire creation. You are the dispeller
of the fear of those under fear. You destroy the distress of your devotees.
Oh Narayani! Let salutation be to you. bi
Ferrahnse waca ciftsarnfinhrs aerate sift et arerafir watsey FT 11 co
A single salutation with devotion to you will dispel poverty. Ward
off the fear of this world. Oh Narayani! Let salutation be to you. 80

Wenfayits ara: 226 Chapter 21
wat wafest a orefast eftiiran derftott exec anrafir aatseq To cen
You are the beloved of Hari. You protect the world as its mother.
In the form of Rudra You destroy this world. Oh Narayani! Let salutations
be to you. 81
wens watrerdt wafeenatirer watt wea anrafir wats Tu cH
Your face is like the lotus. You reside in the lotus. Your hue is
like the filaments of the lotus. You love the lotus. Your feet are like
the lotus. Oh Nardyani! Salutation unto you. 82
wife arte ory wfgesteated: | oar edt te aerator aaIseq To ca
You are the embodiment of compassion. With kindness protect the
world from peril. Oh Narayani! Salutation unto you.” 83
fet wen agqdaat cusaq ufadt qfai garen fafeen car: frafaeracica: 1
aie tf nereitaqegpyer wersfaqar geen fara eT,
fafiregqen @ AAT WAT UTS Hae, HOTA!
wr favarata a target at Ut at uegul
wafia ofttat sararara & gore
afararentatrdtar, tarreatadterr, neon
gem diquativar sitrarara @ aU!
aa faaqfgrat ust qestqadt ayfeadt Wceu
Praying thus, Brahma fell prostrate on the ground. Indra and the
other gods and Siddhas, Vidyadharas, and all of them loudly cried very
much for protection by saying thus—“Oh Devi Mahdlaksmi! Protect us”.
Seeing the gods who had surrendered being troubled by the great fire,
Mahdlaksmi pleased also by the prayer of Brahma, was gracious
immediately. Addressing the gods not to fear, the Great Devi in no time
swallowed that fire generated by the blood. By the showers of Her
ambrosial glances, She quickly brought back to life the gods, the human
beings and others who were burnt by the fire. Then Visnu and Siva also
woke up from their swoon. 84 to 88
a wd aquctelt ofathensfamgone saree fags trepiter area] tl

at ATR 1 227 Sri Tripurarahasyam
All the gods saw Laksmi, from the roots of whose hair all over was
emerging a row of blaze because of her swallowing the fire caused by
the blood. o
faqeat yeadar iste wht yrgtaceren! wteretes wesaret saat wafer go
Getting out of her unconscious state, Gauri the consort of Sankara
approached Laksmi who out of anger was throwing out a great fire. 90
gear weit tat ursft mrercarepfertarom|
wal: Aaraed: welfeaeyferareter Ween
andl teararg: ware faftracerary!
Seeing Laksmi who had a disturbed angry look, Brahma, Visnu and
Siva after pleasing Bharati the consort of Brahma sent her for pacifying
Laksmi and Gauri. 91
a warned aver wart @ efter, een
amare wafer aa: 1 FTAs Tas a YU] Aga YA RI
aagiagaat: wate cirerer ATA Wares faaretse PATA A TTA I kv I
Then Bharati quickly went to Bhavani and Laksmi and joined their
palms by holding them by her hands. She addressed them thus: “Oh Rama!
Oh Bhavani! Listen to my good words. Anger which consumes the world
does not befit either of you. I will clarify the nature of your mutual
curses. 92 to 94
ubat: prarge ame: frarecettafereaters qresattet mer vital: firafafirarr: i ¢4 i
ford seafa & tift aa Zerat ya: afretsraurdt mefterat afereafr Mt 88M
By the curse of Gauri, Kama will be burnt up by Siva and will
again come alive for the sake of Parvati and will win Siva. In your
different form as Daksayani you will be reduced to ashes after hearing
the insult to your husband 95, 96
Tt wast aasagvaraiht waar fad Wasa Bred SAAT I ol
amsant a aa wat warea farqanar até after we ered aftfaTt Ween
Oh Rama! Because of the grief caused by your co-wife you will lose

wefagis ar: 228
Chapter 21
this existing form and get a more beautiful one. During the incarnation
of your husband you will suffer separation from him. So give up confusion
and think about the better form.” 97, 98
ofa aroftaa: grat wiht @ eftacerar wepfree watered erera yiifet ot at 1
Thus hearing the words of Vani, Gauri and Laksmi shedding their
ignorance attained supreme peace. 99
ofa a um aaled THsswart YAteaT!
a Urequaaes TH eatatfowars fet Root
“Oh Rama! I have narrated thus the story of Rama which augurs
prosperity. Devi Rama will grant the wants of him who listens to this
episode.”
ofa stfaqrrest wrereravs wenfagitseara: 11
End of the twenty-first chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurarahasyam.

Bifagits cara:
Chapter 22
sft rat WEISS GMAT WereTa: | Teas YA: wre faferatsergagan eit
sity saat wrerarearrmfagiey! Tareafstadt wafereret aur wen
awa cent: agra faarng:fecs waq aacitqeag:S at tersateHcot AE N31
thats adtrardt werats qe, Het ae Gran are ata aq ad aaqhherséfar i x
After listening to the wonderful glorious story, the astonished great
Paragurama again addressed Dattatreya thus—“Oh Venerable Guru! The
auspicious story of the glories of Rama narrated by you is wonderful to
all. How did Laksmi devoted to Her husband, suffer separation from
him? How did Her co-wife trouble Her? How did She discard Her body?
How was Gauri hearing the insult to Her husband reduced to ashes?
Oh Lord! please tell me about all this. 1 to 4
seafeett artaor site: wre cerfafe: 1 soy Te yeeros Haat ws GI
Requested thus by Paragurama, the pleased kind Guru said thus—
“Oh Rama! I will tell you about the earlier event. Listen with
concentration.” 5
We fawpigreracar aepd wifes was Gat yfics we: eiteenrrsterafeer: 1
arent fart fart & eracar: eater yifige: | wdtat THe areata fereat WLM 9H
Prranstt fated Saeqe srrewreeraft: | are warea HEAT Banter aMazar i cH
raft arvar warger ferepars sarfirar wat
war oeftfedta: @ aera a weret Bas
sates annfeerrearvat enferatstaeret eft: |
Some time ago Visnu was residing in Vaikuntha with Lakeml. Pl
by the devotion of Brnda and Bhimi for a long time, He accepted ew
Doubting the anger of Laksmi, He was secretly spending time with them
which went on for quite some time. When questioned by I ce eon
had come to know of it, Visnu concealed it. In the course of time while
Laksmi was with Her attendants She was invited by Vani and went

at Ree, 230 Sri Tripurarahasyam
there permitted by Visnu. In the absence of Laksmi, Visnu sported with
Brnda and Bhimi who endeared Him. 6 to 9
ASISSHENAMT Sat AMIN Aceitena: I Rot
qa ware caterer Pala warsarer SCT VISA: Le I
frtar dquooerst wat gaat tari arqase eft: vite fest at wasqe een
We SAE at ARaarara 4B Aer! sles aT wesc afear yafausaq ui e311
satya wera ware HAeMSseraT! Aart Alert Tear ahator asaEq I ex Il
Ba wensfrar wre aat ueaaTadtt | Ae FMI YpeRdarssats aT ou eu
Then Devi Laksmi who by chance returned from Satyaloka was
ablaze with anger having seen the lustful Visnu sporting with Bhimi
and Brnda. Alarmed by that Visnu immediately followed Laksmi who
rapidly left Vaikuntha. Meeting Her in the Himalaya, Visnu started
consoling Her by holding Her right hand. Then Laksmi who was burning
with wrath was liquified like a mass of ghee by fire and flowed like a
perennial purifying river named Padma which dried-up by the curse of
Narada. 10 to 15
wmitcatste catia Ygenc! Wet Targa wes taerarist wat 1 eat
TAA AeA VAM YNUTSA Bar aati Aer wen Par y fafera wasfeaTqI Vo I
walerat fame a WAAR AAA! Wag ARS | A HATA, Il Ve
Bhagiratha the sagely king by performing arduous askesis made
river Ganga follow his chariot that drove on the course of river Padma.
Coming in contact with Ganga, Padma who was relieved of the curse
mingled with Ganga and flowed for a long time and broke off with Ganga
and joined the sea earlier than Ganga. A bath at the place of the
separation confers heaven. 16 to 18
sft qe ytatet we: ures MeN! aay aetseaTeaferat Tara: 11 88
Sees Fat wre faysar eae: Srey) UAT vit era Wife AAT BAA:
Listening to the words of the Guru, Parasgurama eagerly questioned
thus. “Oh Lord! How is it that the river Padma was cursed by the
extremely calm and compassionate sage Narada? How was the curse

dismissed? How did the river Padma part with Ganga? Tell me about
all this.” 19, 20
wa yet antaor wre eet wergha: | Uy Te ge acensfate BRU
Thus inquired by Parasurama, the great sage Dattatreya said
“Oh Rama! Listen to the interesting past legend about Narada.” 21
wefaandl deletes AANA: | AT Was Wades qaarad neezM
wa rerdyers tar sare frat: | ered BAUIscHM Meret AAT 23
drat qesaart ancaiste sf teri carrer yesra we WeTTAE: BI
meaetr deter: wgatrad Gan wsigqakd wa arg uftafs Sweat 4H
Once Narada arrived at the assembly in Brahmaloka where the
Gandharvas, the Yaksas, the Kinnaras and others were performing the
Gandharva style of music, each one progressively excelling the previous
artist. Then Narada also played the ragas (musical modes) on his Vina.
By his ragas all who had assembled there were engrossed in the
transcendental melody and were experiencing the bliss of emancipation
and complimented Narada as “Well done, very good”. 22 to 25
ae ait qeadt cat urpesrataar! sareawafa J ARerers at fag: 1 BE
Then Sarasvati the exponent in melody played on her Vina the
Kacchapi. Narada and others could not really grasp the intricacies of
those ragas (tunes). 26
art aur frqursqareed frieera: | acerca af at y fercrers afer aaa ze
area 3 fafecar ar aft: weeteary werett wares aet fT at REI
at afa qedarara araen qyfesar argh TA Yea TerereteTaT Ft It Fe
At the end of the programme Narada also departed from there and
on his way he was thinking about the raga by Sarasvati which was the
best and which he could not comprehend. Going to a solitary forest on
the banks of the river Padma, Narada started to play on his Vina the
same raga which Sarasvati had splendidly performed. Hearing the discord
in his rendering the river Padma laughed loudly. 27 to 29

a fT, 232 Sri Tripurarahasyam
ARE: Wlages cfs waarssqa: | ye wat aftt aatss fear i 3011
aat wean a aA afacafe aftet
Put to shame and angered by the insult, Narada cursed the river
Padma thus. “Oh great River! You will dry up for your insolence towards
gta ert quilt at Arar af cUsawar 3g
wretarara ager vias ser At Urls ae: TEATS ATS At UT Bz HI
TyT were afaerfe ser wel dar eat yaa yaa afaeafe werfe 3311
Hearing that frightening curse Padma fell prostrate before Narada
and repeatedly begged for the termination of the curse. Upon her request
Narada said “Oh Great River! When you unite with the Supreme Ganga,
you will be free from the curse.” 31 to 33
Ha UM ane tf Mes wore wet Cae car fe ar ag ae fe Wareafe i ax
we wert a a ag puashaer sft wera: grat eet Safar: 1 3411
We TargQated wet ute wergfe: 1 yoy ust Hat qual were BRI
Then Padma with reverence inquired Narada thus “Oh Divine Sage!
Where is that Ganga? How will she reach the earth? How did she become
the embodiment of Brahma? Please let me know all these.” Hearing her
words, Narada the best among the divine sages, happily narrated the
excellent story of the Ganga to Padma. “Oh Padma! Listen to this sacred
story that cleanses abominable sins.” 34 to 36
Weel we: Gren: ferent: | vifer: weet wer areqaT BaTfaTAT I Bo I
Wereanrdt oat urarauyfate ae) aarqeararvsanh aarsvs qaarate:
a fran werpfenterengygs ay! Heat AAT Ya WHAT AISTAAT 11 38
at quited ot far gaya ae: | Tage wisaay Sar weTfsOyAT AT: I ¥oll
Sat et arent Sayeciien aft gays saranda went mega axl eR
WH aera a yar fess ada: |
___ Transcending Brahman who is in the form of Siva, exists Sakti who
is His essence, His heart and all. She is the great space containing
countless eggs bearing series of worlds. Brahma and others prayed with

mafrets 1: eos Chapter 22
askesis to such a Great Power who was pleased by that. An indorperead
voice addressed them thus. “Oh Gods! Seek a boon”. Hearing thus the
gods led by Brahma and Visnu said. “Oh Devi! If you wish to grant a
boon, you incarnate in such a visible form and pervade by which even
the ignorant will easily attain the highest good.” Rito Ai
fayrata fafinpeeet weraret Te <9
dar: suet a: viet rere warareq wer Y arenferain aay were:
fiat wat qaifwaardh awe ate fafa agen eraq
fafiacat frog wart facitentrefteafa: faateftecnnes frateatrsarerer:it st tl
aereasqardt feta wert
at at Gear @ wear a ther ar aad aa usa
arg fare afer cer feet aah ATI
sqerat farmasa aarenr weet u ¥ioll
Hearing Brahma and others the Devi replied. “Oh gods! For your
delight I will take a visible form. When the powerful demon king by
name Vaskali subjugates by his strength the three worlds by conquering
Indra, then Visnu for the sake of Indra incarnating as a lad (the dwarf
Brahmacari) begs from the demon a three-foot space and encroaches the
three worlds. From the upper Universal sphere split by the raised foot
of Visnu, I will flow forth like a nectarian great river. By seeing me in
the form of the river and touching me and drinking me, one would attain
salvation. The realised address me as Ganga and Tripathaga.” Saying
this, the incorporeal Mahesvari became silent. 42 to 47
Ua ar fafirqearat at erat weredt wrfereanfer fig aT TAT TeRTAT YHA: It We Ut
Then she, the sacred river, granting a boon to Brahma and others,
becomes Ganga and by uniting with her, you will gain en go
apa araara: Ya: wires ar aati da ae we ee fame YR
upisadint aasregd we areteatis sitghrente aad afeerafr Geper lt sot
Listening to Narada, the river Padma inquired again thus. “Oh Divine
Sage! Let me know how Ganga flowed from the sky rent by the foot of

R ARES, 234 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Visnu. Then how will she reach the earth. I want to hear all the future
events very clearly.” 49, 50
waded WF: UB: We taftana: | Ol ua Hat qvat weTaatonsfra ol et
Inquired again thus by Padma, the eminent divine sage said.
“Oh Padma! Listen to the sacred story named Gangavatarana
(The Descent of Ganga). 51
sreratfagat wate aaa: | Farat arenferaia faopradtstreifat ue
aver deface t wenot HATA at crear a faget afer fats araa 43
afaeata facitengt: wer aiorraur: | seared: Ytfawy: wis arzarsqaq i ux
fanart arenfe ¢ afed famaea: 1 ag: wdetisreofafag aranfir Gut
In the twenty-third Tretayuga from now, the extremely righteous
Demonic Lord by name Vaskali, a devotee of Visnu will conquer in war,
Indra by the many boons acquired by pleasing through penance Brahma
seated on the lotus and rule the three worlds with righteousness. Then
requested by Indra and other gods, Visni assumes by his powers the
form of a dwarfish brahmin lad and goes begging the Demonic Lord
Vaskali devoted to brahmins”. 52 to 55
arquar artaet qe: we faeq efoq aay 4 faritsd faegftarearras 46
afsd wat faarife set a arqudfa
Sukracdrya knowing by his yogic power that the lad was Visnu said
“Oh Lord of Demons! He is not a brahmin. He is Visnu who has come
to deceive you to save Indra. You should not give Him anything.” 56
aa Feat aad fawl ace ftor, Hell
yRtarstaact aranfgaqestaat fe a: 1 seara vit word: tarssat Bfaayrac Ge
wares uret dra dite qfet fareraqs aapenferaras qarefercaet i Gil
Then Vaskali was extremely delighted to see verily Visnu who was
there as a young boy. Quickly rising and bowing he made Visnu sit on
the throne. By cleansing Visnu’s feet he sprinkled that sacred water on
his own head and after devoutly worshipping Visnu spoke to Him.

pifagits ara: 235 Chapter 22
ray fer fret Ase acenitsfransem
Aarts war ot wrtterarsfariga Goll
“Oh Lord! What is it that you desire from me? Take it as offered
to you by me without any hesitation.” 60
age ravi weed werenfeat wet yf weesrssy wrefarrafirary 1 aeHl
The boy said to the Lord of Demons “Oh King! Quickly give to me
who is a Brahmacdri, land measuring three times my foot.” 61
megan arenfer: We HAT TSUTRTEL| ufafrgists & cat at watserert 1
gaua sad a cat afad fret! at ae Wtateataefa year Wat
saan sent Utd ararsge! wfrperntate aay arenfergeaTea: it Gy Hl
Listening to that Vaskali said. “Oh Bhagavan! Inspite of being
prevented by my guru, I shall give. Requested by you the all pervading
Lord how can I not give? Oh! Supreme Being! Pardon my disrespect to
my guru.” Saying this, the unswerving Vaskali poured water into the
hands of the boy and said “Please accept”. 62 to 64
faupatatinfernfapisada gone! Wear yaar weer aI
WaT PSTGH eames rea | ARIK AAT MAT YMA TAT WRG
Thane Fraey weret area array! Wars af: wear fattest THETA Gis I
qranefaareeat ae TAT |
Overpowered by Iévari Sakti, Visnu immediately grew. With His right
foot He covered the earth and raised His left foot. From the
upper universal layer pierced by the nail of His toe, flowed the sacred
Ganga shining like pure nectar. Then Visnu asked for the place to
measure the third foot. He said “Oh Great King! By the first the earth
is covered and by the second, the sky. Tell me the place for the third
foot.” mie
agen farmer: wig arenferetaar: ween
anaater qat & wart we ferret!
Listening to Visnu, Vaskali the Lord of the Demons said
I will show that place which is on my head.”
“Oh Lord!

St Pee, 236 Sri Tripurarahasyam
ofa ara ue afet ere Gre aT, Ween
wast array aged ferrgart
Hearing thus Visnu placed the foot, which was on the earth, on
Vaskali’s head and gladly gave him the liberation of union with the
Absolute. 69
fastatosnerfeatrtat werefootty, wont
agt soauset wen afeeata weterer! se aaret Heat Sa: |METT: = we
Awa Warr wenvt waeafa & fear
Brahma, the creator, by his great strength will collect in a pot the
divine Ganga who emerged out of the pierced universal spatial pan. After
a very long period Indra by performing great askesis will take Ganga
to heaven obtaining the blessing of Brahma. 70, 71
Aa: Hrearat Basa tre afereafr Won
wren afateage a faarate efeatt a aaszafira: aafterafafi, 11 03
Weeraderm: re 7 a a: | aed we ram deaha waft qaq ol
a Ae: Bare after Teat WaT: | APNT ae aaitat wits sathta: 1 4
wfereate a eaten aft tarde fafasa aa anise weal WGI
wen eemiagt wet wet freqdfes yrienreacen vat qf weiter: = well
saanfoerta & tet arsqatieate) write wa feet aartorsqareata it ve i
Aer wt yradt qarat afacafe aftat
Again after a long time a king by name Sagara taking birth in the
Strya Dynasty will perform thousand Agvamedha sacrifices. Indra will
steal his horse and hide it near sage Kapila’s place. The sixty thousand
sons of Sagara searching the horse will dig the earth and there
encountering the brilliance of Kapila will be reduced to ashes. Then the
righteous grandson of Sagara, Bhagiratha by name, thinking about the
salvation of his grandfathers takes to severe penance and Ganga lands
on the head of Siva. By another great penance he makes Ganga descend
to earth. Ganga will follow the chariot of Bhagiratha which moves in
your course and then Oh great river Padma, you will be freed from the

wa UT Bact F2S wre We Ween
Wa: Brera TH Traut caren! Taut aeieaat ey faapAT: i coll
adds career agat f faasa qi wer eit merase qegear on ce
gent egferatt ar oar aitateq ere: 1 at erste ger am weeds ATT
faqans yeaa tas fratrer seat weltracatereseitenas arta cy
ofa gear caratet wart PEE: | YA: Wes a Ye fatter wat fe am cx
Like this, Rama suffered great distress from Her co-wife. Further
“Oh Parasurama! After a long time, in the Sirya Dynasty, Visnu dividing
Himself into four parts will take human birth to kill Ravana the Lord
of the demons who harms the world. Mahalaksmi born as Janaki through
the earth will suffer separation from Her husband Rama because of the
curse from Gauri. Oh Bhargava! Earlier even Gauri was for some reason
separated from Mahadeva and during the sacrifice by Daksa was reduced
to ashes by hearing the insult to Siva on account of the curse from
Laksmi.” After listening to Guru Dattatreya, Parasurama the scion of
the Bhrgu clan inquired the Guru about the detailed episode of Gauri.
sta stage wrerereue gfayitsera:
End of the twenty-second chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurarahasyam.

watfagits cara:
Chapter 23
sit sights faator qantas wht aa fates faqea gto 4 en
Sat Ta Aya Frat Sat Hat aati Hat carsfacaer fret 4 waaraa 1 2
Wart w1aq vid Hua wa Bass
“Oh Venerable Guru! I would like to listen at length to this story.
For what reason was Gauri separated from Sankara? How was She born
to Daksa? Who insulted Siva? Why had the Great Lord Siva to face
insult? Oh Lord! Please describe about all these to me who is your
servant.” 1,2
Wye antacte we waeai az: nau
we arta ante ata: yreenat soy) ye qeMTER cite areMaT HEAT ¥ Il
ford datearara at oe adis@aq at aes ye @ aaa AMT HI 4H
Sweetly requested by Parasurdama, Guru Dattatreya an eminent
orator said thus. “Oh Bhargava Rama! Listen. I will tell you the story
about the curse on Gauri. In the past, a demon Bhasmasura propitiated
Siva through severe penance and obtained a perplexing boon that the
person on whose head he places his palm will be immediately reduced
to ashes.” 3 to 5
We veer at Sea: wedt frreqfrs fate acarereact ta: venfa: «= gl
Semisggtt qat siiensafe wareati ae at weed quien g ada: el
faqant agar g:Gaseraqaar 2¢ facifiradt adt fampearaa: eu
War f wereana are qf camaefatat ararsatratesary neil
Having got that boon, the demon in order to test it proceeded to
place his hand on the head of Siva. Then the God started running.
Pursued by the demon, Siva out of fear disappeared. Searching everywhere
for Mahadeva, the separated Devi with extreme sorrow abandoned Her
body. Then Visnu adopting a trick killed the great demon. Later Daksa
Prajapati pleased Devi Siva by his penance. 6 to 9

zarfagits ara: 239 Chapter 23
war tht Seder Taha yer t waa ator arer ait Ron
Then the pleased bodiless Gauri the vouchsafer of boons, only in
Her incorporeal form urged him to seek a boon. 10
aaa wr Yat Ye A aa yg sia cen aye crashes: tn eet
araraoft at ferara act car: arafe: | sensset wetaayas 4 ETN Vz
arama cafertarenret wen feast 41 aga: cardagre: afedt fame: 1 03
aassangenton: waraferon sft: aft ca: arse st GSAT SAAT: |
wegferat seferrorrens=t Soa diferent: | wefaaeteats=at we at wequfeeran: 11 t4
He requested thus. “Oh Sankari! Live in my house as my daughter”.
Granting that boon She was born as Uma. Daksaprajapati gave Daksdyani
in marriage to Siva and felt elated being his father-in-law. On one
occasion Brahma along with Visnu and others met Siva. The group of
gods and prajapatis also arrived there. Even Daksa went there. Seeing
him the group of gods, the seers and others stood up excepting Brahm,
Visnu and Siva. 11 to 15
aa zat wget werent fers wf sae satenftrtarset wares wed aa: 1 86
we ype at: weqrenafaataa: | weaeares: frerqatsteyedt: 1 ol
aeattatadtise asa seagate!
Then the proud Daksa burning with the flame of anger uttered
harsh words to Siva. He said “This Sambhu who is like my disciple is
standing atop the pillar of pride and bereft of good conduct by not
standing and respecting me his elder, is unfit to be in this assembly.”
figra caaed werqsiretar: Neel
tang ga agictd & fafrarcaa) careret mete & fered wes frefe eee
Hearing the words of Daksa, Brahma the Lord of the world said
“Do not talk like a stupid person” and stopped him. From that time
Daksa was insulting Siva on all occasions.
mates dar: waly tar PA fraser qafeewea: = Rel
ararauiearerrat frat tera atsSeat!

a Ae 240 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Once, Daksa while performing a sacrifice invited all the gods seers
and sages except Siva because of the earlier enmity. Out of anger towards
Siva, he did not invite even Daksayani, his daughter. 20
wae y Heras Safran wat nen
Ysa at yas faq: abandons yrgt wretarra feqaafaqear WWM
foraa ufafrarsta esittenftear aati sea ugaed difadt aa a far on 230
aorsacien frat worareadtaer ara fer &@ faaqarsé az adaadtt ot vt
sure aq: wat wrngafem: qa: |
frafan: fora: aearats sea: afedt war WH
When the yajfia was going on, Daksdyani heard from the celestial
beings about the grand and praise-worthy yajfia by Her father. She
requested Sankara to see that yajfia. Although prevented by Siva, She went
to the place of yajfia where Her father was involved. Seeing Her father
She addressed him with love. “Dear father! Was I forgotten by you for
this laudable yajfia? You have invited other daughters along with their
husbands. Why did you not invite me along with Siva?” 21 to 25
searenud ysogqad cat Tersectarn: |
su aa a waster, fia: qa avéfr Weal
ofa assanftacd ¢ A Yea wet arta:
Hearing Mrdani, Daksa said with red angry eyes thus. “Oh Daughter!
Listen, Siva does not deserve worship in this yajfia and because of your
association with Him you have not been invited.” 26
Fayre fagqatest wet orersoerfrat TL
ae & frafadiet weritsysiea: | fromonta waitfaattarsdagiay tl Rell
fra: Wereneaoma: waqyfaa: | Gsat Ga at ae A a UM Wag Fafa Bll
aaetss Gaaaisate tag visas fergfeansts qafretyet Yet aati zoll
faenétat aen fast aqétar aensaen vitdgtat aen wan aida: wat wet
wae wen ue: qe fet sar aan aged ara feradtat aT BRI
Hearing the insulting words of Her father, Sati said—‘Oh father!
You are suffering from the most inauspicious mental aberration even a8

qatagis Aa: 241 Chapter 23
a person on death-bed sees everything topsy-turvy. Siva is highly
auspicious and venerable. The yajfia, where he is not honoured will never
be complete. Oh father! Your yajfia,although replete with arrangements,
without Siva it lacks elegance just as a well-decorated woman without
a garment, a brahmin without erudition, a lady without a husband, a
king without strength, a boat without a navigator, the night without the
Moon, and the day without the Sun.” 27 to 32
qed wert wer ore catsferntia: 1 ferraref qeraet far a ayaa 4 af ui 33
afer fraamrt yayTtssaraaea! Fartfeet wtared ayer, ax Il
qaasyt afenfet wfeet Aen wafae: wet yea: mqy eafafara: 34
res wa aa aarster ufaet wrfererge: |
Hearing the words of Daksdyani, the angry Daksa said thus. “Fie
upon you who are muttering uselessly. Are you blind as not to see your
inauspicious husband called Siva who dwells in burial ground, who wields
a human skull, who is clothed in tiger skin, who is decorated with
serpents, who has devils and spirits as followers, who has a garland of
bones, whose locks are matted and who is a dancer (nafa 7 means
actor also? How can such a reprehensible person be worthy of worship
during a yajiia? Get back to your unfortunate husband.” 33 to 35
sft grat faqatet adt ofafatrery TELA
ftera aif gereat waar safer wet! saint weetse tad fatrafe nye i
aad asa: waged fafedtsey farerer apigaretet freaney tem: 3c
Beat aronsag: dat ufahreaqs seperasfrear carats frrarcurenf era it 3 I
aut Wasa vat Seerea Werftaar! Varerar Aleat Set Tera UTA | so
wa at werat ura cree: wT aA
adfrargtrayne start werat aT nse
Hearing the words of Her father that were insulting Her husband,
Daksdyani closing Her ears with Her hands and burning with anger
said. “Oh father! Your insolence towards the Great God is unbecoming.
Because of your disrespect to my husband Mahesvara, your sacrifice
will be futile. This body of mine having heard such an insult is unfit
to exist.” Saying thus, Daksayani jumped into the great sacrificial fire

a qr 242 Sri Tripurarahasyam
ie a
and was reduced to ashes. “Oh Bhargava! That was how Daksdyani was
burnt to ashes on hearing the insult to Her husband, because of the
curse from Laksmi.” 36 to 41
oft sratsea ures weit qyspeitae: | HaATaRaeetfrdfasaT: = wR
Sa Waa Wea TAT vifereaattott car at vifenternt ctearadfiresar 11
were: wiferar rarefeoht waar sig A cadres ae asym oi een
After hearing that story Parasurama filled with the joy of drinking
its essence inquired thus. “Oh Bhagavan! Is this Ganga the embodiment
of Sakti? Prayed by Brahma and others for the welfare of the world,
who is she, the embodiment of Brahman, and how did she become Ganga?
I am very much interested to hear. Bless me and let me know about
Bfe yet andar carta: wae yoy we yiferrat wen grefeuit ear w KH
ar ytrerta fig grardt | fiesfeenrs ar aeqar da yrfeertgr qeitenorertt i ve
at wemparanst qorrcafrafera: | ar ucaerfedt AT dtarsarafiett xo
Or qer aisa deqer waste worerava: | gait wadgeped wer wafanrTaT ¥< I
faqa a frontier faoetfs gqat ya: 1 eer face ara wATAAATAT | xs I
wenng tardt fagta aitftar) urd walareat ae arta war Goll
Inquired thus by Parasurama, Dattatreya narrated. “Oh Parasurama!
Listen. It is Tripura, Kumari, the Triple-formed Sakti who is known as
Ganga who has manifested to purify the earth. She is the consort of
Para-Brahman, the embodiment of liberated Consciousness who is
worshipped with great devotion by Brahma and others. By seeing, touching
and even drinking a drop of the most excellent Ganga, all sins will be
absolved. This Tripura takes three courses and hence known as Tripatha.
She flows as a visible river because of compassion towards human beings.
Therefore it is Tripurasundari who is called as Ganga in Her form as
the river. Oh Paragurdma! I have narrated everything about your inquiry.”
afr stfaqereet arereravs waitfayitsera: 1
End of the twenty-third chapter of the
Mahitmyakhandam of Sri Tripuraérahasyam.

agfayits ara:
Chapter 24
aft qe wre: Sargeras sepa: | YS yeewet wy aera wen
snp aeonfecd cratencetean| vitenatewar: wa fyyttor ere wan; 2H
a qanfa ware aarsfe wardtsraunaa Us weet wet Wyeay wet Bl
dart freee: far fafa aararstt at Za: vig: we faffr: en
waite: cet qat sifadt ae arent: |
Having listened to Dattatreya, Parasurama who was soaked in the
ambrosial story, once again started to inquire the Guru about the earlier
legend. “Oh Venerable Guru! Oh Ocean of compassion! After listening to
your narration all my sorrow, attachment and fear have disappeared
without any residue. My desire to listen to you is not in the least
satisfied. That being so, please tell me completely how, after the
destruction of Manmatha, the sacrifices dear to the gods came into
practice? How was God Sankara defeated by Kama? How Manmatha,
who was reduced to ashes, was restored to life? lto4
ua TaUnsyqeR eaaa RAT: wan
sansa mars wre wacat aes 1 WaTaT METAS OY Wa aarena tt kil
sfrera: ydaafisfadtset qeairea: 1 wet fataint aan eearaqertt fret: 1 9
fotifa: wiritsmrafafawagt wins sara aa faa: yrateenfate: nen
ureagicadt war yfaeitnfedifters: 1 aratautrdtradts sarrers: wen
Thus inquired by Parasuraima, Dattatreya the excellent among gurus
and the best among speakers addressed Paragurima. “Oh supremely
intelligent Parasurdima! Listen to the answers to your questions one by
one. The auspicious past is really wonderful. After Kama was
Indra the Lord of the heaven who was set free went back to the
of gods and resided there as in the past along with all the gods.
long as king Viravrata ruled the earth, Indra was friendl; oe iwie

at fear, 244 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Wa: Glenat View: Waaide: | aeaeitch aa fafa cusaaort qa: 1 gon)
wereites fafa: yeh dnd we tad: 1 ware quatssfae: fererrsiizar fir ii ee
faqesr ayfis far 3 aafraienq ag gd afeenfe aa St Genres i ee
After a long lapse of time, Indra went to Satyaloka along with the
group of gods and prostrated before Brahma. Seeing Indra, Brahma filled
with compassion uttered friendly and dignified words. “Oh Lord of the
gods! Stand up and let me know your desire which I will fulfill and
make you happy.” 10 to 12
gfe aren fafaaet faqear sfaa:1 aeisefe: frafed wreenfageda: ean
fears qusenfastaar itt: fare wenfear werereiterar carat erat 1 ex ti
srnadka deat iftaeta 4 a1 daarenrgdt wet canct: we Heat
wufsgearaaa qed ef fasta ae aeehewreas aretsanfrarted: un eal
aisensfi wat qpites at faqer safe sfa fagrerata tae warm:
at aa ware wa ad Yt: Wel
Listening to Brahma, Indra along with the gods stood up and with
folded hands started with these words “Oh Brahma! In the past inspired
by you we secured the blessings of Mahalaksmi and She sent to fulfill
our wants the very powerful Kama who was defeated by Viravrata and
captured along with the gods and was released by the righteous Viravrata
upon the advise of his guru. Then all these days we have been friendly
to Viravrata. Even now the human beings are not worshipping the gods
anywhere on the earth. I have come along with the gods to entreat you. I
am with the gods in accordance with your earlier instructions.” 13 to 17
sft ara via: BET aAaT aut aa: Neel
We wen we cay prada + wats agen at agadfa adel NG
Peamanransaeagae soy afer t1 ustararafaata wat areas fag Roll
aeat aaa yeas aa waafeenias ser aranacared Ber: ustereaAT: Il BRI
wade orey ata: adat fer a aa waadt: eq: weafa Fart BVI
we astra qfeaert @ Rqar Wat: UstrenreT B Fat are arqRAaT 1 VPM
Wa tar aah er eater: qdtaen: 1 wa war afieitas arr: wradatsaa: I

safaris a7: 245 Chapter 24
Listening to Indra, the creator meditated for a while and said thus.
“Oh Indra! Listen. Presently human beings will not perform any yajfia
because of the absence of desires in them. I will give you a plan. Listen.
I will make you the Lord of the rain and you create showers on the
earth where people perform yajfia invoking you. Till now the rain-bearing
clouds were independent and used to shower everywhere according to
my instructions. From now on they will come under your control.” Thus
Indra became the Lord of the rain and hence people who desired rain
had to take to yajfia. Thus on the earth the agriculturists performed
yajfia and yajfia was promulgated. 18 to 24
writ aa weeanaadgae a1 Ud celta Aart AAT WWI
wart wracarag spareferqe: fea: 1 aret ate aarsé fret Sarsfer Ha eq 1
aqurd 3 wee fare wa aaa mfrat are weorefattert To
ae mafgartes citer qasyd fe am wraetasey wea Ta te
Oh Parasurama! I will let you know how Kama conquered Mahadeva.
After Laksmi and Bhavani were pacified, Kama with folded hands asked
his mother Laksmi thus, “Oh Mother! Advise me. How can I vanquish
Siva in the battle. If there is no plan for that, I will discard my body
in your presence. For respectable people loss of honour is worse than
death. Today people are thinking that I am alive. Let them think so.
But it is not good that I should live.” 25 to 28
fended amet eqrear esi: aut aa: 1 fag aaeper cart Reerswetaet
arm asé weiter weet wdetsfrey a fafeera wags wate weafe 11 gol
tern aafagred wardarscrarsfir ari ferarétarafis 4q areresd AEMTET Mt 3
Ten: siege: vitwnitfrent weqi sarars sented ya sartarat: FATA Mt 32
ae welt stzear armseprengeays seqee farcat vitertfe ware at fare 33
Hearing Kama, Laksmi meditated for a moment on Sri Tripurasundari
and bowed to Her. Then looking at Kama, said to him: “Oh Kama! I will
now let you know the highest secret by which you can win everyone in
the battle. You should not disclose this to anyone even by mistake or
otherwise. I will tell you the hundred and eight names of Sri
Tripurasundari that were obtained by me by serving Kameévari, that

at ey 246 Sri Tripurarahasyam
quickly pleases Her and that caused the greatness of even Siva and
others. Oh Manmatha! Without delay return to me after purifying yourself
in the Viraja river.” 29 to 33
gfe seen cHraret etdpeercites: | deayya facade yfetcar efter: 1 3x1
mactaitigat aatunsered afera: 1 deans tats srazeitoaas: 1 3411
ag art woes arafacatsater carl! Faget: ware a Mars ASAT 3g
ATAMBTATeTS WraTaset Tar aati sittea: wre aayet agerale Far 1 300
With eyes booming with joy on hearing the words of Laksmi,
Manmatha stood bowing by Her side after finishing ablutions in the
Virajé waters. Meanwhile Laksmi in the prescribed method worshipped
Mahadevi, who was installed on a gem-set pedestal, with desired materials
of worship. Then calling Kama, Laksmi conferred the blessings of Sri
Tripurasundari to the folded palms of Kama and then chanted the
hundred and eight names of Sri Devi and described the comprehensible
beauty of the Devi. 34 to 37
ua way aaretsfa arat cused: | auyifiratfadt wet wager: tl 3c
Wet We Wed: a WE HaHa! wadtarssg fear aasé at warfeqr 3
fat ater fat a dara sft wed qerssaeit anepeT OT ATATHL II ¥o
carey sitfaquareust efe qufead: | ae warhiiteret qemhat Wesel
After obtaining the secret names of Sri Tripura, Kama prostrated
before his mother and blessed by her, addressed Her with folded hands
and with a sense of achievement. “Oh Mother! Grant me permission. I
will proceed to propitiate the Supreme Devi Tripura who is the protectress
of the three gods viz., Brahma, Visnu and Siva”. Praying thus and bowing
to her, Kama meditating with devotion on the lotus feet of Sri Tripura
moved to the divine caves of the Mandara mountain. 38 to 41
aa Prterqengaicens sarap | aaaraye & frase yt watt YI
Se wa WAR araayfa ea TanitadHavta wera: i vail
oer fagrat wefawafaet: 1 agstacrd arai aera urafeaa: = ¥¥ Il
In that mountain, Manmatha sat under the auspicious Kadamba
tree which was by the side of a limpid and luscious river. After bathing

agfaeits ere: 247 Chapter 24
there and sitting, he meditated in his heart on the form of the Devi
and mentally worshipped Her in splendid detail as instructed by Laksmi
and recited with supreme devotion the hundred and eight names of
AMMISEyTAcHTS Soft Were A Hae: | Arafat wear sit: warfare x4
A AT WATT TATRA AT AT BMT oe Hed wEherser fier wR II
amet cam fer ager arraraated: | sande feat t aet F ear writer vo
Pleased with Manmatha who was daily repeating with concentration
the hundred and eight names, the auspicious Supreme Devi appeared in
his dream in the form of RamA and said words dripping with honey.
“Oh Kiama, my child! How can you achieve your aim just by repeating
many times the names alone and not obtaining My Mantravidya?
gf Arar WOTeTSa CATA: We Sparse: | wrafaet a ara wee a year
pra at afe wet woare qarafa
Hearing that, Kama bowing with folded hands said thus. “Oh Mother!
I do not know the mantra since you have not told me that earlier. Oh!
Compassionate Mother! Please teach me that Mantra.” 48
Ae A Uae wre sare earsfaat neil
ama aisenste fafear ar raiser sarge area Bfatear yor weer it
aaer dftoar aa frawarranrsrar sreraat at sade wart ae feet uel
we Tagaiand qt a fee fadtaqantaragdtd ae age | GRH
fetta aat went qaesfrat ferry woarnqatont array Waal
Then the compassionate Great Devi said thus to Kama. “My child!
Even now you have not known in the same manner as a blind person
the moon, the secret fifteen lettered mantra which is hidden in the
prayer of hundred and eight names. 49 to 53
(Stanzas 51, 52, 53 contain the fifteen-lettered mantra of Devi in a codified
manner which has to be understood in conjunction with the Saubhagya Astottara
given in Chapter 26, stanzas 11 to 25}
Please see page no. 248-249 for explanation.

Sri Tripurarahasyam

Rt ARREST 250 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Uaerannt 4 fagrenngay! seqyaaisaten eat guts uta nasn
This is indeed the great causal knowledge about the physical form
of Tripurasundari.” Saying thus the Great Devi disappeared instantly.
ae wart Faqrysiies araea A at aa afedear fern: wacea We &QH
Et war act we AB: Ue: | tT far arene caret wrefeaeaT 4G 1
we a arfa wet S are: Braads aE! A Halfaafaar Tarate warfea: i Ge I
ofa afexe qatste wage faeraaq fasrerarrer var ame eitargufeear ti ue
fern wyayront ar cent aerials a aca st Arar AAT MreTsyTatUTT i Ge
Then Manmatha opened his eyes and looked around. He could not
see the Mother and was depressed. He thought within himself thus. “The
dream which I saw was really very auspicious. Meditating on the Mother
of the Universe, I am unable to sleep. Six months have passed while
I am practicing daily. Even during nights I never slept because of
meditation.” Thinking thus, he recapitulated the dream and started
surmising the fifteen lettered mantra derived from the prayer containing
the names. Because it was a dream, he thought of that as an illusion.
Then he heard an incorporeal voice. 55 to 59
warm aise dyrfaquedtt wpe aa: | aed sar arenved fayyatsa yA: WAI Go
asst wareat aa wee Wat TANT!
Hearing the distinct incorporeal voice that said “Oh Kama! You
should not have any doubt regarding this”. Kama contemplated again
and again and being unable to come to any conclusion, remembered his
mother Rama. 60
aa ame weit: aaa wet aT nau
warm fen & dapnseitetanre ge: fra
Geet Unat Tat care: Woreans stfaatsater: nau
age Trait we arg: eT! srasa ar fat een weeacaswdt tl
ae am aarared & frente fagta fe X <qct wear we AT TH YI
wed wie wa et awed fe aren) qeeat areteqeren aIsatae gat qo, I

ag fags oa: 251 Chapter 24
Remembered by Kama, Laksmi appeared and standing near him
said “Oh Kama! Why have you remembered me?” Seeing Rama near him,
Kama bowed and with folded palms narrated his dream exactly and the
voice from the sky. Hearing this Laksmi meditated for a long time and
happily said “Oh Kama, my child! You are the most fortunate. Your
desires are fulfilled. It was the Transcendent Sri Tripurasundarl who
Herself addressed you in your dream. Discard that doubt and take Her
words as truth and continue practising Srividya.” Then Laksmi suddenly
disappeared. 61 to 65
aa arg at frat ware: | feet aad usenet weet = GRU
Then Kama practised mentally that mantra for three divine years
and the Great Devi appeared before him. 66
savant aa densert geq fae fafa a wari ot GO
asiafer waretes uarssarer & ayy! TitufewearasTeUyfayeerey | Ge Hl
ure ace cara fer a atfsed warts 71
Seeing the brilliant Manmatha who had controlled his breath and
senses, who was steadfast, immobile and unperturbed, the Devi
compassionately assumed an effulgent form conforming to the teachings
of Rama and said: “Oh Kama, My child! Ask me what you want.”
ofa arert warened aaeaiter asa: nag
aavt Se faget emeesat water wertsinrdtgise watedt a ATTEAT i voll
Hearing the words of Laksmi, Manmatha quickly opened his eyes
and saw Devi Tripurasundari who was extremely beautiful and
resplendent, who had appeared in the same form on which he was
meditating. He was drowned in the ocean of joy. 69, 70
gf sttfingreeet wrereeraus agfaeitseara: i
End of the twenty-fourth chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurarahasyam.

Uetfayits ara:
Chapter 25
qed fat tat qpefecanrany wfimdemegaerareenteten fray, nen
Manmatha saw Devi Tripurasundari shining like a ruby, decorated
with a beautiful gem-studded crown. 1
maldhorafacragrenitgadttateny | cetrenrcetentfatera tte porre ory, wen
Her crown carried the bright crescent moon, Her forehead doubly
red from the vermilion and Lalantikai—an ornament on the forehead. 2
faratterpqaqeaarat sare! aftrare ga Tere ASOT TTS, nan
Her three eyes were bright like bloomed blue lilies, Her aristocratic
side glances were mingled with the diamond ear rings, 3
AraTERMRSSTs MMT! SAAT SAAS ATT ll Yl
The pink lustre generated from Her nose-pearl and red lips spread
in all directions, and the row of Her teeth vanquished the pride of the
jasmine buds, 4
Hrarenforenttaryeregatertertrary | PEATE eA TER TART AT ATT Wail
Her wonderful face was like a lotus born out of the peak of the
lotus-bud-like neck, and Her fingers at the end of the soft creeper-like
arms were like a row of buds, 5
Taare gi TATE — tt Gil
the waves of rays from Her gem-set bangles were mixed with the lustre
of Her moon like nails, Her breasts were like lotus buds sprouting from
the stalk-like pearl necklaces, 6
aniigapeaqaratarrmaterany | drentaars swarereerareytareny tt 8
the three folds near Her naval pond were like the steps of the pond, the
hair on Her stomach was like the moss settled on Her stalk-like diamond
chain, 7

qafagits A: 253 Chapter 25
atqraigencpaterssrcetenifergrorr | cafearerarasyrraorAT tt CH
Her ornaments were shining from within Her red silk blouse and
dress, the waist-band around Her delicate waist was studded with star-like
gems, 8
SSAMTSPAAT RRS SHAT TTT
She was wielding the rope (noose), the goad, the flower arrows and
striped sugarcane bow, Her silk garment that was touching her ankles
was embroidered with shining gems, 9
cerca ferareeperoreg ferry | ary feren ee teraret ee ee Wo
Her feet were decorated with swan-shaped anklets and ornaments;
She was fragrant from profusely smeared saffron, camphor and musk, 10
muifdfarenrcenrgars swat | freraerrargpernrerttercenitaty it RR
She exuded the fragrance of the Kadamba flower that decorated Her
ear and She was wearing a garland made of lotus, vakula and jasmine
flowers, ll
THAT RIAA) ATTATAISAATS RT Sats feta: — RM
She was looking grand, being fanned on either side by Rama and
Vani with small fans. Seeing Her, Manmatha was filled with excessive
joy and tears, 12
dreary: cusaarrat fer sreferghrteat afd Te eaeqy Nt
seg arsaaats yaar atet warfiaenry |
Horripilated, Manmatha fell prostrate before Her. Immersed in the
ocean of bliss he was unable to see, speak or even rise after seeing the
Great Mother. 13
ve fart waret t gear sitfagers ferent Weevil
Sirs care ways unat At aa eraa: | weet acetate afoot far zarht Tu 4
Seeing the state of Manmatha, Sri Tripurambika said “Oh Kama!
Stand up and see me in the same form as meditated upon by you. I am
pleased with you. Tell me what you want. I will grant it to ia A

CBELMICSOLS 254 Sri Tripurarahasyam
ayer ae faqrrareeneara ureter: fra: 1 etraear aren eit ATER ug 1
Listening to what Sri Tripurasundari said, Manmatha stood up and
with folded hands and a voice choked with joy started praising Her. 16
med HeUsagl ANUTStenenrat yA |
ata a gaed fafaq wefaafeart gon
“I worship Kameévari who is the unique primordial cause of creation
and whose glances are compassionate. I do not beg any other god any
time even for a small favour. 17
Uenraferarel ATA TAIT |
AAMAAT AMATO SAAS SHAT Ween
“I solicit that Unique Devi who wields the goad, the noose, the
flower arrows and the bow. I need no others who are called gods but
the Lotus feet of the Supreme Devi. 18
ert faqrrean: areurrenceiterarfacreneran: |
Rafat cirersfar wyarerenfitersat ary, eRsit
“The side-long glances of Sri Tripura that are soaked in the waves
of compassion are supreme in the world. I see Her as the Unique Mother
here. 19
Sftanciftad at vase aad fayfrsafaen: |
Seyparn at ante greet aatsaearoTy, I Roll
“Let me have desired or undesired results from the continuous
worship of the desireless Mother of the Trinity of gods, but I will never
seek other hosts of gods. 20
eg ee da eet wa fret or aeyrdaer
afer Uat ara waists Senseq Saat ATS=MT WM
“Let that Lalita alone, the Empress, the Venerable, the One who
is served by Mahesa sport in my heart daily. Let not other gods be
propitiated by me. 21

qafagits aa: 255 Chapter 25
wiag ana efterqet: wnfansetiegm
aw FarRssen Sarat sas at Fay WRN
“May Devi Tripura, whose feet are sought by Hari, Hara and others
bestow eternal happiness to me. I bow and appeal to Her the Hayarada
who leads the army and rides the horse. 99
Tag anftaqery-qererreaepe aay Aart!
aartaustarra arse wat vate Bu
“May the charming Kamesvari who wields the sugar-cane bow, the
flower arrows protect me always through Her compassionate looks. No
other deity is my Devi. 23
argray efe wfer Fromage war weer
area carmralt AarSea WAISEY AEH: WH
“May the Great Devi Kamaksi, my Mother, sprout in my heart,
everlasting devotion to Her feet. Let me not be devoted even a little to
other gods. 24
arya WH ged ae WAM: VaToa: AAT!
wager fen Weag wt Heat WAT: TC
“My heart’s desires are to always dwell in the Lotus feet of the
Omniscient Devi. May Mahedvari bring about that in my heart.” 25
oft egqer west Set at frquftaays ware cusaaet afeafreicare: | Re
After praising the Devi Tripurambika thus, Manmatha filled with
devotion again and again prostrated before Her. 26
aa ar fagtert ore weerar fire aaifirs weaisfer at qefrarfoery | V9
arts geet aise wat fara
Then Devi Tripura, uttered sweet words thus: “My Child! Rise. I am
pleased with you. Ask for your desired boon. I shall grant that to you
even if it is a rare one. There is nothing that you cannot get.” 27
grad crerritarerqeara ra: Wen
sittciteyiarta aersfereraning: | sare varererfecrat ayryey RR

ot EES, 256 Sri Tripurarahasyam
ANARI: WaRIS Se wre Sat Graver: | faqs wereayhs yaaa tt 30
wieaqaisfer fer are ascreatie fear dtarsyter anteuraarareaaa ii 3g 11
uyaaeat wr waqueras Hae! wdanrate wyeatshraeraey on aR
Listening to the words of the Universal Mother, Manmatha whose
dark ignorance had vanished by a mere look at the Devi and whose
desires were fulfilled having sighted Sri Tripurasundari who was none
other than his own Self-Power, stood up and addressed with satisfaction
and folded hands to the Devi.
“Oh Tripuramba! My thirst has been quenched by drinking the
nectar of sighting Your feet. What do I beg from You? There is nothing
more to be achieved. Asking for a boon would be like drinking salt-water
after tasting ambrosia. My asking for a boon after seeing You would be just
ridiculous. Oh Mother! I will simply obey Your instructions.” 28 to 32
sfa seat wor ate caer feratssaari aca car 4 fafa uremia
faarasmreaenes weraate & Gor warste ashame aad arqufeara:i x
4 date wasng + ad dat aa: 1 darssat + seat ar ureret fefa at wag
Jerr art aroriseqacat at sere ftaear |
Mararestag art aot ATA, nagul
wet wrarea yard wre Yer weet Mtaraged cits addiseq TATA Bel
mer qr warend digqagrg 41 city qa a aq: wdebaraae: 1 3c
Pye Ya WeateMTaa Tact ar aaifesr ar fae ashe waren 381
maretarseg faoaa wafeeieineen | aKa: Waa YT TUTTH: It ¥o ll
aye Tren wet Weert yr! Gear waar deqaisé <eitartafreat: it weil
famrauiamgrtaarantad: | aad witagret fren ashe a wat tl YF
wa tharasataraneng 41 atarafaen ar waar staraserat wat
Threatens swt wit wargia faq
Wat wast wast vita vit warereH nxell
feenféat wafger et earea eofaam yarfaat qaere: wet sraifeat qT |!
Wares vata werent fafadt afr aad oat wei a tat Gad safer,
Geeta weayfrent wasat yoy! weansé viteat wenfir soy ware un ¥e

qafagits a: 257 Chapter 25
geen faquedt aresegrrenet a fereraranstt arene aarsararrarTaT it x2
Hearing Manmatha, the compassionate and smiling Transcendental
Devi said thus: “Oh Kama, My child! There is nothing left for you to
be achieved. For him who has understood the knowledge about the Self,
even the status of Brahma will be equal to a straw. Even then, the
purpose for which you have approached Me should not be defeated because
no action will go waste. There will be no one on the earth, in the nether
world or in the heaven whom you cannot conquer. Take this bow and
these arrows.”. Saying thus the Universal Mother gave from Her bow
and the arrows equally powerful bow and arrows to Kama and pleased
with Manmatha again said: “Oh Son of Rama! May you be blessed with
excellent auspiciousness in all your endeavours in this world. Seen by
you, may all people lose courage. May you be an example for prosperity
in the world and be the foremost among My devotees. Oh Manmatha!
The most excellent fifteen-lettered mantra taught to you in your dream
will become famous by your name because you are the first person to
have practised it. The hundred and eight names taught to you by Rama
and the nine stanzas sung by you which contain the letters of the
Srividya and which are the devotional outbursts; may these two prayers
and the Srividya which will make you prosperous become the source of
prosperity to everyone. In this world, let this Mantra be known as
Saubhagya Vidya, let the hundred and eight names be called
Saubhdgydstottara and let the nine stanzas get the name
Saubhagyanavaratna. I will be quickly pleased with those who read these
hymns. Persons desiring education will become educated, those desiring
wealth will become wealthy, those wanting progeny will beget children,
those seeking wives will get married. All the desires of the persons who
read this prayer will be fulfilled. They will never face misfortune. Oh
Manmatha! Listen. I will very soon bless the persons who chant this
prayer which can entirely grant the wants.” Saying thus the glory of
the hundred and eight names and the Srividya, Devi Tripurasundari
disappeared. 33 to 48
gfe sitfiqrreet meres Tefayitseaa: I
End of the twenty-fifth chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurérahasyam.

wafayits ara:
Chapter 26
fasrdasameran tered wdaisfiean eee Ya: US CaS TRATI H1
wre eperiatringraganay| frat: stapadt adasqaot gat a
aera arat sitter aerated: | are: wat cites Bard aatEAT I 3 1
aarafamrantayent aa dita: | aearaes Tay PTT fa Aaa tt vl
Listening to the unsurpassed glory of the prayers, Parasurama again
inquired Guru Dattatreya. “Oh Lord! My thirst for listening is increasing
every second while I am drinking through my ears the elixir of speech
flowing out of your lotus visage. Please compassionately teach me, your
servant, the hundred and eight names of Devi that conferred enticing
prosperity on Kama and which expounds the letters of the ‘Saubhagya
Vidya’. lto4
froma antatfer carat carafe: 1 wtara arid wi aquserqdey oi Gl
uy arta aq ye aerate yr stfaerauierat Feria dhe kN
sitter aga ata amit qu arta: aeeerdenh Garg a Il
ay aret Gataraseteiswa! agara fora: yf wart agersfart: cil
ararensenreramairer arta! seftead: frayectsqey siteferarsfiarcarn 8
gam faatepertunssact ada: | aren aaa wae wiadagda sl fol
Hearing the words of Parasurama, the munificently merciful
Dattatreya addressed him with sweet words. “Oh Bhargava! Listen to
the hundred and eight names that are the repository of the gem-like
letters of Srividya about which you have inquired. The Puranas and the
Agamas contain a myriad of names of the Devi. Among them this
‘Saubhagyastottara’ which was revealed to Sri Bhavani by Siva after
many requests, contains the essence of it all. For this Astottara prayer
Siva is the Rsi, the prosody is anustup, and Sri Lalitambika is the Devi.
The process of installation or imbibing is through the three sections
(Katas) of the mantra. The prayer should be recited after mentally
meditating and worshipping the Devi.” 5 to 10

wefagts ara: 259 Chapter 26
martatt® caragifet:? aarratarraantet? |
marrear® arene aaftt® ares saar® eet
She is—
NOP ob
KameSvari—the Consort of Kameévara,
Kamasaktih—Devi controlling the desires,
Kamasaubhagyadayini—who blessed Manmatha with prosperity,
Kamarapa—She has Herself manifested as Kama,
Kamakala—Srividya,
Kamini—Lovely,
Kamaladsana—seated on a lotus (or Brahmi), ll
wane’ ewaétar® aadtar’? Heradt**
wuel-andiaen® aferassedata:
Kamala—the manifestation of Kamala (Laksmi),
Kalpanahind—beyond mental comprehension,
Kamaniya—extremely attractive (charming),
Wet
. Kalavati—the embodiment of all arts,
Kamala-Bharati-sevya—attended by Laksmi and Sarasvati,
Kalpitasesasarhsrtih—has created the entire family of the world
by Her volition 12
ATT SAAT SAM SHAR SAC AAT I!
afactrarattart*s tage *feargymer TL
Anuttara—no one excels Her,
Anagha—devoid of demerit (or sanctifying),
Ananta—limitless,
Adbhutaripa—marvellously manifested,
Analodbhava—born from fire,
Atilokacaritra—of supernatural adventure,
Atisundari—most beautiful,
AtiSubhaprada—bestower of the highest auspiciousness,
argo? farferearet sebagar* street |
Veet aah eared are eA nevi

A fea 260 Sri Tripurarahasyam
RES
Aghahantri—destroyer of sins,
Ativistara—of extremely vast form,
Arcanatusta—pleased with worship,
Amitaprabha—infinitely effulgent,
Ekarapa—of unique form,
. Ekavira—of unique valour,
Ekanatha—unique protectress,
. Ekantarcanapriya—likes to be worshipped in secrecy, 14
Waarnrage Pence earrarafira4r®? |
WENT HTS eReTaTe ATA WKH
. Ekaikabhavatusta—pleased with single minded devotion,
. Ekarasa—the undifferentiated Bliss,
. Ekantajanapriya—likes secluded or detached persons,
. Edhamanaprabhava-of ever increasing brilliance,
. Edhadbhaktapatakanasini—destroys the rampant sins of Her
devotees, 15
Uets swage ats fagrenrgerrateata: |
Sera fea ynigaea era WRU
Elamodamukha—a mouth fragrant like cardamom seed,
. Enodrigakrayudhasamasthitih—a thunderbolt unto the mountain
of sins,
. Thasanyaé—the desireless,
. Ipsita—sought by the devotees,
. Isadisevya—attended by Isana and others,
. Isanavarangand—devoted wife of Iévara, 16
Saris safe arenrcarea © feared ** |
Soret ** farses aes aft? att *< nell
: Isvarajfiapika—controls (commands) Isvara,
. Ikaérabhavya—meditated on Her seed letter T’,
Ipsitaphalaprada—grants the wants,
Isina—the ruler of the universe,

we faeits ar: 261 Chapter 26
Itihara—destroyer of distress,
Iksa—the universal witness,
Isadarunaksi—with slightly red eyes,
IévareSvari—the Devi of even Iévara, 17
wferar®® ererarear’? wag oreery:?
waeat’? eaaitfor® ctaenuit'’ erarferert’® Weel
. Lalita—delights the mind,
Lalanarapa—of attractive form,
. Layahina—inperishable,
Lasattanuh—trilliant form,
. Layasarvia—brings an end to everything
. Layaksonih— platform of destruction,
. Layakarni—supporter of dissolution,
. Layatmika—the embodiment of dissolution. (i.e., Kalika) 18
wafer’? eres Seat’* CTA TYGAT "|
FAS Swa Bashar’ erara eras meee
Laghima—the manifestation of Laghimé power (i.e., the power
to contract),
Laghumadhyadhya—with a slender waist,
Lalamana—sportive,
Laghudruta—moves briskly,
Hayaradha—rides a horse,
Hatamitra—killer of foes,
Harakanta—consort of Siva,
Haristuta—praised and sung by Hari (Visnu) 19
wasitawar’ grentiran’s etayear’* |
gion’ gecrenrsargt®® weetadartert’* Ron
Hayagrivestada—fulfiller of the wants of Hayagriva,
Halapriya—who revels in the Varuni drink. (cf: Lalita Trisati
name 120),
Harsasamuddhata—elated with joy,
Harsana—confers joy (bliss),

at faery, 262 Sri Tripurérahasyam
Hallakabhangi—with a body resembling red lotus,
Hastyantaisvaryadayini—who grants riches heaped to the height
of an elephant, 20
waeensfaarer* efaatarentest** |
qrrerarsferat’? Tet’ Tears Tareat® Tha: 8" een
. Halahastarcitapadi—whose feet are worshipped by the wielder
of the plough (i.e., Balarama),
. Havirdhanaprasddini—blesses those who offer oblations to the fire,
Ramaramarcita—worshipped by Srirama and Balarama
Rajfii—the Empress,
. Ramya—enchanting, f
. Ravamayi—the embodiment of sound (Sabda Brahma),
Ratih—Manifest as Ratidevi, 21
vferatte* ceuit’s Treat’? THUftAUseriaT** |
tfaasfacciten ten? tarrorfagieat<* WIN
. Raksini—protectress (protector),
Ramani—sports with Her devotees and attendants,
Raka—shines like the full-moon,
. Ramanimandalapriya—fond of the congregation of lovely ladies,
Raksitakhilaloka—protector of the entire universe,
1si—the Supreme,
Raksogananisidini—destroyer of the gang of demons, 22
Wears Sete CO Tea hiren? saa TT |
SUT SAAT Sra Wwe
Amba—the Mother,
Antakarini—the destroyer during deluge,
Ambhojapriya—fond of lotus,
Antakabhayankari—frightens even Yama the God of death,
. Amburapa—manifests as water,
Ambujakara—holds the lotus in Her hands,
. Ambujajaétavarapradi—grants boons to the lotus-born Brahma, 23

wefagis ey: 263 Chapter 26
Sa Ta sat ear ftus ertet |
SaTeHIST AAT Ree Sat yer 8S eet
92, Antahpijapriya—tikes inward worship,
93. Antahsvarapini—the inner Self,
94. Antarvacomayi—the inner voice,
95. Antakarativamankasthita—seated on the left thigh of the
destroyer of Yama,
96. Antahsukharipini—the inner Bliss, 24
Rag’? Barr arerk* aartee wager? att?
ater: 8°? arar’* ata waht’ area’ Barats AH
97. Sarvajfida—the Omniscient One,
98. Sarvaga—the Omnipresent One
99. Séra—the Essence of all,
100. Sama—The Impartial One,
101. Samasukhé—the undifferentiated Bliss of Siva,
102. Sati—the eternal companion of Siva,
103. Santatih—the uninterrupted progeny,
104. Santata—the Eternal one,
105. Som4—the Moon (the inner Energy),
106. Sarva—the One in All,
107. Sankhya—the science of Universal Soul,
108. Sandtani—the primeval One (or Durga). 25
Uae afert Te areraBrat wr aferated ares: wae: AARTTT tt RI
Ure weet wit fg aiteay gee amarvarTeaat Feat SaeTfgETT 1 ol
Wart walferat fret waxed Buea: | Unser cdeteted Taft AIM tt Xe Hl
“Oh Paragurama! I have told you the hundred-and-eight names that
are the essence of all the names and are to be kept extremely secret.
A prayer equal to this is very difficult to find in the three worlds. This
should not be disclosed to atheists who are not devoted to Devi
Tripurambika. Sadaéiva, Hara and others daily recite this prayer. By
the power of this prayer, Manmatha conquers quickly the three worlds.

Rt ARREST 264 Sri Tripurarahasyam
dhreansereramedst Water aaa wsfaet a et gfe eet 20
“For that person who recites this beautiful SaubhagyastottaraSatandma prayer at the three sandhis (i.e., sun rise, midday and sunset)
there is nothing unattainable on the earth. 29
sifseiureraartacrayach Wa! YReTSMSa AsIeHH faqurt I 301
“Recitation of this prayer is considered as a must for the worshippers
of Srividya. A single reading of this will take care of the deficiencies in
their other actions. 30
aufsenr eafed fret Afafac qa ereitwafa ara od eet aor aa agu
“The daily and special rites performed without reciting this prayer
would be a waste similar to the rites performed by a nude person. 31
ARAAUSaVTTaA a | ASSAAIS Het SAT a, Ta)
“A devotee who is unable to read the thousand names and the like,
will reap hundred-fold benefit by reading this prayer of hundred and
eight names. 32
Ween Ufo ¢ deanna ardanguigen citar avi Taq 33H
wernt dap giiceeancaia wrefagwore wageatfires Wail
“By reciting this one thousand times, one can destroy the enemy
by a stare. One can command the worlds by offering oblations of red
Karavira flowers; one can stupefy the enemy by oblations of white flowers
and extripate through blue flowers. Oblations of pepper destroys the
enemies and of Lavanga (clove) cures diseases. 33, 34
qarfetraterony ar sitsaerg arate: | aay get: wetatstir quate wferarafa: 11 34
VTA AMSAT G aaegR gt far a: Wars sadaanst ATMTSERTA AAA tt 36 Il
wet oft eter cet weer afseaner Ure afedt wa qu a WaT FT 1 all
“The person, who feeds married ladies and brahmins after reciting
these names or worships the Devi with flowers or fruits for each name,
will permanently dwell in the Abode of the Devi. Sri Lalita, the Empress
will bless and grant the desires of the person who continuously repeats

wefarnt ‘Sa: 265 Chapter 26
these hundred and eight names. “Oh Parasurama! I have thus told you
about the prayer. Now listen to the relevant story. 35 to 37
aad wea: wre at em wen! wealeagey agqeris fea acti
wary faqeacts Gant taast FAT!
“Kama after obtaining the great boon from the Devi, immediately
subdued human beings, gods, demons, kinnaras, yaksas, kimpurusas and
others. 38
AG Treat Brat Hereatariterar Teta
Treat wtenfanrarer weitya: Urged Tena ashes soy Tr aafeA: I
“After a lapse of time Kama who went with a desire to conquer
Mahadeva was reduced to ashes like a moth, by facing the fire of anger.
I will tell you this story. Oh Rama! Listen patiently. 39, 40
vitt araracft year frgqdarer aféfe: grat fret weerea veqeraarrat tt wet
arenrerarasar ar het arf frat ater caret farat wade Frat: BRI
ferary wera ancarsferaga: | weqrara Saght wars afera: ll RII
menseireaersdertderqant: | qafaanr ergata sits: ussil
wa agfadt Saqht cape watt ware wre Taye: Weal
“Devi Gauri born as Daksayani was reduced to ashes in the yajfia
of her father after hearing the insult to Her husband Maheéga. Then
Gauri remained in the incorporeal form. After a very long time, Himavan
the Lord of the Mountains, seeing Narada approaching him, stood up
and worshipped with devotion the divine sage by offering him water,
garland, eatables, scented unguents, clothes and ornaments and fed him
with a tasty meal. Then Himavan addressed the highly auspicious divine
sage who was seated in the assembly. 41 to 45
af erarmctergsitse wih fgets aera wera dhtsé Sata: vail
wre ate yaar seat AIT: | geist alt ase warearstt Ga TH vol
‘Oh Divine Sage! Seeing you I am blessed today on this earth because
a small person like me has been allowed to serve you the son of Brahma.

at ATL 266 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Oh Lord! Let me know from which world you came and with what
purpose. Rarely can one see you. What is your next desired destination”
Ue UST ANeISa WENErSt aa: | aaNet dass taqurdaaaar xen
udder aarat: aeactenres Aq! wt feqadaadt aonth freee wei
Thus inquired Narada with words like dripping honey, spoke to
Himavan to inform him about. his journey. ‘Oh Lord of Mountains! I
came from the Satyaloka to see the fortunate ones like you and I will
proceed to the abode of Siva.’ 48, 49
grea ance ferar ore War: | Ta ae HEA TT seaEMa: «tt Goll
Saye Atle: PUTT YPTTI
Listening to Narada, Himavan addressed him humbly thus: ‘Oh Lord!
How are you calling me fortunate? With the agony of childlessness I am
extremely pitiable and unfortunate.’ 50
gf sear fafterat are: wre araay, Wan
Uy Yara aat eared aerate et ata waeferenferqa Gat: URI
oe: Wet war ert gfe wt wife ge: | Tereaquicifasfery werafer: ware
at werfampesren: qarata feat ar yifaa: ua citar wea we ofaftor
ae wydiget amgat yttar: 1 aqaene vee afer A ahragqar Wyatt
W yf: prepara wanqeter: | saeerdt aeraat wa a Se AEs RI
Hearing Himavan, Narada consoled him and said thus: ‘Oh! King
of Mountains! Listen. I will tell how you are fortunate. Presently because
you are devoted to the feet of Paragakti, I called you blessed. In this
world persons with low righteous merit cannot have such great devotion.
That Sakti, who is worshipped day and night by Brahma, Visnu, Rudra
and others, is universally Supreme in whom dwells the entire creation.
I have known by yogic vision what the sage Vamadeva taught you day
before yesterday. That sage who preached to you is the exponent of
goddess worship. Therefore, tell me who else other than you can be
fortunate in the world? 51 to 56

wefaeits 7: 267 Chapter 26
gta areca fe ferary great Beles ara qt wet a avafz i uo
a aswatated fated arate | yeah fafserce aren ufe aa
gaan far wer. 7 ae feed satan wtsuet ger qarrqort ferarea ii ue ii
Listening to Narada, Himavan said again thus: ‘Oh Brahman!
Through your yogic vision you can see the past and the future. There
is nothing within the triple time-frame that is unknown to you. I will
ask you something. Please tell me who is your servant. Oh Brahman!
There is no happiness in this world without having children. Hence let
me know the means by which I will have an offspring.’ 57 to 59
att fecergret aot eqreatsa area: | Ware titra aret feereya: i Gott
su wears warsuet + feet arsataretsfe wage: acter & erfaeafer i eet
sqoy wearsfa & aed garda fe wate: |
a fe cirsaeagqa: weer: gies: safer WRN
wast an gar Ferraarca afe a wcarefercpreonis tATu GET
wer Gara araste afaeater + Aya: |
Hearing Himavan, Narada endowed with spiritual vision meditated
for a moment and addressed the Lord of the Mountains thus:
‘Oh! Mountain King! I know you have no children. I see no way out.
But you will beget a daughter who will cause pain to you. Let me tell
you that progeny will bring misery. There is no one in this world who
is happy with children. More so, understand that a daughter is the
source of distress. If the Supreme Devi blesses you, then even a daughter
will bring happiness.’ 60 to 63
geared aReaa: We TeaaTTeyA: wav
ores ar wT viferatetayeregan aubear wraran TAT ferafag aa e4 i
areas arin! aa: wet H wate TEMAS TTT AE Wag
Hearing those words of Narada, Himavan said again thus: ‘Oh Lord!
I heard from Vamadeva that the Pardéakti is alphabetical in nature and
it is not possible to comprehend Her. Thus when Her form is extremely
hidden and beyond speech, tell me, how can I have Her ra a

R ATS, 268 Sri Tripurdrahasyam
sft gen areisa wares faaanr: | oy vlepenseter a fe Yer wee
arrerrean wedt faqe wearer! wea weed we watseacaaT ferry ae 1
aftsrer faarfa warsafeeaa Fat eT seat we wat ae ge
Aeurensfaatad weqefantaa deat eat waaate daa tt Bolt
aa tit geri ar fae went! at wassyl wereat arfsoamrers wT we
Hearing thus, the intelligent Narada said thus: ‘Oh Himavan! Indeed
She is Subtle, Trans-transcendental, Inexpressible, Supreme, Tripura, the
universal Cause. Only great yogis know Her who dwells in all, within
their being and none else. So, Oh Himavan! Meditate on Her alternative
gross form which is visible to all and get your wants. Even the visible
forms are infinite that are meditated by devotees. Among them meditate
soon on Gauri, Mrdani the intellectual and transcendent form of Mahadevi
and obtain your wishes.” 67 to 71
ered anentert GA: ures ude: | era ar fe ar Sat aor aif aetirarn we
ferent faraarant fedtat ya Ft yA
Hearing Narada, Himavan inquired again thus: ‘Oh Lord! Oh Sage!
Who is the Devi known as Gauri? What is Her form? What is Her story?
What is Her power? Let me know.’ 72
Frere udaaet frome vat af: WO3ll
5 wdarras vtat warfee ye aT AEA wepTaAfawrdss weTT 11 wy Il
fern fardern fra wayten Get aw Ged yet yRt ufos: 11 04
Tart vigradt wen: asa: | dels Tay Heres a Terafe safe ti
Vafeerrarann BRUTE ATTA: | LATA TATA Ufahraae ye: Noell
4 2 werent Hen sitrear fer) waretarn farqdteeafirarsefe it wc
at feat srerntserag:fedt arqad i at aarrer aeat ares firzarera: 11 ol
wen we wae aed wctenfeer) ser areca et yA: waged: = coll
vies yoaemaste 2a: eget wfewatir wereeer cagyrera: wf wfireafer i ce
rat a uct vite wT wren writen) whee ayit weet @ cia wa afacafe nc?
Hearing Himavan, Sage Narada then said thus: ‘Oh! Lord of
mountain! Listen to the auspicious form of Gauri. She the Great Devi

wefagis Aa: 269 Chapter 26
has manifested from the Vaisnava aspect of Paragakti. Blue in colour,
seated on the Lion, having three eyes, wearing the Moon on Her head,
wielding in Her Lotus-like hands the sword, the shield, the trident and
the club, She is the consort of Siva (Sankara) who having been under
Her protection does not suffer while destroying the creation. This Devi
after discarding Her causal form was born to Daksaprajapati and upon
hearing the insult to Her husband got burnt up and took ethereal form
and is not willing to have a physical form even upon the request from
the gods. Without Her, Siva is unhappy. Oh Himavan! Propitiate Her
and request Her to be born as your daughter. Having Her as your
daughter you will shine and become venerable in the world and lauded
by gods. You will also have the fame of becoming the father-in-law of
Mahadeva. With Parasakti as your daughter you will attain happiness,
fame and glory in this world.” 73 to 82
sta street wrereravs wefayitseaa:
End of the twenty-sixth chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurarahasyam.

aeafagits Area:
Chapter 27
amet qu wat arated gan yet teat aed aaa HEAT: nen
aver arama werd frites at aga creat aaresfaact wT, Wen
apt feant cect wet viferneraa: | WapeeT arenas ST UT BH
wa ater afedt cfia: a Aergt:| Wasisvsrrcs wefawyirare yt
sakhtaar tar wa valfants sag! At Ye AEG: Yast WeTATT
wad agisfatt ora: Taquresy waa: | Aer fafatianas fares fafeererer ng
‘Oh Himavan! Listen to the story containing the deeds of Gauri.
Long ago in the ‘Rathantara-kalpa’, the great demon Tarakeya propitiated
through penance the three-eyed Mahadeva and got many boons and
extremely harassed the world. Siva granted him the powers of creation,
protection and destruction. He was able to seize immediately the valour
of the opponent. Arrogant with such boons, that strong demon created
many worlds along with Brahma, Visnu, Siva, Indra and other gods and
became their overlord. Brahma and others created by him worshipped
him. He became the Lord of sacrifices in his creation. He created his
own Vedas and varieties of knowledge. 1 to 6
HUTS AHA Wests ASAT: | at aay |W: ws wa aay ws Te
we wdat fa: wo_ a at WaT!
Then the demon Tarakeya going to Brahma and others said thus
“Let all the gods worship me and recite my Vedas. I am the god and
lord of all. All of you should bow to me always.” 7
sia wget sen 4 ettapder qu: wen
War carhahafier agen tas fafafiear anfecia aga earfeat Weta Il
acer frame fafa went tqareat gol
TeaSH anna warag fatirqeren: | drequeqeare 4 <audtarcegan: it ee ll
Feet fat a7 fafingen qear wesqey! att aera fetqareaseT: 1 ll

aafagits ar: 271 Chapter 27
arvatt ware ay warererge: | fate eft fort ats Gear eta saya i 93
qeaardtate qr eanifeg faye ai wa: qat waver ant wahattsgr: 11 ex
Hearing his words, which the gods did not accept it, he conquered,
captured and imprisoned them in his universe. Then he bound the
Adityas, the Vasus, the Rudras, the Asvins and the Maruts and imprisoned
them. Then he proceeded to destroy Brahma and others. Seeing the
demon coming to capture them Brahma and others along with their
retinue started to battle and after a long fight, realising his invincibility
because of the boon, disappeared. After Brahma and others disappeared,
the great demon created alternative Brahma, Visnu and Siva and
positioned them. He created Indra and other gods and placed them in
heaven and became the universal Lord being worshipped by all of them.
ae TATA PalsupaaTSr aay: | aE yrelt Tareiterr meat etor wtfeT: a
ad fayreararrartd at aarfeyret! ea FA: pret wre rar waranty 1 26 HI
safer arcaraa Bfetsd Wars: | ore Tarrgeyia: wae fg: = gel
we Ura warengy wore yfaterct afeersvsnenrst aa rat aeaferert ti te Ht
vad wenfragé wenfy ayrrera stare et wens sper arreétar ferent 11 Re
_ After a long time while Tarakeya was surveying the worlds, he saw
Sacidevi in the heaven and was infatuated with her beauty. He ordered
his servant by name Niégatha to bring Sacidevi. The messenger went and
bowed to Sac and gave her the message of his lord thus: “Oh Indrani!
Sent by Tarakeya I have come here. The Lord of the Universe and the
Lord of the demons conveys to you thus—Oh lady with pure bright
smile! Come soon with love to me and enjoy universal sovereignty by
marrying me. Thus honoured I will become obedient to you. If not you
will lose your dignity being dragged here forcibly.’ 15 to 19
fit sre area: ereft fercarerarager) fax awctfir 3 ersaat # cent fertsqar
Sat wert Sara ace Sar: BRA: | tet Tt Taf Tafa A MH Re
surdtarsqrat arcanfir a wmnfr srt wtaferacteerert: wear: 2M
aqui weet erste wre ene wera ATTA ATA, 1 28

mn Ayres 272 Sri Tripurarahasyam
ofa fafa aaa yet qaraaa Uy ga aha Wereet woe UesH
faadayg om: steractt wie ad wearsqekat St wargqefes WRN
oat aanargat ware: uftartenr: |
Listening to the messenger Saci got worried and thought thus: “What
shall I do? Presently there is no one to protect me. Indra, Jayanta and
other gods have been captured and moved far away. I have no news
about them. I have none to save me. I shall for the time-being keep
away the demon-king by a clever strategy. In times of danger the weak
with all effort and intelligence will be happy by putting off the event
even half-way. By gaining more time, I will release myself from the
situation.” Deciding thus Saci said to the messenger. “Oh servant! Listen.
Give my message to Tarakeya—Lord Visnu is the Supreme God. His
wife Sri Laksmi is charming. We are Her maids. It is appropriate that
you take Her and then we will all be your maids uninvoked.” 20 to 25
wa yreat aanfest Ga: lara wan: TA
weg aaatste aati! sar gt feared dearra asqtT: i oll
‘Of this proposal by Saci, the messenger humbly informed Tarakeya.
Hearing that the demon Tarakeya felt that to be true and sent the
messenger to Sri Laksmi. 26 to 27
agus a arrest rat Us_raeay! Bacaes Ta Aral EAT AAT N Ve Ml
asaeet Gre F Fa OT Ea: 1 ase Had ara ahaes qa: Vil
wearers a: Wes vitefrat ate: |
Going to Vaikuntha the messenger submitted to Laksmi the message
of the demon. Hearing that Laksmi contemptuously said thus: “Oh
Messenger! It is not good for the wicked Tarakeya to desire me. By this
he is requesting self-destruction. Get out soon from here.” 28, 29
sea Frat qatsa weatararsqufeay, I 301
wine fara: seat ASE: | arte Saar are Sita sift BRN
Thus expelled, the messenger went and reported to the Lord of
demons. Hearing the denial by Laksmi, the furious Tarakeya seized the
dwelling of Laksmi with his army. 30, 31

wafagns ar: 273 Chapter 27
aa aeitde arafeate: venice: Priensgeatat at agree aay
Then Laksmi set out along with Her hundred crores of Saktis and
quickly destroyed the army of the demons. 32
ane: Wictes cea att wea! wa Gata aera war yreaseranifac: 11
wat; aaMagqe ahafsdtaan vad Wdeiteart frwpergratita navi
gens Tatars | aie tat at ter: deals aT BK
wa wr: Geet Gear Fates a: aa watt: aes asad SaTFATN 34 1
wet frat are salt ged a7
Seeing the great prowess of Laksmi, the mighty Tarakeya, an expert
in handling weapons and missiles battled himself with Her. The war
between them which was as if Visnu is fighting with Sankara, created
fear in the Universe. Their war continued for five years. The demon
used to create afresh his army that was being destroyed by Laksmi.
‘He was thus again and again creating his lost army and continuing
the battle. Then Laksmi understanding the heroic demon as invincible,
remembered Her husband Visnu, the Supreme Being. 33 to 36
aa ana: sitar aad waren: 1301
anfadya wat wd: uftarita: 1 ud areitsferstaavsigeranat: |= 3c Il
wait cart ant arat seENgam! Hetserd agassat Se Tera:
Then the glorious Narayana who was glowing like many simultaneous
Suns at deluge, seated on Garuda and followed by His servants appeared
in the battlefield. He saw Laksmi tired and dull and with great anger
fought with all His might with the king of the demons. 37 to 39
Wa ter: wa we fre Het AM FI wate aga wee feropar Fre west
Then the powerful demon immediately turned into two forms and
fought with both Laksmi and Visnu simultaneously. 40
aa fae: vepfaad: uch ae Weer! aqvined aq feat Serres aeeTTT Ween
Uh Teearara earersfiaftarseray Wat AHA FRI: wants weTgey ll
Fw faupr gg wae ah wemeT GS get eet tea: wera searATTAT 8

Rt AES, 274 Sri Tripurarahasyam
gear demad ¢ acerreing: | Tra we Vaya wsfAt ven
Then the angry Visnu discharged the unfailing Sudargana disc to
kill the demon. That disc burnt the demon just as a fire burns a house.
Then the mighty demon who was battling with Laksmi created another
demon who again fought an extremely fierce war with Visnu. Thus the
demon, who was being destroyed again and again, was creating himself
out of his self and fighting. Then seeing the demon unconquerable because
of the boon from Maheégvara, Visnu along with Laksmi disappeared from
the battlefield. 41 to 44
aa wen teaafe: waset cra ei ae earaeitang?: uftartt: un wy
aeat 9 adqaregen wera fawritetettetrer yet wee SET Ht RU
Bs Tees yreitafae sma: 1 t Gearssferdt at yet weghaasaaq
aa t a qatar wore aferatre: | qeagfir tara der ware t Tey
TRiseufafearster terra cifear weraet wat F ufafta: watsat: xe
wag aga aleergtat: | Ed F Awarara qarat w a Prarfta: I 4o tt
aatanrant oe fafsat aa wate: srareaatarg are at at weTge: 4g
fee anf aa treet asfer & yet aafaq
moat ta Stat arniere WR gat WARM
Then the Lord of the demons, thinking that Laksmi and Visnu were
defeated, went back to his palace along with his retinue. Later Saci
getting the news from a Gandharva about the defeat of Laksmi and
Visnu remembered Brhaspati the Guru. Just by her remembrance Guru
came to Saci. Seeing him, the pitiable Saci stood-up and bowed to him
with devotion and worshipped him and with tears in her eyes said thus:
“Oh Guru! Troubled by the king of the demons I am in distress. My
husband Indra along with other gods has been captured by him. Now
he desires to have my company. The messenger sent by him has been
cleverly returned. Laksmi and Narayana are defeated in the war. He
will come today or tomorrow to take me away. What shall I do? Where
shall I go? There is no one to take care of me. Oh Angirasa! Oh Guru!
Helplessly I am surrendering to you! Save me today.” 45 to 52
qed faaftafirawar fareorerer) wuretes wager yet wre earsfaa: i 43M

aeqfagits Ara: 275 Chapter 27
gees qu ra et Sererafena! Ue eet wea wa wa GH
arisen Gat citcsfary weeites @ feet eitfirat + westa: aremghhyasge: 1
amfreats great Aq vite merge: | et ard omafr green citterrea gq ug
saan frict vita: pret a oetathy wht aarrafag aa ayMSeAAT NN Uo I
Hearing the lamentation of Indrani, the compassionate Brhaspati
after probing intellectually said to Saci thus: “Oh Pulomaja! Listen to my
words suitable to the situation. By the boon obtained from Mahadeva
this demon will vanquish everyone. There is no one in this world and
elsewhere who can defeat him. Except by Gauri he is invincible by women.
His powerful messenger will soon come to take you. Hence, you start
immediately worshipping Gauri for a month.” Saying thus the Guru
returned and Saci started to propitiate Gauri the Parameévari. 53 to 57
aft gattret qn feedeat ugar Get a Ge yet yRt cat yay
frat wageret tees at qafearys AAtserteTEs eaTeaTs Saver TETPAAE HN 4e
TPRUETEATAUT ATATSEYTAHTSAAT | EAT. Tee AA ATAT N gol
She made an earthen auspicious idol of Gauri who was seated on
the Lion, who wielded in Her four arms the sword, the shield, the
trident and the club, who had three eyes, whose head was decorated
with the Moon, who was dark-blue in color and was well bejewelled.
After worshipping Her in the prescribed manner and offering varieties
of eatables she recited the prayer of hundred and eight names that was
taught by the Guru and got absorbed in the repetition of the Mantra.
aorsaatsfir wyrar at pret aaregrrs sea: | GAA we Freier acta wererat i Ge
dfadt erat ad a desegaq ser ga: Tare yet wars wag: tl GR
fa daar: una: det tet at aaHpEavoat sat ga STAT GR
weet warenrgary Tat enderaart: | rat warafad aise Hfeetsfer ae ey I
Ufe st auensarfg Serrst wer ga Mesa yet eT ae Te aT Ru
an waatteren at ereaitecrar garth wae: Wag I

at PCE, 276 Sri Tripurarahasyam
wad werared oat aargeft tere Ron
Subsequently the demon thought of Saci and overpowered by passion
went to the heaven along with his servant. There staying at the
Nandanavana the heavenly garden he sent quickly his messenger to Saci.
Reaching Saci the messenger bowed to her and said thus. “Oh Brilliant
one! The Lord of the demons is at the Nandanavana and is looking
beautiful like the spring season covered by flower blossoms. Desirous of
seeing you he is immersed in your thought. I have been sent to take
you to him. Oh lovely eyed one! Come and soon join the king of demons
who is the Lord of hundred universes and become his queen. Many
Brahmas, Visnus, and others along with their wives will serve you. The
Laksmi, mentioned by you earlier, was defeated along with Janardana
and they have fled with fear from their abode. It is your fortunate time,
being desired by the king of demons.” 61 to 67
ofa ager Eres Set Youefrars waar wast tore areafaynraT = CI
ayy & aed oa aanivesta tere: fareaaiised 8 ufed arena: 1 6a
afaa yaaa uftsquie Gal aa araaaa fara ufrqera 4 Noll
waeadaaise Targa! aa gue fart a wat arg afar =i wel
fagat q ad Ueqfadtt: earegd Wa ase ufafadenfa wont adr: 1 RH
aR fe tert aerat arena
Hearing the messenger, the eloquent queen of Indra mentally
reproaching the demon said thus: “Oh Messenger! Listen. For a long
time I was also having the same desire of the king of demons of wanting
me. I think this is the opportune time fructifying my desire and indeed
the king of demons should be my new husband. For that I have undertaken
an observance for thirty days which will be auspicious for the new
husband. Soon after the completion of the vow I will go and join the
king of demons. If the observance goes through without obstacles I will
never be separated from the husband. If the vow breaks, then immediately
my husband will die. Hence by the completion of the observance I will
never face separation from my husband. So, go and inform the king to
excuse me for just a month.” 68 to 72

aaafagits Art: 277 Chapter 27
wa wet ae: great gens waaay Woz
ayer aista waned weiter fee: |
Hearing Saci, the messenger reported the matter to the king who
on hearing the same was happy and waited for that time. 73
sat a ufafet arquransyrt wat nex
ararnteasenfaenaeifean aaa sititttarerest wate fearon ei
fanmirarta apices safest cat fasrarre 4 ret oR
aisenfr 2at watter feathers ase Genres afaentt Fraaut 1 oo
ure fad snfa far great earege wa A ware: wept HE RTVAeAAT It oe
areert aifad & terrae wader qenech oeitfanet fet NT aenfgat un wet
aa: warasy 2g tet agt ada gfe fafrer Saye Gus we lt coll
Went aa wat aa at fraferari
The devout Indrani meditating incessantly on the lotus feet of Gauri
with strict control on senses, food, activities and speech was sustaining
herself on air for food. After twenty-eight days, on the twenty-ninth
night Saci thought thus: “Till today Devi Gauri is not pleased with me.
After one more day I will be under the control of the king of demons.
This looks impassable for me. What should I do to be happy? As of now
I know no plan. I am in danger. Surrendering myself to the demon is
never praiseworthy. Therefore I will wait for one more day with patience
for protection from Gauri. On the morning of the next day I will offer
my body to Gauri through the fire.” Deciding thus Saci prepared a huge
altar in her house near to the idol of the Devi. 74 to 80
wofeterrtda: yet ures & faery ween
ar ore arafrded act yuf afeeafis arg a: arerana Qetet ages oR
Tres qa deaf: qeetteat wf amresteas wt tq awa: TeTEPA: CR
One of the messengers of the demon inquired Saci about the fire-altar.
She replied thus: “The vow of thirty days will be completed and tomorrow
morning I will accompany the king of demons. Go and inform this to
him and let him come here next morning well prepared and well dressed
to take me with him.” 61 to 68

a Ree, 278 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Sa Fa: retest aed wearsgtats fracacatstt we: caret ft wera cx
‘The messenger taking the words of Saci to be true reported to
Tarakeya who happily awaited that moment. 84
aera wenger grat fea audet: | weife qos fafarr wears vaferasaze
erent wht aferga wate Sqfresar yates wares oft a aH cg
aensufe woreasa mrefarare ergy! wat eet wereed ferart F ada con
Bu te Fa Sat ehaseq wearer! sft wet ret aaa Seth cc
apex Wacrenyt aureus! anarenacen:tatisfrwage: = cel
‘Then Saci completed her great worship to the Devi by offering
auspicious materials and filled the altar with wood and lighted the fire
ablaze. Meditating with devotion on Gauri she circumambulated the fire
with the intention of offering her body and bowed with folded hands to
Sankari and prayed thus “Salutations to you the Great Devi the consort
of Siva. I am offering this body to you. May the Supreme Devi be pleased
by this.” After praying thus, when Saci was about to enter the fire, a
terrifying loud sound like that of a thunderbolt was unexpectedly heard
in the sky. 85 to 89
a ger a nerenayanis_a fae qautagit vterrafrataay, oll
wenatt neredt qeaqfraarepiy Gear wnepeT ret gdearepferarsaT ti Vel
‘Hearing that huge sound Saci saw in the sky a golden coloured
Lion as tall as the Himalaya mountain. Seeing on that Lion the Great
Devi resembling the idol worshipped by Her, Saci filled with joy bowed
to Her. 90, 91
aa t yreqnrenud achat qtat: | wEneeed faenquszaarat neu
Weal wan wai & fae yet aatfea: 1 afaa: faeqeaigy ware yreres sya
‘Hearing that sound, Tarakeya the Lord of the demons followed the
sound in the sky and seeing the Lion struck it angrily on its head with
the sword. Falling on the head of the Lion, the sword shattered into
hundred pieces. 92, 93
we ant waretes Set Tessar wart ef yea faewaar: wore = Ul Vv

BeHfaens ATA: 279 Chapter 27
aa vit ayers teits-af ware: | gotta wertat weats semrgrTEe 1 ek It
qaswanerqe warigerara: | ahi arereege anger waite: ee
aiteanttenitten qageerarar Tiga: teat wort ter sere neon
qa: wast wot ents wea africa aah wrgenfefenieem = ec
‘Then Gauri with red angry eyes seeing the demon struck him with
the trident by which he fell with split chest. Rising up again immediately
the demon disappeared and in a moment created a very large army in
the sky. A great battle began between the armies of Bhavani and the
demon. The crores and crores of divine motherly forces born out of the
breath of Gauri, fought with the army of the demon. The demon observing
the destruction of his army created once again a very huge battalion
which was soon ruined by the forces of Gauri. 94 to 98
aa teraficher agent aeaet: | wast seh Sa fered waa il RR
a fia: yyerqera aitat aig waraati ft gear age: wat wyatt:
weer wittafar prequer ar ergdt arti arse ferat we afarte drafefafirr: 1 got
arava fg prover ert arenfrat Toth Beye HIGHTAEATEMATS AeA tt Lo? It
Ware yrgt a Sister erormaa: | anfecrdregernfir: unét: uftanfta: 1 tog tl
‘Gauging the motherly forces to be stronger the Lord of the demons
created a three-eyed Siva who wielded a trident and bore the moon on
his head. That Siva started attacking Gauri with his raised trident.
Seeing him and mistaking him to be the husband of Gauri the motherly
forces discarded the weapons. Then Gauri said thus: “He is not the Siva
my husband. This Siva is the creation of the demon. It is improper to
shed the weapons while fighting with magical persons.” Then Gauri
remembered Her husband Sarikara to dispel the ignorance of the motherly
forces. Sankara immediately appeared holding His trident along with His
retinue. 99 to 103
geen frnfet a a qageaeteent: | are weneat Zar war Tafa: |! Yow Il
aT orsrstace: frat: fargeat sft arearray Senraitatateqaa: it tou tt
‘Seeing Siva the wielder of the Pinaka bow, the motherly forces
resumed the battle picking up the weapons. Then Brahma, Gods, Yaksas,

R ARES, 280 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Gandharvas, Kinnaras, Nagas, Ganas, Apsarasas, Siddhas and
Kirhpurusas came to watch the fight between Gauri and Tarakeya.
aonsvatauftal: werereury! Fs Aarsytata: Sat AaSTAT = ROR
gout atta aqenfafanvad) sa waquErsvent ufaeitad aIsyt: Il tow
fafeeasud factt ¢ dapat wight Aer! sa wlerqee AerHrett fasiieor
ferment qaatheht quenrenfanfiar acareratt at a Gear wrara vig ui 70g
ante vit Qearqeravsta etwate 41
Then the demon and Gauri fought an extremely frightful war in
which the demon created many times armies that were rightaway
destroyed by the motherly forces. Then the demon Tarakeya hid himself
within the universe created by him. Knowing that Sankari fumed with
anger from which appeared the frightening nude Mahakali with dishevelled
hair wearing a garland of skulls and wielding a sword. Seeing Her
Sankari said “Oh Kali! Quickly ruin the universe created by the demon.”
arent frie ot areit wencstit grt aor, i Roll
fate aaa sararaTa a: wat: | Ue farsvenct cet qamerqa: — 1 BRR
arm fragre at ae wat cei aah wereed orafacar wetaet NRT
Wiersma eee yer fore anfesaqi a feaqat yer farrargryer it Beall
Listening to that, Kali in a moment shattered the hundred universes
with Her sword and swallowed the citizens. When the group of universes
were thus destroyed the demon holding a powerful weapon came and
when he was about to create an army to continue the war, Gauri put
him on the ground and stamping on his chest severed his head with the
trident. With his head cut off the demon lost his life. 110 to 113
Gi detarad fer fatima: | waft ret raged agitter W Rest
Wee fated: eitscefeeyiern: | warsfeqer: mggareat fereenfedy 1 eeu
watt ternitsd wan fated: | tay: aacitcnueent aaa: Il Bel
Ht eg eftatsit et at wwaq safe qa sareat far: ww: BMaHTH eee

; mS em": 281 Chapter 27
wer Geer Seen Uifert Gras! Tees Vaca east were: 1 eee tt
At warn verefa afaeafe wétaet gf afsearataratat at weesfarn ee ti
ofa dager ten & waahrambar
Hearing the news about the death of the king of the demons,
Brahma and others uttered slogans of victory and Indra showered flowers.
Brahma, Visnu and others sang hymns and with folded palms addressed
Her who was seated on the lion. “Oh Bhavani! The powerful demon who
was our enemy and harasser of the universe has been killed by you.
Oh Maheégvari! While Visnu or Siva were unable to kill him, how could
Indra and others be competent? By the killing of this wicked one the
world has been protected like a son. Therefore, Oh Great Devi! On the
shore of the western sea, You will become famous as ‘J a’—
Universal Mother and worshipped You will grant the wants of the people.”
Lauding Her thus and bowing to Her, the gods returned to their abodes.
airawate ata aa tent frafaa: Hl Roll
SINT Worenstaae atest qrareter: | Whee geaaefatrens yeqe aT A
woratsfer wrrgifr ait Aarfterfetor seqerar area woven SaTeLAT Azz Ml
Then Indrani came to the place where the demon was killed and
bowed to the Mother and with folded palms said thus: “Oh Gauri! Oh
Protector of the Universe! Oh Dispeller of the distress of the helpless!
I bow to you! I who was drowning in the waters of sorrow, have been
saved by You.” Saying thus the beloved of Indra prostrated before the
feet of the Devi. 120 to 122
ara wiht pret wre wager feraqdarys garoad waarsfer at qerfrenfsort u
Then Gauri who was happy with Saci said with a smile: “Oh Indrani!
I am pleased with you. Ask for your desired boon.” 123
weg wet fem: pret wrarer waar afar ger ate wa ae Vfe wate 1 Rey
TETSU EAT Aa ATMTBR TARTS SHAT RIAA Ft MBTSSATET: MMNGST wT u
wanreretifanfarnt grisea |

at fee, 282 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Listening to the words of the Devi, Saci bowed and said thus:
“Oh Devi! If You are happy with me, grant my desired boon. Just as
You have protected me, save that person who is in deep trouble, who
sings Your hundred and eight names. Grant me unswerving devotion to
Your lotus feet.” 124, 125
are Tit ore Pret weet set PPT Nee
Sarr aera wet aadarseq waar
aw v4 wrfiegerer asset wert at Ron
Then the pleased Gauri spoke auspiciously to Saci: “Oh Indrani!
What you have asked for will be true forever. Go back to your abode.”
Saying thus the Devi disappeared.’ 126, 127
oft & dttarend atat: wafers quaat oegrrt aT at eT ger 1 eee tt
seaqere feastera titat dtterat yar wat vrenseagerat aretseacarta:
“Oh Himavan! I have thus narrated the supreme valourous story of
Gauri which absolves the sins of the listener. Worship that Gauri.”
Telling thus to Himavan the auspicious story of Gauri, Narada permitted
by Himavan, went away by the sky path. 128, 129
oft sifaqueeet wrererees wafayitseara: 11
End of the twenty-seventh chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurérahasyam.

apfagits ara:
Chapter 28
aft qe wat quai wbieidfafatrary! spesartat at cad wer eH
araagamt tat ateyerets sqoadt + fee qf: watt yerga RH
atat araseyrtas wered freon wat wat were weg wat Aseraqaqeny ui 3
After hearing the auspicious glorious story of Gauri, Parasurama
again inquired the great sage Dattatreya thus: “Oh Lord! I do not feel
satisfied hearing the wonderful glories of Gauri that have flowed out of
your mouth. I am eager to hear about the hundred and eight names of
Gauri which Brhaspati told Saci. Please tell me that.” 1 to 3
anfacreanst dfinreterea: | aera arat ure wtat canfater: uel
amare sul sitet aharafaigeq witet afsend werssafefrarormy 4H
wivensea safe: wat afgayes sftaq!
FAEY Saar A sraareas At TT nan
at gm gente fares aren Sager
faedeat teens sat aalgeaisgyenyntrary Wen
wet aé faye want faudt at) aaget frat eraehieigery ic
Thus inquired by Paragurama, the compassionate great yogi the son
of sage Atri disclosed the hundred and eight names of Gauri. He said:
“Oh Paragurama! Listen to the enchanting, wish-yielding and sin-absolving
prayer containing the names of Gauri. The seer of this prayer is Angirasa.
Its metre is Anustup. The presiding Devi is Gauri. This should be recited
to overcome difficulties.
The six seed letters Hrarh, Hrimh and the like are to be installed
(Nyasa) in one’s body and after meditating on Her form, this prayer has
to be recited. She is seated on a Lion; Her hue is dark-green; She is
shining with a silk garment; She is wielding the sword, the shield, the
trident and the club in Her hands; She is decorated with the Moon on
Her head; She has three eyes; She is the granter of wishes;—such a
form of Gauri has to be meditated upon. 4 to 8

mt KES, 284 Sri Tripurarahasyam
EEE ie
POBONOAPraen py
Rt tits? fae? ferar® Sats wea
ARTAUTISyST? AYR’ yaar’ wen
Gauri—The Devi Gauri of golden hue;
Gojanani—Mother of speech, or Mother of Knowledge;
Vidya—the embodiment of knowledge;
Siva—Auspicious Divinity—the consort of Siva;
Devi—The effulgent Devi;
Mahegvari—The most worshipful Supreme Ruler;
Narayandnujé—Sister of Lord Narayana;
Namrabhiisand—Decently decorated;
Nutavaibhava—of laudable glory; 9
fran’: fafgren®* yreqesrar®? erfgrqaurr’? |
Veree’® safer’ ypser’® yprettaitt? I Roll
Trinetra—Three-eyed Devi;
Trisikha—with three plaits (braids); who rules the three aspects
of creation;
Sambhusarhgraya—who is under the care of Siva;
Saégibhisana—decorated with the digit of the Moon;
Stlahasta—Who wields the Trident;
Srutidhara—the supporter of Veda;
Subhada—granter of auspiciousness;
Subharapini—embodiment of auspiciousness; 10
sate erect ofa: atrqaistaeiter® |
arargqaiemeg® drqdpagat® Weg
Uma4—the embodiment of Brahma-vidya; daughter of Himavan;
the form of Om;
Bhagavati—the knower of the past, the present and the future
of this universe;
Ratrih—the Night, extolled in Rgveda (cf., Ratri Sukta);
Somasiryagnilocana—whose eyes are the Moon, the Sun and the
Fire;

aefaits a4: 285 Chapter 28
Somastryatmatatanka—whose earrings are the Moon and the
Sun;
Somasiryakucadvayi—whose two breasts are the Moon and the
Sun; ll
ara? s fiarent® StaparERT * srapenar?? s seater ®* feet?
fereaftrar®® feratsgeer*® yiterar®? ypeerarfertt?? ween
Amba—the Mother of the Universe;
AmbikAa—the Mother controlling the triple powers of will,
cognition and action;
Ambujadhara—the wielder of the lotus (see the Dhyana éloka
of Sri Lalitasahasranama);
Amburipa—the manifestation of water;
Apyayini—the creator of joy;
Sthira—the Eternal one;
Sivapriya—the Beloved of Siva; who loves Siva dearly;
Sivankastha—who is seated on the left lap of Siva;
Sobhana—who is splendidly graceful;
Sumbhanagini—the destroyer of the demon Sumbha; 12
waneer®* wm Gear Gisearras splat: |
mageraen®+ aatqrafiar’® qrefrafear’® wean
Khadgahasta—the wielder of the sword;
Khaga—who traverses in the sky;
Khetadhara—the wielder of the shield;
Khacchanibhakrtih—whose form resembles the purity of the sky;
Kausumbhacela—who wears a saffron garment;
Kausumbhapriya—who likes the saffron flower—Kesara of
Kasmir;
Kundanibhadvija—whose teeth are white like the jasmine ge
mare aranfertt? apa’? aacarerentr®* farar|
ape ** apart afzer aparisear’* poate ues
Kali—the manifestation of Kali;

a fae, 286 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Kapalini—who holds a skull in Her hand; or who wears a garland
of skulls;
43. Krara—the force of destruction;
SREER
KRKESVASSE
Karavalakara—the wielder of the sword;
. Kriya—the Dynamic force of action;
Kamya—coveted by the devotees for release from earthly bondage;
. Kumari—the virgin; (cf., Kanyakumari) the destroyer of the
wicked;
. Kutila—the Tortuous; slyly towards the wicked;
. Kumadramba—the Mother of Kumara i.e., Subrahmanya;
. Kuleévari—the Ruler of the clans (Saktas); 14
wero yererrarats® ygeer yar |
envgyforan’ wredtfirar’® argeratfsar’? KH
. Mrdani—the consort of Mrda, the sattva aspect of Paramasiva;
Mrgasavaksi—with eyes of a young deer;
Mrdudeha—soft or tender-bodied;
. Mrgapriya—who loves deers, antelopes;
. Mrkandupajita—who is worshipped by the sage Mrkandu;
. Madhvipriya—who likes wine; (or who likes to be an introvert
by drinking wine);
. Matrganedita—who is praised by the Sapta-métrkas; (the
collection of divine Mothers); 15
Urgent’ areedt’* arearrar®’ afetarorr®* |
Hewar®® wtgat® yfretar’* atari TEL
Matrka—the phonemes of the divine language;
Madhavi—the manifestation of the consort of Krsna;
Madyanmaénasa—with rapturous mind;
Madireksana—with bewitching eyes;
Modariipa—the embodiment of Bliss;
Modakari—who imparts Bliss;
Munidhyeya—meditated upon by sages;
Manonmani—the transmuter of the mind into a superior state
a level below the thousand petaled lotus Sahasrara; 16

wafers ara: 287 Chapter 28
udaear®® qeqears? arar® urarefar’t |
waren’? uaragiaat* uftorarsfaer®? Nee
. Parvatastha—who dwells on the mountain;
. Parvapijya—who is worshipped on the eighth day, fourteenth
day, full-moon day, new-moon day and sun’s transit day;
. Parama—who is the Most High;
. Paramarthadia—who grants liberation (Moksa);
Paratpara—who is superior to Brahma, Visnu and Rudra; the
Trans-transcendental;
. Paramargamayi—who is the reflection (Vimarsa) of the
Paramasiva;
. Parinatakhila—who creates all existence; 17
urfgraear’? agqafatrar®* agpqaeqar?*|
uvadit’® aefagar’® uttareer’* weT’* Ween
. Pagisevya—who is worshipped by Yama the lord of death;
Pasupatipriya—the beloved of Pasupati Siva
. Pasuvrsastuta—praised by both the dull and the eminent;
Pagyanti—the witness of all; the second level of speech;
. Paracidrapa—the embodiment of the Highest Intelligence;
Parivadahara—who wards off ill-repute;
Para—the Transcendent Word; 18
water? weber et are? wate: * aeIgAAT |
amafranftoit¢s warrqeran®® areata“? Weel
Sarvajia—the Omniscient;
Sarvaripa—the embodiment of the entire creation;
Sa—the Supreme Devi;
. Sampattih—who is in the form of Prosperity;
84. Sampadunnata—who has the Highest wealth;
86. Bhaktasulabha—who is easily accessible to Her devotee;
. Karunamayi—who is full of Compassion;
Apannivarini—who destroys the danger of the devotees;

a Peery, 288 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Berard * Geraren’* aretrenferatesrer®* |
Toraemt® ater’? afar strratsra®* Ron
88. Kalavati—the embodiment of all Arts;
89. Kalamala—who has as garland, the sixty-four arts and crafts
(or She, from whom these emanate);
90. Kalakalitavigraha—whose form embodies all the Arts;
91. Ganasevya—who is attended by the retinue of Siva;
92. Ganeséani—the Ruler of the group of gods;
93. Gatih—the final Goal for all;
94. Gamanavarjita—who is fixed in the Bindu; 20
Saetyrrefarar’® yrfert:** yrftrerarerent** |
Wom? difeenraar’’s qaeqear’’® warratte? WWM
95. Iévari—the Powerful Ruler of the Universe;
96. Isanadayita—the consort of Siva;
97. Saktih—the Power in all;
98. Samitapataka—the destroyer of sins;
99. Pithaga—who is seated in the centres of Powers (Saktipithas,
51 or 108 in number);
100. Pithikarapa—who manifests Herself in the different Energy
Centres within and without;
101. Prsatpijya—worshipped by the gods;
102. Prabhamayi—the Effulgent; 21
Werarar’?? wager’ citenrseitent’’ ferargar’’s |
fereatrrsareaat °° frragrantasra tant’ 11
Uatsfafedt wr eiareragetry Ween
103. Mahamaya—the Causer of stupendous delusion that influences
even Brahma and others;
104. Matangesta—who is benevolent to sage Matanga;
105. Lokaloka—who is manifest as the seen and unseen creation.;
106. Sivangana—the Lady of Siva;

apfanit SAM: 289 Chapter 28
I ee
107. Sivanamajapasakté—Engrossed in chanting the numerous names
of Siva;*
108. Sivasaktyaikyarapini—the unified identical and equal Principle
with Siva.*
* These two names are not in the original text; added to make 108 names.
“Qh Paragurama! This is the rare prayer which I have declared
to you.” 22
ahat asracsreamia: quater srrersitfraat qqotrraraTy, WB
ua wast Preraredt area exe: | aNreTe eras FUT Weil
ween waedt fat faeraheenitfert! at aerate wet t artateay i 2%
“This beautiful prayer containing the hundred and eight names of
Gauri is like a strong boat for crossing the ocean of difficulties. The
difficulties of those who recite this daily will stay away. Persons singing
this with faith will obtain all their wants and in the end attain liberation.
Oh Bhargava! Take this to be the Truth.” 23 to 25
gard ange: wrernficterafa: | aetgfers wate Pract wt aret Weal
are quaadhait qard: udarsfier: | Gran GuarssaAs set SafeatieraraT
erat aft weritat: fareeteat ferefirary! areered ferferars samrtenert: qatar: |
eqrteraant frerrag mrecraudda: | earargued: wit wort GA: GT: RR
waaantsyrat art whit wafesertara: | aed west aterayreh A: ll Roll
whe wera wearsit eqrnect warfeerai stare t was Aenean fire aR
Listening to the words of Narada, the wise Himavan determined to
perform penance to obtain the blessings of Gauri. The Lord of the
mountains, accompanied by his wife, after bathing in the sacred river
sat on its bank and meditated as taught by the divine sage on the form
of beautifully decorated Gauri seated on Her Lion. Then after worshipping
Her with various food offerings Himavan daily concentrated on Her.
While not in meditation, he repeated again and again the prayer. Eating
only ripe leaves, with restraint and silence and sleeping on bare ground
Himavan did penance for twelve years. Then Gauri who was pleased

a ATES, 290 Sri Tripurdrahasyam
eee ——
appeared before him in the same form of his meditation and addressed
him in a dignified thunder-like voice. 26 to 31
airs wi fergfeva aaarfe aac) set & eave care arg Wazn
“Oh Himavan! Let me know what you are performing penance for.
Enough of that harsh penance. I will grant you a good boon.” 32
wegen udesdter: wore qf qeaq! aaIseieye: Yet wananhat: 0
fererafermars at aktefrarad) ef wit areqet vrgefiraeyht Waen
arreraatastaagrst arerqsitaa |
Hearing that Himavan prostrated before Her and with folded hands
praised Her with the names contained therein. Then placing the folded
palms on his head requested Gauri thus: “Oh Devi Gauri! Beautiful to
Lord Siva! Salutations to you! Please revive me who is burnt by the
defect of childlessness.” 33, 34
Bit spat era: ore THT ata TEL
wdag + asuet yet og fret ater wares afeeaft a aera: = ae 11
Hearing Himavan, Gauri said to him thus: “Oh Himavan! You have
no chance to beget a male child. But by My Grace you will undoubtedly
get a daughter.” 35, 36
sensmdtfgaint: more tense: | fa antigay q2aratt gar wy ge
aie acta 8 gant et agar wa 3 wean wheat at ee neu
Then Himavan bowed and said with folded hands thus: “Oh Devi!
The wise say that becoming a father to a girl will bring misery. If I am
going to have only a daughter, then You become my daughter. I do not
wish to have any other boon which You may like to give”. 37, 38
yen fererar witert ore viht weet) anfiers tay arent weTaT 38
ara ter ufeer fa aaa fares Wa SyaaIsSaAea et aay ¥o
_ Hearing Himavan, Gauri said thus: “Oh Himavan! I shall not any
RE gays physical form. I have granted you a daughter and nothing
more is possible”. Saying thus She disappeared immediately like a wish.

referents A: 291 Chapter 28
aarsfarenata yarfsaare: | anfseqaet aaa Ween
wena adgrteh arqaaredten way! Us yragasdit agus weal ¥ RI
are tayyrch feet acynfer: 1 agen aq afeaya eaareatfenatera: 1% 1
warefera freret freesaret Progre: | warray anfserea fret at
waifa que fafaer ateata cree! Us WaUreTe TaN aT A: SGI
fodant waprrerrsns SAC Us arene aalot wre aeT wR
wasnt wer yeterar wer aiseteie saya card fafaery i xl
Then Himavan decided to perform penance again and started the
most severe penance possible only by great sages. Hundred years he
lived on water and another hundred on air. Then after two hundred
years he prepared a huge fire altar and above that he tied hundred
ropes to a banyan tree and tied his feet to them and dangled upside-down
supportless, without eating and breathing and continued his penance.
His wife set a fire, with wood in the altar below. Thus after a year he
cut-off one of the ropes and did so for ninety-nine years. Then the fumes
from the fire of his penance pervaded heaven. 41 to 47
quearen carepferat tar sated Aer Aer eife wares soyCrarah tl
questa aypger aitssisaterar aa: | Gea WaT: AeA: Ht ¥e Il
anrey argued warat cqypfateys Gear ft qxat tar Fale SVSAAAT: | Ml yo!
Distressed by the surrounding fume, Indra and other gods with fear
went to Himavan. There being unable to withstand the heat of the fire
in the altar which was getting intense by the fire of penance, the gods
got back to a distance and reached Satyaloka. Going to the abode of
Brahma, Indra and other gods prostrated before him from a —
48 to
HOTA GAT we Siteftraree: | ure Tee car are wearer Fereersfaey ul
daaifins tae feraererenrcon ae vith wet cere ferred & ervfiferry
Seeing the prostrated gods, Brahma the creator with a dignified
voice addressed Indra thus: “Oh Indra! Rise along with the gods. Why
have you come to me? Without fear let me know. I will fulfill your
wants.” 51, 52

a PRE 292 Sri Tripurarahasyam
grid were y: SUS: | TarHeySeA Mea Wat aa: Waa
wrdtax staat aaeg wath a1 yfaeat vtec 4 fecenfafa faga: ue
a sent aa: seomtrate fat we adie a ad fer ar arsefa satan 4 1
wea yet wer gat feta: eetarfear wa Ydla aera yg UeATSUT 1 Gg
waa a gaa cornet eeigt aq) amr erttafir cecaftaftateann: U4Qon
waar qa: qentat uf fiat aenaen tan festa a qa aafaq i
wate prot cites fara wer fe 3:1
Listening to Brahma, Indra and the other gods rose and with folded
palms Indra slowly said thus: “Oh Lord of the Universe! We are afraid.
I will let you know the cause for our fear. On the earth, the famous
Himavan, the lord of the mountains is performing a great penance. We
do not know what he wants. The fume emerging from his head is causing
poignant fear to the gods. Our bodies are getting scorched by that fume
which has spread over heaven. My throne in the heavenly assembly
‘Sudharma’ is trembling. The insecure gods are not at all happy. For us
who are in trouble, you are the only refuge.” 53 to 58
ua fryrasaat faege earfta: Ta
quritaiter zat adit yang wacfastinsa taeug faferer tt Goll
arret gircarata: vraryapers | faa equa ergerarrereacy Tata
wong qusateml aeisHieyet qa: | sea derderer Sted: athe: 11 62
ae wrenssritrerge gata! feranra qaracecitage Aer Tea
Hearing Indra, Brahma meditated and quickly opened his eyes
and told Indra not to fear. Saying thus Brahma proceeded along with
the gods and reached the shore of the milky ocean where Lord Visnu
wielding the Conch, the Disc and the Mace, was reclining. Prostrating
before Visnu, the gods with folded hands praised Him with Vedic hymns
that extol His glory. Then Brahma reaching near Visnu narrated about
the penance of Himavan as told by the gods. 59 to 63
aen fauyfafege: we aa gt aati aa ude reunite: ot Gl
Feat ¢ aed faapterracitany: vacetrpusgtet creat afar G4 I

setae a: 293 Chapter 28
areas sreafra arency Pym osit a ofteatat wet ag
froparqraga wiyestettrad| car as weISTS YsEtE Gah 11 G91
om we fafa aa srqufea: |
Visnu, hearing him went along with the gods to the place where
Himavan was performing severe penance. There He saw the sage-like
Himavan dangling by a single rope above the blazing altar of fire who
was glowing like a Sun because of the brilliance acquired through penance
and also his wife who was serving him. Then Visnu went near her and
respectfully questioned her thus: “Who are you? Why are you serving
this person in this dense forest? Who is he? With what purpose is he
performing such a harsh penance?” 64 to 67
gar a fawpret wre waerar fret Wael
udarrafanta: ferarte & uff: 1 scerdt wag varinfrarsete Wag
wfafrgerar Sear yraaryensaerat: | ane aiyrtch oreraftaferatete: 11 90 tt
ufvad grenurst feafa wryafe: | Utreigrrerdtargar oA: Wott
at yraat deh fer atest afe wht a wear @: ed PTITITAT I 9? Hl
forn que wach 2¢ werarendye: | deaferaente Hus Sef rH 93 Mt
arnfa aqeteragara wafer
Listening to the words of Visnu, The wife of Himavan spoke sweetly
thus: “He is my husband Himavan the Lord of the mountains. He desires
to have Devi Bhavani to be born as his daughter. Prohibited by the
Devi, he has taken to hundred years of penance by tying himself to
hundred ropes and dangling on the fire. Each year he is cutting off one
of the ropes. Now ninety-nine years have passed and in the hundredth
year one more day is left. If Devi Gauri is not benevolent then tomorrow
morning he will cut off the remaining one rope and become ashes by
offering his body to the fire. Then I will also offer my body to the fire
and follow him,” 68 to 73
ara faenfaerardtferard ergaey wate
sured fora whtebdtafeeatdte: | aeet ithe vratfon sat gerefefor ol
aH: wdorrathe preorrrareae | seme aM: ATT MUTA USAT AM WORT

a ee 294 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Then Visnu, after consulting Brahma and others regarding the further
course of action, meditated there itself on Gauri and with great devotion
praised Siva. “Salutation to you the Protector of the Universe! Salutation
to you the embodiment of auspiciousness! Salutations to you who are
Gauri, Sarvani (the consort of Siva)!” Praising Her thus with many more
hymns, Visnu prostrated before Her. 74 to 76
Ua et: Wreaar Wear at Aesth! srenrgrafaott wre ference firt 1 won
anrann fare 4 deqaisé das aq St Aso sft go oe stgtat un ocn
awa aa warm fendfie wae!
Pleased by the prayers of Visnu, Mahesvari who was in Her spatial
form spoke with love and dignity thus: “Oh Narayana! Why did you
praise me? Earlier Sri Tripurasundari had said that you are my elder
brother. Hence let me know why you have remembered your sister.”
great tite faay: ore aferaqdeny, eet
aU Uae wit aya cite ERA! sofead weet aTarsferretarar coll
Wefan waar arfsed fracas ta cia yaar ats HragrerafaAaTs I 2k
Ut cite: Aare sara: wfetat aa aya waafatted yigt aafe fea cz
Wusene wrepet qearet fase a1 waste faye ar fag atatt 23
afe ampriita afaeta wasyai der sitfagteran yredteerga wag tl cx
seed weafadt cfnm) at ger a aerfe aan tae VISE I Cull
Hearing Gauri, Visnu said with a smile thus: “Oh Gauri! Listen.
Look at the danger the world is facing because of the extremely severe
penance by Himavan. By fulfilling his desire protect the universe which
is being consumed like a moth by the fire of the penance. By such an
act of yours, the world and Indra and others will be saved. Also, look
at Sankara who is in penance without your physical presence. Long ago
Sri Tripurasundari in order to remain calm created us, the Trinity to
do creation and so on. Oh Sister! If you remain incorporeal, it would
tantamount to disregarding the orders of Sri Tripurasundari. Thus I have
narrated the reason for my remembering you. Further it is for you to

apfagns Ara: 295 Chapter 28
eee
protect the moving and non-moving creation in a manner best known to
you.” 79 to 85
geet fampaet Gear cites Tat! sesat Payers wavethae Sef
Hearing Visnu and seeing the danger to the Universe through the
penance and respecting the orders of Sri Tripurasundari, Gauri consented
to Hari thus: “Let it be so.” 86
ga tar fear wer ANT weathy! sraenere ee warafeapiewer: cis
Then Hari and other gods bowed to Devi Gauri and with Her
permission proceeded to their abodes without worry. 87
wast verre fiers wre t vierpert autsfasarerassaMy i ce
st ot sterpergis Waarster Prt ar aasfretedt ae feyntt getica nce
Then the incorporeal Gauri said with utmost dignity to the Lord of
the mountains who was amidst the flame of penance. “Oh Himavan! I
am pleased with you. Look at Me. I will grant your wish. Let Me know
that soon.” 88, 89
Waa: wie: qaegurdie: | fe wa sa Wet aed Visa wT ATT I
wits wesavad uta: water: 1 Tear a feafeaarsa: Trt AaAGAAAA I 8k Il
WaRht Wa: we aad wrefrefeaq dart atat wet ew: YAETTM 82H
4 vant unet aat afeempe: | sre erat agat wfeatreftasa: gall
fens: wt fant at ad weet wit & queasfa ate F ATA: Gery I ev
af tam wie araeradiseg 31 afteret wares wat Sat ferepettroity ne
awet crefrents qrerctersacitera: | ararat werea wer MYST At Tail 6 Ul
afar center arcarafafrda: 1 gfe & urdat af yea wife = gel
Hearing those words, Himavan meditated for a while thinking
whether it was a dream or reality and then opened his eyes and looked
all around and did not see anything. As he was about to take it as 8
» Gauri repeated Her utterances. Listening to that auspicious vouee
s Gauri who was incorporeal, Himavan was very happy and bowed to
the direction of that voice. Then after lauding Her in various ways with

at freee, 296 Sri Tripurdrahasyam
his heart filled with devotion, Himavan sought from the Great Devi his
desired boon. “Oh Gauri! If you are pleased with me and if my penance
is successful, you should take birth as my daughter. I have a great
desire to see you as an infant and caress you with love while seeing
your innocent sport. Then taking Mahadeva as my son-in-law and
worshipping both of you I will attain bliss being assured of happiness
here and hereafter. This is my request. Please fulfil my need.”
of sift reread sprfayitseara: 11
End of the twenty-eighth chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurarahasyam.

Weanlttayits fara:
Chapter 29
gta fifterdes uretat er weet srarensfagyet are veterrerefraht = ei
aqoy uct ween afer ae: 1 ferent gt aed ATaTSE want # nen
aaron w@ fafegists aretarsfadta: | attesar we aq: aver Ft gery an
aa ot agent feeqer eat foram qarar wrearen gent fereates afer nw 1
Sa Tt Heat srratt warm!
Listening to the request of Himavan, the Great Devi who was in
the spatial form said auspiciously thus: “Oh Lord of the mountains! The
boon requested by you will soon materialise. I will be born as your
daughter. Even though it is against my nature to have a physical form,
you have by your persistent penance made it possible. Therefore you
will forget that I am the Supreme Siva and treat me like a worldly
daughter.” Saying this, the Great Devi vanished. lto4
OTST S, MOTTA TANT, wan
fever fir ger: wreate yfects rer ae: eae aera Mev nau
iret fenton dt wrehrerceq fafaer ar rer ae mera frat wl
fawenfetacnrate arate Freer: |
Then Himavan who was happy securing his want, bowed to the
Mother and returned to his abode along with his dear wife Meni. In a
short duration at an auspicious time Mena the wife of Himavan became
pregnant and the Great Devi Siva as directed by Sri Tripurasundari
entered her womb for the sake of the welfare of Visnu and other gods.
are at taemr aa fnfecranyeret nen
creryreretyreiita mrgransfireret wars eet fewer, arate wot nen
samen vafernt yRterserarat fit: |
Then in the sacred house of Himavin, because of carrying the power
ttered. Himavin saw his
of the Supreme Devi in her womb, Menaké gli

xt PRES, 298 Sri Tripurarahasyam
wife as a goddess and was extremely happy at the fulfilment of his
desire. 8,9
aaptaatarat tenhaatfrity, gon
wile: WUgUssai Befesrayart!
SAMHSA: VAT HTT, Ween
sreetefrent facttatratam Qewent ctenfaertacaier = a
aurea wet amt ad wdatae: |
Seeing Menaka, whose body was heavy with all-round development,
whose cheeks were pale, whose face was glowing with drops of sweat,
who was tired at odd timings, whose nipples were dark and glossy; the
hair on whose stomach with vanished folds was protruding, whose loins
were concealed and who was displaying disinterest in pleasures, Himavan
discarded his mental agony. 10 to 12
wer wt Area aster aut fear Tey)
wer wate vierafasay ypstea: | qa: yeReseraT: Yerfor a wens a i ex
fafastht taehe: aferor: ferrari: 1 aredt wert ferergiss orfirary ou ey
at: Yursganratt ter: atewafeur: | fete Prtereact feyit farereyhar: 1 26
Ubreatgiatsea wat: deeare: | ue fant faa aeyarafacetay it go
va fag dater atalfautanicre tastedqaded aremafrenfsery le
From the time when the auspicious Gauri got into the womb of
Menaka, everything prospered for Himavan. The trees were full of flowers
and fruits. The fruits were juicy and fragrant. The birds were chirping
auspiciously. The gentle breeze was soothing to the animals. The sky
was filled with pure clouds. The clouds showered perfume. The rays of
the Sun were clean. The directions looked cleansed. The night was
beautiful with the stars and the Moon. The people were happy. Such
signs were seen everywhere. Seeing them, the exhilarated Himavan
thought it to be the expected time for the birth of Gauri. 13 to 18
am waerrarrarM waywed | Yes stent sare TNT ergraeeTaTy it BV
Then the wife of Himavan at that most auspicious moment

wearafaeits Aa: 299 Chapter 29
delivered a female baby who was the incarnation of Gauri, the consort
of Sankar: ‘a. 19
at feat wast aqaighratrar wet ae yat a carat dtemeperaq i 20
fecnissat Taras Batsssurafeanqs facitetafaat sdf star yeaa 11
fire Uderraare Sara Te aver fengterat gear aart a aay n 22
wear THT Hest sare qfa usa! seers afeawssmrt: AeA Il
Seeing Her, with three eyes, with crescent moon on Her head,
wielding the sword, the shield, the club and the sharp trident in Her
four hands, with dark-green hue, with red garment, and completely
bejewelled, Menaka the wife of Himavan was scared and she informed
Himavan about the baby. Going there Himavan saw the girl and realising
Her to be the Supreme Devi prostrated before Her. Then he stood up
and started praising Her with devotional exuberance. 20 to 23
wat df tagreteyrgst at aie vaats sfadtercntt |
Tat cinaretnegeaed Tae THe AAT Tah Weel
“Oh Devi Gauri! Salutations to You who are worshipped by Indra
and the Lords of the Universe; You are the destroyer of the distress
of the devotees; Salutations to You the unique cause of the worlds;
Oh Bhavani! Many salutations to You. 24
Uarpiferear fererer waient STsaTeryattercat Aaa |
Tatetsanis farenr faa Tat AN ATE alts WM
“You are the unique Supreme Power of Siva; You are the string
holding the gamut of worlds; You are all pervasive; You are the purport
of sound ‘AUM’; You are the myriad formed; Oh Bhavani! Many
Salutations to You. 25
sara waret wefttsfasitt fexarat ayert sar ae
aaat adt at areqgassd ae Tae aH wary RR
“Who else other than You is capable of rescuing Kae" tes
who are drowned in the deep and dreadful ocean of existence. Hence
please save me who is suffering. Oh Bhavani! Many Salutations to =

a ee 300 Sri Tripurarahasyam
NS a ee
aframenmeat fafae eitensdarsemeraten
fafern faerat 4 gat ash wast sat Tae aA 2011
“Oh Compassionate Devi! Having known that I am caught in the
mouth of the alligator called ignorance and bitten by the great serpent
in the form of sensory desires it is not right on Your part to delay
rescuing me. Oh Bhavani! Many Salutations to You. 27
farraed drach q2aurend a aIsaaareiise g2aneTAt
ofa waswat fafgrreierersé weet weet ae wat Reh
“Since long I have firmly believed that Your feet release me from
the bonds of distress and that there is no one else for me in this world
who can quell my misery. Oh Bhavani! Many Salutations to You.” 28
qed feavtesit wer qa: qarefe: | weqhwereardt whet ware yg
Thus praying, Himavin bowed again with folded hands and
overwhelmed with devotion spoke to the auspicious Gauri. 29
edtart vfs wer tfadisqaeccar aeaguisaat fee afseasfafatataa
7 fe ott aeaitsa atat weary! ete a wiaenesrard yg at
a Ween dhistt cites tergenfian: | weraraaat qfet =rerary weft 11 32
wet areangt aret wet arcana fei atat aqarect ware wreagar i 33
tfa & ara feafsefer aanetants 31 faaty fe tena ya waaaae |! 3¥
“Oh Devi! You have now amply blessed me. It would be no surprise
if the desires of those who request the Kalpavrksa are fulfilled. There
is no one on this earth who is more fortunate than me, because of having
the Devi as my daughter. There cannot be a better fortune than that.
Blessed by the Devi, I who am inert and helpless have placed my foot
on the heads of very lucky persons. I am really fortunate. I am really
lucky. No one else is as much fortunate as I am, who is seeing the Devi
in the form of my daughter.
Oh Devi! I want to request you for something that is in my mind.
But I am afraid. Oh compassionate Protector of the Devotees! Please
order me to request you.” 30 to 34

weptafaents Are: 301 Chapter 29
gent feafitatet wat ore at dari wife site vlerrs ag aaet wa aut
tee fe a uratafa fatsa fart
Hearing Himavan, the Devi said sweetly thus: “Oh Himavan!
Discard fear and let me know your want. There is nothing unattainable
by My devotee.” 35
rear wore yrergit arene sparse: naan
ofa wat wrepatergpent ae ater ferytciferactart qeafa fit qf 30 11
zaareftott gear at a vitfet ferrai ar firitdeasaet woneitemngfter 1 3c i
var iadt tr feet wat gedteate: anfcrenr at acrensa 4 a weer
wa wiht auidtsts waarnste area aa waar a at ca: yaeagetat
ape aarsqyé & wnfaansfa aeatts
Hearing Her, the Lord of the mountains bowed and spoke with
folded hands. “Oh Devi! I would like to see you in the form of a normal
worldly child. Parents in this world would be happy to see the sports
of the children. By seeing your Divine form I am not getting that love
which a parent would have from his progeny. My beloved wife Mena
also wants to see you as a normal child. Your dark and fierce form as
Kali is not desirable. Please assume a golden hue and justify your name
as Gaurl. Oh Maheévari! Please bless me with that curse regarding
seeing your form which you had declared earlier.” 36 to 40
ua femfxaat qritsare ferafrar Ween
afsrst war aa: pres sitfrenreoreys agarsfereqat a eareurenterttftarar W¥eu
farq araarsaret aptanfir wetea sega Froett aa THE HEAT Ut BF Hl
wren wt ferefta ette dase
Hearing Himavan, the consort of Siva spoke thus: “Oh Himavan!
My curse on you was for your benefit. Without forgetting my divine
form, you will not have that love towards me as your daughter. However
on some other occasion I will show my Glorious form to you. Saying
thus the Great Devi concealed Her Divine form. Assuming the form of
a child the daughter of Himavan started crying. 41 to 43

St fea, 302 Sri Tripurarahasyam
aren aghed ten ude: faa ae Ux
farmisfact wet Sat arama wefedtfetardtaren atfeat at xq
awa aa wat: grat ofed Terayahr srearssarq: gaat yest: ferrafeta xq
aramafa age fora: waterarrat: | 2g: Afecaissmt atfeqaanafir ve
qrautantat waaassataMy! Porras tanneries i xe
aartefearat faassfafarqet sameeren at wed: aeat sar: ¥en
dent Bares arat Hat AATes
Hearing the cry of the baby, Himavan along with his wife forgot
the Divine form and thought that a female baby was born. His wife
Menaka out of delusion felt the pain of delivery. The people there hearing
the cry rushed to the palace and enquired. The ladies who heard about
the birth of a girl baby came to the labour room and with great joy
saw the marvellously beautiful baby who was brilliant like crores of
Suns, whose body was golden in colour, whose eyes were broad like the
lotus petal, whose face was like the full-moon, whose palm and feet were
red in colour, who had a proportionate body and who looked like a
beautiful painted picture. Then the mid-wife carried the baby. 44 to 49
udtawer def tye fafraagay, WW 4oll
amg taesgrqaviann mswestgryeteat wrrd arsatttar 4g
serag verte, feagtegt wer 2agguat 3q: quater wre U4rt
WAIST TS AMMA! Alea MAHA Ada aw aPSANT UN 43
areramt fret a aecatess wast
Then Himavan purifying himself with water quickly performed the
rituals connected with the birth of the baby and gifted ten thousand
cows and one lack gold coins to eminent brahmins. There was a great
festival atop Himalaya Mountain. The gods played the kettle-drums and
showered flowers. The palace of Himavan was crowded and filled with
the sounds of the brahmins, the musicians, the dancers, the panegyrists,
the mendicants and the artisans. 50 to 53
wa aret farqetcin: waar 1 &¥ ll
AM Pear Weped AM eh Wifed: | waulaghauts gana wae Ul GAM

warafaents AM: 303 Chapter 29
at wihdtfer faroarer wafers meteor wet feareret: area omer it meer 4g
qi wdfdga: ararettet facteraq ut veraweat aga cterarsferat 1 you
Then at the proper time Himavan performed the naming ceremony
of his daughter through brahmins. The priests said thus: “Oh Himavan!
Because of Her pure golden hue, She will be reputedly known on the
earth by the name Gauri.” Himavan thus having the Great Devi Gauri
as his daughter was prosperous and rejoiced seeing the play of that girl.
Thus sporting Gauri grew in the house of Himavan. 54 to 57
arecdtaat wht aya aerate: | feniceat facies wat aarseatey
afeaaafa tear aperistant wh afte ager ae ores ada: 1 Get
Tet an Hard oft ah ayeaft ag a 7 elated afaet qT Nl Goll
Quickly as it were, Gauri attained teen-age. Seeing her, Himavan
started thinking about a suitable husband for her. Himavan approached
sage Garga and bowed to him and inquired thus: “Oh Great Sage! Whom
will my daughter wed? Please let me know. There is nothing past or
future that is not known to you.” 58 to 60
raed fengtorer avert wif wergha: | earear aqut ferferar a We WREATH GE
Wear at Ucar ANT waters AT YoY vee Sas Fr HSE tl
wart aa ate awa asfernfirar) aver: oft: ferat sea: wagamafort: 1 6%
weritat = ferret wear: prt wtf: 1 wreare TT eet aefarereee teraz Gs
Hearing the words of Himavan, the great sage Garga meditated for
a moment and knowing about Her husband happily addressed Himavan
after bowing to the Supreme Gauri. “Oh Himavan! Listen to the glorious
story about your daughter. She is Devi Bhavani who was worshipped by
you. Her husband is none other than Siva who is worshipped by all the
gods. Deluded by the curse from Her, you are unaware of that.” Hearing
sage Garga, Himavan recollected the Supreme Gauri. 61 to 64
marae affatcet waaster: | aamered fafararg: wate wat au
Tear safiararat fear: aeatfera: | afer pats were, RG
afara: wre Safe: fiery ferent wate wget A weisenafegy sel

tt fee 304 $i Tripurarahasyam
at & weyta fant adt arena & fear
One day the divine sage Narada the crown among devotees reached
the house of Himavan to understand the greatness of Gauri. Seeing the
divine sage Himavan suddenly rose and worshipped him after offering
a seat. Thus honoured the sage Narada smiling, spoke to Himavan.
“Oh Himavan! I have come here to see your daughter. Show her to me
soon and thereafter I will proceed to heaven.” 65 to 67
gered aneae: Sa WaT, ae
amt anepe yfafieqara qantas aa ant qarsmea qases PAtaTT ui ge HI
Listening to Narada, Himavan quickly brought Gauri and said to
her thus! “My child! Bow to the sage.” Then Gauri saluted the great
worst ort wht gear taftteran: | aay eayel WAT WTA ATL Goll
qeat at dhansswerqara faferres: | arte fepar asaet aoe facenrem: 11
aad aterar: careers tftaari caret eat quad at a waeeta ate:
wer yaa: aa medgerife wh ag wdarser Het at aqAE: WO3tl
wen ort frqaat gq weraheanarfectt
Seeing the Supreme Gauri who was bowing, the eminent divine sage
concealing the divine secret mentally bowed to Her. Seeing Her teen
aged, Narada said thus: “Oh Himavan! You have got a daughter after
a long time by the grace of the divine. She is ready to be given in
marriage. The ancestors of a dispirited person, who does not get his
daughter married at the right age to a suitable groom will suffer
misfortune. Oh Lord of the Mountains! Let me know who is going to
wed your daughter. A daughter wedded to a deserving person will bring
great happiness.” 70 to 73
sraftarenre. wat We Srarstter: Woe
tat ae arene ces waters: 1 a fe aa afated ypeaaa safer
we wher seer at ast facie a are weet aat vie fevered TesT: I! 98
Listening to Narada, Himavan bowed and spoke with folded hands

warafaeits are: 305 Chapter 29
thus: “Oh Divine Sage! You are the onlooker of the entire universe. No
auspicious event takes place without your knowledge. Based on the words
of sage Garga, I consider Trilocana Siva as the bride-groom. Tell me
who is your disciple, your view.” 74 to 76
fara vaca We ACA: | TOT Usatrersy feat wet oat wa: Weel
asg Wa Grae Get ft wfoitets st ady chy try Erica 11 92
arenUyias sed ufamete ager fora wasfererqym: wetarafaafem: 11 ei
yaya qaagacdtstequar: | atarar fasaralt fererssent wage: 11 cout
qu tat wee oett ant aerate Gear eit waadt yaeteravit war cei
afatatted dter weftyar wetseat
wereat feat asd: welt weyers sera, Wert
ayy wreraytetyr Sarat: Beet wtey! Arr: quettenrat aqpvatrera: FAT 63
wammdta ueitet ward Bert: | ga erste afer fay ube fa wet: cv
ae ude & ard fawpatorgent aa at queer ceitettantats aay i ct
ware afe ugret quifh eftitar
Hearing Himavan, the divine sage said thus: “Oh Himavan! Listen.
If you think Siva as the bridegroom, I do not consider him fit to marry
your daughter who is a jewel in the entire universe. She deserves a
husband who shines with excellent qualities. Every aspect of Siva is
inauspicious. His behaviour is always frantic. He dwells in the burial
ground. He is attended by devils. He is decorated with serpents. His
garment is animal’s skin. He has three eyes. He subsists on poison. He
looks frightening. In the past his wife Gauri seeing his madness became
invisible. Similarly Daksayani, seeing him insulted by honourable persons,
reduced Herself to ashes in the great sacrifice. Therefore Siva does not
deserve to marry your daughter who is a repository of excellent virtues.
Oh Himavan! Listen. I will let you know who is the right person to
marry your daughter. The lotus-eyed Madhava, who dwells in Vaikuntha
who is the Supreme Being, has desirable qualities to marry this =
She also deserves to marry Visnu by virtue of her greatness. Oh Himavan!
How great it would be to have Visnu as your son-in-law. Attracted by
Him, Laksmi is serving Him every day. If you agree with me, I will
choose Hari the Lord of the Universe.” 71 to 8

Tt Pe, 306 Sri Tripurarahasyam
searenud andtfad udagistafaae: Negu
wragat: frat yesterrars sufeat yeti wre faye vet at fafa areaq
ease aaa sa we ort fratfrars wet feat arséfa F a=afraca:
waste war sat witaraat ga car fees wart wryg Heres wa:
aqeata weer: YMtechy aig wenchaed Teas MaTATAT Roll
Listening to Narada and forgetting by the curse of Gauri the consort
of Sambhu whom he had earlier worshipped through penance, Himavan
deciding Madhava as the bridegroom, spoke to the divine sage thus: “I
am fortunate that you have selected a suitable husband for my daughter.
Truly, the inauspicious Siva does not deserve my daughter. Go this day
and soon establish alliance such that Visnu will wed my daughter. Let
there be no delay. Good events are beset with calamities. Hence please
act in such a way which will not spoil the issue.” 86 to 90
gered wdaeet are: wear fatty arent cars ftefieqarar werat fear 1 ge
Hearing Himavan, Narada with a smile said to Himavan—‘I will
achieve your requirement”—and proceeded to the heaven. 91
fa stages arereeraes welafagitseara: 11
End of the twenty-ninth chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurdrahasyam.

fagitseara:
Chapter 30
aferrea feght array | eeu cite arste feat neu
anm afafa: arf at aagta: yp feasteteneniftad aaron tn
fartagratt fosatatisaq aarecates frets grit = a
framratéht vitaettergper aafatettiatad: wogt qurafaeny usu
coasted og aca: wf aafatagteat att attractor wan
AERIRRSUATR ISAT AMG | Aegean Ha HN GI
qeafenms satuf ueytieay aa taadt feoamrare faftaaret = oll
aaenta: uftqer frrartaeperer |
Not accepting the resolve of Her father, Gauri concealing Her real
form and enacting satisfaction went with four of Her friends to the
auspicious but dense forest on the slopes of Himalayan Mountain which
was replete with the humming of the bees, which had many shady
creepers and plants, which was grand with many birds, which was
without Sun’s rays, which was cool, which had whitish patches from
snow fall, which had no pastures; from where at a distance was the
silver capped peak, which had shining streams limpid like the minds of
the sages, flowing on pure stone slabs; whose tall trees were sheltering
groups of clouds, which was filled with many dancing peacocks and the
music from the cuckoos. There, on the banks of the divine river, the
daughter of Himavan sat surrounded by Her friends. lto7
arat at aqarees wt afar Fat AT well
at grea wet wera aaa ATETeTATA Yat at earsseraAM Mt kM
Trtegas dataaa erat ae frairege styrene gol
arrive aereget WaTEATTTS ea!
Seeing the tired Gauri, one of Her friends washed Her feet with
the Ganga water. Another friend fanned Gauri with a straw fan, he
was sleeping on the thigh of Her friend as a pillow. Another frien

at fey, 308 Sri Tripurarahasyam
the feet of Gauri on her own thighs that were soft like silk and rubbed
them gently. 8 to 10
wa qed fase aqerantata: awe Rett
aren Grafts wat Aisa wares aa Tat Gendt fqeagT eh
artensghrerat wragernentefa: | wanes frets veterans: Watt
en wfanitet atedrentachefe aretfavtedts ret artiet: after: ei
Ud Tea: Yaa STserT, aT Pryitat
met aresfrdage war Tt yp ea, Week
RETREAT | Ed Wana ATE Weil
Resting thus for a while and rising up Gauri along with Her friends
bathed in the Ganges and reached a cave nearby. There, in the night
She worshipped, a sand idol of Tripurasundari seated on the thigh of
Kameégvara, with perfume, flowers and fruits in the prescribed way. She
praised goddess Tripura with many Vedic and Tantrik hymns. After
worshipping Her specially with rare fruits and flowers she offered music,
dance and circumambulations. While she was worshipping the night
ended. Next morning Gauri sang a splendid prayer with her mind
intoxicated by the juice of love towards the lotus feet of the Supreme
Tripurambika. Gauri began to chant the wonderful ‘Jiidnakalika’ prayer.
fra af dfarqararnts senaeuista walanis setareTT |
7 fafsfe mencrafta cite aa: Weaeuisfs was — tl QO
“Oh Auspicious Devi! You are the ocean of Intelligence; You are the
Conscious Self in all; There is nothing in this Universe that does not
contain Your aspect (portion); Hence You are the Existence that is True
and False. 17
wae WA: wees fred garsdtatas ay: adtaq
30 af faguien difearet faercent atarsfa way Ween
“The wise proclaim this world as real as well as unreal. You transcend
both. Persons deluded by Your power of illusion, do not comprehend You.
You are knowledge and bliss pervading all. 18

fagits aT: 309 Chapter 30
SS Se a
qurat mafirent ecrafiarngte: aitrersary|
aidiftadfaaeat a yirenaeat vest fageat a asm: eet
“Bifurcating with regard to the concept of time, people consider You
as illusion alone limited to forms like earth and other creations. The
ignorant do not cognise You the Tranquil Great Devi as different from
darkness and light. 19
foranfefafuraararaterat fafear adta yritt fant
ut fase we Sganrataent a wtasta wat I Ron
“The wonderful thirty-six principles starting from Siva upto the
earth are seen in Your body like the painting on a cloth, like the Moon
and stars in water. Like the sky You are vast and You are all. 20
afast fafert afgatssat ar farenfa wenrererat arsfr way
aa wai fafa aa at onfe fefeaaed aaa 7 feferacat BR
“Anything in the universe whether united or divided, within or
without, bright or dark cannot shine or be comprehended without You,
the intelligent principle. Hence You are everything. There is nothing
other than You. 21
freensarg facthaseag afters ada arrfearet
fant neratfiat feet face erent ferent WR!
“In the mental ground of great Yogis who have controlled their mind
by dissolving the senses and who have totally shed qualities like desire,
anger and so on, it is You alone the embodiment of Intelligence and
Bliss Who shines. 22
Wasa waeahad wereascas Tatas ANTES: |
waifarqersestae eprat weretfiraren: waeata wea Waal
“Si mil : t control their wavering senses
imilarly the great yogis who do no the Devi see, within their
but are carefully treading the path of realising
being which is like a mirror reflecting the elixir of self knowledge
everything glittering.

at FREES, 310 Sri Tripurarahasyam
fread nerarcartstrget aft a a facta Yeeraran: |
TAM AM ayaquasarea afewered fates feratt Ween
“To uplift the ignorant people who are unable to achieve salvation
through the subtle and vigorous path of the Veda, You assume different
gross forms that can be seen by them. 24
Fenreastanm fafa faarara arto sari arr
adtart frgdon wtentifa wera waar fe earettencifr WM
“You create many wonderful paths for worshipping Your Gross forms
and whichever path a person takes, You give him the knowledge of
identity with You and absorb him just as an ocean accepts all rivers.
aM ary Yfrertenry Yea azatorrenssgMs seta ye: |
writy qta a at aatquareagd yfaaeqearet TCA
“Thus among many gross forms the One wielding the bow, the arrow,
the rope and the goad is important. Just as the head in the human
body is pre-eminent, those who worship Sri Tripurasundari are the most
excellent. 26
War gate: wader wearer wera weer!
qamanrate faamatfrcatcha Ysa ureereat WWII
“After showing many good paths of worship to rescue people from
the ocean of misery, You who is famous as the compassionate embodiment
of the Supreme Power are the only one adorable. 27
War & waret Wa: weuel & fray aad fda: dfeaatse
sft wreat & fayrenssyprafaate tagie caratadter, Wel
“Oh Devi! Let my mental bee drinking the honey from Your lotus
feet stay there happily. Oh Mother! Lending Your ears to my prayer,
cast just once Your merciful glance on me.” 28
gfe eqea ar wt faget aerate
Wan areata sea eat warferar Weel

fagits ara: 311 Chapter 30
Gauri, after praying to the Supreme Devi Tripura with the prayer
named ‘Jiianakalika’, started meditation. 29
ga wm aanrarseeataunt wraraa | Aer dar ar fag wetaitwaefiaet 1 3011
Then during meditation when Gauri became one with the meditated,
Tripurasundari appeared before her. 30
DAUATAIS SHOT als saUTafear | Warsarcaraaitaera feroraterar Haein
WENS FATA VTA AA ATEN | YRPYAS MT AT TAGS faeiteat Weazn
aritasgirerar tratrantedt ceyt ant eared areerarsapitioiy 33
ufararerareneeyTate | samqat wareitest ant at faqusfrst lal
farms senfaftrent yrfeanacitenaattererr |
aa a uae faferar aterm syray, W3Kt
went ahifad cage citer
The Devi Tripurasundari who was seated in the Sricakra chariot;
bedecked with jewels; served on either sides by Laksmi and Sarasvati
holding fans, red like the hibiscus flower, wearing the crescent Moon,
three eyed, seated on the left lap of Kamesvara, wearing a gemset silk
garment, saw the meditating Gauri who had become the meditated and
who was not disturbed by the uproar of the hundreds of servants. Then
Sri Tripurasundari looked at Cittdkarsini who catching the intention of
the Devi attracted the mind of Gauri which was absorbed in Sri
Tripurasundari the meditated. 31 to 35
eirafrtaferar ar fesicafefr fae Te
areas afediigattes arava Gear weftaant whet worararsteretar TOL
arefeyer tet weagqyeent tf stents at sqeat far ferarennte mT 36
Sere: aaa at AEA Mtr aL re EAH See SeMFeTAT 8
afectulsr & sat auetarsfertea: | aerares aa sors war ag TTA Mt Yo
With her mind dragged out of the object of meditation, Gauri the
daughter of Himavan wondered why that happened and opening her eyes
looked around. Seeing the Supreme Devi, the thrilled Gauri bowed to
Her and with folded hands addressed Her thus: “Oh Devi! Instruct me,

a REST 312 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Your servant what I should do now. My elder brother the lotus-eyed
Visnu made me take this body. Honouring your words I have assumed
this body. My husband, bestowed by You, is engrossed in penance,
Therefore, Oh Paramesvari! Order my further course of action.”
faerer urdat citat: ore ar aetatt yoy orafa afenfsarster asfafed safe
weeraer were + great watery! aver fart ta: feracat oftoteaft 1 x21
grant faa vith wires: | masé dega aa ea TPS wan
qernsretfaarantad weat FM Wad arafearetatratafasyey xx i
TRA Wararare, wer eat Goat FU gfe MT Arr serarssaferafeercAT
Hearing the request from Gauri, Tripurasundari said thus:
“Oh Parvati! Listen. There is nothing unknown to you. Born out of my
aspect, you will not be disappointed. Abandoning his penance Siva will
wed you. Soon you will beget a son who will bring joy to everyone. Oh
Daughter of Himavan! The prayer containing the Sakta philosophy with
which you praised me will enlighten its singers and will become by my
grace, famous by the name “Jfidnakalikastotram”. I will be pleased with
those who recite that prayer.” Speaking thus to Gauri, Devi Tripurasundari
vanished. 41 to 45
ae at worarat crear qraftats ya: aaqee at aft fager aferet aa: i we
qe ward afafa: ae udeabest) ater yitat dart qyitteferenat = we
yrart wisest wast afeenfiat
Then Gauri bowing to Sri Tripurasundari bathed in the sacred divine
river and after worshipping Her idol again immersed it in the water.
Then eating the food that was offered to the Devi the daughter of the
mountain enjoying the beauty of the forest relaxed on a cool slab covered
with leaves and listened to the talk of her friend. 46 to 47
wa ata wet wre wht uft aer aa: Ue
ay wit rer daefaqya ot aq fet wmfiase qat wafecesgt ll YR
aAsenfrtgrnt wararanste ww aq! wat faa at werg-aararftanfiragat | 4
Vifat widta: aed preventer ura

fagits aT: 313 Chapter 30
One of the friends said to Gauri thus: “Oh Gauri! Listen. I think
you have acted without forethought. It is not right coming to the
frightening forest leaving your aged parents who will be anxious about
you. Without you both of them are exposed to the conflagration of sorrow
and really like moth they may die.” 48 to 50
grad afearet a yedt eer Srey W4eH
fratfacitrdt at wextt ore at weit safe afer carers ye afe ferent 42
gensfer waren at fra att oat ae: | gerbera are SANTA GR
at cag coed ar war yfaer forars vernfeagerer at feraferarrar uxt
Hearing the words of her friend, Gauri concealing Her real glory
said thus with tears because of the separation from Her parents; “Oh
friend! Listen. I have already mentally taken Siva as my husband. My
father is preventing that. Therefore I have come to this dreaded forest
along with friends like you. Let the Supreme Devi whom I have propitiated
protect my parents.” Saying many such words Gauri slept. 51 to 54
sf sitfaqereeet arenas fayitseara:
End of the thirtieth chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurarahasyam.

Wenfagits ara:
Chapter 31
mer whet at arat aa: WET: | SAARI Weave:
aad aape aia were F ATeaT saat afer at fearTarara yar: 2H
Wa aissanfa Gt HeMRAAPaSe Wars SATS
wet aafag srthtfser at wae safer, nan
aa at ufa eet mara eer ofa aT safe!
fenfses fafa enfefe farts sae a7: ue
Wayasanfé tat frat a wrap
After Gauri had gone to the forest, Himavan returning to the palace
from the garden was eager to see his daughter who would welcome him
everyday. When she did not appear on that day Himavan thought thus:
“Why has my daughter not come today to greet me? She might have
gone somewhere or she may be ill. Or is she angry with me? No, she
has never been angry with me. There should be some other reason.”
Entering the inner chambers of the palace he questioned his dear wife
Mena. 1 to 4
Bars sara ar yer wert oferafzeay, Wall
walfa: afeat arn safe satsratts seas |
war watt We asft afeararcanstt ar nal
arartg deaf: aritfirererette fire
Bfrarsft war anit fafaeas sferperir a onl
alent year + aafead Sf asada
Inquired as to where the daughter is, Mena replied thus to her
husband. “Wanting to play she would have gone with her friends.
Otherwise she may be in her friend’s house or in the garden. I will send
the maid to bring her.” Sent thus the maid searched for Parvati in her
friend’s house and also in the garden and returned saying that she was
not seen anywhere. 5 to 7

Tatas AM: 315 Chapter 31
aT: grat eat aan: siteedfarara: wen
a waisaita fafzrer at frag afectats agitate: art fafaaq aa aa at eg
viearsea: Weaer, Yat Untat: wa: |
qatar yt afer yer a aah a gon
gamma We fats Gat ye aati aarserquerestai facta ater: =n RH
Bl Hat HA Arata Gea arsfe Gate
gat at aferar at we tatfrat gents stata: RH
aout ga fit are wer fear amersfa ar
afar Bat wea S Tut: eta: yuted: wean
avitpes feerat at fe afaqatt ada: 1
at faatsé aurafe sitfag arte safer Weel
PAU Caleped Wate Ht aT!
aftr arsft great wrorareeaa AeTa: WRG
ae qated wafa daaraafe aafaqs azat we agit we arate, ea
aren wat adder: wae: Youhan: | aT aie waetes epet Mfrareafa nt yo NI
genfeaeat dat yard 3 are wae sete ferry vier: ware afer yfewA: Re I
Hearing the words of the caretaker, Himavan disturbed by sorrow
cursed his ill-fate and went out along with his servants in search of his
daughter here and there. Blinded by grief and stumbling he searched
every where in the houses of the city and in the forest. Again thinking
that she might have gone home he returned to the palace and not finding
her, Himavan lamented thus: “Oh Daughter! Where have you gone? Have
you been abducted by some one? Or have you been eaten up by a demon
or a jackal? Leaving me, the aged dear father, she has never gone out
any time. No one would kill her because of her noble virtues. She would
control even my enemies. Without her I have no interest to live even
for a moment. I will surely kill myself by a weapon or by drinking
poison or by hanging or by entering fire. What a pity? Some times even
the words of gods will be false. The astrologer had said that she will
be the source of honour for me and her husband would be an omniscient
venerable great Puruga who will bring special fame for me in the whole

at Re 316 Sei Tripurarahasyam
world. How can such words of the gods become false?” Wailing thus,
Himavan fell unconscious on the ground. 8 to 18
aa & areyt ater qe aq: | SENS Ss AAT PRATT: 11 ge 1
yaa ar caret ghrmaeg sfeqaa a aha werent gferag ada: 1 204)
amg adeart a mg: arqeraay were aareret aa ASST: «nn eh
Seeing the plight of the king, the ministers awakened him and
encouraged him with consoling words. “Oh King! Do not be disheartened.
Courage is the best in times of distress. Great persons will never lose
courage in times of difficulty. It is said that only a coward will indeed
discard courage during calamity. Therefore be bold and act guided by
your intelligence.” 19 to 21
ua walfritsuietecae abate: ae! aacaauigqeranacat: Waraat 1 BRIN
adfaen viens wore: we & aa: wena ad feg at mfiqafage: = ea
Wa UNpETea 4 wervanafert) sectenafear are wasted after Bx
ameIsgyees Vat sania) saat a aaguit afar werafs on eu
sft arate: aa a aha Gates aterarera fara treats frat fea:
Taare at TaN: AeA: | Ub Tas at waat urfetfeeT: 1 WU
ARISE Waa saa |
Thus woken up by the ministers, while Himavan was about to go
with them for searching, a messenger arrived there. Praising Himavan
and bowing to him the messenger spoke thus: “Oh King! When we were
briskly searching for her, we found in the North-East direction a narrow
path leading to the great forest. Your daughter might have gone through
that path. We are thinking so on seeing her footsteps. We have seen
also the footsteps of four others. Oh Lord! Even in the city those four
ladies who are the best friends of your daughter are not seen anywhere.
Thousands of servants who know the route very well have gone in that
path in search of-your daughter. Getting this news, I have come to ae
wre aneet yyfita axe nell
ex wftradt wet eorest eat gam ae gaat vie: weet aa aafar | RR

ai 317 Chapter 31
anafeas at wet strate qétfetctariis wererettard: ee
fafat afecrarerasigd dtfradaq waretes vient: wher g:faa: 1 3g
Receiving the good news from the messenger, Himavan as if swooning
with happiness immediately presented a gem-chain to the messenger and
quickly went in that route showed by him. Seeing the dense formidable
forest full of trees, bushes, creepers and huge fearful trees along with the
frightening humming of bees, Himavan grieved very much. 28 to 31
at wetet of at at ae ret! te: wet ular ear YHA 1 32
aaeaet: ghfert: aucedat afar eet ar yguareat carat ahaha: WE I
war relate at tiftat sarsft aq Ha: |
aa ufast afafa: aa ar agar wat Nay
ua qt teat amcataetat: | aarentef aret sitemeter yar way ay
sradsifigar ar Far Ser earatsfer wat: 1 serena ar aeeeedar aT arenfeh ers
apr ar wddarse 4 at uyarad ya: 1 sete faery qa: Pactenft we Us I Fe
arate formes y: afeits yrs |
“Oh! What a difficult plight! Along with her friends how did my
tender daughter with soft feet enter the forest path filled with iron-like
sharp thorns? On no occasion have I made her angry. Even so, why has
she entered the forest with her friends? How can she be alive in this
forest infested with carnivorous quadrupeds? She would die just out of
fear. She might have been eaten up by quadrupeds or stung by serpents.
Or else she might have been kidnapped by hunters or killed by bears.
Anyway she is lost today. I cannot see her again”. Wailing thus and
stumbling frequently and scorched by the Sun, Himavan dropped on the
ground. 32 to 37
aarsqafata: vires Teyer: uzeu
frafera: pftactdefafieetar sitfera: | suerer aa: warstter Tat fae: ak
Vierdfarrgga: arartarsyyirad | Aa: AUT TAA: wdaafafry = ¥oll
adfarear worense etaq wearsfart adaat wan a sa: maereaqes =i Rll
sntranfzar dandtdit wedtgart wean aa at we ane Taha Aaa: Weel
at farmequrara: santero: | meme at vit wet eeeahet vail

a Ae 318 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Then he was quickly moved under a tree by his followers and saved
by sprinkling cool water. Gaining consciousness and opening his eyes
Himavan who was agitated by grief thought only about his daughter,
Then suddenly a messenger approached Himavan and after praising and
prostrating pleased him by saying thus: “Oh Lord of the mountains!
Your daughter is eight miles (kroSacatustaya) away from here. She has
been found by the servants sleeping on the bank of a river surrounded
by her friends and our messengers are guarding her all around. I have
reached your feet to communicate the news. You should quickly go and
see Gauri who is a source of joy for you.” 38 to 43
sen aren aeryrapaterery| Sheat: Wea ee: MONA FARA: YS
wat gt at aneferata aalar a rer eget eat yar aft: we wu
sarensy wate qedurera viene arras afi yer: aeat tat wehyese
Hearing the words of the messenger that were dripping elixir,
Himavan suddenly rose as if getting life back and quickly went to the
forest through the path shown by the messenger. There he saw his
daughter and her friends sleeping. Taking her on his lap and smelling
her head Himavan with tears of joy asked his daughter thus: 44 to 46
amt cha fafa arta, wana asus war aarsfa wranisé Get FAT ll vo
Treat & vat feat went sitfaer ea Hea! ae afte aa STAT Sa ARAN
“My Child! Why have you come to the forest? Why did you leave
me who has not done any wrong? Without you, your mother is holding
her life with great difficulty. Tell me without delay the reason for your
coming to the forest.” 47, 48
wea faq: warenvd yitetargd aa: | wept arenfaes weet BATA | ¥e Il
Wea wet yoy aa: wath warswa: | war faite: yrqdaar daa: aia: i Goll
wa teafad gatdearag | weet agaisfer wroTqRAEyEAT Wag
a fe afa qut et wat aft gai afe creafe at ara yeaa Bera ATM URI
Aer Treat ant at at Agar Sarat ayUTfeeres feat at Ele F I Gal
Listening to the sorrowful words of her father, Parvati, displaying
her simplicity, fascinated everyone and said thus: “Oh Father! Listen to
the truth which I will tell you. I have mentally taken the three-eyed

wenfagnts a4: 319 Chapter 31
Siva as my husband. But based on the words of the divine sage Narada,
you are working against my desire. Hence I have come to the forest
with the idea of sacrificing my life. I cannot marry Krsna just as a
sister cannot, her brother. If you tell me truly that you will offer me
to Sambhu then I will go with you to the city or else I will live in the
forest.” Saying thus she embraced her father and wept. 49 to 53
art vieafa: arat wexdt dara: | Bararer Aer ore ars efor ufradaq Gx
aa a a faarnfa fered aren fore aq) afgrnserceanfta: yaerretsfeqam: 11
tare: surerentafadt qatar: | faxeeegeg: mrersserafert: 4G Il
qu aaron wer agate: ati vitestaeafere ar wettyer fags yo
fawy: achyuita: drersarcgyifaa: | crnreraneqareergary: YA: kel
fretgyutcetted aa oferpeegs a Fata: feet a ferret AgryT: | Geil
The helpless Himavan seeing his weeping daughter consoled her by
wiping her tears and said thus: “My Child! You really do not know Siva
who is Siva just by name. He is inauspicious by his looks and character.
He dwells in burial ground wearing serpents. Animal skin is his garment.
Skulls form his garland. He is attended by devils. He is whitish as if
suffering from vitiligo. He is mad with anger. Earlier His consort
Daksdyani grieved about His conduct and reduced herself to ashes in
her father’s house; whereas Visnu is full of all good qualities. He is
beautiful with yellow-garment, fragrant garland, Kaustubha gem and He
is auspicious. Devi Laksmi married Him for His inherent excellent
qualities. My child! Visnu with comparable good qualities is suitable for
you and not Siva. 54 to 59
ager fret: ure Tht arersectero ara ter watseg eH arserETsHT aT
sat qut ferarenfeaatrate agory! frarana fee 3 arsmarad wma nn ae
Hearing the words of her father, Gauri with angry red eyes said
thus: “Oh Father! Whether auspicious or not Siva should be my husband.
I cannot marry any other person even if he is good. In this regard
I believe in my fate. Please do not talk anything else.” 60, 61
eed ayorerert afeeseyear: | aifreqacar waren erat ere wat RR
aa at yfrent arg ferararsfecrafefe: | emt aes ya: Tata: weet: un &3

at freee 320 Sri Tripurarahasyam
fafeen anaes aster: warrats fated qorarara yrreaqea aatar Rx
Listening to his daughter, Himavan who was worried about separation
from her, agreed with her and took her to the city. Then he thought of
offering his daughter to Siva and in his assembly remembered Narada.
Knowing that, the effulgent Narada appeared there. Himavan worshipped
him as ordained in the scriptures. 62 to 64
ateper aeamat a ore uederqufeys adage oye: fered Ht AT West FH G4
war & anfsedt aa arfdt ype Wage THeHIAT: Yee: wrferet war gg
agra water wWaayied J!
Accepting the worship from Himavan, Narada spoke thus:
“Oh Himavan! Let me know why you remembered me. I have accomplished
your auspicious desire. Requested by me, the Lord of Laksmi, the
Supreme Being has, because of your good fortune, agreed to be your
son-in-law.” 65, 66
seared aaa feartedttrarr: NN Re
warste: arate uredarara t yh at fe & ofa aat arene frost
sere faaeityat Foararafsadany ger a frond aat arama uf 1 68
We: wfed aa wa eer aah: | ufawr fated ut yqaeafia ferry 11 Wo
arafea aafsca wate a aed: | Tarafa Ufa Aa wader asfrarsata 1 oe
waast q watt cheteardtefe aq! war fer aa det quits yitar tl 0?
are aefaafe aritsé art aq) art wate ait viet aypadfratsdfa 113
Listening to Narada, the sacred Himavan with folded hands begged
Narada for excuse and said thus: “Oh Sage! I had told you that I will
offer my daughter to Visnu. But due to my bad luck it has turned false.
The next day after I told you that I will offer my daughter to Visnu,
my angry daughter entered along with her friends the fearsome forest
which is like the mouth of death. With great difficulty we traced her
and with effort brought her back. She does not want to wed Visnu.
Instead due to her ill-luck she wants to marry Siva. Oh Sage! What
should I do in this matter? Drowned as I am in the ocean of terrible
adversity, you alone can save me.” 67 to 73

wenfagits ar: 321 Chapter 31
dae fnfed qed gaara: 1 ae sihateg wrereet Gontersferett Fat owl
wart udaitaent: fasrardterer aft: 1 Byerarat: Ft aa ware feet:
Hearing Himavan, the divine sage in order to see the glory of
Gauri became very angry and remembered Vijaya and others who are
the servants of Visnu, and just by that remembrance, they came to
Narada. 74, 75
ware fast aa AIS) WAT Veer! Ue stores: Tarhies F FrareTaTT I 9G
zanife ufiger uftarafag fe 3:1 attecremrereneet TARA oe
wa itt aeftq: ufone: wfteag!
Then Narada burning with anger said to Vijaya thus: “This mean
Himavan who is a black-mark to the clan of the mountains, after
promising to offer his daughter to my Lord Visnu, is trying to humiliate
us. Hence arrest him along with his daughter and take them to Visnu
to wed her.” 76, 77
grata ancaet fara: unica: noel
fart udarat antswraaqen are we wderer ater sitar faq: wel
a tft eran wetter: BET: | ae, seat TATE fefereye fear: 1 co
for pt aarers qafeaqurrn area: welerpedecar Trafetirary neg
wea er aqat warcafrarsedty weatt car Taher Garort afer | 68H
ardcad qnrerdteqaren wren arse! water at arava wre eATeATA:
Hearing the words of Narada, Vijaya the chief attendant defeated
Himavan in the combat and captured him. Then all the citizens of
Himavan yelled and thousands of ladies and children wailed and ran
away. Mena along with her daughter went to Kasyapa, the priest of the
mountain race. Seeing her who was with fear holding her daughter and
crying, “Help, Help” Kaéyapa said to her. “My child! Do not panic, Come”.
Saying thus, he took them inside his house and after consoling en
addressed Parvati thus. Ls ad
afer sitfaqereesat arenes: Venfaeits ema:
End of the thirty-first chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurdrahasyam-

Blfagits cara:
Chapter 32
thernset wereta fr tafe wasdaqi wasé tat tifrreratetag fe au
“Oh Mahadevi Parvati! Why are you weeping as if afraid? Please
stop your sport. I know that you have no fear. You are indeed deluding
us by your fear.” 1
wat Fat warsat at wre weerere fray qo BH citfeatsfe Sear were yao 2
qd wares sweat eat orensfa ate ata yeu ate war ae ama 3H
Then Kasyapa addressed the frightened Mena, the wife of Himavan
thus: “Oh Mena! Listen. You are illusioned. Recollect the previous birth
of the Devi. Oh Queen of Himavan! Seek shelter along with me under
the same Devi after worshipping whom you got your daughter.” 2, 3
qe Vifedra: oper sat wefiacary! wort cuseant qura fafa: ara: ¥
Listening to the words of the priest and remembering the virgin
Great Mother, Mena prostrating on the ground pleased Her through
varieties of prayers. 4
Pent waft ct adetentatt) waa at zert avayg 7 wail
we KIT cites wat asa fe feat) saraquesrsgyar art warATAATH! &
“You are the Mother of the Universe and the Supreme Devi. By
your birth through me, you are really putting on costumes like an actor.
There is no one in the world more fortunate than me because you who
are invisible to persons with infinite merits, are born to me.” 5, 6
aa eyes agT ryan: we vig! wat a wala ad aaal alecsh i oll
wenrat farng aet wate octets wat ae aaa dat wdacrafrary: cl
Then Kaégyapa profusely praised Sankari and said thus: “Oh Mother!
Even the Lord of the serpents (Adiéesa) is incapable of praising you.
Hence, can I praise You? Oh Great Devi! Bless me. Protect, the beloved of
Himavan, the mother of Parvati who is helpless and frightened.” 7, 8

aifaeits eT: 323 Chapter 32
ee
mifaaet var wht frst wo aenferars areata faearet yA eH
| fer waulaeat areresisadtrt Roll
fash Ferrerearqarargatra |
Thus praised, Gauri assumed her real form. Dark like a destructive
cloud, seated on the Lion, shining with embellishments, wielding weapons
with blazing edges, with three eyes, wearing golden garments, with the
moon decorating Her head, She proceeded from the palace like the Sun
from the ocean. 9, 10
aa at arcat gear wore fafa: era: Ween
areqaa uct tat Th yrgracerary
Then Narada seeing the supreme Devi Gauri, the consort of Sankara,
bowed to Her and praised Her through many hymns. 11
Uafarat fawqariar: wetacy, Ween
meee Terssorat Wt ety AA AISA!
art gear wrdet spar frat a west WRB
ARRAS TA RIRTTRUTS eT ARETE Sat facta wa NEI
sarerqat arrerafafeayttet a freirerar fieyst arcaret wt farwet aicafaett 1 a4
ar wore wre wiht far aaeift wees arareafgerprons, wether firftar Tar 6
Meanwhile the servants of Visnu, after binding Himavan, came there
to catch his daughter Gauri. Seeing them and Her defeated father who
was wailing, Gauri became red with anger. From Her body emerged the
dreadful Devi Arund who was exuding fire from her mouth, who was
dark like the deadly night, who had three heads and three eyes, who
was wielding the trident and the sword and making a terrible noise.
She bowed to Gauri and asked Her what should be done. Then Gauri
ordered her to destroy the servants of Visnu in Her presence. 12 to 16
eth ranma Peep eTUTRTCMeNTS SMT! ATCT, AE FA TATA TSH
amcarateppitersfigan ererat war: | aren aceTarend ferrshegaet wt: ween
Guinfreenssey aaeetsfintadty at censor eat saree TRA M
aware wferdhe sareraremedtgam srs surat weet athe men

a fee 324 Sri Tripurarahasyam
mernstatarsye waltpaterrat: gear yet ulate wear witat uv zen
TEU S aoa: | qaitrearaata Wat wer Yes 1 22H
aa Hel eiediat vemnera ana: | seared at Sat wear qedfrarsaq 11 2311
aifsar trepfa War Vareraaar et: YT: | Apsara area: Guat: watar: i ex
Then Aruna with the fire emerging from her sword and trident,
burnt and destroyed the servants of Visnu who were equal to Visnu by
their looks, valour and weapons. Hearing that news, the angry Visnu
appeared there mounted on Garuda, wielding the Sudarsana disc. He
saw Aruna Devi who was fearful with her blazing mouth and discharged
the Sudarsgana Disc (with thousand teeth) that was enveloped by huge
fire. Then Aruna seeing the Sudarsana Disc which was brilliant like
crores of Suns, which was in the sky reducing everything to ashes just
like the fire of dissolution, despatched her trident against that Disc.
That trident which was released from the hand of Aruna very quickly
reduced to ashes the Sudargana Disc just like the fire, a blade of
grass. Then the angry Visnu with his mace chased Aruna Devi with
great speed and struck her on the head. Thus struck, the Jvalavaktra
blew a blaze in front of Visnu whereby Garuda the Lord of the birds
was burnt. 17 to 24
faut ores aet fasta safertseor
faut sexi at Gear vareracat YT AT: Hell
eqepye waar stata wari tat irvigqen aascarenpat gary i 2
Tet soe Tt at wraredarsrasfaatt set at areas arat F agfar loll
Wee Wat araetearagay
Then all the gods and human beings, seeing Jvalamukhi catching
hold of Visnu and swallowing him, cried in agony. As the angry Jvalamukhi
was about to swallow Visnu, Gauri held her throat and said thus with
a smile. “Oh Darling! Enough of your courage. Spit out my brother who
is the protector of the universe. Otherwise the three worlds will soon
be destroyed.” 25 to 27
wetitoterar fare: qfesct erraferct nen
varenisis efton aetstoitssuns stwerar

aifaes a: 325 Chapter 32
viet varerepessret eft Fr -aaE RAH neeH
Then Visnu, spat out by Aruna, fell unconscious on the ground and
the mass of fire also was thrown out along with Visnu. Then Gauri
quickly pulled out Visnu who was amidst the flame. 28, 29
aqa usa a varen fret a ada:
at gear ctedeat sarerafararenry, Hi 30nt
wearer: qeror wt vita: WAR: |
aunt epee arene rey Wail
That flame pervaded sidewise, upward and all round. Seeing that
devastating dreadful flame Brahma and other gods who were frightened
prayed to the Great Devi Gauri and trembling they said in a loud voice
thus: “Protect us, protect us”. 30, 31
eqar ar weary ay wre Tester fires ar fart Yor Fans a: watery
gag at att wet wate: feat grt
The glorified Devi said with dignity to the gods who had sought
shelter under Her. “Oh Gods! Do not be afraid. I have granted protection
to you. Speak out quickly, the boon that you want from Me”. 32
gfe sean faferpan Zar: wrererary n3aul
fa sarenfiat arersaersarereant Fa Ceara wea ere TH TST, |
Hearing this, Brahma and the other gods spoke to the daughter of
Himavan thus: “Oh Devi! Please quell this growing flame which is like
the fire of dissolution and save the moving and non-moving creation.
wifinte aeret: xtorere arutr ares wre Zar wher fra Zar: aqua Wee: Ht Bui
wer saree et mentee aq) seTRefg we: wee AAT PL naan
3 rear Aquear fiescaa aire yfsar Says: wiaery HTH W gen
mem wbarat maurgfeteatens ga exer dercerfarceeg are: naen
fora: aden cites Hert THA TH
Thus requested by the gods, Gauri suppressed the flame and
addressed the gods thus: “Oh Gods! Listen to me. This Jvalmukhi who

a fee 326 Sri Tripurarahasyam
has emerged out of My anger and indeed engaged in swallowing the
Universe, cannot be totally controlled. Now let her stay in this great
mountain. Pleased with the worship by gods and human beings let her
grant their wants. At the time of final destruction she will be content
devouring the entire universe. She is the destructive power of Rudra. In
association with her, Siva will destroy the entire universe.” 35 to 38
saeasyrataca gear fawanfeeart A, Wagn
Torata yar fawnitstfeaarara arsfterenr
fawenfefa: eet ware ret aarferar Nl ¥oll
feat drearara odd: at Te!
Saying thus, the Devi casting Her ambrosial glances revived Visnu
and the group of servants who had died. After being praised by Visnu
and others, She assumed Her form as the daughter of Himavan and
released Her father who was bound. 39, 40
qrarsta ttaheagd afearnaer a went
Treat aifedt titat faarerents fei gad wafserat wean eres FAT
uftersa warara wore faqea wre aerafedtat fam ¢ fromreafary veil
Even after seeing the divine form of Gauri and understanding Her
glory, Himavan deluded by the illusory power of Gauri really forgot that
immediately and thought that he has been somehow set free. Then he
embraced his daughter and fondled her and bowed to the gods. With folded
hands he addressed Visnu the Lord of the three worlds. 41 to 43
Tad Asufate ama wifaat war ag Get carta agai asa ders: vl
wm aden aft wf aa meatier! waIsyea Ur ade aquéfa ol vu
Wet aye wen saga Gane: | wea qed aati ene F PTT WEI
“Oh Lord of Laksmi! I beg you. Please excuse my helplessness. There
was no doubt in my offering my daughter to you. My words have become
false because she wants to marry Siva at any cost. You please pardon
me for my mistake. Your son Brahma and other gods have assembled
here. Instruct me, who has surrendered to you, about what I should do
now.” 44 to 46

Bifagits ara: 327 Chapter 32
gta wdaaret fafa: arava wera: | cared udavista at ataiteyt 1 vou
gatt fratarsa adie wear discard frre: weit whys xen
aa froplaeat cer ora dita: | disenft fore aa: ufratsen win
gee aaferase fore ore fafeeter! eer wore Sayt yrgt cRT_TT I yo
Hearing the words of Himavan, Brahma said with a smile thus:
“Oh Lord of Mountains! You are blessed to have a daughter like this
who deserves the Great Lord Siva alone as Her husband. Even Siva
deserves Her who is the repository of virtues as his wife. How can Visnu
who is Her brother become Her husband? Oh Best among mountains!
Right away I will mediate with Siva to marry your daughter.” Saying
thus, Brahma approached Siva and after bowing and lauding the great
Lord Sankara the benefactor of the world, said to Him thus: 47 to 50
waa oretart ad udaahedo ts wdtes aratarettar arretsferta yin 1 Geil
Saget frtensé qt @ der
“Oh Mahadeva! We request you to accept the daughter of Himavan
as your wife at this moment which is auspicious. Our request does not
deserve to be discarded. Please recollect the past incidence.” 51
ft wiredt sorgrat aifacrarse 4 fire: Wart
aa uderrrat ore wen age: | aferet weer: aeefrnera Sw 4B
afarta yet aret arat ag area
Thus requested by Brahma, Siva wholly agreed. Then Brahma said
to Himavan thus: “Your task is achieved. The Great God Siva has
accepted to marry your daughter. At this sacred moment itself you can
offer your daughter to Him.” odhiad
arent ferdt arent Sart wre TAT: aSEe
Wert uted fafstateanqart! SEO a TANT aT HTT I
wea faare arceat 7 fanfare afro 7
Listening to Brahma, Himavan said thus: “Oh Lord Brahma! No
arrangement has been made for the great wedding. Without preparation
and without inviting prominent persons of our clan, I am unable to
understand how to proceed with the wedding.” 64, 66

at fea, 328 Sri Tripurarahasyam
marenud anted afefreaerare ad, Wag
argars saree & aresiiorare | argu fafear mer was dyed: Qo tt
faaresret adits aarti wad: | CARO ATT WANTS SHALOM TU Ge
aaarnfze waedtt wrenerad! we fas wafafe saferfeafate vet ug
Hearing Himavan, Brahma called the divine builder Tvastr and
ordered him to arrange all the items required for the wedding. Thus
instructed, the divine builder created in a short time the marriage hall,
the platforms, the vessels, the fire, the garments, the ornaments, the
garlands, seats and beds all around. He arranged plenitude of food and
drinks. Then he reported to Brahma that everything was made ready.
geal aevianre wna fasge fers est feral sora frame il Goll
sacdtaqais fart: wear gat! FA Yodravary faytea: geil
aurrafeata war tage: Ea: | sera watarery: yeas t EAH GH
Seeing that, Brahma showed it to Himavan who with happiness
bowed to Brahma. Then Brahma told the divine messengers to go in
divine cars and bring quickly the brahmins, kings and other relatives
of Himavan. Those messengers very quickly came back with all of them.
qear wana wats ude wre fasgqes siyaassma: wae aft weary
astiva frag ase TA!
Seeing the arrival of everyone, Brahma said to Himavan:
“Oh Himavan all arrangements are done. Get prepared and bring your
daughter for the wedding”. 63
ara Ua vere wear eae FTL iW &¥
Sa tae aR aenfate ara eaqeun ad aarfech fare &&
Peal Heat were fraar afedt a1: 1 wtafasifrasitf: dgat Fretat yet tl
faarerremifaya weet a auftesc: |
Thus ordered, Himavan soon went to his palace. After arranging
the sacred ablutions for his daughter and completing the ordained

aifagits a4: 329 Chapter 32
formalities through his guru Kasyapa, Himavan proceeded from the palace
along with his beloved daughter, relatives and their wives and entered
the marriage hall and stayed there. 64 to 66
aa wen fore aa faarefaferr er nol
ataarra aera ae: Uftanrtta: | faaet erat qaet: aaagergqary nee
Then Brahma prepared Siva according to the marriage rites. Then
Siva entered the auspicious marriage hall along with His retinue.
4 cast nada fend aise er ermenisyeeet anrenitter on geil
SUTeeaeraRe UTHUSe crrevattedtd a femora frerary it volt
qragfirensset: ares sarcage: | eremabrertatt: artsy uftet ary tt ogi
qeat ude fara: werareae Gear fateh warp vitenateegTy i oz Mt
fagra ard wer wtararstt fafereter!
Himavan saw Mahadeva who was hideous with matted hair and
emaciated, who was wearing a garland of skulls around the neck, a
serpent as an earring and a poisonous snake as the sacred thread; who
had three ugly looking eyes; who was surrounded by his retinue of frantic
frightening devils with disfigured faces living in burial ground. Seeing
him Himavan was grieved. Looking at Himavan whose face was languid
with sorrow and understanding his mind Brahma spoke to him thus:
far what vites amgeista Yost Wogan
arifa 3 ateramactafte fora seqerar ferfertterrt wrefararea wae: novi
da eanfiget Gear am: fast weet agete erent waeteerGTTy | Ou
“Oh Lord of the Mountain! Why are you drowned in grief at this
fortunate time? You are not aware of the wonderful aspects of the Great
Lord Siva.” Saying thus, Brahma bowed and requested Siva. “Oh
Maheévara! Oh Lord! Seeing You in this form Himavan is depressed.
Please show him Your universally unique beautiful form. 73 to 75
wa wanfirs: vreqafitertaensfaa: | smeart cefarara aptferrayeey en
Terents art Haaretrerr ararecttaererersrapes fererfare wee

a ARTs, 330 Sri Tripurarahasyam
TRS et Aaa! ae: AfsayTO SATE: Ween
Rear waiter ude: dana: | wet Te Wa Yat Ge Tatsaiteet: uv wei
waeenneyt: Wace: |
Upon that request Siva endowed with Supreme wealth and power
presented Himself beautiful like a crore of cupids, with a complexion
like molten gold, with eyes like blue lily, with a crown set with shining
diamonds, with red garments and garland, with many ornaments. His
retinue also with colourful ornaments and dresses resembled Him and
were serving Him. Seeing the beautiful Siva, Himavan was happy and
exclaimed that his daughter was fortunate to have such a husband who
is the Lord of the entire Universe and who is universally attractive.
sean tf ered wor Arar: U coll
4 Weft aeta ca WERITAA AS: WpaaatsSs Tse: Tetsu ce
Saying thus Himavan bowed to Siva and said “Oh Great God! I am
ignorant about your wonderful glory. I am inert and immovable and
hence my mistake deserves pardon.” 80, 81
ste aren qaet fafa arava yrerte! werd Hager afer RUT PRT: 62M
watt afe dest 4 aareitsfertat wae
Thus begging excuse from Siva, Himavan said to Brahma. “Oh
Brahma! This is my daughter. Let Sankara hold Her hand and wed Her.
If you agree let us not lose this moment.” 82
aifieqen fafa: yitt fort ore erate neg
unfor fora eromseat: Urdeat ar faererary!
areata caret: ay: wadtafaatsra: nest
Brahma giving his consent smilingly addressed Siva. “Oh Siva!
without delay hold the palm of Parvati lest we go beyond this very good
time which is free from all blemishes.” 83, 84
Frerer preg faeqert urfit atat: aeredi vier: agai tear arenfsrery tl ok
aa ant wgmiereeattate: | Searararrarest arent uftaerat = CRI

wifes Ara: 331 Chapter 32
opfardaadt Tyger: | aeet atere qaqfaraica: ACH
aat teeaet wet wee Athen fee: | Aqdfeenqer: veatarrect MT cet
On hearing Brahma, Siva held the palm of Gauri and Himavan
along with his wife Mena poured water on their hands. Then the high
sound from the musical instruments mixed with auspicious chants was
heard everywhere. The Gandharvas sang, the heavenly damsels danced,
the panegyrists praised, heaven showered flowers, the gentle breeze
wafted fragrance in all directions, Vasistha and other seers chanted Saiva
Upanisads. 85 to 88
fafafserefafiat arerarara yet aa Vda: watt farTErt ArT I 23 Ul
TAS sMUTaraharerrette | aearaaa war sary fafegartt = — i Goll
qaarara fafear ange: qangut: | atoararea ave AateA AATTATT BU
fafadcaurard: ugarsediitet: 1 qarar famporers aad after et: gz
anfest wast freq: dat ferry wa fears dae ferary weet GT I 83H
aieant taut araiaraconfs ai geraraerdiat wore a aatfeyt: gy Il
urdat eaarqard fired sitearra: | ater aerctarara urddttated: fire: Weal
wet frorerd pitt wat <a near: fatefamppeda: quar: =— tl RI
Brahma performed the wedding rituals of Sankara. At that time
Himavan honoured all the brahmins and guests with countless jewels,
garments and money. In the same manner Himavan worshipped Brahma
and other gods with plenty of presents as ordained. Himavan served
palatable food with varieties of dishes, drinks to all. The Brahmins
satisfied with the gifts departed after blessing the couple. Thus during
the wedding, Himavan gifted a lot of wealth. To his beloved daughter
Pavati, the happy Himavan presented countless gems, garments, jewels,
elephants, horses, chariots and servants. Then Siva accepting all the
presents decided to go to His abode along with Parvati while Brahma,
Visnu and other gods were praising His glorious deeds. 89 to 96
afer sftaqereeet rere’ wifseits era: I
End of the thirty-second chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurarahasyam.

wafeagtts ara:
Chapter 33
wa ta: Haart wes: wddige: 1 fenfonseaqaet frat feragar ne
Then Mahega praised by the gods and permitted by Himavan
proceeded along with Parvati from Himavan’s garden. 1
fefagrrqaat waa: derenrat: | aatsyaA aeTTTATt We aT: wen
wfrargetst ¢ efeqirera: | saya wreddt ta: erat feratssat: a
Filled with love Himavan followed them to a short distance. Then
Maheévara, understanding the unwillingness of His father-in-law who
was following them to get back, looked with a smile at Parvati. 2, 3
wreatgd weyrer tat udeaPett frat ateramre waerreedayfery neil
aviamra fand wre: WOME!
Knowing the mind of Mahega, Devi Parvati enlightened Her father
who had forgotten Her divinity owing to a curse from Her and showed
him Her most wonderful glory. 4
wa Fear Taher Tea, wal
Wer wed tags wre aw ade: 1 fants: donaaawatr: Wan
agra: frrarat a waat wt fragr vertatste orden afedt reqereary
ayaa waraest wae frdqa: | crass ware avatar Wat se wen
Then, seeing his daughter who was the Supreme Devi, Himavan
understood Her reality and all the principles of the world and dispelled
of illusion and permitted by Siva and Parvati returned to his dwelling
along with abundant self glory. After asking Brahma and others to return
to their respective abodes, Siva along with Parvati and His retinue
reached Kailasa and decided to perform penance. 5 to 8
aa taadtht tart Tora! BATA Aeeat =teearfsa: neil
aus ui feratagaen aa feet armaaeeeany Il oll

qafergits ara: 333 Chapter 33
antad waratstt sored unrary ferarc
Then on the banks of the divine river Ganga, Mahadeva sitting
under a banyan tree located in a sacred place, performed penance for
one thousand divine years. During that time He reduced to ashes
Manmatha who was disturbing His penance.
“Oh Bhargava! In this manner even Kama was burnt by Siva.”
ud qensgrenat arta: wigs Weel
qahasagay Hamgent qai Paurgasdta gat dash asta Ween
wa Weeaaralsé 3 Gente fatwad aed afraaanr urghreais A ya: est
aad fords fréva: carat fact aera: | farneirenr ae vita aftqeoe: 11 ex Il
aronste fawitftdrdt varerpea qaviay une Ya: set Aa aeaafe A PT i ty
Listening the wonderful story, ParaSurama inquired again thus:
“Oh compassionate ascetic! The ambrosial stream of story flowing from
your lotus-like face is increasing my thirst even as I have drunk a lot.
Like an intoxicated bee I am never satisfied. I desire to drink that again
through my ears. How was Kama burnt by Siva? Why did Kama hinder
the penance of Siva? Please tell me all that, who is inquiring again and
again. Then again how did Visnu recover the Sudargana Disc that was
burnt by Jvalamukhi. Oh Guru! please tell me about that also.”
wa qust yfrre carseat wt eer erent oqo] aeet qyeteTseaaas 1 RG
Ter qavit ae faapfeacrrtiafe: 1 arensat Beregfsset saygT: | Lo
arguearaat fa werecrecrenn: | qaerarreas efterasrreda: nen
qevita cect fgg: Yqat aa!
Thus eagerly inquired, Dattatreya the Great Yogi narrated the legend.
“Oh Supreme in the Bhrgu clan! Listen. I will narrate it to you. After
a lapse of time of Visnu the Lord of the three worlds losing his Sudarsana,
a powerful demon by name Mura came to fight with Him. During the
combat Visnu without Sudarsana became dull just like a bull without
horns, 16 to 18

Rt PRE 334 Sri Tripurarahasyam
ee —— EEE
wa wen wre eft et UY aa aT Ween
gests cheat i ag fergie! safes at varerqet 2a aanfea: Ron
wet aes Tar eat Ages waa
Then Brahma said to Hari thus: ‘Oh Hari! Listen, without Sudargana
you cannot win this demon. Hence you propitiate with concentration the
Devi Jvalamukhi. Getting the disc from Her, you will be able to defeat
this Mura.’ 19, 20
gad wemfed qerart tarafa: WH
aratguradt aa vat Gear yUsAt: | wats eft wreat wawat wat un BH
Hearing Brahma, Visnu who was fighting there disappeared. Then
the demon Mura seeing that, thought that Visnu was defeated and
returned home. 21, 22
aa famperare vers wIssaaq! aa asehae Sarerga wsaferassaaT
erat dararerarraeatea: | Frrent Prercerent WEA UWI
aeagiffeasa: weet afta!
Then Visnu went to the Himalayan mountain, the abode of the
Supreme Devi Jvalamukhi where she lived day and night with Her
burning face. There, after taking bath Visnu with control of his body,
mind and speech worshipped Jvalamukhi and performed severe penance
for one thousand years without food, without support, with raised arms
and closed eyes. 23, 24
HA A YARNS RATA Tet Hl
anteater etqisatiatratony: qaetfeudtearen TeuseurAgy: tl 28!
Weraratatenticraritet | wart fayyet fame quenrenfaqiia 11 2
reat aeag stead moana: | tac wersaret ait atu 2 Il
yet steorenrn ahtetengeen Rana qratherhearttet: neil
Fatentaars agar tartar
Then the pleased Mahesvari Jvalamukhi appeared before Visnu to
grant his desires. She was effulgent like a crore of Suns; Her complexion
was red like the rising Sun; Her three heads were decorated with shining

safeayits ara: 335 Chapter 33
ee
crowns; She was wielding the sword and the trident and wearing a
garland of skulls; from Her eyes, ears, nose and hairpits was emerging
every second, a huge flame. Born out of the anger of Gauri, she was
looking fierce. She was being praised by an assembly of Gods, Gandharvas,
Apsaras and surrounded by Her own retinue who were singing and
dancing. 25 to 29
faye faopet varempet afaferarrary, Noll
ora qusaqaen warefeqe: feed: 1 wef wer yernttufafesntadyee uae
Oh Bhargava! Seeing Jvalamukhi who had appeared before Him,
Visnu prostrated before Her and standing with folded palms praised Her
with many wonderful secret hymns. 30, 31
aa ger wafrotsateracar weet wre fay crenata western aT azMl
faut citar ersten at quafwraifoaq) car quarafererrag 7 ferret 331
wy em wat war yfaa: Aare: |
Then Devi Jvalamukhi who was happy with the prayers, addressed
Visnu thus: ‘Oh Visnu! Oh Lord of the world! I am pleased. Ask for
your desired boon. I will grant it to you all. There is nothing which you
do not deserve. Being the brother of my Devi you are adorable everywhere.’
qed amet fru: ure wareferert wav
ay umes afr quse wetter che sitter qefeagea AY |W AMI
Waa Ciencanfaat Weary: | arse tere afer sefafage: = 36il
amrdtareriteeett areasfrstaar: | tag mnfirdt thee emeriqa: ge
qe aa gatas eet aqi wenn cheats wee earqufea: ween
Ue wert tense wesee are at wie Setet eta aera aR
Listening to this, Visnu with folded hands said thus: ‘Oh Devi! Lend
your ears. In the past I was created by the Great Devi Tripurasundari
for protecting this world indeed. According to Her co se : the
e d i i Jd. But now some demon known by
ngaged in protecting the world. Bu harassing all the gods.
name Mura intent on destroying the world is 5 ttalion i
Requested by the gods when I was engaged along ——

Rt PRES 336 Sri Tripurarahasyam
the war with him to kill him, I was rendered powerless for want of
Sudargana disc. I have approached you to get Sudarsana. Now, please
protect the moving and non-moving creation by giving the disc to me.
Or, you may by your immense power destroy the lord of the demons.’
grad wife fawitédt sarearget wari are aferrar aren water arerafy
anran wi afadt ora tatfeafaens: | aenrrentt tered Terres wa feo
frat denser presenta wine arat sitfaqteran: wader yfet frsf on
argaifa wer ya sedhe: ware: | er cites errata arftfertfrada | 3
aeamed wera feats Foter wqer a arava zero Prorargeny use
SRA aqaeach Ua Yeviay! easarera Yat Tayfadwahary i vy
freart weet wet faore dtaarrar sé qestt ach werent adtsfiray ol we
aireamdtenrt wad @ afaerta aa Sat cient asstarera faert i ve
Tres tet wife fant cite stitgd Gel seyacassafeat Wea: Tava aT fear
Listening to the request from Visnu, Devi Jvalamukhi addressed
Him with a simile thus: ‘Oh Narayana! You are Trivikrama the dear
brother of Gauri. I am obedient to Her. Hence you are really venerable
to me. Even though I am capable of destroying the demon, we are all
bound by the command of Sri Tripurasundari. When out of fear towards
Her the wind blows, the Sun rises, the Moon rises along with the stars,
the Earth holds the creation, the sea does not transgress the shore, how
can I freely be without respect for Her. I am pleased by your penance.
Take your weapon.’ Saying thus, the benevolent Jvalamukhi took out
from her weapon the Sudargana disc with a thousand blazing teeth and
gave it to Visnu. She also said thus: ‘This Sudargana Disc is more
powerful than the previous one and is unfailing and unassailable. Your
desire will be fulfilled. By this disc you will conquer the worlds and
nothing remains to be won. Go and quickly kill the demon and bless
the world.’ Then the Devi Siva (Jvalamukhi) disappeared soon like a
dream. 40 to 48
Ha Uh AAAS Yt BAT aead teaarahgd aeatta siter: sell
Gey wereraeserd gar sf a aafet we fawitgens sharon it ell

qaferat: Sa: 337 Chapter 33
After receiving the Sudarsana Disc Visnu invited Mura to fight and
immediately with the Sudarsana burnt him like a moth along with his
army. Oh Parasurama! Thus I have narrated how Visnu got back His
aa cert war vettyreregy arta) wofte ard ga: aa rfeTg Aw YR
wa cAIe Wea Aca ATT Sena! YRUesfrearstshe are YETI 4? I
apreynsvestiaet waqaeetaat) sar areat weet qete: Ye: tt Gal
surat fanart dat tanvtda: 1 a Geadfad veh weir
frat wre 2ayt werarsadt feos guy yen Berta Sererat wera: Hl
anh: RUeT Wasa: AMtfeat | A AT aT Tense Sy wre Hew 4K I
far nertage waft fepritgery axes unde fort pater = Wot
aqrera darn: vfrfersqtan wots fryaafert create yet l yell
“Oh Bhargava! Listen as to how later Kama was reduced to ashes.
After marrying Parvati Siva performed a great penance. After the passage
of a long time a demon named Taraka and another by name Strapadma
with their might and arrogance acquired through intense penance, became
the lords of the eighteen worlds. Defeated by them Indra the lord of the
gods helplessly approached the creator Brahma. Seeing Indra who had
lost his glory and was standing reverentially, Brahma after giving a
thought spoke to him thus; ‘Oh Indra! Listen. That Lord of the demons
possesses great power. Taraka and Strapadma who were mentioned by
me earlier are invincible either by you or anyone else except by Svaminatha
the son and fortune of Mahadeva. Hence go to Siva and request him to
beget a son. His son by becoming the chief of the army of gods will
vanquish the demon and restore your wealth of the three worlds.’ _
51 to
nagu
aren fafieret Zaufatanctta: | wat freiret ta wifag Wereeaer
WA Treat faded dterenvsquratet| aavategensdtyt: wird watserd wat Mt Gol
wrench frret: aratfSrermers sera: | PTET : WR
afta titfermat safert awat mot: 1 7 aa aafseaete + fr:afate Fat Wag
Weert = upafar a wear fete eferitstir arerhar argatter aera: 18

A ARREST, 338 Sri Tripurarahasyam
qat 4a wate a erat @ eT: | famssfafeaaaa faftedt weraea i ex
aa aitsfe deang asvrentaqufa: | wretorenfast AEger yay Wag
Hearing the words of Brahma, Indra along with the gods rushed to
pray to Siva. Reaching there, Indra saw the tranquil blue-necked Great
God, the consort of Devi Uma, the protector of all. He saw Siva who
had closed His eyes, who was surrounded by sages like Sanaka and
others who were great by their sdtvic qualities and a serene pure mind
like the autumnal waters. In that place no one was moving, no one was
breathing heavily, nor seeing each other, nor talking. The birds did not
chirp, the wind was speedless, the Sun not scorching, the branches
motionless. Every thing looked like a still painting. Indra was unable
to stand even at a distance. Overpowered by the heat of penance, Indra
was indeed not able to see.
[Note: The second line of stanza 65 was incomplete in the original. It has been
substituted suitably.) 59 to 65
ae wet seat oft erred: | Asxtsarset wa aor gfe Wea YI: | GE
Byrarat afer: Waa: PRGA! Ut TS AaretaT Say: "fact satu Go
airxerea aot witee force aa: | arse: weqare dhtscrargg: fist: ae
arid ayafe yet ere yg-fert) suaitfattaaaert far, Te
areal creat wfag Atereray sees aes aeaatagy, 0
sand: fe anifs ae & crentifert
areagasatfaat ofaa aero eareitieay, 1 98
Then Indra thinking that none other than Brhaspati, the Guru can
protect him, remembered the Guru with concentration. As soon as Indra
remembered, the king among yogis presented himself. Seeing the Guru,
Indra felt relieved. Holding his feet and bowing down with folded hands
the helpless grieved Indra said thus: ‘Oh Guru! Look at me who has
lost the kingdom and drowned for long in the ocean of misery without
any other saviour. Ordered by Brahma I came here to request Siva to
beget a son. But I am unable to go near Him. What shall I do? How
will my desire be fulfilled? Please tell me a suitable strategy by which
my requirement will be achieved.’ 66 to 71

gafeagis a: 339 Chapter 33
Hafsafrensfacnsmy! wesnrtdfaest stata afar i 02 1
yracedt yoy sat TNT awa afer: | ar a faareafe stat asree Tsay
seerasstedt sitet arqqars geryTa
Hearing the words of Devendra, Guru considering the future events
addressed Indra regarding the achievement of his task and pleased him.
‘Oh Indra! Listen. Propitiate with devotion Devi Gauri. She will bless
you. There is no other way.’ Saying thus, the Guru disappeared like a
tiny cloud carried away by the wind. 72, 73
aa zag snfresght atefag a: Next
adie: aaeqer wht afafeatswadi yreceat afe aa wate efwaifery 11 Oy
gfe we wer 2aufadeindara | wore cusaqen fated: wfafireret = GH
we wht auf: pareferyeear tard Eaceasiicgin fremssay — tl WIV
wa we fear at nereaqaraa wadifteatietdt asset arta: i weil
aee warhifacet anrarafeagrsgar Gear aneateedt weed freireary | oe tl
aden apaats seit peor aftaera: | arte yrUt wre: AeaTs SoHTETUATT|
Baa usage: word aereshrar udéoll
Then Indra performed penance for one year to please Devi Gauri.
The pleased Gauri appeared before him and said thus: ‘Oh Indra! Speak
out what you want,’ Then Indra seeing the Devi prostrated before Her
and praised Her with many hymns and said with folded hands thus:
‘Oh Devi! I have indeed lost my kingdom to the demon. I was told by
Brahma that the son of Mahadeva will help me and that there is no
other way to achieve my goal. Hence I came here to have my desire
fulfilled. But on seeing Siva engaged in penance I have lost hopes. As
urged by Brhaspati I am seeking shelter under you. Please save me from
the ocean of difficulty.’ Saying thus Indra again fell prostrate at Her
feet. 74 to 80
aft sitfaqereeet wreremens vafereits ema: I
End of the thirty-third chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurarahasyam.

aa feagits cara:
Chapter 34
qeeatrsaatqara ¢ wea) qo eda wared qdé ufraia & wen
TF dararnster weftarag yea: | Wea Waa Nea aa: 2H
wend vara fed aden aft gener
Hearing Indra, the Great Devi said thus: ‘Oh Indra! Listen. It looks
as though your desire will not be fulfilled. Because of the curse from
the wives of the seers I have no chance of having a child and similarly
Siva cannot have a child through anyone other than me. Hence, how will
your want be accomplished? On the whole, it appears impossible.’ 1, 2
fayrete cet vita: yen: urafercadig, au
tfa ya wa eet we: Sa Ha: Haq St adele ueeasts at Ha 1
adaata fest % aft yrgracett
Listening to Gauri, Indra said with folded hands. ‘Oh Devi! You are
universally worshipped. How is it that you are cursed? From whom and
why? How Mahadeva was also cursed? Oh Consort of Siva! Tell me about
this which is astonishing.’ 3, 4
efton wifirer ta waeqyrecrt Wat
ST] Yew aa yet war wer: feat ai yuse feavteres fags fear aaru gl
war wether ahaha: gat arPTy! yATesTUayiat AByRyfeRA At 1 o
wer frat wafer: eet arenftor: | axeUTAsyaT: aaretaas WaT neu
wa aa Harfeast war yt eer par sageqat Sefer ye aE da ue
watsred at warigafesr arenttur: | fret wyrat: aa uftag: ward: I oll
frat aerate cede ate: 1 ser aa fi:gaat seat eftott ge: eget
a¢ eat yetrsswr: aryarenafe fea: 1 easrar aeerrqaarsfery weray I
praia gear axfrfisfiraraan) aepeqerit feet each = RI
a ARaISUqea Haran! sft wants aa ye wa fast a7 ues
“Requested by Indra, the Devi narrated thus: ‘Oh Indra! Listen why

afer Seq: 341 Chapter 34
Siva and I were cursed. Once in the past when I was living in my
father’s house in Himalaya, I went to the forest along with my friends
to see the autumnal beauty. Ordered by my father a thousand hunters
followed me as bodyguards. In that forest I saw a rare beautiful deer
engaged in love with her partner. I ordered the hunters to catch them
for my sport. All the hunters surrounded the pair of deers and brought
them to me. The female deer was sighing and weeping. The male deer
said thus: ‘Oh Devi! I am Suhotra belonging to Kasyapa lineage living
in this forest along with this lady who is the daughter of the sage
Bharadvaja. Seeing a pair of deers she desired a similar love-sport from
me and assuming the form of the female deer she was amorous.’ In that
context even though requested to be excused for my ignorant act he
cursed me (not to have conjugal bliss). 5 to 14
werteearste soy yraed Gea YT Faye far: atorarsteeary FTA tl
aeradat Wear aeat Yaa: | MPAA aH VAM Ass yTAATT | RM
aramdtarent Zar famrornaay var wa faeitest famrot ayrtt ater wear 11 go
waa Sats Pfanraarcteh: TAA: |
“Listen to the cause for the curse on Siva. Long ago at the beginning
of the Tretaé yuga, the brahmins by their great penance became powerful
and neglected the gods and controlled Indra, Siddhas and Rakgasas. The
gods became obedient to the brahmins. Observing the three worlds brought
under the control of the brahmins, Indra lost his glory and became
subservient to the brahmins. 15 to 17
ae yreet Tararqat werorrerat nell
waeaed arse fas treats: |
“Then the helpless Indra along with the other gods went to Brahma
and submitted his subordination to the brahmins. 18
agra feafer; ore eft ta fare West
if sfinr are farctir art were Sega Saree frmpTeareaAA:H 0
maeatagd saraeagst: |
“Hearing this Brahma said thus to Indra. ‘I cannot counteract because

at ARREST, 342 Sri Tripurarahasyam
I am also frightened of the power of their penance.’ Saying thus, Brahma
along with Indra went to Visnu and narrated verbatim the news about
the gods. 19, 20
AT ATAU: We TROT ATT, WeReMN
frome fafa qo wer, get wr ate fattfSrt ae crecrerenfater: 0 2H
ere Hen
wenvsrat yraeaste agnel: GA: AUT
aaa asa cafad WHE Gyat WA eet
ARCO Hea WHat at faareata sya Bled TaTS: Hear | A
“Listening to the power of penance of the brahmins Visnu addressed
Brahma thus: ‘Oh Brahma! Listen. Presently the brahmins dwelling in
the Daruka forest have conquered everything by their immense penance
and I do not see any means to prevent them. If opposed, they may
destroy the three worlds. They are capable of creating a hundred universes
in a moment. Hence any effort of ours, will not work. Therefore let us
go to Mahadeva who will do good to us.’ Saying thus Visnu reached
Kailasa along with Brahma and others. 21 to 25
wet ford agree feeqyardan Gear fawt ytdert fafa a wre yTge: i 26
suerg frqe: ad areas aon) a TaATAT APTA, tt ROM
ae farrentufrearcrmreamtqa:: | waited: wears afgsarerequt Far 3 i
wes aed faatg warare: qubate: | seqerarsaary fergease warTqeraas:it 2
Waar qanraast yaa Tae!
“After bowing to Siva, Visnu and others, stood there with folded
hands. Seeing Visnu and Brahma along with the gods, Sankara spoke
thus: ‘Oh Gods! All of you listen to my logical utterances. I know why
you have come to me. Presently the brahmins shielded by the blaze of
their penance would burn to ashes just by their proximity even as 4
fire burns a straw. In this regard, let us deliberate along with great
ministers about defeating the brahmins.’ Saying thus, Siva leaving out
others discussed at length point by point with the prominent leaders of
the gods after seating them. 26 to 29

agfereits ara: 343 Chapter 34
wase quettara sorats=it + treat i 30ll
aaa Bat Aqayraaea WetgU: | ARewY Fae wtecageery agit
fanerrsitefarat cutee Fry! qteqar sar fam Hy wreearegq weer i 32
ue asfand: wa: ade efarat
“Then Visnu said thus: ‘Other than by deceit, I do not think that
by any means the brahmins can be vanquished. Hence let Siva assuming
an enchanting form go there and infatuate the wives of the brahmins
and make them slip from righteousness. Once they have lost their
Dharma, the brahmins can be conquered. This is my opinion which is
most dear to me.’ 30 to 32
qa ayracaer fafegar: yu: nau
wile vigt @¢ dtearrgatyrea
: Hearing Visnu, the happy Brahma and other gods prayed to Lord
Sankara and prompted Him for their welfare. 33
foratsfa 2acnratsa qarec: warde: Wav
are aa faust aI aa ATT: | ater AL TAT Batatirere fatrrary tt 34H
afiqurengsa ufaayr wersrar Great wt Yerat aiferraey =— tt Ba Il
apfarara erty aise arget feta: 1
Even Siva for the sake of the gods went along with His attendants
on his bull to the forest where the brahmins were engaged in penance.
Then watching the brahmins going out to fetch sacred fuel and flowers,
Siva entered their hermitage. Assuming a beautiful form resembling a
crore of cupids, Siva presented himself to the wives of the or yey :
to
at arget aarettes famrort a: garter: 1 zon
Seeing such a handsome Siva,
by libidinous arrow followed Siva. Although .
tried to stop them, all of them followed Siva forgetting
Surrounded by them Siva moved to another forest.
their kith and kin.

a fees, 344 Sri Tripurarahasyam
eararanfactdeat atearara yigt: | Ararat: feratd wat we eqeret ot xo
saya faradt: ave 2a: forerge art Sear] aT age: 1 xe
Wr: areasypream: yt: deasfeadas wt a yPueay year yrgcarhea vy
wapfersfaqedt dat waren: |
Sankara by amorous sport deluded them. Coming in contact with
Siva, all of them became pregnant. After cohabiting with them, Siva told
them thus: ‘Return to your houses lest your husbands become wrathful.
We will meet again later. Now it is going to be dark.’ Hearing Sankara,
the wives of the brahmins went back fearing their infidelity towards
their husbands. 40 to 42
aextt Afro: weryerafiacer: uevan
Wat Weieda ERM atensfataqparssat
afar wget: ust: vat: wa wa vel
Vifeat area AA Ara AMT Aer! Neteaswahtd GHA: ul ¥kil
Then the sages who returned to their houses with fruits, flowers
and sacred fuel saw their wives looking different and pregnant, started
doubting. By the power of their penance they understood the misdeed
of Mahddeva and became ferocious. 43 to 45
wyda neat vetted sft qari
arresat Wy Gear wertatsha Tay, eval
Weraaat: viteawaegquends: |
The angry sages went to Siva with the intention of reducing Him
to ashes. Seeing the indignant sages approaching him, the bull bannered
Mahadeva took to His heels. 46
erat ta aatantaarsra, u vel
qeal yer: Pal: yd aferwarsaqg: |
Was tae Tereart att eager, useu
Tented: wt ussretty weeatete
am faga asench ues wat: wefan: nye

agfeasis am: 345 Chapter 34
waaanna afer aI ada
wa fat: fora: sree eeenitftay, Holl
qaqa 4 Wes Wa: |
Seeing Siva running away in the sky, the angry sages cast a curse
on Him thus: ‘Because this lustful one has sown his seed in the wombs
belonging to others he shall become a eunuch for other women. Let the
penis of this paramour by which he has defiled our wives, fall off in
our presence.’ That is how Siva was cursed by the brahmins. ‘Therefore,
Oh Indra! How can you achieve your goal. There is no chance of Siva
getting a child.’ 47 to 50
gare wrddtareafirs: wres Ae W&tl
tea sitqftrearth fea: forthe: | eet fod wea fers fee ot aaa: Tt
Listening to Parvati, Indra eagerly inquired thus: ‘Oh Devi! I would
like to listen to what Siva did later. How was his penis cut off and
after that, what happened to it? 51, 52
quad Sacrsta wre wht ferent wat peitert em ferereats senrererfies: 1h 43
waa ferg aifest qrrerenerarta: | watery wareitet wen farmpreteaa 4 I
uateery ate wteaferr: yfaetaets rere yfaet vient sfereai t Aera: ual
aise erat eitae fared argh eth aearper anceps F arse
wang ercfirenfir aifretor cfeern sear damier feast wen areata: ws
atfretor qeited difeaa: sacra: |
Thus questioned by Indra, Gauri answered him thus: ‘After the
curse, the penis of Siva, who was in the sky, got separated and began
to drop down the sky. Seeing the falling genital, Brahma urged Visnu
thus: ‘Oh Visnu! If this penis of Siva falls on the earth, definitely the
s none other than you who
earth will split into a hundred pieces. There i :
can bear this. Hence to avoid this calamity, become its support in the
form of vulva. I will support you as your base.’ Saying thus, Brahma
the creator placed himself as a pedestal. Above that Visnu took the form
of a vulva. 53 to 57

a ey, 346 Sri Tripurarahasyam
aa fag alfrret wart aurtetet Wen
waders ata ate frefret frat aif diowed wnfarfocarery ue
faey: wensfe aferg arcareragqdend! tarot act at fafagrstt Tarmery i Go
arnt eft: veradt gers!
Then soon the Linga (penis) dropped in the middle of the vulva and
by its impact the vulva got split. Breaking the vulva, the Linga entered
the pedestal. Visnu and Brahma held that Linga with great effort. By
its weight the trembling earth which was entering the Rasatala (a lower
world) was firmly held in position by Visnu in the form of Adigesa
the serpent. 58 to 60
Untaraatt ta: yey: wepfedts wag, Tata
wer Hla: Uaent Aahregqa: | WETS TA aa gahrars Tae, Wa
Sent wae eeraRt HEAL!
Meanwhile God Siva was furious. The flame of His anger emerging
from His third eye started burning the worlds. It was astonishing. As
the worlds were being burnt there was a huge tumult. 61, 62
aa tar: wraat faeracetom: Waan
fear: fagrom: taqratsasti aaa: |
agaiteenud ¢ pat Hrensateh foray, navn
Then the gods, the gandharvas, the vidyddharas, the great
serpents, the siddhas, the manes, the celestial sages and many others
prayed in many ways to the blue-necked angry Siva the destroyer of
wer st art a: ferat ferqer Sear! Tar wen feratreaferqIs ASTM Il G4
When Siva could not tolerate the loss of His penis Brahma became
His penis. 65
Fear fergiat wer errteearH fer: aasefer: WE KYAT Ae YA: TAM
Wea ware safe cise! Waateractarstaa aAyTaET GO
we ae fet forge yore aed war) seqeraT yustienrat fey YaTaneTaT Mt ke

aaferents a: 347 Chapter 34
fatrderarisé: querer awenfater afters arenes wie wah fafatray uae
Seeing Siva who was slightly peaceful having obtained His penis,
Visnu after bowing and praying repeatedly said with folded hands thus:
‘Oh Mahadeva! Oh Lord of the Universe! Protect the moving and
non-moving creations that are getting destroyed by Your flame of anger.
Please withdraw the flame. We will always worship Your Linga which
has fallen.’ Saying thus Visnu worshipped that Linga with several rituals
as ordained and with circumambulatory prostrations prayed wonderfully.
aa feagqats wet: afafedt var: | were fart arate feat wet TN Vo Ht
ae wr yfedtse fergsferafedens: | sretferent fara asa qar waitfeeat
ae myer wenfeerg Ua WEA wart aiszrer ferwit age: waar WA: 11 we
worerg a ut fergeftot adda: | weatssen aft waa aa fatter 99 II
wen torrat afitaenfigad wa. wap arayrer wt eaTyeafaTy | ox I
sera Yrarara eat eregfeacites: | wen taufatar: wa aBETeA TT 1 94 I
uatayr & wet feraer uftd wea yIerer w WaT tat aercUt waeTfeM: 1H OK II
Then Siva pacified by the worship of his Linga went near Visnu
and addressed him this: ‘Oh Visnu! Listen. I have been worshipped by
you for the first time in the Linga unconventionally to have my blessing.
From this day I will be pleased by the worship of the Linga alone by
all and not otherwise. Let all the gods and human beings install me in
the form of the Linga and I will dwell there. The trinity with Brahma
as the pedestal, Visnu as the yoni and me as the Lifiga will in conjunction
be the fourth form of Parameévara.’ Saying thus the three-eyed Sambhu
himself worshipped the Linga. Brahma, Indra and all the other gods
offered their worship.
“Oh Indra! I have told you the glorious story of Siva. I
told you from the start, the reason for His curse.”
afer sitfanqereed mrerearard agfearits ara:
End of the thirty-fourth chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurarahasyam.
have also

Uatagits ara:
Chapter 35
aa tanh ya: ures aren afueites feargqen wet wef: asa 1 gH
unerente & sitqafe sitrornfer a1
Then Indra inquired Gauri eagerly thus: “How the worship of the
Linga was done on the earth? If I may know that, please tell me.” 1
wa wre tet at frftar weArar wu
aul tay cents sat wwe ser qat wat: grat fava fers 3
7 segqda: wrat cienfafgetinega aa fergisdt cites et wear faire: ui vi
afer aq fag iifeaa: ceratagentin aa: ar aeretact Wau
weet eviamra tart year
Then the pleased Girija addressed Indra thus: “Oh Indra! Listen.
I will tell you the purifying anecdote. People on earth came to know
about the worship of the Linga by the gods and did not heed it perhaps
considering it to be hostile to the world. Then Siva, seeing the
discontinuance of Linga worship on the earth, performed extremely severe
penance to propitiate Devi Tripurasundari. After ten thousand years, the
pleased Devi presented Herself in the visible form. 2 to 5
gear aft wera: Arar Aa YA: WA: wall
woret qusaget afeatriftars=ry sear fagterht ctenfareenftt = oil
are viet feraetanrsa serdtatt uel
Seeing the Universal Mother, Siva filled with fervent devotion
repeatedly bowed, prostrated and prayed before Her. Then the Devi
Tripursundari who had assumed a sportive form addressed Sambhu as
Siva and said thus. 6 to 8
TU] Vigt Nalet ciafafesta aq afersqsr wad a atefa ware: Bll
Tass T ATA qer arent aif semrafe citey da yf Waa: | toll
fergisserat warerg fers ysrrara: | qer: fata: wy aan qa west: NVM

qataens AM: 349 Chapter 35
“Qh Sankara! Listen. Human beings are not interested in the said
worship of Linga and are opposing it. Even so, pleased by your penance
I will grant your desire. From this day let all your forms in all the worlds
assume the shape of the Linga. Let the Trinity and the fourth one called
Maheévara be pleased with the worship of just the Linga. 8 to 11
gen frepar ast erat qaur yreqari warieras urs sted fog waeitat-n 92
at fag asdiaacn wet a ar efter
aaste tar farpar warg wa PTET, Weal
“The Linga has to be worshipped by Brahma, Visnu, Sambhu and
the fourth Sadagiva and all other gods. According to my command, you,
Hari and other gods should be unfavourable to him who does not worship
with devotion, the Linga. 12, 13
nearest fargisat fremravaat wa!
arerel fergigt uguister atti a: Ween
wer fronetarseg ad at ad fia!
fargqaaann wtarsé aifeats eet Weal
“Even to My devotee, worship of the Liga is mandatory. Oh Siva!
He who worships Me without worshipping the Sivalinga, all his efforts
will be futile. I will be pleased by mere worship of the Linga and grant
all his wants. 14, 15
faferar afarat forge tase afertarad: |
aot cert areterrrererra Ft: wean
“To him, who with devotion worships Me properly in a Linga, I will
grant a dwelling in My Abode which is unattainable by others. 16
arg ferg warms faferer yorter ATH
aenet aarrasatetfectferet Tat wine
“He who worships Me in Sricakra written on @ Linga will a
myriads of benefits of worshipping Sricakra.

A PE 350 Sri Tripurérahasyam
fagyfeiedt at wdeairinery aa Gear afar: Wagar: Ween
merged atar yferatear: |
“The Yantra (Tantric Diagram) written on the top of a Linga is the
Supreme Yantra. Just worship of that is tantamounts to worshipping all
the gods because the Linga is the embodiment of the Divine Trinity who
have emerged from it. 18
aamt draeats teat Uy VIET nee
sascha centers area: fora: 1 agaaat fog adarorarad: = tt Roll
saqaen fafingetis wees ferqyet! wvaat wad aaarssaeetaT on RH
“Oh Sankara! Listen. I will tell you another secret. Since the Linga
indicates the state of involution, it is the Transcendental ParaSiva, and
it is an alternate form of Mine in its causal aspect.” Saying thus and
instructing Brahma and others to worship the Sivalinga, the Devi
disappeared as all the gods were watching. 19 to 21
aa: wale city wad fgg Ursfated yen Terarsueaa: = BRI
waste uyate fora au: wcfea Freesat fread aet aa TANT: 23 II
weds carnal rata targa a went feta ta aera Ta Taal Vv II
watefa aufeya srrersaafantiaca |
From that day worship of the Linga spread in the worlds. “Oh Indra!
I have told you this. Hence there is no chance of Siva having a child.
Moreover you have seen Siva performing a great penance without
breathing and opening his eyes. How can I have contact with him? Oh
Indra! Go and depute Kama the son of Laksmi for this task. He will
win Siva and later your desire will be fulfilled.” Instructing thus Gauri
disappeared. 22 to 24
wa gaufe: vitranre wahtagry, Weal
Wen ware ed waaay gan sax deyraraey ware tga: = eM
anfafa: vreneerret fritearad: | reo eravatafa: yerarieeys: ti VO
wiisterratadgat afore & chm snfessy wattararat waif a wife a
Then Indra quickly returned to his abode and immediately
remembered Manmatha regarding the job on hand. By that mere

ugfagits aM: 351 Chapter 35
ee ee ee
remembrance, Manmatha made his appearance at that same moment
along with Rati in the assembly of Indra. Manmatha, the juvenile
repository of charm, wielding the flower-arrow and the sugarcane bow
and embracing the indescribably beautiful Rati, lured the sight and mind
of the gods. 25 to 28
gece wet wart t wears feerenfer: | WArTaRT Gea LATS SAT BAwAPTAT IN ze
OTS AUST PATA WATE
Seeing the arrival of Manmatha, Indra holding his hands received
him and placed him on the throne. Then Indra worshipped Manmatha
with suitable articles. 29
wer gyfer: aarat 24: wenfaet yey Io
SAE: wre Savi sweat a featenart
were veya: are far & oped wer ferry, nan
arentis ae dare water & wafer: |
arefeerrararet a race tert ate naz
Manmatha who was worshipped thus and honoured by the gods was
pleased and as the gods were listening, addressed Devendra thus: “Oh
Indra! Tell me why you remembered me. What should I do? Honoured
by you, I will fetch your want. I will achieve the impossible for your
sake. Have no doubt.” 30 to 32
fer qarot ay: wre we: Sparse: |
Safest conga wget wert 7a Waal
Srevarat wea at qerswatsfeatef
wee yrg: fore Qa: war: wae one: naen
# fren wert vterararat afar! :
To Manmatha who spoke in this manner, the happy Indra with
folded hands said thus: “Oh Son of Lakemi! Your words are not surprising;
instead they befit you. You, the invincible one, were created by the
Universal Mother for my benefit. Siva who is your enemy is presently
performing penance. Please vanquish him and unite him with Parvati
the daughter of Himavan. $3, 34

at fqeer, 352 Sri Tripurarahasyam
are vremeret weat ferry Waku
arent ore fattened ferarereongry|
fearequft gut argfraenreet Taya Haan
are fas ary fans marasa faytea: |
Hearing the words of Indra, Manmatha was depressed and silent
recollecting the earlier curse from Giriji and his destruction by Siva.
Seeing the state of Manmatha, Indra said thus: “Oh Kama! Why are
you unusually sad?” 35, 36
sft yremtsqqaa: & fracas asa aon
ae yee er a fied Serer!
wetster tat werd anata srerenfefa nen
W Sle: We sets Way are Grea: |
aasaerar aititfa + patareyt: Hen Hagin
wrearte & fired arpa 2a cesaury)
saan fretat canted ast anita: Nl ¥oll
Questioned by Indra, Manmatha sighed and expressed his inner
thought. “Oh Indra! Please tell me who will love selfdestruction. I am
cursed by Gauri that I will be reduced to ashes by the three-eyed Siva.
I think that this is the time for that. Time is really inviolable. Even
then, after telling you that I will do your job, how can I withdraw?
Hence I will go to achieve your desire and leave the future to the God.”
Saying thus, Manmatha proceeded from the heaven in his chariot named
Caitra. 37 to 40
wa aus wafers tfacerag fear ofa frarcamra eax waar: tl BRI
we wate wares afer ae vifseraretas areryada Fl YI
Team amt eitt vtay wari avatars wet averer até we sitaataat un 3H!
Grenfiregtt far earaasaerarent: | aged wart aed erqeatsgar ol wll
rant sifert tereat wes adres: 1 eran ferareper arse gomedia fy atrae ti v4
wom, antag ara wertag wets 71
Then the extremely grieved Rati embracing her husband around his

qafayits re: 353 Chapter 35
0 aT Se TR SRT ee
neck and weeping, tried her best to stop him. She said, “Oh dear! How
will I survive while your glory alone survives? Please withdraw your
vow of self-annihilation. Let us get back to our city. Living persons alone
will enjoy auspiciousness. Truth, penance, valour and all are for life
only. What is their use if one dies. If you do not concede my words,
I will in your presence discard this life and then you can go as you
wish. Oh Dearest! I am telling you the truth. Separated from you I will
be unable to live even for a second.” 41 to 45
Fayre waftrararest aud want tf Aer neva
afar we aad: fre qu aat w1
vireraneg at dtr: vite: watsdarer: von
serrata ta yrant wenger sft!
Waser aaente area wrorafaer u ven
aad a fagtertarreas YAIsanT!
ar & atat ad afsed ufaereata neen
Listening to his beloved Rati who had embraced him around his
neck, the brave Manmatha said thus: “Oh My Beloved! Listen. The brave
do not grieve in times of distress. Sorrow destroys all benefits. Even
Brahma and others cannot alter what is in store. Oh My Love! I will
join you again soon. Till such time worship Devi Tripurasundari with a
pure mind who will grant you all your wants.” 46 to 49
et qarafte frorenre aerit ofa: firars viteretfercreecar wear =awafiqrtt i wo
yeaa aac tet finfraret aT!
Even when her dear husband Kama was telling her, Rati, frightened
with sorrow, fell unconscious on the ground just as an yellow-plantain
tree chopped at its root touches the ground. =
gear argfterat wronteet virewenrer: ware
Braves yg erie wea weer seer eae wea at arerenraT warn
carstir aa wyfererator anfed aqaTTAT
gece at ert att fer are frat ef way

a Prey 354 Sri Tripurarahasyam
wren: wat a aac eta utes wtf fit tax
we vat fageerenea argent qf aad Sqearitse wre: forages ou yy
wat frat aurea aifwet Aquéfer
Seeing the plight of his dear wife, the sad Kama taking her on his
lap remembered his Mother Laksmi the consort of Narayana who made
her presence immediately. Seeing his Mother, Kama placing Rati on the
ground, bowed to Her and narrated his story. “Oh Mother! Having
promised Indra that I will accomplish his task, how can I go against it
like a bad person on the earth? Hence I will go to Siva to conquer him.
You take my consort to your abode after consoling her.” 51 to 55
Feat wet afters TT Aer W&RU
vireanafverayet ¢ are deta: 1 ace res weet crete fate Gon
yidt vitat frerenduyrest fafirastt 41 axes siteeredt eq feet wy
a & faarafa ye res sta: aaregfir
Then Rama with a faded, sad countenance embraced Manmatha who
spoke to her and with courage told him thus: “My Child! Go. You will
soon win Mahesvara. Even Brahma cannot undo the curse by Gauri.
Hence meditate on the Great Devi Sri Tripurasundari and recite Her
Sri Vidya Mantra (Paficadasaksari) and go. She will bless you. Go and
shine.” 56 to 58
SIAM Heat Aa Hat Sia | W4git
Wardfeaget earaq afeerarag ira: |
Thus advised, Manmatha bowed to his Mother the Universal
Mother and proceeded meditating on Sri Tripurasundari with utmost
devotion. 59
ae aa tet wen sarpryTed: oll
Rat ade aa: erste fata wyfeera
age firerarsitt yiterat aeut wa: Weel
arerag wat tat Gear wasfaye ferary
are wea % fireat afe aa fart qat Wag

afaents Aa: 355 Chapter 35
a tifag ater eons date Ff
ararsé fer ufteraat aden warmqaat azul
wat faor ypartarsé wyatt waIsaTy!
Then Laksmi looked at Rati with Her glances dripping ambrosia by
which she stood up as if after sleep. Not seeing her husband the grieved
Rati said pitiably thus: “Oh Venerable Devi! Tell me, where is my lover?
Separated from him I really do not wish to live even for a moment.”
Again she wailed thus: “Oh My Dear! Why have you abandoned me who
was always following you. Without you this entire world looks naught
to me.” 60 to 63
gente weed at auras water a Wes
wat wa aorta onddcarea argent onde: asf aafewpernf nl a4 II
Having cheered and consoled Rati who was lamenting, Laksmi took
her to Vaikuntha where Rati stayed being guarded by Her attendants.
gfe sified wrerereus wefayitsera: tl
End of the thirty-fifth chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurarahasyam.

wafagits ara:
Chapter 36
ae aarat dare wareaa at aati fasrifeaqusrarar: wea yAteay i ei
aa art qradhtarand Gael! Saray aa Ue Sa TATSAAT: Ta
Then Kama quickly proceeded on his chariot by name Caitra,
meditating on the auspicious lotus feet of the Mother Sri Tripurasundari.
On his way on the banks of the beautiful divine river Ganga, after
bathing he propitiated with a steady mind the Supreme Devi. 1.2
Tal a dedisyrteaqTer | wares Pgerd we TART: nau
Aer afaten tat fag wtatt seonseurcen wager fret lv
UTS geraTaoMy Sar UifoTga: | TaccraPehenafencentyaosAT w&ul
mevaquicraraatvas sarmitaa | tastaeatranega fgrat wall
_ When Manmatha with subdued senses meditated on the feet of
Sri Tripurasundari and became tranquil and introvert, then the Great
Devi Sri Tripurasundari stood near him. She was, red like the rising
Sun, wearing the Moon on Her head, with three-eyes, wielding in Her
lotus like hands the noose, the goad, the bow and the arrows; shining
with a crown bedecked with nine types of gems, young with exquisite
charm, being praised by a host of gods. 3 to 6
at Tar aUSa carat Tat weasel Aer Ter Esha Hae AAAI Il
WE: Suse: Garé waa) ares quite: YoraTARe: fina: uC
Stadt taat dens saearishirret: | yea WRata: aaitersunaeyfa: = Sl
Seeing Her, Kama prostrated before Her feet. The Devi placed Her
lotus hand on his head. Touched by Her lotus palm Manmatha felt
blessed and was horripilated with tears of joy. After rising, he saw the
Devi and filled with ecstasy praised Her with a choked voice unaware
of his own existence. 7t09

aafaeits A: 357 Chapter 36
4 carqamreten wear ota fafectacrarara aa wer efefirar I oll
Seeing him in that condition, the Supreme Devi was pleased. Knowing
about this, Laksmi the beloved of Hari arrived there. 10
wear eat ore Ue Faget oetrey wrest weer: sarah sitferrta: un gen
atigmrasmrdtt asat afaquéfe: tated ayfad areas: Wee
wi far we ctcraer: afrden waft feraefare vite et ree tl 23 1
Laksmi after bowing and praying to the Supreme Devi Sri
Tripurasundari said thus: “Oh Mother! Manmatha who is the enhancer
of my joy is the foremost among your devotees. He is suffering by the
curse from Gauri that he does not deserve. Defeat to your dear devotees
is improper. How can worldly activities go on without him? Creation
would become static. Hence instruct and protect him who has fallen at
your feet.”
ayer Cater Farge ore wreeitcar fire wet yur A A rent arerefer ater it gy
Waq wrquetarat araeeqada: | attenes setsd waitrag yg GH
Wa: area 2¢ wat aa wrensfaqperq Tefaerets cia wat a ATA ye ka Il
sqrt wae ates gfe eaeat Aare!
aa: at faqer cites aarmaitafara gat gel
Hearing Rama, Devi Tripura said in a dignified tone thus:
“Oh Laksmi! Listen. My devotee will never perish. Till he gets a new
body let him stay in my eyes. Let him be reduced to ashes by Sankara
according to the curse from Gauri. Subsequently he will get a beautiful
body and bring happiness to you and Rati.” Saying thus, Devi Tripura
looked at Manmatha and absorbed him in Her eyes and became famous
as “Kamaksi”. 14 to 17

St Free, 358 Sri Tripurdrahasyam
Manmatha who merged in Her looked as if in deep sleep (susupti).
Then his body dropped in front of Sri Tripura and Laksmi. From the
hairpits of his body, crores and crores of Kamas came out all around.
After ordering them to induce desire in the living beings, the Great Devi
Tripura by Her power of illusion made the body of Manmatha rise. His
body rose as if from sleep. The Supreme Devi called him by the name
‘Kama’ and gave him magical flower arrows and sugarcane bow and
blessed him to defeat Mahadeva who was performing penance. 19 to 22
Ha Art TSKS: Yoraiennfe: | wT aa steno AA PRATT: 1 33
aqaara tay: art carer fgets arearcte caer gearevas feaeaiat: i ee
2a: uftqat et updated fea: 1
Then Kama riding his chariot and wielding the flower-arrows and
the sugarcane bow reached the place where the blue-necked Siva was
in penance. Devendra, also to get his task done, followed Kama and
seeing Siva absorbed in penance stood at a distance along with his
retinue watching the victory of Kama. 23, 24
aa aM: Tareas are faery, Wea
asad quan efe dara ara
Then Kama seeing the meditating Siva, struck him in his chest by
loading his bow with the flower arrow. 25
wa ea: wate: ward cet Vee, TCL
feta Of disitea ASsuyaemsarart
fagia erent areat pass dere: nell
wdsuyaanrent yaraoret aati ws Genser Farftasaeras seyA: tl 2
dadafert qerafrreraumrad: | weitye: vepequat wat wyaArT, Wil
Realising the disturbance in His mind, Siva opened his eyes and
saw the daughter of Himavan. Realising the mental aberration, the
furious Siva saw by his side Manmatha who was wielding the bow and
the flower arrow and merely by that angry look Manmatha was reduced
to ashes as Indra and others were watching, just like a heap of cotton
by a destructive fire. 26 to 29

qefaeiis a: 359 Cinaas
awa mrersfaat a Seat SISAL! Feat ate: una: freferretega: 1 30
anrragaed yrs fromat eT
Then Brahma, praised by the sages and seers, listing the
destruction of the creation by the fire of anger requested Sax rs
Great God and the father of the universe to excuse the act. 30
ofa & waarerd antarstrafaeqe Ween
nial: udarsta orenfeerqea carrer weitere arsenite Gas yMT 1 BRU
“Oh Parasurima! I have thus narrated in great detail the birth of
Gaurl from Himavan and the extremely wonderful story of Kama’s
reduction to ashes.
sfa sitfqureet wrereravs wafayitsera: 11
End of the thirty-sixth chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurarahasyam.

aeafagits ara:
Chapter 37
manga qatartert! wtalfaatante areata a Wen
Fert sitgfireants freanitttrarrand! sar par sea: He Sears UST,
wee sitfagteren 3a cidtsft wera: | serat Tagine: weneqaes: BH
ale wet woara free qu Wt) Heana aeriiguueasaay = il ¥ IN
stagsaateet yanarsfray fray caret cite yetsht warargt AI
ada quad arad worara 71
“Oh Venerable Guru! I heard the delightful wonderful glory of the
manifestation of Gauri and the burning of Kama. Now I would like to
listen how, after the union of Siva and Gauri, Kumara was born and
how he vanquished the demons? Also how Manmatha, the dear son of
Laksmi and the dispeller of the sorrow of Rati, who had merged with
the eyes of Sri Tripurasundari, came into existence. Oh Guru! With
compassion tell me, your disciple, who has surrendered to you. Who on
earth including an ignorant person excepting non-moving things will
become satisfied drinking the nectarian, juicy, auspicious story of the
Great Mother flowing from your moon-like face which destroys a heap
of misery. Please tell that story to me, who is bowing and requesting
you. 1to5
Ua Yst weratonsfrgqat We: nail
sy Tete wists waeqyree | ud wernt art qrafeder Noll
g farts qefermsentaiseraaerar) wenot wretarare carsfatret fest i cil
Thus inquired by Parasgurama, Guru Dattatreya started narrating
by addressing thus: “Oh Paragurama! Listen. After Manmatha who was
reduced to ashes by Siva, Indra was extremely sad for not having his
want fulfilled and he requested Brahma to achieve this desire. 6 to 8
ae Ferran carent eer eegrer wye: | gaat: wftgaT qeRqUT TECHN 8 I
Then Brahma pacified Sankara by praying to him and solicited again
along with the gods. 9

aeafaeits a4: 361 Chapter 37
qe: nfagatte: wet cafes: | A qe: wre saasdy faarqyatra igo
ot frarqyan tat agerdtsfrenfseay! aaa or feat aerefeentee yrs ge
Thus praised by secret and famous hymns of His glory the pleased
Sankara said thus to Brahma, Indra and others: “Oh Brahma and other
gods! Ask quickly what you want from Me. Undoubtedly I will grant
you that.” 10, 11
qed VIgtaa: we aa: carafe: 1 fretrate @arensencar gusto ez
aeferar fate: wa fear easter
ard tres urdear afaar t Aa: YA: wean
a taeaat tear am fastest 7 dra:
a aagqriadt weityt wrxat ues
Hearing Sankara, Brahma said thus: “Oh Trilocana! The gods without
a proper leader for their army are defeated and tormented by Taraka
and other demons. Hence please go and join Parvati and You will get
a son who will definitely vanquish those demons by becoming the chief
of the army of gods.” 12 to 14
gen faerprpemfadt ware: | afrerene aeear fracar frat wer Weg
ae udararencrar daft wats urdear drt weet ae ay: Weal
Hearing the request of Brahma and others, Siva deeming it as
destiny, consented. Then Siva joined Parvati and spent one thousand
years with Her. 15, 16
arm tary fafa: wre vrenrdty wepeaterat
squyedt % yer avert ureter ara: fire: Ween
anf st apatite ate abeeera: | aren facets ee afar te
wont af Sar wet ot wat afer wetgrataynd a wate sat fe a ee
amreebasfit arena, area fran fas sega warah aa wretse: uftarft:
Then Brahma addressed Indra and others who were in front of him
thus: “Oh Gods! Listen. You should know that Siva, even after a thousand
years of life with Parvati, has not released His seminal energy accumulated
that completely it
over a long period of penance. If he were to release

at fee, 362 Sri Tripurdrahasyam
would really burn the entire earth because of its mighty prowess. Hence
we will go again to Siva.” Saying thus, Brahma proceeded to Siva along
with Indra and other gods. 17 to 20
undarara t 2a aa wear qt: wel fara et meee AeprfeaarfereAT 1 eH
mrncadthiyt art antag aa: ta wala cease aera 1 eH
After reaching Siva, Brahma requested Mahadeva thus: “Oh
Mahadeva! Please stop your prolonged copulation. Who is competent to
bear your entire seminal energy? If you do not stop, the world will be
destroyed. Please protect the world.” ; 21, 22
graft wereat farrstatgar! adt tat aeret ate aceaferd fa B30
vaadaget wate: arefag aati a yaar aorer wet cert fafa watt eI
Rerass Waaister wees ATA! IMGT TRMAMASS TH Al PROTA BAI
Thus requested by the gods, Mahadeva refrained from excessive
copulation. Then the agitated mountain like seminal fluid dropped on
the Earth who was unable to bear that power which was burning her.
Then she went to Brahma and said thus: “Oh Brahma! I am unable to
carry the power of Mahadeva. I am being burnt. Please protect me who
is seeking shelter under you.” 23 to 25
orend afieet wreae typahaa we ag ardatesadtd qfafterry i 26
UfareRIepan: Menara: |
Hearing the words of Earth, Brahma ordered Agni who was there
thus: “Oh Agni! Carry this power of Siva which is on Earth till it ripens
and becomes Kumara the child.” 26
at we fatatedt difaeta: witfert Holl
wre araratate ta Yat wad Teaeg aaerarht cad eat aed way
Listening to Brahma, Agni expressed his desire. “Oh Venerable Lord!
I will bear that power provided the child will be my son. If not I will
only be sad taking the trouble.” 27, 28

gafagits ara: 363 Chapter 37
geastataadt Ser: wre asey Aeitfea aatsha: yfadteet erate warez ui 2¢
ararara wafacaernta aarar asyreetantad versa: ade wet = 0
famrarcquass cifsaa: wre Were: | Weratse aratsfer arcutser ethra: 11 ae
aaa at cert waeea faqeaar
Hearing Agni, Brahma conceded to his request. Then Agni by his
strength carried that power of Siva which was unbearable and failed to
hold it. Approaching Brahma, the shy Agni said thus: “Oh Brahma! I am
not able to carry this virility of Siva. Protect me who is being burnt
and tell me where I should abandon it.” 29 to 31
faard fafacetsfater frre et W3zn
waaseat aarereate yrgt at ateerta
aren fafaeret tim ureter: wre at fate, TEEN
day asweT aig watt feared ya: aofe A qaranafe 4 asa Bil
aredteqert fererat ar carcsfraferatarat!
até vie adt tem arerisedtada ar Ta
TAHA TEMA Safarsuiags Ta! AAGHAATHA SAAMI Aa: BE
faorat arate We AAAS SAAT! Weatanfaqyae TF HIST U zell
aaerardtaaer aavitgarsfer wine) fafeest areat de: afta: arrtsft si
asqitefa watt freita a waraen aeafe fgets aa arnifa Gat Ge
_ Brahma thoughtfully told Agni thus: “Abandon the great power of
Sankara in this Ganga who will carry it.” Listening to Brahma, Ganga
with folded palms said thus to him. “Oh Lord! Without any benefit I will
never bear the energy of another person. If the child so born will soon
become my son, I will bear it. But not otherwise.” After Brahma agreed,
Ganga carried that energy of Siva and very soon being burnt by it
became a boiling river with tears and fumes and dead water creat res.
Approaching Brahma, Ganga with a lowered, shy face said thus: “Oh
Brahman! I have no interest in bearing this power. Boiling as I am,
I am emaciated. The water creatures are suffering. The ocean does not
want my company. I will end up a dry river. With mercy please tell =
where I should deposit this power of Siva.” 32 to

a Res, 364 Sri Tripurarahasyam
aren fearnet thraret qurafecraqs aa: ore froth HT sy eat wT xo
areracdatsat wesc year! aa ate yrgt ages wandfa Nsen
Hearing Ganga, Brahma thought for a moment and said thus:
“Qh Ganga! You can abandon the power of Sankara in the beautiful big
bamboo forest at the foot of the Kailasa mountain.” 40, 41
grad arqaat tim ures arerq! sensrdfad wet Het watseqaTEy i xy
adaer Urs cargit tim arse Barr A Vepalat wear ses aa He i xB
anaes at grea: warden fad adaesighrents saunsé waafe ot wx
Hearing Brahma, Ganga inquired with reverence. “Your words are
extremely astonishing. How can I deposit the energy there? When the
all consuming Agni, the all tolerating Earth, and me Ganga the best
among rivers are unable to bear, how can the bamboo grove take on the
energy. Oh Brahma! There must be a substantial reason for this. Please
tell me, if I deserve to listen to it.” 42 to 44
yst erat tirade wre we anfafa: 1 oy wt ya BATT, NS
WT wensyte fagean ofeat fears dat gaa eat vitef we: HetaTTN wE
WUd aa Vilas: YAM BT Aes! wen fayiviterandtesrant facy i vo
aerated aaat dttearct aati dated cat carsfaviferat Use
Inquired thus by Ganga, Brahma narrated in detail. “Oh Ganga!
Listen to the ancient legend about the bamboo grove. Long ago because
of the demon Bhasmasura, Gauri was separated from Siva and by the
pangs of which her body started splitting and fell there in hundreds and
thousands of pieces. This bamboo forest has grown from the pieces of
Her body and because it is made up of the adjuncts of Gauri, it can
bear the energy of Siva. Hence without any doubt you abandon there
the energy of Siva.” 45 to 48
grad tire ahigege years ure aghiafereqga ere, nent
wa caret watt arisen! amayatefe: ya adtsaAsfe wary: | ell
Hearing thus, Ganga deposited the potency of Siva in the bamboo
forest. With that energy the bamboo forest grew densely. At the proper

aataens ar: 365 Chapter 37
time the energy of Siva became the adorable child Kumara. Brahma saw
him first and other gods reached there later. 49 to 50
aqUea & aa ft Hak esr wants atfeqatot asrai uftaraar i 4g il
feeds faqedtiaa ese! atfeercderarranastpeey GR
gear dara: wre wea sher afery are wert sirens fe ward Tyee i 43
There, all the gods saw the wonderful child Kumara whose golden
hue conquered the brilliance of crores of Suns, whose eyes were broad,
whose chest was broad and arms long, whose charm put to shame the
beauty of crores of cupids. “Oh Bhargava! Seeing him Agni said ‘He is
my son’. Then Ganga said ‘He is my son’.” 51 to 53
fora, WaaTqeTTRUVEpU ER Wasser Yee wredietat Gel
Along with Parvati, Siva saw the child. Both of them were very
happy knowing him as their progeny. 54
war faerar arenht qparcennsest Bqe: | aftrgte atte: ardetreatsha a ut
recdttagadt aerate waqi etd wer anne aret aerser afaeafe
fran afreanaa wrgrat sitet yt art yt Hear wrt orafag at
aiyfrorarsitsayaey: Sara FA: Sheet FLAT STATA: TTT
Brag wat yar erst arat gt Ut (aa wed ae: aahtaraergg
For the said reasons, Brahma named the child thus: “He is ‘Agnibht’
the son of Agni; Gangeya the son of Ganga, the son of Parvati as well,
‘Skanda’ born from the spilled virility of Siva’. Then Brahma thinking
about who will take care of the baby employed the Krttika stars for
that job. Taking Kumara as their own baby the Krttikas competed to
feed the baby. Seeing their competition Kumara assumed six faces and
simultaneously drank their breast milk and thus got the names as
“Sanmukha” and “Kartikeya”. 55 to 59
tira erat apfaenrat agit fafransea: | wea: weary BaF Tea SaaTE: ge
forest cet wearer: eaificorrem i: 1 SAR: Br wet wa suk MTV

at fee, 366 Sri Tripuraérahasyam
Suckled by the Krttikas, he quickly grew like a mountain with six
peaks and seeing him the gods were greatly astonished. Then seeing all
the gods, Skanda said thus: “All of you offer your strength to me”.
ae wenstaret atameat tari fea: yet vifetaiaach faaperarsgery
Tredt Gaur: Uri aut aus aAGt: 1 Wel AYR TAM AAU ATT: = GV
wa mB Uga w amisfrgheiet! eat pat wdeapeTs FaTeTT tt GI
Then Brahma offered his rosary; Siva the trident, Agni the spear;
Visnu the disc; wind-god (Vayu) the goad; Varuna the noose; Yama the
staff; Kubera the mace; Ocean many gem-set ornaments; Visvakarma the
sandals and very clean fans. All the gods offered worship to him and
bowed. 62 to 64
Veh Feat wearers WA Aa: | SH: MEAS FE FLAT TST G4
Then Skanda, seeing Indra inert and disrespectful, was furious and
invited the haughty Indra for a battle. 65
auswanegs eacareaarerar frauicdqed: tee: view: Atda: 1 ail
Wert wareter 7s aa wife: | yew: Vera: cAtSIseATaaat = GUI
gear qr: feat mtsiatt acrates: | yitfaerarara wad aeat fegry on GC
Then a great war started between Skanda and Indra. Skanda was
supported by the attendants of Siva; Indra got the support from other
gods. Seeing the mighty power of Skanda who was fearsome, Indra fled
and hid himself within the Kraufica mountain. The angry Skanda
shattered the Kraufica mountain which was in front of him, by many
arrows. 66 to 68
wa weayte: wats: fortes: | aerscearateradt warat yreut aat 11 &e
We Aeqaetal Vitea: PrgTea: | woah tre eat feyaafsay =— Voll
wentads a: Saeed | adaafaar vrensdadqa: Hogi
Wale ANeRISw YRUISAtU ai awraysverferereaT WATTS AAT HW? I
Then the Kraufica mountain which was slackened with its many
peaks broken, sought refuge under Brahma. Then Skanda who was

aafaents 04: 367 Chapter 37
a ee a ee ee ee
pacified by the prayer of Brahma, returned the conquered wealth of the
three worlds to Indra who had become obedient and thus became the
chief of the army of the gods. As the chief of their army, Skanda along
with Indra and others waged a war with the demons Taraka and
Sarapadma who were known for their lordship over eighteen worlds.
srasgrdart aitfcetfenersge: | gat eee Yfet wavatserarren ay it 193
ware wat ars: VERT a aH! TaaUsy yrmisdietctes Nextt
RAISIN AT See: | MPa ae: TAT EA: Ht
Fighting for a long time with many groups consisting of crores and
crores and crores (100 crores x crores x crore) of demons and displaying
his strength, Skanda killed Strapadma and Taraka. Then Skanda made
Indra and others as rulers of the worlds. By destroying the demons,
Skanda the dispeller of difficulties, the Lord with Six faces established
happiness in the world. 73 to 75
vd qersaqayrpercercaat YO wes arfat we: YA: SafenaTsaATa oh
wrangafnd qartaerensyay! weet wer Wee: Tears ae TATA wll
arate ugrart: waeregtany! faery frafatwragtaate ayt wee
ut ag dnt silqyentvadseaey!
After hearing the ambrosial story of Skanda narrated by the great
Dattatreya, the curious Paragurama inquired again thus: “Oh Lord!
I heard your narration. But I have a great doubt. I will express that
to you. Please clarify. How was Skanda able to destroy the Lord of the
demons who was invincible by Siva, Visnu, and Indra. I am eager to
know about it. Please tell me.” 76 to 78
are wre eereutte fer etfere: Wont
army enter me qeritaegerene! wera seven wee: YH: 4!
User: Wear RATS ATA: HIATT: | TE ATT STA TAT TTT: M"
Bran aH ervey TT ARCA wh eT, gr:
yee weaTaa wre fenfssrirrery

a fee, 368 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Then Guru Dattatreya lovingly addressed Paragurama thus:
“Oh Paragurama! Listen to the ancient secret. The venerable august
Sanatkuméra the embodiment of all souls, the knower of the past and
the future, who dwells in all, who is quiet, who revels in Self-joy was
residing in the Rsabha mountain. Then Brahma went there to see his
son. Seeing His father Sanatkumara stood up and offered worship like
giving a seat and other respects. After the worship he humbly expressed
his mind to Brahma. 79 to 82
wer 4 eed fatsag fauftada eau
yearaqat aagfaeqerar aa difed: | we wer war aut qe MEIS|ATN cx
qeanirenitergiant aarsat: | aa we verge freat aera: Weutl
agrercnatnd féqaenqec
“Oh Brahman! I seek your permission to inquire about something
within me.” Saying thus and getting Brahma’s consent, he further said.
“Oh Brahman! Last night I dreamt something wonderful. In a fierce war
between the gods and the demons, I killed all the powerful demons.
Please tell me how without any reason I killed the demons.” 83 to 85
PAPA YB: wre wen warafe: neal
Ty] ys qo fared wansacireat: | wefanssara: qaargt: wel cl
tart qaqued aa defeat sar ag faersqueraty gaara: fired yo: 1 ce
areandifa vat deritaresaan: | arereningquraas weraia 7 negu
ferret censht ret USOT! AAAIATUN: AT AAA tl Fo ll
aaIsamT war qe afaeafa a waa!
Inquired by Sanatkumara, Brahma the creator said thus: “Oh My
Son! Listen. In your earlier birth while learning about absolute knowledge
you had heard about the war between the gods and the demons. Then
you had determined to vanquish all the demons and hand over the wealth
to the gods. To achieve that you practised “Vaisvanara Vidya”, but died
in between. Because of the partial practice even though you were fit to
achieve the highest goal, you became my son. Your dream is the
unconscious impressions in your mind and it will come true. 86 to 90

watagits Aa: 369 Chapter 37
a
geaead wererat YA: Ws AAT, nen
qraq vent wrfaorr # aisfer aden wast Gat waaeae TewT NH ez
Hearing Brahma, Sanatkuméara again questioned with reverence thus:
“Qh Lord! How can that be? For me who knows the past and future
there is no future birth. Please enlighten me.” 91 to 92
wa wen We ya afoacarse at uf ereota fe a waren weft we 1 ee
sere yfaaetst wat ee wet fafir
Then Brahma addressed his son thus: “Oh My Son! Listen. All this
will happen when by your self-volition you will take birth.” Saying thus
and worshipped by him, Brahma departed to his abode. 93
aa wreansat yeqursec: ferarge: nee
ayaq wafgerd w wrererears srt afer cavt aa fatto frevet fafereaqu eh i
wawaet yet qe wats_piaey Soe Yes aghad wes HET eH
niet wdetary ta rere wife: 1 fafa: waa: vite: etsamgMeHA: gel
After a lapse of time once Sambhu seated along with Parvati on
the bull was watching the world, reached the hermitage of Sanatkuméra.
In that hermitage Girija saw the son of Brahma seated, who had a pellucid
face, who was calm, tranquil and cool. Seeing such a sage, She
Sankara thus: “Oh Mahega! Who is this unperturbed, calm person, &
kind not to be seen anywhere in the entire creation?” 94 to 97
vet pt firfeorar wre Sait que: | waa: Garatse wage: Year: Mh ge
wera: wasraat frerghda: | apap asfes aeterereit sweet: Hegn
wafata aaerer yet waa uefa
Thus questioned by Girija, the God with the bull-banner said thus:
“He is the famous sage called Sanatkumara the son of Brahma. Having
attained Absoluteness he is immersed in Supreme Bliss and ever detached
and accomplished. Because of his detached nature, he has no oe
Oh Parvati! Indulgence is the root cause of suffering. sa

at faqeeeT 370 Sri Tripurarahasyam
After hearing this, Gauri said thus to Sankara. “Oh Great God!
That being so, let us go and talk to him and then proceed further. I like
to see him.” 100, 101
wrddt we aaanfesaerenreratray fret gol a ater a feat we
aepery tar esq aden ufo geqeraster ax tiquicqert ater yrgT: og
eit aeafwart urddtatea: fora: | sadted qareaa weaqatfirrege: «= Qo
Thereupon Siva told Parvati what was appropriate at that moment.
“Oh Dear! Listen. We should not go anywhere without a purpose. By
doing so one will suffer humiliation.” Seeing Parvati anxious to go there
even after his advice, Siva along with Parvati reached the hermitage of
Sanatkumara. Alighting from the bull they stood in front of the sage.
wrens syret a at aa Rateacasaeifiea: 1 ordeterget aer eye fercarfeaat 11 204
Sanatkumara did not look at them thinking that there was no use
in their knowing his mind. Siva and Parvati stood before him for a long
time. 105
amqursnsagt wer 2a: frarenqe wife acecaaftar weaT: — Il RoG ll
We: we faa: qa ufeiter a saratonfad qa urcarafa git i tow
waart wat cite wet ght erdwa wenqaisdifa war aaa: Il
Was wanaat at qa: adfierséfa
Then the neglected Lord Siva taking it as an insult decided to test
his maturity and angrily shouted at Sanatkumara and said thus: “Oh
wicked one! Your behaviour is uncultured. Insulting good persons will
soon ruin one’s glory. I have excused your misbehaviour because you are
the son of Brahma. Do not once more neglect persons like me.”
reread yieqaet ware wen: Ya: Hol
a favitafag yea: fyratsenepatea: |
waed sata et eacmtanfrdaat gRoll
feactsfer weadte: art fast qa
yor aatfefaat & acmont arsta aarfefa: megegil

aafayits ara: 371 Chapter 37
fasiat arsfastat ar acifaepafaaan
ayraront fagtaromearsrat + ears: eee
qarat wae ga farptarquytaas: | yay aTsyae at eargiees t wet BRB
anfgrerata wa wfafar qa Het wesyreist fe at wenctepa: i eee i
waatta WE: Aateit agarat: | waepae sate facet wet fat: egy
Hearing Sambhu, Sanatkumara spoke thus: “Oh Siva! I cannot be
frightened. I have no fear from anywhere. Swallowing the cause of fear
I am doubtlessly free on my own. Heaving discarded the consequences
of action I am not worried either about crores of curses or crores of
boons. I do not experience any thing special or unspecial any time from
any thing. He who is the support of all speciality does not depend on
any thing special. I consume all distinction just as fuel by the burning
fire. So curse me or bless me as you please quickly without hesitation.
I am very much blessed by your presence here. Without effort I have
propitiated you who are to be worshipped arduously with many services,”
Saying thus Sanatkumara remained silent. 109 to 115
at wer wert Tear arsfaepas SATA WTA: OTe YAR we AHISEY A
Wiser fresar anfrgear wa Yaa arerearsfernt Ta AreaTMTATAAT 1 Ke
Hearing Sanatkumara and seeing his unperturbed being the pleased
Siva said thus: “Oh Son of Brahma! I bow to you who are on the right
path. I am pleased by your steadfast beliefs. Tell me what you want.
I will grant it to you even if it is rare.” 116, 117
aq fereear fafa: ure yreeqeeyrfiga:: 1 arererear ware we & aptfaret ae: eRe
arenfat tera arg aafa ae: werartfransenreit afr & ate anfsoe eee
Hearing Siva, Sanatkumara smilingly and fearlessly said thus:
“Oh Mahadeva! I cannot be shaken by magicians just - oe my ;
be by a great wind. Ask me what you want. Fulfil this neem
will be my boon.” 118, 119
mansurehet wear am sitfircare weet: 1 ate create caret wet AH GHA "
Then Maheégvara seeing the firm Sanatkumara agreed and said thus:
“If you desire to grant my desire, then you should be born as my so),

at fee, 372 Sri Tripurarahasyam
TAI WA: We Taet wa afar yatseta weet facarafe yrgt ui eee
frost gent aa ya: eafefa vie 81 wae gat afaar a ae: ST eee
waarsé Gatsarsas afaget att wari
Granting that boon, Sanatkumaéra spoke again thus: “Oh Sankara!
Your request is really trivial. I am the son of even the low-born creatures.
Tell me what is difficult about becoming your son. I will be born as
your son and not to Parvati anyway. I have granted the boon that was
requested only by you.” 121, 122
aa a adet eat ore ft Afra WR’
wera wifedtste warste aq aden saint codt weet yar RR
aan ana yor fe wat aa aa Sa: Ua faass arent aT 1 Ve
duet aq wat ofa argtifinn: 1
Then Devi Parvati spoke to the great sage thus: “Oh Son of Brahma!
Indeed I have also a request to you. Because we share our body, you
will be my son as well. Equal worship to guests is the conduct of the
virtuous. When Siva has got the boon, how can I return with empty
hands. The wise say that disparity is not a good trait.” 123 to 125
raed urddtaret yace faerge: WRK II
tfa & gaat aft after a a eee: | Uae ad Yea wad aafeatu ez0 Il
Listening to Parvati, Sanatkumara said again thus: “Oh Devi! I will
be called your son. But I will not be born from your womb. It is my
vow that I will not be born through a womb.” 126, 127
oft grat ya: wre ord qPrra a Sint Sedererya AGE war NII
weet wat tents za ada
Hearing that, Parvati again spoke to the sage thus: “Women will
not have the pleasure of having a child without physical contact (like
carrying and delivering). Therefore I wish always that you should be
born from my body.” 128
saat: & aft: feafetzyvarare vg, W RRM

aafags Ara: 373 Chapter 37
ofa fax tread ae: Wepdital wt ade untenrasft wer 1 e301
qu, wet arene aera ETA wen Uda Vet fagitet: wearsat on eae
poan wuled at aa Weett) went qaeea wert YS TT eaRH
Thus requested, the sage thought for a while and addressed Sankari
thus: “Oh Devi! Why are you deluding me with primitive words. You
are the Mother of the Universe who has accomplished everything. Listen
to the truth which I relish. Your earlier body which split into pieces on
the mountain has grown as a golden bamboo grove. I will be born there
through contact with your earlier body and you will be happy.”
seqant wort dat ang: canviftaenys arepARishe yhrararsrateata (33 I
aerafaccart terdtat a ade: | wrerserara: weet aers uftefed: 1 Rael
HATATTSAATAGTL AAAS HAT Us Hatet Fe PAATTATS ATM Ie I
Thus told and adored, Siva and Parvati proceeded to the place of
their liking. Sanatkumara who had by the greatness of his excellent
knowledge attained oneness with Brahma and all the gods and demons,
and grown in strength vanquished the mighty Taraka and other
demons. I have thus narrated to you Bhargava, the legend of the birth
of Kumara. 133 to 135
gf sitfagereeet wrereeraus weafaeits ema:
End of the thirty-seventh chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurarahasyam.

apfagits ara:
Chapter 38
aur a dua qyayrfaqeor ae: waa S netstat oO wen
“Oh Parasurama, who are an ornament to the Bhrgu clan! Listen,
I will narrate to you the supreme glory of Bharati (Sarasvati), which is
indeed extremely wonderful. 1
andt a yu waa ygusacen fear: autad anf gent arfast aa gitar ui 2H
at arquet untae faare: qfrafia: | Herfad acacia at war: afaet fear
aura fageafiatarat yee deqe feaafafatafad: dead: yaa II
SATU ara Aes Wea feat: | Tear a we: taferaaat gate feu Gu
sara ciara teasefiracitan 4a qaqa afe wale ae: I
sone asa aes safea sar wt aaadt Gd Aer ase fear wai 0
dh: ameifaaet: yor watt aa: 1
3 had mentioned earlier about the auspicious Sarasvati, the sister
of Siva. She who is subtle, is known as Savitri because she protects the
three classes of people. She is the consort of Brahma and her marriage
was narrated to you earlier. Oh Parasurama! Once in the assembly of
Satyaloka near Brahma, she was variously praised individually by the
Siddhas and Divine Sages who were present there. Brahma was sitting
with an indifferent smile towards the prayers. Observing his indifference,
the angry Sarasvati spoke thus: ‘Your disinterest in me is absolutely
improper. You married me when you were unable to create the world
on your own. Recollect your pitiable, unskilled condition prior to my
entry, when you sought shelter under Devi Tripurasundari. 2 to7
ae wet ¥ fac fafa: wre seer er well
44 et aaquel ai citi wat fe daa act genera: ueitat wfagfer: etl
aad aitqaatataate at qari 4 a usierdrarsfa weanftatagfiot 1 gol
a mafaaryg wa ae afar
Hearing Savitri, Brahma burning with fury said thus: ‘You should

sofas or: 375 Chapter 38
not talk like that to me. Husband is God unto women. Adoration of a
wife in the presence of her husband is highly objectionable. Without
knowing the conduct of an obedient wife you are abusing me in vain.
By your misconduct you are unfit to be my wife. In future you will
never be with me in any sacred ritual.’ 8 to 10
sta yret ¢ atfast qarerrentiier Ween
ufaend act at sacra yaaa afe aset aafaet wary yoy afe Tu ee
afasitererat uit apfeet ari
The cursed Savitri again burning with extreme anger announced a
counter-curse on Brahma thus: ‘If I do not deserve to be with you during
sacred rituals, then listen— I will be with you by taking birth in a
low-class caste.’ ll to 12
feet fryranss: ya: weftets wa, Ratt
Listening to the counter curse. Brahma was again furious. 13
aa tara: we Gear qafearreqs afetate deat qeq: wtanfe: i ye
wat: waa wet wardsdta aden wat arraorieral aa SoAgTHAT RGM
aren fafa a arfast arrarraqeret |
Then all the gods, seeing both Brahma and Savitri very furious,
surrounded them and praised them. By their anger the entire world
trembled. Then Narayana and Siva quickly arrived there. After hearing
Brahma and Savitri they made them excuse each other. 14, 15
fartt et ayferd fq: arciteat nee
ay asumnfiar dat enfast wa vines sur Sf erarseresrrarrafeatarery te
3 weird ufrepfacrancanqert qari aersaete aaitert erat SET Tera te
rita wa uoft afer a fafa cater eatseratsetrepera aHeNHfoT 88
suateafa asta 223 aaefrt
Then Siva and Narayana said thus: ‘Oh Brahma! It was improper
and inauspicious that Devi Savitri born of Sri Tripurasundari was
disrespected by you.’ ‘Oh Devi! Listen. Your thoughtless curse on Brahma

st ARES, 376 Sri Tripurarahasyam
was not right. We will suggest a solution to your mutual curses. The
angry curse by Brahma that Savitri cannot partake in his sacred rites
and the curse by Savitri that she as a low-born one will partake in such
rites—both these will not go in vain. Oh Savitri! Born with a different
body from your own aspect in the low-class clan you will be with Brahma
during the rites.’ 16 to 19
ged fauyfgradteadt arat a arect W Roll
ving: Blagdon greater faferessicater qaraet wa we WeReH
adtsfrarace ut yea warsfaan adissraste wera epfatat wereafan 220
Hearing Siva and Visnu, Brahma and Sarasvati with residual anger
again cursed each other. Brahma said thus: “Born in the low-class let
her be my wife during the rites; but for having cursed me without
forethought she will not remember that she is born from the aspect of
Sarasvati.’ 20 to 22
gen vind qed areeit ars ferentfirar
fafér wife yremats syy aaa farrgiay, Want
adisfaqya aIscren arqened afeeate
Hearing the curse uttered again, the angry Bharati soon cursed
Brahma thus: ‘Because you have without reasoning cursed me, you will
impulsively love me, a forbidden woman.’ 23
yafeqeynat at gear qat etat Weel
and: dete aa ager ured anfirat
Seeing both Brahma and Sarasvati angrily cursing each other again,
Siva and Visnu prayed to them through various hymns and made them
excuse mutually. 24
AA Hier Asal ARN Alenfaae: Te
qenret wert a arafedtsaaq srarcaeerentatct saferfersy i 28
Waa age ada: wag! apranadat afequsrstentrsay I 2
qareranratot wadquryifaany! aavtars rea aS, ell

apfagits ara: 377 ere
i i eR
After a lapse of long time, the creator Brahma decided to perform
a Yajfia near the great lake Puskara and ordered the divine arti
Vigvakarma to build the place for Yajfia. Visvakarma made the hall
ready for the sacred ritual. The hall was entirely decorated containing
all the required material. The altars for the Yajfia were set with nine
types of gems. The hall had the combined ambience of the six seasons
of the year and contained golden vessels filled with varieties of rice and
drinks. 25 to 28
aa far aIsenTstar PHATE HT: | APSR: I VE Il
arary: ada: seorarsatste yPrpren: 1 stafererg aperen: weferenferyneer:
arranger tar wreratgrscattror: | farerenr: feryear: w feracnetem: 1 Beil
AAAS HCO AGATA AAA: | arama apare gent waet ferry aR
wpfardardt trgerathron: | atest faferpeararerey faferer: ett: aa
At that hall arrived prominent oblationaries like Bhrgu, Kasyapa,
Kardama, Vasistha, Pulaha, Agastya, Pulastya—all experts in the
performance of Yajfia. Many other great sages well-versed in Yajfia and
erudite arrived there from all places. Indra and other gods, Gandharvas,
Apsarasas, Vidyadharas, Kimpurusas, Kinnaras, Great Serpents, Demons,
Raksasas and Humans arrived at Puskara the place of the ritual. The
Gandharvas sang, the Apsarasas danced, the panegyrists chanted many
praises to Brahma and others. 29 to 33
ar aratsfreneaet qraramtye | marae: firat wsttergaseertata: navi
Then at the most auspicious time when the stars and planets were
favourable, Brahma invited his dear wife to the sacred rite. 34
panfefin: ware afer Reerqafes: | mero: ee eave ferret eter? Wait
aa aatsfat fa ares atfra: BA!
arsferarera, weteter rerareatet ft: fire Wan
srayacenfererica anfertt a aarerar ferererrstt at area aed: waren Fe
Sf qpat farfiaférert waver yea: feo Bt want ett ereeTITETT AM BC
ware yaatse war ats feerseran!

R ART, 378 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Indra and others invited Sarasvati thus: ‘Oh Devi! Brahma is waiting
for you from a long time to perform the sacrifice at the auspicious time.
Please go there. Since the time is said to be auspicious it should not
be lost at any cost.’ Thus invited, Sarasvati did not go thinking that
what has to happen will happen. Brahma, coming to know of her delay,
was angry about losing the auspicious period and said thus to Visnu
who was there. ‘Oh Hari! Bring me quickly another equally suitable wife
before we transgress the auspicious period.’ 35 to 38
waitest fanaa efxfacr qaet nen
Wennfeaceat TersUt WaATL|
geal went wat waae 4 aft: Ul ¥oll
wartat faciteassg: yenqnstaar
Wer We: wAMad ag altata waa: ¥en
Thus ordered by Brahma, Visnu searched on the earth and not
finding one in the Brahmin-class, brought a cow-herd girl who was equal
to Savitri. Seeing her having auspicious qualities every one loudly
exclaimed “Well done, Well done”. 39 to 41
ufvita a at ust aero fatter dares caquet f wre cite: it wl
Then Brahma married her and performed the great sacrifice. 42
aasswmm alas aaa wataar! cayt wert: urs waa Sear BF
wearers sfarcratcat ant Targa Far) ster aad aead face faerfssrat
meaavrraie Yeapasqan! ulate wage ceasterassqaT A
aut fariga aa cere ari feaa eaopeassant aa: we Fryers AT
fadtaafid usfart wartqa maser facitat a ada werafea i vo
We WepTAVSt waretet carer feast seqerar Predat aereanfast ageyra: Ml ¥e
Then Savitri came to the sacrificial hall along with her friends and
saw the most beautiful Gayatri by the side of Brahma. Dimmed by the
effulgence of Gayatri, just like a star by the full-moon, Savitri was shy
thinking that the assembly was laughing at her. Just like a lotus that
shrinks exposed to Himalayan mountain, her lotus-like face shrunk and

aqefagits Ara: 379 Chapter 38
she looked as if her limbs were hiding in the mountain of shyness, For
a moment she stood there still as if unconscious and as if a still-painted
picture. Then getting to know about the deed of Brahma, she was burning
enveloped with anger that would reduce the three worlds to ashes. With
throbbing lips she said thus: ‘Oh Brahma! Your conduct is fine’. Saying
thus she departed from the sacrificial place. 43 to 48
dften vieryges wet Tensfaqee: | ta wen: wleafgsatermrenntga:i ¥¢ i
martesyiet & aferrrareey! a asauciant frags wa: i kot
apnisafadt afgdtar srqyarsemad! vat wenfear: wa Bee webaAETAT 11 Ge
tar redqaa: fegarufeat: | afrata usaitet wecadafre: ue
fegt aensfraget alge waenferar: | yarn werarqafiars seamata i 43
arrentfegt: GaIaT Beet: WASNT: | Tegra fearreera seats Taq | 4¥ I
waa facta aearrana sal
Savitri settled on the central peak of a near by mountain. Then the
sacrificial hall along with the priests and others was engulfed with the
blaze of her fury which looked like burning the sacrificer, his wife and
the entire arrangement. Augmented by the wind, as the flame started
destroying all, the priests and members assembled there fled. The gods,
Gandharvas, Sages, Siddhas, Caranas, and Kinnaras discarded their gifts
and without even bidding good-bye to each other ran in ten directions
wailing and trembling with fear. The earth trembled like the leaf of a
fig-tree shaken by a great wind. The horizons were enveloped by darkness,
the oceans were in high tide; the Sun was swallowed by darkness as if
by Rahu, the mountains were splitting as if during dissolution. a
49 to
warqay videy deaisararratey Weal
shar wenea: wa adeatatrsra: | anfettegeorg: wife aeeeretaT Mt 4s I
srrenferatt Serabefarera rere wh enfant mnie ax very fear fe BT ue
When that was the condition of the worlds above and below, Brahma
and all others, uncertain about their course of action ‘went one by one
to pray to Savitri. To begin with, Indra with his retinue went to =~
mountain peak where Savitri stayed. cigs

at fey, 380 Sri Tripurérahasyam
Aa Tesde Ut ae: BTTAST: | VTERTA: CHER: SPCHTATTTTT te
watered fea frtarenfata a: 1 ete: urptdat fafa: vierret on ue
As Indra was proceeding towards the mountain, crores of Saktis
born out of Savitri’s anger wielding fierce swords started to destroy every
one and among them Indra was captured, bound and imprisoned in the
mountain cave. 58, 59
wa anisfaden: Hat teat Hed! VaT aa fadearen aarti TAT: 11 Goll
ua way tay wifeatd: aaa: | feenfrercarara fires faferafiet agn
wifes: mlacatated rrTaaT
tar war: aa wa fe Get 3: YA WaT, WARN
sft até faferensa urddt a carats dearera wrfara: dyrarea eter i G3 Hl
Similarly Yama, Agni, Varuna, Kubera, Nirrti, Vayu, Rudras, Vasus
and all gods were bound. When all the gods were thus captured by the
Sakti forces, Visnu discussed with Siva in the presence of Brahma thus:
‘The fire of Savitri’s fury will burn the three worlds. All the gods are
captured. What should we do to achieve good’? After deeply thinking
about it, Visnu sent Parvati and Laksmi to pacify Savitri. 60 to 63
& rent wlegradten: afeaed wade: | andl wer aerated wreqrsrar tt &¥ Il
avert wg mforensfr a enferrraari car fafrettenar aetarsfer area nt G4 Il
Parvati and Laksmi quickly reached Sarasvati by overcoming all the
angry forces and spoke to her sweetly. When Savitri was not pacified
even by their request, Brahma, Visnu and Siva approached her.
wr aevt faerat afest aeparssmay! Seesrasfe a yA: Wasaret FAA
Ware: AMAIA TEM HEIS|M dt ATMA Aareat afeend: | oll
7 westaaets wefames: | Waa caateta WaT: = tl RCI
aeanigg ay Gea efteara a weit qua faquerat asarearafe fase
Savitri whose anger had slightly reduced, seeing Brahma before her
started burning again with intense fury and because of that her wonderful
form looked frightening and she emitted fire from her eyes. Brahma,

g spel 381 Chapter 38
Visnu and Siva were surrounded by that fire just as the elephants in
rut enveloped by a conflagration. Seeing them who were being burnt,
Laksmi and Parvati propitiated the Primordial Devi Tripurasundari as
there was no other succour. 66 to 69
wa eae Hereat aarsfarray WT) HATA PAT tt Vo Al
Taher qemhry ages swaeMs sGetTETT 1 Oeil
gear wored weptitaten saferthaer: |
Then the Supreme Devi, with a beauty surpassing the charm of a
crore of cupids, appeared there. Seeing Her wearing a gem-decorated
garment, glowing with a crown, and wielding attractively Her
famous weapons in Her four hands, Gauri and others bowed to Her with
reverence. 70, 71
wea: Bfafearser avarafertarsect Wort
fart wikatstresententia: aeata: fer: 1 ara at aredt wre faqer efeatssaat
act anisfralaa ctereregar sauder verter art wreayeaT: tl wv Il
way fase cient: Wea PITA FRM!
By the very presence of Devi Tripurasundari the fire of anger that
had pervaded disappeared just as the darkness with the rising of the
Sun. Then She addressed Sarasvati thus: ‘Oh my dear daughter! Enough
of your anger that is destroying the world. Withdraw the forces born
out of your fury. Let the worlds be free from distress. Look at them
with love.’ 72 to 74
soya aredt tear eiferar sate: Ou
facnftrar: waa 2B yrs war a are
Thus told by the Devi Tripura, Sarasvati who was shy absorbed
all the forces born out of her anger into her own body and became
tranquil. 75
aver at Faget Sat arfertt wore wet nail
fafind: chertfghequra weufeaa: | qorea Asrarefa fat wreath ee
fears fer wires arena vier wafencneTt!

at fee, 382 Sa Tripurarahasyam
Then the virtuous Savitri with extreme devotion praised Deyj
Tripurasundari through many beautiful prayers and said thus: ‘Oh Devi
Tripura! Pardon my mistake caused by my anger. I am here as Your
servant ready to take Your instructions. Please do so.’ 76, 77
aa sitarqereuns scitend: Teather: Ween
afaaivrardtayant tats aad: | afeat qacanre ynbat at wares i oe
wadag qaet ag qaRaa Fa:
Then by the compassionate glance of the Divine Mother, Visnu,
Brahma and Siva stood up and similarly all the gods were freed. The
Devi Tripurasundari said again to Savitri thus; ‘Oh My dear daughter!
Be calm. Let Brahma, the lord of living beings, complete the sacrifice
by uniting again with you.’ 78, 79
sta sear at Gem: arfast wore wet coll
aaisafayer we anisé waatqari seat weit qa: wareareta ada ceil
Wa WSISTAMAAS STARA | AISA AA qa Ufatts arefA i cz
Hearing Devi Tripurasundari, the virtuous Savitri with folded hands
said thus: ‘Oh Mother! I do not desire to be united again with Brahma.
I will settle down here itself always drowned in the bliss of meditating
on Your lotus feet. In this matter, Oh Mother! Please do not again
prevent me.’ 80 to 82
gfe sifaqrret mrerenavs apfayitseara: 11
End of the thirty-eighth chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurarahasyam.

Wenlraranfegits ara:
Chapter 39 :
aa: wre fafadet ayer weet WA: FA: |
aeatt qarssarat ferdtsfea fafeensarar nen
AaISSHAAT Ces He: ATat frateqa
fasrraf feaferat arteteprar Uy neu
aifast afe 4 yan afacatfa aet Haq!
waengqin fire citer at atest var nan
qasvar verter yea: ala BEAT! seat Tada ayer wl
usiteaa sar ar at daiaear aateadtee: areat wratsfer Tena I 4 II
wate simercfs watt pel
“Then Brahma after repeated prayers and prostrations said thus to
the Devi. ‘Oh Great Devi! I am wholly obeying your orders. Without
Your orders, who will be able to move, I would submit my request to
you. Oh Mother! Please listen with compassion. If Savitri does not become
calm, how will my Yajfia be completed and how will the world be without
trouble. In the past, cursed by the angry Savitri that I will fall in love
with a low-class woman, I completed the Yajfia by marrying that woman—
but how will I be appreciated by the great Brahmarsis? Oh Supreme
Empress! Set right all these and bless me.’ 1 to 5
wifaer ctererte sitet fagtatt wan
we Sar get em: aque aren ae fergie wot white =o
areata reeenfiy werferratererrt |
Thus requested by Brahma, the Supreme Tripurasundari said thus:
‘Oh Gods and Goddesses! Listen with devotion. I will narrate the extremely
glorious legend about the birth of the most charming wife who associated
with Brahma during the sacrifice. 6, 7
aafareger areromsea: aatfirent eitenfa ge: wen
aver fereran er agrs seit werera: 1 weed aris sem wat arenghert nen

PUELMCSOL 384 Sri Tripurarahasyam
aera eat uta wales wea wet Afat aeviaaet war i Ron
ate arent quisfer aver wget aa Shad at araarih wisest wa fart i ee
fafraaqredt siyrd wfresfa aver a fat ad oremoens sacar 1 921
‘Long ago a famous liberal brahmin named Kousika who was
addressed as Haryaksa (Kubera) for his virtue and knowledge, performed
penance on the sacred mountain called Suparsva. By a severe penance
he pleased the Devi Savitri who appeared before him. She said thus:
‘Oh Brahmin! I am pleased with your great penance. Tell me what you
want. I will grant that to you. There is nothing which cannot be given
to you. Are you aspiring the position of Indra or Candra (moon) or
Kubera? By your penance you have conquered everything right from
Brahma to moving and non-moving creation.’ 8 to 12
wifes aed arat waa: Gate aa AeRUped fara: worer yqparster: 11 3 11
tfa ast quad aed ar gray Gusé vatset wart Gatfanafe fer: 1
wifarragera Ura rarqUTy! wefarenoet we: Areata RG
Wieramrerrrrgyritsd: | wear At Hat yal AIS ee AEE: negli
Wel AeA BArTAAt Twa) AAMAS Saat TaISAUEHeT at Ae tl
waetagureat wares witfea: |
‘Oh Brahma and other Gods! Listen to what Haryaksa reverentially
said after hearing Savitri. ‘Oh Devi! I am not interested in becoming
Indra or Candra or Kubera. In the past when I was performing penance
in my hermitage I saw a cowherdess who was grazing the cattle. Infatuated
by her beauty I followed her. Inspite of my repeated request she never
obliged. Then I forcibly brought her, who was screaming, to my hermitage.
Tormented as I was with sexual urge, I seized her and had conjugal
union with her.’ 13 to 17
ae was eas Aral BATRA: Well
Frome at teat watssearat acitaan ater ye yee ure at ofa tea:
we Barts Yersem asyS Ags ca: 1 AMT Beal ANd At rey vadt WH Ii
wrernset she tar cava gq aft aa: carafaqersen acres warfare: |
tres antonsaa ated reat gay sat tiragererenct witat afaeater 1 22

earaemfeaits ATA: 385 Chapter 39
‘At that time the great sage Narada came there and hearing the
wailing of the cowherdess who was overpowered by me, angrily said
thus: ‘Leave her, leave her.’ But deluded by lust I did not leave her and
was engaged in sex. Then the furious Narada announced a curse which
was heard by me. ‘Oh Wicked Brahmin! You should not have desired
this girl. Because you have forcibly united with her out of lust, you will
also be defiled soon for such a vile act. Because you were enamoured
by a cowherdess, you will become a cowherd.’ 18 to 22
aatsé yrowaa: yard aed ute faargqeger wear wages YA: YA: BR
tara wteagreretd: donfsat geq alas yaaeat A areafeeafe atfirar ui ex
sufnes werecitfreqarassafedt ati aad wat wereatyeeeat weet tt RI
yrorsfernt ui yiterqar weatel
‘Then scared by the curse I bowed to Narada many times and
repeatedly requested a redemption from the curse. The angry Narada
did not care to reply; but upon my perseverance he said thus: ‘Devi
Savitri when pleased will relieve you from the curse. Propitiate Devi
Savitri.’ Saying thus Narada disappeared. Hence I have meditated upon
You. Oh Maheévari! Please protect me who is drowned in the sea of the
curse.’ 23 to 25
SeTRT Br ares yrarsat wre A wht nea
wear yoy mareRt yrrersat werettfer
Thus requested by the brahmin, Savitri told him about the end
of the curse. ‘Oh Haryaksa! Listen. I will tell you how the curse =
end,”
aieatfrg 3 ar afaate 7 Ae: Wout
aterarate qo afarearreergniyrer: | eae a Aa ferent: wren srs aE A: eH
wren areraut yt wareafis wt eM satamaratt ar sete ae fra Ween
‘You will definitely be born in the cowherd community. Then in one
such birth of yours I will, with my aspect, take birth as your daugiie®
Again you will by the boon from Vignu get Him as your son ant ft
His supreme abode.’ Saying thus, your beloved Saeitsl dies 97 to 29

a PEST, 386 Sri Tripurarahasyam
ae ayy Ta wedi ahs ade: afar I 20ll
wemgientadt wes aft ada: | acarcet wefaerenta wfreaft =n agi
‘She, born from the aspect of Savitri as a cowherdess because of
the curse from you, not through mother’s womb, is irreproachable and
is worshipped by Brahmins and all. She is Gayatri the Mother of Veda
and prosody, who totally protects Her singer. She is the essence of the
Veda and will be reputed as the highest Brahma-vidya (Ultimateknowledge).” 30, 31
aladt ua ad a fratematiar writs tar fase wataer feet feat
‘Oh Savitri! My child! Look at her born from your aspect. Because
of the curse, you could not recognise her. She is your second form.’ 32
geret faquarest wrest varerafauit: weraea eanfaat ufaferet aarsert: 11 33
aayren steer wear yveat Ma! AES sacert VAT Wanfearfeaar i 3x
“Listening to Devi Tripurasundari, Savitri realised that Gayatri was
a reflection of herself. Regaining the memory, which was destroyed by
the curse, by the grace of the great Devi, Savitri was extremely happy
and attained her original tranquillity. 33, 34
aatara wereat fage fafrqerenry trast Wgeet WEEN WT aa: HN BGI
wat auteeat we qerarges VAT: | wet wet: WaetT qarafesdat tl Bal
“Then the Supreme Devi Tripurasundari addressed Brahma and
others thus. ‘Gayatri born out of Me is the embodiment of My speech and
thus Supreme. All beings born out of My face, arms and thighs (Brahmins,
Ksatriyas and Vaisyas) by getting initiated in Her Mantra containing
24 alphabets will become known as Dvijas (Twice-born).’ 35, 36
Tas seterat yoy weTaftay! seTanAes senfasterad: ferry
wast aendt aa aren fatetar) sera ax a carat afaereme aq: i 3c
“Then She said thus: ‘Oh Brahma! Listen. The curse on you by
Savitri that you will fall in love with a forbidden woman will be executed
because of the fact that you will wrongly love Gayatri the embodiment
of Veda who has taken birth from your speech and hence your —

wera AT: 387 Chapter 39
aniten a afast wats street afeeafa! sitet uga: wanted qerarar 1 ae
agta 4 d2et Perea sera agurd: worerg uforrdemfiact 1 xo tt
aufaaet Wat wate Sasa
‘Also Savitri the embodiment of speech will become venerable by
all. All of you listen. Gayatri who is My daughter is undoubtedly Myself.
Persons with a clear vision will see her as my daughter.’ Saying thus
Devi Tripurasundari entered into Gayatri just like Ganga joining Yamuna.
aege aa fafrper gear ana: uewen
faforn wastes adarargrianry sarsuyat aa we raat fagaferearti ¥z
agyat waqet frat egara wensgyreaqatomarerd gary ail
Witnessing that astonishing event, Brahma and others praised the
Devi and saw Devi Gayatri the embodiment of Devi Tripurasundari. Devi
Gayatri was wielding the noose, the goad, the bow and the arrows of
flower in Her four hands; wearing the Moon on Her head; with three
eyes; red in complexion. 41 to 43
tereaqed gat adqaurqfrary witgfafirperat wayremyaey il il
Brahma and others bowed and lauded Her, the most charming and
completely embellished transcendent Devi. 44
Wal we qadet aa squeg ages) aete fe eat a AIST HBT lt Yul
aerated ase we ayag wit wari aett feernrare wear at feenft aq
saat wfegrtat feet craaafiaes aqy: wd waa areas fagafacary it ve
Then Devi Tripurasundari again said thus: ‘All of you hear Me. lam
really Gayatri who is never different from Me. Pleased as I am with all
of you, I will show you My Divine form as Gayatri the embodiment of
the aggregate manifestation of speech.’ Saying thus the Divine Mother
gave them the Divine Vision and all the gods saw Goddess Tripurambika
in the form of Devi Gayatri. 45 to 47
arenreretioft ax carer wef aurea argarotaepacet ereret year se
wraaat upantaeprergrclern! Sea eaTssrages RETEST
Warinernmnfaecat qamheth wemmrafcatent wetter 4°

at PTET 388 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Auta aviaaait veeatferart aredtatt ateqant auteererafaoiy i yen
aptassTyaigat Sithtat weet! aera wxtait fransfrarnn
arr aed AVENE! sadutat wrerarrdgat yar yaa
sents smmentt AAT TENT! START See TOTS serene Ge
STATS R PAA PAETTAEHTS SMTA STS MATS SEPT SHH TTT TAT
The great Devi Gayatri was pervading the Universe as its space;
Her body constituted the fifty alphabets; She was the Supreme Ambrosial
Bliss; the Vowels (a to ah) were Her face; The five groups of consonants
were Her arms. legs and stomach; the semivowels and the sibilants, Her
head, heart and the base; The levels of speech Pasyanti, Madhyama and
Vaikhari were Her naval, heart and mouth respectively; She was
associated with cognisable Nada in Madhyama. Her heart was associated
with the Pasyanti sound; Her speech was the audible Vaikhari; Her face,
the alphabets; Her heart, the words; Her stomach, the sentences; She
was both the audible and the subtle forms of Sound; Her head was
Vedas, Her eyes were the luminous stars, Her mouth the science of
grammar; Her voice the Vedic prosody, Her neck the science of euphony,
Her ears the science of Law, Her heart the Sama Veda; Her breasts the
Rg and Yajur Vedas; Her stomach the Atharvana Veda; Her ribs the
Sankhyayoga; Her hands the rites; Her thighs the science of logic; Her
back the auxiliary Vedas (like Ayurveda, Dhanurveda and so on); Her
glances, the Puranas; Her smile the science of rhetorics; Self-knowledge
was her embodiment (disposition); Her nails and hair were the Buddhist
and Jain philosophy; She was auspicious and transcendent. 48 to 55
qead Frayer witqdvsagia aa agreafaqergga: wath, 4a I
Witnessing that wonderful form, the gods prostrated before Her and
with folded hands praised the Great Devi Gayatri. 56
Ba qe ware yfsat aoe: | Uaferaat qa BUY: Wea: = Wl
amdht qaavend wert wirgfafir qari wera: yoy areenfs cites werfafatiat:
fraen fraaraa aa area Aq) aa eat a wacasfer fag wartertatt 1 uel
HAUS SA WAT AAA TIGHT: |
4 aaa ate det ante wafer, WW Goll

Wea CRIS ATA: 389 Chapter 39
aeu dqurise set at aad afer weet arenitg: anfreyarafeery neen
Wega Waa Avaear WATT
“Worshipped by the gods, Devi Gayatri was happy. At that time
thousands of cow-herds holding sticks arrived there and addressed Brahma
thus: ‘Oh Brahma! Hear us. The world has been created by you and is
bound by your oral instructions. Here, a woman has no freedom even if
she is a Devi. A father is responsible for her birth. Also she is protected
by her brothers. Hence she cannot be enjoyed without their permission
which has been so ever since creation. Hence if a strong person enjoys
her, it would be destroying the bridge of righteousness. Just like hawks
killing themselves for the sake of meat, men would get mutually destroyed
for the sake of a woman. Please tell us clarifying this issue that endangers
the three worlds.’ 56 to 61
geared Tareas wre eee Wat
frafrt factensfer tat wataft fears ge wa fateh cent fragt 11 63
Uyarssarat wa wetferrearat Ye: |
“Hearing the king of cowherds, Brahma said thus: ‘No one can
transgress the ordinance of fate which is paramount. Even Brahma is
bound by it. Hence be peaceful. See your daughter who is Paragakti who
is before you.’ 62, 63
gear faferret aitafreat arcane Wael
arararita at gear adzamgforars wererfienr fates sear aurea Rall
“The cowherd king, as per the words of Brahma, saw Her.
Understanding that his daughter was the supreme Devi worshipped by
all the gods, he bowed and prayed to Her. 64, 65
teat afsrat yet wrear aa yrgitl ausfad vat wecyeeat wererfar Wea 1 KK
aepat ae afer potqenrfae!
‘Oh Devi! Deluded by Your power I was foolish not to recognise you
as the all powerful Great Devi when you were in my house. — wae
on me and again enter my house.’
aferdet wrerprfers: ravens s oteeaterm =

a AS, 390 Sri Tripurarahasyam
STUY WMSPeIS eT AT UNIS SeATETA AUT |
wrife fafaetsseant afar ferry Ren
waisé andhenr dtfear va aya dyeister qaansfa whist wyatt eg
qeaat afaent we grat a fawn tented afeat watrrmdiafa: 1 won
wasé faa aan Hrearafafagan WatSya AA AACATATANTAUT: UT: 1 ett
arefteata & aiifa facitnfaaat foram até farersfafrerar qeat aafergtt aa:
WA 2a walqaute ga: ya: 1 wtf: gfsrat aa ard &@ feast fetar 11 03
ave adcieemi ged nfesmeaeq sf ore at wearegqer tio aytaa: 11 ox tl
wy: waherara vet eet gaat, sar ar octet smssafeafiaar i 41
Requested in this manner the Supreme Devi addressed the cowherd
king thus: ‘Oh Cow-herd King! Listen. Understand me as having the triple
forms Savitri, Gayatri and Sarasvati pervading the space. I gave you bliss
in your house as Sarasvati. Now I have manifested from the Gauri aspect.
In my future manifestation I will be the sister of Visnu. You will be born
as Nandagopa the famous Lord of Cowherds. I will be born in your house
as Katyayani. The Supreme Narayana will be my brother who will bring
auspicious universal fame to you. In the Kaliyuga I will take birth on
the Vindhya mountain and redeem the misery of everyone. Repeatedly
worshipped by the cowherd ladies for a month, I will grant their desire
that is rare in the world.’ Thus obtaining the boon all the happy cow-herds
bowed to the Devi and other gods and returned to their houses. Then
the Great Devi, the Universal Mother, disappeared. 67 to 75
aifest wetcearat area afedt fafa: 1 aarerd ad Ya: yent dieyrat 1 ws
saat Vet Mees! yaa ways ya: fer sitqhresfa 1 we
Savitri resided on the Vindhya Mountain. Brahma along with Gayatri
performed the sacrifice again on the banks of the foremost lake Puskara.
Oh Paragurama! I have narrated to you the wonderful episode of Savitri
which removes the sins of those who listen to it. What do you want to
listen from me further?” 76, 77
ofa stages wrereaaus wetrecanftgits ara: 1!
End of the thirty-ninth chapter of the

ararityits ara:
Chapter 40
wd qaaenitat warreavd ania: Saye: saut qa: Hat wes MET eH
a Gfacigratseaat HANSA | WATTS TTS wen
madtaga tat dtrsaaagifa afagey fatgar gar at aia Bi
gorse ar serra Gate eer anracts afeat afaeaft cet Ha: ¥ il
wat at tatitoret faaat atfrarrart
wa creat arssaiara: far ongitferay, wan
wat afe fant fereara sitgfresd
Listening to the legend narrated by Guru Dattatreya, Parasurdéma
eager to hear again inquired lovingly thus: “Oh Guru! I am not in the
least satisfied by drinking the story from you. Just like the favourite
elixir I feel like drinking more narrations. Please tell me the prayer by
which Brahma and others sang the Devi Tripura associated with Gayatri
resplendent with seed letters forming Her body. Then again, how and
when the universal Mother was born in the house of the cow-heard along
with Narayana? How did Nandagopa gain wide fame? How was Katyayani
born? What did the Gopikas achieve? Tell in detail to me who is your
disciple interested in listening.” 1to5
gfe yet aaye: wae: wre array nw
aramagateatsta aa qfert farts arg weredterfaateatste wear
at arate citds geet faassen wepizem: wararcagryfeaterTa lt ¢
auy arta aeanfic cer sftfagtertts deqar arent fafefermyeret Me
Fear at wafeerarnqerachefeitys SAT MOTT: KT aPTTATT | Rol
Inquired about this, Guru Dattatreya replied to P araéurama —
“Oh Paragurama! You are wholly under the blessings of Devi
Tripurasundari. The desire to listen to the stories of the Devi is a ro
wonderful fortune to persons immersed in worldly cravings. Oh age
Listen. I will tell you how Brahma, Visnu and others pesined eo
Tripurasundari the embodiment of alphabets. Seeing Her as the

at ARES, 392 Sri Tripurarahasyam
manifestation of the entire knowledge characterised by the (fifty)
alphabets, the gods bowed and hailed Her glory singing an extremely
great prayer. 6 to 10
wa wa éf@ coovatafr wa wa ara wrafafi
wa wa cerafacaact wa wa walsssaeaa
Wa wa Wducafaniat wa wa watsaTEd |
wa wa fanfactaace wa wa yigit a: wife Ween
‘Oh Sankari! Victory to You who are immanent and transcendent!
Victory to You who are the Mother of the Universe! Victory to You who
by Your sport are illuminating the Universe! Victory to You who are
the support for the Universe! Victory to You who are the annihilator of
the Universe! Victory to You who are the soul of everything! Victory to
You who are the shining consciousness! Please protect us! 11
Frinrepfesnfatate faapearaqarsret
ufterattfafrarargtatir yerferentata yferate |
arramr witferare wfirqratats agate
wa wa famnfactaaee wa wa yrgft a: of WR
‘Oh Sankari! Victory to You! You are beyond Gunas (tendencies),
action and class! You are the ambrosial ocean of concentrated
consciousness! You are the unlimited supreme eloquence! You are the
primordial effulgence! You are the embodiment of liberation! Your thoughts
are independent! You dwell in the Manipura Cakra! You are Pasyanti—the
second level of the manifestation of speech! Victory to You who are the
shining Consciousness! Please protect us. 12
Tey WANs smMianen TAA ATAM Heat
Temreustedatats fafrreat afgate |
ayfaanfarateeprne diafaae fafaat
wa wa feenfrafanee wa wa yrgit a: wife eau
‘Further, in Your Self as Consciousness, the Madhyama Sound is
distinct and You dwell in the Andhata Cakra with the mixed form of
the Madhyama sound (a part of which) is cognisable. You transcend

aranfeaits Aa: 393 Chapter 40
eight forms of power (eg:, Anima, Garima....) that are apparent. You
dwell in many wonderful centres. Victory to You who are the shining
Consciousness! Please protect us. 13
agate agaared aera
‘aretr ayrer |
aren qerararraaans tr eefererar
wa wa faenfanfaaee wa srr yrgft 7: ote wesin
‘Though You are the Primordial Unique non-dual Consciousness, You
assume dual forms. You manifest as excellent fifteen rays which become
ten when considered in pairs. And those again in union with other
aspects take four different forms. Oh Sankari! Victory to You who are
the shining Consciousness! Please protect us. 14
art Vers tafaterets qrwrareat
usfad arse eeararmeataen |
weq ugal werd fayateast aera
wa wa faenfacfanes wa we yrgft 7: fe Weal
‘Though divided, undivided and manifold, finally You constitute the
fourteen vowels. You are the twenty five consonants grouped into five.
The primordial sound with its modifications takes four forms. Further
these four levels of the sound ignoring the subtle portion of Madhyama,
are in pairs (considering aspects like Bija and Yoni for each letter and
Siva and Sakti aspects). Oh Sankari! Please protect us.
(Note: A clear comprehension of this stanza calls for a deep study of the origin
of alphabets and texts like Satcakira Yoga, Matrkacakra a
Varivasyarahasya, Tantraloka, Paratrimsika, Prapaficasira Tantra, Saradatilaka
Tantra, Nandikesvara-kasika, Maharthamafijari, Cidgag' 3 eS +
This stanza might render itself to interpretation on the basis of thirty-six ee
also.]
ae rer farenferenfer ae wer we wrt A: Te ane

at Aenea 394 Sri Tripurarahasyam
‘You are thus the queen and the Mother of the knowledge rich with
fifty one alphabets. You are the sound (speech). By a clear distinction
among the letters you generate different sounds. Disassociated from your
aspect every thing would be naught like the sky. Victory to you who
are the shining Consciousness! Oh Sankari! Please protect us. 16
waraaafe aera St aa ate wraat fafa
ued astt ud fact esuat asd Facari
aed WeTeteHra age Say Tat Epa
wa wa faenfactaate wa wa yight 3: of Hell
‘Oh Mother! Without Your aspect the three regions would not exist.
Without your prominent aspect even the highest Abode would not be
other than a mere conjuration. By Your skill of combining with them,
You always shine by pervading them. Victory to You who are the shining
Consciousness! Oh Sankari! Please protect us. 17
aafte cia aiaqet ae Gaara
aMeUIMa: Treat Peaaeamtacs: |
ware caret rena star, qerfadtar,
wa wa faenfaafante wa wa yigit 4: fe Neen
‘Fearing You, we are engaged in the task of creation and so on.
Though born out of Your lotus feet we are suffering by not comprehending
You. Oh Sankari Please protect us who are afraid, ignorant and helpless
and who are prostrating before You, time and again. Victory to You who
are the shining Consciousness. 18
Her avait sredt wat fae arat areca
Breit wrat autyat wars sen apfarerar Heegil
‘Oh Devi! You are Intelligence, Vani, Bharati, Vidya, Mother,
Sarasvati, Brahmi, Maya, Alphabets, Transcendent, Primordium, Action
and Eternity. 19
fasen fafaacasat wen arent frat
wrrevifed: adem frat facet It oll

aearers AA: 395 Chapter 40
"You are Vikalpa (Delusion), Nirvikalpa (non-wavering) Aja (non-born),
Kala (Aspect), Sound, Action, Power of Time, All forms, Auspiciousness
and the Supreme, the Vedas. 20
tastaied aerate wdeitenneatt uftatercacurat ta tha aise Tu eeu
‘Oh Mahadevi! Oh Devi of the Universe! Protect us. Protect us who
are at Your feet. Oh Devi! We bow to You.’ 21
gfa eqat ar Ue Agent fasaftott we cary fafigar waa aepaIseaT tl
sues fates 4 aetstrertiars seer!
waaisat qeisfer sda wag: ar TER
qerdtfiar eet urgenrautivans argenrgfatcera fawaase rat: tl 2
frat a: deat Tease arent afer wreventy qrenferdt faereraftot 11
wat eafa waaat a fe faen fadtad wat areata qararey fawedt ar 1 2611
ugfartrarntt wate: ufsaht qi werd fig anrery woearsfrarey — tl RON!
ait ercafa ssiragernfa were af: Gensrageh qensdnferstett ui ze Wt
Wad Asa Hee: TATAATT
“Thus lauded by the gods, the Divine Mother who is embodiment
of the Universe was pleased and addressed them thus: ‘Oh Brahma and
other gods! Listen to what will make you happy. I am pleased by your
excellent prayer which has originated from the alphabets and contains
secret meanings. Hence, let it become world famous by the name “Matrka
Stuti”. I will manifest as word-power and literary talent in the heart of
him who reads this prayer at the three auspicious timings in the day.
There will be no dearth of erudition in him who recites this prayer. He
will equal Guru Brhaspati and win all debates. He, who recites the
twenty-four names of Mine twenty-four times at the three auspicious
times of the day and then recite the prayer & thousand times, will attain
a sharp intellect capable of understanding subtle meanings. My depiaretion
is true beyond any doubt. —*
Ween
fafafaanfarscran: oat wat AH
4 Yayeracashn: uftaren: serge! Bar wraetgratafamyerasTTy Mt 3°

at freer, 396 Sri Tripurarahasyam
WERT MaATATHAT AAA faa: | SYA A Aeleat wa wT frst =n aR
‘Oh Brahma, Visnu and Siva! Listen. You should not disregard these
Saktis (born out of the anger of Savitri). Their fury would swallow the
universe of a hundred Brahmas and Visnus. Born out of My aspect they
who support you are worthy of reverence.” Saying thus the Devi assumed
Her original form.’ 29 to 31
Ura EPes Strea Vert Gist YT AT TO seen ar yal wer ArepeiteAr 1
qisofantert ten weberatom: | qeiteh dtsfreata dereatera: = aa
SaereIRACHAAT AGT F AT Yt Bind Hausa tearsfattoet fe a
ret wasaaatdfacata yan: | sree sft wart sierderfaada: on 84H
Wenssermt: wave: arrertfinterge: | wt: cha sft ware: adeitenmdtsar: 1 36
“Oh Honourable Bhargava! That was the prayer to Sri Tripurasundari
by Brahma and others. Listen again. I will narrate how the Devi was
born in the cow-herd clan. In the twenty-eighth Yuga the demons taking
birth as human beings will torture the earth by their vile deeds. The
present Madhura city located on the banks of the Yamuna river was
ruled by the demon Lavana. There, a worthy king Ugrasena will be born
in the Candravarnga of Bhoja dynasty. His wicked powerful son Karhsa
the reborn demon Kalanemi will harass the entire world. 32 to 36
frrrensieg a fewacnfing: aq fecwarat cae: yea: ahrafrerat tl
Teh: Wares Sera ANTE: | SeMTEN ATES sear tear ecdafeerenr: | Be
areas: wees uftartar: | smgqen werarar: Wayreareacalfaar: tt 38
“Demons like Hiranyakagipu born as Sisupala will rule the Cedi
kingdom; Hiranyaksa will be born as Dantavakra; and Salva, Saumapati,
Naraka of Pragjyotiga, Jarasandha of Magadha and others proficient in
handling weapons and missiles; invincible and powerful and each
possessing many crores of warriors will shatter righteousness. 37 to 39
wera: deat a sameness weet wdar qaqa: w dafaeate ii vo Il
“Karhsa the foremost among them, by continuously torturing gods,
brahmins and the pious will become a terror on the earth. 40

aearheaits AT: 397 Chapter 40
aasetaissmren qa: menor seed weranainswitaay ve
fafatancitat spar a eftterta: carssara: feat erat + anette araeT ¥2
“Then Bhidevi, unable to withstand the weight of the sins caused
by the wicked persons, approaches Brahma who in turn along with her
goes to Visnu, and Siva appears there by their meditation and he will
be helpless. 41, 42
aa frofafoeaten faq ated snfadfaeata gt: wore yfrar at: neat
wiser qarect weet Gear! Geet wt ae: weal tat: Neen
drarenctehtetgar werent: | tyre fest at aareratcrerat: | wt I
waged: Wasa qt AAI: | MraRaENAT sivrsaaTay W¥gil
yruerd artearel crate eftera: | efeafe warssfaw: watafe qarsqt i vio it
“Then meditated upon by the three gods, Devi Tripurasundari will
appear and bowed, worshipped and requested by them for the alleviation
of earth’s misery, addresses them thus: ‘All the divine lords cannot
redeem the earth. Because of the power of their penance and might and
their good time, the demons are unconquerable by you. Hence all of you
take human birth on the earth. I will also incarnate there with My
aspect. First I will torment Karhsa with My curse. Then Visnu possessed
by Me will kill Karhsa and the rest of the demons. 43 to 47
Wa: Waa wet wee: UTA: | Bind afer arferdtayiacra: il ve Il
Tease arafaents uate eft: aq! Gaeat ager Yar TayETY AMM
crarstach wag aded ATTA!
‘Blessed by Me, the auspicious Nandagopa the leader of the cowherds
is living by the river Yamuna. I will be born through his wife. Let Visnu
born to Vasudeva and Devaki transfer Me to Karhsa whom I will mei
wat reer werzer tar: wa watact osha
facty aren: caeatsyt: ererserecuiteren: | areraaitsfie Sereeat aferereafioetera:
BALas guitat at meagre Freitar aren att era err: AS
anfarcfireatar ait arqaaa weg: 1 areraret wrens ages werent AR

cl Rea, 398 Sri Tripuraérahasyam
“Thus spoken by the Great Devi, all the gods by their respective
aspects will take birth through brahmins in order to relieve the earth
of its misery. In the most auspicious Vrsni clan Narayana will incarnate
through Devaki and Vasudeva at midnight in his original form. Then
requested by Vasudeva he will assume the form of a human child and
will address Vasudeva thus: 50 to 53
andtaen waptalfafec carer yf Ue chat age A arreiftact frat
dufa sitrereea atfean wtfeat fe ami ard Yet A Safa Sracracge fe AH
qa wang aa a Utah dyarshea cassfastss erie waft: 1 4a
Sq 7 wes: catsaneaistaact aa: 1 ta at weaed aa Pferaay on ue
AAEISA Aaa sts Biter wat at aaa wfattat aA AAT ue
‘Getting to know from Narada that his death will be from his sister’s
baby, that Kathsa who is my maternal uncle will be alert out of fear.
Now as he is under the spell of the Devi in the form of Mohini, before
he understands me as his death, take me quickly to Nandagopa’s house
where Devi Paramegvari is born. By imbibing Her power I will conquer
Karhsa. Because powerful Karnsa cannot be conquered now put me in
Nanda’s house and bring Her here. Then She will steal his power. Think of
the Universal Mother so that you will have no impediments. 54 to 58
faferar arnt vifed faaitatearerar fe ari
wei cpfterte wet aaed forgpe fiery, W4il
amrera areata a titepet oft Pada: 1 weredt aaa fagitasfaaitgd = — tl Goll
Wentfgranerrt: caferdiafa dare
‘Understanding from the words of Visnu about the Supreme Devi
who when remembered will enable you to reach Gokula by carrying me,
the child fearlessly, and contemplating all along on the Devi, you will
cross in the dark night the Kalindi river through a lit path. 59, 60
HA WA TATE AEA SHOT, aR
ayiaresuyaedt at afrat aan aatfeqdanrarat frat wavrery tl Gel
Westraamyprnass| aunasyadant dhreafaoiny neat

aearheaits ar: 399 Chapter 40
arenfs foret es Wrens saHe Sha: | Cerateyeeraaat Aen a ET:
anrauitsta arat anretetaaget forays weer ay wares aged weiter ey
wa ut aajefatea afeeatea aaeq aT
‘After reaching the house of Nanda where all will be under the spell
of delusion (sleep) you will see on the bed of Yasoda, the Motherly Devi
brilliant like crores of Suns; three-eyed; wearing the digit of the Moon
on Her Head; wielding the Trident, the sword, the knife, the axe, wine
pot, water pot, leather shield, and the rope in Her eight hands; fearful, an
embodiment of deadly dark-night. While Vasudeva places the child there
and stands with folded hands, Brahma, Visnu and Sankara appear there
and bow and praise Devi Tripurasundari. Then the pleased Devi will
assure them and tell Vasudeva to carry Her to his house. 61 to 65
mada We seat Waanets aa: negli
fafren aa darerraes fergpefeciq amrerassenget at erer yet Pranfea: 0
wala wht areararageact J any! wearsameeat ag waa watt NRC
‘As you place me in the house, Karhsa informed by the door-keepers
will rush to the spot and seeing the female baby which is his death,
will pick it up and decides to kill it despite prevention from his sister
Devaki, But unable to carry the baby because of its heaviness, he will
drop it on the ground. 66 to 68
are ore aetar orga a wawafer ye are at ara eae ferwaferey 1 6M
afetor witca wat urafaeata qe wt t aerated war wat farmrary it eel
seqacarsafgar tat fear weet adtsquterery at ar feat qeeott i oe
Then the Devi reaches the sky with Her original form and says
thus to Karhsa:— ‘Oh Foolish Karhsa! You are unaware of your killer
born within your province. He will soon destroy you. Think that your
valour has been snatched by Me.’ Saying thus the Devi will —
Then She will enter me and increase my power. oe
ara querer Sem aferrarshageart Tea eet rat ateate eters Oe
TeeTeRTA fara wren yt ange! Breteafererat aA mrerafeserat AT e3

a ARES, 400 Sri Tripurdrahasyam
‘Then Krsna with his power enhanced by the Devi kills many wicked
demons and on the battle ground easily kills Karnsa. By the grace of
Devi Tripurasundari, Nanda will have Visnu the Teacher of the world
as his son and attain world-wide fame honoured by all. 72, 73
ag Wa Wea Suave sar: | ARTA Henfafa Frat ARTA: = OXI
AeA aI Aaa) caret Yft watedtefaeaha Saar TACT
a wast faqyasea a agafa qarftent: | saved a: Bftad Garcraorga gar ti os
Weise arafsents aden aa dere: | fafeer teaeaNat at HParssarz i wo i
srt weet areata Fara
‘Later the beautiful Gopikas, knowing that Narayana is Krsna, fix
their mind on him. In order to obtain his love they will worship and
secure the blessings of the sage Katyayana who will be engaged in
penance on the banks of Yamuna. After a little thought the pleased sage
tells the girls that their desire to have the company of Narayana is
beyond reach. Even then he promises to help achieve their goal. He will
realise that Devi is with Krsna in the house of Nanda and propitiate
Her with pure devotion. 74 to 77
aa Ot carentiae wear aa deat TCA
anfatfireate forar werarraqzatt | at wagata gerd famed aitfery 1 wel
fe % aeafe weed or fat carats
‘Then, pleased by his prayers the auspicious Devi Kalaratri who
fulfills the desires of Her devotees will appear before him and say thus
to the sage—Tell me what you want from Me. You will have it soon.’
ae at seater aa sar Tega teAT: coll
faupismradtits mearafarinag! cara Safer Ur carefgd Tag NCR
aé fat afaa: a4 ania: wats seraraa: |
fevaradiftaatafs aqeisqarsrar Wer
wat gar a fe waa Goat aa vigil
The sage bows and tells Her thus—“These Gopikas soon want union

aeaneeaits ATA: 401 Chapter 40
eee
with Krsna the incarnation of Narayana. Oh Devi! Please achieve that.
This is my desire. Pleased by their pure service to me I have promised
to achieve their want. Oh Sankari! By your grace let not my promise
become false.’ 80 to 82
wa areareaa: seat frortetat N23
fai or aeafa Gang aa fast wea Wer HH UE aa TA: = cx
aa ad aaa weasferaserant | aa ae ofegr: cara aenfater i cy
aa: cart feyregqaniaqarsstgterte ace sean ad rat aerfata
fre spot wasnt wreath Gear
Hearing Katyayana, the Devi says thus: “Oh Great brahmin! Be it
as you desire. But the desire of these girls is really great. So, during
the Margagirsa month let them undertake according to the ordained
procedure the worship of Katyayani who is named after you. Then I will
grant them the promised desire. Saying thus the Devi will disappear.
Then according to the words of Katyayana they will complete the vow
and have the Supreme Being Krsna as their lover.” 83 to 86
Sta grat seat aa cas TYRE: ucoul
es qa: wie era arena ae afenfeet ate setter aT: eA I
wet cararedt sitar arate wereate
Having heard the story, Parasurama with great zeal enquired
Dattatreya thus: “Oh Compassionate Lord! Please let me know what is
that vow and how the Gopikas will perform that and how Devi Katyayani
will fulfill their wants?” 87, 88
ye ud cayeainereat fac: neg
TU AAGMS SAA AAAS SE fafa 7H!
soy enter aeenfer arate wife i Goll
anivitiens sefafa ward at UTE!
carearace: yforarsat eitoreranfirenrfear TSA
arsitafer achat gpeererencpfe: 1 Senet wat goer saree ate

a Rea 402 Sri Tripurarahasyam
aa Sen Wadant yaoreasaanteta: | rattawrenrt & tae fafa waz ui ea
wa tose deqe tages ateaq! sane Gard fs wet fafa aria ey
Thus inquired by Parasurama, Guru Dattatreya with joy addressing
him as ‘My child’ narrated the procedure of the supreme Katydyani vow.
“Oh Paragurama! Listen. Since I know the entire lore of the scriptures
I will tell you about it. Starting from the first day in the Magasirsa
month the worship has to be done up to the full-moon day. Only women
are entitled to take this vow. After bathing at dawn in the river and
wearing white garments they must make an idol of Devi Katyayani out
of sand and meditate on Her as taught. Garlands of white flowers,
Aksata (rice coloured with Kunkum) and eatables prepared with butter
have to be offered. Then they should propitiate with prayers, songs and
dance and immerse the sand idol in water. 89 to 94
Weat Betar a ANT VAT Yahetts wen fagnen were sitedt Sameer eu it
yarn Yay wens at warsyar ste ATA wera: ETSeTA TAT: 1 ke
Waist Weed: Targhee |
Malavi, Sahadeva, Nanda, Bhadra, Sunandini, Padma, Visala,
Godamni, Sridevi, Devamalavi, Syama, Supesa, Salangi, Manavi, Manada
and Amrta—these prominent Gopikas have to be remembered at the end
of the pooja if it has to get completed. 95, 96
Tititfirs aaeqed ators Tastee gett
Tinitearsuen aniaeafaa Wa: arearaht zat aaa RCI
adttet Honda farensfearfara sf tat qroraft arar ai aera gary, tt 88
vefaviipes qaiqte wet fracadq efaerst wasters wafeat i foo ll
Wart vifeddseret fagtaur weet wen aisesacn vader: ll
Wa aassaUnt aised urashaer Hart oat ses ult WATS! Ro?
weut wad ys Uist qaadt qari ater adahents cad Aisa Hera: 1! RoR!
Then they should bow to the Devi and Krsna by chanting the
following names—“Oh Lover of Gopis, Salutation to You, Oh protector
of the Cows, Oh Lord of the Cows, Oh Stealer of the clothes of Gopis,

aeanfeents Ar: 403 Chapter 40
Oh Revered by the cows and cow-herds! Oh Mother Katyayani!
Prostrations to You, Oh daughter of Nandagopa, Oh Usurper of Karhsa’s
valour, Oh the strength of Krsna, Oh Dweller on the Vindhya mountain.
“Then they should circumambulate a cow along with its calf after
feeding it with a handful of grass. For a month they should calmly
sustain on sacrificial rice (ghee-rice + turmeric). At the end of the month,
the Devi has to be worshipped and the brahmins have to be fed with
preparations out of butter. By carrying out this vow, one will obtain all
the wants. A virgin will secure a good husband who will provide all
happiness. A married lady will beget a son and a lady with a son will
see a grandson. There is no doubt that the women will enjoy happiness
and prosperity by taking to this worship.” 97 to 103
sft sitfagereeet arererars areanftyits aa: |
End of the fortieth chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurarahasyam.

WH aeanhegits Are:
Chapter 41
araagaaAT Bat BaTeaTeTee | ATTA a TATA Hes aha, neu
qa seorag aig wat feratrenfet ara arearet fat at ae cares ui 2
“Qh Lord! I listened to the extremely wonderful story about Devi
Katyayani. I am not at all satisfied by drinking the nectar of the legends.
I like to hear again how the Devi dwelling on the Vindhya mountain
incarnated as Katyayani. Oh Compassionate Guru! Please narrate it to
Tvs BAe Caaaisaage: | Uy Wa way afeet cas ea, nan
Wal qant age a cha gear a afeag: | wet fae fry arearedtafeeate
Wa daar aye: qifrafeatian arefrate qat 4 arearrqufrary 4
Aer arrearitarars wat Tarafa: | Aiea: Aled: Wereat arent fay gl
Thus inquired by Parasurama, Guru Dattatreya said thus: “Oh
Parasurama! Listen. I will tell you the wonderful events that will happen
in the future. After Krsna kills his maternal uncle, Karhsa and makes
his father the king, Karhsa’s father-in-law, to please his daughter, invites
all the Yadavas to the city of Madhura. Then Krsna, anticipating
destruction from the ruler of Magadha, moves along with the Yadavas
to the city of Dwaraka situated on the western sea. 3 to 6
we pot Ferd MaSUTATaat | Heraeratant Freyeagyerat won
Poy cera wets tiger wher pLaftaayg afer: cl
Fara Teale wen tirana: | war aahs was aer wefrar wat |
PorsTerinite: areata: stat west at fan: arearsan: SAAT
Weeata a dat aren at aqat era ayitar faferar Satquemreater fara:
; Then knowing that Krsna is far away, the mighty and cruel demon
kings Nisumbha and Sumbha, the brothers of the demon Aghasura, along
with their powerful army, go to Gokula and unscrupulously destroy it.
They would capture Nanda and the cowherd women and loot their cows

waa AMA: 405 Chapter 41
and wealth. Then Yasoda, the loyal consort of Nanda, along with the
Gopikas dear to Krsna, approaches the sage Katyayana. He will narrate
the legend of the incarnation of Devi Katyayani to the distressed Yasoda
who surrenders to him. From that, Yasoda amazingly realises that the
Devi is her own daughter and worships Her with devotion. 7 to 1l
ad: wearssfavfer aa crear wari
urat at waren fagarerafeaa
aqarate at dearat yeafrgerent Ween
afaerfa adt qa quit terre
aprpemrane feat aftr we a ean
Arahat Taye Tras waa: |
arqareate ary Bey Seay werqatrary nen
data wae: venfaeata AsqT: |
Then the pleased Supreme Devi, Katyayani appears before her and
consoles Her mother. Riding a lion She chases Sumbha and Nisumbha,
the lords of the demons. A fierce war will ensue for fifteen days on the
banks of the river Yamuna and the demons will face defeat. After
releasing Nanda and all the Gopikas, She will pursue the haughty and
mighty demons, to kill them. Frightened by the valour of the Devi, the
demons run away. 12 to 14
war tat waferar AT Aras Tey: WR
aréeqiet gat aa: aefergit war: 1 etree ferent aerentseay aTeTAT MRK
at gafirr der anf weet) catscrarsavead Wafet set wat ute
wanfaysreneaartaart efreata
Then the people of Gokula will request the Devi thus: “Oh Mahesvari!
Oh Mother! These powerful demons do not deserve to be left out without
being killed. In the Kaliyuga men will be weak and no one can destroy
these demons. Hence, you should put an end to these demons. Even if
one among them survives, the activities of the Kaliyuga cannot continue.
Therefore, please destroy them completely.” 15 to 17

at AES, 406 Sri Tripurarahasyam
wiatd sermon eta warate Wee
vat fagpe: wi wart fancier taunt wert Pafaeaft & war 1 ee
yet arate wget ahaa
Devi who was thus requested, pursues the demons to kill them.
Then Nisumbha will hide himself inside his fearsome cave named
Devakhata in the Vindhya mountain. Likewise, Sumbha, after sending
his troops to hide in another cave, will hide himself in the Ganga river.
ua fan fagay deere neat Nl Rol
arent fret qr deraqefacate faye toad gq Peps Pefreafe een
carciedor actat safaeafe arsuer yest efreafa wer faratsa areataha 11 22
we dear fretor gear area oar farstur feat aa cite teeta 23H
Devi MaheSgvari will chase the demons who fled in three ways, by
assuming three forms. By entering the Devakhata cave she will kill
Nigumbha. In Her form as Kali, She will devour the army and with Her
third Supreme form kill atop Vindhya, the demon Sumbha on the banks
of Ganga. Thus destroying the demons through Her three forms,
Devi Katyayani, the Supreme, stays in three forms for protecting the
world. 20 to 23
aa tar: ware witha fafad: waa:1 afaeafa waar a tami aar wer ol
Taft fra wag wary ghar firs qa: afergh ceernfaqersa = KI
wat Genter qear wafaeata aisqe: | ad qf aarrer qerare: quay 2 Il
The gods arriving there will praise the Devi through many hymns.
The pleased Devi will grant them boons. The gods then request thus:
“Oh Maheévari! To redeem the Kaliyuga from the oppression of the
demons, please stay firmly in these three places with Your three forms.
Seeing You, the destroyer of demons, the demons will not exist. We will
on the earth worship You on the full moon and new moon days.
aot aarnran citer eearsqaarraom: | fegqar: wafer afer eqfarerent: It 29
Sars Goer aerate ara equi aqat aft arafeerta arya: | 2

THRACE ATA: 407 Chapter 41
In the Kaliyuga, the human beings will be hyprocrites, untruthful,
calumniating, sinners, atheists, unrighteous, so lustful as to cohabit
even with their mothers; have sex with daughter-in-laws, daughters and
sisters; 27, 28
faa: uff: were) srafasiten aait: axis wert:
facafava: fact aA: wearer aats sat)
ararasearrent: fant gar agfateaenr: i Ron
eardufaen aafreraateer sare oret ya frat oferta a naeul
qe fit a faserafa cif wT adarat amare afeeta ye ye RH
Women will revolt against their husbands and go with low-caste
men: husbands will live on the income from their wives; mothers will
live on the earnings of their daughters; women will sell their sex in the
market; low-born persons will teach sacred texts and brahmins will be
cruel to animals; brahmins, to gain money, will become priests to low-born
class; for the sake of wealth, people will murder their mothers, sons,
fathers, husbands, teachers, friends, and dependent persons, even though
they talk about righteousness and wisdom in their houses. 29 to 32
arafteafated aafrerenicon: | abaararcartiter dfarea frererra: i 33
qafrata wart darren! steers areata aqeey arom: aN I
ditt acta wtent sweatin artery greater areafereafaa eaears ferritin
wa: wt war: wen ager: wagwen: | rant seATAt rasa He: 36 I
The learned brahmins will take to fallacious tantric practices and
condemn the vedic path and perform sacrifices wrongly. The brak ams
will drink liquor and toddy and eat meat with greed. They will manipulate
scriptural injunctions to suit their fancy. By and large every one wil
be wicked, hard-hearted, fraudulent, and critical. The low-born will become
preceptors to brahmins. aes
AUUTTaUT: Ya ares maT: | eAtshteee eat averaetecraT: nen
vuftreatia wetirarereaaransr Saar: | serarererenfest frqear sritate oth aby
areata afeet aararesraferrantg! Sersramfatedt fever eerareraom: || 980
ats srccrearnrnta, xterra er: 1 wefermrarrerenfrat saga: it ¥°

at fey, 408 Sri Tripurarahasyam
weve afadaneraan aafaq
“The low-born will take to penance; the brahmins will lead a
despicable life; the kings will be cowards like women, the business class
will be thieves, the majority of the world will be ruled by low-class
people; Oh Devi! The brahmins will take to practices that offend the
vedas and consume intoxicating drinks and cohabit with low-born women.
Discarding the injunctions of the Veda, they will follow other religions
like Bauddhism, Jainism and Islam. Such a lot, indulging in sensual
cravings cannot find salvation anywhere other than beholding You in
Your shrines.” 37 to 40
wa at: wiferar ar fret fereranfect wet
Pearl Waly Ayag deate wetaet |
Thus beseeched by the gods, the Triple Devi Vindhyavasini will
reside on the earth to take care of the people. 41
urastated ten qa: ypahqery Uszu
geaadanead qeat asad wa sft astated ad fa qa: sighreefa
This is the legend about the destruction of Sumbha and other demons
by the Devi. By listening to this one would be absolved of all sins and
obtain his wants. Oh Parasurama! Thus I have narrated everything to
you. What more would you like to hear from me? 42, 43
sie sifaqureet merenavs waeenfiyits eae: i
End of the forty-first chapter
of the Mahdtmyakhandam of Sri Tripurarahasyam

fracarftetts ara:
Chapter 42
SMETa: We Aa: AST HAHA! HALAS Hea: Waa ArAT: ik
waa Heunyd aeaitadt Sar
qat & squadt aster gitar: waeasts Hated, nen
weg stgfrents qa ypafrgesat: 1 aritanfa at agact ferwerteet =n 3
aa yet ae qeayerdagtad: | ae F aaasat aamser erat @fea tt ¥
After hearing the legend about Devi Katyayani, Parasurama who
was enamoured spoke thus with ecstasy: “Oh Compassionate Venerable
Lord! I will never be satisfied even if I listen to your narration again
and again. Hence I would like to hear about the earlier story of Sumbha
and Nigumbha. How were they destroyed? What was their prowess? With
what form did Devi fight with them? Oh Adorable Guru! Please tell me
all this. There is none other than you who is easily approacbable to
narrate. lto4
aagyeead Bt water at sears wre set fyreara tar: ser aargat i 4 tt
Thus requested by Paragurama, the Ascetic Guru Dattatreya
systematically narrated with love that legend to him who was keen on
listening to it. 5
WET sy arartat renee afrsenrafeargeat wa fatewertet nan
qaear arenta tnteat grave &1 agdewarararenfedeat were Hen
qite areat sifaaphiararrsent war ax fect Mets watsway cl
fet deer carer watiger O aa) watdyt aawafagpee: ET TTS
Sage aed aatoragasent
“Oh Parasurama! Listen to this purifying story containing the eed
of Devi Candika that bestows all gain. This was earlier narrated —
brahmin Sumedhasa to Suratha. In ancient times, Madhu and Kaita
were two powerful sons of Diti. Lord Visnu battled with them for wie
thousand years and with trickery slayed them. The earth filled wi

Rt fey 410 Sri Tripurarahasyam
their marrow got the name of Medini. In their lineage were born the
demons Sumbha and Nigsumbha. They performed formidable penance for
eighty thousand years. 6 to 9
wat fafa: werats qaataefaentdar I Rot
at aardt at wae adetenarasy! Baissea aaa citewfafierer een
qeteantatsditeqan yt at qari staid aat aa ator eaggat ee
aat wdeiteart tet ot aerqaq: | fates citaieiy tet acteafirrg: 1
Then Brahma, who was pleased with their penance, appeared to
grant them boons. They both wanted a boon by which they would be
wholly invincible—a boon fearsome to creation. Knowing that, Brahma
declared a boon to Sumbha that they will not be defeated by any male
person and disappeared. By that boon both the demons conquered the
three worlds and became wealthy. 10 to 13
wis warentafatypedt qufedat: alters arargy areut tad we Re
arate ard a ud yest eet ara! Seararta orgquit yarot a ferarna:
Sumbha became the lord of the heaven and Nigumbha the lord of
the earth. Sumbha appointed his brothers and sons to the positions of
Kubera, Yama, Varuna, Nirrti, Agni, Vayu and others. 14, 15
we dertwat tar dat warren: | sity aasity devia: qta: Weal
wa & ree: Yo tat anf: | Ueietaay Sere tar pTerafeer: 1 gol
Wears: acusadtate aad aanfacr werner: Well
sarea: aanderassa ofeatir: | ua autsqayri Gar: aaa eq: = RSI
Having lost their wealth, the gods became pitiable and wandered
in mountains and forests out of fear. Thus the dethroned gods moved
incognito on the earth. They lived as humans in caves and forests. Indra
and others lived like hermits with matted locks and wearing barks and
tattered clothes. Some of the gods took the form of birds. Thus, for a
million years, the gods had lost their position. 16 to 19
wate ter wrt ada: yeorfera: | gaabrcaaisyaerneery tl Roll
treat waardhees aqadenm! seg: wdtenh cerararte Ween

fracafeaits a4: 411 Chapter 42
nedeites 4 parfe @aag: wade) argu: waa: wa yaetsmay 1 2211
ae: wadaer ae faeranfaart: quot erga @ miyreraytes: 1 2311
aur qeRce Sears! wants anise yirafe waar A: ut ex Il
The demons governed by Sumbha, ruled the world. They usurped
and appropriated the sacrificial oblations, the divine damsels, the nectar,
the Kalpaka tree, the Airavata and the Nandana garden. They hoarded
all the precious gems of the three worlds. Nowhere on the earth, the
sacrificial rites were performed for the gods. As ordered by Sumbha the
rites were dedicated to the demons. Sumbha formulated and promulgated
his own Veda and auxiliary texts, the Puranas, the religious procedures,
the codes of conduct and so on and prescribed the results obtainable by
practising them such as good, medium and bad—heaven and hell, according
to his fancy. 20 to 24
aarsfrettorar Zar: wreRTeA wer Ti ay: waqtetenatefeeta: i BH
aa aa ware erat fagafaas weaerafaepets dt ferereraitfircrerery tt 26 1
ugfiniaedat aqergrttrat qfenta: gferrotfeenfa: afar faye 1 Rol
qutarsan: aa eusaaurarerar! seara yfet farensgfererst wayyy: lt tei
Then the oppressed Indra and other gods together went to Brahma's
abode without being noticed by the demons. There they beheld Brahma,
who was being served by sages; who was glowing like blazing fire; whose
effulgence had enveloped the world; who was wearing four crowns
resembling the four peaks of a mountain; who was being attended by
the embodied Vedas and branches of knowledge, and prostrated before
him from a distance and rose up and praised him keeping their folded
hands on their head. 25 to 28
qearsweTy Fafa Sarre: | wre vrata fete: wdferarat: 11 2811
day afe far tse aarcot ayaa
: salle ies
Seeing the helpless and poor gods who were praising him,
omniscient Brahma said to Indra thus: “Oh Indra! Tell me why you os
come to me now?”
sf qe: rane: Hareferwares aie

a Bee, 412 Sri Tripurarahasyam
ard: ypahypanat afereat area: | et yeti cata Prat: i aen
aa: wufafafaavoran aastxy! saferat eae: PIT: WTPAT ss 11 32
saaaHataemnstarsaay! sifese ara: we quad ay fer: aan
aeafe a: erat yet wepfad ya: dart at fauqant aeerseage safari
Thus enquired, Indra with folded hands said to Brahma thus:
“Oh Creator! By obtaining boons, the powerful demons Sumbha and
Nigumbha have driven us away from the lordship of the three worlds.
Bound by them, we somehow escaped. Having lost our lustre and strength,
we are living incognito like helpless ordinary persons. Snatching from
us the positions of Indra, Candra, Kubera, Isana, Varuna, Agni and
Vayu, the demons are every day enjoying the power. Please tell us what
is best to subdue Sumbha. There is none other than you who can protect
the helpless.” 30 to 34
Sta grat yenaet fafa: aorafastaqi aa: ore Atet ft wen cienfrarae: i 341
fayraat taut aeatsaat wag Tat cent faepyarte yfa: erat KI
7 afwenn anfaceres ufafaerar fort ater wad farsa Tt 301
aed efor gan giur a qdae: | wares eat srearafasa METAL
saan frafaapat tacit gat fafa: 1 mean froomtt feraeg gery tl acl
wore: weet taaqatan: | aerefeayqer ween qeqfeewatty — il ¥oll
wat tet vereet ferardt wad Aa: 1 AA: Weed Gard Fraar: wore: HT ATH I ¥R
seafefafad: witareqaq, afeaarert: |
Hearing Indra, Brahma the creator thought for a while and said to
Indra thus: “Oh Devendra! Listen to the future event. No male including
Visnu can kill these two demons. There is no woman other than Devi
Tripurasundari who can oppose them. Hence for the good of the world,
let us, along with Visnu and Siva propitiate the Devi.” Saying thus,
Brahma along with Siva, Visnu and other gods reached the wonderful
Himalayan peak by the side of the river Ganga and bowed to the Supreme
Universal Devi and with folded hands devotedly praised Her thus:
“Salutations to the Devi, to the great Devi; our constant salutations to
the Auspicious. Salutations to prakrti the Primordial force, the Good.

frscarfeens 7: 413 Chapter 42
With restraint, we have bowed down to Her.” With many such hymns,
the gods with devotion praised the Devi. 35 to 41
aa waar wor fagteit aeat use
wart wfgotaa tart ypaewar
Then the pleased Supreme Devi Tripurasundari sent Devi Bhavani
to the gods to help them. 42
wa a ufent tem odd ahatadar evan
wat Srghaars sera Sarl TRaTS SaetEa: |
afaesita & aa ferndfire de: Wve
Thus deputed by the Devi Tripurasundari, Parvati along with Her
friends, proceeded quickly under the pretext of taking bath in Ganga
and seeing the gods there spoke feigning ignorance thus: “Who are you
all? Why have you assembled here?” 43, 44
Wa UST: AT: wg: Yeeeah: | sa Sar SE MM Sal a MCTTTAT: Hh St I
4 Thus questioned, the gods, who were driven out by the demon
Sumbha, said thus: “We are gods who have come here seeking shelter
under the Devi Tripura”. 45
aear WA: wre Tt waka: eqaasa carl Shr aUEcteTgaT Varah a yTaNTAT It
frttomfimen caret waa arse ater vem: vretrg frtar fageiera: 1 ve
wanegat spear vier: eperatear wre wT geet: wqaisé yriifet: uve
aetfrentr ot ypafrypeat eae | afsasé at afer cart frranitor
aecififa at tat faergmper: qu: 1 Tedstafe rece aetarergeharery | 4o
Hearing them, Gauri saying—“Who is being praised here”?—became
fiercely angry like blazing fire and looked dark like a broken sapphire
gem. From her body emerged a beautiful partial incarnation of Devi
Tripura, a Sakti desirous of slaying Sumbha. She told Gauri thus: “Oh
Kali, interested in helping the gods! I was praised by the gods afflicted
by Sumbha. In association with you, I will destroy those two demon
gods cheered Her who
kings Sumbha and Nisumbha.” Brahma and other ae
was talking thus, with loud cheers of victory. to

St Fey, 414 Sri Tripurarahasyam
HA TEM Wis Ut Heat Acay YA: WA: | Urdeat: salerqenrar SerererenyRat 4
afvsenfa dat cite am ase Weatt!
Then Brahma after repeatedly bowing and praising the Supreme
Devi said thus: “Oh Mahesvari! Because You have emerged from the
angry Parvati, You will become known in the world by the name Candika.”
warea ypaderes afaoragqusfet U4
ausqvstate wad Wradent at) ayes aaHud afer sarTat Ga
Fear wage tat: yreaqar: qu: | fafeeq: qaavey Haty weg aN uy
: At the time, two leaders of the demons, the ministers of the demon
Sumbha, who were famous as Canda and Munda, who were engaged in
hunting in the forest, hearing the shouts of victory reached there to
know about it. Seeing the wicked demons, the frightened Indra and other
gods concealed themselves on trees, in caves and waters. 52 to 54
aa aus: wees afreni create ques aeat weld aytag: 1
al a wanenenta aster fast feaati
at at wasyat aistt wie aaftra, W 4G tl
aevacravaguied & aad war gam watgqett waqafe ay Qe
aé faqareres ypreisares Sa: 1 at aa ifrdgqenn areas wai aerg
sqaeastaaanis sy wet ai at FAT!
Then seeing the enchanting Candika, Canda and Munda tormented
by lust, went near Her to catch Her. They said thus: “Oh Lotus-eyed
lady! Who are you in this lonely forest? Accept me or my brother, as
you please. Oh Beautiful one! By a mere look at you, my mind has been
snatched by your virgin charm. Please come close to me. I am the best
minister of Sumbha who is the lord of the three worlds. Come to me
with love. If not I will forcibly take you away.” Saying thus, he quickly
moved towards Her to catch Her hand. 55 to 58
Wacatet aftserar eer at ws ae W4gil
fort Wear gereat wat: are aceite
Uae ast aaet yfesat qfa i Goll

feacarfeaits Ara: 415 Chapter 42
daghtaqatst vitfiratfarrgaet |
Then Kali glanced at by Candika, caught them with force and holding
their heads with her hands, the powerful Kali, bufetted them one against
the other whereupon they became unconscious and with injured bloody
heads they dropped on the ground. 59, 60
wre tat cafereaat 4 erent aera nag
wate wre aareat aqararifrer: |
Then Candika said thus to Kali. “Oh Kali! These two should never
be killed. By getting the news from these two, Sumbha and Nisumbha
will arrive here.” 61
aa at qedar qart cfsadt sacar Wart
AIGS Aa: YT Ther weqtat: wenrasgqaa sashes tetera = RI
pretax wafer deat fest: feats wearae eaty teryat at wdatsferary
det ydfafes cer aster fret tae a wat saha ater fafa aft
wen: wenaensf dha were: | wage wagqat sf # fafa afer: 1&6
Then getting back their consciousness, those two who were frightened
and put to shame reached Sumbha and reported with respect thus: “Oh
King of the demons! A woman of indescribable universal charm who is
illuminating the directions is staying at the Himélayan mountain. We
consider her as the most excellent gem among women. You are being
served by damsels like Urvasi, Parvacitti, Rambha, Tilottama and Menaka.
All of these put together may or may not be equal to a fraction of the
beauty of the nail in her toe. This is our conclusion. 62 to 66
vrefterenttypanfin: “ar Remarat water at farat & frorifarget aaetenfirare ae
adcianfrecdtzcryarniigyn assarcate wa sitfert weet way RS
araveat at wararg ered wehtfirany) arerarerren ante are ferarcefat u
denssat wag fant stent aceite wear: awafetenfact wea fied feet wr
are & frect ait: fear ufeedt wat great ferent weer wea at iter
water wfeeat attra ge ee |
Without her who is enchanting and served by Sacl, Laksmi and

at eer 416 Sri Tripurarahasyam
other divine ladies, your lordship over the three worlds is a waste.
Though you are the lord of the Universe, without possessing a gem like
her, your existence is of no use. While we were trying to bring her for
your sake, one hideous powerful Kali deputed by her, caught hold of us
and somehow we escaped. Look at the injury on my head. What a pity?
Your pride has been punished by our defeat at the hands of a woman,
Oh Lord of the demons! You should immediately kill that Kali and regain
your fame by obtaining that universally beautiful woman.” 67 to 71
wed aataea: Ara YP: SAMTAS wa WOR
aga at Gite Rearera at uf qa aafatgatrraaen cq TACT
amet ot adetarhrtd wafrerséfa agurafafaensta werd strat 11 6%
aranmisa gor wes vith qarea
Hearing them, Sumbha was urged by lust. He called a messenger
by name Sugriva and sent him to her by saying thus: “Oh Sugriva! One
beautiful girl stays near Himalaya. You should cleverly bring her here.
If she does not come to me by one of the three strategies we will bring
her by the fourth method of force. So, go soon and succeed.” 72 to 74
aa aa oat qaeat cast @ df, TAC
worey wre afar warere fromritar: | YSasA Tergat Wear wat watg Aaa: 11 OG
aé fe vata ofrererasre am areas reader urarsareafa wayTT | Vo
wal et Het oat aor fee feentdfs fet ale aeaeteor fararacrgt at: i! ¢
Then the messenger reached Himalaya and saw her and bowed and
said thus: “Oh Devi! The demon Sumbha, the lord of the three worlds,
considering you as the universally superior gem among women has this
message for you—“I am the lord of all the gems. Hence, come and join
me. If you do not yield to conciliation, you will be taken into my custody
by force”—Our king wants to know who you are? Whose daughter? What
is your plan?” 75 to 78
Hasse eat ¢ at werd qeenfeuit
aé avdife faera assrenserats safad, Wes

fracarfeeits 14: 417 Chapter 42
frofiisa waren ef tafeat 371
tart wfaa 3 ai agit ett qatar, con
afe mearsqeata frat Fag at agri
Then the Devi spoke with a smile softly thus to the messenger,
“{ am well-known as Candi. Till now I have never been subordinate to
anyone. By self-glory I have come here to destroy the demons. Go back
and tell your king to conquer me and take me.” 79, 80
qaeraeantee: years wire, ween
gear ea: wepfa: urdeet queiterays aurfege warétfer weer fren a at ayn
acer ware fanfigadt queites: | getamftqa: weet atgafercary i 23
Thus ordered by her, the messenger reported to Sumbha. Hearing
him, the enraged Sumbha ordered his lieutenant Dhimralocana to bring
her soon by conquering her and binding her. Ordered thus, Dhimralocana
proceeded along with his battalion to fight the Devi.
sfa stfiqeeeet mrereravs fracenftyitsera: 1
End of the forty-second chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurarahasyam

fracarfigtts cara:
Chapter 43
aera at quaat dertaraarga: | aad yratior wre Sat warsfaa: wen
ye caat ale ta: won gay aegal areata tf wer wat yA 2H
Dhimralocana reached the Devi along with his army and angrily
showered arrows on Her and said thus “Oh Foolish Woman! Honoured
by the demons quickly join the lord of the demons, or else bound by me
you will be taken to him disrespectfully.” 1,2
aamdda: Fear werd we alvsent! za wae tea far Gea oT faq 30
sae yratn aaaisqrira
Hearing the words of the chief of the army, Candika smilingly said
thus: “Oh Demon! Take me without delay, by conquering me in the war”.
Saying thus, She showered arrows on the mighty demon. 3
aa tar: waetar afirst afeset wT uit
Tet qiag fart qaqqeaa: | area eft tar: mrefarrgrsrar wall
Then the gods saw Devi Candika standing on the ground and
Dhimralocana on the chariot and thought that to be unmatched. They
immediately requested Visnu for the vehicle. 4,5
ae faaiqufater drat: | sageafieat qe area ees GI
Then Visnu took the form of a mountain-like Lion and carried
Candika in the war and frightened the demons. 6
awe qeeastat gen quralt searae: | ayaa at cHtor garaftarnry i Il
Fears samt Geet EARTH WT EgaEtrtesgeeATeMT GT: ae?
waqaaetinad & Faas: | sa dat taategatis ae, weil
yrearare fafraretteftage: |
After fighting with the Devi for a long period, Dhamraksa, the
leader of the army of demons sprang up to catch hold the hand of the

is 419 Chapter 43
Devi. Seeing the approaching Dhimralocana, the Supreme Devi uttered
the ‘Hum’ sound at him. Dhumralocana was enveloped by that sound
and the flame released from Her mouth and within the moment of a
wink was reduced to ashes like a moth. Then Visnu who had taken the
form of the Lion quickly subdued the army of the demons that was
swelling like an ocean during tides. 7 to 9
aa set ed Sat Ep aga ILQ0
we: we Ursa ausyuSt weIsgt qareaafacra ar weaves fafarer gee
waren eft aH age earste at APTTI
Hearing about the destruction of his army along with Dhamralocana,
the angry Sumbha ordered the great demons Canda and Munda who
were by his side, thus: “Both of you, without delaying, bring her here
by conquering her and her army. Also bring that Lion either tied or
killed.” 10, 11
arfterenferter wer gear eres arf weet
sitet arereq: epee wererat aa: Uy arareat a fasrar ar aaersyT TTT Me
ait edt qhagftaertaane: | abate tet asa actteeat faves: Weel
Hearing the instructions of Sumbha, those two who were frightened
said to Sumbha thus: “Oh King! Please listen. She is invincible by both
of us. Since Dhamralocana, the oppressor of the gods, has been killed
in no time, we think it suitable to enter into a pact with the strong.”
en watt wa: Gra: Yostswdity ati saves fare gat gat afa witfed:
arryeiingt ufavsenstatctan wg varrorenfacaite water HRI
the angry Sumbha chided them thus:
Upon hearing them, on :
“Having started the war, out of anxiety you are thinking of alliance
discarding your loyalty towards me. I even think that you may me -
enemy.”
IMI yaaagest quesrste fatrdtat fardarsaard & arearsafatenrer: 11 89
een Saar yaa aesquet Warrat! Sqeg: fagdeat Regret RC

st fee, 420 Sri Tripurarahasyam
at wmrerqygant terdarenrgat | fiaett yreacarenht aagenta atest uy
Hearing Sumbha, Canda and Munda proceeded, as otherwise it would
be their self destruction. They reached Himalaya and saw the Devi seated
on a Lion just like the Sun on the peak of Meru mountain. In order to
catch Her, they with their army threw a bunch of weapons at Her.
Candika was infuriated by this. 17 to 19
wraqefeas saat caret a dtreftott: tertat waraENsy Walaa |
faarparsaraat a avequet verge fern Gas were aftsert fraeaq 1
Then the terrible Kali, ordered through the angry eyebrows of
Candika, attacked the army of the demons and swallowed all of them.
After destroying the army she severed the heads of the powerful demons
Canda and Munda with the sword and offered them to Devi Candika.
ara at fredt area yea: aaleerepet: | Taare Prepares qa 22M
argueaaat tt afesaerifera
Then Sumbha agitated by anger at the death of Canda and Munda,
proceeded with his entire army and Nigumbha to fight with the Devi
who was staying on Himalaya. 22
act witaa qat SaTgea: Watt
sort annfta Ta ARH! FAY RA ASA WAAMS AAT, ues
Seqnigt dercarafatitge teesaretet werner, RU
TaMVeTsuraatettqatcater |
Then the Devi saw the army of the lord of the demons which was
boundless like an ocean in which the tall chariots were the tides, the
dancing horses were the waves, the elephants were the crocodiles, the
shields were the tortoises, the moving swords were the sharks, the white
umbrellas were the foam, the sound of the trumpets was the uproar and
in which the vibrant ring from the bells of the elephants was deafening
the horizons. 23 to 25
Ua armani ai gear eat Geert TL
Wafer farar: aataeafete: great fad targa, tl zl

FAAS ATF: 421 Chapter 43
met meat dat doret ferfeerett: ancét antes arse aa area uv ecu
Beholding this shoreless army and seeing the lonely Devi, the gods
started worrying about the consequences. Realising their worry, the Devi
created a group of motherly forces such as Brahmi, Maheévari,
Indrani, Vaisnavi, Sikhivahini (Kaumari), Varahi, Narasirhhi, Agneyi and
Varuni 26 to 28
ua qtyrerenitea: viferetererargan: | THRAMATHNT VyaegaTT: ih VA
aie wofertargfadaat wat: waaay Sratewarehit Won
Thus the army of the gods joined the motherly forces by wearing
such dresses and wielding such weapons conforming to that particular
motherly force and the huge army faced the demons. A battle began
between the two armies. 29 to 30
wat: uramifiteurd: uegqaget: | fayperamaftacusdtaryrt: Teta
seheraraarantrgadyet Tr: | awesfercatacgeen wat: Wael
agqerat age: thfren stestifecr: |
A frightening, tumultous war went on between the army of the
motherly forces and the demons employing weapons like swords, axes,
javelins, large axes, flat-strips, tridents, wheels, bolts, rods, iron clubs,
maces and many other huge weapons. A river of blood with froth flowed,
making the weak tremble. 31, 32
aext tented gear afturg vitae: waan
caadtarsfrdt Seat ateerearrat TH
gate yifareanf: @ Seat caret: nasil
qarena sfafacaca yaret aad: ufaaretea: oar aterm: Waal
aeaMT sree dergnssd aatsuty tantra: we wafer: it 36
sresdedwant: sand 4: aedarern) qeaacgt tar vite: feng wafefau de
i i iminishi demon
At that time, seeing the army of demons diminishing, the
by name Raktabija came to the battle field and opposed the motherly
forces. As he was fighting, as many powerful warriors as his drops 0
blood fell on the ground were born and again as many of such warriors

tt fee 422 Sri Tripurarahasyam
were born from each of them and so on, every one equalling Raktabija
in form. intelligence and strength. The entire earth was pervaded by an
extremely huge number of them. Seeing such a perplexing phenomenon
the gods were terrified of the consequences. 33 to 37
aa OT alsa Gear tata aaa! caret wrdferat wre afaaqanat aa: 11
afc farqd aed Graisqeaataay taddirer wat wart at ada: 11 3¢
Then Candika seeing the off-springs of Raktabija, very cleverly told
Kali who was by her side thus: “Oh Kali! By spreading your tongue
keep on drinking the blood that comes out of the injuries of Raktabija”.
wate a faeqassen araom worsfat saat yiftrnt carat areanioit
Ua wet aaerat at aeisga: | argenererdfoet: eorcaats FANT: ve II
Obeying Her, Kali with her mouth widely opened moved all around
the war field drinking the blood of the demons and tormenting them.
Thus as Kali was consuming their blood, the great demons lost their
strength and were cut to pieces by the weapons of the motherly forces.
Ua We tends faypet ceayrar: | atequeart edt ufvsarrgida: = ¥zIl
yrat qadfedafisent ofa afta: | ar usages tf ad ufsada: ou ¥3il
viieafadaan u qatestraciadt viaaiepras area a feat ap vs
qeat fags: dpe: ulvsansfaqet aati
When Raktabija was thus lost, Nigsumbha, the lord of the demons,
arrived with his army to fight with Devi Candika. With fury he showered
arrows on Her. Candika destroyed them by a retaliating shower of arrows.
The mighty army of the demons fought with the forces of Sakti and was
destroyed by Kali and the Lion. Seeing this, Nisumbha angrily went in
front of Candika. 42 to 44
aassamt teafa yraadtartenc, Weal
met & prevation den weft apy: | ave yaad a faqa yada: = vA Il
fstre yreatarfagnst feaeperar

fracanfeents 7: 428 Chapter 43
Then Candika poured weapons on Nisumbha who was approaching
Her. The demons wailed as he was caught in that rain of arrows. But,
Nigumbha immediately destroyed that shower by another one and emerged
from the cloud of weapons just like the Sun. 45, 46
ag 2a ufaand yifed watssadt ger voll
at net wrarcheren foes afrsarseat afte ore yet Wet wratfea Tari ve
fam fact fay feeds araardg: |
Then the angry Nisumbha discharged an iron weapon called ‘Sakti’
against the Devi. Candika cut that in the space into three pieces.
Similarly She quickly destroyed by arrows, weapons like rod, axe, trident,
mace and spear that were repeatedly directed towards Her by Nisumbha.
aa want ame faypaatvsent ute use
aperaractacntart fers ferestr at aetl
Then Nigumbha holding the sword rushed towards Candika calling
out “stop, stop”. 49
Sater cone sree aA, W ko!
qeat facqtanom: waeiteargteda: |
Seeing him, who was like the lord of death during deluge, approaching
the Devi, the gods were frightened. The sages wished for Her —
aeadt waa aerassmHea TT Wall
watts eargrer wees farfirerea: | seer Ferg: senferenr = ereeret Serene
apftsifrat materqget WIA: |
Meanwhile the Supreme Devi overpowered the rushing eg
and with the sword quickly severed his head. Then the Lion, Kalika
other divine forces with fury destroyed the entire army of the 51 52
freer Fret sree HT: Waal
tt we feet tear fdr HRT!

A PRES, 424 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Depressed by hearing the death of his brother and the army as
well, Sumbha with wild anger struck with the sword the Lion on its
qaemt fat vifeafes aiferenrafrdat | AAT AAAATS YT WATE G4
yrenfagerere wen fate ai oredarst ar caret faerst wet aT 4a
zag sew: wa Bg MfeTSTA
After fighting for a long period, Sumbha faced Kalika and battled
wonderfully with her. Kalika was astonished by his strength, skill and
versatility in handling the weapons. The gods and the sages appreciated
qeal a ufvsarseqd gen fama a U4ell
afte at areftrracisgtarn! sat fist Gear eageteara AH
squy qe afe war qasar warsfea Sa) frst: waret qe wea A ae
watg careforent ara sf & aaafara: | aaeatent Bat ai urer a afaeafe i Go
Seeing that fierce, brave and skilled Sumbha who was surpassing
Kali, Candika approached him. Seeing her, Sumbha with a loud laughter
said thus: “Oh Wicked woman! If you are interested in fighting with
me, then let your other forces stay away for a while and you will know
my strength. Out of compassion towards a woman, I was indifferent
about them. Now, all alone you cannot survive fighting with me.”
gee crac fatraatsfaen aft faafad aurea yaa age Fa 1 Gell
wotterdeat we at aurnaa: | yearonfeatriat gear sat Ytae: Ml az
Wtf appear weqterttren: | uervig: wreqyredstagretcaday =n G3
Hearing the words of Sumbha, Candika holding back Her army
fought with Sumbha by riding the great Lion. Then Sumbha quickly
concealed Her in the mist of arrows. Seeing the Devi drowned in the
ocean of arrows of Sumbha, the frightened gods cried in agony, where
as the demons rejoiced and appreciated him with slogans of victory.

fracafeeits a: 425 Chapter 43
ee Se ee
qext afrsanste ardfta yrtent: | ft wcterqresas = ail
srameasret Yat ya: Sefer! Ise erect yet freensentir wera
Then Candika also, adopting breeze-like arrows came out of that
mist of arrows, like a Sun. Sumbha repeatedly poured arrows on Her
who came out. She discharged opposing weapons repeatedly at him.
ara arrmarresticar BEA: MATTEL SATS Sara at Sa ATERARTATS HATA I GG
aa at tees eat Gearsttan: | ¢:fan seqaaret fag were gw
Thinking that She was not conquerable by missiles, the valiant
Sumbha lifted the Devi and travelled in the sky. Seeing Her being carried
by the demon, the sad gods prayed to the Primordial Great Devi
Sri Tripurasundari. 65 to 67
a tera warera wat Prater: | atararat aeerfor eerrarratee Ween
Sumbha carrying the Devi Candika, traversed in a minute ninety
one lakh yojanas. 68
art pen ered afrsarsdet wer wate weTye saree era
Understanding that She is caught and being carried, Candika quickly
struck the demon on his head with the thunderbolt like sword. 69
a eat acral faafgenvrernfaet! ayeat A: arsfir agar TTATSHM it we
fat quem aa ae Tereet WeTget! Mefgeet Fe wae arse Hogi
aorafarcar aut figat erecta qararennferat Ser See BAe aE NOR"
qpotware frint araeqreqefe) arenas ea earner we efreeT WORT
Baa arate fercare ear ape ferserargt Sete rare: wae Bese
Hit hard on his head, he slightly lost control and released ee.
fought with him in the sky. After a long fight, when Ge eee ‘ cod
jumped with his mace to hit Her, Candika caught him by his cea
swinging him many times dashed him on to the ee ke
on to the ground, the demon heavily vomitted = es his
was unconscious. As he was trying to stand up, :

a fey, 426 Sri Tripurarahasyam
chest with Her foot and with extreme fury pierced the trident into his
neck. With his head severed the king of the demons died. 70 to 74
aatsacron: aa vatican fee fargar: 1 feet fafatier areal et EST TEETH oy
Wie Arar aq: Ga: AIA: BT: Feet: |
Then the remaining demons fled in all directions. The horizons
brightened up as the mighty demon Sumbha was killed. The breeze was
peaceful. The Sun shone brightly. The oceans were calm. 15
ua den fated yd teary, WOR
der Fayre wegrqasereny: | qera fawpeat eat aftsent diaara: 1 wot
Hearing the death of Sumbha, the lord of the demons, the gods
rejoiced and praised the Devi in many ways. The pleased Visnu praised
Devi Candikaé thus: 76, 77
waft qratuar ygt ypueat uefyrancefed: oyaat wet
Ponegrecranaaneat ufttaattaneaaritaatateat Neen
“Sankari, the best among gods, the slayer of Sumbha, the great
strength of Paramesvara, the destroyer of the sins of those who behold
Her, the warder of the afflictions of those devoted to Her feet, the dispeller
of the ignorance of those who have realised Her truth, triumphs. 78
fe we veut dap Genafad Hants wate: dyaaHar!
rife aentat ergfad wert weafereranmt afaendferdtary Ta
If ever, in their life, human beings somehow remember even once
Your lotus feet, then how will they again take a painful birth which will
be like a mirage to them. (They will not have births and deaths.) 79
wa waft wit at aucisaaar: ements a ua ta wae
aft tafe mateo: wfiar: eptorattaaen ta a aer de coll
Oh Mother! How can I, even assuming the form of Adisesa (the
thousand hooded serpent) describe Your transcendent glory which is
unlimited. It might be possible to count the number of dust particles in
the air, but never Your glories. 80

fracas aa: 427 Chapter 43
anfa afagia df aaa fat wate aq frsitsd drach argera: |
a fe ana anal ofmisnste afaq forypenferyaster Gatetery on ceil
In this world, the fact that You destroy the sorrow of people is not
surprising because the motherly love towards a child is but natural. In
this world a capable person, even if he is perplexed, will not ignore the
scene of his house being ruined. 81
afraaant gait ashe cies carefree
HU wagEh gies yaad aereanard fa ae Ea: aT We
If anybody in the world desires to please You who is charming, who
are the quintessence of vocabulary, by his skilled eloquence, will that,
Oh Devi! become Your hymn? It would indeed be like converting the
ocean of ambrosia into honey by adding a few drops of it. 82
ofa een eftdat anges a cusaq fafgen af qe afeafrdfcarsar: i cz
Thus praising the Devi, Visnu prostrated before Her. Brahma and
other gods also filled with devotion prostrated. 83
va wy afosenr MISA Tea YUsshAart!
gaara at erat arssratt warzat nen
Candika, who was thus lauded, who destroyed the demons who were
tormenting the gods, disappeared after granting boons to the gods. 84
wa om au aat frre weISAE Yarety attererearaery, cite ferTeTArT | 4 It
wa ar wnat art faq catered ger wer fafepertcqafefa: = ca
anifaart qer taerdereaaeaa | taure @ tenrarmadiont fraisyra: ucell
ARTUTa Sa Utara: Hera wWiealeds apradecat =e d
tt faera wf ertarste wet gory wer ag wees arta ader ceil
ey Oe ee
Werarraenft fares Brera eae Ty, Ngo
~ Oh Paragurama! Thus in the past, the Devi destroyed the valiant
mighty demons like Sumbha, who were destroying the worlds. Worshipped
by Brahma and other gods whenever they are oppressed by the demons,

tt Fae, 428 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Devi Tripurasundari who is propitiated by every one, incarnates with a
fraction of Her Power to protect the gods and the world also. Without
Her involvement, how can even a blade of grass move, just like the
waves without the sea. Therefore, Oh Parasurama! One should worship
the Supreme Transcendental Devi Tripurasundari, who destroys the sins
of Her devotees, by keeping aside worldly actions. If not, the human
beings would get drowned in the middle of the deep ocean of worldliness
and touch its bottom resulting in disaster to the self.” 85 to 90
sft sitfaqrreet wrereravs froenftyitseara: 11
End of the forty-third chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurarahasyam

ag areanfeyits cara:
Chapter 44
fara afosents STA TH PPCURS: | HAMMAR ATTA ASAT UV
faq Tana eRe AAUTS SAAT: | 4 ae want ae aut fafarateae: = 2
wg Ura wenach fafera: ore ATecq!
Having heard the honey-like legend of Devi Candika, Parasurama,
the scion of Bhrgu race, became like an intoxicated bee that was drunk
with honey. He was filled with ecstasy by hearing the great glory of
Sri Tripurasundari and for a moment was still like a picture, unaware
of in and out. Then, remembering his natural state, he was astonished
and said with love thus: 2
anaq Heute vase AyaT: uu
aurismedarneannstatage: | aitsé wracrentantaer Freda: ue
wansife neritt dafteasfator a1 aqzera atferf qeqagar a fret | Gt
wen: sifaquten: weienfaa war arearttatisarat: aan qafentaar ui &
arrears apa! + faqents avrasad sraftagt: i oil
ar: ty Waa stemarsyataan fear qyehfeqerertta welwery — cl
“Oh Ocean of Compassion! Oh Lord! I have been saved by you. I,
who was miserable immersed in the boundless ocean of worldly life, have
indeed fearlessly crossed that fearsome ocean by the boat which is your
divine feet. I am blessed. By your grace, I do not fear death. While
narrating the story of Devi Sri Tripurasundari, you have told me the
great legends of KAtyayani and Candika who are the partial incarnations
of Her. Now, please tell me another legend about Sri Tripurasundari.
I am never satisfied of hearing Her auspicious stories. Which being will
feel satisfied by drinking the elixir of divine legends that is like a great
medicine to the sick excepting a few struck by death.” 3 to 8
area werner aren: | BE: We Teena fay RI
fere at qypaficensgracnant faquenteararar: arferenrar fafefaary

at FETT 430 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Hearing Parasurama, the pleased Dattatreya recognising his interest
in the legends of the Paraéakti, said thus: “Oh Paragurama! Listen to
the wonderful story of Kalika, who was born out of the anger of
Sri Tripura. 9, 10
qu fefargar den: areraet sft am: | aeeTMaEISA GAT AeTTAT: | BRI
mapa AAEM AAT TATAT Aaciteny sArepferats sat ARH
gard wated tata senfagre
In the past, there were one thousand brothers, the sons of Diti,
who were mighty and known as Kalakhafijas. They did penance for
thirteen Arbudas (One Arbuda = One hundred million), which agitated
the worlds. Indra’s throne was shaken and the gods were frightened.
2a: dufadt der: ware wT aL eat
den at aa fer at ad wa: wae) aTEISe Bde FAA: ev
DONS WgITAS ATaISeY A: |
Requested by the gods, Brahma went to them and said thus: “Oh
Demons! Tell me what boon you want from me. Stop your penance which
is harmful to the world”. The demons bowed and said thus: “We should
never die”. 13, 14
sen tated Sean ara wdarae, Wall
Bieiszamied at wafer ware ar
Hearing the demons and realising the danger, Brahma told them
thus: “You will not die from other than women”. 15
faqya asf waiamgey age Weal
atarraftana: chaitsemranse 7: |
afearera ware w aqdeat frag uzer
P The demons mutually thought about it and said thus to Brahma:
Let us not have death from the women who are existing now”. Brahma
agreed and left for his heavenly abode. 16, 17

ASCARIS AT: 431 Chapter 44
EE $< ee
aa Sea: HTS Nera: | Paras He WE heayaataray ke
gfastracara fracreraeat a1
Then the mighty Kalakhafija demons conquered Indra and others
and confiscated the wealth of the three worlds including the sacrificial
oblations, the divine damsels and the dwellings of the lords of the
horizons. 18
wat trarsfatdar: cauereatitaar: eeu
annfefa: qeres oeaTQUeA! Waa HITSSeS: VIM sabeatt
THe dethroned Indra and other gods reached Brahma and sought
relief of their defeat from the Kalakhamjas. 19, 20
wit arnfirer afaet arapa faa terqed ane ciggte: Hee
at tar aa assert Het BTafyrerd a aat qedeq: ciifwat wepareafe: 1 22
a wecteattastattaa dat yf: |
argeit asta citeag afi afar safe, qe: @3ul
tenfataagien a qenedhes Cea dea fagteet weamisdfesa ev
saat teftracree fafinpere: 1 fag qeqdat cranny 24
Requested thus, Brahma meditated and came to know about the
future prosperity of the demons and spoke to the gods thus: “Oh Gods!
In this matter nothing can be done. They cannot be killed either by men
or women who are living today. They could be destroyed by a woman
who transcends worldliness. There is no woman of this kind anywhere
in the universe. Hence the task appears impossible. To achieve our goal,
let us propitiate Devi Tripurasundari.” Saying thus, Brahma and others
reached the Meru peak and praised Devi Tripura who is the executor
of the universe. 21 to 25
Text awe araswmfaatia aniatenaqes faeqrrfaa: i ul
aerat erat vitet Wace: HUST: |
At that time the Kalakhaiijas coming to know the act of the gods,
went there to spoil their efforts as directed by Sukracarya. The demons
shouted thus: “Bind them; kill them by going quickly.” 26

tt fs 432 Sri Tripurarahasyam
eat tar: HTaaMay Aaa: Te Tor
seafaapesat yruitqeraret: | safe ae wert aera Gusher: u ecu
zar prea fagt array, waa |
Seeing the arrival of the Kalakhafijas, the fear-struck gods yelled
loudly surrendering to the Devi thus: “Oh Great Devi! Oh Protector of
the devotees! Oh Tripurasundari! Oh Refuge! Protect us, the gods, who are
in trouble. Protect us, who are being captured by the demons.” 27, 28
farnigreatasitag dereafeaquttacn 2H
afar, qatar Weta! AMS Aaa eTeE: UNTSTEAT FATE: | Zo I
Waar Wena: G fey aay aaa: | AA VINA NEAT AMAT BISA: 11 32H
frag: yfsareaa wear wenvsterq snfadyarsa on fag ate aR
To protect the gods who were wailing and frightened by the demons,
Devi Sri Tripurasundari made Her appearance. A loud fearsome sound
was heard in the North-East direction. The entire sky and horizons were
enveloped by a burning brilliance. By that sound the demons fell
unconscious thinking that the universe was shattered. Then the
Transcendent Supreme Devi Tripurasundari appeared before the gods.
at gear faye tar: ahadaefa ferry atfearcdabedacteaqqery i 331
fageernfira agfern citersfraay waragferarseesareaagT AT 8 I
wayst frat wensgeeg-eer! carat ufsranetehifagaareTs: Wau
qeqicdatiqerdarciteam| qanavawefa yanfeguese it Bel
qeqswatarqatagery ayateretrenrtaarey ea, 1 3ell
UafomerereTrarrenteenTg ferrite miitrerneriarsqaracanisyat tl
Wehreghfnemetgtrargety faeqrerarafefigearerarercr a fra 1 3@l
Teqratrheqehtaranscam! cusaaurn tar eects afeafr ul ¥oll
Seeing in that direction Devi Tripurasundari, the ocean of beauty,
charming like the multitude of crores of cupids; shining like a lightning
blinding the eyes of the world; beautiful with proportionate body; decorated
with the digit of the moon on the head; with three eyes; holding in Her

agacanfeaits ara: 433 Chapter 44
SS EE eee
lotus like palms situated at the end of long coral stalk-like arms, the
noose, the goad, the bow and the arrows; with blue lily-like eyes in the
pond of Her beautiful moon like face; with a charming ocean like face
disgracing the ego of pearl-like water drops; with a pair of breasts
resembling a pair of ruddy geese that are perplexed by the rising of Her
facial moon, with protruding branch-like arms from Her coral-creeper
like body, beautiful with bud-like fingers at the tip of the palm resembling
the coral branch; with a garment resembling the tender sheath of a red
plantain stem, with toes resembling the arrows of cupid placed in Her
quiver like shank; decorated with ornaments shining like stars scattered
around the creeper of lightning, with locks of hair looking like the dense
darkness driven away by the rising of Her facial moon, the gods prostrated
before Her by saying “Please protect us.” 33 to 40
wextsqu: thfaghan faapreder! yRagensaoronsy frataadts freee: i we
At that time, some demons who got back consciousness went, holding
weapons, near the gods to kill them. 41
Fal WA_y Pal Hail! Tansee: wed agar uz
frarssreatssareat Yarenstt forat Gear aurea wafaeistedtao
at ore fagterst deter feet: art!
Seeing those demons, the furious Devi uttered the sound ‘Hum’.
From that ‘Hum’ sound, a great Sakti took birth, with four arms, with
a complexion of the core of collyrium, with dishevelled hair, with space
as the garment, with a frightening face, with protruding tongue and
terrific countenance. Seeing her, Devi Tripurasundari ordered her to
destroy the sons of Diti. 42, 43
aad Weider: aaeitentrayeat Usen
afteiten wrracitaquianian,! wiyenchiaren dest wag xu
apierraceratig area wr! freer deatet sifeque: arafreret: u we
areata aret tar aercrafeata: | care faftat caste citenrsferenrttott 1
areut wet qat qa: dhersfasiteur aq aaasit a qaavigariforn
Wier fat fat arqat dettesar 2fa F fee wahaged Garey gil

a fre, 434 Sx Tripurdrahasyam
a aq armada tary Bef FU
Thus ordered by the Great Devi, Kali born out of Her anger, was
contrary to worldly characteristics. She was nude, her long hair was
dishevelled; her cruel form was frightening; her protruding tongue was
rendered prominent by her fangs; she was wielding a sword—this great
Kall after killing the demons, wore a garland made out of their skulls
tied by their tufts and a skirt made out of the row of their hands and
looked strange. Continuously consuming spirituous liquor and swallowing
the demons, she was looking fearsome, smeared by their blood. She
approached Devi Tripurasundari and with a desire to cohabit said thus:
“Oh Devi! Show me a suitable husband who can make me happy. If not,
overcome by lust, I cannot destroy the demons.” 44 to 49
wiferte arferenar fager acta Wot
ea wearer ore wa watsyeua: | gears wareareqerey: Wafers: i Ueil
geen t afore qed am wee meat oteorsy aernret watt aarferae we
Thus requested by Kall, the Supreme Devi Sri Tripurasundari
addressed God Sadaéiva thus: “Become a suitable husband to Kall”.
Ordered thus, Sadasiva assumed a matching form. Seeing him equal to
Kall, the Great Devi Tripura gave him the name as Mahakéla and told
Kali to accept him. 50 to 52
TEM Wee AT ere METeRTeT ARAT! Tat seararerfay AAAS SAPETMAT 43H
Serevent Tt Merenrers wtfeqy) wets aa: asf wat qa: act aM Wel
wits firetrerernrarenr amnferent wari saremfereret a aarelt MaTETPTTS SAAT Hl 4
enseet wera ucemepfert ga fauttacfreeasfage wrTETTT: tt GE
Seeing him, the pleased Kali united with him and getting into
contact with his body proceeded to destroy the demons. With extreme
lust she started sporting with him. Then Mahdkala also drank copious
liquor. Kalika overpowered by lust, sexually united with the intoxicated
Mahakiila. By putting the drunk Mahikila down, Kali who was not
satisfied cohabited him in a reverse mode. 53 to 56

Wetcatett
Mahakali

eyeenttrts ore 435 Chapter 44
panreat nerenvet fart dear: ayfer: | gear tary waptesy wer Saefegay
faectrcerery frcasyrtereny aera wvsisgerar aire wage Me
srever ted wenmerter wesg wer wen ufede ye ware Ue tl
When Mahakall was united with Siva for a long time, the demons
rose and planned to kill the gods. Then, praised by the gods, ferocious
Kall relinquishing her strange sex, immediately battled with the demons
by laughing very loudly. Occupying the entire space she started swallowing
the mighty demons after cutting them with the sword. 57 to 59
wet wage wreft wareatt consfats were Qerarenfta: wetetrenwagtt i ko tt
wen tratectosr: wet oft agi qeaviteat wae fiftepprera we: aR
wet orga watt wafarer yeda: | vearts aut ar qeararedtet = ARH
Ware wese war fearsgaeatean oer dadarta atefk: ufrety on aa
Thus Kall the conflagration unto the demons, terrifying the universe,
wandered on the battle field swallowing them. By her mastication of the
demons, blood flowed out from the corners of her mouth like streams
from the mountain peaks. Swallowing thus quickly the entire lot of the
demons, Kall, who was black like the core of dense collyrium, intoxicated
by drinking their blood as well as the liquor, frantically danced looking
like a dark-blue mountain moved by the wind of dissolution. 60 to 63
we Fat wereld war wenesnest | want feegufest arqta were: = AI
wefufiargettenttary farruangugatteas vrata ry Waal
werensrefewarernenerre | fa: arereerathyeatire forateerrey naan
As Kall started dancing thus in the universal pavilion, the entire
universe trembled like a huge tree by the wind; by her dancing steps
the peaks of the mountains were pulverised; the worlds were split by
the revolving movement of her arms dashing against them; the trajectories
of the stars and the planets were cut off by the tip of her sword; the
borders of the horizons were smashed by the clouds driven away by her
exhalation. 64 to 66
frees arensfingat wemeewafergen: | qargferger arg: wareftqefeera:

at freeeery, 436 Sri Tripurarahasyam
agafaquadrpatcenytiat: | wefafargraenraarradagan: Ween
Seeing the universe getting terminated, Brahma and others who
were frightened and perturbed, approached along with the Reis,
Siddhas, Vidyadharas, Yaksas, and Gandharvas, with folded hands,
goddess Kali. They praised her with prayers filled with excellent words
and meaning. 67, 68
mae aueaet araretanr atarsaeHrergaTOT weet |
tiiersfrarerfaartacraraa wrarearstea: afta, case, WagH
“May Kali, Mahesi, who is wielding a sword, whose face is fearsome,
who has despatched the demons to death, who has put on a sportive
disguise to dispel the distress of the universe, protect us, who have
fallen at Her feet, from the ocean of danger. 69
afieartemtisteatien fararessragataqatc ara |
tastrspaqpuecmtisaren wearers: Ufa TESS, I Goll
May Kali, whose complexion is like the broken Sapphire mountain,
whose dishevelled hair has spread upto her feet, whose face is adorned
with ear-ornaments made out of the skull of the demons, protect us who
are at Her feet, from the ocean of danger. 70
temaraftacurererardmeatarenmrecte ferrites |
Poig ceresaftrerisent wareureraret: ufrar weser Hogi
May Kali, whose body is shining from the stream of blood flowing
out the sides of her mouth which is masticating the group of demons,
whose breasts are concealed in blood dripping from her red protruding
tongue, protect us, who are at Her feet, from the ocean of danger. 71
Ws wefered ar carn dhhieetraantinfireret: |
taforrfeerafaciatae warcarraed: wire weseT WOR
May Kali, who is wielding in her long serpent-like fearsome arms,
the severed head, the huge sword, the signs of protection and boon, who
is indulging in the pastime of destroying the demons, protect us, who
are at Her feet, from the ocean of danger. 73

aqacanferits ar: 437 Chapter 44
wat frpatefastsapy sagas suremeteratarerrersarargt |
agrgfatiacnererterat
UreTearerserea: Uftary We SEAT, TRACES
May Kali, who is decorated with a shining garland, made out of
freshly chopped wet skulls of the demons, extending upto her feet, whose
skirt and waistband are made out of the arms of the demons, protect
us, who are at her feet, from the ocean of danger. 73
qranen ferent fara S@tareare targa e TAT |
SISTStaT WeNaaAaaeaM Uaeuraaea: UAL Tes eT, ost
May Kali, who just by the strokes from her broad and high
breasts that vibrate during her dance, is smashing the peaks of the
Meru Mountain; whose garment is space; who by the nails of her toe is
splitting the earth; protect us, who are at Her feet, from the ocean of
danger. vES
mlataar wanfe seafaarsredtaht aaaraaraare Taga |
a want faaftersyadrast: rareurasrera: Ufsary cease, HOG
You have taken birth from the anger of Candika and for the
destruction of the demons you are showing by your own power a fearsome
form. If this is not so, how can poison come out of the ocean of nectar.
Oh Kali! May you protect us, who have fallen at your feet, from the
ocean of danger. 75
wefrantact ufrate att wares a a aardgert Hatha
wed TUsyagenhraresn wearers: Ufa, Te STAT WoRll
This terrible creation appears in you to those with illusory sight
and never to those with spiritual vision. You are the Supreme nectar of
blissful knowledge. Protect us, who are at Your feet, from the ocean of
danger.” 76
sf arr fafinper eusacrrar afar sqoaate eafe caret Arsaqert wateneT
Thus praying, Brahma and others prostrated before her. But Kali
who was intoxicated did not take it to her mind even though she was
listening to the prayers. 77

St fae, 438 Sri Tripurdrahasyam
aa faapiereret wearer aaa: |
Viata aifernreean: Hear Alafaew: Ween
Then Visnu bowed and requested Mahakala after excellently praising
him, to pacify Devi Mahakali. 78
BUGS Uerearea: UAT PTA: PTA: | WIENS aaiferenrar: raise fereae: 119 1
a dante! ee aad faraegfa: | degdeastarred weqeaa A af tconl
frqaarosar seat ure tary yt: fears
“waarsfer qu: fa at afsed dardtea Nerul
Then the nude Mahadkala slowly approached the intoxicated Kalika
and lay at her feet. Then Kalika, who was not in her senses climbed
on him and danced on his chest. Just by touching his body she realised
that he was her husband and stopped her dance and addressed to the
gods who were in front of her thus: “Oh Gods! I am pleased with you.
You can obtain your wants from, me.” 79 to 81
gfe stam: anferenar fafiqeat: waqaqi dad afd ad Goa a ad ET: Il
wader it eaftqron farce: | ated tit wat ae cteaferagit = 23
War Ud firrafer feattva ues
Thus spoken by Kalika, Brahma and others said thus: “Oh Kalika!
By Your grace, we gods have obtained every thing. With the slaying of
all our enemies we are without fear. Oh Wife of Mahakala! You have
thus caused auspiciousness to the world. Oh Maheévari, to protect human
beings, please stay on this mountain.” 82, 83
wifarte tanut: caret wre wenfear esi
firt went ot tar wtonsta aden went arfseatsatat werent fasted: 1 ck
at uritciferet sites ararafeatrde: | eoretefie wyft ora feferatsea: 1 call
afofa: arritts gemremqpad: | fafserca: adfutg area a xyra: ucell
_. Thus requested by the gods, Kalika who was pleased said thus:
‘Oh Gods! I will reside on this mountain in my present form and I will
Specially grant the wants of my devotees. I will enable him without any

agacaferts ar: 439 Chapter 44
doubt to achieve powers, who with steady devotion installs my icon
and worships with offerings like meat and liquor and the joy of
cohabitation.” 84 to 87
ofa asfafed wm aaferenrattd meq Ua at anferent yar wae Slee
Oh Parasurama! Thus I have narrated to you the great legend of
Kalika. Thus Devi Candika in the form of Kalika protected the world.”
ofa aifagureet mrereravs ugeratteitseaa: 1
End of the forty-fourth chapter
of the Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurarahasyam.

Ugacanhigits Ara:
Chapter 45
WETS at aed Srey! TERA UTS ASH Yeast AST era: ll
fagrirerqam ent edt weet) tarat Gtteronettfa aftentfitar wu
gfet weofe oper werent atta! wea Mera Gey aT BI
“Oh Paragurama! Further, I will tell you the wonderful Glory of
Durga. By hearing that one will be certainly freed from all sins. Devi
Durga is an incarnation of Sri Tripurasundari. Because She dispelled
the misery of the gods, She is called by the name Durga. She is known
as Durga because by remembering Her, the sins disappear. Her spotless
glory has been described in sacred literature. 1 to 3
qu gauft: yen: fratwcrerd wa: 1 trad warsdt weatscrcat wt: yl
Sfant fercaterat Tg ura: age wa Haare: YAat ya: 4H
wager faye dare watasaery! we Ueit There Year afaaar ngtl
rg weet set wera: ates: | Geaaett wert erat frefiwihy 1
Werited: SrraTeMyTaT Fear wars weary arerarnard fayedt: cil
asta aensfa qart wfedt uff 1 wat faget citar wfet wafeeate 11g
In the past, Devendra, arrogant because of his wealth, riding Airavata
and attended by Gandharvas and Apsaras, reached, out of curiosity, the
top of Vindhya Mountain. There, the great sage Sunetra, the cousin
brother of sage Kagyapa, was doing penance and glowing with immense
effulgence. His wife by name Sumitra, the daughter of the sage Gautama,
who was devoted to her husband, went near the river Narmada to bathe.
Seeing her, who was bulky, dark and ugly, Indra unmindful of his
downfall, laughed loudly and haughtily went near her and spoke satirically
to her thus: “Oh Auspicious Lady! Who are you? Who is your husband?
You are looking like a buffalo to me. To which fat buffalo will you give
birth?” 4to9
aaa Bar afar wfrtaar! wre yeh Brad freeast warhaar 1 oll

qeaenieaits ara: 441 Chapter 45
gia & ated afeat afaat 3TH! yret & uted qn wateeate & fq neen
Hearing the ridicule, Sumitra who was devoted to her husband,
sighing with anger reproached Indra and said thus: “Oh wicked Indra!
A Bison who will subdue your arrogance will be born soon. Your wife
Saci by becoming a buffalo will give birth to that enemy.” 10, 11
faqd 7 vere sitet Gaafrerar cvsaq wordt tat ate arrears =n TI
zat amrst carer afaarsfaeerhaar aqaara Sa: yretqect wars sgt: 83
Feat qaanrehs waerafta Ura! Wagar Yew: Vreltqad: YA: YA: le
Indra, who was cursed harshly, out of fear prostrated before her
and said thus “Protect me. Protect me”. Sumitra after bathing furiously
returned to the hermitage. The frightened Indra along with Saci followed
her. Seeing the seated sage glowing like fire, Indra along with Sacl,
repeatedly requested him to show mercy. 12 to 14
wen tsarat ¢ gearstrefrat fran da: gaa: weefrst ueit qatraq
aax yy aes a ad far war er Utara were adeitenfagtfiry ui ee
uftaat afe ral wanes ATA HO! Waa fagargat weNTS WERTATT II Vo
ufeerarar wrereare, eer: Yafat ays Ye cravat yfrdwaet afr = ke
wean werd cite Wea AG ASAT Aa ear aay yretyA: «=H RR
4% yifaa: udtent aden taque
Even Sunetra, understanding the offence by Indra and seeing his
furious wife, was shocked and in a manner that would please his wife,
said to Indra thus: “Oh Indra! Listen. Have you not heard of the renowned
glory of wives devoted to their husbands? An angry chaste woman can
in a moment destroy the universe. If she is pleased, she can again create
the universe. Once by the power of a loyal lady, the Sun could not move
for a long time. In the past, Daksayani during a sacrifice, really caused
dissolution of the world by the power of her penance. Hence, along with
Saci, propitiate Sumitra. I, in no way have the power to undo the curse.
WS yayReT are aatferfe aT: Ron
we oat argquat gett atengfaars at arqéget sat fared Greeny 11 VI

a EST, 442 Sri Tripurarahasyam
dhedamar wen: arraromdifed: | wet wfaaenssy aerators 2H
Long ago, there lived a great austere brahmin by name Mudgala.
His beautiful wife Sinumati was revered by all. Vayu saw that attractive
woman while she was taking bath in a river. Being tortured by lust
because of her rich beauty, Vayu entered her thigh to toss up her
garment. 20 to 22
fawra arichreaneat arenda det atone dette aoe fe ar 28H
eet argdar wraerar wa wetepat: | Seat: aot afgard stereo 2x
wears eee arg ufaaan aat arqufeerenet Fattaaq, TT
Realising the vileness of Vayu, Sdnumati by her penance seized him
by force and arrested him in between her thighs. When Vayu was thus
prevented, the life all over became static. Then the loyal Sadnumati
considering the causeless destruction of the universe, released that much
of air which was required for lives to continue. Apart from that, she
throttled Vayu between her thighs. 23 to 25
we cient wedi fagen seeyg: | arf wee aarsf aredt eaTANTA: 1 2G
argeienst qt tt wren aeciterenfer: | aaa argaret tayrea weit: | VW
Then the worlds without wind were disquieted. There was no breeze
any where in the world as Vayu was suppressed. Knowing that even in
the Vayuloka there was no wind, the residents of that region reported
the matter to Devendra.” 26, 27
fren aret wea: yratsPaenfact wer) faerarcqiensa worenfa qg-fsa:
wre Weer tat iteat aenqderte a ada quate frat qaaway tl VV
Senet forge Safer stead get faerrt urat 3 we rect wet 30
Hearing about the absence of Vayu, Indra searched for him all over
the worlds and sadly approached Brahma and bowed to him and said
thus: “Oh Lord! Without Vayu the worlds will perish. Not even grass
can grow and the three worlds will lose strength. We have not in the
least offended Vayu. We do not know by whose anger and how the
mighty Vayu has disappeared.” 28 to 30

qaaeaees AMA: 443 Chapter 45
gaat fa: are aeraed! earense Sha UY yen wR, aR
gees yxerea Pratat ufeaars qatadedt arqerarcreers wa: az
wena qyityat quate: qe-fea: |
Hearing Indra, Brahma meditated and understood the matter and
said thus to Indra: “O Indra! Listen to the fate of Vayu. In Kuruksetra
stays the loyal wife of the sage Mudgala. Vayu, by his misdeed towards
her, has been subdued, throttled between her thighs and having lost his
strength and emaciated, is suffering. 31, 32
Ufaaat Byrd areata: arya 33u
wife a faqaaqaes gtat a warerda at pal weiter ax
Yret yrut ate a a stat faereafa
“Sanumati who is devoted to her husband, is full of penantial glow.
If requested cleverly she might release Vayu. Oh Indra! Do not directly
request her. She will burn you with her anger. Hence, you seek shelter
under the sage Mudgala who will bring about good to you.” 33, 34
gad aiqaed Sat ARTS 1e3Qtl
gt: uitqa: vem: Ysrenefaeaa at feat tates deere feat gH
wore wrefarara areas faqera
Listening to Brahma, Indra went to the hermitage of sage Mudgala
along with the gods to fetch materials for worship. After approaching
with fear, the sage Mudgala who was with his consort, Indra with
obeisance requested for the release of Vayu. 35, 36
Re: We tas ngt aet ver TO
Sax qu aed & wei edge: 1 ase aadeat aag wed fagafe en acu
waafafedt ys amen adie aq amregd ft Seeanfer ferqafer ary Tea
ut arent aeite: at veitepaty, guts ari
wefan asfrarents qaraconstare: Nl ¥oll
weedanresat faded warfea: | denfe: dee at ger Hate witfery ul wei
Then the sage Mudgala spoke sweetly to Indra thus: “Oh Indra who

R ARES, 444 Si Tripurarahasyam
are along with the gods! Listen. I will tell you the truth. I am really
not competent to tell her to release Vayu. I already know by my penance
all about the incident. If I were to tell her to release Vayu who has
offended her, she would immediately burn me and my hermitage and
the world. Hence, I will suggest a plan to you. You stay here along with
Kubera, Agni and others in the guise of Brahmacarins and serve her
with patience and please her. Pleased with you, she will oblige you in
your task.” 37 to 41
aifigqecn taufa: qperaeuntate: | wered ufreoat fader dqe: x20
TEM at ard Ulta: MA: | eM: faa Meera wae: ail
OAT: Heed edge: | Wensseraeeaed aeNISaET YY
afagrrs aarmatrerdt yo daa: 1 Saat mr eer ss were Gea vi
TAG Fret Sela! Pals Ae VIHA USSSA i YEN
ae: Taga & dread
Obeying the suggestion, Indra along with Kubera, Varuna, Agni and
others stayed there in the guise of Brahmacarins and with devotion
served Sanumati comprehensively. Indra took care of her dear cows.
Kubera was daily engaged in the supply of fruits and roots.
Varuna fetched water and washed clothes daily. Agni assisted in
the performance of Agnihotra. Indra milked the cows daily and reared
them. Thereby the milk was sweet and rich. Kubera supplied daily tasty
fruits and roots. Varuna brought sweet enjoyable water. 42 to 46
Wa aefagt Set Serr yatta u¥oll
Weal We wattieart aquftem! wt fanfost taufteateraur: nell
wareagre area sft 8 ont aaa: 1 fave write daar: Gates? 1 veil
oa aT USTs Bi aE Wat
In this manner the gods were daily pleasing Sanumati by their
service. The happy Saénumati once said in privacy to her husband thus:
“Oh Lord! These students who are dedicated to service deserve to be
truly blessed. But, why are they specially serving me alone? Oh Lord!
Tell me why you have permitted them to do so?” 47 to 49

qgacarfertts AA: 445 Chapter 45
we wa FRc foreqaaaret Hyon
ayy ae area 3 Ut aGaete | cates Ayah AMM AA AAT ATH Ue A
aasvandt deal Aedt Wasa! aa Ba cealanaaege wa: W4ztt
qe arat wae aisdtadyracet: | ¢ fadtafag de yrenfaacraa: 431
dtareactana: ward adaete
Inquired thus, Mudgala spoke smilingly thus: “Oh Auspicious One!
Listen with patience. Do not become angry. Anger destroys your penance.
Hence be peaceful always. In the absence of Vayu, who has been throttled
between your thighs for offending you, the world is on the brink of
dissolution. Ten years have passed after his arrest. These fear-struck
pupils who are Indra, Agni, Varuna, and Kubera are serving you to have
Vayu set free. You should bless them.” 50 to 53
deat Weal at Wal Weaqa: FT: 4S
sparsterqer Aart warerarrdfearar: |
Having understood that Sanumati is happy, Indra and other gods
bowed with folded hands and waited for her blessings. 54
aM Gearsfaraat Ot Wars aed aer H&u IH
wat frist terecfsae: foros ami wat yrentfedgqed: Tear yatta aT
Then the extremely pleased Sanumati released Vayu. The released
Vayu who was ashamed of his arrest prostrated before her and after
bowing to sage Mudgala proceeded along with Indra and others. 55, 56
w got gaenaqeaq werafsenitar tance: 1 &ell
WaSaIsa aaa ASIA TaAAA: |
This is the ancient story regarding the offence to a loyal wife. Hence,
you who are the third Indra in the Raivata Manvantara should propitiate
only Sumitra. You cannot get rid of fear in any other way.” 57
ger Widarad gfrarafasng: Wk
yet at urefarara qat denqarfarari aa: ar premntedtradite, qrarshaar it 4g
Wes oS WEaIssy nied yraaveqari saisfe ead Starter TATA Go Il

at PaCS 446 Sri Tripurarahasyam
zen gaftgyear yateafa f we ws wares yroraarsraret fafrtat on een
Hearing thus the words of Sunetra, Indra and Saci went to Sumitra,
Helplesslly Saci repeatedly requested for the grace of Sumitra. Then with
mercy Sumitra spoke to Saci thus: “Oh Auspicious Lady! Go and quickly
give birth to a Bison and become relieved of the curse. Also, Indra, who
will be deprived of everything, will by worshipping the Devi Tripurasundari
get back his position with his enemies destroyed by the Devi.” Knowing
thus about the termination of the curse, both of them proceeded from
there. 58 to 61
aaah gutta ufedt arsed faftergirar usfafacrer dicaftoit =n eR
ara aa 7 afedt mage fet erafaear aaa fitter ui 631
waas weno of mina aassfeeenies ewe wee: = GY
weed def udard quicafed fear afedt aqui at waisfagenfaat on gut
vita qetigd eafeantatta faaq f:arditeraareren xatyd wao aq
afed aqurgaastd afe uisaaqi dat aT aise arar uted asia MI
wae afet srorqetaoit fed aati
Then Indrani soon transformed herself into a formidable frightful
buffalo looking like a mountain peak and entered a great forest killing
tigers, lions and elephants and warding off the group of mountains. She
entered a huge forest without animals. In that forest was hidden under
the grass a solidified mountain-like semen of the mighty Kaitabha the
first king of the demons. When the hungry buffalo started eating that
grass, the crystal-like semen which was solidified due to chill melted
gradually by the heat of her exhalation. When she swallowed the entire
semen along with the grass, she became pregnant and gave birth to a
Bison. After delivering the Bison, Indrani relieved of the curse returned
to the heaven. 62 to 67
aa afar a afee: area aaada TAL
werfiforeaitset sqreat wary weit fede cterar qa: gt: yet sre
warsyret Ties Sees ATL! T wer Seat qatersyratea: gol
aa: vremfefafat arnt etary faearsfirererenia wate weg: Hogi

qyacahesnts Aa: 447 Chapter 45
yes aeut dit fren forarserd facientereaar: fee: AAATAT Ht 2H
That Bison grew gradually in that forest. With a mountainous body
the mighty Bison hurled the mountains with his horns and split the
earth with his hoofs. Approaching him, the demons made him their king.
Incited by the demons the Bison demon fought with the gods and
conquering Indra, Yama, Agni and others snatched their wealth and
became the ruler of the three worlds. 68 to 72
wa frograreas afer quer! yreatfacar: wary: weratha warafery, i ORI
wet facargifztn wraa wraq afeaswer ad ad faite: =n ox
musfranadearsmt ofa aetaq fafararatard Taser PROTTAPT I 94 I
Thus subdued by the wicked Mahisasura, Indra and other gods went
to lotus-born Brahma and reported their defeat thus: “Oh Lord! We have
lost our wealth and power to Mahisdsura and are wandering on the
earth like human beings. Please think of a plan to protect us who have
surrendered to you.”
fagrea yrmtfeadt earar citesfrarme: | wear eat at cet fam a ETT ll
aa at aaqurarqeera fafirrerr yerar wareratfahravars agar oe It
Hearing the words of Indra and other gods, Brahma thought for a
while and realising the gravity of the task remembered Visnu and
Sankara. Then Brahma stood up and received with love Visnu and
Sankara who arrived there and worshipped them after seating them
suitably.
ara 24: yrange: wort efterget Freres dere Vet fafirratag: = eel
dreet frarife wemaqaf! are adgararraeases AEST: Ween
waa: ura: yd afgetsqraraen: 1a Saaisgtieh: 3 fedfrastaafe: con
ete fafertatstir qecht merore: 1 arenfetent a aif sarsft eferefr ce
ausfir Samossta seafarers Werarer: | wee yer area ferent raf earery wer
asa fanfacearguit yeaa wer 4 a!
arsenfaderan aisex asareatstt a aera wean
wees wercet Faget weber) Sree WaTSSeY ATS eATe vt ferereater cx

st PRES, 448 Sri Tripurarahasyam
sft fafarr Aquoqarat qEeq: WM Giaenataaqedtamitdar: ean
Then Visnu and Sankara, hearing the deeds of Mahisasura from
Indra and the gods who had supplicated, spoke to Brahma thus: “Do not
take this as a trivial issue. A great fear is in front of us. By his penance
this mighty demon is invincible by any of the gods. Having obtained the
boon in the past from you, this Mahisdsura cannot be killed by gods or
by demons or by human beings or by animals. He cannot be conquered
by men individually or in groups. No woman can vanquish him. He
cannot be destroyed by any other group of gods as well. A difficult
situation has been created by the boons obtained by him in the past.
We are unable even to think of killing him. He cannot be killed neither
by us nor by any one else. Hence let us worship the Great Devi
Tripurasundari who will bring about auspiciousness to us.” Deciding thus
Visnu and other gods jointly prayed loudly to the Great Devi to alleviate
the difficulty. 78 to 85
fafetrtacret afer wyqute: | frsrenatsgiqadt eq tary warrat on cat
fargéar: ameites tet arg ware!
Knowing this news Bidalaksa, the chief of the Mahisdsura’s army,
along with the demons arrived there to destroy the gods. Seeing that
demon who had come to fight, the gods were frightened. 86
agate yiyqs HPeratyperer ucell
weinfenfsfinparsarsfeqraeaa: | Pricer queda: aittatwawet == ceil
waa qenge wdtatatrtas athearag ara facitent carer <feerny i 68 tl
at umegefigan ara ait wafedtathy
Visnu and Sankara became angry. From their angry face and that
of Brahma, Indra and other gods came out a great effulgence which
united immediately. This unique mass that was refulgent, emerging out
of the faces of the gods, took a feminine form that enveloped the three
worlds by its lustre. Visnu and others bowed and asked the Devi who
She was. 87 to 89
a we faaprparnisitvar fit gol
Fret Sites saiseratay) wear waat dary ghar waagqar neil

Seam: 449 Chapter 45
SE eEesesessssssssSFmM eee
To Visnu and others, She said with a thundering voice thus: “Prayed
by the gods for the redressal of their misery, I am Durga. Pleased by
your prayers, I will destroy the demons who are your enemies,” 90, 91
gen eatarett fang t ef fey we a Yt y afadtds: eats: safe
Hearing the Devi, Visnu said thus: “Oh Durga! How will you kill
our enemy who cannot be vanquished by gods or even others?” 92
am ont wre eft sat cae at gam a frat asf arsine wdgaaqear 1 ¢3 il
feta det afeanrgenf @ aserq Herr’ qu: we gfe sentir at fig
Then Durga said to Hari thus: “Oh Visnu! Forget your worry soon.
Born out of all the gods I am neither different from them nor one among
them. I will kill Mahisdsura. Let all the gods arrange for my vehicle
and weapons. I will conquer your enemy.” 93, 94
vaya giant arqinetsmr gay Pratargesrents aqdet yore yay I eh
fenfzatet fae earerart act wari faaenat qeonfs wast tormferary 11 eet
ae areuitaaaretaasya!
Thus addressed by the Devi, the gods individually materialised
weapons from their own weapons and offered them to the Devi. Himavan
presented a powerful Lion. Visvakarma gave jewels. The Sea-god gave
a diamond necklace. Varuna gave a liquor cup filled with bliss. 95, 96
aa a fagarect qfaassqedaa Weel
facietnfrdtomea areas watorari ean feaar aa tery ey Get
Then Durga wearing the ornaments and wielding the weapons,
mounted the Lion and enveloped the three worlds by Her self brilliance.
Praised by the gods She was all set to kill the demons. 97, 98
oft AEs wererars THATS aT: I
End of the forty-fifth chapter
of the Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurarahasyam-

WeaaTey TS ATA:
Chapter 46
aa a feeder aifeqdanata: | fafaens sqetreayqayihet nen
fateatfedareiamt faeitean arenistacdeter torqaorey fier wet
waxed west ware faa fast wet wagner wate ary. Wan
wafaeeatrat a ygatetstaaca: | a gheataqad erafaa waat ea
Then Devi Durga who was shining like a myriad Suns, who was
wielding many shining weapons in Her thousand hands, the edge of
whose crown was touching the orbit of the Sun, who had three eyes,
who was dressed in a golden garment, who was ornamented with diamond
jewels, with great joy blew the conch given by the Sea. Her Lion roared.
The gods reiterated the roar with voices of victory to the Devi. The
frightening sound from the conch mixed with hails of victory and the
roaring of the Lion was as if tearing the three worlds which had gone
unconscious. 1 to 4
wt yea faret fastena: venta: | rergiraamtet aera: Wall
wets verqremsteaa: | farses ty ter: wa Gl
waleigfeadts carmateat serge: |
Alarmed by that sound, Bidalaksa ran away. Mahisasura enraged
by hearing that sound reached there quickly following the sound. Hearing
from Bidalaksa the supreme glory of the Devi, Mahisasura overpowered
by anger came there followed by the demons. 5, 6
seufzgranstacin chieqieit nol
fasrraata wa hen afer 31 scteifedeai Bate: uftarta: el
Udagra, Ciksura, Asiloma, Dirghahanu and Bidalaksa, the five mighty
chieftains of Mahisasura followed him with myriad of armies. 7, 8
SrA SHA: WAT WAS: | ANT: Grae cHrewaaat fares: Mt Sl
afewet Gat Ut Herter: | agreragéat qayren: WRIT: gol

: bai Chapter 46
Ugravirya, Ugrasya, Pralamba, Prabhafijana, Sarana, Krkalasa,
Kakavaktra and Visankata, the valiant sons of Mahisasura, wielding
missiles furiously followed to fight with the Devi. 9, 10
Favs: HIHGUST HPUsszistaHa:| aTsfseat saa: Sr: Hele: Il
waa abarreret Ug chet warag: | Saha: aalfedenta: wetaafriga: 11 22
The nine ministers of Mahisasura by name Bherunda, Kakatunda,
Kuranda, Candavikrama, Bhandira, Dimbha, Krakaca, Kacakanta and
Katotkata each with a myriad warriors followed him to attack the Devi.
sosvategg tami fest: wel weaseadet deere faery 83
yraradaent at weqdat: Grad: | Gest tary Aeegtd Yaya: wii
Then a war started between the gods and the demons in which the
rain of weapons and missiles frightened the cowards. The gods struck
the demons from all sides with weapons and missiles. The demons
retaliated. In this manner both of them were fighting. 18, 14
adt FevenyET: wensmygaM! wearadgqyees dara rads: RAM
Then Bherunda and other leaders advancing towards the mighty
gods showered missiles and weapons on them by which the gods lost
their strength. 15
qFeasmafa gat feeratead Gtarsfafisd: fae: weet TrATSATT Ml R6 Ml
SURAT Tee Uae TG: Hifaye: wifrenifaeengetaraa ee
Werfeaaa: sifargcar aratshe a Sea, ferareraraTa Tee Ta TAT Mt Re Ut
Seeing the defeat of the gods, Devi Durga prompted the Lion and
the Lion that carried Devi Durga flew into the sky and pounced on the
army of the demons like Garuda on the serpents. It destroyed some
demons with its nails, some with its mouth, some by lashing with its
tail, some by the swing of its mane, some by its chest and also by its
speed. It was as if Garuda was destroying the snakes. 16 to 18
erscnuiarsdarerecacarcen: | wleepfiaterctetar gem: FET ASAT WAL
deme uerafafca arat ystea: |

at ERS, 452 Sri Tripurarahasyam
The demons were rendered cheekless, earless, sideless, noseless,
handless, legless, faceless, stomachless and headless by the Lion. The
Lion was like a conflagration in the forest of the demons. 19
aur agra at gear a afar: Rol
seme: preva: fad af weeny: | fats ary qateent qtar aafirefara: ue
wader Martin tet awa a1 sata sat afaueiterqes WRN
fats fag scat dear w woyad: | Gear agentes ate viyiqdaerat: 1 230
Then seeing their army being quickly destroyed, Udagra and other
chieftains wielding weapons moved to kill the Lion. But the Lion which
was protected by Devi Durga fought them alone. It tore with its nails
their diamond-like hard bodies. Then jumping into the sky it pounced
with force on the head of Udagra and pulverised him with its chest,
even as the demons were witnessing. Noticing the remarkable valour of
the Lion, the gods and demons admired it. 20 to 23
Titi saree! saad year uefa gars Bw
sat Weare eftorat gent qari t ufedten: wasuay Yat WAST: WM
wad aha ws qa: Sarat
Then again quickly catching Ciksura and others simultaneously, the
Lion jumped into the sky like a vulture holding flesh with its claws and
tore their stomach like a wolf, an antelope. With their stomachs torn,
all of them fell dead on the ground. After thus killing the five chieftains,
the Lion destroyed their army. 24, 25
Bry tad Gear Taustsag afar: WW
wpearay: fae ey ot afert aa qafeetfat geet Guus avsfaaMy |! Ww
TERT TATA F ATT! feud aaaATA aS a AERAT Il VI
meet ferrarer mad uw cacteneH
PUGS SET HTeCATATATS SBT FHT WET, Hew
wea chreaqventaETErery Us uBanUt gear w feet qaarer: Nl Zoll
WasecaataystaaS aT
Seeing the chieftains killed, Bherunda and others, the nine mighty

venmisemt: eee
ministers advanced at once to slay the Lion. After fighting with those
nine for a long time, the Lion killed Kuranda of fierce prowess by striking
him with the sole of its foot. It ate up Bherunda and tore apart Bhandira.
It killed Dimbha with its chest. It dismissed Krakaca, Katotkata and
the stout headed Kacakanta by lashing them with its tail. Kakatunda
was sent to the abode of Yama by a slap. Killing thus the group of
ministers, the Lion shook its mane and roared like the thunder from
the monsoon clouds. 26 to 30
foma fear aad yRiss war: Wen
afar Yat Get wea: | AMATI Yarreasercatfeat: az
Seeing the dead chieftains and the strong ministers, the eight
powerful sons of Mahisasura who were exponents in war missiles and
weapons advanced to fight with the Devi. 31, 32
sadtef wereeit ateararea & eft qeeat fat acted: wore afer yfeoa: 1 33 1
Ugravirya wielding a mace fought with the Lion for a long duration
and hit by its paw fell unconscious on the ground. 33
BMS SAT WAS WAS: TART: | BA Us efton qggdernfert: tl FI
fayrraftanraacarecnteg ©: 1 eftgate dartsht aareitsereret: | But
Ugrasya, Pralamba, Prabhafijana and Sarana the mighty four
wielding weapons like the trident, bolt, spear and sword combated with
the Lion. Single handed, the Lion fought with them who were like the
god of death during dissolution. 34, 35
aaspeattatrfas sacitets reset: 1 mererara ata aaron efeyefy 1 36
fata ar eftfere: wreasyrfigé cari seraransferatts fant: eg | 3 I
war waar fret: ARUTEfUTATS Fw: |
At that time Ugravirya who regained his consciousness hit with
great force, by revolving his mace on the head of the Lion. The sore
which collided with the thunderbolt-like head of the Lion Bagi
like a ball rebounding from the earth and on its downward aoe
Sarana by pulverising him. :

Rt PRE, 454 Sri Tripurarahasyam
ag fag: wafer atrdth wets: Wen
zen waaa wd qaet aarti atargatrdtat ware ufadt af Wen
Then the enraged Lion caught Ugravirya and tore him with its
thunderbolt-like nails just as Indra the mountain. With torn body
Ugravirya fell on the ground and died. 38, 39
RASA: TENT ATT either: | Heat eas Ft ATT EAAY: it ¥o lt
ddan afer eftggaq eat sd fat Garratt faeqara =n we
Then the remaining six powerful sons of Mahisdsura, thinking that
the Lion was invincible, jointly fought with it. Seeing the brave and
strong Lion that was combating with them, Devi Durga realised that
the Lion was tired enough and spoke to it thus: 40, 41
arg arg eftsts waa wa fama Uahralgfiresnts fern waft: UE UN YR
gantiacn art fara wets sear!
“Oh Great Lion! Well done. Very good. I am happy with your valour.
I would like to fight with these demons. You can relax now.” Hearing
the Devi, the Lion withdrew from the great battle. 42
we gmt agate aed arefaent: Wea
Wd: Yet Valens |
- Then Devi Durga fought for a while with those mighty demons and
using Her Trident despatched them to the abode of Yama. 43
Bart War aha aerate der a: Use
aeasatast dat a atedtanciraa: | agrercat gut afer: yterafsat uu v4 ll
Grittchest wi enthtssafey ayredt wast ae: yesara: tl val
whit viata Wed Wan text qaast a pat ASIC Wve
Feat Ugaent Teresita |
Witnessing the death of the sons, the ministers, the army chiefs
and seeing very few soldiers remaining, Mahisasura with eyes reddened
by fury proceeded like a huge mountain to fight with Devi Durga. Seeing
him, who was splitting the earth by pounding it with his hooves, who

s sail 455 Chapter 46
was dispelling the clouds by his breath, who was dislodging the stars
by the lashes of his tail, who was roaring and emitting fire from his
mouth, who was releasing dung and urine and dancing with a bent neck,
Durga invited him with a thundering voice. 44 to 47
ule Ee were Yad at fer: Wven
geet war frqrorsy avatar aat aL! SeyaaT Paw set wfeATATT 1 ¥e A
Aenfifra sige: wrqparancefaate: | ar gfe: arent wdt werqfrad ti yo
Faget Trenteres Tt AAT
“Qh Wicked Demon! Come and battle firmly with me for a while.
You will soon reach the abode of the manes.” Saying thus, She showered
arrows on Mahisasura like rain-bearing clouds on a blue mountain. Just
like the rain on a mountain, the shower of arrows did not in the least
hurt Mahisasura. 48 to 50
ate gear arora yeaa ae: Wait
atroraaftagrfaantgeraat: | wert ait prearfir wtearste matswa MGR
Tag wer preafir quite S qo srcnadaRVS yeaa TOT, | 43 I
Seeing the failure of the shower of arrows, Durga struck him with
javelin, trident, bolt, spear, sharp weapons and club, without any use.
Upon touching his body the weapons were powdered like the hail-storm
on the mountain stones. 51 to 53
FI WaT HeTARaMUAgtaTT| TET Ut: Yee: wratiarsfratat: 11 4s tl
Then considering Mahisasura as strong like a diamond, Devi Durga
bound him with ropes imbued with powerful hymns (Mantras). 54
qa: aura feet at gate ar era Ba: fetes cre fatter: il
weateegag tanreae fire: | atgreareret aa wed area: 4a
HW &ell
ater gue aearrengrearadar: |
i isd transformed himself into a Lion
fought ith Hi a ea i quickly discarded his form
and fought with Her. Struck by the spear

Mt ARES, 456 Sri Tripurarahasyam
as a Lion and riding a chariot drawn by thousand Lions, he started to
fight in a manly form well armoured. Mahisdsura who was like a huge
mountain, who had thousands of faces and eyes, who had thousands of
limbs, who was wielding varieties of weapons showered many missiles
and weapons on the Supreme Devi Durga. BS torea
frinta ¢ af rrattigat Wen
frat metta wernssauighte: | feaertgon mé aut yeatrarat tn aa
qaatarquiisns gaterstraeit qari WgsearisyHadatTAs TaISHT: tt Goll
wer ent frerapan wareasfasrad | Geaisyradtoat car at eft GHPY:
Then the Great Devi very soon warded off as if by wind that shower
of arrows by pouring her deep-drawn arrows. Severely hit by the arrow
Mahisasura was unconscious for a moment and resumed the fight adopting
his magical powers. When the mighty demon showered boulders, Devi
Durga was totally immersed in it and the gods wailed seeing Her
condition. 58 to 61
We: A AedeaT atet ATA Uferaat feet cea ent wera: = RH
uatetgta dere fauna were! aaa sat Yep Nea ea GBH
Prema yfet ceitstt tarmencaqa: | faenaaia afeetet wera: Weevil
Quitqdtsa a tat Ff urgtarsqaryTac|
Then Devi Durga, using the wind-missile destroyed the shower of
boulders. At that time the powerful Lion carrying Devi Durga flew like
a bird and pounced on the huge chariot of the demon. Mahisasura,
thinking that his death was near, struck the Lion on its head with his
mace and he sprang out of the chariot. His huge chariot of thousand
Lions was powdered by the power of the Lion. Then the Devi tied the
demon with the rope. 62 to 64
TWaetisanpaa: gtetta dha: Wall
aa at Giese fate fiftetior fret arenas qeat Fate ATT
fags we ai vith atvikeqyen: | wate wer at fade ata: Gell
As he was being tied, he grew like the high Sumeru mountain. Then
the Devi shattered his mountainous form by the thunderbolt missile.

HEARTS AT: 457 Chapter 46
But, Mahisasura took the form of an elephant and battled with Her.
While he was trying with his trunk to toss up the Devi along with the
Lion, Durga with the sword cut off his trunk. 65 to 67
aa qatswaeea: aantears sepia: | Tqreat verygiin fade aatsy AMT Ee
Then, Mahisasura assumed again his previous form of a bison and
threw with his horns the peaks of mountains at Her. 68
aa fag: gas Porrarsqiah efor t aaa Eat Gear wes ATAN &e I
neraea frede uferessyy dat feet werththrst aTaTeTATISAT: 11 Vo Il
anvat effet cart fasta oi ¢ Prieoattars sy ent agit ear oe
aa Wa GS Geant wesgey! @ feaqat wats Froua wassye: il
Then the Lion jumped into the sky and fell on the demon. Seeing
the mighty demon overpowered by the Lion, Durga with Her great sword
severed the mountain like head of Mahisasura. Then from the body of
the bison emerged the mighty demon wielding a sword and a shield.
Durga quickly tied him with the rope and struck the powerful demon
who was fighting, with Her sword. With his head severed by the sword
Mahisasura dropped lifeless. 69 to 72
Ud det fated fee searrar: | ater aaefiaet fear fatafirasaay = 08
aot arg: qarergif ea: yoETarereer: | aad gat water: era: Titer: ox
wadaq waeddar fafergeretcr
When Mahisasura was thus killed, the remaining demons with fear
went underground. The horizons brightened, the wind was soothing, the
fire looked peaceful, the rain god showered fragrant flowers on Devi
Durga. Brahma and other gods loudly hailed Her. weer’
ua dat €8 Stent sttorra faery tek
wore fargqer ent wefaeyferarea: | Hee: AISeIAT WF thy :
When the tormentor of the worlds was thus Ae ee wri joy
Visnu, Siva and other gods prostrated before Dev 28 nies 76
praised Her, the Supreme aspect of Sri Tripurasundarl.

it ARNE, 458 Sri Tripurarahasyam
aut que wai fants det waleraeret
woacienrefaarsregqeasmaust uftates gt Veen
“Oh Durga! You are the creator of the world and its destroyer. You
are really the inner being of all. You are the ocean of compassion
protecting the devotees from destruction. Salutations to you. Please protect
us. i
TEMAS SA BAe Wea |
art war pUTeisteret Meh Tse Uftats gt TRCYAT
“Oh Durga! Protect us, just as You have protected the entire trembling
universe which was like a frog caught by a cruel serpent in the form
of a demon king. 78
aa ad Cfaweissuctdiededar et werai feet
citeray: ura faqs fafa ufnfs ot TACK aT
“Oh Durga! When we are caught and immersed in the unbearable
heap of distress, You the Mother of the Universe, just remembered by
us, will assume a sportive form and protect us. 79
wisfact ctafsartawdt: Haissmfasedery
Tet avfafa wed wat aad vitae git ol
“Oh Durga! This universal expanse is a manifestation of a fragment
of Your form and within this, You are displaying Your identity through
Your Mayaé—the power of illusion. Please protect us. 80
matin et fates adt wafearydtdase |
fafaremstt futarasfaneasifaa: ufarte ot Well
“Oh Durga! Oh Mother! By Your magical power You reveal varieties
of creation within Your pure form. Though variegated, Your singular
power of Consciousness is beyond comprehension. Please protect us. 81
aa vertaesane fafaaaen fafafrapye: |
we fatorsspiat a car qa: wa wai uftarfe gt ez
“Oh Durga! By just taking shelter under Your lotus feet, Brahma

‘ : 459 Chapter 46
Visnu and others are performing surprisingly. Then how wonderful would
be Your form? How can we describe or praise You? Please protect us.
aig fret waagey qoaterastefrittaror
TRUBS SSUMs STMaranont we ufnfe et eau
“Oh Durga! Oh Dispeller of the distress of the refugees! Please
protect us who without refuge in this sorrowful formidable worldly life
are being daily swallowed by the serpent of endless worries.” 83
wa wenger tar: wet sat weaty yord: qorarargfafadtedet: fear ni cv i
After thus praising the Great Devi Durga, Brahma and other gods,
worshipped Her with flowers and worthy materials. 84
aa: Wat ar re eat offer wate: yfsar tar: weet atstrerfort
wits feymae gurafe wari
Then the pleased Devi Durga, the destroyer of distress addressed
the gods thus: “Oh Gods! I am pleased by your worship. Ask for your
wants. I will bestow all that to you even if it is rare.” 85
fagrer gar wranyegdar wea: ucgil
WTA Fa: pqrench wigarsge: | Setterenvess: wel wero free coll
ad eqeaud urat aTaeM: WaTea: | aasfer afseaetet at seat areagMTfseT:
aunsfir sat qyearat srrmerorgad t ferat wt cook tet mera caretteet Weal
uaat af Safer ceerafa waa
Hearing Durga, Mahegvara and other gods said thus: “Our enemy,
the troublesome Mahisdsura has been killed by Bhagavati. The entire
world is free from worry. By the grace of Bhagavati we have regained
our respective status. Being sheltered under You, the Kalpavrksa, we
have nothing more to desire. Even then, in the interest of the world,
we would like to ask You something. “Pleased by which prayer will Ln
quickly protect a person who is suffering? Oh Devi! Please seal -
even if it is a great secret.”

st fae, 460 Si Tripurarahasyam
wise gert: we gat carseat eon
dar: queteg temerage afar F aatscafarert een
aisfer aageht arfanghraciarvedt | Tee waa Opes at et a: 11 9g
Thus requested by the gods, the compassionate Devi Durga said
thus: “Oh Gods! Listen to this confidential and extremely rare garland
of My thirty-two names which destroys all danger. In the three worlds
there is no other prayer which equals this secret one. Listen. I will
disclose it to you. 90 to 92
gat? quifagret® guts safatranttott * 1
ginestedt * qtarferit * ofarierit * Neat
Durga—She is Devi Durga;
Durgartisamani—Destroys great sorrows;
Durgamacchedini—Resolves unsolvable problems;
Durgasadhini—Achieves uphill tasks;
Durganasini—Destroys formidable obstacles; 93
gidtarhut® otfest + otersuer®
iarrar’? gidwcitecarent ad uevu
7. Durgatoddharini—Saves the devotees from downfall;
8. Durganihantri—Destroys difficulties of Her devotees;
9. Durgamapaha—Takes away the difficulties in the path of Her
devotees;
10. Durgamajfianada—Confers deep and rare knowledge;
11. Durgadaityalokadavanala—Conflagration unto the troublesome
So Ogg CO RO
gang of demons; 94
Gir ® ghrsscter & ghussarerefitt * 1
gtartnar’ qtafaen ° gtarfarat & TAS
12. Durgama—Attainable through great effort;
13. Durgamaloka—Difficult to behold;
14, Durgagatmasvarapini—The incomprehensible Self in all;

q S ; 461 Chapter 46
Durgamargaprada—Provides rare path or opportunity;
Durgamavidya—Embodiment of transmental difficult knowledge;
Durgamaésrita—Dwells in the inaccessible fort; 95
Gina otrearantet * |
giater*° ot acters herent *2 Neen
Durgamajfianasamsthana—Dwells in the difficult profound
intelligence;
Durgamadhyanabhasini—Shines or reveals Herself during
exacting meditation;
Durgamoha—Inalienable attachment or infatuation in beings;
Durgamaga—Travels in difficult places or paths;
Durgamarthasvarupini—of indiscernible or subtle nature; 96
Stasariedt ? otats sqeenftait ** 1
attargt * eater *8 qatar °° erie Neel
Durgamasurasamhartri—Killer of invincible demons or
Durgamdasura;
Durgamayudhadharini—Wields unconquerable weapons;
Durgamangi—Whose form is incomprehensibly divine;
Durgamata—Unapproachable;
Durgamya—Not accessible to the wicked;
Durgamegvari—of immeasurable glory or Sovereignty;
gatetter ** goatee *° gitar qrrenftuft #71
Durgabhima—Unbearably fierce;
Durgabhama—of incomprehensible beauty;
Durgabha—of incomprehensible effulgence;
Durgadarini—Who tears up torments.
arasafetiat weq qatar wa AMAA:
Wee
wae weeraraqact afereatar a aera: wight: rears ar qearerathe aT M88
wlagrarmerda yeas ase APT: | TAT AAT MISSA: BST ATSTT I I 200
Fa waft crmdat ger ah get waeltfirer: wowetet RoR

st RES, 462 Sri Tripurarahasyam
“Any human being who recites this array of Durga’s names will
undoubtedly be free from all fear. Whether tormented by enemies or
held captive, a person will surely be relieved by reciting these thirty-two
names. Ordered by a furious king to be beheaded, or overpowered by
enemies in war, or attacked by a tiger in the forest, he will be freed
from all fear by reciting these thirty-two names hundred and eight times.
ararg Areageteet TATSTEH! Ur I Ved car: + fafeatad aafaq
Aatanwana aetna Bors U1 Va MaMa Yeeatas Tl oR
There is no other prayer equal to this in removing the fear of
distress. Oh Gods! There will be no shortage of anything to those who
recite these names. These names should not be revealed to non-devotees,
atheists and cheats. These names should be disclosed to a composed
devotee dedicated to the service of the Guru and the Deity. 102, 103
Unet HeIssud Bey UsaMacifay| MEAANAGAAN aT AANA aT ov Il
wrentat ward arsft qeart dence: | direst gre featafactas SrA tt ou II
fet: Yacifomaatteart ais suet wt) agra YSUTTETT~—t QOR II
Anyone in great difficulty will find relief if he recites himself or
hears through a brahmin this array of names thousand times or ten
thousand times or one lakh times. One lakh oblations of these names
with white sesamum seeds mixed suitably with honey, ghee and sugar
will eradicate a host of difficulties. Repetition of these thirty-two names
thirty thousand times is considered as one Purascarana (i.e., repetition
to master a mantra). 104 to 106
Raney wdaratin aed walt qoadi ear yarawyarsfaary | Row Il
MASA MGAMS HALT! Cat Stet feat aifearseaTy Ul Roe Il
feerect fatter yer wfersqey myer aa at wae faferteuarede:t 208 I
area: Wee Ge: vient warsheha: | wataqte waaay, — il eel
Pracaa quate fated: faferatssad: 1 wt muserator srarerafiy areal ke
at fret at waared: w aafeassad aa
SYR Asatte Tarantfeafiaent 1 Vez

HEARTS aya: 463 Chapter 46
All actions must be preceded by Purascarana. One should make in
pure clay My idol having eight arms wielding the mace, the sword, the
trident, the arrow, the bow, the lotus, the shield and the club; with
three eyes; decorated with the crescent moon on the head; with red
garment; seated on the Lion and killing Mahisasura with the trident.
Repeating the names hundred times, fragrant red oleander flowers should
be offered. Oblations of small round cakes of flour should be offered by
repeating My mantra. Varieties of dishes including flesh and wine has
to be offered. By doing such a worship for forty-eight days one will
achieve the impossible. He who worships Me daily will never meet with
danger.” Saying thus to the gods, Devi Durga disappeared. 107 to 112
Uagniners swat sqoaaraaet + fei gfe wr wart Stata] ll RBI
“Oh Parasgurama! There is no danger ever for those who listen to
this great legend of Devi Durga. Thus I have narrated to you the
wonderful legend of Devi Durga.”
gfe staged wrererars weaeanfteits ara:
End of the forty-sixth chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurarahasyam.

Aura HTS ATT:
Chapter 47
MATA HOSTS | UAT SMA: WATS HTT, Wen
aaisfa qpapeister acpararat aa: |
get addi shart eats scitet AY wen
wa cergayd faquafensyaq fraat pacar: ha ala: 3
frareerqariinameet WA: 1 Ta dion afin eigerea i x
Tegihrarsant art GRAAL! WT steerer eat Tag AAT: 4
ae: framtaatquciya sft qa wroteon fear tit: ang: fear Wa
eat oa: fret ore ast vie wera |
“Oh Venerable Lord of the ascetics! Oh Ocean of great compassion!
I feel blessed and accomplished by your narration of the wonderful legend
of Durga, because it is indeed rare on this earth to have your merciful
glances. Nothing can equal the bliss of a person like the partridge (bird)
who drinks the elixir of the glory of Sri Tripurasundari flowing from
your moon-like face. Drinking the honey of the story from your lotus
visage, I am not contented just like a lustful person from a woman.
Hence I yearn to listen to the rebirth of Kama who had earlier merged
in the eyes of Sri Lalita Devi and his body had been reduced to ashes
by the fire of anger of Siva and how his melancholic dear wife regained
him. Oh Intelligent Guru! Please tell me about this.” 1 to 6
gfe ast antaur cartat qAtar: Holl
21 eens Heel AaAats Tas Sats sft: Ml el
x RTA S AERA: | sre waft Gara rR fire neu
= eqs Ore Trt aaa: | ETT er EAT, Ul gol
aft gfe wang’: 1 uragrarafing aegticteraryt — el
Wenraaarad acta caitse enftat at faqeefedtaty ul 2
— inquired by Paragurama, Dattatreya the Lord of the ascetics
was deeply immersed in the ocean of exhilaration. With tears of joy and

SaaS ATA: 465 Chapter 47
horripilation, Dattatreya for a while became unconscious of inner and
outer activities. Then regaining consciousness and with a voice choked
with joy, Dattatreya, rich in austerities, addressed Parasurama thus:
“Qh Parasurama! You are extremely blessed because you are not in the
least satisfied even after listening to the legend of Devi Tripurasundarl.
Cultivation of such a desire in the ambrosial story of the Devi, which
terminates rebirth is uncommon in this world, is really your great fortune.
I am also fortunate to recapitulate the grand glory of Devi Tripurasundari
while narrating it to you. 7 to 12
UA G AAR CARAA AL WAIL Wepaiecitcn waaay YT tl ke
at faftfamtersforomns stearate vat feropera: yreatdfear eitenarert: i ge
adt yet waniterenteqanay! watet weretfageen: wary tl tk
ava ufgat ae: Ga at yfadtaet) aang wate atenreast it 8
qt waifa aca fin eq: eerera a wer: faqueem afeetsatster arte
“Oh Paragurama! By listening to the stories about Devi Tripura one
gets the ability to undo worldly administrative plots. The stories about
the Moon, Indra and others are auspicious than worldly accounts. The
stories about Brahma, Sanmukha, GaneSa and others are better than
the earlier ones. Even better and cleansing are the stories about Vignu
and Siva. Superior to these are the glories of Laksmi, Gauri, Bharati
and others. The supreme is the legend about Parasakti the Devi
Tripurasundari. Who, on this earth, can describe Her Glory? With great
effort it might be possible to count the stars in the sky, to enumerate
the raindrops in space, to confirm the number of dust particles on the
earth but not the countless glories of Devi Tripurasundari. 13 to 17
Torsaarcatit ator Fret qorerear a Sat at aa 7 fe wT tC
if sfory mar ats aerate: 1 acerengeron wearoay a eR: eS
wen: ereuanret fiearratars wari wafzarot erat eet at ae: wafer
ara: Weraratsat: agit Fafteress sore: | aerate art wel eT u
fafrerfererarenn faoare youre
ageregar weresare Sarees soars
“I have presented Her important legends in @ brief way. No one
Hen

St ARES, 466 Sri Tripurarahasyam
can narrate Her entire glory. Even Mahegvara, the Vedas and the Tantras
are stranded without grasping Her form. The sensory organs cannot
understand themselves on their own. The fire cannot burn its own self.
The air cannot enter a stone. Similarly the Vedas that are born out of
Her and which shine due to Her, cannot comprehend Her totally. Existing
as the power of Consciousness prior to the three aspects viz., Iccha,
Jnana and Kriya, She is called as Tripura who is beyond enunciation
and explanation. 18 to 22
arifeneafiest at waaaabrdi! fafaatss areSaUT RMA Ae TAT 1 2a
Tivamtdastatatase fattid wiftaatataat qraamfircet Wess
aa asfafed ya uit fqussmeq) parative fafeafanatary th
seri asfrerente Fagen: wT ag Ter Ares Ae cH farrier: 11 Be
at Yfacifertgant aay Men Mell sre fafat ait wostarradiry 1
afrdtanaratrarataratrr |
“Devi Tripura, who has no beginning, middle or end, by virtue of
Her excessive glory assumes varieties of illusory forms of creation. For the
sustenance of the creation caused by Her great glory She takes visible
forms. Earlier I have told you the legends about Devi Tripurasundari.
Now I will narrate Her wonderful legend dealing with Her incarnation
as Kumari and other aspects. The form of the Transcendental Tripura
from which Kama (Manmatha) came out is called as Sri Lalita because
She sports happily in all. Her wonderful story filled with astonishing
display of valour, might, intelligence and action is the vanquishing of
the demon Bhanda. 23 to 27
We wes git wraetdttacns tad: TAL
Teutscsrarent mefeepfvraratie wnfraras afeaqet uta tl BRI
Taaaget Uastaprsapaan cera frgeafacart wifasast gol
Pea aud aomentiitest WTI
“Long ago a famous demon called Bhanda who was endowed with
the power of austerity and might, created many universes and also many
Brahmas, Visnus and Sivas. Defeated by him the gods, very well
propitiated the Supreme Devi Tripurasundari who emerged from the fire

BTA AT: 467 Chapter 47
altar as Sri Lalita the embodiment of Sri Tripura for the sake of the
gods and redeemed the misery of the world by killing Bhanda and his
army. 28 to 30
wer faapyar eat: erat at erferatsfiaeary uaen
armraeada tet wredarrgam: | tearita pease siteeierererat: = 3g
ma: HIE ahaa taterstag:faan faaar firactgetyitentsfasatera war i133 tl
aetqastratent foarentert sari saree vireredt werd sar ga
vara Ahad Ta Faattit Taretaeasea cat Fe aK HI
Then Visnu and other gods after praising Devi Lalitambika requested
Her to resuscitate Kama by putting Rati at Her lotus feet. “Oh Mother!
This Rati the wife of Kama as a widow is suffering from the pangs of
separation from her lover. She is emaciated and dishevelled like a lotus
whose stalk is cut-off. Please compassionately save her who is drowned
in the ocean of sorrow. We do not consider it proper that Your great
devotee, Kama is defeated by Siva. Hence show mercy on her.”
fryer orefat Sat Sarat wre Yferars Sar: POA Med Ta KaTT TATA: 1196 I
7 Waa afaccitas a caritsfr were: | yi tiaratat waara fever:
de va wergat + art erat Ta: | AT aH aa: sare AEST: RCH
wear wafeaace tit: carafe aati Aeet aeritaa fet earerrot zat aR
wae qreaet went treater apeet aor wae Tag aT: volt
Hearing the request of the gods, the Devi with a beautiful smile
said thus: “Oh Gods! Listen. Nowhere in the world will my devotee face
defeat. This is the truth. Even Kama has not been defeated. Owing to
the special respect to the curse by Gauri on My devotee, only his physical
body was defeated and Kama was not burnt. Kama, the best among rd
devotees is residing in My eyes. Just as darkness cannot exist during the
day, how can my supreme devotee Rati the loyal wife of Kiama aah
a widow? Born again from Me, Manmatha will join Rati. Watch, how >
a moment this Manmatha will remove the grief of Rati. 36 to
sear fran Sat aaritet ete) Peseta ATTA
neven

RETA, 468 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Urge eee Ws HTT WTA: | PL oe eT eat Fash eu yen
eiherafrars soa FAT: | WOT Hered afenattisferieart: x3 i
mat frat Sarat walrafia: | qera cferagiet fafadert: eat: yen
Saying thus, Devi Lalita bathed the Supreme Lord Kamegvara with
the ambrosial showers of Her beautiful side-glances. Through this look
Manmatha entered the heart of Kamesvara and out of his body emerged
with a new body. Manmatha felt as if he had got up from sleep and
soaked in the milky ocean of devotion and bowed to the Great Devi
Lalita. After bowing to his father, mother and all other gods, he praised
Devi Lalitaparameévari with many excellent hymns. 41 to 44
FT WA TET Fea AAA! Gaga a oretarare at fear wit
Wee 7 aeth tenet a! fate wa forth arersitft A wag wR
asé vifaquelfs wear: | afe tafaraa: ufeyarrar ea: Yo
wer & vitfatasad: wet ufos a1 aatarsha ware weityg: UPA Ul xe
meredsisera + slats we deci Ufa tea Vifaaa aT ade xe
3é Aarsefirearta cat ute anrag. firs at Target year sitedtoredsra: tt ko tl
aie detest qasifaraartad
Then hearing from his mother Laksmi, the destruction of his body
and his rebirth from the eyes of Devi Lalita, Manmatha requested Siva
thus: “Oh Universal Mother! I do not desire this ephemeral body. I would
be without a body and have no fear of destruction. Defeated by Mahesvara,
I do not deserve to be alive. I solemnly declare before You that there
will be sense in my living if the three-eyed Lord is vanquished by my
arrow. When I have been reduced to ashes like a moth encountering the
fire from his third-eye inspite of my serving Your feet, I feel my life as
futile. Hence, Oh Devi! enough of this body and life for ever. I do not
like to have a body. Please have mercy on me. Having been born to
Laksmi and devoted to Your feet, fie upon me! If after defeat I live
amidst heroes as an unworthy person.” 45 to 50
aaa wareere: ure siteferars feacat Wag
amt at oad mes canftnda weed sraront gy arshet safe UTA: | 42H

weTaATALETIS : 469 Chapter 47
aaa: dferred GEA Fa You: | vittenafatrded Set wera: «ua
SRE: HTT TATRA: | Watt aden dat ated wa i uy
Hearing Manmatha, Devi Lalitambika said thus: “Oh Vanquisher of
enemies, Oh Manmatha! My child! Do not worry. Nowhere will My
devotees face defeat. You were staying in My eyes as if in deep sleep.
By the curse of Gauri, only your body was reduced to ashes. Countless
number of Kamas born out of your body who are equally powerful will
conquer the entire world and you will become their lord.” 51 to 54
AY HMM, CEAAMTGAS TAT Haga: |
HAT: VIEAG at Sa: CATA wT fra: |
IRAs Val We vahacearra: H&G
wes warm yadé ford wfe Frtea: | 2a: dota: Gragererentfir WRU
aret freara vatsat aq: feafrdt ari a east oH feat fags:
waeateat vit afedt fawpreye
Then Devi Tripurasundari called the Kamas who had come out of
the body of Manmatha and talked to them thus: “Oh Kamas! My dear
Manmatha will be your leader and all of you who have taken birth from
his body shall be always obedient to him. Oh Kama! By having a body
vanquish Siva in a moment. Siva who is being propitiated by the gods
to beget a son is detached and calm like an ocean. Hit by your arrow
He would really become fickle and disturbed and unite with Parvati and
later also with Visnu in the form of Mohini. 55 to 57
aq deoerct wa TGTat Ft Walt Well
aft fart fieitesti tres 2d gt wife!
“If you do not want a body let it not be visible to any one in the
three worlds except Rati. Go quickly and conquer Siva”. bes
$ al
seat wait warm: WHE: WEL WET ue
feratsfar: 1 Go
aqva a anita wars af fre ea: wre se Ta
arpreay udaat sarraronnitfsa: | aat Tat EAT CATR THAT ape
ten: ware quser weretdaerena: | ara Beret Pte ee ATT MGR

st FRE, 470 Sri Tripurarahasyam
aratrgeeat aye vaterttaa: | Uret waared ATT at TF: We an
Thus ordered by the Devi, Kama well prepared went to Sankara
his enemy and staying invisible struck him with an arrow. Extremely
troubled by Kama’s arrow, and requested by the gods as well, Siva went
after Parvati and begot Guha who killed Taraka and other mighty demons
who were friends of Bhanda. Later Siva, struck by the arrow of Kama,
fell in love with Mohini and his semen dripped. “Oh Parasurama! I have
thus narrated completely the story of the rebirth of Kama.”
fa stares wererans aaTeanieents eae: 1
End of the forty-seventh chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurarahasyam.

BATAAN S CATT:
Chapter 48
gen aregadfat smeratstreatget caer yet ures farata: ue
mrad sitghreants cae Frat Sac: 1 atfea aifedt areas vie cares 2
After hearing about the rebirth of Kama, Parasurama with great
interest inquired Dattatreya again with humility. “Oh Compassionate
Lord! I would like to hear how the desireless Igvara was infatuated by
Mohini.” Le,
anfautanget ea: ware afre soy warerentt at amet, 3 1
Ga tasyt ys airarndivaqs ger ag: Gare cer awe sil
Mfetrerararas Garret AAT! Aatacar fafryary Sa STAAL, YAMT | Il
Requested thus by Paragurama, Dattatreya the Supreme Yogi said
thus: “Oh Paragurama! Listen. I will narrate the most sacred story. In
the past during the war between gods and demons, the demons stole
away the pitcher of nectar born out of the milky ocean and Visnu
assuming the form of Mohini snatched the nectar from them and
distributed the same among gods by deceiving the demons. 3 to 5
Farag qi fra aga: safaa Hara fawit wa 3 feared wayta 1g
wing fawy: sien aguafeiterts gaat t died: welt yaactat afaehe 19
Sri Sankara hearing this episode asked Visnu, when he met him to
show the form of Mohini. Visnu said to Siva thus: “The form of Mohini
is extremely infatuating and seeing that your semen will trickle beh
, : ze in said th
Hearing Visnu, Siva laughed loudly and again sat
I cannot be compared to the demons who were very much deluded by

at PRE, 472 Sri Tripurarahasyam
you. The wind cannot show its power at the peak of the Meru Mountain.
Is there any infatuating power that can delude me?” Despised thus Visnu
said “I will show you after some time”. Talking thus Visnu and Siva
returned to their respective abodes. 8 to 10
we fracisfataat faay: cafery cataract
Cul ferat Tenet eater aaa Teta
Man araistt asyerd Meats
ad ma tefaentt aa cat ea: ao Ween
TH aenth agai vevdttfettaga at ar cdaen wit afrt cite ean
faqtisyraqam wat afafeat acti + aaat wtefad wefeviomsaery ev
wena Wedtat qraisé ctearft a sf feraet rar fagya TEAL 4H
ra feet cenftaguen: wareaq + aeafa wd TEMA AANTAATATS BGI
oft Piaciaret fag cig ufeatagentin at warreaaht: 1 gl
Thus discarded by Siva, Visnu brooded thus: “Truly Siva is most
brilliant, self-controlled with an upward flowing semen. Even Kama could
not delude him. How can I attract him who destroyed Kama in a moment?
Surely I will lose my honour by showing the form of Mohini. How can
I with my appearance as Mohini attract Him whom Parvati my sister
the most enchanting born out of the aspect of Sri Tripurasundari could
not distract inspite of her proximity.” Drowned in such a worry Visnu
later analysed thus: “In the present situation indeed without the grace
of Devi Tripurasundari I cannot achieve my goal. Hence I will propitiate
Her.” Deciding thus, Visnu worshipped the Devi Tripura the Supreme
Beauty, for sixty thousand years. 11 to 17
ore Wea fager ogee watt stare fawy adit ater ute = RCI
at ata aseite arene cama aaa fart get facarafirar aa: neal
Then the pleased Great Devi Tripura appeared and addressed Visnu
thus: “Oh Visnu! My child! Ask for your desired boon. There is nothing
that cannot be granted to you because of your long worship.” 18, 19
wa frqer: sitter reper wet eft: 1 ure Sf user aareftafe Tifa Roll

aeacafeants AM: 473 Chapter 48
Titec akeaenstt atea
Ordered thus by the Devi, Visnu bowed to Her and said: “Oh Devi!
I want to assume the form of Mohini by which I can infatuate even
Siva who has vanquished even Kama.” 20
gran fait: wifi aattara fagtat WM
qed arsfr cited adcitceiiery! aceahe war sey Tes AMAA: | VI
qeat wat wararssfaat fifty ateteate wekter: veges atten fra:
ace 3 careist webedes 34 aH Tefserafaatt cite waft a arate i yx
Hearing the request from Visnu, Devi Tripurasundari said thus:
“Oh Visnu! As and when you desire you will be able to assume such a
form either man or woman, which will enchant the entire universe. Take
Manmatha along with you. Seeing you, the infatuated Siva the Lord of
Yogis, the vanquisher of Kama and whose semen flows upwards will fall
in love with you. For this to happen I will give you an aspect of My
beauty by which he will be deluded utmost and you will earn universal
fame.”
wa tam at creat arts Youtan: | wat devas aa ta: fea: fra: 1
ardor wfereremafagt watets aefirgae yeerat Yenfirntssyet wa
Thus obtaining the boon from the Devi, Visnu proceeded to the great
Kailasa mountain where Siva was dwelling. Then on the beautiful banks
of Divine Ganga amidst blossomed garden filled with parrots and cuckoos,
Visnu taking the form of Mohini wandered along with Manmatha not
far away from the place where Siva was with Parvati. 25, 26
aaraatsaad wdahade rat ules
WaMIs saad Yura eras SAT area ftentfaretferenTeRTE ITA OTT, I! 26
tera aer rea RERRL| CTA CH HRA ATTA saan
qaetcaisteraeratrasercterm 1 01
OST S HTP TAATGV SAM TAT wate

xt ARREST, 474 Sri Tripurarahasyam
argais supUaMitcadenteaAy| WaT ARTA TST ATTA Nh 32 1
Tegal frase! Maree hercn re TA AT TT Wasnt
Ayarehtargraraaeas AT! WISI ae
aerergabarrrnstar gant! Astfachtera rears ys, Waki
patrandiaarerarnremasay | Aigeauiteaartract yay, Wen
aligedditracgaga! arstatimtactarateyferareory, Won
Teenager Teas frabederrep eae, acu
Ue Uitfettad sear aaah: wasn
BH gHMtsMt: Yooaais she | AA Feat Te rae YTTSTET tt Yo
Mohini had symmetrical limbs that were the store house of all
beauty; with a lovely body shining like molten gold; with a full-moonlike face marked with the deer-musk representing the black mark of the
moon on the forehead; with a rising moon like face on the back-drop of
dark tresses resembling dense clouds spread on her shoulders; with eyes
like the blue lily blossomed in the milky ocean of her smile; 27 to 29
with a face decorated or painted as if by the alarmed bees driven away
by the fragrance of her Campaka like nose; with eyes resembling fishes
moving briskly in the ocean of her beautiful face; 30
with a row of glittering teeth similar to the row of jasmine buds; charming
with the gem-set ear rings shining on the broad cheeks; 31
with a pair of ball-like breasts similar to ruddy geese; with a pair of
arms that have conquered the shine of the coral creeper; 32
with a beauty doubled by the lustre of the gem studded amulets, bangles
and rings; with lotus-like palms at the end of coral-like arms; 33
with bud-like fingers at the tip of the arms that are like the branches
of her creeper-like body; with a pair of breasts looking like inverted
drums on her broad chest; i
with dark nipples beneath the chest band (brassier); with a serpent like
thin hair coming out of the navel hole; ee

BAAS A: 475 Chapter 48
with a slender waist whose existence is inferred by its bearing the upper
body; with three folds representing three golden steps at the bank of her
navel pond; 36
with lovely posteriors covered by red garment with its redness doubled
by the red gems studded to the waist- band; 37
with pleasant jingling of the anklets set with diamonds; with beautiful
slow gait shaming the swans, 38
with such an exquisite charm, Visnu the lord of the sacrifices, moved
around in front of Siva, as Mohini playing with the ball in the blossomed
gardens and singing melodiously. 39, 40
fra: sear acanagerat yet atl Tit Upaishrgaat aegacntSt TAT 18
aeanrafie cat ASAT ATM! SEH SAS SHAAC TITRA ll B2 Ul
SYR AAAAMUTSAUSA | AMAA TAPATPAAAT Il BF Il
anlage! sraratstrpgents seteara grat | SEI
Hearing the melodious music, Siva saw Mohini in the front garden
and said thus: “Oh Gauri! Look at that extremely enchanting lady playing
with the ball. She is like a bent creeper and lustrous like a streak of
lightning. Her large breasts are protruding out of the dangling garlands
while she is immersed in playing with the ball. With the garment soaked
in sweat, her breasts, waist and thighs are clearly visible. She has
slightly bent forward by the weight of her breasts that are dancing like
buds. Oh Parvati! Let us eagerly go fast to see her whose lotus-like gaze
is fixed on the flight of the ball. 41 to 44
td aaa
frat ueaorarita Geran at eA ye: 1 arnfeavaterarenset fe et gt aa
qeaficerrait ereararerer ata: | aarsfar Gate at ava safes Tara Mt Ye
wait af 3 aret Gear wat frat wer!
Then from proximity, Manmatha with a flower arrow hit the heart
of Siva who was approaching her. Hit by the arrow of Manmatha, Siva
seeing Mohini close-by, started burning with libidinousness and leaving

at fae, 476 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Gauri behind, he proceeded quickly to Mohini. With agitated senses Siva
reached near her and questioned thus: “Oh Beautiful young lady, who
are you? Why have you come here? You beh captured my mind. Look
at me. I am Siva who is talking to you.” 45 to 47
aga aged Ot LSAT WA: TZ
Without paying attention to his talks, Mohini continued to play with
the ball. 48
wrats sfagecat Meatplemsat: | ATaST Ht dea wyestafetfer: wen
raqenhiqrguaetsa: fea: U 4oll
yata dtdaerd urepa: Geet qari
Overpowered with lust and troubled internally and extremely
infatuated, Siva followed her and held her hand. Excited by the joy
experienced by touching her, Siva like a worldly person discharged copious
semen. 49, 50
ag faust ei ca frreaafrat Wall
Wear fratafrqercat feamaed! efthaciat wre eferdt fra A maT GR
wt fegfat wd difearet ater
Then Visnu (Mohini) assumed his real form in the presence of Siva.
Realising this the agitated Siva was shy. Visnu said to Siva thus:
“Oh Siva! I showed you my enchanting Mohini form which you wanted
en eae: weyeisrasaqare: U4
a qu a arnftiticteraria zedtd: areacedt gfrafza: Wuyi
Fagen: qamret + fafa gett waa ws faenfaftcerentaget Teta
FANT WetpUr caeGedea ae |
Hearing the words of Visnu, Siva bent his head with shame. That
was how in the past Siva seeing the beauty of Mohini lost his sensory
control and lost his potent energy. There is nothing impossible through
the grace of Devi Tripurasundari. Thus Visnu, Brahma and other gods
achieved the impossible by securing Her blessings by worshipping Her.

FEATS ATA: ATT an
ud weed: wa far saree: WARN
fa arta afget wera a ay wate: ara: qeetastEr: 1 yon
Thus Brahma and all other gods are the devotees of Devi
Tripurasundari and they worship Her alone and recite Her sacred Mantra.
Among them Manmatha the crowning devotee is the best. 56, 57
framatesarascren: FUaeI! WaT fastaay TEA FET BT: i ue
ané t vagaries yoy arta daa: | WqTs: Hats ciara ww: W&R
anfacta: gas sx: tare: fereetar stengrat Sem greynsct saree: 1
Manmatha is the promulgator of Si Vidya. By the grace of the
Devi many others also mastered the cult of Srividya and twelve among
them are prominent. “Oh Parasurama! I will narrate their names. Listen
with self- control. They are: Manu, Candra (Moon), Kubera, Lopamudra,
Manmatha, Agastya, Agni, Surya (Sun), Indra, Skanda, Siva, and Durvasa.
War Wd: SRfaed Taurd: Wg | Ut WAST AMET: SoA ATMS AST Ml GR I
BU adataraemttadates | faytarsent IS at: carter faytet: 1 ez
TWN: Gate TRU wget RR
ard a dard free faa wari agave wT tanya wat RII
Tamara u sara! West stars atigreas arta RYH
fan: wares wnat Ua fe Areaent: | Ut AAEM ST atoTaTTAT: 11 GE I
By remembering them on each morning one will be free from sins.
Because these twelve have obtained the grace of the Devi, remembering
them daily will confer all-round auspicious prosperity. The worshippers
of Devi Tripurasundari should as a rule remember them by which they
will acquire pure devotion that will cut asunder worldly bondage.
“Oh Bhargava! The twelve exponents of Srividya have by the blessings
of Devi Tripurasundari are empowered thus: Manu creates the world;
Moon sprinkles ambrosia into plants; Kubera is the lord of wealth;
Lopamudra got good fortune; Manmatha conquered Siva; Agastya (drank)
dried up the ocean and so on; Agni became the foremost among gods;
Sun illuminates the world; Indra is the lord of the gods; Siva vanquished

at frees, 478 Sri Tripurarahasyam
(Yama) death; Skanda shattered the Kraufica Mountain and Siva is the
lord of Yogis. They are all masters of Srividya. There are others who
worship Her through seed letters. 61 to 66
aa qenfearrat cite ada ofan: 1 fagrecteigten srerserat: ferargar:
ETAT ATA ATT SH |
“Among the others three foremost preceptors named Mitrega, Sasthisa
and Uddiga who are born from the body of Siva are universally revered.
“They have attained a position in the abode of Mahesvara by intently
meditating on the kutas (i.e., the groups in Srividya) [Viz., Vagbhava,
Madhya and Sakti katas] 67
we a fate qt fafaernrey, Neen
ah Wigaut aw aera fasten qaredit ¢ arafratert feat eg
feant fan da aerate: | yuifrater wee wT: PeTAT Ul Vol
“Thus the Devi Tripurasundari assuming many forms protected the
universe and pervaded it by one of Her aspects (portions). On the shores
of the eastern ocean She stays in the form of Kamagiri. At the foot of
the Meru Mountain She stays in the form of Jalandhara. On the shores
of Western ocean She stays in the form of Purnagiri. 68 to 70
ue fret dfanste qrdgfaen fact arstat ¢ caret Hers art TAT 11 oe
ehtet J Hat at oranssady dra At werent: carla Way AT ll
wart wife cat fret fereatrenfeet aurea fagrenat warat ageradtu 03
Sey Gat Sct Auret qeat sft gegredur daar at feat oY
Unrat eyintea wdort: wert sree avis fret wate wre: wale: «1 Oh
warsequree: wetaTaear | Wart Barker wravitsa ASEAN: W&
per ofa fam edt wargaediiresarn sft & ar auitedt wife: ferattety tl
Even as She has assumed the above three forms, She has many
different forms. She is Kamaksi in Kaficipuram; Bhramari on the Malaya
mountain; Kumari in Kerala; Amba in Saurastra; Mahalaksri in Karavira;
Kalika in Malava; Lalita in Prayag; Vindhyavasini on the Vindya
mountain; Visalaksi in Kasi; Mangalavati in Gaya; Tripurasundari in

spaces Aa: 479 Chapter 48
Bengal; Guhyakesvari in Nepal. She is situated in these twelve places
in India. Just a visit to these places will destroy all sins. A person who
is unable to visit them will be free from all sins if he calmly thinks
about them every morning. Similarly Devi Tripurasundari stays in this
world in hundreds and thousands of forms intent on protecting the human
race.
“Qh Paragurama! I have thus narrated how Siva was deluded by
Mohini”. 71 to 77
sft siamese wears aparanftentsera:
End of the forty-eighth chapter
of the Mahatmyakhandam Sri of Tripurarahasyam.

TRUSTS TAS ATE:
Chapter 49
wa gen werah meagiantgat wsstEdt carats wen
After hearing the legend of Mohini, ParaSurama eager to listen
further about the glories of the Devi inquired the son of sage Atri the
lord of the ascetic clan. 1
TE AGA TM: FAUT Wergay! cerraranks Aetest ae ae VI
waa at at werent wfeenfdtya oi faarent ae Geuniiaver dat a
fe waa: 4 es: Se UR: Ht ETA!
aaadq adarente frrearnsqrarat ue
7 fe fret ager aat Cran: | afraha aeterite Fgura: HATTA, UN I
SERRA! ta aig fagenth fat way fetwat GI
“Oh Lord! Now tell me in detail the wonderful glory of Devi
Tripurasundari who incarnated as Devi Lalita. Through what prayers of
the gods did She incarnate? What is Her form? How did She fight with
Bhandasura? How strong was that demon? Whose son was he? How did
he conquer the gods? Tell me all this, your close disciple. Compassionate
Gurus will not feel troubled by the questions of their disciple. Just like
a bee, I am never satisfied drinking the essence of the stories of Devi
Tripurasundari from the blossomed fragrant lotus of your face.” 2 to 6
We wa aera eat witac: 1 fgmear saved wer We witfed: «NI
TT Ta Tae Marsters |
a fe martyr: fag: sets sfercat well
fage eter wcterrorearony! watss sar fafa: WereMaRTETS SATA U8
Thus inquired by Paragurama, Dattatreya the lord of the sages
observing his inquisitiveness about hearing addressed him with pleasure
thus: “Oh Parasurama! Listen. I will narrate the story of Devi Lalita
who is the incarnation of Devi Tripurasundari. The Great Devi

THATS ATA: 481 Chapter do
Tripurasundari is the cause of all causes, the supporter of everything
and is full of Intelligence, Effulgence and Bliss. 7 to 9
fra: ware dfaerrefare: | wen: diated wisafsroferfadtat 1 e011
an fafa: uterer fearenfa: qars sera
a vied: wayne fangs swen wea Ween
HerareMenT Ae VeTeaheg Tat aT fret sft woes faqs waltfrad 11 ez
“Siva the embodiment of knowledge and bliss is the protector of the
universe. His component of intelligence is known as Cicchakti, the
Paragakti. The dynamic aspect of the blissful intelligence of Paramesgvara
is termed as Vimarsa the profound analytical counterpart. The entire
universe shines in Her vast spatial cosmos. Shining with three forms
she is well known as Tripura. 10 to 12
wee wera qe ferro sai acoar yfrad fra vifanitt = k8
a wat faad at fen aarsft eae set fata werfafatarent wafeata: 11 ex
aft wer a ff: eaduerafre faesad: wertate: aT orate ek
“Just like water in the ocean, rays of the Sun, clay in the Earth,
She is the Power in Siva. Just like there is no ocean without water, no
Sun without rays, there is no Siva without Her power. The glorious form
of Lalita is replete with the principle of intelligence. 13 to 15
gem: Wat: fertarguread, Prete: |
apuraten: yranatsem: wiferar adatsfircet neal
“Her other manifestations like Kumari are identified with Her head,
arms, feet and so on. Devi Lalita is Supreme. 16
TU Sreitqaqhretany FauaU| atefaraaga FEAT SroTTATATT: Mt kU
aarsitgt warfare atearare qari ame Bish agers Fats maT | ke
agar aq yer wre dt yf Pagan: wey: wrereafaahar Weg
aferarer Werte swrsrgraenfccrets aa weit feat roy arta Ha: J
as fil
le visiting sacred places w
“y hi
n the past sage Agastya w! beings. Through a big penance at
with compassion towards suffering

at FRE, 482 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Kaficipura he pleased Mahavisnu who blessed him. Asked regarding the
welfare of the world, Visnu told the sage about various glories of the
visible Devi Tripurasundari such as the killing of Bhandasura by Devi
Lalita. Oh Paragurama! Listen. I will narrate that long account to you.
dfanitera vefaarfeet sitghreat waiset aft cate Prats wat afin x
“After narrating concisely, Mahavisnu departed after deputing sage
Hayagriva who was his own incarnation to elaborate the same to Agastya
who was interested in details. 21
ae SIT Ufa eas SAT! YP wes cferafanad TATE RH
Rares weMe He a faye wri snfadat wuseet aaa HAT aH
wadie siigqué ara aaquefa
“Then Agastya in his hermitage worshipped sage Hayagriva and
inquired thus about the extremely wonderful glory of Devi Lalita. ‘Oh Wise
Hayagriva! How did the Transcendental Tripura incarnate and destroy
in war the demon Bhanda? I long to listen to this legend. Please narrate
it to me.’ 22, 23
ofa yet gacital wifearaanyrar: Ul
Bret sitefernten wert wiht: | arrerqaitera: YoreaTgeet ART: Wl
BARA Ata WaaqyTaHA |
“Thus inquired, the sage Hayagriva, the foremost among the devotees
of Devi Lalita, was filled with joy by remembering Her glories and with
tears of joy and horripilation started narrating with a voice choked with
aaiste qrerdyet sarees fara, Well
whet Ged ase atatar ca Aeyit aeaqvanct AaestaaAaTsTT Ml WI
afoamenaga a: ugatrarsstt dt wtraayedt gerry ll Rel
‘Oh Agastya! You are fortunate. Your desire to listen to the legend
of Devi Lalita is a result of your abundant merit, earned through hundreds
of births, which has fructified today. A person who desires to drink the

RTARTA AA: 483 Chapter 49
ae eae
nectar of the glories of Devi Lalita should be considered as the best who
has been released from the fear of death. 26 to 28
qarart Wetettes eaferarar: Haze: | SPATTER SAT ASAT Ween
qaaq dat Saectferarattd FAH: | aaa oad cat enh ugd zat 1 30
‘Listening to the stories of Devi Lalita is the essence of human
existence. By generating devotion it grants Her abode. All actions by
human beings tantamount to oblations in ashes till they hear the legend
of Devi Lalita. 29, 30
: aeet wader fae sqverarcqar fafegureact aa: 1 agi
Te Aaa sited Saarat: | sUpareraaente quacafentey Wan
aaanitferrrenta fag wtat
‘All beings who worship goddess Tripura should listen to this always
because without hearing this they will not obtain the results of worship.
Hence all Her devotees should endeavor to listen to Her glories. By
hearing or reading this on sacred days, Devi Tripurasundari will be
pleased. 31, 32
arate Gar aus sft aratsfareractt Wagnt
ama a ford a at aasfagetay sarsad wer sea: TseatsH STATA II
frat vert aera wen fawpshreafa: | wafrarert Fe Fare faqaretat ti 3
Waat dean fadedfa uetaq gfaatreacet tere Tar BGI
merge U Aqytea AVSAMTAAM: |
‘In days of yore there was a very powerful demon named Bhanda
who obtained rare boons by propitiating Lord Siva. Then without fear
that demon conquered the three worlds and ruled as if he was Visnu
the lord of the universe. He vanquished Indra and other gods in the
war. Having lost their wealth the gods wandered helplessly on the
earth like human beings. The demons ruled by Bhanda, extremely enjoy ed
the oblations to the gods, their damsels, their garden Nandana and their
Kalpavrksa, 33 to 36
tera avetererar site whrothy aot

at FRE 484 Sri Tripurarahasyam
aristratened aanaeet waa fiat getter ate sat tetera ge
oraudd edt antares waa
‘Seeing Indrani who was beautiful like Laksmi, as the demon Bhanda
was planning to peacefully abduct her, Saci along with her father Puloma
unnoticed by the demons took shelter under Devi Gauri and stayed in
mount Kailasa. 37, 38
watts Hat a cent arqaa a TSA
afta ad dtanft frat deterred! wat feo: wat at faye a aera
urarery faug a faetentryeiad | aaeat vrentlefeaurctigics AT ae
‘In this manner Bhanda after conquering Indra, Kubera, Varuna,
Vayu, Agni, Yama and Soma became the ruler. Staying himself in the
heaven he placed Visukra in the Earth and Visanga in the Nether region
and ruled the three worlds. Binding Indra and other lords of the directions,
he made them carry heavy loads like servants. 39 to 41
Ha SIA TERT Rye: cfs: | Wrens aM eaatararat tl ¥zl
fadtsyt: a wafeavsea: | tert yitforage anert war: ul we
wanes feretgrarnaad afget |
‘After some time Guru Sukracarya released the gods. Bhanda was
thus troubling the gods. Once, upon the advice of the demons, Bhanda
invited Maya the sculptor and ordered him to rebuild the city Sonitapura
which was ruined in the past by the gods. 42, 43
AASSMA Wager vilforanst yt qet uss
Ticats dvi grits sneer queda: cat wef SaATeTATN Bul
gents aft frat afer, geht eet was vitogt wdemaafisna ul YE ll
Then Maya who was instructed rebuilt the Sonita city. Seeing that
beautiful city which excelled the heaven Bhandasura destroyed the heaven
and transferred its assembly hall Sudharma and garden Nandana to the
Sonitapura and converted it into another heaven aboundant with
prosperity. 44 to 46

URIS ATE: 485 Chapter 49
wa tae: feat aa Tsrngred | feardtate tats avenerae: iven
qeal THAT eae: | ws we Ma asda Sn ¥en
Staying in that city Bhanda the powerful lord of the demons created
demonic leaders who were equal to the Divine lords of the directions in
lustre and valour and appointed them as lords of the directions. Everything
was indeed filled by Bhanda and his followers. 47, 48
aarsfadtertsrdt aust citeragrad |
Vilforats swaqreaste Yer A CTA uve
wd midtdgdt aust eergtar: | wad afefada wees TAA Goll
Wasi wi Us ASA was al USheasUSsMfaa: WaMAT RH
AAAS TEMNSSH VaTSUfAEa Fall Ua Sara VANS GRU
Then the exceedingly brilliant Bhanda ruled the universe. He renamed
Sonitapura as Sanyakapura. Thus Bhandasura who had great power of
penance captured many universes by splitting them. He brought under
his control hundred and five universes and became their overlord. In all
these universes his orders were carried out unhindered. Thus Bhanda
ruled all the universes by conquering the gods.
sft sifiqurest arerenaus wRlarSyrats ara:
End of the forty-ninth chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurarahasyam.

USigrants ara:
Chapter 50
W gen vaiteaiad aera: | faferat gate wees ania Wen
waite cafe wantatefatar vadtat queer: Re: on kh
are at et da ATE at waaraa: | wea ar TAMa TenctaraHe: wean
Ut afe aes staqrafted a: 1
“Oh Parasurama! Hearing Hayagriva, the wonder-struck Agastya
again inquired thus: “Oh Hayagriva! Oh ocean of mercy! Your narration
was wonderful. To whom was Bhandasura of such a might born? Was
his valour inborn or due to penance? How did he conquer the gods? How
did he vanquish Brahma and others? Please tell me verbatim all this
who is anxious to hear.” 1 to 3
Wa WS: Brass We qt gars: uel
TY Srites wat weit weds war fear awtaa wart weareraa: lt 4
Wer cated Pramctet reread: | yelteet aa arephe ads fate wall
at wenepft Gear reaatgyiferthy! weptarare wh mate aga: Ol
watscatt afedt mityit 2 firr: Gt: 1
Thus inquired by Agastya, the pleased Hayagriva said thus:
“Oh Agastya! Listen to the ancient legend of Bhandasura. After Manmatha
was reduced to ashes by the anger of Siva, child-like Ganesga heaped
the ashes and made a beautiful human doll out of it. He showed that
lovely doll to Gauri his loving mother. Seeing that Gauri in order to
please Ganega requested Siva thus: “Oh Auspicious Lord! Please impart
life to this idol which is dear to Ganega. Let my dear son play with
him.” 4 to 8
Wetear afea: wequlfirerer thar ug
earsaateativar friter arate a vifectsfaratedag: arrais ere il te
Romteauretre greats war mtgrea fermen ata ug ath Wee

Tees AA: 487 Chapter 50
Requested by Parvati, Siva in view of the future events gave life
to the idol by casting a shower of nectarian glances. That enlivened boy
was extremely beautiful because of his connection with Manmatha, but
was demonic by nature because of his association with the anger of Siva.
He was a good friend of Ganesga and played with him. 9 to 11
went malfas fears dag: | a GRaIST ESSA wet a St sft nee
vefgat: Sat uret seftaat fara
Then, once the lords of the directions reached there. Seeing them
the demon questioned GaneSa thus: “Who are these? How did they become
that prosperous and wealthy? 12
wa ust wayE: we a firemen: wean
we qo wets feaquren viteayfsen: | ara dtafaraet wered feria: nex
sat fayft dorarencar difet fora geist a fe fahren oret ABA un ei
Thus inquired, Ganega said thus to his dear friend: “Oh My dear
friend! I will tell you. Listen. They are the lords of the directions who
are revered by the world. They have acquired the lordship over the
directions by propitiating through penance the great God Siva. If Siva
is pleased by the penance there is nothing that is not achievable just
like one can get everything through the Kalpavrksa. 13 to 15
qa fataarenmeae wat ea) sya Wis watt sa: Weg
manstfage cratagean! weed ayers Geen Aassma Neel
Hearing Ganega, that boy decided to perform penance. Permitted by
Ganega, he went to the banks of the divine river Ganga and did a
long-drawn self-controlled penance sustaining himself on fruits for ten
thousand years propitiating Lord Mahadeva. 16, 17
wa wit weet atqetet ara: | ale aca Asfrad wat a warTa: = ec
Then the pleased propitious Mahadeva appeared before him and said
thus: “My child! Tell me about your intention. Pleased with you I have
come here to grant your wants”. 18
W vetaaet fone disqisaaa wore tadigrararad HaTetet: kA

at AES, 488 Sa Tripurarahasyam
das¢ wdarat yrat ade aan Gaal ders gaits weary ere
yraneati wreatit fae Warde a ae seq A tar wena aft feast: 1
awd adel Aseq Wat wise Hate
Hearing Mahadeva, the demon bowed and with folded hands requested
the lord thus: “Oh Lord! I should become the ruler of the universe.
I should vanquish everyone. I should be able to create gods, demons and
excellent worlds. I should be able to create weapons, missiles, scriptures
and magic. All the gods including Brahma should be always obedient to
me. I shall not fear anything and I should not die.” 19 to 21
gia spat wea aa: Oe 2a: fra WM
Tseeatanqam aunfate yigt: | Frenssafefrmes eeitste g:fiaa: 2H
WARUTARI SW AGAIN! FAISENistat Wer: vitaraTasatay Uw
Hearing his words, Siva said thus: “You are not fit to have such
boons”. Then Siva disappeared. The disappointed demon performed again
a severe penance for a lakh years staying in the sky, sustaining on
smoke and braving cold and heat. 22 to 24
Wa: Qaeda: afate ure asad are ddarenfwader WET WRU
fartenteraat ar: YUsyt war ga waisEcqUy citer yreafzenati
cammisytearat qeaia wi a a ay fata weressaht to WwHl
sft art at wet frreatstatararr
Then, once again Mahadeva presented himself and said thus:
“Oh Intelligent demon! Stop your frightening penance. I will grant that
you become the ruler of the three worlds; that you will conquer gods
and demons; that you can create gods, human beings and demons; that
you can create weapons and scriptures; that you will have nothing to
fear from the gods, human beings and demons; that Brahma and others
will not be controlled by you and that you cannot escape death.” Saying
thus, Siva disappeared. 25 to 27
fraswatarant de: gata Tvl
fe a atime waqi gress ara axe: firs: uel

WSIS AA: 489 Chapter 50
oft ffs qatsft aa st wer 4:1 Seure seat yat frewsarat fritea:
a: Tet Ca: Weateasfamat gyfer
amarengpeatg: ararafeaaeny U3eul
fagfamgd TT AAT AAA: | Ta Tar eT A Teper SEAT u3aen
After Siva disappeared, the demon thought again thus: “Of what
avail are these desired boons without my becoming immortal? I will
again perform penance till Lord Siva grants me this boon”. Thinking
thus, he started a severe penance dangling from a tree with his feet up
and head down just above a burning fire, controlling his breath and
desires. “Oh Sage! As he, who had totally controlled his senses was
being burnt by the fire, did penance for twenty-thousand years, smoke
came out of the pores of his hair. 28 to 32
gaa a acted cared, wae: | Sale wafer tar ate waraq: 1 3301
wm: addannmuacge wera! Yea Aas AeracarTeTET 3s
far: Raa: areapet degedd: | tat Saree: WaT, 84 1
The three worlds were filled with that spreading smoke. The throne
of Indra trembled, the gods became unconscious, fear and sorrow struck
the gods, the earth trembled, the seas transgressed their shores, the
directions were set ablaze, the rivers were polluted. Then Indra and
other gods prayed to Brahma. _ 33 to 35
fafafaard shtun gat ta fretaaq wafreer fat aa fore wre fafererar nn 36 11
Weeasya wt at arg wea ayaaya wee Ute wes writer, TESOH
aeaerananhe cena aatstaat
Brahma after thinking about the matter went to Siva along with
Hari and after deliberating for a long time said to Siva thus:
“Oh Mahadeva! You should grant all the boons that the demon wants
except immortality. Otherwise the worlds will be reduced to ashes by
the fire of his penance.” 36, 37
ud fafinga: ery: Bftwers deat TTA
Tee te wre arg eritaaq wanisafeadt wren sacra way Be I

at fesay, 490 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Sr
aaa & det qe: Weise ate: fora: gfe ae earsfrrdt meerafiseniteay u
Recommended thus by Brahma and others, Siva went near the
demon and saw him in concentrated penance with an emaciated body,
with visible veins and burning like fire and said thus: “Oh Demon! I
am pleased with your penance. Tell me your want. You will have it
fulfilled.” 38 to 40
sethta: fereaise Gear ed AAMT! Wore aUSaT Aa aes orate
ta yd am ad ad eae fe wet yerfgerardiate Serf det xR
Westies vient ag Wear!
Addressed thus by Siva and seeing the God in front, the demon
prostrated before Him and praised Him and with folded hands spoke
thus: “Oh Mahegvara! Earlier you granted me everything except
immortality. In addition I would like to conquer Brahma and others in
war. I should have the strength to split the universe.” 41, 42
geangt areaaras df wear: sail
Ty 8 wit tea tasqray a1 yeqdaelfararssaa w pafaq xvi
wea: wdteags pm: wats uf: | qfrateragisen wafers: uv
feoren: faaqems: carers fopta: | yreanfin a aarentir ufrarite aft Su xe
cash & argtter: wdensyr wey! starer ae A tad afeeate a Ayre: I vo
gfe creat at wet frratssrataaract
Hearing the request of the demon, Maheégvara said to him thus:
“Oh Demon! Listen. You shall not be killed by gods, demons, human
beings, those born from the womb or mind. You shall not be killed by
trees, mountains, wild animals, serpents, birds, worms, insects, bees,
ene Vidyadharas, Kinnaras, Devils, Kimpurusas, Raksasas, The
Trinity, weapons, and Popular missiles in any manner. Your other wants
also will be fulfilled.” Giving boons thus to the demon, Siva disappeared.
wa Seat feagra + 8 aq: quieha: Be
ate ate Gat aegatatse wetanswe: 1 gfe wat Grav et mat areata Ut ¥8

USTs Aa: 491 Chapter 50
quia wageat Patera wre ahaert! senses wrEpeT WIA FAISAT: I ko
eras achat eat ISTaPad | Uretsyt frcgar aca uneit WSR uel
aay sng difreafa tafesmesteras ters SAT: GR
taemadert ufteast Yara: | TaTS: Tone: warns aera ust
weanteta fates ft ata: oftarera
Then the demon reflected thus: “If I cannot be killed by gods and
others, then where is death for me. I have really become immortal.”
Assuming himself to have accomplished everything he went to Kailaisa
mountain. Joining his friend GaneSa he narrated everything to him. Then
along with Ganesa, the demon bowed to Devi Parvati and told Her about
the boons he had obtained. Parvati also congratulated him and said thus
to the demon: “Oh! My Child! You have obtained great boons. You should
not offend the gods. Otherwise you will face fear. Plotting against gods,
brahmins and citizens, the demons have been destroyed. Keep away from
the company of demons because you will lose your wisdom by associating
with them. Go to the Nether region which is better than heaven and
righteously rule there.” 48 to 53
TAT WOT T ile UAT STIL, WSU
wa teehee rearersayred! ar detrarsetgtdat qa: watfire: WY
facet Syaret teaaaremnge: | peas WCET 14g
Agreeing with Her and bowing to Her, the demon went to Patala
(nether region) and ruled there along with the demons. Then by the
repeated advice of the demon leaders, he, supported by his army, started
conquering the three worlds and waged an astonishing war against the
Kurus in the north. 54 to 56
Te Gaal gear cienfiame: | Farad aareeet & sete wine 1 Go
ag t arer gar afeeasits aden wae YAeTSA TT Wa Aaa: Get
aaemtfeg ae fatteat wseq ast: |
Seeing his excitement in war, Brahma amicably addressed him thus:
“Oh Lord of demons! Right now it is improper to fight. All the gods
will pay you taxes. You can entirely rule the Nether region and the

a Rea, 492 Sri Tripurarahasyam
earth. Let the gods live in the heaven. Let there be no enmity with
greet weaat wafaasgterer Ween
sat tet TATE: Hara |
Listening to Brahma and discussing with other demons he asked
for Indrani, Nandana garden, Rambha and others as taxes. 59
qeasqad arena tet petswaifefa: W Ron
quecanta qda sqeraisaeta
Hearing the improper words of the demon, the angry Brahma said
thus to the demon: “Oh Bhanda! You are wicked”. Saying this Brahma
disappeared. 60
ag taeataed WS Seaaar: Ween
qaqa peaemiguear: | frat aegtar aera, aaTet WIM
wa fan faciteat a avedeitstretia: | carat argufgeg a fayeray
Yattayradenit west: | MeaSvSMt wd US Way Wusera: = NBII
Then the most arrogant Bhanda and other demons fought an
extremely fierce battle with the gods and after vanquishing them captured
Indra and others and engaged them in the task of carrying heavy loads.
Conquering thus the three worlds, the highly haughty Bhandasura, created
from the either sides of his ribs, two demons Visanga and Visukra. Along
with his hundreds of sons and grandsons he enjoyed stupendous wealth.
He brought under his sway hundred and five universes. 61 to 64
atalfgeadt ausded gear tf aHISET: | Weraaaat der cet vite as va Il
TIAMAT AME! ATA: TAISTMT: TAIT: siftarscaareattattn
waitet Gat a fragt qyetena sft wat cet arat aa aATAHTSTT: II Go Ml
A demon by name Taraka seeing the preponderant valour of Bhanda
made friendship with him who in turn was pleased with Taraka and
made him the lord of eighteen universes. Tarakasura gave in wedding
to Bhandasura his four sisters by name Sammohini, Sundari, Citrangi
and Kumudotkara who were charming and beautiful like Devi Laksmi.

— 493 Chapter 50
sraizean a faganet fasten: 1 saat fast faa: nec
wa ress tem: fire: wat: Gara: | deat cet feaufiet wast swear: u
Ugrakarma, Ugradhanva, Vidyunmali, Vibhisana, Indraéatru,
Amitraghna, Vijaya and Visvatapana were the wise and dear ministers
of Bhandasura. The pleased Bhandasura made them the lords of the
directions. 68, 69
wd araen WA: HIT Aswad! BE feats a dant aatasatAT | wo
qitaftfadisa Vq ctenftarmen aeacites wat qereda sags TA: Well
fagra cimeraste acitentseytt wa: | dqpusstaraad cheats Haat it 0? I
Having got such prosperity Bhandasura in the course of time became
arrogant. On his own he created, protected and destroyed the worlds.
After discussing with his wicked ministers he reached Satyaloka haughtily
to conquer Brahma. As he was reaching that place Brahma vanished
along with his abode. The same thing happened with Vaikuntha also.
Then he reached Kailasa. 70 to 72
spear watered wrt vier wereregqa: | arid yedged art wa Yara: 163
Fear wigret wt aus waarateay! wate Gad Seas: WHaTsHtenagA: Il ow
Hearing about the arrival of his old friend Ganesa along with the
Pramathaganas lovingly met him midway. But on seeing the proud
Bhanda who had rejected friendship and was accompanied by ig
GaneSéa stopped him.
HUSATS A VATA: Ws Seat fersitear: | t maser gt Tear Gereaitat fereay tl
deiatisa dardt gt a yreoftgre ataqenes vitor aa: weet Teer I RI
were at opie eptsfar git steer ara aT: We wat AGATSSTAAT It we
at aoe deterercnnda ar far sare Sees TTT TAT AE OS
detéar went arden afeeafinn agit res yee oT aera: OR
Ordered by Bhandasura, the demon Vibhisana said thus: “Oh Ganesa!
Go quickly and tell your father Siva thus—“The lord of the demons has
arrived. Quickly surrender to him. If not boldly fight with Oe
the consequences. If you are strong, do not run away ‘Saakh é “4 Sate
Also tell your mother thus: “The lord of the demons wants sac

Mt FE, 494 Sri Tripurdrahasyam
eyes eeeriieseee eo eee
under your protection. Offer her soon to him. If not both of you will be
dragged to me by your hair by the demons and you will lose your
dignity’—Oh Ignorant Ganega! Go and convey this and do not get killed
here.” 75 to 79
gerd deat mitt: ateqfesd: | cement fee: UATE TAT coll
freq: wreranst eae I SesaatTS Seater cen
freq: wdet Cea, WHT Tea: |
Hearing the words of the demon, the enraged Ganesa immediately
hit him on the head with the palm and defeated him. The Pramathas
destroyed the demons who were present there. Then an intense war
started between the Pramathas and the demons wherein the mighty
Pramathas devastated the demons. 80, 81
deat cet grasa ude wert
aracasatad oat Wisi aa deat vexiai aalfefdan Sqr wast cl
at waadani ye adler ude waar gaara areat vega evi
gata ech: ar tat ged aa seer! Yaureofeerideaat wast: WE cyl
vieafa: mtd acatadé ea: 1 den a agua ai werIsaay CRI
foapiivereguipracan: | fea feast weet: vifsahreat ui cell
Meanwhile Parvati hearing about the war between the demons and
the Pramathas arrived there out of love to save Her son Ganega. She
was accompanied by crores of Saktis. Seeing the fierce battle between
the Pramathas and the demons and realising the dwindling strength of
the Pramathas, Parvati along with Her Saktis fought the demons for a
while in a most frightening way. Firmly hit by the strong Saktis and
the Pramathas, the demons unable to withstand the attack started
running away with their limbs cut off, heads broken and pulverised
bodies even as they were being killed and swallowed by the Pramathas
and the Saktis. 82 to 87
adafadd Gear wersyretan! agwenraat gal caeeats terete: i ce
wtte df autetstt avg faced ara: 1 mere fare ga agi fare gfe 28
Tas HaqSs wearin: | aaa wt faapewatita U sell

TAT TAS 2 495 Chapter 50
surafe tosemeargurate welenet! aqertstrdvet at wafefe =n et
Seeing his forces thus destroyed, the angry and fierce Bhandasura
came on a chariot to fight. Chiding Bhanda, Ganega holding the mace
quickly stopped him like the Vindhya mountain stopping the Ganga on
the earth. Then a battle began between them employing fierce thunderboltlike missiles which looked as if Lord Visnu was fighting with the demon
Kaitabha. Both of them worthy of praise and both intoxicated, fought
with rage like inebriated elephants in a forest. 88 to 91
aa mat Toaferterqera aera: | Mifruscears ast yroat ifr Wen
aa wea Ta Tages aot serait att ya: vit rae: eB
aaa TISaTATS MEAT SAHA! sassedishrata Paya sar ues
qedar Frocaet weldarsfarat et af qepeseareqer: WreyTans: BGI
argyresttatend ysrarargeeda: |
Then the angry Ganega flung his raised mace on Bhandasura just
like Indra his thunderbolt on the mountain. By that the chariot, horses,
the flag and the charioteer of Bhanda were reduced to ashes. Then
quickly Ganega with the same mace which was like a thunderbolt hit
Bhandasura severely and Bhanda who was like a speeding bull, fell down
unconscious on the earth like an uprooted tree. All the demons wailed
while the Pramathas and the Saktis who were happy, honoured Ganega
with slogans of applause. 92 to 95
Teatqed: atta aus: Wrest Aa Weegil
aan afeat at: | Tatsserentedt Wfet dtacts gfora aati ve
fargra: uardeat viet auredt wari wae: pifaafrsste a eeETH TST
The mighty Bhandasura who quickly regained consciousness rose up
fast and with great force hit GaneSa on his head with the goad. Hit
severely by the sharp goad Ganeéa dropped on the ground like a mountain
struck by the thunderbolt. The Pramathas and the Saktis wailed very
much. 96 to 98
Feat wusest fagast mac urddt eerarara Eg washaaT tke
tei aqeatsa agra YAS SeqyeAT! arash: warren urdarara urea Yoo

ht RE, 496 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Sfa ast AT AeA: VIZTS AAG! Falaades Tat Tessa SAT Faq 1 goe
Then the angry Parvati uttering a sound ‘Hum’ stupefied Bhanda
who was trying to catch hold of Ganesa. As She was about to kill Bhanda
with the trident after binding him with the noose, Brahma appeared
there and requested Parvati thus: “Oh Devi! According to the boon by
Siva this Bhandasura should not be killed by you. Hence retire from
fighting and let the demon go back to the earth.” 99 to 101
Sem wad arat at Ta TE Tes Cesaa qa ase
sé war waend Aegg Hart Fi yard wlawer Fore: yreer AIsfet Pera 203
Ue ven verdad: wee aAa| BUST WfaUt aeRO
Reminded thus about the great boon of the demon, Parvati cursed
him thus: “You worthless demon! Get back to the earth. You are set
free now and you do not deserve to visit this Meru-peak (Kailasa) at
any time. If you enter here, your head will surely break into hundred
pieces.” Then Parvati helped by the Saktis and the Pramathas pushed
Bhanda and other demons to the earth just like the palmyra fruits by
the wind. 102 to 104
Wa aust fact vitat frat cenige: | searaat yer wa faauoit dae:
That was how Bhanda who was defeated by Parvati returned
depressed, dejected and sad to his Sinyaka city along with the demons.
Wi weer ate a wert ager ae TNigTeageas TeMEMaNTTfStAT: 1 YOR I
WG assy car faftesqrras: | sat Betas ay Gat aT ll
“Oh Agastya! I have thus narrated to you about the valour of
Bhandasura filled with penance. Because of the curse on him from
Parvati, Brahma and others were not defeated. That was how Bhandasura
became the lord of the demons by conquering the worlds and was troubling
the heaven just like a wolf in a city. 106, 107
sit siiqes reread werernts eae: Il
End of thef fiftieth chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurarahasyam.

UWHUSISTAas are:
Chapter 51
ayy gers ate facen: wadtswe: | g:fan: artaeterferg aug
adeey tay eect: | aadhint aret safutettaafan: ue
arpereite: tat pase aar qari wa adagarndit frase Bl
Oh Agastya! Listen. The sad gods who were thus driven away by
Bhandasura, hid themselves for a long time in forests, mountains, caves
and river banks fearing the demons. Some of them who were seen by
the demons were dragged and beaten and engaged like servants. Like
this twenty lakh years lapsed. 1to3
wel aafayg cast conifers Yea wore d we yew: sarefereeret | II
TM at aga vitast 2ayi esa fara aftesisfa fret afe cat He uy
Then once Indra came across somewhere, Brhaspati the Guru. Bowing
to him with folded hands Indra said thus. “Oh Guru! Look at me the
lord of gods who am sad and surrendered to you. I am seeing you after
a long time. Please have mercy on this disciple. 4,5
wisé tight: yrat: aetdfad fast qe fafa: wfedtste war qa: tae wet
Tears weteat caret Saga sqoy 1 Ueter caret carers feat at feeadifery 0
TRAUISE ARNT Gat seta Beene: | A at Saree Wave ereratshs YaTaST
ura at afer at amg addt aay ws He: Huet: eat Teas 7 Ug
Gant UIssx Agra Weal: CAUSE: | APSA: SALAT UA MET: Ararat:
THM: Garon sage Prenatal Sat YeraTat wars set ferareaha: 11 ge
UfaaHA SEM: UeaTa We: | UT: THUe fee arama: WR
qt art widaferqerat yfeodts waa
“Oh Lord! I cannot anymore bear such hardship. Even after my
repeated prayers, Brahma said thus—Oh Indra! Listen. This is not the
time to retaliate. Wait for the time. Without a proper time nothing can
be achieved’—After this innumerable Yugas have passed without a sign

mt ART, 498 Sri Tripurdrahasyam
of happiness. Look at me who am sullied, helpless, emaciated and totally
frightened. This thorny arbour has become my heaven and Nandana
garden and my assembly, Sudharma; the mosquitoes are the singing
gandharvas; the crows are the panegyrists, the birds are the bards; the
fire-flies are the group like Rambha; the stone slab is my bed; the base
of the bush is my pillow, the cry of the foxes is the sacred chant; cranes
and vultures are the members of the assembly; the dust from the earth
is my garment; the thorny branches of the trees shaken by the wind
are my fans. Such is my fortune indeed.” Saying thus Indra became
unconscious. 6 to 12
Wes AAA Uae Ft AA: 3
a graqfead Gaal Ye: Areva: | TATA ravens shea va:
soy catia ger areata Gate sag etenfer: Way AAA TAT: ey
ast fafa ta wef fayrersra: | yiter facet fangs aateior erst: 1 eG
waahr ware cHremrandtarch: | yoy asatrearentt carat weTaET tl ko
Seeing the plight of Indra who had gone unconscious, Brhaspati was
soon filled with compassion. Then consoling Indra, he said thus: “Oh Best
among gods! Listen. The wise are never sorrowful. They will be happy
in distress and balanced in prosperity. Broad-minded great people
will never be perturbed. Instead they will overcome grief through
discrimination and wait with courage for good days. Listen. I will tell
you the method of obtaining your results. 13 to 17
aren aher ete maar wdatsram aT aetabrtat yeperer ferafta: ui gel
frerrat citee afer Hart Safe! Sara: Yorasfr arse PTeHTA: Ml Vel
aditswotfadtag atatt vente prot arfet tants: HTT — Roll
“This demon is fearless by propitiating Lord Siva who has declared
that he cannot be killed by persons born out of the womb or even mind.
Other than these two kinds there is no one anywhere in this universe.
Also he is declared deathless either by gods or men. Hence surrender
to Devi Tripurasundari. Other than Her, there is no one who can protect
you.” 18 to 20

gqaen wed to cet Sayer aeTat STENT: WoT AAG: 11 BeII
Saying thus Brhaspati remembered Vayu who immediately appeared
and bowed to the Guru. 21
areearreraeIs a FUT ATed A aa: 1 et Adana: durorsnsfe wera: 11 211
wa veh fenfht: frat aitrarta: 1 viterar, qu waht wreremnparafie ny 23 1
ane cerorasetedt Fert aa Utes aret acenttfe, eeu
Then Brhaspati addressed him thus: “Oh Vayu! Listen. You are
always moving and you are the life of all and powerful. You carry quickly
along the sky path, Indra and all the gods including Agni to the Himalayan
peak and bring them back after their work unnoticed by the demons.
There they will by their effort obtain their wants.” 22 to 24
aifirgaran Frater gary wall AAA
ater feneegg viene: adatsm: WRU
ag ard tafarar us start qatar
ffarea austere fase anifery Well
fart acter faa te fa: safer
we fafa Sanfeaget west NVI
aq: wdorrgrt frypétarernredt: |
Ua CaM AL PTT, Weel
Agreeing to this, Vayu carried in a minute all the gods. Indra and
other gods congregated on the Himalayan peak. They sent Vayu to bring
the trinity gods. Then they decided their course of action to vanquish
Bhandasura and thought that there was no one other than Devi
Tripurasundari who can help them. Thus Brahma and other gods,
controlling their senses and breath meditated on Devi Tripurasundari
the supporter of the universe. They spent hundred years meditating on
Her. 25 to 28
aa tar wafer faqenitfaead | wera faqs, Taare: WN
FaMASa Went waReA_aya | AA AeNSAaawEN saat yeta Til Zo ll
sehen: frafawaren ant afetetats va!

a ARES 500 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Then the gods after deliberation propitiated Devi Tripurasundarj
through a great Yajiia with tantric rites. In that Yajfia Brahma himself
took the place of Brahma and Brhaspati was the chief priest. Visnu,
Siva and others were other priests in that Mahayaga which was replete
with Vedic chants and sacrificial material. 29, 30
ws=ateae afeafsrarantaartadt 13g
anraet farcreatt nerrectfand | stra yorars seer Yweateay werftaETT I 32
Wel wan Heard tay fguftaen mgt HrswentacrededtsaMT
On the concluding day Brhaspati meditating on the Transcendental
Devi offered the consummating offering into the fire representing
consciousness that was ablaze in the great altar. Then as the gods were
praising, Devi Tripurasundari manifested out of the core of that burning
sacrificial fire of consciousness. 31 to 33
guissgeat garat Sf Hus Water Wah: | aaa wares crt
dats Tastee: Vaasa free: | grargtfafroraren facestarttr afer 34 1
AaSTRTUT aahe YO wes Asal Apaletatedagageresta: ual
We Seyshesaenat Tat Ved aftar Tada a Garetat URN
afrreitqnm: wa yfeoat sae afer fear ye faafree: afar ad wa Facil
wasiteae: Wgethestfagatacar |
With the consummatory offering, the fire in the altar brightened
and its flame spread upto a distance of one yojana creating a sound as
if a mountain was shattering and as if a hundred thunderbolts had
struck simultaneously damaging the ears of the celestials. Then from
the core of the flame emerged a great effulgence equal to a myriad
lightnings striking simultaneously that blinded the gods. Blinded and
deafened by that brilliance and the sound, all the gods, excepting
Brhaspati, Brahma, Visnu and Siva fell unconscious on the ground. Then
from within that brilliance manifested Devi Tripurasundari. 34 to 38
TaUTVUg Seana ewe: 1 3gll
fagrenta faatargengaeet | fageenfaafaaqutasrgaret il xo
Devi Tripurasundari manifested with a bodily hue like a bunched

CRT AA: 501 Chapter 51
redness of the rising Sun; Her creeper-like body was shining like a
streak of lightning; Her face looked like full-moon and the blossomed
lotus in Her creeper-like shining body; 39, 40
atta eUrRgMan | ARTA ATAU uewen
She was shining with the red vermilion radiating out of Her dark
dense hair; The diamonds decorating Her hair resembled the bunch of
stars in the sky; 41
chiviiftraeataitratateen | frqrencifecntaryrantssmT xz
The parting line in Her tresses was like the tongue of Her long
snake like plait; Her hair yard was covered by the redness of the
vermilion; 42
farierrargeret water pacers = YB
Her forehead which is like an inverted half-moon was shining with
the musk mark; Her blossomed lotus face was crowded with curly locks
of hair resembling a swarm of bees; 43
qadtedardittcrasrtarn | aratentestateats sapreetarorr seu
Her pair of eyes were like the blue lilies in the pond of Her facial
beauty; Her glances were like the mystic chants giving birth to a myriad
cupids; 44
ahisterntferettiwasagge | UttatraraatragaatT ll Yul
Her side glances were beautiful producing myriad waves of milky
ocean; Her lovely nose was like the guardian of a bud of champaka
flower; 45
Helrers sapiaMicraRVSHUSe | aIPGAgtaMegarT — tl BEI
Her cheeks were shining like mirrors made out of rubies; Her
gem-set earstuds were like lotuses protruding in the river of Her side
glances; 46
WegIsTquearyans sateen | HUMANA: Mt YI I
The pearls in Her lotus-like earstuds resembled the swans; Her side

at FRR 502 Sri Tripurarahasyam
ES
glances were like the arrows shot out from the bow-like effulgence of
Her ear ornaments; 47
uedelfendinmeneteeesan | fanaa yals santarneeeee: xe y
Her lips resembling the ripe pomegranate seed were imparting
redness to Her teeth; Her bodily hue was like filaments of a blossomed
red lily; a
WAS ASTEAH CGH NAT | Aaeara amare TeTaT Nexen
Her jasmine bud-like teeth were sprouting behind the clean coral
(lips); Her lips were like the coral creeper in the milky ocean of Her
smile; 49
WeMftreercrgans saagqan are | AiraaHTHeTAAAAS ATS I Yo Ul
Her bright chin was like a handle to hold Her ruby like lotus face;
Her lotus like neck was beautiful with a gem necklace; 50
UU qUcecteH eee | Aforeae eet ee TNT W&
Her two lotus-calyx like breasts had blossomed out of the stalk of
Her gem-like hands; She was beautiful with the flower-bunch-like breasts
on Her ruby-creeper-like body; 51
qousmanitfatreittgacttenar | weferrahtaraercy are rteteat W 4H
Her breasts were like the geese hiding out of fear of Her facial
moonlight; Her breasts were like swans playing in the floods of the river
of Her smile; 52
Wqaccienfastentiaccracitted | aumareisraaretcarg eratrsat tl 4a
Her red palms were like the tender sprouts from the branches of
Her creeper like body; Her fingers were like the hibiscus buds at the
tip of Her tender palms; 53
afornpraqatiicaagagea | acaisqatctfipatatacrrg st Wail
Her four arms were shining with the goad, the noose, the bow and
the arrows; Her arms were beautiful with bangles, amulets, diamond
rings and blouse; 54

URIS A: 503 Chapter 51
FSTAYUONAS S AYA | TS SfrAGAPURSISOAPSACT 1 GY
Her creeper-like pearl necklace was like the stalk of Her lotus like
face; Her two breasts were like the lotus buds borne by the thin
creeper-like hair streak; 55
tons sfracerthernfatrens seentert | aritateatatrerastareraterat it 4g il
Her navel was like the basin for the creeper-like hair; the hair
creeper from Her navel was like moss from the navel pond; 56
QRS A aa | Seats percorarat af eraTETTETAT 4g
Her hips were covered with red silk garment; the existence of Her
waist was guessed by the supported upper body; 57
YRS TS SHISYHISA: TAGVAMA AUT | MfvrTHactSaMeySAVSAT
Her star-like girdle ornament was visible within Her garment covering
the subtle space like waist; Her thigh region was defeating the stem of
a ruby plantain tree; 58
RNMMIPETS SMG TYMSM | HUStpStanaqaawTas haar W4gn
Her beautiful shanks were like ruby quivers; Her foreleg was depicting
the grandeur of the tortoise shell; 59
nforgrerateriguitaretataen | freraasataraaarareng at Roll
The small bells in Her gem-set anklet was melodiously jingling; Her
lotus feet was granting grace to the blossomed lotus; 60
vergquafacaaiaa ism | Tara qaacedaada aa Wagn
Her lotus-feet were decorated with gem studded anklets; the
ambrosial flow from Her moon-like nails were stealing the scorch of the
supplicants; 61
Micitrarapes saaegat | Tara sorarcue eeCTaT Warn
Her pair of feet were like the family preceptor to the slow graceful
gait of the swan; Her feet were like the sprouts of the Mandara
(Kalpavrksa) which bestows the wants of the devotees. 62

MR AA, 504 Sri Tripurdrahasyam
wantadandt at Gear TaNeaetal | GUSad OTA Yat Wa eatfet at ary: Tce)
Seeing Her who had manifested thus, Brahma and others prostrated
before Her and said “Oh Devi! Be victorious.” 63
awa areata qa: wera at wm wsdeestaretartfinte: gyi
Tifarataeaycanive: | Tastqueagvarfiqeattge: eqn
aright ginrarcine rer: | TaaTarginteateaifeaqafarcary Ween
There Brhaspati after bowing many times to the Transcendental
Devi rose up and seeing Her, he was immersed in a ocean of joy. Keeping
his lotus like palms folded on his head, he was drenched in the flood
of tears flowing out of his lotus eyes. Overpowered by extreme devotion
he praised Devi Tripurasundari in a choked voice pleasing Her with his
poetic skill. 64 to 66
wa fanataerd ating a vier: afeentt vated arate ite: |
a fe vata adt a qantas afefe waft aer raaareet aft: = GI
“Oh Devi! I do not have the ability to describe your glorious deeds.
Whatever has been said by me is Your own. Hence there is no danger
to my position as the lord of speech. If I fail to praise You it would be
because of the absence of Your grace. 67
yew aka arate wuefreinitaadaaata |
aa $e 7 fe 8 ett areata waHerat ar attferaitars=at W gel
“Whatever I speak as the Guru of the gods, is Yourself. You are
the entire world consisting of differences like You and me. Just like
there is no difference between the sweet waves of milky ocean and
other bitter waves; there is no loss or gain for me praising You. 68
utes fafaand tat qeqiiqractaratearara ary |
afeatie qreanefirt forest weft a qe a: yarn neg
“The ignorant person takes the differences in the world as true just
like the image in a mirror that appears as existing. We consider the
manifestation which You are compassionately showing us, is as ever
illusory. 69

UHTSTAAS A: 505 Chapter 51
Gat want waht wa faerdatfedt qeahe: |
aa frafagifed ating grad wate faenchetfrearcarar Boll
“The ignorant person who is deluded by Your glorious deeds thinks
that the heaven of the gods is superior. To describe your infinite power
he propounds useless logic based on the visible duality. 70
fafaaoararentea arate wafaacracant ata aret ata
quit wreat waenet fast & froefe faqers: dfearet fe ga: RHI
“People waste their time debating with verbosity about the existence
and non-existence of this creation. Oh Universal Mother! I consider those
as really fortunate or blessed who ponder in their heart just for a moment
about Your aspect of Consciousness. 71
farafaraqarart wisang fragt fact crete
wa waa Get at afr: Reon: aquest fe sar aha Ho
“Oh Mother! Those Yogis who are devoid of sensory cravings who
see in the pure and calm mirror of their inner being Your aspect as
their own-self are really blessed and victorious having attained the
highest bliss. 72
ofa faraenret anaed faqyassarafa qeurar: wqfreterara: |
weq afett aaaed yy: wate uafacrae fe aritagen: Wogan
“Thus those, who for a long period ponder over Your form will
acquire a steady perception and reach a natural state and later find
Your form and glory in all external existence, are really the Yogis
deserving adoration. 73
aentt aft mergers aafse afteaaafereansst: War aaatshr
afreart fasararafe cary fare feat asafe arat aatsfer ox
“Oh Devi Lalita! Even with a little acquaintance with Your lotus
feet I have understood by describing and meditating on You, a very
negligible aspect of Your glory. But I have never understood Your totality.
Hence I am bowing at Your feet.” 74

at PERE, 506 Sri Tripurarahasyam
is Ee 8 EAM Sinn
fa qeasacye: wordt qusagia qorya fafrgar aft Weare 11 oy)
After praying to Devi thus, Brhaspati fell prostrate before Her. Then
Brahma and other gods also praised the Devi. 15
Wa wa wart wtiecaaeresiafane aafafrad |
wats sureaagea fara dfaeqararayNKAt TCA
“Oh Mother! You are the equanimous Intelligence creating, protecting
and destroying the universe. You are the Intelligence which pervades
and illumines the entire universe. You exist only as the excellent
Intelligence. 76
aqrataehvrage aretascatatat 31
fara qdeaeatfentedterat TCC
“Your skill and power in making the impossible occur within a being
as if in a mirror even after controlling external activities is amazingly
surpassing. 77
wt afarentaht qieran ultima!
wet ofaqrafatar fata wal, aftareata Ween
“Oh Supreme Devi! Though Your form is vast, by your great power
you have limited it and by creating differences like seeing and the seen
You are illuminating every body. 78
Ua wit watch offen uaa aI
waanfaattqyasaaontaa ahs Aaa, gl
“By witnessing Your many limited forms and contemplating on their
aspects of ignorance You shine again in Your absolute natural form.79
Tare sevt ufadaciteat saad caressa
qeat afeadtaadta teeahet tf are coll
“By virtue of freedom You are imagining Your vast sport within the
mirror of Your Self and seeing that You are always rejoicing. Oh Devi!
Salutations to You! 80

URIS TAS AM: 507 Chapter 51
aadcientatt a: Sat west wetter
aa cam wafta ueatt cere aah 2a: eeu
“Oh Mahe§&vari! That Lord of the world, Siva who is not different
from You and understands all this as Your sport sees it in the same
way as You do and rejoices. 81
qe BG ca faced ae yam a fe A Aa:
aera we weaferrant: we wer
“Your supreme visible manifestation is to bless the indigent who
are unable to comprehend the glory of Your subtle form. 82
git epg waacsset qatar!
grea wet farqaafig sa: wore eau
“We prostrate repeatedly to Your beautiful form which is red like
the saffron, which is bent forward by the weight of the huge breasts,
which is decorated with the digit of the moon, which is wielding the
goad, the arrow, the bow and the noose.” 83
weante were: witq: weafwets sr am we wea aca sheet FAT Nex It
WIsé Haaalel WaT Aaa a: | for atsfaefed qa: wetewed Gta: 24
waraiere ate asad far cat a1
Praising Her thus, Brahma and other gods prostrated at Her feet.
Then the Supreme Devi addressed them thus: “Oh Children! Rise
quickly. I have manifested like this ready to kill your foe. Oh Gods! Ask
for your wants. Oh Brhaspati! You also speak out your desire. I will
grant it to you.” 84, 85
fara aut tem: wredencaea: Wcgu
Hearing the words of the Devi, Brahma and other gods spoke thus:
sta sitet wrereears WareeryTaats ear: Il
End of the fifty-first chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurarahasyam.

fRrsreraats care:
Chapter 52
TW Siler yt Fenda sae: | MEdepar eat aferaqada: Wen
We ues wey wat tated! fader eM watery Wen
Wa: WY He Hse yaeaar ea: Wat freatasat wddtsmai wa: gn
we asa PI Be USAT
“Oh Sage Agastya! Listen to what was spoken by Brahma and others,
Brahma and others with reverence to Devi said thus: ‘You are again
ready to protect the world from danger. You should destroy the demons
who are our enemies. But please listen. How this demon Bhanda who
has by the blessings of Siva become deathless, will be killed by You?
How will our work be done? How will the demon be destroyed? 1 to 3
qed agg aa: at we yigst weil
WI Pa: Ua wt PEMAS ATE! Ase Araya wa asf Heaha
afagusaqgm whasnseaciterent | smfies area Fests TEAC GI
Hearing Brahma and others, Devi Sankari spoke thus: “Oh Brahma!
Do not have any doubt about the killing of the demon. I am not born
from the womb or even the mind of anyone. I am a supernatural woman
born out of the fire. I will kill the mighty demon employing a rare
unknown missile.’ 4 to 6
grad afeaaret wefartt yet: | aataramaye: wget arse: 1 9 tl
ta mai adaritent wath ug wpe qaqa wa: cl
Hearing the words of Devi Lalita, the trinity gods were free from
worry. Then Brhaspati with folded hands said thus: “Oh Devi! Let Indra
and others have a vision of Your Supreme Universal Motherly form by
which they would be sanctified.” 7,8
Pereanigreaa: wre at frgtett) soy sta yreeqer td vif aq Sl
mite sgmeret aisetdefe ay: 1 3 fe aren: aafyeceat wayata gol

fErSTeTTATS ATA: 509 Chapter 52
qa tsererifansagera: Wat stat at afirt daarstde wert ee
warn utd wa wayaG aay!
Hearing Brhaspati, Devi Tripurasundari said thus: ‘Oh Brhaspati!
Listen. Indra and others are incompetent to see My All-powerful form
which has not been seen by others. Ordinary beings can never see this
form of Mine. Because you (i.e., Trinity of Gods) are My devotees who
are constantly meditating on this form are shown this form which has
not been seen by others. Let Indra see My different limited form.’
aa qatsft age wear ai ye: Ween
vevidreocnra Uf at yenaate ate artes wren: wvareUy array 1 23
at wane a sitqectataar aa: 1 cyifent qet cafe we a aera: 1 evi
Fy Yfeoarl Tar YMNGEM WateT AT!
aah wat aa were ayaa, TC
Then Brhaspati requested the Devi many times to show Her form
to Indra. The Devi told Guru thus: ‘If Indra has to see this form of
Mine let him worship Me through the Sristkta method and later I will
surely show him My form.’ Saying thus the Devi by Her ambrosial
glances awakened the unconscious gods and disappeared, witnessed by
Brahma and others. 12 to 15
aafan: verge tar: wat Ged: | seat sifaqueen snfaate adt qari
2a: afedt qeun fagtoraten: | ceitqedtaas aferaraistatdt: 1 got
arrearnre ut fot ata ws TeMSSTaA AAT: Te TH AAT: Il Re Il
Then the gods who got consciousness heard from Brhaspati about
the manifestation of Devi Tripurasundari. Then Indra along with other
gods initiated by the Guru propitiated Devi Tripurasundari through the
Laksmi-sikta. Eleven months passed in such worship. 16 to 18
Feat tenye: grensmfaatery! qwsrgra daqd Wray wey: HN RRM
Ty teat wg: Yten fenafatts wind ueat wfeaqafestr afata: = — Il Roll
Waal atta wat aye ware! eafrafa crenaequerad Far i kel

at Re 510 Sri Tripurarahasyam
are Waa et aaa F areaha Asa Grats: VIET aerate
fed qa wratssy wet waiteoet Sa UTTER tT 1 23 1
ware yout fahren aerate sera yes Ta Tn ey 1
“In between Sukracarya the preceptor of the demons having known
the activities of the gods, completely informed Bhandasura and said thus:
‘Oh Lord of the demons! Listen. Your enemy Indra is propitiating Devi
Parasakti in the Himalayan Mountain with devotion. Pleased with his
worship She will quickly ruin you along with your children and relatives
just like a fire that will burn a heap of grass and wood. Hence try to
save yourself before getting destroyed. There is no other way out other
than conciliation when the enemy is protected by a strong one. So, to
escape peril, handover the Heaven and the earth along with the riches
and the retinue to Indra and rule only the Nether region and surrender
to the Universal Devi.’ Saying thus and accepting worship from him
Sukracarya went away to his desired place. 19 to 24
wo qs eet ahafeiarant: | wararara eeitsat Afar: Ta WT WA
Then the demon Bhandasura in his Sinyaka city secretly discussed
with his expert ministers. 25
UMISSMAM Abad Why: AAT TH! Hf AM Aaa: Wi aayara el
qusnigeial chfaca caepfaat Tar Text faye YA: YHA wat 1 Voll
gratia fread: We AaIsatarq ol Usadyreaaierated Ta: Ul RCI
“Ordered by the king the ministers expressed their individual views.
One of them suggested conciliation. Another one preferred sowing
dissensions. The third one recommended the path of bribery. Some others
were for attack. Thus there was great confusion in the assembly. The
famous Srutavarma, the son of Visukra, who was considered as equal
to Sukracarya, bowed to Bhandasura and said thus: ‘Oh king! Listen.
I will talk based on political science. 26 to 28
maqéetradt faite user! Gan qa waar fay whey!
afaqyaatt agt wig sa avatar) gfaqvaedt weq t Hod Maqui tl Zell
welt quisfaheentsapeqiegare: | uersfirraaan a wad carta: «= BRN

ferareTTATs ATA: 511 Chapter 52
ayrarrated Tart asa dere: | ae ahraafessr ward afad we az
Tega Ta TRE BANAT |
‘External appearance is naturally unsteady and defective. Hence the
reality of everything has to be known through intelligence. One who acts
thoughtlessly perishes like a moth in the fire. Prosperity follows him
who acts thoughtfully. A minister who is uselessly adamant, who lacks
clarity, who is hasty, who always agrees with the king and who is selfish
will surely ruin the kingdom and the king just like a leaky boat drowns
the passengers and the navigator. Therefore a king who cares for his
kingdom must abandon bad ministers. 29 to 32
squag asfrerents ade 3a
WER aT Sara afar GT Horas GAteat wearseatafe F yarn 3x ii
wea 4 fe fasta: qu afesara: | Tet faqat ure fern fafredt act ayn
qa yrafagent a aferafafaat eat qe aftsarat waenfata a:
wa fog 4 @q: eafafid qfefaerat sea asfrarenth fartate der
‘Please Listen. I will tell you about the future action. Oh King! You
obtained boon by pleasing Siva through penance which is in vain because
you have never thought of fear from women thinking them to be
insignificant and today we cannot take it for granted. In the past, the
mighty Mahisasura who conquered the three worlds was killed by a
woman. We have heard that in the past the demons Sumbha and
Nisumbha who were extremely powerful and who had a huge army were
killed in the war by Candika. Other than intelligence and valour, gender
has nothing to do with victory. I will tell you another fact that has
prevailed over a long time. 33 to 37
dearara:g at a: yaad aaa & aqard faeqabteatia aoc 8c Hl
43: qd a teaftqun efter aq! atta weaerfercfadar aware tT RII
sstrprsreantratat Fa AIS Aa!
FAMaISa Sa ASAT AAT FA, ¥oll
‘Visnu plucks out like the thorn in the road all the demons and
raksasas who become prosperous. We hear that the Supreme Devi,

st fag easy 512 Sri Tripurarahasyam
propitiated by Visnu who is the enemy of the demons, has manifested
to destroy you. She has manifested out of the fire in the sacrificial altar
and not from any womb or mind. You have not sought deathlessnesg
from the person who is born from other than the womb or the mind.
ararat war Us: waghaadt at: 1 FT aate A ated alas cermitar ven
Tengeantae gat 3 ufeerad wifeon wdacthicet crest a wR
aaa fant ad: mma warm aden yee fe versie: waar
HU Yet BSNS At TNT weitea: |
aa tsfaad wer, Oy Gat feranitay, Te 32
‘Oh Lord of the demons! Do not take it as trifle what has been said
by the venerable preceptor Sukra who is eminent among intellectuals.
Hence I think that the suggestion by our Guru is suitable. An intelligent
person should by all effort avoid peril. Might is best when there is no
fear. Only peace is the recourse during danger. A wise person should
use all his strength to prevent destruction of the root. Where is the
hope for fruits without the root? If the root is protected there would be
fruits. In the present context, Oh king, hear my thoughtful opinion.
Yeanten dyntat wares vepa YA: | WaT Wdatar Ve waa All BAM
wat qaferrnt ast qe gfe: |
fa asfafedt wat aise: at seq safe, W ¥gll
faqya weve 3 aaret a 3 fart
‘At this moment become peaceful by following the advice of the
Guru. Later you can do penance and get rid of the remaining fear and
again by your heroism gain control over the three worlds. This is my
opinion and I think that there is no other safe way. Hence act quickly
according to your wish after giving a thought to my opinion.’ 45, 46
qaataa: sat aust cerafada: NW viol
We t queda vat errr: | eENSTCae TT ERAT sell
“Hearing the words of Srutavarma, Bhanda the lord of the demons

fersrereats aa: 513 Chapter 52
criticised him in the assembly. He did not like the suggestion of
Srutavarma just like a person willing to die does not like medicine.
aeat welaret Set: ware quoter! See war wet qwasisfrqaray i veil
a waver Wariner Ae: SATA AT: | US aera yee at afr feet
diifaraterat areata ust Genagy ar fewer waa: on ue
fam aarafireon acfenfraaon: | faraufsararetat say at af: | GR
wadicettanreantia: YET: qyerataegat |
7 Garant Waa + yp: yet 4a
wa fart afe qe war sitet amfaefasifetree yaar: W&etl
afe fam qenentt arigea afe waar feret weqde: ara: 44H
shade quit tora fasnfa wadfts atta geet arsfe ater: yrgat wa: 1 4g
Wise afters teaperfaar faster warrantee, W&e tl
war ttetercractfitiara wéter: | qpyreieht fag: earectevtet feat: hue tt
aa at rafreasts ATTA: BAL AAT FT get warss aTfwATAH Ge tt
wendteat Fe ageat ar erat atreaf FT
At that time one demon intoxicated with arrogance addressed the
king thus: “Oh Lord of the demons! Listen to my words that will delight
you. Frightened young boys should not be allowed to counsel. This young
boy does not at all know about your strength. He is frightened by the
words of the scared brahmin Sukracarya. What can a brahmin understand
about the war of a king? Brahmins might know about sacrificial rites;
they might be experts in vedic texts; they might know the methods of
invoking, but how can they know about war? (49 to 52) They might
know the sharpness of their studies; they may be adepts to handle kuga
grass and the sacrificial wood, but they are ignorant about the sharp
sword and the arrows (53). If the brahmins can win a war by chanting
mantras then really elephants will urinate being afraid of dogs that are
village lions (54). If the brahmins can show their strength and fight a
war then even jackals can tear the temple of an elephant. (55). Oh king!
Rise up. This is not the time for taking rest. An enemy, man or woman
Should not be ignored (56). Alas! Today if a woman can conquer you

Rt REST 514 Sri Tripurdrahasyam
EE ee
who can uproot the Meru mountain, who can scorch the three worlds
by the heat of valour, then the petals of the blue lily can split the
mountain and a massive iron mountain can be shattered by sacrificial
grass (57, 58). Or else, Oh king! You stay back enjoying royal pleasures
and order me your servant. I will quickly capture Her and Brahma and
others or even kill them and place them before you’ (59).
ged tered west user: N Rot
weer sqaantot we cHretayi Wa: | ace fee qaaraifata stdtsfa yer gen
Farereaet afasardt afeaste ar a: ferat qgaratfata stat agar: ee
mete tes arias aeons |
fergut aeargyt wen afaut ATT, Wat
donate datfradaracntyret Ger!
sae wifae: werent tary fafefaqy Tra
ailfencagiqer: ytfaargedat: aa yreeqar tarfeaget aqafeee: i aul
Hearing the words of the demon, the happy Bhandasura who was
facing destruction laughed and said to Srutavarma thus: ‘My child! Why
are you uselessly afraid even about the news of the war? A eunuch who
is afraid of war with a woman was never born or will never be born in
our clan. You are yet a lad who is fit to be chatting with women. Fie
upon me who made you a minister who can by his mean thunderboltlike speech shatter the courage of even strong persons and spoil the
deliberation.’ Saying thus Bhandasura with a raised sword followed by
myriad armed demons marched to the place where Indra and other gods
were worshipping Devi Tripurasundari. 60 to 65
and susertyt seat yreRyGT: YT: |
serrata tayiqed: unit dary: TA
Hearing the arrival of Bhandasura, Indra and other gods who were
extremely frightened, prayed loudly to Devi saying ‘Please Protect’. 66
vitary faferer fager wre farat aqévi
Tres waremnfats wt ta tar AO BAT, nao
“Seeing the frightened gods, Devi Tripurasundari said to the

fgvarerersats aa: 515 Chapter 62
fourteenth Nitya Devi thus: ‘Oh Jvalamalini Go and quickly save the
seared gods.’ 67
arate wat dear srarcancfgaenr: |
ware ary ettated: varerarfetrenr fear nae
“Thus ordered by Sri Tripurasundari, the auspicious Jvalamélini
prevented the demons who torture the gods by surrounding the place
with high flames. 68
Gear warergt Set wear erenfrardeqary
wary Zary Uetor wuster: yet nagn
“Seeing that place surrounded by flames and thinking that the gods
were destroyed by the conflagration, Bhanddsura happily returned. 69
tag teat sear atereet ger fare afar forarf ware vo 11
aftrpos gaara: wheat qq: yaaa steps gett quiighera ATT i wei
faferet eryenraret YeptarquteyA: |
“The gods, hearing the great uproar among the army of the demons,
were frightened and deciding to die, cut off their limbs and offered them
to the fire in the altar to please the Devi. After offering all the limbs
they desired to offer their entire body as a consummatory oblation and
whispered mantras. 70, 71
aerator Page waacarerreaor Worn
qreveratardtatscatferaen | Wagseaere: GUSMAaeAT: = WB HI
ware arerdartta ager equ: AU: | varerved wereet aetabecerafing 11 ox ti
wi wa waqehargdvsaam: | sahara yeaqergquqet wee th ul
“At that time, Devi Tripurasundari intent on protecting Her devotees
manifested effulgent like a myriad lightnings from the core of the altar.
A very loud crackling sound was heard from the centre of the altar. The
flame increased excessively. The gods saw in the middle of that flame,
the Devi who was beautiful in all respects. With great joy they shouted
slogans of victory and prostrated before Her. Then Indra and other gods
rose up and chanted prayers to Maheévari. 72 to 75

MR ARS 516 Sri Tripurarahasyam
anerygenfawaren Prastaety | qraferqetet Age gest a WoRL
: Neen
ud dasa fae dearrgwedsh: | Tretferarertecracht afer: Ween
“Then Brahma, Visnu, Siva, the sages and the seers arrived there,
Flowers showered from the sky amidst the sound of kettle-drums.
A fragrant breeze was blowing slowly and soothingly. Brahma and others
worshipped Her as stipulated. The Devi was pleased by many services
like garlands, foods, liquor, meat, songs, dance, instrumental music and
festival. 76 to 79
sft stirs wereraud farses ara: 11
End of the fifty-second chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurarahasyam.

FAT SrgTaats care:
Chapter 53
aa VTS eat Gear at tatty fanqquearyge tem: deataa ne
Then seeing the Supreme Devi, Indra and others requested Brahma
and others that the Devi should be provided with a place to stay. 1
FAISMaa FATE Weta! worer wrtarangregyy wets uu
witaft waka eartfery! seat werat afaet wvanreat weet 3
ad quran fret aeparatecad: | wer adhe & cite waaay i x 1
Ua vrnteat dar frac fraaera! wenvsdd aha ara wer: on GH
west titer fata fart arudfar
“Oh Agastya! After hearing the gods, listen to what Brahmé and
others after bowing requested the Universal Empress. ‘Oh Parameévari!
Indra and others desire Your presence here by which they can see You
everyday. By Your grace, we the lords of the tendencies (Sattva, Raja
and Tamas) can see Your lotus feet by reaching Your abode. But Indra
and others subjected to the conditions of creation cannot penetrate the
Universe and see You. They however long to see You. Hence create an
abode here itself and stay here.’ 2 to 5
wifaeredt wee: fare west wan
weg fagadtatia ant yt seacaattant aa cite wee Tar won
aati forsatraamatenteam artist uft wah ayes mafia i ci
Thus requested by Brahma and others, Devi Tripurasundari stayed
in the auspicious city constructed by Visvakarma atop the Meru peak
along with Her retinue in the same way as in Her original abode. Then
the universal Mother as requested by them fashioned Kamesvara from
Her half body and wedded Him and stayed with Him. 6 to 8
Fe waremfed frera ucema: | ues faaaget wet wracatq: et
wate cated gored fe aqui sige far weet @ afery safe aT eT

at ARES, 518 Sri Tripurarahasyam
sahara faatgter: at 7 TTI wrrarart fer wet eaten aigyry uN
aanstt yeaa: sitqeafatien aq1 safer ar faye weats wacfiaesy Hee
faart aitget wer Gert anit eet fae fer oreret wae Teta aes
vere aa freer qui He war
Hearing the narration from Hayagriva, Agastya keen on knowing
the glory of the Supreme Devi inquired again thus: ‘Oh Compassionate
Hayagriva! Where is that city wherein stays the Transcendental Devi?
How does it look? How vast is it? How did the universal sculptor get
to know about it which is unapproachable by Indra and others? What
is its design? Did not Devi Tripurasundari who was worshipped through
the method of Sri-Sakta by Indra and others, bless them? What is that
method? What is that mantra? What is its greatness? Oh Hayagriva!
Tell all this to me who is your disciple and devotee and bless me.’
set wealyqgqad: @ gare afar: WRI
went ated fe tegen frame w efit: |
“The great sage Hayagriva who was thus inquired, thought it to be
appropriate and narrated with joy thus: 14
TW Pras aan aferrerga wa Waal
AWEsRIMA UME Yat ai aaqad wide aatsfa a wd RA
THMAANAE SEAT GPAT | UteT cAUT afer Aaaeatact YT W geil
yorafay waat fea: arent waqi fageereufaney gota wat Tae tl Rell
‘Oh Agastya! You have devotion and faith. I will answer you. This
knowledge should never be disclosed to him who has no belief and
devotion and who is perfidious. You are blessed on this earth because
you are very much enthusiastic to listen to Her story. Your interest is
not a result of small merit. Devotion towards gods with tendencies is
quite common. But devotion to the feet of Devi Tripura is rather rare.
wa eaters art wae! frafrwranfeafereg ara weather Mt 88
miner fewest wer strete qe wer seqataan aercntfefa:

fora: wren get afe wafer yret-uafad
aed tat TU Hee: ahaqait
aaeamnrent eftefattenta facta
wor wig at Hanagva: wate
Only if conjoint with Sakti, would Siva
become capable of creating the universe.
Otherwise the God is unable to even
stir. While so, how can one who has
acquired no merit be able to bow to or
even praise Thee, who are adored even
by Visnu, Siva and Brahma?
Saundaryalahari, Stanza 1

OSTA AA: 519 Chapter 53
‘The birth in which a person attains devotion to Devi Tripurasundari
will be his final birth. Devotion towards Siva, Visnu and others is
considered as the beginning of the path. After gradually worshipping
Visnu and others, a person will get into the worship of the Sacred Feet
of the Devi and get completely released. Other than this method one
cannot attain liberation even after myriads of Yugas. 19, 20
aatauta aaah deraet vee fel cites Agate ASAT: 1 BVI
Wen wearetar daret ger: wand oft aye eaafeweorat unt fenfat az
qaset gitar giants! urgursmntaae ferrta what Tea
TaN TUR AraaT Shel A aeees Va Ufsaeada a Wil
acest cifmemn gan dfaat: Bey qerivmtes gar eeg a fr:
‘Regarding this I will tell you the reason so that you will have no
doubt. In this world an emperor will have a graded attachment towards
his people, like important, average and least important. These persons
if pleased will grant higher positions to their juniors. Oh Agastya! It is
like this. If the gatekeeper is pleased there will be no problem for entry.
Similarly if the one in charge of the courtyard is pleased, further entry
can be had. Thus let there be no doubt in the well-known fact that
Brahma and others born out of the tendencies are the worshippers of
Devi Tripurasundari. Though in reality there is no difference between
_ Devi and all, from the worldly angle differences like important, subordinate
and so on exist just like the importance to the head in a human body.
we WRTATaT WA Urea setae! Ua ART ARTATAT aranet a: tl
STO wetera TTe faassen! Te fra aa cay Tt aAAT I RO Ul
ae a fagiteen wre afar wad) cad a wae teri HAT RCI
‘Oh Brahmin! You are very fortunate in having devotion to Devi
Tripura which is the result of good association. Your wealth and your
penance are really wonderful. Listen. I will tell you the reason for your
devotion to Devi Tripurasundari. I will tell you how the royal girl
Lopamudra who is your dear wife while she was in her father’s house
long ago acquired devotion towards the lotus feet of Devi. No one ee
about this. 26 to

at ARS, 520 Sri Tripurarahasyam
CE i a
fquqerfeng wrnfetrenstien aetarnt wet war wdearra: 1 291
mreated yafam figdarnraon figgeatareen: st feat Tar 11 301
Trent cat aferat wanrraarat! Us farsa waa wate To ae
Wie wt wad ator ares! aa asat ada: wea ae
eat ast ater aq waa! cea sists at fret argayEUAT
wqetaatita aes Wate! faen select Sore TATA AT Bega av
TET: UAATATATT Ta ATATRT: |
‘The prominent Sakti of Devi Tripurasundari is known as Bhagamalini.
The king was always engrossed in Her worship. The pure-minded
Lopamudra right from her young age, was engaged in the service of her
father and was exposed to the procedures of the worship of Devi. While
the king was taking care of the kingdom, Lopamudra worshipped the
Devi. Thus after a long period of devoted and contemplated worship, Devi
was pleased with her and prompted her to seek a boon. Lopamudra sought
the service of the lotus feet of the universally adored Devi. Pleased with
her, the Devi initiated her into the auspicious mantra of Sri Tripura.
Lopamudra picked up that Vidya which was like a diamond immersed in
the ocean of vocabulary. Then by the grace of that mantra she came to
be known as its seer and the mantra was termed by her name. Because
of your association with her as her husband, you are also devoted to
Devi Tripura.’ 29 to 34
sft great Grave: usa farataecy, Wall
Waa: aaa eit stared!
“Agastya, hearing the vast glory of his wife was happy and adored
her who was devoted to the Sacred feet of the Devi. 35
TAMA SAAS TA Wa: PTAA WU 3all
TT t draene wevitge daa: 1 sigan feat age wat BU
Taare asada a fadaaafiredt wdashrgmfary = Rell
Then Hayagriva pleased with Agastya said thus: ‘Oh Agastya! Listen
with concentration. I will tell you the extremely sacred procedure of
Sri Sikta about which you had inquired. This should not be disclosed

farTerereats ara: 521 Chapter 53
to a non-devotee and also to him who is devoted to another deity. Just
like the Sri Vidya mantra, this should be secretly guarded. 36 to 38
siqad weyrd cafe acaeaq ye fare yqe weer: wee Bel
arisstret wt Viet fayet fase: | dara ctenge waSTAMTAT | ¥o MI
arofaen aeoradartentagtt: | waa Saree ator faq wet uewen
‘Sri Sikta with its origin in the Veda has sixteen mantras (Rks).
In the past it was sighted by Laksmi and drawn out of the ocean of
Veda. By worshipping the Transcendental Sakti with it Laksmi became
the universal Mother and universally worshipped. Propitiated for twenty
hundred million years [one Arbuda = one hundred million years] the
pleased Supreme Tripurasundari offered a boon to Laksmi. 39 to 41
wa ad UT Mss aa: We Tota at war faa faery: uftarert un eH
afer a4 dafavitte fated: 1 adt & Frade wa aréfe anf sau
ae aed fayette ereat wderseeT
arate wat a ad seth sera, Uwe
‘Laksmi asked for being totally absorbed into Devi Tripura. Then
the Supreme Devi said thus: “My child! Without you, Visnu will not be
able to protect the world. Without protection the world will perish. This
would mean the flouting of the laws of My creation. At present you will
not be liberated. But I will always bear your appellation in My mantras
and retain your form. Listen. I will tell you about this. 42 to 44
stfadceareran stat t at wae sitach A adeach site: ITT HA:
sitqertaqart fae stitsyt waa vereteitead Gare waerereaa afer
wo ugatl went ost mreafe dfeara sera first cite canst firt wat
qe ania at waded gfaeraa: 1 aarsenfe quer eat wertefir fagtet:
“T will be known as Srividya; My abode will be Sripura; My mystic
diagram will be Sricakra; the mode of My worship will be Srikarma; the
mantra will be Sri Sakta; My Srividya mantra will have sixteen letters;
I will be known as Mahalaksmi who is one with you. You will stay near
me in four forms and receive worship. Whatever is dear to you in this
universe will be dear to me also. You will be worshipped by devotees

at ARES 522 Sri Tripurarahasyam
as per rituals on Fridays. I will also be worshipped by devotees Specially
on Fridays. 45 to 48
aa qaraad: gfe grea: | gatsfe fafadset: waar afseadar yey
afafrent a cferddrard: wert Ta: | Udenramer wea at yeatfesastt ary
frat Afafres ered qosaas onfa 21 casitgqedt steer tear crafaet we
wpeadaeret: Hel Aa We TAL Yoseat Saet at Yat t a: wa wer
wensfact ad got wager waren faensft erearatrafacate we fir 43 1
“Pleased with worship adopting Sri Sakta mantras and oblations of
different articles, I will grant the desires. I will grant all desires to him
who bathes My mystic diagram (Yantra) or My idol with sweet milk and
fruit juices. One should recite Sri Sukta during daily worship and on
special days and so on while bathing the Devi. Even by one recitation
Laksmi will permanently stay in his house. The one who is unable to
worship, if he recites the Sri Sukta it would equal a complete worship
and I will be pleased and he would because of contact with your mantra
obtain my fond Srividya 49 to 53
aé frenfrent angst 8 ade got aa afer versitatsyrat yx
“I am the fifteen lettered mantra. This will attain completeness
when joined with your most auspicious seed letter (i ) and becomes the
great Sodasaksari mantra. 54
TAY YAS WA, FSTMAL UST A YS AAS Haass Tat FAT
qaasaheur parse wattst aft ara gohear wifseansé aefatie: wrerenre, fg:
asso ties eee sata aad tors a asa val
gaa diset wer wag: cca: | sft car at wet Tard fae wT Wael
We catnat Tar: Wretacuetaa | sige fect a taaqar: Has7 I 4s
aay wea: salferfety a
“By reciting the Sri Sukta mantras during worship, that worship
will be a great worship and I will be pleased quickly. I am hidden in
the Sukta as its meaning. My seed letter is also hidden in it. Requested
by the seers My complete form will be visible through fire who is MY

faTSreraats ATA: 523 Chapter 53
father. No other Sukta in this world is as dear as your Sri Sakta. You
are Me and I am you. There is no difference between us. Anyone who
sees a difference will meet with great danger.” Devi Tripurasundari
granting thus the boon to Laksmi immediately vanished into the sky.
“Oh Agastya! I have narrated to you the greatness of Sri Sakta
which should not be told to non-devotees, fraudulents and faithless
persons. 55 to 59
we set steer ad citearat yoy Il Goll
wer sare waa: MEAT! Bar Ar Ucar Sat onfsrar fairer: ge
yrnrdii aytare feafe apfate seas agtaare deat oftenfereanrftutt 62 1
“Next I will tell you about the extraordinary legend about Sripura,
hearing which one will get rid of all sins. Oh Agastya! When the Supreme
Devi was requested by Brahma to stay in a place where Indra and others
can see Her, the Devi who assumes forms for sport had consented.
Wee Wes wetad sreancafafacer: sitqcer fafafiat azn
fagennt terssqa: wore uftaTTER! aTaR war at Tat spa fer gy
fer wart fernrent ferns far fart fer
Urt vie stay faaretsé Fyre aa Wau
“Then Brahma called the divine sculptor Tvasta and ordered him
to construct the Sripura for the Devi on the peaks of the tall Meru
mountain. Ordered thus Visvakarma bowed to Brahma and said: ‘Oh Lord!
I have no idea of such a city. What are its dimensions? What is its
design? Of what is it made? How is it situated? Please tell me all this
and then I will construct it.’ 63 to 65
wa wre wire uy fast ga stg wat a deat weft var aR II
wuss went waar: Up) Tage faqrereuferararetaAT | G9 tl
arate: quate wiferranctat: | Tet Wea WERT AaqeeMTa: tl Ge II
w sitfaqueen: yt qe wrepa! Brat war aanitedt cadet yfrerta: 11 Ge Hl
wiet wren artegeifrny! sar wrefacrert frrea: $y Not

ot faye Tey 524 Sri Tripurarahasyam
“Then Brahma told Visvakarma to listen. ‘I will tell you about the
dimensions, location and form of the Sripura very clearly. Listen with
patience. There is a wonderful golden mountain called Sumeru. At its
top there is a region of four hundred Yojanas. [One Yojana is eight or
nine miles). You have to build the city of Devi Tripurasundari according
to architectural rules for the benefit of the world after hearing from me,
It should be attractive and beautiful with many ramparts representing
a replica of the universe that I am going to explain.’
sft street wrererars farsrermts ara:
End of the fifty-third chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurarahasyam.

COR IME EINES ICE
Chapter 54
aaedemt ween afe:fee: | weitsaadeare: Gafargsirepan gi
qaouqyianqeatdtarqen: | wer wet wforgta: werfeeraredte: wu
aramt atfesrtfaegatstater: | aeagueattaratataar afta: weft nan
aa fed ot wer: adie! asi ugeiadtatamghegay
maha Ae cieannahead: | agra: wae: ayseaferieate: 4
WAEATAM aarti wane: | aqalcgat are uftaor fercfare: Ta
‘Beyond many myriads of universes, lies the ocean of nectar which
is infinitely huge with dancing tides as high as the Sumeru mountain.
In the centre of that ocean is the attractive island of the gems that is
driving away by its effulgence the array of darkness and which is spread
over hundred crore Yojanas. It has many forests of Kalpaka trees that
are wonderful. In that island is the city of Devi Tripurasundari containing
all kinds of diamonds and spread over four lakhs of Yojanas. Of the
same dimension is the strong Iron square fort which illuminates the
directions. The iron fort is four thousand Yojanas wide with ramparts,
main gates in the four directions and trench all around. 1 to 6
Text: Uaaeeared: fea: | Wee: caiefad: wratartshrarge: tt 9 1
Wet HeTqaareMUTgas Seer | eeTataraferaitotartt raters wen
weratfaraivingecranncra: | fear qeearaars daaatedfa nen
aaaqaRnNya anaapae | ares sala SHANTI l Ro ll
smafaatad wgraoratad | weatetereragaad yeitirt Weel
Werat elena: careitafwtare: | faqrrarredamreatararrdy: nee
areTager sat feat Hews Yoee aewauttanta: Sea: wat fea: it 93 1
‘In the interior of the iron fort at a distance of seven thousand
Yojanas lies the bronze shining fort. Between the iron and the bronze
forts there are hundreds of Kalpaka trees, hundreds of wells each ten
yojanas wide, lotus ponds each hundred yojanas wide, the flooring is

at ERKS Tey 526 Si Tripurarahasyam
made up of equal proportion of iron and bronze; There are many kinds
of birds and animals; in the eight directions there are eight bronze
houses situated on lotus-shaped platforms and each house has many
paintings and five enclosures and hundred yojanas high and beautiful,
In those eight houses is seated on a high throne Mahakala assuming
eight forms and embraced by Kali and attended by a large number of
servants and filled with pomp acquired by serving the feet of Devi
Tripura. 7 to 13
ST: SHAMAN, WRT STAG RA: | Wren Te RATER Perret UTT SUT: Ween
WrenmMeraniturihperary: | feted: Hie aaa saat: gait
tent Wetay Heaqaatda Jey Wad Ay aad: Yast: uel
nemearterat aan: wise! dad: wate: ated Fafa gon
area graf arfien: uferitya: | dtenticta fagrar fayta: dread care ee Ul
‘In the interior of the bronze fort, at a distance of seven thousand
yojanas is situated the copper fort, bright like the rising Sun and has
the same number of gates, wells and lotus shaped dwellings. The ground
between the bronze and the copper forts is made of bronze and copper
and has the Kalpaka garden wherein exists the lovely spring season
served by the gaktis Madhu and Madhava worshipping the Devi. The
spring season shines there with its attendants. The dimension of the
fort, the gates, wells are as described earlier. Anything special will be
told as it comes up. 14 to 18
aa dha: ae: waraaatisa: | iter: died: yengfareratga: 1 ell
‘Then deep inside is the lead fort with the garden called as
Santanavana wherein exists the summer season associated with Sukra
and Suci saktis. 19
anperat aut etacraes: | wearer afer virsa Roll
‘Next is the brass fort with sandal-tree garden called as
Haricandanavatika where shines the rainy season along with Nabha and
Nabhasya Saktis. 20

AY TSITTATS ATT: 527 Chapter 54
upetena: ae: Wenaanfosa: | yrqgitatateat yrfereat ax watt Wee
‘Next is the paficaloha fort (an alloy of five metals) with the Mandara
garden where shines the autumnal season with its Saktis Asvayuja
Laksmi and Kartika Laksmi. 21
aat waar & aftercare: | weenie eaaeT Tt WIM
‘Next is the silver fort with the Parijata garden where shines the
winter season with its Saktis Saha and Sahasya. 22
arfaraearen arrays: | aerated aa eres Haq agTL Hen
qyagieagt crentatddqe ahavscrancferngqratyeny Ween
aa a afauicet after created | agtrargen sat mragtafafesga4r eH
yearn varren areat yufteren gabaenr Atorauppen aAgewTe eayfeear ti
yamen wayat ean waa at faut war!
strgen afsars=n aetanefesp fea: neon
Wagener aatfefa: aftarttari
‘Next is gold fort shining like hundred rising Suns, with the Kadamba
garden filled with the intoxicating sweet fragrance of liquor, with the
music and dance of the bees, beautiful with sweet voices of the group
of parrots. Here is the abode of the most enchanting Mantrini Devi
well-known as the Sangitamatrka and Matangi. Eight deities called Suka
Syamala, Sarika Syamala, Hasantika, Laghu Syamala, Raja Syamala,
Mantrini, Srimatrka and Srimatrkapriya are situated in the eight
directions, all being served by myriads of Matangakanyas. 23 to 27
aa am: yer: yatetatrent: Wren
fea: fradata: aa carafe at wm
‘In the next, Pushparaga gem fort which is situated in the same
way as described earlier, stays the Lord of the Siddhas who is surrounded
by siddhas and who is meditating on the transcendental Devi. 28
WeRTMa anders tatyrars eur: HI
ununfagraan sata qadtyar: |

a FRE, 528 Sri Tripurarahasyam
‘Further inside is the ruby fort shining red like the edge of a flame,
where the Caranas who are devoted to Devi Tripurasundari stay with
their consorts. 29
aet maenfirsreaa daar: W30N
carerianfeut tot ACAI) HUET ATTA SHLAA «th a
asatfedrannt aeegara: | gfagrenticagange: dafaar wer Wart
Tenant araait gfe |
‘In the next Gomedaka gem fort stays Kalasankarsini along with
Bhairavas surrounded by host of Vatukas. She is fearsome, dark hued
and holds a sword. She is always served by eight crores of Bhairavas,
eight Natha Bhairavas, thirty-two crores of Vatukas. She is magnificent
by always meditating on the lotus feet of Devi Mahatripurasundari.
aa aaa: eres sare feerat TED
uftarasire qafrenaert) deat waeasrarat ufsafet Wasi
wa saat eat aay ya! Gaede afEgisa TL
‘Next is the diamond fort which is surrounded like a trench by the
river Vajra whose banks are shining with gomeda and diamonds and
whose destination is the milky ocean. Devi Vajresvari wearing diamond
ornaments stays in that fort happy to give diamonds and worshipped by
Indra and others. 33 to 35
aqdarererarteas arm fet: gat: | Peat eae: WTTETET tt 34
‘Next is the Vaidhirya gem fort wherein the serpents, the children
of Diti are constantly meditating on the lotus feet of Devi Tripurasundari.
aastteraret ae, aa Heat: warfare: |
yataretenean frauen fey at ATT geil
‘Next is the Sapphire fort wherein dwell human beings (like king
Mandhatr). Next inside is the pearl fort, the lords of the directions stay
respectively. 37

AY TST TATS ATA: 529 Chapter 54
aa We: Weed: Ueaatge: | Megara eT: uRen
aa stefosdt eat cart erefarrqar aunfasary aus ata yafeerari 3¢ 11
Wgaalfrararanrre erate |
‘The next emerald fort has a garden of golden creepers and is filled
with the fragrance of the copious liquor dripping from the palmyra trees.
Surrounded by these stays the Devi Dandini who is immersed in the
ecstasy of consuming liquor and who appears in the dream of the criminals
and suitably punishes them. 38, 39
at fagrare: earguraarat fer: ¥oll
arafeaqhataattitis warqa: |
‘Next inside is the coral fort wherein stay many sages, siddhas and
yogis. 40
Tapa anenitstretar: yA: uwen
aa fam: undarfeataaifnfarrae |
‘Next is the luminous and auspicious fort made of nine types of
diamonds where shines Visnu attended by his servants. 41
aatseptatetanat ants ferargr: Wsznt
fora: weedtereoserndt frees: |
‘In the next extremely effulgent fort made of multitude of diamonds
stays the three-eyed Siva attended by the Pramatha servants. 42
aat Waa: Aetseursuraresta: neve
wrelsyaant tar afta: afters sepfa: | wperetantot sigt wenqa: fear it
4: anus: ait: ard: glacier area zacereactenrat yferersat it wt I
Wares aareiar ant wadtearhont | sdwarcitreayifeate: aftartar i wa
afrsarat faa afsa aarcate eater!
‘Next is the Mind fort red like the rising Sun wherein is the trenchlike Nectarian. pond covering one third of the space. This beautiful well
is full of blossomed lotuses surrounded by swans, ducks, ruddy geese
and cranes. In the middle of the pond shines a boat bedecked with nine

at faesay, 530 Sri Tripurarahasyam
types of diamonds, which carries Devi Tara sitting in the lotus posture.
She who ferries across the host of devotees is accompanied by many
Saktis seated in gem-set boats. Without the permission of Devi Dandini,
she does not take anyone at any time across the pond. 43 to 46
aa afer: aret fayesraferraq, N von
aracalftent aa Waracrayiean aarsyaght afirdearr vifeafedar xen
qr wearamieuftarn! aati faarsytgrean tag frat war vey
A aattaiftent ursytaratfectaray|
‘Next is the fort of Intelligence shining pure like a moon. Here the
Ananda pond (well) is beautiful similar to the Amrta well described
above. In that, accompanied by Saktis, stays in a boat Devi Amrteshi
who revels in the joy of drinking liquor. Without the permission of the
Devi Amrtesi no one can drink from the Ananda well and cross the well
which is protected by her. 47 to 49
HERAT: YATES Sele: Hl Goll
trettendterererextaifientstt a faa aracaaettsersitren Wael
aa thane @at qreqreet weet) Tatar aa tae writer ARTA GR
Wher aeerreaatt arenrardaad aba at avatar sera tl 48 Il
‘The next fort representing the ego is dark blue in colour like the
blue clouds and the pond in it called the Vimaréa carries the cool placid
fluid of consciousness. In that in a boat stays the Great Devi Kurukulla.
Without her permission no one can get even a drop of fluid from that
pond. By drinking a drop of that fluid one will get rid of the grief from
ignorance and will see clearly the reality (truth). 50 to 53
aa qatar: aret: Wenrerfrene: fear: | aarat aurea: Gat werafawt it 4 I
mntvstants tfafasternenta: | ata: qaaqereedert aga: Waal
‘Next is the fort which is the embodiment of Sun and is like a mass
of effulgence wherein stays the Sun-god on a lotus accompanied by twelve
forms of Suns viz., Martandabhairava and others and is praised by
devotees resembling the Sun. 54, 55

A TST ATA: 531 Chapter 54
ad: PIPIQISSAUT: calfeeaeare: | ax ata: feat won feetera qaigfa:
‘Next is the Moon fort that is brilliant like a myriad moons, wherein
stays Moon the king spreading his ambrosial rays all around. 56
qext I Fqrareitserafatatia: | atgqererntiraratatiat sari: 1 yo 1
ane after ee grTadya | aa algqedaadd eran Ween
acd: dftadt ten tien afinferd: way srmaticaraticfastferatet i ue i
Femi wet sifaqueeayrar: |
‘Next is the most wonderful and attractive fort called Srngira made
out of bunches of Kaustubha gems wherein is a trench filled with pure
amorous fluid. There in a boat called Srngdra bedecked with Kaustubha
gems stays Manmatha in union with his dear wife Rati and he who is
the exponent among the devotees of Devi Sri Tripurasundari is rejoicing
being served by a myriad loving cupids. 57 to 59
AM F AeA AST, Roll
woeaat fat aver: varfor ae: | aaftraranfe urerdtaberst water
‘Further inside is the great lotus garden filled with fragrance. Among
them is a raised lotus garden in which the stalks, petals filaments and
the pericarps of the lotuses are extremely long. I will tell you about
Weeasas SAT: SAVST Teafeta: | fayrateari y watssara: wentfra:
fagrisrdtatfin warfir arergitqa! ats wsey Saco a chat RH
wafirent ataagifarann: dwestfrar: | ax YET: Utorret: vtesygfiat: feat:
Te stfaqueeraeantrargey! faamafindenstatad faafafry aH
“Oh Agastya! The stalks of those lotuses are thousand yojanas long
and two miles thick; the petals are twenty yojanas broad and thirty
yojanas long; the filaments are fifteen yojanas long, the pericarps are
ten yojanas big. There the bees which are like gems resemble the peaks
of mountains. Inside this lotus garden is situated the most effulgent and
most wonderful dwelling of Devi Sri Tripurasundari made of the choicest
Cintamani gems. 62 to 65

at ey, 532 Sri Tripurdrahasyam
ss aye
agaitgd aa froranqeyaq afeqferanssant agereanrenge: een
“The Cintamani dwelling has four doors; it has a beautiful base; its
round supporting pillar in the form of fire embodies the aspects of fire,
ahem weet faeatse wqacti aa quieres wat ere gon
“the support is five hundred yojanas broad and two hundred fifty
yojanas high where the orb of the Sun’s vessel with its twelve aspects
is situated; 67
anrmt wee 7 feent aredqads casqaraa: got: waret wacraley: «= ae
“the Sun’s orb is thousand yojanas wide and five hundred yojanas
high and within that is the delicious nectarian wine spreading its sweet
fragrance; 68
gages: dyad: senha: uftat fag: | aa defeat: Scie Paraarsye tl G8
“there the moon in the form of nectarian rays along with his sixteen
digits stays in a boat sporting with the waves of the ambrosia. 69
Sram: Vea area ware safer
Terncdteaanste at: yretatsue: i Goll
qeaifenareg wea weft daa!
“This elixir is for the consumption by the Sakti deities of the Sricakra
and those pure Saktis of the Great lotus forest. These Saktis are always
happy obtaining the blessings of the main Sakti. 70
waste werpuS frefasarenferry, Weel
Weeas samt ter fret frikaerqs yeraterrqaan faegar dere: TIE NN
wa sifaqueen wrefiernsad: | fragesieritaasarcmmerassad: 03
“There in the South-east is situated a great altar, thousand yojanas
wide and deep and with three girdled pits each hundred yojanas high.
In that altar is the blazing fire of consciousness two thousand yojanas
high, the father of Devi Sri Tripurasundari. 71 to 78

Aq TATTATS SATE: 533 Chapter 54
eer uferafeter feomsrenrerent Ta: | Taaforrorentet: agers: 1 wy I
agfuiadt qfrracrrstrget: | evifaaeattat waarfedtge: Wott
arramasrgnt anerteeara: | wat fear: quem wdetea: Fert 9G
“To the West of the Cintamani house is a disc-shaped chariot
thousand yojanas wide set with varieties of diamonds. The beautiful
chariot is four thousand yojanas high with nine platforms. It is drawn
by the ten senses and the mind is its driver. The vedas are its wheels.
It is fiery. Yogic rays are its reins, the wind its flag, the sky its canopy.
It is a replica of the entire universe. 74 to 76
farrafone afer strata: | aaracureatfinga: werginer: Hoot
wre fag tat careers | aartanrgeeart watdhear fest = tt 9c Il
“In the centre of that Sricakra within the Cintamani house dwells
the most auspicious Lord of the Sricakra along with the Goddesses of the
nine enclosures. In the centre (Bindu) the luminary Devi Tripurasundari
seated on the couch composed of the five Brahmas (Brahma, Visnu, Siva,
Isana and Sadagiva) shines on the lap of Sri Kameévara.” 77, 78
gfe stfrqereeet wrereerars Uy: TRTeT ATS eaTe: I
End of the fifty-fourth chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripuraérahasyam.

USUSSTAats Cae:
Chapter 55
qeangd ad fasenatstafater: | UUeSISA ATat advitcn fray en
framers weet wey ager wa ee ae Utgeea aad at anf wea
are ffi wart wer dat a Sqarl a ahaa arast yore sft TT 3n
Weise weal arrreransht afta: | wetted fet ta qui qe wettacu ¥ 1
Hearing such wonderful description, the surprised Visvakarma again
inquired Brahma thus: “Oh Brahma! I am asking you again because
I have many doubts about what I have heard. You are competent to
answer me. Who built this city and why? You have said that those born
out of the three tendencies have no entry into this city. Again you have
described the existence of serpents and men in this city. How is this
possible? Oh Lord! show mercy on me.” 1to4
aye Ua citchyt: wre ct feafeear! aw: yoy ware daagd Wifey
qu aa quar fear fafafia: | weneat citwatehattent Ay OG
Tal ad Geqatrarpianran: Wal WpeataeaseMaaT Hl
faga aietfedt: aaen fatrstiett frercrssergretur dact arene frat
aTesenifunt aca: fe a: aafrarea!
Inquired thus Brahma said in this manner to Viévakarma; “Oh
Visvakarma! I will tell you about the secret account. Long ago we were
created by the universal Devi for creating, sustaining and destroying
activities according to the three tendencies Sattva, Rajas and Tamas.
Then while we were carrying out our duties we were always perplexed
and propitiated the Devi. Then the Supreme Power Tripurasundari who
is immutable and who is just an embodiment of Consciousness and
Sound incorporeally addressed us thus: ‘Oh Children! What is your -
5 to
daa wet art ararenfa: ater i
Wen a fated: eitdgreafefaren! weet at afer wipe eT ll

STS A: 535 Chapter 55
vaen fafgednt 4 tafram’ ti! anaecfatt man a fafschritet
FAARaA AMT AIeaat | AepUt He safe a Taniisa aig Ween
Hearing the transcendental words we praised Her in many ways
with folded hands and love and said thus, “Oh Great Devi! You have
engaged us in the worldly tasks in which we are not interested. Nothing
other than meditating on Your form is pleasing us just like the salt
water to the persons who have tasted nectar. Oh Devi! we are not
interested in our activities. Hence have mercy on us.” 9 to 12
Way TaTERagT We a: UA: 1 fafinpen: wines wadaeadias ean
frafristagata vader werda an fatagd added at creatsaefratery
Requested thus by Brahma and others, Devi Tripura again said
thus: “Oh Brahma and other gods! At present your request cannot be
granted. It is impossible to avoid the duties which have been formulated
by Me earlier. You have no freedom to worry about this. If you desire
I can grant an alternate request.” 13, 14
adtsenfi: wife ar fag creme adams cas yest = ek
TRtat yearsharsrt weet He wa ad fed afta, NGI
WIRATHISA Uiet cites AaraMaTeT Aare |
Then the Devi Tripura was requested by us thus: “Oh Mother! If this
is so, we want You the Great Devi to assume the form of Sri Rajarajesvari
with the three Gunas (tendencies) and rule the assembly of universes
and there we can serve you daily and become interested in the worldly
duties and obey Your orders as well.” 15, 16
serndtite seat ore at faqer oT nell
weed at ferrata qraqfétaraeg aansy fea meet faratarrsatertry
Want gavel wt Gara aa wi aferarat Garg Weta: = NTMI
Wa Gus afrensta fart vafert yeti aaftad eared at eatiaepied: BATT
AMAT at yar wenfaasvsaa| casharvsdeat Tenet AAT I
faenft apft <td wera dite sqarasert fafingerrsart sere aT
Hearing us, Devi Tripurasundari said thus: “Let it be so. For your

at ARREST 536 Sri Tripurdrahasyam
ea oe)
good I will assume a visible form. But I will not be within the universes,
Even then I will create another gem island in the nectarian ocean and
let the lords of the worlds worship me there and offer oblations into the
altar containing the fire of consciousness and meditate on Me as desired
by them either as an auspicious female or purusa. Assuming that form
which was meditated by you I will rule the host of the universes. In
that island I will be visible to all the lords of the different universes,
in my gross form.” Saying thus to Brahma and others the Devi disappeared.
ae TaN aad Tavsthatar aaa Urgurfer wares wast Aaa: 1 BIN
fafaaafatunsa afirditsyearfea: | tac: Siretacraferr: = el
wa trent fatale qed crags creat aa afgatert eareeaiftatt un eq
fart went aa aa aisfacfet 4 Ser
Then according to Her instructions we came out of the universe and
reached the nectarian ocean and after searching for a long time found
the gem island which contained nine types of diamonds whose effulgence
had spread to all directions. Going there we constructed the most
auspicious altar and worried about installing the fire that was mentioned
by the Devi, as there was neither wood nor fire. 23 to 25
ag 2a: fea: Hus erentsarqencrad, Weal
ater 7 ¢ deat wera ype fae: cat eaadisyiteifa wreneTa Il
ag sated agi fafa: <a arena) oa: ug afgareanegt saat | RC Il
SUT A UAT AalG Saat WM afters tarda Tata feciigeia Vl
erat efagd aarrad a Utah Husa aySyT AEAGaT | zo ll
waptenta aa adtsenfahaga! fetat wacnrrenafectciarget =— ll atl
Then Lord Siva created fire in the altar from his own eyes. Seeing
that fire diminishing for want of fuel Visnu created the fuel from his
own mind. Then as the fire was ablaze, Brahma made his own mind as
the sacrificial animal, his intellect as the ghee and his ego as the oblation
and used his senses as the vessels in that sacrifice for the Transcendental
Devi. Then after meditating on the feminine form of the Devi when
Brahma offered the oblations then the Supreme Devi manifested in the

FAISAL ATA: 537 Chapter 55
middle of the altar as meditated upon. As we were praying to Her, the
Supreme Devi came out of the fire in a most attractive form. 26 to 31
gorsacat um aarsset 4 fafafesr snfes ud acre afer wat azn
wapimatfasiut aerat yar ua ad) cafead fafa at wptestef ant aor
adanedfatrarrearate afr a1 ated fagioif aatsé ofsardts stan ax
Then the Supreme Devi asked me for a seat. Ordered thus I created
an excellent seat which was shattered by Her touch. Again I created
another seat made of many strong material and it was also shattered.
I was put to shame on seeing all the seats that were created by all my
power being shattered into hundreds of pieces. 32 to 34
aorferdifatian, adea: warhera: | afeesdtea qaer at at ta worag: «a4
Then immediately there appeared Sadasiva the lord of all. As desired
by Her the fourth god Isvara also appeared and both of them bowed to
Her. 35
waadtent tat at aeraaea! Tat Mariya: rar ated TEM: ATTET
master saree: | dara sacs tea: wes TO Bel
at ware vanisestrget: | waleraigi aa fqn, RH
wees Hoe Feat dated BT
The Supreme Devi told them to prepare a seat. Hearing Her, Sadasiva
quickly meditated and there appeared myriads of Sadasivas and Igvaras.
Then pulling out the essence from all of them five extremely beautiful
forms were generated. From the aspect of Sadasiva was formed an
auspicious crimson red plank having the form of Sadasiva. 36 to 38
doreceftfafarrerdeaqed: naen
Weiearateatas a warhera: | apragfrctarcad yas SENT TA: U voll
eaqeefrad sine wea yesh) agd Peferattaqerrgarterry, uve
saat faraatata: warfera: | worst wie at eat fags BATES Un
Then from the strengths of the groups of the four deities Isana,
Rudra, Visnu, and Brahma, Sadasiva prepared the four legs for the seat.

at fee, 538 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Then He prepared a soft swan feather-like seat spreading on it from
the essence of the entire lot of earths. After making ready a pillow out
of the group of peaks of Meru mountain, Sadasiva bowed to the Devi
and said “Oh Mother! The seat is ready. Please be seated.” 39 to 492
wae foe wept Bareran stata sofas dtotahs aR van
Mayes Tahet He TET!
Meanwhile Brahma, Visnu and Rudra bowed to Sadasiva and said
thus: “Oh Lord! without a dwelling (shelter) this seat will be useless,
Hence create a beautiful shelter for this in space. 43
wereratstt get waa we WE ATL Us¥il
ferrafirnt: aitet aanciesifrart disarm & wee faeqat Feasts: i vu
ugetagqdena arrantves: | waiteafaars weastataataa: WU ¥&Ul
Treat We WeAT WAST Bae ae Ue Meas ETL voll
Poleteant at aPet ASNT
Agreeing with them, Sadagiva created an auspicious dwelling made
of Cintamani gems and many beautiful diamonds. That great house
covered an area of two thousand yojanas and had four gates representing
the four Vedas. It was beautiful with the vast sky as its roof. Taking
the house as grand with that roof, Sadasiva created a huge sacred lotus
garden around it. With all such features the dwelling looked bright and
grand. 44 to 47
Ua what tafaereet at Usell
wares fagT arta waa: | tafaerat afer dha a reat BSI
semfatatandiorgayfraantira: | deqar agar wre Palferanet at I gol
alors HASAN Et HE Areaass Ba ates aarhr ferfears soph:
In that dwelling sat on the diamond throne the Great Devi
Tripurasundari illuminating the surrounding. She was praised in many
ways by innumerable Brahmas, Visnus, Rudras, Isanas. She said to
Sadasiva thus: “Oh Sadaéiva! Meditating on My accounts, bring out My
legend by which My form will be known to the world.” 48 to 51

Tareas ANA: 539 Chapter 55
ud war frqanitsa Gada: wariyra: | ae: wares faxtarere ATH 42 I
macaatampeaye: dufadts Taq!
Directed by Her thus, when the Lord Sadasiva was thinking about
Her legend, he was requested by Brahma, Visnu, Rudra and others thus:
ta datas saarad 4: waar U43l
faftgret fer aeagreROTy! eaATtaage cea qraat WaT U4
afaguen tat feat yeas aad vitae citeferrmntete ware WeKU
4 aafaccienfaddt ant Aas Sea Hat aecit ced war yfa ul uel
AAMT WISI spat ule yy at Hews aa: Se eafsarory
“Oh Lord! We think that the Devi in this form will not be of any
use. She who is consciousness, witness, eternal and responsible for
existence or otherwise has with kindness become visible in the feminine
form corresponding to our meditation. It is opposed to the worldly
etiquette that a woman does not shine without the support of a man.
It is rare in the world that a woman is without the support of a man
just as a creeper without a tree. Hence find a suitable husband for this
Devi, the protector of the universe and fulfill our desire.” 53 to 57
ged qonpiamedt ta: werfira: | ferafarat fat avert ore crafearadt: ue
sag Yor A arta Valea: | sa TTA cat Afersacaefaaht it 4s ul
warssdiedgr: wrrareataantat + warcefadt at fates frat aad igo
W eeanafavanttiasaaaad! Uistteantad tareraesicitea | eet
ATeT: Bee: sss Ga varfsent wad ACE: deitheatgdatsa HT TaTI
Hearing them who are born out of tendencies, SadaSsiva after thinking
for a long time and deciding said thus: “Oh Trinity Deities! Listen to
me with patience. This trans-transcendental Devi is nothing but existence
and knowledge. Existing alone before everything, She is the independent
Consciousness. Before Her there was no existence, non-existence,
differences or non-differences. She was shining by the greatness of Her
intrinsic nature. This wheel of the multitude of creation is just a reflection
in the mirror of Her Consciousness. When there is no one equal to Her,

at fey, 540 Sri Tripurarahasyam
A>] chasyar
who can excel Her. Hence who can be the fit husband for this unique
Mother of the universe? 58 to 62
4 fe tsa werofan: ag eared feast aardd war ye fraser maya
fafecnsereitet a from ata seq fart qaoadt aatfeqiiseray Wax
“T am unable to do anything in this matter.” As Sadasiva was saying
thus and as we were watching, the Supreme Devi Tripurasundari
understanding our desire, gave a little smile which was luminous like
a myriad of full-moons. 63, 64
BASHA TevStaaves: | freer stash aletpateare: 1 ei
Wasa Weta: Tafeqnrseet! afecnlegqqaaad adaa-mieoT, 1 ge
Wa Pes Ved Asa wT Wad: | aferdita: fee afeensd Barta: 1 eel
Then a loud sound that would split the heap of universes was heard
deafening every one in all directions. A great effulgence bright like a
myriad lightnings that would swallow the entire directions and blind all
eyes, started ablaze. Rendered deaf and blind by that sound and brilliance,
we were wonderstruck as to what it might be. 65 to 67
qesenfa: gutta aa: at uta wagers wigan =n ac
faepityreearn fated farat aar) Gear wagewagg esau GI
wedage wre: <efessinfea | aigatedenferrtta WITT, I Boll
faufaa afagt whergetear
Then immediately we saw Devi Paramesgvari seated brilliantly on
the left thigh of an equally beautiful god who was as if coupled with
his own image in a mirror. Oh Visvakarma! We enjoyed unrivalled
happiness having achieved our desire. The pair displaying excessive joy
of mutual embrace were surpassing each other by their beauty and
charm. 68 to 70
sasaata: aT tar a: fergie, Woe
we foe fe darn sadiftaddaa | agxaraatatafs ara: weafa safes 1 ORM!
: Then the Supreme Devi told us: “Oh Gods! Your desire has been
fulfilled. For that I have appeared in two forms. Tell us by which single
name both of us will become famous.” 71, 72

WSTSITAATS A: 541 Chapter 55
gat warterat a: Darerae afin faqerte Acar ai STSTHTATTUTI,_ 11193
mat a Vas TA HATTA | USNS TESTA BIT, oe
Imad & 4 Iara SS forget de facet: WOK
Hearing this Sadasiva who saw us ignorant, bowed to her and said
thus: “Oh Devi! Because You have fulfilled our desires (Kama) You will
be KameSgvari and the lord will be KameSvara. Because You are the
governors of us the king of kings You will be Rajarajesvari and the lord
will be Rajaraje$vara. You will be Tripurasundari and He will be
Tripurasundara.” 73 to 75
HT TTS: Went aa ai aaa dorad yeaa wat cae fray 9g
maed Uftatur waquaedtaht Geacnen wai A ad wastaat fra 1 won
Then we, Brahma and others prayed to the Supreme Devi and seeing
Her alone requested Her thus: “Oh Mother! You should have a retinue.
We are not very much pleased to see You lonely.” 76, 77
ua a wfaarenta: weer au: | Ut age vacgTataeaaT ==
seeded at vifedt wear sit Ua lata MUTA = WRI
adeitehfitarent uftart AeyTa: |
Thus requested by us She within no time created another Supreme
Power who was like Her image and gave her the name as MahaTripurasundari and asked her to create a befitting Sakti-Cakra and the
retinue from Her aspect which would fulfill the desires of everyone.
sifaeqerar uw a tat viferach were Noll
Bast singe vacraworgay |
Agreeing to this, Mahatripurasundari created a wonderful Sakti-cakra
having many enclosures for the Great Devi. 80
wate Neredt wast Sreyreats Taq, ern
wae adtsfahtams yeat aereyit Aar!

at ATC eT 542 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Meanwhile the Great Devi assumed sixteen forms and _ stood
separately as the seventeenth one.
Uafaraat ast weforett WeRn
Aart: Tastgr Gear A We aT: whe
WaeR YAM: CAAISTRAT: Vert: Wale: wean
In between, even Devi Mahatripurasundari created nine Saktis and
told them thus: “All of you individually create attractive saktis matching
your forms.” 82, 83
Tergeafa dad: CIa: TW: Ga GaeR ws Geattant wersitfaqufiacer icy
War dat wreasad fata aarti
aaeartteaanta: at pia: Sfears sat, Wek
Instructed by Mahatripurasundari, the nine Saktis individually
created many Saktis. Then Mahdatripurasundari quickly created for them
abodes representing the universe and was served by them. 84, 85
sia stage wees UaTSTeTAts ara: II
End of the fifty-fifth chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurarahasyam.

WAU CATA:
Chapter 56
gqarenragdt ae fermennt wenfefar: | ores qa: worereereapareftrentyent wen
rey vretat 2ear ger arfeaqereran) waster are arat wart ward we ae ti
wofaqrayeat ger aren: weiter far wor: enfe tearer: weqerensfe were
vart ursfa wrreerenufireed fara
ae sitfaqureracar ax car: yrerra: fer: nen
uaet wanes sitet % wartifirry
Hearing that wonderful account, the divine architect Viévakarma
who was eager to listen again inquired thus: “Oh Lord! How many Saktis
did Devi Tripuramba create? What are their forms and work? Which is
their abode? How many Saktis did Mahatripurasundari create and what
are their forms? How and where is the abode of these Saktis, which is
said to be a replica of the universe, which was created by Devi Tripuramba?
I am interested in listening? Please narrate all this to me.” lto4
gfe gat ferwepar wie: ore wafer: wan
soy reefer areata eran weraret ferger ar weniger nan
aayrerftegarr yrerinnen ferrst) warqarerar arey wrgfeaqrpey tl
art art qaratsea vrei ayeifee: |
Thus inquired by Visvakarma, the pleased Brahma said thus:
“Oh Viévakarma! Listen with patience to this great secret. To start with,
Devi Tripura created Mahatripurasundari who in turn created nine
and ordered them to create a host of Saktis. They asked Mahitripurasundari thus: “How do we create other Saktis mentioned by You?”
5to7
aqeafe wre ar yet wenger nen
srreratet arenfarer gat paren or ferns peqerers sor warqweyrereRt: aettce: 0
manforenfefirattat wer Stars were) crerreargrrarora: viferawsterereT:

at AT 544 Si Tripurarahasyam
I Sr
afirn afer da afsatotiacnt a: 1
afercan Wrenraent A qatar: SAT een
aden o frag eet ter: WaRAT: |
Hearing them Devi Mahatripurasundari said again thus: “By your
self-power you create. Do not delay.” Saying thus She created ten Saktis
with red complexion. These Saktis were wielding a noose, a lotus, and
a goad and decorated with the digit of the moon on their tresses. They
are Anima, Laghima, Mahima, Isitvika, Vasitva, Prakamya, Bhukti, Iccha,
Prapti, Sarvakamasiddhi. 8 to ll
aa WT Wager wgdalt ear, Wert
ara a: wfeyas sy aa: Vien: TAM! YeaIsse wT VepreRitteragepst
ate wire after sfaere
Then the nine Saktis asked their Mother thus: “Give us names.
Later we will create Saktis.” Hearing them, Mahatripurasundari said;
“Because you are born out of yogasakti, you will be called as Yoginis”.
soren wretarare fagteit woret | TS a
Tit: Wa HeTaTyy erent aaafeart: |
Then Mahatripurasundari bowed and requested Sri Tripuresi thus:
“Oh Mother! Please quickly provide a place to these Saktis.” 14
wiferte uretiet: Bast TATE, Ugg
aren afecet aaaferataa! faert stort g frente fatter 1 kal
weet ugheg deri uqeaq afefaers Teaagelt ET Well
asemt ¢ fagren frag quate weahrrgdis qeragl Tea: = RCI
Sera UyreTgyfiear! fats adtsateq aterttea Tat TA: Well
we aft der ard: areas
Thus requested the Supreme Devi created a good place. It has 4
square platform two yojanas high and two hundred yojanas wide. On
that in the four directions, after a free space of four yojanas, are four
beautiful gates. Connected with it, within, there is a beautiful space

TATRA ATA: 545 Chapter 56
twenty yojanas wide and six yojanas long having another square platform
two yojanas high. Further within, there is the third platform two yojanas
wide and one yojana high. Thus there are three platforms. 15 to 19
after ater weyrecataar Ron
Further inside these, there is the space sixteen yojanas wide and
one yojana high in the form of sixteen petals. 20
Fertitta aquranpfa: | atsrart gq fase qfrenrsfrrtet We
Further inside in a place twenty yojanas wide, there is a beautiful
eight petalled space, one yojana high. 21
aera aextatertaa! opfrent yrenentorean aetna aradt ol BRA
fret eyrentoren wart: feraatsran ateritear yay eyrentoraarar 11 33
Further inside there is a twelve yojana wide land with fourteen
triangles one yojana high. Next, inside in a twelve yojana space is the
ten triangled platform one yojana high. Further inside in a eleven yojana
land is another ten-triangled platform one yojana high as bright as the
previous ten triangles. 22, 23
oat ariwradierns same: fear aqentonsteren qfratritegragitet
Further inside in a land of ten yojanas is the eight triangled beautiful
platform one yojana high. 24
Tarrereaqing Tatsrdftar! deritea aqeden wagegrnfrt atl
anaraafereart frgafe: gage wares wari ar qayet wae feerar nt 26 1
Further inside is a triangular platform six yojanas wide and one
yojana high. Above this is the circular land one yojana high and one
yojana wide. Creating thus the space for all Saktis the Supreme Devi
stays in the circular space called Bindu-Bhimi. 25, 26
USAR AT ATA | TATATAMT: TTA AT: TATAT FTA SACAT: Ut
TW: wayearerat daferar: ATT! Set: HEAT: TafearfersryeaA: | Ve It
fraren: aadarat arnt a arta 31 aren aartatt fren fadtar aerafertt 1

at ARES, 546 Sri Tripurdrahasyam
a
frrafecrat a teaver at: erafearfest | werfadat wanfesagdt aa: WTI 30 1
wafter qergedt fren fterraferent! fasrar eager VaTeTATET Aa: UTA ae
faafa ara aeadt art ys a afacti ugar seat afr: i aay
wad aera fran atest a qdfean ar aitdtttatreanged aqua 331
weret aa a tat wefagegeadh at faeg patra qa wart ragrat i ax i
She is seated shining on the lap of Kamesvara on the throne made
up of five Brahmas (i.e., Brahma, Visnu, Rudra, [sana and Sadaéiva),
The sixteen Saktis created from Her own body are serially located around
the triangular land below the bindu. These Saktis representing the digits
of the moon are the ruling deities of the days in a fortnight and are called
Nityas. I will mention their names to you. The first one is Kameévari,
the second Bhagamélini; then Nityaklinnaé, Bherunda, Vahnivasinl,
Mahavidyegvari, (Mahavajresvari according to Lalitopakhyana), Sivadatl,
Tvarita, Kulasundari, Nitya, Nilapataka, Vijaya, Sarvamangala, Jvalamala
and Citra. They are located on the left, right and back sides of the
triangle in groups of five on each of the sides. The Supreme Devi
Rajarajesvari is Herself the seventeenth Nitya. The sixteenth one viz.,
Mahanitya who was the first born has attained union with the seventeenth
by virtue of her penance and powers. Mahatripurasundari who came first
has been absorbed into the bindu and located there. 27 to 34
airatstt war yer water: yea: | apa yaapeata oret Ta I
Weret Saat Par AM [era UAT Unara Heitor frat a weer tl Bell
adersfarecren wisaeerant | Frater: atutar tear way TaGY] |! gel
ages Was anes aa: we wgfefiqgarrateetitged ya ya NRC
The nine éaktis created by Her earlier are individually named as
Prakata, Gupta, Guptatara, Sampradaya, Kulottirna, Nigarbha, Rahasya,
Atirahasya and Parapararahasya yoginis. They are individually located
at the square, sixteen petalled, eight petalled, fourteen triangled, two
ten triangled, eight triangled, single triangled, and bindu enclosures of
Sricakra. 35 to 38
Wa: BT WeneTeaMt Set watafifier: | apiece qeat aor fafragrad |

siramaente
Sricakramahameru

UAT RTTAS AT: 547 Chapter 56
Then the yogini by name Prakata located the ten Saktis created by
her in the lowest square. 39
Wr: Geaeyreritey areata genera: |
arigrentttadtacat ‘qftenrat Praga i ¥onl
aa: wast vrerfiat apres werersfren qdtagfienrat ar: atonsfarreyre
Again she created eight Sakits Brahmi and others who represent
the groups of alphabets and located them in the second platform of the
square enclosure. Then the Prakata nitya created another ten
(known as Mudra deities) and located them in the third platform of the
square enclosure. 40, 41
aa qenfrarist gear quae! arqaeradt: yrecitee warren i? i
anera arent frat a qaee yee
wreadeardfirensya yrenitfatataan: Ween
vreitfaercarmre teem waren: | Weert w yifeetent waa ei eit
Then the Nitya by name Gupta seeing the sixteen petaled enclosure
created sixteen Saktis. Then the nityas called Guptatara, Sarhpradaya,
Kulottirna, Nigarbha — separately created wonderful Saktis corresponding
to their enclosures. The Rahasya nitya created seven éaktis and the
Atirahasya nitya created one Sakti. 42 to 44
aaforeren aftr quem way: Pravitsyra: | vert: waererarenrergeereaterqeeT:
Anima and other Saktis also separately created from their power
hundreds of Saktis who were identical with them in form, dress a
weapons.
fagadedt an ar nafaqeget fafrqaat yoton vrerttarafiareyt Wau
Sa TARAS AM YAH TAH!
Mahatripurasundari who is the controller of the bindu was asked
by the Primordial Devi Rajarajesvari to give names to the Saktis.
According to their portfolio Mahatripurasundari gave them a
individually.

at ARReSy 548 Sri Tripurarahasyam
adtaqfrent teit a: Wer cere: eon
Garrataara: wayarenyta: | eet Ye STITT: th xe
Feder a tear areata Tare ara xen
anata @ aan fraveate aearersranadtatt Won
gfa gt dtdacr: warm: dalfrante ai fasfavarendot a act: USTERTET HN ue
sanfett wergen firaver Gat qari dior aha: carga fey setvreretetat:
The ten Saktis of the third platform in the square enclosure are
the embodiments of the Mudras (seals or locks) envisaged with that
knowledge. They are termed so because they bring happiness (qq),
to the Devi. By generating happiness in beings they bring about agitation
(a4), repulsion (STa1), attraction (aT@itt) control (x), passion (se),
seeds (si), sprouts (qv, movement in space (G4), trisection (favs),
and genetic cognisance (areret1a). These powerful Mudras are well-known
as Samksobhini, Vidravini, Akarsini, Vasankari, Unmadini, Mahankusa,
Trikhanda, Khechari, Bija and Yoni and are situated in the directions
and angles of the third platform of the square enclosure of Sricakra.
arent frat areft meat qari stat serret areret ares Aer: TTL 4S I
ATQUST UB Weretat: wane feerat Sat: | WASTAT AAMAS SYMS SALVTATAA: Ut
In the second platform among the three in the square enclosure
deities Brahmi, MaheSévari, Kaumari, Vaisnavi, Varahi, Mahendri,
Camunda and Mahalaksmi reside and they are similar to Brahma and
others in their forms, weapons, ornaments and dress. 53, 54
Wang cifenss ara: wrerysrgetda: | eifeatgerentoa: weRTTyyTT: Ml Ml
The Mudra Saktis are red in complexion wielding the noose, mudra
and goad. The goad is red in colour and they are all wearing ornaments
made of rubies. 55
BT PAST YET AaAeTHeOTAaT |
caratenfafurents sem Parca eeatenfafurent UT 4g
aéarrenfauit a yreats sanfafiret wer rerptenfiterent cagurentaforent aa: ll

BATS ATA: 549 Chapter 56
carenfaforent trerenfafirent ferrgfaent atenfauit eiqats sentient apfarqfaent 1
arayatenfiutt a atsrenfetirent wer) strevrenfetirent ageqarenftut wa: 4g tt
pirated werresarrera: | afaar qertfransauarerra: feat: tt go Ml
Qe: Yue: quarevanitra: | weerySraigegt eA: tt Kel
Then the Saktis created by the Guptayogini who fulfill the wants
of the devotees beginning with Kamakarsini are—Budhyakarsini,
Ahankarakarsini, Sabdakarsini, Sparsakarsini, Rapakarsini, Rasakarsini,
Gandhakarsini, Cittakarsini, Dhairyakarsini, Smrtyakarsini, Namakarsini, Bijakarsini, Atmakarsini, Amrtakarsini and Sarirakarsini. They
dwell in the sixteen-petalled enclosure starting from the front one in an
anti-clockwise direction. They are white in hue wearing white garments
and young, wielding the noose, nectar pot, goad and the boon sign.
HAGHYAMUSAPASASAPT AH | ACA AASAA US ARTS SeeRaCAT Wart
arqahrarggrIapEM ert | UAT YARIS setter APTesePTAATA: = GR
Tarantig¢ncnea feacntorenad: Fearan: | uret ateiteret urarget unfing ferry "
The Saktis Anangakusuma, Anangamekhala, Anangamadana,
Anatigamadanatura, Anangarekha, Anangavegini, Anangankusa and
Anangamélini who are created by the Guptatarayogini reside in the
eight-petalled enclosure in the east, south, west, north, south-east,
south-west, north-west and north-east directions respectively. They are
robed in red and wield the noose, blue lily, liquor vessel and goad in
their hands. 62 to 64
danfaot faarfaottars sanfaott arertet |
aontfedt cafe a yftaoit a ayrgt WRQU
Tart danict @ aagarcheanfert | dafaqeot wart waeaagt Wag
tnerararfadtar aqetity dfeeen: | serercntuta teaatgenym: = GO I
UTETSyMaLTs SaRTigeTe Tay YM: |
The Saktis Samksobhini, Vidravini, Akarsini, Ahladini, Sammohini,
Stambhini, Jrmbhini, Vasankari, Rajijini, Unmadini, Arthasadhini,
Sampattiparani, Mantramayi and Dvandvaksayankari, created by the

a ARES 550 Sri Tripurarahasyam
: 3 Li ra EEL oe
Sampradaya Yogini are situated in the fourteen-triangled enclosure in
an anti-clockwise way starting from the front triangle. Dressed in red
they wield the noose, the nectar pot, the mirror and the goad in their
Kok Handis: 65 to 67
fafguer damer aa: vento Ween
Ugelecniant a at: AMET Bar {arena Tae qa: an
facnfsarfut watgqett acetal ataraaret ufgedatct wracenen: 1
ust quortat urget wiforagea: | carat fayrerenniqenywore fem: Ugh
aeiritnt: ayfeat: great atearfaar: |
The Saktis Siddhiprada, Sampatprada, Priyankari, Mangalakarini,
Kamaprada, Duhkhavimocini, Mrtyuprasamani, Vighnanivarini, Sarvangasundari and Saubhagyadayini reside in the (outer) ten triangles in the
same way described before. They wield the noose, the jewel box, the goad
in their four hands and dressed in pure silk garments and jewels. These
Saktis are called Kulottirnads and display youthful charm. 68 to 71
wrapifeatadver dat art Byat Ww
adt enfafaarirt areanranareattent | ad: eetssaaaet Tararetatt i 93
Sfaarenner af cent Ysa: | UpeMaMe gaa Tae ye: Woxil
frrahen arfaard ceva: yrenatstet: |
The Saktis Sarvajia, Sarvasakti, Aisvaryaprada, Jiianamayi, Vyadhivinagini, Adharasvarapa, Papahara, Anandamayi, Raksasvarupini and
Ipsitaprada reside in the (inner) ten triangles in the same way as said
before. They are robed in red and wield the noose, the sign of boon, the
sign of knowledge and the chisel in their hands. These young and
sparkling Saktis are known as Nigarbhas. 72 to 74
afert afet caferenseun aa: 1 kl
ait ated a attest Shr prada: 1 Teeth ara wererreaa: 1 el!
aMaryeayert ciferqEUr: | arrTaety yatecrtor yfeaferet: =u wel
The Saktis Vaéini, Modini, Vimala, Aruna, Jayini, Sarvesvari and

meres a sds Chapter 56
ee hte 6
Kaulini, created by Rahasya Yogini are situated in the eight triangles
as said before. They are red in complexion and shining in red ornaments
and holding the bow, the sign of boon, the book and arrow, 75 to 77
vifaitent GREATER CeCTUTAR | Wet aT: PreRTTTa YET: WepferefeatT:
The one Sakti created by Atirahasya Yogini stays in the southern
triangle. In this way the Saktis had been created by the primary Saktis
in the Sricakra. 78
ofa sttfaqreet arereaus weUSTeTtS ena: |
End of the fifty-sixth chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurdrahasyam.

AACSTSTAATS ATA:
Chapter 57
ent wast ag: GA: wes Tar fame qusestach wes et
Veriatt ae watted F yes aqi case frat a aa: ward faye 1
West a vette sa aS!
Hearing Brahma, Visvakarma again inquired with devotion thus:
“Oh Brahma! I heard from you about the group of Saktis in the Sricakra.
Let me know how they got their names. How is it that there is no
congregation of Saktis in the eight-triangled enclosure and in the single
triangle? With whom did the sixteenth Mahanitya merge? Please clarify
this to me.” 1,2
Ud MBISTAHSS tit: we wate: wan
fagend: qu werqetahrfea wersitirgteran yet frag steer usu
Teagreal Yea Vata: | ATH ara qacrciateadta frefirr yi
Brahma who was pleased with Visvakarma who inquired of him,
answered thus: “Oh Visvakarma! Listen to the highest secret which is
kept concealed. Devi Tripuresvari created sixteen Nityas. Mahatripurasundari created other Saktis and named them individually according to
their action. 8 to 5
a at vifedteredt frome went! we: Bel facfad were Gl
wenfaqinaigt diac a wea wremisares frateafe fast ol
asaucartasena fataaasnitiet | staenstt vaft wearatsaafett
aar aeerydiat frvst gat water: | wRtearscaret Gar at arate: feed:
wept waa tari edu: ufaferarat weer war fer: I goll
ader ucar ursfe aertenet fear
This moving and non-moving universe is the sport of the Supreme
Great Devi Tripura. By partially manifesting in Brahma, Visnu and Siva,
She is managing the activities of this dynamic world. She, the Mother
who is merely Consciousness and the indivisible unique essence of the

TATA TAS : 553 Chapter 57
universe becomes many by virtue of Her freedom. Just like Sun the
jewel of the sky who is a single mass of thousand rays appears variously
or just like the single sea appears as waves, tides and foam or just like
a single mirror shows thousands of images, She the transcendental One
appears differentiated as well as unique. 6 to 10
vretaisnferenrerar afiraren: wastfiar: neeen
TEM: TAA: TETAS: | at wietimaegqaia wea
Anima and other Saktis are the partial manifestations of the Devi
Tripura who assumes a gross form by virtue of Her freedom. The names
of the different Saktis are according to their actions. 14°12
Ua Yet: WadaeM Terreafantted: | eat ap: Meaty warttateanrad:
The Saktis thus born deluded by the Great Devi started competing
with one another as low and high in their positions. 13
FRM aeoferany Hae Ayu! Nee We HetagrPat = vl
suet yrenta: wat wa aredt fe wine watetarcramas wart catered: 1 kh
geet craters farce arse seyeras Set was Gee aT: |ARTTT
Seeing the disgraceful quarrel among the Saktis, Mahatripurasundari
directed by the Great Devi said thus: “Oh Saktis! Now all of you listen
to me. There is no place in the vicinity of the Devi to those having
jealousy and anger. You have to acquire your status through the power
of penance. There is no other means.” Saying thus, She herself started
first doing an astonishing penance. 14 to 16
Feat waft weg sen: wat aft aasepfraarat: = Voll
Seeing Mahatripurasundari engrossed in penance, all the other Saktis
did penance with controlled minds. 17
we ifr aa aati ait
armrcaret Stdareret TESATT TAT By
A long period passed while the Saktis were engaged in penance.
Then the pleased Great Devi addressed them. 18

at RRC 554 Sri Tripurarahasyam
ee
ararqeisfer aren wart ated feynft a: | seqarar warfare i y¢
a vet ademas cet wert ster frererrentat sreryet Fae 1 201
feared wgerea use fren g sreyit! wesanpEIseMa A AEE eH
Wrahtscadt a: Wage Us Hat agerfeensis a WMH
A aaah Wea WAH GedAT |
“Oh My Children! I am pleased with your penance. I will allot your
deserving place.” Saying thus the Great Devi made Mahatripurasundari
in charge of the entire Sricakra. Then the Nityas were located in the
triangle, five on each side. Though the sixteenth nitya was given a
prominent place in the front, she considered that as not befitting and
again started a great arduous penance. Similarly Kamesgvari and
Bhagamélini also considering their allotment as insufficient, started doing
a great penance. 19 to 22
Ua areafardt vifeuserh feat WBN
Wentfentt aragay T cereal | aatearenhrad wear Weevil
faqugratas apryrenitfaasta ar fager: fet: cart werfgrgethy ut kil
Uneg: We a Sat: Ara Tater See: aT Watery: wrawifeate: ae
When all the Saktis were engaged in penance Devi Rajarajeévari
seeing Herself alone felt it not right. Catching Her intention Mahatripurasundari dislodged ten Saktis from Her limbs and weapons. The Saktis
thus produced asked Mahatripurasundari for a place to stay. She told
them to find it through penance. Thus advised the Saktis did penance
along with the previous Saktis. 23 to 26
Wrdet wauftat wetenrmracitana! aaciterrd WaT: YeRTat AqawSTAT: Ml VW!
ISAT: UTE: Yaa: | Tear vifeetot we aaah Tay | Vell
TH aqereala wager aft dag: |
Again seeing Herself alone, She cast Her glances around by which
four gaktis were created. They were golden coloured holding a lotus and
dressed and decorated with white jewels. Seeing the entire group of
Saktis doing penance they also, Oh Vigvakarma! decided to join poe

BATS S A: 555 Chapter 57
qat cayt aftat art wferagqeay Ween
memeaargiurent taceyeUn: | Saas ala Ta Gear wT Yaa: I Rol
GA: YET TASS TTT: | TATA SegMTSTe TaTAVifaTTOT: ul Bk I
WA: Peas Waa: BafeHweT: | UTaareforets TT sTfeAT: Mt Bz
FRA YAS Wah Tatreantaya: | Tas Tareas Fear yrart: yt: feat:
aa gear a: wie we at fagtedt frat dtefrent at at qafeaory
agerta a aa vat wrearferet Rafryl wrear a uar aa Arges weit wT
Again by seeing around another four Saktis came out wielding the
noose, sign of protection, sign of boon and the goad, all red in colour
and decoration, who seeing their predecessors took to penance. Again
were created four Saktis wielding the noose, the book, the beads and
the goad, all red in colour and decoration. Another four were again
created, who were crystal clear coloured wielding the noose, sign of
protection, sign of boon and the goad, who also started penance. Again
another four Saktis red coloured and decorated were created. The Devi
Tripura saw all of them engaged in penance. Seeing the mature penance
of the sixteenth Nitya, Devi Tripuresvari asked her to seek a boon and
she asked for merger with Devi Tripuresvari since all other states are
ephemeral. Thus the sixteenth Nitya got united with the Transcendental
Devi. 29 to 35
Ol Wat: Target Seca: THAT A aT:
wear vst yar arat ger wafer TC
US Used Aa WE Ase! Trahan HMR AA: WT tl BO ll
qa aeacderd aa: Baten! cata wiecpart Ratt
Along four Saktis born in five groups from Her body, She Herself
joined each group as the fifth one and stayed happily. Hence they got
the name as Pajica-paficakas. In the first group She is called Ratneégvari,
in the next, Kamadhuk, then Kalpalatesi, then KoseSvari and finally
Laksmiévari. 36 to 38
Watch w get pifacageacai fears Ter: ATAU: HereraTatesfrargaT:
maitareren: vedteasatiife a: yaa!

at AI ea 556 Sri Tripurarahasyam
For each of the Ratna, Kamadugha, Kalpalata, Koga and Laksmi
groups Devi gave thousand subordinate Saktis. Oh Visvakarma!
Understand this. 39
Upstarts eran GIR Tae Il ¥oll
Van: Ges Wels Y VERS! USAT STAT Wg PTT: HN Ye I
These twenty-five thousand attendants separately serve their lords,
Five thousand of them belong to the primordial Devi. 40, 41
fagueites oer were ai ater qaagrt gat ancfeeat wat wei
Tia Sar: Weed: HMM: JOT] Taisat aE Tags aa: WT ut v3
dita argegt gat asamqit
Siddhalaksmi, Rajamatangini, Bhuvanesani and Varahi are the
Ratnegvaris. Sudhapithesvari, Sudhasth, Amrtesani and Annaprapirini
are the Kamadughas. 42, 43
AA Heads TSH Aa: WT Te 34)
uftartat astt pant a aa: wel Usa are wise: TAT XI
Paficakama, ParijateSvari, Kumari and Paficabanesvari are the
Kalpalatas. AA, 45
Ut Pence USHA UTgent UIT Sia agra: Wreat: Joy ceitather: |
ARIAS TAA ASTSRATN Ad: WT AIIAt:-ua ala usta: ll
Paraiijyotih, NiskalasAmbhavi, Ajapa and Matrka are the Koéesvaris.
Laksmi, Mahalaksmi, Trigakti, Samrajyalaksmi are the Laksmiévaris.
These are the paficaka Goddesses. 46, 47
Ua Used aren aatfean cat waded faeguentaht war tl veil
Thus the Devi pleased by the penance of the Paficaka deities gave
them in an order, place near the Binducakra. 48
areafey ality are venta: | Wafer ate eeragervey = BRI
To Matangi and Varahi who did special penance in the NE direction,
the Devi gave immense wealth. 49

AATARTTAS AA: 557 Chapter 57
atau aden! ante afte a qequsregary, We 4oll
Matangi was made the minister to take care of the administration
of the worlds. Varahi was made the chief of the army to punish the
wicked.
aa: Blea Sreftahorganal: | wet wart cet Sct weet aaa NGI
Then after a lapse of time the Devi Tripura pleased by the services
of these two deities gave them place in the golden fort and the emerald
fort respectively. 51
wa amt fagtaor ger ward qadet arta a aay serafettet a ar aR
ana: anaedhest Gra VaISH TW Ytad: 1 aa a cfaut ore wart teafencrad 1
Similarly, specially pleased by the penance of Kamesgvari, Vajresi
and Bhagamalini, the Devi provided them place in the front and on
either sides of the back of the triangle and called them Samaya Deities
who control the concept of time. 52, 53
salaat J a tat WAM A WT Aaaenatgaarerat afar Tea
afar aad? areadhat arctatias a4 asta wat WEgU
The Sakti created by the Rahasyatara Yogini got a place and power
by virtue of her great penance in the diamond fort and stayed in the
place by the river Vajra and being in charge of the diamonds she got
the name as Vajresvari. 54, 55
W iaerentty wart ata: | wee anfrearra artatt Fa: 4g Ul
ary fit ao ead wren eaten! AaIsaM aft vreniteg Herat i 4 Ul
tan wal a wary saan fafragrad!
Kameégvari, Vajresvari and Bhagamalini deities because of their
great penance obtained positions in the three angles of the triangle.
Kameévari by Her penance secured the second place in the eight triangled
enclosure. The other Saktis were also located in suitable places by
Mahatripurasundari. 56, 57
wi wag any frase fatraya a Weel
wea aefirert aaa wasrad! fag frgtet a cer Faget West

att A Tee 1 558 Sri Tripurdrahasyam
meat fyrsied: wr fgcnteet faqufeer fufiacn i gon
Fant a tad wa WelgTga | Arras senst fea aah: BRU
qeeens shes dean: wdyrada: |
After thus dividing and locating the Saktis in the nine cakras,
Mahatripurasundari assumed nine forms each presiding over one cakra.
The nine forms are—Tripura, Tripuresi, Tripurasundari, Tripuravasini,
Tripurasrih, Tripuraméalini, Tripurasiddha, Tripurambika and the ninth
Herself Mahatripurasundari. These nine Saktis are situated in front of
their enclosures all facing the Devi Rajarajeévari. 58 to 61
we wenfefagean wayerToTTT WRI
Tat a aerafita aris: wists sai artet aa ta want ya waist:
uftant ferareant taclafaeh aa: 1 Tae wfeert chact faanfafe ay
_ Then Brahma and others saw the Sricakra surrounded by the group
of Saktis and thinking that it was not proper, requested Kameéga thus:
“Oh Lord Kamesa! Please create from your power your retinue, because,
only Saktis will mean an imbalance. 62 to 64
aT SMA ta: Gigesanignistt wT SAITAMA TST, Ul GY
fasresivigiraratranstrarcd: | Getariifrataece, Safer, ae
PATA SHAQ ATA, TTT UAT, WAAACAAOTTT, Il G9
Aa Te Viaerraimeanthertarer! yates qa gaeatafe arsaatt
Then Kameévara from His power and the power of Kameévari created
four forms named Mitrega, Sasthiga, Uddiga and Charyanatha wielding
the book, sign of protection, sign of boon and sign of knowledge in their
hands; crystal-clear hued; dressed in white garments; with three eyes,
seated in a lotus posture along with their consorts red in colour and
having a pleasing face and look. Making them as the preachers of the
Sakti-Mantras, Kamesvara asked them to create other teachers of the
Srividya. 65 to 68
aas ssa ferret fagrernaretan! qdtat arareaieg WIGS HAT I
YRacarnivar wafaanypeta | WasasEaye: sree tt wo ll

SATS S SATA: 559 Chapter 57
SS
Then MitreSa created the Divyas, Sasthiga created the Siddhas;
Uddisa created the Manavas with seven, four and eight members in each
group respectively. The fourth one viz., Caryanatha created nine effulgent
Nathas who are the teachers of all knowledge and who are the
embodiments of time. 69, 70
yeuusete G YET TT: | Aan we warrafe waftar saa Nett
aa fogerstnr abet ator qi feafeaaratrpant dfn fe noe
aa ward wrqahe fg ata quiftreatiors preterarta: «= 3
qefaatfira: wad wart wet aq sft t YeATCad teat UT WET OXI
The Group of Gurus thus created performed penance and secured
places behind the location of Tvarita Nitya. There in three different rows
the abodes of Divya, Siddha and Manava Gurus were located. A person
who propitiates through pirnabhiseka the Great Devi Tripura according
to the ordained procedure will secure a place in the above abode. Later
instructed by the Gurus, he will reach the highest abode of the Devi.
Thus I have narrated to you the great and highest secret about which
you asked me.” 71 to 74
sta sifaqreet wrereaaus aearreTeTeats ara: I
End of the fifty-seventh chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurarahasyam.

SOUSA CATT:
Chapter 58
ae Yasqdedt Sw wes Me wea wat Teorhe yRaRateefim: 1 eH
a: SHAS AS Hae | ATH aT a Aaa Stas: Gusti
watafa: ca waa auial aa Gus wafas cen aa tga onan
fafahamt wipfaadtacenet fast) a Targa davaate yf: nxn
wat J Taageat: Tae: SasyT fraate fat cased eupye aafaq
wa wale seq strat afe A aaa
Then, Visvakarma with devotion, again inquired Brahma thus:
“Oh Brahma! I want to ask why the group of the Gurus were not equal
in number. What are their names? Tell me about the fire altar. How
did the fire of Consciousness appear there? Why did you think of Paragakti
in the female form in that altar? I am never satisfied even after hearing
the wonderful legend repeatedly. Which being other than an unfortunate
pillar will be satisfied drinking continuously the nectarian legend of the
Devi who is our own Self? Oh Lord! Please tell me if I can listen to
it?” 1 to 5
aren faaendtedt dara: afta: Wii
wafer: su eat wefsat gai west adat Iai waa: WGA TaN
fraynang & Yer testa a1 afaampa: at wesdfatrafior: = ctl
uyaait wer ata aad a uu qari ugiae went wapfeafageras = el
tend a wae adta gif
Hearing Visvakarma, Brahma was pleased and said thus: “Oh
Visvakarma! Listen carefully to the ancient purifying legend that has
been kept a secret. Pleased with you I will narrate it to you. Mitresa
and other Gurus created by Rajarajesvara are the teachers of speech
and mantra and all of them represent pure knowledge. Devi Parasakti
appears as four forms of sound—Pagyanti, Madhyama, Vaikhari and
Para. I will narrate this. 6 to 9

ABTS ATA: 561 Chapter 58
farren fe at yifad: treadaeart oll
aaa afbsenfir wat anata aden dalferaryarerastiot utet = eet
a anf star att adefaactar watsafata: wear ae arrive i 22
wet Saat + cat fares cea ade arent est
aaeisudqarerereaahantsa | wat tarraaet facreratt after: u ex
cieda adorrsarerate atta: |
“The Power called Tripura is Pure Consciousness. It is beyond speech,
senses and mind. She, the Paramegvari exists as Atma in everything.
She is beyond codes of conduct, free from conduct and the conductor.
She is merely Pure Consciousness supporting all and beyond speech. She
is just the soul and consciousness. By virtue of Her freedom She is termed
as Maya (illusion). Her glory that encompasses all is beyond logic and
questioning. The being gets deluded in many ways by Her who is the
pure soul. The creation is said to be the sport of the Devi. 12 to 14
faced Ua yrearen wemeafaian: Heat
qeranurderat agaatatr Raa aa wey age saife went ou eat
wa ase aurten cred Sita: |
aecilfmantscifncntga ada dia: uel
Tascam wafer AaeNgUere: | Teast a MPaTTEATS Tea: een
fare sft aaa weitevorfest: car: | Tesferyenfagearracataates: tt 28 tl
gat fades a deta sata a1
This modification or uncertainty is the sound form manifesting in
four ways as the gross, the middle, the subtle and the causal. Here the
gross sound (audible) is termed as Vaikhari. In these the implied state
preceding the articulate sound is indistinct and the distinct one are the
alphabets. Even the articulate sound that exists everywhere is of two
types namely common and supernatural. The supernatural sounds are
the seven subtle states of the Nadabrahma. They are Sadja, Rsabha,
Gandhara, Madhyama, Paficama, Dhaivata and Nisada notes that are
generated in the strings and throat. The tunes are counted as four, five,
three and sixteen. Further they are countless because of different
ramifications. 15 to 19

Bt RE, 562 Sri Tripurarahasyam
a EEE
aeteaaeast Wa: Weare: Ron
fecdtaras diteat feiss warfare: |
All these are the divine states with seven Divyaugha Gurus created
by Mitrega. 20
meatier frame: Hoaqeay, eH
aera: frgrorettt aaceren: | frghayta: viet: estefan: 221
The four groups of uncommon knowledge supported by the group of
four siddhas are created by Sastisa. 21, 22
vitferent AIGQenISHH Mee He Ma: | AAA AAT: AAS AHS:
The common sounds in the form of alphabets are in eight groups
on which depend the Manavaughas who are eight in number. 23
weartayiafian wantaratten: | sitgigmvan ut aque WaT: = evil
The three groups total to nineteen. The eight Manavaughas are
created by Udisa. 24
We: HIG: Pat warratafa! eafrafst: argent autayasat Tl II
a atana 4 walteraqae: | Hiereisaesearet Gard sat: 1 Kl
wenryitse faragieatsarret arden: |
wea: Gut: caurares: uf: yest: Holl
sett waar siteraraferaraenr: |
The sound is of the form of time limited to three syllabic instants.
It consists of a group of inarticulates and eight articulate groups. The
Navanathas created by Caryanatha determine the time frames and occupy
the fourth state. They are named as Prakaga, Vimarga, Ananda, Jfiana,
Satya, Parna, Svabhava, Pratibha and Subhaga. These nine are the lords
of the Oghas. 25 to 27
stesgfast faenfeterepreted: Well
fafarraretentian ata: derafera: | aineg wantstt eagefaenmater: UR’
gastanrayrcatiaret werent: | ae feereran: farsi: HATEsy AAT: |! 30M

ABTS AA: 563 Chapter 58
Jfaeren sf wea Wa-eatedvar: |
Because of the varieties of knowledge (Mantra) the Oghas are of
four types. Because of mixture (overlap) these Gurus are known as
Miéras. There is a fifth Ogha (group) that preaches the knowledge about
the Gurus. They are twelve, eleven and nine in number situated outside
the cakra. They are Divyas, Kumara and others as Siddhas. Nrsimha
and others are Manavas. 28 to 30
aarsmfgsadt t autarty arregyy Watt
quryat qdtat at wereat weet: | aH: fea: wrayfafanaferasat: 1 82H
I will now tell you in order how Agni is Consciousness. Mahadeva
Mahegvara the third among the gods with tendencies whose actions are
destructive is the embodiment of goodness and enlightenment within.
tfeat tenet ania carammeaded frgersrqyeray, aan
portman at fad gt faa ag wet ara fagia: wrgeriar: 1 ax
In the centre of the human body there are three pure paths. They
are Pingala, Ida and Susumna to the right, left and centre respectively.
Among them the paths of desire and action are on either sides and the
path of knowledge is in the centre as said by the learned and the
cultured. 33, 34
farrcafiot war watargedtrta fratirest daate water fe deat:
The vibrating Consciousness whose upward movement is obstructed
on either side creates forces of desire and action and human beings are
termed as conscious by this. 35
frrommdgqen grantee tea: | asdtyafaraeitetarered Seat: 1 36 1
Because of the obstruction (to the upward flow of Consciousness)
human beings are engaged in action and desire. They are said to be
conscious because the Consciousness that supports their action flows
upwards. 36
freamqefamint dterieie feat: 1 a aaaha a qt sors safer 30 1

nt ART, 564 Sri Tripurarahasyam
pete eens ae te ee
wasaageret fds: ad wa fei
In animals since the path of consciousness is prevented by lateral
growth, they are unaware of the past and future events. Hence all
animals are equal to inert things. 37
wa feat vereat afataeadistae: u3en
As such the three-eyed God Mahadeva excels all intellectuals. 38
wert: dita wearet fanaa wrest gol aqua TEST
Within the human body the central nerve (Susumna) which is split
supports the intellect. Hence there is the possibility of complete knowledge
within us. 39
Wea F Weakargeda: | wrest fafafar weraret faarferat i voll
sega Mateeatada Raa Taardsataetarte faga: seu
But within lord Mahadeva because of the excessive Consciousness
the central nerve is unbroken in the region of the forehead. Since there
is no ignorance within Mahadeva, the consciousness which is situated
in His third eye is known as Cidagni (fire of consciousness). 40, 41
ag wastrareanta cheat fatatat aa: |
qu vice fasts age afer, WI
aa: Ga wri aw wife: watern feat qarad Get a cies waa tl
aes Gat a detects wt: Wet Read aifeat MG Tears: ul vil
“Oh Visvakarma! Listen. Now I will tell you why Brahma meditated
on a feminine form. Happiness in this world is nothing but the
consciousness of being. Therefore even among animals love for happiness
is common. It is quite clear that beauty is the cause for happiness.
Because a woman is beautiful everyone in this world looks at woman
as the source of happiness. 42 to 44
aad Asfrareanfa ar ar fagfaoit a!
waauarere fad carter wenferery, Wail
fraen waren: ven fad ada fF

STERN'S A: 565 Chapter 58
“J will tell you another point. She who is the Transcendental Supreme
Consciousness has by Her independence brought out this Universe of
Her Self-glory and everything is going on systematically by Her Self-power
and regulation. 45
afrart gar dered cadter afer: esau
afe mat wa Crea Halse Weert caserermntadaer mois
qa Gentes fated ven fagfien wertftaraeart ate vfanfary
“A human being vainly thinks out of ego that he is the doer. If
this is so, tell me, why should he expect anything from others. Also why
should he face contrary results? Therefore the entire creation is Her
glory and meditating on Her in the feminine form has been prompted
by Her will alone. 46 to 48
wd face dfs wearer ua fear Herat fararafirye der u xe
TEMA ee Stet AeA Aral dele at werenetea: Parfeta: i Gol
sitenst ares fat wreraqr
“The entire variegated universe is bound by Her will. Such a Great
Empress was seated in the house of Cintamani within the great lotus
forest. Thinking that this was unsuitable for Her, Sadasiva with Her
permission created the Sripura (Sricakra) as described earlier. 49, 50
wenvsy feat tat dem seater & Wel
wire fagtertt aetedt afer: | at aa caeany faaha yee yee
Paredsad faaka fat gti awenyfa ware ore gerry GR
Tienes Fad werd aa: 1 fart wt aaNaTSaTE UG I
Tent J tore fadtaqqeres: | yt diararged creat frshar aaa: etl
“The gods, demons and human beings in the universe who worshipped
Devi Tripura attained residence in the Sricakra and are there separately
in their respective places. Indra, Brahma and others are also staying in
respective forts of Sricakra. After completing their stipulated stay, they
will merge with the Absolute which is not comprehensible either by
words or by mind. Brahma, Indra, Moon and others who come into
existence in between will obtain merger and exist always. 51 to 55

a ARES 566 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Sind at fafeea fart aa Waar: | WeNvsradoT: AEST: hug 1
weg o frases aged AAT AAT: | gfa a adarerd at stra ear 49 11
aa it wrantten ai tat Gee aa stqrannat fagqeran afer ue
ad aa feat Fret agar Aaa
“Presently, there Brahma along sixty-thousand others from different
universes is staying. Also six-hundred and sixty three thousand others
merged are staying there. Thus I have narrated completely the size of
the Sripura. Now on the Meru you construct a similar Sripura where
the Empress Tripuramba will stay and we can daily see Her who is a
source of joy to the eyes.” 56 to 58
ofa argaa: rat faaeatsfatafer: Wag
fantg sitgt gem aes wat ea fanaa fafented eifrdftarr: tl Gol
Hearing the narration from Brahma, Visvakarma who was filled
with joy and wonder decided to construct the Sripura of Devi on the
peak of Meru keeping in mind the description by Brahma. 59, 60
ofa stages WereraUs SwIS YETTA eae:
End of the fifty-eighth chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurarahasyam.

Wenlrateaats are:
Chapter 59
wd gen CaaS! HAA: We TaRTHaAaIH: =u
aTaagaet AUseet: WAT: | wat fast Foto fatty afer
Zafaeres faqs: Wad: VRMRA ad: fanaa wat aq Paaey Bl
quay aera: Hat Marea! YA: stg ater A adasfratt AT ou wu
Hearing the pleasing narration from Hayagriva, sage Agastya keen
on listening to the story of Devi inquired again thus: “Oh Lord Hayagriva!
What did Bhandasura, who came to spoil the penance of the gods, do
after he went back disappointed to Stnyanagara seeing the gods
surrounded by fire? Please tell me about this in detail. Hearing your
narration about Devi Lalita, my desire to listen is really increasing very
much.” 1 to 4
wi WS: Sen Wf: we ears: | WU pritea oat fafeat weargary, un kt
aad Wseet Saas ANG: | VERT WTI Pe ATT, wall
wat cagh wvecet faerafa cast qeterd aay accat YA
wart waria af eer: woe! dose fafa ore Hae aa: el
Thus inquired by Agastya, the sage Hayagriva said thus: “Oh Agastya!
Listen to the most wonderful and lovely story. After Bhandasura returned
to Sanyakapura, the divine sage Narada landed there from the sky like
the autumnal cloud. Bhandasura saw the divine sage who was playing
his sacred Vallaki and descending from the sky like a white cloud.
Immediately Bhanddsura rose and brought the sage and suitably
worshipped him and with folded hands said thus: 5 to 8
tat wart aa faarasé wiiftar: 1 oer ova feet a geist F HAA] 1 gu
“Oh Divine Sage! Welcome to you. Really you are visiting me after
a long time. It is difficult to receive your grace. Hence have mercy on
me who is your disciple. 2)

Rt ARES 568 Sri Tripurdrahasyam
Ate afeafastoont weitorat feafe fer orat fae sicat fe yet waritiea: 11
Walgattafacy sarsqraaraen! tar: vifaaqardar: waar afe a wa eet
Tet qa ereenige Tara sass Certbeararat feraiar 1 ee
afgsarcnaciteteanry, Gear tary Farrar!
BS: Wand: wat aa Teoh wea, Ueean
we canta ren cat weranag: | fara faqedt at at via qtr
“Tell me about the gods, who I hope are dwindling day by day.
Generally brahmins are cowards. Even my guru having no idea about
my strength that frightens gods and demons is caught by fear. Informed
that the gods are propitiating Parasakti who if pleased will definitely
vanquish me, and that I should spoil their worship, I went there to
destroy them. Seeing the gods along with Indra surrounded by fire, I
happily returned to my abode. I want to inquire about this. How were the
gods caught by the conflagration and burnt? Has any one among them
escaped? Oh Best among sages! Please tell me about this.” 10 to 14
qe ud 2aqft: vee we ce cetateisgar a aden Herat RI
astd pata aa ates: | wad ae we sa ed ufvsdish a
fautat aq fafirtars qfatiqzit vireo etadt aed dtfadt war got
The divine sage who was thus inquired, said with a laugh to the
lord of the demons thus: “Oh Lord of the demons! I am never jealous
about you people. We, who are wedded to truth never utter a lie. Though
you are learned, you are talking like an ignorant one. Seeing you happy
when you should be sorrowful, I feel that such a state of your mind is
really because of bad luck. 15 to 17
Waa: waa veedtearsa snfadfer wagara difsar yrenywrs: tl veil
facfrarsrratn afer uted adeithat feoreusgareaet = RI
vatqerta a pferddt: wigan ateate wait fed fer gata faqeat ui zo ll
“Your enemies are prospering under the protection of the Great
Devi. Propitiated by Indra and others, She has manifested as
Lalitaparamesvari from the altar of Consciousness to kill you. She is
the controller of the universe. Her form is effulgent and Her prowess is

waAaETATS ATA: 569 Chapter 59
ee eeoeiceaie
astonishing. Accompanied by a host of Saktis, She is wielding all types
of weapons. She will arrive here to kill you. Why are you rejoicing like
a fool?” 18 to 20
ga anedied Wee We See! Tt War ytatad fam: wepfiiea: een
wife a at at Marqettage fey: qhafeact aye A wafra: 0
WSMUVMUSAAaasS Wie | CasqUeaBIss viteyraradad: UB
may fan welfaaerrcat: | He dhitshe aieathrantewen: fear: nevi
Hearing Narada, the lord of the demons laughed satirically and said
thus: “Oh Sage! I had already told you that brahmins are by nature
cowards. You are unaware that I frighten even death. Visnu who is the
strongest among gods, was defeated in war by me. I am the lord of
hundred and five universes. I am the creator of a host of gods, demons,
universes, missiles and weapons. Brahma, Visnu and so on are under
my control. Why are you afraid of a woman? Women are by nature
weak.” 21 to 24
Text susdwues: cafettgen: | taftararrgrata watt: WI
amr qfrendet dysareryerah: | Urered: Gafeaed: Worey WITT, tl 2H
At that time the wives of Bhandasura, Sammohini and others brought
the divine sage to their inner apartment through attendants. After
worshipping the lion among the sages with services like offering a seat,
washing the feet and hands and offering eatables, they said with devotion
to him thus: 25, 26
tat maaes seaEshs Ul aaTenfatens Gea HeUAT ITT VOM
aay Yeusthea: YMsaeaay! Seat cera Sat Sa: TAfeta i ye tt
udder at gaahera uted agterarsqrafe war angi 7 deafit Went
PRU wat wat: Sit fae {Gare
THUSHATY, Sahert: ure a: ufvartter: Noll
seyear aMt wear wegeeatfea: |
“Oh Divine Sage! We are fortunate seeing you and blessed by you.
Please look at us with great compassion. We hear from the wives of our

at freer 570 Sri Tripurarahasyam
gurus some terrifying news. We understand that Devi Lalitaparameévarj
worshipped by the gods, has manifested to protect them and kill our
husband. Hence, please advice the demon king so that he escapes from
the peril. Drowned in the sea of sorrow we have surrendered to you.
Please save us who are your servants, from the ocean of distress.” Saying
thus the wives of the demon Bhandasura touched the feet of the sage
and wept. 27 to 30
atex arat wefed areorearrana: W3en
ara tents & aa ware ane: | Setat aged wa qu] areRt Yara 1 3211
WH yirrarsaensar aT area a area feaaam fe city wa: ueeeiy:
afaarats ssmisard agi a: aad: | aeanfraared fief i ax ti
a qarermrad fayer oat fra age eteeed ate a a4
Seeing their tears, Narada overcome with compassion got the demon
king there and spoke thus:“Oh Lord of the Demons! Listen to my ambrosial
words. Do not put your wives into grief and destroy your relatives. In
this world it is extremely rare to find a person who gives an affectionate
advice. A person who talks sweetly without considering the prognostic
danger is an enemy in the form of a friend. He who intelligently analyses
the impending danger and talks bitter like a medicine is to be taken as
a friend. 31 to 35
Ye: wreattsernitdtatasif fra fea: 1 agerreaaed Ufo test gar 1 BGI
Yeanuftcrs ater worgqar! aad wadifs at aateraa yy uaen
“The advice of Sukracdrya, your guru, who very boldly analyses at
length, the welfare of his disciple, is like an unsalutary medicine to
the sick person. By not discarding the words of the guru you should
enjoy utmost prosperity. For that, Oh Lord of Demons! Listen to my
advice to you. 36, 37
Wat weaned weet aeraa! aarshe yoy aearfy Aeat Serva: 1 3¢ I
rearqagag tet cterenftuit faa feat qasufeat wemtet =n 8g
ford arreet aed ware aq TT ge ypaTAehyet a ufeusy aeTST: |
Basra Ua weIsyracta: nt ¥oll

wenraateaats ATT: 571 Chapter 59
“You are thinking that you are the most powerful among others.
Even then listen. Kaitabha, the crown among demons by whose fat has
this earth the bearer of the world been formed, and whose valour was
outstanding was killed in the war by Visnu. By the Supreme woman,
whom you are assuming as powerless, great powerful demons like Sumbha,
Nisumbha and Mahisa who were having a mighty battalion were killed.
aet % aerator fequr warerenfaar! 3 fer onfa watt ge yea ve
itatfefatatred afer tat) Bert astacntfentimpareae: 0 x2
AISCH: Yet: Weraat weNvSHUsey| we warerea wt waa aferat ar: il
sft wen werea: Toueigiwa: | cect wareraatdarerasfafrtyrr: i ve I
“Enough of your arrogant strength which is an enemy that kills
your own self. Are you not recalling your defeat in the past from Gauri?
Devi Lalitaparameévari excels Gauri and others. She is served by myriad
Gauris and other gaktis. The Universal galaxies are equal not even to
the nail on Her foot. Even Lord Mahadeva, by whose blessings you
consider yourself as supremely powerful, is born from a portion of the
leg of Her throne. Hence discard your resoluteness which destroys your
self and pelf. 41 to 44
woven: firat: aredtt: yirasttesrarran: | ae wat a Fenty wey: warfare
amranfs a at tat waeef aataera: 1 cet wemifin rarer fered vray ATA: th ¥G I
var terattare wr farraaft: fir: aes 7 aafteat waitert wer aft ferret
deter afeesrairet qt wafer trent ferar aifterarar waficger earercaery
“Look at your dear devoted wives who are helplessly wailing.
Therefore, I will take you to the abode of Pardsakti and for your sake
put every effort and make the Devi excuse you. You rule the Netheren
region and let Indra rule the Heaven. Protect your demon clan. Do not
get wiped off along with your dear ones. If you do not act according to
my advice you are bound to perish. Oh Lord of Demons! I hope, my
advice is liked by you. Analyse this with a pious mind for reser

at fee, 572 Sri Tripurarahasyam
qed aneaet suse: Weer a eetera Vas onted atarax
Resygudterst arsed ataghat ararat uforaad faasr yefapt I Ko tt
afwayarat aa aft yequat! cad ufa te i a fret anda Wael
wrt wat werert UgTad: VeTsa!| aeadtafadt at aren fafed war
write wd & ad cierta aati a 4a
Hearing Narada, Bhandasura laughed jokingly and holding the divine
sage by hand, climbed to the top of the palace. On the top floor, which
had a golden dome resembling the peak of the Meru-mountain, he sat
on a gem-studded soft seat by the side of a window. He seated the
divine sage on a soft cotton seat. Then he said thus: “Oh Divine Sage!
You should not become angry on me who is your disciple. I know that
you are a great devotee of the feet of Parasakti. I also know that
whatever you utter will come true. Though you know all my accounts,
you are telling me for amusement. 49 to 53
we AT Tater eat wftrerrghar: | Hatha, at ateores faqeran WEA: tt Gy Il
unseat fafadt wradiaedsar ethan, feat arfearevangagitar 44 tl
Tawar fost after sree) atdtsfaeeart a arat asf tl
“I am really the messenger of Laksmi by name Manikyasekhara.
Once Devi Laksmi was doing penance on the banks of the river Ganga
for three hundred million years to propitiate Devi Tripurasundari. Once
I saw a young Kinnara woman who was brimming with ambrosial beauty.
She was drowning in the Ganga river and was dragged by the current
and could not find a saviour. 54 to 56
Fea Heurnfas smeqa: wahtset | ai West: VAN aATee WATT | Wl
at aaragrd aa facet at aonget! degeaylareass Craver AATAUTAN 4S I
ware Wied srreamatatat fro. eae at tfgesfa war gees
MAHAN HMA Matss TH wilte! Ha fafa Hateoaa: water way tl
apa weepfe eneraarern |) cat arnfearfagard Ft yO aR Il
TRISGA MAIMTa VATU, WETS!
“Seeing her, overcome with mercy, I jumped into the Ganga waters

WRAY AT: 573 Chapter 59
and quickly put her to the banks by carrying her on my back. Very soon
she gained consciousness. I, deluded with passion by touching her and
seeing her charm addressed her thus: ‘Oh Auspicious Lady! You have
been saved by me as if from the grip of death. Having touched you,
I am in love with you. Save me. A helped person, if possible, should by
all means return the help. If not it would be like killing himself.
Therefore, save me who is overpowered by violent passion, who is
seeking your protection, by giving yourself to me. Otherwise I will end
my life.’ 57 to 61
gear afgattatadt aredt ar faratt aa: na
aadieqrare wat yOraaTy! wt afgdsrarres feeattafreaar Te
arated Wat sat F calgrseh | set wet fier uisfer aeeorda BRAT Mt Gx I
ausfrad ofa aartt quay cafe aro a aes: Ayeat ae ares wate: 1
a fear eda: pied wrererere frat wr a a Gat atetse Act at aaquéfe 1
Wee: Ware: Ve AA aSareMeM! Apa Ha: Vit wa ae aya fe
faqya waeoot qe dar ciweteay cige wdat wes a fagte: aepafr i
aeaarnaa Ua WaT At ASS: | Uftaarat steno aT erat aT
“Hearing my adverse talk that loyal Kinnari addressed me with
sweet ambrosial good words thus. ‘Do not go mad. I am a devoted
Kinnari. My husband is engaged in penance nearby. I am his dear wife
attached to him like a shadow to a tree. On no account I will disobey
him. It is said in the Dharmaéastra (religious codes) that a person, who
saves from danger or takes care during childhood, is like a father. Hence
I am your daughter according to dharma and you should not talk to me
badly. A person treading a wrong path should take his mind as his
enemy. If the mind is not controlled it will destroy him. Analyse the
worldly activities with a bold and pure mind. The pleasure derived from
a woman is universal with no difference even among animals. Therefore
have love only towards your own wives and not others. Do not get
reduced to ashes by the fire of anger of loyal wives.’ 62 to 69
senfeferarentt aeait agers earratenttaren wee TET: volt
WT leah Tatemsrconbaaanra) sex tH Tale AeA ATS — tt WR

st AIRES 574 Sri Tripurarahasyam
WAPSATS A Ha HTT | ST GRaISAG Sat TA Pal MINT AT we
aa tangs efadta aalfaani pet wasgt Pawar wa TCE
“Even though she was repeatedly giving good advice, I who was
enveloped in lust was in a hurry to touch her. Then crying for help she
reached Laksmi in whose presence blinded with lust I held her garment.
Seeing my bad behavior the angry Devi Laksmi cursed me thus.
‘You wicked fool! She is a godly woman. It is improper that you touched
her. Your behaviour is demonical. Hence you shall become a demon.’
dowd dived ¢ gear amet ae: | Ufaga: vileeferghasts sansa ut ox
ware faratt a ae waa Tat
“Hearing that terrific curse, 1 woke up from my impetuous lust and
was soon drowned in the ocean of sorrow. The Kinnari, who was consoled,
bowed and returned to her home. 74
UA: We Tareat at art yitewarTt Wek
frm wenit a aa afiesdéfa yet 3 teed arerofrrgiay, TCA
Tea Wa At AGATA: |
“Sri Laksmi again spoke to me, who was immersed in the sea of
sorrow, thus: ‘Shame upon you who are uncultured. You do not deserve
to stay near me. Having touched another’s wife let your body which is
fearsome vanish immediately and become ether.’ 75, 76
Ua war weTatsé stat tat fart wer eel
wares aged: wet: aadetits ud fator qatsfr wears waaftacat Weel
Tar yrafantara wiser Asse At dari Afvreashat Hd aasefatarady |
Arensufate asst apeanht creamer) atssrer % wereona: spa ataterts A I
qweel aayaiat frase vai fag at ufaat att caategqaarfa = kil
aa quannes fend adda meartestad yar sty asaftraytl
Wea Sa: HET ora cevitendfeafeys wrer aa fat aarerrge: wfayfara: it o3
amt aaenree + ya: dafaeafa

wenrraferats at: 575 Chapter 59
“Afraid of her curse I sought the blessings of Devi Laksmi by praying
and bowing to her. After a long time she was pleased with me. When
I requested for the release of the curse she said thus—“Oh Maniéekhara!
Your deed is very much despicable. I do not see anything that can nullify
my curse which is irretrievable. You have to suffer for your action.
Losing your body, you stay as air for a long time and then become a
demon. But because you showed compassion and saved the woman
drowning in water you have earned a merit by which you will become
prosperous and the lord of many universes and enjoy desired comforts.
You will get killed by Mahadevi and reach Her abode. You will stay
there for a long period being worshipped by demons and finally you will
unite with Her and become free from rebirth.’ 77 to 88
eetgat yet eyes citar Wes
efa cr at neredt fea: at gar Wa
at fee wrtstient eat asé wt warfare, cul
afe a at ar a wen: fer ar afer
Hearing her, I again inquired the universal mother thus: “Oh Devi!
Who is this Great Devi by whom I will get killed in war? Is She greater
than you? I do not know any one superior to you. Tell me Her rank
and form. What is Her glory? 84, 85
Seay Tareat ure siteiterargent eg
mitra yoy a edt waa: UIT! Hetfafreaeat at ae: Wepfaenia: ut cio
wenfanperisa wavs yore: | Sariste fetter ar: ween
Waseyecnt: Walfera sethta: | wea Saresyrerahact TT, negn
srnfccnrera Aree! ApTEaa YAAT WEA: WU goll
7 fed: Wet ypTaad: | Sears AATAT Et BG Wafaar: Vg
Thus inquired, Devi Rama the universal mother said thus:
“Oh Manigekhara! Listen. That Devi is the Supreme and the Great
Universal Consciousness. From Her own attributes, are born Brahma,
Visnu and Hara possessing attributes like Satva, Rajas and Tamas in
each of the universes. ISvara who is born of all the three attributes does
the work of concealing the destroyed universe. Sadasiva obliges new

st ATE ey 576 Sri Tripurarahasyam
creation. The entire creation is from Her glances and blessings. Sadasiva
creates newly to help liberate those souls that are bound to illusion from
time immemorial. The souls existing in the dissolved state are not
liberated because of their void non-recognisable nature. When they are
created again with a body they acquire consciousness. 86 to 91
iste wear sigrag sft at areaftott watersat ace fafasrferedtitar ui ez
tare wiferafatredorifiar water deca wererets yrferat wean
a ott 3 wet 3 qnifagn feeotiot) area a dearantaart
ag aaeyht fear utes fae we ee arin daft TO eu
aprate eae Stsyreat Adal Maratauit |
“Even Maheévara is born from Her small portion. Therefore She is
the essence. She who is termed as Supreme Consciousness is the soul
of everyone. Like the wall to a painting and a mirror to an image She
is predominantly present in this creation. Because of Her all pervasiveness,
She is called ‘Brahma’. That Tripura is not feminine, not eunuch and
not a man. She is the embodiment of Consciousness not realisable through
words and mind. Free from inertness She is just Consciousness. She is
the seventeenth Nitya inseparable from Paramesvara. Paramesvara has
two aspects like action and the actor. The action is of sixteen types but
the actor is only one. 92 to 95
siaramnt ¥ aye Yai Wa AAT neal
aatanfieta carat weenie! adat ear aaesit wer fren wef:
wT temsdiya dfaq ade ROT!
at fer 3 fora: afse wen atsfa aarfyra: eel
gar: frafaay at wen at taarron: | ae ard: wrod Set eaTAT TAT Be Il
Wuraearsmuteh at a faafseatyrerd |
“The ten senses, the five elements and the mind are the sixteen
aspects of action. The seventeenth permanent aspect of Maheésvara is
the actor (motivation). Supporting the sixteen aspects of action, She is
the causal consciousness. Bereft of Her there can be no Siva, Brahma,
Sadasiva, Isvara, Visnu, group of gods, men, women, moving and
non-moving objects, breathing and non-breathing creation. 96 to 99

carafe aM: 577 Chapter 59
yang wuts aeraarntey Il Roo
yaeatra arent wea Saat | awe Far Bi Beta TAT AAT Il 2oR
qfaett eentfest sa ar aaa: feat! at eaissefsacteracitateuregat tl
Wattrarrarnsteantattcar |
“She is Omnipresent just like gold in an ornament, water in the
ocean, void in the sky, sense of touch and movement in air, heat in fire,
form, vibration and essence in water and like smell and hardness in the
earth. To protect the universe which is a sport of Her Self Splendour, She
is presiding over the great Sricakra city as its Empress. 100 to 102
Wat aad aageat arp sititttanrear: RoR Nl
alett PAYA Hehe ASAT! SSATY AA MAT ART AxadgaT tl Yow il
THAN AAMT St Sites catale Walshe WeAMgAT «Rout
vais ypfert a afer areaqaar aftsent aveyreaat gut pte aw 1
wa wateragiean a fe anfeaa: wer) ae citeraartor cferarett ART I gol II
@a: decitenaata fat unex fates
_ All of us have manifested from Her body. We are known as Vak,
Sri, and Gauri. Kali born out of Her anger is associated with Mahakala.
Tara born out of Her speech is associated with Bhairava. Durga, the
dispeller of distress, is born out of Her valour. Pratyangira born out of
Her cruelty is coupled with Mahagarabha. Salini is from Her might,
Malini is from Her words, Candika is from Her terrific voice and Dhimra
is from Her fierce look. Thus all are born out of Her body and there is
nothing superior to Her. By Her sportive manifestation as Devi Lalita
You will be killed in the war and after staying in Her abode for a long
period you will attain liberation.” 103 to 107
Sag aa wae west Gaal A: oe
wa aaa wag fafaq at oreda gas aged aaetreraes feat wr it g08 tl
Tirenferaaht wadaq a arg weed wat werg wrefara tt Rol
Thus informed by Laksmi, Manigekhara requested again thus:
“Oh Mother! Let it be so. I request you again for something. Let me be
born as a demon without contact with a womb. Let me be born from

st ARES, 578 Sri Tripurarahasyam
the body of a prominent devotee of Parasakti and let me not ever lose
memory of this.” 108 to 110
wiadd Tag TaeeTadt TA Ae MATS ATCHTATATSAATATETAT RRR
Tearusrmtaret fat aq fara, qaat Fret a farentera: 1 gee
fafauuit fawdsitsé coiat tet at TAHT!
ae den: wltsg deci qHahtsa: Tete a
wet: Wenge arate aa unten Hats suea afeeaf a aff
Yadiaencaiedey Ta Wr decites Praarangy sft F at wa: WRG
ARIS S ret H arat aterats s aferetend: |
“Thus beseeched by me, Laksmi said—‘Let it be so’. Hence I was
born from the body of Manmatha who is the crown among the devotees
of Devi Lalita and I have ruled for a very long period hundred and five
universes and daily enjoyed all pleasures. Now I am despondent and
desire to be killed by Her. I have decided to reside near Her in Her
abode always meditating on Her lotus feet. I am waiting for the day
when She will come and kill me in war along with my children,
grand-children and wives. I am in a hurry to dwell in Her abode.
Therefore please go and immediately awaken my wife from ignorance.”
sft seat suse Ae) eae: Regi
dora wuss waa a afer sasha wart aat ATA: tl
Hearing Bhandasura, Narada was filled with joy. After commending
Bhandasura and consoling his wife, the great sage Narada proceeded to
his desired destination. 116, 117
sta stgereet arenas weataafsants ara: tl
End of the fifty-ninth chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurarahasyam.

Ufsants cara:
Chapter 60
sqdittamrennd aret etary! waa: wre dee: TaqyAhrCOT nen
ohare wget eeaferareran! are aenit a matey at
maartafreent Bt F Mretacnan! farce valent: 1 ail
AeA ae TRAM Yet! aeTpIa we fated et YI
wat qearf & gfe deretatariiera: | srdtrarat aret are & fated eq «1
aqengd ast at arte gad
Hearing the narration by Haritayana.which was a demonstration of
his self-experience, the extremely pleased Narada said thus: “Oh
Haritayana! You have very well narrated the ancient glory of the Devi
which was lingering within and without my mind. Though the legend is
ancient, your verbatim methodic exposition has envisaged an internal
experience in me. You are really blessed on this earth because by the
grace of the Supreme Devi you have known the ins and outs of Her
glory. Therefore I will seek an answer from you about a doubt that is
hidden in me over the years. How did you get to know about the ancient
facts both open and hidden. Oh Disciplined One! How are you aware of
the unseen and unheard incidents?” 1 to 5
eed Aaa: WERT eT: nau
tat uy aenfr ageafrentitat satanht wus waratactt non
aasyyd wats Wa Wane AG | aot Ae: Ae are aS TAT wen
MoMA War A MAvtaryydad! Gerrataarst sitcom: raed: wen
Hearing Narada, Haritayana smiled and said thus: “Oh Divine Seer!
Listen. What has been narrated is very scanty. You will know the reason
for this later, Just like people remember their experiences, I too recollect
the past. By the grace of Brahma I can see the ins and outs. By your
grace and the blessings of the Devi I can recollect without distortion
the past as if it is present experience.” 6 to 9

sit AER ea, 580 Sri Tripurarahasyam
at SUS: We Tatas | TO ala ATS: STF = go
We Gena qesqrearterer
Then Guru Dattatreya said to Parasurama who was hearing with
concentration thus: “Oh Parasurama! Listen. Subsequently Hayagriva
narrated the incident of the wonderful war between Bhandasura and the
Devi to Agastya”. 10
spay eaftaatrat fear Ween
viet aden wash Gear weaya tafedaargt ng
shad aeut wdetaabedaterr adareratea adda a vitae Ween
“Oh Sage Agastya! Listen. Seeing the uniquely beautiful
Lalitaparamesvari, Indra and other gods thought within themselves that
this young girl who is the abode of universal beauty lacks grandeur
without a consort just like a creeper without a support. 11 to 13
date faferdta waren qorpda: | seq: Hat aad aacitste fafa: ew
TAT HTS: VATA: | GATS TRU Seared UAT aT Aa: | el
qaigare: saatitcaryiaaaan: |
“Knowing the thoughts of the gods, Brahma and others born out of
the three tendencies meditated upon Kamesvara who manifested then
and there from Her with a form and ornaments matching with the Devi
Mahadevi. Considering Him as the suitable husband to the Devi, the
gods wished a wedding of those two. 14, 15
afgara fafirger: ured eat acre, Weal
netrafaars faa areca! aa ea: wfsar a feat aa RII
aa Huser UtanMeHera | CARAT GOTTA ST, uel
“Learning about this, Brahma and others after requesting the
Supreme Devi, performed their wedding in a grand manner. Then
requested by the gods, Lalita Paramesvari created by Her mental wish
a retinue and the group of deities connected with the enclosures of
Sricakra, to kill Bhandasura. 16 to 18

afeaats ara: 581 Chapter 60
aeat I cate: wreat cot: warhteny! wort qusaeat eran fafaertera: ii ee 1
qarsfordent at facta aaaret: | tere waa awsderet afea: Roll
anroft werent frend acant: | ded Bieta amrersacyata: WV
aaa a He Gea arg fe ateefea! saat aeet year ferret at aaTEAT HN
qa Te vith IT TAPS A! Fa: WTA ATA TESTATTN 33 U
aan fewer caistaa afeat Geatsfa ati ata qe yeentasira wader
Fyre Feuer wet wee! Was cS fama aa etter ar 1 24
“At that time the divine sage Narada arrived at the feet of the
Devi. After prostrating before Her and praising Her with many hymns,
he spoke to Her humbly with folded hands and bent head.—Oh Devi!
I have come from the residence of Bhandasura. He is arriving here with
a huge mighty army. I am sent here by the great lord of the demons
to convey this message to you—“You weak woman! With whose support
are you wanting to fight with me? Without knowing about my strength
do not get foolishly destroyed. Discarding Brahma and other gods who
are cheats and who have been vanquished by me several times, join me.
Opposing me, no man or woman can ever be happy even as in the jaws
of death.”—Saying thus, Narada expressed to the Devi the need for the
highest preparation for war and also said thus “Oh Devi! I think you
are as if defeated by the bold demon.” 19 to 25
Tron tfa wat fafsaeerarrassy ary fare aretfet at faut aerectart tt
fafear ceafmrafatsaaisa wPauit atures tate tafe wife TT Ml YoU
aa aa waar wre dt waa! Yew ANE Wet aa Tafa fart =n Re
arate wat are: western Tt aistatedt aster cites sftareeisrara |
aorta ges ascites Sf dyrarafeat!
“Oh Devi! Permit me quickly to ask You about a secret.” Hearing
Narada, the Supreme Devi looked at Mantrini. The clever Mantrini
grasping the mind of the Devi took Narada by holding his hand to a
lonely place. There taking her seat, Mantrini said thus: “Oh Narada!
Ask about the point in your mind. I know that you are a great devotee
of the feet of the Supreme Devi. In fact, there is nothing unknown to

st freer, 582 Sri Tripurarahasyam
you in this world because of your devotion to Her. Even then, ask what
you want. I will clear your doubt.” 26 to 29
Bat Us APTA WoreT ETAT: UN 2oll
We aareafeye: WagTEy Fae! sa sMTStsETt Eat war werey wiifna: 1
Wa a aduensmench vrata: | met ae Wy Tess: aR
aarstt a4 water com edt afar fat Praca sitcites adit weet wae
Teclnaa: HASTA Yead | at Herein framed X
Ordered thus by Mantrini, the Divine sage Narada with folded palms
sweetly put his questions to her. “Oh Devi! Bhandasura who was examined
by me really looks like a paramount devotee among us. How will that
devotee of the Supreme Devi be defeated? Even then, he has himself
told me that he would, after getting killed by the Devi in the war, will
stay in Her sacred abode for a long period and finally merge in Her
feet. How is it that such a wicked torturer of the world gets liberated?
How can we obtain that state? Please answer me. 30 to 34
yet vara Uat ane wears FI OT A ag sat Teale aA BK
stared: aarsf dad + Here! deiaaaenfta: ade Lara UTA 3G I
SOT Seas SHR ATT Teather! A ceatt ca wanted eat
aallt aedeae Tato! taht eal gpd faad Hay uct
aeltts sopra feaIsea AAMT US WITTY TAT OT AAT TST, 1 Bel
Thus questioned, Devi Syamala replied to Narada thus: “Oh Narada!
Listen to this, though it is a secret. The devotee of Devi Lalita will
never perish. He gets the highest place and nothing else. Just like a
mother intent on protecting does not give her sick child what it likes,
but forcibly feeds the disliked medicine, the Devi by killing Her great
mighty devotee who has sinned heavily will grant him a place at Her
feet even without employing methods like granting vision, speaking and
using weapons. Let me tell you about this. Listen.” 35 to 39
weg ot weaedtarat wear cet aa vit waeefr a dea: ll voll
uieperipes aaat Aenea! daca wear fat aa: KaeTarqar, i BRI

aeaet 583 Chapter 60
a a we
“To one who secretly requests the Devi for anything, She will soon
grant it undoubtedly. When once the obstacle for getting a desired object
is removed, one will soon secure the desired object. 40, 41
squy wet Preaqeritsfa + & yfea: wetter
AH TTT A HET STG a ween
wat fe qfant areda sar afer gyfer: |
Te: cae yfactresrarsat sitet ser esau
SUT wiftafeer ar aT wTTeT AEA |
aera que fer urftt: warenet az 24
Tea Wneteat Yfaret HAT AT HEMT
“Listen. You are ever liberated and so liberation is not your desire.
Only an ignorant person will have that desire. How does an enlightened
one have such desire? Only the imprisoned one aspires for release just
like a hungry person seeks food. How does a contented person desire
food or how can any one feed him? Can a fulfilled one have the same
longing as a wanting person? Tell me what a person who is complete
like the sky can aspire for? Therefore only the ignorant should desire
liberation and not an omniscient like you.” 42 to 44
eared Ael afautintet SSAA: Weil
wore at a faget stayed wr FI
Hearing Mantrini, the happy ever-liberated Narada bowed to her
and to Devi Tripura and went away. 45
aa ar faye edt avetsyrae wf usagi
wifirer fafafawardtictat yeaa) warrorenrenne waararere il OI
weatehyfirars saraget wreeepe! Seay fra Gearantagarga Mt ve it
aitemnaadfirartataviteut | yrearatrectitar areforaeiret W¥gul
aqdet aftac: fer: uraf qrareefea: 1 preavoereanfir = mar ferafar feeranfa & "
Then Devi Tripura requested by Brahma, Visnu and others proceeded
along with Her army to kill Bhandasura in Her chariot having nine
levels like the Sricakra, piled one above the other and well decorated.

at ARREST, 584 Sri Tripurarahasyam
On the top platform are placed war equipments, impenetrable shields,
sharp and fierce missiles and weapons. By Her side were standing with
folded hands the embodiments of Dhanurveda, the missiles and the
weapons. 46 to 50
watsa: wat: Waters satorgrana: | efyrenfsacnad: yRaret: qaftepa: 1
Tater aft wag: dere qeerafanwr: | aafact gq wareh aad feb 42
dion antart aaa qeadfin yenfevanenat: dermet fardat 4a
feats sHenequiangugdt | qanfaareera feat gartargar Ta
Tatts doercfedt: | aba dace facrtehatafrt: uy
arstt siteferanigt atau wareatfaan dear wisypery way fad feat
fagtadt titareticnterageget |
“Then one below the other in an order were standing the Ssaktis of
the enclosures. Even the gurus desiring to fight were equipped with
wonderful shields and missiles. On the right side of the Sricakra chariot,
Mantrini was seated in a chariot with seven levels along with her
battalion ready to fight. With revolving eyes caused by the pleasure of
drinking liquor and served by Sukagyamala and her group, Mantrini set
out accompanied by myriads of Matangakanyas who were also intoxicated.
Her army was keeping her in good humour by singing, dancing, joking,
and enacting comedies. Mantrini the expert in counselling, and minister
to Devi Lalita was engaged in suitable advice to the Devi. She was
particularly interested in music, instruments and love sports. 51 to 56
FA TEMA CSA Year W&otl
faftad& wsudge wateta: fear uttger eranfasffisrenteeagtiadty: 1 4e Il
Plait: PUT AMAIA) saa Tal Usa wer feaaT RI
Temfeafeerat aeaat waurdat: | florea dieqaerqeyretas wif go Il
agaalftifas atfefa: a atgari
On the left side of the Sricakra chariot was seated Varahi
(Sakaranana) in the topmost level of Kiricakra chariot having five levels.
She was surrounded by many Saktis like Jrmbhini. She was the
embodiment of anger and very ferocious and liked those who beg her

pardon. She always punishes all those engaged in misdeeds. On either
sides of her chariot are huge bisons and lions. She was gracefully wielding
weapons like plough and pounding rod. She was accompanied by myriad
Vatukas and Yoginis. 57 to 60
war siteferarcear aren faarqeatt naen
gant aqenreareret arate! foargtmenfernt: uftenga4 1 ail
Similarly the young Bala Tripurasundari the daughter of Devi Lalita
was seated in the Laghucakra chariot accompanied by a group of powerful
gaktis equal to her. 61, 62
wen afaorarst yore aeetat) torntereereat fren farasfaitact 1 ga
aris fereafiitrereracatas | Prectrt deer wergefaenttott navi
feratear aera: areentfrrayear: HaGH
afore qanfaatten: weer: | wey: wadieriattarcgyfadtt: = ARI
To the right of Bala Tripurasundari joined Sampatkari seated on a
great elephant named Ranakélahala which was resembling the huge peak
of the Vindhya mountain, and which was creating three types of terrifying
onomatopoeic sounds and which was naturally inebriated. She was
wielding the great goad. Following her were myriads of intoxicated
elephants hailing from Vindhya mountain, Malaya mountain and
Pragjyotisa country. They were all well-trained in the ways of war and
were sixty years of age. Mounted by persons wielding weapons and
missiles and experts in warfare these elephants moved briskly along
with the group of saktis of Sampatkari. 63 to 66
wen: frat arrarrrareet weet nol
amufararatet wear! recente arqarat wafetisn Ween
Ted. sethnfredoaumnfesa: | yartdgyfeaintataraterarra: ae
afisarfegyifardtatedt Srarge: | qeraerratseret 7 fag: QeaAATT Ml vo
afer: caftfares wafer aaa aera: faeqeguererar: i el

at ARE 586 Sri Tripurarahasyam
ame: urddtarar arts Qasr: |
vitor: vara: fear: dt: efter: areca Woe
ein quanta: sean dteactfen: | faforarecatar eaaarvSt: a1
fafaaforartrat qe cade: | fahren: wafafisa: oxi
Wt: Uae: UfrentgT sa afta: | cRaRsatiza Gratfaredy: Woegn
On the left side of Bala, the great Devi Asvaridha was sitting on
a tall excellent golden-hued horse named Aparajita which was born in
the Gandharva breed and which sped like wind and with auspicious
signs like Sukti, Ardhasuktimani, svastik, lotus and pebbles it outweighed
with its characteristics Ucchaisravas the horse of Indra. Its fine hoof
was invisible even to a crafty careful eye. It had understood the mind
of the Devi Asvaridha and also the movements of the enemy. Following
Her were innumerable horses from Sindhu, Tankana, Arada, Parvati,
Varvara, and Sutejana with various hues like red, black, white, yellow,
brown, pink, green, grey, spotted and bluish red and with dense hair.
They were well trained to move in various ways, to dance to tunes. They
were mounted by éaktis wielding varieties of missiles and weapons. They
moved forward like the waves of the sea and appeared like splitting the
earth by beating with their hoofs. 67 to 75
Qadri asrecderagda: | Bfraaragrettareitenretatare: WRN
veeiat fasts dhrenicaerat: | wartthadugyegsreentia: Noell
Tinparenh aerate: cas: | fafa: siheacetrercerfieiea: neen
aerate: wafest qafaa wat |
The loud sound generated by beating of the hoofs and neighing of
the horses, the loud sound from elephants, the roaring of the lions, the
clapping on the shoulders, the sound from instruments like drums,
cymbals, cow-faced trumpets and huge trumpets mixed with the sound
from the wheels of the Sricakra chariot filled all the directions.
grat siteferareeat VaaTAT STRAT, West
eet: wreaaned Yetta wareg: | suseea: tara fercfererfid gar i coll

ven: 587 Chapter 60
gen ¢ fad wgeraead weer! ster Sey ware eM YEITATETATT It
Pua wars sfae s¢ warfare
Hearing the big sound of the procession leading to victory of
Sri Lalitadevi, the demons were frightened as if from the god of death.
Hearing that sound, Bhandasura expecting his long-desired death from
Her, quickly got ready to fight. Seeing the demons with faces like dried
lotuses and terrified, Bhandasura filled with compassion thought within
himself thus: 79 to 81
a a wa ae faavafa warear: ee
aie qeainifatedt wane Herat! wept Featar vifeeata freer:
afraid mqyers eat Aerattger ts aes YR Arar qaear sftefearerar cx
TeaMegaen washrrat wf yirrae parecer fetes waaarad: i cu
“These persons (demons) for my sake will die along with their
relatives. In this world there is no greater fear than death at any time.
With their death for my sake their dear children, sisters and mothers
will grieve. Alas! This would be painful. Therefore, I will go first and
fight with Sri Lalitambika and get purified by the fire of Her weapon
and attain my desired end. Why should I cause agony to these demons
by separating them from their relatives? 82 to 85
tect Gnfraaniasts Gat A) vreRstay Mert wre SasT ol call
wan: aq fava: yereet wt: add ufe frie oat ten frost
wat vies vara farteareram ae ata et Saarea Wa ATA: I cc
vefavient 24: wihyat erga: | afeeata yar gar a daafe won cet
“Therefore I should not become the cause of such horrendous death.
If a strong person does not protect his subordinates somehow from
distress, he will become a sinner. Thus, if I go first and get killed by
the Devi, my relatives will suffer the same agony of being bereaved from
me. After my death my relatives will face harassment and shame from
the gods and lose their wealth and will be miserable. Hence this is also
not correct. 86 to 89
wea watege aafsrafinge: ae wa! Tt wie et Soa orEyafearaAa: | ol

st FEA, 588 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Beg weautta dthaterangfeger: | Garat carers walters Bera een
aa a ant: werdtatasatenm: | tat ga Saree fager: witqarfefia: 1
Veatensaiet wage gafren: | ater agai area a Hass i ea
wegen far fara wet arafedt ary anet gear eaely aeitseaaa wa: ex
ae sary fe & oft oar age Gon: | Wed tang: wftaciiatre a
utiwarniua: aifiete went sorft wat oitarerqeart a fe aera eg ti
sudtardiay tama WUT
“How can a person at the helm of affairs face defeat? After my
death my brothers, children and other mighty relatives overcome by
valour and anger would undoubtedly get themselves burnt like moths in
the fire of war. Then the remaining cowards with less strength would
helplessly like gods get separated from their wives and children and
hide beneath the earth. Mutually grieving they would be worse than the
dead. In any case it is impossible that the relatives will not suffer.
Hence what is the use of my worrying? The best thing would be this—I will
get killed by the Devi after all the demons are killed. I think this is
auspicious because of many advantages. Getting killed by the weapons
of the gods is purifying and confers stay in heaven. Women and
children cannot have this chance. There is no way out. God only should
help. 90 to 96
aa daar a qaneareant, feat ugoll
ar ue faye eat wararomgit sft aa atta a yteag aT kel
a2 da asedet weaned: | wee Feat Wager, BI
wt fafaarnt ef warrant wafer) dat ada aTaT PRUE UTAATASA Il foo ll
wat fratstaghagqadtsfer + ara
“Or else I had heard in the past from Brahma that the Supreme
Tripura Devi will really fulfil the wants of Her devotees. Hence let Her
not trouble my group of people. In reality they do not belong to me and
I do not belong to them. Though I know about this, the Devi is deluding
me. Therefore my worrying is a waste about this world which is like a
dream. Hence I will completely surrender to Her. I will act only according
to Her command and in no other way. 97 to 100

afeants ara: 589 Chapter 60
ule at acters god yO RoR I
Hemremerarameadirereta | sft wed weed faqet ausera: HHI
froma daar, ae Tanta ear etafatatara weegd Fa: 11 203 11
@ aa: WH aa: YE ASAT UH TA A: Gdiswafa Gani aa:
yRant a aareAaToTt HeTaafaarate | WeRracaAT BBISE A: WAR: I 2o4 II
USA USAT ASS Helse: | TAMA Beat FT Vi STA st ROR
qafriarren gear fafaer eter arg warite werregte 1 gow tt
“Oh Great Devi! Oh Refuge! Protect me who has surrendered to You
and save me from the shackles of delusion”. Praying thus to Devi Tripura,
Bhandasura seeing the pitiable relatives around him, boldly spoke pleasing
words. “Oh Demons! Listen carefully to my important words. I have no
death from anything. I am death unto death. I have created before you,
weapons, missiles, magical experts and many worlds having moving and
non-moving objects. I am the powerful lord of hundred and five universes.
I did not hurry to kill the Devi thinking that She was a woman. Now
seeing Her vehement desire to fight I will easily vanquish Her and bring
Her to my harem and rejoice very much.” 101 to 107
sta sitrquet mrereravs wfsaitseara: 11
End of the sixtieth chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurarahasyam.

Wenateaats ara:
Chapter 61
sera wradt ad che verge: | aaret Hraarat ta: dasa
aa at fran was Se Aacatea worenfafasttaat, WRU
aretie TAUMNS WUSST: Wa: | Weta Bet UM Werarenfadte: nan
Saying thus, the great demon with eyes reddened by fury instructed
his charioteer Dirghagriva who was near-by to make ready his chariot.
Then the charioteer within no time presented with humility the
well-equipped excellent chariot to the lord of the demons. The mighty
Bhandasura holding the bow and the arrow boarded the superb chariot
and furiously proceeded to fight. 1 to 3
Weal qe w test aot Faeroe! cen fahretg: vit aaa: sateaqfeo:
Wea: wdat: WSs ada: uftard aq fredqdéequer: wget qaeqa: wall
Hearing about and seeing the departure of the lord of the demons
to the war, the angry demons got ready quickly and proceeded. The
soldiers holding weapons set out in groups surrounding Bhandasura on
all sides. 4,5
WseayM: Ws qsqraNTAM: | Hieoratsmaatataaatas: Wail
RT: Fars: aaa: | aalfecltgraga: avec aq: = Il
aeqfanm 2 a dedta fem: | udattenra fangs fags: cll
Veguint wer fragrant tat at werent qarsefiracitest = 8
refers dant wtat aaggag) eernatfecttat war aftartect Ii got
The sons of Bhandasura, all were equal in might to him. The valour
of Kutilaksa, the eldest among them was immeasurable. All of them who
never failed in war preceded Bhandasura well equipped in their chariots
accompanied by hundred Aksauhini army. His two brothers Visanga and
Visukra with a valour matching that of Visnu, and who always compete
to fight first, moved in their chariots on either sides of Bhandasura.
Their eyes were red with anger. Holding a great bow, they looked as if

wHateaat: SNA:
591 Chapter 61
they would swallow the enemies. Each of them had an army of one
hundred Aksauhini. 6 to 10
reiqarenra aban tefaam: | ayarqceaate wansatteiteiga: 1 eeu
His powerful ministers, Ugrakarma and others followed him with a
hundred Aksauhini army. ll
wa Waferd Sars GATTO! TT TTT | Wee sat RR
Hag case waradaaepen! WEA ferme Genet Weil
saiethatiostent warereettye | Garching quineafafatrear | exit
qraranisntdasagrathn | fataresadartecataatanttert Weg
TURAN petaan | Tratererata attedt sterartect Weal
Proiraenredt THN! HeIMTErse OMY ert wad sar Well
When the lord of the demons thus set out for war the royal roads
appeared like a river during rainy season eroding the banks, with vortices
of chariots, with obstacles of horses, with crocodiles of elephants, with
tortoises of shields, with waves ejecting frothy balls of flags, with serpents
of long swords, with fishes of quivers, with lotuses of the faces of demons,
with small fishes of their eyes, with swans and other birds of the
variegated umbrellas, with many sea-horses of high raised billows, and
with the gushing noise of the chariot wheels which flowed out of the
gem-set city gate like the water diffusing into a field from the canal.
The army came out of the gate very quickly. 12 to 17
aaatt g fara: wer Saat FAT ween
watt wore fersrer qexterferge feera: | ureararraraet @ aereteenTereaeTaTy, M1 ¢8 I
deter were ifs adaerat waeeastel wenverts aera Roll
AaAT Uetsa Bite frente: | aishr aeepS wre gs ya: Tee: WH
avat aa weicenfisfettr sitet fie Prara censfie aon eoret areberreataTeTs: "
farrpa Tk araered feerererrafiner ears Jorge YT YMtacaefa Ut 2
SITE Ver writer Sara eOSeTAT! aes eS are AA eT LF
aareras=mnfresegitanfad: | waeaget yar wMedtansTe FT: Weel

tf PRET 592 Sri Tripurarahasyam
wasaatad uaqrangstae! Gea ys waist at sa: waa 1 ye 1
aert arent uty tear ga Taastht waar afaerafagitgar NwN
tant aceite fated ereenfafir: fagereafine caret war a earfies: ge: un ee
fagnfit aaaet cadet creatine
Meanwhile, Vijaya, the minister quickly went near the demon-lord
and seeking his permission, bowed and with folded hands said what was
’ appropriate at that time. “Oh king of the demons! Your fame has spread
everywhere. The Sun of your valour is scorching the universes up above.
Visnu who is considered as the mightiest was defeated facing you in war.
Therefore it is certain that no one can conquer you in war. Notwithstanding
this it is the duty of a minister to analyse and give timely advice to
the king in accordance with the codes of administration. If he does not
express what has to be said on time then he is unfit to be a minister,
Four methods have been said in political science. Each one of them will
be suitable under proper circumstance. By listening to the advice of a
foolish minister, if the king adopts an unsuitable method, he will be
ruined like a patient consuming unwholesome item. It is better to fight
after diligent discussion with the intellectuals the information gathered
by messengers and spies about the opponent. Therefore send dependable
messengers and spies to the enemy. By the time they return our army
will get ready and we can suitably safeguard the city. I have submitted
before my lord what was to be said. It is for you now to act suitably.”
Frere afaarert agent Spyrerarry, Weil
wrare agama wor! Fava sarafafs: aat aa fare: — ll Roll
Grane cfenamarge| afiaet ufaaed wre wosrerge: Nagi
Treasfiaet torent at afe aferarsfrarql
We wat Gat tat wor dsratfearary, Wazn
anatt ag denen arg wafrerrat gaara vat A aed ae wate 38 I
a feat verge wage wet pa: frag wat fran gear gd Walaa
AAT ures wat AAT Aa ATE Asa ashe wat Hara
wigtes & cites efata a agra: | fayyaddegadt weterat aot Waal

waatearts aT: 593 Chapter 61
ota at afe Bren a arat Wem: ater
act ou ad depot areassarfe at WA: zou
Hearing the minister, Bhandasura to satisfy his relatives accepted
his advice as good for the kingdom and divided his army among the
army chiefs. He deputed Kutilaksa to guard the city. Bhandasura
addressed his able minister Amitraghna thus: “Oh Amitraghna! Go with
my permission and convey my mind to that Lalita——‘Oh Beautiful Devi!
I would never fight with you who deserve to be protected. Then why
have you come to fight with me? Your interest in war is acceptable to
me. When I am not afraid of a great war, where is the fear to fight
with you. But I am enticed by your charm. Hence discard the gods and
join my group. Hither by peaceful method or by war, I will bring you
under my control. By opposing me you will definitely suffer. Think about
this and quickly decide to join one of the sides.-—Convey this peacefully
to her and return soon after finding out her intention, her strength and
her further course of action. 29 to 37
aa areafaat snd faganterare a: 1 faganferremm areata tl 3é
uifafedt treat ger: Saragtad: | aet a aad w Aafeoarfor gfera: geil
faart yitrarnfe aaa aytet afer
Then Bhandasura said to Vidyunmali, the expert magician thus:
“Oh Learned Vidyunmali! Oh Leader of the magicians! Go unnoticed and
cleverly find out the strength and plans of her army, their weakness
and rifts and return quickly. I know you are competent to do this.”
araenrfant teat aaq: vfearfetty, voll
gic mast) aftaet wera faeries gar wa: i we
Trarecatarenfa: wfeaha: ufferary! wfrwart waa A Yelat AeTAAT: | wR Ml
uftnftera queararn: aarsaraan aaear freeangy year t WaASATT i etl
whamre aad: mteqatsagt: | aed Sarfiat ger cvsesitgefaary i vs
afaary ufasista aserarpaditarart |
anat faar cust: fast arfettirr, saul

St ERMC SOL 594 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Vast arate qa: marge maz
Thus ordered, the two demons proceeded to the army of the Devi.
Amitraghna somehow entered as if by a boat the ocean-like endless army
which was guarded by Saktis wielding swords. As soon as he entered,
the mighty demon was captured by Kaficanabha a servant-maid of
Dandanatha. Slapping him and holding his neck she angrily scolded him
with terrific words. “You fellow! Who are you who have entered stealthily
our army protected by Dandanatha? Having entered the army without
the permission of Dandanatha you will not return alive, just like yourself
entering the jaws of death.” 40 to 45
aeat Ff wa: Saranac: uxgul
cfrsargrodtfaua: yreeta: YTAST: AVIA!
vache: warenst Fadt yfesdts va, uxell
Meanwhile hundreds of Saktis, who guard the army as ordered by
Dandini, arrived there. Dragged and beaten by them Amitraghna became
unconscious. 46, 47
aN AEA esa seas Usa Tua Gara waattangtanhy: Mu veil
qeat ft arid ot aeat sustsares fei faara afi cen: atom: tl
ast farmer tf ured cferaren: witad: | teat ures at df pet ware fe
Meanwhile Dandanatha hearing about the demon got him to her
presence through her maids. Understanding that he was the messenger
of Bhandasura, he was taken to Mantrini Devi who in turn took him
and reported about him to Goddess Lalita and questioned the purpose
of his visit. 48 to 50
We worensfiaer: wat qustegra: | Sass TET Sees Aad Mata 48 Il
araart fartatsfer qat arg WarTaT
qeeasargqaen at ef saree ATATsTaT W&M
mrararaiat eat ater cat ae dear dahteass wa a TATA ll 43 Il
aerated aa Meat He AataesaeM! sas Heats qaae fafaheat uel
wreay qe ad a ache faaem: | sft wear ufaetsé afaa: wayifeata: ll

eRaPETATS ATT: 595 Chapter 61
pfasaratsfaadt Wetreta viene: | artaet Waal Meter frafrr ug
at gata roa F aat waa
Amitraghna bowed and said thus: “I came here as ordered by
Bhandasura and I am his messenger. I will speak out his message—
‘Oh Devi! There is no enmity between us. Why have you come to fight?
Whether you fight or not you will become my captive. Tell me, how
I can battle with you who are pleasing and dear to my heart? Therefore
abandon the gods and take shelter under me.’—After giving this message
I was asked to find out the strength and weakness of your army. Killing
of a messenger is defaming. The learned say that the scriptures forbid
killing of a messenger. Thinking thus I entered. Seen by the éaktis, I
was captured by them as soon as I entered and I am brought before
you. Now you are my refuge. Killing me is unethical. 51 to 56
frerear gaat otferaran Het aa: Wot
fafeen afauht we Saget aad at ES ES A HTT uel
Fart wuseriet watewaet wi ate a vat aan gaara fda: agi
wipe cayit fretet wate fete safes: a ort fawafa
pe Wet tafe aqaacated: | seater a farted vitay aarsfa afar
Hearing the messenger and understanding the views of Devi Lalita,
Mantrini smilingly spoke sweetly thus: “Oh Demon! Have no fear. Be
happy. You will never be killed. Remember my words and convey them
to Bhandasura thus: “If you desire to live, leave away your empire and
without fear come and surrender to Devi Lalita. Let Indra rule the three
worlds and you dwell in the nether region. Along with your children
and army make friends with Indra. Otherwise you will not find relief
and you will not live.” 57 to 61
wat qusannfs aat ayia ada: 1 apifacar aa: Sarafets farasta naz
“Oh Dandanatha! Take him away and show him our entire army
and then leave him beyond our army camp.” =
Fane seat werd cancitfettys arated Ste ate: Aarhragrart 63M
aa yaa: Qatar wedaa) wae werafad wafeg fear: nest

z 596 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Instructed thus, Varahi after showing to the demon her army.
released him at the outskirts of the army. Then considering himself a
reborn, the demon with fear and confusion went to the king. 63, 64
faganet fremaanfiaet fafefarq sitet cat aerate: catfiret apie: 1 gu
fracas eat wat fremarat wore ada at wees: Th
wae atferoteret Gat fig yéterat wart wists wet: 1 ge
Terpreterarged Gata Tat qe! fat Fae YMEAKTA Yat: HIST un ae
wre derqufatiearonsagitad: | ward weet Gaeteast wf ge
Seeing the tortured Amitraghna, Vidyunmali the great magician out
of fear transformed himself into an owl and flying in the sky surveyed
and counted the entire army of saktis. While doing so he was caught
by a Sakti who was guarding the sky during night. Immediately he flew
fifty yojanas upward and fought with her fiercely. After a long combat
hit by her spear, he somehow escaped and in the early morning dropped
himself almost dead in front of the lord of the demons. 65 to 69
gear ufad eet framt gyi eq TUSTAa Sra TereTigy Ufo I Voll
Taree Saas WAIT: | TIT WTA Sey Ses Ue: FETT wR
aa ye: we faganet ad wach Ha! TERT area Tats PrAETA TAT 0 Ul
qearafer at Sat werargfrafray sansfirsret waret ufadet were Ut 03
Seeing the demon before him, who was heavily injured and about
to die, Bhandasura chanted mantras and touched his body by which he
was restored to life and was free from agony. Then he rose and saluted
the king of demons who was in front of him. Questioned by the king,
Vidyunmali reported the incidents thus: “Oh King! I went from your
place along with Amitraghna and saw the army of the goddess which
was like an ocean at the time of dissolution. Then Amitraghna first
entered that army. 70 to 73
uyadt & gutta yea: wfaatrdera! wqacaferenta: ae wares vfertf ast
an fart: waygearta syed: wbeqatt sa Gs aa UTA tl Ol
mafgefe at siaq a seat we fsa: madhisad que werrisaay tl

WeRaPEAATS ATA: 597 Chapter 61
aaeicant + fartsfer t sare
“As I was observing he was forcibly caught by the saktis and
surrounded by them like honey by the bees. Immediately the strong
Amitraghna lost consciousness and was unable to move even, let alone
fighting and escaping. I thought that there is no way for his survival.
I also, out of fear started fleeing. But I did not return out of fear and
respect to your command. 74 to 76
dat ferraarsé Weargencanitent: well
sadart dart: dated Femara at Sar vedt eer citer teers ue i
dadarrgenéitiactadan egiaea Sarat: areata yfrargT: Ween
“After sun-set I assumed the form of a magical owl and flying above
the army had a look at it. That huge frightening army making terrible
sounds looked like an agitated ocean on tides at the time of dissolution.
The demons would die just by seeing that army. 77 to 79
aa Wat versie: yreanat sitnfaera: | semfanar qa caguret waar: | co
“In that army all the gaktis are frightening and highly powerful.
Each one of them is inclined to fight first. 80
wa Get ant at ctferarar: fats sors
qpanifa: calfegrrenta: uftaritar uel
Waraayrentia qeraeasan! Tega Heath at weather YA: FA CI
“There the young Bala, the dear daughter of Lalitambika,
accompanied by myriads of Kumaris (virgins) well-equipped and skilled
in the art of missiles and weapons was repeatedly announcing that she
will kill the children of Bhandasura. 81, 82
araiste a at qqevegagaredty. aera: autarsferrster: WaRTTeAT: I 63
“Even the young girls who are anxious to fight were loudly shouting
that they will soon destroy the army of the sons of Bhandasura. 83
BN Boat ATARSSRSAT PIA AT | TT ATTA, Mere TferT ere It
axl & acted arermardganfat aa are pone werahraet =—l cull

at ARES, 598 Sri Tripurdérahasyam
aifear sitagedt aaracurerfedhe: | smtaacicativiteiqentargar Wcan
“Next Sampatkari and Asvaradha the leaders of the gaktis taking
their position on either sides of Bala were controlling innumerable
elephants and horses carrying great Saktis. Then behind Bala, Devi Lalita
was seated in the great chariot accompanied by the saktis of the nine
enclosures whose might, ferocity and valour are immeasurable.84 to 86
TEM: UARa WaATAT USES Shea | URS THATS WSTSATHAT = eo tl
maateangaata: eaeata: | fardttatfechae: dqet aft feat
antafa weritafaericptaarmata: | wetdcaria dgastrentart cen
“On either sides of Devi Lalita, Mantrini and Dandini who are
extremely powerful are positioned in their individual chariots. Mantrini
is accompanied by myriad Matangakanyakas equalling her valour. The
extremely angry Varahi is accompanied by saktis and Vatukas who are
fierce looking and have frightening names. 87 to 89
waa viedearg Twat aaste ofa aa a aaqaretaghat fe Wega 11 ol
Aas Vet: Taree aU! Areata A qfgedaart aarferaT i kel
yrefeatatat aleadarratent ate wear terest aah Tu RM
Viera ay act att a fant wal cere, staff aaa ti 83H
sae tent ufos qrarefer: | fagqaret aaa serrarna: ee tl
“In the entire army of the saktis I never found a place where they
were not discussing about your death. I am certain that even the
insignificant Sakti among them can in no time devastate our entire army.
Oh Demon King! Let me report that the army of the éakti is hundreds
hundreds myriads huge. Among them every Sakti excels in strength,
valour and prowess all of us.” Saying thus Vidyunmali bowed with
folded hands to the demon-king and remained silent in the assembly of
demons. 90 to 94
gta sitfiqareet crererers waafeants eae: I
End of the sixty-first chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Sri Tripurarahasyam.

fgatpants ara:
Chapter 62
aa qorefaret: Unt SHA AUSTaTAIA, Tataeieraa: = RI
ager: We Maa: USt Ge wafta: | Were are Tet: PTET, FH
wlaga vifeatirenfaeta Terao |
aa até act arsft aut grea: safe, - man
qaumfrrres Gelreaea YA AUT arat WEIS Tae AT nen
Then soon Amitraghna perturbed with fear arrived at the demon’s
assembly and fell at the feet of Bhandasura. Consoled by the ministers
and questioned he trembled and narrated the incident thus: “Oh King!
Ordered by you I went to the great army of Saktis. As soon as I entered
I was with great force caught by them. My strength and valour were
useless before them just like light from a fire-fly during the day. Caught
by them, I was immediately unconscious. 1to4
aga att gusararafadt yaad fered: | aT Spentahtataan AISTRAT SHTSATAT Hh Hl
arataafaa Paa Agha pferot cer: catenetry =—RI
qeaseand ya: afag aft at wy: 1 ae Fratmeitatse wleafrifacige:
“Then led to Dandanatha I stood as if dead. She was huge like a
great mountain with golden lustre and swine faced vomitting fire of
anger from her eyes and making ‘gharghar’ sound. Her battalion of saktis
were similar to her and lit with anger. Seeing them I was unable to
breath even. Ordered by her I was taken by the gaktis to Mantrini.
W Ger ufaut sat afosecrataer! abedeeeranrgt yotareveanfaat cl
wefan uacarfgenfet ) aera fret atorareatafisat uel
TaN: Wessaresqaautsfasifad: | sradané adalat, It Roll
Wasqqadt Hharsad va alsa car atat weet: AAAS AT = —t-NI
“I saw Devi Mantrini who is green like the leaves of the Tamala
tree, who is proud of her youth, whose body is the essence of the hoard

ott ERIS Tey 600 Sri Tripurdrahasyam
of beauty, who has a gentle smile, who sports in her intoxicated pride,
who is fond of music and comedy and who is always playing on her
Vina. I was restored to life by the graceful ambrosial showers from her
lotus-like eyes. Questioned by her, I told her what you had said. I was
soon led by her to the Great Empress Lalita. 8 to 11
Al eer cera Ue Welfare weet aaa Gat arava i eet
anf qoy daer wraaa Vaan Fart wuseeet wat ale st afA: esi
faeitent fagerara yrut pe aay faa a attarge: urea evi
SAU Usa Yat: yareNfedaga: | ape 7 A Wat car Tn gk
sane wi g feerenenisa sft aa aa Wea Gael BUSaTAG: 1 eG II
There I saw the extremely glorious Empress Lalita. She gave me a
message through Mantrini, which I will convey to you. Oh Lord of
demons! Please listen with patience——“Inform the lord of the demons
thus: ‘If you wish to live, give away the three worlds to Indra and
surrender to the Devi. You can live in the nether region along with your
relatives. Befriend Indra along with your children and ministers. If you
fail to do this, you cannot be free in any world. I will bring you, the
enemy of Indra, under my control.—Return and pass on this message
to Bhandasura.” 12 to 16
Texte efeaten Pa GOAT) HRA eH aa ATTA ngell
Hae Baa Woy cera WATTS Gat AAT aTsyarfsaT
Then one greenish gakti riding a horse and holding a fierce sword
came there. Alighting from the horse and bowing to Sri Lalitambika and
Mantrini, she being questioned narrated thus: 17, 18
Diet western afeat artsfr a wae: yradat Tat Gaal We BATA: Il
afafaenfadt ad dt arta a sf ad car wet wdreratsa tl Fol
tart threat w afaorgees a) deat areas satya grief
Watt & aeqamt agqanrs wast: | a aarsfafed fafsaret ay Til Bll
“My subordinate gaktis who were sent to the army and the city of
Bhandasura, have returned after seeing everything. They have closely
observed his entire army and the city.” Thus she reported everything

feafects AT: 601 Chapter 62
about us such as the number of the demons, the soldiers, the ministers,
the weapons, the vehicles, the treasury, the fort security, your sons,
grandsons and great-grand-children. There was nothing in and out
unknown to her. 19 to 22
farerat: gfafearetrat anit meni wearet Aas arenfatafedtstt a: 0
am Wedsa aat quanta ware yan fast wet fares aaafafers ai ev
aq ade Tar Det were arate) aeaarswaa at at AeA sft AT ul A
wast act Gon aed deagga: | wenisft vifercact watat ATA, AUT 1 2E
She disclosed, about our women and their conversation, about your
secret plans which are not known even to us, all with individual details.
It is really astonishing that the facts and figures told by her are the
actuals unknown to us who are living here for ages. She also reported
facts that are unknown to you. I feel that the army of the Saktis is
indomitable. The weakest Sakti among them will quickly destroy all of
taang 3 a4 afeenat Aq! saleaisft fafaar wear ya: war ROM
isé ufasaratstt yrara Ware AG | Wetat etertargy eftor !WreTATIT | Ve
WM Get: MisaHAeoa THI | TUS aT afta aerarafen ze
Tisqq whequit wfet: say fanart spre adder cetsiy arar Sera:
seyerat farrara deat Setar: |
“Oh Lord of demons! I, who am the foremost in strength in your
army and who have conquered Indra many times in battle, was easily
caught by an ordinary Sakti as soon as I entered just like a lion catches a
young deer. Just like young boys snatch a doll from another’s hand they
caught me who am mighty. I was unable to even shake, then where was
the scope for escape. Certainly the demons cannot conquer the Saktis.”
Saying thus the demon remained silent before his lord. 27 to 30
great saat ws: Tarn fata W3zll
Tw fate pom afs dati wareneties faranrenfrerrafaaty 1 321
WH tiennited densfarnfaq satsé faut gear qasqaea

at RES, 602 Sa Tripurarahasyam
AoeaeaeseaH seh: | AAT Aes WeGaasI ax
After hearing the demon, Bhandasura thought within himself thus:
“Devi Tripurasundari has today compassionately blessed me, who is Her
devotee, by fulfilling my age-old desire. The words of Mother Mahalaksmi
have come true. I am fortunate to see and talk to Devi Tripura in the
war and get my defiled body burnt by the great flame of Her weapon
and reach Her abode of great bliss. 31 to 34
TEM aM Sess UTS: | deranatatedtaraniadt Aq 3uQtl
wars sfafeyaiet fe at wera verte! aasé Gad tend ant fages Ti 3qu
werfret Gaur aa diss faa Ti ahacani fradds wat TCO
woisemtafaamt & 4 fe Tad a wa atest a: Raa: dea AAMT HI
aaé Vane ad area Ffauvitsé qeacrererd fear: W3gu
aera agt teed ctatret gar ag 3 facfeat: vitfereata frat sa voit
wor dead dat a fear aut Ga anet atsaat aft gages yfadag un we
aealgad wate at afaddan wd F fage edt poi patesiftiaay ou we
araete at eae at A ufaenfet al etaootaafrermerar at Prats: i x3
at a wafes a fraiensees 81 seat fafa are apes Tal
Wea Ae ga At HATTER WTA
“Born because of great sins, this body is the shelter for sins and
with demonic nature it has become unbearable. Just like a person carrying
a load runs away discarding it, I will abandon this body of mine which
is the cause for misery and run to a place of peace. I have no grief in
this matter. Though I have had happiness from this body for myriads
of years, I am not interested in this. The same pleasures, women and
contacts that were continuously enjoyed by me are disliked by me. I am
distressed. I desire the destruction of this insipid body just like a man
who is diseased for a long period. But my loved ones will grieve without
me. In the same manner I will also be unhappy without them. Death
brings sorrow before and after. The situation is painful. Devi Tripura
should show Her grace so that there will be no agony for me. I feel it
would be good if She can kill all of us simultaneously. How She, who
by nature grants more than the wants of a devotee, will not fulfil the

fgatecats ra: 603 Chapter 62
desire of mine who is devoted to Her feet.”—Thinking thus and bowing
to the Great Devi, Bhandasura exhibited his extreme outward anger just
like a performer in dance. 35 to 44
foreaan daa at 4a aaa: Ua
afrat wera Haale +t Saa | Uc Uaeciteh ASMA RII
aed Sfert Wea FT YR: sara eafad seit araraet aft yrs + fava
Fa GSTS HE: Hremsfead! aafs AAU cHleenreateaaKy
frdat wrenrretacantea | ugar deat af stat: wear Astrea we
aa Ui aat wet ya: aT aT Afacater
“Qh useless demon! Fie upon you. How are you shamelessly uttering
displeasing praises about our enemy in front of me. Praising the opponent
is resorted to by a coward. Even though the enemy is stronger, a brave
person will not praise him. Whether the enemy is strong or weak, the
bold soldiers will not be frightened”. Saying thus, the angry Bhandasura
vomitting the poison of anger from his eyes like a black cobra, set out
from the main gate of the city as if out of a hole holding high his sword
and shouting thus: “Let all those demons who are afraid of Her see my
might. Facing me today in the war She will not survive any more.”
aan Seayt Ga: AAAI: I 4oll
way ashe ware Haat tat war: ret WTEC al
sea laa wraSt afar say: Wear Te Alas ATPAaT:| 4? I
frig: caeatarfia: Qareqatar wRaUT: | at: Uta: watts oTAT: TS Ts TH GU
stat faygtaa: at waera fatty: |
As the lord of the demons was saying thus, the charioteer brought
the chariot and the demon alighted on it and proceeded. Then the people
took him to be the personification of death determined to devastate the
world. They said that the world caught in the fire of his anger cannot
exist. All the frightened demons, the chief of armies, ministers, sons,
grandsons, great-grandsons and brothers and everyone without exception
Jointly followed Bhandasura. 50 to 53

att AI vet t 604 Sri Tripurarahasyam
aarsgat fageaut cafeeretsr yate: West
satteuiuges Ue TUM! aaa fags fretaredt aay Waa
wat were wafra aaer
Ordered by Visukra, the king Kutilaksa deputed five Aksohini army
to take care of the city and reporting the same to Visukra, he gathering
a huge army marched in front of Bhandasura as if he would swallow
all the directions. 54 to 55
ud waferdt cen fafaaaar Ta
wareeey sear wed: warts: | Ueenaton aadeatearshs: W&on
arenetifietd: wadicenfaferd: | abzarrerearedae traded: W&etl
Reataaircacuena: | gapaerdua: deat fe wera: Watt
aut wracttanted sa Ulta: |
As the entire army of Bhandasura was thus moving, the demons
all over sounded the kettle-drums. The combined sound from the war
drums, instruments, slogans, clapping, chariots, elephants, hoofs of the
horses, neighing, chants of panegyrists and sounds of war-call was heard
everywhere as if tearing the world like a piece of cloth. 56 to 59
nad warned queda, U Goll
fafer anqedt ffs vege efredt cater werarat wet ea tt G8 II
afaayae dort sus: Sarasa: | Wea Ys Aequeary = RVI
fase afeat tat atafeatadar dat wfaanbienstagat naz
ag area aft yea: Vratssqari Ua wre: gad A mena: YI
Tl Gen VAM YS TaAe! Taas starsat ger fasraeHAT uN RK
Hearing the sound of the army and learning through a messenger
the arrival of Bhandasura, Dandini who was certain about the war rushed
to Mantrini and requested thus: “Oh Mantrini, Bhandasura has arrived
with his army completely equipped and a war is ahead. Report this to
Devi Lalita and along with the saktis follow Her and guard Her. I will
go in advance with my army to obstruct him. The sound of elephants
and horses which we are hearing now, I think, is from the battle in

faafecats aa: 605 Chapter 62
which the anxious Bala of astonishing valour is fighting accompanied by
Sampatkari and Asvaradha.” 60 to 65
ua seat Tear re Vavrertutt! afar qusatat afauit arscrerat ui gg
afa wgd Gres Tera We SAUTE Tare HEM FaayE: TC
grayatcateraaearangd: | WAPTA: BUA Feate sclacny: TA
sfe farrerraisé waeeat Fraftiar far aerfis qatar at fat sere ge 1
As Dandini was saying thus a messenger arrived there. After praising
Dandini and Mantrini she spoke thus: “Oh Devi! A battle has begun
between Balambika and the demons. The arrangements and equipments
of the demon-king are stupendous. Helped by his brothers, and children
and accompanied by the entire army that extremely cruel demon is
fighting with wicked valour. I was sent by Sampatkari to inform this
to you. After getting back, what should I tell to Devi Sampatkari.”
TAT Geeks atest steusattenr! We aeartagy aret famadery
Te at Ge grat ude sora Tt atest tray: ogn
wet qatent fet qaenstaqegenr) aaa: or tire wraseaenht gay
am Teer at esa Saag: | aT Mees Age Aa TANT: 1 BU
Wisé wea a fat gaat fararin aera aorta aa: Galea gar ui ox
Tree vitt ames weet Taenfet sree Frtar ar vied: weereot
Hearing the messenger, Sri Dandini spoke words filled with valour
relevant to the occasion thus: “Listen to me and convey that to Sampatkari
the leader of the elephant army.—“You should fight diligently with the
strong demons. The young Balambika who is eager to fight should be
guarded by all. I will reach there very soon. You should be fighting till
I reach there in such a manner that the demon will not deceptively run
away. Then I will very quickly destroy his age-old zeal for fighting just
like the Sun dispels darkness. Go quickly with this message to
Sampatkari”. Ordered thus, the messenger went back. 70 to 75
wt: feftcarect afiedt frdat gay sreeueatfeeartaar caterers Ul OG
frcietet qa: qetoerfeat | fraaxiia cleats val Tera ATT | vo

at fee, 606 Sri Tripurarahasyam
vaafimgrarga: Sarena: | utet eed firey sttaerifor difaery Ween
afreaangrety: Hrererateorepia: | ut sftavsarostt sarang we
The naturally angry Dandini with swollen anger because of the war
was looking as though she would quickly burn the worlds with the fire
of anger. Then accompanied by innumerable saktis, Dandini overpowered
by anger proceeded soon in her Kiri-cakra chariot. The sound from the
wheels of the chariots and the army was breaking the hearts of the
enemies as they heard it. The echo assumed frightening levels. Thus
Sri Dandanatha set out to triumph. 76 to 79
sta sttfaqueeet wrereraus frafrats eae: 11
End of the sixty-second chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurérahasyam.

faafeants ara:
Chapter 63
querqrenrcntereemereary Fayre tacerrqategenrar ferry, wew
unyétet qrarét ar aferarar wa: fren! cavt tener: wera TA: TH
pirrsraryratataayead! went wet tennst adtareargay ua
amieqanfant at aren faqepedt) cyeeaTRSt Tea, sil
Hearing the tumultous sound from the army of Bhandasura, the
young beloved daughter of Sri Lalitambika very much anxious to fight
looked at the northern direction and saw the rising dust caused by the
movement of the army of the demons as if it was the wind of dissolution.
Realizing the arrival of Bhandasura along with his army, the jubilant
Bala Tripurasundari mounted the Laghu-cakra chariot and directed the
charioteer. lto4
stterg: wifi at acharae Hy aqeda wereat ufavitafirdrat Tt)
tarts dat ararnigiafreay terrisfirpadt agai dat nau
pride werte arent arate: | ser get faut war arzat sat wel
wera qaarat at fawn ater weary! saree gaat amy wferdaet cl
Tea: wifafta qeaq: | saRaSTIaTeMeTaATaa Tae: neu
Anticipating the obstruction from Devi Lalita, Bala Tripurasundari
proceeded with great speed towards the army of the demons, without
taking leave of the Devi Lalita, Mantrini and Dandini. Her chariot was
speeding ahead like the autumnal clouds dragged by the wind. Observing
the journey of Bala as dangerous, Asvaradha followed her very quickly
along with her army of horses as tall as the tides of an ocean that
would quench the flame of trouble from the enemies. 5 to 9
waa we aeaurleecteaa | etencHlfemageaateray FAT, Roll
amequantetatercanaa | atfear vitrdart tafaentagner Ween
We: AEPART Award Wa WU were Seretat SrA 1 VV
Wet agftentat ada prado adtanfafrasedt afta eet YA ka

st FRE, 608 Sri Tripurdrahasyam
faa cere eRteeferat ay!
Then Sampatkari riding the elephant Ranakolahala and accompanied
by myriads of elephant forces, speeded behind Bala to protect her. But
inspired by Bala to speed up, her charioteer an expert in that art and
who resembled Bala drove the chariot with great speed and entered the
army of the demons like a river in spate that enters the ocean. Twanging
her bow and raining arrows on the army of the demons she entered the
army with her chariot cutting into it like a boat in an ocean which is
being split by the force of a river. 10 to 18
pleat cea Hardfea: Weevil
Te Aaa Mei Tevtes veracit cada: dist gear aeit |r
Tw rit sraaifin Ws gana! vent tarsi ya_BERANL Weg
wet fart Gad eaten paftear Prfar atacand a AAA. v9 I
Tas¢ afeartat fired: | carat adfaart faster aac tT ou eel
wae wer ara wae yes fe at qari Het Tara aren Vafacfer YA: 1 Veil
Wel Ferrel WarrSays sata! Fata walat Berta fase Fi oil
mae 4 ofa wg aapasen waaay: | fant ar faagt at wet atswaete aT I
Spat Tapa: welch fafeatsr ar
The chief of the army of demons, the mighty Kutilaksa riding an
elephant and accompanied by a huge army opposed Bala Tripurasundari.
The chief of the army seeing the soft eight-year-young Bala who was
sitting alone in the chariot and showering arrows, thought her to be of
great prowess. He wondered who that young girl was who was battling
single handed without fear with the demons who have tormented Indra
and other gods. He took her to be Devi Lalita by the features reported
by the messengers. But he had a doubt because she was not grown up.
“If she is the daughter of Lalita, how could she come alone ready to
fight without an army? It looks as though she will conquer all of us.
I think no one can face her in war, be it Visukra or Visanga or the
king or myself. Then how can the princes either individually or jointly
fight her? 14 to 21

TETAS ATA: 609 Chapter 63
aera aa aa Pte arena: We
erates forfarett cect fafirareda: | catfegit feat tearenfearserarerey: | 23 1
wi fafunargafreqamteretcn: | Ufiatar YasTe Teas HET Be I
yiforanaet adugtent saeafera: | uftareda pragit fram taafrgy Qi
Wherever she sees our army, she is quickly dwindling it then and
there by the bunch of her arrows. Myriads of demons of our army have
been killed and our huge army is frightened. With their hands, legs,
chest, arm-pits and heads cut-off some have fallen, some are dead and
some others are running away with great fear. Being unable to cross
the river of blood hundreds shivering with fear are drowned in the pool
of blood. 22 to 25
mdtusereey fara vfaytd, auras: | Tgett war aenfgeartdfadt Rear
aifegren aearat Farrar Sat wader tafesor wea arash at GT Uw
faut oft % Gace safe waar gfe fafere at Te verses: = WRI
WAN WAST: PRATeaTeate! Gatashraet tear: Serraerat AE 1 Vl
WAT FER AAERATAcAlfae: | cat year are FasAA: FETA 1 Zo tt
Sei arathra fendefratart
This girl will in no time break into our army. She should be
obstructed by me with effort. Fie upon me who is staying without action.
This young girl is entering into our army in my very presence, an act
which neither Indra nor Maruts nor the Wind could do in the past.
Conquering her, looks impossible.” Thinking thus, the powerful demon
Kutilaksa riding his huge elephant, faced her and fought with her by
despatching a bunch of arrows. While fighting with Bala, Kutilaksa an
expert in warfare and use of magical missiles and weapons showered
arrows and covered her as if a rising Sun by snowfall. 26 to 30
mist arareurargt yratenratigyha: Wael
arrrarercast t af fafereia: 1 arcarare Gerex aot fate: 1 aR
afrereerreren: Pera! + ae aafreperetseaterqegesés a Mt 33
aaa wreagirant arefahrtanys wqefatepercrrarentire PreTTy naeu

at Ae, 610 Sri Tripurarahasyam
faqa at weraat ygaterarns: | operat aarare wears fafert: wrt: on au
Then, even Bala Tripurasundari who was red like a rising Sun, very
quickly destroyed that shower by the sharp ray-like arrows and tormented
the demons by sharp arrows. The quickness of her shooting the arrows
could not be seen even by a skilled observer. It was like a continuous
flood of water flowing from the mountain peak during rainy season.
Within no time she destroyed the huge army and going near Kutilaksa,
injured him with sharp arrows. 31 to 35
gate distt acrar wduts dat wer yarns ufagrarerada: 1 3g
Whe great yitedient: Wem Geaa Wat dteoraeets ard qenfesarsrare |
Aagat ASST WAT WETS Sq afsat aad fafa ws: na
dreds faway qat wargraad sone! aferafirsd area opfecnait wear:
PATS Ae WAAAY Taare are Tesaaferetar Ul ¥oll
The mighty Kutilaksa also fought with all his energy. By rendering
all his missiles and weapons futile by counter weapons and hitting him
with sharp arrows, Bala with one sharp arrow broke his bow and struck
the face of his elephant by another arrow. Hit on the face, the mountainous
elephant yelled and revolved and fell dead on the ground. Seeing the
dead elephant, Kutilaksa holding a mace angrily rushed towards Bala,
who was sitting in her chariot, to kill her just like the quick Rahu
chases to swallow the young red Sun. 36 to 40
anya fage: fest aateserdisa: | srarrafaata wereet Fryer ar ii ¥e tl
vrurenuiquts faces eqarat i ao faaeterranita ageifireyiact W¥eil
ward yfeadt ut aars sequetaad|
The gods and the siddhas watched this from the sky. Observing
Kutilaksa who was holding his mace and speeding towards her, Bala
struck his heart with a deep-drawn arrow. Pierced by the arrow, Kutilaksa
heavily vomitted blood and dropped unconscious on the ground just like
a mountain hit by the thunderbolt. 41, 42
aa arent we wet tatat fara wan
ate vit ra tt suseeratiog: | arate peat & afesdt yatta tl vv Il

u
Balatripuras

frafecats AA: 611 Chapter 63
senfooatfen Sas Arg AUST GAT! ATaTETE cvearen aferdita S qa xy
TOT ASSAAA A TA AeA HATHA
Then Bala smiling, addressed her charioteer thus: “Oh Friend!
Quickly take our chariot near Bhandasura. Dandini with a swine-symbol
flag is coming behind me. I am longing to fight with Bhandasura. I am
sure, if Dandanatha reaches me, she will prevent me. Therefore take me
in such a way that she will not catch up with me.” 43 to 45
Sqm tatat ar are wrt wet war Usaul
deerme east dist elad: | qyad saree tatty wa fe = voll
gat qrat -w earefateagga: | werfafarga: dadt wy Great Ween
faacg 7 avait ta Aa perf at yea gat art et area at TAN ¥S II
Thus instructed, the friendly charioteer said thus to Bala: “The
golden high-flying flag which is seen in the centre of the army must be
of the chariot of Bhandasura. It looks he is surrounded by great fierce
demons with huge chariots. I am not finding a way to take the chariot
there. Hence with your weapon create a path by which I can drive my
chariot.” 46 to 49
SAAT AYRE AT Ae aria! VCE Fre seraary WAT: Ht Go Il
arcana aaagitarssant: Sarge Aeepteet wate qT Wail
Thus requested, the swift-skilled Bala created immediately a path
in the middle of the army of demons by showering arrows. By that flood
of arrows the frontage of their army was cloven like a broken bridge
inspite of being opposed by very strong demons. 50, 51
Sfrercnesst aeransaaret: | seer yrearct at wren tem: Wegq: WARM
ant forargfranitecrete: | caret yreaegraaras frets: Gat: Waal
aq: vifirranfsat sfheort arrten: | Gahran gem SwiteHaT Fa Nl 4 Ul
rrmemgritresayant fee: | seta a fafeat setfaaraact: WK I
AATF werget ured arereereaa: | raha AAA Seat Were 4G I
Drmarita waar vlearqari et aa Ya Fas Tafa easeAeT Mt Wo
sft atat nerrdia cera Torage |

PIECES 612 Sri Tripurarahasyam
The chariots of some were broken; some lost their horses and
elephants. Unable to bear the shower of arrows the demons ran helterskelter. Some lost their arms, eyes, legs, stomach and head. Some were
pulverised by the force of her weapons. There was a frightening oceanlike river of blood containing foaming hot currents and waves. The rays
from the Sun were masked by the cloud of arrows and the fleeing demons
could not see the directions. They thought that it was the great god of
death who had appeared in the form of Bala Tripurasundari. The heads
of the demons were dropping in bunches like the ripe palm-fruits by a
strong wind. There was a loud cry of the distressed demons such as
‘Oh father, Oh Son, Oh Friend, Oh Brother, I am doomed.’ 52 to 57
dent Wa wt Varad aT: W4ell
Wasrasyat toast Fae: |
Then, as the frontage of the army was split the charioteer of Bala
with great speed drove the chariot quickly into it. 58
faymeniisamit sustaes dat U4
qear frat eae: FS wet saa reat ters aegyeaferat Tat |
are faaraqaae aensserat! fraitracdtats sear qercafatararaarg &8 Il
aur dasgt: dfarratats safaq! caste wat ytatget war zZ aR
wie aad Waly Serena Tyra: | fen aHfveate ar Sat ifort wat GA:
ada dget tans weUTT!
Seeing Bala forcing herself into his army and eager to fight with
Bhandasura, Visukra the younger brother of Bhandasura thought that
the eight-year young girl with unlimited strength and valour would fight
in an astonishing way and she cannot be conquered even by the strongest
of the demons. But strong persons should fight in the war. There is no
doubt that this girl will destroy all the demons. Later what will Devi
Lalita do in the war? We should fight with all our energy. God wa
59 to
sta fife artsttradepcteay, uavil
ad aqeaat torre Payee Aree War PA TTT TAT Waal
protect us.

panfarats aa: 613 Chapter 63
aig fata drerarecctrergaren: | wtte aret tat ufaya cera on agit
quart waarat faradt easier! deer yradur faettenasmtt 1 gel
Deciding thus, the brilliant Vigukra riding his elephant, that hailed
from the clan of Iravata, which was white like the snow-covered mountain
and which had four tusks, showered arrows as if from the dark rainbearing clouds on the top of Kailasa Mountain. He obstructed by a
shower of arrows, Bala who was speedily moving into the army of the
demons and taking away their lives. Then he roared like a lion.
wena teas fagat a sade der tae Fa Herat Te CI
diem qa fagd ¢ entered: werent aterd att cate a Practet wea: 1 69 tt
fafafaen: fat qa vera wed Ten: | fae cere We Sif: yet qarfwadst
fata dd: sa: Stpareaad: |
He by inviting his army which was fleeing, made them return to
the war-field. He said thus: “Oh Demons! It is improper for the high
born to run away from war. If you do so with fear, you will lose
righteousness and wealth. Hence imbibe anger and prowess and get back
from all over. Defeated by a woman in war, if you go to your houses,
how will you answer your wives who will ask about your return? Death
is better than the insult from a woman.” 68 to 70
faymaat sear wgarenney & Tara
are atet faatt ukagq: wadtd: | SeraahaeRAT AT Are Tae th I
ufafararencdh sa aa SRT!
Hearing Vigukra, the demons returned to the war and surrounded
Bala Tripurasundari who seated in her chariot shone like the rising Sun
with an orb. 71, 72
aa at tat aT wat oe friar TCE)
Putt wt gai aaranisfig-ae: | 7 F unfeizer anfereaenieafares 11 ox
sa dare gar were aad ga te Areata Sager Tr ot
amet tar fara wes atefereafir

st ARREST 614 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Then the sweet-spoken charioteer and friend said thus to Bala:
“Oh Young girl! I think that the army of the demons is unbearable,
There is no one else to support you. There is a huge army opposing us.
If you like, I will quickly take back the chariot. You can come back
quickly with your army and fight the demons as you please.” 73 to 75
a Walaa: we weer Fesfauit Ta
dtasfa fe fra qe Ad wreaqor aftr
water & teat qearen afer 8 aafad, TACO
citerasé faeras gent trentgeat wae ated uve avi deciteea
Hearing her friend, the sweet-voiced Bala smilingly said thus:
“Oh Dear Friend! Why are you afraid? Even a hundred times this army
would be insufficient to face me in war. I, who am eager to fight, am
sportively dragging on the war. If you wish, I can immediately relieve
the world from the demons.” 76 to 78
SUR WM YA: We Bat tae wer! ta ada F sift: AAscitat: wT
aarstt tara wa fat weet wes steafsaten wearaaant aa doll
ae fatrta aster uracareact tor afe vit taad aa vei toate tl
Thus spoken, the friendly charioteer said again thus: “Oh Devi! I am
not afraid of a hundred times larger army. It is my duty to understand
your mind. My only worry is that you have set out to fight without the
permission from Devi Lalita. Tell me quickly which way I should drive
the chariot.” 79 to 81
sf stages crereeraus frafsantseara: 11
End of the sixty-third chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurarahasyam.

aq: Wisaats ears:
Chapter 64
adiadt fyreara ater desta! We vitt wa tet aarat werisra: wen
eat aberutfagyeareat Weg: |
Hearing the friend, the pleased Bala said thus: “Quickly drive the
chariot to the great demon Visukra who is with his army of elephants
and who is being praised by the panegyrists.” 1
see auned Fart SAT, wu
arensfe Seaaat AAI UPA PRA state Tat | aN
F: amenttyat gear at derenfetty uftard frorent fates faergerqn
aged safer Tae! EAA Here: spleens waa: ul 4
wetitqnar: Safad sfagratrgent: | Unareferacoraratsaretarsat we
Ordered thus, she drove the great chariot to that place. By a
continuous shower of arrows of Bala, the ocean-like huge army of the
demons dwindled. Again Bala, seeing powerful groups of demons
surrounding her and trying to kill her, destroyed them using a thunderbolt.
Some were reduced to ashes, some lost their limbs, some their eyes, feet
and so on. 2 to 6
Tercera aso frat aq Prem orfguitarraeraapeteay, nou
ag faye wet qeasErrTa aad wrenafrdferygrange: uc i
Hearing the distressed loud wailing of his destroyed army, Visukra
sent his elephant belonging to the Iravata clan, to fight with Bala who
was displaying wonderful prowess and showered arrows on her just like
a cloud on a gem peak. 7 to 8
wieat aauisa ufaded fireitya: | peated ay cata Torect went
Bala also retaliated hitting each demon with an arrow. The showers
of arrow from both sides caused darkness in the war field. 9

st ARS, 616 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Tet ¢ fairagtorraadon serrevignhs et at wrenfethy Uo
wt mefaat a fafsearrerarmd| aqgeat Teamat wit tegga
Wart WaT wre dearsccragqea: | aeenfedt meqest fayen: we aaa: 1 een
Wa: ata uke aad fia MAI
Then with a deep-drawn arrow having a curved bent tip Visukra
struck the hand of the charioteer of Bala. Hit hard by the arrow she
was slightly unconscious. Seeing this Bala with angry red eyes struck
with four sharp arrows the shouting demon on his forehead. Injured by
this Visukra became unconscious and again rose up immediately and
showered sharp arrows on Bala. 10 to 12
BT Weal ata cyeetenat-aar West
wreat ot aad uw fade qaeqa) setcharenviguigner aacdor Weevil
froma aerittadacitaat! saad fiitfre cer a et TTL TC
quamast frist wearvat fatrta: 1 dia: media werearrtet wae: get
Then the skilled Bala immediately with two arrows at a time cut-off
his umbrella and the bow. Again with another curved tipped arrow struck
the elephant of the Iravata clan. That arrow split the elephant just like
a mountain by the thunderbolt. The arrow entered its temple and
exited from its back and the elephant looked like a log split by a saw.
aefad maaft cd diet ao eet! Genet: GAT at WEdyagT: = gol
TTA HAV! Mata A are sUsaet UAT uel
aac fren wer tt afeafafer fag card fenfserorsd dat ui eel
aust tat cafasst arifsa mefsatsts ator ufeatsa ara Roll
AR Ae wagers TSF!
Seeing the great elephant dead, the demon jumped into the sky and
holding a sword rushed to hit Bala. Then Bala with an arrow broke his
sword into two even much before he could with the raised sword like
the god of death reach her and struck him on his head with three
arrows. With the three arrows on his head, Visukra looked like a great
mountain with three peaks. Even though he was severely hit, he picked up
Bala in his hands and flew fast into the sky like Garuda. 17 to 20

aqsfeaats aa: 617 Chapter 64
Fema feanront at tataractfear WM
act art citer a verstatsaaran wife defor daa aragt a resfe BR 0
Seeing Bala being taken away, the charioteer said thus: “Oh Bala!
Enough of your sport which may end up in danger. Kill the demon by
your power before he goes far away.” 215792
qe Tata Ae Aa care eT: | fret ofs eet rarer wef 230
avaciafsedt fragt arrge mreqestenfast faard wetaet Ww
Hearing the words of the friend and considering it as apt at that
time, Bala hit the demon on his head with her strong fist. Hit by the
thunderbolt-like fist he fell down unconscious on the ground with his
head split and vomitting blood. 23, 24
ay Wet Tarest Bet aafrateaa fra vit za watatsd dea: Bail
dataset hratad: | ae TheahReastahsiedae: Weal
HRA Ta Wass AT Aa TH FAL WaT WaT Yksdt A aUSTM VATA il ll
sed faeces anit aval ta: | aay an gage faefa a ahteat on Ret
Wacgd wean qesest eae! senftonsta we ada avast gy
Then Bala climbed her chariot and urged her friend thus: “Oh Dear
Friend! Drive this chariot quickly in front of the lord of demons who
being served by white umbrellas is looking like a blue mountain
surrounded by swans and streams and shining. Dandanatha is catching
up with me along with her army. I am hearing the frightening roar of
the lions. Definitely she will prevent me from fighting. Till that time
I will battle with the strong Bhandasura. I am anxious to fight. Take
me there somehow.” 25 to 29
Fn aged asft wat wales | MaRS PARMAR AAT: 30
Hearing Bala, the charioteer friend drove the chariot till it reached
the front of Bhandasura. 30
Wer vd faagistt weassat Gage: | stat qaaes teaser Baa 1 BVI
Vifeet = farteltsfer fatrreerar ate wer facfiar ate: cae ada aac

at Ree, 618 Sri Tripurarahasyam
ate ar cfern ust fastata at fe adi Tener ger ya afaaed waar)
sta fafa aren froorarsat ait
Getting to know everything about Bala, Visanga thought that she
was unconquerable by gods and demons. Fighting with her, there is no
scope of living to the lord of the demons. Defeated by her, all his longstanding fame will vanish. The situation will be same if Devi Lalita
defeats him. Hence I should strive to fight with all my might. Deciding
thus, Visanga obstructed Bala. 31 to 33
wari way eet eat tracker Waxil
wusqanettaed wear wre wat whet! fret avsa steed wer fact gate: 1
aya & cree et arcana gare: | sega Paferary arovisrgat farast = ui 361
Seeing the demon approaching in his chariot, Bala considering it as
an obstruction to fight with Bhandasura addressed her friend thus:
“Oh Dear Friend! A great obstacle has appeared when I wanted to fight
with Bhandasura. Watch my skill. I will drive him away.” Saying thus
she despatched four sharp arrows at him. 34 to 36
terer are fret: waa arte: | daar east fet Gates ufo 3
froarise eat faagiserdentfie: | art waters Gers: 1 Rll
area ute atafirggra ara: |
By those arrows his tall horses, having the speed of the wind, were
killed. With another arrow his flag was broken and his charioteer was
hit by one more arrow. Then the enraged demon Visanga seeing his plan
spoiled, riding a different horse and holding a fierce bolt rushed towards
qe waar aaqarnrevsa, Wall
aad rah Wyse Saraeny yrcabroreoeTaTAT ATTA: W ¥oll
Fea Aen gaat Mota wi scatergad dt garatsa faager: Ml Vel
were uf ayorart qeteorys aystia ast serrate Ws
WEA wony war aeraaeie wT wees ata gaqETAR aT wail
qfeoa: wrrgat aprender

ag fears era: 619 Chapter 64
Seeing the approaching Visanga like a wind-driven cloud, Bala
showered arrows on him like a rain on a mountain. When he continued
rushing towards her without caring about the shower of arrows, Bala
with a deep-drawn arrow killed his horse. Visanga without a horse,
holding high the strong bolt and roaring like a sea moved nearer
frightening like the god of death. Bala hit him with a feathered arrow
in his chest. Severely injured he fell unconscious on the ground after
revolving and vomitting blood just like a mountain with its wings chopped.
aagd cot gear tem tars fate: Ta)
wet cefaat Be: WT WRTEM WL! agN aaagqe faayqeaees: i xu
aw Tea wi cede Porfaa: | daly fasta cferat fer after uve
Seeing the astonishing act of Bala, the gods and the demons were
wonderstruck and exclaimed thus: “This demon Visanga who is as powerful
as Visnu had many times vanquished Indra and others in war. But he
has been easily struck down by this young girl who will conquer everyone.
Then what will Devi Lalita do?” 44 to 46
WeEtaIT YA: TAA TH AML! TUSTYTANa Tt TAT ae WaT = KI
wy fret od ae fesfrefad wr saa qeet wet feasfrefirrat:
sera wraior aastsaryatey
As they were saying thus, the charioteer drove her chariot to
Bhandasura. Seeing the great demon Bala said to the charioteer thus:
“You have done the right thing which was my long-pending desire.
By fighting with him I will satisfy my long-pending desire.” Saying thus,
Bala showered arrows on Bhandasura. 47, 48
HT AVSTHY TEAM Ae MSA FATA seit
Wet aed urer fararsfirrd wert @ caret wa ware: fatenfaratset: 1
WH Gr veddt warafsoaguoit yaaa: ait Ase areata: W&gn
arn faereas conf arctan wat stefan: Garigataceat Gz I
Ten fern aanfafraaartaan at freq erste tat carrera GR I
aerate + ate wited asso aq Tat Graft aferarghearenfereer

sit fees 620 Sri Tripurarahasyam
aaretarafataan yreyararea: |
Then Bhandasura seeing Bala in front of him, was happy that his
age-old desire was getting fulfilled. He thought thus: “Appropriate longawaited time has arrived according to the words of Laksmi. I have seen
the great goddess who fulfills the wants of Her devotees. This is indeed
the time to discard my body. Killed by her, I will reach Her abode. This
girl who is the daughter of the Empress Lalita, has wonderful valour.
Born out of Sri Lalita, she is like Her reflection. I have no doubt that
Devi Lalita also will appear to destroy me respecting the words of
Laksmi. The words of Laksmi are unfailing. Let it be so. I will show
my respects to this embodiment of the reflection of Devi Lalita in a
manner presently suitable by offering arrows.” 49 to 54
ge fafara wert wee Yqs Fy: 4a
weraafaaynt wfgrwen: wreat: 1 srersat dterrarafardt elf far 4a
grt fafirag: uret fatet: yitaet: wets | erie qfet wear mrerentrenfaaet
Thinking thus, Bhandasura picked up his strong bow and the arrow.
He sent one arrow charged with water mantra to her feet and another
one charged with flower mantra to her head. One arrow washed her feet
with pure cold water and the other one showered flowers on her head.
aege fyrense ures twerifient) qariaefeat wavaraqtat Wael
ata fated far ar ont carve torar wafer anf farcat & ercorrgatset it 48 tl
ure yorfafa: yt: fafra t aaqi ad dyraqeasfar wt qitpe FAA! Goll
Watching this wonder, the charioteer questioned Bala thus: “Oh
Young girl! I am seeing a wonder in the demon. Is it caused by him or
is it happening because of your greatness? Though you are showering
arrows in the war-field, how can he be worshipping you? Please clarify
soon my doubt about this.” 58 to 60
qedd wre at aren yyy afe wea: | YT at aeetferaniterrererpfeTy GR
Ue eae wereat aren wnforeasrar: | ys Serat wrafeagereRtsTaT: | 62H
us qa fafted: sitqt ufarafan at acer afer yorarare ara: =! 63H

ag stems or: 621 Chapter 64
ater wafrepfatreqeran PRATT! HMR: Taya were wer AAT ex I
arg Weta SS ret BH METAR: | MaTeMHTeS afer eft Ter, WaRKI
Inquired thus, Bala said thus: “Oh Dear Friend! Listen to this great
secret which was told long ago by Devi Lalita. This demon, a great
devotee of Devi Tripura, was Manisekhara, the messenger of Laksmi and
became a demon from a curse. Killed by Devi Lalita, he will reach Her
abode. He has worshipped me with arrows because I am the daughter
of Lalita. Now watch my response.” Saying thus, Bala discharged an
arrow which divided itself into five and touched the head of Bhandasura.
By this the great demon felt happy that the Devi has placed Her hands
on his head and blessed him. 61 to 65
wequear faferarerst arerrar TerafaeaT | as wags HANtwvsteaa: | ee
Witnessing this the charioteer of Bala was wonder-struck. Then a
great battle started between Bala and Bhandasura. 66
qrauftpattd at dtewaraeq wayeaqed geet prea, Ron
wwarqiists qactarge: tataateed: | teat aaitranitfr Gata aera, Ge I
The war between them, with each retaliating the other with showers
of arrows, was unique and frightening the cowards. Bhandasura to please
the Devi fought with devotion exhibiting his astonishing might. 67, 68
fated graconeningcoitet) qreanssaet yreaitrerad sereamt il el
ag Yt woven arg fa aera gerd qeriters GaNtavseeat: tl wot
wader werarfor atenteartor a
Aiming at the vital parts of the body, both of them skilled in the
techniques were mutually appreciating thus: “Oh Hero! Skilled in war,
you have done well. Oh Devi! with great power, you are doing well.” As
the war thus continued between Bala and Bhandasura they attacked each
other with powerful missiles which really deluded the world. 69, 70
apfegiead order ATA STS, WoRt
areaer a untat aer area wer are wer Patna wer da fe wR
tert gat agaqa tamia wi neem Pst a eI PITT 1 31

a ARTS, 622 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Tusteustietd aar aret aw arson, alat Ait Mat thet areata eo ox
tard dunt arentereateg age! Gaudin qartavstert: 1 oui
The Parvata missile was apposed by the Thunderbolt; the Sarpa
missile by the Garuda; the Fire by the Rain; the Rain by the Wind;
again the Naga by the Mongoose; the Mongoose by the Cat; the Cat by
the Dog; the Wolf by the Tiger, the Tiger by the Lion, the Lion by the
Sarabha and Gandabherunda. Also they discharged missiles of Yama,
Varuna, Kubera, Nirruti, Indra, Rudra, Mohana, Pinika, Vaisnava and
Brahma. The war between Bala and Bhanddsura was frightening.
aa tem: vraag wera wana: | Tarsepfafeser qearerafafern: 1 Gi
Ue Waa Wat aera araary A: 1 IM: WAMaevsee wal watt Wl
fags faye afer ute: dae tertafe: uftard qparfterry ui we i
Wag: yrangnidatadiaqeaory) arenstr ar eterta aterarara waa: 11 oe i
The demons and gaktis who had come to help saw the wonderful
war with great surprise. As the battle progressed, when Bhandasura was
losing by the skill of Bala, then Visanga, Visukra and Kutilakga with
their army surrounded Balambiké and fought with her using weapons
ejecting heavy fire. Bala fought with them effortlessly. 76 to 79
vdfadt merge wae area aE! wana coseaTet faa temereayT — tl coll
fara dames ¢ teramafafarqey yaerererararges scfeaawar TeAg
areas verge wet qari! Geartieet tet: wyatt fafera vat
When such a war was going on with Bala, Dandanatha of terrific
prowess, after conquering a huge army of the demons and smashing the
huge mountainous battalion by her thunderbolt-like pounding rod came
near Bala who was fighting with enthusiasm and was surprised to see
her battling all alone. 80 to 82
sft sitfaqereet wrereravs agq:afeeits ara: |
End of the sixty-fourth chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurarahasyam.

Useeants ara:
Chapter 65
ga queer UT Sat HleaaarHart| fagint ada ga Saarqeritcar, gu
gaat densest arerdtqaens set: | fagiotarragad ar aret setae ATT | 8
ceva teat a MeTeIL TTA: | Eafe at GT Ferrer M3 At
Then by the valour of Dandanatha the army of Bhandasura was
shattered just like a mountain by Indra’s thunderbolt. As the army of
the demons was being pounded by her pounder Varahi saw to her surprise
Bala who was fighting again with great interest all alone with the great
demons. 1to3
am at we alert warare faswaant! set art weet Fes fate st uv
dress upafs aed arate! terse, try eat fracas a
at ferterct tether weet sttdtacen yt waeerepferarat i GI
BH gut aera agadta ae aA!
Then Varahi said to Bala thus: “Oh Balambika! Enough of your
brave war which is unparalleled. I have never seen anywhere such
courage by which all alone you have vanquished mighty fierce demons
in the war. Hearing about your lonely battle with the demons, the Great
Devi your mother is worried. You should go and meet the Great Empress
right now.” 4 to 6
Seer Sarees fer eT rT THT, Won
saree wareat warernfraan wer faders waited WA: wei
Saying thus Varahi ordered Asvaridha to take Bala safely and
quickly to the Great Empress Lalita and get back. 7, 8
Fareeangean waar! aera tanfavasadad Ft TM nen
Ordered thus, Asvaradha got into the chariot of Bala, who was not
willing to leave the battlefield, and got it to get back. 9
warrer wenost arai ai fata water qayat aereerafeattat il toll

tt AEST 624 Sri Tripura rahasyam
afrarganftarsgrdttarena |) aaa wees ad qarfratagy, Ween
WaRaraaer ¢ tertametaq ufser aa seat cleat aera: Ween
fanfare merge sustenrattaat fafaet dtrenftat at faagiagerat 1 ean
wat wos amare fraciteearge! qaear dante fat frat wear ji ex
wafsem anren famenssafeat wai sqacat fretat asft gare qomsrai
After reaching Devi Lalita, Asvaridha handed over Bala to Her and
said thus: “Oh Mother! This girl has been brought back with compulsion
from the war-field. She is extremely brave and has wonderful valour
and prowess. When we went as ordered by You to bring her back from
the war, she had entered the ocean-like army of the demons and had
destroyed myriads of mighty demons. She had vanquished Visanga and
Visukra, the brothers of Bhandasura, known for their fierce nature. Then
she fought for a long time with Bhandasura who had conquered all the
worlds and rendered his magical skill useless. With great effort Varahi
reached her and stopped the war.” Saying thus, Asvaridha returned to
the war. 10 to 15
ae wet wernt cargarts wean! Ufersanfrararcamypectarfererefiarenrit 86 1
amt aa qa: ard aafaeneanraa) aqeda wat qe Aaetafeh wae gull
Then the Great Empress Lalita took Bala soon on Her lap and
embraced her and with love smelt her head and said thus: “My Child!
Do not repeat any more such brave deeds. It was improper that you
went to fight without informing Me.” 16, 17
ara wre apart ar feat arat ufti wasefirrtarn fread ya: YA: tl tell
Wafered Gaatsrntqenaren! WEA war aa fast tanaqay, Rel
qastenanratagea arftari aaa eusteass Gea BATU, I Roll
wanitsfareiteans sare wire Torecat) arate arsfr wee faner wer a way tt
Then Bala with red eyes and sighing frequently said to her mother
Lalita thus: “Oh Mother! From a long time I was excited about playing
in the war. Fearing that You will prevent me, I did not inform You of
my going to the war. Even before I was satisfied enjoying the war sport,
Your Dandanatha pulled me out. Respecting Your fear about my war

qeatecrats AT: 625 Chapter 65
craze I returned. Otherwise I would have humbled her by fighting with
her.” 18 to 21
aedifafe at aret uftearsa neath ta aed Gaefar seqerat Baa ATH RHI
The Transcendental Great Devi embracing Bala who was saying
thus, consoled her and asked her not to talk like that. 22
aa querer faftamatsa gata susdeta gaa teraaar WRB
pifaaaat SAAT FAA WA PATA TANTS WAABTS Ye TAT A
den: vier wha qaemradt: | anrafafeurets Generated: 1 eA
vrandist vewifafaddaggar weqdé werd affar aera: Wau
Then Dandanatha seated in the Kiri-cakra fought with Bhandasura
who was accompanied by the army of demons. Both the saktis and the
demons encroached on each other and fought with rage. The demons
were hitting the Saktis with weapons like pounders, tridents, iron clubs,
iron arrows, javelins, swords, spears and axes. The Saktis also were
killing the mighty demons in the fierce battle using varieties of weapons.
aa viferonedteowangeritven: | fate sar: wret: aafery frere: gat:
afaneranyrea: frfirersytaeeen: | areat: ys feather ar arereatrat Seah tl Re I
Hit by the Saktis, the demons lost their limbs, thighs and noses.
Some were sliced into two by the weapons. Some others were pulverised.
Some were completely compressed by the heavy weapons. They were all
wailing, calling for their sons, friends, fathers and brothers. 27, 28
Wet vifeerrorenftarergtarranta: | eat: ferer: AfaaeM: UeMATTRAAT I 2 Ul
ama A Tayo caer | Viera aga: tafren deur: Hl Roll
Rerimrgergieferats sermeraat: |
This way the demons were reduced to ashes by the fire of the
weapons of gaktis. The remaining demons started running away with
fear. Soon none could step into the battlefield which was filled with the
frightening noice of the foamy rivers of blood. It was a feast for the
departed spirits, foxes, eagles and jackals. 29, 30
a fafreamrat terdarqagATy ween

Rt faa 626 Sri Tripurdirahasyam
faye: a faugisa fraratsearaat yas Gres wage wt yifeat: we ge
Visukra and Viganga by preventing the demons who were losing
and running away, brought them back to the war. Again a terrible war
started with the daktis. 31, 32
area yiferraat at faypent wea aon! wast wear caret awe at feremray 1
afgarqaatet a yifeerrerey: | feorfeer yfeear uisermadindrar ot ax I
Vigukra by his magical power perplexed the army of the éaktis.
He created darkness and showered stones along with embers and wind.
By this the huge army of the gaktis was tormented and yelling they
became unconscious. 33, 34
t qearsearaat worentt worrarsar faryghor verge aparsfrgt wat un gyi
sarserste qq faugor were! anét avsters qatenfremfaar i gat
Watching this Sampatkari came there on her elephant and quickly
started an encounter with Visukra. Even the powerful Asvaradha battled
with Viganga. Varahi fought with extreme rage with Bhandasura. 35, 36
TORRTeTeeTS Swart Taree afr seers gar waAet AT 1h BV
faye atearara werrsrearsrar) aad yreatfor faryyes wrerar yay, Ween
farrarseatr gen aaramerifrant wfrator teitsfr aet faferarssert
we quan fat wer agfgede wea: | Hsorrat art t areter aafesAT tl
wet aq.yrd fost peterg ya: yA: | srensfarentedtqert faypnts gaara: | veil
Weer WETHT: AMHal MENG! MeeISseTyaTTAT ATAAsTSy: ll WT
wrt ufat gear gereat WEATH!
Fighting with Visukra, Sampatkari riding Ranakolahala and followed
by a huge army of elephants, showered arrows on him and using an antimagical missile destroyed his frightening magic. Even Visukra showered
opposing arrows. As the war was continuing for a long period, Sampatkari
broke his bow into two. He picked up another bow, which was also broken
by her. Like this, his hundred bows were destroyed. Then the powerful
Visukra with great anger hit the shoulder of Sampatkari with a spear
by which her huge bow dropped. Seeing this he roared. 37 to 42

qguieets a7: 627 Chapter 65
wont aa: Gal wievigret a want
nfraitste afte teaenqdaat waters afwireraita Ween
ected: qorege: wedutth: | cas sothterprettfgtafartioor, Weal
TORR SIS aA Aa Sea seer qt ais Fras weaTIH ut wR I
aot fafrayareteares onfaagars wet fafa dtepay apaercfia: 1 vou
auafeauftera ory: wary za!
Then the angry Sampatkari sent her elephant to fight. Her great
elephant started fighting with the elephant of the demon. It looked as
though two mountains were fighting. They fought severely for some time
interlocking their trunks, dashing their temples, rubbing their sides,
sieging with their tusks and making loud noises. Then the strong
Ranakolahala quickly sieged the elephant of the demon and putting it
on the ground pierced its stomach with the tusk and lifted it up and
angrily dropped it. By this the mountainous elephant yelled and revolved
three times and fell dead. 43 to 47
Uae aretet aH A WETAT: nven
TORUS MATT ToreR Tee TI MET Beate wearers wee: Ween
waters were a Trait firmer: | orsaTe weeqatt erential: it yo Ht
Seeing his elephant fallen, the great Visukra jumped with a goad
and angrily hit the elephant Ranakdlahala in between its temples by
which its head was injured and it receded just about a distance of five
bows. 48 to 50
faypR: qreerea gorge wera ata aret TEM: AeHat gars wu eit
wen: wordt aonfese watt wari were at fret wea aoertesRH
meats aera weal: yaTA: |
Visukra jumping again with the goad on the elephant, fought with
Sampatkari. Snatching her bow and breaking it into two, he angrily hit
with one portion of the bow severely on her head. 51, 52
Ua Fat AT aaa aH ATATAT naa
Fife fafrded ararct srerra yfet wer fayyerer wer wereRe we M4 It

at PRES, 628 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Thus hit with force she was unconscious for a while and again the
angry Sampatkari returned a strong punch with her diamond-like fist
on Vigukra’s head. 58, 54
Yfsarataaqet aexristeyfesd: | pare: vtet sa ToT ageract Waa tt
aagsistt Wes: ValsscHrd AYA: | Aetet TRUST: YEA: wos: 1
trent ed faqet & aaa qaUsaed! Ua Ufa: MATA A ARTET: «= Gol
With his head split by the blow of the fist, the bleeding and
unconscious Visukra dropped on the ground like a mountain with its wings
chopped. Then as the angry elephant of Sampatkari was about to trample
him, Bhandasura’s son who was fighting near by saw that and thinking
that his uncle was getting killed took him away by magical power. Like
this the great demon was defeated by Sampatkari. 55 to 57
Tasareca gqeateast afar: | fafa qed tT wEISAT uel
AMSHUS HHT Weta | afsat Tear Waspeeh wet Gastar GS
Uaant Geek UT vrrNqa! Wares weary frais: = Goll
Uirddisargen: werastt a1 feaqatacon: wag: gage: = RI
Then Asvaradha fought with the mighty demon Visanga who on his
horse was fighting using many types of missiles and weapons. Asvaridha
riding her horse struck his chest with a mace by which Visanga became
slightly unconscious but again quickly picking up weapons like flat sword,
shield and Satacandra roamed in the army of the Saktis. By his weapons,
the saktis losing their heads, bodies and limbs were falling in bunches.
a vrenifatermanrs smatstratttan | acest USA Tea BIS et ATT Ul
ag ashe Weel wear aay! stat Bat Brat war wfaat Te: Ul
Asvarudha furiously bound him, who was thus destroying her army,
by a rope and as she was about to kill him along with his horse by a
mace, the great demon, a master of magic, realising his defeat magically
disappeared along with his horse. Like this Visanga was vanquished by
Asvaridha. 62, 63
wa venfadt gs fargt afta ques w aud gala ae uN a Il

qeaeaats Aa: 629 Chapter 65
fageaseafin aiseatt: era: yrenfor wast: 1
WeRaUsSSHad WTS Alert afar Ta
wangg Ways TI MYGat: | Wes w eeaerafieas afrst Weg
When Visanga was thus driven away from war by Aégvaradha,
Dandanatha accompanied by her army fought with Bhandasura. The
swine-faced Dandanatha overpowered Bhandasura by destroying his
missiles and weapons using counteracting missiles and weapons. She
excelled him in sword fight, mace fight, bow fight, axe fight and even
in boxing. 64 to 66
wd wofaa: weagaey fagyien: 1 Wat wiggeantedatfaai gratisgt: = ge
arrat etary faded wera frrerad ated great a oratcny, Ween
aaa Ga Siena Terai! ets RAM, WsAevSsaaET | Ge Ul
wa aa Ferra Gert WA: YA: | Ufafearseraraigraara Waa: tt Boll
When he was thus defeated in combat with weapons, Bhandasura
thought about it and being an exponent in magic resorted to magical
war. He created darkness, whirlwind, lightning, deafening showers of
stones, serpents, corpses and fire. He created hunting dogs, wolves, tigers,
hyenas, demons, lions, Sarabhas, Gandabherundas. Dandini by employing
retaliating missiles destroyed his repeated magical creations. 67 to 70
HT GUSHETUerAaM eM: | AHLARASAT YT FAT ALASAT: Wogn
WgaeHnIsyaaeAhas Wea VATS eeON wea RI
Then tormented by the luminous weapons of Dandanatha, Bhandasura
hid himself in the sky and started fighting from his chariot. He showered
boulders that made huge sound along with weapons and thunder which
frightened the army of the Saktis. i ante.
Wi ator yea wifsar wifaaatet fradqectrs faagensyd AAA: Ml Rl
The army of the gaktis tortured by these showers was scattered like
a damaged bridge. 73
Fear Tear cust AUSateAT! SMMTATS HAA AGM AMAS HTT Mt Il
at waamnfaya frrermantige Pramas ete TIEPATA TT WII

at ARES 630 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Posgaran pat aateyi Gara! ATES ASTATATAT ATS ARTA 1G 11
Tate vet gat steradony! Tears arearet Gas set Fash tt wo 1
Word Yasar Yut Bilt: Gractel AAT YA: A Wedars sy TaAaiT AMT 9 1
fanrgraeveatat sala Heats sqat
Seeing the disturbance, Dandanatha with violent wrath jumped fast
into the sky holding a weapon. Breaking into the shower of boulders
she started searching the demon in the sky overcast with darkness. Then
she illuminated the sky by her self effulgence and reached the demon
by warding off his magic. With the mace she struck the huge demon,
who was sitting in his chariot and causing showers of boulders, on his
head by which he fell down unconscious on the ground like a mountain
hit by a thunderbolt and like a river breaching its banks. Again with
great fury Dandanatha with her mace destroyed his chariot, horses and
the charioteer. 74 to 78
aa eolfatriam TeTeeTt Held: Woes
saad TH arate fatassvaM ssa anteeTa: colt
TeneRgye SaUMENa! Yada qasad acitatwadt weTqTy, Ween
Tet wend dito qacitestegan aaarat forest edt qacrara: Ween
faraausedter: gu cei qa wad Tree aa A Aes C3
Taq YaaAsa wai ae ea: fag a veredt waraoa cx
at eae wat Manes faad far deat fafaratannaad aa: cull
wert ta aaa Yet HIST! seta qaretsd wfaada a yA CRI
Meanwhile the great demon Bhandasura regaining his consciousness
jumped into the sky with his mace to fight with Dandanatha. A severe
war started between Varahi (Dandanatha) and the demon king. There
was the tumult of exchanging blows with mace and great sound of
thunderbolts. After fighting like this for a while, Dandanatha thinking
that the great demon was excessively powerful dragged him with her
plough and raised her pounder held in her stout arm. Thinking that he
will die hit by the pounder Bhandasura recollected the words of Laksmi
thus: “What was spoken by Laksmi earlier cannot become false. How
can I die hit by the unfailing pounder? The Great Devi Tripurasundari

qaaeaats AM: 631 Chapter 65
—— NT
who fulfills the desires of Her devotees should kill me in the war and
this is my desire from a long period”.—As the demon was thinking thus
an incorporeal voice said thus: “Oh Dandanatha! Bhandasura is not at
all to be killed by you in the war. Hence withdraw your unfailing
pounder.” 79 to 86
gad Waaastisent cusaiten | dread deratarasae WETAT Nl cio tl
Hearing the incorporeal voice the furious Dandanatha released the
great demon from the grip of her plough and decided not to kill him.
aa aisatedt teat fst qusatazar serdar yfeauintefeer wenfrar ce
eat ami tees watiinaread! vada fafaciantt ara wafeat war
Then Bhandasura, who was defeated by Dandanatha, disappeared.
The army of the demons severely hit by the saktis was driven away.
Seeing the collapse of the demons the saktis sounded many instruments
declaring their victory. 88, 89
aa ot deface warsswear Aaaftstt
terra vifadaat aaararstad: ferry gol
Aa Eat: Veta a aqaght wa zATI
aniaatgestad, wat eet at at wegen
WAT LAS SHS AURAMSTAPA | WisaaeaaM Sra sus | VMI
3 at oferneat oat gaat geri Waareaerahh: Gamat wah Wa gel
Then a leader of the Saktis by name Jaya sent a group of Saktis
to Devi Lalita. Those gaktis who were dead or injured were quickly
brought back to life and set right by Amrtesi. Then gathering the happy
army Dandanatha accompanied by Sampatkari and Asvaradha quickly
proceeded in her chariot with sounds from elephants and instruments
declaring her triumph, to meet Devi Lalita. 90 to 93
gfe stfqreet wrereraus weefeats ema: i
End of the sixty-fifth chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurarahasyam.

weafeants ara:
Chapter 66
ae reat qusaren vifeatufatadyfar! sara afait tat wort efeeT ue
asf viet afters wet aa decti ae wea dat are Wet wT TRH
waqd wares vifedanmetat!
Then Dandanatha along with her battalion went to Mantrini Devi
and informed her about the victory after bowing to her. The pleased
Mantrini embraced Dandanatha and honoured her with presents. Then
Mantrini along with Dandanatha went to the Great Empress Lalita and
reported about their victory which brought joy to the saktis. LZ
susraistt deat Sat AEyTAT uazn
wat afe:faaren warsaacdiftea! yperes TE er STATSAT-at ALY Ul
Bhandasura with the residual army departed to Stnyaka city,
exposing grief externally but happy within because his desire was met
and reached his private chamber. 3, 4
aa: free: water sus confetti: | agai fase wat ayaa: qi aT ui KI
Wea Wad aaeaatag Har
Then Sammohini and others, the wives of Bhandasura jointly said
thus: “Oh Lord! Why are you looking helpless today? How has the
prediction of Narada gone wrong?” 5
We Usitea: sar arat washed BL well
aReensfafatrrnta: waters) awacaceny fret: qyt A aa: oll
aufterdarty fax: erfqraaqi fated 3 anetat: ad 2 aaeitfiary uct
aferta veces rent wat et: | fer ety eae Pryfediafe fafa: eu
Hearing his wives, Bhandasura knowing his auspicious desire and
realising that his wives have correctly understood the words of Narada
said thus: “Oh Dear wives! Listen. Why should I be depressed after
attaining my want? Whatever Narada has told you is to my liking. Very
soon killed by the Great Devi, I will reach Her abode. To keep this as
a secret to the demons, I am looking sad.” 6 to 9

aeateaats ar: 633 Chapter 66
aa Wg: Teh ae Aaisfeaserq ate t eat YS eat areas afer
gft Be MAHA TASH AEA: | wa ant: ufafedt aetseach coef aft:
TaN Byars at Bata APA: |
Then the wives again said thus: “Oh Lord! We will tell you our
desire. If it is certain that you will be killed in the war by Her, we are
also prepared to be killed by Her. If so take us, who are dear to you
along with you. We have shown the way. Otherwise what will be our
fate? Please tell us. It would be improper for you to discard us who are
devoted to you and attached to you like your shadow.” 10, 11
great viet freofretone etafasiz: Ween
quad nga weafeatad Ge tT aaeET Gad Ade Tt FT NAM
THAT: Wares BAe Wee APRA! YA A Asaates PaqusareaTArsaT Nl NX Ul
drat quant afsed a fe waar
fesrerareaatt a vat a: eae, Sater, WRN
wasfiarsod aft sadifa: wefa ai aevites aeaed aeersfr at Mera: eg UI
Hearing his wives, Bhandasura filled with ecstasy said thus: “Listen
to my truthful words. I had thought about this long ago which will not
change for the reason that I am going to say. By the grace of Devi
Laksmi, I can remember my previous life. She had told me that Devi
Tripurasundari will take care of us and will fulfil all the wants of
devotees taking shelter under Her, even if they are impossible. Hence
our desire will be fulfilled. I desire to go to Her Abode along with all
of you and there is no doubt about its happening. 12 to 16
waste % witers=sates yareha: wel aateafata ware vaca Tease I
ferariuta waren: quay 7a cites qergqagd wg St gory i gc tl
Wg 7 ahd A as gfe: werronat Unad ores Tt A waa aT: safer
Tarenfraad webttrmefiers ar areate waaarrerearate aThsSTT | Ro I
Weatt farafirad yperaftan: | vith wee Uelsa uratseyee sfege: Mt BM
syeaisege a fade vedi TAT!
“Even then I have another desire that I should go to Her Abode
along with my children and others. This may also happen but I am

mt ARES, 634 Sri Tripurdrahasyam
worried. With Her grace somehow we will achieve our wants. It is
impossible in this world to bear the separation from friends and relatives
without whom even a second will look like myriad years. Hence I am
praying that I should never be without my relatives. All of you should
always pray for this. The Devi will fulfil the impossible wants of Her
devotees. This matter should not be disclosed to others. I have thus
become pure minded. Oh Queens! Leave aside grief. Good time has
arrived.” Saying this Bhandasura entered the huge assembly by sun set.
sans strat fagyenren wrath AfaoreTaT WM
WaT YT: WUT BaEAsfrarat | woransycyoret fafay: warafawt ii 23 1
faye: fea cart virerfte die pateter: worensse adfarased aa: 1
sitter quedeaig ahendaiga afrastartant qatar 41
aistrafguat sat frat yore: | fagen: dist fant ore eardifarag
arreataeas et erat faa srerdeasqes qaqa 2 tl
Then His Brothers, Visukra and others and the ministers, sons,
servants and the members of the assembly who shone like stars arrived
there and after bowing to the king occupied their respective seats. Visukra
seeing the depressed king lauded him and with folded palms bowed and
said thus: “Oh Lord Bhandasura! The deed by Devi of killing the demons
to achieve Her end is unrighteous.” Even Visukra the most intelligent
follower of Sukracarya spoke against his self belief. During unfavourable
period a belief is transgressed. The mind naturally follows the impending
events. 22 to 27
Tent wee & ytafea aaa: | sianaerg tay wvarsaqaraTy tt Re Il
“Oh King! You are sitting grieved in this assembly. While we the
demons are alive, it is improper that you be sad.” 28
Sq: Wee a cele cevect faye fee acrae arerede fad i Be
asd ushydaeMsrt wee: | ter ys fawn yet wat: Weyer:
wet aensft qaet famafe at aafaq dismseracragetdgs wafaa:
fer met Qeafe wi viredifa gare are gfe: seer Agere HEAT ll

ates A: 635 Chapter 66
Addressed thus, Bhandasura spoke again in the assembly of demons
thus: “Oh Visukra! What can I say when the time is unfavourable. I,
who am the lord of hundred and five universes had time and again
defeated Visnu and others and by just hearing whose name Indra will
never sleep, have been vanquished in meaningless war by a group of
women. You are questioning me who am almost dead, why I am depressed.
Death is commendable than this type of defeat.” 29 to 32
fagyen sfa caret ara wre Tat aa: eaete aasefa es arfing areut aa: 133
aaen afefedta revs Asstyard a: 1 taht anise eity yrange:
adi waar ter arsta tegafetrerar | Sees eas Seat Feet: 34
qaroernt wdaa oret weft Ft frestsat-gt HIST Aa: HE 13g
Taisé at fafreta oret uvarfs t ya: | sera urda: ter pleat warn
Hearing these words, Visukra spoke thus: “Oh Lord of the demons!
It does not befit you to utter helplessness. Who will not be compassionate
towards a weak woman? It is a natural code of practice not to use
weapons on women. Either you or me or your sons or even a low ranking
demon ordered by you can very quickly destroy the entire army of the
éaktis. I confirm this by touching your feet. You can be sporting with
the divine damsels in your harem. I will go and conquer Her and again
see your feet.” Saying thus he looked at Kutilaksa, the chief of the army,
who was by his side. 33 to 37
Taaistt wrat qoarfacaad! qaust fete at atte ate safe = ae
Tat We faagur waqaeurayr Sareafatearess Tass Baas ATT BRI
aan assufients wet whofe 31 sqaca uforatasy fredat aerate:
mersatenteagad: aafet: ae!
Then Kutilaksa bowed with folded hands to Visukra and said thus:
“Oh Heir apparent! Why are you talking like this when I am alive? You
please relax with the king, Visanga and the sons of the king. I will set
out with the army and its leaders and conquer Her. If not, I promise
that I will never return.” Saying thus and bowing to them he went out
of the city accompanied by many aksauhini-strong army and leaders.

at fear 636 Sri Tripurarahasyam
aarrea Shere arfettet were: Tis
Bpisatenitgqadt SENtet WET: | WesegIeeRa: MTT KR
are waste fies Sarge: | Haenfawtta wai a: Tae evan
amenti ygda cegat wacnfearm yedaarate at aren ArT YY
afiaet a areata Frelat wart ata Saarargatfeonfit qedg: uv x4
wat vileraqaet qteteat ut
Then another mighty leader of the army named Durmada accompanied
by ten Aksauhini army and riding a camel and holding a mace joined
Kutilaksa. Sitting as if on the pinnacle of arrogance, he bowed to
Kutilaksa and said thus: “Oh Chief of the army! Please stay here along
with your army. It is improper that you should proceed to win a weak
woman.Within no time I will bind and bring that leader of the women.
If I do not bring Her soon, then you can proceed and try.” Saying thus
Durmada set out with great speed sounding again and again musical
instruments heralding triumph and reached early in the morning the
front line of the army of the Saktis. 41 to 45
SAAT eS, evan
ea TU Vat UAT Tetae | Tat starat acat Afauit fossa
faara deraarenqarastitfad | wag: vifeaafacrgeata: wage == xe I
Hearing the tumultous sound of the army of the demons preparing
to fight, Sampatkari and Asvaridha went to Devi Lalita, Mantrini and
Dandini and after bowing to them, informed about the readiness of the
demons to fight. Pleased with the permission granted, both of them
followed by countless saktis proceeded to battle. 46 to 48
aa Vand at WAS AEM! Wreanletecet weraatatary = BR
qauter worertariefaqa | aevarstieret cravatragiget = Goll
faatzh afore anfrseqeays tanga: yieora wR AGHA GR
fart feat qt searfrdt gar sree aUTt: vrata ATERTT: 4? Il
uftart agains faferca: waa: | Weld age wifes sage | GR II
Terftararest Tat wqaetty afafscen decstarsray afer: Wey Ul
seregenfa: safe: whe waa geste seat saer qfrqaraat 44 I

yeufeats aa: 637 Chapter 66
There Devi Sampatkari was riding the mammoth Ranakolahala which
was tall like the Himalaya mountain. With a golden hue she was dressed
in a red garment and decorated with rubies. She was an ocean of beauty
with waves of youthfulness. She was twanging her bow set with gems
shining like a rainbow. To parch the ocean of demons, she set out, like
the Sun from the eastern mountain, shooting arrows like the rays of
the Sun. Innumerable saktis similar to her moved with her on elephants
shooting arrows all around, each of them wielding three goads and
shouting and moving on elephants. One of them seated on an elephant
was directing the army towards the enemy. Many were face to face with
the enemy. With such a huge army Sampatkari entered pervading the
war field as if she would devour the army of the demons. 49 to 55
froifireosre ter: wdaafae: | deredat waaget Garahrates: WGK I
aa afeatrean: Srateraey! Wed: vRaUratsht wrorencrea: W&Ol
The mountainous elephants, with naturally split temples, and which
never move away from war approached the army of the demons. Then
in both the armies were heard sounds of instruments and of the colliding
weapons snatching as it were the lives. 56, 57
dear TAGES PRN UT: | Yeronga Ae aT STAT: Weel
at aralerperatfenaarent: | Use eration areata: UT Ua
arroreuftaqyusterysrgm: | wafaddeart: ata yfertartest N gol
qaqa wed steadier) weet farsa ated: grated: Ween
waist firs vitor gS ei a nepal senfeagarenhs aera: Vea TWH RI
weqdaiett deface: vfetarfetty
The demons were riding on chariots, elephants, horses, donkeys,
camels, deers, eagles, crows, vultures, owls, beautiful peacocks, cats,
mongooses, lizards and ghosts. The demons were wielding fierce spears,
swords, discs, javelins, iron clubs, tridents, bolts, missiles and cudgels.
With these demons fought the army of the Saktis with intense fervour
and with eyes red with rage. Both the armies were exchanging bitter
words. The gaktis were uttering many words like “You are done. Stand
with valour. Do not show your back” and killing many demons. Even
the demons were similarly destroying the saktis. 58 to 62

st FRE, 638 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Ua wget wat wt wagt Wean
fowargfirqata: wfecatsdefer: | wife: yraetatsta ceefafirrem: uu avi
ufeargt aft qe aleEBTeRsT: | We: Wrafoat qs wretdats eh: gyn
AByTE: Warreeifeer 4 aa set aeangas efafrdag: qerT gH
While the battle in which the lives were pledged was continuing
the gaktis were chopping off the hands, the legs, the heads and cutting
into two the bodies of the demons. Similarly the saktis were also killed
by the weapons of the demons. Even though crippled they were biting
their lips with anger and hitting the enemies with weapons, teeth and
fists. Those who lost their weapons were snatching them from others.
Some others were fighting using the wheels of the broken chariots.
Ua aa wat Mt defrahat age cifedtar: whfreatyar: u gen
visairitetatesst feria. vented weft ceratfeforetiery i Ge
While the horrible war resembling dissolution continued, there flowed
a flooded river of blood with froth and waves. The army of the demons
was destroyed by the saktis riding the elephants and the remaining
injured demons from the ten aksauhini were driven away. 67, 68
quar que wd tat aeat Sat VARIA: | SHTRS WaTSeT: HrcA: 11 G8 HI
aprareaqad card figerafir ufguieatedsarg weret wera, voll
ag alas: vreriat dargpistrarran Pecuiuraferreraratarsrahtes: ll 98 Ul
aynatiesterentatas: | haftwsryhits Ya Todt ag We
sem wefadiequernt: aia are arise areareoferdaa tl 3 Il
Durmada holding a mace and seated on a camel, seeing his entire
army destroyed, sent a strong speeding golden hued camel, as tall as
ten palmyra trees looking like the god of death into the army of the
Saktis. This camel entered the army of the gaktis with great speed. Its
tongue was dangling out of its jaws like a mass of flesh. It was making
a big sound like the churning of an ocean. It was spitting frothy saliva
and urinating frequently. Moving around among the Saktis it was
destroying by its chest, feet, face and teeth the herd of elephants.

yates ATT: 639 Chapter 66
qietsta werarcieary vreriiar area! Vietaarten Sa et WeRIEAT | OX Il
The enraged Durmada also like Yama destroyed the sgaktis and the
elephants by striking them with his mace. 714
aegeat vifeaaarar ert watatt | Torenteect TT ATT AAT, | 4 Ut
Seeing the defeat of the saktis, Sampatkari sent her elephant
Ranakolahala to kill the camel. 15
ade sree ard eater! aged faaonpessetiedg: eg
aster extfedant: wedteqert | Us Fe WaT yet aca: Went
gas: aed weeronaefa Forr wearer att ay ect
Then the great elephant approaching the camel, the carrier of the
demon, repeatedly struck it with its temples and the tip of its tusk. The
camel also fought back with its teeth, head and hoofs. Thus a tumultous
fight went on between the camel and the elephant. Then the elephant
caught hold of the camel and pushed it to the ground and killed it by
trampling on it. 76 to 78
fed faferts Tele: Ganga: | dearer ured vet arureptat: 1 8 I
Teasfiedt gait fraqat sage: | wrqeai faenet af ore: yitforrgfact cot
Seeing his camel dead, Durmada flew into the sky holding his mace
and by revolving it struck the temple of the elephant. Hit by the mace
the elephant revolved and with broken knees and bleeding, dropped on
the ground. 79, 80
meamedivante yuna asa: | wet wo gaatste freee fanfer: cei
wt Safed gear fagar serdar: | AGKaT Ysa aatt: vrenitsitfarteTs 62
Meanwhile hit by the arrow of Sampatkari, Durmada died with his
chest split into two. Seeing their leader dead, the demons ran away to
save themselves even without looking back at the Saktis who were chasing
ft stares wrereraus weufeatts ae: 1
End of the sixty-sixth chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurarahasyam.

SaaS ATA:
Chapter 67
qué frat seat evel dat: | Ha sei Teas leary wera: gh
_ fagraatioiiqat agree wart!
Hearing about the death of Durmada, his mighty elder brother
Kuranda taking the orders from Kutilaksa, quickly set out to fight along
with a twenty-aksauhini army. 1
facies waar tees sath Wu
wares seo! WET fafaaret: ast sat that neat
erat age: at Vase Se) aftvshaaaraSl: HAHA: YI
Aeigen: waraeatrensvanfaa: | sant: aresiqataantserarsrat: nH
Usenet saa: VOTUTaTaS: | eater terrence: = KN
AN Weare Alt: | Heras: Wesigqeys: i oil
aafarrarargysigenra: vada wat ua fafrarrgaraeas seaTeTeTaT UA: tlc
afraerafateanr rater gar
Seeing the vast sky-like army of the demons approaching again,
Asvaridha with her huge army of horses set out to fight. Many kinds
of tall horses were looking like waves. With horses of the same colour
grouped together the army was shining. Golden-hued saktis were mounted
on frothy white horses and dressed in blue garments. They were proud
of their youthfulness and wielding swords and shields. Some with
moon-like hue were riding horses black like clouds of dissolution and
dressed in red garments and ornaments. They were shining with sapphiredecked crowns and wielding bows and arrows. Some others red
complexioned moving speedily on green coloured horses were dressed and
decorated with pink garments and jewels. A few others were wearing
the same coloured garments and ornaments as the horses. Thus the
army of the saktis proceeded, looking like the variegated twilight horizon
and a sea overflowing its shore and quickly captured the army of the
demons. 2 to 8

BAaETATS AT: 641 Chapter 67
Wiaerty eacenaaha: nen
qegrpacaerasata: | Eg_RTerfagareatedraratat: oll
mrargfacranreragats fretted |
The sound generated by kettle-drums, trumpets, cow-horns, wardrums, hoofs of the horses, and cymbals mixed with the loud shouts like
‘Hum’ and patting filled the interspace between the earth and the sky.
HY Waa: Wa: Hes afaener: Tea
Gernmentaatnindeeye: | KPEtaaragarat AT: Tea
Riataneragas UAHA! aot pelrgitansss wrt Patactary 1 Vall
Then started a frightening war demanding lives. The directions were
deafened by the sounds from the sword fight. The dust rising from the
pounding of the hoofs of the horses surrounded the sky like the clouds
of destruction and for a moment it was looking miserable like the
new-moon night. 11 to 13
aa Smads eaeres forage: | Titssaenre: Wy: YATE: = SI
Trent WuTet: VeTaT USE: | aeaeifrtearat prfsairetse STETT gh I
wAIsTaeae vitsafntentear feartgentsaafaypesr wey: Weal
Wepreattr utdt fart: SUE: | dent et earetia wera qe faggg:
The darkness from the dust subsided by the shower of blood arising
out of hitting with weapons and the war continued. The saktis and the
demons were killing one another. The strong Saktis stole the show by
rendering the demons powerless. Battered by the Saktis, the army of the
demons was getting destroyed. The great demons having lost their legs,
hands, ears, stomachs and backs threw the weapons all around and ran
away from the war shouting—‘Alas! We are dead’! 14 to 17
frere ari wat wet Gus: talefese: |
saree ecard faces areca fa, ween
Vereat cufava are: Wea: | PRAd: Hrvssebfet: wiferatfett
oT dgftatan wee Garat PRaTaaTTTaTSSt AAT tt Roll
Seeing his army destroyed, the enraged Kuranda riding his horse

at fayeesay, 642 Sri Tripurarahasyam
and twanging his bow discharged arrows on the saktis and destroyed
them in thousands. The army of the Saktis looked like a broken bridge
by the flood of arrows shot by Kuranda. Then Kuranda faced Asvaradha.
amufaaamart aft aafafisan aaenaMesgpenss AMIS Ht RRA
qearsaataa: |
Mounted on the horse named Aparajita she was golden hued and
dressed in white garments and wearing white ornaments and wielding
the noose, the goad, the bow and the arrow. Seeing her Kuranda spoke
thus: 21
aba ferenfa fat areareractren, Wee
oat war gat orat aenet wate gay at freer wr uaayqan: eat oTqetea: 1
fa waytarsset @ ated aferrarqay
“For a long time you are arrogant like a wicked woman. | will
relieve you of the arrogance. You will soon face the consequences of
killing my brother. By killing you first I will become free from the sin
of sacrificing my brother. Show your reputed valour before me.” 22, 23
wa wear tftats areat dtatt: yitfafa: Ne
facara aa daa are fore onfeoaq fata a are oreararea qaet 4H
qitas wer aait erarara ara: | gata geyset faeat acracefe Well
Yfeod: SAS Wats WERT: |
Thus spoken by Kuranda, the angry Asvaridha struck him with
three sharp arrows. With one arrow she severed the head of his horse.
With the second arrow she pushed his crown to the ground. With the
third arrow she struck him fast in his chest. The great demon Kuranda
having lost his horse and the crown and strongly hit in his chest fell
unconscious like a tree with its root cut off. 24 to 26
aur qeatfrfad: ure at orga nul
waren fe aged wera wt wT
Quickly gaining consciousness in the battlefield he said to her thus:
“You are worthy of appreciation in war. I commend your fight with we

aaafeats ara: 643 Chapter 67
gece yaddt faa viata dere Ween
qa aifeg wt sitaytiterat wf ape & staat yt ere RHI
Hearing this Asvaridha said again thus: “Oh Demon! Fie upon you
who are still alive. Intentionally you are left with life just to talk to
me. Look at this arrow which takes away the life and pride of the
enemy. 28, 29
qen tdtadt ta: atenftrcaferapia: | gerard urease ytorrardu it 30 1
faede asft Gain sytney!
ae dest wait wet: Gest fretsenct, Wagn
qatar yet Gatttarsfaaea: | wermerfaftarercnts at ITA = BR
Hearing Asvaradha, the demon burning with anger broke her bow
with a curve-tipped arrow. She in turn broke his bow with a sword. The
demon broke her sword into two by his sword and again hit severely
her horse by which it receded. 30 to 32
mateate tiger acer wets a Ze areper wrecafet aforar cteraray 11 33
sarge faftraqat Set wae Fi
Meanwhile the angry Agvaradha bound him with the rope and pulled
him and hit him on his head with the lustrous goad by which the demon
died with split head. 33
ud quod fret grat Sarfeat war Nast
wrdeary ier Sayer argue! piece: wre Varetyiswtorereiters: 134 1
BF mega: ws qe aaa Ga Me Fe AAT GT A AT TMT AH GK I
warmed a: pifacfer warmed 7q1 Bfdoarear war wa sentar: Tt: 11 Bo
Hearing about the death of Kuranda, Kutilaksa the chief of the
army seeing near the leaders Karanka and others said with red eyes
thus: “Oh Karanka and others! Five of you go with your army and
quickly bring that woman either bound or dead. All of you are having
the magical power of Sarpini by which you are indeed unconquerable by
fods and demons.” 34 to 37

at Fey 644 Sri Tripurarahasyam
SAAT: HtgN wear Safstar fagaatfevitqa: Wels GEA: 3c 1
HS Meas WS HAUSA! aac Wat HCY aAextH: n3en
awaed: Gat dear dimeyiat: |
Thus ordered Karanka and others bowed to their army chief and
proceeded to fight, each followed by twenty-aksauhini army. These demons
were looking fearsome— Karanka in the chariot of donkey, Kakamukha
on the elephant, Vajraloma in the chariot of eagle, Vajradanta on the
camel and Vajravaktra on the donkey. 38, 39
qedcacani feyrentrreeatry, NW ¥onl
ASS a waist VaagqgM! as AASATaS VA FT wfadteqat: uu we
fafaranfeate tfraserieact | wert yraaifin gustan ga Te +3)
Hearing the loud sound of the demons ready to fight, Asvaridha
and Sampatkari gathered their armies. Then both the armies faced each
other and amidst the sound from various instruments and shining weapons
they showered arrows as if from distant clouds. 40 to 42
aa tag Peas fafrafentar mtaeetqusd apdciqfcaray, Weszu
Uled faraana wid wecty nig(”g! feted sre aftatreracaheary, ¥en
Weaeedadta WAC Tatalfsrreraar yrenitarafestiear usa
qedta faget ae tersarfety
Then both armies mingling with each other hit one another. Frowning
and biting their lips with anger they were cutting with the swords,
piercing with long spears, splitting with bunch of arrows, crushing with
bolts and destroying one another using massive weapons. The extremely
enraged elephant and horse battalion of the Saktis destroyed very soon
the army of the demons. 43 to 45
Feat Gat TAMA ACW AeTaT: Newall
wlava vifedaat at AgTaereiisan area teat: Vat Gear wea
ASST TM AIH Saga! AAT AAT Aft Tal HATA ASAT: I ¥¢ Il
frbpat werrat afte adyeorys siterect avetat fafa aiavsery ll XS Il
Bat VRAIN SATS sr aT Geeayt: wiavect: tt boll

aerafeaats ATA: 645 Chapter 67
AIgTaara vrenitat Sareea: |
The mighty Karanka and others seeing their army looking dead,
entered the army of the gaktis and with great energy destroyed them.
Seeing their army getting utterly defeated by the demons, Asvaridha
and Sampatkari fought with the demons. Karanka and other mighty
demons watching their army being conquered by them, released the great
magical power Sarpini who was fearsome wearing serpents and making
loud sounds and creating varieties of serpents to kill the Saktis in the
war field. By the bunch of serpents produced from her face, eyes and
so on she destroyed very quickly the Saktis. 46 to 50
aayrandtetst GSAT SATSTT YTERTA: Ta
ventral: Carey UST Ft TA: Urea ai teaeat siorgatad ferry
yong abauht arse atgters a way Usa aed ara: TST Hest: Ul
wr Ys TANG wet UT! Get edt Fa wie PUSH: = GI
dhitsanscar atfastt Gast qaari arsenfarga ust ten fafaf: 0
Seeing the terrible destruction some éaktis ran quickly to report the
situation to Dandanatha. Reaching her who was by the side of Devi
Lalita, they bowed also to mantrini and said thus: “Alas! The demons
are fearsome. Oh Dandanatha! We went along with Sampatkari to fight
with the demons. A great war demanding lives was fought. Durmada
was killed by Sampatkari. Kurandaka was done away by Asvaridha but
for his fame. We destroyed the horrid army of the demons.” Thus the
demons were vanquished. 51 to 55
aig: wsdarraeaatahe: | wafeat wearer Bfwarea fe aT ARH
Waa: Gait asa, THT FE: |
a: ae: freat ger wat weltepaT HAT men
Where YAMA AAA AY Wag: | Seat F pater watz erat yee: ue u
aq Wdastat aa aren: dat fafefaa: |
“A great magical power named Sarpini was released by Karanka
and others, the five leaders of the army, who had lost their army. Sarpini
Was creating from her eyes and other sensory organs, bunches of serpents.

st FRSA, 646 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Bitten, bound and attacked by the serpents the saktis were severely
burnt and reduced to a state of death. The two goddesses were repeatedly
killing the serpents by showering arrows. Those saktis who were trying
to escape were severely tortured.” 56 to 58
gfe arat aa: sat Gar saleryat cer W4Qtl
et tam qitts qaen fateh fad at waren arersatat a aftuit
aaa WaT Treat tad Ved cafe! Ser ara ATA PTA PEarqa I
faanyrangaary frstinftera: | aacnrar verptfaadataregayear WRI
quuitien Apel arcat tye
Hearing their words, the angry Dandanatha started to go and kill
the demons by her fierce pounding rod. Knowing that the Sarpini was
invincible, Mantrini stopped Dandanatha and quickly apprised the matter
to Devi Lalita. Then the Great Mother meditated and yawned. From the
jaws of Her opened lotus-like mouth came out with great speed a golden
hued great Sakti who was in the form of a Mongoose, the goddess of
speech decorated with diamond jewels and seated on Garuda. 59 to 62
at mores feoraret ore siterfort-act Wazu
Tres at afduit ai aera] wATAT |
Sri Lalitaparamegvari said to her who was standing after bowing
in front of Her thus: “My Child! Go and quickly destroy that Sarpini
by your power.” 63
Sq A Atta BTA SANTIS, Wall
quuiugars wa wat: venta: | aderafatrfadn: greta: wife: a4 I
Addressed thus, she immediately reached the battle field. All the
serpents were driven away by the wind from the wings of Garuda. The
Saktis released from the serpent bonds stood up. 64, 65
qa: wast watt ar afin vifervse! aagear wifragcand viet YE: I
wast weary, Settee straw, AUT!
Sarpini again created serpents to destroy the éaktis. Seeing the
Saktis again surrounded by serpents, Nakuli created soon from her hair
very powerful Mongooses. 66

TAM ETAS AUT: 647 Chapter 67
Apert Herne: qatar: gen
MERA TAI GaTFEAT: |
These Mongooses of various colours possessed great speed. With
erect hairs and tails they were well built and had strong teeth. 67
3 ger Teper itt ay Baty ade: ferary, ueen
zeqamat: wus apie fram vepctenget: wat: afirsar afirar sft gg
Faivifrer: yrfraar argrenrar aeitfeara: |
These Mongooses quickly bit with their teeth the serpents and cut
them into two or three pieces. Bitten, cut and eaten by the Mongooses,
the serpents desiring to kill the Saktis were rendered residueless even
as they were being created. 68, 69
aa t Apert: Baty faarvarsufeytad: Noll
aey: wiyereat aftottate ade: | afioat y wawrat gM wETAT: 1 WRN
agaiqen er yreaseactenm: | aaatet a yrenfir arearate wet: tl WRN
woes prada wea fre snfesrt wamnfeoaraagre Fritgferraraa: 11 93 1
crafty efinen sitar fcag verge
After killing all the serpents the Mongooses bit Sarpini all over.
When Sarpini was killed, Karanka and others fought Nakuladevi with
many weapons and missiles. Then Nakula destroying all their weapons
and vehicles cut off their heads by one stroke of her sword. With their
heads chopped they fell dead. The remaining demons in fear ran
helter-skelter. 70 to 73
warretdatarrapetapent fe a, nox
Far Weer area wPaweh cafe wore wreparerarerent ferearanfer: i 94
Then Nakuladevi absorbed in her body the Mongooses that were
lauding the victory and after bowing to Dandini, Mantrini and Lalitaparamegvari reported with folded hands about her victory to them.
gfe sitfnqereeet wrereeravs rarefbeertts era:
End of the sixty-seventh chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurdrahasyam.

apafeaats ara:
Chapter 68
ay eetfafacan ar HigAyEM Far! Glecrat fatraea farts wEATT AN HI
wate wefemtasta att t1 ches qruse afert fect wt wn
ag va fafa weacensfraafad: | ut atgagar: aftvarsitea gat:
aan cadet ae ge Frorfra: | ar sat yrferrorafaent cafetars fire tt ¥ 1
wr ftada wtangfedtatted ae stat far a waecitee faudte faat aq ou qn
marditafaea agers atfear! wet aftut ugetyt aaen afert eat:
Feat Viferaarat qetenste Het wea ular vier Tass HITT F111
ayrerafifa aenft ya: argedt qari wd fared Spleena ayaat uci
arm faagists fagyaror watfaa: |
Then knowing from the demons about the death of Karanka and
other leaders, Kutilaksa sighed and worried immensely thus—‘“It looks
to me that the great Sakti is really invincible. The mighty Durmada and
Kuranda are dead in the war. Let it be so, I should not worry about it
because victory cannot be one sided. But how was it that Karanka and
others who were indomitable and who were supported by the unfailing
Sarpini were done away in the war? The leader of the saktis known as
Lalita sitting in Her place has by Her assistants destroyed our strength.
Alas! What will not happen if the fate is unfavourable? It is astonishing
that Karanka and others were killed by a woman. Our army has been
reduced to one fourth. Our strong leaders are dead. But how is it that
not even one leader of the saktis is dead? Having promised the king
that I will defeat the Sakti, how can I, like a coward inform him about
my inability?” While Kutilaksa, the chief of the army, was thus brooding
Visanga incited by Visukra reached there. 1 to 8
qear fang Bam: Hfeena: ayia: wen
area: qatar faaerra wer ar gaat fasvured faag: SATII
aadht avstemtit a witefe aar wetgarfaen aifedt cag: Heel
Seeing Visanga, Kutilaksa the chief of the army stood up and after
serving him with a seat and so on, took his own seat. Seeing the sad

Ea eaAts AM: 649 Chapter 68
Kutilaksa, Visanga told him about the intention of the Devi to fulfil the
request of Bhandasura and that Bhandasura is deluded by Her generosity.
afeorat fertteratire avert t ye! teeny fer Paft at ad atte ez
“Oh Kutilaksa! Your face appears worried. Tell me soon the reason
for this. I will resolve everything” 12
ayer wire isfr we Seca weaT! sfearet a rena werraqaferar i 3 1
Hearing Visanga, Kutilaksa narrated the huge destruction of the
demons and the safe condition of the Saktis and the impending danger.
Hea WETS Vas att we sft Maat! Afedt arrar gear qars @fgmrhrs i yx il
sy aad we fafactarsearta: | fear gare vita weractaa UT: Rk
wat gat waa ferret: ar qfgdiorars war yifersatorat fafa: qergheat
ate vier wt gents: | até wat eat: wife seta Yfea: =
Hearing Kutilakga, Visanga laughed saying “This is all delusion”
and himself deluded by the illusion of the Devi, spoke as if he was wise,
thus: “Oh Chief of the army! Listen. I have come here knowing the
matter. We cannot defeat a strong side without skilled planning. Victory
is dependent on skill which in turn depends on intelligence. With my
sharp intelligence I have decided about a plan to defeat the Sakti.
Abandon the darkness of your sorrow by depending on the Sun of my
words. I believe that the saktis will die with my plan. 14 to 17
ayy 3 waraeanfis oar fafart wa. eta faster at aot fafa qa ui ge
aaa at ant ferer eraser weer cfr: ae fagenonsts dqat: 1 Vel
Fara Wat arg wayts dam: | wera Gara wean wife aft tt Roll
five qeafa cfetenfnc waq! aasrerntdtdgierga: ll WN
frie ustarita gaeyt Sars AT Te AAS AAT SAT TTT RRM
vrentticar wdtentr wiamé aereen! aferarraet get wife renter
a viamgut afr Safa reat yer west caveat wararatee ar viferrerfet
weranate at wafgateatste ai ar gy ar afer Tat ances lt

CMELMCSOLS 650 Sri Tripurarahasyam
a wnat war ag fafed A facfeeq us war crated qqenseTEMAT 11 26
we cfeana ad cetefaafr
“Listen. I will tell you about my plan of winning. She can be won
only through fraudulence. I will tell you what I have decided. Let our
well-armoured huge army along with Visukra and the sons of the king
proceed in advance to fight at the end of today itself. All the gaktis will
come to fight with us and Lalita will be alone. Then during the night,
accompanied by many demons, I will get on to the back of Her chariot
from a side and destroy a few of Her bodyguards and forcibly capture
alive the weak and wicked Lalita who is the mother of the group of
Saktis. If She cannot be caught alive, I will hit Her hard with the mace
and kill Her. Whether She is captured or killed, it amounts to the
destruction of Her army which can be annihilated by you. I have known
with my sharp brain for a long time that the tender-limbed Empress
Lalita will be unable to fight with me. Oh Friend! I hope you have no
contrary thoughts about my plan.” 18 to 26
sat faagaat apfeoraarqatea: WON
faqrrreren yet frat aah! wes Sera a dt ad a Ufa Ween
ag teepeeres afer wat qfgray! art Waaer Ghadeter wder Ay ou ei
Fafa gerd afgufsedt war fat vita ustedes wat wT il R01
werrefat we fraeera afar: | teagan fags arssate Gara waar ae
mate fearrat ward afernotaq aad aer yiferaat Prqearretar FAT BVM
wrafreata acne qa atefor daa: |
Hearing the words of Visanga, Kutilaksa the chief of the army
deluded by the illusion of Devi Tripurasundari foolishly believed in the
defeat of the Devi. With ecstasy he stood up and quickly embraced
Visanga and said thus: “Oh Laudable among the clan of demons! Well
done. I know you are most intelligent. It is really rare to find a person
who brings victory by his intelligence. Even Sukracdrya and Brhaspati
are not as intelligent as you are. You are going to achieve the task of
the king. May you live long. Quickly go and inform the king and return
along with the ministers, the sons of the king and Viésukra, to fight.
The Sun is already in the process of setting in the western sea. While

apsfeaats a: 651 Chapter 68
ee TS TT TT a a ES SE
we will be fighting with the army of the éaktis you will by your strength
and intelligence achieve your plan.” sven
saat afenatsa faust am zat W3azu
aa ue faye arsfa dae wader: | arenes: wera: Waal gAT ax
Tayafagenn aPatianstadgqa: | pfeeraur ager wdaararga: Wag
agurarat aa aa yifsarereay: |
After Kutilaksa uttered these words, Visanga entered the city and
apprised about his plan to the king and Visukra as well and having the
consent of those leaders who were under the spell of illusion, returned
soon to the war field where the huge army of the Saktis had gathered.
He was joined by the sons of the king, Visukra, the ministers and
Kutilaksa. 33 to 35
faferat derma warenfrgey, TCA
wiatwaragt undead: | abauht cfernedt aat ad caf BI
Knowing from a messenger about the secret preparations of the
demons and the congregation of their entire army, Mantrini informed
the developments to Devi Lalita. 36, 37
arate cferargeat Abaut wre sfostty ast avstsyrard Wet Grad Aer
Wh teat ya wed Gar Apa: | senha meted Fryyteor yt YF AT 1 3k
ape dares ward vrenitat wfeagtad: |
Ordered by Devi Lalita, Mantrini said thus to Dandini—“Oh Child!
The preparation by Bhandasura appears to be huge. Except the leader
of the demons, all have joined to fight. We should also go there with
our entire army. Prepare the army of the éaktis in an extraordinary’
see cate waerataysar W voll
afawat a wenger Sat aear wat yar facta yrferaar AT AtaTfaTATS SAHeT I
WK va cami was: ufrast) qearfeahrensarfareeat: usu
fafa: fagaret & premftarafaeta
Instructed thus, Dandanatha (Kolamukhi) bowed to Devi Lalita and

st fae, 652 Sri Tripurarahasyam
set out for war along with Mantrini and the entire army of Saktis. Replete
with elephants, horses and chariots, the army of the Saktis as it proceeded
looked like an ocean that submerges the worlds during destruction. The
sound from the musical instruments, elephants, horses and chariots mixed
with the roaring of the lions was verily increasing. 40 to 42
a dht cece seat ee Weary, Uesan
SRE wa & adtste faye wet ate: Saatfist aeastedia: uve
APSO MOTEL: UEACTAT WETTETT: |
Hearing that world-annihilating huge sound, the demons generated
a reciprocal big sound. The mixed sound from the armies pervaded heaven
and earth and killed the cowards and dried up lakes. 43, 44
Tas Mayes Aaa: vifeeerat: Tea
Weden: yeni fafaargad: yaar) daar cea Preatsfe wad: Bfaarat:
yRuetferet: cfr Hat wh Safa Harford wel ofa: yeni:
afaeofeny aecty uta: very werd: | chfaeachur afer eletaed: ll ¥é Il
fear: afte: dfresceitqgufeta: | sritaarst: afta: ufgrat: Sfaewar xe il
Star Foray fet ste: | faa: chfagefa derrgeact: tt uo
Then a severe war started between the armies of the Saktis and the
demons. The demons by using wonderful weapons were destroying the
Saktis. Similarly the saktis with the weapons were smashing the demons.
Some were getting pulverized by arrows, some were cut in their middle
by swords, some were pierced by spears, some lost their neck, stomach
and arms by discs, some were pounded by bolts, spiked clubs and so on,
some were quickly bound by unfailing ropes, some heads were split by
axes and some were struck in their chest by javelins and goads.
wa gg ant aa qed arena: 1 ate gifts dereat ufagat Wag
EAT EM: GS at fa a es ea: | SqgaT: Wert: wut Aeaatsfaa:
A well matched war between them went on for some time. Then
destroyed by the Saktis, the demons ran away wailing thus—“We are
ruined. Alas! we are really ruined.” Chased by the saktis, the demons
were desiring to surrender. 51, 52

apaieaats aa: 653 Chapter 68
AGA AGHA HMAY ASIA: | TA: HIM ea: Af: ua
eaferarg waftar stat at Fratea: |
There flowed a river of blood with waves carrying dead bodies which
was a good sight to the carnivorous animals. Some who drowned in this
river were quickly dragged far away. 53
wa demfagd Gear qStsymeTat Wes
fag: We Wada SCTETSISAT! Mararga agra area TERA NGA I
2 aces Wa Sa Viena seta FSy AIA AAT:
me St orghadt aera weir waa aadi AS qd: waist cat fer
Trasadtaaa vax fds a1
Seeing the demons running away, Visukra the brother of Bhandasura
addressed Balahaka and others who were by his side. Knowing about their
immeasurable strength he invited their attention and said thus: “Oh
Balahaka! Look at these demons who have all been killed by the saktis and
suffering like orphans. You proceed with your brothers and destroy the
enemies. Because of your penance, Sun has really given his power in
your eyes. You go and burn them by your glances at them.” 54 to 57
eM Egat sat vrenifatefaga, W&CH
aenee: Area fast fewer: | qetga: arene: Hear Ae TH 4s it
ornishipraet ata: | a aatashrentor wat Peat FT Goll
tourna feared wetdfad am ud feared Sarat wfaya GrweT
fatter: vifemtot egy: TARA!
Ordered thus, he proceeded along with his brothers to torture the
Saktis. Balahaka, Kalamukha, Vikarna, Vikatanana, Stcimukha,
Karalaksa, and Karata, the seven brothers possessing extremely cruel
power had obtained by propitiating the Sun god the boon to burn and
kill a person by their glances. These seven brothers with such a power
simultaneously entered the army and started destroying the Saktis by
casting their cruel glances on them. 58 to 61
BT a: Veta: Pat SeaTac aa, WRU
HEM FAA SAA: AaTeATaeFa: |

st ARES 654 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Then all the Saktis stared at by the demons suffered intense thirst
and torture all over their bodies. 62
Wantage ate, aan
aaad vif age: wave abauit cfredt ara ad vfs wet
Tagan ufad aug: | wasted a vat: wed aafecas: TC
Fayre agusarar ufavd daca
The entire army of the Saktis in the battle field excepting Mantrini
and Dandini was thus overpowered by extreme thirst and heat and their
elephants and horses were collapsing due to heat. Observing that, the
power in the eyes of the demons was not affecting Mantrini and Dandini
because of their glory, Dandini reported to Mantrini about this.
frat ufacft asta faferar teaqaey WeRqU
sttedraccare ar atssarat wergfar wen wera yifert ferceaftforents fray 1
Mantrini also realised after applying her mind that the power of
the demons was because of the blessing from the Sun. Mantrini thought
about the Sakti named Tiraskarini who had not come to fight in the
great war to protect the Sricakra of Devi Lalita. 66, 67
AT WaT VpfrATANT SaTeTSAAY Sa aTSa ateraqteigenfayeo tl RCI
drerreaan Treearearrargqa! waneanyeadiat atfefa: aftartar 1 agit
a afeest faa aisft uyaat serdtaet) aver afavit aca ore far waza 4 1
qeaqern tert aet qareara ami faastarre ya: yrantat ynfaeaa 1 oe tl
aryaett qafergararraaygat
Just by that remembrance Tiraskarini appeared riding on a collyriumcoloured horse. With a dark blue complexion dressed and decorated with a
blue garment and jewels, wearing a blue garland and enveloped by pitch
darkness, she was accompanied by crores of similar gaktis. No one on the
earth can see her but for her consent. After arriving she bowed to Mantrini
and said thus: “Why was I remembered”? Mantrini who was questioned
thus told her about the strength of the demons and sent her to destroy

EMEA ATA: 655 Chapter 68
them. Again for the pacification of the Saktis, Mantrini ordered Amrtesi
who was like an ocean of nectar to follow Tiraskarin!. 68 to 71
areata WATSRNG PATE TT, Tara
facepfcgyargt argestfeaongan aera dearat Bat yreafrarat: 1 3 tl
facepfa: weaterrared a4 asqu: | ardtyer: fafeete egypt wees i ov ti
waste Geni aedtior agar fat qafatatirer ferceencfirenr aa: 11 9%
Gar Gaara SAT
Ordered thus, Tiraskarini riding an invisible horse and herself
invisible and followed by a similar group of gaktis destroyed the army
of the demons by showering weapons on them. Then she created a missile
named ‘Andhaka’ by which the demons became blind and were unable
to see anything. Then Tiraskarini by fighting for a long period with
them, who were filled with prowess and continuing their fight,
simultaneously beheaded them with rage by a sword. 72 to 75
wa serene frracforeat qr: oan
aaty freapytatcas Sgt! Meqeaanye Seve tl 9 I
aqavaqassatiar: yrerivattaat! wat frcepfatiren teats tl 9c tt
ufactt afrsdt ver ware ferret err
anfaga & at Geared waar wear Hogn
weaqeEapifavitqussnfaas | ust werenye wt qatseraraat Wconl
With the destruction of Balahaka and others, the gods amidst sound
of kettle-drums showered heavenly flowers on Tiraskarinikaé and rejoiced
at the elimination of the tormentors of the world. Then Amrtesi revived
the dead gaktis by a shower of nectar. Conquering thus the demons with
eyes like the Sun, Tiraskarini bowed to Mantrini and Dandini and
announced her victory. Mantrini and Dandini embraced her and lauded
her by saying thus: “What you have done is an altogether impossible
task”. While Balahaka and others were thus killed, the Sun started
setting. 76 to 80
gfe sittings revere’ srewfeersts cara: 1
End of the sixty-eighth chapter of the
of Sri Tripurarahasyam.

Wenlraethar ats ATT:
Chapter 69
wa aaaag frrepers seteate faquaraar yet: Ugertaefea: Wen
faymepfecrarn faagratdaq ufatrefrertra deface fae: Tha
qag: viararfrenceratacn: | fagyeat afauit qusueit Garafa: cae 3 1
wet wosgqaranstt afanas frepieq sepefrayeat wsefas ware
deat: wferaat ateaarare aga: |
Even though the demons with solar power in their eyes were killed
by Tiraskarini, Visukra, Kutilaksa and others deluded by the illusion of
Devi Tripura were happy imagining victory and fought with great strength
the Saktis by sending Visanga and his troop to catch the saktis from
behind. Visukra faced Mantrini, the chief of the army faced Dandini,
the sons of Bhandasura faced Bala, the ministers faced Tiraskarini and
Ulikajit and others fought with Sampatkari and Asvaradha. The demons
thus jointly fought with the saktis. 1 to 4
aret are afaaht adaerraraat wan
Wad: UMisetaren: viet: | Yada weaenygteragw: wan
wat mesraafe nq wat faery saaegreut ys yifaaaraarat: nou
ANTS AACA Wear TAN! FA: wera vied: el
At Sunset, when darkness was enveloping all over, a severe fight
went on for some time in the twilight between the gaktis and the demons.
Then as the darkness grew dense covering the directions the severe fight
between them continued, illumined by the stars. They fought mutually
employing many weapons and making sounds. 5 to 8
aastramtame aa tt shaq areseaadtart acarrgay tl Sl
TeRNAAAaT Yat Terra Tat: | Fqq: wheter WMTSaAAANTA: | Yo Il
cHfanats SRasHPes Aaa: | PRaaaly qeahr aera areata fe 1 V8
Vasa aU | aa Setdat Sen: wileafa: yradaeaT == gl

carraaferrats ATA: 657 Chapter 69
retina Gereredianry| cfresafatrem: ut tafser: West
qacenteasssa teteert: qafia: | Ut went da dng ata aes ew
a asf diag: tat aan Sat aera
ai weanans se at Sarat: aasft at fag: Weg
By the intense collision between the two armies arose dust which
covered the sky lit with stars. Then seized by the darkness the saktis
and the demons blinded by rage fought in confusion. Some were shouting
insults, some were chasing the enemies, some were hurling weapons
which were being destroyed by others. A severe war guided by sound
alone continued where the demons were killing demons and saktis were
killing gaktis. Thus an intolerably cruel war filled with frightening wailing
went on. Some were killed by weapons, some were ground by chariots,
some others were struck by horses and some crushed by elephants. In
such an extremely attacking war one could neither recognise each others
army nor the beginning, middle and the end of the army. 9 to 15
fromacaracan ara f fart wor ware weredt were Page 8g I
Baad a edt werdisunist) saradtagsT saree = RI
Ten aemeatatiord faRact aa: 1 det deat: vretatshe Fag: HAAA: Ul Re I
Seeing the irregular war Mantrini remembered goddess Jvalamukhi
who was born out of the aspect of Devi Tripurasundari. Just by that
remembrance Jvalamukhi appeared in the battle ground. She was like
a burning mountain pervading the directions with flames. Ilumined by
her body, the entire darkness vanished. Then the saktis and the demons
fought properly. 16 to 18
WW: arg wae fate greet arent wusgida fafermaitayry = el
wyalggar wvsqaet faeqfacm: | freee uncaet Faqaterat FeAl Yo
“Oh Agastya! When the war was thus properly resumed, Bala fought
with the sons of Bhandasura in many wonderful ways. The thirty sons
of Bhandasura each with four faces and arms and strong like Visnu,
simultaneously fought firmly with Bala. 19, 20
Tassear fafeagy farce: adat feet! art wareag: wreaferet gets

att fgeeeery, 658 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Riding chariots they covered Bala by shooting special arrows in all
directions just like the mist covering the Sun. 21
aa arenstt yratnfaayreaet aaa argrarara as aH: Yafeat war uv 220
amaisfagrerrd aqfartiert: vt: | Wale USAT RHI
wettest tas enfesats waa yretat ef facae eter ae
ware eyed fag aot aafa yaw: WMA Sawa wMeqfesA: 1 WII
Then Bala also with the power of her weapons quickly destroyed
the heap of weapons of the demons just like darkness by Sunrise. Then
by using four sharp arrows killed individually their horses. With one
arrow each the charioteer was killed. With another arrow their bows
were broken. With one more arrow she effortlessly pierced their chests.
Having lost their horses, weapons and hurt in the chest by the arrow
they fell unconscious as if dead. 22 to 25
seafrarqea soser afiritgqa: | a afeagar gay diedtat: qatfirr: 1 260
afate gareet att w arad: | faferqg ward zefeeredt at QUI
qarqg wnwateyrengatttear feat: |
qaeat fat garsar aaeat UTA A HAT, Ween
fersde farentor fore: wea tft
aeraratste aaa yat weet aM HAM Teta
we facenssengt dearer watt!
Ulakajit and others, the sons of the sister of Bhandasura, sixty of
them were experts in war and possessed fearsome prowess. With these
demons fought Asvariidha and Sampatkari showing extremely astonishing
talent. Each of them fought with thirty demons separately. Asvaridha
after fighting for a long period bound them by a rope and cut off their
heads individually with a sharp sword. Similarly Sampatkari piercing
the demons in their chest by spears despatched them quickly to the
abode of Yama, the god of death. 26 to 29
sreatnqaat gages agit gol
frrenfrancen yearend: | qed afta: aft per wats wea |

CHA TTATS ATE: 659 Chapter 69
fr: arergrentqariniaan: |
Then Ugrakarma and other ministers fought with Devi Tiraskaranika
using many weapons and missiles. Fighting with the ministers, the angry
Tiraskaranika with a sword quickly separated their heads from their
gata apfeenator eusara taferar Wazu
went aguq: wt: wulfafatad: | ccegentta aera fafesg: 1 8301
Tam susaigt: sifeena: weater: | Wael caleaeat qarersfergfetiqa: 3x
Then Dandanatha seated in her chariot fought with Kutilaksa. Both
showered against each other wonderful arrows and their weapons got
mutually destroyed. Kutilaksa, the chief of the army of Bhandasura, who
was well trained fought Dandanatha with force and anger. 32 to 34
quetd steerer arferrerer uff: | fraorrenttent auitepbedgyeqt: 1 84H
waa anf gat frearisat efei prune dfs gaa fregrat A: BRI
qafatfatrfadt wet wrera diega: | feaftacncans saafeeyfet ware it 3 1
Tet datadt aaccat adaas a: 1 car wet aaftut wera efter: = 8c
Fighting with him, Dandanatha killed the eight horses of his chariot
by releasing deep-drawn arrows from the bow. With one arrow she killed
his charioteer and hit him in his chest with another by which he became
unconscious for a while. Again gaining consciousness he jumped up with
his mace and with all his strength struck that thunderbolt-like iron
mace on the head of the lion which was tied to the Kiricakra chariot
and roared like a lion after killing an elephant. 35 to 38
fadtsfa tear frat yet rer frre: |
WA: wat wer war Gear Set ye: ferry, Wagn
wan aaereradt eftaes a: 1 weds Tatert yeaa i ¥oul
rqer anndied fefaepeitea: | oftarerfern: wet aerag ueeen
Hit by the mace, the lion became unconscious for a short time and
gaining consciousness again stared with anger at the demon who was
standing there and mauled him on his chest with its paw. By this, his

at PARRA, 660 Sri Tripurarahasyam
chest was torn and he bled heavily. Again the demon jumped on to the
chariot of Dandanatha and fought with anger with her bodyguards.
Ua df Tamed Fea aT! ante Ghrqearen what weer wT
asqeaq Gleean fat ugedta a Gerad yo Fa Weta | &3 II
Bat me yoy aot ereatsferitsar i Greer Wea at Wet WetgaT x ¥ I
ar a medag wires sofayd! wfaat wf gear a tft GH:
Then Jambhini, the chief guard of Dandanatha opposed the great
demon who was fighting in the Kiricakra chariot. After a long-drawn
fight, the powerful Jambhini struck Kutilaksa, who was intensely fighting,
with an arrow, by which he was paralysed with pain for a moment.
Again he flew with his mace and strongly hit Jambhini on her head by
which she sat down near the chariot. Seeing her condition the saktis
wailed as alas. 42 to 45
Ware ae ausistod wa shan wafer yet gear art fst ay:
SM Wet wedt wet tat way HaswaRes dh aah xo Ul
wferitqaatges fatern gaan: | wear tH Aged qt FSM HAT ll ¥6 I
At that time the demon snatched her bow quickly and broke it.
After standing up, Jambhini seeing her bow broken picked up her huge
mace and was burning with rage. Then a fierce fight with mace started
as if Indra and Tvstra were fighting. The gods and demons who were
witnessing were wonderstruck. Realising that the chariot was small, they
fought on the ground. 46 to 48
Tage Gaye diene ween herrea, neseul
Tegetesaraatnadon | afar rniteataaeea Se, TL
The long drawn mace fight with the sound produced by hitting each
other made the cowards shudder. A shower of fire was generated by the
colliding maces. With acts like overpowering, jumping and so on the
mace fight looked beautiful. 49, 50
Wa Seq at et waft! aanadar yfe acageal EA: Teta

CATT ATA: 661 Chapter 69
TEETER TRACT | aH feat at vitotaat FE: Gz
Tera WAT FAI eT Ala
Then as he was jumping with great speed to hit her, she struck
him powerfully with the mace on his head. With a flood of blood oozing
out of his swollen eyes, tongue and face he fell on the ground with all
his joints loosened and embracing his mace and rolling on the ground
he quickly died. 51, 52
ad ater ayaa der sitar: werfera: West
dam: vetagisti Weg: TAA! Wa eet Peery wit qvenear
wore Ufa ore afvsdt a vettart cet aed ates eon at wate ak
Seeing the chief of the army dead, the demons ran away. The gods
and gaktis rejoiced over the destruction of the enemy. After killing
Kutilaksa, Jambhini bowed to Dandanatha and stood by her side. The
happy Dandanatha embraced her and looked at her lovingly. 53 to 55
fay gatdtechifaet damm fageatste weet gausitsfrattary i 4 1
fafermentiten waster weer yranfin wigrafaeaTay
weaavate qa at we! Ue fat Pree, Wael
FRAT WARES aelaat VM FSA Taaaig aN GR
aqdenech tq fade fafteree: |
The powerful Mantrini vehemently fought with Visukra. The strong
Vigukra, the heir apparent, battled in an astonishing way with Mantrini.
They destroyed each other’s weapons and missiles. Observing the longdrawn awe-inspiring battle by the powerful demon, Mantrini exhibiting
her skill simultaneously destroyed very quickly his chariot, horses,
charioteer, bow, crown and the flag by a bunch of arrows. 56 to 59
wa ga whey faget gT Neon
wye Gettin ef eat wat ca
Thus defeated in the war, Visukra burning with anger picked up
the sword and the shield and decided to kill Mantrini. 60

at fey, 662 Sri Tripurarahasyam
RIUSsart Geteat sees Ufa Tt ay
ara fret qreat Gens Yea! feadeahiaymrardt ceqeey gen
wart vec fates attrar aectedt fagrntstt wht eft ary a3
uforat fase caged ai unfad: | aagt: dade arta watt: navn
TMeqestqard aa Aa, at |
Then Mantrini with an arrow broke into two the sword of Visukra
who was approaching her and destroyed his shield by another arrow.
Then Visukra was approaching with folded fist. Mantrini hit him in his
chest by a huge sharp spear by which the hero was thrown two krosgas
away just like a mountain by the annihilating wind and revolving and
vomitting frothy blood fell deeply unconscious. (One Kroga is 1/4 of an
yojana. Approximately 1 Kilometer). 61 to 64
wa fagasfaet cedar afagat Wayul
Fafa a, ease ateatis feet ceri faye yfeod cer: wares qi aq:
When Visukra was thus struck, the army of the demons ran in ten
directions dropping the weapons and abandoning the vehicles. The demons
carried the unconscious Visukra to the city. 65, 66
fayarfeg qearg Fvenferaaar fate afer ata eq ti G91
cafafaaftantssmpfadagandaan! Sq yreifer dest wat aasgt FAA Ge Ul
ara: Useyatfecitt: quae: | serdamtian: yrRaraagage: Ta
WAY Wea GANTT MISA: | Wares at TTS Haat UW Boll
ad dteigenen dteracorafia: | water dad seat yagartas wget: I RHI
aqeearaygs asad: WI
While Visukra and others were fighting with the entire army of the
Saktis, Visanga happily thought that Devi Lalita will be alone in Her
Sricakra chariot along with a few close bodyguards and could be conquered.
Hence he set out accompanied by Damana and others, the leaders of a
fifteen-aksauhini army, with a small army and many weapons. Watching
the sound from the foot steps of the elephants, Visanga proceeded on
an inebriated elephant along with others riding elephants. All were

aracaferart Sea: 663 Chapter 69
dressed and embellished in blue and each on an elephant assembled and
followed the army of the demons about two yojanas behind. 67 to 71
ad: hfareofadaat amdisst a ca: TACK a
cies atest fear aergreny Us YR UgyEd aqeqdar TA: WRN
Some surrounded the saktis from the left and some from the right
and keeping a distance of two yojanas in between the demons proceeded
like thieves in different groups. 72, 73
TRIISeD Taigiet fe Goa: 1 fafraret we wa vat fafreaT: = oI
wade: Gout fargryErgy: |
Then all of them joined together about a kroga distance behind the
Sricakra chariot and within no time Visanga and other demons reached
the back of the chariot. 74
faarrt siteafean areasergraarty, WK
warren cede ferasarta aa Tl Meta Geese year gt OPrsar: i og 1
yay: wd wat: weary Tart
Devi Lalita, the embodiment of consciousness, knowing the intention
of the demons informed the gaktis about that and remained sporting in
Her chariot as if unaware of the situation. Hearing the war message,
the gaktis without fear slept in the Sricakra chariot in their respective
Braprferrand Weare tegen Hell
dommes wtfaaafia dragforntatcart wat: Ween
Fear wider Star qesawaraa: | ag Tas Ft aitaafdag: Heel
The demons, seeing the gaktis sleeping in the Sricakra chariot which
had rows of glowing lights and gems glittering by those lights and
illumined all over, went near the chariot in groups wanting to climb up
by jumping. 17 to 79
Tarrercarery weetraerfery | caer afta yet wrenaeg farerea:
aafreguca Serag wars TARA: | HATS RAAT wT HTM C8
places.
coll

at ferent, 664 Sri Tripurdrahasyam
weir weataterniqeat sarmt: 1 var tet: vifeafes Gaara qtr
Thousands of gaktis with raised swords were already secretly going
around the chariot. Some gaktis seeing the group of demons on the
elephants surrounding the chariot, called out loudly inviting the saktis
and the éaktis entered the army of the demons and attacked them with
swords and rebukes. Then a fierce war started between the Saktis and
the demons. 80 to 82
gfe sttfaqereeet arererens wentracaferets cara: 1
End of the sixty-ninth chapter of the
Mahitmyakhandam of Sri Tripurarahasyam.

meafaaats ara:
Chapter 70
au viferanet qrassacorgrana: | farara dearrrfornpereret tt il
TAATEUUTRST: PRAT: | Gace: AT wera AT Ta)
Then Anima and other éaktis in the enclosure of Sricakra hearing
the call from the external gaktis, realising the attack by the demons,
riding their respective vehicles and equipped with weapons and missiles
vigourously battled with the army of the demons. 1,2
WAG: BAT: Wat: yrewtat taeifee: | wafaaperapieet freer: aretha: i
weusswarsa at fre ageare fren: | aarserent Fas TareTeTgy wey tl
aerteatgar varerenfertt ar ageyits freer ar wedarenragen Varerars SAT 4 Ht
rere aavarerar fie aftat ators seas wenfirreryes qyq: Preratsyt.n &
Then the égaktis in the Sricakra one by one heard the call and
Kameévarl and other Nityas reported the matter to Devi Lalita. Ordered
by Her they set out with rage to fight the demons. Considering that it
was difficult to fight in darkness, Jvalamélini the fourteenth Nitya whose
mountainous body was enveloped by flame, exuded flames as ordered by
Kameévari. That flame illuminated a yojana (3 miles) all around and
the éaktis fought with the demons. 3 6
megfafermpredeara Sear arearerany wet ATTA Bea Freqdage AA Me
ara fever dere: emer rer wefeenfen: afer revwatiretet erfiee| <I
garart: yifeernrotet Reqeeforgepyy: |
remaining demons who were trying to run away were surrounded by the
éaktis and could not find an exit and hit by the éaktis they wailed
loudly. 7,8
aeqean eafret SHAT WETS AT: nen

at feerea 666 Sri Tripura rahasyam
fafa: vit: preniicieey adat gery seared: yrentshy: grat: ar: 1
wa debfer re preatsfe Frog: | aqyfifigygriin war ao st RRL
ygdrwag ge vrerat cearfefa: | areas Sere SHAE MEAT: «= ARH
wpeatepfert vifeerut yrearexativh: | Awaret ABYTAT FBTAT ABSA: 1 eB
a Sgeeayrarnt wart wrorendory |
Ufewat: vrata: catered aif OT AE: TT:
aioe: Wsyisren: Ufearerat Waray: |
Seeing the destruction of the demons, Damana and other powerful
demons shot many arrows and strongly obstructed the Saktis and with
massive weapons started killing the Saktis in large numbers. The Saktis
who were heavily hit by the demons showered arrows just like the rain on
the mountain peak by rain-bearing clouds. While the Saktis fought with
Damana and others for a short time, the powerful Damana by pouring
weapons and missiles made the Saktis miserable. The saktis losing their
arms, weapons, limbs and lives were unable to withstand the killing
downpour of the weapons by the demons. Some Saktis fell unconscious,
some died, some others were cut to pieces and some were slit to death.
qeaad fred vifeanot arate: Wall
frfatent torssispydeaa: | craifiafatit: aga: wTASTHT: i ail
qa9: vratredtethgacyen: | yearn ufayreten srarraeatfaarya aI V9 Il
waetwadtia der wig ara: |
Seeing the collapse of the Saktis, the most powerful Kameégvari and
other deities of the lunar phase got angry and riding the chariots fought
with the fifteen demons Damana and others. Equipped with many weapons
and filled with strength and valour they destroyed the weapons and
missiles of the demons by counter-weapons and missiles and with great
skill, shot arrows at the delicate organs of the demons. 15 to 17
wa afadaarn dem: mtd ot aq: Well
upmagd ae dttaeadge asda aqdaargefis: yrofan: nee
ier feat ga arrest confat

pata 667 Chapter 70
Thus struck by the saktis, the demons got extremely furious and
fought in an astonishing manner filled with might and violence by
shooting arrows that emitted sparks of fire resembling submarine fire
which would burn the worlds and glowed in the war field. 18, 19
are aifeafargeaea GREATS BATTER ATT, Ron
war tH anfa a act for wi ai
aegerat urd dtenraeet: forfafesgitira Ween
aa ay omy tery cuarfeg fager gerquer: fier tem feyit ze eH
Then the Nitya deities fighting with the wonderfully powerful demons,
destroyed one by one their horses, chariots, charioteers and flags and
breaking their bows with sharp spears and with great strength severed
their heads. When Damana and other demons were killed the remaining
demons with fear ran away in ten directions. 20 to 22
faugt matedt Gate fafagrfeata: | agfrderartent qaterfewurat: i 28
qeranfeddor aftart arta: | weg: artattyar: fre: areeranit: 1 eet
Then the valiant Visanga seated on an elephant, angrily fought
alone with the many Nitya Saktis. KameSvari and other Nityas surrounded
him who was bravely fighting and hit him with showers of arrows,
ara artatt wre fang Gauge! Sensaaret Ysa worsens F nent
yret area urcent wes vit merger) fant agfirairerer wftrenfir #11 26 0
Then Kameégvari said to Visanga, who was engaged in fighting, thus:
“Oh Vile demon! Stop fighting which will put an end to your life. Abandon
your weapons and safely walk back quickly. It looks improper that you
are battling alone with many.” 25 to 26
gen arritarttarert wereaechtarge: | fas ameefer gar ge freer reat Ee: "
aration, quitter wat prfeererafirareys weer at eaferat aft accent ern @ We
Suara a woe: ret ye arene wAhy earefrenet teeter Ha A ferre *8
racer Patines ete ar ware 1 eager we Feearar wet Wey a er: "
warera War Aree AAWTAT AAT

at fea, 668 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Hearing Kameévari, Visanga laughed loudly and said thus. “Oh
Wicked Woman! What are you talking in vain without shame standing
at a distance. All alone I will soon destroy the entire army of the saktis
and surely carry alive Devi Lalita by binding Her. First I will destroy
your weapon. The delay in doing so has been due to my compassion
towards women.” Saying thus he struck them individually with sharp
spears. Hearing him Kameévari said “If that is so, let there be war with
each of us individually and immediately with me”. 27 to 30
sqaen tent tore qat weet Wagn
somnfatrper & wget qoyarec! srett ateenfie qeaet fe tere Weaen
wor weed at rede araarta waa: | separa qearats faqear Serer F i 33 1
t ye ter ufe cat waren fe dor genes addition avant wa chery
afe wt yerafe sera afsrafa at at ta frente Gat at fe verfrry 1
ger yews gene ferraay: | seqerar frie aeary ee wer arf
Saying thus to the demon, Kameévari spoke again thus: “Oh
Bhagamilini and others! Listen. I will fight with him and you carefully
guard him from escaping.” Saying thus she hit him with an arrow and
addressed him thus: “Oh Foolish Demon! Without any compassion towards
me fight with all your might. Let me see your prowess. If you are a
man, you will not run away. I will never torture you who are injured,
but allow you to escape. So shedding your shyness fight like a man.”
Saying thus she hit him with sharp spears. 31 to 36
qaqa distr artvar aemrert trea: |
Visanga also with fury fought using all his strength with Kameégvarl.
aa erotsrquta vitor wet area, non
wert @rerantet aa arta a fac: 1 fren faeferdt qut wore orqefma tl 301
Then with a long-pulled arrow she hit his elephant in the middle
of its temples by which the elephant split into two fell dead on the
ground like a mountain. 37, 38
wearer faugiste ater wert aq:1 ataqrenrat wteragepdtepfeenss: | 38 Il
aa fafa: yitddt aqequitta ai yaad arsfe fasts arty aoreaa: |! xo Il

aatfadats Ara: 669 Chapter 70
Having lost his vehicle, Visanga picking up a bow and arrows rushed
to fight exhibiting his anger by shrinking his eyebrows. Then KameSvari
with three arrows quickly cut his bow, quiver and the crown. 39, 40
aa: aauret faqerters area SraaEaeat aatevtgor ye: Hesen
fron fort verse foraqdyara aq ter yaad S Hearted fqeafe i x21
yea 7 Ue Hest unfadt feafeage fee car a quedt ara: wenfacrgqa:
aot at afer aeerse far Ferdi sued waar yret ore fawaeaa
Were aT res WH Yat ale uteeT!
Then as Visanga picking up a frightening huge sword was
approaching Kameégvari, she cut that large sword by a sharp arrow into
three pieces and with a smile said to him thus: “Oh Demon! Are you
not very powerful? Why are you fighting like this? Why are your weapons
not falling on my body? Are you extremely compassionate towards me?
Why have you lost your weapons? How will you conquer us and carry
Devi Lalita by binding Her? Your weapons are futile to achieve victory.
Hence run away from my presence if you are a man.” 41 to 44
eat atatiarert ea Aer, Weal
foyer at ef werat wape@ sari aan fate: yitefat facarerstractt ATU we I
weeyfey tars seaearrarsyt: | vara afer ae yfe a fafrafagy =n voll
sant cfsadtsa watssratrargy a1 area aartadt eet yrearetas wel: | ve HI
waite art dere aagatrars vat
Hearing the bitter derisive words of Kameévari, Visanga raising his
fist went near to kill her. Then again with three arrows she forcefully
struck him in his foot, chest and fist by which he was unable to move,
see and release his fist and ashamed he quickly disappeared. Before that
Kameévari obstructed his passage by creating a net of arrows all around
which was astonishing. 45 to 48
eaisa waat art arat teat facta, neseu
Wrerspreferrsétat ategrendtyart aie wae META TAATTRHTT 4 I
Wggent fafeat wrarafrwaraent! get get a at wat SerearetraveneA | eH

a faery 670 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Prevented all around thus, the demon spread his magical power. He
created varieties of fearsome showers of weapons, boulders, blood, serpents,
dust, burning charcoal, mountains, great devils, demons and ghosts,
Kameégvari with her weapons destroyed that magic as they were being
created. 49 to 51
sear wenyft: art: qonfiger: | eae fraaaratsfrerrary
qear sey at ef SATA: rae ATI
Then the frantic Visanga assuming a huge terrible yellowish black
form with thousand faces and myriads of feet and emitting fire from his
wide open mouth proceeded to kill her. 52
gear wit vifeerrot & atorafiatarny Wait
qearsqra a wat fafarawarget! saree gorea wrear: wat eattryr
Seeing the Saktis who were frightened by looking at that one yojana
tall figure, Kameégvari dislodged an anti-illusion missile which quickly
obliterated the entire magic. 53, 54
aersoratedt tet ariteit werarera: | mean frarerararet Faq: AUTATAA: 1 44 Il
a de: wereerg: ufaa: weafwat afar avaeat yaaaiifertam: = 4a
wai faag t eerie) serret yrfeeron fragrant aan fir AT 4 It
oat frear uftqar sttedtorecafafary
Then Kameégvari quickly bound the demon who was still hiding by
a consecrated rope and pushed him on the ground in front of her. The
demon who was bound and dropped at her feet bent his head with shame
and closed his eyes as if dead. Kameévari ordered the daktis to carry
the bound Visanga to the Sricakra chariot and she also accompanied by
the Nityas moved near the feet of Devi Lalita. 55 to 57
wear Tet ear eeT wat yetferanf tere Wael
areegfaard asf area afavitqan: | wararyfafarcarttaca wreote Tat it 48
ayer ar fact year teat Areata
faferaraa quatsfe tear yreat uf Nu gon

warferats aT: 671 Chapter 70
After reaching they climbed the chariot and bowed to Devi Lalita
and narrated about their victory. At the same time, Mantrini and others
reached there and announced their triumph after bowing to the Mother.
Hearing about the deception of the demons, Mantrini and the gods were
surprised. 58 to 60
sassttt vifeerotde Qearget veri fryer yrerra: wirqefienterrareper: ue
wert gaat ta foeat frernfife gear custiirarset ad wer cafe
wa sttarpanren afavit werdiga: | vat a qadt weer yaqedt fe way: tt
rregere Barwa Senrara wat Se) FeyeraT Arerarara wre at afavit war
% der qat tet eavenref; ypeafeeys gett afavitaret afro tenga: 11 84
wars saat wat viteaayay yer: YA:
Seeing Visanga who was bound and brought there, the éaktis charged
with great anger said thus, “Let him be killed, injured, cut to pieces
and split”. Hearing them, Dandanatha thought about killing him. Then
as desired by Srimata, Mantrini said thus: “Killing a bound person is
improper because he is considered as if dead. Let him go and narrate
his plight to Bhandasura”. Saying thus Mantrini ordered his release and
said to him thus: “Oh Demon! Do not again practice such deceit which
will be despised by valiants.” Hearing Mantrini, the ashamed Viganga
bent his head and quickly marched away without again looking back.
ara aa yifernot att erferarerar naa
ureat qaqe wrararserge wer!
Then the gaktis assembled around Mother Lalita and mutually
narrated the astonishing events of the war. 66
war wre gusts afavit uf n aon
afer ant wargame tet: quite ofierrerinnfes qa: Yate waft ke
wingaudtart ten: aucatfes: | acenfe: gps eet wearer nagn
ara warraraftasa tere: 1 ef steerer wfreit safer quzH Woon
wavoraraent dergafe ae weet waa free wat qeebegent wre weitere nt ot

a ARES, 672 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Deliberating on this, Dandanatha said to Mantrini thus: “Oh Devi!
A great dreadful war was fought with the demons. Only a small portion
of the night is remaining. Again a most ferocious war might happen
after Sunrise. The demons fight fraudulently. Hence we must go with
our entire army. However the Sricakra chariot has to remain alone here.
There is no danger to the glory of the Great Devi Lalita. Even then
I feel it as improper. Giving a serious thought to my words, please
organise what has to be done about this.” 67 to 71
oft art aarncd eftsan ufauit <a
amaasa tet frat year faa We
efor vfs areas Fae: | cater ater wettest wf = WRI
ware warerrenta: srferarar senlgt Saat AA ta we wars: = II
7 vied erifaenee vfeamuitstec: | Faget wet fasts
ae dqnqed ahaar fasiiga: | a eearecat yet fad daha to RH
waa afe wseaganife at ga: 1 waft srafrents yquremafivit, well
Hearing Dandini, Mantrini after analysing clearly, agreed with her
and bowing to Devi Lalita said thus: “Oh Mother! Please hear me. Dandini
says that after sunrise we have to again go to war taking the entire
army. Then without guards this chariot alone will shelter You. This
looks improper. The saktis after fighting, want rest during night. But
disturbed by the deception of the demons they would never have rest.
If you agree with me, just grant me permission. I will find a plan by
which the enemies cannot attack us.” 72 to 77
fet fagnfirn tat wget at aerfeyry! see ar fafafacarg ar aatsfer ugerit
ararrant fe areafratet erate) arama ar eat sareranferrentsfirat tl
afesarermernet Frtsqater aeritqner yrettat Sat are: Warfera: l Co tl
aqregaiarafadtesatetstrdtanr: | set: vite yretdfeatsrrgemy ceil
et Sree Saad | arated Urerareier Prada WTaTEAaT: «= SI
gay: whereas Gas fe wana: wearer tar waar amfeyr tl
va varerarerre? feat siterferarfiarent nevi
Thus requested by Mantrini, Devi Lalita directed her to go ahead.

aaafacrats AA: 673
Then Mantrini ordered the fourteenth Nitya by name Jvalamélini to
create a fort that would prevent the enemies. Taking the order, she
created a fort of fire which encircled the army of the saktis. This tall
formidable fort of fire was extending its flames one yojana outwards but
it was cool within to the saktis. Seeing this fort the Saktis who were
tired fighting forgot fear and slept comfortably. Mantrini ordered one
thousand Saktis to protect the Sricakra. Devi Lalita was thus situated
in the centre of the fort of fire. 78 to 84
of stfaqrneet orererars wafaaats ara:
End of the seventieth chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurarahasyam.
Chapter 70

Weeacaharaats care:
Chapter 71
wagqadt faugisa aat deren uta ¢:fadtstrat dat eatearetsfatt: waz 11g
weet faat aarti fafast daada: | aa qara Met pfeerat a afar: 1211
watenitstag: ret fra: wearsraa
The released Visanga reached the army of the demons. Extremely
grieved, helpless, depressed and dull, he sat alone sighing in some lonely
place. Hearing about the death of Kutilaksa, the chief of the army and
the ministers, he was drowned in an ocean of sorrow. 1,2
wafagentsfaaat wearer: nan
zaptstafaqouns set fauguqst fea
umes aa fer ase avait afer yar uel
urfatys ferarett ae & aaytea: |
At that time Visukra along with the sons of the king reached there
and seeing his brother Visanga sitting with a sad face, questioned him
thus: “Oh Dear! Why your face is sullied today? Tell me everything that
happened in the unjust war.” 3, 4
gaa ogaat faa ore aIsyT: want
om: fr asfraentt arnited qearsfa 21 ara derargrra caret watsufearnr: 11
aéistifat tant faupatratfiary wiedisaragiieraa ways: tl ol
we censfrraer 4 aert vitfadt we aa fae aif arte geqday aan ui ci
we aan a yard pleoaneatsy: | 7a: Tare Uta eet grata Haha tl
afftusfahatt qranrmrant wh! waft a agers cteasyferate qari
faguritdfad tet a stare At ye
Hearing the words of his brother, Visanga sighed and said thus:
“Oh Brother! What can I tell you? I had never faced this type of plight.
I assume that the time has come for the destruction of the demons. It is
really surprising that the demons who could fight with Visnu have been

cameras Ta: 675 Chapter 71
OTE
vanquished by a group of women just like a lion jackals
is improper for me to live under this bad cnn Watts I 4
I was not killed in the war. Those Kutilaksa and other demons who
died are fortunate because they did not suffer defeat and lived. By
clearing their debt towards their king they have attained place in heaven
and fame in this world. Fie upon a demon like me who is neither living
nor dead. 5 to 10
or: fer agateda art yoy arty & Ween
Sante WM: cHreitseTAarAMT: | Tees A vitae wifes wef ee 0
gat ded: GHatsS Ware: aorarqa wifwigg at fast arranger: — ui gyi
mae Ufotart ad ad fe age: | aaa ware at mitqaeiore: = ex tl
araarea: yiferarrorr tacanfaet fear: | at tet afta qeterrereparforenr: ie tt
aenfrentaaren qaqeeant: | saree weaerenafirararg wit: 1 6 tl
“Oh Brother! What is the gain in talking much? I will tell you the
gist. Listen. A bad period has befallen the demons. Hence defeated by
the women I will not like to live.
At the beginning of the night, I went along with my army and tried
to win Her by attacking Her chariot sidewise. While we were trying to
capture Her by climbing the chariot, the army of Saktis who were guarding
it by going around it opposed us with deadly swords. Even as we were
abusing them, they fought vehemently though stumbling in that darkness
of poor visibility. 11 to 16
areren tasretntafatreeran: | Priqedfert vrerrerenrfrarcory — i to tt
uftag: waeasey aia: FCAT: | aura qaarerteat Brat Arafat: i te Hl
“At that moment, from Her great chariot emerged sixteen Saktis
who created a burning mountain that drove away the darkness and
jointly encircled us and showered a fusillade of arrows and encountered
me after instantly killing Damana and others. 17, 18
arg qa vifsater aritvagafaaran we afer werent: weet
a aeat 3 feremts qete wraract tar! wat Ate: unfadtsa mferaracontarae tt 20 Il

at faery 676 Sri Tripurarahasyam
wen a afaagnt caeeraeeta: | ahedangayigeenaty Tet WReMH
Wasé GAR SAMRAT Aat F vitadt asaf eaenttdatra: un eeu
“The astonishingly powerful and prominent sgakti Kamesvari among
them started fighting with me and in half-a-minute bound me. None of
my strengths and magical powers was effective against her. Tied and
dragged, I was pushed at the feet of Devi Lalita. Then I was released by
Her compassionate minister Mantrini whose complexion was dark green,
whose body was the essence of beauty and whose voice was melodious.
Hence there is no point in my living after losing my fame and vigour.”
grad cfd wear faye: we afr avstsfnafaceaet eaeitetferarerat
am wa fasta sift qasaraert! Gs Wert: ys aafaacdfrn aq
wad 4 afeat wet at ya!
qrea fe wear qat fearsfr eae safer, Tera
7 acta aafaett carat: far vat aq wasweat qefaarateyat wast
Wty Wat wae a: date aaa A wat wa: Wear dferfaa: 1 9 1
wet Hees wrered far aeraene a1 fant ékfafedt waged Warag: ul eI
facade faratanreand vata! yoy a afadt weetag afer lel
Hearing that talk, Visukra smilingly said thus: “Oh Dear! Your
thinking power has been destroyed by Lalitambika in respect of achieving
the wants of Bhandasura. You are unaware of the ways of winning the
war. Sometimes even the extremely powerful are defeated by ordinary
persons which is neither surprising nor acceptable to the brave one. A
person walking on the ground sometimes stumbles even during the day.
The immovable ones will never stumble. Nothing can be concluded by
this. It is difficult to predict victory or defeat in war. Only the final
result can determine victory. Victory in between cannot be considered
as victory. Alas! What can I tell you about the impact of delusion on
you? I can only say that brave and properly deliberated thoughts will
bring success. Keep away from negative thoughts that spoil progress.
Listen to my plan which will end your sorrow. 23 to 29
arias faqer: yreeqen fafatiar: 1 go qat faye Ft aad Oy aaAs | 301!

eqraaATAS A: 677 Chapter 71
——_——— a ee a a a
raforgerrniranretas J Ad! aot viguetard fated ertarsrar TELA
qeu vaareny fafagea acta aerihraaed Pret wferehrery uazn
fafarasé freee get crenth wate
wa gat viferearg wierd WaTy Nazi
aaent: Waa ABataa TTA TAT Teal CANS SATA AAT 13% ll
aurea: vifeartat aise Aeraargte sfass wie eat vitenst etary A ah Il
“Listen. I will tell you the plan, by which earlier many times we
had defeated Indra and other gods, which you have forgotten. It is the
magical missile which creates obstacles to the enemies. I have learnt it
from Sukracarya and I will now construct it as stipulated. By discharging
it the army of the saktis will be ruined. I will inscribe it on a stone
and give it to you. You should cleverly install it in the army of the
éaktis and quickly return. By this the endeavours of the saktis will go
in vain and they will lose their strength. Then we can march with our
army and easily destroy the gaktis. Have no doubt about this plan. Rise
and discard your worry born out of sorrow that kills your valour.”
geet ongenfed werarnfadted: | frafredta fafsrer etarerad Bal
Wea wat wen deere Ghacterery
Hearing his brother, Visanga deluded by the illusory power of the
Great Devi became sure about his victory and was extremely happy and
praised his brother for his skilled intelligence. 36
RATER WANA TA: TOL
frit afgernt oat anigugar erat yfafaerts aamferer Tegey tt BC Il
Wass aa tat aaa farerenftuiy, qatar fafeteret tt 381
ae fret qa yagrrafearsra: | wot at axtcheat arrartersa: tt ¥o it
Wane wet drereat wrerat cafeqa: | erragadhr uftattt: ll ¥gil
Wi tarea tet faagra cet aar antreoferaaran weasferpead: = RM
alec ffaens sate war!
Then Visukra informed his plan to Bhandasura and obtained his

sit fae, 678 Sri Tripurarahasyam
permission. Then he inscribed the Vighnayantra on a stone slab after
purifying himself. He worshipped in that diagram the demonic goddess
who generates obstacles by offering wine, flesh and many other articles,
He smeared the ash from the grave yard on his naked body and drank
the wine from a skull adopting perverted practices. Facing south he
chanted the mantras by wearing a garland of goblin’s bones, and
surrounded by a group of naked women. Thus accomplishing the missile,
he gave it to Visanga and said thus: “Oh Dear! Implant this in the
middle of the army of saktis with its front facing the great chariot of
Devi Lalita and return quickly.” 35 to 42
arin fastest darera aa Haat Ween
ufagte faagise vareraret cay 1 srqet at aareter art viet TAT wy I
a aenitt raary ater qt wafer: | fart waagqer ae aafrafigy v4
arama aerisad: wferer wert ya: | Wea Sparel AT KI
Taking the unfailing Vighnayantra, Visanga reached the enemy camp
at the end of the night and saw the invincible fort of flame and the
§aktis at its door. Out of fear he stood far away and after thinking flew
into the sky and being unable to cross that fort threw the yantra with
great force inside and returned. Assuming that he had completed his
task, he reported the matter to his elder brother. 43 to 46
fae fase: vrata: Wet ga! Tenens ceca wafafiory 1 vw il
ft wat qafaargert facasyt: | faye: adeeart Gra wrqegqa: = veil
Tyg wat a frelat ara: | atfaqeafaraeia acifacarsfacntsgt: tl vel
taunt yer fafrensatfecttran frig: wt wat cer qaera dierent:
Visukra thinking that the gaktis would have been quickly destroyed
by the unfailing Vighnayantra imbued with great power, came outside
the city along with the entire army, his brother, the sons of the king,
leaving behind women, aged and children. Deputing an army of an
Aksauhini to guard the Sanyaka city, all the demons biting their teeth
set out to fight. 47 to 50
amma aitantrara: | ear wget ¢ aret Ay a aa seg: RI

THRaTAATATS AMA: 679 Chapter 71
a
fageampen Sear srearfor were: | reed ure art vient nfeet war 4g
angg arect and unstaanpant a1 fags aremfadt wararater Gail
dantstaeguita aret f:yteat ta
They very quickly reached the flame fort. Seeing that unapproachable
fort they made up their mind to split it. Visukra and other leaders
discharged missiles of wind, mountain, moon, ice, earth, ocean, water,
rain and showers on the flame fort which totally destroyed all of them
like a straw by the fire of dissolution. 51 to 53
aeasterg a aet fagearparsat: NG tt
TRY AGHA HA Seat: AAT: | Sree Aaa Seat qed: ATCA ya
aatsfirenat aa Uren: Waada | Aeragrat Wear Ft was ERATE: UGG
Vag adisata: aoraeitettearert
Realising the formidableness of that fort, Visukra and others decided
to fly high and enter it. As a demon flew high to enter into it, 'the flame
fort grew taller than his flight. Thinking that it is not possible to fly
and enter, the demons reached the gate of the fort. The flame burnt the
demon who tried to enter the gate. 54 to 56
weaseriat wer gee aeerm: Ugo
yrarfir grantor arsearoraerrasyg: | fafecat Saar: Was BATT UGS Ut
qustat wifertarassare arleyte!
Thinking that it is impossible to go through the gate, the demons
discharged weapons and missiles through the gate. Coming to know about
this, Dandanatha ordered the Saktis to get ready. 57 to 58
farraan fagat: sree: waa: fer: Tea
areivensisan fate: | cusustaaest + feats a: go
fara: get qafaat denat area: Ga: | Tatas Vea: Het Afeet wa: Wag il
eat cen gerun zarifiefesa | teefest Hera ae Saar: = ERM
WHAT HAT GUS At Abavit qari wAWeRtat war fae: Taal: FA:
Tenigate caratgaraaa Hall Fasqadaatar wat sat J dat axl

at faery 680 Sri Tripurarahasyam
ufavar waar wad aya waar feat
wera: al faare: ware wtsraaet fe aT war Haun
All the gaktis were affected by the Vighnayantra and became lazy.
Some were sleepy. They did not care for the orders by Dandanatha. They
were thinking thus: “Why should we fight? Why should we kill the
demons? The demons have not offended us. Why should we oppose them?
Why should we fight with the demons to achieve the ends of gods? Why
should we not fight with gods to help the demons? Dandanathaé and
Mantrini are by nature irascible and having drunk they are irrational.
Even Devi Lalita who is always engaged in amorous pastimes with
Kameévara has lost Her discriminating power and She always considers
as good the suggestions of the intoxicated Mantrini. What to talk about
Bala who is always interested in sports. 59 to 65
set Wreea rere farnehrger gat: | cadfearsaeresy wreeaTat ATETTHAT 11 GK I
gat frter ately wren fafernria: | teafearerres gut frepfrremd = gv
anfwergdat qareet at geaatar wear warty aTeAT area: AafeAT 1 KS II
“The influence of illusion is astonishing. Why did we kill the demons?
By engaging in futile cruelty we will perish soon. Let us go to sacred
ponds and as ordained happily have atonement for the sins of torturing
the demons”. Some Saktis thought thus: “Enough of this grief-generating
war. Let us go to sacred places and achieve our wants by performing
penance.” 66 to 68
aren sae qedaedtert: | sped ft wer wteratsfart FoR ae
aera gente agyareraaaram: | tT qearat ad cad warssgrat 4 w feat: tl
mle aftafa afe qearmafe a rari qaisfaart arearitifavar wat wel
ae Fe warare fare yitereafa
Some other éaktis said thus: “Enough of this war which destroys
our body. Let us obtain a suitable husband and enjoy forever.” They
were talking thus resorting to separate views and said to Dandanatha
thus: “We will never fight this useless war and we are not bound by your
orders. If you get angry with us, then we will fight with you. Do not

CRRA ATAS ATA: 681 Chapter 71
be proud by joining with the intoxicated Mantrini. You will be humbled
by confronting us.” 69 to 71
warren: Apel: Yes Ter fe 3: Worn
aa: wate tain acerrayete aa vtafrat at dain fatrarat 11 03 11
a fein qarren wart wafe aafaq
A few other saktis angrily said thus: “Oh Swine-faced! Why are you
always furious on us and directing your horrible eyes at us? Quickly go
away from here lest we will pluck your eyes. There is no other shameless
swine-faced one than you.” 72, 78
sasadt, Geran froenstige aa: Non
fer areata F aret sqoy ates sat ate
autsfia dart aa atateafe waiters HOGI
Sitfad grata yer qaear yreaeaT WaT!
Another gakti holding a sword approached Dandanatha and said
thus: “Oh Pig-faced! If you are really powerful, listen. Fight with me
with your proud valour. Struck with weapons by me you will unnecessarily
gfe qear wfeut efrsaerafateran nog
Oa Uaeens a@ wren afar oft wen gt meat afavd afeaeaty
ufawafit a yradtat afgaret fremer qi faferar siteerersftererer worarserelte_
Seeing the condition of the Saktis, Dandanatha was wonder-struck.
She thought about how suddenly the saktis had gone mad and quickly
reported it to Mantrini. Mantrini was also surprised hearing about the
delirity of the gaktis and went to the Great Empress Lalita and bowed
and submitted thus: 76 to 78
wrarergeh feret Tarerenquftan: | Gt way geet tearariter Se wR
werttat afgarsitsa gyaasfamage: | Sem: arerqgaaet waST: TTA ATA: coll
afiret ut a earcerprertifgcer erste: | ferweererar: weeqar: yreerat trevfteronr
at feats aepet asé: aret facet amafeatens aa yaa: zt

at fray 682 Sri Tripurarahasyam
a waqereraaarsench werd wae! SENT saa aragd Miata AT C3
“Oh Mother! A most surprising obstacle is confronting us. This
should be really the mischief of the wicked demons. The loss of intelligence
of the gaktis is frightening. The demons, fully equipped, are outside the
fort. Excepting Dandanatha, me and the éaktis in the Sricakra the rest
of the Saktis with a changed behaviour are furious. Quickly order what
has to be done. We cannot afford delay. Though You can by a mere
movement of Your eyebrow destroy all the demons, we do not want it
so. With mercy, suggest a remedy quickly for this problem.” 79 to 83
ofa sifaqareet wrereraus wnacfaaats era: 11
End of the seventy-first chapter of the
Mahdtmyakhandam of Sri Tripurarahasyam.

feacafaaats ara:
Chapter 72
wfgad varrerar sttarat atta) citer faaadt vist aferatraraa: nen
aide feacorararl TARTAR HATA Tapa eaters esa tt VA
Requested thus by Syamala (Mantrini), the Universal Mother
Paramesvari sportively and smilingly cast Her loving glances bright like
the rays of myriads of moons and showering the ambrosia of amorousness
on the face of Kamesvara which was like an ocean of beauty. 1, 2
aot tdifarncteanmynpaage: | Wr: weyers eure: uu
Tet yet yiguedt faarot caargfa: | was sah Ut ae we xl
aet arent: YUSTHATA Aa: | Tansee feerareaferyeanr: Tc
frasaqerent aftrentetatisa: | yaar anbeeeet werastens sat: 1 I
wore ofeat tat agreafeyqetsadiq tf afe wear aaa Te II
We Hurayes areraraterg VHA |
Then with the mingling of the smile of the Devi with the face of
KameSvara was born the elephant-faced Ganapati red in complexion. In
his right hands he was wielding the mace, the trident, the conch, the
lotus and the tusk. In his left hands he was wielding the Citron, the bow,
the disc, the noose and the bunch of grain spike. In his trunk he held
a pot filled with gems. He was dressed in a red garment and wearing
effulgent ornaments. He had three eyes. He was decorated with the digit
of the moon on his gem-set crown. Embraced by Sakti, his consort, he
was dripping with ichor. Bowing to Devi Lalita with folded hands he
spoke thus: “Oh Devi! Tell me about my role in the war. With Your
grace I will achieve success even if it is highly impossible.” 3 to 7
grad wre word cferaran Heat wen
Tes ae tapeafrant fears!
Hearing him Devi Lalita said thus: “Oh My Son! Go and destroy
the magical spell of the demons.” 8

at freee, 684 Sri Tripurérahasyam
ee
vet war HTM MTT ATT HT nen
fafereraferrers qorrert ware! sere fared wesferage TAT: 11 tot
arwarenfy tenfigite Toure: | faftrarrequifera frererere rate Ween
vaorerrergrcarmfadat araqRye: |
Ordered thus, Ganesa swinging his trunk searched and quickly
reached the Vighnayantra. As the Saktis were watching, he angrily broke
the yantra which was hard like diamond with his tusk and in a minute
powdered it. Then going out of the gate of the burning fort he was
excited to fight. 9 to 11
fafaya deraat at qaqa zeaqya: Ween
fatw wear waifigention frede wena: | YER eraearay wives fate a i
srorcafgets teary weet: | wat tered qat wet: TATA, BI
amutarernerergfergen terenfest | ararargqrercerfaeper: AERIS AT: Weal
arayn ferferyy: vit yosraficarta: | yosrrnbraggrintyearqeeat: 1 ht
afeapestequrar fr:arargfa diferent: |
WOT wetaTsat a aat: sttaferereaare, ngon
fatter: arutarens searferar sitfert srg: |
Entering the army of the demons, Ganega fought with them. He
crushed some with the mace, cut some with the disc, split some with
the spear and tore some with arrows. He killed thousands of demons
with his tusk. He quickly destroyed the leaders of the demons. The army
of the demons was driven away by the wind generated by the flapping
of his ears. By the wind of his inhalations, groups of demons were drawn
within and helplessly they entered the trunk duct and with their joints
crumbled, there some died. Some who went unconscious were thrown out
by exhalation and killed. Some died hit by the flapping of his ears. Some
were thrown away and killed by the swinging of his ears. 12 to 17
wet fesreray deateretarat star: ween
wrmgery wearer wrerartrareren fing wf att wenrereerafeary, Weel
feegt ergs wer qeatqerey: | wer gear temo wear Were I 20 Il
0 tf ster: aut ereen at verter: |

framafacats art: 685 : ie
Having thus destroyed the army of the demons, Ganeévara
the sons of Bhandasura and floored them by hitting them with the mace.
He injured Visanga severely by piercing his chest with the tusk. Seeing
the sons of the king and Visanga becoming unconscious, the d
wailed and ran away from the battle taking Ganega as the embodied
god of death. 18 to 20
qeaa fagt det fagatsfrenfa: Ween
art tad Geared faery serswarergas fayyerraererat: 1 22 1
Seeing the fleeing demons, the furious Visukra riding a chariot
approached Ganesa who was fighting. A great battle started between
Vigukra and Gane§ga. 21, 22
yranaadet at urea! sruaea: depPSl Waray aaa, ue een
ara wants vist qofarere dy
Both intent on winning showered frightening weapons and missiles.
Then the angry Ganega crushed with the mace the chariot of Visukra
along with the horses and the charioteer. 23
aa wat fagpentste varqerer ere: uel
Weteprrateneat AAMT WAT TMeMETCaftragrre IRI YTY: Wet
ag yore efacae pat wonfa: | wars yet we fayyerenfeerra: = BRI
yetafirageet fargyent yfésdtsama| wet faye fafirer oat aver ufr i 201
Then the angry Visukra raising his mace strongly struck with all
his energy the temple of Ganega by which Ganeéga bled excessively. The
enraged Ganega with a spear pierced with great force the chest of
Visukra. Vigukra fell unconscious. Having thus defeated Visukra, Ganega
proceeded towards the chariot of Bhandasura. 24 to 27
Fears sarst frygra watet eararar we! ference waren arate fermen 36
We tg renter ferqereat war wel arated werd: weleratefe Toa
WH ager wetsfes wer stteaferarerar wretee gt Ae rR avira ATTA! Fo
aa farafind wat aot & eorenitfee Gate pT as aah aa wet aR
frnsytor deed the afar adtse at wares ats sttefernfterary

st ARE, 686 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Seeing Ganesa approaching him to fight, Bhandasura considering
the powerful Ganega as invincible by all the gods and the demons thought
thus: “My desire is to be killed by the weapons of Devi Lalita and thus
reach Her abode. For this I think this GaneSa is an obstacle. But how
can I achieve my desire? Long ago this Ganesa had really fought with
a powerful demon in the form of an elephant. I will create a similar
demon so that Ganesa can fight with him and then I will proceed to
fight with Devi Lalitambika.” 28 to 32
gta fafa wast waded Wega Uderst wereitt ofteterqgency, 33n
Deciding thus, Bhandasura created Gajasura who was astonishingly
huge like a mountain, who was extremely powerful and was holding a
bolt in his trunk. 33
afagaguafa a éet ausefere: | sree waded ft gata To: av
That Gajasura instructed by Bhandasura rushed towards Ganesa.
Reaching Gajasura, GaneSa fought with him. 34
we qeaft are fetes AI Sterta: wepfa ore Pretgdeera on a4
ate qeuaté wstae dda ageeeeani aba efrsttge on 3a
Tafa weniet wa Gare feats astepfendafadiranta: uftqar 301
While Ganesa was thus fighting, as a result of the destruction of
the Vighnayantra, the gaktis returned to normal senses and proceeded
to fight. Seeing Bhandasura well prepared to fight by gathering his army,
Devi Lalita Herself after deliberation set out to fight accompanied by
Dandini, Mantrini and the entire Sakti force, who were angrily gnashing
there teeth. 35 to 37
aret want eat corenterecnfaea | area aeafahrstrashraea, BC
aastufaas sem feat watt) sanacs sake FeAl BS
To begin with Devi Sampatkari riding her elephant by name
Ranakolahala and accompanied by the elephant force proceeded with
zeal. Then Devi Asvaridha riding her horse Aparajita and followed by
the horse force started with excitement. 38, 39

oar c 5 : 687 Chapter 72
are sttrenteat UfreaeT ToegeR! ater wores caferat wre ABTA FAT I ¥o II
managers Fas Pasay Vel Fafaarra wg wR
wasé ufreagister weertsf wert uret qeat wereter Bens WATT Tn we
fargention ys Frit at caraeq ard feast 2 ag assdarraqT
neat war legen feed gfe ot yer se A yar fara a
Meanwhile, Bala who was excited to fight, but prevented by Devi
Lalita, bowed to Her and said sweetly thus: “Oh Mother! Please permit
me who has decided to fight and who is always eager to fight. You are
stopping me even when a great war is ahead. I will touch Your feet
with my head. Please allow me to fight. Though anxiously waiting from
a long period to fight, I am not getting the permission. On the first day
of the war I was never satisfied because I was unnecessarily prevented
by Dandanatha. Today, please fulfil my long-pending desire to fight for
which I am well prepared.” 40 to 44
Sit aretaa: seat wife siterfaean wees waa WrachHaq i vt ll
dente fafa at part we ata
gift qu art afe at agitate Uvgu
waa waa deat ae Wa Wat We Gear cfs Twa AE ll voll
qe ata ues dearg Uae! waved aafugistt warssat wartsrati xe
qaraegcaa tha arg fe avetai
Hearing Bala, The Supreme Devi Lalita smilingly looked at Mantrini.
Grasping the intention of Devi Lalita, Mantrini said to Bala thus “Oh Bala!
If you want to fight then listen to me. If you desire to fight alone with
some one, do so by taking Dandanatha and me along with you. In the
war without us you should not enter the army of the demons. We will
be with you to take care of you. Tell me with whom you would like to
battle.” 45 to 48
grad afauitaret ure arenfaent 97: usen
qarag qvsqat tern aes! ade sorte ar ferqueetarct Ul 4o tt
qeen tenfreste a agra tar afr argerdifa avant senfastig pated
Hearing Mantrini, Bala spoke again thus: “I will fight with the sons

mt faEay 688 Sri Tripurarahasyam
of Bhandasura. No one else should discharge an arrow at them. Fighting
alone I will kill all of them. None should ever destroy their chariots,
vehicles and weapons.” 49 to 51
en aera yat afavit aqara gi Ut Geers Tt cafes at aa
fayrhafaat ye Aentafies wal aoSaT VEIT HUSqeaaaT: Tea
dirdern: we peqafaeman: | wat ay gene aa stg wifi Gx
Hearing Bala, Mantrini again said thus: “As permitted by Devi
Lalita you fight with one person. It is improper that you fight with the
thirty sons of Bhandasura who are very strong equalling Bhandasura.
With a fierce build, all of them are expert tricksters in war. You can
choose one of them to fight with.” 52 to 54
ofa art yarrerar: sear arenfiaent ad: | wore qaetdenarad are:
aredt at wareterr wtar at cfeaftacnr) ceraqat wat snfseres wifaqdeny
Hearing Mantrini, Balambika with folded hands bowed and requested
for permission to fight with all the sons of Bhandasura. Seeing the
beseeching Bala, the pleased goddess Lalita embraced her with love and
gave her permission to fight. 55, 56
ae wre Gaeat aren sitfrget wari wrae_y aah afesater wa we WON
a frag qayfe ya ue ye we) SETAE Tarra aT WE Ween
qwafersg + q fact qa: afteafrs afe qe qafaet aafterfa wer Oy Gehl
War wet Fe AAaAt wayafe
Then Bala spoke again to Devi Tripurasundari thus: “Oh Mother!
Please listen to me a second time. Dandini should not stay with me in
the war field because earlier she had spoiled my zeal to fight. If at all
she goes with me let her stay behind me so that she will not obstruct
me. If she were to again spoil my war, You will see her quickly defeated
by me.” 57 to 59
wa aextt aret at aca eet a otfait Gol
wen at arama ygaret: qayret: | tf vrgt wae ate area waar ae I
Premrnfa t qe aft wa aferaq wararaqesta yea: pests ar G2

SaTTAS AA: 689 Chapter 72
worenfe + fe fast & afeeata a t afer
Understanding that Bala who was talking thus was angry,
Dandanatha bowed to her and spoke to her softly and skillfully thus:
“Qh Devi! Forget your doubt about me. I will accompany you to the war
and watch you fight and do what pleases you by staying either in the
front or at the back as ordered by you. I will not be an obstacle to you
in the war.” 60 to 62
sft seat afte ar atererfscrer wary, naa
qouiee war faetat waticgenr! afauit cust a werereahet = RI
wag: Water: yiferaarerarga |
Hearing Dandanatha, the happy Bala soon embraced her and excited
to fight proceeded quickly in her chariot. Mantrini and Dandanatha
seated in their respective chariots proceeded on either side of Bala
followed by the army of the Saktis. 63, 64
AA HAAS AAT, TT
gare frat eat diraareaaat! aps: ware fafa, Wa
Wee weaned frdat ar facepfa: | fade wrferearrtat array Get
Then Devi Lalita seated in the chariot named Sricakra, set out to
war along with the required weapons. Behind Her, Tiraskarini riding a
densely dark horse, which had the speed of the wind, took along the
ocean-like countless army of the Saktis. 65 to 67
aa VASA FARA! Faatafaarat Aretats trata: Wael
ahrettgepis wanvsediepe: | castradradgasteatt aar Ween
The frontage of both the armies was crowded and frightening. Then an
extremely loud sound produced by drums, axels, clappings, ‘hum’ shouts,
cry of the elephants and neighing of the horses grew intensely. 68, 69
HY Prana Peete eaeTaT EA: | wifgarat Herarcaduifrage: Boll
Bilfs dead vit fans ur fagha wri gat ate eet t aya Tse TTHATI! Ok Il
wa suite ager yard aa age! finfeergr: wit: Sefer Safed, TeEeTATAT: M1 92

a faeerery 690 Sri Tripurarahasyam
yypertsfiranita: ut uaifanfea: | ffir: afte acifeearen: wt 1 03
qiatiffar: afatearn: uracfest: 1 fateuret: yreefera varfafiarear: ox
den away ant pfeatantsden: | afta: viforraet aqera Wea: tl Oy
The cracking noise of the iron weapons emitting showers of sparks
was frightening. Voices like—“You are dead. I will kill you. Stop. Do
not run away. Show your strength. See my valour.” and so on were
heard all over. Some lost their limbs by arrows, some were cut by axes,
some pierced by spears, some cut by swords, some crushed by bolts,
some throats cut by discus, some hit by iron clubs, some killed by tridents
and flats, some cut by javelins, and some heads broken by maces. Thus
thousands of demons were severely attacked by the Saktis and a river
of blood flowed. 70 to 75
wa wfenfrernten terete) venfaar arcu yifereraraafaa i oR tI
sage vifertar aad aeaa wenerafeaeataria at rar wo Il
Thus heavily tormented by the Saktis, the army of the demons wailed
and ran away. Unable to bear the injuries from the weapons of the
Saktis, the army of the demons which was pounded was reducing like
the water in a breached dam. 76, 77
wegen fagat dat deat wusqaa: | aqaigqenfeigrereenfaatreee: | 97
qusqeraen: yreararsfaa Zaqeaer: |
Tas sewer: vifertat seq: araenafata: osu
4: afeeryeofertat aararet: | yreatseatat tearanraet wrer wea: co tl
Seeing the destruction of the army of the demons, Caturbahu and
others, the thirty sons of Bhanddsura, equal in valour to Bhandasura,
well versed in handling weapons and missiles and of unbearable prowess
in war, seated in chariots showered arrows on the gaktis who seized by
those schorcherers were unable to bear the flame from the weapons of
the demons. 78 to 80
gfe sitfeqereeet wera’ frrafeaitseaa: 11
End of the seventy-second chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurérahasyam.

fracafaants cara:
Chapter 73
wd qanut qr we Searwat yA: ears wera wen ei
Torre afaat WSATACAAPTA: | Ys Aa: HMA Yeo: wen
After hearing about the war, sage Agastya said thus: “Oh Hayagriva!
The legend narrated by you was wonderful. You said that Ganega fought
with Gajasura. Please describe their war to me.” 1,.2
gf ye: Grawagqhar Gow: | wersnegqs waaqyranyt nau
arreet Uy aes Harrergat aa AUreaerdttaryat dyat Ta: Wen
qusqea eet gate aw Wat: | YedarnMadals WGA, wan
Thus inquired by sage Agastya, Hayagriva started narrating the
great war by Ganega. “Oh Agastya! Listen. I will tell you the most
wonderful legend filled with the great prowess and elegance of Ganeéa.
Ganega fought for a short duration in an unbearable manner, with the
demon created by Bhandasura. 3 to 5
we Set: TASS I SITTER TATA SAAT I
APH FAA LAT Hal MAT: | AAT TaHTeaMT TMT SATE: |
wid dele weld Torrrent: | ag faravreartere gattrans Tay, wen
“Then the demon created many other demons who were equal to
him in looks, speed, strength and skills. Seeing many of them fighting,
the angry Ganega also created crores of other Ganegas who were equal
to himself in all respects. Each Ganega fought astonishingly with one
demon separately using various weapons and missiles. 6 to 8
ten: vifearomanste sath merge! <qy: Rereat yar qaeeeafereye: tt ¢ i
“All the demons and the gaktis watched their great fight forgetting
their own war activities. 9
aa & Torsten weqfaenea Safe: | aafregered: afgrerchor wrenctepe: Io

st fe, 692 Sri Tripurarahasyam
afagerraqus: afaeafaciita: | afafaqe stat cafsrearenata: ween
caf Seas seatacpea: WUT set afer
ua & afer deat Seg TTA: WReH
Then the Ganesgas struck the demons with their weapons. Some
demons were killed by spears, some cut to pieces by discs, some with
maces, some torn by the tusks, some by dashing with their chests, some
by trampling and some by hitting with the temple. Thus all the demons
created by the demon were destroyed by the Ganesas. 10 to 12
aden: Waa, Gea: | Fata acraiers wotyharfraredt Wea
Rerigists gear tet daca! WHE Tod wars ffranad: ext
RUSHES Tifeenataia | araxeraran: aged YATE Weal
Then the mighty Gajasura stood alone and fought with Ganeéa.
Ganesa seeing the demon who was single as earlier, immediately absorbed
all the GaneSas within himself. Then a great frightening war started
between them using many weapons and missiles. 13 to 15
aa distr were wreats yatetat: | AeaTS StegUaTqaga: | Vil
aut aot a vreau weet W AAs Fl YS YS reani apraguas: = Ql
Feat teres Wat ai wagitstreahad: | fase Grae Ft VAMEAH TI Re Il
Then the great demon by his magical power grew very tall with
thousand faces and twice as many arms wielding many weapons. Moment
to moment he discharged thousands of weapons which were all destroyed
by GaneSa even as they were being created. Seeing the magic of the
demon the enraged Ganega simultaneously destroyed the thousand
weapons held by the demon. 16 to 18
BAS MaRS Were: | ee ea yt Prerathratacy, Wks
Wal TeIgMeat Afsat eT AT aT! yreHettys ufear wat erat Farge: tl Roll
afeyera wort eqarsege: | Teas Sard Seaat wate: wrfaRAT tl BRI
OH Tear wear aes ANgaAaTaed| Mamfteaga war yfs at gar Ween
aa uch faye uftd wife ai fact fat qar qarauceeaqa: Weil
srt afta mweyte sats aad!

fracafadats ara: 693 Chapter 73
Then GaneSa and Gajasura battled with maces hitting each other.
Hit by Ganega’s mace, the mace of Gajasura was broken to pieces. Then
the demon without a weapon rushed with his raised fist to kill Ganega.
Ganega flung his mace at him which without injuring him even a bit
dropped on the ground after striking his body. Then weapons like disc,
trident, bolt and spear which were charged on him fell futile on the
ground after touching his body like a shower of stones on a rocky
mountain. 19 to 23
geal eet Wayanad @ mone: ueetl
farssHea: WAVAMATM TI FT: 1 SeMsmarape eres, 1 BI
Yedericsetratoniga ¢ at aged acer te Foray kcal
frre Ureatssoaer ee Exta ERad Ua faarhtat deat wet wrorietar Tr 11 29 11
Seeing the demon invincible by all weapons, as GaneSa was worrying
the demon hit him with his fist. Then a fierce fist-fight began between
them emitting fire from the collision of their fists. Then GaneSsa by his
arms bound the demon and pushed him on to the ground and trampling
him by the foot pierced his chest by the tusk by which the demon died
in the war. 24 to 27
qeafratet t qadvsrat uit) Tears arTay ws eafaeA: Nl VII
After killing Gajasura, Ganega of astonishing valour again quickly
approached Bhandasura to fight with him.” 28
wera Torafa gear wUSHeTET: | fartaectfereat aAtreTT UTA tt BRI
Wess Gat eat cet farvagqi sft yrs Agel WaNKaTarAa =— tl Goll
Seeing the approaching GaneSa, Bhandasura fearing about his
strength prayed to Devi Lalita thus: “Oh Mother! This body of mine
should be destroyed by You in war. Fulfil this desire of mine who has
surrendered at Your lotus feet.” 29, 30
efter wacarsonore Heat wee firgrys wacracafert = aR
fafecar sagt Sear arent Waraa: | WOT We ATA: fax ayat qafaet fer: 11
Understanding the desire of Bhandasura, Devi Lalita seated in the

at fay, 694 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Sricakra chariot, in order to fulfil the wants of Her devotee remembered
Ganega. Knowing about the remembrance by the Devi, Ganesa came
there and bowed and said thus: “Oh Mother! Why did You remember
me while I was fighting.” 81, 32
We sar aes ifort UA at acatset Gafation firs weardats gar 33 u
Ua Galaga sat qearagrasan! seat Tote fara yw: wail
Hearing Ganesa, the Supreme Devi Lalita said thus: “My child!
Enough of your fighting. Now stay by My side. Let other goddesses who
are eager fight with the army of the demons.” Ordered thus, Ganega
refrained from the fight. 33, 34
ae qusyd: viferaat qearsfafaarary
am aah: fears a are qe waTaE, Wag
arated tetyrgaa: | sergaterat ye are aq wont on ag
ailfert derquet fafearqaattt: | aret treat aqyhist qagder: = go
Then seeing the army of the saktis being enormously destroyed by
the sons of Bhanddsura, Bala pouring arrows at the demons entered to
fight. The sons of Bhandasura accompanied by a countless army
surrounded Bala of astounding valour. Crores of arrogantly roaring demon
soldiers showered on Bala, who was seated in the chariot, many types
of weapons. 35 to 37
aa yifeani wre afrsdt ot aa:
que Yaa: Wal areas sai watt a: acu
wat afeafr gfe a ay wear aafea
weber Prat Usa AT ASAT Aa, uagnl
Deere: wat A ageat Has sft agra Bag afavar afeat aay Ul vo
ad wafacadt qe: wards |
Then Dandanatha addressed the Saktis thus: “Listen. I will convey
the orders by Balambika. None of you should discharge weapons on those
demons with whom Bala fights. If you do so, you will be punished by
me. You should be watching her fight without interfering.” Declaring

fracas ara: 695
Chapter 73
thus, Dandini along with Mantrini stood by the side of Bala to watch
the glory of her war. 38 to 40
AA Feat qUstieM: yt year fe ar Neveu
qageidaguetaen qqasem faghitampen: wracaengrartira: i 2 i
qari aghast pant fafers waq
Bala was pleased by the ruling given by Dandanatha. She wonderfully
fought alone with countless demons. The Siddhas and gods from the sky,
watching her fighting alone with many, were surprised. 41, 42
ae SeilegEyreaetresteas Ta, wan
args auecthta a adel fee! Gear oat wrentfana: yreratsway tt
Then Bala was covered by the bunch of weapons released by the
demons just like the rising sun by a group of clouds. Seeing her covered
by weapons, the saktis were stupefied. 43, 44
aa: gutta aren ufagrarsfiaadtt: | fara at weaqhe qa: wal a et
ae taneearat Graecafacnan argent area aryrateaatacnar UG
at ydtraranfer yrearoata werfesad! ara dtent: ettearareracarsfrera: ti vio
Wussat @ wart Wot a feast! + certsfafaquege sanft waar Use
fag wen apiergacresem gai watts yer feganfadtat: = ee
age deqats: waka Gua: | wets quest Ueetenetay: I ko
Then instantly Bala destroyed that shower of weapons by showering
counter weapons and again hit the demons. Then the skilled Bala of
astounding valour, simultaneously destroyed the weapons and vehicles
of multitudes of demons. She cut off the weapons of the demons even
as they were holding them. Again discharging sharp arrows she quickly
killed the demons. Even a sharp observer could not notice her picking,
placing, stretching and releasing of the arrows. But from the middle of
her bow were continuously emerging in all directions sharp arrows just
like moths from the holes in the earth. The heads the demons were
dropping in bunches making crackling sounds like the ripe fruits falling
from a coconut tree. 45 to 50

st FRESH, 696 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Sfahoratenqeaa sparen: ut) froaca fargi: Gees SASHA RH
aa a afte center: atulegent: |
afagafa dfagr eqorom: feat fea: Warn
qayreat: uqvand fafan: quer gai cfaeoussecdatadt wWasitaat: 43
FSR WAT Sal US TAT YRdA Galley serygar: W4stl
Tasaats ay Vegfaaaret PATAT: |
aaa tea: epistt af caresat fay: Wall
aa Gg Fa a at reamed Het
4 een qeuanttenfeean fag: safer, W&R I
alfegt: wiartart ge writgrerar
Some demons lost their hands, legs, thighs, chests and other their
throats and stomachs. Continuously struck, they looked like thousandeyed Indra. (Means that they were cut to thousands of pieces). Some
cut to pieces were powdered. Some pierced in their chest lost their lives
and stood like paintings holding the weapons. Some flung away by the
speed of the arrow died and looked like fleeing out of fear of war. Thus
within a short period, myriads of demons killed by Bala fell down. There
was not even one demon who even though strong could protect himself.
Hence there was no scope for any one to fight and discharge weapons.
The demons had not believed that all alone Bala could fight so severely
even though they had witnessed the fight of crores of Saktis. 51 to 56
Vifeaaar Aaaea Sates WAAA: TCH
geal aenfacnd arsed wet wa: |
The army of the Saktis and the gods in the sky were wonder-struck
at the prowess of Bala. 57
aad freadt aet qeat eersq gar: Uke
sitar: yrearfir fafger cera wa BT ASAT A Va A atfagren Garftarr ii
weet: wet wane fafefaqa ae fvifed dat teat waft aor
aed Ud malgrit egg: Tet fee sreranrgffad antares fete gal
yranigrenfern: tq@teaney WET: | Hfarest: qafaar: vfs: yracfery gz

fracas ara: 697 Chapter 73
ster fafaga cararrraryegeitaa: |
Then, as Bala was slaughtering the demons, they dropped the
weapons and ran away frightened. They were shouting thus: “Alas! We
are ruined. She is really not a young girl. She is the personified god of
death who has arrived to torture us. Today the entire army of the
demons will be wiped out soon.” Saying thus and wailing they ran
helter-skelter, but obstructed by the downpour of weapons they did not
find an exit. Hit by the arrows they fell in bunches on the heap of dead
bodies and hid themselves there fearing death. 58 to 62
ua dar demas wreat ae wena, Waan
frst asf frerensa wosqat: Waray: | Tanwar: fagaret Werarrent FTL
Hal UHM Met Aq: AAA: | WET sa KAT ht PTAA RG
ada: yranfratet qafirarat
When the army of the demons was getting depleted and fleeing, the
sons of Bhandasura hearing about the small residual army arrived there
on chariots pulled by lions and wielding great bows. Enraged very much
they surrounded Bala simultaneously just like the dark-clouds roaring
like a lion cover the Sun and showered arrows on Bala. 63 to 65
aa: Gard ar faaqgeantent: Wag
ape fe gers yectterar a Fate ai abauitairsttypea Gear ANT AT I
fafern: staged warrepercom af ya ar part a vefaqaefe | ee
wus dauret arsfe gary Samra citer Fave aafteater +t Myra gs
Bala fought sportively with the many who were equal to Visnu in
prowess. Mantrini, Dandini and others were astonished to see the valour
of Bala and reported to Devi Lalita thus: “Oh Devi! Bala will really not
spare any one whether he is Bhanda or his brothers or his sons along
with the army chiefs. Today, she, playing as it were, will undoubtedly
wipe-out the demons.” 66 to 69
Wa Geen aot we ausgd: warad: 1 Aat are, ast wt TATA: 1 wo tt
Wet wenate ot faqa ufrafefe: 1 yrat maraet fase quafefe: wei

at fae, 698 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Fighting thus for a while with the valiant sons of Bhanda she
gradually destroyed in one stroke their chariots, flags and umbrellas.
Countering their showers of arrows she broke their bows by great arrows.
aa a df: Geren! waged ai areaaafed gE OR
aman wfeede dagatrars va! Us PTqe Seat STATE: WATER 11 3 I
are At & feast argteMT
Then even as the enraged sons of Bhanda tried to kill Bala with
swords, maces and so on, Bala cut off their weapons. Rendered weaponless
the demons experienced the amazing prowess of Bala and were worried.
Ud arene aft fry ost
fauga faye verdetitgqet) tad a Usararragqay + Woy
Tr faerarrerarat aexntate ar fear cqet sreaaatfin past career 9 1
Seeing the sons of Bhanda under the grip of Bala the great death,
Visanga and Visukra followed by a huge army quickly reached there to
save them announcing thus: “Do not fear. We have arrived to save you”.
Bala saw them uttering this and showering weapons like dark clouds.
qeat arensfaetor ai gfe sraage anaecitedta aaeat cerarfedh i wo
aqurt areca werarguantre: aragiat arvadt aaearafartfirct TCA
marta Tere | gear wtaletar Fe APTAGHAT 68
waar Yoragayt acaeredt | yfeodt tagqeat asec co
Seeing that, Bala with great joy easily warded off the thronging
weapons. Then she drove away the army of the demons by a wind missile
just like the clouds by a gale and destroyed them. Then seeing the two
demons Visanga and Visukra approaching fast holding mace and sword,
Bala instantly destroyed their chariots and elephants. Then she massively
struck their chest individually by which they fell on the ground like a
mountain struck by a thunderbolt. 77 to 80

freatadt S -
=e 699 Chapter 73
Aext AVSYA: Pree: WTA: | wihaqar wretes fararrentreeon, ween
wearer wgahatert: Me: | wre t wusararer: yt a: weet fray ry
aett gf year ated aa veraary
Meanwhile the sons of Bhandasura were going back to get weapons.
Seeing them going away, Bala quickly destroyed their chariots. Then
striking with sharp arrows their shanks who started walking, Bala said
thus: “Oh Sons of Bhandasura! How are you brave demons showing your
backs in the war? Does running away befit you? Tell me.” 81, 82
ea Hetatech wife asthe: wean
qaiapacaat fra: wap|S wr fire yet arferent Gear qaMaMTaM: | 2% I
Weer, AA WHIM, SISA!
ae Wea Vaeat sat fanci aq feats Wen
Sra WBE STA ANTS | Walch Ffgrtslecteafeatifa wend Fil ce
Vaan AGATA | BT BH: ASH cea afettys con
aad aret Bat: |rhaha: Etat: | Wayret wernietadsary wa: co
Hearing the unbearable, bitter, derisive words the sons of Bhandasura
with pride and angry eyes returned to fight and said: “Oh Foolish Girl!
Encountering us who are like the gods of death, you are somehow alive
because of our compassion towards you as a young girl. Fie upon you!
Now stay firmly. We will destroy your arrogance.” Seeing them running
towards her after saying that with raised fists, Bala severed their heads
individually with sharp arrows. Their heads dropped like ripe palm fruits.
A loud wailing started amidst the army of the demons. Indra showered
fragrant flowers on Bala. Slogans of victory were heard everywhere among
the saktis. 83 to 88
sia sttfiqreet mrereraus fracafaaits ara:
End of the seventy-third chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurarahasyam.

aq weathers s ATE:
Chapter 74
va Wty Hose WAG WY! ate qa: Warees Ufauitavsafaa eI
pagetea strat gear wear fade ai agar yards areas: Grea 8
mater: wararg wera yet: | raat Grad tacereech safe 3H
seqeren at aerara tren stterqafatry seer areata Arar wafareary 1
wagtat qe aera aed we
When the sons of Bhandasura were thus killed, seeing the enthusiasm
of Bala to fight again, Mantrini and Dandini said thus: “Oh Devi Bala!
Let us see Devi Lalita and bow and report to Her. Taking Her permission
we will quickly return to fight. Meanwhile let the angry demons assemble
to fight. You have achieved a difficult task which we would never have
done.” Saying thus they reached Devi Lalita along with Bala and climbed
the Sricakra chariot and after bowing to Her, the Supreme Mother,
narrated the most wonderful prowess of Bala in the war. 1 to 4
fawrere aa: Arar qer stterferanftarent wan
anferet aret oiterr wre a yfrasra
Hearing about the victory, the pleased Devi Lalita embraced Bala
with love and offered her a seat by Her side. 5
WUSTA FA FLAT a eyeafagey: nan
Seeing the death of the sons of Bhandasura the demons with dull
and shrunken faces loudly wailed and ran away in all directions. 6
Wrst fyrensa susdeitstag: faa: Wen
qrfaqes wegen éeinreren weary! are & faqet te: apfirde: ayRA: cI
fer virenfr qdars¢ ten asfrrt Haq war aer wife F vada qa war ug
Wt ved viegta wens: | arg weerre 4 car ten wit ea: gol

ag aafraats a: 701 Chapter 74
reife decent uttartor aga: | sft A urerafedt wfoar aw qatar i eeu
Hearing about the death of his children, Bhandasura was grieved
very much. But again analysing soundly and picking up courage thought
thus: “Alas! How am I deeply deluded and lost my memory? Why am
I sad unnecessarily when Devi has fulfilled my want? She has done
exactly according to my request. My sons would have grieved for me.
Hence killed by the Devi they have attained salvation prior to me. I had
earlier requested the Devi that I will reach Her abode along with my
kith and kin. 7 to ll
HY A THAT Strat SATION! ae aa TeTatet ar few ANAUNTA: tt kz
weet 3 fates fa wat pro: | aAtsayifed aArt qrargy weaft Weal
dere fost Bat A srgeat afeat aa: 1 at aatfaRct vit GS wren
faera wareriirafad Aquefa masé Waste Tage, WeQt
mlarefireartaypledayiay! way stargaet eererarrenera tt 8h I
mare wat afrgge wredatate age atewatecy tl RWI
ear stefan fafaarcats saa, aor
“Now the Devi who fulfils the desires of the devotees has granted
my wants. Why in vain is this great delusion possessing me? Enough of
this confusion. Oh Devi! I have surrendered to you. Oh Great Devi! Fulfil
my remaining desire. After killing my brothers along with the residual
army, purify me and my wives in war by the flames of Your weapons
and place us close to Your lotus feet. Burnt by the fire of Her arrow,
when will I see the face of Srimata which is wearing the digit of the
moon, which is beautiful with three eyes, which has angry red eyes and
frowning brows and attain the sorrowless nectarian place which is rare
even to yogis.” Praying thus and meditating on the form of Devi Lalita
which is beautiful like myriads of cupids, Bhandasura for a moment
went into trance. 12 to 17
manage genres grat uel
# ceviqueatiad earner antag: yaviterwcrart qyfeom tl
aranaaea Wag: sArerararay |

at ARRES, 702 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Meanwhile his brothers reached there and saw him non-moving like
a log and thought that he was unconscious by the bereavement of his
sons and spoke to him consolingly. 18, 19
wat: yaar: yrecetarhrtaara: U Roll
safes Fa yet cext orett feat) eet @ oat: wapaa: fea: i ee 11
Wart Ypite fact waar at edetar et yar at utes frat gaat 201
Tad dara sa Aarearatead: | Wet atstraraerenrent seyit ay
qa aa wager fadtotecar ga
Hearing their pacifying words, Bhandasura came out of the meditation
and opened his eyes and saw his brothers standing before him. To conceal
his real mind and laughing within, he exhibited to his brothers deep
sorrow concerning the death of his sons thus: “Oh Sons! How have you
departed discarding all affinity; Your father is helplessly drowned in the
ocean of sorrow. Hearing about your death, how can your mothers, with
concern and love, live with their hearts broken.” 20 to 23
sete facaxt t gear at arent dar Te
shtediarar yrat eeagt wraqda: | set deagr vite eeietatsuertor =n
vires wai aneiteasweerayatary vat cafe at @¢ aattafia orasw: 1 26
Yee aehoreres tsied Bhatt wa wats sartenuraa at ear Fafert: vit: 11 Yo
qaett afearcarat ant eeiftrarrart
Vast ar gai arsfr agent tere orgy 4 Ne
Seeing the lamentations of Bhanda, his two brothers deluded by the
illusion of the Devi said thus: “Oh Lord of the demons! Enough of this
sorrow which steals our courage and valour. Seeing you, the lord of
innumerable worlds wailing, our body is burning like dried cowdung by
the fire. Oh King! Stay happily with courage for some time. We will go
and by one stroke of sharp arrows kill that Lalita the killer of your
sons. We will quickly bind and bring Her, who has plagued the demons,
either alive or dead. 24 to 28
sya wet aaa Besa | GartaaragefadtareHat WIV

mata Ss -
isla
ferersatfentteaettant gett | yacg wifeamertamrsert mag: z0u
aarreaateerr a strane: | earattectntataeg: mage wan
fagmansts art TasedeHet! Wt Gafead wa: ated wh ae
THe: Tea: Ufa Teel Tats MaarereTeR: wifeertary urea: i
Saying thus, the two valiant brothers Visukra and Visanga angrily
proceeded holding arrows and bows in their chariots followed by twoaksauhini huge army. Individually they attacked the army of the Saktis
from the sides. Visanga with one-aksauhini force attacked the Sricakra
chariot from its left side. Visukra attacked it soon from its right side.
At the time of Sunrise on the third day of the war, all on a sudden
they encountered the army of the saktis and loud noise started on either
sides of the saktis. 29 to 33
ar qrat Fayre afauitevenfaer ayat wigaseraqeg: steefterenny 113% 1
df dreapfanearrarrmnereat: | ad aaa gem: eaueatfer: TEE
qeraas WAS sep was PTI aera sagas vite wee aK
Then Mantrini and Dandini hearing the war sound were alarmed
and said to Devi Lalita thus: “Oh Devi! The loud and frightening sound
of encounter between the éaktis and the demons is heard. The deceptive
demons without prior warning have attacked during odd hours. Oh
Maheévari! Hence permit us. We will go there quickly.” 34 to 36
SAMA Tat Heat Ahauitevsathass | eT: RTT SY Yee HifereTTOTTA 1 3 I
don sfgurargten <frstt avefaerar frtat sfrecnrracaefirorarat: 861
faftard vsadyifraqaa werfeegt wa Sitar war Fr: wagul
tft deat aa wortar eae feera: 1 aera farectarecarens feretery: u¥oll
watiat aor areraget ee! AEs: anfrerqeareqarianta: veil
areata: after frdat weara aT!
Permitted by Devi Lalita, Mantrini and Dandini bowed Santer
set out to fight followed by their individual army of cat os <
fierce valour, who was on the right side of Devi Lalita ne ee
southern gate of the Sricakra in her Kiricakra which — ape
cascading platforms and pulled by two lions on either si

at fg 704 Sri Tripurarahasyam
in the front and driven by Bhairava himself. On either side of the
Kiricakra accompanied the war-longing Svapnesvari and Kalasankarsa
in chariots pulled by lions. Followed by innumerable Vatukas, Kalikas
and Varahis, Dandanatha proceeded to fight. 87 to 41
ud wntagnigarenred afauit uesen
fafrta teaenrarst wetat | waudga aceftcamentert wan
Baal VAM Aa TAAATAAT | YATE: Aca: TW FAME SAAT: Hw I
apirateeaqd vat arrrdit) egyarteenr ys date wars: on wut
uftdt tererercereny fatty: | afavagagqaa: varren: aatfeentfert: xq 1
Tar: Wat FeaAAyAT: |
Similarly out of the north gate of Sricakra proceeded Mantrini in
her very tall Geyacakra chariot which had seven cascading platforms
and which was driven by four green horses. A smiling Shyimalé was
the charioteer. Saktis by name Sukas, Sarikas and Shydmalas were on
the right side. Sangita Syamala and Sahitya Syamala were on the left
side. Laghu Shyamala was at the back in the Geyacakra. Myriads of
Syamalas born out of the body of Mantrini, proceeded surrounding the
Geyacakra. All of them set out well equipped to fight. 42 to 46
wat: deyraftencarsvasittrataan: voll
Taralvaaat tarefaqaum: | acarceranat wearisfaet wrt ve I
aaifagrenariertegioraetreat: | arearenacarstas tarafettear: i ¥e il
ametsriansfreraeterrann: | warararanfedt ar yyypastrat Tat il Koll
afresaraea fanaearenat |
All the gaktis of Syamala were beautiful sixteen year girls wearing
red silk garments and ornaments of nine gems. By their smile and
glances they were enticing the entire world. Their eyes were moving
round as a result of intoxication by drinking wine. They had known the
beauty of literature and enjoyed music. They were interested in amorous
sport and comedy. The army of Mantrini was splendid like a garland of
Tamala with blossomed flowers. 47 to 50

aq aaa ATA: 705 Chapter 74
Bas Tare tea eS AAT: WAR
staat: areata wget qf ser anegareegnrentetren: Wau
TaaAGTIAS ATA: | tates afintpateeqa: Waal
Then the armies of the Saktis and the demons encountered like seas
breaching the shores. The sound from the drums, slogans and striking
on the arms and the loud sound from the chariots and the neighing of
the horses of both the armies were deafening the directions. 51 to 53
pieraguenariadguadtt: | tearaanpaad fadtet years war, WAS
tadafaaqesnn fafaggan teased vifertareata: wad: WAQH
By the shower from the heavy cloud-like Saktis, the front line of
the army of the demons was cleaved at hundred places. From these
openings the river of gaktis flowed into the ponds of the army of the
demons. 54, 55
fifaga deaat at yraat aera: | yRattafaderdareadt aes TeTATTN 4G Il
afeest: gffan: dhfrattentfar: 1 st quafter feeathaengt vara:
wt unfapalgt: wefeoannt: | sat YeTyag war afer sa Wael
amt vifeameafiaqatants ta!
Entering the forest of the army of the demons, the mighty Saktis
reduced it to ashes by the fire of their weapons. Some were pierced by
arrows, some hit by bolts and some with all their limbs cut, died. The
limbs of some were cut by discs and some heads were severed by axes.
Some were strung like beads to spears and others were injured in their
heads and stomachs by the leaders of the Saktis. 56 to 58
ud faaryanrai Bara yiferarar Wag
qemn fayeeteradt tafasafetann: | wrrseaxacsferantedt yrerettt: go
viqe ga autg arr: yremarad: | vifeadarsf qaqa faye a aeftaf agit
Seeing the demons getting destroyed by the saktis, Visukra with
angry red eyes chased the Saktis by showering arrows from his chariot.
It was like the downpour from the clouds during rainy season. Even the
Saktis opposed the powerful Visukra. 59 to 61

PERM OLS 706 Sri Tripurarahasyam
aa at fagener frgqraaee: | siyrenrat cenit: aces: ferhereraa: gz 1
fafava piferearstegen acer: | fageeresatgat Fema vifedatety
agica area Yenfevarrengar: | fayeaaragais SqaTTT Gy I
Then Jimitakaya, Devari, Karambha and Sikhibhasana, the sons of
Visukra who were as powerful as their father, entered the army of the
Saktis and struck them. Seeing the Saktis thus tormented by the sons
of Vigukra, SukaSyamala and other saktis attacked them by showering
series of arrows. 62 to 64
aa siqrenras gate Yenvarren! fat qaeat viters tai Ua PRR
foese fafa aa: vepfadisar: 1 wert dlanrantur Gants Tear RK
wen Tarat Fed: wea: | Teena SHAG WANT ll go
sonata ter Weaaetaet Fa!
Sukasyamala fought with Jimatakaya. After a prolonged fight she
within half a minute destroyed by arrows the chariot, the charioteer and
the bow of the enemy. Then the enraged demon hit her horse with a
sharp edged sword by which it died bleeding in the head. Then
Sukasyamala quickly severed by a half-moon shaped arrow his head
which fell from his body like a ripe palm fruit. 65 to 67
carton yifteren aga qacnfir eel
forasraa tf qeant Wea Geq Tala sae WISE GCI
faaqet fofadt tarfatasites: |
Sarika encountered Devari. She flew and with her mace hit Devari,
who was firmly fighting even after losing his flag, chariot and horse, on
his head by which he fell dead with broken head. 68, 69
Apia Fe HUM THT = Nl woll
qeat fat a4 ae Gas fire anfeear
Sangita Syamala battled with Karambha for a long period and then
severed his head with a sword. 70
uigayvanen qaeat afer frfeareory Neel

Taya
Rajasyamala

aga THATS AT: 707 Chapter 74
praraet fafafare mfargate got free 8 cferaeea: WUAESTY: 1 WRI
Sahitya Syamala fighting with Sikhibhasana, defeated him by
weapons and missiles and quickly pierced his chest by a trident by which
he fell dead. T1572
qaqa fasta fayeeraargy 41 exe: varrerar taf waTANT I 93 Ht
aa Uae Waleed Hela! FLAT TYAS Alaa VATA tl o¥ il
Tara tad wee aaa war yfet acer watrsfracitaar = KI
GRU THe Yrencitaay!
_When his sons were fighting, Visukra in disguise reached the side
of Syamala’s chariot. Seeing him approaching like a thief holding a
mighty mace and trying to get on to the great chariot of Mantrini, Laghu
Syamala quickly hit him with great force on his head with a sword by
which his crown was shattered. 73 to 75
faye seqepe: malareftracira: TCA
Temmea aa ot aafdaat! aaron tere Tat fase TT = WII
forget fagetsfr qfsar caenfsrry! ser wars Ararat wrecafet arr:
aracfaccsyat word afer yfeaa: | Seamemact weld TyPAMTeT TAC aT
Tara vit ageat t me! wfaqaeracet wear wer fe FATT Mt co it
afearscaeredt asdtacayact sat
As Vigukra who lost his crown, with angry red eyes and holding a
mace ran towards her, to kill her, She broke with arrows his mace into
seven pieces. Then without a weapon, as Visukra punched her horses
on their head by his fist, she hit his head with arrows by which he fell
unconscious on the ground. When he was slightly conscious, Laghu
Syamala jumped out of her chariot to catch him and caught his arms.
By then, regaining consciousness and realising that he is being captured,
he struck Laghu Syamala with his fist by which she became a bit
unconscious. 76 to 80
arasreat Treat: vrata fequtace uel
ailfegret wyaiqaifest vraceitsfir ai arate ferret Fae SIP: It ern

R ARES, 708 Sri Tripurarahasyam
qe ware wnat sera wa TAT FAM YA vitae:
fron fafecemtterefiracitaa: | wearer vifadeat ai feerrearadtt: ex
At that moment, the saktis situated in the chariot becoming aware
of the proximity of the enemy attacked him in myriads. Then the eminent
demon thinking that it would be impossible to stand their attack jumped
into his own chariot which was near his army. There seeing his dead
sons, he lamented for a while and burning with extremely enraged red
eyes he tortured the Saktis by showers of arrows. 81 to 84
geet faye vreitat Samronvertory! fait arrears suteysityart: Ta: ch
sat tevideayg wsiereger! dterernafatagetseraagd: cat
Reatedtsfrareant Warr a1 Aenfediearafrtiearcrererory, TRACE
Seeing Visukra killing the Saktis, Mantrini showered arrows from
her cloud-like bow on him as if on the peak of a high blue mountain.
Visukra, injured severely by the rain of sharp arrows bled heavily for
a while from the wounds as if a blue mountain slashed by showers was
expelling mineral (red) streams. 85 to 87
afavar medal tar waferteanta: | fafaayragrerrestead APauiT cc
fats afauieoat ceyreangad: | wremantarireancagated ween
air deayrentin frat yrattt: | sreuiquinees aqvatafesragay tl gol
Severely wounded by Mantrini, Visukra burning with anger covered
her with peculiar weapons as if by moths. Covered by the weapons,
Mantrini was shining like a Tamala flower bunch rich with honey covered
by bees. Instantly she warded off the weapons of the demon by showers
of arrows and by a deep-drawn arrow cut the string of his bow.
massaraatt are fragfagied) aadtengachs yeast Wat TH uel
Mefageeapeers squad Ula TAME AAA WET: Wail
wacamsfrert afro yfet afauiti a arafegon fraqat meqyesar Mt 3 ll
TU, ae aaet Saree
As he was trying to tie another string to his bow, Mantrini hit his

ag aaa A: 709 Chapter 74
fist with a sharp arrow. With that severe injury his bow slipped out of
his fist. While he was picking up the bow by bending, Mantrini hit his
head with an arrow by which with a broken head he fell deeply unconscious
near his chariot just like a mountain hit by a thunderbolt. 91 to 93
ae au afavar afer ¢erare ues
anfayoaype wrerag vit: yar
Then very soon Mantrini destroyed his chariot, charioteer and
umbrella each by separate arrows. 94
arerqeatfatrfadt caytts serene TACT
arenes faa aa He Bae at wari viel wages Heqydaat eau
Taya ATA STATA! Vos firearaeraTS VT fart TT
Meanwhile gaining consciousness, Visukra saw all his war equipments
destroyed and enraged as he lifted a broken wheel of a chariot and
rushed to kill her, Mantrini hit his right shoulder with a fast arrow by
which the wheel dropped on the ground. 95 to 97
wat af agers ta smegqer wea! Afsieert ort weey aad THETA
Wavtanfeat areca Praca!
qe fg fred fager terete wean
uftigrersfafaren: yRageer wad: |
waged viferrnspeayen att fool
Then raising his first as he quickly jumped into the chariot of
Mantrini and tried to break her bow, Mantrini severed his head by a
sharp sword. Seeing Visukra dead, the remaining frightened army of the
demons abandoned their weapons and fled. The Saktis and the gods as
well shouted slogans of triumph. 98 to 100
fa sttfrqueeet arereeraus wg :aafeeats are: It
End of the seventy-forth chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurarahasyam.

Usacataaats ara:
Chapter 75
faagarft arrét agat WAT Bar! Tar serpferenatcaaAtat TH: nen
wena Geranisfaatanradet: | agent fayyereteear yatsfafaerar: 20
fret: forantion ag: oro tonsfat
When Varahi encountered Visanga, a frightening fight started
between the demons and the saktis. The demons died with their bodies
cut by the swords, discs, bolts, iron clubs of the saktis and the tridents
of Vatukas. 1, 2
gem ceray vient: wrat ferro, wan
wpasfaega: vite udcatae: | faagqar: wevsfamt dkiawt: = xii
aucaeat faferat faust face: | sayy: Gusta: werepfantetea: Wl 4
wast dhrafert yreritsteq: Watt: |
Seeing the army of the demons being destroyed by the Saktis,
Karalavaktra, Visikha, Vibhanda, Vikateksana, Indragatru, Surarati,
Mahakuksi and Madoddhata, the eight powerful sons of Visanga who
were like mountains with stupendous strength marched to the army of
the saktis and started killing them everywhere. 3 to 5
adanmt ct pifacartettatrcter 7 Wall
srarergenfaatg wftet raft cari abet wifet wer dea: aarerenfiett
weet a ager suet gfasiter: |
Seeing the sakti forces being killed, the eight dreadful saktis
Jambhini, Stambhini, Andhini, Mohini, Bhairava, Kalakarsini,
Svapnegvari and Vatuka reached there to fight the demons. 6 to 7
mua afar afta aPAAs Fa, well
geen fat war are vrearetdeagga: | Tearsfirsrarats sy aes ifeeTaTEAH"! 8
aifsdt wftsritaret vent frame: | ga wore yeah arqearrahrge: §=— Il oll
Waehal wit a wars fre sete!

qpaatadats ar: 711 Chapter 75
Jambhini fought with Kardlavaktra. After fighting with her for a
long duration using weapons and missiles, Karalavaktra hit her vehicle,
the pig with a mace by which with broken head it fell with the knees
on the ground. Then the enraged Jambhini severed with a sword the
head of Karalavaktra. 8 to 10
fafgra: eaftertt omer qatensfraet qoq UR
aftest gftomect faferatatera fafa: 1 wearer tffet aeifatiratsferercra ii ee
fag ga teas: Yara agyiforry ashe qatsfaes Ateorartor aafiray ey
aquatnfestaat faente fafert: wrt: 1 arecepaar eaftertt a uretaator aforar ni gw
aaeiperaterassangt uit! sa ae autte faferefateratata: eR
frag wpe uni fade Gregfan a fearastren fayerirarary RR
waftertt nfafaate ara ar cafe fora fayyet aces fet tener orraa 1
The mighty Visikha firmly confronted Stambhini. Riding an antelope
she struck Visikha on his head with three arrows that looked like three
peaks on his head and he bled profusely. Even he with anger snapped
her bow-string many times by sharp arrows. Then the enraged Stambhini
with a sharp arrow having feathers of eagle struck his camel and
despatched it to the abode of death. Instantly with three sharp arrows
she simultaneously broke his quiver, crown and the bow. The furious
demon hurled a trident at Stambhini which she broke with a spear and
felled his head. 11 to 17
afer qqa aa fanvet aemfaa: | prearertchs spanfeeatay, Ween
afet ufgarset faavs: cranes: | fat qaeat a4 aa aaoterepEUfATTT Ui Re Hl
wart derqefa aan fargt fanosa: | wart yfeodt are fone garfaTe Mt Roll
The proud mighty Vibhanda fought with Andhini by retaliating all
her weapons and missiles. Andhini was riding a bison and Vibhanda a
mule. After a prolonged fight Andhini struck Vibhanda in his chest by
which he became deeply unconscious and fell like a mountain chopped
of its wings. 18 to 20
ara wareA: TT Udatsseitsfigat: | wares tect spre aye a avert
fafae: vifeatarg dererqeet wet enforcement: certesaqat: tt 32H

sft fA, 712 Sri Tripurarahasyam
aren: wafer et: predtarra
Then his vehicle, a dark grey mountain-like mule braying dreadfully
and lifting its tail and erecting its hair rushed into the army of the
gaktis. It killed some Saktis by kicking, some by biting and some by its
speed. 21, 22
ua yenifatert ut qeastet aar WBN
wRurenviqufs ware wahaa! @ feeeiterants yfeoa: wags ex
maapotfatradt fracsiseraifia: | tt rea wea aed aSaaet Be
afeftargaferentsdt Tear aye fager wasaterted yqreat warfare 26 1
feraroet afgers sfaget srrenret ure aura: | Utat atsrarat ward Bfeyfesa: 11 Vo
Seeing the mule destroying the saktis, the angry Andhini hit it with
a long-stretched arrow by which it fell unconscious. Meanwhile Vibhanda
who gained consciousness, with extreme fury hit strongly her vehicle,
the bison, which burning with anger threw him away by its horns. Flung
by the bison, Vibhanda moved in the sky and fell unconscious at a
distance of more than a yojana. 23 to 27
Wagar Tt areal WHAT: | YS Ovi aarered TEAST tl Rel
aren Ufed qa: WTGRT YAMA: | UMA AalST TAAL, Wen
adyr a ya: Hud Mad Ha: F Aiea:
Tea aad, Hla YATaTeATeT ATA: 201
frfara: at yet oe Fratfatanr: | fapedenaceter fasts frert Tari 38 Ul
ufet mrafeguishect terea wee! aoretefamtan HATS! WAT A: BV
At that time his great mule braying and grunting rushed towards the
bison and kicked it by its hind legs and bit it on its neck. The enraged
bison pushed the mule on to the ground and pierced its stomach by its
horns. With its intestine and eyes damaged, the mule died. Then getting
out of stupor, Vibhanda kicked the bison. Andhini with great fury severed
his head by an arrow and Vibhanda lost his life. 28 to 32
Gate wifet tet yrearatfaentarory wifedt resreat yea frareet: 11 33
quiprivirariqe tatgiti wert: wdaatfrareratatatarry, avi
Fat quutaareat wf pasta: | waquseiftarat ware ufadtsaat | Bull

qaaafaaras ar: 713 Chapter 75
Seated on Garuda, Mohini with weapons and missiles fought with
Vikateksana who was on an eagle. Garuda and the eagle fought in the
sky astonishingly as if two mountains with wings were battling. Then
the eagle attacked by Garuda and split by its claws and beak fell dead
on the ground. 33 to 35
famclat eat ae Hal Faen fat cari afettamatseoanet YeqyITTA: 1 3q
Having lost his vehicle, the angry Vikataksa after fighting with
Mohini for a long duration embraced death with his throat cut by her
discus. 36
say: weet draunsfirage: | areashadts gaterscataeet == BN
The most valiant Indrasatru seated on his vehicle, the dreadful
serpent, encountered Bhairava. 37
dra: rete: Tana: | Hifereqearrgeeta: Vadis ae
aad fayreustenatarsasren: | carertatrar: aiyeun: aafraraa: 1 3¢
saved dint cynsatfeforatrany. fafaya & frttor fret wepetsrat tt vo
cafaregery wate: afaguefaata: | afaad: ufeag: Hfeayfefeced:
aqdaraaret & Acarott woretar |
The dark cloud-hued Bhairava attended always by eight Bhairavas
resembling his own form followed by myriads of Bhairavas each wielding
a trident and a stick, decorated with moon on their head, dark like
cloud, wearing serpents and covered by elephant hides entered the tenaksauhini huge army of Indragatru and by their power destroyed it
completely. Some demons were pierced by spears, some hit by sticks,
some torn by nails and some punched by fists. The Bhairavas wore as
garlands the intestines of the demons. 38 to 41
wa geal WUT MarayTZay SAT U ¥en
Tear deanut wdarara waa: | Us TOA ates Set AA Wau
Tart sfeagieta: | sae ward qq: ware Ty ust
aM ttearera dar: vated wnat amet wer yevsmat: tt eu
aad der agguesta: weda: | ¢ Gear faest tet dearth wagey ol aI

Pi fee, 714 Sri Tripurarahasyam
qe te ant tearorenttar: | geen fargerst reat ef] N¥on
anfarer efe yet yfa t erqurfarat
Seeing his army destroyed, the angry Indrasatru crushed the
Bhairavas with his mace. Seeing this Manthana, Asitanga and other
Bhairavas, encountered the mountain-like Indrasatru who was riding a
serpent. Indragatru opposed all alone all of them. His diamond-like body
was not injured by the tridents and sticks dropped on him just like a
rocky mountain hit by fruits. Seeing the frightening demon unhurt, the
leader of the Bhairavas fought with him and as the demon holding a
mace was jumping into the sky to kill, Bhairava pierced him with a
trident and killed him. 42 to 47
qaear yererferctiy aarerenefirens seary, Nsen
wreantet qerasfirssar yfat act) western eitpaterertT: xe tl
were faaqat wae &1
The mighty demon Surarati seated on a crow battled for a long
period with the gakti named Kalakarsani who was riding a bison while
his army was being destroyed by the saktis. With his head split by her
goad, he died. 48, 49
waver qqa teat werpfadarsza: Koll
varfiesear Gar afore vifaaages: | fat dteaaerer werpatdeitra: = uel
faard opfie was aerate
The demon Mahakuksi riding a wolf fought with Svapneéi seated
in a chariot. His army was destroyed by the Saktis. As he was continuously
fighting Svapneéi killed him by cutting his stomach with a sword.
watantste agentaor qaqa: Wat
aghh: ereurertdyrenfefiteran wereureravered: aiquortgt: | 48
warertietrantant: | mreiettaxgdata ada: nay
aynaifeftrenrqadt qatenfract act
The mighty Madoddhata followed by a huge ten-aksauhini army
severely encountered Vatuka Bhairava who was followed by ten crores

TETAS ATT: 715 Chapter 75
of self resembling Vatukas of five years in age all holding big skulls
and sticks, decorated with serpents, nude and red eyed, black like
darkness and decorated with moon on their heads. 52 to 54
agar won: qar fafavarsqrantety H&G
quéfiger acer aret frapten yp: are ape traf frost wereeq th GR
agent wartehffet gods efterai averssera geraqat ae vert wafer
ufacargy fafraet warisyrerar: |
The enraged Vatukas entered the army of the demons and quickly
destroyed them like dogs by hitting with the sticks. Then the leader of
the Vatukas effortlessly hit with the stick Madoddhata on his head, by
which he fell down inactive vomitting frothy blood and died. 55 to 57
ua farg: Gry Wererag fore: nyell
mreneradte fagreratfevitqa: | fraartenarts werafrerersrant, Wael
fenftarntaft war errarfeatter: | yrerart fags & ape afafinr Ferg: Go
wergfererpe yrerarat wor yar!
Lamenting the death of his sons, Visanga with utmost fury followed
by a huge twenty-aksauhini army suddenly engulfed the éaktis like a
consuming fire. Amidst sounds of drums he showered weapons on the
Kiricakra and rendered dark the directions. His weapons looked like a
swarm of moths flying above a great burning fire. 58 to 60
ara afterinpeanferatforar eroraraa: wag
faugtat yrenfaserenta: yrevenfra afeafaeperepfermcar vifert wg: 42M
ut quafactntgr art often: | sat aradkfrwar aatsat yfeerftar: 0 aan
wenfesarefrangrarcercren anitat: afereretthrermrerrreanctep rere: navn
Then Jambhini and other éaktis instantly ruined the army of Viganga
like moths by the fire of their weapons. Some demons died with their
heart split by tridents; some lost their limbs hit by sticks; some others
were crushed by bolts, some cut by arrows, some punched by fists and
many others lost their legs, shoulders and necks hit by swords. Some
demons were shattered by the heap of weapons ee ceems ee

st FRE, 716 Sri Tripurarahasyam
wa faa da & fang: weqfeoa: | freee meat vifeTeat ferret wtET: 11 Gy
qustsiaad fed a wmf veda fe aaSeT Teast BATE, eg
Seeing his army destroyed, Visanga overpowered with anger
completely destroyed the saktis by his mace and hit the bison and the
lions of Dandanatha’s chariot and climbed on that great chariot. 65, 66
amet ta anfgug ates ada: 1 vfeaarg wayererarseeah: = GOI
vaudhea: wert and ara: 1 aqdvatacret wifagr wat aetna
Seeing Visanga getting on to the chariot the Sakti forces shouted out
of dejection. After vanquishing the Saktis located in the chariot, the mighty
Visanga soon reached the interior of the fourth platform. 67, 68
zusrgatt ¢ gear termrarmPta| aaee Galetedfacst tarda: 1 Gel
wastage cfreditennd: | yafafatrets weitere UN Boll
Dandanatha seeing the demon approaching her, climbed down from
her platform and fought severely using her plough. A great battle started
between Dandini and the demon employing rare weapons and missiles
which frightened the entire universe. 69, 70
wreastameayreadiet tagga: | wat wrested: ade waraSy | oe Il
arprant vigainyrad weraq afaad avad tenteateardory Taka
queqis veniam eee! Weaneaeraaran weaenstr a TRACER
Realising that Dandini was invincible by weapons and missiles, the
great demon Visanga created magical spells which caused fear universally.
He created darkness and stupendous sounds. He showered dust, boulders,
fire, diamonds, blood, filth, and skulls. He created a huge army of demons
and with thousand legs, arms and faces manifested in hundreds of
frightening forms. 71 to 73
agar Area ae Alaa: Maya: |
ate: vert: ametes eftett yrateta: Nes
Sara Fase sae! wat wast Hed Tay: AAPA: | OG Il
By his magical powers all the gaktis were horrified. Seeing the

qaaaacats A: 717 Chapter 75
frightened Saktis, Dandini destroyed by showering arrows all his magic.
As the Saktis were watching the demon again created another magical
demon. 74, 75
faftamta aa Wat Ft Tat wa aetfaeangy tai feraseraHar 1 WRI
waa dat cusyit Syrearst wT BHYAlaa AST St SAE WATT vo it
The magical demon quickly approached the Kiricakra chariot and
destroyed it and quickly touched the hair of Dandanatha. Seeing the
magic, all the saktis wailed loudly. 76, 77
Wad sitet dt aert waar: | act tay a Ufa citern eifterat ui wei
aya wretiarared: vires: ade: fire frataraor tebe ferret area EAT I
wer areafe yee Ara Fea!
Meanwhile Bhairava, the charioteer addressed Dandini thus: “Oh
Devi! Stop your show of fear towards demons. Look at the worried and
frightened saktis. Destroy his magic by an anti-magical missile. Evening
is nearing and then it would be difficult to undo his magic.” 78, 79
Tada: Aa wet Fat a afrsct U coll
frofare ayrges wat wer Sree! agra a tent swt arat a wea cet
Aer TareRt Gat eget BApEIsswAq! Geaa af afosdt a ar Was afew:
werd fafrereta aaur caper gar ua afer farted faag sitafat = 23
aagguar Aguaquadony fast fafafier sre: gras fearent: west
Hearing the charioteer and considering it as wise, Dandini destroyed
like the mist by a wind, the magic of Visanga by despatching an
anti-magical missile. Then Visanga holding a mace approached her and
seeing him, the angry Dandini instantly severed his head with a sword
just as Indra did away Tvastra (Vrtrasura) using the Vajrayudha. When
the dreaded Visanga was thus killed the gods sounded drums and
showered flowers. The directions got brightened and the Sun looked
brilliant. 80 to 84
gfe sttfrqeeet wrereraus wasecaeants era: I
End of the seventy-fifth chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurarahasyam.

Wears aT:
Chapter 76
ua fang fret wayrel very! yfea: sada: watquqdverfaerm ei
As Visanga died, slogans of victory were heard and the happy Saktis
praised Dandanatha. 1
arent aattant gear afr franfaat yiterenratat ore wleteers gr: We
feqyarse yet fear cannes gafaa! set at fer aartte vires Yara: 3 11
aefat wrarat fat at agit ud ar yratedeary aaa Hera: wen
aaaanfit grat: strarggfiriray fererata wersaret stat faethe wget Wau
wet cite adda warisfeafea fegrta area ar are fe ara
wa aan aetna wat feat dag Wa: II
Qaanreafaraitra dhracar ttt eaetafayt yeti wen
anise papesé weptedivenqay! ater, aynerny fared wate i <i
fayiee ant wart ayhafagrigat
Hearing about the death of his brothers and their sons, Bhandasura
grieved out of delusion. Then thinking properly he laughed about himself
and thought thus: “Alas! What can I say about myself worried like this?
Devi has fulfilled my old request. I am sure, She will fulfil my remaining
requests. Hence I will go with my remaining army and face Her. I should
not delay. Success is thronged with impediments. How great! The Supreme
Devi will grant all the desires of a devotee who secretly begs Her. She
who is the manifestation of comprehension is really the Divine Cow
(Kamadhenu). Discarding Her, who is the Inner-Being of all, who grants
more than our desires and who confers Supreme Bliss, the unfortunate
one longs in vain for sensory satisfaction which is the dreadful essence of
sorrow that feeds one to death. I am really fortunate and accomplished as
I will quit this filthy body keeping my eyes on the lotus feet of the Devi
Lalita and attain without doubt the highest Abode of Bliss.” 2to 9
sft afer tea: warrenty gol

aceasta: 719 Chapter 76
qeisert Ha sa Hatersqranetty fvrat acer qerrerar gare gira: ee
TaUTee Aeahaeae eA Sagas ates unt: Ween
qa: Wat: warergearhdcirse: | wentfeafagerrenters staafigt: eet
vaatradtartgiramrantad: | carareafaert aft: yea ery, ueen
frdat dararatse arerafrs afr
Thinking thus, the Lord of the demons, to conceal his mind acted
as if furious and gathered his entire army and set out to fight riding
his huge chariot pulled by thousand lions and hoisted with white umbrella
and fanned by attendants. He was followed by fifty mighty leaders of
the army. Amidst sounds of war drums enhanced by slappings on shoulders
intensified by the loud sound from the series of chariot wheels and the
neighing of horses combined with the roaring of the lions that filled
the universe, he set out to triumph making the earth tremble as it were.
sarsupaesteraa aursearrerotay Ween
armel @ dhol aa wanenat wos Garr AR, Weg
ameter sttreragt aan aa cafes afer aos: were oreit atguerandga: i go
wdtarenrged: wadearfetehr | Saar waa qess ate wert Rel
Then the gaktis saw the huge ocean-like army of Bhandasura which
was unlimited, invincible and making a dreadful dignified sound. Seeing
the arrival of Bhandasura to fight, Mantrini reported to Devi Lalita
thus: “Oh Great Empress! Bhandasura has himself arrived along with
well-equipped army and leaders to fight. If You think so, this is the
appropriate time for Your victory.” 15 to 18
fanfitd ufavar gat weasantaa | sats weresfertar wwar fafireraa: 1 ee
sarees atta: sanpentatioa | waren ar arent wet 11 Ro
wat ater Tareat sarhrordgar |
Entreated thus by Mantrini, Devi Lalita agreed and the éakti forces
got ready immediately. Asvaridha was in the front along with the
equestrian forces. Sampatkari the leader of the elephant force followed
her. Next followed Bala in her chariot accompanied by young ee

at ARE, 720 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Faq Weaeest AeA: Wen
aardanrgadt wformentrrqa: | Padresanetay: Uelenqeastega: WRI
waraaraiet starsat: | aeaat ft was Tera at NBII
wat faaaredieset SAT
Next moved the great Sricakra with nine cascaded platforms
surrounded by Anima and other Saktis. It was tall with a pearl-set
umbrella and flag with lotus emblem. Embellished with nine types of
gems it was pulled by horses representing the senses. Devi Mahatripurasundari, the Empress of Sricakra was shining as She drove it holding
a driving lash symbolising wisdom. 21 to 23
Cea are feo: >a)
fafctaaencat sraat vetadt efsttabaciteat at dfrarearafatisat un eq
gat FSR |
On either side of Sricakra, shone the tall Kiricakra and the Geyacakra
carrying the enraged Dandini and Mantrini accompanied by their
respective armies replete with war accessories. 24, 25
firepfiseterags aarfsra Weel
fafirtetareaqrgantatica searmadecterrntentiercntantert WN
MAMTA TaAIAUScitpaavSsel |
Tiraskarani, black like dense darkness, riding a horse and brandishing
a raised fearsome sword and followed by a host of self-resembling saktis
encircling her, was at the back of the Sricakra. 26, 27
we steafeaedt Saar we frat Wen
Gar qaaarer dager faqear: |
Thus Devi Lalita with Her army well equipped set out to fight while
being praised by the gods. 28
fafert Saatdad crore fayrea: Ween
aqaattet weet: ufrast) Saatecaardaacankorn Roll
ureanfragraniguiggeeta: | waragretatat arettyrfire sor. 3g

oS ruses! 721 Chapter 76
ps lilies SPI
Sares SHIT MeTaeaa| AA: Tate RaaS wet at dammfsar un 32H
aaere srarstacperat ster aeqaaet | aan Tatweriwateinfega: 1 8B
Peas A VAT Arita eee) see TaaTAT aerhraTOTAAT tt By Hl
The two armies facing each other were looking uniquely elegant like
oceans crossing the shore and receding. The dust generated by the
pounding of the earth by the chariots, horses, elephants and soldiers,
created darkness like a new-moon night. Crushed by the weight of the
army it looked as though the darkness within the earth’s core had come
out or tortured by trampling, the earth itself out of fear had risen to
reach her lord. The rising dust looked like an army in the sky for want
of space on the earth. Such were the surmises by the gods watching
from the sky. 29 to 34
aS MAES Saat: waaterat: | Ay Feary FataTTHSTSAA: BA
vrereagiberenfangitamrarde: | rerercnfareareat ange raery: Waal
Prereanygeen wget: Sa! Fa: GA: Wdesee vitew: YaTeATyTA: I
une: far vitfads wreegabtaarerrt
face ofa fate: yredt: wreeare arferey Wezel
aaa fem ye aarnt wet at sft fafer a ter qaqa = RII
Amidst sounds from war drums mixed with beating the shoulders
and roaring, a frightening war started between the Saktis and the demons.
Both discharged weapons like arrows, spears, double edged swords,
javelins, swords, flats, tridents, iron clubs, maces, discs, slings, bolts,
goads and sticks. The demons shouted thus: “We are ruined. We are
suffering the death of our children and relatives. What is the use in
living after being vanquished by the enemy? Let us with all strength
defeat the gaktis and achieve our goal or else reach the heavenly garden
by getting killed in the war.” Determining thus the demons fought
vehemently. 35 to 39
verdtsae derarafar, wader fan! wea we werd oeMasda AaUT io
sft weastaata qagatdant: |
The Saktis also thought thus: “This is the limit of the demons. By

att fag, 722 Sri Tripurarahasyam
killing them we will achieve supreme victory” and fought quickly with
all their energy. 40
wa fqey vifeafatetrsrerr Nee
uret raga: dgfarasitacr: | hfasneitqrargrg yronettaraa: es)
qeareta fre aeerareat aq: | eft Gerard fertgtetea ater xy
wet: fore gars sanet cararet fag ta: 1 Afar yarrartaetea faaritar: xx
war defy qeaty agers Get vit: ferife quit wrt aha ara: ot wy
wqenrencanfir wefan gai faetottioa qa afefaees var U%e
we fafafaartta ufrargrquent | srqraer aat ax ferrenroaran: xo
Rafedt eee ga safest aura faxartor afef qe ga watt
yrfagr Tamoreny: afar sated cafe! arafefearta fears eqyty i
ua yeaa wuseermeray: | Aaya vrei Aarsfet weve TAT Ul Ko Il
During the fight the Saktis and the demons were mutually getting
killed by weapons. Some died by pores created in their bodies by the
arrows, some who vowed to fight reached heaven, the heads of some cut
with the sword jumped crackling into the sky like the dragon’s head
trying to swallow the Sun, some were crushed by clubs, some slit by
discs, a bunch of them were strung like beads in a long spear and some
heads flew into the sky looking like flapping birds. The war field was
looking grand with mutilated bodies spread all around. It looked like a
painting on a cloth or a sculpture in stone. The river of blood looked like
the red paint spilled inadvertently by the painter. At some places it
looked as though the artist has quickly wiped the red lacquer which
was spilled by him. At some spots dead bodies pierced by arrows looked
really like totally painted statues. Thus the huge army of Bhandasura
was very quickly destroyed like a moth by the fire called Saktis.
aa tafeareres atareforaciret: | vifaraat yreaaitecarmrgeer: i Util
Then the leaders of the demon force, with angry red eyes tortured
the Saktis by showering arrows heavily. 51

qeaaeaerats aA: 723 Chapter 76
qear dated: Sarfcaraafage! wPavt aioe ares meta 4?
uftansfaaqen qaqueqetin: | a qaea yfat ea: Bardia: 1 ua
Wee asrararg: watz Baraat fe at:
Seeing the Saktis worried by the attack of the leaders of the army,
Mantrini, Dandini, Asvaradha and Sampatkari accompanied by the saktis
fought burning with anger. After a prolonged violent battle they destroyed
all the army leaders. 52, 53
aera amd art dhiad qargeny, W4enl
fagfsrg a ant ayeTaqersa
Asvaradha killed Vakraksa, Vamana, Tala, Dirghanasa, Subahu and
Vidyujjihva in the battle. 54
aaa aeag pieorat wore W4ail
fagré yet opt want arqured
F Sampatkari killed Talajangha, Kutilaksa, Ranoddhata, Nisatha,
Sambara and Krira in the fight. 55
wien qract wie qfoarpay, 14g
afet ausnent yraet a atest: area aratsft creed arrerenfiit
wart queyatt agat auvsarqory! seq caret a nerepfer ferarcay it ye
vitfirarat aareteng cHretita wWereqy! Years srnyel atest areragfr 1 4g
Jambhini killed Kriravadana; Stambhini killed StcikAmukha;
Andhini killed Kanthakakara and Mohini killed Mrgavaktra; Bhairava
killed Kalakeya; Kalakarsini killed Vyaghrasya; Svapnesi killed
Mundamirdhana; Vatuka killed Bhandabhdsana; Umluka, Karabhasya,
Mahakuksi, Sivarava, Sonitaksa, Kalaketu, Kalagriva, Mahahanu,
Grdhravaha, and Kakamukha were killed by Dandanatha. 56 to 59
ypavarn yufterrea water erqyfar
aifgcavarmen ata fraed prrreteany Roll
wend chide @ argrarmrgecaury! meg? HeeTe YS GUS THAT | Gel
wert frerg a ypach ypenvtant) aeepfie arnge sarees cptet farm 2

at fey, 724 Si Tripurarahasyam
abauit aerarare aetreteHest STAT!
The gaktis Sukasyamala, Sarika, Laghusangita and Sahityasyamala
killed Nikumbha, Kumbhamastaka, Cakraksa and Dirghadamstra,
respectively. Mantrini killed Ulbana, Katankata, Karafijaksa, Munda,
Canda, Vrkanana, Salasira, Dvisrnga, Sunaka, Sarpakarna, Vakrakuksi,
Vamamukha, Kalaka, Kotara, and Vita by overpowering them. 60 to 62
ua faved: Garay wear TER
aust wera: ore aN ta anita: | ta oa A git ast vrferanfetty i gx
uyare an ate ot fafest tredor
When all the army leaders were thus destroyed the happy Bhandasura
seated in his chariot said to his driver thus: “Oh Charioteer! Drive my
chariot quickly to the army of the Saktis and witness my astounding
and horripilating prowess.” 63, 64
seat arert teamtateay TAMA a: QL
abeert deaf ures woreten @etat warssaat: fenfrd we aatfemTN GK II
aefe wore ¢ abeeritsfer adem
Hearing Bhandasura, the charioteer after driving the chariot bowed
to him and asked him about a doubt thus: “Oh Lord of the demons! If
you order me I would like to ask you about a doubt. Please permit me.”
fet yea urged wre eet area: Wael
aaatat veriat dat watson fagenrean war qs gat etenfaciat: ue
aa ramftayarta eaqurggafeay Bert vlcacesee watt sat GSI
area ae a qa oe antwefaa) afeadeamfaat at afe aera, woll
wd wad graearafragt) a ite asta sitf at carat wa CTT: = RII
Ordered by Bhandasura, the charioteer said thus: “Oh Lord of the
demons! I think this army of the saktis is invincible. Visukra and others
were effortlessly eradicated by them. Now I am seeing you, who have
lost your brothers and sons, happy without the least touch of sorrow

weer SATA: 725 Chapter 76
just like a recluse. Even earlier when you fought with Bala I observed
your extreme devotion towards Her. Please tell me about this frankly.
Even after a dreadful defeat which should bring agony, I am not seeing
an iota of grief or fear in you.” 67 to 71
sft ya: qreaxt tet ¢ farafarq
We aus: orey feafea qo, tego 9
wer at eferat cat ar aera feat) Urat Predt Gs oA TENT | OR
aecitch viterferned ade: Gan sa cich avitch S aud gan 1 ox
wraa Hifedt MASA YET! AaTSTATateient S TanitsfraageT:
ea at at aya ayaa: Ba: |
To the charioteer who has been serving him from a long time and
who is repeatedly asking him, Bhandasura with a smile started answering
thus: “Oh Demon! Listen. This auspicious Devi Lalita is the ultimate
Transcendental Reality. By getting killed by Her in war I will attain
Her Supreme ever Blissful Abode free from sorrow and fear. A being
deluded by illusion considers as supreme this earthly existence which is
filled with fear and agony. More so this abode of Demons which is
characterised by passion is extremely dreadful and one who thinks about
this as good is an innocent animal. 72 to 75
we stuerdearreat rftrerryrar: Tc)
wenturerage Uat uretsat em! aansfe aera gear at apfeif wert a
war aaat It wenfesrtt wer Ura feat Fs oreet A Yar srftr ee
preanftaarferarereat cites WAT: TTA! WAT He TAA aeette wT aA A: 1
Wa: whee yretat arenqarAirt
“I am Manikyagekhara the messenger of Devi Mahalaksmi. As a
result of my past deeds I have attained this worst state. Even then, by
the grace of the Devi I have not lost memory of my past state. This
Transcendental Devi, the Mother of Brahma and all, is the ruler of all.
Killed by Her in war, my brothers and sons have been purified by the
fire of Her weapons and have reached Her Absolute Abode. Along with
them and me, you will also soon reach Her Abode and attain immortality.”

st ERS 726 Sri Tripurarahasyam
sft grat wusant faferits aq a ania: Udon
dearer tent df wet vith caren Gear sterferaret arses Gufaaa: 1 ce
Hearing the words of Bhandasura, the charioteer was astonished.
After praising the lord of the demons the charioteer dismissed his inner
worry and seeing Devi Lalita present before him, he bowed to Her with
devotion. 80, 81
sia stages Werens wemafaaits ara: I
End of the seventy-sixth chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurarahasyam.

arta ts att
Jnanaksi Rajarajesvari

Seas ATT:
Chapter 77
ae ag wadivinarsst a cfs ubait a ware qeatereryrary 1 2
veyed WT: Fae HAM Warr U_t teat at qaurqdfactedfecitswaeT i 2
i fart waren a st aor yet weiter: water BF again i
mae cist ages Veh: wei we: ud fafafs qs aisha x
aa waradiseaad sft tear aaeter Fyre seat wear aissta eaten: 1 &
stad @ weten deers Ta! ceuht fagre wensETs 4 ng
Then encountering Sampatkari, Asvaridha, Dandini and Mantrini
and displaying his excellent war skills and pleasing them one by one,
Bhandasura said thus! “Oh Goddesses! I am satisfied by your skills and
prowess in war. I am eager to fight with your Empress immediately.
You can be watching my war with Her. My shoulders feel embarrassed
to fight with her juniors. After conquering Her I will battle with you.”
Hearing his request, the Goddesses consented thinking that he was
invincible by them and that it would be appropriate for him to be
defeated by Devi Lalita and allowed him to fight with Her. 1 to 6
ay sftamtenet TIM Ast! WARARVSteH Garergd AT Nell
wa Wemedaayeattaay dutta: fag: sefereterar wen
Raoras suit: wd caatasetet| AUS sare ciferat yt qearsfeefea: ig
THIS wa Teqeary| fara wafratthacgaratsaad — tl Roll
wa ed YR_ahrad weal: wad Tit Husevis qanferet Heermgat = el
aa: Ut yest Guarana: | aret tern yet quot ype fer RR
Then reaching the Sricakraraja chariot, Bhandasura started his
extremely wonderful war. The Saktis were just watching the war. Similarly
the entire sky was filled by gods, siddhas and rsis who had arrived in
the aerial cars to witness the war. Bhandasura getting face to face with
Devi Lalita was very happy and mentally bowed with devotion to Her
and soon discharged five arrows which created wonders. The first two

Rt ARREST 728 Sri Tripurarahasyam
arrows fell as bunch of flowers at Her feet. The third arrow became a
garland of blossomed lotuses around Her neck. The fourth one showered
flowers on Her head. The last one settled on Her crown as a diamond.
wa afefeat gat gear teafaeftar: Fareatsfe Tagua viigareta waar Wen
ANCAUSAS FAT Ma! Sagiishaatt aa feet wT ee
Seeing such a worship, Devi Lalita was very much pleased. All the
gods started doubting about it. Hearing from Narada about the supreme
devotion of Bhandadsura towards Devi Lalita, Indra was extremely
surprised. 13, 14
wastage aferaruseerdh: | faagreareafrearaeararenrygmreteyy KI
wustaisti din faa arta aitefaqgget gate warafaq = ka
Then began a great war between Devi Lalita and Bhandasura and
the entire sky was covered with wonderful weapons and missiles.
Bhandasura, an adept in the usage of missiles fought with valour to
please the Great Devi. 15, 16
wort waET tat MAPS AYUMTA! YetsueMaatraey weet Won
wafert soy & art wt adta fernfe 31 qarearcca fret eAut GeamfsraT 1 gc I
mreuanfuia dt eikanrataatsen + feat arg wat a gareaaht eafad ii 28
wirafafarantr caayigieatsan aa ape peda als Au Roll
chatter: qetcfaatenta: | aft caafaqersta adata faenft eel
wet 4 wend Wa aratdfaarmtt: anef asit at agar gee: Fear RR
TU wat aaah aaenet Ta A! Aaghetratya walt a HABA Il 231!
TINS wears wea ule fetaa saree war we: WSs AA Wayta i Vv
asf at fe wage agian mas! wei wgradt ag dered Gfeattea
fafen nefrtard qeafan gear ude @ dares frst aT BSH
Bowing mentally to the Devi who was before him, Bhandasura
started insulting Her with words secretly filled with praise. “Oh Devi
Lalita! Listen. You appear to me like an actress engaged in deceit like
a man putting on a female dress but devoid of female characteristics.

aearafaarats AM: 729 Chapter 77
I consider you as neither female nor male. With despicable conduct you
have neither shame nor fear. You are not born in a respectable clan
because you appear contrary. I think only indiscriminate persons engaged
in devious ways will contact you. I consider it as the result of my past
actions that you, with such an abominable nature, are seen in front of
me. Listen. I will utter the truth. Let matters remain as they are.
Somehow you are in my presence. Hence discarding deceit and magic
stay firmly in front of me. Do not run away. You cannot cheat me and
disappear. Hence taking into consideration my secretly determined desire
and seeing my prowess accomplish your vow.” 17 to 26
gen Pryearest aa Waar certian! Uy Stat set aged t ata ATI Vo
meaft waite csrenfa verfean a fe a effete gat waq aafeq
qasatedve: aq fettws ada sqact yreatior aed dengue URE
Hearing his words with concealed meanings, Devi Lalita was happy
and said thus: “Oh Lord of the demons! Listen. What you spoke is quite
in order. I will fulfill your wants and drive away your arrogance. The
person who has come under my vision will not be born again. If you
have any interest in fighting, then be firm totally.” Saying thus She
showered arrows on Bhandasura. 27 to 29
uftad aaatsa distr Seats free: | prea rfaarres ere AT, 30
ayantegé gaa ciredory
Bhandasura also quickly showered counter-arrows. Appreciating each
other their scientific skill in handling the weapons they fought a tumultous
horripilating great war. 30
ud faqer ofat tetsenfin wast = Weagnt
ae areut dhe lat odd tar units araed atel Ata Tn BV
vandaag cfeat utah wearcatyramre diet ferret Waan
Fighting thus for a long period, the demon created missiles of fire,
water, moon, Kubera, Mountain, rain, Indra, wind, Brahma amd Kumara.
Devi Lalitaparamesgvari destroyed all such missiles by counter-missiles
Just like the Sun destroys mist. 31 to 33

st fay, 730 Sri Tripurarahasyam
aor qatar weraaierrand| Haale sustet we Hews 7 navn
dinch wo fecoanat fecoaenfeng cari aferasaaradt ted Traut sar Weayn
arucnuf yt me che fafaata a) wand fame walt creaMOTTerTT I 36
A Ber susdaa ARaMTAUTHAT: | Saat cheteTe THghraTT: = BON
afeavati aera tat HATE GAH ATAU ast eye AAT act
aifvrart aura ypetfamyyfate: |
Similarly Devi Lalita instantly destroyed all the new missiles created
by him. Then Bhandasura created Madhu, Kaitabha, Somaka, Hiranyaksa,
Hiranyakasipu, Bali, Kartaviryarjuna, Ravana, Kumbhakarna, Mura,
Graha, Kamsa and Dvivida and so on, the demons who are the enemies
of Visnu and engaged in the destruction of the world. These demons
possessed the same characteristics and valour as Bhandasura and were
keen on troubling the creation by their ignorance. Then Devi Lalita
created from each of Her hand nails the ten incarnations of Narayana
who very quickly destroyed the demons. 34 to 38
aa Wash yet art faqeta a We 3eul
reread fritsqrrar: | am gear sitar eat wrertagestad tt ¥oll
nerd taeda a Ft area: |
Then again Bhandasura created Andhakasura, Mrtyu, Kama and
Tripurasura who are the enemies of Mahadeva. Seeing them Devi Lalita
from Her third eye created the God of gods Mahadeva by whom these
demons were destroyed. 39, 40
aa seer Aaa, uesenl
sarrafrin vifsafrat go ear frags faye aqaiggar: YT: VI
amigplenarn at gers sari
Then Bhandasura created a frightening huge army that was earlier
killed by the Saktis. He created Visanga, Visukra, Caturbahu, Karanka,
Kutilaksa and so on, just like Brahma creates after deluge. 41, 42
aa t qqq: vifeadarfactratian: wan
aageal fafina: wa susameingay dtarara far wad sft tare vrata: |

ATTA ATATS ATA: 731 Chapter 77
wastes Yasued ari ed ed aa tet qat ya: wast = sual
Then these enraged demons fought with the saktis. Every one was
surprised by the ability of Bhandasura. The gods and the Saktis were
afraid of the consequences. A great war emerged and as the demons
were getting destroyed, Bhandasura again and again created them.
qqquasenifaren: yeaa saat aft wer sitefernedt qgafatirqwret:
ufaut a nedtqrass vores a qatetertgear wetarre & fir i ¥e
fa tere fand Wtsé Guaraeq! uve yifeot aed eaget BATHeTy | we
qertarafaara SSE MEET! et ot ViheerTUta: Yat St OTT ¥e
aqaiggaras Yat ofa frofta: | qparat weacpeed qat Geka waft i yo
faugt ayren aafaxyent Aaersfe ai et: YA: GE Ua avseeas genta WAR
amigpiecnaen sad ager eat: | Gera YA: Yer Aa: areafad fe a: &e
stat: sat: Was Uva yreitearan: | tat vith Taft Arter aaa 4a
Witnessing this, the gods and the Saktis were very much frightened.
Then Brahma and others prayed to Devi Lalita for protection. Mantrini
approached Devi Lalita and bowed to Her and with folded hands requested
Her in a sweet voice thus: “Oh Devi! The prowess of Bhandasura is
dreadful. See the exhausted faces of the Saktis who have been fighting
without rest for the past six hours. The demons killed by the saktis are
being instantly created again. Caturbahu and other sons of Bhandasura
who were killed seven times by Bala are fighting again. Visanga who
was killed ten times and Visukra nine times are fighting again resuscitated
by Bhandasura. Karanka, Kutilaksa and others who were destroyed many
times are again encountering us. We cannot battle any more. Please see
the Saktis who are afraid, tired and dull. Hence I request you to protect
the world with due concern.” 46 to 53
gfe wana Set cafaagara aM ATet: Uva aOtta ATTATAATATT I 4 I
Seat cries vit yreteh Gals! AAS SATS Ue HATTA | 44 I
Wrasqraraned afatrerda: | waite teat Sat array GR I
Thus implored by Mantrini, Devi Lalita with a smile said thus:

at FEST, 732 Sri Tripurarahasyam
“Oh Mantrini! Do not be afraid. Watch while I destroy the lord of the
demons within seconds.” Saying thus, She loaded Her bow with an arrow
and invoked the universally dreaded Pasupata missile in it and discharged
it on the army of the demons. That missile soon reduced to ashes the
ocean-like army of the demons. 54 to 56
qa: wt wane ea fragraeharay
dar fastsfadt sarerareneitets ta, SOT. N&o I
wet q: wafaa: arr at: wafaer areat Wissel Byecet: Wea:
MISSAL Wrersraaraaaag: t
Again Devi Lalita placed another effulgent arrow in Her bow by
which all the directions were filled with flames, the earth trembled, the
ocean agitated, the entire creation was frightened, there was a shower
of thousands of meteors. Many tigers and so on went round Bhandasura
in an anti-clockwise direction. 57, 58
wWaegeal faasi wai Sat arraharary, W&SH
cat staframneage Fact: | AaaaTHat Aad Wt ATSATYT: Ul Goll
Mastered aayrant afar wt Fata avers & yRIsfasvage: | G81
Weta, Valet Yar farenems: | wreat wasnt cefaa Fret: =n GR
quisafe ater qui caret aarti sesTat wa TR TT a RII
wouter warmifirese vette degatasaaq = RI
Seeing the loss of his ocean like army, Bhandasura meditated firmly
on the lotus feet of Devi Lalita and as he was getting absorbed into the
meditated, the Devi released the arrow invoked with Kamegvara missile
which was very dreadful. It was emitting flames that brightened the
universe and looked like the consuming fire which would burn the entire
creation. Blinding the eyes of one and all it astonishingly reduced to
ashes Bhandasura along with his chariot, his Sanyaka city, all the
women, old persons, children, beautiful buildings, animals and so on just
like a straw by conflagration. 59 to 64
wefanparaa ws at wet aed At at Werer Geatenate eater | &&
ageal faa wren wayrenargy: | sfrrey: vif: arfearfor weet: Il

Liki Me
fagdaaenf wephadarae: | caret apdaannt saya: getter: un gon
wionfin tgatvat frat ag: wet ferarqs ceqyfrron we wotgftat wat: ge
Brahma, Visnu and other gods who could not see the trace of either
Bhandasura or his army or his destroyed city or his children were
astounded and shouted slogans of triumph. The gaktis banged the drums
in thousands. The gods played on musical instruments. The Gandharva
leaders sang. Urvasi and other celestial damsels danced happily. The sages
recited hymns. The siddhas repeated the names of the Transcendental
Devi. The sages meditated on Her form and others prostrated before
Her. 65 to 68
Sqy: TORT WPCA ACTH: ATT TWAS IATL GS I
Pradaadcs sandatatsa Wea: Shreya asta: oll
fearra: Gaatsafrad: arnists a waite drat wary atareay i weit
AISME UA: YE Vasa sateera! Frrperragiof ter wvsrgt et ut wl
The gods showered blossomed fragrant flowers, the clouds looked
peaeeful and thundered in a low tone, the wind carried fragrant droplets
mixed with the aroma of sandal and saffron giving a pleasing experience,
the Sun shone bright, the oceans were placid, the rivers and ponds were
limpid like pure minds. With the destruction of Bhandasura the universe
glowed as if resuscitated after a deluge and was free from anxiety and
animosity. 69 to 72
wi det ed Gear averet cima tar veda: fear: wa setquragi 02
When Bhandasura who was tormenting the world was thus killed,
theygods, sages, siddhas and all approached Devi Lalita. 73
ft street mrereraus wereafarts ara: 1
End of the seventy-seventh chapter of the
@ahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurarahasyam.

wparatadats ara:
Chapter 78
ster tanger: wa at aferat we eifftarggafafed: era: gt
Going near the Transcendental Devi Lalita, the ecstatic gods praised
Her with many hymns. 1
wa wa afeara amrendisdar wefie aorai fer ferx cerevitey
fagefaeinnery armen werartt feait qa: dfarteatstagitey on ei
“Oh Mother Lalita! Victory to You. What wants will not be obtained
by those devoted to You as a result of serving Your lotus feet? You will
grant the wants more quickly than the divine trees which are having
qualities similar to You. 2
aafie fauerat ausdemaramerstfectntrersarera STITT: |
auftfravarat afer: ater afefr aq aaa wheat sitet: nan
Like birds with the wings burnt by the dense dreadful flame of the
prowess of Bhanddsura we who had drowned in the vast ocean of fear
have been quickly lifted up into the sky by You. 3
Wrst frre htentemtearaar |
fornfafacteantirt staat aa vented tet citeaatt ui
Your lotus feet which dispels the inner misery of the supplicants,
which controls the dense delusive array of sins of the surrendered, which
is the life nerve of the entire moving and non-moving creation, which
controls the universe is ever prosperous. 4
wa waft faera: wdetnraare: Ga se aa qaeeags ware: |
Wag ware thas fayefaaraqet afar areata: nan
Oh Mother! Your sport illumines the universe. Whence will you feel
tired fighting the demons? May You always dwell in our mind which is
purified by pure actions. 5

Dee 735 Chapter 78
farrataterarat at faccroneg: | waft arorgaeareat wera: wan
Your swan like feet which cause wisdom among age-old ignoramuses
drives Brahma (as well). 6
gfe Wear qusadt wore faferperer: | Yat qatste fated: aquaria
After praising thus, Brahma and others prostrated before Her and
praised Her again and again by many hymns. 7
Macsensalfet Teen: ANU: | sramquldtea: wferqen wets |
a oftreangetiar: wore afar: | ates afeaniteat wgdaerrgee: 11 <i
aafe suse aares yeaa! evs yd Us wat aT wists ATI gol
Wadausy yen sat: chad venta: | ctenfauet ada teta wa a: I
vataat teaaer seas Aad: | 7 aatataagiste weragiste yg | NRHN
wants yeareonet wus wet wpa! dae fret Set waar fer meat eal
venta terror ctenarets diam: | aefranpery and we Pepe
Oh Agastya! Meanwhile myriads of Brahmas responsible for creation
arrived there along with Bharati and other Saktis. With folded palms on
their heads, they bowed and praised Devi Lalita worthy of praise and
said with folded hands thus: “Oh Devi! By the destruction of Bhandasura
today, hundred and five universes, which were ruled by him, have been
protected. In these universes Indra and other gods were imprisoned and
some gods had run away. Everywhere only demons ruled. Only vedas
and sacrifices propounded by the demons were practised. Oh Sanikari!
Worship to gods and sacrifices were not seen any where under his
administration and Brahmins had to propitiate the demons. Now as You
have killed the demon in war other demons have run away and the
lords of directions, Indra and others are established in their portfolios
and everything is peaceful.” 8 to 14
ua aang 2ay samen a faa! Zat faferatenster worer eferarefer: 1 eu
frametsearrarecaan aateqdfr fer: stgefratet aaa chad war RG
aynéfa qeotd ton tae Aya: |
As the gods were saying thus, Visvakarma arrived there and after

at APRS, 736 Sri Tripurarahasyam
bowing to the Devi, Brahma and others said with folded palms thus:
“Oh Creator! As ordered by you I have constructed on the peak of Meru
the Sripura for the Devi. You may please see that along with the Devi
and gods.” 15, 16
ud wag wifoetsar get qe afar, Neon
wifirar tazastefer uted yeaa tarokfar aa sat ga Ween
aquergt reat wefahia wersitqersret wfaferafirarttrry, Ween
faforn: wd waa tar: vif
Thus requested by Visvakarma, Brahma reported the matter to Devi
Lalita who requested ‘by all the gods reached there along with the saktis
and the gods. Seeing the city constructed by Visvakarma which was like
a reflection of the Great Sripura, all the gods and the -saktis were
wonderstruck. 17 to 19
aa aa raat tar: siteferaftaary, I Roll
wedarrgreasdt wort: aera: | aah Waters Gateyaretay Ween
Tefen aeramngeday |
The gods bowed to Devi Lalita and requested Her to dwell in the
Sripura. After taking Her consent, Brhaspati and others arranged
auspicious items required for the coronation. 20, 21
Were aaa, Yared WM
wen yfroitta anfatate fafa aearmgea anfoinreacd: Ul
Gael Sa aed aaatstaa: | werat Sagara feaaret Bayer: Ul Vil
argent: feqea: fart som aft faere: fagqara swe: frattsge: i 24
Reresetrg aleasverntae: | aereraat ust stauststa Wa Tl 26
aq cferamenatates | ufteaa tat afsarat waa: nll
weniananitteica afta: | scat: yaryd: WaT, tt RC Il
After the arrangements, Brahma at the auspicious zodiacal time
assisted by sages performed the sacred sprinkling on the Devi according
to the best Vedic procedures. The group of gods, Maruts, Vasus, Fires,
Gandharvas, Divine messengers, Lords of the directions, Yaksas,

FETA AAAS ATA: 737 Chapter 78
Guhyakas, Demons, Siddhas, Saints, Rsis, Manes, Raksasas and Brahma,
Visnu, Rudra, Isana and Sadagiva from the myriads of universes and
Srikantha and Adigesa were all present at the coronation and served
Devi Lalita in several ways. Myriads of Brahmanis, Laksmis and Gauris
with devotion worshipped Devi Lalita by individual services. 22 to 28
a preernt HATA TIM FEY YAY SAY TPA — tA
waters steneragieainat: | way wyey taavarg waa: Ul 20
aorg afey efeg moog ai qarg fafaeqed: tag urfirqert: =n agit
fafarieaech warfare a
After the auspicious sprinkling and chanting, as the musical
instruments produced enthralling music, as the Gandharvas sang tunes
with pleasing modulations, as the celestial courtesans danced, as the
saints uttered the sacred names, as the Rsis chanted hymns loudly and
as many viewers arrived with effort, Brahma helped Devi Lalita to the
sacred great throne. 29 to 31
aa Tanftarctatatat: TELA
aest: aytansti aden: | srafigecitnarn afyrenqada: 3311
afafirer vetdhreataisacm fafaafecrraat stteensfafercrtsrary i 3%
UeaRarTeyihedt afeatacnry ysrarargea fated: qeareet: Way
fafafaaqrteren: yarafaraafem: | eat fafaaerat: worqyfer cosaq 1 36 1
Then Brahma assisted by Vasistha and others sprinkled Her with
consecrated waters, from various rivers and seas, contained in pots having
special nine types of gems. After the coronation, the gods worshipped
with worthy materials, the Devi effulgent with many jewels and special
garment shining on the Sricakra throne supported by the five causal
deities. Brahma, Visnu, Mahega and others individually prayed to Her
by rare hymns and prostrated before Her. 32 to 36
We sttaferar tet aa sitqeetat feeratsfatiren a ersitqrarat =— lt FI
afavinparat erearrifs mfeer, yee! ust weteayt Heyy EAT ll FoI
Wares shigt wenpayretaenn Saferfererarqeectarefat aera Waeu

at frre, 738 Sri Tripurarahasyam
ant sitegrtear quot waargar | wifirer fafenget: ar etter aeoTTAyTT 11 vo
faarruisdteraret efterage
After getting coronated on the throne in the Sripura at the peak of
Meru, Devi Lalita just as in the Great Sripura allocated suitable places
to Mantrini and others. Oh Agastya! Thus the Devi is dwelling on the
high peak in Sripura giving instructions to Brahma and others. The
Sripura constructed by the skill of Visvakarma using precious material
is marvellous. Requested by Brahmé and others Devi Lalita out of
compassion accepted the umbrella and sandals offered by them. In this
manner Devi Lalita stays here assuming a sportive form, even though
She is nothing but concentrated Consciousness and Bliss. 37 to 40
sft gear waiter, at wore i ¥R
aren: Ww: wTessfafaviiga: | waite cafe Arafary watery ve
amt sinter wat fet frat a1 a 2 fated wart wenveradag aafer
warsfe teragrt war a ear safe ware! Tefaafese fafraaftafer: 11
age aarqearare: waren 41 teqfet wafaeyfrearnt aha tw 4
wa areafatedt Quist magerera: | aq ae afort aa sitgt Fait ve
Hearing from Hayagriva the most purifying legend the exhilarated
Agastya got into a doubt and questioned thus: “Oh Compassionate
Hayagriva! I am surprised that the city of the Devi is on top of Meru
as described by you. There is no place in the universe which is not
known to me. More so on the Meru there is any place unknown to me.
The Meru is like the wall on which the world picture is painted. There
are seven worlds above and seven worlds below and atop Meru there
are abodes of Brahma, Visnu and Siva and there is not even two inches
space on it which I do not know. Then how have you described the
existence of Sripura there? Please clarify my doubt.” 41 to 46
gfe qe: Gress gare: we afta: | oy Gees aenty weed Wagayy i voll
a fe wart wey weet mega 2g sfifeqet wifes fate eyo vel
at wet qyanfa aisatat q aaret) we arererdsqer fees ayRAT | vs Il
wrarat q ware arsured wen farts ured tarat ageaat teatfsear | Ko Il

gatas qulactrarctattga
afigit diearafe faarafirge |
forarant wat wcnfgrandgtrerat
waht wat dean: frat faerrerett
Some fortunate ones contemplate on You,
the billowing Consciousness and Bliss,
as seated on a couch in the form of
Siva with Parama-Siva as its mattress,
in the mansion of Cintamani gems that
is adjacent to the Nipa (Kadamba)
pleasure garden which is encircled by
the celestial grove (Kalpavrksa) located
in the isle of gems situated in the centre
of the ocean of nectar.
Saundaryalahari, Stanza 8

aeaafacaas Aa: 739 Chapter 78
Thus inquired by Agastya, the pleased Hayagriva said thus:
“Oh Agastya! Listen to the profound secret which I will narrate. The
Sripura will not be visible to one and all. Only those persons, who
propitiate Devi Tripurasundari in the ordained way, will see that place
and not others. By listening to Her glory, You have developed devotion
towards Her, by which there would be nothing unattainable. Having
possessed the ocean (the store house of diamonds), there would be no
desire about a diamond. 47 to 50
afead & adt sat ctargar ua fiers war ctatt warara atarax faferaarry, 1 ue
fageeseate ot Asse T Hara
“Your devoted wife Lopamudra is the highest devotee of the
Transcendental Tripura. Get initiated by her and strictly worship the
Devi Tripura, by which you will be able to see Her city and never
otherwise. 51
Und Hrs eat afar wergay, WAgtl
faud quaat gat adorn! wet wetraeat sat eferenfirey nual
treed faqtynareaeray ATS ATAU |
afc: antfasfat frgifa: aesiag, U4stl
soy sraiseatamfaran aa: | feet fered wrfeag a watset aftarena: Qk
faquafftarat sar wate pradts urerretta fate earerefroity 4a I
frer=et detente afreranteat + yadaqeste W4oll
“Oh Agastya! This is the glory of Devi Lalita which I have narrated
to you. Hearing this glory, one will be absolved of all sins. In the Kali
period for people whose mind is polluted and wicked, there is no alternative
except listening to the glories of Devi Tripurasundari. Disappointed
persons, by practising Vedic paths will develop devotion towards Visnu,
Siva and other Saktis and in the end, as a result of maturity, turn to
worship Devi Tripura always. They will realise that She, who is the
unique Consciousness and Bliss ruling the entire universe, is their own
self and experience the Transcendental Sovereignty and attain
immortality. 52 to 57

at Arey 740 Sri Tripuraérahasyam
ved eareraquret stort wena sraot siteererfertarercafaretat: ul &e 1
wanaet wddta staat sta gesat) UTNE Palsteweraey, Wan
saferyere ATAT Area ATATRATL|
“Thus, to realise the nature of one’s own self, listening to the
supreme glories of the Great Devi is the first step. Hence, those who
desire auspiciousness should begin to listen to this legend which destroys
sins and confers all wants and generates devotion and quickly dispels
great fear.” 58, 59
seyret Searsygfrgfaats art yey, Goll
angesa From etarnitst feyrttac: 1 sft a afar we aferarar: area yar
Saying thus and well worshipped by Agastya, Lord Hayagriva seeking
permission departed in the desired direction. “Oh Parasurama! I have
thus narrated to you the auspicious legend about Devi Lalita.” 60, 61
gfe sttfaqeeeet wrereraud arpacafererits cara: 11
End of the seventy-eighth chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurdrahasyam.

Wenlaryitfaaats care:
Chapter 79
ud stteferater werd wadisfra wrafrya: seat gatqatrafar: 1 gu
aferaftfatrit tersteatiar: | fraeaattaarttatega: wen
fads sa WYR: AUTATAaAAa! BATT Resear Yat facfeareter: nau
Hearing the supreme glory of Devi Lalitambika, Parasurama drenched
in ecstasy and drowned in the ocean of devotion, bloated with horripilation
and bathed in the continuous tears of joy became unconscious for a while
as if inebriated and again with folded hands spoke in a stammering
voice. 1to3
araaenat Ufadt waasgan wanted: Wel
sagt casos | AHA SRT Arr {sweaters wan
wreat a aft yret dada at a ant fees gadt get RL
we waee cite caret aremmraey! yee ten ga a vardnfad sata i ott
arise HaHeass Vaca aean! Harcraftafanegrard ater ay wen
“Oh Lord! Today I am completely purified by you by drenching me
with the flood of sacred water in the form of the legend of Sri Parasakti.
Really I have been saved from the ocean of worldliness by your compassion.
Oh Guru! Oh Sun unto the darkness of misery! Oh Saviour! Prostrations
to you. I salute that serene fearless sage Samvarta, who showed me the
right path while I was blindly wandering. Till now I wasted my life
without understanding the proper goal just like a frog in a dried-up
well. By seeking shelter under your feet I have been fortunate and really
accomplished my longing for the wealth of immortality. 4 to 8
wat dyritsa wer ee wafed: | a Geos wat Ma TA aes et
Wrragtseart fs a eon: | asaeted ate wafeost areftrrer tu
ad qritaaqh: wdyneatagme: | Aordtat weft weiner eel
wrsqvaayant ster wT! Heat at ahaa 7 fe carrer avi zt
qa: wa a4 ge aaqt aaaaife
“Oh Lord! I am left with a great doubt about which I will request

at fre, 742 Sri Tripurarahasyam
you to clarify. I am aware of your compassionate blessings on me. Merciful
as you are, there will be nothing that should not be revealed to me,
your disciple. How is that the erudite sage Agastya did not propitiate
Sri Paragakti the universal Devi, because of which the beautiful city of
the Devi was not visible to him? How come that it is not visible to even
persons practising Veda? Later how was sage Agastya able to see that
city? Please tell me about this.” 9 to 12
searger wraaret wre ewe fs: Tea
soy wa waenhh wet Magy! A wa Hae yet watsrenyquat Weevil
Tart weareranrtaearern! araarat yd fet afee orforat gery ui ek
wreatgte wach eager ates: | areaerergacifea arearaeaa UTA tl RG
Thus requested, Guru Dattdtreya addressed ParaSurima thus; “Oh
Parasurama! Listen. I will tell you a great secret wherein mere erudition
will not be of use. The individual beings carry with them the hundreds
of impressions acquired by their actions in the previous births. By
receiving instructions from virtuous persons, these impressions will surface
and will remain as long as that association lasts and there is no other
means for this. 13 to 16
waa warns faqrawag’: | warafageafes: waa dat wares tN RVI
arattat + fata faqirorsantsfa ai a arasitercteer aararteurary: th ke I
fartorat agefeorat adanty) a ataar aensarfa far chat pps RR
sore agitdtanareanr era! gear y pd ant fafa a aafaay ti 0
warsfe wreck vith areracta acer) Bfeart aan efer arsuert Y TAIT | 2
“Agastya only after meeting Hayagriva and listening to the glories
of Sri Tripurasundari and developing devotion to Her, was initiated by
his wife. Till one is initiated, even if he is a worshipper of Sri Tripura,
he will not be competent to climb the steps of the mansion of liberation.
Oh Paragurima! Just as a brahmin, without initiation into Gayatri
Mantra, will have no right to perform any Vedic rituals, even here
without initiation one cannot progress. Without getting initiated by a
Guru and without knowing the procedures of the Guru, even if a person
properly performs worship by self learning, he will perish just like a
half-prepared medicine kills its consumer. 17 to 21

CeRTATT Tera ATA: 743 ust @
wa wafaart a waqaeta ye fami a: warercdes fit Qeesteereqery. 22 1
ae cin: wt arsf fart tanger seat tear att anevada: we 23 1
arRqeae Ue snargeRt A! Atwater quer werevd: quiet: ex
atterdt wdde acararscenftory |
“The person who masters the mantra of a deity and its application
without the help of a Guru will be offending that deity and he will have
no salvation here and hereafter. Such an ignorant person has no chance
of relieving himself of such an offence. The kings, without ignoring the
disobedience of a person, punish him in several ways. 22 to 24
aeartta 7 fe waearsfirenfcar Het
soreaisfreanre frat Afeanare: | yourself aeferadt acter a fir fret 240
afe aefaat dat yermerqehea soprarernqarat yeuratfemnfrary i yi
qeard: ue: eareey tarot Tapa weary Afar erat wa: wet ETT I
wea ae aerqaa greet Heraery fray qoayy wey Faqes: Hen
wreraeursatian ene Werte: |
“Persons who advocate only Veda have no eligibility for the worship
of Devi Tripura just depending on the rituals of the Veda because there
is no scope for liberation in such rituals. If liberation is attainable in
a special way to persons who falsely assume its attainment and have
least knowledge about Self, then why cannot such liberation be had by
trees as well? The Vedic masters assume that the result, obtained by
smokes, is permanent. But, where is it seen that by adopting a fickle
means a stable result was obtained? Without the concept of everlasting
results they seek satisfaction in limited results wrought with ry
to
wafat qorrat at erat werep fi: dou
wreramregeond aerorrafergert | efanrrer ferwert asrfirat werearra: OE
creas we: gat aS et Ferg 1 ever rererer qereitg fe: warn
“The Vedas characterised by the worldly tendencies was promulgated
by Brahma for the continuance of the world and for the satisfaction of
the gods, just like the poison for a person wanting to die. Since the

& fret 744 Sri Tripurarahasyam
spiritual portion of the Veda was concealed by Brahma himself, deluded
persons could not know about it. 30 to 32
wate waste carat anraur: way) wag ca wereR faasstetaraar
ayegeae qat wearfararey! sritsa crerenraramafirenn fadtert = ax ii
“Vedavyasa the incarnation of Narayana, out of compassion towards
human beings has brought out the implications of Veda in a different
way so that it can be grasped easily only by persons who have relinquished
worldly desires. 33, 34
wafeitst: fawsateoreraniftary! sarariedt arsfe faeitafe ery a:
a faverrnfire 3 venta pif: | aanfear q eradet ae arava fer 1
Be Wanerch wer siento aq a fe ag ayfad areas 4 aa: 11 go
“Even sanydsins (renunciates) should propitiate Cicchakti (Absolute
Consciousness). If any one discontinues the worship of Srividyaé either
by ignorance or by insensibility, he will enter the non-returnable world
of dark nescience. A sanydsin should sacrifice all attachments. Oh
Parasurima! But the practice of this Srividyé which is characterised by
liberation should not be discarded by him as he does the Veda.
wemrecamt & wnguretiarag: | afirencaanfirs arefturennctfray 3c
weet fe & yet errant WAT: | eoSTeT Bar: vraatsfafadtaor 1 Beil
agftot afivttea areragiiot var sofaartaearreany Sart Yo ll
arergeg ay arty wear: | Sara Wel: draet vega Wxenl
“Discontinuance of the practice of Srividyaé amounts to severely
dreaded offence, even to a renunciate. He will go to hells like Tamisra,
Andhatamisra, Kumbhipaka and Avicika. Further the offenders, ordered
by Dandanatha, will be punished by the terrifying gaktis like Sankarsinl,
Karsini, and Kalasankarsini, in one of the hells mentioned earlier. The
person devoted to Srividya will attain liberation. 38 to 41
aafturenfacreasts ar waxfreant Afzatarraeter acer 7 fir farert un x?
wat fe Afees ant areder fr after) arftat uted eqrea: aypweitferry it 63
wif atet ant writoreafifinays dreracagy fre sroraferya fers i 6

CHRTATRT ATA OAT: 745 Chapter 79
“The salvation secured by a practicer of Tantra method cannot be had
by him who practises Vedic methods, because the Vedic action is always
extrovert and depends on self-effort without a proper place for Iévara
and suitable to experience sensory pleasures. In the Tantric method the
action directed towards the godhead, Isvara is filled with enlightenment,
belief and devotion which confer realisation and liberation. 42 to 44
warerranton feraepfgarerer faerari wrertsie fargrar wed: utetor fe ou wy
arqer aif eat ant area aarenery| aaferenet fern chet anfor wrreTet
Hareaey tert wer eit TTT! Barferas weeR WEST: ferret: i vo
afiorsamagr & & waft qe! wera Aeyred: yeh: wafer ve
“By engaging oneself in the prescribed action of Srividya, a person
becomes pure and in the same birth equals Siva. Even the ignorant, by
practising Srividya through self effort will attain freedom. Without proper
initiation one has no right to take to the path of enlightenment. The
initiated person will reach the transcendental abode after death. Even
the non-enlightend acquire spiritual knowledge through Siva and become
Siva themselves. Oh Parasurima! Hence, by practising the sapless Vedic
methods, one cannot attain liberation. 45 to 48
fern sitfaqrtat wafwat at adti a aret wet asf wafaatste arte xe it
feat sitfaqtenan: arrar atafaeater
“How can there be the desire for liberation without worshipping
Devi Tripurasundarl? Oh Parasurama! Without Her grace one will neither
have the means nor desire. 49
ane frrafawardtatt aareart wery, Goll
wearsft wear: arava werdtfr farsa: 1 qort wdgarat wereret: UST RH
vifea fear a qarar aect area aafaq
wee Ya y waa: tare was fafear WH: W&R I
“It is certain that the results obtained by the worship of Siva, Visnu
and other gods, are caused by the grace of the Devi. The worship of
Paraéakti is tantmount to worship of all other gods. Without worshipping
Sakti one cannot enjoy the boons from other gods. Therefore Sakti has
to be always worshipped by all. 50 to 52

Rt ARRESA, 746 Sri Tripurarahasyam
wonarytad ¢ fraratet fraaun: | qorata yay ca wet fergha TAT 1 43
“Intelligent persons will first consider the ability of a god in granting
wants and then worship that god and have their wants. 53
eildaswayreadt: aria a ast: wary arta stsecanhoaqe vifedta g fart
fa Sfaerrerfadda: feraatari wargiptfadétt a ta: Ha eat waT
aon aan fafa yifenqe are fora: ae!
fafayracn ufterad qui arsft aa wa W&gul
aeat fatt af aden a fe fear aehea afeafahta arife yea 1 uo
“Oh Parasgurama! In the world also, a weakling is never adored.
Without the support, who is Siva, Sakti never exists. If so without Sakti
who is his consciousness, Siva does not exist just like the Sun has no
locus standi without his brilliance. How can Siva exist without Sakti
his Consciousness. Bereft of the power of consciousness even a blade of
grass cannot exist. The truth is that consciousness is everything and
without it there is nothing. Oh Paragurama! Know that whatever exists
is consciousness. 54 to 57
ureared fe fast adts-aa fe faaei
ud geet g ad fafa a faq, W4E I
darata citehsfar faacha wifanr: | cereastsa Geeta SAAN Ge II
“This is the science of Sakta philosophy which propounds that there
exists nothing other than one’s own self. With such a state of mind even
a blade of grass is the embodiment of Devi Tripura. The learned in the
world call it by many names. Hence abandon all doubt regarding this
and take Sakti as omnipresent. 58, 59
aeheant vga & fastareradt war fafasteg agunausafacrray tl Goll
fagtagt waerantaa eats aeat: | Aart fayreagen yearataytrny, Tata
aise Ff asuyagfenisht a!
“The learned use different terminology to define Sakti who is nothing
but uninterrupted Consciousness. Until one acquires this special
knowledge, he cannot become Her devotee. The Veda which is full of

Ms SIR 747 Chapter 79
distinctions conceals the attributeless. Therefore Agastya, an expert in
Veda could not see Her city. 60. 61
dard: wt aeq fata fe a wag Wa
areqrifaat wet de seat
“The sum and substance of Veda is Devi Tripura. Hence Veda is
said to be the means for attaining Devi Tripura. 62
aeeta oad quot ore ahaa, WRU
aat aera: SAL, PeRTTSTet aS Sm: | AT Yet: Wa wat wea HAT 1
“The sage Vyasa has elaborated the meaning of Veda through
Puranas. Veda is made up of Agamas which are a heap of words that
are the embodiments of Devi Tripura and thus all knowledge is propounded
based on these words. 63, 64
Rafirarsfrantor aeer: wade! cara Uae: Walqadfiresat WRQM
ag arma faraaeqery arma: atyrer fanet sft fra: Wag
PUT FEN Palealaay TL! AIT avast: wdeitaay AAA: 1 got
arent Wefan potas q1 sefefrerarrarter wfacar wrsrar fara it ge
URAISUTATTATATATA SeTaatawet yore fereferTy Weg
“The Veda is meant for the three class of people. For the emancipation
of all, the compassionate Paramesvara has disclosed the Agamas like
Veda. The deliberation of Paramegvara is Agama. Gradually these Agamas
uttered by Brahma pervaded the universe like an ocean. In the course
of time, keeping in view the ignorant helpless lot, the Rsis churned the
ocean of the Agamas by their abundant intelligence and brought out the
Tantras, the nectar-like essence of Agamas that are classified according
to different climes. 65 to 69
wa fami adtewanifa: dence sileetyeta afach afsenttat tt wo
YEtiarg dacaearanventtar ae wa fe at wares Be: wate: nogn
misvataet dat agistats qafaqs car fe aeartg aerart: WevaT tN RIN
wa waayefaart qep]e fey wdifeat tararit areryfet daa: 1 3 1
“Only those brahmins who are refined by rituals are eligible for

a Fea, 748 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Tantric worship. Sudras are directly eligible to practice Tantra. Veda is
Tantra and Tantra is Veda. There is not even an iota of difference
between them. Thus the Veda contains Tantra and where the mantras
and yantras are explicit, such portions are the most prominent in Veda.
Watergate ayaa! Taal agar waareUTafea: Newt
qradt anifafay qe aga Us Gonfey a ATT: WePaT = OKI
war day wiferauiise: wevad! TYME: wed Gifs aria OR
“Oh Parasurama! The Tantra containing codified allusions is superior
to all else. Even in Tantras there are divisions like Vedic portion, Mantra
and Brahmana portions. Hence, methods of Tantra are the best. The
Puranas contain portions of Tantra. Similarly the Tantra which contains
features like creation and so on, is to be considered as the prominent
portion of the Puranas. 74 to 76
THA: Tews supa: | anTaereddt aaterarfer a fast
frafrat fe aofaaeren ad crafter adismereradtantedt afentstt a
asuyanagt aa it frafratad: | sr year werteat wrereat UdatfreA 1 ost
afeagqen: ura dat afacat eager! wea saree faye aa sitarerset
wart one frerged: waefade: | Ua aa et GE a el
“Therefore understand that the Vedas and the Tantras have
originated from the ocean of Agamas which are the natural reflections
of Devi Sri Tripurasundari. The universal process is controlled by Her.
Even though Agastya was a Vedic ritualist, he did not see the city of
the Devi on the Meru for want of initiation. Later by hearing the excellent
glories of the Great Devi, he became Her devotee and got methodically
initiated by his wife into Her worship and after worshipping Her, secured
a place along with Lopamudra in the circle of Gurus and attained Bliss.
Thus Agastya saw and reached the sacred abode of Devi Tripurasundari.
sft sitet crereerars walagitfaantseara: tt
End of the seventy-ninth chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurarahasyam.

aryttfrants ear:
Chapter 80
ud Fear Hat Tat eearrahtary! Ya: We Weare wort wfaarsfet: 1 Hl
mre Tatet Yt Ta sat yore: feat yeah 4 ga: 2H
wa dat ware fromreten: | pafaatrat a fast fe aio on ah
vit weract Paar ustaststt a wt waraes Rt Haar ats Back i ¥ 1
After listening to the narration by Dattatreya, Paragurama with a
pure mind bowed and with folded palms again said thus: “Oh Lord! Your
narration was nectarian and it has cleared all my doubts. But I would
like to ask you further about something. After getting initiated and
undertaking daily the worship of Devi Tripurasundari, by what special
action either a king or a poor man will achieve great result very quickly?
Oh Guru! Please enlighten me on this with compassion who is your
servant.” 1 to 4
sft amys: Ys: wre qafacefea: | oy we were agente, NGI
frat aersfrtest ordfeaperar tae Wisegnrahta a nau
Tea faytikg fate that qemi woprferrigert aa wafert yoy on
Thus inquired by Parasurama, Guru Dattatreya pleased with his
devotion said thus: “Oh Paragurama! Listen to the great secret that
pleases Devi Tripura. Like Siva who is pleased by bathing with water,
like the Sun by prostrations, like GaneSa by many offerings of eatables
and like Visnu by decorations, the Great Devi Parasakti is pleased by
special methodic worship. Listen! I will tell you the best method of
worshipping Her. 5 to 7
reneged fast frata fragrfeaa: | aa steerer ar aft arsf qeraoy tt ¢
tora fatter aa wae AISA AISA!
Waa Uaetet at UgfeaeTH THT nent
3a: urenteahis walt ersdanran fret at feta wear a d_ i gol
seaistt waded wedgy wer ta aretattecranteat ate: Weel

st fear, 750 Sri Tripurarahasyam
untarannmiata qearrgernat: | Ud a: Hed cies wT aes Ween
Ateramrenrery waaay: |
“4 Sricakra or a beautiful idol of the Devi should be installed on
a well-decorated high platform (mansion) according to one’s capacity and
worshipped as prescribed either by himself or through a priest. The
worship is to be done daily five times, or four times or three times or
twice or once during early morning, morning, afternoon, evening and
midnight respectively. On full-moon and new-moon days the worship has
to be done twice or thrice or five times in a day. On festival days the
idol has to be taken round the temple and streets in a chariot or a
palanquin with dance and music in front of it. He who worships like
this will enjoy all comforts in the sapphire fort of Sricakra. 8 to 12
sanatsafated earmaterarreny, nean
aeaged at feet fafa a cer qacrafa: arget fered arene, i ex
stammaned Heisaet BAttay|
“One who is unable to do this can install a Sricakra in a temple
built by others. There is nothing more pleasing to Devi Tripura than
installing a Sricakra. One who does this will have no rebirth and gradually
he will merge with the Devi. Just an installation of Sricakra gives
innumerable benefits. 13, 14
aa Ba wareat oat Padercria: Weal
sort ead an fraafa gayi samen arta aeast wads gail
waIsayrent favaritersardy | ystae tarat ae aft at afeaqeenrn gy tl
“By residing near an installed Sricakra and considering it as the
supreme place the devotee will secure a place in the golden fort of
Sricakra. If he is unable to do so, he should according to his capacity
devotedly worship an installed Sricakra or an idol of Devi. 15 to 17
waateqarn: ferararfeqarn wet waa, HaNyot wa A ea: nee
wa aaherat 7 fears mga AMAT waa A HeMATAATAT = RH
aon qher fawn: ada: waahaa: | qaterqarraign: waeitewaean: I Yo Ml

May my prattle be the repetition of Thy
Mantra, my physical movements be the
gestures (Mudras) of Thy worship, my
loitering be the circumambulation to you,
my eating be the oblations to You, my
lying down be the prostration before You
and all that I enjoy with a sense of
self-surrender be equivalent to Thy
worship.
Saundaryalahari, Stanza 27

argitfadats Aa: 751 Chapter 80
pharsanreeneatgrent: wrforreta | Faget: UeTeTERt: uanneiedat: i aan
armanedena faa ata a1 Taig: wat A wat Gert senfafer
“Oh Paragurama! Worship of the installed Sricakra brings a lakh
time more benefits than the uninstalled one. The devotee should place
the idol of the Devi in the Sricakra and worship as stipulated. To obtain
abundant benefits one should worship all the deities located in the
Sricakra. Just like the rays of the Sun which originate from the Sun
benefit the entire world by destroying cold, darkness and diseases of all
creatures, the accompanying deities of Devi Tripurasundari in the Sricakra
who are the various aspects of Her are deputed to protect the world
and therefore are to be worshipped as ordained. 18 to 22
facut fwsnat ger gat za: feaa: 1 wtarghagreritartaaren fag war 32
fagass wait facanead | agtad: Wormer Tait aa REI
uftanfiosaelt amretderaaa: | aarenafset Ysa warat wat WeweM
Bey Wer Wa ene Fa ated fatter wdeitenfarraay Re
AVE TAH AAT ATTA | efaroTTargeretamaraa ads: Ton
watagafetial vat at at Uta! Aeaetahaed AaHret UTS Ul Wl
WHAT a A ART at adurch: | Gea asfet we se WTA fea:
“Just like the Sun in the sky is the concentrated mass of the rays,
Devi Tripurasundari embodies all Her accompanying Saktis. She is seated
in the central point (Bindu) of Sricakra. He who cannot worship Her in
detail using special worshipping materials, can worship her associate
deities using easily available items within his limits. In some manner
or other the Devi has to be worshipped in an installed Sricakra. He,
who having got near an installed Sricakra fails to worship it, is to be
considered as selfdestroyer and despicable. He who has limitations
can worship with one or two or all items like sandalpaste, flowers,
pounded rice, water, money, betel leaves, lamps, prostrations and
circumambulation. A man or woman, who worships but once the Sricakra
uttering Her thousand names, will undoubtedly get rid of all sins as
declared by Lord Siva. 23 to 29
aa canysitefaast soy afer a1 fagtaadg aa ymartstt aisstaq tl 30

st FRR ES, 752 Sri Tripurarahasyam
ages se Tord cafe fade aretq aa: ese fate assqet weatty 1
yaad arate ediqaente wate: | oa queer art Yat ATT BRU
weariahrg at query aadaaay wer tarda, W3an
ardenfaars wae WA HA Canada: yet: ata A ATL ax 1
wat ot yatiaaterendtstt ar!
“Oh Parasgurama! Listen. I will now tell you the method of worship
through one lakh names. It should be started on special days or on a
Friday. After determination, GaneSa has to be propitiated and benedictory
mantras to be uttered by brahmins. Then the Devi has to be worshipped
along with Her retinue according to the laid procedure. He should worship
with five offerings (like sandal paste, flowers, incense, lamp and milk).
At the stage of offering flowers, he should utter thousand names of the
Devi and conclude with incense and so on. He should repeat this daily
till one lakh offering is completed. The same type of flower has to be
used daily. The thousand names are to be repeated in even numbers
like two, four and so on in one day. He can worship either himself or
along with his sons and grandsons or have it done through a
brahmin/priest. 30 to 34
at I Wades aaah Waal
wey Guiana danifeaqaay seed Graetdel auger tt 3G I
wegen fad a Pera ayqeay) THETA Gea, Ta Nl 3oll
Fafa afer tar, HATeTeSTE TaTeeTa: |
aarge wet Got ot ash WS aT uzenl
wa ufapfa ten: vateaayifaar fase Tea GY TATE 38 Il
warel addtaggadt: wHAat aa! ceeg uw fear Teg a_i A i ¥oll
anidtreanat dasenifeart aad! tamdvat yal wrefaods yor wel
afaagietat taery yraaT!
“In the end a golden pot tied with sacred thread and garment has
to be installed on rice, poured on a Sarvatobhadra Diagram having nine
triangles. Offering incense and chanting the mantra of the Devi, the pot
has to be filled with gems, water and five types of sprouts and a coconut

areitferrats are: 753
Chapter 80
to be placed on its mouth. In front of the pot, a beautiful idol of the
Devi has to be placed and invoked and worshipped. To begin with, the
deities of the Sarvatobhadra Mandala have to be worshipped. Then the
lords of the ten directions and the four gaktis are to be worshipped.
Dharma and other gods are to be worshipped in the middle in whitecoloured houses. Adharma and other gods are to be worshipped in the
red houses half way. The worship is to be done in a clockwise direction.
The pairs of gods Asitanga and others are to be worshipped in the
tricoloured circles (bands). 35 to 41
Ue WSs aaest Weasrayaany, USI
fafarts sare faut Istguanch: | maaEnfech cautaed at Taeay RH
Were Heat aise pateqaqaay ded oreaht at peat AAT STAT Ml ¥¥ Il
qeaguanty amfaaferiga: |
“After worshipping the pot, Devi Tripura has to be worshipped
preceded by the worship of Her seat. Gold and silver flowers should be
offered in equal quantities weighing sixteen black berry seeds each or
half of that or one fourth of that or one-ninth of that. Vasini and other
goddesses are to be worshipped first. 42 to 44
Tet o fag Wat Greaney, Usul
wees Ufsrna: adtasvse | taa aT YTaerarior at weafeaT NKR
“Then during the mid night Devi Tripura has to be worshipped to
the west of the pot in the Sarvatobhadra Mandala. One can either
worship himself or through a priest who knows the procedure. 45, 46
quire qari HANt ages tari Ye Parfedt erste areondtas HAT ll
Tarnfeat Gat warenfaerad: | waft: qatar FART yc
“Then as laid down, a young girl, a Brahmacari, guru, married
woman and brahmins have to be worshipped. After completing the pija
without disturbing the pot, one should keep awake during the night
engaged in listening to Her glories, songs and dance. 47, 48
We: Hapeisa wea! Yee: Usaha WaT VTA: | ¥ VM

at fre, 754 Sri Tripurarahasyam
aareaas Ygarae: weaH! Ys waa dena weet aeaAgGATT tl Gott
afaomfnrget yates Faca areonat wey Yarfeawe aT ue
agata qari framaateataa: | dtortmerdivantcfanorts are 42
“Next day morning, after ablutions, he should again worship the
Sricakra to perform oblatory rituals. After generating as stipulated the
fire in the altar, oblations with the same kind of flowers as was used
to worship earlier have to be offered thousand times. After the worship
the pot along with the garment has to be gifted to a married woman
along with money and the idol. Then sixteen brahmins, eight Suvasinis,
Vatukas and young girls should be sumptuously fed without monetary
miserliness on one’s part. 49 to 52
wa yoann adartfageas | weer faqtert afseardvar wae, W4Qtt
wdatareatqent cergtgaeran | fig wraet watast ata wget Wasi
“By worshipping thus, one will be absolved of all sins. The pleased
Devi Tripura will grant all wants. After enjoying all comforts along with
sons, he will emancipate his manes and finally attain liberation. 53, 54
Treamnferg aac: adtttefegas ware: ae a ardiqehferfear yy
afutierqig ape: ahrerary fayas theta pest: AAT Ga II
wart: greed: yet: ate arta qatar fears vernerarqar il 4 Il
“Worship with lotus flowers grants kingdom; with Karavira (Oleander)
flowers grants riches; with hybiscus grants progeny; with jasmine grants
house and so on; with Girikarniké (Achyranthes) flowers grants children;
with Bakula flowers grants comradeship, with KirhSuka red flowers grants
health and with Kutaja grants destruction of enemies. Similarly worship
with varieties of fragrant flowers and leaves will grant immense benefits.
weatahdaes seamiqanra: | aaafandtiat qortafaqafterenny Wael
aadera afreat dara wae erat vrei aeeonie at qa GI
USE: ARAMA AT! Wake a Yarquindacarama: Goll
aeermfader: wearafata ari aynadaaralfe dearadaast ar nae

arenas aa: 155 Chapter 80
gar waeratssaen at tet waa! at eauls theo aaah afr G2
qe area dt yoafraqueaet | Paty aeret wae ETAT uaz
“Qne can worship Devi Tripurasundari using fruits and grains or
by a lamp with one lakh wicks. The competent one can light ten, hundred
or thousand lamps each having a ghee-drenched wick by uttering one
name of the Devi. The thousand names of the Devi can be uttered once
or Her hundred names ten times. Similarly five hundred names can be
repeated while offering the lamp. Eighteen wicks of gold and silver have
to gifted to a Suvasini along with a copper lamp burning with a ghee
wick. Then oblations with sweet pudding to be offered. 58 to 63
siqecnfetch & patetramaen: anqdtat carat Wea VAT AT GY
wad of mrentatsti afititgrtda: | agfiat merddfatirat great: | gyi
dietafadatsts wa yaferactars at eptigrdt ast ores EAT HATA I GK Il
wey sttqeres ydeag saad! warfetenadt arsfe wermeryat hey TC
“Oh Paragurama! One should bathe the Sricakra by chanting the
Sristkta one lakh or thousand or hundred times, either himself or through
a brahmin/priest using milk or sugarcane juice or ghee or honey or fruit
juice or curds or fragrant water from sacred tanks. In the end, oblations,
one tenth of the number chanted, with sweet pudding have to be offered
for each of the Sristkta mantra. Bathing by chanting Srirudra mantras
will also bring many great benefits. 64 to 67
wt ana waited afar yprareay sereg eriitor aadet ATT RCI
wadedichararg great sa: aATaea aa ar caareart utara wars 1 Gel
sahara astt aaa fare: | afer darata pedir — tt Boll
“Oh Bhargava! I have thus told you the method of obtaining
auspiciousness by the rich. The poor people can do so by physical service.
If possible they can visit sacred shrines and earn merit. If not, they can
render desireless service in the temples. This is the only method for the
ignorant. 68 to 70
tert waareer Hardtat WaraA | SAATHTAUSAL SATS A STAT | 9 Il
aray tained a: wenitraqs a tert aga gq went frerafeary 1 21

® fgerery 756 Sri Tripurdrahasyam
“The intelligent one will benefit by repeating Her names, reading
Her glories, discoursing on Her glories, reading connected literature and
teaching them. He, who teaches the methods of propitiating Her to the
deserving one, will secure after death a permanent place in the coral
fort of Sricakra. 71, 72
fernfor at ferater: urarey quad: | fratareasat faroafearat: 1 03 11
One who paints with devotion the pictures of Devi in mansions,
will live for ever in the Vasanta enclosure of Sricakra enjoying inner
bliss. 73
wae vitritte tertq ae aber afafiarran vitrtefe qarfet: 1 ox i
fravrearxaurt: a aarafaatire: |
One whe cleans Her temple with cold water and bathes Her idol
with perfumed cold water, will reside without afflictions, in the Moon's
enclosure of Sricakra. 74
ag tat diftenrfa: wenerafa aPary, Wout
Praveen: urea sin aeftea wana gar at a: Wat qaty wfet i og
B tera sttgt q wart went ager
One who illumines Her temple during nights with lamps, will dwell
in the Sun's enclosure of Sricakra enjoying desired comforts. Thus, persons
serving in Her temple will secure after death places in the Sricakra
according to the type of services rendered by them. 75, 76
sararent erifs gens: earrarcqart, Noell
a: Jerk Gaara ceretrare afer: | a faganerafee wreqareaqqaraery i wc tl
Wey Garnet ween areata a aatrerdtat fe at dherrarcqar. 1 weil
we wer weer werdtarreneet | aayed frerafer wearers wera: N cont
“By presenting gifts to devotees one will secure a place in Sricakra.
One who gifts a book of the Devi to a deserving person, will happily
live among the Siddhas in Sricakra. One who gifts articles of worship
to a devotee will dwell among the lords of the directions in the Sricakra.

araitfaaats are: : 15% Chapter 80
Thus what ever gifts are given by any-one to the devotees of the Devi,
they will undoubtedly attain commensurable place in the Sricakra.
aa t draente carne we stamaserry wernefearray, neg
quafir amered fagrexeraret: | qart fagerqarat fest erator, ween
aust: wrered fagraseraret: | aearerct: yracar wraqunfefa: aA C8
aid arantut aeaxeadgay! aarredicd eet fare wary cx Il
at fame at Qerqgraqersta! steterqfatiary aren fear: cull
qaktdteag freartsyrrafa: 1 aergrerar arsfr fear ateery waerd: 1 c§
saat atsrafaea amfaeg qarfect: 1 dtsyr arerontentt greymerer arse i ce
wea aeneng art waar ated: | wer iter wereet erarqet waewtt cet
“Oh Parasurama! I will now tell you about the best among gifts.
Gifting of a Sricakra will bring immense benefits. On a full-moon day
after worshipping the Sricakra with special materials, a austere brahmin
devoted to Devi Tripurasundari should be worshipped along with his
wife offering clothes, jewels, sandal paste, flowers, seat and so on and
wash his hands with Arghya water. Then he should retrieve the invoked
Devi and feed as many brahmins as there are goddesses in the Sricakra
enclosures. Sixteen Suvasinis have to be fed by invoking one Nitya in
each. According to ones’ capacity brahmins have to be fed or sixteen
Suvasinis or sixteen or twelve brahmins. In this way, if the Sricakra is
gifted the pleased Devi will confer the liberation of merger with Her.
wedi were: aa we at ope we art ta eet AT TATETET aT: lt ceil
areata qaet & ufser faferererm: | firgesfir a aeetaget safer & wer 1 gol
gf wen erarget wet vit wrest aa: wetorrgaufed wa went ke
areata wet 3 oe fe at wat!
“A person who gifts a Sricakra accrues the benefits of having bathed
in all sacred waters, having done all worships, having gifted all articles,
having done all sacrifices, having done the best of penance and having
studied all Vedas. Even Devi Tripura considering his act as incomparable

st FREES, 758 Sri Tripurarahasyam
grants him the liberation of merger in Her. Oh Parasurama! Because
Sricakra is the embodiment of the universe how will the gifting of it
not include all gifts? 89 to 91
afte area pate t arrest, ween
a a mente wear at art waar!
“If the Sricakra is gifted with a desire, one will have it fulfilled
quickly and gradually he will attain liberation. 92
Wag wat sant eraahaay, ean
vererad ursfe eenfaora a: Gar wet quanadtsht A grat: Hat safe ti
“Similarly when installed Sricakra along with a garland and great
gifts is given to a brahmin, the merit acquired by this cannot be spoken
even by Adisesa. 93, 94
fa arte and at frraarraenfa ari ynfert qposterittea cere fea: 1 ei
sitqt g fat farat qeatteraarh |
“He, who gifts with devotion an idol of the Devi or a Linga found
in river Narmada or a Saligrama or an earring, will reside in the Sripura
for a long period and attain liberation. 95
afet umisedtet qataag a: neg
aqua wrest wanferhafie: | qt arse fatifesat wadafa a: Ga: 1 gol
aayfimera ceasfi yee wer!
“He, who renovates an old damaged temple of Sricakra, will accrue
merit hundred times that of building a new temple. He who revives the
worship of Sricakra which was discontinued from a long period, will
accrue merit hundred times that of gifting lands. 96, 97
wae qa: uy aenfe arta Neen
weg wag aay award aenfevi errr: wy aActanfetirt: 1 ge
Tastee Ta weretfad an: | aes Hatarmusessa feat 1 Roo ll
“Oh Parasurama! Listen. I will further tell you a top secret. He,
who teaches to the deserving the Srividyaé cult by suitably initiating

ayitfacats Ara: 759 Chapter 80
without aspiring for money and fame, will accrue such a merit which
no one can describe. He will dwell in the Sricakra along with the Gurus
as long as he wishes and ultimately attain liberation. 98 to 100
ae aed ames wrearqareat | cararatent waretat Aurarer fata ut Rog tl
ag xenfeeartame vind watsrae cat faert cites: wrcerat werarghry, i Roz
“He, who out of selfishness, delusion, inadvertence or dejection/
aversion obstructs the person who wants to learn the Srividya tradition
and he, who avariciously teaches it to an undeserving person, both will
have no place in the Sripura and both will be degraded. 101, 102
eng: wae & weaat t Preaaq
faencitrgat abeate, atsft areca afr, oR Il
“Even he, who does not teach the tradition to a devotee out of
covetousness of knowledge or foolishness, will go to hell. 103
end raat at get aferanrary|
ame fated + Pred wart UN o¥ Il
Uarterne Te Anger fess sears werent Tay, Nok ll
Warmer & afgerar Freaor! ae A UA Shet AeHet CATEAATHA Mt FOG
aa hgarentgenart fagtad: | faenfafaners arste aeacrgart
“Oh Paragurama! Therefore one should not prevent a person who
wishes to teach the tradition either to his disciple or any other devoted
student. There is no benefit equal to teaching Srividya. Other gifts gather
bondage. Only teaching Srividya amounts to educating about Self or
Consciousness. There is no limit for the benefits from such an act; hence
it is infinite. He who is not learned can gift books on Srividya and earn
the same merit. 104 to 107
serene vier wa frets wt wernemnftafeaqtarenferet TRY
we anta a wtaafeaqean tetas | Wereraeat wet sraurrRfeTATy TAT | Ok
“Oh Paragurama! Out of love towards you, I have narrated the great
secret of worshipping Devi Tripurasundari and the great benefits that
follow. I have narrated in this Tripurarahasya the grand glories of Devi

at fay, 760 Sri Tripurarahasyam
Tripurasundari which will induce devotion in that person who listens
tat dad afad Baers Sear! we wrereravet 4 faqrra wea i Reo tl
a: sont water: arte: ofeqert) wet aret Maerre-afaqada eRe HI
aat afaafe tare safest fret ar mrereagiaga oat a waft safer eee
Teresa Aor went Aq) wrereasraut cites Hees BT ees
“Oh Divine Sage Narada! You have listened with concentration to
the Mahatmyakhanda of Sri Tripurarahasya. He who listens to this will
be free from all sins. This is the ultimate means to attain liberation
because it propounds that devotion brings about liberation and such
devotion will not dawn without listening to Her glories. Therefore, this
is the first step to reach atop the transcendental mansion. Listening to
Her glories is considered as the gateway to liberation. 110 to 113
aferrdige aa aferdafeg) wae faa ut sta: wet eataar WAT eex I
Ware arest wa faar war a fareti ae aevar: dhed fart aden qari
qa fear aan att aisgt wferteae
wer afea feat art wet 4 wera safe meRggil
areata 4 anifer arrftaat faaferars
werafedfatier + arfad ear gf: eater eget
“Without listening to Her glories, how can one develop devotion and
without devotion there will not be prosperity. Devotion to the Supreme
Devi is the means, without which all other qualities will be a waste
just like the beauty of a young girl without her nose. Without the soil,
a seed cannot sprout and grow. Similarly without devotion there can be
no wisdom or benefit. For a non-devotee there is no ritual, worship and
enlightenment. Hence a non-devotee will not have bliss.” 114 to 117
Wea gira yet wearer ae wered Heyy, wos wrereardfrery il
svaat deat erste weraramoner ufsaed frentaceart scien ar i eee il
ware faquerrtatsoat wader ype userqenrdt dingeafaedag = RRO
set ara qareyar yfsett waa awaited araneraser fe daqt: 0 Veet

arenas Ara: 761 Chapter 80
feed fafafad ofad tty faanitt aaferctrenfens Jory eee
Patra aaereaagTAey FI
aga: fraqeat: : at areat fagta Sty, WRB
“Oh Narada! Because listening to Her glory is the origin of devotion,
one should listen to this portion of Tripurarahasya known as
Mahatmyakhanda. It will wipe off the great sins of those who read and
listen to it. Those who desire the blessings of Devi Tripura should read
one chapter or atleast one stanza every day. This will increase longevity
and enhance auspiciousness. The poor will get rich and a barren woman
will beget a son. Whatever one desires will be fulfilled by listening to
this legend. If written and worshipped, it grants erudition and all wants.
If contemplated it grants wisdom, devotion and detachment. This
Tripurarahasya is the ambrosia obtained by churning the ocean of Agamas
(Vedas) and by drinking this nectar Siva and others have become immortal
and this nectar is the Mother Tripurasundari the embodiment of the
seed letter Hrim! 118 to 123
ofa sifagrrest mrereravs aryitfaaatseara:
End of the eightieth chapter of the
Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurarahasyam.
aaratid stages Wereaarsy |
End of Mahatmyakhandam of Sri Tripurarahasyam.
wadeneuneratarmrarentttaeg &
Tena fra acorat Oster!
ama an aed fare digs
wdtraronfid aaa at ad AAO
“Oh Auspicious Devi! Oh Tripurasundari! By an iota of Your
compassion is rendered in English language the most sacred and beautiful
Tripurarahasya. Pardon my courage by accepting this work placed at
Your feet and protect me, Your son Laksmana.
oft faqrrenttaaey

Key to Transliteration and Pronunciation
Sounds like
a-o in son
f-a in master
i-i in if
I-ee in feel
u-u in full
Q-00 in boot
r-somewhat between
r and ri
e-ay in May
ai-y in my
o-o in oh
au-ow in now
k-k in keen
kh-ckh in blockhead
g-g (hard) in go
gh-gh in log-hut
n-ng in singer
e-ch in chain
ch-chh in catch him
ji in judge
jh-dgeh in hedgehog
fi-n (somewhat) as in
French
t-t in ten
th-th in ant-hill
ate aged adt dad gem Atta AgeaAga a
Sounds like
d-d in den
dh-dh in godhood
n-n in under
t-t in French
th-th in thumb
d-th in then
dh-the in breathe
n-n in not
p-p in pen
ph-ph in loop-hole
b-b in bag
bh-bh in abhor
m-m in mother
y-y in yard
r-r in run
1-1 in luck
v-v in avert
é-sh in reich (German)
s-sh in show
s-in sun
h-in hot
th-m in sum
h-h in half
